[Music] Mr. Lawrence Wright, it's really a pleasure to have you have you on here. It's been a long time coming. I've been uh I've been watching I've been watching and reading your work for a very long time. Not a very long time. I think the first time I discovered you was in 2015 when Going Clear came out, the documentary on HBO. And um I was sort of blown away because this place is right in my backyard. It sure is. And I kind of grew up around all of it cuz I I spent a lot of my youth in downtown Clearwater running around with my friends and you know just you know goofing around and I was born in Morton Plant Hospital which is basically right across the street from the Flag Building. That's right. And um I kind of never really dug too deep into them until I saw your film and then I was just like blown away that this was all right here this whole time. Yeah. It's it's the headquarters and had you know they if back when Elron Hubard had taken to the high seas to avoid subpoenas and finally decided to come back to America and he sent a delegation around looking for the right place and they settled on Clearwater. Yeah. And uh they wouldn't tell anybody at the time you know what they were. They were some sort of you know vaguely Christian organization. Just let the word out. But when people in Clearwater found out, they were pretty upset, you know, and he was buying up a lot of the real estate downtown, which is still a part of the church catalog. So, it's a fascinating story. I mean, I I was, you know, the Scientology had kind of put this, you know, electric fence of legal threats and reputational threats u around their story. And so other writers had taken wax at it. Yeah. But I still felt that there was a great story on the ground to be told and it was fabulous story. I I was even despite all the, you know, we're going to get you sort of stuff that comes along with dealing with Scientology. It was always just a great story. And so, you know, you're always grateful as a as a writer to have that opportunity. It's funny. Just recently I was having a conversation with my brother-in-law and he works for one of the biggest Scientology owned companies in downtown Clearwater it's called and he's like it's all Scientology owned and um all of the higherend executives like all the like executives on the executive floor they're all Scientologists. So there's like a Scientology floor and then there's like a uh civilian floor. Yeah. And uh it's like him and all of his buddies will always joke like under their breath or like make fun of the Scientologists and like you know it's kind of like this weird dichotomy of these people all working together in the same building but you're kind you know you're inside of a cult building like these people are all in this cult and I was like wow that would make such a great TV show about it would be like the office meets like some sort of like cult uh science fiction you know reality show or something like And I was asking him, I was like, cuz we were in a restaurant right across the street from where he works. And I was like, I'm like, how do you know? I'm like, do you know by just by looking at somebody if they're a Scientologist? He's like, oh yeah, 100%. And I was like, how do you know? He's like, just look into their eyes and you can see, you can tell by just looking into their eyes. It's like almost robotic the way they look. And sure, I I was like looking around. He's like, there was like five people in that room at the time. And he's like, "There's one guy in here. Definitely a Scientologist. See if you can figure it out." And I looked around and sure I nailed it. I was like definitely that guy. Well, I don't have those powers, but uh you see a lot of people such a wild phenomenon. The sea or which is their clergy, you know, dresses in naval outfits. Yeah. And so you see a lot of that in Clear Water because that's their base. Is that the vest like the the the the vest around the white shirt? Yeah. And often times more, you know, more what looks really very much like a military uniform and um Yeah. Okay. Yeah. The sea or is, you know, when you sign up for it, you know, you sign off for a billion years of service, right? And because of the idea that you get reincarnated and a billion years in the in the time span of eternity is just a small sacrifice. Yeah. I uh I've I've thought a lot about this and it seems like it it it's you know, obviously there's a ton of terrible things about Scientology, right? like like the harassment campaigns they go on and the outright slavery that they um participate in with having their SEO members and and they the most gruesome thing is the the cadet farm or like the cadet organization where they have all the babies in there that are just like not taken care of. And I think um it was one of the women in your documentary who was John Travolta's friend like John Travolta's handler I guess. Spanky. That's right. Yeah. Her baby was in there and she found her baby in there was like covered in fleas and like not fed, sick, fever. That is probably like the most gut-wrenching um aspect of what they're doing and and of your documentary, I think, personally. But, you know, if that stuff wasn't a part of it, I feel like this is just no different than any other religion other than the fact that it's more modern and we know the guy the guy that created it lived in modern times in our lifetime and it's got a way better marketing plan. Yeah. You know, I don't have anything against Scientology except for the human rights abuses, right, that we're talking about. And uh and I, you know, I think John Travolta and Tom Cruz are great stars. I'm grateful for their talents. Um but I hold them responsible for bringing so many people into Scientology and knowing they have to know, you know, the depradations that are visited on people in the sea or and also the, you know, the child care thing. the way that families are broken up and so on. These are these are terrible uh terrible things to do to people and a lot of Scientologists, you know, don't know or don't want to know uh what's going on inside these sea or uh there's several different uh places where the sea or tends to headquarter. And um most people will say well you know but it's given me something really valuable and usually that is uh a sense of being skilled in a particular area or connections and with the you know the most conspicuous thing is the actors that are involved you know they don't have another Tom Cruz Elizabeth Moss is a second generation Scientologist. So, she wasn't drawn in to the organization. She was born into it. But, um, you know, actors, it's one of the things I learned when I was working on this is a lot of them like Tom Cruz, you know, they drop out of high school or he didn't drop out, he finished, but you know, they go into they go to Hollywood when they're really young and and imagine you get out of high school, I'm gonna be an actor. I'm gonna be a movie star. I'm gonna go to Hollywood. Meanwhile, your friends are in college. Uh they're studying. They're getting, you know, their medical degree or whatever. You know, they're going on with their life and you're standing in line, uh for, you know, uh a role, you know, a um you know, one in the background, some you know, somebody in a crowd scene or something like that. you're you're desperate to break it and you're you know that you don't seem to any choice. And then along comes a person with a brochure handing them out to all these would be movie stars saying how to get an agent, you know, come to the celebrity center, you know, we'll show you how. And uh this is like a message from God. you know, you this is somebody's going to help me get an agent or you know how to get insurance and you know these kinds of things that freelancers like actors are desperate for. M so once into the celebrity center uh they're given a menu of different programs that you can uh take there and you know uh people like well Jerry Seinfeld um you know he attributes uh some of his early success to taking I forgotten which program it was but uh he it felt you know that it gave him more confidence and you know other a lot of actors and have been brew and never got very deeply in it, but did taste it and uh and most of them will tell you that it did them some good. Did you lose any friends making that writing that book or making that film or were there any people like in your life that maybe you didn't know were Scientologists that kind of just like disappeared? Okay. One one time when when I was in college, um I was living in an apartment with my girlfriend at the time and downstairs there was a little Scientology org. It was tiny, you know, and um I had heard of it, you know, but this was back in the middle 60s, long time ago. And so Scientology was totally new. And um they they showed me the um I forgot the name of the little lie detector. The E-meter. The E-meter. Yeah. And um uh and I I was intrigued, but I wasn't I was also a little suspicious. But anyway, they were a good neighbor. I'd sometimes go downstairs and you know, hi, how you doing? you know that was but that was my only introduction into Scientology uh before I actually decided to write about it and you know I've written about a lot of religions over my long career and uh I'm always intrigued by the fact that you know reporters tend to pay a lot of attention to politics and uh but my observation is that you can be you can have really strong political ical beliefs that don't affect your behavior at all. And I'm sure everybody knows those people. Yeah. But if you have strong religious beliefs, they tend to govern your life. And I think it's a mistake to to avoid that subject. It's a lot of reporters think it's imp impolite you know prying into what people believe and yet they they'll readily ask are you a Trump supporter or something like that. but they won't ask are you a Mormon or you know it's just um it seems impolite and also pathetic. You know reporters typically are very skeptical and religion is one of those areas that we tend to uh tend to put some distance between us and that. So I because I was interested in religion and had been very religious when I was a teenager. uh Scientology was always on my you know my scope and but I needed um I needed an excuse to write about it and I I thought about when John Travolta's son died if you remember that um there was uh he he was very ill and it was some apparently some kind of environmental toxin uh that affected him and there was the Scientology treatment that um that was employed and uh I don't know if if if this if the boy could have been saved otherwise but um anyway he died and I thought well maybe he will leave the church and that would give me an excuse to talk to him and um I I mentioned it to my editor at the New Yorker and he said it was too tabloid which I thought you Yeah, but it's still very interesting, you know. And so then Paul Haggus dropped out of the church and he had Paul Haggus was a two-time Academy Award-winning writer and director and yeah, he had been in the church for more than two two decades and he dropped out very quietly. He wasn't talking about it. But I thought, you know, most of my readers would look at Scientology with kind of a sneer on their face. You know, it's like, I would never believe that crap. You know, you'd never get me in it. And what was interesting to me about Scientology, it was deeply appealing to a lot of people. And u and for the Hollywood types, I didn't see that it was giving them any advantage. It was like the opposite. It was like a public relations martyrdom. You know that they were they people thought what's wrong with Tom Cruz that he's in Scientology or you know any of the other stars, right? And so what is it that would take someone as talented and interesting as Travolta or Cruz or any of the others? What would it take to have them enlist in this organization and adopt these beliefs? that seems so weird. And um so when Paul dropped out, I was working on something else. Um I I finally decided, well, I'm going to I'm going to ask anyway. So I found the number for his business manager and I said, "Hello, this is Lawrence Wright with the New Yorker and I would like to talk to your client about his decision to leave the Church of Scientology." Are you kidding? Get the [ __ ] off my phone. and click. You know, that was the entire conversation. And uh but the next day I got Paul's email address and I wrote him a letter and said, "Well, I spoke to your business manager and he said this wasn't the best time uh to talk, but if there's ever a time where you'd like to uh discuss your, as I said, intellectual and spiritual development, I'd be honored to do that." And 20 minutes later, I get a call very, you know, a text, you know, very flattered. Let's have lunch on Tuesday. And he was in New York. So I flew up and we had lunch. And then he wanted to smoke a cigarette. And so we went out on the street and I said, "Well, you know, this is going to be apppropo of your decision to leave the church." And his eyes got wide, but he continued to talk. And it was like nine months later, so deep into this story, he finally admitted it had never occurred to him. maybe about Scientology. He was just so flattered the New Yorker was going to do a profile of him. So I I felt I I I totally understood and felt a little sad that that happened. But on the other hand, he was a very courageous source and uh he went through a lot of [ __ ] and as did many of the sources that I spoke to and you know I spoke to hundreds um and you know it it's it's a difficult decision when you know you're facing a an organization that's quite famous for its retribution. Yeah. uh to decide that it's so important to talk to a reporter that you'll feel you know you'll face that and of course the more that you talk to the more will talk to you and their strength in numbers and I think that played a role in in the access that I finally got. Yeah 100%. It's amazing to me how I know they were raided by the FBI once. I think that was in the early 90s right and it's amazing to me that they have not the FBI has not shut them down. Is that because they got that religious exemption and they're quote unquote a religion now? Yeah. Uh, you know, it gave them enormous amount of leeway. Um, so that's that that that designation they got from the IRS when they basically uh assaulted them with lawsuits and brought them to the brought the IRS to its knees. Brought the IRS to to its knees and got got the IRS to basically wipe out a billion dollars in back taxes. Yeah. that somehow makes them exempt from all of this unbelievably horrifying humanitarian atrocities that they're consider that that they're carrying out on their headquarters with children and people paying them basically no money, making them scrub toilets and and all this stuff. Yeah. Uh it's the first amendment, freedom of religion, you know, along with press and speech. So, uh it's a very powerful concession. The other day, I tried to split my dinner bill, and we're all aware of the payment apps that take 3 days to send your money, and it always forgets your password. And then they take a cut, forcing you to have to send extra money. Listen, if I take this $20 bill and I hand it to my friend, that's how fast I expect my money to be transferred digitally. And that's where today's sponsor, Cash App, says, "Hold my beer. Moving money should be simple. We're not trying to apply for a mortgage here." What a relief. It took seconds to set up, and all I needed was my phone number. No digging around for bank account info, no forms, just boom, done. The first time I used it was when a guest didn't receive the taxi voucher I sent. I reimbured him while we were still on the phone and he got it instantly. It didn't take two to three business days. It was instant. And what about safety? If you're about to send money to someone sketchy, Cash App will give you an alert that says, "Hey, you sure about this?" Which definitely saved me once when I mistyped someone's name with my slippery butter fingers. It's such a great safety net. Also, you can personalize your payments. So, you can send your buddy rent money with a pizza emoji and a sparkly background. Every time my in-laws want something, they get the poop emoji. Basically, I use Cash App because it's fast, safe, and it makes my life far less stressful. For a limited time only, new Cash App users can use our exclusive code to earn some additional cash. For real, there's no catch. Just download Cash App from the App Store and use my code Danny10 when you sign up. Send five bucks to a friend within the first 14 days and you'll get 10 bucks dropped right into your account. That's Cash App, baby. It's linked down below. Now, back to the show. And, you know, it's if people say it's a religion, there's, you know, how do you contradict that? Um, you know, it's odd because uh the Hub Elron Hubard, the founder, would say it was not a religion. It was a scientific approach to spiritual enlightenment. And um but now it's a religion. and uh and with all the protections that the constitution awards for that. Is it true that he famously like said something on his deathbed or something like that about like this was all a this was all some scheme to make money? Yeah. Well, it was um I know I'm like butcher. I'm not that's that's Sarge. Uh I'm trying to remember Sarge's last name. Oh, yeah. Sarge. The guy who he asked him to get rid of his body or something, right? when um when he was in his last days, when Hubard was in his last days, he was this little horse ranch in Southern California uh ne joining Kenny Rogers ranch. Um but um Oh wow. He was in disguise. He was in hiding and he was very ill. And um he FA Sarge Fouth uh he asked Sarge to make him an e-meter that would actually electrocute him. And um and this is the way he wanted to go out. And he was living on this little blue bus, blue bell bus, I forgot the name of it. Um and uh Sarge was racked with guilt because he had, you know, essentially pledged his life in the service of this man. And um so he he did make him an E-meter that was uh essentially tied to an automobile battery that was just enough to give him a real shock but not kill him. But he did die uh you know a couple of months later. And was it anything related to that or no? Yeah, it I wouldn't want to say that Sarge killed him, right? Uh I think that it was a terrible shock. It might have affected something. Um he was he did talk he was used Sarge as a kind of confessor. uh he talked about how he wasn't going to return and u that he was going to circle this star uh for eternity and um you know he was um you know it's interesting at that point I don't think he was talking to anyone else in any any way the same with the same degree of intimacy and and sorrow that he he expressed to Sarge. I had heard that Sarge had this information and I was at this retreat with former Scientologist and I asked Sarge if he would talk to me and he he was scared uh and conflicted. Uh it was, you know, of all the people that I talked to, he was the one who um actually knew that Scientology had been proved false because this the the founder had had confessed to him. And um so it was a it was a very interesting powerful interview. Is that quote in the docu like Elron Hubert's actual quote to what he said to him? I don't remember the quote but he talked about you know he disavowed much of what he right he had said before that church doesn't believe that happened but um you know I got it on film. God, did you what kind of um backlash or intimidation tactics or or any sort of threats did you personally get when you made this? Well, first of all, let me say that you know what happened to me and then later Alex Gibney who directed the documentary uh doesn't compare to what happened to our sources, right? And uh for me um you know I had Tommy Davis was the spokesperson for Scientology when I started the story and um he had pledged that u he would take me through Scientology. You know he was really excited and it's going to be like the I think it was Labor Day weekend. And it was a three-day weekend. And uh so I flew out on Thursday and then Friday expected to hear from him. And this is after the film. No, this is before. This is when I'm first interviewing. And um finally on Monday afternoon, after I'd been in the hotel for three days, he and his girlfriend later wife Jessica Fesbach came to my hotel and said, "I I'm not we're not going to talk to you. Well, you could have told me that on the phone. Uh anyway, they finally did come um along with three lawyers u to talk to me at the New Yorker after we had sent in our first tranch of queries. They demanded it be an email. So, we sent 960 questions, fact-checking questions, and there were more after that. And suddenly you know here come this Scientology delegation and they have brought along uh I don't remember how many binders it was but it stretched for seven or eight feet and um the you know longer than this table that we're at. You know it was it was an impressive amount of of of literature all designed to respond to these questions that we had. And what was the assumption I think was we're going to drown them in information. But you can't drown a reporter in information. It's like pouring water on a fish. What what is he going to do with it? He's just going to swim in it. It was And my editor looked at it and he said, "You know what you got here? If you smok, you got a book." I said, "I know. They're very kind to me." So that happened. the article there were, you know, constant legal threats. You know, we had, you know, they they one of their lawyers had been a a federal prosecutor and, you know, there was, you know, they brought some high power into the room and we were always aware of the threat that we were going to be sued and it never happened. In fact, it never happened with um the book. It never happened in in the United Kingdom where we also sold it and they have these very uh you know aggressive liel laws there and it didn't happen there. It didn't happen with the with the series with the television movie. So um uh you know there was all empty threats but you know there was you know the private detectives you know it's that's was in my case kind of a joke you know he followed me around but I rarely go anywhere so but if I had a speech or I'm in a band sometimes he would come to my gigs which I was always grateful for who he was. Yeah. He came and identified himself one time at the uh at one of my gigs and asked me to sign his book. So, what? Hi, Lawrence. I'm the Scientology PI and uh uh to uh follow you around. Can you sign my book? Yeah. Well, they the other thing that you know they you know the New Yorker around Valentine's Day every year has this anniversary issue. We just published our 100th anniversary. So we had uh but there's always this Victorian gentleman with the monle and the butterfly on the cover and his name is Eustus Tilly and they they made a the scientologist made up a a mock New Yorker u with me as Eustus Tilly looking disheveled and just out of the gutter and then out of the top hat I was wearing is Paul Haggus and uh they passed him out in front of Time square office and there you know and uh it's a it's a treasured artifact in my collection but um that but the harassment that the sources got was very personal and um you know they were followed they were you know their garbage was emptied they were spied on constantly they were harassed threatened um and you know they paid a price um one what one you know when the movie came out um we put it in theaters for a couple of weeks and in Austin where I live uh a woman came out of the theater and she was so worked up she drove her car through the front door of the Scientology building in Austin which is right across from the university. Jesus. And she didn't stop there. She just drove around knocking over shelves and you know decks and desk and stuff and oh my god she did a thoroughgoing job and I had to issue a statement disavowing violence in any form but they closed it down for a long time. Um now it's is back and revivified but um you know people were upset about what they saw on that doc. Yeah, there's um there's there's a lot of folks around this area who are former Scientologists that have built their own YouTube channels. Um there's one guy named Aaron who lives around here and he has a great channel called Growing Up in Scientology cuz he grew up literally with his parents, they were Scientologists. He grew up working in the sea or and all this stuff. And now he's he's amassed this incredible following um of basically just talking about all the things that are happening constantly in Scientology. And you know, it seems like there's just this crazy resurgence of of stuff online and YouTube of of new age younger folks investigating Scientology and like walking into the building and interviewing the lady at the front desk and and uh you know trying to investigate all these recent court battles. There's this other guy named Grant Cardone who's this big um celebrity internet figure um who's like into real estate and like you know brags about all the jets that he owns and then you know films himself walking around the flag building you know over there and um you know there's just so much like scandal and um just crazy stuff happening involving all these like big figures and Scientology and the people investigating there's like a new sciento ology documentary that comes out on YouTube every week it seems like. Um, so it's to me it's just bananas how how this organization can continue to survive and thrive for this long with with the way that the media landscape is evolving and everyone talking about it. Well, they have a lot of money and they have a lot of lawyers and you know that they don't have a lot of members and they don't have the kind of um celebrity profile that they they enjoyed for so many years. So I would you know but of course they're so secretive about their membership and their budget and everything. It's it's only estimate. Uh but you know people report that you know nobody's in those buildings and you know I I don't I don't wish harm on Scientology. I just wish that they would reform their practices where their their most ardent members are concerned. What do you think uh David Muscavage the new leader he has done like two interviews in his life? Is that right? Yeah. Did you ever did you actually try to reach out to him or did you just think that's futile or point? The private investigator that u was trying to get to me um wanted an interview of me and I said, "Oh, sure. I I'll do that if you'll let me talk to Miss Gavage." Oh my god. You know, what are you talking about? And I The church was outraged, you know, that I would ask such a thing. And I said, "Well, you know, the deal's on the table and it's been on the table for decades now. I mean, you know, that um he's he's never wanted to open himself up after he had a, you know, a a colossal fail, you know, when he had that big interview uh with was it Ted uh ABC, I think it was. I forgotten. Way back in the day, right? Yeah. But it was it was merciless and u he came off really poorly. Um, so, uh, I think this publicity strategy is don't let anybody talk to him. Yeah. Yeah. There's something about like just like watching your documentary and watching those that big ceremony they put together in Los Angeles after they won like the war against the IRS and just the way he struts around, the way he walks, the way he shakes people's hands is just like, whoa. This dude is like really putting on a performance. is really putting on a show. Um, and then I saw another thing recently that I wasn't aware of that there's like somewhere down the street in Clear Water off of like Highway 19 or something, there's this huge apartment complex, this like rundown apartment complex, which allegedly is the spot where all the Seaorg members live. Yeah. Yeah. And they they turned basically like one-bedroom apartments that might be the size of this room right here. And they basically have six or seven people living in each apartment like shouldertoshoulder on CS which is crazy that that's allowed. Yeah. They're trying to undo that in prisons now. So uh maybe the last repository of the confined dormatory. They're trying to undo it in prisons. Yeah. there's, you know, giving more cell space and stuff like that, you know, it's it's a lot of times when the violence occurs in prison, it's in those dorms, right? Yeah. But anyways, I heard that Muscavage was living on that property on that apartment complex property like he probably has an apartment, you know, somewhere there or maybe in the old hotel. I imagine he stays around here in this area. or LA maybe. Yeah. Well, he has residences in different places. Yeah. It'd be interesting to see how long this thing survives, you know, and like and like you spent a lot of time you you've done lots of investigative research on cults, right? like um well the only other what I would call a cult that I spent time on was uh the Jonestown cult and that was the hardest story and the most wrenching story I ever did. That was how long ago was that? Has that was in the uh the Jonestown thing was in like the uh was that the early 90s? Yeah, but it was excuse me my story was apppropo of the branch devidians. Oh yeah. And um when when the branch devidian just before the apocalypse um the uh my editor then was Tina Brown and she asked me to go to Waco you know cover and I said Tina there are more reporters than branch devidians in Waco now and I just don't right don't see joining the pack right but I don't know if you would remember this but there was a moment before the the tanks started poking holes in the in the building and sending in tear gas and so on. Um they David Koresh sent out a lot of the children and there were I don't know just one or two vans with these kids who went you know through the you know military line the ATF the FBI the press you know and then out of the property into a world they didn't know and and they were leaving behind everybody they knew. Um, and I and their faces were so forlorn, you know. I just remember, you know, them passing the news cameras and and they just lost little kids and um I thought, well, that must have happened before. And so I started researching and it turned out that um there were survivors of the Jim Jones suicide massacre and three of them uh that well there were more than that but there were three who were the sons of Jim Jones. Oh yeah. Two of them were adopted and one uh Stephven Jones was his natural son and they happened to have been in Georgetown, Gana u playing basketball with the national team and u leaving their families and in in the jungle in Jonestown in in the Ganan jungles. And um so I got in touch with uh Stephen and um you know he they had never talked about it. You know it had been 15 years uh since the Jonestown uh debacle and um but this business in Waco brought it all back for them. So I went to they all all three boys lived in the Bay Area and um I had these intense conversations with them. Um one of them Tim um he was a big guy. He could curl 100 pounds in either arm and he was you know very obviously tough guy. Uh but he hadn't since Jones down he hadn't been able to get on an elevator. He had tried to get on a plane, but he made it turn around, which you know, it never happens unless Godzilla tells you, you know, right? But uh so he was wounded and um and he he he agreed to talk, but he wanted to do it in a public place so he wouldn't cry. And he wanted to bring his wife along because he was only going to tell the story once and he wanted her to hear it. So we went to this nice restaurant and somewhere around the bay and after like 10 minutes he was sobbing and pounding the table and the waiter made this huge you know loop away from the t everybody in the in the restaurant was riveted and and and looking at their food but and he told the story of he was the one who was chosen to fly back into Jonestown and identify the bodies of 900 people. Oh my god. His his wife and children, his parents, his birth parents, his, you know, adopted parents, his friends, everybody he knew, his children. He had children. He had to identify. And uh you know, God, I I was never more impressed with the power of belief that it would lead to such a colossal tragedy and they were they supposed to be there? Yeah, they were. And their attendance at the basketball game was very controversial in the Jonestown community. And um and they, you know, these boys, they were young men when I talked to them. Um they bear a lot of guilt because they they feel that had they been there, they might have been able to stop it, but I think that's not true. I mean, I think I don't think it was stoppable. Uh, you know, for for months, Jones had been uh training his followers, you know, having these white knights, as they called it, where they would drink what they thought was cyanide and uh in a Kool-Aid, you know, that's where the phrase comes from, drinking Kool-Aid. But, uh, but and then they'd be fine. So, uh, but in this particular case, Congressman Leo Ryan had just flown down from San Francisco because some of his constituents were worried about relatives that were in Jonestown and he was killed by by some of Jones's followers. Oh my. And, uh, so the, you know, it was too late at that point. Um, you know, and Jones knew that, you know, trouble was coming his way and uh, and he didn't want to die alone. So he wanted everybody to die with him. He was shot to death and not he I guess he refused to take the the the cyanide. But yeah, how who shot him? Uh it was I think it was this woman that was one of his mistresses. What do you think it is about the human mind that creates people like Jim Jones? like what what are not not necessarily about the human mind, but maybe it's probably something about people's upbringing and their development and like how do you how does nature create a Jim Jones type type character? Well, uh the longing for power is a very human quality and it manifests in different ways. [Music] Um, you know, he was a powerful speaker. You know, he had a way of of being uh, you know, extremely compelling presence, very dramatic looking man. He was part Cherokee and had very dark complexion and dark eyes and, you know, handsome in a rugged way. Um he also was a conniver and he would fake healings and things like that. Um I think all of this is with the idea of controlling other people. Uh I think there's a you see it in politics. I mean it's not uh not just religion. You see the longing to exercise control over other people is very powerful. And if you have the capacity that he had to be so compelling as he was, then uh his only goal was to increase his control. And that was why he moved his whole church out of San Francisco to the jungles of Gana. And they did it overnight. You know, people would wake up and they find their spouse gone or, you know, their parents had moved away. I mean, it was all secret and done, you know, with amazing uh security. And they were flown to Gana, a place that most of them couldn't even put on a map. And um and then, you know, they lived out their final days in this jungle. So dark. You have you have a way of uh of navigating your your way through these the darkest stories of human history. Actually, I'm doing a story now that is you would think is dark and it is dark, but it's um it it's it's I'm I'm looking at religion in a different way. Um there's the story that I wrote in the New Yorker in their 100th anniversary just a couple of months ago. Um that I'm making into a book now. Uh really it the I was walking with a friend uh and she was talking about her mother who's in the Catholic prison services and uh and spent time talking to women on the death row in Texas. There are seven women on death row and um and she talked about these nuns that came to visit them every month. And I thought, "Oh, these are the young nuns. There there there aren't very many young nuns, right? They're mostly older. The the uh the average age for a nun in America is 80, right? But this is a new order uh called Sisters of Mary Morning Star that Pope Francis ordained. And uh they live in Waco uh oddly enough, not so far from the remains of the Branch Devidian compound. Um, but I the sort of hero in my book is uh this Catholic deacon named Ronnie Lastovika who's a cattleman and he lives in in Belton, Texas. Um, and uh, you know, a real Texas figure, but you know, he's he's a very pious Catholic. And uh, his bishops said he wanted him to start ministering into the women's prisons. There are five I think in Gatesville and four of them are women's prisons and one men. Huntsville has most of the men. But so he started interviewing the women who are ministering to the women on death row. And um it occurred to him that there were some women who lived very similar lives. So he drove over to Waco and knocked on the door of the convent. And bear in mind, these nuns, although they haven't taken a vow of silence, essentially they're silent and praying all day long. And um and although they're not cloistered, they don't they don't go out very much. So Ronnie knocks on the door and says, you know, sister, there's some there's some women who could use your help. And um you know, they're living in community, but they don't know how. And you've got, you know, ancient monastic traditions about how to live together. And I think you could help them. And oh, okay. Well, where are they? Well, they're on death row. Oh, we don't get out much, you know. So, these women, their average age is mid30s. And so, if there's a future of Catholicism, you know, I think they're going to be a part of it. But they were terrified, but they felt obligated because Arani had asked and it it seemed like um something that they were capable of. So they went to uh this highly secure uh prison and um interestingly the guards were a little scared of the nuns. It's like they entered to a different order. that they were they were on their best behavior and a little odd and they're all in these gray habits, you know, they look you know you know what a riveting scene. Yeah. And they walk into the you know common room where the death row women are all dressed in white and the weird thing is they immediately embraced each other and um and it was true they have very much in common. You know they they each live in cells as they're called in demon in the convent. uh they each arise around 4:30 in the morning and pray and then they got crafts and stuff. You know, it's just very similar lives. But one of the one of the nuns said um also you should understand that we are not beautiful women. We don't use cosmetics. We don't dress. There's nothing to be afraid of us, you know, because we are so we are plain. And you know, the the women on death row had, you know, long since gone past the days when they were, you know, vibrant young women. Um, you know, the the years have taken a toll on them. So, I think they really felt a kinship and um so I'm I'm I'm working on that story. Yeah, that's that's uh an interesting thing about Death Row. I mean, there's um a a huge percentage I don't I don't remember the exact percentage, maybe Steve, you can find it, but of people that end up on death row who are innocent. And it's like a big to-do to get any sort of um look over or like a redo of their conviction or like a a reook at like looking at their DNA cuz I know the DNA they get the DNA wrong a lot or like for whatever reason these whoever gets these convict the prosecutors who get these convictions and the judges and um they just there's this reluctance to admit that they got something so something so um serious like this wrong. Well, there there's one woman on death row who is actually innocent. Some people struggle to fall asleep. Others struggle staying asleep. And then you have people like me who constantly wake up throughout the night with their thoughts racing. I normally wake up in the middle of the night tossing and turning for hours. I found out that saffron is more than just a spice. It's shown in multiple human studies to help you fall asleep faster, stay asleep longer, and wake up refreshed without next day groggginess. It works by boosting your melatonin without dependency or morning fog, calming your nervous system, helping your mind unwind, and improving mood and stress resilience so you can wake up feeling better. Most saffron supplements don't work because they contain cheap unstandardized saffron cut with fillers or low potency extracts delivering weak inconsistent doses. And this led me to the beautiful evening being by Verso, a melatonin-free drink mix perfected over 3 years with a clinically studied trademarked saffron standardized and concentrated to only the active ingredients. Proven to enhance sleep, mood, and relaxation. It is the most researched bioavailable saffron extract available and it's paired with other clinically studied patented ingredients to promote relaxation and deep uninterrupted sleep. After taking Evening Being for some time now, I'm not waking up throughout the night and I'm waking up in a much better mood with far more energy. Click the link in the description below or head on over to ver.so/danny and use my coupon code Danny at checkout to save 15% on your first order. Again, go to ver.so s o/danny and use the coupon code danny at checkout to save 15% on your first order. Your sleep will thank you. It's linked down below. Now, back to the show. And uh her name is Melissa Lucio, and she was convicted of murdering her 2-year-old toddler, uh who in fact had fallen down the steps, and that what was the the reason that she eventually died. She had like a brain hemorrhage. Oh god. But she was convicted by this prosecutor in Brownsville, Texas, uh who was running for Congress, and he was essentially working for the cartel, and he was selling sentences, and Melissa didn't have any money. Uh so it would look good on his record if he had a death conviction uh for a child abuse case. And so, um, he was hiding, uh, evidence, eyewitness testimony from her own children who saw the little girl fall down the steps and that wasn't admitted in the trial. Her defense attorney had just applied for a job with the district attorney and uh, and his wife was working for the judge, so it was a very comfortable scene in Brownsville. Oh my god. Um the prosecutor eventually went to prison himself. Uh he was sentenced for 13 years for fraud and um serve I think five of those years. But yeah, Melissa uh was finally sh demonstrated to be innocent because of all these factors. And uh and you know once the fact that you know the the the the eyewitness testimony was allowed in the court it became very clear that she would never have been convicted. And yet even now she's on death arrow because the court of criminal appeals is twiddling its thumbs waiting to decide you know should we free this one because of what you say. news is sense that if the jury spoke and said she's guilty, then you know we have to move heaven and earth to actually change that. And that there's another woman, Brittany um Hullberg, who uh was convicted of murdering this 80-year-old man in Amarillo. She was a prostitute at the time. Um but it was a gruesome 45 minute struggle between the two of them and uh in a capital case you have to there are several things you can't you don't go you don't get executed just because you murdered somebody. It has to have an additional factor. It has to be a child. It has to be um you in process of a robbery or you know or process of ex escaping from prison. You know there like 10 different things. Anyway, a a jailhouse snitch. They put a woman in the cell with uh Britney and then she came out and said that Britney told me she enjoyed killing him and that she was going to do it again and that she stole all this money. And um so that eventually got to you know the court of criminal appeals in in Texas and the fifth circuit in uh in New Orleans and uh her her conviction has now been vacated but it will be challenged by uh Texas I'm sure again. But in my opinion, um, you know, when you use a jailhouse snitch who was paid for her testimony, um, I think that should, you know, a retrial at best, you know, 100%. I have, um, a good friend who is a local lawyer around here and he takes a lot of crazy crazy cases. Um, one of his first cases actually, um, that really like put him on the map was a, uh, a boat captain who was, uh, driving a boat from Colombia to Tampa with like, I forget 100 tons of cocaine on it or whatever. And, uh, the guy was sentenced to life in prison. And he got him off scot-free. No, didn't spend a day in prison. The guy, he literally let this guy stay in his house. Yeah. During the whole trial cuz he had nowhere to stay. He was poor. And uh essentially the story was the cartel boarded a ship on the way to Tampa and held a gun to his head and said, "You're taking all this cocaine to Tampa or we're going to kill you and your whole [ __ ] family." So he he took it to T you know what I mean that and that's my friend uh his name is Bjorn. He's a the lawyer. He was explaining to me and since then he's been taking hundreds of cases very similar to this where essentially the cartel will take these these you know these poor people like the boat captain or you know just pawns in this whole game and make them transport all this stuff and if they don't do it they threaten to kill their family and the only people that get in trouble are these people that are put in these situations these poor people who have no part in the moneymaking of the cartel. or all the death that happens with the cartels and these kingpins, these highle guys, they they are are just untouched and they never see a courtroom in their life. Yeah. And um the point I was I originally wanted to make about this u lawyer friend of mine, Bjornne, was um he enjoy that magic mind. It's delicious. He um he took a case uh with a convicted murderer who was on death row for um basically he was a truck driver who was on death row for killing a prostitute at a truck stop. And um we I was interested. This was back in the day when I was making documentaries and uh I thought this was a fascinating case because um Bejorn thought that he was innocent because of some of the it's it's a little bit foggy, but that there was no conclusive DNA testing to prove that he did it. He he claimed he was innocent, right? And the family of this prostitute, they wanted this guy to be murdered. They wanted him to be executed. He was on death He's been he's been on death row since like 1990. And this was we filmed this probably in 2015. So long time he's been on death row his whole life. And we went out, we traveled out to this little town in the middle of Florida. I forget the name of the town, but it's one of the last places. It's one of the only places I think one of the two prisons in Florida where they still uh execute people. Middle of nowhere. Spooky town. And we we got there right at sunset and we were filming and there was this big field with TV reporters and on one side of the field and it was cordoned off with like uh caution tape was this uh group of people who were supporting the guy who was about to be executed. And about a h 100red yards away there was another boxed off little area with all the people who were uh family members of the woman who died or friends of them about an equal amount of people. And we were going back and forth interviewing both of them. And it was just the most insane experience to hear both of their sides. I mean, on the side of the people that that uh were trying to stop the guy from being executed where, you know, two of the people there had just gotten off death death row after spending their entire lives on death row and being exonerated after finally getting their case pushed through and you know, also seeing like Bjorn the lawyer who was really emotionally invested in all this and like the TV cameras were all over. I mean, he was like beside himself during this whole process. And like the guy um the guy who was convicted for murder who was on death row, he was strapped to the table on a gurnie getting ready to be lethal injected and they have like this theater in that room, right, where they pull the curtains back and like certain people like the lawyers and like some of the family can be in this theater while they watch the person be executed. And I guess they had the guy strapped to the gurnie for like three hours while they waited for the court to give the decision whether they were gonna the Supreme Supreme Court whether they were going to stay the execution or not. So like this guy strapped to this table for hours waiting for the verdict to come down from the Supreme Court. And we're all and this didn't end till like 3:00 or 4 in the morning. Wow. And eventually I think they they ended up executing him and uh it was just the most bizarre experience. Like it it's like it was to for me like the experience was like it's amazing that we're living here. This was like 2015 and like the way the world has evolved. We're still like in this we're so primitive in some in this in this sense you know. Yeah. That that you know we're still we still can't figure out if people committed a crime or not and we're like we have the fact that we have movie theaters for people to watch people be executed is just bizarre. I I compare it more to a peep show. You know, the old times you carnival thing, you know, where you'd have a curtain move by, you know, right feels feels more and also it's um purant, you know, but on the other hand, I you know, I I'm I'm opposed to the death penalty. I wasn't until I got into the story. It just wasn't important enough to me. And I'd seen a lot of people in prison that I'd never wanted to see get out of prison. And I, you know, I thought I'd save my u my charitable concerns for other projects. But right, seeing how justice is administered in Texas and it's probably no worse off than many states. Uh you you just can't know for certain, right? But you can put you can put a question to a jury fairly or unfairly. uh and of you know different lawyers would get different results well is that justice you know different juries would make a difference you know it's imperfect game and and the process of appeals when there really is a cause to appeal right is you know it's very difficult to to undo a conviction yeah just the slow bureaucracy of the court system Right. Yeah. I can imag I mean you would I can see how it would just be so easy to lose hope if you got stuck in that system. Oh, sure. Yeah. You know, um you also worked on a wild story about satanic ritual abuse. Oh yeah. Which ties into all this crazy stuff. I I was in therapy u back this was like in early 90s and um the uh I I I loved my therapists. They were such dear intelligent people. Mhm. And because I was an investigative reporter, you know, they said, "Well, you know, we've been seeing uh a number of of patients, you know, basically young women Yeah. who uh in therapy are having these flashbacks, recovered memories of satanic abuse. And um and a lot of times they have multiple personality disorder. Uhhuh. And then they said, "And Satanists are responsible for more than 50 murders a year in Austin." Satanists. Yeah. How do you define a Satanist? That would be my first question. Well, my first question was, you know, we don't have 50 murders in Austin a year. Oh, wow. You know, whether Satanist or not, that's more than we've ever had. So, u but I was intrigued. And then there was a a conference of police who were um being the the lecturer was about um uh satanic ritual abuse and and the this cop who was going around the country with his you know slideshow um said that Satanists were responsible for 50,000 murders a year in US. And once again, it was more than our actual total homicide count, right? And they these were cops, you know, I thought, you know, they should be uh a little more skeptical and but no. And so I I went to my editor Tina Brown at the New Yorker and I was proposed to do an article on multiple personality disorder and she was Oh. Uh and I said, well, you know, sometimes in therapy they recover these memories of satanic abuse. Oh, that's so hot. That's so hot. She was so thrilled. Yes. Yes, Larry. Yes. So, uh I thought, well, how would I approach this? So, I the internet was young at that point and but it was very useful and I could go through and uh find all these uh court cases of people who were suing their parents for abuse or their therapists or, you know, just there were hundreds. And there was one case in which a person was convicted of satanic abuse and he had confessed and his name was Paul Ingram. He was a deputy sheriff in in Olympia, Washington. I thought, well, if there's anything to this, that'll be it. So I went to Olympia and uh what I found was that um Paul's had a family of four and two girls and two boys and the girls one of them Erica had uh made the initial outcry and uh it got you know uh got into the sheriff's apartment where Paul was a deputy and uh so uh the assistant sheriff uh arrested him and uh they brought in his preacher who an evangelical preacher who told Tom told Paul that God will not let a false memory come into your brain. And then they brought in a psychiatrist who hypnotized him and u and Paul had said I I know my girls wouldn't lie but I don't remember it. So to help him remember uh you know the psychiatrist and the preacher sat there with the deputy and elicited these memories of you know satanic crimes and um in the church that they were a part of it uh they called the church of the four square gospel there was a lot of gossip you can imagine that something like this was just you know on everybody's mind and and the preacher had access to the deputies and so on so there was information coming out And and so that would generate new memories on the part of the daughters and then they and then it would be reported back to Paul, you know, what they were saying and he would come up with memories but that they and they never had the same memory. There were all these desperate mo memories and the you know girls were talking about these uh satanic fires, you know, they'd have these campfires, you know, and they would uh the girls were impregnated and and then later nailed to a table and had the uh the the fetus withdrawn from them, you know, uh and uh that their neighbors had committed homicide and you know And it was bizarro stuff, you know, but the cops took it seriously. They had helicopters flying around looking for, you know, the where the fires might have been. They digging up the yard and uh I asked uh the the under sheriff, you know, did you find any bones? You know, there was Well, there was. Yes. Really? What was it? Well, it was an elk bone. Obviously offer offering this as evidence, right? And uh so uh but the thing was that Paul confessed and he felt like he must have done this. And you know when uh the the the questioning was so bizarre because so Paul you know he had two friends that were also implicated by the by the girls. So when Ry or Jim, you know, would come in, u what did they do? Well, uh I think they must have they must have raped my wife. Uh okay. Uh and and then what did you do? Uh well, I would have gone back to work. And it was this it it was all in this conditional tense. It must have been this way. I I would have done this. Yeah. He never said I did it and but he confessed. So he went to prison and um at some point I was in LA um and uh I decided to go to the headquarters of the church of the four square gospel. It was a church that Amy Simple McFersonen uh created back in the old days of Hollywood. And um so I was talking to the the leader of the church and um I said, "You know that first outcry by this girl Erica happened I think at your summer camp." Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. You know, one of our counselors led that. And I said, "Is she here?" "Yeah, yeah. Paula, come on in the office." you know, so Paula the evangelist uh who had been speaking at this church camp um came in and I asked her about, you know, the setting for this uh church camp and how many girls were there and what was her role and so on. And she she was said, you know, I would be talking to them and uh the I would say there's a girl in the room. I she I can see her in a closet. She's in a closet and and and she's so afraid of her father and and she's she hears the footsteps coming towards the end to some girl cried out, "It was me. It was me." and you know a lot of hysteria and uh and so at the end of camp she says uh I was preparing to leave and uh some of the counselors came over and said there's a young woman who needs your attention um and so uh Erica was actually a counselor in this uh at this camp and you know we we don't know what to do with her she's on the stage and she's just weeping and so the Paula came over to Erica and she said, "And I put my hand on her head and I prayed over her and I heard God say, "You've been abused." And then I said, "And it's been happening for a long time, and it's your father." Now, this was a very religious young woman, Erica was, and she was getting this message from God telling her that her father had been abusing her. There was no evidence. It never was any evidence of it. It was only this transmittal, you know, the hand on the head and the message from God. And it led to the ruination of Paul Ingram's life and and the splintering of his family. And uh you know it was but he served years in prison. Um and you know once again the business of trying to roll back a conviction is extremely dis difficult especially one that had been framed as child abuse with a satanic uh add addition to it. Is that them? Yeah. Yeah. That's the family before it became the the What did he What did he say about like what did anyone ever ask him like why did you Oh yeah. I talked to him about it. He you know he it's hard for him to understand because you know it it seemed that he must have done something. He had a he was very guilty uh and and he's a fervent believer. So uh he trusted his preacher and the psychiatrist and you know these these you know I Wow. I know you do a lot of interest and have a lot of interest in UFOs and stuff like that, but there was um um a study done in Georgia, which would not be allowed nowadays, but um a psychiatrist or psychologist had a patient and he told her, "I'd like to do a little experiment and um I'm going to tell you, I'm going to hypnotize you and I'm going to put some suggestions in your mind and it's not going to be true. It's just, you know, I'm just just see. And if, you know, so he hypnotized her and um he said, "You were late to our our session. What happened?" Which wasn't true, you know. And she said, "Well, I was driving along the road and I I saw a cow on the side of the road, you know, who was trying to give birth and she was really struggling. So, I thought I could help." So I got out of the car and I went over to help her and he and he said, "And then a light appeared and she said, "And then a light appeared overhead and a spaceship came down and you know and she was abducted." And he woke her up and he said, "Look, this is what you said. Bear in mind, you made it up. You know, I I planted it inadvertently in your mind, but it, you know, just free yourself of this." She couldn't shake the feeling. Wow. that it was as real to her as any other memory. And I think that's part of what was going on with Paul and and to some extent with his children. You know, they uh fantasizing uh you know, they were charged with the idea that something happened. And that phrase uh has done a lot of damage, especially in child abuse cases and the old daycare pursuits. remember the daycare hysteria? You know, there was always Well, maybe they didn't, you know, fly to Mexico and bury a giraffe, which was, for instance, in Austin, that was one of the daycare stories. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Uh maybe that didn't happen, but something happened or these kids wouldn't be so screwed up. So, the jury would convict them on the something happened charge. Yeah. What was that story about the daycare? kid was telling their parents that they like flew to Mexico and buried a giraffe or something where Fran and Dan's uh daycare and you know it was just a kind of neighborhood daycare. Um during that time there were a lot of these daycare cases arising and some of the parents were concerned and so um a mother asked you know her daughter you know had anything gone on and u in the daycare and I think the daughter gave you know responded to one of the suggestions you know well maybe or something like that. I it was it was hard. So she called a psychologist a local psychologist in Austin who uh I had interviewed um and uh she assembled some other family members and they had uh back then they would have dolls that they used to illustrate you know where did he touch you here and stuff like that. Mhm. So, uh they these were parents in and a psychologist interviewing very very young children and I I went to about an hour of of trial of of Fran and Dan. I think they might have been tried separately. I don't remember. M but um there's a little girl on on the stand sitting in her big sister's lap and the prosecutor, you know, honey, did did did Dan uh hurt you? And she had a she said no. Uh did did Dan touch you someplace you didn't? No. You honor me? We have a recess. And then it was Yes. after the recess. Yeah. And I it made me really scared to think that and and I was just a spectator. I wasn't on the jury and they might have heard other more compelling evidence, but they did hear evidence about how these kids were flown to Mexico and they were, you know, slaughtering wild animals and uh and then flying back just in time to be picked up by mommy and daddy. I mean that they served years in prison before they were u exonerated. Wow. And you know, it's uh it's it's a really dark mark on our culture that that kind of hysteria is allowed to proliferate. And what year was that happening? I don't remember the exact year, but the daycare cases all took place in the early in the '90s. In the '9s. Oh god. Yeah. We had um I had a gentleman on here um by the name of Whitley Strieber. Yeah, I've talked to him. He lives in Texas or he used to live in Texas. He lives in LA, I think. Lives in LA now. And uh he had a crazy story about a military school he went to when he was a kid. And he said there was a lot of hypnotizing going on and a lot of like weird psychological experiments going on in there. um where they were like putting kids in boxes and things and like like experimenting with telepathy. And he also uh explains the story which he doesn't really talk about much anymore, but he was he's done two separate radio interviews in the past where he's uh mentioned when he was a kid he was flown down to Mexico as a to some to some a part of some military experiment during the Cold War and uh allegedly um him and the rest of these children were shown videos of people being like mutilated and like dead bodies and they were explain it was explained to these kids that it was their fault that this happened to these people. So, it was some crazy experiment to induce trauma in children um to induce some sort of psychic or psionic abilities in kids. Again, this is like the Cold War. It sounds like crazy woo woo stuff, but but this is the story that he told. Um and and he I he doesn't talk about the Mexico stuff anymore, but that that reminded me of it. And um you know, during that time in the Cold War, there was also a lot of like crazy um remote viewing type things that were going on, experiments within the intelligence community trying to figure out better ways to spy on the Soviet Union. And they thought that this remote viewing thing could happen. And uh there was people like Ingo Swan and um Erie Geller who not Uri but Ingo Swan and a bunch of the other remote viewers in this program called the uh it was uh Stanford Research Institute program were Scientologists. Yeah. Which is bizarre. I recently had a gentleman on here named Jeffrey Michishlov who who explained this all to me and he was I was I was asking him like why are all these remote viewers Scientologists? It's so strange. He's like yeah there was a lot of them. Uh Hal Putoff was another one. And he and I asked this guy um Jeffrey Michel. I'm like why do you think this was and he says uh I think Elron Hubard was on to something. Well, I I had a letter from Whitley um years ago after I did that remembering Satan piece and um he said um that he wished that I would write about him because he knows that there's something wrong with him and but and people think he's the village idiot and you know but these are just like I said about that other in that test uh these are real memories to me and but you know I know that they can't be right so you know please you know consider writing about me so I was tied up on something else and uh then uh Whitley came out with another book of about abduction and uh his we have a mutual friend Jim Jim Ketka and he and Whitley wrote a best-selling novel together they went to school together as a matter of fact but called war day it was a New York Times bestseller. And so they were always in contact. And um Jim and I went to see Whitley at the bookstore when he was signing books. And u afterwards I said, "Whitley, you remember that letter you wrote to me?" And he said, "Yeah, yeah, yeah, I remember that." But you know, that was before I found out about the implants. So, I mean, I I thought I've always been interested in why people how it is that people fantasize these things. Yeah. I don't I don't believe he's deliberately making it up, but uh but there's something wrong and um and it intrigued me. But I also felt I felt he was too fragile to Yeah. to to take on. I'm I'm glad I didn't write about him. How long a was that? Before the movie came out, the Communion movie with uh Christopher Walkin. I don't know. I don't Yeah, that was a long time ago. Yeah, but I can't believe I mean that's that's pretty wild that you can write something like that and then they make a freaking Hollywood movie with Christopher Walkin playing your character, you know? Like I wonder what that does to you, what that does to your belief, you know? Like say for example that he, you know, he thought that these memories can't be real. Something something weird happened. I don't know what it is, but I don't necessarily believe it. And then some crazy blockbuster Hollywood movie gets made about it. Well, it it it's reinforcing to make money out of something like that. And so there's a disincentive to walk. But at one point in his life, he wanted to break the spell and he thought that I could help him. Yeah. He also writes a lot of very dark dark fiction, right? Stuff about vampires and werewolves and things like this. Yeah. Um I got to take a leak real quick. Okay. Take a quick break. We'll jump back in. Right. Um while we're on the topic of all this satanic stuff though, Elron Huard Yeah. and Jack Parsons, that story is fascinating. It is because Jack Parsons was really into all this satanic stuff, right? and um had some sort of connection to Alistister Crowley. Is that right? Uh yeah, he would to some extent considered himself ordained by Alistister Crowley and um and Hubard ran off with his girlfriend. That was annoying to him. Um yeah, it was quite a scene on South Orange Avenue in Pasadena back in the day. So Parsons, who was this, you know, Jet JPL, he was the guy who founded JPL, right? A legitimate high level rocket scientist. Yeah. Ends up like how does a guy like that end up being like involved in all this satanic stuff and like he wanted to um he wanted to like bring the antichrist, right? Yeah. I the your question presupposes that a really smart person wouldn't go into all of this. But the truth is that a lot of these people that you a lot of Scientologists are really smart and very successful personalities. It's uh it doesn't have anything to do with intelligence and I think uh to some extent there's a lot of fantasizing going on which is something we've been talking about this last hour. Um, but if if Jack Parsons can be accused of, you know, being a a cultist, a fanaticist, you know, you know, he he's exploring the universe, but he's also sort of exploring, you know, the outer limits of human behavior. And I I mean, he was very uh proud of it. I mean, he didn't hide it, you know. he really had this, you know, sort of satanic temple and um and people were drawn to it and he legitimized it too by being such a prominent scientist and so on. So uh I don't know he was he wound up killing himself and that was kind of Jack Parson yeah kind of a sad end to his interesting life. There's a um a spot in the Everglades allegedly that he had a site that he worked on. Are you familiar with that? No, I don't know about that. There's this guy who does videos in the Everglades um catching iguanas and there's this spot. I can't remember the name of it. Steve, maybe you can Google it, but it's an abandoned um I guess abandoned air sport air force base rocket area rocket launch area. There's actual like silos in there uh where apparently Jack Parsons uh used to have used to work at and um there's like he goes into the woods into the Everglades and he finds all these abandoned overgrown houses with like pentagrams in there and all kinds of like dark satanic stuff which is wild. I didn't know that, you know, it's it's you know it's just uh it's so strange to me. It's just so because like being satanic is like it's like being religious, you know? It's just like going the opposite direction. Yeah. You don't have to you don't have to play it the whole video, but I was just wondering if you could Google where that where Jack Parson's place was in the Everglades. Um, are you religious? No, I'm uh I was religious as a teenager and um the u Methodist so I was as religious as you get to be in the Methodist church but um I was you know I was in Young Life and some of these Christian organizations and um and left it aside somewhere along in college but have always been interested and attracted to religious ideas without actually being able to allow myself to believe in them. So I can associate ideas. I mean, you know, I I think Jesus is a fascinating historical character and I think a wonderful model and so u was he conceived by immaculate conception or you know did he go to heaven? I I don't in some ways those things don't matter to me. I think, you know, what Jesus would mean to me now is that I'd like to incorporate more of his his behavior into my own. And uh I think that's something admirable. I I feel that way about, you know, uh you know, I don't know that much about Buddhism, but I'm intrigued by the the lessons that people draw from those religious teachings. M do you remember the point where you like stopped being really religious? Do you think was there like an exact point or was it just kind of like a There was this one moment I wouldn't say it was the you know the moment my life changed but it was a moment um in Young Life. We had these two leaders um who were sexual magnets u Roy and Johnny. Roy was um he played in the Rose Bowl. He had a Rose Bowl finger on his finger. He was a center. He was, you know, as you would expect, an impressive piece of meat. And um and his wife Johnny was an airline stewardist and just as hot as she could be. So for a lot of teenage kids, you know, these are appealing roy role models and um the um and of course their marriage didn't last as I understand it. and um he ran off with one of the high school students is what the rumor was. Um but there was a moment when uh I was we we're he was preparing us for the challenges of college, you know, and all the existentialists that awaited us. And uh so uh I was supposed to play uh one of these snoody intellectuals uh who believed that uh God, you know, it was the watchmaker analogy. You know, he created the watch and wound it up and then left us to our own devices. And so I made a very compelling case for that. And he said, "Now refute yourself." And I couldn't do that. you know, it just uh because the way to refute that is simply through belief and um right I I realized that I couldn't find my way there and that was a you know I had talked myself out of it. The the idea of God seems to be a a a fun fundamental part of the operating system of the human mind. Yeah. Uh, I don't think it's I mean it it might be tied to the era that we live in. Um, you know, I think and it's also the culture we're in. You know, I've spent a lot of time in other countries where you don't have the diversity of belief. You know, that uh you can only you can only believe one thing. You can believe it more or less, but there's this one thing and it's Islam or it's Buddhism or, you know, it's whatever. But in America, you can believe anything. And like Elon Hubard, if you don't find something, you just make it up. You know, you create your own religion. And it's a we're think culture in our country more than any other country. It's kind of it seems like a kind of a double-edged sword, right? Because America, there's no really like unifying identity to what it is to be an American, right? Like we're such a diverse country with different beliefs, different, you know, values. Um, and some other countries like Israel, for example, or let's just say some Middle Eastern country, they're they would go as far for their, you know, so far for their beliefs in God to strap a bomb to their chest and detonate it, right? And it's it's almost like the opposite here, right? So it's like it's like they have a very very from like a even from if you want to put it into like a national security frame like is it great that some countries can have this very strong unifying identity? Is that is that good for a country in some in some sense? um versus us who as a population we don't have this cohesive glue that that helps us all stick together but you know we have this giant military this giant government all this money all these weapons and all the all these things it kind of makes for a very interesting dynamic well you know I take into account you're younger than I am and I had um the ide I always had an idea of being an American and um the And as imperfect an identity as that is, it was always something that was dear to me. And as a reporter going into other countries where, you know, you know, you didn't have the freedom to speak. You didn't have the freedom to think clearly, you know, on your own. Um, and you know, you you lived your life, if not in fear, then at least in you lived it at a at a lower level than you might have had had you had you had your freedom. And I often think that maybe other countries have a clearer idea about America than we do ourselves. And there's a there's a sense in which every country has a foot in America in some way. It's like I think we understand so little about the world and it's like a we're surrounded by this mirror glass where we just see ourselves but outside they see who we are and and often times I mean I think invariably you go into a country and they'll have an uncle in America. You know, there's somebody they know in America, someone they're related to. Usually, they know a lot about what's going on with that person, and they compare the life that they're living in Egypt or Saudi Arabia or Thailand or wherever to the life their relative is living in De Moines or Los Angeles and something. So, there's a constant point of comparison, which is America. And that is a very powerful and very precious thing to have. uh but we we abuse it and we treat you know treat the rest of the world so poorly um that it you know I think people want to be I think people want the love and attention of America. I I remember when this was back in the 80s and I went to Nicaragua and the sandistas were in the middle of this revolution. Yeah. And um I it was the most anti-American country I'd had ever been in at that point. And and it was very impoverished and but I went to a baseball game with this the mistress of one of the Kandantes was my escort. She was she was a good number I'll tell you. I bet and you know she we had our bags checked and you know they pulled out this big pistol out of her her purse and I thought well I'm going to really behave myself here. Um, and so we sat up in the stands above the Kandantes and I looked down there and they were all, you know, they had their hands to their mouths and it looked like they were praying. And I asked the escort, you know, can I get you a Coke because no no alcohol served here. And sure. So I went up and I ordered two Cokes and they were it was the country was so poor they couldn't afford paper cups. So they poured the liquid into sandwich bags, little plastic, you know, sandwich bags. So they weren't praying, they were manipulating the liquid in the bag into their mouths. And um so as it happened, just a couple of weeks before I went to to Managa, um the Baltimore Orioles had come. The Baltimore Orioles at that time had three Nicaraguan players, including their ace pitcher, Dennis Martinez, and the legendary manager of the team, Earl Weaver, said, "Well, let's just go to Nicaragua and show off a little bit." So, they flew the team and they they had an exhibition game. Nobody could stop talking about it. They hated America, but they love the Baltimore Royals. And you know that it's just it's the most important thing that had happened since the revolution. Wow. And I think we forget the immense amount of power that we have over other cultures. Although I think we're squandering it so badly these days uh that we're that it's its value is disappearing. The reason I bring this up is because um I've been noticing a a lot of reporting recently on people in Silicon Valley trying to like map Christianity onto everything that's going on in Silicon Valley, which in historically is kind of like an anti-religious area, right? U Peter Teal is one of the biggest people, you know, Peter Teal is a really interesting guy. He's a gay Christian billionaire who is um you know one of the original investors in Facebook. I mean all kinds of cra you know really big companies. Um he also is the owner of Palunteer which is a a huge company that's biggest client is the US military and intelligence services. I think the CIA is using Palunteer. Um, and this guy is putting on these crazy conferences in San Francisco, inviting people to the to these uh Christian conferences. I think it was him and a guy from this company called Y Combinator who is a um this big part. It's like a kingmaker in Silicon Valley. They they fund a lot of uh startups and um there's this church I forget the name. there's this big church right in the middle of San Francisco and like they're putting on these big conferences and and and trying to really sort of push this uh push Christianity and religion onto all the people inside Silicon Valley to sort of give them some sort of purpose. I don't know what it is. I really can't wrap my mind around what's going on. But like is it reasonable to suggest that if they were to push this religion onto a place like Silicon Valley and these places that are coming up with these new innovative technologies that are being used for different things around the country and around the world that are a huge part of our economy and um our military and everything else. Would that somehow strengthen us as a country on the world stage if we were more cohesively involved in a unifying religion? Well, I don't think that we will be involved in a unifying religion. We're fortunate that it's not as divisive as it is, you know, like in Israel and in and the Middle East. Yeah. Um the uh my impression of Palunteer is that I just read Karp's book the technological republic I think it's called and you know the main goal is you know he feels that the the community the Silicon Valley community has been created in America but they don't feel allegiance to America and um I think there's some merit in that and also you know it's been charged with Palunteer has with helping the defense department and but on the other hand when your adversaries are Russia and China you want to keep ahead of the algorithms. So, you know, I I'm not one that says, you know, I what what's interesting to me is, you know, they're developing very powerful tools. Um, but people with varying ideologies can use them for different purposes. And, you know, we we're entering an era uh where technology awards such unprecedented amount of power to small groups and even singular individuals. Yeah. And you know, I wrote about terrorism after 9/11. You know, these were guys who were using suicide bombers and stuff like that. Bin Laden wanted to get a nuclear bomb, but he never could. Right. Um, you know, nowadays, you know, the the amount of power that al-Qaeda or any group uh like that uh could assemble easily uh is just terrifying to consider. I remember I remember the day that I awakened to the drone thing was you know some you know been more than 10 years I guess but somebody flew a drone over the White House fence and I thought oh my god it's that easy you know and and it's it is that easy and of course we know there are all these anti- drone um efforts right now the defense department has been working on yeah but swarms of do drones which are being trained like to fly through a forest the way a flock of birds would do. Right. It's right. That's one of the new palunteer things. Yeah. Yeah. It's really um it's like spreadsheet warfare. It's chilling and u you know it's u so you know Silicon Valley is you know government itself is losing its role in our society and it's being replaced by private industry right for good or ill. And uh you'll see good or ill you'll see both in massive amounts because there's a lot of fervor uh in Silicon Valley and in private investment in general and even the defense department I was talking to one of the the guys who procures weapons and what they do now rather than imagining a weapon you know and then going out and bidding a contract they go from shop to shop where people are develop veloping algorithms and saying, you know, what do what do you have? And it's kind of like shopping. Uh, you know, maybe we could use that. You know, there's not there's not a design in effect. It's it's all, you know, there it's like vintage clothes shopping, you know, in my thinking. And um, and it's a good idea to keep on top of what's the latest. Yes. But on the other hand, it seems to be that there's no idea about what they actually need or want. Yeah. It's it's interesting the types of characters that you can find in there. Like like again going back to Peter Teal and Alex Karp two very different people, right? Like and one of them is he made Alex the CEO of his company and they're both very I think Alex Karp donated like millions of dollars to Camala Harris's campaign. And then you have Peter Teal who is like the one of the biggest backers of Trump and his vice president. Um, and you know, Alex Carp proclaims to be this progressive guy, liberal person, but you know, is also very much, you know, like a, if you could call him a war hawk, but he's a very like expansionist type of guy, right? And I think he said in his um there was a New York Times article I read about him and he said something like something like and I might get this quote wrong but it was something to the effect of uh the idea of taking lives and saving lives is really interesting to me is what it is interesting. I hope that's as far as you go with it. Right. Just like it's it's bizarre. It is bizarre the idea of of private private industries taking control of, you know, some of the some of this technology that can be used, you know, around the world in in war zones and things like this or for espionage. You know, it's ter it's a terrifying idea to think about what would happen if some of these private industries, you know, were able to slip out of control of the United States government or the United States military, right? And um there's little question that'll happen. I mean in a globalized world, you know, where the market is, you know, you you see, you know, the evasion of sanctions everywhere, you know, I mean, Russia's getting pretty much all it needs even though it's sanctioned. You know, other countries are providing and um it's uh you know, once you develop these tools, there's little available to keep them in the box. Yeah. Yeah. Totally. Um, so I want to I want to talk to you about Looming Tower and I want to get to your new book, too. Um, the human scale, which was fascinating. I was able to I wasn't able to read the whole thing. I made it through the first seven chapters, though. All right. I'll just keep my my remarks. They're limited to the beginning. No, no, no. I want to talk about all of it. I think it's fascinating. Um, but I want to spend some a good amount of time on that, but um, I wanted to ask you, uh, about a little bit about Looming Tower. How long after 911 did you decide to write about this? Oh, on 911. It was on 911. Yeah, it was uh you know when the planes hit, it took out the phones in Manhattan. So I uh I texted my editor. At that time I was, you know, maybe thinking about leaving journalism and going into the movie business. And I so I I my relationship with the magazine was a little tentative and I I wrote Remnik, David Remnick, the editor. I said, "Put me to work." And so that afternoon we had a the phones came back on. Uh we had a conference call. Um and there were, you know, maybe a dozen uh New Yorker writers were scattered around. you know, everybody was on a story or something, you know. So, I mean, Jane Mayor, I remember was uh in Washington and Jeff Goldberg and you could hear the ambulances headed towards the Pentagon and stuff like that and um I you were in Austin. I was in Austin. It was very frustrating because you couldn't fly anywhere, you know, planes were grounded and uh so I couldn't go to New York. I couldn't go get into the story. So I started searching uh on the internet and also asking friends, you know, is this somebody I can talk to? And I interviewed some Muslims in Dallas Fort Worth and so on. But a friend had met this young man um at a film um conference. He was a reporter and um he had he was working for an investment magazine uh called Waters and he was supposed to have an interview on top of the World Trade Center in the Windows on the World on the 101st floor, but for the first time in his life, he slept through a subway stop. So he um got off the subway and rushed back in the opposite direction, got to the World Trade Center. Uh back then uh you know the World Trade Center had a bank of elevators. There were more than a hundred and um uh you had to go up a a flight of stairs, an escalator. Yeah. They had the escalators that went up. Yeah. Yeah. So he went up, got on the elevator, and he was late. He he did he was a young man so he didn't have a watch. He just had his iPhone. So he looked at his iPhone and uh he was like 801 and um the and the elevator operator held the door for this woman who was walking across the lobby and and and you know his reporter really was you know let's go let's go and she stepped onto the elevator. He has a a a an amazing memory. And he looked down and he saw as she stepped on that she had a rose tattoo on her ankle. And that made an impression. And then the plane hit. And so the doors to the elevator accordioned and and he walked out and he was it an earthquake? Nobody had any idea. But there were pieces of plaster and stuff lying on the the floor of the lobby. And some he said were like the size of a shoe box and some were the size like of an office desk, you know. And so it was a weird landscape. And remember, he had to go up that flight of stairs or escalator, but he saw uh outside a patio and uh he thought he was going out into the world. And so he stepped out into the patio. This was like second floor or something like that. Yeah, it was mezzanine or whatever. And uh he they stepped out and he said there were hundreds of shoes and uh and what looked like luggage, but he realized they were human torsos. And so he his story about getting home, walking home to Queens became the bookend of the black issue of the New Yorker. And I had been interviewing him and giving my wife the tape and to tape up type up and you know it was you know weeping and you know it was really uh a difficult time and uh my my ed one of my editors uh said you know you've got enough don't worry about it and I thought no you kidding this is it this is the story and f and then that night David Rimnick called and that I want everything you can get from this because this is the the book end of the story which I knew it had to be. So that after that I was looking for a way to write about the story in a in a larger way but how do you take a catastrophe like that some vast human tragedy and make shrink it down in some way to make it relatable? And my I've always had this idea of what I call the donkey, which is sounds like a deprecating term, but a donkey is a beast of burden and it can carry a lot of information on his back and he can take the reader into a world he's never been. So that's I'm looking for that person. And on the Washington Post site, I think I was looking at obits that were streaming online. M uh on the Washington Post site, I found this obituary for John O'Neal, who had been head of counterterrorism at the FBI in New York and had the warrant on Bin Laden, but he had been washed out of the FBI when he took some classified information out of the office to a retirement conference as it happened. So, he took a job as a head of security at the World Trade Center. So, I thought instead of getting Bin Laden, Bin Laden got him. And I didn't know if he was a hero or a goat, you know, but he was a hell of a donkey. And so that's how I got started on the looming tower. And I had to my other donkeys were Iman Elsa Waffrey number two guy and bin Laden himself and Prince Turkey Alfasil who was the head of Saudi intelligence. And through these interweaving biographies I could tell the story of 9/11. Wow. And how as far as like approaching a story like this, I imagine you had to find a lot of sources within the FBI and the intelligence community, right? Yeah. What was that like? I I was real fortunate. It took a while for me to understand why I was so fortunate that uh the FBI I had written a movie called The Siege, right? That came out in 1998. and uh with Denzel Washington and Bruce Willis and you know a number of other fine actors and um and Denzel's job was the same as John O'Neal's and that was odd to me you know that and and then the movie was about what would happen if terrorism came to America as it had in London or Paris you know how what if it came to New York that was the premise and then it came out in 1998 And so it was 3 years before 9/11, but it was eerie in many respects that these parallels were in the movie. And um so I felt having imagined the scenario that I wanted to find out what really happened. And that's what led me on that odyssey to write the looming tower. And was it like when you were doing this research and talking to sources, I imagine some of these people were still actively working. Oh yeah. Well, to get back to your question, how did I had to talk to the FBI, right? And um it when I was writing the movie I didn't get very much cooperation and um but suddenly it seemed the gates were opening and one guy I really wanted to interview was named Ali Sufan right um Ali when I wrote the movie um I knew I had heard about this Lebanese American FBI agent who spoke Arabic and very few I think seven in the whole industry uh whole bureau spoke uh spoke Arabic. So he was an incredibly valuable source and asset and um he was made available to me and that was a good sign, you know, because and then other agents that I was interested in were made available and then finally I figured out what was going on. the CIA was trying to blame the FBI for 911. And so I was I became part of their defense. And so practically anybody I wanted to talk to in the bureau I was able to talk to. And the CIA I talked to people in the CIA, but they weren't nearly as forthcoming. But it and then a lot of my questions had to do with the fact that two of the hijackers came to America in January of 2000. you know, like an 18 month 19 months before before 9/11 and the CIA knew they were in America and didn't tell the FBI. And so they were trying to shove responsibility off of them and put it onto the bureau. And the bureau was not perfect, but they didn't know that al-Qaeda was in America until the CIA came and told them in late August of 2001, uh, a month before the actual tragedy. So, they didn't have the time to go out and find al-Qaeda. The reason I'm convinced that the CIA ever came to tell the FBI is that they lost them. You know, they they didn't know where they were. And so now they maybe had been planning in colludes cahoots with the Saudi intelligence to turn these guys. That's that's a theory of a lot of FBI guys. Um but they couldn't turn them if they had disappeared. And so, right, and they didn't see them again until they showed up on TV. So, the idea here with this uh internal rift between the CIA and the FBI is that John O'Neal and the FBI, Ali Sufon, they wanted to find the culprits and get rid of them or arrest them. And the intelligence community, the CIA, they wanted to keep their distance and try to figure out their way to get more intelligence. Right. There was there was always a conflict in the mission of these two bureaus and also but that was compounded by personal animosity and you know one of the the leader of the bin Laden unit uh in the CIA testified before Congress that one good thing happened on 911 John O'Neal was killed. That's the level of their hatred and it got in the way, you know. I mean, America could have withtood uh, you know, an attack of some sort, but 911 was a trauma deep wound in the country and and it's I still think that the CIA bears a lot of moral responsibility for that. for me. And so John O'Neal and Ali, well, mainly I think Ali Sufon, they they pretty much snuffed the whole thing out, right? Well, you know, Ali was a, you know, unique individual. Yeah. You know, he had super young. He was very young. He's the youngest case agent, you know, I mean, he was in his 20s when he made the was cage case agent for 911. and he's the guy that um he's the guy that identified the hijackers and uh you know he he was he didn't torture anybody you know this uh it's he was very clever interrogator um you know he would uh for instance he had a little snippet of um some taped conversation between two of these al-qaeda guys and Um, so that's all he had, you know, in this one interrogation. And um he he got a bunch of he got a shopping cart, you know, with a bunch of uh similar shaped cassettes, you know, on there and make it look like he had this, you know, library and he walked into this interrogation and he just picked randomly supposedly this one tape and popped it in and played this bit and the, you know, the suspect's eyes are like, "Oh my god, they overheard my telephone calls and what else did they know?" And so he just spilled the beans. There was no more beans. There was one bean, you know, but but it was just it was clever interrogation of a little trickery involved, but no torture. And he's a guy that pulled the FBI out of Guantanamo and said, "We don't torture people." And he was going to arrest the CIA operatives that were doing the torture. You know, that was he was prevented from doing that. But he's a man of the kind of principles that we'd like for the country to stand for. Yeah. I'm sure you know John Keryaku, right? Not personally, but Right. Yeah. His story. I mean, he was the one who basically like blew the whistle on the whole torture program and look what happened to him. They sent him to prison and ruined his life. Yeah. Stripped him of his retirement. Um, so where did I want to go with this? Bin Laden. So, I've had people um on the show, including John actually, um who talk about how in the years leading up to 9/11, we had CIA people, um paramilitary folks over in cartoon in Africa and in the Middle East basically tracking Bin Laden's every move. And in fact, there's this guy who um this guy by the name of Billy Wah, who's like this famous uh CIA paramilitary commando basically um who Annie Jacobson writes about in her book Surprise, Kill, Vanish, who was like there tracking the guy and going on daily jogs around the mosque that he would be visiting every day in cartoon. He was taking photos of the guy. He would I mean of Bin Laden. he would be like literally across the street from Bin Laden taking photos of him around the clock and they couldn't get the and then the way I understand it is um they couldn't get permission to take out Bin Laden even though they very easily could have and as far as your understanding why why was that? Well, at that time there were a couple of things going on. uh bin Laden was um sort of laying low and he spent I think four years in Sudan. Uh he wasn't active. Uh he was mainly al-Qaeda become a kind of agricultural institution. You know he was developing all these seeds that he was very proud of and he was you know he had may have owned more land in Sudan than any other individual. Um and they played soccer and stuff like that. So it wasn't uh yeah he was anti-American. He was making noise but at this point the king was trying to reconcile with him and he sent Jamal Koji you Jamal Kosigible who was bin Laden's buddy and um although you know not a follower you know he was but he was a friend of his and had spent time in Afghanistan with bin Laden during the mujaheden days. Um, and Jamal was a reporter and he's he was a friend of mine and Oh, really? Uh, he was sent to cartoon explicitly to get Bin Laden to renounce terrorism and then you'll be welcome home. Who sent him there? The king. Oh. And um so uh the way Jamal explained it to me, he'd spent three days uh in cartoon. Um and Bin Laden was always very close to the point of pronouncing terrorism because he was homesick. But finally he wouldn't he wouldn't cross that line. So Jamal went home empty-handed. And um the uh at that point the Sudin decided to expel him and rob him of practically everything that he he had, all of his possessions. And um I had a I went to Sudan three times tracking that story down. And I the first time I went uh I I had been working closely with the Sudin intelligence and because I had a someone had referred me and so they were they would drive me around and show me where Bin Laden lived and the mosque and where the soccer fields were and all this sort of stuff. But I said, "Look, I need to talk to somebody, somebody in al-Qaeda." And uh and u so One day I was in this uh in my room in what they called cheerfully the Hilton and uh I I'd have to flash back a little bit. I had the first time I flew to Saudi Arabia. I I I had a job there. I mentoring these young reporters and at this Saudi gazette. Um I when I got off the plane I was in terrible pain. my back was really killing me and I you know for the three months I was there the first time um I couldn't raise my toes I was just you know terrible sciatic pain so the next time I went back to Saudi Arabia I took one of those exercise balls that you know you sit on when your back is and back then you didn't have the pump so you had to blow it up you know and then unblow it and so I flew to cartoon with my exercise ball and so there was a knock at the door and the Sudin intelligence officer was there and he had this uh this guy with him and um and he wouldn't tell me who he was. So um come on in and I I offered the guy the mysterious guy the the the desk chair and the intelligence agent lay down on my bed and went soundlessly. So it left me with this guy that I quickly assumed was an al-Qaeda member and uh and so I sat down on the ball and he was over there and u I started asking him questions and he knew everything and I thought Jesus who is this guy and u so I flew back to America and I researched him and you know, triangulated and I came up with Muhammad Loy Buazid U is his al-Qaeda name was Abu Riddal Suri and he was the guy who took the notes when al-Qaeda was founded. It's in his handwriting handwriting and I suddenly holy [ __ ] I was talking to the guy that has been in al-Qaeda from the moment it started and I didn't know that. So I flew back to cartoon and he wouldn't see me and that was disappointing. And so finally he agreed if I came again he would talk to me. And so I flew back. I said uh Lou you know it's a lot of trouble coming to a cartoon. Why didn't you see me last time? He said well I didn't know how seriously to take you when we met the first time. You were sitting on a balloon. [Laughter] So that's how I got into al-Qaeda. Wow. It was um you know it it when Bin Laden left Sudan, you know there there's a case to be made. We should have just left him alone. Um but because we helped Bin Laden in the originally, right? We helped him against the Soviet Union. Yes. In that sense we didn't directly give money to him but uh we were fighting the same cause and so you know in that sense we were allies but there was a myth that you know that we were underwriting him and that never was true nor would he even want it you know really yeah I mean he got plenty of money from Saudi Arabia he didn't need ours bin L so the history of bin Laden he he's interesting so his dad his father was made a ton of money um working for the king of Saudi Arabia, right? He got some sort of he won some sort of contract to build some like a huge road or something. Well, yeah. That uh he was the major contractor in Saudi Arabia. Up until that point, he had been working for an American company that was building, you know, roads in Saudi Arabia. When they when that happened, there were practically no roads, you know, right? And um there's there's a ridge of mountains um that is right above the western shore of Saudi Arabia on the Red Sea and uh Jedda for instance where I was stationed um was in that level ground below the level you know between the sea and the and and the desert above um this high palisade and um the it was a real challenge. You know, the American companies walked away from the deal, but you know, the only way to get from Jedha to Riad was, you know, some sort of camel trail or, you know, early aviation. So, Muhammad bin Laden, the father, um, took on the challenge and, uh, he he went up, got up on top of the this mountain palisade and he pushed a goat over the edge and followed him down, marking the path that the goat took. And that's amazing. Then that became the uh the route of this very twisty turny uh highway that united the country. And so he became a national hero and he more or less was responsible for the renovation of the the mosque in Mecca. And um you know he was highly valued uh famous uh character. He died in an air crash and um but you know he left behind this 53 kids right? Yeah I think there were 56 I think so um and so there were you know one of my best sources was Jamal Khalifa his brother-in-law but that's not an exclusive term when you have that many brothers and sisters and um that he he was great it was it was a eyeopening experience. Wow. And going back, so 911 happens and we f like h or actually before 911 is when the United States intelligence community goes to the FBI and says, "We know these people are in the US, but we lost track of them." Yeah. That's in August 2001, right? And did they how long before that did they know that they were like for example taking these like flying lessons over here in Florida like down the street from where we are now and being handled by these Saudi intelligence people. It was episodic. The information it wasn't pulled together. You know, there there was suspicion like in Arizona, there was an industrious uh guy who found out about these Saudis um who were in a flight school, but they didn't feel like they needed to learn how to land, right? And u it was a similar story with a guy named Masawi who was um very flagrant uh in in in his aggressive about getting uh to fly. He wanted to fly Boeing planes. He was very, you know, it was suspicious enough that the right local FBI chief uh reported it. So, but was there ever the moment where somebody said, "I'm getting a lot of reports of these guys who are Saudis who are trying to learn how to fly and not land." Yeah. That never happened. No. And there was also uh safe houses, I think, on the West Coast in in California where some of these guys were staying. And there was Saudi official or Saudi intelligence people that were somehow connected to this. These two hijackers that I told you about earlier who they arrived in um they flew in from Malaysia. There had been a big um meeting of uh al-Qaeda operatives and uh and from that meeting uh they came to America. Uh and also from that meeting there were some guys who would then uh go blow up the USS Cole. So it was a high level uh meeting of terrorists and Guala Lumpur and uh two of these guys uh uh Mid Midhar and Hazmi Alhazmi um flew into LAX on January the 5th I think and then on January 15th the CIA found out about them. Uh so early on and they were told by Saudi intelligence uh I interviewed Prince Prince Turkey Alfasil who said that he told the you know the the chief of station in Riad uh about these two al-Qaeda guys. So the CIA found out about it not through their own detection but then uh was the CIA working with Saudi intelligence? Well that's what I believe. I think that I mean they were closely tied but um and uh Turkey you know uh went to school for a while with Bill Clinton. I've forgotten exactly what the he was u he was uh very close you know Saudi intelligence and US intelligence work together closely u but not as closely as they should have and u when when the CIA found out about the by that time um these two hijackers shortly after they arrived Um they were greeted in a restaurant u by uh a fellow Saudi who had just come from the Saudi um embassy or consulate in in in LA. And um lo and behold, surprise, you're from my country. And uh and he sits down and tells him, "Well, you must move to San Diego. I will help set you up." and he does do that. And um they move down to San Diego. Uh and it's at that point that the CIA is beginning to take an interest in them. We don't know, you know, they won't they to date, they haven't really divulged, you know, what they did. And this I I don't want this to die. I I I I want to see this information come out. I mean, is this part of the report that was that was never shown, the part of the 9/11 commission that was hidden, there's still there's still stuff that's redacted about it. and the the the what the the 22 pages or whatever it was that uh the victim's families finally forced out of the CIA. Uh it didn't cover all the material, but it did expose some very interesting stuff like the the tests, you know, they would Saudis would be on airplanes and they would, you know, in one case for instance, walk up and open the cockpit door. Oh, I'm sorry. You know, I thought it was a bathroom and uh they got so suspicious that the plane was grounded and they were interrogated and they they said, "Oh, no. We uh we're Saudis. You know, we're very prominent. Uh Prince Bandar, who is the head of the the ambassador to the US is a friend of ours." As a matter of fact, Bandar's wife was sending money to uh to the to the people that were to the hijackers. Um, so really, let me let me try to get this straight. Uh, she was sending money. I I I'm afraid to get too deep into the well there because I I'm not exactly money from her was given to the operative who was working with the hijackers or to them, the hijackers themselves, but I I forget exactly how that worked. But on these test runs, um, you know, they were they were clearly planning the operation as it was going to go down. Yeah. And you know, that where would we sit on the airplane and sort of how do you how how hard is it to get into the cockpit? Well, not hard as it turned out, right? and uh all of that came out in those pages that had been suppressed for no reason except to protect the uh dignity of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Um my my thinking about this is that I don't think that the Saudi king wanted to attack America. Um, and I think that, you know, when Prince Turkey divulged the presence of uh two Saudis to uh to the CIA, he um you know, he was doing us a great favor. U I'm sure that he thought that, you know, America would take care of this problem. I also think that the CIA decided, let's let the Saudis handle this. you know, uh, you know, they they can follow them and then they they have their means. They can turn them and maybe that's out of our capacity. So, for that reason, they were just going to lightly monitor the situation and and expect that the Saudis would take care of the problem. Has your has your view or your thinking around 9/11 evolved or changed at all since you first wrote about it? Because there's like I mean obviously there's like tons of different theories that float around out there about 911 like conspiracy theories that you know Alex Jones is one of the biggest proponents of it how he called it out like whatever a year before it happened. And there's documentaries that are out there that, you know, try to tie things like 9/11 to like look at Operation Northwoods, you know, it's the same concept, but you know, years later and in a different context and um you know, like why there's there's tons of like legitimate questions that are asked about it from people that weren't really close to it. I've noticed I've noticed the people that were really close to it or directly affected by it through family or or friends, they they are the ones that don't have patience to entertain any of that stuff. But the one the people that are more disconnected from it who maybe were in another part of the country or were born afterwards who weren't directly really emotionally affected by this. I I haven't I haven't changed my view and u and I the first time I really ran into the denier thing u my friend Linklater Rick Linklater was having a a party to uh open up one of his movies and I forgotten which one it was but he invited Alex Jones who was oh really a kind of non- entity in in in Austin at the time. He had been on um they we used to have this community TV station, you know, so anybody wanted to get on, we do, you know, it was crazy. Maline Murray O'Hare, the atheist, had her show on it and you know, and so Alex got a a spot on it and he was uh he could talk really wildly and, you know, uh expressively. Yeah. And so, uh, Rick used him in a couple of his pictures as as a kind of raving maniac who was sitting in the back of a cab, um, sprouting all these conspiracy theories. So, The Looming Tower had just come out and I was, you know, I was at the party and and Rick, he's a mischievous fellow, you know, he comes over and says, "Larry, I wanted you to meet somebody and Alex, this is Larry, right?" You know, and uh, I thought you guys might talk about 911. So Joan starts off on what happened and I said, "Gosh, that didn't that's not true at all." And you know, like what like what I don't remember exactly what it was, but it was it was, you know, way off base and um and I told him what did happen and he he turned around and walked away. Um h you know I but after that whenever I'd make a speech about you know the looming tower uh there would always be people in the audience that would you know what about this what about that and you know what about the you know World Trade Center 7 or you know why didn't structure fall you know it must have been dynamite in it if you look at it is clearly an explosion I mean the thing is it was a horrible tragedy and it happened and and it It's hard to believe that it happened. So therefore, people wonder why. You know, there must be some explanation for this because this is something that surely one man in a cave couldn't have pulled this off. And the truth is one man in a cave did pull it off. It's wild. It really is because there I mean there are a lot of crazy questions that are that are you know like why do they leave stuff out of the commission report? Why were the uh why was the black box in the plane, you know, never show why did the FBI cover that stuff up? You know, we'll never know the answer to that. I feel like we'll we never Well, I'd like for that to to be fully is, you know, the only thing that we are missing here is the truth. Yeah. And um you know I believe it's pretty clear what happened. But yeah, I I think that you know the the evidence that the CIA was in cahoots with the Saudi intelligence is not something that's been admitted. But why not just go ahead and say it because that's what I think really did happen. But instead they're stuck with no answer, right? They can't tell you why they they waited uh you know a year and a half to tell the FBI which had the authority o over terrorism in America. That's what the whole plot of the siege was my movie. Yeah. Uh was a riff between the CIA and the FBI over who was going to control terrorism. And then it became a you know it came true in real life. Yeah. And the way 9/11 changed you know changed everything too. in in America is is bizarre. You know, like some of the things that were enacted as far as um you know, like the TSA, uh the Patriot Act, you know, I had a guy in here recently, Tom Drake, who was a whistleblower for the NSA, who worked for the NSA. His first day on the job at the NSA was 9/11. And um you know he was explaining to me the optimism of everybody in the NSA that day and how they were like just elated with the with the idea of implementing their new uh the new I forget the name of the software now to where they could basically just do drag net uh dragnet surveillance on and collecting of data of all Americans and um you know it's just it's a it's a just crazy how our world and and our country changed after 9/11. When I when I talk to younger people about that question, I I recount um when I was in high school, I took a date to the airport in Dallas and um it was a cheap date, you know, and uh and you know, we were young enough that, you know, this it still was interesting to go to an airport and um so we walked out on the tarmac and climbed into this uh 7 70 7:07 or something some you know we sat in the first class seats and you know imagine the plane had just arrived from Paris and uh and the stewardist as we called them then came and offered us a treat and so we sat there you know having a little party in the plane and then we walked into the FAA tower and come on in kids and you know so watch them land the planes that was America that was the freedom we had before 9/11 and I'm fear fearful that that America is gone and it's gone from our memory and younger people don't realize what we've lost. But if we've lost it and without the idea that we want to steer back to it, then we'll never get back to it. Wow. Yeah. That's something that young people don't have any comprehension of, you know, unless they hear stories like like what you explained. And like I was too young to even you know I was in I think I was in like sixth grade when it happened but I remember vividly I remember I don't remember like going through airports but but you know I remember that day and you know it's not encouraged. No. Right. Right. Um, but so so I want to talk about your new book and human scale and it's it's all about it seems like the timing is impeccable with you with you coming out with these these books you know not only with with this one which I think this you turned in your draft for this I think right before October 7th. Right. Right. And you had been working on it for how long before then? Well, actually a long time because I I it originated with as a screenplay uh that never got made. I think all my novels started out as screenplays, but um the you know the then I did a one-man show which I called the human scale. Uh I did it in New York and and in Tel Aviv. And the what drew me to the the story was I I had gone to Gaza after uh this 2009 a young uh Israeli soldier named Galad Shalit had been kidnapped by Hamas and um and the Israelis never found him. uh he was finally traded for a thousand Palestinian prisoners and I was fascinated by that comparison. How does one life equal a thousand? That's what the human scale is all about. So I did that show. Um it was interesting doing it in New York. There was a lot of anger, you know, people uh it's sensitive subject, you know, when you talk about the Middle East. Yeah. And we had a a a sandwich board outside the theater and somebody kicked it all the way down the street in Tel Aviv. There wasn't anger, but there was a lot of grief. And um so it brought up feelings and I knew I was stirring something very deep. Um and some years passed, but the story lingered and I thought, is there some way I can write about this? because I've I've spent so much of my career in the region. You know, I lived for two years in Cairo when I was a young man teaching at the American University and been back and forth to Israel and Syria and, you know, just everywhere in the Middle East and uh and to Israel many times, always looking at people, you know, trying to understand why this conflict is so durable. M I mean I am the same age as Israel which right that's crazy. Yeah, it's a young country, right? But so this conflict has been going on my entire life. And this is a life that has been lived through I've seen apartheid disappear. I've seen the Soviet Union dissolve. I've seen a black man elected president. I went we went through Vietnam, Iraq one, Iraq 2, Afghanistan. All that's part of the history now. But this just keeps going on and on and on. So why is that? And I thought, well, maybe I can do it as a novel instead of, you know, try to get inside the brains of these people, my characters, and see the world from their perspective, right? And my feeling I I'm I I will always believe that peace is pro possible, but it's not possible if you're unwilling to see the world through the eyes of your adversary. Right? And that's what's happened in in in this case is that it's it's uh there's an there's a loss of human feeling for your adversary. And so I decided to create characters that would be interesting and appealing but would be totally opposite sides. And so the charact the main characters Yosi Bengal is uh the deputy chief of police in Hebrron. Hebron itself is a character because it's um it's the most violent uh hateful environment I'd ever been in. And when I was there in February of 23, um I was a source of peace, about the only peace in Hebrron, uh Issa Amro, was taking me through the old town, old city of Hebrron, which is mostly closed down by the Israeli police. and he was assaulted right in front of me. I mean, uh, this big young soldier, they're all young, they're just out of high school, these soldiers, and policing, uh, you know, another population, but uh, apppropo of, let me say this, there was no provocation. There was no provocation. I was he issa was taking us on this tour. It was me and and Barbara Dubalucer. I think it's a Bernat she's Belgian photographer. We were going through and seeing this shopping street. It was called uh I I remember when I was um went to Hebrron the first time in 1997. This shopping street was very alive, but they were there was a settlement just above it. And these these little settler kids were throwing rocks down at the girls who were just coming out of school in their little school uniforms. And then one threw a rock at me and I was really pissed off. I really wanted to throw that rock back. I had a pretty good arm back then. But I looked up and I saw this Israeli soldier with his M16 who was protecting the kids who were throwing the rocks. Oh wow. So, cut to, you know, x number of years later. I'm walking down that same street. It's now totally deserted and all the shops are closed. Uh, has this mausoleum feeling and then suddenly this soldier appeared. He had confronted me and Barbara earlier but then he reappeared when Issa who was not allowed to walk on that street because he is a Muslim. Mhm. Um he rejoined us and the the soldier he was so angry at Issa for no reason. And uh Issa is reminded me I started my career at the race relations reporter and u covering the civil rights movement and he reminded me of the freedom bus riders and the sitin people you know who knew they were going to get hurt. Yeah. And you know, I just always admired that kind of courage. I just didn't have it myself. But Issa was one of those people. And uh so uh Isa says, "Call your commander. You're not doing the right." You know, he knew all the rules, you know, and it just pissed off the soldier even more. But he did call his commander. And uh you he said um that we have some liberals here. Some liberals. Some liberals. And uh I said, "Wait, I'm from Texas that day." Made I I was trying to cool things off. Um but at some point he grabs he takes him over to a bench and forces him down and stands in front of him with his crotch right in front of his face and his M4 dangling, you know, bumping into Isa's legs. Mhm. And um finally he just the soldiers just exploded and he grabbed Issa by the neck and he's he's modest size but he lifted him up and he hurled him to the ground his head missing a curb by like a quarter of an inch and then wound up and kicked him so hard they nearly fell over. other soldiers were around and I just tried to you know calm the waters and say you know this is going south really quickly and they were afraid of him of the you know this violent soldier and um what struck me and so many things did but one was we were witnesses we're standing right there we're westerners and and Barbara saying you know you know he felt so enraged and so empowered that uh and he was circling around there was one other guy was trying to keep him from finishing up the job. And there had been a Palestinian assassinated by an Israeli soldier not far away who the guy was lying on the ground unconscious when the soldier shot him in the head. Oh my god. So, you know, I thought that was going to be the conclusion of this, but fortunately, we got Issa away. And um but it it caused me to go back and rewrite my my novel. Um and uh I I realized that it was taking me into deeper water than I thought it was, you know. And then uh along comes October 7th and um the draft that I had turned in ended in a war, but it was a war like the one that I'd seen before uh in when I was in Gaza in 2009. And it it was devastating for Gaza, but it wasn't obliterated. And so I I had to go back and rewrite it again. This time I was faced with this situation. You know, this is such a deep wound. Yeah. Uh and uh how can I ignore it? Can I set it earlier in time? Should I set it in the future? And I thought there's really no other alternative but to go right through it and have October 7th be the destination of this novel. And so this, you know, Yosi Bengal is investigating the murder of his chief of police. It's a heinous crime and we think it's Hamas. But in into town comes a Palestinian uh named Tony Malik who's American and uh he comes in at the wrong time and you know he's arrested and they think he's probably uh the guy who killed the chief, but then they discover he's actually an FBI agent and he had an appointment with the chief of police earlier that morning. So these two guys, Yosi and Malik, are very similar in many ways and they have the same job, but they're torn apart by history, ethnicity, religion. You know, these are the forces that are pulling them apart. In short, they hate each other, but they have to to solve the crime, they have to work together. And this is a in some ways a a buddy movie, but it's set, you know, you see the world through their eyes and the eyes of other characters like the the the figure that is loosely based on Issa, you know, is a peace who's trying to bring peace to the region. And then there's a Yosese's daughter Sarah who loves her father but is so ambivalent about where Israel is going. She's in the marches on, you know, that have been going on in Tel Aviv and elsewhere for the last couple of years. So, she's a part of that contingent. So, each of these characters represents a perspective, but I hope that they are fully imagined human beings. So, when you went about researching for this novel, um did you go about it, I mean, I assumed you just went about it in like this typical way you research for your um for your non-fiction works, right? like you just investigated people like how long did you spend actually going there and how many times did you go into Israel or into uh Hebrron to like did you I extensively interview individuals and yeah I I you know see this evolved over a long period of time so uh I've been to Israel five times I think um wow and um then West Bank three or four times Um, did you ever interview Oh, sorry to interrupt. I was going to ask if you ever interviewed any of Israeli's intelligence people. Oh, yeah. And they were very helpful. uh especially one who was in uh Shinbet u and um you know it helped me because one of my characters is in Shinbet and um that's the domestic intelligence um and yeah I I and I there are American operatives who are u with Arab background who have been very helpful to me uh corresponding to my Palestinian American American FBI agent. Um, it's yeah, you know, I've been very fortunate with my sources and they, you know, it wouldn't be the book that it is if I hadn't had the the friendly advice of people on the inside, right? I've talked to a lot of people on this show from um uh the United States's uh intelligence community and um it seems to me like the writing on the wall is even if a lot of them won't outright say it is there's a lot of um a simple way to put it is that America America's intelligence CIA and Israel's intelligence of Mossad don't get along um for what it's worth it and that their intelligence it seems to the the sentiment that that their intelligence is far more I don't want to say superior is the right word but um far more efficient for whatever reason. Um I I would imagine that you know the fact that you know they're surrounded by by enemies and you know their ultimate goal is to is to propagate the future of their race, right? So they have they have um there's more of an existential threat there. I have no question about it. And you know that what the Israelis do is monitor and control and they have a vast population to monitor and control. Um and they feel I mean both sides feel like this is an existential question. Yeah. Although it's not you know Arabs and Jews live together very peacefully in Brooklyn. There's just there's just no reason for this except that this compounding series of traumas that build on each other. Uh, and there's a mythology that each nurses is that we're going to win. We're going to push them into the sea or we're going to drive them over to, you know, into Saudi Arabia and Jordan and somewhere. Just clear the West Bank and then we'll have it all to ourselves. That's never going to happen. And it so it it goes back to my question about why it's so durable. The there's first of all the enemies of peace. Whenever something comes up and looks like peace like the Oslo Accords or something like that, then you have suicide bombers suddenly appear and then you have Yeetsak Rabbine is assassinated and and uh you know and so suddenly everything goes to [ __ ] and every time both sides they fall for it, you know, they they get enraged and they go back to war. But it's all one war. It's all the same war that's been going on since I was born. There are periods where you know of calm where they just rearm but essentially it's the same old war and so with all the amazing intelligence that Mossad and and you know has its capability in Shinbet and their ability to try to control this very restive group of people. They know that there is not a military solution. In fact, one after another, the heads of of MSAD have been public. There's even a movie, a very insightful movie where they're saying, "We're doing the wrong thing. We need to make peace with these people." So, it's generally known that there's not a military this it's not going to be like World War II and there's, you know, the war is over and somebody won, right? It's going to be something entirely different. It's just it's but it continues to be exactly the same thing. And it seems like what's going what has been going on forever is just like a it's um when when Israel is demolishing Gaza and and shooting pe kids through the heart and all these women and children are dying. It's it seems like what they're creating is and they're aware of it is a self-fulfilling prophecy. Yeah. Right. They're they're creating more extremists and more hatred for the IDF. The Israeli Israel Defense Forces says that Hamas is back to full strength. 40,000 warriors after all the slaughter. You know, uh what they've done is create a mighty recruitment theme and and that's always been the case. It's it's not different anymore. You know, it's not different now. It's just going to imagine if you are a young Palestinian man and you've watched your family be killed or dispossessed. See, that's why I think, you know, when you put that question on either side, right? What would you do if you were an Israeli or what would you do if you were a Palestinian? It's a question that nobody wants to answer because they know the answer, right? You know the answer. If you're like I can I could tell you, you know, having my own kids, if some group murdered my child, my toddler, I would do the most unthinkable things to retaliate. Yeah, I think that's part of being human. But it's also part of being human to try to find a way to restore justice and peace. And that's what's absent right now. It's all retaliation and it will be as long as we can see until people actually arise and demand peace. Peace has a price and one is to sacrifice that longing to kill and revenge and and you know I wrote a play and then a movie and then a book I mean uh about Camp David which was the Carter Bean Sedat Summit in in 1978. Carter came into office and the first day in office he told his vice president um my top goal is to bring peace to the Middle East. Walter Manddale is the vice president. He told me he panicked. You know is that what he's about? You know how because it was like the ultimate you can't do that. Mhm. But Carter brought in the president of Egypt, An Marcidat, who had been an assassin, and the prime minister of Israel, Manakim Bean, who was a terrorist, and Carter was a one-term Georgia governor. And they sit behind the trees in Camp David for 13 days. Imagine three world leaders totally cut off. and they come up with a peace agreement that has endured since they signed the paper in 1979. Not a single violation. So, it's possible. But if you look at then what happened to the peacemakers, Carter lost the election. Yeah. He was not reelected. In fact, he lost the Jewish vote. The first time for a Democratic nominee in modern history. U Manakim began thought, "Oh, I can do anything now." and he invaded Lebanon for what he thought was going to be two weeks and he was they were in Lebanon for 18 years and uh and and he was hated. He was in isolation in his house. There were kids for years, you know, there were just like the chants about hey LBJ, how many kids did you kill a day? It was that kind of atmosphere. So he died in in in seclusion and in disgrace. and then Saddat was assassinated. So that's what happened to the people who made peace and I think that's been a lesson to the aspiring peacemakers that there's a lot of personal risk here. Wasn't the first president of Israel um I believe he might have been the first president of Israel. Um Bengurian No, before him. Um he was uh Yes. Yes. Heim Wiseman. Yeah. Uh, wasn't he he was like a a Zionist who came in and thought that um basically we need to come in here and make the the Muslims love us like we're going to we're going to bring in all this innovation and and treat them kindly and just make them to where they just they can't turn us away because we provide so much and and improve their quality of life so much. Um, and then after that, I think Ben Gurian kind of his view of it was like, "No, that's kind of like a the way he I think the way, correct me if I'm wrong, but the way he looked at it was like you can't look at that. That's like pre 911, post 911, like like he looked at like now that you have, you know, World War II and the Holocaust, you can't look at it like that anymore. Now we have to look at it through the lens that they're looking at it now." Yeah. Well, there was at the in the early days of the Zionist movement, you know, they first of all they they wondered, you know, where should we go? And you know, there were Kenya was one of the or Uganda, you know, at the time and u South America. Um but always there was the idea of the holy land and and that's uh in the first Zionist conference in burn Switzerland in the 1890s you know it was decided that's that's where we're going to go um there were mixed thoughts you know Weissman was the optimist you know Bengurian privately felt that the the Arabs would never accept them and um and it's not as if they did a lot to try to help make them acceptable. Um but you know they would at that time the Isra the future Israelis would come and buy a lot of land up and it was uh it was threatening to the native population and there were Arab riots and stuff like that. So things got off to a bad start and u and then when Israel declared itself as a nation, you know, the Nagba, the expulsion of nearly 700,000 uh Palestinians, whether they were forced out or just simply not allowed to return to their homes, that was sort of the the one moment if I were to call history back and say, you know, there's a small change I want to make in the role of human events and I just let them come home and try to work it out. And um and you know the age of modern terrorism was born in that moment too because u it was the Palestinian diaspora that that led to the rise of you know these terrorist movements coming out of Palestine. M now the history uh of this is I think and maybe you can elucidate this a little bit better but originally I think the UN came in and said it's going to be like a 564 split between the Jews and the Palestinians right and Palestine would be an international city right and then um I mean sorry Jerusalem Jerusalem would be an international city oh okay yeah because the the rift over you know these holy places was very profound and uh so what could we do to uh take that off the table? Will we make it it's not an entity belonging to either state. It's one where both can have their capitals. Oh okay. And then down the road um it got it somehow got down to se uh 20%. Which is West Bank and Gaza right to what it is today. Well, even even that is, you know, there those what's left of it. This of the Palestinian state is, you know, just enclaves and, you know, they're divided by different roads and walls and so on. It's not contiguous with each other. And of course, Gaza's set apart, so it's is a different entity. Um, and what's another crazy thing about this whole thing is the I think I heard you explain this, but that the the um the Jews in Israel and the Palestinians are genetically the same, right? Like their DNA and their their heritage is essentially identical. You mentioned Bengurian and you know Bengurian and Yetszak Benzvi who was the second president of Israel were living in Manhattan in lower Manhattan at the turn of the 20th century and they wrote a book about the future of Israel and Benvve in particular had spent a lot of time wandering through the West Bank in these Arab villages and he noticed candles in the windows on Friday night and he noticed Hebrew in the cemeteries and it occurred referred to him that the what we call the Palestinians were really the remnant of the Jews who were not in the diaspora. They just were always there. They didn't come from somewhere else. They were just the original inhabitants who had been Jewish but over the years converted to Christianity or Islam where if you converted you didn't have to play pay this tax that was on non-Muslims. So that was a strong incentive and you know centuries pass and uh you know they are a different people in some respects but he was right because genetically uh they're very very similar. They're both descended from the Canaanites and you know over time they may have differed a little bit but not very much. They're essentially the same people. They always have been. M I thought when I went to do that oneman show in Tel Aviv um and I had just read that book by Benvve and and Bengurian and I thought well maybe the Israelis don't know this maybe I can help them out just saying you know you know these guys are Jewish right and right so it's true they didn't know it but some people when I pulled out my solution u said yeah we know that and that threw me off. Uh, and I I I did a little more research and I came upon this book, The Need to Have Enemies and Allies by this criate American psychiatrist named Vameic Vulcan. And he had grown up in Cyprus, which was inhabited by Greeks and Turks who are historic antagonists. And um and yet they were very similar people and you could tell them apart by they both wore the same white garments, you know, these tunics, white tunics with the the Turks would have a a green sash and the Greeks would have a blue one that you know you knew who was who. They had different cigarettes. On this basis, you were able to tell this is not me, this is the other. In Northern Ireland, the Protestants and the Catholics would paint their doors different colors to signal which, you know, which they were. The Hoous and the Totsis, you know, they were so alike, you had to ask which tribe you're in before we kill you. Wow. So, in every case, you know, they were very, very similar people. And yet, often times with civil wars, for instance, they're bloodier than other kinds of battles. So, why is that? M and uh Vulcan references this Freudian idea of the narcissism of minor differences, which is simply that people that are more alike are more likely to be at war with each other than people who are dramatically different. you know, you can accept the difference and if it's if it's obvious, right? But if it's similar, it's the little things that separate you that can be really annoying. And Freud's idea is it's it's those things that about yourself that you don't like that you see in someone else and and you want to you want to exterminate that that thing that's in the other. Oh, that's interesting. You can almost see something like that bubbling up in America with like political differences in people that are the same, right? Or religious differences, you know, like the you know, in in Saudi Arabia and Iran have differences, but you know, they're in the same religion except one is Sunni, the other is Shia and you know that has been an ongoing civil war for a long time. And yet to the average American, you know, like when we invaded Afghanistan, uh, one reporter went through the US Senate and asked him, "What's the difference between a Sunni and a Shiite?" And not a single senator could tell you, but we're going to go to war. And so, uh, you know, it's it's, you know, those are minor differences. What has been the, um, like your the response from people in Israel from this? I got a wonderful review the other day in Jerusalem Post and uh beyond that I haven't heard u I I don't know if it's for sale in Israel but you know it's uh you know we'll see. Yeah. Yeah. I mean I' I don't know if you've noticed but um I've noticed online just I mean recently like obviously since uh October 7th and now there is just so much debate happening in in the US surrounding this whole topic. Well, it's been troubling to me to watch what's going on on the campuses, although it seems to die down a little bit, but they were just replicating the anger and the hatred in in the region instead of working for trying to create a a solution, you know, but you know, this the the anti-semitism is Arabs think that anti-semitism is a comical charge because they're both semites and uh you know, so it doesn't seem to apply to them. But um the uh what we need is friendly help to try to my feeling is anybody who offers a solution to the Israeli Palestinian problem is naive. And so you have to say, you know, all right, I'm going to be naive for a moment, but you have to go through that. I think that the Israelis and the Palestinians have shown that they can't solve the problem, that they are in some way addicted to it. And so I think the world has to make a stronger case, take on more of the challenge. And by that, well, what do I mean? I'm not sure. Um, most of the world has already identified Palestine as a state. If you look at a map of the globe and it's countries that have have already accepted Palestine as a state uh all of Asia uh all of South America and much of Europe but it's essentially the G7 countries you know France Germany Australia you know the US Canada right u Mexico acknowledges um Palestine as a state well maybe that would be one thing is to unanimously today this is a country and you know Israel has to declare its borders which has never done and you know we have to find a way to create two or one I don't care I mean or confederation you know there are other solutions but the occupation is what is shattering both societies and Israel has to stop occupying the country and they they have to find a way to feel secure doing it. So that's the challenge and I think the world can help with with forceful diplomacy and vast incentives. Yeah. And uh you know when it gets to be more worth it to stop fighting then maybe then we can find a way to talk about peace. Yeah. What do you make of um you know a lot of people who are uh educated in this history uh far more than I am some of them like to say that you know maybe if America wasn't so tied up with Israel and Israel didn't have such a a strong influence over American politics and you know didn't have such a backing of America maybe they would be more incentivized to come up with a solution. It may be true, but you know the the there with Apac and things like this. Well, there like 16 million Jews in the world and there's narrowly divided between the US and Israel, right? Israel has about a million more Jews than America does. But the next population, you know, is France with 400,000. So essentially when we talk about the the Jewish population, we're talking about the US and and Israel. So no wonder we're more interested in Israel than other countries because they're far more. I wish Yeah. If another historical thing, I mean, if we had more Jews, if we had ex if Roosevelt and Truman had just opened the gates, if you go to any city, you know, go look at the, you know, the hospital wings and the, you know, who's funding the symphony and the ballet. There's so many Jewish names there and they're just a very small percentage of of the world. They're 0.02.2 Yeah. percent of the human population. and yet they contribute so much to our society. But it's, you know, now having taken the road to creating a state in the Middle East, um, Israel has to find its way to being a Middle Eastern country among its neighbors. And I think that that was what frightened Hamas was uh this agreement that was uh seemed to be steering towards a conclusion between Israel and Saudi Arabia. And if Israel and Saudi Arabia made peace, oh all the all the other Arab countries would fall in line. They're tired of Palestinians and this whole drama. They just assume walk away. And then and also some of the solutions are very threatening. You know the the idea that is you know the Palestinians would be pushed into Jordan or Lebanon or wherever Saudi Arabia. They don't want that. They don't want to have that additional problem. So suddenly Hamas feels that they've been dealt out of the game and so they've been preparing this attack for a long time. And um so that was the trigger. [Music] Yeah. And then you have, you know, is, you know, um, them trying to, it looks like America is like gearing up to go to war with Iran, you know, when Israel, I think Netanyahu was, you know, in the '9s trying to get, uh, trying to convince us that we needed to go to war with Iran. and you know trying to back them you know in these wars and get entwined in these conflicts overseas that like seem to have no no benefit for us to get involved in yet we do. Yeah. And it uh you know it's frustrating. It's frustrating to watch. And then you have like this lady who recently went in front of Congress some highlevel I forget who she was. was I think she was supposed to be like an ambassador to the UN and she's getting questioned in front of Congress and she says uh so they asked her if she believes that Israel has a right to the West Bank based on uh based on the Bible or something and she was like yes they have a the Israel has a biblical right to the West Bank right like that's like something that's that's absolutely insane to hear somebody say in front of Congress like a an actual highranking government official Oh, so does our ambassador to Israel, Mike Huckabe. Um, you know, in the Bible, uh, God gives the promised land to Moses twice. And the first time is a big bigger parcel. It goes, you know, from like the Red Sea to the Latani River and Lebanon and, you know, all of the West Bank and Jordan, you know, just and then the second time I guess God has reconsidered a little bit and it's a smaller entity u mainly Israel and the West Bank, but also some some other portions uh of other what are now other countries. And then Moses dies before he's able to come into the promised land. And Joshua is sent in to God has told him to kill every living thing, not just people. Just kill every living thing. Wipe the tablet clean. Now, if you're using the Bible or the Torah as your guide, you know, that's a pretty startling model to follow. Yes. And um you know I that's one of the reasons I I felt you know that they the genetic identity of these people is important because uh God gave if God gave the gift to the Jews the people that are called Palestinians are the original Jews and uh so you know they should be in on it. uh it but I don't know how many I mean I've been in the settlements and um you know there are fervent believers there but there are also people there that you know they're getting tax breaks and u so it's you know their rent is underwritten um so they have other reasons to be there other than that God gave them that land Right. It's fascinating stuff, man. Um, what else are you working on? Do you have anything uh that you're that you can talk about at least that that uh No, I there's a story that I'm really enchanted with. And it's um it's about these uh nuns that go visit the Texas road. And so that's I'm finishing that up and um then I'm looking for the fire. Yeah. Well, I'm I'm working all the time, but I But if I'm not working, I'm in despair, so I have to I have to work. What What How do you decide what you're going to dedicate your time to? Because when you're working on these projects, they take a long time to turn out. That's the hardest question. I think the hardest question any writer has to face is what's the story? What what story do I want to tell? because it's not as if there there's an absence of stories. You pick up the paper and there's stories all over the page. Um but what is it that calls to you that stirs something in you and says I've got to do this. And um you know I with the women and the nuns and this sort of thing. I the moment I heard the story that you know there were nuns going to visit the women on death row I was enchanted. You know, I just said this is fascinating to me. And of course, it is a wonderful story and there were awful t parts of it. You know, the the heinous crimes that some of these women have committed. On the other hand, you I think of it as being like it's about redemption and it's a quality that I'm curious about. And so, it gave me was one of those times when I just went home and started making calls. M and I I knew that was my next story, but it's rare that you have that excuse me immediate reaction. Um and you know that you also have to take into account how long is this going to take, right? And you know, when are you going to waste your time, right? And time gets to be more precious the older you get and there's less of it. So, you have to think about, you know, is it if this is a five-year project, then will I ever do anything else or will I even finish? You know, those are real existential questions that you you're always asking, but you ask with increased urgency as you get older. Yeah. It always it always um is interesting to me how people like yourself who spend so much time on these on these complex deep stories are able to manage their time and be disciplined enough to to do their homework right and and make sure they're following up on every single lead and you know getting uh corroboration on things and trying to navigate like am I getting fed [ __ ] on this story or that story or you know even you like working with intelligence community the intelligence community and like and like people in the government and stuff like that like you know how do you know you're not just getting led astray on things and seems like a difficult thing to navigate it is hard but you know I I insist that there is a way of getting it at what is at least close to truth and the my my the way I envision it is first of all you start a story and um if it's going to be let's say looming tower the big story you know how do I how do I start you start by you know who's in the story and so you find out names of people that you know might be able to talk and you write them down I use a a legal pad and um write down the name on one of the 29 lines on the legal pad and Um, then in a little inch and a half column on the left, I write their telephone number and then I go talk to them. And when I talk to them, I take a highlighter and, you know, sort of run across. So, I've I've checked that one off, but I always ask who else should I talk to, right? And those are names I hadn't heard before. So, they go on that list and then I talk to them. Who else should I talk? And that's the way that, you know, it's sinks in the roots into the ground, right? eventually you run out of names and you know that's how you populate the universe of the story but that's the horizontal axis you know and it's sort of the you know the the trope about journalism is you talk to everybody but you you can't talk to everybody and not everybody wants to talk to you but you talk to as many people as you can right and and in that case I talked to 600 people but it took me five years you know but So it was you know long time coming. Then some of those hundreds of people are just more knowledgeable um more fun have better access you know and I go back to them again and again and that's uh you know the first the horizontal axis is a seeking of consensus and the vertical axis is a seeking of understanding and so you're trying to yeah get deeper into a story if you got you know like one of my uh sources in in Saudi Arabia um was you know bin Laden's brother-in-law and he was married to four women as was bin Laden at the time you know they had the that option and um I wanted to talk to her that was never going to happen but he offered to take my questions uh to her every fourth night when he spent the night with that wife bin Laden's sister. Wow. And so she would respond. She wouldn't never see a person like me, right? But she would through the medium of her husband who was very helpful to me. Um, she would respond to those questions. And so, you know, those that was part of the horizontal axis. I wanted to talk to her, but she could tell me things that other people wouldn't know. Like, how did Bin Laden smell? you know, he wore this sandalwood cologne uh that a lot of Saudis wear and u so you know those kinds of things are just they're their access to intimacy that uh gives plausibility to everything you write. I admire that so much and and I you know it's it's uh it's very few and far between that you meet people like yourself who who go to like the primary primary primary sources of some of these things, you know, like boots on the ground, you know, firsthand accounts of what these people are like, what they believe. And you there's not much of that in the media today. more of it is just like the telephone game like people talking about let's you know our daily I'm guilty of it too you know like a daily like a talk show that you do weekly and you're having people that are coming in and we're talking about some reporting we saw in the New York Times or on on some other publication that they maybe got it through somebody else and they got it through somebody else and it's it's uh it's hard to be able to to have the determination and the belief in yourself to stick through something for so long and to do that kind of like boots on the ground reporting that you're doing. And I hope I hope more people um can continue to carry the torch that that you've been carrying for so long in the future. Thank you. I I would like to encourage, you know, reporters and journalists or people that might be interested in it to to give it a try because no matter who you are, being a journalist will open your eyes to other people and where they're coming from. And it makes you more it makes you wiser, I think, because you you've you've learned how people differ and and why those differences shouldn't be discounted. And how you also have to consider who would you be in that scenario, right? All this is stuff that you know if you're sitting in an office and you're surrounded by people who are very much like you and you know have similar concerns and you're not going to be educated about how the world works. And even if it's just for a couple of years, you know, it's a great way to grow into another person. Well, thanks again. I really appreciate your time. Oh, thank you. I enjoyed it myself. And your new book, The Human Scale. Yeah. Boom. Look at that beautiful cover. Will be on um We'll link it below, but on your website or Amazon or what's the best place to buy it? Yeah, you probably should go to Amazon or your local bookstore. Okay. Fantastic. Um Lawrence Wright, ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much. Oh, yeah. We have Patreon questions. Uh we have a couple questions on our Patreon for you from our uh our beautiful Patreon supporters that will do that as well. Okay. Um, but that's the end of the podcast. All right. All right.