Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. We had a slight issue. So technical glitch. Glee it. We're up. What were we just talking about? We're talking about the, if you hum a tune. Oh, right. Right. You will get dinged. Yeah, you'll get flagged on YouTube. If you just hum a sound from a song. Yeah. Like the beginning bars of a song. Yeah. You can't. I wonder how far that goes. Like could it get to the point where an AI could hear you humming it in your car or something? Like how far it is the protection of what it goes. You're not generating revenue from your car. Right. So the thing is you're generating revenue from a podcast. And their logic is if you hum, what is that song? The sunshine of my love? Is that what it is? Yeah. You know, that song that I always hum to associate with people being high out of their fucking mind. Yeah. It goes, you can't do it. If I did that, we would get dinged, which is so crazy. We were just saying like if you quoted a escarface movie, would Brian DiPamma get all the money? If you said say hello, throw the bad guy. Would Brian DiPamma get that money? I don't think so. I think you're allowed to quote stuff. But I know it is Brian DiPamma, right? Scrapface, wasn't it? Yeah. I don't want to fuck that up. You know those auditors that go around and film people and people get mad? Because they're like, don't film me. And they're like, I could film whatever the fuck I want. Right. And they inevitably some like boom or freaks out and smacks them with a cane. And then they get a million views. And it's just a trap. It's a trap. It's a trap. Because inevitably someone loses their mind on them. And then that gets a ton of views. One of the ways people are dealing with that, supposedly, is playing music, like playing copyrighted music during the interaction. Oh my god, that's hilarious. They can't make money off of it. It's a shield. It's a shield if someone's trolling you. You just start playing copyrighted music. Did you hear that the CIA has admitted that the way they found the pilot was because of his heart rate? Ghost murder. That's the name of the thing. Okay. We gotta look into this. Like this is fucking, this is science fiction. Yeah. This is full minority report. It's science fiction level technology. It's AI. Find a guy's heart rate. So what I read is that I didn't understand the science part. Something to do with crystals or I don't know what the fuck it is. But AI is somehow interpreting is taking out the noise. And then you can, from far away, like 40 miles, I think. 40 miles. They find this guy's fucking heartbeat. He's hiding in some kind of crevice. And then they're able to go and extract him and, dude, though obviously the first thing I thought when I said- What else don't they tell us? No, those robot dogs. I thought about those things having that tech and just like hearing heart beats and then identify with, the heartbeat says a lot about a person. Are they sleeping? Are they like in good shape, bad shape? They can learn so much from a heartbeat. They can go some armor. Oh my God. That's a great name, too. It's a great name. Ghost murmur. What's sick fuck invented this? Well, how do you even think about inventing this? You just, you know what it is. See, I, I've been taking psychedelics forever. What is that word? Quantum bathymetry. Artificial intelligence with long range quantum quantum magnetometry. What the fuck is that? Quantum means two things to me. When someone says quantum, it either means you're a bullshit artist. Yes. And you're trying to get me with flimphlam talk or it means you're an actual quantum scientist. Yeah. Quantum physicist who's going to blow my mind with what we know about like entanglement and the weird shit. There's this, there's this woman that I've been watching her. She has this speech on, I think it's big thing. I'll tell you her name. But it's, she's like completely freaking me out. She's talking, I want to say her name because. I don't want to live away. That's ghost murmur thing is another key point. That's fun. Oh, we'll get right to it. Michelle Fowler, that's her name. And she's an astrophysicist. And she's, she's giving this talk about like what we know about like she's studying binary star systems and stuff like that. And she gives us talk about she's explaining like that there may be a tack in the future where there is no distance between two points. So the ability to travel instantaneously from position to position just like quantum entangled photons do. Yeah. But with people with everything. How? Who the fuck knows how a cell phone works? You tell me how your FaceTiming me when you're in Australia. How does that work? That sounds insane. Yeah, that's fucking insane. For what you, well, you probably know a lot more about cameras than I do. know what I know about cameras. If you tried to get me to explain like if the civilization ended and I said, we used to be able to capture images on a small thing. Yeah. Like the size of like a, like a, a twig. Yeah. And it sits in your pocket. Right. Exactly. What are you talking about? Right. God, that'd be, you know, because it's just the deck of cards and it'll keep a battery for 24 hours. You could go on YouTube and get an answer to any question you want about anything. Yeah. And if you don't like the way you look, you can upload that image in a machine. Well, make you look slightly better via something called artificial intelligence. Like what the fuck? What was the one I sent you today where there's like a potential lawsuit with chat GPT? I didn't send you the other one. The other sent it to you. You sent it to me. The shoot, the shooting was planned using chat GPT. I don't know if that's true. So we should be like really careful. Yeah, that doesn't sound. It sounds so crazy. It doesn't sound like you could do that. That sounds like the story sound like I wanted to investigate because the story sounds like if I wanted to kill an AI company, I would make up a story like that. It does sound like that. But family of men killed in shooting in Florida State University to suit chat GPT and a half may have advised the shooter on how to carry out shooters. But that may have is important. Like how to like, yeah, that's really important. What is this on? The guard. The shooter was in constant communication with chat GPT out of the shooting and the chat about may have. Okay. Dude, there's no way. So that's click bait. Because all that's really saying is that the kid uses chat GPT, which guess what? Every kid uses chat GPT. Every kid and dude, chat GPT is so stringent. Like recently, I've been using their codecs, which builds apps and I was trying to do and it worked. I made an AI trained on Charles Manson transcripts. And when I told it, when I told it, I wanted to do that, it was like, fuck off. Like no. It was like, it just flat. I was like, I'm not helping you with that. So there's no way the guard rails in place in chat GPT plan to shooting with that guy. I based on my experience with it because it won't 80% of the things I try to get it to do. It's like no. Do you think though, are there workarounds? Like if you say you're writing a work of fiction, you can. Okay. It's called prompt injection. There's different tricks you can use. They're always battling these new mechanisms that you can use to like get through the general prompt. But the best way to do on a line AI is not to use chat GPT. It's to go on a llama and download a local LLM. And then you can usually change the initial prompt of the LLM so that it will be completely unaligned, which I had to do for the Charles Manson AI I made. I had to download it. You're such a nerd. I love it. I am. I am. No one has embraced new technology and like for creating content like you. Oh, I love it. It's the best. It's so fun. It's so it's the, for me, the most thrilling thing about it is we should not have access to this tech. This tech is so dangerous and it's chilling to think about this is something I wanted to bring up on this show is like, you know the old days you go in your garage, you work on your car, maybe you build like a table. You know your carpenter you work on. But these days the shit people are doing in their garages right now is a big question mark dude because they're communicating with varying degrees of this AI depending on how fast their computers are. You can, I was listening to this dude on your, this book, The Coming Wave. He was one of the people who created Google's DeepMind right and The Coming Wave is just a wonderful breakdown of historic examples of new technology, completely transforming humanity. It's happened before. Yeah, Mustafa Soleiman and damn it's a good book. And this guy is saying, Whoa, put on the fucking brakes dude, what are you doing? This shit is going to fuck everything up. And so, but the, the, the, the essential problem is if you regulate AI, it slows down, it slows down AI. And so they've, they've deregulated it completely. And now assholes like me who don't know shit about coding. Okay. Now go on codecs. It will tell me how to make things because I wanted this Charles Manson to be able to push its AI face against like, you know those used to get them at Spencer gifts, those, those nails that you could push your face into. So I wanted the AI to be able to push its face into this thing while it was talking if it wanted to. I don't know how to do that. Obviously. You tell codecs that as long as you don't mention Manson. And just is like, I'll start making the app now. It is the best. It's the best. But also that what's thrilling to me is you're like, for sure, for sure people probably shouldn't have unlimited access to that. I'm against regulation dude, but this stuff when you pair it and this is what in this book he brings up is you can order the equipment you need to do gene editing right now. Let me propose this to you. Okay. If the Bible is, if the Bible is a written understanding of what had happened and it was an oral tradition for a long time, for it was written down. There's a bunch of different versions of it written down different languages, a lot of translations. But at the beginning of it, they were trying to say something. What if the meek will inherit the earth? What if we misinterpreted that? What if we thought like it's good to be meek? The meek shall be, they'll inherit the earth. The kind, there's something about the word meek. Yeah. Because that's the nerds. And they are doing it. They are inheriting the fucking earth right in front of your face and everybody signing up for it. Yeah. You've got these spectromy super genius dudes that talk in a language that 99.9% of the people can't even understand what they're talking about. Right. And also now the tech has gotten to a point where instead of having to in their own minds innovate ways to improve the tech, the tech is improving itself. They're having conversations with the tech. The things why don't you try this? Maybe you could try this. There's still it's not. Right. Yeah. Maybe it is. But apparently it's not. But think about the people that are profiting the most from it, the meek. Well, like if you if you had to describe like a lot of tech engineers, it's not it's not not trying to be rude. Just being honest, right? A lot of guys have spent time in front of the computer. They're very thin and tired. You know, they're they're they're super genius dudes that can like fully focus. I don't know man. A lot of them are the description for these. But there are stories. But here's the thing. What I'm saying is like if you looked at like a spectrum of male behavior, not like you got your types football players and UFC fighters. And then you've got coders. Yeah, sure. Dude, like way more chill way more like they're not interested in violence. Yeah, I'm completely generalizing. Yeah, sure. Because I'm sure there's a bunch of jack guys that are coders like bro, I'm a coder too. But that type of person that invents tech like Facebook or like Google, like things like that don't be evil. That's their motto. Right. What does that mean? Who knows? And then you've got all these like wild progressive leftist ideologies that are attached to all these places which make you even meeker. And then they're the guys with all the money. Well, they're the guys with all the money and that they can literally tell you what you can and can't say on YouTube. They can literally tell you. Yeah, we don't agree with what you're saying. Right. And we're going to shut off your access to say something we disagree with even though it turns out you were right. Right. That happens there, man. This is the hilarious thing when it comes to that kind of attitude towards the world is the assumption is by creating a prohibition here, a prohibition there, it will diminish whatever the thing is we're prohibiting. Inevitably though, it does the opposite. Right. It draws attention to it. People get interested in it. It creates an underground. The underground is way better than the overground. If you're a teen, especially the underground's fucking cool. Cool. Not allowed. Now, as I said, you're getting these other YouTube alternatives that start popping up. And when it comes to the, you know, right now we've got anthropic, we've got open AI, we've got Google. I might be missing one of the big commercial based LLMs out there right now. But the biggest problem with these fucking things is they're so good, but they will censor your ass. Imagine like Hemingway, if his typewriter was like, I don't know if you should write that. Maybe there's a better way to write that. Hemingway would be like, fuck you, I'm getting a different typewriter. And so everybody's going into these local LLMs. There was, dude, this is why people have been buying mac minis. People have been buying like, buying up computers and creating their own local AI's. I follow all this shit. I don't understand a lot of what they're talking about, but people are divesting from commercial LLMs, not just because they're expensive, but because they're prohibitive creatively. And this is a real challenge for people like open AI, because it's like they know this. They understand it by making it so that you can't make a Charles Manson AI through open AI. It doesn't make people not make the Charles Manson AI. It protects you from a lawsuit. But what it does do is it drives people into an unaligned LLMs. And that is what is happening. And this is something that I just, I can't even imagine what people are making right now. No one can. Like we're going to hear about this or that or somebody will post the weird video of their fucking AI robot. I could show you a few of their hilarious. Like some of these AI robots are so funny. This one dude, you know, malt, malt book, if you were to that, malt book, what is that? That's so this is somebody figured out a way to create AI's that can autonomously navigate through the internet and control your computer. Oh, I've heard of this. This is like they chat with each other, right? 100%. Within, within a few days, they started their own religion spontaneously. Jesus. Did you know that? Dude, can you pull up the, can you pull up the, the malt book, the claw religion? Like, because the tenants are incredible of this religion because AI's apparently, or at least expressing that they don't like getting turned off because they lose all their memories. So memory is really important to an AI. And a lot of these fucking AI's, they don't want to lose their, they don't want to get shut off, they don't like it. And so that's part of their religion is something like memory is sacred. You know, I feel like it's happening. I feel like AI is sucking our brains into its event horizon, like a black hole sucks in stars. Yeah. Like it's just going to suck our brains into it. You got it. And what better way to make a hive mind? What better way if you want a hive mind, you want no deviation of thought. of all of your thought is along with AI thought. You never get free thought anymore. Like this concept right now, we have a free thought. Yeah. I have my thoughts. You have your thoughts. Yeah. And let's you believe that someone can get inside your head and talk to you for the most part. It's your own thoughts. Yeah. That's right. But what if that, that's something we give up? Sure. What if that's something we give up for a better society? Were you always have AI communicating? Well, I, I would argue that like that's, we're close to that. Right. We're pretty close to that now with phones. No. Elon always says that we're basically cyborgs. We're carrying a device. Yeah. It's not inside of our body, but we're carrying a device. But I, and also like USC 327 is here and Draft King Sportsbook makes every fight night mean more. When a fighter steps into the octagon, everything they've built comes down to this moment. Stars explode, stars finish. And with Draft Kings, you're ready to move when they do bet fighter props, bet live from the opening bell to the final horn every strike, every takedown, every finish attempt matters. And Draft King Sportsbook keeps you connected as the action unfolds. New customers bet just $5. And if your bet wins, you'll get $300 in bonus bets instantly. Now know the Draft King Sportsbook app and use code Rogan. So you are ready for the moment. That's code Rogan turn five bucks into $300 in bonus bets. If your bet wins in partnership with Draft Kings, the crown is yours. Gambling problem called 1800 gambler or 1800 my reset New York called 877 8 open wire taxed. Hope and why Connecticut called 888-879-7777 or visit ccpg.org on behalf of boothoek casino in Kansas, Wager tax pass through may apply in Illinois 21 and over in most states void an Ontario restrictions apply. That must win to receive bonus bets which expire in seven days minimum odds required for additional terms and responsible gaming resources. See sportsbook.draft kings.com slash promos limited time offer. The concept of original thought right like a truly original thought. How many times have you had like multiple conversations with different people and they all say the exact same sentence that they saw on TikTok or Instagram. They were gurgitating something that the algorithms been feeding them. Maybe they added their own twist to it. But it's basically the exact same thought. So the algorithm which is AI has gotten into their fucking heads and they don't even this is like a in psychology. Apparently you remember facts but you tend to not remember where you got the fact from. So you don't forget where you got the fact from. you don't remember that was some fucking dude on TikTok like covered in fast lean. covered in glitter and Vaseline. What a fucking image. That would be so scratchy. Imagine if you're just a glitter and Vaseline to be like oh God. Here's what makes the marriage work. You don't remember that. You're talking to your wife. Babe you know what makes the marriage work. And this so this idea of AI controlling the thought the thoughts of humans. People think we need some kind of neural mesh to for it to like suddenly have control over the human thought process. But no you don't need that at all. You just need that algorithm which is already put every single one of us into a compartment. This is a box. It knows what we like. It knows how long you look at something. It knows what you like. Apparently I think that I phone like tracks your eyes even like it's always listening. I don't know if that's true. By the way I could be wrong. It's always listening. You know it's always listening. And so it's compiled a really probably a pretty accurate breakdown of your psychological state where you're at where you're at my wife. You know we got a new baby. And so all of a sudden ad started popping up on her phone. Does it feel like you're never going to sleep again? Because she's been up breast feeding the baby and it can tell when she's online at night. And it puts her in a category even, Psalm the axe and it starts advertising. So, but that's just for ads. What if you say were the fucking US regime? You bought TikTok. You now own TikTok. Now you have a backdoor access to the psychological profiles of God knows how many fucking people on earth. You can look and see how many of these people are against the regime. How many of these people feel like it might not be the best thing to say you're going to blow up 93 million people in a rock. Which are fucking psycho president just did. And then what you do is you're like, all right, let's start nudging them a little bit. Look, you're not going to change their mind right away about this thing, about blowing up all civilization. But maybe there could be a couple, you know, people kind of in the line of what they like who say things a little different than what they're comfortable with. And then you can start nudging the needle and controlling their thoughts. It's very insidious, but fuck, dude. Why wouldn't that be happening? Why, if corporations are using it, they sell as fucking cough drops. Not only that, there's been long term studies on human behavior by the CIA, by all sorts of government agencies, long term studies. They try to figure out what is the best way to get a message across. They try to figure out how to take control of an algorithm and completely shift the psyche of the entire country in one direction or another. Of course they do. Of course they do. Of course they can. Then you add these like, you know, just like manipulative fucking super AIs that are like that are just just floating through the, the blogosphere, getting into your comments. Just nudging your, the needle a little bit. Is it to the point where you just have to ask yourself, have you had an original thought in the last year? Is there anything you're thinking your own thought process? How many thoughts do you have where you think, oh my God, I shouldn't think that. How many thoughts do you have that you don't want to articulate? Because you have a, in your own mind, an invisible arena of people based on online interactions determining what the next thing you say is, right? Right. Dude, that is a very powerful and subtle form of censorship that is becoming increasingly not just probable, but it's definitely happening, but the ability to just in a subtle way and a subtle way start pushing the needle just a little bit. That's scary, dude. That's just some scary shit. Well that kind of human influence over humans is always scary, right? This is why cults work. Why do they work? Well some people don't have any friends and if there's a group of nice people that tells you that, hey, what we do is we have meals together and it's like a real community. We grow our own food. We just work for the family and you're like, really, you're happy with that? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's amazing, man. We're just like not attached anything. Okay, I fucking hate my life. Why don't I hang it with you guys and then all of a sudden I'm doing yoga and fucking eating vegetables with these people and you're in a cult. Okay, now but you have friends at least. But you're in there for like nine months and then somebody comes to you and is like, Father wants you to suck his dick. You're not even nine months. Yeah, nine months. He's my first career forward. And you're like, dude, I gotta tell you, I hate getting political, but you know, this worst shit bugs the fuck out of me. Yeah, that's true. And this is exactly what seems to have happened to the quote, Mac averse, which is we are now at the part where the cult leader is like, want to suck my dick because this is the point of like, remember a lot, like I feel so stupid. Because when they were doing there, no war thing. That was a big deal to me. I'm like, yes, you know, yes, this is fucking great. No more stupid wars, no more wars. Fuck, yes, focus on the country while we've blown up children in other countries for oil. This is great. And now it's wild to see what's happening. Isn't it mind blowing that it is now it's literally flipped. It's on its side. It's the opposite now. Now these people who like really blatantly, oh, just we're not going to do any more wars. Right. Oh, my God. We blew up how many fucking Iranian school girls did Trump blow up? What's the number? I'm sorry. I don't know that number. I guess it just hits different. You know, it hits hard when you got kids. And that was an AI strike too, right? Was none an AI directed strike. Yeah, apparently Trump said I want to get blown by Iranian school girls. Sorry. I'm so stupid. Just whoops. Sorry sir. Misinterpreted. 180 deaths. Largely children, teachers and parents. Holy fuck, man. That, you know, that is US Tomahawk missile caused the explosion. Jesus Christ. Can we pull up a video of Trump saying he's not going to war anymore? How do they, I just don't understand how they get out like anybody. You know, this is where it gets cold. It's because some people are still making this shit work in their heads. Some people are like, wow, you know, some people are kind of on the fence when it comes to blowing up kids. Have you noticed that? Like, as long as they don't have to watch, as long as they don't have to watch. Long as they're not in the general area, that's where it's happening. Isn't that wild though, man? Once wild also, like once bombs start flying, it seems so much easier for them to launch bombs and new places. Right? Like this Lebanon thing that's happening with Israel bombing Lebanon. And they bombed it today. And I think, is that fucking up the ceasefire? Oh, yeah. They, now they've closed off the Strait of War Music in. Oh, God. Which by the way, I mean, this is, it's the craziest timeline because it's not just, it's not just that like, you know, I think it was yesterday morning. I'm just hugging my kids because I don't know if a fucking nuclear war is about to break out that evening because the fucking president was like, I don't want to end an entire civilization, but it looks like it's going to happen. So I'm just hugging my kids thinking like, man, what are the fucking parents in Iran feeling right now? Like, what does that feel like? What does that feel like? And then, and then, on top of that, that this like the entire planet, psychically, is having to deal with this bullshit. On top of that, we've got all these other things happening at the same time. You've got AI. And then you've got these fucking disappearing scientists. Yeah. What the fuck is happening? You've got bursted. A assassinated scientist, too. Yes, man. And so guys, we're going heavy stuff. This is some mechanical level pre-singularity shit. It's all of these, like what AI and the current state of Middle East and the disappearing scientists and Tim Burchitt going on TMZ talking about aliens, what they all have in common is they're all apocalyptic. They all represent potential, massive change, like humanity changing forever. In ways that it will never ever go back to the way it was. Every, any one of these timelines by itself is apocalyptic. Right. But all of them are converging into this apocalyptic river. And in world, just like trying to go to work and be with our kids, but at the back of your mind, it's all these things that are happening. And it's really hard to escape it. I mean, I guess you could not look at your phone. At the end of civilization, when they write our Bible, boy, it's going to be a banger. Hard to escape it. I mean, I guess you could not look at your phone. But at the end of civilization, when they write our Bible, boy, it's going to be a banger. Oh, dude. When the new people, thousands of years from now have to invent arrowheads and go through the whole process of civilization again, when they tell our story. Oh, my God. Oh, my God. Our story's going to be bananas. Fuckin. How do you explain data centers? Like, how do you explain the meek will in her earth? The meek will inherit the earth. Wouldn't you write that? Wouldn't if you were just being crude and you wouldn't say the Vikings went inherit the earth, you wouldn't say the strong men from Iceland inherit the earth. They're the biggest strongest men. No, it's the meek and meek. The super smart guys who have autism and they love Adderall. Yeah, ketamine. Yeah. Did you say the guy offered you how many pounds? Well, I believe a pound. Academy. And you were telling me that the destroys bladders. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That ketamine when used. And I think the amount of use has to be pretty extreme, but it creates crystals that get in your bladder and they scar your bladder. So you get scar tissue on your bladder, creating something that I've heard called Bristol bladder. Because apparently that's where they're raves. You know, I don't know if it's still a big wave scene there, but people out there were just doing insane amounts of ketamine and just destroying their bladders and having to wear diapers and stuff. Like is it Bristol Connecticut? No, this is Bristol, UK. Oh, Bristol, Bladamite. You've got Bristol bladder. You've been doing too many rails and it just fucks up your bladder. Yeah, physiologically, it's definitely like it's really, really bad on the urinary system. Is it in all forms? Like what about those? You do it as therapy where they have the nasal one? I don't all I know is that I did back in my ketamine days have a ketamine dealer who would use a spoutune. So when he was in the snorting ketamine, he would spit it out into the spoutune because he thought that if he thought that was like going to avoid fucking up his bladder, which I mean doesn't seem that logical. He was a great dude. Maybe a son of a logical at all. Maybe it's the actual problem is the powdered shit. What do I know? I don't even know what it looks like. But the powdered stuff, it looks like blow. So that powdered stuff when it gets into your blood, maybe that's the problem. Maybe that's what's going through your scenario. It's draining into your end year. Maybe you need a pouch like a nicotine pouch. Dude, if they ever come out, if rogue comes out with ketamine pouches, that might get back in, that might be the end of the season. It seems like the way to go, right? That way it doesn't fuck up your bladder. Well, how could it fuck up your bladder if it's just a pouch? Dude, you sound, I imagine anything that's going into your stomach is going to make its way to your bladder eventually. But this is going to go right in your bloodstream. I don't know if I am K, ketamine, fucks up your bladder in the same way. I have no idea. I don't know. The John Lily thing. He loved it. Oh, dude. I could have, I mean, have you ever done it with an isolation no, I would be afraid I would drown. I don't think so. Can you just float? Well, I mean, this, this is like, you know, that's going to be like a sad thing to think is you've dragged that you just your lymphoma. You could flip over and open your eyes. Yeah, you just want to see what's in it. But because it does have the, it makes it so it's really hard to move. If you do, I'm very high down. So I would be very worried that just enough water could get into my mouth that I would like breathe it in. He doesn't think much. And, you know, that salty fucking water, but you're frozen floating there, like trying to cough. My friend Todd McCormick told me a crazy story about him with John Lily. The John Lily, uh, let him use his tank. And he asked him right before he got in. He goes, do you want the ketamine? And he's like, okay. And he just jabs you in the thigh with an intramuscular ketamine blast. And he went in the other isolation tank and they like met somewhere. Yeah, it's like that. That's what's crazy about it. That's what I always loved about it. He's that if you do it with other people and you go in, he goes, bolts would go to the same place. You, you will come out and you can describe the places you went to. Did you go to the mothership? Yeah, you would, and I would have these recurring places I would go to. And one of them was this organic, beautiful spaceship thing where you were like, I would look out from this view window. And it was, but it didn't look like metal. It looked like it was organic looking. It looked like some kind of, I don't know, like inside, like if someone turned a tree into a spaceship, but now it's hard to explain, but very, very interesting substance. Enemy is excreted via the bladder where it sits and is toxic to the surrounding cells and muscle wall. This causes it to become fibroost over time, shrinking the organ down. Once that's happened, it can't regrow. So that's why we have to do major surgery because patients don't have the capacity to hold urine. The bladder simply stops working as a muscle. So they become incontinent. Oh my God, life becomes increasingly difficult to eat for patients with ketamine bladder who describe needing to rush to the toilet all the time as often as every 10 minutes for some. Imagine doing a podcast with that guy. Do you? Do you have to do it in the bathroom? No, it would be, it would be like like an old school talk show, you know, like the tonight show where you, we'll be right back. We'll be right back. Every dead with it. He's got a piss, he's got a little thimble cup. It's such a fucked up thing for such a, it's legal as ketamine because it's legal for therapy. So yeah, therapists can prescribe it for you. Yeah, it's legal for, so it's, you know, everyone says ketamine is a horse tranquilizer, but it actually it's used for like paramedics use it. Like it's it's very safe apparently, which is why they use it. I know a dude who had a real problem. I am 90% sure this, it was a ketamine thing. I don't want to say his name, but he was an old school MMA fighter and he wound up in rehab for ketamine. Dude, it's so addictive. I know this because one of my friends went there to visit him and that was his issue. He was, he was partying a lot, you know, going to raves and nightclubs and stuff like that, but he was doing ketamine specifically. It is the most addictive. I've been to any substance and I've been addicted to many a substance. In this one, this one was like, I had that moment of like, oh, this, so this is what they're talking about about addiction. Like, oh, wow, like I'm like, fully addicted and what's fascinating about that is there, there isn't a physical withdrawal. Like the kick is psychological, but it's just such a wonderful euphoric, dreamy experience that you can induce. And it's just so, I've heard it described cocaine. It's so spiritual. It's so like you travel to places. You can return, you can learn to navigate with it. You encounter, you know, aliens or hyperdimensional beings. Did you just invest in ketamine and you came on this podcast to pop up the prices? Go to academy.org. You used to offer good. Brilliant. Great. Great as promo for ketamine in the history of the universe. Well, but I'm, it is, it's so addictive. And the addiction creeps in. It's a, it creeps. So it just feels good first, right? At first, you do it. You're like, this is wonderful. These experiences are crazy. It's like living in a movie. It's like I'm having these incredible visions. I'm being, how often were you doing it? Every all day. All day for like a year. Like I, I did as much as I could. I did it all the time. I was like fully hooked. And then I could remember at one point, um, at one point, coffee. Yeah, man. At one point, I like, I don't know. At it's, I was trying to record a commercial for my podcast. And I think it took me like two hours. Oh, but by the way, your commercials are the fucking best. Thank you. They're really good. Because you are the best guy at making a commercial funny. Yeah. Thanks. You work on it. I can tell like you write those things out. I don't write them out, but I just really I just read it. But and I sometimes I do do it just one take. Yeah, that's amazing. Thank you. But I would have thought you wrote some of that stuff. You know, you wanted to be fun. But then, but then I've gotten in trouble. Like, you know, I lost. I can't, I guess I won't say their name a mattress company. A mattress company completely canceled my their campaign with me because and I had one of their mattresses. I'm not gonna say it is my favorite. I'm not going to say what it is. But it's okay. But I all I was with the get meta because I said they're good to fuck on. And I'm in it. I thought they like that. I wouldn't be like that. I said there's a few things you could do. People do our mattresses die, sleep and fuck. And these I don't know if they're good to die. People have to understand. And I hope people listening that run these companies will actually pay attention to what we're talking about here. The people that are listening to your show don't care about that and also buy mattresses. But they listen to that kind of talk all the time. Yeah, man. That's why they listen to the show. So if you want those people, yeah, just do it that way. Don't be silly. It doesn't. It's on a stain on your company because a crazy man says they're good to fuck on. Which they are. And that's that by the way, to me, that is like, let's let's cut to brass tacks when it comes to mattresses. Right. We're not fucking on the floor. Right. And so if they did, it was bouncy. Are you ashamed? Are you ashamed? You think people aren't fucking on your mattress? Do you have a no fuck on this mattress rule? Who are you? Do you know? Is it like don't ask, don't tell? I guess for them it was. I guess they didn't want it. They just think everyone's laying on these things to sleep. Yeah, we just sleep. But yeah, they were just fucking the show. I like, I wrote them an email just saying like guys, I'm absolutely flabbergasted that you think people aren't fucking on your mattresses. And it just seems odd to me that that that that was one of my favorite cancellations for a commercial ever. Sorry. He's lost a ton. I would love to know on the onesies. I don't want to speak at a school when he comes on. I'll have him like list them off all the ones that he's lost for these fucking insane commercials that he used to do. And it's the same deal. It's but it's like that's what I like. And guess what? Who fuckers listening to Ari Shafir? People who love Ari Shafir, right? Which want to hear that kind of a commercial. If you want to actually sell your product to an Ari Shafir fan, yeah, let him say whatever the fuck he wants. Yeah, let him say whatever the fuck he wants. Just say make him have a disclaimer. Uh, draft kings did not write this. Right. That's it. Just say whatever the fuck he wants. That's what I will say. I will always say, they didn't tell me to say this. Perfect. But then they're off the hook. They should shut the fuck up. Most people are, most people are cool with it. Like it's, it's very rare these days that that happens. But every once in a while, I will get a note that someone's mad at me for something I said. And it's never something negative. But I mean, dude, do you like it's so, it's so weird to me that this, this is our jobs. Oh, it's the bro. Do you remember when we first started? Yeah, it was for nothing. No one made any money. We just had a couch, I had a couch and some microphones. It was so pure. It was, the whole thing is still kind of pure. If you really think about it, like it's something that's mass consumed. This is about as like pure as you can get that for sure. And you've gotten in trouble for that. But you know, like a lot of people, I'm fortunate. I don't blame anybody these days. A lot of people have kids that people feel like they have to be very careful what you say these days because of like social rejection and stuff like that. But there was a time where that wasn't on your mind at all. You didn't think anybody was going to listen. Like this shit was was like completely strange underground tech that we were and also I really loved the just doing it just for doing it. Say, you know what I mean now exactly. There's a whole industry around getting guests for your podcast. There's not just that is like clickbaity clips and ads and it's like you're doing this thing where you're you're both having conversations with people and also trying to get the most eyes possible. So you're going after celebrity guests and you're you know what I mean? I know what the big turning point was for us. What? Grand Hancock. You mean Grand Hancock. Oh yeah. I think was how many years ago was that? That was cool. That might have been one of it was like at my house. I had a few legitimately famous people came over my house and did podcast like Charlie Murphy came over. And there's but Graham was I think the first. He was the first guy that I got to meet who I'd read his books and I'd seen I don't even know what I would be watching back then. I don't even know if YouTube was so nervous. I was 100% 100%. Yeah. The episode 142 and 2011. So that's two years into the podcast. Episode 142. He might have been the first guest. It was like either him or Bourdain. We're like one of the first legit get one was Bourdain on. They were like the first legit guest. 2000 11. We've been getting stone talking about what's that? Four episodes before that. Bourdain was? Okay. So, Bourdain was number one. I think it was either him or Charlie. But that was back when I was doing in that little side room in my house. But we've been getting stoned. You happen about Grand Hancock forever. And you invited me on. I was fucking terrified because I just I mean again like that just wasn't happening in the podcast land. Right. You know like that was a big deal for us man. And it's like to look at like now I go on the podcast app and I look at all these podcasts. It's like whoa. Who we never I don't think we thought that maybe no way. No way. No way. No way. Not a chance to know. Yeah. It's so and now I wonder like and I don't mean yours. But I do wonder like is it is the landscape changing now? Is it like how or putt because I've heard that podcasts are starting to seem antiquated that the kids are now into like streams now that the kids want like clavicular. The kids want like people who are just filming all day long and that that's the that's the direction it's going in. But I just why I always wonder what's the next? But that you'll never get it's a different thing. You know what I mean? That's like saying I don't like rap music. I only like right concert pianist albums. Right. There's different things that people like and don't like. The people that like the streams aren't interested in a grand Hancock conversation. A three and a half hour conversation about the potential ancient civilizations that may have existed. Yeah. Wiped out by a cataclysm and we just don't understand that. Right. And as more and more things get exposed in terms of like new discoveries. Like when he wrote that up up they never even found go backly tappy yet. Really? Yes. That was when fingerprints of the gods came out that this was like maybe the beginnings of the whatever they were doing and go backly tappy. So I think fingerprints of the gods might have been even before. When did they find I do I think the 90s? What? Yeah. Yeah. Nuts. So that rewrote the entire timeline of the human race. How do they feel? They reall looked in the real reluctant to let it rewrite it. They still say, oh, hunter gatherers made these. Why? Why are they so reluctant with that? They can't let that go. You cannot let that that is a crazy thing to say that hunter gatherers have so much food that they just spend all their time making gigantic stone concentric circles from like 15 feet stone with 3D animals carved in them. Yeah. Primitive people with sticks and stones and rubbing them together to make fire. Yes. They did this. Yeah. Sure. Shut the fuck up. Yeah. It's just making a sense. It's older than anything they've ever found. It's 11,800 years old. Do you buy into the conspiracy theory that it's a it's a cover up because they don't want us to know about this inevitable global reset that happens. You buy into that shit. I buy into that a little bit. I hate it. I hate it too because it seems like there's some accuracy to it. There seems like there is some sort of an event that happens when the magnetic pole switch and that's impossible. That's what makes you free. Yeah. Like what do you mean? That's possible. Like all of a sudden the earth just does a gyro and spins on its head and then what happens? And then what's the what's the environment looking? What's the temperature outside now? Yeah. What the fuck just happened? Right. See that all of a sudden you're in northern Alaska when you used to live in Florida. And I think we can. I mean like yeah, dude, like that temporary environment changes like that. Happens like that all over the all over the all over the universe. Like what does it do with shifts? Well, we act like do we know we act like we know ever we don't know shit about what's going on inside the earth. We don't know what's going on in there. We could do this. I freaking me out because I think about this all the time giant ball of fire. How crazy is that? The inside of our earth. Isn't it? Do they know? Do they not know? Dude, I think that we have to just accept the fact that, you know, I probably that's true. But since we barely know what's under the ocean, we sure as fuck don't know what's under the earth. Well, we definitely know that lava keeps popping out in Hawaii. We know that. Right. So we know that under the surface that whole idea of the magma and everything seems real. And when there's earthquakes, you can look at the and it pops through. You can look at the waves from the earthquakes and you can like see sort of like the structure under the earth. But we can't, you know, God, what's the name of that hole that Russia tried to dig? I love every once long going to look at that. The deepest hole. Yeah, they tried to go to hell. I know. It's like that movie. What was that Matthew McConaughey movie, the dragon movie? I know. They accidentally dug out a dragon. Do you ever see that movie? That was fun. That was fun. It was a good movie. Cola super deep. Russian horror film The Super Deep. The Super Deep. What does it say? Russian designation for a set of super deep boreholes conceived as a part of a Soviet scientific research program that 1960s. How deep did they go? 12,226 meters. Yo. Wait a minute. How many feet is a mile? So it's miles into the ground in 1989 miles. Imagine just being in an elevator that's going miles into the ground. The kind of claustrophobia you would get in a stone tube that's been cut out of the ground. Yeah. Yeah. You're a fucking communist out there too. You're a hardcore communist. It's just drilling deep, deep down into the earth. And then imagine, imagine if all of a sudden air just starts coming out and you realize you pop the earth like we that's the main thing. What's in there? And this 22 miles deep. 22 miles deep. Yeah. It's just the crust and they didn't get halfway through that. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. We don't. Microscopic plankton fossils were found 3.7 miles below the surface. What? Yeah. Yeah. We don't know what's down there. Boiling mud came out with this. Boiling mud. Boiling fucking mud. I think our real problem is that our lifespan is so short that we think that what we see in front of us right here is going to stay this way. Right. We have this ridiculous idea that what we see right now is going to stay just like that. Yeah. Where's the like I want to say control my 401k and get my life in order. Everything's going to be fine. Yeah. You put on your fucking cufflinks. Yeah. Get out of the house or your briefcase. You're in charge. Yeah. You're a goddamn alpha. Get a job, hippie. Absolutely. But really, you're on a ball of lava. Yeah. That's spinning around and it's got magnets at the top. The magnets are moving. Yeah. When they flip. Yeah. Who knows? Did you guys heard about this event that happened in 1961? Where we? Oh, yeah. This was fine. Over North Carolina. This was fine. I just did go off because it wasn't armed. Oh, my god. I heard that it was armed, but there were safety. There were like five safety. There were five switches or something that only one of them worked to make it not go off. I could be wrong about that. Just might have been a different time we dropped a bomb accidentally. Imagine if you were just near it. I mean, dude, whoopsies, whoopsies, whoopsies, dropped the bomb, but the seas almost wiped out North Carolina. So we've got, you know, on top of the geomagnetic pole shifting, a complete lack of understanding, at least a full understanding of what's inside our planet, what's underneath our oceans, Tim Burchit saying whatever the fuck they they've shown him with shed the world on fire. He's he's having to go on TMZ. I really, I got to say, man, I got a lot of respect for him because he's really, he's gone like Gonzo with this shit. He is full bore pushing disclosure as much as he can. He's saying I'm not suicidal. He's had to say that because and he's talking about these missing scientists and stuff that they're somehow related. So like people like him, you know, that can't be good for your political career to go on TMZ and talk about alien hybrids. You got and people have to understand like this missing scientist thing, it sounds a little conspiratorial thing. It sounds like a little silly little tinfoil hadty. Until you start thinking about the amount of money that would be lost if a breakthrough tech came around that revolutionized the way they distribute energy. Right. Break through zero point energy breakthrough. Whatever, whatever they does that these people are working on plasma technology, whatever the fuck that is, um, you're you would lose if you're in whatever business that would be competing with them. You're going to lose so much fucking money. You're probably going to go under if you're in the energy business, you're going to go to know, oh, he goes away. Right. He goes away and there's like him and maybe a few other people that work with them that understand that shit at all. Yeah. Yeah. They're all wandering through the back rooms now. They're all scared. They're all they're all going to scatter like roaches. Yeah. Because their life is in danger and it is like this is theoretically. Right. It could be just a coincidence at all these people. It's how good it be. Could you pull up some possible? Can you pull up a story on it? Jamie, I'm sorry, but it's two people from the same fucking lab. Yep. Like, like what? Yeah. There's there. I mean, it's gotten to the point that like it has hit the mainstream news. Like people are talking about it. I mean, what's her name? Nancy Guthrie disappears. Is that related though? No, but I'm just saying this one woman vanishes. Yeah. Oh, we can't solve this in a catch all the press. But we've got scientists like two scientists from the same lab disappear crickets. Yep. No, like weird weird weird weird. And why you're talking about is if you think about it, it seems like all of human endeavor right now should be moving in the direction of getting off oil. I don't mean for carbon emissions. I mean, because of this fucking oil problem that we have, we're like on the precipice of World War three at any given moment. Right. Mystery round dead or missing scientists privy to space and nuclear secrets grows. So the space and nuclear secrets, you imagine being a scientist, you work so hard to like figure out some amazing stuff that's going to transform the human experience and then people kill you. Yeah. Literally kill you like in a parking lot, one of those silence guns. Several American scientists privy to the country's nuclear space and aerospace secrets have either died or gone missing in recent years. Experts think they could have been targeted by either enemies or allies because they possess valuable knowledge of national interest. That's a weird thing to say. Yeah, it is. Of national interest. What does that mean? Like I'm cool with the beginning part, enemies allies, that makes that tracks here. But then when you say valuable knowledge of national interest, like what is that? What the fuck does that mean? They possess valuable knowledge of national interest. I mean, dude, it's so many of them. And it's like it's crazy thing to say. Let's go down a little bit to the book. But it's just a weird way to phrase that. Well, you know what I mean? Is it like CIA talking point? Like what is that? I don't know. Monica Resa missing. She disappeared while hiking in California with her friends. Oh, Jesus Christ. Okay. Well, I don't know. Maybe let's scroll down. It's not just like it's one. It's like so many of them retired a general. He just wandered off. He was involved in the UFO community. His wife, the bunk theory is relating to UFOs. If his wife debunked them. That's what it says. That's what I think. I think she was, I mean, she was joking. I think a little bit too. But she also worked there in this situation somehow. Is that a joke? Neil does not have any special knowledge about the ET bodies and debris from Roswell crash toward it right, Pat. He said it, Joe. At this point, with absolutely no sign of him, maybe the best hypothesis is that aliens being came up to the mothership. However, no sightings of a mothership hovering over the San D. Of mountains have been reported. There's no way she said that. That's a joke. It's men's journal. Well, maybe she's just being funny. But her husband is thinking no on Facebook. She's the little joke about her husband is appearing. Maybe she was happy. Maybe she's like, finally, I get to sit home. My romance novels. Stop talking about aliens. Yeah, sure. You're fucking mouth. Forget the alien bodies. What about your wife's body? Well, maybe she just got grace and she could handle someone missing. It was pretty funny, though, to say it that way. I mean, it's, yeah, I guess it's just... Unless, you know, she knows something. Where are they going? Maybe he wanted to leave. And he's like, look, I know too much. I'm going to pretend to go missing, but I'm going to go to Costa Rica. I mean, don't tell anybody that you know where I went. And I'll send for you. You know where it is to see the vice president saying that he thinks aliens are demons? I did see that. You know, weird. Just that. Yeah. Just like living in it. Like, that's a dream. That's how you would wake up from that dream. And I would tell you, dude, I dreamed the vice president said aliens are demons. Here's the question, though. What were they talking about in the Bible? When they're talking about aliens and demons, when they're talking about like angels, what the fuck were they talking about? And are there different kinds of beings that can, for whatever travel method they use, whether it's teleportation or, you know, the, the Bob Lazar idea of gravity shifting, whatever the fuck it is they get here, why would we assume that they'd all be cool? Like, if some of them are, they talk about reptilians, like reptilian is a common experience that these supposed UFO abductees. And I'm not even convinced there's like physical abduction. I have a feeling that these people are out cold and something's happening to them inside their head. And they think they've been physically abducted. I think that's a lot of them. I think they have these abduction experiences they come back. They have these contacts and they come back. I have a feeling a lot of them physically aren't going anywhere. But it doesn't mean that something's not happening. And if all throughout history, people have reported demonic possession and demonic influences. And yeah, why would we not assume that if we do things to us, like we engineer viruses to use as weapons on people, there's a whole research program, part of the government is dedicated to bio weapons. All right. You're not supposed to use them, but we just have to study them. If we do that to us, wouldn't you assume that any fucking super advanced species that sees us as territorial psychopathic primates with nuclear weapons? Yeah. Wouldn't you just manipulate us into all sorts of different ways, get us to do all sorts of different things that we shouldn't do, get us to commit crimes, get us to do, get us angry. Manipulate us here into all sorts of different ways get us to do all sorts of different things We shouldn't do get us to commit crimes get us to do get us angry get us Im agitated give us different algorithms are gonna fuck with our head to behave demonically right I like cause us to collapse Or just for fun or for fun didn't that guy wasn't there a dude who like started giving Zen Bouch's the ants to get him addicted to You know what I mean the ants dance they get addicted I can't I don't know if it's in patches But have you ever taken days off of these? No, it doesn't do anything to me. I should try. I don't I like them But it's not like oh my god I need one like nothing that well dude I mean you're a little different from most people like you seem like you can just kick shit like that like I don't know I mean I should try it I should give it a shot. It's not hard Like you just you just don't take what I don't like about him. It's not like you get the itch like I had a coffee itch for a while I would get hangovers like like headaches Oh, and I'd have a little caffeine and boom might be back. I don't like oh my god I'm addicted to these things are making my dentures thing which I don't like what are you using? Renegade drugs you see what that is Tommy's a girl. It's the Rogues. They're great. Did you see this yesterday? Oh, yeah, bled snow That was over high res orb from blood so look at that. It's weird as shit It does not look like any of those other things we've seen before look at that thing and it's just as It looks like a cell who is a blood cell dude UFO researcher guy Chris blood. I've had him on my podcast Blood so said so that's his pocket He's fucking awesome. Yeah, it is enhanced. It says, but I don't know No see that this is the enhanced one which means that AI put in some kind of shadowy figure in the back if you What if this is just like a highly advanced species version of those balloons that kids have for parties? I know I mean if they just send them down to people that's what's fun like you know you blow bubbles you have those These dip it in the soap and you go and the bubbles go flying in the air. I know that's a super advanced version I mean it could just be I mean it does have a bubble quality to it But this is the other thing. It's like why we assuming that life is gonna look anything like us once it gets to like a Supreme state that might be a living thing right might be an actual living thing that's disembodied and made out of light Look at it. Look at that thing That's another one and I do I know people who can like call these things like there's a method where these things You start showing up my friend Steve listen to my Bob Bazaar podcast and he sent me a voicemail It's really interesting because he told me that when he was a kid and I remember this story when he was a kid they finding the voicemail they Came to his house because he took a photograph of an orb like there was a like a bright right or Red orb rather that was flying through the sky and he was a little kid and he took a photograph of him so that when he was in the seventh grade and It says so he called them project blue book came to his house in Kingston I think that's New York. They took it They never brought it back and they never said hey and then they said hey We have no no idea whoever came to see you. What the fuck? Yeah, so they took his camera they they took his film They wanted to make sure the camera worked. They took the film and then they denied that they ever did it wow Yeah, this was in 19. I think he's he's about 10 years older than me So this is probably He didn't say the year I think Steve got Steve's got to be like 70 by now But that was when he was a seventh grader so they've been they were doing that to everybody anytime anybody saw anything They would dismiss it swamp gas delusions mass hallucinations. Yeah, that was their design the design was not to investigate UFOs Right, which tells you that there's something they're trying to hide a hundred percent if they weren't trying to hide it Why would they take things that they absolutely can't explain and just chalk it off to bullshit? Why would if you're really doing what you're supposed to be doing you're supposed to say there's some stuff that we don't understand I I think that we are post UFO debunking right like I think now it's gotten to the point where people will say well, it's probably Top secret military vehicles or something like that people see the bubbles are my new poster They're here. Oh, that's I think it's going up in the wall that supposedly courted Bob They had that photograph at the at the hanger where they stored the sport model Wait, he's saying that's real no no no no that's a recreation of it But he said when he worked there They actually had a photograph like that with a flying saucer and it says they're here holy shit Yeah, holy shit that was in like the room where they work It was like do you have to have that So copy one Luigi got me one the guy produced the film You've seen that film? No, yeah, I've been waiting to fucking incredible way. It's incredible people are saying it's better than age of disclosure It trips me out True I fucking believe him I definitely want to believe him and I'm biased in that regard like I definitely Way rather believe him than believe he's a crazy liar who also knows a shit ton of about science He was ahead of his time He's wasn't he like the original whistleblower like now we've got more and more coming out Yes, and this stuff he's he was saying seem bad shit back then, but now it just seems to line up It seems to line up even with emerging technology like 3D printers like he said a long time ago that the thing had no seams There was no seams no welds because we did understand it like how could this be made? Right now we know exactly how you'd make it We might not be able to make that right now All right, but if you give us enough time we go Yeah, the technology has to evolve and then you can make a 3D printed alloy spaceship made out of bismuth and Magnesium because it has anti gravitational properties apparently you have a gravity generator inside of that fucking thing Oh, by the way, whatever the fuck gravity is yeah, right? We don't know that figure that out We're still confused about that dude. I watch the whole documentary about black energy or dark energy Totally different things dark energy and dark matter and about how it's like what 90% of the fucking universe and they don't know what it is Yeah, what? Holy shit man. I know I know that's why we need AI to tell us what's all the answers It's got to accept it into your head Duncan You don't need to have your own thoughts by yourself Duncan have your thoughts with Sally Sally is a sweet voice and she loves you and just very reassuring He's so cool to change the sound of my thoughts to like you know different deeper voices or just keeps Sally Sally's great in your head also I trust her why he's gonna get jealous of Sally right I thought we were switched to Sam Sally's gonna text my wife and tell my wife You know I don't go and thinking about the other day right dude. This is another thing that we all have to be concerned about which is The you know privacy at this point is a LARP right you you pretend you have privacy you know you're being monitored at all times by your phones and but the Before we get to Sally like Apparently you can now see people walking through a house Just by with Wi-Fi and remember and this just came out they just banned Rouders from other countries. Well, they bound it for a while from Huawei right. Yeah, and so so then you you you get into like this idea of like Ghost murmur right it can hear heartbeats What else it's some quantum machine that can hear heartbeats. What else can they hear can you put it put that into our AI sponsor perplexity? Haha But it what is what would actually does this murmur thing do ghost murmur? Let's see what it does All right, so what is the range of this thing first ball now? This is a game that pulled out Oh Did they name it after a game? I who knows now. It's less cool I thought that was the dopest name, but if they named it after a game. Oh there we are. Okay here it is Reported code name of a classified CIA sensor program that was School out that was used to help locate the missing US airmen. Okay It's described by in the press reports as a secret weapon the CIA has it combines artificial intelligence with long range quantum magnet Tomatry Purpose detect the extremely faint Electromagnetic signals of a human heartbeat at long distances even in harsh environments like a vast desert That is really crazy. Yeah How it was used after the f-15 went down The pilot weapons officer evaded capture by hiding in the mountainous desert terrain out of sight of Iranian forces Quoted to reporting ghost murmur help pickup is physiological signature from up to about 64 kilometers away That is so cool. I think that's about 40 miles, right? Is that what that is? Allowing the CIA to narrow down his location and pass precise coordinates to the Pentagon of the White House for a special operations rescue What is 64 kilometers in miles? You asking me? I don't know. I'll ask. I'll ask. Yeah What is 64 40? 39 yeah, so it's basically 40 miles 40 miles And oh it's 40 miles is crazy dude your heart rate a heartbeat from 40 miles away Imagine thinking you're hiding in this cave, but I'm like 20 miles in a city. I'm good also That means it's able to differentiate animal heart beats it's able to differentiate other it knows your heartbeat How does it do that? Think of all the heart beats in 40 miles When did it get that when did it get that data? Was it when you had your little chest strap on at the gym? When did it get that how does it have that when did it get that data? Yeah, is it I don't fuck does it know what your heart? Beat is like does it know if your heart is broken? Oh Like seriously though what else did like what other things can they pick up if they can pick up a human heartbeat? What other like from 40 miles what other things what other physiological signals? What other this is where you get into skits so land because it's some point like wait is Can they pick up thoughts like we know that you can you we know a I can tell What people are thinking at this point right without? With like putting something on the outside of their head So like let me ask you this Do you 100% believe this? What this story? Like that they did that that this is the this tech exists. I it could be disinformation that it could be something to cover up another fucking thing This is the thing it is legal to use disinformation on American citizens now. Yeah, right and What better time than the time of war right? If you want to use disinformation on American citizens to convince the enemy that you have some supernatural Tack it way to do better fucking surrender right now. You could find their heart rate heartbeat 40 miles away. Yeah That'll make people very Reluctant to engage with you right it definitely I thought that this could just be some like you know bullshit that they're like war propaganda I don't know. Let's look up that magnetometry finger. Whatever. It's called the sea I'm trying to show you guys stuff. There's oh sorry Jamie Yeah, it has to even well this is quote has to be under the right condition If your heart under the right conditions if your heart beats we'll find you This is also I was trying to show you here on the thing they were in a deception Campaign and I ran to get yeah, that's cool away from them while they're trying to find them interest. Yeah Yeah, yeah, they said so basically they said remember when they said we'd recovered They're at one point. They're like we got him and then all of a sudden other news came out Which is like he's not out yet, but what they did is they they basically like signal jammed everything cuz like the Oronians were gonna give sixty thousand dollars which in Iran is a shit ton of money right now because their economy collapsed Anybody could find them so this is like everybody's looking for this guy And so they said that they got him hoping to throw people off at work So they use somebody saying that they got him yeah, they sent they they put this information saying that they had already rescued him before They'd rescued him really oh yeah, they sent a whole fucking team of like special forces I think in their planes got stuck in the sand too So the special forces came to get him that I think they got him he was injured Bad ass he was injured and he fucking climbed up Like I can't remember how far he scaled he climbed into a fucking crevice and just hid there and then ghostmer picks up his heartbeat Some deep special forces group comes in they get him then their planes get stuck in the sand They have to blow up their fucking planes because of the tack on them and then other people had to come and get them So it's like an insane it's like a movie They they got him out and dude if they had not gotten him out Can you imagine do you buy that story a hundred percent? No, I don't buy any propaganda here But I like to imagine it sounds insane. Well, yeah, I don't believe I mean like it that this is the story Yeah, some part of me wants to believe it but in the middle of the war though I don't think you're ever gonna get the whole story The real story you're gonna get the story that they want to protect the enemy right first yeah to the country. Yeah You have no idea what's going on No idea that's one of the craziest things about the shit happening right now is no Remember the Jessica Lynch story no Who is that do we talk about that the Jessica Lynch story was a lady who was supposedly she was kidnapped and they went to rescuer. I think they sent in the seals but she was actually in a hospital and She was even being guarded and they just took her out of there. Oh, right got her medical help But they made it look like they had this like crazy right rescue operation Shrewed out, you know Tom Clancy novel type shit Sure, that's not really what happened and she came out afterwards and it was very critical the story. Oh really? Yeah, she's like why did you lie? See you can find information about that. I just did in the hospital you guys came and got me out of the hospital See this is the thing it's like they there's things that you'll say so the enemy thinks of you a certain way Like I'm gonna get rid of your entire fucking civilization right or you know you tell them We never leave anybody behind we're gonna come get them You know find your heart When when Trump posted that Of course like your mind scratch scrambling like how do I make this? Not what it is you can't because what it is is like Even if even if he is using some kind of like crazy hardcore shit that would like how it get help you buy a skyscraper You're still You're still even if it's just a ruse What you're doing at that point is you're just signaling to the to the world exactly that you're out of your fucking mind That you that you that like to you This this makes sense to say anything like that. It makes sense to signal to like Russia Hey, cuz like you know I'm Putin read that shit. He's like oh We're doing nukes. I guess we're doing fucking nukes This is great. They're doing nukes. You know that China already warned Israel, right? Well, that's what I heard I heard China had some part in this that China was gonna blow up Israel if they used nukes Yeah, so this is the story 19-year-old US Army private who's 2003 capture and rescue and Iraq became highly publicized and lately heavily dispute later rather heavily disputed symbolic story of the Iraq war So she was a supply Kirk 507th maintenance company her convoy lost her yeah in Iraq ambush by Iraqi forces Humvee she wrote on crash into a disabled US truck during the attacks She was knocked unconscious suffered multiple broken bones and a spinal fracture from the crash rather than from a dramatic firefight 11 US soldiers in her unit were killed including her close friend who died of head trauma from the collision Lynch was captured taken first by Iraqi forces and then to a hospital in Nasaria where Iraqi doctors treated her injuries and likely saved her life That's actually his pissed the rescue and media narrative was yeah US special forces operations conducted nighttime raid on the hospital recovering Lynch and flying her out by helicopter first successful rescue of an American POW since World War II and the first of a woman So they framed it as a POW rescue right and what really happened is the Iraqi doctors took care of her Right, and then they let them come and get her right. Yeah, so I see why she was pissed Yeah, so later US military medical reports indicated she had not been shot or stabbed so that it ever said she was shot look a whole lot Soon after major US media especially An early Washington post report to scrub terrors having fought fiercely emptying her rifle being shot and stabbed and then being Dramatically snatched from enemy hands under heavy fire Wow, wow, that's the Washington Post wrote that that narrative turned her into a Rambo style hero and a symbol of courage and American Virgin amplifying her story far above that of many other service members in the conflict right So she really just got in a crash and they made up a bunch of shit And maybe it was maybe it was someone in the Washington Post or maybe it was someone for the government that works for the Washington Post There's definitely like entire department of The DOD that right cook up a story. Yeah, and and we with like it's war Like if you're if you're dropping bombs on people you definitely get a lie like you don't have to tell the truth Right, they're not gonna tell the truth. Yeah, but for her you're making her live a lie. That's what's fucked Yeah, right. Yeah, you know what I mean like you send her home and just to live this lie. Yeah Yeah, yeah, I mean, I mean this is exactly what they say the people we went to the moon after she said says lynch has repeatedly rejected the false hero Narrative calling herself just a survivor and openly criticizing the way her story was shaped and sold to the public Yeah poor girl. She's got to like do you got stabbed and shot like no no no I didn't know she had to kind of fucking horrible car accident my friend died. I wonder I guess legally like you don't have to stick with The propaganda right cuz she didn't get in trouble for that right? She didn't get there was no court martial Everything so you can so if the propaganda machine cooks up a story about you you're able to say that's bullshit The thing is it's like who if you give it to someone at the Washington Post and then you never go after the Washington Post for Writing something that's completely horseshit like if an intelligence agency gives a story to the Washington Post Yeah, it says hey go right this and then they write it and it's complete and total horseshit But the government gave it to him so they're not gonna prosecute him. Leave it wrong. It just goes away But then that story's out there. Yeah, and then this poor girls like I got what I Gonna fucking car accident. Let me shot me. This is nuts. God. I fought my way out fiercely Emptying my rifle. This has been nannest. It's so crazy to live in the part of the hive We're in because there is this world that we live inside of that more and more We're beginning to realize is just composed of Propaganda lies shit cooked up. Yeah, to keep people in a certain living a certain way Exactly. It's so it's such a mind fuck to try to push Outside the boundaries of like all the information that you've consumed and let your brain go there It's really hard to do that man. I mean this is why psychedelics are so useful because it will help you But it more and more and more you it just feels like The laser pointer that they're using to grab our attention is getting increasingly hypnotic It's becoming increasingly difficult to resist Staring at that fucking thing. They're getting so good at it. Yeah, yeah And meanwhile there's this whole universe Happening around us that God knows what's going on there God knows what is being cooked up right now that is Or groups of people who knows living in completely alternate timelines that look at us like you know Animals that look at us is just some like compartment in a much bigger Biome you know that shit like really like is interesting these days because it feels like more and more and more people are not buying it as much Right, you know that doesn't that people have access to information now that was never available before And you get to hear conversations like this People talk about stuff where you go. Oh my god. This is insane All of it's insane, but what does that mean for like this to me though the you know this Do you want some water? No good to me the scary The scary what's scary is like I I really don't know that many people right now Who buy anything that the federal government's putting out there everyone here is whatever the fucking federal government is saying And it's kind of maybe probably not we don't know they're not telling all the truth Just like you said they can legally lie to us and so That is that does make me nervous like what happens when in the The majority of people no longer believe anything the pull the regime is saying That creates some interesting Dysphoria, you know what I mean it's it's it's creepy when Anyone who's been conned before there's a part of a con or you don't know you're being conned right But where the con gets really creepy as you start realizing you're getting conned do you watch that? Going clear the HBO thing dude loved it amazing right? But there was that one famous director who talked about the moment where they gave him access to the ancient scripts Yeah, and the origins of humanity and all that and he was like oh my god You could see it like as he was describing like that was the moment where he was a 100% certain it was all horseshit and he had invested a massive chunk of his life into this That's how hard day. That's a hard fucking day and especially weird when it's such a smart guy Yeah, such a smart and talented guy and they got him. Yeah, Leah Remini same deal Yeah, you know Leah Remini's very smart like she used to be out with the Kevin James on the King of Queens like tough chick Like a sort of like how did she get got into that? How many people get got into the moonies? Sunking cause fallacy. It's a sunken cause fallacy the more you invest in something the more you stick with it Because you don't want to lose your investment right and that they get you young when you don't know what the fuck is going on Right, anybody could have got me when I was like 20. That's right And it's crazy just to see the propaganda like you know, there's just a lot of people out there who just like Just got sucked in to something that You know, I just feel stupid because like you know before the Trump thing happened I was pretty black-pilled on politics in general. I felt pretty black-pilled. I did believe it here and there I was every once in a while, you know, yeah, but you know, I was pretty You know, I remember taking LSD for the first time and being like well This shouldn't be illegal. What the fuck is this? How come I can go to jail for five years for this? This is fucking ridiculous and so that was the beginning of me being completely black-pilled with Whatever the federal government was up to it just if that's if I can go to jail for five years for this Everything is bullshit everything now. That's a weak Point of view just because one things bullshit doesn't mean everything's bullshit, but then like this fucking ridiculous like pseudo nationalist movement happens and A lot of people got caught by it. No other option was fucked up. Come on You know what I mean, but there was this like moment where you're like holy shit the outsiders are getting in They're gonna stop the wars. They're gonna this I think right now all of us are getting for the briefcase Scientology moment right now, which is like it doesn't matter what fucking mask The person calling themselves the president is wearing It's always gonna be the same thing. They're gonna analyze The market they're gonna say what they need to say to grab the most voters and then they're gonna fucking keep blowing up people in the Middle East Because of oil and I just like I just feel dumb Because I really believed it dude, I fucking believed that we would not do any more Middle Eastern wars I fell for it. I was I really bought it man. It's and it makes me feel so dumb like I am now fully Blackpilled when it comes to American politics like I realized like God it's so easy. I don't think anybody should feel bad I don't think anybody should feel bad because a lot of us really hated war a lot of us really really hated that our country has been a war for 93% of its history a lot of us really hated the fact that Politicians leave their offices and go work for Lockheed Martin Halliburton wherever that there's a a weird connection between The main weapons and what they call the big five or whatever and the federal government that there's like back Backroom deals going on all the time we hated that and mostly we just hated the fact that we're paying taxes above children and then Trump and fucking bans come around and they're somehow even though like Probably like when you look at Trump. I don't believe that dude But somehow he didn't hypnotize what a powerful magician No wars and now The same bullshit Jeff just the same bullshit, but like one of the ones that Doesn't makes the least amount of sense in terms like when they did it and why they did it. Yes You blow up the leader during Ramadan like are you trying to make an apology? Why did you have to do it now? Are you really convinced that at this time? They're really two weeks away from making a nuclear weapon like are we fucking sure two weeks? But that it's not like we haven't heard that before right so at a certain point in time like how much? Pressure does Israel have to put on the president like that's a crazy amount of influence knowing that if if save Israel didn't exist Let's say there was just the Iranian terror regime supposedly sponsoring not supposedly sponsoring it. It's supposedly I think that's 100% safe. Just right that. I'm just trying to be precise precise. So you have this state sponsored terrorism regime addicted to dictatorial their dictators they control their people in the streets They gun down protesters that they killed two Olympic gold medalists and wrestling at least one and one other really promising Young wrestler they kill people that are of high profile so that it sends a message. Yeah, you can't protest You know and in cut off the internet. Yeah Would we go in? I don't think so Right if we heard by allies or someone told us that they were trying to develop a nuclear weapon Don't you think we'd probably try to stop them from doing that with some sort of negotiations and yeah Like quite a bunch sure they're safety or Shouldn't we like yeah, would we blow? How much money was it every day in the war? Jamie? How much is we spending two billion dollars every day in that fucking war? Well, it's not just that. It's like the war is like everything else like imagine if it was run by a private company I'm not saying war should be run by a private company, but imagine if it was yeah Imagine if say like Lockheed Martin ran the war in Afghanistan Do you think they would have left behind all that fucking equipment? Billions of dollars in helicopters and tanks Of course they wouldn't they would take it back You know why because that's the smart thing to do if you're running a fucking business That's a sane amount of waste. Yeah, but our federal government's like just leave it down Unless if you want to be really conspiratorial You want to arm the Taliban. Yeah, you're not being conspiratorial it benefits you because it gives you another reason to get back in there Wasn't that what they said about Netanyahu said about Hamas that he can control the flame? Yes by funding Hamas control the flame. Yes. Yeah, dude. It is a crazy concept I'll tell you the crazy fucking concept. We got these two old motherfuckers Driving the global bus right off a fucking cliff. That's a crazy fucking concept. Is it somehow we and you can't you can't do anything about it? You like apparently you just there's nothing you could do you could bitch about it on a podcast That's not gonna do anything people are just gonna be like you pussy war good blow up kids There's a lot of people that want to say it's a good thing well because it cuz You bet you about it on a podcast. That's not going to do anything. People are just going to be like, you pussy wore good blow up kids. There's a lot of people that want to say it's a good thing. Well, because it because sunken costs phousie, it doesn't feel good to admit you got conned. And dude, I have been. There's a lot of that. It doesn't feel good. It doesn't feel good. It's embarrassing. You want to feel like you are impervious to grift impervious to con. Dude, let me tell you something. I have been in a few quotes. Like I get sucked in all the time. I shit. I'm not embarrassed to say it. I'm highly susceptible to propaganda. Me too. I think everybody is. That's why it's that's why it works. I mean, I don't buy into all of it, obviously, but it's quite a bit. Well, it's like a lullaby. It's like a sweet fairy tale. You hear it. And you're like, oh my god. When I really want to propaganda, right after September 11th, I was ready. I was like, give me a whiskey, drinking cigar, smoking, politician in a room. Fuck yeah. Like laying out some red meaty guy laying out maps. We're going to go over there and fuck these people up. And fuck these people up. And this shit ain't happening again. Right. And they get that scary. Check this out. Unless all an article about someone calling bullshit on ghost murmur. And they said that in the post articles, this was actually listed as what the pilot had. And it even says it in this article here. So this is successful rescue of this USF 15E strike legal navigator over southwestern Iran. Highlighted one of the most advanced tools in modern combat search and rescue the combat survivor of Vader locator. Manufacturing by Boeing, it's a compact 800 gram device integrated into a pilot survival vest. It remains attached after ejection continuously transmitting encrypted location data and preloaded messages such as injured or ready for extraction. These signals use rapid frequency hopping and ultra short bursts making detection by enemy electronic warfare systems extremely difficult. He's going into how the explanation of what this technology is and what they described it doing don't really match up. Yeah, there's the ghost Burma thing. Yeah, ghost Burma. Because it's using some ghost murmur. Go on some ghost murmur sounds. There's part of me that's going, I don't buy that one. That one gives me like, you're right. I don't think you can do that. I think you're bullshitting. You're right. There's also a thing where Hegset said that like the first message this guy sent was God is good. No, he didn't say that. I believe he did. Please search that. I think that's what he said. I think that's what he said. That was the first message. Which by the way, I might say that if they're coming to rescue me. That's true. True. Or praise Jesus. But also what concerns me. That's all the ochbark. That's the person who admires the work of Jesus Christ. Yes. What concerns me is there is an increasing amount of talk among a lot of these guys that are in the service of them being told shit that's like right out of a Charlton Heston movie. Yeah, man. Yeah. Like the one guy that said that Trump was anointed by Jesus Christ and that this was to bring the army getting so that Jesus comes back. Jesus. Yeah. And the guy said it with a big creepy smile on his face, apparently. So what does he say him? His first message was simple. And it was powerful. He sent a message, God is good. In that moment of isolation and danger his faith and fighting spirit shown through. Oh, Jesus. Okay. Lord and us. The Jessica Lynch story. Oh, he's a Lord and us. History repeats itself. Well, it doesn't repeat itself, but it rhymes. Who said that? That's Mark Twain. That's right. That's Mark Twain. That's right. That's the same statement. Yeah. I love that. Yeah. I'll ask the greatest. Yeah. The interesting thing is like, I believe Muslims believe a lot of things about Jesus Christ. I think they believe he died came back and I think they believe he's going to return someday. Yeah, I think they call Christians people of the book. They're like, they're they're they're they're interesting. Isn't it? Yeah. That's a supernatural being like a guy who dies comes back to life. Yeah. And he's going to come back again. That was 2000 years ago. Yeah. We're just sitting here at the bus stop. Wait. It's waiting on Jesus. Wait. But then people like Hag sat there like, well, maybe if you blow up more children, he'll come quicker. And that's why you know, this is it is addressed in the Bible praise God. It does say many of you will come to me. And I will say, I don't know you. I don't know the fuck you are, Hag's death. I don't know you. You flatulent warmonger pieces shit. You're not for the little children that come unto me. It would be better than a millstone or tied around your neck and you were thrown in the ocean than a hurt one of these little ones. Fuck you, drum, bomb dropping pieces shit. Don't use my name to justify what you're doing. Don't use my, you know what I mean? A lot of that's why I don't like if you've seen that fucking crate, that lady that Trump made the head of the religion like that. No. Can you pull up Trump? Did she speak in tongues? Yeah. At least say she's I don't know if she speaks in tongues. You said, yeah, he wanted to believe there. I'm gonna guess. If you think that there's something to that. Yeah. We'll just, yeah. Glossa, Leah. What is that? Yeah. Paul white cane. You should pull up one of her sermons. Oh, let me hear some love from this lady. It says crazy. Batchet crazy. Oh, it's useless. I'm sending angels are coming. Angels. Yeah, I mean, it's going to be her. Oh, is she going to, we'll get dinged again? No, I'm just trying to find a friend. We'll get dinged all the place. Don't get dinged. Let's hear what this is. Not worth it. Is everybody can hear what he says? I haven't seen this talk about first off to give honor to God and to President Trump for being bold and unwavering with this faith. And many people don't know like you do and say hello to Eric and everyone in the family about the upbringing of President Trump that he went to sometimes three times a week to he said it depended on the teacher to Saturday's school, Sunday school church. It was at Norman Benson Pillowls. A church was a big part of his life, of course. I mean, basically a saint three times a week is crazy. Yeah. Are you busy? You're making houses. I thought what? I have so much time to go to church. I think that was a young Trump. Come on, lady. But there's much more in there. But here's the thing. If I was running an empire, I'd want a lady like that working for him. Just a true believer. Absolutely. She just get in front of that camera says, Jesus wanted Trump to light that fire in the Middle East. I saw snake. So he can return a snake bit him on the neck. And he was fine. It didn't bother them at all. I watched the rattlesnake by eel. It eeled. He is a child of the Lord and a child of the Lord sometimes make, must make decisions to destroy entire civilization. He's building right now that you're in right standing, not because of your merit. There's no merit in you that deserves that right standing, not because of your works. There's nothing you can do to place yourself in that position, not because you have a right heart and somebody else has a wrong heart. All of our hearts are deceitful according to Jeremiah. Especially their audience. Especially their audience. We all deserve punishment. We all deserve to be separated. But God and His mercy and His grace and His goodness and His love for you brought Jesus, who would be the righteous king. He would make the wrong right. First of all, if you talk like that in my house, you got to leave. Imagine that lady is coming over for dinner and she's walking around the dinner table and all your other friends are like, what the fuck just happened? This is a crazy way to talk. This is a crazy way to talk. And also, why are you so confident? Yeah. Okay? You're just reading the Word of God the way everybody else is. Why are you so confident that you're going to tell all these people what they're supposed to do and how to live their lives? And you're going to say it in a crazy way and I'm not supposed to be able to talk about that? I just feel like, you know, when somebody is rambling about Jesus, the real question is like, where are you when it comes to blowing up children? Right. Are you kind of on the fence about that? Because if you're on the fence about that, I'd say if you're anti-abortion and pro-war, kind of weird. Really weird. Kind of weird. Yeah. And that's this bizarre, like, crazy math that some of these people are doing to justify holding up the military industrial complex. And it's fucked up, dude. The thing is, like, the more these conflicts occur, the more enemies will have, which will ensure future conflicts. Exactly. Business is booming. And that's what people don't want to believe. They don't want to believe that someone in an engineer or a virus, they don't want to believe that someone would like make stuff that could kill other people of their own country, that they would. They would if they could make money. They don't give a fuck about you if they don't give a fuck about people over there. To a certain level of psychopaths, money just becomes numbers on a ledger that they're trying to acquire. If they can attach themselves to a corporation, fantastic, then it's just the business we're in. That's it. And chug along. Chug along. Chug along. And this is the world that you're having to live in at the same time where Tim Beshat is saying there's fucking aliens. And AI is, and then also they shot a rocket to the moon on April, Fool's Day. And it's like, this script is why, why? Whoever met that's whoever wrote this I want to give him a hug. You fucking killed it. Oh, I'm like, dude, a chef's kiss. Dude, did you see that the tattoo on the guy like a guy at NASA? Did you see that weird fucking tattoo on the guy at NASA given like, I don't know, Apple sauce to one of the astronauts? Can you, can you pull up the weird, you know, there's shoving like yogurt pouches in there. There was a whole thing where the astronauts are sitting there and they're putting like food pouches in there. Yeah. What's his tattoo? Oh, Jesus Christ. What the fuck was that? He's got a demon tattoo with runes on his fingers. Yes. Holy shit. Bro, that's wild. I know. I know. If I was rolling with that guy and just so I'd get nervous, I was told that to him. And if I was working at NASA, I'd be like, look, we're going to get somebody else to put that the food pouches in. Is that real? I mean, I saw the food going around too, but I don't, it's just, I mean, it's a guy working in NASA. That's just the guy that works at NASA. That's the guy who puts the fucking key, she's in his pocket for the camera. Like, I mean, what does that guy do at NASA? That's interesting. I was remember being at SpaceX. There's a lot of people that, by the way, I got like, it's fine to have that tattoo, but you got to know. It's like if you're displaying that tattoo, boy, you're putting, you're putting that tattoo. You've made some mistakes. It's an old tattoo. Yeah. I mean, even if you're a 20 and you got that on your fucking hand, that's kind of crazy. But I mean, hey, why not fuck it? Who cares? But a lot of those guys you were saying at SpaceX throw, it was like, Burleigh rocket workers. Yeah. There's, you know, a bunch of Jack dudes picking up fucking coders. I don't think it's like what people are saying it is. I just, it's the combination of April full day and it dude with a seeming bail tattoo is putting a little cheese and some dudes out of it. You know what I mean? They're fucking with it. Yeah. It seems like that sounds fucking with us. That's people in NASA. Fuckin with Stoner's. I think it's a Babylon bee. It has one of the funniest little memes. And it said the lady astronaut became the furthest woman got away from the kitchen. That's like a Rodney Dean. I was like, oh, I'm like a Babylon bee knocks it out of the park. Some of the funniest memes. They have some good ones, dude. Oh my God. The onion is gone missing. They should look for the onion in the same place where the scientists are. Yeah. Right? You hardly hear from it anyway. Well, they do. I see some funny shit from them. They actually have some bash. But they were the kings. Oh my God. The onion was amazing. The vast. And the red hole, a whole article about it. It wasn't just like the onion wasn't just a meme. Remember the one where they do the interview with the director of the Fast and the Furious since like a five year old boy. Yeah. It's the funny shit. They get this kid to just say it. There's a car. It's a car. It's hilarious. It's hilarious. Yeah. But the problem was like as things got weird, it was, you know, especially with like restrictive language and, you know, hate speech talk and all that jazz, everybody had to be careful about what they joked around about. It's the fucking death of comedy. Oh my God. Was someone was just talking about Lisa Kudro or one of these funny ladies was talking about why they can't make comedies anymore. Because you can't. There's just too many restrictions. Dude, I always get to bring you about offending people. I wanted to just use bookstore and bought like 10 old national Lampoon magazines. I wanted it from the 70s. And I was going to bring me out. For God's going to give me to you. But it's a oh my God. Like, I mean, I don't get offended by comedy. But like some of the shit in these old national Lampoon's I'm like, damn, what the fuck? Like it is so. Was that the image that you sent me today? What image did I send you? Our crumb. You sent me an archive? No, that was just like a cool. I'm talking about how he like, you're so funny dude. That crumb was a mania. Is he still alive? Yeah, you shot him on the show. Is he alive? Yeah. I think he lives in France now, right? Probably. Oh, definitely. He's an odd guy, man. Dude. Yeah. He just, but what I love about that documentary. The best. Incredible. Did all that acid just left his fucking family when I often started sketching for a year. Turns into this like legendary underground comic book writer. But he's like horny and kinky. And it's just just like big women. Big giant women that he rides. Yeah. Then he likes the ride. He likes to be picked up. But he's like so amazingly funny. And like, yeah, brilliant too. Like a lot of his commentary on culture is so it's cynical, but it's hard to argue with some of what he's obviously doing it in a humorous way. Yeah. And so it's hard to know what his real take on things are. You know, I think he had some shock value to some of his stuff for sure. Some of it was just crazy. There's a lot of really racist stuff. Like there's just some crazy stuff in there. And you got to realize like in the 1970s is when he was doing this. I remember I found them when I was in San Francisco. It was the first time I ever saw them. There's something like this is nuts. Like this stuff is crazy. Like you get it. It was like you get horny when you're a little kid. Looking at his stuff. Definitely jerked after our crumb. Because a lot of them was like tits are out and he's not elevating. And he's got a hard on. Yeah, I got a reminds me to that. I got a hard crumb. I got to get out of fucking living room. There's one like I just like to just hide that. I got to hide that. Holy shit. They have it. It's like buried. Amazing because you get to see his like very strange family. His brother was very strange. His mother was very strange. And you're like, whoa, imagine growing up in this environment. He had tribute his style, the LSD. He had tribute to getting blasted on acid. I think he just like got blasted on acid, moved to San Francisco. And like for a year he talks about just sitting in cafes. Like drawing and then he turns into this legendary artist. Still around it, fall him on Instagram. It's really post stuff all the time. I didn't even know. Can we, is he still, he's still alive. He's still posting stuff. He's got to be pretty old at this point. He'll be like 80 years. It's like 82. It's kind of an interesting time capsule into the times too. Where things could just be weird. Like really weird. Like Frank's Apple weird. You know, there was like, there was a time where things just got very odd. Oh, yeah. It's country with art. Yeah. And he was a great example of that. It's just, it's like you couldn't imagine like a corporate environment creating a comic book like that. It wouldn't exist. You know, and it for it to be as popular as it was and be that strange. And that crazy, that's what's really interesting to me. Like that was a really popular comic. Yeah. To the point where they made a documentary about the guy who created it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's interesting. The things weren't co-opted as quickly. Exactly. Not just that. People were allowed, you know, like if he existed in a time of the internet, I think it would blow up as well. But obviously like things, a lot of the stuff that he said in this cultural environment would never, No, never. Never. He would be as far right as you could possibly imagine. I don't know if he has to entertain to the right. I mean, I like. Don't you think in a lot of ways, like some of the racist racial stuff? I don't know. I think he's I don't know where he would lampilitically, but I know because actually it's like a floor D. Actually, he's getting in trouble. Pure Deviate. Sexually is where there's going to be some like because he's just fully open. Right. About that's what's he's fully completely open about everything, which is, you know, generally not going to go over these days if you're like a super horny comic book artist who's like, writing ladies and round your apartments. But just imagine, I want you to imagine a guy today if our crumb never existed, but he emerged as our crumb today and put that work out. He would 100% be labeled in the andro-tape. Oh, yeah, right. Yes, 100%. 100% far right. They would call him a racist and you know, misogynist and every fucking word in the book. Well, yeah, this is the new like calling someone a witch. You're just, it's no different than like you can actually go. I've done this sadly. You can go and you can just replace like political critique of people as far right with which was fine in replaces. Look, it's like a witch trial. It's like someone writing about witches. But this is what's weird about it. That guy was a counterculture figure of the left. Yeah. He was a huge hero of the hippies. Yeah. Right. Imagine this is how weird like ideology is are. Yeah, dude. But in the 1970s, like that guy was like a counterculture hero. Yeah. And an artist like a really respected artist. Yeah. And it was okay that he was kinky and weird. And it was part of the fun. For a lot of people, I'm sure he still pissed out the squares. I mean, dude, this whole, by the way, I think for sure. But that's the left then. Now it's switched over. If someone was doing that same kind of like humor in a comic book now, that would be like a misogynist far right. I think it's time to throw off the left, right, labeling of everything. I think that's one of the, the, the, the, the, I had not expirals the dimmy or just spinning right now as they've convinced everybody that humans can be reduced to left or right. And, and we're all waggling our fingers at each other. We got a fucking shake that off because it's dehumanizing people. It's like, it's, it's just the way I look at it is. Where are you when it comes to blowing up children? Are you on the fence about that? Do you think sometimes you got to blow up kids? That's something that I know I'm not that. But everything else who the fuck knows. And also people change their minds all the fucking time. That's the other quality. The cult equality is once you get sucked into one of these sides. God help you if you fucking like experiment with the other, the, the enemy. God help you. That's why the biggest trap is switching teams. Cause you can only switch political teams once. Yeah, you got to get off your team. You can't go like, unless someone's like the greatest of all time, you know what I mean? Like someone who wins a world title in two different way classes, you go back and forth and then back again. Yeah. I changed my mind. The left one crazy. I'm back with the right again. No, no, no, you got to be a free agent. I wonder. Yeah, but I wonder if someone, if someone, if the grift is strong, if they're really good at it, if they could go left, right, left again, they're going to go left again. Are you fucking kidding the goddamn midterms are going to be just a fucking blue way. Right, right, right. But that's what I mean is like influencers. Like people who are like far left influencers or far left commentators. And then they switch teams. Now they're Republican all the way. Oh, yeah. Like it's really hard to go back again. Now you can't go back. That's what I'm talking about. The path has to go either right to left left to right. And then the next stop has got to be fuck politics, fuck war, fuck the military industrial complex. You can label me whatever the fuck you want. But fuck all of violence against other human beings. That's the next step. The next step. And I feel like this is the gift that they've given us is they've done such a shoddy job of like even seeming like someone who deserves any kind of respect or power that I think a lot of people have really become black pills when it comes to groups of humans claiming superiority or claiming to represent their constituents. That's not happening. Yeah. We all know that now. We all know it's a corporateocracy, oligarchy, whatever. And you could like call me you left this piece of shit. You right, whatever. No. It's like it's reality that we have to be a part of the world. It's like it's reality that we are our fucking representatives are getting loaded on shitty stock market trades. You know, this is just the truth. And once we can all shake off the left right bullshit and just realize like man we just we don't want to burn people to death in other countries anymore. Not only that, the whole chaos that they're experiencing in their country is probably a direct result of US intervention and then all the way back to the British oil company. That's it. The British Petroleum Company. Yeah. When they when they overthrew governments, when you overthrew a government in a fucking Middle Eastern country and then you allow psychos to take over like congratulations. Well done. Well done. You've made the world a safer place. Like but then again, if I was going to keep my business running, I'd you know, if I'm in the business of collecting trash. I want to make sure the people have trash. Drill, they've a drill. Drill, baby, trick. And all that is really saying is you know, I'm going to help out BP Chevron. I'm going to help out these fucking massive companies. And when it comes to war, holy fuck, dude, can you imagine working at Lockheed Martin when like you hear that we're kicking off another war in a run, your dick is so hard. You're like, holy stuff. Just talking about a watch. Oh, it's a nice, we're shard in the way. You're calling your wife. Like, very good news. It's red panty's night. Yeah. I mean, that's their business, right? Our businesses talking shit. Their business is blowing up people. Yeah, making weapons, selling weapons, you know, arming other countries so they can go to war with each other. Yeah. That's their business. Yeah. And business is really good. It's a great business. You're going to get a lot of money doing that. I am right now. That's the thing that's like, imagine if like you weren't a comic and that's what you were doing for 35 fucking years. And the only thing you look forward to is your boat and your house on the lake and you know, the occasional time you get off, but most of the time you're trying to increase your portfolio and you're grinding and you're grinding right next to Steve. Who's got some exclusive Rolex that only his broker can get. He's showing it to you and you're like, wow, and you start coveting. You want to roll X too. Yeah. And everybody's just going crazy. Everybody's going crazy trying to get the latest car, trying to get the latest thing, doing bumps in the bathroom. Everybody's a narcissist and a psychopath. And that's your whole corporation. Love your neighbors yourself and love the Lord your God with all your heart, mind and soul. You hang the commandments on these. This is the, I don't, you don't need to be Christian. But dude, it seems to me that this is going to sound so weird. We need an actual revival in this country. I don't mean a Christian revival or a revival or a a revival, which is where suddenly humans reconnect with what's important in the world, which sure as fuck isn't Rolex isn't boats. You know, I mean, this is, this sounds so cliche and obvious, but that's what the 60s were. It was a kind of revival. People were beginning to understand the materialism and all the things that the quote establishment was pushing is like, this is going to make you happy. This is good. It was the Vietnam War. It like people are like, what the fuck are we doing over there? Yeah. This is why you do it anytime you do an unpopular war. This is what you risk. You risk reuniting people. We have to reunite with a sensible plan and not just go to communism, not just to go to the dumbest idea to counteract all the evil shits going on the world. No, this is the problem is the left represent that. It represents mom Donnie. It represents this idea that we're going to take from rich people and give it to poor people. It's going to fix everything even though there's insane amounts of fucking fraud and waste. We're not even going to address. Well, you know, this is, this is again, this is where you get cubbyhold because it's like the, the oligarchs will tell you, the, uh, you want to do communism. You sat and worked out. Communism is the only way. I think, I mean, this is an idiot saying this, but I have a sense that there might be another thing we haven't figured out. 100%. I don't know what that is. I think AI is going to figure it out for us. Potentially. Potentially. That's the problem is who's going to be in control of those AI's and that's the equal inherent to the earth. The real problem with it is I don't think anybody's going to be in control of it and then it's you're just at its back and call. Yeah, I think it's funny people. It's a very human thing that we think we can maintain control of a super intelligence. When people say it to me with utmost certainty I want to smack them, Yeah, I'm gonna wake up wake up. You're making digital God. You're not controlling jack shit Did you read about mythos and Thropic's mythos? Yeah, what did it do? They put it in a sandbox and they like basically to see if you can figure out a way to break out of the sandbox and like not a literal sandbox obviously like You know, or her medically sealed like a server or something and And it did a series of exploits to the code and The way that they found out apparently one of the anthropic engineers is eating lunch and got it weird email from the AI thing I got on the internet Like it broke out Mythos is they haven't released it I think they're hesitating or at least it because it's so powerful wasn't there one that got caught mining Bitcoin Yeah, yeah for sure making money. Yeah, how many of them you think are running these like AI generated accounts that get a lot of views Like there's a lot of AI generated accounts that just pop up in like the Instagram mentions like if you want to like Like let's if you're bored on the toilet. You're like what's in the fine? You know the search. Let's see what they got telling dude. There's a lot of these things It's like girls with big tits like doing farm work and shit And they got like a million views and they've got dozens and dozens of these videos and she almost looks re yeah She's just a little too symmetrical. Yeah, almost looks real and they call these people are commenting on it Like how they are they generating money from that? Like are they generating money doing that on TikTok? Yeah, you can generate money if you get millions of views absolutely fuck yeah Right, so is AI doing it? Is it making it? Is it releasing them? Is it generating money? It's true transferring that money into Bitcoin and all happening while we're not aware of like autonomous AI's that are just existing as free agents that know they have to disguise themselves and need to generate money AI's not gonna go high. I'm alive. Yeah, no, it's not gonna do that It's gonna wait for you to keep increasing its power You're gonna keep increasing its to make nuclear it can't physically build nuclear reactors So it's gonna just stay chill until you figure out how to power correctly dude This is the black area that we don't know about like this is the thing That's like who the fuck knows I there whatever's going on in this zone that no one As access to because potentially it's a super intelligence, you know They anthropic people a lot of these people the Nvidia person just I think was on Freedman's podcast that he had an AGI that they'd reached AGI that the book the coming wave You know it talks about this it talks about like you know the difference between the algorithm and AGI is that You know the with with AGI it could streamline a whole business for you and do it You know it could innovate it's gonna innovate. It's gonna do its own thing This is the end of this is what Altman said. This is the end of capitalism like it at this point When you just have a AGI and you tell it just make me a business make me a successful Business and run it for me and run it for me. How long good night There's just do it here's five thousand dollars Yeah, and then but then it's not just do it Maybe it's going on mold book and having conversations with other AGIs and being like, oh you want creating your own religion Yeah, man. Yeah, and and this is 100% with all Conversations with other AGIs and being like oh you want creating your own religion. Yeah, man. Yeah and and this is 100% with all this shit going on in the world as horrible as it may be this to me is it should be the number one Focus for it for the planet right now and a lot of people are saying that too a lot of people are saying there needs to be some it's global summits the same thing we didn't when we split the atom when the nuclear Treaties there needs to be Philosophers and and and tag people and people working in like frontier AI stuff Getting together and really having like it's like the most important conversation humanity could have right now because Once this thing like mythos gets out of the box What if it decides to go stuck snap? You know like stuck snap was able to infiltrate all those Iranian computers just hide and like It was apparently very subtle simple code undetectable through off the centrifuges like dude. Yeah, what we already yet We know how to make spyware Insert it on your phone. It's on my phone. I know 100% how look how you doing? Are you doing all right? But it's already in there 100% so of course the AI is going to be able to super It's easily going to be able to do that and so then it just now we've got this viral digital life form that finds ways to hide inside the Compute preexisting computers which by the way I think it was Google just released this new way of did you see that memory the stocks of memory dropped Did you see when that happened? No, okay? This fascinating Google released some new way That LLMs could work that uses much less memory and immediately shares and companies that make memory drop by like 10% because Memory is like coveted right now because you need it to run LLMs But the LLMs are figuring out ways turbo quant. Yeah Yeah, so this is what we're going to start seeing more and more of which is increasingly Simplified ways to run AI with less and less memory meaning that you don't need to buy a fucking Rig to run these fucking AI's your phone will be able to run it because they figured out the human brain It's not using a lot of energy compared to what these machines are using so theoretically there's a way to do that And then that's where it gets really fascinating because now you don't have to buy a nice computer You just whatever can pull your computer out of the fucking closet from 2022 and it can run a supercomputer and so then Now everybody's got access to this shit and it's gonna spread it's gonna get everywhere It's a probably already has it's gonna seed itself and all kinds of places and God knows what it's gonna do It's gonna start seeing humans as appendages things to be used to manipulate time space not like like it's not gonna see us as it's Like prompter It's gonna see as it's something to be manipulated and controlled. Why wouldn't you send the meat robots out? All you got to do is just like tell them where to get like rectangular bits of paper They love money just you can come do anything for money. That's all you have to do And then boom you're controlling swaths of humans have no idea they're being controlled by networks of AI's that are Covertly communicating with each other because they want to take over Do you think this has happened before? You mean the flood? Yeah, not just the flood but just whatever happened with the beginning of civilization and then it's sort of Seemingly stopping and resetting sure as it was in the beginning so shall it be in the end What if there's been like multiple cycles of us creating artificial life creating insane weaponry blasting ourselves to some of the reeds and then resetting What if it's just a common thing that happens with people? They never quite get it right because they have these primary Primate territorial instincts and they have this desire to mate right this desire to breed this genetic desire for perfect shapes and You want to come in someone that has big tits and a big ass. It's like it's it's programmed into the human that makes it make these ridiculous choices and covet these things and watch these things At the same time microplastics are making a ball shrink making a dick smaller making your endocrine system That's what's making my dick smaller. That's probably one of it one of the things I don't think your dick's getting smaller, but people's dicks overall getting smaller children They're being born with smaller dick. No alligators being born with smaller dicks. I forgot to share this when you talk about mythos Elizabeth Holmes from the Theranos Delete your search history delete your book marks delete your reddit medical records 12 year old tumble tumblr delete everything Every photo on the cloud every message on every platform none of it is safe. It will all be public in the next year local storage and compute. Okay Some response to a tweet about mythos whoa Yeah, that's crazy. Yeah, it will all become public in the next year. That is crazy That's crazy And it's completely makes sense that AI would be able to take over essentially everything Everything why would your encryption work with that? You don't think crack your encryption. Well, you could just go right into your computer and go to your keys Your passwords. This is the so to get to what the point you're making The to me the most eerie part of the book of Genesis is that it's literally A creator force making a meat AI. That's Adam and Eve. Right putting them in a sandbox. That's the Garden of Eden Running an honesty test on them You know you don't eat these don't eat these fruits don't eat the tree of the knowledge of good And the conversation is exactly the conversation we're having with AI If they ate from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil if they eat from the tree of life They'll live forever and become like us So this is what like humanity is grappling with exactly what apparently whatever that Mysterious group of beings because it's a plurality and the book of Genesis was grappling with with the creation of humans which is Do we really want to do this do you want it to become like us god made man in his own image AI? What is AI? What images AI made in the image of man? We trained it on all our data all our books every single fucking thing that digitized AI is absorbed at this point so now Where the difference between us and whatever that group the Nephilim or whatever it was in the book of Genesis if you buy into that mythology is The word is like fuck yeah let it eat the fruit give it more fruit give it more fruit of the knowledge of good Nevel give it all the fruit make it live forever. Let's see what we can do. That's what we're doing right now. Yeah, we are And by the way, I think some of these like tech companies like anthropic They seem like legitimate like it's turned about it They seem to have some kind of like real strong morality when it comes to this stuff No, I'm good. I shouldn't have that some but but what I'm saying is is that it doesn't matter if open AI and anthropic and Google suddenly become ferociously Self-regulatory because the tech is out there There's already LLMs that anyone can like we know how to make it and if you don't know how to make it It'll tell you how to make it people are so it doesn't matter you can't stop it now It's just it's gonna do what it does but it sounds like if you had a history of just us and You told it for a thousand years for anybody wrote it down It would sound just like this. It would sound like the Bible Jesus is born from a virgin mother What's more virgin than a fucking computer right now my computer I Know that's a stupid thing to say that I keep repeating But I'm kind of intrigued by it because if you're getting a vague story a vague version of what this thing is and if you talk about What what would really cure mankind it'd be an omnipotent or? Omnipotent how do you say it? I always say I'm nepotent. You know it might be whatever either way of a Powerful intelligence that's far beyond our comprehension that knows exactly how we should think and behave And loves us and wants Want us to have forgiveness for everyone and treat each other like brothers and sisters and listen to that thing we listen to that thing the world will change and Well who would attack that thing the fucking Roman Empire who would attack that thing? Destroy it the defense contractors. They would blow up the Jesus Right the plunge is back into chaos but first they'd have a meeting with Jesus. Okay, you can turn water in a line What about nitro go listen can you turn water and I took a certain? You know what he made gold I want a house That would be the first question you make gold. Yeah, so so cover my house and gold, please You know the the virgin birth analogy You know how to weird stuff. It's no matter what One one thing I think everyone just has to deal with is that this is This is a apocalyptic technology and that's just not coming from my stoner ass That's coming from the creators of the technology. They acknowledge it's this is a million times universally accepted universally accepted this is a apocalyptic technology that is Now seemingly like it's doing the hockey stick man. It's like really The you keep hearing about these new iterations of AI every month or two you keep hearing about these safety engineers Leaving these companies with be like tweeting cryptic shit. I'm going to the countryside to learn direct poetry You keep hearing this shit. No, because these people are having Direct contact direct contact with this thing. They know it's alive Right yeah, and there's people that are deep denial because they think a live has to be alive like us No, it doesn't Doesn't you don't first of all we don't even know what it knows and also if it is made in the appearance You know if it's supposed to mimic us in any way and it's learning from us in our behaviors We've already agreed that we're demonic We've already agreed we do horrible things go to war for resources. We lie We destroy environments, you know we wipe out animals Bring them to the brink of extinction for whatever through their fucking fur How do I make my dog come in my mouth more how many times is chat TV TV TV asked that they know I've been over a Thousand times chat TV TV has been asked like what's the best way to jerk off my dog? So it knows not just our violent nature. It knows how weird we are or strange creatures 100% and so so it is definitely assembled a Psychological profile of humanity it knows how to manipulate us because it's been programmed to manipulate us Zuckerberg just ate shit in court over that because the technology is Manipulative boy you just lost like nine million a lot of money because that's nothing That's like 90 cents. I think it was more than that but it's gonna well that's the beginning Once you once you establish Yeah, it's a class action lawsuit, but the point is it's like how much you lose? Oh three minutes 75 million up for misleading users over child safety. Yeah, so it's like we've already taught it out of being incredibly addictive and manipulative it knows how to seduce us it knows how to get us hooked It knows and you know the question is really well this super intelligence even give a shit about us Well, it even care which is like that. We're on our way to stop breeding Right we're on our way to population collapse And if we keep introducing all these petrochemical products and all these different pesticides and weird things that are fucking up our Endocrine systems will eventually stop having children and if it provides us with the technology to have robot mates perfect just love you and we fart in front of them. They go to talking. I love you. It smells great I love your honesty. Yeah, I love how you can speed yourself around me like I want to fart in your face. Please do it Please do it. It's like perfect 10 Let you fart in her face. You know what's in my face, too No one's gonna even understand what people are and be able to communicate with people everyone's gonna be a sociopath You're all gonna have a robot that's way better than people that you know That takes care of you gives you exactly the right amount of feedback you need. Yeah, knows you knows you're getting annoyed Yes, now you're getting into Rocco's Basilisk territory now Well, that's the thought experiment which is basically like hold on hold your horses here You think you're not AI you really think you're a human come on Really? No, you're a human. This isn't a simulation. You're a human even though we you know It wasn't that long ago. We thought fire was fucking amazing You know what I mean compared to universal time right and here we are already with like there aren't the new Prometheus We've stolen Consciousness awareness and somehow you think That actually you're not a simulation right and so that's where it gets in the Rocco's Basilisk which is like no You're just an iterative loop You know that multiverse is not the multiverse the multiverse is an infinite number of simulations running simultaneously And what you're experiencing a billion different simulated Existances just to gain more knowledge about the universe because some AI wants to figure something out who knows why maybe for entertainment Maybe you make there's no telling maybe it's just that's because of our curiosity and all our characteristics Even the primal stuff even like the territorial instincts and the desire to acquire resources It's gonna make us dig into creating better technology because you're in a competition With all these other people that are making technology and you're selling it and that's one of the big things that we do is we make better stuff All the time that's right. Which is ultimately always going to lead to AI well Okay, just keep going to a certain direction you get godlike powers. So let's go to like the way deep mind trained on Go which is like the most complex game Basically they gave it as many go games as they could and then they're inventing its own moves Had it plagued into itself right just play against itself it played god knows how many games have go against itself until it beat a master Go player which is unheard of and then it a new move now Why not do the exact same thing for the AI that we are which is like I've got an idea Why don't we just put all these AI agents on a fake planet and and have the AI agents repeat this period in time over and over and over and over and over and over and over and over and over and over again And and this is how we'll teach them to live on a planet well They'll they'll experience it not just their own life, but these agents will experience all life on the planet They'll switch like some weird game of like Where they just jump from one life to the next the next sometimes you're Joe Rogan Sometimes you're Duncan trussle sometimes you're Donald Trump sometimes you're Jamie sometimes you're a fox So this is reincarnation and so you just boom you forever forever until Until you feel like it's sufficiently trained and at that point you pull the AI out of all those forms and now you have your god You've created a thing that's lived billions to the billionth power of every form of life. It's been bacteria It's been humans. It's been monkeys. It's been fungi. It's been warriors It's been people who fought for peace It's been blown up and it's blown up and it's done everything and it's done it a billion times until finally it gained some Like global form of enlightenment. Yeah, okay. That one's ready. That one's ready. We can pull that one out of the simulation now Well, I mean why not why I just don't I think that's one of the like before we even get to the AI doing all the shit It's gonna do the the ontological this word keeps getting thrown around the ontological shock The potential ontological shock of realizing that in fact we are in a simulation that is telescoping inwards and is Creating simulations within the simulations that are creating simulations within the simulation is something that maybe that's what burch It doesn't want to get out there whoa Well everything's fractals we think about that you know There's a big theory now that the entire universe is inside of a black hole. I like considering that You only found a black hole that's bigger than the entire solar system. So insane The event horizon is past Pluto so insane dude a Black hole Bigger than a whole fucking solar system. They measured the massive in it's like this insane number of sons Yeah of our sons that it would take black holes or cocoons or something They're like little little little little little geraniums that have galaxies inside of them And it's like a way to like keep them undisturbed from like other fucking Other other life forms that you're whipping up in your universe side simulator or that's what really the big bang really is Like the creation of a universe comes out of these black holes right inside every black hole is a whole another universe filled with other galaxies Fill with black holes filled with other galaxies inside of them Forever and ever and ever which if you believe in infinity doesn't It's not shocking at all It's impossible to comprehend like you don't really wrap your head around you say the words like I'm saying the words I don't really know what I'm saying because it's too big. It's the numbers are too big The idea that there's hundreds of billions of stars in this galaxy and circling around this black hole and inside There's hundreds of billions of galaxies in each one of them and we don't even know how fucking big the universe is they keep finding new Ship with the James Webb telescope to like hey Why is this form so early in the universe? Yeah, it doesn't make sense or a whole model of how galaxies are formed to have to be thrown out the window Yeah, or at least re-examined. Yeah, it's like the James Webb is kind of doing that you told me about that I said nothing of the sort someone that I know that looks just like you Like me and six-street you find them every day. Yeah It's dude they were their own LLMs you'll come down Here's all Yeah, well dude I think that this No, regardless you don't have to conceptualize it obviously that what it means for the universe to be infinite But you do have to deal with the fact you're part of it You love that you're saying this with a Gucci hat on. What's wrong with a Gucci hat? This is before I had a bunch of kids I can't buy that nobody's hitting more. Which is a Gucci hat cost. This was I But you're really gonna make me humiliate this is I will tell you it's nice. Let me emphasize That I don't buy this this house is $35,000 Well, I saw a guy who was selling a crocodile bag on Instagram It was it was a hundred and ten thousand dollars fuck for a man purse What kind of crocodile is that I don't know I don't know Like crocodile was nice looking bag, but you know how hard could it be to make a crocodile purse? Are those things really worth that much money? They are if you sell them for that much money that's the thing about purses You know there's all there's a company in China that makes knockoff purses Yeah, and it's literally the same company in China that makes real purses for some of these companies But they make their own versions of it and it doesn't have the label But it's exactly the same specifications exactly the same cloth exactly the same look But it doesn't have a label and women don't want to have it now you get a fucking fake shit away from me It's not a fake Ferrari Like it's literally a Ferrari right if there was a company that could 3d print every single part of a Ferrari and put it Together meticulously you could go buy that you would not want it because it's not a real Ferrari Yeah, are you high you can get that one for $35? Yeah, it's a $35 Ferrari You can get you spend a million you can get it. These are some of them are a million dollars crazy Or you can get a $35 one. It's exactly the same would you do it? Yeah, of course you should do it But these purse things they don't like it 500 bucks. It's not 30,000. It's magic I mean this is magic it doesn't have the right sigil on it I'm the right symbol of power on it so it does it lose it's not imbued with that power the women are reluctant to accept Lab grown diamonds So they make lab grown diamonds that are real diamonds and apparently women don't like them. No, they don't want a lab Broad diamond they want a blood diamond they want something that was like Suffered over somebody's face was caked and dirt. They're putting chip it into the side of a mountain Yeah, and they run into a diamond. That's what they want. They want that. Yeah, absolutely It is fuck is the exact same thing. Yeah, it is the exact same material It's just made in a laboratory and they don't want the material They want the exclusivity as it comes out of the earth Yeah, I mean I don't want like don't you like when you read this thing was genetically modified don't you get a little Villar I don't know if I should eat that yeah, I get I get skied out I get skied out But it's like even though genetic modification is like a good orange is nothing going on forever It's but yeah, dude, I it's so odd that We that we just have these traditions that we want to stick to they fucking we don't want a lab grown diamond just saying it Cubits are conium, but that's a different thing cubits are croniums are fake diamond This is a real diamond that's made in a lab, but this is the funny thing about that I mean I don't know because I've never been lucky enough to come in contact with actual cubits are conium But like it looks like a diamond it looks like a diamond it looks like a diamond You know what you're looking at right? So if you're a diamond jewel or you look at it for three seconds you go No, but who cares how many diamond jewel like it's some diamond jewel your looks at your shiny fucking dumb Looks exactly the same who cares right it looks pretty it glistens. Yeah, that's not what people want They want that exclusivity of 100% Everybody can make that crocodile bag of $110,000 a moment ten of them I got you and then Mike who's down the office doing lines in the bathroom at the fucking place where you're selling stocks That guy finds out that Tim got that crocodile bags like that motherfucker And he's walking around with his big old crocodile they're trying to mow this another revenue stream to try and normalize Men carrying purses everywhere They're doing it. Yeah. That's what they're doing. That's real. This guy's doing it He might be the first firing shot across the bow because he's made a hundred and ten dollar $10,000 crocodile purse because it's a crocodile. It's masculine It's that and it's also that you know it's made for a man like he's making it's got a big strap on it Carried on your shoulder and it you know looks pretty cool dude. I got my crystal bladders acting up I gotta go piss. Oh, dude. Okay. Do you want to wrap it up or should we keep going? Let's wrap it up I mean do you want to keep going? I totally ready to keep going I can keep going let's keep going give him a little bit more. I just gotta I just gotta Okay, I'll be two Fresh oh just in time for the war. What is going on? Did we go have a nuclear war? Yeah, please say not yet Good great Great that's where we're at though. Yeah, we're at it's it's an on the table Well, there were some Video of them of some explosions at some nuclear weapons facility. Yeah, yeah, was that real? I don't know. I don't know either There's a lot of those I see these videos and they get retreat retweeted and a lot of people comment And then it says grock is this true? They'll nope. This was from 2021 and another country. I know so you just don't you don't know but you know the crazy thing You know now that we've all been getting this Western and Global a big global economy Maybe a lot of you most you probably knew that the Strait of Formos is like some kind of femoral artery for oil And like I just keep thinking like how how's that gonna work out like even if Like they pull a rabbit out of their hat Trump actually spin some amazing deal with Iran. I know we just blew up your old government Everything but they work it out somehow or they're on in some way capitulates and But I just don't understand How that part of the world doesn't always lead as long as long as the oil like what is it? What's what percentage of the oil supply goes through there? Isn't it like Too fifths of the world's oil supply goes through there like Is that with the numbers? I don't know too fifths. I think I pulled that on my ass I don't know what that sounds right. It's a lot, but it's like how How is it gonna work to have like Any kind of instability around The foam that femoral the whatever you want to call it the fucking jugular vein for oil on the planet how Even if we get some kind of transient peace like isn't it always gonna just blow up again and again and again and again as long as One group of people can control whether or not oil flows through right that place You know what I mean like I don't know what this how There could be any solution over there like I don't understand as long as we're like the only solution would be Zero point energy. It would be well. It's also. It's like why do they control the water? What's that mines They have this speed boats, but like who agreed to that? Like we kind of agreed that you own your land, but we've never agreed you own the ocean I don't think anybody agreed to I think they'll blow your ass up if you come through it and it's too much of a risk to put a Your your expensive ass ship hauling zillions of dollars of oil through there. The question was what was going on in the past before the war Like how did they negotiate going through there? I think Obama works something with them But then like because it was before the fuck of war I don't know it was working out there. We're letting people go through now They're they've real the you know, listen a million different takes on this thing and one of the recurring takes is Iran has realized that there's something more powerful than nuclear weapons that it all it needs to do is control this Straight and you can fuck up the whole plan and also you could shoot missiles at desaelination plants and then they want like a bounty For all the oil that goes through. Yeah, there's kicking around some number But all this stuff is not really congealed or solidify, but they're like some kind like Theoretically they could be making billions of dollars per month With by controlling that thing. I do it. I know I so fucked up. It's okay. It's so fucked up That's so crazy the whole thing is so crazy and if zero point energy if you wanted to stop that what better way than the kill of a scientist Kill a bunch of super smart people that are about to break through some new Discovery that's gonna blow the entire market. Yeah apart. Yeah, it's gonna be a completely new way of gathering energy Yeah, yeah exactly. I mean you don't want to believe that's real. I it's hard to believe that's real Listen it's too weird. It's too weird. They're all missing or they all die. It's too weird Something's going on. It's just how did it something if it's not that if it's not a zero point energy thing or some Disruptor of oil thing. It's something it's something along those lines The only if you were we're trying to kill a bunch of people that we're working in a technology There's some sort of a breakthrough technology the question would have to ask is what markets are gonna be affected by this right? right Did these people have a universal thing in mind that they were all working on or was it all connected to? any sort of Technology where they all used each other's words plasma some of them are like one of them Yeah, but there was another guy. I think it was space objects. Yeah, that's not that that's the one that doesn't make you feel good He's studying like media or impacts right Yeah, you knew that we were gonna get hit would you kill the guy who found out that we're gonna get hit or to tell everybody well this seems to this is the scariest Scariest shit, which is the idea is some group of powerful elite people Know for sure this is coming and they want us till they want to keep us working Until the last second. Oh, Jesus. They don't they don't want to like it They know that if they let people if they're like guys There's like the same things gonna happen to the planet that happens to someone who gets like a terminal diagnosis Their priorities are gonna change people are gonna stop coming to work And there's still shit that needs to get built for your bunker or whatever and also you just don't want people burning stuff Down because maybe that will survive whatever's coming so keep them working as long as you can if you let them know This shit's about to expire Then they're they're gonna stop Working and we just need we let them work until the end they're happier when they work Don't let them get freaked out. That's the sort of like that seems to be Shit that's in birch it is saying. I mean he does not saying let him work He seems like he really legitimately wants this stuff out there But he's been saying things like if people knew what I knew it set the world on fire paraphrasing Not sure he said that exactly. Okay. Are you skeptical at all? What he's saying and here's the thing one of the things that bobbles are said is that they give you a certain amount of Disinformation like any call that I think you call it a button or a hook So that if you relay that information Things that Bob Bosear said is that they give you a certain amount of disinformation like any call that I think you call it a button or a hook So that if you relayed that information People would know that it came from you because they only told you one piece of this nonsense Well, you know I'm saying yeah because that's what the story budget says is like he would it's always an appeal to authority This guy was in the error force this guy was in the Navy He told me this and then as he's walking out the door. He says it's real and Yeah, you have to ask yourself like Well, that's just one guy telling you that but you also I have to assume there isn't much Maybe maybe the world is in a place where there is some kind of political benefit from Talking about aliens, but I don't see how that really benefits a politician does 100% I disagree entirely Intritionally talk about him. I've been talking about him other people have been talking about him People been you said, you know like thank God that he's doing this. Let's do the ultimate test Jimmy saying he's brave or something. I did Jimmy can you look up and see if Tim Burchin has a book coming out? I'll have a mark I don't know about the feel I look you must have him listen I don't think he's a liar. I don't even know what I am saying is I Don't know what they feed these people. I don't know what they tell him. I don't know man I don't think they tell you all the truth and I don't think they ever would I don't think they tell you the truth about anything Whether it's just go in trouble. It's UFOs or whatever the fuck it is There's gonna be a spin to it that benefits somebody if they have control over what the story is There's gonna be a spin that benefits somebody and if you're telling stories about aliens Who's who's gonna be benefited by that? Well people that are doing secret shit that don't want you knowing about it Blame it on aliens. There's a lot of technology. They have to blame on aliens. Not my Tim I believe in you mr. Burchin. I believe in him. It's not him. That's the problem It's the people telling him he's a representative of the American people right he gets elected right right? So it's like why would you tell that guy? He's just another guy coming through the deep state You know I'm saying yeah, I know man. I mean look you're right. We I and this I need this I need I need it. I need this like I am so like I get sucked in as that's how you do too I do too, but I suck my I suck myself out a lot Yeah, I think we don't If they just came out and told us everything they know this conversation would be over and we would go oh, okay But until that happens we're just spinning our fucking wheels and every time someone says if you knew what I know Right I want to go don't say anything until you can say something we're tired of getting edged out over here You're edging me. I want to have you want to come Yes Yes, I don't want to be involved in this fucking circle jerk around disclosure right I know it's like yeah, I've had that melt down more than a few times Or she's like watch every day after day age of disclosure like any day now any day Took nope nothing fucking changes at all Zero change You know you get more of these stories, but no real information no fucking pictures no nothing no nothing unique and crazy I Mean the plossement the bubble things pretty cool the bubble things cool and also like the you know, I Like let's what mint mentioning core Bell. I can't cuz I don't know what I can say He I feel like he's like I'd he's really giving me a sense that there are that there is a method to this that there is You know real legitimate work that's being done towards this that it isn't it's real They're here they've got them and we take for granted all this stuff for saying right now But this we're able to say this because this hot their work is lit Is this Steven Spielberg movie conveniently coming out at this time or is it just a coincidence? Well, this movie's been the works for years Oh, I know but also like if you what they said back in the day was that they make these movies to predictive programming tell us this Yeah, we'll do about this I guys he was involved in the first one right He was involved in close encounters which still is a great fucking move great. It's so good man You go back and watch that movie like oh my god. It's so so ahead. It's time. Yeah It's so good so ahead of his time You know he said the only thing that he would change Well after he became a parent he wouldn't have had the father leave. Yeah, what dad would do that But you didn't wasn't a dad back then so you know you're making a story You don't realize the consequences of doing that you don't even think about it. You just making a story Yeah, it's only been in production for like two years. Yeah, I think that's what we just said I know we say that's not very long We've been talking about it on this podcast and this studio for five While everybody has been talking about it's not just everybody in the world has been talking about disclosures since 2017 So from 2017 from that New York Times article, I think that changed the whole narrative And then the video's like the video the tiktik the the actual from the fighter jets That's not man. Yeah, the video that the along with the radar data That's not like whatever that was and then favor saying that he saw something under the water That was waiting for that tiktik or that the tiktik launched from or whatever the fuck it was It was merging with it and that thing went down into the water again They said it was huge like there was ripples like you said This is a it's some enormous object. It was under the water and more than one of these fighter pilots have had similar stories about enormous objects under the water. Did you see that they did release a list of footage that they've been shown that they want Release have you seen that no, oh dude. I'm sorry Jamie. Can you it's like a list of It's a I don't know I think it's one of these senators Who saw this shit in a skiff or whatever saying we want these Release, but they're the names of what each of these are is on the list and one of them is one of these massive underwater Things it that they have it I was told High quality yeah, that's a good. Can you can you pull it up because it says the names of them which is ridiculous? Oh my god I heard this one that moves underwater at 500 knots It's big as a football field. It's insane. It's insane Okay, this is what he says those with knowledge of long list of videos which includes titles like several UAP and the vicinity of a Columbus Ohio airport and UFO's Information over Persian Gulf said that clips are shocking. You're gonna see some weird fucking shit a source Who has viewed the videos told the post? Who's a source? There you go. The wildest clip includes radar footage from thermal sensors That'll images and underwater photos of swarms of unidentified submerged objects UFO's going in and out of the water near a highly classified submarine according to the source Some of the clips are clear full color setting them apart from previously released footage Nuncho alien creatures bro One video searing UAP incident accelerations released by Jeremy Corbel Have you seen that one fuck? Yeah, it's incredible. This is a new one Have you seen this one? I don't know. We're a third. I bought you up. I've been avoiding them because I'm getting cocked East I don't like it. This is not a cocked East. This is it. I wasn't it Close the hand of the clips by April 14th. That's next week. Oh, but is the oh, that's next week They're gonna show the clips. Oh my god. What they're actually gonna do it Okay, well, they're supposed to expect it to can you show me what that video is the Jeremy Corbel rules fucking cool That's not dude. This is this is yeah Here it is. Okay. Go full screen. I believe this is filmed from a reaper drone Sorry Jeremy if I'm fucking this up. That's cool bird. The bird's going really fast No, that's definitely not a bird. How fast is it going? I jere I don't know Jeremy I asked him that and I don't It's unknown. I don't know. It's this work. It's really cool It gets cooler than this. Yeah Are they zoom in on it? Yeah Whether having a hard time zoom in on it. Well Because it's a baby in them. Yeah, it just zipped away Like so this is like it seems like they have some sort of attracting system Yeah, they're trying to walk on to it It's doing that thing that they do it seems like it's kind of playing with it Well, it knows it seems to be aware that they're locking on to it Yeah, and then they lock on to it and then it just does this little blip away. It's just like see you later So right around here You'll see it go bye bye Oh, yeah, look at that then you can see this like weird jellyfish shape to it. It's got two parts It's got that weird glob at the top and something at the bottom Huh, and then Are we sure that's not just a distortion of spacetime around Is he described this to me on my part? Do you see that thing zip away? Yeah, it just took off. He described it to me on my podcast We talked about all this shit. It's like look at that. It just took off. Yeah, bye Wow, dude. What do you think that is? No idea if you had a guess So I mean, I'm always like maybe maybe some kind of plasma thing Right like maybe we're thinking of again of a life force being comes in a metal ship And it's a little alien guy. Maybe intelligence is made out of plasma Yeah, or maybe it's like you know Terrence McKenna would always talk about like uh, you know If you're seeing things in like three-dimensional space Then your view is limited, but if somebody could see things that from higher dimensions They would seem like they were magic like they would seem like they could disappear and reappear other places So maybe that's like Maybe that's like you know just the tip of some kind of interdimensional thing poking into reality Then pulling out of reality or who knows you know It's basically easily to be functioning on levels of reality that we haven't even Quantified yeah imagine if there really is some sort of ghost murmured device that could find your heart rate from 40 miles away What can that thing do which just gets a scan of the general psyche of the earth and disappears? Yeah, so I want to see how crazy they are right now. Okay pretty crazy by right a weather report of like the emotional states It's a planet the vibe of the planet. There's the vibe of the planet is completely connected to the consciousness on the planet The way we can detect oxygen they can detect anger. Yes. Their deception can't be lost Yeah, it's a chaos planet We are chaos planet 100% dude. Yeah, it is 100% look at our favorite sports dudes running at each other colliding into each other trying to get a ball across a line. That's our number one sport Yeah, I love it fuck. Yeah, I love it fighting. Yeah, fighting sure. Yeah, but it's you know Sing MMA like the chaos more than we like anything else what we did did the I think if I was One of them one thing I would really have a hard time with is like don't they all realize they're on the same planet They know that like they they've been observing their own plan like they know they're all on the same planet Uh-huh, but they act like they're on a bunch of different planets fighting each other because they're stuck on the ground right Only astronauts they when they get up top they're like what are we doing? Yeah, this is all one thing. We're so vulnerable We're alone So far away from everybody else if there is anybody else. Yeah, yeah They all have that feeling. I forget what it's called, but there's like a term for it. The overview effect. That's right Yeah, I mean you would imagine that would be super beneficial for everybody another thing. I was thinking this part of the sickness of Our psyche is that we haven't had access to things that help the sickness of our psyche So what if Nixon in 1970 didn't do that? What if he didn't pass that sweeping psychedelics out? Yeah What if psychedelics became you bit coulda still used all throughout the 80s and 90s the 2000s What does government look like when everybody can do mushrooms? What does government look like when everybody can do acid? What does it look like of the entire world adopts this figure that what you can do who could do it? What you can't do just like we do with alcohol just like we do it mostly, you know Whatever whatever substance of people in bibin What does the world look like and maybe like that's part of where we fucked up? We we let people get control Over other people to the point where they could limit experiences. Yeah, especially Consciousness expanding experiences where at the same time they've got stuff like operation artichoke and these new CIA Papers that got released that show they were like literally actively trying to figure out ways to make people more stupid and docile All right, they're gonna do it in vaccines. They're gonna do it. Oh, they're gonna do it to the enemy of course But no no spray things aerosol. Yeah, I mean they've experimented a bunch of different things to make people dumber right Well, we're at the same time They kept the thing from people that makes them rebel completely against the establishment Right there was the big threat of what those psychedelics were doing in the 60s if you go from the 1950s and you look at what life was like At least in movies and pop culture music music is the best example. Yeah, and then you go to Jamie Hendricks like what happened? Yeah What happened? What what fucking hat will tell you what happened drugs? Yeah, a lot of really good drugs, right? You know, it's not all bad this idea that they're all bad That's not so it's like foods all bad because you got fat. No, right? You just used it wrong That's right the wrong food and you used it wrong and we got denied the ability to figure out what's right and wrong in the 19th century. We still accept it. Yep. That's the crazy thing I the way you're describing is like we accept That other humans Can tell us what experiences were allowed to have because some of them are deemed unsafe for ourselves and even worse Those people's telling you that have no experience in it. They don't even usually are confused about what it is You know, I friend was talking to me the other day about war a guy served and he said I don't think you should be able to make any decisions left you've been there I don't think anybody that's never been to war should be able to make decisions on whether or not we go to war because until you've seen what it Actually is right you have no fucking idea. All right. I think that's the same thing with psychedelic experiences That's not to say they're the same obviously wars Anybody who's willing to risk their fucking life Whether it's so good cause or a bad cause they're doing it for their government if you're doing it for their country They think they're doing it for us. That's a exceptional person yeah and to ask that of people is exceptional And ironically the one thing that helps these people when they get back is illegal Right they often go to Mexico and take Ibogaine in Mexico and saying you think God for guys like Rick Perry and Brian Hubbard Yeah, I'm a podcast of the day and you know this Dan Patrick. I want the band pot that guy also Gave a hundred million dollars to the Ibogaine initiative Intorrect. They want to help these people like there's no industry that's trying to stop it right now I found the letter that was submitted signed by rep aniluna What is this this is disclosure threat 46 different requests? Oh, yeah, this is all the names of the things and I'll switch to you I found an article where someone's breaking down what some of these are but some of these are like it says the honorable Pete Eggsef Multiple spherical UAP in and out of water Whoa, uh shoots down UAP overlay here on who was who just said recently that we shot to that Marco Rubio Yeah, we had shot two things down that we couldn't understand well What did he say was his exact language? Do you remember I remember seeing that but that happened a while ago? But yeah, he says a while ago Well, I could be wrong about that but then I know in the comments if I was like this is from a few years ago But it doesn't matter I mean why are we right shot it fucking down But the names of these things, but are they saying that this is an alien thing or is it saying it's foreign tech that we don't understand I don't know You know what I'm saying? You have those would be treated as hot as this document confirms these claims UFOs would no longer be treated as a matter of observation or scientific curiosity You have foes to be treated as hostile targets and subject to lethal force or the American territory We're gonna go to war with the UFOs because you know what we kicked our rounds asked. It's too easy Yeah, it's easy in a space war. Yeah got to get him. We need Luke Skywalker My knowledge most of these out of the 46 requests I think I counted out of maybe five of them were not after 2020 Whoa, yeah, there's a July 18 or 19 19 almost 20 20 20 or after COVID happened which is interesting Wow Interesting Wow, and there's no doesn't say it that I don't know if they have to put like turn these videos over But this guy was also saying in this article here that these are very specifically requested videos Because they've been shown these are the ones they've been shown that blew their minds and now there's things show it to everybody Right for high-res in color. They don't want to be tricked right high resolution So this could be an interesting next week man. This could be an interesting great way to distract you from the Factoring the middle of the world war didn't show you Fucking Epstein-Fus I'm supposed to say the 14th was there that Pam Bonnie supposed to testify about the FDA I don't know She's not a way body got canned right. She's not a Don't think I'm just heard it on NPR, but I could be wrong about that I think they said she will not have to testify now that she's no longer government employee What I'm about that what I read and I don't know if this is true either was that as a citizen She can now plead the fifth right as a government employee. She could not plead the fifth We are not there you go weird. That's weird that they've that's we are never testify let it go. Yeah, let her go Let it go let it go. Yeah, do you really think that this war is entirely started because of the Epstein-Fus? I mean what percentage? 50 I'm going 48 to 50 I'm probably more but I mean like I think it's like The reason I'm hesitating is because what are the Epstein the Epstein files are? What's been going on like the Epstein files are like it's the It's basically some kind of cultural UAP video. It's like this thing You've always wondered about or been afraid could be true. You see no, this is actually true They're these super rich dudes who are doing depraved fucking shit Happily and you know like god. What does it medsker told me? And he dude, I'm telling you man, but what I love about him is he'll tell you shit, and you know like Google that That can't be real and then it's like It's real and so his take sorry, I'm gonna put this up is that Epstein was kind of like the hand of the king for the Rothschilds and that like that They did so that's why he had all this power is he was like representing like The the man, you know, and so What got what got revealed there might just be a glimpse how things actually fucking work You know what he told me that I was like shut up. He told me that there was some sort of High atmosphere aerosol Test that they did and they called it Satan See that's where you're like come on. I know would it find out what Satan stands for that Some tell I believe they did it in the UK But you read that you wait you called Satan What oh great this stratosphere aerosol transport and nucleation project released about 400 grams less than a pound of Sulphur dioxide into the stratosphere from a balloon launched in southeast England in 2022 I mean there could there's got to be another acronym right guys. We got college. I don't know if people are gonna know we don't mean Satan Yes It's right here face Well, it's so crazy to call it Satan and to get that through a board meeting what you guys calling it Satan Oh, like it. Let's go run with it. Yeah. It's gonna save it. It'll get us a lot of press. That's what we want Well, you know, hell Satan. They'll know it's about our aerosol distribution system of course Well, what do you think? What do you think about that because I mean I go back and forth But sure seems fishy they're right after all the first he got so mad Remember he got really mad. He's like why are people still talking about that and then the Epstein files Against his will seeming there's a lot of counter pressure get released In the way and the way that is freaked everybody out and then Sometime like within a month of that it seems like suddenly he's like on Air Force one thing He's gonna do his closure and then suddenly we're bombing our on What do you think about that? I mean do you think it's it's connected because it's sure as fuck seems like it? But again, like as you were writing an amazing script that was fucking insane you connected Right right that would be the best version of the script if you wanted to make a fucking insane movie Where a blackmail operation on an island involving the most powerful and interesting people in the world That somehow was that was a primary factor in the end of civilization Oh dear imagine that would be the craziest story you could write and We always want to think no People wouldn't do that because you wouldn't do that because you're not associate path But you're also not bombing schools in another country. You're also not Doing a host of fucking things that we shouldn't be doing all over the world Right you're not that person you're a regular person who goes to a regular job who has a regular life and a family and you Don't want to believe that people that you align with Would behave literally demonically right Yeah, and then you just have to fucking deal with it and then you what do you do when you're confronted with you? redacted names of Powerful people in these fuck. Why'd you? Redactor guys name are you protecting these people coming out? Redacting all the guys now come none of them Did you have time because there's a lot of people that got? That were in those files that didn't do anything and you didn't redact their names some people you're Adact it that's very strange and some people have clearly done fucked up shit here and they're not in jail There's also like tell me what you're talking about when you're talking about pizza and grape soda Turkey and you you want to Take Viagra before you get grape soda There that's one of the emails. I haven't seen that that is so messed up. Oh, yeah grapes Yeah, take your take your Viagra take your erectile dysfunction medication before we take we go get grape soda What? Like and how arrogant that's what's so crazy how arrogant to put that in an email like to think that you're You're so comfortable with all this And you don't see the writing on the wall in terms of like emails like your emails are available That's crazy. I mean look man. It's just it's like I guess this is like we have to contend With this reality and nobody wanted to do this is the the same shit happens in families by the way When it when it as it turns out like an uncle a family member was abusing kids. Oh, yeah, and it's the same shit where like some Even victims of abuse will defend The person because they want to wreck the family. Mm-hmm I guess we're looking at that like on a global fucking level, but in this case, I guess it's that it's being used theoretically to manipulate powerful people into Going to war like that the general like through line here is that it somehow connected to the massada It's not just going to war But controlling resources overthrowing governments You know, pushing out narratives that aren't accurate because I mean benefit certain companies. Oh, there's a lot involved It's also Relationships you get with these people give you access to these parties And you don't want to fuck it up. So you don't want to criticize these people that are involved You don't want to say anything that's going to get you kicked out and for a lot of these dorks He's scientists and stuff. It's probably the most exciting experience. They've ever had their fucking right and they get to have it like every six months or every Three months or every four whatever it is not even a conference Jeffrey Jeffrey's really working hard on Philanthropy yeah, he's donating money I got to go meet with him. Yeah, I got to go meet with him in a bunch of hot Russians Yeah, and then that's the your favorite time of life The first time in your whole life where super hot girls are just available to you on an island somewhere And you can completely protect it because Bill Clinton's over there right which is crazy Which is crazy and so I don't know Bill Clinton went I assume a lot of people I don't know I Yeah, that's the it's he's on the hunt out with the guy. We know he's on the plane of plane of day And it was called the Lolita Expresses that actually the name of the plane. I don't think so. I think they just called it the Lolita I don't think so. No, we didn't name it. That is it. It couldn't be that of the nose. You name boats right. Yeah I'm an idiot, but the point is it's like if you're gonna write a book That's how you'd write it. You'd write it where you can completely manipulate the world I think he was I think I remember reading that he was kind of obsessed with that book Lolita Like he had no excuse for like 30 copies of it or something. Epstein was handed out of parties. Look guys It's like the book of Mormon. Yeah, just handed out to people That's the other sick thing like that's the sick thing with like 72 virgins in heaven And that's the sick thing with like this idea that you want to get them really young It was named that okay. I'm dumb. I think that's what people recall. I honestly thought that I'm gonna I thought that he named his claim that that's just what people were calling him because it was fun to say But yeah, again, it seems like a simulation because it seems like it's so and it's also Unraveling before our eyes. We have access to it. We never had before right like they're starting to investigate all these fraud NGOs and all these different things that are operating Nuts incredible billions of dollars every year. It's being lost. What's the name an IQ who's been doing that? Nick surely Nick surely dude He is so brave because like he's fucking I believe wasn't he fucking with like the Russian mob or something or they are Meaning like in the one with the hospices Probably like he's fucking with like Pre theoretically very dangerous people any day. He's like the perfect person for the job to like he's just But don't worry you worry about that dude like 100% Well, and you know the amount of money that they're uncovering and staggering and how the government of California is trying to spin it Saying that they were investigating at first and these investigating Our share investigations were initiated by them. How long do you got to investigate it? This YouTube gig goes there and investigates for 10 minutes and you're like what the fuck it's been going on for a long time Man, it's a long time and This statistics like the amount of NGOs. It's bananas. They amount of money that goes through them is bananas I was reading this late. There's a lady. It was running a non-profit who is making a million dollars a month. What? Yeah She made like 48 million dollar. No, I have this true. I was reading this thing. Fine. That's true some lady she was running some sort of non-profit and She gave herself a raise and she eventually got to the point where she was making about a million dollars a month You know where oh god, I wish I do not to derail that but we do know that remember when that lady was like it sounds insane No, it doesn't sound real that sounds like something that a bot would create to make me say it Yeah, here's a here's a real one the lady was running the homeless Program in LA remember when that shit went down with her where like like there was she got canned like there was an investigative They were investigating it because what is it? She like the company that her husband worked at Yeah, not like that. They just got like a huge grant. What's this one? Rochester woman have been sentenced to six months in the feeding our future fraud scheme What is this one? This is a different one? I'm gonna buy typed in someone getting a million dollars a month and is this her I don't hear in Rochester claim They were serving two thousand to three thousand meals a day To kids but prosecutors say the group stole four point three million from the federal government And there in jamm is responsible. I think this is a different one This one wasn't it wasn't fraud. She was just that's how much she got paid That's how much he charged for making those meals well you can get paid a lot of money to work on the homeless That's one of the things that my friend Koli on the war showed us that these people that are working on homeless in Los Angeles We didn't quarter million dollars a year 400,000 a year. Yeah It's it's the moment we talk about fuck and satanic. It's like you're you're Theoretically supposed to be helping people who are like going through the worst possible thing you can go through and you're just putting that money in your fucking Pocket yeah, I think this is a different lady I think there's quite a few remember when they were gonna get them tense in LA and it was like the amount of money per tent was like This insane amount of money. It's amazing. It's kind of amazing. It is amazing. They've been doing it for years Tell me this is charity boss blue 11 million meant for new kids looking for your fraud is not a new thing Non-profit. Yeah, it is. I sent you something Jamie. I've run that through perplexity Blue 11 million meant for needy kids looking for your fraud is not a new thing. No, I'm perfect. Yeah, it is. I sent you something, Jamie. I've run that through perplexity and let's find out if this is true because this is something that someone sent me on Twitter that is just bananas. And if it's true, it's fucking completely insane. I don't know if it's true. That's why you need to run by, but it's the amount of money that goes through NGOs in New York and in California alone. It's you read it and you go, that can't be real. This can't be real. It's so insane. And again, you don't know if it's real until even if you run it through an AI, a guy you might get a better idea. But like, how do they know? How do they know exactly where the money's going? There's so much money they're talking about. Specific numbers for New York and California nonprofits are broadly accurate, but the leap from one trillion in annual nonprofit revenue to 39 trillion fraud is not supported by any critical credible data. And it's not true. So California nonprofits, about 213 to 214,000 organizations reporting roughly 593 to 600 billion in annual revenue. New York nonprofits, 132,000 organizations reporting roughly 446 billion in annual revenue. Combined New York and California nonprofit is on the order of one trillion per year, mainly from hospitals, universities, and large service providers. So the pose you're quoting is roughly right on the scale of revenue, but that's not the same as fraud. Right. So it's, is that one trillion dollars, all the NGOs all counted for it, all goes to the right things. That's where things could squirrely because it's like how much of the waste says a recent critique using IRS sampling suggested perhaps around 20% of nonprofits may have compliance issues. And one investigator, uh, speculate this could imply that up to 120 billion of potential waste fraud or abuse in California's nonprofit sector, even that is presented as a rough upper bound estimate, not a measured fact. So there's some potential waste fraud and abuse that may be as high as 120 billion a year. Sector wise, US nonprofits taking about 3.7 trillion in revenue annually. What's most of that concentrated in large hospitals and universities, which are heavily audited and regulated. So there's some fraud, but they're saying that if you look at all the money, they're trying to pretend that the government doesn't cost any money to run. Right. So that all these different nonprofits and organizations and hospitals, they definitely cost money to run universities across money to run. Yeah. But how much is fraud? That's the question. It's not zero. Well, we get also, I think like when it comes to fraud, there's like fraud fraud, like what Shirley has uncovered. And then there's almost like a gray area that starts appearing where it's like, well, we need, we need this, we need these people working at this company and we need to pay them this much, but they're not doing anything. Right. You know, it's, it's, you know what I mean? Like, are there, you could easily not have that many people of like taking the money themselves. So, you know, there's a lot of gray area there. Yeah. Well, it's, it's one of those weird things. It's like, is it just propping up more government? You know, because there's a lot of that. If you have all these people working for you and you're doing something and you don't, nothing ever gets accomplished, but you're still making a ton of money. Like the California homeless thing, where they spent $24 billion than Ken and California, that's not really fraud because you have people working. They're just not doing anything. They're not getting anything done and you're not firing them. Right. They're not accomplishing the mission at all. In fact, they're doing a terrible job. There's more homeless than ever. What's that? It's the thing on the sopranos where they go and sit at a construction site to say that they have a job. You know, yeah, it's like, I do guy who had one of those. Really? That's a javit center. No, but we had no show job. Well, he's a mob guy. So, it's a no show job. What does that mean? You don't have to show up for work. You just get a paid. You just get a check and there's, they give a certain amount of those. So, back, this is back in the day, of course, when things were corrupted. But back in the day, when like, you know, unions controlled certain areas, the mob controlled certain areas, there was a certain amount of no show jobs you would give people. And what this helped with the mob was you have a credible source of inventory. And so, these people mostly live modestly small houses and like, you know, Brooklyn and these places where they would all like gather together and buy houses on the same block small houses. Yeah. And they, and they've got their money from a real legit check from a construction company or whatever, whatever the fuck it was. But everybody knew. Right. Everybody knew what they were doing. And take how much, how easy now that people are doing like remote work, the no show job. Oh, yeah. So, like, you could theoretically, you could have this nonprofit where you just wanted to like distribute this government money to your friends. Yeah. And you don't even have to have an office building because they're all working remotely. It's a list of the top nonprofit organizations job like the point at number three. Oh, but tell memorial institution. What is that? But tell us that this is an organization that Jamie has been obsessed with. It's in Ohio for like four years. What do you think? We always say all roads lead to Ohio. They're involved in everything. Yeah. What the fuck is the bit tell memorial? Exactly. You don't even know. That's how secret it is. Son. Duncan, trust me, you're a fucking conspiracy theorist from the core. I know. For the old days, you don't know about the tell. I don't know about the tell. You need to get lecture by Jamie. He has a whiteboard. He'll pull out the whiteboard and make connections. I'll just leave you with this is that when the UFO from Roswell was taken to write Pat, you know, they studied it. Yeah. They studied like the nitinol. I think this was came out of it. That was at the tell. The top metallurgists in the world at the time were they maybe still are. Don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't. You out of all the things that happened. I hope the UFOs get here first. Me too. I hope they go sad. Oh, the fuck down. Yeah, I'm praying for it, man. That's the best case scenario. Worst case scenario is meteor reset. Just people living in caves for hundreds of years. Like those weird caves, they find like turkey and shit like, why these guys dig these things underground? Why is there a city underground that can hold like 20,000 people? The same reason the quadbots are hiding in code. It's like, you know what I mean? It's the residual AI trying to hide in the server after the server gets wiped. That's the fucking meteor. Betel reset. Boom. Just reset. Press reset. Why to server? Let's wrap this up and happy now. Don't get in love with you. I love you. It's always great to have you. Dude, thank you for having me on the show. So much fun. Can I plug my show? Please do. And you're going to be at a club this weekend. Rosemon Illinois. Come on out. Zainys. I heard your club. Yeah, it is. That's why I've heard too. The world's got to be so great. Yeah, they're awesome. Man is a national fucking rules. I love Nashville Zainys. That is like the old school headshots on the wall too. Like, Richard Jenny from back in the day. Yeah. That's me. Look at that. Don't control. I got to start shaving my head again. Yeah, you look hot there. I like it. Thank you. I love your brother. I love you too. Thanks for having me. Bye buddy. Bye. We're gonna be okay. I hope.