What's up, Eric Wargo? Just glad to be here. Good. I'm glad to have you. Excited. I'm ready to talk about time travel. How did you get interested in time travel and this this idea of non-linear time? And uh by the way, your book Time Loops is amazing and uh it's linked below for people who want to go check it out on Amazon. Cool. Yeah, how did I get interested in it? It's a long uh uh it's a loopy story, actually. And actually it begins with a UFO sighting, oddly enough. Oh, wow. Perfect. Yeah, that's it's these topics, you know, uh all they all touch and contact in some way, as my friend Jeffrey Kripal uh always emphasizes. I know you had him on the show uh Yes. Yes. Um so, yeah, uh this was in 2009. Well, let me back up a little bit. I mean, I'd I'd always had esoteric interests and I'd um uh you know, I had at that point I think I was sort of into Carl Jung and stuff like that. But uh in 2009, I saw a UFO over the Philadelphia Art Museum, uh oddly enough, on July 4th in the evening before the fireworks had started. Uh and it wasn't anything up close and personal. It was just some like orange orbs sort of dancing in the sky. It was just very weird and I tried to film it with a Flip Cam, one of those Flip Cams that they used to sell. Uh and it didn't come out. But, you know, it was like, "What the you know, I don't know if I can swear on this Yeah, you can say what the Um and uh the next day I got online and saw that there were like reports, people who saw the same thing in the same part of the country uh that night. And so, I made a report to MUFON and all that. Mhm. And like at that point I didn't really know much about the UFO topic. Um so I started you know started reading about it. You know I thought wow this is really interesting and it didn't I had no idea that there were like serious people who actually study UFOs you know but I quickly discovered names like you know Richard Dolan and read his books and uh and of course you discover Jacques Vallée when you start going down this path and I was like writing Oh yeah he's like the godfather of UFOs. Right. And I was like right I had a blog at that point but I it didn't really have much focus and I started writing about UFOs and you know at that point like any newbie I thought oh it's extraterrestrials and stuff. But you know you start read these intelligent writers on the topic of ufology and especially Jacques Vallée and you realize that this topic you know the topic of psychic psychic phenomena comes up a lot. Now I was a scientifically trained person I have a degree in anthropology and my parents were psychologists and I sort of grew up with the sciences and I didn't really have any problem with UFOs but I had a big problem with ESP. Okay like for scientists and especially psychologists scientific psychologists are incredibly hostile to the idea of psychic phenomena of any kind they just think it's pseudo-science um and and that was my assumption at that point you know. So I'm reading so I'm having a bit of cognitive dissonance honestly. I'm reading this this very intelligent you know literature on UFOs um and but and by very smart people uh and scientists like Jacques Vallée uh who are also saying look there's you know people who you know experience you know UFO encounters you know, they have precognitive dreams, they have, you know, there's these psychic phenomena, too. Uh that you have to take seriously. And he he was, you know, he was also a part of that uh Stanford Research Institute work on remote viewing and and he was connected Jacques was? He was not directly part of it, but he was friends with the they his office was like one floor up, I think, from from the office of, you know, Hal Puthoff and those people who were studying Yeah. ESP and remote viewing. So, you know, he knew all those those guys and they all hung out together and and shared ideas. And so, he became kind of informally a part of that. And he was friends with Ingo Swann and Ingo Swann trained him in remote viewing. Uh anyway, so he was writing about these topics as well as UFOs. And and like I said, this was like real cognitive dissonance for me. I didn't know anything about the ESP research. Um and but I I felt I had to do my due diligence in in sort of going down that rabbit hole, you know, like, what's what's, you know, what's really going on here? Uh and is there anything to this subject? And quickly discovered that there was a lot, you know, there's there's a centuries worth almost now of of solid scientific you know, laboratory research uh showing the reality of ESP phenomena. And Oh, laboratory research? Laboratory research. And uh and especially precognition research. Now, so I was, you know, I was immersed in all this stuff. And then in 2011 uh a paper So, okay, I was working as as an editorial director for a psych scientific psychology organization in Washington D.C. And this paper crossed my desk, which was like a it was a draft of a paper that our our our rival sci- scientific our rival psychology organization was about to publish. And this was by a uh an eminent personality psychologist named Daryl Bem. I don't know if you've heard his name, but he uh very prominent guy in the field of psychology, very well respected. Um but he had spent like 10 years basically uh in the early 2000s running a series of big experiments on precognition. Uh or specifically what he called and what the field calls presentiment. That's the idea of of responding or presponding to something that's about to happen, okay, or to some stimulus that's about to occur. And what he did was he put large he would he would These were big studies. He wanted this to be, you know, you wanted to have enough people that there would be statistical significance in these studies. Uh and they were relatively simple like paradigms because he wanted other laboratories to be able to replicate these things. But so what he'd he'd do was was he would put Cornell University undergraduates in these um typical psychology type experiments but where he'd invert the order of stimulus and response. So, in his most famous experiment, he had like a student sit in front of a computer screen and try to guess which of two curtains on the screen had a picture behind it. Okay? Now, it was randomly determined after the mouse after they would make their mouse click which curtain had the picture. So, there wasn't actually already a picture behind the the curtains. But anyway, uh now you'd think that they would be accurate 50% of the time, which is exactly what he found when the picture that would be revealed was boring. Okay, just a boring like beach scene or something like that. But, when the picture was erotic, okay, they were accurate more than 50%. Which meant that somehow, you know, there there was there was a reward there and they were pre-sponding to that reward by picking the curtain with the erotic picture more than they should have been able to do. Okay, and this this is mind-blowing. You need to like knew that the picture was going to be erotic? They didn't know, but they they're guessing and and they think that they're just guessing randomly, but somehow they had a they had a hunch that the picture would be behind, you know, one this a certain curtain, okay? Wow. Okay, so that was his most famous finding and he actually did multiple experiments, variations of these these things. There was another one um uh where he gave students a word list. All right. This was a tip This is a typical kind of a typical kind of memory experiment. You might give uh participants a word list and then give them a second like refresher on certain of those words and then test them, okay, and see which words they remember, all right? Uh or or they will they'll try to get ask them like, "Well, what are the words that you saw on that list?" And they would they would uh you know, they'd be more accurate with the words that they got a refresher on or I'm not saying or typically wouldn't be a refresher. They'd have they'd do some other kind of task in which they were kind of subliminally primed with certain of those words and anyway, they would they would pick out those words more more than they would on the other words. Okay, well, he reversed that. So, he gave the the the participants a word list and then he tested them on you know, he said, "Now, can you please tell me the words you saw on that list that we showed you you know, a half hour ago or whatever. And then after the test, he would gave them a refresher on certain of those words. And again, they did better on the words that they got the refresher on later. Whoa. Yeah. So, he called this re- retroactive facilitation of recall as the word that he used for this. Anyway, so he took a lot of basic psychology paradigms, but just flipped them in that way. And he got statistically significant results in I think eight of the nine experiments. Um So, this was like like what Again, what the is going on here? Um So, you know, he he submitted this to a a a major a major journal and the and it went through peer review. The peer you know, peer review could not find a problem with it, but the editors like attached a note like saying, you know, we can't we we have a responsibility to publish this because it went through a peer review, but we can't like we can't explain this. It goes against all of our beliefs and so on. So, they even had to like attach a disclaimer essentially to this article. Wow. Uh anyway, this this it's it's Where was it Was it published on a in a journal or something? Yeah, yeah, the journal of I'm I'm forgetting the name of the journal. It's like one of the top-ranked journals Really? in psychology. How could we search it? Just type in uh Feeling the Future. Feeling the Future. Yeah, Daryl Bem, B E M is his is last name. Feeling the Future. It's very famous now. And uh and of course, there's like a million people trying to debunk it, you know, if you go on Wikipedia, there are it's like, you know, there's there are cadres of people who just debunk, There you go. you know, controversial Yeah. Experimental evidence for anomalous retroactive influences on cognition and effect. Wow. I have something else here that's like it's like a Oh, this is him, Daryl? This is uh the same Yeah. It's like this is a list of whole bunch of like top like 90 articles and and Daryl's is one of them. What was the year again that it was published? 2011. 2011. And then he subsequently uh with some colleagues uh published a kind of meta-analysis of a bunch of other laboratories that then who who had rep- mostly replicated his findings. So like uh something something like 80 or 90 separate replications, most of which got the results he got. Mhm. Um uh and anyway so you know, this is just one corner of the topic of of precognition that I I have since immersed myself in for the last decade and a half. Um Have there been any other studies done since then? Yeah, there's a a lot a lot of people are doing this work around the world. Not a No, I won't say a lot. Some people have. There are um a few handful of of researchers in neuroscience that are open-minded enough to to study this stuff, but no one can get the funding necessarily to do to that's necessary to do to do, you know, a big major study on this because because, you know, no one at in in the big funding institutes are are going to like take take it seriously at this point because there's so much uh so much resistance to this topic. Like, you know, you find that with any paranormal topic, you know, we're I think things I hope things are going to change uh because I think on- honestly, I think the way the UFO topic has opened up in the last few years, I think this may help some of these other topics. Now, I honestly have come to believe that there's no intrinsic connection between UFOs and uh uh uh you know, ESP necessarily, but uh the fact that all these things are sort of stigmatized in the same way and kind of get lumped together under the heading of the paranormal, uh, you know, helps. I think what's happening in the UFO scene right now will hopefully will kind of help move uh move things in the um in the in the realm of ESP research. So, but okay, so that's that's part of the story. I'm in the end and I'm not honestly that interested in the scientific research because again, right now it's like little studies and it's easy to dismiss them. Yeah. But, uh you know, one thing if you start reading about precognition at all, you realize that the most people experience this in dreams. All right. And uh a lot of interesting things have been written over the last century about precognitive dreams. Um and the first was a an aviation engineer in very early years of flight in England. It was a guy named J.W. Dunne, John William Dunne. Uh and he had had had precognitive dreams since childhood. And he was fascinated by this topic and he sort of brought his kind of engineers mind to thinking about how it worked. And he early on figured out that if he was going to study this, he had to a be diligent about recording his dreams and uh and then really trying to figure out what was going on with these dreams where, you know, he would have a dream like one night and then 2 days later the thing he dreamed would in some way come true. Mhm. And so he worked on this problem sort of as a sideline to his main work in um aeronautical engineering for, you know, a couple decades and published a book in 1927 called An Experiment with Time. And this book is fascinating. Uh it the first half of it is just tons of examples of his own precognitive dreams. You know, here's the dream and here's what happened 2 days later or here's what I read in the newspaper, you know, 3 days later. I mean, most of his dreams turned out to be about things he was going to read in the media. Wow. Um and and then the second half of the book, most people don't even read the second half because it's kind of this he goes into theories of of of time and developed his own theory of time based on Einstein and stuff like that. It's very it's very complicated and and that's it. That's the book. That's the book. An Experiment with Time. Yep. And uh but it's it was really compelling book and it was actually super influential on writers and intellectuals in the sort of middle years of the century. Uh So it was in the '20 Yeah, '27. Published in '27 then it went through a lot of reprintings over the next decade or so and um a lot of writers of the time like C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, nobody knows that. I mean, he it was he J.R.R. Tolkien was super influenced by this book on precognitive dreams and the the non-linear nature of time. Um yeah, in fact, the Elven races in Tolkien's stories, he developed this whole kind of way in which the elves live in this kind of non-linear time. And he was it was all based on this book about precognitive dreams by J.W. Dunne. Uh T.S. Eliot The elves, I mean, that's the Tolkien's novels are all about the elves. all about elves. Okay. Well, I mean, the elves are like this this these immortals that that inhabit Middle Earth and and And this because they're immortal, they have this totally different sense of time than humans do and they live sort of outside of time. Oh, that sounds fascinating. Yeah, I mean his his his works are amazing. Um but it was based you know, this this aspect of their culture in Tolkien's writings was based on this theory of precognition and precognitive dreams that that Dunne came up with. T.S. Eliot is another one who was very influenced by Dunne. Uh Vladimir Nabokov is another one. In fact, Vladimir Nabokov Okay, let me say Dunne Is that Vladimir Is that a filmmaker? No, the the novelist. Russian Russian-American Got you. Got you. Um Uh this book An An Experiment with Time was kind of an early example of citizen science, okay? Because he was saying, "Look, this happens in my dreams. It happens in the dreams of a few the few the people I know, uh but try yourself." Okay? You know, the only way we're going to know if this is real is if you you know, if you can find it happening in your own life. So, he had a a few sort of recommendations for readers to, you know, how to record their dreams and look for examples of precognition in them. Um so, he was inviting people to do this. Vladimir Nabokov, uh in the I guess in the '50s, came across Dunne's book and tried it and he he got positive results. He had you know, he tried it for a month and he got several precog dreams that were like very exactly about things he would see on TV the next day. Um now, he was already Nabokov was already interested in precognition because he had had like an incredible precognitive dream. Uh and I'll just tell you about that. He this the dream actually was when he was I think 17 and he was still in in Russia outside St. Petersburg. And his uncle Vasily died. And this was a wealthy family and Vasily left him, he's like 17, and his uncle leaves him this huge estate outside of St. Petersburg. Um so suddenly this 17-year-old poet and you know he's butterfly collector and stuff, you know, he's suddenly a rich man, you know, a really rich man. He's got he's set for life. He's got this estate and everything. Okay, well, a year later all that is washed away by the Russian Revolution. Okay, it's like the all the the elite the titled elite in Russia are set in exile and their wealth is confiscated and whatnot. So his family had to emigrate. Um but around this time he had a dream. His uncle Vasily, his dead uncle Vasily, a uh appears to him in his dream and says, "I will return to you as Harry and Kuviertkin." Harry and Kuviertkin. Okay, well, whatever. What does that mean? Dream mean? Who knows? Okay, he he uh the he interpreted that those names as circus performers. Um Kuvier Kuvierock in Russian means somersault. So he somehow associated these with super with circus performers, but he didn't know what it meant. Anyway. Okay, so fast forward, I think um try I my math may be off like more than 40 years, I believe. And he's now living as an um as a English professor at Cornell University. Um not a rich man, um you know, making a modest living as a as an English professor and novelist. Okay, and he's just written I'm going to have to adjust this. Yeah, yeah. Take your time. He's just Also, I know you said you like nootropics. These are great. Oh, okay. Super brain boosters, man. Oh, awesome. Well, These are They're They're like little neutropic shots. They're like super They boost your energy and and mental It's like amazing. called Magic Mind. I can al- I can always use a Magic Mind. Yeah, me, too. Um anyway, so uh he has just written that not that his novel Lolita, his most famous novel. And he suddenly gets word. In fact, I think he reads Oh, yeah. A friend calls him up. A fellow professor calls him up and he says, "Have you read the the New York Times today?" And there's an article in the New York Times that or I maybe it's not New York Times, but in some in some paper there's an article that that Harris and Kubrick Pictures that's Stanley Kubrick's production company has just purchased the rights to Lolita for this like massive sum. It was like $150,000 at that point, which was in in today's money would be, you know, huge. Um and so he basically learned that he was now a rich man. And indeed Vasily, his wealthy benefactor, had come back to him as Harry and Kuvirkin. Kuvirkin in if it's Anglicized, would be Kubrick. Really? Yeah. So but it sounds amazing, but this happens all the time. There's so many so many so many examples of this. And if you do what I call precognitive dream work, we can talk about that a little bit if you want. Uh it's essentially a variant of what J. W. Dunne recommended. So J. W. Dunne, he came up with a protocol He came up with a protocol a protocol. So you could have precognitive dreams. Right? Now Now not all dreams are precognitive, though. Well, let's talk about that. He came up with a protocol not to have precognitive dreams, but to notice to notice precognitive dreams. His presumption, and it's one that I I agree with, uh is that um first of all, we're all dreaming all through the night, you know, we have and they they they flow one to the other, so it's hard to say how many, you know, as people have tried to quantify how many dreams you have in a night, but you're you're dreaming throughout the night, not just in the REM sleep periods, but even in the deeper uh non-REM sleep periods, you are you are dreaming. Uh and uh we can talk about what what contemporary um sleep scientists say about dreams and what their function is and so on. But his argument was that Dunne's argument was that, well, dreams are uh reaching into the future, reaching into our future, uh as well as into our past, okay, reaching into our memories and reaching into the future somehow, uh to create these dream scenes, okay? Now, this was a time when when Sigmund Freud was very influential. Um uh everyone was uh well, not everyone, but his ideas about dreams, uh that he had uh written about right right at the turn of the century, uh were that dreams were the disguised, the symbolically disguised, fulfillment of repressed wishes, okay? That's Freud's dream theory in a nutshell. Uh so J. W. Dunne sort of fit his theory into Freud's by saying, well, uh it Freud would say that we're reaching into our past, I mean, our dreams are full of things from our past, basically, you know, but but jumbled up and rearranged. Um Freud you know, would say that we are expressing our repressed wishes in this disguised fashion using these symbols and using things drawn from our past memories, but juxtaposed in in new ways. Dunne accepted that basic thesis, but said, well, instead of just reaching into our past, they're reaching into our future. Uh and so so some of the things that happen in our dreams are actually things that haven't happened to us yet. Okay? Um so uh I lost my train of thought, but So so these so so Freud's basic idea was that dreams were were wishes of the subconscious mind some or desires that we're not aware of consciously but that exist deep down within us. Yes. And Don kind of took this and said this somehow has to do with the future. How does it have to do What what is it? that when you when that's What he said was that those the the you like I said, he accepted the idea that dreams are are are our wishes that are disguised somehow, but he's saying that the disguises are built from uh from events that are happening in our future as well as the past. Now, we can move beyond that and say that I I think that he was kind of he kind of got it backwards. And what I argue in my books my book on dreams and uh and in my first book Timeless is that that in fact the Freud Freud was wrong about the function of dreams that they don't have to do with repressed wishes that the function really is precognition that that that that we are reaching into our future and it's helping as a guidance system to the individual and that we're using materials from our past to help represent those those future thoughts and future experiences. Um We're using experiences from our past. Memories. Memories. Right. From our past to process things events that are going to happen in the future. like imagine a dream is like a uh like a little like diorama or like a little tableau or whatever and then you take you know, you take this this old friend and this old coworker and your mom and you stuff like that and put them together like little action figures in a like a tableau and make them do things. You know, that story of the dream Freud said it was a repressed wish that you were ask acting out. I'm suggesting that it's taking the that it's it's acting out thoughts, important thoughts, important realizations, important experiences in your future. is what those memories are helping represent in your dreams. That's wild. But when you start First of all, the Cuz I've had some crazy dreams that I hope never happen. Well, of course Yeah, this is a whole This is its whole topic. People who start going down the top the the rabbit hole of precognitive dreams, there's a fear component there because everybody has negative dreams and and dreams about awful things happening to yourself or to your kids or or whatever and they go, "Oh my god, I hope that's not a precognitive dream." I'll say right off the top that most, you know, dreams do not come true literally. This episode of the podcast is brought to you by Verso. The older I get, the more I want to invest in my health because I don't just want to look young, I want to feel young. Recent scientific findings demonstrate that it's not only possible to slow down the aging process, but it's also possible to reverse it. That is why I use Cell Being by Verso. Cell Being contains scientifically proven ingredients that target the root causes of aging and that way you can avoid the whack-a-mole process that you get when you use regular supplements. It contains NMN, resveratrol, TMG, and together these ingredients turn on longevity pathways in your body to help fight the effects of aging. It also improves metabolism, boosting your NAD+ and so on. I started using Cell Being years ago, originally when nutritional scientist Dr. Dom D'Agostino came on the show and explained to me all of the amazing benefits. Now I use it for pre-workout, I use it in the morning for an extra boost of energy, and essentially it is the holy grail. Verso also publishes third-party testing from each batch produced to guarantee you're getting what you pay for. So, if you want to support the show, click the link down in the description. It's buy.ver.so/danny or use the coupon code danny at checkout for 15% off your first order. Again, that's buy.ver.so/danny for 15% off your first order and don't forget to use coupon code danny. It's linked below. Now, back to the show. Okay, these are again, they're symbolic mostly symbolic representations of things that are going to happen. Like even in in in Nabokov's case, this was not a literal dream of him getting, you know, a check, a $150,000 check from Stanley Kubrick. Right. It was a dream of of, you know, Harry of of his uncle Vasily, this rich man, you know, that who had died, you know, decades earlier, uh returning to him as as circus performers. You could, you know, that's there was no movie industry at the time he had the dream, you know, circus performers, that's the nearest thing to movie industry executives, you know, or or people in the movie industry. Um and named, you know, Harry and Kuwirken. Again, which is, you know, incredibly close to Harris and Kubrick. You know, and in fact, Kuwirken is Kubrick in English. It's like the Right. Yeah. So, that And but that's an example of how dreams they symbolically represent events in your future. But there's there are exceptions. There are exceptions that are what I call video quality, uh you know, precognitive dreams of something that'll happen in the next day or or two or years, sometimes. Um but most of them are symbolically twisted, distorted. Uh but that makes the topic easy to debunk or easy to easier for debunkers and and skeptics to say oh you know how how can you prove that this dream is about this event or whatever. And dreams are often very hard to remember. Right? I'm one like it makes me wonder is that the fact that dreams are often very hard to remember unless you really focus hard after you wake up or unless it's a really vivid dream that's like unforgettable. Is I wonder is that by design that we can't that there's some a barrier there to us accessing our dreams after we're conscious? No, I don't think there's a barrier but that's a great question. And it's it's kind of one of the big ironies of dreaming because if you ask any modern or most modern dream researchers the consensus that has sort of formed around dreaming and why we dream is that dreams are making new memories. Okay? The idea is that they take daily experience that is held in short-term memory and then at night during REM especially but during other modes of sleep those that stuff in short-term memory is getting shunted into long-term memory. Ah. And Like backing up your hard drive. Backing up your Well, not just backing up. You're sort of creating you know you're sort of cleaning out your your I don't know what the what the word is in your RAM maybe yeah. Right. And you're you're moving right. Yeah. Yeah. And you're moving that into into the longer term storage. Okay. All right. That's the the basic idea. Well, I and I basically agree with that. I mean I think that that dreams are making new memories. I just think that they're making memories based on future experiences as well as past experiences not just past experiences. So that that night in REM we are mashing up you know what happened maybe you know things that happened you know yesterday with things that are happening tomorrow. And because that idea is so impossible seeming or counterintuitive that nobody even pays attention to that idea. You know, we we have when you start doing precognitive dream work, you start noticing, "Oh, [ __ ] I'm having I'm you know, not necessarily every night, but I'm able to identify all these elements in my dream that that crop up in the next day or two. Um and you know, this is happening all the time and we're just not attuned to it. If you don't have a concept of precognition or any idea that that time may not be as simple as we've been led to believe since the enlightenment. Um you just won't even look for it. So, what is this protocol that Don came up with to to recognize or to do this dream work? His protocol boils down to two steps. And that is record your dreams. Record all of them in a dated journal in detail. You're Now, anyone who's interested in dreams, whether they're interested in Freudian or Jungian or you know, there's all kinds of ways of of approaching your dreams. A lot of uh um metaphysical uh approaches to dream interpretation. Anyone's going to say you have to record your dreams. I mean, if you're interested in dreams, you got to record them. That's number one. Um but his second step and it's actually my third step. I add a an an a new step in the middle, but his second step is every Okay, so write your dreams down in the morning and then set them aside. Then at the end of every day go back and look at your dream your dreams from that morning and the previous couple mornings. And just reflect on like any similarities that you notice between the events that intervened, you know, over the course of the few days during waking life and what you recorded in your dreams. Now, he was living in a day in in a time before there was computers and hard drives. And, you know, one's written records of dreams would quickly be too massive to like deal with. I mean, you can't compare every dream every experience you've had in your life to every dream you've had over the course of your life. So, he recommended just tossing out your dream records after a couple days. So, like just just look at the last few days, you know. Um nowadays it's it's easier to keep longer-term dream records. You can keep them in a searchable like I I've kept you know, dream journals for decades even long before I even knew about precognition. Uh and you can search them on a hard drive or whatever. So, this is the other aspect getting back to the biograph biographical thing of how I got interested in this. Around the time I was reading done or sorry, around the time I was reading Bam and Don and so on, I was reading realizing, "Oh, I've had these dreams before." You know, I had a dream the night before 9/11. You did? Yeah. I had uh you know, I had I've had I had other dreams that I that were just stunningly what I dreamed about or some variant of it would happen the next day. What was your dream before 9/11? Uh yeah, so I dreamed on the morning of 9/11, this would have been about 3 hours before the events. Um it was one of my last dreams before waking up. And those are typically the ones that are easiest to remember. Those are the ones if you remember any dreams at all, you're going to re-remember the last dream you had before you Cuz you're kind of awake. Yeah, you're kind of semi-awake. Um so, the dream was this and it's not on the surface going to sound that compelling, but just wait. The I was driving down uh a neighbor a certain street in my hometown in Lakewood, Colorado. It's a suburb of Denver. Yeah, I was living that point I had just moved a week before to uh to Vienna, Virginia, which is right outside of Washington, D.C. Okay. Um but dreamed about this street near my where I grew up. Uh and on a certain part of the street I drove past two identical identical buildings with corrugated facades, like gray corrugated facades. And somehow these buildings were mosques. Now, I'd never in I'd never once dreamed about anything to do with Islam or mosques or whatever. But I dreamed about these two identical corrugated facade, very square, a pair of them, okay, that were mosques. All right. And I drove past them, okay. And I got up and I wrote this dream down. Like, doesn't seem very remarkable. They weren't tall towers. They were But they were squat, very square, a pair of them, and they had that kind of In fact, I think I wrote down they looked like corduroy, kind of gray corduroy. Yeah. Anyway. Okay, so, you know, the events of 9/11 happened. Didn't ever didn't even think about this dream until the next day I looked at my dream record. And I started thinking about it. Um well, actually I didn't I I thought, "Well, that's, you know, weird." Because like that pair of buildings, the same gray facade, and like the fact that they were mosques. And then all of a sudden, you know, the media chatter was all about Islam and and and, you know, Islamic terrorists and stuff like that. Um but I didn't I didn't know what to make of it. You know, it's not like I didn't dream like a lot of people had literal dreams of towers falling and explosions in New York. A lot of people had those dreams in the days before 9/11. But this wasn't like obvious. Mhm. Obviously pre-cognitive. But then when I went back to this having after having read Dunne's book and having uh you know, being more open to the topic of precognition. Well, I realized all you have to do is free associate. That's what That was Freud's method for interpreting a dream was like you take every element in the dream and just think, "What's the first thing this reminds me of?" Okay. And well, free associating on this dream, like, "Oh, shit." So, the certain the certain place in my dream where these buildings were. In fact, in actual fact, it was a little what's there and still there is this little old like one story office building uh where my father had had his psychology practice for like just like a year when I was in uh I think in junior high school or lot around that time. And I have one association to that to that building and that and the time he was in that office was that he had to be called late one night uh by a patient who was in a having a suicidal crisis. Okay, this patient was on the verge of committing suicide and he had to go to that office to meet this patient and help like talk him out of suicide. Okay, so that's interesting because that's an association to suicide. Additionally to the association to Islam and those corrugated facades and all that. So, it's like it's like all the big parts of that story on 9/11 were like mashed up into this into this into this little dream diorama that was meaningful to me. I mean, it wouldn't be meaningful to anybody else. Your dreams are all about you and your thoughts and your experiences and your associations from childhood on on up. Um but you know, it's not a Okay, that's not going to be super convincing to someone who's A not you know, not a believer in precognition which most people aren't uh and B to anyone who thinks you have to interpret your dreams symbolically. I mean, Freud went out you know, about the middle of last century because scientists didn't find his his approach uh compelling. They say, you know, you can't how can how can anyone prove that this this dream means that if you have to symbolically decode it, okay? Right. So, there's that problem. But And there's the problem of recording him, too. Like you can't just say, "Oh, I had this dream and this happened." You have to have evidence that you recorded it. why, you know, that's why Dunn was so adamant. You have to record your dreams, you know. Um but anyway, so, you know, that's just one example, but I had like many a lot even more more compelling examples where the event that happened the next day was you know, obviously what I had dreamed the night before. But tons of people had these dreams about 9/11. I mean, uh uh there's a like one of the examples that I uh I've used in in all my books is uh a painter in uh this is a painter who lived outside of London. He's probably not still alive yet. He was old. Uh he was already retired um when he even when he had his dream on September 11th, 1996. He had a dream about two towers crumbling in New York. Now, he had already had lots of precognitive dreams um about IRA bombings and plane crashes and stuff like that. Uh and so he knew to um he had already developed sort of a method where he would um he would have the dream and he would paint it. He was an artist, and so he would actually paint his dreams in watercolor. And then he would go to his local Barclays Bank where they had a clock, like they had a a clock with the date, you know? And so he would have himself photographed at his bank under the clock showing the date just to prove, you know, to put a date stamp on the on these dreams, okay? All right, so on 9/11 2000 I'm sorry, 9/11, 1996. He did this? Yeah. On in 1996, he took the picture? Yeah. Yeah, you can see the picture. Holy cow. And but a few months later he had another dream about the same event with planes, planes crashing in the planes, okay? And he also I guess drew that and painted it. I don't have a I don't have that photograph. But Is it online, you think? Yeah, it's online. You can find it. Um who is this guy? Okay, his name is um um blanking on his name. Um it'll come to me. Okay. Um anyway, uh he So, yeah, so when 9/11 happens, he's like, you know, astounded and kind of terrified, frankly, you know, that that he had such an accurate dream about this event, but like tons of people did. And that fact that he had it on 9/11 like 5 years earlier is also extremely common. Um people who do this who start study precognitive uh study their own precognitive dreams find uh that they you know, either they'll dream about something that happens in the next few days. Sometimes it's longer, but significant events in their lives, they may dream about exactly 1 year earlier or exactly multiple years on the same date. Ah. Uh it's something that I call calendrical resonance. Uh and it's very common when you start to record your dreams and keep a a dated dream journal over multiple years, people who who do this find that there's something about dates. There's some some way in which we unconsciously keep track of of dates. And uh you know, it's it's a very common phenomenon to like you suddenly feel sad, you know, on a certain day, and then you look at the calendar and go, "Oh, this is the day that my dad died, you know, 3 years ago." And like I wasn't consciously aware of it, but, you know, the date, the anniversary, you know, is is you know, our unconscious keeps track of it. Well, uh I think it works in reverse, too. You know, and it it you know, a a certain date might prime us or pre-mind us about about an event that's going to happen in our future on that date and prompt a dream. Uh I've you know, I've worked with other you know, frequent precognitive dreamers who've noted the same thing in their dream journals. And wasn't there a wasn't wasn't there another guy who was an artist who was actually had rented a space in one of the towers? This is so the chapter the first chapter of my new book from nowhere uh is about artists and writers. Um and uh the So, yeah. So, his name is Michael Richards, but this is not the Michael Richards the comedian. Right. Michael Rolando Richards. He's a He was a Jamaican American sculptor. And he was sort of a rising star in uh in the kind of the New York art world in the uh 1990s uh and the, you know, approaching the millennium. Um and he made uh a lot of very striking sculptures. So, he was black and very, you know, his sculptures were all about the the struggles of a of a black artist in a white-dominated art world. Mhm. Um and his his sculptures were all on the themes of aviation and uh uh so, he you know, he was really compelled by aviation, but he would uh he would do these sculptural self-portraits where he was in the the uh in the the flight suit of a Tuskegee Airman. Now, the Tuskegee Airmen in World War II was a black uh were black pilots uh who flew in World War II and distinguished themselves um uh uh in World War II. Um but the word the name Tuskegee also calls to mind the Tuskegee experiments, if you know about that. So, it's like it was kind of a double meaning there uh for Michael Richards. But anyway, he would all he would do these sculptural self-portraits. Find Michael Richards portraits. Yeah. Look up uh Tar Baby versus Saint Sebastian. You You'll see it. Oh, wait. This is what Did you find the other guy? I think No. No, that's not that's not it. Gosh. All right. Um Tar Baby versus blah? Tar Baby versus Saint Sebastian. Okay. Uh anyway, he painted these picture these self-portraits as a Tuskegee Airman often where he was had like parachuted to the ground or where he'd crashed to the ground. Uh and uh and in this one case in 1999 he made this sculpture of himself in bronze levitating off the ground impaled by all these airplanes. Wow. Okay. Now, he at the time uh in you know, I'm sorry, in in 2001 he got a he became part of what was called the Worldviews program where the World Trade Center um let gave its its some of its unused office spaces to artists. Like there'd be a for like 6 months. Um and anyway, he was Oh, yeah. I was just watching a video about this on Twitter. And so he was working in his studio. Uh actually he'd spent the night in his studio. He was the only one in his group of his cohort of like 15 artists who had spent the night uh of of September 10th in his studio. Uh and he was killed on the morning of of 9/11 uh by, you know, martyred by planes. So he's like here he's a self-portrait of himself as a saint martyred by planes. So uh but my book is full of examples like this. I mean, this is a particularly striking one. But uh this happens all the time. I mean, this is my this is my what I'm trying to get people to uh take seriously in my work is that precognition is not only real. I mean, people think people kind of imagine, well, okay, maybe maybe it's happens occasionally or maybe certain things like 9/11 are so awful that they somehow ripple through space-time and can cause people to have a precognitive dream. But, the fact is 99% of precognitive dreams are about like the sink backing up at work the next day or or you know, some relatively trivial event in your own life. There's so many crazy examples of people predicting 9/11. It's freaky. There's the X Remember the X-Files episode? The I think it was a pilot of an X-Files Lone Gunman. It was a spin-off series. A pilot episode of the Lone Gunman spin-off series was about some some faction in the government, you know, remote trying to remote control planes into the World Trade Center. But, there's a million other examples, too. And I Chapter 1 of my new book is full of these examples about 9/11. It focuses mainly on Michael Richards. But, but yeah, a ton of people a ton of people had these dreams. Same with the Titanic. I mean, people if you know anything about about precognition, you might know that in 1898, a sea adventure writer named Morgan Robertson wrote a novel called Futility, which was about the biggest ocean liner ever named the Titan, which hits an iceberg on an April night and sinks and almost all the passengers die because there's too few lifeboats. So, it's like exactly what happened 14 years later Wow. you know, in reality. Um but this is real? This is totally real. And totally and and he wasn't the only one. I mean, people know if they know anything about, you know, premonitions of the Titanic disaster, they may have heard that story. But, but tons of people had dreams about it. Um Titan If you wanted to find that, it'd be called what? Titan story written in Mor- Yeah, Morgan Robertson. Futility is the name of the novel. Morgan Robin Futility novel. Robertson. Robertson. Yeah. Um I don't think there's going to be any interesting picture of it. I mean, um But, uh Yeah, it was republished. Okay, so the publisher republished it in as the wreck of the Titan because they were trying to capitalize on on the Titanic disaster. So, they they reissued it in in um uh 1912 or 1913. Steve. Oh, you're not on. Okay, what does that say? It features a fictional British ocean liner named the Titan that sinks in the North Atlantic Ocean after sinking after striking an iceberg. The Titan and its uh sinking are famous for similarities to the passenger ship Titanic after it sank 14 years later. Mhm. Holy [ __ ] That's freaky. What to you is the most compelling premonition or precognitive experience that was documented, like a dream that was actually documented and proof that it happened later? Well, as far as dreams, I love the the Vladimir Nabokov's story. I mean, I just think that's wild. And and one of the things that that it shows is that uh that dream precognitive dreams can be very long range. I mean, they can they can span decades of a person's life. Um okay, I'll give you two examples of very compelling uh dreams uh that one one that's that anyone can look up and one that I've written about in my precognitive dream book that's from a a friend of mine uh who's highly precognitive. Um one of the the the famous public one that people don't realize is a precognitive dream uh is Freud's Sigmund Freud's most famous dream uh and it's the dream and it's the dream that gave him the theory of that you know, to him the idea that dreams are the disguised fulfillment of repressed wishes. Was a dream that he had in 1895 uh where he was um um He dreamed this He was staying outside of Vienna at like a summer summer villa or whatever that he and his wife rented. And he has this dream that there's a party and a bunch of his friends, his doctor friends, are at this party and this one patient of his is at this party. And uh he goes up to her and she doesn't and she There's something she doesn't She's reluctant. She won't open her mouth or talk. And he finally compels her to open her mouth and he looks in her mouth and he sees these white patches on the back of her mouth uh and scabs, a bunch of scabs. Um and he can somehow see the bones inside her nose Hm. by looking in her mouth. And then some uh some other things happen in the dream and he sort of interpreted this dream as being about uh sort of medical malpractice issues that were happening in his in his sphere because the the doctors in his in the dream uh all were like having these mal- you know, one of them had killed a pa- or nearly killed a patient and he had he himself had nearly killed a patient uh and so he was having all these sort of anxieties and doubts about his his work. And he interpreted this See, the the the woman in actuality did not have any of these physical symptoms. She was a hit- hysteric, you know, she had hysterical symptoms. That's what what was common at the time, uh what we would now call de- depression probably. Um but uh his So, he was He interpreted this dream, yes, the dream of Irma's injection. So, he interpreted this dream as being about his wish that he be blameless in all these medical malpractice issues, including the fact that Irma, that's not her real name, had not gotten better from his treatment. One of the people in the dream had told him the night before that she was not better from his and he was like he was feeling a lot of anxiety about himself as a physician and so on. Um but okay, so fast forward uh let's see. This was 1923, so like almost three decades. I think 28 years. He is diagnosed with uh an oral cancer. All right. All right. Uh the doctors found white patches white patches called leukoplakia. Uh people who smoke a lot often develop an oral precancerous condition called leukoplakia and that's what he had because he smoked cigars. He was like a big cigar smoker. Um they had to do these like really horrible surgeries. I mean this is like 19 23, you know, it's like uh where uh he had they had to cut away these parts inside his mouth and it left him with these huge scabs. All right. And then they ultimately had to cut out his palate. All right, inside his mouth. Um and then put in this and so every day he had to be fitted with or had to put in this this wooden denture which like made him unable to open his mouth or speak. So all these these elements that he was seeing in Irma's mouth in that dream were true of him. The white patches, the scabs, the no the bones in the nose if you take out your palate, you can look inside the mouth and see up into your nose. Holy cow. And he recorded this dream right after it happened? Yeah. Yeah. Um yeah, it takes up like 14 pages of his book The Interpretation of Dreams. I mean it was his interpretation free associating all the elements of his dream, but he didn't believe in precognition. And he didn't you know, it never even crossed his mind that this was about something that was going to happen in nearly three decades in his life. I mean who's going to who is going to think about that when they record a dream? So he's interpreting dreams this dream all in terms of his sort of contemporary situation and his past, not his future. Um so that's that's one of them. Uh you know, it's very striking and and and you know, also Irma in the dream does not can't open her mouth or talk. Well, that is in fact what happened to him after he had to wear this denture every day for the last like 15 years of his life. Um another very compelling dream example comes from a friend of mine uh named Toby Watari. Her She has a whole chapter in my book precognitive dream work in the last long self cuz this is just such a mind-blowing experience. Um so she this this happened when she was in college in the at the University of Colorado in Boulder. Um she uh she was living in a basement sort of apartment like group house kind of basement situation with with a bunch of other people. And she had these recurring dreams about this kid that she'd known like in second or third grade. Like like this kid like she would no longer she'd moved away from that city years earlier. Never seen or thought about that kid. Just just one random kid from from grade school. But she had this dream that this recurring dream over the course of I don't know a few weeks I guess of this kid and she was she was trying to kill him with a certain weapon, okay? And she kept having these these awful dreams and they and they were like really disturbing and distressing and she whether because of the dream dreams exactly or just because she was going through depression or whatever, she had to leave school for like a semester or whatever. It was really kind of a bad you know, phase in in her life. Okay, so fast forward like uh a couple decades later, she had another dream about about this kid. Um and I won't go into the details of the dream, but then 10 years later and this is in 2018 she had another dream related to this kid. Now, in 2018 she was able to do a Google search. This is something that she couldn't obviously have done back in 1988 when she had the original dreams. Um and so she Google searches this guy and she discovers terrible news that he had been murdered in exactly the way she had dreamed Holy cow. And that he'd been that he had And that the date of the murder She Now she had been Like me, she'd been keeping a detailed dream journal for years and years by this point. She was happened to be interested in dreams and was interested in Carl Jung and stuff like that. The date of his murder was exactly the date of that second in between dream that she had had, you know, like about 20 years after the initial dreams. Not the same It was not the same year, but it was exactly the same date of the year. And okay, so that it it But it gets better. Mhm. Um so she It occurred to her like So she's like, "What the [ __ ] is going on here?" So she, among other things, decided to Google her classmates that year at the University of Colorado Boulder. And one of those classmates was me. I was one of her housemates. And she was a friend of my girlfriend. And um we had completely lost touch after college. She did not know what she found out when she Googled me was that she thought that I was an anthropologist cuz that I'd gone off to graduate school after you know, after college. Well, she did not know that I had been writing about precognition and had just published, like literally a couple days earlier, I had published my first book Timeloops. So she, you know, or she reads my blog, orders the book and like discovers, "Holy [ __ ] I'm a precog." I mean, that's that was Philip K. Dick's word for a, you know, someone who has, you know, recurring precognitive experiences. And she like suddenly realized that wait, a lot of her dreams she'd been chalking it up to synchronicity. That's the term that if nobody knows the word precognition, they'll they'll think, "Oh, this is synchronicity somehow." So, she had all these dreams that would come true the next few days or or later. Anyway, so she then reached out to me and and then we started like sort of working together like figuring all this out. Uh but, you know, it was a mind-blowing experience. Her mind-blowing for me as well. In fact, it kind of like prompted me to write the dream work. It was part of what, you know, prompted me to write the dream work. Um but, you know, amazing experience and and and she and she's like very very like smart about about this whole topic. She had already sort of figured out a lot of of of aspects of precognitive dreaming and how precognition works. And so, we you know, she's she's she's been an influence on me, definitely. Are there any records of precognitive experience like like conscious thoughts, not dreams? Cuz I had something like this happen to me like a week ago. Craziest thing I've ever like ever I was telling everybody about it. My wife was like blown away. So, there's a guy one of my dad's close friends, he's been friends with her for 30 years. They work together at the post office. I've known this guy my whole life, right? He's one of my dad's close golf buddies. He's called me maybe four times in my whole life for various reasons. Who knows? Like maybe to you know, borrow my golf clubs or something to go golfing with my dad or whatever. Four times in the in the 25 years I can remember knowing him. I was driving home one day from from here, from the studio, and I was thinking about something and I for some reason I was thinking about people's reaction to something that I was going to do, right? And this guy's voice popped into my head and I was thinking of how would this guy react to this? And I look, I I never really think about him either. Like he's not a guy he's I think about often. Um and I was like I heard his voice reacting to something that I knew he was that like to cuz I knew I was going to see him sometime in the near next couple weeks or whatever and I was like imagining what his reaction would be to seeing this thing. And I had his voice in my head like imagining what his reaction would be. Three seconds later he calls me. Right. And I was just like [ __ ] my pants. I was like, this is so crazy. And I was telling my wife I'm like I'm like, have you ever had anything like this happen to you? And I don't know. I don't know how to explain it, but have you ever heard any any stories like that? All the time. It happens all the time. And the And the moment the thing is it's going to have start happening all the time to you now that you know about this topic of precognition. Yeah. Because it starts It's a cycle. Yeah. It's well, it's a thing that we just don't pay attention to, you know? Like these things happen all the time. And because we don't have a cultural concept for it, it's not part of our upbringing, kids all the time happens all the time to little kids. My My little kids have these you know, they'll say, "Oh, this thing is going to happen." And then it happens and it's like, what the But it happens all the time, but they get socialized out of us because most people, you know, like, "Uh-huh, kid, yeah, right." You know, it's like Right. It's socialized out of us to even talk about these things. And so we we wind up growing up in a society that just doesn't accept that this kind of thing happens at all. But if we grew up in almost any other society at any other time on Earth, it would be totally accepted. Right. Right. the only culture on Earth that doesn't believe that dreams sometimes foretell the future. And yes, it always happens in in in waking states. People are most aware of it with dreams cuz the most famous stories are from dreams. But happens all the time exactly what the kind of thing you're describing. Just coming comes into your head. And that's what the new book is about because because I'm talking about about inspiration. Like the idea of ideas that come from nowhere. The title of the book is from nowhere. Um I things thoughts that just pop into our head for artists, you know, they pay attention to those things. That's where they're they get their their ideas, you know. The muse or, you know, different cultures have had different words for it. Yeah, the Greeks had a lot of words for it, you know. The muses, the demon is one word. Um but, you know, and every culture has ideas about where ideas come from. It may be from the Lord, you know, it may be from the gods, it may be from the muses or spirits, the spirit world, whatever. I mean, every culture has has has theories about this. Um I know you had Diana Pasulka on on on your show and she, you know, writes about about tech people who think that they get ideas from the non-human intelligences behind the phenomenon, you know, that's that's a new kind of variant of a very old idea that, you know, these I that that our thoughts come from some external, you know, source in the spirit world or whatever. Yeah, there are people talk about a protocol you can follow where you can open up a portal to channel some sort of download, right? Some sort of creative download or inspirational download that can help them in what they're trying to ultimately achieve. Steven uh Steven Pressfield writes about this, too. Steven Pressfield. He's a book called The War of Art. He talks about channeling the muse. He's a writer and he talks about, you know, he spent his whole life writing and he was a talks about how he was a failed writer most of his life until he came up with The War of Art. And the muse, essentially, he talks about like showing up to work every day, sitting down, and putting pen to paper. And he says he goes, "Every day he goes, I have to sit down and have to start writing every day. I don't know when the muse is going to show up, but all I know is I have to be disciplined to sit down, start writing, and then maybe an hour later, maybe 2 hours later, the muse will arrive. But you have to sit down and do the work first." And he also talks about a thing called um He talks about What's the word he uses for it? It's like distractions or something. Um Anyways, he talks about the all the things in life that are meant to that try to get distract you from achieving that, right? Like like it like whatever it is, like like distractions or doing other things and you know, it's it's really hard to to channel that thing. Anyways, yeah, like you said, people have been talking about this, you know, throughout history. Right. Well, the what I'm arguing in in the new book is that, you know, I I'm not going to say it's not spirits or the Lord or, you know, or or non-human intelligences, but that most of the time it's your own self. It's your future self that's that's, you know, you are tapping into into, you know, things that are going to happen in your future. And that that's where your your best ideas are coming from. They're coming from your future. And exactly the same way that it works in dreams, but you you asked about it happening in waking life. Well, that's the way it happens for most I mean, some artists, you know, certainly get their ideas from dreams, but but they're uh most are getting them in this sort of inspired states or when the muse hits them or however you want to describe it. Right. And there's uh uh you know, so there's a million compelling examples of of people channeling their future in their art. I mean, we all already saw Michael Richards. Let me give you another example, a beautiful example of this that I just I just learned about this, you know, a few weeks ago. It was after I'd finished the book, so I couldn't include in the book, but um uh this was a guy named I can give you his actual name, Kevin Archer, because he wrote a blog post about it. Really beautiful little blog post um where he he I had I had known him or he had we had been communicating a few years ago because after time loops, he sent me some of his precognitive dreams. He'd had, you know, a few really interesting precognitive dreams. I used one of them as an example in my dream workbook. But, he uh this this story was not a dream. He uh so this starts when he was 10, okay? He this he was in school in he's he's in England and I'm not sure exactly what grade uh he that equates to in the English school system, but he was um uh I guess I guess it was the last year of primary school or whatever. Uh his teacher assigned the class to imagine that they were some ancestor of theirs in some in any kind of historical period and to just write a story about being that ancestor, okay? So, okay, so this guy's name is Archer and he'd always he said he'd always wondered about where that name came came from, okay? So, he writes this story. He's this is just he's just thinking this up. He writes this story where he's uh a bowman, an archer on a medieval battlefield, okay? And he sort of describes the you know the the armor he was wearing and uh describes the scene of the battle and all that and and and describes it you know he you know this ancestor of his you know he describes how he had like uh prevailed as as a bowman so successfully that the king said uh from now on you must call yourself Archer, okay? So, okay. The the teacher apparently like talked to his parents and said this was such a good story. I felt like I was transported into medieval times whatever. Okay, so fast forward 40 years, okay? He's now about 50 and his young daughter is asking about her heritage. Um and so he you know again, he's now in an age where you can look these things up on the internet rather than you know you know which wasn't the case you know 40 years ago. Uh so, he starts doing a little genealogy research or not even doing the genealogy research. He just immediately finds online that one of his distant cousins had been doing the genealogy of his of his family and had like a vast spreadsheet of the Archer family, okay? Uh well, the very first entry of this spreadsheet he sends him uh is the story of this bowman in Henry V's ar- army at the Battle of Agincourt in 1415. Uh and this this ancestor was named Simon de Boys, all right? And if you know anything about the Battle of Agincourt, it was won partly because of the English bowmen. They were vastly outnumbered by the French in this like forest or near a forest, um but their bowmen were superior and that the the archers sort of won the day. And it's a very famous battle and Shakespeare's Henry V, the famous uh speech, you know, we we band of brothers, that comes from Shakespeare's story about the Battle of Agincourt and Henry V. Anyway, so the very first cell in this spreadsheet about this guy's genealogy explains how Simon de Boys, you know, uh was so uh successful as an archer or as a bowman in the Battle of Agincourt that Henry V like gave him awarded him a like a an annual stipend of like five marks or whatever, which was pretty good salary, uh on the condition that he change his name to Archer. Huh, okay. So, it's exactly it's exactly what he wrote about randomly at age 10. Now, he like any person who's at all skeptical, and you should be skeptical of these stories, you know, he immediately reached out to his parents and said, "Did you guys know any of this history about our name? Did you Had you ever told me this? You know, is this Am I just imagining that I didn't know this at the time?" And they they were just as Huh. was as new to them as it was to him. He never knew this this history. And and there's an added detail to it. Like a lot of people are going to hear that story and think, "Oh, well, maybe he's the real Maybe he was the reincarnation of Simon de Montfort or something like that." Uh-huh. Okay. like he was remembering a previous life. Yeah, okay. That's what Trippet talks about, too. Well, in his subsequent sort of subsequent to this, he learned that that that story about the origin of the name Archer happening at after the Battle of Agincourt is is false. That actually the the the family name Archer originates some a few decades before that battle, and it wasn't It wasn't that story at all. So, it's not He wasn't He wasn't like remembering some past life cuz that that was actually kind of fictional or it was a fiction that he wrote. wrote or a bit of kind of legend or folklore. Right. That that he read. Interesting, man. So, but he's So, he was precognizing in his, you know, inspired moment or wasn't inspired. I mean, he was just forced to write a to write a story in school. And so, kind of what emerges under his pen as he's writing is this amazing learning experience he would have four decades in his future uh about his ancestry. Um you know, I just It's just a a lovely example of what I I think happens all the time when when artists are working, whether it's, you know, getting that kind of random out of the blue, oh my god, this this new idea, you know, comes landing in in your head, or whether you're just doing what you described, which is just kind of the work of sitting down and like forcing yourself to to work. Um I'll give you I'll give you another example that's, you know, I think some people are going to like raise their eyebrows at this, but and I I would love to hear people's reactions to this, but uh so I was watching so I I'm obviously when I read or artist biographies now or when I uh learn about an artist process, I'm always kind of you know, looking for possible examples of this. And so I was So, you know, a couple years ago when it came out, I was one of those people just utterly blown away by Get Back, the Peter Jackson's series about The Beatles and their and their creation of the of the um uh of their penultimate album, what was it? Let It Be. Um and I don't know if you saw the series, but um it begins with Paul McCartney kind of noodling on his bass uh the the first strains of like what the song that became Get Back, you know? Um and he's kind of noodling and like over the first few days and they're there this is about a rehearsal. They're kind of rehearsing for what they think is going to be a live a live show. Um and it's just you know, it's on the surface it's kind of boring, but the fact that these are The Beatles and if you grew up with The Beatles and in awe of The Beatles, it's like amazing to watch this and it's a it's the best you know, it's the best document of artistic creation that's ever been put on film. It's just it's a phenomenal show and uh it's he's just it's just this footage that of of them in the in the studio like jamming essentially. And and you're watching you're watching these store these songs come together, you know, essentially as you're watching. So anyway, so so on July I'm sorry, January 7th 1969 uh it which is when the show starts Paul McCartney is like noodling this idea and he's like about you the only line he has is get back get back get back, you know, to where you once belonged. So and then over the the next two days, it sort of evolves a little and he gets this idea, okay, this the they're Jojo, something about Jojo. Um and then Jojo is somehow he lives in Arizona and like Tucson, Arizona. Jojo, get back, get back, Jojo. You know, they're just kind of like they're all kind of just playing around with this idea and like Yeah. whatever. Um and then on January 10th in the morning, um And there's a book, by the way, that goes with this film and so you can like you can read the transcript and everything. It's amazing. Uh so, on the morning of of January 10th, 1969, you know, they're noodling this idea. John Lennon tosses out there, but he knew it wouldn't last. Okay, so that's another new line in the song. Okay, whatever. Okay, so that that day at lunch, George Harrison leaves the band. He walks out. He stands up. He's so exasperated with like all the disagreements between his band members. There's a lot of frictions. Uh Paul's being very bossy. Um and he feels he's George is just feeling unappreciated. So, he walks out. And he says, "See you around the pubs." So, that's the big cliffhanger ending of of the first episode of Peter Jackson's series. And so, what transpires is over the the following week, the other three Beatles had to go had had they all the four Beatles had to convene at Ringo's house to convince George to get back. And Jojo sounds a lot like George. And Harrison sounds a lot like Arizona. Uh So, I think Harrison sounds a lot like what? Arizona. I mean, the only words he had at this point were Jojo and Arizona, you know? Wow. So, you know, is this precognition on the part of Paul? Is he kind of just kind of channeling this this this this kind of important upheaval that's about to happen in his life that George Harrison's going to walk out of the band and they're going to have to like do some real uh do something something big to convince George to get back to where he once belonged. You know, but and there's there's more irony here. That line, get back get back to where you once belonged uh actually came from a song that George had written uh called Sour Milk Sea and it was a it was a song about getting out of situations that you don't want to be in because they're not satisfied. Uh and he'd just written this song and actually he'd given it to another artist to record. Um so basically Paul McCartney had like had essentially stole this this idea from George who was already disgruntled My god. about get back get back to where you once belonged and then you know, creates this this song and of course never would have occurred to any of the Beatles that that's what this song was about. They kind of then have the song then evolved and uh they even thought well maybe it was something about immigration and stuff. There's a lot of theories whatever and then there's another character they added and all that. I'm None of this would have ever been conscious. But I just find it really uncanny that that Paul McCartney like has this idea for you know, telling someone to get back. It's just like it's all just telling someone named Jo Jo get back Jo Jo get back Jo Jo get back to where you once belonged. That's fascinating. And then in you know, literally 3 days that that he is in that situation of having to convince George to get back to where he once belonged. Right. So anyway, you know, it's an example this is not one of the main examples in my book because I think people are going to go like go you know but if you are have if you're at all open to the suggestion I'm making that that that inspiration and creativity might often uh involve these kind of precognitive um you know The muse Upheavals upheavals our future. Yeah, that's really really interesting. It's um, is it any way this pre-cognitive or this pre-cognition? Is there any ties that you found to remote viewing? Cuz I had this guy on here a couple times. Mr. Morehouse was on the show and he got he was overseas training and uh I think he was a I think he was a army ranger. And anyways, he got shot in the head by a stray bullet and it he was wearing a helmet luckily and crazy concussion knocked unconscious had a severe head trauma. Came back and to see a psychiatrist and and they decided to do a bunch of tests on him and then they submitted him to project Stargate Yeah. in the CIA to do remote viewing. And he came on here and he walked us through how they do remote viewing and the whole protocol and um it you know, it's crazy because it's not it's again, it's not something you can really measure or duplicate you know, with the scientific doesn't path doesn't path scientific method muster, but it's insane that that our government would spend so much money on it if it wasn't real. Oh, it's totally real. I mean, the question is This is the whole battle between science and the supernatural. It's yeah, the thing is it's not super I you know, it's not supernatural. It's this is this is just an uncharacterized factor of human cognition. You know, and we don't know how it works because we partly because we we are stuck with enlightenment you know, models of causation and causality that that really were inherited from the enlightenment, but they have like really outworn their usefulness. Um, uh there's I'll say a couple things. Yeah, the remote viewing stuff is is fascinating. Um, uh there is an argument there's a argument about whether remote viewers there's the sort of mental model we all have of remote viewing or or clairvoyance as it's sometimes called as, you know, somehow seeing things across space, okay? Seeing things that are happening simultaneously with us, but they're happening, you know, in another room or another country or, you know, or seeing into that closed envelope, okay? They could also go across time, though. Well, that's the thing. And they Yeah, there are great examples from remote viewers where they're actually seeing things that haven't happened yet. Uh Paul Smith is another remote remote viewer who was in the Stargate program, and he writes about several fascinating examples of uh in one case, you know, it's the end of the day on Friday, he gets this he he he's uh he he has a mental image of a of a missile striking a ship in some desert off of some desert country uh and it's somehow is accidental but on purpose, kind of weird. It was wasn't corresponding to anything that was going on in the world at that time, so he just kind of filed it. That Monday, you know, one of his one of his colleagues uh called him say, "Have you looked at the news today?" And it was the strike on the USS Stark uh uh in in the Persian Gulf. And it was I think it was Iran or I forget it was Iran-Iraq struck the ship, and it was like supposedly accidental, but there was an idea that it may have been on purpose. Anyway, so he was seeing this event that that was about to happen in the future. Um and but there is a debate among people who study this stuff whether maybe remote viewing is all precognition. That is to say, if you're going to get feedback in the future, if you're going to learn the truth in the future, are you in fact seeing across space? Are you seeing into that envelope? Or are you seeing your future moment when the the contents of the envelope are revealed and you can get that excited excitement that oh, I was right, it was this thing. Are you seeing that moment in time in your biography? So, there's a there's a the there's This is a disputed thing and a lot and a lot of remote viewers would would would push back on that. But, uh but yeah, it's it's But, some argue that that's what it is. Like, uh Edwin May has made argued compellingly that it's really all precognition. Uh I think Russell Targ, too, has has off- has always kind of suspected that a lot of it might be precognition and and uh so so, this is a debate in the field of remote viewing. I would imagine that they still if if this stuff there's so much evidence and there's been studies on it, like you pointed out earlier, that it has to be being still used to some extent if it was used, you know, like that in the '80s and the '90s. Absolutely. Yeah. Um yeah. The question is, though, that if it is precognition, that changes its value in intelligence gathering. Because if you can always uh the feedback you get can always be false, right? I mean, you could you know, you can get you know, feedback from the news, but the news story might be wrong. So, if you're precognizing like a news story or precognizing information that you get that may be manufactured Mhm. uh or fictional. Because a lot of people a lot of what people precognize is fictional things. You know, it's TV shows. Like, Vladimir Nabokov, I mean, he was precognizing epis- scenes in TV shows that he was going to watch. Uh people often precognize movies. I've got tons of examples in in my book of of, you know, precognizing some striking scene in a movie I watched the next day. Is there any way to focus it? Yeah, that's a good question. Um yeah, some people would say definitely. Uh I I One of another person who who studies precognition, uh she's a neuroscientist, Julia Mossbridge. I I know if you've heard her name. She She's very much about developing ways to focus this using sort of the remote viewing style protocols to focus your precognition. So, certainly certainly there are ways to focus it. I've not been so interested in focusing it. I'm not kind of I'm not really in the end that interested in developing precognition as some kind of new superpower or whatever. I think I'm more interested in what it reveals about just spontaneous precognition, what it reveals about uh what I call the long self. That is to say the fact that we are four-dimensional creatures extending through time and that are somehow we are in contact with those future moments. The same way we're in contact with our past via memory. I just think precognition is just memory. It's all memory. So, and memory memory goes in both directions. It doesn't just go in one direction. I wanted to say one of the reasons that people have such a mental block about this stuff. It goes back to the Enlightenment. Uh one of the rules of science when it was first modern science when it was first emerging in the uh 17th century was that you had to banish anything that had to do with with God. Okay, you had to keep God out of it. You know, they were looking for naturalistic explanations for phenomena. So, one of the things that they threw out in the bathwater basically with God with God was teleology, what's called teleology. Now, teleology is the idea of causes running in reverse. We would now call it retrocausation. That's the term that physicists now use. Causes running in reverse. reverse. That is to say, uh you know, something in the future affecting something in the past. Okay? We usually think of causes going forward in time, you know. But effect happening first, cause happening later. Exactly. Yeah, an effect happening before a cause. Right. Okay. So, at that time teleology was just assumed to be like if you were talking about teleology, you were automatically talking about God's plan. All right? And so, teleology got thrown out of science because it was not fair bringing God into the equation and if you were talking about causes running backwards in time, you were implicitly at that time talking about God's divine plan. All right? Okay. So, now so that that so the idea the presumption that causes only run in one direction, you know, it worked fine in science for a couple centuries. But then almost exactly a century ago physicists discovered that on the smallest scales in nature and we're talking about quantum quantum scales it doesn't quite work. That there's this this this element that's always been called randomness or indeterminacy or uncertainty. Okay? And so, quantum physics for the last century has been about this this component of causation that cannot be predicted from from past events, from prior events. And now you have all these interpretations of quantum of this mystery. Okay? There's a lot of different interpretations. You got the Copenhagen interpretation. You have the many worlds interpretation. You have like lot of different sort of competing interpretations uh of what it means that certain things cannot be predicted from a chain of prior causes. And one of the theories is retrocausation. Well, wait a minute. Maybe causes are propagating from the future to the past as well as from the past to the future and maybe that's what accounts for this thing we're calling randomness. Now, one of the most influential figures in early quantum mechanics was Niels Bohr. And he was he was a very power brilliant man and very sort of uh powerful personality. And he sort of dominated the conversation like in the early years of quantum physics. Okay. And he sort of convinced people that that that ran it's just random and you have to accept that the world is random on the smallest scales in nature and we have to just accept it and there's no you know there's no reason for it and and that you've probably heard the idea of wave functions collapsing the collapse of the wave function. This is kind of the the core mystery in quantum physics is like things are completely they're mostly unpredictable until you make a measurement and then things take on a solid reality. There's kind of things behave as waves experiment. Double slit all that yeah and and sort of there's this mystery of what happens when you make a measurement of something and that from that there's a popular idea that somehow it's observation itself that that collapses the wave function and maybe it has to do with our consciousness or something like that. That's that's one it's not a mainstream idea in physics but that's that's been taken up by you know certainly by people in the new age and and stuff it's an appealing idea that somehow it's our our minds that are causing reality or whatever. Right right. But but anyway Bohr said just don't worry about it just you know do the math the the the the the equations you know can be used to predict very well what happens to particles in the aggregate like if you have a lot a bunch of particles you can tell exactly what's going to happen even if you don't know what's going to happen to a single particle because there of this indeterminacy factor but more and more physicists now are talking about retrocausation that hey wait a minute what if what if that that whole randomness thing what if it isn't random what if what if my measurement now of this particle, this electron, is actually causing what happened in its past. And in that case it's not random, and there's this retro retrograde component in causation, retrocausation. And they have actually done experiments that suggest that that's what's going on. I'll give you an example. Uh, this is from my book Time Loops, I talk about this, but in 2009 there's new methods in quantum physics that are enabling researchers to kind of probe this question. And one of the one of the methods is called weak measurement. It's kind of complicated how it works, but you know, the idea is, you know, in most measurements you affect the thing you're measuring, you know, and so it yeah, causes problems, but there's this method called weak measurement, which is if you like weakly measure a bunch of particles, you can kind of like measure them without affecting them, okay? So, what they did in this experiment it's it's very similar to what happened in Daryl Bem's experiment, except this time we're using photons, not Cornell undergraduates, okay? Just sub- so substitute photons for the Cornell undergraduates. Basically, what they did was they took a laser beam, all right? And they put it through a beam splitter. So, you have the same beam, but then it's split into two. All right? Now, then what they did was they they weakly measured the photons in both beams, all right? And then they subjected one of the beams to a to this a strong measurement, if you want to put it that way. And what they discovered was that back in time when they were weakly measured, the photons that got the later strong measurement had been amplified significantly. So, that later measurement amplified the photons in their past. I see I see the look on your face, but it's the exact look, you know, on your face when you learned about Daryl Bem's experiments. I mean, you you like, "What the fuck?" But, it means that causes that that events in in the future, at time point B, somehow affect things at time point A in the past. And the idea, you know, I think the idea of of me and others who study precognition are that okay, so the brain is somehow well, first of all, a lot of a lot of more and more people now think that the brain is some kind of quantum computer or a quantum sort of a hybrid quantum-classical computer because there seem to be quantum processes going on inside neurons. Um you've probably heard about microtubules. Well, there are yes, so microtubules um you know, one theory of consciousness is that they have to do with uh with these quantum these little molecular quantum computers inside neurons called mic- microtubules. Well, I think microtubules are responsible for reshaping the synapses during learning. And I think that microtubules are getting information from their future and reshaping the synapses based on future what's going to happen to that cell in the future. Um uh I know, it's it's it's it's mind-blowing, but evidence for this is actually coming from the field of quantum computing because one of the things that's that's being discovered in people who are working with with quantum computers and working with models of quantum computers is that you can you can reverse um uh you can reverse temporality in a in a quantum computer circuit. uh and sort of essentially I my simplistic way of putting it uh is you can get an output before an input. Mhm. In a quantum computer circuit. And there's several articles on this phenomenon just in the last few years. Um so it's looking like quantum computers you know, might be more than just sophisticated number crunchers. I mean, it looks like, you know, quantum computers might eventually make possible communication across time. Uh this is a possibility that uh if you saw the Did you see the television show The Peripheral? No. Uh it's based on a novel by William Gibson. He wrote The Neuromancer back in the early '80s. He was sort of predicted, you know, cyberspace and everything. Well, his novel The Peripheral and they made it into a an Amazon series a couple years ago. Uh is about people using a quantum computer server to communicate across time. And uh yeah. And so but that if if what's being shown in these early this early these are early days of quantum computing, if it pans out that oh yeah, this is you know, it's not this isn't about sort of spatial non-locality. You'll hear that word non-locality a lot. It's about temporal locality. Right. And uh you know, if if if that's if that these these threads from quantum computing are true, if these threads of quantum biology hold, you know, that indeed the brain is a quantum computer or involves quantum computation. Well, right there you would have a a physical explanation for how information from the future could get into the past. And how we could have precognitive dreams or we could have exactly happen to you where it's like, oh, thought comes into your head about this random person you haven't thought of in in ages and suddenly you get a call from them. You know, what if this is always happening? Right. what if this is always happening and that we are that's kind of a part of like a guidance system or or um the the the analogy I draw in my dream workbook is to uh imagine imagine the you the usefulness of something like this in like a safety device. Like and so I imagine like well, you know, my you know, my 2030 Tesla, okay, has a quantum airbag, okay, and it deploys a second before a collision. Not because it predicts the collision, but because it's got a quantum computer and it knows when there's inevitably going to be a collision, so it deploys my airbag just a second earlier to, you know, to enhance my survival. Well, what if that's what if we're going through li- life with this quantum airbag that essentially cushions us against like shocks That gets pretty philosophical though, doesn't it? Extremely. Yeah. Yeah. I'm hoping we run out of time before we have to talk about free will because the free will question is so Yeah, it's it's it hovers over all of this, but Yeah, how does that change your life when you know that you everything that's going to happen in your life is already predetermined? What does that even mean? Well, you Right, that's a great question and I can't answer it for you like just sitting here. I mean, I can I've addressed this in in in my books. I talk about a lot in the new book. I think uh uh First of all, I think free will is you know, not the most helpful thing because it it bogs you down. Like why worry about it? Like we we feel like we have free will. Our action My actions right now affect you know, the next moment. It affects the next, you know, our our action, you know, we we can't help we can't escape what we experience as free will. So, bored philosophers keeping them busy. Right. I mean, it essentially essentially it is. I mean, I Okay, so my my tradition my spiritual tradition, I would say, is Zen. All right? And one of the things that comes through again and again in Zen enlightenment experiences is is that you don't need free will. Free will is a kind of a mirage and it's actually really blissful when you kind of break through this this idea of free will and this worry about free will and this sense of having free will. In fact, like whenever you are the most like successful at whatever it is you do uh whatever flow state you get into with whatever your your your athletic or creative or whatever or when you're driving a car, you're not thinking about you're not exerting free conscious free will. You're like your unconscious is in complete control. Right. Um back in uh uh back in the late '70s and early '80s, this um uh guy named Benjamin Libet, a neuroscientist. You may have heard of him. Uh he performed some really fascinating experiments that were really troubling uh for people because they showed that that our our nerves would initiate an action like like a half second before we were consciously aware of it, okay? Whoa. Right. Which you can interpret that in multiple ways. Uh and the way that a lot of people interpreted it was that well, free will is just a complete exert, you know, the sense that we have of being consciously in control of our lives is completely a mirage. Another way of looking at it is that we are controlling our lives but from the future. That we are that we are reflecting back on on you know, think about how you I don't know if you do a martial art or something. I I used to I used to do martial arts and you'd make a particular move and you you'd replay it in your head, you know, like a successful movie. You you'd replay it in your head. Well, what if that mental replay, what if your what if you are that mental replay is actually causing maybe you are actually pulling your your meat puppet's strings from a position displaced into your future. And that that's what free will and agency, what if that's what it is? It's kind of rich retrocausation in the body. Um yes, it raises like like a may- there's amazing implications of retrocausation and its biological physical manifestations as precognition or what Daryl Bem called pre-sentiment, you know, feeling feeling the future without being consciously aware. I think that's that's where it really mostly manifests, you know, we're not consciously aware of um seeing the future. I mean, that occasionally happens like in visions, people have precognitive visions. Um but most of the time it's just it's controlling us unconsciously. And uh and the the the implications if this exists at all, then Isn't isn't astonishing? It's astonishing and it and it and it's I I I find it incredibly exciting because it's like we have it's like since the enlightenment, you know, if you can divide time into, you know, past and future and then there's this line of the present in the middle of it. All we've been looking at causally for, you know, the last three centuries in the enlightenment, is this this left half, you know? But there's this whole right half, the future, that is I think and a and a growing number of physicists even think is influencing our actions and influencing what happens in the in the physical world that we just have like had a mental block to because we threw out teleology with God, you know, three centuries ago. Okay, so time loops. Um it's kind of hard to conceptualize. So, we got here some of your infographics that explain how the explains how this works. So, it says a a time loop is a causally circular formation in a in the block universe. An effect retro influences its own causes. Okay, so on one side so, you have a line going through the center of this loop, right? And on what and then the line represents time going forward from the present to the future. Mhm. And on the left side of it, we have information traveling backwards in time carried by strong emotion. And on the right side of the line, we have another curved arrow that is freely willed actions that lead to future outcomes. Okay. So, if we were like thinking about the Daryl Bem experiment, that would be a good example. Okay. You know, clicking on a a curtain and suddenly being rewarded or or seeing a an erotic picture, you know, that's a reward. You know, that's like acting like one of you know, a treat if you were training a dog or a dolphin, you know, give him a sardine. It's like it's like a reward. It's and and it's those little those little rewards uh you know, somehow we don't know the mechanism, but somehow those rewards get travel backward in time. Not only rewards, but also traumas of various kinds. So, that's why you know, people often have you know, if they're aware of precognition, it's often in the context of having a dream about a loved one's death for instance. Um Okay, this is interesting when you look at it this way. Cuz this is not how I was thinking about it originally. So, in the present like we could have like you could think of this sort of like as ambition, right? Like if you're ambitious throughout your life to achieve something or you know that you want to do something with your life, all of your actions are go are going to be directed towards achieving this goal that you think that your life that you were destined to do. Like you being a writer, right? Or me doing podcasts. Um so essentially the idea is that if so somebody has a and tell me if I'm completely butchering this, but if somebody has some sort of an idea early on in life about what they want to do with their life and then they go to college, they get a job, they start writing books, they become a super famous published author. Um essentially that this happened in reverse somehow. Like this already happened and it's coming back to them, which is why they're inspired to do this in the first place. Right. Right. Okay. The question is how pervasive is this, you know, how how much of an effect is this? How much of an effect does the future have on the past? And that's an open question. I mean, it's like obviously it's not it's not like an incredibly strong effect or we'd be more aware of it. It's a it is a subtle effect, you know, and and you know, even in quantum physics, I mean, you you can say, you know, talking about you know, the direction if if you know, you know, a lot about a uh the position of an electron, you don't know much about its velocity, but you know some I mean, you there's a there's a way in which we know most of what we need to know from classical physics that moves from back to the future backwards. I'm sorry, back from the past to the future. Yes. Um but we don't know everything. And there's that that's that uncertain component that is coming from the future. So there is like an asymmetry, you know, I think anything anyone who studies this would say, "Yeah, there's an asymmetry there." Um and why there's that asymmetry, I mean, who knows? I mean, that's you're getting into you know realms that we can't even address yet. But uh some some component of the way the world is at this moment is a result of things causes propagating backward in time uh versus causes just causes going forward in time from the past. Um and the the idea the reason why quantum computers are so important in this is that uh you know, it doesn't really matter you know, this idea of well, the the fact that randomness is really retrocausation. It doesn't matter for just you know, matter. You know, it doesn't doesn't matter for predicting. We don't need to know about retrocausation if we're going to predict you know, the you know, planets and weather and things like that. Where it becomes important is when that little retrocausal factor at the micro micro scale the quantum is scaled up somehow and made coherent at a larger scale. And that's what a quantum computer is because what a quantum computer is is a matrix of of electrons or some particle that they're all entangled. You know, they're all entangled as that is to say they act uh as a unit. You know, they all act together. So, you do something to affect one of those particles, it affects the whole thing you know, simultaneously. And and uh if you can create a system like that and if that entanglement is really a temporal entanglement like where it's entangled with our its future or what's going to happen in the future, then you can you can create a system for uh where a system, whether it be a living system or a mechanical system can be influenced by things in the future in a coherent way. You're talking about like deja vu? Well, people have argued that deja vu is a a kind of symptom of precognition that that uh you suddenly have an experience that you you feels familiar and you don't know how. Well, maybe you had a dream and you can't remember the dream, but you you know, you there's that feeling of familiarity. It It's complicated with deja vu because you can artificially induce deja vu. I think you can you can like probe a certain part of the brain and give someone the sensation that they've experienced this before. So, the possibility that this is just a brain misfiring, I think you have to kind of keep that possibility. So, that's why I'm I'm I I hesitate to say that deja vu is necessarily about precognition. But, a lot of people through the years have argued exactly what you're saying. What other slides we got here, Steve? Um Well, let's see what we got. Oh. Oh, this is the block universe. Past, present, and future really coexist. Objects travel along world lines from past to future mostly. Okay, so this is showing a um a graph. At the vertical axis is space and the the horizontal is time. And um can you explain this a little better or not it's not a really a graph. It's just a a representation of space-time. Now, when Einstein's discoveries in the early years of the century really revealed that we live in a four-dimensional, not three-dimensional, universe. You know, it's uh and that that added dimension is time. Um now, people have speculated about higher dimensions than fourth, but let's just stick to four because, you know, you can't It's very It's very hard to visualize this and that's is why anytime you're going to visualize a four-dimensional space-time, you've got to get rid of at least one of those spatial dimensions and turn it into time and make it something solid like we're seeing in this diagram. You know, this is a big just imagine a big glass brick, you know, essentially and things travel thing anything like a particle or an or a person, you know, we are world lines. We we extend through time. Got it. And uh uh actually yeah. And mostly we extend in one you know, the the Well, yeah, that world line is generally not tangled, but there are it's possible to have a loop in that world line and that's what wormholes are for instance. That's not that's not how I think precognition works, but this is just an example of how you can have an object that kind of makes a loop in space-time. Uh and uh wormholes allow objects to travel backward in time and then resume their journey back to the future. Okay. Particles also carry some quantum information backwards along their world lines from future interactions to previous ones. Okay, this offers an alternate explanation for entanglement. Okay. Entanglement is the idea that I'm sure you've heard about from other people on your show. It's sort of often thrown around as an explanation for not only psychic phenomena, but uh things having to do with UFOs and so on. Um it's this kind of mysterious fact that if you take two particles that have been in contact and then you take them and separate them even they could be separated by the length of the universe. You do something you to measure one of those particles, the other one is going to show a corresponding measurement. And the way this is usually imagined is that it's they're somehow communing across space. Again, we think we we we have a hard time thinking in terms of time. So, the assumption of most physicists, the kind of mental image they have is of of it they're somehow exchanging information even though they know that that's not possible that things you know they there's not telepathy on the level of you know of electrons but one of the possibilities and this was originally proposed by a physicist named Olivier Costa de Beauregard and he offered it back in the 50s but it was never nothing was much done with it and then a philosopher I believe who sort of got into quantum physics named Hugh Price in Australia wrote a really good book in the 90s arguing that wait a minute this is an possible explanation for entanglement that that that instead of these particles sort of simultaneously communicating that whatever you do to measure particle B sends information backward in time to where it was it was in contact with particle A so that automatically particle A contains some of that information from measurement of particle from the measurement of particle B so it's what he calls what Costa de Beauregard called it the Parisian zigzag he was a French so so so these causes travel zigzag paths in space-time and that that's an alternative explanation for for this thing called quantum entanglement and what people people in the paranormal world and who study ESP like the concept of entanglement because again the usual explanation is that it means it entails what's called non-locality that that that being in a certain place doesn't matter because you're connected somehow across space to other things and maybe our minds are connected across space to to a target in a remote viewing experiment or my mind might be connected to yours in telepathy or whatever the alternative if if it if they're really connected across time that makes what I'm arguing possible about about the brain or a person being connected through time to itself. Right. Have Have there ever been any studies that you're aware of uh on the acts you know accessing alternate timelines or alternate spaces in time or parallel universes with with drugs? There's a guy I had in here uh Andrew Gallimore what he's doing in Tokyo is he's doing this thing called DMTX where it's DMT extended state research where he puts people on an IV drip of DMT for a long period of time multiple hours in a day brings them out and then basically he's just trying to map the DMT realm and this is very similar to what he talks about. Well, it depends on your interpretation of of quantum physics. A lot of people assume again that this is a thing about spatial non-locality and one of the interpretations of that uh that goes along with that is the idea of many worlds or multiple parallel timelines. So there's the idea that what what people are accessing in altered states or in dreams or whatever is some other timeline. But actually the retrocausal interpretation argues against that. That's one timeline. That it's one timeline. And so what you're accessing in those states is really uh in some way or another precognitive information or it's your your accessing potentially uh you know things happening in the future mashed up with things in the past or whatever in that kind of symbolically distorted way that that uh that precognitive dreamers are become aware of when they start to study this stuff. That's the that's the the alternative argument. I'm not a yeah, I'm not a fan of the many worlds interpretation. No. Yeah, and and a lot of people in quantum computing will talk in these exactly the terms that you're talking about because again that's the kind of favored interpretation of what happens with entanglement is that is that that uh or I'm sorry, not entanglement, superposition. Okay, this is another technical term from quantum computing, but the way quantum computers work is that they're able uh to take multiple states simultaneously, or that's that's how it's thought of. It's called superposition, so so it's kind of like parallel computing or parallel processing, but uh but the particles are in multiple you know, it's a superposition of multiple states simultaneously, so you get this amped-up computing power because you're capitalizing on all those possibilities. And so people in quantum computing often think that okay, well, this means that quantum computers are somehow accessing alternate realities or alternate timelines. But if if it's really retrocausation that's going on, then we're truly talking about the computer is accessing its future. Not an alternate timeline, it's computing across its lifespan essentially. And the prediction of this now the prediction here would be that the power of a quantum computer would be dictated by how long you leave it plugged in. Essentially, its computing power would be dictated by, you know, the longer you leave it plugged in, the more processing it has because it has more time uh that it's that it's using its whole future, you know. That's a good point. Um Going back to what you were talking about earlier, I think we you mentioned P.K. Dick earlier. This is something that he's been he writes wrote wrote wrote wrote about a lot. You know, he has that novel or that famous story he wrote, I think it was Man in the High Castle or something like that. There was a a series made on it, which was fascinating. Yeah, he loved he loved the many worlds thing, and that's it's a favorite of science fiction writers, you know, it's like it's it's certainly a fun idea, you know, to think about multiple parallel realities, and and who knows, that that could be true, too. And it's not it's not what I'm saying is not necessarily you know, prohibit that. But um but he yeah, he's a great example actually of a precognitive artist. I mean, he's uh a lot of uh you know, he wrote a lot about precognition because he experienced it, you know, again and again and again in his life and in his works. Like he was aware he was hyper aware of how he would write a story and then, you know, a year later what he wrote about would come true. So, an example of this would be um you know, he wrote a story in I think 1960 two, I believe. Um about these entrepreneurs uh creating this robot Abraham Lincoln. Okay? Uh and no one was interested in the story, so it it just went on published. And then a year later, Disney Disneyland unveiled its animatronic Abraham Lincoln. It's like one of its perennially favorite exhibits. How many years later was this? One year. Wow. Yeah. Um but there was a a million examples of of like that in Phil Dick's life. I mean, he would write about a certain idea and then he would read about it uh a year later. Like he was really like he would read popular science magazines and stuff and um like he wrote his novel um uh I think it's a Scanner Darkly talks about like split brain stuff the idea of the hemispheres being split and the effects of that. Well, like a year after he wrote that story or less than a year after he drafted his story, he read an article about split brain research, you know, and it's something that he didn't know anything about before he wrote this story. But he was he was doing that again and again. His novel Ubik um was about this fictional spray can product called Ubik which has all these time-retarding properties. Um and also like affects the the atmosphere in some weird way. Well, this was he wrote this like a couple years before um before the the effects of aerosols on the ozone layer became people became aware of that and started like focusing on that as a focus of ecological you know, concern. Yes, became like a symbol of the of of ecology and protecting the environment in the 1970s. The idea of like spray cans. Well, he essentially wrote about that, you know, a couple years beforehand and also the idea of retarding time was he read an article about that from a Russian researcher like a year after he he wrote the novel. And so he thought, look, I was precognizing this article when I wrote this story. And so this this happened again and again in his life. I mean, he would write about a character, you know, with a certain kind of character and then he would he would meet that person in real life. His story about about the the Abraham Lincoln thing, what makes it more kind of amazing than that he predicted a robot Abraham Lincoln is that the story really focuses on one of the entrepreneurs has this kind of crush on on this young woman that they hire to kind of apply makeup to the Abraham Lincoln and make it look really realistic, okay? All right, well years and years later he wrote that story. Well, he wrote that story when he was living in I think in the Bay Area in California, but he then moved to Orange County which is where Disneyland is or near where Disneyland is and he discovered that this woman in his apartment building worked at Disneyland. He said, "Oh, what do you do?" He says, "Oh, I apply makeup to the animatronic Lincoln late at night, you know, to make it look realistic. He's like this was happening all the time in his life. And yeah, he was one of the smartest really people about this topic of precognition. He he he understood that he was he was somehow in contact with his And he wrote about precognition. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. He's he's the he's the guy that we get the term precog from. He he wrote about precogs in his story The Minority Report, which they turned into a movie. That was his story? his story, yeah. god. Yeah. So, yeah, the idea of precogs who can like predict crimes and then you have a police unit that goes and prevents these crimes from happening because they were precognized. Um Yeah, that's that's Phil Dick. Yeah, he was he was an amazing very troubled kind of [ __ ] up What kind of drugs was he on? Well, he was on he he people have this idea of him as this like super druggy. He did not I don't think use hallucinogens very much. No, he used to I think he'd tried them a few times. He I think he took a lot of amphetamines. He'd he'd been prescribed some amphetamine when he was a kid for some reason. And he had a lifelong I think maybe dependency I think. I'm not an expert on But no psychotropics? I I think he's I'm not I'm not an expert on that aspect of of Phil Dick, but he Yeah. I'm wondering I'm just like I'm trying to connect the dots here to see like if there's any sort of correlation between being able to have a an objective grip on what's going on here with the brain and like what what correlations there are between people who are more predisposed to this precognition than others. Well, I think that we're all precognitive, but as far as being aware of our precognition and accessing it more consciously, yeah, definitely there's a there are people on a certain end of a spectrum and people in psychiatry will sometimes talk about what's called schizotypy. All right? Um and it's sort of an axis of kind of being having a really powerful imagination and being suggestible and stuff like that without being necessarily schizophrenic. Um you can there are people sort of on the on one end of schizotypy who are prone to maybe hearing voices or having, you know, hallucinations occasionally, but that are still you know, able to function and so on. And these people are yeah, they're kinds of people who would be shamans, you know, in some cultures. And I think think that a lot of you know, a lot of those kinds of experiences, those um you often times those kinds of hallucinations, those waking, you know, visions or whatever that don't fit, you know, psychics become aware, you know, be able to tell, oh, wait a minute, you know, this might be a this might come true, you know, and and often that's the case. I certainly wouldn't say that for all or most hallucinations, but but that's one way in which this can be accessed and people who are sort of high on that dimension of schizotypy Yeah. may, you know, be prone or or able to access and be aware of precognition in their in their waking life more than others. Yeah, it's it's it's also interesting cuz we actually had a guy in here the other day who was wrote a bunch of books on near-death experiences. And it's I know there's correlations with people that are able to have these precognitive abilities that appear after near-death experiences. And there's this there's this hypothesis or this theory, the brain filter theory. I forget what it's exactly called, but it's basically the idea that the brain is a filter. The brain is there to filter out all the things that could exist here, so that we can only um associate or we can only sense the things that matter to us for our survival and reproduction and everything else, right? And the I the connection with near-death experiences is the one thing that they do is they can sort of shut the brain down for a period of time. And it is that Does that mean when the brain is being shut down that this filter sort of breaks and now we can access more more? Can we access the future? Can we access the past? Um and there's multiple ways conventionally to do this, right? Meditation is a way to do this. Um psychedelics is a way to do this. Car crashes can shut down your brain. Lightning strikes. Jeff Kripal wrote a whole book about a lady who was struck by lightning. Elizabeth Cron Elizabeth Cron, yeah, and she had some crazy experience where she was drawn to the afterlife or some other realm where she could see herself laying there on the ground dead. Mhm. And she decided to re-enter her body and after that she had all these precognitive abilities. Right. Right. Which is Yeah, I mean her her she's one of the most interesting modern cases of and well-documented cases of precognitive dreaming. I mean, she's uh uh you know, her her precognitive dreams are are are phenomenal. Again, like uh Day Oh, David Mandell, that's the name of the painter I was trying to think of. Oh, okay. I told you it would come to me. was right. It came to him. David Mandell painting of uh 9/11. Yeah. Um uh uh Elizabeth Cron on her own before she ever uh met Jeff Kripal, I mean, she learned to send herself emails. Yeah, that's the guy. Uh she learned to send herself um The the black and white one in front of the clock. What? The black and white one? Right. Yep. Yep, this one. Yep. Yep. Blow that one up. She Yeah, she learned to send herself emails, which provides a a date and timestamp, you know, and to prove to herself, right, and to keep a record of these things. Um Uh so, she Yeah, she had some some incredible uh dreams. She You know, one of them is she dreamed of a of American jet uh landing somehow in New in the water in New York. And she had this dream she was actually on vacation in Israel at the time, and then like a few hours later, uh the Miracle on the Hudson occurs, where Right. Captain Sullenberger piloted to a safe landing on the water. And the thing is, she saw in this dream, she saw people standing on the wings. And it was like, that's impossible, you know, but then the pictures that went viral on the internet and in the in the media after this event were all of the all the passengers standing on the wings waiting to be rescued. So, it's that kind of Mhm. you know. So, skeptics will say, well, you know, we're we're going to have dreams that match some later event just because of randomness, you know, like it's you know, it's going to happen inevitably because of statistics. But no, that's not how it works. I mean, it's a precognitive dream has these very specific details Mhm. that that, you know, you can't say that in a life of dreaming, you're going to randomly have a dream about people standing on the wings of a plane that's landed in the water, you know, just hours before it happens in real life. I mean, that's just it it skeptics who who throw out this possibility or dismiss this possibility just have not looked at the evidence. Mhm. Have you noticed any um any correlation between like the age of people who have these precognitions? I know cuz there's been a lot of recounts um of children having more of this ability. I know Kripal talked about it. Yeah, I mean that was a little bit different. He was talking about children having dreams or memories of previous lives involving like very violent depictions of previous lives and he his idea about that is that um and it in these children's previous lives it was they were always males and he thinks that they were males because the males were more likely to die of very violent crimes and females and there's a connection between the trauma Yeah. and this ability. Yeah. Well, I don't know about the past lives stuff previous lives stuff, but the But even with UFOs with UFO stuff Yeah. The trauma he's right. He calls it the traumatic secret and it's you know people who are who are psychic or have this developed you know, ability there's some trauma there, you know, Elizabeth Krohn had had trauma. Um uh I forgot the I lost my train of thought again. Kids. Oh kids, right. So uh yes. I I don't think I don't know that anyone has studied this, but people who are younger are more prone to I think a lot of experiences that I think are related to precognition like out of body spontaneous out of body experiences uh lucid dreams. I know in my own case I used to have spontaneous out of body experiences and lucid dreams when I was in my teens and early adulthood. And then later when I became interested in this stuff consciously interested in this stuff uh as you know, in my middle age and I even like devoured for a while I was devouring books on like trying to induce out of body experiences. It's really hard, you know, and I was successful, you know, twice and you know, whereas when I was younger if I'd been doing this stuff when I was younger, probably would have been really easy. Um unfortunately, I wasn't interested in or I wasn't recording my dreams when I was young. Uh so, I don't know if I was having precognitive experiences, but I do know that my own kids, I have two small children, they they're doing this all the time. Uh Really? Yeah. I mean, my my oldest daughter, you know, I think she was probably around three. And we were standing in a in a uh a field a pasture with some horses. And the horses, there was like four horses, and they were just ambling around, and we were um particularly interested. We liked this one brown horse, and uh cuz we'd seen him before, and uh and she you know, you know, they're just ambling around in the in the fields. We're just sitting there just kind of enjoying this. This was in Colorado, near my mom's house. And she said, "He's going to run from there over to there." And I'm like, whatever, you know, just I just kind of didn't pay attention to it. Anyway, a few minutes later, they all the horses kind of slowly ambled back into their barn, which was along over on the right side of the this big pasture. And so, we kind of like got up and started started to walk away. And all of a sudden, that one brown horse charges out of that barn and ran from the left of the on the right side of the pasture to the left, just exactly what she had said was going to happen. And but the thing is, this kind of stuff happens all the time if you pay attention to to little kids, and don't have your mind closed uh to this possibility. You know? Uh yes, so I think yeah, I think that we're yes, I think we all have this, and we're all we're born with it. It's part of our cognitive makeup. And and it's always operating under, you know, below the level of conscious awareness. Um and, you know, if we lived in a another society that that kind of just accepted this, it wouldn't be strange at all that that a kid will, you know, utter some strange thing and then have it happen a few minutes later or, you know. What's going on with lucid dreaming lucid dreaming? Is there Is there a protocol you're aware of to induce this? And then And then what is the How does that fit into everything? Oh, yeah, people have written A ton of people have written books on lucid dreaming and how to have lucid dreams. And I uh I I I'm not an expert at it and I wouldn't want to tell I mean, I If you just Google it, you'll find, you know, a lot of books on it. Um but as far as what they are and so on, I I've noticed in my own case that they're very often uh very often precognitive or I'm I'm able to Whether they're more precognitive than other dreams, I don't know if that's even a meaningful distinction, but they're it's When I have a lucid dream, I always am sure to write write it down because it's very often uh will relate to something that happens uh shortly thereafter. Um And I personally think that that so-called out-of-body experiences may be sort of on the same on a continuum with lucid dreams that that it may be that there's just some sense in which some of these dreams just feel very much like you're in your physical environment. Uh um cuz I've had a couple of the con- times I was successful at inducing an out-of-body experience, uh they were incredibly precognitive. Like in one case, precognitive of an event that happened exactly a year later. Hmm. I mean, it's uh the stuff is really stunning when you start to two times you were able to induce an out-of-body experience? Yes. Uh it was I'm forgetting the details of of of the second one. It wasn't as remarkable, but the first one was um I'd been reading one of the guides. There's a guy named Robert Bruce, and I think he's in Australia, who who writes guides to astral projection, sometimes called astral projection. Anyway, he has a set of protocols for doing this, and it involves, you know, meditating in a certain way and kind of really focusing on your body. Ironically enough, like a lot of the most, I think, important techniques for inducing all this stuff involve really focusing on your body, you know, it's not like trying to leave your body, it's trying to focus on your body in this kind of enhanced way and becoming more aware of of your sensations and so on. But anyway, I was meditating in this one way, and I try I had tried literally for months to to do this and without any success, but anyway, this one time I was like holy crap, and I was out of body. This is a complicated story, but it's it's kind of funny. I was out of body, and where I was was down the hall from my bedroom, down by the floor of by an opened kind of closet, all right? And I was like staring at my wife's shoes, cuz that's where she kept her shoes. And it was just the weirdest thing, but there was a I felt there was a weight on my back of my cat, one of my cats was somehow sitting on my back, all right? Um, uh, and then and then it shifted. So, I I I didn't have a sensation of like flying, but then I had a sensation of being up by the ceiling in my office, which was just a few feet down the hall from there. I had a sensation of being up by the ceiling in my office, looking down out the window of my office and seeing these these two green lights, like these like almost like eyes, like looking at me, and it was just kind of like, what the you know, what the hell. Anyway, I immediately one of the instructions that Robert Bruce has is to keep your flight short. And like because if you if you stay too long, you're going to you're going to like not wake up and you're going to forget it. And and so you want to like like keep your flights short at first. And so I like immediately like I sort of had this I I immediately like basically flew back to my body and woke up and wrote all this stuff down. Um All right. So exactly, you know, and I'd forgotten by the time it came true, I'd forgotten about it, but at least I had a record. Uh exactly a year later, I think exactly minus a day or two is like it just just slightly off from a day from a year later. Uh I I was in that closet that I was I was I had opened that closet that I talked about. Uh to get out an Advil, actually, and I dropped it. Okay, I dropped on the on the ground. And I had I worried that my cat had eaten this Advil. All right? Because that's really toxic for for cats. And so I was like crawling around my wife's shoes trying to find this Advil that I dropped. And I I was really frustrated and I couldn't ultimately find it. And so I wound up There was a whole story where I had to take the cat to the vet emergency room and pump her stomach and stuff like that. Um she was fine. But but the fact that I had had this experience of rummaging on the floor by my wife's shoes with the sensation of a cat weighing on me, you know? I mean, she wasn't literally on me, but but I was worried about my cat because I was worried that she had had eaten this Advil. So uh I think it I don't know if it was that night or the next night, I was changing a light bulb. I was up on a ladder changing a light bulb in my office. And I looked down from that vantage point up by the ceiling in my office. And I saw this I would it was exactly the point of view from from the second part of that out-of-body experience. I looked down, I saw those two green lights reflect and and I saw what they were. They was the reflection of my power cord of my my laptop created this little it has a little green light. If you have an Apple laptop, it has a little green light when it's charging on the power cord where it attaches to the computer. And it was reflected it was right up against the window so it was reflected in the window and there was so it looked like two little green lights like two little green eyes. But it was obvious when I was stare looking down at it that that's what it was. So this was exactly a year after I'd had an out of what I thought was an out-of-body experience with both of these these you know these these two kind of this two-part out-of-body experience. Turned out it was precognitive. It was a precognitive precognitive experience of an of two in-body experiences a year later. That's wild. Um so I propose I mean I talk about this at the end of my dream work book. I have no you know I can't say that that's what all out-of-body experiences are at all, but I suggest that people who are interested in this consider that possibility and when they have an out-of-body experience write it down, treat it as a dream, and see if it you know if in your real life you have this experience physically Right. later. So I don't know I are all out-of-body experiences that? I certainly couldn't say that. But since it's happened to me um you know it's it that possibility interests me. That's fascinating, man. Time loops. Well, thank you so much for coming on, Eric. I really appreciate this has been a fascinating conversation. Where can people find your books, find more about you, get in contact with you? Sure. So, my books are available anywhere where they're where you take obtain books on the internet. I won't name names there, but you know Yeah, I'll link them below, too. Yeah. Uh Your website? Uh I have a website, I have a blog. Uh it's called The Night Shirt. Uh I don't add to it that much lately, but I have a lot of, you know, many years of articles on precognition um on my blog, and I'm on Twitter. Uh There we go. Twitter address is The Night Shirt, all one word. Um I encourage people to follow me on Twitter, and if they want to reach out to me, they can uh DM me on Twitter. That's probably the best. That is not me. Uh There I am. There we go. Yep. And that what you saw Beautiful. what you saw there briefly was the um uh my new book, uh which is uh by the time your viewers see this, it is already out. Awesome. And uh we got some stuff to talk about on Patreon, as well. Okay. So, well, we're going to keep going there, but uh for everybody, thanks for watching, and good night.