Thanks a lot for doing this. How long were you at  CIA? I joined the CIA in 2013. I was in the State Department before that. Private sector. I served a  second Ranger Battalion before that. Second Ranger Battalion, State Department, CIA. When did  you leave CIA? I retired on 30 June, so real recently. Month ago. Yep. Yep. Um, last year you  became a whistleblower. It was before last year, but yes. Um, I think it started long before last  year and it had to do with vaccine mandates, which is a separate topic from co origins, but yes. Um,  you you first came to my attention anyway for and thank you for fighting vaccine mandates, one of  the most evil things this country's ever done. Um, but COVID origins, you just you went very public.  You testified in the Congress. Why did you decide to do that? Well, there's a subpoena that  helps make a decision process. Okay. So, no, but in all in all honesty, I I came forward  um and I had done a transcribed interview for 6 hours and 40 minutes be behind closed doors with  uh the Homeland Security and Government Affairs Committee when it looked like that the CIA was  obstructing our investigation. when it looked like um every obstacle was being put in place. Um  when the subpoena came, I was frankly I was happy to go. I was happy to to speak publicly.  But then you become I mean you're in a different category once you do that. I think um that's a  big decision, isn't it? It is. It is. You know, I I had I hate to say it, I had some practice with  the co COVID vaccine mandates and and frankly, you know, maybe we'll be touching on this  earlier, but that story that came out publicly uh on May 13th in front of uh Senator Ran Paul's  committee, um I had passed that story to the Senate Select Committee of on Intelligence in  April of 2024. I'd also given it to the home uh to the House Permanent Select Committee on  Intelligence, two oversight bodies in 2023. And the first time I came and spoke to the House  Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence on CO origins was actually in November of 2021.  Now, the story was a little different then, but I came forward multiple times trying to let  them know that we're being lied to. So those two committees you you pronounced their for I mean you  spelled out their formal names but just the house and senate intel committees the oversight committ  this is the legislative branches oversight of the most powerful arguably the most powerful agencies  in the government which have very little civilian control particularly CIA I think there only other  what three appointees at CIA I believe three appointees which is in my opinion not enough. Oh,  it's totally crazy cuz it means whoever's elected by the public doesn't have any control over this  agency, which I think is proven true. But anyway, the control is supposed to come from the Congress  in the form of these two committees. Mhm. So when you tell them something really rotten is  happening in CIA where you work, you expect they're going to do something about it. I did and  I think CO opened my eyes. Um I was naive. I was uh I was an operations officer. So I I didn't I  most of the time I spent most of my time out in the field uh collecting intelligence, recruiting  spies. That was my job. I was not an analyst. I was not collecting other people's intelligence and  turning it into finished intelligence. And I was a bit naive about the You were doing the traditional  work. When people hear the term CIA, they think of what you were doing for a living. Yes. Which is  not what most people there do. Correct. Correct. um you know the director of operations does  the conducts the operations for the agency. We collect the intelligence and and this is why  this whole living in foreign countries. Correct. You know I I was gifted many things uh from the  agency. I was gifted Mandarin language training, Arabic language training. Um probably could use  some brush up on Arabic, but my Mandarin's still pretty good. Um you know, and they they give us a  lot of authority to live and work overseas. I love the job. I love the job. And despite everything  that's happened, I actually still think if you're a uh motivated uh critical thinker, you you should  try and get into the director of operations. It is a fun job. It's a good job. I I tried to get in  for that exact reason. Probably never should have admitted that cuz I've been accused of being a  tool of CIA ever since, which I'm not. Uh I think the interview will make it clear I'm not, but I  just for that reason I thought it sound like a very interesting job. Interesting job. You don't  think about the politics. There's no politics in the field. It's about it's such a small group  of people that you get to come back and talk to about what you're doing. So if you're in the  office, you come back and you're like, "Hey, I collected this intelligence. I recruited this  spy. I did this operational act." Um the only people who can cheer you on are is that small  fraternity of people. And so it's it's a special it's a it was a blessing and a gift. Everything  good in my life was touched by working at the CIA, which is why CO woke me up to sort of the mess. I  mean, we're supposed to be and people laugh when I say So, you're not living in MLAN, Virginia at  headquarter near headquarter. You're like abroad, right? For a lot of time. Oh, most of my career.  Yeah, it was abroad. Was abroad and um I loved it. Yeah, I I finally came back to headquarters  uh in 2019 uh right before CO hit. And being a CIA case officer or even any intelligence  officer, your job and people are going to laugh especially when you say CIA, our job is truth.  So, we go out, we we go into this sea of misinformation, lies, different types of motives,  and we're supposed to pull out that little tiny nugget of truth, write it up, and present it to  policy makers so that they can make wise decisions in the most altruistic way. That is what we're  supposed to do. And what co revealed was most of us don't most of the agency, they lost their sense  of discernment. They they gave up on taking a hard look at what was happening all around them. And  I I I I could not believe I mean I was running um work on financial intelligence against strategic  rivals and I had an office. I was running two big branches and um I had like seven people who'd come  into my office every day and like we're not crazy. This we're not crazy. this this masking this thing  where they want to test us all the time like this shot. We're not crazy. This doesn't seem right. Um  and that was that's what started me down the road. Um there was few other things before that. It  was you know few other things before that that uh opened my eyes. But um I'm also a slow learner. I  mean I spent some time in the Middle East looking at dumpster fires saying well you know I know  we didn't actually get this done but thank God we're here for democracy. So, I mean, I I I own  that. You believe that? I did. I did for a long time. I I no longer um I think that we probably  should take a good hard look at the decisions we're making on foreign policy. And I think um  that whole thing about no new foreign wars was probably a good good idea. Most Americans were  strongly in favor of that plank in the platform. Home ownership has always been at the center  of the American dream. It is an actual asset, a place people work their entire lives to build,  a place of stability and security and real value. Right now though, too many homeowners are stuck  swiping credit cards to cover groceries. There's basically a survival tax of 20% interest or  more. So why keep handing your money to the banks when you could keep it for [music] your  family? Interest is what kills you. Our friends at American Financing have a better way. They're  helping homeowners use their hard-earned equity, and they're supporting Americans looking to  fulfill their dream of owning a home. With mortgage rates currently in the fives, American  Financing saves its customers an average of $800 a month. That's about 10 grand a year. It's  not just a loan, it's a true financial reset. We recommend American Financing. They're called  America's Home for Home Loans for a reason. So, get out of credit card debt. I mean, it is  just crazy to borrow money. No judgment, but it doesn't make any sense to borrow money at  that rate. If you want out, call 800685-55696. 800685-55696 or visit americanf  financing.net/tucker. Um, so you come out in this, let's just start with your  testimony before Rand Paul's committee about COVID origins. So just point blank, where did CO  come from? Do you believe it was a lab incident? It was a lab incident in Wuhan and um it spread  from it was already the cat was already out of the bag. Um I think if I you know people look at  my public testimony um I I'm convinced that the intelligence community could have made a pretty  sound assessment by mid 2020 that there was a significant uh chance that this was some variety  of lab incident that occurred that caused this pandemic. and a lab incident um changes how we  view public health uh public health policy. So if it's a natural incident, I have a feeling,  you know, if if Americans, and I I said this during the testimony, if Americans knew that the  basis for the vaccines, for example, came from a nucleotide sequence that was given to us by the  Chinese government, and we just took it, put it into a computer model, and said, "Well, here's  our here's our vaccine." And people are like, "But didn't you just say it came from some lab in China  and Wuhan?" they probably would be a little more hesitant to put that in their body. I I personally  think any new technology is unwise to That's confirmed. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. We we got I  think it was I forget the exact date. It was early January. The nucleotide sequence was sent from um  the Chinese CDC over to I believe it was our CDC, but it was sent over to the health establishment  here in the United States. We took that and it was it was put into a computer modeling that  I mean my guess is there was probably a lot of previous work done on co um so on sorry on  corona virus research I should be precise on that uh there's all sorts of corona viruses that we've  been looking at over the over the years there was a famous outbreak of course in Asia um so do you  believe so you believe that the virus just escaped from the the lab, the famous lab in Wuhan. Do you  think it was an accident? I think that we need more data from the CIA to actually fill out what  Director Gabbard was doing. But yes, um I think that it escaped from a lab in Wuhan. And um it it  spread everywhere inadvertently. Inadvertently, I think I think there's no direct evidence right  now that says yes, they did it deliberately. Um that well that's quite a hedged answer.  There's no direct evidence right now that they did it deliberately. So the possibility exists.  Possibility exists because um I mean I'd love to give you a direct answer but the CIA would  have had to have given the information that was requested from director Gabard's director's  initiatives group that probably could have cleared everything up. We we when I conduct an  investigation, actually an intelligence operation, if I'm going after a target, I first thing I do  is put together a timeline, okay? A timeline of events, known things about the target that we're  we're investigating. If I don't have everything that goes in that timeline, I can't I can't give  you a full answer, right? And well, CIA simply refused to provide the information. And it's  uh it was obvious early in um the outbreak that this was from the lab. I mean there were Chinese  researchers who said it um and then subsequently as you know disappeared but people were saying  this from February of 2020. Yeah. And um and it always seemed likely to me but the US government  from the very beginning went along with this Panggalan lie. Yeah. And then subsequent to that,  even when it became obvious that it was a lie, we were describing continued the cover up. Why?  Well, um, part of the reason, I mean, Fouchy is part of that reason. And, you know, I'm going to  be very blunt about it. And since I'm going to be blunt and also give my opinion. Um, you know,  when I was sitting in front of uh the Senate, I wanted to make sure I was very accurate in  everything I said. But I don't want to give some supposition but I will give a little supposition  here as well. Um because you know I have a brain I think you know I've got synapses that fire off  and occasionally when I see data I don't you know if it looked yeah quacks like a duck right so  um I think Anthony Fouchy was fully aware that um the funding that had gone on for various types  of dangerous research dangerous gain of function research had been going on for a very long time.  Okay. Different viruses, different bacteria and um you know there are I see connections to for  for good good reasons as well. Bio defense I see connections to to to research that goes on. But  um I think they understood that a house of cards was going to fall down if this if this got out too  quickly that that there was a distinct possibility that American knowhow, American expertise  I mean we really do I mean I take a look at some of the scientists that the the IC relies on  for for expert advice. These people are really really impressive people. Okay. um you know they  they uh they receive funding to go do research, they're involved in health, they're involved in  biodense. All of a sudden, you've got a virus that looks boy, it sure there there's there's a  couple ties that tie the financing over to Wuhan, China. He had to know he had to know what that  looks like at the end of the day. So instead, based on everything that's out there, he gets the  proximal origins of SARS Cove 2 written with his buddies. That paper gets waved around the IC as  the end all be all as the paper to prove that yes, it's it's of zooonautic origin. Um, and he had  to know when he's pushing these type of experts, a variety of experts that he pushed towards the  IC once in February of 2020 and again in June of 2021. He pushes those experts in. Um, he he  wants to ensure that narrative is pushed at the IC level. And um unfortunately, I'm going  back to the comment I made before, you know, some people just appeared to swallow like hookline  and sinker. I there was actually I read an email where a very senior person and I I I wish I could  name names, but a very senior person waved that basically waved that paper around and said, "Well,  we've got our answer." that was in somebody who was in a position to to sort of influence not  sort of in a position to influence how the IC looked at SARS CO2. Why are they covering it up  now? Fouch's gone. New administration. I think that um there's an embarrassment piece again. I  I think you know you don't want to be caught with your pants down. I think that um you don't want  to be caught at all [clears throat] covering up for a global pandemic that killed hundreds of  thousands of people. Yeah. So there's I think um I think seen and hold on let me be very clear  about who doesn't want to be caught with their their pants down causing a global pandemic. Um the  very the senior people within um DNI's um the part of the DNI that's responsible for looking into WMD  matters and file weapons matters and the weapons and counterpreration center over at the CIA.  There's very senior people over there that had a heavy hand in what happened and it's not the analy  like the the technical analysts that were were pushing saying, "Hey, listen guys, this looks like  this is a lab leak." Their careers were destroyed for pushing it. This is the story that I I really  want to make sure gets out. I want to correct the record. They were not bribed. There was this there  was a number of analysts inside the CIA and they did everything in their power to include writing  a a little disscent email that went all the way up to the top of WCPMC saying, "Hey, listen guys,  we're technical experts." And I'm I'm paraphrasing obviously. We have this much expertise and it's  it looks like a lab leak. Their careers were destroyed after that. They weren't no longer part  of that establishment. And um if there's ever a So the entire leadership of CA swung behind this lie  that it was from an animal. Yeah. And why are they still doing it? Well, because because I Well, tell  you what, when the CIA produces the documents that were requested to help finish the investigation,  I think we'll have a better answer on why. How can CIA get away with not producing those documents or  documents from the Kennedy assassination 63 years ago, which they also haven't produced as you know?  How who allows that to happen? Oh, that's a that's a packed question. There's a few pieces to that.  So, senior managers allow it to happen inside the CIA. Um, and oversight to some extent lets it well  oversight has failed clearly over the years. I'm not criticizing right now. I just want to be  clear. I'm not I think actually Rick Crawford is on it right now. I'm definitely He'd be the  He'd be the member of Congress who oversees the House Intel Committee. Yes. Yes. So, historically  they've abdicated their their role in oversight and I let me give you an example. I want to give  you a very clear example. When I was a young officer, you know, not a young officer, but you  know, I had earned my stripes, done my work, and I was going to do my first meeting with a liaison  service. Now, most of the time it's it's like, "Good luck, buddy." "Yeah, have fun." I actually  had a senior officer pull me aside. He said, "Listen, here's how he sort of would be a foreign  intel foreign intel service." So, this is where you get declared to the foreign intel service.  You're no longer hiding from everybody. Uh and you're working together on goals that are you both  care about hopefully. And um he said, "Listen, this isn't going to go well. Here's how this is  going to happen. Here's what I need you to do." He did what rarely happens for CIA ops officers.  He trained the junior officer on how to handle the meeting. I was so grateful. Years later, and  I love the guy. Um, years later, he disagrees with me, by the way, on just about everything  of substance, but he's a great officer. And, um, he pulls me aside. I had gotten a job where I  was interacting with oversight on a very regular basis. My job was to ensure that the things that  were coming from the CIA that were going over to oversight were truthful, honest, we were we were  producing things that was valuable for them to actually do their job. So, and I had never really  done that kind of work. I'd dealt with oversight before. He says, "Here's how oversight works.  Take for example um we have to we are supposed to um report all of the organizations that have human  rights abuses that we work with. I mean the CIA works with bad people. That happens. That's it's  by statute. We're allowed to do that. But we have to report it. We have to make sure that they know.  So we give them a list and I don't know if it's quarterly or every other year or whatever it is,  but there's a report that comes out. And he said, "If he was explaining to me, let's say somebody  on the other side of the table says,"Hey, this service here, I don't like this. I don't  want you working with this service." Um, so he says, "How do you handle that?" I'm like,  "I don't know. You tell me." He goes, you say, "Well, just tell us to stop." And the meaning  is, "We know that you can tell us to stop, but you got to get everybody else to tell you to  stop. And if if we keep doing it, you got to get everybody else to pull the purse strings. And that  never happens. So like, you should just tell us to stop doing it. Then it's become a kabuki dance. In  my opinion, a kabuki dance. I sat in an oversight meeting that was 3 years after a a huge failure  happened. And they're asking the people sitting on the other side, the other people are are talking  to the the agency officers. are like, "Has anyone been held accountable for something that happened  3 years prior?" And uh the agency lawyer leans in and says, "We're holding the system accountable."  So unless [laughter] how are we doing that? I uh I don't I don't Well, if they're holding the  system accountable, they need some work cuz uh the system keeps chugging away. System's not a person.  Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Eating right is pretty important, but it's hard if you live here.  About half of the American diet is ultrarocessed foods, and that hurts you. Fake food harms your  body, your mind, and especially your liver. So, people think that feeling sluggish and foggy and  bloated is just what it is to be older. But that's not true. Eating crap makes you feel that way.  Well, our friends at Dose have a solution. It's called Dose for Your Liver. This doctor approved  plant-based liver supplement [music] is clinically proven to promote liver function and lower liver  enzyme levels. That means you're less bloated, less tired, you feel more like yourself. All  you need to do is take a daily 2 oz shot. Tastes [music] like orange juice. An easy shot of  liquid is not the vax. People we know use dose for your liver and they have seen rapid results  in their blood work and they feel much much better. The difference is very obvious. Lots of  brands claim to support liver health, but do so before their products have gone through testing.  This has been tested. Everything checks all the boxes. Visit dosedaily.co/tucker. Use the code  Tucker for 35% off. That's dosedaily.co/tucker. Code Tucker 35% off. You're going to love  it. Um, where does Tom Cotton, who is the senator who chairs the Senate Select Committee  on Intelligence, where does he fit into all this? Well, I think he's a cheerleader for everything  we do, he has no role in oversight. I think he's a complete cheerleader, and I'll give you a very  good example. I provide you a couple documents here. After my hearing, uh, Senator Ran Paul  sent another subpoena over to the ODNI saying, "We need all of this information." I'll leave it  with you. [snorts] We want it. Well, uh, Director Gabbard leaves. PY takes over. And, um, uh, PY  gets a a letter from, uh, Senator Tom Cotton's team saying, "Hey, listen. Here's what you need  to understand. Uh, [ __ ] maintains uh, oversight responsibility." Si is a Senate Intelligence  Senate Select Committee on Intelligence. We maintain privacy on on oversight for uh [clears  throat] these sort of matters. And so, hey, PY, make sure make sure that you consult us before you  decide to give anything over to them. Okay? And not only that, I said that I had done a 6-h hour  and 40minute transcribed interview in a skiff in March of this year for his gak. Republicans and  Democrats were both there. Well, let me clarify that the Democrat tried to leave, but I insisted  that he stay. No, I finished that transcribed interview. They won't give it back. They won't  give it back to his gak. [ __ ] will not give his gak is the sorry, the Homeland Security  Government Affairs Committee, the one that Ran Paul's on and Ron Johnson's on, uh, I think some  of the Democrats are on or Fedman, a few others, um, wouldn't know. They didn't show up to the  hearing. Um, so you know, [ __ ] is saying you can't have your own transcribed interview. [ __ ]  is saying we are the ones who have primacy over oversight over the intel community, but they're  not doing oversight. And how do I know they're not doing oversight? Already sort of mentioned  it. I went to [ __ ] in [clears throat] April of 2024 and I told them a story about six of seven  technical experts saying CO origins uh you know CO originated in a lab incident and they did  nothing with it in 2024. So of course Tom Cotton doesn't want somebody else digging into it cuz  it probably just exposes the failure of the their oversight. Tom Cotton is so clearly a tool of CIA.  Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, as far as I can tell, that guy, he's there to make sure that he protects  the CIA. But that's the opposite of what the job entails. That is exactly the opposite. Yes. Now,  his wife worked at CIA as an analyst in Langley. I don't know, [clears throat] but I believe I know.  And that is correct. I've talked to her about it. And so, I'm not blaming him. She's very nice. I'm  not attacking his wife, just to be clear. But um that's pretty close relationship for someone who's  going to be in charge of oversight of that same agency. Yeah, it's sort of like Fouchy having his  wife in charge of bioeththics. That's a that's an interesting little relation. So that's just again  I'm not accusing Mrs. Cotton of anything. She's a nice person and I think she's left CIA. But the  point is that's weird. And then Cotton's reflexive uh defense of CIA against everybody including the  Office of the Director of National Intelligence. is very very striking and his impulse always is  to hide more from the public. That isn't what we voted for. I'm very aware of that and you have to  and of course he's a very weird guy. I don't know him. Let me just say again, he's a very weird guy  and almost everybody I know on those committees, I know a bunch of members is a I mean Dan Krenshaw  was on the House Intel Committee. So it's like what is going on here? It feels like the IC  CIA probably taking the lead on this controls these people. How do they do that? You know, I'm I  hate to say this, but we've squandered a historic opportunity and director Radcliffe and Deputy  Director Michael Ellis. I think when history looks back, they're going to say that they were the  worst leadership team the CIA could have gotten. Of course. And it's and it's not because they're  it's because of what they're not doing. They have an opportunity for reform, but they've kept all  the same people that were involved in covering up COVID, covering up Havana syndrome. They're  all sitting in senior positions. And why would Trump So Radcliffe has been in contact with John  Brennan? Mhm. Right. And I've heard that. Do you believe that's true? I believe that's true. Right.  So Brennan is a sworn enemy of Trump. Mhm. So why would you ever in a million years, and Trump  has said a million times, I hate John Radcliffe, stripped him of his security clearance, why would  you put a guy he's in contact with in charge of CIA? Like, what the hell is that? I don't know. I  don't know. But what I You think that's weird? I think it's very weird. It's very weird. It's very  weird. And there's other data points that I think speak to this. Um, John Radcliffe, take the Trump  Russia collusion documents that Director Gabbard released in was it late July 2025. So those  documents were damning. I mean, it's treason what they were trying to do. It it was it was  like and I read the unredacted documents. I read the documents. This is our story. We're sticking  to it. Okay? You can't unread that and then go away thinking, "Boy, good thing we've got great  leadership at the IC." So that's all real. The thing is, director Radcliffe was director DNI. He  had possession of the documents that were released by Director Gabard when he was over at the DNI,  right? He could have released them. He could have released them when he was at DNI. Maybe he was  scared. I mean, the I mean, I could But Trump, that was he was he ran DNI in the in the first  term first term. So Trump knew this. Everyone knew that that John Radcliffe is also, by the way,  loyal to a foreign power. I would say, and he's in touch with Trump's enemies and he's doing nothing  to help Trump on the issues that Trump claims he cares about most. And then the first thing Trump  does when he gets elected is appoint that guy director of central intelligence. Like, what the  hell are we looking at? Yeah, I I I can't get into President Trump's head on that one, but what I can  do is Can you just affirm again my suspicion? This is like the weirdest thing that's ever happened.  Yeah, this is dumb. It's flatout dumb. Like, if if you want to be followed like he's he's  proven, President Trump has proven that there are people within the federal government that will  go to great lengths to destroy people. Yes. If you want to continue, especially him, if you want to  continue to be destroyed, this is exactly what you do. Exactly. So, it's dumb. I Well, dumb at best.  It sounds like made under duress to me. I don't know why any person would do that, and especially  with someone with finely honed self-preservation instincts, which Trump has. Why would you do  that? And I also noticed something else. Tell me if you have too that of all the appointees,  high level cabinet secretaries, big appointees in this administration, Rackcliffe has basically  received no scrutiny in the press at all. Yeah, neither did Rubio for the most part. Sorry.  Sorry. I wanted to add Fair. Thank Thank you. Um, but did you notice that? Of course I noticed  it. It's a CI director. You're one of the most powerful people in the world. Giant red flag. It's  a giant red flag to me. I'm sorry. You got to have if you're coming into one of those positions, I  want it doesn't matter who's in charge. I expect controversy. I want an argument over it. I want  to see people get mad about the person that's going. But to this day, most people have no idea  who the director of national intelligence is, right? And he's treated like a head of state when  he travels abroad. He runs CIA. We don't know what their budget is, what the I mean, it's incredibly  powerful agency, as you know better than I. So, and this guy, no one says a word about him. So,  that tells me that the American media are at the very least beholden to, if not controlled by CIA.  Like, where are they? Where's CNN? Where's the New York Times on this? Where's the Washington  Post? Yeah. I'm glad you mentioned the media cuz uh the media plays a huge role at this point  in in American freedom, our future. And like, take a look at the media blackout. Even on like  I'll personalize it here on May 13th, you would have thought every news outlet would want to hear  what what was happening behind the scenes during co Fox News was the only one that covered it. Um  and that happens all the time. It tells me that the media is controlled. The media is controlled  by the government. This this thing where we've got an independent media, it doesn't exist. Okay. And  that's a big problem for um government oversight. It's a big problem because whistleblowers who go  through the system, sorry, I'm going to pivot just a little here, but whistleblowers are essential  to holding the system accountable, but to honest government to honest government. So, I can tell  you I've I've I've personally walked through the system and it's so broken that now when people  come to me and say, "Should I be a whistleblower?" I tell them no. And that's the honest I say the  only reason you should be a whistleblower is if you're prepared to lose everything. Okay? Because  you're not gonna you're not going to get a gold star when you're done. Okay? It's not going to  make it good for you personally. It's not going to be make it good for you professionally.  And if you say go through the IC system, they continue to investigate themselves and find  no wrongdoing. If you go to the ICIG, I went to the ICIG and I tried to get them to intelligence  inspector general. Thank you. I apologize. No, no, it's all right. The internal watchdog. Yeah,  the internal watchdog. The the And Chris Fox, by the way, I think is another one I should mention  specifically. I think he's got the the spine to try and get something done to to clean things up.  And I said that in my testimony. But let's say you go through the whole system and you realize, "Oh  my gosh, the system is broken. What do I do now? Well, that last line of defense, the last line  of defense for a free society is a free media. And let's say you want to you're like, you know  what? I this is wrong. I have to do something. And you say, I'm going to go to the media. Well, that  is that's Russian roulette. Okay. And by the way, let me be perfectly clear. I am not advocating  that people with classified information go immediately to the media and just start spouting  their mouth off. That is not what I'm saying. No, they should just dump it on the internet. That's  what I think. Put it on the blockchain. Just want to be clear. Okay. I am advocating for that and  I do think that people with relevant classified information should disclose it to the public. They  should. They should. Um, but I don't blame any of them for not. The system is broken. Christians  ought to be safe in the Holy Land of all places, but they are not. Keep in mind, these are the  descendants of the first converts, the first people who followed Jesus. people whose families  have worshiped in the land Jesus walked for centuries, for thousands of years. And these same  people are now facing enormous pressure to leave, fleeing their homes amid war and anti-Christian  terrorism. Untold numbers of innocents are lost and without hope, fellow Christians. But how  do you support them? There are groups out there who claim to support them whose real agenda is to  move them out of their actual homeland. We think that's wrong. We think that's evil. in fact. And  so we've looked far and wide to find a group that is actually supporting Christians in the Middle  East. And we found one. It's called the Vulnerable People Project, VPP. It's one of the very few  groups consistently helping vulnerable Christians throughout the Holy Land. They deliver food and  water to Christian communities trapped in Gaza for example. They help rescue civilians. They provide  emergency aid to families who have nowhere else to turn. Today they are helping Christian churches  and families safely remain in the communities where their ancestors worshiped Jesus. There  should be a lot of groups doing this and trust us we have looked for over a year now and there  aren't. But the Vulnerable People Project is doing exactly that and their work makes an amazing  difference in people's lives. A gift of just $33 helps provide a day of protection and support  for the vulnerable Christians in the West Bank. Who's looking out for them? Nobody. Well, they  are. A monthly gift of $83 helps sustain that protection throughout the month. So visit save  westbankchristians.com and stand with Christians in the land where Christianity began. That's save  westbankchristians.com. We are proud to partner with them. Thank you. And if you go to the media,  so if you go to Jake Tapper, maybe you're not he's not gonna Yeah. No, he might criticize CA too  much. Yeah. Yeah. you're you're playing playing with fire cuz you could be putting yourself  in a lot of trouble and that that's that is an oversight mechanism. The whistleblower system  is an oversight mechanism and that's what sorry and that's what I love about Gabbard's release  of information for example. Take the Trump rush occlusion documents. She included whistleblower  testimony. It's not just straight documents. It also provides a contextual sort of real feel of  not sort of a a real feel of what was happening at the time from a real person. And so do you have  any idea why this is the case? Which is to say, do you have any clue how CIA influences the behavior  of the Washington Post, the New York Times, CNN, NBC News, the Associated Press, etc. my limited  window because I like I said I I'm a ops officer. Up until recently all I cared about was stealing  secrets, right, in some foreign country. Yeah. Yeah. Yes. To be clear, not American secrets.  I want to ask you about that in a minute, but Okay. Um my limited window is there's clearly some  preferred outlets that they will go to. Um I mean I I see some of these things and these are puff  pieces. These are these are cheerleading pieces uh you know talking about how great things are  you know talking about all the things all the reform that's I've seen a few recently the the  problem with CI I've long thought this is it doesn't get enough money and so Congress needs to  appropriate more money to that's every piece is like that right if only if only they could you  know they had full funding um [laughter] right what right which I mean which is a great point  you know not only did they not get enough fun no um the funding piece is actually interesting  that you mentioned it because it's also sorry this might be a nonsequittor but I think it's  important part of the the reason we failed is um the Patriot Act and 9/11 um you know I was  part of the whole system post 911 I can tell you I never had a time even during continuing  resolutions where like if I went to the boss and said hey boss I got this great operation going  on you need more money they always found money for me and I think I think I think we started  confusing good managers for good leaders. So after 9/11 Patriot Act opened up a bunch of  authorities um a bunch of operations were opened up and you know the good managers are the ones who  could juggle a gazillion different things at once. I you know I wish I was one of those people. I was  never good at juggling a gazillion things at once. I you know I stuck to sort of a handful of things  I knew I could accomplish. But the good managers, they could. And they were working in a time where  there was a ton of money. We've always had money. We've always had money. And so those good managers  who didn't really have to get tested about, hey, should we do this? Should we save this money for  something else? Should we make this moral decision on blah blah blah blah blah? Uh they got confused  as good leaders. So they got they metriculated upwards and they were never really and this is  a generalization they were never really tested in terms of uh moral decisions or decisions that  were weighty in terms of like should we continue doing this operation or not. So you know and we  had chances to be tested. How many people spoke up during um the whole enhanced interrogation  piece? How many people came forward and said, "Hey, last I checked, that's torture." Well, one  did. One did and he was destroyed, right? He went to prison under the subsequent administration,  which was the amazing part. That's crazy. So, he came forward during Bush, but Obama got there and  John Brennan immediately saw that he was indicted and sent to prison and wrecked his life. So all  these managers who have continued to be moved up, they've never had to make hard moral decision,  co heads, and you got people saying, "Hey, I've got religious rights. Hey, I've got bodily rights.  Hey, this is executive overreach." And no one knew how to handle that. And it proved beyond a shadow  of a doubt the management, they're not leaders, the managers in the CIA are not trained to handle  conscientious disscent and real moral decisions. It it for me that was that was it. They  they failed a test of their humanity and um that opened my eyes. Do um there's a open  qu no one asks this question very often but uh where does CIA's funding come from? Well comes  from the Congress in part but that's not the entirety of its funding. Period. And but the part  that is appropriated is classified. So, we don't know exactly what the budget is. Mhm. How can you  and I'm pretty sure the president doesn't know. In fact, I'm pretty certain the president doesn't  know. So, like how how is that civilian control of an agency if no one really knows how much money  there is or even where it's coming from? It's not, you know, and there's, you know, there there are  reasons why they want to hide budget. They don't want people and like I really believe in sources  and methods. We don't want to see sources dead. We don't want to see sensitive methods destroyed.  But um you know if if the naming conventions for um the various offices at the CIA are made so  indistinct that outsiders can't understand what they do in that office. Well, um that that's  meant to protect the type of operations you work. That's sources and methods of course. But  there's a real question on the oversight piece, like how does oversight happen if you can't go,  what exactly does that office do right there? What does it do? It's got a weird name. Where's  the money going? Yeah. How why does it need that much money? And you also have to ask like, is CIA  doing anything that's so critical to the interest of the United States that you would give up any  hope of managing it or having oversight over it that you would allow it to be its own country in  the middle of your country? The answer is there that shouldn't occur. Period. I mean morally,  ethically, no. Is it occurring? I worry it is. Oh, I It's definitely occurring. There's no question  about I mean I mean Yeah. I mean, from my experience, it sure looks like it. Yeah, it sure  does. And again, if we don't even really know, there's a big debate, uh, which I've listened to  carefully about where this money is coming from. And again, is not all coming from the Congress.  So what um follow the money how can you if CIA is running businesses or engaged in business  practices as an agency which it is it's like I get that this can all be justified if if I were  king for a day if I were in charge and I wanted to start the process I I totally get this it's it's  become such a gargantuan problem where do you even start right but if I wanted to like make immediate  gains on that question. How do we I would so the director of CIA, the deputy director of CIA, and  it used to be the chief operating officer, they've changed names. They have special authorities  um to grant no bid contracts um the under national security o opices. I would come in and  I would start auditing every single one of those contracts that were given out by the director  and deputy director particularly in that little window between administrations. Okay. Once you  catch a little bit of wrongdoing, it makes a lot easier to justify. Okay, now we're going to start  doing the deep dive. Why don't we take a look at, you know, the other funding me mechanisms that are  in play for various type types of u intelligence work. I would definitely I would definitely  audit Incel 100%. Inutel needs to have a full audit. Can you explain for people who don't know  what Inkel is? Inutel is uh you know it's it's the venture capital arm that funds all sorts of  stuff that um venture capital [clears throat] arm of what? Of the CIA. Okay. I mean I know the  answer. I just want to make sure that everyone listening understands that CIA has its own and  I'm quoting you venture capital arm. Yeah. So, we thought that's something that happened on like  Sand Hill Road in, you know, Northern California, but no, CI has its own venture firm. Yeah.  Yeah. I mean, you know, there there's there's real reason to have uh insight into things that  are tech and things that are of value. There are there's good reason to have it, but um if  you're going to do it, if you're going to do it, um you better you better be able to justify every  penny. Well, and you have to have control over it by the public through its representatives. So,  what happened in Pakistan is you know, I don't know if you've been posted in Pakistan, but like  Pakistan did this with its military and the next thing you know, the military runs Pakistan. Mhm.  And no matter who you vote for, the military still runs Pakistan. So, you don't want that cuz that's  the opposite of democracy, right? I spent two years in Pakistan. Okay. Then, I didn't even know  that. But is that a fair assessment? Yeah. Yeah, it's a fair assessment. I mean, how many  businesses does the Pakistani military own? A lot lot a lot a lot right and they're the best  fun institution in the country is really obvious when you drive around Pakistan it's like all the  mowed lawns are the military bases. Yep. Yeah. Well, having life insurance is one of those  things that helps you sleep better at night. If something were to happen to you, what exactly  would happen to your loved ones, your children? We've heard so many stories of families losing  a parent and having their life insurance policy save their financial lives. That's the whole point  of it. It makes all the difference in the world. The next question becomes, well, how do I get life  insurance? That's where Ethos comes in. A company we're proud to partner with. Ethos makes securing  a life insurance plan fast and easy and 100% online. People don't get it cuz it's a hassle and  it's expensive. This solves that problem. You get a quote in seconds, apply in minutes, and get same  day coverage. There is no medical exam. You just answer a few simple health questions, then you can  get up to $3 million in coverage. Some policies as low as 30 bucks a month. Takes about 10 minutes  to get covered. Life insurance through ethos. Free quotes are available now at ethos.com/tucker.  Ethos ethos.com/tucker. Rates and obviously application times may vary, but it's great. So,  um, you don't want that here, right? No. No, I do not. And I, the American people don't  want that. What they want, in my opinion, is um, we were told that we were going to get some  IC reform. And um we haven't seen one lick of it except sorry that's not true. Except with Director  Gabard. She did exactly what President Trump said. I want you to downsize the DNI. I want you  to pursue deweaponization of intelligence. I want you to pursue COVID origins. I want you  to pursue pursue Havana syndrome and election security. She did all those things. She tried to  pursue those things and she got beat up for it. I want to get to that in in some detail in just  a second, but first I just want to go back to um John Ratcliffe, former congressman who's who  runs CIA. Uh why hasn't he pursued reform of CIA? That's a very tough question cuz I'm I'm not  in his inner circle, but as far as I can tell, it's because he doesn't want to. He he's perfectly  happy to let uh the people that are running the agency who are those people those managers who  metriculated upwards who were confused for good leaders. Yeah. They're running the place. I don't  know why he's letting that happen. Um everybody I know in that world says that he's just a pure  mouthpiece for Assad. Everybody says that about John Radcliffe. I don't know about that. Um  I can't speak to that. But what I will say is um he's not getting it done. He's not reforming  anything. I mean, there's still, and I don't remember what they were called, and I'm not  even sure I'm allowed to say what they were, but um you know, right before the administration  changed, the DA came up with three new ways to write products that only stay inside the  CIA. They don't get propagated out. So, what good is that? And so, the CIA continues to  create products that um have no oversight and um can be held on to, especially if they're writing  things up that they want to wait. Explain what a product is. You're not you're not talking about  a new kind of toothpaste, right? Right. No. So, you know, analysts will write a paper finished  intelligence on some topic and there's different types of papers you can they've got different  names. Um, but there's there's a there's a new type of of analytical product that they can write  up now, which that is supposed to be shared with the community. That's the whole point. You write  something up, you share it with the community. No, they decided they're going to keep it inside the  CIA and not propagate it outwards. If uh oversight wants to look at something, look at those papers  that are being written uh that are meant to stay inside the CIA and not go anywhere. My gut tells  me they're just going to hang on to them until they can make them go somewhere. Uh maybe the  next administration. Who knows? Right. I mean, you're describing the ability to create dossas  on people. Dossas on all sorts of stuff. So, here's the reform that I would uh institute if  I had the power to do it. The president of the United States asks for information that is held  by one of his agencies that he oversees because he's one of only two elected officials in the  entire executive branch of government and the CA does not produce that information. And then  that's the point in which you call John Radcliffe and you say, "Listen, [ __ ] [laughter] You've got  24 hours to do this or I'm having Cash Patel have you arrested." Mhm. But there's none of that. It's  like the president's proxies ask for information from CIA and they're like, "We can't find it."  Yeah. when everyone knows that's a lie. Well, election security. Here's a good one. Kurt Olsen  is the guy, but like would that work? Why couldn't you do that? You could in theory. What do you  mean in theory? He the president this is the president's agency. He was elected by the public  to run CIA. Like I'm I'm missing something. Sorry. No, you are treat CIA like it's a foreign power  that he has to negotiate with. I don't I can't understand why. It's the craziest thing I've ever  seen. It should work like that, but it's it's not. It's not working like that. Um there are negotiate  like frankly director Gabbard shouldn't have to negotiate with um with uh uh director Radcliffe  over some of this stuff. She had people in her team that that um uh have all the intelligence  background to handle the type of products that were coming out of CIA operational traffic those  sort of things and had to negotiate. Everybody's got to negotiate. Why do we have to negotiate?  Why would president where's the president in this? The president issues an executive order January  23rd saying I want all available documentation on these number of historical incidents including  the assassinations of the 60s but not not limited to those. He doesn't get it. He does not. And you  know I So why doesn't Trump say where okay it's been a month I want it by this afternoon. Where  is it? Or you're under arrest. I I just don't I don't What is going on? I wish I knew. I wish I  knew because we we expected we we and I, you know, when I say we, I mean the American public voted  for the greatest disruptor in American history. It's not hard, is it? But he's not, for some  reason, he's not being the greatest finisher in my opinion. He's a colluder with the system. I don't  I don't get it. I don't I don't understand because um we we really want to see him successful.  So, how hard is it to get and I'll just going to pick the most benign of them all and that was  Kennedy's murders because it's so old, right? But there's it's not possible you're revealing  sources and methods. Everyone's dead. Like, I don't really see the legitimate impediment  to producing these documents after all these years and all these votes by the Congress to  do the to do it. Multiple executive orders, including this one. So, they don't produce those  documents, which they have not. They have not. Why why is it would be hard for Trump just to  say time's up, I want them now. There is a sea of lawyers who cavettes and say here's here's all  the things that are um here's all the reasons you could be sideways with the law. Here's all  Trump has full power to do all this but he does correct. He he could just do it immediately  but for some reason the bureaucrats they all sit around cavetting over all the legal ramifications  I think. And Tom Cotton too is Tom Cotton too does not want disclosure does not want disclosure at  this point. Like if we're serious about reform, we just got to lay it all out and let it let  it like if if the documents are that come out, these operational records come out uh you know and  they show all sorts of wrongdoing that happened decades ago. Maybe we can finally start correcting  those mistakes that happened and and improve the institutions. Um, I physically handled the MK  Ultra documents. Okay, I they they're about, you know, this high in the office. I And again, I was  hired labor that day. I just needed to move the documents for somebody into another office. But  those were the MK Ultra. I thumb through them. And um um there's no reason there is absolutely no  reason to to not just put that out. Okay. I think those documents that are JFK, which um there was  no daring daylight raid or anything like that, that that is that was incorrect. Um DNI was  locked out of a of getting those access to those documents. And some of those documents um  they're going to use bureaucratic double speak to talk about why, you know, DNI doesn't need certain  documents, why some of these documents probably need to stay, you know, behind closed doors. It's  all bullpy. Um, it's too old. It's too long ago. It It has to be released. There's an executive  order with the force of law requiring the release of these documents with no caveats in it. Yeah.  So, they're breaking the law by holding these. You could say the same thing with the CO act of 2023  that was unanimously passed. Said we want all of it disclosed. Was it? No. No. There's thousands of  documents that are still sitting there. And I pray that PY or whoever else comes after him or even  Ratcliffe, I don't care who does it, declassify him. There's thousands of documents. Well, that's  of course not going to happen. And I'm sure Tom Co Tom Cotton would jump up and prevent it. Yeah. And  it's too bad because um they're the people who put this administration in office is going to look at  that and they're going to they're going to they're not going to be happy. And um well, it's not a  democracy if you don't know what your government's doing. Yeah. And what about 9/11? Was there  ever an effort to cuz as you just said yourself, it was the Patriot Act in the wake of 9/11 that  changed the whole structure, changed the country forever. There's never been a meaningful push to  declassify after 25 years. I you know I I can't there was no push for 9/11 during my time at  the dig to declassify anything as far as I'm very aware of that. I wonder why. Um [clears  throat] I have my theories. I mean what are your theories? that there's something that's, you  know, all these people who are out there that say, um, you know, the government can't keep a  secret. And, you know, you're you're you're a cook. If you think that, you know, there's a  possibility there was something some underhanded thing happening behind the behind the curtain. I  can tell you we can keep a secret. I know. I've kept secrets. I am keeping secrets. Okay? Um,  morally, ethically, I'm keeping secrets. Um, and if somebody says that a group of people can't  keep a secret about 9/11, that's not true. Okay. I have questions about building 7. That for me was  a wakeup call. And that's where the CIA office was. That Yeah. And so I have a real real question  about building 7. It does not make sense. And this is And again, I used to be a normal CIA officer,  you know. I That's such a great sentence. I used to be a normal CIO. [laughter] It's true. Assuming  that's a category, you know, it is a category. Um I'm just joking. I know it's a category. It I you  know, I I and I I still I still love the agency, but there's something uh there's something off  with with building 7. And something off? Yeah. Like how did it fall down? [laughter] Uh why  why was it announced on television before it fell down? Yeah, those are real questions  that need real answers. So because the CIA there was a CI office in that building. They  admitted it. Um I didn't misremember that. No, you didn't. Did anyone ever talk about this?  Well, you mean at CIA over the course of my career? What happened? Yeah. Like what happened  to our office in building 7? There no plane hit but somehow it fell down. So when I say I used to  be a normal CIA officer for most my career no one I knew talked about that right and it wasn't  until co that I started running into people um whatever this means it wasn't until co that I  started running into people that started asking those questions and I was listening to them  going first it I had a CIA employees yeah CIA employees I had a visceral reaction when I first  heard that I was like what are you talking I did exactly that what are you talking about they  can't like that that didn't happen and as time has gone I had the same reaction by the way. I you  know I'm a slow learner. I'm a slow learner and um I'm a slow learner but um [clears throat]  there's a lot of questions that need So what were what were other CIA employees who had thought  about this before you did or I did. What was their theory about how that building came down? H well  uh put me on the spot here. But doesn't mean it's true and you're not endorsing it. And I'm not  I'm interested to know what actual CIA employees think about the destruction of the CIA office in  building 7. A lot of people had questions about, you know, the folks that were dancing on top of  the top of the building and Israelis, the MSAD officers. Yeah. So, a lot of people had questions  about that. A lot of people had questions about um why um was it insurance policy? I believe you  did a whole segment. That's right. You did a whole segment on this. Yeah, we did. Yeah. Uh there's  um there's an insurance policy that was taken out right beforehand which is pretty pretty uh  fortuitous, pretty precient. Um they've brought up a whole bunch of things and um from my perspective  from my perspective, these are good questions that deserve answers. So was the feeling that that  building was by someone brought down? Yeah, I mean some have said that explicitly that I've spoken  to. Yeah, they said explicitly yes. It sure looks like that thing was controlled explosion and, you  know, fell in on itself. Um, and these are Yeah, these are active CIA officers. I mean, it's pretty  obvious if if you if you take, you know, if you filter out the propaganda, the screaming in your  ears from Jake Tapper, like, "Shut up, conspiracy nut," and just ask like, "Well, how did that  happen?" You can't get an answer because obviously it was brought down with explosives. It it sure  of some kind, right? So, but who did that and why? And by the way, that building collapsed in exactly  the same way that the first two towers collapsed. So it does raise like a bigger question. If that  was fake, well, what else is fake, if anything? I mean, we don't know. But anyway, so all of these  questions, if if you're a former normal person and your colleagues at CIA, presumably also these  normal CIA officers you describe, who I love, they're great officers. Of course, they work  hard. Totally kidding. Wellchested freedom fighters. Yeah. I and I've known a lot of people  like that in various federal agencies who are like good people. Not everyone's bad, right? It's true.  However, if they're coming to the same conclusion, then seems like 9/11 would be the number one  thing you looked at in the dig. I would have liked to have taken a look at it. I would have  liked to have taken a look at it. It seems obvious to me that because unlike the MLK assassination,  which is I'd love to know more about it. Clearly, it was a conspiracy, I think. But like in the  end, it didn't change the world in the way that 911 did. Maybe it's just too big to investigate.  Maybe. Maybe. Have you ever heard anybody say, "Hey, we should look we should just declassify the  911 documents." Well, yeah. Some of the people in the dig um said a couple couple times, but I mean,  we have to be direct. We were doing only what we were directed to do. What the EO told you to EO  told us to do. We're trying to We're trying to be trying to follow the law. Well, yeah. Yeah. Trying  to follow the law. trying to make sure that we we accomplish the mission that was put in front of us  and get that done as quickly and as effectively as we could. And we found that um well, the deep  state exists. I I mean, I don't know what you want to call it. I I love Mike Benz's description  of it, the blob. It I think it's the most accurate description. Um cuz it's amorphous. Yeah. There's  no meaning. It's everywhere and it just rolls in. It fills space. It fills the cracks. It pops  up everywhere. It's It's miserable. So what um so the dig was the director's initiatives group  initiatives group and that's the group within the office of the director of national intelligence  oi run until recently by Tulsi Gabbard that was charged with producing these documents that Trump  had called for in his executive order. Is that all true? Yeah. Yeah. So, what were the uh if you'll  just jog my memory, the cases the the events that you were looking into? Well, um a lot of them  are listed in that Rand Paul subpoena. So, if it's okay. So, Oh, of course. But so, it was the  JFK assassination. Oh, the declassification effort and they sort of lumped MLK, JFK, um uh Bobby  Kennedy. Bobby Kennedy uh in that category. There was election security issues. There was uh January  6th. Um there was uh COVID, Havana syndrome, UAPs, um and a couple other issues. They tried to  compartment out things. So like everybody wasn't working on the same things. So there's some  things that I was Those are all super interesting topics. So let's just go through them really  quick and I'm going to ask you, did you learn anything new about the JFK assassination? So I  have to admit I'd never really followed it. So, I was just hoping we'd just release it all and I  assumed there was a lot of people who were into it and they would pull the documents and make  make those conclusions for me. So, um I don't have any revelations that I was following very  closely. I was shocked to know that the CIA was was running Oswald. Yeah. And Yeah, that's true.  I that did come up. He defected, but that was all a scam. The Russians were very paranoid about uh  Lee Oswald. He was a Marine Corporal, I think, and he shows up in Russia and they're like,  "You're a secret agent." But he actually was, so I didn't know that. Um MLK, anything come to mind?  I wasn't following it. Sorry. Yeah. January 6th. Uh I think your interview with Steve Baker covered  quite a bit with that. And I think the only thing I'll I want to add to that is um Steve Baker's  provision of information to the dig. I think that was sort of the first step to the dig being  shut down. And um I've never seen a reaction quite like what I saw from the agency. Can you tell  us what Baker did just so we have context? Yeah, sure. Sure. Sure. Um, so Steve Baker uh provided  information based off gate analysis that indicated that a current CIA officer, former Capitol police  officer, um, may have been the person who placed the the the bombs that were outside the RNC and  DNC on the evening of January 5th, early morning, whatever it was, and um, provided it to the  DNI. Now, he provided it to the DNI because, and I didn't realize this till much later, you  know, as we're doing these in investigations, sometimes you just need to bring in a an expert.  And he had been following it for so long, somebody, and I'm not sure which part of the  team did it. They they asked him to, hey, would you like to help us with this, he deferred.  He said, listen, I'll be glad to give you anything you need, but I don't actually formally want  to be part of the investigatory work because he wants to be a journalist. Yeah. He's actually  a musician. um fine. Great. Um and so he provided that information and um a memo was typed up. The  memo uh went to the PDDNI uh the principal deputy director of national intelligence, Aaron Lucas,  and it got scanned in and sent over to Michael Ellis. And that thing got shot number two at CIA.  Number two at CIA. Shot all over the CIA. And next thing you know, um people were losing their minds.  Uh when I see people they were so excited to get to the bottom of this. Right. Right. Right. We  finally figured it out. Um no, they were pretty upset. They're like, "What [clears throat] are  you doing? This is defamation." And you know, people were pulled in front of other people. And  and uh defamation in what way? Well, you know, they're saying, "Listen, this this person who was  named in this investigation, you know, she's not that that individual was not the the person who  did it. And you know, you could get yourself in a lot of trouble. You could get sued." How do  they know that person didn't do it? They don't. Uh they don't know that. And we know they're a  bunch of liars is what you're saying. Uh that is definitely one way to say it, but yeah, I mean  they don't know that. And [clears throat] it's weird to me because the CIA's job is to take  in information. Exactly. And and our by law, if there's a chance that there is some illegal  activity that occurred, we have to inform the CIA that, hey, listen, there's an employee that might  be might be involved in this. Take it seriously. But you're saying that CIA did not respond cool  or analytically to this information from Steve Baker as provided by ODNI. They did instead what?  Uh they decided they were going to investigate the dig. Okay. And I I've like for what purpose? The  people who provided the information. Yeah. Gave it to them. And you know it to me it's it's insanity.  Um were they upset about this information? Sure. Seemed like it because you don't send somebody for  you don't call somebody up and say we'd like you to show up at this facility for an interview and  that facility is for polygraphs by the way which is basically an interrogation tool. And um and say  hey listen come on by. I mean, there was a fellow sitting next to me. He asked me, you know, how do  I deal with this? And I said, well, you tell them that you work for the DNI and that you would like  them to send a full list of the questions they'd like to talk about. Maybe send it to your lawyer  and uh you make sure you CC everybody in the DNI front office on that email chain because you  want them involved in fixing this. It was insane. I I I the reaction we got from them was a visceral  reaction. And so if you I mean you were practicing tradecraftraft your your career at CIA. So you  know that that kind of reaction suggests Oh yeah. not good. Not good. I immediately assume that  there's wrongdoing and like right or wrong. That's what I assume. If you're going to react like that  well hold on a second. What are you protecting? Why are you of course and so and everybody I'm  like I'm not a genius here. You don't need to be a co to to have the exact same question. So what  I'll say about this was um the CIA decided that that was the end of it and so they put up they  made every obstacle they could to try and prevent us from conducting our investigations. and um it  was simply refusing things, slow rolling things. Um you know, even even within the DNI's office of  general counsel, there are there are things that we want to push through there to make sure that  we're street legal, somehow they managed to slow roll even the stuff we were trying to get over to,  for example, Senator Ran Paul's committee. That's there was there was questions and follow-ups that  sat with that that group for months. And wait, but on the specific uh in in the specific case  of of January 6, so there are a couple things that jump out. One, that of all people in the  world to be identified by a distinctive gate. Mhm. Which apparently is a product of a sports  injury Baker says, but it's a this whoever was in the the [snorts] figure in the picture had a  weird a weird gate. The woman Steve Baker says he thinks is that person has a sports injury. She's a  capital police officer, but of all places to wind up working, it's CIA. How did she wind up? Right.  According to the court documents, she had applied for a job prior to uh 6 months prior to January  6th. I can't remember. Okay. Uh but but I mean, it's possible to get a job over there. It's not  easy to get hired by the CIA. What does she do there? Do you know? She works in security. I  don't know the specifics of of her exact job. Is it possible that she provided security to  the director? I don't know. Um it is possible, I suppose. Um they pull people in if they're  short. Um so they'll pull people in to like there's a special group of people that handle  security for the director, deputy director, the coup. Maybe not the coup. Well, the coup's changed  names, but like the director and deputy director over the coup the chief operating officer is now  the coup against Mosedc. Oh. I'm sorry. No, just kidding. It was a little CIA joke. Yeah. Yeah,  you guys know coups. We know this is a different coup. Okay. Um, so yeah, I suppose it's possible.  Um, it doesn't matter whether she did or didn't. What really matters to me was that reaction and  it's worse because um the information there was an Homeland Security investigator that was given the  information and asked to pursue this. What was his name? uh that the that Osborne Osborne and so uh  he was found dead weeks later in his apartment in his condo and um that's worrisome. It's worrisome  because there's questions about how he died and you know I people there's a lot of people who  don't want to talk about um Mr. Osborne and his death. Uh what is Well, I think I think what they  they don't want Why don't they want to talk about it? They don't want to talk about it. There's no  obituary, I noticed. Yeah. Well, there's no It's still an open question about how he died. Okay. We  don't know. Did he commit suicide? Did he He was killed by a gunshot. He was killed by a gunshot.  Okay. And um it's worrisome because if he was pushing to pursue this investigation and people  don't want to talk about it because they say, "Well, listen, we got to let the system work work  the investigation. We got to let the system figure out whether or not there's something to this." My  issue with that is if there is nefarious intent, which I I hope to God this is just some horrible  thing that happened to this poor man, or if it's suicide, I hope his family isn't suffering. you  all those things, you know, I pray for him. Pray for his family. But if there was nefarious action  that occurred with that, this is not something you want hidden behind a wall of secrecy cuz it's not  safe for anybody else who who was aware of what was happening with that. It has to be talked about  publicly. And I hope that Fairfax County Police, cuz that's where the investigation is going  on, I hope they're getting to the bottom of it. I really do because um it's just interesting that  as someone who spent his adult life working for CIA and you said you've you loved it um and got  so much out of it, but you seem to believe by what you're saying that the CIA would at least  be capable of killing this guy. Well, I don't know who did that. I'm not saying the CIA did  it, but something happened. Something happened. He was killed. And um it it you could make that  supposition that well, it might be the CIA. could be could be other people with interests. And I  also find it fascinating that within a very short period of that Steve Baker piece coming out saying  we found the woman who placed these pipe bombs um the Department of Justice after well I guess  5 years uh of not finding a suspect arrested some autistic black kid and charged him with the crime.  It's crazy. I I don't believe that for one minute that the autistic black kid did this. No, I don't.  Not for one minute. And the other issue I I don't know. Do you think the Department of Justice is  capable of framing someone like that? Apparently, uh I don't [sighs] I can't speak to motives. I so  evil though. If this is what happened, it's pure evil. And there's other data out there. People  should go take a look at Kyle Sarapin's um podcast and what what he was on the surveillance team  surveilling person of interest 3. There's other data out there that seems to indicate that there  is this is not the full story. I don't believe that that kid in my this is just my opinion, but  I don't believe that that kid is the one the guy they got arrested the the autistic kid that that  you know has feet that are six sizes too big to be the same person. Uh-uh. It doesn't doesn't  add up. But I will say, is the NAACP involved in this? All the professional defenders of black  people out there who were like out in force five years ago. I love black people. Okay, now is the  time for everyone who stood up 5 years ago during the George Floyd insanity and said, "I love black  people." What about this black guy? This autistic black kid. Well, who's defending him? Anybody?  Nobody. Nobody. Nobody. Oh, all the I love black people are absent on this. Apparently. Yeah.  Okay. Apparently. I mean, not surprised. It's It's sickening to me. It is sickening. You know, I  I never said I love black people. I never treated black people like gods. They're people like  you and me. But I'm offended by this. Well, I'm offended because human being. if this poor  kid, you know, he's sounds like he's got some spectrum issues on a spectrum. You know, I, you  know, I've got people very close to me with mental health issues. And to think that you'd like, you  know what, this is a throwaway person. This is a throwaway person. That's what they're saying.  If this is really is as bad as it looks to me, uh, they're basically saying it's not the first  time. When Mary Pinchon Meyer was murdered in the on the toe path right near my house, childhood  home in Georgetown, Cord Meyer's widow, wife, she was not. They grabbed some black guy and put  him on trial for her murder when they knew when CIA was perfectly aware that he didn't do it. And  they allowed the DC police to arrest this guy, and put him on trial. Yeah. Well, what I'd say  about all of this? Sorry. It just makes me mad. It makes me mad, too. I mean, it's so mean. Well,  it's it's and it's every single one of these acts that that they're in our face. It's so obvious and  they're throwing in our face. They're it's meant to demoralize us and and make us make us feel like  there's nothing we can do against this giant blob that does whatever they want. Um by Yeah. John  Radcliffe. And so, you know, I as far as the dig is concerned, as far as Steve Baker's story  is concerned, I that was the death nail for the dig. And I think but it's got to make you think if  CIA is this involved in it, clearly they were this involved in January 6th. I I mean why else if I'm  running if I'm John Radcliffe, okay, and I find out that someone on our security team has been  identified by gate recognition software as the person who planted the pipe bombs on J6. I would  say at least we got to look at this. Yeah. So I wouldn't say let's shut down the investigation  that produces information. Right. Right. And if I were I'll take Kyle Sarapin's surveillance  team. If I were on the surveillance team that was surveilling all these people that were in the  vicinity, as soon as that new information came out from Steve Baker, I'd be I'd be calling up my  surveillance team and I'd be saying, "Hey boys, we've got some new information. We're going  to let's go over the old files and we're going to I'm an intelligence officer. I'm not a law  enforcement." But I, as an intelligence officer, if I were doing something overseas and it had some  shades of what this is, I would immediately call my surveillance team together and say, "Let's get  on the target again. Let's let's start let's start getting some some brass tax of what's what's going  down. Go through the old files, figure out what is happening. None of that's happening. I mean, this  person who you like I don't know anything. I mean, I was not involved in investigating this. I just  talked to Steve Baker and you that's it. So, I'm not alleging anything. But I mean, Dan Bonino at  FBI was defending this person and attacking Steve. That's correct. Yeah. Is that Can you verify that?  attacking. Wait, attacking Steve Baker? Yeah, Steve Baker. Yeah, I'm gonna help fund a liel suit  against you and all this stuff. I supposedly he said, but he was certainly attacking Steve Baker.  What does Steve Baker do? He used gate recognition software, which the federal government uses, by  the way. It's not a crackpot technology. No. No. Doesn't prove anything, but it gets it moves  you closer like a like anything else. Facial recognition, right? Yeah. I mean, it it breaks  things open so that you can start conducting more investigations. Okay. So you're an expert in human  behavior. Of course, cuz you're like recruiting spies. If this were happening in Pakistan, not  your country, you'd be like, "This agency must be involved." Yes. In the event in question, J6.  Yeah. Yeah. I mean, and that's that's the problem. I I keep seeing parallels to third world countries  of things like this happening where I'm like, if this were happening in another country, I'd run an  intelligence operation. you know, I've monitored elections in foreign countries and, you know,  as part of that process. And if you know, here's another example. If if I had seen the anomalies  that had occurred during our our election that caused January 6th in some foreign country,  State Department would be probably sending out a demarsh. So there's And will you explain to people  who don't know what that what what does that mean? Oh, it means we'd be criticizing that country for  their election practices. We'd give them a formal statement saying, "You have done wrong and we  think that you need to stop doing X, Y, and Z because your elections are fraudulent." That's  what I'm saying. So, that's another example. You I keep seeing these parallels. If this had happened  in some foreign local, um it's kind of weird if you take three steps back. I'm not alleging  anything at all. I just happen to notice the pattern that this happens in 2020. It's clearly  no one's proved that the election was stolen as far as I can tell, but the evidence that this was  like not how you run an election. It's this how a fraudulent election is run, it's overwhelming.  Mhm. And then Trump gets shot in Butler and then decides to hire Marco Rubio as Secretary of  State, Steve Walls's national security adviser, and critically John Ratcliffe as director of  central intelligence. And then he he wins the election with the majority of the popular  vote. you don't have any of these problems. What I mean, if this were happening in  a foreign country, what would you say? I'd have some questions. I I will say part of the  reason President Trump won was because he managed to capture the MA vote and he should be probably  uh a little more cognizant of uh what MA should be endorsing mRNA technology, stuff like that.  But that's separate from your point. Um yeah, it's just kind of weird like if you wanted above  all to have a war with Iran, not just to get rid of their nuclear program, but to reset the world  order, right? Get the US out of the Middle East, end the US dollar and the petro dollar. Um, and  that was your plan. Clearly, that that's the plan that's happening. And no American president  would go along with that cuz that would like destroy your legacy and your nation, right?  Especially for someone who campaigned on No, of course. And clearly didn't want to do it. But  let's say that was your plan and that's a big plan. That's a history plan. Yeah. You would um  you know, you'd do whatever you could to to make it clear to that guy like there's a carrot and  a stick here. Mhm. Like maybe you get elected, maybe you don't get killed if you go along with  it. Yeah. Has that ever occurred to you? Yeah. I mean, if I'm being honest with myself,  yes. Um I don't know that that happened. Nobody has ever bothered to explain what did  happen if that's not what happened. like, oh, it's just totally normal that that we invaded  Iran after, you know, 6 months after saying we ended their nuclear program to like restart again  without trying to convince the public and then to do this thing that we know is going to wreck our  country, which it now is. Yeah. I what I what I mostly uh not mostly what I very much dislike  is the alternative voices that came together to form this coalition cuz the the whatever MAGA is,  whatever MA is, like all these people came under a very big tent and they offered their voices,  their support for President Trump because it was a great coalition. It was too it was awesome.  It was awesome. You you had these people came forward and then the alternative voices have been  systematically removed from the pool of people that are supposed to be advising. Is that true? I  think so. [laughter] Sorry, I'm just laughing. I was one of them. Um yeah, no, that is definitely  true. And and like Joe Kent, for example, Oh, the best. I He's a wonderful human being who I  agree. I look at the reaction to him resigning the way he resigned. And I I have friends who I deeply  respect. I love them. And they're like, "Oh, you shouldn't have done it that way because it  criticized President Trump." I'm like, you know, many many for many years when people resign  from from office, a lot of times they'd resign on principle and they'd write a letter just like  that. Joe Kent was not disrespectful to President Trump at all. At all. And if you can't get through  to a president, you can't get your message across say, "Hey, listen. I need you to listen to me.  At some point, doing the right thing is writing a respectful letter that says, "Hey, I disagree  with this policy. I'm leaving for this reason." This happened all the time before. The thing that  bothers me is what's the option? Leaking to the media, subverting the president's program. Those  are clearly less honorable responses. Completely. If you can't carry out a job consistent with  your own values, don't. Yeah. I isn't I mean I don't know what how is that bad? Isn't that what  we ask our children to be? It's exactly what we ask and Joe Kent did exactly what many many other  people have done in many other administrations. My problem is the screeching and the nashing  of teeth that came from this people associated with this administration. You know that they  treated him worse than if he was like some kind of leaker. Well, actually they claimed he  was. Um, well, they claimed he was a criminal, that he was under criminal investigation, his  security clearance was unimpeded till the day he left. So, we know that that's not it's not  true. It's a lie. They admitted it was a lie, but they trashed the guy's reputation. They  trashed his wife. Yeah. I mean, just this I mean, I'm sorry. He he has sacrificed for this country  and um you know, he did an honorable thing. Uh he he he spoke with respect to the president. he  couldn't get through, so he decided to leave. Um I I keep seeing these indications that there are  blast doors up around the White House, around key figures that you can't get through. You can't talk  to them. And again, I wish I was part of the inner circle so I could see what was happening. But  as somebody who was, you know, maybe one or two layers below that, it sure looked like blastos  were going up around a whole lot of people. And um I [clears throat] Yeah, I don't know how we got  on that, but but I think for just because it's sad and the coalition that brought Trump back to the  White House in 2024 was like a beautiful thing. Mhm. It wasn't organized around a race or even a  political party. It was organized around a kind of idealistic hope that the country could be better  and that some measure of power would be returned to the citizens who own it. It's like these are  not radical ideas. They're foundational ideas. Well, now that I am It wasn't a hate based  thing at all. No. And now it's totally blown up because a small group of true haters, the genocide  defenders have all been like basically committed to destroying this coalition and it worked and  it's really it has worked and truth now that I am not a government employee, I can speak about  my personal political beliefs. Um I am a lifelong conservative. I I voted for Ross Perau. I you know  I'm a Ross I I gave you Bill Clinton at one point. I'm a lifelong conservative and I was going to  vote for Kennedy. Yeah. I was going to vote for Kennedy and um I was going to go the like I  am a lifelong conservative that was going to go the distance for a President Kennedy. And in my  opinion he did one of the most presidential things that um I've seen in my lifetime. He chose um the  American people over over power. He said, "Listen, I've got an opportunity if I if I work with this  administration. I've got an opportunity to make America healthy again." Um it it was the most  noble thing I'd ever seen. I was really pissed off that he uh he pulled out. I really was going to go  the distance. And I had never if someone had asked young Jim, "Hey, Sunday, are you going to vote  for for a Democrat?" Um, I would have been like, "That's that's crazy talk. You know, I might  vote for occasional libertarian or Rosaro, but probably not a Democrat." And I was going  to go the distance uh with him. That coalition that he brought in, he I don't think President  Trump would be president if he had not brought that in. And so for me, if we're talking  about the coalition that said no more war, um, make America healthy again, we're losing, the  promises are being broken. The promises are being broken. Mocked. Mocked. Openly mocked. And like I,  you know, I'll still go the distance with anybody who wants to protect religious rights, bodily  autonomy, all those things. Um, somebody needs to wake up this administration and say, "Hey, listen.  If the person who owns the the MA agenda at the polls, they're probably going to get those those  little bits of votes that are going to put them over the edge." Um, it's it's a it's too late. I  mean, betrayal is hard to recover from. You know, you get in an argument with your wife and you can  get past it. You catch her in bed with the pool boy and you're never going to see her the same  way because she betrayed you. No. On a very deep level. Not that that happened. I hope it never  does. But but you know what I mean. That's what this is. You You caught Trump in bed with someone.  It's like he cheated on you. And then to lecture you about your lack of loyalty is too much.  You're disloyal. Joe Kent was disloyal. Really? Joe Kent's wife got killed in Syria because of  the neocons. Yep. And rather than whine about it, he kept going and tried to serve his nation and  did. And he was right, by the way, on the merits. And then he calls Trump, tries to see Trump on  his way out because he likes Trump. Actually, he's a respectful guy. And Trump trashes his wife  and says, "Oh, he got remarried awful quick." Really? Cuz it was under your administration that  his first wife was killed because you didn't have the balls to get American troops out of Syria  cuz you're controlled by Israel. That's a fact. So then to lecture Joe Kent about getting married  again after you oversaw the death of his first wife, I was like h can't deal with this anymore.  Yeah. You know, it's it's there's been a lot of disappointment. I know that's the understatement  of the year, but um a lot of disappointment and like I have disappointment like to bring it back  around to the conversation about the agency and everything else. I have disappointment with  the agency. I wanted reform. I wanted real reform. I'm okay with getting rid of some of the  chaff. I'm okay with making some big changes and and never happened. Never happened. In fact,  this administration is is just letting it move on. Like I've left government service now. Um you  know, I co-founded an organization. If it's okay, I'm going to talk a little bit about that cuz  I I think it's important. You know, I at some point I'm going to go into the private sector.  But the thing about being a government employee, if you're in military or forward- facing, you want  to have a mission. You want to have something that you're like, "No, no, no. I want to be part  of something bigger." And that's the hardest part of leaving government service. You know  that. And you realize that, you know, you know, there's a lot of people in the private sector who  are incredibly impressive and you have to compete against them. So, some of these government schlubs  are afraid to leave. Yeah, of course. But, uh, you know, I I co-founded an organization that sued  the federal government over vaccine mandates. Um, we got together. We didn't know what we were  doing. We built a car as we rolled it out of the, uh, rolled it out of the garage. But, we were we  were successful. We got a nationwide injunction that shut down the vaccine mandate for all staff,  federal government employees throughout the entirety of the Biden administration. Done.  Succeeded. We filed 17 class action EEOs. uh you know towards the end of my time at the  dig, the last year in the dig, turns out that the uh CIA decided that every single person who was  non-compliant with those vaccine mandates, yeah, they weren't, you know, just insubordinate. They  were spies. So they had all of them investigated by the counter intelligence mission cent's  counter espionage uh department. Not really. Oh, really? All of them said, "Yep, we  got a check." So, um, I I personally, uh, filed an OP, an Office of Privacy and Civil  Liberties complaint, and I blind CCD every single unvaccinated officer in the CIA. And then when  nothing happened after 40 days, uh, I sent it up to the, uh, intelligence community inspector  general. I said, "You need to investigate this. My problem is they're purposely waiting longer  than a 45day period. Because as soon as I CCed all these unvaccinated officers, as soon as I  CCed them, they have a 45day window to file an EEO complaint. I know a lot about the complaint  process now. Never used to, never made a complaint until co and I wanted to give them the chance  if they were upset about it to actually file those complaints. A bunch of people filed the EEO  complaints. But all we really wanted was and again this is under director Radcliffe. All we wanted  him to do was to expune the records. See when you have a counter John Radcliffe okayed counter  espionage investigations. The investigation occurred in 2021 right? Okay. It was discovered.  So after it was discovered we said hey listen um new administration. This is an easy fix. Here's  what we want. Just expunge the records. just get get that off your permanent security file because  that that's you were investigated as a foreign spy because you didn't want to take the death shot.  Yeah. Because you didn't want to take the death shot. And that was a simple request. Hey, please  just we asked. Did Ratcliffe do it? No. So now we have to sue. And so you know I found proono legal  support. Why is Ratcliffe so vested in I have no idea. Slander against people who didn't take the  vax. I have no idea. We And I don't know maybe he's incompetent too. I he should have his staff  were aware. I made sure that both deputy director and the director's staff were aware that this was  occurring. I wanted them to just fix it and they didn't. So, we're going to sue them. And so, so  I'm I'm I got out of government service, but I'm still working the Feds for Freedom. We're Feds  for Freedom is suing the CIA over this. And we are still actually litigating class action EOS and  this is a half decade later. So, we've got an FBI class action EEO. We've got a there's a a couple  others, uh, DoD, NASA. We're still litigating this stuff a half decade later, which is absolutely  idiotic. It's this administration. They said they said flat out we shouldn't have to have Well, it's  just an attack on Christians. That's what it was. Here's a shot with aborted baby parts in it. Can  you take it? The people who said they can't, they get invested as investigated as spies. Get all the  Christians out. Yeah. So, at some point I'm going to go find a normal job, but uh for right now I'm  I'm going to Let me ask you one final question, one final category of questions. So, back to  January 6th. Sure. Based on everything you've said without any other evidence, I would find it very  likely that the CIA was involved in January 6th just by their reaction to it or is aware that DOJ  isn't covering for DOJ or something the government is clearly based on their reaction. It's actually  the worst possible um conclusion if if I'm just going off reaction. I have no data. I can't prove  anything. But it means that the capital police, the FBI, and CIA were all in bed. Yeah. And  um they perpetrated a hoax of such colossal proportion. And they, you know, January 6,  you had people rotting in these jails. Oh, I know. For a very long time. If CIA was involved  in that, um maybe that four wins thing, maybe that's maybe that's where we should be going. We  should certainly church committee 2.0 just shut it down. Shut it down. Yeah. So, but that raises  the question. I mean, like the firewall always was involvement in domestic politics. Yes, we did  overthrow Mosedc. Yes, we did this that and the other thing abroad, but it was in the service of  American foreign policy goals and so it's okay. But what we'll never do is start tampering in  our domestic politics, our democracy. Right. Right. And and yet I know for a fact that  there are CIA domestic influence operations. I've never seen one. But uh all the indications  are when you take a look at the media um media blackouts, what media covers, it starts  looking like something's happening and you know Yeah. They're pretty obviously involved in the  Monica Lewinsky thing. Not that I'm pro Clinton, never have been. Yeah. But you think that's  fair to say? I think it is. Yeah. Yeah. So, um, that's like pretty shocking that they would be  involved in our politics, don't you think? I It is shocking. And like I said, I used to be different  and um the variety of things that I entertain as possibilities are much much wider than they used  to be. You can't you can't read an email that says this is our story and we're sticking to it and  and not not you can't go back you can't go back to that. So, uh yeah, it's uh it's disturbing.  We're not getting reform and I have a feeling um we've got more pain ahead for us if if we  don't make some changes. I agree with that. Thanks so much for taking all this time, Jim, to  talk to us. My pleasure. Congrats. You've been out of CA less than a month and you're already  doing good work in Thank you. Thank you. [music]