The general gun experience at some point we should talk about the mad honey Yeah, yeah, well, that's how you and I got in touch recently right yeah You saw us talking about mad honey on the show and you reached out and said I'm actually right now Harvesting bad honey. Yes. You sent me a photo of you actually doing it right there I'm gonna grab some from my bag right now And this mad honey you were into bed is that where you get it from? This was in Nepal the Paul very close to Tibet This is it now this looks like store bought honey because there's a label on there What that truly is is I transferred the honey to this grocery store bottle? So if I went through customs I wouldn't have any issues to move but that is that is the same honey I showed you in the video so if you if you look at it you can open it up You'll see a couple things you'll see it's a little bit more liquidy than Typical honey typically golden you know in the bottle shaped like a bear honey and this is supposed to be the honey that makes it trip balls Yeah, does it so I think we should try it in a moment in a moment. Are you willing to try it? Yeah? I'll try right now. Don't try right now. Okay. Oh, yeah, I'm a little bit to build up a little bit of backstory Sorry, I'm very controlling. That's okay. So you see you see it's soupy. You see it's red. Yes. I went to Nepal Some people know how this works already these The honey I think I just think we should explain where the honey comes from right the honey comes from these cliffs There's different places around the world video do you have a video of you doing it yet or isn't not really? Not really so we can find a video of Them harvesting man honey because it's really fascinating how they have to do it Yes, so it was about maybe a 12-hour drive from the capital of Kathmandu that we went to this village of maybe 500 people and We joined these these guys as they collected the honey and they don't have like honey boxes The honey is on the mountain sides and they basically risk their lives taking these ladders They have these ladders these rope ladders and the reason they need rope ladders is because they need to be able to hike Sometimes up to several hours to go to where the honey is the honey's not conveniently located It's located wherever the hell the bees put it keep playing it Jim and so they they take these rolled up ladders and they they string it on the cliff They climb the ladders or descend from the ladders and then they have to carefully use these long sticks to cut the honey comb off of The mountain side Before doing that they put some pegs into the honey comb so this is like a big flat protruding honey comb coming from the mountain side and then eventually they cut it off and they lower it down The people on the bottom then collect the honey and they can start to process it What so there's a couple things that are interesting here one is like the collection process which is dangerous and just kind of unbelievable I mean one of the scariest you see all these bees here I had to wear the bee hat everyone nobody messes around everyone wears the bee hat as soon as they get the smoke going these bees go insane and you see thousands of bees Stinging the shit out of everything and everyone trying to get it through people's clothing and you know when bee sting their stinger comes out So it's all just a common causey mission for all these different bees and so all these people are getting stung So they had the appropriate clothing But the hands the guy my guide who wasn't used to being there got about four bees inside the hat And that's never what you want and so their solution was that to that was to reach to his hat Inside the net and pinch the bees inside rather than trying to get them out. They just killed him inside And so they they got the honey for example you could see here they're dumping out of the basket There's gonna be tons of bees and honey mixed together when I flew my drone there I landed the drone and it was wet with bee body parts. I must have shredded a thousand bees just with my drone Wow, so they are on the defense and before you go there Before you put the smoke the honeycomb is black because it's completely covered by the bees But after the smoke comes up it reveals the actual yellow honeycomb underneath So that's one interesting aspect to this So the smoke is to try to calm down these bees right to repel them to make them leave So how do they do that they start fires at the base of the cliff? Yes And these guys are so badass they know how to start a fire and basically put it into a makeshift backpack and then carry it Oh boy So they're carrying smoke on their back and then dumping it dumping it at the base of the cliff and And then the smoke goes up and then the bees go insane from there is because the bees know Are they accustomed to people trying to steal their honey? I do think it puts them in a defensive mode But also just like a lot of insects don't like smoke so it's like They know they have to leave because they're smoke but they want to protect the hives at all costs. Hmm, so That's one aspect the other aspect is the the hallucinogenic lightheaded effects that are purported to come from eating the honey So how does that happen the bees collect? if it's nectar or pollen from certain types of flowers that grow there locally and These flowers have some kind of chemicals inside it's a creates a neurotoxic effect In your brain when you eat it so I interviewed a villager This is why I want to build up a little bit so you can see how going home about trying to honey you still are But I think we should still absolutely do it together. I went to a villager there I was thinking everyone's just gonna be jacked up on honey all the time and it's a great time and so I talked to this guy He was the one who owned the cliff where the the honey is and I said how often do you do it? He goes I did it 20 years ago. That's the last time I said can you walk me through the experience? He said I took a lot and I couldn't walk for 24 hours Oh, you couldn't walk okay, that's pretty extreme I've heard similar stories from people while I was there and it seemed interesting because At least in the village I went to I know it's different in different parts of Nepal But at least where I went people seemed like I've done it and I'm good and They didn't really want to do it much more So why are they collecting it? Well, there's a big market in places like Japan and especially Korea They said where people want to By the honey and and eat the honey which is interesting because I looked it up and it's it's actually illegal in Korea It said hmm, so this brings me to That day I tried a bit. I tried about a spoon And I got scared about trying too much because we still had a hike in our out of there than a three hour try of I'm like I need to use my legs But my brother my brother joined me my brother scott joined me at a hotel in St. Cloud recently about a week and a half ago And you knew I had the honninks. I talked about bringing it here And he's like I want to try the honey And he's a bit of a hater and he's like it's fucking honey. What's gonna happen? And I got to go to bed because I got work to do the next day and saw me in his room across her mind in the hotel And I give him a couple spoons and I'm like you should just do a couple spoons wait 30 minutes and see how you feel He goes uh yeah, no just give me more you're going to sleep soon Just give me more if I want more. I'll take it. So while I'm still there. He takes more maybe five six spoons Then I go all right. I got to go to bed. I have a good time. Let me know actually I said why don't you text me? The effects During the evening and I'll know what to expect when I do it So here's what he said. I've got his text right here feels good Warm warm breath He goes on Totally legit. All right. Hater vibes gone My body's on fire in a very positive way. It's weird My scalp feels hot. My muscles tingle So far good Might get nauseous. Take less. I can't tell Not good Regret Very bad Just don't Stupid. I keep hoping I'm done. I'm so sick At 5.40 a.m. I should maybe eat a banana So that's my brother So how much in total do you take six spoons? Six of This spoon. I brought this spoon because I want I needed like a measurement system right that was accurate I'm like I need to know exactly which spoon you a plastic ice cream spoon. Yeah, and so this is not a deep Big spoon. This is no a tablespoon. It took six of those. Yeah about six So I think we should try it out and maybe some shit. We would be so terrible. No, but if you do too much it's shit. Are you sure? We got to find out y'all but do we have to find out here? How long does it take? I think we'll show you over before we really feel it. How much time do we have left? Long I'm why not try a little bit. Okay, let's try a little bit try a little bit I don't know if you want to share this plastic spoon I also brought these these are a little bit deeper. Okay, this is what I think I should use the regular spoon This one Use the spoon that was used. Oh, you just so you got to mix it up first Okay, mix it up real good. I mixed it up before coming here, but it separates. I'm not sure what separating it's very Liquidy. It's very different than honey like regular honey. I'm just gonna have a little bit smell like honey Yeah, it tastes like honey too do a whole spoon No, I'm gonna do a half spoon. Okay. You got plants tonight. Yeah, I got to show I gotta do I can't have fake legs Legs aren't moving fake leg. Wow, it feels weird. Yeah, so don't drink any water I'll take a little bit too. It definitely feels different than regular honey. I think I took too much. Yeah Let's find out So you want to put the lid on it sure I'll leave this one here for you. Thank you. You can try it on your own time. Oh, the first thing I experience You don't want to leave me alone to try things in my own time I've gone down dark roads. Do you feel anything because right away. I feel it in the back of my throat. Yeah, I feel the back of my throat it Like I want to cough on I clear my throat. Yeah, it's um It's almost got like a It's not hot like hot peppers But it's got like that feeling like you're reacting to it almost like a hot pepper a little bit Like oh, whoa Yeah, yeah, like I want to cough when I have it. Mm-hmm. Sorry. So I'm told At least by this guy in the mountain in Nepal Don't drink any water. He's like you're just gonna want to drink more and more and look I don't know what this is like a redneck like mountain Bro speak bro science. The buddy said if you sorry Yeah, I'm feeling it At least here my throat. I'm feeling it. How did your brother feel after was all over? He so this guy said if you drink water You just gonna want to keep drinking more and more watering. You'll never stop drinking water and you'll make you more sick I don't know so my brother felt hung over the next day He felt stiff. He said that so what happens is it can lower your blood pressure and And I think that's what makes it difficult to move into walk So your next question might be why the fuck do people want to take this right? I don't know I couldn't figure it out And so I think maybe in the right dose like too much of anything is bad a little bit of cost syrup Great the whole bottle. I did that one time huge mistake Yeah, you know when you watch the news and they're like hey kids are doing this and they shouldn't be Right, you can get a day from cough syrup right. I was like I'm gonna do that and I did it It was like the worst 24 hours of my life I think a little bit of honey in your tea and night might call me down. It might be soothing I'm not sure but to me it's unclear why people are into it folks in Korea seem to like it a lot At least that's what I learned in Nepal Hmm, so they What's the recommended dose? Yeah, that's the tricky part. There's not one there's not one and then there's no There's no way of figuring out like how potent you know it's not like when you buy marijuana edible as you can figure out how many milligrams Are and you really well at least it's a rough estimate right? Here it says mad honey's been commonly used as an aphrodisiac Sexual stimulant and alternative therapy for gastrointestinal disorders peptic ulcer disease Dispepsia and gastritis and for hypertension for a long time See what the recommended dose of Mad honey is so they're selling a bunch of mad honey online But is that real or is a lot of it phoning baloney? It's hard to say and you know that's the trouble I had even when I was there and luckily I had a fixer a local producer who I could really trust and He said it's a real deal and I trust them as soon as I tried it. I felt something like you know I felt it my throat. I felt did you feel like your face get a little bit warmer flush? No, I think it didn't take enough maybe hopefully But hopefully Mad honey dot that's one to three tablespoons But and then please read carefully each of us is unique our body chemistry genetics tolerance lifestyle and environment makes us all very different for every person Finding the appropriate mad honey amount is a personal individual process and as such there is no one size fits all dose Yeah, like animals Jamie can eat out of bals all day long I could perhaps hold jar. Yeah, you should try it. I'm gonna leave it here. I have two jars I have one in my suitcase. I don't know what I'm gonna do with it and maybe I'll find this perfect ratio and I'll It'll be the perfect sleeping aid But I do think there's probably a lot of bullshit online because how hard would it be to take this mix it with ten gallons of honey and be like Yeah, what I put a little red dye in there. Yeah, our friend the beekeeper Erica. What's her last name? Sorry no worries We had a local beekeeper on recently it was really fascinating very interesting conversation And she was saying that a lot of honey that you buy particularly honey from overseas is not really honey It's like partly honey, but they mix it in with corn syrup and oh I think there's a Thompson just like maple syrup. I think most of the honey in the US is that like corn syrup most of it really I think so but I'm based on based on fucking nothing. That's just my intuition She said you have to buy local honey by local honey from local beekeepers I totally agree do it. Yeah. Yeah. Yep. So That said, but you feel good now right. Yeah, I feel fine. Is there a time where you would try more to see what it did Yeah, I'll try more of this, you know if I get out of this, okay? Oh, I think you'll be fine I think it's kind of tasted a little yeah, so you know, I'll try a full tablespoon For me when I had it in the mountain I didn't hallucinate but I lights seemed a bit more vivid and Like if I looked at lights like the lights behind you and looked away They were still kind of in my vision. It's just fascinating to the locals. Oh, okay. I did it 20 years ago. I'm good Yeah, well right and that's what made me even more apprehensive about trying it. Yeah, so