very Christmas Matthew Cox. Everyone's favorite elf on the shelf is back. He's been last time you were in here was right after Trump got almost assassinated. That's right and now we're back and he is the president elect. So first of all, I want to say I'm sorry for your loss. You're girl Kamala lost. I know you're upset about that. That's funny. How you getting through it. I'm okay. We got the fire going. We got the Christmas tree. We got our Santa hats on. Good time. It feels like Christmas. It's like 60 degrees outside right now in Florida. It is. It's hot here. It is a little hot. It's all 70. So we can turn it down a little bit. It is kind of warm. 77. And these beautiful Starbucks drinks you've got. You got us the Christmas Starbucks drinks. Enjoy. Had nothing to do with it. Look at that. It feels good to drink Starbucks, especially after Luigi went out and blew them up for their Christmas, their Christmas ad campaign. You see how Luigi went to Starbucks before he whacked the United Hell CEO. Yeah. Yeah. Free advertising. And all the McDonald's photos. Tim Dillon said, no one goes to Dunkin Donuts before you off a CEO. You go to there. You go to Dunkin Donuts after you bury the body. You go to Starbucks first. Mmm. Yeah. They're going to get a lot. They're going to give a lot of a lot of material out of this. Mmm. Out of Luigi. Yeah. Yeah. He's already got a tons of money on his people are sending in money for like go find me or something. He's got a ton of money for his. I'm going to be alright. I saw an interview. I saw this wild interview on TV. It was an on TV. It was on Twitter. But it was like from TV where they were the reporter with standing outside of the jailhouse and all the inmates were like yelling. Yeah. I saw that. They're like, does the, does Luigi have a TV in his cell? No. And that dude Jesse Waters was like, Luigi better watch out in prison. I'm sure that CEO had a lot of connections in that prison. Like, come on. How out of touch are you? You think the inmates are really going to be like supporting the United Hell CEO? Maybe if you're in like Coleman, the Coleman low with all the white collar criminals, but not the state prison. No, I don't think anybody has any real, you know, empathy for CEOs who are making $19.5 million in bonuses. Well, while you're telling people to, you know, give them two months worth of medication. They don't need six months and you know, cutting back on everything and canceling policies and you know, it's hard to have any any real empathy for someone like that. I mean, you know, I'm not that I'm saying you should kill somebody or anything, but you know, the guys got kids and everything. I'm sure he thought it feels like he's a decent human being, but I don't think that many people probably, you know, everybody said, Dommer was a nice guy, you know, so you know, Halo was nice to his dogs. He was kind of children, but you know, so I mean, you know, if I'm a CEO, I'm being awfully quiet right now. You know, it's funny because I was, I watched there's somebody posting, they're posting wanting to see that. That was, you know, all over New York. I feel bad for finding that finding this stuff. Because somebody did get killed, but I feel like terrible, but it was a revolution. If there was a revolution, if we had to pick us kind of revolution, right, it would be better. Instead of left verse right, it would be better if it was a normal people versus CEOs. Maybe there's less of them. They have more money. I don't know. I'm thinking that they're probably lining up all the CEOs and lawyers and executing everything. That's the first wave is, you know, probably lawyers and so it got Netflix is licking their fucking lips right now. Why could why they oh, they're getting ready to make a million dollar, millions of dollars off of this Luigi guy. They're going to make a show documentary about him. You know, he's a handsome guy, jacked all the gay guys are lining up, going Google Gaga over him on the internet. I saw, I saw like a, I was some TikTok that was talking about like like this guy wanted to get caught. He, he didn't want to get caught. This guy had multiple IDs. He did everything he could to try and hide it. I wonder what I'm curious is like, what was the game plan? Like he understand he kind of had him, he idolized the unibomber right Ted. Cause in yeah, he wrote a, he wrote a review on his book right right. And several like comments and things like that. He'd post it. He had, you know, liked and written little comments underneath multiple posts from Kuzinski on his, I think on his website. But you know, and it was all, they were all very, very, you know, positive. So you know, I wonder if he wasn't kind of thinking to himself that, Hey, I'm going to start cracking these CEOs. You know, that was his game plan because he took a lot of steps to try and hide his identity. He just, you know, he messed up, you know, he was flirting with a girl. He pulled the thing down for a couple seconds didn't realize there was a camera there. I mean, you screwed up like that's, that's really the his downfall. Hmm. They'd be looking for him right now. They'd be looking for a guy with nice eyebrows. crazy that they literally had zero leads on him before some old lady on a Greyhound bus at a McDonald's stop. No, it was a McDonald's employee. All right. Yeah. And McDonald's it was like an old lady who worked at McDonald's. I think and it was like random at some random. He was on a Greyhound bus right on the stop. Like that's somebody who like called the hotline. And says, Hey, I think I found somebody who looks suspicious. And he gave the ID gave the cop his fake ID. Yeah. Well, I like like unless that guy, the guy is a smart guy. Right. Yeah. He's relatively high IQ individual. Yeah. But not everybody, you know, look, if you haven't had interactions with police and you don't know how the system works, he's buying an ID off of some Russian website. Right. Like he didn't go into the DMV and get it. Like I would hate me when I was on the run. I would hand them an ID. I have no problem. I'll get pulled over. Here's my ID. Right. Here's my passport. But I have a passport. I have multiple passports that are issued by the State Department. I have driver's licenses issued by the D. But that, that States DMV. This guy hands them a fake ID bought off some Russian website. Like what do you think? That's not going to pass muster. No. No, it's going to get you maybe get you a bank account. Maybe it's going to get you, it's going to get you into a bar. But you're not. Yeah, this isn't going to work. So they very quickly boom. And he had a couple of different IDs, I believe, a couple of different IDs. Wasn't there a YouTube channel that he had? Did you hear about the YouTube channel? No. I saw my wife was showing me a TikTok last night where this lady on TikTok was talking about how he had a YouTube channel with a countdown on it. And he has a bunch of videos on his YouTube channel that he scheduled to release later, like at later dates, right? And they had count downs and like days on them. Of like saying different things were going to become and Steve. Can you find something about that? And apparently his YouTube channel got taken down, but somebody saved like a screen recording of it and like what the video looks like. Yeah, there you go. That was it. So this is a real truth about claims. Luigi Mangeon. He's posted video saying new details will come today. Okay. So did they to bunk it or what? Copycat warning that they reveal the truth about a cryptic video is posted live posted by Luigi shortly after his arrest on Monday. But blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. The one minute 24 second clip titled the truth was shared to an account with mangeon. He's pictures his profile featuring a countdown with text messages with text that reads, if you see this, I'm already arrested. So was this some guy just trying to capitalize on his arrest scroll down past the McDonald's ad? What's the clock? What's the clock is zero? The screen goes black and the words soon appears at the bottom right corner. After December 11th, the flashes on the screen, which is followed by all the scheduled be patient by for now, the video sparked hysteria. We terminated the channel in question for violating our policies covering impersonation, which prohibit content intended to impersonate another person on YouTube. So that was it right there. So you were just 45 the truth. Yeah. If you see this, I'm already under arrest. And then you're saying that allegedly he posted this like knowing he was going to get arrested, right? Yeah. Allegedly, but they also said they took it down because it was a copy. Right. But would they also take it down if it was really him? Yeah, but they would have said we took it down because it was impersonating him. They would have taken it down because it it was political or violated there. You know, it was whatever it was going. It was, I don't know, you know, it was it was like screaming, you know, fire in a crowded restaurant, right? Could have lead to, I don't know, some kind of, why don't you pay? Why don't you have YouTube premiere? Fuckin no. This is not YouTube. This is a website, dude. Okay. There's ads everywhere. I don't know. Could do we know how to get an ad blocker? Like like the same thing you can do. No, no, no. Just for normal websites. Oh, for cheese. I thought it for a second. I didn't I because we were looking at it. I thought it was. No, no, no, that was just a website. Okay. So yeah, you know, I'm saying like, I think it was so I think it was somebody trying to capitalize on it. Yeah. There's so many things that probably that there's so many things that come out that I've already I've seen. It's like you don't know what's true and what's not true. I watched a video about the the weapon. Remember how he he fires and then he it looks like he it jammed and he clears it. He fires again. He clears it. Yeah. I was again. Yeah. So they were saying the you know, initially it was trying to keep the casings. The shell casings. No, initially it was the gun jammed because it had a silencer on it. That's that that was the first report. Then it was that it may have been, you know, may not have been a great weapon. May have been some kind of an older weapon. May have been a weapon. Turns out now it may have been a ghost gun and it had it was a good. Yeah. That's what I heard. Within the then I saw a guy who was a gun enthusiast that has a channel. He did a video where he showed a weapon that is a one shot, right? It's a one shot weapon that every time you fire it, you have to clear it fire it. And he showed, they actually shows people using it. It's the exact same action. So he's wanted to. So and then of course he was he was found with the ghost gun. So was he found with the ghost gun and the silencer or was it just an additional ghost gun? Like I don't know. Like, you know, all these things slowly come out. You know, there's so much stuff coming out initially. Yeah, boy, let me tell you when this guy was showing the firing of that of that silence gun. He was exactly what this guy was doing. Oh, really? Boom. He's just a boom. It's pulling it because you know, and the guy was clearly not a professional shooter either. He hit the guy with a leg and then like the like all body shots, right? Not one headshot. What he did shoot, here's the funny thing. Look how far away it was. Why wouldn't you just run right up on him? Right. You know, well, yeah, I'm sure if I could push if you were if you were a skilled shooter, you would have been one shot done. Right. Is that the weapon? So this is what you were talking about. This is the, it's the well rod. Put it up for people. This is that what they call an assassin gun. It's meant for not an euthanizing animals. So it's a single shot. That's why it's such a, it's not really good for assassinations. Right. You have to re-load it every time. There's a good picture over there. So that was initially what this guy was saying. This is the weapon that he believed. But you know, I still don't know what was a real weapon was. Keep in mind to the guy had multiple IDs. You could buy these things on, on like the dark web. But if you could buy a ghost gun, I don't know why you wouldn't buy a ghost, but you know, he probably just didn't know that much. Like the average, even getting, you know, getting a fake ID, that's difficult to do. I mean, you have to, you have to do some searching. You probably have to order a few of them before you actually get one. A lot of these places just rip you off. Right. Well, isn't it funny that we also know like way more about this guy, a hundred times more than this quote. They know about Crocs. Yeah. Yeah. That's very weird. Nothing about it. They just, they let that go. Like, oh, yeah, that's over really. Right. Just like that. Nobody's interested in this at all. Mm hmm. What do you think the chances are that this guy, what do you think is going to happen to this guy in prison? He's going to get a lot of time. We idolized. Do you think? Yeah. I think if they were smart right now, he'd be trying to get some kind of a deal for like 30 years. He's going to be idolized in 30 years in New York City. I don't know what it is that 15, 20. I don't know how I don't know if they have parole. I'm not sure exactly how their system works. What did Hinckley get? Hinckley's out now. Right. Hinckley got like like well, Hinckley, I don't know that he got much of anything. He was found to be insane. They could keep him forever. They just eventually after like 40 something years they decided let this guy out. Yeah. Now he's not making YouTube videos. He's making music. He's doing really, he really said, now remember we watched it. We watched it last time we were recording. Yeah. So got the world so weird to do. It's like a video game. Man. Look at the hawk to a girl. I thought, Oh, she's just kind of a cute silly boy. She pulled off her rug. Oh, what happened with that? You got to educate me on this. So she did some sort of crypto. She came with like the hawk to a, not hawk to but it's like the hawk coin. The two, two coin or some the hawk coin or so. Yeah. And it went like it was outrageous how high it went. I think it went to like half a billion, $5 billion, $5 billion. Yeah. And she, whether it's fear of government takeover or just protecting your family, stop box is made for you and me. And I'm happy to have them sponsor the show. Instant access to your firearm while being safe around your family is a huge challenge for gun owners today. Most storage options for you to keep track of keys, fumble around with a keypad or lie on a battery for operation. And personally, I don't want a dead battery keeping me from protecting my family. That's why stop box USA engineered the stop box pro. Now I have a way to safely store my firearm without keys or electronics to open it. Stop box is purely mechanical and dead this means you're always ready even in the dark or under stress. It's glass fiber reinforced poly carbonate and it's tough and secure. This one here is perfect for keeping next to your bed or under your mattress. And it's perfect for bedside. And I even keep this one in my trucks and are console, but they also make one specifically designed for your vehicle. Stop box is also TSA compliance. So you don't need a separate carry case. And they also have a wall mountain version. And like I mentioned, one that's easy access in your vehicle. And for a limited time only, our listeners are getting a crazy deal. Not only do you get 10% off your entire order when you use code Danny at stop box USA.com, but they are also giving you buy one get one free for their stop box pro. That's 10% off and a free stop box pro when you use my code Danny at stop box USA.com. Discover a better way to balance security and readiness with stop box. It's linked below. Now back to the show. She and her team got 85% of it pulled the money out at the at the beginning. Was it 490 million market cap? Oh my God. People were in bed. They got people on YouTube with commercial or with videos that are like talking about how, man, I put $20,000 into this and now my now my coin is worth 190 bucks. So how much money did she make when she did when she when she pulled out? I don't know. It depends on how much of the 85 per go to PewDiePie or not PewDiePie. Go to coffee, Zillis Twitter. Oh coffee, Zillis like his Twitter. He posted something about it. Because people were like trying to say that she made way more than she actually did. And coffee corrected them real quick. He was like, yo, you guys are like, go on getting out of control here. Go up. Go up. Okay. Right there. Can y'all stop the insane headline? She didn't rug for 500 million and she didn't profit 50 million for f**k sake. Number one, the team pre sold a few million to strategic advisors who sold early number two, the token got sniped and three LP. What is that LP made more than 1 million on 15% fees according to the meteors trackers. He's LP the service that sell the coin. Maybe. So what does she make? 150 million. So go down to this next tweet. Okay. Go up, up, up, up, up, up, up, up, up, up, oh, and she isn't being sued yet. So literally everything in this post is missing from me. Keep going down. The nories who purchased did the nories who purchased did get rug pulled. And all of this was enabled by the team, which includes the Hawk to a girl. It's already horrible. No need to invent headlines about a 500 million dollar rugs and 50 million dollar profits. Meme coins always benefit a insiders and trading bots. Oh, that shows it's just so that's the Hawk to a coin. So look, it peaks at 0.4. And then it just f**king falls. Keep going down. he did a Hawk to a jail straight to a jail. 3% allocation to public market 70% allocation unlocked pre sale wallets do the math. So she did something. She like pre sold, they pre sold that stuff to like insiders that they were close to. And then they all sold it before the thing fell. It shot all the way up and boom, they all just they were selling right. And so you're some guy who put $20,000 in and you don't know when to sell. Yeah. So you lose, they just took your money and left you with some worthless coin. At what point are these f**king celebrities going to learn to stop doing when crypto skin. What the f**king shit fbi comes in and starts indicting people and makes examples of a few of them. And then it like here's what's funny is it's so this is such an open and shut case. Like I'm shocked that the the zoo coin with Logan, Logan Paul. Well, why didn't he go to print? Why didn't he get why didn't he get indicted? Yeah. Like it's like they're it's funny how amazing the you know the fbi and these the federal law enforcement is at solving some crimes and how inept they are at solving other ones that honestly any idiot could put together anybody you don't even need law enforcement. I could lay out and I don't you don't even need training. I lay out an entire case that would convince any jury that this person 100% just ran a scam. And yet they just let them keep going and going and going. Maybe they had an arc. Maybe if Logan Paul went to jail would be a bad look for American democracy. I think it'd be a great look. I think it'd be a great look. You know, I think the problem is that one they haven't done it yet. And you know, the first case they want to be airtight. I think the Logan Paul one I think there's tons of them that are airtight. And yet why they keep letting them go. I just don't understand it. Yeah, it's just like there's these cockroaches that are surrounding this Hollywood scene. And whenever somebody just pops up, they just see an opportunity to make a quick buck. What's funny is like, you know, she seemed just like a kind of a backwards kind of girl that, you know, honestly, I like like, you know, seems like she'd probably be a lot of fun to hang out with and silly and funny. And she's just kind of a party girl. You know, kind of like a kind of like a florida southern girl, you know, no big, you know, we're in new crypto thing. Trust me, you're going to be fine. You're going to make a lot of money. It's going to be great for the brand. All right. Yeah, that's what it becomes a problem when people were just like, Oh, well, I don't really know anything about it. So I don't really have anything to stop, stop, stop. You understood the basics that people are going to be investing focus on the hawk to a pot to a podcast. Absolutely. We'll make you some money. Okay. Right. Well, yeah, you're going to be fine. And if that's the case, then then, you know, what it's going to show that when they get all the text messages and emails and all of the phone calls, they're going to be very quickly. You would realize like, Oh, wow, like, she had nothing to do with this. They used her name. They asked her to do a video or two. Like she had very, she was not really culpable. Like she had very little, she had a minor role in this whole thing. And then you'd be like, Oh, wow, they just kind of took advantage of you. But you don't, but I don't know. But if you look at the other way, they're like, Oh, wow, this was very clearly explained to you. You knew what was kind of happened. You know, you're in a lot of trouble. But either way, it doesn't even matter because he's just not going to do anything. They just never do anything with these things. No, they don't. If I was involved, boy, I'd be doing 20 years right now. Right? For real. Yeah, that's true. It's crazy too. I haven't heard shit about the Logan Paul case. I'm telling you I was positive something with coffee. You still making videos about it, isn't he? I don't know. Logan Paul suing him, right? What a jackass this guy is. You know, I mean, what, what? Yeah, just, you know, even everything about this guy is a scam, like even the, the fight with Tyson, you know, we're gonna go through the motions. You're gonna lose. You're gonna, we're, oh, sorry, we're gonna go through, we're gonna go through emotions and then we're gonna, you're, you're gonna lose and then we're gonna fight another one. You're gonna make even more money. Like, all right, I like it. Yeah, let's do that. Yeah. This is a shitty thing for Tyson to do too. Yeah. But that seems like, that's what it is. Yeah, I don't think anybody watched that fight and thought, Oh, yeah, this is legit. Like, and this is not set up. And then, um, and did you watch it? I did. Bro, like, I don't know about you, but our Netflix was just crap. Oh, my God. You're using it for the same. Same. Yeah. Yeah. It was, it was unwatchable. It was a good buffering the whole time. I had to actually, I think I'd turn it off on my TV and I had to watch on my phone. It was working on my phone. What's going on with these New Jersey Drowns? New Jersey Drowns? New Jersey Drowns. You haven't seen them with the New Jersey Drown. I heard something about it. This is, it does have been hovering around New Jersey over New Jersey and other states now, it's in California too. Drones or their drones, their drones, their conventions, they're conventional like drones, but they're big. They're apparently like the size of this table and they're like slow moving, like normal everyday drones are not moving like light speed, like going through wormholes or anything. All right. Um, and they have like lights on them, typical sort of like airplane lights that you see nav lights. Right. And nobody knows what they are. They interviewed the FBI director in front of Congress. He doesn't know what the hell they are. Shoot one down. They're interviewing the people from the Pentagon. They're like, oh, we don't know what they are. Knock one down. How hard is it to, you know, where's this in New York? New Jersey. New Jersey. They got guns in New Jersey. That's what I said. Let's start shooting. Somebody f***ers now. This is all over the news all day every day. It's all anyone is talking about. Well, listen, listen, let me tell you how my, my time is broken up. I have done six podcasts this week. And I have another one tomorrow. This, if you include this as a podcast, which I don't, this would be seven because it's not my podcast. That's crazy. So I'm not really getting much. Yeah. It's a lot of podcasts. So between that and my scroll time for TikTok and and reels, you know, I got to an hour or two. I just stopped working out. Did you really? I can tell dick. Um, yeah, I gotta start working out again or at least up the dose of the other, of the, of the voids. I know. I know. That's what Ryan said. Keep taking them. Oh, really? You still, are you still with Ryan? What's your dose? And what's your weekly dose? No. I don't know. Jess gives it to me. Oh, you don't even f***ing care. You just say, yeah, she just put your pants down and say, go for it. So, you know, so she gives me my, she gives me the ozimpic and the shot at the right balance. I got the right balance. You know, I'm not going to be a zimpic. No, it's the, the, the, the other version on a, ozimpics, the, um, the GLP one. Ozimpic is the name brand. The actual chemical is something else. That's what I'm taking where it's, but I forget the name. Why are you taking that? Bro, I got up to 185. Now I'm like 173. I actually got down to 169 from what though. It's muscle, right? Muscle. I mean, what do you mean, muscle and water? And loss, it's not, loss, not water. It's fat. I lost weight. I lost, you know, you take it and you can eat like you're normally eating. You just start losing weight. Is that okay though? Probably not. It's probably, I don't think it's safe to be whacking yourself with all these pharmaceutical drugs. I know it's horrible. You should see the amount of pills I'm taking right now. I think you should figure out a better way. I need to find, but that's, you know, a lot more things you need to get off that testosterone. Probably, probably a better way. Just up your, if you can up your natural testosterone, you know how you do it, this is how you have to do it, bro. You're up early every day, right? The best way I've learned recently to jack your testosterone levels, is to get outside of the morning, right when the sun comes up and just be outside for like 20 to 30 minutes during the sunrise. You don't have to be in the direct sunlight. You just have to be outside during the sunrise. Right. The other thing is you can do cold water exposure, get in the cold water, come out and then you work out afterwards. That's severely increases your testosterone. Then you just jam a bunch of creatine. You know, go to the gym, do a bunch of like, you know, bench presses squats and all that, you'll be fine. You know, I don't even need to do all that. I just need to start working out again. Yeah. That's true. You know, you started working out again. And I get off the, the ozempic stuff. Listen, I just needed to drop some weight. I dropped it. I'm good. I'm good. Okay. But I did pay for it for it. And I still got some some left in the bottle. So we're going to keep taking it. Plus, I'm being interviewed. I got a good L.A. I'm being interviewed for some story out there. I'm like an expert on some true crime criminal guy that they're interviewing me on. And really, they meet with a producer out there. Fun. What else? Yeah. That's it. What's a, so, so what, so how you haven't seen anything about the New Jersey drone stuff? I saw, I saw something, but no, I haven't really looked into it. I've been, you know, yeah. So the story is that there's, there's, I guess dozens and dozens of drone sightings for people in New Jersey every single day. You can find these videos on every website. It's like Toronto Fox News. It's on their all day long all day. There's people just like showing their videos of what they see in the sky. Senate Congress hearings with the FBI director with people from the Pentagon, the military. And they're all saying we have no clue what this is. Then some, I think some, some state representative. I forget who it was. Maybe it was a Congress person said that it was a Iranian mothership parked off the, off the shore of New Jersey. And all these little mini drones are coming off the mothership and hover and over New Jersey, over Trump's golf course. And then buy someone from Congress. This, yeah. Like, are you kidding me? I can't believe and the guy finally came and walked it back and said, oh, no, I said, you know, it could be a possibility, but which, you know, that was probably the most sure that Navy wouldn't notice them. No, no, no, no, no, no, no. The country that spends 10 times more on military than any other country in the entire fucking world with nuclear submarines patrolling our coast Navy fighter jets and battleships everywhere. They're not going to notice an Iranian mothership. Let alone. Iranian's Navy, like, do they even have a prop plane? Let alone a mothership? Yeah, could they even get over here? I don't know. I mean, I'm sure they got some good shit. I know Russia gives them some serious equipment, but I doubt they all the Russian equipment's working so well. They're not going to get across the frickin Atlantic. No, unnoticed. No, that's the most, that's the most retarded thing I've ever heard. But I think the guy walked it back. Anyways, everyone is like speculating on this. And Julian posted a tweet about it a couple hours ago. The holidays are full of stress with holiday shopping and travel and dealing with that one in law that you don't care for. Restore your zen and embrace the natural power of hemp this season with Vaya. If you haven't heard, Vaya is well known for their award-winning hemp-based gummies, Vape's, Topicals, and calming drops. I've been taking their gummies and I love them so much. I give my way to all my friends and Steve. I like to break them up into little quarters so I can micro dose when I want to be creative or get a good night's sleep. Vaya legally ships to nearly all states in the US into street packaging and a worry-free guarantee. No medical car required. Vaya's hemp extracts are perfect for relaxation and rejuvenation. Vaya is the only lifestyle hemp brand and they use compounds found in hemp along with active plant extracts to create products with specific effects. So you get a tailored experience whether you want to ease anxiety, enhance your mood, or just elevate your life. And if you're not in a THC, that's okay. Their CBD products are designed for sleep, focus, and energy too. They're experts in hemp extract and using it to get the effect you want naturally. Their products range from zero milligrams to 100 milligrams of THC so these guys have you covered whether you're looking to micro dose or enjoy more potent effects. Vaya is handcrafted in the USA with no harsh chemicals and it's A&B tested and certified. milligrams of THC. So these guys have you covered whether you're looking to microdose or enjoy more potent effects. VIA is handcrafted in the USA with no harsh chemicals and it's A&B tested and certified hemp and they've won awards for their customer service with over a half a million served. This holiday season, give yourself some peace of mind. If you're 21 plus check out the link to via in our description and use the code Danny to receive 15% off. Again, check the link to via in the description and use the code Danny for 15% off. After you purchase, they're going to ask you where you heard about them. And please support the show and tell them we sent you enhance your every day with VIA. And can you go on Twitter and pull up Julian's tweet? He posted a random tweet that is going like super nuclear viral on Twitter. Well, I know what that is. I know what that is. I know what that is. It's like a flying car. That's one of those flying cars. Mysterious giant drone. It's a flying car. It looks like the Jetson drone. The Jetson one drone. Have you seen those? What's the thing in the flying car thing? So go to X. Go to X and pull the aliens. Go to Julian. Yeah. Click on him and then scroll down. Look at him. He's getting like a thousand new followers minute now right there. Hearing some very creepy things about these drones from sources. They are. Yes. Yeah. This is what that is. Look, that's exactly what that is. Julian says, I'm hearing some very creepy things about these drones from sources. They're definitely not aliens. I'll tell you that. Almost a half a million views on this tweet. There's a random tweet that he posted five hours ago. Mysterious. So now he's posting a video about it because his tweets going viral, talking about his secret sources. He really needs to get that that kitchen under control. Yeah. So we talked to a source of his one of his sources. Sources on the. No, it wasn't boost of Monte. He said it's somebody who's never been on this podcast. You wouldn't even fucking tell me on the phone who was. Oh, my God. He's so he's so you're borderline the same way. So what I'm not the same way. You're you're maybe 30% of his paranoia with that they're watching me. And this is. Oh, my God. They're the might they've taken their they're threatening my channel or they're. I'm oh, stop it. No, he just wouldn't tell me who the guy was because the guy. He the guy made a promise. He wouldn't say who he was. He's like, Danny Jones. I'm not even telling you. I won't even tell you if we were locked up in a fair day cage right now. Danny Jones. Yeah. He says he'll say when he's serious, he says you're holding. a gun. Yeah. That's not telling you right now that I'm shadow banned and everything I can. I've seen the analytics. I've studied this Matt Cox. I've studied this. Oh, my God. He has. He has. I know he has. He goes deep on the analytics dude. I've never met anyone who goes as deep as he does. Anyways, so his got it. He got a crazy super confidential source whose who knows fucking who the guy is or who he works for. But anyways, nobody we know. Allegedly. That's what he says. I say no. So I say who told him something he won't even tell me what the guy said. He just said that it's not aliens. Okay. Right. But Julian has a theory. And I think he might be spot on with this theory. His theory is that whatever these drones are that is causing all this paranoia, all this media frenzy, we're a podcast talking about it. It's a sigh out. Not a sigh out. But what it is is it's sort of like a they're getting like a systematic societal. They're getting you acclimated. No. It's like a societal war game. Right. So they're they're running a test on society to see how people respond to see the sigh off the theories they come up with. See what what the narrative ends up being. Seeing how people react, what people's actions are. What they do in the case that something real happens that is similar to this to be prepared for how the country will react. Wow. Which I think makes it ton of sense. I think that makes the most sense because how else are how else do you explain people in the Pentagon and military and the FBI not knowing what it is unless it's some sort of like top secret simulation than the running or like a even a test. I think some guy opened his personal, um, his personal flying car early for Christmas, got it out of the box, put some lights on it and flew it at night to see what would happen. And he's laughing as a sauce right now with his wife at their $85,000. There's dozens and dozens of them, dude. I always saw one. Go back to the videos. There's tons of them. There's way more than one. Okay. There's a whole bunch. Okay. As a whole bunch. You want videos on Fox News, but like 12 of them flying around. There's videos of like dozens of them. There's videos of like at least six in this guy at once. It sucks that it's at night because look in its bleak, it's it's it's linking. It's not the new Jersey has an AK 47. It's I can't. I mean, you can't take this thing down. So this is a four rotors. One, two, three, four. And then this is a center body pointing up. You can look like an airplane. No, it's definitely a drone. They're moving like drones, but they look like airplanes. They're a little blinking light. Like what is it? So what would it like? That looks like an airplane. I don't think anybody thinks aliens. No, I think it's a hover. One of these hover car hover craft things flying at night, slowly off the street lamps. This is the video I think I was saying. Okay. Can I can. So look, yeah, look at that. There you go. So can I can I mention something that I've noticed? What have you noticed that you said dozens? She said three right there. That so it doesn't. There's another video. 12. There shows us. But there's would mean at least two, which is 24. You have one, three, three, four, five and three. That's pretty unique right there. At least five in that shot. Boseyak has a drone. They're like, they're like $110. Anybody can get a drone. Now you get it. You get an expensive one for $1000. Why? Well, you know, you know, you so you think these are just like people like random people just trying to sigh opposite the news. You're probably going to find out that this is this is a bunch of 15 year old boys who all got drones and saved it for drones. There's flying over military bases and airports and shit. If you were me going fly our drone over camp international right now, there's going to be a fed on our doorstep in less than 12 hours. Right. That's you've got to be able to track it all the way back to find it. Like if they're not flying. This has been going on for three weeks. Not then then eventually. I think they will find it. They're going to track it back the little Billy's backyard. Billy little Billy's going to give up Donnie and Todd and Steve. They're all going to be crying like a bunch of children in the police department. And then it's going to it's going to be one night of news and it's going to be over. I don't know, man. I think it's something bigger than that. They're drawn. They're clearly drones. They're blinking. Yes, I agree. They're clearly drones. But somebody said that the reports are showing that they're as big as small cars like small SUVs, midsize SUVs. Well, I mean, we saw at least one of them that's probably one of those, those automobile things that looks like the size of one of those automobile things. Yes, exactly. You don't even need a license form. It's under under 60 are sophisticated and I'll drive one of those things around at night. Anybody absolutely think watch the video. They say with with less than an hour of with us in an hour of watching, you can watch a lesson. It's like a 45 minute video tells trains you to know exactly how to fly it. Exactly. It's not like a where you can hit the stick and flip over like it's it's up, down, forward, back, forth. It only flies for about an hour. It's less than 600 pounds. And you do not, they're 85 grand, I think. And my buddy just bought one is called the Jetson one. Okay. And you don't have to have a license because it's under 600 pounds. That's it. Yeah. Anybody. You do have to take like a two day class though from when I heard look at this guy. New York officials launch a public state. What is this through the drones? This is officials provide update on mysterious drone size. Oh, this is a live right now. Yeah. No, this is daytime. They say it's live. You get other cities. We are placing people into housing and making sure to get the services they want. And it's all the same. to Pista NYPD's presence and dedicate outreach teams. Place over 70 new yorkers in shelter. C's over 6600, 50 of those pasty illegal petty cactus. And it's your 6500 petty caddy related violation of the dress. I think it's just click base has nothing to do with the dress. This is lovable Jesus Christ. So Julian said if Trump doesn't he's scheduled to show up to the Army Navy football game tomorrow? Right. If he doesn't show up to that game, he says we need to get the fuck at a dodge. We need to start driving West. Seriously. If Julian calls you tomorrow and says he won't call me, Julian would let me die. If there was the apocalypse, he wouldn't warn me. That's he would. No, if Julian's flying into Tampa, I don't hear about it till he sees about to get on the plane. And Danny says, stop Julian said, I listen, stop it. I'm the outside. I'm an outside person. I know the outside. That's not true. It's true. It's not true. If he calls you tomorrow and says Matt Cox, start my case driving West. Did you see my case? It's beautiful. It's great. Chris Cringle. Very cool with the mistletoe. Yeah. I love Christmas. I know you do. Thank you for sending me all these. Oh, you stopped sending me videos. Yeah. I know. I don't know. I got laxed. I'm going to start up again. You got what? Very, lax. Oh, very disappointed myself. I'm like, I'm sort of sleeping in. Stop going to the gym. Stop sending Christmas videos. What is going on with you, dude? Listen, we've been doing a ton of podcasts. You're a machine. You're recording six podcasts a week. Yeah, because I'm, we're catching up. We're catching up because, because Colby, my Stephen is called Colby. Mm hmm. And so he, he is leaving town and I'm leaving town soon. So we, we need a backlog and the hurricanes wiped out our backlog. You know, we had a, a week or two kind of, you know, cushion. Well, that wiped it out. It wiped out your podcasts. Yeah. Because people couldn't fly in for two weeks. Oh, I thought there's any loss of hard drives. No, no, they couldn't fly in. And so literally, so bad. Colby had to go get two videos from that were shot a year ago, cut that re-edit them and post them. Yeah. We thought, yeah, nobody will know. Well, I was wrong about that. 50% of the, look, the same thing happened to us, man. Yeah. I'm, except the beaches right fucking there. That's the only difference. Yeah. At least you guys didn't get hammered and flooded like us. No, we got no matter fact. I actually slept through the second hurricane that hit ripped off everybody's roof and my neighborhood. Right. Just tried to wake me up. Oh, wake up. It's looking, you know, I would wake up up. I'd be like, Oh, man, that sounds so great. Like it was a real, it was like a nice wind. And then I woke up in the morning and everything was every sign was twist off and lay down there. We've got probably 40 houses in a row where half of the shingles are off. Yeah. If not entirely gone on all these two story houses, you're just like, why slept through this at nine o'clock at night when that second hurricane was coming through. And we lost power for three days. Yeah. So that we lost power for days per hurricane. Oh, and you got little kids too. And we got kids. That is miserable. The second hurricane at nine PM at night, I'm sitting in my living room. This was before my power when I'm a power to go out to late. But I'm sitting in my living room and I'm listening to, I'm sitting next to my chimney. Right. So like I can hear the wind flying on my chimney. And it sounds like this is the best description I can come up with. It sounds like I'm in my house and my house is free falling through the sky. Like my house is skydiving and I'm inside of it. That's what the wind sounded like. You've never seen was fucking scary, dude. You've probably never seen this. Oops. Oops. Let's say this is the hold on Dorothy and just tell him to find out he can pull it up falling. Dorothy from the Wizard of Oz, her house is when her house is falling. Oh, that's it. That's exactly what it sounded like. That is exactly what it sounded like. When you said that to it by a picture, yep, that's exactly what it was, bro. That's where that person got the idea for that scene. They must have been through a couple of hurricanes in Florida. Or maybe some tornadoes and Kansas. But yeah, that sucked. No power is the worst part about it, dude. You don't realize how dependent you are. Everything in the fridge starts going bad. I mean, if you're like a single dude, it's probably not that bad. I mean, if I was by myself, I would be totally fine. But it's like my wife and my kids, they, I mean, my oldest kids find, but like my wife, the little one, they just cannot handle it. If they're not happy, if they're miserable, I'm fucking miserable. So that's the worst part. But we luckily got, we got like, I mean, because you're connected in that kind of, you know, that kind of bond or you mean they make me miserable. Oh, yeah. The latter. But luckily, like the day two days before the hurricane game, we got, I got bought a big ass generator that runs on propane. And I got these propane tanks that are like this tall. So I had generator running my whole, I got a wired into my panel. So fucking connects to my panel and runs my whole house. That's funny. You mentioned that because when it hit and we've lost power, I wished I'd done that. So it's the same thing. You know, yeah, I knew I should have done that. But we were so far inland that when everybody was like, you know, oh, you know, that it's going to hit. I was like, we're fine. We're not going to have it. We're so far inland. You know, what do you mean that evacuate? I'm a Floridian. I'll just deal with it. I'm not going to hit me. And I'm 10 miles inland. And then you lose power. And you're like, this is chaos. Yeah. They have to fix this. Dude, around here was crazy too, because literally like the beaches were destroyed. I don't know if you like saw the beaches if you ever went on the beach. No, I mean, I saw the video. Oh my God, dude, it was like, it was like doomsday on the beach. The roads were covered in sand. Every car was destroyed. Everyone's houses, every house was gutted with all like their beds and their clothes and their furniture all out in the middle of the road. And it was just like, it was a straight up disaster. Like, like everyone had to leave the beach. It was, it was totaled completely total. And like, they're still cleaning it up. They have giant dump trucks going up and down the roads every morning still cleaning up shit. I know, like a week or two ago, we were driving. I forget where we were going. And it was over, it was in, was it Sarah soda? Did we go to Sarah soda? Or anyway, yeah. And as we were going to the hotel, it was, there was still just stuff piled up on next to the road where people were gutted their houses. They're just piling it up. Yeah. So yeah, houses are going now on the beach that were like first sale for four million bucks a couple months ago. They're going for sale for like 1.5. That's a bargain. Two million dollars. You scoop it up. Ah, they're, they're going. It's a fire sale on the beach right now. And then you can buy like one story houses that got really wrecked for like 500,000 bucks right on the water. House of that work two million bucks a couple months ago. All right. 500,000 bucks. What are you doing? You can't get insurance on them. Can't show them. And you got to demo the house. You got to build a new house. If you want to get like a legitimately insured house, you got to build it up 12 feet. Right. And you got to think it's got to be a 12 foot foundation garage basically that's not livable. And then above that, you get, so you got to build a whole new house. Right. So it's like, you're paying that much money for the land. Right. Yeah, that's it. Count me out. You can do a man. That was a good share. Oh, yeah. Yeah, you go. I mean, that's not even the worst of it. That's like, that's like what it still looks like. That's just a small pot. That was like yesterday. You should have seen it two months and a half ago. It was insane, man. All the restaurants completely shut down. They like, they're just starting to reopen now. Like our favorite Thai food restaurant, just reopened a week ago. You've gone this far, this long with no typhus. Yeah. It's great. I actually got me thinking about it. I think after this, I'm going to go get some. Speaking of Thai food, I'm really fucking hungry right now. I mean, I have an eat in all day. I ate breakfast. I ate steak and eggs for breakfast at like 8 a.m. And I'm like, I'm not going to eat the rest of the day to have to the podcast. And then right before I'm getting ready to leave to come here for new my house, my wife has a freaking pile of pizza and breadsticks on the counter. I'm like, oh, I just like demolished four breadsticks right before I got here. So not ideal. Speaking of Thailand, John Boziak is in Thailand right now. Really? Really? Listen, what is he doing there? He lives there. He lives in Thailand now. How long ago is he there? A year ago, he had this, you know, one of his angry rants about how horrific, you know, how he, you know, he can't live here anymore. He doesn't like, you know, he's he busts his ass. He can't make enough money to, you know, he's to survive. He's sick of, you know, working 40 hours a week, 50 hours a week, which he doesn't work, by the way. Um, you know, he's one of these guys, he'll be like, I work, I work. I work at your house, right? Oh, yeah. Yeah. He lives in my spare room. And he'd be like, you know, I've worked 10 hours and it's like, I'm like, no, no, you left at 10 in the morning. You came back at two. You worked for hours, but that's fine. He, the problem is he's just, he just doesn't want to work. And he'll tell you, he's like, look, I'm lazy. I don't want to work 40, 50 hours a week to pay my bills. You know, I, I like working. You know, I like what I do. Like, I don't feel like it's work. So, so it doesn't bother me to work 60, 80 hours a week. You know, he doesn't want to do it. He wants to, you know, he says other interests, right? So, uh, he just a year ago, he came up with the, with the, I don't know if it's a scheme, but the plan that he wants to leave the United States, which he's never left, by the way. So, and decide he's going to, he's researched all the different places go, figured out Thailand was the best place to go. He's going to go to Thailand. And you know, of course, I haven't tell him, you're insane. That's nuts. He's not going to save my money up for the next year. Go there. That'll give me three or four months where I don't have to work. I'm going to start a YouTube channel in Thailand, get it up and running. And I'm going to live off the YouTube channel. Like, you're insane. That's never going to fucking happen. Wow. Here's the thing is that it, it's, he's been there for a week and a half. But it seems to be working. Like, his YouTube YouTube channel, which had like 12,400 subscribers when he got there now has like 13,000, two or 300 subscribers. His videos are getting a few thousand views. He's doing videos where he's walking through the streets. He's telling you how much things cost. And here's the big thing because because it has been a year of research, I get sucked into the research every once in a while and walked by the couch. And he's like, check this out. Look at this condo. And I'll wash the condo. They do a tour of the condo and this and that, you wash the whole thing. You're like, okay. And then they get to the end and they're like, yeah, it's 15,000 bought. That's the name of their currency, you know, a bought, a month. And you're like, okay, what's that? And then it tells you and you're like, are you tell me that that one bedroom, one bath condo on the 22nd floor of a brand new high rise in the middle of Bangkok is going for $490 a month. Yeah. And you're like, that's not possible. And then you start looking at it like you can eat out every meal there, three bucks a meal. So for less than $10, you're going into a restaurant. Hey, I want this such and such and whatever it's three dollars. They across the board, you know, water is going to be about $11 a month. Electricity is going to be about $7 a month. Your, your wife, Wi-Fi bill, $6 a month. I mean, across the board is insane that the, and it's not like a, it's not like it's horrific. There are horrific parts of the city. But it's not just Thailand like it's, I forget the, listen, he watched so many of these videos. He could tell you what street the guy was on who's walking around them with the video. Hmm. So he did it. He really looked into it. And then of course, you know, I kept joking with him and with, with Jess, I was like, you know, I think you're, I think in three months from now, I'm going to get a panic phone call where you're like, so he $1200 to give me back to the nice things. You know, but, you know, but he, he landed and does he have a girlfriend over there? Are there any matter? Actually, met a girl on like a website, right? She was communicating with. And so when, and she's a school teacher, oh, no, so he lands there. He's already got a girlfriend. And he's already put out like four videos. They're doing, okay, I'm not getting a hundred of thousands of views, but he's got a channel that's got like 12, let's go like 13,000 subscribers. But he's doing really well. And he's a good editor. Like he's good at it. He's doing a vlogging thing. You can tell every video he's getting better and better and better. And they're good. I'm dying to know, you know, look as YouTube channel, I'm dying for him for it to work for him. Yeah. John Bose. Yeah. Yeah. It's called John Bose. Yeah. Interesting. So he's basically paying his bills from doing these YouTube vlogs and be a, no, no, no, B.O. That's fine. You'll find it. There you go. Now mind you, this meal literally just cost me a hundred or forty-bought, which is like four dollars, literally about four dollars and 30 cents. Check this out. An egg with rice. And a Coke. Thai fried rice with an egg on top. Some trail mix. Coke with wine. Ooh, they have to drink water out of the bottle there, right? The tap water. Yes. Four dollar meal. And then I got a little surprise for you guys. What we're doing now? Let me see his check. Does he have any other questions? Yeah. You have to search a lot. That's good. That's good. But yeah, that's a huge. That's why, oh man. Yeah. You know, and he's a big as Bangkok. Do we know? Look, he's a big. It's got to be larger than New York, but it's got the same amount of people. So they both have about roughly eight and a half to nine million people living there. And I'd say Bangkok's probably compared to twice. Twice is big. You think maybe more far square footage. There you go. Ah, there you go. Top left. It's got a bigger footprint. That's double. Double size. No one's a double. Well, but come in. It's about a 90. What's 79,000 twice is 15. What's 79,000 twice is 15, 80. Yeah. And here you got 15. So it's actually double. And the population is the same. Roughly. Yeah. I think it all by about half a million. One has about half a million more than the other. Right. Here you go. Right. It's got it all interesting. That's a long, long. Oh, what? Yeah. I caught. Yeah. You got it. Yeah. Anyways. But yeah, he's over there. He's, I mean, look, in the places he's running is like they're like eight bucks a night. $11 a night. You want to stay in like a high rise like amazing. Oh, by the way, when I told you you about that, like the town or the condos you can rent, they're fully furnished. You're not running an empty place. We got to go get $30,000 worth of furniture to run into. It's fully furnished. Wow. You got a concierge. It's got a pool. It's got, you know, a wreck area. It's got pool tables. It's got, um, it's got a gym. It's got everything. Really? I mean, listen, it'd be like going down downtown Tampa and live in one of those hotels. Only their 30 stories they're amazing. They're amazing for, for five or 600 bucks, you can rent like a one bed. If you want a two bedroom, they're more like seven or 800, but the same thing you could get here for three grand for a brand. So he's planning on going there trying to make that channel work, which I think he will just based on if he continues to work hard at it, right? Like it's not easy. And the thing is, how much do you really need for 1500 bucks a month? You can live like you're making 10 grand a month here. Yeah. So I bet if he busts his ass for six months, he could be making 1,500 bucks. Yeah. And he was, did you get rid of his car? He still have his car. No, he, um, he was driving a car that I had bought for him to drive door dash and a month before he left, he wrecked it. That's right on brand. How do you wreck it? Um, he was driving and he made a left to turn somewhere and he stopped because the vehicles were coming like it was like a one way. He stopped and I think he may have reversed and a Chi T bone him. Oh, God, may not have reversed because I've heard two stories. Oh, I'm not sure if he just stopped in the guy T bone him or if he actually reversed two stories from him or what? Yeah. Like I never got the exact, I know he was, I know he got the ticket. So and then of course, you know, then the whole thing, um, you know, we got the insurance and it was, there was a negative, you know, there was, it was, it didn't cover it. So, so I covered it. But and he was like, yeah, bro, I'm sorry. I said, as it was just, we're just going to tack it on to the, yeah, the Sharon's company saw us. It's going to tack it on to the, uh, the deficit that is our friendship. So for me, he's like, he's like, I'm sorry. But he's like, the whole time, I've been joking around like, hey, at some point, I feel like I'm going to get a panic phone call where you're going to be, please, send me somebody to my good. He's like, no, it's not going to happen. It's not going to happen. And then like a month or so before he left, he's leaving. He's like, listen, he said, um, just to go to work. I know you don't think that. And I was like, I don't know. I hope it does. I hope it does. And he said, there you go. I'm just saying that it is. But, like, don't give away my room, right, bro, because you know, you, you just don't know. I don't know if you was joking or not, but maybe laugh. That's funny. I was just saying, I got to take a leak real quick. Yeah. Sometimes when I'm really behind on work or getting stressed about the holidays, it messes with my sleep. And that's why I'm so excited to talk about beams dream powder, a science backed healthy nighttime blend for sleep that is actually clinically shown to improve sleep and have you waking up refreshed. Other sleep aids cause next day grogginess, dream contains a powerful all natural blend of reshape, magnesium, Elthienine, Appie Jenin and melatonin to help you fall asleep, stay asleep and wake up feeling refreshed. Everything changed when I found dream, whether it's holiday stress or too much blue light at night, whatever the reason is when I take beams dream powder, I wake up the next morning, feeling incredible. And the best part is it doesn't taste like dirt. It's a powder you mix in hot water or milk. They have tons of flavors from super latte to pumpkin spice to blueberry crumbled dream or cinnamon hot cocoa. Going into 2025, beams dream powder is part of my nightly routine. And I hope you can experience the same relief I have the ultimate sleeper fresh for the new year, try beams best selling dream powder and get up to 40% off for a limited time when you go to shop beam dot com slash Danny and use the code d a and n y at checkout. That's SHOP B E a M dot com slash d a n n y and use the code dany for up to 40% off. It's linked below. Now back to the show. Well, you know, it's funny. We just partnered with somebody to do a they were already taking. They were already running a YouTube channel using our clips and other people's clips. And they would just take your clip, you know, they take your clip and they had B role and everything and then they put it on their own channel, right? Well, guys were sending us stuff from them saying, Hey, bro, this is a great one. And I'm like, that's not that's me. But that's not ours. Yeah, somebody made that. Yeah. So we tracked or Colby tracked them down and and ended up talking to the guys and saying, can you let's partner on the channel? So we really got partnered on the channel. They started it to let me say they started it on the 20th November, 25th it's got 32,000 subscribers. It's got one video has like 7.8 one little short has 7.8. Yeah, like 4.2. You know, another one's got 3 million, 4 million, 2 million. Oh, I mean, yeah. Yeah, Matt Cox, you're on the rise, man. You know, the only thing that's not doing well, what our Spanish channel, you know, the Spanish channel, I thought I'd be huge in Spanish. Oh, Jesus, I'm not huge in Spanish. Currently nobody in Spanish people, you know, they don't kind of sort of these little people are way too ambitious. I've made some, I've made some Puerto Rican comments. I'm not saying I've been kind to the Spanish, but I've made some comments, but still, I think I'm good in Spanish. Why are those short people so much more ambitious? I'm trying to have a theory. Don't you have a theory about this? What do you have a little man theory? I'm compensating. Is that what they all do? Is that like the... Short people so much more ambitious. I'm trying to have a theory. Don't you have a theory about this? What do you have a little man theory? I'm compensating. Is that what they all do? Is that like the same thing with Napoleon and all these people throughout history? What? What? What? What to explain to me? I need to hear this theory from the horse's mouth. What are you doing? Okay. Pull this up on YouTube. How do we find this podcast? What is this? All right. People can't see this or hear this. So pull it up on YouTube. What do we find it? Is it Matt? Car's Spanish? It's one ice when I speak in Spanish. It's in my voice. Is it AI? Yeah. It's all AI. What? All right. Give us some volume. I don't want to do this podcast. We can see what he's got. All right. Go, go, go, go. Should we, uh, Mr. Go, go. Go, go. Go to the one in him bows. Yeah. Anyone just click somewhere. Go on. I'm not just going to go. Get that. I can't impose that. Either the end. Because he has this one. It's the one. It's the one. I can't. That's the one. Then when you go to Zach. And so who's doing this? Zach sounds it to his voice. It's the one that's going to be. But I'm going to say, I'm going to say, but I'm going to say, I'm going to say, I'm going to say, see, see, see, I'm going to say, wow. That's a magic. What is that? That's not doing well, though. It's like go back. Go back. Let's look at the channel. I like to see all the videos. Let me view the game and stuff. Seven subscribers. Yes. It's ridiculous. Look, look, that one has no views three weeks ago. Not a single view. Yeah, 40. No one clicked it. Yeah. Give him his first view. Yeah. Yeah. Why do they even do it? There we go. Now it's got one. They must not be targeting it right. Yeah, that's that's pretty unusual. That is very unusual. You know what I'm thinking too? Maybe maybe like the keywords aren't they didn't sell the keywords. They didn't feel like something's wrong. Like, bro, I got channels. I put up a channel that I probably have 20 videos on. And it's got like 8,000 subscribers. Like it's still getting views everywhere. And so this thing is just dying. I don't know why. Yeah. And it's months old. It's not like it's a week old. This is three three. I did they go a month ago. Go up. What does that say? Jay-Z what? You did a video about Jay-Z already? Oh, yeah. We did. Yeah. Well, who did you have? Talking about Jay-Z? Ronnie Bow, which is this kid that actually how much vetting do you do before you have people on your podcast? Like, you make sure they're like, if they say they're like a ditty insider, for example. That's what this guy has actually been shot by. There's an informant. So he gets shot. He got shot and an informant that's in Diddy's camp. In his camp. Yeah. Which is working for the FBI tells the FBI Diddy just ordered a hit on this guy. And he got shot. Now, the problem is is that he talks a lot of shit about Diddy. I mean, I'm so not Diddy. God, I'm sorry about Jay-Z. Sorry. An informant in Jay-Z's camp said this guy, Diddy, or Jay-Z just ordered a hit on this guy. And then the guy gets shot. And he tells them like he knew exactly what was happening. What happened? I've seen the FBI. There's an FBI report from the, you know, they call him a, whatever, a CI. And so that's what we were talking about. The problem when I talked to this guy is that because he was, he was out of his jurisdiction when he got shot. Yeah. He doesn't want to come on and say like, I was here next to the projects when I got shot. He didn't want to say that because they're trying to violate his probation. He's on federal probation right now. So he's like, well, I don't want to say exactly where I was because, you know, we had a whole conversation before. So I'm going to be a little vague. And so, you know, it's kind of not great. But the video on my channel got like 400,000 users. Something. Mm. You know, so, and I've done a few videos on Diddy and on, yeah, I saw that. You're like the go to Diddy. Well, in his channel, it's the Courtney Burgess thing. It's because this guy, because the guy Courtney Burgess, which is so funny because I've literally blasted the guy for being just a pathological liar and lying about this whole thing. Yeah. And you know what? So funny is despite the fact that I've done all that, right? Look who stills texted me all the time. He just texted me just now. Courtney still texted me. It's 720. It's 720. It's 720 right now at 720. He sent me a time. Who is this guy Courtney? What's his deal? So Courtney Burgess, I kind of started to tell you a little bit. Yeah. Courtney Burgess. So everybody's heard about the Diddy sex tapes. Yeah. Right. You know, the Cp, right. Cp tape, you know, you want me to say the word or no? Yeah, go ahead. The child. The child. The second. Does that in the future just? The beauty is we don't have to fucking. Right. So the Cp tapes and the just the, you know, the assault tapes, the, you know, whatever, you know what I'm saying. So, so what happened with Courtney is Diddy used to date a woman named Kevin Kim Porter. Kim Porter had a couple kids of his and Diddy adopted her son from another marriage with a guy named Alby Shore, who's a, who's a, a music producer. Okay. So Diddy and, and Porter meet there together like 10 or 12 years. And then they eventually split up. They split up and in 2018, she dies from pneumonia. Now in a lot of people in, in Diddy's camp have died from pneumonia. People that have problems with him tend to die from pneumonia. How that's possible. I don't know people like, oh, he poisons, but I don't understand how you can give someone pneumonia. But whatever people are saying, oh, it's a certain poison. If you, he will, I'm assuming that they're going to test for this. Right. So whatever. I think it's a coincidence. But whatever. The point is is she dies. Well, when she dies, the day after she dies, this is all from Courtney. The day after she dies. Laura Simmons goes to him and Camara Simmons used to be married to Russell Simmons. She's now married to another like multi millionaire. She lives in like a $30 million house like she's filthy rich. The idea that she would be hanging out with or even knows who Courtney Burgess is, is acidized. But whatever he says, she comes to him and says, gives him one flash drive. And this is back in 2000 like 18, gives him a flash drive and says that flash drive has Kim's manuscript that she was working on, which is a memoir of her time with Diddy. It's got all the dirt on him. It talks all about everything, every horrible thing he's done. And I want you to get it out there. And he says, okay. And he really doesn't. According to him, he's like, I gave it to a guy. I kind of got busy and then I gave it to a guy to try to get a bunch of books printed up and we printed up some books and he was supposed to try and help me get it out there. And he's actually like, these are all like street guys. He sells on the back of his car. He got bumper stickers made up. He got t-shirts. It's called it. He had it. He named it. I forget what hit the name of his book was, which was equally as just horrible. So it doesn't go anywhere. You don't know how to make it. These guys are not marketing geniuses, right? Like Courtney says that he's a music producer. Anyway, so what happens is years go by. Well, at one point, my buddy Wade, you know, Wade Williams, he's been on your channel. Wade has a podcast. He's got like 10, 10, 11,000 subscribers and he predominantly interviews. He interviews mob guys. You know, he loves good fellas mob guys. So he interviews all these mob guys. And if he also does other stuff, he'll do porn stars. I don't mean to him. He'll interview porn stars. He's happily married. He'll interview porn stars and he'll interview rap. You know, he likes rap and stuff. He grew up during the like two-pock era. So he hears that he ends up hearing about this guy. Courtney Burgess, who used to work with Tupac because that's what Courtney says. No proof of that. So he ends up reaching a mutual friend, kind of mutual guy knows him. So he contacts the guy. He ended up putting in contact with Courtney. He tells him, listen, I'd love to have you on the podcast to talk about your relationship with Tupac. Like I don't know anybody that knows Tupac. Tupac. And Courtney's like, yeah, yeah, yeah. He's like, listen, I got something, something better than that. Because I got Kim Porter's memoir. And he's like, really? And he's like, yeah. So he gets, he ends up arranging so that Wade gets a copy of the book that he put out. Wade reads it, Wade contacts me and says, this is what this book says. And starts telling me about the book. And I'm like, oh, Jesus, okay. And he's like, yeah, Kim Porter. And he's like, you know who that is right now. You know who Diddy is? I'm like, uh, Diddy. I don't, is that like the guy that is that the puff, puff daddy, puff that he's like, you know, he realizes like I'm an idiot. I don't know. He's like, you know who Tupac is right? And like, of course, I did a painting of Tupac. I know who that is. But prior to the painting, I didn't know. So he's like, oh, great. And I'm like, look, he's like, well, I was wondering if you wanted what would you do? Could you publish it? I'm like, bro, I don't know anything about this kind of stuff. Like it, I wouldn't know what to do. Which by the way, was a huge mistake on my part. There was almost a stupid of a decision as me not opening or YouTube channel when you told me open, started YouTube channel. Almost as dumb of a decision. But whatever we're not talking about me. So what happens is Wade is trying to kind of figure out what to do about this book. And he says, I'm going to contact, uh, I'm going to contact Chris Todd. Chris Todd is a guy who writes salacious, um, true crime books about, you know, high profile crimes. Let's just say that. That's the politeest way to put it. So he contacts Chris Todd. Chris Todd kind of kind of goes, okay, okay, well, put me in contact with this guy Courtney. They get in, get in contact. Courtney tells him, I have the flash drive. I also have additional flash drives that have sex tapes and CP tapes on, um, of Diddy. And so Chris Todd is like, whoa. So Chris Todd goes, I could probably do something with that. Chris Todd starts making phone calls because Chris Todd is connected. He knows other reporters. He calls a bunch of reporters start saying, I have these, I, he starts saying, I have these tapes. He doesn't have the tapes. He's never seen the tapes. I have these tapes. I'd like to try and maybe we could sell them. Well while he's running around talking about selling them. And by the way, at the same point in time, people start hearing about tapes. It's because Chris Todd is running around talking about tapes. And so other, other celebrity or, or a content creator start talking about their, their tapes about Diddy out there with this and this and this and so, and I'm not saying that none of, I'm not saying that Diddy's a decent human being. I mean, he's got clearly he's a scumbac. But I'm saying by running around talking about it, it gets in the ether and people start know it's out there and it's taught, this being talked about. So while this is happening, Wade and Courtney are saying, publish the book, publish the book. Yeah. But Todd's not really that concerned about it, right? And they're saying it, this months go by and then guess whose house gets raided? Diddy's house gets raided. Diddy's house gets raided and they grab a whole bunch of surveillance footage. They grab surveillance equipment, guns, baby oil, the whole thing. I'm not sure why baby oil at any of that is illegal. But whatever it's, it's all creepy. There's a bunch of creepy stuff done. The baby oil is laced with drugs. Well, you know, and it's just excessive. Nobody needs that. That was a little bit. Yeah. So, I mean, I guess if you don't want to keep going in the store, you know, I buy multiple when I go to buy, yeah, I buy four or five two things of toothpaste when I go. And I want to keep going back. So the point is, is that all of this is happening. So Chris Todd decides, you know what? I am going to go ahead and publish the book. He doesn't want his name attached to it. So he puts, he uses a pseudonym, which is a Jamal something, which is supposedly the name that Tupac Shakur is living under, assuming he would still be alive, which is also another ridiculous thing to say. So what? So he, Chris Todd decides, I am going to publish this book. He puts it on Amazon. And I want to say, I want to say that it just so happens, it still takes a month. He's got it to the point where he's going to put it up on Amazon. Did he get to rest it? I'm pretty sure this is how it worked out. I could have it in reverse, but did he get to rest it? And like a week or two later, Chris Todd puts it out. He puts out the book. is called Kim's Lost Words. The book is salacious. It is filled with ditty having intercourse with multiple celebrities, all of them high profile. And I mean, it's not like it's graphic. It's not overly graphic. It's not, it's not, you know, it's not written like to be like a thing or even software, but it's enough that it's like it's, you wouldn't want someone saying these things about you. Right. And there you talk, we're talking about it. You know, so I'll give you two of the, two of the people. Well, I'll give you a few of them. So it's, it's, um, Bieber, Usher, um, uh, Jade, Jade Smith, Jayden, Jayden. No, no, Jayden, the, the blind Smith, that's a, with Smith Smith's, Smith's kid. It's got, uh, just Snoop Dogg's snoop, snoop, snoop dogs in there. Um, I'll be sure, which is Kim Porter's ex-husband. Uh-huh. And it just goes on and on. Right. They're just, you know, they're, they're disturbing scenes. Like if you wouldn't want this, even if it was true, you wouldn't want someone to describe it in these ways. Mm-hmm. So it's salacious. So it comes out and it literally sells like in two weeks, it sells like 30 copies. So Wade contacts me and says, listen, bro, this book is out. This guy was just arrested. Diddy was just arrested. This book is out. It's salacious. I want to, he's getting a piece of the whole thing. He's, I want to try, these guys aren't advertising it. He's like, I want to try and get some, some, some, some momentum on this thing. He's, can we do a podcast? And I go, um, yeah, we can do a podcast. Sure. I don't know anything about it, bro. Like I'm like, yeah, okay, you got understand. I don't know anything about it. He's like, you know what? We do an hour and 20 minute podcast, maybe an hour and 15 minutes. It gets 850,000 views. The book at the same time within a day or two, Chris Todd, which didn't want his name associated with the book before, because he knows deep down. I think he, wow, I don't know. He had, he probably had questions like I'm the doubts that it's probably true. He wouldn't say that, but he starts doing interviews. Listen, he's interviewed by associated press. I think he's interviewed by several large, um, media outlets. He gets in, he's interviewed by Rolling Stone magazine. It doesn't end interview. Yeah. So within two weeks, Kim's lost words is a, is a Amazon best selling book. The best selling book. They sell one over $1.5 million worth of books. Wow. Listen. And I can tell you right now, the royalties. It's a small fortune. It's a small fortune. What these, what how much it brings in? So, but I'll be sure it in the book, it's talking about Diddy sleeping with doing a three sum with Kim Porter and I'll be sure. And it's just the whole thing is vile. And I'll be sure of course is like, what, what, what is this? And so he hires an attorney who threatens a lawsuit and they file a cease and desist order with to, um, Chris Todd and, um, Amazon, Amazon takes the book down. Mm. I mean, you could imagine. I think probably would be close to $78 million worth. Maybe 10 million. I mean, I, I'm assuming fight did they. So Chris Todd didn't do much of anything. No. He didn't do much of anything. He, so, um, what ends up happening is that, um, Courtney Burgess, he's still got a bunch of the original ones that he, he, he had printed up. So he's like selling those on some website right now and for like $200 or something ridiculous. Um, what happens is Chris Todd is, he starts going on all these podcasts talking about of course it gets shut down. So once it gets shut down, he kind of stops doing the podcast, right? And on the podcast, Chris Todd is saying the tapes exist that he had gotten a flash drive that he'd seen the tapes. Oh, wow. And so when I end up talking to Wade, I'm like, Wade, you know, Wade's keeping me kind of a breast of some of the stuff, not everything, but he's like, whoa, this happened. This happened. Bro, this is insane. Chris Todd is calling me right. I've had him on my program on my, my YouTube channel a few times. Mm-hmm. You know, listen, one of my highest videos is one that Chris Todd and I did on OJ Simpson. You know, it's got like, did you do it right before he died? We did it like literally we released the video and he died that that morning. Oh my God. So my video comes out a few hours later just as they announced it. Like my video has been up like an hour and then they announced he's dead. My video shoots up. They're like literally it's got like eight or nine hundred thousand. I don't forget how many views, but it's got like it's close to a million views within, within a week. So, so anyway, Chris Todd's also texting me. You know, hey, do you see this? Hey, do you hear this? Hey, did I'm telling him like, bro, I think you may be in trouble. Like this is a big deal. This is an issue. You're going to get yourself sued. I've read the book and it ain't good. Like this system really fucked up things about people. And the most of the things that it says about people are people are deceased. Anyway, what happens is I go to Wade and I say, Wade, I'd like to talk to Courtney Burgess. He says, okay, I'll put you in contact. I call Courtney and I say Courtney what's going on. I said, you know, I understand that you had a flash drive. I talked about the whole thing. You might that when Todd and Wade have talked about that they've been very vague, nobody has mentioned Courtney's name. Nobody knows who Courtney is. Todd just says I got it from a close from a guy who's a Hollywood insider who was friends who was close friends with Kim Porter, you know, friends of a friend, friend of a friend. So I said, so I understand you had a flash driving because yeah, yeah, he's well, it was actually he was it was three flash drives. So, okay. And I said, you got it like the day after he's like, yeah, like the day after it was good, couple days after it was given to me. I'm like, okay, a little different than when Wade said. So I said, you want to come on the podcast? He goes, yeah, sure, I'll come on the podcast. He's like, yeah, I'm sick of Todd running around, you know, basically getting all the this press like, you know, and he's like, yeah, yeah, I'm a real mother talk. I'm a talk to you. I'm a, okay. I go and I, we set up the podcast and just before the podcast, by the way, and I like to mention this because Courtney consistently will tell you he's concerned about getting the word out that crit, what happened with Kim Porter and how horrific it was and how horribly she was treated and what a scumbag did he is. And he's doing this for her in her name because she's a good person and everything, but he wants $200 to do the podcast. You know, started off in like he wanted, he wanted a fee for the podcast. You want to like a $500 or something like a person? No, just a thing, you know, just a remote, whatever. Yeah. So I'm like, and but I'm, you know, the ditty things big and I never pay for a never like I don't pay for anything. I don't pay for flights. I don't pay for if I don't pay for not that I was like, I talked to Colby and Colby's like, you know, I think I'm a couple of us 200 bucks. That's nothing like we can do 200 bucks. I'm like, he's like, let's just see. Okay. So we do it. I, I, I, I pay him. We get on the podcast. He mumbles about his relationship with Tupac and all these people that he knows and how he knows did he and or does never met did he, but kind of knows who he is. They kind of grew up in the same neighborhood and whatever. So that goes on and on. What ends up happening is I start talking to him about the, the flash drives. Okay. He's like, yeah, yeah, yeah. Like so, have you seen these, these videos of, of Justin Bieber and Usher and, and I'm like, who is it? Those two, you told me that's what they who that was before his. Yeah, yeah. He was that and will Smith's son. He was like, and he throws that in there. Nobody had heard that before. He just throws it in there. Oh, okay. I said when you got this like after her death, no, I got it about three months beforehand. What? Three months. Okay. So name was, was it one or two? How many flash drives? It was like 11. 11 told Wade once one told me three. Now it's 11 told us it was after right then I'm thinking. No. Yeah. This guy's full of shit. Something's not right. He tells me like who gave him to you. Oh, it was a, it was a friend of hers. Now prior to that, he had told me it was, it was Kamala Simmons. Mm. Right. And I've also heard it's Kamala Simmons from two other people. So I know he's been, but nobody knows that. Nobody's been that he has, he's talked to. He won't say who it is. Right. But that's who it was. That's who he told me it was. So by the way, initially he wants wanted to tell people that, but by this point Kamala Simmons has already come out and said that the book is fabricated that it's not true. So I think his initial reaction or his initial plan was I'll tell people on the inside, but I'll never say it out loud. People will maybe assume not realizing the book was going to be a bestseller and Kamala Simmons was going to come out and say that books lie. She would, she never wrote any book. That's not it. Anyway, the point is is that I slowly start talking to Courtney and I go Courtney. So have you seen these videos? Yeah, yeah. I've seen parts of like I watched the whole video because you know, he said, you know, it's two men or two guys have insects. And if you watch to a man, even if you watch a man and a woman have sex, that makes you gay. Well, I think, oh yeah. Really? Wow. Okay. Well, I guess, you know, throw me in that category. I mean, some stuff. So anyway, he's so he's saying it's two men. Mm hmm. Right. No, right. So he said, I've watched enough. I'm a well, then how do you know they were under it? Well, because Bieber didn't have all the tattoos and his hair was different. And I could tell that Asher was definitely underage. So how old do you think? Bieber was he says, oh, he was definitely under 16 years old. Yeah. Probably 15 or 16. Asher was definitely young. So jaded, jade and smith definitely. He's so decapri. It was that much of those parties, those diddy parties. I'm back in the day. Yeah, but I mean, I didn't, I understand, but I mean, we weren't like, we were just talking about this one thing. And I'm kind of talking him like trying to understand. So he says he's seen them, didn't watch all of them, but did watch enough to know that these, these boys are being taken advantage of that they're all under age. Okay. And I said, do you have the tapes now? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, I got them. You still have them in your possession? Yeah. Yeah. I got them. I go, well, how did you wash them if they were on a flash drive? Oh, I put them into my computer. I washed them on my computer. So you transferred them from your flash drives to your computer. Yes, he goes, and then I ended up wiping them off my computer because I didn't want to know my computer because I use it for editing. I was like, okay. Well, transferring it from one device another is, is a distribution. And so I said to him, I said, okay, bro, you understand you're in possession of these, right? And he goes, yeah. And I said, so that's, that's your possession of CP. And he's like, oh, I said, he was, I said, he is, well, I said, and that's he's why, I said, you know, just having them in your possession, you can get, you can get in trouble. That's a federal offense. You know, I didn't make it. I said, that doesn't matter whether you made it or not. Right. You can get in trouble. Yeah. You've seen it. You know what it is. If you don't immediately notify the authorities, they can charge you. Right. Now, if you notify the authorities, you're fine. Right. But you didn't notify the authorities. So I explained that to him. I go at the, it, no. And I said, why don't you turn them in because the, the government's going to want these things to be used in part of their defense. I'm, I'm part of their, their case against Diddy. Yeah. This is proof. Mm hmm. He's, you know, taking advantage of, you know, underage kids, you know, celebrities. Cause also he had, he also said that he had, there was videos of him having sex with, like, you know, Jennifer Lopez and, you know, anyway. So he says, and he's like, so he, he says, um, what did he say? I said, bro, why don't you give it to the authorities? And he goes, um, he goes, uh, in my, in my neighborhood, he's that's snitchin'. And I was like, I was thinking, you know, my neighborhood, that would be protecting children, like snitching on petos. Right. And he's against that. So I, I sit there and I'm like, okay, well, so we, we have another 10, mid 15 minutes where I'm trying to tell him, look, this is the right thing to do, whatever. He just, he's against it, which is fine. Whatever. That's your problem. When it, so it ends, we post the video like the next day. The comments tear him apart. This guy's a scumbag. He's in possession of CP. That's illegal simply being in possession of it's illegal. Yeah. Um, he goes on and on and on about like, I'm sorry, the comments go on and on. They're like, I'm contacting the authorities. I'm contacting the feds. I'm contacting the US attorney. Right. I'm notifying this. I'm notifying. So he gets super scared. Right. He even contacts me and he's like, he's basically like, men, people are talking about me going, you know, the police, they're talking about this. And I, I saw that you, you liked some of the comments. Like I was hitting, but you know, I'll just bring, being, and I was like, yeah, I don't think that's probably what happened. But you know, I'm like, whatever, but he's freaking out. So that night he goes on another podcast, probably gets another 200 bucks, goes on a, a podcast where he says, yeah, yeah, I already gave the flash drives to the, to the authorities. I already gave it to him. Look, how did, how that's pretty quick. Yeah. So the next day he texts me and he tells texts me and says, the, the feds just rated my house. Oh. And I went, they did. I said, who did? Who rated him? He was the fed. I go, yeah, which agency was FBI? Homeland Security is investigating. Not the FBI. So I write, then no. The other thing is, this is the first time you spoken. There's no way they got a, they got a search warrant that quick. You know, like having been through the system and spend as much time in the system, I know how things work. He's lying. So he's, he's like, they took everything. They took all my stuff, all my equipment, all my computers. They took the, they got the flash drives, everything. He's trying to let me know and everybody know by saying, oh, I already gave him the feds to let everybody know I'm not in possession of these things. So I go, okay. So I say, hey, can you send me a copy of the search warrant? And he says, oh, I, I'm going to say, I don't need to do that. My lawyer's got it. And I go, okay, great. Cabra, ever give me a copy. Can she send you a copy? He's, I don't put my business out there like that. And I went, okay, bro, I said, listen, I said, I'm not asking for your bank statements. So copy of it. It's a publicly available document. Right. I said, I just want to see it because I want to know what they were looking for. They'll say that in the search warrant. Yeah. I am about all that. I know, okay. So I figure we're never going to talk again. A couple days. No, I think two, three days later, he texted me again. Bro, I just got raided again. And I'm like, bye who? Homeland security and I thought, uh, uh, uh, uh. He texted me again. Bro, I just got raided again, and I'm like, by who? Homeland security and I thought, uh-oh. Now this is enough time. Yeah, to get a search warrant. Mm. So he immediately takes a photo and he says, here's a search warrant. He sends it to me. I read it. It's not a search warrant. It's a subpoena. You weren't there wasn't a search warrant. It was a subpoena. So probably a couple of guys from Homeland Security showed up, knocked on the door, showed him his badge, and they gave him a search warrant. The search warrant said that it was not search warrant. I'm sorry. A subpoena. No. The subpoena was four days earlier. The day after I posted my video. So Sunday, my video was posted. Monday, they got a subpoena. Whoa. And I know this is true too, because this is what they tell him, because he's subpoenaed to appear in front of the grand jury with flash drives, devices, like anything to do with any video of Sean Diddy Combs, AKA, P Diddy, AKA, love, AKA. You know, the whole man. Yeah, right. Um, uh, and all this device, I mean, literally, you know, they've got a blanket thing that they give. That's a whole right. So he's freaking out. Oh, man. Uh, uh, I said, well, you know, it sounds like you got to go. He's like, he's like, no, I don't like them buildings. You walk in them places. You don't walk out. I said, bro, they just want to talk to you. And, you know, so he ends up getting a lawyer and he goes to be subpoenaed. He goes in front of the grand jury, gets in front of the grand jury. He said, we, I get in front of the grand jury. They turn on the video that he did with me. They watch the grand jury, the US attorneys and Courtney watched the entire video and he stops it like, what about this? Then he asked him a bunch of questions. When they ask him, where's the flash drives? He tells them, I throw him away. Think about this. You told me the FBI took him at the, at the, for the, when they're in the search warrant, that was a lie. Complete lie. So, um, anyway, so he's like, how do you know about everything that happened during that? The, the grand jury thing. He's told me all this. Okay. And it's not public record. What no, it's not public record. Most of this is coming from him, but the, I want to say, the New York Times. So the New York Times did an article where they say that Courtney at the grand jury told the grand jury that he had thrown away the flash drives. He'd gotten rid of them. You know, first of all, so this continues to go on, right? He starts going on podcast after podcast. The problem is he starts lying. It turns into the, the, he got some of, it turns into, I was given the flash drives by a good friend of Kim's Kim Porter's turned it, went to, I was, I was mailed the flash drives. Then it turns into, I was given the flash drives by a guy that used to date Kim Porter. Then it turned into, I was given it to a guy who was a music producer, who has since died. He will not say, so if you go back and say, then it broke into multiple times. Now he's been given a couple flash drives after her death, a three or four of them before her death. And then 10 years prior, he was given the flash drives that contained the book. The problem is she writes in the manuscript up till the day she dies. So how could you have gotten the manuscript 10 years earlier when and when you read it, it's, she was writing in it all the way up to the day she died. Like once again, not an accomplished liar, a liar, but not very good at it. Yeah. So once he's been on all these other podcasts, it's my belief that the government obviously has watched a bunch of these podcasts and realizes this guy is a complete liar. And so they then go and they subpoena him again. We want you to come back in front of the grand jury. Only this time his, I believe his lawyer has probably determined that her client is a liar. Now these guys were on news news nation. You understand the TMZ interviewed him on the courtroom steps. He's been in everything. It's here. If you pull up Courtney Burgess right now, Stephen, sorry, if you pull it up, he's everywhere. He's every shoe. She's never had this much attention in his entire life. That's wild. So this guy who is, yeah, who is Courtney Burgess? The Diddy Witness who calls him blah, blah, blah, blah. Look it down. It's fine. The New York Times, yeah. What I'm about. Look, it's, it's everywhere. Burgess times of India. Yeah. There's the New York Times too. There's one in New York Times. There's one in the type in his name and then time pin New York Times after New York Times right there. How a tale of Sean Cosek's tape is landed. Yeah. And this is man's. All right. This is multiple by the way. There's multiple, looks like there's multiple articles. There have been multiple. They even mentioned me. They talk about my podcast him being on my podcast. Coming out on my podcast. That's bizarre man. You landed yourself right in the middle of this whole scandal Matthew Cox. Well, so here's the funny thing. So here's what I believe after just looking into everything. I believe Courtney Burgess, Kim Porter died. I think her name is Cassandra. I, I figured her last name. She sues Diddy in 2003. Yeah. I'm sorry. 2020, and 2023, she sues Diddy, alleging he would remember when Diddy the tape came out of him beating the girl up and dragging it. That's her. She's a sonderah. That's because I want to say, I'm sure I've got her name, Ron Cassandra, Cassandra, Cassie. I think it was Cassie. Anyway, she sues him and wants like $40 million. And he comes out immediately and says, this is extortion. It's all lies. She's lying. I've never done anything. It's all bullshit. And then her attorney most likely shows him the tape that they have. He settles the next day, the day after he settles about two months later, CNN leaks the tape surveillance video in the hotel. Yeah. That was, that was two months after they released it months after he settled. At this point, this is when I think that um, Courtney Burgess wrote the memoir as Kim Porter. He, he then ran around trying to get trying to get it published and couldn't. He got a whole, a way, got a hold of him and he said, I got something. When he talked to Chris Todd, he told Chris Todd, I got this, this memoir, but I also have these sex tapes and CP to get him all excited. Chris Todd's never seen any of this stuff. He's seen some screenshots of some vague screenshots of images that are already on the internet. Right. These are not original shots. Anyway, so what I think happened was Courtney wrote the the manuscript said he had these other tapes. He of course threw them all away. So you can't prove anything. Do you think you really had them? I don't think they ever exist. I think all of it was a, hey, I think I can make some money. Yeah, it was opportunity. It was an opportunity to make money off of the back of a dead woman who has kids that loved her that from all accounts was a decent human being. And you saw an opportunity to make some money off of this poor dead woman who died, who died, not you don't give a shit about her kids or anything else. And the thing is, he did. He made a small fortune. He and Todd made a chunk of money. And here's the real problem. The real problem is, Diddy's legal team, right? Here's what they're, what they're going to do. And this is why the government brought Courtney back. They probably wanted to get him to go over these lies that he'd been telling on record so they could indict him and say, you've been lying about these things. They wanted him to lie to the grand jury and prove that he's been lying because you've been saying the same thing, multiple accounts. We're going to, we're going to, you're lying to the grand jury. We're going to charge you. It's obstructive justice. It's all kinds of stuff. These that he's that he's in trouble for. But he didn't go back. They claimed his lawyer wouldn't let him go back in front of the grand jury the second time. She claimed the fifth amendment. Think about it. What are you going to say that's going to incriminate you? Right. So Diddy's lawyers are probably going to try and call him to the stand. The government probably most likely has to charge him. If they don't, here's the problem. Diddy's lawyers can use him to undermine the government's case. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Saying one, the only tire, the only time we've ever heard about sex tapes that everybody thinks exists is when you guys were talking about him. You were lying about him. You were lying about this book. You've told all these different lies. You're a pathological liar. And we think that it's you and people like you that have caused all of these things about Diddy. Because so far, the government has done one thing they haven't done as much stuff as they've released. They've never once said we have tapes showing sexual activity with minors or even other celebrities. We have tons of witnesses that will say it. But we don't have tapes out of all the surveillance equipment that they got, mm-hmm. All the video everything they've never come forward to say that they've said everything else, drugs, guns, what else? Sex trafficking, all these other things. You mentioned, you know, what did you see? Did you see what Jamie Foxx came out and said, remember what Jamie Foxx had that crazy medical scare? Yes, he's always said to him. He was poisoned. Was it cyanide poisoning? Yeah. I mean, can you find what Jamie Foxx said about Diddy and getting poisoned by him? Yeah. I don't doubt for a second. He's a company that Diddy's a complete creep. And I know doubt that you probably may have some videos. I'm saying I don't know that the government has the videos. But yeah, there was a lot of claims about him poisoning people with the baby oil, right? Like using the baby oil, like with a GHB or something. Yeah, could go in your skin or something. Right? So it goes into your sport, your pores or something. Right. But so I think that they will use, they can use Courtney to actually help Diddy's case when I'm sure Diddy and sure Courtney has no intention for that. But the guy can't keep a, he's a plan. He just was like going with the flow. And he can't seem to keep the lies straight. Right. So that's the whole um, Diddy Courtney Burgess insider scoop. And what's so funny about this is like Courtney, Courtney, I did a whole thing on it. I put it on my podcast. I did a whole breakdown of the dates and everything. Courtney still texting me. Yeah. That's wild. But yeah, I mean, if that's true, that's crazy. And then the, the Jay Z thing is wild too. They came out and, and, and, and we're not that lawyer. There's like this ambulance chaser lawyer. And then Jay Z released a statement right after, which was, which was good. I think the statement was, you know, he came out and said something. It would have been way worse if he did. Jay Z didn't say anything. Well, here's the thing about Jay Z's like, yeah, I'm not going to pay you one penny. And you know, it was, it was hush money, but the truth is, and I interview that the lawyer that I interviewed. Yeah. Okay. Um, is that, and we had a whole discussion about this where we talked about like Jay Z didn't have a choice, but to fight this. We're initially that lawsuit includes it, it was filed against Diddy. And it said there was a woman and another guy there that were famous. Well, they, of course, the lawyer goes to them and says, Hey, we'll try and keep your name out of this if you just settle. He, he's, so he, I'm sure he goes to his lawyers and says, Hey, how can we, can we do this? And his lawyers probably explained, listen, if Diddy doesn't settle the case, your name's coming out, no matter what? So if you settled this for a million dollars or two million, your name still comes out. Right. So we might as well face, we might as well fight it. Face the music now. Yeah. Come out now and say, I won't tell you, pay you a penny because it's all lies, because if you settle it and it comes out that you were the second guy in this, this, in these claims, and you settled, it makes you look really guilty. So you have to fight it or you can just say, hey, I settled because I didn't want my kids to go through this and hear these claims and I was trying to keep my name out of it, but it's all untrue. You could try that. And he probably went, fuck it. I'm going to, I'm going to go ahead and sit and I'm going to fight it. It's crazy too. There's this like strange phenomena on Twitter on X and probably just the internet in general of people who just want all these people to fall. Yeah. They want Jay Z to be guilty and they want to to paint him as a scumbag. It's like the worst part of the internet. Well, it's, it's the same thing when I, when I came out with these videos talking about these tapes and talking about that, 950,000 subs views, 850,000 views, Courtney, 450,000, 500,000 views. When I come out and I say, hey, listen, there's no way it's possible that it's true. It's not true. This isn't Kim Porter's words. She didn't write this. This is what I believe what the only thing that makes sense is this and it sequentially it works. It's the only thing that works and the people that I'm talking about are consistently lying. And that's, that's absolutely proven when I, when I say that whole thing, 50,000 views, nobody wants to hear that. That's the problem with the internet. Yeah, they want, they want the sensational crazy shit. Right. Yep. Right. Even though look, you know, Diddy is, these clearly got some, some problem. I mean, he's clearly a weirdo, right? Like, I'm not doubting for a second that, and they're very well, maybe tons of tapes. This guy just never had them, right? You know, right? But, you know, like I said, I, I don't want to hear a lawyer. The lawyer that do you know the who the lawyer was who sent Jay Z tried to, tried to extort him for the money. Um, what it's, it's the same, isn't the same lawyer that filed the, isn't the, the, the ambulance or chase or guy? Yeah. Is it in a, find the name of the lawyer? Is it the same lawyer? I'm not sure. It was a guy from Texas, I believe. Yeah. It's Jay Z lawsuit. Yeah. Sexual lawsuit or sexual lawsuit, whatever it is. Type in, uh, type in Jay Z lawsuit. And it's, it's also a civil lawsuit because the statute of limitations is up, right? It was like, it was in the 90s. Yeah. Criminal. It's civil. Okay. Just go off, go off, go up, go up right there. Stop. Okay. rapper 50 sent mocked musical mogul Jay Z on social media after he was named in the sexual lawsuit, uh, alongside 50 cents, longtime rival Sean, did he come? It's months after he reported the question Jay Z who has denied claims against him. All right. Keep going. We find the lawyer's name. Okay. Just, Mark, um, rock nation. This is company. Um, what is the lawyer's name? Maybe you can find the letter. Maybe, oh, Tony buzzby. That's his name. Okay. That's Tony buzzby. That's the same guy that's, that's got like a hundred different claimants against Diddy. It's the the same one. Okay. Okay. Let's look up Tony buzzby. Yeah. Cause Jay Z was saying, lawyers, Jay Z's lawyers claim Tony buzzby pressured a client to blah, blah, blah. So show us. So, so show, can Jay Z show evidence of Tony buzzby trying to get the money out of him and extort him for the money. Well, first of all, it's not extortion. You're writing a letter saying you're, you're, you're a named, you're the person that is unnamed, the unnamed person in this lawsuit. Do you want to settle or do you want us to go ahead and make it public? That's not extortion. It's not just the law. That's just, that's like, can you find Jay Z's response? Find Jay Z's response to Diddy. Um, so, so Jay Z basically, yeah, I, I guess he painted it as like trying to be extorted by this ambulance chaser lawyer for a bunch of money. They always do. That's the same thing. That's what they do. Um, uh, was it Garth Brooks when he got, he's been sued a couple months ago. He got sued by his, the chick that did his makeup said that he assaulted her. He are her grape. Her. Um, and uh, Garth Brooks, okay. Yeah. Um, uh, he, same thing. He, he came at his, his response was this is extortion. They were trying to extort me. I won't pay any money for extortion. Yeah. They all say that. The same is going to be like a screenshot of an Instagram post or something with a bunch of texts on it. It's not going to be, uh, you're going to see, it's going to be a screenshot from social media of something Jay Z said. It's going to be in one of those articles for sure. Okay. That, yeah. Go out. My lawyer received a blackmail attempt. That's he's called blackmail. Uh, called a demand letter from a lawyer named Tony Busby. What he had calculated was the nature of these allegations and the public, public scrutiny would make me want to settle. No, sir. I, it had the opposite effect. It made me want to expose you for the fraud you are in a very public fashion. So no, I will not give you one red pennies. Alligations are so heinous in nature that I implore you to file a criminal complaint, not a civil one. He says that because he knows, he knows the statute of limitations is up. It has to be civil. Right. Yeah. They've owned their only recourse is civil. Okay. Got it. So whomever would commit such a crime against a minor should be locked away. Would you not agree these alleged victims would deserve real justice if that were the case? This lawyer who I have not done a bit of research seems to have a pattern who I have done a bit of research on seems to have a pattern of these kinds of theatrics. I have no idea how you have come to be such a deplorable human being, Mr. Busby. But I promise you, I have seen your kind many times over. I'm more than prepared to deal with your type and you're claimed to be a marine. Marines are known for their valor. You have neither valor nor dignity. The only heartbreak for me, my family, my wife and I will have to sit with our children. Uh, one of whom is at the age where her friends will surely see the press and ask questions about the nature of these claims and explain the cruelty and greed of people. I'm more in yet another loss of innocence. Children should not have to endure such a, that as such a young age. It is unfair to have to try to understand an inexplicable degree of malice meant to destroy families and human spirit. My heart and support goes out to the true victims of this world who have to watch how their life story is dressed in costume for profitability by this ambulance chase are in a cheap suit. You made a terrible air in judgment thinking that all the celebrities are the same. I'm not from your world. I'm a young man who made it out of the projects of Brooklyn. We don't play these types of games and we have a very strict code of honor. We protect children. You seem to exploit people for personal gain. Only your network of conspiracy theorists, fake physics, will believe this idiotic claim you have levied against me that if not, the seriousness surrounding harm to kids would be laughable. I look forward to showing you just how different I am. Mr. Boseby, it's a good response. I mean, if he's innocent, here's the problem. People want it to be true. They want it to be so many people do. If you read the comments on Twitter, it is like, it's unfathomable that the fucking hatred people have for these people when there's no evidence. If he's guilty, like I said, lock them up and throw away the key forever. Here's the thing is that you could pretty much sue anybody. If this chick shoots 13 years old when this happened by the way, if she doesn't have some proof that you were even there, this gets thrown out. How do you have proof? Right. And you don't know what these people are holding back. I'll tell you right now. Was it 25 years ago? So I liked that? Yeah, she's like 37. She was 13. And I think she's 37 now. Yeah. Yeah. It was a, it was, I'm not great with math. Yeah. But it was a long time. So just 37. So 37 minus 13. Yeah. So our 30, yeah, 30, seven minus 13. Right. So it was like whatever 24 years. Yeah, 24 years. So, so here's, here's the thing. Um, I don't know. You know what the story is? Roughly not really. Well, anyway, that, the, the point is is that she's going to have to prove somehow. I'll give you an example. Buzzby probably feels like he's got something. And I give you an example. Look at the ditty when, when Cassie filed that lawsuit. They come to him. They file it. Did he's like, go fuck yourself. You ain't got shit. Here's a video. And they go, he goes, how much? Okay. The fact that he's, he comes out with his little letter and settles so quickly means that they held something and this is very common. You file something. You don't tell them everything because you want them to do something like this. And then they go, you ain't got nothing. You ain't got nothing. You ain't there. And they go, what about this? And they go, listen, let's talk about this. Can we arrange? Right. Right. So whatever. So he does this whole thing thinking you don't have anything. I don't know who this person is. Never been around this person. Don't know anything about it. You ain't got nothing on me. I've never anything. I'm going to fight you tooth to nail. And you know, they're waiting for him to make some responses. I don't know what you're talking about. Yeah. You're a liar. I don't know who this was. Was it at the party? And then you find out, boom, there's pictures of the two of them of all three of these people. This little girl who's 13 with these two guys, she's pictures with her on the, the, the show fur. She's in the hotel room. She, you see saying something? It's like, um, yeah, they wait for them to bury themselves. And, um, or maybe, maybe the show fur that helped get her in to the, to the after party. Maybe he comes forward. Maybe he's like, yeah. No, this whole thing happened. I was actually upstairs when they took her in the room. Yeah. I don't know what happened in the room, but she was definitely there in the room. So you think buzzby wouldn't have done this. I think he's got something unless he had something tangible. Yeah. I feel like he's got something because if he's, it's something like, well, this is what she said does she have it. Right. Buzz you. Does she have the, the course, the buzz you the judge is going to go, okay, I've read the complaint. What do you have that proves any of of this is all my, I have a sworn statement from my, my, uh, you know, from my client. No, no, that's not going to be enough. What else? Uh, her parents will talk about when they, they remember picking her up. Yeah. Yeah. I'm not, you know, what else? Like, do you see him saying, like, he's going to have to have something. If he's got nothing, then they'll be, there's going to be thrown away right away. I'm going to throw an outright away. I hope all my childhood heroes don't just start falling like Domino's bro. Now, like the bronze is going to be next. The bronze like you saw the video and no party like good. Did he party? No, everyone on the internet is like going after LeBron, like LeBron, tell us the truth, bitch. Look at all these people that are fleeing the country. They're like leaving about what? I mean, a lot of them are like, you know, they're, they're, it's, oh, it's, it's Trump. It's this is our people really leaving? Oh, yeah, like Ellen DeGeneres, Tom Hanks, like you got all these, these idiots that, you know, that are, you know, I'm not staying here because I will kick rocks. Um, you know, and, and all of this is like, I just noticed the trees are swaying. Yeah, it's great. It's because it's real bro. That's the window where we're in a time machine in Christmas time in 1800 in the middle of the woods in Ontario. Leonardo DiCaprio, like left for some vacation. He's been, it was been months you've been gone. He's been gone. I think, yeah, I'm pretty, I think I heard you can look that up. Um, has he really been fucking out of the country? Who else left? Like there's a, there's a whole people that have that have left that's like your, these are very timely vacations and they're expensive. Well, LeBron just took a leave from the Lakers. Yeah, like what do you play for the Lakers and he just went on leave? What does it say? Did, Lee, Leonardo DiCaprio flee the country at the aftermath of the, it's going to say no, of course debunked. Yeah, these. Is it, is it debunked or is it what they're a multiple match? Really under our left viral Instagram post to break. You took from acting in 2013. This is not about that. I don't think it's 2013. Yeah. What's that something breaking news? Leonardo judge away of a celebrity departures saying that this is no longer my America keeps going. And that has what? Scroll out, how many shares does that tweet have? No, 228 reshare is 48,000 views. Hmm. Yeah, that's just did he? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's hard to know what's hard to know because real dude because it's just so curated, you know, an Instagram and all these platforms will label it as misinformation. Yeah. You don't know whether that's the actual celebrities team going out and saying that. Right. You know, we're really been debunked. Yeah. But, you know, this whole social media censorship thing, a lot of people are optimistic that it's going to stop in the next year after Trump gets in saying that they're going to kind of like do a bunker bust of these platforms of like YouTube and Google bust them up and try to like break up the monopoly so they don't have so much. But the problem is like Google was literally funded, incubated and curated by the intelligence agencies. Like if you go back and search and if you like, do you read, I've read this incredible background article where this guy did this long form investigative piece on Sergei, Brian and Larry Page when they were creating Google from their, uh, from, I think it was from Stanford. Right. And they were being visited during the whole time they were developing Google and the PageRank system and all of that they were being visited by two members of the CIA and they were like funded by DARPA, the, um, the CIA and the, uh, NSA all their money came from these agencies to defend to create it. And like the actual PageRank system was a part of DARPA like they that's like DARPA technology. So like to say that they've infiltrated these websites is not even doing it justice that these Google and YouTube and all this stuff was funded and incubated by the intelligence agencies. So it is like their tool. Right. You're wanting to hear something. Huh. Guess whose sentence was commuted. You know how, um, Biden commuted 1500, uh, people's, federal sentences yesterday. Mm hmm. Who do you think was among them? I'm sure there's a laundry list. Tell me. Where you know one of them, I know one of them personally. If you've talked to them on the phone, definitely. Oh, Frank, I'm a day. Oh, Frank, I'm a day. Oh, yeah. Frank, I'm a day. Oh, was commuted was pardoned by Biden? Not pardoned commuted. What's the difference? Um, so he had like eight or like seven or eight years to do on an ankle monitor where he's, he's basically in the halfway house. He said, go in every week. These tests do piss. Yeah. They're followed. Remember, they could throw you back in prison. Yeah. So they said, you know what? We're commuting your sentence. You're just on probation now. So he's got like, I think two or three years or three or three or four years of probation. So he's not an ankle monitor anymore. She means he could probably do your podcast. I've talked to him lately. No. Should we call him right now? I don't know. Wow. Wow. I can't believe he got community. He must have been frightened a lot of letters. Huh? Who knows what he had on Biden? No, just know what they did was everybody that was out on an ankle monitor, right? Biden commuted their sentence. Yeah. So anybody who had been gotten like the cares actor or it had been released that they were on an ankle monitor. And these are the guys that are like, we don't know what to do with them. Right? He said, you know what? I'm just going to commute their sentence and put them on probation. So who really commuted their sentence? Because you know Biden didn't really do shit. Well, somebody wrote it up for somebody has to run, probably has to remind him every day that he wakes up and he's still a president of the country. Oh, they see, he probably, you know, he probably, my hate probably has. I wrote it up for him. Somebody has to remind him every day that he wakes up and he's still a president of the country. They see, he probably, he probably has moments of lucidity. Yeah. Yeah. Well, let me tell you, so I could have conversations with my mom and they call it like, I want to say they have called the twilight hours. Sun downers, right. So as the sun's going down, everyone's why my mother would call me. And so I could have had breakfast worth her that morning and she would call me up and say, Matt, you come get me. I'm in the hospital. And I'd be like, what? What's wrong, mom? And you know, and she'd say, I'm in the hospital. Your father hit me. I'm in the hot site. What? My father's been dead for, you know, seven years. And it's like, and you realize like, oh, and she had dementia. Right. But I had, you know, and, you know, she I haven't seen your sister in week. I'm like, have you called Helen. I haven't seen her in weeks. She doesn't care about me. It's like, no, like, oh, okay, mom, you don't want to argue with them. Right. So I'm saying, I'm sure that I don't know if he's to that because listen, the next morning I show up for breakfast. Hey, mom, how are you? How are you? I love you. How are you? Do it perfectly. Doesn't remember the night before. Perfectly fine. Can tell me what's going on on CNN and Fox News and have a normal conversation. Talk about what she's doing that day. And you're just like, yeah. So I'm sure he has moments. Yeah. Times the day when he's better, when he's good and times when he's bad. You know, I was like, everyone's mad about him. Part Partening is son. Yeah. I mean, I don't care about that in part in the, the, the, him, you know, what I care about is that you know, you lied about at the whole time. You knew the whole time. I mean, there's so many other things I could be, you could be upset about. That's a minor one. The fact that the fact that he's never been found guilty of anything, the fact that they haven't properly been able to impeach and the fact that he, he, I'm going to send money to you, and I'm going to have them give me money to my son. My son, his son's going to be indicted. I'm going to fucking pardon him. You are spucking imagine when Biden was the vice president just randomly running at a hunter and Ukraine on the loose, just hunter on the loose on crack in Ukraine when Biden's the vice president. Can you imagine the fucking shit he's trying to pull you using his dad as the vice president? Yeah. Yeah. Definitely pedaling. Yeah. You better have a rock in my hotel room in two. You know the fuck. I will have you murdered unless you have a fucking eight ball in my hotel room in two hours. Oh, God. Tim Dylan did the best bit on this on his podcast the other day. I'm talking about hunter. Like nobody's at their best when they're on crack in the Ukraine with holding a gun to a hooker's head. Don't judge people in that moment. He's your last son. Your last crackhead son. Like let him off. All these people that are getting mad at him. They're the people that are about get behind family values, family values are what matter. Well, if you give a shit about family values, let this man pardon his last crackhead son. You know his first son died of brain cancer from the burn pits in the war. Now he's got one son left. Right. This is his last son, Hunter, who was a crackhead who did Coke in the White House. He sure son. Yeah. I understand. The problem is could you imagine being somebody right now who's doing time for the exact same things that he got part in. Oh, yeah. But you're sitting there doing five years or eight years or seven years. That's tough. And you're sitting there going, wow. That's tough. This is not right. You know, the world's not fair. No, it's not fair. But I mean, you know, they're all there's listen, there's I think there's just corruption at every level. It's just different degrees of it. Right. Yeah. I love that Trump's going to be our first felon president. Love it. Love it. Yeah, man. I Julian scared the shadow me with the drone stuff. I really hope Trump shows up to that football game tomorrow. I'll stop it. If he doesn't show up, we might. What does that mean? What if he doesn't show up? What does it show up to the football game that means he got the fuck out of dodge any change is schedule and he's not there. Where's the game? Where's the harmony game? But what does that mean? Find out where the Army name gave Army Navy game tomorrow. What does that mean? It's going to happen. What's Julian's prediction if that happened? He won't tell me he's being elusive. He's keeping it a secret. It's his journalistic integrity that he can't tell me what the fuck is going to happen. But something on the East Coast is going to happen and it's going to be bad. And we have to start driving West. Where? Maryland, land over Maryland. And Maryland is on the East Coast last time I checked, which is close to Jersey, I think. So everything, hopefully everything will be fine. And we have nothing to worry about. We don't start driving to, you want to hear some call, Rona. What's funny? What's funny? Is, so did you ever hear of the kids for cash judge? Yes, of course. We used them in the book. Right. In the general, in the book we wrote a row. Yeah. So you talked to the person in this case, right? Yeah. Yeah. I was the judge. I mean, the judge that helped with the lawsuit. He also, his, his sentence was community. No. Oh, listen, there's guys. Why would they do that? There's, there's sex offenders, sentences that he committed. Why? I mean, I think it was a blanket immunity said, look, everybody that's currently out on the CARES Act or whatever it was. Then just do it. He probably didn't put a lot of thought into it. No, no, nobody in the White House is putting a lot of thought in anything. Right. Yeah. It's just so much incompetence that I really, including this whole drone, fucking fiasco. But yeah, he was one of the judge and listen, you know, like I, I talked to him, you know, several times, you know, he was out on ankle monitor just like Frank, so nice to be interested to see what happens with Trump gets any said. He's going to release Ross Ulbrick, right? And he said he's going to do that. I think, I think he's going to shake some shit up like never been before. You see, there's appointments. Like these are not go, go with the flow kind of people. These are not bureaucratic, you know, the people that really understand the bureaucracy and are willing to work within it. Yeah. These are guys that are, you know, they're pulling out hatchets to, to some of them, not all of them. Some of them are swamp creatures. Yeah. Right. Some of them are still swamp creatures, but some of them are good. Like the guy cash Patel seems like he's going to shake some shit up. The quantity Elon Musk, Elon Musk, let's jump in a plane fly across the street and pull the fucking plugs on the servers, you know, that kind of so fire 80% of staff. You know, let's got to cut the, he's going to cut some shit. I think people rightly so are skeptical about like what's going to be the difference between this campaign and what's actually what actually gets done and what he actually does when he gets in the fucking warehouse. Yeah. It's cool. You know, the bureaucracy starts taking over where it's like, hey, we're going to do this. Well, okay, we can do that, but we have to do this and this and this and what you thought you were going to get done in a week. Six months later, you're still arguing. He said he's going to release the Kennedy files day one and then he's going to refer you off. Ross Oberick. Okay. Oh, I hope those two things happen. And he said, you know, the Kennedy thing, I think what do you say about that? He said the re goes if you saw what I saw. Right. I saw that on on Rogan. You would want to say it to either because because what supposedly these people some of these people are still alive. Yeah. 99% of them are dead. Yeah. There's like one or two that are still alive. Right. And you know, the thing is look, if you're saying you could always pardon the people that you think I don't, this person I don't want them to go through anything. It's been too long. You know, and he was following orders, whatever, but these four people are still alive, then I'm going to pardon them and I'm going to release it. So fine. You've just guaranteed that those guys are going to be okay. Like, you know, it's been a long time. They're not the same people and they were they were young and following orders. Like, yes, but, you know, yes, when you've got a gun to your head and you're being told to do something. This is what I'm ordering you to do. And it may be horrible, but I'm about to be shot. Right. So I have to kind of go through it. Of course. I'm not saying that's what the case was. But if you're a part of the CIA and you're in a group of guys and you're being told this is what we're going to do. You just kind of like I was just given a very secretive order. And if I say, hey, I'm not going through with that that there's just you're done. They're about to kill the president. They're going to cut you. Yeah. Right. So it's like I have to go through with this. So am I going to am I going to go ahead and drive this guy up to the to the grassy knoll and let him get out and I'm going to be the guy who blows the whistle and all this and exposes all this. Right. Like they just if they can go to the president, they're going to kill me. Like I'm going to I bet I got two kids in a wife. I'm going to go through with it. And now I guess what 50 years later, I'm still alive. You know, and Trump's like this guy rose through the ranks. He's retired. He's 80 years old. You know, I hate to release this stuff. It's going to make his life miserable. What if they come and arrest him? You know what? I'm going to pardon him. And there's four other guys. I'm going to pardon them. And I'm going to release it because it's time that the public knows the truth of what this country is, you know, is really light behind the curtain. Yeah. So and really doing something like that. If that's really the case, and I don't know what the case is that's really the case. Like there are listen, there are people like my mother and my father who made all the right decisions who were raised during the depression error, who who went to college who had children who worked the system who were, you know, lower middle class and reached the goal or reached the, the, um, the status of upper middle class who did everything right despite the problems they may have had as just human beings who 100% believed in this country and believed everything they saw on the nightly news. My father didn't as far as I know ever question what Dan Rather said happened. And then you find out what really hey, they're really our UFOs. They're really are this. Guess what the CIA killed Kennedy that you could you imagine like those people there in their 70s and 80s that never questioned anything have got to who right now think this generation is insane. They would be like just like they're they probably wouldn't believe it though. I mean if you had Trump come out in the, I can't imagine I feel released the documents. Yeah. Yeah, like you see the documents that like this is what really happened. It would be like, you know, guess what oh and by the way, we didn't land on the moon. That will not. I know I we've landed on the news. But I think yeah, I think so too. But but the point is is could you imagine being that person. It's just like yeah, it's got to be tough. You'd be like, I know a lot of people how a lot of people just get all their information from CNN and that would just undermine your belief system in the country in your entire life. Like I don't know you wouldn't know what to believe anymore in that point. Right. Devastating. Devastating. Yeah. Dying to see what what what because listen something is what's going to happen. Do you know how the process works with the confirmations the people in this cabinet. They have to get confirmed. And like I know that so so Bobby Kennedy is one of the big ones going to be the head of the HHS right there. He has to be confirmed by a certain date and that there's like a process of him getting confirmed to that position. Do you know how that works? No, but I mean there's I don't know how you could not confirm these guys like I mean these none of them are half as whacked out as Biden's, you know, appointees right like like you've got that. You've got that nut job who ran the military who what was the other one that was dressed up like a woman that was like I mean they were just insane. They were all pointed like and you've got what in most of this is made up of Congress. Can you find out when Kennedy is supposed to get how the like who like how the comp the confirmations of the cabinet members works or like find out when when does Kennedy get confirmed? Are there so many Republicans in Congress right now? Like you know like this is true. Just like how is it not going to be possible? The problem is a lot of these guys. They probably just don't want to go through scrutiny. You know like you're sitting there. You have to be answer all these questions. They're yelling at you there. You know it's you know they're bringing up this or bringing up any rumor that comes up. You're like what are you talking about? You're bringing up stuff like I was never convicted. That's a rumor. That's something my ex wife said. You know like what are you talking about? I still can't believe Frank out pardon and that's insane. Yeah, commutation is not pardoned. Commutation whatever. Right. Pardon would be like he walks free. He walks free any any he's no longer a felon. Yeah. Like they eliminate the whole thing like if you searched him up and nothing would come up. Maybe have to say he was basically expunged like you're no longer a felon. Yeah. Ten years from now if if neural link comes out and like people are getting it like CEOs are getting it of like health care companies and like big tech companies. They're getting these neural links in there because they're rich and they can afford them and it helps them connect better to the internet helps them in the negotiation. Pull shit off the internet that helps them like like beat somebody in a negotiation or a lawsuit or something like that or it just helps you thrive. Right. And it can just give you an advantage. Do you think you would do it or if like you're driving your car and you could be like, where am I going? I mean 65 years old 10 years from now. We're lucky to be around. I'm not going to have you drilling holes in my head like is this something that they're like they're going to drill a hole in your head. You stick this thing in or because of the age. What if they said that it could get rid of dementia. It could make you think like you thought when you were 35 years old give you you know. Yeah, probably sign me up like I mean I don't want to be the first guy. No, no, no, I'm saying they're saying they've already on the first guy. I'm saying now like thousands of people have them like you can pay 100 grand and get it done in Matt Cox. You're going to be rich in 15 years and you can afford 100 grand for a nor a link and it'll make you be feel younger. It'll make you think quicker. Yeah, I probably do it. You think you would. Yeah, because let's face it. I don't have much life left. If I can take a chance at having a better quality of life for the remainder of it. Yeah, I do it. Absolutely. Why you wouldn't do it. They're going to be listening to you what you're thinking. Know everything. That's the problem. That's the problem who gets control of it. I interviewed a guy about cryptocurrency. Yesterday and yeah, it was what you know he's taught I just the stuff he was saying was like how like okay I get moving away from the fiat system. But the way he it he was talking about laws and things that have already been passed like it's already going to happen like that they're they've already the world bank has already decided will be off the fiat system by 20 like 25. Like he had all these things and it was just like why have I not heard that and he's like that. I don't know you can look it up and he has like the statutes he has the things he's like yeah. And I'm like yeah well to your tell me we're going to be off cash by in a year he's like no no it'll it'll be phased out over a few years. But we'll be all saying we're going to be on a CBDC centralized digital currency. Control by the United States. Yes. Yeah. And that was like I was like so I mean first of all he knows it inside now we're sure company that has completely involved in it. And China's already doing this right well the other thing that was funny was he was like yeah he's like now there are some some states may end up you know kind of you know bucking like like being like they're not interesting like for instance he's like right now you know Florida's already coming up with their own currency and I'm like what. Oh boom he's like oh yeah pulls it up sends me the information I'm like Florida's talking about coming up with their own currency to go on the gold standard. I was the same way I was like like they're looking into it. I was shocked like the stuff he was dude and I was like how is this nice like well it's not because it was very Danny Jones just where it's this is what's happening they're just not telling you. You know like of course the media doesn't cover it well there is some of that it's not everything but there definitely is some of that you know it's definitely scary. Yeah it's terrifying that's why you need to buy a shit a little bit coin and dogecoin. Oh breaking the state of Florida is considering a study to explore using gold and silver as currency potentially bypassing the federal reserve system. And literally it's an amendment there's an amendment that says the states can do it. And I was like why these like yeah it's amendment whatever such and such under this that they're allowed to each state could actually come up with its own currency. The focus that that was one of the things they fought the Civil War over yeah was that they wanted to nationalize currency he was like yeah I know but if certain things happen then they're allowed to do it and they're looking into doing it and it's like yeah. I never heard this right. Yeah you know he had a ton of stuff this was an interesting guy. Interesting guy all it was all about digital assets and NFTs and crypto currency and Bitcoin and how you know way above my pay grade. I don't know 2022 you can't so you can't find anything real recent about. No he's not talking about a digital currency he's just saying Florida currency based on gold and silver right and this was from X. This is from X it had to be recent yeah. Yeah there you go two days ago Fox could gold and silver become a currency in Florida CFO. Patronis supports the move. Wow. Go down. I'm not just metals like gold and silver are not legal tender under current Florida law if the state's chief financial officer gets his way however that could change. Florida CFO Jamie Patronis who's also running a bit for a vacant seat in Congress is launching a study to help figure out how gold and silver could be used to buy goods and services in the state. I mean yeah just accept Bitcoin. Yeah no like why go back to a system that we already phased out. Yeah Bitcoin isn't backed by anything. This is backed by gold. Bitcoin is there's a finite amount there's only 21 million bitcoins to be made that they're going to be created ever and it's like I mean I don't know I can't make anything out of Bitcoin fact why what I don't know what I don't know like what it what is like that means it's not it's not backed by anything it's just the fact that you can't make more of it right. I mean like traditional fiat currency is not backed by physical commodities like gold or silver nor by the promise of a government or central bank. Bitcoin value comes from the widespread trust in its security scarcity and predictability right. So it's so valuable because it cannot be controlled by anything and there's only a specific amount of it. And it's freedom it's basically it's basically monetary freedom it's a way to escape all centralized institutions that exist. But I can sell it. You can also sell Bitcoin. Yeah but I can make stuff out of gold and it gives a shit. You can sell Bitcoin I can go online right now and sell all my Bitcoin for whatever it's where like it's so if I have one Bitcoin I can sell for $101,000 right now instantly in one second I can change I can transfer into cash. It's like it's not like it's some have your bought crypto. No. Okay not buying crypto you're not buying crypto. I mean there are people that are no I'm not buying crypto on by gold. I can physically go to it. But you keep your crypto backed up on this cold storage wallet. It's like a hard drive you keep it on so it's not on the internet. It's like you keep it in a safe first-hand deposit box or whatever and no one can touch it can't be hacked or anything. I hear you. You should talk to this guy. You guys have a ton to talk about. You talk for hours. You've been a part of a bunch of documentaries and all kinds of stuff. Actually there's like a two and a half hour documentary on him I could send you. Not him but he was basically throughout the entire documentary. Right. He's all about the SEC suing who they sued like a couple years ago. They sued somebody saying it was saying that the it's a whole conspiracy behind Ethereum and the government and how they sued this company to try and get to because this company was doing really well. and it was going to take over Ethereum and Bitcoin. It was going to be the number one crypto. And so what happens is a bunch of people in the government who were invested invested into Ethereum and the convincing the SEC to sue this company. And as soon as they sue them knowing they're going to lose the lawsuit. But it will stop them from moving forward. They immediately all like step down from their positions and take other positions and private companies. They're all associated with crypto. And this company spends the next two years and like half a billion dollars fighting the lawsuit. And they just recently like literally a few weeks ago won the lawsuit. But now they're he thinks they'll come back. But of course, you know, Ethereum has been running wild since this lawsuit. So they're coming up. Ethereum isn't a not a commodity, but whatever. It isn't whatever they sued them for. But they're saying that this coin is. It's the same thing. They just filed it to to cripple the company. And it's a whole thing. I mean, it was super interesting. It's just like I said, it's above my pay grade because I don't really know. I'm not really looking at lawsuits. You know, Billy Carson is. Yes, he's being sued. I saw it. He's the one suing. Oh, I'm sorry. He's trying to get some stuff taken now because he losing looking bad in a debate. Yeah. So now he's suing, giving people a servant of cease and desist letters to at their door steps and that two in the morning, it's on video on the guys ring doorbell. And he admitted on a video on a live stream video that he was doing it. He said this on his own fucking video. He goes, I'm just doing this to make them spend money because I know they can't afford to fight me in the lawsuit. And if you say that from lawyer people I've talked to is that you can't admit that. If you admit that your shit gets thrown out. Yeah. Why did he do so badly during the debate? Because he was debating a guy who actually is a PhD in the Bible. Right. And Billy actually has all the facts. Billy likes to make a lot of big claims, big sensational claims about about the past and about ancient history and ancient civilizations and aliens. Got a couple of lucky and all things. He's got a lot of books and he's got a fuck, a little money. He basically got on this debate. I think a little bit, a lot of it unprepared. And this guy was just laying down like hard facts, giving him like asking him legitimate questions and Billy kind of like, oh, it's like on his phone kind of like scrambling with the fine and like it made Billy look bad and really uninformed compared to this guy. And it's not a good look man because Billy makes a lot of money. But I don't think his Pete he'll lose a ton of people. Like the people want to think he will. Yeah. I think you're right about them. And then doing the lawsuit just makes you look bad and makes you look death. Right. Yeah. You know, some people are going to follow you just no matter what they like you, they believe in you, they believe in what you're saying. And maybe if it's not 100% accurate or you're making some assumptions, they're still going to follow you because they want to just talk about they want to believe them. People are going to want to defend them. But at the same time there's going to be a lot of people who want to see him fall just like, you know, everyone else. So he takes a 20% hit and he makes that for the next year. So I don't think it'll, you know, I don't think it'll affect him that much. It might be a little bump in the road, but he's going to still keep doing what he's doing. I thought you were not going to. The lawsuit is that that's where it starts looking bad. Yeah. Well, I mean, well, he publicly admitted he sued them just to fucking make them spend money. Right. Like that's not good. That was not a good idea. I will see what else to want to talk about. Nothing. I mean, what are we doing? What are we? Listen. So the guy that was, you know, you know, how Deborah Lee at the real story, not the movie at the end, you know, how Deborah Lee goes to night armament and night armament convinces him to come to Orlando. Yes. And the guy, the other guy brings or the, the ATF agent brings a Glock and gives it to Deborah Lee and Deborah Lee, Grapp takes it and then he rests him. Yeah, he rests in like, yeah. Well, remember that they have Deborah Lee, he looks at the Glock and everything. He checks out the weapons, gives it back to the guy, tells the guy, look, you know, the guy's like, look, I brought the weapons. Can you go buy the ammunition? And Deborah Lee says, yeah, okay, fine. He's like, and Deborah Lee says, look, I can't buy ammunition, but I'll have my guy buy it. Yeah. That guy's name is like, Dejan Dejour or something. I forget his name. He's, I think he's Serbian. Or maybe he's from the, anyway, the point is is that he has been, he was one of the guys that was with Deborah Lee from pretty much the beginning. Mm hmm. I talked to him the other day. Really? Yeah. About what? He, after the whole Deborah Lee, but debacle, he went back to Serbia for seven years. And he just got back about 11 months ago and about a month and a half ago found out about the book that I wrote. And granted. Yeah. And no, not hand-gridding about once a gun runner and read the book and contacted me and said, listen, man, a lot of what Deborah Lee said is in true. And I was there the whole time and this and this and this and I'd love to talk to you about it. And so we talked on the phone for 30, 45 minutes and I said, look, you know, you gotta come up high cast like we'll go through a piece by these. And he said, carrying the torch, Matt Cox, I love to see it. And he said, he was like, absolutely. So he's supposed to, I think we're going to do it. But he, I think he was saying like the first, he's in Miami like the first of the year, I think we're supposed to do it. He said he's going to get back to me. He had to talk to some people and beautiful. Yeah. You know, he's worried about his English. But his English was good. Like he said, oh, you know, I want to make sure that I sound. So this guy did business with Deborah Lee for a long time. Yeah. Like several of the companies with Deborah Lee's like on, at the ankle monitor that he's out on, like he's got like three or four companies in this guy's name that are buying things that you know, yeah. So this guy's like, he knows, he knows where all the body is in an interview with them. I mean, I'm trying to get no, I mean for your sizzle for our sizzle, I thought. Yeah, I would have the sizzle on paying for the one that I wrote is the whole more wrote it. I'm filming it in paying for it. Oh my God. It's okay. It's all right. It's a, it's a, it's an equal effort on both of our parts. I agree. Yes. So well, I don't know. I thought I'd mention it because I don't think for the sizzle. I think we know, let's get the sizzle out there. But he's one more person that we can, we can interview for that. If we can get to that point where we say, okay, there's multiple people that we know, you know, the more people you have, the more chance that you can go in and say, look, we can interview this guy, this guy, this guy and this guy and these four guys for that. Like, yeah. I think it becomes like, okay, it's not a, a two hour doc now. Now it's a three part doc, right, 45 minutes a piece or whatever. Yeah. This guy is very, look, he's super, um, but I don't know why he, he was like, I'm worried about my, he kept saying he was worried about his accent. He spoke great. People like those kinds of accents. What, what's it? He's from, okay. So Serbian, I think, so I think it was a Serbia, um, Hertz, Gavina, is that what? No, so remember the Serbian ball, Balkan, yeah. Yeah. Like like a back lover accent. No. I don't know. Anyway, those accents do well. Yeah. He doesn't do well. Yeah. At least on my podcast. Um, I was on, um, Sean Atwood the other day. Oh, yeah. Oh, well, I take that back. He's probably one of the biggest podcasts. Yeah. I don't know during the pandemic. Yeah. How's he doing? I mean, he's killing it. He's doing, he's doing five hours a day of lives about Diddy and, oh my God, and an hour of just a regular podcast. This guy is, wow. I think he's like you is a machine. Is he Adam Nellion? of lives about Diddy and and an hour of just a regular podcast. This guy's wow, I think he's like you he's a machine Is he at a million yet? I don't know if he's doing it every day. Well, I think it's the third of the week It's insane same thing he had Courtney Burgess on he had all the players. Oh, wow. Yeah, what other players? Interesting Um, yeah, he's kicking ass. How many more podcasts you got to do this week? I got one tomorrow, and then I'm going to LA on Monday Tuesday and Wednesday. I come back while I come back Wednesday and then There's Christmas what do you guys know for Christmas? I think Jess is what's saying I get her bring you You know, I don't I don't I don't want anything. I feel like I have you know Don't you feel like like I have everything? Yeah, you know like I'm a horrible person to buy for like I don't want and then you can't say You know, no don't get me anything because you know, you know they want to buy you something So yeah, I don't want anything I know I want very little too, you know like I Got Jess a truck did you yeah, I'm kind of trucked out. 250. It's a no. It's a Tacoma with you know, it's like a king cab type. Yeah. Oh, yeah. That's awesome. She loves that. Yeah, 2024. Wow Matt cock bro listen she was oh, are you kidding me? Listen you pay cash listen? We're looking at place Like we're when it was like look because I don't have a vehicle so we're sitting there going hey You know, I'm saying look well what about this vehicle? What about this one like we're looking at SUVs and and she's like yeah That's okay. That's okay. That's good and they're all vehicle to around 60 70,000 right now I figure like get a nice vehicle like we only have one yeah, you know and we're sitting there And she's like yeah, she's like you know what honestly she and I was like yeah, she goes I feel like to come and she's like I really would like me and it sounds like well what I don't know anything about I'm like the comers are fucking great. I love to come. I'm like a truck and she's like yeah But we could get like the kid the one with the so I'm like okay, and so she starts looking and we start looking and she finds one She's like like this. This is what I want. I see 38,000 but it was like 40 that ran and I thought Let's go right now Absolutely like I'm looking at something 60 70,000. I'm like, are you sure? Are you sure? And she's like no, that's what I want like she's not looking at the prices then we're looking You know she don't think she realized the disparity right and listen we bought it that night. Did you really straight to the dealership? Right up let's do this that car But she has a large baby. That's great. Listen. She's a great feeling to buy your to buy your wife a new car She listen the next day washed it that night sat in the car for like an hour and a half two hours Just you know it was you know so cute for a lesson that never had better than mine yourself a new car Oh absolutely I could care a lot. I've had tons of new car, right? Yeah. All right. It's great. Yeah You had a Ferrari in the 90s. You're good So but yeah, she like sits in it washed it three days later washed it again You know knows what everything does reading the manuals. I've never done that in my life I don't know what half the ship does. Yeah, but anyway, yeah beautiful. It's pretty cool. I drove it here I gotta check it out. Cool. Well, thanks again Check out Matt Cox's YouTube channel inside true crime in Espenio On the honest with you. There's other there's better stuff There's some great it mean honestly you guys seriously like there's there's some great stuff on Netflix Apple Apple has a series called Silo no that's something you should check out. Yeah, you know You could do better than it inside if you've made it this far god bless you. Yeah. Yeah This is a struggle. This is a struggle. You're a real one if you made it this far Yeah, I appreciate everybody. I appreciate you Matt Cox. Thanks. Merry Christmas to all and to all a good night. Nice