My memory is fading when we hear last. Well, I like to measure it in who's an assassination of temps. So I was here one coup and one assassination attempt. Pug out. So now it's the first week of second week of August and it feels like a different country. Yeah. Isn't that something? Yeah. What's happened between May and now? assassination attempt in a coup. Yes. That's for one Olympics. So basically the busiest period in American history, but we just sort of kind of forgot it all happened or something. It is really amazing. It is really, it's unbelievable. And I think that like both me and you when I interviewed you on my podcast, which I don't remember when that was but it was several months before I came out here. And we were both kind of talking about how, you know, trying to make predictions about the rest of 2024 is difficult. But the one thing you know is it's going to be crazy. Yes. Like it's going to be something really wild. You could just feel that. And at this point, you're like, how do we even accelerate from here? And I think we're going to, by the way, I don't, I think we've got several more crazy things to go before November. So to the extent you can predict them. What do you foresee? It's so hard right now. I mean, I really have a tough time because this I did not see this coming. I didn't see Kamala Harris being the person. It was always everyone who was speculating about. No, no, no, no. Joe to always to unpopular. You were like, who's it going to be Gavin Newsome or Hillary Clinton or Michelle Obama and everybody ever even in the corporate media in the moment when they admitted the emperor was naked after that debate. Even all of them were speculating. Amber had no person. Yeah, right. Exactly. Even all of them were speculating about who it would be if Joe Biden dropped out. And Kamala Harris was not the person because she's so, I mean, awful at this. And deep down popular. Yes. And so now they've switched into a new emperor's new clothes mode where there is this totally astroturfed fake. You know, Kamala Harris went from being the most unpopular vice president ever to a cultural phenomenon. The one thing this nation needed was more Kamala Harris. It's just it's very bizarre to watch it. You know, I said this last time we were here that I always I like to call them storms. Like when you're in the middle of a massive propaganda storm, I always love the example. I mentioned this last time. I don't know why. I just this example, when Donald Trump said he was going to pull out of Syria, she ultimately back down on and didn't do. Yes. But and for two weeks in the media, it was the Kurds. What about the Kurds? I just draw a callous. The Kurds, we would never betray the Kurds before and we'll never do it again. My grandfather said to me on his death in 1983, goes grandson. Don't betray the Kurds. And then it's like ever since then no one's mentioned to do fight the Houthis. Yeah, right. Right. Right. That's right. It's so important. But it's all, but there's like these weird propaganda storms. There's no, um, there's no energy to that. It's not risking anything. It's not like, oh my God, my channel's going to get me on for something. Exactly. Couple years ago, that was a really risky thing to say. I lived it. Yeah. Cause, you know, you were in that storm. Yeah. So the storm right now is that Kamala Harris has this massive grass root support. That's why when she ran for president in 2019, she had to drop out before Iowa. How many delegates did she get that year? It's, it'll take us the whole show to count them off. But like, come on. I mean, look, however you feel about people, there's people I despise politically. Sure. I cannot stand Bernie Sanders, politically. I hate socialism or whatever he is. He's not exactly a socialist. No, whatever he is. I hate it. But he had real grass root support for real. Real. That's why they had to steal it from it. Yes. Exactly. Tens of millions of Americans. Oh, yes. Bernie Sanders. Donald Trump, however you feel about him. That's right. Real grass root support. Barack Obama, however you feel about him. Absolutely. Real grass root support. You know what? They all have in common. They didn't drop out before Iowa because nobody with real grass root support doesn't make it to the first contest. And Kamala Harris, it's not as if she was a Bernie Sanders or say like a Ron Paul or a Dennis Kucenage. She had major donors behind her. She took much of the, the Clinton campaigns. Yeah. I mean, she was touted by the corporate media as like the candidate when she first announced in 2019. And still with all that couldn't get to Iowa. So in other words, I think the whole Kamala Harris thing is fake. It's all astro-turfed. I think if there was a real election today, I don't see how she could beat Donald Trump. But all of that is, so maybe the, we don't know that that's going to happen. I don't think, of course, that's not going to happen. But I wonder though if the lesson, it maybe we've been taken in by the solution that it's about people when really it's about machines. The machinery of the party system, particularly the Democratic Party. And it just kind of doesn't matter what Kamala Harris is like, what a record is, what she believes, what she'll do or not do. She, she has no role in any of that. She's just to stand in for the oligarchy. Yeah. I mean, we're going to, it's, it does feel that way. Yes. Well, it's an interesting, we're kind of running that experiment right now to see how fake it is or how, how little the people actually matter. I will say at least with Joe Biden, the, they proved they couldn't do it with him. Like he was seeing on that. That's right. To be able to pull that off. So the machine, just like everything, right? Just like the US empire governments in general, they're not gods. There are limits to their power. The question is like, can they pull this off? It's interesting to me. That is a really smart point. And I'm glad that you said that because it actually makes me feel better. Yeah. Well, they're, they're our limits. They're not omniscient. Yes. That's right. Well, I mean, look, there's, there's lots of examples of that like every foreign policy decision in the last 20 plus years. Yes. Yeah. And there's, yeah, they actually can't do everything. We can do a lot. I mean, we can take down nations. We can't build them. We've learned that. Right. But you know, with Joe Biden, there was a really weird mix of things that happened. And one of them is that there, there is a kernel of truth, just a kernel of truth to their corporate media narrative, which is that obviously, you know, like me and you were talking, I think at least since 2019 about Joe Biden's very obvious cognitive decline. Yes. It was like there, it was very clear when he came back around after being vice president. Like if you listen to him back in, uh, in 2016, when he was, it made the decision not to run. Yes. Because, you know, of, uh, he wasn't over his son dying or whatever. But we know it was really because Obama pushed him out. Yeah. You say of a Clinton, even though it was kind of his turn, traditionally speaking, he was the vice president. Um, but back then he kind of was Joe Biden. Oh, yeah. And then once he came back around running in 2019, it was like, well, this isn't Joe Biden anymore. But the kernel of truth to the media narrative is that it's also true that it got drastically worse. Like it got whatever it was. It went from being a thing where, I mean, I remember on your, on your Fox show in 2019, that you'd be like playing these clips of him where he'd go. He'd get the state wrong. He was telling these weird stories. You know, like, it was, it was very clear, but it was still, he was still a little bit like hit or miss. Yes. Like he'd have one speech where he kind of was okay. Then the next speech, ooh, he looks like he has dementia. You know, it was like, whatever Joe Biden showed up and he did the debate with, do you one or two debates in 2020? I think they did they do too? I can't remember her call. But he got through him. I mean, Trump kind of talked over it. Trump made a real tactical error and just dominated where you want to let Joe Biden talk as we learned. Yes. The muting the microphones really worked in Trump's favor in that debate. But lately, it's not like every other speech. No, he's bad. He can't pull off one. He can't pull off any interview. But he's still the president. Who is the president of the United States? Well, yes, we don't have one. And this is strange. This is what's crazy to me though, right? So if you look at, first of all, the distinction, which I think should be obvious more and more to people, is that the distinction politically that matters right now is not left first right. It is just not true. It's one thing that man. It drives me crazy amongst like Republican voters and even Republican leaders that they still want to see things in that distinction. They still want to go the far left Nancy Pelosi or whatever. It's like, yeah, she's not really far left. It's a, she uses far left language. But these people, it's not, you know, Colin Kamala Harris, a communist or whatever. And I know people were sending this clip. These are people who work for JP Morgan. Yes, they're not communists. They're for big business. And they're like, yeah, but look at this clip. She's talking about equality of outcomes. Like she doesn't even understand what that means. It's not really communist. They're using leftist language. Of course, they're liberal. They're neoliberal. Exactly. We're for big business. So the distinction is not left or right. The distinction is like establishment versus dissident or corrupt versus honest or something like that. That's right. That's why Glenn Greenwald is not on the opposition team to us and Mitch McConnell is our ally. Right. It's not about that. But so one of the that's for sure. Right. One of the things that the establishment has, which is really something I've been marveling at lately, um, is there a tip, unbelievable message discipline, something that us, the dissidents could never dream of having. I mean, it's just unbelievable. But you know, you see some of like the compilations of the corporate media is just like, hey, they just, hey, J.D. Vance is weird. That's the line this week. Kim Wall is a fun killer. Yes. Every one weird at all though. Well, look, uh, my, my. Totally not weird. Well, my good friend, uh, Michael Malice, who you had on your, uh, Fox, wrote the book on North Korea. And he's just really smart guy and hilarious and a great guy. Um, but he pointed this out that, uh, you know, when a few years ago when Joe Rogan was taking uh, I've remecton, uh, his doctor prescribed to my vermecton after he was. Is that the fish tank cleaner or the horseshit people as you can't remember what he was? All of them horse dewormer. There's a million different things that I've remecton does yet. And they all picked horse dewormer and repeated that. And then, you know, you can look that sharp as attack. Joe Biden sharp as attack sharp as attack. Everyone said this in private meetings. He sharp as attack. These people forget the shortest lived propaganda campaign ever, which was way back last month was a cheap fakes. Yeah. You remember for a week? Oh, you were told that there are these videos. They're kind of like deep fakes. What distinguishes them from deep fakes is that they're real videos. But, but you see, Tucker. They're trying to make it look like Joe Biden is old and see now. But that's all just bullshit or whatever. So they stay on message. They very much stay on message. Whereas the the magma movement has nothing like that. And part of that is because Donald Trump's at the top and Donald Trump doesn't stay on message. That's how he works. He's a stream of conscious type thinker who goes on stage and doesn't even know what he's going to talk about. He figures it out while he's up there. There's something kind of, uh, in dearing about that. Um, and there's something more fundamentally one movement is about the individual. Right. And the other is about the collective. Absolutely. The collective doesn't care about your opinion. Well, it's, it's amazing, right? Just that even of these people who work in places that you used to work and, and some places you didn't work, but like people at the New York Times or the Washington Post or CNN or NBC or CBS that like all of them, at least in their own mind, still pretend to be journalists. And yet they have, they're somehow able to just repeat the talking point exactly verbatim as everyone else does. So anyway, my point is we don't want to be that because we don't want to be like, we don't want to all just be mindless drones. Right. However, it is, it's amazing to me that Donald Trump, none of his surrogates, no one, it, like on the pro Trump side seems to be able to effectively hit, come on. Wallace Harris with what is the most obvious thing to hit her with. It's the greatest scandal in American history, which is like what you just said, that we don't have a president. We, the president of the United States, everybody has essentially admitted is too senile to run for president. Yet he's going to be president until January. We are in a proxy war with the biggest nuclear power in the history of the world. And we have another proxy war-ish type thing that looks to be devolving into a wider regional war in Israel. And we don't have a president. This is like the biggest scandal in the history of the republic, if we're a republic anymore. And, and Kamala Harris is directly implicated in this. Like she was one of the major people lying through her teeth that Joe Biden is sharp as attacking private meetings. And it seems like somehow the Trump campaign has not been able to effectively hit her for this. It's like right there in front of us. You pulling Joe Biden out was admitting that he's too senile to run for president. Yes. And yet you're not invoking the 25th amendment. This is what it's for. He clearly can't be president. And then what does it say about the machine that they're quite happy with that, that works very well for them. I mean, there are two levels in which it's upsetting. One is the practical level, which is you probably do want to commander in chief if you're on the cusp of nuclear war, which we are. But the others philosophical and speaks to whether our current system can continue. I mean, we're just admitting now that we don't have an executive that we don't need an executive. This is governed that we are governed by an unelected body of people whose names we don't know, whose motives we don't understand. Like what? And also as we all know, the only reason they pulled Joe Biden is because it became clear he couldn't win. But if he could have won, they'd be quite happy to keep him in that like they like that. It's probably better that they don't have this guy who every now and then might think he's president of the United States. Why is your no curiosity about who they is? Yeah. That's a good question. I mean, I can't answer that. I mean, I think most people assume Obama is at the top of that pyramid, but I can't confirm that. Really anybody in a position of authority asked like who does run the government? Yeah. And I don't know that there's an easy, I mean, I don't know the answer to that, but I don't know that there's a lot of hands. I don't think it's Obama. I mean, I think Obama has influence, you know, but I don't know how much Obama really ran the government when he was president of the United States. I certainly know that he definitely at the very beginning got rolled by his generals. And I think that he, you know, I don't exactly know where he was on some of these issues, but at least with like what he ran on in terms of healthcare was not what Obamacare was at all. In fact, he if you remember way back in ancient history in 2008, Hillary Clinton was the one who was for the individual mandate. Of course. And he criticized her. It was a great line he had in the debate. He was like the individual mandate solves the health insurance crisis in the same way that mandating you by a house solves the homelessness problem, which is like a great line. Totally. And that's totally exactly right. How does that help anything to mandate you by something that you've already deemed you can't afford to buy? But then that's what Obamacare ultimately was and why is it? Oh, there's good for the insurance companies. So it's like it seems to me like he was always getting rolled by what are the powerful interests, which are essentially big business that owns the government, uses the government as a tool to increase their profits. So I don't know. I mean, I don't know who's really running things. Is it the director of national intelligence? Is it Biden's chief of staff? I don't know, but it's not Joe Biden. That's for sure. And Kamala Harris seems like kind of flots him on the waves of history herself. Like she's not is she making independent judgments and choices that are is she driving her own narrative? I don't think so. I don't think she stands for anything. You know, I don't think I think she's just like, I don't think there's one issue ever where it's like, no, she believes in this passion. She's going to and she's going to stand up and try her best to make sure this goes through. It's kind of like, you know, she was a in aggressive prosecutor in California. But if she was a prosecutor right now in California, I'm sure she'd be one of these progressive prosecutors. It's just like which way was the wind blowing? Is that the thing to get me more power? Well, how's this for crazy? Has there ever been a more volatile time in American politics? Not in our lifetimes. No one alive has ever seen anything like this. But long before things started to really fall apart, the Harris Foundation sought coming. Harris just pulled together a coalition over a hundred right leaning groups to develop a comprehensive plan for day one. That would include detailed policy proposals on most pressing issues. The big ones securing the border, controlling inflation, cracking down on election fraud, protecting the rights of the individual and saving the nation from being crushed by woke anti-human ideology. The team and heritage has also developed a plan to dismantle the deep state that keeps this nonsense going and reclaim this nation from a small group of technocrats that's broken everything. Heritage is also running a training and vetting program to identify effective conservatives to serve in the next presidential administration. People who will share your values, this country's values and actually do the job. It can't just be the same pool of discredited people from Washington, populating every administration. Heritage has a long head start and they put in a lot of work already, but they need your support to finish the job and to support the incoming president. You can go to heritage.org slash Tucker and contribute to this important work today. A lot depends on it. Heritage.org slash Tucker. We get into the details of what's actually happening right now is to speed ahead a year. No matter who wins, does anybody believe that our system functions as advertised? Do we know too much to continue? It is. It's a good question. I think that our system has worked this way for a very long time. What's really drastically changed is that people have really woken up to it. There's a mix of several things, obviously, like the internet is a huge part of that and social media and stuff like that. Then also just the Trump phenomenon. That's right. The deep state coming out of the shadows is some degree. I know I've heard you talk about this the clip before and I've played it a million times on my podcast, but where Chuck Schumer was on with Rachel Maddow. He says that which is amazing moment because if she goes off script and she asks and she even says before she asks the question, she goes, I don't mean to put you on the spot here, but President-elect Donald Trump is in January of 2016. He's won the election, but he's not president yet because President-elect Donald Trump was just tweeting, you know, whatever it was talking shit to the CIA or whatever. And he just off off the cuff in a real moment goes, I would not do that. It was like the most honest thing Chuck Schumer has ever seen. It was amazing. It was six ways to Sunday. Yeah, back it's true. I never really believed, I mean, I was an idiot, obviously. I didn't really believe any of that. I was hunting probably 10 years ago down in South Texas right in the Rio Grande on somebody's ranch and this guy comes out with a box about this big and an aerial like a fiberglass wine that went up and the end of it was connected to a raccoon tail. And it was a coyote call and they turned this thing on and it made the sound of a dying animal. Like just heart like from the depths of Hades, these sounds. And then this tail would whip around and the air like it's the weirdest thing I've ever seen in my life. And how did you know where within about three minutes all these animals showed up? There was a big cat, all these coyotes and I thought that's kind of what Trump is. He's like a coyote call like he shows up and out of this landscape that looks desolate, like nothing's going on. All of a sudden the predators come out and you see for the first time that you were always surrounded by these things. They were always there. You just didn't see them. Yeah. You don't mean? Yeah. And I felt that way very much about the intel agencies. Like of course I applied to work at one. I knew they were there. But I really had no idea the degree which they're running everything. Well, I think that that's exactly right. Right. So it's like it's not. So like say in like the 90s when I was a kid. And if my parents had like they used to always have a crossfire before you were on it, was that Pap you can in a Tom Brady. And yeah, they'd have that on or whatever. And they knew the CIA existed. It's not like they weren't away. And they were like yeah, it's a super secret spy organization that does super secret spy stuff. You know, like they kind of knew that. Again, it's not amazing. Right. But it was never like a thought like okay, the presidential election between Clinton Bob Dole is coming up. How much is the CIA just crafting the illusion of what we see in front of us? That never would have been a thought. Now that's a thought that's in a lot of people's minds about like the whole thing is fake. There's a great quote that your CIA guy had when you asked about the Kennedy assassination. It's such a great line because yes, the government was involved. It's all fake. It's all fake. That's the perfect line to decide. So, but we know that. I mean, I think people know that. They know that. Everyone's going crazy and really getting down these rabbit holes. I understand why. But like, how is that does that ever change? Like once you know this, can you know it? Yeah, that's a really good question. And I don't think so. I think that I don't think you can put that toothpaste back in the tube. I think ultimately that's probably at least at this point. That's Trump's great accomplishment. You know, for better or worse, I think it's for the better. I think it's better to know things than to be in a state of ignorance. But that is there is no getting away from it. And it's also it's past the point, especially for Trump supporters. I think we're way past the point of them ever believing the system is real. Even in 2020, let's just say hypothetically that the election was completely on the the up and up. And there was no fraud involved in the election. Mark Zuckerberg didn't spend 400 million. Well, no, but that I'm saying that stuff we know is real. Right? Even though the time magazine piece that they ran, like so if you, if you had a guy in Donald Trump with the entire media class and political class told you that it cannot be this guy. And not just like your opposition, like Mitt Romney, the former, the last nominee before him said anyone but this guy, everyone said you can't have this guy. And the voters decided no, we want this guy. This is who we want. And so they framed him for treason, friend, the sitting US president for treason without foreign hostile power, that completely collapsed. It's weird. You don't hear anything about that anymore. Is that just that in itself so crazy that Vladimir Putin's plant is possibly going to be president again and no one in the media is even mentioning that as a thing. And yet also not apologizing. Like it's like they're not, how can you do neither of those things? How can you either say like, oh, Russia is about to have control of the White House again or hey, we were wrong about that whole Russia having control of the White House thing. But anyway, so they, they frame him for treason, they impeach him twice. They rate his home in Mar-a-Lago. They, you know, all these things that happen. How would you ever after that if Trump loses, let's say, how would any Trump supporter ever accept that this was real that he had a real, you know what I mean that they are team actually lost and your team actually won? It's always going to be viewed as like what it is. So you made such a smart point at breakfast, which I wish we had filmed because it was great. But about how there's no effort by the establishment of Washington, both parties, to win over people who support Trump. There's no effort to convince them to cajole them. It feels like the people who run the country of like actually hate a lot of the country for real. Yeah. And there's, I was thinking about this. I recently rewatched Pat Buchanan's speech from the 1992 convention, which was an amazing speech. And he was a speech writer for Nixon. He was really, really good at holding speeches, you know, like that was kind of his thing. And it got the media flipped out about it. They called it the culture war speech and all that. I remember like really that culture war, you really. But there was this one point where he said something along the lines of he was talking about being on the campaign trail. He had run and challenged George H. W. Bush. And this was him coming back into throw his supporters behind H. W. A mistake in my opinion, but gave a great speech regardless. But he said at one point that he was out there, you know, when he was talking to people who were really struggling as he was right. You know, there's some woman who was talking about how she lost her job. And there's there were going to maybe take her kid away from her. And then there was some guy who worked at a plant that was going to close down. And he was like, please save our jobs. And he's kind of like touching moments. And his message to the Republicans was like, look, like these people are our people. There are fellow countrymen. And we have to like, we have to get back in touch with them. And he said at one point, he goes, they don't expect miracles from us, but they have to at least know that we care. And that's kind of it. And it's amazing how little it takes. You know, like one of the things about this, uh, Walt's guy, which he is one of the things that I think is one of the reasons why they picked him is that he at least gets that you're supposed to talk about issues that maybe regular people might care about. You know, and it almost, this is why some of these old distinctions are as meaningful anymore. I mean, don't you mean, we're not like, I'm for Lazy Fair free markets. I'm a libertarian. I do not like socialism. Um, but at least someone like Bernie Sanders is talking about like your healthcare costs or take home pay or whatever. What are the banks of all the power? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, things that like kind of matter. Whereas like the corporate media is totally obsessed over like January 6th climate change, racism, even like democracy in this kind of weird abstraction the way they talk about it. It's like, but no one's like, it's like, you know what people care about is like price inflation like 100 groceries or 30% more expensive. Yeah, that's like a big deal. And so anyway, I think the Pap you can't end point was like, you gotta at least give them something, just something. Try to do something for these people. And it would, I would think it would take very little. I mean, like I think I've heard you say this before, which is just kind of like, all right, you guys get your wall. You know what I mean? Yeah, like you know, okay, Donald Trump won and all you guys wanted to build, okay, so we're going to build a wall because like it's kind of a symbol that you still have a little bit of say in how the country is run. And we're going to give you that and maybe like two other little things and we're going to keep all of the profits that we're raking in in that. Exactly. You know, it's like something they don't want to offer any deal to the Trump supporters to try to pull them back in to this system. And that is very creepy to make. Well, it's ominous too because if you don't care what people think, well, first one in democracy required to care what they think. So I guess we can settle that question. No, it's not in democracy or even in republic. But if you don't care, then you can kind of do, there's no limit to what you can do to them. Yeah, well, that's right. That's right. But also, even whether democracy or not, because obviously we're not a democracy and obviously we're not a republic, whereas we're in oligarchy. That's a world empire. Yes. That's really how you would describe America. But even in an authoritarian dictatorship, there's limits to what you can do to your people. You know, I mean, there's like, you get that you have to at least convince them that you're doing something on behalf of them. Otherwise people won't put up with it anymore. It requires a lot of force. Yeah, right. In a true autocratic way. And even in Middle Eastern theocracies I've seen it, you know, the king or the crown prince or the guy in charge takes the temperature of the country. In the UAE, every week, you know, the country has to sit there while people from the provinces can come in and complain to them in his house. Right. And it's not just a kabuki like there, you know, you have to keep in touch with what people want and you sort of have to deliver some percentage of it or at least pretend you are, right? Yeah. Yeah. like they're you know you have to keep in touch with what people want and you sort of have to deliver some percentage of it or at least pretend you are right yeah yeah you think so i mean it's kind of like right in a friendship or a marriage or a business or anything there's like how about some more suffering and degradation for you i would like a little more of that yeah and that makes makes me worry about what happens if she wins yeah well i'm me too although there's um you know i think i think um like trump supporters and people who are uh who are i think truly dissidents of of this regime have to you know look like i said we're never gonna have the message discipline of the establishment and that's okay we don't want that i think we do have to be wiser about like how exactly are we going to attack this thing you know like i'm i'm uh like a um i'm a hardcore libertarian and there's that's a very small group of people in this country there's there's some you know but there's not that many no you know now there's enough that like Donald Trump came to the libertarian convention because it's it's a presidential elections are close these days and any little block like helps but if you're talking about like trump supporters yes okay hey you got tens of millions of people in this country and you could see where look there's there's real lessons to be learned um from last year's uh the boycotts of target and bud light just in that forget even like politics just in terms of being consumers hey look at the power you guys have if you decide to do something you can really do something and you can change the the direction of the culture the direction of the country but you got to be really smart about when you decide to do it and who you decide to go after and i'm is man it was frustrating me to see like so Donald Trump gets shot in the head you know does this and it's the reason why he's alive if he hadn't done that his brains are blown out on national television now what we know about this and obviously there's a lot more to uncover but let's just say best case scenario it was a wild failure uh you know like uh failure that you really can't even imagine you've seen some of the videos this kid is walking around and scoping out the area for over an hour before he's there he's allowed to be on a roof that's uh 150 yards away from the former president of the United States of America people on the ground are screaming this guy's got a gun and so okay so like but Joe Biden's employees allowed it right Joe Biden's yes yes exactly employees and and also taken to account all the other things that they've done to this guy and then they allowed this to happen yes and two weeks later all of right wing Twitter is up in arms about some trannies in the opening ceremony of the Olympics and it's like guys focus like you know like come on man i don't like that stuff either and i think it's awful that they're shoving that in everyone's face and that shouldn't have been at the opening ceremonies but hey no no no no no no outrageous a finite resource just like everything else and we are outraged about this thing you know like not that we're outraged about this and and all it would take would be a little bit of focus okay we're not gonna have the message discipline of the the corporate media but like just a little bit of focus from the dissonance to just like pick like four things that we're gonna focus on all of our energy like that we're getting a bottom of that assassination attempt what the hell happened there you know they could do it we could figure that out this isn't this isn't Kennedy where we have one you know film the that we have to all rely on we got a bunch of different camera angles we got we can track this kid cell phone we could do all types of different things and like to me the mage man my first message to every like america first type or even like or the glen green walled like true leftists or anyone who's kind of a dissident of this regime it's like the rule is we only support america first non-interventionist candidates and anybody who has anything to say to you about war with a round is your enemy you're not on their side and you're not supporting them you will not support Lindsey Graham you know how the hell let a Democrat get in who cares is it any worse than Lindsey Graham no be much better problem in better of course because it's more straightforward I completely agree with you completely and it's and it is the neo cons it's all the republican senate committee chairman it's Lindsey Graham it's Mitch McConnell it's all the creepy war worshippers who will immediately on every other issue whip around and betray you yeah no that's exactly they're fundamentally corrupt and you just don't agree with them and you know maybe some of them are nice people I haven't met any but I'm sure that they exist but um yeah they shouldn't be in the coalition but to the assassination it seems like you know the difference between you know climate change or equity or systemic racism and the assassination is like bullets are real we can measure their trajectory we can measure their effect we saw it on video like that's actually real in the way that war is real violence is real and so that's gotta be at the top position of concern right oh yeah 100% then I don't I don't understand how we could just a lie right past that yeah yeah what do you think actually happened um you know I gotta say it's just it looks like it is what it obviously is yeah I agree with I mean I just I don't know like I don't know enough to prove the case I did see there was um there was I can't remember who's somebody at the blaze um who had they had reported that you know because you know the it's not just the government who's tracking your phones it's like a million every app is tracking yeah you can buy the geolocation yeah so they had they had a phone from the shooter's house that had gone to DC and been at this spot that's like known to be where FBI meets with like their informants stuff like that right down the road from FBI head yeah what are we looking at here and then of course you know I mean it's like look let's just say there's a like a serial killer in a neighborhood and they've killed like 11 people and then there's a 12 person who's dead and you see that serial killer leave in their house on video it's like okay I'm not saying that's maybe not enough evidence to go to a court of law and and prove beyond a reasonable doubt that this person killed them but I feel like if we're all just looking at that we're like I'm pretty sure I'm my starting assumption is going to be that guy did it you know what I mean and like it's just every let's you predicted this a year ago yeah it was pretty obvious obviously on the trajectory to ending all the information yeah it's not hard and so then when it happens it is pretty difficult to not go all right I mean because if it's not that then you're saying okay so what explains this guy being a block away from the FBI building what explains the fact that this was allowed to happen I mean it's just so it's so hard to understand what other explanation the Biden administration clearly planted or allowed the planting of but I think they clearly did plant pipe bombs on the morning of January 6th in front of the DNC in the RNC Kamala Harris was at the DNC that morning I mean I think that's shown yeah and then nobody cares you were the only eye in cable news who would repeatedly bring this up literally nobody else nobody else is even interested in what what the hell was that most of us well actually all of us go through our daily lives using all sorts of quote free technology without paying attention to why it's quote free who's paying for this and how think about it from it think about your free email account the free messenger system used to chat with your friends the free other weather app or game app you open up and never think about it's all free but is it no it's not free these companies are developing expensive products and is giving them to you because they love you they're doing it because their programs take all your information they who've up your data private personal data and sell it to data brokers and the government and all of those people who are not your friends are very interested in manipulating you and your personal political and financial decisions it's scary as hell and it's happening out in the open without anybody saying anything about it this is a huge problem and we've been talking about this problem to our friend Eric Prince for years someone needs to fix this and he and his partners have and now we're partners with them and their company is called unplugged it's not a software company it's a hardware company they actually make a phone the phone is called unplugged and it's more than that the purpose of the phone is to protect you from having your life stolen your data stolen it's designed from a privacy first perspective it's got an operating system that they made it's called messenger and other apps that help you take charge of your personal data and prevent it from getting passed around to data brokers and government agencies that will use it to manipulate you unplugged game and it's to its customers they will promise you and they mean it that your data are not being sold or monetized or shared with anyone from basics like its custom liver toss operating system which they wrote which is designed from the very first day to keep your personal data on your device it also has believe it on a true on off switch that shuts off the power it actually disconnects your battery and ensures that your microphone and your camera are turned off completely when you want them to be so they're not spying on you and say your bedroom which your iPhone is that's a fact so it is a great way one of the few ways to actually protect yourself from big tech and big government to reclaim your personal privacy without privacy there is no freedom the unplug phone you can get a $25 discount when you use the code tucker at the checkout so go to unplug.com slash tucker to get yours today highly recommended you got to pay close attention don't let the three card money thing distract you yeah you know the moving walnut shell just remember what you care about is who's got the guns yeah yeah watch the guns that's why i think we don't pay any attention all to what's happening in the united states military which is clearly wildly politicized that's not accidental it's not ideological it's practical yeah you support the people with guns you control people with guns then you have power because it's out of the barrel of a gun the power grows right yeah right so i don't know why no one is focused on that stuff but if the secret service heavily armed federal agency is a political tool then i mean then it's like you really have to rethink the terms 100% and to your point about the the three card monte thing is like what i was saying about the olympic opening ceremonies right is that there are like there are these things that are clearly done to trigger right wingers of course like this is we're just doing the thing that makes the conservative dna's blood boil right and so like okay be aware of that now i'm not even i'm not saying that there's not a point where that is necessary to fight again like you know if they're if they're coming after my children or something like that and or teaching like this garbage to kids okay no listen i get it that is something that's worth uh that's worth dying over you know what i mean and i'm not suggesting anybody do anything illegal or come i'm just saying that like someone coming after your children is something okay that must be fought but um but also just at least recognize that like yes this is a tactic it's a distraction tactic to get you caught up in the latest outrage of the day and then also to look crazy to normal people you know so like they're like to someone who's in the middle or maybe someone who's like you know kind of a more liberal person but they're not part of an evil cabal they're just you know grew up in brooklyn or whatever it's like they just see right when he's like man these guys are like obsessed over like whether there was a dude in a dress at the opening ceremony like that it's much easier to dismiss you whereas if you're like relentlessly focused on something that really matters it's much more difficult and so that's a big part of it right like yeah don't get distracted by the three card monday and then to your point i think that um about like who controls i think that's also a big part of the reason why they uh they've been so um triggered by the trump movement in general is also because Donald trump is leading a right wing populist movement right and that's very scary to elites because it's armed it's armed and tough yeah you know i mean like a left wing population be afraid yeah they are afraid yeah no i think i think that's right and and you know i was talking about this i was i was down with uh um kandas owns uh i just did her podcast last week and i was talking about this but it's not like they're not a fan of left wing populism either they hate you know yeah no they don't like it um they don't i mean we went to war with russia to hide the fact that they rigged the primaries against bernie sanders a left wing populist like that's that's right right and there's a reason why they rigged the election against bernie sanders is the reason why he was unacceptable to them um but not they freak out quite the way they did over Donald trump and i think a lot of that's because if you look at the people in bernie sanders movements what are they going to do about it yeah it's like okay you've armed you've you've gotten all of the male feminists together okay good luck with that you know that overthrowing power however when you get every barrel chested man in america right every gun enthusiast every outdoorsman and and and also a ton of cops and military which by the way i think kind of explains what you're talking about with the politicizing of the military it's been and that was a big part of what the vax mandate was too absolutely got to get some of these guys out of here you know like you're afraid of testosterone and they want to identify who's got it in abundance and they want to isolate and punish those people it's why they're against nicotine that's why walls raised the taxes on nicotine pouches for first they're not carcinogens there's no evidence by the way that nicotine is a carcinogen it's not that we know of it's it's all a lie and what they hate about nicotine is it raises test osterone levels even suppress that facts that's a fact on google google nicotine and testosterone and see how many results it takes you to get to the core truth which is yes nicotine use raises testosterone levels man it is way way down and that's not an accident they're afraid of test yeah no one elation 100% that's like completely right and even on top of even like say cigarettes where like there certainly is some evidence that like cigarettes are very bad for you there's overwhelming evidence yeah they are yeah smoke cigarettes although it is cool really cool i miss it vaping is so lame every time i do it i wish i was just smoking a cigarette but anyway it's okay but the playoffs exactly tryouts makes my wife happier so okay it's worth it but you know it's like i travel the country a lot is on a stand-up comic i'm on the road all the time and it's like look there's no question way less people smoke now than use to it's like okay that worked it turns out economic incentives do work detect something you get less of it than you realize what is why it's so great that we tax income it's gonna get less of that than you otherwise what but so but i go all throughout this country and like yeah people don't smoke as much as they used to but everywhere you go it's just harby's McDonald's burger can you know it's like it's not this right it's not like health is really the concern here so like what is actually the concern public health has gotten much worse right oh so you don't have a problem with people being a lethargic and obese you have a problem with them smoking cigarettes so what explains that and i think you just explain it it's a series metal like they are 15 because it's a visible sign of your autonomy right and they hate that it's exactly they're control and no i couldn't agree more so Tim walls just just to descend into the political for a second what do you make of that pick how's that going um you know i was i was somewhat surprised i was by it i didn't think i wouldn't bet money shapiro was getting it yeah i i thought until i mean they kind of sent the signals over the last couple weeks that he was out but i was assuming mark kelly was going to be the guy because he's uh he from what i understood you they were friendly with harris he's got kind of this thing where like um his wife was shot and he's an astronaut and there is something about that that's like right could you kind of like can't help but like it is an archetype of like uh of course of a guy who's appealing and also because uh he's an Arizona yeah um so i just thought he was the obvious choice um the shapiro thing i think evidently came down to him just being like too ambitious and kind of like come on lares can't really have someone no around her right you know what i mean like you just can't because she's so unimpressive he wasn't it beta enough yeah well that's right and then i guess this guy fit that that mold i do um it my initial impression there's not somebody i knew much about until this last week um but my initial impression is that uh he's also very unimpressive um and that he's not particularly bright and he he does at least as i mentioned he does at least seem to understand that you got to try to talk about stuff that people actually care about yeah and and he understands that we live in a populist moment so he's trying to be kind of uh a populist or a present himself that way but i again i just think the thing is i think it's totally fake and astro turfed and the idea that we're supposed to um you know pretend that he has you know like it's remember when they they were like beta a rork has the it factor you know it's just so what am you talking about it was the best what world are you living in where you look at that guy you go man just dripping with tourists but you know it's like so they're doing that right now like i just and this is just totally anecdotal and i don't know what it means but i have personally i've gotten like 30 text messages about donating to democrats in the last two weeks and i've never donated to uh no i i donated to Tulsi Gabbard uh when she was running uh in in 2019 it was because it was like the thing where you needed individual donations to make the debate stage and i just wanted her on the debate stage uh for the so but i'm and so i mean they're they're doing all types of uh maneuvering to give the impression that there's you know enthusiasm and support for these guys including things like having i don't know i'm i'm out of touch and all that but having like all these like wrappers or whatever at her event so you get a bunch of people who are like going to see you know the rapper and then you go look at all these people coming to Kamala Harris's event if they have all of their like techniques uh that they use i just i i think it's it's fake all of that well the walls guy i mean i don't want to be too unfair because i don't know them and i don't have any hard evidence he's he's a weirdo that guy's weird he seems very sorry there's something not right about that guy's personal life um so i hope i'm wrong because i don't i don't want people like that with power but most people i know with power and washing and have personal lives who would not withstand scrutiny at all uh so but i i think that but i can't get past the core fact about walls which is he he presided over allowed the biggest city in a state to get burned down and seem to not only allow it but kind of we like to support it you know okay gee's the video of his wife saying i kept the windows open so i could smell the burning rubber from the riots not see that wow the wife who's hand he shook oh my god by the way i i mean i know it's i mean let's be right i mean picking on a little thing but who the hell shakes their wife's hand well Kamala Harris and her fake husband kissed each other with masks on i mean what it's just so i guess look i i think i'm pretty libertarian on the per i am i mean i've been in tv my whole life i know a lot of people with weird personal lives i'm not a judge or yeah sure however if everybody in power has some sort of weird celibate you know Mitch McConnell and his wife and Kamala Harris and her husband is Tim walls guy like there's just no chance these are normal marriages at all that's not good yeah and people were bad and they were they were jumping on uh on jadey vans uh for i think it was with you uh i think it was an old yeah like where he was just talking about like all these childless people like decisions for the country and and look like i'm not i'm not uh again i'm with you on that i'm not like judging people i don't think there are some people who shouldn't have kids you know it's the best thing i've ever done but i i certainly think there are people who wouldn't make very good parents there are people who are very bad parents who probably would have been one of not not for mandatory child caring but but like come on there is something to be said for like i kind of would like a lot of our leaders to like yeah just be in a marriage where they love their wife and they have some kids i think it gives you some stakes that you really can't get any other way that um and yeah there's just there it is there is no question it is very very bizarre people who seem to disproportionately rise to the top and it's so obvious that they're bizarre i mean i look at this walls guy and i'm like again i don't know i don't have a police report that i'm not sharing or something but that that guy not babysitting my kids like no way yeah no way which is what what's so strange about them going with the line of jadey vans being weird like i understand they're in like a little bit of a pickle where they're like okay they have to find red or you know the trump just got shot so they have to kind of pull back on like the nasi stuff because it's not really working and also it's really hard to say you're not kind of you know it's really hard to be like oh the the right wingers are inciting violence when they say fake news yeah but like we're not inciting silence when we say the democracy is on the line unless this guy's taken out you know um but it's like we're you're using the word weird you're the party of freaks i know like what are you talking about how are you going to how is weird going to be a pejorative for you when you're literally sitting here going you see that that dude with a beard and a dress that's a beautiful one and then you can call someone else we are it's just so it is every accusation is an admission right um but i also think it's just i don't want to go on too much but i don't know i don't want to be mean but it's it's interesting i've always thought this was so strange especially the democratic party you know they're always telling you that you know gay is great it's better to be gay we love gays we're celebrating stonewall okay fine um but then there's so many people the democratic party who are closeted including in you know positions of real power i know them i don't believe in outing people and i'm i'm not going to but i know that for a fact and it's like on what grounds are you hiding it actually that's that's too much i can't i also have absolutely nothing against gay people i do have an issue with people living a lie well kind of yeah because there's something about it's also not just lying but living a lie is like a it's a profound thing where you get used to every inch of your existence being a lie who the very nature of who you are is a lie and that just obviously leads to like people who have the ability to totally lie about who they are exactly that i do have an issue with nicely put and there's so much of it i can't get over it i'm not saying that as like a blue nose or and even as a judgment on the morality of it but i mean i just find it so striking like how many people like that are there in washington it's wildly disproportionate wildly even compared to like San Francisco or some liberty in place like that west village they're a freakier personal lives in dc i just find that really really telling i don't know what it means exactly but it has to with lying yeah yeah that's right and i don't exactly know either i mean i do think that like um look as we've kind of learned like a bit from the jeffry abstien yes uh thing and you know i i guess we're you know so we find out that there's this um this uh child pedophile black male ring that uh was pretty clearly involved a foreign country um and it's going around compromising uh political leaders and and influential people and i guess we're supposed to pretend like that must have been the only one and it's over now i mean we never got to the bottom of it and sure all of the camera's malfunctioned and the guy you know committed suicide and we never get the client list and we never get any of the sitting attorney general of the united states bar covered it up wide right covered up what she did yeah that's right and uh i've said that a bunch of times in every time he tells someone i know that you know that's outrageous he complains and i hope he'll sue me over that because it's true let's go to discover 100% bar lied about it right and so okay we're why what was that right well that's the big question and then like what is what is still going i mean obviously there were people above jeffry abstien involved in it and obviously there if you were doing something like that you wouldn't only have one you know what i mean like exactly so you do it does at least make you wonder like oh is it is it possible that people who obviously people who can be black male they're very easy to control and so oh why would it be that they're they're so many people in in powerful positions who have these secret weird personal lives and i think plausibly part of that explanation is because like well okay then they're very easy to black male you can control them do you ever think about your own life in these terms like you're one of the people who will just say what you think is true period and you're always punching up not down always yeah and um i don't know there's a non trivial risk to that do you ever consider that as the father of all children yeah yeah no i've definitely thought about it before um and i guess like i don't know i guess because of the world that arm in which is like totally removed from the world of power you know like i've never been in dc and i've never been in you know and uh and i'm like in i'm in comedy clubs and then just doing podcasts on the internet so i guess i feel a little bit removed from the threat as like my profiles gotten bigger it's something i think about more um i just i don't know i kind of like can't stop i i'm just i i don't know listen man if it ever really came to like if my kids were ever threatened you could by the way it's anybody see i have your listening or whatever i would i would protect them first and foremost i would i would you know whatever i had to do i would do that daddy's gonna shut up now yeah if i ever felt like that was really um yeah the threat um or my wife for you know for that matter um but i do just think that it's it's something that's kind of hard to describe that what i do is this is my calling in life it's just what i'm supposed to do and my greatest heroes all of them at first and foremost i was talking to you about before is ron paul um and he always just told the truth even when it was like something that would get him booed out of an arena or something that would be like very controversial and i would make him look bad that was just this thing and those are the people i admire you know um and i feel like you do that something i admire about you i feel like you know but i know that so it doesn't matter but you got a wonder like the Epstein i did not take the Epstein murder which it was a murder not a suicide seriously at all um and then you know i spent a lot of time learning about it and talking to his brother mark about it and i think becoming something of an expert on and he was murdered and so but then you have to think well he was murdered not in his bedroom or on west fifty seven straight he was killed in the special housing unit of federal lock up in Manhattan like the most like the inner sanctum of the vault yeah so okay then the next i guess conclusion would have to be anyone with the power to do that can pretty much do anything in this temporal world right so that's a pretty formidable whoever did that and we get you know i've theories on it but can't prove it but somebody did it and those are the people that like maybe you shouldn't criticize yeah right yeah i mean there's certainly there's a point to that um there's also you know i also you know it's like having little kids like i also i have a son and i do feel an enormous pressure um to um to be an example for him and to be a man yeah it was the pressure i never felt until i had a son um maybe that's the sexist in me i mean i just didn't feel that same pressure with my my my daughter um as my wife is also like she's so great that i always just kind of when we our first was a daughter and i always felt when i had her i was like oh like uh i was like okay my job is pretty easy it's actually because i know at first i know she's a great uh like role model to her she's like it just an unbelievable example of of being a great woman so she's gotten basically what i have to do is like you know protector and provide for her and lover and that's really come actually come very natural you're not teaching your daughter how to become a woman right exact So she's gotten basically what I have to do is like, you know, protector and provide for her and lover and that's really comes actually come very natural. You're not teaching your daughter how to become a woman. Right. Exactly. Not your job. And then when we had a son, it like kind of hit me like, oh, I have to teach him how to be a man. So I better figure out how to be a man real quick and then I can teach this to my people. Exactly right. But I think one of the foundational things about being a good man is telling the truth and even when there's some risk involved in that. So I do also feel like kind of a pressure that it's like, well, no, then those are the people who are exactly who I should be criticizing and call for that. Exactly right. Now as far as, you know, I would just say my only pushback on what you said is that it's not, yes, they can touch someone in, you know, a secure presence. So that's certainly something they demonstrate. They have the ability to do. Also, I don't know that it was ever supposed to get to that point and I don't know that we're supposed to know about it and we're supposed to be having this conversation right now. So clearly it didn't go exactly according to plan. Right. So that's smart point. So that's the kind of silver lining and all about. There are a lot from viewers about big tech censorship and those reports are more frequent than ever right now. Censorship meaning shutting down your access to information, not wise or misinformation, but true things. It's only the truth that they censor. Facts that get in the way of the wise are trying to tell you the net effect of this, of course, is interfering in the 2024 presidential elections. That's what they're censoring more than ever now because the stakes are even higher. Shocked by this. But the specific examples of it, do throw you back a little bit. We've seen screenshots and videos showing how a Google search learned more about the attempts of assassination on Donald Trump. Instead, push users to information on Harry Truman or Bob Marley or the Pope, anything other than the relevant truth, which is that they just shot Trump in the face. They don't want you to know that because it might help Trump. We've seen examples where Facebook marks true photos of a bloody, defiant Trump as misleading. Somehow those pictures rely and then limited their visibility. Its AI assistant explicitly denied the shooting ever took place. This is insanity, but it's at the core of big text editorial policy, which is denying the truth to you in order to control the outcome of this presidential election. It's not democracy. We've seen examples where generic search for information about Donald Trump was automatically rephrased to show positive stories about Kamala Harris. Instead, is there any clear example of election interference? So what do you do about it? Well, parlor has been down this road. Parlor is pulled right off the internet for telling the truth. But it's back and it's reaffirmed its lifelong unwavering commitment to free speech. On parlor, the Bill of Rights lives. The first amendment is real. You can say what you think because you're a human being in an American citizen and not a slave. On parlor, users can freely express themselves, tell the truth, express their conscience, and connect with others who are doing the same and they will not be interfered with. They will not be censored. Designers support a wide range of viewpoints. Everyone is welcome on parlor. Parlor is committed to ensuring that everybody is hurt. And so it's become a place where independent journalism is protected and respected. It's protected because it's respected. So is this censorship by big tech intensifies standing up for your God given right as an American to say what you think is essential? Where on parlor, that's why we're on parlor. Our handle is at Tucker Carlson and we encourage you to join us there. You have the right to say what you believe. So does every American and you can do it on parlor. Get the parlor app today. So if you're trying to figure out what the US will look like next year, 26 and into the future, worst case is kind of what's happening in the UK right now. It seems like. Yeah. Yeah, that's pretty bad. People getting a rest of their Facebook posts. Yeah. And this is why people, especially particularly like the dissidents that I was talking about, you really got to be smart in the way that you fight these things. And so, you know, like I was talking about when there was one of Donald Trump's like trials. There was a big like kind of group of Trump supporters who are outside protesting. And I remember I tweeted that day and I was like, hey, dear Trump supporters, if you happen to see a barrel-chested man outside screaming storm the courthouse, just go ahead and don't storm the courthouse. It's like, let's be smart about the way you try to go about this. That's right. You do this is an asymmetrical conflict. You do not want a conflict in the sense of like, let's storm the Capitol. How's that going to work out for you? Okay. No, this is just going to be the excuse now, of course, which obviously the thing was an inside job to a large degree. Right. Can we establish it? Anybody who screamed, let's storm the Capitol. I can think of two people who did who was not arrested. Didn't spend time on jail. Was defended by Democrats in the Congress. Yes. But he and he wasn't alone. There's another prominent person who did that as well as I know you know didn't get arrested. Didn't go to jail. I mean, what can we conclude from that? Yes. And all of the there and just the stuff where you interviewed the head of a student. Yeah. Right. And so I mean, just all of the things together. You can kind of obviously see what it was. But that so you don't want, you don't want to riot. You don't want to do things like that because then that would be an excuse for our government to do exactly what the government in the UK is doing right now. Right. It was cracked down on Facebook posts or whatever. You know. And so you don't want to fight it that way. But you know, I do believe like this country can still be saved or it could be a lot less worse than the possibilities are the country's been in very bad points before. Not exactly the same as where we are right now. What's what's scary about the current position is that it's it's all of these factors plus the like financial realities. They kind of create this weird super storm of things where it's a cultural phenomenon, a political phenomenon. And also just like a debt and and derivatives and bonds and like things that are like all completely unsustainable. But I do think that like like I was saying like there's we have a big opportunity. If we could really just focus and kind of get people who we have these giant platforms like this show it's really incredible. I don't think you can overstate how amazing it is that like the dynamics have shifted technologically and culturally to the point where say someone like. Okay so billo riley obviously a very different person than you and was never was never a critic of the regime in the meaningful way that you were at Fox news but he was the number one cable news show at the mr at Fox news and they fired him and he largely went away. I know he still got his show he still got a little bit of an audience. But he's not really involved in the national conversation anymore like billo riley was like moving the national conversation at one point like any minute. Like his opinion was going to was going to have significant influence over a large portion and they were able to like get rid of him. You on the other hand were the number one show on Fox and cable news that 8 p.m. hour. They go we're going to do the same thing to you and you're like many times bigger than you are at five that's that's a crazy thing that's like that's signal something is totally different about the dynamic that's primarily a technology change I think it's that's certainly a big part of it that now there there was it's also probably. has something to do with you having a younger audience than him because billo riley's audience was much older and it's much tougher to get that audience to go over to the internet that they just don't understand it right now it's different moment and yes yes television is just obviously on its way out anyway so that my timing was. that I was in charge of it but it was turned out to be good no I mean obviously look a lot of it was things that you were in control of a lot of it was things that you are mostly not in control of but the fact that we've got these kind of like alternative. Platforms now which really aren't even alternative I mean this is kind of the mainstream you know I mean it's not. Brian stealther in the mainstream you know what I mean it's like so it's it's you and rogen and now can't so one show is like taken off and there's all these like big shows yes. yes so okay we've got a new tool in our in our disposal here and you know it's like part of the thing that so frustrating to me which watching a trumps campaign so far it's like I don't know who who he has running this thing but it is not it does not have the brilliance that Steve Bannon had. in 2016 where they really figured out like this is the lane you run in and you are and and there's so many things about. and so anyway I guess what I'm saying is that like these audiences man need to pressure Donald Trump right now to be better and to run a smarter campaign so if you're trying to put a run on right well okay so first of all it's like you understand that. the whole appeal of Donald Trump was that he was a giant middle finger to the establishment fact who's failed on everything there was a reason why people wanted a big middle finger to them because they failed on everything just look at in the 21st century alone. what has the ruling elite handed the American people I mean like they failed on 911. for the then used 911 to fight a bunch of wars they already wanted to fight that were. catastrophic yes just just absolutely deserves to oppress their own population yes they stripped us of all types of basic liberties that we took really at the air that's right yeah then that they handed us the greatest financial recession in a hundred years they gave us the. the Obama recovery which was like the most you know crony recovery built off zero percent interest rates of record high government spending so the recovery essentially was Wall Street and the suburbs of Washington D.C. you know this lead then there's the rise of wokeism all this insane stuff that they're pushing on people now they've given us this disastrous war in Ukraine all this stuff right they literally created covid. yeah yeah yeah they man stripped us of our civil liberties in the name of fighting something that they created in a lab with our supposed enemy China like what they right they created the thing yes a loud and I don't mean intentionally because I don't actually think that's the case. well I'm not suggesting no but they allowed the giver set for this to happen and then use that to have the biggest crackdown on the liberties of the American people or in our nation's history. they and all on the basis of pseudoscience it was all completely wrong. Okay so they've given all of us so like the lane here is that you Donald Trump represent the repudiation of all of that and that's how you won in 2016 obviously pre covid but that's how you won in 2016 you were repudiation of the bushes and the Clintons not just the. Democrat establishment but also the last Republican president you got on stage and said he lied us into war I mean like this is what gave you that energy. this year in the campaign I mean look how however you feel about Israel the fact that Donald Trump has made the whole campaign you know his convention is the pro Israel convention and then it's like oh Kamala Harris you're a la she's a Palestinian Chuck Schumer is a Palestinian they're all a bunch of left it's like well now what you're. supporting the status quo which is that America supports Israel that's what every powerful person in DC believes all of them including Kamala Harris by the way who's a part of an administration that is. Completely supporting Israel's war in Gaza right now like what do you what is this weird in bench and then he even frames it as they're all these left wing socialists. You know they're all the like so he's almost like putting himself in the position as the defender of the establishment against the radicals who would. Over throw the establishment and what have a revolution of the workers or something like this none of this is first of it's not true yeah that's not at all what's going on there the defenders of the establishment exactly they use some left wing rhetoric. to pick people against each other and create a culture war to distract from their terrible policies but they're not Marxist. And this is so ridiculous you know what I mean and so like first of all look Donald Trump I'm not saying it's painful to hear this because it's so true well it looks I'm not saying you have to come at you don't have to be me okay and you don't. I'm just objection true we shouldn't be me by the way because my if you were saying what I think it probably wouldn't get you elected yeah what I mean. you can come out there and say we love Israel we will always defend Israel Israel is a great country. But we're we're not funding aggressive wars around what is what is that have to do with anything I. I see why you're irrelevant but you want to be the anti establishment guy you can't take the establishment position so that's where you're speaking the deepest level of truth in my opinion. You are not the incumbent the incumbents have wrecked the country yeah there I mean off the cliff is not too strong a metaphor for what they're doing. And you're opposing that. So hoist the middle finger you're opposed to that you are not on the side of the establishment I don't understand why that's just on hard I put that on the refrigerator. Well I also will say one of the things that was kind of magical about Donald Trump's 2016 campaign which really I mean it just it can't be overstated how amazing. What he did was however feel about him yes in the guy on a shoe string budget. When out there and just through use of social media and his kind of bombastic personality was able to completely dominate the news cycle and took out the bushes and the clinton's the two most powerful. Political families in modern american history he took both of them out in this crazy upset that part of the way that he did that was that there were these. issues that were like overwhelmingly popular that no one else wanted to touch it's like there was like if there was like a poker game and there was just like pocket aces that like everyone's like I don't want those cards. And then Donald Trump was like I'll play those cards those are very good cards I'll play how about how about how about. build a wall stop the flood of illegal immigration like how about we can have immigration but like we get to decide who comes in and does it go this wildly popular with people open borders aren't popular. No I mean it's hard to even find polling on them because it's so unpopular that people won't even ask the question you know like they ask like do you want higher levels of immigration or lower level but the only polls I've seen it's like. single digits you know maybe seven percent of people support open borders maybe less than that but so he is just playing these but hey we shouldn't fight stupid wars. Turns out that's a wildly popular position us however I will say with this you know the majority of Americans don't want to support. Israel's war in Gaza but he won't play that card whatever reason maybe it's because he believes it maybe it's because Jared Kushner convinced him of this or maybe it's but I don't know but he's not going to play that card and just say hey we're broke here. We're 35 trillion dollars in debt that's where we can afford to prop up other listen when I'm like a strict non interventionist I'm like John Quincy Adams I don't think America should fight anyway if we're attacked we destroy those people that's essentially yes you know. But when a couple months ago went around in response to Israel. Killing an Iranian it when they launch those missiles at at Israel and a team of nations led by the United States all helped defend Israel it was a Jordan and Saudi Arabia were involved to by the way which kind of goes to show you the real dynamics of that region. But no one's really complaining about that like okay fine I'm not interventionist but like if missiles are coming toward Israel go ahead shoot them down fine that doesn't mean we have to help them. It doesn't mean we have to fund them fighting there what and then also just the fact that like. There's a foreign country were not allowed to criticize and people's careers get ruined over that this is I'm sorry listen if you want to be America first. Benji what is America first mean right it means we shouldn't have fought the war in Iraq or whatever something okay who really wanted us to fight the war in Iraq. You know I'm just saying it's like no like like all these guys and it's like they come back in now with the napcon movement as it. Douglas a colonel Greg or had a great article about this earlier this summer he co authored it in the American conservative but it's like all this new napcon movement that has all this kind of like pro Israel stuff coming into it it's it's the title of the pieces. of neo conservatism by another name I was a great piece everybody should go read it. But it's like well who do you think the neo cons were who wanted us to fight the war in Iraq like I said last time on here go read a clean break. A new strategy for securing the realm by Richard Pearl and David Wormser it was about overthrowing Saddam Hussein. Israel's benefit like I'm not against Israel I'm Jewish I like Israel it's a cool country I the people there are great I'm just saying like if you're America first then the guy Benjamin Netanyahu the guy who testifies before Congress that we should go overthrow Saddam Hussein and launch a regime change war against Iran and launch a war in Libya that's not your ally. the whole America first thing is that we don't think we should go fight all of these stupid wars unless they help us right right you know unless there's some coherent justification for them at least but so okay so Donald Trump. He needs to just play there's a few things that he could laser focus on right now and he should Donald Trump should be asking himself the question that Hillary Clinton. He's not just yourself in 2016 the most obnoxious question ever but why are you not up by 50 points right now Donald Trump why is that all listen no just run on this no more stupid wars period. We are fighting any wars of choice we are only fighting wars of necessity which we do not have any right now Iran. But you know Iran is a threat to the United States of America give me a fucking break to come on this is too ridiculous and he should if anyone should he should have the courage to say don't push back from anyone well that's what I'm saying of going to war with Iran so if you have a highly motivated. force pushing for something and there's no organized resistance to it that force will prevail yeah and what I see is a bipartisan push Republican and Democrat push toward war with Iran. No even attempt to explain why this is in my interest why I should send my four draft days children to go die in Iran yeah not even a conversation about that so I feel like unless I'm missing something we're going to get that war. well you know the problem at least. It's been a while since I read this but. Scott Horton who's totally brilliant you should have him on man he's a he was like Justin Ramondo's disciple yeah just like he's he's anti war calm and he's just like I queue off the charts he wrote the book enough already which is about the book about the terror the war on terror. from Jimmy Carter all the way through Donald Trump and he's he's currently writing a book on the war in Ukraine which I got an advance copy of his phenomenal I can't wait to send this to you when it comes out so good. It's called provoked and it's just the whole story of how at every turn perfect the west provost the war with you cranes so good. I really can't wait for that to come out and people to read it but you know what stopped the war in Iran. The first time was really the military when when Dick Cheney wanted it and George W I think George W Bush eventually like was like I've been listening to this guy too much like by two thousand seventy and finally figured out like let me stop listening to the jane he could just or no yeah but I'm but it was really the military it was just like logistics like they were just like guys we do not have escalation dominance against Iran. We like they yes we were not going to lose the war but like they can target so many American bases over there it's just going to be a bloodbath like this isn't you know there's one green bure told me off. Camera but he told me he goes this isn't like ten times harder than fighting a war in Iraq fighting a war in Iran as a thousand times harder that it's this is a whole different ball game so perhaps that reality will will stop it from happening. But even just like even just the rhetoric about like being tough on them it's like why why are we even talking like this why are we constantly trying to escalate here it's so simple and it's popular with the American people no more stupid wars look even even the the one of the amazing things in that much. Munich and right I mean. Yeah everyone there again being Neville chamber with the only lesson of history ever is Neville chamber. You're always right if you're on the side of aggression you know it never if you're talking about Neville chamber of course of course right under any history of the war at all. They always tell you it's most important election of your lifetime but of course this one actually is that's demonstrable and it's also because it is so important being censored at every level by the tech companies. So we're thinking about this a couple of months ago when we thought why not get on the road live in front of actual people live audiences coast to coast to nationwide tour where we can't be censored. That'd be good it would also be fun so we're doing it for gonna be on stage with some of our friends some of the most fascinating people we know the most recognizable people we know responding to what is happening in America this September in real time. It'll be just like the podcast but it's gonna be live so we're excited for now so our friend Larry Elder is coming to join us in Milwaukee was constant our friend John Rich. It'll be there with us in sunrise Florida rattying more stops you said it another stadium show in Reading Pennsylvania will be joined on stage by Alex Jones they tell you what Alex Jones is like have you seen him in person you should make up your own mind. It's going to be fun as hell and interesting and intense and we hope you will join us go to Tucker Carlson dot com right now to get your tickets see you there. But like but one of the things that's really interesting that's changed very drastically in a short period of time on the kind of the right in America is that at least what I get now the talking point for Donald Trump like from Donald Trump supporters. Is that there were no new wars. You didn't start any new wars which is I do love that that's the talking point like it's never like he killed all the terrorists are he was so tough where the Democrats are wimpy his supporters are breaking that he didn't get us into a new war now. OK, I you know the reality is that like came pretty close actually in Iran and Venezuela he really flirted with new wars I was there and he didn't end the wars that he said he was going to end and so there's some criticism but it's kind of like look this is what your own supporters like about you so just run on that and then the other thing man that he feels it to yeah I mean I one thing I can say about Trump having talked about this a lot is that that is sincere he is afraid of nuclear war. And I think his instincts are are correct on war in general I think that's exactly right what's it for us like what's the point and he's also the only leader I've ever talked to in my life at that level who routinely says but all people get killed. Yeah, you know I'm not saying he's a you know super faithful Christian or whatever I don't know where that where that instinct comes from but it's totally real I've heard him say it many times. Yeah, people die and they've got widows and kids and stuff it's a big deal to kill people know you're right he's one of the only people like that level I mean I've heard like some anti war left us. Well I think that but I'm not I have no power yeah but like at that level of political power is yeah it's like you'd never hear that like that's never even a part of the calculation. A part of the calculation is not and even when Trump was being manipulated by some very not good people that he had around him like when the strike Syria it does seem like most of the reporting was that that's how they got him was with being like look at these dead kids from these chemical attacks. Yeah then just you know and so kind of like played on that feeling that he has to be like you know you got to do something so one of the reasons nobody pushes back against the big picture claims that you know for example Iran is her greatest enemy or that Putin is going to try and overrun Czechoslovakia is this is freaking insane. Is that anyone who talks like that puts himself at risk and I would just you know Scott Ritter. Yeah this week at the FBI rated as how you know this is a former arms inspector US government employee. Who's been opposing American foreign policy non violently for 20 years and they keep throwing him in jail for it yeah no one cares well there is. There yeah there's there's risks that are attached to opposing the war machine because that's that's kind of the whole game. And so look I I also do recognize that like I'm just you know talking shit on into a microphone in that Donald Trump the the pressures and the forces that he has to deal with here are certainly things that I don't completely understand. But from what I do understand of this is that I know it's the correct position and it would be enormously popular with his base and then there's other things too that he should be laser focused on and obviously immigration I mean this is it's unbelievable unbelievable that what he decided was his signature issue that he ran his campaign centered around. as been basically has won the day and that that he was he was labeled a Nazi for this and now you got the the mayors in blue sanctuary cities all talking about how the influx of migrants is destroying their cities and stuff so he's got a forever he's obviously got pocket aces right there that you play this card. and the other thing is the censorship which really should be more of a focus of his campaign and I'm stunned that it's not like he I mean he's back on Twitter today by the way I mentioned that to you and first I just saw that on my way over here in the taxi. back on Twitter so yeah has to be back on Twitter to win this thing. But like he got kicked off of Twitter and and not just him he shouldn't make it just about him. He should that should almost be like an afterthought you know for his campaign but like all of his supporters. You know like it's in his self interest to defend these guys with everybody through 2020 I mean if you were like critical of the lockdowns you're there's everybody was getting silence left and right. and that is he should make this campaign like the referendum on free speech and that the only way free speech is going to happen is when I'm in there and he should threaten the shit out of all of these companies you know Facebook backed off like Nikita cruise chef level we will bear you yes yes that's right and and not and because Christ I didn't even mean it like with force. He meant like their economic model was going to get better no I want force I mean with force we should listen it is that is the only thing these companies are going to respond to but if they think that Donald Trump like if Donald Trump is really like a bitch in a believable way like he say hey Google I'm I'm going to win this election which look as of right now there's at least a very good chance he's going to win this election and he goes my soul mission in life every morning when I wake up till I go to sleep that night is going to be to take you guys down unless you stop censoring right now. like I'm not I mean when I get in I mean from now until the election if you because you know you see all the stuff like Elon Musk was posting about it easy we're like if you search for the shooter it doesn't come up right to a blanket yeah yeah like or so latest on for his theater I said there was a Reagan in our go on a. Reagan get and then like you know if you search Trump it goes to these come all ads and stuff I mean he should be he should be scary that which by the way they all respond to that. in argon on a dragon g hold them in front of congress and right and all of them and then they're okay yeah sure so weak so turns out don't you just go of it so someone just texted me and i don't know if this is actually true but they he had six shots i mean what should make sense i think that's that's the recommended amount yeah how do you get if you've been vaccinated six times again something how do you get it you should have taken eight i guess it's really it's always need more always need more vaccines no but i mean it's just kind of to your point leaving aside to i think the vaccines i never got vaxed not to brag i hate to rub that people's faces because i'm obviously very proud of it on my greatest achievements but i got covid once i've i've been super healthy ever since then i never washed my hands never wear a mask i'm like the dirtiest person you've ever met i'm happy to breathe the breath of strangers on crowded commercial flights like and i never got covid again here's fact she's had three times biden keeps getting it like what is that why does nobody say anything about this yeah well same same with me never got the vax i had covid twice and you know it's mildly sick and it was i would have rather not yeah i do you know but like whatever it's fine and then i know so many people who who got it and some of whom had the same experiences may got covid a few times and just were mildly sick a lot of them got it several more times than i did um and then and what we can say with one hundred percent certainty is that the thing was sold on lies and not just like oh they got it wrong like they they worked totally there was never any evidence to suggest that you could not get covid or transmit covid you know even in the original uh was it the Pfizer study where i think like uh it was from remembering this correctly it's been a while since i read it but i think it was like in the uh unvaccinated group two people died of covid and in the vaccinated group one person died of covid and then they extrapolated from that that it's one hundred percent you know reductia but there was still a person who died of it in there this idea that you can't die like it this was never true they lied through their teeth and joe biden in the beginning of his administration made his number one priority to by any means necessary get every single american to take this vaccine and luckily with it with our like the the skeleton of constitutional limited republic you know like procedures that we still have the supreme court struck down the worst of of his mandates like the osha mandate which would have had every mid-size and large business in america have to fire anyone who is on vaccinated all the people that fire they've been made whole oh no i'm sure they haven't um then that's yeah man i mean like i know we live in so much stuff happens so quickly that i know going like four years ago or three years ago sounds like ancient history but if nothing else i mean on that alone the democrats deserve to lose all power that they have but they went all in on that and a lot of republicans too so rogan i just want to say for the record i i really love and i revere uh as a as a pioneer in media really more than i mean roger ails level kind of changed everything yes i just always want to say that because i really believe it um but he seemed to uh endorse bobby kennedy then he comes out and says no i was just i'd just like bobby kennedy or i like bobby kennedy too for the record um is a nice man but i was not endorsing and rogan said and i don't really like talk about politics that much i'm i'm summarizing uh but if you want to know like what i think just listen to to dave uh so that was kind of funny and cool that he said that but give us your assessment of bobby kennedy like where what role does he play in this race if any well by the way so when uh rogan tweeted that and i mean like it's just you know like i couldn't even look on my phone for like hours after that because it's just like and he he texted me i was one of the funniest texts i've ever gotten uh rogan texting me and he goes i didn't even realize that i stirred up a whole riot on twitter but i sent all the looters to your house well that's pretty good which is i was like yeah that is really what but i was like i'll take them i love this i like to lose but also the moment really is it's it's because um joe is such a like he he you know i know pretty well we're like pretty good friends at this point and um he is exactly what you say yeah like that's him i've known everybody who yeah if you watch the show you already know who he is so it's like he wasn't he doesn't even think like i'm going to be making an endorsement today on my show about which candidate i want to throw my people support behind he literally just someone asked him a question and he was just having a moment like he was just like i do like this uh Bobby Kennedy guy you know he seems kind of like he's read books about stuff and he wants to discuss ideas and not just like personal effects and i really like that i agree with that and um yeah i mean i kind of i tend to agree with that too i also just by the way i mean um i i was just so furious at trump supporters who were like uh giving rogan shit for that and then i just thought it was maybe the stupidest thing trump's done in the campaign so far was that he posted on truth social attacking joe rogan for it and it's like man is anyone around him to just be like no you don't go to war with joe rogan no that's that he sure is union you should be yeah right you like what but it's also like even whether he's supporting you or not that's your teacher's union you know he's again like i said before it's not left verse right it's dissident verse the regime and this is the guy who cracked the corporate meat he's the guy who cracked the states monopoly on information is true so come on what do you do in here and he said also he's just so removed it's really just the flaw in trump is that he said uh it'll be interesting to see how much joe rogan gets booed the next ufc event and you know like do you really think joe rogan's gonna get booed at a you okay all right i know that Donald trump i know how your your mind works and it's it's there's great things about it and then there's things that hold you back but i know that you think that since they love you with the ufc event there are your people and they'll hate anybody who is not supporting you but actually they really love joe rogan they're not gonna be broish him and and there's it was just so stupid to fight this fight with him anyway um you know to the bobbie kennedy stuff i was when he first started running and i had him on my show and i was just like i just loved the guy and um i thought you know his his positions on ukrain and on the vaccine i thought were heroic and it was amazing but what was so amazing about his campaign was that he was running as a democrat and he's bobbie kennedy yeah like his name is bobbie kennedy and and he's not like some you know peripheral kennedy who's like like he's bobbie kennedy's son he's jack kennedy's nephew and here he is giving democrats this it it reminded me a lot of the ron paul presidential campaigns where because ron paul was such a conservative person and because right after his name there was r texas you know and he could be against the wars it was like he gave permission exactly for you you're allowed to be against the wars you that's right opposed the wars and you don't have to give up your whole identity you don't have to be michael morr in order to be that's exactly right you could be a real american patriot and and oppose these wars and and in a similar fashion i felt like bobbie kennedy was giving democrats permission to abandon these which were look i mean if you think about it i said just a second ago that the vaccine was joe biden's first you know we're all in on the vaccine and then his second big thing was all in on the war and you crane these is the biden administration so he's this total repudiation of joe biden but being like the true democrat what we're really supposed to be you know and so there was something amazing about his campaign um that you know i understand why he made the move to go independent because there's there's not a real democratic process and no democratic party nor is there much of a constituency at this point for that message yes that's that's probably true yeah um i i do think that and and you know me and him i he came back on my podcast to his credit and we argued uh about this um i do think it's it's strained our relationship a little bit but i like i could get past um being not being good on israel from from my perspective of course um and i could i could get past i could probably tolerate all the way up to uh like the vikramaswamy's position on israel which essentially was he was like taking the non interventionist position but doing it in a way where it's like i am not picking a fight with a pack you know what i mean like he was like i think his answer at the debate was something he said uh he goes i'll tell net and yahoo that i'm gonna kill the terrorists on our southern border and you go kill the terrorists on your southern borders i was kind of like i'm not funding your war but like totally support you doing what you're doing i that's not how i feel about the situation at all actually i think it's really horrible what israel's doing and it's inexcusable but i mean i just going around with rabbis schmooli as your campaign advisor and i just like to me once i saw that i was like i'm just i can't i just can't it's too much for me so and i do think again kind of like i'm saying with Donald trump i mean he's just the pocket aces you don't want to play these pocket aces okay i mean a democrats like 70% of democrats oppose this war and want to cease fire i think fifty percent of them consider it a genocide on on the republican side obviously there's a lot of america first people who who could be persuaded that we shouldn't be involved in these conflicts i think bobby kennedy had a real chance to make like if he was non-interventionist on on this war i think he would have made some huge waves and i think that really hurt him he also he lost a bunch of people on his campaign staff because he was the anti war guy at a whole bunch i remember war people who were like oh no i'm not going to be a part of this now so where does that leave him now i am as a political matter it feels like feels like there is a significant chunk of people i don't know how many in the millions though support bobby kennedy clearly repudiate the priorities the butt of the biden harris administration don't want to vote for trump i mean my sense is he's taking potential trump voters yeah that's that might be the case you know i'm not sure exactly and i don't know i mean if if donald trump like you know if he were to drop out of the race and endorse donald trump there i think there's a very good chance he could end up in his cabinet get some type of position out of it if trump were to win for sure i don't know if that's going to happen if he stays in the race the whole time because i think it will be seen as like well no i mean you can't you know diminishing returns for sure yeah yeah i mean you just can't do that and then expect the guy to give you a position do you think if bobby kennedy endorse trump which is possible i would say it is possible um do you think that would push trump over the line um with that with that meaningfully help most endorsements don't with that make a difference it might i don't know i you know it's hard to tell what endorsement you know like a you endorsement actually do anything it's not um you know it's just in general in life it's not like you know you see like obama and donald trump who are two of the most successful political figures in the last the most successful political figures in the last you know of 15 years or so and it's not as if their endorsements seem to carry that much well it's not like it's not transferable like that in the in the same sense that like um you know like i love your show i you were the only guy on cable news who i always watched and i love watching your show on on your new network um and if you were like hey you got to check out this guy someone else you got to check out their show that would certainly get me to check it out but it's not as if that's a guarantee that i'll work it out and if i like it then i'll go watching your on you can't just transfer the thing that people like about you want to other people i never said a bad word about rogan i genuinely like him as a person um i think his show like made such a massive difference in the media landscape in an american history i'm not taking ayahuasca right do you know what i mean it's like nothing i love rogan i'm not taking it's like it's it just doesn't work that way and so i do wonder i really don't know the answer but like is it bobby kennedy you know if he were to drop out an indoors trumpet this point don't people kind of already know they had the option the support donald trump yeah and if they're still not supporting donald trump there there's probably a meaningful reason why um and one of the things that you know kind of uh is i think probably the reason why none of them will agree to have bobby and any of these debates uh is because if they were to then the topic of trumps handling of covid would have to come up and donald trump is kind of lucky in in a situation like it's there's always this dynamic in some issues between democrats and republicans so like for example um when barack obama was president all of the republicans at that point their criticism of him was that he was too soft on foreign policy uh he won't even say radical islonic jee hod and you know dumb michael rubeo you know points like this and so then he totally gets off the hook for his very aggressive foreign policy and the war in libya and syria and all these wars that he started by the way all on the side of al keda and no one ever gave him any pushback from that like no one ever he never got held accountable or had to answer for any of that because the republican talking point was he's weak on defense and worked tough on defense and likewise with covid because the democrats whole merit of the whole time was that he's not reacting enough no one ever really gives trump a hard time because the sanitist tried to do a little bit when he ran against him but it just fell flat it's in sh i mean if you just pull the not to disrupt the flow here but if you pull the thread a little bit on why were we aligned with al keda oh yeah yeah because they're not sheites that's why because they're not backed by a ron and i've got to say i'm hardly an expert on this long to put it mildly i'm a protest in christian however spending a lot of time around the world you know the sheites are pretty sophisticated actually and i do think that our portrait of what your average shite is like is totally wrong completely wrong there are a lot of very cosmopolitan persons like very cosmopolitan very pro western very smart very interesting not savages at all i mean i'm not you know endorsing the foreign policy and ron at all or their sister may think that i'm not endorsing islam either branch but the idea that the sheites are like animals that's that's bullshit well also that's just ignorance i mean look there's lots of problems even in the sheite world i mean there's of course you know it but there's um but they're also not our enemies well except of course they haven't of course they haven't attacked us and they haven't attacked europe i mean they're even the hoothes i was taught as a child to hate the hoothes so freaking of course i never heard of the hoothes tell about 20 minutes ago and they became our historic enemy it's um you know i think essentially what happened right because if you think it's like really al kaida and isis are the two terrorist groups that have actually hit the united states of america and europe and you know what i mean like committed acts of terror against it both were armed and funded by the west at different points and that's pretty appalling when you think about it but really i mean what happened is and i don't know exactly how much of this was the propaganda or how much of it was genuinely believed by by people who were pushing it um but the certainly the stated propaganda which was stated when benchman that nyan who testified in 2002 in front of congress as a regional expert and explained how if you overthrow sadam who's saying democracy will sweep the region this will put pressure on around and then they will have less influence on the region they and a lot of these new conservatives seemed to actually believe this now i don't know if they did it seems to me like some of them actually did it's the dumbest thing in the freakin world to think you would have believed there you had um in iraq where you have a shiite majority that is held down by a soonie minority that if you overthrow that government and install that democracy which means the shiites right like because they're 60% of the country so they win that this will hurt Iran was insane and anyway so what ended up happening after the iraq war after we toppled sadam who's saying was that Iran got drastically more influence in the region now it's possible that people like dick chaney and benjeman net nyan who in them kind of knew that was going to happen and then they were like well then we'll just topple around next so it'll all be fine i don't know exactly but there's no question and there was a piece i believe it was in the new yorker called the redirect in either 2006 or 2007 where basically what was decided was that now that we iraq backfired so much and and iran has so much more power in the region that now we got to go take the shiites down a peg and this is really what was behind like the attempt to overthrow bishar al-Assad and by the way this not overthrowing our democracy and not putting bounties on us soldiers head and have ganna stan or whatever the other lies that they made up about vladimir puten the real crime that vladimir puten committed was he denied the us regime change in and you could look at the wave ladimir puten was talked about before seria verse after seria it is so stark jorge w bush said he looked into vladimir puten's eyes and he was a good christian and hilary clinton had her reset button it it wasn't until he denied the american war machine a regime change that he became adolph hittler he's hell bent on reconstituting the soviet union and all this other crap that's really what it all it all started to side apparently he was close to fes al-Assad sharls-a-s' father and uh... aside called him and so i need your help and he dispatch troops immediately which by the way you know whatever you think the geo political balance or whoever side you're on that is kind of the the key to long lasting alliances is defending your allies with troops when they ask you to right and the you know the bidet administration has not done that to like legit allies um whatever well also because and he was motivated to do it i think because he didn't want to see ISIS takeover Damascus which was a real threat at that point and they were driving around in toyota trucks murdering all the christians yeah yeah and in the most barbaric brutal right to find the christians but you're not allowed to notice that or something until seagabbard is anti-american for caring what happens to the christians of seria um i think we're fast approaching a period where the people who've lied to us and all these different some it should just be quiet like be quiet like what is there somebody's demand that like i'm sorry david from or whomever like your opinion is just not even route morning joe like nobody can like why are we allowing yeah like you've got everything wrong you know truly but i think it was i think i heard you use the uh the analogy or metaphor uh but you're the um it's like the old like once they see your face they have to kill you that's right or once you see their face uh they'll once they'll get that ever right like that's wrong is mask and there is this feeling and i do think this is also part of what freaks them all out about Donald Trump is that okay so first of all like we were saying before he's leading a movement of really every tough man in america pretty much loves Donald Trump yeah maybe not every but you know the the overwhelming majority of tough men in america love don't want to mauls ones yes that's right including um and the well-armed ones including many people in law enforcement and the military yes you know and so he's got that then he's running a campaign that is very specifically pointing a finger at d c and saying these guys screwed you over and he's also like a wild man like he can't control what he says it's the most charming and frustrating part of Donald Trump you know what i mean like even if he wanted to he couldn't control himself you know what i mean like he's gonna say it it's gonna come out of his mouth and then he's saying things on the campaign trail in 2016 like and you know he says it in this kind of sloppy Trumpian way but what would you be like obama created Isis you know obama did that which is like not exactly true but like there's a lot of truth to it you know like it's it's like well no he didn't but he did knowingly fund and arm them and that is trees literal treason like that is exactly what treason is especially he wasn't doing it on behalf of the United States well right and well exactly and so now if you imagine okay now this wasn't just Obama who did this i mean this was uh this was Brennan um then operation timber sycamore right like this was the planet John Kerry's even on tape talking about how they knew they saw Isis was getting the weapons and stuff but they were like hey like you know we'll just keep promoting this myth of the moderate rebels so ridiculous and then that'll put pressure on the side to step down so this is how we're gonna get our regime change war and then Isis went and invaded Iraq they weren't supposed to do that and then obama had to go back into Iraq to kick him out but the the point is that this is actual treason you know like arming giving material aid and comfort to the enemy like al Qaeda in Iraq and in Syria is getting weapons from america that is treason and now you got this guy who's essentially calling you out for treason who might be the president of the united states of america like the punishment for treason is the death penalty and i i do think like i think Donald Trump himself didn't even realize like what enemies you're making when you say and how much power they have like you you know like who's the last president who like fired the head of the CIA and made a big thing about how he was gonna smash into a million pieces what happened to him yeah it took a limo ride through dallas right so it's like Donald Trump i think was totally naive about like you know he knew there was a swamp that needed draining but i don't think he knew what was in that swissen watching schumron rachel madot show right right and i do think you know being in the world of business gave him a lot of correct instincts and but it's like now man there's just nothing like this government isn't the business world government is the criminal organization world which you know maybe he probably had a little bit of experience in rut should you know real estate the painters and you know whatever you know but you know running casinos and stuff like that i'm sure he's kind of been around but not like this man that's nothing compared to you talking about the c i a that is a whole different right these are not paving contracts right the right control of the world yeah and so there was just all of this you know got this tremendous reaction and he's still dealing with that i'm a little bit confused that for two years we were told that the vanguard of the fight for democracy was unfolding in eastern ukraine was really mattered much more than anything in our stupid meaningless lives here in the united states and that's well good people were the blue and yellow lapel pin and put the little flags in front of their houses and nap and all that and then one day we just stopped hearing anything about ukraine what was that well i mean the um it was all built off lies and it's been a disaster like all of these wars and it's not gone at all the way it was supposed to remember there was a period where uh Joe Biden at the very beginning of the war was just with sanctions we're going to defeat russia we're going to destroy the rupel and you know but make everyone in russia paul or and that'll be so great and then we wouldn't even have to send in weapons and then of course we had to and of course just all the lies you cranes winning ghost of kia fault you know these crazy just obvious lies um and so ultimately you're at a point where yeah you don't really want to talk about that because there's nothing you can point to and and brag about but isn't it crazy you know i did a um a debate on uh on this topic on um on breaking points um and uh um that's which a great show and you've you've been on uh with chris dolan and segar yeah i know sogger well yeah oh that's what he used to work for you right yeah yeah yeah he's great i love that yeah i do um but so i was on uh i i did a debate on that show and i was kind of like talking about how it was crazy for all these people who have like the ukraine and flags and we care so much about ukraine and all of this stuff it's like it do you recognize that we we hold all the chips like the united states of america holds all of the chips we could get this war to stop in almost any way we wanted to if we want to just play our ultimate trump card which is that will leave nato i mean there's no reason for us to be in nato anyway it's called america it totally makes no sense it's not no you know i know you've talked about a bunch like it's like this was started after world war two because europe had been totally destroyed america was like the only advanced you know country that was like left standing and it hadn't had their homeland you know wrecked by the thing and then there's this soviet union and so these guys can't defend themselves we have to kind of work on this deal that we we're not gonna let you invade western europe or will come to their defense and now it's like europe is rich america's 35 trillion dollars in debt and oh yeah the soviet union doesn't exist what's the point of this thing being here and bladimir puten would do almost anything to get that to happen to get america to leave nato it would be nothing but good for us we just wouldn't be subsidizing other rich countries defense he could take it as a huge victory of course you know what i mean you could get almost anything you want and if you guys care about Ukrainians and Ukrainians dying so much why not why not just make this deal we could do it right now i mean we're not getting prime me a back to you crane that's not gonna happen here but who cares you know what i mean you could get almost any you could get the end to the war immediately if you were to do this you know how many jobs now occupied by people with no skills whatsoever totally pointless people pure parasites on our economy and culture would be lost yeah if we get rid of nato yeah well that's the problem real that's 100% the issue it's why they get rid of the energy department yeah the education department i mean they serve no purpose other than self perpetuation they've made and they've made all of those areas much worse of course and they were right it's like unbelievable i mean like the state of education in america what did it get a lot better since was it jimmy carter yeah the department of education that's like what and of course like i mean this it's you know because this model doesn't work it should have been the one lesson of the tiniest century that model doesn't work centralized control does not work this is why all of those countries continue to fail everywhere it's tried and now we're doing it and we're failing because it benefits the few so let me circle back to beginning of the conversation here at the end you have been here in two and a half months maybe a lot has changed all of your kind of course suspicions have been confirmed i think by the assassination attempt in the subsequent coup where does that leave you like do we just been a couple hours talking about how bad things are and about all the signs that they're all in the signs that they're about to get much worse does that make you feel afraid hopeful excited company things are and about all the signs that they're, I'm going to signs that they're about to get much worse. Does that make you feel afraid? Hopeful, excited combination? Yeah, probably a combination. I would say, you know, by the way, we didn't even really get into the coup, but it is pretty crazy how much of a blatant coup we just watched. I just, I just see people like, like Democrats on on social media and stuff. And they'll, they'll call like people like us out and they'll be like, well, first you said the guy was too senile to run. And now you're saying it was a coup when they removed him. You're like, yeah, both are true. I don't know what to tell you. The guy is clearly senile. And also he is still the president of the United States of America. And there's a process here. They'll say, and it's just cr, the one thing I can't get over is not that people disagree with me. I assume people always give this to me. I'm often wrong. So it's like, okay, to disagree with me. What I can never metabolize except deal with is people's willingness to just say anything, just like move because it's expedient. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The capacity for lying among certain people just blows my mind. Yeah. You tell Joe Scarborough, you got to save this because there's some material advantage to you. He will say it no matter what it is. And then all that way, it's like, how would you describe threatening a man until he agrees not to run for president again? And then installing somebody without a vote, like that's a coup. And by the way, it's totally unclear. And I would say, and I don't know for sure, but I would say like the high likelihood is that he didn't ever agree to it until after the letter was out. I mean, look, it is so you cannot overstate how bizarre it is that a few weeks before the Democratic convention when Joe Biden had already gone through a couple weeks of all these calls for him to step down at every single turn said, no, I've made up my mind. I am not stepping down. It's me, verse Trump. So get used to it. I beat him last time and I'll beat him again this time. That morning, the morning that the letter comes out was Sunday. His surrogates are going on the Sunday talk shows and saying enough with the hour before the letter could show enough of this. He's made up his mind. He's running even after Pelosi and Schumer meet with him, even after the 90 million or whatever is held back from his kid. He's like, no, I'm good. And then you're telling me the sitting president of the United States of America, a few weeks before the convention is announcing that he won't be seeking reelection. And this is not done in an address to the nation. This is done on personal stationary and just tweet it out. And then in a separate tweet, he endorses Kamala Harris. And it's not for days later that we hear from the president. Like that is crazy. I mean, I know so many crazy things are going on that it's it's almost easy to not appreciate how crazy that one is. But it and you can say, oh, he had COVID or whatever. They just get up. I don't know. Put on one of those masks that you guys pretended worked for so many years and like go, but he can even be an edited video. It doesn't have to be live. I mean, just like I know he stumbles a lot or whatever. It could be two minutes. But how do you not address the American people about that? And it just it really seems like. And of course, I heard that reporting on the call with Obama where they threat they had Kamala Harris on board. We're going to invoke the 25th Amendment. But my suspicion is that that phone call happened. You know, like the the Schumer and Pelosi strong arming didn't work. Obama comes in. We're going to remove you from office. And this will be your legacy. And then the letter is tweeted out already. And it's presented as a fade to complete to him. It's all over. And then eventually he goes, I have to say, I mean, if the sitting president in the United States, purportedly the most powerful man in the world doesn't have enough power to run again for the job he currently holds. He cannot. He's not allowed to. It's not none of its real. The presidency is not real. The president doesn't hold the power. That mean, they just showed us that. Yep. So it's then how do you people aren't thinking this through? Our system is voluntary. All systems are. How do they expect us to accept the election results abide by those results, pay our taxes? How do they expect us to obey when the system has been revealed as illegitimate? Yeah. Well, it's the only way would be some type of escalation of course. You know, I mean, that's the only way to do it. I will say though that, you know, much like when the Soviet Union collapsed and was largely peaceful, you know, and was kind of like a really amazing thing. And now what happened in the years following it was not good and that didn't need to happen. And you know, what they pulled their nuclear weapons out of all their satellites states, they dissolved the Warsaw Pact. I mean, that happened by the way 33 years ago this week. Oh, yeah. Yeah. That was on my honeymoon. And, uh, and you know, there, there were people at the top who wanted to not let it happen. No, escalate the force and don't let this happen, put down these revolts like they had done previously. And ultimately they just kind of lost. And like enough people were just like, no, just let them go, you know, so that's a kind of hope that something like that can happen in the United States of America. And that doesn't mean like a national divorce type thing, which is something that has become kind of a popular thing that some people advocate for. But it does mean some type of like decentralization of power and Washington just having much less power than it currently does have. I think that it is, then I said this to you last time, it's the great case for optimism is that all of this government tyranny relies on propaganda. And the propaganda is being broken at an unbelievable rate that things that would have seemed unimaginable very recently in my adult lifetime, like not, you know, generations ago, but just years ago. And we're seeing that now. And people are waking up in a very profound way. I mean, it really is. It is all fake. And more and more people are aware of that. Like it's, if you zoom out and go like from my mother's, you know, when my mother was my age, to me being this age, it is unbelievable how much more people understand that this is all fake. Right. Propaganda is the key. I mean, Joseph Gerbel's not to make everything a Nazi reference, but it was five, four crippled never fired a gun in his life except into his own head in the end, never commanded an army. You know, he was the political chief of Berlin, but he was the propaganda chief. And therefore, he was the pivotal person in the Nazi government. He was, right, as he was in charge of people's brains. And so that you cannot, and I'm not comparing in one of the Nazis. I hate Nazi references in general, but that's just true. Right. Propaganda is kind of everything actually. Yeah. And that it's the most powerful thing to control. It's more powerful than controlling the laws or the money or the military. Absolutely right. You control what people think, you know, and you control narratives. And it's amazing. I mean, it's still very effective. Oh, I know. It's not nearly as effective as it once was. But it is still there. And you see it like when people get taken over by the propaganda, it's such a bizarre thing. I mean, you're like, it's like talking to someone and there's no soul there when they just repeat back the propaganda to you or something. Or January 6 was an insurrection. You're like, I'm not having a conversation with you. I'm having a conversation with like, what Don Lemon convinced you you're supposed to believe? No people who fall in for that. Yeah. I mean, I don't know in like my close right. Of course not. What do you think? I know I'm so far field again, but I'm just I'm I'm I don't know the answer to this. What distinguishes someone who falls for the crudest kind of propaganda, January 6 was an insurrection, Don Lemon smart, whatever the lie is from you. So many people are smart. I mean, it's not just an IQ difference. Oh, no, no, no, it's not an IQ difference. Oh, I know. Far smarter than me. Who's fall for it. Oh, yeah. Yeah. No question about that. What is it? I don't completely know. I think there's something about there's it's like human beings are were were pack animals, you know, and that's like very at the core of us. Yes, you stay within the pack because like out here is death. Yes. You know, I'm like, so I just stay in here. Right. Yeah. And there's something there's a personality type that certain people have. It's not again, it is not about being left or right. It's not at all. That's what there's something where people have, you know, like there's there's people who like I disagree with on a lot of issues, but like Alex Berenson is very willing to go outside. I totally agree. Oh, you want to like have all these arrows come at me? Okay, fine. You know, Glenn Greenwald is very willing to do that. You were very willing to do that. Berenson's such a great example because I really like Berenson I text them all the time. Um, but I just absolutely disagree with them on a lot of, of issues, but I will never do it. You're in COVID. You're so great. I mean, his sub stack was like a cathartic. I totally agree. And it was he is smart. Berenson's smart. I mean, because reporter, I think he's a really nice guy. But, but really his indispensable quality was bravery. Yeah. That's right. That's what makes it a friend. That's it. Cause look, I mean, like he was in. Yeah, you were in and you're in the New York Times. You're in all this. And you're going to risk all of that just to be right. Yeah. That's something, you know, I mean, like it doesn't even make sense when I say it out loud. You're like, why would you do that? It's a terrible calculation. Like, totally true. But there are some people who just do kind of get so that's, you know, but when you, so many of the people who, and this is something I don't say this like attacking right wing America. I just, it's something like to be humble about. But like in 2002, in the run up to the war in Iraq, so many of these people who are like great now about seeing through all of this, just knew it as a certainty that like obviously Saddam Hussein has nuclear weapons and he clearly was involved in 9-11 and like he's going to hang on these nukes that he doesn't have off to the terrorists. He's not friends with and they're going to nuke and Zess if unless you go support overthrowing him. They just knew that as a matter of time and essentially, what are you some type of wimp if you don't agree with them on that? And they didn't even kind of realize that they were they were doing the exact same thing as some 20 year old who tells you about climate change. You're just repeating lies that someone else put into your head like they, you are a puppet right now, you know what I mean? And you don't even realize it. And so, but it was like, I don't know, that was the culture they were in that was the world they were in. They saw these towers get hit and what are you a pussy? No, you're going to go do something about that. And so it's people play like people sense of identity is very important to them. I remember, okay, one time I was I have a younger brother who was much younger than me. It's 13 years younger than me from my mother's second marriage. And he's great unbelievable kid. I love him to death. And so anyway, he was I think he was three years old. So I would I was 16. I was watching a next game. Now, I'm there for get this three year old kid and he comes over to me and he was like asking about it. And I was like, yeah, I can watch a game with me. And so he was sitting on the couch. Three, we're watching a next game. And he looked at me and he went, which one is me? And I was like, what do you mean? Which one is you? I was like, we're rooting for the team in the blue shirts. And then he kind of accepted that like, okay, that's, but I just remember always thinking there's like this. It's like so profound that that's what's in us. It's like, okay, you want me to like get into this light kind of projected abstraction. So who am I? What defines me? Like that's so important to people. It's like right at the core of everything. It's like who am I as a person? Like what's my identity? And I think that for like, look, you saw this with like broadly speaking like liberal America. Well, during COVID, it's like, there identity. Their whole identity is that they're the scientific people. You know, you guys are the backwards rubes who believe in superstition and religion, but we believe in science and reason and let this is what makes us better. That's their identity. So once you tell them that it's like, well, the science says this, it was so easy to get them in. So I so easy to get them in on climate change. And then with like more conservative America, their whole identity is that like, they're the tough ones. Yeah. Defend the country who aren't, who aren't, who are, who aren't, who will defend the Constitution? And so as soon as you fed them a narrative that, that, you know, gave them that identity, it was so easy to fool them with all this other stuff. So I do think that's a big part of like they're very good. That's what the propagandists do do at their best is they play off your, you know, sense of self, your identity. It's moral judo. Yeah. Yeah. Use your body weight against you. They take your momentum and pull you exactly way past where you thought you would be. But more and more people are waking up to that stuff now. And so that's good. Well, you've had a big effect on a lot of people, including me. And I appreciate Desueth, you're coming. I mean, Tucker, I could do this all day long. Good. Well, I hope you come back before both arrested. I would be nice. We can say once again, man, it's only been two and a half months, but everything's different. Yeah. I hope, I mean, even if we could just share a cell once we get arrested, that would be real for you to continue this on and on. I will, I will never submit. Thanks, man. Thank you. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing our show. I know shocking that in an election year with everything at stake, Google would be putting its thumb on the scale and preventing you from hearing anything that the people in charge don't want you to hear, but it turns out it's happening. So what can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. But that's a waste of time. I'm not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it the way that you could actually get information that's true. It's unintentionally deceptive. And the way to do that on YouTube, we think is to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. You'll have a much higher chance of hearing what we say and we hope you will.