Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. How are you? Great. How are you doing? Very nice to meet you. Nice to meet you. I've enjoyed your content online. Thank you. I got first introduced to you by a video you did with his channels, Megalithic Marvels. Yes. And it was about ancient Chinese artifacts that don't make any sense. Yes. And it was so fascinating. The moment I saw it, I reached out to my guy. I was like, I had to talk to her because this is crazy. So please explain to people what these artifacts are and what so bizarre about them. I first saw these artifacts in the British Museum. So they have an entire whole wall full of them. And they're made of nephrite jade, which is an extremely hard stone. And they just look, they look machined. They look way too precise for the tools that they say built them. So I started doing some research. I haven't been to the site in China. It was built by the Langue culture, so archaeologists say. But it's two different kinds of artifacts that are really famous. One is called a sung tube, which is a tall tube that's circular in the middle and square on the outside. And extremely precise geometry. The other one of these big round beat-ups that almost look like a giant flat donut that are perfectly flat on top. You know, there's the precision versions of these just like you see all over the world. And there are versions that are much crooner. So it almost seems like the civilization had this. My theory is that these were not unlike the hard stone vases in Egypt. So it was something that this culture either was gifted or found. And it turned into a very cherished object, like a grave good for them. So you find these tombs in Langue, China that have literally thousands of these jade artifacts in them. And it's not unlike the hard stone vases that you see in Egypt where you find those in the grapes as well. So what's the timeline where these pieces are attributed to? So these are really old. I mean, the earth works and the community around the Liangju culture is securely dated by archaeologists to like 3,400 BC. And then, you know, just so it's about the same actually as the graves that were in Egypt with the hard stone vases. So it's very, it's very, very old. And at the time of this culture, what were their tools? Like do we know? Well, the archaeologists say that it was made with strings. So they would take strings with sand or some sort of an abrasive, and they would cut the jade that way. And then they would use copper tools, stone hammers, those kinds of things to shape it. So the actually the giant smile on your face. The explanation doesn't make a lot of sense. And even, you know, the hole down the middle of the bead-esque is a perfect, I mean, you can see the drill marks on the inside of the bead-esque. Can we do we have images of these things? Yes. Jamie, I have a China folder. Because the image is on, and by the way, that channel, megalithic marvels Derek's channel excellent. Really fun. So great. Great stuff. Yeah. Derek is the one that got me into all of this. Shout out to Derek. Shout out to Derek. So this is how do you say it? How do you pronounce that bead-esque? The eye disc. Yep. And how big is this? So that thing's about nine inches across. Perfectly circular. Perfectly flat surface on the top. Like measured to what tolerance? You know, I don't know the answer to that. And I don't know that there have been a lot of deep scientific studies on the precision of these. Right. The archaeologists assume that this culture made them with bamboo and strings. Mm-hmm. So yeah, that picture, Jamie, you can see the inside of the actual artifact in the bottom right. That's drilled. Yeah. Right. And the one on the left is an experiment. These archaeologists ran with a bamboo core down the middle of the jade. And you can just, you can see the difference between the two. How far did they get down with the bamboo experiment? Oh, all the way through. They got all the way through. How long did that take? I don't know the answer to that. There was an archaeologist that did an experiment in the 1930s. And they used these strings with the abrasives to cut off a piece of jade that was the size of a basketball. And it took them a week to cut the string all the way through that piece of jade. Mm-hmm. So the difference in the people that are listening. So there's the bamboo experiment where they drilled into something with a bamboo and cord and some, but what else was did they use? Like sand or something? Yes, abrasives. The abrasives. Yeah. And so the difference is if you look at the lines as it's drilling down, they're thick and they don't look the same. If you look at the ones in the actual artifact, they're extremely tight. They're way smaller and they're tighter to each other and it doesn't make sense. Like you look at that, you're like that looks like a machine. It does. And in this specific instance, it looks to me like the drill came from both directions. Like they flipped it over and drilled from the top and then flipped it over again and drilled from the bottom and that's where it met in the middle. Wow. So when, what is like, what's out of all these different artifacts? What's the most puzzling one to you? The song tube, which is the one on the left hand side. Yeah. So that, you know, that is, it's larger on top, smaller on the bottom, perfectly 90 degree corners. It's got a round tube in the middle but the artifact in general is square. So it's just a very complex shape to create with that level of precision. And nephrite jade is a very, a very hard stone. So it would have taken, you know, this is a people in my space talk about the most scale of hardness. Just as a way of saying diamonds are a ten, you know, different stone levels, the hard stone discs like diaries, that would be a six or seven. This is the same. It's that hard. Wow. And so is the idea, well, I'm just assuming the idea is that there was a more sophisticated culture that probably existed predating that and these are leftover artifacts. It is only my opinion that that's the case. I haven't seen a lot of people talk about these artifacts at all. Amy, if you go back to the picture, you had just flashed on the screen. The reason I've developed this theory, so this is an image on the side of the largest song tube. It's called the King of Jade Song. It's a 15 pound artifact that was found. And you can see the raised stone. So it's the high relief carvings that were later etched over. that etching has become very famous. If you look at photos of the museum in Liangjui, this image is everywhere. And I think that this was an image that was used by the Liangjui tribe as like the image of the King, basically. And so I do believe that it was scratched over the top of an original, very interesting, high relief carving that you see in a lot of other artifacts. So I think that he basically found this. It looks, it's something that they maybe could not recreate. And then they kind of stamped their, their kingly symbol over the top of it. So this is, it's common in Egypt as well, particularly this theory among alternative historians because you look at the complexity of some of the sarcophagus and some of the different things that, and then you see the writing on the outside, which looks like crude or the writing is not as precise. The cutting is not as precise. There's a lot of like chips to it. It doesn't look like they use the same materials or the same utensils or tools. Yeah. And you know, the question is if you had the ability, there's the king of J. Song. So if you had the ability to make an artifact in that kind of a shape, why would you not have also created the scratching over the top in that high, that high quality version? So why would you create the artifact like that and then just scratch over the top of it? Right. It doesn't make sense. It's always been the case that history shows that people who are controlling the region will take credit for everything, they'll take credit for all the ancient stuff too. They'll put their name on it. They don't know everything. Yeah. And that's famous with Pharaohs. They did it with everything. And this is documented. We know that they wrote their name on things that they didn't create. Yeah. And that second was King Selfie. He put his cartouche on everything. Yeah. Which is, I mean, it sounds like what a dictator does. It sounds like what a Pharaoh would do. Yeah. You know, it doesn't mean that they made it. And for us to just assume that they did knowing that people in great power behave that way is kind of kind of crazy. That's our map of history. So how did you get down this road where you started looking at these objects and looking at the conventional historical timeline and saying something's wrong here? Specific to the Chinese artifacts? Yeah. Or were you already on that path when you found the Chinese artifacts? I've been on this path for a while. And you know, the name of my channel is Secrets and Stone. And the reason I named it that is because I believe that the stones speak to you, they will show you exactly what the story is. So with these artifacts, just like the hard stone vases, it just is out of place. You know, it doesn't make any sense. And especially in the British Museum, when you look at these with your own eyes. And then you read the story of how they believe that they were made. You know, it just doesn't, it doesn't add up. And so all you have to do, you know, in any of these places is dig one or two levels down and you start to start to steal a lot of inconsistencies. And two levels, so meaning that the older stuff is the more complex. Yeah. Or with the way that the archaeologists have interpreted a lot of these sites, there's a whole lot of assumptions that are made. You know, there's carbon dating that only goes part way down, you know, they'll dig part way down, they'll date it matches their story and they write the report. They'll take inscriptions, you know, especially in Cambodia places like that where a king has written an inscription and they'll say, yep, well that king wrote on this, so this must have been made at this time. And there's really no, no further investigation. So it's become a theme with my work where I'll go somewhere specifically with the megolithic architecture. You can see exactly where the old architecture was built, oftentimes it's the lowest level. And then you can see where other cultures have come later and built on top of it. And it just looks, it looks like a, just a copy of what's underneath. It's like they were really trying to make what they saw but they just couldn't. And so once you've kind of trained your eye for that, you go anywhere in the world and you see it. How did you start looking at this stuff? I went to, well, I went to Egypt four years ago and watched Ben van Kirkwix videos, you know, Ben. Sure. It's awesome. So I watched a couple of his videos on the way to Egypt. That was my first kind of introduction to this. And then it just became a bit of a obsession for me. I like to go to the sites around the world that other people don't really go to. You know, I think Egypt and Peru and Turkey, that's, it's all in good hands, right? Ben's been watching over Egypt. We've got Brian Forrester down in Peru doing amazing work. The sites I go to are the sites that nobody else really visits. So I just got back from India a couple of weeks ago. I spent a lot of time in Cambodia. I went to Thailand. And these are the sites that I think if you're trying to make a case or at least a strong enough case that people will consider, right, that there may be a different history than what we're being told. I think you have to have more than three examples. So if you can start to do a lot of research on these sites all around the world, you can have thousands of examples of nubs, for example, or megalithic architecture that looks very similar. These walls that look very similar all over the world. And it just makes, in my mind, it makes a much stronger case for it than just continuing to look at the same sites over and over again. It seems to me so much more likely that the timeline isn't correct than the historians are right and everyone else is just a conspiracy theorist. We're, though, the more you look at it, the more questions I have, like that kailasa temple in India. Yeah. We've gone over that a few times. Jamie pointed out something that they brought in about, was it like an army to try to destroy it? And they really put a dent in the damn thing. Yeah. And they stayed for a long time. They tried to smash it up and they couldn't do shit to it. And then you go, okay, well, how did they make this? And I saw a really wild YouTube video the other day where this guy was proposing that they used lasers and that it was all laser carved and that they had some sort of like super sophisticated laser set up back. And that's why you're not finding all the stone. Yeah. Well, you know, wait a minute. Look, I think that's absolutely possible. It sounds possible, but also so insane that we're so wrong about the linear timeline of human history that they had fucking lasers in India like how many thousands of years ago that they were using to carve an entire massive perfect temple out of rock. You know, I was just down at the Hoi Solid temples, which are in southern India. And they have these lathes, lathe-turned pillars. The pillars are feet across. They're huge. And you walk up to them and you look at them closely and you can see the lathe marks on them. And archaeologists can see that they're lathe-turned, but they don't concede that it's machined. So they basically say, well, maybe they were turned on a lathe. We'll give you that. But that was probably human-powered or animal-powered. Yes. And these are- Oh my God. These are the lathe-turned pillars in southern India. I was just looking at these with my own eyes a couple weeks ago. It's completely unexplainable. And to think of the size of the machine that would be required, say you turn that pillar sideways, you connect it to a machine on each side and you start laving. Jamie, I have a folder in my India pictures that- God, that's so pretty. That has lots of- so what you can see at sites like Hampian India is you can see the evidence of laving. So it almost looks like the setup that they would have used to carve these kinds of pillars. And it's just sitting in kind of far-flung corners of these sites. Nobody addresses what they are. And so the evidence is everywhere of this. It's just not- it's written off. It's like, well, that must have been an animal powered lathe. So I do think we have strong evidence for machining in ancient history. And in my mind, it doesn't have to be machines. You know, there could have been other ways that they were doing this, that we don't even recognize. So what is this that we're looking at? This is in- this is it, the museum in Hampi in southern India. And that, to me, looks like the love- so it looks like where a pillar might have been placed and the machine was spinning. Some sort of a laving machine. So I think it's like the other side of these pillars, basically. Like the the end plates. Yeah, exactly. Right. And so these pillars, how large are they? Can you- Jamie, can you go to that image in the lower right-hand corner, please? That one right there. That- that God, I can't get over how pretty that is. They're so incredible in real life too. How tall are they? I mean, my head would probably go halfway up that pillar. Their twice is tall as me. So immensely heavy. And what kind of stone is it carved out of? This is a chloridic shift. So it's a- it's called soapstone. It's a- but there are laid turn pillars that are also granite. In southern India, it's a soapstone. So when it's a quarry, it's a little bit softer. And then it hardens once it's out of the quarry. Has anyone done an analysis of the geometry in these things? Like how precise it is? And how- like I'm looking at it. If you go to that, the one next to it, please. That one, yeah, that one. When I'm looking at the precision of that and how many different pieces they are, I would love to know how uniform those are. Because it looks insane. That looks so beautiful. It's it. Yeah, how do you say that word? Copishwar. Copishwar. My dev. Is that how you say it? My dev. God, that's pretty. It's incredible. And, you know, these sites have crazy energy too. You walk into them and you can tell that they were made with a lot of love. These pillars, you know, you can't help but touch them. You allowed touch them? Yeah, absolutely. Look at that. Like I would love to know what the precision of that is. Yeah. Really, imagine if it's insanely precise and then you have to explain that too. Not just stone chisels and tools and stuff, but. When you can see in the pillars, you can see where the lathe started at the bottom and you can see where it stopped at the top. It's just running. And, you know, a lot of people are like, well, turn it sideways. Is that some sort of a sound wave, right? Is it mimicking? Is it telling us something? This episode is brought to you by armra. Every week there's some new wellness hack that people swear by and after a while you start thinking, why do we think we can just outsmart our bodies? That's why armra colostrum caught my attention. It's something the body already recognizes and has hundreds of these specialized nutrients for gut stuff, immunity, metabolism, etc. I first noticed it working around training, especially workout recovery. Most stuff falls off, but I am still taking this. If you want to try, armra is offering my listeners 30% off plus two free gifts. Go to armra.com slash Rogan. I'm glad you're putting that out. I've seen that too. Does that make sense? I think so. Can't see that again, Jamie? Yeah, what is this trend? Of how precise they are. Oh, here it goes. The pillars in how you say it, swarga, mindap of copishwarr temple are lathe turned with extremely uniform circular and polygonal profiles. Having high geometric precision and tight alignment despite being carved from stone without mortar joints. Says it resembles machine-turned work. Resembles. Yeah. That's cute. Isn't it more likely? The machine-turned? It's exactly. Pillars are laid out with consistent spacing in the circular hall so that the open oculus and the ceiling remains perfectly centered, suggesting careful radial planning and load distribution. The temple uses interlocking stone and gravity rather than mortar. So the precise fit of the pillars into bases and beams is critical to stability and is cited as an example of advanced medieval Indian stone engineering. One thing that's interesting when you go to these temples is you can see where they have moved these pillars into the temple. So the core of most of these temples, in my opinion, is the original megalithic part of these temples, the oldest stuff. So you can see where these pillars have been moved into new temples. And so you'll see these crazy, precise dark stones. Because this is a rotating pillar. What? I think it used to rotate. It does not anymore. I actually saw that pillar. When did it stop? I don't know. And maybe that's just a myth. I have no idea. But you can see where they moved these pillars from original temples or maybe who knows, maybe they found a workshop somewhere with these. They put them in the center of the newer temples. So it's not precise at all, very crude stone work above and below them. And then they have this perfect lathe pillar right in the middle. So what is the timeline that they attribute to the construction of these? Oh, you know, 1,200 to 1,500 AD. And why do they say that? Because the kings that ruled during that time period wrote inscriptions on the pillars in a lot of instances on the sides of the temples, things like that. Yeah. It's all inscriptional evidence. I would need more evidence, you know? Right. What's really interesting. I've done a lot of- It's great. It's graffiti. I've done a lot of research in Cambodia. And they date all of their, all of their temples based on inscriptions. And when you actually run these inscriptions through AI and you translate them, they've all been translated from Sanskrit to French. I then translated it from French to English. And when you read what the kings actually wrote, very seldom do they say, I king so and so built this. What they say is I installed a lingam. I brought a, you know, I brought a statue to this temple. And so the archaeologists make a fairly big jump between what the kings actually wrote and saying, well, this king must have built this. So in a lot of instances, they're actually putting words into their mouths. Wow. So what is your belief in terms of the timeline of the construction of these things? I mean, in the old distances, I personally believe that it's pre-flood. So you know, more than 12,000 years ago. I think there are some that are probably older. Peru is, I just got back from Peru a couple of months ago. That's fully unexplainable. You've talked about Peru on your show many times. Egypt is incredibly ancient. I actually believe that India is one of the most ancient places on earth. And were they different civilizations building there? What they built suggests that it probably was. Were they in contact with each other? I believe they were. There's enough similarities around the world that it feels like there was a communication network between them. But when you look at the actual building styles between, take those three examples, India, Egypt, and Peru, they're completely different. Egypt is very just blocks very few decorations, especially in places like the Assyrian. It's just, it almost looks, it's like clinical, you know. But then you're in Peru and it's playful. They're these big, pillowy blocks. And then you go to India and there's carvings all over everything, right? And so I do believe that there are certain places in this world that are substantially older. And I believe that for thousands of years civilizations have been attracted to these places. And they build on top of them and they settle there. And so you just see generation after generation after generation of building on top of them. Well, it makes sense when you think about Kailasa because look how perfect it is now. And this is thousands of years after they attribute it to being built or at least a thousand years. Yeah. And it looks like there's been zero erosion. Now, out of a few thousand years of that, it's going to look exactly the same. And if you're just generation after generation like not knowing who built it and you get a version of this king said he did or this guy said he did. Like, out of a few thousand years and it's fucking guesswork. 100%. And to have archaeologists shift through dirt and find an inscription somewhere and go up, we nailed it like, God, that's such a disservice to what the complexity of the mystery of what we're looking at is. Yeah. Like just the Kailasa one is I am obsessed with that place. I've watched like four or five documentaries on it and see and we went over it on the podcast the other day with a CEO of perplexity. I saw that. It's fucking bananas. Yeah. It's so crazy how precise and one mistake and you're fucked. But yet it's all geometrically aligned. There's they have no idea what they did with all the stone. Yeah. That's the big question right? That seems so cool. It's removed an entire cliffside mountain and you know, it was it was they parked it from the top down. Yeah. And put it where would you do it at all? Good question. That's so much rock. That's not a little bit of rock. You would think there'd be some land around. Yeah. Even after thousands of years, you'd have like a pile somewhere like fuck it. Anybody want some free stone over there? No one's going to take all the stone. You have fucking millions and millions of tons of stone. Like that's crazy. Yeah. What'd you do with it? You know what? I do feel for archaeologists, right? I mean, they go to a site and they're like, gosh, my face feels a little older, but the only evidence I have are pot shirts that I can date. I can dig down and I can find cultural layers of cultures that in my opinion lived there afterwards. They're dating that and they see inscriptions. And that's the evidence that they have to make their case. But I do wonder how many of them are looking at these sites and saying, yeah, this actually doesn't make a whole lot of sense. A lot of the young ones. I talked to them. I've talked to them. I think this is the hierarchical, the hierarchical with the word hierarchy, the structure of academics and in terms of these guys that are teaching university courses and giving out PhDs and writing books. And they have a vast body of work that's all about the timeline, all about what they know and they are the gatekeepers of information. And there's a lot of ego involved with academics. I'm sure you know that. And they get really shitty with each other. And they're vicious. They're vicious and they attack each other. Even if they're wrong, like the whole Clovis first thing was the best example of that, the gentleman who proposed this theory that there were people here older than the Clovis people was destroyed by his own peers. And it took years before it was proven that he was correct and not only was he correct, he was correct by like over 10,000 years. Like now they're pushing it past 22,000 years ago because the footprints they found in White Sands, New Mexico. Right. The peopleing of the Americas absolutely. Yes. Humans have been here a long, long, long time. And this is just indicative of this pattern that happens whenever anybody comes up with any sort of an alternative theory that doesn't come from the gated halls of academia. They're just dismissed. But academics have only been around for a few hundred years. Like we have to stop and think about how crazy it is that we put the power in these people that we know are not always accurate nor are they compromised and they have ego problems. And they have this structure of the people at the top that are giving out grants and giving out funding and giving PhDs and reading people's dissertations. It's very social and it's very complex and to deviate from the narrative is devastating for your career. Like if they can destroy the guy who proposed that Clovis first was incorrect, that guy was an academic. He was established. Yeah. Imagine if you're a fucking PhD student and you're like, I think you guys are wrong. Well you're fuck forever. You know I used to work in corporate America and there were a lot of things that I thought that I absolutely never said. Right? So if you think about these young archaeologists, even if they see something and they think gosh, I wish that I could dive into that and really explore how old this is, they're going to get shut down immediately and their self preservation mechanisms are going to kick in because they've got to paycheck. You know you have to sympathize with the situation that they're in. Oh I do. I completely do. We've all worked for shitty bosses. It's a terrible position to be in. And especially if your shitty boss is in charge of the distribution of information about the history of the human race, that is crazy. That is crazy to get ego involved in that. Because when you see like the attacks on guys like Graham Hancock and all these people that propose that this data that we should look at, that just that like there's a bunch of Because when you see like the attacks on guys like Graham Hancock and all these people that propose That this data that we should look at that just that like there's there's a bunch of data that confounds The timeline like it it fucks it completely up. Yeah, when go backly tippy came along and then everybody was like, okay We're in a we have a problem. We have at 11,000 plus year old structure for sure It was purposely buried 11,000 plus years ago So how old is it it's at least 11,000 years old doesn't make any sense because timeline of civilization It's supposed to be six thousand years ago So now we have immense stone structures with 3d carvings that are in concentric circles That's 5,000 years old in that. Okay, these are hunter and gatherers. They were just assholes That in their spirit time from killing antelopes they decided they were gonna build immense structures on the top of the hill Well, and don't you find it interesting that the dating of go backly tippy has not Opened the door to redoating other sites around the world So when you talk about the stuff in Egypt Nobody's really open to saying maybe this is 10,000 years old. Should we look again? Right You know that that story has been written there's a been a period on it and it's been put to bed not only that There's actual geological evidence and this is where Robert Shaw came into play You know I have had him on the podcast before and I remember watching that documentary on the mysteries of the Sphinx And he proposed that there's water erosion on the outside of the temple the Sphinx and he He's taken photos of that erosion and brought it to other geologists And said what do you think the sense and they said well, that's water erosion and then he shows them where it came from They don't want to have nothing to do with us. Yeah We're just getting it's the wind. Crazy which is crazy Yeah, imagine that timeline of human history is so controversial that you're worried that it would ruin your career If you spoke accurately about your field of expertise Which is erosion and geology? Dude rainfall thousands of years of rainfall Well thousands of years of rainfall means at the very least the Sphinx is 9,000 years old Yeah, the very least but that's probably way older than that because you have to have thousands of years of rainfall from the time that It was constructed constructed to make these kind of deep Fissures into the stone and it was buried for much of its recent history which means there was not erosion taking place The entire time it was buried Yeah, the whole thing's nuts and the wind and sand erosion that's an argument against that right because it was covered in sand Yeah, and you know if it was rain erosion like they're proposing it had to have been when there was rainfall Significant rainfall in the Nile Valley and that's way back 9,000 years ago a long time ago. Yeah And you know, I guess it just it breaks my heart a little bit that this conversation gets shut down Because if you think about think about 23 and me the the number of people that have Subscriptions to websites like that because they are extremely interested in where they came from and it opens up their world when they can see four generations back It gives them you know people that the belong to these subscription services will say I finally have a sense of belonging I kind of feel like I know where I came from We as a humanity imagine if we actually knew where we came from. I think we would feel a lot less lost I don't think it's sad. I think it's funny I think it's just another example of just how funny people are how we're so weird We're so full of shit and we're we're just so filled with this desire to be correct and To enforce our narrative that we do it even with facts that are really Significantly important for the entire world And I think it's funny because it doesn't work because it's only open the door to people like you and people like Derek and people like Graham Hancock and Ben van Kirkwick and Jimmy Corsetti and all these people that Luke caverns They just spend enormous amounts of time making this incredible content Yeah, like all the stuff that Luke has done in the Americas in South America and like good Lord There's so many mysteries like Explain away saucy woman explain away those stones Help me out help me out how people with no steal and no heavy machinery move these things into position move these 20-foot tall immense stones that are cut like jigsaw puzzles. It looks like they were melted into place Yeah, it looks like a melted marshmallow stacked on top of a melted marshmallow. It's literally bananas It makes crazy no sense and then you have the weirdness of these elongated heads that they find down there these skulls That are absolutely real skulls. These are not hoaxes They have a 30 20 to 30% larger brain capacity In the skull I have personally seen elongated skulls in four different countries And it's not the same as skulls that were manipulated to be flattened that's what's different So if people think about this there's a very well-known practice where they would take boards and put them on children's heads Do elongate their heads the question is why were they doing that and where they're trying to emulate something? That's right that existed Another type of person that was here. Well, it seems like it and it seems like these skulls that they find particularly in Peru The bones are larger. It's a larger face and they have a larger brain capacity and they don't have that sagittal ridge The sagittal suture that's down the middle. So they're literally a different kind of skull It's clearly human or some form of human, but it has more brain volume And it's built different than us and everybody's like I don't see anything. Yup They're not like hey, maybe there was a completely different species of human that existed along with it Just like Denisovans just like me and her dolls just like all these new ones that they keep finding Fairly recently like the one they found in China the big-headed man. What was it? What was that one called again? Julian's homo Julian's This is like really recent like a few years ago. They found this like Okay, we don't have the picture guys. We just don't we don't have the full We don't have all the data and when you have these fucking big skulls and you're not even bringing that up It makes me think like Are you afraid to look at this because then you have to admit that you really didn't know this and you were Walking around saying you're an expert in the human timeline Imagine some of the capabilities of These people with that much more brain volume Could they speak telepathically? Could they move stones with their minds with sound right? We don't know what they were able to do if you just unlock an additional 10% of your brain capacity Joe Rogan's brain capacity think of what think of All of the connections you would make think about all of the things you could do that you can't do now Now it's been into your brain volume by 30% exactly like the brandy Cooper movie member. Yes. Yeah, and he kept the same size head or the movie Lucy with Scarlett Johansson. That's right. Just unlock your full brain and suddenly she was moving things with her mind right so Were these people able to do things that regular humans couldn't and that's why they were emulated throughout history with cradle headboarding They were the elite they were maybe building some of these structures who knows and If you are if you are just an average Joe in that community you want to look like them right you All of us do it right especially the elites of the time Especially the humans that you know, were the kings and the pharaohs and all these different people they wanted to have those heads Yep, there were some really interesting. It sounds like we're crazy people right if I just tuned into this it'd be like Oh great another one was retarded Joe Rogan shows where he's talking to crazy people But then you see that Jane pull up some of the images of those skulls. I know we've shown them Jamie I have a folder with skulls. I can show you some really interesting ones from England. No that are on small bodies So it they almost look like fairies and they have these giant skulls on these very small bodies and it does make you think That probably had something to do with the mythology of fairies in in England This was at a ferry which is one of the big stone circles when you walk into the museum there There are these amazing anomalous elongated skulls on these very tiny little bodies. Wow. The other interesting thing about elongated skull children I don't think so. No, there's a woman named Maria Whitley who writes all about these skulls that she found that have been found all over England That's Egypt. Yeah, there it is. Yeah, so this is England This is one of the skulls, but this skull is very small But if you look at the shape of it, you know, their ears are in a different spot. They have huge eye sockets I have another photo where it's there's one still attached to a small body. Oh Look at the size that head isn't that interesting? That's crazy. No, this one may have been a child I don't remember specifically which of these skulls that kids can be a football player You already have a helmet look it is a giant head But it doesn't look right. It doesn't look right. It doesn't look right. I have babies They don't they don't have heads that big. That's crazy. Even when a baby's got a big head when they're little and they're like a barely-holder Head up. Yep, it doesn't look like a little bobble heads. That's crazy. Another really interesting I'm sorry, but look how far it goes behind the spine and look how flat it is at the bottom and the back. Yes I mean imagine holding that head up. Well, that's the other weird thing about these elongated skulls the The part of the skull where it connects to the spine is in a different place Yes, which makes sense otherwise, you know, you know, yeah I guess you'd probably your head would fall backwards. Look look at these look at these that don't have that sagittal suture That one that's closest to us. That is crazy. Yeah, so that one's improved I saw that one a couple months ago. It looks completely different than the skull right behind it right It's like a different kind of person. Yes Interestingly in a lot of these long-awaited one on the side and they don't have the one down the middle. Yeah There's another one that's labeled Malta and you can see the view of it from the top and you can see how it looks Completely different than any of the other so here's an interesting thing that I'm not sure you've talked much about Joe Brain surgery the holes in the back of these skulls. It's trepination. Yeah, so it was a surgery that they that they see evidence of in lots and lots of ancient skulls and The question becomes so if you don't have a sagittal suture and your brain You know, we have the our brain will fuse right as we grow. Sorry, but look at that But it looks like it looks like these drills Yeah, doesn't it like they just drill a circle around that do Ted in a lot of instances these people survived these surgeries The question becomes why were they doing it? Well, look at that top one scoop out some brain, bro That's crazy. Maybe they were trying to relieve pressure Well, if your brain doesn't have all of the sutures that ours does and And your brain is fusing there are some theories that suggest that these people were losing their connection with Consciousness so they because their brains were so big They you know a lot of telepathy and things like that So if you if you cut a hole in a fused skull you still have access, right? It allows your allows you I guess more space in your skull to access what you use to access So it's like relieving pressure in some way This is the idea why they're doing this trepidation. Maybe you know I think we had a woman on who did trepidation to herself. Oh my gosh. I've read about her. Yeah She's still alive. She did it through doing lobotomy until pretty recently. I know right like what this is Yeah, right when we knew better is she still alive Jamie? I think she might have passed recently And and her motivation for that was it not for consciousness? Yes. Yeah, she was out there But is an interest lovely lady lovely lady, but whoo she's out there. Yeah, I mean that was there They're lady been on some trips. She's she had been to other dimensions many many many many times Pass away about a year ago. Yeah, so it's sweet lady too. She was so kind. It makes the question What was the motivation for doing that in these ancient? Describe it in very glowing terms The experience of trepidation when she did she did to herself So this is a photo for isn't it like is there a video for doing it? I know there's photos of the actual procedure for drilling a hole in her head like It must be quite a sense of relief though I don't keep brains no longer locked in your skull. I mean is that really what it is. I don't want to find out But I mean I know people that have had to have brains or a dream because they had brain bleeding. Yeah, there it is Oh my gosh They just drilled a hole looks like they use a stick. What the hell I think she did it what is she using? Doing it to herself. Yes No, so in way You really want to achieve one with chakras or some shit You're probably not going to get a doctor to sign up for that Jamie can you find there's some images of those elongated skulls There's a few really spectacular ones that we pulled up the other day and one of them is like the The sagittal sutures completely missing and it's it's so big and you're looking at it like okay This is a real skull in a museum like help me out Help me out anatomy experts Why does it why does it not have the features of a normal human skull and why is it so big like this seems Completely insane I don't know. Yeah Shut it AI That's a that's a bunch of bullshit archeologists got an AI and wrote I just I thought articles when I saw that one with the little kid or the Small thing with the big mac of the dome Aren't there could that be explained by just like a random anomaly? Yeah for sure like yeah It depends on how many there are but go go to the images of those the skulls so we could see the crazy one Know why Google just changed and there's no longer they don't like you anymore. No like the website. I hate you I noticed yesterday. You can't oh, yeah, that is weird You're being sabotaged because they're trying to get you to use AI. Yeah. It's all gone. Oh, that's so gross just write images Yeah, see now. Now they'll show you okay. So it's the one on the far left Upper corner. It's right below it. Sorry. There you go. That's it. That's the one Look at the eyes. Yeah, the whole thing is nuts that the fact that that is a real skull Should freak everyone out That no one is that this is in the front page of the New York Times That this isn't something that everyone's investigating like this is not a physical Nominally this is a completely different skull That's not a regular human skull at all the capacity is so much larger You cannot explain that by headboarding. You cannot explain the size of the fucking ice sockets. It's crazy Imagine looking into something who's that one lady that has crazy big eyes. She's an actress You know, I'm talking about Jamie. She's really pretty Big giant eyes. I've seen that too But that's but they're not that big the point is like those eyes would be fucking enormous Like if that person was in front of you and they had skin on with those eye sockets and that head you'd be like Yo You know, I want you to meet my friend Mike They'd be like what the fuck that is not what it looks like that that drawing that drawing is way too normal That heads way bigger than that too by the way and the eyes are nothing nothing like yeah They're not even the same place like those eyes are in a different place. Those eyes There's eyes are in a nutty place. I mean that that image on the right the the woman That could be what they looked like if they were cradle headboard. Yes and her face looks flattened Do like the whole thing looks which is such a gross thing that they did to try to emulate these people Imagine tying a baby up on a board and telling it to stay look at that one Look at that one to the left Jamie left right below that. Yeah, that one. Look at that one What the hell is that with the trepination? Yeah, but help me out. Tell me that's a person Help me out. That is not just in the elongated skull That's crazy. That's not if that's a real photo Almost the potential plaster I don't think that would make this stuff. That is true. That is true Rocky Mountain Sasquatch Organization. Well, that's a reputable source. Yeah, they're the best hasquatch organization Click in the photo, but they have all the real information. There's a lot of misinformation in the Sasquatch community. Oh, yes But that is the only place that shows up This got to be other ones well that that one in the middle and the top and the left that we have right there Click on that those three like that almost yeah, still the same one those all the same one From different angles. Well, the one in the middle looks different than the one on the left Definitely look at the recreation below though. At least his eyes are big. He looked like okay. That's a good one That's a good that's a good representation with those people tell me that do can't read your mind Under the left he comes up to you with those beads on like oh I'll do whatever you say you like okay. I guess we're communicating with the mothership Yeah, like look at the size of his head. Please go back to that image again with Yeah, that's is that real yeah, and most of the hair on these elongated skulls is red Oh, that's so wild. Yeah, that's so crazy Go back to that last image, please Where you see the dude like that guy imagine running into that guy at a myen temple You'd be like oh Christ Real of 100 per cent. That's a different kind of person Like that seems the eyes are fucking massive that seems like a totally different kind of person. Yes You know it's very different abilities than the average human yes I mean if the brain is with differentiates us from all the other intelligent animals on this planet And a human it looks just like a human but different has a brain that much bigger than ours What is that? What's a real thing folks? This is these we're not making this up these fucking skulls are real. That's crazy Yep, that is crazy there was a person like that the only museum I've been to in the world Has any sign that indicates it may have been alien is Malta when you walk into the museum in Malta It actually has a poster that talks about the the lack of the sagittal suture has a picture of an alien on it Really? Hmm Wow, and they leave their skulls out a lot of these museums especially the ones in southern Peru They've sort of tucked them away. They've put them in dark cases So it's harder to take pictures of them. You can't they're not out there in the open where it's easy to pop around outside of it They're probably worried about them getting stolen too That this there's an issue that I've been informed about with ancient artifacts That there's a whole underground market where really wealthy people Like want to buy like Egyptian artifacts and there's a lot of scandals involved with a lot of these people That are in charge of these artifacts where artifacts go missing and people get rich And you know they sell books that nobody buys and also they have a mansion Yeah Yeah, and if you if you're on a government salary and you can slip one of these vases away Yeah, and sell it you're gonna make a lot more money than you're gonna make and like working for the government Not just vases, but even skeletons there's evidence of skeletons going missing Skeletons they found a sarcophagus and then all of a sudden they said nope There's no skeleton and then there's clearly documentation that they found a skeleton It leads back decades ago and today they're saying no no skeletons like Where's the skeleton nothing to see here? Yeah, and some of that that's the weird thing is like some of these These skulls that they find if you could find the entire skeleton you'd imagine that is a very big person These are not normal sized people like whatever the Structure that's but unless they have an enormous head and a little tiny body if they have a proportion it had to their body You're looking at a seven eight foot tall person. This is a huge head Yeah, and there's giant lore all over the world in every ancient civilization and in the fucking Bible I don't believe that that's imaginary and I don't believe it's myths. I think that it's remembering Yeah, I think it is too. I think there's probably a different version of people that existed and I think the real problem is we'll we're dealing with the fossil record and the reality of biological life is neither You nor I is very likely to leave behind a fossil. Yeah, so a thousand years from now No one's gonna know who you were and no one's gonna know who I was and there they're not gonna be able to tell from our bones You're not gonna find them. Yeah, they're gonna be absorbed by the ground and that's a wrap and In order to get a fossil a very specific set of circumstance that says to take place Yeah, and so you know, we're lucky that we have some skulls We're lucky in this you know a thousand years old two thousand years old however old they are But you get back to 10 11 12 thousand years ago 15 thousand years ago 50 thousand years ago Good luck nothing left good luck unless you're finding it in the permafrost Like in Alaska like my friend John Reeves he has that place the bone yard in Alaska He's the best that's so that's that place is crazy. Have you been? No, he keeps trying to get me to go out there And I will eventually I promise but the spot is absolutely bananas He's finding all kinds of insane things out there including animals that aren't even supposed to have existed in that area So they're rewriting the idea of like what was alive and like what what animals were alive different cats and different bears yeah Like we don't know that much we're we're basing like they think about all we know about the dinosaurs It's amazing how much work they've done. It's amazing how many dinosaurs they've documented But if you look at the amount of dinosaurs that actually lived over the Hundreds of millions of years hundreds of millions of years a dinosaur is from the earth There's a tiny tiny tiny fraction a tiny fraction Of these dinosaurs that we find that are fossil us. Yeah, most of them are gone forever including who knows how many species that were Completely unaware of we have no evidence of whatsoever Now think about an intelligent species that probably buried their dead like we do or maybe even burned them You know we don't know what they did or you know maybe they were even more enlightened They did the Tibetan sky funeral where they let themselves get eaten by vultures You're not gonna find anything Right no, you're you're absolutely right uh It feels like people should be just maybe a little bit more open to our past I think people are I think the problem is some of these and I say some if it's only some of these academics Yeah, there's a lot of people that are deviating from that now and again It's a lot of young people. You know like guys like Michael button to know he is. Yeah, he's great He went school got a degree and I was like I think there's more to this and I think I could do a better job doing a YouTube channel where I just research these things thoroughly and provide you with a very balanced Perspective on how crazy all this stuff is and how none of this really makes sense if you use the conventional timeline Yep, and people are hungry for that information. Yeah. I am it's I'm obsessed I think goodness that the internet has democratized it so people people like me can get on there and put a video on and just See what people think and you really learn a lot when you see people like you get attacked You know and people like Jimmy Corsetti and all these people like they go after people so hard And they always take the same luck there always takes always races racism exactly That's what I was gonna say which is so crazy because no one's attributing the Indian temples to anything under the Indians Right, it's not racist. It's just saying I was saying Indians from like a long-ass time ago It's the same people they live in more proud of yes. Yeah, it's crazy like no one is saying that the people in Peru Humans in Peru didn't make that stuff. No one knows like that. Right. That's exactly what we're saying. Yep Works that what we're saying is probably the people in Peru were Incredibly sophisticated before the flood. Yeah, that's probably what it was Egypt. It doesn't make any sense that they're shutting that down It to extend your timeline if you're able to to 20,000 years ago. That's twice as much to be proud of Right, but it's it's just the academics who have like firmly stamped 2,500 BC Bam, this is this is what we know and we're gonna stick with it Yeah, despite all the hard evidence like the geological evidence Disputing that is really weird because like look guys rain does a very specific thing to stone over thousands of years Right there. Yeah, that's right there and you don't really know when it was built You're just guessing, but this isn't really much of a guess. This is actual evidence Yeah, and for them to not even consider that and to just Dispist them and it's just lucky that guys like Robert Chalk had tenure and lucky that also that he was in an archaeologist He's a geologist and what are they gonna fault him for his methods the way he did it what he said? No, you can't really because it's pretty rock solid We should be leaning on these geologists and saying what do you see and then informing our theories based on what they're saying? Yeah, not the other way around Ben van Kirkwick has done amazing work on some of the erosion that's around some of the The pyramids and some of the bases of some of the structures around the pyramid And then it seems that there's many levels of construction and that the old is oldest stuff has a preposterous amount of erosion Like insane amount of erosion Absolutely Yeah, I mean even in so I've spent a lot of time researching Cambodia if you look at so there are eight different pyramids in the media anchor water area and these pyramids are massive and when you when you walk up to them you can see how Incredibly ancient they are and the the dating on these pyramids are you know 980 to 1300 AD so not very old the official dating but when you stare at the stones you can see the same thing you see in Egypt You see just ancient weathering patterns down the sides of them you can see how the whole site has been rebuilt and they don't talk about it Right, so the entire history of Cambodia nobody Nobody has opened it all to exploring that it might be older than eight hundred AD Let's look at some photos of Angkor Wat because it's another incredibly bizarre place and When people use the conventional timeline to date it. It's not it's amazing and it's beautiful But it's not as crazy when you really if if you take in a consideration that no one really knows when it was built and The possibility that it's actually 11,000 years old 12,000 years old maybe even older It almost kind of makes sense Have you done it would look just like that? Yeah, and the temples are the towers inside the core of anchor Why in my personal opinion the core of anchor watt it's got three different layers The core I think is extremely old. It's got these five central towers They look almost melted so you can see the five in the middle as you move out by each layer All of the iconography in anchor watt changes so in the center. It's all Duties it's religious symbolism as you move out it becomes war scenes and elephants and battles Right so you can see where each successive culture has built on to the outside of anchor watt But the core of it it looks enormously old And let's get some photos of the core of it Have you ever have you ever discussed the light-ar findings around anchor watt? I have not Jamie I have some photos in my Cambodia folder Dance the line of looking at these before I switch over to your stuff. God look how beautiful that is Look how the trees roots are grow to all around it. Cambodia is one of the most special places on this earth Whoo Imagine what that was like during its prime. No, that's the Bayon temple the temple at 218 faces Wow enormous faces so Are those is that like those are clearly different stones brought in? Yeah, their individual stones to compare to the other stuff We've seen where it's right. Yeah, very different. Yeah, very different kind of construction. Yeah Spectacular, but maybe makes more sense and to then like chilasa in 2012. That's a great photo in 2012 they did a Liar survey in Cambodia and What they discovered in Cambodia Completely shocked the world so you can see Anchor watt in this photo is right in the middle of that giant moat there were Huge mound fields all around anchor watt inside this moat and outside of anchor watt And then if you go south of it you can see these giant spiral embankments if you just zoom out a tiny bit Jamie do you see those spirals in the bottom left side of the screen? Mm-hmm. Those are from one side to the other. They're a mile long Yes, so these are the geometric features that anchor watt and these are hidden from the negative. Yes They're under the jungle canopy Nobody knew that these were there until 2012 when the Liar results came out The negative. Yes, they're under the jungle canopy. Nobody knew that these were there until 2012 when the LIDAR results came out. Holy shit. There are mount fields that are a mile, this particular mount field is a mile long. It's got, it's a 10 by 10 mount field and these mounts are enormous. They're like 30 feet across. And there's no explanation at all for what these are. And they didn't even know they existed. They didn't even know they existed. So this is anchor watt from the air. Very, very interesting. That western bure where you see that's a man made. It's the largest hand cut reservoir on earth. It's eight kilometers long and two kilometers wide. So you can see the old C.M. Reap International Airport just south of it. That's the size of this thing. It is enormous. The official archaeological story of these bureys is that they were hand dug and that they were used to water rice. There's one on the left side. That's the western bure. There's an equally large one on the east side. So there are two of them that are eight kilometers long on each side. Two kilometers wide. Just an enormous volume of dirt would have had to have been removed to create these. And there's no discussion at all about what they were for, how they were made. They're just attributed to different kings based on inscriptions found in the corners of these sites. So if you want to talk about mysteries in my humble opinion, Cambodia is one of the most mysterious places on earth. What do they, how old do they think this reservoir is? Like 980. So not old at all. And there's no explanation for how it was done. Just to excavate the western bure is the equivalent of 53 Giza size pyramids of dirt moved out of it. So this is it today. You can see there's a temple in the middle of it. That's so big. That's so crazy that they supposedly dug that out by hand. You can see this from space. NASA is taking photos of it before. There's no explanation for for what they were doing there. What is the images of the pyramids up in the corner? That's the 50. Yeah. That's the equivalent. So 138 million cubic meters of dirt to dig that out. How deep is it? It's you know, five or 10 meters deep. And I believe that they, you know, they dug out the inside and then they built these large walls, you know, retaining walls on the outside. So I don't think that there's huge piles of dirt somewhere. I think that's, you know, it was just deepened and then they built the walls around them to retain them. But there's a lot of really interesting complex things going on with these burets. This reminds me of side to had perplexity dig up something on the kali asa temple. Yeah. I was, it was just going into like, is the ability of what do you know how many people they thought made it? I guess I'll ask you that first. Do you know how they could the conventional method? They said 250 people made it over five and a half years. Sure. The problem with that is it started to hire those dudes. It started to tell me like that's kind of like, okay, but then it started to get into like actually the hardest part with this is going to be removing all of that rock. Yeah. Like where not they couldn't, that didn't say like where is it, but just was going into the math. This is all the complexity did. It's all this math on this is kailasa. Yeah. The amount of stone that can be removed every day. And it just would have taken it is even this the 250 people is a fourth of the potential, the number they try to destroy it with for three years. And it has the same tools, I guess. They just had some sort of metal. This is five and a half years. They tried to destroy it for three years. That had been a really frustrating three years. A thousand guys tried to destroy it for three years. You imagine that? That is crazy. And that's just exaggerated. You know, they couldn't do anything. That's really crazy. You know, I'm mad that King was he's like just destroy it. Imagine what a dick he must have been. Oh yeah. Do you want to destroy that? This is the problem with kings. It's the problem with kings. Good lord. That's wild. So yeah, the Cambodia is incredibly mysterious. And nobody talks about Cambodia. Did you like some coffee? Sure. Thank you. So how did you get involved in Cambodia? How did you, it was the first thing that you looked at? I went there for the first time three years ago. It was a quick stopover. We were getting ready to hike the sundong cave in Vietnam. You know, the largest cave in the world. Yeah. So we had that trip planned and I said, well, Cambodia is right next door. Maybe we should just pop over there for a week. So we did. And you know, walking on these sites, it's the same thing I was talking about earlier. I like to hire local guides just to hear what's the story? They're telling you what is the official history. And the story that they told me just, it doesn't match what you see with your own eyes. So they say that the earliest civilizations they're built in brick. And then they built with stone. Over time, they developed the ability to build with stone. But all of the brick is on top of the stone. It's on top of these massive pyramids. Right? So it doesn't, it doesn't make sense that the oldest stuff is at the top. So I started sort of questioning the history of Cambodia. I got into these lidar results, which are really fascinating. I mean, they discovered entire unknown cities in Cambodia with lidar. So on top of the Kulin mountains, which is the plateau where they quarry all of the stone for anchor waddle, the sandstone, there was an entire massive city on top of that plateau that they had no idea was there. There were pyramids. There were 2000 acre reservoirs. There were mound fields. There were, you know, massive causeways. And it was all just hidden under the trees, the jungle. So it's, you know, in 2012, sort of the cat was out of the bag in Cambodia. And what's interesting is it should have made international headlines, you know, these spiral embankments that are a mile long on the south side of anchor watt, nobody knows what they are. Nobody has a good explanation for what the archaeologists say. You know, maybe it was a garden feature. Maybe it was fishing. And in my mind, you don't build mile long earth and embankments in a shape of a perfect spiral, unless you have a very specific reason for doing that. What do you think that reason was? I don't know. I, you know, I'm starting to put together a theory about I think it all had to do with water. They were channeling water down from the cool and mountains, which is about 50 miles away from anchor watt. They were channeling water down building 16 kilometer diversion channels, taking the water way out of the way, running them through mound fields into these giant reservoirs. All of these reservoirs have pyramids connected to them. And it's one system after another of reservoirs with temples in the middle. Pyramids connected to the outside. It feels like a massive industrial undertaking. And I've gone back and forth. Does it have to do with energy? Possibly. I personally think it had something to do with how they were treating the water. Like if they could, if they could get it structured, maybe, right? So that it was better for plants, better for people, better for animals, better for consciousness. There was a massive undertaking happening there that that just isn't addressed at all by our kilos. Nobody's tying together these different systems and saying, gosh, that was a monumental undertaking. I wonder what they were doing that for. It's all just rice farming. Is the official story? Can you show me that lidar image again? I'm looking for, there's, I'm looking for more keep running into just the scientific papers about it. They have the lidar images locked away. Yeah, they've done a bunch of studies on this. And there's some cool photos, but I'm trying to find like, you know, can you go back to the ones that we were just looking at though that she provided? Because I want to see the, the, the patterns. Yeah, that, okay, that perfect. Like, so those features are weird. And they're really weird. They're huge. They're a mile long and half a mile wide, like that yellow square. And that's symmetrical. And they're perfectly symmetrical. And this isn't the only place in Cambodia that has these. And so we're probably looking at an intensely sophisticated civilization. Yes, absolutely. I mean, the, the moat you see Doug in the middle of that structure, that was built, built during the Khmer period, which is the civilization that all of this is being attributed to. They're the ones that dug that through the middle. So I don't even think they knew that this was here. It was just completely covered. Yeah. They, they just dug right through the middle of it. And so this is probably really, really old. And people have lived in that same place like how crazy that looks. That's almost every inch of ancient Cambodia is engineered. There's a, there's a site called co-care. It's about 200 miles northeast of Ankhorwat. They discovered a seven kilometer long man made dam that created a 2000 acre reservoir. Look at that image. Yeah, they, they didn't know that this was there. That's crazy. I was on a tour with Derigolsen last, last November. And we actually took the tour group out to the corner of Ankhorwat and walked those mounts. And what's interesting is when you're out there, you actually can't tell that the mounts are there until you're kind of on top of them. And then you look around and you're like, wow, I'm feet above the rest of the landscape. And then you kind of keep walking because these things are 30 feet across. So you keep walking and then suddenly you're at the bottom of the landscape. So I don't think that they knew it was there. Wow. It's so big that without light art, you're really not going to get an understanding. So that, that picture, um, yeah, so there's a good example of the jungle canopy being kind of stripped away. This is what it looks like from the air without light rail. So there's no way you would know. No. Wow. Entire cities, seven kilometer long dams, huge reservoirs. They didn't know about any of this until light art came out. That's incredible. So look how the trees are just growing back in that's so dope. Look how awesome those roots look. That's the Laura Croft temple. It's called Tuproft. Oh really? Yeah. She filmed Laura Croft was filmed at this temple. For real for real? They actually let her film there that movie. Yeah. Wow. Pretty dope. Yeah. Sure as love it. That tree, just overcoming the buildings amazing. They have their hands full in Cambodia with preserving these temples because the jungle is actively tearing it down. Yeah. It looks like the jungle is trying to consume it with that tree. Absolutely. Like eventually it will. Yeah. Eventually if more trees grow like that, it'll break down all the stone underneath that. The structures, I believe, are older, like the pyramids. They're a little bit more impermeable to these kinds of things. The newer temples, like the one you see on the screen, they just get ripped down. You know, it's, it's a little bit inferior construction. So it's newer. Obviously, I think the Khmer actually built those. And so those just get ripped down immediately by trees. But the really old stuff that the pyramids, if you see photos when they excavated it in like the 1920s, they were fully intact. You were talking about the center of it that it's different, that it looks older. Is there any clear images of like what that looks like? If you of the pyramids or a vanker what? Angarwat. The center. I don't think I have photos in that folder, but you can, if you... Because you were talking about the difference between the geography. Yeah. Yeah. If you search the just the central towers of vankerwat, you're probably going to find images of that. The central, it's, so it's three layers that get higher and higher as you get toward the middle of vankerwat. And in the middle of it, it's very, it's just, it's carvings that just blow your mind. And they're all, they're all spiritual in nature, which is something you see all over the world. So in India where I just was, it was the same thing. The older structures, it's spiritual imagery. And then as you move out to the newer structures, it's all war scenes. You can see the de-evolution of human consciousness. Yeah. So these are from the center of vankerwat. It's deities, you know, it's, it's beautiful 3D carvings. You can stick gum wrappers through these. So they're, they're fully enclosed. You can stick a gum wrapper behind these stones. Whoa. God, it's so pretty. It's so beautiful. And this is all the, so it's, that's so interesting that the people that probably built it first had no interest in war. No interest in war, at least had a very enlightened perspective. It does support, you know, the idea of, I know you've talked about the eugos cycles on this show. But the idea of the, of human consciousness, having reached its peak 12,000 years ago and has just been slowly devolving ever since. You can see that in the imagery in some of these temples plain as day. So yeah, there's a lot of images of, you know, war scenes on the outer, like all of the outer layers of anne carwat. But in the middle, it's totally different. Same in India. No, does anybody have an idea? Like does anybody have a compelling theory as to when these were made that like is backed by any kind of evidence or? No. No. I mean, you can look at carbon dating. And you can poke holes in the carbon dating all day long. So they'll carbon date, wood samples, you know, these are made of stone. You can't date stone. There's, there's reconstructions that have happened on all these sites that are brick. And then there's going to be, there's wood doorways that are put in and they've carbon dated the wood. And the wood in a lot of instances is coming back older than the accepted date of the temple construction in general, which is a little bit problematic. So like there's a pyramid called bakong, which is the oldest accepted pyramid in Cambodia. That one's dated to like 800 AD. The wood samples in the repaired sections of bakong are from the 600s. And they say, well, that's generally the same, you know, and, and so you have to ask yourself, if they were reconstructing and rebuilding these sites, say they were doing that during the kamara times, they were using bricks and they were using wood to repair these sites. They were doing that in 600 AD. So how old is the pyramid itself that they, you know, they came there and they repaired the pyramid. How old is that core structure? Yeah, until assumed that it's the same age is crazy. It's crazy. Yeah. And it's a bit of a circular argument because they, they date a temple based on an inscription. And then they look at other temples that don't have inscriptions. And they say, well, this one looks a lot like this one. So they, they place it in the same time period. So just becomes this big circular logic of all of it fits the story neatly, you know, based on one inscription. That seems so silly. Yeah. It really, it just doesn't make sense. It seems much more likely that there's a giant mystery. Yes. Yeah. And especially when you look at the difference in the artwork and the way it looks, we, we show me, Jamie. Uh, this, they say that this one took 300,000 workers approximately 30 years and they never finished. And grow up. Yeah. Yeah. And this is also started at all around 11, 11, 16 CE. Yeah. It doesn't make any sense. So I was, I was recently in India a couple of weeks ago. And I saw something there that was the most impressive thing I've seen with my own T-Actu eyes. It's called the Bahu Bali statue. I have photos in the India folder. It's a thousand tons. So it's as big as the biggest destroyed structures or the biggest destroyed statues in Egypt, but it's still standing. It's in India. It's on top of a mountain. It's made of granite. That's a person at the bottom of it. Holy shit. It's made of white granite. There's, you know, the juries out on whether it was moved there, built somewhere else and moved there, or whether this was built at the top of the hill from living stone. But in my mind, this thing is clearly machine. It's absolutely perfect. Those ears are five and a half feet long. Wow. Look at the lips and the fingernails and everything. Crazy precision is. It's perfect. Look at the head. So these are all photos I took while I was there. It stands, you know, it's 60 feet tall. It's a thousand tons. So it's the largest standing statue on earth from ancient times. And where's the stone supposedly coming from? Well, you know, the story is, and I actually think I believe it, the whole mountain is granite. And so in order for this thing, so that's just it poking out above the temple that's built around it. That's mad. It's insane. The, you know, the story is that basically it was... It's a little leaves on its arm that they built it out of living stone, that it's still connected to the mountain. And it kind of looks like that when you walk around it, you can see this rough stone at the bottom. But it looks very different than the stone from the mountain itself. So this is a white granite. Yeah. So you can see how it almost looks like living stone. And I can't imagine how you could have erected that and moved it to the top of this mountain. So I personally believe that it was found, you know, it was built there. It was a large stone that was there. And they just went in and chiseled the statue out of it. Yep. It represents Bob O'Bally, which was the... It's a Jane statue. And Bob O'Bally was a man achieved enlightenment by standing still for a full year. So the Anton Koberhils at the bottom, and then the vines grew up around him. So he is the picture of enlightenment. So just look at that image. How was that built? I sat in front of this thing for two hours just entranced by it. And the beautiful thing about the temples in India is they are all living temples. So they're actively being taken care of by the community. They're active places of worship. They're not often the jungle breaking down. They're being taken care of. And you know, this looks like it was carved yesterday. And what timeline is this attributed to? About 980 AD. And why do they think that? Because of those very unsophisticated inscriptions at the base of it. Can I see those inscriptions? Yeah, right there. Yeah. Yeah, not so sophisticated. They look really shitty. So they carved those around the base and they said, I built this. Look how clunky those inscriptions are. This paragraph here on this thing I showed you about anger, what? shines a little light onto that. Yeah. Yeah. It says like, let's you read it. Buildings and temples by the Kmerkings was a means of legitimizing their claim to political office and also the lay claim to the protection and powers of the gods. Hindu temples are not a place of religious congregation. Instead, they're homes of the God in order for a king to lay claim to his political office. He had to prove that the gods did not support his predecessors or his enemies to this end. The king had to build the grandest temple palace for the gods. One that proved to be more lavish than any previous temples and doing so the king could make his make visible his ability to harness the energy and resources to construct the temple and assert that his temple was the only place that a God would consider residing in on earth. Interestingly, in Cambodia, all of the pyramids were the first structures claimed by the kings. So the first king built the first pyramid, the second king built the second pyramid. So what I think they were doing is they were going into this landscape and they were finding these incredibly sophisticated pyramids. And just like that, paragraph suggests, they said, well, this is the coolest thing I can find around and they wrote their name on it. And then once all the pyramids were taken, then they started claiming the borays. They started claiming the really nice temples. There's a temple called Bantier Sray, which is a red sandstone temple. It's beautiful. It's one of the coolest places I've ever been. They claimed all of these places first. So all of the coolest stuff in Cambodia is the oldest. And then once everything was claimed, then they started building new ones like that bayon temple that you saw with the faces and the smaller stones. So that's what I think happened in Cambodia. Jamie, can you go back once again to that giant statue and the inscriptions on it? Those inscriptions are weird, because it's so shitty. Like, look how bad the lines are, how squiggly they are and broken up. And there's another photo in there of the rest of the inscriptions. They're even worse. I mean, these are actually very nice compared to the ones that are... But not when you consider the grandness of the actual statue itself. The statue is so spectacular. Yeah. I mean, look how they wrote it just up any space that they could find. Yeah. They wrote their name there. But it looks entirely different than the rest of the statue. Right. It looks super clunky. Yeah. Like it really does. It's stark contrast. The toe on this statue is three feet long. The year is larger than most humans. That's so crazy. Like looking at it. So it's so... Isn't it incredible? Imagine the time that it would take to make something like this with chisels. Yes. And there was nothing else made like it. Not only that. Like, what are we talking about in terms of metallurgy back then? Oh, hammers and chisels. Yeah. Well, did they even have iron? Yeah. Yeah. They had iron. So they had iron chisels. And this is again, was it 900? 900 AD. God. And it's almost perfectly symmetrical. And you think it looks machined. I do. It looks very similar to the Egyptian statues. I have some side-by-side photos in the folder. You focus on the neck, Jamie. Go back to the neck. Because one of the things that was crazy about when you saw the image of the neck. But like, look at the lines. I know. Like, what is that? There's lines similar lines like that on the large statues in Cambodia. And there's similar lines like that on the large statues in Egypt. So, what are your lines about Mount Rushmore? Didn't we make that by hand or no? I don't know. I think they use dynamite. I'm just kidding. It's one of the things I might have like a think of. No, that's true. Mount Rushmore's immense. And this is why it's granite. So this is an extremely hard stone. What was Mount Rushmore maybe? I don't have to look. I was just thinking of it. We made that a thousand years later. That is true. That is true. But we did that with machines. Yeah. And the machines back then. Yeah. I mean, they had jack hammers. They had all kinds of stuff back then. When these were civilizations that were at war, but somehow they found the time to carve this. I'm wondering what those lines in the neck are supposed to represent. The statue is so beautiful. Isn't it amazing? God, it's so incredible. Maybe they were going to make something and stopped. Yeah, dope. That would be if that was in your backyard. I'd never get anything done. You can see this thing from 50 miles away. It's up on top of a mountain. And it's at the peak of the mountain. So from 50 miles in each direction, you can see this massive statue just staring serenely. So if you, it's a go much Swara, Bali, Bali statue of no. So there's a couple of different ones. This one's the best one. So that's the third picture to the right. One in the middle. Yeah. So yeah, that's a drone photo of it. One I was headed. That is crazy. And it's the largest ancient standing statue in the world. And very few people talk about this thing. I've never even heard of it today. Yeah. Wow. So that was probably just a big ass rock that was there. And they chipped away everything to make that. I mean, there's two, there's two options. One, maybe it was a big rock, but look how much would have had to have been reduced. And look at the stones to the right. You can see how different they look than the statue itself. Do you think it's possible that stone was moving? I think it's possible it was moved. There are not with any technology we recognize today, but I think it's absolutely possible. It would have had to have been taken to the top of this mound, which is like 650 feet high and stood up. But even if it wasn't, even if it wasn't, even if it was, and even it was a standalone boulder like the ones you see below it, that's still an extraordinary feat to carve that thing in almost perfect symmetry in a way that looks very, very machined. That has bananas. Yeah. So you climb the mountain. It's like 650 steps. You have to do it barefoot because it's an active temple on the way down. It got real hot. Oh, you can't even wear socks? You can wear socks, but it's slippery. Got to wear them grippy socks. You want to wear them. I didn't think of that. Yeah, we like, for Pilates. Yeah. Wow. It's an amazing place. And it's still the beautiful thing about it is it's still just revered as a holy sight. So people, the chains take pilgrimages there. Every 12 years, they have these major ceremonies where they, they pour milk and honey and things like that over the top of it. They build a big scaffolding. So they'll climb up to its head and pour these libations over the top of it. And it's, it's just being continuously worshiped. And when you sit up there to get a little bit spiritual for you, you feel different. You feel like you're being healed. Like we had a plane to catch and I didn't want to leave. We sat in front of that. It was my brother and I and we sat in front of it for as many hours as we could before we had to go catch our plane. Wow. What was going on back then? That this is the real big question. Like what was the height of sophisticated civilization 10,000 12,000 years ago? What was it really like? And how much information did we lose because of the flood? Yeah. What's interesting is if you look at Jane mythology, so they talk about these great half cycles that are an incalculable number of years. And they're, they're called turthinkaras. So they're like the kings, the, the, um, they're not kings. They're like the enlightened ones of the period. The first turthinkara was Bhobali was the son of that enlightened being. He was described as being over a mile tall, fully enlightened. Right. He was described as millions of years old. And these are their myths that go back to an incalculable amount of time. And that's just in this half cycle. So that they just described these major cycles of time. And this, the images that they're building at the top of these mountains are of these enlightened beings that are part of these like ancient myths. Jeez. You know, when you go into their ancient scriptures and you read about things like vaymanas, like the flying crafts and, you know, and we were talking the other day about, they had some sort of a description that seems to sound like a nuclear bomb. And you had to use it for very specific reasons and you had to get authority to use it. Yeah. Even, uh, do you know what a Shiva lingam is? No. Um, in my Cambodia folder, there's a, some photos of it. So in most of the Indian temples, there's a Shiva lingam that's usually described as a, uh, you know, it's a, it's a male component inside a female component. So it's meant to represent both sides of the polarities. Um, and they're, they're at the entrance of most of these temples and they're small. There may be like two or three feet long. But in Cambodia, there are giant Shiva lingams. There are ones that are, you know, probably almost 20 feet long. And you can, you know, you can see those sites like Kokair. You can see them at the top of Panambach mountain, which is right by one of the big borays. Um, in India, the Shiva lingams are even bigger. If you go to the ancient texts and they talk about these things, they describe them as infinite pillars of light and fire. shevelingums are even bigger. If you go to the ancient texts and they talk about these things, they describe them as infinite pillars of light and fire. So are these shevelingums, these giant shevelingums? Actually, they're not, I don't believe that they're what we say they are today. I think that they were extremely powerful. Maybe a weapon, I don't think so, maybe an energy device. But if you look at modern days stonework and then you tie it into the old myths, that's when it becomes really, really interesting to me. Yeah, so that shevelingum, the man is standing on in the top right photo. That's at Hampi in India. These are always surrounded by water. They're always in ruthless shrines. This very megalithic temples, the one in the bottom right, that's not AI. That's a real photo of these shevelingums. That one's 40 feet high. Originally in a ruthless temple by large bodies of water. I think that these were all something very different than what we're being told today, which is just a spiritual carving. So you think this has something to do with energy and that's why they're surrounded by water. Yeah, I mean, in the ancient texts, they're described as an infinite pillar of light and fire. That's what a normal shevelingum looks like that you see all over the temples. Right, which is just like a beautiful fountain. A very small version of these monumental ones that you can find in Cambodia and India. It's very phallic looking. Yep. Yeah. So go back to the big ones, an infinite source of light pillar of fire and light. That's what they're described as. Yes. What the hell is that? What were they doing with these things? They always face north. They're always in a ruthless temple. They always have major water features next to them. Is that how they made power or maybe if it power and the electricity is implying? Or something, some kind of power? The myths suggest that there was something going on there. Well, this is the question that I always have when, you know, when we think about technology, we always think about in the context of what we understand currently. Yeah. And if you think of human beings, the way we've progressed to get to where we are now is through internal combustion engines and transistors and all these different technologies that we're available that we have right now. There could have a completely different direction that they went in and achieved similar or more spectacular sophistication in this different direction. Yes. And the idea that this is the only way to go is kind of crazy. Yeah. It doesn't have to be mechanical. Especially when this is a fairly sick society in terms of our value system and you know what we, you know, we're, merimass. Yeah. Like objectively. Yes. Mentally, physically, we're as sick as we've ever been. It's the only reason our lifespan is increasing is because we've overcome it with technology. Yeah. Right. We're as sick as we've ever been. That's unhappy as we've ever been. I think that's part of the reason that the powers that be don't want us talking about golden ages. Right. So if you can convince civilization that if you can convince today's society, that we are the best we've ever been life is as good as it's ever been, that's much more palatable than we are as sick as we've ever been. We're as unhappy as we've ever been. Do you think the people are actively trying to enforce that narrative because of that? Or do you think they're just reinforcing their own current beliefs? I think a little of both. I don't think they know. I think there's a lot of these people that are these that are conventional archaeologists, conventional timeline proponents. I don't think they really study at all. I don't think they do. I think they try to discredit some things and they do it very disingenuous. Like some of the people that have gone after Graham Hancock, the things they say are really kind of crazy. But I think they're doing it because they're trying to reinforce their own closely held beliefs and this gatekeeping of information being the person that's the expert. There's a appeal to expertise in an area where you have very little data. It's like you really can't be an expert in something that you especially like timelines of stone. Like how do you know? You don't really know. You don't know? Okay. So let's go from there. We don't know. That's an okay thing to say or I'm open to the possibilities. I don't think they're trying to promote it because they think that we want to establish that you know, human beings today or second. Let's not pay attention to an enlightened golden age when people were different and they were concentrating much more on the spiritual aspects of human life. And they had deities that were spectacular and they had technology that was above and beyond. I think I think they're just not willing to entertain it. Again, I think that's like what they say about science and science moves on and progresses one funeral at a time. Yeah. Yeah. I think that's the case with archaeology as well. I think there's a lot of these people that just they have to go away. Yeah. And then the new people coming up, a lot of them are watching YouTube. You know, a lot of them are reading these papers. A lot of them are looking at the work of Flea Bo beyonde. Yeah. That's underneath the pyramids. They're going, hey, explain that. Yeah. Because you really can't. You know, and they're trying to dismiss it so hard. But that technology is like if you are trust the science, like you got to trust the science and that technology is proven that not only that, they use that technology to accurately get the dimensions of things like that particle collider that's 1.2 kilometers into a mountain. Yeah. So if they have that and they can use that on a known specific structure, they know the dimensions of it. And then they get a reading. That's the exact dimensions that specific structure. It's because technology works. Yeah. Right? Yeah. But they don't want to even entertain it because it's too crazy. Like if what he's saying about what's underneath the pyramids is correct, the whole timeline's gone. Yeah. Everything's gone. Like it's like, okay. Yep. Well, you know, he just basically announced that he discovered a second Sphinx. And if you if you look at the layout of the Giza Plateau, it actually makes sense that a second Sphinx would be there. The structures under the pyramid are very difficult to prove out because you have to dig or excavate under the pyramid to do that. The second Sphinx is, if it's there, is simply buried by a pile of sand. So that would be a very easy thing to dig out and to prove, yes, Felipe beyond he is his technology is showing something that's actually there. Where does the seconds Sphinx look like in the images? He just had a conference in Italy and his translated version of his talk at this conference just came out I think yesterday or the day before. And he shows all of these all of these scans that he's done from space. And he kind of puts them together and shows the shape of the structure that I'm seeing under looks a whole lot like the existing Sphinx. And he actually used AI in Rand probabilities against his scans. And so he went to Grok and Google Gemini and all of the different AI's. And effectively said, if you look at my data, what do you think the odds are of a Sphinx being under the sand? And AI came back in almost every instance higher than 80% probability that it is a Sphinx based on the data that he's showing. Wow. That would be incredible. That seems easy. And like I said, all you have to do is so when they when they excavated the tombs that are right next to where beyond he believes the Sphinx is, they took all of the sand from those and piled it directly on top of the Sphinx, not knowing it was there. And so you just need to move the sand out of the way and dig down and you can prove what he's whether it's there or not. Having people disputed that though, aren't there some photos where that mound didn't exist from like the 1930s or something? Right. Yeah. So that's when they excavated those tombs. They took that that sand and they piled it there. So initially when beyond he talked about this like on Matt Bell's podcast, when he announced this, people came out immediately and said what he thinks he's seeing is actually a modern pile of soil. But what he's showing is is below that in his scans. So I think it's a big opportunity for the people in Egypt to go out, do a little mission, dig down, see what's there. And you can prove, you know, yes, so the dream Stella, all of these, a lot of these different traditions talk about two Sphinxes. And the geometry from the air you can see where he believes he found the Sphinx. You know, geometrically, it looks very similar to where the first Sphinx was found in relation to the different pyramids. So yeah, so you know, I think about that. I just just talking about it. I know, but they say it's false. Well, I love how they said that. Viral claims of second buried Sphinx at Giza are false. Archaeologists say it's not. Well, how do you know if you didn't dig? Yeah. How do you know? And again, so the Sphinx was buried. This is like what's really important. Like when Napoleon found it, it was burned buried. Right. So that was what? What year was that? I don't know. We years Napoleon, 17. 1700s. That could see the head though, right? Yeah, that's it. Just that. Yeah. So if the entire Sphinx, yeah, if the entire Sphinx is varied, I guess my point is, it's very hard to prove his claims of what's under the pyramids because that's a Look, there's a picture of a pole. That's a real excavation. And color. So I mean, you could easily see giving a different geographic layout, you know, different top graphical layout that if the whole body could be covered. Well, if you're in a different place and the sand comes in a different way and it piles up even higher. It's on the west side of Giza Plateau. The current Sphinx is on the east side. And then you have the two pyramids in the middle. So it is possible that sand could have just covered that over thousands and thousands of years. Absolutely. And it would be easy to prove that it's there. Or that it's not. Or that it's not. Or that beyond his full of shit. Yet. Or maybe he's not. Right. He might not be. Well, they have also found chambers inside the Sphinx that they know are real. Yeah. So chambers that are proven that they know exist, this technology also shows them. And in beyond his new scans, he also shows cavities inside that Sphinx. Really? What he believes are. Okay. So it's it's really exciting. And I think, you know, if you think about where this field is going in the next five or 10 years and think about the opportunities with AI and all of this technology, look what was uncovered in Cambodia with LIDAR, look what's happening in Egypt with scans from space. If you take AI and you start to compile, you know, I used to work for a mining company and mining companies use LIDAR or forestry companies or environmental companies, they all scan the earth. Right. With LIDAR. If you could use AI to compile all of the scans all over the world, imagine what you could start to identify that nobody's identified before ancient structures. Like I think you could fundamentally change this discussion in the next five years just using AI in different kinds of technology that we've never been able to do in human history. We can we can translate untranslatable texts. Yeah, I've seen that. I've seen what's really fascinating when they do these scans of scrolls from Pompeii. Have you seen that? The Vesuvius. Yeah. Yeah. So amazing. Like they're completely wrapped. Yeah. And they're covered with ash like in the, they're super delicate, but they've been able to use scans to actually read the text on those roles. It's amazing. Incredible. And there's an incredible amount of ancient texts that have been untranslated. What is hidden in there? Right. You know, not just the languages that we don't know how to translate like Ronga Rongo script in East Ireland, but translatable script that nobody's paid attention to. The thousands of Sanskrit writings, what's hidden in there? Right. You know, so I think it's a really exciting time to to do this work. And I personally believe in the next 10 years, there are going to be extraordinary discoveries that I think it's going to be very hard to argue that we need to at least reexamine our history. Yeah, without a doubt. I think that's already the case. I think there's thanks to people like you and thanks to people that are making these videos. We could see this just it's just so puzzling. I mean, it doesn't make it. The timeline doesn't make any sense. And also doesn't make any sense in terms of like a linear timeline of technology. It's like, what were they using? Like how did they move this stuff? Like and why? Why? Yeah, why? Why were they building these things? Why were they building them? Where they were building them? Yeah. You know, if you think of the earth like a human body, were these sites built on the acupuncture points of earth, they were built in highly energetic places. When you go to these sites, you feel different. People describe spontaneous healings. I have different dreams when I visit these ancient sites. You know, I do a lot of meditations. And when you meditate on top of a pyramid in Cambodia, you drop in immediately. You know, so you are, as a human, you're resonating with these sites in a way that you don't when you're not at them. And so I believe personally that they were building these sites in these places for a reason. What makes sense? And the idea that different places don't have different energy is just one of those things that people like to say that we've got a clear understanding of what energy is and what you know, what it's different about these different places is just different geologies. There's nothing special. There's nothing, but we don't really know that. There's so many things that we can't measure. And we definitely don't understand why certain places have a different effect on human I mean, just wilderness has a different effect on human beings. It's, it's, you know, like forest bathing. It's a real thing. Like hugging trees actually is good for you. Like grounding, walking barefoot on ground is actually good for you. And we don't truly understand why. And there's something that in some way that we're connected to the earth that we don't quite understand. Right after I left my corporate life, I did a basically like a wilderness quest. So picture of like a Native American vision quest where I spent four days on the side of a mountain with no food, no tent, nothing, just a journal and myself for four days with no food. Why did you do that? It was, it was because I needed to heal from the corporate life that I had lived. I needed to recover in better jobs. How bad are jobs that it's better to have no food and be sitting on a mountain for four days to get your head straight. What I'll say about that experience is I think that humans don't let themselves get completely silent any longer. So what you're saying about nature healing you know, you know, over the course of three days your body gets very weak and the voices get a lot quieter and suddenly really the only thing you hear is your soul or God or whatever word you have for it. And you watched the stars pass at night and you're sitting there all day. And it's it was one of the most special experiences I've ever had. Did you bring water? What did you do? You have basically like you have three leaders of water per day that you hike into this area and you just sit with the water and that's it. The last night of it was really cool because what you're supposed to do it's it's meant to be a healing and kind of rebirth. Right. So the last night you you set up rocks in a circle and you at sunset you enter the middle of the circle and you're you're keeping an all night vigil. So you're watching you literally watch the constellations move all night. And you're supposed to try I succeeded but barely to stay awake until the sun comes up. And so the idea is that you're entering as one person and you're leaving the next morning as another person. And so the native Americans with their vision quests they're doing it right. I think that we have completely lost our connection and ability to tune into ourselves and to tune into the earth and you know quests like that are really amazing. Wow. And it's being blunted every day by phones and TVs and screens and yeah. Just flipping through TikTok. You know it's it's different than sitting with yourself in complete silence. We're complete polar opposite to corporate life. Yes. Thank God. Corporate life has its place but yeah. Well it has its place. I'm one an iPhone. Yeah. So I'm just going to make a laptop. Totally. And people need to make a living. Right. Yeah. It's just there's other ways. Not for everybody. I mean we need people to not get it so that they keep working. So we have stuff. Yep. Exactly. Or at least to spend a portion of their life doing that. But when you think about ancient civilizations and how much time they spent in ritual and how important these things were to them and how they had this very strange connection. Like a lot of these ancient structures particularly the Aztec structures and Egyptian structures. They mirror the constellations. And so they they had a understanding of their place in this universe. They knew how to make these temples so that the pillars the summer solstice the summer part through the middle the pillars and light these corridors. Like that that's incredible sophistication. That's incredible planning. This understanding of when the sun's coming up exactly. Yeah. The specific time of the year was the longest day of the year to the knowledge that the sun's moving in the sky. But it'll be back on this day. And this is where it's got to be. So this is where we have to build. And they encoded that in stone. And they didn't miss. They didn't get it off by a half a foot or six inches. No. It's like right there. Sun in the center right up the middle. Like how did you do that? Yeah. How did you do that? You did that while you were hunter gathering? Like what are you talking about? Yes. In bananas. In the spring equinox the sun rises exactly over the center tower of anchor watt. Perfect. They knew exactly what was happening and they built their structures around it. Which gets back to the why. Right? Like yes, how did they build this? It's mind blowing. But why did they build it? Why did they build it? The way that they did? Why did they build it? Where are they? Look at that. Isn't that incredible? That is bananas. Look at all the people. Just straight straight up the east side. What are the odds? I mean, that's pretty small that you would nail it like that. You definitely get fired if you if you were off a little bit. That is crazy. It's so crazy. Yeah. It's so crazy. I really didn't. You know, what was it like? I mean, how much time do you spend thinking about what society must have been like? Then like a lot. I almost every day. I wonder what humans are like if we're not on this path that we're on. You know, with propaganda and gaslighting and technology and being inundated with just nonsense all the time. And wrapped up in materialism and brands and bullshit and popularity. I think we're in touch with each other. I think we're in touch with the earth. I think we have a deep relationship with God. It's all of the things that people are still searching for today. We just feel fully disconnected from it. And I think that's why these ancient sites are so appealing to people. You know, why people travel all over the world to see them. It creates a sense of wonder and awe in us that very few other things do. Yeah. You know, I'm really fascinated by the mind civilization and the timeline of them because that's another one that's really weird. Yeah. Like the the my instructors are so strange. I've, that's the only place that have been the only ancient place I've been is teaching it to and when you're walking around, you just go, what would these people like? Like what was it like living here? Were you there when you could still climb? Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We went in 90s. Yeah. Now maybe early 2000s. Yeah. Early 2000s. And it was stunning. It's weird. It feels weird. There's a lot of ancient stuff in Mexico. Yeah. The all-meck things are really mysterious. The my instructors, their myths, their, you know, it's it's old in southern Mexico. Well, how about the Aztec stuff where they didn't even make those temples? That's what I didn't know. I didn't know that until fairly recently. I mean, it's no different than the Camarre and Cambodia. Yeah. But at least they said it. Yeah. They said these are the place where the gods were born. Yeah. So they described it. Yeah. We attribute those temples to the Aztecs. Yeah. But they, they were like, nope, they were already here. Okay. Well, but then who? The Inca say the same thing in Peru. We didn't build these. These were already here. But we don't listen to them. Like you guys don't know what you're talking about. People wrote myths. Those are just stories. These are just really people. Yeah. One of the things we talked about the other day was that there's a bunch of different cultures that have a timeline of the kings where they, they ruled for thousands and thousands of years. Yeah. Like one king ruled for thousands of years. And then you have the flood. And then you have the ages of these people drops off pretty radically and then becomes a normal age like human beings. Yeah. And we look at that and we go, oh, that, well, that's just myth back then. Yeah. Until its history. And it's the same texts like in the same depictions of these kings, where they have accepted dates, you know, the 5000 year ago, 4000 year ago, kings. Well, yeah, that guy was real. Yeah. But these other ones that lived for 3600 years. No, that's not real. Same with the chains. Like I was talking about earlier, there are 24, turth and kara's. All 24 have lived according to the chains. But archaeology has only recognized the last two of them because those were the only, you know, the timelines and their lifespans. That kind of fits. But when you talk about the way back days, that's just myth. What do they say their timelines were? Oh, I mean, millions of years. And the, you know, the first or the car was over a mile tall. Oh my God. You know, so that it's just, but it's consistent across the world. The chains talk about it. The Hindus, the Egyptians, the Sumerians, all the Bible, all of them talk about very long lifespans, giant statues. You know, is it, is it coincidence that all of our ancient myths talk about the same things? Right. Or might it have been true? Yeah. Well, then there's the book of Enoch, which is Anna Paulina Luna turned me onto that. She's like, you got to read that. And I read it twice now. And like, this is the most bizarre depiction of a human story. The Watchers came down and made it with the daughters of men and created the Nephilim who were giants who destroyed and consumed everything and were wiped out by the flood. What? And the accepted biblical texts barely hinted that they still talk about it. Yes. But the extra biblical canon talks, the stories are much more like the book of Enoch. Yeah. You know, there's a reason I think that those were excluded from the Bible. Well, they were excluded by rabbis. I know because they didn't jive with the Torah, which is hilarious. Like you can't discuss, they all were in the same caves and kumran. Like the version of the book of Enoch was in the same as the book of Isaiah. They were all in the same scrolls. Yeah. It was just like, what? How do you guys leave this out? Like, imagine if they taught that at church on Sunday, you'd be like, what are you saying? Yeah. You know, David and Goliath. The Watchers? I think it's interesting that you can totally accept that David and Goliath is a real story. And Goliath was a giant in the Bible. Yeah. Right. How was it? How tall was he supposed to be, couldn't he be able to really big guy from Iceland? I think he was described, they described the way that the Hebrews described it is that they made them feel like grasshoppers. The giants, the Nephilim made them feel, you know, they were like, we are as if we are grasshoppers. So I think that they were meant to be very, very large. It would be really nice if they found a big foot somewhere. Oh my god. I love big foot. Not a big foot. Not the animal. They could giant foot like a stone. No, exactly. Yeah. David and Goliath. So he's supposed to be 10 feet tall, often calculated as roughly 9 and 10 feet tall. The thing about that is like, you know, people are full shit and they can make up a story. The guy was so big, he was 10 feet tall. But meanwhile, he could have been like the mountain from game of thrones. Totally. A real person. Yep. Maybe six and a half feet tall. Any of our basketball players today? Who says he was six and a half feet tall? Scholars? The Dead Sea Scrolls. So six cubits in a span, often calculated as roughly nine to 10 feet tall. In the ancient Hebrew text, Greek and Dead Sea Scrolls texts say four cubits in a span. So that's only six and a half to seven and a half feet tall, depending on how the cubit was defined. So that makes sense. So who knows? Nine to 10 is pretty big. Yeah, nine times big. But if the the Dead Sea Scrolls are correct, then it's only six and a half feet. So he's a basketball player. Yeah. You know, that's not even a really tall one. Yeah. You know, there's, who's the biggest basketball player now? How tall are they? There's a kid that's like 14. That's almost eight feet tall. What? The man was going to make it to the NBA or anything. But just plop it in. Oh my god, that's so crazy. That's so big. So you got to imagine, but you got to imagine with technology. So they're working right now in life extension technology and they've already figured out a way to reverse the age of skin cells and they're on their path to being able to stop human aging. Yeah. And maybe potentially even reverse it. If that technology becomes implemented, Geez. 20 years old, they was actually playing basketball, but Geez. So he's bigger than a glass, but a lot. Goliath talks shit about him. Right. It's story about it. He got his ass cake by a basketball player. But if you can imagine this technology being implemented in the future and then being refined and then getting to a point where they really have it mastered, you know, like we have with so many medical interventions that we have today, you could get to a point where someone could live to a thousand years or several thousand years. And if you're the king, of course, you're going to want that technology. And you're also going to be very protected. So you're you don't have to worry about dying in other ways unless somebody usurps you. So you can like the Sumerian Kings list and some of these like the Zep Tepi list, you look at that and you go, what are they saying? Like why was this guy six thousand years old? How did he how did he rule the country for 30,000 years? That sounds insane. But it doesn't sound insane if they master biological aging, which is not impossible. It's not impossible. Not always it not impossible. They're actively working on technology that's going to allow that to happen in our lifetime. You think it's going to happen in our lifetime? 100%. Yeah, 100%. Yeah. The human quest for immortality. Well, I don't think that's going to happen, but I think you're going to extend life. You're going to extend biological life in a significant manner and maybe for the sake of looking at things through rose colored glasses. Maybe that's a good thing. Yes. Because one of the things about humans is we barely have enough time to figure out how much of life is bullshit. Yeah. While you're wrapped up in it and then if you have responsibilities, you get married, you have a family, you have a mortgage, you have a bunch of, there's no time to recognize how fruitless a lot of your thinking and behavior and how stupid a lot of the things that people concentrate on. But as you get older and older, you get better at it. I'm way better at it now than I was 20 years ago. Way better way better at life. I would imagine I'm going to be better still 20 years from now and less them to Crap it. So 20 years from now, I could be all worn out and like, you know, my back hurts or get off my lawn, you know, you get stupid. Not in my backyard. Right. You get goofy. You get goofy because you get old and sad and, you know, you're not healthy anymore. But if you were 80 years old and healthy like a healthy 30 year old, you're wise at that yeah. Well then you have immense amount of life experience. You're not healthy anymore, but if you were 80 years old and healthy like a healthy 30 year old Your why is it that yeah? Well then you have immense amount of life experience totally and then if you live on under 100 years on top of value Oh my god. Oh so stupid when I was 80 back when I was 80. I thought I had it nailed But now that I'm 180 now I see the question is if your lifespan is expected to be 200 years Then do you work and tell you're 160? So does it just expand the stages that we're all going through now and you just work longer? Well it depends on what work is so if work is your love why not right? Literally if yeah, it really depends on what work is so if it's hard labor that doesn't sound fun I don't want to be at 800 year old roofer. It seems like cheese my hands are so good. I've lived to 1200 years You still got a long retirement. Ha ha Well, I think retirements out the window if you can stay healthy because the whole idea of retirement is like why we were retiring We were retiring because we hit our jobs. Yeah, okay. Well, maybe if you loved your job You wouldn't want to retire totally, you know George Carlin died on the road died in a hotel room I think in Las Vegas You know and you hear lots of stories of people working their entire careers Retiring and then promptly dying. Oh, yeah within six months They have a heart attack and they die and they had all these big plans and they just never see him through Yeah, and they just feel like the end is near and that the creeping doom The existential angst in the back of your head is probably contributing to a lot of your decay Yeah, because you've kind of like checked down You know that happens a lot with spouses You know the husband dies and the wife died shortly thereafter My grandparents my my grandmother died and my grandfather died within a year. Yeah Yep, that's what happens when the woman dies first. Yeah. Yeah. It's so much harder for the mandalip without her Is it yeah, I think so why is that I mean if you think of the all the old widows You know the women live my my grandpa died 15 years ago. My grandma's 93 Mm-hmm. She's still living. She's still going. That's interesting So she knew how to cook for herself and clean and things like that, but it had to be reversed I'm not sure that he would have lived that long. Mm maybe so Depends on the relationship So I've seen a lot of relationships with older couples where the woman becomes like the caretaker. Yeah I think dudes get dumber quicker when they get older No comment there's worn out by the time they hit 80 You know a lot of times the wife tells them thing like okay You got your right and then they just like fall into that role where the wife isn't charged of everything have you seen the stats of the The expected lifespan of a man that's married versus not married no, I Jamie I don't know these off the top of my head, but they've done studies that talk about Basically the lifespan extension that happens with men when they have a woman in their life. Is it longer? Yes Interesting. Yeah, well then when there's no woman then it's filled with cocaine and hookers Takes years off your life and lots of burgers and beer You know, you're not eating a salad right? It's loneliness is worse than cigarettes smoking. They found that totally Yeah loneliness is like one of the worst things that can happen to people yeah, and it you know Really the term spirituality is is it's kind of tainted in a lot of ways because there's a lot of goofy people that use that Like I'm not religious, but I'm spiritual like it's the term unfortunately has like a stink to it Yeah, but there is a connection that we have to each other that's not as simple as We would like to think like we need each other we need each other in very profound ways and It's it's actually important for survival. Yeah, and what that's why the worst thing they could do to imprison is put in solitary confinement We are a pack animal. Yeah We're we're supposed to be connected to each other and It's not a preference thing. That's why when someone says like I'm a loner I'm like, okay, well either you're the only one that's like that or you're full shit Or you like you want to pretend you're mysterious you like to be alone like we like we attribute strength to that like oh He doesn't need anybody and it's so hard now to build your tribe You no longer live where your grandparents and your parents lived you are out there on your own You're spending hours on your phone You have a community that you feel like is a community, but it's not you don't have you don't have a tribe anymore Yeah, and then people find their own tribes and usually they're political. Yeah, yeah They get ideological or religious, you know, you want to fit in yeah, yeah, yeah, and that's what we do I mean, that's why when you see so many people that are religious devotees like why are they willing to do that? Why they willing to wear those clothes? Why they willing to act that way? Well, it's because everyone's doing it and you want to be a part of it and there's like some some good feeling of community to where everyone's kneeling at the same time and saying the same things There's something to that that likes very profound Totally human beings and if it's directed in the wrong way it could be Incredibly destructive, but it's directed in the right way if it it's real ceremony and real worship and real openness to the cosmos and to to God and to Spirituality like real true real connection understanding real connection with the universe then it's probably a lot better than the way we're doing it 1,000 percent. I think that's why The psychedelics are coming back in such a huge way. It's people it's people accessing that part of themselves that have been shut down their whole lives Yeah, I'm glad you brought that up because I think that's the missing element and I think that's what probably was very prevalent in the ancient times and This is the work of Brian Murr rescue. I'm sure you know about this stuff the immortality key. Oh, yeah, yes I did so he I actually got super fortunate that my family and I were in Greece when he was gonna be in Greece and so I got a tour of Illissus with him. He took me there. Oh, he showed me all the different places and it feels so strange It feels so strange like you're standing in the place where these people had these Illissinian mystery ceremonies and it just feels weird like my family got a little weirded out because I was like holding on to I was like, did it feel good. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Definitely good. Like like a connection. It felt fucking strange Yeah, like I was holding on. I was I had my hand on this wall and my daughter was like, are you okay? I'm fine. I'm fine. I'm fine. I'm just I don't want to talk right now I just want to like see here and try to soak this in like is daddy upset like no, no, no, no, no, is that Like you're dad just like holding a rock Just stabilizing for a child They thought it was cool too, but you know, it's hard near 13 or 12 It's hard to like go. Oh my god. What a special place. They're like yep. Old old stuff. What do we? Like we took him to the museum in Athens and One of my daughters loves museums the other ones. They like couldn't be bothered So like the board by and all what I was like this is crazy like these people lived 2000 years ago and they made this stuff. I don't know if this is like how did they do this? Like what were they doing like what was this society like? Like this is to be able to just see the work of people That they've left behind and just imagine the amount of time that's taking place and then you put yourself back Into that timeline and like go we just assume that this way that we are this is how people are Because this is how people are today. It's so hard to put your mind into like what it's like And what it must have been like to live back then if you go to places Earlier this year. I went to Easter Island and Peru and both of them are described as The navels of the world You know, so they have these these origin myths in both of these places and when you're in these places You have different dreams. You sleep really well. You feel Just good. You feel like you're on peptides. You know, you just feel you're like oh my gosh I feel so healthy. I feel healed and you So the land itself where they built a lot of these ancient places is powerful You know, I don't think it's a coincidence that we see the moi and Easter Island built around this Absolutely incredible place or cusco which is such a beautiful place that you see these stone walls I think that they built there because of the energy that was there already What do you think was before that? And like what is this timeline? How far does it go back? Like what is the origin of sophisticated civilization? Like what is the year? When does it all start happening? I wonder sometimes if the purpose of building structures like that Is so people like you ask those questions? That's the whole point. Well, maybe. Is to Is to blow our minds and get us to think about Consciousness and the history of our species The fact that we're sitting there having this conversation is because of the stones that were built who knows how long ago Yeah, and maybe that was the point It certainly could have been a part of the point because what we're doing today when we talk about our society being sick and Superficial and silly all of our structures are temporary and they're ugly. Oh, some of her cool looking I think some of them. Yeah, they're cool. They're certainly not anchor what cool. Yeah, you know, they're cool But the point is like they're all Essentially temporary a thousand years from now none of them will exist. They will all be absorbed by the earth That's hard for people to understand if you're walking through Manhattan Like what's always bigger? Nope. Nope. Nope. It won't it won't if everybody just left And you came back five thousand years from now. They wouldn't be shit here. Yeah, so that at least me to this question The timeline that we're looking at if you're looking at pre-flood timeline, you know 11, 12,000 years ago things were sophisticated Maybe it's way longer than that because if you have a hundred thousand years of super sophisticated civilization What what does that look like? Yep, what do people look like then and this is one of the things that people are proposing when they Look at anatomically modern human beings so anatomically modern human beings and then not these Peru skulls Whatever just you and I are They've pushed that back now to one million years. Mm-hmm. So okay Why did it take so long before people just like you and I? figured out agriculture figured out civilization figured out cities What were we doing that time what what was going on and is it possible that it's just when you go back that far? You don't find anything. Yeah, you don't find anything that seems more likely to me and when you look at the immense erosion that Ben van Kirkwood has pointed out to the really the older stones in Egypt where you can clearly see they've built on top of them on the outside When you see this intense erosion like this is tens of thousands of years of erosion well, what if it's a hundred thousand? Yeah The fuck is left what if it's two hundred thousand? What's left from a hundred thousand years ago? maybe some stones myths In spiritual traditions or ten thousand years ago. That's the only thing that makes it through cataclysm The human stories spiritual traditions and these megalithic stones and a real cataclysm if you're talking about the destruction of civilization itself How many of those people even know the stories how many live how many scholars survive the apocalypse? How many I mean We know that 70,000 years ago the Toba volcano the Super volcano white people out down to the point with Less than a hundred thousand people on earth It's just 70,000 years ago. Right? 100,000 people. We have been on the brink so many times Can you imagine like one eagles football game? Right take that crowd. That's the entire population of earth now. Yeah, right One packed UT game That's everybody on earth and now we have to branch out and go to China and go to Africa and go everywhere That's all the people on earth. That just shows how amazing and resilient. We are Yeah, and also fragile. Yeah, you know and and also it really It really shines a light on the preposterous nature of the conventional timeline It really does because it's like look guys There's so much evidence that there's holes in the story. Yeah at what point in time do you stop and say look there are a lot of these people did great work and they Made these conclusions based on the understanding that they had at the time but As time has gone on there's Call point. We have to reevaluate this and if you don't reevaluate it You're gonna lose all the respect of the people that are paying attention Because there's too many people that are looking at this and saying hey No one's discounting or discrediting your work no one's saying you're a bad person You know, no one's saying you're an idiot So like this is what we knew back then But to say that this is all we know and any new information as profound as it might be like one point two Kilometer structures underneath the great pyramids Like that doesn't mean that you're an idiot It just means that this isn't ongoing thing. It's not done. Yep. We haven't figured it out yet And we're not going to for a long-ass time This is a long trek and as light are improves and as Radio tomography and all these different things that they come up with and then imagine the advances 10 20 30 years from now and their ability to look like look at sub-Saharan Africa Very little expeditions been done there and they're like what let's light our sub-Saharan Africa. There's whales there I've seen the whales whale. Yeah, okay, so you're incredible. What the fuck you find whales in the desert Okay, what else is out there? Yeah, is there a city under all that shit? Like what is that like what? What is in there? You know, it's funny though You can reveal cities under the jungle and nobody talks about it. Right You know, they just did that in Cambodia And it's not headline news around the world that their entire cities being found in the Amazon jungle or in Cambodia It just is one quick headline and then everybody ignores it. Well, it's good for us because it gives us great podcast content You know, it's like just the only way people could find out about it and again It's science the light are scans of the Amazon are spectacular Incredible and you look at it and you go oh my god There was probably millions of people living here This is not like a bunch of tribal people that are shooting bows and arrows all the time. They were engineering the rainforest Yeah, and it's just the fact that more people aren't talking about this is a little stunning to me But I just think they don't get informed and then they also assume You know, you see some YouTube headline. It's got big fancy font and you know people are older than we think like I'll go on I went to Cambridge fuck off and you have a lot of AI stuff out there. That's just complete focus Yeah, yeah, you know, it's hard to know what What the truth is sure and then there's a lot of weird stuff like the sage wall in Montana I've watched some videos on that. I'm not convinced. I think that might be a weird geological Formation yeah, but it doesn't look like it parts of it really look like it stacks stones I think that you know during the ice age in North America It was an extremely harsh time With walls of ice right so if if the younger dryest happened the way that I believe it happened North America would have been just almost wiped clean Yeah, if so if there were ancient structures here They probably didn't survive the way that they did in Egypt and other places like that Certainly not under the glacier, right? Well, I just found which fun. I see the bill of the desert here. Yeah, I'm gonna zoom in Desert desert desert desert right right Until whoa An ancient fortress. How old is it? I've dropped How old did they say it is? No one knows what it is Yeah, they they assuming that maybe There's a hiding place for Jews when they were being persecuted and taken out of there, but according to this No explanation. It's just in the middle of desert Whoa, sand straw and clay. Wow Just in the mic book of the dunes. I don't fit didn't just go on blowing. Imagine deciding to build there No, why did they build what else is around it? Yeah, you know what's hiding underneath next to it God, what did it look like? When it was first built and was it made out of sand? Don't what does it may know? It said sand and clay Which means it's probably it probably is newer Yeah, I'm sure Bob. I might wear like a hiding under the desert and then just in the middle of nowhere and no one I've never heard of it being brought up on here by anybody that's one big sandstorm and that thing's gone Right buried Look at all the sand With the crazy thing is think that that sand was all jungle and before that it was ocean. I know this It's so insane seeing the whales in the middle of the desert is this surreal experience surreal Have you seen them in person? Yeah. Oh? Yeah, what is that like how close they let you get? You just walk right up to them. There's just like little rocks on the ground outlining the skeletons. Yeah, wow It's you know when we were driving out there. They were they had securities concerns So we had a security car in front of ours then ours and one behind us look how bonkers that is yeah It looks like dragons It's just otherworldly. It's so neat It's so crazy. It's a long drive though. It's like a whole day Well the dragons thing is a weird one. Yeah, because there's this is one of the things that the view made fun of me off Said he believes in dragons Joy they are was in that so I put I changed all of the headings of my social media account dragon believer Because like that's so funny But you and millions of other people around the world and almost every ancient civilization Yeah, believed in dragons. It's very odd. It's very odd that they all have the story of these ancient serpents but but also they were really bad at their depictions of actual things and One of the things that I pointed out to Jamie was when I visited Italy a few years ago I went to this really old church and they had this stone mosaic artwork that was of Noah and Was it no in the whale? No Jonah Jonah Jonah in the whale. I think that's what it was But this whale does not look like a whale. It looks really weird. It's this really weird-looking thing That's supposed to represent a whale why because they never saw a whale so like they're they're making their own version of what What stories right yeah, see if you find that. I know it's on my Instagram Super old. I think it was probably 10 years ago But whatever the fuck that is like okay, that's how they that's it like look at that thing in that dope That doesn't look like a whale right at all right? Yeah, but it looks like a Griffin. Yeah, it looks like Some kind of a monster that was in the ocean So this is like their version of describing what a whale looks like right? So when they're describing dragons like What are they really describing? Did they actually fly or are we talking about like crocodiles? Like what are we talking about are we talking about like some sort of extinct dinosaurs that survived and Then you know they only made it for a few thousand years ago Because there's things that we know existed during the human timeline that they just don't exist anymore They went extinct. Yeah, you know giant sloths for instance is a bunch of North American animals 65% in fact of all North American megafauna didn't make it after the younger dryest impact Yep, so what is what is the serpent? What is the dragon? Like what it? Why is why did China have one? Why does Japan have one? Why does Eastern European have one? Why why so many ancient cultures talk about this one specific thing? Yeah, and the Bible references it like 34 times what's interesting though is in most of the ancient civilizations the Serpents or the dragons are meant to be guardian figures Right, so they were presented in a positive light. They weren't evil right? But in the Bible the serpent is actually the trickster You know, so it's it's one of the only traditions in the ancient world where the serpent is It's suggested that the serpent is evil evil In front of the Eve And yeah, yeah, you know he tricked Eve Yeah, but in front of all of the temples in Cambodia There are giant naga which is like the seven or nine headed snakes and they guard the liminal space between the outside world and the temples So that that's their purpose right there when you see a naga it means you're entering You're entering a temple. You're entering the zone of the gods So it was always positive except for in ancient Christianity The king's James version is a version that says dragon, but it's probably a translation issue maybe Interesting so sea monster serpent translated in many modern versions has jackal sea creature or monster depending on the context But dragon often renders Hebrew terms like Tanin Which is a sea monster certain interesting Fire breathing reptiles, but it's just like what were they like? Why were there so many versions of this was that a real thing? And is it a real thing from 11,000 years ago? Is it real thing from 20,000 years ago? 50,000 years ago and again when it comes to the fossil record Like how much evidence would there be of that thing existing? Right they didn't even find dinosaurs until like what the 1700s or something right yeah Whenever it was and then there's a lot of people to think dinosaurs are fake which is fun There's all sorts of rabbit holes you can go down Well, they have a point In that a lot of what you go to see in the museum is not an actual dinosaur skeleton It's a recreation totally. Yeah because the actual skeletons are probably somewhere else That is a fact and then it's also the fact that they take like portions of it and then they recreate what's missing and then create a skeleton Make a lot of assumptions. Yeah, there's a lot of assumptions. Yeah. Well, this is why in the The science museum in Bozeman Montana we talked about this for I went there with my kids once and they have a raptor and on one side of the raptor It's what we think of like from Jurassic Park that it had like scaly skin like a lizard and the other side It's covered in feathers the bird which is yeah, this is the alternative perspective. This is Gus the most complete Dinus of Tytey rex skeleton 61% complete and it is for sale right now. Oh how much does that cost? Do you want to guess? 20 yeah, no more more taking it's the bids are going up 80 million. Yeah, I mean That's the I think the expected is somewhere in the 65 to 80 million range. Wow In 60% complete 61% so that means you're getting 39% bullshit when you buy it I think they've just left some of it out. Oh They've filled it in all okay, so that's what's left. That's actually what so there's some stuff missing Doesn't that just little arms he does they're right there see some Okay, some some stuff yeah some ribs and shit. I looks pretty. I don't know. It looks pretty complete That looks pretty complete. That's sick. There was a house that I looked at that was for sale in Malibu once and In the house they it came with a dinosaur if you paid an extra million dollars you get to keep the dinosaur Really yeah, they had a raptor skeleton. That seems expensive Is a little high. Well the house is a little high It was probably with 50 bucks now. Nobody wants to live there I think a lot of times about what it would feel like to be hunted from the sky Right the terectals. Yeah, sometimes you'll be hiking in the desert and you'll see a you know a hawk will fly over you and you'll get that shadow Yeah, it just imagine if it's just this massive Hunter just coming for you nothing you can do right when do those die off to? Gus has some bite marks on his ribs Oh That's crazy. I wonder if that's postmortem fossilized bite marks. Yeah, that could have been somebody scavenging him. Yeah Could have been so Trinity is so the so It's valued between 20 million and 30 million the highest presale estimate ever placed on the dinosaur at auction Yeah, I think there's very some higher bids than that though currently I bet there's a lot of dorks out there with a lot of money Want that shit in the house? People love to touch history. Yeah, Elon's probably gonna have that shit at SpaceX Oh do you want to touch some history? Yeah, sure. Yeah, okay. I brought you a little Show-and-tell okay Exciting So I grew up in western Nebraska On a giant corn farm This is called a Jimmy Allen point This is 9500 years old. Wow. It's a spear point. So it was being chipped Basically when go backly tippy was at the height of its building 8500 to 9500 years old My grandpa had a load of rock delivered to his house and that was in it So they would dredge this this river rock from the rivers the plot river and deliver it to your house and he found that in his yard Holy shit Isn't that an incredible experience? That's amazing. That's amazing. I don't know how old this one is, but this is From here. Oh, yes That's a pretty good one. This is actually better This one's really that one's substantially older than this Yeah, I bet this is 2000 years old that one's almost 10. That's crazy. So I'm gonna show you something else It's just a part of one, but this is part of a fulsome point Which is 12,700 years old so that was definitely Created to hunt something that's extinct now You can see the flu up the middle and look at the work on the sides of it Wow That's crazy It's the most incredible Stonework and you see that over time it went from Clovis to Fulsome and then down the line to points like this and it just you know became Yeah, so those are this would have looked like that if it was full Wow You're seeing the central flute on this one But both of these were found out on my farm. That's pretty amazing. Yeah. I saw you talking to Taylor Sheridan about Arrowheads and I thought to myself wonder if Joe would like to hold a 9500 year old spear point. I did love it Thank you. Thank you. Let me hold that. That's pretty dope It's pretty incredible too when you think about the history of North America that when Europe and China and all these other parts of the world that had developed sophisticated Civilizations and machines and all these different things and these people were living a very nomadic hunter-gatherer life Like essentially in the stone age all the way up to the 16 1700s until Except for some of the mounts So some of the mountain structures like in Louisiana. I think those are About 9,000 years old. I believe and those are massive platforms, right? Like earthworks that are almost At least unexplainable for why they would have built them And that was pretty old blood. I don't I don't think any of them have been dated to pre-flood So this is post-flood whoever was here So if people lived here, so the White Sands New Mexico footprints are all pre-flood. That's 23,000. Yep One thing's interesting those people were barefoot, right? So The question is like what was Sophisticated civilization like in North America then because it seems like North America in particular Because of the fact that up until 11,000 years ago was covered in ice most of North America was covered in like a mile high of ice It's so hard for us to think Chicago gone can you imagine yeah gone Montana gone? Yeah, everything's gone Colorado gone Everything's completely covered in a mile of ice and then 11,000 years ago. It all goes away real quick And then you have the Great Lakes Yeah, which is so strange and then if you look at Randall Carlson's done an amazing job of like Sort of Illuminating like what kind of a mass of water it would have sent rushing Through the entire country Yeah, at the time that these things were almost instantaneously melted like how insane that must have been if huge Asteroidal impacts slammed into these ice caps. Yeah, two miles of ice looks like next to a city. Oh my god That's so crazy That everything that we see when you drive through Kansas and Nebraska and Iowa all that was under all that Yeah, my husband's from North Idaho and you can see the all of the ancient remains of these lakes You know these ice dams that burst. Yeah, just float over the landscape and And all that. Yeah. My husband's from North Idaho. And you can see all of the ancient remains of these ice dams that burst. Yeah. Just float over the landscape. And I think Randall Carlson is especially gifted in describing these events, making it real for us. Well, he's obsessed. Yeah. And he spent so much. When I met him, I met him in Georgia. Well, I did a show in Atlanta. I met him like 2005 or something like that. And he was explaining it to me back then. And I had never heard that before. I was like, what? Yeah. That was my first introduction to the younger, dry, as impact theory. And that's when it started putting all the pieces together. OK, well, that's what ended civilization. And now that we know that that's a real event. Because of course, samples, because they've been fun. They find layers of iridium, which is very common in space, very rare on earth. And these micro diamonds that appear when you have impacts. The black mat. Mm-hmm. Yeah. They know that it happened. So some big events happened. I think that they think 11,800 years ago, and I think again, like 10,000 years ago, they think it happened more than once. Yeah. What kind of makes sense that it took so long for civilization every emerge? Yeah. And the question is, did that civilization that was alive at the time know that it was coming? Right. And what did they do to prepare? Right. Or could they be? And did they know that probably the only thing that was going to be left after that is stone? So what is encoded in that stone for us to read today? Yeah. That's the weirdness of things like Egypt when you look at the pyramids and the dimensions and how the dimensions align with the dimensions of earth and the distance is the moon. And yeah, it's all. The whole thing is very weird. It's very weird. Doesn't seem like coincidence. No. It seems like they knew exactly what they were doing. And what is the one language that's going to survive geometry, math, astrology? Right. It's universal. Stones are the things that are going to survive myths. So it's messages being passed down to us today. And now people are looking and paying attention. And it's a complete obsession for me. I don't know how anybody thinks of anything else besides ancient history. What's like an into-I feel the same way? It's just one way of saying. Yeah. I mean. It's too amazing. It's certainly a puzzle. And if it wasn't for people like you and other people that are doing similar things, most people would be very blissfully unaware of how nuts the actual physical history of the earth is. Yeah. Yep. And until recently, a lot of this, first of all, people couldn't travel around the world. They couldn't read scripts that weren't in their language. Archaeologists were exploring sites and their papers were going to the universities. And so we didn't have the opportunity to see these global patterns the way that we do now. To link, OK, I see the same thing in Egypt that I see in India. Like this 1,000 ton statue was in India. And it's also in Egypt. What about these walls? They're the same. I don't think it was as easy to do that back in the day. Even the people that were deep into the research in Egypt in the 1800s, they weren't traveling to Peru. So we are at a very unique time in history where we can look across all of it, especially in the next 10 years when we're leveraging AI and other technologies from space-based scanning or whatever. I think it's going to fundamentally change the way that we view the history of the world. I think so too. And so thank you. Thank you for being here. Thank you for your channel. And thank you for all of your interest in this, because it's absolutely fascinating. Thank you for having me on. This was so fun. My pleasure. Let's do it again. OK. We love that. All right. Thank you. Bye, everybody.