Louis welcome back, bro. Hey, man. How you doing? Good to be here. Good man I'm excited to have you back to talk about some of it's going on. Oh, yeah all around Mexico and South America and it seems like no one's paying attention to it right now But you have had you've been balls deep in cartel world. Yeah, dude I mean, I don't know if luckily or what but it's just the way things goes, you know I'm so supposed to be reporting the whole region like Latin America But Mexico is keeping me so busy right now. It's it's so wild. What is happening in Mexico and what is about to happen? Yeah Yeah, and like I was showing you last night We got the the tridents from my boy Manny whose godfather is Felix Rodriguez Doing gonna be going to talk too soon. Hopefully that will be massive Dude, I mean, I mean I've been after Felix Rodriguez for a while I published this story about the involvement of the CIA in the murder of Kiki Kamarena back in 1997 the first time I published that story was in 2013 in a Mexican magazine called processo before several years before the documentary that it's now showing on Amazon and And I try to get a hold of Felix, but he's a shadowy man I mean, it's it's hard to get a hold of him, right? You see him you've seen him like once every now like On on interviews regarding the killing of Chekevara and his operations in Cuba and Bolivia in South America But he's never really talked about Mexico, right? And why he did in Mexico back in the 80s would be Massive right if we can get hold of him like, you know Yeah, one one of the first documentaries you pointed out to me before we you first came on the show was that documentary called I think it was the last narc. Yeah, was it with With a freak out the guy was but he basically they found out somehow that there was a Cuban guy in the room when they were torturing Kiki and The Cuban guy was most likely Felix. Yeah, I mean, that's what sources say all the time right? And there is like available transcripts of that recording whether torturing Kiki gamma Reina But I don't know for some reason the file that I mean the audio files have never been out they I mean Several officials also say that they don't exist that those tapes are fake. They don't really exist and isn't fucking rumor But there are transcripts of the whole call The thing is the transcripts they don't identify anyone right on on the room They kind of like identify kara kintero. I'll actually but then again kara kintero Because an old man he's always denied that he actually did something to hurt Kiki gamma Reina Everybody's denying it. He's involved their involvement in right whole Kiki gamma Reina case right right? And Felix so Felix was brought Into the CIA I think like leading up to the Bay of Pigs right when they were training a bunch of the key Cubans or the Cuban Americans to like basically go over there and invade and fight. Yeah exactly He was like he was a massive operator, right? He was a he's a Cuban that That used to know his country so well But he was actually working for the US government with the CIA as an asset because he knew the region He knew the language and he was extremely I mean skilled for what he had to do. I mean he found It taken about right and believe yeah, so he was like he was like skilled man Yeah, yeah, yeah, hey guys Just wanted to drop in real quick to let you know that on the back end of this YouTube channel It says that 70% of the viewers have not yet hit the subscribe button So if you enjoyed this podcast and you want to see more underground investigative episodes like this one I want to ask you a favor and that's to simply hit the subscribe button below this video by doing this You're enabling the podcast to get in front of and reach more people Which allows this thing to sustain itself and helps us to get more strange and interesting guests on the show So if you all just do me the favor and subscribe to the YouTube channel I promise to keep making these episodes better every single week. Thank you all. I love you. I'm back to the show Yeah, he was training the people in Mexico the gorillas right to go fight over in Nicaragua. Yeah, so what was happening there is that The the US government through the CIA had this arrangement with Mexican criminal organizations They weren't still called cartels back then back in the 80s the deal was you train our people in the use of arms and You know fire weapon all that's all that stuff so they go and fight in central America against the communism And we'll let you a free pass for planes airplanes packed with cocaine into the US right that was the deal The first time I reported this story I met Tasha Plumlee a great pilot out of New Mexico and He showed me a lot of like his paperwork for all the stuff he did with the CIA He wasn't charged of bringing these loads of cocaine and private small planes Sometimes there were like small saysness Across the border from a ranch in Berakruz and several other places in Mexico back to the US and at the same time kara quintero migail anglefelix que ardo and Ernesto foncica those guys where they had of what was called the Guadalajara Federation, right? And they were training people they were training all these Mexican hunchmen to go and fight In central America. I don't think they actually knew what was really happening in the the broader scope You know that like they were fighting the contrast and there was I think they knew Is that they needed to train armed people to go and fight in central America? But probably they didn't understand who was behind the whole thing because that was one of the main Things that Felix was known for right? So for for keeping a low profile on the CIA's you know like no No paper trail no money trail all that kind of stuff So for Felix probably went to these guys like kara quintero and and and Felix and basically said we want to Train our guy. He didn't say he was CIA He probably just said we want to train your guys to fight Yeah, what I think it's yeah, I mean probably Felix just sold the version that He had a way to keep bringing cocaine into the US. It's a free pass It's probably she probably said like you know what I'm up. I'm a huge trafficker So drop it on the guan or whatever and I'm I can help you out So I have connections so we can bring a lot of airplanes So when the Mexican criminal organizations are like okay, this is a free pass actually working They didn't give a shit what do they have to pay or what I have to deal with in order to do that their eyes are on the target They're for money. Yeah, exactly so they're probably saying just train these people We need I need an army. I need a prisoner army. Whatever. I'm fighting another criminal organizations. Whatever Central America and so just train a lot of my people so they're like yes We'll train your people to use of arms whatever if you keep letting us, you know and that's where Kiki Kamerena this former D.A. agent Shut up. He found First this huge property where they were harvesting weed marijuana in in Chihuahua the biggest plantation they've ever found ever But also he found these ranches where they were training these armed people and He was about to call on his boss. He has he had asked for a meeting with These D.A. Supervisor called cookin doll. He's the only one who has never done any interview When it comes to that story. He was the supervisor who was Kiki Kamerena supervisor So so he's someone knows that what really happened is cookin doll, but he even sued the production company of the Last North for how they portrayed his role in the whole thing really so he's been out of it like He's been out of every story his mention because he's the main guy who was the supervisor where he knows what happened And he's never never never talked about it. So I don't know That's also kind of like sketchy right because you will you will come out and say like yeah my agents were working good Whatever Kiki Kamerena requested a meeting to tell me something before he was kidnapped and eventually killed This guy his supervisor. He was in the office when Kiki got kidnapped He was he wasn't the office and Kiki Kamerena was kidnapped Right in front of the head fraudters going to lunch right? Yeah, I mean exactly. Yeah Yeah, is this guy still alive? Cookin doll. Yeah, I think he is really Yeah Probably between him and Felix they had the whole fucking truth, you know of what happened if they're gonna Tell the truth like sometimes I don't know like they're probably gonna die before they actually yeah Felix is getting old man. He's like well like hey something right. Yeah, he's in his late 80s and he can either be I box around with the cane apparently and They're on very slow and don't he needs to he looks to come clean before he leaves this world dude Just to know I Mean he's probably he was probably I mean it's probably true that he could say like I wasn't even there Hmm, I swear to god whatever we'll take a Bible Dude, it's crazy. Let's like what we were saying last night It's like the olden days of when the the Guadalajara Federation controlled everything It seemed like it was a much more smooth operation way less bloodshed than what it is now with all the factions that are Competing for power down there in Mexico right now so right now in Mexico What is the dynamic and the power structure of the cartels? Is it mainly just the synoloa cartel and the new generation cartel? Yeah, well basically those are the this is what changed through these years since the 80s probably Card back then they were basically or Korean organization the work cartels They were drug cartels. I don't think it's accurate to call them truck or tell anymore We keep hearing the same thing over the news right like drug cartels is probably the easiest way To make people to seem to always simplify what these criminalizations are but I don't think it's accurate at all because they're not just drug cartels back then Felix Ayad on all these dudes they were trafficking drugs and that was the their their whole business right that they don't have any other business But these criminal organizations right now that we're dealing with today They're everything but drug cartels drug is just one revenue stream from a huge Array of different revenues they get like very involved in extortion. They're involved in kidnapping. They're involved in monopolizing they're involved in Basically the sites of corruption right like let's say You want to you're running to be a local president for a municipality in Mexico You want to win so the cartel shows up with you said like okay, you want to win this thing we can put a lot of money and Get you a lot of boats So you win the election but in order After you get elected what you're gonna do with us is you're gonna give us all the contracts for construction for constructing hospitals roads Schools new development all that stuff because that's a way they're gonna make money out of it on these semi-legal Things right there. Monopolizing water. They're monopolizing gold mines. They're monopolizing a lot of like natural resources all over Mexico now they're all over with the immigration. They're basically handling The whole illegal immigration path and networks in Mexico and Central America So they're everywhere where there is money to be made But cocaine is still like 80% of the revenue, right? Yeah cocaine is pretty large still But I'm not I'm not sure if I will call cocaine It's still a main revenue for them. I think it's a study even called a main rep No, I think it's a steady revenue probably the most steady revenue they have But when you talk when you have things like fentanyl which is huge revenue for them I think that that's that's this placing the revenue from cocaine Cocaine right now. It's at its lowest price per kilo in the US. I thought I saw a story I talked I've talked about it on this podcast recently actually I thought I saw a story somewhere where one of the bosses of the Sinaloa Cartel put out some sort of message to all of the other bosses or people that were working in the cartel saying that if they caught anybody Mixing fentanyl in the cocaine they'd be executed or something and there was like signs or something they put out Yeah, yeah If you if you take into account that they make public these This announcement It's not for their henchmen, right? Because they have private communication to have private waste of communicate with the other Organizations and stuff without making the public They have Walkies they have means to reach every other member of the organization to tell them there's a ban, right? But the fact that they make it public Says that they're talking to us Right to be pro to media. It's propaganda exactly that's what they leave banners So that's what they leave like bodies with a small mountain of fentanyl pills So that's literally to this mark to unmark themselves from the whole industry saying like not where the good guys were Enforcing side by side with you guys US and Mexico government were working all together to stop the fentanyl production Let's bullshit. They're just moving kitchens to other places right now. I'm equal to Sinoloa It's really hard to find a laugh a Fenton a laugh in Sinoloa, right? Because there's a lot of operations that want to be you know like on the spot and that stuff This is the article Sinaloa cartels message message to members stop making fentanyl or die crime crime group yields to Intensifying US law enforcement pressure and is kidnapping or killing producers who defy the man Is there a picture of the banners that they're posting? Oh, no, it's a paid it's a paywall Yeah, but this is all propaganda. This is just to get the media attention. That's that's what it was intended for, right? Right articles like this. Yeah, so everybody says like okay They want the US media attention. That's what they want right they reach out to journalists that we talked to Maximum officials they put out banners on folks that they think they think this is gonna make flashy news Headlines, you know the next day and we all fall for it I mean of course my editor tells me like hey do you want to write a story? And I'm like, okay, let me just call some of these contacts I happen in Aloha to see what they say what they feel of course everybody said like did its bullshit where I mean Everybody's still you know cooking fentanyl. It's just a way to make it look like The organization is not involved anymore Because even rivals like the guys in Tijuana right the Ariana Felix organization They've been rivals forever with a with a Chappito's faction with us in Aloha cartel. Are they still legitimate? There's still around. I mean it's not handled by the main family members Up there's still around the organization kept the name But it's just new players right left salt leftovers of probably the leftovers. No But even so they also set up banners at Liberty, Wana saying like yeah We support or Arrivals initiative of banning fentanyl also on our territory in Tijuana So we find fentanyl whatever but if you go to the quantity it's so easy to get a hold of these M30 fake Oxies or fake pills, you know, which are all Laced with fentanyl so It hasn't stopped I mean the fentanyl trade hasn't stopped it hasn't even wind down. It's it's the huge They just moved the kitchens. I wrote a story about the kitchens Being moved to boba that in Colombia. They started moving the whole thing to small apartments in boba that to some loose But they'll see so they're different Mexican states The clearly what's happening So where the cartels are right now like you like you just mentioned they're not just drug cartels anymore They are multinational empires exactly. Yes, they're they're they're controlling Many states or countries in South America Mexico. How many total countries are they? Dude, I mean I guess I don't know do it. I mean it's gotta be because because again You have to understand these these are like criminal enterprises or criminal insurgents right? They're huge and they're not vertical There's not like a single boss and then a bunch of people. They're like more horizontal organizations with with smaller verticals Tears, you know you have a boss and then probably four guys and then below You know, but for the most part they're horizontal organizations very dynamic So you kill one they've moved another one if you arrest one Just the next one pops up, but the organization keeps at it, right? So that means When you try to identify what is and or who is a member of my cartel It's kind of hard because they all lady who is a lookout on on a corner For the cartel is she part of the cartel or is she just getting? You know 20 bucks a month to make a call whenever she sees something strange What they call cartel they themselves? The people who call themselves cartel are just the henchmen they armed people When you go to the in a lower to with the guys of the Jalisco or new generation whenever What we see as the armed branch of an organization? That's what they call cartel so if you sell like if you exactly basically see cannulas and when I interviewed people that are managing the organization that are in charge of money or attorneys or making decisions They hate it when you call them cartel members like right so so your cartel member they're like no no I'm part of the organization right of the Cinaloa organization. Yeah, they could tell it's just the arm branch of or organization That's how they see it and I think that's probably when we were having a hard time to identify what is could tell who represents a cartel Again the buyers of the whole thing of the drugs even if they pay up with money or they paying with arms are in these by of the border right They're on the US or the US I mean that's that's where the drugs are intended to come so Most of the buyers are on the US side of the border So are they could tell members or are they part of the organization or are they just clients like it's hard to tell who it like the boundary? So what we call a criminal enterprise right? Because when you think about like let's think about like a proper enterprise like let's think about coca cola Right you have a blow ease and then you have a buyer on Large scale so they say like okay. I'm a distributor for you Do they work for coca cola or they just distributors? How does that mean how does that play out in the agreement of world? The whole thing is to get arms or money from the US and drugs into the US so you need a buyer even before you start cooking or buying If you want to get into it like as an independent Well, your first need is a client right someone who's already buying your shit So you will go to LA or Miami or whatever And find a buyer and he said like hey man have the capability to bring you 10 kilos of cocaine purest quality whatever and when that presents a gree and it says like okay Yes, let's do it then you go to your source and then source yourself and make money within that transaction But then that's literally how the whole world of draw traffic in works Right so there's a bunch of them representing the cartel or the criminalization on these are the border Usual buyers usual distributors people that knows What arms they need back in Mexico You know where to source them and they're also making money out of it or collecting the whole money for the Criminalizations or laundering money through hotels through real estate through a bunch of different Industries and they are part of the organization right there are probably the most important part of the fucking organization They're not Right right there are kind of the shots, but they're handling the money they're handling The whole part of the operation that makes a criminalization work. They're like the sales team exactly. Yeah Yeah So right now basically what we have in Mexico. It's this dynamic very dynamic operation between criminal enterprises or criminal insurgencies that they work Very they work side by side with the Mexican government as well in terms of corruption in terms of getting rid of rivalry or even political rivals, you know these past federal elections we have the most violent election Process in in Mexico's history. There were over 19 Candidates killed all over Mexico. What was fucking wild? It was I think two years ago Two or three years ago actual presidential candidates Not all presidential political candidates. Yeah, like state state governors local municipal May years presidential candidates. It was wild it and that it that only shows you that a political The political aspect of Mexico. It's not only political anymore It's also criminal. They're embedded right because the order of these hits Why else will Acertail or a criminalization going kill a politician if they don't have stakes in politics right So that means they work side by side and right now there are two main factions. We did this in a lower cartel with the civil law organization with a bunch of different factions And the Carte de Halisco no breaking starting to break into little factions as well Those are the main ones. Not the only ones. There are still the Setas be a squela which is a branch of the old setas cartel, right? You have the cartel del Gault for cartel del Noreste You have a you even have the worst ones are on the east coast, right? Yeah, I mean, I don't think they they are like On the east coast because they really operate in whole Mexico, but they have stronger stakes on the east coast because that's where You have the biggest international ports seaports With the precursors arms monologue coming in right they're coming in from the Gulf They're coming from from I'm sorry from the west coast So you have All the coast of Sinoloa and all the coast of Michoacan And so that's where the Two main cartels are based or operating probably more strongly And then you have the north east part of Mexico in Tamil Liebass, Mowelion You have the Carte del del Noreste which is a strong cartel also a branch of the setas And then on the southern part of Mexico. You have these really interesting new development which is a An indigenous cartel. They're called Carte del Chamola Chamola. It's an indigenous community from southern Mexico Maya descendent and they formed their own cartel like their own criminal organization to fight against the Kalizco fight against the Sinoloa cartel and To handle their own their own shit and they communicate on these million Language between each other and you have to be a Chamola in order to be part of the Chamola cartel So you do the dynamics of the criminal decisions in Mexico are wild and are ever changing So it's really hard to put a black and white thing on them like these are the good guys the bad guys These are the most violent. These are you know the main ones because there's a bunch of them if you even if you talk about Just a single organization like this in a local tell there's a bunch of factions you have Major some bad ass faction you have Los Chapito's faction you used to have the mini leak or the Damasos faction You used to have Los Rousos faction, right? So you have a button you have different smaller families like Los Salazar Los Casa is Terre Terre Terre Terre so you have a bunch of different families and When you talk about the Garre Jalisco no In the city of San Francisco, they are a single brand but right now it's breaking down into the Harineros And it's a ratata are like different other like smaller players that are trying to break their own branch of the same Reconcation that's interesting what you said about the the indigenous cartel and southern Mexico We just had a guy on here a couple months ago or maybe two months ago this guy named Luke who Explorers southern Mexico and south Meso like Meso America Central America and He basically explores all these hidden cities and there is like Millions of miles of hit uncharted cities in the jungle down there. It's southern Mexico and Central America And he says like sometimes when you go out to like these temples He's like they're guarded by armed cartel members Because these guys will loot those places looking for gold and shit and looking for treasure and artifacts and And pottery and artwork and they'll sell on the black market for tons of money 100% true man. Yeah, and that's not that was that's what I was telling like these guys are not dealing with drugs They have a branch that it's looking for gold that are looking for gold or silver or Ancient artifacts, you know, to sell like to traffic and all that stuff And that's literally how it works. The thing is This cream organizations are gonna be around Like flies around shit when there's money to be made, right? When you go to places like the sea of Cortez in in bahakali, fornia beautiful sea and you have a huge you have a season where a lot of Jellyfish come out come up, right? So that's that's not working for tourism and shit. So the local fishermen they start like fishing all these Jellyfish and there was interest by the by a couple of Companies in Taiwan to buy all the jellyfish from them Which is they eventually they hydrate them treat them with salt and sell it to China because it's a Luxury food in real China So when a cartel learn about that they're like, okay, so you're making literally millions of Of dollars out of yellow fish that we don't use in Mexico Okay, we're in so they they started going in the synalog or so particularly by threatening local fishermen they killed one and they burned a couple of of the Trailers where they moved the jellyfish just to To make a statement and say like hey, you're not you're not gonna deal directly with these Taiwanese Companies we are gonna be in the middle. We're gonna buy from you super cheap There's there's no permission for anyone to go out into the sea without our permission You need to ask us for permission to go and feed jellyfish before you do So we know how many exactly you got out of the sea And we have control of the whole operation. We're gonna make money out of it So they multiply the whole yellow fish business now in their little cup of parasite to any sort of fucking money-making operation exist down there Like it's a communism. Yeah. Yeah Little what I wonder what China uses the jellyfish for they did it they eat jellyfish. Yeah. Yeah. They they they hydrate the yellow fish They treated with salt And they eat it like like like a delicacy. Yeah. It's like that looks it. Yeah. It's like it's like a fine photo. I wonder if it tastes good I These President butter and jellyfish sandwich Seems to be like super salty. I mean that's what I've been told that it's super extremely salty Probably not not tasting good for us, but um jellyfish is eaten in China and other Asian countries and China Jellyfish is eaten as a delicacy in many ways including in salads a part of cold appetizers and marinated dish. No Doesn't look bad I bet you with some soy sauce, but you're pretty good. I'm not sure man because if it's ill-brady salty We imagine that even with like soy sauce. Oh, yeah, that might be too salty dehydrated and pickled with sesame oil and salad. I want to try some now Yeah, I'm not I'm not so real. Yeah, it's fine to the fishermen were making millions of dollars harvesting these jellyfish Yeah, and now they're being taxed by the cartels exactly just as that was what happened with the I mean Is it a fair is it a fair tax or is it a tax that literally like crystals their business literally these these past season? They lost the whole season because they couldn't pay them. I'm saying is it a fair tax like that. Yeah, it's fair. It's fair Biggie fairs you would be unfair. That's there's the whole fair game They couldn't pay them saying is it a fair tax like that's a fair. It is a 20% fair Be that's there's no fair game Yeah, so it's so it's wild They had to stop the whole season because they they didn't want to deal with with the cartels right there were too afraid Let's wild What's up guys? I'm super psyched to introduce to you another product that I've been using for years now That was also recommended to me by the world renowned nutritional scientist Dr. Dominic Dagestino and it is called keto brains keto brains. Keto brains. Neutropic creamer is a way to perfectly dial in your morning Beverage to bring you razor sharp focus on demand. I start out every day with keto brains in my cup of coffee to combat the midday slump And I use it for pre-workout keto brains. Neutropic creamer has efficacious doses of focus-inducing Alpha GPC Lions main alpha way promoting Eltheanine and ketones stimulating C8 MCT powder and all of those high functioning Neutropics are packed into a delicious Creamy coconut powder. It tastes amazing. It's a keto Neutropic powerhouse and it tickles all the right neurotransmitters to give you the flow and Jitter-free energy with absolutely zero crash. There's no dosage tricks involved It's just one scoop is a full serving you can put it in your coffee your tea Put it in your water whatever you want and you get 30 full doses per package There's no pills and there's absolutely no waiting for it to work it kicks in like that You can keep your brain razor sharp primed and ready for action with keto brains and neutropic creamer Whether you're an entrepreneur juggling multiple projects a student studying for exams or you're an athlete That's trying to optimize your training keto brains will not let you down all right here I'm gonna list all the ingredients contained in keto brains and what they do it increases keto production via AG C8 MCT powder it increases the seedling and HGH production via 300 milligrams of alpha GPC It increases GABA and alpha wave production via 250 milligrams of Elthienine and it increases BDNF and NGF via 500 milligrams of lion's main mushrooms and these are all carefully sourced and third-party tested ingredients This stuff quite literally increases acute brain function Protect your brain and mitochondria long term and last but not least it makes your coffee delicious If you're interested in keto brains and you want to get a big discount Just go to the link in the description below keto brains.com and use the promo code Danny 20 when you check out again That's keto brains.com Hit the link below and use the promo code Danny 20 at checkout back to the show I spoke with one of these fish men and he's like dude I'm too scared to go out and you know I was who's gonna ask for permission and how's that gonna work and if you're in the middle and You know they think that they're your brick bripping them off and so like no You call it more yellow face than what you're telling me whatever So it was like too afraid well didn't you just do a story about some farmers who were getting Exported they were basically taxing them so much and the farmers got to a point where it's like They're not making enough money on harvesting whatever it was they were The avocados they weren't making enough money so where they either had to Die fighting against the cartel or die a starvation because they weren't gonna make any money Yeah, this is this has been happening in Mexico for a while every super bowl season the US consumes so many avocados And guacamole. Yeah, yes That it makes a war in Mexico. We love walk do every every super bowl season is war season in Mexico So now there is a police called the avocado police that police are like what got the in mitrican It's basically civilians geared up on their own resources to look over Mitrican that's in Saint-Aloe That's in a Or that's in Mitrican No, no, Mitricans have different state Okay, that's central Mexico So they they that's where the self defense groups came up 10 years ago with the Bolito Mona, right? The first time they basically Armed themselves and say like we're gonna fight against cartel or gonna fucking tie Eventually they they won the first fight which was a great precedent for I mean a great background for Mexico So they're started like a lot of people started forming their own Gerella is or their own self defense groups Until cartels sell like you know what fuck it we we had enough So last a lot not this year. I wasn't we took kind of they kill the Founder of the cell defense groups a man very fucking brave man Farmer called it Bolito Mona. He was the leader. He was kind of like the central figure for every other cell defense groups in Mexico, right? And and they killed him on his way back to his house from his farm and they burned him alive inside his pickup truck He had guard by the Mexican state officials They they put him cards to protect his life because he has been receiving threats Even they they all got killed and burned inside the vehicles. It was it was Sad and alarming for I visited his house I visited the playground where he was burned when he was burned Dude everybody was like Why yet like in a fucking funeral? No one was like saying anything they tungled the third at it was really I don't know do it it was like yeah, like kind of like sad and scary at the same time So what's gonna happen with his farm? Well, they kept it the who kept it the fucking cartels the cartels kept all of his line So they killed him they got away with stealing his fucking farm. Yeah, dude And very recently I probably this story you were talking about Probably like two weeks ago in Mexico state These farmers also Got extraordinary they've been extorted forever by by La Familia, Micholcana another cartel in central Mexico but they They asked for twice what they were getting they were paying one pestle per square foot on what they would ever they were harvesting A peso it's a right now. It's 18 pesos per eight dollar So it's probably a peso is not significant in US currency, but but for a Mexican one pay so per square a square foot of Of whether we're harvesting right a lot of corn beans whatever their harvest okay, so if you have I don't know 10,000 square meters of Whatever your harvesting you need to pay a peso for every square foot right of that And they asked them for twice that they're like okay, so this year you're gonna have to pay so in this year double two pesos per square foot They had a really bad season because they it didn't rain in that part of Mexico this season So they were like dude there's no way we can pay that so they're like well you either pay or you die They say yes, but they met and I before they had to meet these guys to pay their the taxing right And they met at a soccer field in this little town in Mexico The cartel members showed up all geared up as usual dress as military members whatever And then the whole community showed up they showed up with With shotguns machete's sticks and stones They were like we're not paying shit man and a fucking hell broke loose You see the videos there's people getting cold Kill like that like boom right in the fucking hand and then other guy in the bag is like boom you kill my friend Everybody's not killing everyone In total there were 14 murders 11 of those murders were cartel members So that was a big win for that community They're like do because they killed the leader of the left. I mean let me draw a kind like that region No shit, so they're like fuck off Now this past week they came back left my medium into a kind of came back to that town and kidnapped a lot of young girls a lot of babies mothers They're keeping them as ransom So they because they asking like turn turn over your leaders the guys who started these fucking fight Turn them off over to us or we're not gonna be we're gonna kill all the all your family members and The situation itself tense. I mean they still haven't released the the kids the woman because they want to They want the community to turn over Little the leaders of who started that brave old against the cartel to teach them a lesson and what does the Mexican military do about this? They asking to help nothing they've been asking for help for probably the last five years this community and The Mexican army or the Mexican government has never showed up Well the Mexican president said was just like oh yeah, we need about when you about those guys that were major targets for us We were just unable to find them before but they're dead now, so you guys are good That's it That's what It's it's mind blowing what's happening right now in Mexico. That's fucking insane While now who who is so you just got done with a you did a really big interview with and I think did you partner with Grillo to release it. Yeah. Well. What was that entered? That was the with the guy who basically was Damas O Lopez right he was partners with with El Chapo. Yeah, or he was has started out as a security El Chapo like he gained his trust over the years however long it was and then eventually it'll chop I made a deal with him saying if I ever get pinched or ever get killed You're gonna take my spot. Yeah, exactly and this guy that you met with was his son. Yes, God So basically the the damas O's Started off when when El Chapo escaped for the first time from from prison in Mexico, right? His first he helped him escape. He was the director of the prison. He was an attorney and He was the director of that prison right so he helped El Chapo escaped So when El Chapo escaped he knew they were gonna come after him to El Chapo over him a job He's like okay after I'm gone come and look for me in to Naloa And I'll give you a job and he made this guy Damas O Lopez Nunez Elis and Seattle he made him his right hand in the cartel on his faction, right? So he was dealing with he was basically calling the shots like even though I'm gonna get a lot of This common saying now dude. He was never a shot caller. Whatever He was the brains behind El Chapo, right? El Chapo will consult everything to him. It was like We want to what do we do we're facing these and that and he was it was a smart man. He was who's enough for an attorney So he will say like okay, let's not go into a fight. Let's do these or let's go into the fight Let's for many a group. Let's move money here and there. He was the chapos by hand. He's most trusted man And they became Compatics basically he was the godfather to his sons and Damas O was godfather to Los Chapi Pos, right? So they were family basically yeah, they were embedded with them. They were family. They grew up together The son of Damas O Lopez Nunez Damas O Lopez Arano El Minilique He was basically part of Los Chapi Pos. They grew up together. He was best friends with Alfredo He was best friends with Edgar the youngest of Los Chapi Pos And eventually when old chapo got kitten when chapo got um was he friends with um was El Minilique good friends with He the old video in the van Arquibardo all those guys They literally grew up together. They they he was uh best friends with El Magio's son as well than my yo-vo So he was like there was there was a pack of narco juniors, you know Basically owning the whole fucking state of Sinelo and So when Hamrez was when they arrested El Chapo and he was got extradited his son a letter to to Damas O to a listen to yado saying that all the money was for his four kids and his wife Emma Coronella right But the organization He was gonna leave that in hand of the Damas Ois right the leak and El Minilique Probably was a smart move Wait, wait, wait. So the money meaning the money that they already had the cash Or the the income that the business was bringing in. I guess both like the cash that he already had The properties all that shit because on the letter what he said it was like You were already having enough money Just get out get out of this shit Leave your life to have more than enough to his kids and his wife You leave you leave your life that more than not to leave a good life And leave your organization in the hands of Damas Right was probably a smart move because of Chapo probably thought that These was coming these War against those Chapitos and then they're gonna end like him Exeter back into the US facing life sentences. I can't shit So he didn't want that for his kids. Just like you know what like let let let Elix and Seattle take the fucking heat and you guys retire and leave well Well, they didn't they didn't want to do that. They were like fuck no the organization is ours Where the head of the organization right now They didn't listen to his dad and they start fighting against the Damas Ois against her godfather Basically the one in charge For what I understand Damas Ois and Seattle trying to negotiate right? Let's try to like say like guys This is what your dad wants To happen to the organization. I want to fight with it But then they started you know killing his henchman killing his security people The killing his killing his for what for what mainly told me like his version of the story And every time they will come after Them saying like hey, why were you killing her people? They're like oh, dude It wasn't he's taking story my my guys were like really high or really drunk whatever But I'm gonna give him a lesson. Sorry about that and they keep doing it. I keep doing it Until Damas Ois Lopez Sarno and Minilique Got fed up with it and he talked to his dad. He's like dude. I'm gonna go all In against those two people's fucking He's that was like dude. We don't we don't need a fight. We don't want to fight between a family within a single faction. Let's just solve this out He gather a group of other cartel members from Everywhere even from like mafia people from Canada like from everywhere That they hated all in those torpedoes, right? So he gather a group Made a WhatsApp group and said like hey, we need to get rid of these figures like they're just making too much Waves here in Tinaloa would want them. What do we do? So they start planning and by the birthday of the oldest if I'm not too old though goes man He was celebrating in in Guadalajara Open at this fancy restaurant And they kidnapped the four Sauntopple chapel They order was to kill them, right? But Elma you got in the middle they try to negotiate And then El Chapo was in prison in see that Juarez right at the border between El Paso Texas and Mexico And from there this is before he was extradited before he was a 2017 probably a couple of months before he was extradited 2016 I'm sorry, so he called he managed to get the news from the from the courts there And he requested a call so he called a prison in calisco where a cholo his right hand his henchman And which all was arrested He's like hey cholo. I know you get along well. We get along well without man chose people whatever I know that will mention the head of the calisco cartel new duration I know that his son isn't prison with you and your friends But you know what? This is no time to make friends I need you to kidnap him inside prison to make him disappear until they let my kids go So El Cholo went after the son of all mancho inside prison Kidnapped the kid made the director of that prison called El Mancho So like hey, your kid is nowhere to be found And this is a message to you As long as soon as you free my kids that are kidnapped All three years Meaning, we should be doing Meaningless Chapeados So so basically El Mancho was like I'm not I'm not part of this yet But it's my turf right? It's it's well, I had at calisco. This is my turf So he ordered the Chapeados freak So they had to free them and then they freed his son inside prison right And that's how they that's how they literally declared war against each other La Chapeados against Damaso La Chapeados eventually managed to get a lot of like more power and overpowered the Damasos And Damaso was a breast in Mexico city Damaso dad It was in Seattle was a breast in Mexico city What year was he arrested? I think it was 2017 And then months after Minilique couldn't hold You know the his his turf right so he had he went for the border in Calaxico and turned himself over to the he has been talking with the DA for a while now And he had been like planning on turning himself over So he can you know give information against those Chapeados And now he's the main guy behind the hunt against those Chapeados Because he won't he served for five years They released him he's free he's not under with sex. It's not under Witness protection or whatever is just the main source of information. He's not under witness protection at all No, he's not they're protecting the DA's protect the DEA is protecting it, but he's not he'd never signed us a Whitsack he's not signed in so we how much protection could you possibly get from the DEA Not sure man not sure but but when I met him I Cool tell that there were a couple of Agents around the place we met. Oh really so they're They're putting an eye on how to so Okay explain to me how this interview came about Well, like did he reach out to you out of the blue or how did this happen? Yes, you reach out to me through Instagram first. He sent me a DM And of course I'm like yeah, I mean I get reached out by these amount of Curly DM's must be insane. They're fucking wild man. They're fucking wild. I mean Every probably get what like five ten messages request every single hour of people saying everything from threats From help me. I have a family disappear. Whatever To advise a man. I'm traveling to Mexico. Is it safe to go to this resort in ku whatever To a amelma yo a I'm talking to you on behalf of This crazy secret organization that you whether you never heard of and we're gonna kill you So there's some out in your head to watch out on my US official and I know that this is happening To this is a new software criminals are using on part of it called tatan we're getting to it later These leads all come in through your molds for the leads come most of them Yes, how do you filter out which ones are legit or not do you do you actually go through them all? No, I imagine it's gonna be hard to do or sand. Yeah, no, no, no, I mean there's no fucking way can go through it all What I usually do is when I think there could be a story I go and try to vet the information and the people behind it If that person is not willing to turn on his video camera to share IDs to share like kind of like that kind of shit I just drop it. I literally drop it If someone tell me even if it sounds like good info most of the guys with good info They will do it will follow they will like I'll show you add the light. Let's move to a secure app I have a couple of secure apps and let's move to that open an account on these on these several to cure apps whatever and Throw on your camera so I can know you also I can because you know my face You know my name you all you know all about it, but I don't know who's behind that account So it's only fair to be on a neutral space. I know how to take care of your Side of things so you don't get backlash or whatever. I'm not gonna record anything We're just gonna talk first right. I need to understand who are you why are you bringing these information to me or your motivations? What do you want for it? What kind of information is this? I waste a lot of time with kind of like fake week leads right but sometimes it works because because you get some strong fucking You know, sometimes it's just nothing all news something that it's just rumors something like I know a guy who knows a guy who has a cousin that Baha How do you vet or how do you what what like red flags do you look for when you're vetting some of these people that are messaging you Like to determine whether they have some sort of ulterior ulterior agenda or motive or might just be like a one faction of one one cartel that wants to Like attack another faction or paint another faction a bad light or first red flag is when they say it's just for the sake of truth Just for the sake of you know Everybody has an agenda to like everyone especially very child to someone who's about to publish something So yeah, so most of these guys are I speak with a lot of honesty like that's what I do I talk about my way of doing it. I'm very honest on saying like it's probably nothing I'm probably not even gonna publish this shit or just stop and don't tell me shit because I don't want to know about that stuff or Just like I do I'm gonna have to if you bring this information to me I'm gonna have to bet this through US and Mexican officials if you're good with it I mean I'm gonna try to protect your identity and everything But with this info I might have to bet it through these people to see they know something to be But I'm super honest about my process, right? and When the person behind that account is honest as well and it's like talking to me on video Whatever and say like you know what you know why I'm bringing this here because I'm gonna retire and I want to fuck these guys over and That's it or they did me wrong and I want to fuck him or I just think this is always stepping You know the there my more or older my you know things and this is this is something that I don't want to be involved into But I got this info so I'm just handing it over to you and do what you have to get to Or yes, I'm a member of the faction against those guys so those guys are a mother fucker like the like damas So himself when he breaks down. He said like hey man. I'm damas. Oh mini league I had uploaded a couple of videos about him And because he was recently freed so I uploaded a video saying that he was free and we have the video that he's originally sent you No, no, no videos that I posted on my YouTube talk about it right first Like saying like hey, so damas was free. This is this guy. This is what he did This is blah blah blah is what it's gonna say like debriefing what who was damas all right and then he I what I got reached out He's like I'm reaching out to you first of all because you talk a lot of Bullshit, but most of that bullshit is not necessarily lies So I just want to set the record straight for you and I'm like, okay, I don't know. I don't know That's a compliment or what but if you are really who you see you are Let's move towards the Europe and turn on your camera. I'm pretty sure that I can recognize your face So he did he turned on his camera and he had these hat on and he was in selfie mode And I was like can you move your hat a bit up, you know So I can see your face and I saw his face and he was him and I was like, oh shit So it's really you and it's like yeah, and I like that you look older Then he just laugh and it's like yeah, you look more fucked up to So I'm like thank you do it so yeah, I mean can you show me your ID pass for something that has your name? Yeah, I mean I don't have to but I'll do it for you. So he shows his idea whatever and Then we kept talking we turn off the camera kept talking for a while So I'm like dude, I'm very interested in any of you with you But I'm pretty sure that you're reaching out with an agenda, right? Like what is it and he was very clear about it. It's like I just want to fuck the chap ethos over So I just want to talk a lot of shit. I know about them and how things really went and Yeah, that's I mean I'm being Transparent or my intentions. I'm like, okay, so that those are your intentions on my intentions The intent the I don't want to fuck anyone I don't I couldn't give a shit about like fucking with Chubby those or whatever. I just want to interview with you and that's the main thing I'm interesting can we agree on the middle ground where I'm when I'm gonna make an interview with you But I'm not gonna talk shit about these guys any Improving improving shit and he's like no I have proof of what I'm gonna tell you and okay, so perfect So we agreed on on meeting right and person in prison. Yes So I flew to LA he was not leaving in LA. He was leaving somewhere else. So he traveled by land To LA you weren't really concerned about meeting with him because he'd already done this present time He was a free man like he he had no reason to fuck with you even though I'm I mean you never know so yes, I'm still never know. Yeah So I was absolutely I was I was kind of like concerned about that, but I was like fucking did I'll just do it, you know I flew to LA he asked me to be in turn of hotel to go Have a whole protocol when I travel to meet people, you know The whole product will that of course I'm not gonna disclose in detail, but there's a whole protocol to do you have people that go there for you in advance to scope out the location like a lot of people like I know Presidents when they go and visit places for meetings or presidential candidate candidates They have what's called an advanced team where they go like if they're meeting a hotel They'll have a team of guys that like walk through the hotel talk to people and like no, I Don't like I work on another way more simple, you know, prockle Part of it I can say probably part of it. It's just either arriving way earlier Day or two days or three days or even a week earlier or a week later You know and say like sorry whatever blah blah blah so I Yeah, that's part of it like yeah, so so it's a whole protocol. I have that has worked for me to make me feel safe Even choosing the I just ask because he said the place But I asked to choose my own room and book my own thing is like okay You you want me to be in this hotel particularly I'll be there But like me handle the whole fucking thing of my or management of flights transport hotel room all that shit Because it's like I can put you that hotel whatever that's like no, I don't need you to do that for me Just set a place and I'll handle the whole fucking thing right so he said the place said the date and I So I request that Certain room where I feel safe where it has like certain You know ways of exiting web about Security protocols on on a room and Yeah, I waited and he showed up at the agreed time and And he was very Normal it was like just like a regular do you mean and say like hey what's up? You are mean you do this in on the US side of of the border most of the times I'm not but sometimes I am sometimes I am in Mexico No But in Mexico when I feel this is the thing My the simplest thing about a security protocol is that if you feel you're gonna you have a chance to die Like a real chance like a real threat. So don't fucking go right. So it doesn't work it So that's that's the simplest thing. It's like okay, so I feel a real threat Something is off. They're asking me to travel to these plays to me these guys to be a bit of a bit of a Nah, I'll just pass on it even if it's Hear that yeah It's the coyote is always that okay. Sorry So that's what I do when I feel like okay, I might I might go In Mexico depending on who I'm meeting if it's like a middleman middle range whatever I do have a bunch of contacts in Mexico that I just ask them like hey can you watch over me? Not together. Yeah, they're like super super legit in terms of they they won't say shit, right? They won't say who I meet where I meet none right I trust them enough and they trust me enough But they are heavily armed and trained people right good good like heavyweight guys. Yeah like a paramilitary guy Yeah, they're fucking a seal or yeah, they're super discreet. They're around like regular people whatever But I like yeah, can you help me out of this one? But if I need them to show up like you know like proper geared up or whatever Then asking like yeah, you can show up like geared up and whatever they will show like like basically secure the escorts And you know like that kind of shit Especially when it's a bar when it's a public bar Caught it with people and you know like a club or whatever And they someone wants to meet there for a reason I ask them to to go like Fully and like a really yeah, like can you help me out and like why had a bar would you run look like that? Because you show you show that you're with people right you show you know you were with security Yeah, like can you help me out and like why are the bar where do you want to look like that? Because you show you show that you're with people, right? You show you know, you were with security And so there are basically bodyguards and you want them to to to know that you have bodyguards because When you when you put into the mix alcohol and shit, right then things can go of Fast this is that's the other thing like I've been rich talk recently by our source that he's looked do like probably one of the biggest interviews I bet I could ever do eventually if But these studies always waste it dude like shit faced So I'm always trying to let him know like do okay call me tomorrow when you feel better, right because I don't deal with people that are Under the influence of anything because yeah, you need a clear mind and and and I also need respect You know for like dude. I'm giving you respect. I'm a journalist. This is my job. I'm being a professional. What are friends? We're not you know this is not a social gathering This is work for me and I'm taking time from my family from whatever my work What to give you time and I appreciate you giving me time for this But I need also respect from your end. You can call me all shit facing like hey, I'm decent that bad bad bad Even if your info is great. I'll rather pass on it because that's not the way I work Right pardon this brief interruption But I want to take a second to talk about our sponsor Verso Now you've heard this podcast before chances are you already know how obsessed I am with health Unlongevity which is why one of my favorite guests to have on the show is Nutritional Scientist and Neuroscientist Dr. Dom Dagostino who actually introduced me to this stuff Verso is a company that is dedicated to translating scientific breakthroughs into products that hold a potential to increase longevity The problem with aging is we accumulate these zombie cells or old-damaged cells that linger beyond their useful life These zombie cells infect other healthy cells speeding up the aging process Causing things like hair loss wrinkles arthritis cancer dementia and everything in the realm of aging What scientists have realized is that we can manually induce autophagy meaning the cleanup process of the old zombie cells Replacing them with new ones Verso's new clean being which I take every night is a powerful blend of Syneolithic molecules that help promote the body's natural cleanup processes like autophagy and apoptosis Promoting better cellular health supporting lower inflammation and natural cardioprotective functions while boosting protection against age-related diseases The three main ingredients in clean being are spermidine luteolan and a hydro corsetin which play key roles in the control of gene expression And are essential for cell growth and proliferation Specifically when it comes to cardiovascular and cognitive function Skin health vision and the immune system head on over to vr.seo and use the coupon code Dany it spelled d a n n y to say 15% off your entire order or just go to vr.seo forward slash Danny back to the show. That was was very serious, right? He was like Cleaned serious. Yeah, good. Hold it soon. He's a 37. It's pretty so Yeah, if I would have met with him in the hotel I would imagine like my first reaction would be like we gotta meet in the lobby or like at the in the restaurant at the hotel There's the thing I requested for a room with a window to the street where I knew he was coming I Asked him to show up right a certain tunnel he asked me to to meet him at certain time And I'm like I'm gonna I'm gonna meet you upstairs. I'm gonna meet you in this room But I changed the plan so I met him On the street, right when I won I was looking over the room I saw a couple of D a agents around because you can tell they're like you know on cargo pants this Oakley glutters thing really they kind of like scouted the place of that and then he showed up He pulled over or not in a black SUV. So he had the DEA As like an advanced team for himself. I think he didn't had the DEA. I think the DEA was like just following him Yeah, follow him. So I'm like, okay, it's moving apparently is gonna go into this hotel for some reason So boom they kind of like one and say like, okay, let's let's you know. You're doing like legitimate spy craft It's everything right? Yeah And and then I saw him arrive and Before he pulled out I was already in the street, right? I wasn't really out in the street So I drew it in he kind of like surprised them like I opened his door. He came out And he was like, hey, almost that's compared. Hey dude. How you doing? I'm like, hey, dude. I'm good. Um, so what time is like hey you want to jump in and probably have a drive and Grab something to eat whatever before we go into um And first I was like, ah probably not not the best idea But I kind of like felt that he was pushing a bit for it So I was like, okay, okay, so okay. I'll follow through. Yes. Let's let's let's let's go So I jumped into the back of his car Black car tinted windows. Who is driving? One of these guys. I didn't I just have a lot of money. Do it here Yeah, man like yes Like a lot of fucking money. Yeah, like his own driver full-time driver kind of money. These guy from But see it was in a lower accent. Young kid. I thought it was family member or something then he was like ever like quiet with bunch of like cash money on his fatty backpack, you know and A cap driving around What what are you laughing at? Fanny fact Yeah, yeah Yeah, bro Because these these guys mini leak was not able because of these Because the condition legal condition. He's not able to meet journalists family members criminal members or former criminals or handle money Right, he needs to use a a a we approved debit card with a DA You know allows him to a lot of him to keep some of his money but of course What else is gonna do so he has a bunch of cash right, but he's not handling his other guy. He's handling the cash What kind of cars are you driving? I can say I don't know. I can say and we want I do I can say work that we want to Have pancakes. It was hand case. It's a real dude a waffle house or our our I hop waffle house Sitting with fucking this former leader of the cinema occurs down and his henchmen or whatever was He was he called him secretary. So he's with his secretary And a fucking waffle house having blueberry pancakes Well, was it pancake waffle houses and how pancakes? I don't think it's only waffles. Yes no fucking Yeah, and yeah, and then yes, I mean I Some other people showed up I can say whatever and then we went back into the hotel room I was like so you're ready like do you feel good to go back to the hotel and then start an interview Like yeah, did you feel pretty good about? Did you have like build a rapport with him during when you guys were eating? Yes, yes, yes, yes, it's pretty confident. Yeah, I do it What I want to do with every single source is first that they know that they have my respect that I'm not judging that I'm not you know anyone to judge whatever they do whatever they want to say what what I don't give a shit They fucking humans so I can't I try to find a common Relatable ground right some something even if it's a sport or a color or music or Something we have in common so we can start like doing small talk and relate really To each other right so we can find common ground right before going into full a lot of the journalists what they do is they go into full Journalist mode and just dump a bunch of questions, right? So how do you start? Well, I bet this and I'll tell me tell me that tell me. I'm not easy on them because I question Damas are really hard on the accusations of him killing a journalist probably the last brave journalist in Mexico have year well There's he was fucking legend there. He was an inspiration for all of us And he is accused formally accused of killing her. He had a while there who accused him the Mexican government that the Mexican government is asking The US government to deport Damaso so he can face jail in Mexico for the killing of whoever you are about this So this is not not only an issue of cartel. This is a by national Political issue between the two countries Does the Mexican government really care or do you think it's the fucking a proxy cartel within the government trying to get him? Exactly that is what it is that's exactly what it is Anyways, I question his version of him not killing There's and he said it was just how long okay, so let's go. Let's do it. So If you guys had breakfast, so we wait actually they'll talk to the hotel and then what and then we started to go Did the guy come with you and you guys go alone? No, no, we came all together I had the room already set up, you know, no personal Like my backpack was literally Ready to go right next to the door in case something, you know, whatever We came up He sat on a chair and his other dudes sat on the other on the other side of looking Towards the door and I live on the side of the floor. It was like you want to There was another chair whatever. No, I'm like I'm feel comfortable hitting the floor just to make just to make a statement that I'm cool You know, I'm not feeling threatened so we we can all relax and be cool and Nice sign the floor and we start talking sort of like so do it like this is probably the first and last I'm gonna talk to you So do you have enough time? It's like do I don't have anything else to do but see it in my fucking house so by all means so this interview last like for probably Probably like 12 hours 11 12 hours We kept we over there full kept talking and talking and talking I first wanted to get out of the fucking room the whole journalist thing right have you had about this so What I'm a first question was like I started with that I said I would like How do you feel what are you doing now? What is your what is your legal situation right now? What is happening with your dad? Still behind bars are you comfortable saying openly saying that you are Cooperating with the US authorities to go against those chapitos I Explain what my plans were to publish right is like this is not gonna be Biography or some shit like that. I'm gonna push back into what you say and lay out what I feel is a true than your impressions He only said like I hope you're not too harsh in me and I'm like well, let's see man Let's let's see how the text goes. I'm not gonna be particularly harsh in you. It's just the way right It's it's it's of try and try to be a subjective as I can right so So I want to get rid of the white elephant in the room have yet about this And he's like okay, let me tell you and I'm like okay before you tell me I didn't tell you that one of my biggest Fears right now is to be sitting across someone who killed a journalist Right because if you killed a journalist then You're basically I direct threat to me as a journalist as well So I don't want to be in the middle of that So if you if you come true and you say the truth and you say you know what yes, I was involved I'm not gonna be judgey Probably gonna call this interview often and just leave man. I can't do these like that And if you even if I feel you're not on the truth I also might take everything else you say For untrue right So let's get rid of that shit. I'm being honest with you. I'm being clear. I'm risking myself a bit too to be here I'm being like good to you So let's let's talk Konnos weh was no let's talk like with balls and And yeah, I mean he's startling out his version that is out on the story He said basically that he wasn't him that he was lose chap pitos Because of the of an interview they put the Javier about this published with Amazon He published it in here. He yeah when they were at war That must have reached out to Javier Valdez to these journalists and he said like amen I want to give you an exclusive interview with me and my dad Telling you what is happening right now in Sinelo I within this in Elo of her town Javier Valdez said okay, let's do it he He did an interview with both of them and he published the interview And when he was about to post the interview Loz Chapito somehow learned that he had interviewed that muscle So they asked him like amen how much money do you want for not to publish that story He said this is not a money thing We're gonna probably work around the story And then he called his the director of the owner of the newspaper and said like a I want to buy you that interview how much money do you guys want And I say nope the work on around the story So they publish the story and look to people send all their henchmen to To basically get all the newspaper distributed in the whole state so no one could read that story So they and they burned the whole fucking yeah, so they they stopped the delivery pickup trucks Whatever and then should they burn the whole fucking thing Then they publish the story again Is this verifiable? Yeah, yeah, yeah, everything is everything is it's it's a it's a very far version of what's that happening Even the director of the newspaper published The whole thought is these a version on the website right so before that I mean after that They publish the story again on the next on the next printed version right and they post it in the line That's when they that's when they killed Have you read this right but but Right after the interview how you read this also published an opd Calling Damaso a shitty fucking henchmen for the synagogue hotel That he had no decision Making capabilities and he was like dumb and you know kind of like trashing me Nick So after that after they published those couple stories he got killed right in front of the newspaper Damaso says he was killed by lost chapee does because he he he published that interview But what chapee does that it was Damaso because he kind of like insulting him What damaso says like imagine if I go killing every guy who who was insulting me I mean it was gonna be fucking blossom all over. I can't take I can't take an insult What does your gut tell you? My god tell me that is That he that it was lost chapee does man. I mean he kind of makes sense. He kind of makes sense that That you know what What I think is What really kill caviar of all this is The impunity that is in Mexico. He a journalist in the US will never face that faith Even if you're giving an interview here getting into there. You publish some shit. I'll be back The a journalist should never face The questioning on who was who was the one who killed me What got him at the end is that he got in the middle of a fucking wire of factions And that he didn't have no protection where the authorities, right that the whole fucking state is run over by these guys So whoever killed him whoever of these two factions killed him They shouldn't have been able to reach out to him in that way Right to threaten him to kill him if If the Mexican government will do his job, right? So either way My gut says it was probably them because they didn't they they show That they didn't want that story published But I'm not putting my hands for that myself because equal easily beat up. So you had a lot of power He of course is a man capable of killing people, right? So I'm not putting my hands there for for his person This is what he says us still haven't had a An interview with any of those torpedoes to hear their version, right? Hopefully one day I can I can bring the other version Their version more journalists die in Mexico than anywhere in the world than anywhere the world outside of a war zone. Yeah outside of war Oh, I was a war zone right. Yeah. So what else did you get out of that interview with him during that 12 hours? So basically We got rid of that shit and then he started telling me how he became part of the organization his whole That story how he grew up and how he didn't want to be part of the cartel. He's like dude I wanted to be a pilot So I wanted to study for a pilot. I started like my the school, but ever but in order to be a pal in Mexico You need to go to at the end you need to go to the through the Mexican military to get a permit to fly So he's like, okay, I have provided my test and exams wherever whatever I showed up to my dad It was about 18 and he's like do I need my credentials from the Mexican military. I'm gonna show up to the military zone here in Tinaloa, whatever to ask for my card And he's like the fuck you're not gonna do that like that's too risky No, find another fucking thing to do. It's like what do you mean is like dude you have my my my own my same name The government is all off to me. They're gonna be after you or they're gonna take you in order to get me So no find another thing to do So he's like what else and is like just set up a business and he's like, okay So I started setting up a business And then my dad said like okay, but you're not gonna run that business right you're gonna have a front-man running that business for you And he's like no do the whole fucking thing of doing a business is to run a business You want to get his hands dirty. Yeah, and no he was like no dude like if you do that You're risking yourself you're putting yourself out there too much They don't if you want to have a business I can't give you the money put the business but have a front-man run run from you for you And it's like nah it doesn't make sense. It's a one just being investor He wants to actually do something do something and then he thought was like then then he was like okay So then you want me basically to become a fucking trafficker and he's like fuck no it's like dude You don't let me do anything. I want to do something. So yeah, let me let me move some bricks And he's like all right, we just want to do that. That's that's how you so he gave him a couple of bricks He told he told me he sold the bricks Came back home and his dad asked him like how much money you made in them and he was like I don't know let's say they he paid 10,000 for the bricks sold them came back how much money you made in it And he's like 10,000. It's like what do you mean 10,000? 10,000 on top of the 10,000 is like oh 10,000 and I do the whole fucking business supposed to be made for you to make money Dude, that's how they were explaining and how the economics of spying and selling works So he's like okay, so then he started learning how to do that shit right how to sell breaks and and how to Yeah, he was eventually in charge of moving large one of you so cocaine and shed in Tinaloa and then handling the money and then palaban then he like kind of like kept stepping up Until the war Between the factions broke loose um What is domicos relation? Does he have a relationship or is he have any communication lines open with El Chapo No, he said it anymore. Not anymore. He said he was he was he said like at the beginning of course I felt bad But because El Chapo was my godfather right when he escaped we gave him We lend him or houses and we were in charge of his security so he was around and with a killed El Chapo's son in 2016 I think I think I killed his son because he's haunted which one of his son and Edgar he was the youngest. Oh Fuck I didn't realize that. I think that was man. He was killed allegedly by mistake because The same by the by another guy by this by his same organization. They thought there was they thought he was part of the Velcro Enléva's a rival faction this in Rocker tell But it was allegedly his own same organization who killed them by mistake And he was best friends with Amazon. They were they were best friends like since kids Um, Damas so says that he's still very heartfelt for what I was like I was supposed to be with him that night But I got a call from a girl So I went into her house And when I'm taking a shower to go To him they called me and say like hey do they killed Edgar Um, and he's like do that broke my heart. He was my best friend the fucking world So whenever I met El Chapo El Chapo would ask me like How was Edgar? What kind of girls he liked and he he was kind of like replaced Edgar with me So so when I got married When I went every birthday and stuff El Chapo would show up to my parties, but he wouldn't show up to his son's parties He's own own weddings or birthday parties Whatever like a video like a video he painted she might go for it or he wouldn't show up to them But he will show up for damasos, right? So they started getting jealous like why the fuck are you Is or that showing up to every single one of your fucking parties. It's not showing up to us. Yeah Um, so he was he felt like He was in the head of El Chapo. He was like another kid But then he was like, oh, I asked him like was it hard to testify against El Chapo when he's trial like to point him and say like Yeah, this is the man. And it's like no, Luke said the end He sent A letter to love to his sons saying that I'm gonna find the fucking rat who's riding on you guys and and I'm gonna happen killed So he's like, okay, so he's after me Um, I'm just gonna go after him fuck it So he went. Yeah, he's like, I don't feel bad about it like fuck it. This is the name of the game He's either he's lying for mine. So it's gonna be his right And and I'm like dude how comfortable you feel telling that you are Sharing all the information the US has against El Chapo And he's like dude that's that's what I'm that's my fucking plan That's my golden life right now To have him either killed or arrested and it's like he told me like I swear to you that I'm gonna see the four of them Here the three of them here the four of them. Sorry here in the US. That was before over the was Exotighter right And after this interview got published Over who reached out to you so this is the thing that the interview got published On on crash up media.com. Sorry for the advertisement. It's a Self-stack. We're managing You want guello and myself. We're kind of like partnering to publish exclusive stories there and This story went Huge right especially in Mexico Before quick aside before you published it or before you even interviewed him Did you reach out to some of the big like media outlets that you typically work with not before interview him? Okay After interviewing him after I recorded the whole fucking excited I recorded a whole interview With proper podcast microphones to shed like they got a gear and have a full It's not it's not the whole hours. Of course. It's it's about at three hours interview Wow you edited 12 into three I Didn't record everything. Okay. I yeah, there was no fucking way I could have enough space to record everything right so I I did take notes on Everything when everything everything I have like huge note paddle notes And I but I have three good Hours of audio of that interview But then okay, so I didn't reach out to anyone Probably after a month after the interview. So I was planning on How I'm gonna publish it. Is it worth it? What scenarios? I'm gonna I'm gonna phase what backlash can I get from that? The legal side of it as well, you know like the whole fucking thing So it took me a month before traveling. I also was dealing with another Sort of stories hard reported stories, you know, so complicated. So I need like free space When I when I have some stories like these sometimes like that before probably two weeks I went out of my home to to my parents to leave on one of the rooms and to just stay there and think right try to focus and Think what I'm about what am I about to do? And is it worth it and how to package this story and who I'm gonna pitch it to right and and just dumb the whole fucking thing, you know Then when I had something together I reached out to to a rolling stone first They said they were interested. They were like yeah, fuck yes. We're definitely interested This is the god son of old chapel speaking for the first time ever So this is this is massive during a hunt for low-chip ethos, right? So this is a great exclusive shit Um, then they took a fucking week or two weeks to get back at me with with something I asked him like okay, so what's the rate and how many words and you know like the details usually you ask after a pitch I do have a deadline whatever They didn't answer for two full weeks. They they got back to me with a question say like how competitive this is Now's like dude if you're asking me that question Then I'm probably gonna waste my fucking exclusive story on a magazine that it's just gonna put it on the back end of a magazine and snuck it up Package it well, right. I was really disappointed at Rolling stone because I have high regards for that magazine. I mean it's a great fucking magazine They published great fucking stories But um, I didn't feel comfortable after that. I was like nah They also have another huge story of mine that he's been sitting there for over a year and it's a huge also exclusive shit And they this was an assignment they did to me in February And it's almost a fucking year and I haven't heard back not even about a kill fee Not even about edits nothing they just let my stories sit there and they stop answering They did a couple of like three months ago. They did reach the back When I reached without story with a pitch I also asked for that other story like hey, but what happened with that other story You who are sitting on it and they're like no, no, we're gonna actually pay you better because this is gonna be on the print New and the print magazines were trying to find the right moment to publish it But it's like yeah, dude for a freelancer to sit on a fucking story for a year Before and then you get paid 30 days net later like after publishing it You're you can kill journalists like that. You could this is the problem with these legacy media outlets and these big publications You know this is the reason for the uprising independent journalism. That's why people like you Everyone that's watching needs to go to the least his channel subscribe you guys you have Substac you have a YouTube channel. Yeah, what else do you have and then it's a mace gram Which is a part of Instagram? Yeah, yeah, do you have patreon or anything or no? I don't know I'm trying to keep everything on on on on YouTube and software YouTube and sub stack and that'll obviously be linked below Yeah, dude, so yeah, I was really tough on because that that can kill our foot in career and and I was like dude why do I feel Kind of like me street it by a magazine with these information with these Fucking story I have in my head, right? I shouldn't feel like that So I decided just to move it and to pitch it to the guys why work more regularly for I actually have a routine with them With vice news. Oh, yeah, so I posted my storm to my editor But at the moment vice was going through the whole bankruptcy thing So they didn't have the capability to move it into I was like these guys are not When do they go bankrupt? On January this year really you find that Steve. I Didn't even hear about this. Yeah, I think that's what the whole conversation started But then then probably like three four months ago Five months ago they they they publicly went bankrupt So it was a it was um oh in me that's when they yeah 2023 vice mini group file for chapter 11 bankruptcy Protection the southern district of Texas the company's bankruptcy cases are jointly administered at Whoa, they've been they've been I remember like fucking eight years ago Seven years ago. I you would see articles coming out Every month about how vice is worth upwards of a two billion dollars Invest What does that say consortium led by fortress investment group for 350 million? Oh vice agreed to be inquired acquired by According to vice the bankruptcy process will strengthen the company in position for it was basically acquired by the main The main money lenders, right? They they wear the main investors, so they basically just owned to clean it on it now yeah because Rupert Murdoch and Disney they hon't they all had stocks they all owned a Significant portion of that. No you met you actually hung out with Shane Smith. Yeah, dude. I started I started right They all had stocks. They all owned a significant portion of that. No. You actually hung out with Shane Smith. Yeah, I started writing for Vice News for freelance 10 years ago. So I mean, I meant, I meant that's when it was really nice. Yeah, I mean, when he started, dude, it was wild. They were great packaging shit and doing stories that you can publish anywhere. They were good. But they lacked the proper journalistic ethics. And yeah, the proper journalistic view of it. Like what is news and what is just not news and how to handle a news story, right? Ethically, how to handle ethically and professionally. In the beginning, it wasn't news though. It was just like, they would go into fucking war zones or go into some crazy fucking place and just turn their cameras on and start fucking talking to people. Yeah. And then they'd come up into like heavy metal and bag down with fucking documentaries and sane and and and um, chirac. But no easy thing where they were there in Chicago and they're fucking in the inner cities of Chicago, like with all the musicians and shit like it's fucking insane what they would do. That was the great fucking thing about Vice. That was news because there was like on the reported stories, right? And they were they they had we had meetings before reporting on all that shit. Like it was, it was like it wasn't there was a neti-torial thing behind it. But there were not like proper editors and shit back then when they when they come out with vice news, they hired for one I think it's the best of the best of the fucking industry, right? The best fucking editors, the best fucking their vectors a lot of like great great fucking journalists video journalists and and you know, like they had like a great fucking team where they put together vice-neals. Still to these days, dude, like I mean, they've been letting go hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of journalists and in vice news, sadly great people. Like like my good friend, a Keekin Hamilton, he's fucking a badass man. David Noriyaga, dude, covering Latin America, who's like great Emily Green. She's like the top fucking reported when it comes to immigration stories, solid fucking people. So they're letting everyone go, right? And and and and look at me, I'm advice still has like some like of the great fucking editors and editorial directors and within within vice that they're like holding positions, even through the whole fucking mass right now. So when I when I picked this story, vice was going through the whole thing, right? So it was hard to think that they will have the mind to take and properly wrap these story, right? I was like, I don't know dude, like I'm not gonna pitch this story and then I see these wherever or I'm gonna pitch this story and then they're gonna fucking kick me in the ass cause they're bankrupt right now and I'm not gonna even get pay him just gotta get fired. And then I'm gonna feel like shit afterwards. They're really honest people and I really appreciate that a lot by so at least on my editorial team, like my head, it's worth a shit. So I spoke to my editor, Deb Rupinello about this. And she's like, dude, I mean, we will love to have your story and we're probably gonna try to make it work and look good, but it's your it's your call, right? So I understand what you're coming from and how you feel about vice right now. So it's your call. I decided to to make a statement and say call, agree on say like I did, why don't we fucking join forces and publish these on your own on one fucking thing on yourself, the account linked to my self-tech account and we'll do an interview, like you interview me on my YouTube channel about like the behind the scenes of the whole fucking thing of damas, oh story, right? And of course it was like extremely like cool with this, like fuck yes, dude, I'm gonna treat this with respect and then shit. Let's see if we make money out of it. I did. I mean, of course nothing nothing huge, but some is it comparable to what you were to get got paid by Rolling Stone or vice or it really depends on the story. But let's say their range for a simple 600 word tapping story, right? Like one of these stories you can tap within an hour. Make a couple of calls, just 600 words. I'll get between 600 and 800 bucks per one of of these stories, right? If it's a more complex complicated, whatever you can get, 2,000, 2,500, probably no more than that. It's hard to make better than that. So it's kind of shitty, you know, really shitty actually. So yeah, basically what I did is like, okay, so do you ask, you want to like can we get something, can I get something similar to this, the closest to what I get paid by the industry right now? If we go there, they're like, I'm definitely gonna try it. We're gonna put half of the fucking store in the paywall and let's fucking give it a shot. I did that, but I also said like, you know what, this story needs to be written in Spanish for Spanish publication that was my home back then, which is the main or major investigative magazine, journalism magazine in Mexico, which is processal. The director and founder of processal is the only interview of my yourself by the has given to someone. He died, who you'll shatter. We found that this magazine with that kind of like, strong fucking critical reporting, right? And trusted enough by Sukumandante Marcos, president and then my yourself by that to give interviews exclusive with the processal. The story broke in 2013 about the CIA being involved was my first cover on that magazine, right? It was the cover of that magazine. So they invited me to collaborate a lot with process on magazine back then when I was, you know, like 10 years ago, probably 15 years ago. So I was like, fuck it, you know what? I love that. Those dudes, they're having a bad time. They're fine, everyone, they're losing money by the minute. They're about to implode. So probably it's gonna be my last chance to feel again that I'm contributing to that fucking magazine. So I call the editor. He was super fucking excited. He was like, no, dude, I went wait, do you have proof of the I was like, I have the audio, I thought I was so exclusive photos. I thought of with him. And he was like, sadly, dude, I don't think we have the money to pay you for something like this. We're going through shitty fucking years right now. We're actually about to close the print magazine. And I was like, how much are you paying? And he's like, we can probably just probably pay a thousand bucks. Let's fucking do it. Send me the money, send me a wife, and I'll take the story. And he's like, fuck yes, let's do it. And they treat the story with a lot of respect as well as Grealow. Grealow with Grealow, I published the story in English and in Spanish, what would process? Right. Guerrilla to the story with the utmost respect, you know, he really package it well. He served us my editor for this one. So it was great working with Grealow. And I was like, dude, we might be up to something here. Like we breaking exclusive in English and in Spanish as well, exclusive photos, exclusive footage, and then wrapping it with social, you know, with a YouTube interview, right? I see it's not going to shit. So that's kind of like what we're trying to do right now. And after what we got published, first, the first thing is I got a call by Damasos people. That was, dude, that's just cool stuff. Are you advertising the shit? Yeah, I do it on the podcast. I get everyone to do it. It's like a become a gag now. Oh shit, dude. Every time. So I got to call my his people telling me that those people by Damasos, like Alex people saying like, hey, dude, so we might have a problem here. Damasos was not allowed to talk to the press, right? And he might get deported because of this interview. And I was like, dude, but this is probably something in you, right? And they're like, no, I'll good. I'm just letting you know what's it was after the article. Because I think probably Damasos kind of like knew that they was going to go big. But he probably didn't know that he was going to be that big, right? Because of course it made the Mexican government to push back again for his extradition back to Mexico, right? Exactly. I left a lot of the interview out. A lot of the things he set out. Everything I couldn't get approved off. And that wasn't first things he'll actually lived through. I left it out. He talked a lot of shit about Los Chapito's, a lot of like shit about a little chapel, personal shit, really crazy stuff. But I again, I'm not in the middle of that war. That's not my work. So why would I publish shit like that? That it's unproofed, right? So I left all that on purpose. And I made a disclaimer about the Javier Palquez version, right? I published the version that that he's colleagues and family members set the, the, the, he's colleagues and family members his wife and kids. They are sure it was him, right? So I published that thing. I published like, okay, so he's that sure was, it was sure it was me and Lake, right? And the authorities, although he says this, I, yeah, anyways, so that was that. And, and then after that, Los Chapito's through one of their costs and just another wild fucking story reached out to me by another Guzman, a man who can't say his name right now, probably in the future, but he's supposed to be that he was, they allegedly kill him. He made the news like they killed him, they killed these guys. And he's like, nope, I'm actually alive. I mean, I'm injured, right? But I'm alive. And I was like, dude, I mean, again, the vetting process like turn on your camera, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. You did all this with all this with him. And he was, he was a Guzman. Yeah, he's the causing of, of Los Chapito's. Wow. And he was like, the first thing he told me was this, he's like, and I'm gonna, I'm gonna lay it on his panties and then I'm gonna translate. Okay. So like combat your secret thoughts, then I'm also crazy. Guilesele su yo, bor entrere me que yer la tas. It's like, dude, I know every one of us has a price. What's your price? So let me know. They were about to that fucking rat. Right? They wanted, they wanted to find Damazil. Dude, I saw that fucking message for days. Just not, it was a message request. I didn't open that. So I was like, just like, shit, what do I do? What do I do? What I do? Is it real? It's not real? Is it this a threat? Or is this just like a friendly? How do you answer this fucking message? If I answer, I might be untongled in something I don't want to be in the middle of. Even if I had the location of Damazil, I'm not sure I want to share that shit. Right? But I want to get killed for it. Also, the thing is I don't have it. So what? I mean, if I say it, don't have, they're not going to believe me. Right? Because they might think, of course, you fucking have it. But I don't. Right. So I was like, and so I sat on it for days. I had to go to Mexico to give a conference about what we face as journalists. Right? I'm trying to do more of that, more like public speaking for college. This was where a group of attorneys from Canada that they were trying to find inspiration into how can they keep being working in a world where there's a council, like strong cancel culture, right, without being afraid of speaking, of using the right to free speech. Right? So I was like, dude, if I get threats, if I, my life has been threatened several fucking times, you can do these two. You're only facing consolation. You're not facing, you know, death threats. So that's basically the whole thing I do when I go and say like talk public speaking. And then I went, they had, they had a dinner, but I didn't felt like going into a dinner. I was like, no, I need to go back to my room and think and see it about like, what am I going to answer? To this DM that you could do. Yeah, exactly. So I opened it and I replied with a lot of respect. This was after, of course, like betting this guy, right? Like I asked him like to move to a, to move to a, oh, so you, so I opened the, so he sent me this message, say like, a Luis, I'm decent that. So I'm like, okay, okay, got it. Send him my, my secured app. And then he moved there. And then he sent that message, but it was a message request. So I was just okay, shit. If this is real, I might be into something in the middle of something that I don't want to be. Anyways, at the end, I just replied, you know what man? Like, I'm going to give you the, the respect I give to everyone. I'm going to, I'm going to be honest with you. If I were to do my job for money, I will have, I'm doing a shitty job, right? Cause I'm not doing it for money. Right. I'm a, I'm a, bro cast journalist trying to make a living and join what I do because I enjoy doing what I do. Thanks for your offering. Even if I had, he's location, I probably wouldn't share it. And I hope you understand it. Right. But I understand that every story has two versions. If you and your family have a different version, my ears are absolutely open to actually hear you and tell your side of the story. And that's it. And he was really respectful. It was like, dude, I just want to let you know that that fucking rhiniscum murderer as well. And you're not dealing with a good man as he's trying to clean up his name, whatever. And I like, I completely understand what you say. I'm not trying to clean up his name. So whenever you feel good to talk about it, like in me doing an interview with you, your story and your side of things of your family, whatever. If I'm one of the Frél, one to talk, I'm all ears. And he's like, okay, let me, let me get back to you on that. And thanks for your, for your honesty and wow, that was it. And that's where I got my ball looks on my Bentley outside. I fucking knew it. Let's rolling on a fucking medley. That's why I had to pick you up at the private airport. Yeah. So I'm not going to have to enter an astronaut. No fucking flying in. I didn't. I want to do it. Fishy man. Good lord. Yeah. How much money do you think they have? I mean, they do have more than enough money. You know, they have billions of dollars. Yeah, probably. Easily too. Like, I mean, if you think about the fact that they're laundering money through major, major artists in the US, you know that they have a lot of money. What do you mean laundering money through major artists? Through events. I mean, I can say because I'm not the type that says just things out of saying. I'm working on something. Okay. But they learn their money. They learn their money through major artists. Like music musical artists, musical artists, sports, man. They do have a whole bag of machinery on laundering money. And we're talking millions and millions of of dollars of money. Oh, so they're acting like record labels. And basically, I'm guessing this is how they could do it, but they could act like a record label and they can give a musician or a singer a ton of money in advance to produce a record and pay for their tour, pay for everything, events, marketing, all this stuff. You could dump millions of dollars into that to build up an artist and free cocaine and free coke. Yeah. Best quality. Whoa, that's a great fucking way to loan your money. Yeah, do it. And that's just part of it. So yeah, I mean, when you think about that, like it's okay, so it's millions of fucking dollars. It's not like you put a hundred thousand dollars to produce something like that. Right. So yeah, that was that the conversation ended right there. And I'm you know, trying to see if there's something, something else to be to like, hopefully a good interview with one of these guys. I haven't heard of them because after that, a lot of shit happened. Right. Like, oh, they they extra died at a video. Yeah. So last time you were here, we basically, I think it was right after you went and went through a video's house after it was rated by the military. I believe. Yeah. And it was all shot up, looted, they stole all his watches, clothing and everything. And it was it was insane. And he had still been in custody by the Mexican government when you were in his house. Yeah. But since then, I don't know how long ago it was a couple months ago, he got extra diet. Except I did. Yes. So yeah, I mean, it was it was do, right? And you met with his lawyer that day. You were in his house, right? Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. I met, I met with the two of his attorneys and his mom. They were pretty pissed, right? About journalists being there trying to go into the house. But anyways, I think I phaged, I phased a lot of like backlash, a lot of like shitty comments on that video. I have a YouTube from a lot of like fanboys, right? That they feel they, they are part of whatever. And this is the fucking fanboy. So so for the chapel and say like, oh, that was disrespectful. I hope you get fucking pop for doing that. If you come into my house like that, I will definitely kill you, whatever. And it's like, dude, this is a house of a criminal that was doing a lot of crazy fucking shit that he's behind bars. And this is about my point of view of public interest of what happened, not only for the sake of what happens to that town, but probably for the sake of also a lot, the military day during the operation that was illegal. Like yeah, they fucking illegal. Right? So it's like, dude, I'm pretty sure that you fucking fanboys are the most upset about this. And probably the family was like, okay, this is proven off as well that they fucking looted the fucking house and they shot a place where there were kids inside. Right. Right. It's about the truth. I'm not siding with the Mexican military. I'm not siding with the women. They pulled up and fucking hummers and shit shot up a whole town killed innocent people. Exactly. I mean, wrong doing by the Mexican government, wrong doing by these hotel members. In the fucking middle, it's a town of innocent people, old men and two kids that are daughters of a criminal, but they didn't willingly, you know, were there. Right. They could have been way more surgical, right? And doing that. It was, and now again, this is a criminal and that's the way he makes his money to buy these cars, Rolex watches, whatever. That that gives no reason for an authority to go and fucking loot his house and stole everything. Right. It's wrong doing all over. It's wrong doing all over. And that's that's my main fucking goal on what I do. People say like, okay, you're siding with the Mexican government and then people say, okay, you're siding with fucking hotels. And when I have like, uh, sources on both sides of the sometimes I get reached by by elite fucking Mexican military, you know, that are my sources. And like, dude, why are you siding with this fucking shit, shit people? And I'm like, what do you mean? You're fucking story, man. It's making us look ugly, is making us look like we don't have enough, you know, power or brains to do an operation. So you're siding with with these fucking rats. And I'm like, dude, no, don't get me wrong. What your colleagues did was also wrong. And then I get caused by these guys and I'm like, hey, dude, why the fuck would you do that? Like, uh, are you, I mean, I know you work for the Mexican government, the US government and you were siding with them, because that's what the journalist does. And I'm like, fuck no, dude, I'm not siding with anyone. Who is saying this? Cartel people, you know, some of my sources in in a lower, you have people like like high up Mexican military reached out to you? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I have really strong sources also on the Mexican military, like really in how high are we talking how high up high up enough to let me know several hours before it was expedited that he was going to be extradited. And that was that was secret even for them. But because they were there, they just tell, they didn't tell them that it was a video, right? They tell them, hey, we're going to actually died a person when it's only to you guys to show up, uh, these prison, but I'll take out these guys, boom, take him out in within an hour. They went and they're like, Oh, shit, the guy they're going to fucking extradite as a video was man. And one of them is my source, right? One of these several these guys are my sources. And so they I heard rumors, I heard rumors that there was movement from lower tier people in the military. It was like, Hey, dude, there's unusual movement on this prison. They're taking out someone and I was like, hmm, let me ask these other guys who are higher up. Hey, dude, I'm here in the movement on this prison. Do you know anything that's happening? It's like, dude, yes, let me reach back to you in an hour. Okay, boom, they reach back. So they're like, okay, now that these persons is in the air heading towards the US, I can tell you it's a video was man. So boom, I tweeted it first, like boom, well, video was man, guy, I've actually died it. Those hours before it was like making headlines, whatever. Um, and then when you hear right from the US, I also have good sourcing in the US on non-force man. And they send me the first picture of a video with the with the orange jumpsuit. Right? Uh, they, they, they, uh, a DA a former DA agent published on his Twitter, the photo of a video sitting on the jet on his way to the US. And then a couple of hours later, these other source I have in the US, uh, he sent me the photo of a video, uh, his mug shot basically, right? He leaked his, uh, orange jumpsuit. You have it on the, you have the photos I sent you as Stephen has it on his orange, um, jumpsuit. That one. Yes. I had to put a Walmart because he went huge on Twitter. Good John, that guy. Yeah, do it. The crimson chin. Look at the size. They're like, I don't know if he's, there's a lot of people saying like he wasn't scared. He's probably just dealing with drugs or whatever. Um, he, he's on, he looks high on Coke. I mean, he is on, uh, anxiety medication. So I don't know what that is. Yes. The pressure on anxiety. He's, he's getting medicated for that. Where, where is he in the US? Chicago, Chicago, you, you, I'm see one of the worst, not because of the tie tie security, whatever, but because of the treatment they get, he is on the 11th floor all by himself. And the water either comes out freezing cold in Chicago during winter or hot enough to burn to burn to burn your skin. And he doesn't have any, yeah, like some time, no windows. It's a shitty fucking place. It's a shitty fucking place. So did you get the story from his lawyer on how they got to extradite him? Like it was, was there any pushback from the Mexican government side to the US State Department on the extradition or was this in what was the US and the Mexico and the Mexican government working together to get him extra dieted basically just fighting the lawyer. Yeah, exactly. The attorneys had sat a bunch of what we call in Mexico, I'm battles, right? Like legal resources to stop his extradition. One after another, after another, after another. So legally, lawfully, both governments will have to, will have to go and dismiss one by one of these legal resources, right? It will take years, years, years, years. Then still he will have a lot of other resources to stay in Mexico. Both governments basically said, fuck the law. Let's get this fucker out of him. And they didn't again, I'm not signing with anyone. This is just the way things are. The Mexican US government broke the law in order to extradite. He was illegally, unlawfully extradited to the US. He had resources and not resources in place to stay in Mexico to avoid extradition. You can't expedite an extradition of a Mexican like that. Special when you have a lot of like legal resources in place. The thing is the US legal, whatever agencies are pretty smart. So right now, even Ivan Archival, he's not arrested, but he has a next-revision order in place, right? Who? The oldest of the Chapeetos, Ivan Archivaldo was a man. He has an extradition order, even though he's not arrested. But that extradition order is in place in the US. So when he gets arrested, that order enters before he can set up a legal resource, right? That's what happened with the video. He had an extradition order since 2019 that was still in place. Just got to be renewed every I don't know, months or years, I can't remember. But the US has just ratified, right? Like, renew the extradition request. Boom, boom, boom. So when he gets arrested, even if he starts a legal resource, they're like, hey, I have a legal resource. Yeah, but the extradition is prior to that legal resource. He should still have a lot of like other legal resources like he had. If one of illegal resources was saying that that wasn't him, one of his legal resources, he stood up before a judge in Mexico, federal judge, to say a video? Yes, they ask him directly, are you a video with man? Yes, are you a video with man Lopez? Yes. Are you the person on these photo? No. Are you the person of that, that, that these address? No, are you the son of Joaquin Guzman, Laura? No. So you're not a video. Yes. It was legal resource to say like, yes, I am a video with man Lopez. Yeah. I have no clue who was man is. Joaquin, the chap who was man. I have no clue who that is. And I'm not the person you're looking for. Right. That was legal resource. What is the government? Does the US have a plan in place for all these extra? Why do they want to extradite these people to the US? And why aren't they happy with them just sitting in prison in Mexico? I think because first of all, the alleged damage they've done to the US by trafficking drugs and that the target country was the US. It was harmful for the US. Right. Mexico is just a transition country when it comes to drug trafficking charges. Right. So that is why most of them are extradited into the US. If the traffic or the crimes will be the other way around, they will have to be in Mexico. First, for starters, right? For starters, the crime is committed against the US because the drugs are being trafficking to the US are not trafficking to Mexico. Second of all, the fact that the Mexican authorities didn't have any charges against most of them. They don't hold charges against many of these guys because they haven't set up a proper paperwork, a proper investigation by Mexican prosecutors, makes them basically to say, well, we don't have charges in Mexico. We only have an extradition order to face justice in the US. But like, or other friend of flag that, yeah, no charges in Mexico. Is Nini had no charges in Mexico? It started to sign the US. But when you look for his criminal charges in Mexico, there is none, not a single one. It's fucking wild. Where is El Nini right now? designed the US. But when you look for his criminal charges in Mexico, there is none, not a single one. It's fucking wild. Where is El Nino right now? He is in Mexico City, sitting in a prison. Does he have an extradition? He has an association order. Yes. He's definitely most definitely is going to be extra that as well. Pretty soon. Dude, it's just so, it's so bizarre. You know, it's even just looking at the war on drugs and what the plan was there. Like, extraditing these people that's crazy, they don't understand what's going to happen when they get extra diet. They, I mean, do or do that. Do they see that. Look, these, these cartels are just going to be broken down into smaller factions and become more violent. Exactly. Like, let's think about, let's talk about like this in a lower court's home. Right? Like, let's say they nav all the torpedoes. They, right, this member of the whole, the whole becomes a power vacuum. It's power vacuum. And not only that, who's going to be the next one up? Right. Who's going to be the next target? Right. It's immediately and automatically. Oh, my, right. He's the only one left on that faction on this in a local tell. And he's the one that nobody talks about. This has never been arrested. This is about 80 years old now, diabetic and he's out there. All of these sons, but one have been arrested in the US. All of them except one. How many sons? I think four. El magito gordo is the set of Finn and be sent to you three. He has four three of them have been arrested on three now, three men in the US. And so the one son that is still living in Mexico is running an organization. El magito flago. I'm like the flago. He's the only one. He's the only one still in the loose. Shower his dad's dad. There's only probably two available photos of him. No, it's actually one and very old photo of him. That was published by the DA on his warrant. No one knows where he is. Something, but he's basically he's handling the the operation with his dad. And didn't you break that story about him getting into how he got into the son of a car tell with he was friends with somebody in the CIA or something or he got married to a girl whose brother was in the CIA. Yeah. I did a I did a story that is on my YouTube channel explaining the probable possible connection with the Maio sambada in the CIA. He's oldest sister got married to this guy called Asha to forget his name, but he's a Cuban. And he started doing intelligence for the CIA during the Cuban revolution. So he got papers to be legally in the US. And when he traveled to the US, he started trafficking shit tons of drugs through Florida actually. And then she moved to Las Vegas where he became even a bigger trafficker there. And then he got arrested twice for drugs trafficking because he was being just too flashy in Las Vegas, right? And then he moved to LA and in LA, he was like looking for a new source. Someone who consortium first weed and then cocaine. So he traveled to Saneloa to meet with people sourcing like say, okay, I want to find who cool sort helping out source drugs to the US. And in the meantime, he met modest as a mala, the oldest sister of a manu and who I think in my opinion, if you ask me, she's the real real deal behind this rocker town. She's the real one behind the organization. And no one talks about her because he's a lady. And Mexico is so much east that do like Mexico is like, no, there's no fucking way. LA is going to be a hand of a tucker. Dude, she's the oldest. She's the one who met this trafficker with ties to the CIA first. And my you was like, what, 11, 12 years old? So we're going to believe that a 12 year old kid started this in Paris. She started it. Do it along with this guy and then they brought them. And then my brother is the brother, Ray Sambada, who's free also right now. I was also arrested, extradited. And he's a free man. He's now a Corrito singer in the streets of LA. All of the Sambada is doing, but El Mago, Modesta and the Malito Flaco, all of them are free. Man, I've been arrested that complied cooperated and are free in the US. Didn't the sun write out some crazy fucking book? Yes. You were telling me about it last time you were here. It's like the cover of it. It's like, wow, yeah. It is a book written by journalist Annabelle Hernandez. And it's called the Trado, the traitor, the traitor. And it's an autobiography, like, saying, laying out his whole fucking story of who we sent to Sambada. Niebula, I showed you photos of his arrest is like this handsome. Yeah. You know? And I'll next publish a couple of exclusive photos of Bicente, that I call him. Now. So El Nini is arrested. He's in Mexico City. And what about El Plaga? And El Plaga? Well, Plaga is... And for people who don't know who El Plaga is. Yeah. So, well, Plaga is basically, he's not a head of the cartel. He's a henchman. He's the... He's basically the equivalent of El Nini for a former xenyloacertile faction called Los unrosos, the Russians, the Russians. And El Nini was basically in charge of the cicarios. Yeah. He was in charge of the killers of the henchman. Exactly. Okay. Of the whole security for Los Japipos, right? Here, the security hat for... For Japipos. And the Plaga is the security hat for Los unrosos. Right. Los rusos just to work for El Maio Sambada. And not long ago, they were the most loyal people for Maio, because El Ruso is a dude that has been out for a while. Then since he was like 17, he's a fucking murderer. And she knows how to trap in drugs, how to move around. So, Maio trusted him a lot. Trust El Ruso a lot. Short story long. I mean, long story short. Long story short. Ruso got into an argument with Los Japipos. Everybody fucking hate El Tapipos too. Like every other single faction, they hate them. Why do you think that? Because they're the inheritance of El Chapo. And then y'all... Fuckers. Yeah, that means yeah, probably part of that. Yeah. Rich kids. So, these guys started finding with El Tapipos, Maio gets in the middle and say like, hey, dude, like this is not good for any one of us. So he asks El Ruso to go to the border of Mexico, the US, to Mexico, right? Right across Mexico, California. He's like, okay, that's gonna be your turf. That's been the turf of mine forever. That's gonna be your turf. Get there. Get your men over there. Don't come back to Sinelo, so we can avoid, you know? In fighting. So he did. He left. He promised El Ruso that he's gonna take care of these properties of his ranch, his houses, all that stuff. So, the Chapipos are gonna touch your shit, right? Just work it now. So he's like, okay, then two years after a year after, Luchapito's one is the one of his ranch and started burning his property, he was taking his cars, whatever. So El Ruso is like, no, you wanna fuck it. I'm gonna go back down there and they started this massive fighting that was all over the news. It lasted like, they kept fighting for over like three weeks. Massive shootouts, a lot of killings. Even the Mexican Marine was involved. Allegedly, per word of black, I told me, the Mexican Marine was operating on behalf of Luchapipos. That's what he says. And so El Mayo kinda like got angry at Luchapos, so I'm telling dude, I asked you to never come back, especially not to fight. He's like, yeah, but you made me a promise and you couldn't comply. So fuck it, I'm not gonna leave my fucking ranch and properties to be taken over these guys by these guys. So Mayo decided to not back him up anymore. He's like, okay, I'm not gonna fight against you, but I'm not gonna back you up anymore. So we don't work together. That happened probably last year. So he became an independent, right? Former son of a locker town. And they operate hugely in Mexico, and we'll be able to go out across California, part of Arizona. And then they'll tag up each time. I had reached out. He reached out. He, the thing is, El Paga has a huge following on Instagram. He has this massive account where he posts a lot of his Rolex watches. You know his username we could pull it up. I don't wanna publicize his, you know, cause I mean. You don't wanna give him any a clout. Yeah, exactly. Like they all are all up for it, right? They will, they will be a potential fucking ranch. And I'm not gonna give it up. Okay. So anyways, he has this huge following on Instagram. He posts his, he posts his luxury cars, watches, jafflings, he even posted another knock on monkey. You know, he had a score, he had a score, and I know a common key on top of it. And so like, oh yeah, so a photo, I saw that photo in the, in the article right? Yeah. And so I reached out like two years ago to him to see if he wanted to give any interview cause I was about to go to Macheik Ali and all the area. He never applied. And then probably a month after the interview with Damaso came out, he reached out. And he's like, hey, do what's up. And I'm like, boom, again, secure app, which tells me he's one. So he reached out, better him. He has some camera I asked him for. He's like, D, show his ID, he was driving a pickup truck and he kind of like stopped in the middle of the night. How old is this guy? Dude, he's like 24, 26, like he's young then. And he's the head of a huge army. So we talked about a lot of like, like, Tapeetos, he asked me like, hey, did you really meet with Damaso? And I was like, yeah, dude, yeah, yeah. And he's like, well, I don't like those kind of guys, but an enemy of my enemy is my friend. So like, okay, is like, kind of get out hold of him or like, dude, I don't have any contact, and then wait to contact him. He contacted me and then lost connection with him. Right? I don't have any means to get back to him. Right. So he's like, oh, okay, dude. So I'll get it. So what's up? And I'm like, dude, can you give me a proper interview? Like, that'll suit it. In person, I wanted it to be in person, but he's like, dude, I can promise you that I'm going to be around, because my boss, he calls El Hefee Ery, the Ruzu. He moves me around a lot. So I can promise you that I can be, you know? And I was like, okay, so let's do a video call, an interview. And if eventually you have the time, I'll travel and meet you in person. He's like, by any means. So he laid out all this story about the fighting, the to know what's happening. So he told me about he was two years ago, he was arrested because he, he got into a gun fight with Mexican state police officers and they killed one of these henchmen when it was his right hand, a deal or something like that. They killed him. And they arrested him. And there's this mug shot that you have also on the files where he's, where he's, that's his Mexican mug shot. And he's all beaten up with a, you can see that's how he's in a plogger. Yeah, that's how pyth. Look at that haircut. Yeah, dude. The cop. Can you punch in on that a little bit Steve? And you have his mouth all. Oh shit, he got beat up, huh? He really beat up. And he's no, he's all broke. Look at that Louis Vuitton jacket. He was, he told me that they were partying in a club in Mexico. And they went out of the club like it's seven in the morning. They were driving back to his, whatever. And they got stopped by a steak police officers. And he's like, his friend was like, don't fucking stop, dude. Fuck him. He's like, no, I don't want to start anything. I mean, but he's like, but why are they stopping us? They know who you are who we work for. And he's like, I don't know. Let's just stop and see what's up. Yeah. So he's like, when I pull over, these guys, they'll deal whatever jumps out of the vehicle with his fucking gun and starts shooting at the police. And then these guys start shooting as well. and there's a couple of killings. And then they killed LTO. He tried to run, got arrested, got beat up. And allegedly, he was moved to a maximum scary prison and whatever. But he called me, I was like, dude, what are you supposed to be behind bars? I was like, dude, I was free to the three days after. Like, I was gonna get a friend negotiated for me and they let me out. And I'm like, dude, are you fucking sure? Yeah, 100% or whatever. I'd better than info also through other sources and other means. And he was fucking out. He was out. And I was like, okay, so these guys really out. So when I published this story, I faced a hard pushback by Mexican government saying, no, he is behind bars. I, the chief of police of California, she told me like, I personally put him on a plane and sending me out to you. I told you this. I put him out to Wajaka. So he's behind bars. I know for sure. And I'm like, well, check again, cause he's out. I just FaceTime, I'm just driving his truck down the street. I don't know who you're talking to, but he's behind bars. That's for sure. So then he had to show up for, for a hearing. He didn't show up. And the federal church declared non-present. They couldn't find him. And I was like, of course, they couldn't fucking find him because he's out. Right. That's proof that he's out. And they're like, no, and then they put out a presser saying that, my story was bullshit. And then they were gonna publish his photo behind bars. So don't we have him? And we're gonna publish his photo. Do they publish it? Of course not. They haven't said anything after that. They just didn't wanna be, you know, left like fucking idiots. So he's just like, Carl King Darrow after he got arrested. He's like, he fuckers. I'll be fucking out of here in 24 hours. And he's out. He's out there. There is a search, a search website. We can search for people arrested. So when you look for a nini, it says where he was arrested by who or what time and who is responsible for his arrest, whatever. And where is he right now? Right. No, I'll be the old as well. Right. For these guys, it only says arrested, no time, no place, no agency responsible for his arrest, nowhere to be found. This is not, this is, why do you think he was able to get out, but not El Nini? Aren't they kind of like the same, they had the same kind of power. In their organization, they have the kind of like same power, but their organizations are definitely on another, not at the same level. No. The Chapeetos faction, I mean, Los Rozos are by far not even close to what Los Chapeetos are right now for me. Right. So you would think El Nini would be able to get out easier than him, right? Not really. Because when you are a requester, when you are looked after the US government, it's actually for old times. I see what you're saying, right? It's too hot. Yeah. The rest of another team. They don't have as much heat on them. Exactly. They'll chapeetos too. Exactly. Yeah. So yeah, that was another cool interview published again with Guerrilla, with E1 Guerrilla. A crash out. It's crazy the mindset of kids like this, this 24 year old kid. And he thinks it's cool to be called the plague. Dude, yeah. I mean, this is the thing on the interview. I asked him, like, why did they call you? Why do they call you the plague? La bla bla bla bla bla. And he's like, because I leave no one life, like a plague. I kill everyone. When I go into fight, there is no one left alive. And that's why I got the trust of my half-air, because he knows that I don't back up and I kill. And I'm, you know, so I was like, shit, dude. And I was like, what made you interested in this shit? And he's like, the, uh, Narko Guerrilla is like this, Mexican Guerrilla. This is like, when I was growing up, there was this group, the most elite Cicario group for El Mario Samba, Los Antrax. Los what? Antrax. Like, Antrax. Uh huh. Like the Antrax? Mm-hmm. They were huge, dude. I mean, El Chino Antrax has this miracle story, because he was arrested in whole, in Netherlands when he was arrested for being part of both the Antrax, right? He was putting jail in the US, whatever. Before that, he was the first, one of the first Cicarios that was super flashy and huge on socials, right? He was post watches, lambos, whatever. He even posted a photo with Paris Hilton. There's a photo of Paris Hilton with El Chino Antrax, the head of Cicario for El Mario Samba. Like he was huge. And he was arrested. He started cooperating. He was in a halfway house and then he vanished. And then his body appeared into, like shopping to pieces in Tialoa. Some say he was kidnapped by the same organization. Some other say escaped, went back. El Mario said, like, now you're a snitch, cut him into pieces. So that was the story of, so these Antrax group, because they were fucking elite and flashy as fuck, a lot of people started like making koritos about them. So El Plaga cut in ties by the koritos. He was like, dude, I wanna be an Antrax. So he met someone in Tijuana, because these guys from Tijuana, he met someone in Tijuana that had connections in El Oa. He went to try to do Tinaloa, introduce himself to these guys, to one of these Tinaloa Hotel members. That's where he met Elinie. They were friends before, because they were really, they were starting together, trying to be henchmen, you know. Oh, wow. And these guys, he's another, like, big player in the Tinaloa Hotel, told him, like, you know what? You're not gonna make a lot of money with the Antrax. I mean, they have respect. They don't make a lot of money. You're from Tijuana, do. I know a couple of guys that worked for us in Tijuana, Larana Eki-lis, two brothers, working for the Miasama right there. Go out with them, work for them. And that's where you're gonna make money. And he's like, fuck yes. He introduced me to those guys. I stay loyal to them, and I started making shit tons of fucking money by helping trafficking drugs and being part of their security team. Started growing up, Elinie started growing up with those Tápitos, and then he went to work for Elros, right? Cause Elros also called for backup to Eki-lis. And Larana said, like, hey, I'm gonna go fight back my turf in Tinaloa. He went with them. Elros always like, hey, come work with me. And then Nina and him started like fighting. So like this culture of these Corillos, like these Corillos, they're basically like songs, right? They're like famous songs about legendary drug traffickers. Yeah. Dead or alive, right? So like there's this culture of the allure, the allure of being this big cartel member or this person with power in Mexico, driving these big lifted trucks, driving land bows, having guns, and they marketed almost to the youth of Mexico. They're really young kids. It's like, wow, look at these people. They had this power. They had these great cars. And then the barrier to entry is like, you have to become a killer. Like you had a young 12, 13, 14 year old. Like if you wanna be in the cartel, you have to show us that you can kill. Is that sort of like how they bring them in? He didn't want to like, I didn't want to believe that the music has the power to bring someone to try to be part of the drug. I felt like it was almost like when the whole Columbine massively happened and everyone they played it on Maryland hands. And it was like, do that. That's fucking dumb, which it is. God, dude. But this thing, you're feeling like a particular in Mexico in the local realist kind of tells me otherwise, right? Because he got enticed by the music, by the anthrax. He's like, I wanna be one of those fucking guys. And he even uses a name that has to do with a viral infection. The anthrax and black, I play. Like, yeah. So a lot of these kids, they work for that. It's not even money. It's not even power is for like being famed and having their own corritos and look at what Pazapluma is doing right now. Everybody wants, no one really knew Elinini, right? Until Pazapluma started singing about him. Everybody wants to be Elinina. If you go into my Instagram account, I have a photo of his arrest. And the comments, it's like free Elinini. Yeah, man, Elinini's the real dude and blah, blah, blah. Everybody's like, super excited about that, man. And they're like, pouching for him. Yeah, but like the difference between those guys and the Columbine shooters, there's a stark difference. These guys are trying to make a name for themselves. They want fame, they want money. They want, they want a like. They're coming from nothing. Yeah, exactly. They're coming from poverty. Yeah, these shooters at these schools, like Columbine or whatever, these guys were complete antisocial, had no friends who knows what kind of, I don't know if they were on depression or whatever. And these religious fanatics come after the blaming that Marilyn Manson is the anti-Christ, this and these goth music. These guys knew they were gonna die. Exactly. They knew it was suicide. Absolutely. Not saying it was the same at all. It's absolutely different. Different motivation for them. And Marilyn Manson's interview with the guy who made Columbine, the Columbine for Columbine, Michael Moore. Michael Moore, he asked him, Mask Marilyn Manson goes, if you could talk to these kids, if you could say one thing to these two guys who'd kill everybody, what would you say to him? And Marilyn Manson's response was, I wouldn't say a word to them. He's like, I would ask them questions. And that's what nobody did. Exactly. So basically saying like, these kids were on her for most part of his life. Right. They were not, yeah, they had to talk. That's probably the same shit. I mean, I don't know, do it, but probably a kid. Because again, these whole story about these kids not having a chance and being impoverished and saying like, this is the only way they could, that probably happened with a different generation that happened with a chapel with a manual that grew up on extreme poverty in the woods, whatever. And a chapel started by killing people. Right? He was originally like a fucking cigar. Yeah. These guys, these are city kids. They're not rich, right? They're middle class. They leave well. They can go to school like a nini, black. These kids are not like, that was my only option. They actually were looking for that option. They were looking for that, right? And it's against like, why? Why? Probably because how we all put these guys on a fucking pedestal, right? We talk about these guys like there are major players. We kind of like look up for them and say like, oh, these guys, you know? And that is exactly why I try to interview all these people because unlike dude, I wanna bring him down to humans, right? To what they face, to what they are. Because otherwise you only listen to the Corridos about them. And what are the Corridos of Apargos? He's a badass killer. He's a good man. He has a good heart, but he takes no shit. That's why he kills a lot of men. And if you cross his path, he's gonna chop your fucking hand whatever. Make some look like this bravado, macho man. That is cool and it's fine. But if you cross my way, I'm not gonna have mercy. And it's like, dude, don't. These people are bad in the fucking head. Right? They're fucking killers. They don't give a shit. They move fucking drugs. They, you know, they're doing a lot of like crimes that are affecting us, all of us. And they face ugly lives. They face living like rats. They face living without like these two. Like I ask him like, why will you be open to share a lot of shit on your Instagram? And he told me like, well, I don't share the beheadings. I do. I don't share like that kind of stuff. It's gonna get me in trouble. What I share is my luxury life, right? My watch is whatever. Cause that's why I do these four, right? For money. And if I can show it, then what's the, what's gold? That let's understand. He's like, okay, so these dude, he had people. He chose people's hats off. But he doesn't show that. What he shows is his luxury life. And he does that because on his hat, he's doing what he does for the money to show, right? So if he can't show, then there is no sense in what he's doing. Yeah. Yeah. It's like it's, it's making a name for themselves and like sort of symbolic immortality trying to, you know, they get Coriros made after them and they live on beyond. Like if they did tomorrow, there's gonna be a Coriolo or, you know, some of these gravy yards that have like these crazy memorials to these guys. People go there and party and it's insane. Yeah, I do. I mean, it's, it's, it's wild how they, how they leave. And I don't know what's gonna happen with that. Like I said, we're gonna get behind because after they, interview came out also he went huge in Mexico because the Mexican government actually kind of pushed back so that made this story even amplified more. Yeah. And he closed his Instagram for a couple of weeks or months. He recently opened it back up. And, but he, he caught all connections, you know, so. One of your stories that you've most recently done that terrifies me the most is the story of this Titan software. Yes. How did you first come come to learn about this software and explain what it is? Again, it was, it was an anonymous tip first. One of the source reached out again on the script. And he said like, hey, you need to know about these software that Mexican and Cortel are using. And I'm only sharing this with you because I think you are the one to publish this story, whatever, to find out more about it. And I can't say a lot of stuff about this guy. So, so for his security, right? But basically, Titan, what this is is a Mexican development a software that is like a mega database for a lot of Mexican databases, right? It gets Mexican border ID database, phone companies, different mobile and land phone companies databases, banks, most of the banks probably all of them. Credit scores, et cetera, like criminal backgrounds and also has the capability to live track it. And it is as easy as to enter a full name or what we call in Mexico and array FSA, which is your basic tax ID or a phone number. And don't by doing that, well, this source offered me a login to go in and try the platform. It was mind blowing how fucking easy it is to just enter, I asked permission to a friend of mine in Mexico if I could enter his name or a phone number to track it, right? And enter his info and it gave me several sheets of personal data, like he's most recent calls, like at least the blogs. And then these database makes like this call crossing to try to identify like how close the people he's talking to are to him, like you can tell probably that he call his mom or he calls, they're like 100 calls into last month to these number, right? So the circle is the most. We talk to the most. Exactly who talks to the most and whatever. Like most recent calls, whatever, gives you a sheet about his credit score, security background, background check, his license plates, of course he owns, addresses, different addresses through the years, Mexican variety, license, what else, it was like a bunch of like shit, dude, like he's different phone numbers. And a list of the last hour location, every 15 minutes, a pinpoint where every 15 minutes who was for the last hour, last two hours. So you can track where he was, where he's been the last 15, 15, 15 minutes dropping point, they're like, Papa, Papa, I'm happy. And then you can access these live location. Well, these live location uses, it's a product called SS7, which is a more vile, product called used by companies, mobile companies, all over the world. So they can communicate between each other. Without this product, if I have a Verizon, have a T&T, we wouldn't be able to communicate with each other. That's why you can communicate with people in China or Mexico, to each other. Without this protocol, if I have a Verizon, you have AT&T, we wouldn't be able to communicate with each other. That's why you can communicate with people in China or Mexico or whatever. But these protocols have been widely criticized for a while because of its vulnerabilities. It's super easy to access this protocol without any malware, whatever. And Mexico, a few years back, made this anti-monopoly law that basically bans a single mobile phone company to own the whole registry or the biggest spectrum for the use of mobile technology, for mobile communication waves. What this does is that you and I can set up a mobile company in Mexico. We can show up with paperwork and say, we want to start our own, that is Jones, mobile phone company. It's super easy to get approved and you will have to pay the rent for access to this protocol. You pay that to the biggest companies because it's cheaper than to get one of your own, your own protocol. So you pay for license. You pay for the license that AT&T is using and you can use that for your own small company. So a lot of criminals and a lot of like these security software shady companies are accessing these SS7 protocol. And through that SS7 protocol, they can pinpoint where you are live without even sending you a malware, whatever. It's just legal because that's access to a protocol that every legal mobile phone company has. And that's where they're accessing your shit. And I'm tracking you all over the world. On my article, my story and my next news for legal reasons, I didn't want to face the US government asking questions, whatever. It was just too messy to say that it works all over the world. So I proved that in Mexico, but I proved that my own devices in the US, in Texas, they need work because it works through SS7 or it also works through a different way of doing things, which is basically the GPS, triangle between the nearest phone, right, kind of like triangles, a three-point point points, your location. So they can take this software, enter your name or your phone number or your social security number, and they can pinpoint where you are anywhere in the fucking world find your credit score, find your recent call list, read your text messages. I'm assuming. I didn't access the no text. No, I don't think so. I or probably I didn't because I didn't work on the on the platform enough. Like I just went through there because it it it it it gives you a huge document, you know, with a lot of different pages and a lot of like excels and maps and bep, bep, bep, bep, and then you have to go and interpret it out what is it with right. I sent you a video. I think you can just put up a video of like how the screener goes on how does it looks like, but do he's so fucking easy. And the most terrifying thing, it's like a lot of people's going to say like, well, there was pigasses right back then. It's known. Pegasus. Pegasus. Yes. It developed by Israeli. It was a cyber arms, basically weapon. You could call it, but it was marketed by the Israelis as a tool to weed out criminals and terrorists. Obviously was not used by governments to to weed out dissidents or journalists. So the thing is, Pegasus, look at all the information you have about Pegasus, right? Because it's available. It's information easily available. Well, that's that's going to be the sheets. It sends out. Okay. So this is the the information that you get. Yeah, that's that's a brief. I will I wouldn't zoom on any phone in case there is like, you know, but probably most of the four numbers are not working anymore. So it's okay. Okay. Yeah, that's that's how it looks. It gives you a lot of fucking info. It gives you a lot of stuff. So now, Pegasus, the thing is it was developed by a proper known company developing software and acquired by official means by governments, right? It wasn't acquired on the table. It was officially acquired by governments. Yeah. Yeah, it's like 200 grand. You can pay for a like, Pegasus. The thing is they have the zero day exploit with that. So exactly like you don't need to click on a link. You can just basically send some send it to somebody and it automatically infects their phone. They don't need to click shit. Definitely more aggressive. Definitely more access. I mean, gives you more access to a device, right? Cause you can turn on and off cameras for microphones, whatever. Yeah, this shit is nothing like that. Right. But the thing I find more dangerous about this thing is that it is not acquired officially by governments. This is highly overlooked, highly shady. The login, there is no information who's behind this shit. You don't know because it's a single developer in Mexico that gets a hand up people say like, okay, but the Mexican, the Mexican border ID, they have a lot of like firewalls. So it's almost impossible to access that shit without that strong malware. Well, the thing is you don't need it because your malware is corruption, right? You pay someone in to let to give you the whole access to an updated database of that shit, same with phone companies, banks, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. That's how this shit is working. Now, this is, I spoke to the developers. He said my intention to this was to provide a mixed governments all over the world access to track criminals. But I know that it's been used by, you know, having a bad use, whatever. And this is not acquired on official capability, right? It's been acquired by a single state commander that says, okay, the license is super cheap. It's about a hundred thousand bucks. Give me 500 license. I'll pay it on my own pocket. And I'll give access to my agents, you know, so we can work this properly, this platform. But I'll sub-rent it. I'm going to rent this out to criminals as well, to people in the Catholic, Jalisco, Catholic, and Elua. So they track rivals or they, they citizens. And that's how this shit is working. That's, that's how they find people that they want to disappear, to kidnap, to kill. They use this kind of people within the Mexican law enforcement or military are knowingly licensing this software out to the cartels. This is the biggest proof that Mexico's a fucking narcostate. They're working side by side. You only have access to these kind of shit by invitation to a once-up group. These, what's up group admins are either four or five different admins. It's a mix between state police commanders and cartel members, high ranking cartel members. This is the consil that'll give you access to these what's up group where you have access to these technology to signal blockers to exotic animals to terra terra terra, like, like, passport. I'll show you for example, like fake US passports, but they're like, because they're coming out of the consulate. A lot of crazy shit dude, like if you need a different identity in Mexico, you can easily get it easily. It's, it's wild. It's, it's fucking wild. Yeah, that's what that dude was telling me that guy you introduced me to, um, who came in here? Yeah, for an endo, for an endo, for an endo, he, uh, he was telling me how he, when he was a guy, okay, they, they basically would bring you into a house. They would, they would have a whole change of clothes for you and make you look like a fucking worker. Yeah, they'd remit, they create you a brand new passport and get you across the border. Yeah, they would. I mean, they even, they're even selling, you know, Steve, pull up that tweet I sent you earlier. They're even selling, what is this bro? This is bombs that they hang into drones. It, it even, one of the selling points is like, he has his hanger for it for your drone. So you can own my, God. So the DJI, little consumer drones that you buy on Amazon and Best Buy, they can carry these things and they just drop them. And they just drop them. A drone bomb. Yeah, this is the kind of shit they're selling on these WhatsApp groups, bombs, the 20 2000 puzzle, which is a thousand bucks. And who is getting these bombs? Uh, this console in this WhatsApp groups. Well, these bombs, Mexican military is getting them and selling on the black market to the cartels. Yes, exactly. Yes. These kind of like, like high level weapons. That's car. It's a, it's people knows about about, um, guns. He's car is pretty expensive. And this is a car all covered in gold. Right. The scope in the lot magazine, gold handle, gold barrel. Ridiculous. I mean, but what was that thing you were showing us earlier with that, that fucking thing that looked like a laser gun. The, well, that, that gun does one, that's a single signal jammer. They use that against their own technology, right? Because if the Kalisuger tell, yeah, yeah, yeah, if the Kalisuger tell has drones, bombing, you know, with bombs, well, you need protection against that. But you also need protection against the government drones that are looking over your turf. So they will, they will, they will, on the same group, they will sell these kind of shit. So you can block. And how does this thing right here work? It's basically a shotgun that blocks the signal of, of your drone. So if you have a drone that is communicating through GPS to find its way, whatever, as soon as you fire this shit, it blocked the signal of that of that, basically shuts off your drone. So it drops. Oh my God, bro. Dude, it's, it's so wild that a lot of like police, they don't even know that this is happening on these WhatsApp groups. Because these world is so small, the criminal one time I was at a bar with one of my sources. He's, he works for, for the Mexican military. So I wasn't a bar with them. And we're talking these and that. And on the WhatsApp group by had access back then, I'm not part of the WhatsApp group anymore. But they, someone posted a pair of binoculars, but they look like super high tech by knocking off your regular night vision shit. They look really something and they were really expensive. They were selling those shit for 200,000 pesos, which is like 10 grand. And I was like, dude, this looks like something really geared up, not your regular binoculars. So I show him to him. So I was like, do you have any clue what this is? Like what kind of binoculars are this? He looks at it. And he thought, he goes pale. He's like, what do you get this? And I'm like, I'm sorry, is telling them. Dude, no, no, can I use your phone, please? And I'm like, no, no, wait, wait, wait, what happened? It's like, no, just send me a photo, like a screenshot of that shit. And I was like, all right, yeah, my all means, what happened is like, just give me a second. Pick something's phone. He calls someone. It's like, hey, remember the fucking pair of binoculars? You bought from it? Well, guess guess because we're like, our. And and then he's like, sack the date is with a khaliso hotel. Why? Why are these binoculars in hands of the haleesco? He's like, okay, just think about that. Boom. He hangs the phone. He's like, dude, I sold this pair of binoculars. These exact pickers, he's like, I'm pretty sure that he's zoom in. Yeah, they have a mark where I raised the seat, whatever, to a guy who works on the military as well. And turns out he's selling this shit to the haleesco. So I was like, fuck, okay, sorry about that. Yeah, like this world is, so there's a, they're sourcing from official, unofficial, military, police, US military, they're sourcing from everywhere and they have access to a lot of fucking shit. This was a major, major leak. These source granted me access to, he granted me access to. Look at this shit. What these are all IDs and passports. Yeah, US, US, resident, permanent resident cards and passports. They are not fake. They have all the, all the ceilings, all the, all the markings, because they're coming out of properly from the company, from a, from a, a US consulate in Mexico. How much money, what percentage of the revenue that these cartels are bringing in is from, is from smuggling people over the border. Right now, dude, that is huge money. That is huge money. These, uh, smuggler in see that why is he recently told me for a story that they are, they are making more money from smuggling people than from smuggling Coke. So he's like, they were kind of like dropping that. We're now huge on the human smuggling side of it. Cause for a single mail just to get him across the border, literally over and down the wall, they're charging 1800 US dollars for a single man. If you're moving a whole family and they, they ask you to go to, I don't know, New York, yeah, then you, you arranged the whole fucking thing from, even drive you in fucking New York. Yeah, dude. I mean, they, they passed, they passed, they get you passed through checkpoints. And then they tell you not one of us, right? Because then there is no more checkpoints after 20 miles from the border. They're not more checkpoints. Wow. There's only one, but like their checkpoints in a circle around 20 miles from the border. And they get past the law using different tricks and different. Play this video, Steve. This video is well. I just saw this on Twitter this morning. It looks like these guys are somehow like they're tying this shit around those. Oh, that's crap. And they're, they're making them. What is it? They're widening the, the bars or breaking them. They're cutting, they're cutting off the, they're selling those bars off. Oh, you, you'll see it. There it is. Is this the Trump wall? Yeah. They're just waving at the cameraman. Yeah, they're, they're loud. Look at them. That, that, that is a recording. He said, you know, they don't give a shit. Look at this. And again, aren't they really a threat? I mean, look at these kids and this. They're not the fucking threat man. They are not. These guys are making money. So these guys are coyotes. These guys are coyotes. That's exactly what happens with, with most of the parents policies. How recent was this? Can you, can you look at the tweet and see when this was or where this was? Like we're specifically on the border. Was this December 11th? This was posted. Okay. This was just posted a week ago. Mm hmm. Just the cartels run the border now. Yeah. Yeah. And it's, it's pretty obvious. I mean, what was happening before, before the whole deterrence, right? Nothing really. I mean, a lot of Mexicans will work coming in and back out. They were like getting across the work and then back to Mexico and then back the next day. But when you put in place, the Terrence policies, when you put crocodiles and, you know, crisis shit, cartels are going to bank on that. They're going to make money on that. They're going to make a lot of fucking money on it. And you'll make them powerful by trying to stop migrants from reaching the border, not having a system in place. You're making them reach if the borders were open as people say. Like they're wide open. Well, who's going to charge for a wide open border, right? No one will be making money. Right. You will, you will face a lot of like, a lot of like, a mess of migrants coming over illegally to the US, right? That's a different thing. But no one will be making money. Not criminal legislation will be banking on it. But when you close the borders, when you really close the borders and make it harder and harder and push people to remote places in the desert, throw the sea across a huge wall under tunnels, that's where they're going to kind of go, and they're going to become more and more and more powerful to the money they are massing. The harder it is to do it, the more money they can make. Absolutely. And when you can just show a couple of kilos in a backpack and walk across the border legally, like this, it's not that hard to do it again. The migrants are not breaking drugs. The cartels don't work like that. They don't put two eggs on the same basket. They, 90, if you go into CVP and I really ask all the people to do that because it's open information, go to cdp.gov and look for these stats, statistics on seashores, right? How much drug is being seized through ports of entry and in between the ports of entry. I mean, through the desert, through the whatever, 99.8% is getting seized on ports of entry on proper ports of entry, like shipping ports, not like the regular bridges. Oh, oh gosh. Yeah, vehicles commercial, personal vehicles, whatever. Like what we use like 99.8, very little drugs are being smuggled in between walls because it's riskier and you don't need that shit. Right. What you need is a full border packed. Like when the CVP officers are taking a long time checking on you and that's making a huge fucking line on the bridge. That's when they they're like, so these holiday seasons like December, a lot of Mexicans go to the US to buy gifts for Christmas, right? So the border waiting times are like fucking three, four or five hours. You have to stand in line to get across into the US and shit. That's when they guys take advantage of that shit. There's like, there's a lot of cars. We have more chances of pulling one car packed with fentanyl in 100,000 cars. For Nando was telling me that there was a system in place. I'm not sure if it's still in place where people citizens of Tijuana actually have there's programs where they can cross the border every day to go to work in the US and San Diego or somewhere. Yeah, it's a border crossing corridor. Is that still in place? Yes, I'll do that. Yeah, that's in place. Which I mean, again, it's for border crossings, right? Like in your, your, perfectly legal to go. You're Mexican citizen, but you work in the US, you go back and forth. I heard a guy, this guy, uh, John Mereshimer was was doing a podcast on the Alex Friedman and they were talking about immigration. And basically John Mereshimer was making the point that the two main things for a country to become powerful are there's two proxies. One is GDP and the second one is population. And he was making the argument that like people in the US, Americans, young Americans aren't having, they aren't making babies like they used to. And he's saying that the immigration of people from South America and Mexico is a good thing because they're still making babies and they're still crossing the US. We want more people. Yeah. More people is good. And more people equals equals a higher GDP. Yeah, definitely. If, if you actually have a program to make these people enter the workforce legally, right? Yes. If you make these people enter the workforce, then yeah, you have, you have a lot of people working, making money, moving money, and you have larger population. Right. When you remove the whole race about it, you know, when you, if you want a country just of white people and you don't take into account immigrants and say, like, well, they don't count. Let's just count for the white people because this is a bank or whatever. That doesn't work. Right. If you take into account a level like an immigrant, say like, okay, let's, let's make these people work and make them get into the workforce, then you definitely have a stronger workforce. Right. Well, pay, paying taxes, buying shit, buying houses, all these stuff. Well, the crazy thing is like they, they, they don't punish. I don't know exactly what, what the system is, but I don't, the people who run big companies that hire these illegal immigrants, they can, they know they have tons of legal immigrants working for them. Yeah. And they pay them cash, and they paid, don't pay them a lot of money. Exactly. They're, they're fucking, they're benefiting. Yeah. That's why Mexico is our biggest trading partners because we do what we put 90% of our manufacturing in Mexico, and we get it dirt cheap. Yeah, the, I mean, again, these country it's not enhanced of bad politicians. It's enhanced of fucking robbers that are owning huge companies, they're stealing from the country. They're, they're doing all these crazy fucking shit like outsourcing for cheap as fucking labor, benefiting everyone, but only their own pocket. So who is fault is that? Is that the guy who's trying to work to pay his family? And he, he's not a citizen. So he has to get paid cash, but he's providing all this labor. He's working harder than any fucking other person on the job site or whatever it may be. Is it their fault? Or is the fucking guy owns the company who knows he's getting the shit for 50 cents on the dollar. It's corporate America. They're what is, but who's fucking up? They own the fucking country. They're doing all these crazy shitty policies for their own fucking benefit, but for the demise of the whole country. I, I, I, I'm pretty sure that any politician call it by an or call a Trump, they're well educated enough to know what's better for a country. But they are in the fucking hands or the pause of corporate America. They don't give a shit. They're going to tell you like, no, you don't want what's best for a country. Let's outsource everything to China. Let's outsource everything to Mexico. And let's, and let's, uh, let these, uh, illegal immigrants work illegally and get paid cash instead of like actually put them on the workforce and make them pay taxes like everyone was for the benefit of the country, right? And then because they're going to be legal. So, so we win. The only one, the only one losing is the owners of that company they're going to have to pay taxes and employees and all that shit. They don't want to do that because they want to earn these extra fucking penny. Yeah. And the politicians all they want to do is they're going to do whatever it takes to stay in power. The same power. Yeah. Yeah. And if these guys corporate America call it corporate cartels, American court, American cartel, whatever, they work as fucking cartels. It exactly the same shit. Right. And they own just it's just it's within legal boundaries. There's a machine. There's a mechanism in America that allows the stuff to work legally. And I mean, senators and politicians, they're, they're basically prostitutes to big organizations, exactly pharmaceutical or whatever it might be. Exactly. Yes. That's what that, that's what was happening with this country, which is we talk about this, uh, yesterday, like this is to like this is a country that manages to every 80, 70, 50, 100 years to renew itself in its fucking great. And it's because it's people, right? Because I've been benefiting people has, they kind of like take everything for granted. But when, when these country feels that their level of comfortable is being threatened, that's when it steps up. And it's great. And it's, it's something that it's not happening in Mexico. Places like Mexico, we're optimistic about it. We say like, no, this year we're doing great. We're doing better every year. But in reality, we're going to shit. It's just an opinion that it's naturally optimistic. And we're feeling that we're doing better every administration every year. We now have, we now have train, we now have electricity, we now have whatever fucking country is going to shed. While this country, the opinion usually goes like that. But the country goes like this. It always comes up first, right? And it's because people still has the capability to turn the country over, right? To say like, okay, it's not Biden. It's not Trump. It's not the migrant. It's the fucking corporation. Let's fucking switch that up and it, and it gets a lot of sacrifices for the people, right? Like economical depression, et al, that shit. Body works at the end. And these countries we use itself. And that's that's that's beautiful about it. That's that's that's cool. Well, bro, I always enjoy these conversations with you. Same bro. Your flight is coming soon. We got to get you out of here. But I like to catch. But I really enjoyed that. Where do you envision the next, where do do you envision the dynamic playing ground of the cartels in Mexico going and the factions? Where do you think this is going in the next five years? The next five years are going to be definitely interesting because the whole playground, it's going to be on the side of the border. These is where everybody's going to be either arrested or free or snitching or talking or trials. And this is going to become really interesting to watch all this legal developments. I'm pretty sure that we're going to start seeing also killings in the streets of the US from these players, right? It is not the first time. It happened before in Miami. It happened before when the all the Colombian cartels were arrested and brought to justice into the US after Pablo Skolak. They all were here in the US snitching, talking, playing their cards. And killing each other on these kinds of work. And this is what is going to happen eventually here with the Cinac Hotel, probably most of the West Coast and LA and all those places. But the next playground for these guys for the next five years, because you going to have the trial of a video probably one or two other Chapito's probably some of them are going to get killed in Mexico. Then you're going to have the mayos. Then you're going to have new players, this is no other hotel. You have a going to have a nini, damasos, you know, all these people that are already on these side of the border. Three out of the four kids of Omayyou are on these side of the border. One Chapito and his security chief is probably going to be soon on these side of the border. Damasou is on these side of the border. So everybody, everybody's going to be on these side of the border cooperating with authorities and that's going to play out really interesting. Well, I'll be following you closely. Again, tell everybody where to watch your videos and read your sub stack and all that. So subscribe to my YouTube channel. I'm going to, I'm going to, I'm going to rebump my YouTube channel, hopefully making more consistent, breaking news there before on Legacy Media. I'm trying to make the leap of faith, you know, with your help. Of course, when I relaunch with some good stuff, I'm going to be back and asking for an assault link from you to help me repump my YouTube channel. Hell yeah, man. I'm psyched. I'll link it below. Yeah. And thanks again, man. We'll get you back in here sometime next year. Fuck yes. All right. Goodbye world.