The Jerogean Experience. This is from 1964. It's a FOIA request made for the Freedom of Information Act, for the file of Barack Hussein Obama Sr. As a graduate student in the Economics Department at Harvard University. Obama has passed his general exams, which indicates that on academic grounds, he's entitled to stay around here and write his thesis. However, they are going to try to cook something up to ease him out. All three, that is all three Harvard people, will have to agree on this, however. They are planning on telling him that they will not give him any money and that he had better return to Kenya and prepare his thesis at home, which means he will never get his PhD. Remember when they said, take a break to you? This is my alma mater. This is the thing I have been unk-y, you know. There's this whole story about what happened in my early life and why I don't talk about it publicly. And this is why this is interacting with your story about joke theory because it's weird for a comic not to turn that into a joke. And it wasn't funny to you. In around, I don't know, 1988, 1989, Harvard University told me to remain in good standing in this program, you cannot live in Massachusetts. Why? And I said, what? How can you tell me where I can live and where I can't live? It wasn't until somebody foyed Barack Obama's father in his file. And I read the story that I realized that Harvard has a program for how it gets rid of people it wants to get rid of who are in good standing. There's a move. It makes them move so that they can't complete their thesis. Why do they want to do that with you? Probably because I was learning disabled as the day is long, probably because I took an unpopular stance that the equations that people were working with called the Donaldson theory self-dual equations were not the right equations to be working with and that we had somehow been assuming that they were highly peculiar to dimension four and the difficulty of the equations, which was giving us all these great results. I effectively gotten on the wrong side. I proposed some equations that where I was told were insufficiently nonlinear, never mind what that means, that in 1994, effectively the same equations took over the entire field. Whatever it was, and this is like part of the idea of reclaiming your own story, it was so crazy that a university would tell me what state I could live in. Can I stop you? So the people that are telling you this, they're operating on a pre-existing solution to deal with people that they find undesirable problem-matic. If you solve thousands of them. Right, so it's written somewhere. I don't know. Or it's like people maintain, for example, one way of getting rid of a tenured professor that's known is that you ask the person to report on their research and you load them up with teaching and you give them a lousy office. And then eventually they'll just quit because you make their life hell. So people know that there are these kind of secret quiet ways to do the undoable. Can I ask you this one? What did you think about Cornell West being denied tenure from Harvard? First of all, I thought I assumed he already had it. I mean, Cornell West is this loved intellectual. When I found out they denied him tenure. I was like, what the, what? How do you deny Cornell West tenure? Like, what is that? What did you think about that? I, first of all, am not knowledgeable in that area. I think of him as a very bright superstar of some sort of part academic, part social crossover, high impact human being. Yeah. I was there when Larry Summers was president of Harvard when he went out and said effectively, too many people are using the Harvard label and we're going to be raining it in and going back to hard rigor and basics. Let me tell you what people don't understand about Harvard. Harvard is two separate structures fused together. One is about power and one is about achievement. And the two of them are interlinked in a way that cannot be separated. Without the achievement, Harvard wouldn't have this kind of glowing reputation that causes us to sort of, ooh, and ah, over a history. Without the power, it wouldn't be able to attract the money and it wouldn't be able to constantly position itself. So through achievement, it gets enough cashay to wield power, through the power it gets the resources to buy achievement. And this sort of thing is not understood. And I've been in both sides of this thing. Like one of the things that happened was that the Boskin Commission in 1996 tried to figure out how to cut social security and raise taxes without getting caught because that's the third real of politics. And what they said is if we change the CPI, the consumer price index, the way we measure inflation, because tax brackets are indexed and because entitlement payments for social security and Medicare are indexed. If we claim that social security, sorry, if we claim that inflation is overstated by 1.1 percentage points, we will gain a trillion dollars in savings. And the public won't be able to object to it because we're gonna be just adjusting a dial. We're gonna say that this dial was broken and we got some technocrats to fix it. So they figured out we wanna get a trillion dollars over 10 years. They backed out, that would require 1.1% overstatement. They broke into two teams. One team came up with 0.5. One team came up with 0.6. 0.5 plus 0.6 equals 1.1. Totally fictitious. And they got a proposal for a trillion dollars that they were gonna steal effectively from social security. And they described this action publicly. Robert Gordon, who was one of the five Boskin commissioners. Jamie, could you bring up something called Boskin Wild versus Mild? They brag about these things. Power wants to explain just how powerful it is. And you remember the scene in the big short where they're talking to these guys in Florida and saying why are they confessing? And somebody says they're not confessing, they're bragging. It's a question of what are you proud that you're able to do. All right. So until Robert Gordon did this PowerPoint presentation, we did not have, understand what happened to the work that I did with my wife in economics, which is that we were trying to show how you could actually compute the consumer price index objectively using gauge theory. The same year they were trying to figure out how do we steal a trillion dollars over 10 years by doing funny games with the gauge called inflation. Do you find the wild versus the mild? Yeah, it's just blowing a PDF and it's like taking it, it's like I've found it. So this thing, perfect. If you go to, go about five or six slides in. We'll see how that works. Okay. Keep going. The final word is somehow. Keep going. Okay, Dale said 1.1% implies 1 trillion in Social Security Savings over 10 years. Somehow our separate efforts came up with the 1.1% bias number. In other words, they came up with the target, which is let's save trillion dollars. And then they came up with, we have to say it's overstated by 1.1. We then broke into two groups and somehow keyword, we put them numbers together and we got the target. This is academic malpractice practice in the absolute extreme. When Harvard was doing that, it was acting in its power capacity. And the way they did it was they buried what I think is probably the best work in 25 to 50 years in mathematical economics that happened in the Harvard Economics Department, which is a second so-called marginal revolution where we changed the calculus underneath all of economic theory. So how does something like this happen? Is there a concerted effort did they get together and they have this idea? They have a 5 person commission behind closed doors that meets at the cousins house of somebody on the commission in Florida. And in another presentation- Lincoln, Florida. Florida man. And in another presentation, they say, we solve this at the kitchen table of my cousins house in Florida. And you're just thinking like, okay, so it's five guys, Bob Packwood and Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat and Republican, got together, picked five economists who were willing to play the dirty game. The dirty game broke into two teams. They knew exactly what they had to do. They found the results to put them together to put in front of Congress, to put in front of the National Academy. And would they ever held a ton of both for this? No, there's an entire book called The Physics of Wall Street in which my wife and I are chapter 10 and the epilogue, which it talks about, they made Weinstein a Melania go away, right? So what I'm trying to talk to you about is like this experience for me. I've never talked about this with anyone. I've never, I mean, I've talked to tons of people privately. This is gonna go out into the world. I was, you know, this question, like what is Eric Weinstein ever done? I did that. I did the marginal revolution using such things. No, no, no, no. The question is Tim Dylan joking around. Yeah, I know. He said, what did he, he never created the rotator. That was very shocking. He was fucking around. That was the funny part about it. He was joking. But he's saying that because he knows you're brilliant. You understand the only reason why he can say that if you were a loser, he couldn't say that. You don't need to make me feel good about myself. I know, but you brought it up again. No, I'm saying something completely different. Okay. Okay. I actually have been scared of this question. What question? That, Tim's question taken seriously. He's gonna take his ears. I'm taking it seriously. Okay. You're in a weird world. Okay. Here's your word world. You're in a world of serious intellectual people. You're dealing with... You're straight. You're also hanging out with Tim Dylan and me. And I love it. But it's, the problem is like you're complating these two things. Joe, Joe, I'm not that angry at Tim Dylan. It's not, I'm not that angry. Do you hear that? You heard the word, you heard the word that? That's a problem. You're not that angry at Carlussman. See it. I'm not angry at him at all. I know. Tim Dylan and I'm sad. I'm sad for Tim. Tim Dylan. Anyway. It should be sad for Tim. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. He's one of the most important comedians of our time. Okay. How dare you. I had to dare it. It gave me a moment to reflect. And I realized something, which is I don't want to talk about this shit publicly. I don't want to say Dale Jorgensen is the guy who buried one of the most important innovations in economics. But yeah, you just did. I just did. And that's what I just done. I realized by reviewing your history and revealing your seven years away from the store. I don't want to be associated with Dale Jorgensen. I don't care about him. I want to be associated with gauge theoretic economics. I see what you're saying. And what I realized is I don't want to be associated with the shit that happened over something called the cyber-witten equations. What I just handed you, one of the reasons I've held it back is that it very clearly gives an alternate definition, alternate motivation and derivation of the equations that revolutionized gauge theory, which is what I was thinking about in around 1987, 1988. And I've lived afraid of my own story because it's such an ugly story. This story of a guy who was not allowed to attend his own thesis defense to any academician. You hear it like, what do you mean you weren't allowed to? You present your thesis. No, no, no. You're allowed in the room of my own thesis. So this is why Harvard wanted you to move out of state. Harvard and I got into a thing because of that, because of a conflict, because also of this, because of geometric unity, because I said I want to do physics. And I have an idea about how physics goes. And to be brutally honest, I was technically underpowered. I am technically underpowered. I was conceptually amazing. I was very creative, very generative, tons and tons of great ideas, I think. I'm being honest on both fronts. Technically underpowered. I couldn't accept myself in this world of like, if you play classical music, everybody's technically brilliant. There's no technically weak people in classical music. I was like a guy, it was like John Lee Hooker in the orchestra of the Cleveland Symphony Orchestra on one string and a guitar playing with some weird syncopated rhythm. Shoot your head down. Yeah, exactly. Mom said, dad, he said, let that boy boogie-wooie. It's in him and it's got to come out. That thing, I'm scared of. Why is scared? Because it's my history because I don't want to go back into it. I don't want to go back to being the guy, begging Dale Jorgensen. Oh, pretty pleased with sugar and top. Let me innovate your entire field. I don't want to go back to the Harvard department and say the words, Clifford Tabs. You had Gary Tabs on your program. Clifford Tabs was the guy who told me I had to move out of state. Clifford Tabs. He was a Gary? Yeah, he was the guy who held the secret seminar. And the thing is, is that I'm not against the person in the story. I don't want to be involved with him. I want him to go and be successful and have a good career. But my story, when I put forward those equations and he said they're insufficiently nonlinear and he said self duality doesn't have anything to do with spinners because if it did, Nigel Hitchens would have told us. Nigel would have told us he didn't say Hitchens. He was wrong. And then when I gave him the opportunity, he didn't say, you know what Eric Weinstein brought these equations up and I told him no. And that thing is like something I've held open the door. He's now in his mid-sixties. I was like, you really couldn't just say, maybe I screwed up. You should go kick his ass. No. I'm choking. I know. Well, but where's the good joke? Such a dick. Such a dick. I had to. Oh man. I thought you were going to cry 30 seconds ago. Do you have a tissue? No. Somewhere. That's all there. But that's the thing. I've been running what I realized through Tim. It wasn't a question of being angry at Tim, really. I've been running away from my own story. Just the way I don't like you associated with, I haven't mentioned the guy who was the joke thief in this entire time. Yeah. I understand what you're saying. Right. It's like, why are you in he entangled his story? Because he has nothing to do with your life. It's okay. It doesn't bother me that I'm entangled with him. What bothers me that I'm entangled with this stuff? I know what you're saying. Because I want to be joyous. I want to produce positive things that uplift us, to give us a hope of breaking like the Einsteinian speed limit. If this is wrong, I want to know. I think it's right. I think with all my flaws and all my failings and being 25 years out of the field, I believe that this story is going to be fixed by people who are trying to shoot it down. I'm going to say, holy shit. I think there's something here. Well, now we're going to know, right? I think I'm hoping you're released today on geometricunity.org. And go to pull that up, Jamie.com. And you can watch all the videos that we didn't show you. Catch new episodes of the Joro experience for free only on Spotify. Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience. On Spotify, you can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data costs all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joro Good Experience.