Three two one boom. Here we go. What's up man? Hey, did you trim your beard since I've seen you last? No, I'm afraid. I don't know. No, maybe a fraction shorter, but that's only because we're falling out more. It falls out? Oh yeah, I mean, I stroke it all the time. You know, it's compulsive. Oh, and so then you get these weird hairs they have to well actually, I don't know. It's enough. I mean you fall that slowly, you know, but I guess you know, I guess there's a certain amount of attrition that so the beard's the same length. Have you gotten any younger since I've seen you last? Yeah, I'd say. But that's your business. That's my business. How many years has it been since I saw you? Four? Ah, nearly five I think it was April of 2015. And you have not gotten younger. I have not gotten younger. Have you maintained? I think I've pretty much maintained, yeah, but not through my own work. So the work is still very much ongoing though. We have come a little feel long way in the past five years. But you know, this is a complicated thing to fix. Yeah. And we need to fix all of it in order to really make people start getting biologically younger. So let's bring people up to speed. What have the, what are the latest revelations? What's the latest in terms of what we understand in terms of what could possibly be fixed about human aging? All right, so the fantastic answer to that question is there are no new revelations in terms of what we understand. Our understanding seems to have been pretty much complete already like 20 years ago. The fact that we haven't found out any fundamental new stuff that we didn't know before then is fantastic news because of course it means that we're unlikely to find anything out in the future either. It means that we are pretty much on top of the description of the problem. And therefore it's all about solving the problem. Is it possible summarise the problem? What is the problem? What causes human aging? Sure, that's easy. So aging is simply the same thing in a living organism like you or me as what it is in a car or an aeroplane or any other simple man made machine. It's a fact of physics, nothing to do with biology that any machine that has moving parts is going to do itself damage in the course of its normal operation as an intrinsic consequence of of its normal operation. Okay, so in the same way a car rusting is going to bring that microphone up again. Yep, so keep it about a fist from your face. So in the same way that a car rusts or you know accumulates junk in the oil or whatever similarly the human body does damage to itself. And again just like a car and aeroplane the human body is set up to tolerate a certain amount of that damage so that we can get through to the point where we have kids before we start going functionally downhill, whether mentally or physically. But after that evolution doesn't care about us anymore and therefore we are only equipped to tolerate that much and eventually the damage that's being done accumulates to a point beyond what the body set up to tolerate and that's when things start to go wrong and we start to function less well. What is the difference physically between a younger person and all the person in terms of their ability to recover from the damage of just regular everyday life and exercise and abuse and running around? Yeah, all that. So that's just one aspect of the difference between a younger person and all the person. So let me answer that question by stepping back one step. Okay, so the difference ultimately arises from what the body is made of at the molecular level and cellular level. The body accumulates various changes that are chemical and biological consequences of what the body has to do to keep us alive from one day to the even starting before we're born. And those changes, or if I'm using the word damage to to describe those changes is because eventually things don't work so well. So you're quite right that recovery from injury is one thing that doesn't work so well. But so plenty of other things, whether it's how fast you can run, how fast you can think, how strongly you can grip something, how fast you can walk, all of these things become progressively less good. But the point is that the amount by which they become less good is pretty negligible until the age of 40 or 50. It's only then that the decline starts to accelerate. So what do you do in your own life to try to mitigate that acceleration? Yeah, I'm a really bad example of this. That's crazy, but you're right. This is your business. So there are two reasons why I'm bad at it. Okay, the first reason is that I'm really well built. I'm just lucky. I've just one of those hateful people who I can eat and drink exactly what I like and nothing's able to happen and I don't even need to exercise this beak of. I'm biologically far younger than I actually am chronologically. Hold you chronologically. Chronologically, I'm 57. Do you think you are biologically? Well, I'm told that I'm a good decade less than that. This is what I get told every time I do these tests, which I've been doing for the past, let me say 18 years. Yeah, so that's pretty good, it is. So you're lucky. Yeah, but the other thing is, I'm working hard to hasten the defeat of aging and maybe it's a net win. Maybe the amount that I'm hastening, it is more than the damage I'm doing myself by, for example, not getting in a sleep. And you still drink booze? I still drink. How often? I drink probably more than the average American. What does that mean? A few beers a day. A few beers a day. A few beers a day. A few beers a few. Three or four? Yeah. Three or four beers every day. Yeah, a musta. And a whiskier too every day as well? Yeah, musta. So six days a week or six drinks a day? Yeah, musta. Wow. Want to drink right now? Only if you have one. Do we have any beer? Do any honeycans or do we have the fake honeycans? I drink whiskey. I only drink actual beer, not honeycans. Oh, you son of a bitch. What is the actual beer? Wow, you know, I pay I think that that's a taste like beer. Honeycans doesn't taste like beer? Of course not. I don't know. I'm in my room. I've got a weird infused beer for a while, but I think, oh, that don't fucking do that. He'll lose all of his gains by my attention. Actually, no, I've never smoked part. I mean, I've experimented with it when I was younger, but it never did anything to me at all. Just get some ice. Get some ice. Well, how's some whiskey? I don't put ice in my whiskey. Oh, you just get some glasses then, Jamie. It's hilarious. You're very specific with your booze. Well, that's not all that specific. When it comes to whiskey, I mean, or beer for that matter, I'm not a snob of a door. I mean, I want to drink honeycans. You got a beer snob. Honeycans are delicious beer. Honeycans is refreshing, which is, you know, it's like when you call someone's research descriptive. It's a euphemism for not worth much. I understand. Refreshing meaning it's a cold beverage, but it doesn't have the stout taste that you enjoy. It has the function of water. Right. Or lemonade or something along those lines. Yeah. How frowned upon it is in the anti-aging community to be a person who drinks as much as you do. Everywhere in the in the agent community knows me. And I know that I don't drink to access for myself. Right. They know that what I drink is, you know, what works for me. This which one's relaunable and yeah, look after you, then it's pronounced. How you say it? Look after you then. And for the gavulin. You fucked it up, Jamie. Did you prefer this? It's very good. Would you ever buffalo trees? That's okay. Like, I've been asked about it. Okay. So it says you. Buffalo trees is American. That's what you don't like. My PR people will get pissed off with me for this. If I'm in the anti-aging community, I am not frowned upon it or I don't know that I do what I do. But everyone says, you know, there will be donors out there who will frown on you for that. But if you're on for it. That tastes like smoke. That's right. It's one of those. Is it smoky? Is it smoky? It's like a peachy. It's really nice. It's very smoky. Yeah. Interesting. That'll be popular restaurants. That's why I know that's selling it. Yeah. I prefer the buffalo trees. It's a little bad. It's weird though. It tastes like it's made with smoke like somehow. That's right. Is it peachy? Is that what you say? That's the word that the tree flies. That's the word that's nothing used. How bad is drinking for? Well, of course it depends whether you drink too much and too much is a different amount for different people. Yeah. So, you know, if you drink within your limits, you know, if you drink enough that you get a hangover in the morning, you know, once a week, then you're definitely drinking too much. A lot of my hangover must have been one over the teenager. Oh, okay. You just keep it going. And jig lots of water. I don't actually think all that much water. Really? God, you're defying all the rules. It's confusing. Are you still rowing for exercise? Last time we spoke, you were... You don't remember enough. What is it called? Settling? What do you call it? So, when are you still living Cambridge in England? Yes. I used to be quite an expert at punting. Punting. Which is this thing that you do in Cambridge, Oxford with a stick. That's right. That you push against the bottom of the river with. It sounds when you describe it like that. Like a really clunky, you know, activity. But actually it's fantastically smooth and when you go to it's really easy. It doesn't, it's not even tiring. And it's ridiculously romantic. Romantic. Yes. And it's definitely a babe magnet. There you go. And good exercise. Yeah, that thing. Yeah. Good for balance. And this is that basically what you do for exercise or do I used to live in Cambridge anymore. I love California now. Oh, you do? You live out here? Yeah. I live in the Bay Area. What are you doing out there? Well, that's where the foundation is, Bay Area. Oh, okay. Yeah, I've been over here for 10 years now. So what is a day-to-day life? What's a normal day for Auburn degree? Well, that isn't really a normal day. I spend a ridiculous amount of time on the road because I view being a high profile member of this community. I view the outreach side of things, just educating people on this as an enormously valuable and important part of my work. And also it's something you can't delegate because, you know, comfort organizers or interviews for that matter, they always want the front man where I was on the science side. We've been able to hire extremely good people. And so I've been able to delegate that to a very large extent. Now, in terms of progress, like what has to happen for there to be a shift in the biological age of people where you could actually reverse it, or we could actually maintain the position they're at now for extended periods of time. First of all, let me answer that last part. So reversing aging is actually going to be pretty much the result of maintaining it. There won't be a justy-baintantie because that would mean that you are repairing the damage of aging just exactly at the same speed that the damage is being led down. Which is ridiculous. You know, you know, if you can do that, you can obviously do it a little bit faster than it's being laid down. So you don't really need to think about the maintaining part. However, what we need is we need to be able to repair all of the types of damage. And because the human body is so very complicated, there are, of course, a lot of different types of damage. So it's a divine and conquer strategy. Any of these types of damage at the molecular level, cellular level, can perfectly well kill you, more or less unscheduled, however, well we fix all the others. So since the beginning, essentially such foundation and my organization has focused on the most challenging, the most difficult types of damage. Because basically the easiest ones are being worked on by other people. We have, you see, we set ourselves up as an independent charity. We're so very charity, we're a public file at 1c3. Which means that if someone gives us money, they go tax break. But we're independent, which means that we do not rely on peer-reviewed government grants or anything like that. We just rely on philanthropy. The numbers of funds do that is that we're not competing with a lot of other people who have their own ideas about what to do. And in particular, the people who are deciding who wins that competition are not, you know, when you're a public government grant, it's terrible. You know, you end up having to basically emphasize really boring, low-hanging fruit just in order to have a chance at getting funded because people want to avoid funding things that don't lead to high-profile publications soon. So, you know, really ambitious high-risk higher award stuff just doesn't get done. And so we focus on that because other people can't. Demi Sensean, that's very unfortunate that it doesn't get done outside of what you're trying to do. Yeah, and then of course this is a recognized problem. And I H for example, have tried to address it with awards, with types of grants that are specifically focused on more cutting-edge visionary stuff. But the magnitude there is time, it's real tokenism, you know, it's less than 1% of the NIH budget. What's frustrating to you about the state of understanding repair and understanding the ability to fix things? Well, I'm not the kind of guy who gets frustrated very much. You know, I'm always a glass-off-full kind of person. So for me, what matters the most is the fact that the understanding that this is what aging is, that this is hard to deal with it, has improved so much over the years. So I started putting out the idea that this was the way to go after aging 20 years ago. Up until then, the only game in town really was, we've got to make the body run more cleanly and generate this damage more slowly than it naturally does. And that's a very big conceptual difference, right? So it's not surprising that it took me maybe 10 years to really get the damage repair approach taken properly seriously by my colleagues in the scientific community. But about 10 years ago, it was taken seriously. And in fact, over the past decade, people have been periodically reinventing the idea. And, you know, I don't necessarily always get as much of the credit as I probably ought to have, but I don't care about that. The main thing is I don't have to persuade anyone anymore. People get it, that damage repair is at least, if not the way to go, at least a very promising way to go. So really what happens next is convincing people outside of the community, right? And there there's been enormous progress as well. So when you and I spoke last five years ago, really, that was the end of the story. I pretty much won the scientific argument, but still, no, it was really listening. And then over the past five years, the huge thing that's happened is the private sector interest in this has taken off. So investors have been coming along. Typically, it's been led by the angel investor types, the seed investors, people who are willing to do really high risk-care award stuff. But they understand that we're getting close enough that this is the next big thing, that we will actually have bona fide genuine rejuvenation medicine in the foreseeable future. How far is it, boy? Wow, some of it's already in clinical trials. Like what kind of stuff? So for example, those stem cell therapies now being used for aspects of aging, whether really clear understanding of how they're going to work, Parkinson's diseases, a great example of this, Western cell therapy is the right way to go and it's in clinical trials. Having been in the news a lot over the past couple of years is synoletics, which are drugs that selectively kill what are called synousent cells. So these are cells that hang out in the body in a bad state where they're doing more harm than good. Not only are they not doing what they're supposed to, they're also secreting nasty stuff that damages their neighborhood. And so drugs have been developed that are seemingly pretty good at getting rid of those and they're in clinical trials as well. And so we used to work on that area. We basically do no work on that area anymore hardly any. And we may end up doing none at all a couple of years from now just because other people are doing it. And so our money is better spent doing the stuff that's still at an earlier stage. And beyond that, we are able, even for things that are a couple of years behind that. So we won't be in clinical trials for another year or two. We've been able even then to get investors interested so that we can actually spend the project out and start up companies and focus on the things that remain. And it's not just us of course, there's lots and lots of, I mean literally way over 100 other companies now that I work with because they're not spin out from my foundation but they are doing closely aligned work. And so I'm literally spending probably a day a week on average just making introductions between entrepreneurs, you know, scientific founders with great science and investors who want to get involved. The stem cell therapy is fascinating to me because I've had some personal experience with it. I've had some injuries that I cured with well, doctors cured with stem cells in a remarkable way where at the point where I was told that I need shoulder surgery and I had a large rotator cuff tear and it's gone. I know it's incredible. It's amazing. But that's not really what I'm talking about. That's gone really well. You're talking about neurodegenerative diseases. Well, the big difference is not just fairly brain versus anything else. What I'm saying is that what you got was using stem cells to treat an acute injury, right, a tear. And that's what stem cell therapies have been developed the most for so far and I've shown the most promise for. But now we're going to the point where we're in a position to use stem cells to address certain aspects of aging. In other words, certain aspects of slow, steady, progressive decline that happens throughout life. Two intravenous use? Well, not necessarily intravenous. So let me talk about the Parkinson's disease case in a bit more detail. So what Parkinson's disease is driven by is the loss of a particular type of neuron. So of course in the brain there's lots of different types of neuron. There's one type called a dopamineergic neuron and they exist just in one specific, very small part of the brain or the substantian nigra. So it turns out those neurons say, well, because they do a lot of work basically. They die at a much more rapid rate than other types of neurons. So we end up all of this with maybe a quarter of those neurons that we had when we were young adults and then gone by old age. That's okay. That amount of margin of error is tolerable in the system. It just doesn't have a consequence. But of course, as with everything in aging, some people have the problem accumulate faster than others. And so some people by old age will have lost maybe three quarters of their dopamineergic neurons. And that is what gives you Parkinson's disease. So what is stem cell therapy? If you think about it, what it is basically you put cells into the body that have been programmed, have been developed into the right state in the lab so that they know what to do when you inject them. So they know like to divide and to then transform themselves to differentiate into the right kind of other cell. So what has been developed is dopamineergic precursor cells, stem cells that know how to become dopamineergic neurons. And those are injected into this one place, the substantian nigra and they do what they do that thing. So they're injected right into the brain. That's right. Wow. So actually this was first tried more than 25 years ago. There was a clinical trial in Sweden because people knew what bug, what was, this was driving Parkinson's disease. So they knew that it's ought to work. But of course back then, we knew almost nothing about how to manipulate stem cells in the laboratory. So what they did was these people, they took cells from the right part of the brain of aborted fetuses. And they just injected them. Now this was enormously speculative because first of all, the brain of an aborted fetus has hardly developed at all. And so just taking the right cells from kind of the right place was hit and missed. And sure enough, almost all the time, there was no effect because they just didn't get the the right kind of stem cell. But occasionally it worked. Occasionally patients got lucky and got some of the right kind of stem cell. Well, I think there was a single digit number in the clinical trial that was done, like maybe three or four. But the question was how good was the effect when there was any effect at all? And the answer was astronomical. So a couple years ago, there was actually a retrospective written by the group that did this clinical trial. And it was written specifically about the first responder. The first person who really got lucky and responded well. And it was written on the on the occasion of the 25th anniversary of that person being treated. What happened with that person was they were treated once just one injection. And the pocket was in symptoms went away. So well, that the person was taken off their prior medication. There's this standard medication for Parkinson's called L-DOPO, which is a precursor molecule for dopamine. They were just taken off it. Again, no symptoms. Symptoms gradually started coming back after 15 years. So 15 years with no symptoms were told from one injection. That's about as good as you can get. So of course, now that we know so much about how to manipulate stem cells before we inject them and therefore how to inject the right kind of stem cell, you know, people are very optimistic. And that's why their clinical trial is already ongoing right now. That's fascinating. So what's really interesting to me is that during the time this person had this one injection, the rate of progress, the amount of understanding of how to manipulate these cells and make them exactly what you want has increased. Well, that's right. Probably shall still increase and consider the... That's right. And so what I was saying about how, since research foundation is moving increasingly away from bothering who are on phenyletics, because other people are doing it, that was already true when we started the foundation in respect of stem cells. We didn't need to. Everyone else, all the important work was already being done by other people. So where are they on right now? Where are you at in terms of like, what's just focus on Parkinson's disease? Okay. So the clinical trials are in phase one, early stage. So we won't know anything really good for another year, maybe two years. But you know, it's not just one trial. There's several groups around the world that are focused on this. Some of them haven't started the trial yet, but they're about two and so on. So, you know, the level of... That gives you a sense of the level of optimism of the specialist in this area. That's very exciting. So you... When you look at your future at 57 years old and you think of yourself at 77, do you think you're going to be the same? Well, have you had a guess? So in order to answer that, I have to come back to what I said about this being a divide and conquer problem. And the fact that we need to fix all of these things in order to really give the proper results in terms of biological age. Now, that means that any speculation that I may make about the timeframe for when we get there is a speculation about the most difficult parts of the problem. And therefore, it's highly speculative because the medical parts are at the earliest stage and therefore there's some... There's more opportunity for things to go wrong between now and then, so to speak. So when I asked to give a timeframe estimate on this, I always make sure to emphasize that it's probabilistic. But what I'm giving you is a timeframe for when I think we have a 50-50 chance of getting a decisive level of comprehensiveness of these therapies. And at the moment, that number is 17 years. Now, that's very specific. Well, yeah, and it is... It is, yeah. I mean, but the thing is, what matters is how that number has changed over the time, over time. So I first started giving timeframe predictions about 15, 16 years ago. And by the time I said 25 years. So it's only come down by eight years in 16 years, which sounds like bad news, right? But here are two pieces of good news. First piece of good news is that it hardly came down at all for the first seven or eight years. It was like I would say, yeah, five years ago, I was still saying 22, 21 years. So it hasn't been slipping any further for a little while. And the reason why I think of speed up to parity is because the only thing that was slowing it down before was lack of funding. Beforehand, you know, I was always saying, this is how fast the science allows the problem to be solved. But the science only allows the problem to be solved if the science can be done. And that will ultimately biomedical research is inherently expensive. And we are just not able to pull in as much money as we need for this. So it's interesting because it seems like that would be something that most people that have a vested interest in funding. You don't say. And sure, over the past five years, as I mentioned, as things have become investable, things have changed a lot. Every time we end up being able to spin a project out from a lab into a private company, another digit gets put on its budget like overnight, just because it's so much easier to get people to write a check if they think with a chance, even a really small chance that they'll get their money back in spades sometime later. You know, I guess that's what you would expect. But yeah, I mean, of course, the other thing that that we always are up against is the mindset that people have got into about aging, that they've needed to get into for all these millennia that we have been unable to do anything about it or have any prospect of doing anything about it at any time soon. You know, what are you going to do? You've got this terrible, ghastly thing that's going to happen to you in the distant future. And you can't do anything about it. So you've got to put it out of your mind so you're not going to spend, you don't want to spend your life being preoccupied by it. So you've got to find some way to not think about it and get on with your miserably short life and make the best of it, right? And of course, the way that one can do that is by somehow denying, somehow, tricking oneself into denying that this is such a big deal. You know, and thereby pretending, for example, that it's not really like a medical problem at all, you know, and that it's like inevitable and universal and natural, alternatively saying, well, okay, maybe we could fix it if we run to, but it would be a bad thing that aiding us some kind of blessing and disguise. And that's where all this is. Yeah, and that's where all this stuff comes from about, oh dear, well, we put all the people or how we pay the pensions or weren't dictators the forever or when it'd be boring, you know, you know, which I have to spend my whole life contending with. How do you say, well, how do you get over the dictators living for everyone? Well, you know, last time I looked, dictator was fairly high on the league table of risky jobs, you know, I mean, not a lot of dictators who's devaging in the first, furthermore, the ones that do die of aging, they tend to have organized their succession in advance anyway. So it's as if they were already immortal. So I mean, come on. Well, not only the percentage of dictators versus the percentage of regular people, it's so incredibly small to not cure aging because of dictators seems like the dumbest idea ever. Well, there you go. I mean, but people are people really, you know, this is what people do. Right? They will come up with some reason why aging is a blessing and disguise. And then they will instantly switch off their brains for fear of actually coming up with a reputation of that reason or even. Yeah. Because romantic aspects of aging are the weird ones, right? Yeah. You know, the inevitable, like, though it's fine. It's wonderful. I'm looking forward to it. It's essentially a disease that we all get. Yeah. I mean, so I have to be very careful with the word disease. Some people are. So you've had David think Carol. Yeah. On the show. He's been a great friend of mine for 20 years. And we've, yeah, we have a very similar attitude to, you know, authority. We don't think much of it. And so we tend to push the boundaries a bit, both of this in some different ways. So he actually, here's our history of calling aging a disease a bit different from mine. He's more comfortable with it. I tend to feel that the problem with calling aging a disease, which is that it makes it sound like it's something that could be cured with one of therapy, like, you know, an infection, which isn't, which it isn't. It's a side effect of being alive. And as such, it's something that, you know, you can repair, you can save off, but you have to do it periodically because the damage is going to continue to be created. And, you know, the reason why that's important is that it determines what kind of, what kind of medicine we look for. A lot of Alzheimer's research, for example, if I would say most Alzheimer's research has been predicated on this kind of mistake, on the idea that if we can just cure Alzheimer's, they, you know, so I would say that actually it's not that the word disease is used too narrowly and should be broadened to include aging. Rather it's the other way around that the word disease is used too broadly and should be narrowed. So it's not to include things like Alzheimer's that are actually parts of aging because really the difference between the progressive chronic conditions like Alzheimer's that we call diseases and the ones that we don't, like, you know, loss of muscle or decline the immune system or whatever. You know, the only difference is semantic. Some of them are, you know, they're both parts of aging. They're just some of them are ones that we've chosen to give disease like names to. What would you call aging if you don't call it disease? Well, I call it a medical problem. All right. That's all I call it. Okay. That's pretty pure. Yeah. Yeah. In terms of potential future treatments stem cells seem to be very promising. Are there other competing treatments that you think are equally promising? Or yeah, sure, but they're not competing. So, um, so as I said, because this is a violent conquer problem with a bunch of different types of damage, all of which we need to fix, then we need to look at the, what fixes are available for each individual type. So what stem cells that they're at a fix is solos where cells are dying and they're not being automatically replaced in the body by cell division. Have you personally experienced any stem cell therapy? No. I haven't done any therapy for any of any kind yet, but of course, you know, I'm paying attention. Yeah. I'll see. You know, of course, the nature of aging is that because it's progressive and because it's only, it only causes functional decline after a certain point, there's a trade off that one always has to keep in mind in terms of timing of a therapy between how badly one needs it and how rapidly the quality of the therapy is improving. So, you know, if I take a stem cell therapy now, then there's a chance that it'll be bad for me for whatever reason. Okay. Whereas 10 years down the road, I will still, I, you know, I would have needed it for those 10 years. I don't know, the right, I missed out to need it a bit more, but that they will, it will have benefited from 10 years more of research and refinement. So you're a cautious teacher. Oh, sure. I mean, I don't think anybody wants to be the first patient. I'll be the first guy. I'm already doing a bunch of stem cell therapies. Well, intravenous stem cell therapies too. Well, sure. But I mean, the point is you, you weren't the first to do any of these things. Oh, for sure. Right. Yeah. So yes, it doesn't have other things. So synolytics do not compete with stem cells because synolytics are there to do a different thing to affect the different type of damage. And namely, the accumulation of these bad cells. Right. And then you've got to have, you know, cancer therapies. You've got to have therapies that remove molecular waste products through inside itself. A couple of us start up companies have, have done doing that. You've got to remove waste products from outside the cells, for example. So people have used the immune system to do that. You've got to repair DNA in the mitochondria, special parts of the cell that do the chemistry of breathing. You know, there's a bunch of different things we have to do. And so another piece of good news, I told you earlier on that, there's been no real change over the past 20 years in our understanding of what the problem is. It's better than that. There hasn't also been no real need to change our preferred approaches to each of the damage repair technologies. We haven't, you know, found bad news that says, oh dear, this potential approach to fixing this particular type of damage, it's not going to work for this new reason that we didn't know before. Therefore, we have to start again and think of a new one that hasn't happened either. That's excellent. So it's just essentially refining the procedures or the other things. Yeah, grinding away and actually implementing them. Is this, is this something that you still truly enjoyed doing? I wouldn't say I ever enjoyed doing it. You know what? I mean, I enjoy life. I enjoy just, you know, staring at the sky from my hot tub. It's just that I want to carry on doing it rather than, you know, dying instead. So almost an investment. It's an investment, but it's also, I mean, it's obviously some sort of intellectual pursuit. No, it's not really. That's humanitarian. I mean, some people view it as an intellectual pursuit, but I don't. I really feel, you know, I've ever seen something with a young kid. I have wanted to spend my life making a difference to the world, improving the quality and of course, in this case, quantity of life of humanity. And I've just, I'm just one of those incredibly lucky people. I've been able to end up in this position of essentially leading the crusade to do that in the biggest possible way. So this is something that you felt compelled to do from a really early age? Not the specific thing. So what actually happened was that as a teenager having pretty much decided that this is what I wanted to do with my life, the first thing I did was I got into artificial intelligence research. And the reason that happened was because when I was a teenager, I tried my hand at programming. I thought, I was pretty dung good at it. And I thought, well, okay, one of the big problems in the world is the problem of work. The fact that people have to spend so much of their time doing stuff that they would not do unless they were being paid for it. And therefore, we need more automation. So I work on that because I'm good at it. And I had no reason at that time to believe that I was going to be any good at biology, specifically, particularly, and there were other people who were particularly good at biology. And I had made the mistake and, but absolute assumption that everybody realized that aging was by far the world's biggest problem. And therefore, biologists would be working on it and grinding away. And of course, you didn't hear much, but hey, it's a really hard problem. So that's not surprise. So it wasn't until my late 20s that I found out that I was wrong. What happened was that I met and married a biologist. Quite a senior one, actually, who was a full professor at that time at UC San Diego. She was in England on Tabatico. And through her, I not only learned a lot of biology just by accident, you know, over the during the table, but I also found out gradually that she wasn't interested in aging. I just kind of hadn't occurred to me. So it didn't come up in conversation. I began to notice that it wasn't coming up in conversation. So I was asking questions. And she would say things like, you know, well, I mean, like, it's just decay, isn't it? And I would say, well, yeah, but so what? And she said, well, I mean, you're not going to learn any fundamental truths about the universe from studying decay. And I would say, well, that's true, yes, but it's bad for you. And she would say, but that's not my problem. And I would say, well, it kind of is. And that would be about as far as we would ever get. So eventually, I came to terms with it because it wasn't just her, of course, it was all the other biology if I was meeting. As the streams caused the mindedness. Well, you know, I'd say people have had to find ways not to think about age. And so eventually, I thought, well, that's just what I do. And I had to, I'd better switch fields. And I happened to have, um, involved myself into a position where switching fields were something I was able to do. I had a very undermining job at the University of Cambridge doing bioinformatics, which allowed me to do my artificial intelligence research in my spare time. I was being paid well enough. And, you know, I had access to university facilities and all that. So all I needed to do was repurpose my spare time. And, you know, start paying my way to go to conferences, because of course back then nobody knew me and I wasn't being invited. And so I went pretty well. I started doing quite well-received stuff. And so I became quite well respected in the field very quickly. And for the first five years, that was all that was happening, because I was basically harmless. And it was then five years in, in the year 2000, that I had this kind of Yuri commandment that damage repair was the way to go. Instead talking about what the impact could be. And people started to think I'd gone completely crazy. And it took a little while for people to, um, come around. So when you say that at an early age, you felt compelled to try to help people like, what was that? So what actually happened was this. It was all down to my mother's desire for me to practice the piano. Um, I think, you know, she wasn't a particularly good pianist herself, but she wanted me to learn how to practice her work, yeah. And so she was, she, but pressure on me to practice all the time. And I was resistant. But somehow or other, my mother had already instilled in me a sense of introspection. You know, I desire to understand why I thought what I thought. So I actually decided to think about why I didn't want to play the piano. And it took very little time for me to realize that the fundamental reason I didn't want to spend so much time tapping away on this thing was that the best case and outcome of this would be that I would become a good pianist. And that was just not good enough, you know, because there were already lots of other good pianists. So I would not be, you know, contributing significantly to the quality of life of mankind by becoming just another one. An additional experience. That's right. And so I thought, well, I might do because, and of course, it was, I'm very young. So it was gradual after that. How are you? That's probably eight or nine. Um, so over the next few years, I'm going to say this general idea that I played the piano with a West time, um, crystal out into the understanding, you know, I would, I could actually articulate that I wanted to make a difference to the world. And, um, so that's how I, you know, by the time I was either 15 with my 30 programming and I've just told you the rest. That's an interesting mapping out of your future. You know, at nine years old, recognize that you're not going to make a significant contribution to the world by doing something that other people have already done. Yeah, that's right. That's a really interesting way to look at the world where you're nine. I have a nine year old daughter. I can't imagine her thinking like that. And then when I started, um, working actually at this bioinformatics project that I mentioned, um, I came, I had a lot of exposure to a lot of top flight biologists. And it turned out that there were fields that were just fashionable, right? And that, yeah, and lots of top biologists would be competing for us, except for us with each other to make the next advance in one particular narrow area that was just really fashionable. Another area would be just completely neglected. And I thought, what is going on here? Why are these smart people choosing to do something that minimizes the likelihood that they will have any impact? In other words, basically, whatever they, whatever they find out, they didn't matter, they themselves didn't matter at all, because they could have been hit by a truck or done something a bit different, and someone else would have found out the exact same thing 10 minutes later. So they were making no difference. I never understood. I still don't understand it. So you've always felt compelled to make a difference. Is that something your mother instilled in years? Is something you just had? Yeah, I don't really think my mother instilled in me. I think the introspection was, and I, if you asked me how she did that, I had no idea. But, um, but yeah, somehow I don't know. I don't think that. But no, I think the one thing that makes a difference is just intrinsic in me, and just something that I just realized as a result of the introspection. When you look back at that now, that's going to be an interesting course where you've recognized at a very young age that you wanted to make some sort of a difference. But knowing that you would have that epiphany at a young age when it comes to being a pianist or doing something that's going to significantly impact people that has not a standard path that many people are gone. It's a very interesting way to set up your life. Well, I wouldn't say I set my life up. I'd say I had intentions, but if we look at how I got from there to here, an enormous amount of it was just sheer luck. I mean, you know, if most people's lives right, exactly. So I would say, you know, I had a hope, I had a general aspiration, but, you know, I would say that I'm just incredibly privileged to have been able to reach the pinnacle of my chosen field of endeavor. You know, hardly anyone can say that. Yes. No, that is. You're also, well, you fit the part too. You're a weirdo. You know, I mean, you know, you're a weirdo. Well, it's suddenly, you know, I say that with all the respect. Of course, yeah, that's in a compliment as well. Of course, it definitely, yeah, it's definitely difficult to make a difference to the world if you're following the rules. And so I'm always instinctively looking for ways to do things that other people might have I mean, even trivial things. Is there anything that frustrates you about this pursuit? I'm not an easily frustrated kind of guy. I mean, of course, sometimes it gets to me how slow, how slowly things are going, how resistant people are, how irrational the resistance is. But even there, you know, I've, you know, I've already, from some of the things I've already said, you understand that I'm really sympathetic to humanity in this regard. I understand that most people just, you know, the psychological burden of the prospect of physiological decline is so enormous that they've got no choice. They've got to put it out of their mind. And you know, some people feel, I don't know, psychologically stronger or whatever, and they can, you know, bite the bullet and actually work on this, even though it's a very, very long haul. But some people aren't, that doesn't mean that they are no more, that they're less deserving of the benefits. It's a very strange thing where people put on intellectual blinders and they're talking about aging and dying. It is very weird. Have you had heated discussions with other intellectuals about this? Because I would imagine... Over time. Over time. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, the whole thing came to me first when I was a Cambridge, actually. I was an undergrad this was sometime before, of the early 1980s. So when I was in my first year, probably 1982, they brought in a stage hypnotist to do it. Have you ever seen a stage hypnotist? Yes. Okay. So this guy, you know, he's got an audience of a few hundred people, all of us, you know, can be undergraduates. And so the first step is, you know, do some stuff that gets some particularly amenable people into a light trance. And he brings a few of them up on stage and starts to go further. Right? So there was this one particular part of the show that stuck in my mind. Well, heaven was, there's one guy who brought up and got into a really, really deep trance. And then the next step was that the hypnotist says, okay, this is actually your right elbow. This is your left elbow. So he switched the guy's elbows. Right? No elaboration of the complications of this, just saying, just going the person to completely completely implicitly believe this thing. Right? And then he said, right, I would like you please to touch your right elbow with your left forefinger. Right? And so of course there was all this really thing in writing and so on, you know, couldn't do it. Right? And that was funny in and of itself. But that wasn't the good address. What happened next was the key thing. The hypnotist says, okay, you can stop now. And the guy stops and the hypnotist says, you can do it. Good, you and the guy says, now. And then the hypnotist says, why not? That's the guy to explain why he couldn't do it. And here is the good address because what happens is the guy gives a completely unhevitating lucid grammatically correct explanation for why he couldn't do it. And the explanation of course will have a hole in it the size of Canada. But the fact is, I think I won't see it. He'll just be sitting there with a straight face just doing this. And his friends are in the, and these are kind of exaggerated. Right? Hi, I cue highly respectfully to other intellect and for one for their own intellect and rationality. And they're rolling in the aisles and the guy's just unaffected. So when I started to have these discussions with people about aging, I'm so hard to find out that people make these unbelievable arguments in favor of it. I got this right. I call it the pro-aging trance. And it was based on that experience from my youth. Yeah, I've always said to people, if there was a pill that you can take that would stop all aging, all deterioration and all diseases, you'd be a fool not to take it. You'd be a fool. Do you want to suffer? The idea that this romantic, if it was a rare thing that people aged, a very rare thing, we would look at it with great sadness. As someone was afflicted with this aging, we saw someone hunched over with severe arthritis and osteoporosis and deterioration of the joints and decaying of the cognitive function and they don't know where they are, who they are, we'd be so sad. That's right. But instead we think of it as like, well, he's 90, he had a good life. That's exactly right. It's not just the fact that everyone gets it. It's the fact that everyone gets it a more or less the same age, chronic like. So it's considered to be this leveler. And just, yes, absolutely. People do a little bit better, you know, 20% better than average. We're people that we're really happy. Is there any concern or any thought whatsoever to the idea of exacerbating overpopulation? Of course this is a legitimate question. The thing that's frustrating to me is that I've been answering it for 20 years. What is it? Are people still there? Listen. Kill dummies. That's a good move, right? Well, of course, a large part of the reason why it's difficult to get their real answers across is because so much fiction has been written and of course movies, giving wrong answers and making a dramatic element out of it, whether it's Blade Runner or In Time or any of these movies. They all make it as if it's actually, they kind of reinforce the probaging chance, right? They make it as if life would be even worse if we had no aging. Okay, so what's the real answer? The real answer is very straightforward. It's simply that other technologies that are coming along already and will be established, well established in ubiquitous before we get this to happen are going to solve the problem because they will increase the carrying capacity of the planet. Remember that the reason why we have too many people today and we've got environmental consequences is not because of lack of space. It's because of the amount of pollution that the average person generates, specifically of course, biggest thing being pumping carbon into the atmosphere, but of course, whether it's plastics or whatever. And we're fixing that. We've got solar energy and wind energy now that are completely exploding and they're going to completely replace fossil fuels. And we got there without people even having to wake up and realize that climate change is actually quite a urgent problem. We got there simply because the technology got to be good enough that the production of a kilowatt hour of energy is actually cheaper with the renewable energy mechanism than it is from fossil fuel. And of course, not just that. It's also agriculture. So artificial meats within not very long, it's going to be both tastier and far cheaper than regular meat and the amount of space we're going to save, not the amount of meat that we're not going to be generating. If going to... I haven't heard anything saying it's going to be tastier. Of course, it's going to be tastier. How so? Well, how would it be popular if it were not tastier? Tastier. I don't think it necessarily would have to be tastier. Well, I have to say it would be good, but tastier would be better. Yeah, I guess. And of course, it's not just that. There's cheap defalination, those plastic eating bacteria. All of these things are coming. And so there is no way that one can make a realistic, plausible argument that denies that the carrying capacity of the planet will rise far, far, far, far than the population. We don't even need to take into account other things, like the fact that fertility rates are coming down everywhere. And that once you can live a very long time, they're probably going to come down even further because people who are now choosing to delay having their kids by five years will be able to delay having them by 50 years. Jesus. Do you have the same optimistic perception about the ocean? Well, first of all, let me say what I think about the word optimism because I know that you're not doing this, but a lot of people when they talk to me and call me an optimist, they actually mean that I'm an over-optimist and when they call themselves a realist, they mean that they're a pessimist. But anyway, about the ocean, of course. I mean, what's the difference? You know, there's certainly there's a lot to do. One big problem right now, of course, is the ocean is storing a lot of carbon and releasing a lot as it's warming up. So we definitely have to fix that as well, but it's part of the same problem. You know, the less carbon the rate in the atmosphere, the less of a problem that is, direct carbon removal from the atmosphere technology that's absolutely burgeoning now, indirect carbon capture from the ocean seems to be something that's equal to plausible, but it's obviously different. So here. I'm optimistic in terms of the ability to clean up the ocean. I've had Boy on slot on a couple times to where of him, his devices that he's created to remove plastics and other garbage from the ocean. My concern is wild fish that the depletion of the fish populations is an unprecedented rate and it seems to be we're somewhere in the neighborhood of 50 years away from a catastrophic, complete collapse of wild fisheries. Well, right. And of course, this is again a problem that can be fixed by technology. You know, I think you make artificial red mate, why not make artificial fish? Well, that wouldn't search. That would be good that we can have artificial fish, but that wouldn't necessarily make that population rebound. We would have to make large steps to try to bring back the equilibrium of the ocean. That's not clear. I mean, it's not clear. It's not clear. No, I mean, most of, as I understand it anyway, this is not an area I'm expert on, of course, so maybe wrong, but most of the severe deplations of population of specific fish species are because of fishing. Because of other fishing. So if we're not doing the other fishing, because we're making the same fish elsewhere on land. Well, I'm sure a lot of it is being done by the United States, but I'm sure and Great Britain and a lot of First World countries, but I'm sure a lot of it is also being done by countries that can't afford to make this artificial fish or don't have the access to it or at least in the time period that it's going to take for these fisheries rebound. When I talk to people that have an understanding of wildlife in the ocean, they say it's a desperate time. And it's a desperate time that is not really being recognized by the general population because they can still get sushi. They can still get halibut at the local market. But that, if you talk to the fishermen, if you talk to the wildlife biologists that are really studying the levels, they're this is nearing a point of no return. Yeah, I wouldn't dispute that. I think it's urgent. But all that really says is we should be investing more in the development of these new technologies that will hasten the ability to rebound. I wonder if they even bother with wild fish. If they can make artificial meat, I wonder if people really get in the artificial fish as well. I guess so. But some of them are not going to make the cut. Like no one's getting artificial to La Pia. Why not? It's not that good. Not yet. So they make it better. Why didn't even call it to La Pia then? But like two people like the name. I guess. I'm really optimistic about artificial meat. I mean, it seems that there, I mean at one point times like a quarter million dollars for a hamburger. And now they've got it down to a point where you could actually make an animal meat product that does not come from an animal dying. They're very close to being able to make this in a mass marketed way. That's interesting. I'm excited about that. I think that's very interesting. And I'm excited about what you're saying that I think people think about overpopulation. One thing that you should take in consideration is that as populations increase in places urbanize, the actual birth rate goes down to the point where places like Japan, there's actually a concern that they're not having enough children. And of course it is driven by prosperity. Yeah. It's the amount of education and emancipation. So at this point, if you look at the largest countries in the world, the largest dozen countries in the world, the only one that has a really high fertility rates to help is Nigeria. If you exclude subs, our in Africa, it's basically a completely solved problem. Really? Nigeria is the only one. Yeah. If you look at the big, the country, if you would not expect like Bangladesh or Pakistan or India, you know, that's what he raised down below three now. Really. That's interesting. So their population will level out over the next few decades. Well, yeah, it's going to start starting. It's still declining. You know, it's plummeting. You know, people often you say that the only reason why China's fertility rate is because of the one-child policy, which of course they have now discontinued precisely because there was problems like this. But it's not true. I mean, other countries were a little bit behind. The one-child policy did certainly accelerate the process. But if you look at Brazil or Indonesia or any of the countries, you'll see exactly the same phenomenon plummeting. Have you thought about what the future looks like when people lived before 500 years old? Like how, first of all, how wise will people be? That's actually interesting because okay, so here's a really important thing that I want to get across. When we think about longevity, well, actually three things are one thing. First of all, longevity is a side effect of health, right? So, you know, a huge amount of the so-called debate that goes on about the desirability of all of this just goes away when you remember that people actually quite like being healthy. But in terms of how the world will be, which was a question you asked, there's two questions here. One question is how will the world actually be? And the second question is, how will people in the near term expect the world to be? And the reason why those two questions are important to distinguish is because the question of how the world will actually be is very obviously completely unanswerable even if we look 50 years in the future. I mean, if you look 50 years ago, right, how much of what we have today would have been predicted, right? It was completely different. And certainly in terms of longevity, you know, we're only going to be getting older at one year per year. There won't actually be any 500 year old people for another 400 years, right? Oh, really? Well, yeah. I mean, I don't know. I don't know what you're going to be able to do. We're not going to be able to change the change the rate of the passage of time, is my point. Right. I understand what you're saying. Right. But expectation is a completely different thing. And here's why that matters. There's going to become a point. There's going to come a point where people in general, the general management starts to realize that they're probably going to live a awfully long time because they're not going to just get progressively thicker as they get older. And, you know, lots of other reasons are going to be just why they're going to live a long time like we're going to have self-driving cars that pretty much eliminate, you know, red accidents and so on. So they're going to want a lot of different things than what they wanted when they thought they were going to live only slightly longer than their parents. They're going to want very different pension plans, very different life insurance, health insurance, very different inheritance arrangements. And these are huge big ticket items, right? They're basically drive the global economy. So policymakers and decision makers around the world had done well better be ready for that shift in public expectation of how long they're going to live, right? Yes. Now therefore it is absolutely critical to estimate and to communicate the estimate of how soon that shift in public expectation is going to occur, which means how, well, what events have to happen, how much progress needs to happen in order to cause that shift. Now this is where I am terrified because I think it's going to happen really soon. I think it could easily happen in the next three to five years and that when it does happen, it's going to happen incredibly suddenly. Here's the sequence of events that I think is going to happen. Step one, we're going to have sufficient progress in the laboratory or the clinic that most of my scientific colleagues are going to be willing to come out and say more or less, yeah, orbit a grab with right all along. They're going to say, yeah, you know, it's very excited about that. No, I'm terrified and I'm going to tell you what. You're a little tired. A little tired. I mean, I know I have been a recognition if never telling me that's driven me. But yeah, they're going to come out and say, yeah, it's only a matter of time before we elect this aging thing. Now, what do you think is going to happen next? You're a media guy, right? Here's what I think is going to happen, but I want you to know whether you think I'm right. I think the next thing is going to happen is that real opinion for most people like you, people like Oprah Winfrey are going to hear that being said and written in the media. And they're going to say, oh, shit, this is actually going to happen. And they're going to say so on air. And they're going not only to say what their opinion is, but they're going to say what they think people ought to do. In particular, they're going to say, well, look, you know, let's actually, if it's only a matter of time, if we're losing 110,000 people every day worldwide to this phenomenon, then we do kind of have a bit of a moral obligation to make it less time if we can. So in my sense is that once that happens, the following day, it's going to become impossible to get elected unless you have a manifesto commitment to, you know, have a war on aging, you know, throw proper money at this. I mean, I really mean a proper war on aging, not just like the war on cancer was, lots of money, not just to do the research, but also to front load all of the investment infrastructure and, you know, training a medical person, and so on. Okay. And everyone's going to know it. Like the world, the public is going to make that switch. I just mentioned of expectation like at once. So it's going to be ridiculously sudden once it happens. And the first step is going to be that shift in what my colleagues in the bio, I want to always be a community, feel able to say on camera and on stage. Now, therefore, the question is what amount of progress is going to be required for that to occur? Now, here's the thing. There aren't very many of us. It's a small field. The number of people at the top of the field who actually talk to the media quite a bit, you know, it doesn't maximum. There's me, this David that you've had on the show, there's, you know, very few others. And we all know each other. We're all good mates. Right? So we know exactly where our heads are, you know, what the drivers are. The number one reason why my colleagues don't already say what I say is funding. The fact that I like me, those people are reliant for most of the money that drives their research on peer reviewed government money, government grants. And they just won't get them if it's possible to accuse them of saying irresponsible things for the media, things that get people's hopes up unduly. Remember, there's hardly, there's nowhere near enough money. There's less than 10% of the necessary money to fund research at the moment. So the committees that decide who gets money and who doesn't are always desperately scouting around for reasons to say no, that can be justified. And saying, oh, this guy says they're responsible things to the media is a totally safe way to say no. Right? So anyway, so this is, this is the problem. This is why my colleagues have to be really pretty curmudgeonly. Even David, David is probably the person out of my colleagues who pushes the envelope as much as possible out of people who have regular faculty positions. But, you know, he's just written a book which I see you have on yourself called, you know, why we age and why we don't have to. He could not have written that book with that title five years ago and kept his job. So, you know, because he's how much has to change? And actually, it's not very much. You know, there's a balance here. There's a tension here between, on the one hand, not saying things that can be characterised as irresponsible. But on the other hand, not saying that can be characterised as simply untrue. So, the more progress is made in the laboratory, not even in the clinic, just with mice. Right? In terms of actually, you know, rejuvenating them, making them live longer with treatments that were given to those mice when they were already in middle age. The more progress is made, the more impossible it's going to be to carry on being pessimistic and refusing to to make time for imperfections or anything like that. So, there's almost a forced pessimism created by this town. Correct. Well, I think what you're saying makes it ton of sense and that once it does get to the point where this is undeniable, this is peer reviewed, proven, established science, and also implementable. This is something that can be at scale, distributed world-wide. Yeah, things are going to get real weird. So people are already, people are obviously still going to be saying it can't be done in humans. It can't really be done until the cow can't hunt. Just in the same way, I've had to happen for any other pioneering technology throughout history. But what matters is what the centre of gravity of expertly, stated expert opinion is. It is a really, really polarising subject. I mean, it is funny how what you're saying rings so true that academics and intellectuals have to be cautious about talking about even what is potentially possible, even though in private, they probably are more than aware that there's just a few steps to go before this stuff gets implemented and we see really catastrophic, mean really spectacular rather changes. Yeah, I mean I'm not saying that all of us absolutely agree on 100% on everything in the science. Certainly I would say that I'm slightly on the optimistic end of the spectrum of expert opinion. But yeah, my colleagues are not all that far behind me in terms of what they would say the time frames are. What you're saying in terms of people discussing it in the media makes absolute sense to me. As soon as that Pandora's box gets opened, then people are going to be looking to establish clinics everywhere and it could be very strange. Well, even if a lot of these things are not yet available for clinical use, even if some of them are still at the beginning of the clinical trial process and we're still maybe 10 or 15 years away from the real Macauai, that will still be enough to trigger this pandemonium. And that's why policymakers decision makers in everywhere and both in government, out in key aspect of industry I call it anticipate the anticipation. They need to be already thought through and prepared for this change in public expectation of how long they're going to live. So you think that this one day will be a gigantic public issue in terms of elected representatives that they're going to need to have some sort of an anti-aging policy. That's right. And the switch from essentially situation normal, but this video is all to this completely new world will be ridiculously sudden. That will happen in a week. And do you think one of the motivating factors would be the price of healthcare that the argument would be part of our issue with healthcare and the incredible amount of money that needs to be spent on hospitalizing people and treating them with diseases, we could eliminate that. That's a huge part of it. At the moment when you talk to any people, any elected representatives anyway, of very persuasion about the aging question, then the immediate knee jerk reaction is always, oh God, we definitely don't want to fix that, how would we pay the pension? Because they obviously then know if the economy is stupid, it still is. And so that's the fact that if you're not going to be able to get away with that kind of thinking anymore, it's going to have to be a case of redesigning a large number of really big parts of the economy from the ground up. Well, especially places like where you live in England, or where you're from rather in England, where they have socialized medicine, the enormous cost of that would be decreased radically. It's a safer healthier. It's got nothing to do with private versus socialized medicine. In the US and the UK and everywhere else, the overwhelming majority of medical expenditure is on the health problems of the elderly, which will go away. Now, of course, the medicine that makes that problem to go away is not going to be free, I mean, to produce and to deliver, but prevention is always better than cure. But that actually is only the minority of the economic benefit. The real economic benefit comes from the indirect costs. First of all, the fact that the kids of the elderly are going to be more productive because they're not having to spend time looking after their sick parents and, you know, really think like that. But also the huge thing that the elderly themselves are still going to be able-bodied and therefore in a position to, you know, continue to contribute wealth to society. Now, that doesn't necessarily mean anything to do with the retirement this comes back to another aspect of the interaction between emerging technologies. So, of course, we've got automation coming. I don't work on it anymore, but lots of people do, right? We're making huge progress in artificial intelligence and most people even conservative commentators say that most of the jobs that exist today are going to be gone 20 years from now because machines will be doing things perfectly well. So, you know, we're going to be completely unable to continue this system of an economy based on full employment. You know, last time this happened with the industrial revolution, we got away with it by inventing an entire new sector, you know, the furthest sector that replaced all the jobs that people didn't have anymore in manufacturing and agriculture. You know, with this look at happiness time, it's just not going to happen. You know, how many people do you need in the entertainment industry? You know, we've got you from come on. So, you know, we're going to have a different, you know, of course, people are already thinking about that with things like, you know, universal basic income. Which is an extraordinarily blunt instrument at just a starting point. But, you know, that kind of thing is going to happen. I can totally imagine a situation in which, you know, 30, 40 years from now work is something like national service used to be. Yeah, well, you know, when you're young and insignificant, you do a bit of a few years of actual work. And then yeah, but that means that the whole concept of pensions is ridiculous to think about that. So we've got a guess, policy makers out of that mindset and to get them to think in more global terms about the health benefits and the benefit to quality of life of everybody and so on. It is funny that work or the concept of work is sort of an ex-orably connected to society to the point where you think you have to work. But, you know, meanwhile, people lived for hundreds of thousands of years without even the concept of that, you know, a place where you go where they give you gold coins. You know, right. Exactly. Exactly. Yeah. I mean, of course, you do have to have something that makes something something that fulfill something to do that you find fulfilling. That's the argument for universal basic income, right? The argument against it is human nature that people need to be motivated and they need something to sort of guide them towards excellence. Yeah, my take is the other thing that needs a better education, which of course is something that we could spend the money on that we've saved from now having to, um, yeah, why are you glad? That's half full guy. Well, I don't know, anybody well educated who gets bored, you know, yeah, I don't agree with you or anybody who's been exposed to interesting things. Right. There are so many things in this world. I mean, if I had, I would love to live five different lives concurrently. I would love to. That's a plan. I would I would I would love to have to become current. They can be. But I would have a question to just dive into the like, I would love to live different lives because there's so many different things that I would have loved to pursue. Well, you can't live a concurrently because I'm the one brang, but let's try and make you live them sequentially and say, yeah, well, sequentially would be fun. I mean, it would be really interesting to take up a whole new career at 70, you know, and so this three to five year timeline, what what makes you think that three to five years from now is when all this stuff will take place. Well, of course, it's subjective. It's based on aggregating a whole bunch of different areas of research. But of course, I'm fairly well informed about where research currently is and how rapidly it's moving in a variety of different areas. I'm so just, you know, just I'm putting all that together in my head and I'm saying, how soon are we going to be able to take my that normally live let's say two and a half years and do nothing whatsoever to them until they are one half and get them to an average live to four instead of two and a half. Right? Now, if you can and of course, those extra years would be healthy years because we would be rejuvenating the mice. Right? So I believe that that would be sufficient. I mean, that's actually a little bit conservative. I think a less dramatic breakthrough than that might be enough to switch most of my colleagues over that get them over the fence. But I think that would definitely be enough. And I think that that is close. What was the research done with mice with myostatin inhibitors? Did that not increase lifespan as well? So yeah, sure. I mean, a lot of things have extended life span a fair bit. But what we have at the moment is not all the components of what I just said. If you do something genetic to mice or if you do it, you know, to them throughout their lives, then we can already get that year, year and a half out of mice. Certainly, yeah. Okay. But not if you start at 18 months. If you start at 18 months, the best we can do it in maybe four months. So that's the difference. You've got to be able to start late and get the big extension. And you're not going to get that without bona fide rejuvenation. So that's not going to come by way of genetics. Well, even if it did come by way of genetics, it wouldn't matter. It wouldn't persuade my colleague or me that we were on the brink of doing it for humans who have the misfortune of being already alive. So the rejuvenation is going to come through some sort of biologics. Well, yes, through the kinds of things we're working on that I mentioned earlier. Yeah. Some cells. In therapy to do various things to introduce, for example, bacterial enzymes that can break down waste products. Similar to things that I talked about, pharmaceuticals to do, other things. What about the use of CRISPR? Sure. Well, CRISPR is a very important part of this. So can you please explain what CRISPR means to people who don't know what we're talking about? Sure. Yes. So CRISPR is a technology that was first developed about eight years ago now. And it is the exploitation of a bacterial mechanism that allows bacteria to defend themselves against viruses. Essentially, how it works is that it allows us to change the sequence of a genome in a particular cell in a very specific way. It's often called gene editing. And there are other technologies for gene editing that already existed before CRISPR. But a very laborious, very expensive and very clunky. This is far, far deeper and easier to use. So what that does is allows us, for example, to inactivate gene or for that matter, to change the sequence of a gene from a mutant form into a normal form so that it works when it was previously not working. Now, doing that in the laboratory in a Petri dish is fair enough. The question is can we do it in the body? And initially, no. Initially, technology was too error-prone. It was prone to do what George Church has called genetic vandalism and make, have what's called off-target effects. In other words, basically do other changes to the genome elsewhere that you didn't want. But of course, people have known this and people have been working really hard to improve the technology and it's getting to the point now where it's possible to actually use it on humans. Maybe, you know, it's going there. Now, you can't do everything with CRISPR. One thing you definitely can't do with CRISPR is insert new genes into the genome. And that's something we really need to be able to do. But actually, one of our big projects is a kind of two-step thing where we use CRISPR to make a small change to the genome that allows us to insert large genes where we couldn't previously. So yeah, so the CRISPR is huge. And it's huge not only in aging research, but across the whole board of biomedical work. That's, they have done some work in China apparently on live human beings. So this was very controversial. What happened was that a group in China used CRISPR to alter the DNA of embryos that were going to be used for IVF for individualization. And the change that was made itself quite a curious one. Essentially what they did was they tried to change a gene called CCR5 into a mutant form that doesn't work, but that in an inactive form protects the body from infection by HIV. This is something that was discovered a long time ago and maybe 1% of people have this genotype. And so this was introduced. Unfortunately, first of all, it probably wasn't done very well, but also... Well, they, what people have looked at the process and they probably didn't make the correct modification. But also, it's not clear whether doing it for someone life long is actually a good thing because as I say, it's an inactivation of a gene that must exist for a reason or it wouldn't exist at all, right? But didn't it also have a side effect of increased intelligence? That is complete speculation. Isn't it? Yes. Why would it cause them to speculate that? People speculate all the time. You know, that's just like click bait stuff that gets people excited about it. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. That's nonsense. But yeah, so anyway, the other thing was that there's not, it's not obvious why it's even worthwhile to make an embryo genetically resistant to HIV first. Well, they don't have HIV yet in the first place and they may never get it. And secondly, we've got drugs that work pretty well to control HIV anti retroviral. So, um, it's not obvious why this was a sensible thing to do in the first place. However, it's certainly got a whole bunch of debate going. So yeah. Well, when I hear about something like that, I always assume first of all, I mean, just American prejudice, you assume that it's in China, they're doing something crazy, right? And you also assume that if they're telling you about someone who's been altered, that means that they've probably been doing this for a decade or since CRISPR was initiated eight years ago. Yeah, never know. Yeah, you never know. It's just, it's interesting to me and I don't want them to do it on people, but when they do do it on people, I'm fascinated. You know, it's, I don't, you know, well, that's right. I mean, that's the attitude that I have a lot of people have to medical tourism in general. Yeah, that the, um, you know, these are not adequately regulated treatments. And they are certainly not adequately characterized. In other words, the people who kept the treatments are people who pay for them rather than people who have been chosen to be in a standardized group of any kind and the tends to be very little follow up. But still, it's better than nothing in the sense that, um, you know, some information exists about the efficacy and safety of these treatments as a result. The more that exists, the better, the more that people who are administering these treatments can be induced to reveal their data, the better, you know, even if it's anonymized. Um, but, you know, I, I, I, some scientists, quite a lot of scientists, take a much stronger view that, you know, we just should oppose all of this period. And we should just say, you know, everyone who, who, who indulges, who gives treatments to people in offshore places should be shut down as much, as best we can and should be demonized. I don't really think that's true. I think there's a half way house. Um, personally, I've had, uh, my, my family, my mother has gone to Panama. Okay, twice. And she was on the verge of a knee replacement. And now she walks without pain. Yeah, I bet you, I bet she went to an ill-reons class. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, there are a lot of people who have very good stories out of an ill group. And, um, I, of course, the thing is you don't know unless someone has a really bad story, whether things are going wrong. So, um, I, I, I mean, I don't know whether Neil releases numbers that the total number of patients per year that he treats. So, we don't know if it hit right. Yeah, I don't know. I just do know that I have, uh, speaking, spoken to, uh, several fighters from the UFC that have gone down there. And again, my mother was, I mean, she didn't want to get a knee replacement. So, uh, when I centered down there and it took, she's, I'm 52. She's 73. So it took her somewhere around six to eight months before she started feeling anything. She was really worried that it wasn't going to work. But then in eight months in, just the pain just went away. And it's continued to get better. And then I centered down a second time, and I'm going to keep sending her down there. It's just, it's out of pretty profound effect. Fascinating to me is they do three days of intravenous therapy. And the intravenous therapy has, I don't know if it's just my imagination, but she looks younger. Like she looks, she looks more vibrant. You know, like when I saw her, she came to my house for Christmas when she looked better. She looked a year younger than she did the last time I saw her. Yeah. I mean, um, you know, this is what we would hope that stem cell therapy was. Yeah. But I might go to what I said about that original Parkinson's trial for more than 25 years ago. Right. For 15 years, really? I mean, no, that was the one that was affected. Right. Exactly. So only a few people benefit. The people who did benefit, benefit, benefit enormously. But he's lumped with the people had no benefit. Yeah. Now that is the kind of stage that we're in for a lot of stem cell therapies right now. Parkinson's disease is a kind of outlier in the sense that the desired function of the stem cell is really well understood. So what kind of stem cells to introduce into the body and where to introduce them is, you know, not in doubt. Most stem cell therapy is not that far along. So every time anyone gets treated right now, it's still an experiment. And that's okay. Up your point. But it does mean that we're on a learning curve and it's vital to have the people like Neil who are administering the therapy to quite a lot of people to actually not just, you know, live off the stories of high profile people who get good benefits and talk them up, but actually to go. At least the day. The full data on this book, you know, including any negative stuff and including follow-up. That's the key thing. Yes. Because so many therapies in regenerative medicine in general have the potential to be beneficial over the first, you know, a few months to a year or whatever. And then to start having side effects that are detrimental. What have you heard that are detrimental side effects? So well, of course, the biggest thing that we always have to worry about is cancer. Because, and this is true for a whole bunch of things, you know, telomerase activators and so on. The thing is that aging can in some senses be characterized as a trade-off between cancer and everything else. In other words, a huge amount of what goes wrong with the body, late in life, is the result of a kind of dialing down of regenerative functions that we actually do naturally have in the body, but which are not as active in older people as they are in younger people. And so of course, we have to ask why are they less active? And a lot of biologists, including myself, believe that a huge part of that is adaptive. In other words, it is kind of the body recognizing that there is a time goes on, a progressively higher number of cells in the body that are almost cancerous and that have to be kind of kept in check in order not to become properly cancerous. Because of course, cancerous, the result of a gradual accumulation of mutations and so on in the cells, right? And so yes, every time that you are improving regenerative capacity, whether of the cells that you put in or more importantly of the cells that are nearby the cells you put in, you are potentially taking a risk of hastening the onset of actual cancer. What is your opinion on the benefits of fasting in that regard? Okay, fasting is okay. Well, let me first of all talk about fasting in relation to cancer. Because that is important. People have certainly found that it is a good thing to do. Which is somewhat counterintuitive because in the later stages of cancer, there is of course, cakaxia, you know, a lot of loss of muscle and so on. But earlier on, it seems that we can say things down. I mean, cancer is a greedy metabolically. You know, they consume a lot of energy. So if you are putting a lot, if you are minimizing how many calories you put in, then you have a chance of slowing the cancer down so that therapies may have a better chance. So that has certainly been found. Let me talk about fasting more generally, though. So for sure, in, I mean, it has been known for nearly 100 years, that if you give mice or rats less food than they would like, then they live longer than they otherwise do. And this is certainly the most reproducible and best study phenomenon in the whole of biology of aging. Still, there are mysteries about how it works. But a lot of stuff has been found out. And many of my colleagues, including David, have made their careers by making progress in, but discovering insights in that area. There are a lot of that. We know how something that people have always recognized to be rather important, namely drugs, that trick the body into thinking it is fasting, but it isn't. There is a colour restriction, mimetics. And, you know, that's good. That's also a worthwhile thing because, of course, people like eating. And so, you know, it would be useful. Then there are variations on the theme. So a guy from Clester here, UCLA, named Valta Longer, so a USC named Valta Longer, has been really the pioneer of intermittent fasting, which is basically properly starving 100%, but only for two day to week or something like that. You know, different people have tried different schedules. And all these things are pretty interesting in terms of being good for your health. But in terms of increasing your longevity by 30 or 40%, the way they do in nice and rats, no way. It turns out, and this is a prediction of evolutionary theory, but it's also been found absolutely clearly in data that different species react differently to starvation, to fasting. In particular, that longer live species get less benefit for on fasting than shorter live species. So if you're doing just right in nematode worms that normally live like three weeks, then you can multiply their lifespan by a factor of five or more. You sure as I can't do that with a mask. However you do it, you can get up to maybe 50% or maybe 60% if you really, really work at it. So the person you might be that you get a year or two. Yeah, that's right. With dogs it's been tried, you get maybe 10% with monkeys, you get a few percent if you're lucky, that's a bit controversial right now. You know, yeah, absolutely. Why is it a bit controversial? Because there were two studies done really long, extensively, obviously, because monkeys live a long time and they've got different results. And so the question is why they get different results. If you look closely at exactly how the experiments were done, then it's pretty easy to see that they got different results because of different methodologies, slightly different methodologies and that the real answer is somewhere between the two. So yeah. And with dogs, you said you get 10%, about that. Yeah, this is with a Labrador that live 11 years. 11 years. Oh, but isn't that normal? That's right. Well, I'm saying it's they got about another year. Oh, they've got 10% of them. Oh, I understand. So fasting with human beings, you think, is it's interesting. It's something, but it's not going to mimic these biologics and what you believe is on our rise. Right. And I mean, I'm not against it at all. First of all, as I say, it is generally good for health. You know, you definitely see people getting sick less, you know, regular sickness, like infections and so on. People seem to stay healthier for a bit longer. But in terms of really pushing out the boundaries of these age related progressive chronic conditions, you know, it may be a he or two. There's a few other factors that are taken into consideration when people talk about longevity and health and those are community enjoyment, friends, loved ones, satisfaction with what you do for a living. How do you take those into consideration? And what do you think is going on with those? Yeah, these things are definitely big. So all of these things, and it goes further than that. It goes, it extends to like, you know, meditation and yoga and so on. Everything that relates to stress is very important in aging. It's reasonably well understood that when you're in a stressed out state, you create, you synthesize elevated amounts of certain hormones that interact throughout the body and in various ways accelerate the accumulation of these various types of damage I was talking about earlier. So it's no surprise that there's a mind-body relationship there. And in fact, if we, so people often study centenarians, people who live in exceptionally long time, right? And why do they study them? Obviously because they want to find out what the tricks are. Unfortunately, it's quite frustrating because there's not a lot in common. You know, some centenarians are a little bit overweight, some centenarians smoke. You know, it's not easy to actually figure out what they got in common. But there's one thing that almost all centenarians have in common, which is nothing bothers them. It's not necessarily that they have had particularly stressed free lives. The thing is that when they encounter a stressful situation, they cope with it really well. And, you know, so, you know, the hormone levels, they're like, you don't get elevated. Interesting. So cortisol doesn't rise, adrenaline doesn't spike, they don't freak out. Or it leaves a spike. It leaves a spike for more modest. Yes, they don't lose sleep. They can handle it. That's interesting. That's so it really boils down to the effect that's going on inside the mind and the body. That's how the body's reacting to this stress. Do you meditate yourself? No, I'm just chill anyway. Well, you're also satisfied. Well, that certainly should have been saying. So you don't feel the need to. Yeah, at a physical level, I have a very stressful life. I spend my life running around airports and so on. But a mental level not at all. Do you take any, do you doing any exercise? Do you take supplements? Honestly, holding my way through my ports is my exercise. Hauling your way through airports. How often are you flying? Ten percent of the time. Do you just take one of them berries you have to carry rather than a roller-bout? Do you? On purpose? Yep. For extra work. Actually, no for extra work now. It's just because I can move faster that way with them. Okay. But yeah, I mean, certainly the fact that I've actually, I've actually got some weight on my shoulders probably good in itself. Yeah, I started carrying a backpack instead of a roller-bag. I've just, it's just easy to move and holding on something and dragging it behind me. And I found that there's something I have a bag that I can stick a laptop in and I can stick all my clothes and it's just a larger bag. Yeah, I go too, generally. When I'm, I mean, like, when I'm doing a day trip like today, I'll only carry my laptop bag, but it's a really cavernous one. So it's pretty heavy. It's got everything in it like, you know, that I need for a day or could need. And then when I'm traveling along a trip, I just have one other bag of sports bag, you know, that I'm carrying. Is there anything that you think you should be doing that you're not doing that you maybe would like to plan for in the future? It's hard to say because I mean, I do have a lot of freedom about exactly how I spend a particular day. I mean, it's more a case where I would be doing if I didn't have to do the thing I'm doing now, which they've obviously doing all this advocacy. And so yeah, have you ever used a sensory deprivation tag? No, no, I'd like you to use that. I'd like to hear your feedback. I have one here. And what would you like? I just want to know because it was very relaxing. I'm relaxed already. You say getting there, say, you know what it is, right? You can't. It's beautiful. Feels amazing. Yeah. No, I mean, to a sensory deprivation in general, you know, when I'm asleep, I don't like to have any kind of noise or like, you know, one of my veins is staying in hotels, which don't have proper blackout curtains. And you know, I typically when I'm in a hotel room, I'll unplug the refrigerator because the noise. Yeah. So you're you basically got it dialed in, you know, which I think so. Well, I'm optimistic because you're optimistic. When you tell me three to five years from now, we're we're possibly looking at some sort of a breakthrough where things start moving into the public eye, where people are really taking a consideration. Like, this is this is real technology that you should we should all start implementing on our particularly on people that are older and ailing. Well, right. I mean, at the moment, even though there are some things in clinical trials, we always have to remember that the most challenging areas are still at an early stage. So that's why I make and not only do they have to individually get, you know, all the way through clinical trials, they're safe, but also they have to be combined. You know, each of these things individually can be applied to a small subset of the population that happened to have, you know, early onset diseases arising from maybe congenital acceleration of one particular type of damage. Right. But then to work to be useful people who don't have any congenital problems who are aging at normal rate, we've got to actually combine them all. And of course, that's going bound to throw up on anticipated interactions. So that's why I put this time frame as far out of 17 years and even then with only 50% probability. Right. But the anticipation is the thing that's where the ship's going to really hit the fat. You know, where there's going to be this enormous turbulence and society arising from the knowledge that this is coming. I for one am very excited about living in B500. I think I can get a lot of shit done. I learned about myself. You know, people, I think it's, I think it makes no sense to think about what one's going to be doing in the distant future. You know, people, there was one time I was on stage about I know say five or six years ago and somebody from the audience for about the thousandth time asked me, you know, how long do you want to live? I just lost it slightly. And I, because sometimes I've had questions just one more time too often. And so I said, look, okay, I've got a question for you. I said, right, what time do you want to go to the toilet next Sunday? Only looked at me like, incredulity. And I said, yeah, you haven't the face idea why I asked you that question. But it's exactly the same kind of question. Yes. You know, you may have an opinion about what time you expect to go to the toilet next Sunday day because of habit. But having an opinion about what time you want to go to the toilet is completely crazy. So you're going to have better information on the topic near the time. And you're going to be able to act on that information. Exactly the same. And also the idea of how long you want to live is going to be irrelevant if they get repair disease and fix all these issues. It's just going to be the quality of life. But firstly, I mean, having an idea of how long you want to live even stating that the quality of life is going to be like an adult physically and mentally. You know, it's crazy to have an opinion, but it's going to be determined by other stuff. Yes. Well, I'm fascinated by the future in every aspect technologically with artificial intelligence, with automation, just the way society is shifting. I mean, I'm a very optimistic person in that regard. And I think even the problem, some of the problems that we have socially, I think those are just a result of this shift towards a more aware, more conscious society. I'm very optimistic. I think all those things are good. So I think that the extending lifespan and getting to see these real exponential changes in our culture and in our society and just our way of life, I'm very excited about it. I think it's, one of the most intriguing things about being a person is to see how things have shifted. I've been reading a lot of books lately about Native Americans and things how they shifted from the early 1800s to the 21st century, the early 21st century, 200 years later, things are impossibly different, unimaginably different at the time. If you could talk to them about what life was like 200 years ago, it'd be fairly similar. 1620 to 1820, not a lot of difference. But 1820 to 2020, good Lord. What is 2,220 going to be like? I mean, I just think that we are at the cusp of one of the most spectacular eras in human history. Things are changing so rapidly amazingly. Well, of course, the thing that one has to recognize is that we have no particular reason to suppose that they will ever flow down. Yes. So you can't really call this one of the cusp. It's just, you know, we're in an exponential scenario and we happen to be noticing it more. Are you, well, just since you started off as a coder, I'm going to wrap this up soon, but I'm going to leave you with this because I'm really fascinated by artificial intelligence. Are you worried at all about artificial intelligence? Do you hear the Elon Musk's and the Sam Harris's of the world that are like sounding the alarm? Like, hey, don't, don't hit that switch. Don't turn this on. I think it's a legitimate question, definitely. Whether the progress that we're making might lead to a development, perhaps accidental development of technology that is so autonomous, that it gets out of our control. However, I do think it's very unlikely. I think that the ways in which we have succeeded in making the progress that we have made so far in AI over the past decade, especially, relies enormously on human computer interaction. In other words, that the machines get their information from us and from the world without which they can't make progress. I don't see that changing really any time soon. I do still pay some attention to the progress of AI. One of my other good friends that I knew from way back at my Cambridge days is the guy who runs DeepMind, which is one of the most high profile companies. I'm definitely excited about what's happening, but no, I'm not particularly apprehensive. However, I do think that it's better to be safe than sorry. Therefore, that what's being done to look at the possibilities of things getting out of control or indeed of things just being misused by humans is a very legitimate and valuable area of work. Well, Aubrey, the next time I see you, if it's five years from now, I hope you look younger. I hope the world has changed and everything's groovy and I appreciate you and I appreciate everything you're doing. Well, thank you for that. Please tell people if they're more interested in finding out about what you're doing. What is the website of your organization? Yep, sense.org. That's Fashoga, A for Elephant, and for November. Fashoga.org. All right. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. Bye, everybody. What's it all? That was fun.