Some of the deepest political analysis is the most simple, the most straightforward people who know obvious truths, sometimes trigger the most profound thoughts in the rest of us. So with that in mind, it is not criticism to say that the following tweet was one of the most simple and obvious and yet meaningful sin in a long time. This is from last week on the Twitter app, X on your phone, and it's from Matt Walsh of The Daily Wire. And here's the totality of what you wrote. Here's the whole tweet. You can see if you agree or disagree. Grocery prices are insane. They're still rising. Addressing this problem should be the number one priority of every elected leader and the stupid foreign wars and focus on this issue. It's one of the main reasons socialists are gaining power. So we can go through line by line and assess the veracity of each one of them, but it's just obvious looking at that every single word of that is true. Yes, grocery prices are rising. They're insane who hasn't gone to the grocery store in the last year and said, whoo, really 200 bucks. I did fill my cart. They're higher than they were. Now there are kinds of measures of inflation, famously the consumer product index, the CPI. And a lot of them are skewed. Some intentionally skewed design to hide the truth rather than illuminate it. But you don't need to consult any of them to get to what's actually happening. All you got to do is buy the things that you've always bought a tube of Crest Truth paste to jars, could be peanut butter, whatever's in your cart every week is more expensive than it was a year ago, two years ago, certainly more than it was five years ago. There is inflation in real terms, whether or not the government admits it, whether or not our political leaders want to own up to it or claim much reserve responsibility for it. Because yes, it's not organic. It's their fault, but it's real. You know it's real. So why is this a problem? Well, it's a problem because for a lot of people, it makes it hard to live here. The United States is suddenly an expensive country. If you've lived here your whole life, you probably have, for the most of your life thought of it as a rich country, but an expensive country, that's the kind of place you go on vacation. That's Monaco or Barcelona. That's Tokyo. That's some place you take your family and then get home and say, whoof, I don't have to pay those prices every day. Well, suddenly you live in that country. You live in an expensive country where people are worried about having enough money to pay the basic bills, housing, food, insurance, medical cars. It's all much more expensive than it was. Then he goes on and say, stop these stupid foreign wars and focus on this issue. Well, that's obvious. Why wouldn't you want to do that? Now why would you want to do that? Well, because in a democracy, your job, if you're a leader, is to represent the people who elected you, which is to say to take their concerns to Washington and try and do something about that, fix their problems. That's why you're there. That's the whole purpose of our government. Doesn't exist to serve itself, much less a foreign country. It exists to serve its population. That's literally the whole point. There is no other point. And so if people across the country of all parties are saying grocery prices are insane, then you should probably think long and hard about what to do about that. If you can, and there's no poll taken in the last year that shows that people are more concerned about the Iranian nuclear program or Islamic Jihad or some Muslim group far away than they are about the price of Skippy peanut butter. There's just, there's no poll that shows that because the majority doesn't feel that way and why would it? Who cares about Islamic Jihad? Honestly, who really cares about the Iranian nuclear program? Not compared to your ability to live here or remain solvent through an illness or send your kids to school or even go on vacation. Those are the real concerns that people have and why wouldn't they be? And then the final line, the reasons socialists are succeeding and they are, says Mount Walsh, is because the people in charge, which would be Republicans at this point, are ignoring these issues. He's blaming inattention by our leaders for the rise of socialism. Is that a controversial thing to say? Is that untrue? Of course, it's entirely true. And it's always been true. There has always been a movement for socialism, however defined. In the United States, certainly since the mass migration of the turn of the last century, there has been a vibrant socialist movement small but active. And one of the aims of both parties and they both agree on this is to keep it at bay. Now, how do you do that? Well, mostly not with force by stealing the issues. So the claim that socialists make is we care about you. And we want to make sure you have enough money to live here without worrying unduly. That's the core claim. And maybe be against Thanksgiving and for transgenderism or whatever insane idea there are for and a lot of them are for those ideas. But their fundamental pitch is an economic pitch and the pitch itself is not crazy. Their solutions may not work. But the pitch they make to voters is very straightforward. And anybody can understand, you don't have to be a socialist to agree. I'm certainly not a socialist. But why wouldn't I want leaders who care what Skippy peanut butter costs? Well, of course I would. And this has been recognized forever, a chicken in every pot. That was the promise of the Herbert Hoover for President campaign in 1928. His supporters said, electric, Herbert Hoover, and there'll be a chicken in every pot. Others will lower the price of Doritos with Skippy peanut butter. Now he made that claim one year before the Great Depression made it a lot harder to put a chicken in every pot. But even before the Depression, Hoover's supporters knew just like any awake person would know that economic concerns are the core concerns of voters and ignore them at your peril. And by the way, there was a socialist candidate that year in 1928. Norman Thomas, who by modern standards was totally moderate. By the way, he was a Presbyterian minister. He was kind of a wet liberal. He was hardly a transgender activist or an anti white hater or anything like that. He didn't want to ban Thanksgiving. But he wanted to make sure that people's material needs were met and that's not a crazy goal. So to keep him from getting into power or people like him, the Hoover campaign promised that they would pay attention to food prices. Doesn't mean that they were tools of socialism. Actually, meant they were opponents of socialism because they knew that if they didn't pay attention, you could conceivably get a socialist. Norman Thomas didn't do very well that year, probably because Herbert Hoover took the threat seriously. So this is not a new idea at all. It's the oldest idea because it's the most obvious idea. If you don't attend to people's actual concerns, they will go elsewhere. In a purportedly democratic system, they have a whole range of options, by the way, most of which we haven't been presented with in recent history. But it could get pretty radical here, why wouldn't it? And so you probably shouldn't ignore those concerns. That's all Matt Walsh was trying to say he works in the daily wire. He's not a wild-eyed radical. But you would have thought he was reading the Communist Manifesto on air and burning an American flag given the response from his fellow conservatives, other elements of the Maga Coalition. Rather than just well ignoring him, if you disagree with someone, you always have the option to just ignore him. Didn't hear what you said. Sorry. Rather than just ignoring him or maybe even smarter, paying lip service to agreement. Yeah, no, Matt Walsh makes a smart point. People care what their groceries cost. No, people care. Maybe you even find out what groceries cost and then play a more elaborate role. And, oh, was it a grocery yesterday? And boy, prices are high. We're going to do something about that. You would think they would do that. But that's the opposite of what they did. And by they, I mean the nail cons. The people who are in charge of the Trump administration, not the people who came in with Trump, but the people who somehow took control of the Trump administration and turned it in a totally different direction from the one most of us voted for. Those people attacked Matt Walsh and not just Matt Walsh, but the idea that it is legitimate that it's allowed that's within bounds to complain about food prices. What's wrong with you? Complaining about food prices? We're going to play you a clip from someone from whom we try to play a lot of clips. It's Ben Shapiro. We're going to play it in just a sec. But before we do just a caveat, we're not playing this to suggest that Ben Shapiro was like a shaper of history, a mover in American politics. He's not, he's an employee like most everybody else. He's doing what he's told. He represents larger interests, obviously. So why bother to replay and then rebut something that Ben Shapiro said? Well, in an effort to speak to the people who put him up to it. So the whole point of Ben Shapiro, and there is a point to Ben Shapiro. This is not like some organic phenomenon. Like Ben Shapiro was just so charming and brilliant that he somehow got into Harvard Law School and then eyebrows and all emerged as a social media titan. No, of course not. Ben Shapiro had a deal with Facebook. I don't know what else got. So the point of Ben Shapiro was, here's a way to send a very specific message to outline and sell a very specific worldview to young people. Ben Shapiro is an old person's idea of a young person. He is a spokesman for a group of older people aimed at younger people. I have an idea. Let's get Ben Shapiro. This guy's been shooting, he's brilliant. He's a really promising young kid and we'll get him to sell free market economics and a robust Reaganite foreign policy to the young folks. And by the way, it kind of worked for a while thanks to the trans movement, which you suspect they also kind of concocted the same group, but whatever, wherever that came from, while Ben Shapiro seemed like he was on the side of common sense and he's for free speech. He's against the trans lunacy, etc, etc. But always from day one, the point was Ben Shapiro is going to sell this very specific version of economics, not capitalism. There's no resemblance to anything Adam Smith advocated for, but the kind of modern American monopoly arrangement where six countries, companies can behave like countries, have sovereignty on like our own nation and control every part of your life through debt, which is kind of broad, but fairly accurate definition of our current economic systems. So sell that and then sell the even harder to pitch idea that it's unpatriotic to oppose wars for Israel. Like first of all, it's obviously anti-Semitic. I mean, it's just an expression of hate if you don't want to regime change some country you can't find out a map. Obviously you're a bigot, you're basically a Nazi. In fact, you must be fore hitler. You probably are opposed to the Second World War II. Probably a problem with Churchill. It's literally immoral to oppose Ben Shapiro's employers foreign policy, but it's also an American. Like this country was founded to fight wars for Israel. That's why we're here. I mean, our founder said explicitly, America exists as a Judeo Christian country to support Israel. Okay? So whatever whatever prime minister of that country wants, we're doing. I mean, that's why we're here. So if you're against it, we, you don't believe in America, you're against America. Why don't you just leave? People will revoke your green card. Oh, don't have a green card. We'll strip your citizenship. And that's what ICE exists to do now. In any case, you should know watching this that these are not just Ben Shapiro's opinions. They actually has opinions who knows. But these are the opinions of the people who prop up Ben Shapiro, who create a Ben Shapiro. But this is what they think. This is the argument they sincerely believe apparently is going to appeal to young people who are worried about the price of burritos. Watch this. Unfortunately, this has become the mode for a lot of young people. Why can't I afford what my parents could afford when they were my age? Spoiler alert, when it comes to groceries, you can. And in areas, by the way, for housing, where deregulation has been the rule, you still can. In fact, you have today more restaurants options, your food costs less of your disposable income. And it is probably significantly better. Here in the United States of America, we are fatter, richer, have nicer houses, nicer cars, and the food we eat is much, much better than it was for our parents in general. Our parents probably would have considered a 450 burrito at Del Taco, a gourmet meal. Your parents would have considered a 450 taco at Del Taco, a deal. Because your parents were pros. They were pathetic. They were disgusting people. And anything was enough for them. You don't want to use a term, goislop, but it does seem kind of appropriate in this specific instance. They would be grateful for a Del Taco. What are you complaining about? It's hilarious. But it's the first line that really does catch your attention. He says it is fashionable, this mode among young people to complain that life is more expensive than it was for their parents. So here you have this whole new generation, this entitled fat lazy tattooed, drug-addicted, green mesmerized generation that has no idea what's good for itself, but is all about entitlement, whining and entitlement. And the main thing they think they're entitled to is a life as good as the life their parents led. Who gave them that idea? Of course, that used to be, I think it was referred to euphemistically as the American dream. And the American dream was the idea that your children might have a better life than you had. And yes, not just spiritually, but materially. They might have the things that you wanted, but couldn't have. That's why you work hard to give them opportunities. But Ben Shapiro was telling you what we never said that. Who told you that was a real promise? How dare you want what your parents had? Who do you think you are? Eat your Del Taco and be happy for 50 for a Del Taco? What a deal. And you know how we know it's a good deal. You know America's thriving? Because it's fatter. By the way, if you live in China during one of the recent famines during the Cultural Revolution, obesity was the sign of affluence. But of course, we don't live in China during a famine. We live in late stage empire in the United States where obesity is not a sign of affluence, but instead a sign of discouragement and poverty. That's the truth. It's a sign most of the time of sadness, not of a thyroid condition, but of depression. So people who are depressed get fat. So if you want to know how your population is doing, measure their BMI. So a little weird for Ben Shapiro to say, we're doing great, we're fat. But what is actually going on here is what is happening across our society on so many different issues, which is a rewriting of history in real time. You just saw something happen. You saw, I don't know, let's just pick an example. Israel pushed Donald Trump into a war that hurts the United States that we cannot possibly win. There's all downside for us, but potentially upside for Israel. That would be the war with Iran. The regime changed war that no one in America supported. And you watched that happen at the end of February of this year. But within days, they were telling you what are you an anti-Semite that didn't happen? Israel didn't push Trump to war with Iran. Who are you saying Trump has no agency? Are you saying Trump's weak? Well, obviously Trump is weak. That's why he allowed the Israelis to push him to war. I mean, who doesn't know that? Of course he's weak. It doesn't matter, weaker, strong. That's what happened. And they admitted it happened and we saw it happen and anyone who paid any attention to it all had no doubt at all because it was true that that's what happened. Israel pushed Trump to war with Iran. It's like they were a critical American interest at stake. There weren't. There are now. But what's interesting is that almost immediately after every big news organization in the United States started telling you what you just saw is not what you just saw. And if you thought you just saw that, the problem is you. There's been wrong with your brain and with your heart. You're a hater. You must hate Jews. Well, no. We don't hate Jews at all. But that just happened shut up. And by the way, we haven't seen polling on it, but it's probably been pretty successful. If you scream at people long enough and persistently enough and tell them lies consistently enough, after a while they kind of give up and believe those lies, you can change the the collective memory about an event pretty quickly after that event occurred. And then you can encode it forever in what we used to call the history books. And we now referred to as AI, which is our collective consciousness. And forever after something that didn't happen will be recorded as historical truth. That can happen. We're watching it right now. So one of the things that Ben Shapiro's employers are trying to tell you is that actually your life is way better than previous generations. You've got it so good. You don't know how good you've got it. And if you can't see that, the problem is you. So stop complaining, bitch, you little whiner, get to work retirement. What? That's for ungrateful people. Get back to work. Eat your del taco. They're only 450. Your parents would have been grateful for a 450 del taco getting out after 18 hours in the spinning mill. They were only nine years old. They didn't have del taco then. That's what they're trying to tell you your parents generation lived through. But did it? We could make a detailed case based on the statistics which are so publicly available from, say, two generations ago. Let's just pick the biggest generation in American history, the baby boom. And we could tell you everything about their lives. So you're the average age at which people had babies in, let's just pick a year. I'll pick the year I was born, 1969. Women had babies in the United States on average the age of 20. years old. How'd they do that? How could you afford a baby at 20? You can't afford a baby at 20. Child care is so expensive. Do you know what's that cost to hire someone from Central America to watch your child? Well, you work as a bank teller. It doesn't make any sense that couldn't have happened. Oh, but it did. It did happen and it's provable. But maybe a more telling picture of what life was like. Let's just pick that same year, 1969 is an actual picture from 1969. Let's pick the biggest event that year in the United States. Certainly the most celebrated and lovingly catalogued event, not simply of that year, the summer of 1916, the same year as the moon landing. But of that entire generation, the baby boom, the famous baby boom that everyone loves to despise and for good reason. People born between 1946 and 1964, right smack in the middle, 1969 was the year of the Woodstock Music Festival in Woodstock, New York. Then numbers kind of vary about how many people went, 400,000, 600,000, hundreds of thousands of Americans went to that event. And there are a lot of pictures of it and they're all on the internet. We've got a couple not great pictures of it, but take 10 minutes tonight and look at the pictures, not on the performers, slide in the family stone and the grateful dead and Richie Haven's at all the rest, most of them long dead. But take a look at the crowd. There it is right there. That's the crowd at Woodstock. That's a faraway shot. So you kind of get a sense of the scale of it, but you kind of get a sense of the demographic composition of it. So 1960 in this country was about 90% white, 1989, 88, 89% white, about 10 or 11% black. And interestingly, or maybe not surprisingly, the crowd at this massive event is about that. It's probably a little more than 90% white, maybe 95% white, but then it was at least 5% black. So it was on some basic level representative of the American population, 90% white, 10% black. But zoom in a little bit. What do you notice? That's not a great shot. They're more on the internet and you should definitely look them up. But those are shirtless people. And if you look carefully, then they're leaned over. The first thing you notice, what's the first thing you notice? Well, the complexion of the skin, again, 90% white. But after that, the first thing you notice is you can see the ribs on almost every single person at that event. These are thin, fit people with muscle definition and not a single hint of what we call now a love handle. These are people like trathletes. And this is a broad cross section. In fact, it's probably not even the healthiest cross section of American society in 1969. These are the drug users of 1969. These are the party people. They're sleeping outside for three days in a field in upstate New York. I mean, these are not probably the captain of every track team on the Eastern seaboard. These are like the stoners. And yet even the stoners in 1969 looked well fit, trim and happy. Of course they were dipping and they had stupid ideas and they were running around naked in the field and it doesn't sound entirely bad. But they were misguided and dumb and probably had opinions that were maybe even malicious. But they certainly looked happy. They looked cheerful. They looked like they thought the future was going to be great better than today. They had not been lectured by their leaders to be grateful for a deltaco. In fact, they weren't eating deltaco's and you can tell by the way they look. And so you can't look at those pictures and thousands more like them on the internet. Of this country before this era that we're living in now and say the people are better off. And they're gravely worse off and you can see it in their faces and in their tattoos and in their piercings and in their demeanor. And they're not all failing. Of course, they're amazing young people who are bright eyed and hopeful, optimistic on it. So impressive. But you can't say they're more confident about their future than their parents were because they're not and they're right not to be. So if you cared about them, you would consider that a tragedy. As a matter of public policy, we consider it a disaster. It's exactly the opposite of what you're charged with doing. Your job, if you run the American government or if you seek to influence the running of the American government, your job is really simple. Help the people thrive. That's it. And by the way, once again, if you don't do it, someone else will. Maybe some with an economic program that doesn't work. Maybe some with deep racial animus that's going to split the country along racialized. Maybe some of the hate's white people or things that men can become women or something crazy. That person's going to win anyway. Why? One reason because he at least pretends to care about the people who live here and not just their material well being, but their spiritual well being. Are they happy? Can you imagine four or 500,000 American 18 year olds plucked at random from cities across the country in a field this summer, this month, August 57 years after Woodstock. Can you imagine what they would look like with their shirts off? Which is not to make fun of their lumpy fizziques that happens to a lot of us over time. But can you imagine what their faces would look like? Would they look as cheerful as the kids you see in the pictures of Woodstock? You hope so? Probably not. So maybe the last thing they need is to be lectured by people who are clearly the beneficiaries of unearned privilege like Ben Shapiro somehow got into Harvard Law School. Despite a middling IQ, how did that happen? Never asked. People like that have no standing at all to lecture the rest of America's young people about whether or not they complain about their clearly declining standard of living and their future prospects. They have no standing at all, but they do it anyway. Now why do they do it? Well, they're two reasons they do it. First because they feel it. Now the second Matt Walsh sent that tweet out, there was a chorus of people making exactly the same noise as Ben Shapiro made. Shut up. Bredos are enough for you. A $20 burrito was a good deal. Each of burrito and be quiet. Each of burrito and be happy. No true lupus for you. So there was that. So it was clearly coordinated, but it's not just coordination that gets us to a talking point like that. There was deep feeling behind it. And that feeling was contempt. That was loathing of the people complaining. That was loathing of the population. And that is part and parcel of this whole program. And this ultimately is the reason that the neo con world view is a cancerous worldview. Not simply because it's wrong about which countries we ought to invade, which leaders we ought to topple, which democracies we ought to erect in countries whose languages we don't speak. Okay, that's obviously all wrong. But that's not the worst thing about it. The worst thing about it is not just it's inattention to the fortunes of actual Americans. It's hostility. It's hatred of Americans because there's no other way to describe the kind of feelings it could get you to give a lecture like the one Ben Shapiro gave. If someone you loved turned to you and said, man, I'm overwhelmed by the cost of food. If you love that person, you know, you might ultimately explain, well, maybe you're buying the wrong food. I have flicked a solution for you. But would your first impulse be to tell a person to shut up and be grateful for a burrito from Del Taco? Probably not. That's the way you speak to people you hate, who you resent, whose degradation pleases you. That was the most revealing moment because it showed you the true motive of Ben Shapiro and people like Ben Shapiro. They don't like you. And if they did, they wouldn't talk like that to you. They would show compassion, but they don't ever. It shouldn't surprise you, by the way. Anyone pushing for a war like the war with Iran clearly hates you, clearly, no matter what they say, and keep in mind that every attack on your interests always comes guys as a liberation with a real liberate you, liberates you from the fear your doubt is feel from his law, and she hod. You're probably worrying about Hezbollah a lot. What? No. He's but what? You worry a lot about Hezbollah, but we're going to save you from that. You know, the Iran nuclear program is a massive threat. Oh, where's Iran? It's trust me. They've killed thousands of Americans. What? Who shut up they have? And so they tell you, of course, that whatever they're doing is to save you from something you probably didn't feel a threat from before, like, I don't know, marriage or cheap food. Think about the liberation movements, decent schools, safe neighborhoods. We're going to liberate you from that. The name of civil rights. Oh, yeah. We're going to liberate you from marriage. It's really a prison. Yeah, big prison. We're going to set you alone and apartment by yourself with your cat. You're your food online. We've got 450 burritos. You're going to feel a lot better. You're going to be free, finally. Okay. So of course you say that because that's kind of what liars tell you. Whatever they're doing to hurt you is actually in your interest. No, it's medicine. Just take it. You won't get COVID. But behind the lie is what? Why would you lie to someone like that? Why would you tell them that? Why would you tell them what's killing them is saving them because you hate them? Obviously. Now in the question of food prices, something so fundamental, something every single human being deals with because everybody has to eat. It's out in the open. It's all revealed. You can lecture me about the Iranian nuclear program or the threat of Hezbollah. But if you're lecturing about food prices at my grocery store, you clearly hate me. And they clearly do. You should know that. And as if we need more evidence, well, here's Mark Levin. On the internet, something very weird happened last week and I was watching this. The price of a burrito. Not in that really end up burritos. Every now and then I'll go to Taco Bell. I don't have one or two. Pretty cheap if you ask me. That is the price. Now, all that said, this debate was about affordability. Now, he doesn't have to pay $20 for a burrito. You can make it for a lot less. But I'm thinking, what the hell has happened to our society? Where is our hand doing mentality? We sit here with a war in Iran. It's against an enemy that has killed thousands of Americans, main thousands of Americans. I remember at a time when Americans say, let's go. Let's destroy that country, destroy that government. You don't get to steal thousands of our fellow citizens, military or civilians. You don't get to try to assassinate our president. You don't get to threaten us with potential nuclear weapons either. Now it's a debate. Should we take him out, shouldn't we? Are you a neo-con or a warmonger? Is this a war of choice? We don't even have a draft. Should we take them out, shouldn't we? Are you a neocon or a warmonger? Is this a war of choice? We don't even have a draft. But a draft even work with young people today, I wonder. Could we even fight World War II today? We're whining about a dollar, a gasoline. 12% of the United States population served in the military during World War II. Over 16 million Americans joined the armed forces out of a total national population of about 130 million people, roughly one out of every eight Americans were uniform. We don't have that today. And people are still whining and complaining. It's getting embarrassing to be perfectly honest with you. It's embarrassing. Your unwillingness, your reluctance, your hesitation in the face of fighting for Israel. It's just embarrassing, it's disgusting. Huge percentage of Americans served during World War II, of course they had no choice, because there was a draft. Why aren't they serving now? That's a question actually, Mark Levin, ought to ask himself, a man who didn't serve, who could be serving now, by the way, it could be in the front lines in Kiev, or for that matter in the Gulf, but isn't. But why aren't Americans serving 80 years after the great victory of World War II? Well, I don't know. Maybe they look around at the country that won that war. And they asked the obvious question, is this what a victorious country looks like? If we won, why are we living like this? If we won, why aren't things getting better? Why are they getting worse? Why are we so in debt? Why does the federal government spend seven trillion a year, but only takes in five trillion in tax revenue? What's the plan there? How do we get there? This is what victory looks like? Just for fun sometime, you ought to fly from Kennedy, airport in New York, to Narita, airport in Tokyo. It's been a day wandering around New York, to do the whole city. Yeah, I bet just Manhattan's washing in heights to try back up. Just walk it, you can do it. It's not very long. It's a day walk. And then go to Tokyo, one of the biggest cities in the world. Now, Tokyo is the city that lost. Actually, we dropped two nuclear weapons on Japan. So they really lost. They actually vaporize them, all their kids too. No country's ever lost like Japan lost in the summer of 1945. But walk around Tokyo after a day of walking around New York, which city looks like it lost to war? It's not Tokyo. So in order to convince people to go die for a cause, probably you should convince them the causes were dying for. But which cause has been worth dying for? Honestly, dying, like actually dying, or probably getting your face blown off. How about your ears melted off your head, losing all your fingers? How about having your genitals shredded? What causes worth that? Well, if it's worth it, tell me how. Tell me how it's worth it, because we're not speaking German. A lot of Americans don't speak English at this point. These are tired and stupid, in fact, nonsensical talking points, but they're also more than that. They're deeply insulting. You are lecturing a population that you personally have taken advantage of. Who's total destruction you have overseen. And you've done nothing to stop it. You did nothing when the sacri was flooded. Appalachia, the part of the country that disproportionately fought the wars that you called for, and destroyed them with opioids. You said nothing. You said nothing when this country was invaded, and it's trillion dollar military didn't stop that invasion. And for you to lecture the rest of the nation about a can do attitude, what do you make by freaking burritos then? It's too much. And then to cap it off with the lie that you and every other person in media is now repeating that Iran is trying to assassinate President Trump as a statement of fact, that is not true. So they're now telling us that Donald Trump was the target of an assassination attempt by a guy with a man pad, a surface terror missile inside the security perimeter in Ankara, Turkey, during the NATO summit. That's not true. That's factually untrue. And then why about it? You don't have to intel. Well, you know, actually some of us have called around. Untrue. So why are they reporting that? Well, of course, like so much that you read and see on television or on the internet, it is the product of a propaganda campaign designed to change the course of events on the ground. A propaganda campaign designed to convince Donald Trump that he has to restart major combat operations against Iran because they're trying to kill him personally. And so they tell him as they have been for more than a year ever since the butler shooting Iran did it. You need to get in a separate aircraft. You need to be moved on the tarmac inside a drink cart because they're gonna assassinate you at any second. And why are they telling Trump that? Who apparently believes it? It's not true, by the way. That is a lie. They're telling him that because they think that if they can make it personal, that Trump will have a stake in emotional staking, continuing this war against Iran, which the United States too restate cannot win. How do we know we can't win it? Because we haven't been able to open the straight-of-form moves despite having a fleet of vessels that can't even approach the Iranian coast. So rather than pausing and asked, why are we spending $1.5 trillion a year on a defense budget or now a war budget that is unable to beat what we were told is a second rate or third rate military, a third world country run by primitives who murder gays by throwing them off the roof. And we can't even open a piece of water so 20% of the world's energy can flow through. How's our military doing? Shut up. Not one moment of reflection or self-awareness even. Not one moment of asking the obvious questions about our own failures, there's that the rest of us paid for have gone into debt for. One of the reasons you can't buy a cheap burrito unless Mark Levin makes one for you. And we hope he will. We hope he has that can do attitude that gets him in your kitchen rolling you a burrito for free. But in the event he doesn't do that, it's gonna cost you more than it used to to buy burrito. Why? Because country's too in debt. Why? Well, the main driver of debt for in wars. That's a fact. The main driver of debt for in wars are discretionary budget. It all goes to war. Wars we don't win. Wars that are being waged, not because the public wants them, but because Mark Levin is calling for them on behalf of the interests of a foreign country. That's a fact. And to continue that, they're now laying this lie, this head trip on the president, no, they're trying to assassinate you in the tarmac that are getting the drink cart and sneak on to another aircraft. And a lot of Americans are just like believing it because they're telling him that. Oh, Mark Levin, y'all are sashing the president, okay. Kill thousands of Americans, okay. You must have missed that part where they were sending opioids into Appalachia. I don't think that was the Iranians who did that. In any case, it's worth at this point taking a step back and assessing really the root problems here. So inflation is real. No one wants to admit it because the policymakers caused it. It's not something that just naturally happens. Inflation is what happens when you mistreat the currency. Do you don't own? It belongs to the American public. You're in charge of it. And you use it for your own benefit and not theirs. And you have short-sighted thinking that in the end destroys nations and it's destroying ours. So if you've got a small business, that cash has to keep flowing or else you go out of business. And sometimes you just need capital to buy inventory, repair equipment, hire employees or just take advantage of an opportunity when it comes along. You're not in charge of that just happens and you have to have access to cash. And that's a challenge if you need it quickly. And that's where a forensic cardiff can help. Unlike the big banks, cardis application takes three minutes. There's no hard credit pull and you can get approved and funded within one day. The process is fast, simple and respectful of your time. You're running a business after all. They've been helping businesses get capital for more than 20 years. They've lent over $12 billion to companies throughout the United States. They are totally real. And unlike Citibank, they're not gonna lecture you about Pride Month as they loan you money. If you've been in business for at least one year and make at least $20,000 a month in revenue, you can apply right now from the 500 grand in same-day business funding. Cardiff.co-tucker. Cardiff, CRDIFF.co-slashtucker. Real-growth, fast-funding, cardiff. So wait a barrel better. We have great news for our listeners and viewers. Hallows Next Prayer Challenge has arrived. The 40-day St. Michael's Lent prayer challenge begins August 12th. In a time when pressure, ambition, the iPhone, and that's constant beeping, are all pulling your attention in various directions. There is a way to re-center, slow down to get your mind on God and that way is Hallows. The journey takes you through where the great Christian works ever written, Augustine's Confessions, written more than 1600 years ago. It's a kind of autobiography and it's a masterpiece. Still powerful because Augustine struggles are ones that we can relate to. He starts for meaning, success, and happiness. It's incredible that something written 1,600 years ago could feel like it was modern, but it does. I guess it answers the deepest questions. But this challenge is more than a history lesson. Through daily prayer and reflection, you will walk with a guston and discover how God is working in your life. God offers healing, freedom, and transformation. Everybody has something that he or she is fighting. Maybe it's fear, probably pride. St. Michael's Lent creates space to bring those struggles to God and allow His grace to change us, to solve those problems, which are unchallurgical without God. Hallows is amazing, we love it. It's a nightly during a terrible conversation in my house. Download the Hallow app today to get started. So there's no one we can think of who's got a clearer handle on this or a more longitudinal view gained over many years beginning at the Treasury Department on this question than Catherine Austin Fitts. And she joins us now to explain why burritos are 20 bucks. Catherine Austin Fitts. Catherine Austin Fitts, thank you so much for doing this. I have a lot of questions. I'll keep them short. Are we experiencing inflation in the United States? Do you believe? Yes, we are experiencing inflation. And there is a reasonable chance that the inflation at least the increase in household goods is going to get much, much worse. Why? So it is because we've been going through a restructuring of the economy for many decades. This has been building for many decades. One, we start off with a model where we have a debt-based currency and that debt-baseding force is huge expenses that you don't have to have. That's number one. But number two, we've run our fiscal economy in ways that I would describe as a financial coup d'etat. And as we've pulled resources out of the economy, we have consolidated ownership and control in a way that forces expenses or lowers the income for the general population and it raises their expenses. And this has been a intentional consolidation of ownership and control. And now you're seeing the results that resulted people being squeezed in a variety of ways. So I'm describing a change in the financial model, this centralization of power and economic control. And it involves many different things throughout the economy. But the important thing to understand is it was a plan, it's intentional. And if you look at where we are, it's going to take many, many things to change it. Because it comes with tremendous and explosive changes in technology which can be used to create great prosperity, but can also be used to consolidate control in a way that benefit the few and destroy the many. So as I hear your big picture description of this transition through which we're moving, the first thought that comes to mind is boy, that sounds a little bit like what happened after the Soviet Union collapsed in the summer of 1991. And all of a sudden Russians woke up 10 years later and all state industries were owned by a small group of people. It was correct. That's kind of what it sounds like. Well, if you generally, I mean, I'm grossly oversimplifying, but if you look at the people who did the, it's called the Rape of Russia. Yes. It's a similar group. And I'll give you a story. I was in the city of London making a presentation in 2001. And I've been asked to speak about what I call prioritization in the United States, the consolidation of the real estate and housing market. So I've been the Assistant Secretary of Housing. And I gave the presentation and two presentations followed, one by Anne Williamson, who had been covering Russia for the Wall Street Journal during the Rape of Russia. And she got up and gave a presentation. And then John Lachlan, who's a remarkable British commentator now in Paris, stood up and did the same on what had happened in Eastern Europe. And the three of us went into shock as did many of the investors in the room because we realized it was the same firms, the same law firms, the same intelligence agencies. And what they were doing in Eastern Europe and in Russia and in the United States was a very similar game. We have a big presentation, it's literally called Plunder. But they were basically going in and plundering. And it was one plan. It wasn't three different plans or three different groups. It was a process of consolidation of the economies in all three places. And basically a privatization of the nation's resources. Well, here's the thing, privatization Tucker is when I transfer an asset or involve corporations in a service at a market price. Pirateization, it's when I transfer an asset to a private party at $0.10 on the dollar. Yes. So at a below market price. And what we've been watching by and large around the world is prioritization, not privatization or plunder. But they're looting. And thank you for that distinction. Because it seems important. So it's not simply a matter. So I think many of us on the right were sold on the idea that government is inefficient, which is an easy case to make because it's true. And in order to make the system, the government more efficient, we need to privatize things and the public benefits and the market rules apply. And so it's fair and transparent. And it just works better. That is the case, I think, that free market economists made throughout the 80s and 90s. So it's so funny. I wrote a piece about this sort of prioritization at the time. And it later became an online book. I wrote called Dylan Read in the Aristocracy of Stock Prophets. And when I first sent it to the, I was working with this firm in London, the head of research just started laughing. And he said, I've always believed that government is inefficient and the solution is to bring in more private, more private capacity. And I'm reading this and what I realize is, what is going on and some privatize are just using the government to pay themselves huge and hideous profits above market in a way that's destroying markets. So we have these public private partnerships that involve huge corruption, huge graft, and aren't productive at all. But the spin they use is what you just described. Boy, it's a very effective argument. And it certainly fooled me. Definitely fooled me. So how does that trend that you just described cause inflation? So for example, and there are thousands of different examples, but one of the things that drive prices up is when you have consolidation into monopolies or do monopolies. And so if the Department of Justice is simply not enforcing antitrust, you're gonna get consolidation from monopoly pricing. The best example, of course, is the bailout. So according to the Leavey Institute, there were $20 trillion of the bailouts. And what did we see? We saw a group of financial institutions engage in massive mortgage fraud and financial fraud. As a result, we had $20 trillion of bailings which does run up the debt quite a certain amount. And then what happens? They get the benefit of more access to the federal credit special, all sorts of special dispensations and coming out of the financial crisis, they have a major, much bigger market share, right? Yeah. So not only did they get $29 trillion of bailouts, but suddenly they shifted their market share up dramatically in a way that gives them monopoly pricing power. Okay. And so, and that was combined, for example, in the financial area, with changing laws in $79.80 to allow essentially, user aid. So, for example, when I, as I told you, I went from a process of being a multi-millionaire to having a very rich cash flow every month, to having to live on $2,000 a month and bring down my companies and run my companies with that on the $2,000. And when things are really desperate, I used to always get credit card in the mail from JP Morgan Chase for $300. With a $50 sign up fee and then 30% interest rate. And it was, you're in the corner, you know, according to the Department of Justice, you have to be in Washington in two days and suddenly, you magically get this credit card, which will finance your trip for 50% interest rates when you combine in the fee. So that this is when you were being a sale prosecuted by the Department of Justice after you left government yourself. Yeah. I had a company Hamilton Securities Group, which was working as the lead financial advisor to the Department of Housing and Urban Development. And we were essentially responsible for making sure portfolio strategy was done properly, as well as doing loan sales. And we were essentially stopping money from disappearing out of the backdoor of HUD. And so to get rid of us, we were targeted in this process. And interestingly enough, after they did care rid of us and the public officials we were working with, suddenly massive amounts of money started disappearing from the HUD financial systems. And it's typical in government. You've got to get the honest people out if you're going to drift in a major, major way. And that's what happened anyway. But we had 18 audits and investigations, 12 tracks of litigation, a smear campaign and physical harassment. And the goal, of course, was to catch us doing something, was to prove that we had done something wrong. And it went on for a long time because they could never prove anything. And they tried to falsify documentation. We caught them, and then it turned into a very long process. So, and ultimately we won the big litigation. So we were able to win. And one of the reasons I refused to settle and insisted on going to, because they try and keep you out of court, I couldn't get into court. I really started in 95. I couldn't get into court on the main case until 20, 2004. So, you know, so they try and keep you out of court because of course they have no evidence of any wrongdoing. And it was very funny, Tucker. I wish I had a video of it on the three times they canceled on the eve of trial. So my lawyers for the most over prepared people in the world, they were being paid by the insurance company. And so we got to the final, the first day of the final trial and I wouldn't settle. And I kept insisting. And they constantly, I was poisoned many times when I wouldn't settle, because they wanted to sort of exhaust me anyway. I come in on the last trial on the first day. And essentially the other side has nothing. They have absolutely nothing. And all the lawyers on the other side are fighting. It's the whistleblower attorney in the Department of Justice Attorney and the HUD attorney, they're all fighting. And at the end of the day, my attorney turns to me, and he's white as a sheet and he says, oh my God, they had absolutely nothing. Home ownership has always been at the center of the American dream. It is an actual asset in place. People work their entire lives to build a place of stability and security and real value. Right now though, too many homeowners are stuck sweeping credit cards to cover groceries. There's basically a survival tax of 20% interest or more. So why keep handing your money to the banks when you could keep it for your family? Interest is what kills you. Our friends in American financing of a better way, they're helping homeowners use their hard earned equity and they're supporting Americans looking in fulfill the dream of owning a home with mortgage rates currently in the fives. American financing saves its customers an average of $800 a month. That's about 10 grand a year. It's not just a loan, it's a true financial reset. We recommend American financing. They're called America's home for home loans for a reason. So get out of credit card debt. I mean, it is just crazy to borrow money. No judgment, but it's just making any sense to borrow money at that rate. If you want out, call 800-685-5696-866-865-5696-96-85696 or visit Americanfinance.net slash Tucker. We pray that the war with Iran ends immediately, but the truth is it doesn't seem to be if you're the head of households you need to think through what this could mean for you and the people you're in charge of. Don't wait for disaster to strike to ensure that you have the basics covered. Food, water, light, energy. And that's exactly why we started a company called Last Country Supply. It's our story carries the same preparedness products that we have, well, in this barn, for example. The products that give any head of household peace of mind knowing that if something bad happened, you could take care of the people you're responsible for. So continue to pray for an end to war and violence, but also at the same time, make sure that your family is ready. Stock up with the products that we trust at lastcountrysupply.com slash Tucker. So, but at the depth of this, when you had no money and you're trying to run everything your life and business on $2,000 a month, you're getting credit card offers from JP Morgan Chase. And that's kind of a metaphor for the entire economy works, right? It's people profit off desperation. So I live in one of the first things I did is I sold my big mansion in Washington and bought a country home in Hickory Valley, Tennessee. And I moved to Hickory Valley, Tennessee. I have cousins or farmers in Hickory Valley, Tennessee. And I moved to Hickory Valley, Tennessee, because I knew that the cost of living was much, much lower. And so the county I live in in Tennessee has a per capita income of $24,000 a year. Yeah, very, very low income. And one of the things, when I, as soon as I moved there, what I realized is we were targeted for predatory lending by all the big banks and lenders. And so one of the ways I used to entertain myself, you know, I was trained on Wall Street. And I was trained by the tops of the best lawyers on Wall Street had a negotiate. It was really fun for me, because I would pick up the phone and they would just assume I was another person with $24,000 a year income, which, you know, $2,000 a month, there was. And so I would start to ask them about their offers and negotiate with them. And I learned all their tricks. And what was amazing to me is the people in my county were targeted by some of the smartest legal strategies I've ever dealt with in my life. You know, but it was war. It was a financial onslaught of trying to trick people into debt. Of course, debt is one of the greatest ways you can destroy a family's finances, addiction and debt. And if you look at the targeting of American communities during that period, they were specifically targeted with both addiction and debt. And it was an onslaught. And I got to learn a lot about it living there. What do you think the purpose was, why would any American want to destroy an American community and kill people and enslave them with debt? So if I want to change the economy, then I want to change it from a democratic republic to essentially an oligarchy, then what I need to do is I need to consolidate wealth. And I need to reduce the general population to a group of people who are much easier to control. So let me go back. In 1995, there was an effort made by the people who I would describe as leading the financial system to try and put the country on a financially sound basis. And it failed and ended up at the end of 1995 in a three week shutdown of the government. I don't know if you remember that. Yes. The stirring equipment was in frustration. And it was described to me by the president of the largest pension fund in the country several years later, he said, you don't understand they've given up. They've given up on the country and they're moving all the money out starting in the fall. And that was when the $21 trillion started to go missing, compounded by the $29 trillion that went out on the bailouts. I think what happened was when they failed to achieve a real fiscal, a fiscally responsible approach to the federal balance sheet that they decided to do two things. One, they decided to do a financial coup in a process where instead of the bankers just running monetary policy, they could then run fiscal policy. And I think the second thing they decided to do is if you can't balance the budget with financial responsibility, you can balance the budget by lowering life expectancy. So if you can't fund the pension and retirement system with enough money to meet your obligations, you can meet your obligations by lowering life expectancy. And I think a conscious decision was made to do that. That literally right after the budget deal sort of busted, two decisions were made, one was to approve OxyContin and open the pill mills. The second was all sorts of policies that permitted HUD and other mortgage predatory lending. And that happened right as they also made the decision to do the private prisons and they kept flooding the neighborhoods with drugs. And if you look at the combination of the pill mills, the predatory lending, narcotics trafficking coming in, again, this is all covered in my online book. You know, it dramatically started to steadily reduce life expectancy, particularly in the lower income groups. And I knew it was coming. One of the reasons I kept talking with everybody about the missing money is I knew that it would hit the middle income groups. It was just a matter of time. And I remember I always tell the story of talking to Dr. Mark Skidmore, who would work with me on the missing money. We were sitting in a car in Ball River, Tennessee. I was doing errands. And he kept saying to me, why do you keep bringing up all the money that's going missing from the federal government? Why don't you give up on this? And I said, don't you understand, Mark, if we don't do something about this, they're gonna take radical steps of lowering life expectancy. And that was in 2018. And of course, COVID hit in 2020. And what did we get? We got a whole series of actions that continued to lower life expectancy, but this time in the middle and upper middle class groups. It's so obvious to me that reducing population either through shortening their lives or preventing them from being born in the first place. I mean, that's officially US policy. Abortion, euthanasia, drugs. But I've always sort of wondered why. And you think it's because that's the only way to get the country solvent. So I think it's a combination of things. First of all, you have, again, we have this explosive new technology. And I think you have a lot of people in the leadership who believe, first of all, it's very difficult to manage people, particularly if they get their hands on this technology. But they also believe they're gonna live for a long, long time. Jared Kushner, when he left the first Trump administration did a podcast and said, I'm the first generation to live forever, the last generation to not live forever. Sean Parker, one of the co-founders of Facebook said, I'm a billionaire, so I'm gonna live 245. If the oligarchs are gonna live 245, one of the things they know is, One of the co-founders of Facebook said I'm a billionaire so I'm gonna live 245 if if the oligarchs are you live 245 one of the things they know it's not everybody can do that or you're gonna have environmental problem right Right so so part of it is that but I also think with robotics and automation They think they don't need a lot of people a lot of people are hard to manage now they You know they if you look at what they're doing to build a control grid Clearly they think if they can accomplish that It's gonna make it much easier to manage a lot of people But frankly, they don't necessarily want them around. They don't need them and so I Do believe that that many of them feel they would be much better off with much lower populations I think that's obviously true I mean ask though about what role a global war would play in that so like on the one hand Obviously war reduces population if you wanted to clear the Ukrainians out of Ukraine Leaving only the resources and Indian immigrants you would do what they did are doing I get it but once you start pushing up against the possibility of a nuclear exchange a Total war a global war that don't you and which they are doing? knowingly and I don't know if it's reckless or intentional or what exactly it is But they know that we're moving toward global war and they're not slowing down at the Trump administration and all the people who support it Right don't you kind of risk your own plans by doing that that seems very much like a dice roll So there are a couple theories. I mean I think there's some people who you know Do want to bring on Armageddon. That's a cultural and religious cross-section of some of some of the people involved But the other thing is if if you've been responsible for the dollar system and you know how how dangerous an improper or or a difficult unraveling of the dollar system could be For most of the countries around the world. You know how An unraveling could could could kill and hurt man Then you will go to extreme lengths and kill many many people to avoid that You know and part of it is if you're used to having power you do not want to convert to a meritocracy I mean the way to solve You know, I told you I just told you the thing you just did on how to save America I think it's one of the best things you've ever done and if in theory we all woke up tomorrow and followed your ten principles of You know in our own lives in our own family in our own community We could see an unbelievably explosive wealth creation I mean one of the things I want to stress is tyranny is very very wasteful and the potential for wealth explosion If we could somehow you know behave like we were in advance civilization is an extraordinary opportunity But it's going to result in a meritocracy and if you look at the people running things they have no interest in Competing in America. Yes, it's gonna lose right? Yeah and and the nature of their situation is you know when people in their situation lose they get killed and their families get killed so so you know they they are at the point where they would do control I remember one group telling me about the a group during the 80s when the Iran contract was really getting out of hand Talking about they had started to make plans about dropping a suit, you know Exploding a suitcase in the middle of Chicago You know just to distract Remember one of the goals of war is to control the domestic population and We are now approaching a time where Whether whether you get that you have a war you get the control grid controlling the domestic population is getting It's going to be very difficult so Won't won't that control grid make it easier? Yeah, if they can get it if they can put it into place So I mean let's look at what they're hoping to do What they're hoping to do first of all is to use stable coins and digital tokens To bring four billion people around the world and and this is the retail market into the Treasury market and into the US stock and bond market and And literally take the US market share for example in the stock market up from 70% to 90% of the global stock market so they're hoping to essentially Tinder for all the citizens in the world and bring them into our financial system You know that what they've said is we're going to do 24-7 trading on the on the global stock markets Using digital tokens and we're going to offer 20 times margin You know everybody right now. It's really worried about we're in a bubble If you look at the tools that are being amassed to bubble using crypto I mean Arguably if they succeed and I'm not saying that they will but if they do it'll be the biggest bubble I've ever seen and I've lived through a lot of bubbles so You know you bring another 4 billion people into the US currency the US bond market the US stock market You know and and you do it with 24-7 trading with 20 times margin It's going to be extraordinary because those are networks. You can also pump out more dead on Yeah, right? So now what's interesting is the Clarity Act It appears is not going to pass this year, which is one of the sort of legal infrastructures. They wanted to do this so I find them sort of the Potential crash and burn this fall of the Clarity Act to be quite remarkable Okay, so so they think through these mechanisms they have tools That can consider this wave and this bubble Going forward now If you look at what they want to do What they want to do is put on Your currency your bank deposits and your stocks and bonds what I call a manual An automatic third lock. Do you know what a third lock is? No Okay, let me describe this if you and I do a transaction and I want to buy a Tucker Carlson hat and you want to sell it to me. I give you cash. I get the hat That's a two-lock transaction. You have a lock. I have a lock if one of us says no it can't happen Okay Let's say we have money in the bank and I want to buy the hat. I'm going to transfer money I'll do an ach to you for the cost of the hat The bank has rules from the Treasury Department and as sanctions it has to know your customer rules It has other regulations and it has the ability to interceden stop the transaction for those reasons Okay, and and that's a sort of what I call a manual third lock So they the bank gets a third lock implementing the government regulations And so if you look at what happened to the truckers in Canada They had all not all but most of the banks exercise that manual third lock under the direction of the government What the government wants to do and and what the Treasury and the central banks one is they won an automatic third lock So you don't have to go through the bank And not only can you apply sanctions and know your customer and money laundering laws You can apply a full blown social credit system Right, so I can make up a hugely complex rule system for Tucker And his kids and his grandkids I can I can customize it for each one of you and I can give you incentives and I can give you rules unless you do Exactly what I say I can turn off your money Or I can apply Negative interest rates to your money or positive interest rates. I can Raise your taxes without anybody having any say about it. So let me give you an example go back to the pandemic If I say you're locked down and you and your family can't leave your house Your money won't work outside your house If I have an all digital system with an automatic third lock And let's say I freeze your bank account You can't go to your bank and talk to them. It's above their head. They won't be implementing it. Okay That gives them that's what the data centers are for. That's what the AI is for at least in North America You know the goal of that because if you if you look at spatial control it involves tremendous data Because of the videos and the cameras and you've got lots of video footage But then you can imagine financial transactions all over the world if they're going to bring four billion customers from around the world into the dollar markets or the Our stock market That's a huge amount of data for spatial and financial control And and but with AI what is AI grade at AI is fabulous at processing and enormous amounts of mathematical information Which is most of the information the data we're talking about And so if they can put a manual third lock in a social credit system for every individual And and essentially automate the whole process with AI Then then they have the ability in fact to control Many many people now. Here's the question Why would four billion people want to come into that system? It's very interesting the secretary that treasury during the I think about a month or two ago Said, you know, they'd seized a billion dollar of Iranian wallets and he was bragging about how easy it was to do it And I thought well You know, I'm not sure if you're going to go out and try and persuade four billion people to come into Our markets that you really want to Have them realize that we can seize their wallets with that kind of speed news No, that would be a disincentive to participation. There's no doubt about it. I think so May I ask you just since we're on markets and I don't want to get sidetracked But I think you might be able to answer this I'm baffled by the behavior of various commodities markets Since this war began they've moved in the opposite direction from what you would expect to supply and demand was real So let's just start with oil prices or Brent crude use that as a measure They've not gone straight up and they kind of gone up and down But not very up and some cases down And I think we can say part of that is because China decided to stop Its energy imports which is bizarre behavior and then gold Has also I mean since this spring has dropped a thousand dollars an ounce at exactly the moment when the US dollars Clearly headed to a much weaker position so that doesn't make any sense at all Is it possible? No, that makes a lot of it does tell me how so Yeah, so let's look at oil first so The Chinese have done a remarkable job of just cutting their imports in half and To me there's not a lot of reliable information about We know they've built a lot of nuclear capacity and renewable Capacity they say the last time I look they say they're not using their oil reserves which are significant is my understanding but um You know, it's hard to believe they haven't the Japanese had a fair amount of oil reserves they've run down the reserves My understanding is our preserves are now below the amount You know the threatens the whole infrastructure of the Of the strategic reserve which is frightening, but we've run arm reserves down tremendously So so part of what's been happening in the oil market is I suspect that the The shorting and the and the things they do to manage the price if manage the price down But that's combined with enormous Relief of pressure on the market because of what the Chinese did and because of ours and the Japanese strategic reserve now um, but if you look at the US strategy the US strategy is designed To replace the petro dollar with what some people call the petro gas dollar and between bottlenecking the trade routes and and sabotaging energy capacity all over the world They're trying to build a much bigger market share for US LNG Remember we're in net export or no and if you look at how much LNG for example, we're selling into Asia You know our our oil and gas industry is making a lot of money now The question is now that the war is continuing And we don't have the Japanese and US reserves to run down a lot There's a real expectation that the price could continue to go higher Now here's the other thing Tucker when you shut down when you do what's been done to the global economy since um Since February you create a lot of inflation uh deflation because you you know you are shutting down I call this COVID 2.0 You're wiping out a lot of little guys and again it consolidates into the big guys But but this is very depressing for the global economy Right and that's deflationary now. Let me let me talk about gold You know ever since I started covering gold and say 2000 and on Whenever there's a more kind of situation. You see gold drop It's very typical and one of the reasons is people get short and they have to sell their gold But the other is people want liquidity so they you know they go into Treasuries They go into the short-term bond market even if the dollars weeks. So so They're looking to go to cash so to speak and and and you'll see them leave gold So it doesn't surprise me that probably a lot of people in the Gulf area and globally needed to sell gold But gold's in a long-term bull market and this is just You know this is the normal volatility of gold in these kinds of situations. I mean I ask why would China slash its oil imports and An import as much gold as it has which is a lot. Why is China importing gold and that is an excellent question and I don't I don't know why I suspect they think they have They have the nuclear and renewable and other capacity to do that for some period of time I mean clearly Venezuela, you know cut them and clearly the situation has cut them But I think that's a big question mark and one of the question one of the reasons might be You know they understood that it was very important to You know let that Steve out there helping the global economy tremendously If if the price was running up You know where where many people thought it would go the pain in the global economy would be Absolutely enormous Yeah, I mean you could easily see $7 a gallon gasoline in the US And but I guess what I'm saying is it seems like The Chinese government has done the Trump administration a huge favor by Keeping things kind of status quo when they wouldn't normally be Yes, that is that is absolutely correct and if you look at the if you look at who's purchasing what in Asia The US is clearly making a lot of money exporting LNG to Asia so So you know that this is I mean this has been very very good for the US oil and gas industry so my last question has to do with attitudes and I'm confused by this and you may have an answer so Consumer prices have risen inflation is real It's the product of long-term changes the ones you just described But it's also the product of this war of choice begun at the end of February That's all it's obvious anybody can understand it with that an economics degree Prices of food have gone up That's detectable to everybody because everybody eats Somebody notes this the other day and says gee whiz, you know $20 burritos are a lot In immediately the same people many of them who advocated for this war of choice Attack anyone who complains about rising food prices And what I see there is a pure contempt if not hatred for ordinary people like what else could explain that kind of response But I also see a kind of crazy recklessness because normally in a functioning society with with normal motives The people in charge the rich people don't make fun of the poor people for Overpaying for food because that's dangerous like they could rise up and bite you if you keep mocking them The let the let the meat cake thing doesn't work as a long-term strategy. Why are they doing that? Why are they showing contempt for the population? So I think they think the best defense is a good offense And and they're attacking people for lazy being lazy or not working and they describe how they made it to where they are and You know it it's simply Um It's simply what psychopaths do Yes, I mean here's the thing and and I'll just be blunt one of the one of the things Uh, you know, we had many people under network all excited about the new administration and they they participated in Maha groups And worked very hard to do everything they could to get Washington to change its policies And one of the great things about watching what has happened because it's in in most respects It's completely going the other way Is it's proved beyond a shadow of a doubt that there is a bipartisan commitment to depopulation. Yes, extraordinary. Yeah. Yeah. We had a wonderful Scientists on the other day who Has been very instrumental in trying to stop the liability shield for pesticides And she got to the end of the show and you could see she was frustrated. She's very careful scientist very thorough And she said down so she really wanted to get her point across. She said you have to understand That if this liability shield happens and they do what they say they're gonna do if they get it I consider that as a scientist to be an extinction level event given the impact on female fertility you know It was it was a showstopper and So if you look at the policies coming through the sausage factory in Washington These are these are intentional policies to depopulate An enormous effort has been made for almost my entire lifetime To come up with any strategy that can obfuscate or stop people from seeing the obvious and something marvelous is happening Tucker And what is marvelous? And it's the first time in my lifetime I've seen it that people are finally saying oh You know, they really do they really are trying to kill us and And that's very frame because once you know it You know to get as far away from them as possible and protect yourself And the thing that's very healthy about it and one of the reasons I loved your you know 10 principles to save America Real solutions come when we let go When we let go of hoping that there's some way we can go into that machinery and turn it around it's not gonna work So we need to leave we need to get away from the disease animal and go Do things that can work and if enough of us do that What is possible is absolutely fantastic the little secret here Is if you look at that machinery It is so destructive of wealth at the state and local level That if we could begin to reverse it even 5% or 10% you don't need everybody The possibilities are enormous particularly with the blessing of due technology So it doesn't have to it doesn't have to go bad here. It can be transformative But what it requires is we've got to stop Hoping you know that the people who would you know attack you for a $20 burrito I mean seriously can anybody take bench a pair of seriously ever again. No, no, we need to laugh We need to laugh. We need to just laugh and turn it off Right? It's a joke. They is not serious. He's not relevant That is the most that's that's the most hopeful thing I've heard a long time Katherine Austin fits No, I I think you have obviously deep knowledge, but also a beautiful perspective So thank you very much for sharing it. Thank you Tucker. You have a great day. You too. Thank you