So let me ask you, you, um, 2022 became famous for a day or two because you got into it with the American Cultural Surgeons. I'm so into it with them. Yes. You're just telling, it's about the approach is approaching its third year. It's third year. Um, can you just give us a quick reminder of what that country comp was about what happened? Sure. Um, I am a surgeon. I'm a plastic surgeon, but I was a general surgeon for a while. Um, one of the things that I did after I became a surgeon, uh, was to apply for fellowship in the American College of Surgeons, which is an honorary sort of the thing to have, you know, attached to yourself. Um, if you become a fellow, you're allowed to put the letters FACS after your name. Yes. And something I thought to do. So I became a fellow on the ACS, the American College of Surgeons, and went along for 30 plus years of practicing surgeon doing my thing. Um, and then what happened was in, um, in and around 2018, 2019, um, you could say I woke up. I realized that there was something going on in my area of surgery. And it began with a transcript of a lecture by a, um, invited a lecturer to the American College of Surgeons Clinical Congress that they have every year. Um, the lecture was titled a pathway to, um, diversity, inclusion and excellence. That was the title of the, of the lecture. And for reasons that I can't explain, I read it. I wouldn't normally have done that, but I read the entire transcript. I read twice and not once was excellence mentioned in there. And, um, so I wrote a commentary that was actually published in the bulletin of the ACS, where I expressed some concerns about, uh, taking down excellence as the primary, um, directive for surgery for surgeons and replacing it with diversity inclusion. And that time, the equity that didn't throw that in there. Um, and, uh, that commentary didn't really do much. Uh, so fast forward a couple of years. And you have COVID, which, you know, it's something. And then you have the, um, uh, the George Floyd killing. And I think it could realistically say that the country went crazy after George Floyd, I mean, everything from riots and whatnot, to this, this mass movement to adopt the idea that the country was systemically racist. And every institution of your organization, uh, was racist. And we had to radically transform the country. Um, and the American College of Surgeons was no different. They, they jumped right on that bandwagon. And within weeks after the George Floyd killing, I mean, literally weeks, they had assembled the task force on racism. And they published this in the bulletin, which is their quarterly newsletter. Uh, and the bulletin basically said that they were doing this to deal with racism in the ACS. Um, it wasn't like it's a racism in the ACS. There was there is racism. And we need to tear it out like refusing to operate on black people. Not. That would be pretty extreme. No, no. Okay. I mean, like where, where was the racism in surgery? It's, it's almost as bad Tucker. It's the, the idea is that. Well, let me, let me take that stuff. They, they claim that surgeons were racist, that the ACS itself was racist. And the practice of surgery was racist. Okay. And the reason why they made that last claim was because there are known disparities. We know that the outcomes for surgery are not as good statistically for, we'll just call a black and white because it just makes it easier to, to deal with that. Um, that is not as good for blacks. That is for whites. And so the idea is that there is some element of racism or discrimination that impacts the outcome of surgery. Of course, if you take that to the next step, it means that, you know, blacks are not getting as good care than like their surgeries, not being as done as well. And whatever. There's a whole lot of reasons why you can have disparate outcomes that this was the one reason that they latched onto and they have never let go. Um, and then I've heard of the term racial concordance. No. Okay. That's, that's a really important concept. Um, and this is something that's being promoted by the ACS. Um, the ACS has explicitly stated that, um, blacks would do better if their surgeon is black. It's simple as that. That's a racial concordance that you are going to receive better care by a doctor, surgeon or other doctor. Uh, if they are of your same race, ethnicity, gender that you might get better care for me, better care, uh, if you're a woman by a female surgeon, for example, um, and, uh, they've hung onto that as well. So that was the, the idea behind segregation in the south, of course. Well, that's the whole thing that trying, they're trying to re-install segregation into surgery, which when you think about it, it's a pretty despicable side. Get away male surgeon is what you're saying. Exactly. Okay. Well, you might need to get a white male surgeon of whatever you're, I think, your stitches. Okay. Now you might do better with kind of happy with the sweetest surgeon. I'm going to win in this. Yeah. I need a Brazilian one, because my mother was Brazilian. Um, meaning German, by the way, I want to have German half Brazilian. There you go. Yeah. So, uh, what happened was this. I, the, uh, the task force came out with the recommendations at the end of, uh, 2020. Uh, and, uh, the recommendations were, oh my gosh, I mean, it just so all litany, it was basically a playbook for how to instill DEI. They still weren't really calling it DEI that often, uh, they were calling it anti-racism still. And that term kind of fell out of favor and then DEI became the, the nice, the more acceptable term for adopting critical theory, critical race theory into surgery. So the recommendations were to, uh, add anti-racism, a Brahme Kendes anti racism into the ACS of the value of the ACS. Uh, they opened up a brand of department of diversity, which had not existed before. And this is what they call a regental department, meaning that the head of that department, the clinical director was now one of the members of the Board of Regents, uh, had its own clinical director, its own executive director. Um, they installed all these initiatives, you know, they started training their staff and the, and even the leadership on things like microaggressions, um, implicit bias, um, ally and act of bystander, um, white privilege. Um, and when I saw this, this is one that, it, I guess it really hit me. Um, I never thought I would be doing this at this point in my career. I'm retired. I'm three months retired from, from 38 years of the surgeon. And to be an activist was never on my radar. Yes. But I couldn't let this stay and it just really bothered me. And I asked you to just go back to the core assumptions that, the drive of this. Are they rooted in science? Is that absolutely no. Okay. So is there any research at all that shows that the outcomes in surgery are better when the surgeon is matched racially, uh, with the patient? Absolutely. Do an harm. Uh, the organization that I joined as a result of this, this whole issue, uh, has actually published. You can go online and you can read it. Uh, they've done a, uh, systematic study. Uh, why should they've looked at five systematic studies, uh, of this issue does the racial concordance, this concordance of ethnicity and race and so forth, um, correlate to better outcomes in surgery. Short answers. No. There's no, uh, scientific evidence that having a surgeon of your own race, uh, will provide better outcomes. Has there ever been evidence? No. So I mean, just ask a dumb. Well, let me, let me, let me call by that. There was a study put out this, that's been repeatedly referred to. I mean, even today, it's repur- it's been completely discredited. Uh, but a study showed that, uh, the survival rates for black babies is better if they have a black doctor, whether obstetrician or whatever, uh, then if it's not. And so they keep repeatedly referring to the study. But if you look at the study, if the study design is terribly flawed, the reviewer, um, if you're familiar with the veni presade, who is a, uh, a data geek and, uh, very good at parsing, uh, clinical studies and so forth came out to this study as catastrophically flawed. Um, and even though the study does not, by any stretch, you know, show that this is the case, it's still referred to as primary, the, the, the primary evidence for this idea that racial concordance, uh, is a real thing. Um, and it's still in the ACS. Were there any, um, was there any push to make certain that white patients got white doctors when you say a push, but push by, like, do they really believe it when they said this? They didn't really believe it. This is just to lower the standards to change the racial composition of surgeons, right? I think the only thing that's pushing this is ideology. I think if you're really science based, you know, if you follow the sciences, the same goes, if you look at that, you can't possibly believe that. So either you have an ideology that supersedes, you know, factual science or you're clueless and you're, you're following. Whoever it is that's, that's taking the lead on this. And who was taking the lead in the American college of surgeons, I think it was the very, I, I can't give me a name. I could, I could probably name a few people that I know that were instrumental in pushing against me, pushing back. Um, but, um, I think it's a very small vocal group of very, very, um, committed anti-racist or, or what DEI zealots. And I think the others have gone wrong. I think some, um, some members of the ACS of, uh, really not research this, they extent to understand it and they kind of go wrong because it sounds, you know, DEI diversity, equity, and inclusion sounds wonderful. Who was, who not before those two rules and surgery? Like, if the other kids are for you, just do it. You'd think not. You wouldn't think not. Yes. That's, that's the thing that was so disconcerting to me. Let me, let me carry the story just to step further down the road. Um, I wrote to the president of the ACS and I expressed my concerns and I'm a writer. I, that's this is what I don't talking is not my thing. Uh, but I love to write. And I wrote a three page single space letter in which I outlined my concerns. Never got a response from that. And so the next thing I did was I actually posted the ACS of the website, of course, and they have a thing called the communities, which is a forum for surgeons to communicate with one other. If you have a question, you can pose it in surgeons will weigh in and provide, you know, advice or answers. If you have something on a topic, you want it to discuss the same thing. So the largest forum is the general surgery forum. And so I posted on that forum, basically, that I was concerned about this rushed embrace anti racism, DDI and the ACS. And if this continued, I didn't see how it could maintain my fellowship. I would drop my membership in the ACS, which is something I never imagined. I would do kind of in a proud member of the ACS for over 30 years. And I'm not here to bash the ACS. I want to be very clear about that. I'm, I'm still a a ACS. I'm so fellow. They consider me a fellow even though I'm permanently banned, which is kind of an interesting situation to be in. And so I posted this thing saying that I will lead the ACS that this continued. And that generated a common thread. And if you're familiar with common threads, if you look at the engagement and the common thread, usually it's only about one to 10% of people that are reading the common thread that actually engage because that's just the nature of things. That common thread ran for four months. And 75 individual surgeons and over a thousand comments had broke the system basically. They had to open up a second common thread because they'd never had this much engagement on anything. And two-thirds of the surgeons that engaged weighed in in favor of my position as opposed to the ACS. And I kept saying, why are we doing this? Tell me where the race is, the myth. Let's deal with the races. But don't just call as racist and go with that. And they repeatedly refuse to do that. So who is they? This is the leadership of the ACS. And this is my beef is not with the ACS, with my fellow surgeons. My beef is with the leadership of the ACS. It might be interesting just to hear if you can recall some of the names of the leadership who did that just for the record. I don't have any problem because it's public record. The general secretary with the Philanin Tower heath just retired. Tyler Hughes. Yeah, a general surgeon. And he was the editor-in-chief of the communities. So he was kind of moderating. And he would weigh in sometimes if it seemed like surgeons were getting a little bit too heated and so forth. And my position was, we're professionals. We're surgeons are opinionated. We're not shrinking pilots. We stayed our case. We're certainly qualified to have conversations without a chaperone. And I didn't really like the whole chaperone thing that was going on. And so this went forward. And as common threads do, it kind of ran its life expectancy really beyond what you'd think four months at which point I was thinking, okay, so I did that. What do I do now? And I was waiting to see what my next step would be when the ACS leadership, the Board of Regents reached out to me. Tyler Hughes reached out to me and said, we'd like to have you on a Zoom call. This was going to happen in 2022. They wanted to wait a little bit. They wasn't until March because they were bringing on board their new director of diversity, a doctor named Bonnie Mason who was a clinical director of diversity. And so the Zoom call consisted of myself and Tyler Hughes and Bonnie Mason and a regent of the ACS, a member of the Board of Regents named Tim Memberlyne, who is a well-known prominent surgeon in a big institution. And I had joined a group called Fair, FAIR, the Foundation Against and Tolerance of Racism. And I helped found Fair in Medicine, which has been working kind of like doing a harm in the area of D.I. Medicine. And so I went to some of my colleagues in Fair until they had listened. I'm invited to the Zoom call. How do you think I should prepare for this? And the first thing that said is, don't go by yourself because you're going to get jumped on. I said, okay, sounds like a reasonable piece of advice. So I invite a colleague of mine who this surgeon I worked with for 30 years. Her name is Celia Nilsenselia is a Jamaican born black female general surgeon, which is an unusual that she's definitely in the minority on the ACS. And she came on the call. So it's five of us in the call. Very, very civil conversation. Well over an hour, we stayed at our position. I stayed at my concerns. She expressed the same concerns that I did from her standpoint as a woman, a black woman surgeon. And I left so encouraged from that. I said, wow, this is great. We got a dialogue. This is what I wanted a dialogue. And I sent an email to everyone that was on the Zoom call and said, thank you so much. I hope this will be the start of a conversation where we can discuss these things. And a few weeks later, I couldn't get on the communities anymore. I tried to get on the website and get on the communities and I couldn't get on. And I thought, okay, this is glitch here. I think you maybe it was on the site had a problem. I waited and I waited pretty close a couple of weeks before I finally said, I contacted Tyler Hughes. It's a toddler. What's going on? I can't get on the communities. And this is one that was told, oh, by the way, you are permanently banned from access to the communities. And in addition, your ban from access to the members directory of the ACS and your ban from your own private voicemail box. So it was a total isolation. And I said, why am I being banned? And the answer was because if you're continuous and I'm basically quoting your continuous use of disrespectful language and persistent posting of nonclinical material on clinical forms. So the thing was, I was being disrespectful, which I have disputed. And I can prove I wasn't. And my nonclinical material was posting this issue of DEI on the clinical forums that they brought up in the first place that they well. And what's interesting is that they're the ones saying that clinical outcomes in surgery are being impacted you know, adversely from an audience. But I mean, you were a, I mean, you spent over 30 years just being a surgeon cutting and healing people. Right. You're not the one who brought this topic into the ACS in the first place they did. Yeah. But because you discussed a topic that they introduced, they said you weren't a serious doctor and needed to be banned. I was disruptive and I was being disrespectful. And so I did ask, I said, can you please show me a single example of anything that I have said at any time that justifies this ban? And they've never done that. They've asked several times they refuse every single time. So I appealed. I went to the Board of Regents and appealed and I said, you know, you know, this has been so wrong. And they came back and said, we review this and we uphold the ban. And this is this is interesting. They said, and we feel that you have received due process. Well, due process means that they're saying I went through the the proper channels in the ACS. Well, the channels are the fixed process for disciplining a surgeon. You have to be informed that you're being investigated for some issue. That has to go to their Central Judiciary Committee, which is empowered to investigate their members. They decide if they're merit to this, you know, allegation. If there is, they send it back to the Board of Regents. So then has to, you know, does the punishment, whatever that may be, could be expelled, could be whatever. They never did that. It never went to the Judiciary Committee. Then ever informed me that I was being investigated for a possible lifetime ban. As a member of the ACS, I am entitled. My privilege is include the right to having a hearing. If I'm looking at being disciplined by my organization, I have a right to have a hearing to defend myself. And they denied me that hearing. And the reason it's like a catch 22, it didn't go through the Central Judiciary Committee. Therefore, I don't deserve a hearing. The gaslighting is unbelievable, Tucker. It's just unbelievable. So I exhausted every avenue I had to address this with the ACS internally. And that's when I went public. And that's when I wrote my article to the Wall Street Journal. And that's when you invited me under your show very kindly. Not all sleep aides are made by pharmaceutical companies. You probably heard about eight sleep by now. They developed the country's most innovative products for sleep. Almost everybody in our office uses something they make called the pod. And they love it. And there's a reason that professional athletes and lots of other smart people do too. You add the pod to your mattress like a mattress cover. And it helps you get a better night's sleep and fill with vitality at the start of each day in an intimidating way almost. It's amazing. How does it do it? Well, it uses advanced technology to track your sleep and automatically adjust the temperature of your side of the bed to what's perfect for sleep and temperature makes all the difference. It's backed by over 600 million hours of data. They've also used those insights to create their new product sleep a little bit. You get quiet before you get a bed fall asleep faster and stay knocked out longer. No grogginess, no weird side effects is better deep sleep. So if you're ready to take sleep and recovery to the next level, go to eightsleep.com slash Tucker to get 350 bucks off your pod for ultra full refund for 30 days. If you don't love it, it works. I wanted to hear more about it not simply because in your the victim of grotesque injustice and authoritarianism, but because the consequences of this kind of thinking are so dangerous to the public health that I think people need to know. It because everything you're saying suggests that they're going to radically lower the standard resurgence, not that they are they have. That's that's. So how is that not a felony? How can you do that? How can you lower the standard for surgeons or air traffic controllers or anyone who's got a job with the public health in his hands, you know, critical job, the critical jobs in our society and you lower the standards for that. That's not a crime. I think the way you do it is you do it really slowly over a long period of time. And no one really notices until I get to that. We'll tell people die. It's that well until that's interesting thing you say that you work with it. Great. In your hand. This is like the highest level of trust you're saying to somebody, I'm going to let you cut me open. Who would you say that to only a surgeon and see the consequence they're just beyond if there was ever a field, you know, people talk about airline pilots, if there's ever a field where excellence is a cynical on of the field, it has to be medicine. And even beyond that, it has to be surgery. Exactly. Because, you know, when you're when you're the guy with a knife in your hand, first off, you know, if you're decent human being, you want to feel like you are competent in doing the best you can for your patient. But I apologize, by the way, for putting you on the spot when we spoke. So I think I may have a good one. Remember ask your question, I said, what's the most important thing you look for in a surgeon and you said, yes, which was exactly right. But I wasn't looking for excellence. I was looking for trust. You have to trust flows from the other. You have to trust your surgeon. And if you're wondering if you're going to get the best care because your surgeon looks different than you do, right off the bat, you're starting handicapped. I mean, you're really, you know, hurting yourself in the patient. If you can't get that trust pretty quickly because when you walk into the ER, you don't have a lot of time to connect. You can't go be doing those nice social things. So my band remain in place. I'm still banned. The ACS will not engage with me. They have not engaged with you in three years. Oh, no, no, no, no. They were refused. I've written multiple letters. I wrote letters to the last two presidents. I never get an answer back. I wrote letters. Well, I would just encourage anyone watching to, to, to, let's Google these people do not accept medical care from them. You don't, I don't want to be cut by an unreasonable idea log. Problem is you don't know who those ideal logs are. Unless you start a name. It would be nice to have their names. So you said, uh, not only do they plan to lower standards, but they already have. Can you absolutely tell us what you mean? In fact, I'm delighted to just said that because I don't want this to be about me. Yeah, I'm the one sitting from the the micro, micro phone. I'm the one that, that was banned. Um, but the issue is so far beyond me. In my 38 years of surgery, I have gradually watched the quality of training and young surgeons to trigger rate, you know, noticeably in my own little, you know, backyard, uh, watching young surgeons come out that have no business operating by themselves. And, um, you've seen that, I've seen that. Oh, yeah, absolutely. Um, I can, I can give you some examples. Uh, you know, doing, I did a, I had a young, this is actually a few years back. I had a, a new surgeon in town at hospital that I worked at. And I do breast reconstruction. So I worked a lot with the surgeons. Uh, together, well, you know, they'll remove the cancerous breath sometimes a lot of times they'll remove the other breasts simultaneously. And then I will come in and do the reconstruction. And I was doing a lot of these cases where you take the abdominal tissue and you create one or two breasts with the abdominal tissue, which is a great procedure, but very significant time consuming and whatnot. Um, and there's a lot of things that have to be done. And this surgeon offered to help me close the abdominal part of the operation or to do it for me so that I could concentrate on the breath. That's a great. This probably cut an hour and a half or two hours out of my operating time. And, um, so I glanced down to see what he was doing at his, he's taking these massive bites of tissue. And every time he ties the stitch down, I mean, the abdominal wall was being distorted. And looking at him thinking, wow. And I, I, I was able to, I couldn't watch more than two or three stitches put in. And I said, uh, you know, Joe, listen, you got things to do. You know, go ahead. I'm fine. I don't, I don't need the help. And he left. Um, and, uh, it was just in a someone who's out of medical school. This is a fully trained surgeon, just newly prayed just what, you know, opened a practice in my community. And he's in last very long. It became very obvious soon because in small hospitals, you can't hide, um, that he was not very competent. And he eventually moved on. I don't know where he went or what he did. But it was obvious to you just from looking down this guy was not. This guy had no clue how to close an abdomen. I mean, it was really bizarre. Um, and that's kind of an extreme example. He became a surgeon. That's the same. Um, lower standards basically was this person from a protected racial group or no, no, he was not. He was your, your heteronormative white male like me, basically. But he was incompetent. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, I only saw this one example, but you know, the thing speaks for itself. If a person is doing this in such a simple situation, such as closing an abdominal wall, then you got to wonder what he's like. And I've, I've worked with other surgeons that were, you know, there's a couple that I refuse to work with that were so bad. Um, that, you know, you often have to ask yourself, is it something that I report? I don't report. I've spoken to, you know, colleagues and so forth. And I've only actually reported one or two doctors in my career because the circumstances are so egregious. And these didn't happen to be surgeons, by the way. Um, but kind of getting off track a little bit. I, I work with the young surgeon, arguably a good surgeon. Um, and I was doing again, a breast reconstruction. And he made a comment to me that I, I found astounding. Um, one of the common, uh, accompanying things you do in breast cancer treatment is a lot of times you go after lymph nodes in the armpit because you want to see if there's cancer there or if there's cancer there, you'll want to remove the cancer. And that's called an axillary node dissection. Yes. Basic operation. Even I know about it. Every general surgeon learns that. Yes. And we were doing a, um, the case and he was doing a biopsy in the, the armpit removing a single lymph node. And he commented, it says, you know, I'm really glad I don't have to do an axillary node dissection because I've never done one before. This is a fully trained board certified general surgeon had never done an axillary node dissection in the course of his five years of general surgery training. Let me stick back a second to when you ask about quality and how it's gone down. Uh, it's not a conscious thing. It's not been deliberate. I don't think that we have gone out deliberately to create a decline in the quality of surgery. I think a lot of circumstances have come to together to do that. Um, one was in 2003, the American Radro medical education. They came out and they took a law that was basically confined to New York from 1964 and made it nationwide. And that law was a reduction to residency hours. In other words, you can't take a trainee in any medical specialty and make them work more than 80 hours a week or more than 24 hours at a stretch. And so that reduced residency hours dramatically because when I trained, uh, it was not uncommon to work in 90 to 110 hour week. That was pretty typical. And being on call, you know, 36 hours straight, I once worked 48 hours straight, not that that's a great thing, but you know, you do what you have to do. And you learn, you'll learn to operate under circumstances when you're tired and things like that. Um, and the idea was to reduce medical errors and things like that, which has been disproved in that studies they've shown that that reduction in hours had nothing did nothing to improve medical errors. But that was one thing that cut back the hours for training and surgery. Um, you know, you have a very limited motive there. The idea behind it, the reason that it occurred was because of a death, a young woman died in New York because of a medical drug error, a very rare drug reaction. And her father happened to be a very prominent attorney. And he decided that the reason was that these residents were working to hard, they were too tired and we needed to change that. And there was this spate of New York Times stories about this. Yeah. I remember this. Yeah. And, uh, that was only confined in New York until 2003. Then it become a nationwide thing. General surgery is a five year residency program. Okay. In the first two years. We can find in New York until 2003, then become a nationwide thing. General surgery is a five year residency program. Okay. In the first two years, you'll learn patient care. You learn how to take care of patients before and after. You assist in operations. You do diagnostic differential diagnosis and you learn how to work up a problem. And if you're good, if you're good intern, if you're good first, you're second, you're resident, you know, they throw your bone on again. No, let you do a hernia. No, you do an app and they hold your hand while you do it. And then in the third and fourth years, you start to operate more. But you're always operating under the direct supervision of a senior resident or an attending, attending a fully trained surgeon. And again, you're having your hands held. I mean, they have to let you work. They've got to put the knife in your hand. But they have to be good enough to do that and keep you out of trouble. And if you get in trouble, to get you out of trouble. And so you spend those three to four years kind of honing your skills. And then in the fifth year, when you are what we call a chief resident, you're basically regarded as being a surgeon. And you get your, you do your cases, you assist the younger surgeons and their cases. And the only time you call an attending surgeon and it's between something very major, very complex and, or if you haven't done this before. And so at the end of that fifth year, you should be able to walk out of the hospital and go anywhere and operate as a general surgeon and function fully independently. I studied on in 2014 in the annals of surgery reported that 80% of the graduating general surgeons were not going into practice. They were going on to do a fellowship, fellowship is additional. 80%, fellowships and whatever thoracic surgery, vascular surgery, colorectal, you name it. And that was in 2014. They surveyed program directors. These are the chiefs, the heads of surgical programs to find out what these residents that were, they were getting, but what these surgeons that they were getting in fellows were like. They found that that 66% of them could not be relied upon to operate independently for more than about 30 minutes. That something like 30% or so could not handle tissues in a manner that was appropriate, mathematically, if you will. 20%, 30% couldn't sew properly. Close to the same number, couldn't identify the early signs of a complication. Some could not identify an anatomical tissue plane. These are people that are graduates of general surgery residencies coming out of these program that are going to fellowships. The saddest thing is that when they surveyed the surgeon, the young surgeons themselves and say, well, why are you going into this fellowship instead of going out in practicing more than half say because they did not feel comfortable operating independently. After five years of training, so there's something very wrong with the training they're getting, they're not getting enough cases to do, they're not being allowed to operate. In some places, the attending surgeons are very hesitant to hand over a case to a younger surgeon because number one, they're responsible for that case. Number two, you're never going to be as efficient or fast as a young surgeon as you will later on when you've had more experience. It takes longer and packed your day or schedule. It's sad because they recognize this. These young surgeons recognize this. It sounds like a total failure to train the next generation of surgeons. It's a system failure. The ACS recognizes this. I know that. It's because since 2014, they've initiated an eight what they call a mentorship program. What they do is they try to find experienced surgeons that will mentor these young surgeons to help them come up to speed. Young surgeons are not a training that should be able to work on their own and find that they're struggling or not really able to do that. They would have an experienced surgeon to, I don't want to say hold their hand, but to oversee them, supervise them, scrub with them. They can't find enough surgeons to do that for one thing. Here the DEI really comes in too is they have this idea, Rachel Concord, and said, what they need to do is find if it's a black surgeon, they've got to find a black mentor for him. If it's a Hispanic surgeon, they've got to find a Hispanic mentor. And there's not enough of those to go around. It's the time of year we focus on the people who matter most in our lives. There's one way to show your family, the people you love that you love them. It's by protecting their health and their safety. And a really obvious way to do that is by preparing for unpredicted moments. There are a lot of those. Break down on supply chains, overwhelmed hospitals, natural disasters, wars, whatever happens next, you can't see it coming, but you can't be prepared for most of it. And that's why a case case works. A case case is a personal supply of prescribed emergency medications. So if things fall apart, you're okay. There's an unexpected global disruption. You can protect yourself and your loved ones. So this February, show them you care. At the case case today, you'll have the right meds on hand when you need them. You only need them once. You ought to have them. So in addition to what are a demonstrable, provable failures of medical schools to train the next generation of surgeons and kind of just say parenthetically, I feel like if they're not training surgeons adequately, surgeons are a small percentage of all physicians. Probably the most important, probably not. And probably the smartest and most driven, then they're probably failing. All agree with you on that. Yeah, yeah. That's urgent. Right. It's the most straightforward kind of medicine. So but in addition to that, they overlay these racial mandates, they decide that racism is the real problem, not incompetence. And then they put these mandates in where you have to somehow have doctors of all these different backgrounds that you don't have. So what happens? Everything starts to go downhill. Yeah, really quickly. I have people contact me just because of my profile is elevated by being out there a little bit. I got a call from a young plastic surgery resident that had been fully trained in general surgery and went on to begin her plastic surgery training. And she was concerned because she wanted to get the most out of her training. And so she reached out to me to find out which things she could do. She told me things that are unbelievable. I mean, I never imagined these things. And this has been confirmed not with just my conversation with her. I've confirmed it from other sources as well. A couple of things. One issue talked about the difficulty getting enough cases under your belt. That is, you know, not getting given cases to do, not having operations that you can actually perform, not having the attendings turn things over to you. This I could not believe. One of the the requisites to become more certified, at least in surgery is you have to turn over to the board of examiners for the American board of surgery, the American board of plastic surgery. A log of the cases you have done in the course of your residency program. So they list, you know, every case you've done at the surgeon as an assistant and whatnot. Well, they're now permitted to list operations in there as part of the surgical experience that they've only watched. So if they sit behind the anesthesia screen or look over the shoulder of the surgeon and watch an operation, they can list that in the log book as part of the surgical experience. And I can tell you personally that you don't learn surgery that way. You learn about getting your hands in there. I've watched a lot of medical shows. I'm not a doctor as a result. Like that's and that's what's scary. And that allows them to qualify for taking their boards. The other thing they do, which is really what would be again the motive there? Why would you allow that? Well, the ACS has already anticipated there's going to be a shortage of 19,000 surges by 2030. Five years from now, we're going to be shining at like 20,000 surges in this country. Right now the USA is short, 1200 trauma surgeons. There are places that need a trauma surgeon that can't get one because they're just not around. So one idea, as bad as it may be, is to put out anybody and everybody and you don't want to drop anybody just so you can get the numbers up there. They, gosh, there's so much to this. Tucker, that goes into this. Well back to the, I mean, all of this begins at the front end of the pipeline, which is medical school. Yes. So the standards for admission to medical school have been dropped dramatically for race reasons. Yeah. Yeah. They've taken the medical license, the examination, the three part medical license examination taken it from a greater exam to a pass fail. And to pass it, you only have to be above the bottom five percent in grade. If you are above the bottom five percent, you are going to pass the medical licensure examinations. And in spite of that, which is an abysmal standard when you think about it, in spite of that, something like 10% or more students at UCLA, 10% or more students flunk one or more of the exams and a number of them flunk these exams two and three times. And yet there's still a bit of putting put through medical school. They don't want to drop you. I know what I wanted to say. Again, back to the DEI for a second. If you're an attending in a surgical training program and you have a surgeon that is inadequate, he's just not cutting it. And I saw this. I had in a while, I wasn't training there were surgeons or people that came into the program that were dropped after year two. It was clear that they weren't going to be able to do it. They just didn't have the dexterity. They didn't have whatever. Today, if you do that and it's a minority or underrepresented in medicine, you know, a minority surgeon, at the intending if you hold them back or if you drop them, what's going to happen is you're going to get reported. They'll get reported to the DEI establishment in that program. And invariably, they're going to side what the resident and not what the attending. Why do they have the moral high ground? If they're putting people's lives at risk, which they are, I mean, I think that's a crime. But how did they get to attack you for upholding objective standards of surgery? I just don't get the, like are there no sane people left in American medicine? Well, the thing is this, how do you recognize the quality going down? How do you recognize bad surgery? And one way that you recognize that is by complications. So the question would be, are people dying? Are complications going up? Okay, in surgery. Right now you can't answer that question. And one big reason why you can't answer the question is that, at least, and out, I'll have to say, this is my opinion. I can't keep quoting this, but I know this is how surgery has evolved. The vast majority of surgery done today is an outpatient. So the people that are in the hospital have an operation are not the majority, the minority. So if you do outpatient surgery, you do the operation. The patient goes home that day or after an overnight stay. Most complications don't arise immediately. It occurs in the first day or two after infections, three, four days. Okay, pulmonary problems. In my particular profession, if I do a flap reconstruction, I may not know if that flap can live or die for five, six, seven days or more. So when you do have complications, they occur after the patient's out of the system, so to speak, out of the hospital system. So there's no required reporting. It's all self-reporting. You get a letter, you know, a pair out of people, and I'll say, hey, can you please tell us how all of your patients did? Do you have any other medications? They do. Well, great. And it's human nature. Of course. If a patient gets an infection, you treat it with antibiotics. You know, do you report that as a complication and the patient ultimately did okay? You could argue, no, you might not report that. And you could rationalize it. It's okay. So that's one of the issues. The other issue, I got this directly from one of the examiners. And I know someone who has been examining surgeons for 15 years for their boards. So when you go to take your board examinations, say he's one of the people that sits in the room and ask you questions and whatnot. And what he's noticed is that a lot of these residents should come in, he's looking at their cases and he's thinking, oh my gosh, they're taking way too long to do these operations. Now one thing that's interesting is when you go to for your boards, the cases that they look at are not cases that you did in training, these are cases you've done since you've been out. You know, when you finish your residency, you're allowed to go out and practice. I could practice. I practiced for two years before I became board certified because it took two years to get my board certification. So of course I have to be able to practice. And I'm regarded at that point as a board eligible surgeon. And I am entitled to full privileges and all those things. So when I go to take my board examination, I present them, you know, in my case, I present them with a log of everything I had done for the past year. And they saw like cases to examine you on and so forth. There's an interesting experience to do that. So these are the cases that these examiners are looking at. And he's saying, they're taking way too long. You know, she was an operation that should only take three to four hours. It's taking seven to eight hours for this person to complete this operation. And I've seen this local. I've seen this in my own community where, you know, nurses who know the good surgeon is from the bad surgeon and say, and this doctor so and so, he says, slow. he just takes forever to do, to do, you know, this operation. And complications are directly tied to length of surgery. I mean, absolutely. Pause it to be correlated. And the other, this surgery, the more potential complicated. Exactly. And this is recognized and it's recognized in a very interesting way. The CMS, the Centers for Medicine, Medicare, and Medicaid. Exactly. And they said, we are not going to pay for anesthesia beyond a certain time. So if we have, for example, a breast reduction, which for me is about a three and a half to four hour operation, you know, we're going to pay for four hours of anesthesia for a breast reduction. If it goes beyond that, we're not paying for that additional time. And the idea is they recognize that, you know, people are taking too long to do these things. The point is anesthesia has nothing to do with the length of surgery. They're just there to keep the patient asleep and stable in life for you while you're doing an operation. But that's the only way they can think to penalize the surgeon because the surgical time does not come into play unless you look at hospital charges or anesthesia charges. And so they recognize this. And this goes back to what I said, you know, a lot of surgeons are not getting enough surgical experience to be able to operate one independently. And two, I would say, you know, efficiently, competently, you know, to do, I'm not a speedster, but I can certainly hold my own with my peers in terms of how long it takes me to finish an operation and do a good job on it. I've never tried to be the fastest guy in the block. So all those things go to the fact that you're not going to really recognize this decline because it's so subtle in so many respects and patients don't know that. And that's the other reason why I'm here, Tucker. I want this to be a wake up call to my fellow surgeons. This is this is what can happen to you. If you speak up and you try to promote excellence and surgery and you and you try to object or push back against a liberal ideology, politics, ideology, call it what you will in surgery. And I would love for there to be a groundswell of surgeons command saying, hey, wait a minute. What's going on in my profession? There isn't really bothers me because it's more than physical dexterity. You're counting on as a patient reason. You want a fact based logical physician or else you could die. And so anyone who accepts clearly illogical, unreasonable, suppositions and doesn't push back against them is basically involved in witchcraft. So if I could say to you something that is provably untrue and just on its face stupid, which is a black female patient needs a black female doctor. It's like, what are you even saying? Show me the evidence. There is no evidence. It's crazy on its face. It's Nazi stuff. If you go along with that, then you've disqualified yourself because you're not a rational person or witchcraft practitioner. So that just freaks me out. So you could say, well, good people are going along with this. Well, no, they're disqualified by the fact they are going along with it. That's my as a patient. Some of them are going to surgeries. That's, I mean, is that a fair view? Do you think? Absolutely. I mean, think about this. You're an intelligent person. You have probably a wealth of experience because of what you do. You weren't aware of racial concordance. And I mean, ask any guy in the street about that. They're going to just look at you like, you know, you have two heads. What the heck is that? Is it true? And if it's true, how is that true? Again, the rest of us trust science, not because we trust the people who carried out, but because the idea itself is inherently reasonable, prove it or I don't believe it. The burden of proof is on the practitioner, the scientist, the physician, the surgeon. And the whole system is based on that. If you can't prove it, then you can't know it. I thought that that science, right? Well, that's what they call evidence-based medicine, which is well, right. Yeah. That's all medicine should be evidence-based medicine. And if it's not evidence-based medicine, it's not really medicine. It's witchcraft. So it freaks me out that the average doctor, average surgeon would first second go along with this. Well, think about it from this standpoint too. Think about the, for example, Celia Nelson, the female Jamaican Black surgeon that was on the Zoom call with me. She's worked as hard as anybody to get to where she is. She's an excellent surgeon. She's experienced racism. And she'll tell you, flat out. Yeah, she did when she first arrived there, people wouldn't mistake her for, you know, ask her to get a cup of coffee in the surgeon. Right. You know, those sorts of things. And she also noticed that sometimes when she'd walk into a, uh, uh, exam in the emergency room, that, you know, the, the look she would get was, ooh, you know, who is this? Is this someone good? And she's worked through all that. Okay. She's worked through that. She just put her head down. She worked hard. And now she says what happens is when, when she goes into the ER, um, that patient has already heard from multiple staff what a wonderful surgeon they're getting. That she's going to be in there to see them. So I mean, she's earned her place. Okay. But think how unfair it is for the people coming up now, the, the minority, if you will, surgeons that have to face this idea when they go into a room that person, look at someone and say, tree, is this a DEI hire or is this a person that really, I think everyone thinks that went through that got here because of their excellence because of their excellent academic performance in college and medical school because they're excellent performance in their residency because they met all the standards, the standards that everyone should have to meet. Or am I getting someone who's a little bit less because of this? And of course you get a fair. You're getting someone less overwhelmingly and that's obvious. And it has nothing to do with race by the way. It's that preferences are always destructive of excellence. So if I, if you tell me that you're the CEO of a company that your family owns and you got the job because you're the first son, my first assumption is, they lowered standards to make you CEO. I mean, right? It's obvious. And so if I have a black female surgeon, my first assumption will be this person had to meet lower standards because the school or the certifying board was so anxious to say we have a black female surgeon. And of course it's unfair to the individual, but then the whole system is unfair. So should you be shocked that it produces unfair results? No. I mean, it's unfair. It isn't fair. On the face of it and in practice and every other possible way. Yes. Yeah. They think about anti-racism that was so, I think, despicable was that said that you know, you cannot be against racism. You have to be for this whole anti-racism stick. So attacking the whites. Yeah. So, you know, if you claim to be an auto-racist, that's a racist statement. I mean, talk about the, but why would anyone go, of course, I mean, it's a Chinese finger trap. You know, the harder you pulled it out, the more stuck you are, but why would anybody you're a surgeon? Like you're at the very pinnacle of our system. Like the science-based, reason-based civilization that we've built, which we consider superior to like, you know, to the witchcraft-based societies of the rest of the world. How in the world could you sit and let this happen? Anybody, any surgeon? Well, I'll tell you why I did it. I was too busy. I was just, I had my head in the sand. Oh, you're the anomaly. You actually stood up, I got banned for standing up. I'm just saying, what about all your colleagues? You know, I'm fortunate in the sense that I was able to get through a career and I'm at the twilight of my career. No, actually, at the end of my career, I have nothing to lose, Tucker. I mean, they can't hurt me. So I got many messages, private messages, which I can't access any longer from surgeons, including minority surgeons that said, you know, we agree with you, but we can't speak up because we're going to get pushed back, you know, we're going to be called, you know, Uncle Tom's or racist or whatever. If we agree with the premise that you're putting out there, I don't have much to lose. Lent is here. The period before Easter, the 40 days, and it's a unique chance to get closer to God. That's the point of it. Hello, the world's number one prayer app can help you do that. During their prayer, 40 challenge, it's a great way to connect with Christians all over the world and unite in preparation for Easter, which is the payoff of this season. It's called the way it helps participants focus on how Jesus is the way to heaven. If you join the challenge, you'll embark on a spiritual journey with some of America's most convicted Jesus followers powerful stories prayer. You grow in your ability to sacrifice. That's what Lent is. That's the sacrifice and taking thought-provoking sermons and true stories of faith in action, which are amazing. This year is going to be the best Lent ever. A thousand people praying together all over the world, and you can be part of it through howlow, which by the way is in use in my house in a nightly topic of conversation. You can sign up at hallowed.com slash talker when you join. Check out thousands of guided prayers, meditations, music, and everything. There is a ton on howlow all designed to help you find peace and closeness to God. Download the howlow app and jump onto the Lent Pray 40 challenge right now. No, of course, I know that you're describing the real answer. That is the answer. It's just hard to let people like that off the hook. If you work in some normal company, it's one thing, but if you're a surgeon, you understand that lowering standards results in the deaths of people, the stakes are just the highest in any part of our society. You have the highest stakes. Sure, I could hurt your career. Sure, it could make you unpopular. Sure, they might call you names Uncle Tom or whatever. You balance that against the deaths of innocence and you think, I have to say something, don't you? If you don't, that's where I found myself. Then you're, I can tell and bless you. If you decide, people will die, but my career is more important or not being called names is more important than kind of a monster, right? Yeah. I don't want to say that. Well, I do. I do. I think that if you give the power that surgeons have the power to cut people open unsupervised and someone dies and you cure the surgeon, you're like, God, in the operating room, you have that power in exchange for that power. You have to hold yourself to the highest moral standards. Don't you? I agree with that. You'll get no argument for me. Who has more power than a surgeon? Nobody. And that immediate moment, nobody does. That's what I'm saying. I mean, actual power, not theoretical power. No, a surgeon is more power than the president. He can cut open a person, the person's unconscious. He is total control over his opportune. Correct me if I'm wrong in any of this. And he capped out of the ship, basically, unquestioned. And he has a life in his hands, like actual, not theoretical, actual beating heart person. And so that person has to be of just the highest moral caliber or else in a sense die. I mean, that's my view. Anything which works against that, you have to fight. I think you have to work against that. It's disconcerting to me. At this, maybe I can use strong returns, but I had a lot of private affirmation from colleagues from surgeons. I don't get a lot of public affirmation for that very reason, because some of them are older and don't want to deal with the blowback, the repercussions and the recrimination that can occur. Some of them, a few agree with the whole situation, crazy that it may be, all the DEI and so forth. We're kind of like me. They were just going along and too busy taking care of their patients to the best of their ability to understand that. I've been doing this for 38 years, and it's really not until about three or four years ago that I popped my head above. The water such as bacon looked around said, oh my gosh, the landscape out there has really changed. This is not the fuel of medicine that I went into. You like to think when you've devoted your life to a career or profession that you're going to leave it a little better than you got it. I'm building my practice on the shoulders of the people that went before. I have a very strong sense of responsibility that I have to honor the traditions and the efforts on my behalf to get me to where I was. You want to think that you've done some with the same. I'm not, I wasn't a professor, I wasn't a researcher, but in taking care of patients, I've always tried to honor the efforts of the people that train me and feel like I could go off. Well, I've got a generation behind me now. I've got a daughter who's a physician. I've got a son-in-law or husband who's a physician. And I feel a very strong sense of obligation to someday when I can't do this anymore to say, okay, I did the best I could to leave medicine in their hands better than I got it. And I can't say that. And that's tragic when you think about it, to think that you're leaving a profession that you love and have committed your life to. And it's in much more shape than when it was put into your hands. Yes, I take responsibility for that. I take my own, but at the same time, I think it's what happened to me. If the AECS can ban me with the impunity that they have done without accountability, without even following their own bylaws for God's sakes, and they have no reason to engage with me, they could do this to anybody. I mean, there's nobody out there who's safe. And that's a pretty frightening proposition. And for those of us watching who aren't doctors, eliminate all trust. Don't trust doctors. I don't want to go to the doctor. I don't like doctors. I load them. I don't trust a lot of doctors. You don't. I don't. Why? My trust in COVID. Yeah. Me too. I haven't been like doctors since COVID. What happened in COVID was so egregiously wrong that I just couldn't, a man will look at the CDC at the NIH FDA in the same way any longer, public health officials. And the other issue, I don't want to open a can of worms here, but the gender affirming care. I mean, how in God's name did we get to a point where you have my profession as far as surgeries concerned is probably the one was closely involved in the whole process. Of course, gender affirming care because of the work we do. want to have this concept that there's no such thing as male and female, then you can take a biological male and convert them to a woman and they realize what's happening. I mean, that is when you talk about witchcraft and voodoo, that is witchcraft and voodoo. And all the scientific evidence is against it. Do you know anyone who participates in it? Oh, yeah. Yeah. You know people. I don't know people that are doing the gender affirming care. against it. Do you know anyone who participates in it? Oh yeah, yeah, you know people. No, I don't I don't know people that are doing the gender affirming care and minors and I want to be very clear. You know, if an adult thinks if an adult male may and thinks he's a woman and God bless them, I feel sorry for them. Me too, really have to. But there, you know, they're a adult with agency to make decisions for themselves. That's one thing. Miners is the whole difference. Have you met any plastic surgeons who've done surgeries on minors? Not that I know appersonally. No, I know some that are doing some of this with the call. You're you're domestically top surgery where they take off a breast, but they're doing this and in women that are adults, they're taking off the breast to to turn them into, you know, make them look more male like. I don't know anyone personally who's done this on children so far. So you saw this with a abortion even when I was a child. There were doctors who said, you know, I just I just don't believe in it. I think it's immoral. I'm not participating in it. Now it's my impression. There's pretty hard to be a doctor unless you commit abortion like you kind of have to as part of your training. If you're OBGYN, I don't I don't know that you can get through medical school without participating in an abortion, an elective abortion. I can't speak of that because I think that there, I mean, I know from personally that that wasn't the case. I'm aware of the case. No, I know that. Yeah. But my sense is now in practice, if not officially, that is the case. And it's extremely hard to be an OBGYN resident and not participate in that. And I wonder if we're moving toward that scenario with transgender surgery where maybe you maybe you don't get certified as a plastic surgeon unless you participate in, you know, mutilating minors in the service of ideology. Like, could you see that happening? Oh, I could definitely see it happening. I mean, it is happening. It is being done. No, people being forced to do it. I don't think that's that's right. I think people that are doing it are or bought into the whole thing and they're doing that because they're bought into it. But that just seems to act against evidence, the scientific evidence as a scientist, a physician, a scientist, it doesn't. It just, I'm saying the same thing 10 times a run, but it just seems like it just quite like you shouldn't be allowed to conduct science if you've shown that you don't believe in it. As a resident in surgery, you don't have a lot of power and the sense of being able to say, I won't do this or I will do that. You can't pick and choose what you're going to do. When I was in training, we had an experimental clinical study going on to do very atic weight reduction surgeries. We were approaching these bypasses through the chest and not the abdomen. And the attendings in our program came to us, the residents that listen. We understand this as the experimental program. We're not going to make you do this. We'll let you decide for yourself if you want to do these cases. There were three of us, at my level. And two of us said no, I was one of those. And the third one said sure, he'd do it. That you did not want to participate. I didn't think it was a good operation, a good idea. Long and short as that, the study showed that, yeah, she could lose weight by doing this, the weight came back. These patients came way together. And so it was pretty much abandoned. We're talking back in 1984, there are bouts. And of course, I remember one young woman who died directly as a result of the operation, which was pretty good. It wasn't that big of group of patients and they had one death in that group. So you're not always allowed to make the decision about what you can do. Now, if you're in a residency program and you've got surgeons that are doing gender-affirming surgery, and again, minors, and you don't want to participate in that. I can't speak this. I can't say that the resident has the ability to say, no, I'm not going to do that. Or I won't do that. I do know that, you know, are you familiar with the case of Atonheim? I've interviewed him. Okay. What a man. One of my heroes. There's someone who has two courage. I mean, my courage is the courage of someone that doesn't have too much to lose. He's at the courage of someone who has everything to lose. That guy, I don't know if he's, I didn't ask him. I don't know if he's a religious man, but I could feel a moral power on that guy. Yes. He's really so good. I've spoke, I've become friends with him. I've actually had call these, you know, divine moments, if you will. I've made a couple of just felt compelled to call him a couple of times. Yes. And it just happened to be when he was in a really difficult, down period and just needed someone to affirm what he was doing and to encourage him so forth. And so, you know, I just happened to be the person I made that phone call. And so we become friends. Good for you. And he is a definitely a religious person in the sense of, I could feel that on him. And more than that, he's a moral person. He had the strong sense of the other. No, it's you're absolutely right. And of all people, I interviewed boys funny, you mentioned him. I've thought about him many times since that interview. Now, he's still on the thick of it. And he's still under indictment and he's still facing trial. And he's going to win. Oh, he'll win. Well, I'm not quite suspicious. It's all going to be dropped because the the reasons that have been brought to the accusations are so out there, they just can't be done. Han ETA and EITHA and H A I am a ton. A ton. I'm a ton. I'm a ton. I'm for those following. You want to Google him? Yeah. So do you think that this can be fixed? I can be fixed. Yes. But you're talking about along the pipeline for surgery is five plus years. So, you know, and then you got the four year before the medical school. So if you're going to fix the problem, you got to go back to the medical schools. Honestly, you may have to go back to universities where people being indoctrinated in all this social justice stuff where they they feel that that's more important than what they're doing. They, you know, the young doctors think that writing historic wrong is more important than taking care of the patient in front of them. And you can't practice medicine that way. That's just not that's not medicine. So it can be fixed. It's going to be a generational problem. It's going to take a long time. We're going to be seeing the effects of this and paying the price for these policies and these ideologies for probably my lifetime, I suspect, which brings up the issue. You know, I'm a healthy guy, but everyone of us is going to be someday needing a doctor. And I don't know who I'm going to go to. I somewhat semi-seriously told friends and family, I said, don't go to a surgeon or a doctor under 40. Yes. You know, they've been indoctrinated. Some of these guys are still wearing masks for Pete's sakes. Masks. Oh, yeah, there's some physician that still mask, you know, patients and things like that. It's just crazy. There's crazy stuff out there. Talk about that. So if you're a doctor, I mean, in your openly mentally ill like that, what is anybody? No, I don't mean that as an attack, I'm saying that with sympathy. But if you have the great question, why doesn't anyone in the physicians group or the hospital say something? Well, first off, there's there's too few doctors I mean, there's so few that, you know, a lot of these guys, you know, men, women, whatever. A lot of doctors are there because they're just not enough doctors. I mean, try to, if you try to do a doctor recently and make an appointment, just a routine appointment, you're talking months down the road. You need something more urgently. Go look with that, you know, you'll probably end up going to an energy care center where you'll see a nurse practitioner or PA or someone that's got a fraction of the education experience of a physician. So it's it's not a real, there's not a simple cure for all of this. One thing I wanted to try to do with this conversation is not just simply bad mouth, you know, my organization, the ACS or bad mouth medicine and surgery because I'm devastated by it. What's happened? I really want, I want surgery to be elevated to where it should be, which is a very highly regarded profession that is dedicated itself to taking care of all comers regardless. Okay, we don't, you know, we don't judge on who or what you are when you're in front of us and you've got a problem that we're trained to fix. So my solutions, you know, my first solution obviously is get DEI in a politics and and ideology, do not belong in medicine. I mean, the, the Soviets prove that. I mean, the idea that you can take care of a patient if your first, you know, priority is to judge them based on their, their color ethnicity is, is countered everything that Hippocratic medicine is all about. The others to reinstall standards of excellence. We have to, we have to quit lowering the bar. We got to start elevating the bar again and requiring that, you know, doctors and prospective doctors meet, you know, minimum standards, you know, they have to be some minimum, but they have to be higher than the lower 5% for Pete's sake. They can't be that. We have to free, you know, the doctors and training to do what they have to do. You can't have restricted errors when you've got such limited time anyway. And in the overall, you know, course of a person's lifetime, you know, three, four, five years in surgery is the drop in the bucket. I mean, to, to ask a surgeon to devote themselves to learning the craft and what they call the art and the science of surgery, you know, not only do you need the time, you need the, the person to apply themselves. One thing I heard, which again is kind of disturbing is that a lot of young surgeons are more concerned about comfort, you know, work life balances that's often called. As opposed to learning to be the best doctor they can be. They want to know how much time off they have. They want, they're very jealous of their time off, you know, five o'clock rolls around, they're done. They check out and they move out. One thing that they found in asking all the the program directors about the surgeons coming into their fellowships was that a large proportion did not have ownership of their patients. And ownership means that, you know, you take that patient as your patient. That's not just someone that you take care of for a 12-hour shift, and then you turn them over to the next person and then, you know, you may not ever see a patient again or not until, you know, two or three shifts later. You know, so a lot of young doctors don't have ownership for their patients. I'm hearing that from from colleagues. How do you treat a rental card? Do you ever change the wheel in it? No, I don't rotate the tire. I don't tune it up. That's exactly right. We've certainly wrecked my day, doctor, but I appreciate you're doing this, taking all the time to explain this. We still have a good medical system. It's probably still in many respects the best in the world. I have to believe that, but it's in disarray and it's definitely, and I believe in decline. And I believe that it's going to take some effort, some will, from people that are willing to make those difficult changes. Well, thank you for your bravery. I don't consider myself brave, but I appreciate that. Appreciate the thought. Thank you. Well, nobody else is. And I can't thank you enough for giving me a pedestal in which to to, uh, I had an emergency appendectomy once, by Dr. Leon Pactor, it was an amazing surgeon. And it, you know, it saved me. So, uh, and I think most people have had an experience like that. And, you know, it's important. I'm sure that it's all the fact. Yeah. Ibram Kendi, the author of anti-racism, not a surgeon, he's an author of anti-racism. I'm more on. Yeah. He had colon cancer. Yeah. And he reported that he went to, he interviewed several surgeons, black surgeons, to have the white surgeon for his surgery. Shouldn't you deal with the most competent, shouldn't be allowed? Nope. You get the surgeon from Burkina Faso, April, Kendi. That's my opinion. Uh, thank you, Dr. But I obviously have been addicted to bad person. So, um, thanks. I appreciate it. Appreciate the time. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level. It's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's a moral. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it. A way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way, you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.