I think we're watching the most evil thing I've ever seen in my lifetime, which is the lame duck administration leaving the next administration with the World War with a nuclear conflict by allowing Ukraine, a proxy state of the United States to strike within Russia. And I'll just have one editorial comment that I'm going to let you go. But I think that people in Washington misunderstand Vladimir Putin and they think he's a monarch with absolute power, which is not true. And Russian politics is complex and it's lively and Putin is very concerned with his proof of writing within Russia. He cannot appear weak. That's a huge threat to him. He feels that I can confirm. And if he can't hide attacks on him by the United States through Ukraine, either a Moscow or big civilian casualties, I think he will have no choice in his view. But to launch like a serious response against Ukraine or some or NATO countries or possibly the United States. So this seems like. I hardly have for words for it. Let me just say, my ever stating it. Do you think no, no, not even remotely. So let me just say specifically what has been authorized. Yes. This is something that some NATO countries, including the United Kingdom, have been pressuring the Biden administration to do for quite a long time for at least a year. But going all the way back to the beginning of 2022, this was an option that they had, which is that we have these these guided missiles called attackums, which are very powerful for attacking inside Russia. You can guide them specifically and very precisely to where you want them to go. Obviously you have to get intelligence about where you want to strike. And the reason we never permitted the Ukrainians to use them is because the Ukrainians can't use those missiles on their own. In other words, if they want to launch these missiles, it's not just the US giving them the missiles and then telling them they'll probably go and use them. It requires the direct involvement of the United States and or a major NATO country like France or the UK or Germany because the trainings don't have the guiding capability in order to know how to launch these missiles. So this is not just us giving them missiles and saying, go attack deep inside. Imagine if some major country, China, Iran, Russia, whoever gave missiles to Canada if we were a war with them or Mexico or Cuba and said we're giving you these specifically for you to use them inside the United States. We would consider that a grievous act of war, not just on the part of the country shooting them, but on the part of the country giving them will Biden to hear so much worse. He didn't just give Ukrainians missiles and say feel free to use them inside Russia. We are going to participate in the bombing of Russia. NATO and or the United States because there's no way the Ukrainians can launch these missiles on their own, which means we are now our military or intelligence community are participating in missile attacks inside the country of Russia. This is something that even the Biden administration for all their hawkishness on Russia and Ukraine feeding that war, fueling it, preventing diplomatic resolutions because they wanted this war, even they were unwilling to do it because they understood the dangers of the escalatory risks for Joe Biden or whoever is acting in his name. To do this just two weeks after the country resoundingly rejected governance by the Democratic Party in the administration and on his way out as an 81 year old man knowing that he has about six weeks off to the office to say, yeah, I know that these are massive rest, but I'm willing to take them. I'm 81. I don't really care and then to make it so much more difficult for the following administration to do what they promised to do during the campaign, which the American people voted for and wanted, which is to resolve this war. Instead, we're risking escalation with the world's largest superpower, nuclear power. Over what? Over what? I mean, it placed in context to this is without precedent. And I think it's blink and I want to ask with that in a second. But so 1956, Soviets invade Hungary and murder a ton of people. in the 1960 one, they put nuclear weapons in Cuba, 68, they invade Czechoslovakia, murder a bunch of people once again. These are all incredibly provocative acts, far more provocative than invading Eastern Ukraine. And this is the middle of the Cold War and no American presidents, Democrats, and Republicans in charge during those periods. They didn't respond by attacking Russia. I mean, there's nothing like this has ever happened. No one's ever been this crazy. Well, this is my big breach with the laugh, my big permanent split with whatever they thought I was in terms of ways to make sure that they hate you. Oh, yeah, I know. And that all happened in 2016 when out of nowhere, Russia, it appeared. And I remember like it was yesterday, the very first ad from Hillary Clinton's campaign with this like menacing baritone voice, you know, what does what a reputant and Donald Trump have in common? What do they what is Russia have on Donald Trump? And, journalistic, I just couldn't believe it because it was so retilent of McCarthyism, which is a civil libertarian as I found. I was taught was like one of the worst civil unions of the 27. Right. I agree. Yeah. I mean, you go around just accusing people of being Russian agents with no evidence. They're storing their reputation, their lives kind of like what they're trying to do to Tulsi Gabbard. Now what they tried to do, Donald Trump for the last eight years. So just on that ground, I was kind of offended by it. So realistically, I was so skeptical of it because when you have intelligence agencies leaking anonymously, unverified claims to the Washington Post in the New York Times and they put it on the front page and got their pull it's for them. That's usually a sign that a huge disinformation campaign of deceit is underway. That was the exact method used. For example, to sell the word on a rock to the American people was that kind of process. That's why these intelligence agencies need to be read out. What I'll be most was that the climate was deliberately created in Washington, especially once Hillary lost and they blame Russia for it, that any communications with Russia, anyone who visits Russia, anyone who talks to a Russian official is automatically deemed sinister or treasonous. And as you said during the Cold War, which dominated our American life for 50 years, Ronald Reagan called the Soviet Union the evil empire. They were infinitely more powerful, more threatening, more everything than they then Russia is now. We always communicated with Soviet leaders. There were phones all over Washington that rang to the counterparts. They commented, they communicated constantly after Russia gave there's basically no communication on the longer between the Russian leaders and the American on either side. And I should just say, I mean, not because Russia wanted that. That was something that in Washington got created because they blamed Russia and claimed that Russia was our existential enemy because of the claim that they interfered in the 2016 election. Before that, there was all the Obama administration and the Putin government cooperated in all sorts of ways around the world. Of course. But it's the leadership of the Republican Party too. I had a conversation with this because I was Mike Johnson and he was about to appropriate tens of billions more for Ukraine. And I said, well, why don't you check with Putin? You're to speak at the house number three in line for the presidency. Well, why not? Can I say, well, I'll see if I can facilitate that. I'll call the press office kind of set you up. Why don't you talk to Putin? No, absolutely not. We'll not. Why imagine if he had though and that leaked, but I'm not excusing him. Why wouldn't he just say, I mean, I'm not attacking Mike Johnson. And I guess I am attacking my channel. I don't know what I'm saying. I'm just reporting what actually happened. I said, do you know, like what I don't you have a moral duty to get as much information about this war before you fund its continuation and the killing of all these people? Like shouldn't you know more? No. I think it is important to say that this war has been 100% bipartisan, although the Biden administration has the leader of the executive branch is primarily responsible. The primary, there's been about, I would say five or six dozen anti interventionists or Republicans, typically more Trump supporters, both in the House and Senate, who have spoken out from the beginning against funding this war. But the vast majority of Republicans to the extent they have a criticism or had a criticism with the Biden administration at all with respect to Ukraine. It was that they didn't do enough. They didn't spend enough money on Ukraine. They didn't give Ukraine enough weapons. They didn't get more involved, more heavily more and earlier than they should. But you know, the thing that you said about encouraging Mike Johnson to speak to Putin, which of course as the third in line to the presidency, as you said, when they're proposing it to escalate a major war, of course you should want to understand the Russian perspective. This is what Tulsi Gabbard did in 2017 when she was a member of Congress and the Obama administration had unleashed this billion-dollar year CIA dirty war to change the government of Syria, to dislodge Bashar al-Assad from the government. And we fought along ISIS and al-Qaeda who also wanted Assad gone. We were told those were our existential enemies for 15 years. We fought alongside them to do it. So many of the weapons we sent ended up in the hands of al-Qaeda and ISIS and other Islamic radical groups in Syria. And Tulsi Gabbard is a member of the military, but also is a member of Congress with constitutional responsibility to authorize or authorize a war, wanted to go to Syria and see what was happening for herself. And then she spoke with Syrian officials and got an opportunity to speak with the Syrian president. And based solely on that, she's now accused of being a Russian agent, being some sort of treasonous sympathizer of Bashar al-Assad. This is the jingleist climate that has been created. Way worse than what prevailed in the Cold War. When all we mixed and went to China, Reagan negotiated all kinds of arms deal with the Soviets. This is now totally prohibited. It's like we live in a marble cartoon for children where there's good guys and bad guys where the good guys, and you don't speak to the bad guys. And the good guys are all kind of an ISIS, they're the good guys. Yeah. Because they're very hard point to, I don't want to speak for Tulsi Gabbard or new director of national intelligence nominee. But my view was, I don't have any feelings about Assad or Syria, but it's a fact that that government protected religious minorities, including an ancient Christian community there in the alloys of which he's won in that country for a long time, he ended dead. So why are they my enemy exactly? I don't understand. Like what does why should I be opposed to Assad in Syria? Why should I be opposed to Vladimir Putin? Why was not supposed to be opposed to the Soviet sewer anti-Christian, but now you have a pro-Christian president supposed to be against him. Tell me, why doesn't somebody explain to me why as a 55-year-old American tax payer, I should be against him? First of all, I think the principle is that, and this is what Donald Trump ran for by here. It's basically in 2016 was that we shouldn't be involved in wars designed to change the governments of other countries, build, rebuild their governments, transform their societies in part because it's not our place to do it and in part because we're terrible at doing it because they have very complex, rich, long histories that American intelligence officials and political leaders have no understanding of whatsoever. It's because of the good language. They don't know anything. They know nothing and we proven that over and over and all these failed attempts. But also when it comes to, I mean, the policy average entire world view, and I have spoken to her about this, I've interviewed her about this so I feel comfortable saying this is that she's not in any way anti-war pacifist. She believes that we should be very militarily aggressive against, say, terrorist groups that actually want to attack the United States or have done so or American assets or American interest on the world. Her argument is that we should not be involved in regime change wars of the kind we did in Iraq, that she fought in of the kind we did in Syria, the kind we did in Libya, the kind that we did in Ukraine in 2014 when we actually engineered a coup on that, most sense it a part of the kind that we're trying to pull off in Russia. Right now the point of this is to knock out Putin. Yeah, a true true. We can that regime into the thing is that what you said about Putin is so important, which is Putin's critics, he doesn't have very many liberal critics, meaning people who is left. Exactly. His real critics are hardcore nationalist. And the criticism of who see him as a liberal, who see him as weak or insufficiently militaristic when it comes to confronting the West, but it's not particularly on Ukraine. They wanted, they wanted a destruction of Ukraine. They're a lot of them are enraged. And as you say, the Russian government has taken the position, warned the United States government privately and publicly that any use of these missiles involving as they do direct US or NATO involvement in their launching against Russia will be seen as the entrance of the United States and NATO as belligerent in the war, as a war against Russia, as World War III. And he will have to treat it as such, even though he's been very constrained, even though he clearly doesn't want to broaden our war. There are a lot of people inside Moscow who do wield a lot of power, who do, and who will demand that he treated us such. Why wouldn't they? We are attacking Russia. We're shooting missiles inside Russia. So I think, as you've said, I don't think we can say it enough. So much of this has been conducted in bad faith, but also someone to that bad faith has been informed by ignorance or uninformed by ignorance, nonformed at all. And I think that people really think that Putin is an absolute dictator who can do it every once, and that is not the case. So not the case, super complex place. A lot of smart people in Russia, complicated political situations. So I agree completely. We're pushing him toward that. The view, I think, I know from Putin is that Blinken is driving this and that Blinken has a lot of hostility. There's reckless, but has a lot of hostility toward Russia that has nothing to do with United States at all. Do you think that's true? Do you think Blinken is driving this? Yeah. I mean, I think Blinken, Jake Sullivan, that's kind of the brain trust as it is. Obviously, Joe Biden has no involvement in this whatsoever, which I think has been an issue which we've shockingly ignored. Everyone saw what Joe Biden was long before that debate. Yes. Everyone knew it. Young people who didn't say so were the media and Democratic allies. After the debate, it became untenable for them to deny it any longer that this is an old man who has lost his cognitive capabilities. Yet he's still the sitting president of the United States and you have the vice president understandably doing nothing for the last four months other than working on her own empowerment through the campaign. She obviously wasn't involved ever in any decision making let alone when she became the nominee. So the question has been all these consequential decisions we made, deploying mass and military assets to the Middle East, making decorations about when we would go to war in the Middle East and for whom escalating the war in Ukraine now authorizing the use of these long-range missiles. He's obviously not coming from Joe Biden. He barely understands where he is. It's not a character flaw in his fault part, but it's just a disability, a clear disability. He's obviously not making any of these decisions. I do think that if you look at the national security crowd that emerged from the Obama presidency, especially the people who were associated with the State Department run by Hillary Clinton and then John Kerry, even before Russia gate in 2016, they had an obsession with Russia. In fact, when Hillary Clinton left the administration as Secretary of State and wrote her book, Hard Choices, the only areas in which he was critical of Obama was her view that he wasn't willing to confront Russia sufficiently. Obama had this view, like sort of this realist view from Brent, Brent Skowcroft, those sort of kind of people who like Jim Baker, that why would we send lethal arms to Ukraine and provoke Russia? Ukraine's not a vital interest to us, but it is to them. He wanted to work with Russia and did to facilitate their own deal to bomb terrorist targets in Syria. And there was a faction in the Obama administration led by Hillary Clinton. Blinken was there. All these sort of national security people woven into the, you know, that victory, victory, no one was hired by Hillary Clinton. That's how she made her way into the Obama administration. They viewed Russia as this grave menace. The reason Putin hated Hillary Clinton was because when Hillary Clinton was Secretary of State, the United States openly spent millions of dollars funding opposition groups and organizing protests in Moscow. I mean, we talk about Putin interfering in our secret politics and our internal affairs. Hillary Clinton was openly funding protests and, and, and, and anti-pootened agitated agitators inside Russia in the 2010 election in 2012, 2011 or other. And they were obsessed with Russia well before that. And I do think that Russia is disliked by a lot of people in Washington because of the perception that they are detrimental to our interests in the Middle East and to especially to Israel's interest in the Middle East, including their support for about China's and Syria, the fact that they have a good relationship with Iran. It doesn't really always have a lot to do with the United States, but with the interest of other countries as well. So you think that's the prime move here? Because it is true that Assad is only there because of Russia. I think I think that's a fair statement. Yeah, that's their ally in the Middle East. Right. It's been their ally in the Middle East for decades. And just like we support our allies around the world, like Saudi Arabia and Egypt, you know, very savage brutal dictatorships, but at least to do our bidding. The Russians have theirs as well. They have a long-term relationship with Venezuela with Cuba going back to the Cold War and still do as well as with Syria. And yeah, the Russians operate in Syria. They protect Assad in Syria. And as a result, they end up being antagonistic to Israel, which ends up being defined as US interests as well. There's no subject. But strictly speaking, this is kind of nothing to do with us whatsoever. I mean, honestly, I'm not a DC Israel as a part of the United States. You know, I'm not hostile to Israel, but I think it's a separate country. It seems to me, it's not my country as well. It's often not treated as that. I'm just saying, but don't pay taxes there wasn't born there. So from my perspective, just from an American perspective without wishing me all in any other country at all. And I really don't. I have been struggling for really since the 2016 election, but particularly since the war began in February of 2022 to identify what exactly would be the US interest in this. And I just can't. And I've really think tried hard, but I just don't see what's in it for us. And talk to her, there's nobody. I'm certain of this in the United States, just an average ordinary American voter who believes that their life is affected in any way by the question of who rules or other provinces in the Donbass in Eastern Ukraine. Nobody thinks about Ukraine, let alone the Donbass, let alone Eastern Ukraine. It's an incredibly complex situation there in terms of the people's allegiances, which are far closer to Moscow than they are to Kiev. The question of what that territory should be. Should it be some of my autonomy? Should it be used as a buffer against the West? The whole framework, as you all know, and those other people have pointed out, when Russia agreed to the reunification of Germany, which was obviously an extraordinary thing for the Russians to agree to, given the Russian history in the 20th century with respect to Germany, when they opened the Berlin Wallfowl and they allowed the Eastern and the Western parts of Germany to reunite and to become part of the the West and become part of the EU, the only concession they extracted and exchanged for that was okay with reunification NATO is now moving eastward closer to our border in a country that has devastated our country twice in two world wars and they derush the twice killed tens of millions of Russian citizens. The only thing we need as a security guarantee and exchange for that is that NATO will never expand one inch eastward beyond what was East Germany and the United States agreed to that and immediately in the 90s and the Clinton administration, the Clinton administration started talking about it and implementing NATO expansion eastward toward Russia, exactly what was promised to Gorbachev, the United States would not do and exchange for the government agreeing to reunification and why, why, why did we need to expand our never-an-un to eastward in general, it's going directly up to the Russian border on the part of their border that has been invaded twice in Ukraine to destroy Russian both of those those world wars. We also participated in the change of government. We removed the democratically elected leader of Ukraine before his constitutional term was expired in 2014 because we perceived him as being too friendly to Moscow, which is we could be Ukrainians voted for and replaced him, the jury knew and constructed a government and they was replaced by a government that was more pro. You have to imagine if the Russians engineered a coup in Mexico to take out the government because they were too friendly to the US and put in a hard-line pro Russian anti-American anti-Natal president. Imagine how threatening we would regard that as and that's exactly what we did in Ukraine. The question is though, this has nothing to do with the national security of the American people. No American is threatened by who governs Ukraine. What they're threatened by is what the United States is doing in Ukraine, including this most recent act. Well, they keep telling you AI is going to make the world a better place than it may be true, but you have to ask better for home, better for your health insurance company, which could use it to calculate exactly how much to raise your premium is based on your WebMD search history. Better for the HR department set companies to absorb the side, whether or not to hire you based on what you've been looking at online. Better for politicians who can use the information they take from you to manipulate you. That doesn't sound better in any way. And that's one of the reasons that we protect ourselves with a product called Express VPN. Express VPN is an app. It encrypts 100% of your online activity and re-routs it through secure servers. That means no one can see what you do online, what websites you visit are apps you use. Now your internet provider, not data brokers, not any malicious AI system that's vacuuming up information on everybody else. Express VPN is easy to use. It works on every kind of device, phone, laptop, tablet. If you can connect it to the internet, you can protect it with Express VPN. It comes with a risk-free 30-day back guarantee. That's one of the reasons that experts like CNET and the Verge rate Express VPN, the number one VPN on the market today. Those are especially to get three extra months of Express VPNs privacy protection for free go to express VPN.com slash Tucker. That's express VPN.com slash Tucker get three extra months for free. So I find it so terrifying. I don't think I'm sort of overstating that. I mean, we're on the brink of global war. But can I just say one thing about that? What you think, aren't you kind of amazed by how impervious and dismissive media and political leads are the prospect of nuclear war? Well, it's unimaginable and yes, and I mean, that's I think it can't happen to all have no frustration. Yeah, and I will say the one thing that Trump has said repeatedly over the past, certainly since he left the presidency for years, that he's received no credit for it and should get enormous credit for it is that nuclear war is the worst thing. He was of course been briefed on it as the person who controlled the launch codes. He knows what it means. And anyone who spends five minutes looking into what a nuclear exchange would actually do is terrified of it. But only Trump seems worried about it. I don't understand why I've said this talk about it so many times. And I think it goes back to when Trump was president in the early States of presidency. Every time Trump talks about the prospect of nuclear war, he knows that he's limited in what everything he can divulge, but he's so clearly trying to signal and he often says that these weapons are of a different universe than even the ones we dropped in that's correct. And he's obviously, as you said, understands and been briefed on. But you see these morons at the Atlantic Council or E.I. or Hudson or these like this cluster of the dumbest people in the world all implicated in the Iraq disaster say, well, you know, maybe tactical nukes are fine. That we then have to work. That's like such next level crazy. Like that's crazier than any schizophrenic sitting next to you on a public subway. Well, yeah. I mean, it's crazy. We constantly call like RFK Jr. they call him crazy. Okay. Call, you know, talk about the government at gauge crazy. Whoever these people who have been empowered, who have been generating American orthodoxy, especially in foreign policy, are the most insane people on the planet. It's because actually United States has been the most powerful country in the world. no one could constrain it. No one could stand up to it. And as is true with everything, that level of unconstrained power corrupts people. That is correct. That is correct. And he's people have been in control of this power for decades that has passed on one to another through this dogma that gets increasingly out of touch and detach from reality and and and megalomaniacal. Absolutely. I mean, at least during the cold while that saying it was a good thing, but the Soviet United States were of equal power. They were competing with one another. They were both very constrained in what they were. They both were petrified of a nuclear will be almost came to nuclear apocalypse at least twice, especially in the cubitical crisis through misperception and miscommunication when a Russian commander of a submarine thought incorrectly that they were using nuclear weapons against the submarine and against Cuba and almost launched the nuclear weapons at the sub came about five minutes away from doing so until someone intervened on that sub and said, I don't think that this is actually an attack. It's very possible. We've come to the brink of it before it probably is the single greatest threat to the survival of the species. Not probably definitely is the use of nuclear weapons. Every time Trump talks about it, you can see the fear that he has he's trying to convey to others. Every time and I mean, Tucker, I'm amazed. This is like impeachment level stuff for Joe Biden on his way out of the door to involve the US directly in a war for the first time. We've been very involved in other ways. They should impeach him. Why doesn't the There's probably not a lot of anger in the house and send it over this except the question that it's called lame duck for a reason. A lame duck is supposed to be a duck that really doesn't do much. Can't do much. It's moved much. It's by design pretty limited. It's like this transition period. He's floating in the water because he's been shot. Exactly. His legs are broken. And so he's lame. This is not a lame duck decision. And it's not like there was any emergency to it. It wasn't there was no emergency to it. They just wanted to escalate it because they thought Trump wouldn't. And so they did. It puts us in this remarkable moment where the only adult is Vladimir Putin. This person we've been told is Hitler and deranged crazy dying of nine different kinds of cancer can't be trusted. Like the only reason we're not I mean, we're all relying on his restraint. That's the fact right now. How weird is that? Well, I mean, first of all, this is this is what amazing me is. I sometimes propaganda and propaganda is you have to respect it. It's a very potent field of human knowledge that has been refined over many decades using every field of discipline. So so sciences and psychology and psychiatry. I mean, propaganda is not just some intuitive thing that people do. It's an argument. It's an argument. Yeah. And it's very powerful. And we love to talk about how propaganda is the Russians are and the Chinese are and how there's no descent allowed, you know, George Orwell in the preface to animal farm wrote or actually 1994 wrote an essay where he was essentially saying that overt totalitarianism of the kind that was taking place in the Soviet Union is repressive, but it's not nearly as effective as subtle repression. The kind where you give the illusion that people are free, but in reality, the flow of of information is heavily controlled because at least when, you know, the guy's dressed in blacks with weapons come and take you and put you in a glue log for criticizing the government, everybody understands the level of repression. It often generates a backlash. But when you combine repression with the illusion of freedom, that's what's incredibly effective. And that's what we all people with an abundant consumer economy, like, you know, here are your edibles. Here's your Netflix come down. Yeah. And you can basically get them to do anything. Yeah. The same time there has been a concerted effort to control what was supposed to be the one innovation that was going to break the centralized control of information, which is the internet. That's why there's so much attention and energy. It's why it's the number one priority of Western power centers to control the internet because it's the one threat to their ability to maintain this propaganda and this to control. You know, this, I still can't believe this that it's not talked about as much, but right a one threat to their ability to maintain this propaganda is to control. You know, I still can't believe this that it's not talked about as much, but right after Russia invaded Ukraine and Western governments decided they wanted full on support for Ukraine. And this very simple, my generative that they fed their public. Well, after they started the war, when the body of frustration started, that's my view of it. They knew that Russia would invade if they publicly push the lens, keeps a joint NATO. So they did that, Kamala Harris did it and Russia did my view as they started this war. Ian threat talking openly about expanding NATO to Ukraine. You find members from the highest levels of the US government. Exactly. You do that. It's not just Putin. It's every political faction in Russia. I will see it as a war in Will in villain. They'll they'll annex Crimea and invade Eastern Ukraine. Of course, the American government knew that you can show documents where it says that. But the, the EU, the minute that war started in earnest with the Russian army invading, one of the very first steps they took legislatively was to ban the platforming to criminalize the platforming of Russian media like Russia, RT and Sputnik. They made it a crime. And YouTube immediately pulled it off because they didn't want their citizens hearing any information from the Russian perspective. I mean, you can hate Russia. You can think Russia is evil. You can think whatever you want about Russia. But why wouldn't you want to hear from the other side? You know, the new times used to publish all the time, like the speeches of Brezhnev and Yuri and Dropov and Khrushchev. And you could read what the Russians would say they would come to the United States. They would speak openly. Now it's it's practically criminalized. Putin's speech in February 2022 to his country nationally televised there. Right before the invasion was absolutely just remarkable speech, which I, by the way, never got around to even looking at before I got to Moscow. And I was like, I can interview Putin. I think you should watch that speech. I read about it. Never watched it. And I think, I mean, he's going to agree or disagree. You could hate Putin. I mean, it's totally fine. I don't care how people feel about Putin. But to most Americans had no idea his thinking in invading Ukraine, like no idea what, why wouldn't people want to know? What it was just the cartoon, he's an evil, hitlarian figure who wants to recon, clap, re, re, re, re, re, re, re conquest. All of Europe, the way Hitler did, Putin has been in office for 25 years. He has gone through six different American presidents every single one of them. Until you were not allowed to say it anymore, always said, you meet with Putin. He's incredibly shrewd. He's incredibly smart. You can trust Putin. If you do a deal with Putin, you can count on the fact that he will adhere to it. Other heads of states still feel that way and see that. Well, American presidents said it all the time starting with Bill Clinton that he's rational, that he acts in his self interest, that he's calculating in terms of and careful. And then suddenly, this is what it means to me, propaganda. Basically is that overnight, everybody was forced to say that Putin invaded Ukraine simply because suddenly he became the psychotic evil, Hitler type figure who just wanted out of the blue. They all believed it though. A lot of them, but the people have screamed at me at airports for being pro-Putin. Of course, I'm not proud. I've never been pro-Putin. I don't have strong feelings either way, but they really had been convinced, not just by MSNBC and CNN, but by the entire oligarch controlled internet, that like anyone who talked about Putin or his questions about the world was like for Putin, it's like that worked propaganda world. No, I probably can't talk or propaganda world, especially nationalist propaganda because human beings evolved over a thousand of years to be tribal. We want to feel part of our group. We take pride in our group. It's why if you're born in America, you say, I'm an American. This is my country. This is what I'm oil to. It comes from these tribalistic instincts, right? It makes sense because we evolved for a thousand of years where you if you got expelled from your tribe, you would you would die. You needed a tribe in order to survive. So we're tribalistic animals. So if you appeal to people's tribalism and say, we're the good guys, we're the innocent victims, our enemy are the bad guys. They're evil. They're, you know, that appeals to people's most of visceral instincts. And the problem, of course, is the counter valing punishment, which is the minute you question it. You know, I had from the beginning, I had on my show, you know, people like John Mearsheimer and Stephen Walt and Jeffrey Sacks, and they were all saying from the beginning, there's no possibility that Ukraine can win this war as NATO has defined it, which means the expulsion of every Russian true from every interview. So I'll just simply on size grounds alone to saying just basic understanding of history. Every one of them, I'm sure I think it happened to you too. I know what happened to me were put on these official list issued by the Ukrainian government of being pro Russian propaganda. Everywhere you went, you get accused of being a Russian propaganda. So some sort of agent for Kremlin simply by questioning our own government's propagandaistic views or simply trying to understand things from the Russian perspective. Like this is, you know, I after 9 11, the big question on the minds of all Americans after they were traumatized by this extraordinary assault on our soil designed, obviously, to impose as much suffering and killing as possible was, obviously, they're like, why do they want to do that to us? Why would people hate us so much that they would devise a scheme as complex and deadly as hijacking planes, passenger planes with box cutters and find them into major American buildings filled with people? Why would they hate us that much? And they had to, the government had to give an answer to that question because people obviously wanted to do the answer. And that was when David from and Cheney and all the people said they hate us for our freedoms. They just can't stand the fact that women are allowed to wear bikinis on the beach and that we have a Congress. And it's like, no one ever thought well, there's like dozens of countries around the world will run and get to win for bikinis and have Congress is like in Japan and Korea and all throughout Latin America and like Scandinavia, why aren't they attacking those places? And then Ben Laden wrote a letter in 2002 to the American people saying here's why there's so much animosity toward the United States. And there was, of course, some appeal to religion in it. I made the mistake of reading part of that letter on the air at CNN at the time, not to make a kind of point, but just because super interesting, you know, when 9-11 changed everyone's life very much including mine lost a friend that day. Like just like every American who was an adult, a 9-11, it was like you felt like it was an event that you participated in or it affected you. So I felt like I had every right to read that letter, like hey, this is he he's now saying why you did it. I'm just gonna pull off the air for doing that. Oh, I just want to I just have to never forget. I not only doesn't that surprise me, a lot of people have forgotten that this happens, but it's actually quite extraordinary. After 9-11, obviously some of the line was one of the most important people in the world. You just perpetrated the worst attack on the American soil. Yes, it's Pearl Harbor. You know, a lot of people wanted to interview him or play clips of interviews. The United States government told called all the network news agencies into the White House and said to them, you should not and cannot show interview Osama bin Laden or show any interviews with him. And they invented this excuse as to why, which is that he might put some sort of code in his interviews that signaled to sleep or sell like he might like wiggle his ear like Carol Burnett did or like, you know, raises eyebrows three times or blank in a more code in a certain way and and then that works all obeyed. And the most amazing thing was this letter, which you could go read where he says exactly why all the different ways the United States has brought violence to that region has interviewed that. We've been bombing that region and interfering in them, opposing dictatorships on those people for decades, specifically to suppress the things they believe in. We don't want popular opinion being prevailing in democratically in the Middle East because we don't perceive it in our interests. So we've been imposing dictators on them, secular dictators. We've been bombing them. We've been sanctioning them. We've been invading them. Of course, we support Israel, which in that region, people view as this grave assault on the rights of Palestinians, but we put bases in Saudi Arabia, which is the most sacred soil to that religion. We imposed a blockade and sanction regime on Iraq, which Madeleine Albright admitted killed 500,000 children. But nonetheless said it was worth it. So we've been so active in that region. And that's the reason they wanted to attack back. That's the reason they'll kind of had so much support. But they banned Osama bin Laden from being heard just like the EU banned Russian state media from being heard because of course you don't want Americans being exposed to this. And then the amazing thing is that letter, which really didn't get much attention at the time, the only place that existed on the internet was on the Guardian's website. And somehow, you know, 22 year olds on TikTok found that letter and they started talking about it. And they were like, oh my God, I was never told this before. He didn't attack us because he hate us for our freedom. He says specifically here why they're attacking us. And in other words, they were reading a historical document and discussing it, things that you would want a free citizenry to do. But the fear that they were allowed to not only read, but talk about the document with one another was so intense that in 48 hours, they forced TikTok to ban every discussion of that letter to remove the hashtags to find it to take down any poster accounts that were talking about it. And then the Guardian, a news outlet removed that letter, which had been there for 20 years, which was of obvious historical and journalistic importance. They were removed it from their website because they were too frightened that people were going to be able to read it. Why? Because it prevents the propaganda's narrative from being unchallenged. And that's the same with Russia and Ukraine. That shows you how we think we're so free. We have we can we hear so much dissent because you have a Republican Democrat bigger and a cable show about trivial things. I go, look, we have free debates open debates. They don't get to have that in Russia and China. But the minute there's information that actually threatens the government, that they fear people understanding, they clamp down on it and suppress it. And that's what they did there. You wonder why we put up with the government that continues to keep secret files about 9-11. It's been 23 years. What could possibly be the justification for not telling me information that I own and have a right to see, which is what the hell was that? And they constantly lecturing even the JFK files, especially the JFK file. But but much more immediate, it was 23 years ago. But I mean, we're both adults. We remember it very well. Yeah, I was traumatized by that. It was a horrible event. Exactly. And then a lot happened. Our country changed radically because of it to this day, the Patriot Act exists. Well, it's not never been the same country. And in some ways, you know, it was much more successful in its aims than than I even want to admit to myself because it's so sad to see what it did this country. But here's the point, there constantly they, meaning the media and the intelligences which work together, as you know, a constantly attacking other people for being conspiracy theorists and crazy and discarding the memory of the 9-11 victims, etc. by coming up with explanations that are not authorized. Okay. Then why don't you just tell us what actually, why not just declassify it? What's the answer? It's going to jeopardize sources and methods. That's not true. And we all know that's true. And you know that this, the importance of protecting those secrets, keeping those documents that might show the truth, not just about not a majevk. That's the most important. It's the, it's in fact the whole point of the second impeachment trial, which never made any sense why would you bring an impeachment trial against the president on his way out the office was because they were petrified that Trump was going to do certain things in that transition, like pardon Edward Snowden, Julian Assange, which came very close to doing, but especially fulfill his promise to declassify things like the JFK files and other national security files that have been kept hidden with no justification from the American public, even though it happened decades ago, 9-11 JFK. And they told him if you do that, all the Senate Republicans are going to vote to impeach you, you're going to be convicted and ineligible to run ever again. That was the sort of damocles they held over his head precisely to prevent him from bringing transparency to the government, allowing the American people to see what they ought to have a right to know. If your greatest fear is transparency, then you're a criminal. I mean, that's a basic proof. Like I can't think of a better indicator of behavior than the crazed desire to keep that behavior secret. Right. Can I want to say something about that, which is if you think about what a democracy is supposed to be, like what an ideal free society is, whatever you call that, it's supposed to be that everything that public officials do in the name of the public power is supposed to be known to the public with very few exceptions, right? Like there's a war in their planning troop movements. They can keep that secret. Yeah, Normandy a week before, right? They can keep a good way. They don't have to tell everyone that they're going to do that. But outside of those very rare exceptions, we're supposed to know everything about what they do. Of course, because they're doing it in our name. They're our employees. Yeah, and they're supposed to be accountable to us, but they can't be if we don't know what they're doing. Conversely, they're not supposed to know anything about what private citizens do. I'm supposed to track us or eavesdrop on us or keep dossies on us or know where we are or where we're going. Unless, again, very rare circumstances were criminal. There's probable cause to spy on us because we've convinced they've convinced according to the Constitution requires that there's probable cause to believe it. But except in those rare circumstances, that's why they're called public officials and we're called private citizens. We're supposed to have privacy. They're not. They're supposed to have transparency. Our society is completely reversed. If your private citizen, the government knows everything about you. They keep all kinds of data on you. That was the Snowden reporting. Obviously, that's what Edward Snowden revealed was the extent to which we were being surveilled by our own government. Conversely, we know almost nothing about what the government you know. When I got the Edward Snowden archive, which was hundreds of thousands, if not more, of top secret documents from the NSA, obviously what was surprising is what was in them and what they revealed. But what even more surprising to me was that the documents that so many of these documents, most of these documents that were marked top secret had no interesting information in them at all. Like they just reflexively put like how to get a parking credential, how to ask your supervisor for vacation. These were top secret because everything the government does reflexively is kept secret from the public. Right. So that's the default. You have no rights. Right. Exactly. So everything is inverse. We, the government knows everything about what we do and we know nothing about what they do. Like, I just should have known this that the big pornography sites are controlled with the intelligence. You save access to the data on those sites. And the reason that they do, and I think the dating sites too. And the reason that they do, of course, is blackmail. And once you realize that, once you realize that like the most embarrassing features of your personal life are known by people who want to control you, then you're controlled. And you look at the behavior of some of these people who I know personally, and particularly in the Congress, you're like, why are you doing that? You don't agree with that. And you're out there doing it anyway. We always imagine that it's just donor. So they're getting paid to do that. I think it's more than donors. I've seen politicians turn down donors before. I've watched it. You know, I don't believe that I'm not doing that. Oh, I have very safe seats. Not everybody is desperate for donors. Exactly. Hey, Keg, just give me an example. I'm not just the carrot. There's a stick in there. I'm not saying this happened here. I'm not saying that at all. I have no bet basis for saying it, but I had Mike Johnson on my show about two months before unexpectedly he became the speaker when he he just became like the 90th number. I was Johnson on your show. Yeah. And every Mike Johnson. And the reason I interviewed Mike Johnson was because he would not go on your show now. Oh, no. This is why this is so interesting. I didn't know why. So yeah, just by chance that every Mike Johnson, the reason was was because Christopher Ray went before a committee on what he sat in the house and Mike Johnson grilled him about FBI spying about the involvement of the intelligence communities and our politics about the attempt to censor the internet coming from the intel agencies. And he did it with this great kind of intellect, but also this very effective demeanor. And I could just tell that he passionately developed passionately about the issue. And then I started following more and more of what he was doing. He was almost single mindedly focused on spying abuses, curbing spying power, curbing censorship, blowing my mind. And so we asked him. I said, you know, can you call my show? And you're like, yeah, I have big fan of plans. I think the work these doing great. I'm like Johnson Louisiana. Yeah. And you know, my show. No, go go watch the interview. And I'm hard to shock you or shocking. I had him on my show. And after this interview, I was like, I love him. One of the reasons one of the things we spent the most amount of time on was Pfizer and the need for Pfizer reform. The fact that I'm swearing, I'm telling you Pfizer reform was coming up in about three months where they had to extend the Pfizer law that allows the FBI to CIA to spy in American citizens, the NSA without really any reforms. And he was determined. It was like his big issue. That's why he was on my show. That's why you like my work was he was like, we cannot allow this Pfizer law to be renewed. It is a great threat to American democracy. At the very least, we need massive fundamental reform. I was like, oh my God, I, I, I, I, and he's very smart. He's like a smart lawyer. He's very informed about these issues. I worked with a super impressed. That is what we spent most of our time on. But also just that when you put these clips on the internet, the whole show is on the internet. No, I know, but we just posted on social media. But I did, but I'll do it again because Mike Johnson become a speaker about two months later. I don't mean four years later or two years later about two months after that, three months at the most, right when the Pfizer law is coming up. And I was like, oh, it's so great. He was made speaker. There's no way this Pfizer law is getting passed. Not only did Mike Johnson say, I'm going to allow the Pfizer renewal to come to the floor with no reforms, not allowing any reforms. He himself said it is urgent that we renew Pfizer without any reforms. This is a crucial critical tool for our intelligence agencies. And I put that clip everywhere when that happened, showing where just two months earlier, did you butt them together? Yeah, of course, I was attacking with the show. Mike Johnson. And then somebody, I finally asked him like, but you've been saying all along for years for the last two years that you vehemently oppose this. And suddenly now you're for it. What changed your mind? And he was like, yeah, well, when you're a speaker, you get access to a lot of things. And I was taken to the secret room in the CIA. And they showed me these very important things. And these sensitive documents about how important these powers are and how devastating it would be if we put any reforms on them. And so I realized that it was wrong when I had believed. And now I believe this law has to be passed with no reforms. You don't have smart people like that. He was already in Congress. He had access classified information, getting briefings, secret briefings. You don't have people that invested in position who with one meeting, I can see someone really dumb being affected by that. Like, oh, these guys with big medals on their chest. They could do like a secret, super secret room inside the CIA, like all these locks and codes and things on the wall. And you're all in pressure. Oh my God, I can't challenge this. He's a very smart guy. I don't believe he changes mine. So the question is, well, why did he? I don't know. I really don't. But I know that the person that was on my show two months earlier no longer exist. Well, I can honestly say that's one of the most shocking things I've heard no long time because I didn't. I should also echo whatever one else who's ever met him will say, which is nice guy. You know, not a mean man or anything with that guy. Like, you know, he'd adopt kids. He liked totally. Everything he says about the agency or just backwards everybody I totally I was even saying today that he was, you know, with the whole thing about the question of whether this new trans lawmaker was got to use about them. He was asked about him. He was just like emphasizing the for respect and decency and civility, even if, you know, things. Yes. And I believe he believes that. I believe he isn't connection with the like best parts of Christianity and take some seriously. I have to duck himself that way and always has nothing against Mike Johnson personally quite the country. But to watch that happen was, I mean, as as skeptical as I am, I don't even know how to respond because I didn't. I have interviewed Mike Johnson over the years, but he was like some guy from Louisiana, whatever. I wasn't paying close attention. And it was only after he became speaker on the FISA question and on the question of funding Ukraine. That was the other thing. Go on. I talked to about that too. He was like, you know, he did say he wasn't at all like, you know, say like Matt Gates type or, you know, Tom Massey, like, we can't fund that war that war. He wasn't saying that. He was he was like, we can't let Russia win, but he was still pretty skeptical, but it was really on these questions of FISA and the CIA and the FBI and spying powers and internet censorship powers where he was passionate, vehement. That's why Adam on. You're making my arms go up because I agree. Look, I'm not alleging anything because I don't know anything. I didn't even know that he was that invested on precisely the opposite side, but very made all very possible. And, you know, I had a conversation with him off camera. So I probably shouldn't be too detailed about it, but he said something that I thought was like, not only nonsensical, but like insane, crazy. And it's just to make any, it was internally incoherent. And he's not stupid as you said. And I got upset. And I was like, that doesn't make any sense at all. And, um, and he just kind of said, no, it does make sense. It does make, it was like there was no answer. It was just like, wow, this is I saw, I saw there's no bomb at you. You have to like, especially for people who are kind of new to power, right? Like not Nancy Pelosi or Joe Biden or Mitch McConnell, people have been in these positions for decades. Mike Johnson went from a very back bank. So Congress to the third in line who controls the, the House of Representatives, you can only imagine the instance just unlimited amount of pressure that comes from multiple directions to force him to align himself with whatever the agenda is of the people who rule rock Washington. Same thing happened with Obama. I believed Obama when he talked for two years when running for president about how he's a constitutional officer, how he believes so much in the core rights of the constitution like KBS corpus the right to cast your imprisonment to have evidence presented against you by places like Guantanamo and elsewhere how we wanted to uproot the worst abuses of Bush, any war on terror. Then he gets into office. No, he doesn't uproot them, but he starts extending them because again, these generals come including the ones he likes who went to Princeton, like David Petraeus, you know, the ones who dazzle and give him secret briefings about all the blood that's going to be on his hands if he does any of the changes he put to your promise again, then suddenly on a dime, he switches and there's a lot of other pressure you can imagine as well like the stick as you said. And anyone who thinks that this is that our intelligence agencies are above these kinds of things, then I give a tear required to believe that is what they're not about the, the, the, they've done it. This is their currency. It's just amazing having spent, you know, all this time in Washington with all these people. I have just who I know and by the way, in some cases like Mike Johnson, I like, it you can't really reach another conclusion other than there's something very heavy duty going on behind the scenes like really profound going on. And I just don't know why no one has ever emerged from the system to say what it is. Is there not one, I they're very few courageous people, your wealth, I mean, there just aren't many in this world. Well, I mean, why doesn't someone just just call one of these people out of the things that made Trump so threatening and that continues to make him so threatening is that in a lot of ways he was pulling the curtain, he is hoping it's the fourth walls coming down. Yeah. I mean, you know, I remember he, he just said openly. Yeah. Like as a billionaire as a businessman, I just gave a candidate, you know, $50,000 and then they would automatically accept my call and do it. I've already told them to do. Who says that in the top level politics? Like, hey, you're I'm an expression. I want you to know here's how the system works. You give a lot of money to some place that these lawmakers tell you to donate money to. And then they do whatever you want. They do your bidding when in that 2016 debate when he started rallying against the evil and the stupidity of their rock war because his principal opponent at the time was Jeff Bush who was backed by the establishment and the audience started booing. You know, as though the America was rising up in defense of the Bush family, he was like, Oh, these seats here, these are all the big Republican donors. That's the only people who are booing me because they're supporting Jeb Bush. If you ever intuit debate, as I know you have, that's exactly how it is. The big both parties, they put their big donors, the partisan right behind where they get where their audience here's only their reaction. So Trump constantly was sort of doing that. Here's how things really work. And then once he started getting targeted by these agencies by the CIA, the FBI starting with Russia, Gate, but the steel dossier, what Jim Comey did, leaking that to the media, and then all those investigations, that's why he started saying these intelligence agencies are corrupted to their core. They're filled with people who have their own politicized agenda. They were supposed to have an elected leader, democratically out to leader who supervises these branches and these agencies and the executive branch and their duty is to carry out his policies. But they don't, they subverted his policies, they sabotaged them because they didn't agree with them. They were like their own branch of government completely powerful. And he's the first one, I guess, in Stoye Eisenhower, who tried to one of this on his way out after spending eight years. And obviously the intelligence community in military and dust companies is way smaller when Dwight Eisenhower tried to warn of how much of a threat it was the democracy in his farewell address. It was before Vietnam before the real build up of the Cold War, obviously before 9-11. They're sprawling now. They're almost impossible to even analyze or quantify. And Trump is the only one who's trying to say these institutions are radically corrupted at their root. They're rotted. And that's why he's trying to choose people. You know, he picks some like comfortable institutionalists and status quo perpetrators like Marco Rubio, at least to Fonic, John Ratcliffe, people like that just to give Washington a sense of okay, there's some people here we're good with. But then the people that he picked who are share his view that these institutions require radical overhaul. They're just undemocratic unaccountable. Those are the ones they're trying to destroy. Well, there's there's Tulsi, there's Matt Gaetz, there's RFK Jr. And a little bit to some extent Pete Haggstaff. I mean, he's not really ideologically unaligned. But the problem is is that he doesn't come from the Pentagon bureaucracy. That's what they care about most. That's a trillion dollar agency. You know how many wheels that Greece is in Raytheon and Boeing in general dynamics. That's what they care about most is making sure that money goes where it's supposed to go. That's why they're concerned about him. But the people who aren't the ones that Commonwealth could have picked easily are the ones who they're most out to destroy because that's what these power, permanent power factions are is they are their own government. And they wield the most power. And they have, sure, considered by Johnson, no threat at all. Let's take them and do what we have to do. But you wonder like just I don't know. I mean, look, these guys are under pressure that, you know, we probably can't imagine, you know, if somebody knew the thing you were most embarrassed about that would destroy your life and make your kids not like you or whatever. I'm not speaking of Johnson specifically, but I know a couple of people who I know are compromised in the US government. And I sort of feel sad for them because how joy to be in that position. But it does all it would take is one brave man to give a press conference. You know, there was actually a guy, um, Cookie Roberts's father, Hale-Boggs, who stood up in Congress. He was this majority leader in about 1970. He was on the Warren Commission. And he didn't buy the did not buy the conclusions at all. And he told other people that he was from Louisiana. And he stood up and made some noises about on the on the floor of the house about how the CIA was, you know, doing things they were not supposed to do in domestic politics and had unchecked power, etc. And he was immediately denounced as mentally ill, probably an alcoholic. And then he disappeared into playing crash with Beggett in 1972. And it'll ask kind of play was never seen again. So I'm like, I'm not saying that he was, he was murdered for that though. You know, I would not at all be surprised who it was. But why is he the last guy to say anything like that? Like more because he died in a plane crash. I mean, this is the thing is, you know, I remember doing the snow and reporting when there was all this controversy about government spying on people. And the big reaction that I got that had been cultivated for a long time, not just by the government, but Facebook, Mark Zuckerberg famously said privacy is archaic value or whatever. Don't worry about privacy anymore. People were saying, I don't have anything to hide. Like I'm not a terrorist. I'm not a pedophile. I don't care what my government is buying. I mean, and I would always say everybody has things to hide. There are things that you don't tell anybody. There are things you only tell your psychiatrist, only your spouse, only your best friend, things that you don't want to need. Whether people to know that you're petrified. If everybody knew about you, we are private. We need we're social animals. We need connection to society and other people. We're create privacy without privacy. We go insane. And there's no freedom with our privacy. None because that's where dissent and creativity and exploration and rejection of societal more A's that's where it resides. And in the private realm, without that, if you're just being surveilled and watched all the time, that breeds conformity. exploration and a rejection of societal more as that's where it resides. And in the private realm, without that, if you're just being surveilled and watched all the time, that breeds conformity. And so everybody needs privacy. Everybody values it. Everybody has something to hide. And the ability to surveil people to know everything about, I think what actually happens is we're so inculcated from birth to have this very idealistic image of our country and our government. And in some ways it's valid. I think I reveal the Constitution. I went to school to study it and that I went to practice it. I believe in its values. I think it's a genius document. I do too. It comes from the Enlightenment. I mean, just a very intellectually based, philosophically based idea how it was constructed, very carefully. And our thing's very good about the United States. But if you think that the most powerful country on the planet, the richest and most powerful country arguably ever do exist, doesn't have at its core in terms of the people who run it, people who are willing to do anything to preserve their power, to augment their power. Again, it just takes a kind of naivete that's almost impossible to find them. People risk death every single day in this country to rob liquor stores for $300. So you can't tell me that control of a trillion dollar federal agency or a multi-trained dog government with vast majority of your own power to decide who gets bombed, where the worst is going. I'm saying that the most powerful institution in human history doesn't have sinister things going on. And people do to control that. No, the stakes are very high. And I think the closer you are to it, the more often you forget that. You're like, oh, it's just secretary of whatever it cares. Well, there's people care. Understandably, there's people will do anything for power and money. Wow, that's so distressing. Did you in your reporting, and I always forget that you were behind the Snowden thing, and thank you for that. What a wonderful guy he is. But did you ever get any hint of what the pressure is that's applied to politicians to comply in obey? Yeah, well, first of all, I do think, like we were just talking about like people who why don't people stand up? Like, Edward Snowden is a perfect example of somebody who believed in the mythology of the government, believed in, you know, he went to enlist in order to fight Iraq. He broke both of his legs. He couldn't join the military. So he went to work for the CIA and then the NSA because he really believed in the, and then what he saw was so horrifying was so corrupting was so deceitful that he risked his life and his liberty, which to the state he's deprived of to inform everybody about what was going on by stealing under their nose documents that he could give to reporters so that reporters could tell the world what was happening. That is kind of an example of that level of courage of somebody saying, here's what's going on. What Snowden gave us was a tiny picture of what the NSA does. So obviously if there had been in their like specific black male sort of documents about how they were spying on particular politicians, that's something we would have, you know, reported on very aggressively and very early so I can't say I saw that. But what I did see is all sorts of incidents of people at the NSA abusing their authority to spy on people who they had no right to be spying on, including sometimes, you know, just things as trivial as like ex-girlfriends or family members. But also when in other countries they wanted to impede our arms somebody, they spy on those people all the time and use that information in part two, gain power over them. So of course, who how can you expect human beings to resist that of all power when it's all operating in the dark? Strong families are built on strong foundations and it all begins with what you bring into your home. It's hard though because big pharma and the processed food industry have spent decades putting you and your loved ones at risk pushing toxic harmful products that make you sick that have made our country sick. It's not a guest that's happened. So it's well past time that someone decided to help you fight back, public square is doing that. Public square is the leading family marketplace where you will find clean, healthy products sourced from American small businesses that actually share your values. The Christmas right around the corner now is the time to abandon the corporate food conglomerates in favor of something better, healthier, more pure. Make the switch, dock your home with the quality essentials and shopper gifts your whole family will love, and it's easy. Public square dot com slash Tucker and you can get started public square dot com slash Tucker. So I mean you can't you can't have anything like representative government with that system in place. The whole idea of having a national security apparatus and intelligence can do that operates in complete secrecy and that just does what it does permanently without end and constantly expands its authorities and powers because there's no political gain and its budgets which are class of friends budgets which nobody you know that was one of the things we actually were able to see was the black book of the intelligence budget and we were putting on the things that you know we thought were were newsworthy about that. There's zero transparency to any of this. There's no oversight. You technically have like oversight in Congress and the Senate, the Senate intelligence committees, he select committees that were created after the church commission found all these you know with the church commission found just by itself you know CIA developments of medications to try and like you know make people lose control of their brains or inject people with diseases like really sinister dark stuff that the CIA was doing that nobody knew about not even the president they just did it on their own. It was a discovery of a secret government inside the government's the idea was we need at least some oversight this oversight they tell nothing to these committees. The people who get put on those committees are people who are the ones who most support these intelligence communities it was run in the Senate for years by Dianne Feinstein. Her husband was a military contractor. She was embedded in these agencies. She defended everything that they did the one time she questioned them which was when she wanted to investigate the use of torture in the CIA. John Brennan CIA spied on Dianne Feinstein and on her entire staff. He got caught doing it. He lied and said he didn't. He finally admitted that it was done. He apologized nowhere. No repercussions. That's about by guns. We're going to go Google. John Brennan spying on that. I'll never forget it. And when that story first broke it was years ago was at least 10 years. He was on the above. He was CIA director under Obama. And I remember thinking I don't think the CIA would ever dare spy on the select committee on the Senate oversight committee of the CIA have the intel community. I mean I can't imagine they would have the balls to do something like that. That's insane. But I had no idea. And they did it on somebody who was one of their most their blindness lulus. The one time she stepped a little bit out of line because she wanted to investigate exactly what happened in the church. At that point like why don't you why have people put up with that? I guess Frank Church did die of incredibly fast acting cancer. So maybe that's why I mean people must be afraid because you'd think out of 435, 535 with the Senate there would be somebody who's like, this is not democracy. This is totally immoral. Like I'm going to just stand up and take them on like, but just let's say that, you know, people had things on you that would as you put it. Destroy your reputation, make your kids think very importantly of you and bears you for the rest of your life or destroy whatever you value in life. It takes a very rare person to say, uh, effort. I'm going to risk that happening. And you know, I think we have this self preservation tactic. That's why those kind of things like blackmail extortion are so effective is because they can force people to know. I think I think you're right. He is. Look at how much these like sexual misconduct allegations are used when Julian Assange really got dangerous. Suddenly I have nowhere up here to women claiming that he, uh, quote unquote rape them because the allegation was they had consensual sex with him, but he didn't use a condom when they had not given their consent to no condom and that became rape under Swedish law. That's what forced him to be Ecuador and embassy and led to everything that happened subsequently. Now with Matt Gates, um, the minute Matt Gates Pete Ex said too, like out of nowhere appears this alleged rape that nobody had heard about that nobody knew about. It's always the thing that always amazes me. This is actually the best example in case anybody thinks, oh, our government doesn't do that. When Daniel Ellsworth leaked the Pentagon papers to the New York Times and the Washington Post. And I remember when I first heard about this, I was kind of confounded about why this happened. Obviously they were saying the normal things you say about people like that. Like, I go, he's a Soviet asset. He hates America. He put troops in harm's way because he showed the public that the government was lying for years about the Vietnam War. Like inside they were saying we can never win. Now, externally they were saying we're on the verge of winning. But what they also did, and it's the only reason Daniel Ellsworth brought gun to do out freeze, right, is they broke into his psycho analyst's office because they wanted to steal all the documents about his most intimate admissions to a psycho analyst about his psychosexual life and fantasies because that was the weapon of choice that they wanted you used to destroy him. That's a fact. The next administration broke into the psycho analyst's office of Daniel Ellsworth when they couldn't find the documents they planned to break in at the guy's house. And that was they finally put a stop to that, but they did break into a psycho analyst's office. And only because of that government misconduct did the judge dismiss the charges against Daniel who otherwise was headed to prison for the rest of his life, why would that be a response to a whistleblower revealing to the press of then reveal to the public that the government was systematically lying about the Vietnam War. It's because if you can have that information over somebody and then use it against them, you destroy. I remember when that happened with joining Assange, no one wanted anything to do with joining Assange anymore. I don't want to mention his name. It's just like, oh, this person's guilty of accused of rape. I just don't want anything to do with so if you could have shown that Daniel Ellsworth had this fantasy or had done this or had done that in the intimacy and privacy of his own life, it just everybody would have wanted to avoid it. It's totally true. Did you ever find yourself on the wrong end of any of that since you were very high profile? I mean, I think the important thing is that if you want to confront the government, if you want to spill secrets, if you want to bring unwanted transparency, which happens to be the job of a journalist, I know people forget that, but that is the job of a journalist. If you're going to another doctor, just put it to try to do. You have to, as best you can guard against that. You have to protect yourself, make sure that your own house is in order as much as possible because that will be a huge vulnerability. But as I said before, everyone has things to hide. There's no one who doesn't. 100%. And it's also true that if you get really attacked in a scary way, you don't want to talk about it. I feel that has happened not sex stuff, but I've definitely felt a lot of pressure. And you don't want to, you know, it's not just sex stuff. Yeah, there's, there's not just all sorts of things in our past that we do that we're there. But are you worried the until agencies would try and hurt you? Yeah. I mean, don't question. Here's the thing, like, I, you know, I think a lot of people remember, but my husband who's now deceased, but at the time, he went to Germany because there was a part of the archive that was corrupted, and we knew there was a lot of work there. And it was with Laura Poitres and she using her genius had figured out how to access it. No one else could, but she didn't trust anybody, including the Guardian, to give it to you to bring to me the only person she trusted was David. I couldn't travel outside Brazil because there was a concern that I would be arrested by the US. So I had to stay in Brazil. So only David could go and get those documents. And the way we talked about it was in a very secure secret way we were using the highest levels of encryption of the time that Snowden's system on. And when David went to Germany, he came back home through, he threw, but at Heathrow, the British arrested him and detained him and threatened to prosecute him under an anti-terrorism law. And the only reason they let him out was because the Brazilian government became a huge story in Brazil. The Brazilian government was like, give us back our studies and immediately. And so they let him go. And then David sued the British government over human rights abuses because they were detaining him for journalism. And the British government said in their papers when they defended their actions, we knew exactly what he was doing in Germany. We knew exactly what he was carrying. And that's the reason why we detained him because we wanted to prevent the secret documents from getting out into the public because it harms British National Security. Now, obviously, we got the archive anyway. And we reported on those documents, but they admitted, they knew, and we're listening to our conversations about why he was going there. They knew when he was going there. They, everything was being tracked. And so when you never figure out how, I knew they were using, I mean, part of the reporting that we did was that the NSA had cracked even the most sophisticated levels of encryption. So things that people thought were safe, there's nothing 100% full proof. And at the time, we were among the most watched people in the world because we had in our hands the most sensitive secrets from the world's most powerful government that we were going around the world publishing to inform people of, journalistic and so of course we knew where we were being spied on by probably a lot of people. It's just that the British were forced to admit it. And when you get that confirmation as opposed to like a belief or suspicion, the level of invasiveness you feel is hard to express because they're not just listening to the parts of your conversations where you're talking about the Snowden document. Oh, I know. Oh, I know firsthand. Yeah. No, I know. Yeah. I mean, you had private conversations leaked as well when you were traveling. Oh, yeah. I was in a big time. A lot of other who didn't had massive problems with Ukrainian and until service, etc., etc. It's not about me. I don't hold any institutional power. It's just interesting if you see what happens in your own life. Just by talking about, I haven't done anything ever. Just sit around studio talk to people. But you know, you see the pressure they apply to you, like what would be like to be, you know, the chairman of the intel committee or the speaker of the house or the president of the United States? Exactly. And I can't even imagine. And it just shows you what a remarkable person Trump is. He is just, he's weirdly resistant to that stuff. And that is that's why they hate him. I mean, remember all the stuff that came out in 2016 when they thought he might win like the how access Hollywood tape that came out of nowhere. And I'm you know, the stormy Daniel stuff, you know, they threw everything out there. And Trump is is a very rare person who's just kind of shameless. Like he doesn't feel a sense of shame. And he doesn't back down no matter what he goes. He gets more aggressive against people who try to force him to is just his instinct. The two years I watched him for many decades when I was a lawyer in New York, when he was a, you know, big real estate vocal constantly being sued in lawsuits. Everybody knew how he was. And that's what is so threatening about him. It's not his ideology or his beliefs. He's a Russia. It's the fact that he's racist. And he's racist. Or that he's a racist. I'm right. None of no one cares about that. No one believes that it's the fact that he's immune to the type of control that for decades they've been able to impose on people who wield any power, let alone the power of the presidency. Well, just type to the, um, the current state of US Russia relations or the war that we're about particularly. How do you, how do you think this ends? I mean, if you're sending in Moscow, obviously if there's a barrage of weapons, you know, aimed at Moscow, St. Petersburg, your major cities, that's one thing. If there's a limited number of missiles aimed in curse, where, you know, Ukrainian forces are, that's another. And obviously they know what we talked about, which is that in about seven weeks, there's going to be a new American president with whom they've dealt extensively. And despite claims that he's some sort of, you know, lack of Putin, he basically did the two things that were most threatening to rush an interest. He sent lethal arms to Ukraine after Obama refused to Trump did. I didn't agree with it, but that's what he did. And what he did even more so that was more threatening damaging to Russia is he spent years trying to battery to Europeans out of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline. Right. He was like, why would you be buying gas from Russia? You're getting dependent on Russia and where the ones who pay for your protection, you should be buying it from us. That's the Nord-selling natural gas to Europe was the anchor, the key to Russian vital interest and Trump threaten those vital interests continuously. So the idea, like anyone who's even a little bit rationally thinking would understand that this claim that he's being blackmailed by Putin, while at the same time he's simultaneously doing the two most threatening things to Russian vital national interest, you would immediately recognize what a fictitious claim that was. So he's being blackmailed by the U.S. insul agencies and in fact more so our government is the fascist state that they claim Russia is exactly so. And that's not so interesting. But but so I think they know that they obviously know Trump's coming in and and they feel like he wants to go in a different direction with the war. And so even though there is going to be pressure on Putin as there would be on the United States and any other country to respond in kind to the NATO and the United States now bombing Russia basically. I think as long as it's limited, as long as it stays limited to curse, as long as it's not, you know, in large numbers, knowing that Trump is coming into office, I think they understand that that's an opportunity to try and end this war without its escalation. I hope again, as you said, we're depending on Putin's restraint and rationality. So is Christmas really about buying stuff? You'll be forgiven if you assumed it is because that's the message you receive. But most people send steeped down there maybe a little bit more to Christmas. Maybe this is the time of year to focus on growing your relationship with God. Remember there is a God and reach out to that God. Well to do that, you can check out Hallo, the Hallo app and its advent pray 25 challenge. Hallo is the world's number one prayer meditation app. And for good reason, it's amazing. It's fantastic. We use it. We're proud this Advent. We highly recommend you join Hallo's prayer challenge for God so loved the world. Boy, that'll put meaning in your Christmas for sure. Got spiritual stories, reflections, musics, testimonies. It's really well done. You're not going to get it anywhere else in as easy a form. Just go to Hallo, download it, and bam it's right there. So this is an opportunity to be transformed by God this Christmas. Don't wait. Get there three free months right now when you sign up at hallo.com slash Tucker. My wife comes home and tells me all about it every day. Spend this Christmas working on something that matters your relationship with God. Maybe the only thing that matters. We hope you will. Hallo. So among the many people Donald Trump has spoken to since winning a week and a half ago is Joan Mika. And that Joe Scarborough Mika Brzezinski, they have a very low rated show on MSNBC, which I do think has outsized influence. The numbers are really are small. People in Washington, watch it. That's exactly it. That's exactly right. And so I think the show does have influence. I disagree with every single word ever uttered on that show, but I don't think it's totally insignificant. It's not joy read. So they went to Mar-a-Lago to meet with Trump. What do you make? And then now they're saying, well, we went because we were afraid that we're going to be persecuted if we didn't kiss the ring or something like, what? No, it's what they're excuse to be more pathetic, which is we're journalists. You have to go and talk to the people in power. But I think those two in particular are singularly pathetic. And I realize saying singularly pathetic in the context of employees of the corporate media seems like a designation that no one deserves alone. But I think in their case, they really merit that distinction because I think like most of the people who work in corporate media, like the racial madhouse and like the war. And so Donalds and the Donald lemons and those kind of people, I think they believe all the insane on his stuff. I think they really believe that there's a Russian agent that Putin is blackmailing him that Trump wants to like put them in camps. Like I think it's insane. But I credit for at least actually saying what they really believe is as preposterous and laughable as it is. Joe Scarborough has no beliefs other than his own advancement and self-importance. Okay. Let's remember in the 1990s he was elected, none is a Republican Congressman. But as a radical conservative liar, the whole yeah, Gingrich like young fire brands were going to go in and like radically reform the re you know, change the country and Washington. No more of that anywhere in Joe Scarborough like this radical transformation of institutional power. And then as Megan Kelly said, no show did more to boost Donald Trump in 2015 and 2016 in the in the in the Republican primary than Joe and Mika, they were down at Mar-a-Lago all the time. They love Trump. They were best friends with Trump. They laughed with him. They let him call another show all the time apart because it was very beneficial to that show. It was the only thing that rated he Trump saved all their jobs. But they also love just being proximate to power like that. That's the thing that they crave most. And then once what really happened was Scarborough thought that he was going to be chosen as Trump's vice president, he really wanted to and when Trump rejected him in favor of Mike Pence. And then also MSNBC turned into this fanatical anti Trump network where the only people who watch were Trump haters at both at a personal upfront, but also at a survival, they had to turn into a full on Trump hating show. You couldn't have the morning show of three hours be someone positive toward or neutral about Trump on the whole rest of the network. Everyone who watch me and I says to you to post respect, I'm just suggesting this Scarborough who I used to know really well. He thought he was going to be V.E. Yeah. That's what they remember how close they were. I know I remember that. I didn't know. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's should come to the United States more often. I learned a lot. And by the way, distance is what enables me to learn things. So yeah, that was a big part of it. And but also it was survival at MSNBC. And so they turned into these, you know, Joe Scarborough, Mr. Radical conservative. Let's change all the way. He became Mr. Institutionalist. You know, the people he had on a show are like Richard Haas and like Norm Ornstein, like all these issues. These like council on foreign relations. Thank you. Thanks people who were obsessed with hating Trump as well. And it became ground zero for Trump as Hitler. They were saying as recently as two months ago or a month ago, like Trump is comparable to Adolf Hitler. He is a Nazi figure. Nika Bresinski went on the view and cried and said Trump wants to murder women. Women are going to die because of Donald Trump. He's a fascist. He's a racist. They said it every day over and over. And then Trump wins. And their whole influence was because they were Joe Biden's favorite show. Joe Biden would wake up at like 6 a.m. like many geriatrics do because he went to bed at like 7 o'clock p.m. And he would watch morning Joe. And then he would hear, you know, Joe Biden is the greatest president. So, if the art, Joe Scarborough said that he personally can assure the country having spent so much time around Joe Biden that he's sharper than ever. He runs intellectual circles around all the Republicans were claiming that he's cognitively impaired. There's like a month before the debate he was saying that. So, of course, they Joe Biden watched that show every day. That's what gave Joe Scarborough her sense of importance was like, oh, I'm close to the White House. He was at the White House all the time. Now Biden's gone. Biden's not asked anymore. Trump is back in power. And one of the things that has happened amazingly since the since Comma's loss is that the MSNBC audience, which is already tiny, has basically completely disappeared. Like the number of people watching those shows when they're live in prime time with that big gigantic corporate power behind them promoting it. It's less than a lot of like YouTube shows. Yeah, including like, I don't mean like the cumulative audience of how many people watch YouTube, oh, YouTube video at the end of the day, I just mean live watching. Again, Bongino show has, I think, unrumble has like five or six or seven times more viewers than MSNBC's prime time. This is unrumble, you know, which a lot of people don't even know about, don't even watch. That audience is gone. In part because they feel disillusioned that the people they trusted who told them Trump is going to prison. The whole Trump family was going to prison. Trump could never win. He was going to be in jail before the election. All the women were going to rise up and vote for Kamala out of anger toward Trump. None of that happened. And they're like, I've been watching this show every day for nothing. It was I was it not have been happened. None of it was true. And that audience is gone. Half out of disillusionment anger, but half out of just like kind of checking out through impudence and helplessness. And I think that their desperate, the only way they think they can get people to come back on is to have Trump come back on their show. And their Trump is going to make them crawl around on the floor multiple times. Like a dog. They were like, Joe and Mika were like, Trump was incredibly cheerful and happy. Of course he was. He loves seeing you humiliate yourself because you know, he knows you need them now. I don't think that, you know, weekly interview at Trump, which is not going to happen anyway. But even if it did was going to save MSNBC, no, because who would watch it no conservative are going to trust that show or MSNBC. And no liberals want to see MSNBC host. Do you know how angry liberals are about just even the fact that Joe and Mika went to tomorrow. So who who's the audience for that? They're caught like Liz Cheney. Well, you know, I have to say of all the reasons I'm so grateful that Kamala lost, seeing Democrats turn on Liz this Cheney and seeing her stranded between the parties and no man's lands to best. Honestly, I can't there's a piece by John Nichols in the nation today. I don't read the nation much anymore. But you know, occasionally the nation is like kind of true to itself, but not always, but so I'm not, I don't agree with it. But John Nichols wrote this piece about Kamala Harris say where he he goes through like all the places that she went with Liz Cheney went with Kamala Harris and like, don't I did it not work? She turned off for Republicans. Like the idea was, you know, we've got Liz Cheney campaigning with us a lot of Republicans are like Donald Trump will vote for us. It's like just the opposite happened. You know, it was so predictable and so obvious. It was pretty also like what made Kamala's campaign like for the six seconds that it seemed like it had some like air to it. What is this like vibrancy of young people, you know, like celebrating the emergence right? Right? Right? Yeah. Totally. And so you then take Liz Cheney and like send Bill Clinton to Michigan to like lecture everybody in the Muslim community. I'm going to hear the H2 because you've been buying it Israel about how the Israelis are totally right. And it's all the fault of the Arabs. And then you take Liz Dick Cheney's daughter with you through the Rust Belt where like all those policies devastated their lives, all those wars. And you think Liz, think about, I mean, this is the thing. Think about how out of touch and cloistered in a bubble. You have to be to think that you're going to win an election depending on people who are in the working class who feel alienated from society who feel like DC doesn't work for you by taking the daughter of like the face of the American establishment Dick Cheney around with you as if she's your running mates. And people are craving change and you have sitting there with Liz Cheney like that through old people only know because she was the vice president's daughter. Her dad was Dick Cheney and not just Dick Cheney, but somebody who supports a whole range of policies that Americans vehemently reject now. And I think that's more than anything. What people like people on media have finally had to come to grips with is first of all, it's good that Liz Cheney actually isn't the secretary of defense secretary of state. That also is good. Even though there are a couple of of people in Trump's campaign who have very similar views like Caribbean, Liz Cheney and Elise demonic, but we'll be that aside. It's good that Liz Cheney specifically is not any of those positions. But I think the best thing is that you have all these people inside these cloistered bubbles in Washington, who really thought that they were the conscience of the nation, the voice of the nation. And not only were they applauding the decision to take Liz Cheney, but they have been spending eight years claiming that Donald Trump is a white supremacist who wants to put minorities in camps and not only did Donald Trump win the election, but there is millions of nonwhite voters who for the first time left the Democratic Party and went to vote for Trump. So imagine you wasted eight years of your life screaming and screeching like a petulant bird who has been like shot. Donald Trump's a race has seen the fascist. He only like white people and then you watch millions of Latino people and black people and people and Muslims refused to vote for Kamala Harris. You obviously like, I have no influence at all. I'm completely out of time. Well, but it's so good to know that about yourself. This happened to me by the way, they're all kind vehemently opposed to abortion, which I think is like horrifying. And but lots of people don't agree with me. And so I see this, you know, wrote. So I mean, that's happened to me by the way, they're all kind of vehemently opposed to abortion, which I think is like horrifying. And but lots of people don't agree with me. And so I see these you know, Roe v Wade comes down and you see these bout initiatives, so you know, we're going to allow abortion until birth. And I'm like, wow, I'm so glad it's up for a vote. And then it turns out the voters just don't agree with me at all. Even in red states, it's true. It's true. Like, that was hard for me to accept because I am, I never talked about it, but I was just so, I'm so sincere on this subject. I'm just, I'm not for abortion period. And so, but you have to be real like, okay, sometimes people agree with you. Sometimes they don't. But there's something about the democratic base, which really is just basically just like unhappy college educated white ladies. That's really who it is. Honestly, I mean, they say that they're like, we're, we're relying on affluent women in the suburbs. That's exactly, but the unhappy ones, I mean, I'm related to some happy ones that are not voting for Kamala Harris, but the one who are sort of disappointed in their husbands and in their lives or whatever I get it. I'm not being mean, but it's just true. But they should know that they're in the subset of a subset and that not everyone agrees them. I think that's the beginning of wisdom. I mean, it has been for me like not everyone agrees. I know that's okay. But the thing is, you were just saying you read the nation sometimes. Yeah. I go out of my way to read everything everybody. Me too. You know, I try and have people in my life to have very different views on, you know, I have a lot of people in my life in Brazil. For example, who worshiped blue. I have a lot of people in my life hate, little worshipable scenario. People who are in between. I want that. Like I want to hear constantly from you want to be challenged all the time, not be ossified. I'm telling you, I know a lot of these people. I used to be on MSNBC all the time. I've been friends with a lot of the people who they were. You know, though, they despise me with burning passion. But in part because nobody hates things more than no one, the person always most hated as the one perceived as the hair attack. Of course. You know, but I was never really on their side in the way that they thought actually anyway, but anyway, it doesn't matter. The I know a lot of these people and what has happened on MSNBC is that or places like in your times, a bed page similar. People who support Trump don't exist in that world. There's not one op ed pay writer at the New York Times of the dozens who is a Trump supporter, even though half the country is more than half the country. Like Ross do thousands like the person closest to like sort of understanding the Trump movement, but he certainly doesn't like Donald Trump at all. And other than that, they just don't have it doesn't exist in the world. There's nobody ever on the MSNBC on their shows who brings that perspective of why they support Donald Trump. So if you're only talking to people who are like minded and a lot of them have now left Twitter trying to go to some other platform, we're only they're only there. They don't want it. They really don't want to hear any dissent. And you're living a certain kind of life. You know, they're well paid. They like are coister in these like affluent places in the United States, in the East Coast, like Brooklyn and Manhattan and Washington and Northern Virginia. How do you not realize that the life you're leading is so fundamentally different from the people on whose behalf you claim to be speaking? And I do think a lot of them, even though they're going to resist it in battle it, have to swallow this election as a complete repudiation of not just themselves, but their entire purpose life, their entire function. Again, I just want to say how non-judgmental I feel about this, that has happened to me. I've been fired. I have found my views repudiated by the public at large. Those are very important moments to me personally. They made me a better person. So I am hoping that they internalize the pain and learn from it. Do you think they will? Yeah. I mean, what always of me is me is like, you know, I really did grow up like a working the last environment, but my whole life that was the only one. Yeah. No, I mean, there are other people who grew up like, you know, I was like poor, but I was not even near middle class. I'm working with Donald. Yeah. My mom worked at McDonald's. She like, my parents got to fourth when I was seven. My father was an accountant. He had three marriages. Actually, you are alone. Like, I don't know anybody. And I mean this. I don't know anybody in journalism. I know people as mom worked at McDonald's. I don't know anyone in journalism is mom worked at McDonald's. Well, I guess my point is that like, of course, that shaped me for a long time, but I realize now that that's not my life any longer. Like, it hasn't been for, you know, 10 years, 15 years. Like, my life has been very separate from that. So I have a great amount of humility about my ability to speak for people who have a different kind of life because of course, the way you live shapes your perspective, shapes your understanding, shapes your priorities. And it amazes me that these people don't have that humility at all. And so I think they're resisting it. Like, there, you know, that was what Obama did remember when he was like, yeah, I know there's a lot of black men who don't want to vote for a combo who are going to over Trump. That's because you all hate women and you're misogynists. And then they're basically saying the reason a lot of Latino and arrogant douchebag to say something like that. And you know, and there's a perfect example. Like he spends all his time in like Richard Branson's yacht. Yeah, I know. And you know, just with the highest level of jet set and any things he's going to go and speak to like black or working class man, you disagree with me. You're a bigot. That's like, that's such a crazy place to start any conversation. It's so alienating. And I think this kind of condescension that, but the other thing is like the main argument is that they're all stupid. Like their victims of disinformation, their misled, they have all these alternative media they're listening to that don't have the controls that have with us with the, they're getting fall. You know, basically they're stupid. They're, they're like, they're easily misled, they're gullible. So either they're racist or misogynist or stupid, that's their explanation. That's the thing they're clinging to. You know, like, oh, they don't realize how good they had it under Biden. Now great. The economy is how much Kamala Harris and Joe Biden did for them. They just don't because they were told that it was untrue. They can't figure it out for their on their own. Like the condescension wreaked out of it. Like just it oozes out of every poor of their being. And then they wonder why people despise them in their culture and their subculture. It's who wants that it is nauseating. But despite, so what I'm saying is that they're not, they don't have the attitude you had, which is like, oh, it's actually good to be humbled to like realize that things that you thought about the world need to be reevaluated. There's no self criticism, no reflection. In fact, every Democrat thinks like, oh, yeah, I know why we lost. It's been what I was saying all along. None of them are saying that. But you know, they're like Democrats did this and Kamala did that. And you know, they all are trying to pretend that if people had just listened to them, the Democrats would have won, even though all on they were like, oh, Kamala is running the most brilliant campaign ever. But what I'm saying is that the result is so overwhelming, so kind of pointed and devastating to their world of view. As I said, I think the thing that has really shaken them the most, even though they're fighting it, they're not embracing it. They're fighting it. But they can't is that so many non white voters who yeah, are the and Trump made huge gains in almost every non white sector of society. I mean, Trump was saying that in Jersey and New York or swing states and people were laughing at him. And he only lost New Jersey by five points. And did the best any Republican has done in in New York City in many, many years because of how many black, Latino, and worse Asians and Muslims voted for Trump non white voters. And so when that happens, like, you don't even get to blame white people, but you you you have to accept that the people who you think you own who have mindless loyalty to you disobeyed you and didn't listen to you. That's what makes them feel really shaken. It's just it's a slave revolt. And if you read the accounts of people who live through slave revolts, not just in the American South, but like in Haiti or you know, anywhere there always wherever you have slavery, you've got slave revolts at some point, they're always so shocked. Like they they they they can't believe that like the nanny came after them with the knife. Like we thought you loved us. It's so it's the world. I mean, those people central to their worldview is that their benevolent leaders of these people. It's like that seen in the animal house. Oh, it is. He loves us. During does drunk frat boy. Yeah, no, people always imagine that the people they control their employees, their serfs love them and what they need to understand. I think this is just true in life is that the people subordinate to resent you. They may like you, but they also resent you. There's just the support and it's alone. That's what I'm saying. Right. And it's one of the reasons you see hostility among women toward Mendeston general. Not not defining characteristic, but there's a little bit of there's a little bit of that if you're in a sexual position, you're like a little man about it. I'm just I'm sorry. I think that sorry to like channel Dr Freud, but there's some truth in them. And I mean, it's probably what I'm about to I've said this so many times. Like just if you belong to one of these so called marginalized groups, that liberals think they own yeah, have an entitlement to control. Do you will never see more naked and unadorned bigotry and temptuous bigotry that you will see toward individuals within that group who disobey. Obviously, I remember when I really started splitting from the left, I never had real homophobia in my entire life before I only started seeing it like once I had that. What once you questioned before you remember the L. B. G. T. community. Right. Exactly. And a pedophile whatever you know all that things are. And then serious. Oh yeah. And then you know, like the way they have always talked about I'm sorry to laugh. No, it's it's amazing. It's the way they talk about Clarence Thomas. Oh, I know. You know, any black person who's who's been a conservative, same with like women who are you know, I, Gloria Steinem said about the people, the young women who were refusing to vote for Hillary and voting for Bernie when asked like why they were doing that. She's like, because young girls go where the boys are. You know, like the most demeaning and something thing you can say about women that they they don't think on their own. They just like mindlessly do whatever the boys are. Right. And so now you're seeing this like, oh yeah, like Latinos like our very misogynistic, conservative, so our black men, eight women, you know, they're easily misled. They're low information voters. You know, the amount of contempt that liberal elites have for these non white voters who didn't do as they're told is almost scary to scary because it's a psychological condition. That's of course why they hate whites that they've been because they're losing the white vote. And the second they started to lose the white vote, then whites became the problem in the country. It's like, where's all the Santa weight hate coming from? Well, it's coming from the Democratic Party institutionally because they're being rejected by white folks. Yeah. And they were ready to they thought they were going to get white women that are going to embrace like white women were going to rise up and join them against Trump at a majority of white women voted for Trump. Incredible. So they're going to get, I mean, I will say to his Hispanics in the United States, you're about to be the subject of a hate coming. Oh, and like the and Muslims too who didn't want to vote for Kamala because the person, you know, because they were feeding Israel. I can't tell you how many times I've seen, I can't wait till you people are deported. I can't wait till you blow up in Gaza. There's a sentiment like you're going to get what you deserve and I'm going to laugh about it and I'm going to cheer it. Same with the with Latinos. I can't wait till you're deported. You're going to get what you deserve when you're a boy lies is deported. Like really sick stuff. Joy read. I'm not talking about obscure people on the internet. Like she's gone on the air almost every night and talked that way. Let's attack attack the his face. Yeah. Well, and and Muslims and Arabs. Well, so the best part about this is the language barrier and very so few liberals like even bothered to listen to what people actually think or say they just they're not interested, you know, it's like they treat everyone like a three year old. But when they find out the social views of your average central American, which I find hilarious and kind of great, but whatever, leaving my views aside, the average social views of a central American just on the social issues are so far out of what's considered acceptable. Like, but they have no idea which is so ironic because democratic strategists used to openly boast about what if you say you'll get called as replacement theory that over going to import all these people into United States, make them citizens and they're going to be supporters of the democratic party and we're going to rain forever like a thousand years because these are all our voters. And they get here and they find out that actually that, but I have to say like there's a great article in New York magazine, which is words that cast my lips very, very rarely where this writer who actually wrote a very critical profile of me like five years ago. So who is a his name is Simon. I just I just talked to him today about this article because it's a great article. I would I'm bears. I don't know his name, but that camera is last name. It's hyphenated. So it's just a little complicated. But anyway, I really recommend this article. He just went what he did was he purposely went to black Latino Asian neighborhoods where there was a lot of Trump votes and he just walked around on the street talked to as many people as he could. He voted for Trump about why. And what I think people don't understand is that the Latino and black NGO presidents who get put on TV were supposedly there at this point. But have lessened common with the people on who have their speaking, then like the white host of the shows way less. And so you go there. Certainly less than me. I mean, I've like got attitudes that are pretty popular in those. Right. Exactly. But still like a lot of them were just like as far from being like, you know, deceived by disinformation, they were like, there's a Democratic party that supported NAFTA. I like we're having trouble paying for our health care or food for our kids and they're sending billions of dollars to Ukraine and to Israel to all these other countries. They're just talking about the struggles that they have in their lives and the way in which the government doesn't care. There's some social issues stuff too. But once you get to the United States, you become a citizen, you integrate pretty quickly. And the thing you you'll sit around thinking about trans people or whatever gay marriage or these are ancillary issues, even if they don't agree with them or credit party on they might then might contribute to the alienation, the fact that, you know, they had that's why that Kamala ad was effective. Not because people are sitting around thinking about whether trans people should get a government funded sex risk, time and start reason in prison. But because it was like a proxy for explaining that these people have nothing in common with your lives. They don't care about you. They don't care about your values. Had they felt economically satisfied. I don't think that would resonate because that's not what people care about. But most of them are just worried about the same thing everybody else is worried about. And they finally got to the point where they were less. So they're even more worried. Exactly. They're the people who get most affected, especially by immigration. Totally. I mean, the people who lose their jobs with immigration often are not my people black, black working class, Latino working class. And they feel resentful about everything that's being done for it. You know, there was a lot of, oh, they're giving free housing and free meals to illegal immigrants while I can't feed my family. I really recommend the article. It's it's not done with caricature. It's not like hand picking a few comments. It's a very long article. And it just lets these people speak for themselves in a very revealing way. What's just so funny is you live in Brazil, which is another continent. You've been there a while. How many years? 20 years. 20 years. But I bet if I called you the week before the election, once you should have done, but I got busy. But if I said like, what do you think black and Latino people, man married people in New York City around the country, what do you think they think politically? I bet you would have been pretty cool. I know you would have figured this out. Yeah, I was talking about this. We don't even live here. I know, but I went to your like for the first 38 years of my life. It's the only country of which I've ever been a citizen. I've here all the time. But I do think that and then how do you know that? And they don't. That's the point. I think that distance gives you a perspective like the fact that I'm my friends are not media and political people in New York and Washington that I'm not cooked, cooked into their to their worldview that I'm not subsumed with that that I'm not dependent upon it in any way. Gives me. I think you brought a perspective like if you live in Northern Virginia and you like spend all your time in Washington and green rooms or New York, you're going to be so distorted. And the things that you think about the world. But also I think you have to like go out of your way to to to okay. I don't want to be told what people think by other people who are reporting to their spokespeople. I want to hear from them directly. I want to look at the polling data. I want to understand what they're thinking. And you can just see it. You could hear it. You could feel it. You could observe it analytically in that data. But they just I remember people on and CNN saying, you know, I think it was Van Jones or no, it was Bakari Sellers who was like, I can I don't care what the polls say. I can guarantee you there won't be more than 5% of black men voting for Donald Trump. I don't care what the polls say. There won't be anywhere near 15% of, you know, he Bakari Sellers said that. Oh, yeah. Just like I don't care what the polls say. I'm not like a you know, I'm not a huge expert on black America. And I don't have a million black friends. But I've some actual like actual friends. I don't know a liberal black guy. I know some who vote for Democrats or whatever, but I don't know. I literally don't know except like the guys you see in green rooms going to Princeton or like fake preachers or something. But like actual black men, I don't know any. The only ones are in the media. The ones that you don't know any person ever even that one. Right. And so like what? And but this has been if you think about the Democratic party, the thing you fear most is that these groups that have been voting for you for generations and have been passed had loyalty's passed down from their parents, their parents who don't even think about not voting for you at the election. Once that breaks, I'm not saying that those people who voted for Trump will never vote Democrat again. But now they know there's an option. They're free people who get to decide for themselves who they want. And nothing is more alarming or or patrefying to Democratic party elites than seeing that. I think it's really good. It's good for the country. The Democratic party in its, you know, current iteration is just is almost purely destructive. And shouldn't be you need a two party system where both parties are represented. It's integrated. Like yeah, I remember like the smartest Republicans, like J.D. Vance, Josh Hotley, like the ones who really understand that you can't have the same Republican party as you did in 1980 have always been describing the future of their Republican party as a multiracial working class coalition. And to watch people identifying primarily based on their citizenship and their class. That's what you want. As opposed to constantly being divided by race. You want is so a man promising to see what's essential or else you have Rwanda. I mean, because you know, your class can change. But your race doesn't change. And so if you engender conflict on the basis of immutable characteristics, it's not solvable. And so you don't want to ever do that. You make people hate each other based on how much they make. Okay, where they live even, but they're skin color. But as you say, that gives them the idea of change. Like, hey, we can change the government. Well, that's exactly right. Exactly. Where's immutable characteristic by definition. No, no, no, that's like, that's like Albanian blood feud that last 800 years. Like you can't do that. But that has been the predominant liberal mindset is to encourage people to see themselves as part of insulated factions who hate other factions based on those characteristics. And there's almost nothing more offensive to me about what American liberalism writ large has done than trying impose that framework on people to divide people based on things that in fact don't divide them. Well, yeah, especially since the experience of just like living in this country, you know, it was so different from what they described. But I've always been on the right. I've never had anybody, anybody whose black or Hispanic or nonwhite ever attacked me one time in public as a racist of only had affluent white women attacked me that way. I don't see people hating in trouble on the basis of race. I don't. I'm sure there's races. I know that there is because people are flawed, but it's not a defining fact in this country that I have ever known. I don't know what the hell they're talking about. I mean, they're trying to scare the shit out of people to get their votes. That's it. Well, and obviously millions of nonwhite people agree with these people. Yeah, and voted for the white candidate over the black one. I know. And the white candidate who they were told was Adolf Hitler and wanted to put all white people in camps. They were looking around. They're like, that's not my experience. So I got to, one last question. Like, we began the conversation with the war that we're now in. I weren't a war with Russia. And that really is something that the Biden administration is doing to punish the incoming Trump administration, I think, and to prevent it from acting, you know, with the autonomy and administration should have. But they're also going to leave all behind all kinds of, I mean, they're not going to spend the next seven weeks doing nothing. And one of the things they're going to try to do is increase censorship, I think, over the next seven weeks, or am I just being paranoid? I think you're right, they're obviously not going to do nothing. They're going to try and fortify everything as much as possible from the kind of change that the American people just voted for. The party of democracy is going to be that. Centorship in my view began like systemic censorship on the internet began as a reaction to 2016 without questions both to Brexit, but without question. That's right. That's when you saw the emergence of these highly well funded disinformation experts that can caution of this fake expertise called disinformation experts. How do people get to be that? Where do you go to school to be a disinformation expert? Like a floating arbiter of truth, but they needed to radically intensify censorship because they blamed free speech and the free flow of information on, they blamed that for Brexit first, but especially for Trump's victory. And they wanted to crack down on that. There's always now an ongoing effort to try and crack down on that. I think though what they're going to try and do is look at the areas that they believe Trump is trying most radically to change beginning with foreign power. That's foreign policy. The thing that they value most, that's the by far, you know, central piece of how America runs in their view. And they're going to spend as much their time subverting him and sabotaging him in advance, even though he just won the election by a pretty like solid margin. And there are some things that'll be reversible, but if you escalate the war in Ukraine and Trump now is coming into a war that the Russians perceive accurately to be not just a proxy war with the West behind Ukraine, but where NATO is actually bombing Russia, it becomes infinitely more difficult to keep under control and to resolve. The problem is that the risks of this are so great that it actually sickens me more than almost anything I've ever seen that they're willing to do this on the way out. Just prevent this worth mending and trifling with the risk of a nuclear exchange with the lives of every person on earth. Yeah. I just got to close by saying there's been internals in my whole life. I, you know, spent a lot of time around journalists braggy about the risk they take. I've never known a journalist who's been threatened with prison more times than you have probably once every six months. I just check to make sure that you're not imprisoned. I'm a friend. Do that too. I'm always assuming you're going to wind up in prison for challenging the powerful and revealing what they're actually doing. So I just want to say congratulations on remaining free. Thank you. I appreciate that. It's not always been such an easy task. There have been times when I've gotten pretty close, including recently, but I feel like if you're not hated by and feel and perceived as a threat by people in power, you're not doing your job. That's for sure. What I really believe. Well, then by that measure, the most successful journalists of our generation, which I already thought it anyway, but congratulations. Thank you. Glenn Graywell. Always good to see you. Thank you. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing our show. I know shocking that in an election year with everything at stake, Google would be putting its thumb on the scale and preventing you from hearing anything that the people in charge don't want you to hear, but it turns out it's happening. So what can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. I'm not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information. That's true. It's not intentionally deceptive. And the way to do that on YouTube, we think, is to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. You'll have a much higher chance of hearing what we say and we hope you will.