Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen or perhaps good evening if you're in an internet time zone What does that even mean if you're somewhere else on the planet? That's what I'm trying to say This episode and by the way, just we just had another thing We had to go forward in time. Did you get that right? Yeah stuff jumped forward Especially when you're at a bar hammered. Yeah my dad was an hour late picking me up at the airport yesterday Of course because if you got this episode was brought to you by stamps.com. Here's a way to save time other than that Going to the air or going to the post office to send your packages is always a pain in the ass Getting the measured on scale and if you're running a small business and you're selling shit online If you're not you should do that because it's way better than having a boss But stamps.com is a way that you can do it all from the comfort of your own home with your own home computer and a regular printer You can print US postage right there in your office They give you a free digital scale if you use the code word JRE and their $110 bonus offer Which includes $55 a free postage and a free digital scale that you are not to use for mushrooms and You can measure your packages and print official US postage right there from your office and send it through stamps.com It saves you a ton of money and you know all you have to do is package everything up Print up put the labels on give them to the postman. Thank you You cut a whole process out if the postage changes stamps.com is on the ball ahead of time So you have to worry about it and you really shouldn't be fucking complaining about postage. I'm so tired be stamps on up to 49 That is the bargain of the universe 49 cents and you can take a piece of paper across the country. Yeah, that's fucking ridiculous You would even complain about that and some dude in shorts will bring it to your door They would car that has a steering wheel the wrong side of the road indoors. That's just commitment Is commitment to live delivering you mail? Yep Anyway, go to stamps.com before you do anything click on the microphone on the homepage and type in JRE that stamps.com JRE we're also brought to you by Ting With Ting is a mobile company that does things Well, they they like to try to cut out all the bullshit that you normally get when you have cell phone service all the bullshit like like early termination fees and These add-ons that you weren't aware of when you signed up to for a contract They don't have contracts. You can't sell any time you want They sell you only what you use so instead of having not you have a hundred monthly minutes How often you fucking use a hundred minutes? I mean shouldn't you just pay for what you use? Well, that's how Ting has it set up if you use more you pay more if you use less You pay less but the bottom line is that 98% of people would save money if they use Ting Ting is also a company that uses the sprint backbone So it's a real cell phone provider. It's not some Mickey Mouse shit that somebody slapped together with duct tape It's fucking sprint and you can get a cell phone from them one of the highest-end Android phones available like they have the HTC one which is a beautiful phone. They have the Samsung phones the Galaxy S4 The Galaxy Note 3 they have all the high-end beautiful Android phones And you just feel better about the transaction. It doesn't feel icky It feels like you're giving them money for a good service But you know I ain't fucked with any weird shit that they tackle sounds like a burner phone. Jeff sounds like what senators do you think To figure out mail over yeah, and drug dealers in Baltimore. No, it's an awesome company Go to rogan.ting.com and save $25 off your first device You know, they're also working with iPhones now. Yes. Just recently they started allowing iPhones. Yeah, which is great But you know the iPhone thing is I've got a weird thing going on with them because of this Bitcoin thing I think Bitcoin is a fascinating subject and Yeah, there's gonna be people that blow a lot of money on it. There's gonna be it's gonna go up and down I mean there's a lot going on with it people maybe trying to sabotage it But the bottom line is you can't get an Apple Bitcoin wallet app Like they canceled their app that I had 120,000 downloads. I don't know But that's disrespectful to the community to the Bitcoin community in my opinion I don't know if Bitcoin's ever gonna work out or not work out But I do know that I don't want to support a company that does something like that Like if if these applications are doing something deceptive Then I think there should be some sort of a press release explaining what deceptive practices were being done by these apps Made you remove them, but I find it odd if I can get all these different Bitcoin wallets for Android But when I look on an iPhone this fucking nothing. I don't that's that can't be a coincidence You can't tell me that that Google is so Negligent that they allow these people to get on their their their network and sell these apps and No one is no one's stopping all the exploits no one's stopping on the bullshit or is Apple just keeping them from coming on their platform Who knows it's interesting yeah, but I think this is a Critical time for something like a Bitcoin because it's what it's not even about it might not even about Bitcoin It might be about what Bitcoin becomes and you know people saying it's not perfect They want to kill it. Oh wow. Whoa whoa whoa slow the fuck down. Why would you kill this? Like what is this let's look at what this could be because what it is right now is like some sort of a computer program and a new form of currency, but if you kill it it never grows into what it could have become We money used to be fucking knots on a rope Okay, they used to be like these weird handmade coins made of precious metals right and now it's paper Like how did it now it's numbers? It's ones it's zeros It's numbers in a computer somewhere You can't tell me that money can't evolve like everything else like a fucking processing system Like like like a computer like like a television things get more complex They get better. They tighten down. They figure out you've got all these smart people working on this Bitcoin thing There's a lot of really intelligent people invested in this idea of making the economy More stable with this sort of a currency a currency that can't be fucked with Or trace that's fascinating like isn't it like more a knot? It's more anonymous. That's yes. Yes. It's more anonymous. Yeah, you know what man I think that we the idea of only going the way we're going and only using the the methods that we're using right now It's ridiculous. I think it's ridiculous. Well, and also the upper level of Currency trading is always has been virtual for a long time. Yeah, you know when banks borrow overnight rates and all that kind of stuff There's no there's no movement of paper going on. It's just a computer click here there. Yeah, we got way off track This is supposed to be a tin commercial But I get fucking crazy when it comes to these things. Yeah, I'm sorry. I mean I got a wedding years ago Who's this world famous seashell expert? I sat with him at the same table so we were chatting boring wedding and sounds like a boring fucking Conversate Like this guy is he gave up because you know Cassie mentioned Mozambique and he's like oh, I've been to Mozambique four times collecting shells It's like this amazing place. So I mean the guy goes all over the way Anyway, he told me you know how we're talking about currency when the Dutch supposedly bought Manhattan Island from the Indians for Wampum, right? They paid them in Wampum. Yeah, and what Wampum was as most school kids know is seashells like zone onto a belt Yeah, but what he told me was that they are a particular type of seashell that only grew in this one bay that was controlled by this one tribe So they sort of had a monopoly. It's like the America the dollar at this point the reserve currency, right? And it would emanate out from there so what the touch did was they went and figured out what shell it was and they figured out how to Cultivate that mollusk themselves So within a couple of years they had an unlimited supply counterfeit the counterbelly Exactly people always come in that's the story. Yeah, well and all currency You can fuck with all currents. Yeah by definition whatever, you know It always has been that way. Yeah, but now it's it's all virtual. It doesn't even there's not even a coin to fake anymore Well, it's not the whole I guess we already done these commercials right we say roga dot thing calm We did right so it's just not even play music just keep going Feels weird when you break up conversations like this But was the idea about gold and precious minerals being there's very few of them is a finite amount So that this is a good thing to base money on because it's you know people have sort of always kind of recognized It's got to be like a way to put a cap on it. Yes Cut away keep the way to keep this thing it doesn't totally make sense for Controlling everything about when you think about what money really is. It's so bizarre It's all because it's not human Okay, it's not thinking But it seems to be an organism it seems to be something that requires you to love it So it allows you to connect yourself to all these material items that fill up this weird Whole in your your idea of the world. I'll tell you what it is a holes of perception perception It's a Western God Right because it's power hungry it accumulates power. It's jealous It doesn't want any other currencies in existence. It wants to control the market and it only works if everybody believes in it That's a that is a that's the dark way to put it I've heard it put it positive way which is it just represents the life flow it represents this flow of energy That's always coming through the universe and it's kind of like one manifestation of that energy flow And if you look at it like that instead of demonizing it, which I've definitely done in the past and just see it as just this thing that sort of It's like you we know when you throw pain on the invisible man or something, you know, it like it reveals this kind of Flow through the universe that's where you get into the secret stuff, you know like if you very generous more comes back You know yeah, but don't you think that money does have Characteristics. I mean don't you think there are predictable things that happen to a person's life on a bunch of money comes into it Yeah, no doubt that I think money is objectively toxic You think so I you know, it's I think it's not it's literally toxic when you consider all the Disgusting people who Handle that shit all the fear sweat that soaks into it is Okay, huh? I don't think that money is inherently toxic I think people with power inherently toxic. Yeah, I don't think it doesn't anything do with money I think the real corrupting factor of money is that they want Someone if you if you everybody wants it, okay? Is so if everybody wants it It's someone at some point in time is gonna try to control the flow of other people acquiring it because then I don't have fear with them And so then it becomes this chimpanzee competition thing It's not that money is toxic because you could take wealthy people who make a lot of money who do a lot of good things with it And they seem to be really nice, you know, and they they have this ability to help and affect all sorts of other folks Like Bill Gates. I don't know anything about Bill Gates But what I know about watching Bill Gates is it's like constant charity work. Okay, but let's take this back to where you started right with The Apple shutting down the Bitcoin right the way Bill Gates got rich the way Microsoft got where they are is by shutting down Competition every time somebody rose that would challenge windows they would shut it down buy them out drive them out of business Mm-hmm. They're like the Walmart or software. That's where everybody bitches about how shitty windows is but like there's not You can't not use windows if you're in a big company in the 90's Well, that's also because they got a stronghold on the market when Apple was shit I mean, I was really didn't let anybody else come up well Apple wouldn't let anybody sell their operating system And just attach it to a computer when you buy an Apple computer you buy it from them They used to have clones. They said these Apple clones. Yeah, you could buy and then they shut those clones down people got really pissed and Businesses also like the old apples were dog shit. They were bad and when windows came out There was so many good things about windows operating system as opposed to the old OS X Like there's something about the way the operating system worked that it was it was really bad with multitasking So I was the other way. I thought that Apple oh Apple Operating systems sort of led the way and windows copied them. No no no no There's there's definitely some copying back and forth from each other But the original way of using a user interface a graphic user interface It was invented by Xerox they invented the first computer that worked like that Everything else was a terminal that you'd have to just punch and code They figured out how to do that first and then Apple and then windows copied that but this so what it's just a graphic user Interface something like what what's going on behind the scenes well the old days before OS X Apple had no memory protection no preemptive multitasking like the old operating systems The old operating operating system for Apple were like really shitty Hmm, so then they changed it to go with the windows platform to go the Intel platform and they couldn't get anything more out of that IBM computer that they used to sell they couldn't get any more juice out of it and then the windows computers were getting up to Like one gigahertz so they just jumped ship and went to Intel had a change everything Are you talking about the chip? Yeah, they had a change their process from they had a change their process and by the way If I butchered any of this real true computer geeks So impressed whatever you the multitasking. Yeah, what the empty of multitasking Wow the ability to do to do well I think a lot of times went like today Windows is awesome with that So it's Mac you can run a bunch of different programs at the same time But it used to be like if you wanted the iTunes wasn't around back then But if you used to be if you wanted to open up iTunes and also have a browser running and also You know be checking your Twitter feed on a Twitter application you'd have a real fucking problem Especially if you're trying to play a video online as well Then your computer is gonna shit itself But now that's super common place But one of the reasons is there's just more the operating system is far more complex And it's a Unix based operating system now so when when when Apple came around with OS X It was so far ahead of anything else like Windows looked like a dinosaur in comparison That's when I switched over the guys in the fear factor office had had these Apple computers with OS X Like for whatever reason Hollywood has always been like super super Apple like every thing like Apple evangelists on Graphics but then yeah, but just that remember when Apple shit all over Final Cut remember that they did that update Define it and just nerfed it and turned it into this like baby machine or something as red and stopped using it Well, so did my brother my brother's a video editor in DC any any switch to PC and the new window system is pretty Amazing man. I've used it. It's really cool. I like it a lot But do new window system for video editing is what you mean well No, just the wind the new windows the operating system itself is so much different if you're used to like whenever you stopped using it If you revisit it now, it's pretty cool man. Oh, I sure it's cool I still use Mac though, but I think one cool thing about Windows is that it gives you the freedom to fuck up your whole computer Up your computer and that's cool man. There's always some with Apple you always feel like your hands are tied a little bit You know, they're always trying to control shit. They took flash away remember when they did that Right after I learned a code and action script a little bit those motherfucker Started launching photon missiles into flash and ever since then I've had a sour taste over Apple good I think there was there was a reason there was a bunch of security exploits with flash. There wasn't there who cares Let me destroy my goddamn computer if I want to and my life It's that attitude of like the older you the older I get the more Grading it becomes when you realize you're being protected from destroying yourself. It's like stop it Let me let me do this if this is what I'm compelled to do well Especially when it's been proven that the things are trying to prevent you from doing aren't harmful oftentimes like a pot Yes, think about the money that's been spent on keeping pot illegal It of course everyone distrust you now. They're never gonna listen to a goddamn word You said you try to keep pot from them like what's one of the dumbest things the government has ever done It's try to keep pot from people know because you you you smoke it you find out. It's awesome You don't die and then you start distressing everything right well masturbation Think about how many people thought they were gonna die for masturbation right you lose your mind you get hair on your palms But when did that end that wasn't my time? No, well Your Catholic no, no, I'm talking about earlier times early 20th century No, I never heard that you were gonna go blind or anything. Oh, yeah There were there were medical books in the 19th century. You know Kellogg had this whole thing about it, you know the causes and sanity Insanity it causes hair to grow in your palms that you know Yes, we're not willing to do this Kellogg from Kellogg cereal, right? Yeah, yeah, he had a thing. He was very He hated people who masturbate. He had a thing about that. I mean the whole thing with cornflakes The reason cornflakes were invented was to stop boys from masturbate. Yeah How was how was the idea behind that? Okay, they explained this to us before yeah The idea is that spicy foods excite the sensibilities and so if you eat something that tastes interesting you're gonna want to come So they they invented and also graham crackers Graham was another of these big anti-masterbation evangelizers so they invent these really intentionally bland foods You know why they like that they you know why they like to keep the teenage boys from jerking off so that when they finger their assholes they immediately Exactly It's like veal Keep them in the dark True Kellogg the guy I'm so fucking horny anything spin your finger father Touchpin Mountain confusion What your cow could milk itself that would be bad I Can climb fences Really cows a cow that does yoga and can reach its own teeth a cow that's so smart It realizes how fucking huge is it could just run through that fence any time shitty wouldn't offenses these keep cows in with it's unbelievable You know how they train elephants You know you see these elephants that are like tie a chain to something and they often could just pull it out Right the way they train them is when they're when they're babies They chain them to a something really heavy that they can't pull and then the elephant for the rest of its life is like oh man When that chains on I can't pull yeah, yeah, you know, I have a friend who keeps cows He's got a like these grass fed cows and he's got his big farm and he butchers a cow every year and guess what those fucking cows know it When they know something going on. Yeah, they don't know that they can he doesn't have like an old-school He wouldn't fence. He's got like a real fence that could keep the cows in but he doesn't what are you doing there? He's drawn dicks on his Don can doodles. Yeah, we're trying to be very sophisticated It's the pads are great if you need to write something down the middle of a show I always wanted to have something like I've got pre-emptive multitasking right down here I'm gonna remember that might be a totally made-up thing That's how I avoid writing your friends cows are paranoid. Oh, dude We went to his his yard where the cows are in the cows fucking run from you and they run from you in like this idea that People like to have of you know eating grass fed meat is being totally cool You know like listen kind of grain fed cows bullshit, but organic grass had me. Hey, those cows lived a great life Guess what no, they don't they live in fear Those fucking things are penned in and you don't think they know that every now and then one of them disappears Did you ever read the hitchhiker's guide of the galaxy? They had it's a futuristic There's a restaurant called the restaurant at the end of the universe and People you could go to that restaurant and watch the universe end like somehow it was in a time portal But that they cows would come to your table And they could talk and they would suggest which parts of them you should eat like they were like yeah That's so creepy. Yeah. If the world keeps going the way it's going that will eventually happen Well eventually bestow upon cows the ability to want to die have no problem serving humans Yes, give them a very simple mind and then have them trot around on two legs and walk around on their hind feet and Explain what parts of their body they want you to eat. That's it. Yeah, they don't even have to die right away Right they can just have amputations so it's really fresh. Yeah, that could be Never see that there was a there was a like we're talking about the fucking military There's a cartoon in the I think it was in the New Yorker It had a little frog coming out of the kitchen in a restaurant right come through the door and he's on a on a skateboard He's got the two things like this and it says special frog legs That's hard. Oh, that's rough. Yeah, that would be worse though You'd have to actually take off the pelvis. I mean you're not just cutting off you cutting off the leg at the socket That's an amazing thing when you've convinced something to want to die Yes, once you've done that you have really like you are in control if you've got a being that you have convinced to die for you Fuck well, that would be the so powerful this is all of me hero Yeah, call him a hero cow here. I'll be the sale The sale would be that these cows have no problem dying. They actually want to die and they have no fear So what we're worried about is pain and fear. Oh, we remove their pain sensors They don't have any they don't feel any pain. They just wander around and when you take them into the background to slaughter them It doesn't even freak out. They're having orgasm the whole way through. It's like an ecstasy trip What about laboratory meat? Have you seen this the growing meat in a laboratory? So that's got no brain at all right right so the fear and the pain are removed Probably doesn't nervous it. It's not as fun. You know not as fun It's a black for whom that's fun for the person that gets to kill the animal well You know they're gonna I mean right now. I don't know what kind of meat they're growing But eventually they're gonna grow human meat. Oh for sure and the question is gonna be if you grow human meat in a lab Is it okay to eat then yeah for sure that's common right? I feel like where is that cannibalism right? Well, I Interesting because it didn't come off a human. It just was grown. Yeah, it'll certainly be thought of as cannibalism by a lot of You know, it's really interesting about cannibalism Do you know would you know our cannibalism? What causes cannibalism? It's very hunger. Yeah, I'm correct Exactly, but there there all these I always just thought like some people some civilizations were cannibalistic and some weren't right It was just like some evilness that got into some and not others randomly, but it turns out that there's a biological reason for this There's again in Marvin Harris a great anthropologist. It was at Columbia for a long time He wrote about how he studied different islands in the South Pacific some of which were cannibalistic and some of which weren't in different Societies around the world and what he found was that the societies that were cannibalistic had no Domesticatable animal that didn't eat the same food as humans in other words You you aren't gonna raise dogs for meat because dogs eat the same shit that humans eat right you want to raise animals for meat like goats That don't eat stuff that humans eat so they're not competing for the same original food source right then it's supplementary Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, so like if you look at the Aztecs There was nothing in Mexico that they could raise that they could domesticate and raise for meat that didn't eat what humans ate So they were protein starved so when they were in a battle and they killed a bunch of dudes they would eat them Whereas in Europeans who killed just as many people is not more We're needing them then consider that a sacrilege because in Europe you had pigs you had goats You had chickens you had all these things that were easy to domesticate that humans had been living on for a long time So it's really a historical accident who's as cannibalistic and who isn't? Which did you imagine if you were a European settler trying to make it across the country during the days of the Native Americans like when you know 1700s 1600s whenever they did that and It you'd after the first wave that had already gone over and basically committed genocide on many populations You were the enemy and you were trying to make it across the country without running into one of these people that might eat you Yeah, I'm wagging train kind of people. Yeah, well the man cheese. Oh, yeah I mean the Nez purse apparently according to Steve Renella my friend Steve Renella is a real historian on Native American history and you know they just the history of the colonization of this country But he told me these great stories about the Nez purse Indians who were known for cannibalism They would they would butcher people and y'all yeah, yeah, yeah They would eat them like the same way they would eat cattle So if they would catch people some enemy or something like that they would kill them and eat them and they they made a regular habit of it And not only that they they would play games like they told this one dude They said they took all his clothes off and they let him run and they said if you can get away You could survive they kill this friend in front of them butcher dumb started eating them And they told him that if he if he can get away They're gonna give him you know a 20 minute head start or however whatever count they had Yeah, right and get away It's right and the guy survived the guy made it to the river who went into a beaver den naked into a swim up into a beaver den to hide Yeah, naked was the beaver in there I Think about that was suck if you can know by a beaver Beaver running for animals. Beaver just killed a person recently. I believe it there. Scary dangerous creatures Trump three hunters a hunter got killed by a beaver you got bitten by a beaver in the leg and he bled out Like you don't realize this thing can take a fucking tree down with its face. Yes beavers You don't want to get bitten by a fucking beaver. No, you don't so this asshole climbs into this beaver den naked Okay to get away from these Nez purse Indians and then he winds up walking some like a hundred miles or some fucking crazy Make it almost starving to death just eating what he could find and kill along the way naked Naked badass just to get the fuck away from these Nez purse Indians who ate his friend in front of him So that's not Nez purse that sounds more like the Iroquois. That sounds like Eastern Yeah, look at that muddy little devil look at it. It's ready to defend its talking. That's weird Jesus Christ What is that a beaver? Yeah, yeah, it's got the flat tail. That's a beaver that's gonna fuck you up Mean beavers Beavers can eat trees man. You don't want to fuck with a beaver and this guy was so scared of these Indians He climbed into the beaver's house in the water in the night Night because if you find one of these beaver dens like Rinalis showed me how to find them when you're going down the river You see like the stacks of sticks. Yeah, it's weird sort of a motion information He's like that's a beaver den and you could tell by looking at it whether or not it's used or whether it's abandoned Because but this guy didn't know that shit because it was at nighttime So he's running down this road and just jumps into the river finds a beaver den and just says fuck it Let's take a chance swims up into it in the middle of the night Fuck an A man. They're so cool beavers when you consider that how radically they change environments that they make lakes happen That's amazing. They actually make lakes. I see there's a great documentary on beavers that I saw Why do they call vaginas beavers? That's one of those things. I've always kind of like fur It's the old days used to be fur but ever so many other things have fur did you see that thing that they had on Vimeo Recently it's been going around the internet how wolves changed the course of river. Yeah, I saw that. It's amazing You haven't seen it now. Oh my god. Duncan. You got to see this. It's incredible. Yeah, it's a it's a piece play-load little expert Yellowstone of it. It's Yellowstone and the introduction of wolves they've they've dwindled the population of deer and Antal and deer and elk down and because they've made the populations lower The soil around rivers has gotten less erosion Because more plants are growing on it and then more More rodents are surviving more rabbits are surviving and then more bears and bears kill the fawns like that It's and it changes literally because of the fact that there's more beavers. It's changing the course of the river itself Yeah, they're amazing. I mean like wolves. It's amazing. They're predation A trophic cascade is an ecological process which starts at the top of the food chain and Tumbles all the way down to the bottom. That's cool. The classic example is what happens is so badass and more badass This guy has an English accent were reintroduced in 1995 now we we all know that wolves kill various species of animals But perhaps it's like less aware that they give life to many others Before the wolves turned up they'd been absent for 70 years that the numbers of deer because there were nothing to hunt But had built up and built up in the Yellowstone Park and despite efforts by humans to control them They'd managed to reduce much of the vegetation there to almost nothing. They're just grazed it away But as soon as the wolves arrived even though they were few in number they started to have the most remarkable effects First of course they killed some of the deer, but that wasn't the major thing much more significantly They radically changed the behavior of the deer the deer started avoiding certain parts of the park The places where they could be trapped most easily particularly the valleys and the gorgeous and Immediately those places started to regenerate Certain parts of the park. The places where they could be trapped most easily, particularly the valleys and the gorges. And immediately those places started to regenerate. In some areas, the height of the trees quin-chupled in just six years. Quin-chupled! They're the bad size! Quin-chupled became forest, and was an animal. And willow and cottonwood. And as soon as that happened, the birds started moving. The number of songbirds of migratory birds started to increase greatly. The number of beavers started to eat the trees. And beavers like wolves, ecosystem engineers, they create niches for other species. And the dams they built in the rivers are provided habitats for otters. This isn't even a human talking. It's a unicorn. Fish and reptiles and amphibians. You know, he was too offensive. I noticed. And he was spatter. And as a result of that, the number of rabbits and mice began to rise, which meant more hawks, more weasels, more foxes, more badgers. Ravens and bald eagles came down to feed on the carreon that the wolves had left. Bears fed in it, too. And their population began to rise as well, partly also, because there were more berries growing on the regenerating shrubs. And the bears reinforce the impact of the wolves by killing some of the calves of the deer. And here's where it gets really interesting. My erection began to grow. With the wolf. We should probably not play all of this video, because it's there. It's not ours. But that's a fascinating thing. And you only hear one side of that. You hear that the wolves are dangerous. People are scared. The wolf population is growing. And that's the part I usually hear. But it's fascinating to hear that all this was going on as well. You know what I was thinking when we were listening to that is how much pleasure that guy was taking in his own accent. And it's something I often notice with British people and French, not so much Spanish. And I don't notice it with Americans speaking English. Like I never like get into how my voice sounds while I'm speaking the way that guy obviously was. Right. But he's a presenter. You know, he's trying to be dramatic, don't you think? He was trying to, yeah, he was like the lord of the forest or something. I think I should do every nature documentary ever. I love it. But he voice me and works. He kept calling it the Yellowstone. The berry is the Yellowstone. Beebels. But the British have, I mean, their accent is much more tied into identity. And I think different parts of identity than American accent. Yeah. American accent is regional, whereas the British accent is a regional but also class-based. So that guy in speaking the way he's speaking is telling you. He went to Eaton and then he went to Cambridge. And his parents had lots of money and his family had lots of money for a long time. A British person listens to three words and like knows where that guy's from, where he went to school. He's old. Really. So sort of like we can recognize accents from the south. Yeah, right. Right. All we have is regional. And we don't even have that much because we all grew up watching a lot of the same TV shows. They're still regional. I mean, there is, yeah. But if you have any friends in New York or Boston or Baltimore's a weird one, they got a weird sort of half southern thing going on down there. But there's no, I don't think there's any equivalent in England to like my accent. You hear me talk. You don't know where I'm from. I don't know. My parents had money. Didn't have money where I grew up. Nothing. There's nothing like that in England. You talk. People know. That's interesting. Yeah. I like those, you know, there's linguists who can listen to your accent. Not everybody, but apparently there's people who are trained to listen to any accent. And they can tell you within like 50 miles where you lived. A lot of the time, they're really good at it. Like they can identify. They're trained to do that. They're like forensic people. You know, like if you hear someone's voice, it says everything about them. There are some words that are indicators too. Like I lived in Western Pennsylvania when I was a kid for a while. And there's some words I'll say, like if someone's trained that way that they can pick it up like, I hate black people. Like that. Oh, you can identify where someone's from when they say that. Right over here. Can you know who can? No, you can't. But there will know, I mean, there are stereotypes that, you know, because there are like, there's people, you know, there's bigots everywhere. But there is a stereotype. There's a lot of stereotypes attached to like a rebel flag on your truck says a lot. You know, like when you see that, it says a lot. Because you are sort of like when you're saying like the South whereas again, you are pointing to a time when slavery was OK. And that's how you see it, my friend. What I see is a bunch of people that are very proud about the Southern heritage. They liked that part of the country. I was raised in the South. I love that part of the country. I really do. I'm 10. I would like the South to rise again minus the slavery. So you're a little young. Wonderful. One Leonard Skinner. Why did you have to? Why does that have to be included? What? The slavery? Yeah. Well, because that flag, that's why everyone has a problem with that flag. Because that flag indicates a war that was partially fought over keeping slaves over the right to keep slaves. Like you wanted to keep your slaves. And these sons of bitches up north were telling you that you couldn't do that anymore. And that's a big problem for your economy. And because you weren't just making money from the slaves working. But the slave trade itself, you're making tons of money too. So therefore that flag just inherently spells racism. It doesn't have to. It's what it does though. To me, I mean, a lot of times it just does. I mean, I'm a pretty open guy. But if I see that flag, I think racism. Well, yeah. It's like any time people, yeah, it's a problem. It's unavoidable, right? It's unavoidable because that's what happens. It's like any time you see the swastika, you don't think Ganesch. Exactly. Isn't that funny? Yeah. You think Nazis. Yeah. If you try to have a swastika tattooed on your body today, you're a real piece of shit. But at one point in time, swastika was in eastern. And what was in many, many different. Too many different. It's a Native American. Hindu Native Americans. Yeah. That it was an old symbol. In fact, that old symbol, there's a place in somewhere in the valley like Kanoga Park or something like that. This is a really old place that was built by people from India. And there's swastikas on it. They have a big sign there explaining. Look at this. Ganesch with a swastika. They had a big sign there explaining what the original meaning of that symbol means. Because today, that's the symbol of hate. Yep. Yeah. And people are, there is, I heard there's some movement called like, they're trying to bring back this, or take the swastika out of the Kanazi idea. Like there's like, they want to bring the symbol back some others. People who are trying to show that it's how you can't. Hitler fucked up that mustache and he fucked up that swastika. Those two things are never seen again. He really did. He was such a cunt. You can't wear the same mustache as him. Do you think about how many people with regular mustaches are just total pieces of shit. And it's okay to wear that mustache. You don't get associated with that person's behavior. Who is, some comedian had a bit about like whether there were lots of Germans named Hitler? Because now you never meet anyone whose last name is Hitler. Well, you know, there were, there were Hitler's descendants decided not to have kids. Like there was a decision. Oh, really? Yeah, something like that. Yeah. What's interesting? I don't believe that. And the family line. Do you think you guys think Hitler actually died? Or do you think do you believe the idea that he went to South America? Do you hear that? That's the most recent one. The FBI saying that Hitler went to Argentina? The FBI saying that. No, it's one of those internet things. I don't know what I'm saying that the FBI. I'm saying it's one of those internet things where someone has supposedly found a freedom of information to article from 1947. It shows that Hitler escaped in a fucking submarine. Do you think he might have? Why not? It's all redacted, like half of it's redacted. Like, look, this is it. The fuck out of here with this. This is a piece of paper that someone put online. That's what that is. Unless I hear better, Hitler is not fucking Argentina. You ask a little bit. Well, not anymore. They're not anymore. You think he found his body? He was kind of cute at that age. Sorry. He just had the picture of Hitler. He looked a bit like he was sulturing. Joe, Joe, would you have spanked him? No, I mean, good God. I don't know if we're afraid of him. Yeah, that guy fucked up a lot of things. But I don't know, man. I kind of believe he escaped. I do kind of believe that. Well, just because it's Hitler. So what? Because if your Hitler- Or come the walls are falling down. Yeah, I'm just going to get out of there, man. How's it get? When is it taped tunnel? There was no body. No, the body, apparently the body that they found, the dental records or the body itself was not the body of a man. It was like a woman's body. There's like, what? Yeah, look it up. Like, let's scout, because they- No, you look it up, man. You're the one with the crazy stuff. If I look it up, they're going to be disproving. They say that they incinerated his body. Or they supposedly his body was set on fire. And then that the bones don't match the bones of a male. And they went to South America and lived a really good life. You really believe that. Well, a lot of Nazis definitely did go to South America. Yeah. And a lot of Nazis got hired by Nassau. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Operation paperclip. Bring him to California. Where in the vombron? In fact, the Simon Weezenthal Center said that if where in the vombron was alive today, he'd be prosecuted for crimes against humanity. Jesus. Stop and think about that. The guy who was the head of Nassau was a hardcore Nazi. He, they hung the five slowest workers, like whether it was every day or once a week, whatever it was, they would hang them in front of the rocket factory in Berlin. They would just take the five slowest workers and hang them. And one of the guys, there was a documentary that this guy did on the moon landings. And he started interviewing people that were in the concentration camps that knew like had seen, where in the vombron walked in, had seen all these different like high level Nazi scientists walking. There's a rocket factories. Where in the vombron's rocket factories used Jewish slaves and murdered them. So I mean, he's a fucking, he was a monster and he was the head of Nassau. Jesus. Yeah. He was a real monster. I mean, people try to sugarcoat that because the fact the guy did amazing things with rocketry. But you know, it wasn't his idea. Well, you got to understand that, please, they hung the five slowest fucking people in front of his rocket factory in Berlin. And then the United States took them aboard. That tendency to sugarcoat murder is so fucked up and it happens all the time. And it's really an odd thing when you see, when you're back in white thing. Yeah. People want someone to be good or evil. Yeah. They don't want someone to be evil and also amazing because that's too fucked up. If you're good or you're bad, that's why they sugarcoat. And that's why they defend. You know, I mean, I've heard someone, there was a recent thing where someone was talking about this guy who had done a bunch of fucked up shit and lied about a bunch of things. And his friends were saying, yeah, but what about this? He did this. They were saying all these positive things that he did. I'm like, that doesn't matter. He still did those other things. It's like, it doesn't make those other things non-existent. If you're doing something fucked up, you're cheating people, you're lying, whatever you're doing, you're fucking people over, you're doing something evil to people. If you're also doing something good, it doesn't mean you didn't do the evil thing, right? They don't go away. Like, and vice versa. Vice versa as well. Right. I mean, there's some saying we judge our heroes by their finest moment and our criminals by their worst. Yes. So you're a great guy, you fuck up, you do one thing, you know, whatever. And that's how we judge you for the rest of your life. You have met some people who've committed some, you know, fucked up crimes. And they turned out to be really good people. Joey Diaz is a perfect example. You know, if you look at Joey Diaz on paper, he went to jail for armed kidnapping of a drug deal with a machine gun. I mean, he did some crazy fucking shit. But if you know Joey Diaz is a human being, he's one of the sweetest guys you'll ever meet in your life. He's so friendly. He's so funny. I mean, every time the phone rings in his Joey, I get excited to talk to him. Yeah. If you just looked at him as on that instance of his life and a cocaine fueled rage, kidnapped some guy, you would see, think he's a terrible person. Yeah. But the strange thing, isn't it, when somebody gets convicted of something that they did? And then they've done like 20 years in prison. And they're probably different. They probably changed, but they have to stay in there for their entire lives. Well, a lot of young men. Did you, I don't know if you guys, if we talked about this, but a couple weeks ago, I interviewed a guy named Bruce Lisker for my podcast who was in prison in California, sank went in for a lot of it for 26 and a half years for killing his mother when he was 17, which he did not do. Oh. And man, he is amazing. He's an amazing dude. He's like, he is so not bitter. That's right. It's unbelievable. And I asked him at the beginning of the podcast, I was like, dude, when I, when, you know, I thought when I met you that I would be sitting next to a ticking time bomb of a guy like explosive with rage, you know? Right. And you're so chilled out. What I feel like I'm sitting here with Mandela. And he said, they tried to destroy my life for 26 and a half years. I'm not going to finish the job for them. Wow. Cool. He's a great guy. He's right near here. That's the truth. He's a wonderful dude. Man, I love that attitude. Because that attitude is saying fuck you to your past. And it's like, you know, because you meet people who are rationalizing being an asshole from their past. You know, they have the story they keep telling about their shitty family, their abusive parents, their awful, whatever it is. And you have empathy for them, but simultaneously you realize how they're recreating that story every time they bring it up, every time they talk about this awful thing that happened to them. It's like in Buddhism, it's compared to like making a necklace, like beating a necklace in every moment, you're sort of recreating yourself again and again and again. And when people have experiences like that and they're like, no, I'm not going to let that be the anchor that pulls me down into a negative life. I can reinvent myself in this very moment right now. Regardless of whatever happened to me, regardless of my past, that's all gone. It's really cool. And he said, he said like, really, who knows where I would be right now if this hadn't happened, right? Maybe I'd be dead. Maybe I would have had a car accident. Maybe, you know, something else would have happened to me that there's no way to predict it. So the fact that I'm here now is unavoidably a good thing. I'm here, I'm intact, you know. And his experience of prison was very moving and not really what I was expecting. Like he said, the sexual abuse and that sort of thing was not an issue for him. And fighting like four or five times, he had to stand up to someone. And he said he got, I think if I remember correctly, he said like he got his ass kicked, but he had to establish that there was a limit, you couldn't push him past. That was the main thing. But he's a cool guy. And yeah, the way I met him was that what happened was his father died, his father never believed that he killed his mother. And in fact, the way he got into it was so fucked up. He's 17, he goes in the detective who was running the investigation just had a bug up his ass and decided he did it and would not be swayed from that conclusion, right? And but there was like the, there was no evidence that the evidence was manufactured fucked around. Anyway, so what they told him was, plead out and they said like you put your 17 and you say you did it, you'll do juvie for a year or two, then you'll do like one or two years in a medium security and you're out, right? So he took the advice, his father encouraged him to take the advice from the lawyer, he pleaded guilty, went in and then he started getting interviewed by psychiatrist, prison psychiatrist, right? And they kept reporting that he wasn't showing remorse. Well, of course he's not showing remorse, he didn't do it. Right. Right? So this, this charade that he was supposed to let, he could just sign the paper and go in for a few years and be out was bullshit because he had to go through 100% and actually act as if he had done it and he was so remorseful and crying and oh my God. And he couldn't do that because the guys got some fucking integrity, right? So that's why he was in for 26 and a half years. Oh my God. Yeah. And so his father died and he left some money, 15 grand or something and he used that money to hire a private detective to go back and sort of refigure, look at the evidence again. This guy did ran blue through the money but the detective by the time the money was gone was like convinced that this was all bullshit. So he was like, fuck it, I'm doing it pro bono. And he kept going at it and then he got a couple of guys from the LA Times to write about the case. And my aunt saw the article and sent 100 bucks to the like fun to help him and they became friends. And that's how I got to know him. Wow. That's incredible. Yeah. But it's incredible. So what happens when a prosecutor does something evil like that? Is that guy criminally responsible now? No, the detective, well, not the prosecutor. Whoever was. Because the prosecutor is relying on the evidence presented by the police. So the detective was the one who said him up, who lied about the evidence, who then, here's the kicker as Bruce said, the guy who got me thrown into jail, got me out. And the way he got me out was by pushing too hard. Because what he did was this same detective throughout his career, every time Bruce's case came up for parole, he would or probation, I don't know which it is. This guy would come to the hearing and you talk about how terrible he was, how evil he was and blah, blah, blah. He came to a hearing like 25 years into it. And he said, not only is this guy definitely guilty, but I have found more evidence now. 25 years later because there was money missing from the mother. And so one of the ideas was the motive was to rob his mother of a couple hundred dollars. This detective said I went back and got into the house, new owners and all that. And they claimed that they had found the money in the crawl space in this kid's former bedroom. Right? So now the case is even stronger than it was 25 years ago, denied that this detective goes back, interviews all the people who'd on the house. And they all said, we never called the police. We never found any money. I have no idea what that guy's talking about. The detective just made that shit up. Wow. And that was his misstep. And that's what eventually got Bruce out. Then the BI went in and he's like, interviews everyone. I'm like, oh, this is a hundred percent sure this guy manufactured that evidence. Well, he must have done that more than one. Exactly. Exactly. And this was one of his first cases in a 25 year career. Oh my God. So the guy's entire crew is just setting people up and treating them like, or not. Nobody knows. And you know why nobody knows? Because the LAPD is not investigating. They're not opening up his cases. They're not going back and looking at this. What? Yeah, it's a fucked up thing, man. So this guy, listen to the podcast of anyone who's interested, it's on my podcast, and essentially speaking, it's like two or three episodes back. Bruce Lisker. He tells the whole story. What the fuck? That's fucked up. This cop is retired with full benefits. Oh my God. How is that possible? That's a criminal. They did an internal investigation for about a year to turn in the results. This guy from Internal Affairs, who's an honorable cop, did the investigation found that this case was definitely a setup, right? Only looking at this one case, right? Definitely a setup, complete bullshit, manufactured evidence, et cetera. A couple of weeks before the year was over and the report would be officially filed. His superiors took him off the case and squashed it. No report was ever filed. Jesus. Oh my God. And the cop who led that investigation, I said to him, Bruce, have you been in touch with this guy? How's his career going? He said he's shunned by the police. So he's still working, but he's like nobody's pals with him. What the fuck? Yeah. It's that culture. Well, it's that culture of shunning rats, culture of going after the people that investigate. But if those people didn't investigate, look what happened in Miami. During the University of the movie, Cocoa, Cowboys, documentary about Miami. Miami was so crazy. At one point in time that the entire police graduating squad of the whatever the academy, the police academy, graduating class, the entire group was either arrested for corruption or murdered. Wow. Is this when Don Johnson was on the force? No, no, this is, I mean, I guess probably like, it was about that era. It was in 1980s and the stories that they tell are fucking unbelievable. Cocoa and Cowboys and Cocoa and Cowboys too are some of the best fucking documentaries ever. Miami has more banks per capita than anywhere else in the country. That's hilarious. It's all cocaine money. That's what built that country or that part of it. You really should be a country. Miami's wild. It's really like a country. Like all those Cubans, all those pissed off Cubans. Yeah, pissed off at Castro. And he's right over there 90 miles away across the ocean. It's one of these things, man. When you watch cops and you realize what you're actually watching is just people getting arrested for something that shouldn't be illegal. It's really hard to enjoy it anymore. Like a victorious cop who's found some drugs on a person and then acts like he's doing some heroic thing. It's like, what are you doing? You're just chaining up a skinny guy who wanted to feel good, man. You're not being a hero right now. This is just a guy who wanted to know what it felt like to be God for a few hours. And you're fucking slapping cuffs on him. These people are getting arrested when you see them mostly. They're the least dangerous-looking people on earth. And then when you add to that, the fact that these motherfuckers are putting fake evidence in there sometimes. Oh, did you hear about this case where there are undercover cops in a high school pretending to be friends for a whole semester? And then they bust some guys because they got them weaned. Yeah. Well, that happened with a woman who was 25 years old. That went in Florida. She was a beautiful woman and she seduced a 17 year old boy. Honors student. Yeah, honor student. Yeah. Get her some weed. And now the kid has a felony on his record. Yeah. So there's like, you never run for office. You can never, there's a lot of things he can never do. It's so predatory and terrible. I mean, it's like if there was a, there's just not, maybe there's not enough illegal stuff out there so they have to make stuff up because they're not enough bad people. That's the problem. No, no, no, no, no, it's certainly not that. There's plenty of bad people. They just don't want to have to find them. You go to find bad people if they have dangerous situations. If you could just coerce some 17 year old boy to sell you weed and then lock him in the cage and you still get that little check on your win column, you're happy to do it because it's, it perverts what the action is. What the, the, the noble law enforcement officer, the noble soldier, those are really important aspects of any society they want to stay safe because we don't have perfect humans yet. They don't have a perfect race. We don't have a perfect culture. So when you deal with it's just an organism that is following the rules and they, they, subvert and pervert these rules in order to be successful. Yeah. The same way people cheat on the rest ATs. They're the same way people take steroids and get caught in the Olympics the same way, you know, all these different things that people do that they're not supposed to do, but they do because they just want to win more than they want anything else. Yeah, this is a very American thing too. I live in Spain for 22 years, right? Spanish cops and American cops completely different. Now they're different for, for cultural reasons having to do with the military, I think, first of all. I think a lot of American cops are ex-military. They come back. They're all jobs. Best job opportunities are in law enforcement. They're already accustomed to the sort of discipline in the uniform and the, you know, the weapons and all that kind of stuff. So they, they've got a lot of them are suffering from PTSD and they've got a very us versus them attitude from the military. They've served in Afghanistan or Iraq, whatever. They come back and they've got that same attitude in LA or in Petaluma or wherever the fuck they're working. So that's a problem. The other issue is the legal system. The American legal system is based as you were just pointing out on rules, right? If you break the rule, that's illegal. Your opinion legal system is a different, the trigger is not that you broke the rule. The trigger is that somebody complained that you bothered somebody. So there are no Spanish cops flying over the city with infrared cameras on helicopters looking for a grow rooms. They're just not doing it. Because unless someone complains, they don't give a shit. Right. It's the same thing with parking. It's like if you're blocking traffic, they'll give you a ticket. If you're just parking in an area where the thing says from 36 and not from 42 or whatever it is, they don't give a fuck. I mean, and I've experienced it directly with them where I'm parking my motorcycle and there's this big, long, long line of motorcycles on the rumbless and the pedestrian area of the rumbless and Barcelona. And I go to this cop and I know you're not allowed to park there but they're like 15 motorcycles. And the cops stand in there. I say to him, can I park here or what? And he's like, no, but normally we won't do anything. He's like, that's a cop. That's a definitely a better way of doing it. So much better. We're doing over here. Yeah. If you're a judge and you've put someone in jail for their entire lives for a drug, how do you sleep at night? Wow. Minimum mandatory sentencing. The judges can't even decide. Right? I've got a Reagan administration. They passed these laws saying, well, if you've got one to four ounces of marijuana, that's five years. Doesn't matter who you are. Or you shouldn't be a judge. Don't be a judge. A lot of judges resign. They can't. Yeah, I hear what you're saying. A lot of judges resigned because of that because they said, what am I doing? All I'm doing, it's a table. I'm not making any decisions. Well, how about that guy in Pennsylvania that was purposely locking kids up to get paid? Yeah, holy shit. He was getting paid, he was getting payoffs. And so he was putting kids in detention center, juvenile detention centers when they were young. They were like teenagers taking them away from their mothers and getting them raped, getting them beat up, putting them in with all these abused kids. Some of them are committing suicide. It's so crazy. That guy ruined lives and did it for money. And he just got locked in a cage. Every one of those kids, every one of those kids, he sends should get as an adult a day to beat the fuck out of them. There should be a tag like you pull a tag like your honey deer and they all throw their money because there's thousands of kids that should get to beat the fuck out of this guy. And what you hope is you get a really early hunting season, at least piss on him or so. No, beat the fuck out of them. Don't let him have fun. All that beat him to death. Sentence to 28 years for selling kids to the prison system. Look at that. Look at that. Look at that. 28 fucking years. Look at that piece of shit. I would love to plant some knuckles on that guy's face. If I was a kid, especially that this guy put away, I would love to beat the shit out of that guy. That's it. They should be beaten to death by every kid that he did that too. Fuck that guy. Yeah, it's a very, it's a, when you start realizing that the criminals have done the exact same thing that pedophiles do, like pedophiles, they will get jobs working at schools because they want to be around kids all the time. They're predatory and they do that. And the same way criminals, they're really smart criminals. They recognize that the best place to be if you're a criminal is in the legal system working there. That's the best place to be if you're a judge and a criminal, you're fucking set man. You're a judge. If you're a criminal and you're a senator, if you're a criminal and you're in the government, that's where the top criminal, a crimm of the criminals go to the fucking legal system and into the government because that's where they have the most power and are the least likely to get busted. You know, the dumb criminals are the ones who stay on the other side of the law. The smart criminals are the ones who infiltrate, get in there and then start exploiting people in the exact same way and then they don't get arrested. They arrest. That's where it's fucked up. Because let's face it, in the laws of the land, it is not criminal to put a skinny guy in handcuffs, take away his house, throw him in jail, ruin his life. That in this land, it's not legal. It's not criminal. But in the law in a greater truth, it's a criminal act. In the same way that in Nazi Germany, it wasn't criminal to incinerate Jews. You could do that. That was not, but from history's perspective, it was an atrocity. So in the same way, it's an atrocity in a very small scale. If you're destroying people's lives over nothing, I know we've talked about this a million times and I don't know if there's even much you could do, except shake your fist at some monolithic power that seems to have infiltrated everything and hope for the best. But God damn it, man. Aren't you a little terrified that one day you'll end up with fucking ankle manacles on wearing that bright safety orange thing is you get sucked through that satanic maze of lawyers and eventually just land in a tiny little cell. That can happen. It certainly can, especially if you do something that threatens some other powerful organization. If you want to sell some sort of a drug that's not sanctioned might interfere with the selling of another drug, when they fucked up is when they made it legal to have private prisons. They fucked up when they turned opening a prison to a bitch. my inner fear with the selling of another drug. When they fucked up is when they made it legal to have private prisons. They fucked up when they turned opening a prison to a business. That's just a mess. When they did that, man. Not just private contractors to build a prison, but private prisons themselves that don't have to give you access. They don't have to let you look around. Louis Thoreau was on the podcast from England, the BBC show. I saw that. And he was talking about private prisons, you can't even get in there. They wouldn't let them in. You can't film in there. Public prisons, your way better off apparently. Definitely. Private prisons, you're essentially being used as a battery to generate money. And what do you call it when corporate power and governmental power fuse? Satan fascism. Yeah. Fascism. Frashes. Brings us right back around to where we started. Yeah. Corporate government, and that's what it fucking is. And that's where we're going. It's, yeah. That's that. Because you're right. Because once it's privatized, then you get that shit in Pennsylvania. Because part of the contract, I don't know if you've seen these, the contracts guarantee an occupancy rate of 98 to 99, whatever percent. It's in the contract that the state signs when they, so like, well, you know, if we don't have enough people in the prison, we pay penalties, we do that blah, blah. So it makes business sense to make sure that you have that occupancy rate. I mean, once you do that, then it's not about people anymore. It's about corporate power. Oh, it's so dark. Yeah. That is a fucking dark. That is always the big philosophical question. Like, would if everyone in the world decided to no longer break the law, would they do? What would they do if everyone drove the speed limit just for a day? If everyone lost Angeles drove the speed limit for a month, like nobody ever made a single traffic violation. What would they do if they, if they have a quota? What is that quota based on? Is it made based on a zero sum evolutionary point? Like, there's no way we're gonna ever evolve past this. So we'll never stop speeding. We'll never stop crashing into each other. We're never stop, it's like banking on complete failure, banking on no growth. Because if there's growth, what are you gonna adjust? You're gonna say, well, I guess we can't rely on speeding tickets anymore because people don't speed. The fuck, that's like a $50 million a month. Build that the city gets. They're not gonna fucking change that. Fuck you. Google cars. What's gonna happen when all the cars are self driving? Who's gonna get tickets? It's gonna be no sexiness anymore. Well, you can fucking go back to the actual Bible. You're fucking in the back seat when you're going up the five. Half the thing is wrong there. You shouldn't be in the back seat. You should be driving like a man. First of all, you should hear an engine that's fucking up the environment. That's half the fun. That's the in and the yeah. The ones that fuck up the environment, the most of the sexiest, they smell like gas when you hit the fucking gas. You smell it overflow when you let up. It's so fun. Man, it is cool though how we are moving in the direction of being able to just perpetually put ourselves on autopilot. Because you know how they have those new cyber suits that you can put on and lift really heavy things. You know they're gonna make miniature cyber suits where you can have them walk your body around. Well, you don't even have to walk. You can put yourself on autopilot. You can like press a button on your suit and it gets you out of bed and like walks into the kitchen bathroom. The atrophy of the body. What is your teeth for you? Yeah, we have a real problem with overpopulation too. We do in this area, meaning overpopulation in certain areas. There's a few spots in the country where it's just like you can't have this many people shoved in together. It's just not wise. It's not sustainable. There's, I mean you're keeping it up right now on red line. Yeah. The training were fucked. If the gas flow stops and you can't run trucks, the carry vegetables were fucked. The trucks also bringing meat. The water has to be pumped from Colorado. That's an earthquake. Oh yeah. I mean, how about you got it all in one place? There's so many things that could go wrong. And one of the big ones is that we're all congested into this one area. It's like a giant game of musical chairs. Like everybody knows the music is gonna stop and you're gonna be fucked most likely and not have a seat. But everybody's like fuck it. Puck it. Oh man, I was talking to this guy the other night and like I was saying, I don't know if I'm gonna have kids and I'm starting to feel happier and happier about that. And he looks at me and he's like, that is a very selfish perspective to have. He just likes saying that to you. He is a self-esteem. He's not even thinking about that. What the fuck are you saying? I guarantee you that guy's not even thinking that. What he's doing is being a parent. Ah, the self-esteem is self-esteem. The person I get to smock at you. Ah, oh, Docan. You're not even right, you're on children. I'm more high ground above you. But I love children. In fact, more than I love anything in this world. So fuck you, Docan. He was attaching it to like how by not having kids, you're somehow not contributing to society somehow. And he was like really like he really thought he knew what he was talking about. And you know, I quoted that Jack Kerwack quote where he said to have a child as the dam of being the death of you. You know what? Every time you have a baby, you're giving something to death penalty. It's a gross thing that people do where they claim more high ground because they're breeding. I hated it when I was a naught of father and now that I'm a father, I still hate it. It's stupid. You don't have to have children. You just have to be cool. Just if you want, if you want people to like you, you don't have to have a fucking baby. All right, just be a nice person and people would like you. Be a nice person. You'll have a positive impact in this life. You don't, it doesn't like make you or break you whether or not you reproduce. It just doesn't. All right. It can enhance your life. Like many experiences, it certainly hasn't enhanced mine. But you don't have to do it. I've met some amazing people that have never had kids and don't want kids. And they're still great to be around. I love them. It's there's nothing wrong with that. But there's so many people that when they get locked into something, whatever it is, it's the way to go. You're not going that way. You're a fucking selfish. Yeah. Dang it. You don't even want to take care of a baby. I don't. Yeah, but you have a little dog, don't you? And I don't want to take care of that. Take care of fucking baby. I was getting out of my little fuck. I like cats. I always say, man, when they invent a baby that knows to shit in this little sandbox from birth, I'll get a baby. And if they're furry and cute. Other than that, I mean, the only reasons I'm ever slightly regretful about the fact that I will never have kids are selfish reasons. The only, see, I'm not thinking for the kid. I'm thinking like, wow, you know, I'll never have that experience of this I'll never have that experience of that. I'll never, you know, my little girl lying on my, you know, back while we read or like, I'll never have those experiences. But that's all about me. Right. You know, as far as there's, it's neutral. You bring a kid in. You don't bring a kid in whatever. That's a wash, right? Yeah. And obviously for the planet, it's a hugely destructive thing to have a child, especially an American child. You don't buy that. This is where I don't buy that because every one that I know that's awesome is a person. The idea that a hugely destructive thing is bringing a person into this life. You're going to bring, if you create a good person, what you're going to do is you're going to bring into this world someone who's going to interact with countless people in their life and most likely have a good personality and shed a good example of what a human being can be. That's the potential of having a person. Yeah, but there's still going to be a lot of resource. But so what? What happens in the world? How about we all kill ourselves and not have to worry about the world? How about we kill ourselves for the world? This poor world is choking on our bullshit and sewage. Let's kill ourselves. You're the guy who's just bitching it over. You're the guy who's just bitching it over. Yeah, oh no, no, don't get me wrong. I'm not playing both sides of the fence. We're here. This is what I'm saying. I'm saying we're here. We should just enjoy the fact that we're here. But our unturned aren't here. Don't worry about bringing kids in the world. We're going to bring kids in the world. We're going to keep breeding. What we should do is try to figure out how to be sustainable. We're not going to keep breeding. You say you won't. But one day, around the road, my area left and that. And that. You get the guy who is the president whose children are still alive today, had kids when he was like 60 something. And I've got one ball. I'm almost 40. I've taken acid almost my entire life. My sperm looked like tobacco. I wasn't supposed to buy cancer. Well, you're one ball survived cancer. The other ball gave up, tapped out. Exactly. Super survivor. Ball survived. I'm killing cancer free kids. I'm getting easily gotten cancer and ball. By the way, I'm not saying I'll never. I mean, I don't know if I'll have kids. I'm not saying don't have kids. I just find it interesting how people really do think you should have a kid. I think you're right, man. The idea is if you feel like having a child, have a child, what's that saying? Only have a kid if you can't live without a kid. You know, like if you just have to have a child, have a child, and then raise it. Somebody had Gandhi. Somebody said that was not. But it's true, it or not. It's even more fun. It's fun. Life is about us interacting with each other, not just interacting with babies, not just interacting with people that are genetically related to you, interacting with all of us. And if you can contribute in any way, there's a lot of people that are great parents that contribute to this world by being a great parent, by raising someone who's going to influence other people. And a lot of them don't necessarily get too much credit for that. But I think it's like you get credit for making a great painting and being a fucking complete schizophrenic outside of that. And everybody's like, oh, he's a brilliant genius. But you don't get credit for raising a human being and developing the personality of a human being or assisting in the development of a person's perceptions and views of the world. That's an incredible resource. And the idea that every one of them is just fucking up the world, whatever. The world's fucked period. It's 2014, all right? The direction that we're going in is fucked. Right, what do you think? It's all fucked. There's too many of us. There's too much pollution. It's not changing. There's the global warming is happening, whether you like it or not, whether you blame it on democratic, vagina, sponsors, whatever you do. It doesn't matter. Yeah. Live, just live, be alive. The justifications of having a baby or not having a baby, all of them are bullshit. They're all bullshit. Just be nice. Just do it. Live your life and be nice. What do you, you don't buy it, huh? Joe Rogan is Nelson Mandela. Wait, you don't buy it. Most people don't know what we're talking about. I know, I know. You played it before the show. Yeah, I saw a thing the other night I was watching, sorry, to interrupt you, Duncan. I wasn't interrupting. I was asking you. You don't buy it. I'm not. You don't buy it. That you or one, you're a person, I'm guessing. Your opinion is don't, you should, as an environmentalist, not have kids. Well, I mean, look, my whole world view is layered, right? It's like there's an optimist inside a pessimist surrounded by an optimist. It's like atmospheric layers. So essentially, I agree with Joe that who gives a shit, it's fucked. That's the optimism, right? But within that, I don't know if that sounds like I'm talking about it. That's what it is because it's like, well, if it's fucked, then I don't need to worry. So I can be optimistic and happy. But within that, there is the sense that, okay, look, we are of the scourge on the planet. We're sucking up the resources, spewing out toxins, destroying everything. And some of us do that at a higher rate than others. Americans at a higher rate than anyone, right? We create more carbon, more plastic, more everything. Use more energy. So having an American baby from an environmental point of view is not a good thing for the trajectory of the planet. Now, within Joe's context, it's all fucked anyway. The trajectory is going over a cliff, so have a good time. You only think it's going to help that trajectory. At both levels. The only thing that's going to help that is human innovations. At this point in time, the momentum of creating things is so out of control that the only thing that's going to be able to put a halt to it is a human being. That's really smart. That figures out how to do it sustainably. A human being figures out what one or series or a group or a movement that figures out how to engineer society, the same way we've engineered many other aspects of our society or our world that make us able to walk down the street and not worry about getting eaten by a lion. So engineer should have babies. Also, I don't know how helpful it is to think of, I mean, I know what you mean. We're fucked in all that language, but we're not. I don't think we are. And I think we're thinking in that trap of thinking of our species as a plague on the planet. If you think of the species as a plague, then you're basically saying, well, I too am a plague, then I am the cancer. I'm walking, I'm a living parasite. And if you think you're a living parasite, then that means you're going to start acting like a parasite. Because why wouldn't you, you're a parasite? So I think it's the language is weird because you're saying nature is malfunctioning. Right now, you're saying this planet is a malfunctioning planet, nature's gone wrong. Look at terrible nature. It made all these little humans and they're ruining the earth. But it's like, how dare you say nature's fucking up? It's nature. You're a piece of it. It's here a tiny little, it's like a little droplet of water in a river being like, this is an evil river. It's tearing up the shore. What is that? OK, so by that logic, how dare you get to keep a therapy for cancer. It's part of the whole. It's your organism having its mutations that just happened. I think the mutations of cancer are similar to the mutation that's happened to our species where it's a thing that grows out of control and threatens to destroy the host. Well, first of all, let me just say when I said how dare you, I don't really mean how to be in that. I'm just following them in the logic. And number two, as far as getting chemotherapy, I didn't get. But if you do have cancer and you get chemotherapy, what you're doing is healing yourself. So that's why you do it. You get chemotherapy. But you're interfering with the flow of nature. Well, I think the flow of nature is healing. Like that's nature is regenerative and heals are a part of it. You get to decide what part you want to be. So then I believe that by reducing human population to the very, very small level where it's not impacting the planet, that's the natural healing process of the planet. Well, no, it's nature. It's your nature to think that. Just like it's a nature of someone who is afraid to die to figure out a way to survive. The nature of a person who's worried about their finite existence creating immortality is also natural. All of it's natural. The human curiosity itself is natural. Human innovation, human imagination. All those things are natural. So we're just living a much more complex world that we've created because we've created all these other variables within our nature that we don't like to think of as natural. But really natural, plastic is fucking natural. It comes out of people. They pull it out of the ground. It's not what we make it in a fucking portal. We, you know, we zap it out of the multiverse and print it up the 3D printer. No, we're fucking taking things out of the earth and we make it. Everything's natural. Every fucking component of the universe that we can measure is, in fact, black holes are natural. The word natural is a shit word because everything's fucking natural. It's a redundant word every time you use it. The world is natural. Even plastic. I think unnatural is a shit word. I mean, man made is what you should call man made man created. And that's also by the way nature, just like a fucking beehive's nature. I just don't want to. I don't want to shuffle around feeling like I'm a goddamn crab lies chewing through the planet earth. You know, you are, but you're not to me. You're not to each other. We're not to each other. But you know, I mean, how many people do you know that claim to be conscious? And then they throw a cigarette out the window and you watch them do it. And now I noticed that because I've seen you, if you want jotle, attack you, throw a cigarette down in front of him because every time it's like a, the woods man. The guy that did it in the woods. Yeah, you're supposed to Sasquatch Hunter. No, that is true. When you see somebody who's like, when you watch them throw the cigarette down and it is an odd moment where you're like, what, what is that? I never noticed it before because I never really just thought about it. That guy we were in Utah for the sci-fi show. And this guy we drove, we flew in, we had a great time together. We flew in, we drove through Utah in the summer with so beautiful, unbelievably green and lushly Utah is fucking beautiful. It's in northern Utah. Wow. Whatever. Yeah, it was about two hours drive and we get all the way there in the guy within five May smoke and cigarettes. He smells like gin. And he's, was his genie smell like you think? I was sound, I don't know how long it is. And he's telling us about how he met Bigfoot the first time he went looking. and he found a bulletproof wolf that appeared out of the mist and I'm like, oh shit. So then the guy, he's, he doesn't have a cigarette on him anymore. We're in the fucking woods, man. You know, and I'm like, where's your cigarette, man? And he threw it on the ground. He just stepped on on the ground. You know, I was like, come on, man. The fuck is it? Was it a filter or a filter filter? Filter. Filter is done by a great. Well, even unfiltered, come on, man. Unfiltered in like two days, it'll be gone. It's paper. You know, I don't want to see it. It's garbage. It stays for a week. It's annoying for a week. It's annoying for zero amount of time if you take it and you put it in your pocket. It's a creep move. It's a creepy selfish move. The one people throw them out the window of their car where they're driving on the highway. That's a creepy selfish person because you've got any awareness at all. The last thing you do is throw a fucking cigarette out the window, especially in California. Well, that's responsible for what percentage of the fires that happen on here. Right. A lot of them are from people throwing cigarette. You guys have read Edward Abbey? Well, Desert Solitary, he was the famous, probably the most famous author who lived in Utah. He lived down in the southeast around Moab, which is all red rock and arches and it's fucking beautiful. Completely different from where you guys were. But if you ever go back, go down there. It's like amazing. That's where those dudes swing through the arches and stuff. What was that asshole, Boy Scout guy? I got arrested for pushing over one of those rocks. Oh, yeah. Exactly. Oh, yeah. It is. It's a kill me. Good idea. For millions of years. Anyway, Edward Abbey is this funny, like Kentanker, it's kind of like, uh, who we talking about earlier, the Gonzo, uh, uh, uh, uh, Hunter Thompson, kind of that kind of character, right? And he wrote this book where he was, um, cruising down the highway throwing cans of beer out the window. Like he'd finished the beer and throw it out the window. And he was very popular among environmentalists. In fact, earth first, that movement started based on one of his books called the Monkey Ranch Gang. But anyway, Edward Abbey was like, fuck it, the beer cans, not the, the litter, the highways, the litter. Don't build the fucking roads, right? The garbage is already here. So I mean, it's interesting kind of twist justification if I ever heard one with a douchebag throwing cans out the window and the road should be there. He would be here to fucking break his ass. I don't know. Read his book. Read his book. You know about earth first, cans flying out the window. That guy's a douchebag. All right. Without having read a word of a book. I know. He's a tin can. I told you one thing that would, that would get under your skin. Oh, bad. You guys know about earth first, though? Right. But what we're doing is basically highlighting what we talked about earlier is that someone can be a cunt. And also be like really awesome. That's something. Yeah. And that's what it is. You're defending him, but you can't defend him. He's a cunt. No. You guys throwing, see? You're doing it. You can't even help yourself. And you know why you're wrong? Because we don't even know that set you up. He don't even know that he actually did it. This is a book. Okay. So he wrote a book where he may have just said he did it as a way to make a point. But by saying he did it now, he's giving permission to all these other people to throw tin cans out the road. And the next thing you know, we've got a, it's raining tin cans out of every asshole's fucking- Exactly more useful. And for the ruin it, for the rest of us. It's more of a cunt move to pretend that you did it and not really have done it, thereby green lighting actually happens. I'm throwing cans out. I'm an environmentalist. I feel like- Alright, here's a guy. He was really good. He was awesome. Here's a guy who gets what? 12 miles for gallon in your muscle car. No, wait a minute. No, my car is a six cylinder. But also Joe's not clinton. It's never claimed to be an environmentalist. That's the difference. Why you claiming that you understand how muscle cars work? I don't have how much car. I'm about 9-11. It's very light car. Because you were saying earlier, like you were the muscle cars and it's the, you got to hear the, you know, the burn in the fuel and then the exhaust. You don't drive one. No. So you're just like Edward Abby. You're just throwing out this bullshit. Give him permission to muscle car owners. I have a different kind of muscle car. I have a different kind. But the kind that I have is not like that. It doesn't eat up a lot of gas. No, this is my- Here's where I take issue with Edward Abby saying that the goddamn street is wrong. It's already trash. Fuck you. Edward Abby. I like driving on concrete. It's fun. I like the, I like the roads. He's on it. He's on it. He's using it. You just think that the moment you start saying like, no, this thing itself is the corruption. You're the corruption. Abby, how about that? Like just deal with your own self. I think that's what it comes down to. Deal with the fucking pollution inside of you. You know, that's gotta be it. Deal with what's going on in the tiny little acreage of nature that you are. That's it. First start in there. And then like before you're looking at roads and deciding that roads are evil or whatever. First start in there. I'm talking to myself. I wag on my finger just about everything and quality evil. So I'm a hypocrite in that. But I do think that the more you can pull your tentacles out of the world with all your tentacles pointing. This is bad and that's bad and that's bad and bring it back into you and see if you can find peace in there. Find tranquility in there. If you can find equilibrium in yourself, you're probably going to stop doing a lot of the things that are causing pollution in the world. I bet. Maybe not. But I would bet that if you could find a way to like find stability and peace, you're gonna treat people better. You're not going to be so inclined to do selfish things. When you're happy, you oftentimes become less selfish. Don't believe me? Chop on some fucking ecstasy. Eat some really good MDMA and then see how you start acting and you're seeing the way you act when you're in a bliss state. And generally what do you do when you're in ecstasy? So often you hear, yeah man, I got on ecstasy and then gotten a fucking bar fight. I just felt like beating a shit out of that guy is being a real dick. It's like when you wake up from getting high on ecstasy, your regrets always involve being too effusive with your friends. Like I'll come too after an ecstasy to be like, oh God. I fucking told him I loved him. I told him I told him I'm important he was in my life and I never want I'm gonna miss him and you know what I mean? Those are your regrets. When you wake up after booze you're like, oh holy shit. I told that guy looks like he's in Game of Thrones and I told that. You know what I'm saying? It's like, it's internal environmentalism. I just don't think there's any way to justify littering like that. And you're justifying littering like that because there's something already bad there. It's a silly proposition. I think that if you sat down and talked to the guy, you'd probably agree. I mean unless he's an asshole. Do you think you could ever justify throwing cans out the window? Would you ever justify throwing cans out your window? I'd like to go to his house and shit on his carpet. It's not a justifiable action. You're ruining things for everybody else and if everybody did it, the whole thing would be ruined. Like you drive through like the boulder. Like you ever really drive from boulder up into the mountains. You don't see any garbage man. It's amazing. It's beautiful. Cars drive through there every day. Nobody throws shit out the window. They have a great respect for what that place looks like. It's very rare you see any garbage on the ground. But what if everybody was like that guy and just threw cans out the window? You know, oh, this shouldn't be here. Yeah, yes it should. It should because that's how you use cars dummy. In other words, it takes a long time to get anything done. So either we all don't use cars and we all walk around a city or you shut the fuck up and stuff thrown cans out the window, asshole. That's stupid. What do you, you're in a car and you're throwing cans out the car because of the roads. Set the fuck out of here with this. Smack that guy. Take his keys and throw them into the river. All right. Look at your keys, stupid. Don't let this listeners don't let this discourage you from reading desert solitaire. I'm sure books grow. He's still an asshole if you're doing this. He's still defending him because of his writing. That's your solitary. That's the name of the game he plays when he drives his car and throws his cans. It's fucking desert animals. Yeah, we shouldn't do that. We shouldn't do that. You know, as often happens, I'm cursed by seeing both points of view. I think you have to be. I think he's making a larger point that civilization itself is the toxin. And I agree with that. He was a civilization you could eat in by wolves. We'll be ridiculous. Life with sock a fat dick if it was a civilization. What about you, man? You know hunter-gatherer? If you didn't have a civilization, what do you do? That's a completely empty argument which goes back to the idea that if you're born into a world, into a time and place, I'm not going to do so. Hey, mom and dad, sorry, I'm going to go be a hunter-gatherer. You know, I mean, what the fuck? I'm not going to use my phone. I'm not going to try the car. That completely invalidates any conversation because no one can ever criticize civilization at all because we all participate in it. So that doesn't make sense. No, that's not saying that no one can criticize civilization. Well, you're saying I should be a hunter-gatherer? Yeah, the wrong. I'm saying civilization isn't all evil. It is what it is. It is. It is light of growth. It is. It is a life of growth. It's certainly like a growth or a movement. It's a fun growth. It is what it is, but it does not necessarily all bad. But wait a minute. You're moving to a different conversation, which is, is it all good? Is it all bad? Of course not. But what I'm objecting to is the idea, because I'm going to be dealing with this a lot in this book, that the idea that you can't criticize civilization if you participate in it. Well, it's not the same thing. But no one's saying that. It's not the same argument. The argument is that you can't criticize civilization. It says civilization much like almost everything is incredibly nuanced. There's a lot of parts to it. Yeah. I feel like most of the parts are fucking amazing. Most of the parts of not having to worry about most of the diseases that used to wipe out the population, not having to worry about gathering your food, not having to worry about sewage, not having to worry about information and education, not having to worry about social structures, not having to worry about being fucking invaded by rival Mongol herds and shit. The amazing aspects of civilization in my opinion, far outweigh the cancerous element of the very human being. Exactly. And let me flip the whole thing back on you and say the reason that we're not going to reason you feel that way is that you were raised in civilization. So just like the Navajo call themselves the people and the Apache call themselves the people and the Iroquois. Everybody believes that the time and place they live in is the place to be. And so a lot of your information about comparing civilization to pre-civilized times is mutated and distorted by the fact that you are from this time and place. You've got a vested interest in believing that. For example, you said, oh, I wouldn't want to have to worry about dying from all these diseases everyone died from. Fact is all that like the top five killers of human beings, all those diseases jumped over to humans from domesticated animals. So they didn't exist in any important sense before civilization. Oh, there's no doubt that tuberculosis. Every one of those fluents, no smallpox. Sure. Well, where are they? And there's no doubt that everyone in every point in time throughout history was in the time that they were in and the best time for human beings. According to them, we justify that. We always justify that or we look back in the past with nostalgia. And that's what I think you do a little bit. Sure. And I do as well. I mean, I think I'm not saying that civilization is the only way to live life. And if we were living back in the tribal days of 6,000 plus years ago in the Amazon or whatever the fuck it was when people were living without any possibility of anything being any different. What's between us now and then is the incredible possibilities of civilization provides. I personally find those things enriching and fascinating. And I would rather hang out with people of today than some asshole from 6,000 years ago that doesn't have the internet. But you never read that asshole. I'm not being honest. I want to I want to fucking around. Do you understand how they talk to community? Let me add. I don't always say what we mean. Oh, your slippery fucker is going to start. I want to add something here. When I'm walking around a group of people, I've noticed this. That my the way that I'm categorizing that experience shapes the experience itself. Absolutely. So if I'm walking through a group of people and I'm thinking, here I am among the locus. Look at them devouring the earth. If I think like that, then suddenly I am living in a in a in a I'm just basically another sticky little bit of scabies on some yes, herpes infested prostitutes vagina. But then if I look around and think, wow, man, these are all expansions of the earth. These are all expressions of the universe. Here is the universe expressing itself in in in this is nature. Sure. I'm not in South America. I'm not surrounded by green and trees. And I don't hear the sounds of the jungle, but I am still surrounded by the natural world, making a very specific form of manifesting that specific way we call civilization. And the moment I see it like that, suddenly things get better. It feels like I make connections more. It seems like it talks to you. We talk to each other. We are the universe talking to it. So do you do you believe in God? I believe in a higher intelligence. I think the word God is a real confusing word, but as the term of convenience, I'll say sure. I ask is that that's essentially how I look at religion is like people can choose to believe in something like that because it makes their immediate experience more pleasant. Well, not to get into semantics, but I think you should separate religion from belief in God. to believe in something like that because it makes their immediate experience more pleasant. Well, not to get into semantics, but I think you should separate religion from belief in God, because I think that's the thing. I think you pull those things away. And then you get into this idea of like, oh, you're just making yourself feel better. And so you're sort of deluding yourself to try to turn your eyes away from their raging fires of hell. Right. Because the fact is the locust vision and the enlightened beings and magic of the universe vision are both true. Exactly. I've been open the possibility of a higher intelligence to space in the fact that if you look at the senses that some animals provide, there's a lot of animals, a lot of life forms on this planet that literally don't have the senses to detect us because we don't, we're not involved in their world on a regular basis. To certain animals, you wag your hand over a slug. They have no fucking idea here there. Yeah. They don't care. They know there's certain animals that are like that that don't have the ability to perceive whether it's fungus or whether it's microorganisms or whatever it is. Why would we assume that this is the end of the line? Why would we assume that in our complex, very limited, in fact, we have so many, so few senses we have them numbered. I mean, why would we assume that those are the only senses to be had and there's not some sort of a next step, next dimension. And the difference between oceanic creatures with no eyeballs and a person living in a penthouse in Manhattan might as well call that a different dimension. Sure. Because it kind of is. And why would we assume that this is the end of the line, that our ability to perceive and adjust our material world is the only one like that out there and there's not something way more advanced that exists in the very fiber of the universe itself. And we can't detect yet because we're primitive. What's like size, right? We assume size and time, we judge it from here. Like our experience is the zero in our number system. You know, like things become infinitesimally small and they become infinitesimally large. So we're not at the middle of anything because there are no ends to it, right? But we just sort of randomly choose it and say, well, this is normal. Anything smaller than this is small, anything bigger is bigger. Anything that goes faster than my experience of time is speed it up and anything that goes slower is slowed down. It's like, well, what the fuck? Your assumption is bullshit there because it's based on nothing. The light travels faster than what you hold on. It's way to make you fucking crazy bitch. It's also the assumption of the birth and the death of the universe itself. I've always wondered why we need to attribute these biological characteristics like birth and death to the universe. Like why would we automatically do that with no assumptions? No, we do it based on our own personal limitations. The fact that we know that we live and die, other things live and die. We're pretty sure planets live and die. We're pretty sure suns have a life and then they burp. We know it. The supernovas, we know that suns die out. We know our sun has a certain amount of time left and then it's over. We know it. So we just assume that the whole universe is like that. Yeah. Well, we use the term die to refer to that moment of radical change that happens in everything in the universe when it goes from being from one form to the next. But it isn't really a death. It's just a radical, radical fucking change. You know? Interesting. Yeah. We don't talk about the death of water when it becomes ice. No. You know, although melting has a little bit of death and it may be. Well, it's just change. Yeah. We're just like, that's the thing. It's a growing this constantly morphing, changing thing. This constantly changing world. And you get to, I think what you said about where existing in these two, all these dimensions. One is the dimension where it's a bunch of locusts chewing up a living planet. Another dimension is where the living planet has sprouted sensory, sensory, I don't know what you call it. It's the what? sensory organs, right? Yeah, right. It's that or it's like that, which are human beings. Which are the human beings. A human being who said human beings are the universe looking back at itself? Yes. There's that. And then these are considered like, Uh, Ronda talks about this. How there's this channels that you can dial into and you get to decide what channel you want to dial into. So if you want to live in like the Fox News dimension, you can live there where you're constantly your fist or clenched. You're watching Bill O'Reilly, everything Obama does makes you want to fucking kill yourself or kill somebody else and your stomach is bubbling, your chain smoking and listening to Rush Limbaugh and beeping at anyone who like cuts in front of you in the wrong way, that's a dimension. You're in a specific universe where you're at war with all these liberals, blah, blah, blah, and culture is the goddess, whatever. So like, but there are all these different channels that you can tune into. And one of them is this channel where you just believe that everything's perfect. And that is blasphemy to a lot of people. They don't want to fucking hear that. They don't want to hear that everything's perfect. Because then they say, look at the fucking radiation, Fukushima, Holocaust, people dying, cancer kids. The hyenas are killing the fucking, the elk, we're all dying, everything's on fire. Or it's sun's gonna supernova. How dare you say everything's perfect, you know? But if you start just playing around with that idea and tuning into that idea that, no, no, this is perfect. This is a beautiful universe. I look at it, Hubble telescope and I see those incredible, just deep fields of stars out there. And I see the supernovas and I see all these things. And I don't think, oh God, the violence of the supernova is that evaporates everything around it. I don't think, oh God, the monster black hole is sucking this dimension into it. And I don't think any scientist or cosmologist would look at that and be like, that is violence happening in evil. Yet somehow when it gets down to us, these little fucking little meaty things, that's where the thing's malfunctioning now? The black hole is fine, it's not evil, that's not a demon. The black hole's sucking, fucking light into it. That's not evil. But suddenly when it comes down to us, it's like, yeah, we're monstrous. Asteroids kill the dinosaurs. Yeah, fucking chunk of metal flying 45,000 miles an hour through space. Yeah. Slams into the earth in several miles deep within the first couple seconds. I say forgive us. But you're right too. Yes, that's the thing. You get to pick where you want to be. The guy throwing cans out the windows still at douchebag. Do you know that you locusts and grasshoppers are the same animal? No, I didn't. It's the same animal. The same animal. The same animal. Yeah, what happens is you've got a bunch of grasshoppers, right? If there's not enough food, below a certain caloric intake, they metamorphize into locusts and they swarm and take off. Wow. Isn't that fun? I'm thinking about that a lot as a metaphor for human nature. Right? Because we're talking about how fucked up the word nature is. And everybody's always asking me, having written this book and whatever. You know, what is it human nature to do this? Human nature to do that. It's like talking about locusts and grasshoppers. I think we become a different kind of being based upon our context. That's not just insects. That's wild pigs as well. Wild pigs and domestic pigs are the same exact animal. And the most different now, I was explaining that. That wild pigs, I forget the exact term, what the pig, what gender it is. But when they move out, like if you get a wild pig and you release it out into the wild, within three weeks, they start changing. Like their body changes. Their snout extends, their hair becomes darker and coarser and their tusks grow. Like the Hulk. They grow these fucking crazy prongs. When you see a wild boar, that's the same thing as a domestic pig. It's literally the same animal. It's an animal that morphs when it has to take care of itself. Yeah. If you leave a wild pig, yeah, there they are. Look at the difference is those two animals. Those are the same animal. The exact same animal. But the one on the right is wild and the one on the left is domesticated. So human beings, there you are. On the left. On the right, hunter-gatherers. Sasquatch, maybe? No, no, still human beings. That's the point, still human beings. Yes. But then wild pigs fuck up their environment. Yeah, hunter-gatherers. They do. Now they don't. Wild pigs, they fuck up the golf course, is what they fuck up. They fuck up, fuck up. Farmland, that's not their environment. That's the point. They're disruptive to all your fishal environments. But they're not a point. No, they're not from here. They're not indigenous species. We brought them in entirely. Which gets back to why the Aztecs were cannibals, by the way. If pigs had existed in North America, they wouldn't have been. Pigs are so crazy with how they reproduce. Deer only re-redoised once a year. So they spit out a couple of fawns. Pigs reproduce all year round. They shit them out every three or four months. And they shit out like eight or nine of them. Or a good litter. But I saw a bunch of wild pigs and they had a whole crew behind them. Oh yeah. They would travel in these packs. But this is one video of wild pigs running through the woods. I don't know, I put it on my Twitter a while back. I'm probably really hard to find it. But if you just find this video, it's the most insane thing you've ever seen. It's like you're watching the Lord of the Rings and a goblin army. It's like trudging through your town. They're crazy man. We went hunting them and we were in this place called Tohone Ranch. And where that door is, which is probably what? 20 feet away, 30 feet away, that close pigs were fighting in the bushes. And we're standing there with rifles. And the bushes are rattling like it's Jurassic Park. And you hear, rah! Rah! Rah! Rah! Rah! Going at it with each other. And they have toks. And it's crazy looking wild, shaggy, dark things. That's the same as babe. It's the same goddamn animal depending upon the circumstances. If they have to fend for themselves, if you take out all the aggression of the natural world, so they don't have to be on point from the moment they're born, they don't have to be like aware of predators. Little piggy's not afraid of shit. The same animal. The same animals are wild boar. Without civilization. Yeah, that's it. The universe is very complex, man. And there's so much adaptability within the natural world in quotes with the world of organisms. There's so much adaptability. It's absolutely, totally, completely fascinating. Getting back to your point about higher beings and why do we assume that we're the end of some spectrum? Another indication for me is just there are, I mean, I'm no mathematician, but there are some mathematical principles that are just too fucking beautiful to be random. And I mean, I've had experiences traveling. I'm sure you guys have had experiences where it's like, holy shit, that can't have just happened. There's no rational way to understand how that just happened. But a sort of universal one, which I ended Sexton with is the sun moon thing. Do you know about this? OK, so the moon is obviously a fraction of the size of the earth, right? One fourth. One fourth. One fourth, really? Is that right? Yeah. I would have thought much smaller than that. No, it's extraordinarily large for a moon. In fact, that's one of the reasons why a lot of the ancients thought of it as a planet. Hmm. Huh. Yeah, it doesn't move like a planet though. No, it stays. There's no regressive. It doesn't spin. It doesn't spin. It spins around us, but it doesn't spin in the air. Right. It just floats around us. The same side is always facing us. Anyway, so the moon's much smaller than the earth. And the sun is far, far, got it. Hundreds of thousands of times larger, right? And as you said, the moon is this very important, obviously. It's important to every civilization or every culture that's ever existed. The moon is often seen as feminine because of the changes and its association with menstruation and so on and so forth. And the sun obviously is super, you know, those are the two most important things that anyone's ever thought about, you know, in terms of like immediately obvious symbols. And they appear to be exactly the same size in the sky because the distance of the sun exactly compensates for its larger diameter. That's interesting. You have to, if you take the diameter of the moon divided by the distance from the surface of earth, it equals the diameter of the sun divided by the distance. So that those two things appear exactly the same. And you have these solar eclipses where the disk of the moon perfectly covers the disk of the sun. That is mathematically like, wow, the fuck did that happen? There's no reason mathematically for that to happen. Isn't that a gravitational law though? No, no, it's not. It's not. If you look at the, in fact, I talked to people about this, you look at what the moons of Jupiter look like from the surface of Jupiter. They're not, they have no relation to the size of the sun seen from the surface of Jupiter. Right, but Jupiter is a gas planet, right? Isn't that different? Don't look at me, man. Jupiter is not a gas planet. It's not. Saturn is. Jupiter is not a gas giant. I don't think so. We can look it up. I know there's, did you guys just watch cosmos the other than? Yes. Because there's a thing called Bodes law that based on the amount of mass that a planet has, you can accurately predict where the next planet will be. And it works. Apparently, it's a, a jovian planet. It's a large planet that it's not primarily composed of rock or any solid matter. Yeah, it's a gas giant. What happens if you- It's four gas giants. Hold on a second. Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune, those are all gas giants. What happens if you fall into a gas giant? You're fucked. But do you, do you just fall through it? It's a big swirling ball of death. Like, it's not primarily. So no conduct. There's some solids within it, right? I mean, it's like a, it's like a, it's like a agglomeration of. It's just not primarily composed of solid matter. Is it muddy in the- It's probably couldn't fall through. It's fucking hurricanes of death. There's this storm that have been going on since the beginning of time that are bigger than our planet. Right, the red spot. Yeah, it's just a storm. It's just a earth-sized storm that's been going on forever. Which is the one with that crazy shape at the top that spins around. Is that Jupiter Saturn? You know what I'm talking about? The one that's got that. Yeah, that's Saturn. It's got like a hexagon at the top of it. Yeah, yeah. It's really bizarre. It almost looks like a design. But so is everything. I mean, you know, the lower you get and start looking at different aspects of nature, everything gets like, look at ice crystals under a microscope. Oh, man. Like, like, like salt. Look at salt and little sounds. Yeah, yeah. Grays of sand. Have you seen that book? This guy who takes micro photographs of grains of sand? Amazing. Look and wild, man. All different colors and little pieces of seashells and coral and like, they're all these wild, crystalline things. I just, you assume every grain of sand is the same. Yeah. It's so much. They're amazing. Yeah. See, that's it. That once you start getting to tune into that channel that we're talking about now. Suddenly the locus are gone. Now it's like, other worlds amazing. Yeah. Wow. Look at these beautiful place that we're in. Oh, there you go. Yeah. Yeah. And you know, those aren't uniform, but I mean, there are many things in nature that are. I mean, the Fibonacci sequence, it exists in flowers and pine cones and all these different things. And it's essentially perfect geometric patterns. And that to me is got. And there it is right there all the time. Right next to you. If you just take a little bit of time to get yourself out of the perception, whatever the perception is that you've become accustomed to. And that is like, that's what they call, I mean, in like, occult systems are in magic. That's like one of the first things you want to do is to like pull yourself out of whatever your condition patterns are so that you could see the world is living. Even for a moment, it's a, I really love chaos magic because it's like a postmodern form of magic that isn't based on like this magic is real. Like Harry Potter shit, it's based on the, if you can change the way you feel, then you're going to change your life. You know, like if you, if you can, if you can induce certain mood states inside of you, then you're going to be more inspired. You're going to write better. You're going to be a better athlete. So that's what it is. So the, the, the rituals that you used to induce those states, that's considered, that's what magic is or that's one form of magic. So it's like the idea is one really fun experiment you can do. It's really cool. Man, this isn't a book I read about chaos magic. You go to like a place where there's shit loads of people and you put yourself in a intentionally paranoid state, not paranoid is in your afraid, but paranoid is in the sense that everything happening around you is the universe conversing with you for like 15 minutes. Now the universe is talking to you. So every accident, every moment, every t-shirt that has something written on it, every song that you hear is related to answering whatever your question is. So like an oracle or something like that. And because our minds consist not just of the conscious, but also the subconscious, suddenly you'll start seeing reflections of your subconscious in the workings of the world around you. And that can answer your question or give you some kind of like information that you're seeking. You really is the information coming from the world or inside of you. It doesn't matter if you find a solution that gives you a course of action to take that betters your life. You know, so it's good to not think that we're, I don't mean to keep going back to this. But if you think that you're a plague, then that from a cult lens, that would be a spell that you're casting. That would be considered a rich, you know what I mean? That's like an actual, you're actually going to induce a specific reaction from the universe around you that maybe it maybe won't be so good. Because if you're a fucking locus, what's the universe around you? I think there's no denying that there's several factors involved in your life and shaping your life. And I think there has to be some impact other than attitude, no, if that's a word that comes out of the way you perceive things that it might not just be, oh, well, you're looking at things the wrong way you're going to be sad. No, it might be that you're shaping the energy that you produce, these shaping what you put out, you're shaping how people receive you. And that may in turn shape the very physical world around you, the same way wolves change rivers. Yeah. And in the end, the love you take is equal to the love you make. Yeah. I mean, basically the thing that shit out in the hippie days, yeah, isn't that what they meant? Yeah. At the end of that great song. It's a fun example. It can't be in it through gas on the whole thing. Just get yourself all worked up in a nice paranoid froth, which I'm quite good at doing and then go into the world and you'll notice everyone's a dick. If you ever notice that when you're really, you know, like all of a sudden, it's like, God, man, everyone's being such a fucking cunt today. It's so true. Every time I'm in LA, I notice that, man. Well, traffic creates aggression within within me. You know, it's what you're saying earlier, like people cut you off, you get all angry. It's I mean, I used to when I was traveling a lot, I first noticed this sort of phenomenon. I always thought of it as the, you know, on the crowded bus phenomenon. I get on the bus in Mexico, whatever. All the seats are taken. I'm standing there. It's a five hour bus ride. I'm like tired. You know, I haven't slept. I've got diarrhea. And I'm sort of like leaning on the seat and the dude who's shoulder, my ass touches occasionally is kind of getting up tight. And I'm thinking, what an asshole that guy is, you know, fuck, I'm standing here. You know, at least he could do is let me lean on the seat without giving me shit. Whatever. Then the guy gets up, gets off the bus. I sit down. Someone else is standing there and they start, they're asked, start touching my shoulder and I get pissed off. And I'm like, yeah, there you go. All depends on where I am. You know, like I am such a fucking hypocrite because my perception of this situation is not accurate. It's, it's, you know, any or it is accurate in both cases. But both cases are true. Now imagine this. Imagine either of those situations, you adjust, met a girl and fallen in love. And you don't give a shit. Yeah. Now I was suddenly, because you're in love. It doesn't matter if someone's rubbing against you. It doesn't matter. And fucking dog could probably come and start chewing on your ankle. It's going to suck. But you're not, you know what I'm saying? So that's honestly, that's why I traveled so much because traveling, put me in the state of mind, where nothing bothered me. But the idea is I always felt so lucky and happy to be wherever the fuck I was. So here's the big question. Can we induce that state of feeling love in love, whatever you want to call it, minus a condition? So in other words, is there a way to actually do we have the controller? Is it already inside of us to find this place where we're constantly experiencing that feeling of intense love wherever we go? Because if you're feeling that the traffic doesn't suck, nothing really sucks. You know, I said this on Ari's podcast, which is like, do something you love with someone you hate and something you hate with someone you love. And you'll see how potent the state of feeling in love is because if you do something you hate with someone you love, you don't hate the fucking thing anymore. But if you do something we love with someone who sucks, it's no fun. It's a miserable situation. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, there's also the question of are you trying to have in asking for this state of love and bliss and whatever it is that the mystics are always guiding us toward? Is that an illegitimate request in a sense that, you know, is that an ultimately selfish request? You're saying, I want pleasure without pain. I want light without darkness. I want bliss without despair. Aren't those things, is there light without darkness? You know, is for now. For now, you'll get you darkness later. You'll get plenty of darkness going down. Well, that's sort of how I feel. like, you know, I've had a, you know, if I, if I tally it up my life, I would say it's 90% great. I would say more than 90%. Well, look where you're at right now. Yeah. No, whatever. I mean, but again, that's one of those things like pick, pick your perspective and the valley looks different depending on what's mountain you're standing on. You know, it's always this condition is 100% great. Yes. It's just nothing's 100% great. No, this right now, this condition right now we're in is 100% great. There's nothing negative about it. We're putting out all this conversation. A lot of people are enjoying it. They're thinking we're sparking ideas. We're having a good time together as friends. We're having a good time talking and stimulating each other. This, I mean, these podcasts are awesome. It's really cool and unique moment. So for me right now, I'm having 100% good time. And this is what I'm judging. I'm judging my time this moment. This, this moment, which you, it's all about maintaining your balance on this tight rope. How long can we stay at this moment? Yes. That's it, man. The razor's edge, right? That's what they say in boot. Because I'm walking to the spiritual path. This is great book. Is tricky is treading upon the edge of a razor. Yes. Beautiful book about a travel. I love the movies and a secret. I like the movie too. The razor says, I never saw the bill Murray. Oh, Bill Murray. That's great. Yeah. But, but yeah, man, that's the thing that, and I love like the other day, man. I was taken a walk and I hit that fucking place by the river, the LA river. This is, I keep having that by the LA river when I go for these walks. And I'll hit this place where it's like, this is amazing. This feels so good. And then I'll think, I want this feeling the last forever. And then it's gone because I'm trying to grasp at it. I'm trying to fucking hold it. You know, that's that I kneel young, that kneel young song. Love is a rose, but you'd never know. I pick it. Only grows when it's on the vine and full of thorns. And you know, you've missed it. Lose your love when you say the word mine. Yeah. You know, when you're, when you're trying to grab it, when you want it to last, when you're like, no, I don't want it to go away. Go, it flees and tear. Awesome. It's kneeling. He's the greatest man. You should get him on this podcast. It's so cool. He, you know, he makes his own bio diesel. Yeah. It makes his own gasoline. He has a farm and he makes his own gasoline to run a diesel truck with. He used to live right here in Topanga. Really? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He's the coolest. Where's the man? I want to stalk him. I want to stalk him. He's still in LA somewhere. I was working at a greatwood center for the performing arts in Mansfield, Massachusetts at a, at a Neil Young concert once. And it was the craziest concert ever because people couldn't hear well. Like it was the, the setup wasn't very good that day for whatever reason. And so the people in the top, there was so much talking like the, the top area was like this grassy area. There was so much talking. It was like, it was like riots almost. And then people started lighting fires and people would snuck in booze and they had to shut the concert. Ah, they had to shut. Literally stopped the concert because there was so much chaos. And it was all in a Neil Young concert. I had sex. It was wild. It was wild. It was wild being there. I put a jacket on over my security jacket. It was like, fuck this. I'm blended in the crowd. I zipped up and got the fuck out of dodge. I think that was one of the last shows I ever worked. It was like this job's just too fucking crazy. It's too dangerous when, when Chico is wild and you see like a whole, this whole field filled with people partying. They're all fucked up drunk and they're lighting fires. I mean, it was just craziness. And then people are beating and shit out of each other randomly. Like you find like little packets of people being and shit out of your brawling. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's brogest broke out. A Neil Young concert. Yeah. I mean, that's not Neil Young's. It's loud. Listen, everybody in mass chooses will punch you in the face. Okay. Be well aware of that. Everybody in mass chooses the unit argument with you. We're very good shot of getting punched in the face. That's just a fact. Man, did you see that video that riot that broke out at the sport, the basketball game, like a, an entire riot broke out in the crowds? Like people were in sharks. When humans stampede, it's scary. Happens all the time in Brazil at the soccer matches. Well, they decapitated that guy. The referee stabbed, they had the referee got in a fight with someone in the, in the crowd. Okay. A fan tried to stab the referee and the referee wound up stabbing the fan or the fan was attacking the referee. The referee stabbed him and killed them. Then the, the audience came down and ripped the guy apart, the decapitated him and removed his limbs. The referee, whoo. The fans murdered the referee and cut his head off. And it wasn't just one fan that did this. It was like 28 people that did this. They tore this guy apart and cut his limbs off and cut his head off. See, everything's perfect. Well, the Buddhists say no snowflake ever falls in the wrong place. No snowflake ever falls on the wrong decapitated. It's all the with the university plan. Don't go fucking stab in people and you won't get dismembered in front of a large crowd of soccer fans. Yeah. I mean, they, they were arrested a few people, but I don't know how that works. How many people can you try for murder? Look at this. Brazilian soccer referee beheaded by angry fans who put his head on a steak. Yes, they stab a boy. That is old school. Wow. They put his head on a steak. They look bad. All those prime evil ways of dealing with things. All those are. You know how La Crosse started? No. It was a substitute for war among the, the, the Iroquois and the people who lived in Northeast US and part of Canada. So what they did was they developed this game and the cross, there was no field initially. There was like a hoop, you know, that they would put on a stick and the one part of the woods and the other one and the other part of the woods. And they had the, you know, the sticks and all that that they were. And you would like fuck people up. You'd kill people along the way. You'd like stab people with your stick. And I don't know if this is true in all cases, but in many cases, the, the losing team whoever was still surviving would then be tortured and killed. So it was actually a substitute for war. Kind of like, why not just go to war? Well, that's what the most you did as well. You know, it's easier. By the way, that doesn't sound like a substitute for war. It's a, it's a channeling of war. Well, it's like about it. You know, war limits. Right. Yeah. Women and children are kid, you know, you're going right. Right. Right. Yeah. And also, I mean, being tortured among those people, when you were talking about the Niz per se earlier, I was thinking that sounded to me like the people in that part of North America and the East, because there was a lot of torturing and eating of, uh, of victims, but that was seen as, um, honorable. If you were, if you were vanquished in battle and captured and eaten and you would be tortured and killed, the running the gauntlet, you know, that's from those tribes. And they would get everybody out there, old ladies, everybody, and you'd have to run down through this line. And they'd hit you with spike sticks and they'd just fuck you up as you went down this, this corridor. These, these are the hunter gatherers. These, well, so they were somewhere agricultural, but yeah, the perfect people. Yeah. Yeah. You guys, everything's perfect. This is the training for me. You guys are actually harder to argue with than academics. Did you ever hear, did you ever hear, you can't make, don't have any humor. Yeah. Humor is the hardest thing to argue with because you look like a fool when people are laughing at you. I would, you're point is good or not. Yes. In Sunday's New York Times, I was quoted saying, uh, Ted is many things and humorless is generally one of them. Well, you're right. Yeah. I know. You're right. It's unfortunate that it's unfortunate that it's unfortunate. that they would have both. Yeah. What they did to Sarah, I think we probably talked about their whole Sarah Silverman thing. Mm hmm. They tried. Any, any, any, wrong stay, any ones, the fucking famous chef. They made him stay with other people. Yeah. They made him stay like a college kid. And then they trashed him when he left to come do your, your thing. He's like, I'm taking an afternoon off. No, you can't leave. What the fuck you're talking about? They make you talk to people. They make you sleep where they want you to sleep. But, you know, they provide awesome content. But it's another one of those examples of just because something does something awesome doesn't mean it's not inherently fucked as well as being awesome. You know, Warner von Braun was a cunt, but he was also a brilliant rocket. Our cunt. It was eventually our kind. Yeah. I mean, it's, it's just a part of the world. There's nothing perfect out there. You know, people try, but so far it's never been achieved. All right. Let me throw this against the wall and see if it sticks. There may be something inherently clunches about people who are high achievers. Just, it did just competitive. It's just, you don't have to be inherently punished to be successful. But you don't have to be no way to switch it around. No, I'm saying that people who are high achievers, there's a book called The Psychopath Tech. currently punished to be successful but you don't have to be no way to do that don't switch it around right i'm saying that people who are high achievers i there's a book called the psychopath test right uh... where he uh... shows a john ronson shows that uh... executives high achieving executives bankers stock brokers military people politicians uh... have a much higher rate of psychopathy than normal people so there's something about being a high achiever you're willing to throw people under the bus you're willing to stab people in the back you're willing to do what it takes you've got the fire in the belly you've got ambition ambition itself is and i know there are exceptions to this but i think ambition itself is psychologically pathological because you don't want to be where you are i think in the kitchen somewhere else ambition without honor ambition without ethics ambition without morals and mission without a code that's when you run into problems it's not the ambition itself it's the ambition represented in an a form of fuckery you know it's represented in cheating it's represented in evil behavior there's there's absolutely ethical competition and anything less than ethical competition should be dishonorable and should be it should be preferable to be poor and that's the problem there's a lack of honor and there's a lack of a code and one of the reasons being is that our society in the rules that are been thrust upon us in many ways is so ridiculous that we reject it yeah you shouldn't probably walk across the street brandably anywhere in jaywalk and make people slam on the breaks but you shouldn't make me pay money because i walk across the street why do why do you get money because i want why what is jaywalking what is that there's a lot of those things there's a lot of those things parking tickets and all sorts of stupid things about like speeding quotas where fundamentally yeah you probably shouldn't speed shouldn't put people in danger but with a fucker you to pull people over and make them write paper what because we elected someone to be in a position to control the traffic and this is your solution is a stupid fucking solution and this whole thing sucks you guys need to steal money for people every year just to pay your fucking salaries you're not even funded you're funded by the fact that people are getting robbed you're pulling people over for rolling through a stop sign you're a cunt you know the whole thing's cunt ish you're in a cunt business and that seems fundamentally to be the problem is that we don't have codes that we don't have a clear ethical structure for our society that's based on being nice to people and raising nice children and stopping abuse at the the fundamental level of childhood and child rearing and making and developing shitty human beings that further instigate this problem i think i think we do have a trade though what is very clear is not clear but i think ultimately the code is get away with whatever you can get away with but that's not to true because there's many people that are very happy because of the succeeded in life without doing that okay we celebrate i don't remember which coach it was we said uh... winning's not the biggest thing it's the only thing that's what you say when you try to motivate players it doesn't mean that that's what people really think that you've seen that allen what animation the south park animation if you've seen some of them yeah if you ever seen alan what south park animation can we play that you know that i'm talking about i can find it for you i'll find it so good there are a bunch of them there's one that i'll find this totally related to this hold on people go ahead Duncan people celebrate people that have a code the code is not a good to celebrate it but i'm saying on a social level on a social look i mean look at who gets the most money who gets the most money not ethical people but we don't celebrate that in its entirety we don't celebrate making the most money at all costs we don't celebrate well we do celebrate no we do celebrate it by giving them the money that's the point that's a structure of celebrating we look down on those people we get angry they don't give a fuck what we know they do i see that's where we disagree i think every person who's not completely other fucking mind thinks about what other people think about that all right then we're back to money being toxic but i'm just saying on a point not what is not necessarily money being toxic or certification i think you are slowly person okay all i'm trying to say is as on a social level social construct our the most resources go to those who win at whatever their their thing is best if they're in banking and finance because that's where more money's going these days and not if they do it unethically ethic the society rewards winning we talk about politicians who have the fire in the belly who have the ambition who have the need to be leaders and so on those are not healthy people the people who should be our leaders are the people who aren't interested in being our yes i agree with you there's a structural distortion in our society that celebrates something that on an ethical level we don't agree we can i show you guys this thing because it really sums up what we're talking about play that video it's so good the South Park people animated all these Allen lots things is so good we don't hear anything music one doesn't make the end of the composition the point of the composition if that was so the best conductors we'll see those who play classes and there will be proposals who both only think of it people go to come to see the one crashing court because that's the end we don't see that as something brought by our education into our everyday conduct we've got a system of schooling which gives a completely different impression it's all graded and what we do is we put the child into the corridor of this grade system for the kind of come on kitty kitty kitty and yeah you're gonna kindergarten you know that's a great thing because when you finish that you'll get it the first grade and then come on first grade leads the second grade and so on and then you get out of grade school you got high school and it's revving out the thing is coming then you're gonna go to college by Joe then you get into graduate school and when you're through with graduate school you go out to join the world and then you get into some racket where you're selling insurance and they've got that quota to make and you're gonna make that and all the time the thing is coming it's coming it's coming that great thing the success you're working for then when you wake up one day about 40 years old you say my God I've arrived I'm there and you don't feel very different from what you always felt and there's a slight let down because you feel there's a hope and there was a hoax a dreadful hoax they made you miss everything and we thought of life by analogy with a journey with a pilgrimage which had a serious purpose at the end the thing was to get to that end success or whatever it is or maybe even after your death but we missed the point the whole way along it was a musical thing and you were supposed to sing or down while the music was being live your life bitches yeah yeah yeah I want I want to watch the bad mother fuck yes he was man yeah totally you know so that's the ambition that you're talking about it's like when people are always rushing at and rushing at trying to get to the lack of balance yeah it's that's you know when we're talking about the bankers and the people that are handling the money what percentage of our population is actually bankers versus what percentage of our population is actually ambitious versus what percentage of the resources of our society go to people we have a corrupt system same just a corrupt system and once people are in power they're very reluctant to give away any of that power and so they keep lobbying and bribing essentially see to keep the laws in place yeah exactly the reason I'm arguing so vociferously about this is that I think that you're right it's not clear because we've got a two-track system we've got an ethical system that tells kids be nice to each other you know blah blah the golden rule but the structure underlying the fundamentals of our society are sending the opposites message they're saying fuck everybody get yours but this is why it's a simplification because we obviously have rules in place to keep people from stealing we obviously have rules in place but as Duncan said not if they're inside the system that's the point if you steal a hundred million dollars nobody went to jail for what happened in Wall Street nobody all those banks you talked about in Miami laundering drug money they've been doing it for decades hundreds of millions of dollars a year nobody's ever gone to jail for that right but that's not out in the public and that's not out in the open what's out in the public and what's out in the open is what's you know what we hear about in the news and what you know that the exactly it's the poor people getting hauled away the skinny guy in handcuffs so what I'm saying is there's this fundamental hypocrisy at the heart of American society and many other societies but particularly American society where the ethical message is in direct contradiction with the fundamental values of the way the society is structured I see what you're saying then about corruption being because of human ambition and that human ambition when it gets into position Japan positions of power ultimate power corrupting ultimately that there's almost no way to avoid it that maybe it's just that human being should never be in that kind of a position of power maybe something like a corporation where you can go outside of the laws of a human one-on-one interaction maybe something like that just really should have never been allowed to take place because as soon as you allow people to have groups those groups to have massive influence and then them to benefit personally from that massive influence yeah the decisions that they make affect so many people are so gigantic they're almost anti-human and that's essentially what people always accuse corporations of being anti-human it's because they've become apart unwittingly of a much larger organism that needs people to live off of but isn't a person and it's whose interests don't align with those of human beings yeah so it's not like human human ambition is what a problem is the problem is is when it gets funneled into these giant groups because one person on their own doesn't really have that much power this is the power that they can physically you know do whatever they can do with people around them but most of the time and you know you're fucking around you're one person and you you know you're subjugating a bunch of different people they all attack you they're going out to you right what the problem is and they when things become so big they can no longer be attacked and shame is no longer an effective form of controlling doesn't mean because like hey I don't give a shit if if I'm like destroying the Amazon with my oil wells because my friends like me because I throw good parties and I take them out of my we all do it we're all doing it everyone's doing it I'm destroyed the Amazon you're just trying to we we'd all be together in it and we'd sort of justify it in some sort of a way yeah there's the locus Louis the Ru was on he was talking about Fred Phelps in that that crazy Baptist church Westboro Baptist church with he spent three weeks with the guy and he said that one of the weirdest aspects of his trip was that after three weeks although it didn't change his views of the world he thought all the things are saying you know God hates fags on it was very horrific it became normal in commonplace it became like the impact of it was less because he'd been around it for so long that he had been sort of acclimated to it and he thinks it's one of the ways that these people get away in their own mind with doing this and sort of connecting it to the idea that this is God's word is because they just get so accustomed to it they get acclimated to madness they get to we all yes we all right that's the wheeling that's what we're so good to decide what you want to harmonize with and if you're like you that's that's what I'm saying you get a little bit a little bit if you can if you can but if you're a child or if you're raised in a terrible fucking place where you you can't get out and your stuck there as an adult books man books are the greatest right if it exists but then it brings back to the internet because that's what I always say is the great savior of the human being because the internet connects all the ideas together to everyone everywhere whenever it's available and you have to but you have to decide what you're gonna look for yeah that's the main thing what are you what are you mining for if you're mining for demons there's a part of this mind that's filled with fucking demons but you can harmonize that's the thing you can tune in for sure and there are there are lots of different ways to do that you know it isn't hopeless this is that joke I've actually given up the joke because I haven't I can't make it funny but I've been saying it being in the United States is like being a cell in the body of a very healthy serial killer you know and it's like so so the thing to do is not to try to destroy the organism or try to like you're not gonna be able to fight against an entire thing it's to fix yourself that's what it is fix yourself that's but you fix yourself then you become the cancer cell because you're disruptive to the dominant logic of your host right so yeah I but hopefully it's not hopefully like the idea is like if with you know you get one really fucking happy person and that happy person is gonna change the people around them well that none did you hear about this none who just went to prison she's like in her 80s in Pennsylvania she was one of these nuns who broke into some top secret defense lab in Pennsylvania or Maryland they went in at night and nobody caught them and they like when it didn't hurt anything but they were demonstrating how insecure the information there was and how easy it would be and they stayed there peacefully and got arrested I think it was a none in two priests and she just went to prison I mean she became you know disruptive to look it's not for is another example sure let Bradley man you know Snowden the human manning and Snowden like if you look at that that they tuned into a higher frequency which is the frequency of justice of truth of what's right a higher ethic you tuned into that any heat sacrificed everything for it now he's a hero and he's created change big time change in that body of the serial killer it isn't he didn't fix it but god damn it that's not going away people aren't forgetting the fact that they're being monitored that didn't go anywhere that's constantly going to be that that's that's that would be an example of a serial killer having something go from the subconscious to the conscious you know or suddenly the serial killer is like oh it's a kidney stone shit maybe I should I'm I'm killing people every day I don't know if this is really good it created a little bit of indigestion in society you know and one person did that that's one person doing what he thinks right yeah so what happens if we get five of those people and then what happens if you get 20 of those people the change could be so drastic and radical that it would make your heads well I think he's going to be looked at in the future as a revolutionary yeah he's going to be looked at as a guy who's sacrificed his own safety to save the culture and you know when you see that guy do that video conference from South by Southwest and these giant standing ovation whatever what other person who's being shielded by another country or country that we always think of as evil gets treated like that what other criminal that's running from the long arm of the government he's hiding literally he calls himself like a large house cat that's what he says he's like he has the life of a domestic house cat because he doesn't go outside wow just lives inside the house and if he did go outside it would be Russia which also sucks yeah it sucks and he's probably on some giant list of death wishes I mean of people who they want dead you know too bad the wiki leaks guys is as fucked up as he is because I loved it well he's apparently a real asshole a very egotistical and manipulative and narcissistic and I would reserve judgment until I met him I really would I just I think imagine how much character assassination has been doctor up about that guy if you're going to come up with one guy to character assassinate it would be Julian Assange he looks like a douchebag he's got silver hair there's videos of him dancing it's so easy to just say that guy's a cunt but I don't know that guy god forbid any video of me seriously dancing emerges on the fucking internet anyone could easily take a point of view of either one of of us especially if they you know had a stuck in a house somewhere that you were a total piece of shit because he becomes some gigantic controversial figure and you might have jeopardized american safety by relaxing military secrets and yeah there's so many variables there that it's so easy to label you a cunt plus you look like a cunt you know he looks like a cunt it's fucking silvery hair and his fucking posh accent fuck that guy that's everybody thinks and then you hear all this crazy shit about him you know being creepy to women and oh I saw that coming yeah well that that's definitely a setup that whole rape thing I mean well it's certainly a really transparent way to try to get him out of the country I mean that's the most transparent shit ever oh you're not worried about the wickie leeks thing you're worried about him I had sex with someone yeah someone who actually invited him over for another night after the event yeah and what she was pissed off about wasn't that he fucked her it's that he fucked her without a condom yeah in the middle of the there were lying naked in bed right you got a bonary stucco and she got mad come on even if she did get mad which by the way she does have every right to get mad how'd that become an international incident how is that something where you're fucking locking some guy up right what kind of a balance does that show when you look at what people are getting arrested for and not getting arrested for yeah that's a shithead thing to do and that guy a girl shouldn't hang out that guy anymore but if you did go out with him again afterwards well people are allowed to make mistakes but you're not allowed to lock that guy up in a fucking house for a year and have armies waiting with loaded guns standing outside of take his fucking head off before you can testify yeah that's it man that's that's the thing you it's creepy when you think about the trajectory because I remember they were talking about yeah okay well what if he does go back to Stan trial is there a possibility that there's an extradition policy where they could put him back in the United States and like well yeah they do have an extradition policy and then it's like okay so wait there's an extradition policy he goes to the United States is there any potential he could be executed for what he did like well yeah it's treason it's a little unlikely but yeah he could be executed he will no doubt be arrested and jailed forever yeah and probably killed in jail before he even gets to try maybe not maybe he'll be stuck manlings manning style in solitary solitary in a cold cell we barely stay alive fucking larium like I was telling you did you know about that yeah yeah chemical waterboarding just being given fucking larium read my friend's book the answer to the riddle is me it's great you know like I'm Neha and fucking India but that's larium will be explained to people people that no one larium is well larium is yeah it's a it's a anti-malaria drug that it can for a small percentage of people who take it it can accumulate in your brain and then suddenly when my friend's book he describes it as putting your thumb on top of a hose and in your and on one of your neurons I'm sure I'm saying it wrong but it's like basically all you're I'm going to say my own way the dumb way it's like your brain juice goes spring all in the wrong places and then you end up completely losing your fucking mind my friend for god who he was had no idea who he was the he lost all of his memories had to be reminded of what his life was had to go through all his pictures is all in this fucking great book and I do want to plug it because he's one of my best friends the answer to the riddle is me so fucking good but in this book he talks about the history of larium and then he talks about how god damn guantanamo bay they're giving this drug to people who they know that they know causes amnesian insanity they're giving it to people in guantanamo bay and massive doses and apparently there's no malaria there there's no there's no mosquitoes that cause malaria there so why the fuck are they giving these people this drug it's sinister man it's a giving them the drug just to a racer memory it's essentially like their version of what the aliens do to you after they check your butt yeah exactly they're wiping they're just fucking they're they're fucking with their brains it's a psychedelic when your brain malfunctions on larium it's basically like you're on acid for a couple of months like you don't just lose your memory walls bend there's a suicide note that in his book of a guy who uh was just talking about how it's been like three years and he's still exactly as fucked up as he was when he started taking larium it's the it's a note to his family but the point is that's like a who was never charged with a crime by the way right exactly fucking that's what i'm saying so fucking a sange comes back here it's not just like they're gonna walk them up it's like they're gonna be injecting all kinds of weird shit in his body they're gonna be filling in with weird chemicals that's spooky man it's very spooky it's very spooky and it's very strange how many people don't see it that way yeah how many people see well if everybody did that new giveaway the night state secrets what is the United States it's a collection of humans and at the very top of that collection what exactly are they doing they're doing what they're doing this they're shooting missiles and fucking minivan's filled with kids they're working for corporation what are they doing they're extracting the money national interest they speak of books did you and Louis Thoreau talk about his dad at all no you know whose dad is no his dad's a really well-known writer yeah yeah yeah he's probably the most famous travel writer in the world Paul Thoreau he wrote the mosquito coast great movie Harrison Ford oh yeah that's great yeah yeah he brought that up it was a great conversation though he's really outstanding I watch like the first half of it he's he's such a cool guy very very very love his show he thinks i'm gonna call though he thinks i'm starting to call he i could tell he was examining me is he based in LA he is now yeah but you know the way he does his his his shows you can tell he looks for like cult everywhere he looks for like did you tell him to shape his actual your Americans i stopped telling them that tells everybody to shave their head well he's got a beard now he's got the cheeses beard he broke out the beard on the website it was first time he ever did it it's on the podcast first time he ever showed the beard it was very proud of that so what about this LSD tainted meat in a Walmart who's injecting LSD in the dough on reddit they said reddit i don't know i didn't exist that someone you know i don't know i didn't examine this but he said that LSD if you cooked it in meat it wouldn't it wouldn't last it's a very delicate chemical endpoint i've heard that also about the French case where the CIA dosed all these people's bread is there was supposedly an experiment that the French a French town the CIA dosed in entire way man i suspect the that story might be a mixture saint elm saint saint vida sis fire i think is called there's a story about the witch hunts and some anthropologists went back and looked at towns that had uh the most sort of uh crazy witch hunts in the medieval period and he found that the years the year previous to that there had been an unusually high level of rain and so air got which is a fungus that grows on rye and wheat and some other grains had grown a lot more and air got also contains LSD right i think it's actually a late frost but i think you're right i think uh it was a late front i think it's a late frost that's the issue but this was not that this was in the bread yeah this was not that case though this was this was something that different that's one of the things that they used with the uh Salem witch trials the Salem witch trials they blamed on air got oh really yeah they they think that when all these people were freaking out about being hixed and that's probably what was going on there probably i really intense psychedelic experiences a 50 year old mystery of the cursed bread of uh point saint s-prey which left residence suffering whose nations has been solved after a writer discovered the u.s had spiked the bread with LSD as part of an experiment 1951 acquired picturesque village in southern france was suddenly mysteriously struck down with mass insanity and hallucinations at least five people died dozens were interned in the silums and hundreds afflicted for decades it was assumed that the local bread had been unwittingly poisoned with a psychedelic mold but now however an american investigative journalist has uncovered evidence suggesting that the c.i.a peppered local food with a hallucinogenic drug LSD has a part of a mind control experiment at the height of the cold it but i don't know what the references this is because this is an telegraph is a telegraph like the daily mail or is it more legit i think it's in in between it's not the guardian yeah yeah well they have all these scientists well they definitely were fucking around with LSD mmm-hmm co-in-dope roasting oh they did that with there's plenty of videos where they did that with uh soldiers and that's also with the Harvard LSD studies it was what created the unibommer you know the unibommer was a part of the Harvard LSD studies and when they did him after he got dosed up he became a fucking nut that's what happened with him you touch his insky right his insky was in the Harvard LSD studies and that's one of the things they tried there's a documentary on a call the net and uh it's about that very that very situation Ted kazinski being a part of the Harvard LSD studies and they don't know what the fuck they did to those kids they dose the shit out of those kids and he went from there to become a professor saved up all of his money from school just to be able to buy this cabin in the woods lived there and plot the demise of technology yeah he became a fucking complete nutter I mean whether or not he was another before that who knows but the fact remains is that guy was a part of the Harvard LSD studies and you know they're very secretive about what actually went on in those studies which studies are we talking about at the Divinity School uh i'll tell you right now Ted kazinski they did studies with Divinity School students at Harvard and then liri and alpert now rammed us um gave uh still a siben i think it was to some of their students but relatively light doses as far as i know yeah but that's the problem when you say that a pros what was far as i know you know i don't know what they did either but if i was fucking up a bunch of people's brains and afterwards people came to interview me i'd say relatively small doses if you seen but in creative you know bombers right if you guys seen that image of ergot under a microscope have you seen it i'm sure yeah have you seen that Joe it looks like mushrooms yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah okay this is yeah here it is um this is uh that in 1959 uh Ted gazinski was uh he was absolutely a part of it 80 sophomores the administrative series of scales of questionnaires dealing with various dimensions of personality pick 25 subjects some extremely high some extremely low and some in the middle of each of these scales study 25 subjects over a year period by the multi-form method of assessment come up with 700 rank orders using a computer obtain clusters of inter correlating correlations factors the final decisions of reach after prolonged discussions and reassessments enormous amounts of data which staff analyzes and interprets and formulas while they're on LSD does it say anything about LSD yes um this is uh this is part one of this whole thing they also um that no evidence LSD was ever used hold on a second this is all very complicated shit apparently and it's hard to discern what exactly was going on during this uh these studies by the way i just want to i want to put in professors i don't mean to interrupt you not so if the way you're looking i want to put in a good word for the inner bomber that did uh i'm not convinced great chef that he's a nut what i think that he took his line of reasoning too far obviously he's killing people but we could say the same thing about all sorts of politicians and and leaders around the world who kill people over an idea that they take too far but i think his fundamental uh argument against civilization has some merit i'll just say that and then the other thing i wanted to say is there's a difference between pedophiles and pedirass and it's something i didn't really understand until i started talking about pedophiles and somebody wrote to me and pointed out that a pedophile is someone who has sexual attraction for people that we consider too young to be appropriate whether that's at 18 or 16 or 12 or whatever generally pre-pubescent though um and a pedirass is someone who acts on it and there's a you know that's an important distinction because i remember reading this uh thing in Dan savage's column where somebody wrote into him and said look i'm attracted to kids sexually i would never touch a kid i you know but it's in me i can't help it it's in me i i want to and i want to get therapy i want someone to help me strengthen my resolve never to do this but by law american therapist have to report you if you express a sexual desire toward children so this guy is uh fundamentally prohibited from seeking any help there are no like group therapy sessions there's no if you're that you've got that in you and we know that you know the kinks of all sorts get placed in a personality and you can't get it out but you can learn to deal with it choose how to how to enact it or not enact it but pedophiles have no opportunity for that in Canada they do but in the United States they can yeah they sealed um his they sealed the records from from harvard class of 1962 they sealed all the records on kazinski and they won't release them but he was absolutely a part of something called the mary study and the mary study was uh the mary center seals uh kazinski data his fucking fast name shit man they might cook that dude's brain they might have cooked that dude's brain and created a monster but he's you're right though he sees the future of the industrial society that is what he was describing you're right that he sees like oh my god this can only go one way but in his craze state where he wasn't able to dance and play music like alan wats suggested he was only able to focus on the finish line of the machines taking over the world yeah and he turned into the eight where he wasn't able to dance and play music like Alan Watts suggested he was only able to focus on the finish line of the machines taking over the world. Yeah, and he turned into the he turned into the monster. He's way bigger monster than the society that he was trying to destroy. What a disservice he did for his message because now there's a there's a fucking male bomb underlining everything he did. So even if he did even if there was a bunch of good stuff, he shit all over his own work because he did not have the foresight to understand that you can't you you you're using the tools of the people that you're so angry at to try to change the people you're so angry at like every terrorist, right? Yeah. Well, everybody who thinks that they're right. The net is the documentary, the unibomber LSD and the internet really fascinating stuff. I recommend it. Very interesting. And you know, the reality of the United States experimenting whether or not they really did this with this French town, I should probably throw that into snopes, right? Maybe the snopes will be able to tell me that it's not true. It's not a snope. It's a snow, it's a heartbreaker. It's a great. Yeah, but those heartbreaks are important. Okay, French bread snopes. They must have it. It's just a message board. The message board is really tricky. They haven't now that you mentioned it though, I have read about that and not that that makes it true, but I have heard about that in the past. Well, they do. I mean, we know that the CIA was dosing people. Oh, sure. Yeah. And that's one of the problems with being a black and white sort of a person. Like being a yes to the government's good or no, the government's bad. You know, it's really hard to be either or because there's a lot of crazy shit going on. And I find that a lot of these people that are never willing to entertain any conspiracy theories at all. One of the reasons why they do is because they don't want to be thought of as a fool. They want to be a no nonsense person and no nonsense person almost always sides with the official story. Right. And that's not the nonsense. Yeah, which is nonsense. Yeah. But many, many times, you know, my favorite one is just the idea of the conspiracy of 9-11. You know, I've had this with many people that are no nonsense type and you say, do you believe that 9-11 happened? And if they say yes, you go, well, then you believe in conspiracies. Right. Because they who no matter who did that, that was a fucking conspiracy. Right. I forget who I would like to give someone credit for that quote. I don't remember who it was though. I think it was one of us, I think. I don't know who it was. It might have been me. I don't know. It might have been somebody else. But I remember that thinking that for the first time is like such a great and elegant way to describe the potential for conspiracy. And that people don't want to look at the potential for conspiracy. They want to pretend that everything is exactly as CNN tells you. And other than that, it's just a bunch of shit that's a little wishy-washy to protect terrorism from terrorism. Right. You're from terrorism. Yeah. Well, or to put, it's depending on what side of the fence you're on, you know? If you're getting cluster bombs dropped on your robots, then that's a terrorist act. The most terror, it's a fucking robot that can't even tell whether or not you're the right guy to go after. Truly is a terror-induced. I mean, the United States induces terror and so many people all the time. Well, how about these latest revelations that they use metadata to find cell phones? They used the data that says that this is like this is your cell phone. And they want to get you. So they shoot a missile at the cell phone, hoping you're near it. But that is one of the most evil and indiscriminate acts of destruction and murder that you could ever possibly engage in. You don't care if there's babies next to that cell phone playing fucking candy chase on it or whatever these fucking games are the kids play these days. Candy cluster, whatever it is. Candy crush. Candy crush. Yeah. You're just shooting at a phone. I mean, the idea that you're just shooting at a phone. That's insane. Have you seen, have you seen like, then you see Obama and between two ferns? Did you see him with guy on the back of some between two ferns? Today, it came out today. Whoa. And you just see this really like, he seems so affable. He's like the sweetest murderer. Like you look at him. I'm like, God damn it, man. He just seems really hip and cool. And like, but it is interesting how like they've, they are using, you know, they're getting savvy. You know what I mean? They're like, they're really smart about getting their stuff out there. But it is cool. I guess that's you can be anything other than the president of the United States, me or the president of the United States. It's like people say to me, why don't you say more funny? Shit when you're hosting Fear Factor? Well, because that wasn't my job. My job was to show the host Fear Factor. His job is to me terrible analogy. I know I'm not me. Fear Factor in the president of the United States. But I don't think, I think he might be a good analogy because I think he's an actor. You know, I think he plays a role in that role as the role, the leader of the free world. And I don't think anybody's, there's, there's no leader. There's a bunch of fucking people that influence whoever is in the position that they call the leader. And we don't see them. Yeah, and I don't think we're ever going to really get a handle on how the whole thing is fucking working. I know, I don't think we will, but you can get a good indication either one of two things about Obama. We think he's affable and he's very friendly and nice, which I agree with. So if that's the case, why has he done things differently once he got into office than what he said he would do before he got into office? Is it because what you got in there, he realized that this world is way more fucked and way scarier than anybody could possibly imagine. It's not inside the White House or is he just being influenced by some unbelievably powerful machine that he can't do anything about? So he's forced to sort of placate these people that got him into positions of power and do their bidding regardless of what his campaign promises are. Either option is not good. But you do look at the economy now and it seems to be doing good. There's a job growth. What? So it's a stock markets going up. That's why they say it's good because the stock market's going up. But you even look at, you know, the, the employment numbers are going up a little bit, and look at what kind of jobs those are. They're all low paying jobs. So you know, it's like they, they fuck with the metrics to make it, make the message what they want it to be, right? Well, it's just, yeah, I, I am not an Obama fan, not an Obama defender. It's hard. I just can't swallow the fact that he's okay, you know, blowing up wedding parties and stuff with drones. And also I, it's hard for me to swallow the fact that he doesn't have the balls to come out and maybe he can't. But I wish he'd like stick up for Snowden and be like, this is a whistleblower. He did a good thing. Let's pardon this motherfucker. How about his, his campaign website? They changed the, the literature and his campaign website because they kept it up for the longest time, but it was top, there was a very specific chapter or part about whistleblowers. Yeah. Marijuana's becoming a way worse. Under his presidency, marijuana seems to be becoming a way worse. Is that something that you just can't stop? I mean, at one point in time, when, when is this country going to have an Arab Spring moment if they keep fucking with us and taking away personal liberties? Is going to come a moment where people are not going to want to deal with it anymore. One of the things that's really easy to give up on is marijuana. Because by golly, look at what's going on in Colorado, they're profiting from it. Yeah. It's become part of the economy that is always there, but now it's officially a part where they're paying taxes. They're making millions of dollars in taxes in Colorado for marijuana since February. I mean, it's for me. I'll never be an Arab Spring here because the powers that be here are too smart. What they do is every time the pressure builds up too much, they let out a little pressure by electing, allowing to be elected a cool seeming black dude, for example, or by allowing the legalization of marijuana, for example, that lets a little pressure off. Things I think at the end of the Bush presidency and with the economic collapse, the people were angry enough, you know, that there was something was going to happen. So they just, you know, like any good negotiator, you know, gives something you can afford to lose to keep the other person from pulling out of the deal. I think that's what happens in this country. I think the mistake that happens in Arab countries or other countries where their hands are tied by some, you know, empire system, they can't play those games or that they're not predisposed to do that. They don't want to give up any power. So I think in this country, that's the problem. We're being numbed by technology. We think we tweet something. We've done a revolutionary act. And every time things really get serious, they'll give a little. Same thing in the depression, right? Things were really serious. First they attacked anyone who had anything to do with communism in the 20s, the red scare. Right. You know, then the depression comes along. They allow Roosevelt to get in there. He is able to pass some law, social security, you know, taking care of old people, dealing with some of the sources of the greatest resentment and anger, neutralize those a little bit so we can keep playing the game. Don't fundamentally restructure anything. We'd have to have massive support of the people that got you into power to fundamentally restructure things. There's no motivation for them to do that. Right. They like it the way it is. Problem that we were talking about earlier with corporations, they don't act in the interest of human beings yet. They're conducted and they're made out of human beings. I mean, they're constructed from human beings and they don't like human beings. Yeah. But it's sort of like, I mean, I hate doing this because it's a beautiful, it celebrates music. It's kind of like music, right? I mean, his music made from guitars and violins and pianos or his music, something else. I kind of feel like corporations are like that. Like some sort of spirit or something that can be used the participant. Pookie. So like, oh, that's so weird. So like all the people in a corporation are all possessed by this spirit. And they don't even know they're possessed by it, even though their entire lives are centered around it. And they're all, so the spirit is manifesting through the corporation and you're basically seeing like one of the old school deities that people used to worship way back in the day, manifesting in a modern way through this organized, coving of people who all think they're doing the right thing or their own little thing or whatever. And they don't realize that together they form a demon. Exactly. It seems to me that also that everything fucking changes. I mean, if you look at the world, you look at the universe, you look at the birth of star stellar nurseries, you look at hypernovas, the death of stars, you look at all these different things. The whole universe is in a constant state of change. And our idea is that somehow or another, when I reach some point of peace where everything's going to calm down and we can enjoy our society and our golden years. And it's never going to happen. It's going to be a constant state of yin-yang, a push and pull to the very end. To whatever, I mean, the existence that we're currently participating in seems to have those laws pretty firm. The tide goes in, the tide goes out, the fucking planet's spinning around the stars. The stars explode eventually. The planets dry up. Stardust becomes more people. More people figure out the atom. They split that bitch. They fucking start making nuclear weapons. They shoot to the moon. They just keeps going on and on and on. Like an endless cycle of the same thing happening over and over and over again, constantly changing, constantly moving forward. Complexifying. Pulling in and pulling out. It's complexifying. That's this thing I just read. Complexive. That's how complexity doesn't seem to fit into the idea of a universe cooling down. Because of entropy, which is the opposite. Yeah. It kind of flies in the face of everything that things are becoming more and more complex because how is things, if the energy is running out, things should not comply. They should simplify. Is that correct? Well, that's entropy. Yeah. It's running down to nothing. So it doesn't make sense that things are complexifying. And there's some kind of, who knows what that means. But it might indicate that we're like the flow of time itself. We're just perceiving it the wrong way. We're like actually what we think is the past going into the future is actually the future pouring into the past and the thing that's pouring into the past is some kind of super complex harmonized thing. So maybe it is possible, Joe. Maybe it is possible. The great giant orgy, the entire planet just filled with humans somehow. stepped together. Not the Borg, not soulless, emotionless things, but somehow we all connect and all of a sudden where all this, the universe is just spitting out UFOs. You're the planet is. Suddenly we're spreading through all of space after we've first harmonized. We're change machines. You know, that's where we're part of this whole gigantic organism that's known as the Earth. And it's a part of a gigantic organism known as the solar system, which is a part of a gigantic organism known as the universe. I mean, it's just one piece of the thing and we're change machines. As a machine, the fluents said. And the multin, the McLuhan said that we are human beings are the sex organs of the machine world. And that's essentially what we're doing. I mean, our whole struggle and this desire for achieving things has a lot to do with that. It has a lot to do with us being a part of this weird process. Which is why that guy said it was selfish of you not to have kids. Because he's spouting the ideology of the machine world of which we're the sexual organs. He's also a dick water wants to get some brownie points. But saying someone else is wrong. Why won't you begin? Speaking of reading and people getting involved in your business. Why is it that right wingers are so uptight about abortion? Because most abortions are poor people. And you would think their whole thing is, you know, demonizing poor people. So you would think that fewer, you know, non white poor people would be a good thing for a right wing perspective. And yet they're participating and creating more of them by making abortion a problem in this country. So strange thing I've never understood. It's a Jesus thing. They don't want you killing babies. And you know, they look at that idea of choice being killing babies and babies are the greatest things you could ever do. How could anybody want to kill babies? The problem then why are they against birth control? Well, only the super religious ones are against birth control. You'd have to get to the Catholics. It's very rare that you hear politicians talking about not being pro birth control. Whoa, whoa, not in most of the southern states where they only teach abstinence. Abstinence only sex eden's rules. It's I think it's pretty rare for someone to actually stand on a platform of being anti birth control in 2014, whether it's condoms or anything. I think it's much more prevalent than you think. Maybe. I think it's standard Fox News rhetoric. Oh, is it really? Yes, sex without country. That's ridiculous. Sex that consequences. Fox per per say. Yeah. So it's anti pleasure because they don't want people having sex without consequences. Did you say Fox News perverts are banging each other? Oh, Jesus. Oh, who gets the bang taking? Oh, man. You do. I got your friends. I wish. She's got to get close to the. Okay. What about hate fucking? Have you ever heard of hate fucker? No. No. I don't. I've never understood that. The thing like you're fucking someone because you're mad at them. I guess. Yeah. That just seems. It's not. I mean, I the only time I would entertain the idea would be the Megan, whatever name is and um, Sarah Palin. You would hate Fox, Sarah Palin. I think I would. I wouldn't. I'd try to hate fucker, but I've been in fall in love with her. Sure. Why not? What do you think would really appeal to you the most about her? Because I bet she's fucking cool. Come on. She's so far from cool. This is the terror of it all, man. It's like, don't don't confuse the persona with a person who knows what's underneath there. I guarantee she's super charismatic and you did just end up being like, God, this is amazing. Yeah, sure. Fissed me. I don't care. I want to see what it's like, Sarah. Wow. Fist. Do you think she fissed people? Oh, Megan. Well, that's not the Megan I was thinking of, but yeah, this is. Megan McCain's kind of cool actually. I was thinking of Megan Kelly, I think the blue. Oh, I know you're saying you're. You're thinking of she's very hot, very like hot and really mean. Yeah, mean uptight, like very American kind of. And there's some of those, the women who do the financial shit, you know, they're just so smoke and hot. And then they open their, is that making Kelly? Yeah, see, look at that. She thought it doesn't even look like you know, she's standing on someone's face right now. That's her. I want to fuck you, pose. A guy's not allowed to do that pose, by the way, if you're a newscaster. You can't sit there with your fucking leg spread open to gym shorts, the blue ones with a white pin striping. Do you guys see that thing that where the newscaster says, it's a New York and the guys like, keep fucking that chicken. Have you seen that? No. Oh, pull that up. That is the funniest thing ever. It's live like 6 p.m. news. Why does he say keep fucking that chicken? It's like a banter between the guy, like the weatherman and the sports guy. Yeah. Oh, it's like, it's less than a minute. I mean, if you pull it up, I don't want to, I don't want to talk about it too much. like a mistake. I have no idea. That's why I'm asking. I thought you guys might have a thing to do. He fucking that chicken. He says that. And you'll see the woman's face when he says it, the, the newscaster woman just loses their shit. That's really fun. I'm sure if you just Google, keep fucking the chicken, it'll, it's there. That's so funny when like people on the news act normal for a second and it horrifies everyone. It's really hilarious to see their reaction. It takes a tough man to make a tender forecast neck. I guess that's really, keep fucking that chicken. Okay, I'll do it. Don't we continue? The loss of the loss of the chicken. You sure that's real? I don't think it's real. I think it's real. It's her name. Yeah, she'll get her face. You think that's real? I think it's real. I'm not. They're positive for it. They did. Mm. Well, he just got a little crazy. Who knows, man, these weirdo Illuminati people, they probably do fuck chickens. Yeah, maybe it's like a thing. You just didn't want to tell anybody. Slipped out. Yeah. I fucking fucked up rotisserie chicken. I bet he buys rotisserie chickens and he fucks them. It would probably work. Oh, Ernie and asked this, right? Right. Keep fucking that chicken. What does that mean to the explain why cares about the apology? You want to know what is it? What's it? What's it? The price probably on drugs, man. I think they had a conversation before they were on air where the one guy was talking about fucking chickens and joking about it. And the other guy just referred to it. No, no, no. Isn't a chicken, a name for like a twink? Isn't it a gay term, like a chicken? No, Google search it. I think it's, let's look it up. I think it is. Yeah, I would you look it up. You can fuck chickens because they have a clowaca where the egg comes out and the sex organs are all in the same hole. Cocks do not have cocks. That's a weird thing. They don't. Yeah, they have the clowaca, which is this hole where they're like they do what's called a clowackel kiss where the male and the female will line up their clowackel holes and a little thing from the sperm shoot out of the male into the female. Hold on guys. I've been vindicated. Can you pull that up please? Twink. It says the term chicken are also preferred down here right after that. They call them chickens. Yes. Plumb chicken or chicken or perfect. Wow. Look at that pork bastard. Imagine if you were on Wikipedia and you look at their twink and they got a picture of you. You are a fucking twink man. Who is that guy? That's like an old statement. Yeah, look what you want to know the word twink. Look, look up and picture yourself in addiction. Wait, it's pretty. It's a name there Brent. Brent was the best amateur twink performer. Oh my god. Well, so he's proud. He's proud twink. Wow. You got to be careful man. We can only have twink around. Ectimorphic build. You can only have twink around for another couple of years for someone gets unbelievably offended by it and calls you a piece of shit. LBD. Can you say twink? Okay. I've been living in Portland for like five days at this point and I've already offended some lesbians. Yeah, you're going to oversell some political correctness. That's really down. So intense up there. I was sitting in a camper the other night and this woman says, I remember what it was in this woman says, well, that's living in the white man's world. And I said, I'm not white. I'm Irish. And that didn't. You're not white. You're Irish. The Irish. You know, in the in the no, no, but she was confused by it. The late 19th, late 19th, early 20th century in the United States and of course in England, the Irish were considered beneath Africans on the scale of evolved human beings. That's interesting because they came last to this country. Is that what it was? No, just because they were like rougher, harder to deal with, you know, farted in public a lot of things. The things we all know and love about the Irish. Is that a thing farting in public? No, I just made that up. Sure. Certainly a thing happens everywhere. No. You don't think it happens everywhere? Farting in public or just openly. I never heard it as scribed to Irish people like when I think of it. No, I'm joking. George Carlin. Yeah, beer. Yeah, it creates parts. You're cutting farts. George Carlin had that whole thing where he's like, you know, how come he talked about the Irish oppression and you know, don't jobs for Irish and all that. But he was like, and what the hell is with the fighting Irish, you know, Notre Dame, the fighting Irish. How is that not offensive, right? Like if you had the like the lazy Mexicans take the field, right? Or the chiseling Jews. He does this like, he's crazily challenged. He's like, great. He's great. He's great. Yeah, he was awesome. That's funny. Hi, gentlemen. I think we're at three hours. Are we at three hours? Yes. I'm just fucking fly by. They fly by. They've been amongst the most popular podcast that I do. And I know you guys are saying the same thing. Well, it's pretty good. When we did together last time, I guess mine was the third, right? Has twice as many downloads as any other that have been up forever. And the second is you, you and me. Wow. Cool. Yeah. Yeah. The same thing with us. I mean, these these podcasts that we have are amongst the highest downloaded ones that we have, you know, the one. just to go for the one we did for sure is the most diverse, down that's ever gone. They're really fun. You know, they're fun. They're bizarre. It's a very bizarre combination. I don't know if you guys saw I created a page that archives them. Okay. Cool. You know, I'm happy to transfer it wherever we decided to do it. But for the moment, it's on Chris Ryan PhD dot com and you'll see tripod cast. Be a tab. And that's where the first three are archived. Yeah. It's just a link that leads back to your site and your site. Cool. For the podcast started about trying to figure out a name, but we're not even close old men. And I know those pretty badass because of your description of what it is. Right. But with people, is it funny without knowing the story? No, you have to tell the story though. Just tell people the story because I don't think you did while the podcast was going on. It was before the podcast. We were talking about techniques that that adolescent boys develop, the good ones anyway, for a not coming. And like some people, like think of baseball stats or whatever, just something like non sexual to get your head away from what you're doing, which in itself is kind of a weird thing to be. You're like having the best experience of your life and you're trying not to notice. Because you know, nature wants you to come instantly and just shoot a load into a chicken maker kit and you want to have a good time. It's a strategy. Yeah. Very Zen. Well, it goes back to sex at dawn. It's, you know, sperm competition. Yeah. Nature's designed you to shoot your load, get out of the way so the next guy came. And that's why by the way, we're turned on by seeing gang bangs and dudes fucking. Maybe you are. Yeah. Anyway, so my technique was to think about old people trudging through the snow, like World War II, you know, Crimean refugees, trudging through that Russian winter. It's freezing. Yeah, like that. A babushka. Yeah, exactly. That makes me not want to come. Yeah, think of what that guy's feet. Sorry guys. I can't come now. Yeah, that guy's asshole. Imagine if that guy's asshole. Would you live the last year life if that guy's asshole was permanently an inch from your face? Oh, it isn't guy. Yeah. That's your life. Well, you can live. You can do everything you want. You can go biking. He's going to move. He's got a block. You're always be like, no, right here. It's the right. You can move it around, but it always has to stay like sort of like the moon is in your orbit. That guy's asshole. He's wrong. He has a orbit. You know what? After a week or two, you wouldn't even notice. You say that. I would kill myself. I would kill myself. I would kill myself. I would just. I didn't enjoy my life. Fartening your face. Everything's perfect. No asshole ever lands in the wrong place. That's what the Buddhists say. How did Krishna? Yeah, okay. Both of you guys. And that and thus lays gentlemen. That very conversation highlights the difference between us. Okay. Follow everybody on Twitter, doc and trustl D-U-N-C-A-N-T-R-U-S-S-E-L-L-N are for in Chris Ryan. Chris Ryan, PhD on Twitter. Chris's podcast is tangentially speaking and it's Chris Ryan, PhD.com. You can get everything on there. And DuncanTrustl.com, DuncanTrustl's family hour is his podcast. Both are awesome. And if you're tired of hearing me, listen to some of that. All right. Get in there. We're also at RoxyBroughtsy by Ting. Go to Rogan.Ting.com. Enjoy awesome cell phone service with none of the bullshit. And get 25% off. Or no, what do you get? $25. $25 off of your first Ting device when you sign up. That's Rogan.Ting.com. $25 off your first device. You're also brought to you by stamps.com. Go to stamps.com. Cook on the old schooly microphone and enter in the code word J-R-E for a $110 bonus offer, which includes free postage. $55 worth of free postage and a free digital scale. And a lot of good shit. All right. And we're also brought to you by on it. That's O-N-N-I-T. Use the code word Rogan and save 10% off any and all supplements. Next week, got a lot of cool guests coming up, ladies and gentlemen. They got Dr. Carl Hart. It's going to be on the podcast. Matt the Terrace Sarah, former UFC welterweight champion in the world, Amber Lyon. We got a lot of shit happening. And thanks for tuning in. Thanks for all the love. Have a good time. We'll see you in Dallas in a couple of days. You fucking savages. Ah!