The Jerogean experience. Like so many things, the Terrence McKenna said it's both true and untrue. I think it's untrue in a literal sense, but very true in a poetic sense because the historical cultural context of a drug is part of what you bring to that drug experience. The molecule does not contain information. The ketamine molecule does not bring an experience to you. That is something that is generated in your brain by your consciousness. And so if you have a new substance that has no cultural associations, then maybe it was like that. So you don't have expectations? You don't have expectations. Right. That's a big part of it, isn't it? It's a huge part of it. Yeah. Yeah. I made a piece in the new season of my show about five of me have DMT containing toad venom. And there's a big controversy in the toad venom community, which believe it or not, is a community. And they are purists. Are they friends with the OPA files? Oh, definitely not. No, no. They don't like the OPA files. So what is the venom community, think? They think that this venom has some spiritual component derived from its association with the toad that makes it better than synthetic five of me O DMT. Now, I've analyzed several samples of toad venom. And before five of me O DMT was made illegal in the United States. And in terms of what you find, if you, you know, injected into a mass spectrometer, five of me O DMT is the only psychedelic that's present. In some samples, there might be trace quantities of another psychedelic called bufotanine, but it's a minuscule amount of a less potent molecule. So predominantly, you have five of me O DMT, which is likely the strongest, naturally occurring serotonergic psychedelic. And for conservation purposes, it's necessary that people stop milking toads because it's become too popular. Mike Tyson's talking about it all the time. I mean, I mean, it sounds ridiculous. Like Mike Tyson could have an effect on conservation. But if a celebrity says they like something, that can have a tangible effect on the environment. I know people who have toads for that very reason, because Mike Tyson talked about those toads. Now they have toads and they milk these toads. Oh, yeah. I mean, me too. I talked to the billionaire who flew a private jet full of toads to grease to create a private toad sanctuary. Wow. Wow. Wow. How many toads did you got? I didn't. And the photos didn't look like that many. It didn't look like a jet full. Five M E O DMT does not strike me as something that you'd want to do a lot. It's so terrifying. That's probably the most terrifying experience I've ever had on psychedelics because I ceased to exist. Like, it's the one drug where I feel like when I took it, I wasn't there anymore. I was gone until I came back. Like I felt like I didn't have thoughts. I didn't have. I knew I knew I was experiencing the five M E O DMT realm or whatever it was. But I didn't. There was no context in terms of I didn't realize I'm on my couch sitting at home. Like, I was gone. I was gone. There's no visuals. It was just this white sort of pixelated grayish white-gone world. You know? And it was terrifying because it felt like death. It was the one thing that felt the most like, oh my god. Like now I don't know. I'm not here anymore. But coming back from it, I think it was very valuable. Like as I was returning, I remember thinking so much about so much about the bullshit way in which I talk. I remember thinking that. Like, god, you just like so much of the way I would communicate was not just me trying to get my thoughts across, but me trying to say things in a way that would be impressive or in a way that would be flowery or try to make it look like I was more intelligent than I was or whatever. But I remember remembering that really clearly, like, why don't I kind of clean up the way I talk? It's a unful of shit. Like thinking that as I was trying to figure out how I was going to describe this experience, I was realizing as I was thinking, like, god, I gotta figure out how to describe this. Like boy, I talk like I'm full of shit. There was value in that, but I did it a few times. I think I did it three times. But it was terrifying. Every time. Terrifying. Like while you're gone, like why you slip away? I remember just thinking like, whoa, this is not good. This is not good. Like you feel like, oh my god, I fucked up. Like, I really died. I really, I really stopped being here. And it also makes you think like, maybe this is going to the light. Maybe this is what they talk about. When they talk about going to the light when you die, like maybe you're having this kind of experience. Because it's really disturbing. But then pretty peaceful when it's over. Like, I felt pretty good when it came back. But the concept of giving away all of my control of reality like that. For some reason, NN-DMT doesn't scare me as much. It's a totally different drug. Yeah. Yeah. Experientially, chemically, it's, you know, silicin is closer to DMT than five meodMT is mushrooms are closer, chemically speaking. Yeah. And yeah, I think that it defies description in a different way than other psychedelic experiences do with something like DMT. It's difficult to describe because there's such an abundance of imagery and thoughts and associations that it's extremely difficult to communicate that to someone with five meodMT. There's nothing. And that's also difficult to communicate that white out and there is an absence of everything. Yeah. Completely. Do you find it terrifying? I have found it terrifying, yes. It's very, I've, you know, I had a very profound experience with it in 2017. I have no real desire to use it again. Yeah, that's my thought, it's like not going back there. I'll go back to NN-DMT. I'll go back to that. Oh, me too, because it's just a different drug entirely. And I think that DMT can be integrated into a normal life much more easily than five meodMT. Actually, I credit DMT with like sort of, I talked about the sort of COVID denial that I had at the beginning of the pandemic where I was, you know, I can't stop making my TV show. We're all going to get it anyway. We can't just stop working. We can't shut down the world. We can't stop flying. And then I spoke to DMT and had this image of MC Escher's angels and demons, but instead of angels and demons, it was pangolins and horseshoe bats. Oh, whoa. And came out of it and thought, of course, I feel horrible. Of course, this is depressing and confusing. This is actually one of the worst things that has happened in my lifetime. And I just have to accept it now. And I felt so much more at peace. It just stripped away the denial. And I could just say, all right, this is happening. And so you were just wrestling with the reality of having to shut down. Yeah. And kind of I resented some other people on my team who in retrospect were behaving in a way that was completely rational where I was thinking like, oh, come on. We're not going to go on this shoot really. But, but they were right. And I was wrong. And I had to stop. for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new Jerry episodes. You just need to search for the Jerry on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.