Do we get up here to them fucking fancy nance earphones? Do you want headphones or no? I figured you might not want them. Why don't we go to fucking... What kind of video are we playing? I just need to make sure that... Yeah, we just need to make sure the audio's getting good. I just can't believe this bullshit. All this fucking stereo equipment right in front of my ass. Let me take you to this goddamn little fucking show right here, fuckers. Okay, now they come to my vote. I turn on the music for now. But yeah, we got all of this. Oh yeah. Created into one mother fucking stereo system. Come on man. We're rolling over. We're rolling. You ready? You ready Shane? Why the fuck? Yeah, time to have a seat. Join us. Join us. Well fucking, that was getting over, dancing around. Oh yeah. What do you think I'm just gonna sit here and do it? Oh no, we're gonna fuck now. We're gonna get some talking. Okay. What are you talking about? We got Shane, motherfuckinglee.com. Concrete podcast on the concrete podcast. Fuck it. God fuckers. What about all of you who might not know who Shane Lee is? He is actually the star of a docuseries we did called deck hands. That's on the concrete. My favorite series that we've done for sure. Shane Lee is a local commercial fisherman from Medir Beach. And fucking fuck. What else? Tell us a little bit more about you. Well, I'm Shane motherfucking Lee and I live at Junction 666. Yep. Just look at that the video right now. This is so amazing. Yeah, this is Shane's documentary called deck hands. This is the deck. I know that that was the one that got me in there. This is where it all started for us. Shane, what are we drinking right now? Lady, blind, Coke. Well fuck yeah, we got it. So is this like Captain Morgan or? Cheers brother. Cheers brother. Cheers brother. Cheers. Fuck yeah. Fuck yeah. So fish it sucks anymore. I mean, so. So I've been doing red tide cleanup. Well, Tommy first gave me a big fan. How long you been fishing? How long you been commercial fishing? 43 years. Fuckers. Always in Florida. Medir Beach or what? No, I'm wanting to have four different states for killing fish. Fuck yeah. Double shit. Yeah, sharks. Fuck yeah. The longer I've killed them all. So on the in the documentary, we kind of covered what you do in Medir Beach and what your role is on these commercial fishing boats. Give me like a quick background of what you've been doing commercial fishing in Medir Beach for the past couple years. Just give it a quick summary. For the couple years. Yeah, what do you mean? What did you do? Well, we had a little problems there. I worked on one boat and they said, well, I got my arms got infected because of some pesticides on a boat. Yeah, so I had to take off about six months out of that. When did you start fishing in Medir Beach? 1978. 78. 78. Yeah, always in Medir Beach. No, like I said, I'm wanting four different states for killing fish. Hello, fucker. Fuck yeah. Where are you from, Shane? Where are you from? A rural Illinois. Illinois. A rural Illinois. That's where they made the movie Wayne's World. Yeah, fucking party on, Shane. Fuck yeah. Fuck yeah, Garth. Fuck yeah. No. And what brought names have been changed to protect the fucking innocence. What the fuck? Yeah. What the hell brought you to Florida? He's a little runaway. So you ran away to Florida to get a better luck? Yeah, I ran as far south as I possibly could from Aurora. And were you already fishing before you came to Florida or you started when you came down here? Fish and mince and stuff, it bore my fucking mom and dad. Everybody fucking, we go fishing. Yeah. I hated to taste a fish. So me and grandma and all these eat motherfucking hot dogs. Fuck it. We go fish with them, fuckers. But groupers, different. Yeah. You ain't catching a group up in Chicago. No. No. Fuck no. What are you catching up there? Crap. Fuck yeah. Fuck yeah. I mean, we need to get space up here with us. Uh, world space. Ages, fucking. What happened to him? Who's this guy? Who's this guy? That's fucking my brother. Ready. Fuck yeah. He's not really an. That's what he says. That's what he says. Yeah. Then smog rolled out in front of my room. Fuck yeah. So what are you doing nowadays, Shane? Well, I've had enough of this fish and shit and everything that's gone crazy with this red tie clean up. Right. So we got red tie. So that's what I do. Uh, can't go fishing. I want to help everybody here in mid-era beach because this is where I'm from. And so I thought, well, I just helped clean up the red tie because nobody else will. Yeah. And I can stand a sink. Yeah. Barely. Yeah. I'm fucking. Oh my god. I fucking puked my lunch. So how bad is it on a daily basis you got there and you just clean fish up all day dead fish? Yeah. It's getting more better. I mean, up and down the beaches. That's what we patrolled last week. Yeah. Um, we're fucking now we're on the boat boat for grade. Yeah. Fuck yeah. That's what you guys got on the boat to what different islands and clean up and we just right out of the water. Go right up in the waters and everybody's backyard. Fuck it. Helping everybody out because I hate red tie because I love mid-era beach. I love everybody around here and nobody else who do this ship, but motherfucking Shane motherfucking Lee will fuckers out there in the sun. Oh, yeah. When's the last time you went fishing? When I, the boat sunk. What boat sunk? Well, I don't remember what the name of it was, but yeah, we fucking got it. That was amazing adventure, dudes. Fuck yeah. Tell us about it. Well, fuck it all side. We wake up in the morning. We had these two fucking kids working with us. They were cool as fuck though. They worked so hard and shit like that. And the one little kid, he was pretty special. Oh, fuck. He was started. Yeah, but he was fucking, yeah. So all that fucking little Kyle dude, man, when the boat started to seek it, we had a co-star. Helicopters, airplanes, we fuck it. So he acts fucking, oh, that's so fucking fun. So why did the boat sing? What happened? The boat just started singing. Fuck it. The goddamn, it started taking on a little bit of water and then a battery bake casing broke. Right. So it snapped the fucking high water alarm about time that we figured out we were sinking. What do you think about? Well, hello, this is the Russian Coast Guard. What do you think about? No, I'm an American. We are sinking. What are you thinking about? I'm under a bear. The boat is fucking sinking motherfucker. So how far is that? That's not the Russian Coast Guard. How far out are you in the boat sinking? 145 miles west of the Gee West. What happens when you're 145 miles offshore in the boat's sinking? They just started making them blow the whistles. So it's you and how many people? Three others. Three other people. Yeah, that was fun. And you're the most experienced out there, right? You got a bunch of green with you. Fuck it. Shit. Fuck yeah. Or that could be captive. Fuck in them dirty videos. Oh, fuck. Fuck. Oh, fuck. God, these fuckers are crazy. Why are you so fucking crazy, Shane? Well, I want to take my mother, my father, my grandpa. Uncle Rocky. Everybody. And you know who I am related to inside of that fucking hole. Who? Fuckin. Three things. You know the bammetry. Yeah. Yeah. What the fuck are you? The tree things. Who just eat James. The notorious motherfucking gangster. 23 million. You're Jesse James? Yes. The original Jesse James? Fuck yeah. Fuckin' get off the train motherfucker. Band it. My dad was General Master. It makes perfect sense that you're a pirate. Yeah. What happened there, dad? Fuck yeah. Fuck yeah. Anybody that gets pissed off about this whole situation, you could kiss my fucking ass. Or remember about the size of the deck. Nine and a half by what? By five and three cores and just around. Tell them what's that? That's the size of my car. You get the socket for your motherfucker. What do people think about the videos? I don't give a fuck. What do they say to you though? They like it. I mean I'm just me. Yeah. Always. So, oh man, if you're not you, who are you? That's what fuck it pissed me off. Is that this fucking, so I finally get this job. Working on the beach, right? Fucker's doing what? Clean it up right there? Okay. Okay. And then I fucking, that I go to the goddamn thing to cash my check. And I haven't had a check because I always been paid cash. You know what I fucking, always hit. Right, so you probably don't have a bank account. No. Oh fuck no. No. Yeah, I mean, it's in my pocket right now. Fuck it. Same as Zoe's. Yeah. Fuck it. Yeah. We don't need the bank to hold our money. The pocket works just as good. Fuck yeah. How'd you get all that money? Because you got to work for a full-evident motherfucker. So you're cleaning up the pocket? So you're cleaning up the pocket? You're cleaning up the pocket. You're cleaning up the pocket. You made all that money cleaning up the beach, cleaning up the dead fish? Well, I just, but you got to work. Yeah, for sure. That's one thing about Shane Lee that everyone always says is, I mean, as, as wild as you might be, as crazy as you might be, you always are the hardest worker out there. That's what they say. Fuck it. Don't like it. But this dude is name is Shane to it. Right. And that's why I knew we'd always get along because we're both in the chain. Yeah, man. So I mean, it's, it's a guarantee. Fucker. Fuck yeah. But that's what they always say. Shane might be wild and crazy, but he's the hardest worker out there for a whole. You fucking, that's what I was training for my whole life when I was a kid. That's why I moved to fucking floor. So I wouldn't have to shovel fucking snow anymore. Bullshit. I've worked a fucking shovel here more than I did. Fuckin, you're fucking fried, Shane. How'd you get so sunburned? Well, because I got burnt fucking, remember I told you that dude sprayed my buck with rage and fucking burnt me. Yeah. Hey, well, yeah, let's get into that story. So that was recent, right? Yeah. So I just, so you're out fishing. And what happened? You wake up one day and you're, you're all fucking itchy or what? Yeah, I come back home and fucking, I was like, God damn, arms had pesticides on it. Fuck it. Did you know that though? You didn't know that. No, I fucking thought it got, yeah, it's a long story. Fuck. Tell me, yeah, let's get it. Yeah, I probably shouldn't do this because I hate the fucking terror. No, I gotta lose code. You fucked that. Yeah, he almost killed me. Fuckin. You got damn right, he don't almost killed me. Right. Yeah, and he confessed to it at the end, but we're gonna drop that because. No, I don't think we should. Just tell us the story without telling us his name. All right, yeah, we don't have, let's, we'll leave him anonymous for the, for the sake of his new, the fuck he has. But he knows. And this is all we gotta say about this because, so I saw the pictures. Everybody knows. Your arms, I mean, it looked like your arms went into a fire. It looked like your arms got burnt and in school, like Popeye size. Yeah, they cracked in the red. Like they got burnt. Yeah, that was the pictures that you saw was fucking two months later after the fucking waste skin pop. So for 32. So we're not gonna talk anymore about this. We need to get into it. No, we don't. We don't, we don't talk about it right now. No. They know who they are. They know what they did. Right, but really what about this shit out fucking, we'll just look at it. They go paperwork from the hospital again. I don't talk about it. You've been in the hospital a lot in the last couple of months, right? No, no, no. I think good. Oh, okay. Yep. All right. Yep. Other than what happened to my arms, this shit like that. Then the year before that was pay-kriitis because I drank too much vodka. That's why I switched to fucking rough fuckers. Yeah, but the rum's really too nice. Yeah, we're been six at six at six. Six cents. Six cents. Fuck. We're drinking lady blind Coca-Cola. Yeah, I mean, this is going to be a different podcast for sure. We're pretty lickered up. We have the Shane motherfucker here with us tonight. But yep, we're going to design a brand new Facebook for our fucking fans out there. We passed me. Oh, fuck yeah, that was a nice. I'm almost got it. God, you see his figures work on that. Oh, fuck. Oh, fuck. So what else has been going on? What's been going on with space? Uh, he's got his new retard bike. Yeah. You see his bike? No, we haven't seen him. We haven't seen him in months. Tell me about him. He shaved his whole hair. I saw a picture he shaved his head. Yeah, okay, but now listen, he fuck it. He's got this little fucking sit down bike with a fucking captain's hair in it. And it fucking pedals. He's got these little too little steering wheel. He's saying he's fucking. He sucks. I'd put a chain steering wheel on it. Oh, fuck yeah. What about what happened to a, yeah. So let's pull up this video. This is the episode we shot with you, the laser light show on the triple X, the timeout, the triple X. What happened to the triple X? Where is it? Well, it cost me $6,500 because they pulled the motors and then the fucking, um, the hoses were left tied. They would, they didn't tie them up. What happened to the boat though? It sunk. It's gone. How did it sink? They fucking did not tie up the hoses, the hoses to the pumps. No, to the engines because they got a fucking outtake engine. We're fucking for the thing, whatever, but they fucking, they did not tie up the hose. So the fucking, but you lived on that boat, right? How long did you live on that boat? Oh, I don't know, but I know I fucked over 35 hundred thousand girls on that boat. Fuck yeah. The lot lizards? Or I've been, no, I've been fucked 35,000 times on there since I own it. Fuck yeah, that's what I was saying. I missed that. They're my, they don't might only been 20, 30 girls, but yeah, I fucked 13, 14,000 times on that boat. How do you get so much ass? You get a fucking dazzle with bullshit, fucker. What do you think? That was, that was gorgeous guy fucking. No, fuck no. But remember, they all know about the cop. The nine and a half by what? Nine and a half by five and three quarters. So what did you do after the boat sink? Where did you live? I mean, you had to, you had to have found a place to live after that. What'd you do? Fuck I really don't remember, dude. I'm fucking, I was joking. I'm fucking hell probably. Okay, probably 34 straight a couple of nights. 49th Street. No, fuck. Oh yeah, I went to 49th Street. What happened there? Well, because oh yeah, I got somebody fucked. Yep, somebody put some kind of stuff inside of my drink where I was tripping my fucking balls off. Yep. And what you got arrested? Nope, they went to go find me help. Who did that covers? Because I could not get out of the middle of the street after Jeffers is so what did they do to help you? They took me the 49th Street. And then they took me the yep, I wasn't under arrest it. But God damn it. They said that when he's going to get me some more help. So here comes help after I go to the joeys and then I fucking, then here comes the ambulance people and help us over with. Fuck it. They strapped me down. These are not strapped you up. Well, yeah, where they put you over there at the hospital. Didn't you tell me, didn't you tell me that? Yeah, guess what kind of fucking amazing question they asked what was the hardest question in the world? What was my name? Fuckin' God damn it. You were so out of it, you couldn't remember it. Fuck no. I was so fucking. Goover or wherever you fucking are. Didn't you tell me that one day you walked out? Yeah, yeah, yeah, fuck yeah. God damn it. Let's get this shit down, fuckers. Let's get it down. Fuckin' come on, fuck up, pussies. Let's do this. Yeah, come on, let's talk some more shit. Shane, did you tell me that you were trippin' on acid one day and then it cops, the cops took you to Fortnite Street and then you put on a laser light show or something. We can't talk about this because that's the same adventure. Well, we gotta talk about it too. No, we can. We have to. We have to tell all the stories. You can't get in trouble. What are you worried about? It's in the past. Because I want them all to be my friends. They are your friends. You know, I know. I love you. The people out there, they want to know this shit, Shane. Well, this is all Steve friends. Yeah, we'll all stay friends. Yep. Just tell us basically what happened. I got fucked up. Yeah, my friends at 49th Street helped me out so much. Just even a nursery. I fucking, I love her so much. Whoever that nurse was that night, I fucking totally adore her. She was in my own trouble. She was like, no, we're just going to get you some help. And that's all I heard all night from the beginning. A little bit of help. Oh, first. Oh, fuck. I need some help. Help! I need some goddamn help. Fuck. Am I crazy? Hell no. You tell me. Everybody's crazy. I want you to tell me that story. Yeah, I think I'm perfectly normal. I think you're all the fucking same. Oh, fuck. I want you to fucking tell me that goddamn story, Shane. What story? The one that you told me when the cops put you in a room with the cop with the lights in the car. Oh, fuck. I can't tell this. What? Nope. Why? No. Are you scared? What are you afraid? I'm scared to tell us so. What are you fucking creeps? Fuck. I'm not so tired. No, I just don't. I just want to tell them good stories. No, I know. But there's my Maryland best of pleasure. All right, let's talk about Maryland Manson. What is Maryland Manson to you? Stop, Donald. Who is it, dad? I'm but fuck. Yeah. I remember that old part of that. It's a good fuck. Yeah. It's okay. What happened to the laser laser? We got to tell some stories on you. Oh, my God. I love it. You got it. Damn it. How did you feel when you figured out that the boat was sinking? Were you on it when it sunk? No, it's outfishing. And then what? You just came back in the boat with sinking. As I, and so what do you do? You show up to the dock and your boats sunken? Well, that fuck had sucked. Right. So what happened right then? What do you do? Everything you own is sunken to water, right? Yeah, I know. The fucking, the one dude was bitching at me to fucking have it taken out. Fuck it. The fucking, he was a creep dude. Who was? The guy that owned the dock or what? Yeah, dock master. I lost everything. I fucking owned right there. Except for that flag. I got that. Okay, let's get down. I lost. No, I got them. We can't hear you because you're on the mic. Okay. Well, I got all them videos back. Fuck yeah. Of course, because they were in my fucking emergency fucking landing clip. What about the speakers? I lost them pornos, but the speakers. Yeah. I got the one's, but I got the nine on one's, I got the nine on one's, but I didn't get the fucking pro studios. Fuck. Did you get the laser lights? No. Nope. No, but I got the iron maiden flag. I got fucking the nump chucks. No, did you get the Maryland Manson sign picture? Yep. Yeah, it's how fuck it's smoked to with us, he's bitter. And you said you lost all the pornos. Oh, yeah, but I bought more. Oh, you bought one. Where do you buy pornos? Where's she get them from? We got damn fucking looking hustler magazine by 15 for fucking $4. Yeah, but you had DVDs. Fuck yeah, that's what I got DVD with VCR with fucking HIV with BVD fucking HIV fucking. I don't know how to buy porn DVD. Hell, M B fucking PRX fucking DVR fucking DV CDA or whatever the fuck. You got them off. Did I do it? You got them all right. Fuck yeah. I do. I would do it. That's what I was like. How's your love life Shane? What what who you got you hit you hit you hit you hit you hit you up right now. You got a girl. Every time I see Shane Lee, he is always with a pretty good looking girl. And it's yeah, how do you get such good looking checks? You know every time we pull off. No offense, but you're not the prettiest dude. Is it your personality? You got money. Fuck yeah. No, I got no money. Fuck it. Let's I'm going to go with B. B would be. Personally, it's. B is nine by five and three quarter. Oh, well, that's that's from deck. Oh, that's that's option D. Yeah. Obviously D. Yeah, where's Georgia? Georgia. It's up there. That's fucking Florida to the right to the north. That's another sea. Shane's got all these things we can't talk about. That's why Shane chains hard to interview because he the fame went to his head and now we won't talk about certain now we can't tell all the good people tell good stories anymore because he's already blown up and gone big time. So and act like he knows nobody. No, I get in trouble. What? You're going to get in trouble. You're going to get in trouble for telling us the truth about how some guy sprayed your bunk bed with a raid and you almost died. You can't even tell that. Yeah, fuck that guy. Bro, he's trying to kill you. Why no? Yep, he sure did. So do I have to tell the story for you? No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, go into that. Okay, we already spit that out. So it's good. No, well, you're calling me tell. What's what kind of stories can we tell the fans? The people it's it's not for me and Danny. It's for. Why this was it all the world. It's fucking fans here. That. Yep, fucking captain's are fucking crooks, criminals. They're fucking. There's a lot of bad people out there. The book happens. Why do you say that? Yeah, but there are so many fucking great ones. I mean, what is it like? It's like fucking, what are my favorite is Jeff? And Ricky Nave's fucking Danny deal, Scott Daggett fucking Randy, there's so many fucking great ass captains out there. Yeah. But then there's a lot of rotten ones that I don't even want to say their fucking names. So let's not say their names, but why are they running? What are they doing? Are they not going out the money right or what? Let's not go into that whole fishing thing because I was just I thought we were here to have a fun asset. Vinnie, we are. We got to get you to tell some sort of story. This is what we got to do because what we're going to do for everybody, fuckers. We're going to make a brand new goddamn Facebook fucking for Shane Lee at the podcast. We're going to make your new Facebook. We're not. All right, Shane start making them. But you do make it. Oh, yeah, fuck yeah. Fuck out. So you guys know how to do this. Shit, we got it. We got it. And so what are we going to do on the Facebook though? You're going to talk to the fans or what? We just want to get so many. If you like me, hit me up on Facebook. Come on. Right? If you hate me, don't hit me up on Facebook. But if you like me on this Facebook, that we're going to do hit it up. Right? Fuck yeah. Fuck yeah. Fuck yeah. Fuck. I love you. Oh my god. They're fucking bikers. They're always going to fuck. Fuck yeah. Fuck yeah. Fuck yeah. So what else the fuck? What the fuck else can we talk about, bro? Well, I don't know. We're fucking a pleasure. Giant or nothing. But god damn man, I have a fucking fucking amazing. Do you want to hear something you want to talk about? Oh my god. I got raped this year. When? Fuck yeah. Recently? No, no, four months ago. These girls are fucking by a dude or a girl. Though all girls. Oh, okay. More than one girl. The one girl fucking hit me so fucking hard. I thought she was a dude. She said we're going to. Was it Hollywood Kim? No, she's dead. Rest of peace. The Hollywood Kim. Yeah. Right. How did she, how did she, how did she, how did she pass away? Do you know, do you have you heard anything? I don't know. You guys are like, you guys ran around the same circles. Everybody knows everybody. My dear bitch, have you heard anything? Or? Yeah, I know. I'm fucking, she died of. They're she was sick, right? Rest of peace to Hollywood Kim. That's we did a good episode with decades on, uh, she was on Kim. And she was definitely super cool. And you know, I'm great. You guys need one. I'm filled up at the moment. You're already you're slapping good behind us. All right. Catch up, Shane. For Hollywood Kim. Hey, shot for Hollywood. Yeah, let's do a shot for this. Cheers for Hollywood. Yeah. Cheers to Hollywood. She's the Hollywood Kim. Fuck yeah. Cheers. Fuck yeah. Anyway, anyway, I want you to finish the story where you got raped. So what? How about this? I have two fucking horrible. I fuck this one bitch one time and I fucking have my friend fucking come over. What was this? No, no, the girls are raped. You know, fucking so this fucking girl's crazy. Yeah. So fuck it. No bullshit. Fuck it. I have my friend. The goon fucking help me rape this girl. And then fuck it. No bullshit. I got fucking handed handed. Rape this girl and then fuck it noble shit. I got fucking Handed handed. I'm not shit. You the other two girls that were there are fuckers brutally Beat my fucking ass after they were just supposed to go get some beer. Okay some beer They got a bottle of Jack Daniels, so we drank it all. Yeah. Wow. It's fucked up They were fucked up the one girl hit me fucker take off your pants. I was like holy fuck Punches you and tell us you to take your pants off. I got raped. You got raped raped Keep on that shit. Yeah, okay. So what happens? She punches you and tells you Quit that fucking bolt off my pants and Start just spit into certain fucking shit everywhere fucking yep all of a sudden Mother fucking the next morning came and I thought that was just horrible You ever stand underneath a public shower and bathe yourself knowing that you are fucking raped Yeah, I'm sure the people are gonna feel really bad about you being raped by a couple girls I'm sure you crash your eyes. I Like right yep Fuck it. Well, what else we got? Well, you are a fucking tug about fuckers that fucking got to tell us Because you won't talk about it. You don't talk about it. So we want to talk about it. We're interested in some shit And you don't want super secret chain now. Well, okay, well, let me ask you this What why are you so secretive are the people giving you shit for the deckhand series or what? Fuck it. I love my fucking deckhand series If there if there's anybody out there that hates me just go ahead and don't watch it It's a fucking simple. Does anybody ever say anything about it? Everybody fucking loves me. Everybody loves it. Nothing negative. Oh, yeah, nobody There's a few negatives. Why would they say? It's a so violent Fucking fuck the haters are I got it are all deckhands fishermen are all deckhands Mid-medir beach commercial fishermen. Are they like you or are there normal people? There's no one like me I can't wait for the nights with me That answers that fuck yeah, I am one of my own you are one of a kind for sure By thank you fucker. Absolutely. Yep. I'm definitely my favorite deck I am here. Yeah, the coolest dude. We know fuck. Yes fuckers right back at you and everybody that loves me Fuck yeah We don't get it's here. I hope you we're just here from the junction 666 and we're just trying to fucking get by There's show home So 666 what the beast the mid-ear beach Well, it's so cool So how is the how's the commercial fishing industry doing now if you were to I don't know I don't care You don't hear anything about it. Nope. I'm fucking here to fucking clean up red type you're done with fishing Yep, what happened when the red tide goes away. What are you gonna do? Go back to fishing Do you make good money cleaning up the beaches do you make good money cleaning up? Yeah, I'm fucking with a great bunch of people. Yeah, and they put me on a great ass equipment It just it's fun. How did you get into it? because I'm tired of fishing and I was met somebody at some bar and All the sunny said if you wanted to clean up red tide, I was like fuck yeah, because I can't stand a smell of it anymore because I'm a Medirby's motherfucker Yeah, fuck yeah, I doubt calm. Mm-hmm. Yep. And so I had to help make a little community and these people I Can't even say the name That's all right. We can leave them anonymous. Yep, but they fucking they are the ones, but they're taking care of you Got a nice room down there. They're paying you good. They got you the fucking water suit Whatever I want if I want to go down there to the condo and live Sure, I got room. Yeah, I just pay my own, but they pay me a check. Yeah, first check ahead of my life Yeah, did I talk about this? Yeah, no, let's get into it. This is the first check ever No, was yet you got your first check by first check at each one Yeah, tell me tell me more and how old are you fucking? 54 first check our first Real life check and then guess what happened what well they've hand written hand written He had written that motherfucker and fucking Noble shit fuck it am Scott wouldn't cash it because it was hand written So how do you cash it out? I fucking go the next day go fucking To the bank where the Check it's from guess what happened I hand on my ID My social security card two forms of ID My ID is expired Who the fuck am I now? This is what kills me if you fucking My I have it you have to use my ID forever, but who the fuck am I now? God damn who the fuck am I I'm not shame Lee anymore after 2016 so did you go back to him and tell me give you cash a Fuck no, I had to go to goddamn fucking DMV and get a brand new ID cash that motherfucking Jack Yep, who the fuck it who the fuck do you turn into after your ID expires? Whoever you want to be Do I get a fucking get I have a fucking guns? Fuck it Shane Lee's got a gun The whole world come on done. No, we can't get Tell me what you get oh fuck Yeah Fuck yeah, holy shit that by the fuckers are fucking nuts Take out the gun man Shane Lee your crazy bro, you're the craziest interview we've ever had ever fuck yeah fuckers Is it all good? Oh, it's all good. Yeah, we do it all fuck yeah, fuck dude fuck yeah Hello fuckers fuck it love you fuck yeah, I'm glad you came up here tonight though. Yeah. Thanks for coming out man Fuck yeah Hold on a second why don't you want to tell us a story about the guy who sprayed your body with raid? That's fucked up why just tell you don't have to say it just tell me why you don't want to talk about it Because I'm gonna get in trouble in my own way Why you seem to get like really upset when we talk about it? Well because I really want to be this fucking ass and that's understandable I would do anybody would that's not that's not you're not in the blay really want to beat us fucking ass I want to the ground. Yeah, you call me rate right I want to just for seeing what he did to you if anybody tried to kill you of course you want to do that I mean that's I mean Maybe No Shane Lee at all costs protect calm fuck yeah everybody loves you everybody wants to protect you at all costs you're fucking The biggest thing So guys for some reason doesn't like you and sprays your bedroom with fucking bugs spray Yeah, fuck a piece of shit and but but you don't even know so you sleep in it and a couple months go by and your arms are Swalling up like they got a fucking force fire to get better. I mean right. I mean really Fucking they're not better Yeah, go over there the cameras over there so the camera can see over there. Okay So look at how the fucking thing just starts I Mean usually I am a dark as fuck. Yeah. I mean I've been here sitting there chair so we can so we can see you better the cameras can't see you If you're standing yeah, the light doesn't get you over there. So fucking I'm usually dark as fuck. Yeah, I mean really for I'm not bullshit and you I'm dark But this is what I got after that fucking little Yeah, so a couple months go by and then what you can't even get up and walk right Yeah, right. You're just fucking how are you? Why why could you you're so sick that you can't even get up? Your point but you don't know it's poison yet. No, you think you're allergic to something No, and then so when how do you when do you find out that you've been poisoned? Somebody gives you a call and let you know what really happened, right? Yeah, and he tells you that somebody sprayed the bunk with fucking raid bug spray Yep, all right scratch stop We're not gonna name nobody. Okay. We're not gonna name nobody stop We got to get something real. Nope. Okay. We don't talk about that, but how how low I Mean how loaded you get when you were sick like that like how what's the hello? Yeah, how I got fucking I bought a gun. I was gonna shoot myself at a fucking head. I was so fucking sick I could walk nothing. I am not showing you. I was gonna blow my fucking head off But I left the bullets at the goddamn fucking dock. I was gonna fucking shoot myself Oh shit, you were in that much. If we want to get down to this. This is exactly what happened. I wanted to shoot myself I fucking could stand anymore. I'm so glad you guys know let's stop this whole part of that goddamn interview All right, please yeah, okay, that's it That's the last machine that's the last fishing trip you ever did Oh, you sunk that was out. Let's do a fucking drink goddamn it so Shane are you an alcoholic? Fuck no, I'm a goddamn drunk fucker. What's the difference? Well, go hollocks go to the meetings. You know got enough fucking meetings, right? Fuckers your drop Your jaw like that. Well, yeah, I Like you You're not being a drunk you handle your fucking business though and you work harder than the majority of people out here By far by far fuck yeah, I don't fuck it. I could drink and work Absolutely, I know you can be y'all that's what I do Your drinking are you are you? What where's your home 20 now? Where are you living now? Oh? We have said that he's motels down there fucking Bebered the fucking all the sun coast. Yeah, fuck it. You don't have that amazing fucking you just float from from hotel Well, yeah No, I can go up there to the fucking home 20. Where's the home 20? Where my buddies live yeah, yep, but um With enough fucking goddamn fucking Slicker suit the most amazing is fucking thing. Yeah, yeah, the slicker suit was unreal We're gonna have to cut that footage. We're gonna cut the slicker suit footage in right now. Yeah, put it. Are you really? Yeah, we're gonna cut it in here right now. Oh, yeah This is fucking good. So we went to go meet up with Shane Lee after couple months last night and we met up with him at his hotel where he lives That and the first thing it would show us his new yeah, slicker suit his emergency sinking ship for the fucking Coast Guard duress you is the whole fucking car though directions is four letters Which is left Did you see my new flip left no check these fuckers out. I'll never have to buy shoes again Fuck it, but I put them on the wrong foot All class, yeah Do I forget anything? Oh, go all right fuckers. Don't vote a second. Let's go Oh And reflective so Hey, so we pull up where did you get the suit from out of what car? Fucking not the one that was over there to the my right your The horny car the horny car. Why is it called the horny car? Guys that horns off Are you fucking right? What had done that question? I don't even know why fuck Shane how are you again? Be yeah, how are you? There's 54 you're 54 you have any kids fuck. Yeah, where are your kids at? There's probably all over fucker place. Yeah, no Yep, I got Fuckers Shane what did you just fucking do? Why are you soaking wet? I fucking had a cool off man. I'm fucking my skin is burning What did you do you take a shower? What? You can stand up and do it. Oh fuck What did you just do? Fuck it or bath. What is that? Who's your favorite rock star all of them no give me one of all time who is your ultimate fucking favorite? You can play rock and roll. I love you who is your favorite all of them. No Nope, all of them if you had to pick one who would it be if you were stuck on a if you if you're fishing Ship sunk and you're stuck on an island and you get one fucking CD. What do you pick? Who do you listen to? You only get one see you get one fucking CD one rock star. Who do you pick? Oh my god. This is so fun. Horrible. I know but you got to do it. You're fucking stuff No, no, I'm You need to listen. I would have to go to my first Johnny Five in my whole life. I'd have to go with my first Ted mother fucking new jit 10 new jint fuck. Yeah, the new would have to go with do it Fuck yeah, that was my favorite. I'll back in the day shout out to the new jit Shout out to the new he inspired Shane laid to become who he is today Ted do it yeah Basically, yeah, because I'm a hunter fuck you you're a hunter just like fucking Ted is Ad here fucking game on fucking with every fucking Yep, if there if there was one thing that All the viewers out there the people that have seen you That you wanted them to know about you for your legacy that they don't know now. What would that be? Well mother fuckers. I Just wanted to let you know that I would party with you Just get down and fucking just have the greatest time Everything in life is about having a good time right correct me if I'm wrong. No, you're not wrong. I like fuck. Yeah How do you want to be? Yeah, we got to get dramatic. How do you want to be remembered? How do you want to go down in the history? Shane mother fucking lead calm fuckers. That's right. Yeah, this is what we do and Maybe I'm crazy. You're not crazy. Why do that? Okay, I look at everybody like there fucking, you know, they look at me like I'm different fuck them. I look at them Like they're the same. How do you how do you want to be remembered? Shane Lee? Shane mother fucking Lee You are who you are Fuck you. That's one thing to be respected about Shane Lee's he never changes for nobody He is him all the time Fuck no all the time. Let's get this little bottle of fucking Remember, I'm not an alcoholic. I'm a goddamn fucking drunk Fuck yeah What is your favorite drink if you if you could pick one drink to drink for the rest of your life? What is it? Well, I'm gonna tell you something right now. Yeah, I want everybody to try this Okay, a little bit of rum. Yep. Okay. Now you go to fucking Dixie fucking get you some of that orange pineapple juice juice. Okay, no soda soda Orange pineapple mix that with a little bit of that and I'm not getting you that is totally drop a cano Is that what you call it the truck Oh Like a mariachi band plays in your head when you drink it Amazing right there fuck yeah, oh Fuck that's the go-to White apple and goddamn rumma dummit Fuck yeah That's the go-to Come on man, yeah What's that if it wasn't alcohol what's your drug of choice? What's the best drug? But I know do but is it the pot of wanta? Explain to fans out there what the pot of wanta is I don't wanna be the pot of wanta. I don't wanna be the pot of wanta Baby, I don't want to know that's fucking grass man. How is the pot of wanta in Florida? Legal you get awesome. Yeah, you can walk down the beach and smoke it anymore fuck yeah fuck yeah fuck yeah You can just get down to it. What about the cosmic cocoa bars? Oh Mgod update that'll be Going down Saturday night Shane Well If you want to take this interview to a little bit more of a higher standard. Yeah, we'd like to Let's do oh God damn it if we did season two of deck hands what would happen? Fuck you god bless you fuckers I Shit, I have fucking are you down to do it? Well, you got to see my Halloween costume. Yeah, it's gonna be amazing Fucking amazing lightness Yes, what are you gonna be for Halloween? I can't tell you to tell Halloween. It's a secret Super fuck and secret super secret After Halloween will post a picture of Shane Lee on the Instagram on his new Facebook On your new Facebook what's your new Facebook? What's that everybody out? I don't know Shane Shane motherfucker Okay, okay, we got it. We're putting it up tonight Okay, let's try this we're gonna do it at we're gonna do it after the show all right Let's wrap it up Shane. Thanks for coming on the podcast. Thanks for coming telling us what's been going down sharing your stories Yeah, we want to thank you for rock the motherfucker rock the motherfucker rock the motherfucker And we'll keep everybody updated on season two of deck hands And if anybody who's hiring Shane Lee he's a good fucking worker regardless of the last deckhand series somebody might be up Out there Water being real protect Shane Lee and he will work his ass off for you protect Shane Lee at all costs Go man All right, what anything else you want to leave the penny last week before we go Rock the motherfucker rock the motherfucker rock the motherfucker All right, Shane Lee fuck yeah