It's just started. Did you start a ride? Yeah. How dare you, man. I'm not, I'm tweeting it. Hold on. So people are gonna have to hand me tweet. Here we go. Here we go. Looking on the Twitter. What is it? Did you do pee? Tapping in numbers. I'm looking about. Come on, Duncan. See what I'm doing. I don't know that song. The Twitter. Yeah, I forgot my phone at home. Good Twitter. You forgot your phone. Yeah, I feel so fucking naked right now. Oh, I guess it's ever do. Awful. At least I just tracked it online. So I'm keeping an eye on it. So it's kind of like looking at like photos of my family. You know, it feels good that I know it's still alive. Like, you know, like I see it on Google Maps and doing the calls. Somebody just, I'm like, it's still alive. Somebody, somebody, somebody, listen, somebody just tweeted. What are the odds that Joe, we're gonna dunk a drugs. Look at so high, are now having an amazing conversation without the podcast running. It's true. I'm gonna tweet or tweet that with 100% Let's just plow through this commercial real quick. So when you get started, the Joe Rogan experience podcast is brought to you by, I said pod cat didn't I? Hi cats. Pod cat is brought to you by the last. If you get a Joe Rogan.net, click on the link for the flashlight and enter in the code name, Rogan. You will get 15% off the number one sex toy for men. Duncan, you're gonna enjoy and I got a new one for you. Excellent. What is it? It's a, I'll give it to you later. Really? Some girls bottle or something. Is it the Iron Ladies bottle? It looks good. Whoever it looks like a great little butthole. You're gonna love it. Yeah. How do you know it's a girl's butthole? Well, they say they model them after the girl's butthole. It looks like a butthole. It's like they, yeah, they do the vagina, they do the butthole. They, they actually make a mold. They're pushing. That's why a lot of these freaks like these porn star chicks. Yeah. They have their own flesh lights. Right. And it's like molded after their own box. So there's a professional pussy mold or something. Yeah, like looks on the outside like exactly what their box looks like. That's the weirdest. They're box. Little bit of 18 back in Boston. Yeah. I want to get inside a box. She got to touch our box. That's what dudes used to say a lot. That always seem like the worst description of Boston. It's the least geometric shape on the planet. Yeah. Her box. The last thing you want to fuck is a box. Yeah. It is that. When you get inside a boat, Boston was a mess. Anyway, did they do that when you were young? Was that box or? No, but I can remember that. But I can remember getting like set my mom was a psychologist. So she like gave me like a sex book. Like when I was trying to learn about sex. And it was like lists of the of the slang for pussy. And I remember getting the box. And it was like wrecking my already vague understanding of what a pussy was. Because it's like, how is it anything like a box? That's hilarious. Isn't it more like a bag than a box? It's not like a tube either. But that's what the flesh like is. It's a tube. Well, it's a it's I want to do a fucking puppet show with flesh lights. That's always taken it. Take like a hand puppet show. Yeah. Because they might because they make you can make mouth. I was thinking about taking the many flesh lights you've given me and doing some kind of like per Shakespeare. How many do you have? Well, I have now there's only two now. One of them is the right. Well, no, one of them. This is a gross story. I don't want to tell it. What? This is a disgusting story. I didn't clean one out. And I left it sitting. On top of the shower. This is a gross story. And I like so so I can remember how that smell. It's the smell is what I imagine these zerg hives and starcraft smell. Like it's like this. It just disintegrated in the alien. It's like the smell of it. Like you know, when aliens when they go down into that fucking in the very beginning when they go into the pit where there's all the pods and the thing pops out and lands on the guy's face in the very beginning in the movie. Alien. It's like a coolest scene. That's what an old flesh light smells like when you open it. It's this kind of alien pungent, prime, mortial smell. But I opened it up and man, it was just like black and dark is black. Ooh, it's just kind of dripped out of it. And then into I threw that one away. It's from that you would have to like seriously disin you would have to disinfect that with so many chemicals. Holy, you would have to worry about those chemicals eventually burning the skin off your deck. Well, yeah, and some unknown disease, yeah, she's a fresh rottinghead. If that's where it gets born in the bottom of a flesh life, some sick fuck that never bothered to clean it. Let me try to fuck it twice. You look imagine, that's the end of the world. The one, the one flesh light that'll be told about on fucking big stone tablets 10,000 years from now, we've traced it back to a flesh light. And there's only a few people survived. Only like from one particular area of Ethiopia, we're able to handle it. Well, what if I can, I mean, a flesh light is truly a breeding ground for bacteria. If you consider, especially you keep it in like the balmy atmosphere of your shower, because you're combining fucking, you're combining so many bad elements. Yeah. And he makes him with heat. That's your and who knows what's in the water supply. DNA. I've true life precursors in there. You could, it could sprout a new life. Jesus fucking Christ. Life. Why not? Right? Yeah. When we, we poo poo that, but could you imagine if it was that easy? Can you imagine if your loads on their own could make people just grow like my shrooms or something? Did you imagine? I mean, we know that you have to interact with the woman and make eggs, you know, you know, yeah, crack eggs and make babies that way. But imagine if that wasn't the case, imagine if every time you came, it made people imagine people came out of your deck. And there's just people everywhere. Everywhere. Like getting stepped on, that little ones never get to be adults. I mean, we, we take it for granted that the process is male and female, and that that's the only way to create life. I don't, I mean, life is crazy enough as it is to think that what it could have been in some bizarre, Gonzo parallel universe that it's possible to just create life with your dick. And every time you come, boom, people. A person. But the power. It would be a very overpopulated universe. Just for me, imagine people screaming at you because you're beating off. You fucking, you're doing. Piling on top of people everywhere and then you catch someone beating off. Were you fucking stopping? They just make it people pop. That's what people would do. We wouldn't make so many people. If that was the case, there would be so many people that the world would came in. There would be no more real. Good work. You would have people would just eat the people in front of them. You could run out of reach. So yeah, we'd be just eating each other. Eating the people in front of them. Eating and jerking off and making more. I mean, at what point can overpopulation exist? I mean, if there's no structure, right? If you took all the people in New York City with no structures, no buildings, and just piled them on top of each other. Yes. You know, how much room is there? How much room is there? At what point in time? Could you fucking imagine how many people would it take to cover the planet in a just a complete mat of people? If just every time someone came, a person was born. How long have everyone planted? It just looked like an octopus. Oh my God. Swarming with freaks. No one would stop. We wouldn't stop. We wouldn't stop jerking off. We would have entire continents covered. And you'd come up with a good reason why you're jerking off. I think you'd rationalize like, you know what I'm going to do. I'm going to do it with my man. Hey, there's a new baby. The government would get involved though and make you see you can't come. Like they would start neutering you. Who would be the government? There'd be swarms of people. It'd be unmanageable. There'd be no government. No, no buildings. A blog. You know, but we would never even built buildings if it was possible. We would never figure out anything. If that was how you could come and make a person. It'd be like grass. It'd be like grass. We would be everywhere. We would be everywhere. Cuts you. Yeah. We did to us. Anyway, go to chorogon.net. Click on the link for the flashlight. That was like a magic. Enter the code name Rogan. And you get 50% off number one sex toy from me. That best commercial ever. Those are the best one we ever did. Yeah. People complain about those. Like, come on. I forgot. We're free ball in. We're just having fun. Let's just do this little business thing. We're also brought to you by. Wait, wait, wait. And if you don't like one of my flesh, I don't buy it. Just make your own. Yeah. How can you do that? Easily. Melons, mallens, fruits. But then not going to be as good as the flesh. If you're looking to masturbate, it's a fucking solid tool. There's probably some shit you can do with Jello and Gumby. And what'd be as good as the flesh line? They got it. They got it down. Whatever that polymer is, they used to make the vagina. It's a fucking outstanding. They spent a long time breathing. Two thumbs up. Yeah, they did. They gave a great product. There's how many people are embarrassed about the fact they like the master base. How many uncomfortable flesh lights did that guy fuck before he came to find a change of sound? Right. Could you imagine that poor weirdo? This one's made out of rock. Nah. That's a huge light. We'll add a test. The test. The test would fingers first. You know what I'm crazy. You know what I'm crazy? Just shove your dick right into this new retro model. You know, you don't let it do that. You don't want to just, they must have tested them out. They used animals. They used animals. They used animals. They used animals. They used animals. They used animals. They used animals. Ultimately, they did. They used animals. Ultimately, they did. They had to fuck like a lot of different substances in order to create that perfect vagina. I mean, how do you describe that? If you're trying to make it, you know, and you bring it to a factory, this is what I'm looking for. Something like a fuck. I'd like to see the moment when he found it. Yeah. This is it. Yeah, I came with five times that last night. Well, yeah, what a weird, what a weird thing to invent. Buddy did an awesome job. However, the process was we're making light of it. He needs to write about the paralllet came about. Yeah. That's an interesting thing to know. I think the dude who invented it, his wife is pregnant when he invented it. And he couldn't have sex. So they figured out he gives resourceful fella. See that? Yeah. That's what you need, man. If you want to invent something good, you've got to be in the list. You've got to be pushed. Pushed in a corner. Yeah. Then you go for the box. Stick your right in a box. The worst description. Bosh, the end. That description started with a guy who has his wife at a deformed pussy. He's got a broad seal by on it.com. Oh, and I.T. makers of Alpha Brain, the cognitive enhancing supplement, Shroom Tech Immune. So you use the Shroom Tech Immune. You're saying it's pretty bad about that? I seem like I'm a fucking shill, because I'm agreeing to everything here. But I've used these things, the Shroom Tech. Yeah, when I'm starting to get sick, I eat it and I get better. The stuff really works. It's great for just to keep your immune system strong, apparently. The way it works is there's something in it that makes your body think that it's like a disease, like a, whatever. Whatever. There's an intruder. So you mean just him fires up for a fight that never takes place. It's a pretty fucking sporty thing. If it works like that. There's also Alpha Brain, excuse me, Shroom Tech Sport, which is the quarter steps mushroom sports endurance supplement. This is only for people who are really into working out. If you're not in Oregon out, don't fuck with it. Brian doesn't fuck with that. Nah, I don't need it. But if you're in the. I had my Fitbit, it would be like a new matter. Well, Bert says that like last three days. Tell what it is for people who don't know what you're talking about. It's this little thing you snap on you and it counts your steps. And it also like, like every time you do go up and down stairs, it measures out what that would be in distance. And you know, it just pretty much tracks everything you do physically. And then at night, you wear it and it tells you how long you sleep, how many times you wake up in the middle of the night. And then it graphs it on this nice page on their website. And then you start having like a Facebook page of what your Fitbit is. It's really weird. It's like Twitter weird. We have these stats. And then like right now, my only friend's Bert Kreischer, and you know, I look at his and he's like, like kicks ass. And in my shits like, you know, barely registering on the graph and my battery likes like seven times longer than birds. That's like a new way to stalk people. I mean, you can be there. Stalk on my stalks. If you can be there exercise buddy, you can really get a constant read out. I bet the read out's being sent to the government. That's going to be the thing man. You're going to have to put your information out there. Yeah, so people know what your heart rate is at every moment. Wow. Yeah, they have this thing that tweets your way. They have a scale that tweets your way so that it's in that supposed to keep you motivated to lose weight. Well, eventually it's going to be more than that. If you have something on, it tweets it every time you get on it. Yeah. So you can't even stop it. So yeah, that's it. So you get on. I don't like that. That's really brutal. That's sort of brutal. You're gaining weight and you start getting it. That's brutal. But like we were saying, like about the invention of the flesh, like if you weren't real changed to happen, change comes from fucking suffering. Change comes from being in a place that you don't want to be. I mean, you could do it other ways. But generally it comes from getting back into a corner. Yeah, you got a straight note. Yeah, you get your shit together. Yeah. You got to fight back. That's it. That's why people get enthusiastic about things and start companies and get crazy. You mean, it's always like a big burst of enthusiasm. I could never murder somebody while wearing a Fitbit. I just realized why because they would know they would be able to see when you got out. Yeah, it's just when you're extremely working out and it has like red grass and stuff. Stop thinking about murdering people or I could put it on somebody that that, you know, isn't like sleeping. Like I could put on my mom and then go out in the middle of the night murder people come back and take off my mom. They're not going to accept your Fitbit and the door. They could use that as a evidence. I would imagine. Well, there's also used as evidence that your resting heart rate went from seven to, you know, 82 or whatever over. Yeah. I did a review on it. Daskwad.tv Fitbit. You're really into it, huh? And it's kind of, I can see it's like when I started using Twitter for the first time. There's something there. Yeah. There's some kind of weird. This is the next step, right? This is the next piece of connectivity. This is turning your body into an Xbox when it comes to like fitness, you know, it's Fitbit. It's fucking badass man. Wow, that's a great idea. Wow, that's kind of interesting. Yeah. And of course, you're going to be like, have the most friends of Fitbit rural because you're going to be working out so extreme. And everyone, that would be like you're, you know, like instead of didn't cook having five million friends on Twitter, that you would have the most extreme. Yeah, you have the most like red graph, like you worked out the hardest. Or a lot of dudes beaten off to my account. Ah, could be that too. Yeah. And the person that sleeps, the person that sleeps, the best would be like some kind of weird wizard of Fitbit rural. Yeah. We should talk about this on the part. Let's just get this on commercial over with on it. Did you just go to on it.com. I'm tired of talking about this stuff. Here's how I feel about it. We can't make this any nicer. And by the way, we had to change a rule because some people are cons. We used to say that if you buy something and you don't like it, you could send it back. And or you don't even have to send it back. We'll give you 100% money back guarantee. But people were buying like 10 bottles and then they would, they would like take like three of them ago. Yeah, I'm not really into this. And so then they would sell the rest on eBay. So then we get their refund and then they would sell it on eBay. People are such twats. They will find a hole. That was a good idea. That was a good idea. That's a advantage of our hospitality. So now it's only the first 30 pills. And you should be able to figure out within 30 pills. I mean, you know, it's a lot of people say like if you could you can you really how much can you tell the difference between when you're eating multivitements and when you're not eating multivitements? I can tell. I can tell there's this subtle thing. But I'm in really in tune with my shit. I eat healthy. I work out a lot. I take supplements. I know like what gets me and what doesn't. But there's some people man that don't know you can you can give them things and they're not sure. Is this my multivitement working? You know, I was in work. You know, they don't feel their body. They're not in tune with their body so much. You know, and I mean, if you're not really athletic, if you don't push your body to extremes and you don't eat healthy and clean, I think a lot of people they there's a missing amount of communication. There's not an intimacy with your body. Well, they what I think when you're feeling bad, you kind of get good at like numb coming it out or ignoring it. So they've kind of like they've shut down their ability to like feel what if you to really honestly appraise their health. Because like if you're out of shape and you're fucking smoking all the time and you're drinking all the time, I speak from experience. If you get into like a jag of living like that, after a certain amount of time, you just start tuning out the weird pains in your body. You just start ignoring it because you don't want to you don't because it's just the truth and the truth is you can't constantly fucking eat like shit and smoke and drink. And that end up with you at the other end of that feeling great. Yeah. It's so important to take a variety of different things that are good for your health in my opinion. You should really eat a lot of healthy vegetables. That's like one of the most important things. One of the strongest things I've ever done is increase the amount of like green leafy vegetables when I die and drink kale shakes and shit like that. Take multivitamins. Please, it's not hard. It's fucking easy and it'll make you healthier. It just will make you feel better. Eat good food and look into new tropics. If you're not into any of the shit that we have at onit.com, there's plenty of other people that have cool shit available. So we try to make it as easy and as clean as possible. I'm way more concerned than I say this every fucking time, but it's because it's true. I'm way more concerned with not ripping people off than I am with making money. So that's the end of that fucking horseshit. Just a button. Let's start the show, Duncan trussles here. Hey, everybody. All day. I cut way back on my coffee consumption. Yeah. I have found that coffee in the show go well together. Oh, yeah. I think they're important in order to keep spitting information out. This is this. What are you doing with that echo man? You kill me. I'm going to go wait and forth. It won't go away, period. That's what it's like to be crazy, man. That's how it feels like when you're like tripping like you smoked too much weed and you start having a panic attack that. Is that what's going on? It's almost going on. It's almost going to happen. Why is on such a delay? It's just a weird stupid special effect that I do. Do you always do the same one? No. It's not easy mix it out. Does this make you feel better when you do these things? No, it's just a cool intro. You know? My husband started off with a weird creepy. No, I'm not talking trusses here. How we don't have to get me weird or a creepier. I'm not creepier. Hey, everybody. No, I'm not creepier. Not creepy in the bad way, brother. Creep in the best pocket way. You know, I love you. We all love you. I love you guys. Oh. We're doing the Chicago theater this Friday night. Fucking super fired up. Yeah. And me and Joey, Coco, motherfucking Diaz in the flesh. If you have never had a chance to see Joey Diaz live, you're going to shit yourself. That guy, dude, he had some moments. He had some moments on stage where it's just ridiculous shit that he says. It just makes you repeat what he said over and over and over again. Yeah. If he's one of those dudes, when Joey really rocks it on stage, they'll say something so fucking completely preposterous and so out of control that you'll just be repeating it. You'd be like, he's fucking what? You'll just repeat what he said. I go over and over. Because you had to re-register in your head almost. Yeah. Did I really just do that? He's fucking that transvestite joke. I'll be able to wait. One of the greatest jokes anybody's ever told on stage, he goes, I like transvestites. They cook, they clean. You can beat out of every once in a while. The cops come, who's gonna believe me or something, do it away in a black eye? There's no support groups, these people. The cops come, who are they gonna believe me? A sort of boo, the wig and a black eye? Yeah. That's just poetry, man. To me, that's poetry. The amount of words used, the structure of it. That's a great joke. He's a fucking animal, dude. Joey Diaz is an animal. He's so funny, man. We had him on the podcast the other day, dude. Just talk, you can talk about anything. Two to pigs, I know a fucking dude who made two pigs on the table. This guy, and I have some fucking crazy story about it. Two to pig factoring this chick was sucking everybody's dick. You know what I'm saying? It's a pop I had to get his. And it's just fucking toothpick factory story will become some fucking epic. He's fucking cruel, man. He's the greatest human being he's ever lived. He's the greatest human being he's ever lived. I fucking love that guy. That's one of the most awesome things about living here is that all you guys are here. It's one of the things that kind of keeps me in this area right now, because all you guys are here. It's like we have a lot of cool friends. We have a very unusual situation. We need to all move at the same exact time. Yeah, we need to get together like an Occupy Wall Street thing and be like, all moving here at the same time. We gotta be prepared for civil unrest, because the government is. Okay. So we've gotta start thinking if the shit went down, we need to, oh, God damn ranch somewhere. Yep. A ranch somewhere with like a bunch of houses. A castle on a move. All living this nice little farming ranch community until they're dost settles. Yeah, you could do that, man. That's like it's edible. It's good to have a place like that to go to, man. I've got a place like that to go to, but it didn't. Yeah, I do, but it didn't. It didn't North Carolina. Well, it's in Georgia. It's in Georgia. I will not reveal the precise. Is it near the Georgia guidestones? I wish it was. No, it's not. It's not near the Georgia guidestones. I don't know where those are actually, but I'm pretty sure it's not. I don't know where those are either. Let's find out. How you gonna do that? Go ahead, bro. Okay. But you got, I think it's a smart thing to have some. I mean, in any fucking house, you wanna have, you wanna, if you're in a hotel or wherever, it's good to know where to go. If there's gonna be a fire. It's the same thing with civilization. It's not. It doesn't make you crazy. It just makes you a normal thinking person. Elbert County. Elbert County's where I didn't go to downtown. Elbert County. The Georgia guidestones, the large granite monument in Elbert County, Georgia. Yeah, a message that contains 10 guides is inscribed on the structure in eight modern languages. And a shorter message is inscribed at the top of the structure in four ancient language scripts. Babylonian, classical Greek, Sanskrit, and Egyptian hieroglyphs. You should have, it's a pretty intense shit, man. Yeah. I mean, this is someone saying, you know, look, if humanity completely falls apart, here's a message, get to this stuff. This is crucial information. Somebody should have told them that there's not a lot of people in southern Georgia that speak classical Greek. This is what it says on it. It's really very interesting because it's very wise words. Listen to this. Maintain humanity under 500 million in perpetual balance with nature. 500 million on the whole planet. Good idea. God reproduction wisely, improving fitness and diversity. Huge genetics. It sounds a little eugenicsy, but rational as well, right? I mean, you know, utopian, of course. Utopian, but rational, right? Okay. Unite humanity with a living new language. Hmm. We all had one language that would make everything a lot fucking easier, right? Rule, passion, faith, tradition, and all things with tempered reason. Sound words, right? Sound words? Protect people and nations with fair laws and just courts. Okay. Let all nations rule internally resolving external disputes in a world court. I don't hear any new world order shit yet, right? Avoid petty laws and useless officials. A bit subjective. Well, I mean, a lot of this stuff is subjective. This is pretty subjective, right? petty laws and useless officials. Also, just saying resolve your problems in a world court. Yeah. How do you do that? That seems like a weird one. The petty laws and useless officials seems silly. That seems like it should be, you know, maybe, well, price is a good one. Balance personal rights with social duties, agreed that smart, right? Strong community shit. Yeah. Prize truth, beauty, love, seeking harmony with the infinite. Okay. I ain't getting a little crystal leon. He sounds almost like Dr. Bronner's soap. It's like that shit on Dr. Bronner's soap. Okay, here we, here. Now I don't like it at all. Listen, be not a cancer on the earth. Leave room for nature. Leave room for nature. Now I don't like it because that's a stupid thing to say. First of all, be not a cancer on the earth. What do you use? Shakespeare, bitch. Just say don't be a cancer. Don't be cancer. Be not a cancer. Yeah. Silly. I guess if you're not going to use contractions, maybe you think contractions and throw people off. I think, here's the thing that I think is really funny about these stones. What? I just watched Cava Forgotten Dreams, which is pretty awesome, which is like they like- I didn't get into it, man. I shut it off halfway on a board. I thought I got into it because I was just thinking about how crazy it was that Rhinos were in France at one point and kind of like who the fuck were these people? It was a little dry. But if you carve something in stone and you put it deep enough in the stone big enough stone, it's guaranteed that if people are still around in like hundreds of thousands of years, they're going to think that that really meant something. You know, they're going to think it was very important just because you carved it in stone. So it could be anything. You could put anything on a cave wall and people will come in and look at it and be like, wow, look at this. They worshiped a penis with a happy face on it. And it's just a guy who painted something on. Georgia guide stones. It's just a guy who went and carved some shit in stone. A lot of it makes sense. I mean, I just be not a cancer on the earth. Leave room for nature, leave room for nature. That is a, I mean, I'm more goofing on it, but that is like a good thought. I think they're great for all of it. Seems like, okay, it's just, I don't think that there's anything. Well, it's like Twitter messages. You can't get too profound. Well, you're carving in stone. Yeah, you're carving in a fucking limited amount of space. Yeah. What would you tell people? If you had Georgia guide stones of your own, if you could leave behind some monument to future monkey people that figure this out again? Yeah. You know what somebody quoted? It was a fascinating quote that civilization, if you look at it as made by the brightest minds, is disappointing, disappointing where we are. But if you look at it as something that's been thrown together by monkeys, it's amazing. It's amazing. We're doing so good right now. If you think about how good we're doing, great. But isn't that an interesting thing that people know, that human beings are capable of so much better, so much better behavior, so much more of a safe, sane, rational, loving world. We're capable that we're all capable of that as individuals. Yeah. We're all capable of being loving and nice and friendly. And if we're all capable of it, then in groups we spread out. And then somehow another gets lost along the way. So where is he get lost on the way? When they're fighting over resources, when they're fighting over crazy ideas. It's the ideas. Mostly it's the problem is the ideas. It's the resources thing. If you, resources, you can work out. If you don't have crazy ideas. Resources, resources, you can work out. It's the fucking crazy ideas. I just saw that guy, the physicist, where I can never pronounce his name, Machayu. What's his, he's a genius. It's Shukaku? Yes. He was talking about the different types of civilization, type zero civilization, type one civilization, type two civilization. I think someone just put it on my Facebook wall. But basically the concept behind it is that right now we're moving from a type zero civilization to a type one civilization, which is we're going into a place where we're going to recognize that we're all, we're planetary. You know what I mean? We're a planetary civilization instead of broken up and all these weird divergent pieces. Where I also speak different languages and we have these different beliefs. We're moving into something where we're all connected via the internet. But he said, this is the most dangerous time possible because we're moving from type zero to type one. And the type zero people, the ones with the crazy ideas, they have nuclear weapons. And so we're in a place where if we don't work the shit out, there can be a, we can destroy ourselves. But if we can get past these crazy ideas, the differentiators that split us up, the shit where people say like, you know those merriest, just pissed on the Taliban, the day shot and everybody got upset about that? Everybody got upset about what? They got upset that they were pissing on them. They didn't get upset that they'd killed. They're like, how could you urinate on bodies? It's like, you just blew fucking holes in the chest of these men. That's horrifying, that's awful. That's the worst still at a place right now where it's worst to piss on a dead body, and then to make a dead body. Now when we get to a place where making a dead body has the same cold shit. awful. That's the worst still at a place right now where it's worse to piss on a dead body than to make a dead body. Now when we get to a place where making a dead body has the same cultural resonance as pissing on one, where it makes national news because one person had the fucking insane idea of like shooting someone instead of working it out through language or talking it out. That's when we're going to be entering a new age, a new, if we can make it there, a new evolutionary period where we recognize that a solution to a problem is never, is never blasting people to smithereens. And if it is, it's so fucking rare that like it's the most rare thing. It's only in the most rare situations, you know? So I think that I think that we're on the verge of getting to this place and I think the internet's helping. I think every time you know you look at what having with soap and people and you see the power of this organizing force and logic seems to rule in the internet. It's just logical. People, the logical majority seems to be making things happen. So if that happened on a planetary scale, we're instead of these fucking insane guys like the president of Syria, look at that freak. Have you seen that fucking guy? He's insane. He's insane. He's an insane dictator, you know? If like these people, what was the name, Mubarak? What's his name name in Egypt? What was his name? Mubarak? Yeah, that's you guys. You think it's okay to be president for 40 years straight? You know what I mean? These fucking assholes once we start getting them out of the picture, you know, and then move on to the fucking the clerics and the priests who are like teaching people that they're the only way to communicate with the universe and connect with God. Once we get rid of those motherfuckers, this is a pretty awesome planet man. The resources thing we can work it out. We can work out the resources. I think we could. Smart, I couldn't believe it. Someone took something. No, an awesome optimistic view of the world. If we could just all communicate in the same native language so we could tell each other this. Yeah. That's a big part of the problem. Big part of the problem is if you were if there was some sort of a civil unrest or some sort of a problem with another part of the country that was European, we would get all the information back immediately. What's going on exactly what's going on. Yeah. Can you imagine if the United States was in Ireland for some reason? Oh my God. Wow. Would be ridiculous. You know. And also this this level, this language, this new language that I that it wouldn't just be us talking the same language. It's a neurologically, it's a technological, neurological interface that allows us to directly communicate emotion to each other. Because it's like, imagine how many stupid arguments you've gotten in like with your girlfriend or with your friends that you it's it just is about language, where underneath it, you're just feeling the exact, you're just like, I really want things to be okay. And you know what I mean? So if you could just feel how that felt, where, because I mean, think about it, we're forced to articulate our universe through the same fucking organ that we used to chew hamburgers. That's our way of describing the entire, it's the tip of our feeding tubes is how we're forced to describe the infinite. We're fucking limited. It's like in my left foot when the guy can only paint with his foot. Remember that. We have infinity out here. And all we have it to access to to describe this infinity and our perception of it in the way it feels to be a part of it is a language that we didn't come up with ourselves. A language that has been passed down and is, you know, is a trade language. So a lot of the words that we have, there might not be words that exist right now that describes certain facets of reality. And sometimes that'll make them invisible. But if you could undercut language and just have a emotional fucking connection where you could feel another person's emotions. I mean, imagine being the president of Syria and you, the guy who's like killing protesters, you know, and jailing people and torturing them, you take that guy in just for one second, he gets a feeling of what it's like to be out in the street or to be in a country where you've had a president forever and you're being completely repressed. If you could feel that feeling, you know what I mean? It would be hard for him to continue on. It would be hard for him to live in delusion and to think that, oh, it's easy to be a tyrant. I deserve this. Are these people are less than me? Slavery never would have been able to happen. Slavery was based on this ridiculous idea that somehow black people deserve to be enslaved. You know, it's the same thing with eating meat. We believe that in general, people one one way, not everyone. Some meat eaters are like, yeah, I'll eat. I eat meat. And I know that these animals have feelings and generally die of brutal life, but I think I deserve to eat meat. And I think that's natural. That's the best rationale for eating meat. That's that's it. You acknowledge the suffering and pain you're causing. And you do it, and you do it because you think you deserve it. But some people, they think fucking animals are like clockwork things. You know what I mean? Like little mechanistic like a wristwatch and they don't feel the same things that we feel. And we'll never know that until we create a neurological interface with animals in the moment, you realize, oh, fuck man, these cows, they feel love. They feel love for each other and fear and they fucking mourn their kids. Then when you sit down and eat a hamburger, it's going to be a much more intense experience. It's maybe it'll make it taste better. I don't know. But it's going to be this cow new love. Do you, uh, is that all true? You said about cows? Well, no, we I don't think we I don't think we can know that. But I think that they're like the my like when I was in India, they like the cows kind of wander the streets and then they're not like, you know, they're not abused in the same way that they are here. I'm sure there are some. But the one they're like, they're like really sweet dogs. They'll come up to you and rub their muzzle against you and you can scratch by their ears. And they're just very sweet. I mean, I'm not saying cows are fucking dolphins. Did you imagine if cows eventually evolve? Just get a little bit smarter and learn how to speak English. And then like start coming into people's houses and see all the leather shit. Oh, yeah. What the fuck are you getting me? You imagine? I mean, we just assume the cows are never going to evolve because where they are right now is where they are. You know, we assume they're just going to fucking eat the grass and just be all stupid and not get anything done. Just run around and make milk. They can't start allowing them on buses. Yeah. What if what if something happens with maybe its radiation, maybe it's like some fucking, it's world country where we were making likes and they did something to the water supply and it makes cows super small. So funny. Dude, can you imagine that for a farmer? You have leather everything. You fuck heads. You think you think it's cool to have leather everything? We have like the skin of a murdered animal is like standard on cars. That's our favorite shit. We want to sit down in flesh, peeled flesh from a murdered animal is the preferred seed of choice. Yeah. That's how I like my seat covered. I like a firm nice back of murdered animal hide with minimal padding. Yeah. Isn't it odd though that like even if like I you know, if I died, I mean, maybe I'm wrong about this. But if I put my will, I want my I want my flesh cured and made into wallets for my friends. I don't think I could legally do that. I don't think you can do that. You know, I don't think you could do that either. People how that's so superstitious and odd. Well, it is, but you don't want to really open up that market. You don't want to get a flash mark. You can flesh wallet market man. You don't even want to open that door. Well, I do. You don't want to have any of those out there. You know why? Because there's some one dude and he just he's going to get through this miserable life in one piece, one way or another. Until one day, he's at the fucking flea market and he finds a human flesh wallet. And that's it. He's got to make human flesh everything. Boom, murder spree. He's making human flesh underwear. Yeah, not good. Yeah. You don't want to encourage that kind of shit. You can't have that out there. You can't have human flesh wallets out there. People just want to unpredictably fucked up. I won't do it. I'll cancel my kickstarter. That's going to be our real problem. It's not just communicating. It's figuring out how to develop people or redevelop them after they've been fucked up as children. That's right. There's going to be something they figured some sort of a reset thing. Well, again, if you can get an emotional read on a person like how they're experiencing reality, then you can communicate with them much better. I mean, some some some some people are fucked because they can't communicate. If we were smart as a species, that's one of the big things that we would do. We would set up places where people who fucked their lives up can go and not be a criminal and get some food and have some and help them and figure things out. Listen, we know we can keep you from going to jail for the rest of your life. Let's work this out. Let's fucking figure you out of fucking career path here. Help this dude. Somebody help these people. They're obviously everybody's like, hey, put yourself up on your own boat straps, which I believe in for for most things, for most things that that would be the advice. But occasionally there's some people that are a part of society. They're just they're handed this shittiest fucking hand of cards ever in life. And you know, and then they find themselves in and out of the judicial system as a young kid and they find themselves in jail. And if I mean, it's like, man, you don't think that that dude somehow or another didn't get a fair shake ever in his whole life. You know, and everybody just wants to just lock them up and put them in that's not the solution either. The solution is how you fix them. It's so weird, man. It's like the vagina is an elevator door that opens up into this dimension. And like sometimes that elevator puts you out on a bad fucking floor. Sometimes you like that is one of the most brilliant things you've ever said. I'm not that elevator smells. You got to remember that. Somebody tweet that to don't remember that. That's a bit, dude. I've been saying some version of that. But not like that. But so the idea is you get smashed out into the in some of these people get fucked up. They get blasted out into a bad apartment surrounded by crack holes. It's terrifying. Yeah, man. And this fucking what is this lead to? This leads to what you're talking about. These people who who have, I mean, imagine spending the first 12 years of your life before you went into a foster home with the most neurons when you're a baby has more neurons in their brain than in any other time in their life. So you're like a wax seal. A baby's brain is like a wax seal. And the fucking family is like the ring that you know, they push into like, you know, like in the fucking medieval times, it's like we get imprinted. And we can't resist it by the vibrational frequencies that were around when we're when we're blasted into this dimension. And you need help to get those things transformed. Like you can't just do it on your own. The record's been pressed, man. You need help to fucking overcome the weird patterns that come from living next to the lunatics that were your parents. Not everyone had crazy parents, but many people had fucked up parents. They were giving my like think about how young. I mean, I think our younger parents were when they had you. Think about that. Were they on their 20s, Joe? Yeah. My mother was 21. What'd you have me? When was the last time you talked to a 21 year old? Yeah. Last night for him. Brian lives in that world. He lives in the world of he's the only 37 year old man I know that abuses the word like I'm like, I'm like, get out of here. I do that. I do the likes, man. I listen to these YouTube videos sometimes people make it. And you're my like, the makes me want to sell my lips. Well, this is a cool thing about podcasts is you get to find out how annoying your personality really is. You do the annoying aspects of it. Yeah. I lighted. Yeah. It's stuck back in your face. It's good to see. It really is. There's a I've read this. There's an interesting essay that this guy who's got the weirdest name his name is Zurzan. And he's a he's like, I don't know the exact word for what he is, but he's like an anarchist primativist. He thinks everything started going bad when we started using symbols to represent reality. Instead of just being in reality that when the moment you start using symbols to represent reality, you're kind of boxing reality in and you're separating yourself. You're creating the separation from you and the universe. And so that he was talking about the growing use of the term like, people use the word like instead of just saying what it is. So you know, it's like you're walking outside and you're like, come up to this thing. And you're like, and he says, what that is is this subconscious problem where people are not directly experiencing reality. So everything's like something else. Things aren't being things are being like something else. It's very curious. It's pretty good. If you look up Zurzan, it's it's it's a little fucking dense, but it's a pretty good essay. Yeah, if you're hung out with guys, uh, hate symbols that hate symbols. Yeah, and drums. Yeah, not either one of those instruments. Well, you know, it's weird, you know, um, one of the things that I always thought it was fascinating about ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs is that they had a completely different way of writing things. So they must have had a completely different way of talking, completely different way of like, of phrasing things. And of, and you, you, when you look at like how you could be a human being, obviously an intelligent human being, advanced sophisticated culture capable of producing amazing works of art, but that languages like totally alien to us, like we look at it and like, what is this crazy chicken scratch and pictures of birds and shit? And these fucking people, this is what they use to describe the world, but somehow or another to them it worked. Like they they they they thought of things like in a different way. They're their language, the written language consisted of like symbols. Yep. You know, and not not like ours, but like, you know, but like images really fascinating shit. Yeah, it is. Language is is one of the, uh, most fascinating things to think about when you're tripping like it's fun to contemplate where each word is coming from. Like the transformation of the thought into the word and how instantaneous that happens. So when you start contemplating where it, where is this, where's this language coming from? I don't even think about this. It just, it just happens. And from the longest time for the longest time, people have always been aware that one of the big things that keeps people from really directly communicating with everybody is the language barrier. Yeah. I mean, that's why the myth of the tower of Babel existed that that that was like a plan to give us all different languages so we could never fucking figure out how to communicate with each other. Yeah. Which is really fascinating because I mean, it really would make sense. Like if someone had that kind of power, if there were really like a warlock who could just go, I will give everyone a different language. God. You know, I mean, that would be a good move. If you really could do that, I mean, if it was that easy to be the architect of reality, that would be a good move. You don't want them to rally up. We'll have them all live in these little spots and give them fucking languages and shit. No one understands what they're saying. If I went over to God's house, like if there's a lot of gods living in the same neighborhood and they all have these little aquarium earth that they're fucking with. If I went over to a fucking God, the God's house that did that, I feel like you're a dick, man. Let them speak the same language and have fun. Why do you consistently fuck with these people? You got to give them a break. You know what? I call animal control on God. Like look at it. Look at it. Like if you believe the concept of God and really think about like the fundamentalist Christian concept of God, if this, if any, if someone was doing that to animals, what God is apparently doing to us, according to the fundamentalist Christians, he would go to jail for a long time. Anonymous would fucking attack him. God's a sadist. He's like taking gay people, burning them in hell forever. He's like giving cancer to people because they deserve it. He makes people go blind. He turned a whole city in the Bible to salt or something. Yeah, he did a lot of creepy shit. He's a creep. There's no other way around it. There's no other way around it. There's better ways to deal with people. But you don't understand Duncan. The Lord has a plan and all the owed to you and your mind. You believe you have an all figured out. And then you're smarter than the Lord. And I say that's not possible, Duncan. You're a marker. You're a marker. I can remember this. You're thinking too much. They get mad at you. Well, you can't have questions. That's not what you shouldn't use your mind for that. You got to let God be scripture sales, scripture sales, he who walk it with me, walk it with the Lord. Yeah. They'll say shit like that. And you go, what does that even mean? What the fuck does that mean? Well, I mean, what it means? That's the dude with the mushrooms. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Yeah. That's so that's the sad thing is these there's a great book called it's by Abraham Maslow and it's called Religious Values and Peak Experiences. And it talks about a theoretical, the theory of how religion happens. And the progression of information as it goes from being someone who's really happy to it being a priest class that's controlling people. And so his idea is certain people throughout time have had peak experiences where they break through the particular ego barrier created by the zeitgeist of their time. They have a direct communication with some kind of like super ideas, super intelligence, whatever you want to call it, they get really happy, happy in a way not just like someone who's having a good day, but in a way where if you were in into them, you would recognize that they'd figured something out. So that person gets a group of people around him who are kind of magnetized by the energy and by what they're saying and they're talking about a real way that you can live and actually be happy in the world. And those people from being around someone who's like, you know, like in sports, they used to say you can only a five minute mile, you could only run a mile in this amount of time. And everyone thought that and everyone was doing that. And then right when someone broke it, all of a sudden everyone started breaking. It's like, oh yeah, I could do that. So in the same way, these, you know, certain people will overcome a specific, you know, phantom of their time, which is causing them to be miserable. Those people get people around them will also get this certain level of happiness. The person who came up with the original, original idea dies. Now he's just got the disciples and the disciples have people around them. And they transmit this idea to the people around him, but now it's a little diluted. And some of the people who are doing it aren't quite, you know, aren't really quite happy. They're not doing it right. So you pass that down. You know, keeps getting water and water and water and water. And then the next thing, you know, you just, you have like some fucking like old horny man with his pants down just nailing a fucking toddler in a confession booth. And that's the end result starts off with a super happy guy ends up with a fucking pedophile dress like a god clown with his cock and a kid's ass. That's how that's how mutated things get, which is why it's very funny that people feel so desperate to cling onto this old thing instead of thinking, wait, there might be a new thing that we can come up with based on all the information we have right now. At the end of the day, it's all shit that was written down by people at the end of the day. And why would we ever think that the people who lived thousands of years ago had it right? Okay. Why? Why would you want to believe that? There might be information there that we could use and could help us. But the most important thing is to know what we know now. Yes. No, we know now. And let's figure this fucking thing out together. That's right. Following some any crazy shit, anything. I don't care what it is. Judaism, Christianity, Muslim. What do you want to be? What do you want to be? I want to be a kari Krishna. It's all the same. It's all something that someone put together. What the message behind it, who knows if it's right and who knows if it's wrong? Who knows if there really is an actual man in the fucking clouds and in the biblical sense. What the fuck knows? I mean, it doesn't seem likely to me based on what I've experienced in my life. But if it is, I'm going to be pissed. But even if it is, I mean, the universe is fucking so bizarre. The idea of the infinite space is so bizarre that a guy in the clouds with a harp. Why is that so weird? I mean, yeah, why not? Why not? Why not? Why not? There be one guy that's running the whole fucking thing. With the fuck, it sounds crazy that there could be a heaven, a pearly gates and shit, you get up there and there's dudes wearing white and everybody's floating. But imagine if it was true. Imagine if you got up, you I wouldn't, that is not to me nearly as shocking. Heaven is not nearly as shocking as the universe itself. Well, I think that it's what we're talking about here is that the ability to describe reality and to understand reality keeps increasing as we evolve as a species. So really smart people, you know, in every single time, there've been very smart people at every single time, really smart people in different ways. But their ability to describe reality was limited to the language available to them and the technology that was around them at the time. I mean, if you look at like shit, man, I hope you remember this because there's a book in the Old Testament that is in my mind is clearly a UFO encounter. I think it's Leviticus. It's not what it's Ezekiel. It's Ezekiel. Now you look at that and what is the guy used to describe this thing? He's like a wheel with a little more wheels and chariots and just the shit that's available to him to describe this experience that he had. Now, now if someone saw that same thing, they'd be like, yeah, I got sucked up by a UFO. They gave me a psychedelic. I saw something that's coming, which is relevant to your experience. Or a coconut fell on that motherfucker's head and sparks were flying. And he didn't know what happened. He woke up in a ditch with a bloody head with a, you know, it could have been a hallucination and people just believed it. But I think that, I mean, outside of, you know, religious hallucinations or visions and people trying to describe it, everyone's limited to the tools that they have around them to observe reality and they can only report on reality based on the tools that they have. And the experiences that they have to draw upon, which is one of the reasons why the whole UFO thing seems so preposterous to people. So we don't have that experience to draw upon it. And they experience an alien intelligent life form. It's like looking back at us while we're looking at it. I don't think I think 90% of the people on the planet, which is die of a heart attack, like immediately. Boom. They're hard to fucking explode. Yeah. If aliens came and they were super intelligent with those big fucking gray heads and those giant black eyes, they could totally read your mind. And they were all just like floating and freezing people and erasing memories and shit. Like all these Travis Walton stories, you know, like that, that guy that, if that's all, if that, what word to actually happen, I don't think the human race would survive. I think we can't serve, we're the alpha. We can't exist in a world where we're under the thumb of some incredibly intelligent, super sophisticated alien life form that thinks in a completely different way than us and can control matter. Well, you know, man, I always, I have this optimistic idea that control matter like I'm working right for the X-Men. It's not going to, I don't think it's going to come from the sky and the silver ships. I think the way it goes down is, maybe all of a sudden you kind of, we as a species get to a point where we kind of realize we remember actually what's going on. I think right now we have a little bit of amnesia. We have lost a sense of like what truly is happening. I think when you take a really potent psychedelic, sometimes you'll see this universe that already is around you that's already happening around you at all times. You get a sense, all of a sudden that you've been there before and then it goes away. But it seems like we're more like getting projected into this reality with awful amnesia for some, I don't know what it's for. It could be a, it could be just a video game, could be a sadistic joke, could be a prank. This could be a prank that one super intelligent entities playing on another super intelligent enemy entity. It could be anything. Or it can be a novelty creating machine like you can have thought. McKenna thought that the universe was a novelty creating and harvesting machine. And then we as the most complex organisms possibly in the universe were at the pinnacle of this novelty creation. Yeah man. And then that's like, you know, that's the whole reason for it all. It seems chaotic to us and see like this is provostuous. We should know, but it's almost like in our instincts as an organism. We have a direction to go and the direction is not spiritual. It's technological. That's it. People are not looking for some sort of a spiritual release and some sort of a broader perspective on the universe and an objective view of life. No, they're looking to see if they can punch a hole through the center space. You know what I mean? It's the real height of progress is not a complete overhauling and understanding of the educational system of the way to develop human minds, the way to stop people from harming each other instead of devoting all of our resources to evolving socially. If it even is possible ever, instead of doing that. Well, like one thing you can do is instead of when you think about the passage of time as we move into the future, if you like get out of your head this idea it's like running down a racetrack or something like you're running down a track and think of it more in the sense of a revealing is happening. So as we progress into the future, more things begin to emerge into this reality that weren't there before. Like we go from having stone tools to all of a sudden having iron tools and then we go from that to all of a sudden where we are now where we're surrounded by fucking silver glowing Macintosh computers and like microphones that are somehow recording our voice and these things keep getting revealed more and more and more and any of these items should you take them back a hundred years. People would think it was a UFO. They'd see it and think that fell out of a spaceship. So all of a sudden you realize and I maybe McKenna said this and I think you may have said something like this but the idea is the spaceship, the alien, the extra terrestrial intelligence, it's growing around. It's like crystals when you're a kid and you're growing crystals but it's growing in the form of technology that eventually is going to become self aware which is why I heard this awesome thing which is the first alien contact that we have is going to be a computer that wakes up. That's going to be our first communication with another consciousness. Not something from the great void of space but something that grew through time. I'd say that's totally possible but I don't say not something from space because it could be something from space. Yeah, that's possible too. I hope it is. It could be that the first UFO or the first the first real intelligence that we encounter that's greater than our own is something that we create ourselves replicates itself. It's like very quickly. That was the idea that once a computer becomes sentient the real issue is going to be that they're going to be able to, well this is a stupid fucking design who built me and then they built something like way better instantly. They know exactly how to put it together. Once they're, yeah. And you know, the idea of programming emotions and programming, you know, our mammalian system of dealing with babies and puppies and little baby chickies and shit. They won't have any of that guilt or weird feeling about biological life. And they might just say look at these fucking assholes, shitting all over this planet. We can't even use half of the resources on the planet because it's buckets of blow it up, nuclear bombs and left nuclear waste and holes. We're like cats. We like take our nuclear ships and we just throw them at a hole. We cover over it. We're like stupid cats at the top of the heap of technological innovation science, the best way to get rid of nuclear waste besides shooting it at other planets. Could you imagine what assholes we would be considering in the universe if we just shot our nuclear waste up in the space like a rocket? You know, we send it out with the Voyager to crash lands on someone's fucking moon someday. What if it starts some future war? They think it's a bomb. We send we shoot nuclear waste there where just apparently it's very devastating to their particular environment. It feels like 80% of the people on the planet. The rest they get together on giant battleships and head to earth. It's a fucking good movie. Somebody make that, make that movie. Could they shoot nuclear waste in the space? Can they do that? Well, it gets stuck in the problem with that. I'm sure you could, but it would take so much energy to get it out of the orbit of the planet that it ends up becoming less efficient to use nuclear energy. You know, they blew up a bomb in the atmosphere. Why wouldn't you know? Operation, I believe, I think it was called Operation Starfish Prime. I think that was the name of it. Yeah. I'm like, when are you going to Google that? Starfish Prime? Michael, they involved. No, no, no for real. I believe I think it was called Operation Starfish Prime. Konai. I think that was the name of it. Yeah. I'm like, when are you going to Google that? So I don't want to. Starfish Prime. Michael Bay involved. No, no, no, for real, man. They decided to shoot a fucking nuclear warhead. Right up. Seems like what in the eye on a sphere? We didn't like fuck up some kind of rotation or something or possibly. Well, you don't want it to fall back. Yeah. You mean blowing up a fucking nuke in the atmosphere? I think at that time, they didn't really know what it was getting. What did I say was prime what? Oh fuck, something prime. I starfish prime. Starfish prime. That sounds like the last one. Initiate starfish prime. Like call my daughter's get album. Doesn't it? Yeah. It's a good nickname for somebody. Starfish puts a good lymphiscuit on it. It's like a nickname for like a stripper and that's correct. Sounds like a weed stripper. Yeah. Wow. Wow. One of five high altitude tests. Jesus Christ. They shot a bunch of fucking nuclear bombs up in the space. Just to see what would happen. Oh, these people are so crazy. The people that we got, people that we got running our world are so fucking hilarious. Yeah. The people that created weapons and the people that decided to like test them and blocean up and see what you do. You've seen the video of the one nuclear bomb that they blew up in the ocean where there's all these battleships around it and the fucking water. It's going like, I don't know like half a mile into the sky. And it's just it's so ridiculous. The people who are exaggerating am I even exaggerating? I might not be man. I would just like like a I would see it was more than 100 feet. It was ridiculously high in the sky. And these are battleships dude like big ass battleships. Just flying water just flying through the like somebody made that. They will a group of people. They made that and then they just fucking did it. They just did it. Let's see what it looks like. Yeah. You're not fucking fastening that. It must have been when it was only theoretical when there was all these eggheads sitting around just into the have these ideas. Yeah. Oppenheimer and Einstein and all these motherfuckers with their ideas come together and they think it could be done. And they know it could be the it's almost like science compels them to create it. Well science could knowing that's the that's that that right there. There's the danger because things get weird at that point like those fucking scientists. Someone is in control of it other than the scientists themselves. Yes. And someone always will be because you know that the people that will be would never be able to create that in the first place. They would never be able to come up with this intellectually. That's why scientists are it's a very interesting thing because they they have this idea. They're just seeking knowledge that you know that they know more out. That's what they do. And then you know, but the people paying them to do this are generate to off quite often the military. But look at these fucking guys who just invented that new bird flu. Did you hear about this? Did running it through ferret kidneys or something they created. I don't remember how they did it was like running it through ferrets. So they created apparently something that was the what is it 30% of the people who died or kill. Yeah, something insane. They said it. It would make smallpox look like the common called smallpox is already something that if it if it there was a smallpox outbreak, we'd be fucked. We beat smallpox. Yeah. Why are they making fucking super disease? Because they're just trying to find information. They're exploring the universe. And so that's their motivation. Yet what they did is they created a biological nuclear weapon. Now she's all over the fucking planet. There's people in the military. I mean, when someone I sure that some military commander was just looking through the air and I was like, Oh, Martha, can you get out of those scientists on the line? I'd like to talk to them. And they're like, Hey, do you guys want to make $17 million this week? Send over your research. We'd like to know how to make this biological agent. And then the next thing you know, some fucking government somewhere in the world. I mean, shit, you think Iran wasn't interested in that or what maybe North Korea or us certainly any any fucking world power would want that weapon. That's a great weapon outside of the fact that it ends up. We'll see, you know, biological weapons. Biological weapons have a really the problem with that one is it might not burn itself out. But biological weapons have a distinct advantage over nuclear weapons. Because nuclear weapons destroy infrastructure, biological weapons just kill, you know, logical. So if you have a nice, fast moving fucking disease that you've made that you can drop on a city, then you know, fly in there three months down the road, clean up the bodies. You've got a city, you know, she's just fucking right. Yeah. So it's it's better than it fucking nuclear webinar. Now you've got a nuclear wasteland that you can't use for a long time. So isn't it strange? This comes down to the, the people that are in control of that kind of power. Yeah. Almost can't help but be cut. Right. The only reason why you got to that position in the first place is because you wanted to do this. Well, yeah, you ended up if you're, if you're one of those guys pushing these buttons, you, you, you, you've always wanted to do this. Yeah. And it puts us in a real bind, man, because it doesn't represent us. It doesn't represent us. Doesn't represent any of us. But it, but even if let's say we spread it, let's say somehow it spreads through an office and like the consciousness of like all these people who started getting into power, they're like, you know, people who are like coming, like people who are coming into power, we're starting to have more open-minded internet ideology of how the world works. And let's say that just the whole of our government suddenly turns into like the smartest fucking people and forgive me for saying this, the smartest people on Reddit are now running the United States government. All of a sudden that's being, it would be awesome. It would be fucking the country would be perfect. There'd be like, dude, if the internet ran the world, the world would be beautiful. There will be a crowd. It won't be because the internet is the voice of the people. It really, it's the only voice of the people. It's the only voice we all have. They're the only way. They're the breaking news stories of be like cute cat pictures and fucking the, but here's the problem. If that happened in this country, let's say it happened in Europe and let's say it happened in parts of parts of, you know, Asia, still these different pockets. All you need is like two or three fucking pockets of people who are worshipping some mythological entity that they think is a hate-gate people and wants women to wear a fucking weird shit or things. It's okay to like lash people or I think I don't remember what's country was I think some country just as executed someone, I think it might have been Iran, but that could be propaganda. Who knows, I don't know, but apparently someone they executed a guy for coming up with a program that allows people to download porn. What? Yes. Now if you just have a few of these psychopaths out there, they can ruin the whole fucking party. Oh my God. It's like the earth right now has the potential to turn into an awesome party, but you know that thing that happens when two dicks roll into a party, like two weirdos that nobody invited or like, I was said and start fucking drinking too much and like trying to pick fights. That's what we have on a planetary scale right now. Yeah. But then, but the people there's becoming, it used to be it was mostly the cycles of the party. Now it's getting to be where there's more and more cool people at the party. And we got to figure out how to get the dicks out of the house. That's where we're right now. How do we do it? Let's get these assholes. What we got to do is we got to convert the dicks. Right. Convert whatever dicks that can be converted, convert them to be cool human beings. You know, that to be nice to people feels good for you too. And it's the best way to communicate with people be nice to everybody. Pump your friends up, you know, help each other out be cool to each other, support each other, look, look out for each other, develop a community of people who are giving them all mushrooms don't you do? Why not? We settle. Yo. I just found why you're clowning on my game, kid. This is a thread on mixedmartialarts.com. What are this is? Why is Joe Rogan so in a mushrooms? Did you see that thing I tweeted today? Obviously written by someone who hasn't done mushrooms, right? Or did you have to ask that you've never done mushrooms? Yeah, come on, silly. You see that thing I tweeted today? It's kind of old. I've known about it for where, but they found evidence to help mushrooms helping depression. Yeah, I did see that. Look, in this day and age, you know, what they should be doing with mushrooms is studying them. They should have lived. It should be absolutely decriminalized. They've known as dying for mushrooms. Okay. What people are doing, they're freaking out. Yeah. One of the reason why they're freaking out is because life is fucking crazy enough as it is. And a lot of times you're holding a billion things in the back of your head that you're trying to fight off. You don't want to remember or you want to pretend you did a better thing than you really did. And you take those mushrooms and your ugly truth, they just thrown into your face like diarrhea from a horse. Just all over you. That's what it's just like. You're reality. And that's a bad trip. That's not a bad trip. That doesn't trip you needed. There are no bad trips, Joe. They're only difficult trips. Difficult. Challenging trips. That's the idea you've got to remove the, I heard that. That's the last, I didn't get that for those. That's what I do with a bad trip. There's nothing. Well, Ryan, it's sort of like if you got jet fuel and you shifted into someone's Prius, then put like what the fuck is this in here for? Yeah. We're not working right. We just don't like, I couldn't walk Duncan. I was following my feet would not work. We don't have the, you don't have to be like Shaquille O'Neill to handle that. I kind of hear that. You know what I mean? Well, but in this, in this super society we're talking about, they would have a 911 for bad trips. Like 7-1-1 if you're having a bad trip, call it and be like, I'm fucking freaking out. I can't feel my feet. And then they could, you know, they could send over some fucking cool. Well, the real problem is we're great when we communicate directly with each other. But when we band together and big groups and then we can't communicate, we get too far away from each other, then we just start getting dicky with the people that are furthest away. Yeah. Fuck them man. I'm taking their shit. They're over the good water. Yeah. And you know, there's this like, that that's where the lack of it, the fact that you don't feel all these other people. I think it's an evolving entity. That's what I think. I think the human organism is some crazy technology, inventing, evolving organism. I think the, the invention of technology though, I think is like the whole reason why we're here. I think what we're all doing as stand up comedians and as nurses and doctors. And we are all supporting the system that keeps alive the people that make the awesome shit. We're just going to find out that we are technology. That's what I mean. When you die, you're like, oh, I get it. We're the caterpillar that becomes the butterfly. We are working towards the invention of this ultimate technology. We just don't see it that way. We think of our lives as I've got to get my shit together and I've got to get me yoga. You know, when I get to yoga, I'm there. I'm home. I'm centered. You know, you're just trying to make up for the fact that you know, you've got some weird situation when your husband doesn't fuck you anymore. Let's be realistic. You're getting all crazy with your crystals because you ain't getting no good dick crazy with them. Christ crazy with your crystals. But at the end of the day, I have a feeling that the whole thing might be in place just so we keep buying cooler shit and this weird, complex social order that we have is all just fucking the ripples and waves of reality. But the whole thing is pushing towards more improved technology. Oh, yeah, pushing towards innovation. Like, look at what's happening right now with soap and peep and what you're seeing is right now technology has surpassed government and surpassed the control mechanisms that are in place and like the entertainment industry to monetize their product. They they have to innovate a new way. They have to be able to vote on shit online. That's what it should be. It should be you log in. You have a fucking email address. You know, it's Duncan Trosso at the United States of America.com. Yeah. And you fucking log in and you get the vote period. That's how it should all be done. Yeah. Keep the system secure. Don't be an asshole. Don't abuse it. Let's find out what people really want. How about that? Yeah. It's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's the future. It would be it would be it's right. It's down. I know that some dude hacked you have to see. Yeah. That's because I went. I wanted to find out some information on one of the upcoming match ups on what you gotta be. Mother. Fucking kidding me. Some. Little weirdo dude made this cool. It was actually kind of a cool weird picture that you would love. It was like a Hitler with a big crazy giant eyes that you can't. Yeah. But you know, it's it was a motor. Direct. Is that it is that is yeah. It just read that. We're really doing. Why did you do a side? Because it's almost. But I sopa you know the UFC supports the Online piracy thing why did they they must not understand it well every media companies doing everything That's what it's for because they're there. You know what it is man It's like you got this fucking problem people are afraid of afraid to speak up and a lot of people agreed on this dumb thing And now the truth is coming out about the way it works and people are afraid to speak out I don't know enough about it, but I'm gonna see them this weekend I'm gonna ask them what it's all about I don't understand You see Dana's tweets during when all this was happening is like I don't get a shit He's like I'm not even that's what he said He goes I'm not eBay LOL because I'm not in the website business. I'm in the flight business. Yeah, you cannot have I'm not that thing you cannot have better. Yeah, that's it. That guy's a cool You get a white shit. Oh, he would I don't know man. He wants to be high with his employees Huh? Yes, we do we're gonna do a podcast no he doesn't we don't have to smoke we did it we could have a month for sure We just want to tell him. I don't know if there's a lot of shitty couldn't talk about now. It's big time big time with a fox Fox that could a big fox fight this weekend man You don't even fuck so I'll just talk about amongst myself. I'm very excited Wait the oh, you have seen this weekend. Oh, yeah, I know that. Oh, I see yeah, it's a Damien Maya versus kid Chris Wiedman, he's just badass wrestler from New York Fucking kids at beat. He's like one of those up and coming guys Strangling people putting people sleep taking people down smashing like veterans and he's taking on that Damien My jitsu wizard. That's a bad ass fight. You know what shocking about the UFC man that I never you don't see unless you come to like a live You have see what seeing somebody get choked out up close. Oh, yeah, fucking disturbing man It's awesome, but man when you see that fucking it's like it's like watching somebody with like I don't know Gardening shit just though it just clamps down. It's like watching a clamp just smash someone's windpipe It seems like they can't live after that. It seems like you destroy their neck. Yeah, you feel like it But no dudes come right back boy. So did you see that UFC has the Xbox app now where you can just watch live UFC's on Xbox Yeah, they sit there and that's like pay per V but through Xbox how much is the charger Xbox? Is that what? Yeah, yeah, sweet. Yeah, they're gonna do it in they're doing them in movie theaters as well They've done them before movie theaters. That would be fucking wick it but you know chokeouts Physiologically not that bad for your body head impact is bad. Yeah Head impact they're finding out is you know you got to limit the amount of times you get hit That's why for a fighter. It's really important to know when to hang it up There's a certain amount of shots and after that you should really you should you know I know you still like to do it, but you got to think about your future who decides this does the Does the is it always in that decision of the fighter can the UFC ultimately it has to be the decision of the fighter unless someone owns him Unless he's a slave, but though as an organization if you kind of know a guy's the organization If the UFC decided that someone should be fighting for them that doesn't keep them from fighting They'll go someone else and the the UFC you know does offer advice to guys and they They you know they care very much for their fighters They have like you know like Chuck Liddell they gave him a great job and part of the reason was they did did one I'm to fight anymore. Yeah, this amazing career But when it's over it's over and you know they they they had one last fight he lost that they said alright You're right. I'm just gonna settle in and they got him an awesome cushy desk job and he travels around You like represents the UFC and the the beauty of that is it's like they took care of them They're like they pulled them, you know, they mean like they said looking this is this is it This is time let's let's just settle the fuck down You know, let's let's move on to the next stage of life. You're an awesome your bad motherfucker He'll be a bad motherfucker business. He'll be a bad motherfucker. Anything he wants to do I do certain point in time You know it's good to have someone who cares for you Yeah, he's in his steps in and that's what Dana did Dana like totally hooked Chuck up You know Chuck was with him from the beginning there were there there were together at the beginning and he's taking care of him It's awesome. It's awesome to see that. It's awesome to see a guy who knows like you know What this is a smart thing to do? I'm just gonna step away because it's so hard for fighters man that moment of the moment of competition Is so intense and so extreme and victory? You know, I've been there while Chuck Ladell won like some big big fights I was like right there during his heyday when he was in his prime man and having been there and having seen that If you could ever do that ever if you could ever do that you would want to keep doing it You would just be convinced I'm just gonna go one more time I'm gonna keep doing it. It's amazing that he could ever stop because it's such a rush for them I watched him knock these goo down. I watched him knock Randy Koteur out twice She is flat lining guys with these punches. It was crazy and then running around He was just scariest fucking guy on the planet for like a few years, man He was terrifying when he was just running shit in the UFC when he was in his like true athletic peak There must have been an amazing feeling it must have been that life must have been so crazy and exciting Yeah, you're stepping into a cage against the most ferocious guys in the planet and you're smashing them Smashing them in front of the whole world. Yeah, you know, I mean he's this career was incredible man Just fucking Incredible knockouts the Bobble unocouts me. He was just a beast man When he when chocolate Dell was on top when he was on at his best man One of the most exciting guys of all time so for that guy, you know, it's it's probably real hard Just just accept getting up in the morning Listening to the quiet of your yard as you walk towards your fucking newspaper that's sitting in your front porch And you're looking out there and just people mowing their lawn you start shadow boxing Start going maybe just one more fight all right You get bored when I get back in there. I want to feel the fucking rush You want to Wow, you know, it's hard for those guys. It's very hard. It's an incredibly difficult transition I experienced it in the most minute of levels You know, I'm just talk window and kickboxing when I When I stopped fighting when I was like 20 21 or 22 was my last fights. I just fucking It's it's a it's a weird to say it's a hard to say I know the feeling man I get that feeling reality gets boring. I get that feeling when I delete Starcraft from You know, it's The real problem with me when I was a kid doing martial arts is I worried about two things one You couldn't make any money. There's no money in like kickboxing. There's nothing back then See you couldn't even kickbox and Massachusetts You'd have to drive to Rhode Island like we couldn't it was weird You could fight in full contact Taekwondo matches in Massachusetts, but you couldn't kickbox You had to go to Rhode Island for that and they didn't even have more tighter It was just like it was a it was a mess and then there's the brain damage issue Brain damage always a concern. I was always Because I knew I was like, you know, I did not do very well in school But because I did not want to pay attention. I was just a really distracted kid I'm sure if I was with the wrong parents they would have drugged me especially today Yeah, there's like super distracted, you know, but I read a lot of shit and you know go being like a young kid and Not knowing like what the fuck is going on with the world and trying to figure things out and Trying to like read as much as you can try to piece it together yourself It's a very bizarre place to bit. Yeah A lot of us get there right a lot of people that we know Came from a place where when they were really young They were like what the fuck is going on with the world. Yeah What how old do you think you were when you had your first oh? I think my parents might be fucking crazy thought when you like these people are in charge of telling me what to do This is nonsense. You're making you're talking crazy talk here. It happens. It happened for me The first time that I took LSD and maybe before that but when I took LSD When I took LSD for the first time I can remember whenever you take LSD Especially, you know, I mean that you know when I took LSD what it what worries do I have? I'm in fucking high school There's no there's nothing in there's nothing to there's no demons to come swimming out of my brain and taught me with like all the Mere of things you get when you're older. There's just fucking nothing. You just open. I might be upset because like a cheerleader that came over to my house. I couldn't figure out how to kiss her maybe that's like the biggest Problem I'm having at the time so but I you know at that time when I did it for the first time and had that initial experience You know when you go back to your parents who've never taken it and if you mentioned to them that you'd even taken it They might want to put you in a drug rehab or they think you're insane Or they think you're getting down the wrong track you're forced into this place of like fuck man. I can't I You guys don't even you don't even know you don't even understand this this New way of experiencing life, you know, so and I think there's a lot of people Who's been their whole lives never knowing that you don't have to take psychedelics to get to that place There's other ways to get to that place, but yeah, it's a very strange thing and those people who never get to that place They're the ones who are a lot of them are in control right now So your life took an in Exorable change when you did acid that was like the point where you look back You said this is the point where I went off into this direction Well, I know I'd say that the that that taking acid started with a series of like books It started with contact with like you know The whole weirdness my whole weirdness weirdness started with or as I recall it started with me Coming upon this book that my mom had called Raja yoga by Yogi Rama, Choraka who by the way It was never a yogi. It was just some English mystic It's a fascinating story, but the book, you know, that was the first time I'd ever read the idea The you there that you're an observer Observing yourself that you you aren't necessarily the you that you think the you that can be observed is Not you you're the observer state the mindfulness the watcher That's when I that's the first time I'd come upon the idea of what's that's called the otman the thing that observes Yourself, you know when you you know someone will say I'm really mad right now The moment you say I'm mad You're creating a distinction You know between the thing that's observing that you're mad and the thing that's mad So that observer that watcher That's the thing that that mindfulness is what you know throughout My whole life I try to you know go into that place of observing myself rather than being the thing When it's a game that you can play and it really is quite helpful with Variety of problems especially if you get really angry If you get really angry and you can stop yourself and just watch And there's tools you can use in that book. I remember it said as you walk around start thinking he is walking That was like one of the tools like it's in a book in your character in a book So when you're going around you're like, you know right now he's doing a podcast right now He's talking and so that's these are these are activities designed to create this like the watcher the state of presence of watching So that started it that led me to like you know And then I found out about you know I Think I read the electric collate acid test You know about fucking Ken Keezy and the Mary pranksters blasting themselves on acid and going to the world's fair and a buzz Then I read that shit. No, I remember wait. I'll tell you that I'll stop this weird weird rant I remember now Fucking film strip. That's what it started in my head. I think I was in my trip fourth grade They showed us a drug film strip Remember film strips. Yes, I do And if fucking popped up this guy like it There's a guy I still remember it's a guy in a it's a guy in a fucking um empty apartment and he's curled against the law on the fetal position And it said LSD and it looks terrible and then the Narrator says LSD can make you experience hallucinations you can see dragons and I remember him saying you could see dragons I'm like I want to see a fucking dragon I see a dragon that sounds awesome Fuck the olympic apartment the fetal position. I'll figure it out That guy's a pussy. Yeah, like what are you crying so I drag you a little bit into acid Jigsaw yeah, and that was that put it in my head is like well, you know, I think that that's a interesting thing to explore but Yeah, that's hilarious So you think that you were like two Duncan's like Duncan won and Duncan too like Duncan won is like regular Duncan growing up innocent boy boom Psychedelics and then Duncan too. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, there's definitely a Duncan too that that happened I'd say and then that that Duncan too changed to man because you you know as you get older the best thing There's two great the best thing that can happen is you get knocked off track That's the best thing that can happen to you in general because generally the track you're on has been set for you by people who Never got off their track you end up You know you end up the child of someone who decided to have you in their 20s 21 22 they're not gonna know a lot of stuff They're not gonna understand the universe that much unless they were like came from a really good family of like Artist or intelligent people chances are they're scared hungry desperate angry They they don't want to be in the relationship anymore They don't want to be monogamous anymore the idea of non monogamy to them might just seem insane The you know like who the fuck knows and but you're born into that planet You're that's the atmosphere you're born into that's what you're breathing when you're first born and that can set you on a weird path And that's a very sad path that you can get on and so Hopefully if you're lucky you'll come across somebody who knocks you off that fucking path You know I remember the guy hooked me up with acid I remember sitting in the theater of my school because I was taking I was a drama nerd And I was sitting in the theater of my school next to this guy to what you said that to next to this guy Brad and I remember sitting in I and we were talking and he mentioned tripping on LSD and I'm like what so I go yeah, I took acid over the weekend like What you can get acid The movie the life of dunk somebody must animate this Somebody please I know your folks out there the anime shit. You got to animate this that that moment Took me to and this is really weird tell me what the the first trip was like. I love to the first trip was It was white blotter White blotter paper. I don't it was just white blotter a little Pete. You know if for somehow if you don't know this LSD gets put on sheets Which look like blotter paper and sometimes they have designed something they don't but the name is Always a reference to usually as a reference to the design on the sheets. So You know purple Jesus white blotter lips, you know, there's a million different names for the different types of acid But so this is just white. You know is what it was, but it was really good and I can remember I took it and You have to you know it takes 30 to 45 minutes Sometimes longer for it to kick in I still remember I was sitting in my friends trailer in a trailer park in North Carolina Sitting in an empty bathtub like one of like an empty jacuzzi tub that was in this trailer And I'm sitting there and they're watching Star Wars and I'm sitting in this bathtub and all of a sudden the greatest The greatest feeling just started going through my legs and up into my body and it was a fucking sword fight It was a lightsaber fight I'm listening to that But all of a sudden now the sounds echo like someone's turned an echo up on it So it's like you know, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, it's a kind of bouncing around It's beautiful and I feel so fucking good started laughing. It seems so funny Then I went outside and lay in the grass. I'm staring at the sky guy, everything's beautiful trails. You put your hand in front of your face and it's just this rainbow of hands drifting in front of your face. Everything's breathing. Then my friends come running out because they knew this the first time I was tripping and they all start jumping over me. They're like jumping over me. I'm laughing and they're laughing and we're all fucking laughing and it's just perfect. Then I- somebody pulled their cock out. That's when they pulled that's when we all started fucking. We fucked and fucked. Then a dog came by and we grabbed the dog and started fucking the dog. No. No. It was beautiful. It was beautiful. It was very, no. Yeah, there was no fucking happening. There was a lot of laughing. I remember going into my friend shitty high school car and sitting and pulling the seat back and looking at the- There's a lot of laughing. I remember going into my friend shitty high school car and sitting and pulling the seat back and looking at the ceiling. And I'm looking at the ceiling and it's fucking hieroglyphics or some kind of ancient writing. I don't even think I knew what Sanskrit was at the time, but I'd probably be like, oh, I'm seeing Sanskrit. Some kind of runes or glyphs all over my friend's car that's just kind of breathing and warping and it's just beautiful. So yeah, that was the first time. And once you've had that experience, how do you go back to a normal kind of world? The first time I ever did acid, I've told you this before I met Kurt Cobain. How crazy was that? Whoa. Wow. Tell that story again. I think I died this night, by the way. I have just been very that no, this is what made me think of a theory that every time you die, you don't know that you died, but then you left this world and everyone else in this other parallel world, they think you died. Right. This is where I thought this from was, the first time I did acid, me and my girlfriend, at the time there was Marissa, we went to go see... Harlem, awesome. Yeah. We went to go see Nirvana and she had acid and I've never done acid before. She goes, let's do acid and see Nirvana. So we took acid and the opening band was on, which was some Asian band that just screamed the whole time and it was like, it's kind of like, I don't know, it's annoying. So I was sitting next to the side of the stage and Kurt Cobain comes around the corner and just comes out and like, it was really dark. So then we could see it and he's just standing right next to me. I look over and I'm like, what, fucking God, it's Kurt Cobain. And I was like, hey, what's up? And he goes, hey, what's up? You want to cheat on? I mean, like, I held out his bag and I'm like, yeah, and so I held on the cheeto and then suddenly he just like somebody goes, oh, Kurt. And then he just like throws all the cheetos out in the crowd and then it goes, returns backstage. I'm holding the cheeto and I'm like, he threw the cheetos in the crowd? Yeah, I like it. He was eating for me. He just threw it at the crowd. Yeah. He just threw cheetos everywhere. I mean, this is like a mosh pit in Dayton, or you know, like, side of the stage like a rock club, you know, hair arena. I think it was a fucking video of Dana White getting a mosh pit. That's right. No. Yeah, he went to a range of machine, range against the machine concert. Motherfucker got in a mosh pit. She got security guards looking out for him and she jumped in a mosh pit. So I took this cheeto and I put it in my pocket. Like I'm like, I'm going to save this cheeto, you know. And then I start tripping really hard and it was an amazing concert. On the way home, we're driving and we go by and like I'm driving it. And this is a thunderstorm of rain. I'm still tripping. I'm tripping on acid. Those are the ones. No, no, no. And then this is even better. And I swear to God, you could ask her, I'm not going to say who she is on here, but we started fucking while I was driving in the rain storm on acid for my first time. You fucking baby. And that's where I think I died the first time. One of the first times I died. It might be. Yeah. Well, that's isn't it. Isn't that a theory that you said to me once? Yeah, it's the idea that when you die. I think yeah, you're the one who said that before. Yeah. Yeah. It's just like it's like it's a multi-first idea. The idea is you're a fucking, you know, what you're a bottle. And a turtle being. Your an eternal being. Your body is a frequent. It's like a radio that tunes you in. Tunes your specific, your personality in. And the moment you die, that radio frequency pops into something else. So there's no death. There's no, you're not. It's not like you die. And there's nothingness or emptiness. And it's not like you die. And you're born as a baby and get to start over again. It's like you, something happens. You're driving down the street and you're like, man, why is that guy in my, and then all of a sudden you open your eyes and you're, you know, well, go into work and like, man, that's a weird dream. And then you start that life again. It goes on forever. Like that. That the horrible idea, especially horrible, to bring it up to anybody who's had poor fortune in this life is to somehow know they're connected with past lives. You know, you've ever heard someone say that like, oh, he must have been a real fuck head in his past life. Yeah. And it's like, wow, like what a, you really, are you sure, I'm going to be sure, could it just not be a role of the dice? And maybe part of your karma is recognizing that. I think that yeah, that's why I like the, you know, Buddha, you know, I like in like Buddha as said, don't, don't think about the afterlife so much. I think even Christ said, I am the God of the living, not the God of the dead, the idea being like, I do that with a voice. Yeah. Oh, I'm the God of the living. It's a good, I think real spiritual masters always tend to try to bring people back into the present moment because it's like, yeah, you know what? The present moment is everything. I know when shit goes wrong in my life, I know why it went wrong. I don't have to go back to when I was a friar in the 1800s and like, fisted a fucking, you know, none. I know that if shit's going wrong right now, generally it's like, because I'm fucking up now. It's good for it. And people can get lost. People can start blaming their, their karma, uh, or where they're at right now and pass lives and it puts them in this place of stupid hopelessness. And they don't do the things they need to do right now to get to a better place. Praise Jesus. Praise the Lord. Say his name. So many fucking say his name. So many simple things you could do, man. All you got, here's what you have to do. This is my new theory. Identify the vampire in your life. Hmm. Find the vampire. Identify the parasite. Well, it doesn't have to be that you have parasites in life. It is possible that you could have gotten lucky and there's no parasites and you get off Groovy. Sure. No, I'm not saying everyone's got one. But if you got one. If you're walking around with those fucking vampire blues, you've got the fucking heavy heart and you can't feel happy and you feel bad, there may be an action that you need to take that you're afraid to take. That's the vampire and you've got a fucking not even a person. Oh, no. I mean, it's a situation. I see what you're saying. Yeah, it's a vampire in your life. Yeah. Find a life sucking situation that you're afraid to kill. And the reason I say vampires because vampires only go where they're invited. And generally the situation that you're in, you invited it in. You invited this thing into your life and now it's sucking your life energy and your blood and your happiness away. Don't it's in a lot of times that you'll try to believe you'll try to convince yourself that this thing is not a vampire. But in your heart, you know you're a servant to a fucking blood sucker. You are a rim felt. This thing is like sucking your life essence away. Sometimes it's doing it with a trade. Quite often they'll be a bad trade. It'll be whatever the situation you're in and you'll feel like you're in the situation. It's worth it. It's kind of bad, but it's doing worth it. This happens with jobs quite often. You know, where you're like, well, you know, but that's good enough. That's the vampire. You got to take a fucking steak and drive it into a tart. How do you kill a vampire? Two ways. Direct action. You don't kill a vampire by like making up with a vampire. You don't kill a vampire by like having a sit down talk with a vampire. You're not going to be able to like, you know, make friends with a vampire. There's two ways to kill a vampire. One, you fucking, you know, put a steak and it's hard. The other one is light sunlight. Truth. Light. That's the greatest metaphor of all time. You shine the light of truth onto the situation, fearlessly analyze it. And then you'll destroy it. You know, because if you really allow yourself. If you could act, you got to act. The real problem with people is not recognizing the enemy. That's acting on that enemy. That's the real problem. That's it. And that enemy being, you know, personal, your personal demons, your personal, gee-hod. That's it. You got to fight the beast. And it's in the end. You know what I mean? It's like everybody's beast is different. Chapter two of the Bhagavagita, Arjuna's dejection. Arjuna is drawn between these two forces. He does not want to fight. He drops his bow and God says to him, you've got rise to the fight. Fight. You're a warrior. Fear for. Fight. Fight. It's better to die. It's better to die in a righteous battle than goes skulking off into the fucking woods and be a beggar. It's better to fucking do what you do when you're a warrior. You got to fucking do it, man. It fucking sucks. When you're drunk and you want to throw up and you try to not make yourself throw up, just throw up, you'll feel better. You'll feel better in the end. When you're puking, it's going to suck because you're helpless and you can't breathe. Go through it, man. And jab a fucking knife into the fuck, not literally, of course. But yeah, you got to act and you got to make the big fucking decisions sometimes. And it's scary. If it wasn't scary, it wouldn't be worth anything. Yeah. For some people, it's almost like they don't know how to start. They know that there's action that they need to take in their life, but they're paralyzed, trying to think about it, trying to figure out how to start. And they can never gather up the courage to get away. It's like a lot of people stay in abusive relationships. They don't have the courage to leave. Exactly. And it seems like there's so many things that people, like ideas people will create. They'll keep you trapped and whatever prison you're in. It's very similar to what you're talking about in the UFC with these fucking fighters. This is a visual representation of what anyone can do in their life. But you're not going to get obviously be world class fighters that you're in the ring in front of the entire planet and fucking knock someone out. You have in your life right now, if you haven't already done this, there's you have the chance to be heroic. You have the ability right now to make a heroic act. They could kill you. That's the thing. These actions, it's not always guaranteed that because you do the right thing. You're going to end up in a great place. You might end up fucked. You might end up, you might end up temporarily in a homeless or you might end up temporarily jobless. There wasn't risk associated with it. You would have already done it. That's the point. If there wasn't risk associated with it, it wouldn't be worth anything. If Mount fucking, if the Himalayas were a little Greek grass covered hill in a part, nobody takes pictures of them at the top putting a flag into it. It's a danger makes it heroic. So sometimes you just have to fucking, it's not like Tony Robbins. Take the leap. Kill the vampire in your life. Kill the vampire in your life is a brilliant speech dude. You're dead right. I thought I stopped you because I'm like, not everybody has a bad person in your life, but I didn't know that that's what you're me. You're absolutely dead right. I always say that the energy vampires that you have in your life are really your number one enemy. They keep you from enjoying good times. Everybody knows that one person when you settle down and you're like, ah, finally I can fucking relax and you turn on the television and then someone for whatever fucking reason will decide that they have to talk to you now and they want to get angry you now. You know, it could be a guy or a girl whoever the fuck it is. It's one person that wants to, they want to have power over you somehow or another and they want to stop you from doing what you want to do. There are people that have issues in relationships because one of the persons and one of the people in the relationship has some sort of a transparent issue with the other person. And what they try to do is they try to control that person from doing things that they want to do. It's time that guy wants to go play, you know, play basketball or something like that. They come up with a reason why now is the time I would really like you taking me shopping or now it's the time it's almost like they want to see if they can drag you away from the thing that you like to do thus proving that they're the most important thing in your life. Right. And you know what man that's fucking sad. Well you know what it is. It's instincts. It's instinct. It's just how a girl behave if you don't keep the pimp hands strong. That's a fact. That's a fact. And why girls get away with stuff like that is because guys let them get away with it. Just like you know the real issue with guys being douchebags to girls of course is the physical violence issue. It's not fair. It's not fair if you're you know if you're fucking two chicks get into fight with each other. You know two lesbians and you're basically the same size. You know hey you know I don't want you to fight but you know I don't know why you're fighting but hopefully you got a good reason but it's not a mugging. It's not a man beating up a woman. So physical fights are completely out of the question. So and then what else is left? What else is left trying to explain each other to each other you know arguing with each other, trying to piece it all together, not understanding their side at all. You know we certainly have to protect people from that kind of violence. And that's you know that's one of the ways that we know there's some sort of a weird disconnect between what we're capable of and the way we currently behave like as a human race. The fact that it's even possible that we have a real issue with men beating the fuck out of women like that's a real issue. Women who get in relationships and get beat up. It's terrifying man. That's terrifying. That's a scary shit. Yeah it's scary. It was a girl and I dated when I was in high school and she was really crazy and she was just she had like super strict Catholic parents and she was really pretty and she was just not bad. And we didn't see each other for years and then one time I was at this might might have even been years maybe months I might be exaggerating but I hadn't seen her in a long time when you're 17 years old, six months might as well be fucking years. I mean things are accelerating you know you're graduating from high school and you know what I mean. I met her and she was telling me that she had this new boyfriend that hit her and that she liked it. It was the craziest conversation. And I was like whoa. And first of all I was thinking thank God I never hit her because what if I liked it too? What if you know you know what if you date a girl and she would totally start fights and totally do shit to piss me off but I never thought she wanted to hit like what that I never you can't hit a girl it's just it's it's it's silly. The face or hit in the vagina. It's get smacked. She liked to get smacked in the face. She liked to get rocked. Yeah it's crazy but she was telling me she didn't understand it. No she was not rationalizing. You're talking about she was being really honest with me she was like I'm so confused. You're talking about the girl. No no no no talking about a dude basically just smacking her around and fucking her like really rough and beating her up. Some girls actually liked that. There's like a weird thing in them that once I mean obviously they don't want to get injured but they want to get roughed up. They want to just get hair pulling and smacked in the face. And this girl was like into getting smacked. It was like really crazy to hear. I was like I don't know what to say. I'm like you know what I said to her I said listen you can only get hit so many times in the head before I get brain damage. Okay you really have to consider that. Sounds like that already happened. I said how I this guy's fucking you all the time and every time he's fucking you he's hitting you in the head. I'm like you have headaches. I started asking her things I asked fighters. Like you get headaches. I didn't sleep at night. Like I'm a brain doctor or some shit. I was like you can't let that dude hit you in the head. Alright don't let but if for whatever reason like turned her on. Can you imagine having to tell someone you shouldn't let that guy hit you in the head. Well no man because you know what's confusing is guys can be like super loving after they do it because they feel terrible and then they're like really really really like affectionate. Yeah they're really affectionate with some of them aren't even that you know but with a lot of people there are the ones that like get drunk and blame it on getting drunk and that's where they're abusing each other. It's a sad world out there and there's a lot of sad homes in America. There's a lot of sad sad it's just broken people. It's broken people interacting with each other. It's broken people interacting with each other all can be fixed with mushrooms. With the Duncan Trustful Shamanic Institute of America. He's the correct all of these problems with plants. That'd be great. Wisdom of the Indigenous people, the Amazon rainforest. For a combination of chanting and eat flesh lights. We will try to talk. Well the flesh light uses mandatory when you're meditating at my ashram because I don't want anybody horny. I don't want like why you're in there and you're you know you're supposed to be doing your alms you're thinking about getting your dick sucked. But you know what man you know like the way like I read this great autobiography of Timothy Leary and they were talking about I can't remember the name of the famous house that he lived at but where they were all tripping out and like. They constantly taking LSD. They would do this. They were all swingers so they're they'd be like guys and girls. And what they guys banging guys they were right. I think I think so yeah I do know fast. I think they're all yeah but I think Timothy Leary is pretty straight. He was always dating models and shit like I think really yeah but that's why America hated them bunch of haters. But what they would do is they would like have this weird thing because what they were trying to do is they're trying to dissolve the re-out there. They're trying to dissolve all the fucking ego constructs of which one of them is monogamy. monogamy is an ego construct where you want to be the only person who is fucking the person that you're with and you and they want you to be the only person to be fucking them. This is like a basic way that most people in our interrelationships. So what these guys would do is they would marry couples and what they would do is randomly two people would be picked, a man and a woman to go into this bowling alley that they had and they would stay there for like three days straight and just take ass at the whole time. And they would always end up fucking. So is this idea of what? I bet there was a lot of babies where nobody knew who the father was. Oh for sure. That I'm sure that happened all the time. That was McKenna's idea was that an orgiastic mushroom culture that existed in his you know, really think that's kind of a lot of it was his imagination of what could have been possible. Yeah. Because it doesn't seem like that you really explain exactly what these people were doing, you know, 10,000 years ago in Chocolat all he took and all these different places. But he had this idea that this, they developed this sort of an orgiastic mushroom style of living and that people would get together and they would just like come, you know, so they would raise each other's kids. They would all have, they would all be loving each other and all taken care of each other's kids. Wow, that's kind of trippy, you know, it makes me think like could you live in a world like that? I mean, if it if that we all are just automatically possessive of our loved ones, our sexual partners, you know, your wives and boyfriends and husbands. And it feels terrible. Yeah. Well, yeah, it does. But it also feels great when you have each other to count on and you have this really cool relationship. Oh no, that's fantastic. Right. But the idea that someone like like you're connected like you like you're not even a lot of touch in other body, like everyone else is like get away, get away, get away, get away, get away, you're connected, you're connected to the one, you're connected to the one, think out that feels man. That's it, that, that strange, the feeling that inspires that is not a loving feeling. It's a fucking floor. No, no, it's because men and women have completely different wiring and for a lot of women and not all of them, some women just want dick all around every corner, some women that's that prerogative man. If you're young and hot and you want dick around every corner, you should be able to get it. That's bad, but it's only good when you fucker. No, people are goddamn crazy. They really are. Like there's a fucking whore, if she was fucking you, you'd be like, oh, I got so lucky, dude, we had one smile and she goes, you want to come up to my room, I should use. You know, like how come when you score, it's awesome. And when she scores, well, the dudes, she's a fucking. Well, it's good. I'll tell you why. The reason that is is because our descendants were fucking sexually repressed psychopaths and we still have, we still have that in us. And I know there's a genetic. That's a little of that, but it's also that we know that girls that are freaks like that. It's a rare thing. It's a weird thing. It's like probably a weird combative thing. I think women are getting a really shitty position where they got to feel bad if they fuck a few guys. Right. And that's not fair. And I know some of it's genetic, but I know every relationship gets stale, taking out the idea of the genetic idea why people want men want to reproduce who there's many women as possible. There's all, even if you didn't have that, that instinctive nature, there's still the idea that being with one person would just get stale. Imagine this. Somehow from your mind is removed. All the negative or weird or strange connotations about sex. Now sex is just a physical experience of what is with another person. So there's no, nothing from the zeitgeist has been put in your head. Right. Now imagine eating mushrooms and all of a sudden being in the experience of having sex with a group of people with zero sexual inhibitions with zero guilt, just pure hedonistic pleasure as you sort of merge. That would be amazing. Agree with in terms of like a utopian society. Right. But the way our world runs, it's like my thoughts on it have always been and my advice has always been that when you find someone who you really enjoy hanging out with, hang out with them. And whatever, if you get to the point where you really trust them and you're really honest with each other and you're really enjoying each other, it's called find out what bothers that person. What is it? Is there a genetic thing that you have? Maybe that I don't have? What is it? Yeah, yeah, I don't like any, any, any word, if you can do that, if you could find someone you really sync up with and you actually enhance each other, then the relationships are fucking beautiful. Congratulations. The real problem is most people, they're not even in exploring their own consciousness. They're not in exploring their own, the origin of their own thoughts that they're not really into self-examination. They're not really into a lot of different things that lead to sometimes problematic conversations that you have, especially when they have a commodity in the commodity is that they're an attractive woman and you're in some sort of a weird situation where there's a master, there's a master over you. It just depends on, it also depends on the way you get into the thing. If you look at the entry mechanism into these things, you know, quite often it's purely based on physicality. Yes, well, it's, that's the problem is that the drug of sex and it's, it's really exciting and thrilling to get to the, I love you part as quick as possible. So the sex can get really intense. Yeah. And that is one of the things that happens when you really love someone, like you, you could fuck someone that you think is hot and it's like a sexual thing and it's, you know, it's really, it's like it's a real big turn on, but it's not like fucking someone that's hot that you love. It's just not this. And that first awesome time when you're just getting into a relationship where the person says, I think I'm falling in love with you and even feeling that. Holy shit, my fireworks. It's been great. So for some people, they look for an artificial that, you know, like you, if you get lucky and you actually do have that, wow, that's so lucky. You the stars have to align. Yeah. You know, so many people get in situations where the person they're with is just a little off man. It's whatever it is. It's a little off. Have you ever seen that awful, what I consider be the most grotesque experiment of all time where the fucking, they took a monkey, a little baby monkey and they gave him a why or it did. Yeah. I don't even want to talk about this. It disturbs me. Well, I, I, I want, they're covered a fucking like a little box with fur. Yeah. And the fucking things clinging to it. Oh, see, now here's the thing. It's crazy. Some people, you see that? Yeah. But that a lot of people are in that relationship where they're clinging to something that's not even real and they don't even under, they've like tricked themselves into thinking that, um, and the real issue is the root, the other person, the real issue is the people that raising these people, the real issue is how you, you know, everyone starts out neutral with a whatever blend of personality. I bet almost every kid unless they have some serious neurological difficulties. Almost every kid could be rendered a positive human being by the right people. If you're, they're surrounded by the right people. It's like we're, what we're doing is by putting, we're putting the most important thing for the resources of the human race, the youthful people developing into contributing members of society who can actually add to the culture, add to the experience, add to the process. And we're putting the development of our most valuable resource in the hands of everyone and anyone, including retards, morons, assholes, douche bags, fuck heads, everyone in between. There's a bunch of crazy motherfucker shit now kids every day and you can't, you can't say anything about it because then you're Hitler and then you're, you're, you're, you're, you're your fan of eugenics. Do you know that didn't work on the past? The guess what else is working? Is it working? Yes. Well, yeah. It was overpopulation by monkeys is in work. And you know, that's why you got to be a bit of, I mean, if you start waking up to, yeah, we got to wake all these people up and figure out a way to reevaluate, I'm not reevaluate what reset people's minds, to reset people's, whatever it is that you're operating system is how, where, where it's failing. Well, you, you have to, and like, you know, sometimes that you will, I'll get these really fucking flattering tweets from people who listen to this. I like, man, I, I wish I had friends like you guys in my hometown to talk to you. And that's really a super sweet thing to say. But I always think to myself, you know what? Why don't you go, why don't you go make some? Why don't you use fucking tar turn into it? I know it's hard, but I don't, I don't mean go, I don't mean, I don't mean go make some in the sense of like, I don't mean, no, I mean, no, like baskets, no, not, not we go wicked. Why don't you go, why don't you go weave a friend? Yeah. No, I'm saying what you do is you got to be the, you got to be the force that maybe like throw somebody off their track. You know, you might have to be the thing that does that because my, like the people I owe the most to are the people who manage to fucking knock me off my track. You know, manage to like fucking bring to me music I'd never heard before. Show to me books I'd never heard before. And then all of a sudden that like steers you out of the fucking, you know, public sector, the fucking, well, that's what you're doing. That's what you're doing right now. What you're doing right now is doing that exact same thing to all these hundreds of thousands of people that are listening this. It's the exact same thing. You're doing what you're saying has always been greatest in your life. You're introducing ideas into people's heads that they probably never would have come up with. Well, that's what might not have come up with today. You know, who knows, given the right amount of experience and time anybody could pout, you know, that's the idea that thoughts aren't your own. You're just tuning into them like some sort of a, that's it. Well, that's the idea. Well, that's not it because I am struggling with that because I like it. It sounds beautiful. It sounds kind of spooky and crazy. But it also makes me think, I wonder if it's just that the mechanism for retrieving really good, interesting creative ideas that the mechanism for thinking you have to have all your resources, all your facilitating resources. So the ego has to be fucking completely quiet. And if the ego is not completely quiet, the ego is like, I'm going to get some fucking new clothes so I can look slick. Yeah. I'm thinking about getting a news, no's ring, no's rings are pretty hot. Like chicks are really into that. You know, whenever my hair would be cool if it was blonde and you start really tweaking your ego starts wagging out on your, maybe I should get myself a new Cadillac, chick dig that shit. And you start, you know, fucking, I'm tired of being the VP at work. I'm going to step it up this year. Yeah. And I'm going to demand the fucking, you know, you start getting crazy, egoy. Yeah. And it like, it cuts out all the noise. I mean, it makes, it creates too much noise and the creative mind, the, the, the Zen mind, the humble mind. It is not enough resources. So this is a, you know, you use this, this tool and this tool is this, oh, I'll just pretend they're not even my thoughts. I'm just tuning them into the universe. I'm so humble. So what you're doing is with this philosophy, like putting it through this filter, you've just shut your fucking nasty stupid ego up by saying that you're just a vessel and you're just tuning these things. Well, yeah. And you know what, man, I'm not arguing on it. It's like either or. I use it. I look at it. I don't know. It's not either or whatever fucking vehicle you need to use to get to the point where the things turned off. Yeah. If you need to conceptualize it by thinking you're connecting with some kind of a super intelligent consciousness that just wants the planet to be happier because it doesn't want the planet to die and it's giving its own voice to as many people as allow it to do. Whatever that, that's a vehicle. What that is, any, any ideology like that along, it's a vehicle for you managing happiness. It's a vehicle, you know, it's a, and so when you get in a fucking bus to get to point A, B or C, it's not the bus. It's the point that you're getting to use the vehicle. Use whatever mechanism you have to use to dissolve your ego to the point where you're not going to turn into a fucking dick because the moment you start claiming ownership over whatever it is, man, like I think the most obvious version of it is like super attractive people who act like they deserve it. Who act like they've done something for it. Yeah. Like how ugly that makes it. It's gross. It makes them ugly. Yeah. Like really pretty girls say nasty shit. Right. I just want to say like, God, do you know how fucking lucky you are to be as pretty as you are? You should be like so happy all the time. Yeah. Shit on what another girl looks like. Yeah. Oh my God. And it, it makes them ugly. And so unfortunately, it was because of all the shit you could talk about. Like when a really hot chick shits on a girl for not being so pretty, like wow, that's like damn. Dude, what is more deadly and attractive than a super hot girl who doesn't care that she's super hot or who's managed to overcome all the fucking years of being worshiped by people and it's just normal and cool. That's a heartcracker. The crush with that girl is she's not going to be one of nine wives in the cult. What do you know? It's too fucking smart. Yeah. I'm thinking for yourself and shit. My post-apocalyptic cults will have their place. I love that. Well, you know what? You can make her the high priestess of the cult man. Oh, yeah. But, yeah. I like the way that goes. The idea is you just got a fucking, the idea is don't get caught up in like all the other things. Well, the idea is continue to advance and always analyze, observe, look at all the people around you, look at all the different influences, all the different things you can draw from online, take what is useful, analyze yourself. You know, it's a process where we're all a part of this process. You and I have both seen each other evolve. We just don't really realize this much because we all... Take what is useful analyze yourself. You know, it's a process where we're all part of this process. You and I have both seen each other evolve. We just don't really realize this much because we evolved together. But if we went back in time 10 years ago to when we met and then like when we meet, it was about 10 years ago a little over that I think really. Yeah, it might have been like 2001 or something. Yeah. Was it like even before that dude? Yeah, I knew you were the first one. I was the first one. Joe, I bet you don't remember this. I remember the first time at you. Really? Yes, I was this was when I was a Corey's assistant at the comedy store. And I was sitting next to you. And you were I think you would this was right around when you just started smoking weed or you were more you were kind of a marijuana starting to become a marijuana advocate at this time. But it wasn't this was what's called my annoying face. No, but it was really funny. Yeah, it was annoying. It was really funny because I was sitting. Man. No, I was sitting next to you. And I at the time I had been I'd gone I went through this being a marijuana advocate phase like you know a few years before. But I remember sitting next to you and talking about weed. And as a joke because I didn't know you that way. You didn't know me. And as a dumb joke, I was like man, we should be illegal. And you shot me this fucking look, man, you were you were like, you should make an accident. Because you thought out. You put some fake dress. You put a bump on it. He said he's all Gary oldman. Him on. You seem no, I said it should be illegal. And you seem so pissed. And then Corey like was like, just shut up, shut up. Don't say anything because we didn't know each other. And I could have seemed like a real asshole at the time. But then I don't remember that at all. I know. I think you might just be a little paranoid. I think you tuned me out. I probably went, oh, I don't think I like like like that angry with you. I think it angry. I probably just seem like that. You're probably like, I'll dare you. Yeah, I was making it. Well, one of two things either you were trying to make a joke, which would be not funny. And I would be bored with it. That's what happened. Or I'd be like, what an asshole. I think it was the former. It was the former. And then after that we started talking on the phone. And we started having conversations like this on the phone. We've been having- Duncan and I used to have these fucking 45 minute phone calls. Yeah, a call up. Because Duncan was the dude who like you'd say, hey, I can work Tuesday, three, Thursday this week. You go, okay, cool. And then you know, they'd get together and create a schedule. You'd call Duncan would get your avail. So me and Duncan just started talking on the phone. I don't know what started off. We'd have these crazy ass 45 minute fucking while he's working at the company store. And every now and being like, oh, hold on a second dude. Sorry. He put me on hold. You have to answer some other phone call. So I can see what's like in your bed with your little swatch phone. Both baked as fuck. Duncan was high on the job. Every goddamn day worked there. Yeah, it was a natural progression for me to stay high on the job doing fear factors as well. Like it all went like everybody was high when they were working. And that's how you got through work. Yeah. When you started working there, you know, I remember you went through this little struggle where he is, you know, you wanted to be a comic, but they didn't take you seriously while you're still working there. That's right. I had to go. I had to kill the vampire man. I had to kill the fucking vampire there. And anytime you fucking kill that vampire, if you survive, flowers will rain from me. Oh, flowers will bloom. You can get better. Everybody can get better. We can all advance and move forward. But you got to be boshock. Don't be convinced that you have anything figured out. Whether it's the secret or Buddhism or whatever the fuck it is. Don't be convinced. Don't be convinced. This world might be entirely made up of imagination. It might be. It might be entirely made up of imagination. The more time moves forward, the more I wonder if there's a theory and I believe that you were the first one introduced me to this theory as well. The theory that your life, the world that you live in is really something that your own mind has created. And as you get older and your body starts to slowly deteriorate and progress towards death in your own particular universe. That's when the shit hits the fan and it all goes down. And you've managed to manufacture this idea inside your mind that the life your experience is an actual real life when what it really is is just a series of events that have been tied together to prepare you for the next stage of existence. That's right, man. And the more that you can let go of your attachments to this particular life and become the thing that is throughout the evolutionary cycle, then the less traumatic death will be. Can you imagine that really does get proved someday that you're in everybody who would be like, what? Your imagination controls your fucking life. God damn it. I could have made a fucking awesome life. Let me think. I just fucked up and rewired everything I want to make this shitty life. Could you imagine if that was really the case? You believed what the fuck. That would be it would be such evil information that people wouldn't even want it to get out. But then you would that would be that would be a religious issue. People might withhold that. They found out that we are in reality architects of our own world, our own universe that each one of us is actually that thing. Well I think I think that if here's a here's a weird idea. If there were imagine there's a hell and the only way that you could keep the people on hell was making sure that they didn't realize that you know any second they could turn that hell into heaven. You had to keep them you had to keep them like oblivious to this idea. You would realize that the thing you're talking about the things that obscure the light so to speak of making people's lives great. It's like TV. It's the media. Every time you turn the fucking TV on it showing you death and destruction. When you turn on the radio they're talking about wars and bombs. Every where you will look it's darkness, darkness and darkness. It's like people are really trying to keep our consciousness focused on the dark instead of on the light. But if there was a global movement to try to get people's minds to shift from the obsession with death and all the forms of negativity that so many people are focused on and to turn their minds towards the beauty and towards friendship and towards like healthy sex and towards embracing each other then really this entire planet could transform into some version of heaven I think. Some something a form of paradise you know but there's a ultimately an eventually but right now. Well no. I think it's going to take it's either going to have to happen right. Well it's in some form of invention we either get an invention we get an alien or we get destruction. It's quote morcy if it's not love it's the bomb that will bring us together. That would be awesome if you didn't quote morcy. I'm sorry but it's a great fucking quote he said it man he's a great I've actually said it. What is his real name? What is his real name? What is his real name? Don't ask me that I'm like every goth on the planet's going to hate me forever if I can't answer that right away. Well I don't know I think it's named morcy. It would be really cool quote if you just said his name not just morcy you know maybe it's Ronald morcy. Ronald morcy. I hope so. What a Gary morcy. It's so funny how morcy would never have got a name like a rapper. He never would have gotten famous if on his albums it said Gary. Oh my god dude if you heard Gary. What's going on? It's kind of a mystic I have a mystic it's named Gary. No your mystic his name is name Abaddon Sean Falach. God it's going to be that. Yogi Ramach. Yogi Yamaj. Yaaah. It's Steven by the way. Steven. I knew someone who got really into yoga and changed her name. She insisted you call her by her new name. I think there's a usefulness. I understand that I think there's a usefulness to that. I think that there's a reinvention. That's a good tool man and I understand why people do that because if you think about your name and where it came from with like we're not getting named in the way people used to get named people and people used to get named on you know based on their actions and stuff their real name would come later. We get named on what some fucking 22 year old dope decided that some you you're the little pink wriggling thing that you or should be called you know. I'm a name after my great-grandfather. Is that what you were named after Duncan? I don't know. My first name is a journalist. I don't know where the name came from but I do understand this idea of like rebirth or the idea of like once you get knocked off track why not go really deep and fucking just rename yourself. That is the best cult speech I've ever heard of my life. That's the way to get people to really drink that Kool-Aid. Just jump in balls first. Come on man. I'm not going for it. Just get in there son. Well take the big jump in what it's like. Change your name into a crazy new name. Your name's Duncan Bitch. If I was Joey Diaz you've been Duncan since you were fucking me. Now all of a sudden you want to change governments. Well I mean look at fucking cats Stevens. Yeah that's not a good example. Crazy asshole. You supporting the fucking murder of someone Rush D. Get out of here man. You're a print artist. And you're a print. And you're a print. What happened? Well print printed it for recording rights reasons. Oh really? Yeah. Yeah. An issue with them owning his name. I don't think it always works. I think but I think sometimes I do I can understand the usefulness of it as a tool. I can understand it as a way to like create the differentiation between whoever with a person that you were in your earlier phases and who you've become. I don't think it's always good. I think if people allow me to name them. I will name them beautiful names that they'll be quite pleased with. How crazy is it that Prince changes named to a fucking symbol? What an amazing move that was. Art is really an amazing move. Amazing move. I mean that's how you get out of a legal contract. You're not even a name anymore. It's just some fucking squiggly crazy thing. That's hilarious. I mean the language of contracts is so ridiculous in the first place. The idea that there's anything you could ever sign away with that person owned you and your likeness. How the fuck can you sell that? You don't own that anymore. You can't use your own likeness. Now you have to use this crazy symbol. I mean really you can't. You can't signature just like the signing shit. No you give up that name. You give up the name Prince or Duncan Trousell you know or if he especially if it was like a Larry the cable guy thing where it was like a name you made up. You know you get that's a proper my my intellectual property. My first name my first name is Charles. My name is Charles. I'm a nice dude. You just fucked up man. I don't care. Charles Duncan Trousell is now the new the the latest name on Twitter right now. What's wrong with that? That's the problem is that guy's going to confuse everybody. He's going to have a picture of you that looks exactly like your Twitter picture and when you change it he's just going to copy and paste it. Make his own Twitter. It's always come to some hack some mystery hack. You're disrupting people. You have an issue every time you have an issue he's going to know a little bit more of kind of fix your issue and he's going to give you some awesome advice and you're going to start really getting freaked out as to how this this fake dunk and trust so it really knows how to manage the real dunk and trust was life and then you're eventually just going to live under the assumption that this fake Twitter account Charles Duncan Trousell is actually the universe giving you advice through Twitter. Can't wait Charles. I can't wait to meet my true. You're not going to get to meet him. You're going to get to communicate with him online but Charles Duncan Trousell will be giving you information. So what's about to happen? So Joe's are you about to start a Twitter account? No, not to the universe is going to do this for us. I love it. So what are you going to do? What do you have to do is now you know you have various untold issues in your life. I'm sure we all do get online and tweet them and then say Charles Duncan Trousell, what should I do now? And it's like calling up. It's like candy man. Like somebody man. Yeah. And you'll come with all those stupid Charles. I picked Duncan when I was a kid. My name is Joe. It's like you want to be honest. Yeah. I started off of course as a Charles and then my parents I think started just calling me dunk and then I decided I wanted to be called Duncan and instead of Charles and so then that's when I became maybe because you knew the one day you would work with Fleischer. So wasn't even your head. So you didn't it's not even your middle name. It's my middle neck. Well they just added it later. No, sometimes for some reason in the West when we name people will give them three names. He won't just be a first and last. Right. It'll be like Joseph James Rogan Joseph James Rogan. So you get these extra names for summary. The whole thing is just idiotic and so right now in. Right now. B. A. R. So yeah, you just pick you got a fucking pick this name. You know, you got to like you can choose your middle name or your first name. The fact that there is a first name and some people they're so narcissistic. They just name their kids after themselves. And that's where you run as your Jenkins and third George Foreman George Foreman named all this George echoes. So now you're making echoes little fucking genetic echoes named after you. It's just a terrible thing to put into someone's mind. Yeah, my whole family is completely unoriginal. I was Joe. My father's name was Joe. My grandfather's name was Joe. My grandmother's name was Joe I mean really completely unoriginal. Just yeah. Yeah, it's a very odd thing. Well it was a fact. I really requested a lot of Joe. That's what I wanted. So I just in my life in my lineage and when I was creating myself and my imagination. I decided I wanted to really see what happens if you overdose on Joe. I want a ton of Joe's back there. Come out of the gate. Come swing and well who knows. Well it's it's a ridge on original names. The fox. Yeah, everybody's Joe. Come on. Everybody really. Stop it. Everyone's Brian. Are you Brian Allen? He imagine if you became a stand up and you called yourself Brian Allen. He made you go to clubs and everybody built with the fuck man. I thought it was that black guy that interviews comedians. They'd all be coming out of here. If you go on to Wolfram Alpha. Yeah, you can put your name in and see how many people right now are existing with your name. Well, that's really want to feel insignificant. Well I've talked to one of the phone that Joe Rogan. Joe Rogan.com. Seems like a nice guy. X military guy but he wanted a lot of money for the site. He saw dollar bills. He's got his own his own website running there and he's been doing it for a while. Yeah, he's a nice military guy. He doesn't look like like ex-emilitary. He looks more like I don't know scientist. Well when they get older they look like older men. Weird. Brian thinks he should have a flat top and a fucking knife in his teeth. I mean he looks like the opposite though. He just seems like a soldier. So Duncan. Yes sir. We leave in the morning. I know we can Chicago. I'm going to do the Rosie O'Donnell show. Oh, romantic. I'm excited. Yeah, I know. I'm a Rosie O'Donnell fan. Hey, can I say one thing real quick? Because something fucking cool happened and I want to answer. I did this South by South. I got invited to go to South by Southwest. Yeah. And they offer me the shitty deal. I won't go into it here but if you want to see the deal, look up Hitler gets invited to South by Southwest. It's so great. It's our just complaining because they don't fly the comics out and it's just a generally a bum deal. And I'm just saying this because pretty much right after I or from that video I got invited to this awesome festival that's happening in Austin called the Moon Tower Comedy Festival. And that's happening in April and they just like are doing the press releases today and I just think it's so fucking cool that they like or you know, like they're showing that festivals can pay performers pay air for them up. Which isn't that insane an idea. It's just normal but it's beautiful. I don't understand how anybody ever got away with anybody working for free when you're making money. I don't get unless South by Southwest is some amazing charity that I don't understand. They're not it's not a charity but what are you sure? Yeah. I'm really sure. Yeah. No. Yeah. It's probably all these poor wishes that are we should go to that just to be sure. Yeah. I'm a feeling they would have set it by now based on the awesome videos I've been making. But yeah, let's look up and stuff. I'm getting my apology. Stop by South. Yeah. Start typing this $10,000 for charity. Let's see. Charity. Let's see. South by Southwest. It seems like they do some stuff for charity. You can impact charity without being rich. I'm sure that they do. I'm sure South by Southwest does charity but when you ask artists to perform for free at your festival that's sponsored by 16 million different corporations it's a bit of a charity. The strongest memory of South by South by Southwest 2010 was a rooftop party when the South by Southwest party go is spontaneously raised $300 towards the purchase of a wheelchair for the nephew of one attendee. The young man was paralyzed temporarily and the family could not afford a wheelchair. That's beautiful. That's beautiful. That's very nice. That's nice and all but still. That's so many answers. How many people are paying to go see South by Southwest? What else is it? Right. What are your expensive? Look, go to their website. I think the cheapest passes around $100 but it might be more than that. Wow. So they get everybody and they don't get everybody to work for free. They must pay some people. No, I think some of the bigger names get paid but mostly after I did these videos, mostly what I heard from people is that the idea, here's the concept to play South by Southwest advocate. The idea behind it is, hey man, it's just we're all having fun out here. It's a party. It's a chance to hang out with a bunch of other comics and have a good time. We don't invite a lot of comics out. So it's a, you know, it's a, it's an honor to get invited out and you're going to get a chance to perform. We'll put you up in someone's guest bedroom but we can't pay you and we can't pay for your airfare and we, you know, we, if you want to stand out and tell you're going to have to pay for your own hotel. Now I think that that coming from like a festival that really was a charity like the Make a Wish Foundation or something that was solely raising money for charity or even a start-up festival. What about just a start-up festival that seems really cool and isn't making any money? All that I totally makes, it makes sense to me. It'd be really cool. But I think when it's coming from a festival, the size of South by Southwest, which is a giant festival. I read that 30,000 people come through there a year and they're asking performers to come out for free and to pay for their own ticket. I think there's something in that that's, that's pretty fucked up. Dear Southwest Airlines, if you want me to come, I'll totally do it now. Pay for everything. Thanks. South by Southwest Airlines, not go ahead. No, not by South. She was right. Veronica Rishi was right. It is sponsored by a fucking airline man and they don't even fly to comics out. So it really is. I thought you were joking. No, she told us that at dinner and we both laughed at her and we were like, like I was like, oh, you're so silly. Well, you, I thought you were right. You too. I thought you knew. No, I didn't know. God damn it, Brian. You spread disinformation across the world. Now you've been interested in it. No, no, no, I don't know anything about the, I don't, I don't look. I think it must be an awesome hang. I did one thing once, one, one festival I did summer fest in in Milwaukee. It was fucking great. Man, I loved it. But I felt weird because I'm on stage and I'm just doing my regular acting as people with babies or holding babies in the crime. Like this is just fucked up. You know, it's just, it's just a, I like doing stand up in a place where people come to see stand up. Totally. Yeah. But no, I think, I think festivals, I've done festivals. I've done sometimes are fun. I like, I did the Vancouver comedy festival. That comedy festivals are different. They're performing at a music festival. Yeah, that's a little, music festivals are way more rowdy. It's way, there's this, it's way more likely that the people did not come to see that. Right. There's a big difference. But comedy festivals are amazing. Montreal's, I did Montreal several years. I think I did it six years. It was fucking in place. Right. And it's a whole town, you know, Montreal that literally has been privy to these festivals coming in every year. So they have like this really like high palette for comedy. It's a fucking great place to do comedy. We were supposed to go back in March. But unfortunately, the UFC had to move its March date. They had to move the Montreal date because no champions were available. They were going to put together a big card for up there. So they postponed it. I was like, damn, I was really looking forward to going back to Montreal. Yeah. Well, you know what, Montreal, I don't care about like, I don't want to come across like I'm like, you got a fucking, you got to pay up if you want me to, but it's not that at all. It's like, oh, no, it's like it's reasonable. Just acknowledge something, you know, like Montreal pays people. Yeah, they do. Yeah, you can pay people. You can pay people. You can do Tower Festival pays people, Saw Squatch pays people. And people have argued like Stanhope got really mad at, you know, what the, the Montreal people and started his own thing just for spite, you know, they followed the just for laughs. Yeah. So he would do it in town. Performed at it. Yeah. There you go. So, but, you know, when if you, if you, if you, if you look at like what they're doing, like, even if you think that they should be paying more, you know, like Stanhope does, it's fucking infinitely better than nothing. Nothing's ridiculous. Nothing. No help tell room. No airfare. Why? Well, no, they said, here's, they said no hotel room, but they say you can stand someone's guest bedroom. The fuck out of here. Imagine they stand over someone you live in. No, you know, the other thing that the guy said to me during these emails and the guy who books it is a super nice guy. I, I started feeling guilty because he's a really nice guy, very friendly guy, but he would, he couldn't acknowledge the one point that I was making, which is that if you're charging tickets for people to come see performers, you have to pay the the performer something. It's just basic logic. That's all. Maybe you don't have enough to pay for everything. Maybe the performers, you know, you, you can only get them in a hotel and get them out there. But don't, because if you're making them pay for everything, then they're subsidizing your phone. I would go, though, just for it to be fun. In my opinion, like, like, if you're, like, looking at, you know, see yes, you know, the consumer electronic show or any of these huge things, people are usually going because it's what they love. And it's a collection. And to me, I would go just because it would be an awesome party. It'd be awesome doing it. But here's, here's the thing, man, here's the problem with that in my mind. The thing that I can't get past is that the reason it's fun and the reason people are going is because the great fucking performers that are there, the movies. Yeah, unquestionably, it was that was the main argument about comics for member of the main art. The common story was they were making it out that was an honor to perform at this star. They did that every day. You guys are crazy because this is not, this is just a box. We have a microphone and you turn it on. What you're selling here is art. And the artists who would create the art, you're selling art, you're selling state of comedy, you're not selling a spot. And yeah, it is a popular spot. It's a popular spot because of the fucking artists that perform their period. That's it. And that's the, with big festivals, the, the same truth. It's the exact same truth. And, and festivals who are making a shitload of money have this awesome opportunity to make things fair. Make things fair. That's all you got to do is make it fair. Yeah. Like these concerts like South by Southwest, isn't this where like, you know, like, like people go to go, hey, we're looking for people for the next year's sitcom, you know what, but, but with Vancouver, with Montreal, with, and you could say that for any festival. But it is that right. It is something where you're not for comedy. There's things that get set up, man, they get set up and then they become law. They become like, this is just how it's done. And there's a lot of them that don't make any fucking sense. And this is one of them. The idea that you would perform with something where, where people profit, you know, they make a profit. Yeah. And just pay a little bit. That's the thing with, I mean, that's guy, the guy through my emails. This guy Charlie seemed really passionate about comedy. He seemed like a really cool guy. It's just, if he would just, you know, if they would just make one small step in the direction of being like, you know what, we thought about it. We should pay airfare for the performers to come out. That is something that's sponsored by South by West. They should be at no brain or that. In the fair. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's just some discount. Well, it just drives so much fucking business to the town too. I mean, I'm looking at an article about nine ways to profit from South by Southwest. Yeah. Even if you weren't there and they're talking about how to figure out how to profit from this, this gathering of people. Isn't that amazing? That's like, when you look at human beings, like some sort of a life form and you look at just with this article says, nine way to profit from South by Southwest, even if you weren't there, the idea that you could be extracting resources from some spot. You know, we're near there. You don't even go there and you just can't. Now, wait a problem. You're a fan. Wait, what is that? What are you doing? You're profiting. You're pulling money out somehow or another from some plate. I mean, I'm not saying you're doing it illegally. I'm not saying anything in wrong, but the idea that you can do that. The idea that you're just, I'm signing checks and sending things out and I'm extracting money from a situation. There's a lot of people in that one spot. When you invent that one spot and sell them things. It's very fucking strange. Weird. It's really strange. People are weird. It's fuck, man. When is South by Southwest? Like, March? I don't remember. What we need to do, you know what we need to do? We need to put together an LA comedy festival. LA is one of the best places in the world. I think this is a few. Now, our own. Our own. God. I want to join anybody else's face. Or do a comment. Then you have to put their people on. I'll tell you a comedy festival. Let's do an isos comedy festival. I'll tell you a comedy festival, but I did this, my favorite festival that I ever did was. Furries? Yeah. How'd you know? I love furries. I love dressing up like at raccoon. It's like you liked in the end. Do you go tail in no tail? I don't. Tail makes it hard for them to grab your ass. Yeah. I find that. Tail gets no way to that. Tail gets no way to get to tail gets no way to ask. No, there's this place up north. There's this place called Nevada City and they have this film festival up there and that place has the fucking deepest hardcore hippies I've ever seen in my life. And there's this beautiful river. I think it's the Yuma River that runs through there. And in the day you go swimming in this river. It's so fucking beautiful. It's like this primordial river you jump off rocks. Where's this place name? It's called Nevada City. Nevada City County. No, no, no. It's they pronounce it Nevada. It's where all the Nevada City. Yeah, it's like there's I think that California. Yes, that's right where you're getting into what I think and I may be wrong about this. What is called the Emerald Triangle. It's like right where you start getting where they they grow the buds. Oh, slam a jam. That's a dangerous area too because they got a lot of Mexican people to go up there to the grow pot. And guys actually stay there. It's really amazing. I watched a documentary on it on that show. God damn it. Vanguard, ever see that show. I believe it's on true TV. One of those reality TV networks. Anyway, these people did an investigative journalism thing where they went into the the the woods up there. Very dense woods up there. And they found like these crazy campsites. These guys that set up with this guy was the Saint of Narcotics. Yeah, they have a narcotic Saint. Yeah, that's right. You know, I forget his name. Something to narco, you know, and it's like, wow, they have a Saint to watch over them while they're growing drugs. Why not? Why not? Why not? Because the thing is, it's like, if you think about what they're doing, nothing wrong growing drugs, nothing wrong with being a farmer, you're just growing something out of the ground. You're not doing anything wrong. You're not evil. You're not bad. But because we happen to exist at a time period in human history or somehow idiots have determined that certain things that grow out of the ground are fucking bad. Yeah, not only are you certain things that have never killed anybody. And how about these people are moving through the night with night vision on? They started fucking hiking at four o'clock in the morning because they had a walk like five hours to get to these fucking people. And they wanted to catch them. You know, so they these guys are they're hiking through the woods at night with machine guns. To catch farmers. To go get Mexican farmers. To catch them. Mexican. They're Mexican. They've got a fucking god of drugs. We can't stop these people. That's all they are. Anyone who grows pot is just a farmer. You know, and it's amazing that they force these people to be fucking, why do they have guns? They have guns because they have to have guns. They have guns because they're all the way up here because they can't grow it down there. They'll get shot in the head. If you if you made it illegal to grow corn, corn farmers would have fucking gun. Yeah, it's like any time it's it's yeah, you have to defend it. It's such a fucking the consciousness of this country, this world, this this global entity, this human race, the consciousness of this human race is altering right in front of our eyes with the internet and the internet and psychedelic experiences together. It has changed more in this hundred years than at any time ever. The just the idea of how people feel about life on earth. It's so different. Yeah, it's so different than at any time. And we're riding the wave. We're lucky. We're so lucky. We're riding or we are in a dream that is symbolic of our own life and we're slowly decaying. That's when there's a great battle. Will the shit hit the fan? Will they come up in an adventure that makes me live forever? Tune in next week till I fucking go head on into a semi and wake up 15 years old going to school again. We're going to have the best call. It's the best already. It's already explode. People are drawing fucking pictures of us. You've received that thing up there. What's that homeboy's name pants? What is his name? Formal sweatpants. Formal sweatpants. You can you can buy that Joe Rogan experience poster from him. If you haven't seen it, it's fucking awesome. What's his website? Formal sweatpants.com. Just the coolest thing. All this stuff I just want you guys to all know that I am 100% humbled blown away, flattered. I can't use enough positive words to describe how awesome it is that you guys first of all just like the show. But then that you make like these little videos and little I mean there's so many cool videos of rants of just you and I just you and I just going off about. It's the man that's that combination. That stuff is the coolest stuff ever, man. That stuff really really makes me happy. When we when are that rant we had that landed on Alex Jones where I was talking about Alex Jones getting arrested. And that landed on his website. That was intense, man. I was like fuck we're going to we're going to end up in a fucking FEMA camp. That's like I felt a real because I was like no you know why we're not going. And I was like, fuck, we're gonna, we're gonna end up in a fucking FEMA camp. That's like, I felt a real, because I was like, no, you know why we're not going to because we can talk to the fucking troops. We can talk to the cops. We communicate to those people and they're not going to do what these assholes are telling them to do. That's ultimately a real problem with civil unrest in this country. The fucking genies out of the bottle, the cops, the firemen, everybody knows that this is a fucking mess. Everybody knows that these people are just, they're just doing what you're supposed to do when you're in American. They're protesting some gross injustices and they don't know exactly how to do it. And the way I've described them is that there's a fucking, there's a problem and they're white blood cells. And they're surrounding this problem. And they don't know how to conquer it and they don't know what to do. But the fact that so many people have gravitated towards one area. If you were looking at any other organism and this sort of a situation was happening, you're like, well clearly there's some sort of a disease. There's an illness. There's a sickness. There's an issue that's being addressed. Something very, very important is being addressed. Here, babies in the background. How do you do? Yeah, my kids are screaming. Little, little munchkins. Talking trust on one day, you're going to have some little munchkins. I love some little munchkins. Well, you're a good doggy daddy. Yeah, we got rid of our five puppies. We got rid of all of them. That's awesome. Got them all in good home. To the little chihuahua puppies, how cute are they? How can you not say, you know, you go over there and you see them. You're just like, you got to take them in. Well, yeah, I knew that we'd have no problem getting, man, there is nothing fun. Like the power of fucking young things, it's so powerful that they can wake you up at four in the mornings, you know, squeaking. So cute. And you go in there and they will do jail breaks where they would like get out and suddenly the house is just flooded with two wild puppies. You're trying to like bring back in. It's so fun. And they would always make you like, you can't get angry at a puppy. It's almost impossible. Yeah, they're so goddamn cute. It's amazing. That's how nature is sort of engineered them. Nature and human beings have engineered them to be so goddamn cute and so loving. I mean, what's more loving than a dog, man? It's so funny that my sister had her kid. She did the exact same thing as you, man. Like immediate lays like, who cares about the dog anymore? Baby, I still love my dogs. But you know what I mean? She's a love worker. I love playing them. But yeah, that's not a person. Dogs and people are totally different things, man. You don't even understand. Yeah. But doesn't mean I don't love my dogs. I don't have a little fucking baby one day, man. Little baby, don't get a little fucking sweetie. I think we should just both get a baby, dunk in and just like, you get one week and I get the next weekend. Well, I think you guys should let somebody, we will be a contest and they'll be able to film the baby coming out. So that would be whoever did the best compilation video. We'll give him access to your wife, Savannah, as the baby's coming out. What do you think? Yeah. It sounds great. Sounds great. Sounds good. Yeah, perfect. But seriously, what is that dude's name again? Formal sweatpants. Formal sweatpants. I'm not the Joe Rogan experience poster. I don't know how much he's selling it for, but it's an awesome piece of artwork. I don't have any piece of this. It's all his. I really, really, I have a poster. Have you got a poster coming to? Yeah, they did a new desk wide logo, right? Yeah, I did it. A desk wide top 10 bitches, top 10 on iTunes, Holla, Jiboy. Got his highest, what is six? Five five. Five five. Five five. Coming up in the world, bitches. Choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo You get this bitch up, it's bringing home. That's right. We've got a desk wide show Friday with Doug Benson. Doug Benson, at the is house, my black. Yeah. He keyed Davey, nice nice nice nice nice. And if you've never been folks, the is house has two rooms. It's in Pasadena, California. The annex is a very small. It's only 85 seats with a guy like Doug Benson that chits going to sell out quick. So go to Ishousec.com, is that what it is? Just Ishousec.com. Yeah, Google. Just for desk. Just go to Ishouse Co. And just whatever Google ishouse Co. Team. and check for stage two. That's what you want to look for. That's this weekend. And I say so. I think it's for, yeah, fuck yeah. I'm going to be at the Arlington draft house in February. Look it up. I don't have the exact same. Oh, I know in Maryland, it's called the Arlington draft house. And I'd love to see you guys there. Arlington Maryland. Arlington draft house is what it's called. Just Google it. Arlington draft house. And what is the, it's the second week in February, I think. I have to look at my calendar, but is that a place that you do on a regular? You've done it. No, this is the first time I've done it. and apparently, and it's kind of like a movie theater. And I've heard great things about it. I'm super excited about it. I can't, I can't. Who got you that gig? My booking guide, APA. Nice. That sounds like fun. Yeah, I can't wait. I did a movie theater. It's like the first time I ever did Washington DC, they used to have that. They would have stand up comedy and then they would have a movie after the comedy. Oh, that's cool. Yeah, it was a good gig, man. It was fun. I don't remember the name of it. So anyway, Duncan Truce will be with me this Friday night at the Chicago theater is almost sold out. There's only, I think there's less than 200 tickets left. Yeah. It's the most ticket that ever sold for anything. It's crazy. It's going to be nuts. We have to have big giant screens. We have to, they have to turn on these big giant screens to watch it. This place is huge. Oh. So it's an enormous, awesome place. But so that'll be this weekend, this Friday and then next Friday, we're doing the house of blues. Same line of pictures, same lineup. Joey Diaz, Duncan Truce will. And then after both nights, we're going to watch some crazy shit. We've got some too crazy UFC cards. Hold on. So thank you to everybody that tunes in. Thanks to all the positive Twitter messages and all the cool shit. You know, the cool people outnumber the cunts by a staggering amount. There's so many more cool people out there that I'm connecting with because of Twitter, because of Facebook, because of this podcast, because of the internet. There's so many more cool people out there than anybody imagines. We just got to find each other. And so we're glad you found this. We connect. We stay together. We grow party on. Howdy, good to see you. Party on. Thanks to the flashlight. Go to Joe Rogan.net, click on the link for the flashlight, enter in the code name Rogan, and you will get 15% off number one sex toy for man. Eventually, I guarantee you, I predict they will be sponsoring the death squad as well. That's what's moving up in the world. Death squad needs a logo. You need a sponsor. You get to talk to them. You're going to make this happen. It's perfect fit. You guys have porn stars on with their own flesh lights. Yeah. It just makes sense. It's built in. No, they have a designed flashlight. I have 17 packs of cash now. That's so much pocket. We've got a lot of podcasts. The death squad is free on iTunes, and it's the only place to get the Ice House Chronicles, which is a podcast that we do live from the Ice House. Seriously, it is. To me, the coolest fucking thing that we do. It's so fun. We have a great time every week. The last week we had Dane Cook on, Bert Kreischer, Ari Schafir, me, Kevin Christie, Brody, Steven, Nick Yusef. It's fucking awesome. I mean, you know what it is? We have a room at the Ice House. So we have this stand up show that's totally sold out, packed, little tiny, intimate, awesome room. And then the comics are rotating and going on stage from the podcast. It's amazing. It's the most fun and the most, the closest you can get to hang in with a bunch of best friends in the green room before we go up there and fuck shit up. It's like the greatest podcast of all time. I love the Ice House Chronicles. The only way to get it though is you got to subscribe to Death Squad. So go to iTunes, subscribe to Death Squad, and get it. It's all free. Of course, this podcast will always be free. Death Squad will always be free. We will not charge you. Duncan Trussle, though, he'll charge you a cup of bucks. And you know what? Pay him. For what? Pay him for your lavender hour. Go to this episode. It's $1. We do all day. It's not much. It's only $1. It's only $1. You can't get mad. People get mad at him. How dare you ask me for anything? I've given you free stuff. You don't have to take. It's not like I'm saying. You have to pay. You don't have to pay. You do whatever you want to. But if you want to, there's the possibility. I am talking. Thank you for everybody asking. I am talking with my people about doing the same thing that Louis C.K. did. I'm totally going to steal his idea and try to put out my next special just online like that. It just seems to make sense. Now that everybody has iTunes, so many people have Apple TV, so many people have Netflix, so much. I get more messages about my streaming special from like 2005 on Netflix. I get more email about that particular special than anything I've ever done ever because I think more people are seeing it through Netflix. Like the, I don't know if they can get the last one, the talking monkeys in space, but the Netflix one, they made. They produced it. So I get every day I get tweets about that, man. That's the future. The future is Louis C.K. showed us the way. I'm going to totally do what he did and release it that way. And buy my book. You got a book? Not yet. It'll be on the series. Fuck out of here. All right. You dirty freaks. Oh, next Friday we're at the house of blues. Okay. I said that already. That's it. Show us the flashlightslightslightslightslightslights to onna.com to go to onint.com. What's there? Mysteries. Mysteries. Mysteries of the mind. Pills to change your focus. Google Neutropics go there. First 30 pills. If you don't like it, you get a money back guarantee. It used to be more, but the world's filled with cuts. That's just the way it goes. You could have invested $1 million and probably made $30 million if you would have done that. And what? That much pills and got, you know, and then sold on eBay. Should I do that? Yeah. I should totally rob myself. I should totally rob myself. I just just shout to order in shit for myself. I can't wait for robbing yourself. All right. You dirty freaks. For bottom of my hearts, we can't say that now if this is hard to say goodbye. We don't know when to do it. I never know how to shut it off. Bye. We're putting it out there. We're putting it out there. We're getting it from you. Thank you very much. We love you guys.