Joe Rogan, fine. The Joe Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. What's up, Nolan? Nothing much. You guys hear me through this? Yeah, far away. No, it's perfect. It's perfect. It's perfect. It's a pleasure to meet you, man. Hey, you too. You too. Thanks for having me. I have a feeling if there's a movie that they do in the future of how the world changed in 2024, you're going to be in that movie. Yeah, that would be cool. Yeah, that'd be cool. I wonder if they'd get to play me. I probably don't need people by then. They probably just do movies with AI and probably really quickly. You could probably take a really great novel, like, the great Gatsby, run it through an AI video creator, and it would just make you the most amazing version of the great Gatsby. Yeah, that's true. Probably. Yeah, that'd be sick. But if we're talking about historical moments in human beings and in technology, the implementation of neural link on the first human patient. That's you. Yeah, yeah, I guess so. No, definitely. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, I was, I keep thinking about it like, you know, BCI have been around for a while. So I've been able to. Which is BCI? Brain computer interface. So like just implants that they've done in people, different ways that they've found, they've given people the ability to like control electronic devices, they've been able to control computers and stuff. There are a couple of things out there that you tall, Ray, Synchron came out with something where basically they go through the artery in the neck and that they kind of thread something up into the brain and it expands in a vein up there and an artery up there and then they can like control the brain through that. So BCI has been around for a while a few decades at least I think since like the 90s. So I always say that we're standing on the shoulders of giants sort of thing, but I know nearly just has a ton of things to think of its own and I know that you know with Elon's name attached to it, it's going to blow up way more. But I think this is the beginning. I think everyone else that you know comes after this basically is going to be pulled up by the progress, neural links making and the fact that they are trying to like open source basically all of it. I think the whole field is just going to grow exponentially at this point. Well we can only hope so and that really is fascinating. It really is fascinating how many different ways and strategies they've employed to try to connect computers to human beings and brains. So what do you know what year the first one was they did this? 98? Oh wow. Yeah, I think so. I think that was the Utah array. That just was it looks like a chip with like more fixed like threads on it. They were I think a lot smaller and it just sat on the brain. So obviously another open brain surgery and they put it in there and then it would read section of the brain motor cortex I think as well. Have you seen some of the stuff now where they're using some kind of scanning imagery where they can actually see thoughts? No, I haven't. Yeah, they're doing where they think they're going to be able to record dreams eventually. And what they're able to do now is get like an approximation of what someone is seeing and thinking. Whoa. Can you find that, Jimmy? Sort of figure out exactly what they did. Yeah, here is scientists read dreams using brain scans. Is an older one? It's not the normal one. Okay, that's crazy. I mean I've always heard that scientists really don't know how like what dreams are and like what is going on or why we do it. I've heard plenty of people say like, yeah, we still don't know why you even need to sleep or like what's going on in your dream. I don't know if that's changed recently, but you like I don't know dreams are dreams are an interesting thing. The whole sleep thing is interesting. Yeah. MRI scans reveal what we see in dreams. Japanese researchers unveiled dreams visuals with 60% accuracy using innovative MRI scans at pivotal Kyoto study showcasing a breakthrough in sleep science. Whoa. Wow. Wild stuff. That picture just looked AI. Are we dreaming an AI now? I think we're close. I think if the simulation is real, it seems ridiculous now. Less so than it seemed five years ago, but I think five years now it seems likely. I think it's all interconnected in some very bizarre way. I think we were slowly building toward that connection with all this technology and all of these new innovations and all of a greater understanding of quantum physics and space and all these two as they build on all this stuff. I think it's going to become more and more likely that this whole thing somehow another real but not real at the same time. Yeah. Neither a simulation nor like actual reality like a hybrid of these things. Oh, yeah. That'd be crazy. I'm that's one of the things I'm really excited about with the neural link is how much we're going to learn just about the brain from this like the amount of data that they're collecting. I mean, little things like the fact that all the stuff with the thread pull out going on with my brain. Oh, one of the reasons that they think it happened is because well, I don't know. Have you heard about like the thread pull out and stuff? Yeah. So basically, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So basically there are 64 threads implanted in my brain with 16 electrodes on them each. And over the course of a month, we saw a lot of the threads start retracting from my brain. So the threads that the robot implanted were retracted. And so we were getting less signals from a lot of them. And they can't see that on like brain scan or anything. So like the threads are so small, you know, not even the size of a human hair that in order to get a scan of them, you'd have to use such a big machine that it would probably just fry my brain. So they can't just go in and look at them. So a lot of the data that we have that shows that they were moving or coming out of the brain was literally just whether or not the electrodes on the threads were sending signals anymore if they were picking up neuron spikes. So a lot of the threads were getting pulled out and that led to some decline performance for a while. They kind of fixed that in a way. But some of the reason that that happened at least we think is because the brain moves more than they thought it would, which is something that was so bizarre to me when I first heard that. I was like, you guys don't know how much the brain moves. Like this feels like that should have been something that was solved, you know, ages ago. I never even thought it moved. Yeah. It's what pulses like with with like your brain with your heart I mean, so like as your heart pulses and stuff, your brain pulses as well. Because you know, there's blood running through it and everything. So it's just pulsing. And they thought that it moved like pulses out about a one millimeter rate. So that's how much it'll pulse like move is one millimeter. And they found a migraine that it was moving three millimeters pulsing. So that's on a scale of three X times what they had made the whole neural link in the threads and everything for to be able to withstand. So they think that that might have had something to do with it as well. So is that a normal thing that like does the brain have a range? Yeah, I don't know. I think that's going to well, well, no more stiffness pulsation of the human brain detected by noninvasive time. The human brain pulses every time the heart beats scientists have used the tiny jiggle to reveal new insights about our neurons, neuroscientists try that name. Yulee root ish hour, root to shower, Yulee root ish hour, PhD thought he'd uncover the strange new phenomenon about the human brain. So so it pulses every heartbeat. So if your heart beats a lot of your heart's beating fast, if you're jacked up, does your brain pulse fast to? Yeah, I'm sure. I mean, I get like what happens with me is if my heart rate tire, I'll get like headaches and stuff. So like I have a lot of weird things with my with my body with being a quadriplegic where like I can tell like if I have really high blood pressure, my head just gets a really, really, like I get really bad headaches and stuff. But yeah, so brain moves more than we thought it did, which blew my mind. Once we get more people in the study, then we'll really know if for some reason my brain just moves a lot more than it should. I imagine that we'll see something around the same. And then we will be able to determine like a range like you're talking about if it's, you know, a range of one millimeter to say five millimeters or if it's pretty consistent around three millimeters, I'm not sure. So what this implant allows you to do is you can interface with a computer and you can use keyboard, you can type in URLs, you can play video games. Yeah. How does it work? Yeah. So basically, excuse me, my implant has like a Bluetooth connection to the computer and then through that, neuralink has created an app that they have uploaded to the computer and through that app I can interface with the, with the computer. What it does is all of the electrodes on the threads are sending neurons spikes, neuron signals and through my, so it's all implanted in my motor cortex through my intentions. So say if I want to try to, you know, move my hand left, right, up, down, I can't really move it. I have like a little bit of movement in my hand, but I can't really move it. But the neurons are still firing. That intention is still there. So like those signals are being sent, there's just a cut off in my spinal cord. So obviously it's not getting down. But it's still, it's still going on in my brain and those electrodes are picking up those signals and there's an algorithm like machine learning going on in the background that is, you know, taking those intentions and over time, it is learning what I'm trying to do and that translates to cursor control. So yeah, so if I want to try to move the cursor to the left, I move my hand to the left, but that's not necessarily what I would need to do. If I wanted to move the cursor to the left, I could kick my foot or I could do any sort of like motor action to train it to learn. That's what I wanted to do to go left. So there will be like a visual on the screen that says like move your hand to the left and then they will train that left movement to left on the cursor control. But that visual could be anything. It could be like do a little jig and that'll move it to the left. Like anything that it can do, anything you can do. I mean, it can learn and you can map that to anything. So does this include facial movements? Yeah. Yeah. So you could like move it with your nose? Yeah. I'm I'm pretty sure like we haven't tried anything like that. We haven't tried, you know, a lot of stuff. This is very, very like it's still very new. So there are things that, you know, we've we're working on what works well at this point. So like a lot of it is like my right hand stuff. We have mapped a lot of things to like individual fingers, hand movements in general, but we've done like left hand stuff. We've done like foot kick stuff. And it doesn't look like the signals are as good. But that also might be just due to the fact that some of the threads are pulled out. So when they fix that issue with the next people, then those things would be much, much better. And if that's the case, then you could theoretically do multiple things at once. It's not just, you know, you map say my right hand to the cursor control, then you map my fingers in my other hand and my toes to like key control. So I could be moving the cursor and typing at the same time with my toes or something. Wow. Yeah. There's there's a lot, a lot to explore with this. That's so interesting that it's tied to your mind telling different parts of your body to move. I come I'm very obviously very ignorant to this stuff. I thought like you were just using your mind and telling the cursor to go around. Yeah. So it's something that is true. So it's something that we differentiate. There are what are called attempted movements and imagined movements. So at the very beginning, I did a lot of attempted movement. Attempted movement is just what it sounds like. I attempt to move my hand in a certain direction. I attempt to move my fingers like lift your finger up, down, left, right. I attempt to do something and then the algorithm will take that and translate it to cursor control. But what I realized maybe a few weeks in was that I could just think cursor go here and it would move. That it blew my mind when that happened for the first time. Like like I said, with everything going on in my brain, all of it still works. All the signals are still there. Like I think something to try to move and the signal gets sent. So when I'm attempting to move my hand and the cursor is moving and it's moving basically where I want it to, I'm like, yeah, that makes sense. It didn't really shock me that it worked. I assumed that it would work because all the signals are still working. It's just my spinal cord that's jacked up. But when I moved it for the first time with my mind without attempting to move it all, it, like I was giddy the entire day, I could not believe what had just happened. And I think we're going to find that with a lot of things. Right now we are doing like I'm trying to map like sign language, like the sign language alphabet in order to text, like write words and stuff. And it's pretty promising. It worked. Sure, there's a video out there of me somewhere that Newerling has of me spelling a couple words with sign language. Wow. So you're thinking in your mind or you're trying to get your hands to make the signs of sign language and then the computer interprets that as the language and types it out. Yep. And I think the same thing is going to happen where I went from attempting to move my hand to imagining just moving the cursor. I think it's going to be the same way with the texting. I'm not, I haven't had this confirmed yet, but I don't see why not. I think at some point the computer is going to learn like me trying to do certain letters. If like attempting it at some point I'm just going to think that letter instead of actually trying to move and it'll type it. Wow. Yeah. Because I think it's, I think it's both like me learning what like the computers trying to do the algorithm and the algorithm learning what I'm trying to do. And so over time, it's just going to be completely thought based. I don't see why it wouldn't get there. From what I've seen just with the cursor control, it makes sense that you know, as I'm attempting it's learning and then instead of even need to needing to attempt it will just understand what I want to do and it'll do it. So you were saying that you were one of the first people to do this and there's going to be more people in the trial and that maybe they'll learn like the things that are going wrong with yours. Can they do yours again? Can they redo it? Yeah, they could. It was something that, you know, when the thread retraction had happened, I was obviously pretty broken up about it. I thought that. So like when they told me I didn't have very good control of the cursor anymore. It was really hard for me to get the cursor to go where I wanted it to go. I thought my time in the trial was coming to an end and that's really hard. It's something to something hard to come to terms with because they had just shown me this whole new world. Like all these new capabilities that I had and they'd introduce so many things like before that point I had played video games for, you know, 10 hours without needing any sort of help. And it was hard to, you know, internalize that it could all be coming to an end. I know that it will at some point because I'll be out of the study and I won't be able to use it anymore. So my first thought was can you guys go in and fix it like go in take it out put in a new one. And they basically said we're not at that point yet. We're going to see if we can fix it. We're going to see if we can do things on the software side to fix it which they ended up doing. It works better than it did before now. Even with like fewer threads. So I'm glad we didn't because they learned a lot. If we would have just gone in and taken it out and put a new one, they wouldn't have learned the last like anything that they had learned over the last three months. They could go in and do it. They're not going to. I don't think that they need to. But at some point I know that the whole point of the nurling is to be upgradeable. So at some point they're going to go in hopefully and take it out and give me a better one. Now what is the extent of your injury? Sorry. I dislocated my C4 C5. In a people keep calling it a diving accident. It wasn't really a diving accident. It was just sort of like a freak accident while I was swimming in the lake. So I dislocated my C4 C5 which they told me was good because I didn't sever my spinal cord. It was just kind of like my spinal cord like bounce out of place for you know split second and hop right back where it was supposed to be. And so I cannot move anything. I have no control or sensation below my shoulders. I got a little bit back like I can move my hand a little bit but not enough to do anything like I couldn't control the joystick or anything. So yeah, no no movement or sensation below my shoulders. Is there anything that if you looked into what they do with stem cells? Yeah. Yeah, I'm so I applied for studies before in Neuralink and I never got asked to be in any of them. I never even heard back from anyone which is kind of what I assumed would happen with Neuralink, honestly. But I applied for things because I obviously don't want to be paralyzed anymore. I don't want to be a quadriplegic. So it would be great if I could get into something and have them fix as much of me as possible. I mean, even if I had more control over my hands, the amount of things that I could do would like skyrocket, like an order of magnitude, better. And my life would be better. My independence would be better. Everything. Yeah, I don't. I mean, I don't think it would hurt to try. And you familiar with a lot of these clinics like the cellular performance institute in Mexico? No. They do a lot of UFC fighters. They do like you can do things in other countries that you're not allowed to do in America because of regulations. But what they're able to do down there is they're going right into disks and they're alleviating people's disk problems. We're they're actually making the disks grow larger and heal people with back injuries. And I know I've read things about spinal cord injuries and improvements, but I would love to connect you with them. And they, you know, they're the experts on this. They'd be able to tell you like what what the state of the car in terms of like the research shows the stem cells can and can't do. Yeah. I don't think you could hurt. I mean, it's just a healing thing. Right? If you're getting some sensation, a little bit better movement, maybe they could accelerate that. Yeah, that would be great. I'll connect you with them. Cool. I don't know if I'm allowed to at this point. Oh, really? Because I'm in the nursing study. I'm not sure that maybe you should lie. Yeah. I mean, it would be great. It would be great. But that would suck to get out of the study too. Both things would suck. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, maybe they would allow it. Yeah. I mean, we'll see. We'll see. I mean, it's only something that would help you heal. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I know. I just know that like in a lot of studies, something like that, you know, they might not want to take on like the added risk. Understandably. Also, we would kind of mess up their control. Exactly. Like what happens? You juice somebody up with stem cells and says the brain pulse eight more. Does the fibers come out more? Yeah. How does the interplay with any sort of price? Right. Right. Right. Yeah. I get it. I get it. Um, is there of hope in the future of utilizing this technology to help people regain movement? Yeah. Yeah. That's one of the plans. I don't know if you've seen anything on it. Basically, they do something similar to what the stem cell, a lot of the stem cell research is a lot of the stem cell stuff is, you know, implant stem cells above and below the level of injury. And those stem cells will migrate basically and create a bridge. Some of them have even talked about injecting right into the level of injury. So, um, with the neural link, the plan is to implant one in the brain and then implant one below the level of injury. And then the neural links will just talk right to each other. Um, all the brain signals that are that it's picking up in the brain, wherever, you know, it's implanted motor cortex in this point. Um, in this scenario would go straight to the other one and it would send it right through your body like it should. And are they, do they have a plan on when to try this? They're already trying it in animals. Um, they have one in a pig. You can watch the video of it where basically, um, they have an implant in the pigs brain and an implant in the pigs spinal cord. I think in the thoracic section of the spinal cord. And they have been moving the pigs like legs, um, on its own. The pigs not paralyzed or anything, but basically they like tell the pig come to this section of, you know, they like grid off the floor and they put food in a section of the grid. And they're like, if you're okay with us testing on you, pig come over here, basically, and the pig will go in there. And then they will take control of the pigs leg and they will like start playing around with it like making the pig. Yes. So this right here. Um, so all those movements right there, the pigs leg are them. Um, they're doing it. So, um, and this is just the beginning, obviously. So this is flex or movement it's saying it's saying it in the pig is lifting it's leg up unconsciously. It's not doing it on its own. Nope. They're doing it all. Dude, how long before they can hijack people? Oh, for the CIA can hack into you. Yeah. I know. Right. That's like, I mean, that is the ultimate fear of human beings becoming cyborgs is that we're going to be subject to all the problems that our computers and our phones have with malware and spyware and yeah. I mean, people people ask me all the time if this thing can be hacked. And short answer is yes. But at this point, at least, hacking this wouldn't really do much. Um, you might be able to see like some of the brain signals you might be able to see some of the data that Nureling is collecting. And then you might be able to control my cursor on my screen and make me look at weird stuff. But that's about it. I like how you could go in and like look through my like messages, emails and like that. But I'd also have to be like connected already. So if I'm not connected to my computer or anything, you can't get in there on your own. So it would have to be a time when I am on it and you are able to hack it. And then you're given it basically a guidebook out of ruin your life. It's going to crank up the volume, but gay porn on full glass. Meekspin.com. Yeah. I mean, it it it. It is what it is. It is what it is. Yeah. I think if it happens, it happens. I've it's something that they had to tell me about before I got into the study. This is possible, but I'm not worried about it. What kind of a piece of shit would they be to hack your brain? Can't the fuck out of here? Yeah. I know. There's plenty of bankers out there still money. Right. Go concentrate on them. I've you know, along that line, it's something I've thought a lot about with like doing interviews and stuff is like some of the people that I've done interviews with interviews with. I'm like, are they going to try to attack me to get to like Elon Musk or something? Are they going to say things about me? Or like, you know, try to do like a getcha on me. Gotcha. Sort of me. Yeah. And everyone that I've talked to about that, they were just like, they would have to be the scum of the earth to try to do that to you. But we'll see how it's happened yet. Maybe maybe someone will. Oh, there's some scummy people out there. They'll give it go. Yeah. Especially if they think you can go viral. Yeah. Yeah. It's a it's become in fashion to criticize Elon Musk. Yeah. I've already had some people who just the way that they're interviewing me. It's just so I don't know. It gives me the heebie jeebies. Like I can tell they're trying to get me to say things. And I'm just like, no. So what do you think they're trying to do? Are they just trying to attack? We'll see here. Here's a thing about interviewing that's kind of that a lot of people don't know. When you're used to talking to people, like I talked to a lot of people, I'm used to talking to people. If I just meet them, this is me. If I was a store by a food, this is me everywhere. I can be me. But it's because I'm used to it. But a lot of people when they sit down, they know they're going to be on camera. They've never been on camera for it. And they get very nervous. And that's why I like to talk to people before the show, just kind of hang out a little, get you chilled out. I'm just a person. You're just a person. We're going to just talk. It's going to be easy, man. I'm your friend. We're going to have a good time. Some people don't want to do that. They want to do the opposite. So they want to sit there with a clipboard. And they want to like look at you in a condescending way. And it's like a little bit of a power move. And what they're trying to do is make salacious content. That's all they're trying to do. That's their job. Their job is different than a person who just wants to have a conversation and ask questions, which is my job. Their job is to make something dramatic happen that's going to be shared on TikTok. Yeah. You know, that's they're barely in the news business anymore. What they're kind of in is the clip business. Viral clip business. They're just they're farming viral clips. So if they can say something ridiculous and maybe you'll say something back and that'll become the gotcha. Oh, he claps back. Yeah. It's something like like I'm not nervous talking to people. I never have been. I've never had stage fright. I think people are people. I think I'm pretty good with people. I'm not weird about interacting with others. I think it's because of my mom, my mom's like the friendliest person in the world. So I grew up just being able to walk up to someone on the street and start a conversation if I wanted to. And so then I can obviously tell things when people are interviewing me like what they're trying to get from me. Right. Like just the way that they ask questions, the tone of their voice. Yeah. Like, hey, I'm your friend like open up to me. Man. It's like so it's a dear. I know. I know. It's just not it's not great. Well, you know, that's the business they're in. You know, you were for a tire store. You're trying to sell tires. But they're business, you know, you need new tires. Do I really, you know, their business is talking shit and making things, you know, it's just it's a bad format. Most of those media interviews are bad formats because it's a very limited amount of time. And you have to have a clip that fits in between commercials. And also that they're not free. They have executives and there's too many people that get in there and just. The person talking to you should just be talking to you and they should have an understanding of what you do and how it happened and what this is all about. What is what this means for future people? No, it shouldn't be like going after Elon. Must everyone's so God damn political right now. It's so weird. They're even making a political people political. It's just the so to connect you to that. It's just so stupid. Yeah. What you are is like I said, I think if there's a movie about the future, one of the very first people that has used this kind of technology and we're learning that these people are getting better at it and they're and now at the use of AI. I mean, who knows what's going to be possible with you just in a few years. Yeah. It's very exciting. It is very exciting. I know a lot of people are really nervous about it and understandably so. I want to. I'm nervous. Yeah. I've heard I've heard a little bit of what you said about it. And I don't have like good arguments against it. No, I can come on here and be like, Joe, don't worry. Then like I'm here to help. Don't worry about it. I would say that's a computer and you're going to talk to me. Let me, let me into your computer, your phone. I'll show you there's no big deal. I'm your friend. Joe. No, but I get it at the same time. The way I look at it is like how much it's going to be able to help people. How much is going to be able to help people like me at the beginning at least. Like I know a lot of this is like down the road stuff. Like, you know, what it's going to do to normal people who, who get this they're going to be able to be happy. is like down the road stuff like you know what it's going to do to normal people who who get this they're going to be able to be hacked or controlled or something but for me I think about it like how many people who are paralyzed don't have to be paralyzed anymore how many people with disabilities ALS or you know Alzheimer's or any of these who are blind how many people are going to be able to live their lives again and that's my goal at the beginning I know that I feel like people are going to look at me and say like I really need to be more concerned about a lot of the like things coming down the road and it's something that I'm trying to think more about because at some point people are going to ask and I don't have good answers for it because all I'm thinking about is you know like I want to help people and I feel like this is going to help people and that's what I'm focused on so well I think your perspective is probably the right one because no one knows what's coming yeah no one and you can be freaked out about it like I am but sometimes freaked out about other times I'm just sort of resigned to the fact that this is just the existence that we find herself in yeah this is our timeline we live in a very strange timeline and it's happening in a very very rapid rate and no one has a map of the future it's not possible it's just all guess it's completely it is like an ant trying to figure out how to operate a iPhone there's it's not we don't have it yeah whatever it is whatever it's going to be it's going to be and you're not going to stop it now it's we are a runaway train yeah let's just hope we're going to a cool spot yeah right I mean you look at a hundred years ago like there's no way that could have imagined what our world will be like now no so and I have a feeling the next five to ten years is gonna be a lot bigger than that yeah I mean experimental growth yeah so well it's just once this stuff goes live it's just it's gonna be really weird it's gonna be really weird but along the way we're gonna solve a lot of the problems yeah that I mean look if I have I have had three knee surgeries two ACL reconstructions if I lived a hundred years ago I'd be a cripple yeah you know just how it is yeah my knees would be destroyed I wouldn't be able to walk good yeah and now I could do anything it's that's just medical technology and understanding of the human body implementation of this kind of device that can allow you to move your body and can as you were saying earlier you can bring back eyesight to some people this is something that they really are hopeful for have they done any of that on animals yet um I'm not sure I know that what the plan is like they did a talk about it a while ago um on like a show and tell they basically show how like the how the neural link works in my brain would be very very similar you would just take you would you would like activate certain parts of the brain or behind the eye the part of the brain the part of the eye that dictate sight and stuff you would activate certain things in order to display what's going on around the world to someone to the back of someone's eye to their retina whatever it is I don't know much about it but they have done it um oh they did it with monkeys actually yeah so there's a video of um them lighting up parts of a screen and they have like basically an eye tracker in the monkey and so the monkey will look to different parts of the screen and um like wherever they've lit up on the brain basically so whatever is going whatever implant they have in the brain they'll like light up somewhere on the brain and it then they'll light it up on the screen and the monkey will look there and then at some point they stop lighting it up on the screen and they're just lighting it up in the monkey's brain and the monkey still looks there so yeah so they know that they can do these sorts of things um yeah it's it's amazing I know that there are other companies that have done something similar to this too um like giving people uh like helping people with their eyesight I know one of them like went under which was it was just a wild story of basically about a company who had implanted things in people and the company went under and then the people in the study were like well what do we do now um and they didn't know if they were just going to like continue that's one of the things about like wow yeah yeah yeah I should mention that the blind sight implant is already working in monkeys the resolution will be low at first like early Nintendo graphics but ultimately makes seed normal human vision holy shit also no monkey has died or been seriously injured by a neural link device yeah much 21st by a neural link device right but they did have to kill the monkeys that they originally did studies on right yeah do you know much about like studying with animals and stuff like that yeah you have to kill them to find out what damage you've done yeah exactly well like yeah basically all all animals that um are in studies at some point get I think they have a really terrible term for I think they call them call it sacrifice so they sacrifice that's the animals yeah it's come up with a new word guys right I know right um but this day and age there's a lot of f**kens not fear it's not a great it's not a great um yeah for their cause we could have worked on that we'll yeah all right put a little bit more thought into it um so yeah they do that they have to like you said learn right something from the monkeys um from the animals that they're testing on so some of them they will um you know let live longer some of them they'll uh implant something in and then sacrifice almost immediately to see because they have to know what it's doing short term medium term long term um so basically all animals and all animal testing get sacrificed at some point I don't know how true that is because obviously a lot of them um once they're done with the study that they're in they let go live if it wasn't too invasive if they don't need to like study any part of them they were going to be killed for but if you're going to study the brain if you're going to study the brain yeah there's really no other way you gotta get um so then and then there was the whole like um report that came out about all the terrible things that nearly was doing the monkeys I've talked to the people I got to meet them um the people who are working directly with the monkeys those monkeys have the best animal facility in the world someone like came in and built it um like basically they're going around now that person is going around and changing how other um like labs treat their monkeys like for the better so they're going they're like revolutionizing the world of like animal testing basically so neuralink treats their animals better than anywhere else and then the report that came out instead like all these terrible things that were happening with animals it's it's skewed because all of the things that they brought up were just um it was all of the bad like basically anything bad that happens to um the monkey has to be or any of the animals has to be reported and gets reported in this um like you know xyz format of this is what's going on with the monkey this is what happens what we think happened we had to kill the monkey yes or no um but none of the other things get reported at all none of the time between like if it's five years of the monkeys alive and one bad thing happens then there's a report about that one bad thing happened to the monkey and you compile all that and you're like look at all these terrible things that are going on the monkeys but it's just not really true um interesting yeah well it's a tough one because some people don't think any study should go on with animals at all yeah and so for them everything that happens to an animal in captivity for a scientific purpose is evil you know I get it I get it I get it from their perspective yeah I get it you know they call us speciesists because we're willing to do things to monkeys that were yeah you know I don't think I like a lot of evil people in the world we can practice on you know I mean I don't want to give anyone any ideas right it's tear that's terrible thing to say should do that but an innocent monkey it's fine very weird I mean monkeys do terrible things to us too and they do provoked you know or if they live in urban neighborhoods where they rely on tourists and they steal their phones for food and attack people yeah they're they're fuckers yeah they can be fuckers but I saw I saw a story of a monkey who basically tore some kids face off is thank you it was like outside of the village or in his village and the whole story was about how they were doing reconstructive surgery on the kid and like making him look a bit more normal again but that's terrifying monkeys are unbelievably strong there's a video of a guy sitting on the ground cross-legged or monkey hops on his shoulder and then the guys like thinking it's cute and smiley and then the monkey just decides to take a massive chunk of his scalp off just bites down on his head and just takes like a football-sized chunk of scalp off this dude's head it's horrible just decided for no reason unprovoked wow you know monkey lives in a rough neighborhood get a heart you have a life he's not out there just you know picking fruit this is it so this dude is just sitting here with his monkey is sick sitting on his lap and he's like into the monkey he's like oh no mr. monkey something bad about it look it doesn't seem like he's bummed out about the monkey now watch where the monkey does whole geo ouchy wah wah that is skull yeah that was a stone brain no not that I mean that would have to be a chunk of skull right is but it was the skin pulled I mean that's gone that's gone forever yikes no things ouch yeah gross but you know the monkey again probably on a hard life yeah you know we need his monkey life reform yeah I think when we're looking at these kind of scientific experiments on animals a lot of people are gonna have a problem with yeah but I wonder through with new technology if that's even going to be necessary anymore if they'll in the future particularly with the leaps that are going to be made with AI I wonder if they're going to be able to just be able to map out a study you know like understand the interactions between human beings and these devices and be able to map out the possibilities and probabilities without having to do that yeah you would think so I but who knows yeah it makes sense it makes sense I feel like at the beginning they would probably need to do like that along with the study on a human so they might run say simulations a million times on what you know an AI simulation on what how this would interact with a human but then they would have to go in and do it to see how true the like simulations are and then depending on how accurate they are then maybe they could just go fully to that but if it ends up being different then yeah I have a feeling they're going to be able to replace parts with artificial parts too like like the eyeball itself I was just thinking about that the other day like how complex like look how small these little cameras are on your phone so tiny ass cameras but one of these can do a hundred X zoom yeah you know one of these is two hundred megapixels it's a little tiny thin thing like what's to say that they wouldn't be able to come up with something that works way better than the human eye but you could zoom in yeah just like a phone just like zoom in to something like but have like a real optical zoom yeah I just hope they don't give them red redness that'll be creepy yeah I know yeah it's just seems like they could do better yeah it would be very weird talking to someone with two fake eyes it'd be it'd be weird if you couldn't even tell you probably wouldn't trust them anymore right because you kind of like looking at someone's eyes you know you find out they're cool yeah you're just looking into these lenses so are you even in there anymore yeah I'm just trusting that you're still there it's like talking to someone with sunglasses on forever you know you know you net what's going on yeah yeah what are you looking at that is a weird thing that we look through the eye you know it's the old expression the windows are to the soul yeah I mean you can you can tell right yeah looking at people you looking their eyes you're like you know you're a little angry dude yeah it was sketchy yeah something like that yeah like I'm saying maybe at some point you wouldn't even be able to tell which is also something to think about like who like if you wouldn't be able to tell someone had robot eyes like just looked like an normal person right but that's a real part of how we interact with each other it's like facial expressions like figuring each other out just by like how your eyes are looking at me oh man well it's not like you distrust someone because they have like a glass of ice no not glass I mean yeah if they got like red lights stood around inside their head maybe this is the one way it works it's especially when you're alone with them here it's all through the night yeah little when you look at the rapid eye movement and yeah why are you sleeping yeah I mean I'm sure they've worked there wasn't there some sort of study where they were trying to develop an artificial I got a whether or not this is I'm trying to find out real it is I got one guy who has a 3d printed eye 3d printed I got a camera in it or something I'm trying to find it and it oh it doesn't it hook up to his tooth that I don't that there's two things I'm seeing here they figured out a way to allow people to see things through their tea I've seen that yeah I don't get it I don't get it I'm not gonna get that one yeah it's not enough time in the world for me to figure that out for me though thank God for smart people all right I mean how are they getting it through the tooth both of them the 3d printed eye here's the one guy first guy he's a director show himself in the eye and I'm actually oh no guess he's got a camera in there it says and he sees through the camera that I was trying to get to yeah it's got a transmitter I don't know if it's going to some of his brain but he can see on a cake he oh you see it on a phone yeah that's kind of weird maybe that's the first step and they need to that guy would make the weirdest POV porn just made in like the 90s it's not new and I'll look yes 12 years ago huh feel so good playing out on the game boy yeah it's not a game boy but it's some sort of a proprietary little electronic video player hmm yeah amazing times yeah so what is next in terms of like how long does this study that you're on a blind woman sees with tooth in eye surgery doctors in Florida restore a woman's site by implanting a tooth in her eye no but I think that's how they do it that is that is the thing that's I was saying like three or two I mean that's that is how they do it team specialist the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine announced Wednesday that they are the first surgeons in the United States to restore a person's site by using a tooth the procedure is formally called modified osteoodonto carea top caretaw carato prosthesis sorry Sharon Kate Thornton 60 went blind nine years ago from a rare disorder called Stephen Johnson syndrome the disorder left the surface of her eye so severely scarred she was legally blind but doctors determined that the inside of her eyes were still functional enough that she might one day see with the help of this thing this is a patient where the surface of the eye was totally damaged no wetness no tears doctor Victor El Perez the ophthalmologist at the Bascom Palmer eye institute at the University of Miami who operated on Thornton so we kind of recreate the environment of the mouth in the eye what I don't get that three phase operation started with the University of Miami dentist dr. Yo so Barti so sauotari who removed the tooth from Thornton's mouth and prepared an implant of her own dental tissue for almost severely damaged eye the tissue would be used to make a new cornea to replace the damage one the doctors didn't remove a section of Thornton's cheek that we become the soft mucus tissue around her pupil whoa finally present his team implanted the modified tooth which had a whole drill through the center to support a prosthetic lens we use that tooth as a platform to put the optical cylinder into the eye explained Perez Perez said doctors often use less risky and less invasive techniques for place corneas but the damage for Thornton's Stephen Johnson syndrome ruled those out whoa using a tooth might sound strange but it also offers an advantage because doctors used Thornton's own cheek and tooth tissue she faces less risk that her immune system will attack the tooth and reject the transplant patients getting a cornea transplant from a deceased donor on the other hand face chances that their immune system will reject the new tissue Wow yeah wow yeah I for some reason I thought they were using that tooth to like model and use it as a replacement for like her vision in some way but it's literally just placeholder for like you know different different things like the tissue and different places like like this that hold that lens and stuff that makes more sense yeah I thought it was that too I've other seen through the teeth yeah that doesn't I don't know that makes more sad like why can't we see through our teeth all the time be looking at what's going on in my mouth right yeah all this stuff is it's it's it's just mind blowing to imagine where this is going to be in a hundred years yeah and with you do you have the like if they start doing the range of motion studies or the being able to recreate motion or restore motion are you going to be available for those studies to can they can you do that to or you only like locked into this one study yeah I don't know I imagine I'm locked into this for now at least but at the same time I'm not sure I'm really not sure you would have to do it with someone who already has the implant in the brain so I don't know if it'll be a separate neural link that they would need like a different one specifically for like the two implants interacting together I don't see why that would be the case just like the same thing with people who they're going to have to test to see if the surgery to replace a neural link is safe at some point they're going to go through whole thing so they're going to have to do around people who already have it in so I imagine like that sort of study might be something I would be involved in if they're planning on implanting one and someone's spinal cord and then seeing how they interacting seeing if it works I don't see why I couldn't be in that but we'll see it's kind of a long way off I think how big is the the neural link implant it's about the size of a quarter it's much it's thicker than a quarter I don't know maybe half an inch it's like that thick and does it you it's on the surface yeah it's implanted on my school so they cut out a chunk of my school I think it's called the craniectomy and then they left that chunk out and just replaced it with the neural link do they take that chunk and like put it in the freezer so they could put it back in you some yeah I'm not sure I don't think so I oh talking about it yeah talking about it afterwards that's it yep yo that's your head I was talking about it with my buddy afterwards and I was like I should have asked them for my chunk of school out of then sweet yeah I don't think they're allowed to give that to people yeah I think that's like bio waste or something like that I think bio has I know I should it definitely should be yeah I think they give people their testicles back right but it has to be like from ala high or something okay so let's take your skull and put it it in for malda yeah that's funny as long as I can have it um how many versions did they go through before they got to the one where they're willing to do it on people uh a lot I saw like from their very first idea of neural link through this one I don't know I don't know how exactly how many there were I would say at least one or two dozen different like iterations mmm yeah and then like the version I have is like thousands and like the thousand or two thousand iteration of um this one so like they're constantly changing stuff so like even the next person that gets it they've probably made I don't know a thousand more modifications to it little things just like if they've seen certain certain things in my implant they can improve on obviously they're going to change how the threads work they're going to add more electrodes they're going to maybe update the battery they might update a lot of things they're looking at updating what signal it uses instead of Bluetooth they're looking at different things like that so the next one that comes in is probably going to be much different maybe the same design maybe they found a better design I don't know and I know in the future they've talked about putting this into people that don't have any issues medically what are they planning on doing like how are they planning on that do you know what do you mean how like in terms of like is that going to just be offered for you're going to get what what are the long term goals is it to get the internet on that is there's a people communicate to have telepathically is it going to be a slow build up to the idea that everyone is going to want to get one of these things I think once it's proved so like this this studies to prove whether or not it's safe and if it works basically I think once that's proven then they're going to get into a lot more of what it's actually capable of and then once it's released to the public I think I think people are going to rush to get it honestly at least a group of people who have been following it at the very least because once we know that it's safe then that's one of the big things that people are going to like once that's lifted once you're like okay it's safe now we can go through and start talking about being able to communicate with people and being able to you know possibly download information have it be available to you using AI and stuff like that I'm not sure if that's going to happen I don't see why it's not possible at the very least and then they I know Nuralink's talking about opening up a clinic in Austin basically where you would go in and get a surgery and like walk out So it's not like like my surgery was I don't want to say not invasive because obviously they didn't bring surgery but It was they were expecting it to be you know something like three to six hours and my surgery took under two hours It went super super fast. There were no complications at all. It was not Like obviously invasive in the brain, but there was no damage done really so And this was the very first time so once they get this even better even more tuned in than I imagine people will go into this clinic and Going in and come out in a few hours with an Erlink and then they can chat with other friends online or something else Pretty cool. It'd be pretty cool. Again, I'm not I'm not here to talk about like the ethical ramifications of that or like how How it's fun to think about like the things that Might go wrong or could go wrong and it's probably something that People much smarter than me should think about whether or not it should be done, but I think there are so many things that you could do with it I think it's going to be done no matter what and if it's not done by Nuralink It's gonna be done by someone in another country. Yeah, it's going to be done Technology always moves forward. It never stops over concerns of what could possibly go wrong. Hence the nuclear bomb Yeah, it's not gonna stop. Yeah. It's just not what we do. We we always try to come up with greater things and If someone does figure out a way to connect human beings to some form of wireless internet or wireless data or Some completely new thing instead of thinking as the internet as we know it being these devices that go to websites It might be a completely different invention that uses a completely different type of technology to sink All the information and all the minds in the world together It might not be as dopey as going to a website like going to a website is probably like an archaic way to do it Yeah, you know It'll be like the cloud or The metaverse or something you just hop in and Everyone will be there you can go chat with whoever you want around the world and they can just upgrade your operating system Make you woke He's signing up for the wrong one that you see there. He gets a way way crazy ideas Propaganda will take new leaps and bounds right, but then who's running it? Like that's what is it one person and everybody else's a robot like that doesn't make any sense They'll try so I'm sure someone's gonna want to run it all someone is gonna want to run it Yeah, it's gonna need to be hopefully they by that point They will regulate it, but as we've seen with like you know things like AI art even They're trying to catch up with that. Yeah. Oh, should we should we have like thought about this before all this was released And like no government will figure it out. Yeah, you can get a look with that right Well, they're able to scour the internet for every artist's work and then sort of take pieces of that and create art And these artists are like hey, you know, that took me fucking forever to paint that Like you just stole it and did a version of it in 13 seconds. Yeah Weird yeah, yeah, and that's just one problem another problem is deep fakes and songs like they made a Drake song that became a hit and Drake had nothing to do with it It's not that not that far away from it being out of the barn where you're not gonna be able to ever stop You're not gonna be able to be able to do whatever you want in terms of like creating videos Audios and it'll look Indistinguishable from a real video real audio. Yeah. They're already gonna take this podcast and translate it into different languages without me being able to speak Speak them just through AI. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I think they did the same thing with the deep fake like you were just saying Mm-hmm. I think they did something with like Trump recently where it was like a deep fake of Trump and after a while He had to be like hey guys. That wasn't me wasn't there Was there a football player that was saying some wild shit that turned out to be fake or basketball player? Did you hear about this, Jimmy? Yeah, but apparently it was just Barely wacky enough for people to go that looks big We have to be very sophisticated if you saw this. I mean we're getting used to looking for things being fake Whereas 20 years ago you would say that's real. Yeah, I see it. It's video. It's real. It's something that I was actually just talking with my buddy about the other day I think it's going to be something similar to you know how like we get emails from Nigerian princes And we're like yeah, like grandma don't open that don't send them money. It's not real I think it's going to be something that people are able to do like the next generations Where they look at something online and they're like oh yeah, that's AI. Oh, yeah, that's fake. Yeah, I think you're right Yeah, they're just they're gonna grow up with it so they're gonna be able to figure out But maybe not this stuff looks so real that I don't know but Maybe they're gonna have to be required to do like watermarks or something on it. I don't think they're gonna be able to stop it I think we're just gonna get to a real weird blurry place. I think the one thing that might help this sounds crazy, but I Think ultimately what technology does is Closes it makes things more accessible it gets you more information it connects people more It's with translation it's connecting people from different cultures and different countries more I think ultimately what it's gonna do is it's going to be some sort of a mind interface I don't think it's gonna be as simple as language. I think it's gonna be a next level mind interface And if it's something through a technology akin to to neural link or maybe future versions of neural link I think we're gonna be able to know what someone's actually thinking I think you're not gonna be able to lie anymore So I'm saying yeah, I don't think lying is going to be possible a hundred years from now Which would be a really good thing and if you're a person right now that lives your life without lying You know this this is way better as the person who used to lie and doesn't lie ever now I'll tell you right now. It's great. Yeah, I love it. It's a good thing to not lie And if you live your life in this manner where there cannot be deception How much more would we would we get done? How much more would we understand each other in in relationships and and if you're bullshitting You'll understand that you're bullshitting by the way another person sees your thoughts and then You'll be forced to handle those and go you know what? I'm trying to put this off on other people and it's really me. I'm the problem Yeah, you'll be able to see it everyone will see reality Instead of these sort of manufactured narratives that people have with this very selective view of memory And their thoughts of the past and you know my boss did me wrong. No, you were a fuck up You showed up late every day like you know, and well fucking they fucking hated me No, you were super insecure and real shitty around people. You know, it's like you'll see well Well, we'll be able to solve a lot of our social issues that seem insurmountable Because of poor communication of a poor understand and lack of honesty a lack of real honest conversation a lot of our social issues that seem insurmountable because of poor communication, but poor understand and lack of honesty, lack of real honest conversations instead of just people trying to win arguments. Yeah, yeah, that'd be great until people realize that, you know, maybe you don't need to lie exactly. Maybe you can find ways to work around having to lie with this thing. If you can't lie anymore, if you're not allowed to, I mean, people find ways to kind of sort of lie all the time. And then also if you can hack it and then you're able to lie and no one else is, then that becomes kind of an issue too. If in some way you are able to like jailbreak your neural links so you can't lie anymore, and then you're the only one lying, everyone's going to believe you. They think that you can't lie and then that brings up a whole new world problems. My eyes, you're seeing right into the thoughts. Oh, I don't think you have a chance to lie. I don't think there's any, there's not, that doesn't exist anymore. I think, I think it goes away. And hence, leaders go away. That's going to be a real problem. We're going to have to have actual understanding of all the different processes that are in play, whether it's environment or resources or, you know, inter-country conflicts, whatever the fuck is going on, we're going to have a, where I have to have a real understanding of it without politicians bullshitting us as to why we're going to do something that won't exist anymore. That would be wild. They would be the ones that would resist at the most. They were like, we've this dangerous mind reading technology. They can look at Nancy blows. You'd have a breast conference. I mean, I just think of something like that ever came about. They would never let it happen. I don't think they have a choice. Because China will do it. Rush will do it. Everyone will do it. Someone's going to do it. All these eggheads out there that are willing to push that, but they're not going to listen to the government shut the fuck up. The government is just a bunch of people. The, the super nerds out there are the ones who are really in charge of this stuff because even we're seeing this with technology and some of these hearings on AI, the people that are asking the questions don't know what the fuck is going on. Yeah. You know, and I'm sure you saw that with some of the Facebook hearings and some of the other hearings. The people that are actually asking about the tech, how much time do you have to get into the understanding of this? How much time between worrying about water rights in your district and this and all these other problems that you have as a politician? How much time are you actually spending trying to figure out how social media works? Yeah, probably none. They just have AIDS that are getting people. Right. That's why they have pieces of paper and they're looking down with their reading glasses. Now, Mr. Zuckerberg, my phone doesn't go to Google. Right. Why is that? He's like grandpa's who argue on Facebook. Like they're, they're not going to be the people that control AI and they're not going to be the people that are going to be able to figure out how to stop mind reading technology. I think when mind reading technology comes, it's going to come so fast that it's going to be just like all these other things like the internet. It came so fast they couldn't control it. Because if you looked at the internet, if you looked at what what the internet is done for like a distrust in mainstream media, distrust in politicians, exposing corruption, all the different things that we know about now that are a fact that just 20 years ago you would have thought been crazy conspiracy talk. If they knew that that was going to happen and make life so much more difficult for them, they would have regulated the internet from the jump. They would have stopped stepped in, took over like China did, took over like North Korea did and you would have get their version of the internet forever and that's it and there's no growth and there's a nail silence dissidents and that's how they would have done it if they had ever known that it was going to be what it is now. I think that's exactly what's going to happen with mind reading software and mind reading technology. I think it's going to happen. They're going to be bubble, oh geez that's Christ. I don't think you know and also look they're just human beings too. They're going to want that. If they find out there's a technology that allows you to communicate with people in a completely new way and it's much more fulfilling and we understand each other much better and we really do realize that we are all one. Imagine we can communicate with this technology and it ends war overnight. It makes war literally impossible. You realize that these people that you're about to bomb are you and that we're all the same thing. We're all one consciousness experiencing itself through different bodies and different lives and different experiences and different genes and different parts of the world but we're all genuinely the same thing. Yeah I don't know. It brings up a lot of questions like where we would go from there though. Like how it's going to change the aliens land. The aliens land we figured out. Oh finally. Oh man yeah we were waiting. If that's what it takes to bring aliens down then I'm all for it. If that's what it takes to really get us to be face to face the only thing I keep telling my buddy is like I am all down for the whole like aliens come in us interacting with them and everything as long as they're not the mantids. If they're the mantas people I don't want anything to do with them. I think that you know I just don't want it. I'm with you bro. Yeah fuck the mantas people. Did he manage the mantas? He's really like the size of a dog. We would be so fucked. We'd be so fucked. One of the most gangster videos I've ever seen online is like a gecko and the geckos trying to eat the mantas and the gecko walks up to the mantas and tries to get it and the mantas is like not today. I'm going to eat you. And the gecko is like what is happening? You know you could see it looking at space. It's like so confused and it's got it's claws these fucking these giant things wrapped around and controlling the stress arts eating its face. Yeah mantas are like insects themselves like you look really get up close to an insects and like that thing is ugly. I do not like it one bit. Now imagine that and the things I've heard about the mantas is they're not the size of a dog. They're like the size of like multiple people and no things. Absolutely not. The mantas aliens I'm not too familiar with. I've seen a couple things online. How many people have seen the mantas aliens? Yeah I know of one story where there was a hunter just walking around and it got like dark over him or something and he looked up and there was just like a ship over him and he looked through his scope and he looked right into some like mantas people and yeah and I'm not okay with that. Like that's the one alien story I think I'll stay far away from and hope it's something else. Well you got to think that insects have some kind of bizarre intelligence because that's if you've ever seen leaf cutter ant colonies when they they pour the cement in them and you realize like how sophisticated they are like how did you guys do this? Like how do you figure this out? There's like they have channels where the air can pass through so they can ferment leaves. So they have like a fermentation factory inside their ant colony and the colony is huge. Yeah it's so big and you're like you little tiny fuckers built a city underground right here. There's got to be some sort of intelligence. Now if ants evolved to the point where they develop that kind of intelligence, who's to say that in a different environment where ants have more accesses to food, more access to resources and more competition that they don't evolve to the point where that intelligence it keeps getting scaled up and they get to like a human human level intelligence from an insect or beyond. Why not? Yeah they just need some psychedelics or something to really get that brain to grow or a neural link. Yeah right that's what I have a feeling. I have a feeling that in the future everyone's going to be some sort of a cyborg and everyone else is going to be artificial that there'll be complete life forms that were developed just with computers. Just like computers technology whatever form of chips and they'll put together things that are more intelligent than us can communicate with us can work with us but that's going to be one of those things. It's not going to be one of us and that'll be a different life form that exists alongside with us but I don't think there'll be very many people like me no chip, no nothing just a person like like what is that more on doing? You're running around with no chip. You know I think in the future it's going to be everyone's going to have something that enhances them. We already do with our phones you know it's going to be something like beyond that where it's going to be so compelling that everyone's going to want to do it. You're not going to get it. If it comes out. I'm not saying we're not going to get it. I might get it. I might have I don't want to be alone. Yeah I'm going to be the only person who can't read minds. I probably wouldn't want to be the first adopter. Yeah yeah I want to wait a little bit. That was an argument that I had with doing this was do I really want to be the first? I mean who knows what kind of problems is going to be but but for a guy like you I would say like they're pretty sure it works and they were right. Yeah you know and how cool was it the first day to be able to play video games? Yeah it was awesome. What did you play? Civilization VI I don't know I don't even know if I heard of it. It's a massive game. It's something I've been wanting to play for a long time. I was able to kind of sort of play it with some different assistive technology over the last few years but not really and I played it like all night I didn't sleep. It was freaking awesome. Man I just love. I mean I grew up being a gamer. I grew up in kind of this age so the last eight years I've watched all of my friends play games that I've wanted to play and the fact that I might be able to play some of them like some of them are still too far out of reach for the nerling at this point but not for much longer and the next few years I think I'll be able to play anything anyone else played. Hey Loe I love Halo. I'm a big Halo. Are you gonna be able to play that? Yeah I hope so. Wow really hope so. Yeah so you'll be able to play shooters like Call of Duty. Yeah yeah that's that brings up another thing like I basically have an aim bot in my head. Oh that's probably the probably have like different leagues for people like me because it's just not fair. Wow is it that accurate? It's that accurate and it's faster. One thing that I found with the nerling is something that kind of blew my mind too is that when I'm attempting to do stuff sometimes or I'm thinking it to like move in a certain place sometimes it's so good that it's moving before I even like think it to move it's almost like if you think about moving your hand the signal is basically already being sent before you move your hand like you're your mind is saying okay he's about to move his hand basically so the signal needs to be sent all the way down and back up in order for you to move your hand. So the speed that all that happens and it's almost a little preemptive I saw that with the nerling where it was moving the cursor before I was actually moving my hand. Wow so with video games stuff like that you just need to think for it to move somewhere and is that accurate and it's quicker than you can even think so there's no way it's gonna like no one else is gonna be able to keep up with it. That's gonna be wild for something like Quake like at first person like a fast first person shooter to run it down hallways and you just catch some people and shoot them instantaneously. Yeah on must go have a field day. It wasn't here like one of the best Quake players in the world. Was he? Yeah I didn't know that. Yeah I think he was like one of the top Quake players in North America at one point. I don't that wouldn't doubt that. I know he's a gamer. I know he gets addicted to games especially some of that's that exciting. That's gonna be so dope for you man. You'll be fucking people up. Yeah. Yeah. It's really cool. I'll just enter tournaments and I won't tell them I have the nerling and I don't know how I would do it I guess. Yeah but if I'm doing it all online like kind of cool for you to play them in a tournament like a one-on-one tournament and fuck up like the best players in the world. Would that be insane? I bet they would play. Just to see for sure for sure. Because like there's tactics and strategy especially if you're like doing one-on-one deathmatch we have to know like when the health is spawning and when the weapons are spawning how to control a map. So they'll have like a little bit of it advantage in that. Yeah but if you just can't make it. I'm pretty good. Yeah. I like it. Now what about VR? Has there been any sort of interface that allows you to use like meta's VR or Oculus? No not yet. I don't think so like a lot of what we've done is just the computer at this point. Like they're planning on doing it into phones. I did connect to an Nintendo Switch at one point. I was playing Mario Kart and that's something that isn't like too far off as well for me to just be able to do that on my own. But that's going to be every console. I don't see why VR would be any different. I think at some point in the study they're going to do it just to see if it works. I don't see why it wouldn't. I don't know. The only thing that I would say is that VR actually requires physical movement. Like there's a couple games that we have. Yeah but if the brain is already interpreting your like motor cortex the movement of your motor cortex then you can just think move this and it'll move it in VR as well. I think it would work. Right but you're actually moving these handles in VR. Oh yeah I see what you mean. You know you have the handles. Well still getting off to Miss Robot and then have him have him hold the VR handles and then you can control that. He's connected to you. Yeah it would be the same. Bro you're going to be inside that thing walking around. What? I'll just I'm always thinking. Yeah I've always thought if you know you just give me an off to Miss Robot I'll have it get one of those like baby chest carriers or something. I can just carry me around like that. Bro you imagine walking down the street with that. That's so you'd accidentally step on people. You ever watch Dave Shepels old like show that you did. Shepels showing you Michelle. Yeah I was on it. Couple of times. I didn't. Sorry I didn't. No worries. There was one about the Homestonographers and it's basically like a little person that they carry around on one of those carriers on like their back and it's just like a stenographer. He's typing down everything you say and I just want something like that like a little homie. Miss Robot carrying me around on its back and it's like a kangaroo pouch. Yeah something like that. Put it right in the front so you just like be sitting there. Yeah you want like your head on the chest and it's just yeah let me see what's this guy doing. Oh there it is. Oh he's sorry. And he just reads back things. Oh what you said. Yeah. Oh yeah. I do remember that bit. Yeah that would like I think the future is going to be very interesting and I think there's going to be a lot of really wild discoveries that build upon other wild discoveries and stuff like neural link. I'm sure there's competing companies that are doing something similar right. Yeah that's what I'm saying. I think that I'm like I'm pretty sure some of the people who have left neural link have gone and either started their own little companies or have gone to other companies that are doing something similar. I think neural links advancements now are going to pull everyone else up. I think neural link will be at the lead for quite a while but I don't see why companies that haven't been able to achieve but neural link is achieving now won't be able to do it in a year or two time. Like especially like I said because neural link isn't making everything so open source and there's people like me out there who are just talking about it like Willie Nilly that I don't see why other companies won't you know find some way to catch up over time. No for sure I think with them leading the way and the fact that it's been implemented and it's been successful and the fact that they're already improving upon the software and how you're being able to correct issues with it. What is their timeline like in terms of next being able to use something that allows people to move that could move restore site do they have like a timeline but they think well yeah I don't know I keep saying that it's all going to happen in my lifetime for sure I keep saying that it's going to happen in the next 10 years 20 years where quadriplegics like me paralyzed people won't have to be paralyzed anymore I have this vision of someone being paralyzed going into the hospital getting the neural link and walking out like a day or two later which I think is totally possible. I think it's going to happen a lot sooner than later especially how fast all this is moving in the fact that this is like successful now I think it all I don't know that it would help me per se like even though I said it's in my lifetime. Part about being paralyzed in quadriplegic is my body is just deteriorated so much that even if they did give me something to like make me able to move again my body's just so jacked up at this point that I'm not sure it would really help that much I could probably build it back up to a certain point but even people who have recovered or have been part of studies where they get some movement back their bodies just don't work the same because of atrophy because of atrophy like one of my you know ankles is completely jacked up it's like twisted the wrong way I have to wear this hand brace because if I don't my fingers are all just like curled up basically and so like correcting some of that would take probably some extensive surgery one of my buddies is like one of the top ortho surgeons in the United States so maybe I could just get him to go in and fix it all but it would be a lot and I'm not sure it would help and muscle atrophy so I don't know but I'm that doesn't matter to me what matters is that people won't have to be paralyzed in the kitchen like that that's more like that's worth more than anything well that's also one of the legitimate uses for steroids one of the legitimate uses for steroids is the people with like muscle wasting disease and yeah people who have like severely atrophied and that it allows them to build up tissue better oh yeah maybe that would help yeah stem cells steroids gonna make you a superhuman bro yeah I mean aren't I already one kind of already one especially if you're playing you quake I can't wait to see that that's uh now with the future of this stuff it's going to eventually get to a point where it's probably like in the beginning it's probably going to be very difficult to acquire right like very expensive but it's probably in the future going to be much more accessible yeah when do they like if yours is if they complete your trial they find it satisfactory they have like a way to do it when will the average person who is a quadriplegic be able to start being able to use some of this technology I have no idea I know that my study is like the main part of the study is a year and then uh five years kind of extent of like follow up stuff in the study so once that's done however many people I've I've seen numbers up to like a few hundred people have it in this five year timeline so once all that happens um and I don't know what like phase two is with this uh I would say 20 years but that's me probably also being very optimistic I have no idea I don't know like what the FDA is going to decide with all this I don't how much how many more phases of the trial need to happen before that I really couldn't tell you but honestly I think it's within my lifetime for sure and how did they contact you how did you wind up getting chosen yeah um oh my buddy's probably out there having a freaking heart attack um so basically what happened was um I knew nothing about an early I was just lying in my bed one day and I got a phone call from my buddy um at like 11 a.m. or something and he uh I answered the phone I was like what's up and he was like you know an early just opened up their first in human trials he's like you should apply for this I was like cool like what is it so he explained it to me gave me like a five minute rundown of what they're doing and stuff and we applied over the phone like I just basically like told them all my information he applied for me um he spelled my name wrong on the application which is pretty funny um because he was drunk at the time again on on a on a Wednesday over the week like 11 a.m. he was already wasted respect um yeah respect to the day drinkers yeah yeah it was he his justification for it is that he was like going to a wedding that weekend he hadn't drank in a long time she's like I need to understand what my tolerance is so he drank like a whole bottle of fireball or something like that just to see like how he would be um so yeah we we did all that um and then within like a day or two they contacted me and then I went through about a month long application process of different like zoom interviews and stuff and then finally culminating in a like an in-person interview or in-person like full day of testing where they did like eight hours of tests on me um like different scans blood test your own test things like that um and then I was just waiting what was the like when you found out it was going to be uh it was cool it was cool uh yeah an email to get a phone call they called me they called me uh for the first like so I applied like September late September September like 19th or something around that day um a month later October end of October I had finished all my testing and interviews and then I didn't find out they had chosen me until maybe the end of November early December and even when they said they had chosen me they said I was going to be one of the first like three people that they were doing for the first part of the study so they didn't tell me I was going to be the first um they just said we selected you as one of the candidates basically um and so that was really really cool and then it was sort of uh back and forth of do I want to be the first do I want to wait till I have someone else because being the first um a lot more risk obviously and I have the worst version of the neural link that's ever going to be in anyone it's only going to get better so I was like maybe I'll let someone else get the first and then I get a better version than the second or third one um but ultimately being the first is cool um it's something that I just decided to do uh I was like this this is the best way I can help too if anything goes wrong I'd rather go wrong to me than passing it up and having someone else struggle having someone else it's like god forbid anyone like anything bad happened to someone I would rather it happened to me and I would rather not have passed up and watch it happen to someone else so um decided to do it and I was like yeah just let me know if I'm going to be the first or not obviously I wanted to at that point and then about a month later they called and they were like we're going to do your surgery you're going to be the first person I think in December they had told me that it could be me and they said that we might end up having to be the first and it could happen as early as like mid-December and that kind of stressed me out because I was a little worried that something bad would happen and I would have ruined Christmas for my family forever I was like if this is right around Christmas and something bad happens like Christmas is going to be ruined forever um luckily they waited like an extra month and a half uh but it was cool like like I kept pretty level expectations through the whole thing I didn't know what was going to come of it I didn't know if I was going to end up doing media or anything there's something that I talked with my parents about but it wasn't something that I really wanted to do per se um I wasn't wanting to like get famous or anything from this there are a couple things that I did want to do and ultimately that's why I decided to do media but um yeah it was cool it was all right you have a very noble and selfless outlook have you always had that no no I would say being uh paralyzed made me just rethink a lot of things in my life a lot of my perspective I mean one thing about being paralyzed is there's uh especially being a quadriplegic that you just have a lot of time to think I thought through everything I'd ever done all the mistakes I ever made why I was who I was where I uh like where I was I realized a lot of things about myself I realized you know that I wasn't the person who I thought I was I always built myself up a certain way and then going back through all of my interactions with everyone all the mistakes I made I realized I'm painting a much prettier picture of myself in my head than who I like actually was then a lot of the interactions I had with people you know actions speak a lot of the words and if I was thinking I was this great person and treating people like absolute you know dog crap basically like then maybe I'm not as good of a guy as I thought I was um I realized that I wasn't as good of a son as I thought I was I wasn't as good of a boyfriend as I thought I was and I wasn't as good of a friend like so I found the reasons why I was doing these things and I thought about it for probably a few years just lying in my bed staring at walls for you know eight ten hours a day just thinking um and eventually I came to this conclusion that um partly through my like faith um my interactions with God and uh partly just because I wanted to be better I wanted to be a better person uh I realized that there were things that I could do to help and this seemed like my best chance honestly Wow that's a wild thing to happen to someone to have a like a radical shift in perspective that's forced upon you yeah yeah I I heard you say I was watching I can't remember who I was watching you interview um maybe it was the Tucker interview maybe it was the uh um taren tower to interview because I just watched those once recently and you were talking about people like people never having been through anything like extreme happened to them and so um you know they're never forced to think certain ways or they just I don't know they never grow in certain ways um that's paraphrasing but it was along those lines and I don't know being a quadriplegic is I kind of make this joke but it's it's easier than people think um I mean I just get waited on uh all the time I get to lie in bed and watch TV and read books and people bring me food and bring me drinks and people do everything for me like it's really not that bad um but obviously it was really really hard like being paralyzed getting all of the things that I love to do most taken for me like I was a really big athlete I played like every sport under the sun um and then not being able to play sports anymore was one of the hardest things that I think I've ever had to go through um and there were a lot of other things not having any privacy anymore um like having to have everyone to and everything for me like go to the bathroom having to take a shower with people having like my parents scrub me in the shower or having my mom like help me go to the bathroom like it's just it's not easy and it's not easy being a burden to everyone around you and people always say like you're not a burden like we love you and we would do anything for you but it like I am I know I am it's not something that someone's gonna be able to convince me that I'm not and I understand that they love me and they're willing to do it but at the same time like like obviously there are things that if I could change I would and I can't so I just have to try my best to you know do as much as I can for those around me and this is part of what I can do I've thought for years like what can I possibly do to help and this is this is it I think as much as I can I want to do um everything with nerling to make these better for people in the future that's a beautiful way of engaging with this man it really is and I think what happened to you is tragic but your perspective is pretty fucking cool it really is it's it's beautiful to hear and um I mean I wish all the best I really hope that this becomes something that allows you to move again and I mean and that they keep improving a part here. And I mean, I wish all the best. I really hope that this becomes something that allows you to move again. And I mean, and that they keep improving upon it. And thank you for risking this. And thank you for being the first guy. Yeah. Yeah. No worries. People keep saying a lot of weird things about me. Like, you know, you're like an Apollo astronaut. I don't see myself that way. I know that people keep saying you're the first. You're like a pioneer. I don't see myself that way at all. I just think anyone in my position would have done it. I think that I guess it took a bit of bravery. I don't think I just I don't see myself that way. I just think that I did it. So to show people, like I did it because I knew that I could. I did it because I knew that I was capable of going through it. I did, you know, became a quadriplegic and I made it out the other side. I feel I feel good about my life. I feel like I manage that pretty well. I'm a pretty chill guy. So I feel like I rolled with the punches pretty well. Not the same thing with an early. And so like I never thought of myself like trailblazing or anything. But it's just cool to be a part of it. And I'm really happy that an early chose me. And I'm looking forward to having some like cyborg buddies in the future. Yeah. How long before you can link those things together? I guess we'll find out when they get the next patient like the next participant, like maybe a couple months and we'll be chatting with each other. I mean, I've been, you know, having telepathic communications with pager the monkey for a few months. No one knows about it. But we talk about that kind of stuff all the time. He's oddly obsessed with the new planet of the ape's movie. But couldn't tell you why? What kind of joke is that man? You can't crack jokes like that. I don't know if you're telling the truth. You're talking to a monkey telepathically? No, you're joking. Yeah. So yeah, I can tell because you have human eyes. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. I think you do. Okay. Or they're really good. Yeah. You know, if they could develop an eye just like artificial intelligence can make images like pretty fucking clothes. Maybe they can make an eyeball that just really does kind of like talk to you a little bit. Makes you think just no one someone's bullshit and dude. Yeah. Come on. Yeah. There's no way I talk to pager at all on a daily basis, at least. Now, I'm thinking you do. Now I'm going the other way with it. Yeah. It's, it's exciting times. It's very interesting. The ability that you have right now is limited to computer interfaces. Right? Yeah. What about other smart things? Can you interact with like could you interact with other sort of electronics? We have to be not really. It's all through the computer. Just because in order to even interact with the computer, it has to be uploaded with that app. And so that's why like putting it on a phone or something, you would just upload the app onto it. Any sort of other devices, there's ways to like connect to them. So like for me, even with the switch, it's through my computer still, but then you run like a cord for my computer through like a converter box and then into the into the switch. So it's all through the computer right now. I don't think it's going to be that way forever. I think it's going to be much easier to connect to other devices in the future, especially if neural link takes off like I think it will, then companies will start just uploading software onto it, downloading software onto it. So that way you can connect to it. Like it's going to be one of those things where like it's Alexa compatible. It's an early compatible. Right. Right. That makes sense, especially if there's widespread implementation of this and it turns out to be a real thing, it might be something that someone has to have like you have to have a wheelchair wrap at certain businesses. Yeah. Yeah. You test the phone. I'm sure he's just going to build all that into that. All the optimist robots are going to have it built in. Do you think he's going to make a Tesla phone? Yeah. He might. I think when he said that all they might ban Apple devices because they're going to use open AI. I was like, why is going on? Yeah. I get real nervous when someone way fucking smarter than me gets nervous. You know, when he's saying that if AI, basically what he's saying is I think to paraphrase, he's saying that Apple wasn't smart enough to create their own artificial intelligence, but they're smart enough to keep artificial intelligence from running rampant through their operating system. Like I don't think they are. Yeah. I don't trust it. I don't trust it. That's going to mean your head, bro. Yeah. Yeah. When they were all going to have to trust it, you know, if I had Scarlett your hand since voice in my head all the time, I don't think I would mind. It would be dreamy. It would be okay. It would be okay. Just get a dreamy voice. Well, listen, man, thank you very much for being here. Thanks for being you. And let's do this again sometime in the future. We can see what, you know, what improvements and how it's going. Hey, man, absolutely. As we move this thing along, then I'm more than happy to come back. All right. Yeah. Thank you very much. Do you have social media or anything where people can find out what you're up to? Yeah, I have an exa like at modded quad. I think it's called I have like an Instagram and stuff. And I'm getting other stuff up and running. I'm going to start like streaming more and stuff. So it'll be it'll be out there. You got a stream? Yeah. Yeah. I did once. I did like kind of like a test stream about to do another test stream probably this week at some point. Maybe the next few days, then the stream from like video games and stuff. That's great, man. I think people would love to see that and love to hear you talk about your experiences. Yeah. Yeah. It'll be cool. You got a great perspective, man. You really do. Thank you. Thank you very much. Pleasure to meet you. Yeah. You too. All right. All the best. Thank you very much. Goodbye, everybody.