Hello everybody. If you don't know who Rick O'Barry is, he is a legendary dolphin activist who's known for the documentary The Cove that won the Academy Award as well as every other award a documentary could possibly win. It's all about the dolphin trafficking and the dolphin slaughter that goes on in Tai Zhi Japan. He went down there to expose the secret slaughter that goes on every year in the billions of dollars that's made from it. We also get into his friend John Lillie and his NASA-funded research on non-human intelligence involving dolphins back in the day when he was working on flipper and all kinds of other crazy stuff. This episode's packed with gems and I know you guys are going to love it. So please hammer that subscribe button below the video if you haven't already. I enjoy the show. Alright Rick. Thank you so much for coming man. It's an honor to have you on here. I've been trying to get you on the show for years. I didn't know that. I would have showed up earlier. I didn't know you were in St. Pete. Last time I heard you were in Indonesia, then you were in Denmark, then you were eating you're still in the world. I am. You're in your early 80s. Is that right? 84. 84. Yeah. That's incredible that you're still moving around like that. Yeah. When I came here a year ago, I didn't expect to stay on the beach for a little while, but I've been in Portugal and Japan, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, chasing the whale up the coast of Beluga whale. I haven't been here very much actually. But you got a nice place here. Thanks. I appreciate seeing much of it yet. I almost not much to see except for this room in the room you were just in. But you said you were chasing a Beluga whale? A Beluga whale by the name of a wildeemier. Yeah. Escape from the Russian Navy. It's believed nobody knows for sure. But there are several people who work in Russia with the Russian dolphins that haven't worked with these Beluga whales who confirmed that he was a Russian spy whale. So we don't have any data, like a birth certificate. It's important because dolphins that are born in captivity are very different from dolphins that are born in the wild. They're completely different animal. Many of these dolphins right here, in fact, clear water probably and sea world and these places are around here. All over Europe and places especially northern Europe where the climate is cold. They suffer from the cold weather, I believe, because all of the dolphins, every one of them in Europe, for example, originally were captured in Florida near here, near Pine Island, Florida, or Cuba. So they are indeed subtropical creatures. They've never ever thinks about that. I think about what I'm standing outside the Hagenbeg Zoo in Humburg, Germany with a snow up to my knees. And it's winds blowing and it's freezing cold. And I'm out there protesting and don't know any things when they buy a ticket. They're going to go inside this building. You know, they're going to see dolphins that were captured in Florida there that shouldn't be here in the first place. So we try to expose all of these things, hoping that people will think twice before they buy a ticket for a dolphin show. That's what we do. So going back to that Russian spy whale. Yeah, that's weird. I'll go back there. I'm just waiting right now for the ice to melt because the ice on the roads, we have a home in Denmark and we'll put my wife, Halena, and I will put the car. What we do is put the car in the ferry boat. And we go to Sweden drive off and then we have people on the ground who know where a Valdemir is. And we're in touch with Evan, who will drive there and look, follow him all the way up the coast from Sweden to the Norway last time we were there. But now it's really frozen and dangerous to drive for me, especially because it's ice and snow and not used to it. So do you think they have him like retro fitted with some sort of like trans radio transmitters or some cameras and stuff? Yeah, he showed up with cameras, go pros. He's wearing a harness. Why? Can't this harness? Is there photos of this? Yeah, you can Google it in Valdemir and Valdemir the spy whale? So this is not live. Is it? No, it's not live. Okay. You can insert voice over. I'll tell you where those that footage is. Well, Steve, I'll send you some actually Steve. Actually, he's on the computer. He can actually Google stuff like as we're talking and he can pull it up and show it to us. So it's HVALD. I am my R. Valdemir. He was featured in the New York Times cover of the New York Times magazine about two weeks ago. It's a big four or five page story photograph. But images. There's the heart of Sarah. Wow. No way. He's very underweight here. You can't tell, but I can't write them. When on the lower left, he's clearly, yeah, he's in bad shape there. That's what he left the Arctic Circle and started traveling towards Sweden and Denmark. That's what I left here and got on the first plane and tried to interrupt him, turn him around because he will not find another beluga whale once he leaves the Arctic Circle and starts heading in that direction. He's going in the wrong direction. That's so sad, man. Yeah. And he is the friendliest of all the dolphins I've worked with and I've worked with a lot of dolphins and whales in the last before Flipper 60 something years. He is by far the friendliest and he just goes right up to people like if he could hug of them, he would. And my fear is he's going to be transferred to the an area in the north of Norway where there are about 300 hungry polar bears. And so that's all the bears will get them. I don't know. I mean, nobody knows. You would never be able to monitor him there, but this whale swam into the largest whale nation on planet earth. Right. Right. So the government, what we've been trying to do the dolphin project, at least we've been trying to get the government to step up and take responsibility to actually make him a citizen and let him and assign a cadre of five or six could be coast guard or forest ragers or somebody to be there with him. And there are some civilians to see that photograph. They're doing that, but the government should do that. The government just wants to get rid of him. He's the embarrassment. Really? Yeah. If they protect him, well, how about the other whales you're killing? You're killing more whales than anybody on the planet. Russia? No, this is this is Norway. Oh, Norway. Okay. Russia did. They stopped, but now it's Norway, Iceland, Japan. So Norway's killing more whales than Japan. Yeah. Wow. Since when? Yeah. The last year or two, that's crazy. Norway is like now become the largest, the numbers. How many whales they kill? That's based on how many they kill. So he swam into, you know, and I I'd like for him to stay right there and bring as much media attention as he can to the fact that Norway is killing whales unnecessarily. They don't have to do this. So there are fish farms. That's what these guys here, you're looking at on this photograph work at the fish farm. These are salmon farms. Norway is a very, very rich country and they make their money on oil at salmon. Almost all salmon you eat now worldwide is from Norway. And if you're a don't eat it, it's if you knew if you well, it was exposed on sea spheracy. There's a movie on death, Alex. Everybody should see if you are still eating salmon. Go to death, Alex and look at sea spheracy. Why what's wrong with the salmon? It's disgusting. It's just I don't want to people are eating what they're watching this show. That's okay. It doesn't matter. We can make them throw up. It is disgusting. They only are what you they shovel in there too. So like you mean like they're raised on farms, right? They're farms. They're fed in these very large circular sea pads that are used. They call that the form. Yeah, it's disgusting. It's dangerous. Don't eat it. Where do you have to eat salmon? Look for salmon from sometimes you can find it at Whole Foods. It's from Alaska. While caught from Alaska, doesn't have mercury and all the problems that you find in Alaska and the other salmon. Even the color of this beautiful salmon color when you go to the sushi place, that's fake. If you saw the color, but you wouldn't be buying it in the first place. Gray is actually gray. It's that color. Is that color? Really? Yeah. Because of what they feed it. They feed a garbage. Wow. And so people dress it up in these sushi market. It looks wonderful, but it's all fake. So for people that don't know, you have one of the most famous and legendary documentaries that have come out in the last couple decades is the cove, which won an Academy Award, one of us, ungodly amount of awards, one every single award. One of the most famous wildlife documentaries that has ever been known when they were making that documentary. Is this something you were a part of from the start or did these guys just sort of discover you and decide to make a documentary about you? Well, there's those guys. It's like everything else like this podcast. This is your baby. So there's somebody there who that would be Louis that was his project. And how it started, he was a phone call from San Diego. I was in Coconut Grove. He calls and introduced himself and said, I just saw your, I didn't make the cove, by the way. Right. I'm not a filmmaker, but I didn't make a short film video with Diane Theder, who is a, what would you call her? She's an artist, a video artist. And she's a photographer video artist. Okay. That works. I don't know. It's different than what you do in documentaries. Okay. They show, I don't know, but she did a proper doc. And it's not something you would put on television because it's so graphic. It's really meant for a journalist. If a journalist calls me and says, what's this all about? I can show them. I can't explain it. It's so over the top. What happens at the cove in Taiji? If I had to explain it to you, I wouldn't be able to. Well, you've seen this. So you know, right. But if I show you something, you know, you might get interested and get involved. There's no words. So we made this one. And Louis Sohoyas was in San Diego. And a marine mammal conference. I was scheduled as the keynote speaker. And I was going to show my 15 minute film at the last minute. Sea world said we're scrapping that. Oh, Barry can't speak. And that peaked. Louis curiosity. Why can't he speak? Because he's speaking about dolphins in captivity. Dolphins being captured at the cove in Taiji, the capture of the dolphins and the sale of those dolphins is indeed the economic underpinning of the slaughter. It's not about meat. It's about live dolphins for dolphin shows. So Louis said, so he said, can I saw that? I saw that video you made all the Sea World Moon show it. Somebody showed it to me. And I'm wondering if I could follow you around with my camera. So what what what is you're doing? He said, we're doing a up at your phone. That line. Yeah, I should have shut that off. That's okay. You can answer it. Yeah, it's a good question. It's like in the real. Yeah, no worries. Hello. Yeah, I should one second to make the premises. Can you repeat that, please? I I'm doing the interview right now. And daddy's here in front of me. And he and the photographer can hear what's up Lincoln. Repeat said the city of Miami, Dave just terminated. Are you rolling? Well, that's wonderful. They they terminated the lease for who? It might be secret. It's over. We won. We won. Wow. That's amazing. Yeah, I'm going to hold you the up to the microphone. Repeat that one more time, please. The Miami game County's office just issued a letter of nation for the lease. Miami, Sequari, April 22 April 21st to vacate the premises. What a beautiful thing. I've been trying to do this is 1970. Really day. It happened on your show. Live. Okay. Look at the thanks. I got to get back to work. Thanks, Lincoln. Look at that. One of the chances that you just got the news of right now. That's amazing. You guys have been trying to do that since the 70s since 1970 when when Hugo and the low leader arrived at the Miami Sequari. I quit. I went out and for the secret. I was the head trader. Get a little closer. I lived there at the Sequari in the house. That was the flipper set. Right. And I, um, it would, the orc is arrived. And I left the Miami Sequari now I'm standing outside the gate, not allowed inside. Even though I had the keys to the place of my pockets, though, because I lived there. And, uh, and I'm starting to protesting and standing out from the Sequari, with the sign. I don't know what it said. Cars going by honk if you're, and nobody would honk, of course. People were going like this and people were laughing at me. Even people in the edible welfare industry, these big groups I was trying to get them come and join us. Um, they would laugh at me. Really? What are you talking about? Dolphin captivity? That's not an issue. That's not a real issue. And they were laughing today. It's a mainstream issue. And all those big groups who would not get involved. I'll now have sort of taken over this issue. So, so going back real quick, I want to get, I want to get to them. Um, I want to jump back to the early days of flipping everything after after we get finished, what we're talking about with the, uh, when you first went to San Diego to do the conference and see world ban you from the conference. I didn't go to the conference. I wasn't, I went to the lab. They were showing the film. And Louis was there. I know I'm not going to be allowed to get into SeaWorld to them. And why would every gay, if you talk to any SeaWorld trainer I talked to one yesterday, would you go to buy a ticket? All of those ticket booths have my photograph there. If I show up, they have, uh, instructions to call the police at that's not only the SeaWorld, that's the aquarium, marine land, all of these places. So I wasn't there, but the film is going to be shown finally. And, uh, but it didn't. So Louis said, can I go with you? And I'll, I'll fill it. That's what what is it you're doing? We're doing a television series like the old Jacques Cousteau series. Do you remember that? Yes. He's asking me that. I said, sure, I remember everybody. Well, we want to feature you in the first episode. I said, well, I'm here. Bring the cameras. You were here, meaning Taiji. Yeah. Okay. I'm going to the next day. I said, I'll be there tomorrow. I'm going right now. And how often did you go there? I'm going up to this five or six times a year. When did you start going there? Uh, 2003, I believe. Okay. And, uh, so Louis, I said, he said, can I photograph you? I said, sure. He hung up the telephone and went out and took a three day crash course on how to make a movie. He never made a movie. And he's telling this story where in Paris, he and I and Luke Basson, the French film maker, he was a distributor for the COVID. So the three of us are sitting at the press conference and Louis telling this story. He said, so I told Rick, I'll meet him in Taiji and I hung up the phone and went out and took a three day course on how to make a movie. Here's a guy who never made a movie before. His first movie would be a cat in the morning and every award that, and, um, Jesus. So I like telling filmmakers, I told my son this story. And I, I, I, I was just in, in, uh, Portugal recently at a film school telling all of the students trying to encourage them to go out and do what Louis did. Anybody can do it. And everybody should do it. Uh, so Lincoln did that. Anyone out made a three part television series Discovery show. Blood dolphin. Blood dolphins. Now he's doing a feature film for, uh, dog, what if I think it's called dog wolf dog wolf? They did, they do documentaries. Okay. Oh, it's a company. I can't go. Yeah. And London, they did, um, the documentary that won the Academy Award this year, it's called the, the Valni, the Voni. Yeah. That's their film. Right. It's a profile based out. They're doing another profile. He said, what we're doing. So that's exciting. That's amazing. Yeah. Lincoln couldn't win an Academy Award. So you guys met up. This is not in the shot. Is it? No, no. No. And, uh, they, you said, I'm going to Taiji the next day. They said, we'll meet you there. And so he shows up. Got a little, a little camera, um, by himself. And, uh, we're at a restaurant. I took a few of a restaurant that night. Japanese restaurant and he leans across the table. He says, so what, what's this movie about? This is so encouraging because I have been doing interviews literally since before flipper hundreds of minutes. I, I wrote a couple of books in my writing partner. Uh, it was a journalist for so many years, 30 years. And he told me one time, journalists aren't looking for the truth. They're looking for a story. That stuck with me because that's what I experienced all of these years. I put that together. They're looking for a story. Right. And usually they know what that story is before they even interview me. And here's a guy once in a while, you'll get a investigative journalist who has a blank mind and they're going to document what it is. Yes. So that's why I was excited. Right. You have already made up your mind what this is. Just follow me around. You'll see. Right. It is what it is. Right. And that's how the code was made. What was the response from the people in because I mean, watching that documentary, it is quite literally astonishing how many people are aware of you who are tailing you every day, getting in your face, trying to intimidate you like it's a very, very high level operation. Those fishermen have going there and you are the bane of their existence. Um, I can't imagine the reaction you got after this documentary, not only drop, but one in Academy award. What was the reaction from those guys and from the home, not just Taiji, but Japan. Anger. They don't want to be exposed like that. And they know they know that it's all true. So they have to do damage control now and pretend that we're making all those and stuff up. And anger, anger is what they just made them angry or that's all. How long after the film came out and won the Academy award? Did you go back to Taiji or did you go back? I never actually left. I was there almost all the time. It goes on six months a year when it starts, it doesn't stop for six months every day. Right. So I'm September to March. Yeah, I'm constantly going back and forth. And I was doing a lot of hiding in those days from because they're angry fishermen. And they're not the real threat though. The real threat is the the achooza want to be the young guy who wants to be the achooza is very involved in fisheries in Japan. And these live golf and sales and anywhere there's money to the achooza is in that neighborhood. From people listening who don't know, can you explain what the achooza is? The achooza is a Japanese mafia. They're everywhere. ubiquitous in Japan. They are in government. They run the government. They were everywhere. And so the guy I'm afraid of is the young guy who's had too much to drink, makes a bad decision and something happens. And that happens in Japan. You know, not so much with guns, with knives, you know, it's a guns or outlaw. But you have to constantly look over your shoulder. Guns are outlaw there. I think they're outlawing bad. You know, you find guns like you do here. That's a good thing to because they get very angry when you expose them like that. It's something you just don't do in Japan. Yeah, Japanese people would never do that to one another. Their culture is very, very different. And you don't take sides with Westerners. So it's a very, very difficult, very difficult campaign that we've been on since 2003. And we're still on it. And we're not, we're not having any results. So we've tried something new, sued the bastards. We've had very good success with suing them. I've been arrested twice on false charges and deported it went to prison. They took, I took him to court. It sued them. Who specifically the government of the Japanese government? Yeah. And I won. That's never happened before. When I was in Japan in September, Lincoln and I were there filming. We went to the lawyer's office. This law firm and he said, this is congratulations. This is the first case ever in Japanese history where somebody was deported sued the government with all the way to the Supreme Court in so I'm back whenever I want to go back. That makes them just angry here. So our strategy now is to sue them. C Shepherd was there also another environmental group. Right. The couple of other guys got arrested. They also sued using the same law firm. Japanese law firm. They won. So we have a a good track record with this law firm and the Supreme Court, the higher courts are much more fair than the lower courts. So we're going to keep the lawsuit going and yeah, that's our new strategy. Have you ever sat down with one of these fishermen and had us to direct face-to-face conversation? I've had many. I've got it to do it. Like a cordial conversation? Yeah. And recorded it. I would sometimes record them with a button camera or something like that. And yeah, we've done that. And what about that? What is it you want to know about that? What came out of that? What was your schedule? There's a hug. I bet there's any of them. There's two thousand. All of them together. The thing I've taken away from it is that they admitted they will stop. If it's illegal, as long as it's legal, we're going to do this. You killed cows. We kill these. You know, beef looks at it. Put it on a table, cut it up. You can't even tell the difference. So of course, they're right about that. This episode of the podcast is brought to you by Rome. If you're a fan of this podcast, you're already aware that I am one of the most stylish best dressed people in the world. Not really, but when I do have to go to a fancy event, a dinner party or even one of those fancy golf courses that makes you wear slacks on a collared shirt, my go to is Rome. And it's because they fit the best. They're the most flexible and they don't shrink a wrinkle. Rome's commuter collection is the most breathable, comfortable and versatile set of clothing products known to man. Rome has clothing pieces for everyone and for every occasion, whether you're one of those guys who likes to wear skinny pants on the tee box, or you like to wear a pink polo or a blazer, no matter what it is or what you're doing. They have a clothing piece for you that can be worn individually or mixed and matched with other round products. And their signature faraway stretch fabric is breathable, flexible. I'm going to work anywhere from your commute to the office to the 19th hole. This clothing is high tech. The commuter collection not only features their wrinkle release technology that has 100% machine washable. It's also treated with gold, fusion, anti odor technology so you can get more wares between washes and stay fresh all day long. And if you're like me, you probably don't have tons of extra time to go to the mall, try on tons of clothes just to bring them home and have them not fit anymore. And on top of that, all my other clothes are always wrinkled, not with Rome. So if you want to support this podcast, check out Rome today. It's roan.com slash Danny and you can get 20% off your entire order. It's spelled r H O N E dot com slash d A and N Y for 20% off. It's linked below. Now back to the show. And it's the way they kill them, the way they're doing this. And other impropriety's, illegalities are being recorded. So when you, and we live stream, when we're there, we're live streaming, everything we have grows or small drones. And we're looking for, we're looking. are being recorded. So when you, and we live stream, when we're there, we're live streaming everything. We have drones or small drones and we're looking for, we're looking for illegalities and we funnel all of that to the law firm in our next assault will be illegal law in the courts. There's so many questions regarding the ethics of what it is. And compared like in the documentary, they're always coming up with different arguments to back up what they're doing slaughtering these dolphins. And one of them was it's pest control because they're eating too much fish. Another one was, you know, like what you said earlier, you guys slaughter cows or there's a guy in in people in Australia, they slaughter kangaroos. So why can't we slaughter our own dolphins? And yeah, they're right too. Excuse me, is there any sort of legal loophole there that you can get around or that you can sort of lobby for to. No, ethics, no, ethics. No, it has to be something. There's nothing based on like the intelligence of an animal whether you can kill or not. Well, go to court and fight that for years and two sides are debating what intelligence is. What is intelligence? Right. Right. No, you will never shut it down based on intelligence. They will argue about that. And intelligence, some anthropologists might tell you is the ability to adapt to your environment and survive. That would make a kakaroos more intelligence than us. They could survive and nuclear Holocaust. That needed. Well, what is it? And so you go down that road. Now, it's got to be something breaking the laws of Japan, you know, very black and white. And I can't we have a lot of evidence of that. And we're building more. I can't tell you publicly what that is because it's tipping off the who are getting on watch your broadcast. They monitor me all the time as those the captivity industry who should be fighting this battle, not me. That's their industry that they are not policing. Right. Or the animal welfare industry since the captivity industry is not going to do it. That's a multi billion dollar industry that could end that dolphin slaughter anytime they want to. Now, in 2009, I think you said that the industry was responsible for like $2 billion in revenue a year for captive dolphins. That industry, sea world alone makes a billion and a half a year still to just that just one company. You're not talking about the industry, the alliance of marine parks that equates all over the world. It's massive. Yeah, they could end to whatever they want to. They don't want to. They don't want to get it, but they only get involved in things that make money, not not negative cash flow, positive cash flow. But these guys, people like these groups in Tai Chi, Japan who are rounding up the dolphin and capturing them and selling them for 100 grand a pop. They're having their been offers that you guys have made to basically subsidize what they're making. Like, hey, we'll figure out a way to reimburse you for all the money you're losing for selling these dolphins. And that would be a fair compromise. And they basically said no. We've had meetings with the mayor, the city council, the police, the coast guard, all of them at a table like this, a huge table in the city hall of my wife, Helena and I, long before the film, the code was made and anybody cared about this issue. We're in there asking them if they would agree to take a year off, we'll pay that 13 boats that were hunting dolphins. We will pay, they didn't have any money, could be pay for lunch. But I'm bluffing sometimes it works. I'll find the money later. So we told them we would, we'll pay, we'll, we'll subsidize the boats. These guys stayed up for one year and don't hunt any dolphins continue doing what ever else you do, but leave the dolphins. We'll give you the same amount of money. And that was translated around the room and then it comes around again. The answer was it's not about money. It's about pest control. In other words, the dolphins are eating too much fish. Right. And so let's kill the all the dolphins. Yeah. That was the, that was the answer. Whether it's true or not. I don't know. It's just one person at that table, two sets they're putting in. But they didn't go for the subsidized thing. No. Yeah. It seems like that's just, it's an excuse for something else. Whether it be like that, the fishing has been their lives for so long. It's a lifestyle for them. It's a culture for them. Maybe it's not, it's not called the meat. No, it's not cultural. That's one of the, they say that over and over again. And it's some warped away. It's become the truth. The truth is, it's never been, ever been their culture. Commercial factory whaling has never been their culture. You can see the boats. They still have these antique canoes where the whole tribe would go out and, and they will hunt one whale and bring it into Taiji and they would live off that whale for a long time. They never hunted dolphins for dolphin shows. All of that is a lie. Yeah. So they make up, but you have to understand what I say they I'm talking about a very small minority of men and get a very remote village in Taiji. There's a hundred audience pay attention. There's 127 million people in Japan who don't harm, harm dolphins. Right. And they don't even know about this stuff. No, not really. They're, it's a small island, actually relative to California. It's the same as this, it's about the same size actually. It's California, but it's got, uh, 127 million people all crammed together, living there. And, uh, and they do it pretty well actually. But those people don't really eat whale meat anymore. The, the, the younger people kind of laugh at it. It's a much older people. People my age, I'm 84. They would continue eating whale meat because that's what they grew up on during the second world after the war. All of the cattle had been bombed. There wasn't any protein that they were eating. It was General MacArthur who told them go out and kill whales. Really? The Americans gave them the ships. They still have to go out and hunt whales because we bombed all the cattle and they were starving. And so they did. There's no need to do that today. There's plenty of, you go into the supermarket in Taiji, Katsuura in these places, plenty of food. They're doing it, to sell to dolphin shows not even about meat. That's the day live. Right. If they had to depend only on the meat, they would have gone out of meat. It was just a distraction 20 years ago or something like that. Are they still funneling all that meat into the school system? No, that ended. That ended. I'm exposing you sometimes exposing us. You know, the way to go. So we keep doing that. We keep doing that. They try to keep from getting arrested on false charges. And yeah, that was bizarre. Some of the stories about the history of mercury poisoning in Japan, like from the Chisholf factory and children being born deaf and blind and from the pregnant mothers being exposed to this mercury. And I think even in the documentary, you guys like took a hair sample from one of the Japanese guys and you found out his the mercury level in his body was like 200 times the acceptable level or something like that. Yeah, it's a big problem. Yeah. You guys are going back there still every year, right? Yeah, we do not as much where we're we're we're trying to get our Japanese colleagues to be the face of it and step up. No, you guys, right. Yeah. And replace so we can step down. It's really, it's up to the Japanese people to do this. Our work is about facilitate that helping them do that. How many operations around the world do you think are similar to what's going on in Taiji with this, like as far as like using those big metal rods to round up the dolphin with the sound wall and then bring him into the cove and slaughter him like that. Solomon Islands in Indonesia. No, that's a, oh, it didn't do Dijia. There are a few places that that happens. Isn't the Solomon Islands near Indonesia? No, okay. They're all Australia. Oh, it's Australia. Yeah, Lincoln's got a place there. We had one of our board members, Dr. Sarah Meltsov live with that tribe for many years. Still goes there. That is really traditional. They've been doing that for hundreds of years. Really. Yeah. The same way it's been done Taiji. Go into Taiji. So only been going on since the 50s. They lie about that when they say we, so our tradition our culture, it is not their culture. It's not their tradition. It is in the Solomon Islands, but not in Taiji. Yeah, hunting whales in a canoe that is traditional. They don't do that anymore. They just lie about what they do covered up. So how do you approach the people in Indonesia that have been doing this for a very long time? In Indonesia, I don't approach them at all. We don't do, we don't, we have our colleagues who are in Indonesian deal with that. Westerners going into places and telling people what to do. It's found a long idea. We're like, yeah, we don't have a good track record. So it's not like we said at the right hand side of God and we have to, you know, well, we think we do sometimes. I don't know. I sympathize with the, we try to, we try to get the Japanese people to take ownership of this. Right. That's what it's about. It's hard for them to do that because you don't take sides with their, you don't take sides with Westerners. You don't do that. You don't criticize the government. That's something you just don't do in Japanese culture. If you you get arrested and I was told, I have friends in Japan who I've known for 40, 50 years. That's how long I've been involved in the, the Japanese thing. And they told me early on, if I get arrested, they are breaking all contact with me. And that's what they do. If you get arrested, even if it's for the right reason. And by the way, I have been arrested many times, how many I couldn't count it. But every time is by my design, right, every time, except when I was never an accident. Well, in Japan, it was a little bit. I mean, I, I, I, I was my my design. They arrested me. I'm false charges. I had no control over really. But I took them to court in one. So they don't do that anymore. What was the false? What was the false charge? Uh, let's see. Well, the first one to play by was arrested. I had just arrived in Taiji. I was jet lag. I arrived in Tokyo, got on the train. And by the time you get to Taiji, you're exhausted. And I got to Taiji got off the train, walked to a restaurant. And it was opening day of the dolphin hunt September 1st. So a lot of Japanese journalists are there. These journalists are all, we call them the mayor's pet journalists. He brings them in to write the story he wants written. And so they plotted against me, propaganda. Well, they, yeah, they told, they saw me drinking a beer in the restaurant. I had a half a glass of energy. I don't really drink, but I had a half a glass. And then I left the gun in the car and I was driving to the hotel, which is like five minutes away, get almost through a rock to it. Couple of cop cars were parked waiting for me. They pulled me over, gave me a breath of eyeser test. And I passed. Now there's dozens of people and all the photographers, all of the, the media Japanese media were there. They're the ones who called the police on me. But it's a very serious crime in Japan, drinking and driving. They don't, they do not tolerate it. One strike and you are out. Oh, wow. And so I passed the test on five. And they said, let's see your driver's license. No, my passport, I couldn't find my passport. I said, it's in the hotel. We're parked in the parking lot of the hotel. I said, I'll go up there and get it for you. Right. No, you're under arrest for not carrying your passport. And so I went to jail that night. And they found my passport. It was actually a Gulf Department of the car. I was in the head of let me go. That was the first arrest. The second one was I was going through September 1st again, seasons just starting. And whenever I go through immigration, as soon as they put my passport in the computer, the red light goes off of the bells and every time. Yeah. And people behind me are getting out of the language. It happens every time. And they take me to the back room, which I'm very familiar with. And I lay down on the bench and usually try to sleep because I'd be up for hours doing this. They tie you. Oh, yeah. They want me to miss my baggage and all that stuff. Right. Right. So you just get comfortable because you're used to it. Yeah, I usually fall asleep. And they always let me go this time. They did. It's time they put me in a cell down in the basement with several other people trying to get into the country. Wow, a fishing commute, a small group of fish Tokyo. This is in Tokyo. This still, this all stems from the small fishing village. It goes so far up the chain. Yeah. Yeah. So they really care about this in Japan. Like it's up in the higher levels of the government. If we can shut this down, they're thinking this little thing, this little coat, we could probably shut down well. Maybe that's what they're thinking. I don't know what they're thinking for all the same reasons. I don't know what you're thinking. But I, I assume that's what they're why they're so spending so much money and time and energy on making sure that they can continue doing this. And they're winning so far to take money to stop it. You cannot. This is a war. This is a full blown war. Yeah. You cannot fight a war without ammunition. But I've been doing that. The dolphin project has been doing that since 2003. If I had a fraction, a little, that the cost to make the makov movie, I could end this thing. If I had a fraction of the money that comes in, you go to the 10 top. Well, go ahead. Sorry. No, no, I was going to say, you said fracture of the money. How like how if you, if you like what we're doing, we're hiring lawyers, right? I was looking for illegalities, taking out full page advertisement and educational material in magazines, billboards. There's a lot of things you can do if you have money. I never had that. I wasn't working for the dolphin project because I had to leave and go get a paying job somewhere. I went to work for Earth Island Institute, the environmental group. And I ended up resigning because they were totally ineffective. And like most of these big groups, what they're looking for is issues like this that they can attach themselves to and escort donations. And those donations, you could see them. If you go to the 10 top groups, edible welfare groups, they have to publish their taxes. We've published ours. Right. The first, the biggest one, they have $300 million sitting in a thing called reserve. In other words, they have enough money to do everything they're doing, plus their retirement. But they just have this extra. And there's 10 or 20 groups like this. There's hundreds of millions of, they have 300 million in reserve. Why am I there doing this? When they could be doing it? Right. I don't have the money to fight this war. We didn't even have a budget. I had a credit card from Earth Island. I could buy airplane tickets and food and hotels, but no money to fight the fucking war. Right. I resigned. And I know they have it. I can look at, you can see their tax $30 million or something. So I've got become very disgusted and disillusioned with the animal welfare industry and the environmental industry, all these big groups. I realized if we cannot fix that problem, that cove is in much bigger than the orange ball, than a football field. If we can't fix that, what, what, and they're working on these big projects to save the world to save the ocean, if you can't fix that, how are you going to fix the biggest things? And they can't fix it because they don't even try. So it, it, it, it's very depressing and it will lead you to a place that you don't want to go. And that's where I have been on this dolphin trail having to fight this war with no ammunition realizing. I mean, this is there. You just, it's kind of like in Gaza. The food is sitting right outside the gate, but they will let the food in. It's one of those. There's money to fix that problem. It's not that big, but nobody works on it. Nobody does anything about it, except selling this petition and send us money. That's the problem. We don't have the money to fight this war. And the people who have it are out looking for other opportunities. They're not actually spending the money on the war. Everybody is missing an action. So I've never said these things. I've stayed away from these podcasts and stuff like that. But I think this will be in Lincoln's movie, the truth about what is going on. Who are the biggest customers for the Japanese fishermen in Taiji? Who countries what organizations are still going there? Atlantis. You know, Atlantis and Thomas? Well, they have what to do by this even bigger than that. And they have, yeah, they have, when they opened up, they had sold over these ploated from all over the world. Everybody who was, and those dolphins came from Kaiji. So what's going on here? I thought we were all against this. What about sea world? Or they came from those came from this from Solomon Islands, same thing, another drive. So they know what they so so sea world is still purchasing dolphins from the Solomon Islands. They're not coming into the United States, or we stopped that. No, they're not they're having to do with captive breeding. So they have, this is true in Europe. Also, most of the captive dolphins are actually, thanks, Steve, forgive me a geography lesson. But it's close to Indo kind of. Same part of the world. Yeah, this is the largest Indonesia, largest archipelago of the islands in the world. And that's where Lincoln lives now. Yeah, we have a sanctuary there. That's the only one in the world. Yeah, how do you confiscate a dolphin? What is the process of confiscating a dolphin? Indonesia, it's very different than it is in America in Europe. In America, Europe, you have the, well, in America, we have the National Marine Fisheries Service. They're in charge of all things dolphin whale. You need their permission to do whatever you're doing. And in Indonesia, it's the forest department. The forest department is in charge. They own literally owned all wildlife. So they can march in and take them away if they want to. You can't do that. It's sea world. That's somebody's property. You'll get sued any more than they come in here and take your camera away. So it's your property. But in Indonesia, it's very different. That's why we're having success over there. The minister is also the minister of fisheries, she's the minister of fisheries and forest department. So we also rescue turtles and monkeys and between all the other stuff we're doing. So when they confiscate something, they give them to us, they call us and ask us to help them. And we have to pay for it. They have to do money, no budget. Right. Now if there's a dolphin in captivity, how do you reaclimate it or reconnect it back to the environment? Is it that is that process always successful? No, it's a, I've written protocol and I'll send it to you so you can put it on your thing and people can read it. Okay. Several pages along. We're still writing it after 30 years because we're still learning how to do this. This is pioneer work. And we don't have all the answers. And you only learned from your mistakes, not from your successes. So we've learned a lot because we've had mistakes also in the last 40, 50 years. What was your original question? I was basically like asking, is it always, does it fail sometimes? What happens if you have a dolphin who's been in captivity for 10 years and you, you, you, you rescue it, you bring it to your seepan and try to try to reaclimate it to the wild. Free willies. A good example. Yes. Kiko. That was a brilliant rescue. They rescued Kiko from a swimming pool in Mexico. This particular animal should never have been put in a sub tropical climate like that. Same as true with the orcas that sea world and the Miami Sea Cori, these places either cold water animals. They don't care about that. They get a tropical animals. They dolphin research centered down the Florida disease, captured dolphins in Pine Island, Florida sent them to fennel and where it's freezing cold and to Canary Islands. It's tropical at least. But, you know, sending them to, so, so, so here was a, an orca by the name of Kiko. They're swimming pool in Mexico. And I was working for Earth Island Institute at the time. They rescued Kiko from the swimming pool. Built a tank on the west coast and got rid of the papaloma virus that you see on his skin. And then moved him from there to Iceland, where he came from to a fjord. I think they had about $20 million to work with. Wow. Yeah, $20, one or two million dollars. A lot of money for one animal to be released. But, yeah, why so much money? What do you spend $20 million on? Salaries, six figure salaries. Yeah, right. Exactly. So, would I wish to do almost problem in LA when we when we do this rescue work, we try to make sure I, and I've done this in Guatemala. Same thing they did here in Guatemala, Nicaragua, Colombia, Brazil, Haiti, South Korea, in Indonesia. And I always try to keep it down to $30,000, trying to prove it is more cost effective to rehabilitate them and let them go than to keep them and warehouse them for the rest of the life. But when you hire these guys from SeaWorld, for example, the last two golfers they released in Turkey for the board free foundation, that cost almost a million dollars for $2.00. Jesus. Sometimes when we do it, it doesn't cut. The first ones we did cost $600. From the mesh to island on Kebas gain, we flew them to the Bahamas to exactly 25.05 north, 76.40 west. There was a group of dolphins we could see from the Chok Seaplane, and we landed on the water and let them go there. That cost us, that cost us $600, not $200 million or not $800,000. You just landed the seaplane right on a school of dolphins and you let them free right there. Well, not on top of them. But, yeah, right. Right. Yeah. But does that work? Does the dolphins let them in? It's not immediately. And they may not. So there are some unknowns. They can be accepted. Sometimes they don't want to be like Valdenbeer. There are many dolphins that are they call friendlies. This episode of the podcast is brought to you by Bubs. Bubs Natural is a badass company that has collagen, peptides, it has coffee creamer has coffee, electrolytes. And they are amazing because they are a tribute company to a Navy SEAL and former CIA contractor Glenn Bubs' doorty who died defending American freedom in Benghazi, Libya. Again, there is obviously no shortage of collagen products available on the internet. But I support Bubs because it is not only a superior product, but they support American veterans by donating 10% of all their proceeds to veteran organizations and 100% of their proceeds on veteran's day. Bubs, collagen, peptide, packets are easy to use as a daily supplement. I keep them in my truck and I drink them on the way to the gym. It's flavorless, easy to mix nature. It makes it easy to mix into anything. I prefer mixing it in coffee. You may not know. But after the age of 25, your natural production of collagen starts to fade, which can severely impact your skin. An interesting thing about collagen is more you supplement with it, the more your natural production increases. Since I started using it a few months ago, I've already noticed a huge improvement in my joint connective tissues, my skin elasticity and the overall quality of my hair, believe it or not. You can support Bubs and this podcast by visiting BubsNaturals.com and using the code DJP at checkout for 20% off your first order. Again, that's BubsNaturals.com and use the promo code DJP at checkout for 20% off. It's linked below. Now back to the show. They chose to be alone. They're comfortable being alone. I'm kind of like that myself, actually. So I can relate. Yeah, what were we talking about? Talking about the money it costs to treat these animals back into the wild. Yeah, it depends on who you hire to do it. If you hire a bunch of the sea world people, they'll stretch it out. talking about talking about the money it cost to trade these animals back into the wild. Yeah, it depends on who you hire to do it. If you hire a bunch of the sea world people, they'll stretch it out as long as they can and make as much money. So that's what happened after several years trying to free willy this $40 million ran out and they all left. Where did they go? They went to Panama. Now you would think the dolphin trainers who worked on the free willy project would be so proud of this planet. And they know now that captivity is wrong. These are all orchestrators from sea world, right? They have left the industry and now they've got this project to free willy under their belt and you think they would be the new guys who take over this captivity issue and run with it. But instead they ran to Panama, they bought more land than sea world has in Orlando and they were going to outdo sea world by building a new one in Panama. They applied for a permit to capture, I don't know, 20 dolphins, something like that. As soon as we heard about it, we went there and organized protests and these were huge protests. The pan medias were outraged. You're trying to capture our dolphins on you guys from free willy. And the protests were very successful and they we actually ran them out of town. Where did they go? These trainers from free willy. Yeah. They went to the Solomon Islands, started trafficking dolphins from Solomon Islands to Mexico to Singapore to the Philippines and other places. People don't know these things. They only know what, you know, I start to question about history. I see how history is rewritten all the time. And I start to question what to real and what isn't. Right. I know what you mean. So, Keko, why is there finally? Finally, it was very obvious at some point if you ever worked with a orca in captivity. And I did. And so did these guys. If you've ever done that, you know that Keko at some point after the 20 million that was gone and they were gone that this animal is not a candidate to be released. But since they were all gone, now the money's gone. Now, we're going to pay her all except HSUS and in the Earth Island Institute. That's basically two people. Two people are making the decision and their decision is freedom at all costs. Although he's not a candidate. That was watching this. It was more about optics. He died. Right. And we will never know why he died. What kind of shape he was in because they buried him in a secret location as quickly as possible with no knee crops. When I heard they didn't do a knee crop. See, the captivity industry, they do that only because they don't want you to know why they died. Right. So, as they did this, I went right to the guy and I asked them, how come you didn't do it? De-cruptcy. See, they're spinning the story now and everybody who donated 20 million bucks and believing a bunch of bullsh**ing it. They can spend it anyway they want. Right. Why is the dorsal spent fin curved over like that? There are theories. Mine is that it has to do with gravity. In the wild, they will spend 80% of their time underwater where there is no gravity. The captivity, they're always looking for food, looking for a handout. Right. And gravity, I believe, has a lot to do with that. Okay. Yeah, that white stuff all over her skin. That was the papilloma. That's from being in a cold water animal in Mexico. Come on. Okay, go guys. Why did he die? They'll have some vet prostitute vet come out there and give you some f**king story. That's not true. And I get a trouble with all these people because I out them. What is your what is your theory or what do you believe about why a couple of those trainers were killed by the, uh, by the orcas, like dragged down and drowned by the orcas. Why do you think that that happened? Frustration. No question about it. One day I got a call from a guy. I forget his name. He was the president of the California Trial Lawyers Association. He's representing a C world trainer by the name of John Sillick, who was riding on the back of an orca on the surface of the water during a show. He's actually riding backwards. He's facing backwards on them. So you show me in the video. Another orca leaps up and deliberately lands right on it, breaking most of the bones of their body and really, oh my God. So this guy, flew me out to California and showed me this and it wouldn't be to be well, I was. There's video on it. Yeah, that's it right there. Play that. You see, he's facing backwards. Okay. I see. Does that not work? Steve? Oh, so he needs an eye witness video who actually trained orcas to say that because there are millions. So he could sue C world. No, they're good. It's a good deal. Okay. How much is right? 100 million bucks or what? Here's a dog. This is another lady. Her name was. So anyhow, let me go back to they're going to show the video this guy getting slammed. I think. Oh, wow. Oh, here he comes. He's riding on the dorsal fin going backwards. He deliberately did that. See, that's my lord. So this guy said, will you testify that in court? I said, yeah, I will if you agree to go to court because historically, this is not the first time. There are many of these. And they always settle out of court. Right. Right. It's kept quiet. And that's why this guy got hurt because the last lawyer didn't take it to court, didn't make it public kept quiet. Take it to trial. Don't take the settlement. And he said, I promise you, I'm not taking the settlement. We don't want to see this to happen. And he was lying to me. Of course, he took the settlement. He settled and for a lot of money, John Sullock bought a nightclub and said, yeah, this guy, yeah, he survived. But the next accident, there was another one, Donald Bradshaw after that because he didn't take it to court. Right. And there was a girl, there was a woman that right after before that. And she was in Vancouver and or could pull her the water and killed her. Kelty britters, her they, she would be alive today. If that guy didn't lie to me, it said, let's go to court. That's what they do. And C world pays them because they have they make up. What do they care about? 100, February 2024 in February 2010, Tilacom killed Don Bradshaw, Bradshaw, 40 year olds, C world trainer, Bradshaw was killed following a dying with shin, new world. The veteran trainer was rubbing Tilacom as part of the post show routine when the organ grabbed her by her pony, oh, by her ponytail and pulled her in the water. Whatever happened with Tilacom after that. Well, that's that's a lie right there that you're reading early stuff that is Wikipedia. It turns out that C world spotted it as her fault. She should never have the ponytail. We tell people don't do that. It's just been that's not true. Right. So what happened with Tilacom after that happened today? Did they decommission her? They put him in a, him isolation in a small tank. Tilacom died. Really tidy little tank. They punished him. How long did it take him to die? I don't know. I'd have to go back and reach that. Right. So, so now, what you were saying earlier is because they, where the US no longer imports whales or dolphins, right from anywhere around the world. And is it, oh, no, they could import, they could import them. They can't. I don't have the laws here in front of me. There's lots of different laws, but they can get them if they want them. They can't capture them. They just do it secretly, probably like it's frowned upon. So they just try to keep it out of the line line. They have, they have loopholes like breeding alone. It's a breeding alone, like like Canary Islands. All of the orc is there. There's, they're, they're actually owned by sea world. They're not owned by Canary Islands. So what is it called? Laura Park in Canary Islands. My wife goes there quite a bit monitoring those whales, but they're actually from sea world. They call it a breeding loan, but they never come back. So they get their stock, they get the sperm delivered every month, you know, they masturbate them, take the sperm and captive breeding. Now the thing is these animals at US about sea world or the one here was it called Clearwater Marine. Yeah, what do you want to read? It's really not supposed to have dolphins in captivity unless it's an educational experience. Right. So that's the loophole. They pretend this and it is an educational experience, but it is a negative educational experience. It's a form of bad education. So they just take advantage of the fact that our system, the way it's set up, the lobbyists lead and the politicians follow and they get whatever they want. They have cart blocks because the system doesn't work. You take the national marine fisheries and aphas, these agencies that are protecting every all dolphins are under their care. But who is above them? They're a branch of the department of commerce. Look at that word, commerce. Right. They don't protect them at all. That's not their job. Their job is to regulate. In other words, if you want to send dolphins to Europe, the cap here of them at Pine Island, they were rubber stamping them. 98.4% of all permits to capture dolphins and exploit them any way you want to was approved by the Commerce Department. Right. And all these agencies work. Well, the whole thing is about money and the agencies, the national, the government, how do they profit from it? It's a multi-billion dollar industry. They pay taxes just like you and me. Where does that money go? It goes through the government. The reason I learned about you was in, it was I think around 2009, 2010, I was working on that dolphin tail movie that was filmed at the Clearwater Marine Aquarium. And that's where I met Pete Sugareini, who is the underwater legendary, amazing underwater cinematographer who filmed all the parts of the Caribbean movies and he helped link in film The Blood Dolphin Show. He told me all about this story and linking, you know, I came to like understand that. That's when I first discovered like the polarization in this world. And you know, there's a lot of people like I think Jack Hannah is one of the people you debated about this on TV a long time ago. That say like if you take a place like the Clearwater Marine Aquarium who has people, dolphins like winter, who was caught up in a crab trap and the rope basically mangled or tail, the amputated tail, the kept her alive is, is there anything to say about aquariums like that that are keeping animals that are injured that need to be rehabilitated who would have died the other way or like if it would have been if it would have stayed in the law they would have died. Yeah. And what they're telling you about them rescuing that animal and doing whatever they did, they were absolutely correct. That's good work. They do that better than anybody else in the world because these are dolphin traffickers. They know how to transport them and move them around and have the veterinarians and people who are trained in marine mammal husbandry. And whenever I'm debating with them, maybe you've seen some of them, they bring that up immediately and say, this is what we do. That's not what they do. That's what they do 5% of the time and they do it better than anybody. And that's what Clearwater should be that a rescue center outdoors where the dolphins can experience the natural rhythms of the sea and the tide and the current see the sky. All of these elements are very important in the healing process. You can't do that inside of the building. The reason they're in the building and that's what I'm up to that set about spending $40 million for another tank in building. It's that of revolutionizing the concept. And by the way, that's what we're trying to do. We're not trying to abolish that industry. We're trying to revolutionize it and make the 5% the 95%. If we get about the 5%, which is just stupid dolphin tricks. Yeah, I guess the question is like, where does all the money go? Right, because they spent all that money to rebuild that aquarium and build those giant. They got rid of those round wastewater tanks and they built really big tanks for those things. And they obviously show tanks. Their show tanks for shows. And obviously the movie was a huge marketing tool for that aquarium. Really, they drew people from all over the world to come visit Clearwater to come see that aquarium and that didn't just benefit the aquarium that benefited the city of Clearwater. It benefited all the tourism around here, which, you know, a majority of the economy around here is based on tourism. So, you know, what's to say? That's that money can't go towards revolutionizing this and building more awareness towards these dolphins and their intelligence and helping and using that money to rescue more animals rehabilitate more animals, whether they can be released. Because I don't know. I think they do release some animals that they catch. They do work in that rescue and release. But they'll tell you themselves the ones that they want to keep. They do. Manatees, the manatees they have don't have scarred. They're looking for dolphins without scars and they'll go into their collection because they'll make sure this authorities understand they can't be released. I mean, so how how did the the whole flipper TV series come about? What were you doing? How old were you? Where were you living? And how are you approached to be a part of this flipper movie? Which eventually became a series? Well, my first kind of little scooting a little bit. My first encounter with that whole thing, I guess would be on Christmas Day 1955. I had just come home from a 14 day leave from the Navy. I just got through bootcamp. And when you get out of Navy bootcamp before you get shipped out to sea, you have a 14 day leave. So I was home on that 14 day leave. My ABC choreo just opened. I went there with my family. I mean, you reform. I'm standing there in front of this big glass window looking into this half a million gallon tank. And by the way, this was the third dolphin area in the world at this point in 1955. It was not a multi billion dollar industry. The only the third one in the world first one opened in St. Augustine, 1938. And then in Los Angeles, Palace Verdes, California, it opened in 1954 or something like that. So this one just opened. And I stood there at the window, the glass window looking in. And it was just a movie away. There were sharks. There were 500 pound Gruber, turtles the size of this table, slithering along the bottom. It'd be big giant saw fish slithering around more aeels. And now here comes a guy walking across the tank. Jumping over the rocks and stuff. It's got a canvas suit on spun cover miller done helmet and air flowing out of the helmet to the surface. And I can see that light coming through the water. And there's a hose going up to the surface. And the dolphins and everything is surrounding this guy who's passing out fish, everybody. And I thought, man, when I get out of the Navy, I'm going to come back here and get that guy's job five years later. I did. That's how I started. I applied for a job as a diver. I graduated from the Iber's training academy of the first class deep sea diver. Mm hmm. I was having been diving all over the Mediterranean. Yeah. What were you doing for the in an aeel? What kind of missions were you on? I was on an anti-submarine hunter killer group for the last two years out of destroyer in the Mediterranean. And we go to get Mo Bank for a gunnery practice every year. We go to Dorsey play war games with submarines. We'd be anchored in Monaco, for example, and have three submarines. We'd all swing on the same anchor. I wanted to continue diving. So when I got out of the Navy, I went to work for Arthur McKee, who was a treasure diver. He was the world's foremost treasure diver, a family friend. I did that for a couple of years. And it was the hardest work I ever did in my life. And I never failed to go to Mars that I fantasized. I was about to get married. I thought I was going to. And I told Captain McKee, I've got to get a real job. He took me to the sequarium to his friend, Captain Bill Gray, who was in charge of everything. He's the guy who started this whole industry actually. He hired me on the spot. And I'm doing that job that I explained to you, the feeding, the fish, and you get promoted as you, you know, spend your time there. I was promoted to doing this top deck show. I wasn't actually a dolphin trainer, but my pay grade and my job description was a dolphin trainer, although I never trained it often. Anybody could actually step out there at show time. The dolphins know three times a day, they're doing this routine. And you could put a mannequin out there passing out fish. And they would do this. So it looked like I was a dolphin trainer, but I really had never trained it often. I went there to be a diver. That's what I wanted to do. By the way, my first day on the job, I was assigned the diver's diving job on the capture boat. And we were capturing dolphins at that time every day for, I don't know, a few months for the world's fair in New York. For new dolphin areas, they were opening up in Europe. We were selling them. I remember loading a dolphin. You could buy a dolphin from the boat from the sea quarry, a boat for $300 or $350. If you wanted a particular sex size and sex, they called it. If you wanted a female six feet long, that was 350. 300 for just in the 50s. And I remember loading a dolphin into the station wagon of a guy who drove here to St. Pete Beach to give it to his girlfriend for her birthday. There were no laws protecting dolphins. And finally, there was a 1972 Marine Mammal Protection Act, which they could have called Marine Mammal Park Protection Act, because that's who they protect the corporations, not the animals. But wow, that just that reminds me, I don't know if you're aware of, there used to be a bar, a little shitty dive bar literally like two miles from here that should have been shut down for a year, probably 10 years now. It was called the Porpoise pub. It was a bar. And in the middle of the bar, in the middle, like it was a big circular bar in the middle, there was a big round fish tank, and they had dolphins in there. People would go and buy shots and drink beers and watch the dolphin some around in this little tank. I may have captured those dolphins. You could buy them then for 350, 350 bucks. But to answer your question, that's how I started. And then the flipper movie was made, the very first movie with Chuck Conner's and Luke Halpin. And it was very, very successful. Some scenes were shot at the sea quarry with sharks that I was involved in, shark wrangling, and all of that for that first movie. Then they came back and made a deal with the sea quarry to do a TV series. They had the green light to do a series. It's going to start off with a pilot feature, first called flippers, a new adventure. The deal was the sea quarry and would supply the dolphins and a trader. And we're going to be training underwater. It's never been done before. Historically, dolphins are training topside. You come in by a ticket, you sit down and they're doing tricks on the surface of the water. So this was all new. I was chosen as that diver, trader, trader. I was making $85 a week as a diver. And when I got promoted to trader, I was making $95. And this liver came along in a short period of time, I'm the highest-paid, admirable trader in the world. I'm buying a new Porsche every year. And Rico, the director, is a big one. Don't buy anything you can't pay for in 13 weeks. He had been down this road before, you know. So the sea quarry had to supply a golf and five dolphins actually. And we decided on females, they decided on females. I wasn't really in the decision-making role at that point. We'll get five. They decided because we don't know what we're doing. This has never been done before. We don't know how many we're going to need. And you capture them in Biscayne Bay. I had already captured them in Biscayne Bay when I was on the boat. So they were already on the grounds in holding tank somewhere on the grounds. We didn't have to go get them. We had them ready for whoever wanted to buy them. Or in this case, they were given to them. So that was the deal. They were going to, and I'm just thinking back here. What's your original question? Am I drifting too far? No, no, no, no. We're just going to like through the linear story of how the first show came about. Okay. So I was, there was a guy when I was doing the show, remembering these things. So I'm not giving you the chronology. Exactly. But when I was doing the show, and I was promoted to traitor and I'm all over the ground, you know, walking around. There was one guy working with a dolphin back there. That was Rico Browning. And I would go help him. Rico was the creature from the Black Lagoon. Right. The guy who directed most of the underwater for Sea Hunt, Balobur, the aqua nuts, all those 50 black and white shows. Right. And he became my best friend. He was a diver, stuntman, took me under his wing. He was my mentor. He wanted to be a director. At that point, he was just putting the show together. He was the creator of Flipper. He had written the book. He and his brother-in-law, Jack Houghton, called Flipper. And he told me it was not as a refrigerator for about 10 years. He finally gave it to Ivan Tours. They're there. Let's do this. And they did it was a huge success all over the world. This episode of the podcast is brought to you by Verso. Have you ever tried fasting or intermittent fasting? If so, you may be aware of the sizzling energy and mental clarity that you get if you do it the scientific data validating the health benefits from fasting for weight loss is overwhelming. But what doesn't get talked about enough is the longevity benefits you get from fasting. When you fast, your body turns on all its defense mechanisms to help your body hunker down to fight off illness and disease. But the problem is it takes three days of starving yourself to activate this process. Scientists like Davidson Claire have recently discovered molecules to help your body turn on this process without having to fast. If you've ever heard this podcast before, you've heard me talk about Verso many times and I've had world renowned nutritional scientists like Dominic Daggasdino on the show who is the guy who actually introduced me to Verso and I've been taking it every day for the last three years. Cell being is always the first thing I take in the morning after dragging my carcass into the kitchen, which wakes me up and gives me energy. I even use it for pre-workout. And clean being is the product I use every night before bed. After taking clean being for some time now, I've actually noticed a huge improvement in not only my hormone regulation, but my vision has improved. I know it sounds insane, but this stuff actually can improve your vision. My lipid regulation has gotten better. And another huge thing is all of a sudden I don't get affected by all the pollen in the air. I don't have any of these reactions and clean being has actually been scientifically proven to alleviate these things. Other clinical trials have proven healthier less inflammation, healthier hair, lipid regulation, enhanced cognitive function and improved metabolism. On top of that, Verso always publishes third party testing on each batch produced to guarantee you're getting exactly what you pay for. So if you want to check out Verso and support this podcast at the same time, go to vr.so forward slash Danny and use the coupon code Danny Checkout for 15% off your first order. Again, it's vr.so forward slash d a n n y and use the code Danny and check out. It's linked below. Now back to the show. So I found myself living with these flipper dolphins seven days a week, 24 hours a day for seven seven years or something like that. And when you do that, it's very different than the job I had before where you go into the morning, you do three shows. You've got the weekends off in the second day to eight to five job for most dolphin trainers. They don't really live with it often. If they did, they would probably Morning. You do three shows. You got the weekends off for the second day to eight to five jobs for most dolphin trainers. They don't really live with it. Dolphins. If they did, they would probably be doing what I'm doing. Because that's when you really get to know them. What you're living with them like that. How so? It's like, uh, do you have any pets at home? I have a dog. I've had a dog for the last, uh, 14 years. Actually just died two days ago. Okay. It's right there. What's the dog's name? My friend Julian got me this cool little crystal. Julian Dory shot out to him. You got me this, this 3D crystal of my dog. Wow. It looks like a fox. Teacup, Yorkie. Yeah. He looks like a little fox. You're working. He's named dunk. So if you were to, uh, what's name is dunk, dunk. If you, if you, if you had, uh, interacted with dunk, uh, few times a day, you know, five days away or something, it's not the same relationship. When you're living with him, you can anticipate when he gets up and walks across the room. What are he's going to do? 14 right? Right. That's, that's what I'm talking about. I don't know how to express that, but you get to know them like that. Okay. Whereas dolphin trainers never really get to, they have a utilitarian relationship with the animals. Right. They don't really get to know them. Right. Um, so that, that's, that's, that's, that's, that's, I don't know where to go from there. So where, that's where it all began. So you, you lived literally right next to the lake where they filmed, right? Like you lived in the house. I was at that point in my house. I also had a house trailer. There, so there is a fenced in area there. Mm hmm. Public's not allowed. Boys, though, I had the, I, I would lock it. I was back. There would just be in the dolphins for years. I became very reclusive. I'm still very reclusive. Um, it was during a time when there was a lot of turmoil to the Vietnam war was raging. Right. America was divided not as much as we are today, but divided because of that war, protesting, going on all over the place. I became one of those people who started doing a lot of soul searching back there and questioning what I'm doing. It was, um, it was a very strange duality. I was living. I, my, my, my work, my job and my life. But what I'm doing there is trying to get the trust. I'm trying to get their trust. You know, I accomplished that, of course. If you spend it, I sleep on the dock with them. I mean, I'm really, I call it dolphin time. And, uh, did you have any sort of, was there a special way you can communicate with the dolphins? Would you say we silence? It's all in silence. At that time, I was actually being silent for, I was studying it, but the Indian guru who was silent for its, I think 26 years. And I was doing this. I was living in a world of silence with them. Um, a lot of the time I had to interact with anybody. I would drive my portion to back and lock the gate and they stayed away from me. The trucks would come to film. What's in a blue moon? After the first couple of years, they had so much stock footage. They left me. I was there alone all this time with my surfboard, my little buck, the dolphins. And my, and my friends, I was loving a coconut grove. And, you know, it was, it was during a time when it was during a time when coconut grove was, it was an art colony. And some of the, John Sebastian, who you just saw, remember a band called the love and spoonful? You don't remember that way? God, I'm not getting a hold. Yeah, that's one of the world in the world. Before my time, Rick, do you believe in? Oh, of course. Yes, okay. When you see the poster for what stock there's a guy, you see the audience, you see a guy wearing tie-dye clothes? That's John. So, okay. So these, he made all this friends Fred Neale, who wrote everybody's talk of did that cowboy with the Academy work. He was my best friend actually. He and I started doing musical experiments back there because nobody was there. And we could do this communication. Okay, let's, that's a language too. And we're back there going with our guitars sometimes. Cass Elliott would come. You remember them? The mubbers and poppers? You don't remember me? I don't remember my name, but I probably heard their music. Oh, you have California dream of it? Oh, of course. Yes. So sometimes Casa and Denny were there. Crosby was always there. David Crosby, Stephen still actually put the first money into it. Jody Mitchell, Jody and Crosby lived in the garage next door to me. I lived in one house. They were there. John lived in another one. Tennessee Williams lived at the end of the street. So all these celebrities started coming out at night. They were doing Timothy Leary, Jack Elliott, Timothy Leary. Timothy Leary. So you're all taking LSD. Sorry. You guys were taking LSD? Well, no, I wouldn't just. Well, are you asking me if Timothy Leary was taking LSD? I'm saying were you guys all taking LSD and not making music with the dolphins? No, I'm trying to be real careful not to create that image in your mind. Because those days I did myself, I never gave it to the dolphins, but I did experiment with it. It was perfectly legal at the time, even if it wasn't. I still would have experimented, but I want to give you an idea of what the rest of the world was thinking about LSD. They weren't thinking about it. It was nobody even knew what it was. No one cared. But Tim came to coconut grove. What's with he had a cardboard box full of LSD 25, he called it, from the San Dose laboratory in Switzerland. Probably legal. Nobody knew what this was. It was just the new thing. And John Lillie, you know who he is. Of course. So John had his, he lived across the street for me. No way. Yeah. Link had just filmed all of this. I've explained to you in coconut grove. So pull up John Lillie's bio on there. So, John, let me see. So yeah, to answer your question, nobody, nobody, yeah, there's John right there. Yeah, he invented, yeah, he's the guy who invented the isolation tank, the sensory deprivation tank. And I use that one in his house in Malibu. He was living in Malibu. When I stayed there, I would stay in that room that had the isolation tank. And he was he was obsessed with the case with dolphins. Obsessed, he was, he had a grant from NASA to try to communicate with a non-human intelligence because they were going to the moon. They were sure at some point we're going to run into some non-human intelligence. And we need a code to communicate. John got a grant from them. I probably captured those dolphins as well because we were selling them to whoever at the the sea court. He was in coconut grove and the old bank building, the early bank building had three or four of these portable swimming pools. You see in people's backyards, they were inside the bank, the bank had been closed for years. And he had dolphins in there. And yeah, he was trying to, no, not with the music. He was taking their skull cap off and putting wires into their brains and doing all of this kind of very, very intrusive. And most of them were dying. At that point, when he was doing that, nobody knew that dolphins were automatic that they were not automatic air breathers like us. If you give me a sedative, I will go to sleep. Now, keep breathing. If you do that with the dolphin, they die. Every breath is a conscious effort. How do they sleep? They don't like we do. They rest. They switch different atmospheres of the brain back and forth and rest. But they don't sleep. Every breath is a conscious effort. They're never fully unconscious. No, not really. I don't believe so. Nobody would be able to know that, but I don't think they think they're always awake. Wow. So he had written two or three books that I was reading back there. And I was taking sides with it. He was saying dolphins are more intelligent than humans. It shocked this scientific community for a science, for a brain surgeon to be saying this. In what way were they more intelligent? Well, that's the thing. He's saying they're more intelligent because, well, first of all, just evolution. They have been here 65 million years. Let's just say as a graph, it's the size of this table in length. This is 65 million years. We have been here about two inch length. Right. So if you flip a blip on the timeline, if you assume that the brain is more than excess baggage, we're carrying on this trip through time and space. The porcelain is on and somebody is home. And that's not only dolphins. Look at the the look at the sperm whale. And one third of its body is his head. It's the largest brain unplanned. How big is the sperm whale's brain? It's an average. Do you know like the weight or the dimensions of it? Like the size of his brain? Wow. You can see that. You can see that. There's a good picture. Yeah, it's a third of his body. Yeah. It's like the first time I read Charles there was a voyage of the beagle he had gone from England to the Galapagos Islands. And he wrote, it creates a sense of wonder that so much beauty was so evidently created for so little purpose. It's kind of like that with this brain. Why does this, how did this evolve after 65 million years to for no so little purpose? Right. It has a purpose. We just though know what it is. It can't manipulate that. Going back to your question. What makes it more intelligent? Yes. This was what John was his hypothesis. All of the senses are better. So I started reading as much as I could in exploring and I'm back there living with them. And I started to come up with a giant yellow thing in the front of his face. You can be a sense of sensory organ. That is that a sensory organ? Yeah. That big yellow thing. I'm sure the largest brain of all living organisms. All I can craft. That's wild. Well, dolphin brains are like the same size if not bigger than ours. Just regular fingers. Bigger than ours. Bigger. Yeah. So this is these are the things and I'm starting to believe this and at the same time I'm being paid by the sequarium. I'm part of this fucking circus. going on. And I started rebelling against it. But now my friends are coming out. Turn that thing a little bit towards you at night and we're doing music and trying to experiment with them. It looked pretty weird to the sequarium because there were no long hair people at those days except my friends coming to the night. And you know, so yeah, it's interesting that that these animals have been around for so long, 65 million years and we've only been here for a couple hundred thousand years. But we are so intelligent. I mean, maybe they're more intelligent, but we're it's really close. And there's a lot. Are you aware of the the stoned apophesis? How like there, well, there's multiple different theories on how we are brains at all, right? Because there's quite a game. There's nothing like us on earth. There's nothing. There's a massive gap between us and the next primate, right? It's like, yeah, there's why is there such a big gap? The evolutionary gap between us? You know what I mean? And how did we come up? How do we just pop up out of nowhere? This intelligent animal that came in, it's in its environment and build all these crazy things and create artificial intelligence. Have you been watching ancient aliens? I have not watched ancient aliens. have to watch that. Everybody has to watch that because they're actually showing you the evolutionary question. They talk about, I know there's like a bunch of ideas. One of them is Panzpermia too. How, you know, there's rocks that hit that come from other, yeah, mother solar systems and they hit our earth and they contain microorganisms from other galaxies or whatever. And that could have somehow fueled our evolution or like changed something within us and made us possible. Right. That's what their hypothesis is. Yes. Yes. They're saying this, we are actually an experiment. Yes. That's one of the ideas. The other one is a monkey ate a mushroom and then our brains jumped 10 times the size. So who knows? You know, but also John Lili, his experiment cutting the skull caps off the dolphins and putting electrodes in their brains. What did he say his, his results of those experiments were? Did he got off track? He got, he got off track with drugs with, last time I saw John, I was saying it as house of Malibu. He was so far. I don't want to say God. Maybe he's the only one who's, but he's communicating with aliens at this point. Oh, really? It's not about, it's not about do they exist? He's actually touched with them. Oh, he that's what he said to you. I didn't say to me. He's just, he just does it. He I couldn't understand him. When I first met him in coconut grove and he came out to the sequaring, he was very straight. I'll use that word. White doctor coat with a tie, short haircut and scientist scientist after Tim Larry left. He wasn't different person off the air. Now he's freeing the dolphins from the coconut grove bank and putting them in Biscayne Bay, letting them go. The last dolphin he had to them, there were, their names are Joe and Rosie. They've, after Joseph Ela Bean and his wife, Rosalie, who made the movie day of the dolphin, he made a lot of movies, Joseph Ela Bean. But John agreed that when they were captured, when he threw doing his human dolphin communications work, he was at the free and they were stuck at the dolphin research center down the Florida Keys for about four or five years. The promise just went undone and a group of people got together. They hired me. We moved dolphins by helicopter. And Lincoln was with us. He was about three feet tall. Flew up to Georgia to the National Geographic Document that this in the, I think it was the very first explorer series. But they, we rehabilitated the dolphins that sat in free. That's the last, he did with dolphins before he died. Have you, there's this, we were just talking about the son of a podcaster the other day. There is a new artificial intelligence company or it's an organization that's developing, it's called inner species IO. And they're using artificial intelligence to communicate with dolphins and to other species. So what they're doing is they're using artificial intelligence to record, like you record the sounds that these animals make. And it's supposed to be able to decipher it so we can understand what they're saying. So essentially using AI to communicate with animals and understand and communicate, possibly communicate back with them. It's bizarre. Yeah, this is it right here. It's a think tank. artificial intelligence think tank. And it goes back to what John Lilly was doing, you know, that's it's it's all about understanding non human intelligence. Anyway, so okay, so you guys were spending time trying to, you know, you were playing music, you were communicating with the animals, you were spending a lot of time with the animals and this sort of catapulted your sort of like sent you for a loop and it changed you and made you at what point was it during flipper or what maybe maybe it was after flipper that he was before it was before the end and long before like the second year. I knew, I mean, it's real obvious dolphins do not belong in captivity. It's very black and white when you're living with it like this, but I didn't do anything about it. Was it the death of a cat? Yeah, that's so it was an act of passion that enforced that there was an automatic organic reaction to her suicide. You mentioned earlier, they are self aware. Yes, that every breath is a conscious effort. And that's what she died from self induced asphyxiation. Not every breath they take is a conscious effort. Right. Right. If you don't take the next breath, you're going to itself induce thisphyxiation. And that's what I witnessed. And I have seen that over and over again at the cove in Taiji where they're driven in. If you don't know how to read their body language, you wouldn't see what I see. When I go to a place where dolphins are, I see, I don't see the same thing. I see what's really going on. And I see dolphins being driven in visually. You're only seeing them on the surface, but I've spent so much time with them underwater. I know what's going on underwater when they're being driven in, when they're being driven into the cove, the boats are banging on this pole. And there's pedicant. There's the old, I'm imagining you all this, but I know it's going on. The older left behind because they can't keep up. There are, there are pregnant females who are aborting. They're pedicestric in there. And so I I experience all this with them and they're driven into the cove. It's sealed. And a lot of them I'm watching them on the they take that last breath, the young ones and the mother, you can watch them getting together and they sink and they don't come back up again. That that's what I'm talking about because nobody can see that, but me that is self-induced this to excitation. They're committing suicide. So it's not it's not uncommon. Not because that unbearable. If I were at a topically equipped like they are, I probably would have done the same thing in that Japanese prison and a few other places I've been just not taking that next breath. Are there in the in the also in the cove, documentary you mentioned there's another town in Japan that no longer has any dolphins there that would be Eto. EKE or Eto. EKE Island. EKE Island. EKE Island. Yeah. Because there's two types of dolphins, right? It's the same with orcas. There's there's a the high this guy, Forest Galante on the show a couple months ago and he was explaining to me how there's transient orcas. Yeah. That basically like they just roam. They don't stop and they eat anything. They have their diet is very they have a wide palette, right? And then there's other ones that kind of like stay centralized into one specific area. Is that the case in in EKE Island where they just like one localized group of dolphins that they were all killed. Now there's none there. Yeah. And they were doing the same thing they were doing in in Taiji. No in Taiji. Those are all transient. Those are all those ones are all transient. Yeah. But they were doing the same slaughter in EKE Island. Yeah. Exactly. And now they are very upset because they can't sell the dolphins for you know, they were selling the meat and that you could buy up the size of this of like a size of a soap bar soap, probably $5 selling that dolphin alive to do by a couple hundred thousand dollars probably. So it's really about live dolphin shows. Right. That's one of the problems with these dolphin shows is the copycat syndrome when people come through SeaWorld or you know, wherever clear water and they watch these dolphins shows they go, wow, like it. And people swim me with it. You charge a hundred bucks. Right. What you can dolphins will heal us. We can charge them eight thousand dollars and they do these places charge eight ten thousand dollars. Insurance companies pay for it. And it's all fake. It's all phony. Dolphins cannot heal us. They can't heal themselves. The dolphins that we have in sanctuary in in Bali all came from dolphins dolphin when they call it assisted therapy. And these are all Russian tourists who are coming to Bali to be healed by the dolphins. And my heart goes out to that poor mother. I still get calls from Germany a lot from Germany. So what's really? My my child's got autism. I was calling you. I hope it's okay to call you at home. I'm going to take my daughter to the dolphin research center. They have a program there. But what do you think about that? I'm going to hope this moment's being ripped off. False hope. Dolphin can't heal her. Where the Alliance of Marine Parks, they know about all this and they allow it this fraud and this because Disney does it. All of these dolphins when programs offer research center. Dolphins plus who came up with the idea that dolphins can heal us. When I worked at the Sequarium people would pay five dollars. They buy a ticket. They would sit in their seat and I would put on a show for them. They were playing basketball and they're jumping in blah blah blah. They would applaud and they would leave. Some of the accountants probably in the front office went wait a minute. Let's let them in the water with the dolphins. We can charge a hundred dollars instead of five dollars. That's $20. And so that that became this win with dolphins craze. Then let's tell them they could heal us. Autistic children. You know, you got people like Dave Phillip, Dave, Dave, psychologist. One of those guys calls themselves doctor. He's got a degree in psychology and he started his craze with dolphin desisted therapy. Does he own dolphins? No. He came to the Sequarium first. He came over to my house. He wanted me to be partners with him. I listened to him and I could tell he's just exploited. He just wants money. And I just wouldn't talk to him anymore. And he just sort of labeled me as being anti-social because I never come to the meetings and discuss this is what they're doing. This is the dolphin assisted therapy. It's fraud, full of fraud. He's retired. These people are looking at dolphins like a real estate investor looks at an old dilapidated apartment building. They see, you know, they can fill up X amount of units and rent get X amount of rent every single month. And it has a lifespan. That's exactly how they're looking at it. You're just paying for your kids happiness. This kid's autistic here. Yeah. I can tell that's what they're doing here. Now the kid is actually getting something out of it. No, let me, let me show you something. Uh huh. Okay. What's the, yeah. What's this is a very, this is these first trick or they call it a behavior. It's called targeting targeting. This is targeting. This is targeting. But what? This is targeting. What happens is the first thing you train a dolphin to do is to touch your hand. Okay. Target, touch it, blow the whistle. That means that's the bridge. That means yeah, you did it right. I'm going to give you a fish. Uh huh. If you don't touch my hand, you're not going to get a fish. They catch how real quick. Okay. Now you can replace that once they get that downed by taking a few months, might take a week, might take a year. Depends on how long it takes you as the trainer to get the idea across. They're ready immediately. They're smarter than we are. That, that's targeting right here. Right. You can replace that now with your foot. Okay. Okay. They got that. Now when you see the show and you see the, when you see the trainer being pushed through the water, it's the same targeting trick with the foot, but the foot. Now you could take something this size like a cone, like a glass that goes on the dolphin's snap. These are dolphins of war and the navy program for the swimmer nullification system. At the end of this device, you know what a bank stick is underwater shark thing? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So it's like a, it's like a spear, it's a spearhead tip with like a shotgun shell at the end of it or a. Yeah. So this thing is equipped with a, the swimmer nullocations that you put on their stout and they'll go over and simply target, the target diver in their training. Dolph, it has no idea. There's a 45 caliber bullet in there. And they wouldn't put that bullet in unless it was a combat situation, but their trained every day without the bullet. The bullet has been replaced actually with a, well, I think it's a shotgun shell. I actually blew my thumb off with one of them. What? And, um, and so how did that happen? We were working on a movie called, uh, I was doing a lot of stuff working those days. Yeah. Thunder ball. That went with the one Thunder ball. We did Thunder ball, but it was another one like Thunder ball called never say never again. James Bond movie. And it was like we were just starting. I think it was the second day we were there. And the diving barge was in light for key and maybe a mile out. And we have a seep head in Nassau. We used to film flipper. Uh, that's where the dolphins were. So seven o'clock in the morning, Luke, helping the kid who was starting in the flipper show. He's now a grown 40 years old or whatever. He's one of the stuff. He and I were in Boston, Weller, 13 foot boss. We go over to pick up one of the sharks 13 foot shark. Much bigger than this table and bring it out to the way we're going to film it. And I, I loaded the bank stick 40 with a 12 gauge shotgun shell, put the safety in and then a swell came and lifted the boat up like this. And I lost my balance and I went to grab the gun on the boat and I grabbed the bank stick and it went up. Fucked out my whole day. I lost my balance and I went to grab the gun, the boat, I grabbed the bank stick and it went cup. Oh, fucked up my whole day. Blue your thumb off. Yeah. That's not a good day. So I went out to the barge. I wrapped my hand in the towel, got out to the barge. Rico was there. He didn't know what would happen, but he could see the blood and stuff. And yeah, it was one of those. Yeah. And these are outlawed now. Can I got those taken off the market? Which of those things, these things will fly right out. That's the safety. Uh huh. Does it work? I had to take it off the market. You had them taken off the market? How'd you do that? I sued the decor dive cup and I sued them, took them to court. Oh my God. Yeah, it just pops right out. So that's the only thing that's separating the firing pin from the shell is this pin right here. Oh, okay. And because this is like a spring, it just pops out. And that's what happened. It popped out. Cumboom, we jump into a car and go to, I told before I passed out. I said, do not take me to Princess Margaret Hospital because I've been in there before. And they would have just amputated away up here somewhere. Right. Get me to Miami. Right. So there was a plane landing, a little Piper cover or something. And I, we just ran out to the thing that I, the guy was getting on the back seat. And I just got him out of my way. I got in the back seat and I passed out. I wake up. We're in Miami. I mean, mercy hospital in Miami waiting for the doctor still in my went to full of blood. Got the towel around my, and I'm looking in the, it's not a mirror. It's a stainless steel towel rack. And I could see my face and the thumb that was missing was all over my face. Oh gosh. That's what I really got scared because it told me that that shotgun shell was so close to it could have blown my head off. You know, wow, man. That's fucking terrifying, man. Yeah, it was. And it put me out of work for a couple of years because I had an, I was trying to do pushups. I was trying to become left handed. I was doing pushups and stuff like that. And I pitched the nerve in my head. Yeah, I hadn't worked a long time. Finally, I get a call to go do a job here in St. Pete Beach at the Donsies R hotel. What kind of job? It's a job in a Barry Gibm music video. And I have to repel from the top of the building in a tuxedo with a rose between my teeth. So I go to Miami Beach and I'm talking to these guys, you know, they're interviewing me. He said, have you ever done this before? I said, what mean repel? Yeah. I was repelling out of helicopters in rice paddies while people are shooting at me. You got the job. I went home and I called my buddy Hank who actually wasn't Vietnam and was repelling up. I had never done it before. But I knew I could. I'd be kidding. Of course. I had two story house. We got from the roof and he showed me how to do it. Like in 10 minutes or something. Next day Lincoln and I get into car Lincoln's only like third grade or something. And we go in the Donsies R hotel. I've never been here before. And they take me up to my dependents. There's two penthouses in your room. The room next to me had a sign on the door that said, do not disturb underscore three times with exclamation points. I think that's probably Barry's room. Who's Barry Gipp? Oh, Barry. Yeah. Yeah. Right. It says movie. You're right next to him. So next morning, I go down to do the job and I was scared chitless. And so I look over the edge. I can see Lincoln down in the pool is like the size of an aunt with Barry Gibbs kids. They're all playing in the pool. And so I did it three or four times. And the guy didn't like it is the only time I have ever been fired. Well, I wasn't fired. He just didn't like it. The director I said, OK. And he didn't want to pay me. I went back up and I knocked on that sign. It said, do not disturb. And Barry opens the door and lets me in and I explain what happened. He was very cordial and very nice about it. But he had somebody come up, paid me off and $100 bills off. I went. I'll show you. I have that video. Whenever I'm here in St. Pete Beach where I now live, I have meetings with people that come over and do interviews and stuff. I always have them meet me there so I can show them the video at the dawn. Yeah, that's great. Elaine Lone, a new year in her husband came down for a visit once and I was telling him this story. And we're at the pool at the Dunsies are having lunch. And she said, what's the name of it? I said, I don't know. I had never saw it before. I had never seen it. It was like 20 years earlier. You know, somehow she found it. It's called night is for lovers or something like that. Uh huh. And I said music video. I didn't understand it. But why am I telling you about this? Oh no. It's funny. It's an interesting man. It's entertaining. You were saying before we started that you still have people from SeaWorld who spy on you. Oh, yeah, of course. Why wouldn't they? They want to know what I'm doing. why people come in my office and make it obvious. If I watch them, yeah, they make it real obvious. See, McCulloch was one of them. I'll give you the example. He came in there in my office. Do you know who he is? No. He was one of the dolphin wranglers. Anyhow, oh, yeah, I want to help. So he went and bought it. He said, oh, camera, video camera and went to SeaWorld, Ohio. I made a very damaging video at the petting pool, which is a very abusive, most abusive pool in tank in the SeaWorld. That's where everybody groves the dolphins and teases them with food and all this. This shot this powerful video. It was so powerful. We held the press conference in San Diego where SeaWorld was headquartered. And Steve calls me just before the press conference. It says, I don't know what happened. Somebody must have broken my room last night and stole the video. I don't have it. We had to cancel out the press conference. In reality, he gave it to Brad Andrews, who was the president who was there and talented the press company. He gave it to him. And he works very closely with him even to this day. So that's the kind of, you know, of course they want to know what we're doing. Anybody can volunteer. Save us true with the Japanese police. Why would they not volunteer and help us join us in Taiji? It's easy to do. You're looking for volunteers. They don't have any secrets. We don't have been allies. Any secrets. Everything's an open book and we don't care if you are part of it. Is this an everyday thing? Yeah. Yeah. I think it's a contact. I don't come in contact with people that much anymore every day. Right. Right. What is, what are you in Lincoln doing right now in Bali and Indonesia? Like what's going on there? I remember during or in the film, the blood dolphin film, there was a guy named Chris Porter, some wacko who was from Canada who had a, had a bunch of dolphin areas out there. What's the deal or he was a dolphin dealer? Yeah. And so he was, he was selling dolphins to the dolphin areas in Mexico. Okay. Dubai, excuse me. And the dolphin trainers who worked on the free Willy movie, worked with him after that movie. In other words, those guys really weren't against captivity at all. Right. They were in it for a six figure job. They're going to get it told the 20 million is gone. They're going to go back to. Did you guys, is that guy still a dolphin, an active dolphin dealer? Did you guys put a commotion on him? Oh, he wouldn't be dealing. Nobody would. He's been out. There's no way he could, uh, traffic, dolphins anymore. I don't know what he's doing. Hmm. But he's had a business there. So, so what's next for you guys? What's, uh, obviously Lincoln's got his documentary coming up that you guys are working on, but um, he's working on it. I don't even think about it. I don't even know what exactly, you know, it's his thing. And you, you, uh, you said, obviously you guys have some stuff in the works as far as lawsuits in Japan. Yeah. Um, but what other big issues are you trying to tackle at the moment? It's the captivity issue. It could change at any moment with another phone call or email or, uh, while I was sitting here with you, the sequarium closed, right? But trying to do that since 1970. That's what I'm talking about. Mm hmm. So what am I going to do about that? I don't know. I got to get out of here and go there. That's fine. That's how it works. Right. It's very organic. No matter what you plan, I'm planning. I want to go see my wife and daughter. That's what I would like to do there in Denmark. And Denmark. Um, and we connect up in different parts of the world. But somebody wants to interview me. They'll fly me into Paris or something. And that's when I get to see my family or they'll come here. What's the next for me is because I mean, like, so I mean, it seems like you are just this, you're sort of a vigilante that goes after these dolphin air, these captive dolphins and you try to cat you take them and you rescue them. And it seems like you kind of take it one piece at a time. Right? Like, yeah, are there any, I mean, I don't know if you want to give stuff up in public, but like, are there any certain parts of the world that you are more focused on than the other, other than Norwegian Indonesia, Indonesia, Japan, that's, that's the big one. The two big ones right now, but it seems like the Indonesian governments working with you. Yeah, they're their biggest. Right. The minister for the minister for the for fisheries, she works for this. We want to build a really big one in Portugal, Portugal on our radar right now to have 35 dolphins in Portugal. All of them were born in captivity, except for two that were captured in Pine Island, Florida that are too old to come back to Pine Island, Florida. So they're going to need a sanctuary, a big, big sanctuary somewhere in Europe or somewhere in Portugal. We're working on that. When I leave here, yeah, I'll go pick up my wife, put the car on the ferry boat and go to Norway and check on the whale and then go to Portugal and get back to work on that. By then, maybe we will have to return to Indonesia. If we have the five dolphins, we get a phone call that, you know, come on back. We're good. It happens very quickly. Things happen very quickly. Do you think there's any one end-all-be-all solution to all of this? Like if the president of the United States said, Rick, we're going to make you in charge. We're going to put you in charge of all this. You're going to be able to make the final decision on all dolphin captivity. Obviously, we can't control the entire world, but we kind of do. What do you think a diplomatic end-all-be-all solution would be to this problem? Well, let's just look at the...are you talking about the industry in the United States or the industry all over the world? Because it's everywhere. But if you want to... Let's start with the United States. Okay. Let's focus on just...see Quarrym. What do you do about sequarrym? Now, let's close. All those animals are lives hanging in the balance. You need a sanctuary somewhere. They can't be released back into the wild. Many of them don't even know what that is. They've never seen the wild. I think the majority of captive dolphins, older ones are psychotic. Right. What do you do with them? Sanctuary. A place where they can experience the natural rhythms of the sea, the tide, and the current, the rain, the sunshine. These simple natural elements have healing properties. When they're inside of a tank, they...it's dead. There's nothing moving. There's nothing alive there. It's not organic. There's just a wall. Sometimes there'll be a sink or a toilet bowl. You'll see the water going down the drain. They'll just be looking at that because there's nothing inside of this barren tank to look at. I have spent years underwater in these tanks with them. The tourists, the management, the authorities, haven't. They don't know what they're doing. They don't realize how cruel that is. It's kind of like if you were in this room for the rest of your life, let's get rid of all this stuff that you can look at and interact with. There's nothing in this room. How long would your mind be healthy? Right. I'm afraid not. That's what they do until they go fucking crazy. As soon as you move them, like when we take them out of the hotel swimming pool in Bali, it was stretchers. Lincoln will give me its footage. You can do it voiceover. Then we take them to a truck. There's a box waiting. Boxes about the size of this table only longer and it has some water in it. Maybe a foot. It's got a big thick foam rubber soft patty in it so that when you place the dolphin stretcher inside the box, the stomach, all of the weight of their weight, 350 pounds is on their internal organs. You've got to compensate for that. As soon as we get them to the sanctuary and place them into the seepin, for the first time since they were captured experiencing the sounds of the sea, there's a lot of sounds that they're hearing for the first time. We want them to remember who they were before they were captured. We don't teach them. We don't train them to be wild again. You can't train the dolphin to become wild again. They didn't train Keko to become a wild orca again. The training itself is the problem. Training it to do more is not going to solve the problem. Nature heals them. The salt water as iodine has healing elements in it, catching their own fish in captivity. They're simply opening their mouth and somebody is dumping a dead fish in their mouth. Living is actually chasing that fish. The hunt itself is living and that was all taken away from them. You have to get them in a place where you have to give them back all the things we took away from them when they were captured. That's what heals them. They heal themselves. Some of them cannot be free. During the whole process, you can watch what they do and how they act. For example, one of them was banging his head against the dock constantly. We knew something wrong with this guy. We're not freeing him. So you have to watch him every single day all day long and all night. You're playing God because you are going to figure out whether they're going to be free or they're going to be in here or the rest of their life. Whatever happens to them, it's a huge responsibility. I take it very serious too. Looking at it from a numb capitalist perspective, how do you incentivize corporations to walk away from billions of dollars and put money into something like this that doesn't generate any sort of profit? I don't. I don't. I would be away at the time. They're not going to. I don't have any expectations of the government fixing it. I don't deal with them. I don't listen to them. I don't pay any attention to them. The customer, well, not the customers. The only hope that I've thought about this sounds awfully simplistic, but the only solution is for people to stop by tickets. There is no other solution. You're never going to stop. It's not going to happen. You can waste your time doing that if you want to, but it's based on supply and demand like any other product. You stop buying this but light or whatever it is. They're in trouble. It's up to the consumer. Our work is really about educating the consumer. When we're doing a release, that's why these dolphin releases or sanctuaries are so important because for the first time, the audience, same people who are buying tickets are seeing this process and learning for themselves. Oh, yeah, I get it now. I get it. They're not going to get it from the propaganda that the owner is telling everybody on the chain all the way down to the trainers. Because I was the head trader at the Sequarium. I know how it works. In order to be successful, that trainer has to become a professional liar. You have to lie to the customers every day with asking you questions. You have to lie to the media and you, worst of all, you have to lie to yourself every day. What do you lie about? Three things. Education, research and conservation. That's what we're doing here. Well they are 5%. Yeah. And those rescues and stuff. Yeah, great work. They'll be doing it better. Yeah, that's 5% though. All of the dolphins, everything you see in Taiji, that massacre is a direct, you can directly connected to those people who are selling tickets to their dolphin area because it's the copycat syndrome over here that keeps them fueling them. And they don't police their own industry. So fuck those people. I don't deal with them. They don't like me. I don't have a pathological need to be liked. So I'm okay with that. Do you maintain any relationship with any former dolphin trainers that you used to work with or that are currently involved in any of these operations? Do you ever talk to them or do you ever have interventions? No. No. I've been touched with a couple, but they've left recently. They'll be more at the sequarium. They'll be. I just can't, I can't fathom house a person who would want to dedicate their career to spending time with these animals. You have to be passionate about this topic. And you have to, if you're a trainer, don't you make a question. Make some sort of a connection with these animals. And how could you, if you are the person. It's not real. It's not real. It's the same dilemma, duality I live with with the flippered dolphins. Yeah. You walk away, you go home and you live your life. Yeah. You were trying to get them to be your friend and it's a stucco syndrome at best. At best. I was going through the stucco syndrome in reverse where I would need let people come around the dolphins. I became one of them, one of the dolphins. And I was rebelling the same way they were because I could see how wrong this whole thing is. Now, if I wanted to at that point, SeaWorld hadn't been built yet. I had a reputation as the highest paid dolphin trainer in the world. I could have been running SeaWorld. I could do that when I leave here. I can go down to the Bahamas, start a dolphin swim program with two or three dolphins and be making three or four million dollars a year. But I wouldn't be able to sleep at night. Right. Instead, I go to Taiji where I can't sleep at night. Oh, how long ago back to Taiji? You're going to go back this for the summer? The only reason I'm not there now is we want to go with you. Well, we don't have enough money to go back. I should be there right now. All the time I shouldn't leave there because there are no six months I could be putting events together in Tokyo. We did one with Matt Sorum who is also not just in dormies. He's a really good singer or songwriter. So he could entertain all. We invited all the Japanese activists to this big club and they all came and it was so successful. So they became all the Japanese protesters. Oh, really? Yeah. They're the ones who are there now. So the problem isn't Taiji, but the solution isn't Tokyo. We're getting them to step up and take ownership of this. But to do that requires money for me to go to Japan. I have to fly business class now at 84 because I can't sit in the chair that long. The last time I did it packed in like a sardine. The last time I did that was about six or seven years ago. I remember getting up from the seat. I like came off and I said you can walk around the plane. I was going to the bathroom. I remember opening the door to the bathroom. And the next thing I know I'm lying at a pool of blood. Oh, God. And I'm hearing on their loudspeaker if there's a doctor on the plane. I'm thinking, I think they're talking about me. And there's a woman in my face, very lovely black doctor. She said, we have to turn the plane around and go back. You have a large gas. What happened was I passed out and I fell backwards and hit my head and so forth. And it was the atai hall. It was it was I had to be there for the world premiere of the cove, the premiere in Japan at the foreign coast. The pond is clear. I said, don't turn this plane around. I have to be there. She said, I said, please, listen to me. Just put some ice on it. When I get to the place, I'll talk you all. I'll get stitches of up above. Trust me, I'll be okay. They didn't really want to turn around anyhow. So they didn't. When I get to Tokyo, the wheelchair comes in and they take me down and the guy says, too late, we can't sew it up now. You waited too long. Let me go. Now I'm going, but they shaved half of my head to look at it. Now I'm going to the premiere. I think I had or something. Yeah, whatever happened. So what happened was I it's just exhausting and I don't fly unless I get on the plane down and I lay down. I've lost two friends on airplanes. Albert Grossman, Bob Dylan's manager, died on a plane like that. How and Fred Neale's manager. I don't know. Now maybe you're supposed to know it's circulating or something. I don't know, but people do die on airplanes. Those who are laying down, I think are so I lay down, take a sleepy pill and I wake up on the Tokyo or wherever I'm going. That's how I do it. Whatever happened with the people who is expensive, you know, it's like, it's not the boxer. It's not the fly first class of Japan. No, it's business class. Oh, business class. Yeah, that's guess it's not first class. But it's still expensive. You fly from LA, right? It pays for me. And you can usually provide for no from Denmark or from Denmark. Let me get Denmark where I came here. Right. So whatever happened with the people who were involved with purchasing the documentary in Japan, wasn't there a group that purchased the rights in Japan for the documentary? And they somehow the Yakuza stopped the distribution of the documentary in Japan like in theaters. For a long time. Yeah. And they would actually go into the distributor's house, the Yakuza. They have these black trucks with big megaphones out of and they unsaturated and Sunday. They go to the homes of Koreans, Chinese people that they don't like their racist. They're like the cooks. KKK. Really? Oh, yeah. It does a lot of racism. You don't in Japan. Yeah. There are places that have the sign that says Japanese only. And so they did this at the Taiji whale museum, which is actually a dolphinarium. And they're the number one distributor of dolphins. So we go in there. We monitor them closely. One day we go in there. They had to sign up, kept by a ticket. Japanese only. We took them to court, sued them. One. And they had to take that down. It's racism. Wow. So I think lawsuits is the way to stop this thing. Because the courts seem to be fair with their right. Yeah. Well, that's that's hopeful that the court, the Supreme Court system in Japan is working with you and you're being successful. So where can people that are listening to this? Where can they get in contact with you? Where can they do anything to help the dolphin project and what you and Lincoln are doing? Go to dolphinproject.com and take action. Let's take action, mean. Well, people they can donate. They can come with us at Japan if they want to or volunteer to do different things. Maybe they're shocked by a teacher support that take action, adopt the dolphin. People in this area are getting involved in that campaign. Disney dolphins. There what? Walt Disney World has a lot of dolphins. Disney World has a lot of dolphins. They're living seas except it used to have a hundred percent mortality rate. Yeah. Wow. So you can adopt a dolphin so you can basically pay to have a dolphin rescue and what that means. Yeah. When we rescue them and they we have to feed them, it's very expensive. People adopt it that helps offset our bills. Oh, that's incredible. We are not part of the animal welfare industry. That's a big, big industry that I want nothing to do with. We're outside of that. We're grassroots and we're going to stay that way. We got to get you on more podcasts. Why don't you do more podcasts? I know. Well, I just did this because Lincoln kept pestering me. I don't like doing the frankly. We got to make this. We got to make you ubiquitous. Man, that's the only way to let the people know not to buy tickets to these places. Yeah, I know. I've done it for so long. I'm just tired of it now after 70 years of it. You know, it's basically the same interview. Like the challenges. How do I change the words? Right? That's OK. Yeah. But it'll worry you out too. Well, thanks again, man. Thank you. I appreciate it, Rick. I spent a pleasure talking to you. Good night, everybody.