The Newer Spiritualism (Frank Podmore, 1910)
============================================
Frank Podmore — Podmore's follow-up on the new physical mediumship — the definitive Edwardian debunking. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (newerspiritualis01podm) — 1910 first edition.

V' 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

Books  on  Psychical  Research  and 
the  New  Psychology. 

After  Death — What  ?  Spiritistic  Phenomena  and  their 
Interpretation.  By  Cesare  Lombroso,  late  Alienist  Professor  of 
Psychiatry  in  the  University  of  Turin,  Author  of  “The  Female 
Offender,”  “  The  Man  of  Genius,”  &c.  Second  Impression. 
Illustrated.  Demy  8vo,  cloth,  10/-  net. 

Psychotherapy.  By  Hugo  Munsterberg,  M.D.,  Ph.D., 
Litt.D.,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Psychology  in  Harvard  University. 
Large  crown  8vo,  cloth,  8/6  net. 

Modern  Light  on  Immortality.  Being  an  Original 
Excursion  into  Historical  Research  and  Scientific  Discovery 
pointing  to  a  New  Solution  of  the  Problem.  By  Henry  Frank. 
Large  crown  8vo,  cloth,  7/6  net. 

Psychology  and  Crime.  By  Hugo  MOnsterberg,  Pro¬ 
fessor  of  Psychology  in  Harvard  University.  Crown  8vo,  cloth, 
5  -  net. 

Both  Sides  of  the  Veil.  A  Personal  Experience.  By 
Anne  Manning  Robbins.  With  a  Letter  from  Professor 
William  James.  Crown  8vo,  cloth,  3/6  net. 

Psychotherapeutics.  A  Symposium.  By  Morton 
Prince,  M.D.,  and  others.  Crown  8vo,  cloth,  3/6  net. 

Modern  Belief  in  Immortality.  By  Newman  Smyth, 
D.D.,  author  of  “Through  Science  to  Faith,"  “Passing  Pro¬ 
testantism  and  Coming  Catholicism,”  &c.  Crown  8vo,  cloth, 
3/6  net. 

The  Christian  Religion  as  a  Healing  Power.  By 
Elwood  Worcester,  D.D.,  and  Samuel  McComb,  D.D., 
Emmanuel  Church,  Boston.  Crown  8vo,  cloth,  8/6  net. 

London;  T.  FISHER  UNWIN. 

THE 

NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

BY 

FRANK  PODMORE 

AUTHOR  OF  "  MESMERISM  AND  CHRISTIAN  SCIENCE,”  ETC.,  ET€. 

FISHER 

UNWIN 

LONDON  :  ADELPHI  TERRACE 
LEIPSIC:  INSELSTRASSE  zo 
1910 

(All  rights  reserved.) 

CHAP. 

I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 

/  '  - 

/  .  ■  ■ 

CONTENTS 

BOOK  I 

INTRODUCTION  ...... 

THE  OLDER  SPIRITUALISM  :  DANIEL  DUNGLAS  HOME 
LEVITATION  AND  THE  FIRE  ORDEAL  . 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  .  .  .  .  . 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AND  THE  S.P.R.  . 

BOOK  II 

THE  NATURE  OF  THE  PROBLEM 
THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  PIPER 
THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  THOMPSON 
SOME  RECENT  COMMUNICATORS 

CROSS  CORRESPONDENCES 

THE  MOST  RECENT  EVIDENCE  . 

THE  STAGE  SETTING  OF  THE  TRANCE  . 

CONCLUSION  .  .  .  . 

INDEX  .  .  .  .  . 

S 

PAGE 

7 

31 

55 
87 
1 14 

145 

164 

184 

199 

225 

255 

277 

298 

318 

C'  o  O'  ‘V  r. 
C*  <J  o  0  O 

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2018  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 

https://archive.org/details/newerspiritualis01podm 

INTRODUCTION 

The  belief  in  intercourse  with  the  spirits  of  the  dead 
may  be  said  to  begin  in  modern  times  with  Sweden¬ 
borg.  Prior  to  his  time,  indeed,  alchemists  and 
magicians  believed  themselves  to  have  opened  up  com¬ 
munication  with  the  world  of  spirits  ;  but  the  entities 
with  whom  they  came  into  contact  were  conceived  of 
as  creatures  of  the  elements,  or  spiritual  beings  parasitic 
on  mankind.  Again,  throughout  the  Middle  Ages  the 
faithful  found  in  witchcraft,  in  epileptic  attacks,  and 
in  various  epidemic  visitations  amongst  religious  com¬ 
munities,  irrefragable  proof  of  spirit -intervention.  But 
the  spirits  concerned  in  such  intervention  seem  rarely, 
if  ever,  to  have  had  a  human  origin  assigned  to  them  ; 
they  were  regarded,  not  as  the  souls  of  dead  men  and 
women,  but  as  Divine  emissaries  or  as  ministers  of 
the  powers  of  darkness. 

The  Swedish  seer  in  his  trances,  however,  professed 
to  speak  with  the  mighty  dead  of  all  ages.  And 
though  the  belief  in  such  intercourse  as  a  practical 
possibility  appears  to  have  died  out  amongst  his 
followers,  they  bore  witness  at  any  rate  to  the  fact 
that  the  gates  of  heaven  and  hell  had  once,  in  modern 
times,  been  opened  to  a  mortal  visitor,  Swedenborg’s 
revelations  had,  moreover,  a  far-reaching  influence  out¬ 
side  the  narrow  circle  of  his  professed  disciples. 
Trances  of  like  character  to  his  own  were  found  to 

7 

o  c  3  3  Q  r: 
O  O  0  J 

8 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

occur  in  connection  with  the  practice  of  animal 
magnetism  ;  and  in  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth 
century  “  magnetic  ”  clairvoyants  in  every  civilised 
country  claimed  to  hold  converse  with  those  who  had 
passed  beyond  the  barrier  of  death,  and  to  reveal  the 
secrets  of  the  spiritual  world.  The  claims  of  the 
clairvoyants,  and  the  ready  credence  afforded  to  their 
revelations,  were  equally  the  direct  outcome  of  the 
teachings  of  the  Swedish  seer.  As  the  practice  of 
mesmerism  spread,  it  was  found  that  the  liability  to 
fall  into  trances,  and  with  it  the  power  of  holding 
communication  with  the  spirit  world,  was  not  a 
privilege  confined,  as  the  Swedenborgians  would  have 
it,  to  a  few  chosen  souls,  or  even  necessarily  associated 
with  any  marked  pre-eminence  in  moral  or  intellectual 
endowment.  In  the  United  States,  at  all  events, 
towards  the  middle  of  last  century,  the  nascent 
spiritualism  showed  signs  of  becoming  a  thoroughly 
democratic  movement. 

An  accidental  circumstance  set  fire  to  the  train  thus 
prepared  ;  and  the  new  movement  overran,  like  a 
flame,  the  whole  continent  of  America.  Bewitched 
children  land  magnetic  clairvoyants  had  always  been 
prone  to  enhance  the  effect  of  convulsions  and  trances 
by  marvels  of  a  more  material  kind — there  would  be 
vomiting  of  pins,  throwing  of  gravel,  or  surreptitious 
introduction  of  flowers  and  sacred  relics,  according  to 
the  taste  of  the  performer  and  the  demands  of  the 
environment.  An  exhibition  of  a  like  kind  broke  out 
in  1848  in  the  village  of  Hydesville,  New  York.  Two 
little  girls  produced  raps  on  their  wooden  bedstead — 
in  the  first  instance,  doubtless,  by  the  time-honoured 
method  of  scratching  it  with  their  toes.  Later,  more 

INTRODUCTION 

9 

subtle  methods  were  introduced  ;  others  took  up  the 
pastime  and  refined  upon  it.  Dark  stances  were  held, 
and  musical  instruments  flew  about  the  room  ;  the 
spirits  spoke  and  wrote,  and  even  showed  themselves 
in  bodily  form.  The  movement  spread  to  Europe  in 
the  early  fifties  ;  and  by  1870  there  was  scarcely  a 
town  of  any  importance  in  the  civilised  world  which 
did  not  boast  its  regular  circle  of  “  inquirers,”  whilst 
upwards  of  a  hundred  periodicals  devoted  themselves 
to  chronicling  the  doings  of  the  spiritual  world,  as 
revealed  in  the  sdance-room  and  in  ‘‘  inspirational  ” 
lectures.  The  movement  remained  at  its  zenith  for 
a  few  years,  and  then  rapidly  declined.  Those,  indeed, 
who  had  once  been  convinced  remained  for  the  most 
part  convinced  believers  still.  But  the  faith  of  such 
as  were  still  in  their  novitiate  was  seriously  checked 
by  the  constant  exposure  of  fraud  at  materialisation 
seances,  in  spirit  photography,  and  other  marvels  of 
the  kind.  And  the  decline  of  the  belief  was  hastened 
by  the  increased  attention  given  by  medical  men  and 
others  to  the  obscure  mental  states  from  which  the 
belief  in  the  first  instance  had  its  rise.  Men  saw  that 
the  outpourings  of  the  entranced  subject  and  the 
revelations  of  the  crystal  and  of  planchette  could 
reasonably  be  classed  with  other  manifestations  of 
automatism  and  unconscious  cerebration  ;  and  that  to 
invoke  spiritual  agency  would,  in  most  cases,  be  as 
rational  as  to  ascribe  the  ravings  of  delirium  to 
demoniac  possession,  or  the  journeyings  of  the  sleep¬ 
walker  to  angelic  guidance. 

In  the  decade  of  1880  to  1890  the  belief  in  inter¬ 
course  with  spirits  of  the  dead  seemed  rapidly 
approaching  its  euthanasia.  The  renewed  vigour  of 

10 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

the  movement  during  the  last  twenty  years  is  derived 
mainly  from  three  sources  :  the  trance  revelations  of 
the  American  medium,  Mrs.  Piper  ;  the  physical  mani¬ 
festations  of  the  Italian  medium,  Eusapia  Palladino  ; 
and  the  labours  in  interpreting  and  correlating  these 
and  other  manifestations  undertaken  for  many  years 
by  the  late  Frederic  iW,.  H.  Myers,  the  results  of  which 
were  gathered  together  in  the  two  massive  volumes 
of  his  “  Human  Personality.”  * 

In  this,  his  posthumous  work,  Myers  does  not  indeed 
disdain  whatever  support  may  be  derived  from  the 
trance  utterances  and  the  physical  phenomena.  But 
in  both  directions  the  evidence  has  been  so  multi¬ 
plied  since  his  death  that  it  will  be  necessary  to  devote 
the  bulk  of  this  book  to  its  discussion.  Myers’  peculiar 
contribution  to  the  subject  may  be,  considered  more 
briefly,  not,  indeed,  as  being  less  important,  but 
because  the  nine  years  which  have  elapsed  have 
brought  nothing  to  strengthen  his  position.  Briefly, 
Myers  essayed  to  lift  the  whole  problem  of  man’s 
immortality  to  a  higher  level,  and  propounded  an 
argument  of  far  wider  scope,  whose  cogency  we  are 
hardly  yet  in  a  position  accurately  to  estimate. 

To  the  older  philosophers  the  mind  of  man  seemed 
a  thing  apart — a  clear-cut,  indissoluble  unity,  whose 
permanence  and  identity  admitted  neither  doubt  nor 
degree.  To  the  newer  experimental  psychology  the 
unity  of  consciousness  is  a  mere  illusion  ;  it  is  even 
as  the  “  elementary  ”  nature  of  air,  earth,  and  water, 
the  unreasoned  judgment  of  ignorance.  The  laboratory 
and  the  alienist’s  clinique  show  that  consciousness  in 

1  “  Human  Personality  and  its  Survival  of  Bodily 
Death.”  London  :  Longman  &  Co.,  1903. 

INTRODUCTION 

11 

the  last  analysis  is  but  the  casual  and  transitory  co¬ 
ordination  of  countless  ill -defined  and  variable 
elements.  Consciousness,  in  fact,  is  but  the  imperfect 
reflection  in  the  psychical  world  of  the  whole  activity 
of  the  cerebro -spinal  nervous  system  ;  and  that  system 
is  itself  a  collection  of  separate  nerve-centres,  which 
represent  the  multiform  activities  of  the  whole 
organism.  Consciousness,  then,  is  but  the  reflection 
of  a  reflection  ;  it  represents  all  the  innumerable  doings 
and  sufferings  of  each  part  of  the  body,  much  as,  to 
employ  Ribot’s  simile,  a  map  represents  the  features 
of  a  countryside.  To  found  an  argument  for  the 
survival  of  the  soul  on  the  supposed  unity  and  indis¬ 
solubility  of  this  shifting  aggregation  must  seem 
indeed  the  building  of  a  house  upon  the  sand. 

Now,  the  peculiar  contribution  of  Myers  to  modern 
psychology  lies  here.  He  accepts  to  the  full  the  results 
of  recent  research.  He  recognises  that  human  con¬ 
sciousness,  as  we  know  it,  is  a  highly  composite  and 
unstable  thing,  having  neither  completeness  nor 
essential  unity.  Consciousness  is,  to  employ  his  own 
simile,  a  selection,  like  the  visible  spectrum,  acci¬ 
dental,  interrupted,  and  variable,  from  a  much  larger 
potential  whole.  But  at  this  point  Myers’  views 
diverge  from  those  of  the  recognised  schools.  To 
him  the  surface  consciousness,  the  only  thing  which 
we  know  as  consciousness  in  ordinary  life,  is  com¬ 
paratively  unimportant.  “  I  award  no  primacy,”  he 
writes,  “  to  my  ordinary  waking  self,  except  that, 
among  many  potential  selves,  this  one  has  shown  itself 
the  fittest  to  meet  the  needs  of  common  life.”  It 
is  the  hidden  life  which  counts — the  self  which  the 
struggle  of  the  market-place  and  the  senate  has  thrust 

12 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

back  into  the  darkness,  or  has  not  yet  called  into 
conscious  activity. 

“  There  is  in  each  of  us,"  he  proclaims,  “  an  abiding, 
psychical  entity  far  more  extensive  than  he  knows — an  indi¬ 
viduality  which  can  never  express  itself  completely  through 
any  corporeal  manifestation.  .  .  .  All  this  (unexpressed) 
psychical  action  is  unconscious,  all  is  included  in  an  actual 
and  potential  memory  below  the  threshold  of  our  habitual 
consciousness.” 

The  subliminal  consciousness,  he  supposes,  may 
embrace  a  far  wider  range,  both  of  physiological  and 
of  psychical  activity,  than  is  open  to  normal  personality. 
The  invisible  spectrum  of  consciousness  stretches  in¬ 
definitely  in  either  direction,  extending  on  the  one  side 
to  physiological  processes  which  have  long  dropped 
out  of  human  knowledge,  on  the  other  to  supernormal 
faculties,  of  which  only  stray  hints  have  reached  ,us 
in  our  present  stage  of  evolution.  Conformably  with 
this  view,  a  stream  of  consciousness  flows  like  an  under¬ 
ground  river  within  ust,  sleep  is  no  longer  to  be  regarded 
as  the  mere  abeyance  of  waking  activities,  but  as  a 
phase  of  personality  with  characteristics  definitely  its 
own  ;  crystal  vision,  the  hypnotic  trance,  hysteria,  and 
allied  states  open  a  door  into  the  hidden  life  ;  and 
the  improvisations  of  genius  are  outbursts  of  subter¬ 
ranean  forces. 

Now,  this  theory  claims  to  be  founded  on  induction 
from  observed  facts.  There  are  indications,  however, 
that  in  its  author’s  mind  the  conception  owed  less 
to  induction  than  to  analogy.  There  is  a  class  ,of 
hystero -epileptic  patients  to  be  found  in  the  Paris 
hospitals,  whose  remarkable  symptoms  have  been  de¬ 
scribed  by  Charcot,  Jules  Voisin,  Bourru,  and  especially 

INTRODUCTION 

13 

by,  Pierre  Janet.  A  typical,  case  is  that  of  Lucie, 
sometime  a  patient  of  Professor  Janet.  This  unhappy 
young  woman  had  a  terrible  fright  at  the  age  of  nine, 
which  brought  on  a  series  of  severe  epileptic  attacks. 
At  the  time  when  she  first  came  under  observation  in 
the  hospital  she  was  almost  completely  ansesthetic.  She 
had  no  sense  of  touch  and  no  muscular  sense.  She 
would  “  lose  her  legs  in  bed,”  as  she  herself  described 
it,  and  could  only  walk  by  looking  at  the  ground  and 
at  her  limbs.  She  was  very  deaf  ;  and  her  .sight,, 
her  piost  serviceable  sense,  was  extremely  defective. 
Lastly,  the  memory  of  a  great  part  of  her  past  life 
was  a  blank  :  she  had  no  recollection  of  her  child¬ 
hood  before  the  age  of  nine.  But  when  thrown  into 
the  deepest  stage  of  the  hypnotic  trance  a  marked 
change  would  be  observed.  She  could  now  feel  her 
limbs,  and  walk  without  looking  at  her  feet  or  the 
floor.  Her  powers  of  vision  would  become  practically 
normal.  Concurrently  with  this  enfranchisement  of  the 
senses  was  observed  a  corresponding  enlargement  of 
the  memory.  She  would  not  only  be  conscious  of  all 
lier  life  as  a  hospital  patient,  but  she  could  remember 
also  the  first  nine  years  of  her  childhood,  and  give  a 
clear  account  of  the  terrible  fright  which  brought  on 
her  calamity.* 

Now,  close  observation  brings  to  light  some  curious 
facts  about  the  condition  of  these  hystero-epileptics. 
It  would  be  a  grave  mistake  to  suppose  that  their 
anaesthesia  is  merely  feigned.  But  it  is  certainly  less 
profound  than  the  anaesthesia  which  results  from  disease 
or  from  actual  severance  of  the  nerves.  It  can  occa- 

'  P,.  Janet,  “  L’Automatisme  Psychologique,”  pp.  104, 
105. 

14 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

sionally  be  restored  by  directing  the  patient’s  special 
attention  to  the  anaesthetic  limb.  And  it  is  noteworthy, 
Janet  points  out,  that  hystero -anaesthetic  subjects  are 
not  liable  to  get  their  limbs  burnt  or  otherwise  injured, 
as  is  the  case  with  patients,  e.g.,  in  the  later  stages 
of  leprosy.  Again,  a  patient  in  whom  the  visual  field 
is  hysterically  restricted  will  not  see  ordinary  objects 
held  outside  the  hysteric  limits  of  vision  ;  but  he  can 
be  sent  into  convulsions  if  any  object  of  special  signifi- 
'cance  for  him  be  held  outside  those  limits,  but  within 
the  normal  visual  field.  The  real  self,  then,  of  these 
hysterics  is  still  active  below  the  surface,  and  is  still 
able  to  keep  watch  and  ward  over  the  vagaries  of 
the  starved  consciousness. 

To  Myers  the  fate  of  these  poor  hystero-epileptics 
seems  profoundly  significant. 

“  Might  not,”  he  asks,  “  all  the  hysteric  tale  be  told, 
mutato  nomine,  of  the  whole  race  of  mortal  men?  What 
assurance  have  we  that  from  some  point  of  higher  vision 
we  men  are  not  as  these  shrunken  and  shadowed  souls?” 
(i.  p.  67.) 

In  that  larger  potential  consciousness  which,  as  we 
have  warrant  for  inferring,  surrounds  the  narrowed 
personality  which  suffices  for  our  common  everyday 
life,  he  believed  himself  to  discern  traces  of  faculties 
too  large  for  merely  terrestrial  needs,  and  signs  of 
a  guiding  power  wise  with  more  than  human  foresight. 
This,  in  effect,  is  Myers’  case.  There  need  be  no  fear, 
he  proclaims,  lest  the  soul  of  man  should  be  disinte¬ 
grated  with  the  disintegration  of  the  body  ;  because 
it  exhibits 

”  traces  of  faculty  which  this  material  or  planetary  life 
could  not  have  called  into  being,  and  whose  exercise  even 

INTRODUCTION 

15 

here  and  now  involves  and  necessitates  the  existence  of 
a  spiritual  world”  (i.  p.  11). 

The  argument  may  be  admitted  to  have  cogency 
if  the  premises  can  be  established.  But  what  in  fact 
is  this  so-called  ‘‘  subliminal  self,”  and  what  are  its 
chief  properties?  Certain  pathologic  cases — F61ida  X., 
whose  history  has  been  recorded  by  Dr.  Azam,  Mary 
Reynolds,  chronicled  by  Dr.  iWilliam  James,  the  three 
“  Misses  Beauchamp,”  of  Morton  Prince,  &c. — show 
that  there  may  exist,  below  the  personality  presented  to 
us  in  ordinary  life,  another  personality,  larger,  freer, 
and  saner.  In  subjects  who  have  been  frequently 
hypnotised  the  personality  which  is  evoked  by  the 
operator  in  the  trance  will  often  prove  more  intel¬ 
ligent  and  alert  than  the  waking  self,  and  may  show 
keener  and  more  exalted  powers  of  sensation.  The 
hypnotic  memory,  too,  is,  as  a  rule,  wider  than  the 
waking  memory.  Again,  we  have  evidence  in  the  many 
striking  manifestations  of  the  “  post -hypnotic  promise  ” 
that  this  hidden  personality  may  exercise  just  such 
a  potent  influence  on  the  subject’s  waking  hours  as 
the  hidden  personality  of  the  hystero-ansesthetic  is  pre¬ 
sumed  to  exercise  ;  and  the  source  of  the  influence 
will  be  as  completely  hidden  from  the  normal  self 
in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other.  It  is  a  commonl- 
place  for  the  student  of  hypnotism  that,  within  limits, 
it  is  possible  to  guide  a  waking  subject’s  thoughts 
and  actions  in  blind  obedience  to  a  programme  laid 
down  for  him  in  a  previous  state  of  trance.  He  will 
go  the  predestined  journey,  or  make  the  pre-ordained 
fatuous  remark,  and  will  not  even  suspect  that  his 
thought  ^and  action  have  any  other  source  than  his 
own  free  choice  or  the  inspiration  of  the  moment. 

16 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

You  may  even  pervert  his  present  perceptions  or  his 
memory  of  the  past.  Such  an  one,  in  fulfilment  of  a 
forgotten  compact,  \vill  swear  that  his  dwarf  Japanese 
maples  are  fig-trees,  or  will  claim  a  past  acquaintance, 
substantiated  by  full  details  of  time  and  place,  with 
a  perfect  stranger. 

But  the  secondary  personality  in  the  case  of 
F^lida  X.  and  the  “  Misses  Beauchamp  ”  is  obviously  the 
product  of  pathologic  conditions,  whilst  in  the  hypnotic 
subject  it  seems  probable  that  it  is  simply  the  result 
of  training.  Apart  from  these  special  cases,  and  from 
a  few  sporadic  instances  of  latent  fa;culty  emerging 
in  dreams,  or  through  planchette  and  the  crystal,  there 
is  scanty  support  for  the  assumption  of  a  hidden 
personality  in  man.  There  is  little  evidence,  in  other 
words,  that,  in  normal  persons,  there  is  below  ,the 
surface  any  sequence  of  memories  or  separate  form 
of  consciousness,  so  far  organised  or  so  stable  as  to 
deserve  the  name  of  a  secondary  personality  ;  and 
there  is  still  less  evidence  of  interference  with  the 
operations  of  the  work-a-day  self  by  any  such  sub¬ 
terranean  agencies. 

To  put  it  briefly,  the  manifestations  of  the  secondary 
consciousness,  automatism,  the  subliminal  self,  or  what¬ 
ever  else  we  choose  to  call  it,  so  far  as  at  present 
ascertained,  can  be  adequately  explained  up  to  a  certain 
point  in  terms  of  physiology.  .We  are  apparently  con¬ 
cerned,  in  most  cases,  merely  with  the  functioning  of 
lower  cerebral  centres,  or  the  revivification  of  dormant 
tracts  of  cerebral  tissue  ;  possibly,  in  such  cases  as 
F61ida  X.  and  Ansel  Bourne,  with  the  setting  up  and 
removal  of  inhibitory  processes.  Most  of  the  facts 
find  a  sufficient  explanation  in  physiological  terms — 

INTRODUCTION 

17 

except  the  fact  of  consciousness  itself.  But  no  con¬ 
clusive  results  can  be  looked  for  by  approaching  the 
problem  exclusively  from  this  side.  For  the  physical 
explanation  is,  of  course,  largely  conjectural,  and  is 
apt  to  fail  us  just  when  we  need  it  most.  Moreover, 
it  is  Myers’  contention  that  the  subterranean  conscious¬ 
ness  contains  psychical  facts  which  are  not  also  brain 
facts — that  is,  psychical  facts  which  have  no  correlates 
in  rwhat  we  know  as  the  material  world' ;  and  it  is 
easier  to  appraise  the  evidence  for  the  existence  of 
such  psychical  facts  than  to  attempt  to  prove  or  dis¬ 
prove  the  existence  of  any  cerebral  processes  corre¬ 
sponding  with  them.  That  is  the  point  to  which  we 
must  now  address  our  argument. 

Argument  in  this  region  may,  no  doubt,  be  helped 
by  analogy.  But  the  analogy  must  not  be  pressed 
too  much  in  detail.  From  this  point  of  view  Myers’ 
own  metaphor  of  the  spectrum  needs  discreet  handling. 
The  spectrum  as  we  know  it  is  but  a  segment  of  a 
long  series  of  waves,  differing  each  from  the  other 
only  in  amplitude.  Between  the  first  visible  red  ray, 
or  the  last  visible  violet,  and  the  nearest  ray  outside 
the  spectrum  in  each  case,  the  physical  difference  is 
expressible  only  in  infinitesimal  fractions  of  wave 
length.  There  is  nothing  in  external  nature  corre¬ 
sponding  with  the  difference,  for  the  human  observer, 
between  light  and  darkness.  Light  is  merely  the  result 
of  the  adaptation — the  accidental  adaptation,  it  may 
be  said — of  certain  wave  lengths  to  the  structure  of 
the  human  retina.  Now,  this  metaphor  of  the  spectrum 
carries  with  it,  almost  inevitably,  the  implication  that 
the  surface  consciousness  bears  the  same  kind  of 
relation  to  the  potential  consciousness  that  the  visible 

2 

18 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

spectrum  does  to  the  whole  gamut  of  ethereal  vibra¬ 
tions — that,  in  other  words,  our  actual  consciousness 
is  an  arbitrary  selection,  not  corresponding  with  any 
fundamental  difference  in  the  psychical  elements  of 
which  it  is  composed.  The  metaphor  here  ceases  to 
be  a  mere  metaphor,  and  has  leaped  into  the  place 
of  a  theory.  If  we  are  to  argue  by  analogy,  it  is 
safer  to  vary  the  illustration  as  much  as  possible,  in 
order  to  avoid  the  chance  of  being  so  misled. 

The  human  mind,  then,  may  be  compared  with  a 
house,  of  which  consciousness  serves  as  the  reception- 
room.  At  the  stage  of  evolution  which  our  hypo¬ 
thetical  dwelling  has  reached  the  single  primitive  apart¬ 
ment,  which  served  for  eating,  sleeping,  and  living 
in,  has  disappeared,  and  separate  rooms  have  been 
assigned  for  these  several  functions.  The  furniture 
of  the  kitchen  and  bedroom  are  useful,  indispensable 
indeed  ;  but  they  are  no  longer  displayed  for  social 
purposes.  In  such  a  house  search  in  the  attics  or 
the  lumber-room  might  bring  to  light  now  and  again 
curious  and  antiquated  things,  some  of  them  even 
now  good  enough  for  the  drawing-room.  But  groping 
in  the  dust-bin  after  jewels  would  be  likely  to  prove 
unprofitable.  And  few  houses  contain  a  secret  treasure- 
chamber.  The  metq,phor  is  a  homely  one  ;  but  it 
will  serve  to  suggest  another  aspect  of  the  case.  It 
is  to  the  kitchen  and  the  dust -bin,  more  often  than 
to  the  treasure-chamber,  that  expeditions  into  the  sub¬ 
conscious  lead  the  investigator.  For  what  do  we  find 
when  we  pass  out  from  the  reception-room  of  con¬ 
sciousness?  At  the  outset  all  parties  are  agreed.  In 
sleep,  in  the  hypnotic  trance,  and  in  other  sub -conscious 
conditions  we  find  much  that  is  fragmentary  and 

INTRODUCTION 

19 

chaotic — lapsed  and  rejected  impressions  which  repre¬ 
sent  the  mere  debris  of  the  waking  life.  We  find 
also  definite  enlargements  of  faculty.  There  is  often 
an  exaltation  of  some  particular  sense  ;  there  is  very 
generally  a  marked  heightening  of  the  pictorial 
imagination,  amounting  frequently  to  genuine  halluci¬ 
nation.  Further,  the  patient  in  the  hypnotic  trance 
frequently  acquires  new  powers  over  the  organism. 
The  most  familiar  example  of  this  is  the  condition  of 
insensibility  to  pain.  But  the  organism  can  be  influ¬ 
enced  in  many  other  ways.  The  digestion  and  other 
organic  functions  can  be  stimulated  ;  the  circulation 
can  be  directed  and  controlled,  so  that  inflammations 
may  be  reduced,  or,  in  pathologic  cases,  sham  tumours 
and  even  stigmata  may  be  formed.  In  particular,  the 
skin  can  be  readily  affected  ;  some  of  the  most  con¬ 
spicuous  triumphs  of  suggestion  have  consisted  in  the 
cure  of  obstinate  skin  diseases. 

In  all  this  it  is  permissible  to  conjecture  that  we 
are  reverting  to  a  more  primitive  stage  of  conscious¬ 
ness,  that  we  are  regaining  partial  control  over  organic 
processes  which  have  long  since  escaped  from  the 
guidance  of  civilised  man.  We  have,  in  fact,  pene¬ 
trated  to  the  kitchens.  But  there  are  other  remarkable 
powers  occasionally  associated  with  these  sub-conscious 
states,  which  are  of  more  doubtful  interpretation. 
There  is  a  curious  power  of  what  can  best  be  described 
as  “  spatial  memory,”  an  illustration  of  which  was 
quoted  by  Huxley  some  thirty  years  since,  in  a  famous 
article  on  Human  Automatism.  Huxley  cited  the  case 
of  a  soldier  who  had  suffered  some  injury  to  the  brain, 
which  induced  occasional  accesses  of  automatism.  In 
the  automatic  state  he  would  write  from  dictation, 

20 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

without  looking  at  the  paper,  and  would  be  able  to 
correct  what  he  had  written,  crossing  the  t’s  and 
dotting  the  i’s  with  perfect  accuracy,  though  a  sheet 
of  cardboard  were  interposed  between  his  eyes  and 
the  writing.  Similar  observations  have  been  made  on 
hypnotic  subjects  by  William  James  and  others.  The 
power  is  possibly  to  be  explained  as  a  special  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  muscular  sense. 

Again,  there  is  a  remarkable  faculty  of  estimating 
with  laccuracy  the  lapse  of  time  possessed  by  piany 
hypnotic  subjects.  This  may  possibly  be  due  in  simpler 
cases  to  a  quickened  perception  in  the  trance  state  of 
some  organic  rhythm.  But  such  an  explanation  will 
hardly  apply  to  the  remarkable  observations  recorded 
by  Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.  Dr.  Bramwell  made  a 
number  of  experiments  in  giving  a  post-hypnotic 
suggestion  to  be  fulfilled  after  a  considerable  interval 
— the  interval  being  expressed  in  minutes,  so  as  to 
involve  subliminal  processes  of  calculation.  Thus,  to 
take  a  single  instance.  Miss  A.  was  told  in  the 
hypnotic  trance  that,  at  the  expiration  of  1 1,470 
minutes,  wherever  she  might  happen  to'  be,  she  should 
make  a  cross  on  a  piece  of  paper  and  note  down  the 
exact  time  at  which  she  did  it.  Miss  A.  had  noi 
recollection  in  the  waking  state  of  any  such  sugges¬ 
tion  being  giventj  nor  was  she  even  conscious,  either 
in  the  hypnotic  or  the  normal  state,  of  ever  having 
made  the  somewhat  prolonged  calculation  required  to 
find  out  the  actual  time.  Yet,  out  of  fifty-five  experi¬ 
ments  made  with  this  one  subject,  forty-five  were 
completely  successful.^ 

I  An  account  of  the  experiments  will  be  found  in  Dr. 
Bramwell’s  “  Hypnotism  ”  (1903),  pp.  119 — 34. 

INTRODUCTION 

21 

It  is  difificult  to  suppose  that  this  curious  power  is 
merely  the  remains  of  a  lost  faculty,  crowded  out  in 
the  struggle  for  life.  Still  more  remarkable  is  the 
case  of  the  calculating  boys,  dealt  with  pretty  fully 
by  Mr.  Myers. •  The  power  of  extracting  cube  roots 
and  calculating  logarithms  at  sight  can  at  no  period 
have  been  a  common  endowment  of  the  race.  By 
what  strange  freak  of  evolution  does  it  then  from  time 
to  time  make  its  appearance  in  children  and  unlettered 
peasants?  The  fact  should,  at  any  rate,  warn  us  that 
we  are  not  yet  in  a  position  to  dogmatise  on  the 
nature  of  sub -conscious  mentation. 

So  far  we  have  cited  phenomena  which,  if  not  yet 
sufficiently  familiar  to  be  included  in  scientific  systems, 
are  yet  coming  to  be  tacitly  accepted.  But  we  now 
approach  yet  more  dubious  matters.  It  is  on  the  sup¬ 
posed  existence  of  a  group  of  transcendental  faculties 
— telepathy,  clairvoyance,  precognition,  and  the  like — 
that  Myers  in  the  last  analysis  based  his  belief  in  the 
soul’s  immortality.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that 
these  faculties  have  not  yet  been  admitted  to  the  rights 
of  citizenship  in  the  republic  of  science,  though  one 
of  them  has  filed  a  petition  of  naturalisation.  Let  us 
examine  first  the  claims  of  this  aspirant,  telepathy. 

Obviously  there  are  two  questions  to  be  answered  in 
this  connection.  First,  can  one  mind  act  upon  another 
without  the  intervention  of  the  senses  ?  and,  second,  does 
such  a  power,  if  it  exists,  point  to  a  transcendental  ex¬ 
planation?  Myers  was  quite  clear  on  both  points.  Tele¬ 
pathy  does  exist,  and  it  is  transcendental  in  its  nature. 

“  Believe  though  we  may  in  the  ultimate  continuity  of  all 
existence  and  operation,  there  is  still  a  vast  and  sudden 

*  Vol.  i.  p.  79,  seq. 

22 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

separation — unbridgeable  at  present  by  any  hypothesis  of 
ethereal  vibrations  or  the  like — between  the  smallest  act 
of  telepathic  transmission  and  all  that  we  have  previously 
known  concerning  matter  and  motion  ...  we  have  here 
for  mortal  minds  the  Rubicon  between  the  mechanical  and 
the  spiritual  conceptions  of  the  Universe  ”  (i.  24). 

Now,  the  main  evidence  for  the  operation  of  this 
presumed  faculty,  of  telepathy  consists  of  experiments 
in  which  the  two  parties  to  the  transfer,  the  agent 
and  the  percipient,  were  in  the  same  room,  or,  at  any 
rate,  within  a  few  yards  of  each  other.  Many  series 
of  successful  experiments  in  the  transference  of  ideas 
and  sensations  have  been  conducted  under  these  con¬ 
ditions.  The  classic  experiments  of  the  kind  are  those 
carried  on  in  1889  and  1890  by  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick, 
with  the  assistance  of  the  late  Professor  Sidgwick 
and  others.  Some  thousands  of  trials  were  made,  and 
a  high  degree  of  success  was  obtained  in  transferring 
simple  images,  such  as  numerals,  or  even  more  com¬ 
plicated  pictures,  from  the  mind  of  the  agents.  But 
it  was  found  that  a  slight  increase  in  the  distance 
exercised  a  marked  effect  on  the  result. 

These  results  accord  with  the  experience  of  other 
investigators .  There  have  been  a  few  isolated  instances, 
and  a  few  short  series  of  experiments,  in  which  it  is 
claimed  that  definite  ideas  of  numbers,  objects,  or 
pictures  have  been  telepathically  transferred  between 
agent  and  percipient  when  separated  by  distances  vary¬ 
ing  from  hundreds  of  yards  to  hundreds  of  miles. 
But  when  we  remember  the  habitual  inaccuracy  of 
untrained  investigators,  and  the  various  sources  of  error 
in  experiments  of  this  kind,  together  with  the  practical 
certainty  that  the  successes  reported,  even  if  recorded 

INTRODUCTION 

23 

with  perfect  accuracy,  bear  but  an  infinitesimal  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  unrecorded  failures,  it  is  impossible  to 
assign  much  weight  to  these  sporadic  instances  of 
“  thought-transference  at  a  distance.”  The  only 
series  of  experiments  at  a  distance  comparable — by 
reason  of  the  competence  of  the  observers,  the  care 
with  which  the  trials  were  conducted,  and  the  precision 
of  the  results — with  the  Brighton  experiments  of  Mrs. 
Sidgwick  are  the  experiments  carried  on  at  Havre  in 
1885  and  1886  by  Dr.  Gibert  and  Professor  Janet. 
The  subject  was  Madame  B. — better  known  to  the 
world  at  large  through  her  later  experiences  as 
“  E^onie  ’’  ;  the  distance  varied  from  a  quarter  of  a 
mile  to  a  mile  ;  the  effect  aimed  at  was  the  induction 
of  the  hypnotic  trance.  A  fair  amount  of  success 
was  obtained  ;  and  the  results  certainly  go  some  way 
to  prove  that  telepathic  influence  can,  under  favourable 
circumstances,  operate  over  a  considerable  interval  of 
space.  But,  even  if  we  admit  that  the  result  was  not 
due  to  unconscious  expectation  on  the  part  of  the  per¬ 
cipient,  we  have  still  something  very  different  from 
the  transfer  at  close  quarters  of  a  complex  visual  or 
auditory  image. 

In  some  recent  experiments  undertaken  by  Miss 
Clarissa  Miles  and  Miss  Gwendolen  Ramsden  the  agent 
and  percipient  were  separated  by  a  much  greater 
distance,  varying  from  twenty  to  three  hundred  miles 
or  more  ;  and  there  appears  to  be  evidence  of  the 
transmission  of  such  complex  images  as  portions  of 
a  building  and  real  scenes.  The  experiments  were 
conducted  and  recorded  with  care,  each  lady  writing 
down  her  experience  on  a  postcard  despatched  on  the 
day  of  the  experiment.  And  the  correspondence 

24 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

between  the  impressions  of  the  two  parties  was  in 
many  cases  fairly  precise  Moreover,  as  shown 
in  a  later  chapter,  there  are  some  instances 
of  “  cross -correspondence  ”  between  the  scripts  of 
various  automatists,  which  appear  to  involve  telepathy 
over  a  distance  measured  by  thousands  of  miles.  But 
this  recent  evidence,  however  good  of  its  kind,  is  hardly 
yet  sufficient  in  bulk  wholly  to  overthrow,  though  it 
may  be  admitted  to  weaken,  the  presumption  derived 
from  the  Brighton  experiments.  In  his  recent  work, 
“  The  Survival  of  Man  ” — the  only  authoritative  pro¬ 
nouncement  on  the  evidence  as  a  whole  since  Myers’ 
book — Sir  Oliver  Lodge  recognises  that  the  experi¬ 
mental  evidence  is  not  yet  sufficient  to  substantiate 
the  non-physical  nature  of  telepathy.® 

Arguing  from  experimental  results  alone,  then,  we 
are  not  yet  justified  in  claiming  a  transcendental  origin 
for  telepathy,  even  if  we  admit  it  as  a  fact  in  nature. 
There  are  presumed  to  be  molecular  disturbances  in 
brain -tissue  corresponding  with  each  act  of  thought  ; 
there  may  be  ethereal  vibrations  set  up  by  these  various 
changes,  which  may  bring  about  corresponding  changes 
in  brains  somehow  attuned.  The  prejudicial  effect 
on  the  results  of  even  a  slight  increase  of  distance 
suggests  a  physical  explanation  on  some  such  lines 
as  these.  It  would  be  quite  in  harmony  with  a  physical 
explanation  that,  whilst  the  shallow  and  strictly 
localised  vibrations  corresponding  with  an  image 
summoned  up  ad  hoc  [(a  playing-card  or  number  pr 

•  See  the  accounts  of  these  recent  experiments  in  Pro¬ 
ceedings  S.P.R.,  vol,  xxi.  pp.  60,  seg.  ;  and  Journal  S  P-R- 
for  June,  1908. 

2  Op.  cit.,  p.  116. 

INTRODUCTION 

25 

diagram)  should  be  rapidly  extinguished  as  the  distance 
increases,  the  more  massive  and  deep-seated  vibra¬ 
tions  corresponding  with  the  agent’s  conception  of  his 
own  personality  should  make  their  influence  more 
widely  felt.  And  there,  if  we  had  only  the  experimental 
evidence,  the  matter  would  end. 

But  another  large  class  of  phenomena  has  been 
subsumed  under  the  category  of  telepathy,  a  class  of 
which  the  common  stories  of  apparitions  at  the  time 
of  death  may  be  taken  as  the  type.  The  distance  here 
appears  to  be  immaterial  ;  the  percipient  and  the  dying 
man  may  be  separated  by  the  whole  diameter  of  the 
earth.  Now,  “we  may  be  justifled — speaking  for  myself, 
I  think  we  are  justifled — in  attempting  to  correlate 
these  phenomena  with  those.  But  we  are  bound  to 
recognise,  in  the  first  place,  that  we  are  dealing  with 
evidence  of  a  very  different  quality.  The  evidence 
for  thought-transference  at  close  quarters  is  experi¬ 
mental  ;  and  the  experiments  have  been  conducted  by 
such  competent  investigators  as  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  Edmund 
Gurney,  Professor  ,W.  F.  Barrett,  Sir  Oliver  Bodge, 
Pierre  Janet,  Charles  Richet,  and  others  of  like  calibre. 
Yet,  even  so,  it  is  still  a  claimant  for  scientific  recog¬ 
nition.  But  the  evidence  for  apparitions  at  death 
depends  upon  observation,  and  upon  the  observation 
of  untrained,  often  of  ignorant  and  credulous,  witnesses  ; 
there  are  very  few  contemporary  records,  and  the 
evidence  is  subject  to  all  the  defects  of  observation, 
memory,  and  narration  in  persons  unused  to  observe 
or  describe  with  accuracy.  Moreover,  the  emotions 
are  so  deeply  engaged  that  accurate  accounts  are  in 
many  cases  hardly  to  be  looked  for.  .Whilst,  there¬ 
fore,  the  attempt  to  correlate  the  two  classes  of  pheno- 

26 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

mena  is  perhaps  legitimate,  we  can  hardly  be  justified 
in  making  the  spontaneous  phenomena  the  basis  of  a 
theory  of  telepathy. 

On  the  naturalistic  view,  the  apparitions  of  the  dying, 
if  they  really  do  occur,  and  are  not  altogether  to  be 
explained  by  unconscious  perversion  of  testimony,  are 
simply  telepathically  induced  hallucinations.  What  is 
transferred  from  the  mind  of  the  dying  man  to  the 
percipient  is,  on  this  view,  just  a  vague,  massive  feeling 
of  the  agent’s  personality — that  and  nothing  more.  The 
vibrations  started  by  this  feeling  (for  it  has  in  it,  ex 
hypothesi,  more  of  emotional  than  of  intellectual 
quality),  impinging  on  the  percipient’s  brain,  give  rise 
to  the  idea  of  his  friend,  which  is  thereupon  clothed 
in  hallucinatory  form.  Briefly,  the  apparition  seen  is 
purely  subjective  ;  it  is  only  the  impulse  which  caused 
it  to  be  projected  which  can  claim  a  source  external 
to  the  percipient’s  mind.  If  it  is  thought  inconceivable 
that  a  primitive  massive  feeling  of  that  kind  should 
have  power  to  penetrate  to  so:  great  a  distance-,  the 
alternative  is,  not  to  subvert  our  theory  of  telepathy, 
but  to  leave  apparitions  of  the  dying  on  one  side. 
Considered  by  themselves,  they  hardly  carry  weight 
enough  to  count  ;  it  is  only  because  of  their  pre¬ 
sumed  kinship  with  the  manifestations  of  experimental 
telepathy  that  they  have  any  claim  to  be  heard  at  all. 

Myers’  ovra  procedure  is  the  precise  reverse  of  that 
above  indicated.  In  building  up  his  theory  he  starts 
with  the  more  sensational  and  more  dubious  phenomena, 
and  works  backwards  to  those  which  are  simpler  and 
better  attested.  Consider  the  following  passage  : 

“  In  this  world  of  vibrations  it  may  seem  at  first  the 
simplest  plan  to  invoke  a  vibration  the  more.  But  in  the 

INTRODUCTION 

27 

case  of  telepathy  the  analogy  which  suggests  this  explana¬ 
tion,  the  obvious  likeness  between  the  picture  emitted  (so 
to  say)  by  the  agent  and  the  picture  received  by  the 
percipient — as  when  I  fix  my  mind  on  the  two  of  diamonds, 
and  he  sees  a  mental  picture  of  that  card — goes  but  a  very 
short  way.  One  has  very  soon  to  begin  assuming  that  the 
percipient’s  mind  modifies  the  picture  despatched  from  the 
agent  ;  until  the  likeness  between  the  two  pictures  becomes 
quite  a  symbolical  affair.  We  have  seen  that  there  is  a 
continuous  transition  from  experimental  to  spontaneous  tele¬ 
pathy  ;  from  our  transferred  picture  of  a  card  to  monition 
of  a  friend’s  death  at  a  distance.  Mere  monitions  may 
indeed  be  pictures  of  the  dying  friend  ;  but  they  are  seldom 
such  pictures  as  the  decedent’s  brain  seems  likely  to  project 
in  the  form  in  which  they  reach  the  percipient.  Mr.  L. 
— to  take  a  well-known  case  in  our  collection — dies  of  heart 
disease  when  in  the  act  of  lying  down  undressed  in  bed. 
At  or  about  the  same  moment  Mr.  N.  J.  S.  sees  Mr.  L. 
standing  beside  him  with  a  cheerful  air,  dressed  for  walking 
and  with  a  cane  in  his  hand.  One  does  not  see  how  a 
system  of  undulations  could  have  transmuted  the  physical 
facts  in  this  way  ”  (i.  245). 

How  the  vision  of  Mr.  L\  is  to  be  explained  on 
the  naturalistic  view  I  have  already  indicated.  Myers’ 
own  explanation  is,  by  the  plain  man,  hardly  to  be 
distinguished  from  the  primitive  conception  of  a  ghost, 
as  a  thing  tangible  and  having  form  and  parts  prtd 
magnitude  ;  though  he  himself  would,  I  believe,  have 
repudiated  the  comparison.  He  supposed,  at  any  rate, 
that  persons  whose  apparitions  are  thus  rendered 
visible  have  a  “  psychorrhagic  diathesis  ” — that  is,  are 
so  constituted  that  some  portion  of  the  soul  or  psyche 
may  actually  leave  the  body  at  moments  of  crisis,  may 
travel  through  space,  and  may  make  its  presence  visible 
at  a  distant  spot.  In  his  own  words  : 

“  I  still  believe — and  more  confidently  than  in  1886 — 
that  a  psychical  invasion  does  take  place  ;  that  a 

28 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

phantasmo -genetic  centre  is  actually  established  in  the  per¬ 
cipient’s  surroundings  ;  that  some  movement  bearing  some 
relation  to  space  as  we  know  it  is  actually  accomplished  ; 
and  some  presence  is  transferred,  and  may  or  may  not  be 
discerned  by  the  invaded  person  ”  (i.  247). 

This  theory,  as  said,  is  founded  on  the  least 
authentic  part  of  the  evidence  at  hand.  But,  in  fact, 
out  of  a  dubious  and  sensational  class  of  phenomena, 
Myers  chose  precisely  the  most  sensational  and  most 
dubious  instances  to  form  the  foundation-stones  of  his 
edifice.  Apparitions  at  death,  such  as  the  case  just 
quoted — the  momentary  vision  by  a  solitary  percipient 
of  a  dying  man  dressed  as  his  friend  w^as  accustomed 
to  see  him — belong  to  a  fairly  well  established  type. 
Stories  of  this  kind  are  sufficiently  numerous  and  con¬ 
gruent  to  command  attention.  It  is  not,  however,  on 
such  as  these  that  the  transcendental  theory  is  based  ; 
but  rather  on  sporadic  cases  of  apparitions  seen  by 
several  persons  at  once  ;  of  apparitions  seen,  not  by 
friends,  but  by  uninterested  strangers  standing  near  ; 
of  the  dying  man  and  his  friend  reciprocally  visiting 
and  seeing  the  other.  If  the  whole  class  barely  wins 
recognition,  what  weight  is  to  be  attached  to  such 
outlying  and  aberrant  types,  supported  as  they  com¬ 
monly  are  by  evidence  imperfect,  scanty,  and  remote 
in  date?  However  honest  the  narrators,  it  is  impossible 
to  attach  much  credence  to  details,  especially  to 
melodramatic  details,  in  narratives  of  this  kind. 

But  if  apparitions  of  the  dying,  and  other  kindred 
phenomena,  are  only  worth  considering  because  of  their 
possible  connection  with  experimental  thought-trans¬ 
ference,  what  is  to  be  said  of  clairvoyance,  precogni¬ 
tion,  retrocognition,  and  the  other  transcendental  modes 

INTRODUCTION 

29 

of  pefception?  The  evidence  in  these  cases  is  very 
much  weaker.  It  is  less  in  quantity  ;  it  is  inferior 
in  the  accuracy  of  the  records — there  are  only  one  or 
two  cases  of  prophecy,  for  instance,  noted  down  before 
the  event  ;  the  testimonies  quoted  are  frequently  vague 
and  often  of  ancient  date  ;  and  there  is  no  experi¬ 
mental  evidence  to  support  the  claim.  The  last 
statement,  indeed,  requires  some  qualification.  There 
is  a  good  deal  of  testimony,  in  the  works  of  the  early 
mesmerists,  for  what  is  called  “  clairvoyance  at  close 
quarters  ” — the  vision  of  objects  enclosed  in  boxes,  or 
placed  behind  screens,  and  so  on.  It  has  been  the 
lot  of  the  present  writer  to  examine  all  the  best  avail¬ 
able  records  of  this  kind  ;  to  weigh  the  evidence,  and 
to  find  it  in  every  case  wanting.  Sometimes  the  results 
might  be  explained  by  thought-transference  ;  more 
commonly  they  are,  as  in  certain  recent  experiments 
at  which  I  have  assisted,  attributable  to  fraud  on  the 
part  of  the  percipient,  or  to  a  misconception  (common 
enough  in  the  hypnotic  trance)  of  the  source  frorb 
which  he  obtained  his  information.  In  the  classic  case 
of  Major  Buckley’s  clairvoyants  •  there  can  be  very 
little  doubt  that  the  procedure  was  deliberately 
fraudulent.  So  in  the  case  of  X  -f  Y  =  Z,  quoted  in 
the  same  volume,  there  are  the  strongest  grounds  for, 
attributing  the  alleged  clairvoyance  to  trickery  on  the 
part  of  a  pathological  secondary  personality .2 

In  short,  Myers’  argument  is  sound,  and  may  ulti¬ 
mately  prove  fruitful.  But  the  data  are  at  present 
wholly  insufficient,  and  hardly  any  fresh  evidence  of 
these  hypothetical  powers  of  the  imprisoned  soul  has 

«  Quoted  by  Myers,  vol.  i.  557,  sei/.,  from  the  Zoist. 

2  See  a  brief  account  of  this  case  below.  Book  II.  chap.  i. 

30 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

been  adduced  since  his  death. ^  In  these  lofty  regions, 
where  we  almost  lose  sight  of  terrestrial  analogies, 
we  have  no  right  to  use  the  word  “  impossible,” 
perhaps  not  even  the  word  ‘‘  improbable.”  Let  us 
admit  that  it  is  wholly  a  question  of  evidence.  But, 
so  far  as  the  evidence  at  present  goes,  clairvoyance 
and  precognition  are  mere  chimeras,  and  telepathy  may 
be  no  more  than  a  vestigial  faculty,  to  remind  us,  like 
the  prehensile  powers  of  the  newly-born  infant,  of  a 
time  when  man  was  in  the  making. 

Myers’  great  synthesis,  therefore,  remains  alike  in 
its  strength  and  weakness  untouched  since  his  death. 
Within  the  last  nine  years,  in  fact,  psychical  research 
has  turned  its  energies  in  other  directions — to  the 
physical  phenomena,  chiefly  of  Eusapia  Palladino,  and 
to  the  trance  revelations  of  Mrs.  Piper  and  the  sub¬ 
conscious  writings  of  a  band  of  automatists,  most  of 
whom  owe  their  interest  in  the  subject  directly  to  the 
influence  of  Myers  himself. 

•  In  his  recent  book,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  devotes  two 
chapters  to  the  evidence  for  clairvoyance  and  prevision. 
But  only  one  of  the  examples  cited  is  new  ;  and  most  of 
the  cases  grouped  under  Clairvoyance  are  explicable  by 
telepathy,  or  perhaps  by  even  more  familiar  causes. 

The  Newer  Spiritualism 

BOOK  I 

CHAPTER  I 

THE  OLDER  SPIRITUALISM  :  DANIEL  DUNGLAS  HOME 

The  movement  of  modern  spiritualism  is  by  no  means 
dying  out.  The  last  decade,  in  fact,  has  been  in  some 
respects  more  fruitful  than  any  similar  period  in  the 
past,  and  has  presented  us  with  an  entirely  new  set 
of  problems,  of  which  the  most  confident  critic  can 
scarcely  yet  claim  to  have  found  the  solution.  The 
last  ten  years  have  been  fruitful  in  two  directions. 
On  the  one  hand,  the  belief  in  the  physical  phenomena 
has  received  a  powerful  impetus  from  the  feats  of  the 
Italian  medium  Eusapia  Palladino,  who  has  won  over 
many  scientific  men  to  her  allegiance.  On  the  other 
hand,  there  has  been  an  altogether  new  and  striking 
development  in  the  trance  messages  received  through 
Mrs.  Piper  and  the  writings  of  a  new  group  of  auto- 
matists,  ladies  of  culture,  who  have  themselves  taken 
a  leading  part  in  investigating  the  remarkable  messages 
written  by  their  unconscious  hands. 

Now,  the  ordinary  unlearned  spiritualist  bases  his 

31 

32 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

belief  in  a  spirit  world  on  these  two  heterogeneous 
groups  of  facts,  the  movement  of  tables  and  tambour¬ 
ines  in  the  dark  and  the  messages  received  through 
automatic  writing  or  in  trance.  And,  in  fact,  hetero¬ 
geneous  though  they  may  seem,  the  unlearned 
spiritualist  is  no  doubt  right  in  refusing  to  dissociate 
the  two  classes  of  phenomenon.  For  they  are  con¬ 
stantly  associated  in  rerum  naiura.  This,  in  fact,  is 
the  justification  for  their  treatment  side  by  side  in 
the  present  book.  For  the  chief  interest  in  the  recent 
automatic  writings  lies  for  most  persons  in  the  hope 
which  they  hold  out  of  bringing  us  into  touch  with  a 
world  beyond  the  grave  ;  whilst  few  even  of  those 
who  believe  in  the  genuineness  of  Eusapia’s  feats  are 
now  disposed  to  attribute  them  to  the  a'gency  of  spirits 
disincarnate.  But  it  is  an  historical  fact  that  the 
physical  and  the  psychical  manifestations  have  always 
been  closely  associated  together  ;  that  the  peculiar 
physiological  or  psychical  temperament  which  has  pre¬ 
disposed  its  possessor  to  automatic  utterance  has  also 
commonly  predisposed  him  to  move  tables  and  play 
on  musical  instruments  in  the  dark.  In  the  attempt, 
therefore,  to  decipher  the  secret  of  these,  it  would 
seem,  still  unexplained  automatic  messages,  it  is 
essential  that  the  student  should  first  make  himself 
conversant  with  the  so-called  physical  phenomena  of 
spiritualism.  In  the  following  chapters,  in  order  to 
attain  something  of  the  proper  perspective,  the  dis¬ 
cussion  of  Eusapia  Palladino’s  recent  feats  is  prefaced 
by  a  brief  summary  of  the  most  important  achievements 
of  physical  mediumship  in  the  past.  For  this  purpose 
I  have  selected  the  career  of  Daniel  Dunglas  Honie, 
No  well-informed  spiritualist  will  deny  that  in  Home 

THE  OLDER  SPIRITUALISM 

33 

the  case  is  presented  at  its  best.  No  medium  ever 
performed  more  remarkable  feats  or  before  witnesses 
so  distinguished  and  so  competent.  Further,  Home 
stands  alone  amongst  physical  mediums  in  that  he  was 
never  exposed  in  fraudulent  practices. 

Daniel  Dunglas  Hume,  or  Home,  as  he  later 
preferred  to  spell  his  name,  was,  according  to  his 
own  account,  born  in  Edinburgh  in  1833.  In  one 
of  his  autobiographical  writings  he  claims  descent 
from  the  tenth  Earl  of  Home  ;  but  no  proof  is 
offered  for  the  statement.  At  an  early  period 
of  his  life  he  was  taken  to  America  by  an  aunt, 
and  lived  with'  her  until  1850.  From  that  date 
onwards  he  practised  as  a  spirit  medium,  at  first  in 
America,  later  mainly  in  England  and  on  the  Continent. 
It  does  not  appear  that  he  ever  accepted  a  definite 
money  payment  for  his  stances.  He  was  a  man,  from 
the  testimony  of  all  who  knew  him,  of  great  personal 
charm.  Mr.  lOn  Perdicaris,  who  knew  him  well  in  the 
early  part  of  his  career  both  in  America  and  in  this 
country,  has  described  him  to  me  as  “  very  vain  of 
his  personal  appearance,  with  a  quite  innocent  and  not 
unpleasing  vanity.  Always  pleasing  manners — very 
affectionate  towards  all — men,  women,  and  children 
alike.”  Speaking  at  a  meeting  of  the  Society  for 
Psychical  Research  in  1 894,  Sir  W.  Crookes  said  :  “  Tq 
those  who  knew  him  Home  was  one  of  the  most  lovable 
of  men,  and  his  perfect  genuineness  and  uprightness 
were  beyond  suspicion.”  • 

His  chief  characteristics  seem  to  have  been  a  child¬ 
like  spontaneity,  gaiety,  and  frankness,  and  an  over¬ 
flowing  warmth  of  affection  for  those  around  him. 

'  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  345. 

3 

34 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

These  qualities,  together  with  the  exercise  of  his 
wonderful  powers,  secured  him  throughout  his  life  the 
friendship  and  patronage  of  many  persons  of  wealth 
and  social  distinction.  He  lived  in  their  houses  and 
enjoyed  their  hospitality  ;  a  circle  of  American  friends 
subscribed  money  to  send  him  to  Europe  ;  in  this 
country  he  lived  with  and  on  his  spiritualist  admirers  ; 
when  funds  were  low  he  gave  public  recitations,  and 
his  friends  took  tickets,  or  set  up  a  studio,  and  his 
friends  gave  him  commissions  ;  he  married  succes¬ 
sively  two  ladies  with  private  fortunes.  Mr.  Perdicaris 
provided  at  one  period  for  the  education  of  his  youn;g 
son  ;  at  another  time  a  salaried  position  as  secretary 
to  a  spiritualist  society  was  founded  for  him  by  some 
wealthy  patrons. 

Home’s  life  seems  after  childhood  to  have  been 
almost  uniquely  successful  in  the  kind  of  success  at 
which  he  aimed.  But  there  was  one  failure.  Mrs. 
Lyon  was  a  wealthy  widow  who,  in  default  of  a  natural 
heir,  professed  her  desire  to  adopt  Daniel  Home.  As 
earnest  of  greater  benefactions  to  follow  she  pre¬ 
sented  him  with  the  sum  of  £40,000,  besides  various 
gifts,  and  Home  in  turn  took  the  name  of  his  adopted 
parent.  A  few  months  later  Mrs.  Lyon  changed  her 
intentions  and  desired  to  revoke  her  gifts.  She 
obtained  a  verdict  in  her  favour,  and  the  money  had 
to  be  returned.  In  giving  judgment  the  Court  appears 
to  have  felt  that,  though  no  definite  charge  of  fraud 
or  illicit  influence  could  be  proved  against  Home,  there 
was  in  the  circumstances  a  strong  presumption  that  Mrs. 
Lyon’s  gifts  were  not  “  acts  of  pure  volition  uninfluenced.” 

In  this  country  Home  gave  stances  to  many  persons 
of  distinction,  amongst  them  Lord  Brougham,  Sir  David 

THE  OLDER  SPIRITUALISM 

35 

Brewster,  Robert  Owen,  Sir  E.  Bulwer  Lytton,  T.  A. 
Trollope,  and  Dr,  Garth  Wilkinson.  But  the  chief 
English  witnesses  to  his  phenomena  were,  as  will  be 
seen.  Sir  William  Crookes,  Lord  Adare  (the  present 
Earl  of  Dunraven),  the  Master  of  Lindsay  (the  present 
Earl  of  Crawford),  and  Mr.  H.  D,  Jencken.  Home 
was  also  a  frequent  visitor  to  the  Continent  ;  he  per¬ 
formed  on  more  than  one  occasion  before  the  Emperor 
and  Empress  at  the  Tuileries,  before  the  Czar  of 
Russia,  and  many  other  royal  and  noble  personages. 
He  first  paid  this  country  a  brief  visit  in  1855;  but 
his  most  remarkable  manifestations  were  given  during 
his  more  prolonged  residence  here  from  i860  to  1872 
or  thereabouts. 

After  the  latter  year,  having  shortly  before  married 
his  second  wife,  he  retired  into  private  life,  broke 
with  most  of  his  old  friends,  and  finally  died  in  1886. 

This  brief  sketch  of  Home’s  life  and  character  jis 
necessary  to  a  proper  understanding  of  the  phenomena 
produced  in  his  presence  and  through  his  agency. 
During  the  period  of  his  youth,  when  Home  practised 
as  a  spirit  medium  in  America — from  1850  to  1855 — 
there  were  many  other  mediums  producing  apparently 
similar  phenomena  and  with  apparently  almost  equal 
success.  If  Home  excelled  them  at  all  in  public  esti¬ 
mation,  it  appears  to  have  been  due  more  to  his  social 
qualities  than  to  any  other  superiority  of  endowment. 
The  Fox  Girls,  Gordon,  Cooley,  Abby  Warner,  E.  S. 
Fowler,  and  other  practitioners  of  that  date  could  move 
tables  in  the  dark  no  less  persuasively  ;  could  dis¬ 
course  sounds  to  the  ear  of  faith  not  less  entrancing 
on  divers  instruments  of  music  ;  could  to  the  eye  of 
faith  display  spirit  hands  and  faces  not  less  convincing. 

36 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

It  was  on  his  second  visit  to  this  country,  as  already 
said,  that  his  powers  appear  to  have  reached  their 
maximum  development.  Mr.  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  a  well- 
known  solicitor,  gives  an  account  of  a  typical  stance 
at  that  period  : 

“  .  .  .  There  were  eight  of  us,  all  well  known  to  me,  and 
some  of  them  known  wherever  the  English  language  is 
spoken.  We  were  in  the  drawing-room  of  a  house  in 
Cornwall  Terrace,  Regent’s  Park,  and  we  sat  round  a  large 
loo-table  and  commenced  talking.  Curiously  enough,  one 
having  said  that  Professor  Faraday  was  coming  on  the 
following  Monday  to  a  stance,  and  speculating  as  to  his 
guardian  spirit  not  allowing  him  to  be  easily  convinced, 
there  were  at  once  very  loud  knocks  on  the  table  in  affirma¬ 
tion  of  that  proposition.  I  was  sitting  next  to  my  wife,  on 
her  right  hand,  and  immediately  afterwards  I  felt  my  left 
leg  gently  touched,  in  a  position  where  it  was  impossible 
for  Mr.  Home  to  have  reached  it.  There  then  began  ,a 
gentle  but  deep  vibration  of  the  table,  chairs,  and  floor, 
till  all  the  room  was  shaking  violently,  during  which  the 
table  rose  about  ten  inches,  the  trembling  continuing  all  the 
time.  The  table  began  to  rise  on  the  opposite  side  to  where 
Mr.  Home  was  sitting,  and  it  was  clearly  out  of  his  power 
to  have  so  raised  it.  Mr.  Home’s  chair  Was  quietly  moved 
back,  away  from  the  table,  about  three  feet  ;  and,  whilst 
there,  the  dresses  of  my  wife  and  the  lady  next  to  her  were 
both  pulled,  and  so  strongly  that  I  could  see  them  dragging 
down.  I  also  felt  my  wife’s  dress  whilst  being  so  pulled, 
and  there  was  a  wonderful  force  expended  in  the  act.  At 
this  time  Mr.  Home  was  fully  six  feet  off,  and  both  from  the 
distance  and  from  his  being  in  full  view,  I  could  see  that 
it  was  done  by  no  force  of  his.  Mr.  Home  now  held  the 
accordion  in  his  right  hand  beside  his  chair,  and  it  at  once 
began  to  play.  He  held  it  by  the  bottom,  the  keys  being 
on  the  top,  and  they  were  therefore  out  of  his  reach.  It  was 
impossible  that  he  could  touch  them.  I  carefully  examined 
the  instrument,  opening  the  slide  beneath  the  keys,  and  I 
found  it  to  be  a  common  instrument,  with  only  the  usual 
mechanism  of  the  keys.  There  was  nothing  inside  it. 

THE  OLDER  SPIRITUALISM 

37 

I  looked  steadily  at  it,  and  at  the  hand  and  fingers  with 
which  he  held  it.  There  it  was,  being  pulled  up  and  down, 
and  discoursing  sweet  sounds,  whilst  his  hand  was  stationary 
and  his  fingers  motionless.  I  could  see  above  and  beneath 
the  instrument,  and  there  was  no  visible  cause  for  its  motion, 
nor  for  the  opening  and  shutting  of  the  keys  which  caused 
the  music.  When  it  ceased,  my  wife  asked  if  it  could  not 
be  played  in  her  hand,  and  immediately  the  instrument 
emitted  three  sounds,  which  we  took  to  mean  that  it  would 
have  much  pleasure  in  trying.  It  was  accordingly  given  to 
her,  and,  whilst  she  was  holding  it,  she  said  she  felt  one 
of  her  fingers  being  touched.  Immediately  afterwards  the 
table  was  raised  about  a  foot  steadily  from  the  floor.  As 
there  was  no  sound  from  the  accordion  in  her  hands,  she 
returned  it  to  Mr.  Home,  but  it  was  taken  from  his  hand 
immediately  and  given  back  to  her,  and,  whilst  in  her  right 
hand,  it  began  to  play.  She  felt  it  distinctly  lifted  up  and 
drawn  forcibly  down,  and  she  did  not  and  could  not  touch 
the  keys,  which,  however,  must  necessarily  be  opened  to 
make  a  sound.  In  Mr.  Home’s  hands  a  beautiful  tune  was 
now  played,  during  which  we  heard  what  has  been  so  often 
described — the  full  notes  gradually  decreasing  till  they  died 
away  into  the  thinnest  streaks  of  sound.  By  three  quickly 
repeated  notes  it  was  promised  that  the  instrument  should 
play  the  tune  of  the  other  evening,  representing  ‘  The  Two 
Lives,’  the  one  in  this  life,  the  other  in  that  which  follows. 
The  first,  or  this  world’s  life,  was  represented  by  discords, 
grating  painfully  on  the  ear,  and  which  I  thought  did  but 
scant  justice  to  a  world  which,  though  capable  of  improve¬ 
ment,  still  has  some  rich  harmonies  within  its  depths.  In 
mercy  to  our  ears,  the  first  life  did  not  last  long,  and  was 
then  succeeded  by  the  second,  which  was  made  up  of  beau¬ 
tiful,  soft,  angel  music,  such  as  I  had  never  heard.  It 
played  for  several  minutes,  swelling  into  rich  sounds,  of 
which  the  sweetness  was  enchanting  to  the  ear,  and  gradually 
changed  into  the  dear  tune  of  ‘  Home,  sweet  home.’  .  .  . 

“  But  now  the  table  rises  again  a  clear  foot  from  the 
floor,  and  there  stands,  not  quietly,  but  strongly  undulating, 
still  so  that  I  was  able  to  make  the  following  note  on  my 
paper  resting  on  the  table,  whilst  at  its  full  height  :  ‘  Table 
rose  a  foot.  Count  10.  I  wrote  this  whilst  up  and  undulat¬ 
ing.’  It  then  gently  descended  to  the  floor  again.  We  now 

38 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

changed  places  according  to  directions,  and  a  gentleman 
became  my  right-hand  neighbour,  who,  in  a  minute  after, 
said  that  he  saw  a  hand  which  he  believed  to  be  his  son’s. 

I  did  not  see  it,  nor  did  I  see  three  fingers  which  my 
wife  shortly  after  saw  ;  but,  in  answer  to  a  question,  I  had 
three  taps  on  my  knee  as  from  a  hand,  still  with  no  such 
distinctness  as  to  make  me  sure  what  it  was.  At  this 
time,  several  at  once  said  they  saw  a  light,  cloudy  appearance 
dart  across  the  room,  but,  being  behind  me,  I  saw  nothing 
of  it.  I 

“  In  one  corner  of  the  room,  near  where  we  were  sitting, 
was  a  shrine  with  several  Indian  idols  of  bronze.  Suddenly 
there  was  a  commotion  among  them,  and  a  crash,  and  a 
large  one  was  thrown  down,  and  brought  with  some  violence 
and  noise  under  the  table.  There  it  appeared  as  if  it  was 
in  the  hands  of  some  vigorous  power  ;  and  presently  we 
heard  a  jingling  of  some  metallic  substance  against  it,  which 
afterwards  proved  to  be  a  metal  ornamental  canopy,  which 
had  been  unscrewed  from  the  back  of  the  idol,  and  with 
which  questions  were  now  answered  by  knocking  them  to¬ 
gether.  In  like  manner,  loud  knocks  were  made  in  answer 
to  questions,  by  rattling  the  idol  against  the  floor.  A 
remark  was  made  as  to  the  want  of  respect  thus  indicated, 
and  at  once  a  number  of  jubilant  raps  were  produced  by 
again  knocking  the  two  parts  of  the  idol  together.  Two  or 
three  times  the  idol  appeared,  pushing  up  inside  of  the 
table-cloth,  and  twice  it  made  its  appearance  naked  above 
the  table,  and  gently  reached  the  ground  again.  Some 
flowers  were  brought  from  the  shrine,  and  placed  in  the 
hand  of  each  person  present.  Our  present  consisted  of  a 
rose  and  several  pinks.  I  felt  the  rose  placed  in  my  hand 
under  the  table,  all  other  hands  being,  visible  and  on  the 
table. 

“  Several  times  during  the  evening  we  all  perceived  a 
cool  air  pervading  the  table,  and  which  it  was  impossible 
not  to  notice.  The  accordion  was  now  placed  on  the  floor, 
and  all  hands  on  the  table,  when  it  was  heard  to  sound 
clearly  several  times,  but  no  tune  was  played.  It  then 
tried  to  get  from  the  floor  to  the  table,  but  was  not  able 
to  accomplish  the  whole  journey,  and  fell  gently  back  to  the 
floor.  The  table  was  now  again  raised  clear  from  the 
ground,  both  my  feet  being  on  its  pediment,  and  pressing 

THE  OLDER  SPIRITUALISM 

39 

heavily  downwards  the  whole  time.  The  resistance  and 
upward,  steady  movement  of  the  table  were  strangely  curious, 
as  was  its  careful,  quiet  descent,  my  feet  still  pressing  on 
it,  and  yet  it  reached  the  ground  without  noise.  There  was 
nov/  a  general  rattle  among  the  idols,  and  several  loud 
knocks,  and  then  came  an  end  of  a  very  interesting  evening, 
during  which  I  had  seen  and  heard  what  was  sufficient  to 
convince  me  that  those  are  wrong  who  deny  the  possibility 
of  these  phenomena.”  «  , 

This  account  is  typical  in  all  respects.  This  order 
of  phenomena  was  almost  invariably  observed  at  a 
mixed  seance.  First  came  raps  and  knocks,  then 
vibrations  of  the  table  and  room,  levitation  of  the 
table,  touches  on  the  hands  and  dress  of  the  sitters 
under  the  table,  self -playing  of  the  accordion — even 
the  tunes  showed  little  variation.  After  the  simpler 
phenomena  would  follow,  if  the  circumstances  were 
favourable,  visible  hands  and  arms,  luminous  appear¬ 
ances,  variously  described  as  clouds,  or  hands,  or  even 
heads,  movements  of  various  articles  of  furniture  from 
distant  parts  of  the  room  up  to  the  table  in  the  vicinity 
of  the  medium,  a  general  distribution  of  flowers. 
Sometimes,  when  the  sitters  were  tried  and  trust¬ 
worthy,  still  more  remarkable  phenomena  occurred. 
The  polished  table  would  be  inclined  at  an  angle  of 
450  or  more,  and  all  the  articles  on  it — candlesticks, 
paper,  pencil — would  retain  their  place  ;  or  the  person 
of  the  medium  would  be  elongated  ;  or  he  would  be 
carried  bodily  through  the  air  above  the  heads  of  the 
sitters,  occasionally  touching  them  as  he  passed  ;  or, 
finally,  he  would  plunge  his  hands  into  the  fire,  and 
walk  about  the  room  carrying  a  piece  of  flaming  coal. 

We  will  consider  the  more  striking  phenomena  later. 

‘  Spiritual  Magazine,  1861,  pp.  359 — 62. 

40 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

For  the  present  let  us  again  turn  to  Mr.  Wilkinson’s 
account.  It  is  typical  also  of  the  mental  attitude  of 
the  sitters.  It  will  be  observed  that  Mr.  Wilkinson 
does  not  give  the  date  and  place  of  the  sitting,  or 
the  names  of  his  fellow-witnesses,  nor  does  he  give 
any  details  as  to  the  general  arrangements.  He  does 
not  tell  us  the  relative  position  of  the  sitters  ;  he 
does  not  say  whether  hands  were  held  round  the  circle  ; 
he  rarely  mentions  where  the  medium’s  hands  and  feet 
were  ;  he  does  not  give  the  distance  of  the  medium’s 
chair  from  the  objects  moved.  Above  all,  he  does  not 
say  how  the  room  was  lighted. 

From  the  accounts  of  seances  by  other  observers 
we  can  gather,  piecemeal,  what  were  the  usual  arrange¬ 
ments.  Home  selected — though  careful  to  conceal  the 
selection — the  sitters  who  sat  next  to  him.  His  hands 
and  feet  were  not,  as  a  rule,  held  or  controlled  in 
any  way.  Nor,  as  a  rule,  do  the  sitters  seem  to  have 
joined  hands  round  the  table.  The  light  during  the 
first  part  of  the  sitting,  when  the  phenomena  took 
place  beneath  the  table,  was,  as  a^  rule,  fairly  good — 
gaslight  or  several  candles.  Before  the  appearance 
of  hands,  the  movement  of  distant  objects,  and  the 
higher  phenomena  generally,  the  lights  were  generally 
extinguished  ;  the  room  would  then  be  lighted  by  fire¬ 
light  only,  and  very  frequently  the  fire  would  be 
screened,  or  damped  down,  and  the  shutters  opened. 

That  there  was  little  light  in  the  room  during  the 
latter  part  of  the  stance  under  consideration  may  be 
inferred  from  the  fact  that  a  light,  cloudy  appear¬ 
ance  was  seen  to  move  across  the  room.  The  light 
was  probably  turned  out  when  the  change  of  seats 
was  made.  It  would  seem,  further,  that  no  precau- 

THE  OLDER  SPIRITUALISM 

41 

tions  were  taken  against  trickery.  This  omission  arose 
directly  from  the  mental  attitude  of  the  sitters.  Mr. 
Wilkinson,  in  this  respect  also  typical,  prefaces  his 
account  with  the  following  remarks  : 

“  I  had  several  times  seen,  both  in  London  and  Paris, 
direct  writing  by  invisible  power,  on  paper  placed  beyond 
mortal  contact,  and  I  was  well  convinced  also  of  the  alleged 
power  of  mediums  to  float  in  the  air,  by  having  had  one 
come  down  on  my  chest,  as  well  as  having  on  other  occa¬ 
sions  had  hold  of  his  hand,  whilst  he  floated  about  the  room. 
I  did  not  therefore,  on  this  evening,  care  to  disturb  myself 
and  others  by  taking  those  precautions  which  would  have 
been  necessary  if  I  were  the  President  of  the  Royal  Society, 
and  were  about  to  make  a  conclusive  report  to  that  illustrious 
body  of  inquirers  into  physics.  I  did  not  doubt,  but  I  sat, 
and  saw,  and  heard,  and  felt,  and  made  notes.” 

Arid  in  the  middle  of  the  stance,  after  the  playing 
of  “  Home,  sweet  home,”  he  breaks  off  his  account 
to  comment  : 

‘‘  What  more  appropriate  and  happy  view  of  the  second 
life  could  be  given  in  musical  sounds  than  this  of  its  being 
home  ;  and  what  a  sweet  sermon  on  the  relative  value 
of  the  two  lives  I  I  believe  it  was  received  more  solemnly, 
and  yet  more  thankfully,  by  all  who  were  present,  from 
our  knowing  of  the  sickness  ‘  even  unto  death  ’  of  one  of 
the  party,  the  youngest  and  the  happiest  in  her  bright 
longings  for  this  second  life.  It  would  be  almost  blasphemy 
to  ask  in  her  presence  what  is  the  good  of  spiritualism. 
Such  a  question  would  not  occur  to  a  good  man,  and  could 
not  be  asked  by  a  wise  one.  The  mere  man  of  science,  who 
measures  human  souls  by  mathematics,  would  be  out  of 
place  in  such  a  scene,  and  had  I  not  been  too  happily 
engaged  with  my  own  thoughts,  I  should  have  felt  glad 
that  we  were  troubled  with  none  such.” 

This  attitude  towards  the  subject  is  to  us  of  the 
present  generation  hardly  conceivable.  But  it  was  the 

42 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

general  attitude  of  the  inquirers  in  the  decade  1860- 
1870.  A  great  wave  of  exalted  emotion,  partly  re¬ 
ligious,  partly  arising  from  the  personal  affections, 
swept  through  the  sdance-room;  ;  the  gospel  of 
spiritualism  carried  men  away  from  their,  footing  on 
the  solid  earth.  The  whole  psychological  environment 
was  such  as  we  now  associate  with  a  revival  meeting. 
This  result  was  due  primarily,  not  to  the  puerile  feats 
which  we  have  just  considered,  but  to  the  messages 
of  love  and  consolation  purporting  to  come  from  the 
dead.  Fifty  years  ago  little  was  known  of  subcon¬ 
scious  mental  action,  and  all  such  messages  coming 
through  automatic  writing,  or  from  the  lips  of  entranced 
mediums,  were  apt  to  be  taken  at  their  face  yalue, 
as  genuine  voices  from  a  world  beyond  the  grave. 
Often,  very  often,  there  was  no  trickery  at  all  in  the 
matter.  The  seeker  became  the  prey  of  his  own  fond 
imaginings,  the  dupe  of  the  self  below  the  threshold. 
The  impressions  thus  produced  in  private  were 
strengthened  tenfold  by  the  outpourings  of  the  seance- 
room.  Cunningly  phrased  spirit  messages  were  part 
of  the  stock-in-trade  of  all  the  tribe.  But  Home  out- 
topped  them  all  to  such  an  extent  that  we  are  often' 
compelled  to  wonder  whether  he  really  could,  on 
occasion,  read  the  minds  of  his  sitters,  as  Mrs.  Piper 
appears  to  do  now.  Of  course  Home,  moving  in  his 
ordinary  life  as  an  intimate  friend  of  the  persons  to 
whom  he  gave  his  seances,  had  exceptional  opportunities 
of  acquiring  useful  information.  But  the  knowledge 
which  his  trance  messages  appear  occasionally  to  show 
of  the  private  affairs  of  his  sitters  is  certainly 
very  remarkable.  Unfortunately,  the  problem  cannot 
now  be  solved — we  have  not  the  whole  data  before  us. 

THE  OLDER  SPIRITUALISM 

43 

But  Home  in  particular  enhanced  the  effect  of  these 
intimate  personal  messages  by  the  display  of  what 
passed  for,  and  perhaps  was — for  who  can  read  the 
riddle  of  another’s  mind? — genuine  religious  feeling. 
Amongst  intimate  friends  the  physical  marvels  of  his 
seances  were  constantly  interspersed  with  sermons. 

He  published  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine  an  account 
of  a  beautiful  vision  of  heaven  and  purple-tinted  clouds 
which  had  been  vouchsafed  to  him.  The  late  Lord 
Dunraven  was  profoundly  impressed  by  Home’s  rever¬ 
ential  attitude  to  the  name  of  Christ,  and  describes 
some  of  Home’s  trance  utterances  as  very  touching  and 
beautiful.  Home’s  “  control  ”  frequently  gave,  through 
his  mouth,  spiritual  counsel  and  exhortations  to  his 
young  friends.  The  names  of  God,  the  angels,  heaven 
were  continually  on  his  lips  when  sitting  in  the  darkened 
seance-room.  Here  is  an  extract  from  a  letter  written 
in  1855  by  Home  himself  to  the  Hartford  Times 
(U.S.A.),  in  which  he  describes  the  effect  produced  by 
a  seance  on  Mr.  T.  A.  Trollope  : 

“  When  at  length  the  light  did  beam  upon  his  soul,  and 
the  chords  of  his  spirit  vibrated  in  unison  with  the  celestial 
harmonies  that  ushered  in  the  birth  of  faith  through  the 
shadows  of  his  old  unbelief,  the  result  was  too  much  for  his 
stoicism,  and  the  tears  of  holy  joy  coursed  down  his  manly 
cheeks.  It  was  an  impressive  scene,  and  an  occasion  of 
deep  interest.  There  are  many  such  in  the  life  of  a  spirit 
medium.” 

The  reader  will  perhaps  think  that  the  thing  here  is 
a  little  overdone.  But  the  letter  was  written  at  the 
outset  of  the  medium’s  career,  for  the  benefit  of  a 
comparatively  uncultured  audience.  His  later  utter¬ 
ances  reflected  the  polish  of  the  social  circles  in  which 
he  moved. 

44 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

Set  down  in  cold  print  the  business  must  seem 
inconceivably  nauseous.  And  to  some  contempo¬ 
raries,  as  to  Robert  Browning,  for  instance,  it  so 
appeared  at  the  time.  But  Browning  was  a  rare  ex¬ 
ception,  or  Home’s  enemies  were  mostly  inarticulate. 
And  if  Home  were  merely  playing  a  part,  he  played 
it  as  no  man  ever  played  before.  Alexander  of 
Abonoteichos  Was  not  worthy  to  black  his  boots  ; 
Cagliostro,  the  Count  St.  Germain,  and  Madame 
Blavatsky  seem  but  ’prentice  hands.  He  was  an  artist, 
in  the  common  phrase,  to  the  tips  of  those  delicate, 
all  too  capable  fingers.  Passionately  fond  qf  music, 
and  a  passable  performer,  an  admirable  reciter  of 
poetry — he  earned  his  living,  as  already  said,  for  some 
time  by  giving  public  readings — a  sculptor — at  least, 
he  set  up  a  studio,  and  his  friends  bought  his  busts — 
and  a  charming  social  companion,  Home  won  and  re¬ 
tained  the  personal  affection  and  esteem  of  all  those 
with  whom  he  came  into  intimate  relations,  from  Lord 
Adare  and  Sir  William  Crookes  to  Mr.  Cox,  of  Cox’s 
Hotel,  in  Jermyn  Street. 

Under  the  circumstances  it  is  not  to  be  wondered 
at  that  Home  was  never  convicted  of  trickery.  He 
could,  of  course,  in  his  capacity  as  distinguished  guest, 
not  only  select  his  sitters,  but  appoint  their  place  at 
the  table,  and  the  ladies  who  were  usually  chosen  to 
sit  on  either  side  of  him  would  as  soon  have  suspected 
their  own  husbands  or  sons.  In  any  case,  there  was  at 
this  time  little  risk  of  public  exposure.  The  time  of 
dirty  muslin,  spirit  lamps,  and  false  beards  had  not 
yet  come.  The  practitioners  of  the  period  used  little 
apparatus,  preferring  to  rely  for  their  effects  on  their 
own  deftness  of  hand  and  foot,  helped  by  the  imagina- 

THE  OLDER  SPIRITUALISM 

45 

tion  of  their  clients.  Home  was  certainly  no  exception 
to  this  rule.  With  two  possible  exceptions,  to  be  dis¬ 
cussed  later,  it  would  seem  that  he  used  no  adventitious 
aids  in  any  of  his  feats. 

Robert  Browning  was  convinced  that  Home  was  an 
impostor,  and  gave  characteristic  expression  to  his  con¬ 
viction.  But  there  is  no  direct  evidence  that  he  ever 
proved  that  Home  cheated,  though  he  formed  a  decided 
opinion,  after  witnessing  a  single  performance,  “  that 
the  whole  display  of  hands,  spirit  utterances,  &C.,  was 
a  cheat  and  imposture.”  * 

The  only  direct  evidence  of  imposture  which  I  have 
come  across  is  in  a  letter  from  Mr.  Merrifield,  who 
wrote  in  August,  1855,  an  account,  from  which  the 
following  extract  is  taken,  of  a  sitting  held  with  Home 
the  previous  month.  New  moon  occurred  on  July  14, 
1855,  and,  as  the  moon  had  already  set,  the  date  of 
the  sitting  would  probably  be  not  later  than  the  i8th, 
a  time  when  the  last  faint  traces  of  daylight  would 
still  be  lingering  in  the  sky  even  at  eleven  p.m.  There 
had  been  a  sitting  earlier  in  the  evening,  at  which 
the  usual  phenomena — movements  of  table,  playing  of 
accordion,  and  plucking  of  dresses — had  occurred  ; 

“  .  .  .  Just  as  we  were  on  the  point  of  taking  our  leave, 
the  medium  professed  his  willingness  to  give  us  another 
sitting.  Accordingly,  we  took  our  places  at  the  side  of  the 
table,  the  medium  occupying  the  extreme  right,  and  a 
constant  associate  of  his  sitting  opposite  to  him.  I  sat 
nearly  half-way  between  them,  and  therefore  facing  the 
windows.  The  table  was  circular,  and  the  semicircle  nearest 
the  window  was  unoccupied.  The  lights  were  removed,  and 
very  soon  the  operations  began.  It  was  about  eleven 

‘  See  letter  from  Robert  Browning,  published  in  the  Times 
of  November  28,  1902. 

46 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

o’clock  ;  the  moon  had  set,  but  the  night  was  starlight, 
and  we  could  well  see  the  outline  of  the  windows  and 
distinguish,  though  not  with  accuracy  of  outline,  the  form 
of  any  large  object  intervening  before  them.  The  medium 
sat  as  low  as  possible  in  his  low  seat.  His  hands  and  arms 
were  under  the  table.  He  talked  freely,  encouraging  con¬ 
versation,  and  seeming  uneasy  when  it  flagged.  After  a 
few  preliminary  raps  somebody  exclaimed  that  the  ‘  spirit 
hand  ’  had  appeared,  and  the  next  moment  an  object, 
resembling  a  child’s  hand  with  a  long,  wide  sleeve  attached 
to  it,  appeared  before  the  light.  This  occurred  several 
times.  The  object  appeared  mainly  at  one  or  other  of  two 
separate  distances  from  the  medium.  One  of  these  distances 
was  just  that  of  his  foot,  the  other  that  of  his  outstretched 
hand  ;  and  when  the  object  receded  or  approached,  I  noticed 
that  the  medium’s  body  or  shoulder  sank  or  rose  in  his 
chair  accordingly.  This  was  pretty  conclusive  to  myself 
and  the  friend  who  accompanied  me  ;  but  afterwards,  upon 
the  invitation  of  one  of  the  dupes  present,  the  ‘  spirit  hand  ’ 
rose  so  high  that  we  saw  the  whole  connection  between  the 
medium’s  shoulder  and  arm,  and  the  ‘  spirit  hand  ’  dressed 
out  on  the  end  of  his  own.”  > 

No  doubt  Mr.  Merrifield  saw  what  really  took  place. 
But  his  account  in  itself  carries  no  more  weight  than 
that  of  the  rest  of  the  spectators,  who  “  saw  ”  spirit 
hands.  It  is  valuable,  however,  as  showing  that  Home 
did  not  succeed  in  hoodwinking  all  his  sitters. 

But  Home’s  manifestations  did  not  altogether  escape 
the  challenge  of  science.  More  than  fifteen  years 
after  the  seance  last  recorded  Sir  Wi.  Crookes  under¬ 
took  a  prolonged  investigation  of  the  subject  of 
spiritualism.  Notes  of  some  stances  with  Home  were 
published  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for 
Psychical  Research  in  1889.2  The  circle,  which  met 
round  a  table,  was  formed  of  Sir  Wi.  Crookes  and  his 

>  Journal  S.P.R.,  May,  1903,  pp.  77,  78. 

2  Proceedings  S.P.R.  vol.  vi.  pp.  98—127. 

THE  OLDER  SPIRITUALISM 

47 

personal  friends.  ,With  the  exception  of  two  partial 
levitations  of  the  medium,  and  the  fire-test,  to  which 
reference  will  be  made  later,  the  phenomena  observed 
were  the  ordinary  feats — levitation  of  the  table,  self¬ 
playing  of  accordion,  luminous  hands,  &c. — and  the 
conditions,  except  for  the  higher  qualifications  of  the 
observers,  were  similar  to  those  already  described.  It 
is  difficult  to  feel  sure  that  trickery  if  practised  would 
have  been  detected,  especially  as  Sir  Wl.  Crookes  him¬ 
self  was  never  permitted  to  sit  next  to  the  medium, 
and  as  his  attention  was  further  distracted  by  having 
to  take  notes.  A  few  movements  of  objects  are,  how¬ 
ever,  recorded  which  are  difficult  to  explain,  unless 
we  suppose  that  a  thread  was  employed. 

Thus,  on  June  21,  1871,  the  light  being  appa¬ 
rently  sufficient,  but  not  more  than  sufficient,  to  admit 
of  the  indicator  of  the  spring  balance  being  read,  a 
message  was  spelled  out  by  the  table  : 

“  Hands  off  the  table,  and  all  joined.”  We  therefore  sat 
as  directed. 

“  Just  in  front  of  Mr.  Home,  and  on  the  table,- was  a  thin 
wooden  lath  23 J  inches  long,  1|  inches  wide,  and  f  inch 
thick,  covered  with  white  paper.  It  was  plainly  visible  to  us 
all,  and  was  one  foot  from  the  edge  of  the  table.  Presently 
the  end  of  the  lath,  pointing  towards  Mr.  Walter  Crookes, 
rose  up  in  the  air  to  the  height  of  about  ten  inches.  The 
other  end  then  rose  up  to  a  height  of  about  five  inches, 
and  the  lath  then  floated  about  for  more  than  a  minute 
in  this  position  suspended  in  the  air,  with  no  visible  means 
of  support.  It  moved  sideways  and  waved  gently  up  and 
down,  just  like  a  piece  of  wood  on  the  top  of  small  waves 
of  the  sea.  The  lower  end  then  gently  sank  till  it  touched 
the  table,  and  the  other  end  followed. 

‘‘  Whilst  we  were  speaking  about  this  wonderful  exhibition 
of  force,  the  lath  began  to  move  again,  and,  rising  up  as 
it  did  at  first,  it  waved  about  in  a  somewhat  similar  manner. 

48 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

The  startling  novelty  of  the  movement  having  now  worn 
off,  we  were  all  enabled  to  follow  its  motions  with  more 
accuracy.  Mr.  Home  was  sitting  away  from  the  table,  at 
least  three  feet  from  the  lath,  all  this  time  ;  he  was 
apparently  quite  motionless,  and  his  hands  were  tightly 
grasped,  his  right  by  Mrs.  Walter  Crookes  and  his  left  by 
Mrs.  William  Crookes.  Any  movement  by  his  feet  was 
impossible,  as,  owing  to  the  large  cage  being  under  the 
table,  his  legs  were  not  able  to  be  put  beneath,  but  were 
visible  to  those  on  each  side  of  him.  All  the  others  had 
hold  of  hands.” 

The  sitters  had  changed  their  seats  immediately  before 
this  performance,  which  would  have  given  Home  the 
opportunity  for  attaching  a  thread  ;  the  dim  light  and 
the  injunction  to  join  hands  removed  any  risk  of  detec¬ 
tion  during  the  performance  ;  and  the  immediate 
breaking  up  of  the  stance  at  the  conclusion  of  the 
movement  would  have  afforded  Home  the  opportunity 
to  remove  the  thread. 

But  Sir  W.  Crookes  was  not  contented  with  |mere 
observation  under  conditions  which  were  so  clearly 
favourable  to  fraud.  In  July,  1871,  he  published  in 
the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science  an  account  *  of  an 
investigation  carried  out  under  more  rigorous  condi¬ 
tions  at  his  own  house,  with  Sir  Wiilliam  Huggins, 
Serjeant  Cox,  Mr.  Walter  Crookes,  and  Mr.  Williams, 
chemical  assistant,  as  the  witnesses. 

Sir  William  Crookes  had  prepared  for  the  occasion 
a  cylinder,  about  two  feet  in  diameter,  constructed  of 
upright  laths  fastened  at  either  end  to  a  wooden  hoop', 
and  crossed  by  horizontal  strands  of  insulated  copper 
wire.  The  wire  was  then  tied  together  by  vertical! 
lines  of  string,  knotted  at  the  points  of  junction,  the 

>  Afterwards  reprinted  with  other  articles,  under  the  title 
‘‘  Researches  in  the  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,”  1874. 

THE  OLDER  SPIRITUALISM 

49 

whole  forming  a  network  with  meshes  about  two  inches 
by  one.  The  cylinder,  which  was  one  foot  ten  inches 
high,  would  just  fit  under  the  dining-table,  but  would 
not  allow  of  the  insertion  of  a  hand.  A  new  accordion 
had  been  purchased  for  the  occasion.  Home  sat  at 
the  table,  with  his  feet  on  either  side  of  the  wire 
cylinder,  which  was  placed  under  the  table.  Sir  iWi. 
Crookes  sat  on  his  left  hand,  and  another  observer 
on  his  right,  each  with  a  foot  on  one  of  Home’s  feet. 
One  of  Home’s  hands  was  placed  on  the  table,  in 
full  view,  with  the  other  he  grasped  the  accordion  by 
the  bottom,  leaving  the  keyed  end  to  hang  downwards. 
The  cage  was  partly  withdrawn  from  under  the 
table,  to  permit  of  the  insertion  of  Home’s  hand,  still 
holding  the  accordion  the  cage  was  then  pushed  under 
the  table  as  far  as  Home’s  arm  would  permit  it  to  go. 
Under  these  conditions  the  accordion  was  seen  to  move, 
and  then  played  at  first  a  few  notes,  and  afterwards  a 
simple  air.  The  assistant,  who  went  under  the  table 
for  the  purpose,  reported  that  under  these  conditions 
he  could  see  the  instrument  expanding  and  contracting. 
Home  then  removed  his  hand  altogether  from  the 
accordion,  and  left  it  suspended,  with  no  apparent 
attachment,  in  the  cage  under  the  table,  no  person 
being  near  it,  and  Home’s  hand  being  held  by  the 
person  next  to  him.  The  instrument  under  these  con¬ 
ditions  continued  to  play,  and  Sir  William  and  two 
others  saw  it  “  floating  about  ”  inside  the  cage  with 
no  visible  support.  Home  then  again  grasped  the 
accordion,  and  while  it  was  playing  in  his  hand  Sir 
William  grasped  Home’s  arm  below  the  elbow,  and 
felt  no  movement  of  muscles. 

It  seems  clear  that,,  even  if  the  observers  had  relaxed 

4 

50 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

their  control,  the  cylindrical  wire  cage  must  have 
effectually  prevented  the  co-operation  of  Home’s  feet, 
or  his  free  hand,  in  this  experiment  and  at  first 
reading  the  thing  ipay  well  seem  inexplicable  by  fraud. 
But  [(i)  though  the  room  is  said  to  have  been  lighted 
by  gas  the  degree  of  illumination  is  not  stated,  nor 
the  position  of  the  table  and  the  investigators,  and  of 
Home  himself,  with  reference  to  the  source  of  light  ; 
(2)  the  accordion  was  seen  to  be  expanding  and  con¬ 
tracting  when  Home’s  hand  held  it.  It  is  reported 
only  as  floating  about  (?  swaying)  when  Home’s  hand 
was  altogether  removed  ;  and  the  accordion,  as  will 
be  seen,  played  only  in  the  partial  obscurity  afforded 
by  the  table.  I  know,  indeed,  of  no  instance  in  which 
it  is  recorded  as  playing  in  a  good  light.  All  that 
is  described  here  is  consistent  with  the  supposition 
that  the  accordion  never  played  at  all,  but  that  the 
sounds  heard  proceeded  from  an  automatic  instrument 
concealed  about  Home’s  person,  actuated  by  pressure. 
There  is  evidence  that  Madame  Blavatsky  used  an 
instrument  of  this  kind  to  produce  her  “  astral  bells.” 
I  am  not  aware  of  any  good  evidence  that  the  keys 
were  ever  seen  to  move  ;  and  any  conjurer  in  a  light 
of  his  own  choosing  could  make  the  instrument  con¬ 
tract  and  expand,  whilst  he  held  it,  by  a  loop  of 
strong  thread.  If  Home  contrived — as  we  see  that 
he  did  contrive — to  put  his  hand  again  on  the  accordion 
before  it  was  removed  from  the  cage,  there  would  be 
no  risk  that  the  attachment  which  he  had  presumably 
fixed  underneath  the  table  to  support  the  accordion 
would  be  detected.  The  risk  was  extremely  small  in 
any  case.  Home,  an  honoured  guest,  displaying  his 
maryellous  powers  for  the  satisfaction  of  some  persopal 

THE  OLDER  SPIRITUALISM 

51 

friends,  was  easily  master  of  the  situation.  It  is 
argued  that  there  could  have  been  “  no  machinery, 
apparatus,  or  contrivance  of  any  sort  ”  secreted  about 
Home’s  person,  because.  Sir  W.  Crookes  having  called 
at  Home’s  apartments  to  fetch  him  for  the  experiments, 
the  medium  actually  changed  his  dress  in  Sir  William’s 
presence.  But  what  was  there  to  prevent  Home’s 
slipping  into  the  pocket  of  his  overcoat  a  small  musical 
box,  a  loop  of  black  silk,  and  a  hook  with  a  sharp 
end?  No  further  “  apparatus  ”  would  be  required. 

Another  experiment  made  on  the  same  occasion  and 
before  the  same  observers  presents  us  at  first  sight 
with  a  more  difficult  problem.  The  apparatus  employed 
is  thus  described  : 

“  In  another  part  of  the  room  an  apparatus  was  fitted 
up  for  experimenting  on  the  alteration  in  the  weight  of 
a  body.  It  consisted  of  a  mahogany  board  36  inches  long 
by  inches  wide  and  1  inch  thick.  At  each  end  a  strip  of 
mahogany  1^  inches  wide  was  screwed  on,  forming  feet. 
One  end  of  the  board  rested  on  a  firm  table,  whilst  the 
other  end  was  supported  by  a  spring  balance  hanging  from 
a  substantial  tripod  stand.  The  balance  was  fitted  with 
a  self -registering  index,  in  such  a  manner  that  it  would 
record  the  maximum  weight  indicated  by  the  pointer.  The 
apparatus  was  adjusted  so  that  the  mahogany  board  was 
horizontal,  its  foot  resting  flat  on  the  support.  In  this 
position  its  weight  was  3  lbs.,  as  marked  by  the  pointer  of 
the  balance. 

“  Before  Mr.  Home  entered  the  room  the  apparatus  had 
been  arranged  in  position,  and  he  had  not  even  the  object 
of  some  parts  explained  before  sitting  down.”  > 

•  But  if  this  particular  piece  of  apparatus  was  new  to 
Mr.  Home,  the  general  plan  of  the  experiments  was  not, 
for  Sir  William  tells  us,  in  another  part  of  his  article 
(p.  17),  that  he  had  ”  for  some  time  past  been  making 
similar  experiments  ”  with  Home. 

52 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

When,  after  the  experiments  with  an  accordion, 
attention  was  turned  to  the  apparatus,  Mr.  Home 
placed  his  fingers  lightly  upon  the  extreme  end  of  the 
mahogany  board  farthest  from  the  balance.  Dr. 
Huggins  and  Sir  W.  Crookes  sitting  one  on  each  side 
and  watching  ;  under  these  conditions  the  index  of 
the  balance  moved  several  times,  the  greatest  down- 
M'^ard  pull  registered  being  6  lbs.  It  was  particularly 
noticed.  Sir  Wi.  Crookes  tells  us,  that  Home’s  fingers 
were  not  at  any  time  advanced  more  than  inches  from 
the  extreme  end  of  the  board — that  is,  not  outside  the 
point  of  support — so  that  it  was  physically  impossible 
for  lany  pressure  of  his  fingers  to  have  produced  the 
downward  movements  of  the  board  shown  by  the  index. 
Moreover,  “  his  feet  as  well  as  his  hands  were  closely 
guarded  by  all  in  the  room.” 

Sir  William  Crookes  then  stood  on  one  foot  on  the 
end  of  the  board  where  Home’s  fingers  had  rested,  and 
the  (Whole  weight  of  his  body  (140  lbs.)  so  applied 
only  depressed  the  index  i|  to  2  lbs.  when  he  jerked  it 
up  and  down.  It  would  seem,  then,  that  Home’s  fingers 
exerted  thrice  the  force  of  the  whole  of  Sir  William’s 
body,  and  that  without  perceptible  effort  on  his  part. 

The  publication  of  these  results  provoked  pro¬ 
longed  and  acrimonious  discussion  in  the  scientific 
world,  the  echoes  of  which  have  hardly  yet  died  down. 
But  none  of  the  scientific  critics  pointed  to  the  real 
weakness  of  the  evidence.  The  weakness  consists  in 
this  :  that  Home,  a  practised  conjurer,  as  the  past 
record  of  himself  and  his  fellows  entitles  us  to  assume, 
dictated  the  conditions  of  the  experiment.  He  did 
this,  not  in  any  crude  or  obvious  way,  but  simply  by 
declining  to  allow  the  capricious  force  of  which  he  was 

THE  OLDER  SPIRITUALISM 

53 

master  to  operate  until  the  conditions  were  to  his 
liking,  or,  in  Sir  William’s  own  words  : 

“  the  experiments  I  have  tried  have  been  very  numerous, 
but  owing  to  our  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  conditions 
which  favour  or  oppose  the  manifestations  of  this  force,  to 
the  apparently  capricious  manner  in  which  it  is  exerted, 
and  to  the  fact  that  Mr.  Home  himself  is  subject  to 
unaccountable  ebbs  and  flows  of  the  force,  it  has  but 
seldom  happened  that  a  result  obtained  on  one  occasion 
could  be  subsequently  confirmed  and  tested  with  apparatus 
specially  contrived  for  the  purpose.”  ' 

Put  shortly,  this  means  that  Home,  by  the  simple 
device  of  doing  nothing  when  the  conditions  were  un¬ 
favourable,  could  ensure  that  the  light  (gas — the  degree 
of  illumination  not  stated)  was  such  and  so  placed,  the 
apparatus  so  contrived,  and  the  sitters  so  disposed  as 
to  suit  his  purpose  ;  further,  that  in  the  actual  experi¬ 
ment  the  attention  of  the  sitters — all  of  whom,  as  we 
are  expressly  told,  guarded  his  feet  and  hands — should 
be  concentrated  on  the  wrong  points.  That,  of 
course,  is  part  of  the  conjurer’s  art,  and  Home  had 
this  inestimable  advantage  over  the  ordinary  conjurer, 
that  he  could  fail  as  often  as  he  chose  without  discredit. 

No  doubt  Home  arranged  that  the  light  should  be 
lowered,  and  that  the  apparatus  should  be  in  shadow. 
In  some  further  experiments  with  the  same  apparatus 
made  a  few  weeks  later,  the  circle  being  at  Sir 
William  Crookes’  house,  we  are  told  that  at  the  first 
trial  the  light  was  by  Home’s  order  lowered  to  such 
a  point  “  that  there  was  scarcely  light  enough  to  see 
the  board  and  index  move.”  2  The  movement  was 

'  “  Researches  in  Spiritualism,”  p.  110. 

2  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  110.  It  was  a  little 
later  in  the  same  stance,  after  the  light  had  been  increased, 
that  the  movements  of  the  lath  occurred. 

54 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

probably  effected  by  means  of  a  loop  of  black  silk, 
which  would  be  invisible  in  the  obscurity,  passed  over 
the  distal  end  of  the  board  and  attached  at  the  other 
end  to  some  part  of  Home’s  person.  The  curious 
movements  of  the  lath  already  referred  to,  and  the 
seldom  attested,  and  therefore  probably  risky,  pheno¬ 
menon  of  the  inclined  table  with  its  self-supporting 
candlesticks,  were  possibly  worked  by  similar  means. 
A  thread  or  hair,  as  we  shall  see  later,  is  known  to  bei 
used  by  other  mediums,  and  its  use  involves  little  risk 
of  detection  if  the  attention  of  the  witnesses,  as  would 
certainly  have  been  the  case  in  the  balance  experiment, 
can  be  diverted  from'  the  point  of  attachment. 

It  seems  possible,  then,  to  explain  the  great  bulk 
of  the  marvels  recorded  of  Home  by  a  combination  of 
trickery  on  the  one  side  and  unconscious  misinterpreta¬ 
tion  on  the  other.  But  it  is  not  easy  to  understand 
how  the  investigators  of  a  generation  ago  could  have 
been  deceived,  and  repeatedly  deceived,  by  devices  so 
crude  as  those  here  suggested  ;  and  if  we  find  ourselves 
unable  to  accept  their  testimony,  we  are  guided  to 
an  adverse  decision,  not  so  much  perhaps  by  the  defects 
which  have  beeh  demonstrated  in  the  particular  evidence 
here  presented  as  by  our  realisation  of  the  psychological 
environment  in  which  these  feats  were  performed,  and 
by  the  general  presumption  against  the  operation  of 
the  supposed  new  physical  energy  which  inevitably 
follows  from  an  analysis  of  the  cognate  evidence  accu- 
piulated  down  to  the  present  day.  Even  so,  there 
remain  a  few  manifestations  witnessed  in  Home’s 
presence  which  the  hypothesis  of  simple  trickery  does 
not  seem  to  fit.  The  chief  of  these  marvels — levita¬ 
tion,  elongation,  and  the  fire  ordeal — will  be  dealt  with 
in  the  next  chapter. 

CHAPTER  II 

LEVITATION  AND  THE  FIRE  ORDEAL 

The  feats  described  in  the  last  chapter,  with  a 
single  exception,  were  part  of  the  ordinary  reper¬ 
tory  of  the  spirit  medium  then  atid  latef.  Home 
was  perhaps  more  successful  in  rapping,  moving 
tables,  exhibiting  spirit  hands,  and  distributing 
flowers  than  Mrs.  Marshall  or  any  of  his  American 
colleagues  who  thronged  to  our  hospitable  island 
at  this  time,  but  only  as  one  conjurer  is  more 
successful  than  another.  These  feats  required  no 
apparatus  and  involved,  in  the  peculiar  psychological 
environment,  little  risk  of  miscarriage  or  exposure. 
The  one  manifestation  which  appears  to  have  been 
peculiar  to  Home  has  been  described  above  at  some 
length,  and  the  explanation  suggested.  Other  mediums 
performed,  in  the  dark,  on  musical  instruments  of  many 
kinds.  Home  appears  to  have  been  the  only  prac¬ 
titioner  of  the  period  who  could  play — or.  could  produce 
the  impression  of  playing — an  accordion  held  by  one 
hand  with  the  keys  downward,  and  that  with  tho  room 
sufficiently  lighted  for  the  outlines  of  the  instrument 
and  the  supporting  hand  to  be  seen. 

But  the  phenomena  now  to  be  considered  stand  on 
a  different  footing.  Home,  indeed,  was  not  the  only 
medium  of  the  period  to  be  levitated,  and  other 
instances  of  elongation  and  the  fire -test  are  on  record. 

5S 

56 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

But  if  we  may  judge  by  the  accounts  that  have  come 
down  to  us,  Home  certainly  carried  these  feats  to  a 
greater  pitch  of  perfection  than  his  rivals,  and  ex¬ 
hibited  them  with  greater  frequency  and  with  a  happier 
audacity.  In  none  of  these  performances,  again,  does 
the  explanation  lie  so  near  the  surface  as  in  the  petty 
chicanery  already  described.  We  cannot  attempt  to 
explain  the  records  of  levitation  and  the  fire-test  with¬ 
out  taking  into  account  the  psychological  conditions  ; 
and  let  us  suppose  the  spectators  to  be  as  suggestible 
as  we  will,  a  few  of  the  incidents  reported  still  remain 
unexplained — though  logic,  it  need  hardly  be  said,  does 
not  require  us  therefore  to  conclude  them  inexplicable. 

Home’s  levitations  were  of  two  kinds,  the  partial 
and  the  complete.  Of  the  partial  levitations,  in  which 
he  was  seen  elevated  at  most  a  foot  or  two  above  the 
ground,  we  have  but  few  records.  It  was  a  less  effec¬ 
tive  manifestation,  and  would  be  more  likely  on  that 
account  to  escape  record.  Here  is  one  description 
quoted  from  an  account  dated  January,  i86i,  by  Mr. 
John  Jones,  whose  name  is  familiar  in  the  literature 
of  the  period  as  one  of  the  most  recklessly  credulous 
believers.  The  incident  took  place  in  a  drawing-room, 
lighted  originally  by  a  good  fire  and  three  gas-burners. 
After  the  ordinary  display  of  minor  phenomena,  the 
account  proceeds  : 

“Two  of  the  three  gas  lights  were  now  put  out,  and  the 
fire,  burning  brightly,  gave  a  subdued  light  in  the  room. 
Mr.  Home  then  became  cataleptic  in  his  hands  and  arms  ; 
he  was  raised  from  his  seat  till  he  stood  upright,  and  then 
he  rose  vertically  till  he  was  a  foot  above  the  floor,  his  head 
level  with  the  chandelier  ;  this  was  repeated  twice,  but  he 
did  not  rise  higher.”  ’ 

’  Spiritual  Magazine,  1861,  p.  69. 

LEVITATION  AND  THE  FIRE  ORDEAL  57 

Home  rarely  permitted  so  much  light  during  a  per¬ 
formance  of  this  kind  ;  but  no  doubt  he  knew  with 
whom  he  had  to  deal.  It  will  be  observed  that  Mr. 
Jones  gives  no  details  as  to  Home’s  position  or 
his  own. 

Sir  William  Crookes,  in  a  speech  delivered  at  a 
meeting  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  in  1894,^ 
thus  describes  some  of  the  levitations  of  Home  which 
he  had  witnessed  : 

“  On  another  occasion  I  was  invited  to  come  to  him, 
when  he  rose  eighteen  inches  off  the  ground,  and  I  passed 
my  hands  under  his  feet,  round  him,  and  over  his  head 
when  he  was  in  the  air. 

“  On  several  occasions  Home  and  the  chair  on  which  he 
was  sitting  at  the  table  rose  off  the  ground.  It  was  generally 
done  very  deliberately,  and  Home  sometimes  tucked  up  his 
feet  on  the  chair,  and  held  up  his  hands  in  view  of  all  of 
us.  On  such  an  occasion  I  have  got  down  and  seen  and 
felt  that  all  four  legs  were  off  the  ground  at  the  same 
time,  Home’s  feet  being  on  the  chair.” 

Sir  William  on  this  occasion  was  apparently  speak¬ 
ing  from  memory.  His  published  notes  of  stances 
with  Home  2  include  no  case  in  which  he  had  the  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  observing  the  phenomenon  of  levitation  under 
such  favourable  conditions.  He  records  only  two 
instances  at  which  he  was  present  ; 

On  July  30,  1871,  shortly  after  the  gas  had  been 
turned  out  and  spirit  lamps  [i.e.,  lamps  burning  spirit] 
substituted  : 

‘‘  Mr.  Home  walked  to  the  open  space  in  the  room  between 
Mr.  I.’s  chair  and  the  sideboard,  and  stood  there  quite 
upright  and  quiet.  He  then  said,  ‘  I’m  rising.  I’m  rising,’ 

'  Journal  S.P.R.,  November,  1894,  p.  342. 
2  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi. 

58 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

when  we  all  saw  him  rise  from  the  ground  slowly  to  a 
height  of  about  six  inches,  remain  there  for  about  ten 
seconds,  and  then  slowly  descend.  From  my  position  I  could 
not  see  his  feet,  but  I  distinctly  saw  his  head,  projected 
against  the  opposite  wall,  rise  up,  and  Mr.  Walter  .Crookes, 
who  was  sitting  near  where  Mr.  Home  was,  said  that  his 
feet  were  in  the  air.  There  was  no  stool  or  other  thing 
near  which  could  have  aided  him.  Moreover,  the  movement 
was  a  continuous  glide  upwards.” 

On  April  21,  1872,  after  some  playing  Of  the 
accordion, 

a  message  was  given  : 

“  Try  less  light.” 

The  handkerchief  moved  about  along  the  floor,  visible  to  all. 

Mr.  Home  nearly  disappeared  under  the  table  in  a  curious 
attitude  ;  then  he  was  (still  in  his  chair)  wheeled  out  from 
under  the  table  still  in  the  same  attitude,  his  feet  out 
in  front  off  the  ground.  He  was  then  sitting  almost  hori¬ 
zontally,  his  shoulders  resting  on  his  chair. 

He  asked  Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes  to  remove  the  chair  from 
under  him,  as  it  was  not  supporting  him.  He  was  then  seen 
to  be  sitting  in  the  air,  supported  by  nothing  visible. 

Then  Mr.  Home  rested  the  extreme  top  of  his  head  on 
a  chair,  and  his  feet  on  the  sofa.  He  said  he  felt  supported 
in  the  middle  very  comfortably.  The  chair  then  moved  away 
of  its  own  accord,  and  Mr.  Home  rested  flat  over  the  floor 
behind  Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes. 

On  the  first  occasion  the  performance  took  place 
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  room  from  where  Sir 
William  Crookes  was  sitting,  and  he  was  separated 
from  the  medium  by  the  whole  length  of  the  dining¬ 
room.  On  the  second  occasion  the  circle  sat  at  a 
round  table,  Mrs.  D.  between  Sif  William  and  the 
medium.  Mrs.  Walter  Crookes,  behind  whom  the  levita¬ 
tion  took  place,  was  seated  on  the  farther  side.  On 
each  occasion  the  light  had  been  lowered  shortly  before 

LEVITATION  AND  THE  FIRE  ORDEAL  59 

the  performance.  Sir  William  Crookes,  it  will  be  re¬ 
membered,  doubled  the  part  of  observer  and  note- 
taker.  Under  these  conditions  the  feat  can  hardly 
be  considered  an  impressive  one. 

Of  the  complete  levitation  of  the  medium  we  have 
numerous  accounts.  The  phenomenon  is,  in  fact,  one  of 
the  most  fully  attested  of  all  spiritualist  marvels.  As 
already  said,  it  was  not  peculiar  to  Home.  So  early 
as  1851 — three  years  after  the  outbreak  of  the  Rochester 
rappings — we  hear  of  an  American  medium  called 
Gordon  being  taken  up  in  the  air  by  spirit  hands. 
From  Mr.  Isaac  Rehn,  President  of  the  Harmonial 
Society  of  Philadelphia,  we  have  an  account,  written 
in  1855,  of  a  similar  performance,  with  the  same 
medium.  The  incident  is  said  to  have  taken  place 
“  some  two  years  since.” 

‘‘  About  the  same  time  a  company  of  persons,  whose 
names,  as  far  as  I  can  recollect,  I  shall  mention,  were 
seated  around  two  tables,  joined  together,  in  order  to  furnish 
room  sufficient  to  seat  the  party.  The  house  in  which  I 
then  lived  had  two  parlours,  with  folding  doors.  The  two 
tables  referred  to  occupied  the  entire  length  of  the  front 
parlour,  leaving  barely  room  enough  for  the  chairs  at  the 
front  end  of  the  room  ;  the  other  end  of  the  table  extended 
quite  to  the  folding  doors,  leaving,  of  course,  no  passage 
on  either  end.  It  so  happened  that  I  was  seated  at  the 
end  of  the  table  projecting  into  the  doorway.  The  medium, 
Mr.  Gordon,  was  seated  about  midway  of  the  tables,  on  the 
left,  the  other  seats  being  occupied  by  the  rest  of  the 
company,  '■''ti'll 

“  After  a  variety  of  manifestations  had  occurred,  the 
medium  was  raised  from  his  seat  by  an  invisible  power, 
and,  after  some  apparent  resistance  on  his  part,  was  carried 
through  the  doorway  between  the  parlours,  directly  over  my 
head,  and  his  head  being  bumped  along  the  ceiling,  he 
passed  to  the  farther  end  of  the  back  room,  in  which  there 
was  no  one  beside  himself. 

60 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

“  Although  all  the  individuals  present  had  not  equally 
good  opportunity  of  ascertaining  the  facts  in  this  case, 
the  room  having  been  somewhat  darkened,  still,  his  transit 
over  the  end  of  the  table  at  which  I  was  seated,  and  the 
utter  impossibility  of  the  medium  passing  out  in  other  way 
than  over  our  heads,  his  continued  conversation  while  thus 
suspended,  and  his  position,  as  indicated  by  the  sound,  with 
other  facts  in  the  case,  leave  no  reasonable  doubt  of  the 
performance  of  the  feat.”  i 

Mr.  Rehn’s  admission  that  the  room  was  “  some¬ 
what  darkened  ”  is  probably  a  severe  under-statement 
of  the  case  ;  for  it  will  be  noted  that  he  does  not 
venture  to  appeal  to  the  sense  of  sight  for  verification 
of  the  miracle. 

About  the  same  time  D.  D.  Hume  (as  he  then 
preferred  to  spell  his  name)  was  the  protagonist  of 
a  similar  performance. 

”  Suddenly,  and  without  any  expectation  on  the  part  of 
the  company,  the  medium,  Mr.  Hume,  was  taken  up  in  the 
air.  I  had  hold  of  his  hand  at  the  time,  and  I  felt  of  his 
feet — they  were  lifted  a  foot  from  the  floor.  He  palpitated 
from  head  to  foot  with  the  contending  emotions  of  joy  and 
fear,  which  choked  his  utterance.  Again  and  again  he  was 
taken  from  the  floor,  and  the  third  time  he  was  carried  to 
the  ceiling  of  the  apartment,  with  which  his  hands  and  feet 
came  in  gentle  contact.  I  felt  the  distance  from  the  soles 
of  his  boots  to  the  floor,  and  it  was  nearly  three  feet. 
Others  touched  his  feet  to  satisfy  themselves.” 

The  writer  of  this  account  does  not  think  it  neces¬ 
sary  to  mention  a  fact,  which  we  learn  from  a  fuller 
record  of  the  same  seance  given  elsewhere,^  that  some 
time  previously  to  the  supreme  manifestation  the  com- 

>  Quoted  by  Hare,  ‘‘  The  Spirit  Manifestations,”  pp.  291, 
292. 

2  Quoted  in  Spicer’s  ‘‘  Sights  and  Sounds,”  pp.  129 
and  268. 

LEVITATION  AND  THE  FIRE  ORDEAL  61 

pany  had  adjourned  to  a  darkened  room,  ostensibly  that 
they  might  see  the  “  spiritual  flashes  of  light  said 
to  have  been  vouchsafed  to  other  investigators.”  They 
saw  apparently  nothing,  but  they  heard  plenty  of  raps, 
and  some  of  them  felt  Mr.  Hume’s  boots. 

One  of  the  earliest  descriptions  of  the  feat  in  this 
country  is  to  be  found  in  an  anonymous,  but  care¬ 
fully  written,  account  which  appeared  in  the  Spiritual 
Magazine  for  June,  i860.  The  writer  records  that 
towards  the  end  of  the  seance  the  lights,  by  direction 
of  the  raps,  were  put  out.  It  was  then  found  that 
the  light  issuing  from  the  unshuttered  window  was 
sufficient  to  enable  those  present  ‘‘  to  faintly  see  each 
other.”  After  this  the  window  blinds  were  partly  pulled 
down  by  an  invisible  hand,  so  as  still  further  to  deepen 
the  obscurity.  The  usual  distribution  of  flowers  then 
took  place. 

”...  After  a  pause,  Mr.  Home  said  he  felt  as  if  he 
were  about  to  be  lifted  up  ;  he  moved  from  the  table,  and 
shortly  he  said,  ‘  I  am  rising  ’ — but  we  could  not  see  him — 
‘  they  have  put  me  on  my  back.’  I  asked,  ‘  Will  you  kindly 
bring  him,  as  much  as  possible,  towards  the  window,  so 
that  we  may  see  him  ?  ’  And  at  once  he  was  floated,  with 
his  feet  horizontally  into  the  light  of  the  window,  so  that 
we  all  saw  his  feet  and  a  part  of  his  legs  resting  or  floating 
on  the  air  like  a  feather,  about  six  feet  from  the  ground, 
and  three  feet  above  the  height  of  the  table.  He  was 
then  floated  into  the  dark,  and  he  exclaimed,  ‘  They  have 
turned  me  round,  and  I  am  coming  towards  you  !  ’  I  then 
saw  his  head  and  face,  the  same  height  as  before,  and  as 
if  floating  on  air  instead  of  water.  He  then  floated  back, 
and  came  down  and  walked  up  to  and  sat  on  the  edge  of 
the  table  we  were  at,  when  the  table  began  to  rise  with  him 
on  it.  He  asked  a  lady  to  sit  on  the  table,  and  perhaps  the 
spirits  would  take  them  both  up  ;  the  table  moved  a  little 
and  then  was  still.” 

62 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

The  writer  then,  at  Mr.  Home’s  request,  sat  down 
beside  him  on  the  ottoman. 

“  .  .  .  He  took  my  hands,  and  in  about  a  minute,  and 
without  any  muscular  action,  he  gently  floated  away  from 
me  and  was  lost  in  the  darkness.  He  kept  talking  to  let  us 
know  where  he  was.  We  heard  his  voice  in  various  parts 
of  the  farther  end  of  the  room,  as  if  near  the  ceiling.  He 
then  cried  out,  ‘  Oh,  they  have  brought  me  a  cushion  to  sit 
upon — I  am  sitting  on  it — they  are  taking  it  away.’  Just 
then  the  tassel  of  the  cushion  of  another  ottoman  in  the 
room  struck  me  on  my  hair  and  forehead  as  if  coming  from 
the  ceiling,  and  the  cushion  was  deposited  at  my  feet 
on  the  floor,  falling  as  if  a  snowflake.  I  then  saw  the 
shadow  of  his  body  on  the  mirror  as  he  floated  along  near 
the  ceiling.  He  said,  ‘  I  wish  I  had  a  pencil  to  make  a 
mark  on  the  ceiling.  I  have  made  a  cross  with  my  nail.’ 
He  came  down  near  the  door,  and  after  a  pause  he  was  again 
taken  up  ;  but  I  did  not  see  him,  but  heard  his  voice,  as  if 
near  the  ceiling.  Again  he  came  down,  and  shortly  returned 
to  the  table  we  were  at  ;  and  the  sounds  on  the  table  bade 
us  ‘  Good  night.’  ” 

A  more  highly  decorated  description  of  the  same 
feat  pn  another  occasion  is  contained  in  an  article 
which  appeared  in  the  Cornhill  Magazine  for  August, 
i860,  the  writer  being  Robert  Bell,  the  well-known 
dramatist  and  critic.  All  the  lights  on  this  occasion 
had  been  extinguished  by  the  direction  of  the  spirits, 
and  the  room  was  illuminated  only  by  occasional 
flickers  of  a  dying  fire  and  by  the  faint  grey  light 
which  came  through  the  unshuttered  window.  At  this 
stage,  the  writer  says, 

“  we  could  see,  but  scarcely  distinguish,  our  hands  upon  the 
table.  A  festoon  of  dull,  gleaming  forms  round  the  circle 
represented  what  we  knew  to  be  our  hands.  An  occasional 
ray  from  the  window  now  and  then  revealed  the  hazy 
surface  of  the  white  sheets  [sc.  of  paper]  and  the  misty 
bulk  of  the  accordion.” 

LEVITATION  AND  THE  FIRE  ORDEAL  63 

But  even  this  gloom  was  not  sufficiently  profound 
for  the  spiritual  requirements,  and  presently  the  window 
blind  was  drawn  down  by  an  invisible  hand,  “  and  the 
rooiji  was  thrown  into  deeper  darkness  than  before.” 
Then  the  manifestations  began.  Hands  were  felt,  and 
a  bell  was  rung. 

‘‘  Mr.  Home  was  seated  next  the  window.  Through  the 
semi-darkness  his  head  was  dimly  visible  against  the  cur¬ 
tains,  and  his  hands  might  be  seen  in  a  faint  white  heap 
before  him.  Presently  he  said,  in  a  quiet  voice,  ‘  My  chair 
is  moving — I  am  off  the  ground — don’t  notice  me — talk  of 
something  else,’  or  words  to  that  effect.  It  was  very 
difficult  to  restrain  the  curiosity,  not  unmixed  with  a  more 
serious  feeling,  which  these  few  words  awakened  ;  but  we 
talked,  incoherently  enough,  upon  some  indifferent  topic. 
I  was  sitting  nearly  opposite  Mr.  Home,  and  I  saw  his  hands 
disappear  from  the  table,  and  his  head  vanish  into  the  deep 
shadow  beyond.  In  a  moment  or  two  more  he  spoke  again. 
This  time  his  voice  was  in  the  air  above  our  heads.  He 
had  risen  from  his  chair  to  a  height  of  four  or  five  feet 
from  the  ground.  As  he  ascended  higher  he  described  his 
position,  which  at  first  was  perpendicular,  and  afterwards 
became  horizontal.  He  said  he  felt  as  if  he  had  been 
turned  in  the  gentlest  manner,  as  a  child  is  turned  in  the 
arms  of  a  nurse.  In  a  moment  or  two  more,  he  told  us 
that  he  was  going  to  pass  across  the  window,  against  the 
grey,  silvery  light  of  which  he  would  be  visible.  We  watched 
in  profound  stillness,  and  saw  his  figure  pass  from  one  side 
of  the  window  to  the  other,  feet  foremost,  lying  horizontally 
in  the  air.  He  spoke  to  us  as  he  passed,  and  told  us  that 
he  would  turn  the  reverse  way,  and  recross  the  window, 
which  he  did.  His  own  tranquil  confidence  in  the  safety  of 
what  seemed  from  below  a  situation  of  the  most  novel  peril 
gave  confidence  to  everybody  else  ;  but,  with  the  strongest 
nerves,  it  was  impossible  not  to  be  conscious  of  a  certain 
sensation  of  fear  and  awe.  He  hovered  round  the  circle 
for  several  minutes,  and  passed,  this  time  perpendicularly, 
over  our  heads.  I  heard  his  voice  behind  me  in  the  air, 
and  felt  something  lightly  brush  my  chair.  It  was  his 
foot,  which  he  gave  me  leave  to  touch.  Turning  to  the  spot 

64 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

where  it  was  on  the  top  of  the  chair,  I  placed  my  hand 
gently  upon  it,  when  he  uttered  a  cry  of  pain,  and  the  foot 
was  withdrawn  quickly,  with  a  palpable  shudder.  It  was 
evidently  not  resting  on  the  chair,  but  floating  ;  and  it 
sprang  from  the  touch  as  a  bird  would.  He  now  passed 
over  to  the  farthest  extremity  of  the  room,  and  we  could 
judge  by  his  voice  of  the  altitude  and  distance  he  had 
attained.  He  had  reached  the  ceiling,  .upon  which  he  made 
a  slight  mark,  and  soon  afterwards  descended  and  resumed 
his  place  at  the  table.  An  incident  which  occurred  during 
this  aerial  passage,  and  imparted  a  strange  solemnity  to  it, 
was  that  the  accordion,  which  we  supposed  to  be  on  the 
ground  under  the  window  close  to  us,  played  a  strain  of 
wild  pathos  in  the  air  from  the  most  distant  corner  of  the 
rootn.” 

W.  M.  Wilkinson,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  last 
chapter,  was  convinced  of  the  “  alleged  power  of 
mediums  to  float  in  the  air  ”  on  the  ground  that  one 
had  come  down  on  his  chest,  and  that  he  had  held  the 
hand  of  another. 

In  neither  of  these  last  quoted  cases,  again,  it  will 
be  noted,  is  there  any  *serious  appeal  to  the  sense 
of  sight.  The  most  that  could  be  seen,  in  the  care¬ 
fully  regulated  gloom,  is  a  dim  silhouette  representing 
Home’s  person,  or  part  of  his  person,  outlined  against 
the  grey  square  of  the  window.  But  it  probably  was 
not  a  square.  The  second  account  mentions  the 
curtains.  But  neither  writer  thinks  it  worth  while  to 
tell  ,us  how  far  the  curtains  shrouded  the  window. 
We  are  by  no  means  called  upon  from  these  incom¬ 
plete  , accounts  to  assume  that  the  whole  of  Home’s 
person  was  seen  at  once  floating  horizontally  in  the 
air.  From  the  first  account,  indeed,  it  seems  quite 
clear  that  this  was  not  the  case,  and  Robert  Bell’s 
phrase,  “  we  saw  his  figure  pass,”  probably  represents 
more  of  inference  than  of  observation.  We  can  solve 

LEVITATION  AND  THE  EIRE  ORDEAL  65 

the  problem  without  supposing,  as  one  contemporary 
newspaper  critic  suggested,  that  Home  brought  a 
balloon  with  him  into  the  seance -room. 

But  the  most  famous  levitation  is  that  which 
occurred  in  December,  1868,  at  5,  Buckingham  Gate, 
in  the  presence  of  the  Master  of  Lindsay  (the  present 
Lord  Crawford),  Lord  Adare  (the  present  Earl  of 
Dunraven),  and  Captain  Wynne.  It  was  not  the  first 
feat  of  the  kind  which  the  two  former  gentlemen  had 
witnessed.  In  his  evidence  before  the  Dialectical 
Society  on  July  6,  1869,  Lord  Lindsay  thus  describes 
a  prior  incident  of  this  kind  : 

“  Home  on  one  occasion  was  sitting  next  me  ;  in  a  few 
minutes  he  said,  ‘  Keep  quiet  ;  I  am  going  up.’  His  foot 
then  came  and  touched  my  shoulder  ;  I  then  felt  something 
like  velvet  touch  my  cheek,  and  on  looking  up  was  surprised 
to  find  that  he  had  carried  with  him  an  arm-chair,  which 
he  held  out  in  his  hand,  and  then  floated  round  the  room, 
pushing  the  pictures  out  of  their  place  as  he  passed  round 
the  walls.  They  were  far  beyond  the  reach  of  a  person 
standing  on  the  ground.  The  light  was  sufficient  to  enable 
me  to  see  clearly.”  » 

If,  however,  we  turn  to  the  contemporary  account 
of  what  is  apparently  the  same  seance,  given  in  Lord 
Adare’s  “  Experiences  in  Spiritualism,”  we  find  that 
the  room  was  ”  nearly  dark.”  No  artificial  light  is 
mentioned  ;  the  date  of  the  sdance  is  not  given  ;  it 
appears  to  have  taken  place  some  time  in  November 
or  December,  but  there  is  no  mention  of  a  fire.  The 
window  blind  was  drawn  down.  At  an  earlier  stage 
of  the  proceedings  Home  had  also  drawn  the 
curtains  across  the  window  ;  and  there  is  no  mention 

‘  “  Report  on  Spiritualism  of  the  Committee  of  the 
Dialectical  Society,”  p.  214. 

5 

66 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

of  their  being  drawn  back  again.  Lord  Adare’s  con¬ 
temporary  account  of  the  incident  at  no  point  speaks 
of  seeing  Home  ;  in  fact,  from  the  stress  laid  upon 
contact  with  Home’s  feet,  &c.,  it  would  seem  manifest 
that  he,  at  any  rate,  could  not  see  clearly. 

Rather  than  believe  the  miracle  I  prefer  to  believe 
that  Lord  Lindsay  was  mistaken,  and  that  in 
describing  the  incident  half  a  year  later  he  based  on 
the  sense  of  sight  a  conviction  which  at  the  time  he 
had  based  wholly  on  the  senses  of  hearing  and  touch. 
It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  that  this  is  a  not 
imcommon  form  of  memory  illusion. 

The  more  famous  incident  took  place  in  December 
of  the  same  year,  1868,  a  week  or  two  later  than  the 
case  just  recorded.  Mrs.  Home  ^  gives  the  date  as  the 
1 6th  of  the  month.  But  this  date  appears  to  be 
founded  on  a  misreading  of  Lord  Adare’s  account  (the 
only  account  known  to  the  present  writer  in  which  any 
date  is  given).  His  record  is  headed  “Seance  at 
5,  Buckingham  Gate,  .Wednesday,  December  i6th.’’ 
But  the  report  of  the  seance  commences  “  On  .Sunday 
last,’’  i  e.,  December  13th.  The  exact  date  is  a  matter 
of  some  interest,  for  a  reason  which  will  appear  later  .2 
The  fullest  account  is  that  of  the  Master  of  Lindsay. 
In  his  evidence  before  the  Dialectical  Society  he  is 
reported  as  saying  : 

“  I  saw  the  levitations  in  Victoria  Street  when  Home 
floated  out  of  the  window.  He  first  went  into  a  trance,  and 
walked  about  uneasily  ;  he  then  went  into  the  hall.  While 
he  was  away  I  heard  a  voice  whisper  in  my  ear,  ‘  He  will 
go  out  of  one  window  and  in  at  another.’  I  was  alarmed 

J  “  Life  of  D.  D.  Home,’’  p.  299. 

2  See  Miss  Johnson’s  remarks  on  this  point,  Proceedings 
S  P  R-,  vol.  xxi.  p.  492. 

LEVITATION  AND  THE  FIRE  ORDEAL  67 

and  shocked  at  the  idea  of  so  dangerous  an  experiment. 

I  told  the  company  what  I  had  heard,  and  we  then  waited 
for  Home’s  return.  Shortly  after  he  entered  the  room.  I 
heard  the  window  go  upj  but  I  could  not  see  it,  for  I  sat 
with  my  back  to  it.  I,  however,  saw  his  shadow  on  the 
opposite  wall  ;  he  went  out  of  the  window  in  a  horizontal 
position,  and  I  saw  him  outside  the  other  window  (that  in 
the  next  room)  floating  in  the  air.  It  was  eighty-five  feet 
from  the  ground.”  « 

In  a  letter  written  two  years  later  he  writes  : 

“  I  was  sitting  with  Mr.  Home  and  Lord  Adare,  and  a 
cousin  of  his.  During  the  sitting  Mr.  Home  went  into 
a  trance,  and  in  that  state  was  carried  out  of  the  window 
in  the  room  next  to  where  we  were,  and  was  brought  in  at 
our  window.  The  distance  between  the  windows  was  about 
7  feet  6  inches,  and  there  was  not  the  slightest  foot¬ 
hold  between  them,  nor  was  there  more  than  a  twelve -inch 
projection  to  each  window,  which  served  as  a  ledge  to  put 
flowers  on.  We  heard  the  window  in  the  next  room  lifted 
up,  and  almost  immediately  after  we  saw  Home  floating 
in  the  air  outside  our  window.  The  moon  was  shining  full 
into  the  room  ;  my  back  was  to  the  light,  and  I  saw  the 
shadow  on  the  wall  of  the  window-sill,  and  Home’s  feet 
about  six  inches  above  it.  He  remained  in  this  position 
for  a  few  seconds,  then  raised  the  window  and  glided  into 
the  room,  feet  foremost,  and  sat  down.” 

Lord  A'dare’s  account  of  this  incident  is  as  follows  : 

“  We  heard  Home  go  into  the  next  room,  heard  the 
window  thrown  up,  and  presently  Home  appeared,  standing 
upright  outside  our  window  ;  he  opened  the  window  and 
walked  in  quite  coolly.” 

Lord  Adare’s  account  appears  to  have  been  written 
a  few  days  after  the  incident.  In  February,  1877, 
the  third  witness,  Captain  Wynne,  gives  his  testimony, 
in  a  letter  to  Home,  as  follows  :  “  The  fact  of  your 

«  Report,  p.  214. 

68 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

having  gone  out  of  one  window  and  in  at  another  I 
can  swear  to.” 

Here  we  have  three  separate  accounts  of  what 
purports  to  be  the  most  stupendous  marvel  of  modern 
times.  Let  us  examine  each  account  separately.  Lord 
Lindsay  was  the  chief  spokesman,  WJiat  did  he  see 
and  hear?  He  heard  a  sound  which  suggested  to  him 
that  a  window  in  the  next  room  was  being  lifted  up. 
Subsequently,  sitting  with  his  back  to  the  window,  he 
saw  on  the  wall  a  shadow  which  he  interpreted  as 
that  of  Home  ‘‘  floating  ”  outside  the  window,  opening 
the  window,  and  gliding  into  the  room  feet  foremost. 
Even  if  the  outside  illumination  had  been  good,  and 
the  shadows  on  the  wall  quite  sharply  defined.  Lord 
Lindsay’s  testimony  would  amount  to  very  little. 

The  shadows,  we  are  given  to  understand,  were 
cast  by  the  moon,  and  Lord  Lindsay  could  not  of 
course  determine  from  the  shadow  on  which  side  of  the 
window  Home  was  standing.  At  most,  he  could  testify 
that  there  was  a  space  between  Home’s  feet  and  the 
window-sill.  But  were  the  shadows  sharply  defined? 
On  reference  to  the  almanack,  it  will  be  found  that  the 
moon  was  new  on  December  13,  1868.  A  three-days- 
old  moon  Xon  the  improbable  assumption  that  the  date 
quoted  by  Mrs.  Home  was  correct)  would  not  have 
afforded  much  light  •  a  new  moon  is,  of  course, 
invisible.  The  only  light  which  came  through  the 
window,  it  would  seemj  was  that  of  the  stars  and  the 
diffused  light  from  the  streets  of  London,  eighty-five 
feet  below.*  Did  this  light  enable  Lord  Lindsay  to 
see  anything  at  all? 

*  Lord  Adare  states  that  the  room  was  on  the  third  floor. 
Some  one  has  blundered.  Perhaps  85  is  a  misprint  for  35. 

LEVITATION  AND  THE  FIRE  ORDEAL  69 

But  we  have  two  other  first-hand  accounts.  What  do 
the  other  witnesses  say?  Captain  Wynne,  eight  years 
afterwards,  says  he  can  swear  to  the  fact.  Lord  Adare 
says  :  “  We  heard  the  window  open,  and  presently 

Home  appeared  .  .  .  outside  the  window.”  Appeared 
to  whom?  Lord  Adare  tells  what  he  heard.  Why 
does  he  not  tell  us  what  he  saw?  Is  it  not  a  little 
curious  that  two  of  the  witnesses  to  this  stupendous 
marvel  should  be  content  to  give  so  meagre  an  account, 
without  any  details,  and  couched  in  such  ambiguous 
language?  And  is  it  not  still  more  curious  that  the 
task  of  describing  the  details  should  have  been  under¬ 
taken  by  the  one  member  of  the  party  who  from  his 
position  could  see  nothing?  If  Lord  Adare  had  really 
seen  the  whole  drama,  is  it  likely  he  would  have  left 
it  to  be  told  practically  at  second-hand?  A  comparison 
of  the  three  accounts,  and  the  ambiguous  wording  of 
the  testimony  given  by  Lord  Adare  and  Captain  Wynne, 
suggest  that  possibly  none  of  the  witnesses  had  their 
faces  turned  directly  towards  the  window,  and  that 
Lord  Lindsay  was  the  only  qne  of  the  three  who  made 
the  attempt  to  distinguish  between  what  he  saw  and 
what  he  inferred.  For  Lord  Adare  is  not  generally 
chary  of  detail.  He  records  much  more  fully  an  inci¬ 
dent  which  took  place  immediately  after,  an  incident 
of  which  he  was  the  only  spectator  : 

At  Home’s  request  he  had  shut  the  window  in  the 
next  room.  On  his  return  to  the  seance-room 

“  I  remarked  that  the  window  was  not  raised  a  foot,  and 
that  I  could  not  think  how  he  [Home  ]  had  managed  'to 
squeeze  through.  He  arose  and  said,  ‘  Come  and  see.’ 
I  went  with  him  ;  he  told  me  to  open  the  window  as  it  was 
before.  I  did  so  ;  he  told  me  to  stand  a  little  distance 
off  ;  he  then  went  through  the  open  space,  head  first,  quite 

70 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

rapidly,  his  body  being  nearly  horizontal  and  apparently 
rigid.  He  came  in  again  feet  foremost,  and  we  returned 
to  the  other  room.  It  was  so  dark  I  could  not  see  clearly 
how  he  was  supported  outside.  He  did  not  appear  to  grasp, 
or  rest  upon,  the  balustrade,  but  rather  to  be  swung  out 
and  in.  Outside  each  window  is  a  small  balcony  or  ledge 
nineteen  inches  deep  apparently,  nineteen  inches  wide], 

bounded  by  stone  balustrades  eighteen  inches  high.” 

What  really  took  place  was  probably  somewhat  ps 
follows  :  Home  had  found  in  the  three  young  Imen 
specially  suggestible  witnesses.  Of  Captain  Wynne, 
indeed,  we  know  little.  But  both  Lord  Lindsay  and 
Lord  Adare  had  frequently  seen  in  Home’s  presence 
shadowy  forms  and  lights,  some  of  which,  at  any  rate, 
were  unquestionably  hallucinatory.  Home  had  pro¬ 
phesied  to  the  former  gentleman,  who  was  quartered 
at  the  Tower,  that  he  would  have  curious  manifesta¬ 
tions  there  from  some  of  the  dreadful  spirits  whoi 
haunted  the  place.  The  prophecy  was  made  on 
November  20,  1868.  A  few  days  later,  at  the 
beginning  of  the  next  recorded  seance  with  Home, 
Lord  Lindsay  reports  that  “  he  had  had  strong  mani¬ 
festations  that  evening  when  alone.”  ^  In  the  course 
of  the  same  seance  occurred  what  seems  to  have  been 
a  rehearsal  of  the  miracle  of  December  13th  : 

”  The  room  was  nearly  dark.  We  had  physical  manifesta¬ 
tions.  Home  went  into  a  trance  ;  he  walked  about  the  room 
for  some  time,  arranging  the  light  and  talking  to  himself  ; 
he  then  opened  the  window,  drawing  the  curtain,  so  that  we 
could  see  nothing  but  his  head,  and  got  outside  the  window. 
This  frightened  us,  and  Lindsay  wanted  to  stop  him,  but 
did  not.  Presently  he  came  back,  and  told  us  that  we  had 
no  faith  whatever  or  we  would  not  have  been  alarmed  for 
his  safety.”  2  _ 

■  ‘‘  Experiences,”  p.  77. 

2  Lord  Adare,  in  ”  Experiences,”  p.  77. 

LEVITATION  AND  THE  FIRE  ORDEAL  71 

Later  in  the  same  sitting  occurred  the  levitation 
already  referred  to,  in  which  Home  brushed  against 
the  pictures.  The  record  of  this  seance  '(of  which,  as 
already  said,  the  date  is  not  given)  immediately 
precedes  the  record  of  the  stance  of  December  13th. 

It  will  be  seen  that  Home  on  this  occasion  seems 
to  have  begun  preparing  the  minds  of  his  sitters  for 
what  they  were  to  witness  later.  At  the  stance  of 
December  13th  the  same  process  was  continued.  Lord 
Lindsay  at  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  “  saw  two  spirits 
on  the  sofa,  and  others  in  different  places.”  Various 
deceased  acquaintances — Adah  Menken,  little  Dannie 
Cox,  and  E. — held  impressive  communications  through 
the  medium’s  voice  with  those  present.  E.’s  repentant 
tears  were  so  hot  as  to  leave  a  red  mark  on  Lord! 
Adare’s  hand — an  incident  curiously  suggestive  of  a 
mesmeric  experiment. 

‘‘  Home  then  got  up  and  walked  about  the  room.  He 
was  both  elongated  and  raised  in  the  air.  He  spoke  in 
a  whisper,  as  though  the  spirits  were  arranging  something. 
He  then  said  to  us,  ‘  Do  not  be  afraid,  and  on  no  account 
leave  your  places  ’  ;  and  he  went  out  into  the  passage. 
Lindsay  suddenly  said,  ‘  Oh,  good  heavens  !  I  know  what  he 
is  going  to  do  ;  it  is  too  fearful.’ 

‘‘  Adare  ;  ‘  What  is  it?  ’ 

“  Lindsay  :  ‘  I  cannot  tell  you  ;  it  is  too  horrible  !  Adah 
[the  spirit  of  the  deceased  actress  Adah  Menken  ]  says  that 
I  must  tell  you  ;  he  is  going  out  of  the  window  in  the 
other  room,  and  coming  in  at  this  window.’  ”  * 

Immediately  after  these  words  there  follow  the  three 
lines  descriptive  of  the  levitation  already  quoted  from 
Lord  Adare’s  record. 

What,  no  doubt,  happened  was  that  Home,  having 

>  P.  82. 

72 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

noisily  opened  the  window  in  the  next  room,  slipped 
back  under  cover  of  the  darkness  into  the  stance- 
room,  got  behind  the  curtains,  opened  the  window,  and 
stepped  on  to  the  window-ledge. 

Was  ever  drama  so  slenderly  staged?  Did  ever 
dramatist  more  cunningly  excite  the  pity  and  terror 
of  his  audience?  Did  ever  audience  lend  themselves 
more  greedily  to  the  melodramatic  illusion?  Did  ever 
miracle  receive  such  casual  attestation?  » 

The  phenomenon  of  the  elongation  of  various  parts 
of  Home’s  person,  and  of  his  whole  body,  is  frequently 
described  in  the  years  1867-70.  Some  accounts 
of  the  phenomenon  certainly  suggest  that  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  elongation  may  have  been  produced  by  quite 
normal  means,  and  imply  less  ingenuity  on  the  part  of 
the  medium  than  simplicity  on  the  part  of  the 
spectators.  In  a  case  of  elongation  of  the  hand 
observed  by  Mr.  H.  D.  Jencken  in  1869  a  tracing 
is  given  of  the  right  hand  in  its  normal  position,  and 
as  elongated,  the  two  outlines  overlapping.  The  extra 
elongation,  in  this  case,  of  the  thumb  and  index  finger 
is  rather  less  than  an  inch  ;  in  the  remaining  fingers 
it  slightly  exceeds  an  inch.  To  secure  that  the  hand 
did  not  move  the  observer  held  his  pencil  pressed 
against  the  trapezium  bone  of  the  wrist,  i.e.y  at  the 
point  where  the  thumb  joins  the  wrist.  No  other  pre¬ 
cautions  are  said  to  have  been  taken.  So  small  a 
difference  in  length  would  easily  be  produced  if  Home 
at  the  outset  had  slightly  flexed  his  fingers — the  hand 

*  See  the  criticism  of  this  famous  seance  by  Miss  Alice 
Johnson  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxi.  pp.  490 — 97),  to 
whom  I  gladly  acknowledge  my  indebtedness  for  the  correc¬ 
tion  in  the  date  of  the  stance,  which  had  hitherto  escaped 
my  observation,  and  for  some  additional  points  in  the  case. 

LEVITATION  AND  THE  FIRE  ORDEAL  73 

rested  palm  downwards — so  that  they  did  not  lie  flat 
on  the  paper  throughout  their  length,  and  afterwards 
extended  them  to  their  full  length,  at  the  same 
time  rotating  the  whole  hand  on  the  trapezium  as  a: 
pivot.  The  tracing  shows  that,  in  fact,  such  a  slight 
rotation  did  take  place,  and  in  the  direction  required, 
viz.,  to  the  left.* 

The  phenomenon  on  this  occasion  is  said  to  have 
taken  place  in  a  well-lighted  room.  Generally,  how¬ 
ever,  the  lights  had  been  lowered  before  the  manifesta¬ 
tion  took  place,  and  the  room  was  in  partial  obscurity. 
General  Boldero  witnessed  an  incident  of  the  kind  on 
February  4,  1870.  His  account  was  written  on  the 
following  day.  After  the  seance,  which  took  place  in 
a  private  house  in  Edinburgh,  had  been  proceeding 
for  some  time.  Home  summoned  two  ladies  and  General 
Boldero  to  leave  the  circle  and  accompany  him.  They 
went  with  him  to  the  library — 

“  The  library  opened  on  to  the  landing,  where  there  was 
a  bright  gaslight,  but  the  room  itself  had  no  light.  ...  In 
a  few  minutes  Home  went  off  into  a  trance.  He  got  up  and 
walked  about  a  little,  and  then  came  to  me  and  took  me  by 
the  hand,  saying,  t  Will  you  look  at  Dan’s  feet  and  see  that 
he  does  not  move  them  off  the  ground,  and  tell  the  others 
to  look  at  his  head.’  I  watched,  and  saw  his  whole  body 
elongated  as  much  as  nine  inches  or  a  foot.  I  went  and 
felt  his  feet,  and  found  thefn  on  the  ground.  I  must  tell 
you  that  he  was  standing  where  the  light  of  the  gas  on 
the  landing  fell  upon  him.  It  was  an  extraordinary  sight. 
He  then  said,  ‘  Come  here,’  so  I  went  back  to  him.  He 
was  still  of  prolonged  stature.  He  took  both  my  hands, 
and  placed  them  on  each  side  of  his  waist,  above  the  hips  ; 
there  was  a  vacuum  between  his  waistcoat  and  trousers. 

‘  Feel  Dan,  that  you  may  be  satisfied  ’  ;  and  surely  enough 

“  Human  Nature,”  vol.  iii.  p.  140. 

74 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

he  came  back  to  his  own  size,  and  I  could  feel  the  flesh 
shrink.  He  again  was  elongated,  and  I  could  feel  his  flesh 
stretch  and  again  shrink.”  i 

Here,  if  we  take  into  account  the  nature  of  the 
light,  and  the  fact  that  the  three  witnesses  had  been 
specially  selected,  no  doubt  for  their  suggestibility,  we 
shall  scarcely  find  the  incident  as  impressive  as  it 
appeared  to  General  Boldero.  It  is  to  be  noted  that 
General  Boldero  did  not  feel  the  feet  until  he  had 
seen  the  elongation.  There  is  no  proof,  therefore, 
that  the  feet  were  flat  on  the  ground  when  the  elonga¬ 
tion  reached  the  extreme  limit  of  nine  inches  or 
more. 

When  H.  D.  Jencken  was  witness  of  an  elongation 
by  the  light  of  a  candle  held  in  Home’s  hand  he 
estimated  the  increase  in  height  at  four  inches  only.^ 

The  Master  of  Lindsay  was  again  fortunate  in 
witnessing  an  elongation  of  considerable  extent  by  the 
light  of  a  candle.  In  his  evidence  before  the 
Dialectical  Society  he  states  : 

“  On  another  occasion  I  saw  Mr.  Home,  in  a  trance, 
elongated  eleven  inches.  I  measured  him  standing  up 
against  the  wall,  and  marked  the  place.  Not  being  satisfied 
with  that,  I  put  him  in  the  middle  of  the  room  and  placed 
a  candle  in  front  of  him,  so  as  to  throw  a  shadow  on  the 
wall,  which  I  also  marked.  When  he  awoke  I  measured 
him  again  in  his  natural  size,  both  directly  and  by  the 
shadow,  and  the  results  were  equal.  I  can  swear  that  he 
was  not  off  the  ground  or  standing  on  tiptoe,  as  I  had  full 
view  of  his  feet  ;  and,  moreover,  a  gentleman  present  had 
one  of  his  feet  placed  over  Home’s  insteps,  one  hand  on  his 
shoulder,  and  the  other  on  his  side  where  the  false  ribs 
come  near  the  hip-bone.” 

'  Journal  S.P.R.,  July,  1889,  p.  125. 
2  “  Human  Nature,”  vol.  ii.  p.  611. 

LEVITATION  AND  THE  FIRE  ORDEAL  75 

Later,  in  answer  to  questions,  Lord  Lindsay  supple¬ 
mented  his  evidence  as  follows  : 

“  The  top  of  the  hip-bone  and  the  short  ribs  separate. 
In  Home  they  were  unusually  close  together.  There  was  no 
separation  of  the  vertebras  of  the  spine  ;  nor  were  the 
elongations  at  all  like  those  resulting  from  expanding  the 
chest  with  air  ;  the  shoulders  did  not  move.  Home  looked 
as  if  he  was  pulled  up  by  the  neck  ;  the  muscles  seemed 
in  a  state  of  tension.  He  stood  firmly  upright  in  the  middle 
of  the  room,  and  before  the  elongation  commenced,  I  placed 
my  foot  on  his  instep.  I  will  swear  he  never  moved  his 
heels  from  the  ground.  When  Home  was  elongated  against 
the  wall.  Lord  Adare  placed  his  foot  on  Home’s  instep,  and  I 
marked  the  place  on  the  wall.  I  once  saw  him  elongated 
horizontally  on  the  ground  ;  Lord  Adare  was  present. 
Home  seemed  to  grow  at  both  ends,  and  pushed  myself  and 
Adare  away.” 

I  cannot  identify  in  Lord  Adare’s  ‘‘  Experiences  ” 
any  reference  to  the  particular  occasion  referred  to 
by  Lord  Lindsay.  But  Mr.  Hawkins  Simpson  has  given 
an  account  of  an  elongation  at  which  he  assisted  Lord 
Lindsay  in  testing  the  phenomenon.*  If  this  was  the 
occasion  referred  to  in  the  first  of  the  extracts,  the 
accounts  of  the  two  witnesses  differ  in  material  points. 

Several  professional  mediums,  Herne,  Morse,  Peters, 
are  said  also  to  have  exhibited  elongation  of  the  body. 
We  have,  as  said,  no  contemporary  account  of  the 
manifestation  in  the  case  of  Home  which  can  be  relied 
on  as  giving  an  accurate  description  of  what  took  place. 
For  Lord  Lindsay’s  account  was  written  some  time 
after  the  incidents,  and  Lord  Adare’s  contemporary  notes 
are,  on  this  particular  phenomenon,  so  meagre  as  to 
be  of  little  value  in  elucidating  the  subject.  Where, 
as  in  the  two  cases  already  cited  from  H.  D.  Jencken, 

‘  Printed  in  Journal  S.P.R.  for  July,  1889,  p.  123. 

76 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

the  light  was  good  and  the  incident  contemporaneously 
recorded,  no  supernormal  explanation  would  seem  to 
be  required.  The  effect  produced  on  the  observers 
is  certainly  remarkable,  and  the  illusion,  if  illusion  it 
were,  not  easy  to  understand.  But  we  have  not  the 
necessary  data  for  attempting  an  explanation.  We  can 
only  note  that  the  phenomenon  was  vouchsafed  to  none 
but  a  few  specially  selected  witnesses. 

Perhaps  the  most  puzzling  of  all  Home’s  feats  was 
the  fire -test.  The  evidence  for  this  is  fairly  abundant, 
and  of  good  quality.  In  many  cases,  no  doubt,  we 
can  see  how  the  results  may  have  been  effected  by 
normal  means.  Thus,  to  take  an  oft -quoted  case,  Mrs. 
S.  C.  Hall,  on  July  5,  1869,  gives  the  following  account 
of  an  incident  which  took  place  at  a  seance  “  several 
weeks  ”  previously.  The  seance  was  held  in  a  back 
drawing-room  ;  a  fire  was  blazing  in  the  large  front 
room.  Home  went  into  the  front  roqm.  He  poked 
the  fire, 

“  held  his  hand  over  the  fire  for  some  time,  and  finally 
drew  out  of  the  fire,  with  his  hand,  a  huge  lump  of  live, 
burning  coal,  so  large  that  he  held  it  in  both  hands,  as  he 
came  from  the  fireplace  in  the  large  room  into  the  smaller 
room,  where,  seated  round  the  round  table,  we  were  all 
watching  his  movements.  Mr.  Hall  was  seated  nearly  oppo¬ 
site  to  where  I  sat,  and  I  saw  Mr.  Home,  after  standing 
for  about  half  a  minute  '  at  the  back  of  Mr.  Hall’s  chair, 
deliberately  place  the  lump  of  burning  coal  on  his  head. 
I  have  often  since  wondered  that  I  was  not  frightened.  But 
I  was  not  ;  I  had  perfect  faith  that  he  would  not  be  injured. 
Some  one  said,  ‘Is  it  not  hot?’  Mr.  Hall  answered, 
‘  Warm,  but  not  hot.’  Mr.  Home  had  moved  a  little  away, 
but  returned,  still  in  the  trance.  He  smiled,  and  seemed 
quite  pleased,  and  then  proceeded  to  draw  up  Mr.  Hall’s 

*  Italics  not  in  the  original. 

LEVITATION  AND  THE  FIRE  ORDEAL  77 

white  hair  over  the  red  coal.  The  white  hair  had  the 
appearance  of  silver  threads,  over  the  red  coal.  Mr.  Home 
drew  the  hair  into  a  sort  of  pyramid,  the  coal  still  showing 
red  beneath  the  hair  ;  then,  after,  I  think,  four  or  five 
minutes,^  Mr.  Home  pushed  the  hair  back,  and,  taking  the 
coal  off  Mr.  Hall’s  head,  he  said,  addressing  Mrs.  Y.,  ‘Will 
you  have  it  ?  ’  She  drew  back,  and  I  heard  him  murmur, 
‘  Little  faith.’  Two  or  three  attempted  to  touch  it,  but  it 
burnt  their  fingers.  I  said,  ‘  Daniel,  bring  it  to  me  ;  I  do 
not  fear  to  take  it.’  It  was  not  red  all  over,  but  it  was 
still  red  in  parts.  I  put  out  my  right  hand,  but  he  mur¬ 
mured,  ‘  No,  not  that  ;  the  other  hand'.’  .  .  .  He  then  placed 
it  in  my  left  hand.  I  felt  it  warm,  yet  when  I  stooped  down 
to  examine  the  coal,  my  face  felt  the  heat  so  much  that 
I  was  obliged  to  withdraw  it.”  2 

The  account  is  several  weeks  old,  and  has  probably, 
not  lost  in  the  telling.  Yet,  even  as  it  stands,  we  can 
see  that  any  conjurer  could  have  done  as  much.  The 
conjurer  would  have  provided  himself  with  a  piece 
of  slag  from  the  furnaces,  a  large  cinder,  or  some  other 
good  non-conductor,  on  which  he  would  place  the  live 
coal.  He  would  wait — half  a  minute  or  so— until  the 
heat  had  sufficiently  moderated  before  placing  the  cold 
cinder  and  its  burden  on  Mr.  Hall’s  head.  That  the 
white  hair  was  seen  as  white  is  sufficient  proof  that 
the  coal  was  not  really,  glowing  red.  Had  that  been 
the  case,  any  object  that  intercepted  the  glow  would 
have  appeared  black.  The  conjurer  would  then  wait 
four  or  five  minutes,  by  which  time  the  original  lump 
of  coal  would  probably  have  cooled  sufficiently  to  be 
held  in  the  hand  without  serious  inconvenience.  The 
prepared  cinder  or  slag  would  then  be  withdrawn,  as 
we  may  infer  from  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Hall  held  with- 

'  Italics  not  in  the  original. 

2  “  Experiences  in  Spiritualism,”  by  Lord  Adare,  p.  178. 

78 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

out  difficulty  in  one  hand  what  Home  had  held  in  two. 
The  two  or  three  who  were  “  burnt  ”  were  probably 
burnt  in  their  own  imagination. 

Sir  William  Crookes  has  recorded  three  instances  of 
the  fire  test.  The  first  account  is  extracted  from  a 
contemporary  letter  to  Mrs.  Honywood,  describing  a 
seance  which  took  place  on  April  28,  1871  : 

“  At  Mr.  Home’s  request,  whilst  he  was  entranced,  I  went 
with  him  to  the  fireplace  in  the  back  drawing-room.  He 
said,  ‘  We  want  you  to  notice  particularly  what  Dan  is 
doing.’  Accordingly,  I  stood  close  to  the  fire  and  stooped 
down  to  it,  when  he  put  his  hands  in.  He  very  deliberately 
pulled  the  lumps  of  hot  coal  off,  one  at  a  time,  with  his 
right  hand,  and  touched  one  which  was  bright  red.  He  then 
said  :  ‘  The  power  is  not  strong  on  Dan’s  hand,  as  we  have 
been  influencing  the  handkerchief  most.  It  is  more  difficult 
to  influence  an  inanimate  body  like  that  than  living  flesh, 
so,  as  the  circumstances  were  favourable,  we  thought  we 
would  show  you  that  we  could  prevent  a  red-hot  coal  from 
burning  a  handkerchief.  We  will  collect  more  power  on  the 
handkerchief  and  repeat  it  before  you.  Now  1  ’  ” 

“  Mr.  Home  then  waved  the  handkerchief  about  in  the  air 
two  or  three  times,  held  it  above  his  head,  and  then  folded 
it  up  and  laid  it  on  his  hand  like  a  cushion  ;  putting  his 
other  hand  into  the  fire,  he  took  out  a  large  lump  of  cinder, 
red-hot  at  the  lower  part,  and  placed  the  red  part  on  the 
handkerchief.  Under  ordinary  circumstances,  it  would  have 
been  in  a  blaze.  In  about  half  a  minute  he  took  it  off  the 
handkerchief  with  his  hand,  saying,  ‘  As  the  power  is  not 
strong,  if  we  leave  the  coal  longer  it  will  burn.’  He  then 
put  it  on  his  hand  and  brought  it  to  the  table  in  the  front 
room,  where  all  but  myself  had  remained  seated.”  > 

Again,  a  conjurer  could  do  as  much  with  a  pre¬ 
pared  handkerchief.  The  waving  of  the  handkerchief 
in  the  air  may  have  been  the  opportunity  for  substitu¬ 
tion,  if — what  is  not  expressly  stated — the  handkerchief 
ostensibly  to  be  used  had  been  previously  inspected. 

I  Proceedings  SiP^.R.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  103,  104. 

LEVITATION  AND  THE  FIRE  ORDEAL  79 

The  next  case  can  be  explained  in  the  same  way. 
The  account  of  the  test  is  extracted  from  the  detailed 
notes  of  a  seance  which  took  place  on  May  9,  1871. 
At  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  the  room  was  lit  by  a 
wood  fire,  somewhat  dull,  and  by  four  candles.  During 
the  fire  test  two  of  the  candles  were  put  out.  After 
passing  his  fingers  slowly  through  a  candle-flame,  Home 
took  up 

“  a  fine  cambric  handkerchief  belonging  to  Miss  Douglas, 
folded  it  up  on  his  right  hand,  and  went  to  the  fire.  Here 
he  threw  off  the  bandage  from  his  eyes,  and,  by  means  of 
the  tongs,  lifted  a  piece  of  red-hot  charcoal  from  the  centre, 
and  deposited  it  on  the  folded  cambric  ;  bringing  it  across 
the  room,  he  told  us  to  put  out  the  candle  which  was  on 
the  table,  knelt  down  close  to  Mrs.  W.  F.,  and  spoke  to  her 
about  it  in  a  low  voice.  Occasionally  he  fanned  the  coal 
to  a  white  heat  with  his  breath.  Coming  a  little  farther 
round  the  room,  he  spoke  to  Miss  Douglas,  saying,  ‘  We 
shall  have  to  burn  a  very  small  hole  in  the  handkerchief. 
We  have  a  reason  for  this,  which  you  do  not  see.”  Presently 
he  took  the  coal  back  to  the  fire  and  handed  the  handkerchief 
to  Miss  Douglas.  A  small  hole,  about  half  an  inch  in 
diameter,  was  burnt  in  the  centre,  and  there  were  two  small 
points  near  it,  but  it  was  not  even  singed  anywhere  else. 
(I  took  the  handkerchief  away  with  me,  and,  on  testing  it 
in  my  laboratory,  found  that  it  had  not  undergone  the 
slightest  chemical  preparation  which  could  have  rendered 
it  fire-proof.)  ” 

The  candle  on  the  table  had  been  blown  out,  by 
Home’s  desire,  before  he  reached  it,  and  we  cannot 
share  Sir  W.  Crookes’  confidence  that  the  handker¬ 
chief  on  which,  in  the  carefully  prepared  obscurity. 
Miss  Douglas  saw  the  hot  charcoal  resting,  was  the 
same  handkerchief  which  he  afterwards  tested  in  his 
laboratory.  The  re-substitution  and  the  burning  of 
the  original  handkerchief  could  have  been  effected 
when  Home  took  the  coal  back  to  the  fire. 

80 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

But  the  last  instance  described  by  Sir  William 
Crookes,  which  took  place  immediately  after  the 
incident  just  given,  seems,  if  accurately  recorded, 
beyond  the  possibilities  of  the  conjurer’s  art. 

“  Mr.  Home  again  went  to  the  fire,  and,  after  stirring  the 
hot  coal  about  with  his  hand,  took  out  a  red-hot  piece  nearly 
as  big  as  an  orange,  and,  putting  it  on  his  right  hand, 
covered  it  over  with  his  left  hand  so  as  to  almost  completely 
enclose  it,  and  then  blew  into  the  small  furnace  thus  extem¬ 
porised  until  the  lump  of  charcoal  was  nearly  white-hot, 
and  then  drew  my  attention  to  the  lambent  flame  which  was 
flickering  over  the  coal  and  licking  round  his  fingers  ;  he 
fell  on  his  knees,  looked  up  in  a  reverent  manner,  held  up 
the  coal  in  front,  and  said:  ‘  Is  not  God  good?  Are  not 
His  laws  wonderful?’” 

Again,  Lord  Adare  describes  "  a  case  in  which  Home, 
“  kneeling  down,  placed  his  face  right  among  the 
burning  coals,  moving  it  about  as  though  bathing  it 
in  water.”  Mrs.  Honywood  and  Lord  Lindsay,  in  a 
joint  communication  to  the  Dialectical  Society,^  describe 
an  occasion  in  which  Home  took  a  chimney  from  a 
lighted  lamp  and  thrust  it  into  the  red-hot  coals,  leaving 
it  there  for  four  or  five  minutes.  To  test  the  heat  he 
then  asked  his  hostess  to  apply  a  match  to  it — the 
match  instantly  ignited.  Home  then  thrust  the 
chimney  into  his  mouth,  applying  his  tongue  to  it. 
Other  descriptions  almost  equally  marvellous  will  be 
found  in  the  literature  of  the  period. 

It  is  not  easy  to  see  how  simple  trickery  could 
explain  some  of  the  phenomena  attested,  such  as  the 
last  incident  quoted  from  Sir  Wt.  Crookes’  contempo¬ 
rary  notes,  or  the  elongation  of  Home’s  person  by 

■  ”  Experiences,”  p.  68. 

2  ‘‘  Report  of  the  Dialectical  Society,”  p.  361. 

LEVITATION  AND  THE  FIRE  ORDEAL  81 

candlelight  as  described  by  the  Master  of  Lindsay. 
iWe  almost  seem  to  be  driven,  as  Mr.  Feilding  and 
his  colleagues  have  suggested  in  their  report  on 
Eusapia’s  manifestations,  to  accept  the  alternatives  of 
a  new  force  or  a  collective  hallucination. 

But  “  hallucination  ”  has  an  alarming  sound  to 
modern  ears.  Its  original  meaning  is  simply  wander¬ 
ing  in  mind,  or  dreaminess,  what  would  technically 
be  called  slight  dissociation  of  consciousness.  Sup¬ 
pose,  then,  we  substitute  for  “  hallucination  ”  a  word 
charged  with  less  portentous  significance,  and  say  that 
the  choice  lies  between  a  new  force  and  some  form 
of  sense -deception.  As  regards  the  first  alternative,  it 
may  perhaps  be  admitted  that  a  force  which  was 
capable  of  depressing  a  balance,  playing  an  accordion, 
distributing  flowers,  and  unscrewing  the  canopy  of  an 
oriental  idol,  might  conceivably  be  capable  of  carrying 
a  slenderly  built  man  round  the  room.  But  it  is  a 
little  difficult  to  suppose  that  the  same  force  could 
stretch  his  bodily  frame  to  the  extent  of  a  foot  ,or 
so,  or  could  render  not  only  his  own  skin  but  that 
of  his  elected  witnesses  immune  alike  to  the  pain  and 
to  the  physical  effects  of  fire.  And  if  we  add  all 
the  other  phenomena  vouched  for  by  competent 
witnesses,  including  Sir  W.  Crookes  himself,  raps, 
spirit  lights,  even  semi -material  mimicries  of  the  com¬ 
plete  human  form,  we  must  suppose — that  is,  if  we 
allow  ourselves  to  be  guided  by  terrestrial  analogies 
at  all — that  we  have  to  deal,  not  with  one  new  force, 
but  with  many.  We  are  surely  not  justified  in  doing 
more  than  casting  a  glance  at  such  a  possibility  before 
we  have,  at  any  rate,  attempted  to  find  a  cheapef 
solution  elsewhere. 

6 

82 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

Now,  hallucination  has,  as  said,  an  alarming  sound. 
It  suggests  a  blue  dog,  or  the  thronging  apparitions 
which  burdened  the  life  of  Nicolai  and  the  half- 
mythical  Mrs.  A’.  But,  in  fact,  we  are  all  of  us  con¬ 
stantly  experiencing  minor  hallucinations  of  one  kind 
or  another.  .What  we  see  is  not  simply  a  reflection  in 
the  brain  of  the  picture  painted  on  the  retina.  That 
is  merely  the  raw  material  which  the  brain  has  to 
work  up.  The  act  of  seeing  is  an  intellectual  process, 
involving  memory,  comparison,  reflection,  and  judg¬ 
ment.  Of  course,  in  ordinary  circumstances,  and  under 
favourable  conditions,  the  intellectual  factor  is  re¬ 
duced  to  a  minimum,  and  the  brain  has  little  chance 
of  making  a  mistake — a  hallucination,  in  fact.  But 
the  intellectual  or  creative  element  is  always  there, 
and  shows  itself  when  necessary.  Two  common 
instances  of  sense -deception  will  illustrate  its  action. 
It  must  have  occurred  to  most  of  us  occasionally  to 
see  a  simple  geometrical  pattern,  on  wall-papers,  tiles, 
or  in  a  book  on  geometry,  which  could  be  interpreted 
by  the  eye  in  two  different  ways  as  the  representation 
of  two  different  solid  objects.  The  brain  chooses  one 
of  two  interpretations — that  is,  in  the  act  of  inter¬ 
preting  it  adds  to  the  data  of  sense.  Here  is  another, 
probably  less  familiar,  illustration.  Prick  a  small  hole 
in  a  postcard  and  look  through  it  at  a:  lighted  lamp. 
You  will  see  the  lamp  in  its  ordinary  position.  Now 
between  the  eye  and  the  pinhole  insert  a  pin,  head 
upwards.  You  will  see  the  monstrous  image  of 
a  pin  /lead  downwards.  In  fact,  the  image  of  the 
lamp  coming  through  the  pinhole  is  inverted  but  the 
brain  knows  that  lighted  lamps  don’t  occur  upside  down^ 
and  automatically  corrects  the  image.  But  the  image 

LEVITATION  AND  THE  FIRE  ORDEAL  83 

of  the  pin  is  painted  on  the  retina  in  the  opposite 
direction  to  that  of  the  lamp,  and  the  same  intel¬ 
lectual  process  which  presented  to  our  perception  the 
topsy-turvy  lamp  right  side  up  necessarily  presents  the 
upright  pin  topsy-turvy. 

•When  the  data  derived  from  the  retina  are  scanty, 
as  in  a  bad  light,  the  brain  has  a  good  deal  of  work 
to  do  to  fill  in  the  picture,  and  frequently  fills  it  in 
incorrectly.  We  are  all  familiar  with  occasional  mis¬ 
carriages  in  this  process  of  construction  on  too  slender, 
a  basis — e.g.,  in  walking  through  a  w’ood  on  a  dark 
night.  But  sometimes  the  senses  are  presented  with 
data  which  are  intentionally  misleading.  A  conjurer 
takes  a  ball  in  his  hand  and  makes  the  motion  of 
throwing  it  across  the  stage.  Almost  simultaneously 
is  heard  the  sound  as  of  the  ball  falling  into  a  metal 
bowl.  How  many  brains  correctly,  interpret  the  sensory 
data?  I 

Now,  in  all  the  cases  before  us  we  have  these  two 
conditions  favouring  sense-deception — an  imperfect 
light  and  the  intention  on  the  part  of  the  performer 
to  mislead.  But  in  Home’s  case,  as  is  shown  in  the 
last  chapter,  and  in  most  cases  of  so-called  spirit 
manifestations,  we  have  another  factor,  probably  more 
favourable  than  either  of  them — exaltation  of  the 
emotions,  especially  the  religious  emotions.  How 

>  Some  further  experiments  on  the  psychology  of  con¬ 
juring  are  much  to  be  desired.  Professor  Jastrow  (“  Fact 
and  Fable  in  Psychology  ”)  has  a  suggestive  chapter  on  the 
subject.  He  quotes  an  experiment  made  by  Mr.  Triplett, 
in  which,  after  several  actual  throws,  the  performer  made 
the  gesture  of  throwing  a  ball  into  the  air,  but  actually 
kept  it  in  his  hands.  Out  of  165  children,  78  described 
how  they  had  seen  the  ball  go  up  and  disappear. 

84 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

powerful  may  be  the  effect  of  stimulating  the  religious 
feelings  can  be  seen  in  the  innumerable  miraculous 
visions  in  the  annals  of  the  Church.  A  modern  instance 
will  be  found  in  the  apparitions  at  Knock  a  genera¬ 
tion  ago.  Another  instance  occurred  at  Remiremont, 
in  the  Vosges,  in  1907.  Owing  to  the  risk  of  a  riot 
between  the  clerical  and  anti-clerical  parties,  the  civic 
authorities  had  thought  it  necessary  to  prohibit  a 
specially  important  religious  procession  in  honour  of 
the  local  Madonna.  A  few  days  later,  on  May  26th, 
occurred  a  fall  of  large  oval  hailstones,  in  which  more 
than  a  hundred  devout  Catholics,  men,  women,  and 
children,  declared  on  oath  that  they  had  recognised 
images  of  the  Madonna. ^ 

The  last  illustration  furnishes,  no  doubt,  an  extreme 
instance  of  what  may  fairly  be  called  hallucination, 
and  suggests,  what  would  naturally  be  inferred  from 
other  considerations,  that  of  the  three  factors  indi¬ 
cated  as  favourable,  viz.,  insufficiency  and  uncertainty 
of  sensory  data,  deliberate  false  suggestion,  and 
emotional  exaltation,  the  last  is  by  far  the  most  potent 
in  inducing  sense-deception. 

We  find  a  possible  illustration  in  an  allied  field. 
We  have  numerous  accounts  of  what  are  called  Polter¬ 
geist  phenomena,  in  which  naughty  little  girls  surrep¬ 
titiously  throw  stones,  crockery,  and  miscellaneous 
articles.  Now,  many  of  the  witnesses  in  these  cases 
report  that  the  things  seemed  to  glide  or  hover  through 
the  air — moving  much  more  slowly  than  if  they  were 
actually  thrown.  Now,  we  know  in  many  cases,  and  we 

*  An  account  of  the  incident  will  be  found  in  the  'Catholic 
paper  La  Croix.  The  matter  was  investigated  by  M.  Sage 
in  September,  1908.  See  his  report  in  Proceedings  S.p.R., 
vol.  xxi.  p.  405. 

LEVITATION  AND  THE  FIRE  ORDEAL  85 

may  fairly  infer  in  all  cases,  that  the  articles  yrere 
really  thrown.  We  have  seen  the  little  girls  in  the 
act  of  throwing  them  ;  we  have  received  confessions 
that  they  have  thrown  them.  This  peculiar  appear¬ 
ance  of  moving  slowly  is  consistent  with  the  suppo¬ 
sition  that,  in  the  excitement  of  the  moment — and  many 
of  the  witnesses  believed  themselves  to  be  seeing  some¬ 
thing  supernatural — there  was  a  slight  dissociation  of 
consciousness,  dreaminess,  on  the  part  of  the  spectators . 
From  observations  on  the  gradual  disintegration  of 
consciousness  under  anaesthetics  we  learn  that  one  of 
the  first  effects  noticed  is  a  disturbance  of  the  kinses- 
thetic  sense,  in  consequence  of  which  muscular  move¬ 
ments  seem  of  much  longer  duration  than  they  actually 
are.  We  judge,  of  course,  of  the  speed  of  external 
movement  mainly  by  the  sensation  of  movement  in 
our  own  eye  muscles  in  following  the  object  from  point 
to  point.  A  man  in  the  early  stages  of  chloroform  or 
haschisch  intoxication  would  see  a  stone  or  a  saucer 
moving  slowly  through  the  air.i 

Now,  let  us  apply  this  modified  theory  of  collective 
sense-deception  to  Home’s  performances.  Personally 
I  find  no  difficulty  whatever  in  explaining  the  whole 
of  the  recorded  feats  of  levitation,  whether  of  Home, 
Gordon,  Eusapia,  or  Stainton  Moses,  as  simply  instances 
of  rather  crude  sense-deception  in  which  the  sensory 
data  played  an  extremely  small  part.  All  the  favouring 
conditions  are  present — a  dim  light,  subtle  suggestion 
on  the  part  of  the  medium,  and  a  considerable  degree 
of  emotional  exaltation.  But  I  find  it  more  difficult 

*  See  Elmer  E.  Jones’s  article  in  the  Psychological 
Review  (Baltimore,  U.S.A.)  for  January,  1909  ;  and  Ernest 
Dunbar,  in  Proceedings  S.P .R.,  vol.  xix.  p.  69,  “  The 
Action  of  Drugs  on  Consciousness.” 

86 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

to  apply  the  explanation  to  the  phenomenon  of  elonga¬ 
tion.  I  cannot  readily  represent  to  my  imagination  the 
mental  processes  by  which  two  intelligent  men  holding 
a  lighted  candle  and  taking  special  steps  to  correct 
their  measurements — even  though  these  steps  appear 
to  me  not  specially  well  devised — could  have  supposed 
Home’s  body  to  be  abnormally  lengthened,  when  he 
was  really,  let  us  say,  only  standing  on  tiptoe  and 
stretching  himself.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that 
this  manifestation  was  vouchsafed  to  very  few  witnesses, 
and  that  two  of  these  witnesses — the  Master  of  Lindsay 
and  Lord  Adare — were  highly  suggestible,  and  had  fre¬ 
quently  seen  in  Home’s  presence  figures  which  can 
hardly  have  been  anything  but  hallucinations. 

The  difficulty  is  quite  as  great  with  the  red-hot 
coal  performance.  Some  of  the  instances,  indeed,  as 
shown,  can  be  explained  by  simple  sleight  of  hand. 
And  there  are  many  parallels,  or  seeming  parallels,  to 
be  found  in  magical  and  religious  ceremonies  all  the 
world  over  ;  the  marvel  depending,  so  far  as  the 
reports  of  travellers  will  enable  one  to  judge,  partly 
on  endurance,  partly  on  preparation  of  the  skin  by 
drugs,  most  of  all,  perhaps,  on  skilfully  staged  illusion, 
But  the  testimony  to  Home’s  feats  is  abundant  ;  and 
it  is  difficult  to  see  how  Sir  W.  Crookes,  if  in  full 
possession  of  his  normal  senses,  could  be  mistaken 
in  describing  the  flames  licking  Home’s  fingers. 

iWe  don’t  quite  see  how  some  of  the  things  were 
done,  and  we  leave  the  subject  with  an  almost  pain¬ 
ful  sense  of  bewilderment.  But  to  say  that  because 
we  cannot  understand  some  of  the  feats,  therefore  they 
must  have  been  due  to  spirits  or  psychic  force,  is 
merely  an  opiate  for  the  uneasiness  of  suspended 
judgment,  a  refuge  from  the  trouble  of  thinking. 

CHAPTER  III 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO 

Concurrently  with  the  retirement  of  Home  into 
private  life  shortly  after  his  second  marriage  in  1871, 
the  character  of  the  spiritualist  movement  underwent 
a  subtle  change.  Home,  as  I  have  endeavoured  to 
show,  relied  for  his  success  mainly  upon  the  psycho¬ 
logical  atmosphere  which  he  himself  created.  But  he 
found  no  worthy  successor.  Future  performers  were 
for  the  most  part  of  much  coarser  type,  and  less  gifted 
by  nature.  Whilst  still  employing  the  appeal  to  the 
emotions  and  affections  of  the  sitters,  now  somewhat 
staled  by  frequent  repetition,  they  relied  mostly  on 
mechanical  effects  ;  and  the  sitters — as  the  enthu¬ 
siasm  of  the  first  two  decades,  the  age  of  Robert 
Chambers,  William  Howitt,  the  De  Morgans,  and  the 
Wilkinsons,  died  out — insisted  on  holding  the  medium’s 
hands  and  introducing  other  precautions  against  fraud. 
From  1870  to  1890  circles  were  mostly  held  in  almost 
complete  darkness  ;  the  sitters  would  hold  the  medium’s 
hands  and  each  other’s  ;  or  if,  as  was  frequently  the 
case  from  this  point  onwards,  the  medium  sat  in  a 
“  cabinet,”  for  materialisations,  two  of  the  sitters  would 
be  appointed  to  tie  him  to  his  chair  and  take  other 
measures  to  prevent  fraud.  The  supreme  manifesta¬ 
tion  of  this  period  was  the  materialisation,  under  such 

87 

88 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

conditions,  of  the  human  form.  But  this  was  also 
the  era  of  slate -writing  and  spirit  photography.  The 
annals  of  spiritualism,  hitherto  happily  vacant,  were 
now  diversified  by  frequent  exposures  of  fraud — the 
exhibition  of  stuffed  spirit  hands,  mediums  masque¬ 
rading  in  dirty  muslin  and  false  beards,  spirit  lights 
of  phosphorised  oil,  trick  slates,  and  doubly  exposed 
photographs.  The  whole  subject  fell  into  increasing 
disrepute..  Professor  and  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick,  F.W.  H. 
Myers,  and  Edmund  Gurney,  who  had  in  the  early  part 
of  this  period  made  experiments  with  several  mediums, 
reached  the  broad  conclusion  that  the  phenomena  de¬ 
generated  precisely  in  the  ratio  in  which  the  precau¬ 
tions  against  trickery  were  rendered  more  effective, 
until  sometimes  a  point  was  reached  at  which,  the 
safeguards  being  absolute,  the  manifestations  ceased 
altogether.  On  the  foundation  of  the  Society  for 
Psychical  Research  in  1882  the  first  President,  Henry 
Sidgwick,  laid  it  down  that  the  Society  could  not 
encourage  , fraud  by  experimenting  further  with  pro¬ 
fessional  mediums,  but  proposed  to  invite  the  co¬ 
operation  of  private  persons  gifted  with  similar  powers. 
To  this  appeal  there  was  practically  no  response. 
Beyond  the  valuable  exposure — through  the  labours 
chiefly  of  Dr.  Hodgson,  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  and  Mr.  S,  J, 
Davey — of  the  methods  employed  in  spirit  slate-writing, 
no  effective  work  was  done  by  the  Society  in  this  field. 
In  short,  the  whole  subject  seemed  likely  to  die  out 
like  a  candle  flame,  leaving  a  malodorous  memory 
behind  it.  Then,  in  1892,  Eusapia  Palladino  appeared 
on  the  scene.  Eusapia — for  by  universal  con¬ 
sent  the  gifted  Neapolitan,  she,  too,  an  artist,  has 
been  assigned  a  place  amongst  her  immortal  fellow- 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO 

89 

countrymen  who  are  known  through  the  ages  by  their 
Christian  names  alone — Eusapia,  then,  is  an  Italian 
peasant  woman,  who  from  her  early  youth  has  been 
possessed  of  mediumistic  powers. 

In  the  autumn  of  1892  a  committee,  amongst  whom; 
were  M.  Schiaparelli,  Director  of  the  Astronomical 
Observatory  at  Milan,  Professor  Gerosa,  Professor 
Brofferio,  and  M.  Aksakof,  held  a  series  of  sittings 
at  Milan  with  Eusapia.  Professor  L'ombroso  and  Pro¬ 
fessor  C.  Richet  were  present  at  some  of  the  meetings, 
and  a  statement  by  the  latter  of  his  own  observations 
was  published,  together  with  the  formal  report  of  the 
Committee,  in  the  January-February  number,  1893,  of 
the  Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques,  The  pheno¬ 
mena  observed  were  of  a  familiar  kind  :  tilting  and 
levitation  of  tables  and  other  movements  of  furniture, 
alteration  of  the  weight  of  the  medium  in  the  balance, 
raps,  and  the  appearance  and  contact  of  hands  in  the 
dark,  or  in  semi-obscurity.  That  the  reports  of  the 
Milan  Committee  were  held  to  deserve  more  respectful 
consideration  than  the  innumerable  other  accounts  of 
similar  manifestations  was  due  mainly  to  the  high 
scientific  standing  of  the  witnesses,  and  the  obvious 
care  and  freedom  from  prepossession  with  which  their 
observations  were  for  the  most  part  made  and  recorded. 

The  phenomena  most  frequently  observed,  and  which 
presented,  apparently,  the  best  opportunity  for  ex¬ 
cluding  fraud,  since  they  took  place  in  a  fairly  good 
light,  were  the  levitation  of  the  table  and  the  alteration 
of  the  medium’s  weight  in  the  balance.  The  table 
was  a  common  kitchen -table,  with  four  legs,  3  feet 
8  inches  long,  by  2  feet  4  inches  wide,  and 
weighing  about  17  lbs.  Professor  Richet,  who  had 

90 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

witnessed  the  levitation  of  the  table  on  several 
occasions,  described  it  as  follows  : 

“  Eusapia,  seated  at  one  end  of  the  table,  gave  her  right 
hand  to  one  of  the  investigators,  and  her  left  hand  to 
another.  Usually  in  the  experiments  at  which  I  assisted, 
M.  Schiaparelli  held  her  right  hand,  and  I  held  her  left. 
The  other  persons  stood  more  or  less  aloof,  so  that  the  two 
table  legs  at  the  end  farthest  from  Eusapia  could  be  seen, 
and  the  two  at  her  end  of  the  table,  and  between  which  she 
had  placed  her  legs,  knees,  and  feet,  were  visible  all,  or 
almost  all,  the  time. 

“  After  various  movements,  during  which  there  were 
partial  liftings,  now  of  one  foot,  now  of  another,  the  table 
was  suddenly  lifted  up,  all  four  feet  being  raised  slightly 
from  the  ground,  from  about  three  to  five  inches.  But  in 
several  instances  (when  there  was  little  or  no  light)  it 
seemed  to  me  that  the  table  legs  were  lifted  off  the  ground 
to  a  height  of  from  eight  to  ten  inches.  This  only  lasted 
for  a  short  time,  difficult  to  estimate,  but  v/hich  I  take  to 
have  been  about  one  or  two  seconds.  Nevertheless,  on  one 
occasion,  at  the  second  stance,  the  table  appeared  to  me  to 
be  raised  from  the  ground  for  about  three  seconds,  with 
a  sort  of  swaying,  rocking  motion  in  the  air.  The  room 
was  lighted  during  the  experiments.” 

The  light  in  some  cases  was  sufficiently  good  to 
allow  of  photographs  being  taken.  A'  copy  of  one 
photograph,  appended  to  Professor  Richet’s  article, 
shows  the  table  suspended  horizontally  some  inches 
above  the  floor,  whilst  Eusapia’s  hands  were  held,  pn 
the  surface  of  the  table,  by  Professors  Richet  and 
Lombroso  respectively,  the  former  having  his  other 
hand  pressed  on  the  medium’s  knees,  and  his  left  foot 
in  contact  with  one  of  her  feet.  Two  other  members 
of  the  Committee  were  watching  the  proceedings  at 
a  little  distance  from  the  table. 

I  have  described  this  feat  in  detail,  not  in  accord- 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO 

91 

ance  with  my  own  estimate  of  its  importance,  but 
because  these  levitations  of  the  table  have  filled  p: 
large  part  in  all  subsequent  investigations  of  Eusapia’s 
phenomena. 

In  fact,  though  the  light  was  often  fairly  good  during 
this  particular  feat,  the  degree  of  illumination  was 
nevertheless  always  prescribed  by  the  medium.  And 
under  the  conditions  described,  Eusapia  sitting  close 
to  the  table,  her  legs  under  it  and  part  of  her  dress 
in  actual  contact  with  it,  it  seems  practically  impos¬ 
sible  to  prevent  trickery.  Feet,  knees,  or  hands  can 
all  be  used  on  occasion,  even  when  all  the  limbs  are 
supposed  to  be  under  observation  ;  and  there  are 
mechanical  appliances — e.g.,  a  hook,  attached  by  a 
black  tape  to  a  band  passing  over  her  shoulders  under 
her  dress — which  can  be  employed  even  in  a  fairly 
good  light.  In  fact,  nothing  short  of  complete  isola¬ 
tion  of  Eusapia  from  the  table  could  effectually  pre¬ 
vent  fraud.  The  Milan  Committee  observed  that  the 
levitation  of  the  table  appears  to  have  been  generally 
preceded  by  a  puffing  out  (gonfler)  of  Eusapia’s  dress 
until  it  touched  and  partially  covered  one  foot  of  the 
table  ;  and  that  when  contact  of  the  dress  with  the 
table  was  prevented  the  experiment  failed.  Further, 
the  experiment  also  failed  when  Eusapia  and  the  ex¬ 
perimenters  stood  upright  ;  and  she  refused  to  try  the 
experiment  sitting  at  one  of  the  longer  sides  of  the 
table  or  with  a  pasteboard  screen  placed  round  her 
dress. 

The  experiments  with  the  balance,  also  made  in  a 
good  light,  were  equally  puzzling  and  equally  incon¬ 
clusive.  First  an  ordinary  platform  weighing  machine 
was  used,  and  a  diminution  in  weight  amounting  to 

92 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

17  lbs.  was  observed.  Richet  and  Schiaparelli,  who 
were  watching  closely,  reported  : 

“iWe  are  certain  that  she  threw  nothing  away  (if  she 
had  thrown  anything  away  she  would  have  had  to  recover 
it  in  order  to  restore  her  original  weight),  and  equally, 
certain  that  she  derived  no  support  from  any  neighbouring 
object.  And,  finally,  the  movement  was  sufficiently  slow 
— it  occupied  from  twelve  to  twenty  seconds — to  make  jt 
impossible  to  attribute  it  to  a  jump  or  quick  movement  of 
any  kind.  Nevertheless,  the  observation  did  not  appear  to 
us  conclusive.  In  brief,  in  the  ordinary  weighing  machine, 
constructed  on  the  principle  of  the  steelyard,  the  weight 
varies  (although  it  is  true  within  very  narrow  limits)  with 
the  position  of  the  centre  of  gravity.  By  changing  his 
position  on  the  platform,  especially  when,  as  was  the  case 
here,  the  machine  is  not  a  very  good  one,  the  person  being 
weighed  can  appreciably  vary  his  weight.” 

The  Committee  therefore  devised  a  more  accurate 
balance,  in  which  the  platform  was  suspended  by  all 
four  corners.  A’  slight  diminution  in  weight  was 
observed,  but  only  when  part  of  Eusapia’s  dress  touched 
the  floor.  iWhen  this  contact  was  prevented  the  balance 
remained  steady. 

The  phenomena  observed  in  the  dark  were  incon¬ 
clusive  for  another  reason.  To  prevent  fraud  the 
medium’s  hands  were  held  by  her  neighbours  on  either 
side.  But,  in  Professor  Richet ’s  words, 

”  During  the  experiments,  Eusapia  generally  has  the  right 
and  left  hands  held  differently.  On  one  side  her  whole 
hand  is  firmly  held  ;  on  the  other  side,  instead  of  having 
her  hand  held  by  the  person  next  her,  she  merely  places 
her  hand  on  his,  but  touches  his  hand  with  all  five  fingers, 
so  that  he  can  feel  quite  distinctly  whether  it  is  the  right 
or  the  left  hand  with  which  he  is  in  contact. 

“  This  is  what  follows  :  At  the  moment  when  the  mani¬ 
festations  are  about  to  begin,  the  hand  which  is  not  being 
held,  but  which  is  lightly  placed  on  the  hand  of  the  person 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO 

93 

on  that  side  (for  the  sake  of  simplicity  we  will  suppose 
that  it  is  Eusapia’s  right  hand,  though  it  is,  in  fact,  sometimes 
the  right,  sometimes  the  left) — the  right  hand,  then,  becomes 
very  unsteady,  and  begins  to  move  about  so  rapidly  that 
it  is  impossible  to  follow  its  movements  ;  it  shifts  about 
every  moment,  and  for  the  mere  fraction  of  a  second  it 
is  not  felt  at  all  ;  then  it  is  felt  again,  and  one  could  swear 
it  is  still  the  right  hand.” 

In  short,  whilst  the  majority  of  the  Committee  were 
satisfied  that  some  at  least  of  the  phenomena  could 
not  have  been  produced  by  trickery,  Professor  Richet, 
though  much  impressed  by  what  he  had  witnessed, 
preferred  to  reserve  his  judgment. 

Some  two  years  later  Professor  Richet  found  oppor¬ 
tunity  for  continuing  the  investigation  at  his  own  house 
on  the  lie  Roubaud,  in  the  Mediterranean,  and  later 
at  Carqueiranne.  He  invited,  amongst  others.  Sir 
Oliver  Lodge  and  F.  Wi.  H.  Myers  to  co-operate  with 
him.  Professor  and  Mrs*  H.  Sidgwick  also  attended 
some  of  the  later  sittings  at  Carqueiranne.  The  sittings 
were  held  in  “  semi -darkness  ”  ;  the  circle  sitting 
round  the  table,  in  accordance  with  the  almost  in¬ 
variable  procedure  in  a  stance  with  Eusapia,  and  the 
two  observers  on  either  side  of  the  medium  controlling 
her  hands  and  feet  and  head.  Professor  Richet,  Sir 
Oliver  Lodge,  and  Mr.  Myers  were  convinced  that  some 
at  least  of  the  things  done  were  due  to  supernormal 
agency.  Professor  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  were 
present  only  during  the  latter  part  of  this  investigation, 
when  the  phenomena  appear  to  have  been  less  striking, 
were  impressed,  but  not  wholly  convinced.  Amongst 
the  phenomena  for  which  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  specially 
vouched  “  as  being  the  most  easily  and  securely, 
observed,  and  as  being  amply  sufficient  in  themselves 

94 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

to  establish  a  scientifically  unrecognised  truth,”  were 
the  movements  of  a  distant  chair,  visible  in  the  moon¬ 
light,  bulging  of  curtain,  sounding  of  notes  of  untouched 
piano  and  accordion,  movement  and  uplifting  of  a' 
heavy  table,  and  other  purposive  movements  of  appar¬ 
ently  distant  objects  ;  graspings  and  pattings  of  his 
hand,  arm,  and  back,  whilst  the  he^id,  hands,  and  feet 
of  the  medium  were  under  complete  control  and 
nowhere  near  the  place  touched.  Further,  the  rude 
outline  of  a  large  face  was  seen  against  the  back¬ 
ground  of  the  window  ;  little  lights  like  glow-worms 
were  seen  to  flit  about  ;  some  scent  like  verbena 
appeared  on  the  medium’s  hands,  and  blue  marks  were 
made  on  the  under  surface  of  a  table  previously 
examined  and  found  clean,  and  on  part  of  Richet’s 
shirtfront  under  his  waistcoat.  On  another  occasion, 
after  the  seance,  Eusapia  took  Professor  Richet’s 
finger  and  drew  it  along  a  clean  sheet  of  paper. 
The  finger-nail  was  seen  to  leave  a  thick  blue  mark 
on  the  clean  white  paper,  as  if  made  by  a  blue  pencil. 
This  experiment  took  place  in  full  candlelight,  and  was 
repeated  several  times,  the  movements  of  the  finger 
being  closely  watched  by  the  investigators.  It  should 
be  added  that  the  observers  severally  recorded  their 
conviction  that  Eusapia’s  hands  and  feet  were  under 
adequate  control  throughout  the  stances,  and  that  a 
note -taker  was  stationed  in  the  verandah  outside  the 
room,  who  took  down  contemporary  notes  dictated  to 
him  from  within. 

Now,  there  is  a  time-honoured  device,  exposed  in 
the  seventies  by  Moncure  Conway,  and  afterwards  by 
Maskelyne  and  others,  by  which  mediums  at  dark 
seances  succeed  in  freeing  themselves  from  the  control 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO 

95 

of  the  sitter.  It  may  be  described  briefly  as  the  art 
of  making  one  hand  ^(or  one  foot)  do  duty  for  two. 
Thus,  if  the  hand  is  to  be  freed,  the  medium  will 
contrive  that  one  at  least  of  his  neighbours  shall  have 
control  only  of  a  part  of  his  hand.  During  the  stance, 
by  a  series  of  convulsive  movements,  such  as  are 
commonly  observed  in  the  case  of  Eusapia,  and, 
indeed,  in  mediums  generally,  before  the  outburst  of 
the  physical  manifestations,  he  will  bring  his  two 
hands  into  close  proximity  on  the  table,  and  then,  p.t 
a  favourable  moment,  will  withdraw  one  hand,  leaving 
the  other  in  contact  at  the  same  time  with  the  hand 
of  each  of  his  neighbours,  who  will  each,  of  course, 
believe  that  they  are  touching  a  different  hand.  Some 
device  of  the  kind,  it  may  be  inferred  from  the  descrip¬ 
tion  already  quoted  from  Professor  Richet,  Eusapia 
had  employed  at  the  Milan  investigation.  The  investi¬ 
gators  of  the  lie  Roubaud  were  not  ignorant  of  ,this 
danger.  Both  hands  and  both  feet  of  the  medium 
were  held  or  controlled,  the  hands,  as  a  rule,  being 
touched  by  the  hands  of  one  or  more  of  the  sitters,  the 
feet  controlled  either  by  the  hands  or  feet  of  an  in¬ 
vestigator,  or  by  a  piece  of  mechanism  devised  for  the 
purpose.  Moreover,  the  investigators  reported  that  they 
frequently  took  occasion  to  assure  themselves,  before 
or  after  the  occurrence  of  a  manifestation,  that  the 
sitters  detailed  to  guard  the  several  parts  of  the 
medium’s  person  were  not  neglecting  their  duty. 

Nevertheless,  when  Sir  Oliver  Lodge’s  report  and 
the  detailed  notes  of  the  1894  sittings  reached  D'r. 
Hodgson,  then  resident  in  Boston,  he  pointed  out  that 
the  precautions  described  did  not  exclude  trickery  of 
the  kind  indicated  ;  in  place  of  explicit  descriptions 

96 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

of  the  method  of  holding,  the  contemporary  notes  fur¬ 
nished  for  the  most  part  bare  statements  to  the  effect 
that  Eusapia’s  hands,  feet,  and  head  were  held  by  the 
sitters.  A  precise  realisation  of  the  nature  of  the 
trickery  to  be  guarded  against  would  have  elicited 
from  the  sitters  a  correspondingly  precise  statement 
of  the  measures  taken  to  prevent  it.  That  such  a 
precise  statement  was  not  forthcoming  afforded  in 
itself,  he  contended,  a  prima  facie  presumption  that 
the  danger  was  not  fully  realised. 

Dr.  Hodgson  proceeded  to  analyse  the  descriptions 
given  of  the  chief  feats,  and  suggested  explanations  of 
some  which  had  puzzled  the  investigators  at  the  time. 
In  his  view  all  that  had  been  described  could  be 
accounted  for  on  the  assumption  that  Eusapia;  could 
get  a  hand  or  foot  free. 

F.  Wi.  H.  Myers,  Sir  O.  Lodge,  and  Professor  Richet 
each  replied  at  length  to  Hodgson’s  criticisms.  Each 
severally  mentioned  that  they  were  fully  aware  of  the 
danger  referred  to,  and  that,  in  fact,  though  it  had 
not  been  thought  necessary  to  make  continual  state¬ 
ments  to  that  effect  in  the  notes,  the  hands  and  feet 
were  so  held  as  to  make  fraud  of  the  kind  suggested 
impossible.  Richet’s  assertions  on  this  point  were  the 
most  emphatic,  and  as  coming  from  an  investigator 
who  had  himself  been  the  first  to  draw  attention  to  the 
unsatisfactory  nature  of  the  control  usually  permitted, 
are,  no  doubt,  entitled  to  considerable  weight.  He 
pointed  out  that  he  had  previously  attended  fifteen 
seances  with  Eusapia  in  Milan  and  Rome,  and  that  forty 
stances  had  been  held  under  his  direction  at  Car- 
queiranne  and  in  the  tie  Roubaud,  extending  over  ^ 
period  of  three  months. 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO 

97 

“  Pendant  ces  trois  mois,  d6jk  prepare  par  les  experiences 
faites  k  Rome  et  k  Milan,  je  n’ai  pas  song^  k  autre  chose 
quA  ce  point  trfes  special,  et  cependant  tres  important,  de 
bien  tenir  la  main,  a  manifere  a  ne  pas  laisser  cette  main  se 
liberer,  prendre  des  objets,  et  me  toucher  au  dos,  au  nez,  au 
front.  .  .  .  Eh  bien  I  sans  me  croire  plus  habile  et  plus 
perspicace  qu’il  ne  convient,  il  me  semble  que  cette  constant 
preoccupation,  cette  idee  fixe,  doit  un  peu  me  garantir  du 
reproche  d’avoir  conclu  a  la  leg^re.  II  me  semble  qu’apres 
trois  mois  d’exercice  et  de  meditations  on  pent  arriver  a  la 
certitude  qu’on  tient  bien  une  main  humaine.”  ‘ 

And  really  to  impute  negligence  on  this  point  to 
Richet  and  his  fellow-investigators  would  almost  seem 
equivalent  to  imputing  imbecility. 

Not  unnaturally,  neither  M.  Richet  nor  Sir  Oliver 
Lodge  were  at  all  shaken  in  their  convictions  by 
Hodgson’s  arguments.  But  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  if  not 
shaken,  was  at  least  impressed  by  their  weight.  A 
further  series  of  sittings  was  accordingly  arranged  for 
the  following  summer  at  Myers’  house  at  Cambridge. 
As  the  attitude  of  the  investigators  at  these  sittings 
has  been  seriously,  though,  of  course,  unintentionally, 
misrepresented  by  many  believers  in  Eusapia,  I  will 
quote  the  result  in  Myers’  own  words.  Myers,  at  any 
rate,  will  not  be  accused  of  leanings  towards  in¬ 
credulity  ;  and  Hodgson,  it  should  be  pointed  out, 
was  not  summoned  from  America  to  join  the  circle 
until  the  Cambridge  investigators  had  already  satis¬ 
fied  themselves  that  fraud  was  being  habitually 
practised.  In  communicating  the  results  to  the  Society 
for  Psychical  Research  Myers  said  : 

“  I  cannot  doubt  that  we  observed  much  conscious  and 
deliberate  fraud,  of  a  kind  which  must  have  needed  long 

‘  Journal  S.R.R.,  vol.  vii.  p.  68. 

7 

98 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

practice  to  bring  it  to  its  present  level  of  skill.  Nor  can 
I  find  any  excuse  for  her  fraud  (assuming  that  such  excuse 
would  be  valid)  in  the  attitude  of  mind  of  the  persons, 
several  of  them  distinguished  in  the  world  of  science,  who 
assisted  in  this  inquiry.  Their  attitude  was  a  fair  and  open 
one  ;  in  all  cases  they  showed  patience,  and  in  several 
cases  the  impression  first  made  on  their  minds  was  distinctly 
favourable.  With  growing  experience,  however,  and  careful 
observation  of  the  precise  conditions  permitted  or  refused  to 
us,  the  existence  of  some  fraud  became  clear  ;  and  fraud 
was  attempted  when  the  tests  were  as  good  as  we  were 
allowed  to  make  them,  quite  as  indisputably  as  on  the  few 
occasions  when  our  holding  was  intentionally  left  inadequate 
in  order  to  trace  more  exactly  the  modus  operandi.  More¬ 
over,  the  fraud  occurred  both  in  the  medium’s  waking  state 
and  during  her  real  or  alleged  trance. 

“  I  do  not  think  there  is  adequate  reason  to  suppose  that 
any  of  the  phenomena  at  Cambridge  were  genuine.”  > 

In  fact,  the  tricks  were  effected  in  the  manner 
already  indicated  by,  Hodgson,  by  the  surreptitious 
freeing  from  control  of  a  foot  or  hand.  Sometimes 
the  head  seems  to  have  been  employed. 

The  effect  of  this  experience  was  to  weaken,  though 
not  wholly  to  destroy,  the  impression  produced  on 
Myers  by  the  phenomena  witnessed  in  the  preceding 
summer.  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  retained  his  conviction  un¬ 
shaken,  and  so  did  Richet  and  the  other  continental 
investigators.  A  few  years  later,  after  witnessing  some 
more  of  Eusapia’s  performances  in  Paris,  Myers  re¬ 
turned  to  his  original  allegiance,  and  formally  avowed 
his  renewed  belief  in  the  supernormal  character  of 
Eusapia’s  mediumship.^ 

After  the  exposure  of  systematic  fraud  in  1895  the 
Council  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  felt  that 

'  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  p.  133. 

2  Letter  to  Light,  February  18,  1899. 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO 

99 

they  would  not  be  justified,  either  on  ethical  or  scientific 
grounds,  in  prolonging  the  investigation.  But  from 
that  date  onward  Eusapia’s  performances  have  been 
almost  continuously  exhibited  before  various  groups  of 
foreign  investigators,  chiefly  French  and  Italian. 

It  would  be  futile  to  notice  most  of  the  reports 
printed.  Eusapia’s  feats  show  little  variation.  Levita¬ 
tions  of  tables  and  movements  of  small  objects — 
within  the  radius  of  three  or  four  feet — remain  still 
the  most  frequent  and  best  attested  phenomena.  But 
of  late  years  there  seems  to  have  been  a  tendency 
for  hands,  heads,  and  luminous  appearances  to  show 
themselves  more  frequently  through  the  curtains. 
Several  impressions  in  clay  have  been  obtained  of  what 
purport  to  be  faces,  hands,  and  feet  ;  but  in  all  cases 
the  impressions  are  indistinct  and  blurred.  Eusapia 
herself  has  been  levitated  on  to  the  table.  With  some 
specially  favoured  investigators  Eusapia  also  gives 
materialisation  seances,  retiring  for  the  purpose  to  the 
cabinet — an  angle  of  the  room  screened  off  by  a  black 
curtain,  which  is  habitually  made  use  of  in  her  later 
performances — and  being  there  tied  hand  and  foot  to 
a  couch.  Dr.  Venzano  records  having  witnessed  at 
such  a  seance  no  fewer  than  six  different  figures — a 
man,  four  women,  and  a  child  ;  a  woman  and  child 
appearing  simultaneously.* 

Many  persons  of  scientific  distinction,  especially 
within  the  last  three  or  four  years,  have  investigated 
the  phenomena  and  publicly  proclaimed  their  conviction 
of  their  genuineness.  Among  the  more  distinguished 
of  the  converts  are  Professor  Morselli,  Camille  Flam- 
marion,  and  the  late  Professor  Lombroso.  The  later 

*  Annals  of  Rsychical  Science,  September,  1907. 

100 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

investigators  have  not  been  contented  with  simple 
observation,  but  have  employed  self -registering  instru¬ 
ments  to  record  the  movements  of  tables  and  other 
objects  ;  they  have  frequently  been  permitted  to  take 
photographs  of  the  table  during  levitation,  and  have 
endeavoured  to  impose  other  scientific  tests.  In  the 
early  part  of  1907  Doctors  Herlitzka,  Charles  poa, 
and  Aggazzotti,  assistants  of  Professor  Mosso,  the 
eminent  physiologist,  held  some  sittings  with  Eusapia 
in  Turin.  The  observers  saw  phenomena — including 
the  breaking  up  of  a  small  table  before  their  eyes, 
and  the  impression,  by  radio-activity,  of  four  finger 
marks  on  a  sensitised  plate  wrapped  in  black  paper — 
which  they  regarded  as  unquestionably  supernormal. 
They  inferred  that  some  kind  of  energy  capable  of 
acting  on  matter  at  a  distance  radiates  from  the  nervous 
system  of  the  medium.  But  the  tests  which  they  had 
specially  prepared  in  order  to  render  physical  inter¬ 
vention  on  the  part  of  Eusapia  impossible  unfortunately 
miscarried.  At  the  first  sitting  a  clockwork  cylinder, 
covered  with  blackened  paper,  was  placed  inside  d 
bell-glass,  secured  from  interference  by  sealed  tapes. 
The  object  of  the  test  was  to  obtain  a  vertical  mark 
on  the  cylinder  ;  and  the  key  of  the  electric  circuit 
through  which  this  end  could  be  accomplished  was 
enclosed  in  a  securely  fastened  and  sealed  cardboard 
box.  In  the  event  the  sealed  tapes  were  torn  ,off 
from  the  bell-glass  ;  the  lid  of  the  cardboard  box  was 
forcibly  removed,  and  the  key  then  depressed.  The 
test  was  thus  rendered  useless.  Eusapia  explained, 
however,  that  if  woven  material  instead  of  ca:rdboard 
had  been  used  to  protect  the  key,  it  could  have  been 
moved  without  interference  with  the  apparatus.  Acting 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO 

101 

on  the  hint  the  experimenters  prepared  for  the  next 
seance  a  new  apparatus.  Inside  the  cabinet  was 
placed  a  manometer — a  U-shaped  tube  of  mercury  with 
a  floating  pointer  which  would  automatically  register 
any  movements  of  the  mercury  on  a  scale.  The  tube 
was  in  connection  with  a  vessel  full  of  water,  ^nd 
closed  with  a  rubber  capsule.  Pressure  on  the  capsule 
would,  of  course,  force  up  the  mercury  in  the  tube. 
The  vessel  of  water  was  enclosed  in  a  wooden  box, 
the  sides  of  which  rose  high  above  the  capsule.  The 
top  of  the  capsule  was  blackened.  In  place  of  a  lid 
the  box  was  covered  with  cloth,  so  as  to  prevent 
pressure  on  the  capsule  by  normal  means.  At  the 
close  of  the  stance  the  mercury  was  found  to  have 
risen  ;  but  the  cloth  covering  was  torn.  The  experi¬ 
menters  still  attach  weight  to  the  result  of  the 
experiment,  on  the  ground  that  the  wooden  box  was 
outside  the  cabinet,  so  that  no  one  could  have 
approached  it  without  being  seen.  They  add  :  “  We 
do  not  know  why  the  stuff  which  had  covered  the 
wooden  box  was  torn.  Certainly  Eusapia  did  not 
understand  the  importance  which  would  have  attached 
to  the  experiment,  if  it  had  remained  intact.”  ^ 

A  further  series  of  investigations  was  conducted  in 
the  same  year  by  Professor  Philippe  Bottazzi,  Director 
of  the  Physiological  Institute  at  the  University  of 
Naples,  assisted  by  six  brother  professors  and  one 
or  two  other  gentlemen.  No  trouble  was  spared  to 
test  the  phenomena  and  ascertain  the  conditions.  At 
the  beginning  of  each  sitting  the  barometric  pressure, 
the  temperature,  and  the  atmospheric  saturation  were 
recorded.  Several  pieces  of  apparatus — a  letter 

>  Annals  of  Psychical  Science,  May,  1907. 

102 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

balance,  an  electrical  metronome,  a  commutator,  a 
rubber  ball  in  connection  with  a  manometer — were 
placed  on  a  table  in  the  cabinet  behind  Eusapia,  in 
connection  with  automatic  registering  machinery  in 
another  room  ;  and  in  the  course  of  the  stance  several 
movements  were  registered  of  which  the  tracings 
are  published.  Other  inexplicable  phenomena  were 
observed,  such  as  a  mandoline  moving  about  by  itself 
on  the  table,  whilst  Eusapia’s  hands  lay  in  her  lap. 
But  again  the  only  really  conclusive  test  failed.  A 
telegraph  key  had  been  securely  enclosed  in  a  wire 
cage,  and  this  Eusapia  and  her  spirit  control  “  John  ” 
were  unable  to  move.^ 

The  most  elaborate  investigation  of  Eusapia’s 
phenomena  undertaken  by  continental  experimenters  is 
that  conducted  by  the  Institut  G6n^ral  Psychologique 
of  Paris.  Forty-three  sittings  in  all  were  held  in  three 
successive  years,  1905,  1906,  1907.  Of  the  investi¬ 
gators  the  best  known  were  M.  and  Madame  Curie. 
The  circle  seems  to  have  included  several  other  com¬ 
petent  physicists,  and  the  apparatus  employed  in  the 
inquiry  was  as  well  devised  as  it  was,  unfortunately, 
for  the  most  part  unproductive.  The  general  arrange¬ 
ments  were  those  usually  made  at  seances  with  Eusapia. 
Part  of  the  room  in  which  the  stance  was  held  was 
partitioned  off  by  a  pair  of  black  curtains.  Inside 
this  “  cabinet  ”  was  placed  a  light  stool  '(weighing 
between  three  and  four  pounds),  one  or  two  musical 
instruments,  a  saucer  full  of  clay,  and  a  few  objects 
covered  with  lamp-black,  &c.  In  front  of  the  curtains 
was  placed  a  table,  thirty-three  inches  long  by  twenty 

•  'Annals  of  'Psychical  Science,  October  and  December, 
1907. 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO 

103 

inches  wide.  The  table  was  placed  with  one  end  (i.e., 
one  of  the  shorter  sides)  parallel  with  the  curtains. 
At  this  end  Eusapia  sat,  with  her  back  to  the  curtains. 
The  investigators  sat  round  the  table,  linking  hands, 
those  on  either  side  of  the  medium  undertaking  the 
control  of  her  hands  and  feet.  The  room  in  which  the 
stance  was  held  was  illuminated  at  one  time  by  gas, 
at  another  by  oil  lamps  or  electric  light,  arrange¬ 
ments  being  made  in  each  case  to  lower  the  light  to 
the  required  degree  of  obscurity  in  accordance  with 
the  medium’s  request. 

More  critical  than  most  of  their  predecessors,  the 
Committee  dwell  at  considerable  length  upon  the  ex¬ 
tremely  unsatisfactory  nature  of  the  control  generally 
and  the  conditions  of  illumination. 

Moreover,  they  point  out  that  the  controllers  are 
also,  from  their  position,  the  chief  observers,  for 
Eusapia  will  rarely  tolerate  an  isolated  observer 
near  the  scene  of  action.  Thus  their  attention 
is  kept  constantly  on  the  strain,  and  constantly 
liable  to  be  diverted  by  the  occurrence  of  un¬ 
expected  phenomena — unexpected  alike  in  the  time 
of  their  occurrence,  their  nature,  and  their  position. 
Further,  Eusapia  frequently  requests  the  investigators 
to  talk,  a  request  which,  whether  designedly  or  not, 
has  the  effect  of  still  further  distracting  the  attention 
of  the  controllers.  The  most  perfect  control  would 
be  that  Eusapia ’s  feet  should  be  held  by  the  hands  of 
a  controller  under  the  table,  and  that  her  hands  should 
be  held  on  the  table,  each  grasped  fully,  so  that  the 
thumbs  could  be  identified.  But  Eusapia  rarely  permits 
one  of  the  investigators  to  be  under  the  table.  Her 
feet  are  generally  controlled  by  being  placed  over  or 

104 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

under  the  feet  of  the  controller-observer  on  either 
side.  Unfortunately,  the  Committee  found  that  she 
suffered  from  a  painful  corn  on  the  right  foot,  so 
that  this  foot  had  generally  to  be  placed  on  the  left 
foot  of  her  neighbour  instead  of  under  it. 

As  to  her  hands,  she  practically  insists  on  the 
method  of  control  already  described  ;  one  hand  may, 
as  a  rule,  be  clasped,  but  the  other  must  lie  free, 
resting  wholly  or  partly  on  the  hand  of  her  neighbour. 
This  preference  of  hers  is  due,  as  would  appear  from 
her  statement  to  the  Committee  of  the  Institute  to 
cutaneous  hyperaesthesia,  which  makes  it  difficult  for 
her  to  tolerate  pressure  on  the  hand  for  long  together.' 
It  is  not  stated  whether  she  has  an  equally  good  reason 
for  constantly  placing  her  hands  together  in  her  lap, 
thus  removing  them  into  still  deeper  obscurity,  or  for 
occasionally  enveloping  one  of  them  in  the  curtain,  so 
that  the  controller’s  hand  is  no  longer  in  direct  contact 
with  hers. 

Again,  one  of  the  invariable  concomitants  of  the  mani¬ 
festations  is  the  incessant  agitation  of  Eusapia’s  limbs 
— sometimes  she  swings  her  leg,  which  her  neighbour 
has  to  control.  Much  more  frequently,  however,  it  is 
her  hands  which  are  in  almost  continual  motion.  All 
these  conditions  and  peculiarities  are  not,  of  course, 
incompatible  with  innocence.  But  they  certainly  facili¬ 
tate  fraud,  and  fraud  of  the  kind  which  Eusapia  is 
known  habitually  to  practise — the  substitution  of  hands. 
A  conspicuous  instance  of  this  kind  occurred  in  the 
course  of  these  stances.  This  is  what  happened  : 

“  L ’obscurity  avait  et6  rapidement  demand^e  :  on  avait 
dteint  toutes  les  lumiferes  et  Ton  avait  entr’ouvert  les  rideaux- 

Report,  p.  517,  &c. 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO 

105 

tentures  d’une  fenetre  pour  6clairer  un  peu,  par  le  rayonne- 
ment  du  gaz  de  la  rue,  la  Salle  des  Seances.  M.  Courtier 
controlait  la  droite  d’Eusapia,  en  tournant  le  dos  k  la 
fenetre  ;  M.  de  Mech  controlait  la  gauche.  Eusapia  libera, 
par  son  proc4d6  ordinaire,  sa  main  droite. 

“  M.  de  Mech  gardant  volontairement  le  silence,  elle 
appuya  fortement  sa  main  gauche  sur  la  main  gauche  de 
M.  Courtier,  et  replia  sans  doute  d’une  mani^re  fort  habile 
son  petit  doigt  gauche  introduit  entre  I’annulaire  et  I’auricu- 
laire  de  M.  Courtier,  de  mani^re  a  lui  donner  I’illusion 
pendant  quelques  instants  qu’il  contrdlait  toujours  le  pouce 
droit. 

“  A  ce  meme  moment,  M.  Courtier  voyait  un  bras  blanc 
soulever  de  son  cot^  le  rideau  et  I’^carter.  Une  tete 
apparaissait  brusquement  et  se  penchait  vers  lui  en  poussant 
un  gemissement.  M.  de  Mech  voyait  k  ce  meme  instant  la 
silhouette  d’Eusapia  se  detacher  sur  la  bande  de  lumiere 
venant  de  la  rue  et  s’incliner  vers  M.  Courtier. 

“  Qui  plus  est,  M.  Courtier  se  sentit  pris  aux  6paules  par 
deux  bras,  pendant  qu’une  tete,  sous  le  rideau  cette  fois, 
s’appuyait  contre  la  sienne.  Eusapia  venait  de  se  lib^rer 
des  deux  controles,  et  ses  mouvements  avaient  ^td  si  rapides 
qu’apres  I’impression  du  choc,  M.  Courtier  retrouvait  sur 
sa  main  gauche  la  main  droite  d’Eusapia  ”  (pp.  524,  525). 

The  investigators  loyally  complied  with  the  condi¬ 
tions  imposed,  but  sought  in  various  ways  to  devise 
tests  which  should  still  be  valid.  The  really  valuable 
part  of  their  report  is  the  history  of  the  successive 
rejections  or  evasions  of  their  tests  by  Eusapia.  At 
one  time  they  suggested  that  the  sleeves  of  the  medium 
should  be  sewn  to  the  sleeves  of  the  controllers’  coats 
by  tapes  four  inches  long.  She  accepted  this  method 
of  control  on  three  occasions  only — one  in  each  year — 
and  then  refused  to  have  anything  more  to  do  with  it, 
giving  as  her  reason  that  she  had  seen  lunatics  fastened 
together  in  this  manner  in  an  asylum,  and  that  the 
recollection  was  unbearable. 

106 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

One  of  the  most  frequent  phenomena  was  the 
“  levitation  ”  of  the  stance  table.  The  Committee  put 
each  leg  of  the  table  into  a  separate  electric  circuit, 
and  succeeded  by  this  means  in  proving  that  all  four 
legs  did  actually  leave  the  ground,  and  that  Eusapia’s 
foot  was  not  placed  under  any  of  them.  By  means 
of  a  thread  and  pulley  they  proved  that  the  apparent 
movements  of  the  little  stool — which  would  advance 
and  retreat  on  the  floor  in  a  puzzling  fashion — really 
took  place  as  they  appeared  to  do.  Further,  Eusapia 
permitted  the  employment  of  photographic  apparatus 
on  the  condition  that  she  gave  the  signal  for  the 
camera.  Three  of  the  photographs  here  reproduced, 
taken  from  a  position  facing  the  medium,  show  the 
little  ‘tool  against  the  background  of  the  dark  curtain, 
apparently  suspended  in  the  air  over  the  medium.  But 
a  fourth  photograph,  taken  simultaneously  on  the  last 
occasion  from  the  side,  shows  that  the  stool  was  actually 
supported,  in  quite  normal  fashion,  by  Eusapia’s  head. 
Unfortunately,  Eusapia  saw  this  last  photograph,  and 
the  cameras,  which  henceforth  lay  in  wait  to  right 
and  left,  were  baulked  of  their  prey,  for  the  little 
stool  was  levitated  no  more. 

But  the  Committee  obtained  another  solid  result  by 
the  use  of  scientific  apparatus.  They  placed  Eusapia 
upon  the  platform  of  a  weighing  machine.  Now,  Eusapia: 
tolerates  human  “  control  ” — she  understands  men  and 
women  ;  but  she  has  a  rooted  antipathy  to  scientific 
apparatus  of  any  kind.  Apparently  in  order  to  avoid 
hurting  her  feelings,  the  Committee  employed  a  novel 
kind  of  balance,  somewhat  less  delicate,  it  is  true,  than 
the  ordinary  platform  weighing  machine,  but  still 
adequate  for  their  purpose.  Between  two  innocent- 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO 

107 

looking  planks  of  wood  they  placed  a  coiled  rubber 
tube,  with  one  end  closed.  Eusapia’s  chair  and  feet 
rested  on  the  upper  plank,  the  free  end  of  the  tube 
was  connected  with  a  manometer  which  recorded  the 
pressure.  At  a  later  seance  we  are  told  that  Eusapia 
showed  impatience  at  finding  herself  seated  on  a 
balance,  and  in  the  course  of  the  stance  the  rubber 
tube  was  forcibly  stretched  and  broken.  But  before 
the  tube  was  broken  it  had  been  repeatedly  proved 
that  when  the  table  was  “  levitated  ”  the  balance  indi¬ 
cated  a  corresponding  increase  in  weight  ;  a  similar 
result  followed  on  the  levitation  of  the  small  stool. 
When  the  table  tilted  on  the  two  legs  nearest  to 
Eusapia  the  balance  again  showed  an  increase  of 
weight.  When  the  two  legs  nearest  to  Eusapia  rose 
in  the  air,  and  the  table  rested  on  the  two  further  legs, 
a  diminution  of  pressure  was  recorded.  But  let  not 
the  uncritical  reader  too  hastily  conclude  that  Eusapia 
herself  lifted  the  table  in  the  one  case  and  pushed  it 
in  the  other.  The  results  are,  no  doubt,  consistent  with 
that  supposition.  But  no  one  could  have  anticipated 
that  the  weight  of  the  table  would  be  annihilated  ; 
that  would  be  a  miracle  indeed.  It  must  appear  some¬ 
where.  All  that  the  records  prove  is  that  the  new 
force  emanates  from  and  is  dependent  on  Eusapia’s 
organism  "^(p.  441). 

The  Committee  then  turned  their  attention  to 
Eusapia’s  person.  They  tested  her  memory,  her 
reasoning  powers,  her  keenness  of  sight,  and  her 
visual  and  auditory  reactions  generally  ;  they  measured 
her  rate  of  respiration  and  tested  her  hyperaesthesia  ; 
they  employed  the  dynamometer,  the  sphygmograph,  the 
pneumograph,  and  Hallion  and  Comte’s  plethismo- 

108 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

graphic  tube  ;  they  took  her  temperature  ;  they  made 
uroscopic  analyses  ;  they  applied  thermoscopes  and 
galvanometers  ;  they  made  a  chemical  analysis  of  the 
air  in  the  stance-room,  and  M.  Curie  took  some  trouble 
to  draw  off  the  air  behind  the  curtain  to  see  whether 
it  was  ionised.  And  after  all  these  labours,  the  results 
of  which  are  to  be  seen  in  many  pages  of  curves  and 
tables,  they  found  that  Eusapia  is  just  like  everybody 
else. 

But  if  the  Committee  did  not  find  what  they  sought, 
they  did  find  something  else.  They  tested  Eusapia’s 
alleged  power  of  affecting  the  balance  without  touching 
it.  At  first  a  small  machine,  like  a  letter  weigher, 
designed  by  M.  Yourievitch,  was  employed.  It  was 
surrounded  with  a  wooden  frame,  with  linen  or  wooden 
panels  to  fit  in  the  frame,  so  as  to  prevent  the  use 
of  a  hair  or  other  fraudulent  device.  Eusapia  tried 
it  with  the  wooden  covering  and  failed  ;  tried  it  with 
the  linen  covering  and  failed  ;  tried  it  with  the  frame 
alone  and  failed.  All  the  protecting  apparatus  was 
then  removed.  Eusapia  put  her  hands  on  either  side 
of  the  scale  and  it  went  down,  and  the  onlookers  could 
not  find  out  how  it  was  done.  Nothing  daunted,  M. 
Yourievitch  then  procured  a  more  delicate  balance 
f(pese-cocon)  and  surrounded  it  with  a  panelled  glass 
lantern.  M.  Yourievitch  further  isolated  the  balance 
on  a  cake  of  wax,  and  put  it  in  connection  with  a 
charged  electroscope,  so  that  if  Eusapia  touched  the 
balance  the  fraud  would  be  instantly  detected.  No 
result.  All  the  glass  panels  were  then  removed  except 
the  one  next  Eusapia.  Still  no  result.  The  last  panel 
was  then  taken  away,  a  handkerchief  being  placed 
over  Eusapia’s  mouth  to  prevent  her  breath  affecting 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO 

109 

the  sensitive  balance.  She  stretched  out  her  hands  as 
before,  and  once  more  the  scale  moved  ;  but  the 
electroscope  was  not  discharged.  Twice  more  the  same 
results  followed.  Then — in  consequence  of  some 
suspicious  movements  observed  by  Madame  Curie  and 
another  member  of  the  Committee — the  light  was  raised 
[(our  first  intimation  that  the  previous  experiments  took 
place  in  partial  obscurity),  and  an  arch  of  thick  wire 
was  placed  in  front  of  the  balance.  The  balance  moved 
no  more,  and  Eusapia  said  she  was  tired. 

Now,  Madame  Curie  and  her  colleagues  had 
suspected  from  the  position  of  Eusapia’s  hands  that 
she  might  have  effected  the  movement  by  means  of  a 
fine  thread,  and,  in  fact,  on  experimenting  afterwards, 
it  was  found  that  the  scale  could  be  depressed  by 
means  of  a  hair  without  discharging  the  electroscope. 
After  this  experience  M.  Youri^vitch  coated  the  scale 
with  lamp-black,  on  which  even  the  pressure  of  a  hair 
would  leave  a  mark — and  the  balance  moved  no  more. 

They  then  tried  again  with  the  other  balance,  re¬ 
placing  the  metallic  scale  by  a  disc  of  paper  in  a. 
wooden  frame.  If  a  pin  were  used,  the  paper  would 
be  pierced  ;  if  a  hair,  it  would  crackle.  In  fact,  the 
balance  moved  once,  when  Eusapia’s  hands  were  held 
— but  the  paper  crackled  ! 

On  another  occasion  Eusapia  asked  that  her  hands 
might  be  held,  and  in  this  position  she  placed  [her 
hands  on  either  side  of  the  leaf  of  an  indiarubber 
plant,  and  the  leaf  was  seen  to  move.  Unfortunately 
for  her  she  had  forgotten  her  usual  precaution;;  an 
isolated  observer  saw  the  hair  between  her  hands 
(p.  521).  She  was  detected  on  another  occasion 
moving  the  balance  by  the  same  means. 

110 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

The  results  with  the  balance  being  at  best  ambiguous, 
the  Committee  devised  another  test  experiment  ;  this 
time  with  a  manometer.  A  U-shaped  tube  filled  with 
a  coloured  liquid  was  connected  by  one  limb  with  the 
ordinary  automatic  apparatus  for  registering  move¬ 
ments  on  a  cylinder.  The  other  limb  communicated 
through  a  rubber  tube  with  three  small  rubber  bladders. 
On  these  bladders  rested  a  small  plate,  so  that  any 
pressure  exercised  on  the  plate  would  depress  the  level 
of  the  fluid  in  the  nearer  limb  of  the  tube  and  cause 
it  to  rise  in  the  other.  To  prevent  direct  pressure 
the  entire  surface  of  the  plate  was  covered  with  lamp¬ 
black.  The  experiment  was  conducted  in  a  subdued 
light,  and  Eusapia  procured  a  still  deeper  obscurity 
by  asking  M.  Yourievitch  to  place  the  curtain  over  her¬ 
self  and  the  apparatus.  Eusapia  then  approached  her 
hand  to  the  plate.  There  followed  slight  oscillations 
in  the  liquid,  the  largest  to  the  extent  of  about  two- 
fifths  of  an  inch.  Eusapia  then  cried  out  that  she  had 
accidentally  touched  the  plate.  When  examined  in  q 
good  light  the  blackened  surface  was  found  to  show 
slight  marks,  marks  which  M.  Perrin  imitated  by 
touching  the  surface  slightly  with  a  nail  (human). 
Some  time  later  at  the  same  meeting  M.  Courtier, 
seated  by  Eusapia’s  side  at  the  table,  saw  a  tiny  nail 
[(metallic),  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  long,  fall  on  the 
table  near  Eusapia’s  left  hand.  It  had  not  come  from 
the  ceiling,  and  it  appeared  probable  that  it  came 
from  Eusapia’s  person.  This  nail  also,  it  was  found, 
left  traces  on  the  blackened  surface  similar  to  those 
found  there  after  the  experiment.  The  Committee 
cautiously  conclude  :  “  L’exp^rience  est  restde 

cependant  fort  douteuse  ”  (p.  523). 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO 

111 

There  are  other  “  very  doubtful  ”  incidents — a  strong 
smell  of  phosphorus  in  the  cabinet  indicating  appar¬ 
ently  a  “  spirit  light  ”  that  failed  ;  an  occasion  when 
during  a  strong  upward  pressure  of  the  table  M.  de 
Fleurieres,  putting  his  hand  down,  found  Eusapia’s  knee 
pressing  against  the  lower  rim  of  the  table  ;  prints  in 
the  clay  placed  in  the  cabinet  of  a  hand  strongly  re¬ 
sembling  Eusapia’s,  the  hand  covered  with  a  stuff  found 
under  the  microscope  to  resemble  a  fragment  of  stuff 
afterwards  accidentally  dropped  by  her,  and  so  on. 

Let  us  pass  on  to  the  verdict  of  the  Committed^ 
They  conclude  that  the  fraud  which  was  apparently 
practised  is  readily  explicable  by  the  circumstances. 
Eusapia  is  growing  old  ;  she  receives  gifts,  at  any 
rate,  if  not  always  formal  payment  for  the  display 
of  her  powers.  She  would  not  wish  to  disappoint  her 
clients.  Hence  a  strong  temptation  to  resort  to  fraud 
when  the  genuine  power  fails,  as  it  probably  does  at 
times  with  her  failing  physical  strength.  There  is  a 
general  opinion,  they  find,  that  Eusapia’s  phenomena 
are  growing  much  less  striking  and  abundant  as  the 
years  go  on.  The  opinion,  perhaps,  is  scarcely  justi¬ 
fied.  Eighteen  years  ago,  at  Milan,  in  a  circle  of 
scientific  investigators,  Eusapia  gave  a  show  certainly 
no  better  than  her  recent  performances  at  the  Institut. 
On  the  other  hand,  in  quite  recent  years  Maxwell, 
Venzano,  Lombroso,  and  other  go-as-you-please  in¬ 
vestigators  have  got  all  the  phenomena  they  wanted. 

The  Committee  hesitate,  however,  to  conclude  that 
fraud  is  the  final  explanation,  because  they  have 
witnessed,  under  conditions  which  seemed  to  them  such 
as  to  exclude  fraud,  movements  of  the  table  and  stool 
and  other  phenomena  which  they  could  not  explain. 

112 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

They  point  out  that  the  actual  movements  of  the  objects 
are  substantiated  by  the  automatic  recording  instru¬ 
ments  above  referred  to  ;  there  is  no  room,  therefore, 
here  for  the  hypothesis  of  collective  hallucination,  and 
they  see  no  sufficient  reason  to  adopt  it  as  the  ex¬ 
planation  of  the  other  phenomena — lights,  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  hands,  &c. — in  the  case  of  which  no  automatic 
record  was  possible.  They  point  out  that  the  preva¬ 
lent  conception  of  matter  aims  at  expressing  it  in  terms 
of  electric  charges.  If  Eusapia  does  influence  matter 
in  some  novel  way,  no  doubt  she  influences  it  by 
affecting  the  ether,  which  is  the  vehicle  of  light  and 
electricity,  and,  indeed,  of  all  physical  forces  which 
we  know,  since  gravity  itself  is,  it  would  seem  probable, 
ultimately  explicable  as  a  want  of  equilibrium  between 
positive  and  negative  electricity.  Put  in  that  way, 
Eusapia’s  presumed  powers  present  no  difficulty — it  is 
but  pne  marvel  the  more  in  a  world  which  teems 
with  marvels  and  electricity.  It  is,  perhaps,  unfortunate 
that  the  only  proof  Eusapia  has  yet  given  of  her  mastery 
over  the  electric  forces  is  that  on  one  or  two  occasions 
she  has  succeeded  in  discharging  an  electroscope,  with¬ 
out  anybody  being  able  to  find  out  how  it  was  done. 

The  Report  of  the  Committee  of  the  Instiiui 
has  certainly  thrown  fresh  light  on  the  problem  of 
Eusapia  and  her  performances.  They  have  shown  that 
the  table  is  really  moved — that  so  far,  at  any  rate,  the 
hypothesis  of  hallucination  will  not  explain  the  pheno¬ 
mena  ;  they  have  shown,  further,  that  the  table  is 
really  moved  by  a  force  residing  in  Eusapia,  and  that 
this  force  conforms  to  the  laws  of  the  conservation  of 
energy.  They  have  shown  that,  apart  from  these 
dubious  phenomena,  Eusapia  presents  nothing  excep- 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO 

113 

tional  in  her  relations  to  the  physical  world,  the  world 
in  which  electricity  plays  so  large  a  part  ;  and  they 
have  added  some  further  demonstrations  of  Eusapia’s 
readiness  to  cheat  when  she  can. 

The  great  defect  of  their  report  is  that  whilst  they 
cannot  explain  some  of  the  things  seen  and  done,  they 
have  not  given  us  a  chance  of  explaining  them.  They 
do  not  publish  the  shorthand  notes  of  the  stances. 
They  tell  us,  to  take  an  instance,  that  on  such  an 
occasion  the  table  was  raised  with  all  four  feet  off 
the  ground  ;  that  the  controller  to  the  left  was  M.  A’., 
to  the  right  M.  B.  .We  want  to  know  what  went  before 
the  movement  ;  how  the  hands  and  feet  were  held  or 
otherwise  controlled  ;  where  the  curtain  was  ;  above 
all,  the  nature  of  the  illumination.  Without  these  and 
other  details  the  report  is  worthless.  We  see  that  on 
this  particular  occasion  the  Committee  believe  that  the 
control  was  adequate  ;  but  then  we  know  that  it  qs 
Eusapia’s  art  to  induce  this  belief- — and  we  know  or 
suspect  that  in  many  previous  cases  the  belief  has  been 
ill-founded.  On  the  positive  side  this  report  does  not 
advance  the  matter  at  all.  Such  a  condensed  descrip¬ 
tion  is  of  just  so  much  value  as  the  ordinary  observer’s 
account  of  a  conjuring  trick.  It  tells  us  only  that  the 
witnesses  didn’t  see  through  the  trick  ;  but  it  doesn’t 
tell  us  how  it  was  done. 

8 

CHAPTER  IV 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AND  THE  S.P.R. 

The  Society  for  Psychical  Research  last  autumn 
appointed  a  Committee  pf  three  to  inquire  into  the 
performances  pf  Eusapia.  Mr.  Hereward  Carrington 
is  an  amateur  conjurer,  who  has  for  several  years 
made  a  special  study  of  the  tricks  of  American 
mediums.  His  book,  “  The  Physical  Phenomena  pf 
Spiritualism,”  is  the  standard  authority  on  these  fraudu¬ 
lent  performances.  The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding  and 
Mr.  Baggally  have  also  to  their  credit  years  of 
practical  experience  in  the  same  field.  Mr.  Baggally, 
again,  is  a  practical  conjurer,  and  Mr.  Feilding ’s 
humorous  exposures  of  the  tricks  of  British  and  foreign 
mediums  are  familiar  to  all  members  of  the  Society 
for  Psychical  Research. 

On  the  ground  of  personal  qualifications  and  prac¬ 
tical  experience  a  more  competent  Committee  could, 
since  the  death  of  Dr.  Hodgson,  scarcely  have  been 
selected.  Nor  is  it  easy  to  indicate  any,  point  in  which 
the  conduct  of  the  seances,  the  methods  of  control,  or 
the  means  of  recording  fell  short  of  the  requirements. 
The  Committee’s  Report  is  published  as  Part  LIX. 
pf  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical 
Research, 

The  sittings,  eleven  in  all,  were  held  in  November 

114 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AND  THE  S.P.R.  115 

and  December,  1908,  in  a  room  tenanted  by  one  of 
the  Committee  on  the  fifth  floor  of  the  Hotel  Victoria 
at  Naples.  The  room  was  prepared  for  the  sittings 
by  stretching  across  one  corner  a  pair  of  black  curtains, 
the  triangular  space  so  enclosed  measuring  2  feet 
8  inches  from  the  angle  of  the  walls  to  the  middle 
of  the  curtains.  Within  the  recess  so  curtained  off 
were  placed  a  small  round  table  and  several  cheap 
musical  instruments — bell,  toy  trumpet,  tambourine,  &c. 
In  front  of  the  curtains  and  with  its  longer  sides  at 
right  angles  to  them'  was  placed  a'  plain  wooden  table, 
2  feet  1 1  inches  long  by  i  foot  7  inches  broad. 
During  the  sdance  Eusapia  would  sit  at  the  narrow 
end  of  the  table  with  her  back  to  the  curtains, 
the  back  of  her  chair  being  from  a  foot  to  eighteen 
inches  distant  from  them.  One  of  the  investigators  sat 
on  either  side,  \ 

“  holding  or  held  by  her  hand,  with  his  foot  under  or  on 
her  foot,  his  leg  generally  pressing  against  the  whole  length 
of  hers  ;  often  with  his  free  hand  across  her  knees,  and 
very  frequently  with  his  two  feet  encircling  her  foot.” 

Sometimes  the  hands  and  feet  were  tied,  but  generally 
the  control  by  direct  contact  was  preferred. 

It  is  to  be  understood,  of  course,  that  in  investi¬ 
gating  phenomena  of  this  kind  depending,  whatever 
view  we  may  take  of  them,  on  obscure  psychological 
and  possibly  physical  conditions,  the  investigators 
impose  their  own  conditions  at  their  own  risk.  It  is 
more  profitable  to  follow  the  medium’s  lead,  and  to 
adapt  the  procedure  accordingly.  If  the  Committee 
had  begun  by  putting  the  medium  in  an  iron  cage, 
they  might  have  ended  with  nothing  for  their  money. 

116 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

In  accordance  with  the  principle  above  referred  to, 
of  following  the  medium’s  lead  rather  than  insisting 
on  imposing  conditions  on  her,  the  Committee  had 
provided  several  electric  lights,  lanterns,  &c.,  of  vary¬ 
ing  power.  The  lights  were  frequently  changed  by 
the  Committee  in  the  intervals  between  the  stances 
in  their  endeavours  to  find  a  light  which,  whilst  suf¬ 
ficient  to  enable  the  observers  to  see  clearly,  would 
not  interfere  with  the  progress  of  the  phenomena. 
Moreover,  the  degree  of  illumination  was  repeatedly 
varied  during  the  seance  itself  at  the  request  of  the 
medium  or  her  spirit-control.  It  is  not  easy,  to  arrive 
at  a  clear  idea  of  the  amount  of  light  in  every  case. 
But  it  is  stated  that  the  strongest  light  allowed  by 
the  medium  enabled  the  Committee  to  read 
“  Baedeker  ”  at  the  seance  table  ;  and  the  feeblest 
light  was  apparently  sufficient,  with  one  or  two  possible 
exceptions,  to  enable  the  observers  on  either  side  to 
see  the  outline  of  the  medium’s  form. 

A  stenographer  had  been  engaged  who  attended 
throughout  the  seances,  his  table  being  generally  placed 
in  the  adjoining  room,  with  the  door  open.  When  an 
incident  occurred  each  sitter  in  turn  dictated  his 
account  of  it,  and  then  each  in  turn  stated  the  nature 
of  the  control  exercised  over  Eusapia’s  hands  and  feet. 
The  stenographer’s  notes  would  be  written  out  on  the 
following  day,  generally  in  presence  of  the  Committee. 
Any  remarks  added  after  the  sitting  by  any  member 
of  the  Committee  were  put  in  parentheses  and  dated 
to  distinguish  them  from  the  contemporaneous  record. 

Under  these  conditions  the  following  phenomena 
were  observed  :  movements  and  “  levitations  ”  of  the 
table  ;  movements,  especially  bulgings,  of  the  medium’s 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AND  THE  S.P.R.  117 

dress  ;  extensive  movements  of  the  curtains  ;  move¬ 
ments  of  objects  behind  the  curtains  ;  transportations 
of  objects  from  behind  the  curtains  ;  touches  and 
grasps,  as  of  hands,  on  various  parts  of  the  sitters’ 
persons  ;  raps  and  thumps  ;  small  lights  ;  objects 
bearing  some  resemblance  to  hands  and  heads, 
appearing  generally  from  behind  the  curtains,  &'c. 

Such  are  the  facts  attested.  And  here,  for  the  first 
time  perhaps  in  the  history  of  modern  spiritualism,  we 
seem  to  find  the  issue  put  fairly  and  squarely  before  us. 
It  is  difficult  for  any  man  who  reads  the  Committee’s 
report  to  dismiss  the  whole  business  as  mere  vulgar 
cheating.  It  is  difficult,  because,  with  one  exception, 
which  will  be  discussed  later,  we  cannot  point  to  any¬ 
thing  which  the  investigators  ought  to  have  done  which 
has  been  left  undone.  Given  the  necessity  for  leaving 
the  medium  free  and  unrestrained  that  the  flow  of 
manifestations  might  not  be  impeded,  all  precautions 
possible  have  been  taken,  and  all  restrictions  possible 
have  been  imposed.  The  record,  it  need  hardly  be 
said,  is  unimpeachable  ;  it  is  at  first  hand  from  all 
the  witnesses,  and  as  nearly  synchronous  with  the  inci¬ 
dents  as  the  time  conditions  will  allow.  The  dilemma 
with  which  the  Committee  confronts  us  must,  it  would 
almost  seem,  be  accepted  as  inevitable  :  either  there 
was  a  display  of  some  hitherto  unrecognised  force  or 
the  witnesses  were  hallucinated. 

Let  us  consider  the  alternatives.  Suppose  we  infer 
from  these  baffling  occurrences  the  existence  of  a  new 
force.  It  is  not,  ex  hypothesi,  a  question  of  simple 
mechanical  attraction  and  repulsion,  capable  of  moving 
the  table  and  other  small  objects  to  and  fro  ;  our 
hypothetical  force  can  already  be  so  delicately  con- 

118 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

trolled  and  directed  that  it  will  carry  articles  of  vary¬ 
ing  weight  through  the  air  and  deposit  them  without 
shock  on  a  spot  selected— a  bell  on  the  medium’s 
head. 

But  the  same — or  is  it  another? — force  can  also  make 
raps  and  bangs  on  the  furniture,  can  cause  luminous 
appearances,  can  create  substantial  bodies,  mimicking 
on  occasion  human  hands  and  heads  ;  and  these 
substantial  phantoms  are  capable  of  purposive  move¬ 
ments — the  mimic  hands  can  stroke  and  pinch  and 
carry. 

iWhat  manner  of  force  is  this  that  can  produce  such 
multifarious  effects?  and  what  are  we  to  say  of  the 
ignorant  peasant -woman  who,  untaught  and  unaided, 
has  obtained  so  complete  a  mastery  of  the  secrets  pf 
nature?  If  the  new  force  is  admitted,  Mr.  Feilding 
is  surely  justified  in  pointing  out  its  significance  for 
science  and  philosophy,  perhaps  even  for  theology  : 

“  The  force,  if  we  are  driven,  as  I  am  confident  we  are, 
to  presuppose  one  other  than  mere  conjuring,  must  either 
reside  in  the  medium  herself  and  be  of  the  nature  of  an 
extension  of  human  faculty  beyond  what  is  generally  recog¬ 
nised  ;  or  must  be  a  force  having  its  origin  in  something 
apparently  intelligent  and  external  to  her,  operating  either 
directly  from  itself  or  indirectly  through  or  in  conjunction 
with  some  special  attribute  of  her  organism.  The  pheno¬ 
mena,  then — in  themselves  preposterous,  futile,  and  lacking 
in  any  quality  of  the  smallest  ethical,  religious,  or  spiritual 
value — are  nevertheless  symptomatic  of  something  which, 
put  at  its  lowest  by  choosing  the  first  hypothesis,  must,  as 
it  filters  gradually  into  our  common  knowledge,  most  pro¬ 
foundly  modify  the  whole  of  our  philosophy  of  human 
faculty  ;  but  which,  if  that  hypothesis  is  found  insufficient, 
may  ultimately  be  judged  to  require  an  interpretation  involv¬ 
ing  not  only  that  modification,  but  a  still  wider  one,  namely, 
our  knowledge  of  the  relations  between  mankind  and  an 
intelligent  sphere  external  to  it.” 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AND  THE  S.P.R.  119 

But  suppose,  desiring  to  economise  the  marvellous, 
we  reject  that  horn  of  the  dilemma  on  which  the  Com¬ 
mittee  have  chosen  to  impale  themselves  for  a  cheaper 
solution  of  the  problem.  What  is  the  smallest  draft 
on  the  unknown  that  we  must  be  prepared  to  make 
on  the  assumption  of  collective  hallucination?  It  will 
be  observed  by  the  attentive  reader  of  the  report  that 
the  feats  described  were  not  in  themselves  of  a 
marvellous  or  even  recherche  kind.  And  again,  things 
did  not,  as  a  rule,  happen  outside  of  a  moderate 
radius — say,  three  feet — from  Eusapia’s  person.  In  a 
word,  if  Eusapia  could  have  freed  an  arm  or  even  on 
occasion  a  leg,  she  could  have  done  everything.  More¬ 
over,  with  the  possible  exception  of  the  lights,  which 
only  appeared  on  one  or  two  occasions,  and  may  have 
been  themselves  hallucinatory — though  this  is  unlikely 
—  she  could  have  done  all  that  was  done  without 
extraneous  apparatus  of  any  kind,  beyond,  at  most,  a 
few  black  threads  and  her  own  handkerchief. 

Now,  it  is  clear  that  this  hypothesis  pf  collective 
hallucination  is  very  much  in  the  air  ;  and,  indeed, 
for  reasons  which  will  appear  presently,  it  is  only  put 
forward  provisionally.  But  it  is,  at  any  rate,  in  better 
case  than  the  hypothesis  of  a  new  force.  That  rests 
on  the  sole  foundation  of  sixty  years  of  fraudulent 
mediumship,  chequered  by  a  few  baffling  and  hitherto 
unexplained  feats  like  those  now  under  review.  It  has 
no  analogy  and  no  support  from  outside. 

As  regards  the  nature  of  the  hallucination  to  be 
assumed,  the  Committee  point  out  that  the  objects 
moved  were  found  in  their  new  position  at  the  end  of 
the  sitting.  In  any  case,  we  should  not  be  justified 
in  assuming  that  the  movements  of  furniture,  and  the 

120 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

things  seen,  heard,  and  felt,  were  other  than  objective. 
Indeed,  the  so-called  heads,  as  the  Committee  them¬ 
selves  point  out,  bore  on  some  occasions  a  suspicious 
resemblance  to  hands  variously  disguised,  and  there 
was  no  feature  in  any  one  of  the  reported  appari¬ 
tions  pointing  to  an  extraneous  origin.  On  the 
hypothesis  of  hallucination,  then,  Eusapia  herself  moved 
the  table,  pinched  the  sitters,  and  put  her  hand  behind 
the  curtain  or  dressed  it  up  in  a  handkerchief  to  simu¬ 
late  a  phantom  head.  Arid  she  was  able  on  the 
hypothesis  to  do  these  things  because  the  hands  of 
the  witnesses  who  were  supposed  to  control  her  limbs 
could  not  be  trusted  to  report  what  they  had  felt, 
nor  their  eyes  to  report  what  they  had  seen.  So  far 
we  find  ourselves  in  agreement  with  the  Committee. 
This,  they  argue,  is  the  form  which  the  hypothesis  of  hal¬ 
lucination  would  naturally  assume  for  serious  criticism. 

But  there  is  one  point  in  their  presentation  of  the 
case  to  which  exception  must  be  taken.  On  the 
hypothesis  of  hallucination,  they  say  : 

“  We  should  have  to  assume  not  only  that  each  of  us 
was  subject  to  hallucinations  both  of  touch  and  of  what 
appeared  to  us  perfectly  clear  vision,  but  that  we  were 
concurrently  and  concordantly  hallucinated.  When,  for 
example,  at  1.0  a.m.  in  Stance  XL,  B.  reports  that  he  is 
holding  both  the  medium’s  thumbs  in  different  hands,  and 
F.,  from  the  farther  end  of  the  opposite  side  of  the  table, 
shortly  afterwards  spontaneously  reports  a  change  of  B.’s 
control,  and  says  that,  visibly  to  him,  B.  is  now  holding 
both  her  thumbs  in  his  right  hand,  we  must  assume,  first, 
that  B.  was  hallucinated  when  he  reported  that  he  held 
both  her  thumbs  in  separate  hands  ;  and,  secondly,  that  F. 
was  hallucinated  when  he  reported  the  change  of  the  thumbs 
to  B.’s  right  hand,  and  that  both  remained  concordantly 
hallucinated  during  the  continued  touches  on  B.’s  left  hand 
by  a  hand  within  the  curtain.” 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AND  THE  S.P.R.  121 

It  may  be  that  on  this  particular  occasion  we  have 
to  assume  “  a  concurrent  and  concordant  ”  hallucina¬ 
tion  of  the  kind  described  ;  but  it  is  worth  pointing  out 
that  the  foot  control  was  not  verified  until  the 
phenomenon  had  been  proceeding  for  seven  minutes, 
and  that  after  attention  had  been  once  called  to  the 
foot  there  was  an  unproductive  period  of  twelve 
minutes,  enlivened  by  only  one  brief  repetition  of  the 
phenomenon.  Further,  the  curtain  which  had  blown 
out  over  the  table  would  have  formed  a  convenient 
screen  for  the  right  foot.  But  in  any  case  the  incident 
is  not  typical.  iWe  may  search  far  through  the  record 
before  we  find  another  instance  as  pertinent  even  as 
this  one  to  the  theory  of  collective  hallucination.  In 
nearly  every  case,  perhaps  in  every  case,  a  much  simpler 
form  of  sense-deception  would  appear  to  be  indicated. 

Thus,  to  take  an  illustration  from  Seance  V. 
’(December  2,  1908),  Mr.  Baggally  and  Mr.  Feilding 
sat  at  the  right  and  left  hand  of  the  medium  respec¬ 
tively.  At  1 1.5  p.m.  it  is  reported  that  the  medium 
had  backed  her  chair,  so  as  almost  to  touch  the  small 
table,  which  had  been  placed  at  the  beginning  of  the 
sitting,  as  usual,  in  the  triangular  recess  behind  the 
curtain.  At  11.8  p.m.  Mr.  Baggally  reports  that 
the  little  table  struck  him  under  the  shoulder  and  fell 
on  the  right  of  the  medium.  The  light  was  Light  IV. 
(a  new  150-volt  ruby  glass  lamp,  enabling  Mr. 
Carrington,  who  sat  at  the  end  of  one  side  of  the 
table  remote  from  the  medium,  to  see  clearly  the 
medium’s  face,  and  to  distinguish  eyes,  ears,  and  nose, 
at  a  distance  of  about  four  feet).  At  ii.io  p.m.  Mr. 
Baggally  reports  :  “I  am  holding  her  right  hand  with 
my  left  hand,  and  her  right  foot  is  on  my  left  foot,  and 
I  am  feeling  the  whole  length  of  her  leg.” 

122 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

11.22  p.m.  B. — The  small  table  is  moving. 

F. — She  squeezed  my  right  hand  at  the  time  with 
her  left  hand,  on  her  lap.  Her  left  foot  quite 
clearly  on  my  right. 

B. — Same  control  of  foot  as  before. 

B. — The  small  table  rises  and  touches  my  elbow. 

B. — I  am  perfectly  certain  that  her  whole  right 
hand  is  on  my  left  hand  on  the  table,  and  I  can  feel 
the  whole  length  of  her  leg. 

B. — The  small  table  is  again  moving  ;  same  control. 

F. — My  right  hand  was  on  her  two  knees,  and 
her  left  hand  in  mine  and  visible,  and  close  to  me  ; 
legs  both  firmly  between  B.’s  and  mine,  and  I  have 
felt  their  position  with  my  hand. 

11.25  p.m.  The  small  table  is  rising  again. 

11.26  p.m.  The  small  table  is  levitated  right  on  to  the 

stance  table,  through  the  curtains,  between  B.  and  medium. 
It  rose  to  a  height  of  2i  feet  from  the  floor,  and  is  now 
resting  on  the  sdance  table. 

[The  small  table  which  had  been  in  the  cabinet  was  levi¬ 
tated  from  behind  the  right  curtain,  between  it  and  the  door 
(the  door  was  to  the  extreme  right  of  the  medium,  i.e., 
behind  B.),  and  came  over  the  medium’s  right  arm  and  my 
left  arm,  the  legs  resting  on  my  arm  and  the  medium’s. 

It  seemed  to  make  successive  efforts  to  get  well  on  to  the 

sdance  table.  B.,  Dec.  3/08.] 

B. — My  control  is  perfect  ;  the  same  as  before. 

F. — Her  left  hand  is  right  over  this  side  of  the 
table  and  visible.  Her  head  close  to  me  and  visible. 
My  right  hand  on  both  her  knees  as  before. 

Here,  at  any  rate,  the  feat  of  moving  the  table 
would  have  presented  small  difficulty  to  a  woman  with 
any  practice  in  such  feats  if,  under  cover  of  the 
obscurity,  she  could  have  got  a  hand  or  foot  free. 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AND  THE  S.P.R.  123 

It  will  be  observed,  however,  that  the  movement  was 
not  a  sudden  one,  but  was  accomplished  in  several 
stages,  and  occupied  four  minutes  from  start  to  finish. 
The  difficulty  would  seem  to  lie  in  supposing  that 
Messrs.  Baggally  and  Feilding,  expert  observers,  who 
were  perfectly  aware  that  Eusapia  would  release  her 
hands  and  feet  if  she  could,  and  were  on  the  watch 
for  precisely  that  form  of  trickery,  could  have 
been  deceived,  not  once,  but  repeatedly,  in  their 
assertion  as  to  the  position  of  Eusapia’s  limbs.  But 
it  would  not  appear,  on  close  scrutiny,  that  Mr. 
Feilding  had  really  any  say  in  the  matter.  It  is  not 
stated  this  time  that  both  hands  were  visible.  The 
reason  is  to  be  sought  two  or  three  pages  back  jri 
the  report.  At  10.57  p.m.  B.  reports  :  “The  curtain 
is  blown  over  my  head  ”  ;  at  10.58  he  reports  ;  “  The 
curtain  is  still  over  my  hand.” 

At  1 1. 10  it  is  explained  that  the  curtain  is  still 
over  B.’s  arm. 

As  nothing  more  is  said,  we  must  assume  that  the 
curtain  was  over  B.’s  arm  during  the  progress  of  the 
levitation,  and  that  Eusapia’s  right  hand  was  therefore 
invisible.  Moreover,  it  will  be  seen  from  B.’s  notes 
of  the  following  day  that  the  “  force  ”  which  moved 
the  table  used  the  curtain  as  a  shield. 

The  problem,  then,  in  this  particular  case  is  simpli¬ 
fied.  .We  have  to  suppose  that  only  Mr.  Baggally’s 
senses  were  deceived — indeed,  as  Eusapia’s  hand  was 
presumably  under  the  curtain,  and  her  leg  under  the 
table,  we  are  not  justified  in  using  the  plural — we  have 
to  suppose  merely  an  illusion  of  the  sense  of  touch. 

Dr.  Hodgson’s  most  valuable  legacy  to  the  world 
consists  in  his  exhaustive  analysis  of  the  processes  of 

124 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

deception  employed  by  the  slate -writing  medium, 
Eglinton — or,  to  put  it  more  accurately,  the  processes 
of  self-deception  habitually  set  in  motion  by  Eglinton’s 
clients.  Dr.  Hodgson  was  assisted  in  his  work  by 
the  late  Mr.  S.  J.  Davey,  who  set  himself  to  learn 
Eglinton’s  tricks,  and  to  reproduce  them,  with  improve¬ 
ments,  before  unsuspecting  sitters.  The  main  secret 
of  success,  alike  with  Eglinton  and  with  Davey,  con¬ 
sisted  in  their  ability,  at  the  critical  moment,  to  divert 
the  sitter’s  attention  in  such  a  manner  that  he  should 
himself  be  unaware  of  the  momentary  lapse.  It  is 
true  that  these  earlier  victims  had  not,  for  the  most 
part,  any  special  training  in  conjuring  feats,  and  did 
not  know  exactly  what  tricks  to  expect  ;  and  the  ques¬ 
tion  of  hallucination  or  dissociation  was  not  raised. 
The  unrealised  breaks  in  attention  were  in  some  cases 
very  remarkable.  A  sitter  who  had  brought  to  the 
seance  slates  completely  wrapped  in  paper  and  tied  up, 
in  order  to  prevent  their  being  tampered  with,  would 
sit  by  unsuspectingly  whilst  Davey  unfastened  the 
slates,  wrote  upon  the  inner  surface,  and  made  them 
into  a  parcel  again.  Another,  when  told  to  concen¬ 
trate  his  attention  on  a  particular  slate,  on  which 
writing  was  to  be  produced,  would  allow  Davey  to 
remove  the  slate  from  before  his  eyes  and  substitute 
another,  and  at  the  end  of  the  sitting  would  be  pre¬ 
pared  to  swear  that  he  had  never  moved  his  gaze 
from  the  spot.  It  is  permissible  to  suggest  that  in 
this  curious  skill  exercised  by  Davey  and  Eglinton 
we  find  the  first  rudiments  of  the  supreme  art  of  which 
Eusapia,  ex  hypothesi,  is  an  exponent.  Moreover,  as 
already  shown,  it  is  by  the  use  of  similar  devices  that 
Eusapia  has  admittedly  performed  many  marvels  in 
the  past. 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AND  THE  S.P.R.  125 

Let  us  put  the  hypothesis  of  simple  sense-deception 
to  the  proof,  and  see  how  far  it  will  explain  the  records. 

The  first  three  sittings,  at  which  only  Mr.  Feilding 
and  Mr.  Carrington  were  present,  exhibited  little  of 
interest— raps,  levitations,  movements  of  table,  curtain, 
and  small  objects,  and  a  few  touches.  The  most  im¬ 
portant  manifestation  was  the  transportation  of  the 
small  table  from  behind  the  curtain  on  to  the  stance 
table  in  Stance  II.  At  her  own  request  each  of 
Eusapia’s  ankles  had  been  tied  to  the  nearest  leg  of 
her  chair  by  means  of  a  rope  passed  round  her  ankle 
and  tied,  then  attached  to  the  leg  and  rung  of  the 
chair,  leaving  her  a  play  of  about  four  inches.  At 
1 1.30  p.m.,  the  electric  light  in  the  s6ance-room  having 
been  turned  out  some  time  previously,  leaving  the  room 
to  be  illuminated  solely  by  the  light  coming  through 
the  partly  open  door  of  the  adjacent  room  in  which 
the  stenographer  sat,  the  door  was  still  further  closed, 
and  the  light  was  now  no  longer  sufficient  for  the 
stenographer  to  see  the  head  of  the  sitters.  C.  was 
seated  on  the  left  and  F.  on  the  right. 

11.30  p.m.  C. — The  left  curtain  has  blown  right  out 
on  to  the  table. 

C. — My  right  hand  was  under  the  table  firmly 
holding  the  medium’s  left  hand. 

F. — I  have  hold  of  her  right  hand  continuously 
in  her  lap. 

11.34  p.m.  F. — The  medium  kicks  with  her  right  foot 
violently  on  mine. 

C. — She  kicks  me  with  her  left  foot  also.  Her  left  hand 
raises  my  right  hand  towards  the  curtain. 

Objects  in  the  cabinet  rattle  on  the  table  inside  the 
curtain. 

126 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

11.35  p.m.  F . — 'Medium  asks  me  to  put  my  left  arm  on 
her  shoulder.  Her  right  arm  is  round  my  neck. 

11.36  p.m.  C. — With  her  left  hand  medium  is  holding 
my  right  hand  on  the  table. 

11.37  p.m.  The  objects  in  the  cabinet  have  fallen  over 
on  the  table  inside  it. 

,C. — She  grasped  my  right  hand  firmly  in  her  left 
hand  at  the  time  this  was  going  on,  and  pressed  on 
my  right  foot  with  her  left. 

F. — I  was  holding  her  right  hand  on  the  table  with 
my  left,  and  the  tips  of  both  her  feet  under  the  table 
with  my  right  hand. 

C. — My  left  hand  was  holding  her  head  and  I  was 
holding  her  left  hand  in  my  right. 

11.42  p.m.  The  small  table  in  the  cabinet  has  been 
lifted  up  on  to  the  stance  table,  behind  the  curtain,  several 
objects  remaining  upon  the  top. 

F. — I  could  see  that  her  head  was  motionless. 

,C. — My  right  hand  was  held  in  her  left  hand  on 
the  stance  table.  Her  left  foot  was  on  my  right. 

F. — Her  right  hand  was  in  my  left  hand.  I  was 
holding  both  her  toes  in  my  right  hand. 

C. — The  small  table  from  the  cabinet  is  pushing  against 
me  with  considerable  force,  the  objects  being  still  on  it. 

[The  table  was  pushed  out  on  to  the  stance  table  at  an 
angle  of  about  45  degrees,  still  covered  by  the  left-hand 
curtain,  which  thus  prevented  the  objects  from  falling  off. 
The  four  feet  of  the  table  were  about  two  feet  from  the 
ground,  and  the  table  remained  in  this  position  for  at  least 
one  minute,  pressing  strongly  against  my  hand  which  had 
been  raised  from  the  table  still  holding  the  medium’s,  and 
apparently  making  efforts  to  climb  on  to  the  stance  table. 
C.,  Nov.  24/08.]  [After  which  it  fell  back  to  the  ground. 
F.,  Feb.  6/09.] 

C. — My  right  arm  is  under  the  curtain,  my  hand 
being  held  by  the  medium’s  left  hand.  The  curtain 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AND  THE  S.P.R.  127 

has  remained  on  the  stance  table,  covering  our  two 
arms,  with  several  small  objects  inside,  these  having 
fallen  off  the  top  of  the  small  table. 

The  light,  it  will  be  seen,  had  been  expressly  lowered 
for  j:his  performance.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  sup¬ 
posing  that  Eusapia  knew  how  to  free  herself  from 
the  leg  fastenings  which  had  been  put  on  at  her  own 
request.  Any  conjurer  could  do  as  much.  The  precise 
moment  of  freedom  was  probably  marked  by  the 
violent  kicks  recorded  and  the  simultaneous  movement 
of  the  left  arm.  She  then  leaned  her  body  to  the 
right,  no  doubt  to  give  herself  the  necessary  purchase 
for  imoving  the  table  with  her  left  foot.  Eater,  she 
appears  to  have  inclined  her  head  to  the  left.  Five 
minutes  later  the  little  table  was  lifted  up.  Her  head 
is  now  apparently  not  inclined  to  either  side.  The 
whole  of  these  movements  are  consistent  with  the  sup¬ 
position  that  Eusapia  freed  her  left  leg  and  used  jt 
to  move  the  table,  the  left  curtain  being  employed 
at  once  to  conceal  the  movement  and  to  assist  in  pre¬ 
serving  the  balance  of  the  suspended  table.  The  chief 
objection  to  this  hypothesis  is  that  Mr.  Feilding 
claimed  to  be  holding  the  tips  of  both  feet — perhaps 
one  shoe  was  empty. 

The  incident  last  quoted  cannot  therefore  be  held 
as  a  good  test  case.  The  doubts  of  the  committee, 
indeed,  were  not  dispelled  until  a  later  seance.  Let 
us  consider  another  case  of  transportatioix — the  most 
striking  manifestation  of  the  kind  in  the  whole  series, 
in  which  it  would  seem  clear  that  the  result  could  not 
be  explained  by  the  use  of  the  foot  alone. 

At  Stance  VIII.,  held  on  December  loth,  some 
visitors  were  invited  to  attend.  One  of  -them,  Mr. 

128 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

Ryan,  was  for  a  great  part  of  the  sitting  in  control 
of  the  left  hand  and  foot.  The  diagram  below  repre¬ 
sents  the  arrangement  of  the  sitters  at  the  timp  of 
the  phenomenon  now  to  be  described. 

Mr.  Feilding,  it  will  be  seen,  was  in  control  of  the 
right  side,  and  Mr.  Carrington  was  standing  behind 
him.  The  light  during  the  progress  of  , the  manifesta¬ 
tion  was  Light  III.,  which  is  described  "^(p.  465)  a’s 
“  =  1 10  volts,  10  candles,  ruby,  shaded  with  one  thick¬ 
ness  of  thin  tissue  cream-coloured  paper,  and  one 
thickness  of  a  white  silk  handkerchief  hung  over  it, 
so  that  the  whole  handkerchief  is  illumined  with  a  red 
glow.” 

12.22  a.m.  B. — A  white  thing  appeared  between  the 
curtains  over  her  head. 

R. — I  saw  nothing. 

F. — I  saw  it. 

F. — Her  right  hand  holding  mine  on  the  edge 
of  the  table.  I  am  sure  it  is  the  whole  of  it,  I 
am  feeling  her  thumb. 

R. — Something  lifts  the  clay  and  puts  it  on  the  table. 

F. — The  medium  blew  three  or  four  times  while  it  hap¬ 
pened.  The  clay  came  gently  out  from  the  side  of  the 
curtain  near  the  window,  between  the  medium  and  R.,  over 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AND  THE  S.P.R.  129 

her  left  shoulder,  on  to  the  table  and  on  to  the  top  of  her 
right  hand  and  mine. 

R. — The  block  of  clay  passed  my  eye,  coming  from  over 
my  shoulder,  and  slid  down  my  right  arm  and  passed  over 
to  the  opposite  side  of  the  table. 

R. — My  right  hand  was  lying  perfectly  flat  on 
the  middle  of  the  table,  and  her  left  hand  was 
stroking  my  wrist;  her  left  foot  between  my  two 
feet. 

F. — Her  right  hand  was  continuously  in  mine. 
My  left  hand  on  her  head. 

The  following  are  the  notes  upon  the  incident  made 
later  by  Mr.  Carrington  and  Mr.  Feilding  ; 

I  was  in  an  exceptionally  good  position,  standing  behind 
F.,  for  seeing  one  of  the  phenomena,  viz.,  the  trans¬ 
portation  of  the  clay  from  the  cabinet  to  the  stance  table, 
shortly  after  12.22  a.m.,  and,  as  I  happened  to  be  closely 
watching  the  curtain  at  the  time,  I  saw  the  movements  of 
the  board  and  clay  very  clearly.  The  clay  appeared  first 
at  the  opening  on  the  extreme  left,  next  to  the  white 
window  curtains,  and  at  a  distance  of  at  least  three  feet 
from  the  medium’s  chair.  It  must  have  been  moved  to 
that  point,  2,  from  its  former  position  on  the  small  table 
in  the  cabinet,  1.  [It  was  transported  from  2  to  the  right 
shoulder  of  R.  H.  C.,  June  30/09]  and  then  slid  gently 
down  on  to  the  table,  until  it  rested  at  the  point  3.  I  saw 
a  white,  opaque  substance,  about  two  inches  broad  and  six 
inches  long,  apparently  carrying  this  clay,  which  came  across 
the  medium’s  left  arm,  her  left  hand  being  on  R.’s  right. 
The  movement  of  the  clay  was  peculiar.  It  travelled  slowly 
as  though  carried  through  the  air,  and  was  most  certainly 
not  thrown.  It  would  have  been  an  utter  impossibility  for 
the  medium  to  have  placed  the  clay  in  the  position  in  which 
I  first  saw  it,  2  (even  supposing  that  she  had  her  left 
hand  free),  and  then  to  have  moved  it  on  to  the  stance 
table.  Had  she  done  so,  the  left-hand  curtain,  behind  which 
her  left  arm  must  have  been  thrust,  would  have  been 
crumpled  together  and  carried  forward  some  considerable 
distance  over  her  arm.  Such,  however,  was  not  the  case.  I 
clearly  saw  that  the  left-hand  curtain  did  not  move,  and 

9 

130 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

I  am  consequently  quite  sure  that  her  left  arm  and  hand 
did  not  and  could  not  have  transported  the  clay  from  the 
left  opening  of  the  cabinet  curtain  to  the  stance  table. 

H.  ,C.,  Dec.  15,  1908. 

I  find  I  wrote  no  contemporary  note  to  this  stance.  My 
recollection  is,  however,  perfectly  clear  as  to  the  trans¬ 
portation  of  the  clay.  Eusapia’s  two  hands  were  both 
visible,  her  left  on  R.’s  right  near  the  middle  of  the  table, 
her  right  hand  under  my  right  about  a  foot  distant  from 
her  left.  I  did  not  see  the  board  on  which  was  the  clay 
till  it  arrived  on  R.’s  right  shoulder,  nor  did  I  notice  the 
white  opaque  substance  referred  to  by  C.  I  saw  the  board 
and  clay,  however,  slide  slowly  down  R.’s  right  arm,  alight 
on  the  table  by  his  hand,  move  across  the  table  and  come 
on  to  the  top  of  my  own  right  hand  near  my.  side  of  the 
table.  I  am  absolutely  certain  that  neither  of  Eusapia’s 
hands  carried  them. 

E.  F.,  April  14,  1909. 

Mr.  Carrington’s  note,  it  will  be  seen,  was  not  made 
until  five  days  after  the  incident.  Mr.  Feilding’s  state¬ 
ment,  made  four  months  later,  that  he  saw  Eusapia’s 
left  hand  resting  on  R.’s  right  in  the  middle  of  the 
table,  could  in  any  case  be  worthy  of  little  credence. 
Moreover,  it  is  in  conflict  with  R.’s  contemporary  state¬ 
ment  that  the  medium’s  left  hand  was  stroking  his 
wrist.  How  long  had  the  hand  been  stroking  his 
wrist?  Was  the  stroking  going  on  all  the  time?  And 
how  does  he  know  that  it  was  a  hand,  and  a  left  hand, 
all  the  time?  He  doesn’t  say  that  he  saw  the  medium’s 
hand,  nor  does  Mr.  Carrington,  writing  five  days  later. 
That  clear  vision  seems  only  to  have  been  vouchsafed 
to  Mr.  Feilding,  and  he  didn’t  think  it  worth  mention¬ 
ing  until  four  months  afterwards.*  There  is  nothing 
in  the  contemporary  statements  to  forbid  the  supposi- 

*  In  his  article  in  McClure’s  Magazine,  reprinted  in  the 
Journal  of  the  American  S.P.R.,  Mr.  Carrington,  in  a 

BUS  APIA  PALLADINO  AND  THE  S.P.R.  131 

tion  that  whilst  Eusapia’s  right  hand  was  held  by  F., 
who  was  feeling  the  thumb  “  on  the  edge  of  the  table,” 
she  employed  a  finger  or  two  of  the  same  hand  to 
stroke  R.’s  wrist,  being  unable  to  reach  his  hand,  which 
was  flat  on  the  table,  and  thus  had  the  left  hand  free 
to  move  the  clay. 

But  criticism  of  isolated  manifestation  is  unprofit¬ 
able.  This  particular  feat  has  indeed  been  selected 
for  consideration  because  the  Committee  themselves 
directed  attention  to  it  in  their  Summary  ’(P*  33^)‘ 
Let  us  take  a  broader  view,  and  consider  the  stances 
as  a  whole.  Broadly  speaking,  the  manifestations  fall 
into  two  classes.  In  the  one  may  be  placed  levita¬ 
tions  of  table,  movements  of  objects  within  and  with¬ 
out  the  cabinet,  bulging  of  dress  of  curtain,  grasps 
of  invisible  hands.  Now,  all  these  things  could  be 
done  if  Eusapia  had  the  free  use  of  a  foot,  sometimes 
even  of  a  knee,  her  head,  or  some  other  part  of  her 
person.  It  is  impossible  in  the  given  conditions — 
conditions  of  Eusapia’s  own  choosing — effectively  to 
check  the  controller’s  statements  that  such  freedom 
was  not  permitted.  But  the  rarer  and  what  may  be 
called  the  ”  higher  ”  phenomena — transportation  of 
objects  from  the  cabinet  to  the  top  of  the  table,  lights, 
the  appearance  of  visible  hands  and  heads — would  re- 

similar  fashion,  amplifies  at  a  later  date  the  contemporary 
notes.  In  relating  that  he  felt  his  arm  gripped  by  a  hand, 
he  says  in  the  magazine  article  :  ”  I  was  holding  both  of 
Eusapia’s  hands  in  mine.  ...  Her  feet,  knees,  and  head 
were  also  visible.”  But  from  the  shorthand  notes  (Report, 
p.  518)  it  appears  that  one  of  Eusapia’s  hands  was  under 
the  curtain,  and  nothing  is  said  about  the  feet  and  knees 
being  visible.  Perhaps  Mr.  Carrington  means  that  he  would 
have  seen  them  if  he  had  looked  under  the  table. 

132 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

quire  in  most  cases  the  use  of  a  hand,  and  it  is  not 
only  easier  to  control  the  hands,  but  easier  to  check 
the  controller’s  statements  that  the  hands  were  effec¬ 
tively  controlled.  If,  as  seems  occasionally  to  have 
happened,  a  foot  is  used  in  these  feats,  extensive  move¬ 
ments  of  Eusapia’s  body  will  be  observed. 

At  the  first  three  stances  Mr.  Carrington  and  Mr. 
Feilding  were  in  sole  control. 

During  these  three  stances  the  only  “  higher  ” 
phenomena  were  the  transportation  of  the  table  in 
Stance  II.,  already  described,  and  the  appearance  of 
a  black  head  emerging  from  the  curtain  [(p.  370). 
This  solitary  apparition  was  seen  at  a  moment  when 
Mr.  Feilding  had  released  the  medium’s  right  hand 
and  was  kneeling  down  to  cut  the  rope  by  which  her 
feet  were  confined. 

At  Stance  IV.  two  strangers.  Professor  Bottazzi  and 
Professor  Galeotti,  were  in  control  for  part  of  the 
time.  During  the  period  of  their  control  two  white 
things  shot  out  from  the  cabinet  (p.  408).  After 
Mr.  Feilding  resumed  control  the  white  things  appeared 
no  more. 

Seances  V.,  ,VI.,  VII. — Mr.  Baggally,  who  had 
now  come  over  from  England,  was  in  control  of 
Eusapia’s  right  hand  throughout  these  three  stances, 
except  for  two  brief  and  unproductive  *  periods  at  the 
beginning  of  Stances  V.  and  VII.,  during  which  Mr. 
Carrington  controlled.  Mr.  Carrington  was  on  each 
occasion  displaced  by  direction  of  the  medium  to  make 
room  for  Mr.  Baggally. 

During  these  three  stances  the  “  higher  phenomena  ” 
were  abundant. 

«  Unproductive,  that  is,  of  “  higher  ’’  phenomena. 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AND  THE  S.P.R.  133 

Stance  VIII. — Mr.  Ryan  in  control  of  the  left  side. 
Higher  phenomena  abundant. 

Stance  IX. — Mr.  Carrington  in  control  of  right,  Mr. 
Baggally  left.  No  higher  phenomena. 

Stance  X. — A  failure. 

Stance  XI. — A  visitor,  Mrs.  Hutton,  continuously  in 
control  of  left  hand.  Higher  phenomena  abundant. 

There  were,  therefore,  only  five  completely  repre¬ 
sentative  stances.  We  should  not  be  surprised  to  find 
that  at  two  of  these,  VIII.  and  XI.,  the  most  striking 
phenomena — appearance  of  heads,  hands,  transportation 
of  objects  from  cabinet — took  place  on  the  side  con¬ 
trolled  by  the  stranger,  on  these  two  occasions  the 
left  side.  But  a  similar  preference  for  one  side  is 
at  least  equally  conspicuous  in  the  three  remaining 
stances,  V.,  VI.,  VII.,  the  side  preferred  being  the 
right  side,  which  was  controlled  by  Mr.  Baggally. 

We  find  that  the  whole  of  the  higher  phenomena  at 
these  three  stances,  V.,  VI.,  VII.,  occurred  within  reach 
of  the  limbs  controlled  by  Mr.  Baggally,  and  could 
be  explained  on  the  assumption  that  Mr.  Baggally 
was  mistaken  in  supposing  that  at  the  time  of  the 
particular  feat  he  was  in  actual  contact  with  the  right 
hand  and  right  foot  of  the  medium.  The  actual  limb 
used — at  any  rate,  for  the  special  feats  under  con¬ 
sideration — at  these  three  seances  was,  it  would  seem 
probable  in  most  cases,  the  right  hand.  There  are 
the  following  grounds  for  thinking  that  Mr.  Baggally 
may  have  been  mistaken  in  his  conviction  : 

I .  Throughout  these  three  seances  Eusapia’s  right 
hand,  with  few  exceptions,  is  reported  as  resting  qn 
or  under  Mr.  Baggally ’s  left  hand,  whereas  Eusapia’s 
left  hand  is  generally  reported  as  lying  in  or  being 

134 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

held  by  the  hand  of  the  other  controller,  Mr.  Fell  ding 
or  Mr.  Carrington. 

2.  On  many  occasions  in  these  three  stances  it  is 
reported  that  the  right-hand  curtain  has  blown  over 
Mr.  Baggally  so  as  to  cover  his  arm  and  hand,  or, 
again,  it  is  reported  that  he  is  holding  the  hand  pf 
the  medium  through  the  curtain  or  under  the  curtain. 
It  is  clear  that  in  the  hands  of  a  practised  conjurer — 
and  such  we  must  assume  Eusapia  to  be — the  use  of  a 
curtain  would  considerably  facilitate  the  freeing  of  a 
hand  ;  e.g.,  when  the  controller’s  hand  had  been  to 
some  extent  numbed  by  continuous  pressure,  the  folds 
of  the  curtain  might  be  made,  for  a  time,  to  do  duty 
for  a  hand  detached  for  special  service.  It  is  surely 
extremely  significant  that  during  these  three  stances 
neither  of  Mr.  Baggally’s  colleagues  was  on  any 
single  occasion  embarrassed  in  this  manner.  This  use 
of  the  curtain  was  reserved  for  Mr.  Baggally, 

3,  The  medium  is  reported  as  occasionally  releasing 
one  hand  momentarily  and  replacing  it.  This 
manoeuvre  is  not  exclusively  reserved  for  the  hand 
held  by  B.  In  Stance  V.,  for  instance,  on  at  least 
two  occasions  she  released  herself  from  F.’s  grasp 
[(see  10.44I  and  11.37  p.m.).  But  no  results  of 
importance  followed  on  these  occasions.  In  the  case 
of  B.,  however,  the  manoeuvre  is  employed  to  some 
purpose  [(see  VI,,  12.4,  12.30  ;  VII.,  10.59  p.m.). 
On  each  of  these  occasions,  after  control  is  resumed, 
it  is  found  that  both  of  Eusapia’s  hands  are  on  her 
knees,  the  right  hand  lying  on  Mr.  Baggally’s,  the 
left  hand  held  by  the  other  controller.  Now,  these 
are  precisely  Eusapia’s  usual  preliminaries  to  sub¬ 
stitution  of  hands.  She  is  known  to  practise  this  trick 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AND  THE  S.P.R.  135 

whenever  circumstances  allow  it.  Several  instances 
were  detected  during  the  course  of  these  stances  (twice 
in  Stance  III.,  and  again  in  X.,  12.11;  XI.,  10.30). 
There  is  nothing  in  the  contemporary  report  of  Mr. 
Baggally’s  utterances  to  forbid  the  supposition  that 
the  device  was  successfully  employed  by  Eusapia  on 
these  three  occasions.  On  none  of  these  occasions 
does  he  make  mention  of  the  thumb,  or  show  any  signs 
of  being  alive  to  the  danger  of  substitution,  and  on 
each  of  the  three  occasions  the  release  of  the  hand 
was  followed  shortly  by  the  appearance  from  behind 
the  curtains  of  a  “  head  ”  or  nondescript  object. 
Again,  at  Stance  VI.,  11.40,  the  release  of  the  right 
hand  is  followed,  as  usual,  by  the  appearance  from] 
between  the  curtains  of  a  nondescript  object,  but  the 
right  hand  this  time  is  found  on  the  table  under  the 
curtain . 

But  the  special  applicability  of  these  remarks  will 
be  made  plainer  by  an  actual  extract  from  the  record. 

I  will  begin  with  an  incident  which  Mr.  Baggally 
has  specially  challenged  me  to  explain. ^ 

Stance  V.,  11.38. — B.  controls  on  right,  F.  on  left. 
C.,  standing  beside  F.,  leans  over  table  and  feels  a 
hand  under  the  curtain  about  two  feet  above  medium’s 
head.  iWhat  is  this  hand?  and  how  did  it  come  there? 

Let  us  see  what  had  preceded  its  appearance. 

At  11.30  C.  had  reported  ;  “  The  curtain  ”  , (which 
curtain  is  not  specified)  “  is  blown  right  out  against 
me  as  I  am  leaning  over  the  table.” 

•  Journal  S.P.R. ,  February,  1910.  I  have  chosen  this 
incident  because  it  is  the  first  on  the  list  ;  but  all  the  other 
cases  cited  by  Mr.  Baggally  seem  to  me  explicable  by 
similar  methods. 

136 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

At  11.36  F.  reported  :  “  She  is  leaning  back  in  my 
arms,  my  right  hand  on  her  two  knees  and  her  left 
hand  on  the  corner  of  the  table.” 

B. — ‘‘  Her  right  hand  on  my  left  hand  on  the  table. 
She  swings  her  right  foot  backwards  and  forwards 
continuously,  and  I  follow  it  with  my  left  foot.” 

At  11.37  F.  reports  :  “I  have  hold  of  her  left  hand 
again.” 

B.  makes  no  report. 

Immediately  after  the  touch  at  11.38  F.  reports: 
“  Her  head  is  lying  on  my  shoulder,  her  left  hand 
continues  in  piine.” 

B.  makes  no  report. 

C.  reports  another  push. 

F.  again  reports  his  control.  B.  makes  no  report. 

C.  reports  a  third  push.  B.  then,  and  not  till  then, 
reports  that  her  right  foot  is  still  swinging  backwards 
and  forwards  followed  by  his  foot. 

I  take  it  that  the  three  pushes  were  caused  by 
Eusapia’s  right  foot,  lifted  up  under  cover  of  the 
curtain  and  of  B.’s  prolonged  lapse  of  attention,  and 
that  Eusapia’s  curious  position  in  F.’s  arms  was  de¬ 
signed  to  give  her  the  necessary  fulcrum  for  the  move¬ 
ment.  A  similar  attitude,  as  we  have  just  seen,  was 
reported  in  connection  with  the  transportation  of  the 
small  table  in  Stance  II. 

Now  let  us  turn  to  the  last  part  of  Seance  VIL, 
the  third  of  three  consecutive  successful  stances  in 
which,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  summary  prefixed  by 
the  Committee  to  their  report,  the  phenomena  seem 
to  have  reached;  a  maximum  of  intensity  and  frequency. 

Seance  VI I. — At  10.54  p.m.  the  medium  asks  to  be 
allowed  to  touch  the  curtain,  presumably  with  the  hand. 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AND  THE  S.P.R.  137 

but  which  hand  is  not  stated.  Three  minutes  later,  at 
10.57  p.m.,  a  white  thing  comes  out  from  between  the 
curtains . 

F.  reports  that  he  is  holding  left  hand,  feeling 
thumb.  B.  feels  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand  resting 
on  his.  Both  hands  are  in  the  medium’s  lap. 

10.58  another  white  thing  appears.  F.’s  control  as 
before.  B.  reports:  “Her  right  hand  on  my  left 
hand,  both  on  pay  knee.” 

At  10.59  medium  momentarily  releases  her  right 
hand  from  B.’s  control.  .Within  the  next  few  minutes 
there  follow  several  thumps  on  the  table,  a  partial 
levitation,  a  black  thing  shoots  about  feet  towards 
B.’s  head  ;  the  table  in  the  cabinet  is  shaken. 

F.  reports  that  throughout  these  phenomena  he  is 
holding  the  medium’s  left  hand  in  his  right  on  her 
lap  ;  B.,  first,  that  the  medium’s  right  hand  rests  on 
his  left  hand  on  her  right  knee  ;  next,  that  he  holds 
the  right  hand  in  his  left  hand  on  her  lap  ;  lastly, 
that  her  right  hand  is  on  his  left  hand  on  her  knee.' 

At  1 1 .17  p.m.  F.  is  touched  on  his  left  hand,  which 
is  on  the  back  of  the  medium’s  neck. 

Both  Eusapia’s  hands  are  now  reported  to  be  on 
the  table  ;  but  B.  reports  :  “She  has  her  right  hand 
in  my  left  resting  on  the  table,  under  the  curtain.” 

11.20  p.m.  C. — A  bell  from  the  cabinet  is  lifted  from 
the  small  table  in  the  cabinet,  through  the  curtain,  and  put 
upon  the  medium’s  head  and  remains  there. 

'  B.’s  statement  is  not  very  clear.  At  10.58  he  had 
reported,  “  Her  right  hand  on  my  left  hand,  both  on  my 
knee.’’  At  10.59  he  reports  that  the  hand  has  been  momen¬ 
tarily  released,  and  adds,  “  Both  hands  are  now  again  on 
her  right  knee.”  If  he  is  correctly  reported,  Eusapia  has 
effected  an  important  change  in  position  without  the 
controller  realising  that  any  change  has  occurred. 

138 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

F. — I  heard  the  bell,  which  had  been  on  the  table  in  the 
cabinet,  begin  to  ring,  and  then  it  suddenly  appeared  out¬ 
side  the  curtain  and  came  over  the  medium’s  head,  and  it 
hung  there  and  went  on  ringing.  ,  She  told  me  it  was  tied  to 
her  head.  I  felt  with  my  fingers,  and  felt  something  like 
muslin  tying  it  to  her  hair.  As  I  was  looking  at  it  I 
suddenly  saw  a  white  thing,  which  I  thought  was  the 
medium’s  right  hand,  come  to  untie  the  bell,  ring  it  hard, 
and  throw  it  on  to  the  stance  table.  This  was  within  one 
foot  of  my  nose.  I  could  see  the  medium’s  face  perfectly. 

B.  — I  saw  the  bell  come  out  and  lie  on  the  medium’s 
head,  and  also  saw  it  thrown  from  her  head  on  to  the 
table. 

C.  — I  saw  the  hand  coming  to  untie  the  bell,  and  heard 
the  bell  ringing  above  her  head  ;  also  saw  the  hand  throw 
it  out  on  the  table. 

[I  also  saw  this  hand  distinctly  lift,  ring,  and  throw  the 
bell,  but  thought  it  was  F.  or  medium’s  hand.  M.  (the 
stenographer),  Dec.  8/08.] 

[B. — I  did  not  see  the  hand.  Dec.  8/08.] 

F. — Her  left  hand  was  visibly  in  my  right  all  the 
time  on  the  table. 

B. — During  the  whole  of  this  phenomenon  her 
right  hand  was  resting  on  my  left  hand  on  the 
table  and  her  right  foot  on  my  left  foot. 

F. — I  had  got  the  whole  of  her  left  hand  on  the 
table  visibly  in  my  right  on  my  corner  of  the  table, 
so  that  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  there  cannot  be 
any  question  of  substitution. 

B .  does  not  say  whether  the  hand  he  held,  or 
believed  himself  to  hold,  was  still  enveloped  in  the 
curtain.  That  it  was  so  may  perhaps  be  inferred  from 
the  fact  that  F.  mentioned  that  Eusapia’s  left  hand 
was  visible  on  the  table,  but  does  not  say  the  same 
of  Eusapia’s  right  hand.  Nevertheless,  as  we  learn 
from  the  notes  written  the  next  day,  the  light  at  the 
time  was  sufficiently  good  for  the  stenographer,  distant 
six  feet  from  the  medium,  to  see  the  hand  which  was 
busied  with  the  bell  on  the  medium’s  head. 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AND  THE  S.P.R.  139 

A't  11.26,  11.30,  11.32,  and  11.36  a  white  object 
is  reported  issuing  from  the  curtains.  At  11.36  a 
brilliant  light  is  seen  by  F.  and  the  stenographer. 
B.’s  reports  are  :  At  1 1.30,  “  control  of  foot  and  hand 
exactly  the  same  as  before.”  At  11.32,  ‘‘My  control 
also  quite  complete.  I  confirm  with  my  hand  that  her 
foot  is  really  on  mine.” 

11.37  p.m.  F. — Now  another  light  has  come  out,  this 
time  on  the  medium’s  lap. 

F. — Her  left  hand  is  on  the  table  in  mine. 

{It  will  be  observed  that  B.'s  control  is  not  stated.} 

[I  asked  if  the  lights  might  be  shown  to  the  others,  who 
had  not  yet  seen  them  owing  to  the  position  of  the  curtain. 
F.,  Dec.  8/08.  ] 

11.42  p.m.  Five  tilts  of  the  stance  table,  apparently 
without  contact,  ask  for  less  light. 

F. — My  hand  on  her  lap  with  hers. 

B. — My  hand  on  hers  ;  control  of  feet  also  the 
same. 

11.45  p.m. 

Light  IV. 

B. — Both  C.  and  I  saw  a  brilliant  light  inside  the  cabinet 
about  2^  feet  from  medium,  inside  the  right-hand  curtain. 

B. — Her  right  hand  was  on  my  left  hand,  but 
she  had  lifted  her  foot  and  placed  it  on  the  bar  of 
her  chair.  I  have  verified  this  fact  with  my  hand. 

F. — Her  hand  in  mine  on  this  side  of  the  table, 
and  her  left  foot  was  on  mine. 

It  will  be  observed  that  B.  does  not  state  whether 
Eusapia’s  hand  is  on  the  table  or  in  her  lap,  nor 
whether  it  is  still  under  the  curtain. 

11.54  p.m.  Something  touches  B.’s  jacket;  again 
something  presses  through  the  curtain  against  B.’s  face. 
F.  holds  Eusapia’s  hand  in  her  lap.  B.  reports  :  ‘‘  My 

140 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

control  as  before,  except  that  she  has  now  taken  her 
right  foot  from  the  chair  and  is  now  pressing  my  left 
foot  with  it.”  11.58  to  1 2. 1.  B.  again  feels  a  touch 
and  a  pressure  through  the  curtain,  and  hears  a  sound 
like  the  clicking  of  nails. 

1 2 . 1 .  F .  reports  control  the  same. 

B. — ‘‘  The  control  the  same  as  before  of  both  hands 
and  feet.  Her  right  hand  on  the  table  during  the  last 
phenomena  ” — from  which  it  may  nO'  doubt  be  in¬ 
ferred  that  her  right  hand  had  previously  been  in  her 
lap — an  important  fact  which  B.  had  not  stated. 

12.5-2-  a.m.  F. — I  saw  a  thing  exactly  like  the  head 
of  a  ninepin  or  a  small  wooden  head.  It  stayed  out  about 
three  seconds. 

B.  — I  saw  this  object  come  out  too. 

[It  came  from  the  farthest  side  of  the  right  curtain,  past 
B.’s  head,  rather  slowly,  towards  F.,  above  the  level  of  our 
heads,  and  then  went  back  again.  B.  and  F.,  Dec.  8/08.] 

F. — It  is  certainly  not  the  medium’s  left  hand, 
which  is  motionless  on  this  corner  of  the  table. 

B . — And  it  is  certainly  not  the  right  hand,  because 
I  had  control  of  it  all  the  time.  My  foot  control  is 
the  same. 

12.9  a.m.  B. — I  saw  a  hand  distinctly  come  out  of  the 
(extreme  right  of  the)  curtain  ;  it  grasped  my  left  shoulder, 
and  I  felt  its  thumb  and  four  fingers.  My  control  is  the 
same  as  before. 

C.  — I  saw  the  white  hand,  which  seemed  to  me  to  remain 
out  about  three  seconds. 

F. — I  was  complaining  to  the  medium  that  the  head  which 
came  out  was  not  large  enough  to  be  a  man’s  head. 
She  said  that  she  had  not  seen  it.  While  we  were  talking 
it  came  out  again.  This  time  it  appeared  to  me  to  be  larger, 
and  it  waggled  about  for  quite  a  time  between  B.  and  me. 

F. — I  had  her  left  hand  absolutely  in  my  left 
hand,  and  her  left  foot  on  my  right  foot,  and  my 
right  hand  across  both  knees. 

B. — My  control  is  the  same  as  before. 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AND  THE  S.P.B.  141 

Again,  B.  does  not  tell  us  the  nature  of  his  control, 
nor  the  position  of  Eusapia’s  right  hand. 

The  above  extracts  give  a  fair  sample  of  the  pheno¬ 
mena  and  of  the  control.  They  have  not  been  selected 
with  a  view  to  placing  the  case  in  an  unfavourable 
light.  It  is  true  that  the  lapses  of  attention  and 
defects  of  control  appear  to  have  culminated  in  this 
stance.  But  so  did  the  phenomena. 

Thus  the  case  stands.  The  Committee  are  certainly 
not  inferior  in  general  capacity  to  any  previous  investi¬ 
gators,  and  their  practical  experience  is  probably  un¬ 
rivalled.  The  record  is  as  nearly  as  possible  perfect. 
No  other  record  of  the  physical  phenomena  of 
spiritualism,  it  may  be  said,  is  of  any  value  beside 
it.  And  yet  the  record,  as  we  have  seen,  is  at  critical 
moments  incomplete,  and  at  almost  every  point  leaves 
obvious  loopholes  for  trickery.  So  far  from  being 
required  to  assume  the  concurrent  and  concordant 
hallucination  of  sight  and  touch  in  two  independent 
observers,  the  events  of  the  three  most  important 
stances  can  be  readily  explained  if  we  assume,  what 
the  record  itself  seems  to  indicate,  that  a  single 
person  was  hallucinated — if  the  Committee  prefer  the 
word — and  a  single  sense,  the  sense  of  touch.  ,We 
cannot  blame  the  individual  members  of  the  Com¬ 
mittee.  Rather  we  must  recognise  that  the  task  which 
they  set  themselves  to  perform  is  probably  beyond 
human  powers.  In  no  other  field  of  human  activity 
is  the  strained  and  unremitting  exercise  of  every  sense 
faculty  for  several  consecutive  hours  demanded  by  the 
circumstances.  Where  these  three  gentlemen  have 
failed,  we  others  would,  no  doubt,  fail  more  con¬ 
spicuously  and  more  disastrously. 

142 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

There  is  one  way,  and  only  one  way,  in  which  ,the 
operation  of  a  new  force  in  this  dubious  region  can 
be  substantiated  to  the  satisfaction  of  sober-minded 
men.  iWhen  Sir  W.  Crookes  was  about  to  undertake 
a  similar  investigation  he  indicated  the  principles  which 
should  guide  scientific  research  in  this  field. 

“  The  spiritualist  tells  of  flowers  with  the  fresh  dew  on 
them,  of  fruit,  and  living  objects  being  carried  through 
closed  windows  and  even  solid  brick  walls.  The  scientific 
investigator  naturally  asks  that  an  additional  weight  (if 
it  be  only  the  thousandth  part  of  a  grain)  be  deposited  on 
one  pan  of  his  balance  when  the  case  is  locked.  And  the 
chemist  asks  for  the  thousandth  of  a  grain  of  arsenic  to  be 
carried  through  the  sides  of  a  glass  tube  in  which  pure 
water  is  hermetically  sealed.”  > 

Only  by  such  means — only,  that  is,  by  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  effects  which  are  not  merely  measured  and 
recorded  by  instruments  of  precision,  but  which  dis¬ 
pense  at  all  points  with  the  necessity  for  supervision 
by  fallible  human  senses — can  the  reality  of  the  hypo¬ 
thetical  new  force  be  established.  More  than  a  genera¬ 
tion  has  passed  since  Sir  W.  Crookes  wrote  the  words 
above  quoted,  but  the  desired  proof  is  not  forthcoming. 
No  doubt  he  has  tried  to  procure  evidence  of  the 
kind  required.  We  know  that  Zollner  tried — and  failed. 
We  know  that  every  attempt  hitherto  made  to  obtain 
such  an  automatically  guaranteed  record  has  failed. 
Attempts  have  actually  been  made,  as  we  have  seen, 
to  obtain  such  evidence  in  the  case  of  Eusapia,  but 
they,  too,  have  failed. 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  that  the  con¬ 
viction  of  Messrs.  Baggally,  Carrington,  and  Feilding 
that  their  senses  were  not  deceived  is  quite  irrelevant 

>  ‘‘  Researches  in  Spiritualism,”  by  Sir  William  Crookes, 
F.R.S.  London,  1874. 

EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AND  THE  S.P.R.  143 

to  the  issue.  If  a  man  knows  that  he  is  deceived,  the 
deception  is  ipso  facta  incomplete.  In  any  case  the 
matter  is  not  to  be  decided  by  argument,  but  by  ex¬ 
periment.  Uet  renewed  and  again  renewed  attempts 
be  made  to  procure  physical  effects  under  automatic 
check,  and  automatically  recorded,  and  until  success 
has  been  obtained,  let  us  leave  Eusapia  in  a  decent 
obscurity.  The  mere  fact  that  throughout  its  existence 
of  more  than  sixty  years  modern  spiritualism  has  no 
single  piece  of  evidence  of  the  kind  to  offer  is  in 
itself  of  extreme  significance.  If  test  experiments  of 
the  kind  indicated  have  not  been  frequently  tried — as 
we  know  they  have  been  tried  occasionally — so  much 
the  worse  for  the  qualifications  of  the  investigators. 
If  they  have  been  repeatedly  tried,  and  have  failed, 
so  much  the  worse  for  the  phenomena. 

Since  the  above  chapter  was  completed  news  of  an 
interesting  exposure  of  Eusapia’s  methods  comes  from 
America.  At  a  sitting  held  on  December  i8th  a  young 
man  under  cover  of  the  darkness  crept  half  into  the 
cabinet  behind  Eusapia.  It  was  too  dark  to  see  any¬ 
thing,  but,  warned  by  a  slight  movement  of  the  small 
table  '(preparatory,  no  doubt,  to  its  transportation),  he 
put  out  his  hand  and  grasped  a  human  foot,  unshod, 
by  the  instep.  Eusapia  at  the  same  moment  screamed 
out  that  her  foot  had  been  touched.  The  interesting 
point  about  the  incident  is  that  Professor  Miinsterberg, 
the  well-known  psychologist,  was  controlling  on  the 
left  side — it  was  a  left  foot  that  was  seized — and  con¬ 
tinuously  felt  the  pressure  of  her  left  foot,  as  he 
supposed,  on  his.  What  he  felt  was,  no  doubt,  the 
empty  shoe.* 

>  See  Miinsterberg’s  article  in  the  Metropolitan  Magazine, 
February,  1910,  and  Journal  S.P.R.,  April,  1910. 

144 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

At  subsequent  stances  she  was  watched  from  a  con¬ 
cealed  window  in  the  cabinet,  or  an  observer  was 
secreted  in  a  bureau  provided  with  a  peephole. 
Expert  observers,  like  Mr.  W.  S.  Davis,  of  New  York, 
were  able  while  seated  at  her  side  to  satisfy  themselves 
that  substitution  of  hand  and  foot  was  habitually 
practised.  But  the  most  complete  demonstration  pf 
her  methods  was  obtained  at  some  stances  held  in 
April  last  at  the  house  of  Professor  Lord,  of  Columibia 
University.  Whilst  Eusapia’s  attention  was  momentarily 
diverted  two  extra  sitters  were  introduced,  who  placed 
themselves  flat  on  the  floor,  with  their  eyes  only  a 
few  inches  from  Eusapia’s  feet.  These  observers  were 
able  to  prove  that  at  this  particular  stance  the  whole 
of  the  movements  of  the  table,  the  bulging  of  the 
curtain,  and  the  movements  of  objects  in  the  cabinet 
were  produced  by  Eusapia’s  free  foot.  She  was 
enabled  to  free  a  foot  because  owing  to  the  narrow¬ 
ness  of  the  table  the  feet  of  the  controllers  were 
necessarily  very  close  together,  and  it  was  an  easy 
matter  for  Eusapia  to  make  one  foot  do  duty  for  two. 
The  whole  process  of  gradual  substitution  was  seen 
by  the  concealed  observers. ^ 

The  result  of  these  American  observations  is  to  con¬ 
firm  the  view  taken  in  the  foregoing  pages,  that  the 
whole  of  Eusapia’s  performances  can  be  explained  by 
the  time-honoured  device  of  substitution  of  foot  or 
hand. 

But  it  does  not  appear  that  Mr.  Carrington’s  faith 
in  Eusapia’s  supernormal  powers  is  seriously  shaken. 
How  should  it  be?.  i  | 

I  See  article  in  Collier^s  Weekly  (N.Y.),  May  14,  1910; 
and  the  New  York  Times,  May  12th  and  subsequent  dates. 

BOOK  II 

I 

THE  NATURE  OF  THE  PROBLEM 

The  problem  considered  in  the  preceding  book  was  a 
comparatively  simple  one.  Either  the  phenomena 
described  were  mere  conjuring  tricks,  eked  out  by  mis¬ 
representation  and  illusion,  or  they  are  a  proof  of 
some  supernormal  agency.  There  is  no  middle  course. 
That  on  the  former  alternative  the  authors  of  the 
conjuring  tricks  were  not  wholly  responsible  for  the 
fraud  involved  is  a  conceivable  hypothesis.  But  it 
is  one  with  which,  in  this  particular  field,  we  are  not 
directly  concerned,  since  it  can  have  no  bearing  upon 
the  nature  of  the  phenomena. 

But  in  the  region  which  we  are  now  about  to  enter 
the  problems  presented  to  us  are  much  more  complex  ; 
so  complex,  indeed,  that  there  seems  little  likelihood 
of  a  final  solution  being  attained  in  this  generation. 
And  the  question  of  fraud,  apart  altogether  from 
ethical  considerations,  assumes  considerable  import¬ 
ance.  I  should,  perhaps,  state  at  the  outset,  as 
emphatically  as  possible,  that  it  seems  to  me  incredible 
that  fraud  should  be  the  sole  explanation  of  the 
revelations  made  in  trance  and  automatic  writing.  No 
one  who  has  made  a  careful  study  of  the  records,  and 

10  W5 

146 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

is  sufficiently  free  from  prepossession  to  enable  him 
to  form  an  honest  opinion,  will  believe  that  any 
imaginable  exercise  of  fraudulent  ingenuity,  supple¬ 
mented  by  whatever  opportuneness  of  coincidence  and 
laxness  on  the  part  of  the  investigators,  could  con¬ 
ceivably  explain  the  whole  of  these  (communications. 
And  the  more  intimately  they  are  studied  the  more  the 
conviction  grows  that  we  must  assume  supernormal 
agency  of  one  kind  or  another.  In  what  follows,  then, 
I  shall  take  it  for  granted  that  fraud  is  not  the 
complete  explanation,. 

But  that  fraud — or  what  would  in  ordinary  circum¬ 
stances  be  called  fraud — plays  some  part  in  the  results 
I  do  not  doubt.  The  word  is  not  happily  chosen  ; 
play-acting  or  make-believe  would  more  nearly  express, 
in  typical  cases,  the  meaning  to  be  conveyed.  But  the 
nature  of  the  problem  will  become  clearer  as  the 
discussion  proceeds. 

To  understand  the  full  significance  of  anything  we 
must  trace  it  to  its  roots  ;  we  must  make  ourselves 
acquainted  with  its  history.  The  most  conspicuous 
example  in  modern  times  of  trance  revelations  is  (to 
be  found  in  the  writings  of  Emanuel  Swedenborg. 
But  Swedenborg’s  seership  was  an  isolated  phenomenon. 
He  had  no  immediate  successors.  For  practical 
purposes  trance  speaking  and  trance  writing  are  co¬ 
eval  with  mesmerism  and  the  induced  trance. 
Towards  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  in  the 
records  of  the  Societies  of  Harmony,  which  were 
founded  in  France  to  carry  on  the  work  of  Mesmer, 
we  find  accounts  of  mediums  who  spoke  in  the  trance 
words  which  were  recognised  by  the  bystanders  as 
proceeding  from  an  intelligence  not  that  of  the 

THE  NATURE  OF  THE  PROBLEM 

147 

speaker.  Throughout  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth 
century  trance  speakers  of  this  kind  were  common  in 
Germany.  The  physicians — enthusiastic  magnetists — 
who  observed  them  believed  that  their  entranced 
patients  were  possessed  or  inspired  by  spirits,  and  in 
that  conviction  cherished  all  their  utterances  with 
scrupulous  care.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that 
there  was  any  pretence  about  the  trance,  or  about 
the  impersonation  of  spirit  controls,  the  descrip¬ 
tions  of  journeys  to  the  moon,  the  planets,  or  heaven 
itself.  All  that  is  now  part  of  the  recognised  phantasy 
of  the  dream  consciousness. 

But  in  some  of  the  best-known  cases  the  trance 
utterances  were  accompanied  by  what  passed  for  tele¬ 
pathic  or  clairvoyant  visions,  and  in  one  noted  case, 
the  famous  Seeress  of  Prevorst,  by  various  physical 
phenomena.  I  have  tried  in  vain  to  find  in  the  records 
of  these  German  somnambules  any  telepathic  or 
clairvoyant  incidents  resting  on  fairly  good  evidence. 
They  may  have  been  genuine,  but  it  is  suspicious  that 
the  accidents  and  other  happenings  seen  by  the  clair¬ 
voyants  in  the  trance  mostly  concerned  members  of 
their  own  families.  The  physical  phenomena  in  the 
case  of  the  Seeress  of  Prevorst — throwing  of  gravel 
and  occasionally  candlesticks  and  boots — must,  in 
accordance  with  the  presumption  already  referred  to, 
be  taken  as  prim&  facie  evidence  of  fraud. 

But  a  trance  medium  is,  ex  hypothesi,  in  an 
abnormal  condition  ;  and  there  are  other  indications 
that  the  dissociation  of  consciousness  frequently  in¬ 
volves  impaired  moral  control.  In  using  the  word 
“  fraud,”  therefore,  in  this  connection  we  do  not  neces¬ 
sarily  imply  a  higher  degree  of  moral  responsibility 

148 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

than  when  we  pass  judgment  ori  the  play-acting  pf 
a  child.  Conjuring  tricks  and  sham  telepathy  seem 
to  be  merely  part  of  the  automatic  romance.* 

It  is  easy  to  recognise  the  probability  of  such  an 
explanation  in  the  case  of  Frau  Hauffe  and  other 
German  somnambules — sickly  neurotics  whose  psychical 
instability  was  accompanied  by,  or  perhaps  rather  based 
upon,  serious  physical  deficiencies  and  anomalies.  It 
is  more  difficult  to  apply  the  same  measure  to  the 
case  of  a  highly  educated  and  apparently  normal  and 
healthy  Englishman.  Stainton  Moses  was  aJ  graduate 
of  Oxford,  for  some  years  a  clergyman  of  the  Church 
of  England,  and  English  Master  in  University  College 
School.  In  the  prime  of  his  life  he  developed  into 
a  spirit  medium  of  the  most  advanced  kind.  He  wrote 
“  inspirational  ”  discourses  and  books,  and  delivered 
messages  purporting  to  come  from  the  dead.  Most 
of  his  clairvoyant  revelations  can  be  shown  to  be  re¬ 
productions  of  recent  obituary  notices  in  the  news¬ 
papers  and  other  published  material.  The  few 
instances  which  have  not  yet  been  traced  to  such 
readily  accessible  sources  cannot  be  certainly  relied 
upon  as  indicating  supernormal  faculty .2  But  Stain- 
ton  Moses  was  also  a  physical  medium.  In  his 
presence  brass  candlesticks,  Parian  statuettes,  flowers, 
and  seed  pearls  were  brought  into  the  darkened 
seance-room  ;  delicious  scents  oozed  from  the  medium’s 
head  ;  pencils  wrote  of  themselves  ;  spirit  lights  floated 
around  ;  the  strains  of  exquisite  spirit  music  would  be 

>  For  a  full  discussion  of  the  psychology  of  mediumship 
see  M.  Flournoy’s  “  Des  Indes  k  la  Planete  Mars.” 

2  See  an  analysis,  by  the  writer,  of  these  trance  revela¬ 
tions  in  “  Studies  in  Psychical  Research,”  pp.  125 — 33. 

THE  NATURE  OF  THE  PROBLEM 

149 

heard  ;  sometimes  the  medium  would  be  levitated  in 
the  darkness. 

Stainton  Moses  worked  under  conditions  entirely 
favourable  to  trickery,  in  complete  darkness,  unbound, 
without  tests  or  precautions  of  any  kind,  and  in  the 
midst  of  a  circle  of  confiding  friends — and  the  pheno¬ 
mena  were  generally  reported  by  himself.  ,We  should 
laugh  at  such  “  evidence  ”  in  the  case  of  a  profes¬ 
sional  medium.  If  it  is  still  thought  by  some  persons 
worthy  of  consideration  in  the  case  of  Stainton  Moses, 
it  is  because  of  the  difficulty  of  reconciling  the  elabo¬ 
rate  and  systematic  trickery  involved  with  the  character 
of  an  English  gentleman,  for  some  time  a  clergyman 
of  the  Established  Church. 

The  question  resolves  itself  into  the  weighing  of 
two  improbabilities.  But  until  Eusapia,  or  some  other, 
has  moved  the  smoke -blackened  balance,  or  depressed 
the  covered  manometer,  we  must  assume  that  the 
candlesticks  and  the  spirit  lights  were  brought  into 
the  stance-room  in  Moses’  pockets,  and  that  the  re¬ 
ported  levitations  were  due  to  cunning  suggestion 
acting  in  a  dark  room  on  a  trustful  audience.  Let  it 
be  noted,  however,  that  Stainton  Moses’  life  was  given 
up  to  the  propaganda  of  a  new  faith  :  and  if  our  view 
of  his  physical  phenomena  is  correct,  he  enforced  the 
lesson  of  inspirational  sermons  by  means  of  parlour 
conjuring  tricks  parading  as  miracles.  The  thing  in 
a  sane  man  is  incredible.  On  either  hypothesis  we 
have  to  assume  abnormality.  Either  Stainton  Moses 
was  gifted  with  abnormal  powers  as  a  physical 
medium,  or  he  presented  some  extraordinary  psycho¬ 
logical  abnormality  which  could  reconcile  inspired 
sermons  and  parlour  conjuring  tricks. 

150 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

The  case  of  Stainton  Moses  may  throw  some  light 
on,  and  in  turn  be  illuminated  by,  the  case  of  another 
clergyman,  who  appears  to  have  excited  the  admira¬ 
tion  of  his  friends  by  many  feats  of  pseudo¬ 
clairvoyance. 

The  Rev.  C.  B.  Sanders  was  a  Presbyterian  minister 
living  in  Alabama.  He  was  bom  in  1831,  the  seventh 
child  of  his  parents.  From  1854  to  1876  he  was 
subject  to  severe  nervous  attacks,  attended  with  con¬ 
siderable  pain  and  the  apparent  opening  of  the  main 
sutures  in  the  skull.  !(This  phenomenon,  though 
described  by  several  lay  witnesses,  is  not  attested  by 
his  medical  attendant,  who  gives  otherwise  a  full 
description  of  the  case.)  During  these  attacks  a 
secondary  personality,  accompanied  by  a  complete 
change  of  consciousness,  developed  itself.  This 
secondary  personality  assumed  the  title  of  X  +  Y  =  Z. 
The  thoughts  and  doings  of  X  +  Y  =  Z  were 
hidden  from  the  waking  Mr.  Sanders,  whilst 
X  +  Y  =  Z  had  complete  ktiowledge  of  his  primary 
personality.  X  +  Y  =  Z  soon  showed  himself  gifted 
with  remarkable  powers.  Some  of  his  feats — e.g., 
shooting  ducks  at  night,  which  were  invisible  to  his 
companions — could  probably  be  explained  by  hyper- 
assthesia  of  vision  ;  others — the  habitual  writing  of 
letters  and  sermons  with  his  hand  and  the  paper 
entirely  concealed  by  the  bedclothes — appear  to  point 
to  a  special  exaltation  of  the  muscular  sense.  But 
X  +  Y  =  Z  also  gave  numerous  demonstrations  of 
what  appears  to  have  been  genuine  telepathy.  On 
several  occasions  he  told  of  a  death  or  an  accident 
occurring  in  the  circle  of  his  acquaintance  hours  or 
days  before  the  news  reached  the  town  where  he  lived. 

THE  NATURE  OP  THE  PROBLEM 

151 

Two  of  thfee  cases,  out  of  many,  are  died  by  Mr. 
Myers  '(“Human  Personality,”  Vol.  II.,  pp.  566-9). 
The  witnesses  to  these  events  are  beyond  suspicion, 
the  evidence  is  clearly  given,  and  from  the  nature  of 
some  of  the  Cases  it  seems  improbable  that  there  could 
have  been  any  mistake  or  misrepresentation.  More¬ 
over,  the  published  instances,  themselves  selected,  as 
we  are  told,  out  of  much  larger  numbers,  are  fairly 
numerous.  It  seems  difficult  to  question  that  Mr. 
Sanders,  in  his  secondary  state,  was  gifted  not  only 
with  remarkable  extensions  of  the  ordinary  sensory 
faculties,  but  also  with  the  new  mode  of  perception 
which  has  been  named  telepathy.  But  there  are  some 
marvellous  occurrences  recorded  which  cannot  be  ex¬ 
plained  either  by  telepathy  or  by  any  extension  of 
the  known  senses.  They  are  concerned  with  the  find¬ 
ing  of  money  or  jewellery.  There  are  twelve  cases 
of  the  kind  recorded  in  the  book.* 

Thus,  on  one  occasion  Mr.  Sanders  was  driving  in 
a  carriage  with  two  ladies.  He  went  into  a  trance  and 
got  out  of  the  carriage,  attended  by  one  of  the  ladies, 
who  writes  :  1 

“  He  got  out  with  his  eyes  still  closed,  for  I  watched 
this  closely,  and,  counting  aloud  sixteen  steps,  stooped  down, 
caught  hold  of  the  hook  of  a  rather  heavy  gold  watch- 
chain,  and  drew  it  out  of  the  sand,  which  fell  from  the 
chain  as  he  drew  it  up.  My  eye  followed  his  hand  as  it 
stooped,  and  there  was  nothing  visible  to  me  till  he  drew 
the  chain  out  of  the  sand”  (p.  97). 

Three  other  instances  occurred  in  daylight  ;  in  the 
remaining  eight  cases  the  discovery  was  made  at  night. 

I  ‘‘X  +  Y  =  Z;  or,  the  Sleeping  Preacher  of  North 
Alabama,”  by  Rev.  G.  W.  Mitchell.  New  York,  1876. 

152 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

Thus,  about  eleven  o’clock  one  night  X  +  Y  =  Z  said 
he  saw  a  nickel  in  the  lot,  went  out  at  once,  walking 
very  fast,  attended  by  the  company,  and  was  seen  to 
pick  a  nickel  off  the  ground.  In  four  other  cases  Mr, 
Sanders  found  respectively  a  dollar,  a  ten-dollar  bill, 
a  five-dollar  bill,  and  one  old  dollar.  In  all  these 
cases  he  picked  up  the  articles  himself — at  night.  In 
three  cases  he  led  his  friends  out  at  night,  and  indi¬ 
cated  a  plot  of  ground  on  which  a  coin  would  be 
found.  In  three  cases  only  out  of  twelve  does  it  appear 
that  the  object  “  found  ”  had  ever  been  lost  ;  and  yet 
one  would  scarcely  suppose  that  the  soil  of  a  rural 
township  in  America  would  be  so  thickly  sown  with 
casual  currency.*  ! 

The  clairvoyance  of  X  -f  Y  =  Z  was  exclusively 
directed  to  finding  “  lost  ”  objects  of  this  kind,  always 
jewels  or  money  or  other  small  articles  of  value,  and 
generally  in  the  dark.  In  no  one  of  the  twelve  recorded 
instances  is  there  any  serious  difficulty  in  the  suppo¬ 
sition  that  X  +  Y  =  Z  had  himself  placed  the  article 
where  it  was  eventually  found.  There  can  be  no 
reasonable  doubt  that  this  was  in  fact  the  case.  For 
there  is  no  evidence  worth  considering  for  “  clair¬ 
voyance  ”  of  this  kind.  There  are  also  several 
analogous  incidents  in  X  +  Y  =  Z’s  experiences  of 
apparently  manufactured  telepathy. 

In  short,  we  have  here  the  case  of  a  man  who  passed 
a  considerable  part  of  his  adult  life  in  a  state  of 
abnormal  consciousness,  and  in  that  state  appears  to 
have  given  proof  of  genuine  supernormal  powers,  and 

I  In  each  of  the  three  cases  referred  to  it  seems  possible, 
or  even  probable,  that  X  +  Y  =  Z  was  responsible  for  the 
loss  as  well  as  the  recovery  of  the  article. 

THE  NATURE  OF  THE  PROBLEM  153 

unquestionably  supplemented  his  genuine  gifts  by 
trickery  of  an  obvious,  even  childlike  kind.  That  his 
trickery  escaped  detection — or  even  suspicion — was,  of 
course,  due  to  the  high  character  of  the  waking  Mr. 
Sanders,  whom  his  friends  knew. 

The  whole  subject  is  too  novel  and  obscure  to 
permit  us  to  express  a  decided  opinion.  But  it  seems 
probable  that  his  friends  were  justified,  and  that  Mr. 
Sanders  in  his  normal  condition  was  not  responsible 
— certainly  not  fully  responsible — for  the  puerile 
chicanery  of  his  other  self. 

Yet  another  illustration  of  an  apparent  mixture  of 
genuine  supernormal  faculty  with  what  might  be  inter¬ 
preted  as  trickery  will  perhaps  throw  further  light 
upon  the  problem.  In  the  case  to  be  quoted  the  nature 
of  .the  “  trickery  ”  proves  it  to  have  been  automatic. 
Alexis  Didier  was  a  well-known  professional  clair¬ 
voyant  of  the  middle  decades  of  last  century.  His 
feats  were  attested  by  Elliotson,  Townshend,  Newn- 
ham,  and  many  other  mesmerists  and  magnetists  of 
this  country  and  in  France.  The  most  remarkable 
things  told  of  him  are  the  reading  of  words  or  descrip¬ 
tions  of  articles  in  closed  packets  and  the  descriptions 
of  distant  scenes.  Many  of  these  feats  are  so  pre¬ 
cisely  recorded  and  so  well  authenticated  that  it  is 
difficult  to  doubt  their  genuineness.  They  stand  pn 
the  same  evidential  level  as  many  of  the  similar  inci¬ 
dents  recorded  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.' 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  Alexis  was  gifted 

*  See  especially  the  cases  described  in  the  Zoist,  vol.  ii. 
p.  517,  vol.  vi.  p.  418,  vol.  ix.  p.  403,  vol.  xi.  p.  75 
(Adolphe  Didier),  and  the  numerous  instances  recorded  in 
Dr.  Lee’s  “  Animal  Magnetism,”  1866. 

154 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

with  genuine  telepathic  powers  of  a  remarkable  kind. 
But  his  performances  also  included  feats  such  as  play¬ 
ing  cards  face  downwards  and  reading  with  eyes  band- 
agedj  which  resembled  closely  the  ordinary  trick  per¬ 
formances  of  pseudo -clairvoyants.  For  a  long  time  I 
found  these  questionable  performances  an  insuperable 
bar  to  accepting  the  testimony,  otherwise  difficult  to  set 
aside,  for  his  exercise  of  telepathy.  But  recently  I  haVei 
come  across  an  interesting  proof  that  Alexis  was  really 
in  an  abnormal  state  of  consciousness  during  these 
dubious  performances,  and  that,  though  his  success  was 
no  doubt  due  to  the  exercise  of  his  normal  senses, 
he  was  probably  not  himself  conscious  of  any  deception 
in  the  matter. 

One  of  the  most  puzzling  of  Alexis’  feats  was  the 
reading  in  a  closed  book.  The  performance  was 
witnessed  by  the  celebrated  conjurer  Houdin,  who  paid 
Alexis  two  visits,  and  went  away  completely  baffled. 
The  feat  was  generally  performed  as  follows  :  a;  book 
would  be  handed  to  Alexis,  who  would  himself  open 
it,  holding  it  upright  with  the  edges  of  the  pages 
towards  him,  and  rapidly  turning  the  leaves  over  until 
he  reached  a  particular  page,  and  opened  the  book  flat. 
A  particular  part  of  the  open  page  would  then  be 
chosen,  sometimes  by  Alexis,  sometimes  apparently 
by  the  spectators,  and  Alexis  would  then  read  a  few 
words  which  would  be  subsequently  found  at  a  corre¬ 
sponding  place  some  pages  below.  It  is  clear  that, 
under  the  conditions  described,  we  can  never  eliminate 
the  possibility  that  Alexis,  in  rapidly  turning  the  open 
leaves,  caught  a  glimpse  of  words  and  sentences  in 
some  part  of  the  book,  and  that  he  simply  reproduced 
what  he  had  seen.  That  so  simple  an  explanation  did 

THE  NATURE  OF  THE  PROBLEM  155 

not  suggest  itself  to  Houdin  and  other  skilled  obseryers 
would  seem  to  indicate  that  Alexis’  powers  of  vision 
were  preternormally  acute — acute  to  a  degree  probably 
in  excess  of  what  deliberate  training  would  produce. 

That  Alexis  was  not  in  a  normal  condition — that 
he  was,  in  fact,  acting  automatically  at  the  time — is 
proved  by  one  little  detail,  a  detail  seemingly  so  in¬ 
significant  that  it  escaped  the  notice,  or  at  least  the 
record,  of  almost  all  the  contemporary  observers. 
Alexis  did  not,  as  a  rule — at  any  rate  in  his  later 
sittings — speak  the  words  at  all.  He  preferred  to  write 
them.'  In  this  one  point  lies  the  proof  that  [Alexis 
was  an  automatist  and  not  simply  a  conjurer. 

A  man  in  full  possession  of  his  normal  faculties, 
consciously  striving  to  reproduce  an  elusive  memory, 

'  The  accounts  given  by  Elliotson  and  others  of  the 
stances  with  Alexis  in  1844  are  much  condensed.  They 
were  mostly  too  much  preoccupied  with  the  marvellous  side 
of  the  programme  to  record  small — and  to  them  insignifi¬ 
cant — details.  And  even  Sir  John  Forbes  and  other  critical 
witnesses  do  not  mention  the  circumstance.  It  is,  however, 
stated  on  two  occasions  in  the  reports  of  1844  that  Alexis 
wrote  the  words,  and  he  may  have  done  so  generally.  But 
Dr.  Lee,  who  gives  a  detailed  account  of  thirteen  stances 
with  Alexis  in  1849  (“  Animal  Magnetism,”  1866),  specially 
mentions  the  writing.  In  eleven  out  of  nineteen  trials  of 
reading  several  pages  in  advance,  the  words — in  each  case 
several  words — are  recorded  as  having  been  written  down  ; 
in  three  cases  the  report  leaves  it  uncertain  whether  they 
were  written  or  spoken  ;  in  five  instances  they  were  spoken. 
But  in  four  out  of  the  five  spoken  tests  the  test  was 
offered  by  Alexis,  instead  of  being  chosen  by  the  spectators, 
and  consisted  of  a  single  word  only,  e.g.,  “  Here  is  a 
curious  word  under  my  pencil.”  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that 
Alexis  preferred  writing,  unless  he  was  quite  sure  of  his 
accuracy.  In  the  nineteen  cases  there  were  only  three 
failures  :  one  written,  one  spoken,  one  indeterminate. 

156 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

would  naturally  speak  rather  than  write,  as  involvingi 
less  effort  :  the  mere  act  of  writing  would  tend  to 
distract  him.  And  a  conjurer  would  unquestionably 
prefer  speech  to  writing  :  liter  a  scripta  manet — it  js 
much  easier  to  confuse  the  issues  and  disguise  a  bad 
shot  when  it  is  a  question  of  spoken  words  only.  But 
just  as  inevitably  as  the  normal  man  would  prefer 
speech  to  writing,  the  automatist  would  prefer  writing 
to  speech.  Automatic  writing  is  much  commoner  than 
automatic  speech  ;  it  involves  much  slighter  dissocia¬ 
tion  of  consciousness,  and  is  apparently  a  much  more 
delicate  and  reliable  method  for  interpreting  the  faint 
echoes  of  subconscious  perception.  It  seems  practi¬ 
cally  certain,  then,  that  Alexis  was  an  automatic  writer, 
and  that  his  feats  of  clairvoyance  were  so  far  genuine 
that  they  involved  no  conscious  deception  on  his  part. 

These  historical  parallels  suggest  that  we  should 
never  be  justified,  in  the  case  of  a  trance  automatist, 
in  excluding  a  normal  explanation — even  though  this 
should  involve  apparent  dishonesty — for  any  revelations 
given  by  automatic  writing  or  speech.  In  the  case 
just  quoted  it  seems  probable  that  the  dishonesty  was 
only  apparent.  Alexis  may  well  have  been  quite  un¬ 
conscious  of  the  channel  through  which  he  derived  his 
information.  It  is  possible  that  we  may  be  justified 
in  taking  an  equally  charitable  view  of  the  perform¬ 
ances  of  X  +  Y  =  Z,  and  that  the  right  hand  of  Mr. 
Stainton  Moses  may  not  have  known  what  the  left  hand 
was  doing. 

In  this  connection  it  should  be  recorded  thaf  most 
clairvoyants  qf  note  since  1848  have  at  one  time  or 
another  exhibited  physical  phenomena,  if  only  to  the 
extent  of  rapping  and  movements  of  the  table,  as  part 

THE  NATURE  OF  THE  PROBLEM 

157 

of  their  mediumistic  gifts.  This  is  true  not  only  of 
the  professional  mediums,  but  of  some  of  the  chief 
private  clairvoyants  and  ^.utomatists,  who  have  placed 
their  services  gratuitously  at  the  disposal  of  the  Society 
for  Psychical  Research,  and  whose  powers  of  super¬ 
normal  perception  seem  beyond  question.  Sometimes 
the  physical  phenomena,  as  in  the  case  of  Mrs. 
Thompson,  considered  in  Chapter  III.,  have  been  re¬ 
corded  without  the  name  of  the  medium  ;  generally 
they  have  taken  place  only  in  the  family  circle,  or 
amongst  intimate  friends,  and  have  escaped  public 
record.  But  the  fact  remains  that  prior  to  1902  there 
are  few  automatists  of  importance  who  do  not  voyage 
in  the  same  boat  with  Home  and  Eusapia  Palladino.’ 
For,  as  the  case  stands,  it  may  fairly  be  claimed  that 
the  occurrence  of  physical  phenomena  is  primd  facie 
evidence  of — I  had  almost  written  fraud,  but  the  word 
does  not  fit  the  facts — the  production  of  things  which 
are  not  what  they  seem. 

Now,  there  are  several  indications  in  the  trance 
utterances  of  Mrs.  Thompson,  and  some  in  those  of 
Mrs.  Piper,  of  a  process  for  which  fraud  would  seem 
too  harsh  a  name.  Make-believe,  or  economy  of  the 
supernormal,  would  better  fit  the  facts.  Dr.  Richard 
Hodgson,  who  observed  some  suspicious  circumstances 
in  the  case  of  six  sittings  with  the  former  lady,  formed 

•  It  should  be  explained  that  the  remarks  in  the  text 
apply  chiefly  to  automatists  who  pass  into  a  trance  or 
other  abnormal  state.  Where  there  is  only  slight  dissocia¬ 
tion,  as  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Verrall  and  other  more  recently 
developed  automatists  who  appear  to  retain  their  normal 
consciousness  during  the  act  of  automatic  writing,  past 
experience  does  not,  so  far  as  I  know,  furnish  grounds  for 
anticipating  these  suspicious  developments. 

158 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

an  altogether  unfavourable  opinion  of  her  powers .  The 
circumstances  remain  suspicious,  but  those  who  have 
given  most  study  to  the  subject  do  not  endorse  Dr. 
Hodgson’s  opinion.  Briefly,  Dr.  Hodgson  found  that 
the  names  and  other  correct  information  given  at  these 
six  stances  could  have  been  derived  from  some  letters 
placed  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  hand,  or  otherwise  acces¬ 
sible  to  her  during  the  seance,  and  that  most  of  the 
incorrect  information  betrayed  erroneous,  but  plausible, 
deductions  from  passages  in  those  letters.  I  see  no 
difficulty  in  agreeing  with  Dr.  Hodgson  that  Mrs. 
Thompson  had  probably  read  the  letters.  But  his  con¬ 
clusion  that  therefore  Mrs.  Thompson  is  untrustworthy 
seems  to  me  to  go  beyond  the  warrant  of  the  facts.* 
Miss  Johnson,  in  the  same  volume  (p.  163)  records  an 
instance  in  which  Mrs.  Thompson  apparently  derived 
some  information  from  an  address  written  on  a  post¬ 
card  which  had  been  handed  to  her  inside  an  ppen 
envelope.  Miss  Johnson’s  impression,  however,  was 
that  Mrs.  Thompson  was  not  conscious  of  having  seen 
the  address,  and  did  not  realise  the  source  of  her 
knowledge.  On  this  supposition  she  would  be  in  the 
same  position  as  Alexis  Didier.2 

Mrs.  Verrall  notes  that  the  only  letter  which  was 
satisfactorily  read  in  the  course  of  twenty-two  sittings 
with  Mrs.  Thompson  happened  to  have  been  left  jn 

*  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  138 — 61. 

2  .We  know  from  Mrs.  Verrall’s  observations,  and  from 
the  experiments  with  a  magnet  made  by  Messrs.  Jastrow 
and  Nuttall,  that  when  the  sensory  indications  are  extremely 
faint,  the  percipient  cannot  always  determine  through  which 
particular  channel  he  gains  his  information,  and  may  repre¬ 
sent  it  to  himself  through  inappropriate  sensory  images. 
Thus,  Messrs.  Jastrow  and  Nuttall  occasionally  knew  whether 

THE  NATURE  OF  THE  PROBLEM 

159 

a  cupboard  in  her  writing-fable  for  a  period  of  three- 
quarters  of  an  hour  when  Mrs.  Thompson  was  alone 
in  the  house  with  the  servants.’  Again,  after  the  first 
sitting  with  Miss  Jane  Harrison,  when  Mrs.  Thompson 
had  probably  learnt  the  identity  of  her  sitter,  seven 
correct  names  were  given,  all  of  which  could  have 
been  found  in  “  Who’s  Who. ”2  Again,  Mrs.  Thompson 
in  the  trance  gave  the  name,  age,  and  place  of  burial 
of  a  lady  dead  half  a;  century  before,  correctly  indi¬ 
cated  her  relationship  to  a  former  acquaintance,  and 
stated  that  the  death  had  come  after  great  suffering. 
Precisely  these  five  details  were  found  recorded  in  an 
old  diary  unearthed  in  a  cupboard  in  Mr.  Thompson’s 
house.  Mrs.  Thompson  herself  found  and  showed  the 
diary  to  Mr.  Piddington,  at  the  same  time  stating  that 
she  had  never  seen  it  before  .3  In  all  these  cases  it 
may  be  assumed,  without  casting  reflections  on  Mrs. 
Thompson’s  honesty,  that  the  knowledge  displayed  in 
the  trance  came  from  normal  sources. 

There  are  comparatively  few  instances  in  which  there 
is  reason  to  suppose  that  Mrs.  Piper  may  have  owed  her 
information  to  analogous  sources.  Much  stricter  pre¬ 
cautions  have  been  taken,  as  a  rule,  in  her  case,  to  close 
all  normal  avenues.  And  it  has  not  been  the  practice 

the  current  was  “  on  ”  or  "  off  ”  without  realising  that  their 
knowledge  was  derived  from  very  faint  sounds  {Pro¬ 
ceedings  of  the  American  S.P.R.,  pp.  322 — 6  ;  old  series). 
Mrs.  Verrall  saw  the  images  of  cards  in  which  she  had 
only  felt  the  surfaces  with  her  thumbs  {Pjoceedings  S.P.R., 
vol.  xi.  p.  176). 

’  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xvii.  p.  205. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  209. 

3  Ibid.,  vol.  xviii.  ppu  268,  269.  See  also  p.  284  for 
another  case  of  information  obtained  from  a  letter. 

160 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

so  frequently  as  with  Mrs.  Thompson  to  hand  letters 
to  Mrs.  Piper.  But  there  are  a  few  recorded  instances 
which  seem  to  suggest  recourse  to  outside  sources. 
These  instances  appear  to  have  been  more  frequent  in 
her  early  stances.  Thus,  when  the  Rev.  Robert  West 
professed  to  communicate  through  her  he  gave  his  full 
name,  the  place  of  his  burial,  and  the  text  on  his 
tombstone.  A’  lad  called  Guernsey,  who  had  been 
drowned  in  Lake  Pepin  some  years  previously,  fur¬ 
nished  some  particulars  of  the  accident  ;  the  spirit  of 
Gracie  X.  was  accurately  described  in  the  dress  (in 
which  she  was  portrayed  in  a  life-size  statue  on  her 
tombstone.  In  all  these  cases  many  correct  particu¬ 
lars  were  given,  including  names  of  persons  and  of 
places — of  which  Mrs.  Piper,  as  a  rule,  is  somewhat 
grudging — which  could  have  been  obtained  from  news¬ 
papers  and  cemeteries,  but  the  information  was  con¬ 
fused  and  inaccurate,  suggesting  rather  imperfect  re¬ 
miniscences  of  information  casually  acquired  than  the 
deliberate  getting  up  of  a  case.*  I  am  not  aware  that 
many  cases  of  this  kind  have  been  observed  of  recent 
years . 

But  a  curious  incident  occurred  at  one  of  Professor 
Hyslop’s  seances,  which  is  strongly  suggestive.  Pro¬ 
fessor  Hyslop  had  an  uncle,  James  McClellan,  whose 
father  was  named  John.  James  McClellan  purported 
to  communicate  through  Mrs.  Piper,  talked  of  John 
McClellan,  and  mentioned  his  going  to  the  war  and 
losing  a  finger  there.  These  two  statements  were  not 
true  of  John  McClellan,  the  father  of  James.  But  they 
were  true  of  another  John  McClellan,  no  connection  of 
Professor  Hyslop’s,  who  had  lived  within  a  few  miles 

*  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  35 — 43. 

THE  NATURE  OF  THE  PROBLEM 

161 

of  John,  the  father  of  James  ;  and  this  other  John 
McClellan  is  mentioned  in  the  published  history  of 
the  county.* 

Amongst  recent  communications  from  the  entranced 
Mrs.  Piper  the  attempts  at  translating  the  Latin 
message — to  be  discussed  later — point  most  strongly 
to  what  may  be  called  illegitimate  sources  of  informa¬ 
tion.  As  will  be  seen,  the  translations  given  in  the 
trance  are  difficult  to  reconcile  either  with  the  theory 
of  communication  from  the  dead  or  that  of  telepathy 
from  the  living.  Another  suspicious  incident  is  the 
mistranslation  of  mori.'^ 

To  sum  up.  The  presumption  of  honesty  based 
upon  the  character  and  conduct  of  waking  life 
counts  for  nothing  in  the  case  of  a  medium  who 
is  liable  to  pass  into  spontaneous  trances.  For 
the  upper  consciousness,  the  primary  personality, 
the  real  self,  the  man  or  woman  whom  we  know 
and  regard  as  ai  friend,  who  lives  a  sane  and 
:healthy  life  amongst  men  and  women  like  him¬ 
self,  who  does  his  day’s  work  and  fulfils  his  social 
duties — this  familiar  person  is  not  responsible  for  the 
words  spoken  by  his  mouth  or  for  the  writing  pro¬ 
duced  by  his  hand  in  the  trance.  iWriting  and  speech 
alike  are  the  work  of  some  other  intelligence.  In 
most  cases  that  other  intelligence  is  unquestionably 
of  the  same  substance  as  the  primary  consciousness — 
it  is  either  a  maimed  and  mutilated  form  of  it  or  an 
allotropic  modification  of  it. 

Nevertheless,  in  this  secondary  self — or  personified 
subconsciousness — which  we  have  learnt  to  know  pot 

*  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xvi.  pp.  110,  470,  535. 

2  See  below.  Chapter  V.,  the  Sevens  incident. 

11 

162 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

merely  through  the  revelations  of  the  stance-room,  but 
from  the  careful  studies  of  many  French,  German,  and 
American  physicians,  we  have  to  deal  with  a  being  of 
marked  characteristics,  which  display  a  curious  uni¬ 
formity,  notwithstanding  the  numerous  diversities 
between  the  primary  selves  of  the  subjects.  To  begin 
with,  the  trance  personality  is  commonly  non-moral, 
in  the  sense  that  many  children  and  some  savages 
are  non-moral.  It  knows  little  of  the  respect  felt 
by  the  civilised  adult  for  the  thing  that  is,  and  still 
less  for  the  thing  that  ought  to  be.  It  has  few  scruples. 
It  shows  little  desire,  perhaps  has  little  aptitude,  for 
distinguishing  between  fact  and  fiction-i;  it  has  a  child¬ 
like  zest  for  make-believe,  a  childlike  spontaneity  of 
dramatic  faculty,  and  uses  whatever  material  it  can 
find,  or  invent,  to  support  its  self-suggested  phan¬ 
tasies.  It  presents  us,  in  a  word,  with  the  supreme 
example  of  art  for  art’s  sake.  Its  motive  force,  again, 
seems  to  be  a  childlike  vanity  which  will  not  permit 
it  to  say,  “  I  don’t  know,”  but  prefers  any  kind  of 
disingenuous  evasion  to  a  pldin  confession  of  ignorance. 
Again,  this  dream  self  which  wakens  when  the  true  self 
is  asleep  has  some  of  its  faculties  very  much  alive. 
It  frequently  shows  an  abnormal  cunning  in  fishing  for 
information,  and  marvellous  ingenuity  in  piecing 
together  the  scraps  so  gained.  To  this  must  be  added 
that  in  many  cases  we  have  in  the  utterances  of  the 
secondary  self  proof,  which  it  is  almost  impossible  to 
gainsay,  of  a  faculty  by  which  this  uncanny  monster 
can  on  occasion  read  the  secret  thoughts  of  those  who 
consult  her  as  an  oracle. 

It  is  not  merely  possible,  then,  that  a  trance  medium 
will,  when  opportunity  serves,  avail  himself  of  any 

THE  NATURE  OF  THE  PROBLEM 

163 

normal  means  to  achieve  the  end  aimed  at  by  the 
entranced  intelligence  ;  historical  precedents  indicate 
that  it  is  probable  that  he  will  do  so.  And  the  lives 
of  Stainton  Moses  and  X  +  Y  =  Z  show  us  that  an 
automatist  may  habitually  employ  what  in  other  circum¬ 
stances  would  be  called  dishonest  methods  in  order  to 
impress  his  friends  with  a  belief  in  his  marvellous 
powers  ;  may  all  the  time  escape  detection  in  making 
the  necessary  preparations  ;  and  may  thus  continue  to 
enjoy,  and  possibly  to  deserve,  an  unblemished  repu¬ 
tation  in  his  normal  life. 

CHAPTER  II 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  PIPER 

Mrs.  Piper,  as  already  indicated,  is  a  trance  medium, 
who  has  lived  for  many  years  in  Boston,  U.S.A.  The 
main  outlines  of  her  psychical  history  are  as 
follows  :  In  1884,  as  a  young  woman,  she  con¬ 
sulted  for  some  ailment  a  professional  clairvoyant 
named  Dr.  Cocke.  At  her  second  visit  to  Dr. 
Cocke  Mrs.  Piper  herself  became  entranced,  and  was 
thereafter  controlled  by  a  large  number  of  “  spirits  ” 
— an  Indian  girl  named  Chlorine,  Mrs.  Siddons, 
Bach,  Longfellow,  Commodore  Vanderbilt,  Loretta 
Ponchini,  and  a  French  doctor  named  Phinuit.  In 
the  following  year,  when  Mrs.  Piper  first  came  under 
the  observation  of  Professor  James  and  other  members 
of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Phinuit  had 
obtained  almost  exclusive  control,  a  position  he  re¬ 
tained  until  1896,  when,  as  will  hereafter  be  related, 
he  was  ousted  by  a  band  of  superior  spirits  .under 
the  guidance  of  Imperator.  Since  1885  Mrs.  Piper 
has  been  under  the  almost  continuous  observation  and 
supervision  of  members  of  the  Society  for  Psychical 
Research.  Dr.  Hodgson  assumed  entire  charge  of  her 
sittings  until  his  death  in  December,  1905.  Since 
that  date  the  arrangements  generally  have  been  in  the 
hands  of  the  English  or  American  Societies  for 
Psychical  Research.  Mrs.  Piper  visited  this  country 

164 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  PIPER  165 

in  1889-90,  and  gave  numerous  sittings,  under  the 
direction  of  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Sir  O.  Lodge,  and  Dr. 
Walter  Leaf.  The  general  character  of  her  trance 
utterances  is  too  well  known  to  call  for  detailed 
description. 

The  following  account  of  two  seances,  not  conspicu¬ 
ously  better  than  many  other  stances  at  this  period, 
will  give  a  fair  idea  of  their  nature.  Mrs.  A.,  the 
sitter  in  the  first  case,  was  on  a  brief  visit  at  Cambridge 
to  her  sister,  Mrs.  B.  The  brother,  whose  “  funny 
arm  ”  is  described,  is  a  literary  man,  distinguished 
rather  than  well  known,  and  it  is  improbable  that  Mrs. 
Piper  had  ever  heard  of  him,  and  practically  impossible 
that  by  normal  means  she  should  have  known  of  his 
relationship  to  the  sister,  whose  visit  was  both  incognito 
and  impromptu. 

Mrs.  A.  had  come  to  call  at  Mr.  Myers’  house  on 
the  morning  of  November  24,  1888.  She  was  intro¬ 
duced  to  Mrs.  Piper  and  taken  upstairs  to  sit  in  a  few 
minutes.  It  is  therefore  in  the  highest  degree  im¬ 
probable  that  Mrs.  Piper  could  have  had  any  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  learning  anything  about  her  beforehand.  She 
was,  of  course  introduced  under  another  name  than 
her  jown.  The  following  notes  were  taken  by  Mr. 
Myers  : 

I  see  a  sister  ...  in  the  body.  She  has  not  been  well  ; 
has  changed  her  surroundings. 

[The  name  given  was  an  approach  to  the  right  name  of 
one  sister,  which  was  afterwards  given  correctly.  It  is, 
however,  not  correct  to  say  that  the  sister  in  question 
has  “changed  her  surroundings.”] 

I  see  Jessie  Poder  [?].  [Not  recognised.] 

You  have  three  sisters  and  two  brothers  in  the  body  ;  an 
elderly  gentleman  in  the  spirit,  your  father.  [Right.] 

One  of  your  brothers  has  a  funny  arm,  the  right  arm 

166 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

paralysed  ;  very  funny  [points  to  a  place  a  little  above 
the  elbow  on  inside  of  arm].  That  is  sore;  it  is  lame. 
It  is  on  the  cord  and  hurts  him,  troubles  him  a  good  deal. 
I  think  I  could  help  him.  It  has  been  coming  some  time. 
He  can’t  use  his  arm  ;  it  aches.  He  is  a  smart  fellow 
and  could  do  a  great  deal  of  good  if  he  could  use  his 
arm.  Show  me  some  article  belonging  to  him.  The  lump 
keeps  growing.  He  is  a  nice  fellow  and  has  done  a  great 
deal  of  good.  He  will  do  more  if  he  can  use  his  arm. 
I  can’t  see  the  future  about  that. 

[This  is  a  correct  description  of  Mrs.  A.’s  eldest  brother, 
who  suffers  from  writer’s  cramp,  which  seriously  hinders 
him  in  his  profession.  There  is  a  lump  on  the  arm  which 
gives  him  pain  ;  but  it  is  significant  that  it  is,  in  fact, 
below  the  elbow,  not  above  it.  But  Mrs.  A.  at  the  time 
believed  it  to  be  above  the  elbow,  as  it  was  described  to 
her.  ] 

A  spirit  (Joseph)  comes  near  to  you  ;  an  uncle  on  the 
father’s  side.  [Not  recognised.] 

Timothy  is  the  nearest  spirit  you  have  got  to  you  ; 
some  call  him  Tim  ;  he  is  your  father.  Timothy  was 
your  grandfather  also.  Your  father  tells  me  about  S.  W. 
Stay,  I  can’t  get  that,  I  must  wait.  Your  mother  had 
trouble  in  the  stomach  ;  she  is  in  the  spirit -world.  Your 
father  had  trouble  in  heart  and  head.  Myers’  father  passed 
away  from  disease  to  the  heart. 

[Except  the  allusion  to  “  S.  W.,”  which  is  not  recog¬ 
nisable,  the  above  is  all  true,  if  the  “  trouble  in  heart 
and  head  ”  be  taken  to  refer  to  Mr.  Myers’  father,  as  seems 
to  be  intended.] 

I  see  Laurie,  Lausia.  [Not  recognised.] 

You  have  a  brother  Jim,  James,  in  the  body.  He  is  so 
funny  ;  it  is  hard  to  get  at  him.  He  is  kind  of  stubborn, 
self-willed.  A  little  quiet  influence  manages  him,  but  he  is 
wilful  if  pushed.  He  comes  with  the  same  influence  as 
your  father. 

[This  is  a  true  description  of  Mrs.  A.’s  second  brother. 
Mr.  Myers  now  asked  what  ^the  father  Timothy  was  interested 
in  ;  what  kind  of  things  he  did  in  earth  life,  or  cared 
for  now.] 

He  is  interested  in  the  Bible — a  clergyman.  He  used  to 
preach.  He  has  a  Bible  with  him,  he  goes  on  reading  and 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  PIPER  167 

advancing.  He  is  living  with  your  mother  just  the  same 
as  on  earth.  He  has  been  in  the  spirit-world  longer  than 
she  has.  Your  mother  is  a  little  nervous.  I  can’t  get  her 
to  come  near.  Your  father  has  a  solemn,  graceful  manner, 
as  he  had  on  earth.  He  had  trouble  with  his  throat — 
irritation  [points  to  bronchial  tubes].  The  boys  used  to 
call  him  Tim  at  college. 

[The  above  statements  are  all  correct,  so  far  as  they  can 
be  verified.] 

Howell,  a  friend  of  his,  has  passed  over.  [Not  known.] 

This  is  the  first  time  your  father  has  spoken  to  you  since 
he  passed  out.  You  may  hear  footsteps.  You  do  a  great 
deal  of  work.  Sometimes  you  get  a  little  blue  and 
depressed.  You  exercise  your  body.  Do  you  like  that 
picture  of  your  father  in  the  hall  ?  [here  confused  as  to 
whether  oil  or  crayon;  not  photograph].  He  has  a  high 
collar  and  a  garb  partly  white  ;  white  in  front,  round  neck, 
like  a  high  collar,  and  dark  waistcoat.  He  has  a  prominent 
nose,  his  eyes  very  clear  and  grey,  bluish  grey  ;  a  good-sized 
man.  [Here  confused  talk  as  to  colour  of  eyes.  Dr.  P.  says 
he  is  not  good  at  colours,  and  shuffles  about.]  Brownish 
grey,  hazel  ;  your  eyes  are  lighter  than  his.  He  has 
a  firm  expression  round  the  mouth,  a  determined  expression. 

[The  account  of  the  portrait  is  not  very  satisfactory  ; 
but  it  is  true  that  there  is  a  large  oil  portrait  of  him  in 
Mrs.  A.’s  sisters’  house  in  ecclesiastical  garb,  something 
as  stated.  His  eyes  were  brown.] 

Then  followed  immediately  the  names  of  five  persons 
and  a  description  of  a  sixth,  none  of  which  were  recog¬ 
nised.  No  other  incorrect  names  were  given.  After 
this  the  name  of  the  mother  and  the  names  of  two 
sisters  were  correctly  given.  The  sitter’s  own  name 
was  given  nearly,  but  not  quite,  correctly,  and  she  was 
identified  as  the  daughter  of  her  mother,  but  not  as 
being  present.  Some  description  of  the  grandchildren 
was  given,  partially  correct,  but  showing  some  con¬ 
fusion.  Other  statements  about  illness,  &'c.,  of  other 
members  of  the  family  were  partly  true  and  partly 
false.* 

*  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  581 — 3. 

168 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

It  will  be  seen  that  there  were  several  names  un¬ 
recognised  and  some  untrue,  irrelevant,  confused,  or, 
unverified  statements,  but  the  names  of  the  brother, 
father,  grandfather,  and  mother  were  all  given  correctly 
and  without  any  fishing  or  ambiguity,  and  were  assigned 
definitely  to  their  proper  owners,  living  or  dead.  The 
names  of  the  sisters  and  the  sitter’s  own  name  were 
given  after  some  hesitation  and  inefiectual  attempts  ; 
but  the  number  of  definite,  true  statements  puts  the 
question  of  chance  guessing  wholly  out  of  court. 

In  the  next  case  also  the  sitter,  Mr.  Harlowi  Gale, 
was  a  stranger,  introduced  anonymously  and  unex¬ 
pectedly,  and  in  a  way  which  made  it  certain  that 
information  could  not  have  been  got  up  beforehand 
about  him.  The  sitting  took  place  at  Professor 
Sidgwick’s  house  at  Cambridge,  on  January  22,  1890. 
Mrs.  Sidgwick  was  present  and  took  full  notes,  from 
which  the  following  account  is  summarised  : 

The  sitting  was  chiefly  occupied  with  a  description 
of  different  members  of  Mr.  Gale’s  family,  which  he 
recognised  as  strikingly  accurate.  The  following  are 
the  most  important  points  : 

What  is  that  thing  your  father  wears  over  his  shoulders? 
He  looks  quite  important  in  it.  He  wears  it  because  of 
his  throat.  He  is  in  a  different  place  from  here. 

[Mr.  Gale  says  that  the  most  noticeable  point  in  his 
father’s  appearance  is  a  white  silk  handkerchief  which  he 
wears  because  of  a  sensitiveness  of  his  throat.  He  lives 
in  Minnesota.] 

lYour  father  is  a  queer  genius — dreamy.  He  does  not  do 
much  ;  he  leaves  that  to  some  one  else.  He  has  an  office, 
a  desk,  books,  &c.  His  peculiarities  strike  me  very  much. 

[Mr.  Gale  says  that  this  is  all  right,  as  far  as  it  goes.] 

William,  a  brother.  He  is  small,  a  bright  little  fellow, 
dark  eyes,  clear  complexion,  a  pretty  fellow,  smart  as  a 
cricket. 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  PIPER  169 

[Mr.  Gale  says  that  this  is  a  correct  account  of  his 
brother  William,  a  boy  of  sixteen  ;  except  that  he  is  some 
5  ft.  7  in.  in  height,  whereas  the  medium  indicated  with  her 
hand  a  height  of  not  more  than  4  ft.  ] 

You  have  got  a  sister.  She  sings  and  plays  two  different 
instruments  ;  one  with  keys  and  one  with  strings — par¬ 
ticularly  the  one  with  keys.  She  is  a  little  younger  than 
you,  probably  ;  but  her  age  is  difficult  to  tell  from  her 
appearance.  She  is  older  than  William. 

[Mr.  Gale  has  a  sister  younger  than  himself  and  older 
than  his  brother  William.  She  sings  and  plays  the  piano 
well,  but  does  not  play  any  stringed  instrument.] 

There  is  a  minister  in  your  family,  an  uncle,  in  the 
spirit.  Tall,  fine  physique  ;  wears  spectacles  ;  with  a  high 
forehead  ;  something  like  you.  He  is  your  father’s  brother. 
He  died  some  little  time  ago — away  from  you  across  the 
water.  He  died  suddenly.  [Asked  what  denomination  he 
belonged  to,  Dr.  P.  could  not  tell.]  He  used  to  wear  a  cape 
— a  long  coat  thing.  He  was  not  Episcopal,  but  like  a 
Methodist — that  sort  of  doctrine. 

[Mr.  Gale  had  an  uncle,  his  father’s  brother,  who  was 
a  Baptist  missionary  in  Minnesota.  The  description  of  him 
is  accurate,  except  that  he  would  not  be  considered  a  tall 
man.  He  died  suddenly  fifteen  years  ago  while  travelling 
in  Palestine.  He  never  wore  a  cape  at  home,  but  had  one 
made  before  leaving  for  his  trip  to  Palestine,  to  wear  on 
his  overcoat.] 

There  are  five  of  you.  [After  some  counting  and  a  little 
help  from  Mr.  Gale,  Dr.  P.  said  that  there  were  five  not 
counting  the  mother — three  boys  and  a  girl,  father  and 
mother.  Right.] 

Dr.  P.  then  attempted  to  get  the  name  of  the  second 
brother,  trying  George,  Geord,  Jordan,  Jorge,  but  finally 
giving  it  up.  The  brother’s  second  name  is  Griggs,  but  he 
is  never  called  by  it.  Dr.  P.  went  on  : 

He  gets  round  about  the  boys  as  well  as  any  one.  He’s 
got  many  friends  ;  they  all  like  him.  He  is  very  happy- 
go-lucky — musical — he  can  do  everything,  whistle,  sing,  and 
dance.  He  is  not  far  away.  He  has  lots  of  letters  and 
friends.  Girls  like  him  very  much.  He  is  studying  to  be 
a  lawyer  or  doctor,  or  something  of  that  sort.  He  gets 
into  different  costumes  and  acts.  Do  they  call  him  Jack? 
John?  They  call  him  Pete  ;  they  call  him  everything. 

170 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

[None  of  these  names  were  right,  though  he  is  called 
by  many  names.  Nor  is  he  studying  for  a  profession.  In 
other  respects  the  statements  are  accurate.  This  brother 
is  the  only  one  of  Mr.  Gale’s  family  who  is  not  far  away, 
in  America.  The  name  of  Will  Adams  was  given  as  that 
of  a  friend  ;  but  the  brother  has  only  the  slightest 
acquaintance  with  a  man  of  that  name.] 

A  correct  description  was  given  of  Mr.  Gale’s  mother. 
She  was  said  to  look  very  young  for  her  age.  “  She  and 
William  are  more  like  one  another  than  the  rest  of  the 
family.  She  is  small  and  rather  dark.”  These  and  other 
traits  given  are  said  by  Mr.  Gale  to  be  strikingly  correct. 

The  name  Edward  was  then  tried,  and  applied  to  brother, 
father,  and  uncle,  all  wrongly. 

When  your  mother  went  away  it  did  her  a  great  deal 
of  good  ;  she  had  a  cold  on  her  chest.  She  has  been 
staying  with  an  elderly  gentleman. 

[Mr.  Gale’s  mother  took  a  trip  for  her  health  last  spring, 
and  returned  greatly  improved.  But  nothing  is  known  of 
the  elderly  gentleman.] 

Your  grandfather  on  your  mother’s  side  was  lame.  [Asked 
“All  his  life?”]  No;  but  that  one  time.  You  don’t 
remember  that,  but  your  mother  will  tell  you. 

[Mr.  Gale  finds  that  his  maternal  grandfather  was  lame 
from  a  stroke  of  paralysis  for  some  ten  months.  He 
remembers  nothing  of  this,  as  he  did  not  see  his  grandfather 
during  this  time.] 

Edward  :  is  he  your  uncle  or  your  cousin?  I  don’t  like 
him,  and  I  don’t  know  that  any  one  did.  He  don’t  seem 
to  get  on,  somehow. 

[Mr.  Gale  recognises  this  as  a  cousin.] 

The  name  of  Alice  was  given,  and  finally  said  to  belong 
to  Edward’s  sister.  This  was  right  ;  but  she  was  wrongly 
said  to  be  musical.  After  this  the  statements  made  were 
mostly  wrong.  The  name  of  Williams  was  given :  “  It 

was  your  uncle,  I  think  ;  a  relative  connected  by  marriage. 
I  think  on  the  mother’s  side.” 

[Mr.  Gale  remarks  :  “I  have  a  second  cousin  on  my 
mother’s  side  named  Williams,  whom  we  always  call  “  aunt,” 
however.  She  has  been  a  widow  many  years,  and  I  never 
saw  her  husband.”]  * 

Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  642 — 3. 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  PIPER  171 

In  commenting  on  this  sitting  Mrs.  Sidgwick 
writes  ; 

“  During  all  the  earlier  part  of  it,  Phinuit  gave  the 
impression  of  really  knowing  what  he  was  talking  about. 
He  described  Mr.  Gale’s  father  and  mother  as  if  he  had 
them  before  him,  in  a  bad  light,  perhaps,  or  rather  far  off, 
so  that  he  could  not  make  them  out  with  absolute  distinct¬ 
ness,  but  still  as  if  he  was  trying  to  describe  what  he  saw, 
not  at  all  as  if  he  were  guessing.”  ‘ 

The  significant  point  in  these  early  sittings  is  that 
the  information  given  about  the  sitter’s  living  friends 
seems,  generally  speaking,  to  have  been  as  vivid,  as 
copious,  and  as  accurate  as  the  information  given  about 
the  dead,  and  that  there  is  no  means,  as  a  rule,  of 
discriminating  between  them  either  as  regards  sub¬ 
stance  or  source — that  is,  the  statements  about  the  dead 
and  the  living  alike  are  given  as  if  they  proceeded 
directly  from  Phinuit’s  own  knowledge.  Sometimes, 
on  the  other  hand,  where  the  dead  are  concerned  the 
utterances  are  put  into  their  mouths,  but  there  is  rarely 
any  indication  that  this  is  more  than  a  traditional 
dramatic  device. 

The  result  of  these  early  stances  was  to  leave  all 
those  who  had  carefully  studied  the  matter  profoundly 
convinced  that  Mrs.  Piper  was  gifted,  at  the  lowest, 
with  some  supernormal  faculty  of  acquiring  information. 

Shortly  after  her  return  to  America  an  arrange¬ 
ment  was  made  under  which  Dr.  Hodgson  took  entire 
charge  of  her  seances,  himself  making  all  appointments 
and  arrangements,  undertaking  or  providing  for  a  full 
report  of  what  took  place,  and  introducing  all  sitters 

‘  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  618. 

172 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

under  assumed  names.  A  year  or  two  later  a  change 
took  place  in  the  conditions.  “  Phinuit  ”  still  assumed 
control  from  the  spiritual  side,  but  whereas  in  the 
seances  held  in  this  country  the  communications  had 
been  made  almost  exclusively  by  voice,  the  entranced 
Mrs.  Piper  would  now  by  preference  write  her  com¬ 
munications,  the  voice  still  being  used  occasionally, 
especially  during  the  prolonged  process  of  emerging 
from  the  trance  at  the  end  of  the  sittings. 

There  had  been  during  Mrs.  Piper’s  stay  in  this 
country  several  instances  in  which  deceased  friends  of 
the  sitter  had  purported  to  speak,  sometimes  directly 
through  the  medium’s  organism,  sometimes  through  the 
intervention  of  Phinuit.  But  the  circumstances  had 
not  admitted  of  any  prolonged  display  of  these  im¬ 
personations,  and  there  are  many  details  in  these 
early  seances  which  point  strongly  to  some  form  pf 
thought  transference  as  the  sole  and  sufficient  explana¬ 
tion  of  the  phenomena.! 

But  in  1892  opportunity  occurred  to  put  the  question 
of  spirit  control  to  a  more  searching  test. 

George  Pelham  (the  name  is  assumed)  was  a  young 
American  lawyer  and  author,  well  known  to  Richard 
Hodgson,  who  in  February,  1892,  died  suddenly  as 
the  result  of  an  accident  in  New  York. 2  Hodgson 
and  he  had  had  long  talks  on  philosophic  subjects  and 
had  discussed  the  possibility  of  a  future  life,  which 
to  Pelham  seemed  incredible  and  inconceivable.  Four 

1  See  Mr.  J.  T.  Clarke’s  stance,  Proceedings  S.P.R-, 
vol.  vi.  pp.  569 — 74.  On  the  other  side,  see  Sir  Oliver 
Lodge’s  report,  pp.  458 — 64. 

2  The  account  which  follows  is  taken  from  Hodgson’s 
report  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  284 — 582. 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  PIPER  173 

years  before  his  death  he  had  had  a'  single  sitting  with 
Mrs.  Piper,  but  his  name  had  been  carefully  concealed 
from  the  medium,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
that  she  knew  of  the  existence  of  such  a  person.  Mrs. 
Piper,  it  should  be  added,  resided  in  the  suburbs  of 
Boston  ;  Pelham,  who  had  lived  for  many  years  in 
Boston,  had  passed  the  last  three  years  of  his  life  in 
New  York.  ^ 

Between  four  and  five  weeks  after  George  Pelham’s 
death,  on  March  22,  1892,  a  friend  of  his,  John  Hart 
’(assumed  name)  was  having  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper. 
In  the  middle  of  the  seance  Phinuit,  who  purported 
to  be  controlling,  said  ;  “  There  is  another  George 

who  wants  to  speak  to  you — how  many  Georges  are 
there  about  you,  anyway?  ” 

The  “  other  George  ”  purported  to  be  George 
Pelham.  He  gave  his  full  name  correctly,  also  the 
full  name  of  the  sitter  '(presumably  unknown  to  Mrs. 
Piper)  and  the  names — Christian  and  surname — of 
several  of  George  Pelham’s  most  intimate  friends.  He 
recognised  as  his  own  a  stud  which  the  sitter  was 
wearing,  saying,  “  That’s  mine.  Father  gave  you  that. 
[No.]  .Well,  then,  father  and  mother  together. 
Mother  took  them.  Gave  them  to  father,  and  father 
gave  them  to  you.”  This  was,  in  fact,  correct  :  the; 
stepmother  had  taken  them  from  the  dead  body. 
George  Pelham  mentioned  two  intimate  friends,  James 
and  Mary  Howard,  and  gave  a  message  to  Katharine 
(their  daughter)  :  “  Tell  her  ;  she’ll  know.  I  will 

solve  the  problems,  Katharine.”  On  this  Mr.  Howard 
later  explained  that  Pelham,  when  he  had  last  stayed 
with  them,  had  had  frequent  talks  with  Katharine,  a 
girl  of  fifteen,  on  the  great  problems  of  existence. 

174 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

and  had  promised  her,  in  almost  the  words  of  his 
spirit  message,  that  some  time  he  would  solve  them. 
George  Pelham  referred  by  name  to  Meredith  and 
Rogers,  two  other  friends,  with  appropriate  messages. 

At  the  first  sitting  with  Mr.  Howard,  on  April  loth, 
G.  P.  greeted  him  with  entirely  natural  familiarity, 
and  made  relevant  remarks  about  Rogers  and  his  de¬ 
ceased  daughter,  Martha,  and  two  other  friends, 
Berwick  and  Orenberg.  Mr.  Howard  states  of  this 
stance  that  “all  the  references  to  persons,  incidents, 
characters,  &c.,  so  far  as  they  are  known  to  living 
persons,  are  correct.” 

Mr.  Howard,  though  much  impressed,  remained  for 
a  time  unconvinced.  At  a  sitting  some  months  later, 
however,  in  December  of  the  same  year,  he  reminded 
G.  P.  of  the  many  summers  and  winters  which  they 
had  spent  together  in  G.  P.’s  lifetime,  and  asked  for 
some  convincing  proof,  something  known  to  him  and 
G.  P.  alone,  to  show  that  the  communicating  intelli¬ 
gence  was  really  what  it  claimed  to  be.  Then,  jas 
Hodgson,  who  acted  as  notetaker,  described  the  scene, 
whilst  Mrs.  Piper’s  body  lay  inert  and  apparently  life¬ 
less,  the  right  hand  impatiently  and  fiercely  wrote  in 
answer  to  Mr.  Howard’s  request. 

“  Several  statements  were  read  by  me,  and  assented  to 
by  Mr.  Howard,  and  then  was  written  ‘  private,’  and  the 
hand  gently  pushed  me  away.  I  retired  to  the  other  side 
of  the  room,  and  Mr.  Howard  took  my  place  close  to  the 
hand  where  he  could  read  the  writing.  He  did  not,  pf 
course,  read  it  aloud,  and  it  was  too  private  for  my  perusal. 
The  hand,  as  it  reached  the  end  of  each  sheet,  tore  it  off 
from  the  block  book,  and  thrust  it  wildly  at  Mr.  Howard, 
and  then  continued  writing.  The  circumstances  narrated, 
Mr.  Howard  informed  me,  contained  precisely  the  kind  of 
test  for  which  he  had  asked,  and  he  said  that  he  was 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  PIPER  175 

‘  perfectly  satisfied,  perfectly.’  After  this  incident  there 
was  some  further  conversation,  with  references  to  the  past 
that  seemed  specially  natural  as  coming  from  G.  P.” 

An  extract  from  the  second  sitting  with  Mr.  Howard 
will  give  some  idea  of  the  nature  of  the  impersonation. 

Second.  November  28,  1892. 

Present  :  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howard,  and  (part  of  the  time) 
their  eldest  daughter  Katharine,  R.  H.,  and  Reporter. 

Phinuit  :  He  [G.  P.]  has  been  to  see  his  father,  and  he 
has  seen,  he  has  taken  a  book  and  carried  it  to  have  it 
printed.  [His  father  had  collected  his  poems  and  had 
them  printed  in  a  small  volume,  which  appeared  just  before 
the  first  sitting  of  this  series.] 

During  the  early  part  of  the  sitting,  Katharine  entered 
the  room  and  sat  down  in  a  remote  corner.  Almost  imme¬ 
diately  Phinuit  said,  “He  wants  to  see  who  is  Katrine.” 
Katharine  comes  over,  and  G.  P.  takes  control  of  the  voice, 
and  personal  greetings  follow.  .  .  .  Recognition  of  dress, 
also  of  shawl,  which  was  asked  for,  and  which  was  placed 
over  Mrs.  Piper’s  shoulders. 

“What  is  if  takes  me  to  Paris?”  The  shawl  had  been 
worn  in  Paris  frequently  during  a  year,  but  there  is  no 
reason  to  suppose  that  G.  P.  living  was  aware  of  this. 

G.  P.  inquired  what  had  been  done  with  a  special  picture 
which  he  had  owned. 

Mrs.  H.:  That  got  torn  up  after  you  passed  out,  but 
here  is  a  picture  that  I  don’t  know  whether  you  will  recog¬ 
nise,  but  you  used  to  know  the  place.  [G.  P.  puts  picture 
on  top  of  the  head.]  .  .  . 

G.  P.  :  What  is  this?  This  is  your  summer  house. 

Mrs.  H.  :  Yes,  you  have  got  it  right. 

G.  P.  :  But  I  have  forgotten  the  name  of  the  town. 

Mrs.  H.  :  Don’t  you  remember  D - ? 

G.  P.  :  Oh,  the  little  brick  house  and  the  little  vine, 
grape-vine,  some  call  them.  Yes,  I  remember  it  all  ;  it 
comes  back  as  distinctly  as  the  daylight.  .  .  .  Where  is 
the  little  out-house?  [All  correct.  The  little  brick  hen¬ 
house  that,  like  the  house  itself,  was  solidly  built  of  brick 

176 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

jusl  did  not  come  into  the  picture,  but  came  to  the  very, 
edge  of  it,  so  it  was  natural  for  George  to  ask  where  it 
was.  The  grape-vine  that  covered  the  whole  house  up  to 
the  roof  was  a  striking  feature  of  it. — K.]  .  .  . 

Mrs.  H.  :  There  is  the  painting  [handing  another  pic¬ 
ture  ] . 

G.  P.  :  No,  I  have  no  recollection  of  that. 

Mrs.  H.  :  No,  I  painted  it  when  you  were  not  there, 
you  never  saw  that. 

G.  P.  ;  It  is  not  fresh  to  me  at  all  ;  but  this  [fingering 
the  photo  of  the  house]  is  very  clear.  Katharine. 

Mrs.  H.  :  She  remembers  that  too. 

G.  P.  :  She  was  a  little  thing.  Then  you  bought  a  place 

at  some  ville  [Katharine’s  age  when  we  left  D - -  was  six, 

nearly  seven.  We  first  bought  the  place  at  X - ville  in 

1886].  Further  references  to  personal  incidents  at  D - . 

“Katharine,  how  is  the  violin?”  [She  plays  the  violin.] 
...  To  hear  you  playing  it  is  horrible,  horrible.  .  .  , 

Mrs.  H.  :  But  don’t  you  see  she  likes  her  music  because 
it  is  the  best  she  has? 

G.  P.  :  No,  but  that  is  what  I  used  to  say,  that  it  is 
horrible.  [George  was  always  more  or  less  annoyed  by 
hearing  Katharine  practise  when  she  was  beginning  the 
violin  as  a  little  child. — K.] 

G.  P.  :  [A  basket  put  into  G.  P.’s  hands  which  he  had 
given  as  a  Christmas  present.]  That  is  mine.  Where  is 
my  lamp  arrangement?  I  was  very  fond  of  that,  you  know. 
[He  had  also  expressly  got  a  small  light  shade  that  could 
be  moved  round  the  shade  of  an  ordinary  lamp  to  cut  off 
the  light  from  the  eye,  and  he  had  used  this  much  when 
living.  He  had  made  other  references  to  this  in  previous 
sittings.]  .  .  . 

Mrs.  H.  I  want  you  to  see  that  [handing  a  paper  ']. 

G.  P.  :  You  wrote  that  to  me  this  morning.  [It  was  a 
ipoem  on  death  written  that  morning  with  G.  P.  in  mind, 
but  no  reference  to  G.  P.  in  it.]  .  .  . 

«  It  must  be  assumed  that  these  papers  may  have  come 
within  the  field  of  vision  of  Mrs.  Piper,  but  my  conviction 
is  that  the  trance  personalities  do  not  obtain  any  informa¬ 
tion  by  the  ordinary  process  of  vision.  [Note  by  R. 
Hodgson.  ] 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  PIPER  177 

[Another  paper  handed.*]  That  is  a  letter.  That  is 
mine  .  That  is  my  own,  but  that  was  written  a  long  time 
ago.  [Correct.  A  letter  of  his  written  many  years 
before.]  .  .  . 

Give  my  regards  to  James  Peirce.  Tell  him  I  could  not 
speak  to  him,  but  I  will  again,  and  when  you  dine  with  him, 
think  of  me. 

[George  occasionally  dined  at  the  house  of  James  Peirce 
in  company  with  Mr.  Howard.] 

Mr.  H.  :  George,  do  you  know  who  this  is  from?  [hand¬ 
ing  an  unopened  newspaper  *  enclosed  in  a  wrapper  as  if 
just  received  in  the  mail]. 

After  saying,  “Where  is  John  Hart?”  G.  P.  correctly 
stated  that  the  newspaper  came  from  Orenberg  ;  then  to 
Mr.  Howard  he  said,  “  Get  the  long  pipe  and  smoke.” 
[Mr.  Howard  was  in  the  habit  of  smoking  a  long  pipe  in 
the  evening.  ] 

Partially  coming  out  of  the  trance,  Mrs.  Piper 
described  a  gentleman  with  a  beard  and  a  high  fore¬ 
head.  She  then  became  re-entranced,  and  on  finally 
emerging  from  the  trance  some  time  later  she  picked 
out  from  nine  photographs  of  men  an  excellent  like¬ 
ness  of  G.  P.  as  being  the  man  she  had  seen  .2 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  impersonation  was  natural 
and  lifelike,  and  that  the  intelligence  manifesting  in 
the  trance  showed  apparent  knowledge  of  the  country 
house  which  his  friends  had  left  six  years  before,  and 
of  the  early  childhood  of  their  daughter.  Nothing  is 
indeed  stated  which  was  not  within  the  present  con¬ 
sciousness  of  the  sitters,  but  its  presentment  must 
be  admitted  to  be  dramatically  true  to  life,  and  jio. 
misstatements  appear  to  have  been  made. 

Some  interesting  experiments  were  made  to  test  the 
control’s  power  of  seeing  things  on  earth.  G.  P.  was 

*  See  Note  on  previous  page. 

2  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  414 — 18. 

12 

178 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

asked  to  watch  and  report  his  father’s  movements. 
He  correctly  stated  that  his  father  had  taken  a  photo¬ 
graph  of  his  '(G.  P.’s)  to  the  artist  to  have  it  copied. 
In  fact,  the  negative  had  been  accidentally  broken. 
Another  experiment  on  the  same  lines  produced  more 
interesting  results.  G.  P.  was  asked  at  the  sitting 
of  April  28,  1892,  to  visit  Mrs.  Howard  and  report 
what  she  was  doing.  Mrs.  Howard  meanwhile  had 
arranged  with  Dr.  Hodgson  to  do  various  fantastic 
things  as  a  test.  Later  in  the  seance  G.  P.  purported 
to  come  back  to  report  through  Phinuit  : 

She’s  writing,  and  taken  some  violets  and  put  them  in 
a  book.  And  it  looks  as  if  she’s  writing  that  to  my 
mother.  .  .  .  Who’s  Tyson  .  .  .  Davis.  ...  I  saw  her 
[Mrs.  Howard]  sitting  in  the  chair,  sitting  before  a  little 
desk  or  table.  Took  little  book,  opened  it,  wrote  letter  he 
thinks  to  his  mother.  Saw  her  take  a  little  bag  and  put 
some  things  in  it  belonging  to  him,  placed  the  photograph 
beside  her  on  the  desk.  That’s  hers.  Sent  a  letter  to 
TASON  (Tyson?)  TYSON. 

She  hunted  a  little  while  for  her  picture,  sketching.  He’s 
certain  that  the  letter  is  to  his  mother.  She  took  onie 
of  George’s  books  and  turned  it  over,  and  said  :  “  George, 
are  you  here?  Do  you  see  that?  ”  These  were  the  very 
words.  Then  she  turned  and  went  up  a  short  flight  of 
stairs.  Took  some  things  from  a  drawer,  came  back  again, 
sat  down  to  the  desk,  and  then  finished  the  letter." 

Dr.  Hodgson  sent  a  copy  of  this  report  to  Mrs. 
Howard  who  replied  as  follows  : 

“  Dear  Mr.  Hodgson, — I  did  none  of  those  things  to- 

I  The  extract  quoted  contains  all  that  passed  at  the  stance 
on  the  test  in  question  ;  the  portions  omitted  refer  to  the  con¬ 
cerns  of  the  sitter,  and  to  some  questions  asked  by  Hodgson. 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  PIPER  179 

day,  but  all  of  them  yesterday  afternoon  and  the  evening 
before  I 

“  Yesterday  afternoon  I  wrote  a  note  to  Mrs.  Tyson 
declining  an  invitation  to  lunch  ;  this  I  did  at  a  little 
table.  Later  I  wrote  to  his  mother  at  a  desk,  and  seeing 
George’s  violets  by  me  in  their  envelope,  gave  them  to  my 
daughter  to  put  in  my  drawer,  not  ‘  into  a  book.’  This  is 
the  only  inaccuracy  of  detail.  The  day  before  I  also  wrote 
to  his  mother,  putting  his  photograph  before  me  on  the  table 
while  I  was  writing — two  of  his  photos,  in  fact,  one  from 
another  photo  and  one  from  a  portrait  I  had  painted  of 
him  ;  these  I  afterwards  put  into  his  mother’s  letter.  Did 
‘  hunt  for  my  picture,’  my  painting  of  him.  Also  wondered 
in  my  mind  what  they  had  done  with  the  photo  of  jne 
painting,  and  received  letter  from  Mrs.  Pelham  saying  they 
had  burned  it.  What  he  says  about  the  book  is  also  true, 
though  I  can’t  tell  at  precisely  what  time  I  did  it,  as  I  'was 
alone  at  the  time.  In  all  other  matters  my  memory  ,is 
corroborated  by  my  daughter,  who  took  the  note  to  Mrs. 
T.’s,  and  saw  me  put  photo  before  me  on  the  desk.  She 
now  says  that  I  only  put  one  before  me  on  the  desk,  and 
went  and  got  the  other  just  before  putting  it  in  envelope. 
It  was  only  a  minute  on  the  table. 

“  While  writing  to  his  mother  I  did  ‘  go  and  take  things 
from  a  drawer,  came  back  again,  sat  down  to  the  desk,  and 
then  finished  the  letter.’  This  was  the  letter  written  at 
the  desk,  not  the  one  written  at  a  table. 

9|(  sH  ^  ^  ^ 

“  PS. — I  don’t  know  whether  I  made  it  quite  clear  that 
I  sat  thinking,  wondering  where  the  photo  of  me  while 
painting  could  be,  and  I  think  that  in  the  first  of  the  two 
letters  I  wrote  to  his  mother,  I  told  her  he  had  asked 
for  it.  I  know  I  thought  of  doing  so. 

"  I  seldom  write  to  Mrs.  Tyson,  and  this  note  is  almost 
the  only  one  I  have  written  her  this  winter — have  not 
written  to  her  for  weeks,  perhaps  months,  before  this.  It 
is  certainly  strange  that  he  should  seem  to  know  so  much 
of  my  doings.  I  feel  as  if  he  must  have  seen  them.” 

The  correspondence,  it  will,  no  doubt,  be  admitted, 
is  far  too  detailed  here  to  be  attributed  to  lucky  guess- 

180 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

ing.  The  facts  came  clearly  from  Mrs.  Howard’s 
memory — whether  they  were  conveyed  thence  by  a  spirit 
disembodied,  or  by  a  spirit  still  in  the  flesh.  The 
fact  that  the  other  sitter  was  a  friend  of  the  Howards 
as  well  as  of  G.  P.  himself  may  have  some  bearing 
upon  the  case,  but  it  can  scarcely  be  supposed  that 
the  knowledge  was  derived  directly  from  his  mind. 

The  impersonation,  if  it  were  an  impersonation  and 
not  the  actual  G.  P.  manifesting  through  Mrs.  Piper’s 
organism,  was  consistently  and  dramatically  sustained. 
Out  of  some  150  persons  who  had  sittings  with  Mrs. 
Piper  between  the  date  of  G.  P.’s  death  and  the  date 
of  Hodgson’s  report  on  the  subject,  five  years  later, 
there  were  thirty  friends  or  acquaintances  of  G.  P. 
in  life.  All  of  them  were  recognised,  and  all,  a  fact 
on  which  Dr.  Hodgson  laid  much  stress  in  discussing 
the  matter  with  me  orally,  greeted  with  appropriate 
shades  of  welcome.  There  was  only  one  case  of 
failure  to  recognise,  and  in  that  case  the  sitter,  in 
the  course  of  the  nine  years  which  had  elapsed  since 
she  had  seen  G.  P.  in  the  flesh,  had  grown  from  p, 
girl  to  a  woman.  Once  G.  P.  claimed — the  exact 
words  were  :  “  Who  is  this?  I  have  met  her  before 
to  have  seen  a  sitter  who  did  not  remember  ever  to 
have  met  G.  P.  in  the  flesh.  But  it  is  admittedly 
not  improbable  that  they  may  have  met,  or  at  least 
that  G.  P.  may  have  seen  her  (p.  327). 

Some  of  G.  P.’s  most  intimate  friends  were  con¬ 
vinced  that  they  were  actually  in  communication  with 
the  deceased  G.  P.  ;  nearly  all  were  impressed  by 
the  realistic  nature  of  the  impersonation. 

To  set  against  this  strong  presumptive  proof  of 
identity  there  are  several  circumstances  in  the  records 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  PIPER  181 

which  point  to  another  source  for  the  communica¬ 
tions.  Thus  on  one  occasion  G.  P.  is  reported  as 
saying  : 

I  wish  you  could  convince  my  father  and  make  him 
come  here.  [Can’t  you  tell  us  something  he  or  your 
mother  has  done?]  I  saw  her  brush  my  clothes  and  put 
them  away.  I  was  by  her  side  as  she  did  it.  I  saw  her 
take  my  sleeve  buttons  from  a  small  box  and  give  them 
to  my  father.  I  saw  him  send  them  to  John  Hart.  I  saw 
her  putting  papers,  &c.,  into  a  tin  box. 

The  fact  that  the  studs  or  sleeve-links  had  been  taken 
from  the  dead  body  by  the  (step)  mother  had  already 
been  stated  in  the  trance.  But,  in  fact,  G.  P.’s  clothes 
had  been  brushed  and  put  away,  not  by  the  step¬ 
mother,  but  by  “  the  man  who  had  valeted  George.” 
The  mistake  would  seem  to  indicate  that  in  this 
instance,  at  any  rate,  the  communication  proceeded  from 
Mrs.  Piper’s  own  intelligence.  Further,  G.  P.,  in  this, 
it  may  be  said,  resembling  all  the  other  Piper 
personalities,  is  frequently  unable  to  give  names  when 
specially  asked  for  them,  although,  as  has  been  shown, 
he  voluntarily  gave  in  the  earliest  sittings  a  large 
number  of  names,  all  those  of  friends  and  intimates. 
The  failure  to  respond  to  a  challenge  ought  not  to  be 
regarded  as  in  itself  suspicious.  .What  is  suspicious 
is  the  manner  in  which  the  challenge  is  evaded. 

Two  test  questions  were  put  to  G.  P.  at  the  sitting 
of  March  30,  1892  : 

I.  What  was  the  nature  of  the  society  formed  by 
you  and  some  other  young  people?  2.  What  were 
the  names  of  the  members?  G.  P.  made  two  attempts 
— both  incorrect — at  the  object  of  the  society,  and 
succeeded  only  in  giving  the  Christian  name  of  one  of 

182 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

the  members.  At  a  later  sitting  he  returned  to  the 
subject,  and  gave  the  full  name  (known  apparently 
to  the  sitter)  of  this  one  member,  but  excused  himself 
in  the  following  terms  from  giving  the  other  two 
names  : 

I  answered  part  of  that  question  [the  part  he  answered 
was  correct],  but  did  not  give  the  names  of  the  other  two 
people  because  it  would  be  no  test,  because  I  told  her 
[the  sitter]  the  names  of  the  other  two  in  life,  and,  as  she 
knows  them,  if  I  was  to  give  the  names  in  her  presence, 
they  would  say  it  was  thought-transference.  No,  I  shall 
reserve  the  two  names  to  tell  Hodgson  some  time  when  he 
is  alone  with  me,  because  he  does  not  know  them.  [All 
true.  ] 

But  the  names  subsequently  given  to  Hodgson  were 
incorrect. 

The  five  years  from  1891  to  1895  formed  a  very 
fruitful  period  in  Mrs.  Piper’s  mediumship.  The  case 
of  G.  P.  has  been  selected  for  comment  because  the 
materials  for  forming  a  judgment  are  the  most 
abundant,  and  the  impersonation  itself  was  perhaps  the 
most  striking  and  the  best  sustained.  But  there  were 
other  impersonations  hardly  inferior  in  lifelike  qualities. 
The  selected  records — mainly  of  first  sittings  only — 
cover  nearly  two  hundred  octavo  pages.  During  the 
whole  period.  Dr.  Hodgson  tells  us,  so  far  as  his 
knowledge  went,  “  there  are  not  more  than  six  !(first) 
sittings  that  can  be  classed  as  complete  failures.”  > 

'  The  reason  for  publishing  the  accounts  of  first  sittings 
only  is  that  at  each  successive  stance  the  medium  has  more 
and  more  opportunities  for  acquiring  by  normal  means  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  sitter  and  his  affairs.  As  every  sitter  was 
introduced  under  a  pseudonym,  generally  Smith,  the  only 
chance  of  obtaining  information  by  such  means  at  a  first 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  PIPER  183 

The  results  are  very  impressive  ;  and  many  of  those 
who  have  studied  the  records  hold  that  they  establish  at 
least  a  prima  facie  case  for  the  belief  in  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  communication  with  our  departed  friends. 

But  this  highly  productive  period  came  to  an  end 
in  1896.  Early  in  that  year  Mrs.  Piper  underwent  an 
operation — the  second — and  in  the  autumn  a  fresh  band 
of  spirits  purported  to  assume  the  control  of  her 
organism.  The  new  controls  forbade  indiscriminate 
experiments  with  what  they  described  as  “a  battered 
and  worn-out  machine  ”  ;  and,  in  fact,  the  number  of 
stances  has,  under  the  advice  of  these  controls,  been 
severely  restricted  since  that  date,  and  the  privilege 
of  a  sitting  has  no  longer  been  afforded  with  the  same 
freedom  as  formerly  even  to  serious  inquirers.  Of 
the  results  under  these  changed  conditions  we  shall 
have  to  speak  in  a  later  chapter. 

sitting  would  be  by  various  processes  of  “  fishing,”  or 
skilful  inferences  from  unguarded  admissions  in  the  course 
of  the  stance,  and  the  report  of  the  proceedings,  of  course, 
shows  how  far  such  methods  were  actually  employed. 

CHAPTER  III 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS,  THOMPSON 

Mrs.  Thompson,  a  lady  who  for  some  years  was  good 
enough  to  place  her  services  freely  at  the  disposal  of 
the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  for  the  purposes 
of  the  inquiry,  is,  or  was,  for  she  has  now  ceased  to 
give  sittings,  a  trance  medium.  In  her  earlier  seances, 
however,  the  spirit  communications  were  interspersed 
with  physical  phenomena  which  appear  to  have  been 
of  the  ordinary  type.* 

Mrs.  Thompson’s  early  sittings  were  held  in  1897 
and  1898,  generally  at  the  house  of  Mr.  F.  iWi. 
iThurstan,  M.A.,  a  gentleman  who  at  that  time  had 
charge  of  two  Indian  pupils.  The  regular  circle  con¬ 
sisted  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thompson  and  Mr.  Thurstan, 
but  two  or  three  visitors  who  were  known  to  be  sympa¬ 
thetic  to  the  medium  were  present  at  most  of  the 
sittings.  The  sittings  took  place  generally  in  a  double 
room,  with  curtains  drawn  over  the  opening  of  the 

»  During  the  lifetime  of  the  late  Mr.  Thompson,  Mrs. 
Thompson’s  connection  with  physical  phenomena  was,  in 
deference  to  his  wishes,  suppressed  ;  and  in  the  accounts 
published  in  the  Spiritualist  newspaper  Light  during  1897 
and  1898  the  medium  is  referred  to  as  Mrs.  T.  As  the 
reasons  for  secrecy  no  longer  exist,  Mrs.  Thompson  has 
been  good  enough  to  grant  permission  for  the  facts  to  be 
made  public. 

184 

THE  MEDIUMSHTP  OF  MRS.  THOMPSON  18.5 

two  apartments,  the  space  behind  the  curtain  being 
without  artificial  light  of  any  kind.  The  circle  sat 
in  the  other  room,  the  “  usual  conditions  ”  being  that 
the  light  was  “  subdued  to  a  point  at  which  we  could 
just  distinguish  our  figures  as  we  sat  opposite  to  each 
other.”  The  medium  under  these  conditions  would 
be  controlled  by  her  daughter  Nelly,  who  had  died  in 
infancy,  her  sister,  and  her  mother,  also  by  relatives 
of  ,the  various  sitters  and  occasionally  by  strangers. 
“  Peter  Pindar,”  for  instance,  came  on  one  occasion 
and  gave  his  proper  name,  the  dates  and  localities 
of  his  birth  and  death.  Originally  one  Peter  Wharton 
and  some  associate  spirits  took  charge  of  the  medium’s 
trance,  but  on  October  17,  1897,  it  was  announced  that 
Peter  had  left  and  that  the  band  had  been  reinforced 
by  seven  new  spirits.  Four  of  the  newcomers — Esther, 
Charles  Wade,  Annie,-  and  another  whose  signature 
could  not  be  deciphered — wrote  their  names  in  the 
course  of  the  seance  by  “  direct  ”  writing. 

The  physical  phenomena  were  of  a  familiar  type — 
raps  and  knocks,  the  blowing  out  of  a  curtain  as  if 
by  wind,  spirit  lights,  movements  of  a  tambourine,  a 
lamp  shade,  a  toy  trumpet,  chairs,  and  tables.  Once 
a  heavy  table  is  reported  as  moving  continuously  for 
some  minutes  whilst  the  medium  was  eight  feet  away. 
On  several  occasions  the  table  was  levitated.  Once 
the  medium  is  described  as  being  elongated  to  the 
extent  of  six  inches. 

There  were  several  instances  of  materialisation.  On 
January  i,  1898,  a  sitting  was  held  at  Mrs.  Thompson’s 
own  house,  the  sitters  being  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thompson, 
their  little  daughter  Rosie,  Mr.  Thurstan,  and  two 
friends,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  A.  A  pair  of  light  curtains 

186 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

were  hung  so  as  to  cut  off  a  corner  of  the  room. 
Mrs.  Thompson  sat  in  the  opening  of  the  curtains 
facing  the  company,  who  sat  round  in  a  horseshoe, 
Mr.  Thurstan  next  the  curtain  on  the  medium’s  right, 
Mr.  Thompson  in  the  corresponding  position  on  the 
left.  The  lamp  was  turned  out,  and  the  circle  ^at 
“in  a  dim  light  in  which  we  could  just  distinguish 
one  another.”  Then,  to  quote  Mr.  Thurstan’s  report : 

“  While  we  were  singing  Clare  controlled  Mrs.  T.,  and 
joined  in  the  hymn,  at  the  end  of  which  she  whispered  to 
me  in  the  direct  voice  to  place  my  hand  behind  the  curtain 
at  the  opening  by  the  wall  on  my  side,  and  I  found  a  lily- 
of-the-valley  leaf  and  flower  placed  in  it  ;  and,  soon  after¬ 
wards,  a  number  of  additional  lilies  were  flung  out  for  the 
rest.  There  were  none  of  these  flowers  in  the  house  at  the 
time.  While  we  sang,  once  more  my  hand,  remaining  behind 
the  curtain,  was  fondled  by  ‘  Clare,’  and  a  soft,  gauzy, 
scented,  white  drapery  was  flung  over  my  head  and  seen  by 
the  others  on  my  side  of  the  room.  Then  Mrs.  T.  felt 
‘  Clare,’  who  also  passed  over  to  the  other  side  and  touched 
Mr.  T.  with  her  fingers  and  her  drapery.  As  her  power 
increased,  her  voice  also  gained  strength  and  timbre;  and, 
in  a  direct  voice,  loud  but  sweet,  and  with  a  mannerism 
of  utterance  noticeably  distinct  from  that  of  Mrs.  T.,  she 
said  that  if  Mrs.  A.  and  Mr.  A.  would  change  places  with 
me  and  Mr.  T.  she  would  touch  them.  This  was  done,  and 
Rosie  also  had  her  turn  ;  and  then  Mr.  T.  and  I  resumed 
our  chairs.  All  this  while  Mrs.  T.  was  in  full  consciousness, 
but  she  kept  exclaiming  that  she  felt  ‘  all  hollow  ’  ;  and 
another  thing  she  noticed  was  that  whenever  ‘  Clare’s  ’ 
fingers  touched  any  one  she  distinctly  felt  a  pricking  sensa¬ 
tion  in  her  body,  very  similar  to  her  experiences  when  she 
had  been  placed  once  on  an  insulating  stool  and  charged 
with  electricity,  and  persons  had  touched  her  to  make  sparks 
come  from  her. 

“  After  this,  some  beautiful  spirit  lights  were  seen  behind 
the  curtains,  which  were  of  a  diaphanous  art  muslin.  They 
floated  to  the  top  of  the  curtains  some  nine  feet  above  the 
ground,  Mrs.  T.  all  the  while  remaining  seated.  Then,  while 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  THOMPSON  187 

my  sister  ‘  Clare  ’  was  still  touching  my  hand  and  talking  to 
me,  ‘  Nellie’s  ’  voice  was  suddenly  heard  by  her  father’s  side, 
saying,  ‘  I  am  here  ’  ;  and  both  father  and  mother  were  in 
raptures  to  feel  the  touch  of  the  vanished  hand  of  their 
little  daughter  caressing  them.  Simultaneously  ‘  Clare  ’ 
was  speaking  to  me  on  a  private  matter  ;  and,  finally  asking 
me  to  bend  forward  my  head  towards  her,  she  flung  her 
drapery  round  my  neck  and  laid  her  palms  on  my  head  as  if 
to  bless  me.  All  of  us  agreed  that  the  touch  of  the  fingers 
felt  warm  and  life-like  ;  the  whole  air  was  also  filled  with 
a  subtle,  strange  perfume.” 

It  would  seem  that  the  materialised  figures  were  not 
seen,  but  only  heard  and  felt.  This  is  clear,  not  only 
from  the  account  above  quoted,  but  from  the  corrobora¬ 
tive  testimony  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  A'.,  who  write  as 
follows  :  • 

“  My  wife  says  that  once,  when  she  was  holding  Mrs. 
T.’s  hands  and  kneeling  just  in  front  of  her,  she  felt  at 
the  same  time  touches  of  ‘  Clare’s  ’  hands  and  soft  drapery 
fall  over  her  head  and  neck.  I  also  noticed  the  presence 
of  more  than  one  visitant  at  the  same  time  ;  for  while 
I  was  talking  with  one  whose  direct  voice  I  heard,  I  felt 
several  touches  on  my  hand  and  knees  from  another  simul¬ 
taneously,  and  also  noticed  a  spirit  light  moving  about  at 
the  same  time.” 

W.  A. 

Sheffield.  E.  A. 

At  another  materialisation  stance  held  three  weeks 
later  under  the  same  conditions  two  or  three 
materialised  figures  were  seen,  but  apparently  by  Mrs. 
Thompson  only,  the  sitters  again  only  heard  and  felt. 
The  materialisations  were  not  therefore  so  striking  as 
some  which  have  been  afforded  by  other  mediums. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  apports,  which  were  numerous, 
left  no  doubt  of  their  objectivity.  Thus,  again  to 
quote  an  illustration  from  Mr.  Thurstan’s  report  : 

188 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

“  When  Mr.  and  Mrs.  T.  were  spending  the  day  with 
me  at  Eton  last  Sunday,  and  we  were  seated  chatting  round 
the  fire,  about  3  p.m.,  suddenly  Mr.  T.  noticed  a  banana 
lying  on  the  floor  between  my  chair  and  that  of  Mrs.  T., 
who  objected  to  its  having  been  found  so  suspiciously  close 
to  her.  Presently,  when  Mrs.  T.  had  her  purse  in  her  hand, 
counting  her  money  in  case  it  should  be  spirited  away,  and 
Mr.  T.  was  bending  over  her,  helping  her,  and  I  was  at  the 
piano  in  the  far  end  of  the  room,  down  fell  two  pistachio 
nuts  with  considerable  force  just  past  me,  as  if  they  had 
fallen  from  the  ceiling  straight  above  me.  While  my  two 
Indian  charges,  in  another  corner  of  the  room,  were  laughing 
at  this  incident,  down  came  another  shower  of  three  more 
pistachio  nuts  and  two  walnuts  at  their  feet.  We  were  then 
told  that  if  we  sat  at  the  table  and  raised  the  table-cover, 
by  placing  a  cardboard  box  under  it,  we  should  get  some 
white  grapes  brought.  So  we  five  sat  as  directed  in  full 
light,  with  our  hands  on  the  cloth  ;  and,  after  half  an  hour, 
during  which  ‘  Mr.  Giles  ’  manifested  by  raps  and  gave 
Mr.  T.  an  important  direction  relating  to  his  business,  we 
were  told  that  the  grapes  had  come.  I  raised  the  cloth 
and  found  them  in  the  centre  of  the  dining-table,  five  of 
them  in  a  bunch,  fresh  and  uncrushed.  I  asked  ‘  Nellie,' 
who  came  to  explain  matters,  how  it  was  that  they  knew 
that  while  I  had  most  other  kinds  of  fruit  in  the  house 
I  had  no  pistachios  or  walnuts,  bananas  or  white  grapes. 
She  said  the  friends  had  come  the  day  before,  when  I  was 
buying  fruit,  to  impress  me  not  to  buy  those  particular 
kinds.  This  little  detail  I  mention  ...  as  showing  that 
the  phenomenon,  apparently  occurring  so  extempore,  was 
really  the  result  of  careful  rehearsing  and  pre -arrangement.” 

On  another  occasion  Mr.  Thompson  was  holding 
both  Mrs.  Thompson’s  hands  as  a  test,  to  see  whether 
the  Hindoo  sowar,  who  occasionally  controlled,  could 
under  these  conditions  make  his  characteristic  tinkling 
noises.  Mr,  Thurstan  was  seated  at  her  side  watch¬ 
ing  her  hands.  After  waiting  some  minutes  without 
result,  “  suddenly  at  the  back  of  her  chair  we  heard 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  THOMPSON  189 

something  drop  heavily  out  of  the  air,  falling  first 
on  the  top  of  the  back  and  then  slipping  to  the  seat 
behind  her.”  It  proved  to  be  a  florin,  and  Mr.  Thurstan 
tells  us  that  Mrs.  Thompson  tied  it  in  a  corner  pf 
her  handkerchief,  intending  to  give  it  to  a  poor  woman, 
and  found  next  day  that  the  knot  was  still  there,  but 
the  coin  had  vanished. 

The  above  extracts  give  a  fair  impression  of  the 
physical  phenomena  produced  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s 
presence.  She  ceased,  I  believe,  to  sit  for  physical 
phenomena  shortly  after  making,  in  1898,  the  acquaint¬ 
ance  of  Mr.  F.  Wj.  H.  Myers,  and  thereafter,  as  already 
said,  gave  her  services  to  the  S.  P.  R.  as  a  ,tran,ce 
medium. 

Mrs.  Thompson’s  trances  are  much  lighter  than  those 
of  Mrs.  Piper,  and  appear  to  be  scarcely  distinguish¬ 
able  from  the  state  of  normal  wakefulness.  Unlike 
Mrs.  Piper,  too,  she  has  occasional  flashes  of  what 
purports  to  be  supernormal  perception  outside  the 
seance-room,  and  sometimes  in  what  appears  to  be  a 
normal  condition. 

Thus,  on  May  8,  1894,  Mrs.  Thompson  paid  a  visit 
to  3.  dentist  named  Reeve,  and  whilst  seated  in  the 
chair  was  observed  by  the  dentist  to  have  fallen  into 
a  kind  of  trance,  in  which  she  was  apparently  insensible 
to  the  pain  of  the  operation.  In  this  trance  she  saw 
the  vision  of  a  girl  named  Annie  Reeve,  an  old  school¬ 
fellow.  She  mentioned  the  incident  to  Mr.  Reeve  next 
day,  .and  he  then  told  her  that  Annie  Reeye  was  aj 
cousin,  but  a  stranger  to  him  until  the  previous  day. 
He  had  actually  seen  her  for  the  first  time  in  his 
life  ,an  hour  after  Mrs.  Thompson’s  departure.  At 
Mr.  Reeve’s  request  Mrs.  Thompson  described  the  dress 

190 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

worn  by  the  vision,  which  corresponded  accurately  with 
the  reality. I 

On  another  occasion  Mrs.  Thompson,  this  time  in 
a  pormal  condition,  saw  a  message  in  a  crystal  con¬ 
taining  an  unquestionable,  if  somewhat  muddled, 
reference  to  an  acquaintance  of  Mr.  Piddington’s.^ 

Mr.  Piddington  cites  two  or  three  other  instances 
of  supernormal  perception  in  a  normal  condition. 

Thus  Mrs.  Thompson  writes  : 

“  May  24,  1900. 

“  On  Monday,  March  7,  1900,  about  7.30  in  the  evening, 
I  happened  to  be  sitting  quite  alone  in  the  dining-room,  and 
thinking  of  the  possibility  of  my  subliminal  communicating 
with  that  of  another  person — no  one  in  particular.  I  was 
not  for  one  moment  unconscious.  All  at  once  I  felt  some 
one  was  standing  near,  and  quietly  opened  my  eyes,  and 
was  very  surprised  to  see — clairvoyantly,  of  course — Mr. 
J.  G.  Piddington.  I  was  very  keen  to  try  the  experiment, 
so  at  once  spoke  to  him  aloud.  He  looked  so  material  and 
lifelike  I  did  not  feel  in  the  least  alarmed. 

“  I  commenced  : 

“  ‘  Please  tell  me  of  something  I  may  afterwards  verify 
to  prove  I  am  really  speaking  of  you.’ 

“  J.  G.  P. — ‘  I  have  had  a  beastly  row  with - ’  [naming 

a  specified  person.] 

“  R.  T. — ‘What  about?’  JNo  answer  to  this.] 

“  J.  C.  P. — ‘  He  says  he  did  not  intend  to  annoy  me,  but 
I  said  he  had  been  very  successful  in  doing  so,  whether  he 
intended  or  not.’ 

“  After  saying  that  he  disappeared.” 

Mr.  Piddington  explains  that  all  the  details  are 

»  Proceedings  S.R.R.,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  108 — 10.  The 
episode  sufficiently  impressed  Mr.  Reeve  to  induce  him  to 
write  a  full  account  of  it  the  same  day.  Of  course,  Mrs. 
Thompson  may  have  caught  a  glimpse  of  Miss  Reeve  in 
the  street  on  her  way  to  the  dentist. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  103. 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  THOMPSON  191 

correct,  even  to  the  exact  words  used  by  him.  The 
quarrel  had  been  conducted  by  correspondence  ;  Mr. 
Piddington’s  final  remark  had  been  addressed  to  Mrs. 
Piddington  at  breakfast,  and  he  regards  it  as  highly 
improbable  that  Mrs.  Thompson  could  have  known  of 
the  quarrel,  and  impossible  that  she  should  have  heard 
of  the  remark. I 

In  another  instance  Mrs.  Thompson  on  leaving  the 
rooms  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  one  after¬ 
noon,  and  when  in  full  possession  of  her  normal  senses, 
made  an  unmistakable  reference  to  a  curious  and 
altogether  unusual  incident  connected  with  the  purchase 
of  Mr.  Piddington’s  coat,  which  was  hanging  on  the 
door  .2 

As  in  the  parallel  case  of  Mrs.  Piper,  it  rarely 
happens  that  the  spirit  professing  to  communicate 
through  the  entranced  Mrs.  Thompson  is  allowed  to 

'  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xviii.  p.  183. 

2  It  will  be  noted  that  of  the  four  incidents  quoted  the 
first  is  readily  susceptible  of  a  normal  explanation.  The 
other  three  are  concerned  with  one  particular  person.  Mr. 
Piddington  was,  at  the  time  of  the  first  incident,  unknown 
personally  to  Mrs.  Thompson,  but  she  may  very  well  have 
known  his  name  as  a  friend  of  Mr.  Myers.  The  other  two  in¬ 
cidents  occurred  when  Mr.  Piddington  was  Honorary  Secre¬ 
tary  to  the  Society,  and  had  much  to  do  with  the  arrange¬ 
ments  of  the  stances  with  Mrs.  Thompson,  and  naturally 
saw  a  great  deal  of  that  lady.  This  would  no  doubt  facili¬ 
tate  telepathy  between  them.  It  would  also  in  various  ways 
facilitate  leakage  of  information  through  normal  channels. 
The  incidents,  to  my  thinking,  are  worth  little  as  evidence  for 
supernormal  faculty  ;  they  are  quoted  here  as  having  some 
bearing  upon  the  question  discussed  in  Chapter  I.  of  the 
present  book.  I  should  perhaps  add  that  the  supernormal 
source  of  much  of  the  information  given  at  Mrs.  Thompson’s 
stances  seems  to  me  to  be  almost  beyond  dispute. 

192 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

take  direct  possession  of  the  medium’s  organism.  The 
usual  control  is  “  Nelly,”  whose  acquaintance  we  have 
already  made  at  the  stances  with  Mr.  Thurstan’s  circle. 

Nelly  is  assisted  in  her  task  by  Mrs.  Cartwright,” 
a  lady  who  kept  a  girls’  school  at  which  Mts. 
Thompson  was  educated.  A  Mr.  D.  also  occasionally 
assists  in  the  control.  Some  further  account  of  these 
trance  personalities  will  be  given  in  a  later  chapter. 

Two  instances  of  successful  stances  with  Mrs. 
Thompson  may  be  cited.  Mr.  J.  O.  Wilson  *  had  two 
interviews  in  January,  1900.  The  lady  to  whom  he 
had  been  engaged.  Miss  Clegg  ^(assumed  name),  had 
been  killed  a  few  months  previously  as  the  result  of 
a  bicycle  accident.  At  the  time  of  the  sittings  Mr. 
J.  O.  Wilson  was  staying  with  Miss  Clegg’s  family, 
and  occupying  the  room  described  by  Nelly  which 
had  been  Miss  Clegg’s.  A  girl  cousin  who  had  been 
devoted  to  Miss  Clegg  was  staying  in  the  house  at 
the  same  time.  Throughout  the  first  stance  the  girl 
cousin  and  Miss  Clegg  would  appear  to  be  referred  to 
indiscriminately,  but  Mr.  Wilson  and  Mr.  Piddington 
state  that  there  was  no  actual  confusion  in  the  refer¬ 
ences.  It  remains  to  add  that  Mr.  Wilson  was  but 
slightly  acquainted  with  Mr.  Piddington,  and  had  no 
connection  of  any  kind  with  Mrs.  Thompson,  who  did 
not  even  know  his  name. 

Mr.  Wilson  handed  to  Mrs.  Thompson  at  the 
beginning  of  the  seance  a  stocking  which  had  belonged 
to  the  deceased  lady.  After  one  or  two  inconclusive 
remarks,  the  trance  intelligence,  ‘‘  Nelly,”  proceeds  : 

I  The  name  is  assumed,  as  Mr.  Wilson  is  unwilling  to 
give  his  real  name  for  fear  of  causing  pain  to  the  relatives 
of  Miss  “  Clegg.” 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  THOMPSON  193 

The  feeling  is  of  live  influence.  Please  tell  me  if  it 
is  of  a  dead  influence. 

[J.  G.  P.  says  “  dead,”  on  receiving  information  from 
J.  O.  W.] 

I  can  see  a  girl  with  hair  down  her  back,  darker  than 
mother’s  [i.e.,  Mrs.  Thompson’s],  but  not  black,  not  pushed 
back,  but  a  cutting  over  the  forehead  like  a  fringe. 

[This  is  a  very  good  description  of  a  girl  cousin  of  the 
deceased  lady.  ] 

***** 

Is  it  too  ordinary  to  say  blue  dress  with  white  braid 
on?  Sort  of  sailor  dress. 

[All  this  fits  well  for  the  deceased  lady’s  cousin,  who  at 
the  time  was  wearing  a  kind  of  sailor  dress  trimmed  with 
white  braid.] 

Oh,  dear  I  something  like  something  coming.  There  is 
something  in  an  envelope  I  ought  to  have  belonging  to  the 
lady.  The  girl  in  blue  and  the  lady  connected  with  the 
stocking  are  not  the  same  person. 

***** 

I’ve  got  it  in  my  head  that  this  stocking  has  been  round 
somebody’s  throat.  [Nothing  known  of  this.] 

There’s  an  envelope — long  in  shape — with  stamped 
monogram  or  something  on  the  back.  It’s  got  G.  at  the 
back.  [The  lady  is  not  known  to  have  used  envelopes 
stamped  writh  a  G.,  but  G.  is  the  initial  letter  of  her  iChristian 
name.]  There’s  a  rather  old-fashioned  bookcase  with 
glass  doors.  [R.]*  The  envelope  is  there.  [The 
envelopes  would  have  been  kept  in  the  bookcase.]  This 
[i.e.,  the  stocking]  has  been  taken  off  the  lady  before  she 
died.  [R.]  It  hasn’t  a  laundry  association  [R.],  but 
was  taken  off  when  the  lady  was  not  very  ill.  [“  When 
she  was  not  ill  at  all  ”  would  be  correct.]  There  was  an 
old  lady  with  white  hair  in  the  room  when  the  stocking 
was  taken  off — not  quite  white  hair,  but  streaked.  [Prob¬ 
ably  wrong.]  There  is  a  chest  of  drawers  in  the  room 
with  a  white  cover  on.  Old-fashioned  cover — do  you  call  it 
Marcella?  White,  with  a  pattern  all  over  and  a  looped 
fringe. 

«  In  this  and  subsequent  extracts  [R.]  =  Right. 

13 

194 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

[All  references  to  the  bookcase  are  good  ;  description 
quite  accurate.  The  room  opens  into  a  bathroom — in  the 
bathroom  is  a  chest  of  drawers  with  a  white  fringed  cover. 
This  room  where  the  bookcase  stands  is  perhaps  the  most 
intimate  association  that  could  have  been  named.] 

She  wore  a  twisted  brooch.  It  was  like  as  if  it  formed 
a  name  or  figures. 

[A  glove  is  given  to  Mrs.  T.,  who  keeps  stocking.] 

J.  G.  P. — Can  you  see  the  name  or  figures? 

Nelly. — It’s  like  Gertrude.  No,  it  isn’t  Gertrude.  Ger¬ 
trude  was  a  very  great  friend  of  the  blue  dress  girl. 

[The  lady  had  a  brooch  of  decorative  scroll-work,  but 
none  forming  a  name  or  figures.  But  a  sister  of  Miss 
Clegg  states  that  the  description  immediately  suggested  to 
her  this  brooch,  and  that  at  first  sight  the  scroll-work  looks 
like  a  name.  The  lady’s  name  was  Gertrude,  though  Nelly 
does  not  say  so,  but  merely  says,  “  Gertrude  was  a  very 
great  friend  of  the  blue  dress  girl,”  which  was  true.] 

±  ^ 

‘‘  I  associate  this  glove  with  a  sailor  dress,  and  with  the 
house  where  the  funny  bookcase  is.  [R.]  The  bookcase 
nearly  comes  to  the  top  of  the  house — I  mean,  of  the  room. 
It’s  like  old-fashioned  mahogany,  red  coloured.  [Quite 
correct. ] 

‘‘  There  is  some  trouble  about  an  examination  with  the 
girl  in  the  blue  dress.” 

[J.  O.  W.  had  been  going  over  work  with  the  girl  for  an 
approaching  examination,  and  he  writes  that  the  girl  was 
also  “  very  anxious  ”  about  an  examination  which  her  brother 
was  going  in  for  in  a  few  months’  time.] 

[Mrs.  T.  holds  J.  O.  W.’s  hand.]  ‘‘The  blue  girl  is  a 
relation  of  the  other  lady.”  [R. — cousin.]  ‘‘The  girl  with 
the  blue  dress  came  home  with  a  lot  of  examination  papers 
[true  of  three  months  later  ]  and  broke  something,  and  there 
was  a  fuss  about  it.  [W.]  The  lady’s  brother  wears 
glasses.  [R.]  He  is  alive.  [R.]  She  has  got  a  Margaret 
— belonging  to  that  lady.”  [R. — a  cousin,  as  intimate  as 
a  sister  would  be,  who  used  to  live  with  her.] 

‘‘  In  that  room  there’s  one  of  those  chairs  that  makes  a 
noise  when  you  sit  down  on  it  :  an  old  creaky  chair.”  [A 
very  definite  and  apt  reference.]  ‘‘  She  has  got  a  dead  baby 
with  her.” 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  THOMPSON  195 

[J.  O.  W.  was  doubtful  of  this  at  first,  having  forgotten 
that  the  lady  had  two  sisters  who  died,  one  as  quite  a  baby.] 

“  I’ve  got  one  of  mother’s  dead  babies  at  our  house. 
Mother  doesn’t  think  it  was  a  little  live  boy — but  it  was.” 

For  the  sake  of  brevity  I  have  omitted  many  of 
the  more  indefinite  statements,  some  true,  some  false, 
and  some  doubtful.  But  the  number  and  nature  of 
the  true  statements  given  above  seem  beyond  the 
possible  scope  of  chance.  No  incorrect  names  were 
given  ;  and  the  two  names  actually  given  were  precisely 
appropriate. 

Dr.  van  Eeden  had  several  sittings  with  Mrs. 
Thompson  in  the  winter  of  1899  and  in  June,  1900. 
Dr.  van  Eeden  speaks  English  well,  but  would  no 
doubt  be  recognised  as  a  foreigner,  and  as  his  interest 
in  the  subject  was  well  known,  it  cannot  be  safely 
assumed  that  Mrs.  Thompson  was  unaware  of  the 
identity  of  her  visitor.  Much  detailed  and  correct 
information  was  given  about  himself,  his  relations,  and 
surroundings  generally  in  his  native  country,  Holland. 
But  the  most  striking  and  dramatic  communication  re¬ 
ferred  to  a  young  man  who  had  committed  suicide  ; 
he  had  first  cut  his  throat,  and  had,  later,  shot  himself. 
Van  Eeden  brought  with  him  to  England  an  article 
of  clothing  that  had  belonged  to  this  young  man. 
Nobody  in  the  world,,  he  tells  us,  knew  that  he  had 
done  so. I  The  parcel  containing  the  clothing  was  in¬ 
troduced  at  a  stance  held  on  June  2nd,  Lady  X.  and 
Dr.  van  Eeden  being  the  only  sitters. 

“  Nelly,”  on  taking  the  parcel,  says  : 

”  I  am  frightened.  I  feel  as  if  I  want  to  run  away.” 

'  Proceedings  S-P.R-,  vol.  xvii.  p.  78. 

196 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

(To  van  E.)  “That  lady  won’t  be  cross.”  (To  Lady  X.) 
“  Don’t  go  away.  I  feel  rather  frightened.  What’s  Marfa, 
Martha?  She’s  got  a  lot  of  people  belonging  to  her.” 

Van  E. — “  That’s  my  wife.” 

Nelly. — “  She  was  not  very  well.  It  is  better  now.  She 
went  to  lie  down  [doubtful].  Old  gentleman  sends  his  love 
to  Martha.  He  says  :  ‘  My  love,  Martha.’ 

“  This  ”  (pointing  to  parcel)  “  is  a  much  younger  gentle¬ 
man.  Very  studified,  fond  of  study  ”  [R.]. 

Van  E.— “  Why  were  you  frightened?” 

Nelly. — “  Because  something  seemed  like  a  shock  to  me. 
He’s  not  a  rich  gentleman.  If  he  lived  a  bit  longer  he 
would  have  had  more.  He  wanted  to  make  some  ”  [R.]. 

Van  E. — “  How  do  you  know?  ” 

Nelly. — “  Mrs.  Cartwright  tells  me.” 

Van  E. — “  Ask  her  why  you  were  frightened.” 

Nelly. — “  She  says  because  I  was  afraid  of  making 
faults.” 

[Obviously  wrong.] 

“  Gentleman  used  to  have  headache  at  the  back  of  his 
head.  He  used  to  take  tablets  to  make  his  headache  go 
better  ”  [doubtful]. 

[There  were  interpolated  here  some  references,  unidenti¬ 
fied,  to  a  “stout  William.”] 

Van  E. — “  You  have  not  told  me  the  principal  thing  about 
this  man  ”  (parcel). 

Nelly. — “The  principal  thing  is  his  sudden  death  [R.]. 
I  can  tell  you  better  when  she  (Lady  X.)  is  not  there. 
It  frightens  me.  Everybody  was  frightened,  seeming  to 
say,  ‘  Oh,  dear  I  good  gracious  !  ’  .  .  . 

“  This  gentleman  could  shoot.  He  was  rather  an  out- 
of-doors  man.  What  a  funny  hat  he  used  to  wear.  Round 
with  a  cord  around.  He  had  a  velvet  jacket.  You  have  a 
velvet  jacket  too,  but  not  real  velvet,  and  like  trousers  [R.]. 
But  that  gentleman  had  real  velvet  jacket.”  [References  to 
dress  doubtful.]  “  I  can’t  see  any  blood  about  this  gentle¬ 
man,  but  a  horrible  sore  place  :  somebody  wiped  it  all  up. 
It  looks  black  ”  [the  bullet  wound  probably].  “  I  am 
happy  because  that  man  is  happy  now.  He  was  in  a  state 
of  muddle.  And  when  he  realised  what  he  had  done,  he 
said  it  is  better  to  make  amends  and  be  happy.” 

Asked  how  he  made  amends,  Nelly  replied  :  “  When  any 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  MRS.  THOMPSON  197 

people  want  to  kill  themselves — he  stops  their  hands 
from  cutting  their  throats — He’s  got  such  a  horror 
that  anybody  would  do  the  same  thing.”  (Then  to  van 
Eeden)  :  ‘‘You  don’t  seem  to  have  any  whiskers.  I  don’t 
see  your  head  properly.  Some  one  covers  up  your  head. 
He  covers  up  your  head  to  show  you  how  his  own  head 
was  covered  up.  Oh,  dear  !  isn’t  it  funny  1  You  must  not 

cut  off  your  head  when  you  die.”  [The  suicide’s  head  was 

covered  up  when  he  was  found  dead.] 

At  a  stance  held  three  days  later  Nelly  asked  again 
for  the  parcel,  and  then  continued  : 

‘‘  This  person  [of  the  parcel  ]  talks  foreign  language 

[R.].  Has  got  something  about  the  throat”  \i.e.,  the 

wound  resulting  from  the  unsuccessful  attempt  at  suicide], 
‘‘  talks  not  very  distinctly  [R.].  He  can  talk  English  a  bit, 
but  not  many  [R.].  He  is  standing  before  a  desk  with 
white  knobs  on  it  [doubtful].  He  was  very  disappointed 
and  got  depressed  and  got  a  headache.  Worried  much  [R.  ]. 

‘‘  Very  friendly,  and  used  to  go  about  a  good  deal  with 
a  tall,  fair  man,  fair  complexion.”  [He  was  intimate  with 
a  tall,  fair  man,  who  in  turn  committed  suicide  two  days 
after  him.  ]  ‘‘  They  had  a  good  quarrel.”  [Probably  right.  ] 

‘‘  I  don’t  like  that  fair  man.  I  don’t  believe  in  him,  don’t 
trust  him.  It  was  a  shock  to  him  [parcel  man]  to  find  this 
out  about  his  friend”  [doubtful]. 

At  the  sitting  of  June  7th  the  young  suicide  himself 
purported  to  take  control  of  Mrs.  Thompson’s  organism. 
She  spoke  hoarsely,  and  complained  on  waking  of  a 
taste  like  chloroform  in  her  throat.  Van  Eeden  states 
that  the  wound  in  the  throat  had  been  dressed  with 
iodoform.  He  adds  that  ‘‘  during  a  few  minutes! — 
though  a  few  minutes  only — I  felt  absolutely  as  if  I 
were  speaking  to  my  friend  himself.  I  spoke  Dutch, 
and  got  immediate  and  correct  answers.  The  expres¬ 
sion  of  satisfaction  and  gratification  in  face  and  gesture, 
when  we  seemed  to  understand  each  other,  was  too* 

198 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

true  ,and  vivid  to  be  acted  ”  (p.  82).  It  should  be 
explained  that  van  Eeden’s  questions  in  Dutch  were 
apparently  understood,  since  relevant  answers  were  re¬ 
turned,  but  in  English.  Many  Dutch  names  and  some 
appropriate  Dutch  words  were,  however,  given. 

It  is  extremely  difficult  to  apply  statistical  methods 
to  such  discursive  and  indefinite  accounts  as  the 
records  of  trance  seances.  Mrs.  Verrall,  however,  who 
had  no  fewer  than  22  sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson, 
has  made  the  attempt.  She  finds  that  out  of  238 
definite  statements  referring  to  things  present  or  past,* 
33  were  false,  64  were  unidentified  or  have  not  yet 
been  verified,  141 — or  59  per  cent. — were  recognised 
as  true. 

Mrs.  Verrall  explains  that  she  has  only  reckoned  in 
this  enumeration  fairly  definite  statements,  such  as  that 
the  sitter  had  a  brother  and  two  sisters  living,  or  that 
a  lawyer  called  Stephens  or  Stevens  was  intimate  in 
a  certain  house,  &c.  Of  the  141  true  statements,  ,51 
were  such  as  could  have  been  ascertained  from  normal 
sources — e.g.,  the  “  Peerage,”  “  Who’s  Who,”  and 
other  public  records.  This  leaves  90  cases  in  which 
the  information  could  not  apparently  have  been  obtained 
by  any  normal  means.  It  will  be  admitted  that  the 
number  is  far  too  great  to  be  accounted  for  by  lucky 
chance, 2  There  seems,  indeed,  little  doubt  that  Mrs. 
Thompson  must  be  placed  in  the  same  category  as  Mrs, 
Piper,  and  that  the  explanation  that  will  eventually 
be  found  to  fit  the  facts  in  the  one  case  mu'st  be 
applied  to  the  other  also. 

*  A  few  predictions  were  made,  but  the  results  were  of 
no  value. 

2  Some  of  Mrs.  Verrall’s  true  incidents  will  be  discussed 
in  .Chapter  VII.  below. 

CHAPTER  IV 

SOME  RECENT  COMMUNICATORS 

Of  the  four  men  who  were  instrumental  in  founding 
the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  in  1882 — Henry 
Sidgwick,  Edmund  Gurney,  F.  .W.  H.  Myers,  and  Pro¬ 
fessor  :W.  F.  Barrett — the  last  named  only  remains 
with  us,  More  recently  we  have  lost  Richard  Hodgson, 
the  only  member  of  the  Society  who  has  been  enabled 
to  devote  his  whole  life  to  the  work  of  investigation, 
and  whose  knowledge  both  of  the  physical  phenomena 
of  Spiritualism  and  of  the  trance  communications 
through  Mrs.  Piper  was  unrivalled.  On  any  theory 
of  the  subject  we  should  expect  to  receive  innumerable 
communications  through  mediums  purporting  to  come 
from  the  spirits  of  these  leaders  of  psychical  research, 
and  as  a  matter  of  fact  messages  have  been  received, 
especially  since  the  death  of  F.  Wi.  H.  Myers,  from 
many  different  sources.  But  it  is,  of  course,  peculiarly 
difficult  in  the  case  of  persons  so  well  known,  land 
so  well  known  to  the  workers  in  this  particular  field, 
to  find  the  kind  of  proof  that  is  desired.  When  the 
spirit  purporting  to  communicate  is  that  of  the  unknown 
relation  of  a  sitter  whose  name  is  concealed,  as 
has  been  the  case  in  some  of  the  most  strikingly  suc¬ 
cessful  of  Mrs.  Piper’s  stances,  any  definite  statement 
of  facts  which  are  beyond  the  scope  of  cunning  guess¬ 
work  may  be  regarded  as  prima  facie  evidence  of 

199 

200 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

some  supernormal  faculty  of  perception,  even  if  only 
of  telepathy  from  the  mind  of  the  sitter.  But  we 
must,  of  course,  assume,  in  the  cases  now  to  be  con¬ 
sidered,  that  the  main  facts  of  the  lives,  the  chief 
personal  relationships,  the  published  works,  and  the 
mental  antecedents  generally  of  the  communicators  are 
known  to  the  trance  intelligence.  The  region  unknown 
to  the  medium  is  very  much  narrowed,  and  the  oppor¬ 
tunities  for  test  questions  proportionately  reduced. 
That  in  the  circumstances  there  is  anything  in  the 
communications  that  can  be  offered  as  evidence  for 
the  identity  of  these  special  communicators  is  the  more 
noteworthy.  In  the  first  two  cases,  it  may  be  said, 
the  evidence  amounts  to  little  more  than  an  occasional 
dramatic  appropriateness  of  speech,  or  a  resemblance 
in  writing.  But  in  the  case  of  Myers  and  Hodgson 
some  of  the  communications  are  more  definite  and 
much  more  impressive. 

Edmund  Gurney  died  in  the  summer  of  1888. 
Shortly  after  his  death  communications  were  received 
through  automatic  writing  by  a  lady  who  was  at  that 
time,  I  believe,  personally  unacquainted  with  any  of 
the  leading  members  of  the  Society  for  Psychical 
Research,  but  who  immediately  afterwards  joined  the 
Society,  and  took  an  active  part  in  its  work,  contributing 
papers  to  its  Proceedings.  In  the  course  of  the  follow¬ 
ing  year  communications  which  purported  to  come  front 
Gurney  were  received  through  Mrs.  Piper  at  a  sitting 
with  Professor  James.  Professor  James  comnients  on 
these  communications  : 

"  It  was  bad  enough,  and  I  confess  that  the  human  being 
in  me  was  so  much  stronger  than  the  man  of  science,  that 
I  was  too  disgusted  with  P.hinuit’s  tiresome  twaddle  even  to 

SOME  RECENT  COMMUNICATORS 

201 

note  it  down.  When  later  the  phenomena  developed  into 
pretended  direct  speech  from  Gurney  himself,  I  regretted 
this,  for  a  completer  record  would  have  been  useful.  I  can 
now  merely  say  that  neither  then  nor  at  any  other  time  was 
there,  to  my  mind,  the  slightest  inner  verisimilitude  in  the 
impersonation.”  • 

During  the  experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  this 
country  in  the  winter  of  1889-90  the  Gurney  con¬ 
trol  held  several  conversations  with  Sir  Oliver  Dodge. 
Correct  references,  as  Sir  Oliver  tells  us,  were  made 
to  private  matters  personally  unknown  to  him.  The 
fact,  (however,  that  the  same  matters  had  been  pre¬ 
viously  mentioned  in  the  trance  to  other  sitters  who 
were  conversant  with  the  facts  deprives  their  intro¬ 
duction  at  the  seances  with  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  of  its 
chief  value  as  a  proof  of  spirit  identity.  The  whole 
manner  of  the  impersonation,  however,  seems  to  have 
been  remarkably  lifelike.  The  Gurney  control  spon¬ 
taneously  recalled  having  once  taken  tea  with  Lady 
Lodge  and  having  met  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Isaac  Thompson. 2 
On  the  other  hand,  he  professed  no  recognition  of 
Sir  Oliver  Lodge’s  sister,  who  attended  one  of  the 
sittings,  and  whom,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  Edmund  Gurney 
had  never  met.  But  there  were  things  in  the  substance 
of  the  communications  wholly  unlike  the  real  Edmund 
Gurney.  Asked  for  his  opinion  on  the  physical  pheno¬ 
mena  of  Spiritualism,  the  control  said  that  they  were 
“  mostly  fraud,  the  rest  electricity  ”  I  and  that  some 
of  the  Indian  juggling  tricks  were  due  to  “a  veil. 
Lodge,  an  etherial  veil  between  the  thing  and  the 

'  Proceedings  S.PiR.,  vol.  vi.  p.  656. 

2  This  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thompson  have  no  connection  with 
the  Mrs.  Thompson  whose  mediumship  is  discussed  in  the 
previous  chapter. 

202 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

spectator  .  .  .  it’s  done  through  ether,  it’s  a  gap  in 
ether  (?).”  *  These  utterances  are  clearly  diagnostic 
of  the  intelligence  of  the  trance  medium  rather  than  of 
the  author  of  “  Phantasms  of  the  Living,” 

Again,  on  his  introduction  to  Miss  Lodge,  the  Gurney, 
control  remarked  :  “  Glad  to  see  you.  I  wrote  a  little 
book  on  ‘  The  Power  of  Sound.’  Did  you  ever  read 
it?  You  might  by  chance  be  interested  in  it.” 

A  more  uncharacteristic  utterance  could  hardly  have 
been  invented. 

To  some  other  difficult  points  in  the  impersonation 
reference  will  be  made  in  the  next  chapter. 

“  Edmund  Gurney  ”  again  communicates  occasionally 
through  Mrs.  Verrall,  and  has  assumed  the  general 
direction  of  the  automatic  communications  made 
through  another  automatist,  Mrs.  Forbes  (assumed 
name).  The  impersonations  through  these  two  ladies 
— both  of  whom  knew  Edmund  Gurney  in  the  flesh — 
are  of  a  neutral  character,  and  cannot  be  said  to  offer 
any  evidence  one  way  or  the  other.  The  Gurney  con¬ 
trol  who  communicates  through  Mrs.  Holland  (assumed 
name)  is  of  another  type.  His  constant  exhortations 
addressed  to  the  automatist  are  marked  by  an  im¬ 
patience  and  brusquerie,  verging  on  actual  discourtesy, 
which  are  quite  irreconcilable  with  the  demeanour  of 
the  Edmund  Gurney  whom  his  friends  knew.  Mrs. 
Holland,  it  should  be  added,  did  not  know  him 
personally. 

Communications  purporting  to  come  from  Professor 
Sidgwick  have  been  received,  amongst  others,  through 
Mrs.  Thompson  and  Mrs.  Verrall.  Professor  Sidgwick 
died  in  the  summer  of  1900,  and  in  December  of 
j  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  156. 

SOME  RECENT  COMMUNICATORS 

203 

that  year  his  sister,  Mrs.  Benson,  had  several  sittings 
with  Mrs.  Thompson.  No  reference  at  any  of  these 
was  made  to  Professor  Sidgwick  ;  but  at  a  sitting 
held  on  January  ii,  1901,  at  which  Mrs.  Benson 
was  not  present,  the  Sidgwick  control  spoke  through 
Mrs.  Thompson.  Mr.  Piddington,  who  was  present, 
tells  us  that  the  voice,  manner,  and  style  of  utterance 
were  extraordinarily  lifelike,  and  that  he  “  felt  that 
[he]  was  indeed  speaking  with  and  hearing  the  voice 
of  the  man  whom  [he]  had  known.”  *  At  a  later  date 
several  sentences  were  written  by  the  control.  The 
first  script  was  written  in  Mr.  Piddington’s  presence  ; 
the  remaining  three  while  Mrs.  Thompson  was  alone. 
They  bear  a  very  striking,  and  indeed  quite  unmis¬ 
takable,  resemblance  to  the  writing  of  Mr.  Henry 
Sidgwick.  Mrs.  Thompson  states  that  she  had  never 
seen  his  writing.  But,  of  course,  there  may  have  been 
opportunities  for  her  to  see  it  unconsciously,  and  we 
cannot  therefore  assume  her  ignorance  of  the  writing. 2 
The  substance  of  the  communications  contained 
nothing  of  an  evidential  nature  ;  and  some  of  the 
remarks  credited  to  the  Sidgwick  control  impress  one 
strongly  as  appropriate  to  the  mind  of  the  medium 
rather  than  to  the  mind  purporting  to  communicate. 
Such  is  the  sentence  addressed  to  Mr.  Piddington, 
put  into  the  mouth  of  the  Sidgwick  control  :  ‘‘  You 
always  thought  me  old  and  shabby,  but  I  am  shabbier 
now  ”  ;  3  or  the  remark  reported  by  the  Myers  con¬ 
trol  of  the  Sidgwick  control  :  “  He  says,  ‘  Myers,  now 

*  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  236 — 7. 

2  Reproductions  of  the  control  writing,  with  some  speci¬ 
mens  of  Mr.  Sidgwick’s  own  writing  for  comparison,  are 
given  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xviii. 

3  Ibid.,  vol.  xviii.  p.  237. 

204 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

we  are  together,  you  convince  me  that  I  am  sending 
my  messages  and  that  she  is  not  getting  them  from' 
us  some  way  ’  ’V;  or,  again,  the  statement  made  by 
another  control  about  Myers  himself  :  “  Do  you  know 
he  feels  like  the  note-taker,  not  like  the  spirit  that 
has  to  speak  ”  ' — ^all  these  rather  cheap  witticisms  seem 
to  point  immediately  to  the  “  Nelly  ”  control  of 
Mrs.  Thompson  as  their  source. 

The  Sidgwick  communications  through  Mrs.  Verrall’s 
hand  are  naturally  more  in  character,  as  coming  from 
one  who  knew  him  well  in  life.  But  they  contain  little 
that  can  be  regarded  as  throwing  light  upon  the  identity 
of  the  communicator.  Several  remarks  were  made 
about  an  old  MS.  connected  with  children,  and  on 
reference  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  it  was  found  that  she 
had  recently  come  across  a  play,  written  in  1856  for 
some  children,  one  of  whom  was  a  friend  of  Henry 
Sidgwick’s.2 

On  the  other  hand,  repeated  references  were  made 
to  three  letters  of  which  Mrs.  Sidgwick  knows  nothing  ; 
and  the  control  failed  to  answer  a  test  question.  Mrs. 
Verrall  was  asked  to  request  the  control  to  state  the 
text  which  (as  stated  in  the  “  Memoir,”  then  not  yet 
published)  represented  the  dominant  thought  in  the 
last  part  of  Dr.  Sidgwick’s  life.  Many  attempts  were 
made,  but  all  incorrect  .3 

Communications  purporting  to  come  from  the  late 
F.  W.  H.  Myers,  who  died  on  January  17,  1901,  have 
been  received  through  many  automatists.  The  only 
cases,  however,  which  it  will  be  necessary  to  consider 

'  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxiii.  pp.  201 — 202. 

2  Ibid.,  vol.  XX.  p.  279. 

3  Ibid.,  vpl.  XX.  pp.  296 — 7. 

SOME  RECENT  COMMUNICATORS 

205 

in  the  present  connection  are  those  made  through  Mrs. 
Piper,  Mrs.  Verrall,  and  Mrs.  Holland,  which  have 
offered  some  opportunities  for  testing  the  genuineness 
of  the  impersonation. 

As  regards  Mrs.  Holland,  I  see  no  reason  to  ques¬ 
tion  that  the  “  Myers,”  who  shares  with  “  Gurney  ” 
the  general  direction  of  this  lady’s  automatic  writing, 
is  the  creature  of  her  own  subconscious  intelligence, 
owing  nothing  to  any  external  inspiration.  Miss  Alice 
Johnson,  who  has  edited  Mrs.  Holland’s  script, i  has 
pointed  out  many  instances  in  which  these  automatic 
impersonations  have  clearly  owed  characteristic  details 
to  information  recently  acquired  by  the  normal  self 
from  books  and  newspaper  articles.  The  most  striking 
proof  of  the  artificial  character  of  this  personality  is 
afforded  by  the  following  incident*:  In  October,  1905, 
Mrs.  Holland  read  in  the  Spectator  a  review  of  Max¬ 
well’s  book  dealing  with  the  physical  phenomena  pf 
Spiritualism.  The  book  had  a  preface  written  by  Sir 
Oliver  Lodge.  In  the  same  month  Sir  Oliver  Lodge 
described  at  a  meeting  of  the  Society  some  phenomena 
which  he  had  witnessed,  at  Dr.  Maxwell’s  invitation, 
at  Bordeaux.  Mr.  Feilding  also  was  at  this  time 
planning  to  attend  some  stances  with  Eusapia  Palla- 
dino  in  Paris,  and  had  discussed  the  phenomena 
with  Miss  Johnson. 

Mrs.  Holland’s  script  of  November  and  December 
was  full  of  impressive  and  repeated  warnings  purport¬ 
ing  to  come  from  Myers  against  fraudulent  spiritual¬ 
istic  manifestations.  Thus  :  “  The  phenomena  that  will 
shortly  be  introduced  are  utterly  misleading  .  .  .  the 
old  familiar  trickery.”  Again,  after  a  reference  to 
>  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxi. 

206 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

Eusapia  Palladino  by  name  :  “  The  trance  condition 
is  partially  genuine  ;  the  manifestations  are  simply 
fraudulent.”  Definite  statements  are  then  made  as  to 
the  use  by  Eusapia  of  feet,  toes,  and  lazy-tongs,  and 
the  message  is  written  :  “  The  kind  of  ridicule  this 

would  bring  would  be  the  killing  type.  Has  [s/c]  we 
endured  so  long — done  so  much,  endured  so  much, 
hoped  so  much,  only  to  come  to  an  end  in  the  course 

of  the  year  now  coming - It  is  a  very  sad  thought 

to  me.”  The  last  sentence  is  obviously  intended  to  fore¬ 
shadow  the  probable  collapse  of  the  Society  for 
Psychical  Research  through  the  discredit  brought  on 
it  by  its  attitude  towards  physical  mediums,  and 
Eusapia  in  particular.' 

Now,  the  living  Myers,  as  already  shown,  had  some 
years  before  his  death  formally  recanted  his  suspicions 
and  announced  his  conviction  of  the  genuineness  pf 
Eusapia’s  phenomena.  That  his  attitude  towards  the 
whole  subject  had  not  changed  in  his  lifetime  is  suffi¬ 
ciently  proved  by  the  views  expressed  in  his  book  on 
‘‘  Human  Personality.”  The  apprehensions  shown  in 
Mrs.  Plolland’s  script  are,  therefore,  entirely  foreign  to 
the  views  held  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers  when  alive.  If  he  had 
changed  them  since  his  death,  he  would,  no  doubt — 
since  the  problem  affects  the  authenticity  of  the  con¬ 
trols,  not  only,  of  Mrs.  Holland,  but  of  Mrs.  Thompson 
and  Mrs.  Piper  as  well — have  thought  it  necessary 
to  explain  the  change  through  these  or  other  sources. 
The  circumstance,  again,  points  immediately  to  Mrs. 
Holland’s  subconscious  mind  as  the  sole  source  of  these 
messages.  i 

Mrs.  Verrall  developed  the  faculty  of  automatic 

‘  Proceedings  S.R.R.,  vol.  xxi.  pp.  273 — 8. 

SOME  RECENT  COMMUNICATORS 

207 

writing  shortly  after  Myers’  death,  and  amongst  ,the 
communications  received  from  him  were  some  that  pur¬ 
ported  to  reveal  the  contents  of  a  sealed  letter  which 
Myers  had  written  in  1891  for  the  express  purpose 
of  such  a  test,  and  had  left  in  the  care  of  Sir  Oliver 
Lodge.  The  sealed  letter  was  opened  on  December  13, 
1904,  but  it  was  found  that  the  contents  bore  no  re¬ 
semblance  to  the  statements  made  in  Mrs.  Verrall’s 
script. 

In  January,  1907,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  propounded  to  the 
Piper-Myers  a  test  question  of  which  she  alone  knew 
the  answer.  In  order  as  far  as  possible  to  exclude 
the  operation  of  telepathy,  the  question  was  put  by 
Mrs.  Verrall,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  herself  not  interviewing 
Mrs.  Piper  until  later.  Briefly,  at  one  of  Myers’  last 
meetings  with  Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  he  had  called 
Mrs.  Sidgwick  aside  and  urged  her  to  induce  Mr.  Arthur 
Sidgwick  to  write  a  Memoir  of  his  brother. i  Other 
matters  were  also  referred  to.  The  Piper-Myers  was 
asked  to  state  the  subject  of  the  conversation.  Mrs. 
Verrall  knew  only  that  the  conversation  had  taken  place 
out  of  doors  in  the  porch.  In  the  presence  of  Mrs. 
Verrall  and  Mr.  Piddington  the  Piper-Myers,  through 
the  hand  of  the  entranced  Mrs.  Piper,  stated  correctly 
that  the  conversation  had  taken  place  out  of  doors, 
though  he  gave  the  locality  incorrectly  as  near  some 
shrubbery.  After  some  vague  and  general  remarks 
natural  to  the  circumstances,  the  following  definite 
statements  were  made  about  the  subject  of  the  con¬ 
versation  :  That  it  referred  to  Professor  Sidgwick’s 

•  The  Memoir  was  afterwards  written  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidg¬ 
wick  and  Mr.  Arthur  Sidgwick  jointly,  and  had  been 
published  before  the  test  had  been  propounded. 

208 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

writing  a  letter  [(for  the  purpose  of  a  test)  ;  that  it 
related  to  the  posthumous  publication  of  some  book 
of  his  ;  that  it  referred  to  “a  certain  document  ”  ; 
to  some  “  matter  pertaining  to  the  College  to  “a 
library  matter  ” — later  expanded  into  the  Gurney 
Memorial  Library.  After  this  Mrs.  Sidgwick  herself 
attended  the  stances  with  Mrs.  Piper.  Reference  was 
again  made  on  February  13th  to  the  Library  and  to 
the  document.  On  February  20th  the  Library  was 
again  referred  to.  On  March  20th  the  Myers’  control 
wrote  :  “I  recall  very  clearly  speaking  with  you  about 
a  will.”  Later  in  the  same  sitting  the  message  came  : 

‘‘  Let  me  ask  if  you  remember  .  .  .  my  advising  you, 
to  see  about — see  [illegible  scrawl  here]  about  his  life.” 

E.  M.  S. — ”  My  advising  you  to  see?  ” 

[Rector  communicating.  ] 

“  I  can’t  tell  you  just  what  the  word  is.  It  sounds  like 
R-e-v-n-u-a  of  his  life.” 

E.  M.  S. — “  R-e-u-n-u-a — is  that  it?  ” 

[Myers  communicating.  ] 

”  Yes,  it  was  to  write  it.” 

Mrs.  Sidgwick  then  acknowledged  the  correctness 
of  the  statement  so  far,  but  pointed  out  that  some¬ 
thing  else  had  been  said  in  the  conversation  referred  to. 

The  Piper-Myers  returned  to  the  question  at  later 
stances,  but  still  harped  on  the  point  of  having  asked 
Mrs.  Sidgwick  to  write  the  Life,  and  made  various 
guesses  at  the  further  question  asked. 

Then  on  April  2nd,  after  having  stated  ^correctly) 
that  Myers  wanted  the  Life  written,  but  was  too  busy 
to  undertake  it  himself,  the  trance  intelligence  con¬ 
tinued  : 

”  Now,  dear  friend,  let  me  refer  again  to  the  book. 

I  remember  I  asked  you  to  try,  and  do  you  remember  copy- 

SOME  RECENT  COMMUNICATORS 

209 

right,  and  bring  out  the  work  that  it  should  not  fall  into 
other  hands.  I  felt  it  was  your  work  alone,  and  the  exact 
words  I  pointed  were,  I  believe,  like  this — I  had  [?]  unless 
you  take  certain  [  ?  ]  on  this  point  they  would  lose  their 
value.  Am  I  not  correct?  ” 

E.  M.  S. — “  I  do  not  think  you  referred  to  copyright.” 

Control. — ”  I  do  not  intend  to  say  copyright,  only 
copies.  Rector  does  not  understand  my  point.  I  will 
explain.  Do  you  remember  my  suggesting  to  you  about 
views  [?]  photographs  which  I  thought  would  be  necessary? 
and  I  think  I  suggested  Arthur.  Do  you  remember  about 
Arthur  and  what  I  said  about  his  giving  anything  [  ?  ]  to 
assist  assisting  you?  ” 

At  the  next  sitting  there  was  a  further  reference  to 
“Arthur”—/.^.,  Mr.  Arthur  Sidgwick. 

It  will  be  seen  that  only  one  piece  of  correct  in¬ 
formation,  and  that  known  to  Mrs.  Verrall,  was  given 
before  Mrs.  Sidgwick  came  to  the  seances.  After  she 
came  and  after  several  incorrect  guesses  had  been  made, 
and  the  field  thus  narrowed  down,  the  answer — correct 
so  far  as  it  went — was  given  that  the  conversation 
related  to  the  writing  of  a  Life  of  Professor  Sidgwick. 
But  Mr.  Arthur  Sidgwick  only  came  in  as  assisting 
Mrs.  Sidgwick,  which,  in  fact,  he  had  done. 

Mrs.  Sidgwick  thinks  that  the  statements  made  by 
the  trance  intelligence  were  not  such  as  Mrs.  Piper 
would  have  been  likely,  to  guess,  and  that  on  the  whole 
they  seem  to  indicate  some  supernormal  source  of 
information.  But  it  leaves  the  question  open  as 
between  telepathy  and  communication  from  the  dead.' 

Several  other  opportunities  for  testing  the  Piper- 
Myers  occurred  in  the  course  of  Mrs.  Piper’s  visit  to 
this  country  in  1906-07.  Two  of  them,  the  Greek 
sentence  selected  by  Mrs.  Verrall  and  the  Latin 

'  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxii.  pp.  417 — 44. 

14 

210 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

message,  are  involved  with  the  general  question  of 
cross-correspondences,  and  can  most  conveniently  be 
dealt  with  in  the  next  chapter,  to  which  the  reader  is 
referred.  Another  case,  which  furnished  the  most 
striking  test  in  the  whole  series,  the  Lethe  incident, 
is  discussed  in  Chapter  VI.  But  at  the  seance  of 
January  23,  1907,  at  which  the  question  about  the 
Greek  phrase  was  put  to  the  Myers  control  by  Mr. 
Piddington,  the  question  was  also  asked  :  “  Which  ode 
of  Horace  entered  deeply  into  your  inner  life?  ”  The 
answer  desired  was  a  reference  to  Odes  I.  28,  the 
Archytas  Ode,  which  Myers  had  himself  described  in 
a  letter  written  in  1884  in  the  words  quoted  in  the 
question.  Several  references  to  Horace  and  many  to 
poems  were  made  at  subsequent  sittings  ;  but  a 
definite  reply  was  not  given  until  April  17th.  Mrs. 
Sidgwick  then  reminded  the  Piper-Myers  of  his  promise, 
and  he  answered  :  “I  recall  the  question  and  I  had 
the  ‘Ode  to  Nature  ’  on  my  mind,  but  as  I  thought  I 
loved  another  ode  better  I  did  not  reply  until  I  could 
say  it  more  clearly.  Do  you  remember  immortality?  ”  ' 
It  happens  that  Myers’  posthumous  “  Fragments  of 
Prose  and  Poetry  ”  include  an  “  Ode  to  Nature  ”  and 
a  poem  on  “  Immortality  .”  Both  contain  some 
similarities  of  thought  and  expression,  too  marked, 
it  would  seem,  to  be  accidental,  with  two  well- 
known  odes  of  Horace  (Odes  HI.  4  and  I.  28,  the 
Archytas  Ode).  Mrs.  Piper  states  (pp,  109-10)  that 
she  had  not  at  this  date  seen  the  “  Fragments.”  Her 
knowledge  of  the  book,  however,  in  this  connection 
is  immaterial,  since  her  reading  of  it  would  not  have 
enabled  her  to  connect  any  passage  in  it  with  Horace. 

'  Proceedings  SP.R.x  vol.  xxii.  p.  398. 

SOMES  RECENT  COMMUNICATORS 

211 

But  Mrs.  Verrall,  who  suggested  the  question,  had 
seen  the  ‘‘Fragments  ”  two  or  three  years  before,  and 
had  at  that  time  (October,  1904)  read  the  poem  on 
“  Immortality.”  It  does  not  ^appear  that  she  consciously 
connected  the  poem  with  the  Archytas  Ode,  nor  that 
she  read  the  “  Ode  to  Nature.”  Had  she  done  so, 
she  could  hardly  have  failed  to  recognise  the  Horatian 
allusions  in  it.  In  the  circumstances  it  would  not 
be  reasonable,  in  view  of  the  frequent  telepathic  inter¬ 
changes  which  appear  to  have  taken  place  between 
Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Piper,  to  exclude  the  possibility 
that  the  knowledge  of  the  titles  of  the  two  poems 
shown  by  the  latter  may  have  been  derived  from  the 
mind,  if  even  the  unconscious  mind,  of  the  former. * 

Richard  Hodgson  was  born  in  Melbourne.  He  left 
Australia  to  come  to  this  country  in  1878,  and  lived 
here  until  1887,  when  he  went  to  America  to  act  as 
Secretary  to  the  American  Branch  of  the  Society  for 
Psychical  Research,  remaining  there,  with  brief 
intervals,  until  his  death  in  December,  1905. 

iWhat  appears  to  have  been  the  earliest  communica¬ 
tion  from  a  Hodgson  control  in  this  country  came 
through  Mrs.  Holland. 2  Though  Mrs.  Holland  had 
produced  automatic  writing  occasionally  for  some  years 
previously,  her  systematic  pursuit  of  the  practice  dates 
only  from  September,  1903.  Almost  from  the  outset 
her  automatism  purported  to  be  controlled  by  Edmund 

'  See  Mr.  Piddington’s  further  discussion  of  the  incident 
in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxiv.  pp.  150 — 69.  I  do  not 
find  that  his  argument,  ingenious,  subtle,  and  scholarly 
though  it  is,  carries  much  weight  to  my  own  mind.  But 
this  is  a  question  to  be  decided  almost  entirely  by  the 
personal  equation.  Let  the  reader  judge  for  himself. 

2  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxi.  p.  304. 

212 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

Gurney  or  F.  W.  H.  Myers.  But,  as  already  said, 
there  is  nothing  either  in  the  substance  of  the  com¬ 
munications  or  the  manner  of  them  which  should  lead 
us  to  attribute  them  to  any  other  agency  than  the 
subliminal  consciousness  of  the  writer. 

Mrs.  Holland  is  generally  awake  or  in  apparent 
possession  of  her  normal  faculties  while  practising 
automatic  writing.  In  February,  1905,  she  had  found 
a  tendency  to  drowsiness  during  the  process  which 
she  had  successfully  resisted.  Early  in  the  following 
year  she  found  the  drowsiness  coming  again,  and  in 
sending  to  Miss  Johnson  some  script,  written  on 
February  9,  1906,  she  stated  that  she  had  felt  yery 
sleepy.  It  should  be  mentioned  that  Mrs.  Holland 
had  a  few  days  previously  seen  a  newspaper  para¬ 
graph  giving  the  fact  of  Dr.  Hodgson’s  death,  but 
without  details.  The  writing  was  as  follows  : 

Friday,  Feb.  9,  1906.  9  p.m. 

“Sjdibse  Ipehtp  o — only  one  letter  farther  on. 

18 

9 

3 
8 
1 

18 

4 

8 

15 

4 

7 

19 

15 

14 

“  They  are  not  haphazard  figures  ;  read  them  as  letters. 

“  The  shortness  of  breath  was  the  worst  part  of  the 
illness — worse  even  than  the  exhaustion. 

“  K.  57.  (A  Christian  name) — grey  paper. 

[Then  come  references,  unidentified,  to  some  document.] 
“  It  is  a  wide  prospect  from  the  window.  A  gold  watch- 
chain  with  a  horse -shoe  shaped  cigar -cutter  attached  to  it — 
an  old  seal,  not  his  own  initials — a  white-handled  knife 
ink -stained. 

SOME  RECENT  COMMUNICATORS 

213 

“  Nitrate  of  amyl — probably  too  late  even  if  it  had  been 
thought  of — a  corpse  needs  no  shoes.”  ' 

The  reference  to  Richard  Hodgson,  whom  Mrs. 
Holland  had  never  met,  is  clear.  S  j  d  i  b  s  e 
I  p  e  h  t  p  o  are  “  only  one  letter  farther  on,”  and 
the  two  columns  of  figures  give  the  numerical  order 
in  the  alphabet  of  the  letters  forming  the  two  names. 
Hodgson  died  suddenly  of  heart  failure  whilst  playing 
at  hand-ball,  so  that  the  reference  to  illness  and  short¬ 
ness  of  breath  are  inaccurate.  He  wore  a  gold  watch- 
chain,  with  cigar-cutter  attached — but  it  was  not  horse¬ 
shoe  shaped.  An  old  broken  seal  was  found  amongst 
his  possessions,  but  there  were  no  initials  on  it.  Nitrite 
of  amyl  is  used  for  heart  failure.  There  are,  however, 
three  points  which  specially  connect  the  script  with 
Hodgson. 

1 .  The  device  of  giving  a  name  by  means  of  conun¬ 
drums  is  extremely  characteristic.  Hodgson  was 
extraordinarily  fond  of  anagrams  and  puzzles  of  lall 
kinds.  It  appears,  however,  that  Mrs.  Holland  had 
as  a  child  played  at  a  secret  language  by  using  letters 
of  the  alphabet  in  the  same  way,  though  she  cannot 
recall  ever  having  used  numbers  for  the  purpose. 

2.  The  suppressed  Christian  name  was  that  of  a 
lady,  dead  so  far  back  as  1879,  who  had  played  a 
large  part  in  Hodgson’s  life.  The  name  had  been 
mentioned  at  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  but  never  pub¬ 
lished,  and  it  seems  impossible  that  Mrs.  Holland 
should  have  known  of  it  by  normal  means  .2 

*  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxi.  p.  304. 

2  The  name,  however,  is  a  fairly  common  one,  and  the 
actual  termination  ”  sie  ”  had  been  published  in  the  Pro¬ 
ceedings  S.P.R..  But  Mrs.  Holland  had  not  read  the  Pro¬ 
ceedings. 

214 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

^3-  K.  57. 

'A  copy  of  the  script  was  sent  to  Mr.  Piddington, 
at  the  time  in  Boston,  helping  to  arrange  Dr.  Hodgson’s 
papers.  On  the  same  morning  that  he  received  it  Mr. 

Piddington 

found 

in  a  notebook  of 

Hodgson’s  the 

following  entries 

R. 

H. 

R.  H. 

1 

K.  6  Mr. 

(or  Mrs.)  p- 

4 

K.  52 

8 

6 

K.  8 

14 

3 

3 

2 

4 

K.  36 

7 

52 

K.  6 

7 

K. 

11 

K.  7 

10 

K. 

52 

K.  52 

10 

K.  13 

K. 

30 

7 

3 

No  explanation  of  the  figures  is  forthcoming.  But 
they  present  a  curious  resemblance  to  the  K.  57  and 
lines  of  figures  in  Mrs,  Holland’s  script. 

One  or  two  other  references  to  Hodgson,  but  of 
little  evidential  value,  are  found  in  Mrs.  Holland’s 
script. 

Naturally,  however,  the  Hodgson  control  has  been 
most  active  in  Mrs.  Piper’s  trance,  sharing,  in  this 
country  at  any  rate,  with  the  Myers  control  the  bulk 
of  the  work  of  communicating.  The  Piper-Hodgson 
in  this  country,  however,  has  given  no  satisfactory 
proofs  of  identity.  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  whose  testimony 
to  the  Gurney  control  has  been  already  quoted,  finds 
very  little  feeling  of  reality  in  connection  with'  the 
Myers  and  Hodgson  controls.  “They  seemed  in  my 
case,’’  he  writes,  “  rather  shadowy  and,  so  to  speak, 

SOME  RECENT  COMMUNICATORS 

215 

uninteresting  communicators.”  >  Four  intimate  friends 
of  Hodgson’s  were  introduced  at  various  times  i(of 
course,  under  assumed  names),  and  had  in  all  twelve 
sittings  with  the  entranced  Mrs.  Piper.  But  no  satis¬ 
factory  evidence  even  for  recognition  was  forthcoming, 
though  some  of  the  sittings  were  by  no  means  unpro¬ 
ductive  in  other  respects  .2 

In  marked  contrast  the  Piper-Hodgson  in  America 
seems  to  have  been  one  of  the  most  lifelike  and 
dramatic  impersonations  of  the  whole  series  given 
through  Mrs.  Piper,  and  many  true  and  relevant  state¬ 
ments  were  made  of  an  intimate  kind  such  as  could 
scarcely  have  proceeded  from  Mrs.  Piper  herself.  Of 
course  Hodgson  was  well  known  to  Mrs.  Piper  in  her 
normal  state,  and  had,  further,  been  present  at  her 
trance  sittings  for  many  years,  and  was  on  intimate 
terms,  so  to  speak,  with  her  controls.  There  were 
thus  several  channels  through  which  it  is  possible  some 
of  the  information  given  might  have  reached  Mrs. 
Piper,  and,  in  fact,  as  will  be  shown,  two  or  three 
incidents  which  at  first  sight  seemed  of  an  almost  crucial 
character  were  robbed  of  their  chief  evidential  value 
by  the  later  discovery  that  some  of  the  facts  had  at 
one  time  been  within  the  knowledge  of  the  trance 
intelligence.  But  when  all  deductions  are  made,  the 
impersonation  remains  a  very  remarkable  one. 

The  Hodgson  control  first  appeared  at  a  sitting  held 
on  December  28,  1905,  eight  days  after  his  death. 
The  sitter.  Miss  Theodate  Pope,  had  been  a  friend  of 
his.  Rector  (the  controlling  spirit)  3  described 

'  Proceedings  SiP.R.,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  282. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  123. 

3  For  some  account  of  Rector  see  Chapter  VII. 

216 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

Hodgson  as  holding  a  ring  and  showing  it  to  the  sitter, 
and  then  wrote  “Margaret  a  11  B.  L.” 

At  the  next  sitting,  early  in  January,  the  Piper- 
Hodgson  gave  eight  lines  of  rhythmical  and  passably 
melodious  verse,  which  he  claimed  as  original. 
Hodgson  in  his  lifetime  had  been  an  omnivorous 
reader  and  an  enthusiastic  lover  of  poetry. 

On  January  i6th,  at  another  sitting  with  Miss  Pope, 
the  Hodgson  control  wrote  : 

Give  ring  to  Margaret  back  to  Margaret.  ; 

Miss  P. — Who  is  Margaret? 

I  was  with  her  in  the  summer. 

[Hodgson  had  spent  two  summers  at  the  house  of  Miss 
Margaret  Bancroft.] 

On  January  24th  the  actual  donor  of  the  ring,  Mrs. 
Lyman  '(assumed  name),  whose  Christian  name  is  not 
Margaret,  had  her  first  sitting.  As  soon  as  the 
Hodgson  control  came  on  the  scene  he  wrote  : 

The  ring.  You  gave  it  me  on  my  fiftieth  birthday. 
When  they  asked  I  didn’t  want  to  say  you  gave 
it  me,  I  didn’t  want  to  say  that.  .  .  .  Two  palm- 
leaves  joining  each  other — Greek.  [Here  followed 
illegible  word.  The  palms  truly  described  the  ring, 
which  Mrs.  Piper  probably  had  seen  ;  but  it  bore 
no  Greek  inscription,  nor  was  the  symbol  on  it  a 
Greek  cross.]  You  gave  it  me - - 

Mrs.  L. — Yes,  Dick,  where  is  it  now? 

They  have  got  it.  They  took  it  off  my  finger 
after  I  was  gone. 

Mrs.  L. — No,  they  didn’t  find  it  on  your  finger. 

Pocket,  it  was  in  my  pocket.  I’ll  find  it  you  shall 
have  it. 

On  January  29th  Mrs.  L.  had  another  sitting.  The 
Hodgson  control  wrote  : 

SOME  RECENT  COMMUNICATORS 

217 

I  have  been  trying  to  make  clear  about  that  ring. 
It  is  on  my  mind  all  the  time.  I  thought  if  I  could 
get  Margaret  B.  to  get  it  for  me,  I  would  get  it 
to  you  through  her,  then  no  one  would  understand. 
I  could  not  tell  Miss  Pope  about  you. 

Mrs.  L. — Did  you  think  Margaret  B.  gave  it  to  you? 

Oh  dear  no  !  not  at  all. 

Mrs.  Lyman  asked  for  the  motto  on  the  ring  to  be 
given,  but  the  control  replied  :  “  All  will  be  clear  to 
me  in  time.  Do  not  ask  me  test  questions  now.” 

On  March  5th  the  Hodgson  control  was  again  ques¬ 
tioned  as  to  the  whereabouts  of  the  ring,  which  had 
not  been  found.  He  replied,  first,  that  a  man  had 
taken  it  from  his  finger  ;  next,  twice,  that  he  could 
recall  putting  it  in  his  waistcoat  pocket  before 
beginning  to  play  ball.  ^(As  already  stated,  he  died 
whilst  playing  a  game  of  hand-ball.)  On  May  i6th 
he  stated  that  he  saw  it  taken  from  his  locker  by  a; 
man,  of  whom  he  gave  a  description  ;  he  further  de¬ 
scribed  the  house  where  the  man  lived.  As  a  matter 
of  fact  the  ring  was  ultimately  found  in  the  pocket 
of  Hodgson’s  waistcoat,  which  had  remained  at  the 
house  of  a  personal  friend,  Mr.  Dorr.  The  descrip¬ 
tion  of  the  man  was  but  little  like  that  of  Mr.  Dorr, 
and  the  description  of  the  house  did  not  accord  with 
the  facts. 

The  interpretation  of  this  incident,  as  Professor 
James  has  pointed  out,  is  ambiguous.  It  is  consistent 
either  with  the  theory  of  fishing  and  general  cunning 
on  the  part  of  the  trance  intelligence  playing  a  new 
part,  or  with  the  theory  of  a  living  Hodgson,  still 
half -mazed  by  the  great  change  and  without  full  control 
of  his  reason  or  his  memories. 

218 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

The  Nigger  Talk  Incident. 

On  February  27,  1906,  at  a  sitting  with  Professor 
Hyslop,  the  following  dialogue  took  place  : 

R.  H. — I  wonder  if  you  recall  what  I  said  I  would  do 
if  I  should  return  first? 

Hyslop. — I  do  not  remember  exactly. 

Remember  that  I  told  Myers  that  we  would  talk 
nigger  -talk — Myers — talk  nigger  -talk  ? 

Hyslop. — No,  you  must  have  told  that  to  some  one  else. 

Ah  yes,  James.  I  remember  it  was  James,  yes, 
Will  James.  He  will  understand. 

In  fact,  Professor  James  recalled  that  he  had  more 
than  once  remarked  to  Hodgson  that  the  pompous 
“  sacerdotal  verbiage  ”  of  the  Imperator  Group  could 
by  tactful  suggestion  be  turned  into  nigger  minstrel 
talk.  The  incident  seemed  at  first  a  very  striking  one. 
But  it  was  eventually  discovered  that  Hodgson  in  his 
lifetime  had  made  use  of  the  same  phrase — nigger-talk 
— in  speaking  to  the  Myers  control  of  Mrs.  Piper.  So 
that  the  incident,  however  dramatically  appropriate, 
cannot  be  held  as  otherwise  significant. 

Another  series  of  communications,  at  first  sight 
extremely  impressive,  proved  on  investigation  to  lose 
much  of  their  value  for  similar  reasons. 

At  a  sitting  held  on  May  2,  1906,  the  Hodgson 
control  asked  Mr.  Piddington  to  look  among  his 
papers  for  some  letters  from  Chicago  written  by  a 
Miss  Huldah  Densmore  j^(surname  a  pseudonym), 
adding  that  he  would  be  much  distressed  if  they  fell 
into  other  hands . 

The  letters  could  not  be  found,  and  at  a  later  sitting, 
in  reply  to  a  question  from  Mr.  Dorr,  who  knew  ,a 
family  named  Densmore  :  “Is  she  a  sister  of  Mary, 

SOME  RECENT  COMMUNICATORS 

219 

Jenny,  and  Ella?  ”  the  control  replied  :  “  Ella  is  the 
one,  Huldah  we  used  to  call  her.” 

At  another  sitting,  being  asked  whether  she  was  the 
same  person  as  Ella,  the  control  replied  that  she  was 
not  Ella,  but  another  sister  (in  fact,  she  was  Ella), 
and  that  he  had  proposed  marriage  to  her. 

Miss  Ella  Hannah  Densmore  admitted  that,  in  fact, 
Hodgson  had  proposed  to  her  some  years  since.  It 
appears  that  the  only  friends  to  whom  Hodgson  had 
mentioned  the  circumstance  were  Professor  Newbold 
and  Mrs.  Thaw,  neither  of  whom  had  been  present  at 
the  sittings  when  the  matter  was  referred  to,'  and  the 
episode  had  pot  been  even  suspected  by  Hodgson’s 
other  friends.  Further  investigation,  however,  showed 
that  Hodgson  at  the  time  of  his  disappointment  had 
consulted  Mrs.  Piper’s  trance  controls,  so  that  the 
circumstances  were  known  to  them. 

Later,  when  Professor  James  asked  the  Hodgson 
control  why  he  gave  the  lady’s  name  as  Huldah,  he 
replied  :  “I  used  that  name  instead  of  the  right 
Christian  name  to  avoid  compromising — it  was  a  very 
delicate  matter.” 

It  will  be  remembered  that  he  had  given  the  surname 
correctly. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Hodgson  control  gave  to 
Mr.  Dorr  and  to  Miss  Margaret  Bancroft,  |at  whose 
country  houses  he  had  often  been  a  summer  guest, 
many  correct  details  about  persons  and  incidents  con¬ 
nected  with  these  two  places.  Mrs.  Piper  had  not 
been  to  either  house,  and  the  details  mentioned  are 
the  kind  of  trivial  intimate  things  which  Hodgson, 

'  At  later  sittings  the  Hodgson  control  spontaneously 
indicated  these  two  friends  as  knowing  about  the  matter. 

220 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

always  reticent,  as  Professor  James  points  out,  would 
be  most  unlikely  to  have  mentioned  to  her.  But  the 
incidents,  so  far  as  they  could  be  verified,  were  within 
the  knowledge,  if  not  always  within  the  immediate  con¬ 
sciousness,  of  the  sitter. 

The  following  are  some  of  the  most  striking  cases 
quoted  in  Professor  James’s  report  : 

1 .  At  a  time  of  some  pecuniary  embarrassment  a 
friend  had  unsolicited  sent  Hodgson  some  money.  In 
writing  to  thank  him  Hodgson  had 

cited  the  story  of  a  starving  couple  who  were  overheard 
by  an  atheist  who  was  passing  the  house  to  pray  aloud 
to  God  for  food.  The  atheist  climbed  the  roof  and  dropped 
some  bread  down  the  chimney,  and  heard  them  thank  God 
for  the  miracle.  He  then  went  to  the  door  and  revealed 
himself  as  its  author.  The  old  woman  replied  to  him  ; 
“  Well,  the  Lord  sent  it,  even  if  the  devil  brought  it.” 

At  this  friend’s  sitting  of  January  30th,  R.  H.  suddenly 
says  : 

Do  you  remember  a  story  I  told  you  and  how 
you  laughed,  about  the  man  and  woman  praying. 

Sitter. — Oh,  and  the  devil  was  in  it.  Of  course  I  do. 

Yes,  the  devil,  they  told  him  it  was  the  Lord  who 
sent  it  if  the  devil  brought  it.  .  .  .  About  the 
food  that  was  given  to  them.  ...  I  want  you  to 
know  who  is  speaking. 

The  sitter  feels  quite  certain  that  no  one  but  himself 
knew  of  the  correspondence,  and  regards  the  incident  as 
a  good  test  of  R.  H.’s  continued  presence.  Others  will 
either  favour  this  interpretation  of  it  or  explain  it  by 
reading  of  the  sitter’s  mind,  or  treat  it  as  a  chance  coinci¬ 
dence,  according  to  their  several  prepossessions.  I  myself, 
[says  Professor  James,  ]  feel  morally  certain  that  the  waking 
Mrs.  Piper  was  ignorant  of  the  incident  and  of  the  corre¬ 
spondence. 

2.  At  a  sitting  on  May  21,  1906,  Professor  James 
asked  the  Hodgson  control  whether  he  could  recall 

SOME  RECENT  COMMUNICATORS 

221 

any  incident  about  playing  with  children  at  the  Putnam 
camp.  The  control  replied  : 

Do  you  remember — what  is  that  name,  Elizabeth 
Putnam?  She  came  in  and  I  was  sitting  in  a  chair 
before  the  fire,  reading,  and  she  came  in  and  put 
her  hands,  crept  up  behind  me,  put  her  hands  over 
my  eyes,  and  said,  “  Who  is  it?  ”  And  do  you  re¬ 
member  what  my  answer  was? 

W.  J. — Let  me  see  if  you  remember  it  as  I  do. 

I  said,  “  Well,  it  feels  like  Elizabeth  Putnam,  but 
it  sounds  like - 

W.  J. — I  know  who  you  mean.  [R.  H.  quite  startled 
me  here,  because  what  he  said  reminded  me  of  an  incident 
which  I  well  remembered.  One  day  at  breakfast  little 
Martha  Putnam  (as  I  recall  the  fact)  had  climbed  on 
Hodgson’s  back,  sitting  on  his  shoulders,  and  clasped  her 
hands  over  his  eyes,  saying,  “  Who  am  I  ?  ”  To  which 
R.  H.,  laughing,  had  responded,  “It  sounds  like  Martha, 
but  it  feels  like  Henry  Bowditch  ’’ — the  said  H.  B.  weighing 
nearly  200  lbs.  I  find  that  no  one  but  myself,  of  those 
who  probably  were  present,  remembers  this  incident. — 
W.  J.] 

Do  you  realise  how  difficult  that  is? 

W.  J. — It  is,  evidently  ;  yet  you  were  just  on  the  point 
of  saying  it.  Is  it  a  man  or  a  woman? 

A  man. 

W.  J. — Have  you  any  message  for  that  man  now? 

Dr. — not  Putnam — Dr.  Bowditch  I 

W.  J. — That  is  it — Bowditch. 

“  Sounds  like  Dr.  Bowditch.” 

3.  At  another  time  Mrs.  James  asked  the  control 
whether  he  could  remember  what  happened  one  night 
when  he  was  arguing  with  her  sister  : 

“  I  had  hardly  said  ‘  remember,’  ”  she  notes,  “  in  asking 
this  question,  when  the  medium’s  arm  was  stretched  out 
and  the  fist  shaken  threateningly.”  Then  these  words 
came  : 

222 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

R-  H- — Yes,  I  did  this  in  her  face.  I  couldn’t  help  it. 
She  was  so  impossible  to  move.  It  was  wrong  of  me,  but 
I  couldn’t  help  it. 

[I  myself  well  remember  this  fist -shaking  incident,  and 
how  we  others  laughed  over  it  after  Hodgson  had  taken 
his  leave.  What  had  made  him  so  angry  was  my  sister-in- 
law’s  defence  of  some  slate-writing  she  had  seen  in 
California. — W.  J.] 

On  January  30,  1906,  within  six  weeks  of  the  death, 
Mrs.  M.  had  a  sitting.  Mrs.  M.  said  : 

Do  you  remember  our  last  talk  together,  at  N., 
and  how,  in  coming  home,  we  talked  about  ,the 
work  ? 

(R.  H.) — Yes,  yes. 

Mrs.  M. — And  I  said  if  we  had  a  hundred  thousand 
dollars - 

Buying  Billy  1  I 

Mrs.  M. — Yes,  Dick,  that  was  it — “  buying  Billy.” 

Buying  only  Billy? 

Mrs.  M. — Oh,  no — I  wanted  Schiller  too.  How  well  you 
remember  I 

Mrs.  M.,  before  R.  H.’s  death,  had  had  dreams  of 
extending  the  American  Branch’s  operations  by  getting  an 
endowment,  and  possibly  inducing  Professor  Newbold  (Billy) 
and  Dr.  Schiller  to  co-operate  in  work.  She  naturally 
regards  this  veridical  recall,  by  the  control,  of  a  private 
conversation  she  had  had  with  Hodgson  as  very  evidential 
of  his  survival. 

Taken  as  a  whole,  the  correspondences  are  so 
numerous  and  precise,  and  the  possibility  of  leakage 
to  Mrs.  Piper  through  normal  channels  in  many  cases 
so  effectually  excluded,  that  it  is  impossible  to  doubt 
that  we  have  here  proof  of  a  supernormal  agency  of 
some  kind — either  telepathy  by  the  trance  intelligence 
from  the  sitter  or  some  kind  of  communication  with 
the  dead. 

SOME  RECENT  COMMUNICATORS 

223 

The  ring,  the  nigger-talk,  and  the  Huldah  Densmore 
incident  seem  to  be  adequately  accounted  for  by  tele¬ 
pathy,  eked  out  now  by  cunning  conjecture,  now  by 
unconscious  reminiscences. 

Nor  are  the  probabilities  greatly  strained  by  the 
application  of  the  same  explanation  to  most  of  the 
other  successful  sittings,  if  we  assume  that  telepathy 
can  draw  upon  the  stores  of  the  unconscious  mind. 
But  the  four  incidents  last  quoted  must  give  us 
pause.  It  is  not  merely  that  the  information  given 
is  correct,  and  such  as  could  scarcely  have  been  within 
the  normal  knowledge  of  Mrs.  Piper  ;  the  manner  of 
its  introduction  is  so  like  Hodgson  and  so  unlike 
anything  that  we  can  attribute  to  the  medium’s  mind. 

But  these  dramatically  true  incidents  are  diluted  with 
a  very  large  amount  of  inferior  matter.  The  Hodgson 
control  makes  many  incorrect  statements,  and  endea¬ 
vours  to  conceal  his  mistakes  by  apparently  disingenuous 
evasions.  We  have  already  had  occasion  to  note  two 
instances  of  this — the  mention  of  Margaret  in  con¬ 
nection  with  the  ring,  and  the  curious  statement  that 
Miss  Densmore’s  Christian  name  was  inaccurately  given 
out  of  delicacy,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  true 
surname  was  given  from  the  outset.  It  is  noteworthy, 
too,  that  no  test  questions  are  answered.  Hodgson 
left  behind  him  many  private  papers  written  in  cipher. 
The  key  to  the  cipher  is  unknown  to  any  one  now 
living.  The  Hodgson  control  has  promised  to  reveal  it, 
but  he  has  not  yet  done  so.  He  was  unable  to  give 
the  solution  to  two  charades  of  his  own  composi¬ 
tion  [(p.  54).  iWhen  asked  to  give  the  names  of  some 
of  Professor  Newbold’s  deceased  relatives,  whom  the 
control  professed  to  kiiow,  the  trance  intelligence  imme- 

224 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

diately  changed  the  subject  '^(p.  76).  When  asked  to 
give  the  contents  of  any  sealed  letters  written  in  his 
lifetime  for  the  express  purpose  of  being  read  by  him 
after  death  the  two  sentences  were  given  :  “  There 

is  no  death  ”  and  “  out  of  life  into  life  eternal” 
(p.  102).  Whatever  Hodgson  may  have  written,  it 
was  surely  not  quite  so  commonplace  as  that. 

Hodgson,  as  already  stated,  had  passed  his  child¬ 
hood  and  youth  in  Melbourne.  This  circumstance 
afforded  a  good  opportunity  for  a  test,  seeing  that 
incidents  of  his  early  years  would  be  known  to  no 
one  in  America.  He  made  many  statements  about  his 
childhood,  some  true,  some  false,  many  unverified.  His 
sister,  to  whom  all  the  messages  were  sent,  wrote  : 
“  To  my  mind  there  is  nothing  striking  in  any  of  the 
statements.”  She  propounded  in  turn  three  test  ques¬ 
tions,  to  which  the  trance  intelligence  gave  no  reply. 
Moreover,  the  Piper-Hodgson,  when  questioned  by  9. 
sitter,  could  not  remember  the  name  of  his  schoolmaster 
in  Melbourne.  We  have  seen  already  that  the  Piper- 
Hodgson  failed  in  England  even  to  recognise  ^ome 
of  his  intimate  friends. 

If  we  could  suppose  that  sometimes  the  real  Hodgson 
communicated  through  the  medium’s  hand,  and  that 
sometimes,  more  often,  when  he  was  inaccessible,  the 
medium’s  secondary  personality  played  the  part  as  best 
it  could,  these  difficulties  would,  no  doubt,  be  lessened. 

It  may  be  justifiable,  as  a  guide  to  further  investiga¬ 
tion,  provisionally  to  entertain  such  an  hypothesis  ;  but 
it  seems  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  at  this  stage,  at 
any  rate,  it  cannot  be  seriously  defended. 

CHAPTER  V 

CROSS  CORRESPONDENCES 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  problem  of  proving  the 
authenticity  of  the  alleged  communications  from  the 
dead  is  by  no  means  a  simple  one.  For  how  are  we 
to  get  behind  the  secondary  personality  of  the  medium? 
iWe  cannot  rely,  as  evidence  for  personal  identity,  on 
a  repetition  of  characteristic  gestures,  the  choice  of 
a  word,  or  the  turn  of  a  phrase.  iWe  are  forced  to 
remember  at  every  step  that  we  have  to  deal  with  an 
actor  whose  mimicry  is  as  subtle  as  it  is  unscrupulous. 
Again,  we  cannot  base  our  faith  on  the  relation  of 
intimate  details  known  to  no  one  but  ourselves  and 
the  dead,  for  we  can  place  no  certain  limits  on  the 
mysterious  agency  of  telepathy.  The  only  evidence  that 
can  satisfy  us  of  the  survival  of  an  active  and  individual 
intelligence  is  evidence  of  the  present  activity  of  such 
an  intelligence.  Within  the  last  few  years  some 
grounds  have  appeared  for  hoping  that  traces  of  such 
intelligent  action  had  been  found. 

Several  indications  of  what  appeared  to  be  a  reci¬ 
procal  influence  with  other  automatists  were  noted  somel 
years  back  in  connection  with  Mrs.  Thompson.  Thus, 
on  several  occasions  in  the  early  months  of  1900  there 
appeared  to  be  some  correspondence  between  the 
dreams  of  Dr.  van  Eeden  in  Holland  and  Nelly’s 

statements  about  him.  The  most  striking  case  is  as 

15  226 

226 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

follows  :  Mr.  Piddington  records  that  stances  were 
held  with  Mrs.  Thompson  on  January  loth,  12th,  i6th, 
and  1 8th.  No  reference  was  made  to  Dr.  van  Eeden 
on  the  first  three  occasions,  but  on  the  i8th  Nelly 
said,  in  reply  to  a  question,  that  she  had  not  seen 
Dr.  van  Eeden,  but  that  he  had  called  her  twice,  and 
that  her  spirit  friend  Elsie  had  said  to  her  :  “  Old 

Whiskers  in  the  bed  is  calling  you.” 

Now,  it  appears  from  Dr.  van  Eeden’s  diary  that  on 
the  night  of  the  1 5th  he  had  before  going  to  jbed 
resolved  to  dream  of  Nelly — he  has  the  power  of  in¬ 
ducing  dreams  on  a  subject  chosen  by  himself — and 
as  a  test  to  give  her  the  name  Walden.  In  the  event 
he  found  himself  calling  out  in  his  dream,  “  Elsie, 
Elsie  1  ”  then,  remembering  that  this  was  wrong,  he 
changed  it  lo  ‘‘  Nelly,  Nelly.”  It  is,  of  course,  not 
impossible  that  Dr.  van  Eeden  may  have  known  the 
name  of  Nelly’s  spirit  associate,  though  it  was  new 
to  Mr.  Piddington.  But  the  coincidence  is  certainly 
curious.  I 

Other  correspondences  occurred  between  Mrs. 
Thompson’s  utterances  and  those  of  Miss  Rawson 
(vol.  xviii.  pp.  206  and  295)  and  Mrs.  Scott  (ibid., 
p.  302). 

In  recording  these  correspondences  Mr.  Piddington 
writes  :  ' 

“  The  resemblances  quoted  above  are  far  from  complete  ; 
they  are  suggestive,  rather  than  indicative,  of  supernormal 
agency,  yet  I  cannot  ascribe  them  to  chance.  If  they  are 
not  supernormal  I  would  attribute  them  to  the  minds  of  both 
automatists  having  developed  from  similar  data  in  their 
common  possession  similar  phantasies  concordant  with  the 

I  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xvii.  p.  113. 

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES 

227 

general  trend  of  ideas  that  run  through  spiritualistic  mani¬ 
festations.  But  at  least  I  claim  for  them  serious  study,  for 
should  we  be  fortunate  enough  (and  I  am  rather  sanguine 
that  we  may  be)  to  multiply  analogous  and  more  clinching 
instances  of  the  same  phenomenon,  it  would  open  up  one 
of  the  most  promising  lines  for  observation,  and  even 
perhaps  for  experimentation.”  ' 

These  words,  published  in  1903,  have  now  received 
abundant  fulfilment.  Since  1901  especially  several 
members  of  the  S.  P.  R. — Mrs.  Verrall,  Mrs.  Holland, 
Mrs.  Forbes,  and  others — have  practised  automatic 
writing  with  success.  The  scripts,  independently  pro¬ 
duced  by  these  ladies  in  different  parts  of  the  world, 
have  been  regularly  sent  to  the  office  of  the  Society 
and  carefully  collated.  It  was  soon  found  that  these 
writings  showed  traces  of  reciprocal  influence,  coinci¬ 
dences  of  thought  and  expression,  too  numerous  and 
too  precise  to  be  ascribed  wholly  to  the  chance  associa¬ 
tion  of  ideas.  Mrs.  Holland’s  script,  for  instance,  con¬ 
tained  several  veridical  references  to  Mrs.  Verrall’s 
occupations  and  surroundings,  even  before  she  had 
made  that  lady’s  acquaintance. 

It  is  impossible  fairly  to  estimate  the  value  of  these 
cross-correspondences  without  a  close  study  of  the 
nature  and  development  of  the  automatic  script.  Our 
space  will  pot,  however,  admit  of  more  than  a  brief 
description  of  the  phenomenon  in  the  case  of  Mrs. 
Holland.  This  lady  had  occasionally  since  1893 
written  automatic  poetry,  and  her  hand  had  on  three 
or  four  occasions  been  impelled  to  write  letters  to  an 
acquaintance  purporting  to  be  dictated  by  a  deceased 
friend.  Some  at  least  of  the  messages  so  sent  through 
her  hand  appear  to  have  been  recognised  as  containing 
‘  Proceedings  S.P..R.,  vol.  xvii.  p.  307. 

228 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

references  to  matters  known  only  to  the  recipient  of 
the  letter  and  to  the  deceased  communicator.  In  the 
course  of  1903  Mrs.  Holland  read  Myers’  “Human 
Personality,”  and  from  that  date  onward  her  automatic 
writing  came  fluently  under  the  ostensible  direction  of 
Myers  and  Gurney.  The  messages  contained,  how¬ 
ever,  little  of  an  evidential  nature,  and  Miss  Johnson 
has  traced  stage  by  stage  how  the  impersonations  grew 
more  definite  as  Mrs.  Holland’s  opportunities  for 
acquiring  knowledge  from  normal  sources  increased. 
Her  first  vision  of  the  two  controls,  for  instance,  came 
shortly  after  she  had  glanced  through  Myers’  post¬ 
humous  “  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry,”  which  con¬ 
tains  photographs  of  himself,  Gurney,  and  Sidgwick. 
It  is  noteworthy  that  even  after  having  seen  his  portrait 
Mrs.  Holland’s  vision  of  Professor  Sidgwick  was  in¬ 
correct  in  two  important  particulars.  Many  other 
references  in  Mrs.  Holland’s  automatic  writing  to 
matters  connected  with  prominent  workers  in  psychical 
research  were  apparently  inspired  by  articles  in  the 
newspapers  and  other  outside  sources.  Intermixed  with 
these  were  apparent  instances  of  telepathy,  chiefly  con¬ 
cerned  with  Mrs.  Verrall.  Some  of  these  veridical 
references  occurred  at  a  time  when  Mrs.  Holland  knew 
nothing  of  Mrs.  Verrall  beyond  the  fact  that  her  name 
is  mentioned  in  Myers’  “  Human  Personality.”  Later, 
Miss  Johnson  arranged  that  the  two  ladies  should  sit 
on  fixed  days  for  experiment,  neither  being  told  the 
name  of  her  partner  in  the  experiment.  Indications 
of  reciprocal  influence  appeared  in  each  script.  The 
experiments  were  continued  after  the  ladies  had  become 
acquainted  with  each  other.  To  give  an  idea  of  these 
apparently  telepathic  references  I  will  quote  the  rele- 

CEOSS-CORRESPONDENCES 

229 

vant  passages  of  the  script  of  March  2i,  1906.  Mrs. 
Holland  on  that  day  was  wearing  a  ring  belonging 
to  Mrs.  Verrall,  who  at  the  time  was  staying  with 
Mrs.  Forbes.  Mrs.  Holland  did  not  know  Mrs.  Forbes, 
and  did  not  know  that  Mrs.  Verrall  was  staying  with 
her.  Omitting  three  paragraphs  referring  to  matters 
within  Mrs.  Holland’s  normal  knowledge,  the  script 
runs  : 

1.  They  have  all  been  trying  in  turn,  but  some  of  them 
are  not  serious.  Margaret  [Mrs.  Verrall]  and  Helen  [Miss 
Verrall]  are. — M.  saw  a  real  place  that  last  time,  but  she  has 
never  seen  the  place  itself,  and  did  not  describe  it  very 
clearly. 

2.  Two  windows  in  the  room,  one  very  much  smaller  than 
the  other. — Yes,  you  can  see  the  river. 

3.  The  honeysuckle  is  all  rjght,  but  the  Jap  passion-flower 
died  in  the  frost. 

4.  Frank  paid  a  heavy  price. — Daisy? 

[Here  the  script  broke  into  verse,  which  had  no  reference 
to  Mrs.  Verrall  and  her  surroundings.] 

5.  [Drawing  of  a  dagger.]  There  is  gold  inlay  on  the 
blade — the  hilt  is  very  worn.  It’s  in  the  hall — he  forgets 
where  it  came  from — but  its  story  is  clearly  impressed  upon 
it.  Get  it  pschometrised  [sfc],  E.  P.  even  would  not  fail. 

6.  Button — button — whose  got  the  button?  Look  under 
the  carpet.  The  0  went  out  of  doors,  and  she  won’t  find 
it  again. 

7.  F  [?]  a  pair  of  scales. 

Then  follows  the  figure  of  a  horoscope  with  the 
symbol  of  Cancer  (incorrectly  drawn),  Venus,  the  Sun 
and  Moon.  Then  another  figure  which  apparently 
represents  a  further  attempt  to  draw  a  horoscope,  and 
a  reference  to  an  amphora  on  the  mantelpiece. 

There  are  several  possibly,  or  probably,  veridical 
references  in  this  script. 

230 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

1.  On  the  same  day  Mrs.  Verrall’s  script  contained  allu¬ 
sions  to  “  Massiliotes  terragencC  olives  old  and  hoary — 
Posilippo,  a  terrace  there — blue  sea  beyond  the  marble 
balustrade.”  Mrs.  Verrall  had  never  seen  Posilippo. 

2.  There  are  two  windows  in  Mrs.  Forbes’  drawing-room, 
one  a  large  bow,  the  other  a  small  one — there  is  a  stream 
in  the  garden  which  can  be  seen  from  one  of  these  windows. 
It  was  in  this  room  that  Mrs.  Forbes  and  Mrs.  Verrall  did 
planchette  writing  together. 

3.  Mrs.  Forbes  writes  (April  8,  1906)  :  ”  There  is 
honeysuckle  outside  the  window  on  the  house,  and  there  was 
a  Pirus  Japonica,  but  all  except  a  small  shoot  has  died. 
No  passion-flowers.” 

4.  ‘‘  Frank  ”  is  Mr.  Forbes’  name  ;  but  the  statements 
made  seem  to  have  no  relevance. 

5.  On  this  day,  March  21st,  Mrs.  Forbes  had  brought  into 
the  room  to  show  Mrs.  Verrall  an  inlaid  dagger,  part  of  it 
much  worn. 

6.  Possibly  refers  to  a  game  Mrs.  Forbes  and  Mrs. 
Verrall  used  to  play  with  a  dog — hiding  things  for  him  to 
find. 

7.  Many  years  ago  Mr.  Forbes  used  to  be  much 
interested  in  drawing  nativities. 

It  will  be  seen  that,  speaking  generally,  the  verifi¬ 
able  references  in  this  script  are  of  a  fairly  simple 
and  straightforward  kind,  and  this  comparative 
simplicity  may  be  said  to  be  characteristic  of  Mrs. 
Holland.  Her  writing  shows  fluency,  and  is  frequently 
embellished  with  poetic  imagery  or  actual  quotations 
in  verse.  To  a  reader  it  gives  the  impression  of 
flowing  without  impediment.  It  deals  little  in  riddles. 

Mrs.  .VerralTs  utterances,  on  the  other  hand,  are 
extremely  difficult  of  interpretation.  It  is  not  merely 
that  a  large  part  of  them  is  written  in  Latin  or,  less' 
commonly,  Greek,  but  that  the  Latin  and  Greek 
sentences  themselves  frequently  contain  new  coinages, 
and  are  nearly  always  of  ambiguous  application.  Her 
English  utterances  are  hardly  less  broken,  allusive. 

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES 

231 

and  enigmatic.  The  cross -correspondences  with  other 
automatists  are  most  numerous  and  most  striking  in 
Mrs.  Verrall’s  script.  Two  early  examples  may  be 
given.  In  December,  1900,  Mrs.  Verrall  had  made  the 
acquaintance  of  the  lady  known  as  Mrs.  Forbes  ^(the 
name  is  assumed),  and  their  respective  scripts  during 
the  next  three  or  four  months  contain  two  or  three 
vague  and  not  specially  striking  allusions  to  each  other. 
On  April  16,  1901,  Mrs.  Verrall  had  a  letter  from 
Mrs.  Forbes,  but  did  not  see  her  or  hear  from  her 
again  until  October  of  that  year.  In  the  interval, 
however,  her  script  contained  an  unmistakable  allusion, 
not  recognised  until  later,  to  Mrs.  Forbes’  concerns. 
Mrs.  Forbes  had  lost  a  son,  Talbot,  in  the  Boer  iWar, 
and  this  son  was  one  of  the  chief  controls  purporting 
to  communicate  through  her  hand.  On  August  28, 
1901,  Mrs.  Verrall’s  hand  wrote  : 

Signa  sigillo.  Conifer  a  arbos  in  horto  iam  insita  omina 
sibimet  ostendit — ‘‘  Sign  with  the  seal.  The  fir-tree  that  has 
already  been  planted  in  the  garden  gives  its  own  portent.” 

”  The  script,”  Mrs.  Verrall  writes,  “  was  signed  with  a 
scrawl  and  three  drawings  representing  a  sword,  a  sus¬ 
pended  bugle,  and  a  pair  of  scissors  ;  thus  : 

“  A  suspended  bugle  surmounted  by  a  crown  is  the  badge 
of  the  regiment  to  which  Talbot  Forbes  belonged.  Mrs. 
Forbes  has  in  her  garden  four  or  five  small  fir-trees  grown 

232 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

from  seed  sent  to  her  from  abroad  by  her  son  ;  these  are 
called  by  her  ‘  Talbot’s  trees.’  This  fact  was  entirely 
unknown  to  me.  On  August  28th  Mrs.  Forbes’  script  con¬ 
tained  the  statement,  purporting  to  come  from  her  son, 
that  he  was  looking  for  a  ‘  sensitive  ’  who  wrote  automatic¬ 
ally,  in  order  that  he  might  obtain  corroboration  for  her 
own  writing,  and  it  concluded  with  the  remark  that  he  must 
now  leave  her  in  order  to  join  E.  G.  in  controlling  the 
sensitive.  The  hour  of  her  writing  on  August  28th  does 
not  appear,  but  as  she  usually  writes  early  in  the  day,  and 
as  mine  of  the  same  date  was  10.30  p.m.,  it  is  probable 
that  hers  preceded  mine. 

“  It  thus  appears  that  on  a  certain  day  Talbot  Forbes  in 
Mrs.  Forbes’  script  declared  that  he  was  seeking,  and 
implied  that  he  had  found,  another  automatic  writer  through 
whom  to  communicate  with  her.  On  the  same  day  a 
statement  was  made  in  my  script  about  fir-trees  planted 
in  a  garden  which  had  a  meaning  for  Mrs.  Forbes,  and  a 
special  connection  with  her  automatic  experiments,  and  the 
signature  of  this  script,  to  which  attention  had  been  directed, 
represented  partially  the  badge  of  Talbot  Forbes’  regiment, 
together  with  a  sword.  As  bearing  on  the  question  whether 
such  a  combination  is  likely  to  have  been  accidental,  I  may 
say  that  on  no  other  occasion  has  a  bugle  appeared  in  the 
script,  nor  has  there  been  any  other  reference  to  a  planted 
fir-tree.” 

The  connection  between  the  two  writings  and  the 
significance  of  the  drawings  were  only  brought  to 
light  accidentally,  owing  to  Mrs.  Forbes,  in  talking  to 
Mrs.  Verrall  about  her  son  one  day  in  the  following 
November,  happening  to  describe  the  regimental  badge. 
Mrs.  Verrall  then  remembered  the  drawings,  which 
had  puzzled  her  at  the  time.  The  nail  from  which 
the  bugle  is  hung  is  clearly  indicated  in  the  original. i 

Another  striking  correspondence  occurred  a  few 
months  later  between  the  automatic  utterance  of  Mrs. 
Verrall  and  Mrs.  Piper. 

«  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xx.  p.  222. 

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES 

233 

Oa  January  31,  1902,  Mrs.  Verrall,  when  about  to 
accompany  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  and  Mr.  Piddington  to  a 
meeting,  was  seized  with  a  sudden  desire  to  write,  and  with¬ 
drew  for  the  purpose.  The  writing  produced  was  as  follows  : 

Panopticon  afpaipuT  artrdXXti  avvdkyfia  fivariKW,  ri  ovk  ididtsi’T  J 
volatile  ferrum — pro  telo  impinget.” 

The  writing  was  shown  to  Dr.  Verrall  on  the  following 
day,  but  neither  he  nor  Mrs.  Verrall  could  interpret  ^its 
significance.  The  first  word,  Panopticon,  though  not  an 
actual  Greek  word,  is  derived  from  the  Greek,  and  pre¬ 
sumably  means  “  all-seeing.”  The  third  word  in  the 
sentence  is  rare  ;  the  fourth,  though  correctly  formed,  is 
not  found  in  any  extant  Greek  writing.  The  whole  sentence 
appears  to  mean,  “  The  all-seeing  of  the  sphere  fosters 
a  mystic  joint-reception.  Why  did  you  not  give  it?  The 
flying  iron  [“  iron  ”  used  for  ‘‘  weapon  ”]  will  hit.”  Volatile 
ferrum  (literally,  “the  flying  iron”)  is  used  by  Virgil  for 
a  spear,  and  Mrs.  Verrall  recorded  in  her  notebook  that  the 
word  was  probably  meant  to  be  translated  “  spear.” 

The  first  five  words,  taken  by  themselves,  suggest 
an  attempt  to  describe,  in  dog-Greek,  the  practice  of 
c'rystal -gazing,  in  which  Mrs.  Verrall  had  at  one  time 
made  experiments.  But  another  interpretation  was 
suggested  when  a  letter  was  received  from  Dr. 
Hodgson.  For  it  appeared  that  on  January  28th,  three 
days  before  this  incident.  Dr.  Hodgson  had  held  a 
sitting  in  Boston  with  Mrs.  Piper,  at  which  an  allusion 
was  made  by  the  control  to  Mrs.  Verrall’s  daughter, 
Hodgson  asked  if  the  control  could  make  Miss  Helen 
Verrall  see  him  {i.e.,  the  control)  holding  a  spear  in  his 
hand.  The  control  asked,  through  the  automatic  writ¬ 
ing,  “  Why  a  sphere?  ”  and  Hodgson  repeated  “  spear” 
At  the  next  sitting,  on  February  4th,  the  control 
claimed  that  he  had  made  himself  visible  to  Miss 
Verrall  with  a  “  sphear  ”  ^(so  spelt  in  the  trance 
writing).! 

‘  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xx.  p.  214. 

234 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

It  is  certainly  difficult  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that 
Mrs.  Verrall’s  script  of  January  31st — a  date  inter¬ 
mediate  between  these  two  seances — with  its  curious 
enigmatical  allusions  to  “  sphere  ”  and  “  spear,”  had 
reference  to  this  transatlantic  experiment. 

.When  Mrs.  Holland  described,  in  the  extract  quoted 
above,  the  occupations  and  surroundings  of  Mrs. 
Verrall  and  Mrs.  Forbes,  she  did  so  in  language  which 
suggests  that  her  mind  was  in  some  fashion  reflecting, 
however  dimly  and  imperfectly,  the  thoughts  of  her 
fellow-experimenters.  But  in  the  two  cases  last  cited 
there  is  evidence  of  a  further  process.  Mrs.  Verrall’s 
script  does  not  simply  reproduce  images  within  the 
mind  of  another  automatist.  There  are  indications 
that  some  intelligence  has  worked  over  the  simple 
telepathic  data,  and  transformed  them  so  that  the 
message  conveyed  is  not  intelligible  at  first  reading. 
But  though  not  intelligible  at  once,  the  message  is 
absolutely  unambiguous  as  soon  as  the  key  to  the  riddle 
is  found.  These  enigmatic  utterances  cannot  therefore 
rightly  be  compared  with  the  ordinary  trance  ambigui¬ 
ties  which  simply  leave  the  utterances  open  to  more 
than  one  interpretation.  A'  still  more  striking  instance 
of  this  apparently  intentional  obscurity  occurred  in  a 
correspondence  between  the  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall  and 
Mrs.  Holland  in  March,  1906,  shortly  before  the 
simple  case  of  correspondence  already  quoted.  On 
March  2,  1906,  Mrs.  Verrall’s  hand  wrote  automatically 
two  Latin  sentences  as  follows  : 

‘‘Non  tali  auxilio  invenies  quod  velis  non  tali  auxilio  nec 
defensoribus  istis.’*  * 

♦  *  *  *  ¥ 

‘  ‘‘Not  with  such  help  will  you  find  what  you  want  ;  not 

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES 

235 

“  Primus  inter  pares  ipse  non  nominis  immemor.  Cum  eo 
frater  etsi  non  sanguine  animo  consanguineus  ii  ambo  tibi 
per  aliam  vocem  mittent — post  aliquot  dies  bene  quod  dicam 
comprehendere  potes — usque  ad  illud  vale.”  ■ 

To  Mrs.  Verrall’s  mind  these  sentences  appeared 
to  have  no  connection,  and  suggested  no  application. 
To  Dr.  Verrall,  however,  who  was  consulted  at  the 
time,  the  two  passages,  by  a  kind  of  trapeze  flight  of 
association,  suggested  Raphael’s  picture  of  Attila 
before  the  gates  of  Rome  confronted  by  Pope  Leo 
and  by  the  vision  in  the  sky  of  St.  Peter  and  St. 
Paul.  Dr.  Verrall  did  not  mention  his  idea,  but  Mrs. 
Verrall’s  script  during  the  next  two  sittings  seemed 
to  convey  hints  of  the  same  scene  in  the  phrases  : 
“  Pagan  and  Pope  and  Reformer  .  .  .  Crux  signifi- 
cationem  habit.  Crucifer  qui  olim  fertur  .  .  .  Leonis 
pelle  sumpto  claviger  .  .  .  ask  your  husband,  he  knows 
it  well.”  On  March  7th  Mrs.  Holland,  in  the  midst 
of  a  mass  of  correct  allusions  to  Mrs.  Verrall  and  her 
surroundings  and  occupations  at  the  moment,  wrote 
the  following  significant  phrase  :  ‘‘  Ave  Roma  immor- 
talis.  How  could  I  make  it  any  clearer  without  giving 
her  the  clue?  ” 2 

In  view  of  the  numerous  verified  correspondences 
between  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs,  Holland,  some  of  them 
contained  in  the  same  piece  of  script  as  the  Ave  Roma 

with  such  help,  nor  with  those  defenders  of  yours.”  The 
sentence  is  partly  quoted  from  a  well-known  line  in  the 
“  .^Eneid  ”  (ii.  521). 

'  ‘‘  First  among  his  peers,  himself  not  unmindful  of  his 
name  :  with  him  a  brother  related  in  feeling  though  not  in 
blood.  Both  these  will  send  a  word  to  you  through  another 
woman.  After  some  days  you  will  easily  understand  what 
I  say — till  then  farewell.” 

®  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxi.  pp.  297 — 303. 

236 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

message,  it  is  difficult  to  explain  the  incident  as  the 
mere  random  result  of  a  similar  association  of  ideas  ; 
but  if  the  two  sets  of  utterances  have  something  more 
than  an  accidental  relation,  it  is  clear  that  simple  tele¬ 
pathy  will  not  explain  the  facts.  In  the  two  previous 
cases  cited  from  Mrs.  Verrall’s  script  the  riddles 
puzzled  Mrs.  Verrall,  but  their  meaning  became  clear 
when  the  connection  of  the  script  with  the  other 
automatist  was  known.  But  in  the  present  case  Mrs. 
Holland  knew  no  more  of  the  matter  than  Mrs.  Verrall, 
and  the  mere  juxtaposition  of  the  two  scripts  would 
not,  and  did  not,  explain  the  riddle.  There  are 
indications  that  is,  of  the  operation  of  a  third 
intelligence  not  that  of  either  of  the  automatists. 

But  further,  the  intelligence  which  guided  Mrs. 
Holland’s  hand  seems  clearly  to  indicate  that  it  was 
giving  an  answer  to  a  riddle  in  the  phrase  :  “  How 

could  I  make  it  any  clearer  without  giving  her  the 
clue?  ”  And  scattered  thi'ough  Mrs.  Verrall’s  script 
at  this  period,  generally  in  immediate  connection  with 
these  enigmatic  “  cross-correspondences,”  occur  other 
phrases  of  similar  import,  urging  the  writer  to  wait 
for  the  solution  of  the  words  she  has  not  understood, 
to  piece  together  and  compare  the  different  writings.* 
Here  is  one  of  the  plainest  of  these  exhortations, 

’  These  passages  occur  almost  exclusively  in  Mrs.  Verrall’s 
script.  There  are  a  few  vague  references  in  the  scripts 
of  Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Forbes  to  co-operation  between 
sensitives.  But  the  only  unmistakable  reference  outside 
Mrs.  Verrall’s  script  to  these  cross -correspondences  is  the 
sentence  quoted  from  Mrs.  Holland  in  connection  with 
Ave  Roma.  It  should  be  added,  however,  as  I  learn  from 
Miss  Johnson,  that  Mrs.  Verrall  herself  attached  no  im¬ 
portance  to  these  phrases  until  long  afterwards,  when  their 
possible  significance  was  pointed  out  by  Miss  Johnson. 

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES 

237 

addressed  to  Mrs.  Verrall  by  the  intelligence  which 
guides  her  hand  : 

“  Sit  regularly  and  wait.  I  want  something  quite 
different  tried.  You  are  not  to  guess,  and  you  will  prob¬ 
ably  not  understand  what  you  write.  But  keep  it  all  and 
say  nothing  about  it  yet.  Then  at  Christmas  or  perhaps 
before  you  can  compare  your  own  words  with  another’s,  and 
the  truth  will  be  manifest.” 

These  frequent  references,  in  conjunction  with  the 
actual  illustrations  of  the  process  described,  suggested 
to  Miss  Johnson,  who  edited  Mrs.  Holland’s  script, 
”  that  one  and  the  same  intelligence,  or  group  of 
intelligences,  were  responsible  both  for  the  cross - 
correspondences  and  the  contemporary  comments  upon 
them  ” — in  other  words,  that  they  formed  part  of  a 
scheme  of  communication  designed  by  those  beyond 
the  gulf. 

With  a  view  to  elucidate  the  significance  of  these 
‘‘  cross-correspondences,”  it  was  arranged  to  bring 
Mrs.  Piper  over  to  this  country,  and  seventy-four 
trance  sittings  were  held  with  her  between  Novem¬ 
ber  lo,  1906,  and  June  2,  1907.  Mrs.  Verrall  and 
Mrs.  Holland  also  sat  at  intervals  during  the  same 
period  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  automatic  writing. 
Mrs.  Holland,  it  should  be  added,  knew  nothing  about 
the  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  and  was  throughout  the 
period  resident  in  India.  From  one  point  of  view 
the  experiments  may  be  claimed  to  have  been  com¬ 
pletely  successful.  The  masterly  collation  and  analysis 
of  the  three  sets  of  scripts  (including  also  a  few 
automatic  writings  by  Miss  Verrall)  undertaken  by  Mr. 
Piddington  reveal  coincidences  of  thought  and  expres¬ 
sion  too  numerous  and  too  detailed  to  be  accounted 

238 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

for  by  chance.  Whatever  interpretation  may  ulti¬ 
mately  be  given  to  these  curious  writings,  we  are 
forced  to  recognise  something  extraordinary  to  be 
explained.  It  may  ultimately  be  proved  that  there  is 
no  indication  of  post-mortem  agency,  but  to  prove 
that  it  is  necessary  to  assume  the  action  of  living 
minds  upon  one  another  of  an  unprecedented  kind. 
From  every  point  of  view,  then,  these  remarkable 
records  are  worthy  of  careful  study.  A'  few  pimple 
cases  may  be  quoted. 

1.  Between  ii  a.m.  and  noon  on  March  1 1,  1907, 
Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  automatically  as  follows  : 

“  With  violet  buds  their  heads  were  crowned 
violaceas  odores 

Violet  and  olive  leaf  purple  and  hoary 
The  city  of  the  violet  and  olive  crown.” 

4:  ^  Nt  * 

An  hour  or  two  later  on  the  same  day  Mrs.  Piper 
on  coming  out  of  the  trance  said  “Dr.  Hodgson  said 
‘  violets  ’  ” — the  usual  formula  for  indicating  that  a 
cross -correspondence  had  been  attempted. 

2.  On  April  3,  1907,  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  : 

Write  three  words — something  about  their  serried  ranks, — 
the  avenging  flame — the  troop  triumphant — 
no,  not  quite  that. 

flaming  swords — no 
flammantia  moenia  mundi 
But  wings  or  feathered  wings  come  in  somewhere 
‘  And  with  twain  he  covered  his  face  ’ 

Try  pinions  of  desire 
The  wings  of  Icarus 

[Drawing  of  a  wing  ] 

long  pointed  rainbow  wings.  But  you  keep  going  round  the 
ideas  instead  of  giving  three  plain  words 

LOST  PARADISE  REGAINED 
Of  man’s  first  Disobedience — no  that  is  something  else 

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES 

239 

a  fluttering  faint  desire.  Triumphant  hosts  in  long  array 
the  wings  point  upwards  behind  the  marshalled  hosts. 

It  is  a  picture  can  you  not  see  it  ?  with  sweeping 
stationary  wings,  not  used  in  flight,  but  making  a  great 
aureole  behind  the  central  group.  The  hosts  of  heaven 
[Scribbles  ] 

No  I  cant  get  it  at  all 
Leave  it  to-day 

his  flame  clad  messengers 

[Drawing  of  winged  figure  of  angel  ] 

that  is  better 

F  W  H  M  has  sent  the  message  through — at 
last  I 

Five  days  later  in  Mrs.  Piper’s  trance  the  “  Myers 
control  ”  claimed  to  have  given  Anget  as  a  cross - 
correspondence  to  Mrs.  Verrall. 

3.  On  April  16,  1907,  Mrs.  Holland,  in  India, 
wrote  as  follows  : 

“  Maurice.  Morris.  Mors. 

“  And  with  that  the  shadow  of  death  fell  upon  him  and 
his  soul  departed  out  of  his  limbs.” 

* 

(signed  with  the  initials  of  a  dead  man).* 

On  the  following  day,  in  the  intermediate  stage 
between  the  trance  and  waking,  Mrs.  Piper  said 
Sanatos  and  Tanatos  (interpreted  at  the  time  as 
Thanatos — the  Greek  for  “Death”). 

On  the  23rd  and  again  on  the  30th  of  the  same 
month  she  ejaculated  Thanatos — on  the  last  occasion 
repeating  it  twice. 

On  April  29th — the  day  preceding  the  last  appear- 

■  For  some  further  details  of  this  script  see  Miss 
Johnson’s  note  on  the  case  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxiv. 

p.  221. 

240 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

ance  of  the  word  in  Mrs.  Piper’s  utterances — Mrs. 
Verrall  had  written  the  following  : 

Warmed  both  hands  before  the  Fire  of  Life. 

It  fails  and  I  am  ready  to  depart. 

A 

Manibus  date  lilia  plenis 

[Sign  apparently  representing  the  ace  of  clubs 
The  river  Nile  A 
Daisy 

Come  away  Come  away 

Pallida  mors  aequo  pede  pauperum 
tabernas  regumque  turres 
put  in  pulsat 
Another  time  will  help 
Goodbye. 

But  you  have  got  the  word  plainly  written 
all  along  in  your  own  writing.  Look  back. 

The  four  quotations — from  Landor,  Virgil,  Shake¬ 
speare,  and  Horace — all  refer  to  death.  The  ace  of 
clubs  was  one  of  the  two  fatal  cards  in  Stevenson’s 
Suicides’  Club.  The  Greek  letter  A  {Delta)  had  for 
Mrs.  Verrall  a  special  association  with  death.  The 
whole  script  thus  completes  a  triple  cross -corre¬ 
spondence. 

4.  On  April  8,  1907,  at  7  a.m.  ’(Greenwich  time), 
Mrs.  Holland,  in  India,  wrote  : 

“  The  constellation  of  Orion.  .  .  . 

“  Do  you  remember  that  exquisite  sky  when  the  afterglow 
made  the  East  as  beautiful  and  as  richly  coloured  as  the 
West - ” 

On  the  same  day,  at  about  i  p.m.,  Mrs.  Piper  ejacu¬ 
lated  in  the  waking  stage  of  the  trance,  “  Light  in 
West.”  1 

At  about  3  p.m.  on  the  same  day  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  : 

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES 

241 

“  The  words  were  from  Maud  but  you  did  not  under¬ 
stand.  Rosy  is  the  east  and  so  on. 

“  You  will  find  that  you  have  written  a  message  for  Mr. 
Piddington  which  you  did  not  understand  but  he  did.  Tell 
him  that.” 

The  actual  words  in  “  Maud  ”  are  : 

‘‘  Rosy  is  the  West,” 

preceded  by  : 

”  Blush  from  West  to  East, 

Blush  from  East  to  West, 

Till  the  West  is  East. 

Blush  it  thro’  the  West.” 

These  are  but  four  instances  out  of  many.  Mr. 
Piddington  discusses  the  successful  cross-corre¬ 
spondences  under  twenty-three  heads,  but  some  of  the 
heads  include  several  verbal  coincidences  such  as  those 
given  above. 

Two  conclusions  are  forced  upon  us  by  an  impartial 
study  of  the  report  : 

1.  That  the  coincidences  cannot  be  explained  by 
mere  chance  association  of  ideas.  They  indicate  un¬ 
mistakably  the  action  of  some  external  intelligence  on 
the  minds  of  the  automatists. 

2.  That  the  enigmatic  form  of  the  phrasing  is  due, 
not  to  aimless  groping  after  an  elusive  idea,  but  to 
design.  Take  the  second  case,  for  instance.  The  word 
“  Angel  ”  is  suggested  throughout  Mrs.  Verrall’s  script. 
But  it  is  nowhere  expressly  written  ;  the  nearest 
approach  to  it  comes  at  the  end,  where  the  word 
“  Messenger  ” — the  literal  translation  of  the  Greek 
^Angelos — is  given,  followed  by  the  drawing  of  a 
winged  human  figure. 

16 

242 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

So  in  the  third  case.  Mrs.  Verrall’s  whole  script 
suggests  death,  but,  again,  the  word  seems  to  be 
deliberately  avoided.  The  Shakespearean  quotation  is 
even  broken  off  immediately  before  the  significant  word 
is  reached. 

In  both  these  cases  there  seems  to  be  design  :  the 
question  to  be  determined  is,  whose  design?  These 
cases — and  they  are,  with  some  qualifications  to  be 
considered  later,  fair  samples  of  the  evidence  printed 
in  Mr.  Piddington’s  report — can  scarcely  be  claimed 
as  illustrating  the  type  of  cross -correspondence  desired 
as  evidence  of  design  on  the  part  of  a  disembodied 
spirit.  In  the  Ave  Roma  Immortalis  incident  the  allu¬ 
sions  in  Mrs.  Verrall’s  script  were  so  artfully  veiled 
that  they  remained  for  the  writer  herself  an  unsolved 
enigma  to  the  last.  But  a  child  could  guess  the  riddle 
in  these  others.  It  looks  rather  as  if  Mrs.  Verrall’s 
dream  consciousness  was  aware  that  the  central  idea 
must  be  concealed  in  allusive  imagery,  and  was  doing 
its  dreamlike  best  to  fulfil  the  requirement.  That,  in 
fact,  the  imagery  was,  in  some  cases  at  least,  supplied 
from  the  writer’s  own  mind  we  have  clear  evidence. 
It  will  be  remembered  that  an  equilateral  triangle  ap¬ 
peared  twice  in  the  script  of  April  29,  1907,  and  that 
on  the  second  occasion  it  was  prefaced  by  the  words 
“  The  river  Nile,”  as  if  to  show  unmistakably  that 
it  was  intended  for  the  Greek  letter  Delta  (A).  Na^v, 
Delta  has  no  general  association  with  death,  but  it 
happens  to  be  closely  associated  in  Mrs.  Verrall’s  mind 
with  the  idea  of  death,  from  a  mistaken  notion,  con¬ 
ceived  in  childhood,  that  the  letter  Delta  was  engraved 
on  the  voting  tablets  used  to  condemn.  The  imagery 
in  this  case,  then,  could  have  proceeded  from  no  other 

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES 

243 

source  than  the  writer’s  own  mind.  The  introduction 
in  the  same  script  of  Manibus  date  lilia  plenis,  a 
quotation  from  the  passage  in  the  Sixth  “  ^neid  ” 
where  Anchises  foretells  the  early  death  of  Marcellus, 
is  also — as  Mr.  Piddington  points  out — probably  to  be 
explained  by  the  fact  that  on  the  day  before  the  script 
was  written  Mrs.  Verrall  had  come  across  Dante’s  trans¬ 
lation  of  the  passage  in  “  Purgatorio,”  canto  xxx. 

There  is  one  other  case  which  is  still  more 
significant  in  this  connection. 

On  February  19,  1907,  Mr.  Piddington  suggested 
to  the  entranced  Mrs.  Piper  “  Giant  and  Dwarf  ”  as 
the  subject  of  a  cross -correspondence  experiment  with 
Mrs.  Verrall.  Mrs.  Piper’s  control  accepted  the 
suggestion,  and  said  he  would  go  off  at  once  to  execute 
it.  Later,  the  controls  repeatedly  claimed  to  have  been 
successful  in  transferring  Dwarf.  Mrs.  Verrall,  who 
was  not  told  of  the  date  of  the  experiment,  twice 
searched  the  whole  of  the  script  written  during  a 
period  of  some  months.  On  the  first  occasion  she 
failed  to  find  any  allusion  to  Dwarf.  On  the  second 
occasion,  still  in  ignorance  of  the  date,  she  found  in 
the  script  of  February  19th,  written  a  few  hours  only 
after  the  suggestion  had  been  given  to  Mrs.  Piper, 
an  allusion  to  Dwarf  which  had  escaped  her  original 
scrutiny.  The  allusion  is  contained  in  the  words  : 

“  A  long  feather, 

Ask  about  the  feather, 

Up  the  mountain — no,  that  is 
Owl’s  feather  ;  not  what  I  want.” 

“  Up  the  mountain  ”  and  “  owl’s  feather  ”  suggested 
to  Mrs.  Verrall  a  poem,  very  familiar  to  her,  by  William' 
Allingham,  telling  of  little  men,  wee  folk,  or,  in  other 

244 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

words,  fairies.  The  coincidence  in  time  is  here  go 
close  that  it  seems  probable  that  Mrs.  Verrall’s  script 
is  actually  connected  with  the  Dwarf  of  the  experi¬ 
ment  ;  and  it  would  seem  at  first  sight  that  we  have 
found  here  a  cross-correspondence  of  the  kind 
desired  :  an  allusion  artfully  concealed  even  from 
the  automatist  herself.  But  if  there  were,  indeed, 
design  in  this  instance,  it  was  not  the  design  of  ^ 
directing  intelligence  external  to  the  minds  of  the  two 
automatists.  For  what  the  Piper  controls  repeatedly 
claimed  to  have  impressed  on  Mrs.  Verrall  was  not 
the  idea  of  Dwarf,  but  the  actual  letters  of  the  word — 
D  W  R  F .  So  that  the  allusive  imagery  in  this  case 
also  was  supplied  by  the  mind  of  the  automatist. 

One  more  case  may  be  quoted  as  throwing  isome 
light  on  the  genesis  of  these  curious  cross-corre¬ 
spondences.  On  January  i6,  1907,  Mrs.  Piper’s 

controls  claimed  to  have  given  “  Steeple  ”  as  the 
subject  of  a  test  message  through  the  hand  of  Mrs. 
Thompson  and  of  Mrs.  Verrall.  Mr.  Piddington,  at 
the  moment  when  the  entranced  Mrs.  Piper  wrote  this 
statement,  was  under  the  impression  that  he  had  re¬ 
ceived  a  letter  a  few  days  previously  informing  him 
that  the  word  “  Steeple  ”  had  occurred  in  the  writings 
of  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Holland.  Subsequent  inquiry 
proved  that  he  was  mistaken  :  no  such  letter  had  been 
written,  and  the  word  had  not  occurred  in  the  scripts 
of  any  other  automatist.  Nevertheless,  so  firm  had 
been  the  impression  in  Mr!.  Piddington’s  mind  that 
on  January  14th,  two  days  before  the  Piper  sitting, 
he  had  told  Mrs.  Verrall  of  the  discovery  of  the  word 
“  Steeple  ”  as  a  cross -correspondence  in  her  script. 
The  fact  is  attested  by  a  letter  written  by  Mrs.  Verrall 

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES 

245 

in  ignorance  of  the  claim  made  by  the  Piper 
controls. 

Here,  then,  we  have  a  clear  case  in  which  the  Piper 
controls  received  an  impression  (telepathically,  it  must 
be  presumed)  from  Mr.  Piddington’s  mind,  but  inter¬ 
preted  it  as  a  case  of  successful  experiment  with  two 
of  the  other  automatists. 

The  experiments  cited  would  seem  to  point  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  coincidences  demonstrated  are  due 
to  the  direct  action  of  the  mind  of  one  automatist  on 
the  mind  of  another,  or  possibly  to  such  action  through 
the  intermediary  of  the  other  experimenters.  The 
allusive  and  enigmatic  phrasing  in  which  the  test 
words  are  concealed  is  rarely  found  in  Mrs.  Piper’s 
utterances,  and  is  most  conspicuous  in  the  script  of 
Mrs.  Verrall.  It  has  been  proved  that  in  some  cases, 
at  any  rate,  this  characteristic  indirectness  of  phrasing 
is  due  to  the  efforts  of  the  subconscious  personality 
apparently  aiming  to  produce  the  kind  of  evidence 
required. 

Before,  however,  dismissing  these  records  as  fur¬ 
nishing  yet  one  more  illustration  of  the  readiness  pf 
our  mysterious  inner  self  to  meet  any  demands  that 
may  be  made  upon  its  dramatic  powers,  we  must  con¬ 
sider  ,the  evidence  a  little  more  closely.  There  are 
a  few  cases  of  cross -correspondence  which  do  not  so 
readily  lend  themselves  to  analysis.  In  these  cases 
we  have  to  deal,  not  with  the  coincidence  of  a  single 
word  or  a  single  idea,  but  with  a  series  of  partial  and 
allusive  coincidences,  suggesting  that  the  minds  of  two 
or  three  automatists  are  developing  the  same  train  of 
associations,  and  reciprocally  influencing  each  other’s 
thoughts  in  so  doing.  The  triple  coincidence  quoted 

246 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

under  heading  4  forms  part  of  a  long  series  of  similar 
partial  coincidences  between  the  scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall, 
Mrs.  Holland,  and  Mrs.  Piper.  In  this,  as  in  the 
other  cases,  the  coincidences  appear  chiefly  in  the  form 
of  literary  allusions,  the  authors  principally  drawn  upon 
being  Tennyson,  Browning,  Dante,  and  F.  W.  H. 
Myers.  To  most  it  will  seem  probable,  if  telepathy  is 
admitted  as  a  vera  causa,  that  these  coincidences  are 
due  to  random  telepathic  reverberations  from  one  mind 
to  another.  There  is  certainly  no  such  clear  indication 
as  in  the  Ave  Roma  Imntprtalis  incident  of  the  action 
of  a  directive  intelligence  other  than  those  of  the  auto- 
matists  themselves.  But  the  details  are  complicated  : 
some  of  the  links  of  association  are  extremely  subtle 
and  elusive,  and  the  appreciation  of  the  whole  bearing 
of  the  evidence  is  extraordinarily  difficult.  For  in  deal¬ 
ing  with  ambiguous,  allusive,  and  semi-coherent  utter¬ 
ances  of  this  kind  it  is  almost  inevitable  that  the 
interpretation  should  be  guided  by  the  unconscious  bias 
of  the  reader.  A  conspicuous  example  of  the  tendency 
is  afforded  by  the  Shakespeare-Bacon  cryptograms. 
Space  will  not  permit  of  more  than  a  single  illustra¬ 
tion  of  these  difficulties  being  quoted.  I  will  choose 
for  the  purpose  the  Latin  message  and  its  suggested 
connection  with  a  previous  cross -correspondence — 
Hope,  Star,  and  Browning.  To  test  the  hypothesis 
that  they  had  to  deal  with  discarnate  intelligences  who 
had  already  designed  the  plan  of  cross -correspondence 
as  a  means  of  proving  their  personal  identity,  the 
following  message  was  drawn  up  by  the  experimenters  ; 

“  iWe  are  aware  of  the  scheme  of  cross -correspondences 
which  you  are  transmitting  through  various  mediums,  and 
we  hope  that  you  will  go  on  with  them.  Try  also  to  give 

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES 

247 

to  A  and  B  two  different  messages,  between  which  no 
connection  is  discernible.  Then  as  soon  as  possible  give 
to  C  a  third  message  which  will  reveal  the  hidden 
connection.” 

For  the  purpose  of  transmission  to  Mrs.  Piper’s 
controls  the  message  was  translated  into  Latin  as 
follows  : 

‘‘  Diversis  internuntiis  quod  invicem  inter  se  respondentia 
jamdudum  committis,  id  nec  fallit  nos  consilium,  et 
vehementer  probamus. 

‘‘  Unum  accesserit  gratissimum  nobis,  si,  cum  duobus 
quibusdam  ea  tradideris,  inter  quae  nullus  appareat  nexus, 
postea  quam  primum  rem  per  tertium  aliquem  ita  perficias, 
ut  latens  illud  in  prioribus  explicetur.” 

The  Latin,  it  will  be  seen,  is  so  worded  that  a  person 
ignorant  of  the  language  or  a  lower-form  schoolboy 
armed  with  a  dictionary  would  be  unlikely  to  arrive 
at  the  meaning  of  the  whole  passage.  The  message 
was  repeatedly  dictated  word  by  word  at  several  succes¬ 
sive  stances  to  the  entranced  Mrs.  Piper.  The  dictation 
began  on  December  17,  1906,  and  was  not  completed 
until  January  2,  1907.  On  January  i6th,  a  fortnight 
after  the  completion  of  the  dictation,  and  before  a 
translation  had  been  attempted,  Mr.  Piddington  tells 
us  that  he  impressed  on  the  Piper-Myers  the  import¬ 
ance  of  cross-correspondence  messages,  and  expressed 
the  opinion  that  it  was  “  more  important  to  get  them 
than  for  you  spirits  to  give  facts  about  your  past  lives.” 
To  that  the  Piper-Myers  replied  by  asking  why  so 
much  importance  was  attached  to  cross -correspon¬ 
dences  :  for,  said  he,  ‘‘  if  you  establish  telepathic 
messages,  you  will  doubtless  attribute  all  such  to 
thoughts  from  those  living  in  the  mortal  body.”  The 
answer  shows  conclusively  that  the  Piper-Myers  had 

248 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

not  grasped  the  plan  of  complex  cross -correspondences 
which  the  Verrall-Myers,  according  to  the  hypothesis, 
had  been  actively  elaborating  for  some  years  pre¬ 
viously  ;  and  further,  that  the  Piper-Myers,  at  that 
date,  January  i6,  1907,  had  not  yet  succeeded  in  trans¬ 
lating  the  Latin  message. 

The  first  attempt  to  translate  the  Latin  message  was 
made  on  February  20th,  more  than  a  month  later. 
“It  is  with  reference,”  the  Piper-Myers  says,  “  to  my 
being  a  messenger  and  my,  handing  through  to  you 
coherent  .  .  .  messages.” 

A  few  days  later,  on  February  27th,  the  Piper-Myers 
writes  :  “I  feel  a  little  perturbed  over  your  message 
to  me  when  you  said  I  [failed]  in  replying  sufficiently 
to  convince  you,  &c.,  altho’  I,  as  intermediary,  had 
long  since  united  my  ideas.”  Later  in  the  same  sitting 
he  makes  it  clear  that  this  passage  was  intended  for 
a  translation  of  the  Latin  message  :  for  he  now  gives 
the  translation  as  follows  : 

“  Although  you  as  intermediary  have  long  since  united 
mutually  ideas.  You  have  or  do  not  reply  or  respond 
sufficiently  to  our  questions  as  to  convince  us  of  your 
existence.” 

These  replies  show  unmistakable  knowledge  of  the 
meaning  of  some  of  the  individual  Latin  words,  and 
equally  unmistakable  ignorance  of  the  meaning  of  the 
passage  as  a  whole.  There  is,  it  will  be  seen,  no 
reference  to  cross-correspondences. 

Later  the  trance  intelligence,  after  attempting  to  con¬ 
nect  the  message  with  a  “  poem  ”  or  “  poems,”  and 
with  individual  experiments  already  made,  seems 
definitely  to  have  connected  it  with  the  idea  of  cross - 
correspondence  in  general,  as,  indeed,  under  the 
circumstances  it  or  they  could  hardly  fail  to  do. 

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES 

249 

But  even  then  the  reference  is  to  cross -correspond¬ 
ences  of  the  simple  kind.  On  March  6th  the  trance 
intelligence,  after  repeating  in  almost  identical  words 
the  “  translation  ”  above  quoted,  adds  to  it  :  “  Now  if 
you  give  a  clear  message  through  Mrs.  V.  and  repro¬ 
duce  it  here,  it  will  do  more  to  convince  or  it 
will  .  .  .  greatly  help  to  convince  the  world  of  your 
continued  existence — this  was  the  idea  as  I  received 
it.”  Finally,  pn  May  27th,  the  Piper-Myers  gives  as 
the  translation  the  following  : 

“  You  have  long  since  been  trying  to  assimilate  ideas, 
but  I  wish  you  to  give  through  Mrs.  Verrall  proof  of  the 
survival  of  bodily  death  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  it 
conclusive  ”  ;  and  then  adds,  ‘‘  He  mentioned  my  own 
words  in  it,  viz.,  the  Survival  of  Bodily  Death  ”  [words 
which  formed  part  of  the  title  of  Myers’  last  work]. 

It  would  appear,  then,  from  the  reception  of  this 
Latin  message  that  Mrs.  Piper’s  trance  intelligence, 
though  it  had  somehow  learnt  the  meaning  of  some  of 
the  words  in  the  first  clause,  and  succeeded  in  putting 
them  together  so  as  to  make  sense,  was  unable,  after 
repeated  efforts  continued  for  nearly  four  months,  to 
construe  the  passage  as  a  whole  and  is  reduced  to 
guesswork.  It  hardly  required  any  supernormal  faculty 
for  the  trance  intelligence,  after  repeated  attempts,  to 
guess  no  nearer  the  truth  than  it  succeeded  in  doing. 

If  this  were  a  complete  account  of  the  matter,  it 
would,  no  doubt,  be  recognised  by  all  that  the  recep¬ 
tion  of  the  Latin  message  had  proved  fatal  to  the 
claims  of  the  trance  intelligence,  at  any  rate,  on  this 
particular  occasion.  But  the  experimenters  do  not 
admit  that  the  foregoing  statement  is  a  complete 
account  of  the  matter.  Mr.  Piddington,  in  his  original 

250 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

“report,  claims  that  the  Latin  message  was  adequately, 
answered,  not  by  the  translations  above  quoted,  but 
by  repeated  references  to  an  actual  cross -correspond¬ 
ence,  which  almost,  but  not  quite,  fulfils  the  require¬ 
ments.  Miss  Johnson,  in  criticising  the  foregoing 
summary  of  the  Latin  message  incident,  repeats  the 
claim  : 

“  Mr.  Podmore,"  she  says,  “  has  omitted  to  take  into 
account  the  important  fact  that  though  the  Piper-Myers 
failed  to  show  any  real  comprehension  in  the  abstract  of 
the  plan  of  cross -correspondences,  he  pointed  out — and  main¬ 
tained  his  point  in  the  face  of  every  discouragement — 
that  ‘  Browning,  Hope,  and  Star  ’  was  an  instance  of  the 
kind  required.”  > 

‘‘  Browning,  Hope,  and  Star  ”  is  a  brief  description 
of  an  extremely  complex,  allusive,  and  enigmatic  cross - 
correspondence,  in  which  Mrs.  Piper,  Mrs.  Verrall, 
and  Miss  Verrall  all  took  part.  The  relative  scripts 
were  written  in  the  period  between  January  23rd  and 
February  17th — shortly  after  the  Latin  message  had 
been  dictated.  The  first  attempt  at  translation,  as 
already  said,  took  place  on  February  20th.  In  the 
interval,  on  February  i  ith,  though  not  in  any  con¬ 
nection  with  the  Latin  message,  the  control  sponta¬ 
neously  referred  to  Evangelical,  Browning,  Hope,  and 
Star.  Immediately  after  the  second  reference  to  the 
three  words  last  quoted,  Mr.  Piddington,  in  taking 
leave  of  the  control,  asked  him  to  reply  to  the  Latin 
message  at  the  next  sitting  '(Report,  p.  320). 

In  the  course  of  the  next  few  days  Mr.  Piddington 
read  the  scripts  of  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall,  in  which 
the  cross-correspondence  ‘‘  Hope,  Star,  and  Browning  ” 

*  Broceedings  S.R.R.,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  262,  note. 

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES 

251 

occurred,  and,  in  his  own  words,  before  February  20th  : 
“  I  had  become  impressed,  I  may  even  say  obsessed, 
with  the  idea  that  Mrs.  Verrall’s  script  of  January  28th, 
which  had  on  February  i  ith  been  described  in  the 
trance  by  the  Piper-Myers  as  ‘  Hope,  Star,  and 
Browning,’  was  an  attempt  by  the  Verrall-Myers  to 
give,  by  means  of  indirect  allusions  to  stanza  vii.  of 
‘  Abt  Vogler,’  an  intelligent  answer  to  the  Latin 
message”  '(p.  330). 

Note  Mr.  Piddington’s  very  candid  account  of  the 
state  of  mind  in  which  he  approached  the  stances  of 
February  20th  and  subsequent  dates. 

On  February  20th  there  occurred  the  first  attempt 
at  translation.  On  February  27th  occurred  the  two 
other  attempts  above  quoted.  In  the  interval  between 
these  two  later  attempts  the  control  remarked  :  “I 
believe  ...  I  have  sufficiently  replied  to  your  various 
questions  to  convince  the  ordinary  scientific  mind 
.  .  .”  Mr.  Piddington,  referring  to  this  statement, 
said  later  in  the  stance  to  the  control  ;  ‘‘You  say  you 
have  replied — tell  me  in  what  messages  your  reply  is 
given.”  The  control,  in  answer,  refers  successively, 
to  ‘‘  the  poems,”  “  halcyon  days,”  ‘‘  evangelic,” 
”  shrub,”  ‘‘  syringa,”  ‘‘  the  poems  and  cross-correspond¬ 
ence  messages.”  Mr.  Piddington  then  asks,  ‘‘ ,What 
poems?”  The  control  replies,  ‘‘My  own.  Browning 
.  .  Horace.”  At  the  control’s  request  Mr.  Pidding¬ 

ton  Repeats  the  last  utterance,  and  the  control  con¬ 
tinues  ;  ‘‘  Yes,  chiefly  Browning’s  lines  as  given 

through  Mrs.  Verrall  and  another,  which  I  referred 
to  before.” 

Mr.  Piddington  then  tells  the  control  :  ‘‘I  want 

to  say  that  you  have,  I  believe,  given  an  answer  worthy 

252 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

of  your  intelligence — not  to-day  I  mean,  but  some  time 
back — but  the  interpretation  must  not  be  mine.  You 
must  explain  your  answer  [through  Mrs.  Piper].  You 
could  do  it  in  two  words.” 

The  control  replies,  ‘‘  Hope,  Star.”  Mr.  Pidding- 
ton. — ^^Well?  Yes?  The  control. — ‘‘  Browning.”  Mr. 
Piddington  then  tells  the  control  :  “In  telling  me  that 
Browning,  Hope,  and  Star  contains  your  answer  to 
the  Latin  message  you  have  given  an  answer  which 
to  me  is  both  intelligible  and  clear.”  ^ 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  after  the  last 
explicit  statement  by  Mr.  Piddington  no  later  reference 
to  the  connection  of  the  Latin  message  with  “  Hope, 
Star,  and  Browning  ”  could  possess  much  evidential 
value.  But,  in  fact,  it  does  not  appear  that,  despite 
the  strong  hint  given,  the  trance  intelligence  did 
advance  much  farther  in  connecting  the  two  ideas. 

It  is,  then,  on  the  conversation  above  summarised 
that  Mr.  Piddington  has  based  his  contention  that  the 
control  showed  a  comprehension  of  the  purport  of  the 
Latin  message.  And  presumably  Miss  Johnson  relies 
upon  the  same  incidents  to  support  her  statement  that 
“  the  Piper -Myers  pointed  out — and  maintained  his 
point  in  the  face  of  every  discouragement — that 
‘  Browning,  Hope,  and  Star  ’  was  an  instance  of  the 
kind  required.” 

In  my  view  we  should  not  even  be  justified  in 
regarding  the  connection — casual  and  insignificant  as 

'  The  account  of  the  whole  conversation  is  much  abbre¬ 
viated  ;  but  if  the  reader  will  refer  to  the  original  {Pro^ 
ceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxii.  pp.  320 — 31)  he  will,  I  think, 
find  that  nothing  which  has  any  bearing  upon  the  present 
question  has  been  omitted. 

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES 

253 

that  connection  seems  to  be — of  the  Latin  message  with 
“  Hope,  Star,  and  Browning  ”  as  spontaneous  on  the 
part  of  the  trance  intelligence.  The  control  suggested 
several  things.  Mr.  Piddington,  on  its  repetition, 
selects  the  word  “  poems,”  and  asks,  “  What  poems?  ” 
The  control  names  three  poets,  and  asks  Mr.  Pidding¬ 
ton  to  repeat  the  sentence  after  him.  After  listening 
to  Mr.  Piddington  the  control  selects  Browning.  But 
“  Browning  ”  had  already  been  connected  with  ”  Hope 
and  Star  ”  at  a  previous  stance.  The  evidence,  as  it 
stands,  is  not  such  as  would  be  accepted  in  a  telepathic 
experiment. 

But  another  question  arises  from  the  record.  How 
did  the  trance  intelligence  learn  the  meaning  of  the 
individual  Latin  words  in  the  first  clause?  There  are 
two  possible  sources — telepathy  or  a  dictionary.  Now, 
apart  from  other  objections  to  the  hypothesis,  it  seems 
improbable  that  telepathy  should  give  just  what  a 
dictionary  would  give  and  no  more.  The  experimenters 
would  not  think  of  “  messenger  ”  and  “  intermediary  ” 
as  the  translation  of  internuntiis,  nor  of  ‘‘  coherent  ” 
as  the  translation  of  invicem  inter  se  respondentia, 
nor  would  they  have  translated  fallit  nos  consilium 
as  “  failed  to  convince.”  To  recognise,  however,  that 
the  knowledge  shown  by  the  entranced  Mrs.  Piper 
was  perhaps  derived  from  a  dictionary  does  not  imply 
bad  faith  on  the  part  of  the  Mrs.  Piper  whom  her 
friends  know  and  esteem  in  the  waking  state.'  Nor 
does  it  seriously  invalidate  the  evidence  in  the  other 
cases,  since  no  dictionary  could  have  told  Mrs.  Piper 

'  For  a  similar  incident,  suggesting  possible  reference  to 
a  dictionary,  see  the  mistranslation  of  mori  {Proceedings 
S.P.R.,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  223). 

254 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

what  Mrs.  Verrall  was  writing  in  Cambridge  or  Mrs. 
Holland  in  India. 

It  would  appear,  then,  from  the  four  months’  trial 
of  the  Latin  message  that  the  trance  personality  which 
the  experimenters  call  Myers-P.,  or  the  Piper-Myers, 
had  not  even  at  the  end  of  the  sittings  grasped  the  scheme 
of  complex  cross -correspondences  :  was  so  far  from 
grasping  it,  indeed,  that  not  even  the  numerous  hints 
given  in  the  course  of  the  dialogue  succeeded  in  con¬ 
veying  that  idea.  From  this  it  would  seem  to  follow, 
not  merely  that  the  Piper-Myers  is  an  intelligence  of 
distinctly  inferior  capacity,  but  that  it  is  not  identical 
with  the  intelligence,  claiming  to  emanate  from  the 
same  discarnate  source,  which  has  for  years  past  been 
elaborating,  through  Mrs.  Verrall’s  hand,  a  scheme  of 
complex  cross -correspondences. 

But  this  conclusion,  even  if  put  forward  in  a  less 
tentative  form,  would  not,  of  course,  end  the  matter. 
Some  parts  of  the  records,  as  already  indicated,  are  not 
easy  to  interpret.  In  the  present  chapter  only  a  few 
of  the  simpler  and  less  ambiguous  cases  of  cross - 
correspondence  have  been  dealt  with.  The  space  at 
my  disposal  would  not  permit  of  an  adequate  sum¬ 
mary  of  the  more  complex  cases.  For  these  the  reader 
must  study  the  Report  itself.  But  so  far  as  my 
analysis  of  these  cases  has  gone  I  cannot  find  any 
coincidences  of  thought  and  expression  of  which  the 
natural  association  of  ideas  in  minds  preoccupied  with 
the  same  themes,  aided  by  occasional  telepathic  inter¬ 
action  amongst  the  automatists  themselves,  would  not 
appear  to  furnish  a  sufficient  explanation. 

CHAPTER  VI 

THE  MOST  RECENT  EVIDENCE 

The  latest  publication  of  the  Society  for  Psychical 
Research  «  contains  papers  by  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick, 
Mrs.  Verrall,  Miss  Johnson,  and  Mr.  Piddington  de¬ 
scribing  the  most  recent  cross -correspondences.  The 
results  add  considerably  to  the  strength  of  the  case 
for  supernormal  faculty  of  some  kind.  Their  bearing 
on  the  more  difficult  question  at  issue,  the  source  of 
the  supernormal  knowledge  shown  by  the  automatists, 
is  of  an  equivocal  nature.  There  is  one  case,  at  least, 
which  may  be  held  to  furnish  perhaps  the  clearest 
and  most  direct  evidence  yet  obtained  for  the 
Spiritualist  hypothesis.  Another  case,  in  which  the 
coincidences  are  equally  striking,  may  be  set  against  this 
as  pointing,  with  perhaps  even  greater  emphasis,  to  a 
naturalistic  interpretation  of  the  whole  series  of  cross - 
correspondences. 

The  Lethe  Incident. 

After  Mrs.  Piper’s  visit  to  this  country  in  the  winter 
of  1906-07,  she  returned  to  America,  and  in  the 
spring  of  the  following  year,  1908,  Mr.  G.  B.  Dorr 
arranged  to  have  a  series  of  sittings  with  her.  Mr. 
Dorr’s  object  was  twofold  t  (a)  to  obtain  cross-corre- 
>  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxiv.  part  lx. 

25S 

256 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

spondences  with  the  English  group  of  automatists, 
who  were  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  any  such  experi¬ 
ments  were  being  made  ;  '{b)  to  attempt  to  revive  the 
literary  memories  of  the  Piper-Myers,  and  thus  test 
his  claim  to  identity.  Both  experiments  met  with 
success.  Some  interesting  correspondences  were 
obtained,  chiefly  with  the  script  of  Miss  Verrall. 
With  one  exception,  however,  they  add  little  to  our 
previous  knowledge.  The  success  obtained  in  the 
other  direction  was,  howeveir,  of  a  most  striking  kind  ; 
and  the  results  constitute,  perhaps,  the  strongest 
evidence  yet  obtained  for  the  identity  of  any  com¬ 
municator.  Briefly,  the  Piper-Myers,  after  his  memory 
had  been  stimulated  by  a  few  trite  classical  quota¬ 
tions,  by  the  recital  of  some  verse  translations  from 
classical  writers,  and  one  or  two  extracts  from  his 
own  autobiography  bearing  upon  his  classical  studies, 
showed  an  intelligent,  and  in  many  particulars  intimate, 
knowledge  of  some  of  the  classical  poets,  especially 
of  Ovid  and  Virgil — a  knowledge  which  far  exceeded 
that  possessed  by  his  interlocutor,  Mr.  Dorr.  Before 
proceeding  to  discuss  the  possible  explanations  of  the 
knowledge  shown  I  will  quote  at  length  a  single 
illustration. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  sitting  held  on  March  23, 
1908,  Mr.  Dorr  asked  the  Piper-Myers  :  “What  does 
the  word  LETHE  suggest  to  you?  ”  adding  that 
the  word  related  to  the  old  mythology,  that  it  was  a 
water,  and  was  situated  in  Hades. 

The  trance  intelligence  in  the  course  of  the  same 
sitting,  amongst  many  irrelevant  classical  allusions, 
wrote:  “Do  you  remember  'cave'?”  In  the  waking 
stage,  again  in  the  midst  of  many  irrelevant  allusions, 

THE  MOST  RECENT  EVIDENCE 

257 

some  to  contemporary  cross-correspondence  experiments, 
Mrs.  Piper  muttered  an  indistinct  word,  recorded  by  Mr. 
Dorr  las  “  pavia,”  and  a  little  later  said  : 

“  Pharaoh’s  daughter  came  out  of  the  water.  Warm  sunlit 
love. 

Lime  leaf  heart  sword  arrow 

I  shot  an  arrow  through  the  air 

And  it  fell  I  know  not  where.” 

Mrs.  Piper  then  described  a  vision  of  “a  lady  who 
had  no  clothes  on,”  who  held  in  her  hand 

‘‘  a  hoop  and  two  pointed  things — and  she  pulled  a  string 
and  she  pointed  it  straight  at  me,  and  I  thought  it  would 
hit  me  in  the  eye  .  .  .  and  there  was  only  half  of  the 
hoop  there.”  » 

This  ended  the  stance  of  March  23rd. 

All  this  conveyed  nothing  to  Mr.  Dorr’s  mind,  and 
he  supposed  the  woman  archer  to  represent  Diana. 

At  the  sitting  of  the  following  day  the  control,  pur¬ 
porting  to  be  Hodgson,  said  that  Myers  was  disturbed 
because  he  felt  that  Mr.  Dorr  had  not  understood 
the  replies  about  Lethe,  and  added  ; 

I  wrote  in  reply  to  your  last  inquiry  Cave  Lethe. 

G.  B.  D. — I  asked  him  \i.e.,  Myers]  whether  the  word 
Lethe  recalled  anything  to  him. 

He  replied  Cave  Banks  Shore. 

G.  B.  D. — But  these  last  two  [/.e.,  “Banks  Shore”] 
were  not  written  until  after  I  had  told  him  it  was  a  water. 

>  It  should  be  explained  that,  for  the  sake  of  clearness, 
I  have  selected  in  my  account  of  the  Lethe  incident  only 
the  most  indubitably  relevant  passages.  There  is  a  good 
deal  of  irrelevant  matter,  and  some  minor  points,  which, 
as  explained  by  Mr.  Piddington,  go  some  way  towards 
enhancing  the  value  of  the  coincidence.  But  space  will 
not  admit  of  an  exhaustive  setting  out  of  the  incident. 

17 

258 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

lYes,  but  he  drew  the  form — a  picture  of  Iris  with 
an  arrow. 

G.  B.  D. — But  he  spoke  of  winds. 

Yes,  clouds  arrow  Iris  Cave  Mor  M  O  R  Latin 
for  sleep  Morpheus  .Cave.  Sticks  in  my  mind  can’t 
you  help  me? 

G.  B.  D. — Good.  I  understand  what  you  are  after  now. 
But  can’t  you  make  it  clearer  what  there  was  peculiar  about 
the  waters  of  Lethe? 

Yes,  I  suppose  you  think  I  am  affected  in  the 
same  way  but  I  am  not. 

From  the  la,st  sentence  it  is  clear  that  the  trance 
intelligence  was  familiar  with  the  ordinary  associa¬ 
tions  of  Lethe,  and  that  he,  apparently  with  intention, 
refrained  from  giving  them. 

The  control  then  repeated  “  Cave,”  “  I  R  I  S,”  and 
“CLOUDS,”  and  when  asked  for  more  details  about 
Lethe  gave  “  Flowery  Banks,”  and  explained  that  the 
woman  shooting  was  meant  for  Iris. 

In  the  waking  stage  of  this  second  sitting  the  first 
word  whispered  was  again  recorded  as  “  pavia,”  but 
again  it  was  impossible  to  hear  it  distinctly. 

Mrs.  Piper  then  said  :  “  Mr.  Myers  is  writing  on 
the  wall  ”  ;  and  said,  first,  C,  and  then,  after  a 
pause,  Y  X. 

At  the  sitting  of  March  30th  Mr.  Dorr,  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  his  custom,  asked  the  control,  now  writing 
through  Mrs.  Piper’s  hand,  for  further  light  on  the 
enigmatic  utterances  of  the  waking  stage  at  the  previous 
sitting.  C-y-x  was  explained  as  “chariot.”  Asked 
to  spell  the  word,  the  control  wrote  Cynx,  C  Y  N  X, 
and  assented  to  the  suggestion  that  it  was  a  Greek 
word.  In  reply  to  a  question  about  the  word  recorded 
as  pavia,  the  hand  wrote  Pomona.  Later  in  the  sitting 
Mr.  Dorr  said  :  “  I  see  no  connection  between  Iris 

and  Lethe.” 

THE  MOST  RECENT  EVIDENCE 

259 

To  which  the  control  replied  ;  “No,  only  Iris  shot 
an  arrow  into  the  clouds  and  caused  a  rainbow.  It 
brought  it  to  my  mind  simply.” 

In  the  waking  stage  on  April  6th  again  came 
C  Y  X  ;  and  in  the  sitting  of  April  7th  the  hand  ex¬ 
plained  CYX  as  SCYX,  CSYX.  Finally,  in  the 
waking  stage  of  the  same  sitting  Mrs.  Piper  said  : 
"  Mr.  Myers  says,  '  No  poppies  ever  grew  on  Elysian 
shores.’  ” 

Mr.  Dorr  found  all  these  remarks  irrelevant  to  the 
topic  of  Lethe.  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mr.  Gerald  Balfour, 
who  some  months  later  read  through  the  scripts,  equally 
failed  to  find  anything  coherent  or  intelligible  in  them. 
The  clue  was  eventually  discovered  through  the  industry 
and  acumen  of  Mr.  Piddington,  who  searched  the 
classics  until  he  found,  in  the  Eleventh  Book  of 
Ovid’s  “  Metamorphoses,”  hitherto  unknown  to  him, 
the  source  of  the  various  allusions. 

Briefly,  the  story  told  by  Ovid  is  as  follows  : 

C  E  Y  X,  King  of  Trachin,  was  drowned  at  sea,  and 
Juno  sent  IRIS,  goddess  of  the  Rainbow,  to  Somnus 
'(SLEEP)  to  bid  him  carry  the  news  in  a  dream 
to  Alcyone,  Ceyx’s  queen.  Iris  prints  her  B  O  iWi  upon 
the  sky,  and  glides  down  to  the  CAVE  of  Sleep, 
which  was  surrounded  and  hidden  by  dark 
CLOUDS.  F  rom  the  foot  of  the  rock  flows  fhe 
river  of  LETHE,  and  on  its  BANKS  are 
POPPIES  and  innumerable  FLOWERS,'  from 
whose  juice  Night  distils  Sleep.  Finally,  Somnus  sends 
his  son  MORPHEUS  to  impersonate  in  a  dream 
the  dead  Ceyx. 

In  the  above  extract  I  have  emphasised  by  capital 
*  ”  Innumerasque  herbee.” 

260 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

letters  the  points  of  correspondence  between  Ovid’s 
story  and  the  trance  utterances.  The  only  doubtful 
point  is  the  identification  of  the  indistinctly  articu¬ 
lated  word  “  pavia  ”  with  papavera,  the  Latin  for 
poppies. 

There  can  be  no  question  that  the  intelligence  which 
answered  the  question  about  Lethe  knew  this  story 
from  Ovid  ;  and  it  is  a  plausible  inference  that  it 
deliberately  chose  this  particular  legend,  rather  than  the 
more  familiar  stories  about  Lethe,  with  the  intention  of 
giving  a  more  conclusive  test.  In  the  course  of  the 
same  sittings  spontaneous  reference  was  made  to  three 
other  legends  included  in  the  Tenth  and  Eleventh  books 
of  the  “  Metamorphoses,”  the  whole  story  being  given 
in  one  case — that  of  Hyacinthus,  slain  by  a  discus 

thrown  by  the  hand  of  Apollo,  from  whose  blood 

sprang  up  a  purple  lily.  The  trance  intelligence 

showed  also  a  scholarly  grasp  of  the  subject  of  the 

first  book  of  the  “  .^neid,”  and  made  references,  which 
seem  to  imply  accurate  knowledge,  to  passages  in  the 
Second  and  Sixth  Books.  Further,  after  an  English 
translation  of  lines  160-83  of  tho  “Agamemnon” 
of  yEschylus  had  been  read  aloud  by  Mr.  Dorr,  Mrs. 
Piper  in  the  waking  stage  of  the  same  sitting  whispered 
“  Agamemnon  ”  ;  i  and  at  a  later  sitting  stated  that 
“  Achylus  ” — afterwards  corrected  to  “  ^schylus  ” — 
“  wrote  three  plays  ” — &n  obvious  reference  to  the 
famous  Trilogy. 

The  first  thing  to  be  noted  is  that  the  knowledge 
shown  went  far  beyond  that  of  the  sitter.  Mr.  Dorr 

*  The  part  of  the  chorus  quoted  does  not  include  the 
word  “  Agamemnon,’’  or,  indeed,  give  any  possible  clue 
to  the  subject  of  the  play. 

THE  MOST  RECENT  EVIDENCE 

261 

Has  explained  that  he  dropped  Latin  and  Greek  after 
his  second  year  at  Harvard,  and  that  he  has  read  no 
Greek  since  “and  scarcely  any  Latin — none  for  a  long 
time.”  He  had  read  at  school  the  first  three  or  four 
books  of  the  yEneid,  but  no  Ovid.i 

If  we  cross  the  Atlantic,  we  find  that  neither  Mrs. 
nor  Miss  Verrall,  two  classical  scholars  who  are  known 
to  have  influenced  Mrs.  Piper’s  trance  intelligence, 
though,  of  course,  familiar  with  the  “  ^Eneid  ”  and 
the  “  Agamemnon,”  had  ever  read  the  Tenth  and 
Eleventh  Books  of  the  “  Metamorphoses  ”  ;  nor,  as 
already  said,  had  Mr.  Piddington. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  love  and  homage  which 
Frederic  Myers  paid  to  Virgil  are  well  known  ;  and 
Ovid  figures  in  a  list  of  five  classical  poets  whose 
poetry,  as  he  tells  us  in  his  Autobiography,  he  was 
in  the  habit  of  inwardly  reciting  between  the  ages  of 
ten  and  sixteen .2 

Mr.  Piddington  adduces  other  reasons,  based  on  a 
study  of  his  poetry,  for  supposing  that  Myers  was 
familiar  in  particular  with  the  Tenth  and  Eleventh 
Books  of  the  “  Metamorphoses.”  It  may,  no  doubt,  fairly 
be  assumed  that  all  the  knowledge  shown  by  the  trance 
intelligence  had  been  combined  in  the  mind  of  Frederic 
Myers  ;  and  we  know  of  no  living  mind  in  Mrs.  Piper’s 
environment — even  if  we  allow  that  environment  to 
stretch  across  the  Atlantic — from  which  all  the  infor¬ 
mation  could  have  been  derived  telepathically.  The 
result  of  the  Horace-Ode  question  already  referred  to, 
and  some  of  the  previous  cross -correspondences  in 
which  the  Verrall-Myers  and  the  Holland-Myers  ex- 

’  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  42,  note. 

2  “  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry,”  p.  17. 

262 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

hibited  characteristically  allusive  methods  of  revealing 
knowledge  similar  to  those  employed  in  this  case  by 
the  Piper-Myers,  all  seem  to  point  in  the  same  direc¬ 
tion.  It  must,  I  think,  be  admitted  on  all  hands  that  the 
method  of  answering  the  Lethe  question  was  well 
devised  ;  that  this  is  precisely  the  kind  of  evidence 
demanded  for  the  proof  of  spirit-identity  ;  and  that, 
though  no  single  case  can,  of  course,  be  conclusive, 
yet  that  if  evidence  of  this  kind  were  multiplied  the 
presumption  in  favour  of  the  reality  of  spirit  com¬ 
munication  might  at  length  become  irresistible. 

Taken  by  itself,  however,  the  new  evidence  can 
hardly  be  claimed  as  strong  enough  appreciably  to 
weaken  the  presumption  against  the  authenticity  of 
these  spirit  messages  derived  from  the  whole  experi¬ 
ence  of  the  past,  and  there  are  in  the  present  case 
two  special  features  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the 
{hypothesis . 

I,  It  will  have  been  noticed  that  the  bulk  of  the 
communications  received  from  Mrs.  Piper  are  written 
through  her  hand  in  the  trance,  and  purport  to  be 
dictated  by  some  discarnate  intelligence.  But  in  the 
prolonged  process  of  emerging  from  the  trance  (what 
is  called  ‘‘  the  waking  stage  ”)  Mrs.  Piper  gives  many 
important  pieces  of  information  uiua  voce — the  names 
CYX  and  Agamemnon  were  thus  given  in  the  case 
of  the  American  sittings — and  gives  them,  as  a  rule, 
in  propria  persona.  Now,  it  frequently  happens  that 
the  intelligence  which  guides  the  hand  in  writing  is 
unable  to  explain  the  words  uttered  in  the  waking 
stage.  Thus,  in  the  present  series,  to  take  a  few 
instances,  the  hand  gave  ridiculous  explanations  of 
CYX  and  of  “  pavia,”  explained  an  apparent  allusion  to 
Orpheus  and  Eurydice  by  the  word  “  Venus,”  and  said 

THE  MOST  RECENT  EVIDENCE 

263 

that  the  words  “  a  lily  came  up  from  the  blood  ” 
referred  to  Prometheus  ! 

But  all  the  successful  allusions,  whether  written  or 
spoken,  are  counted,  for  the  purpose  of  the  corre¬ 
spondence,  as  proceeding  from  the  same  intelligence  ; 
and,  indeed,  some  of  the  utterances  in  the  waking  stage 
are  prefaced  with  the  remark  “  Mr.  Myers  says.”  It 
is  extremely  difficult  to  reconcile  this  ignorance  or 
forgetfulness  with  the  identity  of  the  spirit  purport¬ 
ing  to  communicate  alike  by  hand  and  voice.  In 
this  connection  we  note  the  curious  fact  that  the  trance 
intelligence  seems  to  be  unaware  of  its  mental  pro¬ 
cesses.  According  to  the  views  above  put  forward 
Iris  was  introduced  at  the  first  sitting  as  a  prominent 
feature  in  the  Ovid  story,  which  was  itself  intended 
to  furnish  a  complete,  but  enigmatic,  answer  to  the 
question  about  Lethe.  But  note  that  Iris  is  intro¬ 
duced  at  the  first  sitting  through  the  intermediary  of 
“  arrow,”  which  is  itself  apparently  suggested  by  the 
otherwise  meaningless  “  sword.”  Again,  at  the  sitting 
of  March  30th,  when  Mr.  Dorr  says,  ‘‘  I  see  no  con¬ 
nection  between  Iris  and  Lethe,”  the  reply  is  :  ‘‘  No, 
only  Iris  shot  an  arrow  into  the  clouds,  and  caused 
a  rainbow.  ...  It  brought  it  to  my  mind  simply.” 

Are  we  to  suppose  that  discarnate  intelligences  also 
are  liable  to  dissociation  of  consciousness? 

2.  The  other  point  is  this.  The  name  written  Ceyx 
is  a  dissyllable  and  not  only  so,  but  both  vowels  are 
long — Ce-yx  (pronounce  Kay-eeks).  But  it  would  seem 
that  both  the  hand  and  voice  in  their  efforts  to  recall 
the  exact  word  represent  it  as  a  monosyllable.  On 
its  first  appearance,  in  the  waking  stage,  the  word  is 
spelt  viva  voce  C  (pause)  Y  X,  and  the  pronunciation 

264 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

is  not  attempted.  But  the  hand  makes  three  shots — 
C  Y  N  X,  S  C  Y  X,  C  S  Y  X,  and  the  voice  on  April  6th 
spells  it  C  Y  X.  Now,  this  misconception,  improbable 
in  a  scholar  who  was  familiar  with  the  original  poem' 
where  the  word  occurs  repeatedly,  would  be,  one  must 
think,  impossible  to  a  scholar  who  was  also  a  poet, 
for  whom  the  sound  of  a  word  must  be  of  primary 
importance.  But  the  mistake  would  be  perfectly  natural 
in  the  case  of  one  who  was  not  a  scholar,  and  who 
made  the  acquaintance  of  the  word  only  in  a  prose 
translation.! 

But  these  considerations  are  not,  of  course,  con¬ 
clusive  against  the  spirit  hypothesis,  and  no  other 
solution  which  can  be  suggested  fits  the  facts 
conspicuously  better,  if,  indeed,  as  well. 

The  theory  that  Mrs.  Piper  should  have  deliberately 
got  up  the  information  is,  in  my  judgment,  untenable 
as  a  complete  explanation  of  the  facts.  .We  Could 
scarcely,  for  instance,  explain  the  Agamemnon  inci¬ 
dent,  and  many  others,  by  previous  knowledge  on  her 
part.  So  in  the  Lethe  case,  “  Cave,”  “  pavia,”  and 
“  Iris  ”  were  indicated  at  the  same  sitting  at  which 
the  test  was  sprung  upon  her.  That  Mrs.  Piper’s 
reading  should  have  included  Ovid’s  ‘‘  Metamorphoses  ” 
would  be  a  most  surprising  chance  ;  that  she  should 
also  know  the  “  Agamemnon  ”  so  well  as  to  recognise 
the  translation  of  part  of  a  chorus  would  seem  to  be 
practically  out  of  the  question. 

!  The  trance  intelligence  appears  to  be  aware  of  its  own 
deficiency  in  this  respect.  At  the  sitting  of  March  30th, 
after  giving  the  meaning  of  C  Y  X  as  “  Chariot,”  the  hand 
wrote  “  Pronounce  the  word  for  me.”  It  should  be  men¬ 
tioned,  as  Mr.  Piddington  has  pointed  out  to  me,  that  the 
name  “  Ceyx  ”  is  a  monosyllable  in  Homer  (‘‘  Odyssey,’’ 
XV.  479). 

THE  MOST  RECENT  EVIDENCE 

265 

Moreover,  Mrs.  Piper’s  known  history  during  the 
past  twenty-five  years  affords  a  strong  presumption 
against  any  deliberate  deception  of  the  kind-;  and,  once 
more,  the  curious  ignorance,  in  the  trance,  of  utter¬ 
ances  made  in  the  waking  stage  is  hardly  compatible 
with  the  deliberate  getting  up  of  a  subject. 

That  the  information  given  should  be  due  to  un¬ 
conscious  reminiscence  on  Mrs.  Piper’s  part  is  again 
negatived  by  the  wide  range  and  precision  of  the 
knowledge  displayed.  Men  and  women  of  moderate 
education  are  presumably  not  more  inclined  in  America 
than  in  the  corresponding  social  class  in  England  to 
read  Virgil  and  ^Eschylus  for  the  amusement  of  their 
leisure  hours.  Mr.  Dorr  has  searched  Mrs.  Piper’s 
library,  and  found  no  trace  of  classical  culture,  even 
in  the  shape  of  English  translations  or  stories  from 
the  classic  writers. 

There  remains  the  possibility  that  the  classical 
knowledge  shown  was  derived,  by  telepathy,  from  the 
mind  of  the  sitter.  This  theory  has  the  advantage 
that  it  is  entirely  consistent  with  the  two  features  most 
difficult  to  explain  on  the  hypothesis  of  spirit  com¬ 
munication.  If  the  knowledge  shown  in  the  Lethe 
incident  came  from  Mr.  Dorr’s  mind,  the  treatment 
of  Ceyx  as  a  monosyllable  would  be  accounted  for  on 
the  assumption  that  Mr.  Dorr  had  read  the  story  in 
English  as  a  boy.  Further,  the  division  between  the 
memories  of  the  two  stages  of  trance  is  a  perfectly 
natural  and,  indeed,  common  feature,  if  we  regard 
Mrs.  Piper’s  trance  as  simply  a  case  of  spontaneous 
dissociation  of  consciousness,  comparable  to  numerous 
other  cases  of  “  secondary  personality  ”  which  have  been 
described  of  recent  years.  In  these  cases  the  several 

266 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

stages  of  dissociation  are  marked  either  by  mutually 
exclusive  memories  or  by  what  may  be  called  con¬ 
centric  memories. 

Again,  there  is  some  possible  evidence  for  this 
theory,  apart  from  the  general  presumption  in  its 
favour  derived  from  the  study  of  Mrs.  Piper’s  trance 
phenomena  at  large.  Mr.  Dorr  had  successful  sittings, 
referred  to  in  a  previous  chapter,  with  the  Piper- 
Hodgson,  and  received  many  accounts  of  incidents 
which,  so  far  as  they  were  identified,  could  have  been 
derived  from  his  own  memory.  In  the  present  series 
of  sittings  some  of  the  correct  answers,  especially  the 
Agamemnon  and  .^schylus  case,  could  have  been 
derived  from  his  thoughts  at  the  moment. 

And  finally,  Mr.  Piddington’s  indefatigable  industry 
has  established  that  the  four  Ovidian  stories  to  which  the 
most  detailed  references  were  made  in  connection  with 
the  Lethe  incident,  viz.,  the  legends  of  Ceyx  and  Alcyone, 
Orpheus  and  Eurydice,  Pygmalion  and  Hyacinthus, 
are  all  contained  in  a  book — Bulfinch’s  “  Age  of 
Fable  ” — which  Mr.  Dorr  had  actually  read  as  a  boy, 
though  he  now  retains  little  recollection  of  these 
classical  legends. i 

On  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Piddington’s  conjectural 
emendation  of  papavera  for  “  pavia,”  which  is  too 

'  On  learning  that  the  Cave  of  Sleep  story  was  contained 
in  Bulfinch’s  “  Age  of  Fable,”  Mr.  Dorr  obtained  a  copy 
of  the  book,  and,  after  looking  it  through,  wrote  as  follows  ; 

“  The  book  seems  little  familiar  in  its  stories  to  me  now — 
unlike  other  books  that  interested  me  more  when  I  was 
a  child,  and  whose  every  incident  still  comes  back  to  me 
as  I  turn  the  pages  over.  The  one  part  of  it  that  I 
remember  well  is  the  Norse  stories  at  the  end.  I  doubt 
my  ever  having  read  the  others  wholly  through,  for  much 
seems  new  to  me.” 

THE  MOST  RECENT  EVIDENCE 

267 

probable  to  be  lightly  dismissed,  can  scarcely  be 
fitted  in  with  this  theory.  Moreover,  the  four  Ovidian 
stories,  which  are  quoted  by  the  trance  intelligence 
in  close  chronological  sequence,  are  all  found  in  close 
connection  in  the  original,  viz.,  in  the  Tenth  and 
Eleventh  Books  of  the  “  Metamorphoses  ”  ;  whereas 
in  Bulfinch’s  book  they  are  scattered  through 
chapters  yiii.,  ix.,  and  xxiv.  Further,  Mr.  Dorr  can 
recall  having  read  only  the  first  three  or  four  books 
of  the  “  .(Eneid,”  whereas  there  are  one  or  two  refer¬ 
ences  which  seem  to  imply  intimate  familiarity  with 
passages  in  the  Sixth  Book. 

Mr.  Dorr’s  own  opinion  on  the  subject — “  My  experi¬ 
ence  with  the  Piper  trance  does  not  lead  me  to  believe 
that  the  trance  consciousness  is  able  to  tap  my  mind 
for  facts  or  thoughts  ...  [I  think  that]  it  rarely  if 
ever  gets  subliminal  impressions  from  my  mind  ” — 
is  also  entitled  to  some  weight."  And,  finally,  we 
have  to  remember  that  Mr.  Dorr  found  many  of  the 
allusions  at  the  time  unintelligible,  and  that  others 
which  were  in  accordance  with  the  legends  appeared 
to  him  incorrect.  If  all  these  stores  of  classical  learn¬ 
ing  really  came  from  Mr.  Dorr’s  mind,  we  have  to 
credit  him  with  a  capacious  forgetfulness,  if  the  phrase 
may  be  allowed,  hardly  less  remarkable  in  its  way  than 
the  powers  of  telepathic  assimilation  which  we  must 
ascribe  to  the  trance  intelligence. 

The  explanation,  then,  must  be  admitted  to  involve 
many  and  serious  improbabilities.  But  I  feel  that  the 
improbabilities  involved  in  any  of  the  suggested 
alternatives  are  at  least  equally  serious.  The  wisest 
counsel,  if  also  the  most  difficult  to  follow,  is  to  hold 
our  judgment  in  suspense. 

‘  “  Proceedings  S.P.R-,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  42,  footnote. 

268 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

The  Sevens  Incident. 

The  correspondences  are  contained  in  the  script  of 
six  different  automatic  writers. 

1.  On  April  20,  1908,  Mrs.  Verrall’s  script  re¬ 
ferred  to  “  the  seven  hills  ”  of  Rome.  Rome,  it  should 
be  noted,  was  founded,  according  to  tradition,  on 
April  2 1  St. 

On  April  27th  her  script  consisted  exclusively  of 
three  groups  of  apparently  meaningless  figures.  The 
figures  3,  7,  6 — and  no  others — were  common  to  all 
three  groups. 

On  May  8th  the  script  produced  a  poem,  in  the 
metre  of  Myers’  “  St.  Paul,”  describing  Virgil  as  a 
forerunner  of  Christianity.  The  poem  was  obviously 
inspired  by  the  “  Purgatorio,”  of  which  Mrs.  Verrall 
had  been  reading  the  last  four  or  five  cantos.  In 
the  poem  occur  the  following  lines,  which  may 
perhaps  be  interpreted  as  referring  to  Dante’s  vision 
of  Jacob’s  Ladder  in  the  “  Paradiso  ”  : 

“He  knew  the  night,  he  only  hoped  the  morrow, 
Longed  for  the  beauty  of  the  flying  feet. 

Blest  are  the  messengers  that  bring  the  tidings 
Lovely  their  feet  are,  lovely  is  their  face. 

Borne  far  aloft  on  oarage  of  their  high  wings 
Glorious  shining  in  majestic  grace.” 

2.  On  April  2 1  St,  April  27th,  May  4th,  and  May  8th 
the  following  piece  of  mediseval  doggerel — a  motto  of 
the  Tavern  Club  in  Boston,  of  which  Hodgson  jiad 
been  a  member — was  repeated  by  Mr.  Dorr  to  Mrs. 
Piper  . 

THE  MOST  RECENT  EVIDENCE 

269 

“  Meum  est  propositum  in  Taberna  mori 
Et  vinum  appositum  sitienti  ori 
Ut  dicant  cum  venerint  Angelorum  chori 
Deus  sit  propitius  isti  potatori.”  * 

On  the  last  occasion  a  fairly  correct  translation  was 
given  by  the  trance  intelligence  :  propositum  was, 
however,  translated  “habit”  and  mori  “  custom.”  ^ 

In  the  waking  stage  of  the  same  sitting  Mrs.  Piper 
said  :  “  Habit.  .  .  .  iWe  are  Seven.  I  said  Clock. 

Tick,  tick,  tick.  Stairs.  .  .  .  Angel  Band.  Toast, 
my  toast  to  you.  .  . 

Asked  at  the  next  sitting  to  explain  “  We  are  Seven,” 
the  hand  wrote  :  “  That  is  Wordsworth,  but  we  were 
Seven  in  the  distance  as  a  matter  of  fact.”  And  later, 
“  Seven  of  us — 7 — Seven.”  No  explanation  was  given 
of  “  Clock.” 

3.  On  April  29th  Miss  Verrall  wrote:  “The 
figure  3  that  seems  wanted.” 

On  May  4th  :  “  8  eight.” 

On  May  i  ith  her  script  ran  as  follows  : 

A  branching  tree  not  a  real  tree  but  emblematical.  Scrolls 
in  place  of  leaves. 

Jacob’s  ladder  and  the  angels  upon  it.  What  does  that 
mean — 

A  spinning  top  many  colours  but  as  it  spins  they  are 
blended  into  one. 

•  Translation  :  “  It  is  my  intention  to  die  at  the  Inn  and 
to  have  wine  served  to  my  thirsty  lips,  so  that  the  bands  of 
angels  may  say  when  they  come,  ‘  May  God  be  propitious  to 
this  drinker.’  ’’ 

2  As  if  from  mos,  moris.  Mr.  Dorr  made  the  same 
mistake,  so  that  the  mistranslation  may  have  been  derived 
from  his  mind.  But  compare  the  mistranslations  in  the 
Latin  message  (above,  p.  248  f.). 

270 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

Mark  the  simile. 

A  leaf  that  hangs  down  like  that  and  a  flower 
small  and  white  I  think  and  a  sweet  scent  it  is 
a  shrub — foreign — ^not  English — Sciola  a  name 
like  that. 

The  seven  branched  candlestick  it  is  an  image 
— the  seven  churches  but  these  not  churches  seven 
candles  united  in  one  light  and  seven  colours 
in  the  rainbow  too. 

Many  mystic  sevens 
all  will  serve 
We  are  seven 

Who  (?)  F.  W.  H.  Myers.. 

4.  On  February  14th  Mrs.  Verrall  had  sent  to.  another 
automatist,  Mrs.  Frith,  the  following  question:  “Can 
R.  H.  [Hodgson]  say  what  are  his  associations  with 
the  words  : 

“  ‘  Climb  the  Mount  of  Blessing  ’?  ” 

On  June  i  ith  Mrs.  Frith  produced  a  piece  of 
automatic  poetry,  apparently  in  answer  to  this 
question.  The  last  stanza  ran  : 

There  may  I  rest,  may  rest  in  sight  of  heaven, 
Pisgah  is  scaled,  the  fair  and  dewy  lawn 
Invites  my  footsteps  till  the  mystic  seven 
Lights  [sic]  up  the  golden  candlestick  of  dawn. 

These  lines  obviously  allude  to  the  “  Purgatorio,” 
cantos  xxviii.  and  xxix.  But  Mrs.  Frith  states  that 
she  has  read  no  Dante  and  did  not  recognise  the 
allusion. 

5.  On  July  14th  Mrs.  Holland  had  a  singular  dream, 
of  which  she  sent  the  account  to  Miss  Johnson  : 

July  15,  1908. 

Last  night  I  dreamt  that  I  was  in  a  large  bare  room — 
rather  like  a  studio. 

Some  one  showed  me  an  old  note  book — or  diary — in 
which  was  written  in  a  small  neat  hand  : 

THE  MOST  RECENT  EVIDENCE 

271 

“  Since  in  1872  a  dear  friend  chose  as  a  sign  by  which 
to  communicate  to  me  the  figure  6,  I,  in  my  turn,  will  try, 
in  the  time  to  come,  to  send  the  figure  6, — simply  the  sign 
of  6.” 

On  July  23rd,  when  at  sea,  she  wrote  automatically 
a  script,  of  which  I  quote  the  first  few  lines  : 

Thursday,  July  23,  1908.  At  sea. 

There  should  be  three  at  least  in  accord  and  if  possible 
Seven — 

The  Lady  and  the  learned  lady  and  the  maiden  of  the 
crystal  and  the  scribe  and  the  professed  scribe — and  the  two 
new  comers — what  could  be  better  than  that? 

The  seven  persons  referred  to  in  the  script  are  appa¬ 
rently  Mrs.  Forbes,  Mrs.  Verrall,  Miss  Verrall,  Mrs. 
Holland,  Mrs.  Piper,  Mrs.  Frith,  and  Mrs.  Home. 

6.  On  July  24th  Mrs.  R.  Home,  a  member  of  the 
Society,  in  the  presence  of  Colonel  Taylor  and  Miss  H., 
under  the  influence  of  a  “  Myers  control,”  spoke 
automatically  as  follows  ; 

Seven  times  seven  and  seventy-seven 
Send  the  burden  of  my  words  to  others. 

[Miss  H. — To  whom  shall  we  send?] 

Souls  that  labour  for  your  earthly  wisdom 
Send  no  names. 

All  these  automatisms,  as  it  will  be  seen,  occurred 
in  the  spring  and  early  summer  of  1908,  and  the  one 
idea  that  runs  through  them  all  is  the  number  Seven. 
The  jdea  of  numbers  is  also  emphasised  in  two  or 
three  of  the  scripts^  there  are  unmistakable  Dante 
allusions  in  the  scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Frith, 
probably  also  in  Miss  •  Verrall’s.  There  is  also  a 
possible  Dante  allusion  '(oniitted  for  want  of  space) 
in  Mrs.  Holland’s  script.  So  far  it  might  be  sup- 

272 

THE  NEWER  SPIRIT^UALISM 

posed  to  be  a  simple  case  of  cross-correspondence  in 
which  Mrs.  Verrall,  as  appears  to  have  been  the  case 
in  previous  instances,  played  the  leading  part.  It  was 
Mr.  Piddington,  however,  who  furnished  the  clue  to 
the  mystery  in  this  case. 

On  July  13,  1904,  Mr.  Piddington  had  written  a 
“  posthumous  ”  letter,  for  the  purpose  of  a  test,  that 
it  might  be  read  after  his  death.  The  contents 
of  the  letter  he  communicated  to  no  one.  The  letter* 
itself  was  duly  sealed  and  deposited  at  the  rooms  of 
the  Society.  After  learning  of  the  occurrence  of  these 
cross-correspondences  Mr.  Piddington,  in  Miss  John¬ 
son’s  presence,  opened  the  letter.  It  read  as 
follows  : 

t 

"July  13,  1904. 

“  If  ever  I  am  a  spirit,  andl  if  I  can  communicate,  I  shall 
endeavour  to  remember  to  transmit  in  some  form  or  other 
the  number  Seven. 

“As  it  seems  to  me  not  improbable  that  it  may  be  difficult 
to  transmit  an  exact  word  or  idea,  it  may  be  that,  unable  to 
transmit  the  simple  word  seven  in  writing  or  as  a  written 
number,  7,  I  should  try  to  communicate  such  things  as  : 

‘  The  seven  lamps  of  architecture,’  ‘  The  seven  sleepers  of 
Ephesus,’  ‘  Unto  seventy  times  seven,’  ‘  We  are  seven,’  and 
so  forth. 

“  The  reason  why  I  select  the  word  seven  is  because  seven 
has  been  a  kind  of  tic  with  me  ever  since  my  early 
boyhood.’’  > 

It  seems  hardly  possible  to  doubt  that  the  idea  of 
Seven  which  runs  through  all  the  automatists’  utter¬ 
ances  was  derived  ultimately  from  Mr.  Piddington’s 

I  To  save  space  I  quote  only  the  first  three  paragraphs 
of  the  letter.  The  remainder  of  the  letter  has  no  further 
direct  bearing  on  the  question.  There  is  no  allusion  to 
Dante. 

THE  MOST  RECENT  EVIDENCE 

273 

mind.  The  inferelnce  is  strengthened  by  the  occurrence 
of  figures  in  two  or  three  of  these  scripts,  and  is 
practically  clinched  by  Mrs.  Holland’s  singular  dream 
which,  except  in  the  substitution  of  6  for  7,  is  a  precise 
reflection  from  the  “  posthumous  ”  letter. 

But  Mr.  Piddington  tells  us  that  he  was  not  think¬ 
ing  specially  of  his  letter  during  the  three  months 
over  which  the  cross-correspondence  extended,  though 
few  days  of  his  life  passed  without  his  thinking  of 
that  subject.  It  would  appear,  then,  as  if  some  other 
factor  were  needed  to  reinforce  Mr.  Piddington’s  un¬ 
conscious  telepathy.  That  other  factor  must  be  sought 
in  Mrs.  Verrall’s  agency.  We  find  traces  of  her  influ¬ 
ence  in  the  Dante  allusions.  An  attempt,  then,  may 
be  made,  of  course,  provisionally  and  in  very  crude 
fashion,  to  sketch  the  mental  processes  which  seem 
to  (be  involved.  Mr.  Piddington  had  for  years  been 
repeating  Seven  for  all  the  world — that  is,  all  the  world 
within  the  range  of  his  telepathic  influence — to  hear. 
His  is  a  voice  crying  in  the  wilderness,  however,  until 
it  happens  that  Mrs.  Verrall  reads  the  “  Divine  Comedy,” 
and  the  idea  of  Seven,  already  latent  in  her  mind,  is 
reinforced  by  a  series  of  Dante  images.  Mrs.  Verrall, 
then,  apparently  a  much  more  powerful  telepathic  agent 
than  Mr.  Piddington,  swells  the  stream  of  telepathic 
influence,  and  the  effects,  in  the  five  remaining  auto- 
matists,  rise  to  the  surface  of  the  dream  consciousness. 
The  particular  form  which  the  transmitted  idea  assumes 
in  each  particular  case  is  determined  partly,  perhaps, 
by  the  relative  susceptibility  of  the  subject  to  the  two 
streams  of  telepathic  influence.  But  it  is  in  the  main, 
no  doubt,  a  result  of  the  normal  association  of  ideas. 
Thus  Mrs.  Piper  says  “  Angel  Band  ”  because  Mrs. 

18 

274 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

Verrall  after  reading  Dante  has  been  trying  to  say 
“  Angels  ”  to  her,  and  the  words  “  Angelorum  chori  ” 
happened  to  occur  in  the  Latin  doggerel.  Mr.  Pidding- 
ton’s  Seven  gets  itself  fixed  by  recalling  Wordsworth’s 
“  We  are  Seven.”  The  words  of  Longfellow’s  ”  Old 
Clock  on  the  Stairs,”  floating  casually  through  Mrs. 
Piper’s  mind,  are  arrested  by  their  accidental  co¬ 
incidence  with  the  unusual  word  tic  which  occurs  twice 
in  Mr.  Piddington’s  letter.  (This  particular  coincidence 
may,  however,  be  due  to  mere  chance.)  Miss  Verrall 
embodies  the  transmitted  idea  Seven  in  illustrations 
borrowed  primarily  from  a  child’s  toy,  Bentham’s 
“  British  Flora  ” — a  book  quite  familiar  to  her — and 
the  Book  of  Revelation.  But  it  happens  that  all 
the  images  which  her  automatic  self  selects  have  Dante 
associations,  and  may  have  owed  their  selection  from 
a  Crowd  of  other  images  floating  through  her  mind  to 
this  circumstance.  Miss  Verrall,  again,  had  read  no 
Dante  previously  to  this  experiment. 

On  some  such  lines  as  these  we  may  provisionally 
sketch  out  an  explanation  of  this  strange  series  of 
coincidences.  The  only  hypothetical  element  involved 
is  the  action  of  telepathy  itself.  It  must  not,  however, 
be  overlooked  that  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  is 
founded  on  actual  experiments,  and  that  there  is  little 
direct  experimental  evidence  for  the  complicated  pro¬ 
cedure  here  supposed.  The  experimental  evidence, 
however,  generally  speaking,  indicates  that  telepathic 
influences,  whatever  their  nature,  act  most  freely  in 
the  sphere  of  the  automatic  or  dream  consciousness. 
And  we  find  a  rough  experimental  parallel  to  the  kind 
of  double  influence  here  presupposed  in  some  experi¬ 
ments  made  nearly  a  generation  ago  by  Professor 

THE  MOST  RECENT  EVIDENCE 

275 

Richet,  and,  unfortunately,  never  repeated.  Those  who 
took  part  in  the  experiments,  it  should  be  explained, 
were  all  M.  Richet’s  personal  friends.  Three  of 
the  experimenters,  one  or  more  among  them  being 
“  mediums  ”  or  automatists — that  is,  persons  whose  un¬ 
conscious  muscular  action  had  been  proved  capable 
of  tilting  a  table — ^were  seated  at  a  table.  Behind  their 
backs,  at  a  second  table,  was  seated  an  “  operator,” 
who  incessantly  let  his  pencil  travel  backwards  and 
forwards  along  a  printed  alphabet.  The  alphabet  was 
further  concealed  from  the  mediums  by  a  screen. 
Whenever  the  table  tilted  a  bell  rang,  and  the  letter 
indicated  by  the  pencil  at  that  moment  was  recorded. 
Under  these  conditions  M.  Richet  himself,  standing 
apart  both  from  table  and  operator,  would  think  of 
a  word,  or  select  a  word  in  the  dictionary,  and  his 
thought  would  be  spelled  out  by  the  table  letter  by 
letter.' 

In  this  curious  experiment  we  have  to  assume  a 
double  telepathic  process  of  some  kind.  The  simplest 
explanation  js  that  the  “  mediums  ”  were  influenced 

'  Revue  Philo  so  phique,  December,  1844,  pp.  649  ff.  An 
account  of  the  experiments  will  also  be  found  in  Pro¬ 
ceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  247  ff.  The  results  attained 
were  altogether  beyond  chance.  The  only  possible  explana¬ 
tion  by  normal  means  that  occurs  to  me  is  that  M.  Richet 
may  have  watched  the  alphabet,  and  that  the  unconscious 
variations  in  his  breathing  may  have  given  a  hint  when 
the  right  letter  was  reached.  This  explanation  was  sug¬ 
gested  by  M.  Gomalez  (see  Journal  S.P.R.  for  September, 
1885).  M.  Richet,  in  his  account  of  the  experiments, 
unfortunately  does  not  expressly  say  that  he  refrained 
from  watching  the  alphabet.  But  it  cannot  be  thought 
probable  that  he  neglected  so  obvious  a  precaution.  It  is 
much  to  be  desired,  however,  that  further  experiments  should 
be  conducted  on  similar  lines. 

276 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

both  by  Richet  and  by  the  “  operator.”  Alternatively 
the  operator  may  have  received  Richet’s  thought  tele- 
pathically,  and  have  telepathically  influenced  the 
mediums  to  tilt.  In  either  explanation  we  seem  to 
find  a  rudimentary  form  of  the  more  complex  process 
demonstrated  in  these  recent  cross-correspondences. 

But  whatever  the  explanation  of  this  particular  series 
of  coincidences,  I  can  see  no  evidence  whatever  to 
justify  the  assumption,  even  provisionally,  of  a  direct¬ 
ing  intelligence  other  than  those  of  the  automatists 
concerned.!  It  would  appear,  on  the  contrary,  |that 
this  case  has  important  bearings  upon  the  interpreta¬ 
tion  pf  the  evidence  as  a  whole.  Not  only  does  it 
vindicate,  in  the  least  equivocal  fashion,  the  .action 
of  telepathy  from  the  living,  but  it  further  invalidates 
by  anticipation  all  the  evidence  for  the  agency  of  the 
dead  which  might  have  been  derived  from  “  post¬ 
humous  ”  letters,  and  has  thus  deprived  us  of  what 
would  have  seemed  an  important,  though  not,  of 
course,  a  crucial,  test. 

!  See,  however,  Miss  Johnson’s  comments  on  the  case, 
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxiv.  pp.  255 — 63. 

CHAPTER  VII 

THE  STAGE  SETTING  OF  THE  TRANCE 

Hitherto  little  has  been  said  of  what  may  be  called 
the  machinery  of  the  trance  communications.  But  it 
is  not  possible  to  estimate  the  significance  of  those 
communications  without  a  careful  consideration  of  the 
form  in  which  they  are  delivered.  Mrs.  Piper’s 
mediumship,  as  already  stated,  originated  in  some 
visits  paid  by  her  in  1884  to  a  professional  medium, 
Mr.  J.  R.  Cocke.  At  her  second  visit  she  fell  into  trance 
and  was  controlled  by  an  Indian  girl  who  gave  the  name 
Chlorine.  Thereafter  Mrs.  Piper  was  inspired  by  many 
of  the  famous  dead — Mrs.  Siddons,  Sebastian  Bach, 
Longfellow,  Commodore  Vanderbilt,  and  an  Italian 
artist,  Loretta  Ponchini.  Mrs.  Siddons  recited  a  scene 
from  “  Macbeth  ”  ;  Longfellow  gave  some  verses  of 
his  own  composition  ;  and  Loretta  Ponchini  made  some 
drawings.  Sebastian  Bach  at  first  assumed  the  general 
direction  of  the  trance,  but  afterwards  gave  way  to 
Phinuit,  who  purported  to  be  identical  with  the  spirit 
of  the  same  name  (pronounced  Finne),  who  had  con¬ 
trolled  Mr.  Cocke. I  Phinuit  was  in  control  for  ithe 
greater  part  of  the  time  during  Mrs.  Piper’s  first  visit 
to  this  country,  occasionally  giving  way  to  other  spirits 
related  to  the  sitters  ;  and  he  remained  in  control,  I 

'  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  46,  47. 

277 

278 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

believe^  until  1892,  when  he  was  ousted  by  George 
Pelham.  G.  P.  in  the  winter  of  1896-7  gave  place 
in  turn  to  Imperator  and  his  band  of  spirits. 

Mrs.  Thompson  was  controlled  chiefly  by  the  spirit 
of  a  daughter  Nelly,  who  died  in  infancy  some  years 
since,  and  by  Mrs.  Cartwright,  the  lady  who  kept  the 
school  at  which  Mrs.  Thompson  was  educated.  Nelly, 
as  already  stated,  first  appeared  at  the  physical 
stances  held  in  1897  and  1898. 

Obviously  the  question  whether  these  controls  (are 
what  they  assume  to  be  has  some  bearing  upon  the 
interpretation  of  the  later  evidence.  Now,  in  most 
cases  where  the  dissociation  of  consciousness  is  pro¬ 
nounced  or  habitual,  as  in  spirit  mediumship  and  other 
forms  of  spontaneous  automatism,  in  deep  hypnotic 
trance,  in  cases  of  secondary  personality,  &c.,  we  find 
that  the  new  consciousness  is  apt  to  assume  a  new 
name.  Into  the  psycho-physiological  explanation  of 
this  peculiarity  we  need  not  now  enter.  Suffice  it  to 
say  that  the  change  in  the  consciousness  is  presumably 
in  all  cases  conditioned  by  physiological  changes 
which  sometimes,  as  when  local  anassthesise  or  dis¬ 
turbances  of  muscular  control  occur,  are  of  a  fairly 
obvious  kind.  Even  the  hand  of  an  automatic  writer, 
who  is  otherwise  apparently  normal,  is  frequently  found 
to  be  insensitive  to  pain  whilst  in  the  act  of  writing. 
There  can  be  no  question  in  most  cases  that  the 
assumption  of  a  new  name  is  merely,  so  to  speak,  a 
kind  of  illegitimate  inference  drawn  by  the  transformed 
consciousness,;  it  feels  itself  a  new  creature,  and  de¬ 
mands,  therefore,  a  new  name.  Nobody  would  main¬ 
tain  that  the  Mrs.  Piper  of  twenty-five  years  ago  was 
really  controlled  by  Chlorine  or  Sebastian  Bach. 

THE  STAGE  SETTING  OF  THE  TRANCE  279 

Indian  maidens  have  always  been  fashionable  in 
'American  spiritualist  circles.  So  have  been  the  names 
of  the  mighty  dead.  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that 
these  earlier  impersonations,  at  any  rate,  were  wholly 
the  creations  of  the  medium’s  dream  consciousness.  In 
persons  of  some  mental  instability  such  dreams  may 
even  take  possession  of  the  waking  organism.  Con¬ 
tinental  observers  have  described  many  cases  of  the 
kind  amongst  persons  certainly  not  to  be  classed  as 
insane.  I  have  myself  come  across  a  case  which  is 
perhaps  worth  quoting  as  having  some  analogy  with  the 
impersonations  of  the  dead  given  by  Mrs.  Piper  and 
Mrs.  Thompson.  In  the  case  to  be  cited,  however, 
the  man  impersonated  was  alive.  I  received  the 
account  of  the  episode  from  the  young  woman  herself, 
whom  I  will  call  A.  B.,  and  from  her  brother.  The 
account  is  taken  from  my  notes  made  at  the  time  : 

Miss  A.  B.,  a  young  woman  of  about  thirty,  experienced 
a  sudden  and  demonstrative  attachment  for  a  man,  C.  D., 
living  in  the  same  neighbourhood.  The  affair  attracted 
some  unpleasant  notoriety,  and  the  young  man,  who  had 
apparently  acted  a  rather  passive  part  throughout,  abruptly 
discontinued  the  acquaintance.  Miss  A.  B.  continued,  how¬ 
ever,  to  cherish  the  belief  that  the  man  had  been  influenced 
by  the  malice  of  her  enemies,  and  that  he  was  still  pro¬ 
foundly  attached  to  her.  A  few  weeks  after  the  breach 
she  felt  one  evening  a  curious  feeling  in  the  throat,  as  of 
choking — the  prelude  probably,  under  ordinary  circum¬ 
stances,  to  an  attack  of  hysteria.  This  feeling  was 
succeeded  by  involuntary  movements  of  the  hands  and  a 
fit  of  long-continued  and  apparently  causeless  sobbing. 
Then,  in  presence  of  a  member  of  her  family,  she  became, 
in  her  own  belief,  possessed  by  the  spirit  of  C.  D.,  per¬ 
sonating  his  words  and  gestures  and  speaking  in  his 
character.  After  this  date  she  continually  held  conversation, 
as  she  believes,  with  O.  D.’s  spirit  ;  “  he  ”  sometimes 

speaking  aloud  through  her  mouth,  sometimes  conversing 

280 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

with  her  in  the  inner  voice.  Occasionally  “  he  ”  wrote 
messages  through  her  hand,  and  I  have  the  testimony  of 
a  member  of  her  family  that  the  writing  so  produced 
resembled  that  of  C.  D.  Occasionally  also  A.  B.  had 
visions,  in  which  she  claimed  to  see  C.  D.  and  what  he  was 
doing  at  the  moment.  At  other  times  she  professed  to  hear 
him  speaking  or  to  understand  by  some  inner  sympathy  his 
feelings  and  thoughts. 

A  significant  feature  in  this  case  is  that  A.  B.’s 
dream  had  imposed  not  merely  on  herself,  but  on  her 
brother,  who  related  the  facts  to  me,  and  also 
apparently  on  one  other  member  of  her  family. 

But  the  classic  case  of  spirit  possession  in  modern 
times  is  that  recorded  by  Professor  Flournoy  in  his 
book  “  Des  Indes  a  la  Planete  Mars  ”  ; 

Miss  Hdlene  Smith  (the  name  is  fictitious)  was  born 
about  1863.  Her  parents  are  well  educated  and  healthy  ; 
Hdlene  herself  as  a  child  was  quiet  and  dreamy,  and  had 
occasional  visions,  but  was,  on  the  whole,  not  specially 
remarkable.  She  is,  to  all  outward  appearance,  at  the 
present  time  healthy  even  to  robustness.  From  the  age 
of  fifteen  she  has  been  employed  in  a  large  shop  in  Geneva, 
and  holds  a  position  of  some  responsibility.  It  is  in  1892 
that  her  real  history  begins.  In  that  year  she  was  per¬ 
suaded  by  some  friends  to  join  a  Spiritualist  circle.  She 
soon  proved  to  be  a  medium  ;  she  saw  visions  and  heard 
voices.  Moreover,  there  were  movements  of  the  table, 
and  “  apports  ”  of  flowers  and  shells  traceable  to  her 
mediumship.  In  the  course  of  two  or  three  years  her 
mediumship  developed  on  the  normal  lines.  She  passed  at 
every  seance  into  a  state  of  trance,  in  which  she  had 
clairvoyant  visions  and  delivered  messages  purporting  to 
proceed  from  deceased  friends  of  the  sitters.  She  was 
from  time  to  time  controlled  by  spirits  of  the  famous  dead. 
Some  of  her  earliest  trances  were  under  the  guidance  and 
inspiration  of  Victor  Hugo.  Within  a  few  months,  however, 
the  spirit  of  the  poet — too  late,  indeed,  for  his  own  reputa¬ 
tion,  for  he  had  already  perpetrated  some  verses — was 

THE  STAGE  SETTING  OF  THE  TRANCE  281 

expelled  by  a  more  masterful  demon,  who  called  himself 
Leopold.  The  new  comer  was  at  first  somewhat  reticent 
on  his  own  past,  and,  when  urgently  questioned,  was  apt 
to  take  refuge  in  moral  platitudes.  Later,  however,  he 
revealed  himself  as  Giuseppe  Balsamo,  Count  Cagliostro. 
It  then  appeared  that  in  Helene  herself  was  reincarnated  the 
hapless  Queen  Marie  Antoinette,  and  that  others  of  the 
mortals  present  represented  Mirabeau,  Philip  of  Orleans, 
and  the  Princess  de  Lamballe.  Cagliostro,  “  ce  cher 
sorcier,”  attended  only  in  his  discarnate  state.  Of  the 
high  courtly  functions  then  held  in  nineteenth -century 
Geneva,  with  all  their  ghostly  memories  of  past  splendours 
and  tragedies,  there  is  no  space  to  speak.  But  from  M. 
Flournoy’s  spirited  description  it  is  clear  that  the  rein¬ 
carnated  queen  was  lacking  neither  in  wit,  grace,  nor 
dignity. 

At  times  Helene’s  memory  in  the  trance  went  back  to  a 
still  remoter  past.  As  Simandini,  daughter  of  an  Arab 
sheikh  in  the  fifteenth  century,  she  had  been  courted  by 
the  princely  Sivrouka,  lord  of  the  fortress  of  Tchandraguiri, 
in  the  province  of  Kanara,  Hindustan.  She  had  enjoyed 
as  his  wife  many  years  of  married  happiness,  adorned  by 
the  chaste  but  passionate  devotion  of  the  Fakir  Kanga,  and 
had  finally  proved  her  fidelity  by  expiring,  in  wifely  fashion, 
amid  the  flames  of  her  lord’s  funeral  pyre.  All  the  scenes 
of  this  forgotten  history  were  enacted  in  lifelike  tableau 
before  M.  Flournoy  and  his  friends,  and  duly  interpreted 
for  their  benefit  by  the  serviceable  Leopold-Cagliostro.  It 
should  be  added  that  the  entranced  medium,  in  her  role  of 
a  princess  of  the  Orient,  wrote  a  sentence  or  two  in  passable 
Arabic  and  spoke  a  few  words  of  Hindustani. 

It  is  Helene’s  extra-planetary  experiences,  however,  which 
have  excited  most  attention,  and  which  furnished  to  the 
attendants  at  her  circle  the  most  convincing  proofs  of  her 
dealings  with  the  spiritual  world.  In  November,  1894,  the 
spirit  of  the  entranced  medium  was  wafted — not  without 
threatenings  of  sea-sickness — through  the  cosmic  void,  to 
arrive  eventually  on  the  planet  Mars.  Thereafter,  night 
after  night,  she  described  to  the  listening  circle  the  people 
of  our  neighbour  planet — their  food,  dress,  and  ways  of 
life.  At  times  she  drew  pictures  of  the  inhabitants — human 
and  animal — of  their  houses,  bridges,  and  other  edifices, 

282 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

and  of  the  surrounding  landscape.  Later  she  both  spoke 
and  wrote  freely  in  the  Martian  language.  From  the 
writings  reproduced  in  M.  Flournoy’s  book  it  is  clear  that 
the  characters  of  the  Martian  script  are  unlike  any  in  use 
on  earth,  and  that  the  words  (of  which  a  translation  is 
furnished)  bear  no  resemblance,  superficially  at  least,  to  any 
known  tongue.  The  spirits — for  several  dwellers  upon  Mars 
used  Helene’s  organism  to  speak  and  write  through — de¬ 
livered  themselves  with  freedom  and  fluency,  and  were  con¬ 
sistent  in  their  usage  both  of  the  spoken  and  the  written 
words.  In  fact,  Martian,  as  used  by  the  entranced  H61fene, 
has  many  of  the  characteristics  of  a  genuine  language  ; 
and  it  is  not  surprising  that  some  of  the  onlookers,  who 
may  have  hesitated  over  the  authenticity  of  the  other  revela¬ 
tions,  were  apparently  convinced  that  these  Martian 
utterances  were  beyond  the  common  order  of  nature. 

M.  Flournoy,  in  his  masterly  analysis  of  the  case, 
shows  that  the  whole  of  these  marvellously  consistent  and 
lifelike  impersonations,  with  the  incorporation  in  the 
case  |Of  the  Royal  cycle  of  much  authentic  history, 
and  the  invention  in  the  Martian  cycle  of  an  entirely 
new  language,  were  simply  the  developed  products  of 
the  medium’s  childish  daydreams.  Bit  by  bit  he  traces 
all  the  elements  in  the  several  romances  to  incidents 
in  Helene’s  history,  and  gives  the  date  at  which  each 
cycle  was  originated  ;  the  Martian  cycle,  for  instance, 
originated  in  early  childhood  when  the  medium  knew 
no  other  language  but  her  own  ;  for  the  Martian 
language,  marvellous  work  of  art  though  it  is,  is 
obviously  modelled  exclusively  on  French. 

Now,  Phinuit  appears  to  be  a  creation  of  the  same 
order  as  Simandini  and  Leopold-Balsamo-Cagliostro. 
He  was  transferred,  as  we  have  seen,  from  a  pro¬ 
fessional  medium  to  Mrs.  Piper.  W.e  first  make  his 
acquaintance  in  the  questionable  company  of  Chlorine 
and  Mrs.  Siddons.  He  claims  to  have  been  a  doctor. 

THE  STAGE  SETTING  OF  THE  TRANCE  283 

but  does  not  know  the  names  of  the  Latin  or  French 
drugs  which  he  prescribes,  and  cannot  recognise  com¬ 
mon  medicinal  herbs  when  shown  to  him.  He  claims 
to  have  been  a  Frenchman,  though  his  knowledge  of 
French  is  apparently  limited  to  a  few  common  phrases 
and  a  slight  accent,  which  frequently  proved  service¬ 
able  in  the  old  days  in  disguising  a  bad  shot  at  ^ 
proper  name.  His  ignorance  of  French  he  has  qx- 
plained  as  being  due  to  his  having  passed  the  later 
years  of  his  life  at  Metz,  where  there  were  many 
English  residents.  He  has  given  his  full  name,  with 
particulars  of  his  life  and  education  at  Paris,  but  no 
trace  of  any  person  of  his  name  can  be  found.  On 
being  more  closely  questioned  he  betrayed  some  un¬ 
certainty  whether  he  had  been  born  at  Metz  or 
Marseilles,  and  finally  came  to  the  conclusion  that  his 
name  was  not  Phinuit  at  all,  but  Jean  Alaen  Scliville, 
and  that  he  had  never  had  any  connection  with  Dr. 
Cocke. I  , 

But  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  other  controls 
endorse  Phinuit’s  claim  to  a  substantial  existence. 
Thus  the  Gurney  control  talked  much  to  Sir  Oliver 
Lodge  in  1889  about  him: 

“  Dr.  Phinuit  is  a  peculiar  type  of  man  ...  he  is 
eccentric  and  quaint,  but  good-hearted.  I  wouldn’t  do 
the  things  he  does  for  anything  ;  he  lowers  himself  some¬ 
times  ;  it  is  a  great  pity.  ...  A  high  type  of  man  couldn’t 
do  the  work  he  does  ;  but  he  is  a  good-hearted  old  fellow 
.  .  .  a  shrewd  doctor,  he  knows  his  own  business 
thoroughly.”  2 

‘  See  Dr.  Hodgson’s  account  of  the  Phinuit  impersona¬ 
tion,  Proceedings  S.P..R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  50,  seq . 

2  Ibid.,  vol.  xxiii.  153,  158. 

284 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

The  case  of  Imperator  presents  further  difficulties. 
Imperator — “  Impersonator,”  as  Professor  Hyslop,  or, 
perhaps.  Professor  Hyslop’s  printer,  has  felicitously 
christened  him  • — is  one  of  a  band  of  lofty  spirits. 
Rector,  Prudens,  and  Mentor  being  amongst  the  other 
members,  who  purported  to  control  the  late  Stainton 
Moses.  Now,  Stainton  Moses,  as  we  have  already 
seen,  was  a  physical  medium,  and  as  Imperator  and 
his  company  can  hardly  be  acquitted  of  connivance 
with  their  medium’s  doings,  the  admission  of  their 
claims  to  substantiality  would  still  further  complicate 
Mrs.  Piper’s  case  by  involving  it  with  the  whole 
question  ,of  these  presumably  deceptive  phenomena. 

But  even  those  who  place  most  faith  in  the  trance 
communications  generally  find  it  difficult  to  believe 
that  Imperator  and  Rector  are  what  they  assume  to 
be,  especially  since  they  are  unable  to  give  the  real 
names  of  the  persons  whom  the  Imperator  and  Rector 
of  Stainton  Moses  claimed  to  represent  .2  Thus  Sir 
Oliver  Lodge  writes  :  “I  conjecture,  however,  that 
whatever  relationship  may  exist  between  these 
personages  and  the  corresponding  ones  of  Stainton 
Moses  there  is  little  or  no  identity.”  3 

But,  again,  just  as  Phinuit’s  claim  was  endorsed  by 
the  Gurney  control,  so  Imperator  and  Rector  are  recog¬ 
nised  as  real  personages  by  the  Hodgson  and  Myers 
controls.  There  is  another  point  referred  to  by  Sir 
Oliver  Lodge  which  probably  has  some  bearing  on 

*  Journal  of  the  American  S.P.R.,  March,  1907,  p.  136. 

2  The  names  were  known  only  to  two  or  three  intimate 
friends  of  Stainton  Moses. 

3  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  235.  Professor  W. 
James’s  view  is  that  they  are  all  probably  dream  creations 
of  Mrs.  Piper  (ibid.,  p.  3). 

THE  STAGE  SETTING  OF  THE  TRANCE  285 

the  question.  In  Mrs.  Piper’s  earlier  trances  there 
purported  to  be  direct  changes  of  control.  Phinuit 
would  get  out  and  Gurney  would  get  in  ;  and  these 
changes  of  control  were  marked  by  appropriate  drama. 
Now,  even  in  the  latest  trances  there  are,  occasionally, 
apparent  changes  of  control  accompanying  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  different  communicators,  but  the  communicators 
expressly  state  that  in  the  latest  trances  Rector  always 
controls  the  medium’s  organism.  “  So  it  would  appear 
that  the  change  of  control  claims  to  be  now  usually 
dramatic  rather  than  real.”  > 

Of  Mrs.  Thompson’s  trance  dramatisations  it  is  not 
necessary  to  say  much.  “  The  characteristics  of  the 
respective  personalities,”  writes  Mrs.  Verrall,  “are  not 
very  marked  :  all  bear  strong  resemblances  to  that 
of  Mrs.  Thompson  herself.  The  actual  voice  is  hardly 
to  be  distinguished  from  hers.  The  words  and  phrases, 
so  far  as  they  are  in  any  way  distinctive,  are  such  as 
she  herself  uses  in  the  normal  state.”  2  Mrs.  Verrall 
recognises,  however,  that  the  several  impersonations 
produce  on  the  sitter  the  impression  of  individuality 
and  independent  existence. 

From  the  nature  of  the  case  little  opportunity  can 
be  afforded  for  testing  the  genuineness  of  the  Nelly 
personality,  nor  has  any  attempt,  so  far  as  I  am  aware, 
been  made  to  test  the  impersonation  in  the  other  cases. 
iWe  have  seen  already  under  what  circumstances  and 
in  what  company  Nelly  made  her  first  appearance. 
The  band  of  spirits  who,  under  the  leadership  of  Peter 

■  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  in  Proceedings  S.P..R.,  vol.  xxiii. 

p.  161. 

2  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xvii.  p.  90  ;  vol.  xviii.  pp.  206 
and  266. 

286 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

, Wharton,  controlled  Mrs.  Thompson’s  early  trances 
belong,  no  doubt,  to  the  same  family  as  the  band 
which  appeared  early  in  Mrs.  Piper’s  career  and  ulti¬ 
mately  gave  way  to  Phinuit  ;  but  Mrs.  Siddons  and 
her  associates  were  innocent  of  spirit  lights,  apports, 
and  materialisations.  To  do  her  justice,  Nelly  is  not 
ashamed  of  her  past  ;  she  admits  having  knocked  and 
shaken  g  table  “  before  she  knew  Mr.  Myers,”  and 
she  has  expressed  her  intention  of  materialising 
herself  some  day.i 

It  would  not,  then,  appear  that  there  are  any  ex¬ 
ternal  characteristics  by  which  we  can  discriminate 
between  impersonations  representing  themselves  as 
our  deceased  friends  and  such  other  figures  of  the 
medium’s  trance  as  Phinuit  and  Imperator  ;  nor  can 
we  again  distinguish,  except  by  their  greater  consis¬ 
tency  and  permanence,  between  Phinuit  and  Imperator, 
and  such  transient  creations  as  Mrs.  Siddons,  Loretta 
Ponchini,  and  the  Indian  maiden  Chlorine  ;  and  these 
last  figures  link  Mrs.  Piper  with  the  ordinary  medium 
and  her  band  of  spirit  controls — Shelley,  Benjamin 
Franklin,  the  Duke  of  Kent,  Aristotle,  Apollos  Munn, 
Bacon,  Swedenborg,  Moses,  Paul,  and  names  more 
sacred  than  these. 

And  there  are  other  indications  that  the  trance  com¬ 
munications  through  these  later  mediums  are  all  of  the 
same  fundamental  kinship.  The  trance  machinery  is 
the  same,  and  the  curious  evasiveness,  or,  to  use  a 
less  invidious  term,  suggestibility,  is  the  same.  At 
moments  when  the  “  light  ”  is  good  we  have  flashes 
of  emphatic  unambiguous  utterance,  often  thoroughly 
characteristic  of  the  supposed  speaker.  But  when  the 

'  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  266 — 7. 

THE  STAGE  SETTING  OF  THE  TRANCE  287 

conditions  are  unfavourable  the  whole  manner  of  the 
communication  is  hesitating,  tentative,  and  strongly 
suggestive  of  fishing.  Phinuit’s  fishing  and  his  am¬ 
biguous  pronunciation  of  proper  names,  a  procedure 
so  constantly  repeated  that  it  can  hardly  have  been 
fortuitous,  were  notorious  during  his  tenure  of  office. 
Professor  Shaler,  who  had  a  fairly  successful  seance 
in  1894,  calls  him  a  “preposterous  scoundrel.”' 

Now  that  the  communications  through  Mrs.  Piper 
are  nearly  all  written  instead  of  being  delivered  orally, 
opportunities  of  this  particular  kind  are  necessarily 
more  restricted,  but  they  still  occur  ;  for  though  the 
writing  can,  by  those  who  are  conversant  with  it,  be 
deciphered  without  serious  risk  of  ambiguity,  it  is  by 
no  means  easy  to  read,  and  this  leaves  it  open  to  the 
incautious  sitter  in  his  attempts  at  interpretation  to 
give  a  hint  of  the  answer  desired.  Thus,  at  one  of 
Miss  Bancroft’s  sittings  the  Hodgson  control  writes  : 

“  Don’t  you  remember  how  I  had  to  laugh  at  you  laugh 
on  that  boat  about  that  boat  ” 

The  last  word  was  deciphered  by  the  sitter  as 
“  hat,”  and  she  therefore  replied,  “  Whose  hat  blew 
off?  ”  The  control  wrote  :  “  My  hat.  Do  you  jiot 

remember  the  day  it  blew  off?  ”  and  then  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  connect  the  incident  of  the  hat  blowing  off 
with  a  fishing  party.  But  Miss  Bancroft  can  remember 
nothing  definite  about  a  hat,  and  the  whole  incident  was 
apparently  suggested  by  her  misreading  of  the  word. 2 

Again,  at  a  later  sitting.  Professor  Newbold,  in 
asking  the  Hodgson  control  to  recall  the  incidents  of 
a  day  spent  at  the  seaside,  adds  : 

*  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiii.  p.  524. 

*  Ibid.,  vol.  xxiii.  pp.  49 — 50. 

288 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

After  that  what  did  we  do  ? 

R.  H. — We  went  and  got  some — let  me  think — 

W.  R.  N. — I  can’t  read  that,  Dick. 

R-  H. — A  drink — drink.  I  asked  you  to  have  cigar. 
Cigar — and  something  else.  [P.  63.] 

Now,  the  cigar  was  correct,  but  the  drink  was  not  ; 
and  the  word  appears  to  have  been  suggested  by  the 
sitter’s  attempts  to  decipher  the  word  “  think.” 

There  are  several  instances  of  the  same  kind  in  the 
prolonged  series  of  sittings  which  Professor  Hyslop 
had  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  1898-99.  Consider  this  extract 
from  the  first  sitting  : 

Professor  Hyslop. — What  is  the  last  sentence? 

Control. — I  am  with  her. 

Professor  H. — With  whom? 

Control. — Yes,  I  have  A — A  .  [Last  word  unde¬ 

cipherable  ;  possibly  either  Alice  or  Annie.] 

Professor  H. — Is  it  Alice? 

Control. — Alice. 

Professor  H . — Alice  who  ? 

Control. — I  do  not  say  Alice,  I  say  Annie. 

It  need  hardly  be  said  that  “  Annie  ”  had  a  meaning 
for  the  sitter,  while  Alice  had  none.* 

Again,  in  another  part  of  the  same  record  we  read 
that  the  word  “  mother  ”  was  written  five  times,  but 
“  a  close  re-examination  of  the  automatic  writing  indi¬ 
cates  that  the  first  of  these  words  looks  like  mother  ; 
the  others  look  like  brother”  ’’(P*  316). 

On  another  occasion  the  sitter  asks  :  “  Who  passed 
out  soon  after  you?  ”  The  answer  given  is  :  “  Mother 
[query  brother]  is  here  also”  '(p.  331). 

Again,  at  another  sitting  the  control  (assumed  to 
be  Professor  Hyslop’s  father)  asks  :  ”  Do  you  mean 

*  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xvi.  p.  607. 

THE  STAGE  SETTING  OF  THE  TRANCE  289 

F.?  ”  Professor  Hyslop  replies  :  “  Yes,  father,  I  mean 
F.  if  you  can  tell  the  rest.”  The  control  replies  : 
“I  can  remember  very  well.  FRAD”  (p.  338). 

In  commenting  on  this  Professor  Hyslop  renaarks 
that  the  symbol  printed  as  D  bore  in  the  original 
writing  a  strong  resemblance  to  N  K.  The  brother’s 
name,  in  fact,  was  ”  Frank  ”  ;  but  the  ingenious  port¬ 
manteau  word  framed  by  the  spirit  would  apparently 
have  stood  equally  well  for  Fred. 

But  the  difficulty  in  interpreting  the  writing  is  only 
one  and  quite  a  minor  source  of  uncertainty  in  the 
trance  utterance.  The  whole  machinery  of  communica¬ 
tion,  as  interpreted  to  us  by  the  controls,  is  directly 
productive  of  ambiguities  of  many  kinds.  The  com¬ 
municating  “  spirits  ”  do  not,  at  any  rate  in  recent 
years,  profess  to  assume  direct  control  over  Mrs. 
Piper’s  organism.  They  used  to  dictate  what  they 
wanted  to  say  to  Phinuit  or  G.  P.  ;  they  now  dictate 
to  Rector.  This  procedure,  whether  it  really  repre¬ 
sents  any  psychical  fact  or  is  merely  part  of  the 
machinery  of  the  medium’s  trance,  at  any  rate  affords 
a  cloak  for  many  mistakes  and  an  excuse  for  many 
ambiguities,  to  be  interpreted  according  to  the  sitter’s 
prepossessions.  The  Piper-Myers  found  a  plausible 
excuse  for  his  difficulty  in  interpreting  the  Latin 
message  on  the  ground  that  Rector  knew  no  Latin. 
Again,  when  he  had  learned  that  ”  copyright  ”  was 
an  incorrect  answer,  he  explained  that  he  did  not 
intend  to  say  “  copyright,”  but  ‘‘  copies.”  Through¬ 
out  these  stances  Rector’s  difficulty  in  hearing  and 
interpreting  is  a  constant  feature.  But  we  can  scarcely 
regard  Rector  as  anything  but  a  symbolic  figure 
invented  iby  the  medium’s  subconscious  imagination. 

19 

290 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

In  other  ways,  too,  the  machinery  of  the  trance 
communications  is,  unfortunately,  if  not  designedly, 
ambiguous.  With  all  automatists  alike  the  communica¬ 
tions  tend  to  be  fragmentary  and  incoherent  ;  they 
are  also  generally  indirect  in  form,  tentative,  and 
ambiguous  in  their  application.  At  even  the  most  con¬ 
spicuously  successful  sdances  with  Mrs.  Piper  the 
precisely  definite  statements  admitting  of  but  one 
interpretation  are  comparatively  few.  Personal 
messages  are  apt  to  bear  no  label  either  of  origin 
or  destination  ;  names  and  allusions  are  thrown  out 
haphazard  to  be  taken  up  and  identified  as  the  sitter 
wills.  Thus,  to  take  one  or  two  illustrations  out  of 
many.  Professor  Hyslop  explains  that  at  one  period 
of  his  first  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  he,  at  the  .time, 
supposed  himself  to  be  communicating  with  his 
brother’s  spirit,  but  later  saw  reason,  purely  from 
internal  evidence,  to  suppose  that  his  father,  not  his 
brother,  was  the  communicator.!  In  other  words,  he 
found  a  head  to  fit  the  cap. 

Or,  to  take  another  case,  at  Mr.  Hyslop ’s  second 
sitting  the  control  announces  that  there  is  a  little  girl’s 
spirit  trying  to  find  her  mother.  He  then  proceeds  : 
“  Who  is  Ruth?  ”  Hyslop  replies  :  “  I  do  not  know 
Ruth.” 

Control. — “  Not  to  thee,  friend,  but  to  thee  ”  {i.e., 
Hodgson,  who  was  also  present  at  the  sitting). 

Another  illustration  of  the  same  procedure  will  be 
found  in  the  introduction  of  the  name  “  Margaret  ” 
without  context  at  the  sitting  of  December  28,  1905, 
when  Hodgson’s  ring  was  mentioned.  If  Margaret 
had  happened  to  be  the  name  of  the  lady  who  had 
given  the  ring,  this  would  have  been  regarded  as  a 

!  Proceedings  S.P.R  ,  vol.  xvi.  pp.  22,  307,  361. 

THE  STAGE  SETTING  OF  THE  TRANCE  291 

remarkably  good  test.  As  it  is>  the  name  having 
been  introduced  without  definite  context,  it  does  not 
create  the  impression  of  a  failure. 

If  we  were  dealing  with  the  ordinary  professional 
clairvoyant  who  describes  before  a  roomful  of  her 
clients  the  apparition  of  a  sweet-faced  widow  lady, 
or  an  old  gentleman  with  silver  hair,  or  some  other 
typical  figure,  we  should  say  that  the  conditions  were 
cunningly  devised  to  insure  that  her  clairvoyant  de¬ 
scriptions  should  never  fail  to  find  a  billet  somewhere. 
But  really  these  ambiguous  messages  dealt  in  by  the 
entranced  Mrs.  Piper  widen  the  scope  of  chance  co¬ 
incidence  in  much  the  same  way,  though,  no  doubt,  to 
a  less  extent.  Obviously  the  cap  is  more  likely  to  prove 
a  good  fit  if  it  is  not  aimed  at  any  particular  head. 

In  short,  where  the  context  is  not  given  the  imagina¬ 
tion  of  the  sitter  has  to  supply  it,  and  the  process 
bears  a  very  close  analogy  to  the  corresponding 
process  in  the  material  world  of  building  up  a  per¬ 
ception  out  of  faint  and  inadequate  sensory  data.  The 
result  may  be  a  visual  image  corresponding  to  the 
half -guessed  reality,  or  it  may  be  altogether  wide  of 
the  mark — an  illusion,  in  short.  But  the  mental  pro¬ 
cess  is  much  the  same,  and  it  is  often  impossible  to 
say  just  where  the  line  which  divides  reality  from 
illusion  is  overstepped.  That  it  is  sometimes  over¬ 
stepped  will  be  clear  to  the  reader  who  summons  up 
the  courage  to  study  Professor  Hyslop’s  monumental 
report  already  referred  to.  Here  are  two  specimens 
of  his  interpretation  of  ambiguous  utterances  :  Pro¬ 
fessor  Hyslop’s  father  purporting  to  communicate  re¬ 
ferred  to  a  visit,  in  company  with  his  son,  to  the 
mountains  and  then  a  trip  to  the  lake  after  leaving 

292 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

the  camp.  The  statement  is  admitted  to  be  false  in 
every  particular  ;  but  Professor  Hyslop  and  his  father 
did  once  go  together  to  a  town  called  Champaign 
(generally  pronounced  Shampane,  and  so  pronounced, 
according  to  the  widow,  by  Mr.  Hyslop  senior,  though 
Professor  Hyslop  thinks  that  he  often  called  it 
Campaign) .  After  this  they  went  to  Chicago,  and 
naturally  visited  the  lake-shore  whilst  in  the  city. 
Professor  Hyslop  accordingly  suggests  a  possible 
reconstruction  of  the  trance  statement  as  follows  : 

[Mr.  Hyslop  senior  is  supposed  to  be  dictating  to  Rector, 
who  is  writing  through  Mrs.  Piper’s  hand.]  “  I  am  thinking 
of  the  time  when  I  went  into  [father  says  Illinois.  Rector 
does  not  understand  this,  and  asks  if  he  means  hilly. 
Father  says  “  No  1  Prairies.”  Rector  does  not  understand. 
Father  says  “  No  mountains.”  Rector  understands  this  as 
‘‘  No  I  mountains  !  ”  and  continues]  the  mountains  for  a 
change  with  him  and  the  trip  we  had  to  the  lake  after  we 
left  [father  says  Champaign.  Rector  understands  Camp, 
and  continues]  the  Camp.”  i 

Or,  to  take  another  illustration  :  The  Hyslop  control 
is  asked  if  he  remembers  Samuel  Cooper  ;  the  reply 
is  that  he  was  an  old  friend  in  the  .West,  jand  that 
they  used  to  have  long  talks  on  philosophical  subjects. 
Of  Samuel  Cooper,  an  old  neighbour  of  Mr.  Hyslop’s, 
the  statement  is  false.  But  there  was  a  Dr.  Joseph 
Cooper,  whom  Mr.  Hyslop  knew,  and  with  whom  he 
may  Jiave  conversed  or  corresponded  on  theological 
questions  in  1858.  It  is  true  that  Joseph  is  not  the 
same  name  as  Samuel,  that  theology  is  not  precisely 
philosophy,  and  that  Dr.  Cooper  did  not  live  west  of 
Mr.  Hyslop,  but,  unfortunately,  east.  There  was,  how¬ 
ever,  a  Cooper  Memorial  College  founded  after  his 
‘  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xvi.  p.  409. 

THE  STAGE  SETTING  OF  THE  TRANCE  293 

death,  of  which  Mr.  Hyslop  may  have  been  thinking, 
or  the  mention  of  talks  on  philosophy  may  have  been 
intended  to  apply  to  correspondence  on  theology  with 
Professor  Hyslop’s  uncle.  “  The  misunderstanding 
would  probably  be  Rector’s  ”  (p.  500).  On  the  whole. 
Professor  Hyslop  thinks  the  incident  “  has  consider¬ 
able  interest  and  importance”  (p.  410). 

These  are,  no  doubt,  extreme  instances,  and  it 
is  not  intended  to  suggest  that  any  of  the  inter¬ 
pretations  of  these  fragmentary  utterances  suggested 
in  the  present  reports  fall  so  flagrantly  wide  of  the 
mark.  But  there  are  many  passages  where  I  have 
felt,  in  reading  through  page  after  page,  as  if  I  were 
battling  my  way  through  cobwebs.  One  cannot  say 
that  there  is  nothing  in  the  argument,  because  one 
cannot  get  near  enough  to  it  to  grasp  it,  to  measure 
its  strength  and  its  weakness.  At  no  particular  point,  it 
may  be,  can  one  assert  with  confidence — this  inference 
is  quite  unjustifiable,  or  tliat  interpretation  is  wholly 
supplied  by  the  editor’s  imagination.  If  an  editor  has  to 
deal  with  fragmentary  and  incoherent  utterances,  which 
are  yet  presumed  to  have  a  meaning,  he  is  clearly 
entitled  to  introduce  order  and  coherence  if  he  can. 
And  the  process  inevitably  requires  the  use  of  a  sympa¬ 
thetic  imagination.  How  are  we  to  decide  at  what  point 
his  imagination  becomes  too  sympathetic?  Let  the 
reader  who  cares  to  pursue  the  subject  study  the  accounts 
of  the  Light  in  the  West  and  the  Star,  Hope,  and 
Browning  cases  :  or  the  chain  of  reasoning  by  which 
“  Plotinus  ”  is  associated  with  Homer’s  “  Iliad.”  ' 

More  significant  even  than  these  possibly  unde- 

•  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxii.  pp.  59 — 77,  130 — 6, 
241 — 81,  and  elsewhere. 

294 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

signed  ambiguities  of  utterance  are  the  evasive  and 
disingenuous  explanations  frequently  given.  We  have 
seen  that  Phinuit  explained  his  present  ignorance  pf 
French  on  the  plea  that  he,  a  Frenchman,  had  passed 
the  later  years  of  his  life  in  Metz  amongst  the  English 
residents  there.  So  the  G.  P.  control  evaded  the  test 
of  giving  two  proper  names  on  the  plea  that  if  he 
gave  them  then  in  the  presence  of  a  sitter  who  knew 
them  it  would  be  attributed  to  telepathy,  and  later 
gave  them  incorrectly.  So  the  Hodgson  control  offered 
a  ridiculous  and  palpably  false  explanation  of  the  mis¬ 
take  made  in  giving  “  Huldah  ”  for  Hannah.  In  an 
analogous  case,  also  through  Mrs.  Piper,  a  lady  who 
was  known  to  her  friends  as  Kitty  gave  her  name  in 
the  first  instance  as  Kate.  When  at  length  she  gave 
the  right  name  she  was  asked  why  she  called  herself 
Kate  before,  and  answered  :  “  Because  I  did  it  for 

Rector’s  understanding.”  i 

So,  again,  the  Hodgson  control,  asked  by  Pro¬ 
fessor  Newbold  as  a  test  to  recall  a  particular  con¬ 
versation  about  his  (the  sitter’s)  work,  replied  :  “  Oh, 
yes,  I  recall  you  said  you  would  like  to  give  it  up.” 
Professor  Newbold  replied  :  ”  No,  I  did  not  say  that.” 
And  the  trance  writing  continued,  as  if  to  finish  pn 
uncompleted  sentence  :  ”  Not  for  anything  1  ” 

Thus  the  case  stands.  The  automatic  utterances, 
and  especially  the  trance  utterances,  show  all  the 
characteristics  of  automatic  utterance  generally,  inco¬ 
herence,  vagueness,  ambiguity,  evasiveness.  The 
whole  elaborate  machinery  of  control  has  the  effect, 
whether  designed  with  that  end  or  not,  of  increasing 
the  uncertainty  of  interpretation  and  affording  a  cloak 
‘  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxiii.  pp.  272 — 3. 

THE  STAGE  SETTING  OF  THE  TRANCE  295 

for  mistakes.  The  latest  controls  are  connected  by 
many  binding  links  with  those  who  have  gone  before. 
They  vouch  for  them,  and  are  vouched  for  in  turn. 
Dr.  Hodgson,  I  believe,  continued  to  regard  Phinuit’s 
substantial  existence  as  an  open  question,  but  Phinuit 
was  always  very  human.  It  is  more  difficult  to  take 
seriously  the  claims  of  Imperator,  with  his  sacerdotal 
verbiage,  his  lofty  pretensions  of  sanctity,  and  his 
signature  of  the  cross.  As  we  have  seen.  Sir  Oliver 
Lodge  regards  them  as  dubious. 

Professor  .William  James,  in  his  report  on  the 
Hodgson  control,  has  a  striking  passage  on  the  inter¬ 
pretation  of  the  phenomena  in  the  light  of  history  ; 

“  I  myself  can  perfectly  well  imagine  spirit-agency,  and 
find  my  mind  vaccillating  about  it  curiously.  When  I  take 
the  phenomena  piecemeal,  the  notion  that  Mrs.  Piper’s 
subliminal  self  should  keep  her  sitters  apart  as  expertly 
as  it  does,  remembering  its  past  dealings  with  each  of 
them  so  well,  not  mixing  their  communications  more,  and 
all  the  while  humbugging  them  so  profusely,  is  quite  com¬ 
patible  with  what  we  know  of  the  dream-life  of  hypnotised 
subjects.  Their  consciousness,  narrowed  to  one  suggested 
kind  of  operation,  shows  remarkable  skill  in  that  opera¬ 
tion.  If  we  suppose  Mrs.  Piper’s  dream -life  once  for  all 
to  have  had  the  notion  suggested  to  it  that  it  must  per¬ 
sonate  spirits  to  sitters,  the  fair  degree  of  virtuosity  it 
shows  need  not,  I  think,  surprise  us.  But  I  find  that  when 
I  ascend  from  the  details  to  the  whole  meaning  of  the 
phenomenon,  and  especially  when  I  connect  the  Piper  case 
with  all  the  other  cases  I  know  of  automatic  writing  and 
mediumship,  and  with  the  whole  record  of  spirit-possession 
in  human  history,  the  notion  that  such  an  immense  current 
of  experience,  complex  in  so  many  ways,  should  spell  out 
absolutely  nothing  but  the  word  ‘  humbug  ’  acquires  a 
character  of  unlikeliness.  The  notion  that  so  many  men 
and  women,  in  all  other  respects  honest  enough,  should 
have  this  preposterous  monkeying  self  annexed  to  their 
personality  seems  to  me  so  weird  that  the  spirit  theory 

296 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

immediately  takes  on  a  more  probable  appearance.  The 
spirits,  if  spirits  there  be,  must  indeed  work  under  incredible 
complications  and  falsifications,  but  at  least  if  they  are 
present  some  honesty  is  left  in  a  whole  department  of  the 
universe  which  otherwise  is  run  by  pure  deception.  The 
more  I  realise  the  quantitative  massiveness  of  the  pheno¬ 
menon  and  its  complexity,  the  more  incredible  it  seems  to  me 
that  in  a  world  all  of  whose  vaster  features  we  are  in  the 
habit  of  considering  to  be  sincere  at  least,  however  brutal, 
this  feature  should  be  wholly  constituted  of  insincerity.” 

It  is  with  reluctance  that  I  venture  to  express  an 
opinion  opposed  to  that  of  Professor  James.  There 
is  no  living  man  whose  utterances  on  this  subject  carry 
greater  weight.  But  the  lesson  which  I  have  learned 
from  history  is  precisely  the  reverse.  Some  eight  or 
nine  years  ago,  in  reviewing  the  whole  course  of  the 
spiritualistic  movement,  I  wrote  that  “  Mrs.  Piper  would 
be  a  much  more  convincing  apparition  if  she  could 
have  come  to  us  out  of  the  blue,  instead  of  trailing 
behind  her  a  nebulous  ancestry  of  magnetic  somnam- 
bules,  witch-ridden  children,  and  ecstatic  nuns.”  ^  A 
large  amount  of  evidence  for  and  against  the 
spiritualist  theory  has  been  accumulated  in  the  inter¬ 
vening  years,  but  the  essential  features  of  the  problem 
remain  unchanged.  We  have  still  to  deal  with  the 
same  protean  figures — vengeful  human  ghosts,  familiar 
spirits  of  Shaman  or  wizard,  angels  from  the  abyss, 
devils  released  from  Jewish  or  mediseval  hells,  oracles 
of  Olympian  deities,  spirits  of  angels  and  prophets, 
spirits  of  earth,  air,  and  fire,  spirits  of  the  damned, 
spirits  on  furlough  from  purgatory,  spirits  floating  in 
a  Swedenborgian  limbo,  ghosts  of  fleas  and  archangels, 
decaying  astral  shells,  spirits  of  the  seven  celestial 
spheres,  spirits  clothed  in  luminiferous  ether— they  have 
*  “  Modern  Spiritualism,”  vol.  ii.  p.  361. 

THE  STAGE  SETTING  OF  THE  TRANCE  297 

been  with  us  since  the  first  syllable  of  recorded  time, 
and  generation  after  generation  they  have  shaped  them¬ 
selves  to  suit  the  changing  fashion  of  the  hour,  the 
hidden  or  hinted  fears  and  hopes  of  those  who  put 
their  trust  in  them.  To  dismiss  the  whole  matter  as 
fraud  would  be  not  only  uncharitable,  but  a  blunder  ; 
it  would  be  to  misinterpret  the  essential  nature  of  the 
phenomenon.  Whatever  sham  or  make-believe  there 
may  be  in  these  still — after  so  many  millenniums — 
undeciphered  messages,  we  may  be  sure  that  the  blame, 
if  blame  is  appropriate  at  all,  does  not  lie  wholly  on 
the  spirit-  or  devil -possessed.  From  Pythian  priestess 
to  modern  clairvoyant  she  has  been  an  almost  passive 
instrument  to  be  played  upon  by  minds  other  than  her 
own,  by  the  hopes  and  fears  of  the  whole  race  of  man. 

Mr.  Piddington’s  scholarly  commentary  has  not 
exhausted  the  significance  of  the  legend  of  Ceyx  and 
Alcyone.  The  central  incident  in  the  legend  is  the 
despatch  of  Morpheus,  the  god  of  dreams,  to  carry 
the  news  of  Ceyx’s  death  to  the  widowed  queen. 
Morpheus  fulfils  his  mission  by  assuming  the  form  of 
the  drowned  man,  and,  that  he  may  secure  credence  for 
his  message,  he  assures  the  dreaming  Alcyone  that  it 
is  indeed  her  husband’s  spirit  which  is  addressing  her, 
and  backs  up  his  claim  by  mimicking  the  voice  and  the 
very  gestures  of  the  dead  king  : 

“  Non  hasc  tibi  nuntiat  auctor 
Ambiguus  ;  non  ista  vagis  rumoribus  audis  ; 

Ipse  ego  fata  tibi  prassens  mea  naufragus  edo. 

:|c  *  *  *  * 

Adjicit  his  vocem  Morpheus,  quam  conjugis  ilia 
Crederet  esse  sui.  Fletus  quoque  fundere  veros 
Visus  erat  ;  gestumque  manus  Ceycis  habebant.' 

>  Ovid’s  “  Metamorphoses,”  xi.  666 — 73. 

CHAPTER  VIII 

CONCLUSION 

In  view  of  what  has  been  said  in  the  last  chapter  ^t 
must  be  recognised  that  there  is  a  very  strong  prima 
facie  presumption  that  all  the  personalities  claiming  to 
communicate  through  Mrs.  Piper  and  other  automatists 
proceed  from  the  same  manufactory  as  Mrs.  Siddons 
and  Loretta  Ponchini.  If  a  man  came  to  us  with  p, 
letter  from  a  fellow-countryman  languishing  in  a 
Spanish  prison  and  offered,  on  our  providing  the  small 
sum  needed  for  the  release  of  the  prisoner,  to  give 
us  a  share  in  the  hidden  treasure  known  to  his  friend 
alone,  we  might,  through  mistaken  clemency  or  m’ere 
inertia,  be  content  with  showing  him  to  the  door.  But 
if  he  should  approach  us  for  the  second  time  with  a 
similar  tale,  varying  only  the  locality  and  the  inci¬ 
dents,  we  should  unquestionably  call  in  the  police. 
We  are  offered  a  heavier  bribe  than  Spanish  gold,  and 
though  we  ought  not  to  lose  sight  of  the  enormous 
improbabilities  involved  in  the  claim,  yet  the  moment¬ 
ous  issues  at  stake  may,  no  doubt,  be  held  to  justify 
a  suspension  of  judgment  until  the  further  investiga¬ 
tions  which  are  still  proceeding  have  shed  fresh  light 
upon  the  problem. 

In  fact,  the  investigators  themselves  now  recognise 
that  the  primitive  theory  of  possession,  the  theory 
advocated  in  a  modified  form  by  Dr.  Hodgson  i  and 

I  In  his  report  on  the  Piper  communications  prior  to  1898. 
See  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiii. 

CONCLUSION 

299 

still  held  by  most  Spiritualists,  can  no  longer  be 
defended.  They  have  substituted  for  it  a  theory  of 
telepathic  interaction  between  the  mind  of  the  auto- 
matist  and  other  minds,  of  the  living  or  of  the  dead. 
The  result  is  a  compound,  in  which  the  different 
elements  can  only  be  separated  by  patient  analysis. 
Thus,  to  quote  Miss  Johnson  : 

“  I  will  then  compare  the  script  to  chemical  com¬ 
pounds  of  two  or  more  elements  which  are  found  in 
different  proportions  in  the  various  compounds.  Thus, 
if  we  call  the  automatists  P.  and  V.,  and  the  hypo¬ 
thetical  external  intelligence  X.,  we  may  get  in  the 
one  script  such  compounds  as  PX,  or  P2X,  or  PX2, 
and  in  the  other  VX,  &c.  ;  or  we  may  get  in  either 
of  them  such  compounds  as  PVX,  P2V3X,  &c.  We 
may  also  get  such  compounds  as  PV,  or  PY2,;  or  we 
get  the  elements  P  and  V  by,  themselves.  The  one 
element  that  we  never  get  alone  is  X.”  " 

But  the  propounders  of  this  theory  do  not  seem  to 
realise  the  full  implications  of  their  admission.  We  can¬ 
not  simply  drop  the  theory  of  possession  as  if  the  facts 
on  which  it  was  originally  based  had  never  existed,  and 
then  proceed  to  balance  the  successes  against  the  failures, 
as  in  a  telepathic  experiment.  If  these  impersona¬ 
tions,  as  is  now  admitted,  are  not  what  they  pretend 
to  be,  they  are  shams,  and  we  are  faced  with  a  gigantic 
system  of  make-believe.  In  a  telepathic  experiment, 
if  we  found  the  percipient  continually  trying  to  cheat, 
we  should  drop  his  acquaintance,  and  betake  our¬ 
selves  to  an  honest  man.  That  course  is  not  open  to  us 

'  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  262.  Mr.  Piddington, 
in  a  letter  to  me,  expresses  his  general  agreement  with 
this  view. 

300 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

here,  because  the  automatist  without  reproach  has  not 
yet  been  found.  All  alike,  it  would  seem,  are 
engaged  day  in,  day  out,  in  weaving  their  dream 
romances.  But,  again,  in  a  telepathic  experiment  the 
particular  form  of  deception  here  encountered  would 
not  affect  the  result.  In  a  telepathic  experiment  we 
are  concerned  only  with  excluding  the  action  of  the 
subject’s  normal  senses.  If,  under  such  conditions, 
he  -correctly  names  the  concealed  card,  the  result  may 
be  due  to  reading  our  thoughts,  it  may  be  due  to 
communion  with  the  world  soul,  or  to  the  direct  inter¬ 
position  of  the  Deity.  In  any  event,  we  have  agreed 
provisionally  to  call  the  result  telepathy.  But  in  the 
cases  before  us  we  have  to  decide  between  one 
of  two  unknown  causes,  and  all  the  sympathies  of  the 
automatist  have  been  proved  to  be  actively  engaged  on 
one  side.  That  fact  surely  ought  to  be  kept  pro¬ 
minently  before  us  in  every  attempt  to  interpret  these 
baffling  utterances.  Buf  I  see  no  proof  in  these  reports 
that  there  is  any  adequate  recognition  of  it,  or  any 
realisation  of  the  extreme  improbability  involved  in 
the  assumption  that  one  out  of  ten  thousand  lay 
figures,  in  outward  appearance  indistinguishable  from 
all  the  other  lay  figures,  should  for  a  passing  moment 
be  endowed  with  life,  and  should  then  again  sink  back 
amongst  the  crowd  of  lifeless  mockeries  ;  for  that,  and 
nothing  less,  seems  to  be  the  implication  in  some  of 
the  arguments  put  forward.  Take  the  following  case  : 

On  July  13,  1904,  at  11.15  a.m.,  the  same  day, 
and  possibly  the  same  hour,  in  which  Mr.  Piddington 
wrote  the  posthumous  letter  referred  to  in  Chapter  VI. 
in  connection  with  the  Sevens  case,  Mrs.  Verrall  pro¬ 
duced  the  following  script  : 

CONCLUSION 

301 

[After  some  nonsense  Latin  and  Greek  words.] 

But  that  is  not  right — it  is  something  contemporary  that 
you  are  to  record — note  the  hour — in  London  half  the 
message  has  come. 

I  have  long  told  you  of  the  contents  of  the  envelope — 
Myers’  sealed  envelope  left  with  Lodge.  [Here  follows  a 
statement  as  to  the  contents  of  this  envelope,  quoted  in 
full  in  Mrs.  Verrall’s  report  on  her  script,  Proceedings 
S.P.R.,  vol.  XX.  pp.  424 — 5  ;  also  a  similar  statement 
about  a  sealed  envelope  left  by  Professor  Sidgwick.  The 
script  continues  :  ] 

I  don’t  know  what  you  want  more — why  can’t  you  act  on 
this  ?  You  ask  more  and  more  tests  and  it  is  hard  to 
see  why. 

Helen  could  probably  give  the  contents  of  the  envelope 
too  if  you  want  confirmation.  Tell  her  to  write  down  a 
reference  and  see  what  she  puts.  We  will  try  to  give  it 
her  to-day.  Some  one  will  speak  of  it  to  her — will  that 
do  for  you,  O  skeptics  I  Surely  Piddington  will  see  that  this 
is  enough  and  should  be  acted  upon.  F.  W.  H.  M. 

The  whole  message,  it  will  be  seen,  an  unusually 
coherent  one,  purports  to  be  inspired  by  the  Myers 
control.  The  first  paragraph  appears  to  refer  to  Mr. 
Piddington ’s  contemporary  letter,  of  which  Mrs.  Verrall 
could  have  had  no  knowledge  by  normal  means.  The 
latter  part  of  the  script  professes  to  give  the  substance 
of  a  posthumous  letter  written  by  Myers  himself.  The 
statements  made  in  this  part  of  the  script  proved,  when 
the  letter  was  opened,  to  be  entirely  wide  of  the  mark." 
This  part,  then,  presumably  belonged  to  the  lay 
figure.  But  Miss  Johnson,  in  commenting  on  the 
passage,  thinks  that  the  phraseology  of  the  first  part 
of  the  message  can  hardly  have  come  from  Mr. 
Piddington’s  mind,  and  that  it  rather  suggests  the 
operation  of  another  intelligence  {i.e.,  the  Myers  con¬ 
trol). ^  But  if  Mrs.  Verrall’s  dream -self  can  so  skil- 
*  See  above,  p.  207. 

2  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  256. 

302 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

fully  work  up  the  raw  material  originating  in  her  own 
mind  so  as  to  fit  into  her  dream  romance,  why  should 
it  be  supposed  incapable  of  working  up  raw  material 
presumably  received  from  the  outside? 

The  theory  can  only  fairly  be  tested  by  careful  and, 
so  far  as  possible,  dispassionate  study  of  the  utter¬ 
ances  as  a  whole.  The  automatists  unquestionably 
show  that  they  possess  information  which  could  not 
have  reached  their  consciousness  by  normal  means,  and 
it  is  in  tracing  this  information  to  its  source  that  the 
main  interest  of  the  inquiry  and  the  main  burden  of 
proof  will  be  found.  .Whether  the  faculty  of  super¬ 
normal  perception  constitutes  a  real  difference  between 
Mrs.  Piper  and  the  majority  of  her  predecessors  it  is 
difficult  to  say.  Clairvoyant  powers  have  been  widely 
claimed  for  other  mediums  and  magnetic  sensitives, 
but  the  imperfection  of  the  records  prevents  us,  as 
a  rule,  from  testing  the  claim.  There  is,  however, 
one  conspicuous  exception,  and  it  is  a  peculiarly  in¬ 
structive  one.  One  Alphonse  Cahagnet,  a  French 
cabinet-maker  in  the  middle  years  of  last  century, 
had  a  magnetic  hypnotic)  subject,  Adele,  who 

granted  interviews  much  after  the  fashion  of  Mrs. 
Piper’s  early  seances.  Strangers  would  be  introduced 
to  Ad^le  in  the  trance,  and  she  would  profess  to  see 
their  dead  friends  and  would  give  copious  informa¬ 
tion  about  their  personal  appearance,  dress,  character, 
disposition,  and  the  disease  from  which  they  died.  The 
information  given  rarely  went  beyond  this,  but  within 
these  limits  it  seems  to  have  been  remarkably  accurate. 
Cahagnet  published  notes  of  the  stances,  signed  in 
each  case  by  the  sitter. *  On  two  or  three  occasions 

'  “  Arcanes  de  la  vie  future  devoil^s.” 

CONCLUSION 

303 

as  a  , special  test  Adele  gave  a  correct  description  of 
a  person  unknown  to  her  interlocutor.  But  striking 
though  these  results  were,  there  are  clear  indications 
in  many  cases  that  Adele  obtained  her  information 
from  no  other  source  than  the  mind  of  the  sitter. 
Thus,  M.  du  Potet,  a  well-known  writer  on  animal 
magnetism,  received  a  very  vivid  and  detailed  descrip¬ 
tion  of  an  old  friend  of  his  :  “  Je  croyais,”  he  testi¬ 
fies,  “  le  voir  moi-meme,  tant  le  tableau  en  dtait 
saisissant.”  But  on  further  inquiry  M.  du  Potet  found 
that  all  the  correct  details  could  have  come  from  his 
own  mind,  whilst  other  details  given  of  which  he  was 
ignorant  turned  out  to  be  incorrect.  A  more  striking 
proof  of  the  real  source  of  these  messages  is  afforded 
in  two  other  cases.  Twice  Adele  was  consulted  as  to 
the  whereabouts  of  men  who  had  disappeared.  In 
each  case  she  professed  to  find  the  man  alive,  and, 
after  giving  many  accurate  particulars  of  his  appear¬ 
ance  and  disposition,  she  went  on  to  converse  with 
him  ;  but  there  is  a  curious  similarity  of  detail 
between  the  two  accounts.  Both  men  profess  to  have 
written  home,  but  the  letters  must  have  miscarried. 
Neither  can  write  now,  because  they  are  far  from  the 
sea,  in  the  interior.  Both  have  suffered  much  ;  both 
have  been  prisoners  ;  both  protest  that  their  relations 
will  see  them  before  they  die  ;  neither,  however,  is  in 
a  hurry  to  come  back  ;  and  neither  is  willing  to 
discover  the  jiame  of  his  present  place  of  abiding. 
Ad^le,  in  fact,  committed  herself  to  the  statement  that 
these  far  countries  “  have  no  names.”  As  nothing 
more  was  ever  published  on  the  subject  we  may, 
perhaps,  assume  that  the  missing  men  were  not  heard 
of  again.  Must  we  also  q.ssume  that  Adele’s  power 

304 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

of  communicating  with  the  spirits  of  the  living  was 
restricted  to  persons  who  had  gone  away  to  distant 
climes  to  escape  their  relations?  If  Adele  was  really 
able  to  communicate  with  the  living  at  a  distance, 
it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  Cahagnet  in  the  course 
of  his  many  years’  experiments  would  have  furnished 
us  with  some  further  evidence  of  such  a  power.  But 
if  these  narratives  are  not  what  they  seem  to  be,  what 
are  we  to  say  of  the  other  narratives  in  the  book, 
which  are  cast  in  the  same  dramatic  form,  and  contain 
similar  details  harmonising  with  the  expectations  or 
memories  of  the  interlocutors?  If  those  are  not 
authentic  messages  from  the  distant  living,  we  require 
some  further  warrant  for  the  assumption  that  these 
are  authentic  messages  from  the  dead.  Thought  trans¬ 
ference,  so  far  as  we  can  judge,  seems  a  sufficient 
explanation,  and  the  only  consistent  explanation,  of 
these,  the  only  cases  of  trance  communication  re¬ 
sembling  Mrs.  Piper’s  of  which  we  have  adequate 
records  before  the  present  generation. 

If  we  compare  the  early  and  later  seances  of  Mrs. 
Piper,  we  shall  find  that  there  has  been  a  marked 
change  in  their  character.  The  dramatic  develop¬ 
ments  of  the  later  stances  have  been  sufficiently  indi¬ 
cated  in  Chapters  II.  and  IV.  But  when  Mrs.  Piper 
first  came  to  this  country  little  opportunity  was 
afforded  for  the  gradual  development  of  a  trance 
personality.  A  large  number  of  sitters  were  intro¬ 
duced  ;  Phinuit  would,  as  a  rule,  be  the  sole  control, 
and  would  pour  out  for  the  visitor’s  benefit  a  miscel¬ 
laneous  budget  of  information  about  his  friends  and 
relations,  living  or  dead.  In  the  case  of  the  living, 
Phinuit  simply  described  what  he  saw,  as  in  the  two 

CONCLUSION 

305 

typical  stances  quoted  in  Chapter  11.  There  was,  as 
a  rule,  no  pretence  that  the  information  came  to  him 
from  any  other  source.  When,  however,  the  informa¬ 
tion  related  to  the  dead,  it  was  frequently,  but  by  no 
means  invariably,  given  as  coming  directly  from  them. 
But  neither  the  nature  of  the  communications  nor  the 
manner  of  delivery  afforded,  as  a  rule,  any  evidence 
of  the  authenticity  of  the  impersonation.  In  most  of 
these  early  cases,  certainly,  the  circumstances  suggest 
that  the  impersonation  of  the  dead  was  merely  a  conven¬ 
tional  dramatic  device,  inspired  generally  by  the  beliefs 
or  hopes  of  the  sitter.  The  change  in  the  character 
of  the  recent  sittings  and  the  remarkable  and  lifelike 
development  of  some  of  the  trance  personalities  is,  no 
doubt,  consistent  with  the  hypothesis  of  spirit  control. 
But  it  would  not  be  safe  to  build  much  upon  such  an 
argument.  At  the  earlier  sittings  the  main  object 
aimed  at  was  a  rough  survey  of  the  field  in  order  to 
ascertain  its  value.  As  soon  as  definite  proof  of 
supernormal  powers  of  perception  had  been  obtained, 
those  who  had  charge  of  the  seances  naturally  turned 
their  attention  to  the  more  vital  problems  of  the  source 
of  those  powers  and  the  nature  of  the  trance  personali¬ 
ties.  They  sought,  in  fact,  to  obtain  evidence  for  the 
identity  of  the  supposed  spirit  communicators,  and  in  this 
region,  above  all  others,  demand  tends  to  create  supply. 

The  only  test  that  we  can  apply  to  these  earlier 
sittings  lies  in  the  substance  of  the  communications 
themselves.  The  great  bulk  of  the  information  given 
was,  of  course,  within  the  knowledge  of  the  sitter,  and, 
apart  from  its  dramatic  form,  there  is  no  ground  for 
assuming  any  other  source  than  telepathy  from  his 
mind.  But  there  are  thirty-eight  cases  enumerated 

20 

306 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  the  stances  of  1889 — 90  of 
information  furnished  by  the  trance  intelligence  which 
was  not  within  the  conscious  knowledge  of  the  sitter 
at  the  time.* 

Of  the  38  cases  there  are  five — 27,  37,  78,  and  two 
incidents  in  Mr.  J.  T.  Clarke’s  sitting — in  which  the 
sitter  explains  that  the  facts  stated  had  at  one  time 
been  known  to  him.  It  must  be  assumed,  therefore, 
that  Phinuit  was  simply  reproducing  latent  knowledge 
telepathically  acquired.  Of  the  remaining  33  cases, 
12  only  related  to  the  concerns  of  the  dead. 

Of  the  twenty -one  instances  relating  to  the  living, 
some  five  or  six  may  probably  be  accounted  for  by 
latent  knowledge.  Four  are  concerned  with  experi¬ 
ments  in  jwhich  the  trance  intelligence  more  or  less 
correctly  described  the  actions  of  persons  at  a  distance. 
In  most  of  the  remaining  cases  the  reproduction  pf 
latent  knowledge  or  mere  guesswork  on  the  part  pf 
the  trance  intelligence  seem  alike  improbable,  though, 
no  doubt,  some  allowance  must  be  made  for  chance 
coincidence.  To  take  two  of  the  most  striking  cases  : 
Mr.  Deronco,  a  German  gentleman  then  resident  in 

*  The  list  given  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  649 — 
50,  reckons  40  cases.  For  the  present  purpose  two  of 
these  have  been  excluded — sitting  40,  the  private  affairs 
of  Edmund  Gurney,  because  we  know  from  Sir  Oliver 
Lodge’s  later  explanation  that  the  matters  communicated 
had  come  out  at  a  previous  sitting,  and  were  therefore 
known  to  the  trance  intelligence  {Proceedings  S.P.R. 
vol.  xxiii.  p.  141)  ;  and  sitting  47,  the  cuts  on  the  watch, 
because  it  is  not  quite  clear  either  that  the  cuts  were 
intentionally  made  or  that,  if  made  intentionally,  they  were 
made  as  stated  by  the  trance  intelligence,  since  the  owner 
was  probably  blind  before  he  owned  the  watch.  The  inci¬ 
dent  can,  it  seems  to  me,  hardly  be  used  as  evidence  in 
this  connection. 

CONCLUSION 

307 

Cambridge  and  known  to  Mr.  Myers,  was  informed 
that  his  brother  in  Germany  was  painting  a  picture. 
Asked  if  there  were  many  figures,  Phinuit  said  :  “I 
see  one  head  ;  it  is  side  face.”  From  subsequent 
inquiry  it  appeared  that  Mr.  Deronco’s  brother  “  was 
at  that  moment  painting  and  that  the  picture  was  a 
portrait  of  Manfred,  a  single  figure  in  profile.”  *  In 
another  case  the  information  is  put  into  the  mouth 
of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge’s  deceased  Aunt  Anne,  who  said 
that  Charley,  “  her  Charley,”  had  eaten  ‘‘  the  bird, 
the  chicken,  and  made  himself  sick.  He  has  had  a 
trouble  with  stomach  .  .  .  some  kind  of  bird.  .  .  . 
IQuite  sick.”  A  subsequent  letter  from  Sir  Oliver’s 
cousin  gave  the  news  that  Charley  in  Manitoba  had 
shot  a  prairie  hen  in  the  close  season,  “  so  We 
had  to  hide  ih-j  it  was  hung  for  about  a  fortnight, 
and  a  few  days  before  Christmas  we  ate  it,  Charley 
eating  most  ;  the  bird  didn’t  make  him  ill,  but  he  was 
ill  at  the  time”  (pp.  518,  520). 

Of  twelve  instances  directly  connected  with  the  dead, 
several  which  relate  to  trivial  circumstances  may, 
perhaps,  be  explained  as  due  to  the  reproduction  of 
latent  memories.  There  are  two  episodes,  however, 
one  consisting  of  four  evidential  points  (reckoned  as 
four  cases  in  the  above  enumeration)  in  which  the 
agency  of  the  dead  is  strongly  suggested.  The  first 
episode  is  that  of  Dr.  Rich,  who  purported  to  take 
control  for  a  few  minutes  at  a  seance  at  which  the 
sitter,  Mr.  Thompson,  had  a  very  slight  acquaintance 

*  Proceedings  S.R.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  628.  The  coincidence 
is  the  more  striking  because  it  would  not  appear  that  Mr. 
Deronco’s  brother  was  a  professional  artist — Phinuit  had 
already  described  him  in  the  same  sitting  as  ‘‘  writing  a 
good  deal,”  and  this  information  is  stated  to  be  correct. 

308 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

with  him.  He  sent  messages  to  his  father,  then  Post¬ 
master  of  Liverpool  and  known  both  to  the  sitter 
and  to  Sir  O,  Lodge,  who  was  also  present,  and 
correctly  stated — what  was  unknown  to  the  sitters — 
that  Mr.  Rich,  senior,  occasionally  suffered  from  slight 
dizziness.  The  whole  episode  seems  to  have  been 
entirely  characteristic  and  lifelike.  The  other  episode 
is  the  appearance  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge’s  uncle  Jerry, 
who  correctly  described  four  incidents  unknown  to  the 
sitter  :  (i)  A  fight  in  which  his  (living)  brother  Frank 
had  fought  with  another  boy  ;  (2)  swimming  the  creek, 
a  feat  in  which  the  same  brother  Frank  had  shared  ; 
(3)  the  gift  of  a  snake-skin  to  another  living  brother, 
Robert  ;  (4)  and  playing  in  “  Smith’s  field  ”  with  the 
same  brother  Robert. 

Sir  Oliver  Lodge  is  confident  that  he  had  never 
heard  of  these  incidents  from  any  of  these  uncles,  so 
that  if  his  recollection  on  this  point  may  be  trusted, 
the  hypothesis  of  latent  memory  of  the  sitter  must  be 
excluded.  But  it  will  be  seen  that  all  the  incidents 
related  were,  or  had  been,  within  living  memories,  and 
that  one  or  other  of  the  living  brothers  was  concerned 
as  a  principal  in  all  four  instances.  If  “  Dr.  Phinuit  ” 
could  see  what  Mr.  Deronco’s  brother  was  doing  in 
Germany,  it  seems  not  impossible  that  he  could  also 
see  what  Sir  O.  Lodge’s  Uncle  Frank  was  thinking 
about  in  Cornwall.  In  the  other  case  the  sitter  had 
some  knowledge  both  of  Dr.  Rich  and  his  father. 

Again,  in  the  stances  with  G.  P.  several  pieces  of 
information  were  given  which  were  not  known  to  the 
sitter  at  the  moment — e.g.,  the  statement  that  the  studs 
had  been  taken  from  the  dead  body  by  the  (step-) 
mother,  that  his  father  had  taken  his  photograph  to 

CONCLUSION 

309 

be  copied,  the  message  to  Katherine  Howard,  and  the 
accurate  account  of  Mrs.  Howard’s  doings  on  the 
previous  day.  This  last,  it  will  be  remembered,  was 
given  in  answer  to  a  request  to  G.  P.  to  see  what 
Mrs.  Howard  was  doing  at  the  moment,  and  the  nature 
of  the  information  given  clearly  shows  that  it  came  from 
Mrs.  Howard’s  mind.  There  is  surely  no  justification 
for  the  assumption  that  G.  P.  acted  as  intermediary 
in  tapping  Mrs.  Howard’s  memories. 

If  we  turn  to  the  other  automatists  we  shall  find 
many  indications  of  the  operation  of  simple  telepathy 
in  the  records  now  under  consideration.  The  frequent 
allusions  in  Mrs.  Holland’s  script  to  Mrs.  Verrall’s 
surroundings  and  occupations  do  not  seem  to  call  for 
any  other  explanation. '  Many  of  the  cross -correspond¬ 
ences  discussed  in  Chapter  V.,  as  shown,  point  to  tele¬ 
pathy  between  the  automatists.  Mr.  Wilson,  who  had 
two  successful  sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson  (cited  in 
Chapter  HI.),  formed  the  opinion  that  the  correct 
statements  given  were  probably  not  derived  from  the 
dead,  but  arose  simply  as  reflections  in  Mrs. 
Thompson’s  mind  of  his  own  thoughts  and  interests 
at  the  time  of  the  sitting  .2 

Mrs.  Benson,  again,  who  had  several  sittings  with 
Mrs.  Thompson,  found  nothing  to  suggest  communica¬ 
tion  with  the  dead  ;  but  many  incidents  which  pointed 

•  Miss  Johnson  considers  that  the  reading  of  the  Selwyn 
text  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxi.  pp.  235,  252 — 3) 

suggests  the  agency  of  Myers,  because  it  was  a  definite 
piece  of  association  between  him  and  Mrs.  Verrall.  But 
this  very  fact  would  tend  to  make  it  prominent  in  Mrs. 
Verrall’s  “  automatic  ”  mind,  which,  ex  hypothesi,  impressed 
Mrs.  Holland. 

2  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xvii.  p.  129. 

310 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

to  reading  of  the  mind  of  herself  and  her  daughter, 
who  was  not  present  at  the  sittings.  Thus,  on  one 
occasion  Mrs.  Thompson,  on  Mrs.  Benson’s  arrival  at 
the  seance-room,  mentioned  that  she  [(Mrs.  Benson) 
had  an  engagement  at  4.30.  The  engagement  had 
been  made  at  lunch  immediately  before.  On  another 
occasion  she  correctly  described  Mrs.  Benson’s  daughter, 
as  looking  at  her  money  and  thinking  about  a  wedding 
present.! 

Mrs.  Verrall  relates  nine  instances  with  the  same 
automatist  of  facts  being  communicated  which  were  un¬ 
known  to  the  sitter .2  Four  of  these  cases  clearly  point 
to  telepathy  from  the  living,.  Thus,  on  two  occasions 
Mrs.  Thompson  gave  to  Mrs.  Verrall  particulars,  un¬ 
known  to  her,  of  presents  which  Miss  Verrall,  then 
away  from  home,  had  received.  On  another  occasion 
Mrs.  Thompson  told  Miss  Verrall,  in  Mrs.  Verrall’s 
absence,  that  some  one  called  Margaret  (Mrs.  Verrall’s 
name)  would  give  her  a  trinket  to  wear  on  her  watch- 
chain  if  she  asked  for  it.  Mrs.  Verrall  had  actually 
marked  in  a  shop  catalogue  a  pendant  which  she  pro¬ 
posed  to  give  her  daughterl  as  a  Christmas  present  .3 
In  the  fourth  case  some  correct  details  were  given 
about  a  locket  sent  to  Mrs.  Verrall  by  her  sister.  In 
none  of  these  four  cases,  as  Mrs.  Verrall  points  out, 
was  there  any  reason  to  suppose  “  that  any  dead 
person  knew  the  facts  or  was  interested  in  them.  Nor 
did  Nelly  claim  to  have  become  possessed  of  the 
information  through  any  other  means  than  her  own.” 

'  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  278 — 9. 

2  A  tenth  instance  is  referred  to  but  not  described,  as 
being  too  private  to  quote. 

3  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  175 — 6. 

CONCLUSION 

311 

iThe  other  five  incidents  related  to  the  family  of 
Mr.  A’.,  who,  with  his  wife,  had  two  sittings.  The 
information  given  concerned  the  habits  of  an  old  lady, 
still  living,  and  of  Mrs.  A.’s  deceased  mother.  All 
the  facts  stated,  though  not  known  to  Mr.  A.,  were 
in  .the  knowledge  of  his  sisters,  with  one  exception. 
This  one  exception  was  as  follows  :  It  was  stated  that 
Mr.  A.’s  mother  had  kept  a  receipt-book,  and  that  it 
contained  not  only  cookery  receipts  but  a  receipt  for 
pomatum  ;  the  daughter  knew  of  the  book,  but  pot 
of  the  receipt  for  pomatum.  It  was  eventually  found, 
after  some  searching,  in  the  middle  of  the  book.* 
Even  here  the  hypothesis  of  latent  memory  on  the 
part  of  Mr,  A.’s  sister  cannot  be  excluded. 

The  analysis  of  these  cases  where  information  un¬ 
known  to  the  sitter  was  given  by  the  trance  intelli¬ 
gence  scarcely  adds  strength  to  the  hypothesis  of  spirit 
communication.  In  every  case  the  information  given 
was,  or  may  have  been,  within  the  knowledge  of  some 
living  mind.  In  many  cases  all  the  circumstances  point 
to  some  form  of  telepathy  between  the  distant  agent 
and  the  trance  intelligence,  mediated,  as  it  would  seem 
in  all  cases,  by  the  presence  of  a  common  acquaint¬ 
ance  in  the  person  of  the  sitter.  It  is  true  that  we 
have  little  or  no  experimental  evidence  for  telepathy, 
of  this  complicated  form,  but  neither  have  we  experi¬ 
mental  , evidence  for  the  action  of  the  spirits  of  the 
dead.  That  a  disembodied  spirit  should  be  able  to 
read  the  mind  of  a  living  person  at  a  distance  ican 
only  seem  more  probable  because  we  know  nothing 
about  disembodied  spirits,  and  our  fancy  is  free  to 
dower  them  with  any  powers  we  choose,  whereas  we  do 

’  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  177 — ^83. 

312 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

know,  or  think  we  know,  the  limitations  of  our  poor 
human  faculties. 

The  trance  personalities,  then,  have  never  told  us 
anything  which  was  not  possibly,  scarcely  anything 
which  was  not  probably,  within  the  knowledge  of  some 
living  person.  None  of  the  “  posthumous  ”  letters  have 
yet  been  read.  Twice  only  have  the  messages  re¬ 
ceived  through  the  automatists  been  held  to  justify 
the  opening  of  a  posthumous  letter,  and  in  each  case 
the  automatist’s  version  has  proved  wholly  wide  of 
the  mark. I  Nor  has  the  Hodgson  control  yet  revealed 
the  secret  of  his  cipher. 

These  facts  do  not,  of  course,  constitute  an  insuper¬ 
able  objection  to  the  hypothesis  of  spirit  communica¬ 
tion.  The  hypothetical  conditions  of  communication 
between  the  other  world  and  this  by  means  of  a  kind 
of  partial  reincarnation  may,  as  suggested  by  Hodgson 
long  ago,  be  such  as  to  confuse  and  impair  the  intel¬ 
ligence  of  the  spirit  wishing  to  communicate  ;  or,  if 
we  discard  even  this  modified  form  of  the  possession 
theory,  our  terrestrial  experience  is  sufficient  to  show 
that  telepathy  is  a  very  uncertain  means  of  communica¬ 
tion.  Evidence  derived  from  dramatic  verisimilitude 
should,  no  doubt,  be  largely  discounted,  since  the 
dream-self  is  unquestionably  a  first-rate  actor  ;  but, 
when  all  allowances  are  made,  it  is  difficult  not  to 
feel  impressed  by  some  of  the  utterances  of  the 
Hodgson  control,  especially  the  “  Buying  Billy  ”  inci¬ 
dent,  the  little  drama  of  shaking  the  fist  at  Mrs.  James, 
and  the  Putnam -Bowditch  episode.  The  Hodgson 

*  One  of  these  cases  has  already  been  cited  in 
Chapter  III.  The  other  case,  which  occurred  some  years 
ago,  is  described  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  657, 
and  vol.  viii.  p.  69,  seq. 

CONCLUSION 

313 

cipher  message  to  Mrs.  Holland  also  carries  some 
weight.  In  the  case  of  the  Myers  control  the  reminis¬ 
cences  of  the  “  yEneid  ”  and  the  “  Lethe  ”  incident  ' 
seem  to  me  most  significant.  There  is,  too,  the  curious 
fact  that  Mrs.  Piper  has  occasionally  recognised  photo¬ 
graphs  of  the  supposed  control.  She  selected  a  photo¬ 
graph  of  G.  P.  out  of  several  others,  and  on  a  later 
occasion,  after  a  series  of  communications  purporting 
to  come  from  one  Joseph  Marble,  in  the  waking  stage 
of  the  trance  she  picked  out  his  photograph  from 
among  several  others,  with  the  exclamation  “  That  is 
the  man  I  saw  I  ”  2 

Now,  Mrs.  Piper  had  only  once  seen  G.  P.,  at  a 
single  sitting  held  four  years  before  his  death,  and 
then  did  not  know  his  name  ;  and  Mr.  Marble  she 
had  never  seen  at  all.  Of  course,  again,  the  incident 
is  explicable  on  the  assumption  that  the  sitters  con¬ 
ceived  the  visual  image  of  the  deceased  with  suffi¬ 
cient  vividness  to  impress  it  on  Mrs.  Piper’s  mindly 
and  for  telepathy  in  this  form  we  have  some  direct 
experimental  proof. 

Another  line  of  argument  which  has  much  im¬ 
pressed  me  personally,  and  which  seems  calculated  to 
help  forward  the  solution  of  the  problem,  is  that  out¬ 
lined  by  Hodgson  in  his  report  of  1898.3  The  argu¬ 
ment  may  be  roughly  summarised  as  follows  :  If  all 
the  successful  messages  are  the  result  of  telepathy, 
between  the  sitter  and  the  medium,  we  should  expect 
to  find  that  the  hits  group  themselves  round  particular 
sitters.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  speaking  from  an  inti- 

‘  See  Chapter  VI. 

2  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  278. 

3  Ibid.,  vol.  xiii.  ;  see  especially  pp.  391 — 395. 

314 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

mate  and  unrivalled  knowledge  of  all  the  communica¬ 
tions  recorded  up  to  that  date,  Hodgson  claimed  that 
the  true  messages  tended  to  group  themselves,  not 
round  particular  sitters,  but  round  particular  com¬ 
municators  and  classes  of  communicators.  He  found 
that  persons  who  had  committed  suicide,  or  who  had 
died  after  suffering  from  prolonged  bodily  weakness 
or  extreme  mental  disturbance,  showed  themselves  weak 
and  confused  communicators.  On  the  other  hand,  he 
found  that  the  best  communicators  were  some  young 
children  recently  deceased,  and  two  or  three  adults, 
notably  G.  P.,  who  died  by  an  accident  in  the  prime 
of  a  healthy  and  vigorous  life.  Hodgson  puts  forward 
this  theory  tentatively,  and  indicates  it  as  a  promising 
line  for  further  investigation.  Some  recent  observa¬ 
tions  certainly  tend  to  confirm  his  view.  Of  the  com¬ 
municators  of  the  last  few  years  none  has  produced 
so  vivid  an  impression  of  a  living  personality  behind 
the  veil  as  Richard  Hodgson  himself.  Next  to  him 
comes  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  but  in  this  case  the  impression 
is  produced  less  by.  his  personal  than  by  his  intellectual 
qualities. 

The  facts  here  are  undoubted.  But,  perhaps,  we 
should  expect  such  a  result  on  any  theory.  Richard 
Hodgson  in  his  lifetime  was  a  strongly  coloured,  many- 
sided  personality,  with  a  lot  of  loose  energy  to  spend 
in  various  by-products,  and  a  genius  for  friendship. 
Such  a  man  was  calculated  to  impress  a  vivid  image 
of  himself  and  all  his  sayings  and  doings,  likes  and 
dislikes,  upon  the  memory,  of  his  friends,  and  if  tele¬ 
pathy  requires,  as  it  appears  to  do,  a  certain  degree 
of  emotional  temperature,  that  very  fact  should  make 
them  good  sitters.  Successes  would  still  group  them- 

CONCLUSION 

315 

selves  round  the  man  who  had  an  abundant  life,  just 
because  his  life  had  abounded.  George  Pelham  would 
seem  to  have  been  a  man  of  much  the  same  make  as 
Hodgson — a  man  of  many  keen  interests  and  warm 
friendships.  Myers,  even  more  than  the  personal 
regard  which  he  inspired,  left  a  deep  intellectual  im¬ 
press  on  all  who  came  in  contact  with  him.  For 
similar  reasons  suicides  and  persons  who  died  gfter 
lingering  illness  or  mental  disturbance  would  be  un¬ 
likely  to  leave  vivid  and  productive  memories  behind 
them. 

The  most  promising  line  of  inquiry,  however,  at 
the  present  time  would  seem  to  consist  in  the  possible 
indications  of  a  directing  and  organising  intelligence 
to  be  found  by  careful  comparison  of  the  scripts  of 
several  automatists.  I  have  dealt  with  the  argument, 
so  far  as  the  present  state  of  the  evidence  and  jny 
own  understanding  of  it  would  permit,  in  the  chapter 
on  cross-correspondences,  and  in  the  discussion,  at  the 
beginning  of  the  present  chapter,  on  the  interpretation 
to  be  put  on  the  allusion  apparently  contained  in  Mrs. 
Verrall’s  script  to  Mr.  Piddington’s  posthumous  letter. 
The  evidence  so  far  presented  will  not,  it  seems,  admit 
of  a  positive  conclusion.  But  even  whilst  the  investi¬ 
gation  is  still  incomplete  it  is  clear  that  the  results 
so  far  attained  are  worth  all  the  labour  that  has  been 
spent  upon  them.  If  a  final  verdict  must  be  deferred 
until  further  investigation  shall  have  enlightened  our 
ignorance,  and  shall  enable  us  to  give  a  decisive 
answer  to  the  question  whether  these  dark  sayings  pro¬ 
ceed  from  the  dead  or  the  living,  we  need  not  wait  to 
recognise  that  even  now  there  are  other,  if  perhaps 
less  momentous,  issues  involved  which  concern  our 
immediate  interests.  In  the  history  of  mankind  there 

316 

THE  NEWER  SPIRITUALISM 

have  been  many  crusades  which,  missing  what  seemed 
the  highest  good,  have  yet  won  something  worth  the 
pains,  not  for  those  who  took  part  in  them,  but  for 
the  later  generations  which  have  entered  into  the  fruit 
of  their  labours.  Out  of  the  long  and  tedious  search, 
renewed  generation  after  generation,  for  the  philo¬ 
sopher’s  stone  and  the  elixir  of  life,  has  come  the 
wonder-working  science  of  modern  chemistry.  The 
seekers  in  the  present  case  may  have  been  fooled  by 
visionary  gold,  but  at  least  they  have  been  digging 
a  very  fruitful  vineyard.  These  enigmatic  utterances 
have  been  recorded  with  all  the  precision  demanded  in 
a  scientific  inquiry.  The  conditions  and  circumstances 
are  set  down  with  scrupulous  candour  and  care.  The 
exhaustive  editorial  comment  places  the  reader  in  as 
favourable  a  position  to  estimate  their  significance  as 
the  experimenters  themselves.  No  person  who  care¬ 
fully  studies  the  records  would  think  it  possible  to 
attribute  all  these  numerous  and  well-attested  coinci¬ 
dences  to  fraudulent  design  or  the  mere  chance 
association  of  ideas.  If  we  reject,  for  the  present, 
at  any  rate,  the  explanation  suggested  by  many  of 
the  utterances  themselves,  that  of  communication  from 
the  dead,  we  must  seek  for  some  other  cause  adequate 
to  the  effects.  There  remains  only  the  agency  which 
has  been  provisionally  named  telepathy,  but  which  no 
one  has  yet  ventured  to  define  in  other  than  negative 
terms,  as  communication  apart  from  the  recognised 
sensory  channels.  The  establishment  of  such  a  faculty, 
if  only  as  the  vestige  of  a  primitive  mode  of  sensi¬ 
bility,  now  superseded  by  articulate  speech,  would 
surely  be  a  result  worth  all  the  labour  spent  in  the 
vineyard  :  a  fruitage  which  would  go  far  to  compen¬ 
sate  for  the  loss  of  that,  perhaps  visionary,  gold. 

NOTE 

The  Introductory  chapter  is  based  on  an  article  which 
was  published  in  the  Independent  Review  in  May,  1904  ; 
and  part  of  the  chapter  on  Cross-Correspondences  has 
already  appeared  in  the  Fortnightly  Review  of  September, 
1909.  I  have  to  acknowledge  the  courtesy  which  permits 
republication. 

F.  P. 

317 

INDEX 

Accordion-playing  by  Home, 
36-7,  49,  51 

Adare,  Lord,  35,  65  f,  75,  80,  86 
“  Agamemnon,”  260,  266 
American  investigation  of  Eusapia, 

143-4 

“  Angel  ”  cross  -  correspondence, 
238-9 

Animal  magnetism,  8,  146-7,  153 
Apparitions  at  death,  25-8 
“Automatism,  Human,”  19 

Baggally,  Mr.  W.,  ii4f. 

Balance,  Sir  W.  Crookes’s  experi¬ 
ments  with,  51-4 
Balfour,  Rt.  Hon.  Gerald,  259 
Barrett,  Professor  W.  F.,  25,  199 
Bell,  Robert,  account  of  levitation, 
62-4 

Benson,  Mrs.,  203,  309-10 
Boldero,  General,  account  of 
elongation,  73-4 
Bottazzi,  Professor,  loi,  132 
Bourne,  Ansel,  16 
Bramwell,  Dr.  J.  M.,  20 
Brougham,  Lord,  34 
“  Browning,  Hope,  and  Star”  cross¬ 
correspondence,  246,  250-3,  293 
Browning,  Robert,  on  Home, 

44-S 

Buckley,  Major,  his  experiments  in 
clairvoyance,  29 

Cahagnet,  Alphonse,  302-4 
Carrington,  Mr.  Hereward,  114! 
Charcot,  12 
Clairvoyance,  29,  150  f 
Clarke,  Mr.  J.  T.,  his  sitting  with 
Mrs.  Piper,  306 

Consciousness,  Subliminal,  10  f, 
146  f 

Crawford,  Earl  of.  See  “  Lindsay  ” 
Crookes,  Sir  W.,  33,  35,  142 

Crookes,  Sir  W.,  his  account  of 
fire-test,  78-80 

Crookes,  Sir  W.,  his  investigation 
of  D.  D.  Home,  46  f 
Crystal  vision,  9-12 
Curie,  M.  and  Mme.,  102,  108-9 

Dante,  allusions  in  automatic 
script,  268  f 
Davey,  S.  J.,  88,  124 
Davis,  Mr.  W.  S.,  144 
“  Death  ”  cross  -  correspondence, 
239-40,  242-3 
Dialectical  Society,  65,  66 
Didier,  Alexis,  153  f 
Dorr,  Mr.  G.  B.,  217,  219,  255!, 
268-91 

Dunraven,  Earl  of,  43.  See  also 
“  Adare,  Lord  ” 

“  Dwarf  ”  cross  -  correspondence, 

243-4 

Eeden,  Dr.  Van,  his  seances  with 
Mrs.  Thompson,  195-8,  225-6 
Eglinton,  W.,  spirit  medium,  124 
Elliotson,  Dr.,  153 
Eusapia  Palladino,  10,  30,  31,  85, 
87  f ,  205-6 

Experiments  in  thought-transfer¬ 
ence,  22-4,  275-6 

Feilding,  Hon.  E.,  81,  ii4f,  205 
Felida,  X.,  15,  16 
Flammarion,  Camille,  99 
Flournoy,  Professor,  280-2 
Forbes,  Mrs.,  202,  227,  229,  231-2 
Fraud  in  automatic  state,  145-163 
Frith,  Mrs.,  270 

Gale,  Mr.  Harlow,  his  sitting  with 
Mrs.  Piper,  168-171 
Gibert,  Dr.,  23 

Gordon,  an  American  medium, 

35.  59.  85 

318 

INDEX 

319 

Gurney,  Edmund,  25,  88,  199-202, 
215,  228,  283 

Hall,  Mrs.  S.  C.,  description  of, 
fire-test,  76-7 

Hallucination,  collective,  81-6, 
112,  ii9f 
Herlitzka,  Dr.,  100 
Hodgson,  Richard,  88, 95-6, 123-4, 

157,  164,  I7if,  199,  211-24,  238, 
29S>  298,  313  f 

Holland,  Mrs.,  202,  205-6,  21 1-4, 
227-30,  234  f,  270-1 
Home,  D.  D.,  31-86,  87 
Home,  D.  D.,  his  spirit  messages, 

42-3 

Home,  D.  D.,  evidence  of  impos¬ 
ture  of,  45-6 
Home,  Mrs.  D.  D.,  66 
Home,  Mrs.  R.,  27 
"  Horace  Ode”  test,  210-11 
Houdin,  Robert,  and  Didier,  154 
Huggins,  Sir  W.,  48,  52 
Hume,  D.  D.  See  “  Home  ” 
Huxley,  Thomas,  19 
Hyslop,  Professor,  160,  218,  288-9 
290,  291-3 

Hystero-epilepsy,  12-16 

Imperator,  284,  286,  295 
Information  unknown  to  sitter 
given  through  medium,  305-  ii 
Institut  Psychologique  of  Paris, 
investigation  of  Eusapia  by,  102  f 

James,  Professor  William,  15,  20, 
164,  200,  217,  218,  220-2,  295-6 
Janet,  Pierre,  13,  23,  25 
Jastrow,  Professor,  83  n 
Jencken,  H.  D.,  35,  72,  74 
Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  66  n,  72  n, 

158,  205,  228,  237,  250,  255,  299, 
301 

Jones,  John,  account  of  levitation, 

56 

Latin  message,  the,  246  f 
Leaf,  Dr.  Walter,  165 

“  Lethe  ”  test  question,  255-67 
“  Light  in  West  ”  cross-corres¬ 
pondence,  240-1,  293 
Lindsay,  Master  of,  35,  65  f,  74-5, 
80,  86 

Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  24,  25,  30  n,  93, 
96,  97-8,  165,  17211,  201,  205, 

214,  284,  295,  306  f 
Lombroso,  Professor,  89,  99,  iii 
Lucie,  a  patient  of,  P.  Janet’s,  13 

Maxwell,  Dr.,  iii,  205 
Mech,  M.  de,  detects  Eusapia 
cheating,  104-5 

Merrifield,  Mr.,  on  D.  D.  Home, 

45-6 

Mesmerism.  See  “  Animal  Magnet¬ 
ism  ” 

Miles,  Miss,  and  Miss  Ramsden, 
their  experiments  in  thought- 
transference,  23-4 
Morselli,  Professor,  99 
Moses,  Stainton,  85,  148-50,  156, 
163,  284 

Miinsterberg,  Professor,  143 
Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  7-30,  88,  93,  96, 
97-8,  151,  165,  189,  199,  204-11, 

215,  228,  255-67 

“Nelly,”  Mrs.  Thompson’s  con¬ 
trol,  185,  192,  225-6,  278,  285-6 
Newbold,  Professor,  287-8,  294 
“  Nigger  talk  ”  incident,  218 

Palladino,  Eusapia.  See  “  Eusapia 
Palladino  ” 

Pelham,  George,  172  f,  278,  294, 

3H-S 

Perdicaris,  Mr.  Ion,  his  testimony 
to  Home,  33 

Phinuit,  164,  171-2,200,277,282-5, 
287,  289,  295,  304 
Photographs  recognised  by  Mrs. 
Piper,  313 

Physical  phenomena  associated 
with  trance  condition,  31-2, 147, 

156-7 

Physical  phenomena  of  Mrs. 
Thompson,  184-9 

320 

INDEX 

Piddington,  Mr.  J.  G.,  159,  190  f, 
203,  21  in,  214,  226-7,  244-5, 
25o-3>  255,  259,  261,  297,  299  n 
Piddington,  Mr.  J.  G.,  his  “  post¬ 
humous  ”  letter,  272  f,  300 
Piper,  Mrs.,  10,  30,  31,  42,  157, 
160-1,  164-83,  233,  237  f 
Piper,  Mrs.,  her  early  history,  164, 
277 

Poltergeists  and  hallucinations, 

84-5 

Possession  theory  of  spirit  inter¬ 
course  now  given  up,  298  f 
Posthumous  letters,  207,  272  f,  300, 
301 

Post-hypnotic  promise,  15 
Prevorst,  Seeress  of,  147 
Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  15 
Psychical  Research,  Society  for, 
88,  98,  1 14,  164,  184 

Rector,  289,  292-3,  294.  See  also 
“  Imperator  ” 

Remiremont,  miraculous  hailstorm 
at,  84 

Ribot,  T.,  II 

Richet,  Professor  C.,  25,  89  f,  96 
Richet,  Professor  C.,  his  experi¬ 
ments  in  telepathy,  274-6 
Ring-incident,  with  Hodgson 
control,  215-7,  290 
“  Roma  Immortalis  ”  cross-corres¬ 
pondence,  234-6,  242 
Ryan,  Mr.,  128  f 

Sanders,  Rev.  C.  B.  See  X+Y=Z 
Schiaparelli,  Professor,  89,  90-2 
“  Sevens  ”  cross-correspondence, 
268-74 

Shaler,  Professor,  287 
Sidgwick,  Mr.  Arthur,  209 
Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry,  22,  25,  88, 
93,  171,  207  f,  255 
Sidgwick,  Professor  H.,  22,  88,  93, 
199,  202-4,  207  f,  228 

Simpson,  Mr.  Hawkins,  75 
Smith,  Helene,  subject  of  Professor 
Flournoy,  280-2 

“  Steeple  ”  cross-correspondence, 
244 

Substitution  of  hands,  94  f 
Swedenborg,  7,  8,  146 

Telepathy  as  explanation  of 
trance-communications,  305  f 
Thompson,  Mrs.,  157  f,  184-98, 
202-4,  225-6,  278 
Thompson,  Mrs.,  her  physical 
phenomena,  184-9 
Thompson,  Mrs.,  supernormal 
perception  in  normal  state, 
189-91 

Thompson,  Mr.  Isaac,  201 
Thought  -  transference,  experi¬ 
mental,  22-24,  274-6 
Trance-personalities.  See  “  Im¬ 
perator,”  “  Nelly,”  “  Pelham,” 
“  Phinuit,”  “  Rector,”  “  Myers,” 
etc. 

Trollope,  T.  A.,  35, 43 

Venzano,  Dr.,  99,  iii 
Verrall,  Mrs.,  157  n,  158,  198,  202, 
204,  206-7,  227  f 
Verrall,  Dr.,  233,  235 
Verrall,  Miss  Helen,  233,  250, 
269-70 

“  Violets,”  cross-correspondence, 
238 

Voisin,  Jules,  12 

Wilkinson,  W.  M.,  account  of  a 
Seance  with  Home,  36-39,  41, 
64 

Witchcraft,  7 
Wynne,  Captain,  65,  67  f 

X4-Y=Z  151^3 

Yourievitch,  108,  no 

Zollner,  Professor,  142 

UNWIN  BROTHERS,  LIMITED,  THE  GRESHAM  PRESS  WOKING  AND  LONDON. 

Date  Due 

i 

1  1 

1 

* 

PEB  2  S  ’49 

8ESERVF,n 

1 

! 

1 

1 

t 

1 

Form  335 — 25M — 7-35— B-M.Co. 

Duke  University  Libraries 

D00359568- 

I 

133.9  P742N 

Podmore 

283335 

Newer  Spiritualism 

133.9  P742N 

283335
