Modern Spiritualism: A History and a Criticism (Frank Podmore, 1902)
====================================================================
Frank Podmore — The classic critical history of spiritualism by the SPR's chief skeptic — every later history cites it. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (modernspiritual02podmgoog) — Vol. I. Scan via Internet Archive (modernspirituali02podm) — Vol. II.

Google 

This is a digital copy of a book lhal w;ls preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as pari of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one thai was never subject 

to copy right or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often dillicull lo discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher lo a library and linally lo you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud lo partner with libraries lo digili/e public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order lo keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial panics, including placing Icchnical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make n on -commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request thai you use these files for 
personal, non -commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort lo Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each lile is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use. remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 

countries. Whether a book is slill in copyright varies from country lo country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull lexl of 1 1 us book on I lie web 
al |_-.:. :.-.-:: / / books . qooqle . com/| 

)' !mw \ 

■* 

MODERN SPIRITUALISM 

MODERN 
SPIRITUALISM 

A HISTORY AND A CRITICISM 

BY 

FRANK ^PODMORE 

author or "studies in psychical research," etc. 

IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOL. I. 

METHUEN & CO. 

36 ESSEX STREET W.C. 

LONDON 

1902 

c 

373896 

i '1 

PREFACE 

MY chief amongst many and weighty obligations for 
help and counsel given is to Mrs. Henry Sidgwick, 
who kindly placed at my disposal the material col- 
lected for her article in the Encyclopedia Britannica on 
u Spiritualism." At a later stage Mrs. Sidgwick read a great 
part of the following pages in typescript, and gave me many 
valuable suggestions. To the late Henry Sidgwick I am 
indebted for some wise counsel in the writing of the earlier 
part of this work ; that I could not submit to his clear judg- 
ment some of the delicate questions dealt with in the last 
Book I regard as an irremediable loss. 

To Dr. R. Hodgson also I owe much. Alike by natural 
endowment and by his unrivalled experience, Dr. Hodgson is 
probably better qualified than any living person to deal 
critically with the history of Spiritualism ; nor did I venture 
to set about the present work until I had ascertained that 
he was not prepared to undertake the task himself. I had 
hoped, however, that he would have been able to contribute 
to the book his own version of his investigations in slate- 
writing, and an account of the Eusapia stances, with his own 
criticisms. Pressure of other work prevented the fulfilment 
of this scheme ; but my own account of these matters is based, 
as the reader will see, almost exclusively on Dr. Hodgson's 
writings, supplemented by his criticisms and suggestions on 
the completed chapters. 

Not to Dr. Hodgson alone, but also to the late Frederic 
Myers, I, in common with all others who are engaged on the 
investigation of these obscure and widely neglected problems, 
am indebted not only for much of the material used, but for 
the means of using it 

vi PREFACE 

1 have ventured to dissent from some of the conclusions 
formed by these writers, each of whom can claim a wider 
experience and a more intimate first-hand knowledge of 
borne, and not the least important, aspects of the case. In 
the wttry act of combating their views I am forced to rely 
upon weapons which they have helped to forge. I gladly 
acknowledge the debt. 

To <sther colleagues and friends who have helped me in 
various ways I tender my cordial thanks; and especially 
to Mr. Dawson Rogers and the Council of the London 
Spiritualist Alliance, who have placed unreservedly at my 
di.sposal the valuable collection of books included in their 
library. 1 am the more sensible of my obligations in this 
particular instance, seeing that the Council cannot but have 
Im*-i i aware that my views differed widely from their own. Fas 
e*t et ab hoste doceri. I have tried to profit by the example 
of tolerance and fair play set by my adversaries in the 

«U'£UHR*Mt, F. P. 

CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION 

FAGS 

Nature and scope of the inquiry — Relation of Spiritualism to previous 
mystical beliefs, especially to the belief in Animal Magnetism zi 

BOOK I 
THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

CHAPTER I 

POSSESSION AND WITCHCRAFT 

_ with tongues — The devils of London — The Tremblers of the 
Cevennes — The Irvingites— Crystal gazing and divination — Dr. Dee and 
Kelly — The primitive language — Earliest belief in disembodied human 
spirits — Swedenborg and his revelations — Witchcraft : analysis of the 
evidence — (a) Confessions — Antoinette Bourignon — The outbreak at 
Moira— (J) Lycanthropv and apparitions— fc) Witchmarks — {d) The 
sufferings of the witches' victims — Prominent part played in the 
accusations by children — Mistress Faith Corbet, Abigail Williams, Mary 
Longdon, and others — Hysterical fits, attended by vomiting of nails, 
throwing of stones, etc. . ... 

CHAPTER II 

ON POLTERGEISTS 

Further cases of stone-throwing and other physical manifestations persisting 
after the decay of the beliefin witchcraft — The Drummer of Tedworth — 

The Castle of Slawensik— Beatings Bells— Mary Jobson— The ghost in 
the Wesley household (the Epworth case) — Detailed comparison of the 
contemporary and later evidence, and the first-hand and second-hand 
evidence, as exemplified in the Wesley case — Inference that the evidence 
in such cases, being generally second-hand or remote in date, is for the 
most part untrustworthy — Angelique Cottin . . . 25 

CHAPTER III 

THE SYMPATHETIC SYSTEM 

Paracelsus, Maxwell, and Fludd — Analysis of their views of Magnetism — 
Action at a distance — The Sympathetic System essentially scientific-* 
Contrast with spiritualistic belief, as exemplified by Valentine Greatrakes 44 

A 2 

viii CONTENTS 

CHAPTER IV 
MESMER AND HIS DISCIPLES 

PACK 

Mesmer — Hit views — His career — The first French Commission on Animal 
Magnetism — De Jossien's Minority Report — P uy scgu r and his views — 
Tardy de Montravel — General belief in radiating fluids — Pectin and his 
experiments in clairvoyance— Delenze . . 51 

CHAPTER V 

THE SECOND FRENCH COMMISSION 

Bettrand — His belief in action at a distance and transmission of thought — 
His explanation of his predecessors' results as due to suggestion and 
imagination — Discussion preceding appointment of second French Com- 
mission — Report of the Commission — Affirmation of the reality of 
clairvoyance at dose quarters ... 67 

CHAPTER VI 

SPIRITUALISM IN FRANCE BEFORE 1848 

Spiritualism at Stockholm in 1788 — Defense's views — Correspondence be- 
tween Defense and Billot — Association of physical phenomena with the 
trance — Cahagnet and his somnambule Adele — Various illustrations of 
her power — Argument that the results were due to thought transference, 
not to communion with spirits • . ... 76 

CHAPTER VII 

THE GERMAN SOMNAMBULES 

German investigators generally believed in fluids, not spirits — Some evi- 
dence for clairvoyance and thought transference — Jung -Stilling, the 
founder of the Spiritualist school — His views — The revelations of the 
clairvoyant, Auguste Miiller, and of Fraulein Romer — The Seeress of 
Prevorst — Her prophetic visions — Clairvoyance — Intercourse with 
ghosts — Her physical phenomena — Heinrich Werner's somnambule — 
Her clairvoyance and physical phenomena — Philosophical teachings of * 
the German somnambules — Sun-circles and life-circles — The primitive 
language ... 93 

CHAPTER VIII 

THE ENGLISH MESMERISTS 

Tardy interest in the subject in the country — Dr. Bell — Chenevix— du Potet 
— Elliotson — His experiments with the Okeys — Opposition of Wakley 
— The Zoist and views of the English Mesmerists in general — (1) Belief 
in radiating fluid, action of magnets, metals, drugs — Reichenbach's 
experiments — Braid's counter demonstrations — (2) Phrenology and 
Phreno-Mesmerism — Braid's experiments — (3) Community of sensation 
and clairvoyance — Opposition of the medical profession — Disbelief in 
mesmeric anaesthesia — Esdaile's demonstrations in India — Amputation 
of a leg in the trance in this country— Dr. Marshall Hall's action — The 
Pkrtn+Magtut and the popular movement • . . • 111 

CONTENTS ix 

CHAPTER IX 

COMMUNITY OF SENSATION 

The most general explanation to be found not in fraud, but in suggestion 
and hyperesthesia — Some results, however, appear to go beyond this 
—Illustrations from Elliotson, Esdaife, Townshend, Haddock, Engledue, 
Jago . . . . . ... 13a 

CHAPTER X 

« 

CLAIRVOYANCE IN ENGLAND 

Clairvoyance at close Quarters probably always due to normal causes, and 
commonly to fraud — Major Buckley's subjects — Townshend's experi- 
ments — Alexis Didier — Houdin's evidence on Didier — Evidence of 
Colonel UeweDyn— Clairvoyance at distance— With Didier— Testimony 
from Dr. CosteUo, Townshend, and others— Other clairvoyants — Testi- 
mony from Professor de Morgan, Professor Gregory, Dr. Haddock • 141 

CHAPTER XI 
ANDREW JACKSON DAVIS AND THE UNIVSROBLUM 

The mesmeric movement in America — Collyer, J. Bovee Dods, Grimes, 
Buchanan, Sunderland — Andrew Jackson Davis — His birth and child- 
hood — Dictation of Nature's Divine Revelations — Description and 
criticism of the book — Founding of the Unwercabtm — The contributors 
and their views — Association of the new spiritual revelation with 
Socialism and Co-operation — Other contemporary prophets and their 

BOOK II 
EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

CHAPTER I 

IN ARCADIA 

The rappings at Hydesville— The Fox family-— Rapid spread of the move- 
ment — Horace Greeley's testimony — The Buffalo exposure — Mrs. 
Culver's confession — Further exposures — Answers to mental questions- 
Testimony from the New York Tribtmu Asa Mahan, Spicer, and others 
— Explanation of the apparent " thoupit-readine " — The Stratford dis- 
turbances — Testimony from Dr. Phelps, Sunderland, Andrew Jackson 
Davis, and others . • . ... 179 

CHAPTER II 

SOME DWELLERS IN ARCADIA 

Explanation of the rapid spread of Spiritualism in America — The ground 
prepared by Mesmerism — Amongst the earliest advocates of the new 
teaching were the writers on the Univercalum, Laroy Sunderland, and 
the Rev. J. B. Ferguson — Socialism and Spiritualism — Warren Chase, 

{ohn Murray Spear — Universalism and Spiritualism — Rev. Adin Ballon, 
osiah A. Gridley, Judge Edmonds . • . • • 

CONTENTS 

CHAPTER III 
THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA 

PACK 

The early dark seances — Testimony of Tallmadge, William Lloyd Garrison, 
Judge Edmonds — Experiments of Professor Hare — E. P. Fowler and the 
direct spirit writing — "Spirit" Hebrew — The disturbances at Ashtabula 
— A seance with Home — Levitation of Gordon — Also of Home — Dr. 
Hallock's testimony — Koons' spirit-room — Other manifestations . 237 

CHAPTER IV 

CLAIRVOYANCE AND SPEAKING WITH TONGUES 

Clairvoyance with professional mediums commonly fraudulent — " Benjamin 
Franklin invoked to furnish a test — Clairvoyance in private circles 
infrequent, dubious, and ill-attested — Case quoted from the Rev. J*B. 
Ferguson — Speaking with tongues — Analysis of the evidence — With 
professional mediums the manifestation was fraudulent, with private 
mediums it rested on misconception and exaggeration . 251 

CHAPTER V 

TRANCE WRITING AND SPEAKING 

These automatic manifestations mostly genuine and involuntary — Testimony 
of Gridley and Dexter — Account of several "inspirational" writings — 
The Pilgrimage of Thomas Paine, by Rev. C Hammond — Messages 
from Bacon and Swedenborg, by Edmonds and Dexter — Charles 
Linton's communications from Shakespeare and The Healing of the 
Nations— John Murray Spear and The Educator— Thomas Lake Harris 
and a Lyric of the Morning Land— Spirit paintings — Healing mediums 264 

CHAPTER VI 

GENERAL SURVEY OF THE MOVEMENT 

Immunity of fraudulent mediums from exposure due to various causes, 
chiefly to widespread prepossession towards belief — Odylo- mesmeric 
theories of the phenomena — Dr. Rogers and The Philosophy of Myste- 
rious Agents—]. Bovee Dods — The North American Review — Attitude 
of the churches — Accusation of free love probably ill-founded, but 
Spiritualism associated with advanced views of marriage — Extravagances 
of early Spiritualists — T. L. Harris and the Mountain Cove Community 
— Brother Spear and the New Motor — Religious views of the Spiritual- 
ists sympathetic to Christianity—Spiritualism regarded as a later and 
fuller revelation — Various mystical beliefs — Their limited spiritual 
horizon and materialistic tendencies — External history — Legal proceed- 
ings — Memorial to Congress • • . . 283 

INTRODUCTION 

THE system of beliefs known as Modern Spiritualism 1 — 
a system which in one aspect is a religious faith, in 
another claims to represent a new department of natural 
science — is based on the interpretation of certain obscure 
facts as indicating the agency of the spirits of dead men and 
women. The primary aim of the present work is to provide 
the necessary data for determining how far, if at all, that 
interpretation of the facts is justified. But the question, Is 
the belief justified ? cannot, as the whole history of mysticism 
stands to prove, be finally answered until we are prepared 
with a more or less adequate answer to two subsidiary ques- 
tions : first, If not justified, what is the true interpretation 
of the facts ? and, second, How can the origin and persistence 
of the false interpretation be explained ? 

As supplementary, therefore, to the purely evidential aspect 
of the inquiry, it became necessary to give some account, on 
the one hand, of the contemporary history of the movement, 
and of its social and intellectual environment, and, on the 
other hand, of the prior systems of belief from which it 
sprang. For the modern belief iq Spirit-intercourse is not, 

«« 

1 There is, of course, a certain ambiguity involved in the use of the word 
Spiritualism," since that term has been commonly employed, both before and 
since 1848, to denote a system of philosophy, or more strictly perhaps a philo- 
sophical attitude. But whilst in philosophy the connotation of the term is 
somewhat vague, and there are, moreover, sufficient synonyms to admit of the 
word being dispensed with, in the alternative sense in which it is employed 
throughout this book, viz. the belief in intercourse with the spirits of the dead, 
the meaning is well defined, and no other term in common use will meet the 
requirements. The only practicable alternative, short of introducing a new 
word, is to employ "Spiritism"; but "Spiritism" outside France has never 
won general recognition. Moreover, it is frequently applied by Spiritualists in 
this country to denote one particular form of their belief, the doctrine of re- 
incarnation associated with the name of Allan Kardec 

xi 

xii INTRODUCTION 

of course, a mere accident of the time. It cannot but be 
recognised, whatever bearings such an admission may have 
upon its intrinsic truth or falsity, that the belief in its present 
form is an organic outgrowth from previous forms of mysti- 
cism. Historically, if not also logically, it is the necessary 
consequent of well-ascertained antecedents. 

In 1 87 1 the Committee of the London Dialectical Society, 
in presenting the results of a prolonged inquiry into the 
phenomena of Spiritualism, reported that while they were 
overwhelmed with testimony from believers in the alleged 
marvels, their appeal had elicited hardly any response from 
the more numerous body of persons who held the belief to 
be based upon fraud and delusion. 1 The Committee's ex- 
perience is typical of the whole history of Spiritualism up to 
the present time. Within the last fifty years there have been 
throughout the civilised world scores of periodicals devoted 
to the propaganda ; hundreds, perhaps thousands, of volumes 
have been published representing the views either of those 
who have accepted the Spiritualist creed as a whole, or of 
the minority who, after more or less prolonged investigation, 
have found themselves unable indeed to pronounce judgment 
on their ultimate implications, yet convinced of the genuine- 
ness of some of the alleged manifestations. 

The other side is represented at most by a few score of 
books, pamphlets, and magazine articles, not one of which 
can be said to have considered the movement as a whole, or 
to have discussed the evidence at its strongest. Amongst 
the more obvious reasons for a neglect, which may well have 
seemed judicious, one in particular must be mentioned here. 
There can be no doubt that in each succeeding decade those 
who, with or without adequate inquiry, had satisfied them- 
selves that the alleged physical marvels at any rate were 
baseless, were satisfied equally that within a short time the 
belief in them would die out of itself, and that to treat the 
matter seriously might even tend to postpone that desired 
end 

Those expectations have not yet been fulfilled. Ten years 
ago, indeed, it might have been said with some confidence 

1 Report on Spiritualism, p. I. 

INTRODUCTION xiii 

that the movement was tending rapidly to decay ; that alike 
in this country and abroad there was less widespread interest 
in the subject amongst the educated classes than at any 
period since i860 ; that physical mediums and manifestations 
were less striking and abundant; and that the ranks of 
avowed Spiritualists showed a decline, not so marked perhaps 
in the actual numbers as in the intellectual standing of the 
recruits. 

But within the last decade the strongest evidence adduced 
in the whole history of the movement for the belief in com- 
munion with the dead has been furnished by the trance- 
utterances of Mrs. Piper, as interpreted in Dr. Hodgson's 
Report ; l whilst within the same period the physical mani- 
festations occurring in the presence of an Italian medium, 
Eusapia Paladino, have seemed, and still seem to many 
persons of eminence in this country and on the Continent, 
worthy of consideration as testifying to the probable opera- 
tion of forces unknown to science. That men of such 
distinction in various fields of thought as Sir Oliver Lodge, 
the late Mr. F. W. H. Myers, Dr. Hodgson, Professor 
William James, of Harvard, and Professor Charles Richet, of 
Paris, should have been strongly affected, and in some cases 
actually convinced by the new evidence, whilst older converts 
like Sir W. Crookes and Dr. A. R. Wallace maintain their 
belief unimpaired, is proof sufficient that the movement, if 
on the decline, is visibly still far from its euthanasia, and 
may at any moment receive fresh accessions of strength with 
the discovery of new mediums or new forms of manifestation. 

Whether the belief in the intercourse with spirits is well 
founded or not, it is certain that no critic has yet succeeded 
in demonstrating the inadequacy of the evidence upon which 
the Spiritualists rely. That evidence groups itself into two 
distinct categories ; and in some cases those who accept the 
one category reject wholly or in part facts coming under the 
other. In the first place we have to consider certain sub- 
conscious activities manifesting themselves in trance speaking, 
automatic writing, seeing of visions, which though they may 
be readily counterfeited, are not necessarily, or in typical 

1 Proc. Sac. for Psychical Research, voL xiii. pp. 284-582. 

xiv INTRODUCTION 

cases, associated with imposture. In the second place, 
second in the historical as in the logical order, there are 
certain physical manifestations, unquestionably, in their later 
developments, bearing strong resemblance to conjuring tricks, 
but as unquestionably appearing in the first instance in the 
presence and through the agency of uneducated and unskilled 
persons, mostly young children, and in circumstances where 
the hypothesis of trickery presents formidable moral as well 
as physical difficulties. 

At the outset of our inquiry we must note a significant 
distinction between the two classes of phenomena. With 
the exception of one well-defined type of cases — to be con- 
sidered in detail in the next two chapters — there is, broadly 
speaking, no parallel to be found in civilised countries, during 
the last three or four centuries at least, for the physical phe- 
nomena alleged to occur in the presence of certain Spiritualist 
mediums. On the other hand, the annals of Spiritualism 
contribute nothing new as regards die first class. There is 
no manifestation of inspired writing and speaking, of spiritual 
healing, of telepathy, or clairvoyance, occurring since 1848, 
which cannot be matched amongst the records of Animal 
Magnetism ; and again, before Mesmer, we meet with similar 
phenomena in the chronicles of ecstasy, obsession, magic, and 
witchcraft. 

Historically, moreover, Spiritualism is the direct outgrowth 
of Animal Magnetism. In America, the land of its birth 
— according to the common reckoning, which dates the 
movement in its present shape from the rappings of 1848 
— the embryo faith was incubated in the revelations of a 
*' magnetic" clairvoyant, and its first apostles were drawn 
mainly from the ranks of those who had studied and prac- 
tised Animal Magnetism, or attended clairvoyant seances. 
Moreover, not in America only, but in the older civilisations 
generally, there were many who had adopted, long before 
1848, the spiritualistic interpretation of the phenomena of 
the u magnetic " trance. 

For the proper understanding of the subject it is essential 
to note that the recognition of the trance phenomena, as 
testifying to the existence of a spiritual world, preceded the 

INTRODUCTION 

xv 

acceptance of the physical manifestations as signs and 
wonders vouchsafed from that world. The raps and move- 
ments of tables did not, in the ultimate analysis, originate 
anything; they served merely to confirm a pre-existing 
belief. It is, no doubt, amongst other causes, primarily 
because of the failure to recognise this historical sequence 
that most attempts to demonstrate the falsity of the 
Spiritualist belief have proved ineffectual. It was of little 
use for the American doctors to prove that the raps could 
be produced by cracking of the joints, or Faraday that 
tables could be turned by unconscious muscular action 
alone ; for Maskelyne to imitate the rope-tying feats of the 
Davenport Brothers; or for hardy investigators at a later 
date to seize the spirit form at a dark stance. Alike in 
the larger historical cycle, and in the sequence of each 
individual experience, the faith in Spiritualism was buttressed 
by these things, not based on them; and though shaken, 
could not be permanently overthrown by any demonstration 
of their futility. Some, indeed, like Braid and Carpenter, 
approached the subject from the other side, and attempted 
to show that not only the physical movements, but the 
visions, inspired writing and speaking, could be traced to 
such recognised, if insufficiently familiar, causes as automa- 
tism and hallucination. If these attempts also met with 
no substantial success, it was apparently because the analysis 
did not go deep enough, and especially because it failed 
to take adequate account of those rarer and more dubious 
phenomena of the trance, which were interpreted by believers 
either as indications of new faculty or as tokens of a new 
world of being. 

On various grounds, therefore, it seemed essential to pre- 
face the detailed account of the movement since 1848 with a 
sketch of earlier mystical beliefs and especially of the cult of 
Animal Magnetism in America and Europe. And for other 
reasons a brief history of Animal Magnetism seemed ger- 
mane to the present inquiry. The more striking phenomena 
of the induced trance and of automatism, such as suggestional 
anaesthesia, hallucination, catalepsy, involuntary speaking 
and writing, are now, it may be presumed, fairly established. 

INTRODUCTION 

But it must not be overlooked that it is only within the last 
generation, almost, it may be said, within the last decade, that 
these phenomena have come to be recognised as genuine 
accompaniments of a genuine if still obscure cerebral con- 
dition. They have occurred sporadically for centuries ; and 
since the last quarter of the eighteenth century they have 
been reproduced experimentally in every civilised country ; 
they have been studied by more or less trained observers ; 
they have been recorded, in bewildering variety, in innumer- 
able treatises; and have yet failed until yesterday, not 
merely to secure a favourable verdict, but even to gain 
entrance to the Court of Science. The history of Animal 
Magnetism affords a most striking illustration of that 
dichotomy of opinion which seems, at a certain stage, to 
be the inevitable condition of the growth of knowledge. 
For more than three generations such part of the instructed 
world as took any note of the phenomena which we have 
now learnt to call hypnotic were divided into two sharply 
opposed camps. On the one side were those who believed 
in the phenomena and a good deal more, and ascribed them 
to the operation of a subtle fluid ; in the other and larger 
camp were those who rejected them as merely the results of 
mal-observation, when they did not actually stigmatise them 
as fraudulent And, precisely as in the process of organic 
evolution, all forms of belief intermediate between these two 
extremes tended to extinction and oblivion. 

To us, looking back over the past century, two names 
stand out prominently in the early history of Animal Mag- 
netism. Bertrand in France and Braid in England separated 
themselves from all their contemporaries by accepting the 
phenomena in general as genuine, whilst attempting to relate 
them to the known facts of physiology. It is instructive to 
note what manner of treatment they met with from those con- 
temporaries. Bertrand, it may be said, died too young for 
fame ; but the indifference shown to Braid's remarkable work 
is one of the most singular episodes in the history of science. 
That the medical authorities of his day turned a deaf ear to 
his enunciation, a generation before Bernheim and the Nancy 
School, of an explanation essentially the same as the modern 

INTR0DUC5TI0N xvii 

theory of suggestion, is matter of common knowledge ; it is 
probably not so well known that, despite his endorsement of 
the genuineness of most of the phenomena, including those of 
Phreno-Mesmerism, his writings and his very existence were 
almost completely ignored by those who, like him, believed 
in the facts. No contribution from Braid, nor any review of 
his numerous writings, appears in the Zoist ; and the whole 
thirteen volumes of that periodical contain but two or three 
contemptuous references to his views. Nature, it may be 
said, abhors a Mugwump. 

Now this recent episode in the history of science has 
a direct bearing upon one of the problems presented to 
us by Modern Spiritualism. Side by side with the now 
admitted manifestations of automatic activity, which, as said, 
form the bulk of the psychological phenomena, there have 
been found from very early times, and more abundantly 
perhaps in the records of Animal Magnetism and Mesmerism, 
facts which seem to indicate some mode of perception, or 
some form of communication between mind and mind, as 
yet unrecognised. It would be difficult to maintain that 
these indications are as clear and unmistakable as the 
evidence for the establishment by suggestion of a state of 
complete insensibility to pain. But the recollection that 
fifty years ago the medical profession and the leaders of 
science generally were practically unanimous in rejecting 
the evidence for the one class of facts accumulated by the 
demonstrations of Esdaile and others is full of encourage- 
ment for those of us who now are inclined to think that 
the case for thought-transference has not yet had a fair 
hearing. But the exponents of mesmeric anaesthesia were 
with one or two exceptions tainted with theories of a 
mystical character; Elliotson and Esdaile believed, on 
evidence which we can now see to have been quite in- 
sufficient, in the operation of an invisible fluid emanating 
from the magnet and other bodies ; and their medical con- 
temporaries felt themselves thereby absolved from any 
inquiry into the alleged anaesthesia. In the modern case 
of thought-transference, the grounds alleged for an in- 
difference, which, it must be admitted, is neither so marked 

xviii INTRODUCTION 

nor so unanimous, are similar, but without equal justification. 
For the modern belief in the possibility of a new mode 
of perception is not necessarily associated with any mystical 
or transcendental doctrine ; and, indeed, if fairly examined, 
will be found the most effectual solvent of all mystical 
beliefs, for it furnishes a rationalist explanation of phenomena 
hitherto commonly interpreted, by those who found them- 
selves forced to admit the facts, as due to the interference 
of spiritual agencies. For my own part, at any rate, I see 
no reason to doubt that, if the existence of thought-trans- 
ference should eventually be demonstrated — and I do not 
claim that the demonstration is or ought to be considered 
at present complete — the explanation will be found to lie 
strictly within the region of natural law. To assist in the 
elucidation of this particular question, which is, to my 
thinking, the key to some of the most perplexing problems 
of Spiritualism, I shall endeavour in the course of the present 
work to present, as fully as practicable, examples of the 
experiments and observations which seem to point to some 
faculty of the kind supposed. It must be admitted that 
the older evidence is far from demonstrative ; possibly, apart 
from two recent items — the experiments at Brighton con- 
ducted by Professor and Mrs. Henry Sidgwick, and the 
records of Mrs. Piper's trance utterances — the question of 
the reality of such a faculty would hardly seem worth 
discussion. But the existence of the recent evidence gives 
a retrospective importance to all the scattered hints which 
we meet with in the literature of Animal Magnetism and 
Spiritualism, and makes the presentation of records of 
mesmeric clairvoyance and of experiments in community 
of sensation, in themselves not sufficiently impressive, seem 
worth the pains. 

MODERN SPIRITUALISM 

BOOK I 

THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

I. — B 

• .•- 

• • • 

THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

• 

CHAPTER I 
POSSESSION AND WITCHCRAFT 

THE belief in the overshadowing presence and continual 
intervention of spiritual beings underlay, it need hardly 
be said, the whole of the popular thinking and much 
of the philosophy of the Middle Ages. But this belief differed 
widely from the Spiritualism of to-day. The later alchemists, 
such as Paracelsus and some contemporary and succeeding 
mystics, believed, indeed, in the agency of immaterial beings, 
but for the most part of a non-human and non-moral order. 
The spirits which intervened in mortal affairs were in their 
view parasitical on mankind, or even mere temporary products 
of man's misdirected spiritual energies. Spiritual entities 
never formed the mainspring of the alchemical philosophy ; 
and by the chief followers of Paracelsus in this country in 
the seventeenth century their agency, as will be shown in a 
later chapter, appears to have been practically discarded. 
Again, amongst the unlearned generally, in ecclesiastical 
societies, and even with many who represented the best 
culture of their time, belief in the active intervention of 
angels and devils continued to exert a powerful influence 
down even to the earlier decades of the eighteenth century, 
In all matters the belief in spiritual presences still counted for 
much ; the unfamiliar and mysterious were referred to such 
agencies as naturally as in recent times they have been re- 
ferred by the ignorant to electricity. But these supposed 
beings, diabolic or, on occasion, divine in their nature, were 
not identified with the spirits of deceased men and women. 
Though accessible to human prayers or threats, and con- 
versant with human speech, they stood outside and apart 
from the human order. 

4 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

Amongst the phenomena which down even to the 
eighteenth century have been commonly held to indicate 
such spiritual ope^atiop, the most notable are those outbreaks 
of spontaneous trabfce, ecstasy, and speaking with tongues 
which have from time to time appeared like an epidemic in 
religious communities of various denominations. One of the 
most famous epidemics of the kind in comparatively recent 
times is that of die Ursuline Nuns of Loudun in 1632-4. 
.Urbain Grandier, a cur£ of Loudun, had been accused of 
/grave immorality; but whether because he boasted powerful 
friends, or because he was innocent, his accusers had so far 
failed to procure his conviction. But in 1632 there broke out 
in a convent in the town — a convent to which Grandier had 
unsuccessfully sought to be appointed spiritual director — a 
singular epidemic Several of the nuns, including the Mother 
Superior, were seized, now with violent convulsions, now with 
symptoms of catalepsy — rigidity, insensibility to pain, etc — 
or again, in a state of ecstasy poured forth all manner of 
blasphemies and obscenities. Naturally in those days it was 
held that they were bewitched ; and, indeed, the devils con- 
fessed themselves through the mouths of their victims. 
Various ecclesiastical and judicial inquiries were held, and 
in the sequel the hapless Grandier, whom all the possessed 
indicated as the author of their troubles, was burnt alive in 
April, 1634. The feature of the epidemic which is of special 
interest for our present purpose, is that the possessed persons 
were commonly reported to speak in foreign tongues — a 
faculty which, as is well known, is one of the four principal 
signs of the presence of a demon. The anonymous author 
of the earliest history of the outbreak 1 has as little doubt of 
the reality of the portent as he has of die guilt of Grandier. 
He cites the testimony of a doctor of the Sorbonne and 
other prominent personages to the effect that the devils 
understood questions put to them in Latin, Greek, Turkish, 
Spanish, a Red Indian language, and so on, and in many 
cases made answer in the same tongues. But he does not 
write from first-hand knowledge ; he gives no authority for 
his statements, and his testimony in any case is vitiated by 
his theological bias. From a much later work, also anony- 
mous, 2 written from a Protestant standpoint, we have details 
of some of the actual examinations. From these it appears 
that some of the nuns, chiefly the Mother Superior, did 

1 La Veritable Histoire des Diddles de Loudun . . . par un Temom, 4 Poitiers. 
1634. Translated and edited by Edmund Goldsmid. London, 1887. 
* Histoire des Diables de loudun. Amsterdam, 1693. 

POSSESSION AND WITCHCRAFT 5 

indeed answer in Latin the remarks addressed to them in 
that language, but that their answers were frequently in- 
correct, causing the bystanders to comment on the bad Latinity 
of the demon. Thus, when exhorted, Adora Deum tuum, 
the nun replied to her interlocutor, Adoro te. 1 On another 
occasion, when asked Quoties she replied as if the question 
had been quando* and exclaimed Deus non volo when she 
meant Deus non vuli} Or again, if the question proved too 
difficult, she constantly evaded a reply by exclaiming, Nitnia 
curio sitas. The Mother Superior further excused herself from 
replying in Greek, on the ground that there was a pact between 
the demon and Grandier not to speak in that language. 4 Of 
other foreign languages we hear nothing at all. 

There seems no need to adopt the hypothesis of the later 
historian that the nuns had been coached up by Grandier's 
enemies, and had learnt their lesson badly ; such little know- 
ledge of Latin as they betrayed could probably, as suggested 
by Bertrand, have been picked up from constantly attending 
the offices of the Church. It is noteworthy that various 
witnesses credited the possessed with the power to read the 
thoughts of those present and to respond to mental questions. 6 

At the beginning of the eighteenth century similar phe- 
nomena, but attributed by the subjects to celestial inspiration, 
occurred amongst the persecuted peasantry of the Cevennes. 
Many of them fled to England, and their recitals were col- 
lected and published in London in 1707. 6 The symptoms of 
this epidemic possession in the most marked cases were very 
similar to those observed amongst the nuns of Loudun ; to 
wit, convulsions, rigidity, insensibility to pain, and loss of 
consciousness. These alternated with an ecstasy, in which 
the subjects spoke fluently and with authority as if inspired, 
preaching good works, repentance, and salvation. The utter- 
ances appear generally to have been couched in excellent 
French, whereas to the natives of the Cevennes, as I can 
testify from personal experience, French is to this day a 
foreign language. Thus Jean Vernet writes that his mother, 
under the inspiration, talked in French for the first time in 
her life. 7 An idiot shepherd boy expressed himself fluently 
in good French; 8 nay, an infant fourteen months old was 
heard by one witness to speak from the cradle and exhort his 

1 Op. cil. f p. 57. 2 Page 129. s Page 65. 4 Page 163. 

* In addition to the writers already cited, see Bertrand, Du Magn4tisme 
Animal, p. 336, etc, and Traiti du Somnambulism e, p. 328, and Bibliothtque du 
MapUHsme Animal, torn. iv. pp. 83-5. 

• Le THAtre Sacrides Cevennes. 

7 Op cit., p. 14. • Page 31. 

POSSESSION AND WITCHCRAFT 7 

Insensibility to pain, even the pain of burning, and to severe 
blows and other ill-treatment was repeatedly demonstrated. 
The ecstatics frequently preached under inspiration, and are 
commonly reported to have spoken in Greek, Latin, and other 
languages, which they had never learnt, and occasionally in 
unknown tongues. The evidence, again, for the speaking in 
recognised foreign languages is defective ; but there seems to 
have been no question that the ecstatics did occasionally 
pour forth unintelligible sounds, which the bystanders 
assumed to represent utterances in an unknown tongue. 
Here is an account given by a witness of one of these out- 
pourings, the ecstatic in this case being the Chevalier Folard : 
" II se met tout k coup k parler par monosyllabes ; c'est un 
baragouin ou personne n'entend goutte. Quelquesuns disent 
qu'il parte alors la langue esclavone ; mais je crois que 
personne n'y entend rien." * 

The most recent and perhaps the most instructive out- 
break of the kind occurred just a century later in London. 
The speaking with tongues in Edward Irving's congregation 
began in 1831. Irving himself seems, indeed, for some years 
to have believed in and looked for an outpouring of spiritual 
gifts, such as is described in the Acts as having taken 
place amongst the early Christians. This belief and expecta- 
tion were raised to an acute point with him and some of 
his more prominent followers by the outbreak, in 1830, 
amongst some pious Scotch peasants, of speaking with 
tongues and apparently miraculous gifts of healing. In the 
course of the following year, at a time when grave ecclesi- 
astical troubles were impending over the minister and his 
congregation, he instituted a series of services in his church 
at 6.30 a.m., and there prayer was offered up day after day 
for the bestowal of the miraculous gifts which the worshippers 
held had been promised to the Church. At last, in July, 
1 83 1, expectation was fulfilled, and one after another of the 
little band of believers began to speak with tongues. It was 
not, indeed, without hesitation that the manifestations were 
accepted by Irving himself as supernatural, still less as divine. 
But seeing that those who spoke were true believers and 
persons of honest and good life, and that their utterances 
conformed in all things to the Christian Faith which he him- 
self held, Irving, after some weeks of doubt and trial, yielded 
his belief freely to these utterances. From Robert Baxter, 
who had shared Irving's anticipations, and who himself 

1 From Histoire d 'un Voyage lit ttr aire fait en 1733, quoted in Bibliothhpie 
du Ma%tUtisnu Animal, vol. v. (181 8) pp. 210- 1 1. See also Bertrand, op. cit. 

8 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

became eminent amongst the "gifted" persons, we have a 
very detailed and instructive account of the matter. Baxter 
had not been present at the earlier manifestations, but had 
heard of them, and was almost persuaded. In December be 
came to London, and both heard in others and experienced 
in himself the working of the new power. To his brother he 
writes, on December 29th, 1831, as follows : — 

" When I was in London I attended at one of the meetings, at 
which a Mr. T. and a Miss C. spoke ; the first in a tongue, the 
other in prophesying. The prophesying was upon the near coining 
of our Lord, and rebuking those who did not faithfully declare 
it ; it was delivered in a tone and energy which carried conviction 
to my soul, that it was the presence, in power, of the Holy Ghost- 
As the prophesying proceeded, in rebuking the unfaithfulness of 
those who did not declare the near coming of the Lord, I found 
laid open the very misgivings of conscience with which I have for 
the last six months been exercised. ... In fact, the secrets of my 
heart, which I had told to none, were laid open ; and I felt myself 
openly rebuked ; the effect upon me was that tears ran down my 
cheeks ; and my anguish of soul increasing, I was obliged to hide 
my face and as far as I could suppress my groanings. This, how- 
ever, lasted only a few minutes, when the power of the Spirit was so 
great upon me, that I was obliged to call out, as in agony, for 
pardon and forgiveness, and for strength to bear a faithful testimony. 
In these cryings I was, however, at the time conscious of a power 
of utterance carrying me beyond the natural expression of my feel- 
ings. ... I was conscious of a strained utterance, not my own ; 
and of a power and pressure of the Spirit, quite unutterable in a 
natural way. After this I was silent, but, with composure of mind, 
my whole body was convulsively agitated; and for the space of 
more than ten minutes I was, as it were, paralysed under a shaking 
of my limbs, my knees rapping one against the other, and no 
expression except a sort of convulsive sigh. During this period 
I had no other consciousness than this bodily emotion, and an 
inexpressible constraint upon my mind, which although it left me 
composed and sensible of all I was doing, yet prevented my utterance 
and gave no distinct impression, beyond a desire to pray for the 
knowledge of the Lord's WilL This increased so much that I 
was led to fall on my knees and cry in a loud voice, 'Speak, Lord, 
for thy servant heareth ' : and this I repeated many times, until the 
same power of the Spirit which I had before felt, came upon me, 
and I was made to cry out with great vehemence, both of tone and 
action, that the coming of the Lord should be declared, and the 
messengers of the Lord should bear it forth upon the mountains 
and upon the hills, and tell it to the winds, that all the earth should 
hear it and tremble before the Lord" 1 

1 Narrative of Facts characterising the Supernatural Manifestations in Members 
of Mr. Irving s Congregation, by Robert Baxter. London, 1833, pp. 147-& 

POSSESSION AND WITCHCRAFT 9 

Baxter for the next few months spoke much "in the 
power." These discourses, delivered in most impressive 
language, conveyed rebuke, warning, exhortation, or en- 
couragement to his hearers; sometimes he would speak 
"with tongues"; on one occasion he tells us that when 
sitting at home " a mighty power came upon " him, and he 
uttered sentences in French, Latin, and in many languages 
unknown to him ; his wife, who was present, identified some 
of the words as Italian or Spanish. Often the power would 
direct his doings ; he would be called on abruptly to leave 
a meeting, or cease from some particular course of action. 
Once he was made, in the power, to declare that he was to 
go into the Chancellor's Court and there testify, and that 
for the testimony he would be cast into prison. Not without 
misgivings he went to the Court and there stood for three 
or four hours; but no utterance was given to him, and he 
came away much disheartened. 

A singular circumstance noted by Baxter is that when 
speaking under the influence he could often meet the un- 
spoken thoughts of his hearers. That the " tongues " should 
solve the religious difficulties of others, as they had already, 
as we have seen, solved his own, is not perhaps a matter that 
calls for any supernormal explanation. But he mentions 
cases in which, meeting with strangers who came to him for 
counsel, he gave them such information about their private 
circumstances as convinced them of his supernatural powers. 1 

At a later stage there came through Baxter's lips "an 
appalling utterance" that the Lord had set him apart for 
the spiritual ministry ; that he was to separate from his wife 
and family; and that at the end of forty days he would 
receive a full outpouring of spiritual gifts. The failure of 
these and other prophecies ; the evasive replies of the 
u Tongues" when asked to account for the non-fulfilment; 
the appearance of unclean spirits in the congregation ; the 
fact that one or two members had already confessed that 
they were deluded by false spirits ; and finally, the discordant 
nature of the doctrines preached through the tongues, some 
of which, delivered in living's Church and confirming living's 
special view of the nature of Christ's fleshly Body, appeared to 
Baxter " fearfully erroneous " — all these considerations, backed 
by the influence of his wife, who had from the first given a 
less complete adhesion to the new faith and was naturally 
unwilling to accept the authority of some of the later utter- 

1 Op. cit. t pp. 14, 18, 70, 72, 135, etc. In none of these cases is the evidence 
sufficiently detailed to enable us to endorse Baxter's opinion. 

10 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

ances, finally convinced Baxter that he had been deceived. 
But even then it never occurred to him to doubt the super- 
natural inspiration of the utterances; he inferred that the 
source was demoniac, not, as he had at first supposed, divine. 

It is impossible after reading Baxter's narrative to doubt 
his honesty in the matter. The impulse did, manifestly, come 
to him without conscious volition on his part, and the words 
without premeditation — they were a given to him." This, by 
the testimony both of Irving and Baxter, was the general 
characteristic of the utterances. One Miss H., indeed, was 
pronounced a false prophetess, and admitted the justice of 
her sentence, mainly because on two or three occasions she 
had meditated utterances beforehand. 1 

Often the utterances began in " an unknown tongue " and 
then passed into English, the English being by some re- 
garded as merely a peroration, by others as an interpretation 
of all that had preceded. One witness gives the following 
description : — " The tongue invariably preceded (the English 
speaking), which at first I did not comprehend, because it 
burst forth with an astonishing and terrible crash, so suddenly 
and in such short sentences that I seldom recovered the 
shock before the English commenced." 2 

Another characteristic of the speaking was that the phrases 
used seem almost always to have been taken from the Scrip- 
tures, as we have seen was the case with the prophets of the 
Cevennes ; and the same phrase was frequently repeated over 
and over again, as in the following utterance, preserved by 
the Record: " He shall reveal it ! He shall reveal it ! Yea, 
heed it! Yea, heed it! Ye are yet in the wilderness. 
Despise not His Word ! Despise not His Word ! Not one 
jot or tittle shall pass away." 3 But there are few authentic 
records of the actual words spoken, possibly because the 
" Spirit " on more than one occasion forbade the writing down 
of utterances. 4 

As regards the content of the utterances, Baxter notes, 
among other characteristics of the " power," its secrecy and 
unwillingness to be examined ; its evasiveness when called 
upon to explain contradictions and failures ; its general 
debasement of the understanding and exaltation of blind 
faith in authority ; finally, the bitterness of spirit shown, and 
the extraordinary exclusiveness — the whole world outside 
the one little congregation was denounced and condemned 

1 Baxter, op. cit., p. 95. 

2 Quoted by W. Wilks, in his Life of Irving, p. 205. 
* Quoted in Mrs. Oliphant's Life of Irving* p. 331. 
4 Baxter, op. cit. t p. 126. 

POSSESSION AND WITCHCRAFT 11 

to perdition, under the names of Babylon and the Abomina- 
tion of Desolation. 

But enough has been said for our present purpose. There 
is no need at the present time to defend the spontaneous 
nature of the utterances, nor the good faith of those who 
spoke in the power. But no one, apparently, professes to 
have recognised with certainty the unknown utterances ; and 
Baxter is of opinion that they represented no language what- 
ever, but only a " jargon of sounds." 1 

One other aspect of this singular outbreak should perhaps 
be noted. There were several cases in which persons were 
professedly possessed with evil spirits, and were rebuked by 
the bystanders, and the evil spirits bidden to come forth. In 
one such case, recorded by Baxter on the authority of Irving 
and another eye-witness, the u possessed " man, when released 
by the " tongue," fell upon the ground crying for mercy, and 
later lay there "foaming and struggling like a bound de- 
moniac" 2 

All these cases, it will be seen, present the same general 
features. We find a highly contagious epidemic, manifesting 
itself in convulsions and ecstasy, and variously interpreted 
by the subject and the onlookers, according to their pre- 
possessions, as demoniac or divine possession. The more 
marvellous features — the speaking in foreign languages un- 
known to the speaker, the speaking with unknown tongues, 
the reading of thoughts — rest upon evidence which must be 
adjudged quite insufficient On the other hand, it appears to 
be fully established that the u possessed " persons were able to 
speak with extraordinary fluency, and sometimes in a language 
with which they were at best very imperfectly acquainted. 

For the rest, apart from its fluency, the most notable 
characteristics of the utterance when intelligible appear to 
have been its grandiose character, both in manner and diction, 
and its tendency to make use of a limited number of sonorous 
phrases, drawn generally from biblical sources. In its more 
elementary forms it seems to have degenerated, as in one of 
the instances quoted above, into mere emphatic repetition of 
one or two sentences. 

In the history of Modern Spiritualism we shall come across 
many cases of similar possession, less violent and prolonged, 
indeed, but apparently equally spontaneous. 8 

1 Op. cit. y p. 134. * Page 26 ; see also p. 74. 

* See especially Book II. chap. iv. and Book IV. chap, vi, the case 
of Mr. Le Baron. The ecstasies of the early Quakers — "witchcraft fits," as their 
enemy Muggleton called them — were no doubt of this kind. 

12 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

In the cases just described the supposed n 

the spiritual world came, unless perhaps we — 

ception in the case of the Irvingites, unbidden. Bat there 
were some who by means of magiral mcair" - ^ % 

visions in the crystal, sought such intercourse 

unples of this supposed 

muning with spirits is afforded by the diary of Dr. 

Dr. Dee was a scholar and learned mathematician in the 
sixteenth century, some of whose writings on Euclid, the 
reform of the calendar, and other matters are still extant. 
The revelations which he records were obtained through 
visions in the crystal by one Edward Kelly, Dr. Dee acting 
the part of scribe and director of the vfances. The typical 
crystal seer was, of course; a young boy without sin. How- 
far Dee's scryer was from fulfilling that ideal may be gathered 
from the fact that by common report he had, before meeting 
Dr. Dee, committed forgery and desecrated graves, and had 
for one or both these offences lost his ears in the pillory; 
that later Dr. Dee saved him from being dragged away to 
meet a charge of coining ; that the diary itself records his 
drunkenness on one occasion, and on another the casting out 
of him of no fewer than fifteen devils. Crystal vision is not, 
of course, necessarily associated with moral excellence ; but 
it is clearly impossible, with such a dossier, to have much 
confidence in Kelly's good faith. But after all the interest 
of the revelations does not depend upon the seer's veracity, 
it is enough for our present purpose that they apparently 
in^ Wlth fa , !r ?? curac y the ideas of the time. Th^form, 
cr^ii * * a,uab,e link in ** historical series, for while 
HS? JL t f y J lp ;** r ' M Kell y himself °n one occasion 
ET manv \1° te / ou r nded ™ earlier mystical writings, they 

ZSS. res «£££«; ** *«- *Jt «j 

comLTvtln° f .^ ina «on was as follows : The sittings 

to him, or sh Jw C 5 *> Spintu . al Wng, who would speak 

he would dtytlSSt To°n S V" ?? in ** c V sta1 ' w *** 
beings-Madini rEL?i r^ D , ee ' None of *«* spiritual 
WnladSe Sd the reJ ?"*' Na t a » "• Monrorgran, 
human spirits, though som7?^f r to have been identified as 

and all are understock 1*? are s P° ken of M an S els » 

erstood to be of good character. Neither 

A iftti ami faithful AVA*// 
Dm . j„j „„ SiHtt ™ $»f« Passed /„ numy years between Dr. John 

'-•wubon, d.d. London, 1659. 

POSSESSION AND WITCHCRAFT 13 

Dr. Dee himself nor the Polish Count Albert Lasky were 
privileged to see anything in the crystal, and Dee's son, 
Arthur, who tried to act for a few days during Kelly's 
recalcitrancy, saw no visions that were worth recording. 

The spirits revealed to Kelly many strange things that 
were to have taken place in the world ; a glorious future 
was prophesied for their patron the Polish Count, who was 
ultimately to become King of Poland. Again, the destruc- 
tion of the kingdoms of this world and the restoration of 
Jerusalem were foretold, all which things were to take place 
in the days of the Emperor Rudolph, for whom a grand 
career was to be opened if he would hearken unto the words 
of the Lord's prophet, Dr. Dee. This latter vision, fortunately 
enough, came whilst Dee and Kelly were staying at Prague, 
immediately after the former had been honoured by a private 
audience with the Emperor. 

A great part of the crystal revelations consists of tables 
ruled in small squares which are filled with letters, numerals, 
and mystical symbols, understood to be the alphabet of the 
primitive language. Moreover, much of the book is taken 
up with the dictation of various invocations or "calls" to 
spirits. These invocations are given in the primitive 
language, accompanied by its translation, word by word. 
There follows also a detailed account of the constitution 
of the spiritual hierarchy, of their subjects and principalities, 
and of the lordship exercised over the kingdoms of the 
earth. The details of this description, as Kelly took occasion 
to point out, agree with that given by Cornelius Agrippa, who 
had himself borrowed it from Ptolemy. 1 

Of the primitive tongue itself we are given many speci- 
mens ; it is read backward, like Hebrew, which indeed (and 
not Gaelic, as some in these later times do vainly pretend) 
represents the corrupted form of that primaeval tongue which 
prevailed after the Fall. The primaeval speech, employed by 
the angels, and by Adam in his state of innocency, has very 
singular properties : — 

" Every letter signifieth the member of the substance whereof it 
speaketh : Every word signifieth the quiddity of the substance . . . 
signifying substantially the thing that is spoken of in the center 
of his Creator, whereby even as the minde of man moveth at an 
ordered speech, and is easily perswaded in things that are true, 
so are the creatures of God stirred up in themselves, when they 
hear the words wherewithal they were nursed and brought forth . . . 
the creatures of God understand you not, you are not of their 

1 Op, cit. t p. 158. 

14 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

Cities; you are become enemies, because you are separated from 
Him that govemeth the City, by ignorance. . . . Man in his 
Creation, being made an Innocent, was also authorised and made 
partaker of the Power and Spirit of God, whereby he did know all 
things under his Creation, and spoke of them properly, naming them 
as they were." l 

This doctrine, that the original speech of man, and that 
of angels now, bore an organic relation to the outer world, 
so that each name expressed in itself the properties of the 
thing spoken of, and that the utterance of the name had 
a compelling power over the creature, was, without doubt, 
borrowed by Kelly from an earlier philosophy. We shall 
meet with similar ideas again amongst the German clair- 
voyants of the first half of the nineteenth century. 2 

There are many references in the early part of the diary 
to a book, in the primaeval language, which Dr. Dee was to 
write under spirit influence. Apparently the task was not 
congenial, or the learned doctor was not so good a medium 
as some of the American automatic writers whose pro- 
ductions we shall consider later, 8 for, on his professing one 
day that he was "wonderfully oppressed with the Work 
prescribed" for him to perform, the mother of Madini 
undertook to carry out the task instead. 4 The rest of the 
revelations are concerned mostly with allegorical visions, 
prophecies that failed, and dreary pages of what Casaubon 
calls " Sermon-like Stuff" — matters which are common to all 
later clairvoyants. 

Finally we have a record of an abortive physical phenome- 
non. Kelly confesses that he had tried consulting the spirits 
on his own account, and had left written questions in the 
window ; and " Nalvage " tells him, through the crystal, that 
the devil had taken those questions away. "Kelly went down 
to see if it were true, and he found it true." 6 But Dee does 
not appear to have been as much impressed as he should 
have been. 

The spiritual beings, it will be seen, which by the popular 
belief of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries intervened 
in mortal affairs, were not human spirits. The nuns of 
Loudun were possessed by demons; the Tremblers of the 
Cevennes were inspired by a divine afflatus. The spiritual 
entities of the Rosicrucians and of Paracelsus were creatures 
of the elements — sylphs, gnomes, undines, salamanders — or 

1 Op. cit.y p. 92. s See below, Book I. chap. vii. 

1 See below, Book II. chap. v. * Pages 26, 27. * Page 80. 

POSSESSION AND WITCHCRAFT 15 

beings still more remote from humanity. The spirits who 
presented themselves to Kelly in the crystal appear never to 
have been identified with human prototypes. The idea of 
intercourse with distinctively human spirits, if not actually 
introduced by Swedenborg, at least established itself first in 
the popular consciousness through his teaching. Emanuel 
Swedenborg is therefore deservedly ranked as the first 
Spiritualist in the restricted sense in which the term is here 
used Of his philosophy, from which the main conceptions 
which underlie the Spiritualist creed are no doubt derived, it 
is not necessary to speak in detail ; and the less because in 
its general outlines it is not peculiar to himself, but forms 
a part of the great mystical tradition. His special contribu- 
tion to the Spiritualist belief consists in his conception of a 
future life. Well versed himself in the science of the day — 
he held from the King the post of Assessor of Mines, and 
his published works include treatises on metallurgy, human 
anatomy, and various mathematical and philosophical subjects 
— he carried the methods and results of physical science into 
the region of the Unseen. For him there was no gulf fixed 
between this earthly life and that which he believed to lie 
beyond death. The great principle of continuity is pre- 
served; Nature makes no leap, even over the grave, and 
heaven and hell are seen in his prosaic pages to be much 
like Stockholm or London. In short, he believed in inter- 
course with the spirits of those .who had once lived as men 
and women, and in the future life as a state admitting of 
much the same variety of character and circumstance as life 
on earth — the two chief articles of the Spiritualist creed It 
is true that Swedenborg held them with a difference. Him- 
self the son of a bishop, he is still sufficiently under the 
influence of theological tradition to conceive of the future 
state as divided into heavens and hells and peopled by 
angels and devils, though his descriptions of them by no 
means accord with orthodox conceptions. Again, the inter- 
course with spirits in which he believed was not a gift 
common to any or all of mankind, but a special privilege 
conferred by the Lord on him, alone of all the sons of men. 
And the spirits with whom he talked were of such quality as 
accorded with this high embassy; saints and philosophers, 
kings and popes, Calvin, Luther, Moses, Paul, and John. 

Thus the small and singularly exclusive sect which soon 
grew up and called itself after his name refused to recognise 
any supplement to the revelations of their master, and 
taught — an uncharitable view for which they found ample 

POSSESSION AND WITCHCRAFT 17 

enforced sleeplessness, or the maintenance for hours of a 
constrained and painful posture. But apart from these ex- 
torted confessions, there is evidence that in some cases the 
accused persons were actually driven by the accumulation 
of testimony against them, by the pressure of public opinion, 
and the singular circumstances in which they were placed, to 
believe and confess that they were witches indeed. Some of 
the women in Salem who had pleaded guilty to witchcraft 
explained afterwards, when the persecution had died down 
and they were released, that they had been " consternated and 
affrighted even out of their reason " to confess that of which 
they were innocent 1 And there were not a few persons who 
voluntarily confessed to the practice of witchcraft, nocturnal 
rides, compacts with the devil, and all the rest of it The 
most striking instances of this voluntary confession are 
afforded by children. At Antoinette Bourignon's Girls' 
School at Lille, in 1639, the whole thirty-two children 
ultimately accused themselves of witchcraft, confessed to 
having intercourse with the devil and to riding through the 
air nightly to attend his infernal banquets. All but one of 
the children recanted when examined by the magistrates. 
The one girl who maintained her guilt to the last was 
imprisoned ; and Mademoiselle Bourignon expressed a pious 
regret that for the good of her soul she had not been burnt 2 

The children at Moira, in Sweden, who also (with many of 
their elders) confessed to infernal compacts and nightly rides 
to Blockula, where they met the devil, danced, feasted, and 
engaged in various dull, if unquestionably diabolic, diversions, 
were not so fortunate. Fifteen of them, if Dr. Horneck's 
narrative is to be believed, were put to death, and many 
others were cruelly whipped. 8 

1 "And indeed that Confession that it is said we made, was no other than what 
was suggested to us by some Gentlemen, they telling us we were Witches, and 
they knew, and we knew it, and they knew that we knew it, which made us think 
that it was so," etc., etc. {An Historical Essay concerning Witchcraft ', by Francis 
Hutchinson, D.D., etc London, 1718, p. 85). Another instance of an extorted 
confession is given by Sinclair (Satan's Invisible World Discovered), who tells us 
that the facts are attested by " an eye and ear-witness — a faithful Minister of the 
Gospel." The woman in this case, immediately before her execution, attested 
that her confession was a false one, made through sheer weariness of life, after the 
persecutions which she had undergone. 

8 Complete works of Antoinette Bourignon (Amsterdam, 1686), vol. ii. p. 200. 
There are three separate accounts of this case of witchcraft: two by 
Bourignon herself, La Parole de Dieu and La Vie Ext&ieure ; one, La Vie 
Continu/e t written some years later by a friend. It is a valuable lesson in 
evidence to compare this last version with the first-hand accounts. 

* See Dr. Horneck's Account of what happened in the Kingdom of Sweden in 
1669, 1670 and upwards, quoted by Glanvil, in Sadducismus Triumphatus y 

I.— C 

18 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

In both these cases, it should be noted, the confessions, 
though voluntary, were by no means spontaneous. They were, 
in fact, suggested ; in the first case by Antoinette Bourignon, 
who from the very first seems to have been troubled by the 
conviction that her little charges were not as pious as they 
should have been, and ultimately got it into her foolish head 
that they were in league with the devil, and made no secret 
of her opinion. The only grounds adduced for this belief, 
prior to the confession of the children themselves, were that 
on one occasion she saw little black figures with wings 
flying around them, and straightway told the children what 
she had seen ; and that, some time later, one of the girls who 
had been locked up for some trivial misdemeanour managed 
to escape from her confinement It is difficult to know how 
far, in a case of this kind, the " confessions " were intended 
seriously by the children themselves ; but the fact that they 
were persisted in before the priests who were called in to 
investigate the matter certainly tends to prove that they 
were not merely jest Probably the children themselves 
could not have given a very clear account of the matter. In 
the Moira case the whole population seems to have been the 
victims of an epidemic delusion, to which children would 
naturally fall easy victims ; and the force of the suggestion 
was no doubt aided by leading questions from the Commission 
appointed by the King to examine into the matter. 

But it is hardly necessary to labour the point. For even 
among the earlier writers on witchcraft the opinion was not 
uncommonly held that the nocturnal rides and banquets with 
the devil were merely delusions, though the guilt of the 
witch was not lessened thereby. And in the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries, at least in English-speaking countries, 
this belief seems to have been held generally alike by 
believers in witchcraft and their opponents. Thus Gaule, 
"But the more prodigious or stupendous (of the things 
narrated by witches in their confessions) are effected meerly 
by the Devill ; the witch all the while either in a Rapt 
ecstasie, a charmed Sleepe, or a melancholy Dreame; and 
the Witches imagination, phantasie, common sense, only 
deluded with what is now done, or pretended." 1 Even 
Antoinette Bourignon, observing her scholars eat "great 

1 Select Cases of Conscience touching Witches and Witchcraft (London, 1646, 
p. 109). To the same effect, Increase Mather, Cases of Conscience concerning Evil 
Spirits t etc. (London, 1693 ; London Reprint of 1862, p. 279). Beaumont, A 
Treatise of Spirits ( London, 1 705, pp. 388, 309). See also Hutchinson, op. cit. t p. 76, 
and the Preface to the anonymous edition of the True and Exact Relation of the 
trial of the Chelmsford witches of 1645 (London Reprint of 1837, p. in). 

POSSESSION AND WITCHCRAFT 19 

pieces of Bread and Butter" at breakfast, pointed out to 
them that they could not have such good appetites if they 
had really fed on dainty meats at the devil's Sabbath the 
night before. 

(b) But if the witch's own account of her marvellous feats 
may be explained as, at best, the vague remembrance of a 
nightmare, it is hardly necessary to go beyond this explana- 
tion to account for the prodigies reported by others. In 
most cases there is no need to suppose even so much founda- 
tion for the marvels, since the evidence (eg. for lycanthropy) 
is purely traditional. And when we get accounts at first 
hand, they are commonly concerned, not with such matters 
as levitation, or transformation of hares into old women, but 
merely with vague shapes seen in the dusk, or the unexplained 
appearance of a black dog. Even so the evidence comes 
almost exclusively from ignorant peasants, and is given years 
after the events. The corroborative evidence on which the 
Salem witches were put to death consisted largely of state- 
ments from various neighbours that six, eight, or fourteen 
years ago the deponent awoke to find the shape of the 
accused in his bedroom, which thereupon grievously assaulted 
him and then disappeared ; or that, on dates not stated, he 
saw a black pig approaching him, or was much beset by the 
gambolling of phantom puppies which ran between his legs. 1 

Indeed, it is not easy to find any respectable evidence in 
the annals of witchcraft for any marvel which even seems to 
call for explanation by sensory hallucination. One of the 
best-attested cases occurs in the trial of the Chelmsford 
witches in 1645 before referred to. At that trial Matthew 
Hopkins, the witch-finder, John Sterne, gentleman, and six 
others, testified that on the previous night they had sat up 
in the room where the accused was confined in order to watch 
for the appearance of her imps ; that the accused promised 
that her imps should appear; and that the witnesses saw 
them, to the number of five or six, enter the room in the 
shape of cats, dogs, or other animals. 

The evidence of a professional witch-finder, who was well 
paid for his services, is perhaps not more worthy of credence 
than that of a professional medium at the present day. But 
John Sterne seems to have been a credible person, and was 
so convinced of the truth of what he saw that he afterwards 
wrote a pamphlet about it ; and the interval was so short 
that it is difficult to suppose a hallucination of memory. It 

1 The Wonders of the Invisible World* by Cotton Mather, D.D. (London, 
1693 ; London Reprint of 1862, pp. 130-50). 

20 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

is to be noted, moreover, that the witnesses had apparently 
sat with the supposed witch for some hours, watching for the 
appearance of her familiars, and that the witch's own promise 
to them had raised expectation to the highest pitch. The 
circumstances were therefore undoubtedly favourable for the 
production of sensory hallucination. 

(c) The evidence for " witch-marks " does not greatly con- 
cern us. The insensible patches on which Matthew Hopkins 
and other witch-finders relied may well have been genuine 
in some cases. Such insensible areas are known to occur in 
hysterical subjects, and the production of insensibility by 
means of suggestion is a commonplace in modern times. 
The supposed witches' teats, which the imps sucked, appear 
to have been found almost exclusively, like the imps them- 
selves, in the English-speaking countries. 1 Any wart, boil, 
or swelling would probably form a sufficient warrant for the 
accusation ; we read in Cotton Mather of a jury of women 
finding a preternatural teat upon a witch's body, which could 
not be discovered when a second search was made three or 
four hours later;* and of a witch's mark upon the finger of 
a small child, which took the form of "a4eep red spot, about 
the bigness of a Flea-bite." 3 And the witch-mark which 
brought conviction to the mind of Increase Mather in the 
case of George Burroughs was his ability to hold a heavy 
gun at arm's length, and to carry a barrel of cider from the 
canoe to the shore. 4 

So far, then, we may search the annals of witchcraft in 
vain for any testimony for material marvels at all comparable 
to the evidence adduced in recent years for the physical 
manifestations of Spiritualism. Let us now turn to the last 
head of evidence. 

O[0 Of most of the evidence based upon the injuries 
suffered by the witches' supposed victims, it is difficult to 
speak seriously. If a man's cow ran dry, if his horse 
*^ u jyjbled^ his cart stuck in a gate, his pigs or fowls sickened, 
if his child had a fit, his wife or himself an unaccustomed 
pAin, it was evidence acceptable in a court of law against 

*«» J^. ,,U . tchln,lon » # A "'.• P- 57* *'l meet with little mention of Imps in 
S i££ ; ry i U i ° ur * wh ** the Uw makes the feeding, suckling, or rewarding 

Htstencai Essay, pp. 

loquitur) been one of 

«««•» %ihu m > -""i persons did upon oath 

ftmftitr ««lJpJ?feJJl* 5 *° * u "* thing* as no man that has not a Devil to his 

•h """JIVY 1 . ntVc acquitted him; for several persons did^upon oath 

POSSESSION AND WITCHCRAFT 21 

any old woman who might be supposed within the last twelve 
months — or twelve years — to have conceived some cause of 
offence against him and his. Follies of this kind are too 
well known to need repetition. 

But there is another feature of witchcraft, at any rate of 
the cases occurring in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries 
in England and America, which is not so well recognised, 
and which has a more direct bearing upon our present inquiry 
— the predominant part played in the initial stages of witch 
persecution by malevolent or merely hysterical children and 
young women. 

In Glanvil's collection of cases in Sadducismus Triumph- 
at us, the first eight narratives deal with witchcraft of the 
ordinary type. In the first three of these the protagonists 
are young children ; in two others a servant girl plays the 
principal part One of these five cases — the Drummer of 
Tedworth — will be discussed in the next chapter. Again, in 
the Collection of Modern Relations* we find a case of a woman 
who was tried for a witch apparently upon the sole evidence 
of a Poor Woman's Boy who was struck dumb by coming 
upon her suddenly crouching behind a bush ; and in another 
case in the same collection the afflicted person and chief wit- 
ness was Mistress Faith Corbet, aged ten or eleven, who fell 
into convulsions because poor old Alice Huson had carried off 
her gloves. In a sixteenth-century case at Chelmsford one 
of the chief witnesses was Agnes Brown, a child of twelve, 
who testified to seeing a big black dog with a pair of horns 
on his head, and a face like an ape. This fearsome being 
entered the dairy where she was churning butter, and con- 
versed with her. 8 The outbreak at Salem, Massachusetts, in 
1692, was started by Abigail Williams, aged twelve, and her 
little friend, Elizabeth Parris. It was a boy of eleven who 
started the persecution of the Lancashire witches (1634); it 
was some silly children, the eldest only sixteen, who were the 
first and chief witnesses against the Samuel family, known as 
the Witches of Warbois (1593). Rose Cullender and Annie 
Duny, known as the Suffolk witches, who were tried before 
Sir Matthew Hale in 1665, were condemned on the testi- 
mony of young children, who fell into fits and vomited nails 
and crooked pins. It would be easy to lengthen the list; 
but, in effect, it is enough to point out that these cases of 
child evidence constitute the type to which most of the 

1 London, 1693. 

9 The examination and confession of certain Witches . . . in ijj6. London, 
1864 ; reprinted from a pamphlet in the Library of Lambeth Palace. 

22 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

cases of spontaneous 1 origin at this time will be found to 
conform. 

The symptoms of the alleged bewitchment were, in all 
these cases, monotonously alike. The victims would fall into 
fits or convulsions, of a kind which the physicians called in 
were unable either to diagnose or to cure. In these fits the 
children would commonly call out on the old woman who 
was the imaginary cause of their ailment ; would profess, at 
times, to see her shape present in the room, and would even 
stab at it with knife or other weapon. (In the most con- 
clusive cases the record continues that the old woman, being 
straightway sought for, would be found attempting to conceal 
a corresponding wound on her person.) These fits, which 
sometimes lasted, with slight intermission, for weeks together, 
would be increased in violence by the approach of the sup- 
posed witch ; or, as Hutchinson notes, 2 by the presence of 
sympathetic spectators. The fits, as was also commonly 
noted by contemporary chroniclers, would diminish or alto- 
gether cease when the witch was imprisoned or condemned : 
on the other hand, if the supposed witch were released the 
victim would continue to suffer horrible tortures, insomuch 
that, at the Salem trials, one old woman who had been 
acquitted by the jury was, because of the hideous outcry 
from the afflicted persons in court, straightway re-tried and 
condemned. 8 The witch's touch would always provoke severe 
attacks ; indeed, contact with the witch, or the establishment 
of rapport between her and her victim by means of some 
garment worn by the latter, as in Mistress Faith Corbet's case, 
was generally regarded as an essential prerequisite of the 
enchantment Once this rapport established, the mere look 
of the witch, or the direction of her evil will, would suffice. 
The afflicted in Salem were, as the Mathers testify, much 
tortured in court by the malevolent glances of the poor 
wretches on trial ; and two " visionary " girls added greatly 
to the weight of the evidence by foretelling, with singular 
accuracy, when such or such of the afflicted persons then 
present would feel the baleful influence, and howl for anguish. 4 
It should be added — though the evidence, as we now under- 
stand the word, for the fact alleged is of course practically 
negligible — that it was commonly reported that the witch's 

1 From this generalisation are excluded, of course, all such cases of witch 
persecution as were initiated from the outside, by the direct interference of royal, 
priestly, or professional witch-finders. 

a Historical Essay, p. 106. * Hutchinson, op. cit. y p. 79. 

4 The Wonders of the Invisible World, pp. 139, 215, etc 

POSSESSION AND WITCHCRAFT 23 

victim could, although blindfolded, distinguish her tormentor 
by the touch alone from all other persons, and could even 
foresee her approach and discern her actions at a consider- 
able distance. 1 

The effect of the convulsions and cataleptic attacks, which 
modern science would unhesitatingly dismiss as being simply 
the result of hysteria, was heightened in many cases by 
manifestations of a more material kind. It was a common 
feature for the victim to vomit pins, needles, wool, stubble, 
and other substances ; or for thorns or needles to be found 
embedded in her flesh. In a case recorded by Glanvil an 
hysterical servant girl, Mary Longdon, in addition to the 
usual fits, vomiting of pins, etc, was tormented by stones 
being continually flung at her, which stones when they 
fell on the ground straightway vanished Her master bore 
witness in court to the falling of the stones and their miracu- 
lous disappearance. Moreover, the same Mary Longdon 
would frequently be transported by an invisible power to the 
top of the house, and there "laid on a board betwixt two 
Sollar beams," or would be put into a chest, or half suffocated 
between two feather-beds. 3 

Gross as these frauds appear to us, it is singular that for 
the most part they remained undetected, and even, it would 
seem, unsuspected, not merely by the ignorant peasants, for 
whose benefit the play was acted in the first instance, but 
in the larger theatre of a court of law. But there are some 
notorious instances of confession or detection. Edmund 
Robinson, the boy on whose accusation the Lancashire 
witches were tried, subsequently confessed to imposture. 
Other youths were detected with blacklead in their mouths 
when foaming in sham epileptic fits, colouring their urine 
with ink, concealing crooked pins about their persons in 
order to vomit them later, scratching the bedposts with their 
toes, and surreptitiously eating to repletion during a pre- 
tended fast 8 But commonly the spectators were so convinced 
beforehand of the genuineness of such portents that they held 
it superfluous to examine the claims of any particular per- 
formance of this kind on their credence. 

It is difficult to know in such cases where self-deception 
ends and where malevolent trickery begins. Nor would the 
examination of these bygone outbreaks of hysteria — trivial 
in themselves as terrible in their consequences — be of interest 

1 Sadducismus TriumpJutius, pp. 286-8, etc 

3 I6id. 9 edition of 1726, pp. 313-26. 

3 Hutchinson, Historical Essay, pp. 185-224. 

to mh ¥$&&&£&. -off ^naanrrjMJKM 

it to vi*»eir vwnrstruur. scep: hr iiK iacr imc. wc find 
iasit tijt v^wiihivt nmr vr iuisit lutexgsfi: tnanSssariaxs 
Kk«itiCt £*iv» -tut yjpusc nmmiB n zhid ti Iht leLtf iu 
tfivcrtri >vrhuainnL arrr rnci art sril appcatssi id by 
ti*vwt ¥*tif. lu&tmaiT. tie psimneiKs :f "ins pbvshaL mmro- 
k#uj'.*viit ^y tut ttsanst »un: » incssBics if similar 
Vii**<Mttitn;t vK:irr«sf ajfjmaii?rjuti>i' Tie tarpt Tsmamt lie 
sfett*: tiiMugi ht tJrXRt of rr^iraaiui. vsvt fiiigiry changed. 
T3k «:ur«xk cafras'Kr mrc t»ri -jr -nr^t nrnturct age 
*rttoi*AfcC v- twau^K'wet Tie iitgaca: if riear lirfr -world br 
fl/i* 1 '*? *** *uuri}Tt tt Bic *g . iucj g8L 3Csj?xr:usiiQ&. mmr lamuscr 
tv tuw <Ju;*a*£C tjg-'jrdan: rnr praKsxn£ t: be At agents of 
t^iritwsJ veib^fc ur ti&t inrc-jascniu* vehidjcs of '■cttiiTt iorces. 
9*i5^+*syijG^„ fet ata<2 icasdtcig: --f pn* anc ceil of dair ; 
wt tfcv^py-iug <jf stoats aac xBj-fCeriiiiif txaosportalioEts of 
tU* futti&fts subject, as in Mart' Lrjagdoz * oseuoccar is many 
wA**n P'jfott&iisti:, fttsiiy hi the kg & orkal imfrmnr of the 
Vhttyn dxtertn at Stratford 'Craoectkse in iSja- 

Stfv,*, tfaen, this sttnrrraj £rccs the wTtrirrait bcBefc of the 
Mvidk Age*. «J Stxdf insignificant, has a ^>jrwi a diqititi oos 
ifnjsortasvjt, both from the part which it has demon s trably 
lA*y<&i in rvoent history and from the weight stiS attached 
l/y tfee tubject by tome competent persons, it has seemed 
w*th white t/> examine in detail, in the next chapter, some 
%y\ /kal instance* of the modern Poltergeist manifestations. 

* f Ascribed a* kogOs is Book IL chap. i. below. 

CHAPTER II 
ON POLTERGEISTS 

MYSTERIOUS knocks and rappings, accompanied by 
throwing of stones, ringing of bells, breaking of 
crockery, and other more violent disturbances, have 
been commonly reported in all civilised countries for the past 
two or three centuries, to go back no further. It is here 
proposed, rather for the reasons indicated in the last chapter 
than from any exaggerated appreciation of their intrinsic 
merits as evidence, to analyse some of the best-known and 
most frequently quoted cases of the kind occurring before 
1848 for which we have testimony at first hand. 1 

The case to be first quoted goes far to justify the statement 
made in the last chapter that the so-called Poltergeist per- 
formances in modern times are a direct legacy from the 
witchcraft of the Middle Ages. For whilst we have in this 
case the same general type of disturbances which characterise 
the nineteenth-century cases, there is a seventeenth-century 
reference to the malicious action of a supposed wizard, and 
the cessation and later renewal of the manifestations are 
reported to have shown that singular correspondence with 
the condemnation and subsequent escape of the suspected 
agent, which forms so marked a feature in the sufferings 
of the witch's alleged victims. The evidence offered for the 
disturbances, it will be seen, is about on a level with that for 
the witchcraft phenomena in general. 

1 That the reader may have some assurance that the cases analysed in this 
chapter have not been chosen as unduly favourable to the rationalist interpreta- 
tion, I think it well to state that my selection is based on a letter from the 
distinguished naturalist, Dr. A. R. Wallace, which appeared in tint Journal 
of the S.P.R. for February, 1899. Dr. Wallace, in advocating the supernormal 
character of the Poltergeist manifestations, quotes nine cases as affording good 
evidence ; three of these cases, however, present no first-hand evidence, ana one 
occurred alter 1848 — the limit assigned in the text The five remaining cases, 
viz. the Drummer of Tedworth, the Castle of Slawensik, Bealings Bells, Mary 
Jobson, and the Wesley Case, are dealt with below. 

*5 

26 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

THE DRUMMER OF TEDWORTH 

In March, 1661, John Mompesson, of Ted worth, in the 
county of Wilts, caused a certain vagrant drummer to be 
arrested and taken before a Justice of the Peace. The drum 
was confiscated, and in the middle of April, during Mr. 
Mompesson's temporary absence, was taken to his house. 
On his return, Mompesson learnt that great noises had been 
heard in the house; the noises thereafter came night after 
night, in the shape of thumping and drumming. An invisible 
drum was constantly heard to beat Roundheads, Cuckolds 
and Tat-too, and would also knock at request a given 
number. Sometimes the manifestations were accompanied 
by "a bloomy noisome smell," as of sulphur; also chairs, 
boots, a board, and other objects were seen to move across 
the room of their own accord ; a bed staff hit the minister 
on the leg, but without hurting him; "the old Gentle- 
woman's " clothes were flung about the room, and her Bible 
hid in the ashes ; mysterious lights were seen ; the man- 
servant was terrified by the vision of " a Great Body with two 
red and glaring Eyes"; a gentleman found all his money 
turned black in his pockets; and Mompesson's horse was 
found one morning with a hind leg fixed so firmly in its 
mouth that it was difficult for several men to get it out with 
a lever. But the disturbances were especially frequent and 
violent in the neighbourhood of the younger children. The 
bedsteads would be beaten and shaken as they lay in them, 
and a sound of scratching, as with iron talons, would be 
heard. Moreover, "it would lift the Children up in their 
Beds, follow them from one Room to another, and for a while 
haunted none particularly but them." The disturbances 
ceased when the drummer was sentenced to transportation, 
and recommenced when " I know not how ('tis said by raising 
Storms and affrighting the Seamen) he made shift to come 
back again." 

The whole of the account is given in Glanvil's own words, 
but it is founded, as he tells us, partly on the oral relation 
of Mr. Mompesson and the other witnesses to him, partly on 
Mompesson's letters. There are also extant two letters of 
Mompesson's, dated respectively 1672 and 1674. But he 
gives in these no detailed confirmation of Glanvil's account ; 
indeed, when the second letter was written he expressly says 
that he had lent Glanvil's book " for the use of Lord Hollis " 
the previous year, and did not know what the account 
contained. Glanvil first published his narrative, as we learn 

ON POLTERGEISTS 27 

from the Preface to the third edition of Sadducismus 
TriumphatuSy in 1668. It had been in part written some 
years previously, but not apparently from full notes, for only 
two precise dates are given in the whole narrative. But even 
if we assume that Glanvil had accurately put down, possibly 
some years later, all that he had heard from Mompesson and 
others, it does not amount to much ; for it does not appear 
that Mompesson himself witnessed any of the more 
marvellous incidents — the drops of blood, the chairs moving 
by themselves, " the Great Body with two red and glaring 
Eyes," and all the rest of it These things were witnessed 
by neighbours, by men-servants, by a" Roomfull of People," 
or by an undistributed " they." So that Glanvil's account of 
them may be third hand or tenth hand. The only first-hand 
account which we have is Glanvil's own. Glanvil paid one 
visit to the house "about this time" — the last date given 
on the previous page being January 10th, 1662. Glanvil's 
account of all he saw and heard is, in brief, as follows : On 
hearing from a maid-servant that " it was come," he, with Mr. 
Mompesson and another, went up to a bedroom ; a there were 
two little modest Girls in the Bed, between seven and eleven 
Years old, as I guest" Glanvil heard a scratching in the bed 
" as loud as one with long Nails could make upon a Bolster." 
This lasted for half an hour and more, and Glanvil could not 
discover the cause ; it was succeeded by a panting, like a dog, 
accompanied by movements in the bedding; also the 
windows shook ; also Glanvil saw a movement in a " Linnen 
Bag " that hung against another bed, but was not apparently 
sufficiently sure of the accuracy of his observation to men- 
tion this incident in the first (1668) edition. Further, 
Glanvil was aroused by an untimely knocking next morning ; 
and his horse fell ill on the way home, and died two or three 
days later. 1 

I pass over the Cock Lane ghost (1762), because though 
we may admit with Mr. Lang 2 that the so-called "exposure" 
was inconclusive — no exposure in matters of this kind ever 
is conclusive — not even Mr. Lang can persuade us that, apart 
from the pleasing literary aroma that pervades it, the case 
presented for us in contemporary newspaper gossip is worthy 
our serious consideration. Nor need we linger over the 
Stockwell case (1772). It is true that the evidence here is 
first hand ; but for practical purposes it is of little value. 

1 Sadducismus Triumphaius, by Joseph Glanvil, F.R.S. ; third edition, 1689. 
Also Preface to second part, containing two letters from Mompesson. 
* Cock Lane and Common Sense, pp. 161-70. London, 1894. 

28 THE PEIHGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

Six persons signed a general statement of the disturbances, 
setting forth that various articles of furniture, crockery, pickle 
jars, and so on were thrown about and broken, without any- 
apparent cause for the movements. The narrative does not 
explicitly state that any of the six persons saw any particular 
thing done, and collective testimony in such matters is as 
vain a thing as collective responsibility in another sphere. 
But we may no doubt accept the statement that five pails 
were filled with the fragments of the broken china, and that 
the servant girl, Ann Robinson, a young woman of twenty, 
betrayed a surprising restlessness, being always present on 
the scene of action and walking backwards and forwards the 
whole time* 1 

THE CASTLE OF SLAWEIfSIK 

Councillor Hahn and a friend, a young officer named 
Charles Kern, spent some months in the winter of 1806-7 
in the lonely Castle of Slawensik, in Silesia. Shortly after 
their arrival — apparently in December, 1806— various dis- 
turbances broke out : bits of lime fell or were thrown about 
the room ; then strange noises were heard ; knives, spoons, 
snuffers, and all manner of small objects were flung about ; 
occasionally objects were seen to rise from the table and fall 
on to the ground. The disturbances lasted for about two 
months, and the nuisance finally became so great that the 
young men had to move to other apartments. 

The disturbances are said to have been witnessed by two 
other officers and various other reputable persons whose 
names are given, but we have only one account, written by 
Councillor Hahn on November 19th, 1808, and by him given 
to Kerner in 1828. From the fact that no dates are given it 
may be inferred that Hahn did not keep notes — at any rate, 
not accurate notes. There is no apparent reason for doubt- 
ing Hahn's honesty, but his studies of Kant and Fichte are 
no guarantee of his competence as a witness. In any case, 
his unsupported testimony, given eighteen months or more 
after the events, is not good evidence, even for things which 
he saw, or believed himself to see, with his own eyes. But 
many of the marvels are only given at second hand. It was 
the dauntless Kern who saw in the glass the white figure of a 
woman looking at him ; Hahn stood before the glass for a 

1 The Authority for the Stockwell ghost is a contemporary pamphlet entitled 
An Authentic % Candid % and Circumstantial Narrative of the Astonishing Transae- 
ti§m at Slpekuniit etc. London, 1772. The account is quoted by Mrs. Crowe, 
AttgkUid* §/ Nature, third edition, pp. 412, etc 

ON POLTERGEISTS 29 

quarter of an hour and saw only his own reflection. It was 
Kern, again, who saw the white dog ; Hahn only heard the 
dog's footsteps. Again, it was Kern and Hahn's servant, 
during Hahn's absence at Breslau, who saw a jug of beer 
rise from the table, as if lifted by an invisible hand, and pour 
out a glass half full, and the glass then raise itself in the air 
and tilt its contents (which disappeared without leaving a 
trace) down an invisible throat In default of corroborative 
evidence of any kind from the other witnesses, it seems not 
improbable that the whole affair was an elaborate practical 
joke at Hahn's expense. 1 

BEALINGS BELLS 

On the 2nd of February, 1834, the housebells at Bealings, 
near Woodbridge, in Suffolk, the residence of Major Moor, 
F.R.S., began to ring violently — sometimes singly, sometimes 
three or more together — without any apparent cause. They 
continued so to ring at intervals until the 27th March, 
when the disturbances finally ceased. The cause was never 
discovered. 

The evidence for this singular outbreak is at first hand ; it 
is practically contemporaneous, being based on notes made 
at the time and written out in full at intervals within a few 
days of the occurrences ; the witness is a Fellow of the Royal 
Society, who devoted, on his own showing, much time and 
ingenuity to the search for a cause for the manifestations, 
and who recorded with scrupulous care the atmospheric con- 
ditions and the readings of barometer and thermometer 
during their progress. 

If the evidence then fails to impress us as it undoubtedly 
impressed Major Moor, it is because Major Moor himself 
gives us good cause for distrusting his competence as a 
witness. He is practically the sole witness, and from the 
outset he had made up his mind, not only that the phenomena 
could not be explained, as he justly points out, by "the 
known laws of the electric theory" or the expansion of 
metals by rise of temperature, but that they were inexplicable 
by any cause known to science; for on February 5th, 1834 
— that is, three days after the bell-ringing began — he writes : 
" I am thoroughly convinced that the ringing is by no human 
agency " (p. 5), and later (p. 22) he repeats his conviction that 
the bells " were not rung by any mortal hand." 

1 Die Seherin von Prevent, edition of 1832, vol. ii. pp. 236-52. A translation 
of Hahn's account is given by Mrs. Crowe (The Seeress of Prevorst\ 

30 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

That this conviction rested on grounds wholly insufficient, 
and that Major Moor was the kind of man who could make 
a strong-sounding statement of this kind without fully 
realising its meaning, is shown by the fact that in the 
interval (p. 9) he had admitted the possibility of the bell- 
ringing being due to trickery. But he gives us other and 
stronger grounds for discounting his testimony. Though 
he devoted many pages to describing the courses and the 
attachments of the wires, the state of the atmosphere, and 
so on, Major Moor never tells us of whom his household 
consisted, and never describes a single occasion on which, 
when they were all gathered together in his presence, the bell- 
ringing occurred. He boasts, indeed, that he took no such 
precautions against trickery. A writer in the Ipswich Journal 
had made the sensible suggestion that Major Moor should 
begin his investigations by gathering all his household into 
one room and posting trustworthy friends round about the 
house. Major Moor, in quoting the letter, adds, " I did not in 
any way follow the advice therein offered." 

Major Moor's testimony is freely quoted by Spiritualists 
and other advocates of the Poltergeist theory ; but in fact the 
book might plausibly be interpreted as a gentle satire on 
those who are ready, on such evidence as that here offered, 
to believe; in supernormal or even unfamiliar agencies. 1 

MARY JOBSON 

Mary Jobson was a child of twelve or thirteen, who at the 
latter end of 1839 was smitten with a mysterious malady, the 
most prominent symptoms of which were bloodshot eyes, 
constipation, swelling of the abdomen, occasional convul- 
sions, and the occurrence of insensitive areas on the body. 
The phenomena occurring in her presence consisted chiefly 
of raps and knocks, the opening and shutting of doors, and 
beautiful music ; occasionally water was mysteriously thrown 
on the floor, and astronomical designs on one occasion made 
their appearance on the ceiling of the bed-chamber. The 
case is recorded by Dr. Reid Clanny, F.R.S. 

Dr. Clanny himself, indeed, neither saw nor heard any- 
thing of the alleged phenomena. Of the five medical men, 
besides Dr. Clanny, mentioned by name as having visited the 
girl during her illness, two only, Mr. R. B. Embleton and 
Mr. Drury, both young men, have given an account of what 

1 Beatings Bells: an Account of the Mysterious Ringing of Bells t etc., etc., by 
Major E. Moor, F.R.S. Woodbridge, 1841. 

ON POLTERGEISTS 31 

they witnessed. Neither saw anything out of the way ; but 
both heard knocks and loud scratchings — apparently on the 
foot of the wooden bedstead in which the child lay. Dr. 
Drury on one occasion, calling on the child after her recovery, 
heard at her suggestion " most exquisite " music His account 
of the manifestation is as follows : (I experienced) " much 
difficulty in drawing her into conversation, but at last she 
suddenly exclaimed, 'Oh, what music!' and on listening I 
distinctly heard most exquisite music, which continued during 
the time I might count a hundred." Dr. Drury does not give 
the date of this incident, and the letter from which the above 
extract is taken is dated simply " Sunday morning, 2 a.m." 
It was certainly written some time after the occurrence. 1 

On another occasion Mr. Embleton was specially invited 
to hear "the voice." This voice, which Mr. Embleton de- 
scribes as realising his ideas of angelic sweetness, dictated 
as follows : " I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out 
of the land of Egypt, etc ... I am the physician of the 
soul. . . . This is a miracle wrought on earth. . . . Mark, I 
am thy God sounding out of the heavens," etc The knocks, 
the throwing about of water, and so on, which are described 
by the other eleven witnesses, all of whom were apparently 
superstitious villagers, so illiterate in some cases as to be 
unable to write, appear to have been simply the puerile 
trickeries of a mischievous girl. 

A remarkable feature in the case is the occurrence of 
visions, like some of those attested in witchcraft trials, which 
are best to be explained as hallucinations either of sense or 
memory. Thus one witness testifies to having seen the figure 
of a lamb passing, unseen by all others, through the house ; 
and three witnesses, two of them a husband and wife, quite 
illiterate, recount that at the child's bidding they looked up 
at the ceiling of her room and saw there a beautiful repre- 
sentation of the sun, moon, and stars " in a variety of pleas- 
ing and brilliant colours." 2 From another witness we learn 
that the colours were green, yellow, and orange. As no 
reference is made to this vision by any member of the family 
who were said to have been present, and as no trace of it 
apparently remained on the ceiling, it is difficult to suppose 
that it had any objective foundation. 

The ailment, which baffled all the physicians (or rather 
the three physicians who have written about the case), was 

1 It appears only in the second edition of Dr. Clanny's pamphlet. 
* The wording is apparently that of Dr. Clanny, who wrote down the account, 
as the actual witnesses were unable to do so. 

32 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

as obviously hysterical as "die voices'* were blasphemous; 
the core was as mysterious as the disease After eight 
months of dropsy and convulsions (Dr. EmbletonX brain 
disease (Dr. Clanny), intolerable torture (all the witnesses), 
she suddenly turned her sympathising relatives out of the 
room, dressed herself in a quarter of an hour, and was com- 
pletely restored to health. Dr. Danny's enthusiastic belief 
m the genuineness of the case may perhaps have been due 
to the fact that the girl (amongst whose affable spirits were 
the Virgin Mary and a large circle of apostles and martyrs) 
told him that his name had been favourably mentioned to 
her at different times by Jesus Christ, St. Paul, and St. Peter. 
Dr. Clanny quotes this amazing statement in all seriousness. 1 

THE EPWORTH CASE 

I have reserved until the last what is at once the most fully 
authenticated case in the literature of the subject and the 
most instructive for those who read with understanding — the 
disturbances in the Parsonage at Epworth, the birthplace of 
John Wesley. The main disturbances lasted with intervals 
for two months, December and January, 1716-17, with occa- 
sional outbreaks after that date. The record consists (1) of 
letters written to Samuel Wesley (John's elder brother) by 
his mother and his two sisters, Susannah and Emilia. These 
letters are dated January, February, and March, 17 17, that 
is, within a few weeks of the disturbances. (2) A copy of 
an account written by Samuel Wesley (John's father). The 
copy was made by Samuel Wesley, the son, in 1730, from 
a copy made by John Wesley in 1726. (3) Letters written 
by Mrs. Wesley and four of her daughters to John Wesley 
in the summer and autumn of 1726, more than nine years 
after the occurrences. The evidence comprised under (1), 
(2), and (3) was first published in 1791 by Priestley. A copy 
of the letters and diary in the handwriting of Samuel Wesley 
(John's brother) had been given to Priestley, as he explains, 
by the Rev. S. Badcock, who had himself received the MSS. 
from a granddaughter of Samuel Wesley. 2 (4) An account 
compiled in 1726 by John Wesley from the letters and from 
conversation with some of the other spectators, and published 
in the Arminian Magazine. 

1 A Faithful Record of the Miraculous Case of Maryjobson, by Dr. W. Reid 
Clanny, f. r.s. Monkwearmouth, 1841. 

a Original Letters by the Rev, John Wesley and his Friends, by Joseph 
Priestley, LL.D., F.R.S., 1791. 

ON POLTERGEISTS 33 

A. First-hand Contemporary Accounts. 

We will take first the contemporary letters and diary, and 
in the first instance we will consider only the statements 
made by the actual eye- or rather ear-witnesses of the things 
described. Mrs. Wesley writes on January 12th, 1717, that, 
beginning from an early date in December, she heard 
unaccountable knockings, mostly in the garret or the 
nursery: — 

" One night it made such a noise in the room over our heads as 
if several people were walking; then run up and down stairs, and 
was so outrageous, that we thought the children would be frightened, 
so your father and I rose and went down in the dark to light a 
candle. Just as we came to the bottom of the broad stairs, having 
hold of each other, on my side there seemed as if somebody had 
emptied a bag of money at my feet, and on his as if all the bottles 
under the stairs (which were many) had been dashed in a thousand 
pieces. We passed through the hall into the kitchen, and got a 
candle and went to see the children. The next night your father 
would get Mr. Hoole to lie at our house, and we all sat together till 
one or two o'clock in the morning, and heard the knocking as usual. 
Sometimes it would make a noise like the winding up of a jack ; at 
other times, as that night Mr. Hoole was with us, like a carpenter 
plaining deals ; but most commonly it knocked thrice and stopped, 
and then thrice again, and so many hours together." 

That is practically all that Mrs. Wesley relates of her own 
personal experience. 

There are two letters from Miss Susannah Wesley, dated 
January 24th and March 27th. In the first she records her 
own experience as follows : — 

" The first night I ever heard it, my sister Nancy and I were set 
in the dining-room. We heard something rustle on the outside of 
the doors that opened into the garden, then three loud knocks, 
immediately after other three, and in half a minute the same number 
over our heads. We enquired whether anybody had been in the 
garden, or in the room above us, but there was nobody. Soon after 
my sister Molly and I were up after all the family were abed, except 
my sister Nancy, about some business. We heard three bouncing 
thumps under our feet, which soon made us throw away our work 
and tumble into bed. Afterwards the tingling of the latch and 
warming-pan, and so it took its leave that night 

" Soon after the above-mentioned we heard a noise as if a great 
piece of sounding metal was thrown down on the outside of our 
chamber. We, lying in the quietest part of the house, heard less 
than the rest for a pretty while, but the latter end of the night that 

L — D 

34 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

Mr. Hoole sat up on, I lay in the nursery, where it was very violent. 
I then heard frequent knocks over and under the room where I lay, 
and at the children's bed head, which was made of boards. It 
seemed to rap against it very hard and loud, so that the bed shook 
under them. I heard something walk by my bedside, like a man 
in a long nightgown. The knocks were so loud that Mr. Hoole 
came out of their chamber to us. It still continued. My father 
spoke, but nothing answered. It ended that night with my father's 
particular knock, very fierce. It is now pretty quiet, only at our 
repeating the prayers for the King and prince, when it usually begins, 
especially when my father says: ( Our most gracious Sovereign 
Lord,' etc. This my father is angry at, and designs to say three 
instead of two for the royal family. We all heard the same noise, 
and at the same time, and as coming from the same place." 

There is one letter from Miss Emily, undated, but obviously 
written at about this time. She describes various noises, 
more particularly groans, the sound as of " a vast coal " being 
thrown down in the kitchen ; the sound as of a stone being 
thrown in among the bottles under the " best " stairs ; " some- 
thing like a quick winding up of a jack at the corner of the 
room by my bed's head " ; knocks on the floor and elsewhere, 
mostly three times running. 

The account by old Mr. Wesley was apparently in great 
part written very shortly after the disturbances. It is not, 
however, dated ; and it is clearly not a day by day record, as 
in a diary, for he is occasionally uncertain of the exact dates, 
and the account is mostly written as a continuous narrative. 
Mr. Wesley was the last to hear the noises, though he had 
been told what other members of the family had heard. On 
December 21st he was awakened by nine loud knocks, 
apparently in the room next to his bedroom. Two or three 
nights later Mr. and Mrs. Wesley were both aroused by the 
loud and continuous noises, and searched the house, with the 
result already described in her narrative. 

Thereafter he frequently heard the knocks ; they answered 
him when he rapped with his stick knock for knock ; they 
came on the children's bedstead, in his own study, and in 
almost every room in the house ; they would make a great 
noise at family prayers at the names of King George and 
the Prince. He often spoke, but never received any articulate 
answer, " only once or twice two or three very feeble squeaks, 
a little louder than the chirping of a bird, but not like the 
noise of rats, which I have often heard." Often the latch of 
his bedroom would be lifted when he was in bed. Finally, 
he records: "I have been thrice pushed by an invisible 

ON POLTERGEISTS 35 

power, once against the corner of my desk in the study, 
a second time against the door of the matted chamber, a 
third time against the right side of the frame of my study 
door as I was going in." 

B. Second-hand Contemporary Accounts. 

These are all the experiences which are given in the earlier 
accounts at first hand. We will now turn to the contem- 
porary second-hand evidence. Emily Wesley tells us that 
her sister Hetty heard coming down the stairs behind her 
" something like a man, in a loose nightgown trailing after 
him"; that the knocks would answer Mrs. Wesley if she 
stamped on the floor and bid them do likewise; that Mrs. 
Wesley had seen something under a bed "like a badger, 
only without any head that was discernible"; and that Robin 
Brown, the man-servant, had seen the same creature twice, 
the last time in the appearance of a white rabbit 

Miss Susannah adds, under date March 27th, 17 17 : — 

" Last Sunday, to my father's no small amazement, his trencher 
danced upon the table a pretty while without anybody's stirring the 
table." 

Mr. Wesley has also much to say of the experiences of 
others : that Mrs. Wesley had seen a thing " most like a 
badger " ; that " one night when the noise was great in the 
kitchen, and on a deal partition, and the door in the yard, 
the latch whereof was often lift up, my daughter Emilia went 
and held it fast on the inside, but it was lifted up, and the 
door pushed violently against her, though nothing was to be 
seen on the outside"; and that Robin Brown saw "some- 
thing come out of the copper-hole like a rabbit, but less." 

C. Later First-hand Accounts. 

To turn now to the letters written in 1726. Mrs. Wesley 
adds to the account which she had given nine years before, 
that on one occasion the sounds answered her when she 
knocked ; that at another time, " Upon my looking under the 
bed, something ran out pretty much like a badger"; and 
gives the following variant of the noises heard on the 
nocturnal journey round the house, undertaken by herself and 
Mr. Wesley : — 

" Near the foot (of the stairs) a large pot of money seemed to be 
poured out at my waist, and to run jingling down my nightgown to 

36 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

my feet Presently after we heard the noise as of a vast stone 
thrown among several dozen of bottles which lay under the stairs, 
but upon our looking no hurt was done. In the hall the mastiff met 
us, crying and striving to get between us." 

Thus, in the later version the one sound, diversely in- 
terpreted, has become two successive sounds, and various 
decorative details — the jingling down the nightgown, the 
search among the bottles, the fright of the mastiff — have been 
added. 

So sister Emily, in the later account, adopts and enlarges 
upon the description already given in her father's account 
(but wanting in her own earlier letter) of seeing the latch of 
the kitchen door move, and finding the door itself resist her 
efforts to shut it So in sister Susannah's later account, 
what had been described in her earlier letter as " the tingling 
of the latch and warming-pan," is now amplified into " the 
latch of the door then jarred, and seemed to be swiftly moved 
to and fro." 

Sister Molly and sister Nancy (who were not represented 
in the earlier correspondence) also gave accounts of their 
experiences to their brother Jack in 1726. From the latter's 
account, which is written in the third person, apparently as 
representing John Wesley's notes of a conversation with her, 
the following extract may be quoted : — 

" One night she (Nancy) was sitting on the press bed, playing at 
cards with four of my sisters, when my sisters Molly, Etty (Hetty ?), 
Patty, and Kezzy were in the room, and Robert Brown. The bed 
on which my sister Nancy sat was lifted up with her on it She 
leaped down and said, * Surely old Jeffery would not run away with 
her.' However, they persuaded her to sit down again, which she 
had scarce done when it was again lifted up several times successively, 
a considerable height" 

This incident is not mentioned by Molly, or indeed by any 
of the others. 

Lastly, we have an account given by Robin Brown, the 
servant, in 1726, to John Wesley, confirming the story of 
the white rabbit, already quoted, and adding this new in- 
cident : — 

" Soon after, being grinding com in the garrets, and happening to 
stop a little, the handle of the mill was turned round with great 
swiftness. He said nothing vexed him but that the mill was empty. 
If com had been in it, old Jeffery might have ground his heart out 
for him.* 

ON POLTERGEISTS 37 

John Wesley's own account, based apparently exclusively — 
since he was not himself a witness of any of the phenomena 
—on the correspondence and on conversations with his family 
and others in 1726, it is not necessary to consider at length. 
It introduces, however, one or two sensational details, such as 
his father's threatening the unseen author of the disturbances 
with a pistol, which find no place in the earlier narratives. 

Now a record of this kind suggests two questions : First, What 
precisely are the things to be explained ? Second, What may 
the explanation be ? Most of the writers who, from the days 
of Glanvil, have formed from a mass of similar narratives 
collections of supernatural seemings, have, as already shown, 
passed at once to the second question, and have found the 
search for a solution so fascinating that they have never 
returned to look for an answer to that indispensable pre- 
liminary inquiry. Let us in this instance reverse the 
customary procedure, and ask first, What are the things to 
be explained in the Wesley case? To begin with, we are 
not called upon to explain what it was that made the handle 
of the mill turn round, to the amazement and chagrin of 
Robin Brown. The real problem is a simpler, if also a less 
alluring one — to find out, to wit, what made Robin Brown 
believe, nine years after, that he had seen the handle of the 
mill move. Again, we have got to ask, not what was the 
badger-like form which Mrs. Wesley saw, but how it came 
about that Mrs. Wesley's husband and daughter, in 17 17, and 
Mrs. Wesley herself, in 1726, testified that she had seen such 
a form. Nor need the vagaries of Mr. Wesley's trencher, nor 
Robin Brown's spectre somewhat like a white rabbit, nor 
the door which resisted the stoutest efforts of Emilia, perplex 
us. The problem, in fact, as now simplified is to search for 
a rational explanation of various noises, suggesting, indeed, 
an intelligent, but not obviously a supernormal origin, which 
disturbed the Wesley household for a couple of months 
in 1716-17. 

Old Samuel Wesley had at the time seven daughters 
living, of whom two, Patty and Keziah, were children, and 
five were, apparently, sufficiently grown up to write letters. 
Of these five, two are represented in the earlier correspondence, 
four in the later. One only, Hetty (Mehetabel), has con- 
tributed no account at all. There is no obvious reason for 
this silence, for Hetty, as we learn from John Wesley's 
account, was nineteen at the time. She had apparently 
undertaken to write, but failed to carry out her promise; 1 and, 

1 See Miss Susannah's letter of March 27th, 17 17. 

38 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

by the testimony of all those concerned, she seems to have 
enjoyed more of Jeffery's attention than any other member of 
the household. Consider, for instance, these extracts from 
the correspondence: — 

Mrs. Wesley writes, January 25th and 27th, 17171 "All 
the family, as well as Robin, were asleep when your father 
and I went downstairs (on the nocturnal exploration already 
described), nor did they wake in the nursery when we held 
the candle close by them, only we observed that Hetty 
trembled exceedingly in her sleep, as she always did before 
the noise awaked her. It commonly was nearer her than 
the rest" Or again, this extract from Miss Emily's letter 
(17 1 7): "No sooner was I got upstairs, and undressing for 
bed, but I heard a noise among many bottles that stand 
under the best stairs, just like the throwing of a great stone 
among them, which had broken them all to pieces. This 
made me hasten to bed ; but my sister Hetty, who sits 
always to wait on my father going to bed, was still sitting on 
the lowest step of the garret stairs." 

And again : " It never followed me as it did my sister 
Hetty. I have been with her when it has knocked under her, 
and when she has removed has followed, and still kept just 
under her feet." 

Again, in Mrs. Wesley's later account, after describing loud 
noises which they heard in their bedroom, she writes: 
" Mr. Wesley leapt up, called Hetty, who alone was up, and 
searched every room in the house." 

In sister Susannah's later account: "Presently began 
knocking about a yard within the room on the floor. It then 
came gradually to sister Hetty's bed, who trembled strongly 
in her sleep. It beat very loud, three strokes at a time, on 
the bed's head." 

And, once more, in John Wesley's version of Mr. Hoole's 
experience: "When we" (i.e. Mr. Wesley and Mr. Hoole) 
" came into the nursery it was knocking in the next room ; 
when we were there it was knocking in the nursery, and there 
it continued to knock, though we came in, particularly at the 
head of the bed (which was of wood), in which Miss Hetty 
and two of her younger sisters lay." 

After the perusal of these extracts, Miss Hetty's inexplic- 
able reticence seems more than ever to be deplored. Perhaps 
the conjunction of this reticence with Miss Hetty's singular 
habit of trembling in a sound sleep when loud noises were 
going on all round her, and with the notable predilection 
shown by the Poltergeists for her person, is not in itself 

ON POLTERGEISTS 39 

sufficient, in the absence of fuller details, to justify the charge 
of trickery against her ; but it hardly seems worth while to 
inquire whether the noises which perplexed the Wssley 
family did indeed proceed from a supernormal source. 1 

Those who are familiar with the history of geology will 
remember that it has frequently happened that naturalists 
have been puzzled by some stray bone, tooth, or other frag- 
ment which seemed for a time not to belong to any known 
organic type, and to foreshadow an impossible, or at least 
a paradoxical monster; until later research, by bringing to 
light a complete skeleton, resolved the difficulties and showed 
that the anomalous fragment fitted into the general scheme. 
Now the Wesley narrative is like the complete skeleton of 
the pterodactyl or the dinosaur. Nearly all other Poltergeist 
narratives are mere organic fragments. For the most part 
the evidence is so imperfect that we infer a monstrosity; 
it is only when, as here, we find the case complete, that 
our monstrosity proves to be a harmless but instructive 
Saurian. 

But to drop the metaphor, the Wesley case indicates 
pretty clearly that the main reason for the apparently in- 
explicable element in these narratives is the defect of the 
evidence. When we have only second-hand accounts, or 
accounts written down months or years after the events, as 
in Glanvil's and Hahn's narratives, or accounts from un- 
educated or irresponsible persons, as in Mary Jobson's case, 
we find an abundance of marvellous incidents ; when, as here, 
we have almost contemporary accounts at first hand from' 
sober-minded witnesses, the element of the marvellous is 
reduced to a minimum. But the peculiarly instructive feature 
of the Wesley case is that we can see how the witnesses, 
whilst in the earlier letters they narrate of their own personal 
experience only comparatively tame and uninteresting 
episodes, allow their imaginations to embellish the ex- 

1 The Spiritualist writers contend that the Wesley Poltergeist continued to 
manifest for more than a generation later. The inference is founded on a single 
passage in a single letter of Emily Wesley's, dated February 16th, 1750, given in 
Adam Clarke's Memoirs of the Wesley Family (London, 1823, p. 195). The 
passage runs as follows: "Another thing is that wonderful thing called by us 
Jeffery. You won't laugh at me for being superstitious if I tell you how certainly 
that something calls on me against any extraordinary new affliction ; but so little 
is known of the invisible world, that I at least am not able to judge whether it 
be a friendly or an evil spirit" 

It will be seen that the writer does not even mention in what form the spirit 
M called " ; and it seems probable that the warnings referred to may have been 
purely subjective. At any rate, no reason is given for assimilating them to the 
earlier disturbances. 

40 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

periences of other members of the household ; and that 
these same embellishments, nine years later, are incorporated 
in the first-hand accounts as genuine items of personal 
experience. 

I have elsewhere dealt with the results of the investiga- 
tion by the Society for Psychical Research of some recent 
British Poltergeist cases. 1 

The conclusions drawn from those investigations may be 
briefly summarised as follows : — 

i. We have positive evidence, by confession or detection, 
or both, that in some cases tricky little girls or boys have 
thrown about the crockery and upset the kitchen furniture 
with their own hands, whilst the onlookers have accepted the 
portent as a manifestation of supernormal powers. 

2. We have, speaking broadly, no good evidence for any- 
thing having been done which could not have been done 
by a girl or boy of slightly more than the average cunning 
and naughtiness. 

3. In the few cases where the records are sufficiently full 
to admit of such a comparison being made, it is found that 
when second-hand accounts and first-hand accounts of the 
same incidents are compared, or when accounts written down 
long afterwards are compared with accounts written down at 
the time, or accounts given by an excitable and ignorant 
witness with those of an educated and competent observer, 
the more marvellous features which appear in the one set of 
reports are almost or altogether wanting in the other. 

4. The author or centre of the disturbances is nearly 
always a child, generally a young girl; and the outbreak 
is very often associated with some abnormality or disease 
on her part. In no case that I have yet seen recorded has 
any adequate or intelligible motive beyond that of mere 
childish vanity and love of excitement been assigned for the 
performance. 

The peculiar difficulty of investigating the ordinary Polter- 
geist is that the phenomena cannot as a rule be produced to 
order ; and that any insistence on conditions or even betrayal 
of suspicion is liable to stop them altogether. The Polter- 
geist is a delicate organism, which flourishes only in a 
favourable environment. Actual exposure of the fraud 
practised becomes therefore extremely difficult; and as a 
matter of fact, in many of the recorded instances, as with 
Major Moor in the Bealings Bells case, those who attest the 

1 Proceedings S. P. P., vol. xii. pp. 45-115. Studies in Psychical Research , 
chap. v. 

ON POLTERGEISTS 41 

phenomena seem to have made up their minds from the out- 
set that they were privileged to witness, if not something 
supernatural, at least something which the known laws of 
physics would not explain. There are, however, a few re- 
corded cases of "electric" girls, which form a partial ex- 
ception to this rule, inasmuch as the manifestations recurred 
in their presence with tolerable regularity, and investigation 
was therefore within certain limits practicable. Cases of this 
kind possess a special interest for us, since they furnish an 
illustration of the development of the Poltergeist perform- 
ance into the phenomena of the stance-room. The best- 
known instance is Angelique Cottin, who practised in Paris 
at the beginning of 1846. 

Angelique was a peasant girl of fourteen living in a small 
village near Mortagne, in Normandy. 1 On the evening of 
January 15th, 1846, when she was engaged with three other 
girls in weaving gloves, the frame at which they were work- 
ing began to jump about The movement was soon seen to 
be connected with Angelique, though apparently there was 
no conscious agency on her part, nor any visible connection 
between her and the object moved. The mere touch of her 
garments, or even the approach of her hand, seemed to be 
sufficient to move heavy pieces of furniture, or to throw 
scissors or light articles across the room. The matter was 
investigated by the cur£, to whom the girl was taken in the 
first instance under suspicion of witchcraft, and by various 
local celebrities. Finally, her parents, willing to profit by the 
curiosity excited by these mysterious movements, brought 
the child to Paris. There Dr. Tanchou, happening in to his 
bookseller's one morning, heard of the prodigy, and straight- 
way investigated. His observations are summarised as 
follows: Chairs and sofas held down by one or more men, 
exerting all their strength, were violently forced away when 
Angelique sat down on them ; a heavy table was moved 
from its place by the mere contact of her petticoats ; a small 
piece of paper would at her approach be blown away or 
made to rotate upon a pin thrust through it ; balls of pith 
or of feathers hung upon a silken thread would be alternately 
attracted or repelled by the force emanating from her body ; 
she could distinguish by the touch between the poles of a 
magnet, the north pole giving her a shock, whilst the south 
pole exercised no effect It was reported further that a 

1 The account which follows of Angelique Cottin is taken from a contemporary 
pamphlet, Enquftc sur FauthentieiU des phtnombus iUctriquei <T Angeliqu* 
Cottin, par le Dr. Tanchou. Paris, 1846. 

42 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

magnetic needle would be violently agitated in her presence. 
Dr. Tanchou sometimes noticed a cold wind, like a breeze 
upon his hands, during the progress of the phenomena. 

All this Tanchou reported to Arago, who himself took the 
girl to his observatory, and there witnessed violent move- 
ments of a chair held by two of his colleagues. Arago 
reported to the Academy of Sciences, which straightway 
nominated a Commission of six, amongst whom were Arago 
himself, Becquerel, and Isidore Geoffroy St Hilaire, to in- 
vestigate and report further. Three weeks later, at the 
sitting of the 9th March, 1846, the Commission reported. 
They found that the magnetic needle experienced no dis- 
turbance in the girl's presence, and that the girl herself was 
not able to distinguish between the north and south poles of 
the magnet ; the only phenomena which the Commission had 
observed were the sudden and violent movements of a chair 
on which the girl was sitting. They were not satisfied, how- 
ever, that these movements were not due to muscular force ; 
but, after they had expressed their doubts on the point, the 
girl's manager reported that the power had temporarily 
waned : and no further opportunity had since been offered 
for investigation. Thus far the Commission. 

Tanchou, Hubert de Garnay, and other persons remained 
convinced that the phenomena testified to the operation of 
some new force, probably electrical in its nature. But no 
evidence is offered for this conclusion that will bear examina- 
tion. And even in the naively sympathetic reports from 
himself and his friends that Tanchou prints there are many 
observations which are singularly suggestive of fraud. It 
was constantly observed, for instance, that the contact of the 
girl's garments, particularly the lower extremity of her petti- 
coats, was necessary to the production of the phenomena ; * 
and several observers noticed, in connection with the throw- 
ing about of chairs and other objects, that there was a double 
movement on the part of the girl, a movement first in the 
direction of the object thrown, and afterwards away from it, 
the first movement being so rapid that it generally escaped 
detection. 2 

The contact of the lower edge of the petticoats with the 
object moved recalls the similar proceeding reported of the 
Italian medium, Eusapia Paladino ; 8 whilst the violent move- 
ment of a chair in opposition to the efforts of the men who 
tried to hold it down is curiously like the feats of skill and 

1 Op. ri/. f p. 14. 9 Pages 3, 21, etc. 

3 See below, Book IV. chap. i. 

ON POLTERGEISTS 43 

strength performed in recent years by a Mrs. Abbott, who 
styled herself the u Little Georgia Magnet" 1 

We read that a few years earlier, in 1839, ^ wo "electric" 
girls from Smyrna, whose phenomena seem to have closely 
resembled those of Angelique Cottin, had landed at Marseilles 
with the intention of giving public performances, but found 
that the atmosphere of France was too humid to admit of the 
display of their powers. 2 There are accounts of other "electric" 
girls in the early literature of American Spiritualism. 

1 See a report on her performances by Professor Oliver Lodge (Journal 
S. P. R., vol v. pp. 168, 169). Mrs. Abbott's performances, though Professor 
Lodge shows that they could all be explained by the deft exercise of the muscles, 
combined with some knowledge of human nature, seem for a time to have com- 
pletely baffled the Press and the public. 

* From the account given in the Boston Weekly Magazine, December 28th, 
1839, quoted by Rogers, Philosophy of Mysterious Agents > p. 1 00, 

CHAPTER III 
THE SYMPATHETIC SYSTEM 

THE men who, because of the theory of physical 
effluence which informed all the speculations of the 
Animal Magnetisers, rejected the genuine phenomena 
of the induced trance, were, no doubt, justified in their 
suspicions of the theory. For, in fact, not only did Mesmer 
borrow his theories ready-made from earlier mystics, but even 
the name " magnetic " was in common use in the seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries to denote the sympathetic system 
of medicine which was founded on those mystical doctrines. 
Paracelsus is commonly reputed to be the founder of this 
magnetic philosophy. He did, indeed, employ the actual 
magnet in medicine, recommending its use, inasmuch as it 
attracted martial humours, in fluxes, inflammatory diseases, 
hysteria, and epilepsy. But with Paracelsus the " magnet " 
was commonly spoken of in a metaphorical sense, and with 
his later disciples its actual use in therapeutics seems to have 
been almost entirely discontinued. Maxwell, in his treatise 
De Medicina Magnetica, hardly mentions the magnet at all ; 
and Fludd uses it simply as illustrating by its behaviour 
the interaction of living bodies in the sympathetic system. 
In brief, the mystics of this period regarded the magnet less 
as possessing a special virtue in itself than as presenting in 
miniature a picture of the forces which governed the universe. 
The action of the magnet at a distance was ascribed to a 
force or fluid — for its exact nature is usually left undefined — 
radiating from its substance ; and a like force is inferred to 
radiate from the stars, from the human body, and from all 
substances in the universe: each body thus reciprocally 
affecting and being affected by all the rest Moreover, these 
rays were not lifeless or fortuitous, but were guided in their 
incidence and their operations by the indwelling spirit of 
the body from which they proceeded — a spirit of which 
the stream of light or other palpable rays formed merely 

44 

THE SYMPATHETIC SYSTEM 45 

the gross vehicle. Thus Fludd writes : " The Etheriall 
Sperm, or Astralicall influences, are of a far subtiler con- 
dition than is the vehicle of visible light ... It is not 
the starry light which penetrateth so deeply, or operateth 
so universally, but the Eternal Centrall Spirit" l 

Again, the duality of the forces resident in the magnet 
was interpreted as typifying the dual or reciprocal action 
which, manifesting itself as flux and reflux, light and dark- 
ness, heat and cold, masculine and feminine, systole and 
diastole, centrifugal and centripetal force, formed the rhythm 
of the material universe. 

Further, the man himself was understood to be a micro- 
cosm, or miniature reflection of the whole complex world ; 
as Fludd puts it, " Man containeth in himself no otherwise 
his heavens, circles, poles, and stars, than the great world 
doth." 2 It followed, therefore, that man comprised in his 
body the virtues of a magnet ; nay, that his body, like this 
planet, was one large magnet, though philosophers differed 
as to the exact disposition of the corporeal poles. Moreover, 
any substance, especially any living thing, to which was 
imparted of the body of the living man, or even any of his 
waste products, such as sweat and the clippings of the nails 
or hair, became indued with the like magnetic properties. 8 
And from the living tissues of the man, or from such waste 
products, could be compounded a magnet of wondrous 
remedial virtue. It is this magnet — the tnagncs microsmi — 
which Paracelsus and his successors commonly understood 
by the words " magnet " and " magnetical." 

It is, then, on these ideas — the radiation from all things, 
but especially the stars, magnets, and human bodies, of a 
force which would act on all things else, and which was 
in each case directed by the indwelling spirit, together with 
the conception of a perpetual contest between reciprocal and 
opposing forces — that the mysticism of the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries mainly depends. Again, upon these 
ideas, combined with the Paracelsian doctrine of Signatures, 
and the proposition, itself a corollary from the doctrine of the 

1 MosaicaU Philosophy (London, 1659), p. 221. C£ Maxwell, De Medicina 
Magtutica (Frankfort, 1679), p. 3. " Ab omni corpore radii corporales fluunt, 
in quibus anima sua praesentia operator, hisque energiam et potentiam operandi 
largitur." And again, Aphorism xvii, "Stellae vitalem spiritum corpori disposito 
ligant per lucem et calorem, eidemque iisdem mediis infundunt." And again, 
Alkindus, quoted by Fludd, "Mundus elementarius est exemplum Mundi 
Syderei . . . manifestum est quod ononis res hujus mundi radios faciat suo more 
ad instar Syderum." a Op, cii. % p. 215. 

* Quodlibet corpus, cui mummia viva in alio nomine propinatur, illico fit 
magnet (Paracelsus, quoted by Fludd, op. tit.). 

46 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

magnes tnicrocostni, that a dissevered portion of a body retains 
something of the virtue of the body from which it was taken, 
and can act magnetically upon it, the theory of sympathetic 
medicine was based ; a theory familiar probably to most 
readers through the medium of Sir Kenelm Digby and his 
weapon-salve. The practice of anointing the weapon instead 
of the wound was in fact a logical deduction from the general 
theory. As Fludd puts it, if I may venture to paraphrase his 
statement of the doctrine, it would be useless to attempt to 
heal the wound so long as a portion of the vital spirits, re- 
maining in disastrous union with the weapon which wrought 
the mischief, should by its antipathetic influence react upon 
its fellow-spirits in the body of the patient But if we act 
upon that portion of the vital spirits which still adheres to 
the weapon, which we can most conveniently do by applying 
an appropriate ointment, then "the Oyntment so animated 
by those spirits" (*.*. the spirits on the weapon) "will become 
forthwith magneticall, and apply with a magneticall aspect 
and regard unto those beamy Spirits which stream forth in- 
visibly from the wound," and the patient shall be ensured 
a speedy recovery. 1 

It was a necessary consequence of this doctrine that the 
physician might affect his patient, or generally that one man 
might affect another, if the requisite conditions were fulfilled, 
"at any reasonable but unlimited and unknown distance." 

1 Mosaieall Philosophy, p. 262. The entire passage, since it presents a succinct, 
if not altogether perspicuous, statement of the theory, seems worth quoting : — 
" If, after the wound is made, a portion of the wound's externall blood, with his 
inward spirits, or the internal! spirits onely, that have penetrated into the weapon, 
or any other thing which have searched the depth of the wound, be conveyed 
from the wound at any reasonable but unlimited and unknown distance, unto an 
Oyntment, whose property is Balsamick, and agreeing specifically with the nature 
of the creature so wounded, the Oyntment so animated by those spirits will become 
forthwith magneticall, and apply with a magneticall aspect and regard unto those 
beamy Spirits which stream forth invisibly from the wound, being directed thereto 
by the Spirituall bloody spirits in the weapon or other thing which hath received 
or included them: ana the lively and southern beams, streaming and flowing 
from the wound, will with the northern attraction of the Oyntment, so magnetic- 
ally animated, concur and unite themselves with the northern and congealed, or 
fixt, bloody spirits contained in the oyntment, and stir them to act southernly, 
that is, from the center to the circumference ; so that by this reciprocal! action, 
union or continuity, a lively southern beam will act and revive the chill, fixt or 
northern beams which do animate the oyntment with a magneticall vertue, and 

Quickened spirits of the oyntment, animated by the spirits of them both, and 
irected by the spirits which were first transplanted into it, doth impart by the 
said union or continuity his balsamick and sanative vertue unto the spirits in the 
wound, being first magnetically attracted, and they afterwards by an ^inseparable 
harmony, transfer it back into the wound. And this is the reason of that Sym- 
patheticall or anti-patheticall reference and respect, which is by experience ob- 
served to be between the Oyntment and the wound.** 

THE SYMPATHETIC SYSTEM 47 

Thus Paracelsus : " By the magic power of the will a person 
on this side of the ocean may make a person on the other 
side hear what is said on this side . . . the ethereal body 
of a man may know what another man thinks at a distance 
of ioo miles or more." 1 Fludd expresses the same idea more 
generally : " How, by relation of naturall things unto one 
another, they do, after a corporall contact or touch is made 
between them, operate wonderfully, and that by a Magneticall 
concent and Spirituall continuity ... by a mutuall operation 
at an unknown distance." 2 And Maxwell definitely applies 
the principle to the relation between physician and patient : 
"Qui spiritum vitalem particularem efficere novit, corpus, 
cujus sfriritus est, curare potest ad quamcunque distantiam, 
implorati spiritus universalis ope." 3 

The reader who will compare these ideas with Mesmer's 
own statement of his theory 4 will see that the later mystic 
contributed little of his own to the philosophy which he 
borrowed. His peculiar service consists in the fact that, 
whilst exploiting the mystical doctrines for his own private 
advantage, he hit upon a practical application of them which 
has already proved of singular interest to psychology and of 
some value to therapeutics, and whose ultimate developments 
we are yet unable to foresee. 

The writers whose views we have briefly considered, widely 
though their methods and results differ superficially from 
those of modern science, were still animated by something of 
the scientific spirit They essayed to relate phenomena to 
one another by comparison, observation, and analysis, and to 
subsume them under universal laws. The main difference 
would seem to be that the mystics, with an impatience, and 
even contempt, for the mere brute fact, which was part of the 
disastrous inheritance from earlier centuries, built up their 
magnificent generalisations on the basis of a few bare hints 
from the external world. They lacked both the inclination 
and the means to wait for the slowly maturing results of 
experimental investigation. They did, indeed, it may be 
said, interrogate Nature after their own fashion ; like jesting 
Pilate, they asked, "What is truth?" and, anticipating the 
slow accents of the reluctant Sphinx, took the echo of their 

1 Philosophy Sag* L cap. 60, quoted by Hartmann, Life of TJuophrastus 
Bombastes, p. 296. 9 Op. cit. y p. 252. * Op. cil. t aphorism 69. 

4 Quoted below, at the beginning of chapter iv. A detailed comparison of 
Mesmer's ideas with those of earlier mystics, including, besides those mentioned 
in the text, Van Helmont, Kircher, Borel, and others, is given in Thouret's 
Ruhtrcfus et doutts sur U MagnitUtne Animal, Paris, 1784. See also Bertrand, 
Du Ma&Utisme Animal tn France (Paris, 1826), pp. 13-18. 

48 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

own voices for the answer. The mystical philosophy, in fact, 
was an attempt at a short cut to knowledge, a premature 
synthesis of the universe. But it was, nevertheless, a syn- 
thesis on rationalist lines. The factors in the explanation 
offered were not spiritual beings acting by arbitrary will, but 
effluences radiating under ascertainable laws. It was this 
rationalist view, which culminated in the eighteenth century, 
and, naturally enough, in France, which Mesmer and his 
immediate followers adopted ; and even at the present day 
Paris, faithful to her old tradition, remains the headquarters 
of the rationalist school of Mysticism. Baraduc, de Rochas, 
Luys, Gibier, and others stand as the supporters of fluids as 
against spirits. 1 

The rivalry between the two schools of interpretation, it 
need hardly be said, dates from a very early period in the 
history of Mysticism. At the very time when Fludd and 
Maxwell were expounding the magnetical system of medicine, 
marvellous cures were being effected throughout the country 
by methods which curiously foreshadowed those employed in 
our own times by the hypnotic treatment But the seven- 
teenth-century healer ascribed his success to a divine gift, 
just as some of Mesmer's contemporaries saw in the " mag- 
netic " crisis signs of spiritual intervention. 

Valentine Greatrakes, the son of an Irish Protestant 

gentleman of Affane, co. Waterford, was born in 1628. He 

served for some six years as a lieutenant in the army in 

Ireland. On his retirement in 1656 he lived on his own 

estate, was made a Justice of the Peace, and acted for some 

time as Registrar of Transplantation. In 1662 he had "an 

Impulse or strong Persuasion " in his own mind that on him 

was bestowed the gift of curing the King's Evil. Straightway 

many came to him from the country round, and were cured 

by the laying on of his hands. Three years later there came 

similar Impulse, foreshadowing the gift of curing the ague, 

suggestion which the next day was successfully put to the 

iq£ "Within some small time after this," he continues, 

od was pleased by the same or the like Impulse to dis- 

er unto me, That he had given me the gift of healing." 

ereafter Greatrakes laid his hands on all that sought his 

t, He was so besieged by sufferers that he had to set aside 

se days a week whereon, from six in the morning to six in 

evening, he received all who came to him. The matter. 

te to die ears of the Bishop of the Diocese, who forbad 

Since this sentence was written two of those named, Luys and Gibier, have 
sd away. 

THE SYMPATHETIC SYSTEM 49 

Greatrakes to exercise his powers. Greatrakes answered that 
he could not obey a command to cease from works of charity, 
and so continued. 

In January, 1666, at the request of Lord Orrery, he came 
to England, and though he failed entirely to cure the 
Countess Conway, on whose behalf he had been summoned, 
he continued to exercise his gift with surprising, though not 
uniform, success, first in the provinces, and later in London. 
He was successful in curing or sensibly alleviating such 
diverse maladies as the King's Evil, palsy, dropsy, epilepsy, 
ulcers, the stone, wounds and bruises, lameness, deafness, 
partial blindness, "Pthysick," besides innumerable cases of 
vaguely described pains and weakness. His cures are 
attested by a considerable number of grateful patients and 
other credible witnesses, doctors, divines, and persons of 
quality, including Robert Boyle, Sir William Smith, Dean 
(afterwards Bishop) Rust, Richard Cudworth, and Andrew 
Marvell. 

His method of operating was to stroke with his hand the 
part affected, by which means the pain was gradually dis- 
lodged from the diseased part, and ultimately driven to the 
extremities — fingers, toes, or even nose or tongue — and so 
out of the body. Sometimes the pain divided. On one 
occasion part thereof fell into the great toe of the patient's 
left foot, and the other part into the little toe of the 
right foot, and so left the patient. It was noted that the 
fingers or toes during the process were commonly rendered 
insensible to pain inflicted from the outside, as by pinching 
or pricking. 

A contemporary medical witness gives the following ex- 
planation of this method of expelling disease : — 

"These considerations made me think that God had been 
pleased to bestow upon Mr. Greataricks such a Complexion and 
Temperament, that his Touch or Stroking should instantly matu- 
rate Diseases, or render them Turgent ; whereupon the part touched 
being strengthened, and the blood and spirits Invigorated, a Hetero- 
geneous Ferment or paine (which if not occasioned by some 
evident and externall cause, is caused by a Heterogeneous Ferment) 
is expelled from the corroborated place to some other more Weake ; 
that being corroborated, it is driven upon another, and so on, till it 
be quite ejected." * 

Greatrakes himself, whose entire honesty in the matter can 
hardly be doubted — he practised without fee or reward of any 

1 The Miraculous Conformist, p. 17. 
I. — S 

CHAPTER IV 
MESMER AND HIS DISCIPLES 

MESMERISM, like chemistry, is a French science. 
For even though the birthplace of Mesmer him- 
self — which, indeed, as in the case of greater men, 
is to some extent uncertain — was not in France, yet France 
was the country of his adoption ; it was by Frenchmen that 
his doctrines were first welcomed, and it is on French soil, 
under the various names of Animal Magnetism, Mesmerism, 
Hypnotism, Hysteria, or Suggestion, from the days of 
Bergasse and Puys£gur to those of Charcot and Bernheim, 
that they have borne most abundant fruit 

Franz Antoine Mesmer was born in or about 1734. He 
studied for the medical profession, and took his doctor's 
degree at Vienna in 1766, choosing as the subject of his 
inaugural thesis De planetarum influxu, or, as he himself 
translated it later, " De l'influence des Pianettes sur le corps 
humain." It is from the publication of this essay that 
Mesmer himself dates the discovery of Animal Magnetism. 1 
But his ideas on the nature and extent of this influence, as 
already said, seem to have contained little that was original, 
being founded on the writings of various older mystics. 2 The 
best exposition of his views is contained in his own statement 
drawn up some years later in a series of propositions, of 
which a few may be here quoted : — 8 

1. II existe une influence mutuelle entre les corps celestes, la 
terre et les corps animes. 

2. Un fluide universellement r^pandu et continue de mani&re k ne 
souflrir aucun vuide, dont la subtilet^ ne permet aucune com- 
paraison, et qui, de sa nature, est susceptible de recevoir, propager 

1 Precis kistoriqm de fails relatifs du Magnttisme Animal, p. 1. Paris, 1781. 

* See preceding chapter. 

* In 1779 ; Mfmtire sur la dtcouverte du MagnHisme % p. 83. 

51 

52 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

et communiquer toutes les impressions du mouvement, est le moyen 
de cette influence. 

3. Cette action r&iproque est soumise k des loix m^chaniques, 
inconnues jusqu'a present 

4. II r&ulte de cette action, des effets alternatifs qui peuvent etre 
considers comme an flux et reflux. 

6. C'est par cette operation (la plus universelle de celles que 
la nature nous offre) que les relations d'activite s'exercent entre 
les corps celestes, la terre et ses parties constitutives. 

9. II se manifeste particulierement dans le corps humain, des pro- 
pri£t& analogues h celles de I'aimant; on y distingue des poles 
egalement divers et opposes qui peuvent £tre communiques, changes, 
detruits et renforc£s; le phenom&ne meme de l'inclinaison y est 
observe 

10. La propri^t^ du corps animal qui rend susceptible de Tin- 
fluence des corps celestes et de Taction r&iproque de ceux qui 
l'environnent, manifest^ par son analogie avec I'aimant, m'a deter- 
mine h la nommer Magnetism* Animal. 

14. Son action a Ugu & une distance eioignee, sans le secours 
d'aucun corps interm&iaire. 

1 5. Elle est augments et refl&hie par les glaces comme la lumiere. 

16. Elle est communiqu£e, propag£e, et augments par le son. 

He professes to have spent many years in testing and 
verifying his ideas by experiment and observation on all 
kinds of diseases ; but it is not until 1773 that he actually 
gives details of any cures effected by the applications of his 
methods. The first patient was a young woman afflicted 
with periodical attacks, which, from the description given, 
seem to have been of an epileptic nature. He applied 
magnets to the limbs of the sufferer, and a rapid cure was 
effected. Publicity was given to this case by the Jesuit, 
Hell, who had, it appears, furnished the magnetic plates used 
by Mesmer, and who claimed that the cure was due to the 
application of principles discovered by him. There ensued 
a bitter controversy between the two men. The next few 
years seem to have been spent by Mesmer in vindicating 
his own prior claim to the discovery, in the practice of the 
therapeutic virtues of Animal Magnetism, and in knocking 
at the doors of the various learned societies of Europe. No 
door was opened to him ; and finding little honour and less 
profit in his own country, he came in 1778 to Paris, and 
there took up his abode. From the learned societies of Paris 
he met with as little recognition as from those of Vienna, 
Berlin, and London. One of his first converts, however, was 
M. D'Eslon, medical adviser to the Count d'Artois. In 

MESMER AND HIS DISCIPLES 53 

September, 1780, D'Eslon summoned a general meeting 
of the Faculty of Medicine to lay before it a statement 
of Mesmer's doctrines. He began by reciting the proposi- 
tions from which extracts are given above, and then made 
on Mesmer's behalf a formal proposal that the Faculty should 
investigate the subject by choosing twenty-four patients, 
of whom twelve should be treated by Animal Magnetism, and 
the remainder by the orthodox methods, and should then 
compare the results. 1 The reply of the Faculty was to reject 
the proposal and to warn D'Eslon that his name would be 
struck off the rolls at the end of the year if he bad not in 
the interval formally recanted his heretical beliefs. 

But if Mesmer found little favour with the wise and 
prudent, he met with a reception more cordial and much 
more profitable from the general public So much attention 
did his cures — or the rumour of them — excite, especially, as 
it would seem, in the fashionable world, that in March, 1781, 
the Minister de Maurepas was commissioned by the King to 
offer him a pension of 20,000 livres, and a further sum of 
10,000 livres annually to provide a suitable house, on con- 
dition that he would establish a school and communicate 
the secret of his treatment Mesmer rejected the terms, 
ostensibly because he held it beneath his own dignity and 
the dignity of the great truth which he proclaimed to be 
a party to such a bargain. But it is not difficult to infer that 
if the terms, sufficiently liberal as they seem to us, had been 
commensurate with his appetite, he would have been willing 
to take the cash and let the credit go. For, two years later, 
in 1783, a subscription was set on foot to which each 
would-be. pupil contributed 100 louis (2400 livres), and a 
sum of no less than 340,000 livres (nearly £ 14,000) was 
handed over to Mesmer. In return he gave a course of 
lectures on his system. Before admission to these lectures 
he had required each pupil to sign an undertaking that he 
would not practise on his own account, nor impart the secret 
to others without Mesmer's permission. As the price of this 
permission he subsequently proposed that they should 
establish centres of magnetic treatment in every town of 
importance in France, and should hand over to him half of 
all the fees that they received. His pupils, many of them 
men of position, who had no desire to practise for money, 
formed themselves into a Sociiti de FHarmonte, and vindi- 
cated their claim to the title by repudiating, after an unseemly 
squabble, their part of the contract 

1 Prtcis historiquCy etc, p. 113. 

54 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

In the following year the Government took a further step 
and charged two learned bodies, the Faculti de Midecine and 
the Sociiti royaU de Midecine, with the task of examining 
into Animal Magnetism. The Commissioners chosen from 
the Faculty asked the King to add to their number some 
members of the Academy of Sciences, and five delegates 
from that body, including Benjamin Franklin, Bailly, and 
Lavoisier, were accordingly directed to co-operate with the four 
members of the Faculty. This Commission was appointed on 
the 1 2th of March ; on the I ith of August the same year they 
presented a Report, signed by all nine Commissioners. They 
had decided, for reasons which are not stated in the report, 
to make their observations on the magnetic treatment as 
practised, not by Mesmer himself, but by his friend and 
disciple D*Eslon. The Report commences with a description 
of the methods employed to set the hypothetical fluid in 
motion, methods which D'Eslon had borrowed without sub- 
stantial change from Mesmer. In the middle of a large 
room was placed a circular tub, called the baquet, of con- 
siderable dimensions. The report does not mention the 
internal arrangement of the baquet, but we learn from 
Puys£gur (whose book, Du Magnitisme Animal, has as a 
frontispiece to its second edition a picture of a baquet, of the 
size of a large bath, with patients sitting round it) that it 
was filled with bottles "arrang&s entireties d'une mani&re 
particuli&re," and covered with water up to a certain height 1 
In the lid of the baquet were several holes, through each of 
which passed an iron rod connecting with the interior, and 
bent in such a way that the patients, who sat round in rows, 
could apply the point of the rod to any part of their persons. 
The patients were tied together by a cord which passed round 
the circle, and sometimes another chain was formed by hold- 
ing hands. A pianoforte in the corner of the room played 
various airs during the performance; and sometimes there 
was singing. The operator carried an iron rod, ten or twelve 
inches long. 

The Report then describes the scenes which ensued as the 
charm worked : there were violent movements, profuse sweat- 
ing, spitting, often of blood, vomiting, etc, piercing cries, 
hiccoughs, immoderate laughter, and extraordinary and long- 
continued attacks of convulsions. This was (ailed the crisis, 

1 Puysegur, Mimoires pour servir, vol. i. p. 9. A fuller description of the 
baquet is given by another writer of this time, an Englishman named Bell, in 
his book on the Principles of Animal Electricity and Magnetism (London, 1792). 
See below, chap. viii. 

MESMER AND HIS DISCIPLES 55 

and was supposed to be beneficial in accelerating and guiding 
the course of the disease to a successful issue. The crisis 
was frequently succeeded by the collapse of the patient from 
sheer exhaustion into a lethargic condition. 

The Commissioners conceived that there would be little 
profit in attempting to study the curative effects of the 
treatment, because of the extreme difficulty and uncertainty 
which always attend the purely empirical method in medicine, 
so much so that even if cures could be demonstrated they 
would prove little, since they might be attributed with equal 
plausibility to Nature or to the imagination of the patient 
Moreover, to press these questions too closely might annoy 
the distinguished sufferers who thronged M. D'Eslon's 
clinique. They resolved, therefore, to confine themselves 
to the search for evidence of the new physical force which 
was claimed as the agent for the effects observed. They 
found, of course, little difficulty in demonstrating that no 
such evidence was forthcoming ; and that, as a matter of 
fact, those effects could be produced by the aid of the 
imagination alone. A single illustration must suffice of 
their method of experiment. The veteran Franklin — he 
was then in his seventy-eighth year — was unable to attend 
the meetings in Paris. But D'Eslon came down to his house 
at Passy, bringing with him a suitable subject A tree was 
" magnetised " ; the subject, a boy of twelve years, was 
brought into the garden with his eyes blindfolded. He was 
then introduced successively to four trees, which stood at 
varying distances from the magnetised tree; the character- 
istic phenomena of the crisis developed themselves with 
unusual rapidity, and he collapsed in a swoon at the fourth, 
without having approached within twenty-four feet of the tree 
actually magnetised. 

The Commissioners concluded that the magnetic fluid 
could not be perceived by any of the senses, and that its 
existence could not be inferred from any effects observed 
either in themselves or in any of the patients examined. 
And they pointed out, further, that the methods employed 
by D'Eslon and Mesmer in their treatment were liable to 
cause serious mischief to the patients themselves and, by 
imitation, to others. Further, in a confidential report to the 
Minister they emphasised the dangerous consequences which 
might result from the spread of these practices, and recom- 
mended their legal suppression. 

The Report signed five days later by four members of the 
Sociiti royale de Midecine was to the same effect, but pre- 

56 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

sented with less literary grace. One member, however, of 
this second Commission submitted a Minority Report 1 
M. de Jussieu began by suggesting that the Commission 
had perhaps acquiesced in too narrow an interpretation of 
their mandate. "Sans remonter k une thdorie peut-£tre 
trop sublime," it appeared to him that it was within the 
scope of that mandate at least to verify the physiological 
facts alleged, to endeavour to ascertain their proximate 
causes, and the possible utility of the medical treatment 
which they had witnessed. And to be able to pronounce 
decisive judgment on these points, it was essential that the 
mere observation of a crowd of patients passing through 
the wild convulsions of the magnetic crisis should be supple- 
mented by experiments and observations on individual cases, 
with a view of disentangling the complicated relations of 
cause and effect This M. de Jussieu, so far as circumstances 
would permit, had endeavoured to do. And one of the 
observations which he records is of considerable interest 
He had seen on several occasions a young man pass through 
the crisis, then become silent, and walk up and down the 
hall, touching and magnetising the other patients. When 
he returned to his normal state he remembered nothing of 
what had passed, and no longer knew how to magnetise. 2 
In this incidental observation — not the less valuable because 
the observer altogether failed to realise its significance — we 
have the first indication of the somnambulic trance, the 
master fact alike in the Animal Magnetism of the first half 
of last century and in the Hypnotism of to-day. 
— But the experiences which most interested M. de Jussieu 
were those which seemed to indicate action at a distance, 
independently of the patient's imagination. On several 
occasions he states that he succeeded in provoking or 
directing the course of the crisis by merely pointing his 
finger or an iron rod towards the patients without their 
knowledge, ix. behind the back ; or in the case of a blind 
patient, towards the epigastrium at a distance of six feet 
M. de Jussieu appears to have been a careful and critical 
observer, and to have been on his guard against obvious 
sources of error in the experiments; but the conditions 
under which they were made, generally in the large hall 
in the midst of a crowd of patients and medical men, were 
clearly not such as to admit of accurate observation. Such 
as they were, however, he thinks himself justified in deducing 

1 Rapport de Pun des Commissatres chargit par k Rot de Pexamen du Magm4t- 
*mu Animal. Paris, 1784. * Rapport, p. 15. 

MESMER AND HIS DISCIPLES 57 

from them the possible existence of a fluid or agent which 
can exercise a sensible influence on the human body at a 
distance. This fluid he provisionally identifies with Animal 
Heat But the Animal Heat of which he speaks is not the 
radiant energy with which we are familiar, the result of 
chemical action, and capable of affecting the mercury in 
a thermometer. It is the principle of life itself, the special 
vital modification of the universal energy, which in its 
material manifestation he identifies with electricity. De 
Jussieu points out that "Animal Heat" conforms to the 
same laws as electricity, it constantly seeks equilibrium, it 
radiates preferably from points (the finger or the baguette), 
it produces a feeling of heat in the recipient and of cold 
in the giver, it surrounds the body as with an atmosphere ; 
and the existence of this atmosphire particulate can be 
occasionally demonstrated to the senses. But, unlike the 
material energy, the operations of this vital force are directed 
and intensified by the human will. 

In short, de Jussieu's theory of Animal Heat is almost as 
far-reaching as Mesmers theory of a universal magnetic fluid. 
He does not, indeed, make the planets the pivot of his 
speculations, but he cannot bring himself to leave them out 
The really important modification of the theory which de 
Jussieu introduces is the presentation of the distinctively 
human element in the case, which he supposed to depend 
on the will of the operator, but which modern science, more 
justly perhaps, attributes to the imagination of the patient 
It is probable, indeed, that Mesmer himself believed the 
human will to be the active agency in directing and con- . 
centrating his universal fluid ; and that, as expressly stated X 
by Puys£gur, the secret upon which he put so high a price 
was precisely this recognition of the part played by the will. 
But it was by his published pronouncements that he elected 
to be judged, and in these we find no hint of anything 
beyond an indifferent mechanical or vital agency. Later 
magnetists, however, followed de Jussieu, and this theory 
of a specific organic emanation, controlled and directed by 
the will of the operator, dominated all speculations on the 
subject throughout Europe for more than two generations, 
persisting even after Bertrand had formulated die modern 
doctrine of Suggestion. 

Of the significance, as indicating action at a distance, of 
the facts observed by de Jussieu we shall have occasion to 
speak hereafter. It is enough to point out here that on 
these and similar seemings (if I may so translate the exotic 

58 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

" phenomena ") depends not merely the theory of a magnetic 
or mesmeric fluid, but, in great measure, the whole movement 
of Modern Spiritualism. 

Such were the reports of 1784. It will hardly be thought 
that the Commissioners failed conspicuously in the discharge 
of their trust The spectacle of the hysterical mob of fashion- 
able men and women at the height of the " crisis " round the 
magnetic tub — enfer d convulsions, as someone called it — 
must have seemed as futile to science as it was repulsive 
to common sense. It must be remembered, however, that 
barbarous though the treatment seemed, it was not altogether 
ill-suited to the medical ideas of the time : even the magnetic 
crisis might have seemed a merciful alternative to the lancet 
and the moxa. Indeed, the very violence of the treatment 
no doubt recommended it to the patients, for the more 
excessive the remedy the greater seemed its probable efficacy. 
Puysegur, for instance, expressed doubts whether one of his 
patients was really cured, because he had "not yet ex- 
perienced the painful crises which, I believe, are necessary 
to cure so grave a malady." 1 

But whilst it must be admitted that the spectacle offered at 
first sight little material for scientific investigation — less, 
probably, than the cures of modern faith-healing — it is still 
matter for regret that the Commissioners held it no part 
of their duty to inquire as to the actual curative effects of 
the treatment That medical science is not to be judged by 
results is a dangerous admission for doctors to make. It was 
liable to, and did in fact provoke, inconvenient retorts. 2 It 
might have been plausibly urged that, after all, it is the 
business of the physician to cure, and that if cures were 
effected — and it is certain that a large section of Parisian 
Society so believed — it might be profitable to ascertain the 
cause, even if it should prove to be only the imagination 
of the sufferer. But these reports of 1784 are remarkable 
chiefly for what they do not include. None of the more 
striking and characteristic phenomena of Hypnotism as we 
know it at the present day appear to have been observed 
at all. We hear nothing of the varied hallucinations and 
die muscular feats which any itinerant lecturer can now 
V»monstrate on his subjects: there is no mention of that 

tensibility to pain, which was to be so bitterly disputed 

* **m c i res p§ur servir, etc., vol. i. p. 45. 

», for instance, Bergasse, Considtrations surle Magn/tisme Animal, p. 21. 
a fait dire a quelques hommes de mauvaise humeur, que la mldecine et 
guerir sont done deux sciences qui n'ont rien de commun entr'elles." 

MESMER AND HIS DISCIPLES 59 

upwards of half a century later, and which has to-day grown 
to be almost a commonplace. Most singular omission of all, 
we have but one incidental reference to the condition of 
induced somnambulism — the eponymous fact of modern 
Hypnotism. Probably if the Commissioners had observed 
these things they would have passed them by, as they were 
passed by in this country more than fifty years afterwards, as 
being explicable by deliberate deception, and generally as 
offering no evidence which a responsible inquirer could afford 
to take into account ; but from de Jussieu's careful analysis it 
seems probable that they were not observed. 

The effect of the publication of the reports was what 
might have been anticipated. Whatever chance the theories 
of Mesmer might have had of attracting the attention of the 
scientific world was dissipated. The universal magnetic fluid 
was definitely classed with the philosopher's stone and the 
secret of Hermes Trismegistus ; and the medical men of the 
day no doubt stifled whatever unprofessional inclination 
some of them may have felt to meddle with the new treat- 
ment But the sufferers, aristocratic and other, who had been 
cured, and the great multitude who believed themselves to 
have been cured, naturally continued the cult of the baquet 
and the bent iron rods. 

The close of the year 1784 saw the publication of a number 
of replies to the reports by partisans of the new theory, 
amongst whom D'Eslon himself, another doctor, Bonnefoy, 
and Bergasse are the most notable. In the course of the 
same year de Puys£gur began his cures at Busancy, and 
circulated a privately printed account of his experiences. 
M. Jumelin, as we learn from Bailly's report, was also 
practising magnetism at the time in Paris, and arriving at 
the same results by a different method. Bergasse, who 
collaborates with a marquis and dedicates his book to a 
marchioness, mentions incidentally some half-dozen persons 
as having a reputation for the cures which they had per- 
formed, amongst them another marquis and three counts ; 
he states also that there were societies for the pursuit and 
study of Animal Magnetism then established in six French 
provincial cities; also at Turin, Berne, Malta, and in the 
French West Indies. 1 Societies of Harmony were indeed 
springing up in various centres, of which that at Strasbourg, 
founded in 1785 by de Puys^gur, attained to considerable 
repute, and published three volumes of Proceedings, from 
1786 to 1789. Books and pamphlets on the subject followed 

1 Op. cit. % pp. 135, 136, etc. 

60 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

each other in rapid succession until the last-named year. 
From that date, until the publication in 1807 °f Puys£gur's 
Du Magtrftistne Animal inaugurated a new era, very few 
books on the subject appeared. France during those years 
had something else to think about, and the atmosphere was 
not favourable to Societies of Harmony. 1 

At the moment when the Commissioners were incurious 
and reluctant spectators of the hysterical antics at D'Eslon's 
clinique in Paris, de Puysegur, himself a pupil of Mesmer, 
was obtaining surprising results of quite another kind on his 
own estate at Busancy, near Soissons. In May, 1784, he 
writes enthusiastic letters to his brother and to friends at 
Paris, describing the use which he had made of the wonderful 
gift of healing which he had derived from Mesmer's teaching. 
His first patient was the daughter of his bailiff, whom he had 
cured of toothache. He soon found other patients, and to 
husband his own powers he magnetised a large tree in his 
grounds, fastened cords to it, and invited the sufferers to 
attach themselves. The tree proved a most efficacious baquet, 
and the peasants flocked in from all the country round ; on 
one morning upwards of one hundred and thirty persons 
availed themselves of its healing virtues. " Every leaf," he 
writes, " radiates health." 

One of his earliest patients was a young peasant of twenty- 
three, Victor by name, who was confined to his bed with 
inflammation of the lungs. The invalid, after being magne- 
tised for a quarter of an hour, fell asleep in the operator's 
arms. In this sleep he began to talk. The somnambulic sleep, 
as Puysegur describes it from his observations on Victor and 
many other somnambules, is at this time sufficiently familiar. 
It is important to renjark that its most characteristic feature 
— a feature for which Puysegur was apparently not prepared — 
the complete oblivion on waking of all that had happened 
in the sleep, seems to have appeared from the outset, as we 
have already noted in the observations of de Jussieu. 

Of other phenomena described by the early magnetists 
many were grouped under the general name of rapport The 
magnetic subject could hear no voice but that of the operator, 

1 Ddeuze,^is/0fV* Critique du Magntiisme Animal, voL i. pp. 427, 428, explains 
the discredit into which Animal Magnetism fell during the last decade of the 
eighteenth and the opening years of the nineteenth century as partly due to the 
fact that many prominent disciples of Mesmer afterwards became patrons of 
Cagliostro. This may have no doubt contributed to the result. But there is 
hardly need to go beyond the cause assigned in the text. Probably no one in 
France during those years had much leisure for writing of books in any depart- 
ment of thought. 

MESMER AND HIS DISCIPLES 61 

could feel no touch, and obey no influence but his. But his 
influence would be felt and obeyed when expressed not only 
by speech or gesture, but even by silent will — and this some- 
times when the operator was in another room, with a thick 
wall intervening. It was this rapport, as shown by the un- 
receptiveness of the subject to all alien impressions, that was 
regarded by the writers of this date as the surest test of the 
true magnetic sleep. 1 

Further, the somnambule would diagnose his own maladies 
with greater skill than his physician, and would prescribe 
with more confidence and with happier results. And he 
would thus diagnose and prescribe with equal success not 
merely for his own ailments, but for those of other patients 
introduced to him by the magnetiser. He would predict also, 
with the most minute accuracy, the date of a future epileptic 
seizure, or other crisis in his malady, and the precise term of 
the treatment Tardy de Montravel describes how one of 
his somnambules walked about the town with her eyes fast 
closed in the magnetic sleep, as easily as if she was wide 
awake ; she could see, he writes, without eyes, and hear with- 
out ears. He relates further how she would tell the nature 
of an object by placing it to the pit of the stomach.* 

As to the explanation of these phenomena, the curative 
effects of magnetism, the crisis itself, the manifestations 
of silent willing, and of the rapport generally, seem to have 
been attributed by all the animal magnetists of this period 
to the effluence of a sensible fluid. Some somnambules 
could see the fluid radiating as a brilliant shaft of light from 
the person of the operator, 8 from trees, and other living 

1 See e.g. Puysegur's reply to those who inquired of him how they should 
recognise the magnetic state: " Rien n'est plus aise que de s'en apercevoir : il ne 
doit d'abord avoir d'analogie avec aucun autre que celui gui l'a magnetise^ il ne 
doit repondre et n'obeir qu'a lui" (Memoires pour servtr, voL i. p. 192). It 
would seem that observations which were held to indicate a special relation 
between magnetist and subject were made very early in the practice of Animal 
Magnetism, though owing to the sudden break, already referred to, in the pub- 
lished records of these early years, information on the point is somewhat scanty. 
Puysegur's book, from which the above extract is taken, though not published until 
long alter, was apparently in great part written shortly after the experiments which 
it recounts, i.e. before the Revolution. But the question of the exact date of the 
origin of the belief in rapport is not of so much importance as some writers have 
supposed in its bearing on the reality, or rather non-reality, of the phenomena so 
explained. In the induced trance the observer always finds what he looks for ; 
and the idea of a reciprocal influence between physician and patient is, as shown 
in the preceding chapter, at least as old as the Sympathetic System. 

a Essai sur la Thtorie du Somnambulism* Magnttiqtu (London, November, 

I7»S)» PP- 64, 65. 

* An occasional device for the frontispiece of books on the subject of animal 
magnetism is a gentleman in evening dress, with dotted lines proceeding from his 
eyes and fingers and impinging upon the person of a lady seated in an armchair. 

62 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

objects, and would note differences in colour and brightness 
according to the diverse sources. There was a magnetic 
effluence from the sun, and yet another, differing in glory, 
from the earth. Iron and glass would conduct and even 
augment the magnetic current, but wax or copper dispersed 
it, and silver reflected it back on the rod. Mesmer had 
already stated that the fluid was reflected by a mirror, but 
Tardy bettered this observation. It was not the glass of the 
mirror, which was already proved to act as a conductor, but 
the metal backing which operated in the reflection. 1 

So again the fluid could be seen in passing into water and 
milk. The substance under such treatment would become 
luminous; and magnetised milk could be retained by a 
stomach which would at once reject all other nourishment 
The tree which Puys6gur had magnetised retained its virtues 
long after the operator had left for Strasbourg, and patients 
continued to resort to it and experience the crisis and the 
healing influence. Puys^gur goes further than Tardy de 
Montravel, and identifies the fluid with the " dephlogisticated 
air" — then a new discovery — which is given out by plants 
under the rays of the sun, and finds in it the active principle 
of vegetable as well as animal life. He even extends its 
influence to the mineral kingdom, and points to the " revivifi- 
cation" of metals by phosphorus as a probable instance 
of its action. Puys6gur*s science, no doubt, was a little out 
of date even then, for in 1784 the new chemical conceptions 
of Lavoisier had captured Paris, if they had not yet reached 
Strasbourg and Soissons. But in the matter of animal 
magnetism Puys6gur, I think, showed himself the better 
philosopher of the two. With the facts and "seemings" 
above described before him, it was not perhaps less reason- 
able for Puys£gur to believe in a magnetic fluid than for 
Priestley to believe in phlogiston. Puys^gur was not indeed 
a man of wide learning or conspicuous ability, but he was 
a good soldier and an honest man, and he faithfully described 
what he saw. Any board-school child can learn now that 
both he and Priestley were misled by a false theory; but 
even Lavoisier might have added to his laurels by studying 
the one set of phenomena with the same clear vision which 
he turned upon the other. The generations which succeeded 
were the poorer for the lost opportunity. 

Yet another theory of the physical forces at work in the 
induced trance was advanced by a medical man who rejected 
the term "Animal Magnetism" altogether, and whose ob- 

1 Op. cit., p. 81. 

MESMER AND HIS DISCIPLES 63 

servations incidentally furnish perhaps the best evidence to 
be found in the literature of the period for some new mode 
of transmission of ideas and sensations. J. H. D6sir£ P6t6tin, 
a doctor at Lyons, was perpetual president of the medical 
society of that city, and had held several public apppointments 
from the Government He published in 1808 Electricity 
Animate, describing observations which he had made for 
many years past on several cases of spontaneous catalepsy. 
y The disease is, of course, sufficiently rare, and it is, as 
Bertrand subsequently pointed out, a little remarkable that a 
single provincial practitioner should have come across no less 
than eight cases in one district But the phenomena which 
P£t6tin's subjects presented were more remarkable still. In 
the cataleptic state the patient generally remains motionless, 
and gives often hardly any sign of life at all, pulse and 
respiration being alike almost imperceptible. P£t£tin found 
that his patients, though they would show no signs of 
intelligence if questions were directed in the usual way to 
their ears, would answer either by voice or gesture if the 
speaker addressed himself to the pit of the stomach, the tips 
of the fingers, or sometimes even the toes. Not only so, but 
they would appear to taste, smell, and even see with those 
parts of the body, even when strict precautions were taken to 
exclude the intervention of the normal organs of sense. 
P6tetin gives details of several occasions on which, due 
precautions being taken, his patients were able to describe 
medals, letters, playing cards, and other small objects placed 
under die bedclothes on the epigastric region, or even hidden 
in the pockets of the interlocutor. 1 It is not necessary to 
consider in detail the explanation which M. Pet£tin offers of 
these curious manifestations. It is again a purely physical 
one, and rests on a theory of Animal Electricity which, from 
our standpoint, does not differ essentially from the hypothesis 
of Animal Magnetism. His observations afforded him abundant 
proof that the phenomena depended on electrical action. 
Thus he found that the most convenient way to speak to the 
patient was for the interlocutor to place one hand on the 
stomach (duly covered with clothes) and to address his 
remarks to the finger-tips of his free hand. The human 
body being of course a conductor, the patient would then 
hear and reply. The same results would follow if the 
operator stood at the remote end of a chain of persons 
holding each other's hands, of whom the last only touched 

1 Some of the experiments are quoted in Phantasms of the Living, vol. it 
PP- 345-7- 

64 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

the patient But if a stick of wax were placed in the circuit, 
communication at once ceased. Again, the patient would 
not hear music played close to her by any person not actually 
touching her. But if the performer were connected with the 
patient by a moistened thread, she would hear music even in 
a distant part of the house, and would respond to questions 
addressed to the far end of the thread. 

The experiments in " seeing " with the pit of the stomach 
on one occasion, P£t6tin tells us, so amazed and affrighted 
the spectators that calm was not restored until, by showing 
that objects wrapped up in wax or silk could not be " seen/' 
he satisfied them that the phenomena had a natural cause, 
and were not due to the intervention of demons. 

The spectators of these marvels were not always so easily 
satisfied. A religieuse, the aunt of another patient, could not 
understand why the physician should place the fingers of one 
hand on the patient's stomach and mutter to the fingers of 
his other hand. She accused him of sorcery ; and when, to 
clear up the matter, he placed heiN rosary, unseen by the 
patient, where his fingers had been, and the patient described 
it correctly, the poor lady's suspicions became so acute that 
she could not be content until by direct inquiry — addressed, 
of course, to the same region of her niece's person — she had 
ascertained that the sufferer still retained her hold on the 
Christian verities. 

Another figure of importance in the early history of 
Animal Magnetism is J. P. F. Deleuze, who since 1795 had 
held the post of Assistant Naturalist at the Jardin des Plantes 
in Paris, and in 1828 was appointed Librarian of the Museum 
of Natural History. He had first witnessed the magnetic 
treatment in 1785 at a friend's house. Thereafter he continued 
to practise and observe as opportunity offered ; but his first 
published work on the subject, his Histoire Critique du 
MagnJtisme Animal, did not appear until 181 3. Deleuze, 
though his scientific training and native common sense pre- 
served him from the extravagances into which some of the 
earlier followers of Mesmer had fallen, was still firmly 
convinced of the magnetic theory. We miss, indeed, the 
fine cosmic flavour which distinguished the writings of 
Mesmer himself, and some of his immediate disciples. For 
him Animal Magnetism is no longer " un rapprochement de 
deux sciences connues, l'Astronomie et la M&lecine." 1 But 
he is convinced of the existence of the magnetic fluid, on the 
word of all the somnambules whom he had consulted. Many 

1 Mesmer, Pricis kistoriqiu % etc., 1781, p. 2. 

MESMER AND HIS DISCIPLES 65 

had seen the fluid raying from the operator's fingers ; some 
had smelt it, or perceived its effects in their own persons. 
Moreover, Deleuze had satisfied himself, by direct experiment, 
of the existence and physical properties of the fluid. It is 
not, he points out, apparently identical with the electric 
fluid, though both are probably modifications of a universal 
medium. It has many analogies with nerve- force. It forms 
an atmosphere round each of us, which does not make its 
presence continually felt, only because it is necessary, for any 
sensible effect to be produced, that it should be concentrated 
and directed by the will. How it is that the will directs the 
fluid, we know as little as how our will moves our own 
organism. Cest un fait primitif : we cannot go behind it 

It is in accordance with this conception of Animal 
Magnetism, as a definite physical agent, that Deleuze 
attributes painful effects to it in some diseases. Generally 
speaking, it has a tonic action, and may be usefully employed 
when stimulating agents are indicated. But when the system 
is already irritated and excited, as by poisons, for example, 
he finds that the effect of magnetism is to increase the 
irritation and the suffering, and frequently to bring on con- 
vulsions. Again, in many diseases where it can be usefully 
employed its first effect is generally to increase the pain and 
accelerate the crisis. 

So far, it will be seen, no theories of a transcendental nature 
have been advanced. If the somnambule can see without 
eyes and hear without ears — a fact of which Deleuze has no 
manner of doubt — it is, according to him, because the im- 
pressions from without are conveyed directly by the magnetic 
fluid, a medium of extreme tenuity, to the brain without the 
intervention of the external organs or even the sensory nerves. 1 
The same explanation will apply to the supersensible influ- 
ence of the operator on the subject, and to the subject's 
perception of diseases in himself or in those placed in rapport 
with him. Deleuze, relying indeed partly on his own obser- 
vations, but mainly on those of others, has as little doubt of 
the reality of such supersensible phenomena as he has of their 
explanation by material causes. 

Puys^gur, again, expressly repudiates any attempt at a 
transcendental explanation. It was said in Parisian Society 
that his subject Madeleine could divine people's thoughts. 
Puys^gur characterises the statement as absurd. In obeying 
his silent will she simply acts "as an animated magnet" 
His will, directing the magnetic fluid, moves her organism 

1 Histoirt Critique, second edition, vol. i. pp. 189, 200, etc. 
I. — F 

CHAPTER V 
THE SECOND FRENCH COMMISSION 

SUCH were the conceptions of Animal Magnetism which 
up till 1820 or thereabouts held the field as an ex- 
planation of the phenomena of the somnambulic 
trance, and which, even after a juster and more philosophic 
view had been propounded, continued to flourish for many 
years, and still linger not merely in the remoter bypaths of 
human experience. The inauguration of a new era in the 
science is due to Alexandre Bertrand, a young Paris 
physician, who, in 1823, published his' Traitf du Somnambu- 
lisms In this, and another work published in 1826, Du 
Magnitisme Animal en France, he reviews the work and 
theories of his predecessors, and puts forward an explanation 
of the multifarious phenomena which does not greatly differ 
from that held at the present time. 

He begins by relating the artificial trance with spontaneous 
noctambulism, the somnambulic states associated with certain 
diseases, and the states of ecstasy epidemic from time to 
time in religious communities. The various phenomena ob- 
served by his predecessors — the magnetic crisis ; the sensa- 
tions of heat and cold ; the influence of the baquet and the 
iron rod ; the tree at Busancy ; the stream of light seen by 
Tardy's somnambules ; the conduction by iron, the reflection 
from mirrors, the dissipation by copper ; the effects of wax, 
silk, wet cords, etc., as observed by P£t6tin — the whole 
machinery on which the earlier writers relied as demonstrating 
the existence of a fluid — celestial, magnetic, or electric — 
he sweeps away in a word by attributing the results to the 
imagination of the subject, preternormally alive to the least 
suggestion, by word, look, gesture, or even unexpressed 
thought, from the operator. It is not necessary to follow 
Bertrand in detail through the steps of his argument His 
theory of suggestion is the modern theory, and by it, as we 
know, are explained most of the phenomena which to the 

67 

68 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

earlier observers appeared most inexplicable. Indeed, it is 
surprising how modern Bertrand's book is. It might have 
issued within the last decade from the Hopital Civil at 
Nancy. It would need but a slight change in names, dates, 
and other unessential particulars to make it fit the times. 
For the magnetic crisis we should now substitute the three 
classic stages of the trance as observed in Paris, and for the 
names of P£t£tin and Deleuze those, say, of Charcot and 
Gilles de la Tourette. The transfer of diseases, the influence 
of magnets and metals, the presence of a nerve atmosphere 
have all been demonstrated as conclusively within recent 
years at the Salp£tri£re or the Charity as they were more 
than a hundred years ago at Busancy or Lyons ; whilst 
the most brilliant results of Tardy de Montravel have been 
outshone in modern Paris by Dr. Luys, Colonel de Rochas, 
and M. Baraduc. For modern scientific appliances have 
enabled these later observers to claim that they can photo- 
graph the fluid which the earlier writers could only take on 
trust from their somnambules. And to complete the parallel, 
the scientific world, and the mass of medical men in this 
country, at any rate, are hardly more concerned about the 
whole business than they were sixty or a hundred and 
twenty years ago. As has been said of another subject — 

"Hie liber est in quo quctrit sua dogmata quisque 
Invenit etpariter dogmata quisque sua. 11 

It is no doubt this uncertainty — or rather this certainty 
that the observations will vary with the preconceptions of 
the observer — which has throughout the last three or four 
generations repelled the great majority of thinking men from 
the investigation. That Bertrand himself, had he Jrved, would 
have done much to dispel this prejudice and to win recogni- 
tion for the subject among his scientific contemporaries seems 
probable; his premature death in 1831, in his thirty-sixth 
year, was an irremediable loss. 

But for our immediate purposes even the revolution which 
Bertrand essayed in the attitude of science to the subject of 
artificial somnambulism is of less importance than his views 
on the supersensible phenomena of the trance. For this free 
critic of his predecessors' results, amongst so much else 
which he destroyed, left this part of their observations intact 
Partly from his own experiments, but mainly from facts 
communicated to him by other observers and from authentic 
records in the past, he found himself constrained to believe 

THE SECOND FRENCH COMMISSION 69 

that P£t£tin and the rest had been justified in their belief in 
action at a distance, and in the existence, in certain cases, 
of a faculty of acquiring information which had not passed 
through any known sensory channel. As may be inferred 
from the critical character of his mind, Bertrand had not 
come to this conclusion lightly. He was, of course, keenly 
alive to the influence of the imagination in such cases, and 
devised various experiments in order to exclude such in- 
fluence. That he seems to have been less alive to the 
possibility of hyperesthesia is, of course, to be regretted ; 
but such experiments as the following can hardly be thought 
to be capable of explanation by that cause. Bertrand heads 
the chapter from which this extract is taken, " Communica- 
tion sympatique des symptdmes des maladies." He records 
three experiments on somnambules who had the faculty of 
describing correctly the diseases from which other persons 
were suffering. 

To test this power he brought to the first somnambule a 
patient of his own whom she had never seen. The chief 
affection in this case was asthma. The somnambule, after 
being placed in rapport with the invalid, shortly presented 
all the symptoms of a severe asthmatical attack ; she then 
proceeded to describe with great accuracy various minor 
ailments and pains, and finally, a particular skin affection, the 
existence of which was almost certainly known to no one but 
the patient and her physician. 

He made two similar observations on another somnambule. 
The second I give in his own words : — 

" Void une troisi&me observation faite sur la m£me somnambule, 
et qui ne paraltra pas moins remarquable que les prec&lentes. ' Je 
n'avais pas pr£par£ cette £preuve : le hasard me la fournit. J'&ais 
aupr&s de la somnambule, que je magn&isais endormie sur son lit, 
quand je vis entrer un de mes amis accompagn£ d'un jeune homme 
bless£ depuis peu de temps en duel, et qui avait re$u une balle 
dans la tite ; il 6tait encore malade de sa blessure, et venait pour 
consulter. On me le dit k voix basse, sans parler du genre de la 
blessure ; et comme la somnambule parut disposle k donner la con- 
sultation qu'on lui demandait, je la mis en rapport avec le bless£, 
et me bomai k lui demander de declarer ce qu'il avait. 1 Elle parut 
chercher un instant, puis elle dit en s'adressant le parole k elle- 
m&me: "Non, non, ce n'est pas possible; si un homme avait eu 
une balle dans la t&te, il serait mort." — " Eh bien ! " lui dis-je, " que 
voyez-vous done?" — "II faut qu'il se trompe," me dit-elle; "// 

1 Je n'ai pas besoin de dire avec quel soin on doit eviter de faire aux somnam- 
bules des questions qui puissent leur indiquer les reponses qu'ils doivent faire. 

70 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

me dit que monsieur a une balle dans la tete." 1 Je l'assurai que 
ce qu'elle disait etait vrai, et lui demandai si elle pouvait voir par oh 
la balle 6tait entree, et quel trajet elle avait parcouru. La somnam- 
bule r^flechit encore un instant, puis ouvrit la bouche, et indiqua 
avec le doigt que la balle etait entree par la bouche, et avait pen&re* 
jusqu'a la partie postdrieure du cou ; ce qui £tait encore vrai. Enfin 
elle poussa l'exacritude jusqu'a indiquer quelques-unes des dents qui 
manquaient dans la bouche, et que la balle avait brisees. 

Cette observation ne me laissa rien a d&irer, puisque d'ailleurs 
j'&ais sdr que la somnambule n'avait eu d'avance aucune connais- 
sance de la personne qu'on lui avait amenee, et qu'elle n'avait pas 
ouvert les yeux depuis l'instant ou le blesse* etait entre* dans la 
chambre. Au reste, quand elle l'aurait vu, la balle £tant entree 
dans la bouche sans faire aucune lesion aux tegumens ext^rieurs, il 
lui aurait 6t6 impossible d'acqu£rir d'un coup-d'oeil toutes les con- 
naissances qu'elle montra sur la nature de la blessure. 2 

Bertrand cites a few observations of his own indicating 
action at a distance; but he admits that what indications 
he has himself seen of this faculty, though sufficient to justify 
him in giving due credence to the observations recorded by 
other persons on whose accuracy he could rely, were not in 
themselves conclusive. His explanation of the phenomenon 
is the precise reverse of Puys£gur*s. When the somnambule 
responds to the passes of an unseen magnetiser, the effect 
is attributed not to a physical, but to a mental cause — 
transmission des pensies. 

He cites, moreover, the testimony of several contemporaries, 
amongst them two Paris physicians of some note, Georget, 
who had been converted by what he had seen from material- 
ism to a belief in the existence of the soul, and Rostan, the 
author of the article on "Animal Magnetism" in the new 
Dictionary of Medicine , a physician of Aix, Despine, and 
one or two others, all of whom claimed to have witnessed 
phenomena — reading with the fingers or toes, the back of the 
head, etc — which compelled belief in some preternormal 
faculty of vision. Unfortunately in none of the cases cited 
are the particulars given sufficient to enable us to judge 
whether all sources of error were excluded. 8 

It will be seen that the phenomena of somnambulism were 
exciting considerable attention in the medical circles of Paris 
at this time. From 1820 onwards, indeed, there had been 
several exhibitions in the Paris hospitals, designed to illustrate 

1 " II "=not the patient, but the inner voice which seemed to the somnambult 
to speak from her stomach. * TrmU, etc, pp. 232-4. 

^ A. Bertrand, Du Magnitisme Animal en France, p. 454. 

THE SECOND FRENCH COMMISSION 71 

action at a distance and insensibility to pain. If the results 
in the first case were dubious, the demonstrations of 
anaesthesia were not lacking in cogency. The insensibility 
of the patients was frequently tested by the application 
of moxas. The moxa, we learn, produced bums, the exact 
dimensions of which are given, involving the whole thickness 
of the skin. The unhappy patients betrayed no sign of 
consciousness. These experiments are amongst the earliest 
indications of the recognition of anaesthesia as an accompani- 
ment of the induced trance. 1 

But at this time (1820-1825) not only the medical world, 
but Paris in general, and indeed the whole country, were 
busied with the marvels of the magnetic trance. A bi- 
monthly journal, the Annates du Magnitistne Animal, had 
been started in Paris in 18 14, which after a short interruption 
reappeared as the Bibliothique du Magnitistne Animal. This 
came to an end in 18 19, and was replaced by the Archives 
du Magnitistne Animal, under the editorship of Baron 
d'Henin de Cuvillers. There were, moreover, professional 
clairvoyantes in plenty, as we learn from casual references 
in writings of this period, who seem to have found in the 
practice of clairvoyant diagnosis and treatment -of disease 
a lucrative occupation. The Abb£ Faria claimed that he had 
entranced more than five thousand persons. 2 Nor was the 
interest in it confined to France. The Academy of Berlin 
in 1 82 1 proposed a prize for the best essay on the subject; 
a prize for which Bertrand would have contended, but 
unluckily his essay arrived too late. 8 In Russia a Com- 
mission appointed by the Emperor in 18 15 had reported 
in its favour. In Prussia and Denmark the efficacy of 
magnetism had been recognised, and its exercise confined 
by law to members of the medical profession. In fact, 
throughout Northern Europe, but especially in Germany, 
the new treatment seems to have been widely practised. 
It was only the land of the immortal Newton "qui dans 
la culture des sciences, suivant la marche s£v&re de l'ex- 

1 It is not a little remarkable that at a time when anaesthetic drugs were 
wholly unknown the induction of anaesthesia in the trance appears not to have 
attracted the attention of the early magnetists. They do, indeed — e.g. in the 
Reports of 1784 and the discussions which followed — take note of the numbness 
in the limbs which occasionally accompanied the trance, but this was generally 
attributed to the constrained attitude or, as by Deleuze, to the fact that the lower 
limbs were generally not included in the passes, and thus escaped the vitalising 
influence of the fluid (Histoire critique, vol. i. p. 149). This singular omission 
is, of course, but another illustration — if another is needed— of the fact that 
ip Hypnotism the observer finds what he looks for. 

2 $ertrand, DuMagntiism^ Animal, p. 248, * Ibid., Preface, p. 8 

72 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

perience et de l'observation, a d^daigne jusqu'a present de 
s'occuper de magn&isme." * 

On the nth October, 1825, a young doctor, P. Foissac, who 
had for some time past occupied himself with the study of 
the somnambulic trance, wrote to the Medical Section of the 
Royal Academy of Medicine at Paris asking them to appoint 
a Commission to investigate the subject anew, and offering 
to lend a somnambule for the purpose of experiment The 
Section proceeded in the matter with due circumspection. 
They appointed a committee of five to consider the question 
whether it was suitable for the Academy to concern itself 
with the question or no. On the 13th December, 1825, this 
committee reported by the mouth of M. Husson, and recom- 
mended the Section to undertake the inquiry. The reading 
of the preliminary report was followed by a heated discus- 
sion, which was prolonged over the next three sittings. 
There is no need to analyse the debate in detail. The 
arguments of the opponents are by now sufficiently familiar. 
In the course of the fourscore years which have intervened 
they have been reproduced, it may be hazarded, with local 
modifications in the annals of every medical society in the 
civilised world. It was pointed out that Mesmer was a 
quack, and Puysegur a man without scientific education ; 
from Germany and the Scandinavian countries, where the 
doctrine was most rife, had notoriously proceeded too many 
extravagant systems and erroneous beliefs, alike in medicine 
and philosophy. Some of the speakers had studied the 
subject for years, and were convinced that all the phenomena, 
"or at least nine-tenths of them," were due to illusion and 
fraud ; it would be beneath the dignity of the Academy to 
undertake the inquiry, for the subject was an altogether un- 
professional one, and had fallen into the hands of quacks 
and charlatans, who made a lucrative living out of their 
alleged clairvoyance ; moreover, it was a very difficult sub- 
ject to investigate, since so many of the phenomena depended 
on the good faith of the subject ; and if all that was said of 
it were proved true, it would still not be of the smallest use 
in medicine — let the physicists or somebody else take it up. 
Last, and most singular argument of all, there were such 
grave moral dangers arising from the abuse of the magnetic 
influence that it would be most undesirable for any responsible 
body of trained investigators to have anything to do with 
such a disagreeable business. 

The supporters of the motion had, as may be imagined, 

1 Foissac, Rapports et Discussions (Paris, 1833), p. 41. 

THE SECOND FRENCH COMMISSION 73 

the best of the argument ; they had also the majority of the 
votes, and the recommendation was finally carried by thirty- 
five to twenty-five. The Commission commenced its inquiry 
at once, but owing to various causes did not actually present 
its Report until June, 1831, five and a half years after its 
appointment 

The Commission reported, in effect, that the alleged pheno- 
mena were genuine, and in particular that the peculiar state 
called somnambulism, though of comparatively rare occur- 
rence, was well authenticated. Time had not permitted them 
to investigate with precision the therapeutic relations of 
magnetism, but they had seen enough to satisfy them of its 
importance as an adjunct to medical science. 

But the most interesting and most controvertible of the 
Commission's findings related to the supernormal aspect of 
the phenomena. They reported that the characteristic effects 
of the magnetic state could be produced in the patient without 
his knowledge, by the mere will of the operator ; that certain 
clairvoyants could distinguish objects placed before them 
when their eyes were fast closed and normal vision was 
impossible ; that they could occasionally diagnose the diseases 
of other persons with whom they were placed in rapport ; 
and that they could also predict with great exactness more 
or less distant pathological changes in their own organisms. 

Unfortunately the extracts from the detailed experiments 
given in the Report furnish little support for any of these 
conclusions, except, indeed, the last The power of sorrinam- 
bules to predict to the minute the occurrence, even weeks 
ahead, of epileptic crises and the like, seems fairly well 
established. But it is doubtfully to be explained, as even 
Bertrand essays to explain it, as an inference from a quick- 
ened perception of organic processes. It is in most cases 
probably not an inference at all, still less a prevision. What 
really happens, no doubt, is that the patient subconsciously 
sets his organism to explode in epileptic crisis, mania, and so 
on, and himself subconsciously attends to the fulfilment of 
the prediction. It is thus analogous to the carrying out of 
an hallucination suggested to him by the operator — as we 
have seen in recent times at Nancy — with this difference, 
that the suggestion is given by the patient to himself. But 
the false interpretation placed on phenomena of this kind 
undoubtedly contributed much in the early days to the dis- 
repute of Magnetism in scientific circles. 

As regards the operation of the magnetiser's will without 
the knowledge of the patient, several observations are quoted, 

74 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

of which the best are two cases in which Foissac himself, 
concealed in another room and at a distance of ten or twelve 
feet from the subject, with two closed doors intervening in 
one case and one in the other, succeeded in inducing the 
sleep in a few minutes. 

The experiments on which the proof of vision without 
eyes were supposed to rest are obviously inconclusive. The 
subjects' eyes (two persons were found to possess the power 
of seeing under these conditions) were closed, so that the 
lashes interlaced, and the eyelids were seen by all present 
to be pressed together. On one occasion the lids were held 
down by the fingers of one of the experimenters. Under 
these conditions the somnambules — for they were apparently 
in a genuine somnambulic trance — could describe, though not 
without some difficulty, objects placed before them. But 
it was observed that the eyeballs moved, as if following the 
object, as in the act of normal vision. Moreover, the subject 
failed to read with the pit of the stomach, or through a 
closed envelope; and the intervention of a screen or a 
bandage over the eyes interrupted the performance. There 
can be no reasonable doubt that the " clairvoyants " in these 
experiments — who may have been perfectly innocent of 
intentional deception in the matter — did actually see with 
their fleshly eyes, and in a perfectly normal though somewhat 
unusual way. One of the committees of the Society for 
Psychical Research had the opportunity in 1884 of experi- 
menting with a "clairvoyant" youth, "Dick, the pit lad," 
whose performances were conducted in much the same way, 
except that in the later case the eyes were bandaged in a 
manner which to the untrained spectator seemed completely 
effectual. Dr. Hodgson subsequently, with his eyes bandaged 
in the same way, and under like conditions, succeeded in 
seeing objects held up before him. 1 

On the whole, it cannot be said that, apart from their 
unanimous testimony to the reality and importance of the 
phenomena in general, this second French Commission 
added much to our knowledge of the subject, or much, it is 
to be feared, to their own reputation. Their observations 
were few and inadequate, and their conclusions were not 
carefully framed, nor in all cases well established. It is note- 
worthy that though the elements of a philosophical explana- 
tion of the whole problem had been put forward some few 
years previously by Bertrand, with much literary skill and 
abundance of apt and cogent illustrations, Bertrand's nacrie 

1 §et Journal of the S. P. if*, for June^ 1884^ 

THE SECOND FRENCH COMMISSION 75 

is not mentioned in the Report, and his theories are dismissed 
in a line. 

M. Foissac, in publishing the Report, 1 triumphantly pointed 
out that Magnetism, after being so long a subject of derision, 
had at last, after a strife of fifty-seven years, been rehabili- 
tated before the first medical society in Europe. 

He may be counted happy in that he could not foresee 
how many rehabilitations, by or in spite of how many learned 
societies, would be needed before the next fifty-seven years 
were completed. 

1 Rapports it discussions de VAtadtmu Royale (U Mtdtcin* sur U Magnitism* 
Animal, Paris, 1833. 

CHAPTER VI 
SPIRITUALISM IN FRANCE BEFORE 1848 

ONE of the earliest detailed accounts which we possess 
of questioning the spirits through the mouth of a 
somnambule is contained in an extract from some 
unpublished Journals of the Soctiti Exigitique et Philantropique 
of Stockholm, which is quoted in the Annates du Magnttisme 
Animal by M. Lausanne, in the course of a history of Animal 
Magnetism. 1 This society, founded in the birthplace of 
Swedenborg, apparently for the propagation of his doctrines, 
had addressed in 1788 to the Soctiti des amis r funis at 
Strasbourg a famous "Lettre sur la seul explication satis- 
faisante des ph£nom&nes du Magn&isme Animal et du som- 
nambulisme d&duite des vrais principes fond&s dans les 
connaissances du Cr£ateur de lliomme et de la Nature, et 
confirmte par rexpdrience." True to the principles of its 
founder, the Strasbourg Society had retorted by insisting on 
a naturalistic interpretation. Thereupon M. Halldin, of the 
Swedish Society, replied by another long exposition of the 
Swedenborgian view, backed up by extracts from journals 
of trance experiments for a few days in the month of May, 
1787. From these journals it would appear that in the 
presence of several members of the nobility and other persons 
the wife of a gardener named Lindquist, a woman of forty 
years of age, when placed in the trance, was controlled on 
successive days by two different spirits, her own infant 
daughter and another young child, a former native of the 
town. These "spirits," in reply to the questions of the 
bystanders, gave some account of their own lives on earth, 
described the state of intermediate or probationary existence, 
le chemin de milieu, through which the spirits of the dead 
had to pass before finally proceeding to their appointed place, 
expounded the Christian Scriptures, and even entered upon 

1 1816, No. XXV. 
76 

SPIRITUALISM IN FRANCE 77 

an abstruse disquisition on the worthlessness in that other 
world of all man's "natural goodness" — in all this discourse 
faithfully reproducing the teachings of the Swedish seer. 
Other somnambules and other "controls" delivered them- 
selves to a like effect They also prescribed for the diseases 
of persons present or absent Asked as to the state of the late 
King, the spirits replied that he was happy ; the late Captain 
Sparfvenfeldt was reported to be "encore flottant," apparently 
in the probationary state above described. But the "controls" 
refused to satisfy a natural curiosity as to the whereabouts of 
the late Comte de Stenbock, and leave us to the grimmest 
conjectures. 

It is to be noted that the ascription of these somnambulic 
utterances to spirit intelligences was in the circumstances not 
merely easy but almost inevitable. The entranced person was 
in a state obviously differing very widely from either normal 
sleep or normal wakefulness ; in the waking state she herself 
retained no recollection of what happened in the trance ; in 
the trance she habitually spoke of her waking self in the 
third person, as of someone else; the intelligence which 
manifested in the trance obviously possessed powers of 
expression and intellectual resources in some directions far 
greater than any displayed by the waking subject Add 
to this that the trance intelligence habitually reflected the 
ideas in general and especially the religious orthodoxy of her 
interlocutors ; that on occasion she showed knowledge of 
their thoughts and intentions which could not apparently 
have been acquired by normal means; that she was, in 
particular, extraordinarily skilful in diagnosing, prescribing 
for, and occasionally foretelling the course of diseases in 
herself and others — the proof must have seemed to the 
bystanders complete. 

That without impugning the good faith of the " medium " 
we can now explain these manifestations without the sup- 
position of an extraneous intelligence is no reflection on 
the common sense of the earlier investigators. Taught by 
the experience of more than a century in this particular field 
and with a wider and more intimate knowledge of allied 
abnormal states, we can now explain the division of memory, 
the assumption by the somnambule of an alien personality, 
and the enlargement in certain directions of die psychic 
powers, as phenomena directly dependent on changes in 
the physical basis of consciousness, such as accompany and 
condition the trance. The unshakeable orthodoxy of the 
medium is seen to be less significant when we find that 

78 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

she is apt equally to reflect the ideas of the magnetist, whether 
Catholic, Protestant, Rationalist, or, as in the case just cited, 
Swedenborgian ; and, if some of the more marvellous phe- 
nomena of the trance are still obscure, they can at least be 
seen to fall into line with other mundane facts, which do not 
obviously call for spirit-intervention. But at Stockholm in 
the eighteenth century such comparisons and inferences were 
not possible. Even if the members of the Exegetical and 
Philanthropic Society had started as doubters, they might 
have been excused for succumbing to the evidence of their 
senses, as did the young somnambule whose history is pre- 
served for us by Bertrand. The boy was heard in the trance 
to exclaim — " Mais il n'y a pas de revenans, ce sont des contes. 
Cependant je les vois, la preuve est enti&re." 1 Starting, as 
they apparently did, with a belief in the spirit communings 
of their famous fellow-citizen, Emanuel Swedenborg, these 
Stockholm inquirers could hardly fail to see in these later 
manifestations corroboration of their faith and an earnest 
of fuller revelations to come. 

It was in Germany, as will appear in the next chapter, that 
the Spiritualist interpretation found most favour. There were 
many philosophers in that country who welcomed the som- 
nambulic revelations as affording support for mystical beliefs 
antecedently held on less cogent evidence. In the heated 
debates which preceded the appointment of the second French 
Commission there were numerous allusions to the Spiritualists ; 
and Germany and the countries of northern Europe were 
pointed to as the chief offenders against scientific orthodoxy. 
But they do not seem to have stood alone ; the clairvoyant 
who saw and conversed in a vision with two great prophets, 
and when asked to identify them, named Rousseau and 
Voltaire, must surely have been a Parisian. 2 

In France, however, as we have already seen, not merely 
by Mesmer and his immediate disciples, but by those who 
pursued the subject in the next generation, the phenomena of 
the somnambulic trance were studied as part of the natural 
sciences. However extravagant the theories which, in some 
cases, those phenomena were suborned to support, they yet 
did not pass beyond the limits of the materia} world. For 
the great body of investigators the interest in Animal 
Magnetism lay primarily in its use as a healing power, and 
secondarily as illustrating the workings of a new physical 
force. If there were any inquirers who saw in the phenomena 
indications of something transcending the physical universe, 

1 TraiU du Somnambulismc^ p. 437. * Foissac, op, cii. t p. 58. 

SPIRITUALISM IN FRANCE 79 

they remained for the most part inarticulate. They published 
few books, and contributed no articles to the leading periodicals 
devoted to Animal Magnetism. Echoes of the Spiritualist 
beliefs are found, however, from time to time in the early 
literature of the French magnetists. Even so early as 1787 
M. Tardy de Montravel indited a series of letters controverting, 
in the politest language, the view that in the trance the soul 
of the somnambule became freed from its fleshly bonds, and 
soared into the world of real existence. Per contra in 1793 
Keleph Ben-Nathan, in his Philosophic Divine, argued that in 
somnambulism the spirit of man did indeed hold intercourse 
with other spirits, but of an infernal order; and that the 
Spiritualist magnetisers were, in fact, practising that sorcery 
and divination against which the Israelites had been warned 
in the Jewish Scriptures. 

Some years later Deleuze, in the first volume of his 
Histoire Critique, found it necessary to devote a chapter to 
an examination of the views of the mystics and to argue at 
length that a belief in the phenomena of Animal Magnetism 
was not logically or necessarily associated with such doctrines. 
Later, in the Bibliothtque du Magn/tisme Animal, Deleuze 
defines his own position more precisely. 1 A friend had 
drawn his attention to the Spiritualist views then widely 
current in Germany, and asserted his own inclination towards 
them in preference to the naturalistic explanation adopted 
generally in France, in deference, as he suggests, to the 
fashionable philosophy of the day. Deleuze, in his reply, 
admits that the phenomena of clairvoyance and the like go 
far to establish the spirituality of the soul and its independence 
of the material organism, and thereby to destroy the strongest 
argument that can be adduced against the soul's survival. 
But he urges various considerations for holding the judgment, 
so far as relates to anything more than this admission, still in 
suspense. Spirit-intercourse must, he thinks, at present be 
regarded as not proven by any manifestation of the som- 
nambulic trance. The phenomena which seem to point in 
that direction are susceptible of another interpretation. 

In his later years, however, Deleuze appears to have been 
almost converted to the Spiritualistic hypothesis. One 
Dr. G. P. Billot had been experimenting for many years with 
various patients of that hysterical type which at that time, as 
at the present day, appears to have been so common in 
France. By means of leading questions he readily induced 
his patients, in the somnambulic trance, to declare that they 

1 Vol. iv. (1818), pp. 1-63. 

80 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

were possessed by spirits. The spirits in the case of Billot's 
subjects proclaimed themselves the guardian angels of the 
somnambules, through whom they communicated, confessed 
the Catholic verities, and on occasion, in proof of their 
claims, made the sign of the cross. All these matters and 
many more Billot reported at great length to Deleuze, in a 
correspondence which extended over more than four years, 
from March, 1829, to August, 1833. 1 At the beginning of 
the correspondence Deleuze adheres to the position above 
described. In one of his last letters, however, dated 
3rd August, 1833, when he was in his eighty-second year, 
and within a few months of the complete failure of his mental 
powers, he writes to his correspondent : " I have unlimited 
confidence in you, and cannot doubt the truth of your 
observations. You seem to me destined to effect a change in 
the ideas generally held on Animal Magnetism. I should 
like to live long enough to see the happy revolution, and to 
thank Heaven for having been introduced into the world of 
angels." 

On the strength of this and similar utterances Billot 
claims Deleuze as a convert to his views. But apart alto- 
gether from the effect produced by them on the octogenarian 
naturalist, Billot's letters are of considerable interest In the 
first place, it is clear that the author, though firmly convinced 
of the truth of his views, was reluctant to publish them — 
in itself strong proof of the rarity of similar views amongst 
his countrymen — because of the ridicule and opposition 
which he foresaw that they would encounter. The corre- 
spondence was not, in fact, published until six years later. 
But it is specially interesting to note that Billot's clairvoyants 
had on some occasions furnished him with physical phenomena. 
On the 5th March, 18 19, three of the somnambules — one man 
and two women — were sitting in a row. They were in the 
" theo-magnetic " state, in which they would see visions, 
and all of them the same vision. The only other persons 
present were Dr. Billot himself and a blind woman, who was 
apparently in the habit of consulting his clairvoyants : — 

"Towards the middle of the stance, one of the seeresses ex- 
claimed, ' There is the Dove — it is white as snow — it is flying about 
the room with something in its beak — it is a piece of paper. Let 
us pray.' A few moments later she added, * See, it has let the paper 
drop at the feet of Madame J ' (the blind woman).' 1 

1 Recherehes psychologiques , . . ou correspondance surle magnitisnu vital entre 
un Solitaire it Af. Deleuze, Paris, 1839. 

SPIRITUALISM IN FEANCE 81 

act, Dr. Billot saw a paper packet lying at the spot 
ed, which, on picking it up, he found to exhale a 
>mell. The contents of the packet consisted of three 
ieces of bone glued on to small strips of paper, with 
ds " St Maxime," " St Sabine," and " Many Martyrs " 
vely written beneath the fragments. The account is 
^ptember, 183 1. 1 

he 27th October in the following year, 1820, he 

hj a somewhat similar occurrence. The same blind 

had come to consult one of his somnambules. In 

:e the somnambule said that she saw a maiden hold- 

i branch covered with flowers. Billot remarked that 

re no plants in flower at that season in the country. 

/ the blind woman cried out that a spray of flowers 

been placed on her apron. On examination the 

9 proved to be a piece of Cretan thyme. Later the 

maiden, in answer to the doctor's entreaties, gave 

a piece of the same plant 2 

incidents Billot recounted to Deleuze as proofs 

of spirit-intervention. He cannot, he says, under- 

>r is it, indeed, easy of understanding — how the 

lid have been brought by Animal Magnetism only. 

1 in his reply states that he has just received a visit 

stinguished physician, who had had similar experi- 

, ne of this gentleman's somnambules had frequently 

lim material objects; but she never professed to 

views with spirits. Deleuze himself finds it easier 

5 that these " apports " should be conveyed by mag- 

er than that spirits should have power to move 

ejects. 

respondence is of value as showing that physical 
1 of the kind familiar to modern Spiritualists — the 
•me exactly foreshadows the " apports " of flowers 
witnessed in Mrs. Guppy's presence — occurred in connection 
with the trance long before 1848. Two or three similar 
incidents in connection with German clairvoyants are described 
in the next chapter. 

Whilst, however, it was in Germany, in the early part of the 
last century, that the idea of intercourse with spirits through 
the medium of an entranced subject first received its full 
development, yet France contributed, in the remarkable 
trance utterances recorded by Alphonse Cahagnet, one of its 
most striking illustrations. We learn from his writings that 
Cahagnet was familiar with the teachings of Swedenborg, 

1 Vol. ii. p. 8. a Vol. ii. p. 6. 

I.— G 

82 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

and it is not unlikely that he may have read the articles in 
the A tinales from which the account of the Swedish 
Spiritualists above quoted is taken. And no doubt to both 
these sources of inspiration we may add the interest evoked 
by the German clairvoyants, some reports of whose 
marvellous revelations must have reached Paris. But it is 
noteworthy that in the Paris of his day Cahagnet seems 
to have stood almost alone. He belonged to no school ; he 
persuaded few of his contemporaries to share his views of the 
somnambulist revelations which he recorded ; and but for the 
advent of Modem Spiritualism from America, he would, it 
may be hazarded, have found few readers. If in the present 
chapter, therefore, Cahagnefs work is treated at greater 
length than its historical importance would seem to justify, 
it is because these trance utterances are at once amongst the 
most remarkable and the best-attested documents on which 
the case for Spiritualism depends. 

Alphonse Cahagnet describes himself as a simple ouvrier. 
He was, in fact, as we learn from an authoritative account of 
him in lbs Journal du MagniHsme} originally a journeyman 
cabinet-maker, and subsequently took up the trade of 
restoring old furniture. His attention appears to have been 
attracted to the phenomena of somnambulism about 1845, 
and thereafter he employed much of his leisure in studying 
and recording the utterances of various entranced subjects. 

In January, 1848, he published at Paris the first volume of 
his Arcanes de la vie future dtvoiUs, in which he gave an 
account of communications received through eight somnam- 
bules, which purported to proceed from thirty-six persons of 
various stations, who had died at different epochs, some 
in two centuries previously. This first 
volume contained "revelations" of the usual post-Sweden- 
borgian kind about the constitution of the spirit spheres, the 
xcupations of the deceased, the bliss of the after-life, and 
' ■ n of angelic beings clothed in white, walking on beauti- 
ful '..\y- 1 1,-- li;:.ht of a fairer day than ours. 

m hi.! aabry be justified in assuming that these 

■■■'. and of the occupations of the spirits 

'■'■ :■;■ 1,. 11: !i !■ : 1 irge part of the first volume is taken 

; h.ul . iT.ovc ,:;,., te origin than the medium's own mind, 

'. ii ..' :-_■ vvmrl m . , sv..;i. 00 doubt directed, now by memories of 

1 ■-- "ii - \, :-.■■■•- in !,■: :hood, now by hints of the Sweden- 

1 11 ii> . . :S. iid of the revelations of German clair- 

Cahagnct himself. This first volume 

Hu xiii. p. j*o. 

SPIRITUALISM IN FRANCE 83 

also included personal messages from deceased friends of 
those persons whom Cahagnet admitted to witness the 
manifestations. But there is little or nothing to show that 
these communications did not emanate exclusively from the 
imagination of the medium, and we are dependent solely 
upon Cahagnet's good faith and competence for the accuracy 
of the reports given. Cahagnet appears, however, to have 
been a man of quite unusual sincerity and teachableness. 
The criticisms on his earlier work showed him where the 
evidence was defective ; and in the later seances described in 
his second volume, which was published in January, 1849, he 
appears to have done his utmost to establish the authenticity 
of the alleged spirit communications by procuring, wherever 
possible, the written attestations of the other persons present 
The medium in all these later sittings was Adele Maginot, 
whom he had known for many years. A natural somnambu- 
list from her childhood, she had, in the first instance, allowed 
Cahagnet to " magnetise " her, in order that he might put 
a stop to the spontaneous attacks which were impairing 
her health. He soon found her an excellent clairvoyant, 
especially for the diagnosis and cure of diseases. In the 
later stances, however, which took place in the spring and 
summer of 1848, Ad&le was chiefly consulted by persons who 
wished for interviews with deceased friends. Cahagnet drew 
up a statement of the communications made at these sittings, 
and asked the sitters to sign the statement, indicating how 
far the particulars given were true or false. These state- 
ments, with the signed attestations, are published. In the 
few cases where the names are not given in full Cahagnet 
explains that for sufficient reasons the sitters had desired 
that their names should be withheld from the general public, 
but that they were at the disposal of any private inquirer 
who might wish to satisfy himself of the genuineness of the 
accounts. Of course these reports, which do not profess to 
be verbatim, do not show what indications the clairvoyant 
may have received from leading questions or undesigned 
hints by the sitters. 

Cahagnet, indeed, seems to admit a certain amount of 
editing on his part. His words are : — 

"Cet ouvrage est loin d'ofirir l'int£ret du roman par son style 
forclment coup£, accident^. Aussi conviendrait-il mieux aux 
amateurs de la science qu'aux lecteurs passionnes des descriptions 
po&iques de nos romans du jour, fai chercfu a rtndre le style le 
plus clair possible en le depouillant de cet entourage de questions, de 
seines itrangeres i a genre de reflations. Je tiens moins a bien 

84 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

ccrire qu'a bien persuader. . . . Je suis reste dans les limites de 
1'austere verite, du role impartial de 1'historien, presentant a la 
philosophie du jour des fails dans toute leur nudite 1 , mais aussi 
dans toute leur sincentg." 1 

But it is evident from the accounts given that many of the 
sitters, at any rate, were sceptical, and on their guard against 
deception. And in some cases it seems clear that no hints 
received from the sitters could have furnished information. 
Another possible evidential defect is that though Cahagnet 
tells us that he has recorded all the somnambule's mistakes 
as well as all her correct statements, 2 he does not ex- 
pressly say that he has published the records of every 
seance. As, however, we have numbered records of forty-six 
seances in the interval between going to press with the first 
volume in the autumn of 1847 and the end of August, 1848, 
twenty-eight of which sittings took place between the 6th of 
March and the latter date, it may fairly be assumed that the 
sittings here recorded represent at least a substantial pro- 
portion of those which actually took place. Lastly, to 
complete the enumeration of the more prominent evidential 
defects, very few dates are given. In this respect also, 
however, the second volume shows a marked improvement 
over the first The ninety-six seances there recorded con- 
tain hardly a single date. But of the later seances several 
are dated, and the rest, from internal evidence, appear to 
be printed in chronological order. In short, in the whole 
literature of Spiritualism I know of no records of the kind 
which reach a higher evidential standard, nor any in which 
the writer's good faith and intelligence are alike so con- 
spicuous. ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 

The following are a few representative records. In the 
seance first quoted the sitter, Dejean de la Bastie, Delegate to 
the Government from the Isle of Bourbon, had come a few 
days previously and received a personal description of his 
1 ;!i ; , : ; l, !>: acknowledged to be exact with a few trifling 
■ 1 ■ . '(:■ ■!.■., 1 -.',;:■: her with much excellent paternal advice. 

■:'< I ■ 1 '1. ' : la Bastie, already quoted in Seance 138, 

■ ;,,.-. f|. ,, .jr. I isks for M. Marie-Joseph-Theodore 

:■ - i:i ■ ..,. ,\Ji ri:-ni about forty years of age, rather tall, 

ii 1,- ..,-, i.ji . Ml ',]■ .1 1 tempts Adcle by saying that this is 

■ < ihi: 1 :.:, 1 for whom tie asks. We see that this 

■ ■' accurate information. At the words 

£ aays, "He was tal\ and not brown- 

L p. 116. 

SPIRITUALISM IN FRANCE 85 

haired." Ad£le answers that the person whose appearance she is 
describing must have the same name and belong to his family, that 
she is conscious that it is so ; but he again asks for this gentleman, 
and a second person appears. The first remains. " The new-comer," 
she says, " is thirty years of age and over ; he is tall and thin, has 
dark, flaxen hair, a pale face, with rather sweet, dark blue eyes ; a 
long nose, a mouth that is large rather than small, a long chin. I see 
he wears a sort of great coat, such as is no longer worn. It is not at 
all becoming; it resembles a dressing-gown, but is not one; it is 
dark blue or black. This garb proclaims him to be a man in orders 
— a priest, or something of the kind. He looks stern. He must 
have had chest complaint I see that his lungs are distended with 
blood. He has been ailing a long time. He is very weak. I think 
that privations have caused this, and made his chest so delicate. I 
do not see, however, that he has the germs of any fatal disease, and 
this makes me believe that his death was violent, accidental, un- 
expected. His hand is large and thin. I see a medal on his breast, 
the size of the palm of a hand. He wears low-cut shoes, such are 
not worn now. He will not speak to me, so I conclude that he did 
not speak French." 

The following remarks precede the signature of M. Dejean : — "This 
person had more of gentleness and kindness than severity in his dis- 
position. He died of a malignant fever, accompanied by delirium 
lasting several days, and attributed by the doctor to the needs of a 
vigorous constitution thwarted by absolute continence." 

"The details acknowledged to be accurate. 

(Signed) Dejean de la Bastie, 

This 25M August, 1848. 18, Roe Neuve de Luxembourg." l 

The introduction in the first instance of a figure which 
is not recognised by the sitter is a not uncommon feature 
at these stances. Ad&le generally persisted, as in the 
present case, that the figure belonged to the same family ; 
and not infrequently the sitter was ultimately induced 
to recognise it In one case Cahagnet describes, 8 under 
the title " Quadruple Apparition/' a case in which three 
figures appeared before one was recognised. In this case 
the sitter appears ultimately to have given a grudging 
recognition to all four. But the unprejudiced inquirer will 
probably not share Cahagnet's view, that the introduction 
of three tardily recognised figures adds strength to the evi- 
dence. Cahagnet himself was satisfied that the somnambule 
actually held converse with spirits, and most of his sitters 
seem to have shared his conviction. But there were a 
few who ascribed the results to thought-transference; and 

1 Artafus, toL ii. pp. 219, 22a * Vol. iii. pp. 101-8. 

86 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

the sitting next to be quoted certainly lends support to this 
view. 

M. du Potet, a well-known writer on Animal Magnetism, 
and editor at that time of the Journal du Magnitisme in 
Paris, came to see Cahagnet's subject, and brought with him 
the Prince de Kourakine, who is described as Secretary to 
the Russian Ambassador. The Prince had asked for his 
sister-in-law, and a striking personal description had been 
given by Adile, which was acknowledged by the Prince, in 
the hearing of M. du Potet and two other witnesses, to be 
accurate. Unfortunately, the Prince's signed attestation was 
not procured on the spot ; he had promised to come again, 
but — as Cahagnet delicately put it — " les 6v6nements survenus 
en France l'ont forc6 de partir," and the promised testimony 
was never obtained. After the apparition of the Russian 
Princess, however, the record continues: — 

No. 117. 1 — M. du Potet wishes in his turn to call up M. Dubois, 
a doctor, a friend of his who had been dead about fifteen months. 

Adele said : " I see a grey-headed man, he has very little hair on 
the front of his head ; his forehead is bare and prominent at the 
temples, making his head appear square. He may be about sixty 
years of age. He has two wrinkles on either side of his cheeks, a 
crease under his chin, making it look double; ha is short-necked 
and stumpy ; has small eyes, a thick nose, rather a large mouth, a 
flat chin, and small thin hands. He does not look to me quite so 
tall as M. du Potet ; if he is not stouter he is more broad-shouldered. 
He wears a brown frock-coat with side-pockets. I see him draw a 
snuff-box out of one of them and take a pinch. He has a very 
funny walk, he does not carry himself well, and has weak legs ; he 
must have suffered from them. He has rather short trousers. Ah ! 
he does not clean his shoes every day, for they are covered with 
mud. Taking it all together, he is not well dressed. He has asthma, 
for he breathes with difficulty. I see, too, that he has a swelling in 
the abdomen, he has something to support it I have told him 
that it is M. du Potet who asked for him. He talks to me of 
magnetism with incredible volubility; he talks of everything at 
once ; he mixes everything up ; I cannot understand any of it ; it 
makes him sputter saliva." 

M. du Potet asks that the apparition may be asked why he has 
not appeared to him before, as he had promised. He answers: 
" Wait till I find out my whereabouts ; I have only just arrived, I 
am studying everything I see. I want to tell you all about it when 
I appear, and I shall have many things to tell you." 

" Which day did you promise me you would do so ? " " On a 
Wednesday." Ad£le adds : " This man must be forgetful ; I am 

1 VoL ii. pp. 1 1 8-20. 

SPIRITUALISM IN FRANCE 87 

sure that he was very absent-minded." M. du Potet asks further: 
" When will you appear to me ? " "I cannot fix the time ; I shall 
try to do so in six weeks." " Ask him if he was fond of the Jesuits ?" 
At this name he gave such a leap in the air, stretching out his arms 
and crying, " The Jesuits," that Adele draws back quickly, and is so 
startled that she does not venture to speak to him again. 

M. du Potet declares that all these details are very accurate, that 
he cannot alter a syllable. He says that this man's powers of con- 
versation were inexhaustible ; he mixed up all the sciences to which 
he was devoted, and spoke with such volubility that, as the clair- 
voyant says, he sputtered in consequence. He took little pains 
with his appearance ; he was so absent-minded that he sometimes 
forgot to eat When anyone mentioned the Jesuits to him he 
jumped as Adele has described. He was always covered with mud 
like a spaniel. It is not surprising that the clairvoyant should see 
him with muddy shoes. He had, in fact, promised M. du Potet 
that he would appear to him on a Wednesday or a Saturday. M. 
du Potet has acknowledged the accuracy of this apparition in No. 75 
of the Journal du Magnetisme. 

In effect, in the Journal of August 10th of the same year, in 
reviewing the first volume of Cahagnet's work, du Potet gives 
handsome testimony to the striking nature of the impersona- 
tion, " si bien que je croyais le voir moi-m£me, tant le tableau 
en £tait saisissant Bientdt cette ombre s'est enfuie en effray- 
ant la somnambule ; un seul mot avait cause* cette disparition 
subite, et mon £tonnement en fut porte" k son comble, car ce 
m6me mot le mettait toujours en fureur." But du Potet, for 
all that, is inclined to attribute the phenomenon to trans- 
mission of thought from his own mind, 1 and a few months 
later, 2 in reviewing Cahagner/s second volume, he takes 
occasion to give the result of his further inquiries on this 
stance. Generally, the minute description of the personal 
appearance and other particulars which were prominent in 
du Potet's own mind at the time were correct ; and other 
details were correctly given which du Potet might have 
heard, but had certainly not remembered at the time. He 
had ascertained, however, from the widow and children that 
Dr. Dubois took no tobacco ; never had a redingote of the 
colour described ; had no hernia, and consequently wore no 
bandage. Moreover, the apparition predicted never came off. 
Du Potet, however, adds expressly that Dr. Dubois was un- 
known in life to Cahagnet and his somnambule. 

But, in fact, Cahagnet's own records furnish us with the 
most convincing refutation of his theory that these com- 

1 Journal du Magntti$nu % voL vii. p. 89. * /did., vol. viii. p. 24. 

88 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

munications were authentic messages from the spirits of the 
dead. For there are two or three accounts which, while they 
point to the action of telepathy, are extremely difficult to 
reconcile with the theory of spirit-intercourse. On two 
occasions, recorded in the second volume, Adfcle was asked to 
search for a long-lost relative of the sitter. On each occasion 
she found the man alive, and conversed with his spirit. 

M. Lucas came to inquire after the fate of his brother-in-law, 
who had disappeared after a quarrel some twelve years 
previously. Adfcle, in the trance, found the man at once, said 
that he was alive, and that she saw him in a " foreign country," 
where there were trees like those in America, and that he was 
busy gathering seeds from small shrubs about three feet 
high. He would not answer her questions, and she asked to 
be awoke, as she was afraid of wild beasts. 1 M. Lucas 
returned a few days afterwards, bringing with him the mother 
of the missing man. 

No. 99. 2 — Adele, as soon as she was asleep, said: "I see him." 
" Where do you see him ? " " Here." " Give us a description of 
him again, and also of the place where he is." " He is a fair man, 
tanned by the heat of the sun ; he is very stout, his features are 
fairly regular; brown eyes, large mouth; he appears gloomy and 
meditative. He is dressed as a workman, in a sort of short blouse. 
He is occupied at present, as he was last time, in gathering seed, 
which resembles peppercorns, but I do not think it is pepper ; it is 
larger. This seed grows on small shrubs about one m&tre high. 
There is a little negro with him occupied in the same way." " Try 
to obtain some answer to-day. Get him to tell you the name of the 
country where you see him." " He will not answer." " Tell him that 
his good mother, for whom he had a great affection, is with you, and 
asks for news of him." "Oh! at the mention of his mother he 
turned round and said to me, ( My mother ! I shall not die without 
seeing her again. Comfort her, and tell her that I always think of 
her. I am not dead ! ' " " Why does he not write to her ? " " He 
has written to her, but the vessel has no doubt been wrecked — at 
least he supposes this to be so, since he has received no answer. 
He tells me that he is in Mexico. He has followed the emperor, 
Don Pedro ; he has been imprisoned for five years; he has suffered a 
great deal, and will use every effort to return to France ; they will 
see him again." " Can he name the place in which he is living ? " 
M No ; it is very far inland. These countries have no names." " Is 
he living with a European ? " " No, with a coloured man." " Why 
*oes he not write to his mother?" " Because no vessels come to the 
»ce where he is. He does not know to whom to turn. Besides, 
only knew how to write a very little, and has almost forgotten. 

1 Arcanes, vol ii. pp. 32, 33. * Ibid. % vol. ii. pp. 34-37. 

SPIRITUALISM IN FRANCE 89 

There is no one with him who can render him this service ; no one 
speaks his language; he makes himself understood with great 
difficulty. Besides that, he has never been of a communicative 
disposition or a talker. He seems to be rather a surly fellow. It 
is very difficult to get these few words out of him. One would think 
he were dumb." " In short, how can one manage to write to him or 
hear news of him ? " " He knows nothing about it He can only 
say these three things : I am in Mexico, I am not dead, they will 
see me again." "Why did he leave his parents in this manner, 
without saying anything to them, as he was happy at home?" 
" This man was very reserved ; he hardly ever spoke. He loved his 
mother very much, but he had not the same affection for his father, 
who was a passionate, surly man, and often treated him brutally. 
The cup had long since been full. It was not the trifling dispute 
that he had had with his father the day before his departure that 
made him decide to go away ; it had been his fixed determination 
for some time past He told no one of it. He went away on the 
sly. Having kissed them all the evening before, he made good his 
escape next day, without another word. Do not be uneasy, madam ; 
you will see him again!" This good woman burst into tears, 
because she recognised the truth of every detail given her by Adele. 
She did not find anything at fault in the description. The dis- 
position, the education, and the departure of her son were as Adele 
said ; but a greater semblance of probability is given to the clair- 
voyant's account by the fact that his relations had an idea that he 
had enlisted in Don Pedro's army, and at one time took some steps 
to ascertain the truth of it M. Lucas told me of this detail on a 
journey which he afterwards made to Paris. No information was, 
however, obtainable. 

Shortly after this incident M. Mirande, the head of the 
printing-office in which the first volume of the Arcanes had 
been printed, came to Cahagnet and asked for a sitting. He 
was much impressed with what he saw and heard, and finally 
begged Adele to ask for the apparition of his brother, who, 
he believed, had died in the Russian campaign. Adele did 
not see him in the spirit world, and said that he was not dead, 
that she saw him on earth. She then gave a description of 
his personal appearance, uniform, and disposition, which, with 
certain qualifications and corrections, appears to have tallied 
fairly well with M. Mirande's recollections and surmises. She 
also gave a plausible account, alleged to be derived from 
actual conversation with the absent brother, of his whereabouts, 
and an explanation of his long silence. 1 

We have, unfortunately, no corroboration of the truth of 
the statements made about these two persons. A third 

1 Arcanes, ro\. ii. pp. 60-3. 

SPIRITUALISM IN FRANCE 91 

relatives will see them before they die ; neither, however, is 
in a hurry to come back ; and neither is willing to discover 
the name of his present place of abiding. 

To suppose, as the recorder supposes, that these narratives 
are authentic revelations obtained from actual conversations 
with the spirits of men living in unnamed and — as Cahagnet 
explains at length — probably nameless localities in the 
interior of Mexico or Asiatic Russia, is to strain credulity 
to the breaking-point But if these two narratives are not 
what they seem to be, what are we to say of the other 
narratives in the book, which are cast in the same dramatic 
form, and contain similar details harmonising with the ex- 
pectations or memories of the interlocutors ? If those are 
not authentic messages from the distant living, we require 
some further warrant for the assumption that these are 
authentic messages from the spirits of the dead. Considered 
in conjunction with the visions of heaven and dead play- 
mates which characterised the earlier trances, these later utter- 
ances certainly point to an exclusively mundane origin. 1 

1 It is fair to say that, in his third volume, Cahagnet records another case in 
which a missing person was found by Adele and news of him conveyed to his 
anxious mother, and that in this case the details communicated — which were 
beyond the mother's knowledge or conjecture — were stated by her subsequently 
to have proved correct. There is, however, no very striking correspondence in 
the details which she actually quotes ; and as the only account of the sitting is 
contained in a letter written by the mother "some months" later, and some 
months, also, after the unexpected receipt of the confirmatory letter from her 
absent son, which came a few weeks after the sitting, the record cannot be held 
to have much value (Vol. iii pp. 141-9). 

CHAPTER VII 
THE GERMAN SOMNAMBULES 

IN Germany the history of Animal Magnetism was more 
complex. As already said, Spiritualist views found many 
disciples. But not all the German magnetisers gave 
themselves over to parleying with spirits. From the first 
there were students of the new facts at least as cautious and 
sober-minded as in any other European country. With such 
men as Gmelin, Wienholt, Fischer, Kluge, Kieser, Animal 
Magnetism was, just as to Deleuze himself, primarily an 
adjunct to the art of healing; and perhaps most of the 
German investigators possessed sounder knowledge of the 
physical sciences in general and of medicine in particular 
than the earlier French magnetisers could claim. But the 
phenomena observed were essentially the same. The ex- 
periments of M. Tardy de Montravel were repeated, con- 
firmed, and improved upon. Light was observed to stream 
from the fingers of the operator, from the poles of a magnet, 
from the heart of a living frog, or the spinal marrow of a 
recently killed ox. This radiant light would impregnate a 
glass of water, and would be conducted, reflected, or dispersed 
by the intervention of various substances. Metals exercised 
characteristic effects on somnambules at a distance of ten or 
fifteen paces, inducing severally pricking, warmth, numbness, 
drowsiness, catalepsy, and so on ; the poles of the magnet 
could be distinguished by the different sensations to which 
they gave rise. In a word, we find scattered through the 
writings of the first two decades of the nineteenth century the 
germs of those curious pseudo-observations, which Reichenbach 
was a little later to expand into an enormous treatise. 

Again we read that to the clairvoyant somnambule her 
body is transparent, so tHact the exact condition of every 
organ can be seen, and th^ nature of any ailment described. 
A good clairvoyant, of co^v rse, possessed the same power of 

tght into the bodily prc^^-gges and ailments of others, and 

9* 

THE GERMAN SOMNAMBULES 93 

could foretell the course of diseases, and prescribe the fitting 
remedies. 

Again, in the books of this period we find much of com- 
munity of sensation between operator and subject; of reading 
of thought; of the action of the operators will — even at a 
distance of some miles — in sending the patient into trance ; 
and finally of clairvoyance, whether at close quarters or at a 
considerable distance. 1 The latter faculty — though abundant 
illustrations of it are given — is said by Kieser 2 to be much 
rarer than in France. But the incident which apparently 
provoked the comparison — an account in the Annales du 
Magnttisme Animal of a man who on his first essay had 
made five women simultaneously clairvoyant in one evening — 
can hardly, perhaps, be taken as representative. 8 

One of the most fully recorded series of observations in 
thought-transference and clairvoyance is to be found in a case 
given at great length in the Archiv fur den thierischen 
Magnetismus, by Dr. Van Ghert, Secretary of the Royal 
Mineralogical Society at Jena. 4 Van Ghert's patient was a 
young woman of twenty-eight, who appears to have been a 
neurotic of the same type as Frau HaufTe, and the other 
somnambules to be discussed later. Several instances are 
quoted in detail, in which the somnambule gave accurate 
descriptions, to persons who came from a distance, of their 
homes, the furniture contained in each room, the personal 
appearance of the inmates, their mental idiosyncrasies, and 
even the diseases from which they suffered, and the appropriate 
remedies. If we may trust Van Ghert, who seems to have 
been a careful observer and without strong bias towards the 
marvellous, the descriptions coincided so closely with the 

1 Klagc, Vcrsuch finer Darstellung des ammeUischen Magnetismus, etc. 
(Berlin, 1815), gives a useful summary of the observations and views of his 
predecessors on all these points. 

* Archiv fUrdtn thiertschtn Magnet ismus, vol i. part iii. pp. 126, 127. 

* The numerous observations which are cited to prove the existence of a 
faculty of vision, either in the pit of the stomach or some other portion of the 
body, are as inconclusive as those quoted by the French Animal Magnetists. In 
most of the cases, indeed, no precautions, or wholly inadequate precautions, 
seem to have been taken to exclude normal vision through the half-closed eyes, 
and in the rare instances where vision at the time was apparently impossible, as 
when the word to be read was wrapped up in vellum paper and scaled before the 
sitting, there is still open the possibility that the subject might have surreptitiously 
obtained knowledge of the text beforehand, or that she might have been influenced 
by transmission of thought from the hypnotist and those around who knew the 
word. {Archiv, voL iv. part iii. pp. 80-2. See also vol. iii. part ii. p. 131 ; 
part iii pp. 14 and 18 ; v. part iii. p. 14 ; vi. part ii. pp. 103, 124, and elsewhere, 
and the numerous references given in Kluge's book already quoted. ) 

4 Archiv, vol ii. part i. pp. 3-186 ; part ii pp. 3-51. The account given in 
the Archiv is translated from the original Dutch. 

94 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

facts that something more than chance must have been at 
work. But the evidence, since it rests on Van Ghert's 
testimony alone, and we have no means of knowing how the 
conversations were reported, or what hints may have been 
given by the witnesses, is no better, perhaps not so good, as 
in some of the cases quoted in a later chapter from English 
observers. 

A large selection of instances of apparent thought- 
transference and clairvoyance, cited for the most part from 
contemporary publications, will be found in another work of 
this date, Der Magnetismus und die allgemeine Weltsprache, 
by H. M. Wesermann, Government Assessor and Chief 
Inspector of Roads at Dusseldorf. 1 The most valuable part 
of Wesermann's book is a brief record of some experiments 
of his own in thought-transference at a distance. On four 
occasions he reports that he succeeded in inducing four 
separate acquaintances to dream on matters suggested by 
himself. On the fifth trial he caused the subject of the 
experiment, and a friend who happened to be in his company 
at the time, to see a waking vision of a woman's figure. 2 The 
experiments are of interest as anticipating very closely some 
experiments on the same lines recorded in recent years in the 
publications of the Society for Psychical Research. 

The writers so far quoted, even when treating of clair- 
voyance and similar marvellous powers, expressly repudiated 
a Spiritualist or mystical interpretation of the phenomena, 
and regarded Animal Magnetism as a branch of physical 
science. Thus Wesermann supposed that his power of 
influencing the thoughts of a distant acquaintance depended 
upon the projection from himself of a stream of magnetic 
fluid, visible to the clairvoyant eye as a stream of light 
Van Ghert's patient never professed to commune with angels. 
Kluge* contends that the pious Jung, in claiming that the 
denizens of the spiritual world are perceptible to our senses, 
overshoots the mark, and falls back into sheer materialism. 
Ghost-seeing, in Kluge's view, whether induced or spontaneous, 
is pure illusion. So Kieser, in reviewing in the Archiv* 
Meier's history of Auguste M tiller, to be discussed later, 
takes occasion to controvert Meier's explanation of the 
apparition of his somnambule to a friend at a distance. 

1 Crcveld, 1822. 

a Op. ctt., pp. 26-30. The experiments are quoted 'in Phantasms of the 
living, vol. i. pp. io 1, 102. The fifth and most important experiment is given in 
full in the Journal S. P. K. for March, 1 890 ; and again in my own Apparitions 
and Thought- Transference, p. 231. 

* Versueh emer Darstellung, pp. 300, 301. * Vol. ill. part iii. p. 1 19. 

THE GERMAN SOMNAMBULES 95 

Meier claimed the incident as a proof that the soul of the 
ecstatic can leave the body and make itself perceptible to 
human senses. Kieser sees in it merely proof of an action 
upon the mind of the seer exercised by the mind of the 
ecstatic. For the soul, says he, being immaterial, cannot 
make itself visible except through its proper body. But, 
while rejecting the crudely Spiritualistic view, Wienholt, 
Kieser, and Kluge — to mention no others — are agreed that in 
the higher stages of the trance the soul approaches the 
threshold of the universal life, and seems partly to free itself 
from the shackles of space and time. 1 Whilst Nasse goes 
further, and frankly claims that in somnambulism we have to 
deal with a fact of the spiritual order ; and that any attempt 
to correlate its laws with those of the physical universe must 
end in failure. 2 It is clear, indeed, that men who believed in 
the reality of clairvoyance at a distance (as distinguished 
from reading the thoughts of those present) must have been 
hard put to it to find an explanation in physical terms. 

But side by side with these sober-minded investigators there 
were many who saw in the phenomena of the trance proofs 
of intercourse with a spiritual world, and recorded the utter- 
ances of the somnambules as precious revelations from super- 
human sources. The founder of this school may be said to 
be J. H. Jung, better known as Jung-Stilling; not, indeed, that 
Jung could or did claim to be the originator of the scheme of 
spiritual cosmology which he propounded. Much of it could 
certainly be found in Swedenborg ; much of it, again, is the 
common property of the mystics of all ages. And no small 
part of his teaching was simply a re-statement in modern 
terms of certain Christian beliefs. But Jung's special dis- 
tinction is that he placed the doctrine of the psychic body on 
a new and surer basis, first by associating it with the con- 
ception — then for the first time beginning to gain general 
acceptance in the scientific world — of the luminiferous ether ; 
and secondly, by supporting and explaining it by means of 
illustrations drawn from the observed phenomena of som- 
nambulism. Jung, who was born in 1740, began life in 
humble circumstances. In early manhood, however, he obtained 
a medical degree, and practised for many years as a doctor, 
ultimately becoming Professor of Political Economy at the 
Universities of Marburg and Heidelberg. His book, Theorie 

1 Wienholt, Lectures in Somnambulism (? 1804). I know this work only in an 
English translation. Kieser, "System des Teliurismus oder tkUrischen Mag- 
n/ttsmus." Kluge, op. cit. t pp. 259-306. 

2 Archivfiir den thieriscnen Magnetismus, vol. i. part iii. pp. 3-22. 

96 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

der Geister-Kunde, appears to have been published in the 
last years of his life. It is hardly, even in form, a scientific 
treatise, being avowedly a piece of Christian apologetics. 
About three-fourths of the book consist of a collection of 
ghost stories, anecdotes of prophecy, and second sight, recorded 
without any attempt at verification or critical treatment 1 

Jung gives a convenient summary of his theory, in the 
shape of fifty-five propositions, from which I quote the 
following : — 

9. Animal Magnetism undeniably proves that we have an inward 
man, a soul, which is constituted of the divine spark, the immortal 
spirit possessing reason and will, and of a luminous body (Luhlshulk), 
which is inseparable from it 

xo. Light, electric, magnetic, galvanic matter, and ether appear to 
be all one and the same body under different modifications. This 
light-substance or ether is the element which connects body and soul, 
and the spiritual (SinnenweU) and material world together. 

n. When the inward man, the human soul, forsakes the inward 
sphere, where the senses operate (du inture Merkstdtte der Sinner 
verldssf) and merely continues the vital functions, the body falls 
into an entranced state, or a profound sleep, during which the soul 
acts more freely, powerfully, and actively. All its faculties are 
elevated. 

12. The more the soul is divested of the body, the more extensive, 
free, and powerful is its inward sphere of operation. It has, 
therefore, no need whatever of the body in order to live and exist 
The latter is rather an hindrance to it . . . 

1 3. The whole of these propositions are sure and certain inferences, 
which I have drawn from experiments in Animal Magnetism. These 
most important experiments undeniably show that the soul does not 
require the organs of sense in order to be able to see, hear, smell, 
taste, and feel in a much more perfect state. . . . 

30. The boundless ether that fills the space of our solar system 
is the element of spirits in which they live and move. The atmosphere 

1 The value of this evidence may be estimated from a single example. Jang is 
anxious to prove his contention that the soul of a man can leave the body while 
the man is still alive, and show itself in a distant place. The narrative which he 
selects for this purpose was told him by a friend (unnamed) on whose veracity he 
could rely; the friend heard it from a respectable {redlichc) individual (unnamed) ; 
the source of this respectable individual s information is not mentioned ; but he 
was not, apparently, personally concerned in the episode, and it cannot be inferred 
from Jungs account that he was even acquainted with the chief actors (unnamed). 
The only date mentioned in connection with the case is "about 60 or 70 years 
ago," and this does not relate to the date of the incident itself, which had taken 
place an indefinite number of years previously. I do not quote the story in full, 
since, perhaps because of the length of its pedigree, perhaps because of the 
soundness of the narrator's theological views, it forms a prominent item in nearly 
every collection of ghost stories since published {TA, der Geistcr Kundt, new 
edition, p. 60. Stuttgart, 1827). 

THE GERMAN SOMNAMBULES 97 

(Dunstkreis) that surrounds our earth, down to its centre, and 
particularly the night, is the abode of fallen angels, and of such 
human souls as die in an unconverted state. 1 

It remains to add that Jung taught that the trance was a 
diseased condition ; and that the attempt to communicate 
with spirits or foretell the future by such means was highly 
dangerous and sinful (Propositions 23, 24); and warns his 
readers against yielding implicit trust to the somnambule's 
utterances. But Jung's successors paid little heed to these 
warnings, and in the course of the next thirty years there 
were recorded at prodigious length the sayings and doings of 
many " highly remarkable somnambules." One of the first of 
these to attract attention — an attention which the nature of 
her performances scarcely seems to have merited — was a 
certain Fraiilein Auguste M tiller, of Carlsruhe, whose history, 
as preserved by Dr. Meier, may be taken as fairly representa- 
tive. 2 The young woman in the trance was able to diagnose 
and prescribe for the ailments of herself and other persons in 
the usual fashion. She said in the trance that she could 
discern not only the bodies of men, but also their thoughts 
and characters ; but no proofs are offered of this power. She 
claimed to converse with the spirit of her dead mother. She 
also said that she could visit her brother in Vienna, and make 
her presence known to him ; but she rejected Dr. Meier's sug- 
gestion that she should speak aloud, for fear that she should 
frighten him. It is recorded that with her eyes closed she 
could read theatre tickets and songs out of a music-book. 
But no details are given. The nearest approach to a test is 
as follows : Meier asked her one evening whether she could 
tell him anything noteworthy which had recently happened 
in his own family, and the clairvoyant in reply was able to 
tell him of the death of his father-in-law at a town fifteen 
miles off. Meier had received the news of this event on the 
morning of that day, but was confident — a confidence which 
he does not enable us to share — that the somnambule knew 
nothing about it One other case may be cited. A friend of 
Auguste, one Catharine, happened to be suffering from tooth- 
ache, and told the somnambule that she would probably be 
unable to pay her usual visit on the following day. Auguste 
replied," I will visit you, then, to-night" That night Catha- 
rine is reported to have seen Auguste enter her room clothed 

1 From the translation by Samuel Jackson, Theory of Pneumatology. London, 

1834. 

2 Hockst merkmiirdigt Geschichte der magnetise h helhehendcn Auguste MiilUr. 

Stuttgart, 1818. 
I. — H 

98 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

in a night-dress. The form, which hovered above the floor, 
came up to Catharine and lay beside her in bed. In the 
morning Catharine awoke to find her toothache gone, and 
was much astonished to learn that Auguste had never left 
her own bed all the night through. The incident is regarded 
by Meier as a manifest proof of the existence of a psychic 
body. Kieser, as already mentioned, reviewing the case in 

Xj the ArcAiv, adduces it as a striking instance of action at a 
distance, conditioned by the rapport between the young 
women. The reader may possibly prefer a still simpler 
hypothesis. 

In another case, which is recorded by Dr. C. Romer, we 
advance a little further into the realms of the unknown. 1 

The somnambule in this case was Romer's own daughter, 
a girl of fifteen, who in November, 1813, was seized with con- 
vulsive attacks, followed by catalepsy. Ultimately she be- 
came somnambulic, prescribed for her own ailments and 
those of her father and other persons, rejecting all other 
medical treatment than her own. Romer frequently asserts 
that she displayed in the trance knowledge which she could 
not possibly have acquired from normal sources. But he 
offers little evidence for the statement ; and most of the utter- 
ances which he records were from their nature incapable of 
verification. One curious feature of this trance — a feature 
which we shall see developed to a much greater extent in a 

j later somnambule — was the tendency to arithmetical symbol- 

ism. Romer reproduces a whole page of numerical calcula- 
tions, the meaning of which is left obscure, but which seem 
to have profoundly impressed the onlookers as having 
presumably some mystic significance. 2 In another direction 
Praulein Romer advanced beyond Auguste Mullen Like her, 
she conversed freely with her dead relations. But, further, 
she was conducted, sometimes by a deceased relative, but 
more frequently by the spirit of a still living companion, one 
Louise, to the moon. But, alas ! her description of her first 
voyage reveals a conception of the solar system scarcely more 
adequate than that of the Blessed Damosel, watching, " from 
the gold bar of Heaven," 

" . . . the tides of day and night 
With flame and darkness ridge 
The void, to where this Earth 
Spins like a fretful midge." 

1 AusfuhrNch* histariscki Dante Hung eintr hikkst merkwurdigen Somnam- 
bulic etc., etc yon C Romer, PH.D., etc. Stuttgart, 1821. 
1 Ibid., p. 146. 

THE GERMAN SOMNAMBULES 99 

« 

It was night when she left the earth — 5.30 on a January 
afternoon — and continued night, apparently, as she voyaged 
to the moon, for she describes how that luminary, at one 
point, showed forty times larger, but there is no mention of 
the sun. However, she enjoyed a unique astronomical ex- 
perience. She watched the sun rise over the lunar moun- 
tains, basked in his rays for a whole lunar day, witnessed his 
setting, and returned to the earth in time for supper. Miss 
Romer was probably not aware that in the ordinary course of 
nature about a fortnight would elapse between the rising and 
the setting of the sun on our satellite. 

After this, no description of birds, flowers, waterfalls, 
mountains, lovely valleys, and even the inhabitants of the 
moon, can seem anything but tame. In truth, her account of 
lunar scenery bears some resemblance to a pre-Raphaelite 
painter's conception of the plains of heaven. At her first 
visit to the moon she learns that her two little sisters had 
already gone to "Juno": the spirits of the dead apparently 
come first to the moon, and then progress to higher spheres. 1 
The knowledge of this fact lends a painful interest to Miss 
Romer's first interview with her deceased grandparents, 
whom she meets in the moon, and, with the terrible candour 
of the clairvoyant, asks why they have not already gone 
higher. Satisfactory explanations are given ; and, indeed, the 
somnambule allows that her relatives shine more than they 
did upon the earth. 2 

It would be scarcely profitable to carry our study of these 
revelations further. It should be noted, however, that Romer 
apparently accepts them, if not as indubitably authentic, at 
least as having serious claims upon our consideration. He 
records them with scrupulous care and at great length, and 
he mentions that the descriptions of the inhabitants of other 
worlds given by his daughter accord precisely with the 
descriptions given by Ennemoser's subject and by another 
more recent clairvoyant 8 

Justinus Kerner, a well-known poet of that generation and 
a physician of some distinction, had his attention early called 
to the trance and its value in therapeutics. In 1826 he 
published the history of two " remarkable " somnambules, 
whom he had treated magnetically. Towards the end of the 
same year there came to him at Weinsberg, to be treated by 
him, one Frau Frederica Hauffe, better known from her birth- 
place as the "Seeress of Prevorst" A full history of her 

1 Page 54. * Page 85. * Page 213, note. 

100 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

remarkable trances was published by Kerner in 1829, shortly 
after the death of the Seeress. 1 

From her childhood she had been delicate ; had suffered 
from convulsive attacks, had fallen into spontaneous trance, 
and seen visions. She had already been magnetised, with 
more or less success, by different persons on several occasions. 
When she came to Weinsberg, Kerner, by his own account, 
was somewhat incredulous, and disposed to treat her by 
ordinary medicine rather than by magnetism. After a few 
weeks, however, finding drugs of no use, he magnetised her, 
and thereafter followed implicitly the treatment prescribed by 
her in the trance. From that time, until her death in August, 
1829, she appears to have spent the greater part of her exist- 
ence in somnambulism — the trance, or secondary condition, 
lasting on one occasion for about a year. 

The phenomena claimed to be observed in her case were 
such as we are already familiar with. She reacted in various 
ways to the presence or contact of stones, metals, plants, and 
drugs. She would become cataleptic if left seated on a sand- 
stone bench ; glass or crystal, on the other hand, awakened 
her from the magnetic state. She wielded the divining rod 
with great success. She could distinguish magnetised water 
by its appearance, and could even tell how many passes had 
been made over it Further, in the magnetic state the lower 
part of her body would involuntarily rise out of the water in 
her bath — a procedure which reminded Kerner of the medi- 
aeval test for witches. She could see the internal mechanism 
of the human body, and could trace and accurately describe 
all the ramifications of the nervous system. In die case of 
persons who had lost a limb she could see the psychic form of 
the limb still attached to the body. 

But signs and wonders of this kind, which are more or less 
common to all somnambules of the period, need not detain us 
further. The Seeress is conspicuous, above all her fellows in 
the history of somnambulism in Germany, for three things : 
the numerous proofs which she purported to afford of abnor- 
mal powers of vision, whether of the distant or of the future, 
and of seeing and conversing with ghosts ; the physical dis- 
turbances which were observed in her presence; and her 
extraordinary revelations on things spiritual. 

1 Die Seherin van Prevorst, Eroffnungtn uber das irnitrt Leben aes Menscken 
und uber das Hcreinrage* einer Getsterwelt in die Unsere, Stuttgart und Tubin- 
gen. A second edition, to which reference is made in this account, was published 
n 1S32, and two others, in 1838 and 1846 respectively. An English translation, 
greatly abridged, by Mrs. Crowe, was published in London in 1845. 

THE GERMAN SOMNAMBULES 101 

As regards the first, Kerner gives several instances of 
clairvoyant and prophetic dreams and visions ; but though he 
shows a better notion of evidence than many of his contem- 
poraries, none of the records, are^of much account Dates and 
other essential details are freqtiontJy lacking, and in the only 
cases which appear to be definite abq- Conclusive we are depen- 
dent, so far as can be gathered from .'Kernels narrative, on 
members of the Seeress* family for ' alf particulars of the 
alleged fulfilment 

But the Seeress' supernormal faculties fcrJrd their chief 
field of activity in seeing and holding conversations with 
phantasmal figures, the spirits of deceased men arid /vvdiinen, 
who came to her mostly for help, guidance, and prayer.* * : fn 
this manner she held communication, on occasion, with the 
spirits of deceased citizens of Weinsberg, and received from 
them much information on their affairs and family history. 

Thus, a certain poor family in Weinsberg were disturbed by 
a ghost This came to Kerner's knowledge, and he brought 
the woman of the house to see Frau Hauffe. Thereafter the 
ghost seems to have attached itself to the Seeress. He — the 
ghost — told her that he had lived in the house where he had 
first appeared, and that he had in his lifetime defrauded two 
orphans ; later he said that he had lived about 1700 ; that he 
had died at the age of seventy-nine ; and later still, that his 
name was Belon. Search in the town records showed that 
there had been a burgomaster of that name, who had actually 
lived in the house named ; he had died in 1740, aged seventy- 
nine, and had been a guardian of orphans. 1 

On another occasion the Seeress was much disturbed by 
noises from an unquiet ghost, who ultimately revealed himself 
as the spirit of a bankrupt solicitor, recently deceased, who 
had owed much money in the town. In connection with the 
communication the Seeress was enabled, as a test, to describe 
the whereabouts of a certain document, which was ultimately 
discovered in the position described by her in the office of the 
High Bailiff. 2 The incident is narrated at considerable 
length by Kerner, who regards it as a striking proof of spirit- 
identity. It does not appear, however, that either in this case 
or in that of the Burgomaster Belon any information was 
actually furnished by Madame Hauffe which could not have 
been obtained from local gossip, or at most by carefully con- 
ducted inquiries. 

These ghostly figures which purported constantly to appear 
to the Seeress herself, both by night and by day, were 

1 VoL ii. pp. 136-71. 3 Vol. ii. pp. 93-110. 

102 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

occasionally visible to others. Thus Kerner himself on one 
occasion saw a cloudy figure : — 

" On the 8th December, at seven jn the evening, I happened to be 
in Frau H.'s outer room, from Which- one could see into her bed- 
room. I saw there a cloudlike -figure (a grey pillar of cloud as 
though with a head), without fuiy definite outlines. I seized a light 
and hurried silently • irtto-the room with it. There I found her 
staring fixedly at the Spot where I had seen the cloudy form. It had 
disappeared, however, from my view." 1 

Kerner states that this is the only occasion on which he 
himsqlf saw a ghost ; but elsewhere he tells us that one even- 
ing, tyhen they were sitting in a lighted room at the supper- 
table, a form like a white cloud floated past the window. This 
\ . • form was seen by all. 2 There were women servants and 
• ' other persons who slept in the same room as the Seeress, or 
in one adjoining, who at various times professed to have seen 
figures similar to those seen by Frau Hauffe. 

More noteworthy, however, than these apparitions — seen 
for the most part by servants and peasant women, whose 
nervous equilibrium had, no doubt, been already upset by 
hearing of Frau Hauffe's marvellous powers — were the noises 
and physical phenomena which took place generally whilst 
the Seeress was staying in Kerner's house. Kerner himself 
and his wife on several occasions heard knocks on the walls 
and windows of the bedroom, and other sounds, when they 
retired for the night 8 All the household on one occasion 
heard somebody trying to force the house door. 4 Frau 
Hauffe's sister heard the noise of chains at the window. 6 
These noises, especially the knocks and raps (Klopfeln und 
Klatschen), were so puzzling that Frau Kerner on one occasion 
spent part of the night in Frau Hauffe's room in order, if 
possible, to ascertain their origin. The raps began about 
10 p.m., proceeding apparently from the bedstead, the table, 
and the walls. Kerner tells us that his wife satisfied herself 
that they were not caused by either the Seeress or her sister, 
who was present in the room. 6 

The physical phenomena mostly occurred when the Seeress 

was alone or accompanied only by her sister. Thus gravel 

was on several occasions thrown in at the open window. 

Kerner himself did not see the gravel thrown, but he saw 

it lying ^ n the floor, and found that it resembled the gravel 

at vol. ii. 257 ; see also page 33. * Vol. ii. p. 168. 

5 p. 133 5 "• P- »55f itoi 229, etc 4 Vol. ii. p. 183. 

Vol. ^ P- 1& § V0L * P ' ' 4I - 

\ V* V. 

THE GERMAN SOMNAMBULES 103 

in the garden just outside the house. One evening some 
of this gravel was thrown at the maid when she was standing 
near the house. 1 Again, a stool was thrown across the room* 
and a knitting-needle flew through the air and settled in a 
glass of water ; 8 but both these phenomena had the Seeress 
herself for their only witness. 

There were cases, however, in which other inmates of the 
house were privileged to witness the physical phenomena, or 
at least to be present in the room when things were moved. 
The following is a brief summary of the evidence given by 
Kerner under this head. 

On one occasion, the Seeress having announced that a 
ghost would visit her on a certain night, a trustworthy person 
was deputed by Kerner to share the bed of Frau Hauffe's 
sister, who slept in the same room as Frau Hauffe, and watch 
for the coming of the ghost The trustworthy person fell 
asleep at 1 1 p.m., and was wakened at midnight by the sister 
getting out of bed to give Frau Hauffe her supper. Hardly 
had the sister got back into bed, when strange and alarming 
noises were heard all about the room. Presently the Seeress, 
who meanwhile lay quite still, began to talk to the ghost, and 
at last said, " Open it yourself." Then the trustworthy person 
beheld, " with awe such as she had never felt before," a music- 
book which lay on the bed gradually open itself as though 
by an unseen hand, the while Frau Hauffe remained still 
motionless. 4 On another occasion, when Kerner himself was 
present in the room with the sister, small pieces of cinder 
were thrown, not this time through the window, but from 
a corner of the room. Kerner could discover no natural 
cause for the phenomenon. He gives no details, however, 
and does not mention whether the Seeress was herself present, 
but leaves us to infer that she was. 6 An account of two 
other physical phenomena witnessed by Kerner or a member 
of his family may be quoted in full. 

" An hour later, as Frau H. lay dressed on her bed in her boots, 
which were fastened firmly on her feet with clasps, she saw this 
ghost again go clanking through the room as though wearing spurs. 
Then she turned round at once without looking at him closely 
(besides it was in the dusk), lay on her other side and fell asleep, as 
it seemed to her. At that moment I [Kerner] entered the room, 
where her sister also was. Frau H. lay quite still as I looked at her, 
but her boots at this moment parted violently from her feet, which 
remained motionless, as though pulled off by an invisible hand, sped 

1 Vol. ii. p. 165-7. a Vol. ii. p. 166. * Vol. ii. p. 214. 

4 VoL ii p. 143. • Vol. ii. p. 169. 

104 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

through the air towards the sister, who was just looking out of the 
window, and turned round at that moment and laid themselves 
quietly on the ground close beside her." 1 

Three days later another remarkable phenomenon is thus 
recorded : — 

" Whilst Frau H., her sister, and my daughter were alone in the 
room (Frau H. was lying in bed), suddenly the lamp shade, which 
stood on the table at a distance from everyone, flew to the other side 
of the room, as though thrown by an invisible hand. A moment 
before this happened Frau H. had seen the ghost with the spurs 
come in at the door, but she immediately became cataleptic (fiel in 
Erstarrung) and did not see what happened to the lamp shade." * 

The only other physical disturbances recorded by Kerner 
for which there is any independent evidence are as follows : 
Kerner and his wife, at midnight (and therefore presumably 
in the dark), heard a noise in their room, and found that a 
table which stood by the bed had been thrown into the middle 
of the room : the Seeress was at the time staying in the house, 3 
A trustworthy person, who shared the sister's bed one night, 
saw the nightlight extinguished without visible cause, and 
thereafter saw the candlestick glowing of itself. 4 A maid- 
servant and another person, hearing a great noise in the room 
where Frau Hauffe lay alone in bed, entered the room, 
when a stool was flung at them as by an invisible hand from 
another quarter of the room from that in which the Seeress 
lay asleep. 6 

The attentive reader will not fail to observe that none of 
the evidence for these marvels, except Kerner's own, is at first 
hand, and that the presence of Frau Hauffe's sister was 
apparently indispensable to the production of physical phe- 
nomena before witnesses. Indeed, this dependence on the 
support of her family forms, as has been already noted in 
the case of the alleged instances of clairvoyance and pro- 
phecy, a marked feature in Frau Hauffe's manifestations of 
supernormal power. 

It will be convenient if we consider the case of the Seeress 
of Prevorst, both in its evidential aspects and as regards the 

•stical teachings of the ecstatic, side by side with another 

1 of the kind, recorded a few years later by Heinrich 

*er, Doctor of Philosophy.* It is fair to assume, es- 

<#/., vol. ii. pp. 21 1-2. 3 Vol. ii. p. 212. * Vol. ii. p. 222. 

ii. p. 213. 5 Vol. ii. p. 215. 

<khut*geister % oder merkwiirdige BtUkt zweier Sektrintun in die Geisler- 
etc. Stuttgart und Tubingen, 1839. 

THE GERMAN SOMNAMBULES 105 

pecially as the later book was also published at Stuttgart, 
that Werner's somnambules as well as himself were probably 
acquainted with the doings and teachings of the Seeress of 
Prevorst There is indeed a striking similarity in both re- 
spects between the two books. " R. D., w Werner's leading 
clairvoyant, was a girl of eighteen, of whose medical history 
and manifold ailments he gives a minute account Werner is 
careful to explain that, so far was he from attempting to 
induce a state of magnetic clairvoyance, both he and his 
patient were much surprised when she spontaneously fell 
into that state. 1 However, the trance once established appears 
to have recurred, or was re-induced, at almost daily intervals. 

The physical phenomena attending R. D. were not so 
numerous or striking as those just considered. Here are two 
instances: The clairvoyant had just been engaged in con- 
versation with a wicked monk, of most terrible appearance, 
and a Jesuit to boot, who by his own confession had murdered 
his five children and buried them one by one in a cloister. 
Even Albert, R.'s guardian spirit, could not always keep this 
fearsome being at a distance. Except for this spiritual com- 
panion, Werner was alone with the clairvoyant He heard, 
as if proceeding from a small table near him, a clatter (Klirren) 
like a cup rattling in a saucer, but could find nothing to account 
for the sound. Presently it occurred again, but louder, and 
was repeated several times. Werner was completely puzzled. 
R. D. explained that the wicked monk had made the noise, 
and was much delighted with the effect produced. 1 

In the other case the spirit was more ambitious. Werner 
returned at noon one day to his lodgings, which consisted 
of five rooms, leading into one another, the suite terminating 
at either end — an arrangement common in Germany — in 
a door giving on to the staircase ; these doors stood opposite 
to each other. The one on the left was fastened on the day 
in question. Werner entered by that on the right On his 
entrance Werner, u together with the lady whom he found " s in 
one of the rooms (no further account of this lady is given), 
heard the sound of a heavy fall in the front room, to which 
the door on the left gave immediate entrance. They both 
rushed through the suite of connecting rooms, and found that 
in this front room two flower-pots, which had stood on the 
ledge of the middle window, had been violently flung to the 
floor and broken in pieces, the sherds, earth, and plants being 
scattered right across the room. Moreover, one of the curtains 

1 Introduction, pp. xii, xiii. 3 Pages 188, 189. 

* die Dame possibly means the landlady of the lodgings. 

THE GERMAN 90MNAMBULES 107 

Finally, let us briefly consider the doctrinal utterances 
of the somnambules, and the inferences founded on those 
utterances as to the constitution of man and the nature of the 
spirit world. 

The central point of these teachings is that man consists 
of body, soul, and spirit, the two latter surviving death and 
forming the spiritual man. But the soul itself is clothed, for 
the time at least, after leaving the body by an ethereal body 
{Nervengeist) which partakes rather of the nature of body 
than of soul, and ultimately with progressive spirits, according 
to some somnambules, decays and leaves the soul free. It is 
apparently this Nervengeist which carries on the vital processes 
when the soul leaves the body in the magnetic trance, and 
which after death withdraws with the soul and leaves the body 
to perish. It is the Nervengeist which attracts to itself grosser 
particles and becomes visible even to the fleshly eye in the 
case of low and undeveloped spirits. 

The conception implicitly held by all mystical writers at 
this time of the relation between body, Nervengeist, soul, and 
spirit is apparently that they differed from each other only as 
in the gradation of coarser and more attenuated substances. 
Indeed, Werner expresses this conception in so many words. 
There is, he says, but one absolutely immaterial Being — that 
is God. Below God there is an infinite chain from seraph to 
grain of sand, from highest self-consciousness to most absolute 
unconsciousness, each link in the chain having more of earth 
intermixed with its spiritual nature than that which went 
before. The soul of man occupies some intermediate position 
in this universal procession. Would it not, he asks, be a 
piece of extreme folly and self-conceit to suppose that the 
spiritual part of man, as soon as it was separated from 
the body, could be as absolutely immaterial as God Him- 
self? 1 

But apart from this general scheme of man's constitution, 
which was more or less common to all the mystics of the 
time, and has been adopted and generously amplified by 
Spiritualists and Theosophists since, the Seeress of Prevorst 
is responsible for other revelations of a very curious kind. 
She described, with the utmost minuteness, certain systems 
of circles — designated respectively Sun-Circles and Life- 
Circles — which had relation apparently to spiritual conditions 
and the passage of time. Kerner gives most amazing 
diagrams of these circles. The grand sun-circle has two 
concentric inner circles and innumerable radii, and the inner- 

1 Page 432. 

/ 

108 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

most concentric circle is itself ornamented with twelve sub- 
sidiary systems of triple concentric circles, having their 
centres at equidistant points on the circumference of the 
primary circle (itself the innermost circle of a larger system). 
Then the Seeress had a life-circle of her own, and seven 
private sun-circles of a somewhat less intricate nature, with 
an intercalary circle in the seventh. All these circles are 
ornamented, in addition to the radii, with eccentric straight 
lines like the spokes of some bicycles ; and the interpretation 
of all this bewildering maze of lines — 

"With centric and eccentric scribbled o'er, 
Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb" — 

is furnished partly by cyphers, partly by words of the 
primitive universal language written in the primitive ideo- 
graphs. With the somnambule's dissertations on the meaning 
of these interlacing circles and the mystic relation of the 
numbers attached to human life, all of which Kerner records 
with the most amazing patience, we need not here concern 
ourselves further. Gorres, Eschenmayer, and other members 
of the circle of mystics, which continued for some years to 
expand and illustrate the revelations of the Seeress, 1 found in 
this part of her teaching analogies with the philosophical 
ideas of Pythagoras, of Plato, and of more recent mystics. 
But they do not seem to have exercised much effect on the 
utterances of later somnambules. The conception of a 
primitive universal language, however, deserves some further 
consideration. The characters of this language, as preserved 
for us in Renter's plates, bear to the uninstructed eye some 
resemblance to Hebrew; but they are in many instances 
quite as complicated as an Egyptian hieroglyph. It was 
to Hebrew, however, that the Seeress herself, following the 
example of Dr. Dee's familiars, compared the language ; it 
was, according to her, the primitive universal tongue and 
resembled the language actually spoken in the time of Jacob. 
She frequently spoke the tongue in the trance, maintaining 
that it was the common language of the inner life. Kerner 
asserts that she was quite consistent in her use of the words 
of this primitive tongue, and that those who heard her often 
gained by degrees some familiarity with its meaning. A few 
words are quoted and their likeness to Hebrew pointed out 
Werner's somnambule, R. D., a\so made use of this language, 
and confirmed Frau Hauff^ s account of it; and Werner 

1 In the Slitter ams Pmvrst, of ^ .^ seven! ▼oUmes were published from 
*|l onwards. >*!**** 

THE GERMAN SOMNAMBULES 109 

himself gives us a dissertation upon it which recalls faint 
echoes of the age-long contention of the Schoolmen on the 
relation of words to things. 1 

With primitive man, as yet not wholly estranged from God 
by sin, thought, according to Werner, answered exactly to the 
realities of the external world, and speech was the organic 
correlate of thought This was because man shared the 
nature of God, with whom thought, its object and its ex- 
pression are all one. The name of a thing in that primitive 
Nature-speech was not, as now, a mere label, fortuitous and 
inadequate ; it expressed by some one symbol — which was, in- 
deed, not a symbol, but rather a reflection — the form, properties, 
value, and existence of the thing named. With the coming 
of sin, the primitive Nature-speech was lost and forgotten ; 
traces of it remain in Hebrew, and in the babbling of children ; 
but the nations of the earth have now to be content with 
innumerable collocations of accidental vocables, which with 
ever-growing elaboration and refinement yet continually fail to 
be an adequate mirror of even the external aspect of this 
complex world. But the compendious and all-sufficient vo- 
cabulary of the world's childhood is yet preserved in the inner 
spirit of man : and in rare states of exaltation he can recover 
something of what he has lost. The priestess who chanted 
the Greek oracles expressed herself in that forgotten tongue, 
and from pure somnambules in the highest stage of ecstasy 
we can catch its apocalyptic accents. 

Werner, had he known it, might have found further support 
for his argument in the curious outbreak of speaking with 
unknown tongues in Edward Irving's church in London, 
which had taken place in the interval between the publication 
of Kernels book and his own, and in the account of the 
primaeval language given by Dr. Dee.* 

It is by the German Magnetists of the first half of the nine- 
teenth century, whose works we have just been considering, 
that the foundations of the movement of Modern Spiritualism 
were laid. It is not merely that we find here in miniature all 
the characteristics of the later belief; it would be easy to 
demonstrate that it was through the writings of Jung-Stilling, 
Kerner, and their contemporaries that a path was prepared in 
this country, and probably also in America, for the coming of 
the new gospel It was from this source, after Swedenborg, 

1 Pages 353-61. 

* Chapter i. above. See also the account given by Flournoy (Des Indes A la 
planHe Mars) of the Martian language constructed by his clairvoyant Flournoy's 
results are quoted below, Book IV. chap. vii. 

110 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

that the Howitts, Shorter, Mrs. De Morgan, and others of the 
early English Spiritualists derived most of their philosophy ; 
and it was largely owing to the intermixture of physical 
phenomena with the revelations of the Seeress of Prevorst 
that the grosser manifestations of the same kind found after- 
wards so ready a reception. 

Again, all die chief problems of Spiritualism are posed in 
the records of this time ; on the one hand, we find in the 
observations of men like Wesermann and Van Ghert charac- 
teristic examples of apparent thought-transference and clair- 
voyance ; on the other, we find in Frau Hauffe and her kind 
indications of systematic trickery, often of a puerile character, 
whose only object appears to have been the satisfaction of a 
diseased vanity, conjoined with trances and ecstasies ap- 
parently genuine, and outpourings, also probably not less 
genuine, of religious feeling. 

CHAPTER VIII 

THE ENGLISH MESMERISTS 

AS we have already seen, the phenomena of Animal 
J-\ Magnetism attracted little attention in this country, 
alone of European nations, for the first twenty-five 
years, at any rate, of the last century. Not, indeed, but that 
some echoes of the marvellous doings of Mesmer and his 
disciples had reached England. One Dr. Bell, Professor of 
Animal Magnetism and member of the Philosophical 
Harmonic Society of Paris, founded in 1782, had, in 1785, 
after attending a course of lectures by Bergasse and Duval 
Despremenil and passing a sufficient examination, received 
from that society under the hands of its president and council 
a certificate setting forth his competence to teach and practise 
the science. Equipped thus "by patent from the first 
noblemen in France," he returned to his native land, and pro- 
ceeded to give lectures and practical demonstrations in many 
of the chief towns of the United Kingdom. His book, 1 
dedicated to the pupils of his different classes, contains a fair 
exposition of Mesmer's teachings, such as we have already 
found in the writings of the earliest French Magnetists. 
Beginning with a dissertation on general ideas of motion, it 
proceeds to a consideration of magnetism at large, and as 
affecting the human body in particular. He gives a full 
description of the large oaken tub, eight feet across, which he 
himself used as a baquet, and incidentally mentions various 
points of difference between this apparatus and that used by 
"our society in Paris." In his treatment he is careful to 
begin by placing the patient with his back to the north ; and 
he makes liberal use of artificial magnets and of magnetised 
water. Further, he gives instructions for magnetising, not the 
sick only, but a shilling, or a guinea, rivers, rooms, trees, and 

1 The General and Particular* Principles 0/ Animal Electricity and Mag- 
netism, etc, by Monsieur le Doctcur Bell, 1792. Entered in Stationers' Hall. 

Hi 

112 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

other inanimate objects, referring in this connection to the 
results which he had witnessed "at the late Marquisses de 
Puysegur's and Tissard's seats." It is interesting to note that 
he claims to have observed somnambulism as early as 1 784 ; 
and that amongst the phenomena of the trance he describes 
how some of his patients can see in the dark, can tell what is 
going on in another room, and can diagnose and prescribe for 
their own diseases and those of others. There is one curious 
touch, which marks off Dr. Bell from generous enthusiasts, 
such as were Puys£gur and many of the early French 
Magnetisers. He recommends his disciples to have as little 
to do as possible with scrofula, cutaneous eruptions, and 
consumption ; such diseases were very dangerous to treat In 
the first two cases the magnetiser may contract the disease, 
in the last he may impart too much of his own vital force to 
the sufferer. 

Bell was followed in 1788 by a pupil of D'Eslon, one de 
Mainauduc, who remained in this country for some years, 
teaching and holding private demonstrations. In the last 
decade of the eighteenth century many other professors of the 
art of Mesmerism sprang up in London and the provinces, 
and appear to have found the profession profitable — Holloway, 
Miss Prescott, Loutherbourg, and others. The last-named 
lecturer's demonstrations at Hammersmith in 1790 were so 
crowded that three thousand persons are reported to have 
attended on one evening. 1 The craze, however, seems to have 
died out in a few years without leaving any serious traces 
even on popular belief, and without apparently producing any 
effect on scientific opinion. 

In 1798 Perkins' Metallic Tractors came upon the scene ; 
and after that date all interest in Mesmerism seems to 
have completely disappeared. At any rate, we hear little 
more of it in this country for a full generation. In 1828 
Richard Chenevix, F.R.S., an Irish gentleman who had resided 
for some years on the Continent, and had there frequent 
opportunities of witnessing the magnetic treatment, came to 
this country and gave demonstrations before a large number 
of persons in London, Dublin, and elsewhere. Amongst 
those who witnessed his experiments were Faraday, Sir B. 
rodie, Dr. Henry Holland, Dr. Prout, and many other 

■dical men. 1 
lie interest excited, however, appears to have been shor\_ 

9 -tim*l Magnetism, etc, by George Winter, M.r>, BusU>\, 1801. 
* his articles on " Mesmerism, improp^V, A e tiaa&Tt&\ed A^. v 
." published in the London AMical and ^W t aii <mr,,a ' °* l *=*^ 

THE ENGLISH MESMERISTS 113 

lived, and five years later J. C. Colquhoun complains in /sis 
Revelata 1 that, " of late our medical men seem liable to the 
reproach of having almost entirely neglected the most 
important labours of their professional brethren upon the 
Continent," i.e. in connection with Mesmerism. 

In 1837 "Baron" du Potet, who had assisted seventeen 
years previously at some experiments in action at a distance 
at the Hdtel Dieu in Paris, came to London to practise 
Mesmerism. He obtained an introduction to Elliotson, whose 
interest in the subject had already been awakened by 
Chenevix. Elliotson allowed du Potet in the first instance 
to mesmerise several patients at University College Hospital. 
Shortly afterwards, however, he undertook the mesmeric 
treatment of the patients himself, and succeeded in evoking 
the somnambulic state and many singular phenomena in 
connection with it, notably in two sisters named Okey. The 
matter caused some stir. Many men of science and other 
persons of distinction, including even royal personages, came 
to the hospital to see the marvels. So great was the crowd 
that Elliotson applied to the Council for permission to hold 
demonstrations in one of the theatres of the college. Per- 
mission was refused, and he was finally requested, in the 
interests of the hospital, to discontinue the practice of 
Mesmerism within its walls. He replied by resigning, in the 
autumn of 1838, his professorship and severing his connection 
with the hospital. 

The objection of the hospital authorities to the use of 
Mesmerism was not altogether ill-founded. Elliotson had 
not, indeed, confined himself to using the mesmeric sleep 
as an auxiliary in therapeutics. He claimed to demonstrate 
many other phenomena of a dubious kind, especially the 
extraordinary influence of metals and other substances in 
conveying and enhancing the virtues of the mesmeric 
effluence. Gold, silver, platinum, water, and the moisture 
of the skin were found to transmit it; copper, zinc, tin, 
pewter, etc., unless wet, were non-conductors. Of the con- 
ductors, nickel and gold were said to be the best ; but the 
mesmeric influence as transmitted by nickel was of an 
extremely violent and even dangerous character. Some 
of the most striking effects were produced by gold : thus, if a 
sovereign, mesmerised by being retained in the operator's 
hand, were placed in the hand of one of the Okeys, it would 
cause cramp, either local or general, trance, or coma, the 

1 /sis Revelata: an Inquiry into the Origin, Progress, and Present State 
of Animal Magnetism. Edinburgh, 1833. 

I.— I 

114 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

effect being, it was alleged, strictly proportioned to the 
strength of the original dose of mesmeric fluid communicated 
to the metaL Analogous effects were observed if a sovereign 
was placed successively in the hands of several hospital 
patients and thence transferred to the hand of the sensi- 
tive, the effect produced in the latter varying in strength 
with the state of the patients' vitality. If mesmerised 
sovereigns were placed in a pewter vessel, the influence 
would be gradually transmitted to the sensitive's hand. In 
stooping to pick up a mesmerised sovereign from the floor, 
the Okeys would suddenly become cataleptic, as their hands 
approached the metal, and remain fixed in a stooping position. 
Dr. Herbert Mayo records * a still more striking experiment 
It sufficed for the Mesmerist to gaze intently at a stone 
mantelpiece, and to place a sovereign on the spot where 
his gaze had fallen, for the metal to become imbued with the 
mesmeric virtue and to produce the characteristic reactions 
with a sensitive subject 

Water and other substances could also be mesmerised ; 
the sensitives had prevision of the course of their own 
diseases; and transposition of sensation, to the pit of the 
stomach or the general surface of the skin, was also occasion- 
ally observed. Mr. Thomas Wakley, editor of the Lancet, 
had at first opened his columns to the recital of these 
u beautiful phenomena," as EUiotson was wont to call them. 
But in the month of August, 1838, he determined to test 
them for himselt On the 16th and 17th of that month 
EUiotson brought the two Okeys to Wakky's house, and 
there, in the presence of several medical men, a series of 
experiments were made. On the first day the violent con- 
tortions and muscular cramp, which were the characteristic 
results of contact with mesmerised nickel, were produced 
when the nickel — unknown to EUiotson and most of the 
company — was safe in the waistcoat pocket of one of the 
spectators. It was shown in a further series of experiments 
that unmesmerised water could produce sleep, whilst water 
which had been carefully mesmerised had no effect ; and that 
whilst three or four mesmerised sovereigns could be handled 
with impunity, weH-marked catalepsy was produced when 
Jane Okey stooped to pick up a sovereign which had merely 
been warmed in hot water, without human contact at alL* 

Some little triumph in a successful demonstration of this 
kind is no doubt permissible. The experiments so far as 
hey went were conclusive enough. But Mr. Wakley's jubi- 

1 Zmrrf, 1st Sept, 1838. * IUd., 1st Sept., 1858. 

THE ENGLISH MESMERISTS 115 

lation appears to us at once ill-natured and excessive. It 
was ill-natured, for he had not " exposed " the Okeys, and his 
insinuations against their honesty were apparently without 
justification. So far as can be discovered, neither he nor any- 
one else showed any valid reason for doubting the good faith 
of these two girls. It was excessive, because his experiments 
were not, as he supposed, conclusive against the claims of 
Mesmerism ; they were conclusive merely against certain 
fanciful and extravagant theories of Dr. Elliotson. However, 
Mr. Wakley's views as to the value of his demonstrations 
appear to have found acceptance with the profession generally. 
His article is commonly referred to by contemporary writers 
as the exposure at once of the Okeys and of the pretensions 
of the Mesmerists ; and the columns of the Lancet and other 
medical journals were closed for some time to come against 
the partisans of the new science. 

In all the circumstances it is perhaps scarcely a matter for 
wonder that Elliotson in the course of the next few years 
seems to have made but few converts. The interest in the 
subject, indeed, appears again to have been in some danger 
of flickering out, when in 1841 another Frenchman, La 
Fontaine, came to this country on a lecturing tour. He met 
with striking success, especially in the provinces ; and it is to 
his demonstrations that many of the writers on Mesmerism 
of that time, including Braid himself, owed their first impulse 
to investigate. The next few years saw the appearance of 
many lecturers on the subject in this country, and of a very 
considerable literature. 1 

In the year 1843 there appeared for the first time two 
periodicals devoted to the subject: the Zoist, under the 

1 Exclusive of the books already mentioned, the chief works consulted in 
drawing up this account of the English Mesmerists have been — 

Rev. Qiauncey Hare Townshend, Facts in Mesmerism. London (second 
edition), 1844. The first edition appeared in 1839. 

James Braid, M.R.C.S.B., Neurypmlogy (London, 1843) 5 The Power of the 
Mind over the Body (1846) ; Magic, Witchcraft, Animal Magnetism, etc. (1852). 

W. Newnham, M.R.S.L., Human Magnetism, 1845. 

Spencer T. Hall, Mesmeric Experiences, 1845. 

Harriet Martineau, Letters on Mesmerism. 1845. 

Reichenbach's Researches, translated by Gregory. 1850. (A preliminary sketch 
of Reichenbach's results had been published by Gregory in 1846.) 

W. Gregory, M.D., Professor of Chemistry in the University of Edinburgh, 
Letters on Animal Magnetism. 1851. 

{. W. Haddock, M.D., Somnolism and Psycheism, Second edition. 185 1. 
ames Esdaile, M.D., Natural and Mesmeric Clairvoyance. 1852. 
Edwin Lee, M.D., Animal Magnetism, 1866. 
Ashburner, Philosophy of Animal Magnetism, 1867. 
Sir John Forbes, illustrations of Modem Mesmerism, 1845. 
And the Zoist and Phreno- Magnet, passim. 

116 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

direction of Drs. Elliotson and Engledue, which continued 
nntil 1856; and the Phreno-Magntt, edited by Spencer T. 
Hall, which lasted for one year only. Of the Phrcno-Magnet, 
which represented the popular side of the movement, without 
serious pretensions to science of any kind, something will be 
said later. In the first instance it will be convenient to con- 
sider the views held by the medical Mesmerists — Elliotson, 
Esdaile, Haddock, etc — and of other writers, such as Gregory 
and Townshend, who may fairly be classed with them. Apart 
from the purely medical aspect of the question — the efficacy 
of Mesmerism as a therapeutic agent and in relieving pain, 
to which the pages of the Zoist are mainly devoted — the 
Mesmerists of that date lay stress upon three main classes 
of phenomena — (1) certain physical effects regarded as proving 
the actual transmission of a fluid or physical force from the 
operator or from inanimate substances to the subject ; (2) 
Phreno- Mesmerism ; (3) community of sensation and clair- 
voyance. 

(1) As already indicated, all the writers on Mesmerism at 
this period, with the solitary exception of Braid, had in- 
herited from the Animal Magnetists the conception of a 
physical effluence passing from operator to subject as the 
agent in producing the mesmeric sleep. This effluence was, 
indeed, no longer conceived of as identical with the hypo- 
thetical magnetic fluid, though analogies between the pheno- 
mena of Mesmerism on the one hand and those of electricity 
and magnetism on the other were generally recognised. The 
mesmeric fluid was by most identified with the hypothetical 
nervous or vital fluid. The act of mesmerising was com- 
monly supposed to involve a flow from the active organism, 
or that of superior vitality, to the passive or less highly 
vitalised. The weight on the eyelids felt by the patient, 
the pricking, the slight feeling of cold, and other subjective 
sensations were adduced as evidence of this physical effluence; 
and the mesmeric coma itself was by some regarded as the 
result of a determination of nervous fluid to the brain. 1 The 
fluid, being identical, or at least closely associated with the 
nervous force, was, like it, under the control of the wilL The 
fluid formed an aura, or nerve atmosphere, round the human 
body. It was further capable of impregnating inanimate 
substances, and by them being communicated in turn to the 
sensitive. Elliotson himself claimed to have formulated no 
theory as to the nature of the mesmeric agency. But his 
belief in mesmerised metals and the other phenomena ex- 

1 Esdaile, *. at., p, 236. 

THE ENGLISH MESMERISTS 117 

hibited by the Okeys certainly points to some conception 
such as that above indicated as being provisionally, at all 
events, accepted by him. And other writers of the time, 
Esdaile, Townshend, Gregory, Haddock, Newnham, and the 
rest, had no such reserve. They were satisfied that there was 
a physical effluence of some kind. Esdaile, in particular, 
made frequent use of mesmerised water as a medicine or 
an anaesthetic, both for internal and external application. 
Again, a patient could be thrown into mesmeric catalepsy 
by clasping the arms of a chair on which the operator had 
breathed, or by merely walking across a portion of the floor 
which the operator had impregnated with his mesmeric virtue 
by the same method. 1 Other experiments showed that the 
force could, in certain cases, be reflected from a mirror. But 
action at a distance, unknown to the patient — since the effects 
produced could not in such a case be attributed to the 
imagination — was commonly regarded as a crucial proof of 
physical transmission of force. All the writers cited give 
numerous instances, some of which will be quoted in the 
next chapter, of patients in another room or another house 
being entranced without their knowledge that the experiment 
was being made. Esdaile claims to have succeeded, at the 
first attempt, in catalepsing, in open court, three natives who 
were wholly ignorant of his intentions. One of these patients, 
moreover, was actively conversing with the judge and Moula- 
vies whilst the experiment was being made. 2 

Further, various substances were supposed to act on the 
sensitive by their intrinsic virtues. The north pole of the 
magnet attracted, the south pole repelled. Diamonds and 
opals produced agreeable sensations; the emerald was un- 
pleasing, and the sapphire positively painful. 3 But with the 
publication in 1845 of Reichenbach's researches, and their 
introduction in the following year to this country by Professor 
Gregory, the few scattered observations on manifestations of 
the kind last referred to received independent and apparently 
overwhelming confirmation. Baron von Reichenbach himself 
was a man of scientific attainments ; a chemist and metallur- 
gist of some repute. His subjects were very numerous, and 
he estimated that one-third of the people whom he tried were 
sensitive in some degree. In the second part of his work he 
gives a list of nearly sixty persons with whom he had ob- 
tained results. The list included, besides many ladies of title, a 
baron, a chevalier, a councillor, professors of physical science, 

1 Esdaile, op. cii. t pp. 126, 127 ; Newnham, op. cii., p. 320 ; and elsewhere. 
3 Op. cit. % pp. 67-91 * Townshend, op. cii. t p. 152. 

118 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

several physicians, two curators of museums, and many 
other persons of good position and education. The majority 
of these persons were experimented with in the normal state, 
though some of the best subjects were spontaneous som- 
nambules and cataleptics. Reichenbach claimed to show that 
all these persons were, in a greater or less degree, susceptible 
of receiving various sensations from magnets, crystals, and 
practically all other substances in the universe in their degree 
— the planets and fixed stars themselves not excepted. For 
the effluence assumed to produce these sensations he proposed 
the name odyle, or odic force. The sensations were broadly of 
two kinds — vague feelings of temperature, which were either 
pleasant or unpleasant, and quite definite perceptions of light 
and colour. The latter required a higher degree of sensitive- 
ness in the percipient Magnets, crystals, and the human 
body excited sensations of the vague kind in the highest 
degree, and all other bodies in their electro-chemical order ; 
potassium and the metals generally exciting warmth and a 
disagreeable feeling, oxygen and the electro-negative bodies 
coolness and a pleasurable sensation. But the effects of the 
odylic light were even more striking. The human fingers 
radiated light ; so did the poles of the magnet — each pole in a 
fairly strong magnet being capped with flames, reddish yellow 
from the south pole, and bluish green from the north. A 
similar polarity was observed in the luminous emanations 
from crystals. Each elementary substance had its distinctive 
light, the metals being most conspicuous. Copper, iron, 
bismuth, nickel, mercury, osmium, rhodium, tellurium, etc., 
had a red glow, each differing, however, from the other ; 
in lead, cobalt, palladium, etc., the flame was blue; silver, 
gold, cadmium, diamond, shone white, etc., etc A sensitive 
could even see the glow of the odylic matter over the bodies 
of the sick in hospitals ; and a column of faintly luminous 
vapour would hover over a newly made grave. 1 This odylic 
radiance was capable of illuminating other objects. It pro- 
duced no effect on a thermometer, but it could be con- 
centrated by a lens, reflected from a mirror, and was liable 
to be absorbed by the glass of the percipient's spectacles. 
To those who could see it the luminous appearance was 
so distinct, and so lasting, that one or two artists who 

1 A similar phenomenon was attested, and a similar explanation offered, by 

the alchemists. Thus Maxwell [De Medicina Magnetica % Book I. p. 9), ' * Ex dictis 

mssa manifesta videtur cor circa sepulcra violent^ morte interemtorum spectra 

■rersentur: nam spirits vitali humidoque radicali nondum plane dissoluto 

ua hseret, et exhalationibus hoc spiritu humidoque impregnatis formam 

tanam tribuit." 

THE ENGLISH MESMERISTS 119 

happened to be amongst the Baron's sensitives drew what 
they saw. The English translation is enriched by repro- 
ductions of such drawings, showing magnets, a human hand, 
a flower, a lady's face, and other objects illuminated by their 
own odylic radiance. 

The obvious good faith and apparent care with which 
Reichenbach's experiments had been performed; their 
elaborate and varied nature ; the large number of his wit- 
nesses ; their unimpeachable respectability and extraordinary 
unanimity; his imposing lists of chemical substances 
arranged in odylodynamic order; his diagrams showing 
the diurnal variations of the odylic force in the human body, 
and all the display of scientific machinery in his work were 
calculated to produce a profound impression on the English 
Mesmerists. Elliotson, Gregory, Haddock, and others at 
once experimented on Reichenbach's lines, and found that 
their somnambules also could experience the required sen- 
sations, in due gradation of strength, from various electro- 
negative and electro-positive bodies ; and could see flames of 
the appropriate colour proceeding from the human body, the 
poles of a magnet, or anything else that was presented to 
them. 

Against a theory so abundantly supported by experiment, 
argument and demonstration were alike used in vain. 
Bertrand had already, more than twenty years before, in- 
dicated the true explanation of the similar phenomena 
observed in his own day. Braid now, working on inde- 
pendent lines, arrived at a like conclusion. In his Power 
of the Mind over the Body he contends that the whole of 
the phenomena are explicable as due to the subjects' 
imagination, acting on slight hints unconsciously furnished 
by the experimenters. He is by no means desirous, indeed, 
of belittling the work of Reichenbach or his English trans- 
lator. "Better-devised experiments," he says, "or a more 
laborious and painstaking effort ... I have never met with 
in any department of science." * But he points out that the 
observers were not sufficiently on their guard against two 
sources of error : the extraordinary acuteness of the organs 
of the special senses and the enhanced receptivity of the 
mind in the somnambulic condition. He describes a number 
of experiments made by himself on private persons, some 
wide awake, some when hypnotised, in which all the 
characteristic results described by the Mesmerists appeared, 
when no magnet or other odylic substance was acting, and 

1 Op. tit., p. 4. 

jiV THE PBMWaEEE <QF ^HBSIfTAll-SIf 

iaiied li> ajspsan v*hen amib agent* were present, in rarfti case 
fin accordance wife *fhfr auggzs&torj {jivsen lr> "fne aeraibiwe. 
Hlhiih. li» qutr& n few re aji c nme rtte -wifhoni adualhr tanrihnig 
file akir ifaf inew :fhe ibandte of a pair of sc»«nr* iQcwihr 
iSk'VT ±ht ihanc of * Ltachr patent, ^ic was Vide awaibe aft 
ifibe lone anc watdiii^ Ae process "wifh interest. She ink a 
tSxflhr 3un2u Hpasxnudic '.twin filing of *£he muscle**, and '^Ifflimr 
wnnxptwnik. He &cc agtniertted iher Id place her ctflher hamd 
-cai ihe latfe and t*> turn Iher lead away. She 'did irc% aaud 
xd % Atari xnme firm flax sensl&inF wcjt •r.fcpnriHnrsftd sd the 
tstflrar hand -vifhtnc ;fihe .application of Ae scissors. TMs 
OadrV iuH&and ,akt» -wide awake, at Braid* TBgnesi ■rKflmiiiird 
'Cine hand and luiiied 9uf lead. Hlhe aum, jpiririkrog, and 
.^pasttnwifir lwhdning moee ' dbam ato! Braid ttibim rraaaatad, 
jbo so anadftfle ^rihHgaer. to t&e -vrife, l3bat Ac w&ald soon sec 
ihe unHsdte* e nrint ; r a nr aend 12he band ^radsalEhr <Skaxh itself 
The predicted ntBUMtf tfbihr ifcxDcxwcd. Ian Tinllllitni eff these 
cases lad aaralluing mftuil t rM ei r heem afflpfied to due hand; 
Bnod had hnmn aaa Tnartliroe ^ptn lUiitmn,. and she ses&uts were 
due whoiEjjr to tffloc imaganadaciB 'Of 1fa*» patents. In other 
cases a casataptiac cioaidDiioBD ctf the hand aa&d arm was pro- 
duced In* ■wtrmnlair sflggesfiwe processes, without the inter- 
vention of amy jdnrsDcail agent. In tic same may Braid 
found that his snibjedfcs co«nid see m© flames from the most 
powerful magnet cmt53 warned what to Hook for ; and would 
then see flames and cxsnascatSoiQS from a wooden box or 
the bare surface of the wall Xay, Brakf s portmanteau- 
key and pendent ring, by means of a p pr op riate suggestion, 
would medicine to a swe c to sleep than all the drowsy syrups 
of the East ; and woukl prove in turn as potent to dispel it 
as the archangel's trump. 

How !Me the persons whose views he criticised were 
affected by Braid's arguments and demonstrations may be 
inferred from two facts. In the Preface contributed by 
Gregory to his full translation of Reichenbach's Researches 
(1850) he deals at some length with objectors and objections, 
devoting many pages to arguing against imposture as an 
explanation of the results ; but Braid's name is not men- 
tioned, and the theory of imagination guided by unconscious 
suggestion is not included amongst the hypotheses which 
he essays to refute. And again, in the thirteen volumes of 
the Zoist, from 1843 to 1856, during which period the whole 
of Braid's books were published, some of them passing 
through two or three editions, I can find his name mentioned 
but two or three times, and then only to give Elliotson the 

THE ENGLISH MESMERISTS 121 

opportunity of exalting " the old-established modes of mes- 
merising" at the expense of "the coarse method practised 
by Mr. Braid." * 

(2) Elliotson had been from an early period an enthusiastic 
phrenologist He had in 1824 founded the Phrenological 
Society of London, and was in 1843 *h e President of that 
society and on the Council of the Phrenological Association. 
The Zoist itself had as a sub-title, " A Journal of Cerebral 
Physiology and Mesmerism." Mesmerism, indeed, gave 
powerful aid to the science of phrenology ; for it was soon 
found that if in the somnambulic state the patient's head 
was touched by the finger of the Mesmerist, each of the 
organs mapped out by Gall and Spurzheim could be made 
to yield a prompt and characteristic reaction. It is not 
a little curious to note that some of the medical journals 
of the day in their comments on the movement lamented 
that a comparatively respectable study should be contami- 
nated by its alliance with the absurdities of Mesmerism. 
Naturally, in the hands of the Mesmerists, abundant proof 
was soon forthcoming of the truth of phrenology. Perhaps 
almost too abundant, for an American Phreno-Mesmerist — 
as will be seen later — took occasion to discover one hundred 
and fifty new organs and to demonstrate them past dispute 
on the heads of his somnambules. With Elliotson, it should 
be pointed out, phrenology connoted a rather crude material- 
ism ; all mental phenomena, according to him, were " pro- 
duced " by the brain, much as bile is produced by the liver ; 
and he frankly used this weapon to combat the belief " in 
a certain thing called Soul and immaterial " and " the useless 
belief of the immortality of this Soul." 2 

It was natural that this particular development should not 
find favour with all the supporters of Mesmerism. Towns- 
hend discreetly evades all mention of the subject Newnham 
devotes a chapter to " the pretensions of Phreno-magnetism " 

1 Zoist f vol. iii. p. 345. In vol. ix. p. ji6 a pamphlet of Braid's is 
cited with other books at the head of a renew, but the reviewer does not 
mention Braid's name in the course of his article. I have come across one or 
two other incidental references (see especially vol. xi pp. 391, 395), but 
Braid's name does not appear in the index of the Zoist at all. This is, indeed, 
not conclusive as to its absence from the text The Mesmerists paid scant atten- 
tion to such minor matters as indices and dates. It is a trifling point, but none 
the less "significant of much," that whilst each of Braid's books has a good 
index, none of the books here quoted by Colquhoun, Newnham, Reichenbach, 
Esdaile, Townshend, Haddock, Gregory, etc., have any index at all; and the 
index to the Zoist is meagre and extremely inaccurate, whilst the proof-reading 
was so careless that the French quoted is often quite unintelligible. 

* Ibid., vol. iii. pp. 433, 424. 

122 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

and whilst apparently admitting some of the phenomena, 
suggests that they may be due to thought-transference 
between the operator and subject But Braid, sceptical 
of the " higher phenomena" of Mesmerism generally, 
expressed himself in his earlier writings as " quite certain as 
to the reality" of these particular manifestations. In his 
Neurypnology he records, in brief, twenty-five out of forty-five 
cases in his own practice in which he had produced 
demonstrations of phreno-hypnotism ; and expresses himself 
as satisfied that in most of these forty-five cases the patients 
knew nothing of phrenology, and that the manifestations 
were evoked "simply by contact or friction over certain 
sympathetic points of the head and (ace, without previous 
knowledge of phrenology, trickery, or whispering, or leading 
questions." A single illustration may be quoted : — 

A gentleman who had been present at a previous demonstration 
" was so much astonished and gratified with what he had seen that 
he begged I would try one of his daughters. I hypnotised the 
eldest, and all the manuestations came out quite as decidedly as in 
her cousin. Under ' adhesiveness 'and ' friendship' she clasped me, 
and on stimulating the organ of ' combauveness ' on the opposite 
side of the head, with the arm of that side she struck two gentlemen 
(whom she imagined were about to attack me) in such a manner as 
nearly laid one on the floor, whilst with the other arm she held me 
in the most friendly manner. Under ' benevolence ' she seemed 
quite overwhelmed with compassion ; * acquisitiveness,' stole greedily 
all she could lay her bands on, which was retained whilst I excited 
many other manifestations; but the moment my fingers touched 
' conscientiousness,' she threw all she bad stolen on the floor, as if 
horror-stricken, and burst into a flood of tears. On being asked, 

* Why do you cry ? ' she said, with the utmost agony, ' I have done 
what was wrong, I have done what was wrong.' I now excited 

* imitation ' and ' ideality,' and had her laughing and dancing in an 
instant On exciting ' form ' and ' ideality,' she seemed alarmed, and 

when asked what die saw, she answered, 'The D L' 'What 

colour is he?' 'Black.' On pressing the eyebrow and repeating 
the question, the answer was 'red,' and the whole body instantly 
became rigid, and the race the most complete picture of horror 
which could be imagined. ' Destructiveness,' which is largely 
developed, being touched, she struck her father such a blow on the 
chest as nearly laid him on the floor. Had I not endeavoured to 
restrain her, he must have sustained serious injury. Having now 
excited 'veneration, 9 'hope,' 'ideality,' and 'language,' we had the most 
striking example of extreme ecstasy, and on being aroused she was 
quite conscious of all that bad happened, excepting that she had 
heard music, and had been dautdng. Her 'phito-pcogenitiveness' 
was admirable. 1 ' * . «. ~ 

~ U,H ™ C - i Ncurypmmit,, pp. 135, I* 

THE ENGLISH MESMERISTS 123 

Braid from the first rejected the phrenological explanation 
of the phenomena. He believed the results were due to 
stimulation of the nerves of the scalp, either as calling into 
play muscles associated with the expression of certain 
emotions, or, quantitatively, as producing different emotional 
reactions according to the varying sensibility of the part of 
the integument affected. But if we can place any confidence 
in Braid's description of the results attained, and can share 
his conviction that the subjects were ignorant of the position 
of the phrenological organs and of the results to be expected, 
the real interest of the matter for us is that no adequate 
explanation on physiological lines has yet been offered. 
Modern physiology would probably find it easier to reject 
Braid's facts than to accept his tentative explanations. 1 

(3) Finally, the chief writers on Mesmerism of this period, 
again with the exception of Braid, believed in " community 
of sensation," that is, the ability of certain somnambules to 
share in the sensations, especially those of touch, taste, and 
pain, experienced by a person in rapport with them ; and 
also in clairvoyance. Clairvoyance, as used by the writers 
of this time, covered two different classes of phenomena: 
(1) perception of objects near at hand, but placed in a 
position {eg. behind the patient's back, or in a closed box) 
where normal vision would be impossible ; and (2) travelling 
clairvoyance, or the vision of scenes at a considerable dis- 
tance alleged to be unknown to the percipient and often to 
any person present 

Elliotson himself, whilst accepting apparently the phen- 
omena of community of sensation at an early stage in his 
investigations, remained until 1841 doubtful as to the reality 
of the alleged u seeing with the eyes closed," and was not 
satisfied of the reality of travelling clairvoyance until 1844; 
even as late as 1845 he had never met with an instance of 
the faculty in a case of his own. 2 Esdaile also, though he 
has no doubt of the reality of the phenomena, even in 1852 
had himself witnessed but a single case of clairvoyance. 3 

1 Nturypnology was published in 1843. In reviewing some years later the 
whole subject of Hypnotism {Magic, Witchcraft % etc., third edition, 1852), Braid 
makes, so far as I can discover, no explicit mention of phrenology — an omission 
the more significant since he had devoted much space in his earlier work to 
records of experiments in this direction. From a passage on page 71, however, it 
may perhaps be inferred that, in looking back on the matter, ne was not quite 
satisfied with the conditions under which the results were attained. Possibly 
more than he supposed was due to previous training of a subconscious kind, 
and much also to inadvertent suggestion on his own part and that of the 
spectators. a See Zcist, vol. ii. p. 477, and vol. lii. p. 107. 

* Natural and Mesmeric Clairvoyance, p. 96. London, 1852. 

124 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

, But numerous instances of the alleged faculty, as exercised 
both at close quarters and at a considerable distance, were 
published by Townshend, Gregory, Haddock, and others in 
their books and in the columns of the Zoist itself. An 
attempt will be made in the two succeeding chapters to 
estimate the significance of the phenomena reported under 
this head. For the present purpose it is sufficient to note 
that belief in the mesmeric trance was at this time associated, 
in the writings of nearly all its leading adherents, with belief 
in community of sensation and clairvoyance ; and few were 
found to imitate Elliotson's wise reserve in the matter, and 
speak only of what they had seen and tested for themselves. 
It will be seen that Mesmerism came before the British 
public unfairly handicapped. Even the bare fact of the 
trance itself — which, as Bertrand had already shown, mani- 
fested close affinities to various spontaneous states, some 
of them by no means rare — could hardly win its way to 
recognition, weighted as it was with a mass of dubious and 
incredible phenomena, and forced to subserve ill-considered 
and grandiose theories, which were hardly less extravagant 
when they avowedly confined themselves to the physical 
world than when they frankly leapt the barrier and pro- 
claimed themselves transcendental. Many of the phenomena 
on which these speculations were based were obviously 
capable, as Wakley and Braid had shown, of being ex- 
plained as due to imposture or imagination. The effects 
were unquestionably in most cases subjective, and it made 
little difference as regards the proof of a new physical agency 
whether the feelings which the subject claimed to experience 
were really felt or deliberately simulated. Most of the 
medical journals of the day seem to have adopted the less 
charitable view, as on the whole the easier interpretation of 
what they witnessed. I cannot find any justification for this 
assumption of fraud, even in such a case as the Okeys. But 
when applied, as it was commonly applied, to demonstrations 
of painless surgery, the assumption becomes preposterous. 
Indeed, one cannot help suspecting a certain confusion of 
thought somewhere. The Okeys imagined they felt peculiar 
sensations from mesmerised metals, or else they pretended 
to feel — what did it matter, since in either case there was 
nothing to feel! But the argument was not of universal 
validity. To the man whose leg was cut off during the 
*ance it obviously mattered a great deal whether he imagined 
felt no pain or only pretended to feel none. Nor was 
distinction without interest of a more general kind, 

THE ENGLISH MESMERISTS 125 

for if the patient in such a case imagines he feels no pain, 
there is no pain to feel ; and in the days before the intro- 
duction of anaesthetics that was no light matter. 

The opposition of the medical profession to the employ- 
ment of Mesmerism in order to give relief from the pain 
of surgical operations is one of the most singular episodes 
in the history of science. James Esdaile, a Scotch surgeon 
practising in Calcutta, who had had his attention drawn in 
1845 to the subject, and had found that the natives of India 
were remarkably susceptible to mesmeric influence, performed 
many extensive and severe operations on patients during the 
trance. His proceedings naturally excited attention in India, 
and the medical profession, whilst laughing at Esdaile for 
his folly, freely insinuated that the alleged insensibility was 
simulated. The Calcutta Medical Journal, for instance, de- 
scribed his patients as "a set of hardened and determined 
impostors." In January, 1846, Esdaile reported to the 
Calcutta Medical Board the results of seventy-five operations 
— the removal of monstrous tumours, amputations of limbs, 
etc — performed without pain, and offered to demonstrate 
the reality of the influence. Finding his application ignored, 
he appealed later in the same year direct to the Government 
A small committee of investigation was appointed, which, 
as the result of observations on ten cases, reported that " by 
the mesmeric method sleep could be so deepened as to 
permit of the performance of severe surgical operations with- 
out pain, according to the declarations of the patients!* Further 
than this the committee declined to go, but they expressed 
strong doubts as to the expediency of extending the mesmeric 
treatment generally. The Governor-General, however, on the 
receipt of the report, placed Esdaile in charge of a small 
hospital, that he might have full opportunity for pursuing 
his researches, and shortly afterwards appointed him Pre- 
sidency Surgeon. But the general introduction of chloroform 
and other anaesthetics a year or two later caused popular 
interest in Mesmerism to cease. The feeling of the profession 
on the subject is aptly illustrated by an utterance of Dr. 
Duncan Stewart, one of the official visitors to Esdaile's 
Mesmeric Hospital, "It is time to throw away mummery 
and work above board, now that we have got ether." 1 

In this country the determined antagonism of the medical 
profession found similar expression. The Okeys, and, in fact, 
mesmeric subjects generally, were habitually referred to by 

1 See Esdaile's Natural and Mesmeric Clairvoyance and other works, and the 
Zoist, passim. 

126 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

medical men as impostors ; the Lancet expressed the opinion 
that Mesmerism would always flourish "wherever there are 
clever girls, philosophic Bohemians, weak women, weaker 
men." 1 One Madame Plantin, whose breast had been re- 
moved in Paris by M. Cloquet, in the mesmeric trance, died 
a few days after the operation. There were English surgeons 
who did not scruple to say that the strenuous efforts which 
she made to conceal her anguish during the operation had 
hastened her death. 2 The first considerable operation per- 
formed in England in the mesmeric trance took place in 
1842 at Wellow, in Nottinghamshire, the patient being one 
James Wombell, whose leg was amputated above the knee. 
Mr. Topham, a London barrister, was the Mesmerist, and 
the operation was performed by Mr. Squire Ward, M.R.C.S. 
An account of the case was read before the London Medical 
and Chirurgical Society at their meeting on November 22nd, 
1842. The paper was received with much disfavour, many 
of the medical men present expressing their opinion that 
the alleged insensibility was simulated, and that Wombell 
had been trained to bear pain without betraying any signs 
of it. In the interval before the next meeting the authors 
published the paper on their own account, 8 and the Society 
gladly took advantage of this breach of etiquette to expunge 
all notice of the discreditable transaction from their minutes. 
But this was not enough for the opponents of Mesmerism. 
It was freely stated by medical men in the public Press and 
elsewhere, whenever the subject of Mesmerism was under 
discussion, that James Wombell had subsequently confessed 
to a wicked deception ; that he had in fact felt the whole 
pain of the operation, but to gain his private ends had 
successfully concealed his feelings at the time. Elliotson 
took the trouble in 1843 to get a statement signed by the 
man himself and witnessed by the clergyman of the parish, 
giving the lie to the slander. 4 Eight years later it was 
revived. At a meeting of the same Society on December 
10th, 1850, Dr. Marshall Hall "begged leave to communicate 
a fact of some interest to the Society. . . . He understood 
that this man (Wombell) had since confessed that he had 
acted the part of an impostor." Mr. Topham wrote to ask 
Dr. Hall for his authority. Dr. Hall replied, " The fact . . . 

1 Lancet, Sept. 15th, 1838. 

9 Zoist, vol. 1. p. 209. For other illustrations of the incredulity with which the 
•is of hypnotic anaesthesia were first received by medical men, see Moll, 
ttmtism (English trans., London, 1890), p. 329. 

• Account of a cast of successful amputation of the thigh during the mesmeric 
'#. London, 1843. 4 -&w'» vol i. p. 21a 

128 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

associates, was not conciliatory. The following epithets 
(omitting the names, which are given in full in the original) 
are taken at random from the index of the Zoist : " Dr. 

, his laughable folly ; Dr. , his ignorance and folly ; 

absurdity, nonsense, remarkable folly, folly and falsehood, 
discreditable conduct, untruth, egregious folly, sad conduct, 
false reports, stupid obstinacy, slobbering childishness," etc., 
etc. Nor were these hard words reserved for the opponents 
of Mesmerism. Elliotson and his colleagues on the Zoist 
resented so deeply Newnham's criticisms on the theory of 
Phreno-Mesmerism that they could not trust themselves to 
review his book, and that task is assigned to another. 1 On 
the other hand, whilst Elliotson and Engledue found them- 
selves by no means in complete sympathy with Townshend, 
Sandby, and other clergymen, the columns of the Zoist are 
apparently freely open to their contributions. Of the attitude 
of the Zoist to Braid we have already spoken. 

There was yet another section of Mesmerists at this time, 
represented by Spencer T. Hall, whose relations with the 
Zoist were far from cordial Hall was not, apparently, a 
man of any scientific training. His attention was first 
drawn to Mesmerism by attending a lecture given by La 
Fontaine in Sheffield, in 1841 or 1842. Thereafter he 
devoted himself enthusiastically to the new science, and in 
1843 — *h e y G3LT which saw also the appearance of the Zoist — 
he started a monthly journal, the Phreno-Magnet, which, 
however, ran for one year only. In 1844 Spencer Hall was 
invited by her physician to mesmerise Harriet Martineau. 
He did so with conspicuous success, as told by Miss 
Martineau in her Letters on Mesmerism. 

In the Phreno-Magnet we come in contact with the popular 
side of the movement The men whose writings we have 
hitherto considered were possessed of some scientific attain- 
ments, or at least of scholarship and literary faculty. The 
pages of the Zoist, in particular, were mainly concerned with 
the therapeutic aspect of Mesmerism, and the other phenomena 
observed, however misinterpreted, were still valued primarily 
for their scientific interest But the writers in the Phreno- 
Magnet were of a different class ; their interests and activities 
were less restrained. Few of the persons who contributed to 
its pages were medical men, or, indeed, possessed special 
qualifications of any kind for the study. 8 In the pages of 

1 Zoist, vol. iii. p. 3. 

9 It is to be noted that James Braid wrote in December, 1842, just before the 
ppearance of the first number, to express his interest and sympathy. (Phrewf- 
w^, p. as) 

THE ENGLISH MESMERISTS 129 

the Phreno-Magnet, as in the other writings of the period, 
are found numerous instances of community of sensation and 
travelling clairvoyance, but the records are not sufficiently 
detailed or exact to be of much value as evidence. Spencer 
Hall describes himself as a lecturer on Phrenopathy ; and a 
large space in his organ is taken up month by month with 
chronicles of lectures delivered by the editor and others in 
various towns in the United Kingdom. In a retrospect 
published in December, 1843, Hall estimated that during 
the past year no fewer than three hundred persons had 
lectured and experimented in public in Great Britain, Ireland, 
and America, and this propagandist movement was con- 
cerned primarily, not with Mesmerism as a healing art, but 
with the science of Phreno-Mesmerism, or Phrenopathy. 
The phenomena on which the new " science " of Phreno- 
Mesmerism was founded had been before the world since 
1 84 1 or 1842. The honour of the first discovery was 
disputed, in America by Dr. Buchanan, Dr. Collyer, and 
the Rev. Laroy Sunderland ; and by H. G. Atkinson, 
better known as the "Mentor" of Harriet Martineau, and 
others, in this country. Dr. Collyer had, indeed, by this 
time (1843) already ceased to believe, on philosophical and 
anatomical grounds, in the science which he claimed to have 
founded j 1 and Laroy Sunderland could at least assume a 
certain quantitative credit in the matter, for he had added no 
fewer than one hundred and fifty new organs to those pre- 
viously mapped out by orthodox phrenologists. Some cor- 
respondents of the Phreno-Magnet bettered this record, and 
related that they had already tested and proved the existence 
of nearly two hundred organs. 2 Amongst these new faculties 
of the human mind which were thus given a local habitation 
we find acquativeness {sic\ human nature, insanity, dis- 
contentment, opposiveness, love of pets ; organs for shooting 
with crossbow, skating, aerostation, slinging, spearing, pulling, 
sculling, and many other manly sports; also two organs 
relating to a deity and a future state respectively. 

Dr. Collyer, who had been a pupil of Elliotson's at Uni- 
versity College Hospital, by no means relinquished with his 
belief in mesmero-phrenology his interest in Mesmerism, or, 
as he called it, Animal Magnetism. From the pamphlet 
already referred to we find that he laboured in the United 
States to make it known as a solemn truth, which must 
revolutionise the false philosophy of the past, and open to 

1 Psychography, or the Embodiment of Thought, by R. H. Collyer, M.D. 
Philadelphia, 1843. a QP- '**-> P- 5*» ctc - 

I. — K 

130 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

man the secret of immortality. His title-page is adorned 
with a diagram representing two persons looking into a bowl 
of molasses, with dotted lines radiating from their foreheads 
to a point on the surface of the fluid. The experiment illus- 
trated by this diagram is thus described : The subject was 
requested by Dr. Collyer to look into the bowl, the doctor 
doing the same. " When," he writes, u the angle of incidence 
from my brain was equal to the angle of reflection from her 
brain, she distinctly saw the image of my thought at the point 
of coincidence." 

As already indicated, there was little sympathy between 
the medical Mesmerists and the supporters of the Phreno- 
Magnet. The first number of the Zoist, under the heading 
of " The Lecture Mania," contains some severe reflections on 
the ill-judged proceedings of a certain Mr. Brooks, who had 
been giving popular lectures followed by demonstrations of 
Phreno-Mesmerism on persons taken at hazard from the 
audience. Spencer Hall is characterised in the same article 
as "a gentleman influenced by good motives," but without 
scientific education. The writer of the article feared that 
the extravagance and want of judgment shown by the 
popular advocates of Mesmerism would prejudice the whole 
subject. The fear may have been justified, though to us now 
it seems to matter little whether the advocates of Phreno- 
Mesmerism taught that the mind expressed itself by means 
of twenty or two hundred organs, Or whether the mesmeric 
effluence was demonstrated by radiation from a crystal or 
reflection from a bowl of treacle. Weighted, however, though 
it was with such dubious theories and disputable facts, it can 
hardly be doubted that in the ordinary progress of events 
the trance and the suggestion-phenomena generally would 
ultimately have won recognition, and that the accessory 
marvels would gradually have dropped out of sight as the 
part played by the imagination in their production became 
more clearly demonstrable. Indeed, in April, 1852, Gregory 
was able to congratulate the readers of the Zoist 1 on the fact 
that Sir D. Brewster and others, instead of ascribing the 
trance, anaesthesia, and other phenomena to imposture, had 
now publicly admitted their reality, and explained them as 
due to suggestion acting on the impressible organism of the 
sensitive. That having reached this point, the further ad- 
vancement of the study should have been retarded for more 
than a generation was due to two special causes, the full 
effect of which could not at that time have been foreseen. 

1 Zoist t voL x. p. I, etc 

THE ENGLISH MESMERISTS 131 

The discovery in the years 1846-7 of the anaesthetic 
properties of ether and chloroform, and their rapidly growing 
use in medical practice, deprived the mesmeric trance of its 
most obvious utility. What effect that discovery had in 
checking the interest which had been aroused in Calcutta in 
Esdaile's mesmeric clinique we have already seen. If the 
effect was less marked in this country, it was only because 
the practice of operating in the trance was much less common, 
and had excited less attention. But another circumstance 
which did more to discredit Mesmerism throughout the 
civilised world was the gradual spread of the belief in 
Spiritualism, and the absorption by that movement of many 
of those who had been pronounced advocates of Mesmerism. 
Elliotson and his chief associates, indeed, for many years 
resisted the new doctrines, and in the later volumes of the 
Zoist 1 we find several articles dealing with the absurdities of 
the spirit-rappers. But from the outset many of the leading 
advocates of Mesmerism — Townshend, Sandby, Gregory, 1 
J. W. Jackson, H. G. Atkinson — were disposed to see in table- 
turning and other physical manifestations the operation of 
the mesmeric or neuro-vital fluid ; whilst others, sooner, as 
Ashburner, or later, as Elliotson himself, became converted 
to Spiritualism. In Elliotson's case the process of conver- 
sion did not stop at this point Before his death he renounced 
his former materialism and embraced Christianity. 8 Again, 
of the American authors whose names figure so largely in 
the Phreno-Magnety we find several who were afterwards 
prominent as Spiritualists. 

So that from causes largely accidental and external to 
itself Mesmerism for a time lost whatever hold it had suc- 
ceeded in gaining on the attention of sober-minded persons, 
and passed out of sight, until the labours of Ltebeault, and 
later those of Bernheim at Nancy, of Charcot at the Sal- 
petriere, and of Heidenhain at Breslau, once more brought 
the subject into prominence. 

1 Especially vols. xi. and xii. 

* Gregory appears to have been all but converted to the spiritualistic doctrine. 
In an interesting letter from him dated October, 1857, and published in the 
Spiritual Magazin* % 1865, pp. 451-3, occurs the phrase, "The higher phenomena 
appear to me to render the spiritual hypothesis almost certain. His widow, 
Mrs. Makdougall Gregory, for many years, until her death in the early eighties, 
held regular spiritualist seances, and her house was a place of meeting tor the 
converts of the new faith. 

* See obituary notice of Elliotson in the Morning Post, Aug. 3rd, 1868. 

CHAPTER IX 
COMMUNITY OF SENSATION 

THE effect which the writings of the Mesmerists of this 
period is likely to produce on a first reading is no 
doubt a profound distrust of human testimony alto- 
gether. The marvellous behaviour of magnets, crystals, and 
mesmerised sovereigns, and the Protean manifestations of 
clairvoyance, seem hardly more credible than old tales of 
lambs which grew on trees, and men whose feet expanded to 
serve as umbrellas. But a closer examination tends to show 
that the beliefs of Reichenbach and the rest were yet, perhaps, 
not so entirely unreasonable as their opponents believed. 
The phenomena were, as few now doubt, entirely subjective. 
But if the believers were wrong in seeing in them the 
manifestations of a new physical force, their critics were 
almost equally wrong in attributing them wholly to fraud. 
Fraud, no doubt, there was ; but it was an accident, and not 
the essence of the problem. It was an unjustifiable assumption 
when employed without any attempt at proof in a case like 
the Okeys ; it became preposterous when applied to persons 
like many of Reichenbach's sensitives — men and women of 
position, who were not'at all likely to lend themselves to 
imposture merely to humour the folly of a friend and 
colleague ; in the case of the patient who showed no pain 
under the surgeon's knife the charge was merely ludicrous. 
But, in fact, this wholesale imputation of imposture, unjust 
to the subjects of it, was equally unjust to the Mesmerists 
themselves. Puys£gur was no doubt not a man of science ; 
Deleuze, it might be urged, was only a botanist ; Chenevix, 
Elliotson, Reichenbach, Gregory, and the rest may have been 
visionaries and fanatics. But the fact remains that many of 
them had done good work in medicine, chemistry, metallurgy, 
or some other department of physical science; and apart 
from a certain intemperance which marked, in some cases, 

13a 

COMMUNITY OF SENSATION 133 

the advocacy of their views — a defect which the example of 
their critics did little to remedy — there was nothing to be 
urged against the men themselves. Braid, it has been seen, 
generously acknowledged the care and ingenuity with which 
Reichenbach's experiments had been conducted ; and it is 
Braid who has pointed out the two causes to which mis- 
interpretation of the results attained was mainly due, the 
extraordinary suggestibility, to wit, of the hypnotic subject 
and the temporary exaltation of the senses in this state. 
Some years later, no doubt, other writers, no longer satisfied 
with an assumption which was fully as mischievous, and 
hardly more reasonable, than the theory of the Mesmerists, 
came to the same general conclusions as Braid. But by that 
time extraneous circumstances had already obscured the 
interest in the subject ; and this change of view remained 
unfruitful. 

But it may be doubted whether even suggestion and 
hyperesthesia will explain everything. Braid's own recorded 
results in Phreno-Mesmerism, as already pointed out, can 
with difficulty be brought under such an explanation. He 
has shown that precautions were taken to exclude suggestion 
by normal means ; and his tentative explanation on physio- 
logical lines was clearly inadequate. If we accept merely 
Braid's record of his own experiments, and leave out of 
account the enormous volume of similar observations tendered 
by less cautious observers, it is difficult to resist the conclusion 
that the curious results described may have been in some 
cases due to a mental suggestion supplied by the expectation 
of the operator ; and if we scrutinise the rest of the " magnetic " 
or mesmeric manifestations we shall find other evidence for 
the operation of mental suggestion. That evidence is by no 
means conclusive. The experimenters were for the most part 
prepossessed with the idea of a physical effluence ; and they 
were not so far ahead of the medical knowledge of their day 
as to be fully alive to the possibilities of hyperesthesia. But 
there are experiments recorded in which the precautions 
described — avowedly taken in order to preclude deception or 
suggestion of a normal kind — would appear to have been 
sufficient to exclude such suggestion even when acting on a 
hyperasthetic subject When, indeed, a sovereign " mesmerised " 
by merely looking at it was picked out from a number of 
other sovereigns, it may very fairly be said that the operator, 
who remained in the room and watched the experiment, 
probably gave sufficient indication by gesture or change of 
breathing to guide the sensitive ; similar feats are performed 

134 

fir 

PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

our day by professional ** thought-readers/* Again, 
m mesmerised " water may have been identified, as Braid 
suggests, even after the lapse of some minutes, by the smell 
alone. But there are experiments in which we have to assume 
some grave error in observation or record to make such 
explanations fit the results. EUiotson, for instance, tells us 
that a mesmerised sovereign would send the Okeys into the 
trance ; and that whilst contact of the coin with iron would 
neutralise the influence, contact with other metals had no 

" Nothing," he writes, ** could be more interesting than to see a 
charged sovereign or shilling lying in their hand, a screen being held 
between it and their head ; and as soon as the hand began to dose 
and the eyes to fix, to observe these effects instantly arrested and 
subside when a short iron rod was brought into contact with the 
metal, and augment again when it was withdrawn. I have often 
substituted a rod of sliver or some other metal — for I had rods 
made of various metals precisely similar in form and size — when it 
was impossible the girl could know which was being used; and in the 
case of a leaden rod I myself should not have known by the eye at 
the moment, but to prevent confusion had put each into a separate 
pocket The silver, copper, and lead had no neutralising power, 
and therefore never arrested or diminished the effect-" l 

A common experiment at this time to illustrate the power 
of a mesmeric attraction " was to mesmerise a particular object 
and let the patient, unawares, come in contact with it 
EsdaDe's first experiment of the kind was made at the 
hospital in Calcutta on a patient who could scarcely be 
supposed to have heard beforehand of the result anticipated, 
nor were the conditions of the experiment — an impromptu 
one — such as to afford much opportunity for any hint of what 
was expected reaching his mind by normal channels. Several 
gentlemen were present 

M Desiring them to observe, I seated myself in an armchair in the 
waiting-room, placed my hands on each of the knobs at the end 
of the arms, and then breathed on them. I now joined the com- 
pany, and desired them to get the man I should send for to seat 
himself in the chair I had just vacated. The man was brought 
and manoeuvred into the chair, where he was questioned about the 
operation he had undergone, etc, and was then desired to return to 
the ward. 

1 Zm&i voL iv. p. 109. la 
case is rcoorcled in which these 
CTmmlfd in the hand of the 
peculiar 

Facts in Mmmerism, pp. 152, 153, a 
identified various gems held to her forehead 
She alleged that she experienced 

COMMUNITY OF SENSATION 135 

" He had naturally placed his hands on the knobs of the arms, 
and now attempted to rise, but stuck fast ; and those present will 
not soon forget his look of amazement, first at one arm, and then at 
the other, and his bewildered look of inquiry towards me when 
he found himself in such slJIx. 

" His arms were found to be rigid and insensible to the shoulders, 
and the fingers were so firmly clutched upon the knobs of the chair 
that they could not be opened. He was relieved by upward passes 
along the arms ; but for some time his fingers were in a painful state 
of spasms, which I had some difficulty in dissipating. I now left 
the room, and made passes along and breathed upon the floor near 
the door by which he had to return to his ward — the door being 
closed, of course, Returning to the party, I desired him to go away 
now, and he did ; but he no sooner planted his foot outside the door 
than he became rooted to the spot, and was violently convulsed, 
calling upon me to come to him, that he was dying, etc." l 

Another experiment much relied upon as proving the 
reality of the mesmeric effluence was the production of sleep 
at a distance. In the following case, quoted from Towns- 
hend's Facts in Mesmerism, two previous trials on the same 
patient had been completely successful. In this instance, it 
will be noted, we have a double coincidence. 

"The third trial that I made to mesmerise this patient from 
a distance was still more remarkable and decisive. 

" One evening, when sitting with my family, the idea occurred to 

me, ' Could I mesmerise Anna M there as I then was, while 

she was in her own house ? ' to which I knew she was just then 
confined by slight indisposition. Acting on this thought, I begged 
all the party present to note the hour (it was exactly nine o'clock), 
and to bear me witness that then and there I attempted a mesmeric 
experiment 

" This time I endeavoured to bring before my imagination very 
vividly the person of my sleepwaker, and even aided the concentra- 
tion of my thoughts by the usual mesmeric gestures; I also at 
the end of an hour said, * I will now awake Anna,' and used appro- 
priate gestures. We now awaited with more curiosity than confidence 
the result of this process. 

"The following morning Anna made her appearance, just as we 
were at breakfast, exclaiming, ' Oh, sir ! did you magnetise me last 
night ? About nine o'clock I fell asleep, and mother and sisters say 
they could not wake me with all their shaking of me, and they were 
quite frightened ; but after an hour I woke of myself ; and I think 
from all this that my sleep must have been magnetic. It also 
did me a great deal of good, for I felt quite recovered from my cold 

4 Natural and Mesmeric Clairvoyvnte, pp. 1*6, 127, 

136 THE PEDIGEEE OF SPIRITUALISM 

after it. After a natural sleep I never feel so much refreshed. 
When I sleep for an hour in magnetism, it is as if I had rested 

a whole night' These were the words of Anna M , noted down 

at the time as accurately as possible." * 

In one case out of many cited by Haddock the effect 
appears to have been produced without the intention of the 
operator. 

"On another occasion I was wishful to induce the mesmeric 
sleep on a lady for the relief of a rheumatic affection from which she 
was suffering. Finding the continual stare very fatiguing to my 
eyes, and also expecting to be called away by patients, it occurred to 
me that if I directed her to look steadfastly at something it might 
answer the same purpose, and allow me to leave her without 
interrupting the mesmeric action. I therefore arose and took a 
small magnet and suspended it by a wire from a hook in the 
ceiling. Emma was in the kitchen, situated under the room where 
I was operating, and knew nothing of my movements. In a few 
minutes the smell of burning arrested my attention, and I desired 
my daughter to go downstairs and ascertain the cause. She called me 
quickly to come down, saying that Emma was on fire. I ran down, 
and found her with her eyes closed, and mesmerised, and on her 
knees before the kitchen fire, engaged in sweeping the hearth, and 
her apron on fire from contact with a burning coal that had fallen 
from the grate ; but of the fire she was unconscious, or at least 
she took no notice of it, and her attention was wholly directed 
to a point in the kitchen ceiling under where I had been sitting 
in the room above. Having asked her what she was doing or 
looking at, she replied, ' / want that magnet.' I pretended not 
to understand her, and said, 'What magnet ' ? The reply was, ' That 
magnet hanging up there,' pointing accurately to its situation." 1 

The phenomena of " Community of Sensation " are also 
susceptible of explanation as being due to thought-trans- 
ference. In its commonest form, indeed — the appreciation 
by the hypnotic of sensations of taste or smell experienced by 
the person with whom she was in rapport — it is difficult to 
exclude the possibility that indications may have reached the 
aesthetic organs of sense by normal channels. Most of 
' substances in common use, in fact, give out a 

i Wmnw/i'jrn surf PsyrhtiiM, p. 93. Similar experiments have been 

a success during the last two decade* by variout French otserven, 

i noat noteworthy ate thoae conducted by Profeisor Janet and 

a. See fltfui /AiJ**r+iftu,Feb., 1886 ; Jtetme dt FHyfne- 

P. Jt „ voL iv. p. 133, etc., vol v. 

COMMUNITY OF SENSATION 137 

sensible odour; and unless experiments of this kind are 
carried on at a considerable distance and with closed 
doors intervening, or care is taken to select substances as 
odourless as common salt (and I can find no record in the 
writings of this period of experiments conducted under such 
conditions), it seems probable that the results may be attribut- 
able generally to hyperesthesia. The following case, however, 
recorded by TownshencJ, cannot be thus explained, and even 
though the Mesmeriser held the subject's hand, can hardly be 
accounted for by muscle-reading. Some successful trials of 
the usual kind with tastes and odours had first been made 
with the same subject. 

"It now occurred to me to try the experiment which B had 

suggested with respect to the cognisance of form. With every pre- 
caution, I took up from a table, on which were many other articles, 
a small square box, and passed my finger over the edges. I, at the 
same time, asked the patient, ' Can you tell me what sort of a thing 

I am touching?' Upon this Miss T made motions with her 

fingers, as if she had the object under her own hand, and replied, 
1 It is something with edges like a box.' I next took into my hand 
a chessman, some parts of which were carved in points, and felt 
alternately the carved and uncarved portions of the piece. Between 
these she discriminated correctly, saying, ' Now it feels rough ; now 
smooth'; and always before speaking she went through the same 
motions of touching with myself. 

" One of the patient's sisters, without giving notice of her intention, 
went out of the room and fetched an egg, which she concealed care- 
fully in her hand and gave me from behind. The patient now said, 
• 1 feel something smooth and round.' Being urged to tell what it 
was, she said, ' I think it is a ball.' Stretching out my hand behind 
me, I whispered to one of the party to hurt me in some way ; I was 
pricked with a pin, when my patient started and shook her hand as 
if she felt the injury. On being asked what she felt, she answered, 
• As if they pricked my hand.' 

" At another time, when I inquired if she suffered in any way, she 
replied, *No, only my feet are very cold.' My own feet being 
exceedingly cold at the moment, I suspected that her feeling was 
sympathetic. I conjectured rightly, for, awaking soon after, she 
assured me that her feet were perfectly warm." 1 

Again, the following observation in the transference of pain 
seems free from objection, and the distance beween agent W^ 
patient was, it will be seen, considerable. Dr. E.r\cr\ed ue 
writes in the Zoist : — * 

1 Townshend, op. cit. t pp. 69, 7a * Vol. ii. pp. 269, 

138 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

" In a drawing-room containing forty persons this experiment was 
performed, and I select and relate it here because it was not pre- 
arranged. After the patient had been entranced a gentleman requested 
to speak to me at the other end of the room. He engaged me in 
conversation, and whilst I was standing with my hands behind me, 
one of his companions suddenly pushed the point of a penknife into 
my thumb. Immediately the patient cried out, and rubbed the 
exact spot on her own hand which had been injured in mine. 
Another gentleman requested me to accompany him into the library, 
which adjoined the drawing-room. He closed the doors, and then 
said, ' I wish to tickle your ear with the end of a pen.' I requested 
him not to do so for a few minutes, for I have almost always noticed 
that if experiments are performed in too rapid succession the ex- 
pected result does not take place ; nay, more, I have frequently noticed 
that if experiments are too much crowded together, several minutes 
may elapse and the experiment be considered a failure, but after all 
the expected result may come out My right ear was tickled for one 
minute. We then entered the drawing-room, and found the patient 
rubbing her left ear upon her shoulder and shuddering in the same 
manner that I had, and as every person does when the same stimulus 
is applied. . . . 

"... When my hair was combed in another room, my patient 
expressed great dissatisfaction, and complained that somebody was 
teasing her and pulling her hair. 

" When I used a toothpick, she picked her teeth with a pin ; and 
generally she did this on the same side and inserted the pin between 
the same two teeth that I did. This, however, was not invariable." 

Sometimes the same phenomenon was observed in the 
higher senses, as in the following case, recorded by Mr. Jago, 
of Bodmin, and communicated to the Zoist 1 by Dr. Elliot- 
son. Mr. Jago, it will be noted, suggests community of 
sensation as the explanation of the facts observed ; he 
supposes the sensitive to be "seeing with his eyes." 

" A person present was asked to put something in a cup, and, 
without saying what it was, to bring it to me in such a way that I 

might look in it, but that it would be impossible for Miss D to 

see what it contained. The cup was brought on a level with my 
eye. Having looked over the edge of it and seen what was in it, I 
desired that it might be taken away again ; then turning to Miss 

D and placing my finger on the organ of language, I asked her, 

* What's in that cup ? ' She instantly and without any doubtful tone 
of voice said, ' Cotton/ It was a little ball of cotton. 

" Anxious to test this to the utmost, I asked a person to go out of 
"he room and put something in a cup and bring it to me that I only 

1 Z*ist % vol. iii pp. 223, 224. 

COMMUNITY OF SENSATION 139 

might see what was in it, as before. This was done, and the cup 
again placed upon the table, which was at the opposite end of the 
room. Turning to Miss D— — , I asked her, ' What's in it now ? ' 
'Wafers.' This was perfectly true. 'How many are there?' 
4 Two.' * What colours are they ? ' ' Green and red.' The last 
answer is most extraordinary. By candlelight I thought the wafers 
were white and red. My question was repeated, ' Are you sure that 
one is green ? ' * Yes.' ' Are you quite sure of this ? — think.' ' Yes/ 
she replied rather sharply. Believing that this answer was incorrect, 
I desired to see the wafers again; one of them was a delicately 
pale green. 

" Astonished at these results, I requested that the cup should be 
placed on the table with something in it, as before, but that neither 

myself nor Miss D should be told or be allowed to see what it 

contained. This was done. I then asked, ' What's in that cup now ? ' 
She paused as if thinking, and in about a minute said, * I don't know.' 
1 Do you not really know ? — think again.' ' No ; I do not know.' I 
now directed a person to bring the cup to me as before, that I alone 
might see its contents. This was done, and in such a manner that 

it was impossible for Miss D to look ; in fact, during the whole 

of this experiment her head was leaning a little forwards and her 
eyes were quite closed. Care was taken to hold the cup above the level 
of her forehead each time that it was brought near me, so that had 
her eyes been wide open she could not have seen what was in it. 

" After I had looked at what had been put in the cup, I asked her, 
* Do you know now what it is ? ' * Yes ; it is a thimble.' This was 
correct 

" Supposing her by some inscrutable means to be seeing with my 
eyes, I thought she might be able to describe any object which was 
known to ma I therefore began to question her about that of 
which I was certain she could have no previous knowledge. • Do 
you know my dressing-case ? ' ' Yes.' ' How many bottles are 
there in it?' 'Two.' 'What colours are they?' 'A white and 
a green. 9 ' Are you sure that one of them is green f ' ' Yes.' I 
had considered that bottle to be blue, and therefore supposed she 
had given me an incorrect reply; nor did I until the following 
morning convince myself that it was green. It is that particular 
shade of green which many find it difficult to distinguish from 
blue. Her answer was right, and though the question was repeated 
three or four times, she persisted in giving me the same repty- 
' How many drawers are there in the case ? ' ' One.' * How inax^V 
locks are there?' 'Two.' 'What sort of case is it?' 1300^ 
with brass.' Had it been before her she could not have eWe* 1 a 
more correct description." ^ 

It is clear that in the latter part of this record the Tt^^jt^^^A 
of seeing with the Mesmeriser's eyes no longer hoV^j fS° VS 
If the information given by the subject was not ^T B <<& 

140 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

acquired — and illustrations of this faculty are so numerous 
that it is difficult to doubt that in some cases, at any rate, 
the information came through supersensory channels — we 
have to deal with a sympathy not of sensation but of 
thought Some of the writers of this period, indeed, frankly 
recognise the existence of such a faculty of thought-trans- 
ference, as Bertrand had before them. 1 

1 For two instances of the kind see Townshend, op. cit. , pp. 324, 325. 

CHAPTER X 
CLAIRVOYANCE IN ENGLAND 

THE manifestations of what is known as "clairvoyance" 
present us with a more difficult problem than the 
phenomena of action at a distance and community of 
sensation discussed in the last chapter. As regards the so- 
called clairvoyance of objects at close quarters, or "seeing with 
the eyes closed," there seems little reason to doubt that the 
results vouched for by so many observers were due, as a rule, 
either to normal vision under somewhat unusual conditions, 
to deliberate fraud, or possibly in rare cases to hyper- 
esthesia of the sense of touch. In one case, indeed, it seems 
to me clear that the whole of the manifestations were due to 
fraud of a tolerably obvious kind. There was in those days 
a certain Major Buckley — a retired officer of the Indian 
Army. Major Buckley seems to have been an amiable old 
gentleman, with a fondness for taking parties of young ladies 
to the opera. His young friends repaid his hospitalities by 
manifestations of a very surprising kind. Their specialty 
was reading mottoes in nuts bought at the confectioner's — 
hazel-nuts or walnuts, the natural contents of which had been 
replaced by small sweetmeats and a piece of paper bearing 
a motto, the hole in the nut being filled in apparently with 
chocolate. Major Buckley himself seems to have been 
convinced of the genuineness of these performances ; and so 
were some of the persons who witnessed them. Elliotson, 
though obviously suspicious, allowed accounts of the experi- 
ments to appear in the Zoist. A detailed report by 
Ashburner of a series of experiments at which he and Lord 
Adare assisted allows us to see how the feat was probably 
accomplished. The young women who were the seers had 
no doubt brought with them some nuts which had been 
previously opened and resealed, and contrived during the 
proceedings to substitute their own prepared nuts for those 
brought by the investigators. At any rate, it would appear 

141 

142 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

that opportunity was again and again in the first series of 
experiments (afforded for such substitution ; and that when 
the nuts were marked, so as to prevent substitution, the 
experiments proved inconclusive. 1 

However, Major Buckley's experiments were not typical. 
They do not seem to have been accepted generally by those 
interested in the subject, nor — which is certainly curious — 
does this particular form of clairvoyance appear to have 
found any imitators outside Buckley's circle. But there were 
many subjects both in France and England at this time who 
claimed, or on whose behalf the claim was made, that they 
could see near objects when their eyes were closed and 
firmly bandaged, or when placed in absolute darkness. A 
well-known case was that of Mdlle. Pigeaire, whose 
claims were examined by the Academy of Medicine in 
Paris, in 1837, with negative results. At Plymouth, in 1846, 
the clairvoyant powers of a boy of fifteen, Thomas Laycock, 
were investigated by a committee of twelve responsible 
persons, who after plastering and bandaging his eyes, 
expressed themselves, by a large majority, as satisfied that 
his alleged power of supersensuous vision was genuine. 2 
Townshend minutely describes similar performances on the 
part of a subject of his own, a French boy named E. A., and 
adduces the testimony of several independent observers. In 
all these cases — and they are but samples — many of the 
results, as described, seem hardly susceptible of explanation 
by the exercise of the normal senses. Townshend's subject, 
for instance, is described as seeing objects in absolute dark- 
ness, or when held at the back of his head, or behind a 
screen. Most commonly, however, the object to be seen was 
held in front of his eyes, which were assumed to be securely 
bandaged, and the interposition of a screen, a variation in the 
angle at which the object was held, or the addition of a 
further covering to the subject's head, interfered with success. 
It is quite clear, therefore, that in most cases the process of 
seeing with the eyes shut had some relation to the normal 
organs of vision ; and it is not difficult to suppose that the 
few apparent exceptions referred to were due to malobserva- 
tion or the neglect of essential precautions. As regards the 
singular freedom of vision possessed by youths whose eyes 
were in appearance securely bandaged, the experience of the 
S. P. R., as already stated, has shown that, with some 
persons, at any rate, a very small chink at the side of the 

1 Zoist, vol. vi. pp. 9S-110 see also pp. 380-4. 
3 Zoist, voL iv. p. 82. 

CLAIRVOYANCE IN ENGLAND 143 

nose suffices for the purpose of vision ; and that there is 
practically no means of blindfolding the eyes, without 
injuring the patient, which would preclude the possibility of 
vision by this means. 1 

The most notable success in this kind of clairvoyance was 
attained by a young Frenchman, Alexis Didier, who was 
brought to this country and exhibited by one Marcillet, whom 
Elliotson and others vouched for as a gentleman of high 
character and undoubted integrity. Alexis was, apparently, 
in the first instance thrown into a deep trance ; his eyes were 
then bandaged, generally as follows : a pad of leather would 
be placed over each eye, and then a handkerchief would be 
tied diagonally across ; over all a third handkerchief would 
be tied horizontally, and the interstices would be filled up 
with cotton wool. In these circumstances he would play 
4cart4 with great skill and rapidity; would know not only 
his own cards, but frequently those in his adversary's hand as 
well ; would play correctly with his own cards face down- 
wards on the table; would frequently, by request, pick out 
any named card when the whole pack was face downward. 
Further, he would — though generally with his eyes un- 
bandaged and merely closed — decipher words written in 
sealed envelopes, describe the contents of closed packets, and 
read words and sentences several pages deep in any book 
which might be presented to him. 

That the art by which these marvellous results were 
achieved was not that of the ordinary conjurer seems toler- 
ably clear. Indeed, in 1847 Robert Houdin himself, having, 
at the instance of the Marquis de Mirville, paid two visits to 
Alexis, at which he played tcartd in the usual fashion, pre- 
sented a book in which Alexis read half a line some pages 
in advance, and received other proofs of the clairvoyant's 
powers, testified " qu'il est tout k fait impossible que le hasard 
ou l'adresse puisse jamais produire des effete aussi merveilleux." * 
As against conjuring of the familiar kind, Houdin's testimony 
is no doubt conclusive. As against the view here suggested, 
that the "clairvoyance" of cards and sentences in closed 
books, and so on, was probably to be explained as due to 
preternormal acuteness of vision, or of touch and vision, con- 
ditioned by the hypnotic trance, it is perhaps not so con- 
clusive. No doubt Houdin, as a trained observer, if his 
attention had been specially directed to this possibility, 

1 See above, chap. v. p. 74, and references there given. 
8 Des E sprits, Js. E. de Mirville. Paris, 1854. 3rd edition. Vol. u 
pp. 18-32. 

144 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

would have been better qualified than most persons to 
pronounce judgment upon it But this acuteness of vision 
here supposed is a distinct thing from the rapid and com- 
prehensive glance, the result of long training, which is, as 
we know from Houdin himself, a part of the conjurer's 
equipment, and might well pass for incredible even with 
an expert observer whose experience had lain in other 
directions. 

As to the actual means by which the results were achieved, 
the accounts we possess are not sufficiently detailed to enable 
us to determine. The exact position of Marcillet is rarely 
mentioned ; the proportion of failures to successes is hardly 
ever recorded, nor the nature of the failures. The table is 
described, if described at all, merely as "a card table," pre- 
sumably, therefore, with only a slender strip of polished 
surface. In one case, indeed, we learn that the cards were 
highly glazed, 1 but we do not know if this was usually the 
case, or whether Alexis had other opportunities of seeing 
the cards by reflection from a polished surface. Nevertheless, 
from the descriptions of the performances given by many 
observers in the Zoist itself and in the periodical literature 
of the time, we can gather some indications of the probable 
modus operandi* In any case, the bandaging could not have 
been accepted as satisfactory. But a writer in the Morning 
Chronicle tells us that he had himself been bandaged by a 
friend in the same way, and had managed to read distinctly. 
It was noticed, moreover, by several persons that Alexis 
contorted his face both during and after the process of 
bandaging; that he frequently touched or fidgeted with 
the bandages ; that he held the objects to be looked at at 
curious angles, and changed their position, as if trying to get 
a better view. Envelopes and closed packages would be 
carried, for instance, to the stomach or the top of the head. 
Further, the card-playing appears to have been the only form 
of experiment which was pretty uniformly successful. Even 

1 Zoist, vol. ii. p. 496. 

3 See especially Zoist, vol. ii. pp. 393-409, 477-5*9 > tne detailed and, on the 
whole, impartial account by Dr. Forbes, F.R.S., in the Lancet, August 3rd, 1844; 
a letter in the Morning Chronicle, June 28th, 1844, signed "No Go"; the 
Times, June 25th, 1844 ; Medical Times, July 27th, 1844, and subsequent dates ; 
various articles in the Critic for 1844 and 1845, etc For an account of some 
*ater seances, given at Brighton in 1849, *** Animal Magnetism, by Edwin 
«e, M.D. (London, 1866), and Zoist, vol. vii. pp. 92 et seqq. Dr. Forbes (after- 
vds Sir John Forbes) published his account of two sittings with Alexis, also 

xrants of experiments with Adolphe Didier and other so-called clairvoyants, in 

wall volume, Illustrations of Modern Mesmerism (London, 1845), which should 

lead by all interested in the subject. 

CLAIRVOYANCE IN ENGLAND 145 

here there were many failures, but the failures seem to have 
predominated over the successes in other cases. Again, 
Alexis appears to have selected the passages which he was 
to read from amongst a large number presented to him. The 
contents of sealed envelopes could not be read in the hands 
of a sceptic; the seal must be broken, and the contents 
shown to a sympathetic witness. Marcillet was present in 
the room throughout the performance, and some of the 
numerous bystanders, if not actually confederates, were 
friendly and indiscreet. 1 Of all the feats, that of reading 
the words several pages deep in a book was the most 
strongly suggestive of trickery. This appears not to have 
been attempted, as a rule, until Alexis had already read some 
words on the open page, the book in his hand, with the text 
covered by a piece of paper or a handkerchief placed there 
by himself. Alexis would then separate a number of pages 
from ten to one hundred and fifty, holding them vertically 
before him, and offer to read some words on a particular 
part of the page several pages further on. It is not stated 
in any account which I have seen whether Alexis or the 
audience chose the particular spot on the page, but it is 
certain that Alexis could not indicate with even approximate 
correctness the number of pages deep. In one case the 
desired words were found eighty and one hundred and fifty 
pages further on respectively. 

If this were all that Alexis had to show, we should perhaps 
be entitled to wonder at the simplicity of the numerous 
witnesses — lawyers, medical men, members of Parliament, and 
others — cited in the Zoist y who vouched for his performances. 
But there are two considerations which give us pause. In the 
first place, though it would have been difficult to prove this 
even at the time, and, of course, no certain proof is now 
possible, there are indications that his trance was genuine. 2 
And if genuine, it is permissible to suppose, though the 
knowledge which he displayed had apparently been acquired 
by the exercise of the known senses, that he himself was 
innocent of deception in the matter. In the second place, at 
every stance, together with this display of conscious or 
unconscious jugglery, there occurred instances of w travelling 
clairvoyance" and thought-reading, which, if not genuine, 
involved deception of a more hazardous and complicated 
nature. Of course, fraud is the first explanation in a case of 

1 See Sir J. Forbes* observations on this point {op. cit.). 
3 On the other hand, Sir J. Forbes [pp. cit. t p. 51) writes that it was not proved, 
nor even probable, that the mesmeric state was genuine. 

I. — L 

146 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

this kind. Alexis was a professional — he received on some 
occasions as much as five guineas a stance ; and there is no 
strong improbability in the assumption that the respectable 
M. Marcillet was a confederate. And perhaps the most 
probable, though not necessarily the correct, explanation of 
his card-playing performances, is that of deliberate fraud 
When, therefore, Alexis correctly described a medal enclosed 
in a casket covered with paper and sealed, we suspect that he 
may have succeeded in opening the casket unobserved, or 
that the lady who had brought it may have imprudently 
revealed its contents to those about her. 1 Or take the 
following incident, the account of which is compiled from 
notes made by the then Lord Adare (father of the present 
Earl of Dunraven) of a sitting with Alexis, which took place 
on July 2nd, 1844, at the house of M. Dupuis, in Welbeck 
Street A corresponding, but rather fuller and more dramatic 
account of the incident is given by the Rev. G. Sandby, in a 
letter to the Medical Times, dated July 8th : — 

" Colonel Llewellyn, who was, I believe, rather sceptical, produced 
a morocco case, something like a surgical instrument case. Alexis 
took it, placed it to his stomach, and said, 'The object is a hard 
substance, not white, enclosed in something more white than itself; 
it is a bone taken from a greater body ; a human bone — yours. It 
has been separated, and cut so as to leave a flat side.' Alexis 
opened the case, took out a piece of bone wrapped in silver paper, 
and said, 'The ball struck here; it was an extraordinary ball in 
effect ; you received three separate injuries at the same moment ; 
the bone was broken in three pieces; you were wounded early 
in the day whilst engaged in charging the enemy.' He also 
described the dress of the soldiers, and was right in all these 
particulars. This excited the astonishment of all the bystanders, 
especially the gallant Colonel. This account is drawn up, not only 
from my own notes, but from Colonel Llewellyn's statement made 
after the seance, and from a written account given me by a lady 
who was sitting close by." * 

On the hypothesis that the information given was normally 
obtained, we must suppose that Colonel Llewellyn was a 
garrulous old gentleman, who had betrayed his secret to 
someone in the room at the time ; or that Marcillet or 
Alexis had by some means acquired beforehand knowledge 
of his history, and of his intention to attend the seance. 
Neither supposition can, of course, be dismissed as altogether 
improbable. 

1 2#&, vol. ii. p. 516. * ZHst y ▼oL ii. pp. 510, 511. 

CLAIRVOYANCE IN ENGLAND 147 

Or, to turn to examples of the so-called " travelling clair- 
voyance," when we read that on one occasion Alexis gave to 
Lord Frederick Fitz-Clarence a minute description of his 
visit to St Cyr from Paris two days before the stance, it is 
natural to remember, even though Lord Frederick himself 
thought " nothing could be much more extraordinary," that 
his lordship was probably a well-known figure in Paris, and 
his journeyings matters of common report 1 When we hear 
how the clairvoyant, sitting in London, described, at the 
request of Dr. Costello, an operation for lithotrity which the 
doctor had performed at Clifton two or three days before, 
we can but regret that the date of Dr. Costello's visit had 
apparently been arranged with Marcillet beforehand. 2 

Again, the Rev. Chauncey Hare Townshend relates that he 
paid a surprise visit to Marcillet in passing through Paris in 
October, 1851 ; that Alexis gave, in the trance, a surprisingly 
minute and accurate description of Townshend's house at 
Lausanne, its garden and surroundings, and even the subjects 
of the pictures hanging in the salon; passing on to give 
an equally circumstantial inventory of the narrator's house 
in Norfolk Street, London ; of the maidservants there, the 
horses in the stables, and other details. 8 

The obvious remark on a case of this kind is that 
Townshend was a well-known writer on Mesmerism ; that 
it was practically certain that he would at some time or 
another come to see Alexis ; and that it would possibly be 
worth while for Alexis and his agents to " get up " as many 
facts as possible in connection with him, in order to afford 
a convincing proof of supernormal faculty. That the 
description of the maidservants in the house in London, 
and the grey horse in the stable with sores on its flanks, 
applied accurately to the time of the stance would only 
prove, on this hypothesis, that Alexis* Intelligence Depart- 
ment was up to date. It is true that this explanation 
becomes more and more difficult as it has to be applied to 
a wider and wider circle. But though successful clairvoyant 
descriptions of the kind appear to have been given at every 
stance, the reports which we possess are mostly at second- 
hand, or insufficiently detailed, and the names of persons 
concerned are frequently not given. Occasionally, as in the 
case of the stance at the house of the Rev. Thos. Robertson, 
on the 9th July, 1844, we have a full account, drawn up 
shortly after the event by one of the principal witnesses, which 

1 Zoist, vol. vi pp. 417-9. 9 Medical Times, July 27, 1844. 

' Zcist, vol. ix. pp. 405, 406. 

148 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

reveals an amount of correspondence which certainly cannot 
be attributed to chance. 1 But a seance with Alexis, as in 
the case cited, appears to have been a kind of levee attended 
by some thirty or forty persons, so that he had considerable 
chances of utilising any information which he might have 
surreptitiously acquired ; and the supposition that his display 
of apparent clairvoyance was, in fact, to be so explained, 
though it certainly implies the possession of highly trained 
confederates and singular good fortune in the chance of 
sitters, is not perhaps to be summarily dismissed. It is 
interesting to remark that Alexis himself expressly dis- 
claimed any assistance from spirits in the matter. 8 

The hypothesis of a Private Inquiry agency — not un- 
reasonable in the case of a professional clairvoyant, who 
received comparatively large sums for his performances — is 
more difficult to apply to the numerous other cases recorded 
in the literature of this period. There are, for instance, 
several striking reports in the Zoist of the clairvoyance of a 
young woman named Ellen Dawson, a patient of a London 
surgeon named Hands, who discovered the faculty in her 
by accident, and apparently allowed a few privileged persons 
to witness it in operation. But something could no doubt 
have been gleaned by a cunning and unscrupulous person 
from the gossip of servants, and in nearly every case a wide 
margin must be allowed for misdescription on the part of 
the narrator of the marvels. 3 

The following account, however, by the late Professor 
de Morgan is worthy of consideration, partly because of 
the intellectual distinction of the recorder, partly because 
there is no obvious source from which the information could 
have been derived : — 

"I have seen a good deal of Mesmerism, and have tried it 

myself on for the removal of ailments. . . . But this is not the 

point I had frequently heard of the thing they call clairvoyance, 
and had been assured of the occurrence of it in my own house, 
hat always considered it as a thing of which I had no evidence 

voL H. pp. 590, 531. 

' woo attended some seances with Alexis, noticed "how, whilst 
iWid* (according to his friends) but 'fishing' or * pumping' 
*■), he wasnelped by the information lie gleaned from 
~T§ of his questioners." (Mesmerism and Spiritualism, 

ants of Ellen Dawson's clairvoyance is given in the 

111 unfortunately Miss l&ovYe, who tells the story, 

ind moat of the Cuts gfvjeu could conceivably have 

CLAIRVOYANCE IN ENGLAND 149 

direct or personal, and which I could not admit till such evidence 
came. 

" One evening I dined at a house about a mile from my own — 
a house in which my wife had never been at that time. I left it 
at half-past ten, and was in my own house at a quarter to eleven. 
At my entrance my wife said to me, ' We have been after you? 
and told me that a little girl whom she mesmerised for epileptic 
fits (and who left her cured), and of whose clairvoyance she had 
told me other instances, had been desired in the mesmeric state 

to follow me to Street, to 's house. The thing took place 

at a few minutes after ten. On hearing the name of the street, 
the girl's mother said — 

" * She will never find her way there. She has never been so far 
away from Camden Town.' 

" The girl in a moment got there. ' Knock at the door/ said my 
wife. * I cannot,' said the girl ; 'we must go in at the gate.' (The 
house, a most unusual thing in London, stands in a garden; this 
my wife knew nothing of.) Having made the girl go in and knock 
at the door, or simulate, or whatever the people do, the girl said 
she heard voices upstairs, and being told to go up, exclaimed, 
'What a comical house! there are three doors,' describing them 
thus. 1 (This was true, and is not usual in any but large houses.) 
On being told to go into the room from whence voices came, she 
said, 'Now I see Mr. de Morgan, but he has a nice coat on, 
and not the long coat he wears here ; and he is talking to an old 
gentleman, and there is another old gentleman, and there are 
ladies.' This was a true descriptipn of the party, except that the 
other gentleman was not old. 'And now,' she said, 'there is a 
lady come to them, and is beginning to talk to Mr. de Morgan 
and the old gentleman, and Mr. de Morgan is pointing at you 
and the old gentleman is looking at me.' About the time indicated 
I happened to be talking with my host on the subject of Mesmerism, 
and having mentioned what my wife was doing, or said she was 
doing with the little girl, he said, 'Oh, my wife must hear this,' 
and called her, and she came up and joined us in the manner 
described. The girl then proceeded to describe the room : stated 
that there were two pianos in it. There was one, and an orna- 
mental sideboard, not much unlike a pianoforte to the daughter 
of a poor charwoman. That there were two kinds of curtains, 
white and red, and curiously looped up (all true to the letter), 
and that there were wine and water and biscuits on the table. 
Now my wife, knowing that we had dined at half-past S«* hm^ 
thinking it impossible that anything but coffee could w otv \be 
table, said, 'You must mean coffee.' The girl persi^^* 4 ^V&&* 
water, and biscuits.' My wife, still persuaded that vj*^ ^^ >Qfe 
coffee, tried in every way to lead her witness, and nrv^v ^^ ^* 

1 A little diagram is given of these doors (she counted threes fc *^ 

mote) in the letter. — S. E? de M. "^ ^V>^ 

150 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

coffee. But still the girl persisted, ' Wine, water, and biscuits,' which 
was literally true, it not being what people talk of under the name 
of a glass of wine and a biscuit, which means sandwiches, cake, etc., 
but strictly wine, water, and biscuits. 

" Now all this taking place at twenty minutes after ten was told 
to me at a quarter to eleven. When I heard that I was to have 
such an account given I only said, 'Tell me all of it, and I will 
not say one word ' ; and I assure you that during the narration I 
took the most especial care not to utter one syllable. For instance, 
when the wine and water and biscuits came up, my wife, perfectly 
satisfied that it must have been coffee, told me how the girl per- 
sisted, and enlarged upon it as a failure, giving parallel instances 
of cases in which the clairvoyants had been right in ail things 
but one. All this I heard without any interruption. Now that 
the things happened to me as I have described at twenty minutes 
after ten, and were described to me as above at a quarter to eleven, 
I could make oath. The curtains I ascertained next day, for I 
had not noticed them. When my wife came to see the room she 
instantly recognised a door, which she had forgotten in her narra- 
tion. 

"All this is no secret You may tell whom you like, and give 
my name. What do you make of it ? Will the never-failing doctrine 
of coincidence explain it ? . . . . 

"I have seen other things since, and heard many more; but 
this is my chief personal knowledge of the subject " 

The letter is unfortunately not dated, but the events re- 
corded are obviously of no very distant date. Mrs. de 
Morgan, the editor of the memoir, gives the year as 1849, 
and adds the following note : — 

" I heard [*>. from the entranced girl] all about the house and 
furniture, etc, before the girl told me what was going on. Mr. de 
Morgan has represented it to Mr. Heald as occurring after, and it is 
quite possible that I told him in this order. But I never heard of 
this letter until after his death. — S. E. de M." 1 

Cases such as that above recorded — and there are many 
similar accounts in the Zoist and elsewhere— can of course 
be explained, on the assumption that the record is correct, 
by the hypothesis that thoughts actually present to the mind 
of the sitter are telepathically conveyed to the subject But 
there are many narratives which, taken at their face value, 
would force us to go beyond this explanation. It is not of 
course always possible to assure ourselves that the facts were 
written down at the time, and when this was not the case 

1 Mmrir tf Augustus de Morgan, by his wife, S. E. de Morgan, 1882, pp. 

CLAIKVOYANCE IN ENGLAND 151 

large allowance must no doubt be made for imaginative 
embellishments and suppression of erroneous details. The 
following narrative, however, by Professor Gregory, written 
in December, 185 1, and relating to events which took place 
seven months previously, appears to have been based on 
contemporary records. Professor Gregory describes a visit 
paid by him to a friend in a town about thirty miles from 
Edinburgh. He there met a lady who had been twice 
mesmerised by his friend and exhibited considerable clair- 
voyant powers. At Gregory's request, this lady — who was 
personally unknown to him — began by giving him a minute 
description of his own house in Edinburgh, and then of his 
brother's house, near the same city, and his brother's occupa- 
tion at the moment The details given proved on inquiry to 
be correct Gregory then continues : — 

"I now asked her to go to Greenock, forty or fifty miles from 
where we were (Edinburgh was nearly thirty miles distant), and to 
visit my son, who resides there with a friend. She soon found him, 
and described him accurately, being much interested in the boy, 
whom she had never seen nor heard of. She saw him, she said, 
playing in a field outside of a small garden in which stood the 
cottage, at some distance from the town, on a rising ground. He 
was playing with a dog. I knew there was a dog, but had no idea 
of what kind, so I asked her. She said it was a large, but young 
Newfoundland, black, with one or two white spots. It was very 
fond of the boy and played with him. ' Oh,' she cried suddenly, 
' it has jumped up and knocked off his cap.' She saw in the garden 
a gentleman reading a book and looking on. He was not old, but 
had white hair, while his eyebrows and whiskers were black. She 
took him for a clergyman, but said he was not of the Established 
Church, nor Episcopalian, but a Presbyterian dissenter. (He is, in 
fact, a clergyman of the highly respectable Cameronian body, who, 
as is well known, are Presbyterians, and adhere to the covenant) 
Being asked to enter the cottage, she did so, and described the 
sitting-room. In the kitchen she saw a young maidservant preparing 
dinner, for which meal a leg of mutton was roasting at the fire, but 
not quite ready. She also saw another elderly female. On looking 
again for the boy, she saw him playing with the dog in front of the 
door, while the gentleman stood in the porch and looked on. Then 
she saw the boy run upstairs to the kitchen, which she observed 
with surprise was on the upper floor of the cottage (which it is), and 
receive something to eat from the servant, she thought a potato. 

"I immediately wrote all these details down and sent them to 
the gentleman, whose answer assured me that all, down to the 
minutest, were exact, save that the boy did not get a potato but a 
small biscuit from the cook. The dog was what she described ; it 
did knock off the boy's cap at the time and in the place mentioned ; 

152 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

he himself was in the garden with a book looking on ; there was 
a leg of mutton roasting and not quite ready ; there was an elderly 
female in the kitchen at that time, although not of the household. 
Every one of which facts was entirely unknown to me, and could 
not, therefore, have been perceived by thought-reading, although, 
had they been so, as I have already stated, this would not have' 
been a less wonderful, but only a different phenomenon. 

" I shall send you another case for your next number. The above 
case I regard as a very satisfactory one, inasmuch as I did not know 
beforehand that I was to try any experiments at all, and had never 
seen the lady before. 

" I remain, etc., etc., 

" Dee. 1851." " William Gregory. 1 

Many clairvoyants at this period were applied to, with 
success, to trace lost and stolen property. Several cases of 
the kind are recorded by Dr. Haddock of his subject, Emma, 
a young woman in his employment as a domestic servant. 
One case attracted considerable attention at the time. A 
sum of £650 sent by post to Messrs. Arrowsmith, of Bolton, 
had disappeared. Arrowsmith's cashier, Mr. Lomax, believed 
that he had paid in the sum to the bank, but the bank 
denied all knowledge of it, and a search which was made 
at Lomax's instance proved unsuccessful. In this dilemma 
Messrs. Arrowsmith and Lomax called on Dr. Haddock 
to consult his clairvoyant On being given the envelope in 
which the money had been enclosed, she is reported to have 
described accurately the appearance of the missing papers — 
two banknotes and a bill of exchange — and the pocket-book 
in which Mr. Lomax had placed them on receipt. She 
further described how they were handed in at the bank 
counter, and finally said that she saw them in an envelope 
with other papers, in an inner room at the bank. In conse- 
quence of her statements Mr. Arrowsmith went to the bank 
and insisted on a further search ; and the missing notes and 
bill were ultimately found amongst some old circulars, etc., 
on the mantelpiece in the manager's private room. 2 Of 
course, in this instance the clairvoyant may have merely 
reflected Mr. Lomax's own surmises as to the disposal of the 
money : and this explanation is no doubt still possible in the 
cases where a thief was indicated and stolen property 
recovered through the agency of clairvoyance. For despite 
the assurance to the contrary given by the persons who 

1 Zoist, vol. ix. pp. 423, 424. 

1 Bolton Chronicle* Sept. 8th, 1849. The account is reprinted in Haddock's 
Somnolism and Psycheism, pp. 117-24. 

CLAIRVOYANCE IN ENGLAND 153 

consulted the clairvoyant, it is permissible to suppose that 
a latent suspicion in their minds may have inspired the 
sensitive's utterances. But the accurate and detailed descrip- 
tion of the missing property itself, of the manner of the 
robbery, and of the personal appearance of the thief, alleged 
to have been given in two or three cases, is very remarkable. 1 
The instances given in this and the preceding chapter may 
be taken as favourable samples of the evidence for thought- 
transference and clairvoyance afforded by the writings of the 
English Mesmerists. Whilst, no doubt, insufficient in them- 
selves to prove the existence of such faculties, it will 
perhaps be admitted that, in the light of more recent 
evidence to the same effect, it is difficult summarily to reject 
these records as the result of malobservation or inaccurate 
reporting. 8 

1 See Somnolism and Psy chrism, pp. 1 15—17". Zoist, vol. vii. 95-101, and vol. 
xiii. 56. In the last case the body of a drowned woman is alleged to have been 
traced by the clairvoyant 

2 A striking instance of inaccurate reporting is furnished by Miss Martineau. 
In her Letters on Mesmerism she relates that a vague report had come on Sun- 
day, October 13th, 1844, to the house at Tynemouth where she was then lodging, 
that the boat in which a cousin of her clairvoyant subject, Jane, was sailing had 
been wrecked. On the Tuesday evening no authentic news as to the fate of the 
sailors had, according to Miss Martineau, reached the house up till 8 p.m. At 
that hour a seance was held, and the entranced Jane gave the joyful news that 
all on board were saved, except one boy, and that the boat which rescued them 
was a foreign one. At the very hour, Miss Martineau adds, when this intelli- 
gence was being delivered in her sitting-room, the sailor's mother, who had come 
in after the commencement of the seance, and without the knowledge of Miss 
Martineau and her circle, was telling the same story in the kitchen, two floors 
below. In his Illustrations of Modern Mesmerism Forbes shows, on the 
evidence of a local doctor and of one of the witnesses at the seance, that the 

food news was actually known in the house three hours before the sitting;, 
fiss Martineau's deafness may have accounted for the misunderstanding. In 
her Autobiography (edition of 1877, vol. ii. p. 198) Miss Martineau, referring to 
Forbes' action in the matter, states that she holds a legal declaration which 
"establishes the main fact on which the somnambule's story of shipwreck was 
attempted to be overthrown." But she gives no particulars, nor attempts to 
refute Dr. Forbes' exposure in detail. 

CHAPTER XI 

ANDREW JACKSON DAVIS AND THE 

UNIVERCCELUM 

OF the mesmeric propaganda in America we have 
already caught a glimpse through the pages of the 
Phreno-Magnet} Collyer, with his bowl of treacle, 
and Sunderland, with his hundred and fifty phrenological 
organs, seem to have fairly represented the movement. 
Though here and there we hear of medical men employing 
the mesmeric trance for therapeutic purposes, or for opera- 
tions, there was in the decade 1840-50 no school of medical 
hypnotism as in France, Germany, and England ; nor any 
organ at all comparable to the Zoist and the various 
Continental periodicals to which we have had occasion to 
refer. The phenomena of the somnambulic trance seem 
indeed to have become generally known in America at about 
the same time as in England, i.e. from 1838 onwards ; but 
in the former country there was no convert of conspicuous 
ability and recognised standing in the scientific world to form 
a school, or win even such measure of recognition as fell to 
the share of Elliotson and his circle in England. The 
propaganda rested therefore mainly in the hands of popular 
lecturers and preachers ; and the medical men who concerned 
themselves in the matter were not specially qualified either 
to investigate such a subject for themselves, or to impose 
their views on others. All the writers of the time believed, 
or had believed, in phrenology ; though Collyer, as we have 
seen, had within a year or two recanted his views, and 
Sunderland was soon to repent him of his intemperance in 
cerebral geography. And, again with the exception of 
Sunderland, all seem to have believed in the transmission 
of a physical effluence from operator to subject as the cause 
of the trance and the more dubious phenomena associated 

1 See ante, pp. 129, 130. 
154 

ANDREW JACKSON DAVIS 155 

with it Indeed, a large portion of the various treatises 
published at this time is devoted to vindicating the prior 
claim of their respective authors to the discovery of the true 
system of phrenology, and to inventing new names for the 
hypothetical effluence. Amongst these writers were several 
whom we shall meet with later in the history of Spiritualism. 
Thus the Rev. J. Bovee Dods, author of Six Lectures on the 
Philosophy of Mesmerism} afterwards published his views on 
the stance manifestations, attributing the whole of them to 
the operation of "vital electricity."* Dr. J. S. Grimes, 
Professor of Medical Jurisprudence in the Castleton Medical 
College, by whom the subject of Mesmerism was afterwards 
introduced to the notice of A. J. Davis and his neighbours, 
explained the phenomena of the trance as due to the 
influence of a subtle fluid, for which he proposed the name 
Etherium, his conception of which is not distinguishable in 
some aspects from the modern conception of the ether. But 
Grimes' theory had some features peculiar to itself. He 
supposed that the motions in the Etherium which produced 
the trance, whether initiated by another organism or an inani- 
mate object, always returned on themselves, like the galvanic 
current, in a closed circuit Further, in his theory the trance 
and all that belonged to it were symptomatic of disease, 
resulting from disturbed equilibrium in the ethereal currents. 
He also assigned a large part in the production of the phen- 
omena to the u credencive " faculty. The action of drugs 
at a distance and clairvoyance were ascribed to the direct 
influence — through the Etherium — of external objects on 
the imperfectly insulated nervous system of the sensitive. 
Grimes had invented a special system of phrenology, and 
a new name for the science of Mesmerism, to wit, 
Enteropathy} 

Dr. J. Rodes Buchanan, still living (in 1899) 4 to instruct and 
encourage a new generation of Spiritualists, had issued about 
1843 a "Neurological" map, giving an entirely new distribu- 
tion of the phrenological organs. But it was not until 1854 
that he published a complete exposition of his system of 
Neurology, or Anthropology. 5 Beside the re-classification of 
the phrenological organs, his chief contribution to science was 
the theory of Nervaura, a subtle emanation given off from 

1 New York, 1847. . * See chap, vi, book iL 

3 Etherology and the Phrene- Philosophy of Mesmerism and Magic Eloquence, 

etc Boston and London, 1850. Second edition ; the first had been published 

some years previously. 4 He died in 1900. 

* Outlines of Lectures on the Neurological System ef Anthropology % as discovered, 

demonstrated \ and taught in 1841 and 1842. Cincinnati, 18:4. 

156 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

the nervous system, which differed not only for each individual, 
but for each organ. Nervaura, as Buchanan explained it, 
stood in the scale of materiality midway between electricity 
and caloric on the one hand and will and consciousness on 
the other, being indeed the mediating link between the two 
sets of entities. Like other mundane forces, it could be 
transmitted from one organism to another through an iron 
bar; but it was so far akin to the purely spiritual energies 
that by means of the Nervaura radiating from the anterior 
and superior cerebral centres "an individual operates upon 
a nation and transmits his influence through succeeding 
centuries." 1 

Buchanan also started in the early fifties a Journal of Man, 
which was originally, as we learn from Brittan, to have taken 
the place of the Skekinah* but seems ultimately to have been 
devoted mainly to the exposition of the science of Neurology. 
Records of the Spiritualist movement, however, and the stance 
phenomena found hospitality in its columns, as is testified 
by the frequent references to it in other periodicals. 

The one figure at this time which, by reason of superior 
common sense, stands out from the group of believers in 
phrenology and nerve-fluids was the Rev. Laroy Sunderland. 
Born in 1804, Sunderland became at the age of nineteen a 
revivalist preacher, and had the gratification of seeing his 
congregation profoundly affected by his first sermon : some 
prostrate and groaning on the floor, some smiting their breasts 
in an agony of grief, others crying aloud and clapping their 
hands in ecstatic joy. 3 He soon became an ardent Aboli- 
tionist, 4 and in 1835 started a paper called the Watchman, 
which ran until 1842. In 1839, however, he first had his 
attention called to the mesmeric trance ; he made experiments 
for himself, succeeded in obtaining the usual phenomena, even 
to the extent of inducing anaesthesia for surgical operations, 6 
and finally, in June, 1842, founded a periodical called the 
Magnet, in which he propounded a novel theory of the 
subject We have already seen something of Sunderland's 
contributions to the science of Phreno-Mesmerism. It is fair 
to say, however, that he soon saw that he had been mistaken 
in attaching any weight to the phrenological demonstrations 

1 Op. rtV., p. 194. a See Telegraph Papers, vol. iii. p. 489. 

3 The Trance and Correlative Phenomena, by Laroy Sunderland (Chicago, 
1868), p. 12. (The copy now before me was Sunderland's own.) The account 
which follows of Sunderland's life and work is taken, unless otherwise stated, 
from this book, or from the columns of the Spiritual World and Spiritual 
Philosopher. * See his Anti-Slavery Manual. New York, 1837. 

* The Trance, pp. 137, 159, etc. 

ANDREW JACKSON DAVIS 157 

on the heads of entranced persons. The whole subject of 
Phreno-Mesmerism is completely ignored in his paper the 
Spiritual Philosopher (i 850-1), and in his work on The 
Trance (1868) he briefly owns his mistake. 1 So, in his 
theories of the trance he was misled at first by various 
physical analogies. He discoursed on the magnetic nature 
of living bodies and the polarity of the cerebral organs, and 
was disposed to explain somnambulism as a result of nervous 
induction. 2 But notwithstanding these earlier extravagances, 
Sunderland appears to have been one of the soundest and 
most cautious investigators of his time. He shares, indeed, 
with Braid the honour of having recognised in his later 
writings — and, it would seem, independently — that all the 
phenomena of the trance could be explained without fluid 
or aura or effluence of any kind, as being simply results 
of the subject's own mental reaction to suggestions supplied 
by the voice or gestures of the operator, or, in some cases, 
by the patient himself. When the suggestion came from 
without, it was an essential condition that a relation should 
have been previously established between operator and sub- 
ject ; but that relation he conceives as consisting in the 
subject's own anticipation or apprehension of certain results. 
This process Sunderland called Pathetism. In his work on 
The Trance he thus formulates the principle of Pathetism : 
"When a relation is once established between an operator 
(or any given substance, real or imaginary, as the agent) and 
his patient, corresponding changes may be induced in the 
nervous system of the latter (awake or entranced) by sug- 
gestions addressed to either of the external senses." 8 Through- 
out he seems to have been clear that the assumption of an 
effort of the will on the part of the operator being a necessary 
condition was, generally speaking, as gratuitous as the as- 
sumption of a fluid ; and showed that, in many cases, the 
results followed, not on the will of the operator, but on the 
expectation of the patient He allowed, however, that in rare 
instances, when a relation between operator and subject had 
been previously established, effects could be produced by 
mere volition on the part of the former. Agreeably to these 
views, he rejected as unproven and superfluous the magnetic 
and electric analogies commonly employed amongst his 
contemporaries to explain the vital phenomena ; and frankly 

1 Op. ctt. t p. 52. 

1 See his early articles in the Magnet, quoted in the Phreno- Magnet % pp. 3, 166, 

295- 

* Op. at., p, 19 ; see also Pathetism, by the same author. Boston, 1847. 

158 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

intimated that Reichenbach's vaunted demonstrations were 
probably to be attributed to imagination alone. 1 

But die man in these early years who was destined to play 
the most important part in the future history of Spiritualism 
was Andrew Jackson Davis. The prophet of the New Dis- 
pensation was born in 1826, in a small rural township in the 
State of New York, and in 1838 moved with his parents to 
the town of Poughkeepsie, in the same State, from which 
place he takes his name as the " Poughkeepsie Seer." His 
father was part weaver and part shoemaker, and eked out his 
profits from those two trades by hiring himself out in the 
summer as a farm-labourer. Both parents appear to have 
been honest and respectable ; but his father, according to the 
son's account, was shiftless and for many years given to drink. 
The young Andrew Jackson was apparently an undersized, 
delicate boy, with very little education, and in childhood of no 
conspicuous ability. In 1841 he was apprenticed to a shoe- 
maker named Armstrong, and worked at that trade for about 
two years. In the autumn of 1843 considerable interest was 
aroused in Poughkeepsie by a series of lectures on Animal 
Magnetism delivered by Professor Grimes; and a tailor 
named Levingston succeeded in December of that year in 
entrancing young Davis. Thereafter, until August, 1845, 
Davis was constantly magnetised by Levingstcta, and practised 
under his guidance as a professional clairvoyant, giving tests, 
and especially prescribing for diseases. In March, 1844, 
according to the account given by himself, he wandered away 
into the country for a considerable distance under the guidance 
of his inward monitor, and fell into a spontaneous trance, 
during which Galen and Swedenborg appeared to him in 
a churchyard and instructed him concerning his mission to 
mankind. 2 In the following year, in the course of a pro- 
fessional tour, he made the acquaintance of Dr. Lyon, a 
physician then practising at Bridgeport, Conn., and of the 
Rev. William Fishbough. Later in the same year he ap- 
pointed these two gentlemen to act as his magnetiser and his 
scribe respectively, and to assist him in the inditing of certain 
lectures on philosophy to be delivered in the clairvoyant 
trance. 8 The three accordingly took lodgings in New York, 
where Davis continued to practise as a medical clairvoyant, 

1 In an article in the Spirit World (vol. ii. p. 134) Sunderland gives a clear 
exposition of his views on Reichenbach's work. 

a Autobiography, pp. 225-45. 

* Davis had already published in the same year (1845), apparently before his 
falling in with Lyon and Fishbough, some Lectures on Clairmativtness, See 
footnote below, p. 167. This publication is not mentioned in the Autobiography. 

ANDREW JACKSON DAVIS 159 

passing into the trance on the average twice daily. The 
lectures were actually commenced in November, 1845, ex- 
tended over a period of fifteen months, and were published 
in the summer of 1847 in the shape of a large octavo volume 
of nearly eight hundred closely printed pages, under the title 
of The Principles of Nature, Her Divine Revelations, and A 
Voice to Mankind. The method of production was as 
follows: Davis, having been thrown into the trance state 
by Dr. Lyon, proceeded to dictate his discourse a few words 
at a time. Each utterance was repeated by Dr. Lyon, and 
only then written down by Fishbough. The scribe, in his 
introduction to the book, dated July, 1847, assures us that 
the whole book was written down exactly as dictated, the 
only alterations made, according to his explicit statement, 
being a few corrections in grammar and occasional removal 
of verbal redundancies or slight emendations to make the 
sense less obscure. It is obvious, however, that the peculiar 
process of dictation employed, by which the trance utterance 
was filtered through the minds of two educated persons 
before reaching the public, gave opportunity, not merely for 
correction of crudities of expression, but to some extent 
for the guidance of the argument There seems no sufficient 
reason, however, to doubt the good faith of those concerned ; 
and there were many witnesses, including some persons of 
note, who attended the lectures from time to time and counter- 
signed the reports, so that it seems probable that the book as 
we have it is substantially in the form in which it was dictated 
by Davis. 

Amongst those who had frequently attended the circle 
while the Revelations were being dictated, and who had taken 
a warm interest in the young seer, was the Rev. George Bush, 
of New York, Professor of Hebrew in the University and 
a well-known Swedenborgian. It was very largely to Bush's 
advertisement of the work that the favourable reception which 
the book met with on its first appearance was due. Bush 
vouched for the good faith of the author and his circle, and 
for the fact that the clairvoyant on more than one occasion 
had digressed from the main current of his discourse to answer 
impromptu questions put to him as tests ; and he further gave 
a most enthusiastic account of the nature of the book itself. 
Thus he writes : " Taken as a whole, the work is a profound 
and elaborate discussion of the philosophy of the universe, and 
for grandeur of conception, soundness of principle, clearness 
of illustration, order of arrangement, and encyclopaedic range 
of subjects, I know no work of any single mind that will bear 

160 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

away from it the palm." And, again : " The manner in the 
scientific department is always calm, dignified, and con- 
ciliatory, as if far more disposed to excuse than to censure 
the errors which it aims to correct ; whilst the style is easy, 
flowing, chaste, appropriate, with a certain indescribable 
simplicity which operates like a charm on the reader." 

The work was published in December of the same year 
(1847), in England, by John Chapman, who thought it 
necessary himself to write a Preface explanatory of the nature 
of the book, in which he quotes Bush's eulogy, and adds his 
own testimony, in a manner hardly less impressive, to the 
moral value and scientific insight of the book. 1 He found 
the philosophy of the Revelations was allied to the teachings 
of Kant, Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel ; whilst the scientific 
conceptions therein advocated were confirmed by the views 
enunciated by Goethe, Oken, and the evolutionists generally, 
and by recent discoveries in astronomy. The aim of the work 
was exalted, and the style and thought alike impressive and 
dignified 

It is with a certain diffidence that one approaches the task 
of appraising a work of this character ; it is no light matter to 
essay in the compass of a few pages to offer an adequate 
summary of the great Harmonial Philosophy, of which this 
book contains the germ, a philosophy for which its author has 
not found complete expression in some thirty volumes. But 
some account, at any rate of the contents of this book, must 
nevertheless be attempted. The book, as indicated in the 
triple division of the title, is divided into three parts ; and it is 
on the second part, " Nature's Divine Revelations," that the 
indiscretion of the seer's admirers has caused attention to be 
chiefly concentrated. Bush speaks of it as " one of the most 
finished specimens of philosophical argument in the English 
language." It opens as follows : — 

" In the beginning the Univercoelum was one boundless, un- 
definable, and unimaginable ocean of Liquid Fire! The most 
vigorous and ambitious imagination is not capable of forming 
an adequate conception of the height and depth and length and 
breadth thereof. There was one vast expanse of liquid substance. 
It was without bounds — inconceivable — and with qualities and 
essences incomprehensible. This was the original condition of 
Matter. It was without forms, for it was but one Form. It had not 
motions, but it was an eternity of Motion. It was without parts, for 
it was a Whole. Particles did not exist, but the Whole was as one 

1 Brief outlines and Review of " The Principles of Nature? etc London, 
John Chapman, 1847. 

ANDREW JACKSON DAVIS 161 

Particle. There were not suns, but it was one Eternal Sun. It had 
no beginning, and it was without end. It had not length, for it was 
a Vortex of one Eternity. It had not circles, for it was one Infinite 
Circle. It had not disconnected power, but it was the very essence 
of all Power. Its inconceivable magnitude and constitution were 
such as not to develop forces, but Omnipotent Power. 

" Matter and Power were existing as a Whole, inseparable. The 
Matter contained the substance to produce all suns, all worlds, and 
systems of worlds, throughout the immensity of Space. It contained 
the qualities to produce all things that are existing upon each of 
those worlds. The Power contained Wisdom and Goodness, Justice, 
Mercy, and Truth. It contained the original and essential Principle 
that is displayed throughout immensity of Space, controlling worlds 
and systems of worlds, and producing Motion, Life, Sensation, and 
Intelligence, to be impartially disseminated upon their surfaces as 
Ultimates." l 

From these opening sentences the entranced clairvoyant 
traces the evolution of the universe — or, as he terms it, Univer- 
coelum — by a gradual process of differentiation into vast 
systems of suns, moving in concentric circles of inconceivable 
magnitude round the Great Eternal Centre, " pregnated with 
the immutable eternal essence of divine Positive Power." 
Thereafter, descending upon details, he gives a description 
of the particular solar system of which we are members, and 
of the gradual progression and development through the 
geological cycles of our own planet, ending up with a sketch 
of the first appearance and early history of the human race, 
and of its future in the spirit world. 

His scientific competence for the stupendous task he essays 
may be judged from the following extracts. Here is an 
account of the first appearance of living organisms on the 
nascent planet: — 

"Chemistry will unfold the fact that light, when confined in a 
certain condition and condensed, will produce water, and that water 
thus formed, subjected to the vertical influence of light, will produce, 
by its internal motion and further condensation, a gelatinous sub- 
stance of the composition of the spirifer, the motion of which 
indicates animal life. This again being decomposed and subjected 
to evaporation, the precipitated particles which still remain will 
produce putrified matter similar to earth, which will produce the 
plant known as the fucoides. It is on the result of this experiment 
(the truth of which, as above represented, can be universally ascer- 
tained) that rests the probability, though not the absolute certainty, 

1 Op. cit. (thirty-fourth American edition, Boston, 1876), pp. 121, 122. 
I. — M 

162 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

of the truth of the description which I am about to give concerning 
the first form possessing life." * 

Or take, again, this remarkable extract from a description 
of the marine fauna of the Old Red Sandstone period : — 

"The radiata and articulata, in their progression, now begin to 
assume the form of the scarpion [sic] and insect, between which 
the fuci determined upon by geologists sustains an intermediate 
position. The seas at this time were inhabited by annelidans and 
scarpion fishes, the ultimate of which represents nearly the shark 
and sturgeon. The annelidans were a species of sea-worm, still 
to be found upon many coasts and coves, where stones and other 
bodies of concealment exist Of this class there are two kinds 
— the white and red, the first of which is hermaphrodite, sustaining 
an intermediate position between the lower type and the higher, in 
which the serpula becomes visible." 1 

Or, again, this description of the Oolite : — 

" No stratification has attracted so much attention among geolo- 
gists as this. For it represents a formation as resulting from the 
decomposition of previously existing plants, animals, and mollusca, 
together with the deposition of solutions of existing substances upon 
the land and in the water ; and the whole renders this stratification 
altogether mysterious and incomprehensible. It is known that lime 
in various proportions enters into this formation ; but the cause has 
not as yet been discovered which could possibly unite the substances 
of the previous formations with the living substances of the earth, 
and render the whole an aggregated stratification. And by passing 
the substances of the various oolite beds through chemical processes, 
alumina and other substances will be discovered ; not as naturally 
inherent ingredients, but as a condensation of the dissolved particles 
of previous formations." 8 

Again, he describes the ichthyosaurus as inhaling through 
"an adipose branchae" an atmosphere which consisted of 
" carbon, nearly counterbalanced by oxygen " ; 4 he accounts 
for the occurrence of fossil shells high up on mountain 
sides as due to a general rise in the level of the ocean, 
" caused by the expansion of previously condensed particles 
composing the water " ; 6 amber he explains as formed out of 
sea-water " by a strange and peculiar chemical process." • 

But his admirers claim that he anticipated Adams and 
Leverrier in the discovery of the planet Neptune ; and it is 
certainly curious that in a lecture committed to MS. in 

1 Op. cit., p. 237. * Page 242. » Page 270. 

4 Page 263. • Pages 243, 244. * Page 312. 

ANDREW JACKSON DAVIS 163 

March, 1846, he does give a fairly detailed description of an 
eighth planet 1 

This is the first part of his account : " Its density is four- 
fifths of water. Its diameter it is unnecessary to determine. 
Its period of revolution can be inferred analogically from 
the period in which Uranus traverses its elliptic and almost 
inconceivable orbit The atmosphere of the eighth planet 
is exceedingly rare, containing little oxygen, but being 
mostly composed of fluorine and nitrogen." 2 The first 
of these statements happens to be approximately correct, 
so far as modern science has succeeded in determining the 
matter ; but as the figures quoted apply with equal accuracy 
to the density of Uranus, Neptune's nearest neighbour, the 
coincidence is not, perhaps, very remarkable. The last state- 
ment, it need hardly be said, is preposterous. 

But if there are any who still think that Davis* description 
of an eighth planet is something more than a lucky shot, 
they will have to explain how it comes about that in his 
account of the planetoids he goes not a whit beyond the popu- 
lar knowledge of his day. Four planetoids — Ceres, Pallas, 
Juno, and Vesta — were then commonly known. 8 Astrono- 
mers now reckon many hundreds. But Davis enumerates 
four only, and the account which he gives even of these is in 
some respects glaringly incorrect 

This second part of the book includes also a detailed 
description of the various planets of our system and their 
inhabitants, vegetable, bestial, and human. Towards the end 
he gives an account of the relations of man with the world 
of spirits, and a description of the six spirit spheres and 
their societies, and concludes with the following prophecy: 
" It is a truth that spirits commune with one another while 
one is in the body and the other in the higher spheres — and 
this, too, when the person in the body is unconscious of 
the influx, and hence cannot be convinced of the fact ; and 
this truth will ere long present itself in the form of a living 
demonstration, and the world will hail with delight the 
ushering in of that era when the interiors of men will be 
opened, and the spiritual communion will be established 
such as is now being enjoyed by the inhabitants of Mars, 
Jupiter, and Saturn." 4 

1 The calculations of Leverrier were not verified by the actual discovery of 
the planet Neptune until September, 1846. * Page 167. 

1 A fifth, Astrea, had actually been discovered in the previous year (184$), but 
probably news of the discovery had not penetrated to Poughkeepsie. 

4 Pages 675, 676. 

164 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

The first part of the book, "Principles of Nature," con- 
tains an involved, wordy, and often unintelligible or self- 
contradictory exposition of a system of mystical philosophy, 
of which space will not permit even a brief analysis. But 
the leading notes are that the universe is one great whole; 
that " the Whole is a vast Machine operating unceasingly by 
an inherent principle of perpetual action n ; that there is thus 
an eternal progression from lower to higher ; that this pro- 
gression moves on spiral lines ; that matter and spirit differ as 
finer from coarser ; that, the Universe being one, truth may 
best be attained deductively by mastering general principles ; 
that it is, in fact, so learnt by the clairvoyant, who ascends in 
trance to the world of the Real ; that there is a vast svstem of 
correspondences, or analogies, throughout the universe ; and 
that things in general are arranged in series of three. Thus, 
to quote Davis' own illustration of correspondences, degr ees , 
and series, in the human body we have the Head as the Cause, 
the Chest as the Effect, the Abdomen as the End or Ultimate. 
We have the mouth, the stomach, and the intestines as another 
series; or, again, we have saliva, gastric juice, and bile; or 
blood, lymph, and perspiration. So in the mineral world 
we find " interior, mediatorial, and exterior forms " ; in in- 
dustry, farmer, mechanic, and manufacturer. Whilst in the 
ideal State the legal, medical, and clerical professions "are 
a trinity forming one Whole, which corresponds to Wisdom." 1 
With this key the secrets of the universe may be unlocked. 

In the third part, "A Voice to Mankind," is set forth a 
rather crude Socialism, ending up with a scheme for the 
salvation of mankind by the organisation of society into 
phalanxes of Co-operators. 

As regards Davis' attitude toward the Christian theology, 
it should be added that in the Revelations he goes through the 
books of the Old Testament — or, as he calls it, " the Primi- 
tive History" — seriatim, and endeavours to show that they 
have no title to exclusive or infallible inspiration ; and of 
Christ he explicitly speaks, alike in this and in his later 
works, as a great moral reformer, but not in any special sense 
divine. 

It is not easy to form a just appreciation of the book. The 
mistakes, indeed, where the nature of the subject admits of 
the statements being put to the test, are frequent, gross, and 

Jpable, and many passages, as already shown, are pretentious 

nsense. In its treatment of philosophical themes the style 
for the most part wordy and diffuse, and the meaning 

1 Op* <#., p. 77a 

ANDREW JACKSON DAVIS 165 

elusive beyond the tolerated usage of philosophers. But 
nevertheless, at its best, there is a certain stately rhythm and 
grandiloquence which partly explains the favourable impres- 
sion produced on Bush, Chapman, and others. And whilst U 
the book is obviously the work of an imperfectly educated 
man, its qualities are more remarkable than its defects. 
Viewed merely as an effort of memory, it is a stupendous 
work to have been produced by a man less than twenty-one 
years of age, whose few months of schooling had barely 
sufficed to impart the beggarly elements, and whose life had 
been mainly spent, since childhood, in working hard for his 
living. His later occupation as a professional clairvoyant no 
doubt gave him more leisure for study, but it is denied by 
those around him that he made use of his opportunities. His 
friends, indeed, not unnaturally gloried in the deficiencies of 
his education as tending to enhance the marvel of his trance 
utterances, and Davis himself protested that up to that time 
he had read only one book in his life, a romance apparently, 
called the Three Spaniards} But the Rev. A. R. Bartlett, 
who knew him intimately from 1842 to 1845, ue. in the three 
years immediately preceding the dictation of the Revelations, 
says that "he possessed an inquiring mind — loved books, 
especially controversial religious works, which he always 
preferred whenever he could borrow them and obtain leisure 
for their perusal. Hence he was indebted to his individual 
exertions for some creditable advances which he made in 
knowledge." 3 Davis, in his Autobiography, apparently re- 
ferring to this passage, says that he borrowed the books 
from Mr. Bartlett in order to lend them to his friends, but 
had neither time nor inclination to read them himself. 8 
Perhaps it is the clairvoyant's memory that is at fault, for it 
seems clear that he had read books prior to 1845, though not 
necessarily many books. 4 Indeed, it is perhaps more prob- 
able that he had read very few, and that their contents were 
the more readily stored up in a memory of enormous but 
undiscriminating retentiveness. Amongst these books, it 
may be surmised, was the Vestiges of Creation, or some 
similar work, containing in popular form an account of the 
nebular hypothesis and the main facts of the geological pro- 

1 Autobiography (The Magic Staff), pp. 186, 304, etc. New York, 1876, 
thirteenth edition. 

2 Revelations, Introduction, p. x. 

3 Autobiography, pp. 199, 20a 

4 Bush states {Davis 9 Revelations Revealed, p. 11) that Davis, writing to him 
from Poughkeepsie some time before the inception of the Revelations, quoted a 
passage from Swedenborg's Arcana Calestia, giving the exact reference. 

166 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

gression, 1 and some English or Scotch geological text-book, 
possibly some book of Hugh Miller's, for the geology de- 
scribed is that of the British Isles. 

The third part of his work, " The Voice to Mankind," was 
no doubt based on some book — perhaps Brisbane's Social 
Destiny of Man — advocating Fourier's views on Socialism, 
which just before the date of the Revelations had spread in 
the eastern States of America and had there excited extra- 
ordinary enthusiasm. Brisbane himself is mentioned amongst 
those who attended the delivery of the Revelations, and 
countersigned the reports. 2 The Fourierist newspaper, The 
Phalanx, was started in New York City in October, 1843 ; 
the great Convention of Associationists met in the same city 
in the following year ; and most of the Socialist communities 
of that day, not only those which were originally founded on 
Fourierist lines, but semi-religious associations, such as Brook 
Farm, Hopedale, and Oneida, started in New York State, 
or in the States immediately adjoining. It is impossible that 
young Davis should have escaped the contagion of the time. 

As regards the philosophy and theology, Professor Bush 
testifies that the Revelations, for the most part, accurately reflect 
Swedenborg's views ; that the coincidence in the language in 
several cases is •' all but absolutely verbal," and that in one 
instance Davis gives an accurate analysis of one of Sweden - 
borg's scientific books, The Economy of the Animal Kingdom, 
a translation of which, published a year or two before in 
England, had recently made its appearance in America. 8 
Bush founds an argument for Davis* supernatural power upon 
this analysis. The book, he says, had only recently been 
translated ; very few copies (all consigned to one publisher) 
had reached America, and his inquiries had satisfied him that 
not one of these few copies had actually come into the hands 
of Davis or his circle. His inference is that Davis acquired 
the information clairvoyantly. Bush does not give details 

1 Davis, in his Autobiography (pp. 322, 323), says that during the progress of the 
lectures, owing to remarks being made on the similarity of his doctrines with 
those set forth in the Vestiges (published in 1844), he purchased and glanced at 
the book, but had not actually read more than a page at most. There is, of 
me, some resemblance in the general treatment of the facts. But I have com- 
*d several passages in the Revelations with corresponding passages in the 
"ins, and I cannot find any such detailed coincidences as to make it certain 
Jtevis had actually borrowed from the earlier book. Indeed, it seems pretty 
from his introduction of geological and astronomical terms and facts {e.g. 
eke and the names of the planetoids), which are not apparently mentioned 
'estiges, that he must, in any case, have had some other source of infbrma- 

* Nature's Divine Revelations, p. 2. 
«s to the New York Tribune, Nov. 15th, 1 846, and Aug. 10th, 1847. 

ANDREW JACKSON DAVIS 167 

of his investigations, and it is obvious that it would be 
extremely difficult to offer satisfactory proof that Davis had 
not had access to this, or any other work of Swedenborg's. 
In the particular case referred to (pp. 587, 588 of the Revela- 
tions) the knowledge shown might conceivably have been 
derived from Bush himself, who, during his attendance on 
one of the lectures, may have discussed the book aloud with 
some friend. And, speaking generally, Davis' own statement 
that he had read no books on the subjects dealt with in his 
lectures, supported though it is by the testimony of Fishbough 
and others, is quite insufficient to override the enormous im- 
probabilities involved. Moreover, we have the direct assertion 
of Bartlett, who was in a position to know, to set against that 
of Fishbough, whose knowledge was at best second-hand. 
And, lastly, Davis and his friends are not immaculate witnesses, 
for they are guilty of having deliberately suppressed all re- 
ference to an awkward fact, viz. the previous publication of 
some other lectures by the seer, which were not altogether in 
accordance with the later Revelations} 

It is unlikely, however, that there was any conscious 
plagiarism, and almost certain that there was rarely direct 

1 In 1845 there had been published in New York, under the title Lectures on 
Clairmativeness, a small pamphlet containing four lectures by Davis on the 
mysteries of human magnetism and electricity. In this pamphlet Davis writes 
of himself in the clairvoyant state : — 

"I possess the power of extending my vision throughout all space, can see 
things past, present, and to come. I have now arrived at the highest degree of 
knowledge which the human mind is capable of acquiring ... I am master of 
the general sciences, can speak all languages," etc., etc 

In this early work Davis had taught that salvation lay in the belief in Christ 
and His resurrection ; whereas in the Revelations, as already said, he explicitly 
disavowed dogmatic Christianity. It must be presumed that Fishbough and 
the rest knew of the earlier work, and had felt the difficulty involved in the 
conflict between the earlier and the later utterances of the one infallible prophet. 
There appear, indeed, to have been also numerous minor discrepancies. At any 
rate, it is significant that neither in the sketch of Davis' lite by Fishbough, 
which is prefixed to the Revelations, nor throughout the work itself, is there 
any mention of this earlier publication. Davis himself, in his Autobiography 
(p. 276), dismisses it in a single paragraph, in which he explains that the title was 
wrongly spelt and should have been Clairlativeness. Presumably there was at 
least one language, therefore, as well as one system of theology, of which his 
knowledge at that epoch was imperfect. 

I have not been able to see a copy of Clairmativeness. It is not, so far as I 
can discover, included in Davis' collected works, and does not appear to have 
been reprinted. The foregoing account of it is based on Sunderland's review of 
it in Pathetism (1847). Mattison {Spirit Raffing* \ pp. 121, 122) suggests that 
Davis and his friends called in and destroyed the pamphlet. It is noteworthy 
that, in the Preface to volume i. of the Great Harmonia, Davis speaks of the 
Divine Revelations as his first work. It is fair to add that in volume iii. of the 
Great Harmonia (p. 210) he explicitly recants the assertion of infallibility quoted 
atjpve from his earlier work, explaining that this belief in his own infallibility 
comes naturally to a clairvoyant. 

168 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

verbal reproduction of borrowed passages. In his later 
books and lectures, indeed, which purported to be produced 
under spiritual impression, but not in the trance, a few 
charges of wholesale verbal plagiarism have been substanti- 
ated against him. The most striking case of the kind is 
the parallelism of certain passages in the Great Harmonia 
(vol. Hi., published in 1852) and in Sunderland's Pathetism 
(1847). That Davis should have deliberately copied those 
passages, half a page at a time, and that he should have 
chosen for the purpose a book written by a fellow-believer, 
which contained, moreover, a criticism on his own writings, 
and would certainly be familiar to many of those who read 
his own book, argues a want of foresight which is scarcely 
credible. It is probable that the real explanation is to be 
found in his possession of an extraordinarily retentive 
memory, such as is not infrequently associated with the 
somnambulic state. The same explanation no doubt applies 
to the other charges brought against him. But in the case 
of the Revelations I am not aware that, however obviously the 
ideas and the phraseology have been borrowed, any plagiarism 
of sentences or paragraphs, with the exception of the cases 
referred to by Bush, has ever been proved. 1 

But if all that Davis could offer was a garbled reproduc- 
tion of books accessible to all, it is impossible to conceive 
that any public, however superficially educated, could have 
demanded thirty-four editions of his book in less than thirty 
years. Something the clairvoyant did no doubt contribute 
of his own to bind his gleanings into a golden sheaf. Despite 
pretentious ignorance, mistakes of grammar, fact, and logic, 
misty metaphysics, and second-hand Socialism, there is a 
certain imaginative quality in the work which gives it an 
independent value. What the clairvoyant poured out was 
not merely undigested fragments of other men's ideas ; there 
is in the book a fairly consistent scheme of thought, the 

1 Sec Sunderland, The Trance, p. 104 ; and compare The Great Harmonia, 

vol. iii. pp. 92, 93, 96, 101, 102, 136 with Pathetism, pp. 74, 75, 105, 101, 102, 

111. Sec also, for other cases, Mattison, Spirit Rappings, etc, pp. 121, 122, 

1*6; Asa Mahan, Modern Mysteries, etc, p. 30. In Human Nature (London, 

1868), vol. ii., p. 321, the authoress of Primaeval Man, an "inspirational" work 

published in 1064, shows that Davis, in his Arabula (1867), had quoted several 

*r*graphs from the earlier book with a few verbal alterations. Davis, writing 

outturn Nature later in the same year (p. 407), explains that he got perplexed 

he proof-reading by various Quotation marks which had been misplaced, and 

he imagined himself in this passage to have summarised the views of the 

■ess, not to have made a direct quotation. He further excuses his mistake by 

ig out that if he cannot claim the credit of the passage referred to, neither 

1 victim, since her book was admittedly " inspirational. n 

ANDREW JACKSON DAVIS 169 

guiding conception of which had in those days sufficient 
novelty and audacity for the English publisher to think it 
necessary to point out that the theory of organic evolution, 
though rejected by such men as Owen and Lyell, had found 
many distinguished advocates on the Continent. 1 Davis had, 
in fact, realised something of the orderly progression from 
the primaeval firemist ; something of the unity in complexity 
of the monstrous world ; something, too, of the social needs 
of his time and of ours — the waste, the injustice, the manifold 
futilities and absurdities involved in the present stage of 
economic evolution. It was partly because he could ap- 
preciate the bigness of the ideas with which he dealt, and 
in a semi-articulate, barbarous fashion could make other 
people appreciate them too, that the Revelations had such an 
extraordinary and immediate success. Partly, too, the secret 
lay in the moral attitude of the author. The whole book is 
transfused by a vague enthusiasm — an enthusiasm not always 
according to knowledge — for the moral regeneration of man- 
kind, like that which in England inspired the Owenite and 
later the Co-operative movement, which in America expressed 
itself in phalansteries, in religious revivals, and in abstinence 
from alcohol, tobacco, or meat, and which in both countries 
found perhaps its fullest expression for a few years in the 
movement known as Modern Spiritualism. And, indeed, it 
was the fulfilment — I had almost written the accidental fulfil- 
ment — a twelvemonth later, in the eyes of Davis and his 
followers, of the prophecy quoted above, of freer spirit-inter- 
course upon earth, that after all is mainly responsible for the^ 
fame achieved by the Great Harmonial Philosophy^^-Tfie 
fulfilment was not, of course, " accidental." In the first place, 
the Spiritualism of the years subsequent to 1848 was not a 
different movement from the Spiritualism whose course we 
have been tracing prior to that year. It was characterised by 
the same ideas, but found other external manifestations. In 
the second place, there is no doubt that Davis and the little 
band who gathered round him helped materially to the fulfil- 
ment of this prophecy. It is conceivable that but for them 
and the movement they represented the Rochester knockings 
might have remained as barren of results as the Cock Lane 
ghost, or any other exploded Poltergeist 

We learn from Davis' Autobiography that during the 
fifteen months in which the Revelations were being dictated 
in New York, the three persons immediately concerned — 
Dr. Lyon, Fishbough, and Davis — were dependent mainly 

1 BrUf Outlines and Review ^ etc. 

170 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

on the money earned by the latter by means of his clair- 
voyant prescriptions for disease. When this source of 
income proved insufficient, they were forced to borrow what 
was necessary for the publication of the book ; the money 
being advanced by a middle-aged lady who shortly after- 
wards became the wife of A. J. Davis. 

But when the book was published the Poughkeepsie seer 
found himself already famous ; and his later life belongs to 
history. 1 The rumour of his seances and of the pending 
revelation had spread far, and the appearance of the book 
had been anxiously looked for in many quarters. A little 
band of reformers soon gathered round him, and it was 
resolved to publish a paper which should be the mouthpiece 
of the new philosophy. 

The Rev. S. B. Brittan, a Universalist minister, was ap- 
pointed the editor-in-chief of the new organ ; and associated 
with him in the work of writing and editing were the Rev. 
W. Fishbough and the Rev. T. L. Harris, then twenty-four 
years of age, both of the same denomination ; the Rev. W. M. 
Fernald, J. K. Ingalls, Dr. Olivers, Frances Green, and 
others. 2 

Harris had, in the early part of 1847, formally withdrawn 
from the Universalist Church, and later in the year went on a 
lecturing tour to spread the knowledge of the new Revela- 

1 So far, for our account of Davis' early life and circumstances, we have had 
to depend almost exclusively on his Autobiography \ The Magic Staff, written 
some years later, and on the Preface to the Revelations, written by Fishbough, 
but founded largely on Davis' own statements. As we have already seen, the 
Preface omits all mention of one fact of cardinal importance in the clairvoyant's 
past life. Nor can the Autobiography be regarded as an entirely trustworthy 
authority, either for the inner life of the man or for his external relations. Few 
men can regard themselves and their work with the impartial eye of the 
historian. And when the subject of the Autobiography claims to be in receipt 
of information direct from the "Great Centre of intelligence, the positive sphere 
of thought, the Spiritual Sun of the Spiritual Sphere," it may be anticipated 
that the need for justifying these tremendous pretensions will take precedence 
over the claims of mere mundane happenings. The seer's descriptions of what 
he did and felt, how he acted towards his fellow-men, and what visions of 
spiritual things were vouchsafed to him, were, no doubt, written in good faith, 
but they should probably be read as representing primarily his own later con- 
ception of how it would have best become the dignity of the youthful prophet 
to nave felt and done. 

3 In September, 1847, within a few weeks of the appearance of the 
Revelations, Professor Bush, who had hitherto been, as we nave seen, one of 
Davis' most enthusiastic champions, published a small pamphlet, Davis' Refla- 
tions Revealed, in which he solemnly warned the public against being misled by 
the numerous errors, absurdities, and falsities contained in that work. Viewed in 
the light of Swedenborg's teachings, he declared, it was clear that Davis, 
although himself apparently an honest and single-hearted young man, had been 
made the mouthpiece of uninstructed and deceiving spirits. Further, he pointed 
*t Davis 1 pretended revelation was no isolated phenomenon ; there were 

ANDREW JACKSON DAVIS 171 

tion. He was known as the poet of the little circle; and 
from the outset there was some friction between him and 
Davis. Each, in fact, was possessed with a jealous vanity 
which could tolerate no rival pretensions. Early in 1848 
there came a complete rupture between them, Fishbough 
taking the part of Davis and Brittan siding with Harris. 
The immediate cause of the rupture was a scandal in 
connection with Davis and the lady already mentioned. 
Whatever ground there may have been for the scandal — and 
it is by no means clear that Davis was in fault — the two were 
married in July, 1848 ; and a few weeks later a formal 
reconciliation took place between the Poet and the Prophet 
But they never worked together again. 

The first number of the Univerccelum appeared on 
December 4th, 1847. The prospectus set forth that "an 
interior and spiritual philosophy" was its basis; that it 
would devote special attention to pyschology, including 
dreams, somnambulism, clairvoyance, prophecy, trance, and 
kindred subjects ; that it would be the organ for the com- 
munications made through A. J. Davis, who would begin 
by contributing a series of articles on physiology and 
medicine ; and, generally, that " the establishment of a univer- 
sal System of Truth, the Reform and Reorganisation of 
Society," were the ultimate objects contemplated. In his 
editorial article in the first number, Brittan thus expresses 
the central idea of the new philosophy : — 

"The Unwercctlum will, in its general tone and tendency, recognise 
the Great Supreme Intelligence as a Cause, Nature as the Effect, 
and the immortalized Human Spirit as the Ultimate Result, the three 
being united in the formation of one Grand Harmonious System. 
The Deity will be considered as an infinitely intelligent Essence, not 
existing separately from the Universe, but entering into and actuat- 
ing and vivifying all things, from the most ponderous globe to the 
infinitesimal particle of matter. This Great Essence will be con- 
sidered as an organized Being, possessing faculties corresponding 
to those of Man, only in an infinite degree — as constituting the 
Soul of which the material Universe is the Body. The Infinite 
Soul and Infinite Body are thus united in the same way as the 
finite soul and finite body are united in the formation of man ; and 

already many cases of the kind, "and, if we mistake not, the indications are 
rife of a general demonstration about to be made, or now being made, of the 
most pernicious delirium breaking forth from the world of spirits upon that 
of men" (p. 7). 

The reason for this rapid change of tone was, no doubt, the change in the 
seer's attitude towards Christianity already referred to. 

172 THE PEDIGREE OF SPIRITUALISM 

hence, according to an ancient record, 'Man is created in God's 
own image.' 

"This great intelligent Essence being the Soul of Nature, the 
Laws of Nature will be considered as the outward expression of the 
will or thoughts of that Soul, in the same way as the positions and 
movements of the human body are the expressions of the will or 
thoughts of the spirit within. . . ." l 

Again, in the first article in this first number, "On the 
Necessity for new and higher Revelations, Inspirations, and 
forms of Truth, for the benefit of Mankind at the present 
day," Fernald points out the deficiencies of the last or 
Christian revelation. Christ stood indeed at the head of the 
human race, as its supreme moral exemplar ; but His teach- 
ing furnished us with no new principles even of morality ; 
much less did they provide an adequate philosophy of God, 
Nature, Immortality, and the Organisation of Society. It 
is on these subjects — as the slow progress of the world since 
Christ had shown — that light was chiefly needed ; and the 
revelations of A. J. Davis were, the writer contended, the 
first instalment of the new inspiration which should supply 
the need. 

This belief, that a new revelation was about to burst upon 
the world, seems to have been shared by all the men and 
women who wrote in the Univerccelum. Thus Fernald else- 
where, in an article on "The Pending Revelations," 2 ex- 
presses his belief that the " Great day of final battle between 
the Demon of Darkness and the Angel of Light is near at 
hand." Warren Chase, in an enthusiastic article, " hails with 
joy the new philosophy as the positive sign of a good time 
coming. It shadows forth distinctly the approaching com- 
mencement of that condition of earth and man portrayed 
more or less vividly by Isaiah, Daniel, Jesus, the book of 
Revelation, and by Swedenborg and Fourier." 3 Another 

wtributor, Mrs, Peabody, writing on " Communion with the 
ead," asserts that " they (sc. the spirits of the dead) may be 

J round us without our discovering them, because our 

.piritual vision is not strong or clear enough," and that 

idtimately " the union of the two worlds may form as much 

part of the consciousness of every disciple as it did of the 

aviour Himself." 4 

It is to be noted that though the Univercoelum continued 
•or more than a year after the outbreak of the Hydesville 

1 VoL i. pp. S, 9. - Vol. iv. p 25. 

* VoL i. p. 343. 4 VoL ii. p. 177. 

ANDEEW JACKSON DAVIS 173 

rappings, its contributors appear to have been slow to recog- 
nise in them the fulfilment of their hopes. There is, so far 
as I can discover, but one allusion to the subject in its 
pages. In the third volume 1 there is a note on "Strange 
Manifestations/' signed, " W. F." (Fernald). The writer, in his 
editorial capacity, explains that a correspondent has sent him 
an account of some singular manifestations taking place at 
Auburn. He promises to investigate the occurrences as soon 
as possible and lay the result before the readers of the Untver- 
caelum. " We think, however," he continues, " that this is a 
question which should be put to the torture before any con- 
clusions are definitely announced thereon," lest premature 
discussion of the matter should serve the cause of superstition 
and fanaticism. 

The writers in the Univerccelum appear to have looked to a 
reconstruction of the economic organisation on Socialist lines 
as the first indispensable step towards the coming millennium. 
Thus one writes: "We are in earnest in the advocacy of 
general reforms and the reorganisation of society, because 
such is the natural counterpart and outer expression of the 
interior and spiritual principles which we are endeavouring 
to set forth." In conformity with this view, we find articles 
expounding the general principles of Socialism, much informa- 
tion about the building associations, the industrial associations, 
the trades unions, the protective unions, and other co-operative 
organisations which appear at this time to have been springing 
up all over the country ; and occasionally vague hints of a 
grand scheme for realising the new social ideal in a com- 
munity. One of the leading writers on this subject is 
Fernald, but we have also an article by Horace Greeley, 
on " Life — Ideal and Actual," and editorials on the same 
subject by J. K. Ingalls. Sunderland makes his appearance 
in a long letter, defending the claims of Pathetism. Davis 
contributes a series of articles on cholera, dyspepsia, etc., 
afterwards republished as volume i. of the Great Harmonia ; 
whilst we learn from the advertising columns that Harris has 
become the pastor of the "First Independent Christian 
Society," and is conducting services in that capacity twice 
each Sunday. In one pronouncement of Harris' we find an 
indication of the rupture already referred to between himself 
and Davis. He issues a solemn warning against " a tendency 
on the part of certain minds to place implicit reliance on 
all statements which come from persons in states of mental 
Illumination : to make their words Authoritative ; to receive 

1 Page 155. 

174 THE PEDIGEEE OF SPIRITUALISM 

their sayings as Oracular and Infallible." 1 In view of the 
later career of the writer, this utterance is in itself a fine 
example of life's irony. 

There are two cases recorded in the columns of the 
Univerccelum of revelations somewhat like those of Davis. 
The first case is published on the authority of a gentleman in 
Akron, Ohio. No names are given, but the editor professes 
himself satisfied of the good faith of his informant; and, 
indeed, the narrative bears the stamp of truth. The prophet, 
in this case a working mechanic, writing in November, 1847, 
gives an account of a spiritual experience which had befallen 
him in September, 1836, when he was eighteen years of age. 
He earnestly desired to become a preacher, and had gone 
to his pastor for instruction. The pastor had in the course 
of conversation asked him how he would prove, apart from the 
Bible, the existence of God. The question rankled ; he took 
it home and pondered over it ; it kept him awake at night 
and held him from attending properly to his work. Then, 
after a day or two, on the 16th September, 1836, the solution 
came. 

"I went to my dinner with a troubled mind. My brain felt 
hot I ate but sparingly. After dinner I strolled into the pasture 
back of the house, walking with my hat in my hand. The cool 
breeze fanned my brow. I wandered until the bell reminded me 
that it was one o'clock. I returned towards the shop ; while on my 
way I stopped and sat down. I then and there began to doubt the 
existence of God, then the existence of matter, then of myself, of my 
power and ability to move, and at the same time attempted to 
move my hand and could not, and immediately mother appeared 
to me," 

His mother (dead some time previously) then proceeded to 
instruct him on the nature of God, the world, man's soul, and 
other spiritual mysteries. At the end she said, " Now you 
have become convinced there is a God. You need no longer 
doubt your own existence. Move your fingers a little, and 
then you can get up. Remember what I have told you. 
Go in peace." When he returned to the shop it was almost 
night 

Two days later he wrote down the substance of his 

ber's teachings, and had kept it in his trunk until the 

Tin of 1847, when he first learnt of the similar revelations 

J . Davis. This earlier trance utterance presents in brief 

me general ideas as those found in Natures Divine 

1 Vol. ii. p. 280. 

BOOK II 

EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

I.-—N 

EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

CHAPTER I 

IN ARCADIA 

IT was in Arcadia that the mysterious rappings were first 
heard. Arcadia is a township in Wayne County, New 
York ; and in December, 1847, one John D. Fox, a 
farmer by occupation, a Methodist by religious conviction, 
entered on the tenancy of a house in Hydesville, a small 
village in that township. The household consisted, beside 
John D. Fox and his wife Margaret, of two unmarried 
daughters, Mapgaretta and Katie, aged fifteen and twelve 
years respectively. There was also a married son, David 
Fox, living about two miles from the parents' homestead, 
and a married daughter, Mrs. Fish, afterwards successively 
Mrs. Brown and Mrs. Underhill, living in Rochester, N.Y. 
The house itself, of which an illustration is given in Mrs. 
UnderhilFs book, The Missing Link, was built, as was usual 
in new settlements at that time, of wood, and consisted 
apparently of one floor only, with a cellar below, and a 
loft or garret above, the whole being little, if at all, bigger 
than a labourer's cottage in England. 1 

The former tenant, one Michael Weekman, who had resided 
in the house about eighteen months, is said to have beard 
from time to time loud knockings and other noises, f<^ v*Yv\cYv 
he could find no apparent cause. His testimony, k^o 5WCVC 3LX 
appears to have been given only after the raps which ^-^C^** * 
during the Fox tenancy had made the whole subject nc^^AO* ^" 

1 Capron (Modern Spiritualism, p. 33) describes it as a small frata — . vcO^ 

one and a half stories high. ^^=^ v ^ 

9 It is dated April nth, 1848. See Modem Spiritual Vsm ; U*~~ <\> 

fanaticisms, by E. W. Capron. Boston, 1855. I* 

179 

c«tf*t 

180 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

But it is matter of history that on the evening of the 31st 
of March, 1848, the Fox family, who, by their own account, 
had passed several disturbed nights previously by reason 
of the raps and other noises in the house, went to bed 
early, in order to make up their arrears of sleep. What 
follows is based upon the testimony of the Foxes. The 
girls were already in bed, and their parents — who occupied 
another bed in the same room — were about to follow, when 
the raps were again heard. On this occasion, in reply to a 
challenge given by one of the girls, the raps repeated, sound 
for sound, the noises which she made by snapping her fingers, 
and again and again gave the number of raps asked for. At 
this proof of an intelligent cause for the raps, Mrs. Fox, 
prescient that the matter was one of no ordinary moment, 
resolved to call in her friends and neighbours, that they also 
might bear witness. From the account given by one of those 
neighbours, William Duesler, written down on April 12th, 
1848, the following extract is taken — 

" The first I heard anything about them (the noises) was one week 
ago last Friday evening (31st day of March). Mrs. Redfield came 
over to my house to get my wife to go over to Mr. Fox's; Mrs. 
Redfield appeared to be very much agitated. My wife wanted I 
should go with them, and I accordingly went When she told us 
what she wanted us to go over there for, I laughed at her, and 
ridiculed the idea that there was anything mysterious in it. I told 
her it was all nonsense, and that it could easily be accounted for. 
This was about nine o'clock in the evening. There were some 
twelve or fourteen persons there when I got there. Some were 
so frightened that they did not want to go into the room. I went 
into the room and sat down on the bed. Mrs. Fox asked questions, 
and I heard the rapping which they had spoken of distinctly. I felt 
the bedstead jar when the sound was produced. 

" Mrs. Fox then asked if it would answer my questions if I asked 
any, and if so, rap. It then rapped three times. I then asked if 
it was an injured spirit, and it rapped. I asked if it had come to hurt 
anyone who was present, and it did not rap. I then reversed the 
question, and it rapped. I asked if I or my father had injured 
if (as we had formerly lived in the house), there was no noise. 
■n asking the negative of these questions the rapping was heard. 

1 asked if Mr. (naming a person who had formerly lived in 

use) had injured it, and if so, manifest it by rapping, and it 

tree knocks louder than common, and at the same time the 

\ jarred more than it had done before. I then inquired if it 

tiered for money, and the knocking was heard. I then 

it to rap when I mentioned the sum of money for which it 

ered I then asked if it was one hundred, two, three, gr 

IN AKCADIA 181 

four, and when I came to five hundred the rapping was heard. All 
in the room said they heard it distinctly. I then asked the question 
if it was five hundred dollars, and the rapping was heard. ... I then 
asked it to rap my age — the number of years of my age. It rapped 
thirty times. This is my age, and I do not think anyone about here 
knew my age except myself and family. I then told it to rap my 
wife's age, and it rapped thirty times, which is her exact age ; several 
of us counted it at the time. I then asked it to rap A. W. Hyde's 
age, and it rapped thirty-two, which, he says, is his age ; he was there 
at the time and counted it with the rest of us. Then Mrs. A. W. 
Hyde's age, and it rapped thirty-one, which, she said, was her age ; 
she was also there at the time. I then continued to ask it to rap the 
age of different persons (naming them) in the room, and it did so 
correctly, as they all said. 

"I then asked the number of children in the different families 
in the neighbourhood, and it told them correctly in the usual way, 
by rapping. Also the number of deaths that had taken place in the 
families, and it told correctly. I then asked it to rap its own age, 
and it rapped thirty-one times distinctly. I then asked it if it left a 
family, and it rapped. I asked it to rap the number of children 
it left, and it rapped five times ; then the number of girls, and it 
rapped three ; then the number of boys, and it rapped twice. Before 
this I had asked if it was a man, and it answered by rapping, it was ; 
if it was a pedler, and it rapped." 1 

The affable intelligence proceeded by the same method to 
give further particulars of the murder ; and even the initials — 
C. R.— of its first name and " sir name " ; but refused on that 
occasion to gratify curiosity further. 

On the two following days some hundreds of persons came 
to witness the marvel ; and on the Sunday, again to quote 
from Mr. Duesler's account, the raps indicated, in reply to his 
questions, that the body of a man had been buried in the 
cellar. From the statement of David Fox, preserved for us 
by his sister, Mrs. Underhill, 2 we learn that in the early days 
of April, 1848, the Fox family and some of their neighbours, 
following the indications given by the spirit, dug in the cellar 
to the depth of about three feet, when they were stopped 
by water, without finding anything. Later, in July of the 
same year, when the water in the hole had gone down, the 
digging is said to have been resumed, a depth of several feet 
was reached, and some teeth, bones, and hair supposed to be 
human, and fragments of a broken bowl were discovered ; a 
wooden board was also found, which apparently covered a 

1 Explaumtien and History of the mysterious Communion with Spirits, by 
E. W. Capron and H. D. Barron ; 2nd ed., pp. 15, 16. Auburn, N.Y., 1850. 
' The Missing Link m Modem Spiritualism, p. 18, etc New York, 1885. 

182 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

hollow space. But the authority alike for the discovery and 
for the identification of the teeth and bones appears again 
to be the Fox family alone. The incident is not even men- 
tioned in Capron and Barron's book (1850), and in Capron's 
Modern Spiritualism (1855) it is introduced with the preface, 
" It is not generally known that in the summer of 1848 Henry 
Beach and Lyman Granger, of Rochester, and David S. Fox 
and others . . ." l Again, some of the neighbours were found 
to recollect that, at a time vaguely described as " one winter," 
a pedlar had called in the village, had failed to redeem his 
promise to call next day, and had never more been seen ; 
also that the earth in the cellar of the house afterwards 
inhabited by the Fox family had been observed at that time 
to be loose ; also that another neighbour had seen in the 
kitchen of the house a figure resembling that of the pedlar. 2 

It should be added that Mrs. Fox had herself elicited most 
of the facts about the alleged pedlar before calling in the 
neighbours, and Mr. Duesler's catechism would therefore 
seem to have been dictated by her. 3 Further, no corro- 
borative evidence of the supposed murder, or even of the 
existence of the man supposed to have been murdered, was 
ever obtained. Even Capron, the sympathetic historian of 
the movement, can only say that the (alleged) discovery of 
the (possibly) human teeth and bones affords "a shade of 
circumstantial evidence" for the story. 4 

Shortly after these incidents Margaretta Fox went to 
Rochester, N.Y., to stay with her married sister, then known 
as Mrs. Fish, and Catherine visited another neighbouring 
town, Auburn. In both these places the raps broke out 
with renewed vigour. Mrs. Fish herself and many other 
persons in Rochester became mediums for the mysterious 
sounds, and the like result followed with several inmates 
of the boarding-house in Auburn where the younger sister 
stayed. 5 Sometimes the contagion was Qpnveyed by a casual 
visit. Thus Miss Harriet Bebee, a young lady of sixteen, 
had an interview of a few hours with Mrs. Tamlin, a medium 
of Auburn, and on her return to her own home twenty miles 
distant the raps forthwith broke out in her presence. 6 In 
the course of the next two or three years, indeed, the rappings 
had spread throughout the greater part of the eastern States. 

1 op. tit., p. 53. 

3 Ibid., p. 33, quoted from a pamphlet published in 1850 by one Lewis. 

3 Capron and Barron, op. tit., p. 14. 

4 Modern Spiritualism, p. 54. Mrs. Hardinge Britten {History of Modem 
urban Spiritualism, p. 37) writes to the same effect 

s Ibid., p. 40. • Ibid., p. 42. 

IN ARCADIA 183 

Thus a writer in the New Haven Journal in October, 1850, 
refers to knockings and other phenomena in seven different 
families in Bridgeport, forty families in Rochester, in Auburn, 
in Syracuse, "some two hundred" in Ohio, in New Jersey, 
and places more distant, as well as in Hartford, Springfield, 
Charlestown, etc. 1 

A year later a correspondent of the Spiritual World 
estimated that there were a hundred mediums in New 
York City, 2 and fifty or sixty " private circles " are reported 
in Philadelphia. 

The Fox family — the mother and her three daughters — 
practised no unwise parsimony of their spiritual gifts. In the 
course of the years 1849 and '850 they appear to have given 
demonstrations of their power in several large towns before 
considerable audiences. Their claims to supernormal power 
did not, of course, escape challenge. Again and again com- 
mittees were appointed to examine the subject and report 8 
But for some time the source of the rappings remained in- 
explicable. Horace Greeley, for instance, writes in his organ, 
the New York Tribune, in August, 1850, as follows : — 

"Mrs. Fox and her three daughters left our city yesterday on 
their return to Rochester, after a stay here of some weeks, during 
which they have freely subjected the mysterious influence by which 
they seem to be accompanied to every reasonable test, and to the 
keen and critical scrutiny of the hundreds who have chosen to visit 
them, or whom they have been invited to visit. The rooms which 
they occupied at the hotel have been repeatedly searched and 
scrutinised; they have been taken without an hour's notice into 
houses they had never before entered. They have been all un- 
consciously placed on a glass surface concealed under the carpet, 
in order to interrupt electric vibrations; they have been disrobed 
by a committee of ladies appointed without notice, and insisting 
that neither of them should leave the room until the investigation 
had been made, etc., £ta, yet we believe no one to this moment 
pretends that he has detected either of them in producing or 
causing the Rappings; nor do we think any of their contemners 
has invented a plausible theory to account for the production of 
these sounds, nor the singular intelligence which (certainly at times) 
has seemed to be manifested through them. . . . Whatever may be 
the origin or the cause of the 'Rappings/ the ladies in whose 
presence they occur do not make them. We tested this thoroughly 
and to pur entire satisfaction." 4 

1 Quoted in the Spiritual Philosopher (1850), vol. L p. 99. 
3 Op. cit., vol. iii. p. 151. 

3 Capron and Barron, op. cit. % pp. 46-48. 

4 Quoted in the Spiritual Philosopher, vol. i. p. 39. 

184 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

But early in the following year an explanation was fur- 
nished. In the middle of December, 1850, the Fox girls 
came to Buffalo, N.Y., and stayed there for some weeks, 
giving public exhibitions of their marvellous powers. Among 
those who visited them were three doctors — Flint, Lee, and 
Coventry, Professors at the University of Buffalo. On the 
17th February, 185 1, these gentlemen wrote a joint letter 
to a local newspaper — the Commercial Advertiser — pointing 
out that the rappings could be explained by movements of 
the knee-joints, and stating that a lady of their acquaintance 
had actually produced similar sounds by that means. Mrs. 
Fish at once challenged the doctors to prove the truth of 
their theory at a personal interview, a challenge which the 
three doctors accepted. The following is their report of 
what took place: — 

"detection of the fox girls. 

"The invitation thus proposed was accepted by those to whom 
it was addressed, and on the following evening, by appointment, 
the examination took place. After a short delay, the two Rochester 
females being seated on a sofa, the knockings commenced, and 
were continued for some time in loud tones and rapid succession. 
The ' spirits ' were then asked whether they would manifest them- 
selves during the sitting and respond to interrogatories. A series 
of raps followed, which were interpreted into a reply in the 
affirmative. The two females were then seated upon two chairs 
placed near together, their heels resting on cushions, their lower 
limbs extended, with the toes elevated, and the feet separated from 
each other. The object in this experiment was to secure a position 
in which the ligaments of the knee-joint should be made tense, 
and no opportunity offered to make pressure with the foot. We 
were pretty well satisfied that the displacement of the bones 
requisite for the sounds could not be effected unless a fulcrum 
were obtained by resting one foot upon the other, or on some 
resisting body. The company, seated in a semicircle, quietly waited 
for the ' manifestations ' for more than half an hour, but the • spirits,' 
generally so noisy, were now dumb. . . . On resuming the usual 
position on the sofa, the feet resting on the floor, knockings very 
soon began to be heard. It was then suggested that some other 
experiment be made. This was assented to, notwithstanding the 
first was, in our minds, amply conclusive. The experiment selected 
was, that the knees of the two females should be firmly grasped, 
with the hands so applied that any lateral movement of the bones 
would be perceptible to the touch. The pressure was made through 
the dress. It was not expected to prevent the sounds, but to 
^certain if they proceeded from the knee-joint It is obvious 
& this experiment was necessarily far less demonstrative to an 

IN ARCADIA 185 

observer than the first, because if the bones were distinctly felt to 
move the only evidence of this fact would be the testimony of those 
whose hands were in contact with them. The hands were kept 
in apposition for several minutes at a time, and the experiment 
repeated frequently for the course of an hour or more with negative 
results; that is to say, there were plenty of raps when the knees 
were not held and none when the hands were applied save once. 
As the pressure was intentionally somewhat relaxed (Dr. Lee being 
the holder), two or three faint, single raps were heard, and Dr. 
Lee immediately averred that the motion of the bone was plainly 
perceptible to him. The experiment of seizing the knees as quickly 
as possible when the knockings first commenced was tried several 
times, but always with the effect of putting an immediate quietus 
upon the manifestations. . . . The conclusion seemed clear that 
the Rochester knockings emanate from the knee-joint Since the 
exposition was published we have heard of several cases in which 
movements of the bones entering into other articulations are pro- 
duced by muscular effort, giving rise to sounds. We have heard 
of a person who can develop knockings from the ankle, of several 
who can produce noises with the joints of the toes and fingers, 
of one who can render loudly audible the shoulder, and another 
the hip-joint We have also heard of two additional cases in which 
sounds are produced by the knee-joint" 

In a letter dated the 21st of February Dr. Lee, one of the 
three signatories, explained that the movement, or partial 
dislocation of the knee-joint, probably consisted in "the 
movement of the tibia outward, partly occasioned, I believe, 
by pressure on the foot, there being great relaxation of the 
ligaments about the knee-joint, but chiefly by the action of 
the muscles of the leg below the knee." The ability to 
produce sharp raps by " cracking " the smaller joints is, of 
course, not uncommon. Newman Noggs was a u medium n of 
this kind. One Chauncey Burr earned some fame at this 
time by giving lectures on Spiritualism, in which he demon- 
strated that the raps could be produced by the toe-joints. 

A few weeks after the report of the Buffalo physicians a 
connection by marriage of the Fox family, Mrs. Norman 
Culver, stated that Margaretta Fox had confessed to her 
how the raps were produced. Mrs. Culver's statement, duly 
written out on the 17th April, 185 1, and attested by two 
witnesses, a doctor and a clergyman, was published in the 
New York Herald. The chief points in the deposition are 
that Mrs. Culver had for two years believed in the raps as 
genuine, but recently, noting some suspicious circumstances, 
she had offered to Catherine to assist her. Catherine — 

186 EARLY AMEEICAN SPIRITUALISM 

Margaretta being absent — had gladly accepted the offer, and 
explained that the raps were produced by the knees and toes, 
but chiefly by the latter. Some practice was required, and if 
the feet were thoroughly warmed the raps would come more 
readily. Mrs. Culver tried, and became fairly adept She 
continues : — 

"Catherine told me how to manage to answer the questions. 
She said it was generally easy enough to answer right if the one who 
asked the questions called the alphabet. She said the reason why 
they asked people to write down several names on paper, and then 
point to them till the spirit rapped at the right one, was to give them 
' a chance to watch the countenance and motions of the person, and 
that in that way they could nearly always guess right. She also 
explained how they held down and moved tables. (Mrs. Culver 
gave us some illustrations of the tricks.) She told me that all I 
should have to do to make the raps heard on the table would be to 
put my foot on the bottom of the table when I rapped, and that 
when I wished to make the raps sound distant on the wall, I must 
make them louder, and direct my own eyes earnestly to the spot 
where I wished them to be heard. She said if I could put my foot 
against the bottom of the door the raps would be heard on the top 
of the door. Catherine told me that when the committee held their 
ankles in Rochester, the Dutch servant girl rapped with her knuckles 
under the floor from the cellar. The girl was instructed to rap 
whenever she heard their voices calling the spirits. Catherine also 
showed me how they made the sounds of sawing and planing boards. 
(The whole trick was explained to us.) When I was at Rochester 
last January Margaretta told me that when people insisted on seeing 
her feet and toes she could produce a few raps with her knee and 
ankle." 

Mrs. Culver adds that she learnt from Catherine that 
Elizabeth Fish (Mrs. Fish's daughter) accidentally discovered 
how to make the raps, by playing with her toes against the 
footboard when in bed. Many naughty little girls before and 
since appear to have made the same discovery. 

Mrs. Culver's statement, though it fits in with the Buffalo 
demonstration, may not be thought conclusive in itself. But 
it receives indirect confirmation from the fact that the apolo- 
gists for Spiritualism could find nothing worse to say of it, or 
of Mrs. Culver herself, than that the statement about the part 
played by the Dutch servant girl at the Rochester investiga- 
tions was obviously incorrect, because at the Rochester 
investigation of November, 1849, the meetings were not held 
at the Foxes' house at all, but at the houses of members of 
the committee, or in a public hall ; that the Foxes at that 

IN ARCADIA 187 

time could not afford to keep a servant girl, and further, that 
Catherine herself was not present at these meetings. It is 
obvious that, independently of the fact that there may have 
been more than one investigation by a committee at Rochester, 
inaccuracies of this kind in reporting facts at second hand are 
quite compatible with honesty on the part of the reporter. 1 

These exposures seem, however, to have done little to 
check the progress of the movement Apart from the 
general eagerness to believe the marvellous, there were three . 
special reasons for their ineffectiveness. In the first place, the l\ 
Buffalo doctors did not claim, except in one instance, actually 
to have demonstrated that the knocks were produced by the 
knee-joints or toe-joints ; they had at best only shown that 
appearances were consistent with their being so produced. 
The faithful were not slow to take advantage of this loophole. 
But if any reader should now be disposed to question the 
sufficiency of the explanation put forward by the Buffalo 
doctors, he should note that, in the first place, no pains have 
ever been taken by the Spiritualists themselves to disprove 
the Buffalo demonstrations. Of course, conclusive experiments 
in such a case are not easy to devise, because of the extreme 
difficulty of locating with approximate accuracy the source of 
a sound. But it is precisely on that account that we are not 
justified in attaching weight to loose and vaguely worded 
statements made by irresponsible observers, so little qualified 
for their task that they have not even recognised this initial 
difficulty. It is frequently reported that the sounds proceeded 
from quite a different direction from the medium ; that they 
were heard to come from the door, the walls, the ceiling ; or 
generally that they were heard in such circumstances that it 
was physically impossible for the medium to have produced 
them. If in place of these general statements — with which 
the diligent student may fill his note-books, if it so please 
him — we could find in the whole literature of Spiritualism but 
one case, in which, in the presence of competent observers, and 
under conditions well ascertained and fully described, the 
raps were actually heard, when there was good cause for 
believing it impossible for any person present to have made 
them, we should no doubt do well to suspend our judgment, 
at any rate, as regards that one case. In default of such 
evidence the later confessions of the two younger Fox sisters, 
though not, of course, conclusive, are at least pertinent In 

1 See letters by Capron in the New York Express, reprinted in The Spirit 
Worlds vol. iii. pp. 1 8, 93, and Modern American Spiritualism, by Emma 
Hardinge (Mrs. Hardinge Britten), London (Burns), no date, p. ?o. 

188 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

flie autumn of 1888 Mrs. Kane (Margaretta Fox) and 
Mrs. Jencken (Catherine Fox) made public, and apparently 
spontaneous, confession, that the raps had been produced by 
fraudulent means. Mrs. Kane even gave demonstrations 
before large audiences of the actual manner in which the toe- 
joints had been used at the early stances. Mrs. Jencken, at 
any rate, if not also Mrs. Kane, afterwards recanted her 
confession. * 

Several confessions of the kind were, however, made at 
flie time. Thus in October, 185 1, a girl of thirteen, named 
Almira Bezely, was tried on the charge of murdering her 
infant brother. Almira had apparently been a rapping 
medium for some months, and had herself through the 
rappings predicted the baby's death. At the trial her father 
and sister testified that, after her arrest on her own confession 
of murder, Almira explained that she had made the rappings 
with her feet, and showed them how it was done. 2 Again, 
in the pamphlet, Knocks far the Knockings, published by the 
Brothers Burr, in 185 1, there is quoted an affidavit, duly 
attested before a justice of the peace, by one Lemuel J. 
Beardslee, who states therein that he was a rapping medium 
for about three months, and that he produced the sounds 
voluntarily by his toes and shoes, and gave answers to mental 
questions by carefully watching the questioner's countenance, 
and noting hints involuntarily given. 8 Again, a cabinet- 
maker named Hiram Pack, of 488, Pearl Street, New York, 
gave to Mr. Mattison a written statement to the effect that 
he had made to order two "medium" tables, which had 
machinery for rapping concealed in the bed of the table, 
operated by wires carried down the legs. 4 But it may be 
surmised that the demands of the credulous could generally 
be satisfied by less elaborate apparatus. 

1 Sec 7fcr Death-blew to Spiritualism, by R. B. Davenport (New York, 1888) ; 
also New York Herald of 24th September and 10th October, 1888 ; Light for 
November and December, 1888 ; *&& Journals. P. R, % December, 1888. 

' Quoted, from a contemporary account of the trial given in the Providence 
Journal, October 23rd, 1 851, in Spirit Rapping Unveiled, p. 172, by the Rev. 
H. Mattison (New York, 1853). Other persons, it should be noted, gave 
evidence to the effect that they had heard the rappings and did not believe that 
Almira had caused them. Amongst the grounds given for this belief, persisted 
in in spite of the culprit's confession, were that it was not possible for Almira to 
have made the raps ; that she had been watched closely, and no trickery had 
been detected ; and that the answers given by the raps alluded to facts not within 
Almira's knowledge. * Ibid., p, 175. 

4 /hid, p. 174. Mr. Maskelyne (Pall Mall Gate**, April 18th, 1885) states 
that some thirty years previously he had been asked to repair a little apparatus 
for a spirit rapper, and that from its construction he inferred that the apparatus 
was fastened under the flounces of a dress, and used for producing raps. 

IN AECADIA 189 

It seems clear, in the second place, that the Buffalo 
demonstration fell short, in that it failed to give a complete 
explanation of the case. It is probable that the raps were 
produced by various methods ; and that where the conditions 
rendered one device impracticable, another was employed. 
He would be a poor conjurer who could not employ a 
variety of means to produce his effects. The Rev. Eli Noyes, 
indeed, claimed to have produced raps in four different ways, 
and to have succeeded in deceiving the whole company; 
while Mr. Chauncey Burr boasted his acquaintance with no 
less than seventeen methods ; x and the descriptions given by 
various Spiritualist witnesses point strongly to a diversity of 
origin for the mysterious sounds. Mr. W. Duesler describes 
the sounds as raps or knocks which jarred the bedstead, and 
one particular rap — louder than common — sounded like the 
falling of a heavy stick on the wooden floor above their 
heads. 2 One of the editors of the Excelsior (New York) 
says that the raps varied " from a light, clear, metallic sound 
to a dull, muffled one, like a rap with the knuckles upon a 
partition covered with cloth." 8 A witness in the Spirit 
World K speaks of "a clear, distinct sound . . . nearly 
resembling the spark of transmitted electricity, only softer 
and muffled." Spicer 6 says that the prevailing rap is like the 
sound made by a pheasant confined in a strong wooden box 
and pecking vigorously to get out ; or again, like a blow on 
the table with the knuckles. Fishbough describes the sounds 
as "characterised by a kind of vibrating sepulchral rumble"; 6 
whilst De Morgan, some years later, writes that the raps 
occurring in the presence of Mrs. Hayden were " clean, clear, 
faint sounds such as would be said to ring had they lasted. 
I likened them at the time to the noise which the ends of 
knitting needles would make if dropped from a distance upon 
a marble slab and instantly checked by a damper of some 
kind." 7 

From such varying descriptions as this it may be inferred, 
on the one hand, that the Buffalo doctors had not furnished 
a complete explanation of the mystery; and on the other, 
that the claim repeatedly put forward by the early 
Spiritualists, that the sound of the raps was unique and 
inimitable, and once heard could never fail to be distinguished 

1 From Burr's pamphlet, Knocks for the Knocking?, quoted in Spirit Rapping 
Unveiled^ p. 176. 2 Capron and Barron, op. cit., p. 17. 

3 Quoted in History of the Strange Sounds, etc., by D. M. Dewey, p. 52. 
Rochester, 1850. * Vol ii. p. 99. 

9 Sights and Sounds, pp. 210, 330. * Ibid., p. 393. 

7 from Matter to Spirit, p. xli. 

f 

190 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

from all other sounds, must be accepted with some qualifica- 
tion,' 

But there was a weighti er argument which helped to dis- 
count the effects of the Buffalo exposure, and no doubt gave 
the rapping mediums a longer lease of popularity. The 
theory of simple fraud did not explain how it came about 
that the raps could correctly reply to questions of which die 
questioner alone knew the answer, or even to mental ques- 
tions. Nothing is more striking in the early history of spirit- 
rapping than the numerous accounts of correct information 
being given in answer to the questions of persons who were 
complete strangers to the medium. Nor does the testimony 
to this portent proceed only from the Spiritualists. The 
Rev. Asa Mahan, First President of Cleveland University, 
who wrote a book to denounce the errors of the Spiritualists 
and to prove that spirits had no part in the matter, gave 
many instances of the kind resting upon credible testimony ; 
and is driven— or perhaps I should rather say hastens — to 
conclude that the rappers possessed the power, by odylic 
force, of reading the thoughts of thosje who consulted them. 2 
It was this circumstance which most impressed the early 
investigators in this country who attended Mrs. Hayden's 
glances; and apparently went far to convince so astute an 
observer as the late Professor De Morgan. 8 When we read 
— as we frequently do in the literature of the time — that the 
spirits rapped out names of friends dead many years before, 
and correctly answered all kinds of test questions, to the 
number sometimes of fifty at a time, expressly prepared for 
their confusion, we feel that those early Spiritualists had 
perhaps some justification for the faith that was in them. 
IJut in fact the explanation was in most cases an extremely 
simple one; and there can be no reasonable doubt that 
Mrs. Culver and Lemuel Beardslee have correctly indicated 
it in their depositions. 

The approved method of consulting the oracle at the early 
stances was for the questioner to repeat a number of possible 
answers to his question, until a rap indicated the correct one. 

1 See, for instance, Capron and Barron, op. cit., p. 41, "The sounds have 
never been imitated, nor do we believe they can be." Judge Edmonds, however, 
whole experience in such matters was very wide, and whose judgment was 
probably sounder than that of most of his contemporaries, frankly admits that he 
bad never heard a sound which he could not imitate ; and that he had known 
mediums deliberately to counterfeit the raps. (Letters en Spiritualism, Memorial 
Bdltion, p. 180. London : James Burns, 1874.) 

* Modem Mysteries Explained and Exposed. Boston, 1855. 

9 See his account of a seance with Mrs. Hayden in the early fifties, quoted in 

ok III. chap. i. 

IN ARCADIA 191 

The following is extracted from an account of a stance 
famous in the annals of Spiritualism, which was drawn up 
by Mr. Ripley and published early in 1850 in the New York 
Tribune} At this meeting the " Rochester ladies " were the 
mediums, and J. Fenimore Cooper, William Cullen Bryant, 
N. P. Willis, General Lyman and others were amongst the 
consultants. After various communications had been given — 

"Mr. J. Fenimore Cooper was then requested to enter into the 
supra-mundane sphere, and proceeded to interrogate the spirits 
with the most imperturbable self-possession and deliberation. After 
several desultory questions to which no satisfactory answers were 
obtained, Mr. C. commenced a new series of inquiries. ( Is the 
person I inquire about a relative ? ' Yes was at once indicated by 
the knocks. 'A near relative?' Yes. 'A man?' No answer. 
'A woman?' Yes. • A daughter? a mother? a wife?' No answer. 
'A sister?' Yes. Mr. C then asked the number of years since 
her death. To this the answer was given in rapid but distinct raps, 
some counting 45, others 49, J4, € ^ c * After considerable parleying as 
to the manner in which the question should be answered, the consent 
of the invisible interlocutor was given to rap the years so slowly that 
they might be distinctly counted. This was done. .Knocks knock, 
knock, for what seemed over a minute, till the number amounted to jo, 
and was unanimously announced by the company. Mr. Cooper now 
asked, ( Did she die of consumption ? ' naming several diseases, to 
which no answer was given. 'Did she die by accident?' Yes. 
'Was she killed by lightning? Was she shot? Was she lost at 
sea ? Did she fall from a carriage ? Was she thrown from a horse ? ' 
Yes. Mr. Cooper did not pursue his inquiries any further, arid 
stated to the company that the answers were correct, the person 
alluded to by him being a sister, who, just fifty years ago the present 
month, was killed by being thrown from a horse" 

As an illustration of the unconscious improvement of 
evidence by Spiritualist writers, it may be noted that Capron, 
in giving an account of this stance, substitutes for the passage 
italicised in the foregoing extract the single sentence, " 50 
knocks were given, and the number unanimously so announced 
by the company." 2 

It will be seen that the procedure allowed the medium 
to gain indications from the manner, the tone of voice, or 
the hesitancy as to the answer expected. Moreover, she gave 
herself, as a practised conjurer should, more than one chance. 
If the answer given proved incorrect, it could always be 

1 Quoted from Spiccr, op. tit., pp. 75, 76. See also History of Modern Spirit* 
ua/ism, by Emma Hardinge, pp. 64-60. 
9 Modern Spiritualism, p. 1 74. 

Wv 

192 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

suggested that the raps had been miscounted or attached 
to the wrong letters. At the early stances, indeed, if the 
alphabet was used at all, it was customary for the medium 
herself to point to the letters, as it was found that the com- 
munication was facilitated by this means. And this practice 
still continued so long as the questions related to general 
topics, or when spirits like Channing, Swedenborg, or 
Franklin held the floor. But when a sitter desired a more 
conclusive test, and especially when he desired to receive 
a communication from a deceased friend, or an answer to 
a mental question, the printed alphabet would be placed in 
his own hands, and he would be requested to move his pencil 
slowly down it, allowing a short pause after each letter until 
a rap came. The letter indicated by the rap was then noted 
down, and the process recommenced. Precisely as in the 
muscle-reading experiments with which Cumberland and 
Irving Bishop made us familiar some years ago, the questioner 
was invited to concentrate his attention on the question 
asked ; and as the tedious process was usually performed 
in full view of the medium, it is obvious that she had the 
benefit of any unconscious indications of preference or ex- 
pectation given by the sitter. Mahan observes with pride 
that some of his friends, who were possessed of great strength 
of will and unusual powers of intellectual concentration, 
were extraordinarily successful in obtaining answers to 
'test questions/ In one case this strength of will mani- 
fested itself in "loud and emphatic pointing and sticking 
at particular letters " ; and the recorder explains that, had 
he not known better, he should certainly have come to 
the conclusion that this emphatic pointing gave the medium 
the desired cue. 1 It may be added that it frequently hap- 
pened, if the original propounder of a set of mental questions 
failed to receive satisfactory answers, that he would be re- 
quested to hand his written questions to a more sympathetic 
sitter, who had been already proved to be in rapport with the 
spirit. The answers, we are told, would then be elicited with- 
out difficulty. 2 

The results attained by this method were certainly very 
remarkable. But shrewder observers, even of those who 
believed in the phenomena in general as being of supra- 

1 Asa Mahan, op. cit. 9 p. 221. See also other cases recorded in that book. 
Mattison, Spirit Rapping unveiled, p. 57 ; Spicer, Sights and Sounds, and the 
early literature, passim. 

2 Joel Tiffany, Spiritualism Explained, p. 123. Tif&ny admits that the 
" spirits" often contented themselves with reading the sitter's thoughts. 

IN ARCADIA 193 

mundane origin, soon saw that the hypothesis of spirit-agency 
in this particular manifestation was at least sometimes super- 
fluous. A gentleman of Baltimore, for instance, writes to 
Spicer, in August, 1852 : — * 

" For example, I will give you an instance in which my friend the 
Colonel {i.e. the spirit-Colonel communicating through the raps) 
manifestly to my mind followed the course of my own mental per- 
ceptions. I noticed that when I asked what I already knew the 
answer came more promptly than when such was not the case. In 
these questions I expected the answer ; in fact, designed the questions 
to draw certain ones only. The Colonel spelt my names correctly, 
using an initial only for the middle one. I then asked him for the 
middle name, as that was my military name. He spelt it promptly. 
4 You have known someone of that name before ? ' Yes. 'Where ? 
in this country?' No. 'England?' No. 'Scotland?' Yes. 
(Scotland being what I anticipated from the first) 'Perhaps you 
know the name of the old estate in Scotland from which we came ? ' 
Yes. 'Will you name it?' (The name I wanted was 'Auchentorlie,' 
a word which I do not remember to have heard from the lips of 
any but my own household here — certainly known to none of those 
present except my brother, my uncle, and myself. Now I com- &- 

monly pronounce this name as though the first syllable was spelt 
with a k instead of the h y not caring to strive after the Gaelic 
guttural ch.) So the Colonel began — A uc^ent. When the k ap- 
peared, I noticed the coincidence with my own pronunciation, but 
also noticed it as an error, and was speculating thereon while the 
spelling of the word was progressing, but the Colonel pulled up at 
the / and announced a mistake. I questioned upon each of the 
letters backward, and the k was declared wrong and an h substituted." 

After this it is surprising to read that the gentleman from 
Baltimore drew the conclusion, " that we were communicating 
with an intelligence not embodied in the flesh we did not 
doubt" 

A few experiments were made expressly to exclude the 
directing influence of the questioner's thoughts ; but it was 
found that what the sitter did not know the s pirits could -not 
tell. 2 Further than this the ordinary investigator does not 
seem to have gone. Here and there, indeed, a sceptic did 
take precautions to prevent observation on the part of the , 
medium. Thus, Professor Page, at a stance with the Fox 
girls and their mother, effectually concealed the movements 
of his pencil behind a book, with the result that the raps 
which he obtained were indistinct and dubious, and the 

1 Op. cii. % pp. 369, 37a 

9 Spicer, op. cit. t pp. 239, 240; Asa Mahan, op. cii. % 216, 217, etc., etc 

I. — O 

194 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

answers to his mental questions were in five cases out of six 
incorrect His experiments, he tells us, were repeated by 
different investigators, who generally obtained, under like 
conditions, incorrect answers. 1 Sometimes, indeed, as in a 
case recorded by Mahan, the answers thus received were 
ludicrously inappropriate. 2 But to the faithful the results 
of such an experiment illustrated only the influence of 
scepticism in frustrating the kindly intention of the spirits. 
Or, as in the case last mentioned, the comment would be, 
M Yes, it is certainly odd that the spirit in reply to you should 
give its name as * Miserable Humbug,' and say that its diet 
in the spirit world consisted of ' pork and beans ' ; and I 
don't blame you for drawing inferences unfavourable to the 
medium's honesty ; but I have received such convincing tests 
at other times through the same medium that I feel that I 
know better." I cannot JincL ftny:_cases at this date recorded 
at first hand in which precautions against fraud of this kind 
are even alleged to have'beeh taken, with successful results. 8 
It would seem, then, that the alleged manifestations of thought- 
reading by the rapping mediums rests on evidence as in- 
adequate as that for the supernormal character of the rappings 
themselves. 

There was another set of phenomena occurring in 1850, 
which had obviously some relation to the Rochester rappings, 
and were regarded by the faithful as almost equally signifi- 
cant of the intervention of the spirit world. 4 

The Rev. Dr. Phelps, of Stratford, Connecticut, was a 
Presbyterian minister, who had for many years been a believer 
in clairvoyance, and had himself treated diseases by Mesmer- 
ism. He had late in life married a widow with four children 
— two girls who in 1 8 50 were sixteen and six years of age 
respectively, and two boys, one eleven and the other three. 
Dr. Phelps himself was at this time about sixty. On March 
10th, 1850, there broke out in his house a series of disturb- 
ances, which continued with extreme frequency and violence 
for several consecutive days, and were renewed at intervals 

1 Psychomancy : Spirit- Rappings and Tipping* Exposed* by Professor Charles 
G. Page, M.D., etc New York, 1853. % Op. cit. t p. 221. 

' Asa Mahan, op. cit. t pp. 199, 200, gives a case, but it is not first-hand. 

4 The documents in the Stratford case consist mostly of letters written during 

the progress of the events to the New Haven Journal and other papers. These 

%re nearly all reprinted in the Spiritual Philosopher^ together with editorials on the 

object by Sunderland. Some additional testimony, in the shape of letters from 

tjhbours, was collected by C W. Elliott, and published in his book, already 

ted, Mysteries % or Glimpses of the Supernatural. The following account is 

ipiled mainly from these two sources, and is given as nearly as possible in the 

as of the narrators. 

IN ARCADIA 195 

for about eighteen months. Objects of all kinds were thrown 
about the house, apparently by invisible hands ; windows were 
smashed, and a great deal of damage was done ; mysterious 
writings were produced ; raps were heard, which, like the 
Rochester knockings, would give intelligent — and frequently 
blasphemous — answers to questions. From two letters, 
written by one Webster, in the New Haven Journal, which 
were regarded by Dr. Phelps himself as amongst the most trust- 
worthy records of the phenomena, I quote the following : — l 

" While the house of Dr. Phelps was undergoing a rigid examina- 
tion from cellar to attic, one of the chambers was mysteriously 
fitted up with eleven figures of angelic beauty, gracefully and im- 
posingly arranged, so as to have the appearance of life. They were 
all female figures but one, and most of them in attitudes of devotion, 
with Bibles before them, and pointing to different passages with the 
apparent design of making the Scriptures sanction and confirm the 
strange things that were going on. . . . Some of the figures were 
kneeling beside the beds, and some bending their faces to the floor 
in attitudes of deep humility. In the centre of the group was a 
dwarf, most grotesquely arrayed; and above was a figure so sus- 
pended as to seem flying through the air. These manifestations 
occurred sometimes when the room was locked, and sometimes 
when it was known that no persons had been there. Measures 
were taken to have a special scrutiny in regard to every person who 
entered the room that day, and it is known with the most perfect 
certainty that many of these figures were constructed when there 
were no persons in the room, and no visible power by which they 
could have been produced. The tout ensemble was most beautiful 
and picturesque, and had a grace and ease and speaking effect that 
seemed the attributes of a higher creatioa" 

On another occasion, Webster continues, Dr. Phelps was 
writing at his table — he was alone in the room — and had 
turned away for a moment On resuming his seat he found 
on his table a sheet of paper, which had been quite clean a 
moment before, covered with strange-looking writing, the ink 
still wet A brickbat was seen to start from a large mirror 
and fall violently to the floor ; letters were seen to drop from 
the ceiling, and turnips covered with hieroglyphs to grow out 
of the pattern on the carpet, under the very eyes of the 
astonished family. Chairs would move deliberately across 
the room, missiles would start from space and dash through 
costly panes of glass. 

From another witness, H. B. Taylor, writing to the same 

1 Elliott, Mysteries, or Glimpses, etc, pp. 184, 185. 

196,EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

paper, we learn that the elder boy was carried across the 
room by an invisible agency ; that the boy's pantaloons were 
cut into strips, and the doctor's hat whirled up in the air; 
that a piece of shingle was seen to fly about the room with 
unknown characters inscribed upon it ; and that the supper- 
table was lifted thrice from the floor when the room was 
empty. From a writer in the Spiritual Philosopher* we learn 
that letters, written by no human hands, were thrown down 
from the air. The letters proved to contain mischievous and 
rather childish satires on Dr. Phelps' brother clergymen and 
other persons. From Laroy Sunderland, at this time editor 
of the Spiritual Philosopher^ we learn that on March nth, 
1850, an umbrella was thrown without human hands some 
twenty-five feet; that on March 13th several persons saw 
various articles rise from their places, describe a parobala {sic), 
and descend to the floor ; that on the following day a brass 
candlestick was seen to rise and dash itself against the floor 
until it was ultimately broken ; that a large potato was 
dropped out of the viewless air on to the breakfast-table 
within a few inches of Dr. Phelps' plate ; that the shovel and 
tongs, together with the iron stand in which they rested, 
moved into the middle of the parlour, and then danced upon 
the floor ; that the large dining-room table of solid mahogany 
was seen to rise two feet into the air ; that on another occa- 
sion a lamp that was burning on the mantelpiece in the elder 
boy's bedroom was seen to move across the room and set fire 
to some papers which lay on the bed ; that the boy was 
found to have been hung on a tree by the invisible agency ; 
that his pants were stripped from his body ; that a pillow was 
drawn over the elder girl's face when she was sleeping peace- 
fully, and a piece of tape tied round her neck with such 
violence that it all but strangled her. Finally, from one of 
Dr. Phelps* sons by a former marriage, Professor Austin 
Phelps, we have the following additional particulars: That 
as Dr. Phelps was walking across the parlour, no other person 
being in the room, a key and a nail were thrown over his head 
and fell on the floor at his feet ; and that in the evening, in 
presence of the whole family, a turnip fell from the ceiling in 
their midst ; that at dinner the spoons and forks would fly up 
out of the dishes ; that one day at dinner a bundle of six or 
eight silver spoons were all at once taken up and bent double 
by no visible agency ; that on another occasion, when he was 
alone, the raps directed that Dr. Phelps should put his hand 
under the table, and that, when he complied, it was grasped by 

1 1850, p. 70. 

IN ARCADIA 197 

a human hand, warm and soft Lastly, that the raps pur- 
ported to come from a Frenchman, named D s, who had 

been clerk to a firm of lawyers who had prepared Mrs. 

Phelps' settlement ; that D s, through raps, asserted that 

he was in hell, and that he had, when on earth, cheated 
Mrs. Phelps in drawing up the settlement ; that Dr. Phelps 
investigated the matter, and found clear evidence of fraud in 
the matter of the settlement, but not sufficient to justify a 
prosecution. 1 

The affair naturally created much excitement in Spiritualist 
circles. Andrew Jackson Davis himself came down to Strat- 
ford, and gave his certificate to the phenomena. He ex- 
plained that, speaking generally, the raps were produced by 
discharges of vital electricity from the elder boy's organism ; 
that when magnetism preponderated in the systems of the 
boy and girl, nails, keys, books, and other objects would fly 
towards them ; when electricity preponderated such objects 
would be repelled ; but that the spirits frequently initiated 
and directed these movements ; that, in fact, as he was im- 
pressed to declare, the majority of the disturbances were 
caused by spirits, of whom he had himself seen no less than 
five present, as u delegates from the spirit land," in Dr. Phelps' 
house. The same high authority also recognised the hiero- 
glyphics inscribed on the turnip already mentioned, the boy's 
pants, and elsewhere, as being spiritual symbols having no 
affinity with any earthly language, oriental or other. By 
interior impression he was able to interpret the message of 
goodwill conveyed, as thus : " A high society of angels desire, 
through the agency of another and a more inferior society, 
to communicate in various ways to the earth's inhabitants." 2 

On the other hand, Laroy Sunderland and Mrs. Fish were 
inclined to attribute the manifestations entirely to the agency 
of lying, mischievous, or insane spirits, and the former even 
questioned whether the Poughkeepsie seer had correctly 
translated the vegetable hieroglyphs. Mr. Beach, whose 
testimony is quota! below, believed that there was nothing 
superhuman in these mysterious occurrences. For his part, 
he did not believe in ghosts. "The theory is," he writes, 
" that there exists in Nature an element as yet unknown to 
the scientific world." 

In order to secure, if possible, at once the interest of the 

1 From a statement given to the Rev. C Beecher, and embodied in his book 
on Spiritual Manifestations, pp. 18-24. Boston, 1879. 

3 The Philosophy of Spiritual Intercourse (New York), edition of 1875, 
pp. 77-"7. 

198 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

reader and his sympathy with the Spiritualist interpretation 
of the manifestations, I have ventured, in the preceding pages, 
to base my account of the Stratford disturbances, not on what 
the several narrators themselves saw, but on what they under- 
stood that other people had seen. Not one of the marvels so 
far related is described by a person who professes to have 
been actually present ; and Professor Austin Phelps' account 
was written nearly thirty years afterwards. No eye-witness, 
indeed, so far as I can discover, ever claims to have seen a 
turnip issue from the carpet or the ceiling, or a brickbat from 
the mirror, to have seen Dr. Phelps* little boy carried across 
the room by an invisible power, or a candlestick jump up and 
pound against the floor, or inanimate objects describe a 
parabola, or any other kind of curve, unassisted. 

What they did see was much less dramatic. Dr. Phelps 
tells us that he saw with his own eyes more than thirty 
broken panes of glass; that he watched the movements of 
objects with care and close attention ; that " I witnessed them 
hundreds and hundreds of times, and I know that in hundreds 
of instances they took place when there was no visible power 
by which the motion could have been produced " ; and that 
he never could find out how the rapping was done. Laroy 
Sunderland saw some of the hieroglyphs and the letters which 
had been written by the spirits ; he also saw a window in 
which every pane had been broken ; and he heard rapping 
under his feet whilst he was at breakfast Veritas, writing on 
September 21st in the New Haven Journal, says that he was 
struck on the arm by a clothes-pin, and is sure that no one in 
the room threw it Also that in the parlour a peach stone 
fell at the feet of one of the members of the family, and that 
shortly afterwards two or three fragments of apple and a 
piece of anthracite coal fell at intervals close to him, and that 
he put a piece of apple in his pocket, and kept it as a 
memorial of the marvellous incident Further, that on the 
following morning a cup, an iron spoon, and a couple of 
apples were thrown, the latter striking two members of the 
family. 

Mr. Newson, of the Derby Journal, writes, that when he and 
three other persons were standing outside the girls' bedroom 
listening to the rappings, they heard something thrown with 
great violence against the door, instantly sprang into the 
room, and found the young lady (of sixteen) in bed in a very 
nervous state, with a very red cheek. A large white pitcher 
had, it was found, been thrown against the door, and broken. 

The Rev. Mr. Mitchell saw sentences which had been 

IN ARCADIA 199 

written on the walls, made-up figures which had been 
arranged in various parts of the house, objects which had 
been thrown about; also he heard loud noises and screamings. 

The Rev. Mr. Weed had also seen the furniture disarranged, 
and dolls dressed up to look like live figures. 

The things which Mr. Beach and Mr. Day saw were so 
interesting that I quote parts of their accounts in their own 
words. 

Mr. Beach writes in the New York Sun, April 29th, 1850 : — l 

11 While our conversation was quietly proceeding, there seemed to 
be a general start of all present, the boy instantaneously sitting up 
in bed. I was then looking at the carpet, on a line parallel to the 
front side of the bed and of the mantelpiece, when I caught sight of 
a matchbox, about four inches long by three wide, within an inch of 
the floor, if not upon it. I heard a noise corresponding to what 
would be expected from a heavy iron box of that size, falling from 
about the height of the mantelpiece ; and at the same time saw the 
box slide toward the bed, and directly away from the mantelpiece 
about four inches, while the lid flew open, and some matches bounded 
out upon the floor. The boy denied any agency in the matter, with 
an expression of innocence that defied the closest scrutiny. . . . 
A few moments after that event, and while all present occupied their 
former positions, the boy sat up in his bed as suddenly as before, 
exclaiming, ( They have set the bed on fire ! ' I sprang instantly to 
the spot, and saw a piece of printed paper, etc, on fire ; securing a 
piece of it about the size of a dollar, it proved to be a part of the 
Derby Journal. . . . Again, the ladies stood facing the window and 
me, and about six feet from me — they were side by side, about two 
feet apart ; no One else was in the room. Suddenly the daughter's 
right arm straightened, inflicting an apparently severe blow on her 
companion's right arm, just below the shoulder, and at the same 
time she cried out, ' I am pinched ! ' The sleeve of her dress being 
turned up a little, there was plainly visible a mark closely resembling 
a severe pinch freshly made." 

Mr. Beach's theory of these mysterious occurrences has 
been already quoted^ 

Mr. Horace Day writes on September 27th, 185 1, to 
Mr. Elliott, author of the book from which I have frequently 
quoted : — 

"While conversing with the family on the subject of their trials 
and perplexities, the lady of the house ran into die room, and said 
that her son, a boy of twelve or fourteen, was missing. Except on 
the face of the father, I saw no expression of alarm or apprehension. 
He seemed greatly excited ; but the rest of the family, consisting of 

1 Elliott, op. cit. % pp. 191-3. 

V 

200 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

Mrs. P., a daughter, a lady visitor, and her son, certainly manifested 
no extraordinary emotion. After a few hurried remarks, I noticed 
that Mrs. P. led the way to the backyard. What reason there was 
for not first examining the house did not appear. This was the first 
thing that looked suspicious to me, coupled with the general air of 
imperturbability over the family. The boy was found in the hay-mow, 
in an apparently comatose state, from which he recovered in the 
course of an hour. . . . The similarity of the writing, which Dr. P. 
showed me as being ( spiritual,' to that of the boy when I got him 
into a room alone, together with the singular fact that every broken 
window could be reached only from the doorway of the young ladies' 
bedroom, conspired to increase my contempt for the whole concern. 
. . . Dr. P. seems never to have recognised his son's handwriting, 
though his room was flooded with his lucubrations, in a regular 
schoolboy's hand." 1 

Further, from a full account of the matter compiled by 
Capron from the various records preserved by the family, and 
authenticated by conversation with Dr. Phelps, we learn that, 
speaking generally, the disturbances centred round the elder 
boy and girl ; that they ceased when the children were sent 
away; that Dr. Phelps in particular was favoured with 
several striking manifestations when alone with Harry ; and, 
finally, that when Harry was despatched to a school in 
Philadelphia, the spirits destroyed his books, tore his clothes, 
and generally became so outrageous that Harry was brought 
home again to Stratford, when the disturbances finally 
ceased. 2 

But perhaps the most interesting evidence is that furnished 
by Andrew Jackson Davis, in the article already referred to. 
Confronted with a practical problem in spiritual dynamics, 
the seer found his position a peculiarly delicate one. Should 
he pronounce the phenomena to be genuine, it might go hard 
with his reputation as a philosopher if some of them were 
afterwards proved to be fraudulent On the other hand, as a 
Harmonial Philosopher, it would ill become him to depreciate 
what his followers already acclaimed as a demoniac visitation. 
He found safety in a middle course. After giving the certifi- 
cate already quoted, the seer proceeded to point out that 
"the young Harry frequently failed to discriminate, during 
certain moments of mental agitation, between the sounds 
and effects which he himself made and those sounds which 
were produced by a spiritual presence " ; and he explains as 
follows the portent of the boy being tied to a tree : " I 

1 Elliott, op, eit. t pp. 200, 201. 

a Modern Spitituaitsm, etc, by E. W. Capron, pp. 132-71. 

IN ARCADIA 201 

discovered when viewing the circumstance from my superior 
condition . . . that, to control the boy from effecting some 
premeditated imprudence, a spirit near him, taking advantage 
of the electrical state of his system, actually made him un- 
consciously instrumental in tying himself to a tree/' and to 
complete the work, afterwards made the boy feel frightened, 
and believe that he had called for help, when in fact he 
had not done so. 1 And again, " It is possible — and my im- 
pressions strongly move me to assert the probability thereof 
— that the spirits have employed some impressible person in 
the family, or in the Stratford Community, to write some 
of those communications which were there received, also to 
arrange the expressive tableaux." 2 No utterance of the 
Poughkeepsie seer reveals a profounder insight 

1 Op. dt. y p.88,. * Page ill. 

CHAPTER II 
SOME DWELLERS IN ARCADIA 

SINCE, as shown in a previous chapter/ naughty little 
girls have for many generations amused themselves and 
mystified their elders by rapping on the foot of their 
wooden bedsteads and throwing about the less expensive 
crockery, and the world has gone on as before, we must look 
to something else than the novelty or the mystery of the 
manifestations for an explanation of the world-wide results 
which followed from these exploits of the Hydesville and 
Stratford children. That explanation is, of course, to be 
found in the conditions of the time. And first amongst 
these conditions was the recent familiarity of the American 
people with the phenomena of the induced trance. As 
shown in the first part of the present work, these phenomena, 
which had been known and studied in France, Germany, and 
generally on the continent of Europe, for more than two 
generations, had only in the decade 1840-50 attracted any 
wide recognition in the two great English-speaking countries. 
That recognition appears to have come at about the same 
time in both England and America, and through the same 
means — the demonstrations of itinerant lecturers. 

The interest, so recently excited and still actively spread- 
ing, in the somnambulic phenomena, helped the cause of 
nascent Spiritualism in various ways. It furnished, in the 
first place, a machinery already organised for the rapid 
spread of the new manifestations, in the shape of a large 
number of professional clairvoyants. Some of these clair- 
voyants, like Mrs. Tamlin 1 and Mrs. Bushnell, 3 were not 
slow to include spirit-rapping amongst their accomplish- 
ments. Others were content to work side by side with the 
rapping mediums who now sprang up throughout the land. 

1 Book I. chapter iL * Caproo and Barron, */. cit., p. 42. 

* Spiccr, Sights and Sounds, p. 8& London, 1853. 

SOME DWELLERS IN ARCADIA 203 

From the early Spiritualist journals it is evident that a large 
part was played in the first few years by healing and trance 
mediums simply. In the second place, Mesmerism furnished 
the popular mind with a ready-made philosophy of the whole 
matter. As previously shown, apart from the general dis- 
position to believe in the marvellous fostered by the various 
electric, magnetic, and odylic theories, many persons had 
already been induced through trance utterances to believe in 
the possibility of spirit intercourse. Of the manner in which 
Davis and his circle were prepared by clairvoyant revelations 
for the advent of the new dispensation we have already 
spoken. Dr. Phelps, of Stratford, had first had his interest 
excited, some years previously to the Poltergeist manifesta- 
tions, by the marvels of clairvoyance. So Warren Chase, of 
whom we shall speak later, had, in 1843, made experiments 
in Mesmerism with a few friends, and had ordered a dozen 
copies of Nature's Divine Revelations in 1847, as soon as it 
was issued ; l and generally throughout the country the 
attention given to clairvoyance and Mesmerism prepared the 
way for the greater marvels of Spiritualism. 2 Many even of 
the chief critics and opponents of the new movement, such as 
Asa Mahan, B. W. Richmond, and E. C. Rogers, whilst 
denying the evidence of spirit intervention, found no diffi- 
culty, on the strength of their studies in the literature of 
Animal Magnetism, in accepting the phenomena in the lump. 
All these writers are agreed in explaining the raps, the move- 
ments of tables, and the Poltergeist performances generally, 
as illustrations of odylic force. 8 To its inventor, the reader 
should perhaps be reminded, odylic force was an impalpable 
emanation of such exquisite tenuity that its presence could 
be detected by no instrument less delicate than the human 
organism, and that only in persons of exalted nervous sensi- 
bility. To harness this exquisite essence to the gross antics 
of the kitchen furniture was surely an illegitimate extension 
of the theory. 

But probably the mesmeric movement of the previous 
decade helped the new propaganda most conspicuously by 
furnishing a band of able editors and lecturers already trained 
and equipped for service. Of those who assisted at the birth 
of the Revelations and afterwards united in editing the Univer- 
ccelum, many in the course of the next two or three years 

1 Forty Years on the Spiritual Rostrum, pp. 14, 15. Boston, 1888. 

5 For additional instances see Modem American Spiritualism t by Emma 

Hardinge, pp. 274, 346, 408, etc, etc. 
* See Modem Mysteries, 

etc, pp. 326, 327, and passim. 

204 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

became editors of papers devoted to one aspect or another 
of the new movement 

Till as late, indeed, as the end of June, 1849, when the 
Univerccelutn ceased to exist, none of the adherents of the 
Harmonial Philosophy had publicly recognised the importance 
of the new physical manifestations. But in the spring of the 
following year, as we have already seen, Davis visited Strat- 
ford, there witnessed some of them for the first time, and 
became convinced of their reality. 1 In the summer of the 
same year the first number of a paper called the Spirit 
Messenger was published in Springfield, Mass., under the 
joint editorship of the Rev. R. P. Ambler, a Universalist 
minister, and Apollos Munn, which appears to have been 
Davis' chief organ for the next two or three years; for, 
indeed, partly no doubt alienated by the intolerable arrogance 
of the Poughkeepsie seer, partly because two of this trade 
of prophet can rarely agree together for long, the little band 
of Harmonial Philosophers were soon widely scattered. By 
the middle of 185 1 we find some six or seven papers in 
existence devoted to the propaganda, in most of which the 
late editors of the Univerccelutn had a part At Auburn was 
published Disclosures from the Interior and Superior Care for 
Mortals, under the editorship of J. D. Scott and T. L. Harris ; 
and another paper, The Spiritual and Moral Instructor, was 
started in the same town under the editorship of T. S. Hiatt, 
with Fishbough as a leading contributor. In September, 
185 1, was published at Boston the first number of Heat and 
Light, a review of A. J. Davis* philosophy, by W. M. Fernald, 
being the principal article. 2 Again, S. B. Brittan, in 1852, 
brought out a well-written monthly periodical called the 
Shekinah, which, during its brief career of about eighteen 
months, represented Spiritualism at its soberest and best In 
1853 appeared The Spiritual Telegraph, a weekly paper edited 
by Brittan conjointly with Partridge, a New York merchant, 
which lasted for nearly eight years. 

But the first in the field of the Spiritualist editors was 
Laroy Sunderland, whose acquaintance we have made in 
previous chapters. In July, 1850, Sunderland started in 
Boston a paper called the Spiritual Philosopher^ which in the 
following year changed its title to the Spirit World. In his 
editorial address he offers the hospitality of his columns to 
all sects, schools, and parties, and " to each world in the con- 
stitution of the Universe." But even at this epoch he showed 

1 Philosophy of Spiritual Intercourse, p. 78. 
1 Spirit World, vol. iii. p. 76. 

SOME DWELLERS IN ARCADIA 205 

something of the critical temper which had distinguished his 
later writings on Mesmerism, for in another article in the 
same number on the " Spiritual Knockings," after incidentally 
mentioning that he had himself made pneumatology a subject 
of investigation for the last thirty years, and had no doubt at 
all as to the existence of other spheres beyond our own, he 
reviews the History by Capron and Barron, pointing out 
several difficulties in the spirit theory and defects in the 
evidence so far adduced. Sunderland had not at that time 
had the opportunity to satisfy himself as to the origin of the 
knockings. A few weeks later, however, his own daughter, 
Mrs. Margaretta Cooper, became a medium ; and he writes in 
October, 1850 : "The manifestations of the Spirit World have 
been continued in our own family in Charlestown, and our 
Office in Boston, with increasing and wonderful interest . . . 
the mysterious sounds have been made in nearly all the rooms 
in our house, and have been heard at different times by 
different people. The responses to questions are made freely, 
at our table, during meal times, which are thus prolonged 
often to an hour and a half by conversation with our 
Heavenly visitants." He adds that articles of furniture had 
been moved, that the spirits had made musical sounds, that 
members of the family and strangers had been touched and 
handled by the spirits, that manifestations had been made 
to the sense of sight, and, finally, that communications had 
been vouchsafed, as he believes, "from the Higher Spheres, 
giving important information relating to the Spiritual Dis- 
pensation now opening to the Universe of Human Beings." l 
But this state of exaltation was not to last long. Perhaps 
his reversion to a more sober state of mind was hastened by the 
result of a hoax played upon him in the early part of the year 
185 1. An illiterate letter, purporting to come from a woman 
who was anxious for news of her dead daughter, was sent 
to Sunderland. He submitted it to the spirits, and received 
from them a message of consolation to transmit to the 
anxious inquirer. The letter, however, was a hoax, and the 
inquirer and her spirit daughter alike fictitious. 2 But it seems 
probable that in any case the caution — natural or acquired — 
which is so conspicuous in his earlier work would have led 
him sooner or later to reject the extravagant absurdities 
of the Spiritualists around him. 

1 Spiritual Philosopher, vol. i. pp. 68, 69. 

a Capron, Modern Spiritualism, pp. 21 1, 212. The author of the hoax was 
a clergyman named Austin, who wrote in the New York Express under the 
pseudonym of " Shadrach Barnes. " 

208 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

seeing visions. An automatic communication given through 
his wife is quoted in chapter iv. below. 

Ferguson's high character, his eloquence, and the breadth 
and liberality of his religious views gave him wide reputation 
and influence, and there is no doubt that his advocacy did 
much to advance the propaganda of Spiritualism in the 
South. He appears to have kept his faith unchanged until 
the end. His last public appearance in connection with 
Spiritualism was in England, whither he accompanied the 
Brothers Davenport in 1864, in order to introduce them to 
a new public under the most favourable auspices. 

But after all Poltergeists and a widely diffused interest 
in Animal Magnetism were factors to be found at this time 
in most European countries. It was rather in the conditions 
of a new and rapidly expanding civilisation, and perhaps 
in the special genius of the American people, that the ex- 
planation must be sought for the extraordinary spread of 
the new movement In the first place, we find a nation in 
whom the standard of popular education and intelligence 
was much higher than in England, and probably most other 
European countries at the same date. But this very diffusion 
of education was in some aspects mischievous. In the older 
civilisations the world of ideas is still an oligarchy, with a 
constitution to some extent fixed and defined. There are 
recognised standards and precedents for the guidance of 
thought in every department But in the American Republic 
of fifty years ago every man claimed the right to think for 
himself, and to think as extravagantly and inconsequently 
as he chose. Again, the geographical conditions gave specu- 
lation a freedom which would have been impossible in a 
more settled society. Even the eastern States were at this 
time very sparsely populated ; civilisation was daily enlarging 
its boundaries and absorbing more and more of the un- 
claimed territory around. In 1850 not thirteen in a hundred 
of the American people lived in towns of 8,000 inhabitants. 
Thus we find, outside the few large cities, an immense fringe 
of semi-rural " townships," carved out of the wilderness but 
yesterday, and filled with an enthusiastic horde of pioneers 
who had learnt to read and to think from men, or as we 
have just seen, from children, scarcely better trained and 
equipped than themselves. In those raw, outlying districts 
there was no intellectual centre, no recognised conduit through 
which the gathered experience of the centuries could flow, 
such as exists in every town and almost every village in 
Europe. There was inevitably expended on the problems 

SOME DWELLERS IN ARCADIA 209 

of life a large amount of vigorous but crude and undisciplined 
thinking; and the results stand on record now in the his- 
tory of various American religious epidemics, of American 
Socialisms, of American phrenology, of crusades against 
alcohol, tobacco, pork, and in favour of free land, free 
marriage, and equality of the sexes. 

It is in conformity with this view that we find the early 
American Spiritualists, almost to a man, adopted every plank 
of the platform roughly indicated above. Sunderland, indeed, 
as we have already seen, had cooled somewhat towards 
phrenology, and seems to have held aloof from most of the 
popular enthusiasms. But his critical temper was, of course, 
exceptional. There were no such reserves in the attitude of 
the ordinary Spiritualist. 

Of all the popular enthusiasms of the time, that which was 
most intimately bound up with Spiritualism was the Fourierite 
movement, which had shortly before swept in a great wave 
over the United States. There appears to be some natural 
affinity between Socialism of a certain type and Spiritualism. 
The vision of a new heaven will perhaps be most gladly 
received by those whose eyes have been opened to the vision 
of a new earth, the dwelling-place of righteousness. It is 
certain that many Socialists have been Spiritualists. The 
veteran Robert Owen was converted to the new faith a few 
years before his death. The Shakers claimed to have had 
spiritual communications as early as 1837, and to have re- 
ceived at that time predictions of the advent in a few years of 
fuller revelations: 1 and many of the older American com- 
munities were founded by leaders who claimed direct inspira- 
tion from spiritual sources. But the connection between the 
Socialist revival of 1840-50 and the gospel of 1848 was more 
intimate still. There were those who traced a definite re- 
semblance between the ideas of Fourier and Swedenborg, 
especially in the doctrine of Universal Analogy taught by 
Fourier and the well-known "Correspondences" of the Swedish 
seer. It is certain that there were many disciples of the one 
prophet who joined in the cult of the other. The list of 
writers in the Phalanx and the Harbinger^ given by Noyes 
in his History of American Socialisms? contains many names 

1 Elder Evans seems hardly to be justified in his claim. From the (un- 
fortunately anonymous) account of an eye-witness quoted by Noyes {History of 
American Soda/isms, pp. 604-9. London, 1870) and from the signed letter given 
in Spicer's Sights and Sounds (p. 349), it seems clear that the alleged communica- 
tions were not only purely subjective, but that they had little in common with the 
Spiritualistic manifestations which they were supposed to foreshadow. 

3 Page 212. 

I. — P 

210 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

— such as Horace Greeley, Stephen Pearl Andrews, Henry 
James, and J. Garth Wilkinson — which were afterwards well 
known in connection with Swedenborgianism or Spiritualism. 
Of the two leading Socialist communities founded under 
religious impulses in the early forties, before the main crop of 
u Phalanxes," Brook Farm, as is well known, cultivated 
Swedenborgianism ; whilst Hopedale, in the person of its 
founder, the Rev. Adin Ballou, helped towards the propaganda 
of Spiritualism. Of the two most successful secular com- 
munities of the day, the Wisconsin Phalanx was founded 
by a Spiritualist, Warren Chase, and the North American 
Phalanx had Horace Greeley as a Vice-President Nor did 
the connection between the two movements cease with the 
revelations of 1848. Two or three years later the Auburn 
Spiritualists, headed by Thomas Lake Harris and James D. 
Scott, founded the Mountain Cove Community ; while Harris 
himself later inaugurated a new Spiritualist society at Brocton, 
N.Y., and afterwards at Santa Rosa, California. Another 
communist society of the same type was the Harmonial 
Society, founded under angelic direction by one Spencer, an 
ex-Methodist minister, and his wife in 1855. Again, T. L. 
Nichols and other Spiritualists were members of the Socialist 
community of Modern Times, founded on Long Island in 
1 85 1. 1 And many of the "inspired" writings of the time 
sketched out plans for an ideal society to be founded on 
communist or phalansterian lines. Andrew Jackson Davis 
and the other writers in the Univerccelum y as already pointed 
out, preached social reconstruction as the concomitant of 
spiritual regeneration. 8 

Of the typical American Spiritualist of the early days — 
the man who began with Socialism and, adding thereto in 
due course all the other reforms above enumerated, finally 
found in Spiritualism the creed which would unify all his 
enthusiasms — no better illustration could be found than in 
the life of Warren Chase. Fortunately there are ample 
materials for the study. With a confidence, which again is 
typical of the man and the time, that what was so profoundly 
interesting to himself could not fail to have both interest 
and value for others, he has given to the world two 
autobiographies — The Life Line of the Lone One: an Auto- 
biography of the World's Child? and Forty Years on the 

1 Spiritual Rostrum, p. 50. An interesting summary of the relations between 
Socialism and Spiritualism, on which the account in the text is largely based, will 
be found in Noyes' book, already quoted. 

- $ee above, p. 173. * Fifth edition. Boston (U.S.), 1868. 

SOME DWELLERS IN ARCADIA 211 

Spiritual Rostrum 1 — the former dealing mainly with his 
Socialist, the latter with his Spiritualistic experiences. Born 
in 1813 in Pittsfield, a little village of New Hampshire, he 
never saw his father, and his mother, unwedded, died when he 
was five years old. In accordance with the laws of the State, 
the friendless orphan was " apprenticed " by the Selectmen of 
the township to a farmer, who was bound, in return for his 
services, to feed and clothe the child until the age of twenty- 
one, leaving him free to attend school in the winter, and 
giving him a sum of money on completion of the full term. 
The farmer proved a brutal master, and neglected his side of 
the bargain, and the boy escaped in his fifteenth year, and 
was finally bound over by the Selectmen to another family, 
by whom he was kindly treated. In this new place he had 
the opportunity of attending school for the first time, soon 
learnt to read, and made good progress with his studies 
generally during the next four or five years, passing on from 
thence to the academy at Gilmanton Corners. Here he 
appears to have read the works of various Freethinkers, and 
to have adopted their views. The Boston Investigator was 
at this period of his life his guide, and Rationalism his 
religion. In 1835, when twenty-two years of age, he left 
New Hampshire and went away West, into what was then 
Michigan Territory, to seek his fortunes in new lands. There 
he found friends, and in January, 1837, married a young 
girl then employed as school teacher. Of his wife we are 
told that she had already learnt to eschew pork, tobacco, 
and coffee, a renunciation which Warren Chase himself did 
not imitate until some years later, and that she soon gave 
up her former faith (Baptist) to adopt the views of her 
husband. In course of the next few years children were 
born to them, of whom more than one died ; and they went 
through many vicissitudes in trying to make for themselves a 
home and a living in the still unsettled West In 1838 they 
moved to Southport, in Wisconsin, and for some years en- 
dured the bitterest poverty, living through a whole winter 
with their one child on potatoes mainly, with a little flour, 
milk, and butter, sent by kindly neighbours, hardly richer 
than themselves, in pity for the delicate child. There, as a 
homeless, landless outcast, "the World's Child" had oppor- 
tunity to meditate on social and economic problems. 
Gradually, as the settlement developed, his worldly affairs 
improved. He achieved a modest competence, and a certain 
position amongst his fellow-townsmen; he was appointed 

1 Boston, 1888. 

212 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

Street Commissioner and Road Master in 1843. 1° the 
following year came the turning-point of his life. He had 
already, in the winter of 1843-4, been studying Mesmerism, 
in company with a few friends, under the guidance of 
Sunderland's paper, the Magnet. At the same time he had 
imbibed from the New York Tribune and other journals 
Fourier's scheme of Socialism. The matter was much dis- 
cussed through the winter in the local Lyceum. The glow- 
ing accounts of the success already achieved, or manifestly 
about to be achieved, by various communities already or- 
ganised, fired the imagination of the untaught settlers. 
They were dazzled by the great vision of peace, order, and 
harmony, of want and crime abolished, of toil translated 
by the magic of co-operation into pleasure, and earth made 
to yield tenfold increase, of the return of exiled Justice, and 
the vanished reign of Saturn. Early in 1844 ^ey formed 
an association, with shares of twenty-five dollars each, and 
sent out a small committee to select a suitable spot for the 
realisation of their dreams. A tract of virgin soil was chosen 
in Fond-du-lac County, near the present town of Ripon, 
situated on the banks of a beautiful stream. They named 
their new home Ceresco, in honour of the goddess Ceres. 
Thither, in the middle of May, 1844, the pioneers of the 
new settlement, nineteen men and a boy, marched with 
their waggons and household goods, reaching the spot on the 
seventh day. They at once set to work to prepare for the 
coming winter. 

" The long days were well filled with toil by the pioneer Socialists, 
and the short nights were devoted to sleep on the ground, under 
the tents. The Scotch sailor cooked for them in open air, and 
they ate on rough boards, under the shade of a bower, when it did 
not rain ; and when it did, they ate standing, to avoid an excess of 
water on the body, and because they could shed rain better in that 
position. They put in one hundred acres of wheat on the prairie 
for the next season, and potatoes, and corn, etc., for the running 
season. On the morning of June 10th the ground was white 
with frost, and used up most of the corn, and beans, and vines, 
which they had hurried up on the new sod, so beautifully turned, 
where no rock nor root was in the way of plough and spade. 
They also began to erect three dwellings, twenty by thirty feet 
each, one and a half stories high, and thirty feet apart, which 
were completed by winter, from oak trees, which furnished, with- 
out saw-mills, the frame, the clap-boards, the shingles, and the 
floors, and all except the stairs and upper floors, which were 
obtained at a saw-mill twenty-two miles distant, at Waupun. A 
saw-mill was also erected, and a dam ; and on this, in the hardest 

SOME DWELLERS IN ARCADIA 213 

work and most exposed labour, could be found the Lone One, 
almost every day, never to be beaten at hard labour nor outdone 
in devotion to what he believed true. It was late in winter before 
the saw-mill was in running order, and then the stream was frozen 
too much for use, and they had to winter once without many boards 
for man or beast The hay, which was abundant, supplied the place 
of boards for shelter for beasts and for beds for the families." l 

The community lasted for six years, the numbers rising at 
one time to about 180, of whom more than two-fifths were 
under twenty-one years of age. Of all the communities of 
the time it was perhaps the most successful. The members 
worked and danced and sang and held high debate. They 
solved the religious difficulty by allowing each denomination 
to use the hall for worship in rotation ; they brought up their 
children and kept themselves free from debt ; and when, in 
1850, partly through internal friction and jealousy, partly be- 
cause some among the members were hastening to get rich 
elsewhere, the society was dissolved, it enjoyed the dis- 
tinction, unique perhaps amongst the secular communities 
of the time, of yielding a substantial profit to its members at 
the division of the communal property. Warren Chase had 
been its virtual founder, was throughout its existence its lead- 
ing spirit, and was ultimately entrusted with the duty of 
winding up its affairs. 2 

But meanwhile the World's Child was beginning to take a 
prominent part in the larger political life outside. He was at 
this time known as an active reformer, advocating the aboli- 
tion of property in land, of usury, of banks and banking, of 
capital punishment ; freedom for the negro ; and equal rights 
of property, of person, and of franchise for men and women. 
In 1846 he was elected a delegate from Fond-du-lac County 
to a Constitutional Convention of Wisconsin Territory. In 

1 Life Lint, pp. 117, 118. 

3 In the following passage he gives its epitaph : — " Had been a great stock 
and grain grower, raising in one season as high as ten thousand bushels of wheat 
Had one genius who did most of its preaching and law business, and others who 
attended to the sanitary department. Never used intoxicating drinks, nor 
allowed them on its farm. Never used profane language, nor allowed it, except 
by strangers. Never had a law suit, nor legal counsel. Had little sickness, and 
no religious revivals. Never had a case of licentiousness, nor a complaint of 
immoral conduct. Lived a strictly moral, honest, upright, and virtuous life ; 
and yet was hated, despised, abused, slandered, lied about, and misrepresented 
in all the country round about — mostly by preachers. Kept a school of its own 
all the time. Took five or six newspapers to each family. Stopped work on 
Sunday to accommodate the neighbours, and rung its bell for meetings. But 
they danced without rum, or vulgarisms and profanity. They had meetings 
without prayers, and babies without doctors." (Op. cit. % pp. 126, 127.) 

214 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

1848 Wisconsin was admitted to the Union as a State, and 
Chase was elected as a member of its first Senate. At the 
meetings of this body he sat side by side with a feDow- 
Spfritualist, one Latham Sholes, and in their joint desk they 
kept for spiritual refreshment and for sale to then* feflow- 
Senators copies of Natures Divine Revelations. 1 In 1849 he 
was nominated by the u Free Soil n party for the Governor- 
ship of the State. For the next thirty years he seems to 
have taken a prominent part in politics, moving ever west- 
ward to new lands, and eventually becoming a member of 
the Californian Senate. During those thirty years he was 
also untiring in his advocacy, by lectures and writings, of the 
new gospel of Spiritualism. Never had cause a more single- 
hearted nor, for the type of men whom he addressed, it may 
be surmised, a more persuasive advocate. An enthusiastic 
visionary, he believed in other men as thoroughly as he 
believed in himself. It would have been as ungracious as 
futile to seek to demonstrate to such a man that the move- 
ment in which he fpund the realisation of his dreams for the 
future of humanity was founded on folly and fraud. He 
remained happy in his faith until the last, and deserves 
some better tribute than the numerous M inspirational " poems 
which, in his later years, were dedicated to him by grateful 
mediums. 

Another convert, gifted with the same childlike simplicity, 
and with no less enthusiasm for humanity, was John Murray 
Spear, one of the most attractive figures amongst the early 
Spiritualists. Born in 1804, he had been baptised by John 
Murray himself, whose name he bore. As a child he worked 
in a cotton factory, and thereafter was apprenticed to a shoe- 
maker in Abington, Mass. But his earnest desire was to be 
a preacher. Ill health and the untimely loss of his hard- 
earned savings interfered with his purpose for a time; but 
ultimately, through the aid of his brother and the well-known 
Universalist, Hosea Ballou the younger, he received the neces- 
sary instruction, and preached his first sermon in December, 
1828. In 1836 he heard W. Lloyd Garrison speak, at once 
accepted his views, and thenceforward became a prominent 
champion of the emancipation of the negro. So much ill 
feeling was aroused against him by his advocacy of the un- 
popular cause that he was forced to resign his pastorate in 
New Bedford, and removed to Weymouth, Mass. A few 
B later, in 1844, whilst lecturing in favour of Abolition, 
tacked by the mob and so seriously injured that his 

1 Spiritual Rostrum, p. 68. 

SOME DWELLERS IN ARCADIA 215 

life was endangered. In the following year he removed to 
Boston, and in company with his brother Charles published a 
weekly paper, The Prisoners Friend, designed, as its pro- 
spectus explained, to promote the abolition of capital punish- 
ment, criminal reform, and the spread of peace and general 
intelligence. Thereafter for the next six or seven years Spear 
appears to have devoted himself almost entirely to helping 
the poor, and especially prisoners or accused persons, by his 
personal service, advice, and, where needful, money. He 
would attend the various courts, and go bail for many who 
must otherwise have been imprisoned pending their trial ; he 
would visit the prisons, and perform all such offices as a large 
charity could suggest; he would communicate with the 
prisoners' friends, write their letters for them, sometimes pay 
their fines, or support their innocent wives and children ; and 
when the prisoners were released he would, so far as his 
ability served, help them to find honest employment All 
this time he was lecturing and writing and doing all that in 
him lay to further the cause of the prisoner. In one year he 
is reported to have given as many as eighty-one lectures on 
prisons and the cause and treatment of crime, to have dis- 
tributed 7,500 books to prisoners, and to have travelled 8,000 
miles. 

Outside his lecturing, such work as Spear did no doubt 
depended largely, if not almost altogether, for its success on 
the personal influence of the man. A committee which 
found bail for prisoners would have been liable to be de- 
frauded again and again ; and a committee governed, as any 
such body must be, by definite rules could scarcely have 
performed to such good purpose, or with such spontaneous 
grace of human kindness, the innumerable acts of mercy 
with which Spear's life appears to have been filled during 
these years. It may have been a wise instinct which led him 
to refuse compliance with the expressed wishes of many of 
his friends, that he should form a committee or society rather 
than work single-handed. But such single-handed effort, 
however disinterested the worker and however noble the 
cause, has its peculiar dangers ; and if Spear's long and 
successful labours for the poor and suffering led him at last 
to believe that he was chosen and appointed from among all 
the children of men to be the evangelist of a new gospel, 
much may be forgiven to one who had already done so much, 
and who had fairly earned the title of the "American 
Howard." 

Spear's attention was first called to the Spiritualist 

216 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

manifestations in 1851. On the 31st March of the following 
year his hand was involuntarily moved to write a message, 
signed "Oliver," and understood to come from the spirit of 
one Oliver Dennett, a friend who had nursed him in 1844 
during the illness which followed the assault by the mob of 
anti- Abolitionists already referred to. The message bade him 
go to Abington, a town twenty miles distant from Boston, 
where he then was, and call upon one David Vining; the 
object of the mission was not stated. Spear went as he was 
bidden, found that a man named David Vining lived, not in 
Abington, but in an adjacent town, Weymouth, and was then 
suffering from severe neuralgia. At Spear's touch the pain 
left him, and he fell later into a refreshing sleep. Spear 
stated — and no doubt quite honestly — that he had never 
heard of David Vining until the message came to him ; but 
it is to be noted that Spear had in his youth worked as a 
shoemaker at Abington, and in manhood had lived for some 
years in Weymouth, and had therefore probably many links 
with these localities. 

Other missions of a like kind were imposed upon him. 
Later his hand was moved to execute various drawings, 
representing in some cases parts of the human body, 
inscribed with appropriate texts from the Bible and other 
mottoes. There were also geometrical drawings and strange 
unintelligible figures, of which no interpretation was vouch- 
safed. A little later in the same year the spirit of John 
Murray introduced himself at a seance, and asked that a 
reporter might be found to take down the discourses which 
he proposed to deliver through the lips of his namesake. 
A reporter was found, and the discourses were actually 
published at the end of 1852, under the title Messages front 
the Superior State, They treat of righteousness, of the 
glories of the spirit spheres, of the final salvation of all 
mankind, and of the spiritual illumination which was about 
to shine upon the world. Spear's later "inspired" writings 
are treated of below, in chapter v. Spear paid more than 
one visit to this country, and was a familiar figure at 
gatherings of English Spiritualists in the earlier years of the 
movement. 1 

The restless energy of the American people, and their 
freedom from the restraints imposed in older societies by 

1 The foregoing account of Spear's life is based on the Biographical Sketch by 
Mrs. H. F. M. Brown, in the Educator (Boston, 1857), the Preface to Messages 
from the Superior State, edited by S. C. Hewitt (Boston, 1852), and Adin 
Ballou's Modem Spirit Manifest at ions * chap. xii. 

SOME DWELLERS IN ARCADIA 217 

tradition and authority, were nowhere more conspicuous than 
in the realm of faith. Unfortunately there was no attempt 
at an authoritative enumeration of the strength of the various 
religious denominations until a much later date than that 
which we are now considering. But it is certain that out of 
the population of twenty-three millions given by the census 
of 1850 a relatively large proportion belonged to no special 
Church. 1 There are many circumstances, indeed, which 
indicate the fluid character of the religious views commonly 
held ; notably the rapid spread of Millerism and other 
religious epidemics, the recent revival of Swedenborgianism, 
and the facility with which preachers and congregations alike 
from time to time changed their religious tenets. All these 
features appear to have been symptomatic less of the weak- 
ness and instability of the religious impulse than of a certain 
freshness and spontaneity in its manifestation, strictly com- 
parable with the insistent, childlike questioning of social 
problems to which reference has already been made. 

The ranks of the Spiritualists were naturally recruited 
largely from those who had freed themselves entirely from , 
the Christian tradition, and had therewith lost all definite •' 
hope or belief in a future life. One of the most prominent 
of these converts was Professor Hare ; and by the general 
testimony of the Spiritualist writers of the time, Hare was 
but one of many in like case. 2 But the converts who were 
most active in the propaganda came as a rule from the 
Churches, and especially from those who, like the Friends, 
the Unitarians, and the Universalists, held some liberal or 
attenuated form of Christian doctrine. Thus amongst the 
earliest converts we find the Friends Isaac Post and George 
Willetts, the Swedenborgians Courtney, Tiffany, and Bush, 
and ministers of various denominations, such as Sunderland, 
Fernald, 8 Newton, Hammond, Ferguson, Allen Putnam, etc. 

No religious body gave a larger contingent to the new 
faith than the Universalists. Of those whose names have 
already been mentioned as associated with A. J. Davis on the 

1 Judge Edmonds {Spiritualism, vol. i. p. 9, eighth edition, by Edmonds and 
Dexter. New York, 1853) says that there were but five millions of professed 
Christians ; but he gives no grounds for this estimate, and there were no official 
figures on the subject until much later. 

3 See e.g. Edmonds and Dexter, op. cit. % vol. i. pp. 53, 61. Telegraph 
Papers , vol. ii. pp. 79, 122, 469, etc 

* Fernald {Spirit World, vol. iii. p. 90) deprecates the title of Swedenborgian ; 
but he certainly at this time held, and continued for many years to hold and 
express the leading Swedenborgian doctrines. Probably, however, the title of 
his then recently extinct paper, the Christian Rationalist % fairly indicates his 
position. 

218 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

Univeraglum y Harris, Fishbough, and Brittan, as said, were 
all Universalist ministers, whilst Fernald at one time appears 
to have been connected with the same denomination. Later, 
we find prominent in the ranks of Spiritualism R. P. Ambler, 
Adin Ballou, J. M. Spear, S. C. Hewitt, and many others 
who had been educated for Universalist pulpits. A corre- 
spondent of the Univerazlum had expressed his fear lest the 
new movement should prove merely a division of the older 
denomination ; and charges of the same kind continued to be 
brought against the Davisian theology. It would be pertinent 
to inquire, therefore, what special characteristics of the Univer- 
salist faith led its followers to bulk so largely in the Spiritualist 
movement Universalism, to quote the definition of its 
American historian, Dr. Eddy, is "the doctrine of the final 
holiness of all men through the grace of God revealed in 
Jesus Christ" 1 In one form or another the Universalist 
belief is almost as old as Christianity itself. In America the 
foundation of the sect is usually ascribed to John Murray. 
But Universalist tenets were held in America long before 
Murray, as Dr. Eddy shows. So early as 1636 there were 
two prominent mystical writers who preached the doctrine, 
Samuel Gorton and Sir Harry Vane, then Governor of 
Massachusetts. It is noteworthy that in its beginnings the 
doctrine seems habitually to have been associated with 
mysticism. No doubt the central dogma, as commonly held 
until within recent years — the immediate and unconditional 
entrance into glory of every human soul at death — is based 
on the mystical doctrine of the divine and incorruptible 
nature of the soul, from which it followed that all sin belonged 
to the body, and that all the consequences of sin ceased with 
the death of the body. Contributory sources of the faith in 
America were the Rappists, a sect of German mystics, who 
migrated to America in 1803, and there founded a Society 
of celibates, who had all things in common, and looked for 
the early advent of the millennium ; and the Dunkers, or 
German Baptists, a sect which founded a monastic Socialist 
community at Ephrata early in the eighteenth century. In 
fact, the doctrine of Universalism, though not necessarily 
under that name, has been very generally held by the re- 
ligious communist societies. 2 

At the time of which we are now speaking the Universalist 

1 Universalism in America, by R. Eddy, D.D. Two volumes. Boston, 
1884-6. 

a Sec Eddy, op. cit. ; Noyes' History of American Socialisms ; Nordhoff, The 
Communistic Societies of the United States (London, 1875). 

SOME DWELLERS IN ARCADIA 219 

Church in America was in a state of transition. From an 
early date in the nineteenth century a bitter controversy had 
been waged within its ranks on the nature of the change at 
death. The orthodox section, comprising at first the great 
majority, held what appears to have been the primitive 
doctrine, that in the next life there is no room and no need 
for repentance, but that salvation comes to all alike at death. 
The younger school, called Restorationists, denounced this 
doctrine as immoral and contrary to the authority of the 
Bible; their opponents used hard words in return, and the 
dissension waxed so bitter that in August, 1831, a convention 
of Restorationists, which included Adin Ballou, drew up a 
manifesto in which they declared that "the doctrine of no 
future accountability and immediate entrance into glory" was 
incompatible with u pure religion and subversive of the best 
interests of Society," and therewith seceded from the Com- 
munion. But notwithstanding this secession, it seems clear 
that many of those who remained held the same Restorationist 
tenets, and the rationalist view, in fact, grew so rapidly that, 
in 1878, a representative convention of Boston Universalists 
drew up a statement of the general belief of the Church on 
this subject, in which it is laid down that "we believe that 
repentance and salvation are not limited to this life. ... In 
respect to death, we believe that, however important it may 
be in removing manifold temptations and opening the way 
to a better life ... it has no saving power." 

Such, then, was the position of the Universalist Church in 
the middle of the nineteenth century. Founded originally on 
a revolt from the rigid and unlovely eschatology of orthodox 
Protestantism, its younger members had recently carried the 
rationalising spirit still further, so that some of them had 
already separated themselves from the parent body, and 
others still within the pale were less openly working towards 
the same position. To men who had thus been preoccupied 
for a generation with the problem of a future life, and who 
had for themselves evolved the conception of it as a life of 
probation and progress, the new philosophy of the Spiritualists 
came as a most welcome and timely revelation. Or it would 
be equally true to say that their preoccupation with the 
problem led them to grasp with eagerness those signs and 
wonders which seemed to hold out the promise of light in 
the darkness, and to shape their meaning in conformity with 
their own dearest hopes. It is certainly not without signifi- 
cance that for the first few years, at any rate, several editors 
of Spiritualist papers and a large proportion of the more 

220 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

influential and respected speakers and writers had originally 
been Universalist ministers. 

One of the best known of the early Universalist recruits 
was the Rev. Adin Ballou, a member of a family who had 
for two generations occupied a leading position in American 
Universalism, and who had himself, as already indicated, 
taken a prominent part, on the rationalist side, in the Restora- 
tionist controversy. In 1842, the same year which saw the 
beginnings of the more famous community of Brook Farm, 
Ballou had founded near Milford, in Massachusetts, the 
Society of Hopedale, to be, in his own words, " a miniature 
Christian republic." In the year 1850 spirit manifestations 
of various kinds — raps, movements of furniture, "direct" 
writing and various trance phenomena — appeared in the com- 
munity. Later, within a few days of the death of their son, 
the Rev. Adin Augustus Ballou, in February, 1852, the 
parents received, through the hand of one Elizabeth Reed 
of the community, messages assuring them of their son's 
happiness and giving a sketch of his life and surroundings in 
the spirit sphere, with other information of the customary 
character. In the middle of the same year Adin Ballou 
published his testimony, for the following amongst other 
reasons, as set forth in his Preface : " Because he believes that 
a just and discriminating faith in Spirit manifestations, such 
as he sets forth, will promote the regeneration of mankind 
individually and socially. Because he believes that only the 
dawn of the manifestations has yet appeared, and desires to 
assist in preparing all well-disposed minds for the brightness 
of the approaching day." 1 

Others there were, of a spiritual temperament like that of 
the early Friends, who whilst still holding to the central 
doctrines of Christianity, had severed themselves from con- 
nection with any Church or Christian society. Josiah A. 
Gridley was a doctor practising in Southampton, Mass. 
From his own account of himself 2 we learn that he began 
life in poverty with feeble health, which had prevented him in 
youth from pursuing his studies for the ministry, and continued 
to beset him throughout his later years. He was further 
hampered in his career by the charge of a wife, also in weak 
health and at times deranged, and a numerous family. 
Throughout, however, his main preoccupation appears to 

1 Modern Spirit Manifestations, Preface, p. li Liverpool, 1853. (Reprinted 
from the second American edition. ) 

a Astounding Facts from tht Spirit World. Southampton, Mass., J. A. 
Gridley, 1854. 

SOME DWELLERS IN ARCADIA 221 

have been with spiritual matters. This is his own account 
of his life history : — 

"With an ardent and unwaning desire to find the true and 
unerring way of God, I ran rapidly through the various and multi- 
form sectarianisms of the churches, as the Congregationalism Metho- 
dist, Unionist, Perfectionist, etc., till I reached Paul's charity, when 
sectarianism of every form retired, for that is an inclosure into 
which its profane and unhallowed feet never enter. Yes, I ran 
through all these, and in 1834-5 I was convicted for a higher life. 
The sinning and repenting that I had followed under the instruction 
of all my teachers, from 18 16 (when I was fourteen years old), 
became to me exceedingly loathsome. 

" I sought help from the most renowned Spiritualists of that 
day, but none understood my wants — none knew the unutterable 
desires of my thirsty soul. I had been filled for years with the 
blessings of ' Revivals,' but they could no longer reach that aching 
void. I finally left everything that bore the name of religion and 
betook myself to God." l 

But even before he ultimately found spiritual peace, 
Gridley had been the subject of frequent monitions and 
angelic interpositions. He was constantly impressed, even 
before seeing the patient, with the cause of the disease and 
the treatment to be followed, and attributes the remarkable 
success of his practice to his communion with the spirit 
world. He gives an instance in which, in 1842, he believed 
himself to have been the medium for effecting a miraculous 
cure. He was seated at the bedside of a dear friend, having 
done all that his art could effect to relieve her pain, and 
believing her to be near death. 

"In this emergency, with external hope cut off, I seated 
myself at her bedside with my forehead in my hand, and my 
elbow resting on my knee. In this position I opened my mind 
upward. The swelling tide from the spirit world set in, while each 
rolling surge which came in quick succession carried up my spirit 
to a point of faith and power that seemed to me omnipotent. The 
object I dreamed not, but instantly as on the next buoyant surge, 
were evolved these words, which echoed through my spirit, mighty 
as the roar of a thousand thunders, ( In the name of the living 
Christ, I bid these pains leave you.' I knew she was healed." * . . . 

He did not move or speak, but the pain left the patient 
and she recovered. Like celestial guidance, as he believed, 
followed him also in his business matters ; on more than one 

1 Op. cit., p. 231. » Pige 188. 

222 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

occasion saved his life or that of others ; directed him in 
all his actions, telling him when to give and when to withhold 
charitable doles; for the space of some months, for his 
own spiritual edification, forbade him to make any charge for 
his medical s er vi ces ; and ultimately for a season withheld 
him from practising his profession at alL 

Finally, within a few weeks of the death of his son Albert, 
he was privileged to have an interview with him in the spirit. 

"My spirit stretched itself immeasurably and inconceivably 
into the sympathetic network of the heavens in its lengthened 
desires for my son. Within two or three mirmtes he was by my 
side. After exchanging the fulness of our affections upon each 
other, which no language of earthly lovers can reach, as I had 
desired, he first most strikingly and unmistakably impressed me 
with his identity. He then showed me his condition and the body 
he occupied — the heavenly radiance that glowed from within and 
through that body may be felt better than uttered It was 
transparent ; I could see through it, yet its lineaments were clear 
and well defined ; it was verily a glorified body ... I now desired 
to know whether he remembered the Truths of which we had so 
often spoken together during the last years of his earthly pilgrimage, 
and whether be was still interested in them. In reply, had he 
instantly daguerreotyped them in letters of fire on the wall before 
me, they could not have appeared more clear and distinct. Such a 
conception is very near the truth — they seemed to roll out from the 
glorious body that stood beside me like a rapidly unfolding canvass, 
till they completely covered the whole wall of the room." l 

A man whose lifelong experience had thus anticipated the 
teachings of the Spiritualists became inevitably one of the 
early converts to the new faith. It was not until February, 
1852, however, that he came into close contact with the 
movement. In that month he found a medium in his own 
household, in the person of a young man who had been a 
personal attendant on his deceased son Albert. From this 
time he held almost daily converse with the " spirits." There 
can be no doubt that Gridley's simplicity offered a strong 
temptation to the young man Nathan, and probably to other 
members of his household. The most singular scenes of 
confusion and disorder took place at the early stances, ex- 
plained by later utterances as denoting war between good 
and evil spirits who were contending for the body of the 
medium. Articles of furniture were moved about; spirit 
messages were written in various parts of the house in chalk ; 

1 op. rft. f p. 17a 

SOME DWELLERS IN ARCADIA 223 

and on one occasion a famous manifestation of a later date 
was anticipated — the breakfast- table was laid by spirit 
agency. 1 

The earlier communications to the circle appear to have 
been written or spoken almost exclusively through the 
organism of the young man aforesaid, the communicating 
intelligences purporting to be the son already mentioned, 
one or two intimate friends of Gridley, or of other members 
of the circle, and occasionally more famous personages. Later, 
Gridley himself became a medium, and was " impressed," like 
Davis, to utter spiritual truths. 

The communications, not unnaturally, reflected Gridley's 
own peculiar views on spiritual matters. Much of the book, 
indeed, is devoted to the defence of the Christian doctrines 
and the biblical miracles from the attacks of A. J. Davis. 1 
Apart, however, from these apologetics and the affirmation, 
again in opposition to Davis, of the existence of evil as 
something in its nature distinct from good, the book differs 
little from other revelations of the period. It enters minutely 
into the geography of the spirit spheres, the nature of the 
spiritual body, and other matters of the kind. There are, 
moreover, traces of one or two mystical doctrines to be 
found ; especially the " interior " breathing, which Gridley 
describes as a teal physical experience of his own ; s and 
which afterwards figured prominently in T. L. Harris' later 
mystical writings. 

Of those whose faith in a future life, tottering apparently 
under the stress of a recent bereavement, was restored and 
enlarged by the Spiritualist manifestations, the most notable 
instance was John Worth Edmonds, next to Andrew Jackson 
Davis the most popular and most influential of the early 
American writers on the subject Judge Edmonds had been 
a Senator of the State of New York, and a State Prison 

1 op. cii. y p. 67. 

2 The defence was not perhaps always successful from the orthodox standpoint, 
as the following extract will show. Gridley had asked the spirits for an explana- 
tion of the sun's standing still in the valley of Jehoshaphat, Davis having said 
that Joshua's statement was mistaken. The answer is : — 

' * Mr. Davis sometimes draws hasty conclusions. When he affirms that the 
laws of nature are as unchangeable as their Eternal Author, he affirms the truth ; 
but the laws of Nature in Joshua's time might have produced some wonders equal 
to those in our own day, when we have seen the ignorant cobbler, in an incredibly 
short time, converted into one of the profoundest philosophers of the age. Mr. 
Davis should know that an angel's face, acting as a mirror or luminous cloud of 
the right density, could reflect the sun's descending rays for a much longer period 
than usual, upon the contending armies of Israel Cannot the merest schoolboys 
with a couple of mirrors make the sun stand still all day in the bottom of the 
deepest well, if they choose?" (p. 74). * Op. cif., p. 262. 

SOME DWELLERS IN ARCADIA 225 

recognised from her description as friends of persons present 
with her. 1 Meantime, through the years 1853 anc * ! ^S4» 
Judge Edmonds, with a few chosen friends, was holding a 
circle for the receipt of spiritual communications through the 
mediumship of himself, Dr. Dexter, and others. Copious 
extracts from these communications were published in the 
two portly volumes already referred to, the first in 1853, the 
second early in 1855. The work appears to have had an 
enormous sale, and no doubt exercised a great influence on 
the rising faith. The spirits who chiefly communicated to the 
little circle were Swedenborg and Bacon ; Luther and Calvin 
were reported as present on one occasion, but left without 
giving any token or message. 2 

Such in brief were the social and intellectual conditions in 
which the new religion had its birth, and such were its first 
apostles — lecturers on Mesmerism, Socialists and reformers, 
revivalist preachers, Unitarian and Universalist ministers. 
Laroy Sunderland and J. R. Buchanan, and somewhat later, 
Professors Hare and Mapes, represented the critical and 
philosophic aspect of the new movement, and gave it what 
seemed an assured scientific foundation. The strong impulse 
which transformed the tricks of mischievous children, in other 
circumstances merely a nine days' wonder for a gaping 
village, into the beginnings of a new gospel of hope and 
freedom proceeded from men like Warren Chase and John 
Murray Spear, full of crude but sincere aspirations for the 
bettering of the world ; men whose eyes were often blinded by 
the very splendour of their distant ideals to all that was 
sordid and contemptible in the present. There were many 
men of the same type who were at that very time labouring 
for the abolition of negro slavery ; and it is interesting in this 
connection to note that at a later period both Abraham 
Lincoln and William Lloyd Garrison professed their faith in 
Spiritualism. 

The shaping of the doctrines of the new religion was the 
work of men, many of whom shared with the Socialists and 
reformers their large enthusiasms and their generous in- 
capacity to see the trickeries and mean egotisms which 
surrounded them, but whose aspirations tended to religious 
rather than to social ideals. These men came for the most 
part, as we have seen, from the outlying fringes of orthodoxy, 
the Churches in which, under the powerful solvent of in- 

1 Op. cit., voL ii. pp. 44, 45. 

2 For some accounts of these spirit communications and of Edmonds' other 
experiences see below, chaps, iii., iv., and v. 

I.— Q 

226 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

tellectual freedom, the sharp outlines of dogmatic Christianity 
were already beginning to disappear. There were comparatively 
few Methodists and Episcopalians amongst the advocates of 
the new faith, but many Friends, Unitarians, and Universalists. 
Sometimes, as would seem to have been the case with Judge 
Edmonds and Adin Ballou, the intellectual openness to new 
ideas was quickened under the stress of recent bereavement 
into a vivid personal craving. 

In this manner for a time the new faith seemed to focus in 
itself much that was finest and most generous in the religious 
and social aspirations of the growing nation, and spread 
through all classes of society with a rapidity and persistence 
unapproached by any other religious movement of modern 
times. 

CHAPTER III 
THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA 

SO far, in considering the phenomena presented at spirit 
stances, we have confined our attention mainly to the 
rappings. But while these remained for some time the 
chief source of interest and the standard means of communi- 
cation with the invisible intelligences, other physical phenomena 
were soon added. So early as the autumn of 1849, indeed, 
Capron and Barron, in their History} record a series of stances, 
with Mrs.Tamlin apparently as chief medium, though Catherine 
Fox occasionally assisted, at which tables were rocked and 
tilted, small objects moved about, a guitar played, and so on. 
The Rev. C. Hammond's account of a stance with the Foxes, 
in January, 1850, testifies to similar phenomena. 2 Later irt 
the same year, as we have already seen, Sunderland was 
favoured with a surprising variety of manifestations in the 
domestic circle. In many of the earlier sittings the phenomena, 
as in the Hammond case and in Tallmadge's account quoted 
below, seem to have taken place in the light, the table round 
which the circle sat affording sufficient cover for the musical 
performances and other manifestations. Sometimes, indeed, 
as in the two cases last cited and in Elliott's seance, s the 
investigator was alone with the two, or three, Fox girls and 
their mother. 

But when a larger circle was to be entertained — and the 
circles of the day frequently numbered from twenty to thirty 
persons — the advantages of darkness and of singing or piano 
playing during the period of incubation w<ere early perceived. 
Capron's stances in 1849 were held in the dark; and the 
more violent physical demonstrations nearly always took place, 
if the circle was a large one, in the dark. 4 The sitters were 

1 Pages 69 et scq. * Dewey, op. cit. f pp. 27-32. 

s Quoted in his book, Mysteries, or Glimpses, etc., pp. 146-51. 
4 See e.g. Spirit World, vol iL p. 126, vol iii. pp. 102, 103, et 

227 

228 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

also, as in later times, generally enjoined to sing or play 
on some musical instrument — a compliment which the 
"spirits'* frequently reciprocated by rapping an accompani- 
ment to the tune. In these earlier stances, again, the pre- 
caution of holding hands all round the circle appears to have 
been frequently, but by no means invariably, observed. 

Very few critical accounts of the earlier seances have been 
preserved ; but they are not needed. The accounts given by 
Spiritualists themselves, when they condescend upon detail, 
are sufficient to show that we need look for no other cause for 
the results described than trickery of the most trivial and 
vulgar kind — trickery for the most part too obvious to need a 
commentary. 

But as I desire to put the case at its strongest, I propose to 
select in the present chapter the best accounts which I can 
find given by Spiritualists, beginning with extracts from the 
personal experiences of some of the leaders of the movement, 
told by themselves. 

One of the most distinguished of the early converts was 
the Hon. N. P. Tallmadge, Governor of Wisconsin. In a 
letter to a friend, dated April 12th, 1853, which was published 
in most of the journals at the time, he gives some account 
of his experiences, the most remarkable of which were con- 
nected with the " spirit " of the late John C. Calhoun. He 
held, on dates not specified, several sittings with the Fox 
family — the mother and two unmarried daughters — generally 
with no other persons present. At these sittings he received, 
through the raps, communications purporting to come from 
Calhoun. The table was also alleged to move when no one 
was near it. Further, on one occasion Tallmadge tells us 
that he sat on the centre of the table, and the three ladies sat 
at the sides, with their hands and arms resting upon it Not- 
withstanding this added weight, the table rose, "and was 
suspended in the air about six inches above the floor? Tall- 
madge pours just scorn upon the hypothesis, put forward 
by some ignorant persons, that this stupendous manifestation 
could be explained by electricity. At a later stance bells 
and a guitar were placed on a drawer under the table, and 
music of indescribable beauty was produced. The climax 
was the production of direct spirit-writing. The first sitting 
held for this purpose was a comparative failure. The 
mediums were the three Foxes, and Tallmadge was the 
single sitter ; but only a few vague pencil marks were pro- 
duced. 

Through the raps, however, an appointment was made for 

THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA 229 

the following Friday (date not specified), at seven. Apparently 
the sitters were the same as before. 

" We met, pursuant to appointment, took our seats at the table, 
our hands and arms resting on it as usual. I placed the paper with 
my silver-cased pencil on the drawer, and said : — 

"'My friend, I wish the sentence to be in your own hand- 
writing, so that your friends will recognise it' He replied, 'You 
will know the writing.' He then said, 'Have your minds on the 
spirit of John C. Calhoun.' 

" I soon heard a rapid movement of the pencil on the paper, and 
a rustling of the paper, together with a movement of the drawer. 
I was then directed to look under the drawer. I looked, and 
found my pencil outside of the drawer, near my feet, but found 
no paper on the drawer where I placed it. On raising up the 
drawer I discovered the paper all under it. The sheets were 
a little deranged, and on examining, I found on the outside sheet 
these words : ' rtn with you still J " 

Tallmadge showed the sentence to several friends, who, 
according to his report, recognised the writing as " a perfect 
facsimile " of Calhoun's ; and two witnesses added that the 
abbreviation " Pm " was characteristic of the deceased states- 
man. Upon which Tallmadge comments : — 

"How significant, then, does this fact become! We have not 
only the most unequivocal testimony to the handwriting itself, but, 
lest any skeptic should suggest the possibility of an imitation or 
a counterfeit, this abbreviation, peculiar to himself, and known only 
to his most intimate friends, and which no imitator or counterfeiter 
could know, is introduced by way of putting such a suggestion to 
flight for ever." l 

Another well-known name is that of William Lloyd 
Garrison, who gave his testimony in the Liberator of 
March 3rd, 1854. At the sitting which he describes the 
medium was Mrs. Brown (formerly Mrs. Fish). The date 
is not given, but it occurred " recently." The circle consisted 
of ten persons, four of whom were ladies. Raps and other 
demonstrations were given. Then by means of the raps the 
alphabet was called for, and 

" letter by letter, it was rapped out that the medium must put her 
feet in the custody of one of the party, and then we were told 
to wait for demonstrations. This was evidently done to convince 

1 The Healing of (hi Nations, by Linton and Tallmadge, pp. 474-82. New 
York, 1858. 

230 EAELY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

everyone present that the medium had nothing to do with the 
phenomena, by way of fraud or collusion; and during the entire 
sitting (a protracted one), before any remarkable feat was performed, 
the medium was invariably ordered to take such a position as to 
render it clearly impossible for her to be privy to it. The presence 
of several spirits was indicated during the evening, and satisfactory 
tests were made; but the most communicative and efficient one 
purported to be that of 'Jesse Hutchinson.' It was he who had 
been playing bo-peep with us under the table; and now that the 
medium was secured to the satisfaction of all present, he renewed 
his salutations not only to us personally, but to nearly every one 
of the circle. The ladies had their dresses, and the gentlemen their 
pantaloons, pulled, and their feet patted, in the most emphatic 
manner. . . . He then spelt out the following communications by 
the alphabet : * I am most happy, dear friends, to be able to give 
you such tangible evidence of my presence. The good time has 
truly come. The gates of the New Jerusalem are open, and the 
good spirits, made more pure by the change of spheres, are knocking 
at the door of your souls.' " 

After this a bell was put under the table and rung, and 
a stick was moved about ; three spirits, two of them being 
the well-known Abolitionists, Isaac T. Hopper and Jesse 
(Hutchinson), wrote their autographs on paper placed for 
the purpose in the same spot, and spirit hands grasped — 
also under the safe cover of the table — the feet and hands 
of the company. 1 

Adin Ballou unfortunately gives no details of his personal 
experience of the physical phenomena ; he merely recounts, 
in general terms, that he had heard at the circle noises of 
various kinds, had seen tables and other articles of furniture 
move about, with or without contact of the medium's hands, 
and had witnessed " direct spirit-writing," besides other lesser 
marvels. 2 

Judge Edmonds* testimony to the physical manifestations 
is also wanting in detail. In his Appeal to the public, dated 
August ist, 1853, he merely describes in general terms 
levitation, tiltings, and other violent movements of tables 
and chairs, ringing of bells, and so on. But there is one 
particular manifestation, reference to which is excluded from 
the Appeal, because it occurred when Judge Edmonds was 
alone, which possesses a special interest, since we have two 

1 Quoted by Hare, Experimental Investigation, etc., pp. 327-9. Hare 
ascribes the account to Henry Lloyd Garrison, but there seems to be no doubt 
that the famous Abolitionist is intended. The seance is referred to in the 
Telegraph Papers, voL iv. p. 418, and William L. Garrison is said to have been 
present. a The Modern Spirit Manifestations, pp. 19, 20. 

THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA 231 

accounts of it, written by the judge at a considerable interval. 
This is the later account, dated March 13th, 1859: — 

"And, finally, after weeks of such trials, as if to dispel all idea 
in my mind as to its being done by others, or by machinery, the 
rappings came to me alone, when I was in bed, when no mortal 
but myself was in the room. I first heard them then on the floor, 
as I lay reading. I said, * It's a mouse.' They instantly changed 
their location from one part of the room to another, with a rapidity 
that no mouse could equal. 'Still, it might be more than one 
mouse.' And then they came upon my person — distinct, clear, 
unequivocal. I explained it to myself by calling it a twitching of 
the nenres, which at times I had experienced, and so I tried to 
see if it was so. It was on my thigh that they came. I sat up 
in bed, threw off all clothing from the limb, leaving it entirely bare. 
I held my lighted lamp in one hand near my leg, and sat and 
looked at it. I tried various experiments. I laid my left hand 
flat on the spot — the raps would be then on my hand, and cease 
on my leg. I laid my hand edgewise on the limb, and the force, 
whatever it was, would pass across my hand and reach the leg, 
making itself as perceptible on each finger as on the leg. I held 
my hand two or three inches from my thigh, and found they 
instantly stopped, and resumed their work as soon as I withdrew 
my hand. 

" ( But, 1 I said to myself, ' this is some local affection, which the 
magnetism of my hand can reach.' Immediately they ran riot 
all over my limbs, touching me with a distinctness and rapidity 
that was marvellous, running up and down both limbs, from the 
thighs to the end of the toes." 1 

On comparing this account with that given in a con- 
temporary extract from his diary, 2 we find some interesting 
variations : — 

(1) Nothing is said about the raps on the floor preceding 
the raps on the thigh: the account in the diary begins, 
" To-night, after I had gone to bed, and while I lay reading 
... I felt a touching on my left thigh," etc. 

(2) Nothing is said about the raps being felt on the hand 
when laid flat on the limb ; on the contrary, it is expressly 
stated that this procedure stopped the manifestation. 

(3) Nothing is said about the stopping of the raps when 
the hand was held two or three inches from the thigh. 

(4) "They ran riot all over my limbs" is represented in 
the contemporary account by the following sentence : " After 

1 Originally published in the New York Tribune, March, 1859. Reprinted 
in Litters and Tracts* p. 156. Memorial Edition. London, James Burns 
(no datej. * Spiritualism, by Edmonds and Dexter, vqL l pp. 1 8, 19. 

232 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

this there came a storm of touchings from my left big toe, 
all the way up my leg to the upper part of my thigh. . . . 
This storm ran up and down my leg several times in a 
perfectly straight line," etc. From a perusal of this earlier 
account there seems no sufficient reason for regarding the 
experiences as other than subjective. 

In the case of some other manifestations witnessed by 
Judge Edmonds, we also have the advantage of two accounts, 
in this case by different witnesses. C. W. Elliott quotes a 
report, dated 25th May, 1851, given him by a friend, of a 
stance at which two young men of Springfield (Gordon and 
Cooley) were the mediums. The stance was held at the 
house of Charles Partridge on the 21st May, and Edmonds, 
Gray, and some fifteen or twenty others were present In 
the first place Gordon gave various manifestations of trance 
speaking and writing : — 

"After this the spirits desired the lights put out, and, every 
vestige and gleam of light being excluded, in the most pitchy 
darkness, a series of proceedings took place, which utterly and 
entirely disgusted me; of course, anything done in the dark is 
useless, so far as convincing people goes. We sat and listened, 
for about one hour and a half, to a perfect pandemonium of noises, 
bangs on the table as loud as could be made by hand or foot, 
loud slaps, bells ringing loudly, the table creaking, flapping its 
leaves and turning quite upside down, as was announced by the 
exclamations of those about it, Judge Edmonds continually ex- 
claiming, 'I'm touched — now I am tapped on the shoulder — hear 
that — now they are at my feet, now my head,' and then he would 
cry out, 'They are pulling my coat-tails — they are pulling me to- 
wards Margaretta (Fox) ' . . . . Meanwhile the white-haired (medium) 
was going on in the most extraordinary manner, crying out, 
seemingly scuffling and contending with spirits who wanted to take 
possession of him. At one time Dr. Gray says, ' They have lifted 
him up in the air, 1 and someone else rejoined, ' No, he is standing 
on his chair'; at length, amid a loud outcry, and exclamations 
of, ' Don't, I don't want to ; leave me alone,' accompanied by the 
noise of a struggle, he was dragged into the closet and shut up 
there ; this we knew from Dr. Gray's exclamations. Presently Dr. 
Gray was also sent in there, then Judge Edmonds, finally all the 
mediums and some others. We were then favoured with the most 
absurd series of noises from this closet that ever was heard : loud 
hangings, a chorus of Auld Lang Syne, sung by all the closetees, 
accompanied by raps on the door, and scrapings on an old violon- 
cello, which was in the closet, violent ringing of bells, which were 
afterwards hurled out into the room, and then rang all around a 
sort of accompaniment to the music in the closet . . . We left 

THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA 233 

them at last at half-past eleven still in there, the noises going on 
as loud and meaningless as ever." 1 

Fortunately, Partridge published a full report of the pro- 
ceedings at this stance in the New York papers, from which 
we learn that, in addition to Gordon and Cooley, E. P. Fowler 
and Mrs. Fox and her daughters were present The most 
interesting variation is in Partridge's account of the spirit 
lights seen at the beginning of the dark stance, which do not 
appear to have been visible to Elliott's correspondent 

" At the stage of the proceedings last alluded to it was proposed 
by someone to darken the room, in order to try whether the lights 
or sparkles known frequently to accompany the manifestations in 
former instances would be perceptible. It was accordingly done, 
and the lights were observed at different times and in different parts 
of the room — sometimes resembling phosphorescent flames, some- 
times forming luminous clouds moving about, sometimes like glisten- 
ing stars, crystals, or diamonds. Physical demonstrations increased in 
variety and force, and continued for three hours, • during which,' says 
Mr. Partridge, ' the Judge seemed to be in the possession of the spirits* 
Many things occurred to him, which he mentioned, that he alone 
could be conscious of, though we could perceive that something 
extraordinary was going on with and around him. Many things, 
however, also occurred which all could witness." 2 

In other respects — except for the omission of all mention 
of the " levitation " — the account given by Partridge agrees 
pretty closely with that furnished by Elliott's correspondent, 
the main difference being in the mental attitude of the reporter. 
Judge Edmonds himself, in describing this stance, states that 
his experience on that night finally convinced him that the 
manifestations were produced by no mortal agency. 8 

It is interesting to note that Edmonds professes to have 
seen on various occasions the odic light issuing " like a pale, 
shadowy smoke" from the magnet, the human head and 
fingers, and from the members of the circle before a stance. 4 

Almost the only experiences in these early days to which 
the name of experiments could be applied were those re- 
corded by Dr. Hare, sometime Professor of Chemistry in 
the University of Pennsylvania, and a member of many 

1 Mysteries, er Glimpses of the Supernatural, pp. 167, 168. 

* Quoted in Sights and Sounds, p. 120, etc The account given by Spicer is 
considerably abridged, and I have not had the opportunity of consulting the 
original. ' Spiritualism, by Edmonds and Dexter, vol. i. pp. 25-7. 

* Letters and Tracts, pp. 169, 170 ; from a letter to the New York Tribune, 
dated April, 1859. 

234 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

le ar ned societies. Even here there was nothing that deserved 
to be called scien tifi c investigation. The machinery, indeed, 
was not ill-devised, but its use did not dispense with the 
n ec essi t y for dose and continuous observation of the human 
agent; and there is no evidence that Hare recognised this 
n eces si t y , or took any steps to guard against trickery. 

He was, at die time when his attention was first called — in 
the summer of 1853 — to the spirit manifestations, already 
seventy-two years of age, and his book, 1 published two years 
later, shows him to have been ready — when once his first 
repulsion from the subject had been overcome — to accept 
without questioning the most amazing testimony, and to 
place implicit trust in the mediums with whom his investiga- 
tions were conducted. 

Briefly, Hare's apparatus was of two kinds. The first, a 
wooden board about four feet long, supported on a fulcrum 
about a foot from one end, and at the other end attached by 
a hook to a spring balance. A glass vessel filled with water 
was placed on the board near the fulcrum, between it and the 
spring balance ; a wire gauze cage attached to an independent 
support, and not touching the glass at any point, was placed 
in the water, and the medium placed one or both hands in 
the wire cage. In this position he could, of course, exercise 
no appreciable effect on the balance if he was effectually 
prevented from touching the apparatus at any other point. 
Nevertheless, on several occasions the balance snowed a varia- 
tion of weight, on one occasion indicating the exertion of a 
force of eighteen pounds at what was assumed to be the 
point of application. Gordon was the medium on this 
occasion ; but the medium generally employed for this class 
of manifestation was a little boy of eleven, of whom we shall 
hear more later. No details of the experiments are given, 
and there is no evidence that any measures were taken to 
prevent the medium from forcing up the short end of the 
lever. The experiment, indeed, is chiefly of interest as 
having apparently furnished the model for the more elaborate 
trials of a similar nature conducted some years later by Sir 
W. Crookes. 

The other machine, of which Hare invented several 
varieties, consisted essentially of a revolving disc, with the 
letters of the alphabet printed round its circumference, and 
attached to a table. The disc was actuated by a band pass- 
ing over a small wheel, attached to one leg of the table or 

1 Experimental Investigation: The Sfirtt Manifestations y etc., by Robert 
Hare, m.d. New York, 1055* 

THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA 235 

fastened to a fixed weight on the floor, so that as the table 
moved different letters would come under the pointer. The 
primary object of the device was to secure that the medium 
should not see what letters were indicated by the pointer. 
Further, it was sometimes sought, by placing on the table 
a small board supported on castors or on metal balls, and 
causing the medium's hands to rest on the board, to pre- 
vent die medium from exercising any direct force on the 
table except in a downward direction. Again no details 
are given of the experiments, not even, as a rule, the names 
of the medium and the persons present ; and there is no 
indication that any precautions were taken to guard against 
trickery on the part either of the medium or her friends. 
The only particulars of interest which Hare gives are that 
the spirits always expressed a dislike to the use of the board 
supported on castors or balls, and professed to find it ex- 
tremely difficult to give intelligible messages when the 
medium could not see the alphabet, because, as they ex- 
plained, it was in such a case necessary to see through 
Hare's eyes. Some "spirits," indeed, through the mouths 
of their mediums, refused to have anything to do with the 
machines, or tried and failed to produce any results. 1 

Even if we had the fullest confidence in Dr. Hare's com- 
petence as an investigator, it is clear that experiments of 
this kind, unless carried out with the most stringent pre- 
cautions, could carry little weight But his readiness to 
accept the most amazing and ludicrous accounts from others ; 
his own complete faith in the communications received from 
various spirit worthies — Washington, Franklin, etc.; and, 
finally, the simplicity shown in the following extract from 
a speech delivered at the New York Conference in September, 
1854, show that any confidence in his capacity for an investi- 
gation of this nature would be misplaced. I have not space 
to quote the whole speech, but a brief extract will no doubt 
suffice. Hare was on his way to attend the meeting of the 
American Association for the Advancement of Science at 
Montreal. He was accompanied by a boy-medium, ap- 
parently the same boy who was the medium in the balance 
experiments. 

" Next morning, while yet in their state-room on board the boat, 
they [i.e. Hare and the boy] found the door locked and the key 
missing. They searched for a long time unsuccessfully, when the 
spirits said it was in the bottom of the carpet-bag. But the key of 

1 Op. cU. % pp. 41-3, etc. 

236 EAKLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

the carpet-bag was also gone, when the spirits said it was at the 
bottom of the trunk, and on taking out the baggage they found it, 
and then found the key of the door at the bottom of the carpet-bag. 

"When they arrived at Montreal and put up at their hotel, he 
hunted his baggage for his toilet-case, but could not find it. The 
spirits told him it was under the bolster of his bed. He raised the 
bolster and searched, but could not find it He had his eye upon 
the boy all the time. The spirits told him to look again, and upon 
raising the bolster again, precisely where he had looked before, he 
found it It was impossible, he said, that the boy could have done 
this, for he stood in the same place all the time, and could not have 
moved without his seeing him. 

" The next evening they went to a large party, at the house of a 
lady, to hold a circle. They had packed the spirit-scope, balls, and 
other apparatus in the carpet-bag. There were many sceptics and 
disagreeable persons present, many counter-mediums, as he supposed. 
When they came to open the carpet-bag they could not find the 
key. They went to the table, but could not get any communica- 
tions. They entered into another room with the boy, and the spirits 
spelled out, by means of raps, that he would get the key before he 
got home. Whilst he was riding along the streets of Montreal on 
his way home the key came down upon his breast ! 

" On another occasion, while alone with the boy in their room, 
and after they had locked up the balls, spirit-scope, shaving-case, 
etc, in his carpet-bag, the balls were, in some inscrutable way, taken 
from the carpet-bag and fell upon him in a shower. Then came 
the box, razor-strap, etc., all falling, apparently, from above, on and 
around him." 1 

Among the most widely celebrated manifestations of these 
early days were the spirit-writings given through the medium- 
ship of Mr. E. P. Fowler, a younger brother of the well- 
known phrenologist The case is of special value for our 
present purpose as having been the leading case selected as 
illustrative of the phenomena in general, in a discussion 
between Brittan, editor of the Skekinah, and Dr. B. W. 
Richmond, a friendly sceptic, which was carried on in 1852. 2 

Mr. Fowler, a young medical student, was a member of the 
New York circle. This is his own account of the first spirit- 
writings, contained in a letter written at Brittan's request on 
March 26th, 1852, and published in the Shekinah: — s 

". . . On the night of the 21st November, 1851, while sleeping 
alone in the third story of the house, I was awakened about one 

1 Quoted in Modern American Spiritualism, by Emma Hardinge Britten, 
p. 118. London : J. Burns (no date). 

1 Republished in book form in the following year at New York. 
3 Vol L pp. 301-4. 

THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA 237 

o'clock by sounds of footsteps in my room. Looking up, I saw five 
men, some of them dressed in ancient costume, walking about and 
conversing together. Some of them spoke with me, and among 
other things told me not to be frightened, that they would not harm 
me, etc I attempted to rise, however, to go downstairs, but found 
that my limbs were paralysed. These strange visitants remained 
with me about three hours, and finally disappeared while going 
towards a window and when within about two feet of it. They did 
not open the window. During the succeeding night, and at about 
the same hour, I was again awakened in a similar manner, and saw 
several persons in my room. Some of those who were there on the 
previous night were present, with others whom I had never seen 
before. One of them had what appeared to be a box about 18 
inches square; it seemed to contain electrical apparatus. They 
placed the box on the table, and then electrical emanations, like 
currents of light of different colours, were seen issuing from the 
box. One of the company placed a piece of paper, pen, and ink 
on the lid of this box. The luminous currents now centred around 
the pen, which was immediately taken up and dipped in the ink, 
and without the application of any other force or instrument, so far 
as I could perceive, the pen was made to move across the paper, 
and a communication was made which I have since learned was in 
the Hebrew language. This information I received from Professor 
Bush, to whom the writings were submitted for translation, and 
whose letter addressed to you will accompany this statement Soon 
after three o'clock my new companions left me as they had done 
the previous night, taking the box with them. During the time 
they were in my apartment I was in possession of my natural 
senses, and not only saw them, but the furniture in the room, by 
means of the illumination which their presence caused ; and I also 
heard the clock strike and carriages passing in the street" 

In a later letter, dated August, 1852, 1 Fowler adds some 
particulars about other writings. Another piece of Hebrew 
was written in his room at three o'clock in the afternoon (date 
not stated), he having been previously requested by the spirits 
to leave the room for that purpose. This piece of Hebrew, 
like the other, was a quotation from the Old Testament 
Again, returning one day in the middle of December, 185 1, to 
his room, about three o'clock p.m., he found upon his table 
" written upon a sheet of drawing-paper which was incidentally 
left" there, the legend, "Peace, but not without Freedom," 
followed by the autographs of forty-three spirits. Subsequently, 
according to a statement signed on the 25th December, 185 1, 

1 Published in Richmond and Brittan's Discussion, p. 12. A much fuller 
account, by Fowler, is given in the Appendix to Edmonds' and Dexter's 
Spiritualism \ vol. i. pp. 443-51. 

238 EAKLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

by sixteen members of the New York circle, 1 the spirits, 
owing ostensibly to the omission of any history of the 
occurrence and the irregular mode in which the signatures 
of the attesting members of the circle had been affixed to the 
document, directed the medium to burn it, and undertook to 
write another. Accordingly, two pieces of parchment were 
placed on the table in Fowler's bedroom, and on the morning 
of the 23rd of December, when the medium arose, he found 
the same legend inscribed on the parchment, together with 
the signatures of fifty-six spirits, including many of the 
original signatories of the Declaration of Independence, in 
their characteristic handwriting. At a meeting held on the 
25th December the spirits were asked whether each wrote his 
own name on the parchment, and answered emphatically, 
" Yes ! " Thus far Mr. Fowler's own letters and the statement 
drawn up by the circle on the 25th December, 185 1. Later, 
in reply to Dr. Richmond's challenge in the Discussion, already 
referred to, a second and a fuller statement of the circumstances 
was drawn up and signed by eight witnesses. This later 
statement, and Brittan's covering letter, are alike undated, 
but from the dates of the corresponding letters of Richmond, 
it would appear to have been written in August or September, 
1852. 2 

Apart from internal evidence, the authenticity of the 
writings, it will be seen, depends exclusively on the testimony 
of the medium, a young medical student with a turn for 
drawing. It becomes important, then, to scrutinise the 
character of the writings themselves. A reproduction of the 
fifty-six spirits' autographs is given at the end of Mrs. Hardinge 

1 Published in No. 9 of the Spiritual Telegraph. 

3 Discussion, pp. 14-16. It is important to point out certain discrepancies in 
the evidence. 

(1) Fowler, in his own letter of 25th March, 1852, says the spirit signatures 
were written on the first occasion on a piece of paper " incidentally left ' in his 
room. In both of the statements signed by members of the circle it is expressly 
said that the paper was placed there by direction of the spirits. 

(2) Fowler says the writing was executed on the first occasion in the daytime, 
but the statement of the 25th December says that it was written upon " in the 
course of the night." The later statement agrees in this respect with Fowler's 
own version. 

(3) The earlier statement says that the medium awoke " on the morning of the 
23rd December," and found the second legend and set of signatures written on the 
parchment. The later statement says that the writing was executed " during the 
night of the 23rd December." 

The first two of these discrepancies were pointed out by Richmond in the 
Discussion. Brittan, in his reply, only alludes to one discrepancy, and without 
specifying its nature, or attempting to explain it, says that it is only apparent, 
being due to careless copying on his part It is clear that he has not even taken 
the trouble to understand the charge of inaccuracy which he attempts to refute. 

THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA 239 

Britten's Modern American Spiritualism, and the curious can 
examine it for themselves. Richmond, a not unsympathetic 
or unduly sceptical witness, as will be seen in the sequel, 
could not digest the spiritual autographs. After comparing 
them carefully with each other and with the originals which 
they counterfeited, he drew attention to many points of 
unlikeness with the originals, and to a common family re- 
semblance between themselves, and hinted pretty plainly that 
they were the work of one hand — and that hand the medium's. 1 
The only relevant point in Brittan's reply is that the tremulous- 
ness of some of the lines was due, not, as Richmond had 
suggested, to the slowness of the movement necessary to an 
unpractised forger, but to the roughness of the parchment 

An examination of the Hebrew writing proves still more 
illuminating. This had been submitted to the Swedenborgian 
George Bush, himself an occasional attendant at the circle, 
who writes of it, as quoted by Brittan in his first letter, 2 that 
"altogether the specimens are of a very extraordinary 
character, such as I cannot well convey by any verbal 
description." The letter then goes on to express Bush's own 
conviction of the medium's honesty. In replying, Richmond 
points out that Brittan has omitted one important sentence 
from Bush's letter, as originally printed in the Shekinah, and 
himself supplies the omission, viz. : " The first of these 
manuscripts was in Hebrew, containing a few verses from the 
last chapter of the prophet Daniel. This was correctly 
written, with the exception of several apparently arbitrary 
omissions, and one rather violent transposition of a word 
from an upper to a lower line." 8 Bush does not appear to 
have carried his analysis further ; but Richmond submitted the 
writing to two or three Hebrew scholars, one of whom, the 
Rev. W. Carter, a graduate of Yale, enters into details of the 
errors referred to. Carter points out that it is quite clear that 
the Hebrew was copied by a person so completely ignorant 
of the language as not even to know that it is written from 
right to left. Thus, the quotation begins in the middle of a 
line ; but it is the right half of the line (in Hebrew the beginning) 
which is copied, corresponding to the last part of the ninth 
verse of the twelfth chapter of Daniel, " and sealed till the time 
of the end? The first part of the next verse, " Many shall be 
purified, and made white, and tried," which no doubt made up 
the left half of the interrupted line, is omitted (except the 

1 Discussion^ pp. 45 ct seq. 

* Ibid. % pp. is, 19. Bush's letter was originally written at Brittan's request, 
and published in the Shikinah, voL i. pp. 305-7. * Rid. y p. 206. 

240 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

word " Many"), and the quotation continues, "Many but the 
wicked shall do wickedly \ and none of the wicked shall under- 
stand^ but the wise** In the original Hebrew words equivalent 
to u shall understand " form the conclusion of this verse. But 
these words in the " spirit " Hebrew come at the end of the 
quotation, i>. they have apparently been carried on from the 
right-hand extremity of the last line but one to the left-hand 
extremity of the last line. In English, of course, this would 
leave the order of the words unaffected. In the Hebrew it 
has the effect of taking the two last words of the tenth verse, 
and inserting them in the middle of the twelfth verse, making 
the end of die quotation read, "Blessed is he that waiteth and 
cometh to days a thousand three shall understand" l 

It is perhaps hardly necessary to consider further these 
particular instances of spirit-writing. It will be seen that the 
evidence for their production by spirits rests ultimately on 
the testimony of one man — the medium ; that the witnesses 
who have recorded the circumstances, and vouch for the 
medium's trustworthiness, are so little concerned to be ac- 
curate that several discrepancies may be detected even in the 
scanty records which they have published ; that the Spirit- 
ualist champion cannot see these discrepancies when they are 
pointed out to him ; that in quoting the testimony of his own 
Spiritualist expert he suppresses (no doubt in perfect good 
faith) the only passage which is calculated to damage his 
cause; that this Spiritualist expert, though admittedly a 
competent Hebrew scholar, is unable to appreciate the real 
significance of the mistakes which he points out ; and finally, 
that the claim of spirit authorship derives but questionable 
support from an examination of the writings themselves. 

That these deficiencies in the evidence were not conspicuous 
to the Spiritualists may be inferred from Brittan's conclusion 
on the matter in his controversy with Richmond : — 

" I leave this part of my subject with a single additional remark. 
If it be difficult to convince sane men that spirits wrote that parch- 
ment, the reason will be found to consist in their obstinate scepti- 
cism rather than in any defect in the testimony." 2 

But Richmond was critical of the phenomena only when, 
as in the case last considered, their authenticity seemed to 
involve the Spiritualist interpretation. In all other cases he 

1 A corresponding analysis of the errors in the Hebrew quotation, by Professor 
Vail, of Concord, together with a facsimile of the quotation, is published in 
Mattison's Spirit- Rapping VrweiUd, pp. 1 18-20. 

2 Discussion, p. 19. 

THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA 241 

shows himself fully as hospitable to new marvels as his 
opponent in the argument It is Richmond who first intro- 
duces the famous Ashtabula Poltergeist, which he uses to 
support his own view of the electro-odylic origin of the 
manifestations. Richmond's own account of this case was 
based mainly on oral evidence from two of the witnesses, 
Miss Martha Cowles and Mrs. Rachel Cowles, with whom he 
had a long-standing acquaintance. Later, Brittan procured 
an exhaustive history of the case from Mr. L. M. Austin, of 
Austinburg, Ashtabula County, Ohio, which is countersigned 
by Richmond's two informants and five other persons. 

Mr. Austin, dating his letter on the 4th February, 1853, 
begins characteristically by acknowledging Brittan's letter 
of the 19th instant, and then proceeds to tell the following 
story : — 

A young widow, H.» after the sudden death of her husband, 
came to reside with a neighbour in Austinburg, Mr. S. M. Cowles. 
Soon after her arrival she became a rapping medium. Later she 
went to Marlborough to study anatomy, and on her return to 
Austinburg in the autumn of 1851 told a weird story of various 
uncanny manifestations which had attended her during her recent 
studies. Shortly after similar disturbances broke out, in H.'s 
presence, in the Cowles' house. The stair-rods jumped up and 
followed H. when she went up to the bedroom. When she and 
her friend were in bed, in the dark, muskets, cartridge belts, candle- 
sticks, and other objects came from all quarters and piled them- 
selves in the middle of the room ; tables moved ; spirit raps were 
heard ; washstands and chairs started from their places when' H. 
came into a room ; pillows, brushes, boots, and other light articles 
flew around. At Marlborough, when she resumed her anatomical 
studies, the manifestations were still more outrageous. One night 
H. and her room mate, alarmed by the most frightful sounds, * be- 
held standing by their bedside the spectre of the corpse that they 
had been dissecting, all reeking and ghastly, as they had left it on 
the table, save that one of the arms was folded across the breast — a 
change which was actually found to have taken place when the 
remains were examined.' On another night H.'s brother, at her 
entreaty, came to the side of the bed where H. and her friend lay, 
'and saw by the moonlight a human skull dancing up and down 
over their heads.' 

Such, in brief, was the story. The account, it will be 
observed, is dated February, 1853, and the disturbances 
which the witnesses attest took place in the autumn of 185 1. 
Moreover, not one of the eight signatories appears actually 
to have seen anything remarkable. Most of the movements 

1. — R 

242 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

took place in the dark, or when H. was alone, or were wit- 
nessed by visitors to the house whose attestation is not given. 
No single incident is so described as to make it clear that 
anyone who signed the account professed to have ever seen 
anything in the act of moving. The disturbances at Marl- 
borough rest upon H.'s word alone. 

But Richmond is quite as ready to accept the phenomena 
as Brittan himself. The stair-rods, muskets, and candlesticks, 
he explains, moved from their place because they were 
attracted by the magneto-odylic energy radiating from H. 
He adds some details (gathered, as he alleged, in conversa- 
tion) which the signed account does not give, viz. that a glass 
tumbler, a watch with crystal glass, and a scent-bottle were 
not moved, owing, no doubt, as he points out, to glass not 
being susceptible to the magneto-odylic attraction. A pillow 
charged with the same force was projected towards a person 
who was badly frightened, and therefore negative. The 
chairs, tables, etc, moved in the wake of H. as she passed 
through a room, under the combined force of "electrical 
vacuum " and odylic attraction. The phenomena took place 
mostly in the dark, because light interferes with the evolution 
of this subtle force, and were most violent at Marlborough, 
because the emanations from the dead bodies in the dissect- 
ing room reinforced the odylic energies proceeding from the 
medium. 

Lastly, the vision of the dead body was a vision only, 
emanating by odylo-cerebral sympathy from the brain of 
the doctor, who had altered the position of the corpse after 
the ladies had left the laboratory. 1 

There were some manifestations at this time which, though 
apparently of rare occurrence, created a profound and lasting 
impression on all who witnessed them, and are constantly 
referred to in the early books and discussions. One of them 
was the phenomenon of human levitation ; another, of a table 
tilting at an extreme angle, without the objects resting on 
it falling off. The most circumstantial account which I have 
come across of the latter manifestation is contained in a com- 
munication made by Dr. R. T. Hallock at a meeting of the 
New York Conference on June 18th, 1852. As Dr. Hallock 
was himself the Secretary of the Conference, it may be 
presumed that the account preserved in the minutes, and 
quoted therefrom in the Spiritual Telegraphy is accurate. 
The sitting took place on June nth at the house of Mr. 
Partridge, and the medium was one Daniel D. Hume (Home), 

1 Discussion, pp. 89-91, 262-72, etc, etc 

THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA 243 

then at the beginning of his distinguished career. There were 
seven sitters : — 

"On the table round which we were seated were loose papers, a 
lead pencil, two candles, 1 and a glass of water. The table was used 
by the spirits in responding to our questions, and the first peculiarity 
we observed was, that, however violently the table moved, everything 
on it retained its position. The table, which was mahogany and 
perfectly smooth, was elevated to an angle of about 30 degrees, 
and held there, with everything on it remaining as before. It was 
truly surprising to see a lead pencil retaining a position of perfect 
rest on a polished surface inclined at such an angle. It remained as 
if glued to the table, and so of everything else on it The table was 
repeatedly made to resume its ordinary position and then its inclina- 
tion as before, as if to fasten on us the conviction that what we saw 
was no deception of the senses, but a veritable manifestation of spirit 
presence and of spirit power. They were then requested to elevate 
the table to the same angle as before, and to detach the pencil, 
retaining everything else in precise position. This was complied 
with. The table was elevated, the pencil rolled off and everything 
else remained. They were then asked to repeat the experiment, 
retaining the pencil and everything else upon the table stationary, 
except the glass tumbler, and to let that slide off. This also was 
assented to, all the articles retained their position but the tumbler, 
which slid off and was caught in the hands of one of the party as it 
fell from the lower edge of the table." * 

At another stance with the same medium a witness relates 
that he stood upon a table which canted to an angle of forty- 
five degrees without throwing him off. 8 

But unquestionably the most striking manifestation of spirit 
power was the levitation of the human body. This particular 
marvel was vouchsafed at a very early period of the move- 
ment Even in February, 1851, Sunderland writes in the 
Spirit World:* "We have been assured by eye-witnesses that 
Mr. Gordon has been taken up, and his body moved some 
distance, entirely by spiritual hands." 

About a year later, at the house of Dr. Gray, in New York, 
the same medium is said to have been carried through the air 
a distance of sixty feet 5 From Mr. Isaac Rehn, President of 
the Harmonial Society of Philadelphia, we have a detailed 
account, written in 1855, of a similar performance with the 

1 It is not stated that th« candles were lighted. 

9 Quoted in Brittan and Richmond, Discussion, pp. 249-50 ; also in Sights and 
Sounds, pp. 316-8. This feat is further considered in Book IV. chap. iii. below. 

* Sights and Sounds, p. 128. 4 VoL ii p. 62. 

* Telegraph Papers, voL ii. p. 198, vol. v. p. 195, etc. Brittan and Richmond, 
Discussion, p. 248. Capron, Modern Spiritualism, etc, p. 189. 

1 

244 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

same medium. The incident is said to have taken place 
u some two years since." 

" About the same time a company of persons, whose names, as far 
as I can recollect, I shall mention, were seated around two tables, 
joined together, in order to furnish room sufficient to seat the party. 
The house in which I then lived had two parlours, with folding 
doors. The two tables referred to occupied the entire length of the 
front parlour, leaving barely room enough for the chairs at the front 
end of the room ; the other end of the table extended quite to the 
folding doors, leaving, of course, no passage on either end. It so 
happened that I was seated at that end of the table projecting into 
the doorway. The medium, Mr. Gordon, was seated about midway 
of the tables, on the left, the other seats being occupied by the rest 
of the company. 

" After a variety of manifestations had occurred, the medium was 
raised from his seat by an invisible power, and, after some apparent 
resistance on his part, was carried through the doorway between the 
parlours, directly over my head, and his head being bumped along 
the ceiling, he passed to the further end of the back room, in which 
there was no one beside himself. 

"Although all the individuals present had not equally good 
opportunity of ascertaining the facts in this case, the room having 
been somewhat darkened, still his transit over the end of the table 
at which I was seated, and the utter impossibility of the medium 
passing out in other way than over our heads, his continued con- 
versation while thus suspended, and his position, as indicated by the 
sound, with other facts in the case, leave no reasonable doubt of the 
performance of the feat" l 

D. D. Hume figured in another widely celebrated case of 
the kind. A correspondent of Spicer's, in Boston, thus 
describes the occurrence, from report : — 

"One evening a unanimous request was preferred that the 
spirits would afford the party assembled some irrefragable evidence 
of their actual presence. To the utter amazement, as you may 
suppose, of the entire circle — prepared, as they doubtless were, 
for something strange — the medium was, on the instant, lifted into 
the air, and there suspended by invisible agency for a space of two or 
three minutes, without touching anything or anybody present^ 

This is the account of the incident as given by Brittan : — 8 

"On the 8th of August, 1852, several gentlemen were assembled 
at the residence of Ward Cheney, Esq., Manchester, Conn., where in 

1 Hare, op. cit. 9 pp. 291, 292. * Sights and Sounds, p. 131. 

3 Brittan and Richmond, Discussion, p. 248. 

THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA 245 

the course of the evening very remarkable demonstrations occurred. 
One of the editors of the Hartford Times was present, and from 
his account of the exhibition, as published in that paper, I cut the 
following paragraph : — 

" c Suddenly, and without any expectation on the part of the 
company, the medium, Mr. Hume, was taken up in the air 1 I had 
hold of his hand at the time, and I felt of his feet — they were lifted 
a foot from the floor! He palpitated from head to foot with the 
contending emotions of joy and fear which choked his utterance. 
Again and again he was taken from the floor, and the third time he 
was carried to the ceiling of the apartment, with which his hands 
and feet came in gentle contact I felt the distance from the soles 
of his boots to the floor, and it was nearly three feet ! Others 
touched his feet to satisfy themselves.' " 

Neither Brittan nor the anonymous Bostonian thought it 
necessary to mention that some time previously to the 
supreme manifestation the company had adjourned to a 
darkened room, ostensibly that they might see the " spiritual 
flashes of light said to have been vouchsafed to other 
investigators." 1 They saw apparently nothing, but they 
heard plenty of raps, and some of them felt Mr. Hume's 
boots. 

But no account of this marvellous form of manifestation 
would be complete without Dr. Hallock's testimony to what 
he witnessed at Philadelphia. At one of the meetings of the 
New York Conference, 

"Dr. Hallock stated that on the previous Sunday afternoon (in 
the course of his lecture) while, as he believed, every eye and all 
thoughts were directed towards him [*.*., Dr. Hallock, the lecturer], 
Mr. Henry Gordon, the well-known physical medium, who then sat 
at some distance from, but in front of him, in the perfectly well- 
lighted room, rose in the air, without any human aid, till the speaker 
beheld him floating so high that his feet just grazed the top of the 
seat, above which he hung in the air, where he swayed about from 
side to side, and turned partly around. By this time the attention 
of the entire congregation was rivetted on him, when he sank to the 
ground. The manifestation was imperfect on the part of the power 
that lifted him up, because it was afterwards declared by the spirits 
that they intended to have carried him over the heads of the entire 
congregation, and landed him on the rostrum, had the conditions 
permitted ; but it seemed that the intense astonishment and agita- 
tion of the audience had broken the conditions of passivity 
necessary for the fulfilment of their design, and so he sank 
suddenly to the ground. Still, there remained the phenomenon of 

1 Sights and Sounds, p. 129. 

246 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

his having been lifted up and suspended in the air without mortal 
aid ; in fact, in a manner which no mortal could have achieved. . . . 
The effect of this marvellous operation of spirits in a crowded 
assembly and the full light of day, instead of distracting the atten- 
tion of the audience from the address, intensified it to the utmost 
degree. ' I think I may say/ added Dr. Hallock, 'that I never was 
in an assembly where so much serene joy and spiritual exaltation 
was manifested. Each one felt that it was good to be there. 
I cannot describe that Pentecostal scene in words.' " 

I have not come across the testimony of any member of 
the audience who, according to Hallock, were witnesses with 
him of this marvellous sight, nor any other reference to the 
incident in the literature of Spiritualism. 1 

But of all the wonders of the time, few perhaps excited 
greater interest, or are more liberally attested, than the 
performances in Koons* " spirit-room." Jonathan Koons 
was a farmer living in a remote and mountainous district 
in the township of Dover, Athens County, Ohio. Early 
in 1852 he became interested in the Spiritualist movement, 
and it was revealed to him at a seance that all his eight 
children, and himself in a supereminent degree, were mediums 
for the spiritual forces. Thereafter, by direction of the 
spirits, he built, a few feet from his own house, a log building 
of one room, sixteen feet by twelve, to be used exclusively 
for spirit manifestations. The room was furnished with 
a spirit table and rack, supporting drums, triangles, tam- 
bourines, and other instruments of music, with a certain 
visible arrangement of wires, nowhere, so far as I can ascer- 
tain, precisely described, attached to some of the instru- 
ments, and having suspended from it bells, plates of copper 
cut into the shape of birds, and other objects. The mediums 
— generally Mr. Koons and his eldest son Nahum, a youth 
of eighteen, accompanied occasionally by other members 
of the family — sat at a smaller table in contact with the 
" spirit table " ; the sitters, to the number of twenty or more, 
sat on benches beyond — i.e. the mediums were between the 
circle and the spirit table. Phosphorus was placed ready in 
wet paper for the spirits to show themselves by. Doors and 
windows were then closed, so as to exclude the light, the 
candle was put out ; Mr. Koons began to play the fiddle, 
and the spirits responded with a concert, in which another 

1 Quoted in Modern American Spiritualism^ p. 279. The most probable 
explanation of this extraordinary statement is that Hallock suffered a hallucina- 
tion, of sight at the time, or of memory in the retrospect See below, Book IV. 

chap. iv. 

THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA 247 

fiddle, the drums, a guitar, banjo, accordion, French harp, 
the horn, tea bell, triangle, tambourine, etc., played their 
parts. Most of the witnesses appear to have been impressed 
more by the energy than the excellence of the resulting 
harmony ; more than one tells us with pride that the strains 
could be heard a mile off. But the music is sometimes 
described as exquisitely beautiful, or even seraphic ; occasion- 
ally a choir of angel voices would join in, but the words 
of the song were rarely articulate. The leading spirit would 
subsequently address the company, using for the purpose 
a horn or trumpet to speak through. Of the other mani- 
festations the following extract gives a fair idea : — 

" Mr. Koons then said, € King, it is very warm here ; won't you 
take Mrs. Gage's fan and fan us?' But before he had finished 
speaking, the tambourine began to fly around the room like 
lightning, breathing a strong current of wind and fanning all in the 
house. Then the phosphorus was taken up and darted around the 
room like flakes of lightning, and a hand began to develop. We 
talked with the voice while this process was going on, and tried to 
urge our spirit friends to write a communication for us. When the 
hand was formed, it passed around the room and shook hands or 
touched the hands of many of us. It took hold of my hand, and 
then of my wife's. We both felt the shape of a hand distinctly. 
It then got some paper and a pencil, and laying the paper on the 
table, right in front of us, began to write with great rapidity, 
covered one side of the sheet, turned it over again, wrote five lines, 
signed it, filled the rest of the page with flourishes, folded it, and 
placed it in my wife's hand. It then flew around the room, darting 
from the table up to the ceiling, there making three or four distinct 
knocks, and darting down and up, repeating the knocks a number 
of times in succession; it then passed all around the room, 
stopping and showing the hand to all that wanted to see it It then 
commenced darting around the room again, and snapping its fingers 
as loud as a man could do. It then threw the phosphorus in the 
back corner of the room, said 'Good night,' and was gone. 
Mr. Koons then lighted the candle, and my wife read the paper 
which was given her by the spirit hand." 

An extract from the message written under these con- 
ditions may perhaps be of interest The presiding spirit had 
been urged, by way of a test, to give the sitters, some of 
whom had come from a distance to consult him, the names of 
their deceased relatives personally present, as was commonly 
done by the rapping mediums. He thus excuses himself : — 

" On entering the assembly, he [the presiding spirit] looks around 
upon his anxious inquirers, and sees them attended with their re- 

r '• ^ 

248 EAELY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

spective safeguards, such as he never saw before. In the discharge 
of his official duty, however, he is necessitated to exclude himself 
from the direct view and intercourse of the safeguards, so as to be 
brought into a nearer relation to the corresponding parties. The 
interlocution accordingly takes place, when each one in turn begins 
to interrogate the speaker in his excluded position, on subjects 
relating to their excluded guard, of which the speaker knows but 
little or nothing, except the cognition of their presence on his 
arrival; and in order to acquaint himself with the circumstances 
and matters inquired after, so as to answer correctly, the speaker 
has to disencumber himself at every inquiry, and not only so, but 
would also fail to perform his devolved duty by submitting himself 
to the scrutiny and criticism of the corresponding parties." l 

It should be added that the spirits by whom these mani- 
festations were produced purported to be a spirit band of 
pre-Adamite men one hundred and sixty-five in number, of 
exceeding power and wisdom, bearing die generic name of 
King. It was from this circle, indeed, that the celebrated 
John King and his scarcely less famous daughter Katie, 
beloved of two generations of Spiritualists throughout the 
breadth of two continents, are said to be lineally descended. 

These performances appear to have been accepted by the 
Spiritualists with the same whole-hearted faith as any of 
the other manifestations described in this chapter. Hare 
devotes several pages of his book to discussing the evidence ; 
so at a later date does Mrs. Hardinge Britten ; * the 
Spiritual Telegraph* from the commencement of the 
phenomena admitted letters and articles from enthusiastic 
correspondents describing the marvels; and, finally, one of 
its editors, Charles Partridge, in May, 1855, went to Dover 
township, had several sittings, and recorded his experiences 
in a letter of some length in its columns. 4 

There were other physical manifestations at this date 
which time would fail me to recount : spirit-writing on slates ; 
writing in raised red lines on the bare arm or forehead ; 
formation of spirit hands — this last a prominent feature 
of D. D. Hume's stances; 6 miraculous materialisation of 

1 Letter from Mr. John Gage to Professor Hare, quoted in Hare's book, 
already cited, pp. 300, 301. 

2 Modern American Spiritualism, pp. 307-33. 

3 See e.g. Telegraph Papers, vol. 1. p. 424 ; voL iii. pp. 267, 352 ; voL vi. 
p. 132 ; vol. vii. p. 248, etc. 

4 In du Potet's book, Traill complet du Magnttisme Animal (Paris, 1856), 
a detailed account is given of a sitting with the Koons family by Dr. J. Barthet. 
On this occasion, in compliment to the nationality of the visitor, one of the 
written messages contained four words in French {pp. cil. 9 p. 517, etc.). 

• See e.g. Telegraph Papers, vol. viii. p. 293. 

THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA 249 

spiritual ointment; 1 the fire ordeal; 8 spirit lights; apports 
of objects, and so on. Indeed, there is but one conspicuous 
manifestation of present-day Spiri tualism which could not 
be paralleled from the records o fT85Q-5 — th e " materialisa- 
tion " of a complete human form! Ihere were,*" indeed, as 
we have seen, materialised hands, and some Spiritualists, 
like Dr. Gray, contended that the spirits habitually created 
temporary physical organisations, to enable them to deal 
with material objects. Others held, with Brittan, that the 
facts so far adduced hardly warranted such a hypothesis. 
One writer, indeed, Professor Mapes (Phoenix), discoursed 
learnedly on the means by which the semblance of such 
temporary organisms could be produced, in accordance with 
the kinetic theory of gases, with a minimum employment 
of actual material particles, provided a sufficiently intense 
energy of motion were imparted to them. 8 But, at any rate, 
these hypothetical organisations, with the single exception of 
the hand, had so far apparently been perceptible to the sense 
of touch alone. 

To quote further speoimens of the evidence for physical 
phenomena could hardly serve any useful purpose. The 
foregoing extracts afford sufficient examples of the best 
evidence which the most competent and distinguished 
Spiritualists of the time could offer for their belief, so far as 
it was based on purely material marvels. To the reader of 
to-day the mere statement of such belief on such grounds 
may well appear preposterous. Logical grounds for the 
belief — as logic is understood in the modern world — were 
clearly wanting. But the matter should not on that account 
be summarily dismissed, as a pale recrudescence of mediaeval 
superstition. For which of us is in better case ? The causes 
of belief in the last analysis are not logical. It should not 
be overlooked that, in die present instance, the men who 
believed, if not of high intellectual distinction, had at least 
proved themselves capable, and had won more or less repu- 
tation amongst their fellow-citizens, as merchants, preachers, 
University professors, physicians, lawyers, legislators, and 
men of science ; that many of them had embraced such 
belief when still in the prime of life and the ripeness of their 
judgment ; that the same beliefs are held by a large number 
of persons even at the present day. We may feel assured 

1 Supramundatu Facts t etc, p. 129, edited by T. L. Nichols. London, 1865. 
' Telegraph Papers, vol. ii. p. 451 ; voL iii. p. 189. Modem American 
Spiritualism, p. 205. 

* Ibid., vol. viL pp. 117, 149, 185, etc. 

250 EAELY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

that in one form or another the belief in such marvels, as it 
has revived again and again in the past, will manifest itself 
again and again in generations to come ; and history shows 
that those who sneer at such credulity without attempting to 
understand its causes are perhaps themselves not the least 
likely to fall victims, precisely because they do not under- 
stand. 

Some further light will be thrown upon these causes during 
the consideration, in the next two chapters, of trance utter- 
ances and other psychological phenomena. But one remark 
may be made at this point However large a part the 
personal craving for assurance of a future life may have 
played in predisposing the average Spiritualist to accept the 
phenomena as genuine, it is clear that this was not the only, 
perhaps not even the chief cause of belief. The whole 
history of Animal Magnetism in France and of Mesmerism 
in England testifies to the contrary ; and for further proof we 
have die curious fact that men like Mahan, Richmond, and 
Rogers, who rejected the Spiritualistic interpretation, gave as 
blind a faith to most of the alleged marvels as any 
Spiritualist of them all. To champion the cause of truth 
disinherited is always an attractive part; so attractive that 
many men are too little careful to scrutinise the title of 
each pretender to the inheritance. 

CHAPTER IV 

CLAIRVOYANCE AND SPEAKING WITH 

TONGUES 

WHEN we turn to the psychological phenomena we 
find that the records of this period add little or 
nothing to the evidence already furnished by the 
Mesmerists for the operation of some special faculty of 
clairvoyance, or thought-transmission. Not, indeed, but 
that the Spiritualists of the time firmly believed in the 
existence of such a faculty, as in some cases an alternative 
explanation to communication with spirits through the 
organism of the medium, and held that they had themselves 
received abundant proofs of its operation. That the medium 
should answer mental questions, and give information con- 
cerning friends long dead and private family matters, was 
indeed so common an occurrence that Edmonds and others 
excuse themselves from the superfluous task of furnishing 
evidence in detail. When, however, details are given, we 
find as an almost invariable rule that the information came 
through the raps, and there can be no reasonable doubt that 
in such cases the real explanation of the mystery lies in the 
cunning and keen observation of the medium. 

It is, indeed, a striking confirmation of this view that, 
though writing mediumship was quite common at a very 
early date in the history of the movement, it was only by 
exception — an exception of the rarest occurrence — that a 
medium undertook to reply in writing to a question of which 
the answer was presumably unknown to him. 1 There was 
no obvious reason for this curious reserve, since the com- 
municating intelligences were wont to be voluble enough on 

1 Two cases are Quoted by Mrs. Hardinge Britten {History of Modern 
American Spiritualism). In the first (p. 224) the medium wrote out a copy of the 
first of a list of questions, but asked that the others should be answered by the 
raps. The other case (p. 257) is second-hand, and is open to other evidential 
objections. 

»5i 

252 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

all other matters, in heaven or elsewhere, and when speaking 
through the mouth or writing through the hands of their own 
relatives, to whom the facts would be known, no such reti- 
cence was observed. The inference is irresistible that what 
the medium did not know the " spirit " could not tell. 

There are, indeed, a few instances at this time, which were 
widely advertised and recorded with all due circumstance, of 
mental telegraphy at stances. But for the success of this 
form of mental telegraphy it appeared to be essential to 
have a professional medium at each end of the wire. The 
earliest recorded instance of this kind is found in Capron 
and Barron's History} 

On the 1 2th February, 1850, Mrs. Draper, of Rochester, 
had in the trance an interview with Benjamin Franklin, who 
gave her, as a test, a violent electric shock, by which her 
body was visibly shaken, and undertook in a few days to 
provide an illustration of spiritual telegraphy. The first 
attempt, three days later, met with only partial success. An 
appointment was, however, made for the following Wednesday. 

" On the day appointed, February 20th, the above-named persons 
convened ; some of the company were late, and as soon as order 
was observed, the question was asked, * What are the directions of 
Benjamin Franklin?' A. * Hurry; first magnetise Mrs. Draper.' 
This was done, she immediately saying, 'He says we are behind 
the time, but he will forgive us this time; we must do better in 
the future.' The company was divided as follows: Mr. Jervis, 
Mr. Jones, Mrs. Fox, Mrs. Brown, Catharine Fox, in a retired 
room, with two closed doors between them. Mrs. Draper, Mrs. 
Jervis, Mr. Draper, Mr. Willetts, and Margaretta Fox remained 
in the parlor. Sounds unusually loud were heard in each room 
by either company, as before, resembling the telegraphic sounds. 
They were so unusual that Miss Fox became alarmed, and said, 
1 What does all this mean ? ' Mrs. Draper, while her countenance 
was irradiated with animation, replied, * He is trying the batteries.' 
Soon there was the signal for the alphabet, and the following com- 
munication was spelled to the company in the parlor : ' Now I am 
ready, my friends. There will be great changes in the nineteenth 
century. Things that now look dark and mysterious to you will be 
laid plain before your sight. Mysteries are going to be revealed. 
The world will be enlightened. I sign my name, Benjamin Franklin. 
Do not go into the other room.' 

"After waiting a few minutes, Mr. Jervis came into the parlor, 
saying that he was directed by the sounds to come and compare 
notes. They read as follows: Q. 'Are you all right?' Answered 
affirmatively; signal for alphabet, and the following was spelled: 

1 Pages 94, 95. 

SPEAKING WITH TONGUES 253 

* There will be great changes in the nineteenth century. Things that 
now look dark and mysterious to you will be laid plain before your 
sight Mysteries are going to be revealed. The world will be en- 
lightened. I sign my name, Benjamin Franklin. Go in the parlor 
and compare notes.' Mr. Jervis returned to his company, and by 
alphabet was spelled, 'Now all go into the parlor.' The notes 
were then compared in presence of the whole company. Q. ' Is 
there anything more from Dr. Franklin ? ' A. 'I think I have given 
tests enough for this day.' Q. ' Will it not be better to keep this 
matter private?' A. 'No; it should be published.' Q. 'In what 
paper ? ' A. ' In Democrat or Magnet? " * 

Later this form of telegraphy without wires became com- 
paratively common ; messages were exchanged between New 
York and Philadelphia, Baltimore and Pittsburgh, New York 
and Washington, and so on. Professional mediums were 
always present at each end of the line ; the most effective 
batteries being Messrs. Gordon, Conklin, Whitney, Mrs. French, 
and Mrs. Long. 1 There were numerous other instances of 
spurious clairvoyance, always through professional mediums, 
including the pellet test, which need not be further discussed 
at present 2 

But when we turn from the phenomena of the stance-room 
to instances of a less obviously manufactured kind, we find a 
marked deterioration in the quality of the evidence. The 
records of the first class are unimpeachable. We can have no 
reasonable doubt that identical messages were given to the 
expectant circles in Mrs. Draper's house at Rochester, though 
we may hesitate to credit the results either to Franklin or 
to thought-transference. But in other cases the attestation 
is of the most slovenly and inadequate character. When, for 
instance, Judge Edmonds tells us that his friends in New 
York were clairvoyantly informed of his doings on a voyage, 
we can only regret that the judge's legal training did not 
suggest to him the need for substantiating this statement by 
furnishing extracts from his own diary and the minutes of 
the circle ; and that the clairvoyant did not catch a glimpse 
of him when he was engaged in some less readily conjectur- 
able occupation than talking about Spiritualism. 8 When 
Mr. Jarvis, a Methodist clergyman, narrates that his friend 
Pickard received the news of the death of his child, and 

1 Hare, op. cit., p. 294 ; Telegraph Papers, vol. iv. pp. 79, 80, 447 ; voL vi. 

P. 447. 

' See e.g. Telegraph Papers, voL iiL, pp. 101, 140 ; voL v. p. 40a Modem 

American Spiritualism, op. 172, 191, 193, 201, 252, etc 

* Spiritualism, by Edmonds and Dexter, p. 3a 

254 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

actually started on his homeward journey, before the arrival 
of the annunciatory telegram, we again note the unfortunate 
omission from Mr. Jams' letter (itself undated) of precise 
hours and other particulars, and the absence of any account 
from the person chiefly concerned. 1 Or, once more, in the 
account given, apparently in entire good faith, by Mr. Willetts, 
one of the early Quaker converts, of two or three instances 
where excellent advice was given him by spirits in business 
matters, exhibiting apparently superhuman knowledge of the 
iinotives and future actions of third persons, we again note 
with regret that Mr. Willetts did not think it necessary to 
date his communication nor to offer any corroborative testi- 
mony. 2 Not less striking than the poor quality of the 
evidence actually forthcoming in such cases is the paucity 
of the records. The same examples — as was noted by Mahan 
and other early critics — are quoted over and over again by 
writers and lecturers on the subject Even Mrs. Hardinge 
Britten, the later historian of the movement, whilst explain- 
ing that she is embarrassed in her selection by the wealth 
of the material at hand, including over two hundred narratives 
in her own possession, contents herself with quoting as ex- 
amples of this early time the three narratives here referred 
to from Capron and Barron's book and one other. 8 

In nearly all cases we find that the Brother, Wife, or Child 
who purported to communicate through the medium — when 
raps were not the vehicle of conversation — seems to have been 
taken on trust There are hardly any detailed accounts of 
actual proof of their claim being asked for or furnished ; whilst, 
on the other hand, there are several cases recorded where a 
dead relative or friend greeted the anxious inquirer, and 
furnished circumstantial proofs of decease, who was afterwards 
found alive and well. In one case, acting upon information 
received through the medium, the dead man's relatives dug 
for his body in a swamp, and after an arduous and unsuccess- 
ful search, learnt that the murdered man was sawing lumber 
in the next county. 4 

1 Capron and Barron, History -, pp. 38, 39. a Ibid., pp. 50-3. 

* Modern American Spiritualism, pp. 47-55. Other instances of alleged 
clairvoyance, thought-transference, etc., at this time will be found in Capron and 
Barron, op. cit., p. 54 ; Asa Mahan, Modern Mysteries \ etc, pp. 227, 228 ; Adin 
Ballou, Modern Spirit Manifestations, pp. 82, 112 ; Spicer, Sights and Sounds, 
p. 307, etc ; in the Prefaces and Appendices to Edmonds and Deleter's Spirit- 
ualism ; in Mrs. Hardinge Britten's History, pp. 136-40, 253 ; Richmond and 
Brittan's Discussion, pp. 198, etc ; and in the Spiritual Telegraph. 

4 Spirit World, voL iii., p. 38; see also ibid., pp. 36, 37 ; Asa Mahan, op. 
cit., pp. 176, 177, etc, etc 

SPEAKING WITH TONGUES 255 

There are a few cases, however, which excited considerable 
notoriety, of a spirit furnishing detailed evidence of his 
identity. Probably the best -known case is that of John 
Chamberlain. At a circle held in Waterford, N.Y., on the 
5th and 6th March, 1853, there communicated, through the 
mediumship of Mr. John Proper, one John Chamberlain, who 
claimed to have fought in the Revolutionary War, to have 
frequently seen Washington, and to have died at Point 
Pleasant, New Jersey, on the 15th January, 1847. Further, 
he said that he had been the father of eleven children. The 
postmaster of Point Pleasant was applied to, and all these 
details (except the having seen Washington) were found to 
be correct The case was looked upon at the time as a 
remarkable proof of spirit identity : and John Chamberlain 
may perhaps be regarded as the prototype of Abraham 
Florentine, who communicated some twenty years later 
through the Rev. W. Stainton Moses. It is perhaps hardly 
necessary to point out that the evidence, in the earlier case as 
in the later, depends primarily on the good faith of the 
medium. And even if we could be satisfied of the good faith, 
it would be almost impossible to exclude the possibility that 
a latent memory might have been revived in the trance. 1 

There is, however, one case recorded at this time to which 
it is more difficult to apply this explanation. On the 5th of 
August, 1854, there died at St Louis one O. F. Parker. On 
the following day, at Maryville, Kentucky, Mrs. Ferguson, 
wife of the Rev. J. B. Ferguson, gave automatically — orally, it 
would seem, though this is not expressly stated — a long 
communication purporting to be addressed by O. F. Parker 
to Mr. Ferguson, who was his cousin and close friend. As 
proof of identity, he referred, in the first place, to a conversa- 
tion between them some time before on a peculiarly intimate 
matter. The writing then went on : — 

" But you shall have other evidence. My books I ordered to be 
sold to defray my funeral expenses; but it was not done. I am 
afraid, too, that there will be some flaw picked in my life policy, and, 
if so, I wish you to order my books to be sold to pay my debts, and 
if they fail, do not fail from any delicacy of feeling to write to my 
mother, and she will have all properly settled The policy now is in 
the hands of Mr. Hitchcock. 

"To show you further that I am he, I will remind you of the bill 
you paid Mr. Hough. The medium, I know and you know, knows 
nothing of that. I disliked, in your condition, pressed as I knew 

1 Telegraph Papers, voL i pp. 69, 7a Capron, Facts and Fanaticisms, pp. 
284-7. For other cases, see Telegraph Papers, voL L p. 302 ; vol v. p. 138. 

1. 

256 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

you were with your own obligations, to have you add that to your 
many kindnesses. You must pay yourself." 

Other matters were also referred to, and there were in- 
terspersed reflections and exhortations of a general kind. 
Mr. Ferguson thus comments on the communication : — 

"Truth and candour require me to state that the evidence of 
identity presented by the above communication was overwhelming. 
At the time it was received the only account we had respecting his 
death was a brief telegraphic despatch. We have since had every 
particular confirmed . . . His life policy to which he refers was, from 
some neglect, without an endorsement of the payment of his pre- 
miums, which fact was not known to any of us till six weeks after his 
death. It was allowed, however, by the generous justice of the 
company, without difficulty, and without the knowledge on their 
part of this fact 

"At the time Mr. P. gave us the spiritual communication I sup- 
posed the policy to be in the hands of Mr. W. Meriwether, of 
Kentucky, for whose security it was issued. In the last conversation 
with respect to it with Mr. P. in life, he informed me it was his 
intention to leave it with Mr. M., and on his way to St Louis he 
stopped in Kentucky for that purpose. I mention these facts and 
leave them to make their impression, which no honest man can 
resist 

"It should also be stated that at the same moment, upon my 
return to Nashville from Kentucky, where the above was received, 
some eleven days after the death of Mr. P., when I handed it to 
Mr. M. C. C. Church, he handed me letters from St. Louis detailing 
the circumstances of Mr. P.'s death and the state of his effects, 
confirming the particulars given from the spirit world. Of course, no 
language could express our gratification at the incontrovertible 
evidence of the reality of our intercourse with the spirit of our worthy 
relative. There are no less than eleven distinct particulars stated in 
the communication, which could not have been stated under the 
circumstances by any other than the spirit of our cousin friend." l 

It would, of course, have been more satisfactory if Mrs. 
Ferguson's version of the incident had also been forth- 
coming, and if it could have been made quite clear that she, 
in her normal state, had no knowledge of the dead man's 
affairs. But even as it stands the narrative is of consider- 
able interest, and is certainly one of the most detailed and 
best -authenticated cases of the time. Ferguson gives other 

1 Spirit Communion : a Record of Communications from the Spirit Sphere^ etc., 
pp. 41-8. By J. B. Ferguson. Nashville, 1854. 

SPEAKING WITH TONGUES 257 

cases of the kind, some with other mediums, but less striking 
and insufficiently detailed. 1 

One other class of phenomena which is claimed as furnish- 
ing evidence of supernormal knowledge remains to be con- 
sidered. We find occasionally in the literature of the period 
accounts of speaking " with tongues," and forced vociferation, 
which recall the histories of possession amongst various 
religious sects. What has been already said in a former 
chapter* on the Ursuline Nuns of Loudun, the Tremblers 
of the Cevennes, and other earlier cases, will help to explain 
the American outpourings. But the differences are suffi- 
ciently marked to justify a detailed examination. 

The manifestations amongst the American Spiritualists 
from 1848 and onward were pitched in a much lower key. 
There were, as a rule, no convulsions, rigidity, or insensi- 
bility, such as we find amongst some of the more extreme 
cases, even in Irving's congregation. But there seems no 
reason to doubt that the phenomena, when not deliberately 
counterfeited by professional mediums, were of the same 
type ; that the utterance was unpremeditated and involuntary, 
and the subject generally in a state of trance or ecstasy. 
Moreover, the outpourings were often accompanied by danc- 
ing and rhythmic gestures which represented, no doubt, the 
more violent movements of the Nuns of Loudun and the 
Convulsionaries of St Medard, and appear occasionally, as 
in the earlier outbreaks, to have been contagious. 

The following account illustrates at once the epidemic 
nature of the influence, and the tendency of the utterance 
to assume the form of an "unknown" tongue, at least a 
tongue presumably unknown to both medium and audience : — 

"SPIRITS IN KEOKUK. 

"From a letter dated Keokuk, Iowa, March 7th, 1854, signed 
William Wittinmyer, we are informed that two mediums were de- 
veloped at circles held on the 28th and 30th of January. One of 
them was influenced to speak Latin and translate the same into 
English, to sing in the Swiss language and speak in an Indian 
tongue, and also to delineate various Indian characteristics. The 
Indian spirit claimed to be a Chippewa. The other medium was 
made to deliver an oration on the bad treatment the Indians had 
received from the white people, after which the spirits, through the 
two mediums, held an earnest and lengthy oral interview, closing 

1 See also Dr. Dexter's testimony, in his Preface to Spiritualism (Edmonds and 
Dexter), and Rev. A. E. Newton's account of a conversation with his deceased 
lather through a medium, quoted by Hare, op. cit. y p. 33a 

* Book I. chap. i. 

I. — S 

-*. 

258 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRfftJALISM 

with a majestic anthem, improvising words first in some Indian 
dialect, then in the English language, praising God for sending 
messengers to proclaim glad tidings of great joy to the children of 
men." 1 

There are numerous accounts of similar stances in the 
literature of the time, but there is rarely any evidence that 
the M languages" spoken were anything but a succession of 
meaningless sounds. The next extract, however, introduces 
a new feature — the writing in tongues. 

"The friend who briefly narrates his spiritual experience in the 
following letter is a clergyman of expanded views and liberal 
culture: — 

"'Key West, May 10, 1853. 

"'Friends Partridge and Brittan, — One week ago I com- 
menced writing in my room, alone, with an ease and facility, if 
possible, far above my usual voluntary writing. Since the first 
effort I have conversed in writing with a number of spirits of 
different degrees of intelligence. I have been a medium for the 
Greek, Latin, French, and Spanish languages. The last-mentioned 
I am entirely ignorant of. With the other three I have heretofore 
had some acquaintance. — A. Gage.' " 8 

Judge Edmonds is the chief source of information on both 
forms of manifestation. Of his own knowledge he enumerates 
seven instances, two of them being his daughter and his niece, 
of whose performances he gives, in a letter dated October 27th, 
1857, the following account : — 

" On another occasion some Polish gentlemen, entire strangers to 
her, sought an interview with Laura [Miss Edmonds], and during it 
she several times spoke in their language words and sentences which 
she did not understand, but they did; and a good deal of the 
conversation on their part was in Polish, and they received answers, 
sometimes in English and sometimes in Polish. The English she 
understood, but the other she did not, though they seemed to 
understand it perfectly. 

" This can be verified only by Laura's statement, for no one was 
present but her and the two gentlemen, and they did not give their 
names. 

" The incident with the Greek gentleman was this : One evening, 
when some twelve or fifteen persons were in my parlor, Mr. E. D. 
Green, an artist of this city, was shown in, accompanied by a 
gentleman whom he introduced as Mr. Evangelides, of Greece. He 

1 Telegraph Papers, vol. iv. p. 409. a lbid. % vol. i. p. 253. 

Exki 

SPEKKING WITH TONGUES 259 

spoke broken English, but Greek fluently. Ere long, a spirit spoke 
to him through Laura, in English, and said so many things to him 
that he identified him as a friend who had died at his house a few 
years before, but of whom none of us had ever heard. 

" Occasionally, through Laura, the spirit would speak a word or a 
sentence in Greek, until Mr. E. inquired if he could be understood 
if he spoke in Greek. The residue of the conversation, for more 
than an hour, was, on his part, entirely in Greek, and on hers some- 
times in Greek and sometimes in English. At times Laura would 
not understand what was the idea conveyed, either by her or him. 
At other times she would understand him, though he spoke in Greek, 
and herself when uttering Greek words. 

" . . . My niece, of whom I have spoken, has often sung Italian, 
improvising both words and tune, yet she is entirely unacquainted 
with the language. Of this, I suppose, there are a hundred 
instances. 

"One day my daughter and niece came into my library and 
began a conversation with me in Spanish, one speaking a part of 
a sentence and the other the residue. They were influenced, as I 
found, by the spirit of a person whom I had known when in Central 
America, and reference was made to many things which had 
occurred to me there, of which I knew they were as ignorant as they 
were of Spanish. 

" To this only we three can testify. 

"Laura has spoken to me in Indian, in the Chippewa and 
Monomonie tongues. I knew the language, because I had been two 
years in the Indian country.' 1 1 

Judge Edmonds, it will be observed, does not say how far 
his own acquaintance with Spanish or Indian went, nor doqs 
he in any instance give examples of the sentences actually 
spoken, nor any proof of his statement that the two young 
ladies knew nothing of the languages which they used, nor 
the dates of any of the incidents, nor any corroboration from 
the mediums themselves or any other person to support his 
own unaided memory. We learn, however, from another 
passage 2 that the conversation with the Greek had taken 
place some time in 1854, about three years before this, the 
only detailed account of it which I have seen, was written. 

His testimony to a corresponding manifestation with two 
professional mediums possesses a much higher evidential 
value, for a contemporary account was preserved in his 
diary. 

" November 3rd, 1852. There was a special meeting of the Circle 
of Hope last evening, to meet some of our friends from Albany. . . . 

1 See Letters and Tracts^ pp. IIO-I2. 

2 Spiritualism, by Edmonds and Dexter, vol. ii. p. 45. 

260 EAELY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

Mr. Ambler was soon thrown into the magnetic state, etc. . . . After 
he came out of the trance state Mrs. Shepherd was affected, and 
spoke in several languages. She occasionally spoke English. . . . 
And she continued for an hour or two thus to speak in some foreign 
language. It seemed to us to be Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese. . . . 
Mrs. Mettler was then thrown into a trance state, and she was 
developed for the first time in her life to speak in diverse tongues. 
She spoke in German, and what seemed to be Indian. 

"And they two, Le. Mrs. Shepherd and Mrs. Mettler, then for 
some time conversed together in these foreign languages. 

"Occasionally they spoke in English, and sometimes in broken 
English." 1 

Edmonds does not say whether he himself knew German, 
and the identification of the other foreign languages is, it 
will be seen, left ambiguous. 

But besides testifying in his own person, Edmonds, early 
in 1859, appealed in the Banner of Light for evidence of 
this power, and received nineteen replies, giving in all, on 
the personal knowledge of the writers, no less than thirty-four 
cases of persons who occasionally spoke or wrote in the 
"tongues." Out of these thirty-four cases there are two — 
and only two — instances in which sentences in a foreign 
(/>. a recognised foreign) language were written. In both 
cases the circumstances were attested by several witnesses, 
the evidence is recent, and the writings — French, German, 
Latin, Greek, Gaelic, Chinese, etc — were preserved and are 
still open to inspection. The mediums were both pro- 
fessional, viz. A. D. Ruggles, who had acted as medium for 
Professor Hare, and J. V. Mansfield, who, from his skill in 
reading and answering sealed letters, left in his custody for 
that purpose, had earned the title of the " Spirit Postmaster." 

The evidence, it will be seen, in these two cases is in most 
respects unimpeachable; the only point on which the most 
stiffnecked unbeliever could desire more rigorous proof is 
on the medium's complete ignorance of the languages written, 
a point on which the medium himself is of course the only 
competent witness. 

Amongst private mediums there are eight cases recorded 
(six in one circle), also recent and on fairly good evidence, 
of sentences being written in languages unknown to the 
mediums. But these languages were also unknown to the 
sitters or to anyone else, and had either not been identified 
at all, or had been identified, on the authority of the spirits 

1 Letter and Tracts, p. 219. 

.r 

SPEAKING WITH TONGUES 261 

themselves, as dialects spoken in the South Sea Islands or 
other remote regions. 

When we turn to the question of speaking, as distinguished 
from writing, we find the same characteristics. There is 
excellent evidence for Mr. Ruggles speaking in French (a 
language which, according to his own statement, he did not 
understand) ; and fairly good evidence for other professional 
mediums — Mrs. Warner, Mrs. Thompson, Mr. Hersley — 
speaking in German, French, Indian-, and other languages. 
But the fifteen cases in which mediums who were apparently 
non - professional are alleged to have spoken in French, 
German, Italian, Chinese, Indian, or other recognised foreign 
language, include no recent account of the phenomenon. In 
four of the accounts the date of the occurrence is not given \ 
in the remainder the time ranges from "about a year" toi 
some four years previously. The gift of tongues had not 
ceased amongst professional mediums when Judge Edmonds 
issued his appeal, nor amongst private mediums so far as 
relates to speaking or writing in unknown tongues; and 
it is difficult to resist the suggestion that the absence of 
any records less than a twelvemonth old amongst private 
mediums of speech in foreign languages was not a mere 
accident, but that past experiences of this kind " could only 
win a glory from their being far," and that had Edmonds 
issued his appeal for evidence in the spring of i860 instead 
of the spring of 1859, the year 1858 would have proved as 
fruitful as any of its immediate predecessors. 

Moreover, the evidence, alike for the medium's ignorance 
in the normal state of the language alleged to have been 
spoken, and for the identification of the language itself, is 
extremely defective. Many of the instances are vouched for 
by persons ignorant of the language, on the authority of 
other persons, themselves imperfectly acquainted with it, 
whose first-hand testimony is not given. Two young men 
are said to have spoken a language which was " recognised 
by my father and brother as the Chinese, they having been 
acquainted with many of them in California, but could not 
speak the language." 1 Other mediums are said to have 
spoken Italian — " We learned that from a gentleman present, 
who understood the Italian language partially (I have for- 
gotten the gentleman's name)." 2 Mr. Sizer Barnum's Indian 
songs were recognised by an aged widow lady who "had 
lived when young near or among a tribe of Indians in the 
State of New York." 3 

1 Page 222. * Page 225. * Page 244. 

262 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

It is curious to note that in many cases the proof of the 
language being " Indian/' etc, is based upon the " interpre- 
tation" through the mouth, now of die same, now of 
another medium, of an unintelligible utterance previously 
given. 1 

If we turn to the literature of the movement at large, we 
shall find abundant evidence for similar phenomena, but all 
pointing in the same direction. Thus a writer in the North 
American Review, April, 1855, relates that a medium of his 
acquaintance, a lady of "transparent ingenuousness," pro- 
duced three poems purporting to have been written by the 
spirit of John Milton. One of these poems was headed 
" A Latin Sonnet " ; it was not a sonnet, nor was it written 
in Latin, or in any other language ; but it had throughout 
a Latin sound, and the terminations were all Latin. The 
explanation, no doubt, is to be found, as the reviewer suggests, 
in the fact that the lady's father had for years prepared young 
boys for college, and she herself had probably in her youth 
often heard Latin read aloud. Again, we read that Mr. E. 
McBride, of Iowa, a converted infidel, received a treatise 
on the millennium from the spirit of the Rev. W. C. Davis, 
written in an "unknown tongue," and wrote to the editor 
of the Spiritual Telegraph to ask him where he could get 
it translated. The editor comments that probably thousands 
of pages of this kind of spiritual cryptography had been 
produced in the past two or three years. 2 Tallmadge had 
seen a lady translating the Old Testament into hieroglyphics, 
which, the spirits told her, represented the original language 
in which it was written. 8 Some of these spirit languages 
were so condensed that e.g. the phrase Ki-e-lou-cou-ze-ta 
required no less than forty-five words to furnish an adequate 
translation in English. 4 

Sometimes, it may be surmised, though the evidence is 
insufficient to substantiate such an inference, these later 
ecstatics may have spoken with fluency in a language with 
which in their normal state they were imperfectly acquainted, 
as seems to have been the case with the Tremblers of the 

1 See Letters and Tracts, pp. 215-64. 

2 Telegraph Papers, vol. i. p. 422. 

3 Healing of the Nations, pp. 59, 60. 

4 Mattison's Spirit- Rapping Unveiled, p. 73. For other instances of speaking 
or writing in tongues, see Nichols, Supramundane Facts, pp. 56, 57 ; Mattison, 
op. cit., p. 76 ; Edmonds and Dexter, Spiritualism, vol i. p. 87 ; Mrs. Hardinge 
Britten, Modern American Spiritualism, p. 388 ; Telegraph Papers, vol. i. 
PP- 37. 253, 332 ; vol. iii. 7, 13, 62, 203 ; vol. iv. p. 409 ; vol. vi. pp. 56, 191 ; 
Asa Mahan, Modern Mysteries^ etc. , pp. 296 et sea. 

SPEAKING WITH TONGUES 263 

Cevennes. But, as a rule, the phenomena appear to have 
been comparable rather to the speaking with tongues in 
Edward Irving's congregation — a spontaneous outpouring 
of articulate but meaningless sounds, at one time producing on 
the imagination of some hearers the effect of rapid utterance in 
some language with which they had a rudimentary acquaint- 
ance, at another authenticated as the genuine utterance of an 
unknown tongue by the subsequent interpretation vouchsafed 
under spirit guidance. The only new element introduced — a 
complication from which previous outpourings were happily 
free — is the deliberate fraud of the professional medium. 

CHAPTER V 
TRANCE WRITING AND SPEAKING 

IF we turn now from counterfeit clairvoyance and speak- 
ing with tongues to utterances of a more coherent 
and normal type, such as were poured forth in abund- 
ance at this period at every Spiritualist meeting, we shall 
find that, in private circles at any rate, it was less the 
substance of the communications than the manner of their 
occurrence which impressed the earlier investigators. 
Whether or not the messages testified to matters outside 
the medium's knowledge, whether the words were common- 
place or sublime, were questions of secondary interest ; that 
the human agent spoke and wrote through a power not his 
own was patent to all, and was a fact of crucial importance. 
And here it may be well to emphasise once more a dis- 
tinction often lost sight of, but nevertheless essential to the 
right understanding of the Spiritualist position. So far as 
we have seen, there is no reason to doubt that the whole of 
the so-called physical phenomena were due to fraud, if not 
always to preconcerted and fully conscious fraud. We have 
seen also in at least one notorious case before 1848 — the 
Seeress of Prevorst — that such physical phenomena were 
associated with examples of clairvoyance and premonition 
themselves also apparently fraudulent. But taken in the 
mass there seems as little reason to doubt that the mental 
phenomena of the trance and of automatism generally were 
genuine. There were, of course, spurious manifestations of 
this kind ; but the mediums who feigned trance-speaking 
were probably seldom content to exclude spirit-rapping and 
other marvels from their repertory. And, indeed, as we have 
just seen, cases of clairvoyance, mental telegraphy, and 
speaking with tongues, which are in themselves suspect, are 
generally connected with persons who have made themselves 
responsible also for physical manifestations. But the bulk of 

264 

TRANCE WRITING AND SPEAKING 265 

so-called spirit communications, both now and later, were 
free from the taint of this association. The physical phen- 
omena, indeed, throughout the history of the movement, 
have been generally the privilege of professional mediums, 
occasionally of young children, or other persons whose birth, 
temperament, or circumstances rendered them specially open 
to the temptation, not necessarily of a pecuniary kind, to 
enhance their importance in their social environment by 
fraudulent methods. Physical mediumship amongst adults 
of good education and recognised social position was fully 
as rare at the beginning of the movement as it has been 
throughout its course. On the other hand, many of the best- 
known of those who have practised inspirational speaking or 
writing, even professionally, such as Mrs. Hardinge Britten, 
Mrs. Cora L. V. Tappan-Richmond, Mr. J. J. Morse, have 
had as little to do with the trickery of the stance-room as 
any modern University Extension Lecturer. 

The commonest form assumed by the automatic impulse 
(for the manifestations were not necessarily confined to the 
trance), at any rate amongst educated subjects, was that of 
speaking or writing in the mother tongue. The descriptions 
of their own experiences given by various automatists agree 
that the impulse to speak or write was involuntary, and that, 
for the most part, the human agent was not conscious of the 
nature of the message delivered through his organism. In 
the case of A. J. Davis, and of the mesmeric or " magnetic " 
subjects generally, this characteristic was, as we have seen, 
referred to the action of the subject's own intelligence 
working under altered conditions. But after 1848 it became 
natural to interpret all such involuntary manifestations of 
intelligence in the light of the Poltergeist performances, and 
to refer them to a common cause, the agency of spirits; 
and the interpretation favoured by those around the auto- 
matist inevitably reacted, as we have already seen in the 
history of Animal Magnetism in France, Germany, and 
England, on the content of the automatic utterance. 

In some cases the impulse to speak did not affect the 
external organs, but manifested itself merely as an inner 
voice or mental impression. It was in this manner, as we 
have seen, that A. J. Davis* later pronouncements were 
inspired : " I am impressed " is his favourite formula in the 
Great Harmonica Josiah Gridley was also a medium of this 
kind. He had, indeed, as we have seen, been the subject of 
such impressions or angelic interpositions, as he occasionally 
calls them, throughout his life ; and after he had attended 

266 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

seances and witnessed automatic utterance in others, his own 
internal monitor appears to have developed and systematised 
its instructions. But the inspiration appears not to have 
been, as a rule, verbal. Thus he writes, as a preface to a short 
dissertation, " At this time Christ's position in the Universe 
was as clearly impressed on my inner being as the rays 
of a midday sun were ever impressed upon my outer being 
. . . the best I can do at present towards clothing them 
(sc. the truths impressed) the reader will find in what 
follows." 1 And again, in the course of an explanatory post- 
script to his work, " It is due to the reader of this work 
to say, that while the sentiment has been given me in every 
instance by the spirits, I have often assisted these friends to 
clothe their sentiments in simple but suitable language." 

But this no doubt represents a rudimentary stage of 
automatic action, hardly perhaps to be distinguished from 
normal reverie. In some of the more noteworthy instances 
of more developed automatism there seems no reason to 
doubt the medium's own account of the matter, that the 
utterance, whether verbal or written, was involuntary, and 
for the most part unconscious. Thus Dr. Dexter gives the 
following account of his own development as a writing 
automatist He had attended many stances, and had seen 
his own little daughter of nine years old controlled to write, 
apparently under spirit influence. He was not yet, however, 
convinced of the Spiritualist belief until his own hand was 
made the instrument of similar communications. The 
process began late one night when he was sitting alone in his 
office and felt the right hand and arm fixed tightly to the 
arm of the chair on which it rested. Afterwards the whole 
limb trembled violently, and two raps were heard on the wall 
of the room. Similar experiences recurred again and again, 
until at length he determined to yield to the influence : — 

" When in pursuance of this design I attended circles, my hand 
was seized and made to write. At first the sentences were short, 
and contained a single idea, but as I became developed they wrote 
out many pages, embracing various ideas and subjects. . . . Every 
meeting, however, at which I was present something new was 
always developed, and the handwriting of the spirits manifesting 
assumed peculiar and distinct character, thus identifying the 
individual who wrote through my hand. The earlier attempts we 
were hardly able to decipher, but after some practice the writing 
was rapid, bold, and easily read. From the first essay of the spirits 

1 Astounding Facts t etc., p. 162, 

TRANCE WRITING AND SPEAKING 267 

to influence my hand to write, it was the medium by which many, 
both friends and strangers, communicated with the circle ; but when 
the design was apparent that they had developed me for a special 
object, my hand was controlled by two spirits, whose names will be 
found recorded in this book as Sweedenborg (sic) and Bacon. 

" During the whole time, from their earliest endeavour to write, 
they have used my hand as the instrument to convey their own 
thoughts, without any appreciation on my part of either ideas or 
subject 

" I know nothing of what is written until after it is read to me, 
and frequently, when asked to read what has been communicated, 
I have found it utterly impossible to decipher it. Not only is the 
thought concealed, but after it has been read to me I lose all 
recollection of the subject, until again my memory is refreshed by 
the reading." 1 

Now that his powers were fully developed, he continues, 
the influence often seized him when he was alone, and he 
would even be awakened from sleep and compelled to write 
out long communications before retiring to rest again. 

Somewhat similar was Mrs. Hardinge Britten's initiation 
into the mysteries of mediumship. She had attended, as 
a sceptic, one or two public stances, had been interested in 
what she had witnessed, and in the stock prediction that she 
would develop into a remarkable medium. Thereafter she 
held a few private circles, and, at her next visit to a pro- 
fessional medium, she went off into a trance, impersonated 
the spirit of an old gentleman, and gave tests on her own 
account 2 

But the phenomena of automatic utterance, whether within 
or without the trance, are sufficiently familiar at the present 
time to render it unnecessary to labour the point further. 

The automatic utterances purported for the most part to 
be communications from deceased friends or near relatives 
of the sitters or of some person present, such as are common 
at Spiritualist stances even at the present day. More rarely 
the "control" gave himself out to be a stranger, who had 
been drawn to the circle either to receive help and consola- 
tion or to give it — an ignorant newsboy, a repentant drunkard, 
a bright child- spirit, a murdered man seeking for vengeance, 
or some uneasy ghost wishing to communicate with friends 
on earth. Numerous examples of both these types of com- 
munication will be found in the works of Edmonds, Dexter, 
Putnam, Hare, Tallmadge, and other writers from whom I 

1 Spiritualism, Edmonds and Dexter, vol. i. p. 93. 
9 Sec her History, pp. 136-40, 

268 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

have already quoted. Of their evidential aspect enough has 
already been said. 

But frequently the names attached to the communications 
claimed to be those of the mighty dead. Hare summoned a 
convocation of spirit worthies, including Washington, Byron, 
Isaac Newton, and Benjamin Franklin. 1 Of all the august 
names which figure in the "inspirational" literature of the 
period, none, it should be remarked, occurs more frequently, 
or is made sponsor for more outrageous nonsense, than 
that of Franklin. Whatever sins of omission may be laid 
to his charge on the Bailly Commission sixty or seventy 
years before, the penalty was surely paid in full Again, 
Spear's revelations were signed, amongst others, by Franklin, 
Jefferson, Seneca, Apollos Munn, Plato, and Aristotle.* Davis 
held converse with Franklin, Solon, Swedenborg, St. Paul, 
and St John. 8 Harris and Scott, as will appear later, were 
the chosen instruments of a circle of apostles and prophets at 
Auburn. 

But these extravagances were no doubt most conspicuous 
in the earliest years of the movement The common sense of 
the majority of Spiritualists soon revolted against the attempt 
on the part of certain mediums to win recognition for them- 
selves and their utterances by the use of great names. There 
were, indeed, from the very beginning some, more level-headed 
than the rest, to warn their fellow-believers against placing 
implicit reliance on any of the spirit teachings. Of Sunderland 
we have already spoken. Brittan, too, consistently appears 
to have shown a critical spirit, and from a discussion at the 
New York Conference, in the early part of 1854 — started 
apparently by the intervention of a boy of fifteen and a girl 
not much older, who had spoken under control at a previous 
conference — it appears that many leading Spiritualists adopted 
a similar attitude, and recognised that so-called spirit utter- 
ances should be judged on their merits. 4 

Of automatic trance-speaking at this time, even to large 
audiences, we have innumerable accounts; but as reports 
were not, as a rule, preserved, we have rarely any means of 
judging of the value of the utterance beyond the effect 
alleged to have been produced on the audience. Thus a boy 
of twelve is said to have preached sermons " characterised by 
a depth of thought that would do credit to the most eminent 
divines." 5 Miss Vanduzer, controlled by the spirit of 

1 Op. cit., p. 113. * The Educator, pp. 46, 297. 

8 The Spirit World, vol. ii. p. 169. 

4 Telegraph Papers, vol. iv. pp. 146-9, 196, 200. • Ibid., v 

• Ibid., voL i. p. 387. 

TRANCE WRITING AND SPEAKING 269 

Lorenzo Dow, delivered discourses in Wampsville (N. Y.) and 
its neighbourhood "to from five hundred to two thousand 
earnest listeners." 1 The Eureka circle at West Troy were, 
we read, "sitting at present for a course of lectures from 
the spirit of Dr. Franklin on the laws of progression." The 
next course, by the same lecturer, was to treat of the solar 
system. 2 

But of the more important automatic writings of the 
period many were published. 

One of die earliest of these books was The Pilgrimage of 
Thomas Paine and others to the Seventh Circle, by the Rev. 
C. Hammond, Medium, published at New York in 1852. In 
his Preface Hammond expressly disclaims any personal 
credit for the work. " I had no will to write it, or exercised 
any other control, than to let my hand be moved by an 
invisible influence, and write as it would." Often, he explains, 
he could not tell what word he was writing until it was 
completed, and very rarely knew the whole sentence before- 
hand. The book, which contains over two hundred and fifty 
pages octavo, was produced with extreme rapidity. Hammond 
began to write at the end of December, 1851, the manuscript 
was completed on the 1st of February following, and the 
book published on the 5th of March. 

The Pilgrimage purports to be a recital by Thomas Paine 
of his spiritual experiences. He begins by describing his 
death-bed, and how in his dying hours he was visited by his 
beloved wife, who revealed herself to him as a spirit and 
explained to him something of the spirit world. After his 
death he is present at his own funeral, hears the minister read 
the service over the grave, and overhears later a conversation, 
in which the minister expresses his fears that "poor Tom 
Paine " is eternally lost. 

He is then cheered and instructed by conversation with his 
wife and mother in the spirit world, and is made to see 
" his former wisdom isolated and torn into fragments." He 
meets Washington, Richard Rush, the inevitable Franklin, and 
others, and is introduced to William Penn. Penn argues 
with him through many pages, convinces him of errors in his 
earth life, and finally converts him to a knowledge of the 
truth. He is then led by Penn towards a light exceeding the 
brightness of a thousand suns, through an archway built of 
stones of the most excellent workmanship, and dear as 
crystal, into a magnificent temple. The temple was all 
inlaid with gold, and within it Paine saw 

1 Telegraph Papers, vol ii. p. 461. * Ibid., vol i. p. 341. 

272 EAKLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

the hand of Dr. Dexter, and to many persons, looking on and be- 
holding the use of the same ex pr essions as you adopt on earth, they 
would remark on its foolishness and absurdity as a spirit manifesta- 
tion. But look at the ideas we inculcate, regard the thoughts we 
express. And if in the whole history of written thought there is 
anything that can approach it, either in the magnitude of the ideas 
or the profundity of the thoughts, then I am heartily willing it 
should be said to be a farce," 1 

But Bacon himself could on occasion rise to a lofty strain, 
as witness the following extract : — 

" How glorious that man's destiny ! He leaves behind the errors 
of time, and boldly pushing forward through the untried future, he 
plants his standard on the very outward wall of eternity, and here he 
makes his stand ; here he calls around him all the aid that position 
furnishes, and he leaves the traces of his progress in his errors, the 
doings, the actions sacrificed to truth, which he scatters in the path- 
way which has led to this goal. — Bacon." 1 

It was such passages as these which moved Tallmadge to 
write to Judge Edmonds that, after reading all the specimens 
of ancient and modern eloquence, and after listening to some 
of the greatest orators of the day, he could say without hesi- 
tation, 4< I have never read nor heard anything to equal the 
communications from Bacon and Swedenborg. For beauty 
of style and sublimity of thought their equal never proceeded 
from mortal man." 8 

One of the most remarkable writing mediums at this time 
was Charles Linton. He was a young man of good intelligence, 
but limited education, who for some years had earned his 
living as a blacksmith. At twenty-two years of age he 
became a clerk in a store in Philadelphia, and afterwards 
bookkeeper. He then became developed as a writing 
medium. Many communications were written through his 
hand which purported to be from Daniel Webster. 4 At 
another time Governor Tallmadge and Mr. Fenno, an actor, 
held a conversation with the spirit of Shakespeare, writing 
through the medium's hand. Tallmadge, in endorsing 
Fen no's account of the stance, states that some of the ablest 

1 Op. cit., vol. i. p. 181. a Ibid., p. 267. 

8 Quoted in Telegraph Papers, vol. Hi. p. 311. 

4 Some of these are quoted in the Appendix to Edmonds* and Dexter's 
Spiritualism, vol. i. It is interesting to note that J. Bovee Dods says of them 
that they bore a " respectable impress of the exalted intellect M of the deceased 
statesman {Spirit Manifestations Examined, p. 129). 

TRANCE WRITING AND SPEAKING 273 

critics have pronounced the communications perfectly 
Shakespearian. Two extracts are subjoined: — 

" To act requireth two things — a brain and an eye ; the scene will 
do almost all the rest. 

"The eye calleth up and holdcth the magic spell, which in the 
audience centres. 

" Thy brain the gestures makes — the stand, the position ; and grace 
doth take therefrom its own existence. 

" The eye speaks volumes ; silly mouthers may mince and hawk, 
but with thy piercing eye thoult dumb them a/I" 1 

And again, in response to some remarks from Fenno about 
the management of the voice, and the difficulty of portraying 
passion without ranting : — 

"The ocean waves rise and fall; the mountains wave in earthly 
strength ; the plains undulate in airy waves ; and the light, the life of 
all things, partakes of the inmost principles producing these outside 
results ; hence, to speak well and gracefully, you must not beat the 
sea flat with a hurricane, or with an earthquake rend the mountains, 
or tear the plain into a level void; but imitate the waves of the 
ocean, rise from a dead calm to grand sublimity, and subside again 
with the gentle ease of the mighty fluid. You catch the breeze 
gently, and a lovely strain will vibrate through your throat; your 
spirit catches the tone, and in unison vibrates. Onward and upward 
you rush, and as the waves rise in grandeur, the bark of opposition is 
handled, as the boundless ocean handles the unmoored vessel." 2 

But some time in 1853 Linton was bidden by the spirits to 
prepare for the inditing of a great work, and in the course 
of the next four months there was written through his hand a 
long dissertation, forming a volume of over 370 pages octavo 
(considerably over 100,000 words). The writing, as we are 
told by Tallmadge, who was frequently present, was performed 
rapidly and in a clear hand, different from the medium's 
ordinary writing, and the manuscript presented hardly any 
erasure or alteration. The medium was not entranced 
during the writing, and would indeed occasionally converse 
with Tallmadge, interrupting his writing for the purpose. 
But according to his own account of the matter, Linton had 
no idea beforehand of the ground-plan of the book, and 
frequently did not see even a word ahead of that which he 
was writing ; he wrote what was given him from moment to 

1 The Healing cf th* Nations, p. 504, by Charles Linton. New York, 1858. 
The italic marks, Tallmadge tells as, are the spirit's own. 

* /did., pp. 506, 507. 

I. — T 

274 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

moment to write. The book is a religious rhapsody ; an 
outpouring, without definite logical plan or strict coherence, 
of a devout and intelligent, but not highly educated mind ; 
the ideas and imagery seem obviously drawn almost ex- 
clusively from the Bible and various religious writings. The 
following extracts will give a fair idea of the contents of 
the book : — l 

"71. Thy imperfection does not regulate God's perfection. 

" 72. Thy unfaithfulness will never check his liberality. 

" 73. If thou hadst never existed, God's power or his love and 
light had never been less. Having existence, if thou dost not com- 
prehend them surely the fault is thine own. 

"74. A little time is given thee on earth, and in that time 
thou dost see all things perishing, changing, and unto thy sight 
passing away. Then why shouldst thou labour about and among 
them ? 

" 75. The earth is regulated by time, thou by eternity. 

" 76. That is the creature of a day, thou the ornament of a God- 
given eternity. That is thy feeding-place, designed to give thee 
strength and knowledge. Eternity is the home whence the know- 
ledge cometh, and in which thou wilt learn in purity that which 
emanates from the eternal fountain of Light 

77. Thou art a seed dropped in earth by God's own hand. 

78. Thou art nourished by His own holy attributes. 

" 79. His pure Light quickens thee, feeds thee with thought, 
forms the harmony of thy mind ; His love, as a gentle dew, falls 
upon thy morning and evening wanderings, and in the shade of the 
sunny noon He fans thee as a mother doth her sleeping babe." 

The book, which was published in 1855 under the title of 
The Healing of the Nations, represents inspirational writing 
at its best Another book of the same type was produced 
at about the same time through the mediumship of John 
Murray Spear, of whom we have already spoken in chapter 
ii 2 On the 1st of April, 1853, Mr. Spear, who had for 
about two years been interested in Spiritualism, and had, 
indeed, already written some Messages front the Spirit 
Life, under the inspiration of John Murray, found his 
hand involuntarily moved to write a document setting forth 
that a band of spirits, called the "Association of Benefi- 
cents," had chosen him as their mouthpiece for certain 
revelations to mankind. A few months later Spear and 

1 Healing of the Nations, p. 179. 

* The Educator, being Suggestions, theoretical and practical, designed to 
promote Man-Culture and Integral Reform, with a view to the ultimate establish- 
ment of a Divitic Social State on Earth, etc. Boston, 1857. 

TRANCE WRITING AND SPEAKING 275 

another medium, in inspirational strophe and antistrophe, 
announced that there were six other associations with similar 
ends, who designed to use for the teaching of mankind the 
same earthly instruments. They were called severally the 
* Association of Electric-izers," the u Association of Element- 
izers," the "Association of Healthful-izers," and so on. 
Thereafter, at different periods, Spear was delivered in 
the trance state of dissertations on the structure and laws 
of society, the duties of humanity, the process of creation, 
the nature of elementary substances, of electricity, of the 
laws of health, etc., which were sometimes written by his 
hand, sometimes spoken and taken down by an amanuensis. 
They were afterwards edited by the Rev. A. E. Newton, and 
published as Volume I. of the Educator. The work bears a 
certain general resemblance to the Divine Revelations of 
Andrew Jackson Davis, and, like it, teaches Socialism as 
the highest form of human society, even sketching out a plan 
for a model colony which would realise the divine idea upon 
earth. In its cosmological section, however, it is less pre- 
tentious than the earlier work, and is almost entirely innocent, 
not merely of scientific terminology, but of the most ele- 
mentary scientific knowledge. There is, indeed, an almost 
mediaeval quality in these untrammelled speculations on the 
phenomena of the physical universe. 

The various spirit associations, speaking through the mouth 
of Spear, declared the sun to be the eye of God, and to 
consist of vitalised electricity; it further acts as a focus 
through which rays from the Grand Diamonics, which is 
another term for " the Grand Central Source of all Life, all 
Light, all Wisdom, all Knowledge/' are directed on to the 
earth. These rays, which we know as light, consist ulti- 
mately of fine, angular, diamond-shaped particles, being 
indeed of the same substance as the diamond itself. These 
particles of light penetrate the interior of the earth, mingle 
with certain fine sands, and there " copulate, cohere, multiply, 
expand, grow, and take the form of gold." 1 Or, again, here 
is a passage which might have been written by Paracelsus or 
Eirenaeus Philalethes : — 

" Like all things else, polishing is wrought by a fixed, simple and 
natural law. It is the action of the finer on the coarser. Each 
thing has within itself a certain amount and quality of caloric. It 

1 This is a familiar idea amongst the alchemists. See, for instance, Fludd, 
The Mosauall Philosophy \ p. 221 : 4< The Etheriall Sperm or Astralicall influences 
are of a far subtiler condition than is the vehicle of visible tight Yea, verily, 

276 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

be id crude or cause conditions in one ml Mince, and in finer 
crude c o n di f io m m another. Bring these two together ; the 

acts upon the coarser, by friction the coarser caloric 
and the finer takes ks place, and so the coarser substance is 
into finer or more polished conditions. The «^«^"<y r^ifr-d emery 
has within it a very fine caloric, and hence its usefulness as a 
polisher.' 91 

Turning to biology, Spear gives directions for magnetising 
water, so as to impart medicinal virtues to it; he explains 
tuberculosis as due to the accumulation in the lungs of certain 
minute, floating, barbed particles, which are also responsible 
for the moss on stones, the down [? mould] on certain vege- 
tables, and so on. Under the section "Microscopies," it is 
explained that the hairs, being tubular, are in reality organs 
of perception, hence their location round the eye and ear. But 
whilst the hairs round the eye see things in front, the hairs at 
the back of the head see what has passed — ie. they act as 
organs of memory — "and those females who intertwine or 
twist the posterior conductors [the hair at the back of the 
head] thereby ignorantly render themselves less able to 
recall or recollect" 2 

Of inspired poetry there was at this time an abundant 
supply. Much indeed of what is so called consists of inferior 
and ungrammatical prose cut up into lengths, without either 
rhyme or rhythm. But some of the u inspired M productions 
were distinguished by a certain sonorousness and melody. 
Most notable, perhaps, were the poems of the Rev. T. L. 
Harris, the former associate of the Poughkeepsie seer. 

Harris had written poetry before; and one Spiritualist 
critic concedes that nothing in his "inspired" poetry transcends 
his possible natural powers. It is on the conditions under 
which the poems were delivered and ostensibly composed 
that the claim of superhuman origin is based During 
fourteen consecutive days in November and December, 1853, 
T. L. Harris in the trance state dictated an entire poem, con- 
taining between 3,000 and 4,000 lines, entitled "An Epic of 
the Starry Heaven," which purported to have been composed 
by a circle of mediaeval spirits having Dante amongst their 
number. The dictation of the poem occupied thirty hours 
and a half. 3 A few weeks later, on the 1st January, 1854, the 

they are so thin, so mobile, so penetrating, and so lively . . . that they con- 
tinually penetrate even unto the center or universal bosom of the earth, where 
they generate metals of sundry kinds, so the antient philosophers do justifie." 

* Op. ctt. % p. 555. * Page 291. 

1 Telegraph Papers y voL iii. p. 293 ; voL iv. p. 151. 

TRANCE WRITING AND SPEAKING 277 

conception of a new poem began : " At the hour of noon the 
archetypal ideas were internally wrought by spiritual agency 
into the inmost mind of the medium, he at the time having 
passed into a spiritual or interior condition. From that time 
till the 4th of August, fed by continued influxes of celestial 
life, these archetypal ideas internally unfolded within his 
interior or spiritual self/' and were then dictated by the 
entranced medium at intervals, again during fourteen con- 
secutive days. Harris himself professed entire ignorance 
in his waking condition of the poem and all connected with 
its utterance. This second poem, which contains over 5,000 
lines, in varying metres, is called A Lyric of the Morning 
Land. The poem consists almost entirely of a succession of 
lyrics, strung on a slender thread of connecting narrative, also 
rhymed. A few extracts are subjoined : — 

"THE POET'S SONG OF OUTER LIFE. 

I. 

" We are shadows, we are shadows, 
Fading with the night of time. 
Till the poppy wreaths we twine 
Overcome us in the meadows. 
Shrouded in our robes of white, 
Phantoms of a fled delight, 
Pallid ghosts of memory, 
To our children henceforth we. 

II. 

" As the stream to ocean glideth, 
To its burial in the waves, 
We are hurried to our graves ; 
Death alone eterne abideth, 
Sitting on his throne of graves ; 
And die dreary wind that raves, 
Blows us from life's shaken tree ; 
Wind-swept shadows henceforth we." 

Here are the opening stanzas from the "Song of Saturn " : — 

" I am the Patriarch Star ; I stand 
And view, entranced, that Wondrous Land, 
That Worlds ascend to when they rise 
From outward space to inward skies. 
1 am the eldest child of Space, 
And gaze into the Sun's bright face, 
And in the Sun, prophetic, see 
My own approaching destiny. 

278 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

ii. 

" Soon shall I cease, a planet fair, 
To glow in Nature's azure air ; 
Soon shall I circling cease to swim 
Within the bounds that circle in 
The Solar System. I shall pass 
Beyond the sea of fire and glass, 
And all my Angel-Nations rise 
Into diviner harmonies." 

And here are extracts from the latter part of the poem de- 
scribing the bliss of the after-state : — 

"Great Milton dwelleth here ; he sees with eyes 

Grown brighter from Earth's desolate eclipse : 
And Dante and his Angel-bride ; from skies 

That outward burn he turns to her sweet lips. 
Correggio here, the poet-painter, dips 

His pencil in celestial light, and throws 
Visions from God's unveiled Apocalypse 

O'er all the burning walls. In splendid rows 
The Demigods of Song enjoy the Heart's repose. 

These glorious ones are seated twain ; beside 
Each Lyric Angel glows his Seraph-bride ; 
And they who on the Earth, most desolate, 
Died with slow fires of wrong, sit most in state, 
And they rejoice, being free from mortal stain ; 
And evermore within that sphered fane 
The multitudinous anthems peal and roll ; 
And evermore some New-ascended Soul 
Joins their triumphant choir ; and far below 
Lies the vailed sepulchre of mortal woe. 
And evermore Celestial Angels twine 
For them fresh garlands ; and they drink the wine 
Of Poesy, and with diviner art 
They chant their lyric hymns." * 

From the foregoing extracts a fair — perhaps even an 
unduly favourable — estimate may be formed of these "in- 
spirational" writings. If we allow the claim put forward 
that these various writings were, so far as the ordinary 
consciousness of the medium was concerned, absolutely 
extemporaneous, it must be conceded that they are highly 
remarkable productions. Not, indeed, that any of them 
appear either in thought or expression to be beyond the 
possible range of the medium's capacities, working under 
favourable conditions. So much, as we have seen, is admitted 
in the case of T. L. Harris. But the improvisation of some 

1 A Lyric of the Morning Land. New York, 1855. Glasgow, John Thom- 
son, 1869. See also I elegraph Papers ', vol. vi. p. 291. 

TRANCE WRITING AND SPEAKING 279 

5,000 lines roughly of the same quality as those set down 
above — even if we assume that the work was polished at 
leisure — would certainly be a remarkable feat in any circum- 
stances. Part of the explanation, at any rate in the case 
of comparatively finished work like that of Davis, Linton, 
and Harris, is no doubt to be found in the sentence 
already quoted from the last-named medium ; the ideas were 
probably latent or fructifying for some time before they 
found external expression, and that fructifying process was, ' 
it is likely, carried on somewhere in the twilight of conscious- 
ness. 

The actual utterances, again, are distinguished by certain 
characteristics which may be said to be typical of automatic 
utterance in general. To begin with, we note the extra- 
ordinary fluency of the speaker. Whatever we may think 
of the value of their remarks, there can be no question that 
the little boys and girls at this period who preached for an 
hour at a time to crowded congregations, or uneducated 
youths like Davis and Linton who indited long treatises, 
could not in their normal condition have spoken or written 
at such length, or with such copiousness of vocabulary. We 
note, moreover, in some of the utterances of this time, as for 
instance in "Bacon's" messages through Dr. Dexter, in Linton's 
book, and in Harris' poems, a tendency to sonorous and 
grandiloquent language, such as we have had occasion to 
note amongst the Irvingites. We shall meet with many 
more specimens hereafter, in discussing the later phases of 
Spiritualism. 

Much of this sounding stuff no doubt consists pretty 
obviously of distorted echoes from earlier writings — the 
Bible, Shelley, and popular poets and preachers of the day 
being probably the chief sources. But there were few 
instances of actual, even unconscious, plagiarism. Some 
charges of this kind had, as already shown, been substantiated 
against A. J. Davis; 1 some stanzas in Harris 1 inspired 
poems have been traced to foreign sources ;* and there are 
three or four examples to be found of " inspired " poems 
given at stances which were afterwards discovered to have 
been previously written by Longfellow, James Wallis East- 

1 See ante. Book I. chap. xL 

* Mr. Gerald Massey points out that in one volume alone of Harris* poems, 
Hymns of Spiritual Devotion (New York, 1857), there are couplets or stanzas 
obviously suggested by corresponding lines in the works of Watts, Heber, 
Mrs. Browning, Thomas Moore, and others. But Mr. Massey does not, I 
think, make good his charge of deliberate plagiarism. {Concerning Spiritualism , 
pp. 19, 20. London, 1874?). 

, : 

» 

t 

f ' 

I 

282 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

object of his mission, or of any link of connection with t) 
sick person. 1 There are several examples of similar guidii 
monitions related on good authority of the early "Friends" 
this country. But obviously it would be extremely hazardo 
to found on such evidence a presumption, I do not say 
spirit guidance, but even of supernormal knowledge. ] 
other cases recorded at this period — eg. with the notorio 
Mrs. French — it seems likely that the impulse was imaginar 
and the whole incident fictitious. 

In fine, none of the cases recorded in this or the precedir 
chapter afford even *prim& facie ground for supposing supc 
normal faculties of any kind Such instances of clairvo 
ance, speaking with tongues, and trance writing and speakii 
as cannot readily be attributed to the known powers 
automatism find an adequate explanation in fraud and u 
conscious exaggeration. 

1 Adin Ballou, Modem Spirit Mamfestatioms, pp. 93-7 ; Messages from , 
Superior State, edited by S. C. Hewitt, pp. 28, etc Boston, 1852. 

'» 

CHAPTER VI 
GENERAL SURVEY OF THE MOVEMENT 

SO far as the evidence before us enables us to form a 
judgment, we have found little reason to infer any 
supernormal element in the beginnings of Modern 
Spiritualism. The earliest physical phenomena were ap- 
parently of the ordinary Poltergeist type, but springing 
up in an unusually favourable environment, they were 
gradually improved and systematised by the Fox children 
and by their numerous imitators. Even the raps which 
formed so prominent a feature in the outbreak at Hydes- 
ville and its subsequent developments can be paralleled from 
many earlier records. The distinguishing characteristic of 
the new movement was its permanency ; and this, again, was 
no doubt due largely to the, extraordinarily favourable recep- 
tion which the youthful impostors encountered and to their 
long immunity from detection. Some credit must also be 
assigned to the "mediums" themselves for their skill in 
inventing and perfecting one or more methods of rapping, 
and for that practised facility in noting and interpreting 
slight gestures, hesitations, changes of voice, and other in- 
dications, which formed, no doubt, the secret of their ability 
to answer mental questions. 

As the movement grew, the physical phenomena, in re- 
sponse, it may be surmised, to the insatiable demands of 
its patrons, grew more elaborate and more audacious. But 
their essential character appears to have remained unchanged. 
It is clear that the records quoted in chapter iil — and as 
already said, I have studied to present the evidence at its 
best — -do not afford even a faint presumption of the inter- 
ference of any unfamiliar mode of energy. The facts re- 
corded suggest fraud ; they are such as are known to have 
been produced fraudulently both before and since this epoch ; 
and neither the precautions alleged to have been taken, the 
qualifications of the observers, nor the circumstances of the 

283 

284 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

experiments, were such as to afford an effectual safeguan 
against the ingenuity of practised tricksters. 

This view of the matter finds strong confirmation in th 
analysis of the mental phenomena given in the last tw< 
chapters. On the one hand, we find that evidence, such a 
we can regard as primd facie worthy of consideration, for tb 
exercise, by persons whose good faith may fairly be pre 
sumed, of any supernormal faculty, is almost entirely want 
ing, a want which is the more surprising because we havi 
found traces of such faculties in the past, and possess ii 
recent experimental work and in the trance utterances o 
Mrs. Piper and others a considerable body of evidence fa 
their operations at the present time. On the other hand 
hireling mediums of this period furnished many instance 
of mental telegraphy, speaking with tongues, and the like 
where the evidence would be quite unexceptionable, if wi 
could assume the honesty of the chief actors and thei 
witnesses. 

As against the view that the physical phenomena and th< 
instances of mental telegraphy and speaking with tongue 
furnished by professional mediums were in all cases due tc 
fraud, the rarity at this time of any demonstration of firauc 
may be urged. It is no doubt true that trickery was seldom 
detected. There are one or two cases, however, in which 
mediums professing to bring "apports" of various objects 
into s6ance-rooms were convicted of fraud. In one suet 
case it was claimed that a knife and a ribbon had beer 
carried by spirit agency across the Atlantic, but the impos- 
ture was detected a few months later, and denounced in the 
Spiritual Telegraph ; x and there may have been other cases oi 
exposure which were hushed up. But it is probable from the 
scantiness of references by hostile critics that exposures at 
this time were extremely rare. 

It is obvious, however, that the conditions were unfavour- 
able to the detection of fraud. The exposures with which 
the later annals of Spiritualism are filled have almost always 
. been concerned with such complicated and audacious mani- 

I festations as " materialisation," or spirit photography. The 

earlier phenomena did not readily lend themselves to such 
methods of investigation. Where no apparatus is used, and 
the performance is shrouded in darkness, it is extremely 
difficult to prove trickery, however certain the investigator 
may be, on a wide comparison of instances, that trickery is 
responsible for the manifestations. It would have been 

1 Telegraph Papers, vol. vi p. 131. 

f 

r 

GENERAL SURVEY 285 

practically impossible, for instance, to convict Gordon or 
Hume of fraud in their levitation performances. If the gas 
had suddenly been turned up, and the medium found standing 
on a chair or table when he should have been floating in the 
air, it would have been as easy for him to suggest as for the 
spectators to believe that the spirits had let him drop because 
the action of the light prevented the completion of their task. 
Or, again, if Fowler had been observed copying passages 
from the Hebrew Bible on his own account, it may be 
surmised that an explanation that he was acting under 
spirit-control would have met with ready acceptance. In- 
deed, the foundations of that famous system of Spiritualist 
apologetics, the doctrine of spirit-control, were already 
being laid. The Poughkeepsie seer, as we have seen in 
chapter i. of the present book, first introduced it to account 
for some of the Stratford performances. And the members 
of the Springfield Harmonial Circle, in January, 1851, gave 
a testimonial to the medium Gordon which contains the 
following passage: — 

" It may be stated, however, as a circumstance which seems to 
have been the cause of some misapprehension, that the individual 
referred to is highly susceptible to the magnetic power of spirits, 
and that, under the influence of an impression which he is unable to 
resist, he occasionally endeavours to perform the very action which 
he perceives to be in the mind of the spirit Of this peculiarity we 
were made fully aware at the commencement of our investigations, 
and throughout the whole have been unable to discover any evidence 
of deception, or even secretiveness, with regard to the assistance 
which he sometimes undesignedly renders the spirits, in being acted 
upon by their influence." * 

In such circumstances the task of exposing trickery would 
have been a singularly thankless one. But, in fact, the ex- 
planation of the immunity of the medium is to be sought 
rather in the general conditions of the mental environment 
than in any skill on his part, whether in apologetics or in 
sleight-of-hand. That part of the American public which 
concerned itself with the manifestations at all was possessed 
by the belief that, whatever their explanation, they were 
genuine. This belief became, in fact, an epidemic delusion 
hardly less imperative than the ideas suggested by the 
hypnotist to his subject It did not occur to the earlier 
investigator, prepossessed as he was by this belief, to be 
constantly on his guard against fraud. He did not turn 

1 The Spirit Werld % voL ii. p. 21. 

286 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

} 

up the light while Gordon was being levitated, or look undo 
the table when the spirits were writing, or seize the sptrr 
hands presented to him. Fraud was to him, at worsts ai 
occasional incident of the manifestations. 

Again, the pecuniary factor was not so prominent at thes 
early stances as it has since become. The Fox girls are sak 
to have taken no money for their performances at first, unti 
indeed the " spirits " insisted on their doing so ; and group 
of admirers from time to time subscribed, so that popula 
mediums, the Foxes or others, might give gratuitous sitting 
to inquirers. 1 It is stated by Partridge and others tha 
Koons would take neither money nor recompense of an; 
other kind for the performances in his spirit-room.* Ballo 
mentions the case of some physical mediums in poor cir 
cumstances who invariably refused to take money from thos 
who attended their stances. 3 The same thing is recordei 
in the Spirit World* of a rapping medium. But in thi 
case the medium was a child, who accepted ten cents fo 
himself, whilst his father, who refused the larger sum 
offered, was probably ignorant of the deception practised 
It is significant that in the first volume, at any rate, c 
the Spiritual Telegraph (1853) there are but few advertise 
ments of mediums, and those exclusively of medical clair 
voyants, who charged a fee for diagnosing and prescribing. 

It is probable that the unseemliness of selling spiritua 
gifts at a price was recognised at the outset, as it has mor 
or less been recognised ever since. It is stated on goo< 
authority that in more recent times D. D. Home (Hume 
habitually, and Eusapia Paladino at least occasionally, refuse* 
to accept money payments for their stances. But it i 
certain that most mediums both then and now took regula 
fees, and probably all have received a sufficient paymen 
in coin or in kind. 6 In any case, as will appear later, unpaii 
mediumship is not necessarily honest ; there are other thai 
pecuniary inducements to fraud — even to systematic an< 
long-continued fraud. There is nothing, then, in the sur 
rounding circumstances to weaken the presumption of fraui 
derived from an examination of the phenomena themselves. 

1 Mrs. Hardinge Britten, History, p. 134. 2 /j#. f p . 31 lm 

* Modem Spirit Manifestations, pp. 8 3 _ 7 . 4 Vo l. iii. p. 45. 

• Cf. the North American Review, April, 1855: "The frequently mercenar 
character of this necromancy goes far towards negativing the idea of its stririttu 
origin. In almost every city in New England are Pythonesses (not alwaj 
persons of fair reputation), who, for the price of fifty cents and upwards, wi 
command the presence and responses of the most exalted spirits that ever dwd 
on earth." 

GENERAL SURVEY 287 

The explanation of the ready credence which greeted 
these supposed proofs of spirit intervention, notwithstanding 
that to our judgment it seems clear that where not merely 
inconclusive they were deliberately fraudulent, lies partly, as 
we have seen, in the apparent marvel of answers to mental 
questions through the raps, partly in the fact that the in- 
dubitable genuineness of the automatic manifestations in 
private persons predisposed the inquirers to accept as 
genuine in the professional medium what purported to be 
phenomena of the same class, but in a higher stage of 
development. 

But the explanation of the facile acceptance and rapid 
spread of the new marvels is chiefly to be sought, as we 
have endeavoured to indicate in chapter ii., in the special 
conditions of the nation and the times ; in the general 
diffusion of education combined with aji absence of authorita- 
tive standards of thought and the want of critical training ; 
in the democratic genius of the American people ; in their 
liability to be carried away by various humanitarian en- 
thusiasms ; in the geographical conditions incident to a 
rapidly expanding civilisation. But especially, as we have 
seen, this tendency to belief was fostered by the still recent 
growth of popular interest in Mesmerism and in the various 
theories of a physical effluence — odyle, etherium, or vital 
electricity — which were associated with it, and had already 
been employed to explain the manifestations of various 
" electric " girls and other impostors, as well as the probably 
innocent hallucinations of Reichenbach's sensitives. No 
doubt, too, the introduction throughout the continent of 
the electric telegraph, an invention still so recent that the 
popular mind had not become familiarised with it, and still 
regarded its operations with something of childlike wonder, 
helped to quicken expectation and generally to induce a 
mental condition favourable to belief in other phenomena, 
which after all were to the uninstructed not more mysterious. 
A* we have seen, it was in electricity that Spiritualists 
sought the physical basis of their phenomena. 

But whatever the explanation, of the facts there can be 
no doubt The people who wrote and lectured about the 
spiritualistic manifestations had been almost to a man pre- 
possessed with a belief in their genuineness. The evidence 
upon which they supposed this belief to rest played much 
the same part in its structure as the element of external 
sensation, according to some French writers, in a hallucina- 
tion ; it was less a justification than an opportunity. Hardly 

288 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

less remarkable than the existence of this epidemic delusior 
is the fact that outside the obsessed circle so few person* 
of any intellectual standing thought the matter sufficient^ 
important to inquire into, still less to write about, and thai 
by those writers who did express their entire disbelief ir 
the phenomena the subject was treated with a very in 
adequate conception of its importance. Page's pamphle 
consists of a few hasty memoranda. Mattison's book i 
superficial, mediocre in quality, ill-informed, and warped bj 
theological rancour. C. W. Elliott, the most capable o 
these early critics, devotes unfortunately two chapters onl] 
of his book to the modern manifestations, and deals onl] 
with the beginnings of the movement With these and ; 
few other unimportant exceptions, every writer who hat 
qualified himself by actual observation to express an opinioi 
believed in the phenomena, or the bulk of them, as genuine. 
The odylo-mesmeric hypothesis as applied to Spiritualisn 
is well formulated by E. C. Rogers, a medical electrician. 
According to this authority, the alleged phenomena, botl 
physical and mental, were in the main — for he does nc 
attempt to discriminate — genuine. The explanation commoi 
to both classes was that the medium was a person in whor 
the conscious and personal control of the higher brain centre 
was for the moment in abeyance, leaving the organism ope 
to be acted upon by the universal cosmic forces. Thu 
he explains as follows the occurrence of raps at Sunderland 1 
house : " By means of a specific pathetism sensitive person 
are thrown into a condition of the nervous system in whic 
the brain, losing the controlling power of the responsibl 
agent, falls under the law of mundane dynamics, is acte 
upon and acts by the material agency of the world." 2 S 
clairvoyance, again, is explained as the result of a peculfc 
condition of the nervous system, in which the outwar 
material world is brought into a special and intimate relatio 
with the human organism. The whole tribe of Animc 
Magnetists and Mesmerists, the drummer of Tedworth, th 
Seeress of Prevorst, the electric girls, and the Poltergeisl 
are cited in support of the theory; and a flavour of modernit 
is imparted by quotations from Carpenter on cerebri 
automatism, and by an exposition of Faraday's recent di< 
covery of the magnetic properties of oxygen. The boo 
is, in fact, nothing more than an elaborately futile attemf 

1 Philosophy of Mysterious Agents. Boston, 1853. A discussion on ti 
automatic Powers of tho Bruin {doing an answer to the criticism of Ken. C 
Backer). Same year. ' Philosophy etc., p. 304. 

GENERAL SURVEY 289 

to restate in modern scientific terminology Mesmer's theory 
of a universal cosmic fluid. 

Another theorist of the same type, but with less scientific 
pretensions, was J. Bovee Dods, who had been known for 
some years previously as a lecturer and writer on Mesmerism, 
and had in 1846 been interested in the trance revelations of 
A. J. Davis. In 1854 Dods published a book in which he 
essayed to give a complete explanation of the Spiritualist 
phenomena. 1 Dods* hypothesis is essentially the same as 
Rogers', though he is careful to explain that he does not 
believe in odic force. Like Rogers, he is satisfied that the 
phenomena in general are genuine, and depend for their 
manifestation upon the subconscious working of the medium's 
organism. The genuine medium, he explains (and he ex- 
pressly includes in this category the Fox girls), is always 
honest The movements of tables and chairs which occur 
in her presence are not consciously caused by her ; they result 
from " a redundancy of electricity congregated upon the in- 
voluntary nerves"; the raps are caused by "an electro- 
magnetic discharge from the fingers and toes of the medium." 
But the force has its limitations. Generally the more violent 
physical movements — rocking and tilting of tables and chairs, 
and so on — are due to involuntary and unconscious move- 
ments on the part of the mediums. But tables may also be 
moved "by electro-magnetically charging the table from a 
living battery of many human hands, and thus attracting or 
repelling it without contact " ; the process is really " as simple 
as the raising of a balloon," though perhaps more arduous ; 
"the millions of pores in the table are filled with electro- 
magnetism from human brains, which is inconceivably lighter 
than the gas that inflates the balloon." 2 But the process will 
enable a piece of furniture to be levitated only after pro- 
longed contact with the human body has allowed saturation 
to take place, and it will not be equally successful with all 
substances. Dods is justly critical of Edmonds' description 
of a dinner-bell moving round the circle unassisted. The 
judge had clearly not realised the insuperable difficulties in 
the way of such a feat, for, as Dods explains, " bell-metal 
is so dense, and its pores so minute . . . that its gravity 
cannot be overcome by charging it with nervo-vital force from 
a thousand brains." * 

1 Spirit Manifestations Examined and Explained, etc., by John Bovee Dods. 
New York, 1854. * Ibid., pp. 87, 88. 

* Ifa'd, p. 164. Dods, it should be explained, a few years later became an, 
adherent of the Spiritualist doctrine, 

I— U 

290 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

Even the North American Reviewer cannot but admit ti 
genuineness of some of the phenomena, both physical an 
mental, and is constrained to propound a similar theory. It 
probably, he thinks, the right hemisphere of the brain whic! 
in the automatic or trance state, acts independently of i 
usual controlling centres in the left hemisphere. The spin; 
column, he suggests, is a battery in which the vertebrae pla 
the part of the metallic plates and the soft matter of tl 
spinal chord acts as acid. The right hemisphere, becomin 
in certain states overcharged with the electric force so pit 
duced, explodes and produces raps, lights, and physic 
movements. Rogers' hypothesis of the interference of tl 
mundane forces reappears in the reviewer's suggestion tha 
as the electrical equilibrium of the whole surroundings ma 
be disturbed by these explosions, the medium's organism ca 
thus in effect draw (unconsciously) upon a huge reservoir c 
external energy for the production of physical movement 
upon a large scale. l 

Other writers suggested that the legs of the tables wer 
filled with electricity before each stance, 2 or that medium 
resided near telegraph lines, and so became charged wit! 
electricity to such a degree that they spontaneously explode 
in raps. 3 Hare's attention was first called to the manifesta 
tions by a correspondent who consulted him on the adequaq 
of the electric explanation of the phenomena. 

In the Press, again, it is surprising to note how hospitably 
the phenomena were received. The smaller provincia 
journals naturally gave up much of their space to thi 
manifestations as being excellent "copy." But many evei 
of the daily papers in the principal towns, as the move 
ment grew in importance, felt themselves unable to dismis 
the whole subject as imposture, and suggested that, if no 
the agency of spirits, at any rate the working of some nev 
material laws were demonstrated by the mysterious occur 
rences. The North American Reviewer begins his article bj 
explaining that he had no liking for the task in hand, anc 
had deferred it in the hope that the movement would di< 
of itself. But so far from dying out it was growing in im 
portance, and now included in its ranks some men of higt 
culture and many persons of good repute and sound commor 
sense. He adds : — 

1 North American Review t April, 1855. 
9 Telegraph Papers , vol. iii. p. 485. 
• Spirit Worlds vol. ii. p. 107. 

GENERAL SUEVEY 291 

" We do not think the following paragraph from the address of 
the New England Spiritualists' Association an overstatement: 'It 
is computed that nearly two millions of people in our nation, with 
hundreds of thousands of people in other lands, are already 
believers in Spiritualism. No less than twelve or fourteen periodi- 
cals are devoted to the publication of its phenomena and the dis- 
semination of its principles. . . . Every day^ and much more than 
daily, lectures are given in the presence of audiences quite respect- 
able as to both number and character ; circles are held by day and 
by night in nearly every city, town, and village throughout our 
country.' " 

Amongst the clergy of the various religious denominations 
the tendency on the whole seems to have been towards belief 
in the phenomena as being actually of spiritual origin. Many 
ministers from the more advanced denominations had, indeed, 
as already shown, accepted the new revelation in its entirety. 
Others, like the Rev. Charles Beecher, whilst pleading for a 
serious and dispassionate investigation and a careful trial of 
the claims put forward by the spirits, were inclined to suspect 
diabolism. l So the Swedenborgians generally, whilst believ- 
ing in the genuineness of the manifestations, held it unprofit- 
able or even dangerous to meddle with them. Thus, Henry 
James, 2 in an essay on the spirit-rappings, after stigmatising 
the assumed spirits as " ghostly busy-bodies," writes : " On 
the whole I am inclined to regard the so-called spirits rather 
as so many vermin revealing themselves in the tumble-down 
walls of our old theological hostelry, than as any very saintly 
or sweet persons, whose acquaintance it were edifying or even 
comfortable to make." 3 

Other Swedenborgians, however, took a prominent part in 
the early propaganda. But by the more orthodox sects 
generally the new movement was either condemned as mere 
folly and chicanery, or regarded as of probably diabolic 
origin ; and there were cases in which ministers were ex- 
pelled from their churches, teachers from their schools, and 
communicants from their congregations, for meddling with 
the unholy thing. 4 

of tk$ Spiritualist Manifestations. London, 1853. 

* The father of the well-known novelist, and of Mr. William James, Professor 
of Psychology at Harvard. 

» Lectures and Miscellanies, p. 418. New York, 1852. See also Bosh on 
" Pseudo-Spiritualism," in New Church Miscellanies (New York, 1855) ; The 
Phenomena of Modem Spiritualism, by W. a Hayden (Boston, 1855); and The 
Spirit fVorU, vol. ii.jp. 1 15-17, for an exposition of the Swedenboqpan views. 

4 See the extracts from various religious papers quoted by Ballon in his work, 
Modem Spirit Manifestations , chap. ix. 

292 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

This view of the matter was, in the time and circumstance 
and from the standpoint of the Christian believer, not al- 
together unnatural. For unquestionably the movement was 
in certain phases, extravagant, blasphemous, and dangerou* 
to accepted standards of morality. Perhaps the most damag- 
7 ing accusation brought against the Spiritualists at this time 
was that of the propaganda of free love. There were some 
grounds for the charge. From their close association with 
various contemporary Socialisms, so much might, perhaps, 
have been anticipated. For Socialism in its extreme form has 
generally included in its scheme for the reconstruction ol 
society a reform of the institution of marriage; a reform which 
has taken the shape, sometimes, of lifelong celibacy, as amongst 
the Shakers, sometimes of a wider freedom, as amongst the 
Oneida Communists. There were in the early years of 
Spiritualism two or three societies which apparently taught 
and practised a similar freedom, of which the most notable 
was the Kiantone Community, which numbered amongst its 
prominent members John Murray Spear. 1 A few Spiritualist 
writers and lecturers advocated, or were understood to ad- 
vocate, like views. 2 Moreover, charges of loose sexual rela- 
tions were brought against A. J. Davis, Warren Chase, and 
others ; s and the fact that many prominent mediums were 
married several times in the course of a few years appears to 
have been due to a certain laxity of the marriage tie, rather 
than to any exceptional rate of mortality. 

Finally, if additional evidence is needed that the charge 
was not wholly baseless, we have the testimony of men like 
Adin Ballou and Joel Tiffany. Ballou, in the autumn of 
1854, published a solemn warning to Spiritualists against 
the Free Love Movement, of which the signs were already 
manifest to him in certain quarters, pointing out that sexual 
aberrations of this kind had in the past again and again been 
associated with Spiritual movements like their own. 4 And 
Tiffany, in a course of lectures on Spiritualism delivered 
before the New York Conference in February, 1856, thought it 

1 Mrs. Hardinge Britten, History, pp. 233, 234. 

a Mattison, Spirit- Rapping ', pp. 101-4 ; Mahan, Modern Mysteries, etc, 
pp. 285, 286 ; Telegraph Papers, vol. vi. p. 336 ; and T. L. Nichols, in Marriage, 
quoted by Davis, Great Harmonia, vol iv. pp. 410-14. 

3 See the Magic Staff, pp. 397, etc, and Life Line of the Lone One, pp. 
145-155. Both Davis and Chase refer to the circumstances and offer plausible 
explanations of their conduct. Whilst, however, the episodes remain obscure, it 
would seem that, at worst, they were guilty of weakness or indiscretion, not of a 
calculated revolt against accepted and acceptable moral standards. 

4 Telegraph Papers, voL vi. pp. 297, 298. 

GENERAL SURVEY 293 

necessary specially to distinguish the Spiritualist ideal of a 
permanent union founded on love from the debased travesty 
of so-called Free Love : " To say of the impulse calling for 
such union that it desires change, and consequent variety, is 
blasphemously false and absurd. The basis of conjugal love 
is as deep and immutable as are the foundations of immor- 
tality and eternal life." * 

Spiritualism, indeed, necessarily attracted within its sphere 
the "cranks," the social theorists and reformers, the rebels 
against convention and the exiles from society. And as 
free love was in the air at the time, naturally the ranks 
of the Spiritualists were to some extent recruited from the 
adherents of that doctrine. But whatever the aberrations 
of individuals, or here and there of small cliques of 
Spiritualists, it would be impossible to substantiate the 
charge against Spiritualists as a body. In fact, the charge 
mainly rested upon a misconception. Free love, in the 
sense of perfect liberty for contracting temporary unions to 
be dissolved at will, was probably promulgated as an ideal 
by very few writers, and by none who can fairly be called 
representative Spiritualists. But there had been in America 
before 1848, as already shown, a wide-spreading impulse of 
social reform, which in one direction found expression in 
free discussion and criticism of marriage, of the position 
of woman, of sexual relations generally and of their bearing 
on the future of the race. The Spiritualists of the radical 
school had for the most part been brought up in an environ- 
ment favourable to these ideas, and they were inevitably 
reflected in the Spiritualist propaganda. But whatever may 
have been the effect here and there on undisciplined in- 
dividuals, it was a singular misconception which accused 
the teachers of the new ideas of a design to subvert the 
existing social order in the interests of sensual licence. The 
ideal put forward was even puritanic in some of its aspects. 
It was, indeed, the wrongs of women and children which 
for many advocates of so-called "free love" formed the 
ground and the inspiration of their teachings. The following 
resolution, moved by A. J. Davis and his wife Mary at a 
Spiritualist Congress held in September, 1856, expressed 
this aspect of the question. After reciting the claim of 
women to co-equal civil and political advantages with men, 
the resolution ends: "And that, in the marriage relation, 
she shall be fully secured in her natural rights to property, 
to the legal custody of her children, and to the entire control 

1 Spiritualism Explained, p. 205, by Joel Tifiany. New York, 1856. 

294 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

of her own person, that thereby fewer and better childra 
may be born, and humanity be improved and elevated." 1 

To these purely mundane arguments Davis, Harris, an< 
other Spiritualists added the doctrine, as old perhaps a 
mysticism itself, of spiritual counterparts. The infant wa 
born married ; somewhere or other in the wide world wa 
the counterpartal half of his nature, waiting to be unite* 
to him. From this doctrine it followed that, while the tru 
marriage was necessarily indissoluble and eternal, being ii 
fact not a union, but a reunion, it was lawful and eve 
expedient that other unions should be dissolved as sooi 
as the mutual incompatibility became manifest and intolet 
able. "Transient marriages bring divorces. Divorces ar 
natural until the harmonial plane is reached ; there only a 
eternal union is natural." 1 

The spirit teachings of J. M. Spear are to a similar efiec 
Here is an excerpt from " a prayer for a marriage occasion " 
u Entering intelligently into the new relations, comprehend 
ing the divine matehood, may they be faithful to eaci 
other in all the relations of life; and should they, fror 
any cause, come to feel that they are no longer husban< 
and wife, amicably may they withdraw from one another." 
And Brittan writes : " To constitute a true spiritual marriag 
two congenial souls must be irresistibly attracted and per 
fectly conjoined ... by the spiritual natural law of affinity * 
and when the marriage falls short of this ideal, if the marrie< 
pair " cannot possibly agree to live together, they should d< 
the next best thing, which may be to separate by mutua 
consent" 4 

In brief, the Spiritualists of the time, whilst regarding 
occasional divorces as a regrettable necessity, resultinj 
from imperfect conditions, advocated the permanent unioi 
of one man with one woman as the ideal state. Thei 
teachings, no doubt, especially because of that unfortunate 
doctrine of the " spiritual counterpart," may have done mon 
than the teachers contemplated to encourage divorce ; bu 
I can find nothing to substantiate the charge that the» 
men deliberately advocated the forming of temporary unions 
still less that they connived at licence. It is obvious, indeed 
to those who study the matter that their ideals were highei 

1 A. J. Davis, Events in the Life of a Seer, p. 208. See also Wane 
Chase, Life Line and the Spiritual Rostrum, passim, for an enlargement of thi 
theme. 

2 Great liar mania, vol. iv. p. 418. See also vol. ii., The True Marriage. 

3 The Educator, p. 669. 4 lelegraph Papers, vol. vi. pp. 241, 245. 

GENERAL SURVEY 295 

and founded on a wider and juster view of the facts of life 
than appears to have been the case with some of their 
accusers. 

There were, however, extravagances of doctrine or practice 
advocated " under spirit guidance " by individual Spiritualists 
which gave rise to much scandal. For such eccentric in- 
dividuals could always reckon on a certain following amongst 
the ranks of their fellow -believers. As instances of these 
aberrations we may take the Mountain Cove Community 
and the New Motor. 

THE MOUNTAIN COVE COMMUNITY. 

The town of Auburn, New York State, had been from 
the first an active centre of spiritual propaganda. So early 
as 1850 there were, according to E. W. Capron, between 
fifty and a hundred mediums there. An "apostolic" circle 
had also been formed under the direction of a well-known 
medium, Mrs. Benedict, which claimed to receive through 
the raps communications from St Paul, the prophet Daniel, 
and other high personages. " St Paul " had also been instru- 
mental in driving away an evil spirit which had obsessed 
a young girl for the space of a day and a half. In 1850, 
by direction of the same apostle Paul, given through die 
raps at the circle, James Scott, minister at Brooklyn of 
the sect of Seventh -Day Baptists, removed to Auburn; 
he was shortly followed by the Rev. T. L Harris, and they 
soon gathered round them a group of disciples and founded 
a paper, Disclosures from the Interior and Superior Care far 
Mortals 1 whose columns are filled with messages signed 
"John the Divine," "Daniel the Prophet," etc, and with 
poetry inspired by the spirits of Shelley, Coleridge, and 
others. 

Later, Harris being then in New York, the word came 
that a community should be founded, and that the faithful 
should yield themselves and their possessions implicitly to 
the guidance of the perfect medium, James Scott ; and Scott 
himself, with about a hundred others, did in effect in the 
autumn of 1851 settle themselves on some land in Mountain 
Cove, Fayette co., Virginia, which had been spiritually in- 
dicated. The inspiration had now assumed a loftier source, 
as will be seen from the following quotation : — 

" I read, written in letters of fire : Dost thou believe ? and what 
dost thou believe ? Who, thinkest thou, called thee here ? Who, 

296 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

bclievest thou, appeareth to control? Who inspireth? Not an 
angel, for he is led ; not a seraph, for he is controlled ; not created 
existence, for that is inspired. Who, then, thinkest thou, called thee 
to the Mountain ? Who but a God inspireth f Believest thou the 
indication of these questions? Who is prepared for the coming 
of the Son of Man ? Who is it that hath consecrated and yielded 
themselves, severing therefrom every attachment to earth? Who 
have submitted their dictation and design entirely to him who 
ordereth this manifestation from the regions of intelligence per- 
fected ? Who doth not exercise external judgment, will, and design ? 
Who doth not violate that law by which perfect redemption shall 
be accomplished in fallen man? / Am That I Am inquirttk 
now of thee! and prepare to answer thou met . . . None other than 
God, thy Redeemer, calleth for thee. None other than He who 
hath the keys of death and hell addresseth you through one of your 
number I " 

At about the same time the inspired utterance through 
the mouth of Scott called upon the true believers to sur- 
render all their worldly goods, and to hold them at the 
disposal of the spiritual guide, as follows : — 

"God . . . hath aforetime committed to your charge, as His 
Stewards, the means designed to be employed while conducting 
the external in the manifestation into its consummation. And 
lo, now He cometh and calleth upon you, and requireth the charge 
committed, with its improvement. Whoso hath, and now con- 
secrateth to this great work, to him shall be given ... to him . . . 
who is wanting in disposition to render back to the author of all 
blessing, from him the Spirit departeth, and shall be taken even 
that which he hath." 

There were, however, as we learn from T. S. Hiatt, who 
himself joined the infant community in December, 1851, 
dissensions and money losses at the outset, and perhaps 
some revolt of the natural man against the command to 
divest himself of his worldly goods ; and the community 
within a few months was in danger of breaking up. But 
in the early summer of the following year Harris again 
joined them, bringing with him more persons of property, 
and the scheme was resuscitated. Another manifesto from 
the controlling intelligence was now issued through the 
organism of the faithful medium : — 

"Dear Brethren, — The especially appointed and commissioned 
spirits, through whom superior wisdom has approached and in- 
structed mortals, dictate unto you the present epistle in the light 
of understanding, in the purpose of council, and in the desire of 

GENERAL SURVEY 297 

harmonious interprocedure of love. They review their works, 
declare their directed purposes, and seek to guide your feet in the 
way of peace. 

"The Circle of Apostles and Prophets do finally declare that 
in the eighth month of the year 1851, common diurnal time, the 
Word of the Lord came unto them, commanding disclosure of 
His most holy will concerning the establishment of a terrestrial 
centre for the unfolding of His heavenly kingdom, and a refuge for 
His obedient people .... 

14 In obedience to our instructions, we guided James, the medium, 
into the place appointed, and have established upon this mountain 
the standard of the cross, as a sign for the gathering of the obedient 
people. 

" In further fulfilment of our charge, we have guided Thomas, 
the medium, to the appointed place, and have disclosed unto his 
mind full evidence of his associate medium's faithfulness in all the 
work given unto him to do; and that also all discord within the 
boundaries of the place appointed is caused by the presence of the 
unsanctified, and subsides with their removal therefrom. 

" Having thus guided the vehicles of communication to the place 
directed by His most holy will, and united them thereupon, the 
Spirit, who deviseth and establisheth the Redeeming Procedure, 
issueth commandment unto His messengers to resume the dis- 
closure of His truth without delay, that His name may thereby be 
glorified, His people instructed and comforted, and His com- 
passionate and lovingkindness, in accordance with the purpose in 
the consummation of His procedure, be manifest unto the earth 
and the inhabitants thereof. 

" Dictated at Mountain Cove, 

"Fifth Month, 185a." 

The dissensions and pecuniary difficulties, however, still 
continued; some of the community left, others were banished 
by command ; and the movement seems to have died out 
early in 1853, Harris then returning to his ordinary work of 
lecturing, writing inspirational poems, etc, for a time. The 
impulse for community founding, however, was strong in 
him, and some years later found more complete and per- 
manent expression. 1 

1 The history of the Mountain Cove Community is taken from the account 
given by Capron, Modern Spiritualism, chap. vi. See also Noyes, History of 
American Socialisms t pp. 5o&-74 : Mrs. Hardinge Britten, History^ pp. 207* 
17 ; The Spirit World % vol. ii. pp. 86, 122, 141, 169 ; voL iii. pp. 29, 105. 

298 EARUT AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

# 
> 

THE NEW MOTOR. 

In April, 1854, S. C. Hewitt, the editor of the New En 
announced in the columns of that paper that the " Assocu 
tion of Electricizers " * had given directions through tfa 
l organism of Brother Spear for the construction of a machin 

, which was to embody the principle of a new motive powe 

; Later we learn that the machine was to be so constructed a 

'» to draw upon the great reservoir of the magnetic life c 

i Nature, and to be " self-generative." All so-called electrics 

r machines hitherto constructed by merely human agenc 

f derived their power, it was pointed out, from sources whic 

* were artificial and easily exhausted. But die new moth 

power — like the human body, with which it was compare 
by its founders — was to be a living organism, quickened b 
an indwelling spiritual principle. The analogy with tr 
human body was developed in an almost incredible mannc 
Whilst yet the new motive power stood in its wooden shed ; 
, High Rock, near Lynn (Mass.), an inert mass of zinc an 

' copper, it was announced in a beautiful vision to Mrs. 

a respectable married lady, who numbered herself among 
Spear's disciples, that to her it was appointed to be "tl: 
Mary of a New Dispensation." The word later came to h< 
through the mouth of Brother Spear that she should go 1 
High Rock, to where the New Motor stood. There si 
endured pangs as of parturition for two hours ; " her ow 
perception was clear and distinct that through those agoni 
ing throes the most interior and refined elements oPh< 
f spiritual being were imparted to and absorbed by " tr 

machine. At the end of two hours there were indicatioi 
K of life in the metallic framework, "at first perceptible onl 

I to her keenly sensitive touch, but visible ultimately i 

movement and pulsation to the eyes of all." Then followc 

for some weeks on the part of Mrs. "a proce 

analogous to that of nursing," by which it was claim* 
that the life of " the new-born child," the " Physical Savioi 
of the race," was cherished and sustained. Thereupon ri 
enthusiastic disciples hailed the New Motor as "the Art < 
all Arts, the Science of all Sciences, the New Messiah, God 
Last Best Gift to Man." A. J. Davis went down in Ma 
1854, to see the wonder. He was "impressed" to repo 
that Spear was undoubtedly honest, and the design of tl 
mechanism undoubtedly the work of spirits, on the grour 
apparently that it couldn't have been produced by Spe« 

1 See an/t t p. 275. 

GENERAL SURVEY £ 299 

out of his own head. Further, he was impressed to declare 
that " the positive and negative — the male and female — laws 
of Nature were very truthfully divulged and prescribed 
theoretically"; yet that in practice the thing had not 
moved, and obviously could not move, and that if it did 
move it couldn't so much as turn a coffee-mill. The seer's 
conclusion on the whole matter was that some mechanically 
minded spirits, of good intentions and " correct philosophy," 
but " deficient in the practical knowledge of the means to 
consummate its actualisation," were conducting experiments 
at friend Spear's expense, to the extent of some two thousand 
dollars, and that, in the interest of all parties, the less said 
about the matter the better. Others of the more level-headed 
Spiritualists reported to the same effect 

The end of the New Motor, as we learn from a letter 
written by J. M. Spear, came a few months later. The 
machine had been moved to Randolph (N.Y.), that it might 
have the advantage of more terrestrial electricity. One night 
the neighbours arose, broke into the shed, and smashed up 
the machinery. Spear finds comfort in the reflection that 
Garrison was mobbed and Birney's printing-press had been 
thrown into the river. 1 

But the main body of Spiritualists had as little sympathy 
with such movements as those which culminated at Mountain 
Cove or High Rock as they had with the propaganda of 
free love. It was not merely that they were repelled by 
their extravagance and absurdity ; they resented not less the 
claims to exclusive inspiration put forward ; for the special 
characteristic of the Spiritualist- movement from the begin- 
ning has been its democratic character. There has been 
neither recognised leader nor authoritative statement of 
creed. This characteristic, again, gave breadth, tolerance, 
and expansiveness to the movement, which made it unique 
amongst religious revivals, and rendered it possible for the 
new belief to combine with almost any pre-existing system 
of doctrine. As a matter of fact, many persons appear to 
have found a belief in Spiritualism not incompatible with 
dogmatic Christianity. As already shown, for instance, in 
chapter v., the spirit communications published by J. A. 
Gridley explicitly defended, against the attacks of A. J. 
Davis, the genuineness of the biblical miracles and the 
verity of the Christian doctrines ; and Spiritualists in general 

1 For the history of the New Motor, see Capron, Modern Spiritualism, pp. 
220 et sea. ; The Educate* ', pp. 238-57 ; and Telegraph Papers, voL iv. p. 459, 
vol. v. pp. 39, 182, 342, vol. vi p. 397. 

300 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

showed no hostility to the Christian faith. The new ideas 
were in themselves so engrossing that the devotees rarely 
came into active and conscious collision with older systems 
of belief. A partial exception is no doubt to be found in the 
writings of Andrew Jackson Davis. Davis set himself to 
explain the futility of the Christian scheme in the light of 
the New Revelation ; he maintained that Jesus was a man 
inspired from the same universal source as himself, and that 
his wisdom had in some respects been greatly overrated; 
that the Christian miracles were instances of the operation 
of the same natural laws now responsible for the Spiritualis- 
tic phenomena ; and he takes occasion to point out that the 
evidence for some of the biblical marvels which did not 
readily lend themselves to this interpretation was faulty and 
insufficient 1 Further, he taught that — all evil being but 
good in the making — there is no hell and no personal devil, 
and that in the temptation, therefore, Jesus was assailed 
merely by the promptings of his own lower nature. 2 

But the tone of hostility towards Christianity adopted 
by A. J. Davis was frequently deprecated by his contem- 
poraries, and found few imitators. Writers like Sunderland, 
Edmonds, Hare, and Brittan, whilst not admitting the 
uniquely divine nature of Jesus, or the exclusive inspiration 
of the Bible, seem to have regarded the Spiritualist utter- 
ances as supplementing and fulfilling the earlier revelation.* 
The essentially democratic character of the movement, 
/> however, renders it a task of some difficulty to define its 
creed. Creed, no doubt, in the sense in which the word is 
understood by the Christian Churches, it had none. But, 
nevertheless, certain factors can be recognised which went 
to make up a general body of more or less defined belief. 
The older mesmeric doctrines were represented abundantly ; 
there was a strong Swedenborgian element, whose chief 
spokesmen were such men as Joel Tiffany, W. S. Courtney, 
and W. M. Fernald ; there was an element of newer 
mysticism, represented mainly by Davis, and pre-eminently 
in his later years by Thomas Lake Harris. Of the 
universalist contingent, Brittan, the editor or co- editor 
successively of the Univerccelum, the Shekinak, and the 
Spiritual Telegraphy was the most conspicuous exponent. 

1 Events in the Life of a Seer, pp. 235 et scq. 

1 Great /farmonia, vol. ii. p. 347. 

1 See Sunderland, in Spirit World, vol. ii. p. 45 ; Edmonds and Dexter, 

ituatism, vol. i. pp. 209, 216, 384; Hare, Experimented Investigation, 

7 ; Brittan, in Telegraph Papers, vol. ii. , p. 454. 

GENERAL SURVEY 301 

The chief negative aspects, as judged from a Christian 
standpoint, of the resulting body of beliefs are thus summed 
up by Beecher : — 

"Rejecting the Bible as authority, claiming for all men in- 
spiration in common with Christ and the Apostles, and of the 
same kind ; regarding sin as immaturity of development, eschewing 
all received ideas of a fall of angels and men from original holiness, 
of total depravity, atonement, regeneration, pardon, etc., the system 
is in its last analysis, though but half-developed, a polytheistic 
pantheism, disguising under the name of spirit a subtle but genuine 
materialism. " l 

The one positive tenet common to all Spiritualists was 
the possibility of communion with the spirits of deceased 
men and women. But associated with this belief almost 
universally was the conception of the other life as one of 
limitations and conditions not unlike the present ; a world 
of orderly and continuous progression. This conception 
implicitly carried with it the negation of the distinctive 
Christian doctrines, as commonly understood — the scheme 
of redemption, of heaven and hell, and of a last judgment. 
The vision of the other life was developed and embellished 
by each believer according to his individual prepossessions 
and environment But the anaemic optimism of Davis 
pervaded the whole. And there was a widespread be- 
lief, having its roots deep in older mysticisms, in a suc- 
cession of concentric zones or spheres arranged in groups 
of seven, which were commonly conceived as having a 
definite location in space, insomuch that Hare tells us that 
he learnt from the spirits that the bands seen through a 
telescope over the equatorial regions of Jupiter are actually 
the spiritual spheres of that planet ;* and Gridley gives the 
exact dimensions of the various terrestrial circles, the first 
being 5,000 miles and the sixth 30,000 from the earth's 
surface. 3 

In fact, the common conception of spirit was of a more 
refined matter. Thus Hare was expressly taught by the 
" spirits " that there were peculiar elementary principles out of 
which spiritual bodies were constructed, which were analogous 
to, but not identical with, material elements ; that the spirits 
have bodies, with a circulation and respiratory apparatus ; 
that they breathe a gaseous or ethereal matter, which is also 

1 Review of the Spiritual Manifestations. London, 1853, p. 79. 
3 Experimental Investigation, p. 120. 
* Astounding Facts, etc, p. 96. 

302 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

inspired, together with atmospheric oxygen, by men, 
and fishes — the spiritual gas being especially necessary t 
the latter class of animals. 1 Ballou, in a summary of th 
theory of Spiritualists, tells us that matter and spirit ar 
both eternally coexistent substances, the lowest grade c 
spirit being always more subtle, elastic, and penetrative thai 
the most ethereal matter. This "subtle ethero-spiritua 
substance" he calls " Spiricity." - Dr. Ashburner, in ; 
letter quoted in the English edition of Ballou's work 
defines a train of thought as " currents of globules of highl] 
refined matter." 3 Capron and Barron, in their History, 
speak of "the more refined substance to which we givi 
the name of spirit" And W. S. Courtney, one of th< 
most thoughtful of the earlier writers, quotes from th< 
Univercoelum — 

"the following illustration of the only difference between matte 
and spirit 'If you fill a hogshead with cannon balls, there wi 
be left large interstices between them, which can be filled wit 
musket balls, still leaving interstices between the musket balls whic 
can be filled with shot, those interstices again with sand, thos 
again with water, those again with air, the air with light, the ligt 
with electricity, the electricity with magnetism, etc.* We migh 
pursue," Courtney writes, "the interiorising process, and say th 
magnetism is pervaded by a principle of sensation, sensation b 
intelligence, intelligence by love, etc., thus showing the differenc 
between spirit and matter to be only a difference in degree c 
development or refinement — the higher associating with, infilling, an 
actuating the lower, and holding it, as it were, in consistency." 6 

But it is needless to multiply quotations and authorities 
The unity of substance and the omnipotence of electricity- 
" salvation by electricity," as James happily terms it — wer 
the two keys which for the early Spiritualist unlocked th 
doors of all knowledge in heaven or on earth. Of the natur 
of God, or other transcendental mysteries, the spirits hav 
nothing to say. The world they present to our view i 
a strictly material world, developing by processes of materia 
evolution towards an unknown end. There is no mystery 
about their teaching. Spirit is only attenuated matter ; th< 
other world a counterpart of this; the living universe ar 
endless series of beings like ourselves. Their view, in short 

1 0£.cit.,pp. 1 16-18. 

* Adnm Spirit Mamfutmtions* pp. 3, 4. 

> /Ml, pi 144. l ¥£ge 8. 

• T%€ fytritWirU, toL ii. p. 42. 

GENERAL SURVEY 303 

represents the product of common sense, the common sense 
of the ordinary uninstructed man, acting upon the facts, 
or rather his interpretation of the facts, presented to him. 
Given his interpretation as correct, the inferences which he 
drew, the cosmological scheme which he constructed on the 
lines of his own parochial experience, follow inevitably. 
There is rarely any hint of deeper insight The problems 
of Space and Time, of Knowing and Being, of Evil and 
Good, of Will and Law, are hardly even recognised. 
Common sense is not competent for these questions; and 
in so far as the Spiritualist scheme fails to take account of 
them, it falls short of being a Theology, or even an adequate 
Cosmology. But such as it is, though it makes no appeal 
to the higher imagination and ignores the deeper mysteries 
of life, it has for nearly two generations satisfied the in- 
tellectual needs and the emotional cravings of hundreds of 
thousands of votaries. And its followers can boast that 
throughout that period they have shown a sympathy for 
opinions differing from their own, and a tolerance for their 
opponents, unique in the history of sects called religious. 

The annals of Spiritualism, up to 1855 at any rate, are 
filled almost exclusively with accounts of phenomena and 
opinions. Of history, in any other sense, there is little to 
record. The new sect certainly grew rapidly in numbers, 
though there are no statistics, and it is difficult to find an 
estimate which is even professedly based on anything but 
conjecture. Hammond speaks of two thousand writing 
mediums alone in 1852 j 1 Partridge, writing in 1854, says 
that Spiritualists in America numbered over a million ; 2 
Tallmadge, a few weeks later, says two millions ; 8 Tiffany, 
in 1855, writes, "they now number millions"; 4 whilst a few 
years later, at a Catholic convention, it was stated, "on 
accurate and reliable information/' that the Spiritualists 
numbered eleven millions. 6 But all these statements are 
mere guesses, inspired by the hopes or fears of their 
authors. Even the estimate adopted by the North Ameri- 
can Reviewer, though at any rate disinterested, cannot 
safely be regarded as presenting an approximation to the 
truth. 

But whatever their actual numbers, it is certain that the 

> TJU Ptigrimmp of Tkamms Paine (Preface). 
1 T*U s raph Papers, voL iv. p. 27a 

• Ma\ 9 toL it. p. 531. 

4 Spiritualism Exfinned, p. 15a. 

* Mrs. Hardinge Britten, History, p. 273. 

304 EABLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

y new sect bulked largdy in the Press ; that its followers be 

conferences, services, and stances in almost every town 
importance in the United States ; that they supported mai 
periodicals of their own, and organised themselves into mai 

it 

# 

) 

i societies — Harmonial Brotherhood, Society for the Diffusk 

* of Spiritual Knowledge, and the like; and that, general] 

they carried on an active propaganda by their lectures, the 
published writings, and their seances. 

For the most part this propaganda, save for the accusatk 
of diabolism constantly levelled at them from the varkw 
pulpits, seems to have proceeded peacefully enough. In ch 
or two instances, however, Spiritualism made its appearand 
before the law. One of the most noted cases at the time w: 
that of Abby Warner. One Dr. Underbill (afterwards tl 
husband of Leah Fox) had on Christmas Eve, 1852, 
?' company with a medium named Abby Warner, attend* 

service at the Episcopal Church in Massillon, Ohio. Soc 
1 , after the service had commenced loud raps were heard. Tl 

^, officiating clergyman requested that the noise might ceasi 

but the sounds shortly recommenced, and became louder th* 

before. They apparently proceeded from the part of tl 

building where Abby Warner was seated — and, indeed, 

was rumoured that the spirits had directed Abby to go 

church on purpose that the manifestations might be product 

in so favourable a theatre. Abby was accordingly arreste 

and tried on a charge of disturbing a religious meeting. C 

i behalf of the defendant it was pleaded that though sirail 

/. sounds occurred in her presence, they were not made I 

t her conscious agency nor under her control. In the rest 

the evidence proved insufficient to locate the sounds wii 

exactness, or to fix the responsibility of their productio 

\ and the accused was discharged. 1 The Spiritualists, som 

what illogically, claimed the result as a triumph, and coi 
tinued to take credit, on behalf of the spirits, for tl 
manifestation. A year later Dr. Underhill brought an actic 
for libel in connection with the case, but the jury di 
agreed. 2 

Of other legal proceedings the Eddy case was tl 
most noteworthy. Insanity at this time was frequent) 
charged as a result of belief in Spiritualism. And there w« 
some justification for the charge. Andrew Jackson Dav 
and other Spiritualists admit that cases of insanity ha 

1 History* by Mrs. Hardinge Britten, pp. 299, 300. 
* Telegraph Papers % voL iii. p. 361, 

gSn 

ERAL SURVEY 305 

occurred in their ranks, and formidable statistics are quoted 
by some writers. 1 

In any case, the matter is one of but little significance. 
Religious mania is a well-recognised type, and no doubt 
many persons lost their reason over spirit-rapping who might 
otherwise have gone mad over the doctrine of hell-fire. 
Something more than newspaper reports or unsifted statistics 
from asylums is needed to establish a general tendency on 
the part of Spiritualists to lunacy. One case of the kind, 
however, excited much interest A man of some wealth 
named Ira B. Eddy, of Chicago, started, apparently under 
spiritual direction, a bank in that city in conjunction with 
some other persons. His brother, D. C. Eddy, fearing that 
Ira would dissipate his substance, took the case into court, 
and, on the plea that Ira was incapable of managing his own 
affairs, was appointed conservator of the estates. Some of 
the partners appear to have resisted the order of the court, 
and legal proceedings followed. Later, D. C. Eddy, in a 
somewhat high-handed manner, had his brother removed 
forcibly in the charge of some medical men to a private 
asylum in another State, where he was incarcerated for a 
week. The postmaster and other prominent citizens of 
Chicago protested against this arbitrary proceeding ; the 
question was tried, and, as his incarceration appears to have 
been illegal and no evidence was forthcoming that his deten- 
tion in the Asylum was justified in the interest of society, Ira 
Eddy was released, and the matter ended. 2 

There are other indications of the distrust and dislike not 
unnaturally inspired in various quarters by the new move- 
ment Thus so early as June, 1851, the New Hampshire 
House of Representatives adopted a resolution, "that the 
Committee on the Judiciary inquire into the expediency of 
making provision by law for protecting the people of the 
State against imposition and injury by persons pretending to 
hold intercourse with departed spirits, and report by bill or 
otherwise." 8 This particular resolution appears to have 
borne no fruit ; but some nine years later the Legislature of 
Alabama passed an Act prohibiting public spiritualistic 
manifestations under a penalty of five hundred dollars. 4 

1 See Davis, The Present Age. pp. 245-6, 252 ; Spirit World, voL iii. pp. 15, 55 ; 
Telegraph Papers, voL i. pp. 38, 159, voL v. pp. 100, 186, 410; and Mattison, 
Spirit-rappings Unveiled, pp. 158, 162. Mattison gives returns from various 
asylums showing ninety alleged cases. 

* Mattison, op. "*•» £ x 55 » Telegraph Papers, vol. L p. 437, vol. ii. p. 10, 

* Spirit World, vol. uL p. 3. 

4 Mrs. Hardinge Britten, History, p. 416. 

I. — X 

7 

306 EARLY AMERICAN SPIRITUALISM 

Spiritualism once in these early years came prominently 
before the Legislature of the United States, by means of a 
Memorial to Congress. The Memorial begins by represent- 
ing " that certain physical and mental phenomena, of ques- 
tionable origin and mysterious import, have of late occurred 
in this country and in almost all parts of Europe, and that 
the same are now so prevalent, especially in the northern, 
middle, and western sections of the Union, as to engross a 
large share of the public attention." After briefly describing 
the various phenomena, and stating that two general hypo- 
theses obtained with regard to their cause, viz. the spiritual- 
istic and what may be called the odylo-magnetic, the 
Memorial continues : — 

"While your memorialists cannot agree upon this question, they 
beg leave, most respectfully, to assure your Honorable Body they 
nevertheless most cordially concur in the opinion that the alleged 
phenomena do really occur, and that their mysterious origin, peculiar 
nature, and important bearing upon the interests of mankind de- 
mand for them a patient, thorough, and scientific investigation. 

" It cannot reasonably be denied that the various phenomena to 
which the Memorial refers are likely to produce important and last- 
ing results, permanently affecting the physical condition, mental 
development, and moral character of a large number of the 
American people. It is obvious that these occult powers do 
influence the essential principles of health and life, of thought and 
action, and hence they may be destined to modify the conditions of 
our being, the faith and philosophy of the age, and the government 
of the World." 

Finally the Memorial prayed for the appointment of a 
scientific commission of investigation. The Memorial, which 
bore over 13,000 signatures, was presented to Congress in 
April, 1854. The introducer, one General Shields, did not 
conceive it to be any part of his duty to attempt to move 
Congress to accede to the prayer of the petitioners, and, 
after some rather cheap jests at its expense, the Memorial 
was ordered to lie on the table. 

In the same month Spiritualism met with another rebuff. 
Hare, at a meeting of the American Scientific Association in 
Washington, read to the Convention an invitation from the 
Spiritualists of Washington to attend a lecture to be given 
by T. L. Harris. The invitation was laid upon the table. 1 

It remains only to add that the propaganda, even at this 

1 Telegraph Papers, vol. v. p. 112. 

GENERAL SURVEY 307 

early period, was not confined to the American continent 
At least two missionaries, Mrs. Hayden, wife of the some- 
time editor of the Star- Spangled Banner \ and D. D. Hume 
visited England before 1855 and helped to spread the new 
doctrines there. Of them and their doings we shall speak 
more later. 

END OF VOL. I. 

: 

A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS 

AND ANNOUNCEMENTS OF 

METHUEN AND COMPANY 

PUBLISHERS : LONDON 

36 ESSEX STREET 

W.C 

CONTENTS 

FACE 

PAGE 

9 

LEADERS OF RELIGION, . 30 

GENERAL LITERATURE, 

• 

. 8-»7 

SOCIAL QUESTIONS OF TO-DAY, . 30 

methuen's STANDARD LIBRARY, 

*7 

UKTYEESITY EXTENSION SERIES, . 3 1 

BYZANTINE TEXTS, 

• • 

*7 

COMMERCIAL SERIES, • • . 31 

LITTLE LIBRARY, . 

• | 

•8 

CLASSICAL TRANSLATIONS, . 31 

LITTLE GUIDES, . 

• « 

a8 

SCHOOL EXAMINATION SERIES, . 39 

LITTLE BIOGRAPHIES, . 

• « 

38 

MBTHUKN'S JUNIOR SCHOOL-BOOKS, 39 

LITTLE BLUB BOOKS 

• « 

«9 

TEXTBOOKS 09 TECHNOLOGY, 39 

UBBAEY OF DEVOTION, 

• ■ 

*9 

OXrOED COMMENTARIES, 

• 

«9 

THE rLEUR DB LIS NOVELS, . 39 

HANDBOOKS OF THEOLOGY, 

• 

•9 

BOOKS rOR BOYS AND GIRLS, 40 

CHURCHMAN'S UBBAEY, 

• 4 

»9 

THE NOVELIST, .... 40 

CHURCHMAN'S BIBLE, . 

• < 

3* 

methuen's SIXPENNY LIBRARY, . 40 

OCTOBER 1902 

Messrs Methuen* 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

THE COMPLETE WORKS OF CHARLES UUfR Edit 

fcyE-V. Ixca*. Ha wan IfcMiiiiiM /i&aliib 

Tki> — «■«■> rf :i. — *> rf C-l. —4 K-T I>A « *■* ■ al— u fa 

THE LIFE AND LETTERS O F OLIVER CROMWEI 

I iMndacCKm by C HL FltT 

> br hk s. a Lous, n 

I^H^ LI Llil rf—r w«* 

CRITICAL AND HISTORICAL ESSAYS. By Loi 
MtirjT. ££££■£ :. T F. C MowTAcn, M.A. 72n> FW— 
(T-m>Sc«. &.«**. [Jtfaw-'j Sftmdi J ZJtw*. 

IN VKMOKIA5C MAUD, AND THE PRINCESS. Edk. 
t» I. Cmiw f"»™, M. A. Cm 

THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. Bt Thomas Caju.ti 
E&ed b» C R. L. Fixtckm, F«Ojw <rf IfaffekB CoDctc Oifct 

OTHELLO. Edhed by H. C Hakt. /V«r 8«t. y. 6d. 

[Tit Ardem -\kmtnftm 

ROBERT BARLEY, EARL OF OXFORD. B y E-S.Rosco 

DbantaL Dtmr icm.-i.6d. 

Messrs. Methuen's Announcements 3 

WALTER RALEIGH. By Miss J. A. Taylor. With 12 

Illustrations. Cloth, y. 6d. ; leather, 4s. net. 

[Little Biographies. 

LORD TENNYSON. By A. C Benson, M.A. With 12 
Illustrations. Cloth, y. 6d. ; leather, 4s. net. 

[Little Biographies* 

ERASMUS. By E. F. H. Capey. With Illustrations. Cloth, 
y. 6d. ; leather, 4s net. [Little Biographies. 

CHRISTMAS BOOKS. By W. M. Thackeray. Edited by 
Stephen Gwynn. Pott 8tw, cloth, is. 6d. net; leather, 2s. 6d. net. 

[The Little Library. 

ESMOND. By W. M. Thackeray. Edited by Stephen 

Gwynn. Two Volumes. Pott Saw, cloth, is. 6d. net; leather, 2s. 6d. 
net. [The Little Library. 

CHRISTMAS BOOKS. By Charles Dickens. Edited by 
Stephen Gwynn. Two Volumes. Pott &vo, cloth, is. 6d. net; 
leather, 2s. 6d. net. [The Little Library. 

THE INGOLDSBY LEGENDS. Edited by J. B. Atlay. 
Two Volumes. Pott 8iv, cloth, is. 6d. net ; leather, 2s. 6a\ net. 

[The Little Library. 

A LITTLE BOOK OF ENGLISH SONNETS. Edited by 
J. B. B. Nichols. Pott 8tv, cloth, is. 6a\ net; leather, 21. 6d. net. 

[The Little Library. 

THE SCARLET LETTER. By Nathaniel Hawthorne. 

Edited by Percy Dearmer. Pott 8tv, cloth, is. 6d. net ; leather, 
2f. 6d. net. 

[The Little Library. 

THE INHERITANCE. By Susan Fbrrier. Two Volumes. 
Pott 8tv, cloth, is. 6d. net; leather, 2s. 6a\ net. 

[The Little Library. 

PARIS. By Hilaire Belloc. Illustrated. Crown Zvo. 6s. 

CORNWALL. By A. L. Salmon. Illustrated by B. C. 
Boulter. Pott Bvo, cloth, 31. ; leather, y. 6a\ net. 

[The Little Guides. 

KENT. By G. Clinch. Illustrated by F. D. Bedford. 

Pott Bvo, cloth, y. ; leather, y. 6d. net. [The Little Guides. 

BRITTANY. By S. Baring - Gould. Illustrated by J. 
Wylie. Pott 8c*, cloth, y. ; leather, 31. dd. net. 

[The Little Guides. 

THE ENGLISH LAKES. By F. G. Brabant, M.A. Illus- 
trated by E. H. New. Pott Boo, cloth 41. ; leather, 4s. 6d. net 

[The Little Guides. 

Messrs. Methoem's Announcements 

THE BRUNT OF THE WAR. By Emily Hobhouse. Wi 

Map and Illustrations. Crtarn 8w. 

THE HEART OF JAPAN. By C. I- Browxkm. Illustrate 

Crown fkw. 6j. 

Wi: 

A KEY TO THE TIME ALLUSIONS IN THE DIVIN 
COMEDY. ByG. Praduup. With* Dial. SmtUi quart: ys.t 

THE STRUGGLE FOR PERSIA. By Captain Donai 
Stuart. With ■ Hap. Cram* 8™. 6>. 

THE VISIT TO LONDON. Described in verse by F_ 
Lucas, and in coloured pictures by F. D. Bedford. Small ^ta. I 

Thii durmiaf book dexxiba tbc ininsdacusn of ■ coaster etuU (othodcHcbn i 
liibii of London. It U Uh mull of * welMtnowa partBcnlup between — nthrrT ■ 

THE BOOK OF THE COUNTRY AND THE GARDE 
By H. M. Batson. Illustrated by F. Cakruthlks Gould and 

C Gould. Dtmy 8m. ioi. 6rf. 
MODERN SPIRITUALISM. By Frank Podmore. 7^ 

Volumts. %vo. 311. ml. 

ANCIENT COFFERS AND CUPBOARDS : Their Histoi 
and Description. With many Illustrations. By Fred Rc 
Quart* £i, 31. *tl. 

THE INNER AND MIDDLE TEMPLE. By H. H. 
Billot, M.A. With nunwront IlliulMtiou. Crvwn Srv. 6j.it 

SIDELIGHTS ON THE GEORGIAN PERIOD. ByGEORi 

PaSTON. With many illustrations. DtMf Sea. IOj. bd. 

THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A ' NEWSPAPER GIRL.' ] 
Elizabeth L, Banks, Author of ' Campaigns of Curiosity. ' Wi 
Portrait. Crvmn Svo. 6s. 

THE DEVOTIONS OF ST. ANSELM. Edited by C. C. 
Wkbh, M.A. Pell 8iw, doth, as. ; Icotktr, is, &J. net. 

[ Tit Library of DetrtHii 

THE DEVOTIONS OF BISHOP ANDREWES. By F. 

BftlGHTMAN, M.A, of Pusey House, Oxford Crsram Sua. dr. 

THE AMERICAN COTTON INDUSTRY : A Study in Wo 
and Workers. By T. M. Young. Crown Btv, tlttk, If. 6d.; fat 
bard,, 1*. 64, 

Messrs. Methuen's Announcements 5 

COMPARATIVE THEOLOGY. By J. A. MacCulloch. 

Crown 8xv. 6s. [The Churchman 1 s Library. 

SECOND STRINGS. By A. D. Godley, M.A. F*cap. Zvo. 
2s.6a\ 
A volume of light rerse. 

Educational Books 

DESIGNING AND WEAVING. By A. F. Barker. Illus- 
trated. Demy 8tv. 

AGRICULTURAL GEOLOGY. By J. E. Marr, F.R.S. With 
numerous Illustrations. Crown %oo. 

ARITHMETIC AND MENSURATION FOR THE WORK- 
SHOP AND TECHNICAL SCHOOL. By C. T. Millis, 
M.I.M.E., Principal of the Borough Polytechnic College. With 
Diagrams. Crown %vo. 

EASY DICTATION AND SPELLING. By W. Williamson, 
B.A., Headmaster of the West Kent Grammar School, Brockley. 
Fcap. 8tw. is, 

THE ROSE READER. By Edward Rose. With Four 
coloured and other Illustrations. Crown Svo. 2s. 6a\ And in 4 
Parts. Parts I. and II., (xL each ; Part III., Sd. ; Part IV., tod. 

JUNIOR ENGLISH EXAMINATION PAPERS. By 
W. Williamson, B.A., Headmaster West Kent Grammar 
School, Brockley. Fcap. ivo. is. [Junior Examination Series. 

JUNIOR ARITHMETIC EXAMINATION PAPERS. By 
W. S. Beard, Headmaster Modern School, Fareham. Fcap. 8xv. 
is. [Junior Examination Series . 

THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. Edited by A. E. Rubie, 
M.A., Headmaster Royal Naval School, Eltham. Crown Svo. 2s. 

[Methuen's Junior School Books. 

THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. Edited by 
W. Williamson, B.A., Headmaster of the West Kent Grammar 
School, Brockley. Crown&vo. is.6d.[Methuen'sfunior School Books. 

A JUNIOR FRENCH GRAMMAR. By L. A. Sornet and 
M. J. Acatos, Modern Language Masters at King Edward's School, 
Birmingham* [Methuen's funior School Books. 

THE STUDENTS' PRAYER BOOK. Part 1. Morning 
and Evening Prayer and Litany. Edited by W. H. 
Flecker, M.A., D.C.L., Headmaster of the Dean Close School, 
Cheltenham. Crown 8tv. 2s. 6d. 

Messrs. Methuen's Announcements 7 

HONEY. By Helen Mathers, Author of * Comin' thro' the 

Rye.' Crown Svo. dr. 
HOLY MATRIMONY. By Dorothea Gerard, Author of 

' Lady Baby.' Crown Svo. 6s. 
MISS QUILLET. By S. Baring-Gould, Authorof 'Mehalah.' 

Illustrated by G. Grknville Manton. Crown Svo. 6s. 

BARBARA'S MONEY. By Adeline Sergeant, Author of 
'The Story of a Penitent Soul.' Crown Svo. 6s, 

JIM TWELVES. By W. F. Shannon, Author of 'The Mess 
Deck.' Crown Svo. 31. 6d. 

THE ADVENTURES OF SIR JOHN SPARROW. By 
Harold Bbgbib. Crown Svo. 6s. 

THE FATE OF VALSEC. By J. Bloundelle Burton. 

Crown Svo. 6s. 

PAPA. By Mrs. C. N. Williamson, Author of 'The Barn- 
stormers.' Crown %vo. 6s. 

MRS. CLYDE. By Julien Gordon. Crown Svo. 6s. 

THE BRANDED PRINCE. By Weatherby Chesney, 
Author of 'John Topp, Pirate.' Crown Svo. 6s. 

A PRINCESS OF THE HILLS. By Mrs. Burton Harrison. 

Illustrated. Crown Svo. 6s. 

THE TWICKENHAM PEERAGE. By Richard Marsh, 

Author of ' The Beetle. ' Crown Svo. 6s. 
THE PUPPET CROWN. By Harold Macgrath. Illus- 
trated. Crown Svo. 6s. 

WITH ESSEX IN IRELAND. By the Hon. Emily Law- 

less. Cheaper Edition. Crown Svo. 6s. 
A cheaper edition of a book which won considerable popularity in a more expensive 
form some years ago. 

THE INCA'S TREASURE. By Ernest Glanville. 
Illustrated by A. H. Buckland. Crown Svo. y. 6d. 

Gbe novelist 

Messrs. Methuen are issuing under the above general title a Monthly 
Series of Novels by popular authors at the price of Sixpence. Each 
Number is as long as the average Six Shilling Novel. 

No. XXXII. THE KLOOF BRIDE. By Ernest Glanville. 

ffletbuen'* Sixpenny Xtbran? 

THE MILL ON THE FLOSS. By George Eliot. 
PETER SIMPLE. By Captain Marryat. 
MARY BARTON. By Mrs. Gaskell. 
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. By Jane Austen. 
NORTH AND SOUTH. By Mrs. Gaseell. 
JACOB FAITHFUL. By Captain Marryat. 
SHIRLEY. By Charlotte Bronte. 

A CATALOGUE OF 

Messrs. Methuen's 

PUBLICATIONS 

Part I. — General Literature 

Jaoob Abbot. THK BEECHNUT BOOK. 

Edited by K. V. Lucas. Ilhwrrated 
Square Pea* fte*. sc 6d. 

[UttkBhae Books. 

W. F. AdftBty, MA. Sec 

JbehrlOfl. AGAMEMNON, CHOEPHO- 
ROE, EUMKN1DES. Translated by 
Lewis CAMrMtLL, LL.D., late Protestor of 
Greek at St. Andrew*, cr. 

I rhwrrel Ti 

Q.jLAltkUL See Swift. 

, D.D., Archbishop of 
THOUGHTS AND COUN- 

William Altxanrttr 

Armagh. 

SELS OP MANY YEARS. Selected 
from the writing* of Archbishop Alex- 
ander. Square Pett 8tv. as. 6a. 

•t Anitlm, THE DEVOTIONS OF. 
Edited by C. CI. Wkhb, M.A. Pott 8cv. 
L'/eth, %s. ; /eatker, is. td. net. 

I Library of Devotion. 

ArlltOPhAIIM. THE FROGS. Translated 
into English by E. W. Humtinoford, M. A., 
TrofetMir of Classics in Trinity College, 
Toronto. Crown Bve. as. 6a\ 

ArUtOtto. THE NICOMACHEAN 
ETHICS. Edited, with an Introduction 
and Notes, by John Hurnkt, M.A., Pro- 
fessor of Greek at St. Andrews. Demy 8sw. 
ty. met, 

* We have seldom, if ever, seen an edition 
of any classical author in which what is held 
In common with other commentators is so 
i Uarlv and shortly put, and what is original 

is (with equal brevity) of Mich value and 
merest.'— /7/*/. 

J. B. Attlni. THE RELIEF OF LADY- 
NMITH. With 16 Plans and Illustrations. 
Third Editien. Crown it*. 6* 

PRIDE AND 
DICK. Edited by E» V. 
Volumes. Pott***. 
ts.6dL; iemt*er,9$.6d\ 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. Edited by E. 
V.Lccas. Pott mm. Ob**, ix. 6*1; iemther, 
as. 6d. net. [Little Library. 

Constance Bache. BROTHER MUSI- 
CIANS Reminiscences of Edward and 
Walter Bache. With 16 IDostnriom. 
Crown iva. 6c net. 

R. 8. S. Baden-FowaU, M 

THE DOWNFALL OF PREMPEH 
Diary of Life in Ashanti, 1895. With 
Illustrations and a Map. Ti 
Large Crown 8r*. 6*. 

THE MATABELE CAMPAIGN, 2896, 

With nearly 100 Illustrations, fourth and 
Cheaper Edition. Large Crowm Brno. 6s. 

ai 

Graham Balfour, the life of 

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON. Second 
Edition. Twe Volumes. Demy Qvo. 25*. 
net. 

* The biographer has performed his labour 
of love with exemplary skill, with unfailing 
good taste, and with an enthusiastic admira- 
tion for the genius of the writer and a whole- 
souled affection for the man.* — 

Daify TeJegrmjA. 
t ( The story has all the charm of a revela- 
tion. It is written with admirable taste and 
simplicity. WW/ MailGaMette. 

General Literature 

1 Mr. Balfour has done his work extremely 
well— done it, in fact, as Stevenson himself 
would have wished it done, with care and 
skill and affectionate appreciation. His 
own personal tribute in the last chapter of 
the second volume is an admirable piece of 
writing, the tribute of a relative and admirer, 
but none the less faithful and discerning.' — 
Westminster duett*. 

8. Barinf-OOQld, Author of * Mehalah,' etc. 
THELIFE OF NAPOLEON BONA- 
PARTE. With over 450 Illustrations in 
the Text, and is Photogravure Plates. 
Gilt top, Large quart*. 36c 

'The main feature of this gorgeous 
volume is its great wealth of beautiful 
photogravures and finely-executed wood 
engravings, constituting a complete pic- 
tonal chronicle of Napoleon I.'s personal 
history. '—Daily Telegraph. 

THE TRAGEDY OF THE CjESARS. 
With numerous Illustrations from Busts, 
Gems, Cameos, etc. Fifth Edition. 
Royal too. 15c 

'A most splendid and fascinating book 
on a subject of undying interest. It is 
brilliantly written, and the illustrations are 
supplied on a scale of profuse magnificence. ' 
—Daily Chronicle. 

A BOOK OF FAIRY TALES. With 
numerous Illustrations and Initial Letters 
by Arthur J. Gaskuc. Second Edition. 
Crow* too* Bufhrmm. 6c 

Biography. 
WUh Portrait 

OLD ENGLISH FAIRY TALES. With 
numerous Illustrations by F. D. Bedford. 
Second Edition. Cr. too. Buckram. 6c 
' A charming volume. '— C u m rdim m , 

THE CROCK OF GOLD. Fairy Stories. 
Crown too. 6s. 

• Twelve delightful miry tales.'— Punch. 

THE VICAR OF MORWENSTOW: A 
A new and Revised Edition, 
'ortrait. Crown too. 3c 6d. 
A completely new edition of the well- 
known biography of R. S. Hawker. 

DARTMOOR: A Descriptive and Historical 
Sketch. With Plans and numerous Illus- 
trations. Crown too. 6c 

* A most delightful guide, companion and 
itsstroctor.'— Scot sma n. 

THE BOOK OF THE WEST. With 
numerous Illustrations. Two volumes. 
Vol. 1. Devon. Second Edition. Vol. it. 
Cornwall. Second Edition. Crown too. 
6c each. 

'Bracing as the air of Dartmoor, the 
legend wend as twilight over Dosmare Pool, 
they give as a verj f°pd idem of this en- 
chantmgandbeauttruTdistr 

A BOOK OF BRITTANY. With numerous 
Illustrations. Crown too. 6s. 

Uniform in scope and sire with Mr. 
Baring-Gould's well-known books on Devon, 
Cornwall, and Dartmoor. 

OLD COUNTRY LIFE. With 67 Illustra- 
tions. F\fih Edition. Large Cr. too. 6c 

AN OLD ENGLISH HOME. With numer- 
ous Plans and Illustrations. Cr. too. he. 

HISTORIC ODDITIES AND STRANGE 
EVENTS. Fifth Edition. Cr. too. 6s. 

YORKSHIRE ODDITIES AND 
STRANGE EVENTS. Fifth Edition. 
Crown too. 6s. 

STRANGE SURVIVALS AND SUPER- 
STITIONS. Second Edition. Cr.too. 6c 

A GARLAND OF COUNTRY SONG: 
English Folk Songs with their Traditional 
Melodies. Collected and a r r an ge d by 
S. Baring-Gould and H. F. Shsptard. 
Demy \to. 6c 

SONGS OF THE WEST: Traditional 
Ballads and Songs of the West of England, 
with their Melodies. Collectcdby S. 
Baring • Gould, M.A, and H. F. Snth 
pard, M.A. In 4 Parts. Parts /., //., 
///., 3*. each. Part IV., 5c In One 
Volume j French Morocco % 15*. 

'A rich collection of humour, pathos, 
grace,and poetic fancy. * — Saturday Review. 

8.B. Bally. A FRENCH COMMERCIAL 
READER. With Vocabulary. Second 
Edition* Crown too. 2/. 

[Commercial Series. 

FRENCH COMMERCIAL CORRE- 
SPONDENCE. With Vocabulary. Third 
E d itio n. Crown too. sc 

A GERMAN COMMERCIAL READER. 
With Vocabulary. Crown too. ac 

(Cotameroial Series. 

GERMAN COMMERCIAL CORRE- 
SPONDENCE. With Vocabulary. Crown 
too, ac 6d\ (Commercial Series. 

W. B. Btxnec, D.D. ISAIAH. Two 
Volumes. Fcaf. too. ts. net each. Vol. l 
With Map. [Churchman's Bible. 

In. P. A Bamett. A LITTLE BOOK 

OF ENGLISH PROSE. Pott Bvo. 
Cloth, is. 6d\ net; leather, ac 6d. net. 

(Little Library. 

R. R. N. Bartm, M.A FRENCH PROSE 
COMPOSITION. Crown too. ac id. 
Key, 3c net. 

H. K. Barron. M.A. Wadham College. 
Oxford. TEXTS FOR SERMONS ON 
VARIOUS OCCASIONS AND SUB- 
JECTS. With a Preface by Canon Scott 
Holland. Crown too 31. 6d\ 

A2 

io 

Messrs. Methueh's Catalogue 

C. F. Battahle, M.A., Professor of Econ- 
omic* at Trinity College, Ifebfin. THE 
COMMERCE OF NATIONS. Second 
Edition. Crown loo %s.td. 

(Social Questions Series. 

Set Edward FiuGerald. 

O.E.D. Blggl, RD 

IPIiTLlPPlANS. Edited by. Fca 

THE EPISTLE TO 
THE 

tvo, it.6d.tui. [Churchman's Bibfe. 

1 Mr. Biggs' work it very thorough, and 
be hai managed to compreu a good deal of 
information into a limited space. ' 

—Guardian. 

A.HvJmeBeamaiL PONS ASINORUM ; 
OR, A GUIDE TO BRIDGE. Second 
Edition. Fca/. 8m. a*. 

A practical guide, with many specimen 
games, to the game of Bridge. 

Peter BeckfOTtL THOUGHTS ON 
HUNTING. Edited by J. Otho Paget, 
and Illustrated by G. H. Jalland. Demy 
8rv. lot. td. 

WUlUm Beekford. THE HISTORY OF 
THE CALIPH VATHEK. Edited by E. 
Demison Ross. Pott boo. Cloth, is. td 
net; father, at td. net. [Little Library. 

SL C BOOfMllff, M.A. See Tennyson. 

JaoobBehnten. THE SUPERSENSUAL 
LIFE. Edited by Bernard Holland. 
Fca/. 8r*. ys. td. 

W. H. Bennett, M.A.. A PRIMER OF 
THE BIBLE. Second Edition. Crown 
%V0. 2S. td. 

'The work of an honest, fearless, and 
sound critic, and an excellent guide in a 
small compass to the books of the Bible.' 
—Manchester Guardian. 

W. H. Bennett and W. F. Adeney. A 

BIBLICAL INTRODUCTION. Crown 
Bvo. js. td, 

* It make* available to the ordinary reader 
the best scholarship of the day in the field 
of Biblical introduction. We know of no 
book which comes into competition with it.' 
—Manchester Guardimn. 

A. a Benson. M.A. THE LIKE OF 
LORD TENNYSON. With is Illustra. 
tion*. Fca/. Zvo. Cloth, ys. 6d. ; Leather, 
4#. net. [Little Biographies. 

ft. M. Benton. THE WAY OF HOLI- 
NESS: a Devotional Commentary on the ; 
119th Psalm. Crown Bvo. 51. ! 

H. Bide*. Bee Parmentier. j 

0. Biff. TU>. See St. Augustine, X Kempis, ! 
andWilUam Uw. 

T. Herbert Btndkrr. B.D. THE OECU- 
MEN1CAL DOCUMENTS OF THE 
FAITH. With Iirnmli lii ■» amd Motes, 
Crown 1m. 6c 
A 

M.A. THE SONG OF 
SONGS. Being Selections from St. Be* 
kard. Pott 8ml Cloth, 
6d.net 

George Body, D.D. THE SOUL'S PIL 

klAGE: 1 

GRIMAG1 

1 

his published and unpablished 
Selected and arranged by J. H. Boxx, 
B.D. Pott bee. ns.6dL 

THE BENIN 
Edition, Ct 

MASSACRE. 
8ew. ys.td. 

Cardinal Bona. A GUIDE TO eter 

NITY. Edited with 

Notes, by J. W. Staksudgs, RD., late 
Fellow of ? • • • — -r»- - »- 

F St John's College, Oxford. Pott 
Cloth, as.; toother, a*. 6V. met. 
[Library 

8m. 

F. 0L Boon. B.A. 

GEOGRAPHY 
NATIONS. C 

A COMMERCIAL 
OF FOREIGN 
8a*. as. 

George Borrow. LAYEngro. Edited 

by F. Himdes Grooms. Two Vohunex. 
Pott 8v». Each volume, clotk. ix. 64. met; 
leather, a#. td. net. [Little Library. 

J. Bitsema Boc AGRICULTURAL 
ZOOLOGY. Translated by I. R. Aims- 
worth Davis, M.A. With an Introduction 
by Eleanor A. Ormerod, F.ELS. With 
155 Illustrations. Cr. 9vo. ys. 6dL 

C. G. Bottlng. B.A. JUNIOR LATIN 

EXAMINATION PAPERS. Fcafi. Bvo. is. 

[Junior Examination 

E. M. Bowden. THE EXAMPLE of 

BUDDHA: Being Quotations from 
Buddhist Literature for each Day in the 
Year. Third Edition. itmo. as. td. 

E. Bowmaker. the housing of 

THE WORKING CLASSES. Crown 
Bvo. ax. td. [Social Questions 

F. G. Brabant, M.A. SUSSEX. Illus- 
trated by E. H. New. Pott 8no. Cloth, 
3*. ; leather, y. td. net. [Little Guides. 
' A charming little book ; as full of sound 
information as it b practical in conception.' 
— A thenarum. 

' Accurate, complete, and agreeably writ- 
ten * — Literature. 

Miai H. Brodrlck and Him Anderson 
Morton. A CONCISE HANDBOOK 
OF EGYPTIAN ARCHjEOLOGY. 
With many Illustrations. Crown Zvo. ys.td. 

General Literature 

ii 

E. W. BrOOkl. See F. J. Hamilton. 

O.ltarwninff.M.A. A SHORT HISTORY 
OF MEDIEVAL ITALY, A.D. 1250-1530. 
/• Two Volume*. Crown few. 5*. omch. 
Vol. i. 1250-1409.— Guelphs and Ghibellines. 
Vol. il 1409-1330.— The Age of toe Con- 
dottier! 

J. BuCb&n. See Isaak Walton. 

MlMBlOley. See Lady Dtlke. 

John Banyan, the pilgrim's pro- 
gress. Edited, with an Introduction, 
by C H. Firth, M.A. With 30 Illustra- 
tions by R Anning Bell. Cr. few. 6s. 

•The best " Pilgrim's Progress."— 

Educations! Time*. 

'0. J. Bnrch, M.A., F.RS. a manual 
OF ELECTRICAL SCIENCE. With 
numerous Illustrations. Crown Zvo. yt. 
[University Extension Series. 

Gelettztargess. GOOPS AND HOW TO 

BE THEM. With numerous Illustrations. 
Suutl/4/0. 6*. 

S. Burn, B.D., Examining Chaplain to 
the Bishop of Lichfield. AN INTRO- 
DUCTION TO THE HISTORY OF 
THE CREEDS. Demy few. xot. 64 

[Handbooks of Theology. 

' This book may be expected to hold its 
place as an authority on its subject/— 
Spectator. 

J. H. Burn. B.D., F.R.S.E. A MANUAL 
OF CONSOLATION FROM THE 
SAINTS AND FATHERS. Pott few. 
Cloth, ax. ; leather, ax. 6a*. mot. 

[Library of Devotion. 

C. C. Ghanner and M. B. Roberts. 

LACE-MAKING IN THE MIDLANDS, 
PAST AND PRESENT. With 16 full- 
page Illustrations. Crown few. at. 6d. 

Robert Burns. THE POEMS OF 
ROBERT BURNS. Edited by Andrew 
Lang and W. A. Craigie. With Portrait. 
Second Edition. Demy few, gilt tof\ 6$. 

J. B. Bury, LL.D. See Gibbon. 

Alfred Caldeeotk D.D. THE PH'L- 

OSOPHY OF RELIGION IN ENG- 
LAND AND AMERICA. Demy few. 
iot. 6a\ { Handbooks of Theology. 

' Dr. Caldecott treau the subject as we 
have long hoped it would eventually be 
treated.' — Church Time*. 

' A lucid and informative account, which 
certainly deserves a place in every philo- 
sophical library.'— Scotsman. 

D. B. OalderWOOd, Headmaster of the Nor* 
mal School, Edinburgh. TEST CARDS 
IN EUCLID AND ALGEBRA. In three 
packets of 40, with Answers, is. each. Or 
in three Books, price a4, %a\ % and yd. 

*. K. and A. J. Cartrle, M.A. bishop 

LATIMER. With Portrait. Crown few. 
3*. 64 (Leaders of Religion. 

* An interesting book, illustrated by fasci- 
nating photographs.'— Speaker. 

Lord Chesterfield, THE LETTERS OF, 

TO HIS SON. Edited, with an Intro- 
duction, by C Strachey, and Notes by 
A. Calthrop. Two Volume*. Crown few. 
6s. each. [Methuen's Standard Library. 

F. W. Christian. THE CAROLINE 

ISLANDS. With many Illustrations and 
Maps. Demy few. isx 6a\ net. 

Gioero. DE ORATORE I. Translated by 
E. N. P. Moor, M.A. Crown few. 3*. 6a. 

(Classical Translations. 

SELECT ORATIONS (Pro Milone, Pro 
M arena, Philippic 11., In Catilinaml Trans- 
lated by H. E. D. Blakist. n. M.A., Fellow 
and Tutor of Trinity College, Oxford. 
Crown Bvo. 5*. [Classical Translations. 

DE NATURA DEORUM. Translated 
by F. Brooks, M.A., late Scholar of Balliol 
College, Oxford. Crown few. y . 6d, 

[Classical Translations. 

DE OFFICIIS. Translated by G. B. 
Gardiner, M.A. Crown tvo. at. 6d\ 

[Classical Translations. 

P.^ Clarke, M.A. BISHOP KEN. With 
PortraiL Crown few. 31. 6d. 

[Leaders of Religion. 

B.B.Colbeek.M.D. diseases of the 

EART. with numerous Illustrations. 

HE 
Demy Zvo. 

1 ax. 

W. 0. CoUinfWOOd, M.A. THE LIFE 
OF JOHN RUSKIN. With Portraits. 
Cheap Edition. Crown few. 6*. 

J. CL Collins, M.A. See Tennyson. 

W. B. Collins, M.A. THE BEGINNINGS 
OF ENGLISH CHRISTIANITY. With 
Map* Crown few. v. 6d. 

(Churchman's Library. 

A. M. OOOk, M.A. See E. C. Marchant. 

R. w. Cooke-Taylor, the factory 

SYSTEat. Crown tvo. **.6d. 

(Social Questions Series. 

■arte Oorelli. the passing of the 

GREAT QUEF.N : A Tribute to the Noble 
Life of Victoria Regina. Small 4(0. 1*. 

A CHRISTMAS GREETING. Sm. 4 to. 1*. 

Rosemary Cotes. DANTE'S garden. 

With a Frontispiece. Second Edition. 
Fern/, few. cloth %*. 6a\; leather, 3*. td. 

12 

Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue 

Harold OOX. B.A. LAND NATIONAL- 
IZATION. Crown Bvo. ts.bd 

(Social Question* Scries. 

W.J. Craig. See Shakespeare. 

W. A. Gralgie. a primer op burns. 

Crown Svo. a*, bd 

■re. Craft, john Halifax, gen- 

TLEMAN. Edited by Annib Mathb- 
ron. Two Volumes. Pott Bra. Each 
Volume, Cloth, t*. bd. net ; leather, as. bd. 
mt* [Littk Library. 

Richard Graehaw, THE ENGLISH 

POEMS OF. Edited by Edward Hut- 
ton. PottBvo. Cloth, u. bd net ; leather, 
a#. bd. met. (Little Library. 

F. 0. Crawford. See Mary C. Danson. 

0. 0. Oromp, M.A. See Thomas EUwood. 

P. B. B. CnBlifla. Fellow of All Souls' Col- 
lege, Oxford. THE HISTORY OF THE 
BOER WAR. With many Illustrations, 
Plans, and Portraits. In a vols. VoL /., 15*. 

B. L. OuttS, D.D. AUGUSTINE OF 
CANTERBURY. With Portrait. Crown 
8m. 3*. bd. [Leaders of Religion. 

The Brother* Dal&laL A RECORD OF 
FIFTY YEARS* WORK. With 150 Illus- 
trations. Large ^to. air. net. 

The record of the work of the celebrated 
Engravers, containing a Gallery of beauti- 
ful Pictures by F. Walker, Sir J. Millais, 
Lord Leijjhtonj and other great Artist*. 
The book is a history of the finest black-ancU 
white work of the nineteenth century. 

' The book is abundantly illustrated, and 
shows what wood engraving was at its best.' 
— Scotsman. 

'A store of genial reminiscences. ( The 
designs of the various masters are exquisitely 
engraved. A worthy record of a period that 
is gone.' — Standard. 

0. W. Danitll, M.A BISHOP WILBER- 
FORCE. With Portrait. Crown Bro. 
ys. bd [Leaders of Religion. 

Mary 0. Damon and F. 0. Crawford. 

FATHERS IN THE FAITH. Small too. 
is. bd. 

Dante AUghlerL LA com media di 

DANTE. The Italian Text edited by 
Paget Toynbee, LitLD., M.A. DemyBvo. 
Gilt Up. Bs.bd. Also, Crown Bvo.^ 6s. 
[Methuen's Standard Library. 

THE INFERNO OF DANTE. Trans- 
lated by H. F. Caky. Edited by Paget 
TovNBBB,LittD.,M.A. Pott**. Cloth, 
it. bd. net; leather, ax. bd. net 

(Little Library. 

THE PURGATORIO OF DAHTE. 
Translated by H. F. Caky. Edited by 
Paget Tovxan, Litt.D., M.A. Pott woo. 
Cloth, is. bd. net; leather, as. 6al net, 

[Little Library. 

THE PARADISO OF DANTE. Ti 

lated by H. F. Caky. Edited by Pagkt 
Toynbee, Litt-D., M.A. Post two. Cloth, 
is. bd net; leather, a*. 6d. net* 

[Little Library. 
See also Paget Toynbee. 

A 

5E. 

LITTLE 
Pott am. 

A a Dean*. Edited by. 
BOOR OF LIGHT VERS] 
Cloth, is. bd. net; loather % 

(Little 
Leon Delboa THE METRIC SYSTE1 
Crown 9vo. ar. 

A theoretical and practical guide, for 
in schools and by the general reader. 

D emo e t he n ei : THE OLYKTHIACS 

AND PHILIPPICS. Translated upon a 
new principle by Onto Holland. Crown 
%s.ba\ 

AGAINST CONON AND 
CALL1CLES. Edited with Notes and 
Vocabulary, by F. Dajtwim Switt, M.A. 
Fcaf.Bvo. as. 

(ThiTloi Dtckona. 

THE ROCHESTER EDITION. 

Crown 8c*. Each Volume, cieth\ ye. bd 
With Introductions by Gko*gs Gtssrwc. 
Notes by F. G> Kittoh, and Topographical 
Illustrations. 

THE PICKWICK PAPERS. With Illustra- 
tions by E. H. New. 7W Volume**. 

'As pleasant a copy as any ooe could 
desire. The notes add much to the value of 
the edition, and Mr. New's illustrations are 
also historical. The volumes promise well 
for the success of the editioa.'- 

NICHOLAS NICKLEBY. With Illustra- 
tions by R. J. Williams. Two Volumes. 

BLEAK HOUSE. With Illustrations by 
Beatrice Alcock. Two Volumes. 

OLIVER TWIST. With IHustratioQs by K. 
H. New. 

THE OLD CURIOSITY SHOP. With 
Illustrations by G. M. Brimelow. Turn 
Volumes. 

BARNABY RUDGE. With Illustrations by 
Beatrice Alcock. Two Volume*. 

0. L. Dickinson, M.A., Fellow of King's 
College, Cambridge. THE GREEK VIEW 
OF LIFE. Second Edition. Ct - 

ax. bd [University Extensa 

H. N. Diokson. F.R.S.E., F.R.Mec 
METEOROLOGY. The ~ 
Weather and CGmate. Illustrated. Ct 

Elements of 

General Literature 

>3 

LadyDtDrt, KU»BnU«T,«>dMl»iWlilt- 

Imy. WOMEN'S WORK. Crwmm In. 

at, td. [Social Qutjtiom Seriea. 

P. B. DtteMaln, M.A., F.S.A. ENGLISH 

VILLAGES. Ubamtad, Crams ha. St. 

'A booh wbich foe iu iastructrre and 
pectoral aah*t abooJd find a place in e*ery 
villaf a library.' — Sit/imaM. 

' Una of the but books on nQaca ■nli- 

aaioea n tun ■eeo.'-U.H-*. 

THE STORY OF OUR ENGLISH , 

TOWNS. With Introduction by 

AiKutTim janr, D-D. Stcrmd XdiUrm. , 

OLD ENGLISH CUSTOMS I Extant at 
the P a—at Time. As Account of Local I 
Obeennutcea, Ftttival Ctweo mi, and Ancient 
Crnwia yet Snrriring la Great Britain. 

W. A. Dirtt NORFOLK. Uleatratad by 

B. C Boultu. PtU Be*. Cfci*. ji.; 

IfOtr, 31.6d.mi. 1 I iuk Goidee. 

Clamant EdWATde. RAILWAY 

NATIONALIZATION. Crna «w. 

u. Cat [Social QntMioni Serial. 

W. Dondu Edward*, commercial 

LAW. CihmIh - "• ■ '" ' 

V. K. Dinrn. M.A 
TENNYSON. S, 

. PRIMER OF -j-^. 

' Modi "Html and TtH- n pf tn fil critirii 

Tin bibBofTaphy u a boon.'— Sfr^rtr, 

ENGLISH POETRY FROM BLAKE TO I 

BROWNING. Stand Edilitm. O 

originally pt 

J. DOWdML D.D., Lord Bieboy of Edn 
bonk THE WORKMANSHIP OF , 
THE PRAYER BOOK: Iu Literary 
and Latarfical Aepecte. Stctmd Edili**- 
CraaraBn.. jj. 6i 

{ Churchman t library. ' 

S. R. DrlTax. , D. D. , Cam of Cbriet Charch, 
Regiaa Profaeeorof Hebrew la the Uinnir/ 
afOdoTd. SERMONS ON SUBJECTS 
CONNECTED WITH THE OLD 
TESTAMENT. " 

n Parrlaa-. MARRIAGE. Edited by 

: Com), Antnor of 

*J»l^m.' flN THE 

lb* Bail Of Dnrhun. A REPORT ON 
CANADA. With an Introductory Not*. 
Otmtfmrt. jt.6d.mtt. 

A reprint of the celebrated Report which 
Lord Dnthaai made to r*- ---^ " 

in 1839. Ilia probably the m 
atleranc* OB Britith colonia 
puhlubrd. 

« Britith Go-rtni- I 

Aa elaborate etndy and deacrrntjoa of 
Cronwall'i army by which Ibe victory of 
the PatUaaaaat an ■ecured. Tha ■ N iw 
Model' iideecribed In minnt* detail, and 
the antbot. who ia one of tb* meat dii- 

treat urn of nnpobliahed kuEL 
O. W. lUter. M.A. ANNALS OF 
SHREWSBURY SCHOOL, With 
na mer o ni Ilh r a rrati o n e. Dumjtt*. tor. Cat 
! Edward FltxOemdd. THE RUBA1YAT 
OF OMAR KHAYYAM. Wilb a " 
atentnrybyH. M. BAraoH.and ~ 
of Omar by E. D. Ross, 6s. 

*4 

Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue 

B. A. Fitarttondd. the highest 

ANDES. With a Maps 51 Illustration*, 
13 of which are in Photogravure, and a 
Panorama. EoyaiBvo. jot. net. 

\ Ward* Ftrwltr. 

White. 

M.A. See Gilbert 

J. P. FnuMT. ROUND THE WORLD 
ON A WHEEL. With soo Illustrations. 
C r ow n tvo. 6s. 

* A clank of cycling, graphic and witty.' 
—Yorkshire Post. 

W. Trtaflh, M.A., Principal of the Storey 
Institute, Lancaster. PRACTICAL 
CHEMISTRY. Part 1. With numerous 
Diagrams. Crown %vo. is. td. 

(Textbooks of Technology. 

1 An excellent and eminently practical 
little book.'— Schoolmaster. 

Ed. tou Frtudtnrtieh. dairy 

BACTERIOLOGY. A Short Manual for 
the Use of Students. Translated by Jf. R. 
Aikswoktk Davis, M.A. Second Edition. 
Revised. Crown 8vo. 2s. td. 

H. W. PulfOTd. M.A. THE EPISTLE 
OF ST. JAMES. Edited by. Fca+. 8rv. 
ix. 6d. net. [Churchman's Bible. 

Mr*. GaaktJL C RAN FORD. Edited by 
E. V.Lucas. Pott tew. Cloth, is. td. net ; 
leather, %s. td. tut. [Little Library. 

H. B. Oeorge. M.A.. Fellow of New College, 
Oxford. BATTLES OF ENGLISH 
HISTORY. With numerous Plans. Third 
Edition. Crown 8w. 6*. 

' Mr. George has undertaken a very useful 
task — that of making military affairs in* 
telligible and instructive to non-military 
readers — and has executed it with a large 
measure of success. ' — Times. 

H. dt B. Oibbilli. Litt.D., M.A. IN- 
DUSTRY IN ENGLAND: HISTORI- 
CAL OUTLINES. With 5 Maps. Second 
Edition. Demy 8tv. 10*. 6d. 

A COMPANION GERMAN GRAMMAR. 
Crown Zvo. is. bd. 

THE INDUSTRIAL HISTORY OF ENG- 
LAND. Eighth Edition. Revised. With 
Maps and Plans. Crown Zvo. 3*. 

[University Extension Series. 

THE ECONOMICS OF COMMERCE. 
Crown 8c*. is. 6d. [Commercial Series. 

COMMERCIAL EXAMINATION 
PAPERS. Crown Zvo. \s.6d. 

[Commercial Series. 

BRITISH COMMERCE AND COLONIES 
FROM ELIZABETH TO VICTORIA. 
Third Edition. Crown Zvo. »«. 

[Commercial Series. 

ENGLISH SOCIAL 

Second Edition. Ct 

CUnii 

REFORMERS 

_ ».6dL 

RdaB. <Hbttn«,D.LUt., lf~A. v a*dl.i. 
HadflakLof the HecU Works. S 
A SHORTER WORKING DAY. 
too.2s.6d. (Social 

Edward CHbbon. THE DECLINE AND 
FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 
A New Edition, edited with Notes, 
Appendices, and Maps by J. B. Buwr, 
LL.D., Fellow of Trinity Cotfcge, Damn. 

in Seven Volumes. 
8s. 6d. each. A Ism, O 

'At last there is 
edition of Gibbon. . 
the nin et eenth 
Manchester Guardi, 

'A great p i ece of 

GOT a* 

MEMOIRS OF MY LIFE AND WRIT- 
INGS. By Edwaiu Gibbon. Edurd, 
with an Introduction and Notes, by G. 
Birkbbck Hiix, LL.D. Crown Zvo. 6c 
1 An admirable edition of one of the most 
interesting pe r sonal records of a literary fife. 
Its notes and its numerous appendices arc a 
repertory of almost all that can be known 
about Gibbon. '-Jf- 

B. C. 8. GibMn. D.D., Vicar of Leeds, 

THE BOOK OF JOB. With Iurodnctke 
and Notes. Demy Zvo. 6x. 

[Commentaries on the R.V. 

'The publishers are to be congratulated 
on the start the series has made.' — Times. 

* Dr. Gibson's work is worthy of a high 
degree of appreciation. To the busy worker 
and the intelligent student the commentary 
will be a real boon ; and it will, if we are 
not mistaken, be much in demand. The 
Introduction is almost a model of concise, 
straightforward, prefatory remarks on the 
subject treated.' — A theutrum. 

THE XXXIX. ARTICLES OF THE 
CHURCH OF ENGLAND. With an 
I ntrod uction. Third mnd Choafer Edition 
in One Volume. Demy Zvo. ixs. 6W. 

[Handbooks of Theology. 
1 We welcome with the utmost satisfaction 
a new, cheaper, and more convenient edition 
of Dr. Gibson's book. It was greatly wanted. 
Dr. Gibson has given theological students 
just what they want, and we should like to 
think that it was in the hands of ev e ry 
candidate for orders.'— Guardian. 

THE LIFE OF JOHN HOWARD. With 
1a Illustrations. Pott Zvo. Cloth, %s.; 
leather, ys. 6d. net. [Little Biographies! 

See also George Herbert. 

General Literature 

15 

CtoOfgeCHaring. See Dickens. 

JL D. Godl*y,M.A.. Fellow of Magdalen 
College, Oxford. LYRA FRIVOL A. 
Third Edition. F'cn/.tvc zs.td. 

VERSES TO ORDER. Cr. few. a*. 64 net. 
Mlas CtoOdriCA-FrOtT. See Susan Ferrier. 

F. Anderson Graham. THE RURAL 

EXODUS. Crown too. %s.td. 

[Social Questions Series. 

P. 8. Onager, M.A., luld. psych- 
ology. Second Edition. Crown too. 
as. td. (University Extension Series. 

THE SOUL OF A CHRISTIAN. Crown 
few. 61. 

A book dealing with the evolution of the 
religious life and experiences. 

* A remarkable hoik.'— Glasgow Herald. 

See also University Extension Series. 

'QaetnQrar. GERMAN PASSAGES 
FOR UNSEEN TRANSLATION. 
Crown few. a*. 64. 

F. I* Gray, B.S&, formerly Lecturer in 
Physics in Mason University College. Bir- 
mingham. THE PRINCIPLES OF 
MAGNETISM AND ELECTRICITY: 
an Elementary Text-Book. With 181 Dia- 
grams. Crown few. 3** 6d. 

a BUfthiaild Green, M. A., Assistant Master 
at Edinburgh Academy, hue Fellow of St. 
John's College, Oxon. NOTES ON 
GREEK AND LATIN SYNTAX. Crown 
few. 3*. 6**. 

Notes and explanations on the chief diffi- 
culties of Greek and Latin Syntax, with 

for 

K, T. Green, M.A. THE CHURCH OF 
CHRIST. Crown**. 6s. 

[Churchman's Library* 

B, A. Gregory. THE VAULT OF 
HEAVEN. A Popular Introduction to 
Astronomy. With numerous Illust ra t i on * . 
Crown few. a*. 64 

(University Extension Series. 

W. Hall Griffin, M.A. SELECTIONS 
FROM THE EARLY POEMS OF 
ROBERT BROWNING. Edited by. 
Pott few. Cloth, is. 64. tut; leather, 
as. 6d. net. 

& H. Glinllnc. A HISTORY OF THE 
GREAT NORTHERN RAILWAY, 
1845-05. With Illustrations. Demy few. 

1 Mr. Grinling has done for a Railway what 
Macanlay did for English History. —7*/ 
Engineer. 

F. BlBdM Groom*. See George Borrow. 

K. L. Gwynn. A BIRTHDAY BOOK. 
Royal too. 1 ax. 

This is a birthday-book of exceptional 
dignity, and the extracts have been chosen 
with particular care. 

Stephen Oywon. See Thackeray. 

John Hackett B.D. A HISTORY OF 
THE ORTHODOX CHURCH OF 
CYPRUS. With Maps and Illustrations. 
Demy too. 15s. net. 

A. & Haddon, ScD.. F.R.S. HEAD- 
HUNTERS, BLACK, WHITE, AND 
BROWN. With many Illustrations and a 
Map. Demy few. 15/. 

A narrative of adventure and exploration 
in Northern Borneo. It contains much 
matter of the highest scientific interest. 

B. A. Hadneld. See H. de B. Gibbins. 

R. V. Hall and W. a VeaL THE 

ANCIENT RUINS OF RHODESIA. 
With numerous Illustrations. Demy few. 
2i/. net. 

This book contains descriptions of two 
hundred ruins of temples and forts, and of 
their types and aires of architecture. ^ It 
describes also the Sabesan and Phoenician 
occupations of Rhodesia; King Solomon's 
gold, ancient burials, ancient gold-mining, 
etc It is profusely illustrated, and contains 
many maps and plans. 

F. J. Hamilton, D.D., and E. W. Brooks. 

ZACHARIAH OF MITYLENE. Trans- 
lated into English. Demy few. is*. 6d. met. 

(Byamntine Texts. 

D. Hannay. A SHORT HISTORY OF 
THE ROYAL NAVY, From Early 
Times to the Present Day. Illustrated. 
Two Volumes. Demy few. *r. 6d. emch. 
Vol. I. isoo-1688. 

A. T. Han, M.A. THE CONSTRUCTION 
OF LARGE INDUCTION COILS. With 
numerous Diagrams. Demy few. 6* 

Clifford Hantaan. READING AND 

READERS, /cm/, few. %s. 64 
' An extremely sensible little book.' — 

Manchester Guardian. 

8T«n HfXttn, Gold Medallist of the Royal 
Geographical Society. THROUGH ASIA. 
With 300 Illustrations from Sketches and 
Photographs by the Author, and Maps. 
Two Volumes. Eofa/Bro. jjSs.net. 

'One of the greatest books of the kind 
issued during the century. It is impossible 
to give an adequate idea of the richness of 
the contents of this book, or of its abounding 
attractions as a story of travel unsurpassed 
in geographical and human interest. Much 
of it is a revelation. Altogether the work 
Is one which in solidity, novelty, and interest 
must take a first rank among publications 
of its class. '—Times. 

i6 

Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue 

T r nwiilM ira A LITTLE BOOK OF 
SCOTTISH VERSE. /W/8n#. CfrtfA, 
u. 64 •#/ ; leather, a*. 64 m*. 

Sec abo D. M. M< 

LT.HobhoOM, Fellow of CCC. Qxfad, 
THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE. 
Demy doe. ns, 

J. A. HOIMOB, M.A. 
POVERJY: An ' 
trial Condition of 
Edition. Crwmt 
[Social Questions 

PROBLEMS Or 
into the ladav 
Poor. 

THE PROBLEM 
PLOYED. 

OF 

UNKM- 

THE 
%s. 64 
[Social Qaettk 

T. HodfWlL D.C.L. GEORGE FOX, 
THE QUAKER. With Portrait. Crmm 

y. 64 V 

CbMtarHolOOBllM. THE REAL CHIN- 
ESE QUESTION. CrmssSsw. 6*. 

'It it an important nddition to tat 
materials before tnepab&c far 
opinion on a most difficult and \ 
bJem.'— Timet. 

Bir T. H. Holdleh. K.CI.K. 

INDIAN BORDERLAND : 
tonal Record of Twenty Y 
Demy 8tw. 15s. net. 

THE 

V< 

/fee/, to* 

r f it will 
classical work on the history 
(toaaa.'—PiUt. 

to 
the 
the ladsaa 

. ENGLISH LYRICS. 
CittUf. y.64 

W. R Hn*fcy and C. Whlbley . A BOOK 
OF ENGLISH PROSE. Crmtm 8tw. 
Bwckrmm^ gilt tef. 6c 

H. H. 1TM11W1, M.A., Fellow of AU Soak', 
Oxford, Canon of Westssinster. APOS- 
TOUC CHRISTIANITY : As Illustrated 
bytheEpistksofSLPaultoth«a>rutthi*ns. 
Crvswsfew, 6a, 

UGHT AND LEAVEN : Historical and 
Social Sbsmoks. Crown 80*. 6c 

DISCIPUNE AND LAW. Fern/. Sew. 
a*. 14 

QMfgv RdbnTtb THE TEMPLE. 
Edited, with aa Introduction and Notes, 
fcrE.CS. Gibson, D.D., Vicar of Leeds. 
Rett Sn*. CAra, at. ; leather, ax. 64 met. 

[Library of Devotion. 
Tab edition contains Walton's Life of 
Herbert, and the text is that of the first 

EASY SELECTIONS. With 
By A C lonrarn, M.A. 
is. 64 

W.A.S.Hrwixt,B.A. ENGLISH TRADE 
AND FINANCE IN THE SEVEN- 
TEKNTH CENTURY. Crown to*. 

[University Extension Series. 

T. HtlbOTt. THE AIR GUN: or, How 
the Masterman* and Dobsoo Major nearly 
lo&t th«ir Hohvlavs. Illustrated. Sonar* 
/c*/. It*, at. 64 (Utile Bine Books. 

OftXt HID. Registered Teacher to the City and 
Guilds of London Institute. MILLIN- 
ERY, THEORETICAL, AND PRAC- 
TICAL. With numerous Diagrams. 
Crown dr*. sx. 

[Textbooks of Technology. 

H«nT7 mil, R A.. Headmaster of the Boy's 
High School, Worcester, Cape Colony. A 
SOUTH AFRICAN ARITHMETIC 
Crown ***. 3 x. 64 

This book has been specially written for 
use in South African schools. 

a Bilkbeck Hill, LL.D. See-Gibbon. 

Howard C. HUtaC**, WITH THE BOER 
FORCES. With M Illustrations. Second 
Edition. Ow Brw. 6x. 

B. L. Hinde, THE FALL OF THE | Alexander Hode. MANCHURIA. With 
CONGO ARABS. With Plans, etc Demy \ Illustrations and a Map. Demytvo. sor.64 
8rv. tax. 64 ■ net* 

Canon Scott Hftllamri. LYRA APOS- 

TOLICA. With an Introduction. Notes 
by H. C Bucking, M.A. /V//8vw. Cloth, 
2X./ leather, ax. 64 net, 

(Library of Devotion. 

0. J. Holyoaks. the cooperative 

MOVEMENT TO-DAY. Second K "' ' 
Crown Svo, ax. 64 

[Social Questions 

Horace: THE ODES AND EPODES. 
Translated by A. GoDunr, M. A., Fellow of 
Magdalen College, Oxford. Crown a**. 
ax. [Classical Translations. 

E. L. B. Horaburgh. M. A. WATERLOO : 
A Narrative and Criticism. With Plans. 
Second Edition, Crown Boo. 5X. 

'A brilliant essay — simple, sosrnd, and 
thorough'— ZW*>t%»n»v£. 

THE LIFE OF SAVONAROLA. With 
Portraits and Illustrations. fc*f. 
Cloth, 3X. 64 ; leather t 4s. net. 

[little 

R. F. Hoxton, D.D. JOHN 
With Portrait. Crown Boo. 3X. 

HOWE. 

General Literature 

17 

Q. HowelL TRADE UNIONISM— NEW 
AND OLD. Third Edition. Crown Svo. 
as. 6d. [Social Questions Series. 

H. O. HutCbinson. THE GOLFING PIL- 
GRIM. Crown Svo. ts. 

A. W. Hntton, M.A. CARDINAL MAN- 
NING. With Portrait. Crown Svo. y. 
td. [Leaders of Religion. 

See also Tauler. 

Edward Hntton. See Richard Crashaw. 

R. H. Hntton. CARDINAL NEWMAN. 
With Portrait. Crown Svo. y. td. 

[Leaders of Religion. 

W. H. Hntton. M.A. THE LIFE OF SIR 
THOMAS MORE. With Portraits. 
Second Edition. Crown Svo. 5*. 

WILLIAM LAUD. With Portrait. Second 
Edition. Crown Svo. y. 6d. 

[Leaders of Religion. 

Henrlk Ibflen. BRAND. A Drama. Trans- 
lated by William Wilson. Third Edition. 
Crown Svo. y. td. 

Lord Iddeslelgh. See Susan Ferrier. 

W. R. ft**, M. A., Fellow and Tutor of Hcrt- 
fc^CoUegeLPxford. CHRISTIAN MYS- 
TICISM. The Bampton Lectures for 1899. 
Demy 8m iax. td. net. 

1 It is fully worthy of the best traditions 
connected with the Bampton Lectureship. '—- 
Record* 

A. D. Inner M.A. A HISTORY OF THE 
BRITISH IN INDIA. With Maps and 
Plans. Crown Svo. 7/. td. 

.' Written in a vigorous and effective style 
... a thoughtful and impartial account. — 
Spectator. 

• Mr. Innes has done a difficult piece of 
work well. He has taken the history into 
his mind; given it shape, feature, and 
vitality there ; therefore it comes alive and 
fresh from his mind.' — Scotsman. 

& Jackson, M.A. A PRIMER OF BUSI- 
NESS. Third Edition. Crown Svo. 
zx. td. [Commercial Series. 

P. Jacob. MA. JUNIOR FRENCH 
EXAMINATION PAPERS. Eca/.Svo. 
zx. [Junior Examination Series. 

J. Stephen Jeans. TRUSTS, POOLS, 

AND CORNERS. Crown*™. as.td. 

[Social Questions Series. 

R. L. Jefferson. A NEW RIDE TO 
KHIVA. Illustrated. Crown Svo. 6r. 

E. JenkS, M.A., Professor of Law at Uni- 
versity College, Liverpool. ENGLISH 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT. Crown few. 
or. 6d. [University Extension 

0. 8. Jerram, M.A. See Pascal 

Augustus Jessopp.D.D. JOHN DONNE. 

With Portrait. Crown Svo. y. 6d. 

[Leaders of Religion. 

F. B. JOYOUS, M.A., LitLD., Principal of 
Hatfield Hall, Durham. EVOLUTION. 
Crown Svo. 31. td. [Churchman's Library. 

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE 
HISTORY OF RELIGION. Second 
Edition. Demy 800. 10s. td. 

[ Handbooks of Theology. 
' The merit of this book lies in the penetra- 
tion, the singular acuteness and force of the 
author's judgment. He is at once critical 
and luminous, at once Just and suggestive. 
A comprehensive andf thorough oook.'— 
Birmingham Post. 

Sir H. H. Johnston. K.C.B. BRITISH 

CENTRAL AFRICA. With nearly 300 
Illustrations and Six Maps. Second 
Edition. Crown +to. \Ss. net. 

H. Jones. A GUIDE TO PROFESSIONS 
AND BUSINESS. CrownSvo. js. td. 

[Commercial Series. 

F. W. Jpjoe, M.A. THE LIFE OF SIR 
FREDERICK GORE OUSELEY. 7 s.td. 

Lady Julian of Norwich. REVELA- 
TIONS OF DIVINE LOVE. Edited by 
Grace W arrack. Crown Svo. 6s. 

A partially modernised version, from the 
MS. in the British Museum of a book which 
Dr. Dalgairns terms 'One of the most 
remarkable books of the M iddle Ages. ' Mr. 
Inge in his Bampton Lectures on Christian 
Mysticism calls it ' The beautiful but little 
known Revelations." 

H. Kanftnann. socialism and 

MODERN THOUGHT. Crown Svo. 
ax. td. [Social Questions Series. 

J. F. Keating, D.D. THE agape and 

THE EUCHARIST. Crown Svo. y. td. 

John Keble. the christian year. 

With an Introduction and Notes by W. 
Lock, D.D., Warden of Keble College. 
Illustrated by R. Anning Bbll. Second 
Edition. Ecaf. Svo. y. td; padded 
morocco, 5*. 

' The present edition is annotated with all 
the care and insight to be expected from 
Dr. Lock.'— Guardian. 

LYRA INNOCENTIUM. Edited, with 
Introduction and Notes, by Walter Lock, 
D.D., Warden of Keble College, Oxford. 
Pott Svo. Cloth, a*. ; leather, as. td. met. 

(Library of Devotion. 
' This sweet and fragrant book has never 
been published more attractively.'— 

«•■ Sj^sjoss^^sirv^ 

A3 

18 

Messrs. Methuem's Catalogue 

THE CHRISTIAN YEAR. With Intro- 
(taction and Notes by Waltek Lock, 
D.D.. Warden of Keble College. Second 
Edition. Pott Bvo. Cloth, a*. ; leather, as. 
6a\ not. [ Library of Devotion. 

Thomas 1 Kempis. the imitation 

OF CHRIST. With an Introduction by 
Dean Fakkak. Illustrated by C M. 
Gere. Second Edition. Fcay.Bvo. ys.6d. 
not ; yadded morocco, y. 

'Amongst all the innumerable English 
editions of the *' Imitation^' there can have 
been few which were prettier than this one, 
printed in strong and handsome type, with 
all the glory of red initials. '--Glasgow 
Herald. 

THE IMITATION OF CHRIST. A Re- 
vised Translation by C. Bigg, D.D., Canon 
of Christ Church. With an Introduction. 
Crown Bvo. ys. 6d. 

A new edition, carefully revised and set 
in large type, of Dr. Bigg's well-known 
version. 

'Dignified, harmonious, and scholarly.' 
—Church Review. 

THE IMITATION OF CHRIST. A Re- 
vised Translation, with an Introduction by 
C. Bigg, D.D.. late Student of Christ 
Church. Second Edition. Pott Bvo. Cloth, 
a/. ; leather, as. 6d. net. 

[Library of Devotion. 

A practically new translation of this book 
which the reader has, almost for the first 
time, exactly in the shape in which it left 
the hands of the author. 

James Houghton Kennedy, D.D., Assist- 
ant Lecturer in Divinity in the University 
of Dublin. ST. PAUL'S SECOND 
AND THIRD EPISTLES TO THE 
CORINTHIANS. With Introduction, 
Dissertations and Notes. Crown Bvo. 6s. 

C W. WmtnlTia , M.A. THE CHEM- 
ISTRY OF LIFE AND HEALTH. 
Illustrated. Crown Bvo. as. 6d. 

[University Extension Series. 

A. W. Kinglake. EOTHEN. With an 
Introduction and Notes. Pott Bvo. Cloth, 
is. 6d. net; leather, ax. 6d. net. 

[Little Library. 

Rndrard Kipling. BARRACK- ROOM 

BALLADS. 73rd Thousand. Crown Bvo. 
6s. ; leather, ox. net. 

* Mr. Kipling's verse is strong, vivid, full 
of character. . • • Unmistakable genius 
rings in every line.' — Times. 

'The ballads teem with imagination, they 
palpitate with emotion. We read them with 
laughter and tears : the metres throb in our 
pulses, the cunningly ordered words tingle 
with life : and if this be not poetry, what 
\*V— Pall Mall Gazette. 

THE SEVEN 
Crown Sew. 
leather, 6s. not. 

'The Empire has sound a 
no depredation of the songs to' say at 
statesmen may have, one way or otter, to 
take account of them.' — 

, gSU top, &; 

;«■ 

F. O. XlttOIL See Dickens. 

W.J. Knox Little. See St. Ft 

Charles Lamb, THE ESSAYS OF ELLL 
With over 100 Illustrations by A. Gaktm 
Jones, and an Introduction by E. V. Local 
Demy Bvo. toe. 6a\ 

'Tnis edition is in many r e sp ec ts of 
peculiar beauty.' — Dms/y Chronicle. 

* It is in every way an arfmiraMe edmni 
and the illustrations are dehghtxuL' — 

I 

ELIA, AND THE LAST ESSAYS OF 
ELI A. Edited by E. V. Luc as. Pott 9m. 
Cloth, xx. 64 net; leather, ax. 6dL met 

[Little Library. 

THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS: 
An 1805 Book for Children. IBnatrated br 
William Mulrkady. A new triti*!"-. m 
facsim i le, edited by E. V. Lucas, ia 64. 

This little book is a literary c uri osity, and 
has been discovered and identified as the 
work of Charles Lamb by E. V. Loess. 
It is an exact facsimile of the original 
edition, which was illustrated by M already. 

Professor Lambroe. ECTHESIS 

CHRONICA. Edited by. Demy 
7s. 6d. net. £ Byzantine T« 

Stanley Lane-Poole. THE LIFE OF 

SIR HARRY PARKES. A New and 
Cheaper Edition. Crown 8w. 6s. 

A HISTORY OF EGYPT IN THE 
MIDDLE AGES. Fully Illustrated. 
Crown Bvo. 6s. 

F. Lanfbridfe. M.A. BALLADS OF THE 
BRAVE : Poems of Chivalry, Enterprise, 
Courage, and Constancy. Second Edition. 
Crown Bvo. as. 6d. 

'The book is full of splendid things.'-- 
World 

William Law. A SERIOUS CALL TO A 
DEVOUT AND HOLY LIFE. Edited, 
with an Introduction, by C Bigg, D.D., 
late Student of Christ Church. Pott Bvo. 
Cloth, s*. ; leather, as. 6d. net. 

[Library of Devotion. 
This is a reprint, word for word and line 
for line, of the Editio Princess. 

0. 8. Layard. the life of mrs. 

LYNN LINTON. Illustrated. Demy 
Bvo. 1 a*. 6d. 

1 Mrs. Lynn Linton b here presented to 
ns in all her moods. She lives in the book ; 
she is presented to ns so that we really 
know her.' — Literature. 

General Literature 

*9 

Captain Melville Lae. a history of 
Police in England, Crown 8t*. 

7/. 6d. 

4 A learned book, comprising many curious 
details to interest the general reader as well 
as the student who wuj consult it for exact 
information. ' — Daily News, 

' The book rests on accurate research and 
gives a vast array of facts and statistics.' — 
Glasgow Herald. 

V. Bl Lewee, M.A. air and water. 

Illustrated. Crown Bvo. a*. 6a\ 

[University E xtensi o n Series. 

Walter Look, D.D., Warden of Keble Col- 
lege. ST. PAUL, THE MASTER- 
BUILDER. Crown Bvo. ys.6d. 

See also Keble and Oxford Commentaries. 

JOHN KEBLE. 
8c*. 3*. 64 

With Portrait Crown 
[Leaders of Religion. 

B. Y. Lneaa. See Jane Austen and Mrs. 
Gaskell and Charles Lamb. 

SIX DIALOGUES (Nigrinus, 
Icaro-Menippus, The Cock, The Ship. The 
Parasite, The Lover of Falsehood). Trans- 
lated by S. T. Irwin, M.A., Assistant 
Master at Clifton ; late Scholar of Exeter 
College, Oxford. Crown 8c*. 3*. 6d. 

[Classical Translations 

L. W. Lydu, M.A. A COMMERCIAL 
GEOGRAPHY OF THE BRITISH EM- 
PI RE. Third Edition. Crown Bvo. a*. 

[Commercial Series. 

Hon. Mrs. Lartteltoa. women and 

THEIR WORK. Crown Bvo. a*. 64 

* Thoughtful, interesting, practical'— 

Guardian. 

"The book is full of sound precept given 
with sympathy and mil.'— Pilot. 

J. EL B. K*Alle&, M.A. THE PRINCIPLES 
OF BOOKKEEPING BY DOUBLE 
ENTRY. Crown Bvo. a*. 

J P. Mahaffy, LittD. A HISTORY OF 
THE EGYPT OF THE PTOLEMIES. 
Fully Illustrated. Crown 8c*. 6r. 

F. W. MaltlaTld. LL.D., Downing Professor 
of the Laws of England in the University of 
Cambridge. CANON LAW IN ENG- 
LAND. Royal to*. 7s. 6a\ 

H. E. Maid 
CORDS. A 
England. C 

M.A. ENGLISH RE- 
ipanion to the History of 
8c*. 3*. td. 

THE ENGLISH CITIZEN : HIS RIGHTS 
AND DUTIES. Crown 8c*. is. 64 

E. C. Merchant, M.A. , Fellow of Peterhouse, 
Cambridge, and Assistant Master at St. Paul's 
School. A GREEK ANTHOLOGY. 
Crown Bvo. ys. 6d 

E. C. Marchant, M.A., and A. X. Oook. 
M.A. PASSAGES FOR UNSEEN 
TRANSLATION. Crown 8s*. 3*. 64 

' We know no book of this class better 
fitted for use in the higher forms of schools.' 

F. MaflOimn JOHN KNOX. With Por- 
trait. Crown Boa. 3*. 6a\ 

[Leaders of Religion. 

A. H. Mafikar. THE CHURCHMAN'S 
INTRODUCTION TO THE OLD 
TESTAMENT. Crown**,, v . 6a\ 

(Churchman's Library. 
'The book throughout is frank and 
* ~ Herald. 

Laurie Magnus, M.A. A PRIMER OF 

WORDSWORTH. Crown too. %s.6d 

J. E. Hair, F.R.S., Fellow of St. John's 
CoUcge, Cambridge, THE SCIENTIFIC 
STUDY OF SCENERY. Illustrated. 
Crown 8s*. 6s. 

1 A volume, moderate in sue and readable 
in style, which will be acceptable alike to 
the student of geology and geography, and 
to the tourist.'— Aikenamnu 

A.J. Maaon. THOMAS CRANMER. 
With Portrait. Crown 8c*. 3*. td. 

[Leaders of Religion. 

George Xasaee. the evolution of 

PLANT LIFE: Lower Forms. With 
Illustrations. Crown Bvo. ts. 6d 
(University Extension 

C. F. 0. Maiterman 

AS A RELIGIOUS 
8c*. 6r. 

'A thoughtful and penetrating 
tion, full of interest and 
World. 

Annie Matheeon. See Mrs. Craik. 
Enuna 8. Mellowt. A short story 

OF ENGLISH LITERATURE. Crown 
8c*. yt.td. 

'A lucid and well-arranged account of 
the growth of English literature.'— Prnil 
MallGasetU. 

L. a Miall, F.R.S. See Gilbert White. 

E. B. MichelL THE ART AND PRAC 
TICE OF HAWKING. With 3 Photo- 
gravures by G. E. Lodge, and other 
Ill us t rati ons. Dentj 8c*. to* 6a\ 

M.A. TENNYSON 
TEACHER. 

20 

Messrs. Methuem's Catalogue 

J.O.MHUdft. THE LIFE AND LETTERS 
OF SIR JOHN EVERETT BIILLAIS, 
President of the Royal Academy. With 319 
Illustrations, of which 9 arc Photogravure, 
a vols. Royal 8c*. so*, net. 

' This splendid work.'— World, 

' Of such absorbing interest is it, of soch 

completeness in scope and beauty. Special 

tribute must be paid to the extraordinary 

completeness of the illustrations.'-— ^r'rv/Aic. 

J. a Milne, M.A. A HISTORY OF 
ROMAN EGYPT. Fully Illustrated. 
Crown Zvo. 6s, 

P. Chalmers MitcnelL M.A. OUTUNES 
OF BIOLOGY. Illustrated. Second 
Edition. Crown 8vo.^ 6r. 

A text • book designed to cover the 
Schedule issued by the Royal College of 
Physicians and Surgeons. 

D. M. MolT. MANSIE WAUCH. Edited 
by T. F. Henderson. PottZvo. Cloth, 
is. 6d. net ; leather \ as. 6d. net. 

[Little Library. 

H. E. Moore. BACK TO THE LAND : 
An Inquiry into the cure for Rural Depopu- 
lation. Crown &vo. ar. dd. 

[Social Questions Scries. 

W. R. MOTflll. Oriel College, Oxford. A 
HISTORY OF RUSSIA FROM PETER 
THE GREAT TO ALEXANDER II. 
With Maps and Plans. Crown Svo. 7*. td. 
This history, is founded on a study 
of original documents, and though neces- 
sarily brief, is the most comprehensive 
narrative in existence. Considerable^ atten- 
tion has been paid to the social and literary 
development of the country, and the recent 
expansion of Russia in Asia. 

R. J. Moricb, late of Clifton College. 
GERMAN EXAMINATION PAPERS 
IN MISCELLANEOUS G R A M M A R 
AND IDIOMS. Fifth Edition. Crown 

Zt'O. 2S.6d. 

[School Examination Series. 

A Kky, issued to Tutors and Private 
Students onlv, to be bad on application 
to the Publishers. Second Edition. 
Crown Zvo. 6r. net. 

Miss Anderson Morton. See Miss Brod- 
rick. 

H. C. 0. Motile, D.D. CHARLES 
SIMEON. With Portrait. Crown Ivo. 
js. 6d. [ Leaders of Religion. 

M M. Pattieon Mnir. M.A. THE 

CHEMISTRY OF FIRE. The Ele- 
mentary Principles of Chemistry. Illus- 
trated. Crown Bvo. as. 6d. 

[University Extension Scries. 

V.A.Mundella, M.A. SeeJ. T.Dunn. 

W.CLMLL See R. N.Hal. 

B. W. VertnMO. UU>Y5MITH: 1st 
Diary of a Siege. With x6 

O 

iSJDee VorthOOto, R.A., THE CONVEI 
SATTONS OF, AND JAMES WARD. 
Edited by Esnbst Fucicrii. Waaaway 
Portraits. Dewmy taw. ira cW. 

•Mr. Fletcher's book win xaage awi xss* 
with Haxfitt's.'— Globe. 

* Every reader, with any taste tot art, wS 
find the bool 

A. H. VorWiy. Author of • Highways a«d By- 
ways in Devco and Cornwall' NAPLES: 
PAST AND PRESENT. With 40 Oav 
trationsbyAG.FKaAXix. OswjwSm. es. 

StaadUh f/Orady. the story of 

IRELAND. Crommimm. as, 64, 

Mn. (H lnliant . THOMAS CHALMERS. 

With Portrait. Ct 

a W. Oman, M.JL, Fellow of AB Soak', 
Oxford. A HISTORY OF THE ART 
OF WA R. V ol. ii.:_The Middle Ages, 
from the Fourth to toe 
Illustrated. Demy too*. 

« The whole art of war ia it 
tioa has never 
ample and oomi 

question if any recent coatribatioa to the 
exact history of the world has 
more enduring value.* — Doily 

Prince Henri of Orleans, FROM TON 

KIN TO INDIA. Translated by Hamixt 
Bent, M.A. With 100 Illustrations and a 
Map. Crown 4 to, gilt tofK 251. 

R. L. Ottley, M.A., late Fellow of Magdalen 
College. Oxon., and Principml of Pusey 
House. THE DOCTRINE OF THE 
INCARNATION. Second 
Edition, Demy boo. tar. 6o\ 

[Handbooks of Theology. 
' A clear and remarkably fall account of 
the main currents of speculation. Scholarly 
precision . . . genuine tolerance . . . 
intense interest in his subject— are Mr. 
Ott ley's merits.'— Guardian, 

LANCELOT ANDREWES- Whh Por- 
trait. Crown Svo. 3s. 6d. 

[Leaders of Religion. 

J. H. Overton, M.A. JOHN WESLEY. 
With Portrait. Crown Zvo. 31. 6d. 

[Leaders of Religion. 

M. N. Oxford, of Guy's Hospital. 
HANDBOOK OF NURSING. Crown 
Bvo. y. 6d. 

* The most useful work of the kind that 
we have seen. A most valuable and f 
tical manual.'— Manchester Guardsam. 

General Literature 

21 

W. a 0. PHC60. THE SCIENCE OF 
HYGIENE. With numerous Illustrations. 
Demy Boo. 15*. 

'A thoroughgoing working text-book of 
its subject, practical and well-stocked.'— 

FroJL Loon Pannentler and M. Bidet*. 

EVAGR1US. Edited by. Demy 8m. 
ior. 6d. net. [Byzantine Texts. 

H.W. Paul See Laurence Sterne. 

B. H. Pearoe, m.a. the annals of 

CHRIST'S HOSPITAL. With many 
Illustrations. Demy Boo. js. 6d. 

( A well-written, copious! authentic his- 
tory. *— Times. 

ft. B. Peary, Gold Medallist of the Royal 
Geographical Society. NORTHWARD 
OVER THE GREAT ICE. With over 800 
Illustrations, a volt. Royal Boo. 32*. net. 

'His book will take its place among, the 
permanent literature of Arctic exploration.' 
— Timet* 

8idney Peel, late Fellow of Trinity College, 
Oxford, and Secretary to the Royal Com- 
mission on the Licensing Laws. PRACTI- 
CAL LICENSING REFORM. Second 
Edition. Crown Boo. if. 6d. 

lLPeruginL SELECTIONS FROM 
WILLIAM BLAKE. Pott Boo. Cloth, 
if. 6d. net; leather , ax. id. net. 

[Little Library. 

J. P. Peters, d.d. the old testa- 

MENT AND THE NEW SCHOLAR- 
SHIP. Crown too. 6s. 

[Churchman's Library. 

' Every page reveals wide reading, used 

with sound and scholarly judgment. 

RELIGION AND CONSCIENCE IN 
ANCIENT EGYPT. Fully Illustrated. 
Crown Bvo. a*. 6d. 

W. K. Flinders Petrie, D.C.L., LL.D., Pro- 
fessor of Egyptology at University College. 
A HISTORY OF EGYPT, from the 
Earliest Times to tmb Present Day. 
Fully Illustrated. In six volumes. Crown 
6s. each, 

1 A history written in the spirit of scientific 
precision so worthily represented by Dr. 
Petrie and his school cannot but promote 
sound and accurate study, and supply a 
vacant place in the English literature of 
Egyptology.'— 77m*j. 

Vol. 1. Prehistoric Times to XVIth 

Dynasty. Fourth Edition. 
Vol. 11. The XVIItm and XVIIIth Dy- 

nasties. Third Edition. 
Vol. iv. The Egyit op the Ptolemies. 

J. P. Mahappy. Litt-D. 
Vol. y. Roman Egypt. J. G. Milne, M.A. 
Vol. yl Egypt in the Middle Ages. 

Stanley Lane-Poole, M.A. 

SYRIA AND EGYPT, FROM THE TELL 
EL AMARNA TABLETS. Crown Bvo. 
a*. 6a\ 

EGYPTIAN TALES. Illustrated by Trist- 
ram Ellis. In Two Volumes. Crown Saw. 
3s.6d.emch. 

EGYPTIAN DECORATIVE ART. With 
lao Illustrations. Crown Bvo. ys. 6d. 

1 In these lectures he displays rare skill 
in elucidating the development of decora- 
tive art in Egypt. —7jmm«. 

Philip Plenaar. with steyn and 

DE WET. Second Edition. Crown Bvo. 
y.6d. 

A narrative of the adventures of a Boer 
telegraphist of the Orange Free State 
during the 

Plautni. THE CAPTIVI. Edited, with 
an Introduction. Textual Notes, and a Com- 
mentary, by w. M. Lindsay, Fellow of 
Jesus College, Oxford. Demy Zero. tos.6a\ 
net. 

For this edition all the important mss. 
have been re-collated. An appendix deals 
with the accentual element in carry Latin 
The Commentary is very fulL 

I A work of great erudition and fine scholar- 
ship.'— ■Scotsman. 

THE CAPTIVI. Adapted for Lower Forms, 
by J. H. Frebse, M-A., late Fellow of St. 
John's, Cambridge, if. 6d. 

J. T. Plowden-Wardlaw, B.A.. King's 

College, Cambridge. EXAMINATION 
PAPERS IN ENGLISH HISTORY. 
Crown 800. ar . 6d. 

[School Examination 

M. C. Potter, M.A., F.L.S. A TEXT- 
BOOK OF AGRICULTURAL BOTANY. 
Illustrated. %nd Edition. Crown Boo. 
4f. 6a\ [University Extension Series. 

L. L. Price. M.A, Fellow of Oriel College, 
Oxon. A HISTORY OF ENGLISH 
POLITICAL ECONOMY. Third 
Edition. Crown Bvo. *r. 6d. # 

[University Extension Series. 

M a." THE GOLDEN POMP. A Proces- 
sion of English Lyrics. Arranged by A. T. 
QuiLLBX Couch. Crown 8m. Buckram. 
6$. 

R. B. »«^«", M.A. THE ACTS OF 
THE APOSTLES. With Introduction 
and Notes, -Ocmy Boo. iar. 6d. 

[Commentaries on the R.V. 

'A really helpful book. Both introduction 

and commentary are marked by common 

22 

Tl'fttr. With 
Plana, Demytmo* 15c 
' From its ir— itir 

COmpWft lades, thf* M 

that we are likely lor 
utrm the tmkjaci with which 
Athenrmm. 

ILKBrtftTta. kCC 

A. BtfbtrttOB. D.D., JViadpal of J 
C<41«gc, London. REGJfUMDEL 
HmmtuUm Lectare* of root. Dewsy 
its. Id. met. 

1 A notable votnme. Iu 
irtlereeC U in iu historic 
great l\t*m*.'—Dmdly News. 

1 It U altogether a •olid piece of work 
ft valuable contribution to the 
Christian thought.'— Scotsman. 

flrO.t.Robertaon.icc.s.i. chitral: 

The Story of a Minor Siege. With n 

tut* Illustrations, Map and Plant. Second 

Jidltion. Demy Zvo. 10s. dd. 

'A book which the Elizabethans would 
have thought wonderful. More thrilling, 
more piquant, and more human than any 
novel. —Newcastle Chronicle. 

J. W. RobtrUonSoott the people 

OK CHINA. With a Map. Crown too. 
\s. ttd, 

A.W.RobilliOIl.M.A, THE EPISTLE TO 
'I UK (JAI.A'HANS. Kxplained. Fca*. 
n*>ti. u. ttd. met. (Churchman's Bible. 

' Tli« tri'Ml attractive, sensible, and m- 
«trit< t|v« mamml for people at large, which 
*• have ever MHirt.'- -Church Cautte. 

OtnUURoWniOlL THE MINISTRY OF 
IH'.Af nNl.s.sKS. With an Introduction 
by ti)« I' 4 "'! HUhop of Winchester. Crown 
Wf'rf. 31, ttd. 

NEW TESTAMENT 
ourse for Deginners. With 
a IWnte by Wai.thk Ixktic, U.D., Warden 
irf Habit College, tea/, to* y.td. 

0, RodWtU, II. A. 
(JWI'klt. A (mi 

valuable addition to 
gallery. —Z>«/r A', 

St. Frtadi de Sales, ov the Lovi 

OF GOD. Edited by W. J. Kjcox-Littu 
M.A. Pott few. Clerk, a. 
21. 6<£ **£. (Library 

j.SanrMumt.M.A. annals of west 

MINSTER SCHOOL. With 
Illustration*. /VnrrSrw. js. 6dL 

THE HISTORY Ol 
Demy Boo. 15*. ««/. 

[Bywtme T« 

a Baths*. 

PSELLUS. 

H.O.Seeley. F.R.S. dragons of thi 

AIR. With many Illustrations, Crmm 
8vo. 6s. 

A popular history of the 
flying animals which ever lived. Their reb 
tions to mammals, birds, and repcOes, livim, 
and extinct, are shown by an original 
of illustrations. The scattered remain 

served in Europe and the United Staiei 

been nut together accurately to show tin 
varied forms of the animals. The book as a 
natural history of these extinct 
which flew by means of a single 

General Literature 

*3 

V. P. Mill, M.A. THE MECHANICS 
OF DAILY LIFE. Illustrated. Crown 
8m. as. 6d. [University Extension Series. 

Edmund Salons, tommy smith's 

ANIMALS. Illustrated by G. W. Ord. 
Stand Edition. Fcap. Bvo. at. 6d. 

'A quaint, fascinating little book : a nur- 
dassic — A thenttum. 

William Shakespeare. 

THE ARDEN EDITION. 

'No edition of Shakespeare is likely to 
prove more attractive and satisfactory than 
this one. It is beautifully printed and paged 
and handsomely and simply bound.' — 

\St. /anus's Gazette. 

Demy Bvo. y. td. each volume. General 
Editor, W. J. Craig. An Edition of 
Shakespeare in single Plays. Edited with 
a full Introduction, Textual Notes, and 
a Commentary at the foot of the page. The 
first volumes are :— 

HAMLET. Edited by Edward Dowden, 
Litt.D. 

ROMEO AND JULIET. Edited by 
Edward Dowobn, Litt.D. 

KING LEAR. Edited by W. J. Craig. 

JULIUS CAESAR. Edited by M. Mac- 

MILLAN, M.A. 

THE TEMPEST. 
Lues. 

Edited by Morton 

A. Sharp. VICTORIAN POETS. Crown 
Sew. as. 6d [University Extension Series. 

J. 8. ShOdTock. THE PIANOFORTE 
SONATA : Its Origin and Development. 
Crown Bvo. 5** 

'This work should be in the possession of 
•very musician and amateur. A concise 
and lucid history and a very valuable work 
for reference. '- 

Arthur 8herir6U,M. A. life in west 

LONDON. Third Edition. Crown Bvo. 
»*. 6d. [Social Questions Series. 

P H. Skrlne and EL D. Boas, the 

HEART OF ASIA. With Maps and 
many Illustrations by Vbrbstchagin. 
Large Crown Bvo. tos. 6d. net. 

This volume will form a landmark in our 
knowledge of Central Asia. . . . Illuminat- 
ing and convincing.' — Timet. 

Bran Small, M.A. the EARTH. An 

Introduction to Physiography. Illustrated. 

Crown Bvo. as. 

(University Extension Series. 

Howell a Smith, Fellow of New College. 
Oxford. SELECTIONS FROM 
WORDSWORTH. Pott too. Cloth* 
xs. 6d. net; leather, a*. 6d. net. 

[Little Library. 

8ophOCl66. ELECTRA AND AJAX. 
Translated by E. D. A. Morshbad, M.A., 
Assistant Master at Winchester, ar. 6d. 

(Classical Translations. 

R. SOUthey. ENGLISH SEAMEN 
(Howard, Clifford, Hawkins, Drake, Caven- 
dish). Edited, with an Introduction, by 
David Hamnay. Second Edition. Crown 
Bvo. 6s. 

1 A brave, inspiriting book.*— Bind mnd 
White. 

C. H. 8pence, M.A., Clifton College. HIS- 
TORY AND GEOGRAPHY EXAM- 

INATION 
Crown Bvo. 

PAPERS. Second Edition, 
as. 6d. 
(School Examination Series. 

W. A. SpOOner, M. A., Fellow of New College, 
Oxford. BISHOP BUTLER. With Por- 
trait. Crown Bvo. ys. 6d. 

(Leaders of Religion. 

J. W. Stanbridge, B.D., Rector of Bainton, 
Canon of York, and sometime Fellow of St. 
John's College, Oxford. A BOOK OF 
DEVOTIONS. Pott Bvo. Cloth, as.; 
leather, as. 6d net. [Library of Devotion. 

* It is probably the best book of its kind. 
It deserves high commendation. '—Church 
Gnutte. 

See also Cardinal Bona. 

'Stancllffe.' GOLF DOS AND DONTS. 
Pen/. Bvo. is. 

A. *L M. Stedman, M.A. 

INITIA LATINA : Easy Lessons on Ele- 
mentary Ac ci dence. Fifth Edition. Pen/. 
Bvo. is. 

FIRST LATIN LESSONS. Sixth Edition. 
Crown Bvo. as. 

FIRST LATIN READER. With Notes 
adapted to the Shorter Latin Primer and 
Vocabulary. Sixth Edition revised. xBmo. 
is.td. 

EASY SELECTIONS FROM CiESAR. 
Parti. The Helvetian War. Second Eds', 
tion. iBmo. is. 

EASY SELECTIONS FROM LIVY. Parti. 
The Kings of Rome. iBmo. Second Edi- 
tion, xs. td. 

EASY LATIN PASSAGES FOR UNSEEN 
TRANSLATION. Eighth Edition. 
Pen/. Bvo. is. 6d. 

EXEMPLA LATINA. First Lessons in 
Latin Accidence. With Vocabulary. Crown 

&VO. IS. 

General Literature 

25 

E YAIUMA LETTERS. With an Etched 
r Portrait by William Strang. Third 
1 Edition. Crow* too. Buckram, ts » 

«_ THE LIFE OF R. L. STEVENSON. See 
& Balfour. 

; a\ IX StO&ft, M.A., late Assistant Matter at 
Eton. SELECTIONS FROM THE 
i ODYSSEY. Pea/, too. ts.td. 

Cfclll— ttrmolMJ. See Chesterfield. 

' A. W. tftrwme, d.d. ecclesiastes. 

Evphrinrd, /fct/. too. ix. &£ *W. 

[Churchman's Bible. 
'Scholarly, suggestive, and particularly 

J.E. 
REV 

lu: 

Otamtmt & Stratum, a history of 

THE MIDLAND RAILWAY. With 
nnmerous Illustrations. Demy too. lu.td. 

ttttrOOd. D.Sc, M.A., Professor of Physics 
in the Durham College of Science, New* 
cartk-on-Tyne. PRACTICAL PHYSICS. 
Fully Illustrated. Crown toe. y.td. 

[Textbooks of Technology. 

F. f-^flT'U See C Stephenson. 

Jonathan ftwift THE JOURNAL TO 

STELLA. Edited by G. A. Aitken. 

CfVSVM 9CO% OX. 

(Methnen's Standard Library. 

M.A. THE FRENCH 
ION. Crown too. ax. td. 
[University Extension Series. 

TaettDJL AGRICOLA. With Introduction, 
Notes, Map, etc By R. F. Davis, M. A., 
late Assistant Master at Weymouth College. 
Ohms few. ar. 

GERMANIA. By the same Editor. Crown 
too. at. 

AGRICOLA AND GERMANIA. Translated 
by R. B. Town sh end, late Scholar of 
Trinity College, Cambridge. Crown %vo. 
ax. td, [Classical Translations. 

J.TanltT. THE INNER WAY. Being 
Thirty-six Sermons for Festivals by John 
Tauler. Edited, with an Introduction. 
ByAW.HurmN.M.A. Pott***. Cloth, 
as. ; leather, ar. td. net. 

[Library of Devotion. 

B. L Taunton. A HISTORY OF THE 
JESUITS IN ENGLAND. With Illus- 
trations, Demy too. a it. net, 

'A history of permanent value, which 
covers ground never properly investigated 
before, and is replete with the results of 
original research. A most interesting and 
careful book.'— Literature. 

P. a Taylor. M.A. COMMERCIAL 
ARITHMETIC Third Edition. Ct 
too. 1*. td. 

T. X. TaylOT, M.A, Fellow of Gottvilleaad 
Caius College, Cambridge. A CONSTI- 
TUTIONAL AND POLITICAL HIS- 
TORY OF ROME. Crown too. 7* td. 

' We fully recognise the value of this 
carefully written work, and admire especially 
the fairness and sobriety of his judgment and 
the human interest with which he has in- 
spired a subject which in some hands be- 
comes a mere series of cold abstractions. It 
is a work that will be stimulating to the 
student of Roman history. '—^4 thenetum, 

Alfred, Lord Tennyson. THE early 

POEMS OF. Edited, with Notes and an 
Introduction, by J. Churton Collins, 
M.A. Crown %vo. tx. 

[Methnen's Standard Library. 

Also with xo Illustrations in Photogravure 
by W. E. F. Britten. Demy toe. xoe.td. 

An elaborate edition of the celebrated 
volume which was published in its final and 
definitive form in 1853. This edition con- 
tains a long Introduction and copious Notes, 
textual and explanatory. It also contains 
in an Appendix all the roams which Tenny- 
son afterwards omitted. 

MAUD. Edited by Elizabeth Words- 
worth. Pott few. Cloth, is. td. net; 
leather, si. td, net. [Little Library. 

IN MEMORIAM. Edited, with an Intro- 
duction and Notes, by H. C Beech inc., 
M.A. Pott too. Cloth, ix. td. net; 
leather, as. td. net. [Little Library. 

THE EARLY POEMS OF. Edited by J. 
C Collins, M.A. Pott toe. Cloth, ix. td. 
net; leather, 2*. td. net. [little Library. 

THE PRINCESS. Edited by Elizabeth 
Wordsworth. Pott too. Cloth, ix. td. 
net; leather, at. td. net. (Little Library. 

Alice Terton. LIGHTS AND SHADOWS 
IN A HOSPITAL. Crown too. y.td. 

VANITY FAIR. 
With an Introduction by S. Gwynn. Three 
Volumes. Pott too. Each volume, cloth, 
ix. td. tut; leather, ax. td, net. 

(Little library. 

PENDENNIS. Edited by S. Gwynn. 
Three Volumes. Pott too. Each volume, 
cloth, xs. td. net ; leather, ax. td. net. 

(little Library. 

P. W. Theobald, M.A. INSECT LIFE. 
Illustrated. Crown too, ax. td. 

[University Extension Series. 

A. H. Thompson. CAMBRIDGE AND 
ITS COLLEGES. Illustrated by E. H. 
New. Pott too. Cloth, vs.; leather, 
y. td. net. (Little Guides. 

* It is brightly written and learned, and 
is just such a book as a cultured visitor 

J 

38 Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue 

Obe little Xftrarg 

With Iotroductkms, Notes, and Photogravure Frontispif 

Pott Sew. Each Volume, cloth, is. 6d. net; leather, zs. 6d. net. 

' Altogether good to look upon, and to handle. '—Outlook. 

' A perfect aeries.'— /YiM. 

* It u difficult to conceive more attractive volumes.'— St. Justus's Gasette. 

9 Very delicious little books.'— LiUrmturt. 

' Delightful editions.'— Record. 

« 

Vanity Fate, By w. M. Thackeray, 
S. Gwyan. Three Volumes. 

PBMDENNIS. By W. M. 

John Halifax. Gentleman. By 
Edited by Aanic Matheaon. Two A 

Pride and PREJUDICE. By lane 
byE.V. Lacaa. Two Volumes. 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. By J 
by E. V. Lacaa. 

THE PRINCESS. By Alfred. Lord 
by Elisabeth Wordsworth. 

Maud. By Alfred. Lord 
Elisabeth Wordsworth. 

E dBod by 

Edited by S. 

Mrs. Craik. 

Edited 

Edited 

By Alfred. Lord Tc 
. M.A, 

by 

tyson. Edited 

IN MEMORIAM. 

byH-C 
The Early Forms op Alfred. Lord Tennyson. 

Edited by J. C. Collins, M. A. 

A LITTLE BOOK OP ENGLISH LYRICS. With 
Notes, 

The Inferno op Dante. Translated by H. F. 
Cary. Edited by Paget Toyebee. Utt.D. M.A. 

THE PURCATORIO OP DANTE. Translated by H. 
F. Cary. Edited by Paget Toynbee, LituD.. M. A. 

THE PARADISO op DANTE. Translated by H. F. 
Cary. Edited by Paget Toyabee, LitLD., M.A. 

A Little Book op Scottish verse. Edited by 

T. F. Henderson. 

A little Book of Light verse. Edited by A. 
C. Deane. 

Edited by 

Selections prom Wordsworth, Edited by 
No well C Smith. 

THE ENGLISH POEMS OP RICH A BO CRASHAW. 
Edited by Edward Huttou. 

SBLSCrtOMS FROM WILLIAM BLAJCB. 
M.Penajhti. 

EOTHBN. ByA.W.Kmglake. Wit* an 
and Notes. 

CRANFORO. By Mrs. Gasket! Edited by E. V. 

Edited by 
By Ceoffe Borrow. Edited by F. 

J* 
By 

A Ltttle Book op English fkosb, 
Mrs. P. A. 

LAVRNCRO. 

Hmdet 

the History op the Caliph Vathbk. 
W&mui Becfdord. Edited by E. flamlsiin R< 

ANGLER. 

The Complbat 
Edited by J 

MARRIAGE. By 
Goodrich- Fi 

Volumes. 

ELI A. AND THE LAST ESSAYS OP Fl.IA. 
Lamb. Edited by E.V. ' 

A SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY. 

by M1« 

Two 

Edited 

CENTAL J 

byH. W. 

Paid. 

A LITTLE BOOK OP LlPB AND DEATH. 
Mrs. Alfred Waterhovse. 

MANSIB WAUCH. 
F. Henderson. 

Edited by 
By D. M. Moir. Edited by T. 

Cbe Xittle euiteft 

Pott 8w, cloth, y.; leather, y. 6d. net. 

OXFORD AND ITS COLLEGES. By J. Wells, M.A. 
Illustrated by E. H. New. Fourth Edition. 

Cambridge and its Colleges. By A. Hamilton 
Thompson. Illustrated by E. H. New. 

The Malvern Country. By B. C A. Windle. 
D.Sc, F.R.S. Illustrated by E. H. New. 

SHAKESPEARE'S COUNTRY. By B. C A. Wandas. 

D.Sc. F.R.S. lUustrated by E. H. New. SecomJ 

Edition. 
SUSSEX. By F. G. Brabant, M.A. Ulnstrated by E. 

H.New. 
WESTMINSTER ABBEY. By G. E. Trontbeck. 

lUustrated by F. D. Bedford. 
Norfolk. By W. A. Dutt. Illustrated by B. C 

Boulter. 

Xittle JStograpbte* 

Fcaf. %vo. Each volume, cloth, y. 6d. ; leather, 4/. net. 

The Life of Dante Alighieri. By Paget 
Toynbee. Litt-D.. M.A. With la Illustrations. 
Second Edition. 

Thb Life op Savonarola. By E. L. S. Hors- 

bunrh. M.A. With Portraits and Illustrations. 

The life op John Howard. ByE.CS. 
D.D.. Vicar of Leeds. Withrs 

the Life of Lord Tennyson. By a. C. 
M.A. With is Illustrations. 

General Literature 

29 

Cbe Xtttle JSlue JSoofee tor Gbtftren 

Edited by E. V. LUCAS. 
Illustrated. Square Fcap. $vo. 2s. 6a\ 

* Very elegant and very interesting volumes.'— Gleugow Hermld, 
1 A delightful series ol diminutive volumes.' — World. 

1 The aerie* should be a favourite among junenUes.' — Observer, 

x. the castaways op Meaoowbank. By T. Cobb. 

a. thr Beechnut book. By Jacob Abbott. Edited by E. V. Lucas. 

3. The air gun. By T. Hilbert. 

XLbc Xtbrarg of Devotion 

With Introductions and (where necessary) Notes. 
Pott Svo t cloth, 2s. ; leather, 2s. 6d. net. 

1 This series is excellent.*— The late Bishop op London. 

* Well worth the attention of the Clergy.*— The Bishop op Lichpielo. 

* The new " Library of Devotion " is excellent.'— The Bishop op Peterborough. 
'Charming.'— Record. • Delightful.'— Church Bells. 

The Confessions of St. Augustine. Edited by 

C Bigg. D.D. Third Edition. 

Thr Christian Year. Edited by- Walter Lock, 
D.D. Second Edition. 

The imitation op Christ. 

D.D. Seemd Edition. 

The Psalms op David. 

dolpn.D.D. 

Edited by B. W. Ran 

Lyra APOSTOLIC A. Edited by Canon Scott Holland 
and H. C Beaching, M.A. 

The Inner Way. Edited by A. w. Hotton, M.A. 

The Thoughts op Pascal, Edited by C. S. 

Edited by W. J. Knot- 

Jcrram, M.A. 

On the Love op God. 
Little. M.A. 

A Manual op Consolation prom thb Saints 
and Fathers. Edited by J. H. Bora, B.D. 

The Song op Songs. Edited by B. Btasland, M.A, 

The Devotions op St. Ansblm. Edited by C 
C J. Webb, M.A. 

Edited by C Bigg, 

A book op Devotions. Edited by J. w. Stan- 
bridge. B.D. 

LYRA INNOCBNTIUM. Edited by Walter Lock. D.D. 

A Serious Call to a Devout and holy Life. 

Edited by C Bigg, D.D. Second Edition. 

THE TEMPLE. Edited by E. C S. Gibson, D.D. 

A Guide to Eternity. Edited by J. W. Stan- 
brldge,&D. 

Gbe Commentaries on tbe "Revises Version 

General Editor, WALTER LOCK, D.D., Warden of Keble College, 

Dean Ireland's Professor of Exegesis in the University of Oxford. 

The Book op Job. Edited by E. C S. Gibson, I The Acts op the Apostles. Edited by R. B. 
D.D. Demy few. it. • Back ham. M.A. Demy taw. tar. id, 

fumbboote of tlbeologi? 

General Editor, A. ROBERTSON, D.D., Principal of King's College, London. 
The XXXIX. articles op the Church op 
England. Edited brE.CS. Gibson, D.D. 
Third mud Clumptr Edition m One return*. 

Demy taw. tar. id. 

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY 
OP RELIGION. By F. B. Jevons, M.A., Utt.D. 
IdMum. Demy 9m. tot. id. 

(Tbe Gburcbman'e Xibran? 

General Editor, J. H. BURN, RD., F.R.S.E., Examining Chaplain to tbe 

Bishop of Aberdeen. 

THE DOCTRINE OP THE INCARNATION. By R. L. 

Ottley.M.A. Second mnd Cheaper Edition. Demy 
•aw tar. id. 

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY OP THE 

Creeds. By A. E. Bern, B.D. Demy ma. 101. 

The 'philosophy op Religion in England and 
America. By Alfred Caidocott. D.D. Demy 
ma. tor. id. 

The Beginnings op English Christianity. 
By W. E. Cotta*. M.A. With Map. Crown taw. 

SOME NEW TESTAMENT PROBLEMS. By Aftkw 

WiickL M.A. Civm sow. ex. 
TUB KINGDOM OP HEAVEN HERB AND HERE- 

AFTER. By Canom Wtnterhotham, M.A* B.Sc, 

LL.B. Crown Saw. %t. id. 
THE WORKMANSHIP OP THE PRAYER BOOK r Ita 

Lltoiary and Ufrgteal Aspects. By J 
DJX Jarrna* ifaWftn Crown ma. nc 

see* 

EVOLUTION. 
Crown iva. 

By P. B. Jerons, M.A^ Utt.D. 
jr. id. 

Thb Old Testament and the New Scholar. 
SHIP. By J. P. Peters. D.D. Crown taw. it. 

THE CHURCHMAN'S INTRODUCTIOK TO THB OLD 
TESTAMENT. Edited by A. M. Mackay, B.A. 
Crown m*. it. id. 

THB CHURCH OP CHRIST. 
C$ 

Messrs. Methoen's Catalogue 

ill t,M[!-r '■ ,' | r.-v-HrTi-V"'- 

fcA&s 

School Examination Scries 

Edited bj A. M. M. STEDMAN, M.A. Cmrn Btw. 

nHS 

'^l 

ttccbnoloflB—tteitbooRS or 

Edited by W. GAR NEXT, D.C.L., and Professob J. WERTHEIMER, F.I.C 
Fully Illustrated. 

Ituw TO MAKE > DtesK. By J. A. E. Woed. i futncu. PHYSICS. By II. Strand. DAl, it 

Part II. — Fiction 

Marie Corelli's Novels. 
Crown $va. 6s. each. 

A ROMANCK Of TWO WORLDS. I of man. ■ • . The a 

y*i™(y. 7*iW A'eWwrt. 
VKNItKTTA. f.it*t/r*t* Editit*. 
TIIKLMA. Twtntr-Smnlk Edith*. 
AKIIATH: THE STOKV OF A bfcAD 

SELF. TkirUntk Edition. 
THE SOUL Of L1LIT1I. Elnt*t\ Edit. 
WORMWOOD. T^ll/lh Bdi, 

will li.t loneiriM 
MtcntoR of the ■! 

' The tender re.erence of the treatment 

anil lilt imij;in»llie IjcinlYl-l [lit writing 

t/S&M. This "Dteam of the World'i 
Tragedy" ",* lofty ud not inadequate 
purapliiuc of the lurwcme climaz of the 
liupired nnrrnti«.'— Dnbli* Rrviru. 
THF. SORROWS Of SATAN. Forty- 
Sirtk Kdilim. 
The conception is magnificent, ud u likely 

THE MASTER CHRISTIAN. 

ti*V* T 

1 II ciniyit he denied ihai "The l|u> 

likcy lo rai-e un^msV.riaUe questions ii 

that it strike, at the tool of lW.Vi.-V ; : 
the Churchcs-tb. decay of fii ln _i n 
manner which thowt [he inevitable disilr 
heaping up. . . The good Cardinal Ronpp 
it » beautiful figure, fit to «*nd beaide th. 
got*' ■**= 

"La Miserable*." 

Fiction 

33 

Anthony Hope's Novels. 

Crown Zvo, 

THE GOD IN THE CAR. Ninth Edition. 
•A very remarkable book, deterring of 
critical analysis impossible within oar limit ; 
brOHant, but not superficial; well con- 
- sidered, but not elaborated; constructed 
with the proverbial art that conceals, but 
yet allows itself to be enjoyed by renders 
to whom fine literary method is a keen 
.'- The W0tuL 

to 

A CHANGE OF AIR. Sixth Edition. 

( A graceful, vivacious corned 
human nature. The characters 
with a masterly hand.'— Timet. 

A MAN OF MARK. Fifth Edition, 

'Of all Mr. Hope's books, "A Man of 
Mark" is the one which best compares with 
" The Prisoner of Zend*." '—National Ob* 

6s. each. 

modest and tender of lovers, a peerless 
gentleman, an intrepid fighter, a faithful 
friend, and a magnanimous toe.' — Guardian. 

PHROSO. Illustrated by H. R. Milla*. 
Sixth Edition. 

'The tale is thoroughly fresh, quick with 
vitality, stirring ti*\*ood.'-Sl J onus* 

THE CHRONICLES OF COUNT 
ANTONIO. Fifth Edition, 

* It b a perfectly enchanting story of love 
and chivalry, and pure romance. The 
Count is the most constant, desperate, and 

SIMON DALE. Illustrated. Sixth Edition, 
'There b searching analysb of human 
nature, with a most ingeniously constructed 
plot. Mr. Hope has drawn the contrasts 
of hb women with marvellous subtlety and 
delicacy.'— Tinus. 

THE KING'S MIRROR. Third Edition. 
1 In elegance, delicacy, and tact it ranks 
with the bes of hb novels, while in the wide 
range of its portraiture and the subtilty 
of its analysis it surpasses all hb earlier 
ventures '—Sfoctator. 

QUBANTE. Tktrd Edition. 

• The book b notable for a very high liter- 
ary quality, and an impress of power and 
mastery on every pmgt.'—DaHyLhroniele. 

Lucas Malet's Novels. 

Crown Zvo. 

COLONEL ENDERBVS WIFE. Third i 
Edition. . 

A COUNSEL OF PERFECTION. Now \ 
Edition. 

LITTLE PETER. Second Edition, y. 6d. 

THEWAGESOFSIN. Thirteenth Edition. 

THE CARISSIMA. Fourth Edition. 

THE GATELESS BARRIER. Fourth 
Edition. 

' In " The Gatekss Barrier** it b at once 
evident that, whilst Lucas Malet has pre- 
served her birthright of originality, the 
artistry, the actual writing, b above even 
the high level of the books that were born 
befonu— Westminster Gnu tie. 

6s. each. 

THE HISTORY OF SIR RICHARD 
CALMADY. Seventh Edition. A Limited 
Edition in Two Volumes. Crown Sew. is*. 

1 A picture finely and amply conceived. 
In the strength and insight in which the 
story has been conceived, in the wealth of 
fancy and reflection bestowed upon its 
execution, and in the moving sincerity of its 
pathos throughout, " Sir Richard Calmady " 
must rank as the great novel of a great 
writer. ' — Literature. 

• The ripest fruit of Lucas Malet's genius. 
A picture of maternal love by turns tender 
and terrible.'— Spectator. 

' A remarkably fine book, with n noble 
motive and a sound conclusion ■ '—Pilot* 

W. W. Jacobs' Hovels. 

Crown Zvo. 

MANY CARGOES. Twenty-Sixth Edition. 
SEA URCHINS. Ninth Edition. 
A MASTER OF CRAFT. Illustrated. 
Fifth Edition. 
''Can be unreservedly recommended to 
. all who have not lost their appetite for 
wholesome laughter.'— -Spectator. 

'The best humorous book published for 
■any a day.*— Black mud White. 

ys. &/. each, 

LIGHT FREIGHTS. 
Edition. 

Illustrated. Fourth 

' Hb wit and humour are perfectly irresis- 
tible. Mr. Jacobs writes of skippers, and 
mates, and seamen, and hb crew are the 
jolliest lot that ever sailed.'— Daily Xews. 

4 Laughter in every page, — AmVjt */<«# 

J. H. n»Ca*cr. THE GREEN GRAVES 

OF BALGOWRIL 

'A. 

train taeJL—r*mzrr'F**>. 

* A samlarfy orapaci. cbrvcr, ; 
falaary?— Cmm^imm 

'Rmah touaKvvritoofi 
tacalty 

*Aa exqaisite idyll. 

Sec also FVur dc Lis No 

nndUtar. A NARROW WAY. 

OVER THE HILLS .So**/ E£tiim. 
cV«r« Jrw*. 6*. 

Sec au>o Facts- dc Us Novels* 
Tom Gallon. Astior of ( Kiddy.' RICK- , 

ERBVS FOLLY. CrfMSm 6*. s 

Dorothea Gerard. Author of ' Lady Baby.' , 
THE MILLION. civamSw. 6*. I 

THE CONQUEST OF LONDON. 
StctmJ Edition. Cim m m tew. 6k. 

THE SUPREME CRIME. Cr. drv. 6*. 
Sec al«© Flear dc Lis Novels. 

TONGUES OF CONSCIENCE. Stc**J 
Edxtifm, Crwmmttm. 6c 
See also Flear dc Lis Novels. 

JOBS OHftr Hobbtm. Aatbnr of ( Robert 
Orange' THE SERIOUS WOOING. 
CrmrmSrm. 6c 

* Mrs. Craigie « as brilliant 
has been : bcr characters arc all 
with jparUmg gems of dc sciiuuo n, and the 

scintillates with aa alamt 

kmXbtmj Hope. Seepage 33. 

YlolH RSMa. THE HUMAN IN- 
TEREST. Cmnfim 6c 

& J. Cvtcttffl* Hjne, Author of * Captain 
Kettle' PRINCE RUPERT THK 
BUCCANEER. With 8 
StcmU EJitiim. CnramBr* 6c 

MR. HORROCKS, PURSER. O 
Srw. 6c 

* Mr. Horrorks b a good second to the an- 
approachable Captain Kettle.' — * ' 
^Mr. Horrocks is sobBa**'— ^ 

' The Purser is a di 
bis 
Dmify 

W.W. Jacob*. Sec pace 33. 

with rigour.'— 

Fiction 

17 

Author of 'What 
/ THE SACRED FOUNT. 
Crown too. 6s. 

THE SOFT SIDE. Second Edition. 
Crown torn. 6s. 

0. F. Keary. the journalist. 

Crown too. 6s. 

Ikram Finch Kelly, with hoops 

OF STEEL. Crown too. 6s. 

'Every chapter is filled with exciting 
incidents/— M orniur Leader. 

' A daring and brilliant story of adventure. 
The novel teems with life and character, 
with fife which is always within an ace of 
death, and character which curiously blends 
the ruffian and the hero.' — Scotsman. 

Emily Lawless, traits and 

CONFIDENCES. Crown too 6s. 
See also Fleor de Lis Novels. 
E. Lynn Linton. THE TRUE HISTORY 
OF JOSHUA DAVIDSON, Christian and 
Communist. Eleventh Edition, Crvwn 
too. is. 

Charles X. Loin. THE AUTOCRATS. 
Crown too, ox. 

'A clever story of American life. Its 
atmosphere is convincing and striking.' — 
Vanity Fair, 

'Eminently readable with clever photo- 
graphs of American social life.'— tSYmufenf. 

ft, Msrnianghtsn THE FORTUNE OF 
CHRISTINA NACNAB. Crown to*. 6s, 

A. MaodOOSlL THE STORY OF 
TERESA. Crown 9oo. 6s, 

'Varied and clever characterisation and 
dose sympathy with humanity.'— West- 
minster Gazette, 

'The book is bracing as the moor itself. 
It has a threefold interest — its keen 

w— - w -.— .„,». its psychological insight, 
and Us philosophy of life.'— Pilot. 

LOOaS Mslot. Seepage^ 

RiChSTd Xarih, Author of ' The Seen and 

the Unseen.' BOTH SIDES OF THE 

VEIL. Second Edition, Crown too. 6s. 

1 Here we have Mr. Marsh at his best.'— 

Globe, See also Fleurde Lb Novels. 

A. E. W. Mason, Author of ' The Courtship 
of Morrice Buckler,' ' Miranda of the Bal- 
cony,' etc CLEMENTINA. Illustrated. 
Crown too. 6s. 

* A romance of the most delicate ingenuity 
and humour . . . the very quintessence of 
romance.' — Spectator, 
L. T.Meade. DRIFT. Crown too. 6s. 

♦Well told, and full of incident and 
character.'— World 

' A powerfully-wrought story.'— Birming- 
hant Post, 

'A powerful story, which treats of the 
drifting of a man of high intellectual gifts.' 
—Court Circular, 

Bertram Mltford. THE SIGN OF THE 

SPIDER. Fifth Edition. 

F. F. Montresor, Author of ' Into the High- 
ways and Hedges.' THE ALIEN. Second 
Edition, Crown too. 6s. 

' Fresh, unconventional, and instinct with 
human sympathy.' — ManchesterGuardian, 

* Miss Montresor creates her tragedy out 
of passions and necessities elementarily 
human. Perfect art.'— Spectator. 

Arthur Morrison. See page 34. 

W. E Harris. THE EMBARRASSING 
ORPHAN. Crown too. 6s. 
See also Fleur de Lb Novels. 

Alfred OUlTant OWD BOB, THE GREY 
DOG OF KENMUIR. Fifth Edition. 
Crown veto* 6s. 

'Weird, thrilling, strikingly graphic.'— 
Punch. 

'We admire this book ... It is one to 
read with admiration and to praise with 
enthusiasm.' — B o okman . 

1 It b a fine, open-air, blood-stirring book, 
to be enjoyed by every man and woman to 
whom a dog b dear.* — Literature, 

E. Phillips Oppenhelm. MASTER OF 

MEN. Second Edition, Crown too, 6s. 

Qilbert Parker. See page 3* 

James Btarthe Patton. BIJLI, the 

DANCER. Crown too. 6c 

MaxPemberton. THE FOOTSTEPS OF 

A THRONE. Illustrated. Second Edi- 
tion. Crown toe. 6s. 
m 'A story of pure adventure, with a sensa- 
tion on every page.' — Daily Mail. 

I CROWN THEE KING. With Illus- 
trations by Frank Dadd and A. Fonestkf . 
Crown too. 6s. 

' A romance of high adventure, of love and 
war. It b a story of true love, of indomit- 
able will, and of steadfastness that nothing 
can withstand.' — Daily News. 

' A stirring tela.'— Outlook, 

EdenPhlllpottS. See page 34. 

Walter Raymond. Author of 'Love and 
Quiet Life.' FOkTUNE'S DARLING. 
Crown too. 6s, 

Edith RiCkert OUT OF THE CYPRESS 
SWAMP. Crown too. 6s. 

'A tale in which a note of freshness and 
individuality b struck, and the delicate 
question of colour b handled with originality 
and power. It has fine thrilling moments. 

— Spectator. 

' The whole story b admirably told. Not 
even in " Uncle Tom's Cabin " is there any- 
thing more exciting than the bloodhound 
chase after the hero* ?— TatUr. 

W. Pett Bids*. LOST PROPERTY. 
Second Edition. Crown too, 6s. 
' The story b an interesting and animate 

40 

A Fobbst Officer. _ 

B» Orton Ptowm* 
THsreooMor asps. 

BftcBaxd Fiyoa. 
Tram amd tub woman. 
Thb guiBT Mrs. Flemoic 

W. FtUSldft. 

A SOW OF THE STATU. 
SECRETARY TO BaYNB, M.F. 

Horltj Bobtrto. 

Thb Fluxdbbbrs. 

Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue 

B. H. Strain. 
Elmsub* DrauVNet. 

A woman of forty. 
Chbjstalla. 

DuchaM of SathcrlAiid. 

One Hour and thb Next. 

Benjamin twlfL 

Sirbn City. 

Cboss Trails. 

I CRARXJTTR. 

W. o. Scully. 

the whitr hecatomb. 
Between sun and sand. 

A VENDETTA OF THB DBSBBT. 

B.H. ttophoas, 

AN ENEMY TO THE KING. 

A Cbntleman Flayer. 

SUCCESSORS TO THE TITLE. 

Percy White. 
A Passionate pilgrim. 

Kfi» 0. H» WiDiijiiiwnL 

THE ADVENTURE OF FRDtCESS SYLVIA. 

X.L. 

Alt Diabolus aut nihil. 

Thb Icelander's Sword. By S, B a ri ng G ou l d. 
Two Little children and Chinc By Edfeh b. 

Cutbefl. 
Toddlebbn* Hero. By if . M Bkdte. 
Only a Guard-Room doc. By Edith E. Cuthal. 
The Doctor of the juubt. By Harry Colling. 

JSooft* tor J9o£0 anft QMB 

Crown 8w. y. 6d. 

SYD Bblton : Or, the Boy who would not go to Set 

By G. Mauri** Fenn. 
Thb Red Grange. By Mrs. Molesworth. 
The Secret of Madame db Momluc By the 

Author of' Mdte. MojL* 
Dumps. By Mrs. Fur. 
A Girl of the People. By L, T. Mead*. 
Master Rockafellab's Voyage. By W. dark j If kfsy Gipsy. ByLT. Mead*. **.»*. 

I The Honovrablb Miss. By l, t. Mi 

Vbc novelist 

Messrs. Methuen are issuing under the above general title a Monthly Series 
of Novels by popular authors at the price of Sixpence, Some of these Novels 
have never been published before. Each number is as long as the average Six 
Shilling Novel. The first numbers of ' The Novelist ' are as follows : — 

I. Dead Men Tell no Tales. By E. w. 

Korvmc. 

II. Jknnie Baxter. Journalist. By Robert 
But. 

III. THE INC A* TREASURE. By Ernest Oaarille. 

IV. A Son op THE STATE. By W. Pert Ridge. 
V. FURZE Bloom. By S. Barinr-Gould. 

VI. Buntrr's Cruise. By C. Clew. 
VII. Thr Gay Deceivers. By Arthur Moore. 

Vllt. Prisomkrs of War. By A. Boysou W< 
IX. Ot* if firing. 
X. Vkldt and Laacbb i Tahw ol too Transvaal. 

By E. S. Valeatiiie. 
XI. THB NltiCER KNIGHTS. By F. Korreys 

CooncL 
XII. A Marriage at Sea. By w. dark RusselL 

XIII. THE POMP OF THB LAVILBTTES. By 
Gilbert 

XIV. A Mam of Mark. Bt Anthony Hop*. 

XV. THE CaRISSIMA. By Lucas Malet. 
XVI. THE I-ADY"s Walk. By Mrs. Ouphant. 

XVII. DERRICK VaUGHAN. By Edna LyalL. 

XVII L IN THE MIDST OF ALARMS. By Robert 
Barr. 
XIX. His GRACE. By W. E. Norm. 
XX. Dodo. By E. F. Benson. 
XXI. CHEAP JACK ZlTA. By S. Baring-Gould. 
XXI L WHEN VaLMOND CAME TO POMTIAC B? 

Gflbert Parker. 
XXIIL THB HUMAN BOY. By Edea PhJBpotts. 
XXIV. THE CHRONICLES OF COUNT ANTONIO. 

By Antboay Hope. 
XXV. BY STROKE OF SWORD, By Andre* 

Balfour. 
XXVL Kitty alone. By S. Bariar-Gouid. 
XXVII. GILES INGILBY. By W. E. Norm. 
XXVIII. VRITH. ByS. Baring-Gould. 
XXIX. Thk Town Traveller. By George 
Gissuig. 

XXX. MR. SMITH. By Mrs. Watford. 

XXXI. A CHANCE OF AIR. By Ant boo y Hope. 

Aetbuen'6 Sigpenn? Xibrarg 

A New Strus of Copyright and non- Copyright Books 

By Major-General 
By Major-General 

Thr Matabf.lb campaign. 
Baden-PowelL 

The Downfall of Frempeh. 
Baden-PowelL ^^ 

MY Danish Swkethhart. By W. dark RusselL 

IN the Roar of the Sea. By S. Baring- 
Gould. 

Peggy of the Bartons. By Bl m. Croker. 

THB CRKBN GRAVES OF BALGOWRIE. By Jj 

H Fladlater 
THE Stoi.un 'BACILLUS. By H. G. Wdh. 
MATTHEW AUSTIN. By W. E. Norm. 

The Conquest of London. By Dorothea 

Genrd. 
A Voyage of Consolation. By Sara J. 
The Mutable Many. By Robert Barr. 
Ben H U R. By Gen era l Lew WaBace. 
Sir Robert's Fortune. By Mrs. Olphnra. 
THE Fair God. By General Lew WnBace. * 
Clarissa Furiosa. By w. e. Nocris, 
Norm I. By S. Baring-Gould. 
THE THRONB OF DAYID. By f. H. 
ACROSS THB SALT SEAS. By J. 

Burton. 

* 

"l05 010 3M5 hi"? 

STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES 

STANFORD AUXILIARY LIBRARY 

STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004 

(415) 723-9201 

All books may be recalled aller 7 days 

DATE DUE 

_ 

, 3 Q T997


**********************************************************************
END OF VOL. I — VOL. II FOLLOWS
**********************************************************************


K   PODMORE 

MODERN    SPIRITUALISM 

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2010  with  funding  from 

Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School 

http://www.archive.org/details/modernspirituali02podm 

MODERN 
SPIRITUALISM 

A   HISTORY  AND   A  CRITICISM 

BY 

FRANK   PODMORE 

AUTHOR   OF    "studies   IN   PSYCHICAL   RESEARCH,"   ETC. 

\ 

IN    TWO    VOLUMES 
VOL.    II. 

METHUEN   &   CO. 

36   ESSEX   STREET   W.C. 

LONDON 

1902 

CONTENTS 

BOOK   III 
SPIRITUALISM    IN   ENGLAND 

CHAPTER  I 

TABLE  TURNING  AND  TABLE  TALKING 

PAGE 

Mrs.  Hayden's  seances  in  London — The  raps — Attitude  of  the  London  press 
— G.  H.  Lewes  in  the  Leader — Elliotson  in  the  Zoist — R.  Chambers  in 
Chambers^ s  Journal — Testimony  of  Professor  de  Morgan — Table-turning 
— Explanations  of  Braid,  Faraday,  and  Carpenter — The  popular  view, 
Electricity — Sandby,  Townshend,  EUiotson,  and  other  Mesmerists 
adopt  similar  views  —  The  Evangelical  clergy  regard  table-turning  as 
Satanic — Revs.  Godfrey,  Gillson,  and  Dibdin — The  Spiritualist  view — 
Testimony  of  Ashburner — Conversion  of  Robert  Owen — The  Keighley 
circle — Dr.  Hardinge  and  Julius  Hartegilligan,  the  new  Messiah  .         .         3 

CHAPTER   II 

THE  INCUBATION  PERIOD 

Robert  Owen's  share  in  the  movement — The  New  Existence  of  Man  upon 
Earth — The  Yorkshire  Spiritual  Telegraph — Home's  first  visit — Mrs. 
Marshall's  seances — Private  mediums — Dixon  and  Dan — Mrs.  de  Mor- 
gan's servant  "Jane" — "Inspirational"  writing — Robert  Owen  and  the 
Crowned  Angel  of  the  Seventh  Sphere — The  spirits  of  Shakespeare, 
Franklin,  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  and  others — Extraordinary  influence 
of  these  automatic  utterances — Testimony  of  Thomas  Shorter,  Dr.  Garth 
Wilkinson — Mrs.  de  Morgan's  book.  From  Matter  to  Spirit — Automatic 
drawings — Mrs.  Newton  Crosland  and  Light  in  the  Valley — Drawing  in 
W.  M.  Wilkinson's  family — The  Howitts  catch  the  infection — Revela- 
tions of  Frank  Starr ;  of  J.  G.  H.  Brown,  of  Nottingham — General 
characteristics  of  the  early  movement  in  this  country      .  .         .       22 

CHAPTER  III 

THE  AMERICAN  INVASION 

Second  visit  of  Home :  Article  in  the  Cornhill  Magazine — Squire  and  his 
table-lifting  performances :  Testimony  of  Dr.  Lockhart  Robertson — 
Foster  and  pellet-reading :  Testimony  of  Spicer,  Barkas,  and  others — 
The  Davenport  Brothers — Articles  in  the  Standard,  Times,  Lancet,  etc. 
— Imitation  of  the  manifestations  by  conjurers — Exposure  of  the  Daven- 
ports at  Liverpool — Challenge  of  the  Anthropological  Society  not 
accepted  .  .  .  .  ...       47 

viii  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER   IV 

PRIVATE  MEDIUMSHIP 

PAGE 

Physical  manifestations  originated  in  England  with  amateurs — Mrs.  Everitt, 
Edward  Childs,  Willie  Turketine,  the  first  Mrs.  Guppy,  Miss  Nichol  (the 
second  Mrs.  Guppy),  her  flower  "apports,"  etc. — Discussion  of  private 
"mediumship"  in  general — Automatic  phenomena  widely  prevalent  at 
this  period — Testimony  of  Dr.  McLeod,  Mr.  Fusedale,  Miss  Houghton, 
Mrs.  de  Morgan,  Miss  Anna  Blackwell,  and  various  witnesses  before 
the  Dialectical  Society,  to  seeing  visions,  hearing  voices,  to  automatic 
drawing  and  writing,  and  to  involuntary  guidance  in  action — Conclusion : 
that  mediumship  is  to  be  explained  as  an  abnormal  development  of  the 
subconscious  activities,  not  necessarily  involving  any  serious  deviation 
from  sanity  .  .  .  .  ...       63 

CHAPTER   V 

PHYSICAL  MEDIUMSHIP  IN  GENERAL 

Heme  and  Williams  amongst  the  earliest  professionals  in  this  country — 
Description  of  their  seances — The  transit  of  Mrs.  Guppy,  and  sudden 
appearance  at  one  of  these  circles — Spirit-writing  by  Mrs.  Jencken's  baby 
— Mrs.  Fay's  seances — The  writer's  experience  with  Miss  Nella  Davenport 
— How  the  trick  was  done — David  Duguid  and  his  "spirit"  paintings — 
Dr.  Slade's  slate-writing  performances :  Professor  Ray  Lankester's  ex- 
posure— Mr.  Morell  Theobald's  servant  and  her  mediumship — Direct 
spirit-writing  and  poems  from  the  Persian  Saadi  .  .         .       jS 

CHAPTER   VI 

MATERIALISATION 

Mr.  Livermore's  experiences  with  Kate  Fox  in  1861,  etc. — The  Keeler 
materialisations  near  Auburn,  N.  Y. — Mrs.  Guppy's  earliest  face-material- 
isation—  Heme  and  Williams  —  Miss  Florence  Cook:  her  full-form 
materialisations — Miss  Showers  and  her  servant  Ellen — "John  King" 
and  ' '  Peter "  appear — Dr.  Richardson  describes  in  the  Medium  the 
spirit  form  of  "Florence  Maple" — Various  exposures-^Miss  Cook  and 
Mr.  Volckman — Miss  Showers  and  Serjeant  Cox,  etc.,  etc. — Spiritualists 
recognise  dubious  nature  of  manifestations — Various  theories  advocated 
— Transfiguration — Imposture  by  spirits — Temporary  splitting  up  of 
medium's  material  organism — Williams'  performance  before  the  Research 
Committee  of  the  B.N.A.S. — Exposure  of  Williams  and  Rita  at 
Amsterdam — -Miss  Wood's  "test"  seances,  and  the  writer's  criticisms 
— Subsequent  exposure  of  Miss  Wood — Of  spirit  drapery — Of  "recog- 
nition "  at  dark  seances — Quotation  from  the  Seybert  Report  .         .       95 

CHAPTER  VII 

SPIRIT  PHOTOGRAPHS 

Mumler  in  New  York  in  1862-3 — Mrs.  Guppy  and  Hudson — Enthusiastic 
reception  of  the  first  spirit  photographs — Subsequent  demonstration  of 
"double  exposure,"  and  differences  of  opinion  amongst  Spiritualists — 
"Recognition"  of  the  photographs — Buguet's  studio  in  Paris:  accept- 
ance by  Stainton  Moses  and  others  of  his  pictures — Buguet's  trial  and 
confession — Remarkable  evidence  of  recognition — Mr.  Beattie  and  Josty 
—  Other  spirit  photographs,  mostly  from  private  sources  —  Various 
explanations  of  the  results     .  .  .  .  .         .      117 

CONTENTS  ix 

CHAPTER   VIII 

CLAIRVOYANCE  AND  TRANCE-SPEAKING 

PAGE 

General  lack  of  evidence  for  clairvoyance  or  telepathy  amongst  mediums — 
Mr.  Barkas'  experiments  with  Madame  Esperance  in  1875 — Analysis  of 
the  records — David  Duguid's  trance-painting  with  closed  eyes — Hafed, 
Prince  of  Persia,  dictates  his  life -history  through  Duguid's  mouth  — 
Description  and  criticism  of  the  book — Other  inspirational  writings — 
Inspirational  speaking — Mrs.  Hardinge  Britten,  Mr.  Morse — Serjeant 
Cox's  testimony — Mrs.  Cora  L.  V.  Tappan  -  Richmond — Her  career — • 
Extracts  from  an  improvised  lecture  on  the  Darwinian  theory — An 
eloquent  peroration — Two  quotations  from  her  "inspirational"  poems 
— Criticism  of  these  automatic  utterances — Other  cases  cited  .         .126 

CHAPTER   IX 

SCIENCE  AND  SUPERSTITION 

Unfortunate  attitude  of  scientific  men  in  general  to  the  subject :  quotation 
from  the  Times — Sir  D.  Brewster's  seance  with  Home — His  account  in 
the  Morning  Advertiser  contrasted  with  the  contemporary  account  in 
his  private  diary — Professor  de  Morgan's  testimony — The  trial  of  Lyon 
V.  Home — Faraday's  letter  on  an  invitation  to  investigate  Home's  feats 
— Tyndall's  experiences,  and  attitude  to  the  subject — Investigation  by 
the  Dialectical  Society  —  Their  Report  —  Criticism  of  the  evidence 
offered — Testimony  from  Serjeant  Cox,  Cromwell  Varley,  Dr.  A.  R. 
Wallace,  F.R.s.,  and  others — Dr.  Carpenter's  attitude — Mr.  Crookes' 
investigations — His  defence  of  Miss  Cook — Photographing  the  spirit 
form  at  Mr.  Crookes'  house — Miss  Cook  and  the  spirit  "Katie"  appear 
simultaneously — Miss  Cook  placed  in  a  galvanic  circuit  by  Cromwell 
Varley — Mr.  Crookes  adopts  similar  tests  with  Mrs.  Fay — Criticism — 
Professor  Barrett  at  the  Glasgow  Meeting  of  the  British  Association       .      140 

CHAPTER   X 

GENERAL  SURVEY  OF  THE  MOVEMENT 

Growth  of  the  movement  in  France — Allan  Kardec  and  Reincarnation — In 
Germany  and  on  the  Continent  generally — Speculations  of  Perty,  von 
Hartmann,  Hellenbach,  Aksakof,  and  others— In  London  Spiritualism 
under  guidance  of  Howitt  at  first  predominantly  Christian — Provincial 
Spiritualism  in  England  Democratic  and  Secularist — James  Burns  — 
His  views  and  work — His  periodicals,  Human  Nature  and  the  Medium 
—  Description  of  the  popular  movement — Quotations  from  Mr.  St. 
George  Stock  and  Mr.  Gerald  Massey — The  scientific  aspect  repre- 
sented by  W.  H.  Harrison  and  the  Spiritualist — Founding  of  the 
"British  National  Association  of  Spiritualists" — Serjeant  Cox  and  the 
"Psychological  Society" — Rationalistic  explanations  of  the  phenomena 
— The  Mesmerists — Mr.  Guppy  and  "Mary  Jane" — Views  of  Charles 
Bray — Thought  rays  and  a  general  thought  reservoir — Serjeant  Cox's 
Mechanism  of  Man — Its  scientific  and  philosophic  conceptions  — 
Various  contemporary  schools  of  mysticism  —  Account  of  Esoteric 
Buddhism — Professor  Barrett  and  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research — 
Present  state  of  the  movement  .  .  .  ,         ,     i6i 

X  CONTENTS 

BOOK    IV 
PROBLEMS   OF   MEDIUMSHIP 

CHAPTER  I 

SOME   FOREIGN   INVESTIGATIONS 

PAGE 

Examination  of  the  evidence  in  general — {a)  The  psychological  phenomena, 
(3)  the  physical  phenomena — Defects  in  the  evidence  for  (5) — Two  special 
objections — Establishment  of  general  presumption  against  genuineness 
of  physical  phenomena — Chief  foreign  investigations — De  Gasparin  and 
Thury,  Baron  de  Guldenstubbe,  Zollner  and  Slade — Tying  of  knots  in 
endless  cord — Abstraction  of  coins  from  closed  boxes,  etc. — The 
Seybert  Commission — Dark  seances — Their  special  difficulties — Fallacies 
of  the  sense  of  touch — Eusapia  Paladino — The  Milan  experiments — 
Richet's  criticism — The  experiments  at  the  He  Roubaud  in  1894 — Testi- 
mony of  Professor  Lodge  and  others — Dr.  Hodgson's  criticisms — Ex- 
posure of  Eusapia  at  Cambridge  in  1895 — General  estimate  of  the 
evidence  in  Eusapia's  case     .  .  .  .  .         .     181 

CHAPTER  II 

SLATE  -  WRITING 

Testimony  of  conjurers  for  genuineness  of  physical  phenomena,  especially 
slate-writing — Eglinton's  performances  and  Spiritualist  testimony  to  their 
genuineness — Account  of  a  seance  by  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey — Dr.  Hodgson's 
criticism — Account  of  a  conjuring  trick — Remarks  on  the  kind  of  obser- 
vation required — Dr.  Hodgson's  analysis  and  collation  of  reports  of 
seances — Accounts  of  a  seance  by  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  and  Mr.  Murray 
Templeton — Truesdell's  imitation  of  slate-writing — Mr.  S.  J.  Davey's 
pseudo-mediumship — Accounts  by  Mr.  A.  Podmore  and  Mr.  J.  M.  Dodds 
— Summary  of  Davey's  feats,  and  remarks  on  his  "mediumship"  .     204 

CHAPTER   III 

DANIEL  DUNGLAS  HOME 

His  parentage,  childhood,  and  career — Description  of  his  person  and 
character — His  trance  addresses — His  clairvoyance — His  physical 
manifestations — Ordinary  half-dark  seances — Vibration  of  the  table — 
Movement  of  musical  instruments,  flowers,  etc. — Exhibition  of  hands — 
Collation  of  two  independent  accounts  by  Mr.  Rymer  and  Mr.  Barlee 
of  the  same  seance — Mr.  Crookes'  experiments  with  Home — Movement 
of  the  balance — Criticism  of  the  evidence — Some  defects  pointed  out — 
The  device  probably  employed  by  Home  to  move  the  balance — Illustra- 
tions from  other  feats  performed  by  Home  himself,  by  S.  J.  Davey,  and 
others — The  floating  of  the  lath  similarly  explained  .  .         .     223 

CHAPTER  IV 

WAS  THERE  HALLUCINATION? 

In  most  cases  the  hypothesis  is  unnecessary — A  few  instances  quoted  in  which 
fallacy  of  memory  hardly  seems  sufficient  explanation — Rev.  T.  Colley 
and  Dr.  Monck — Mr.  St.  George  Stock  and  the  choir-boys — Hallucina- 

CONTENTS  xi 

PAGE 

tion  merely  a  distortion  or  exaggeration  of  normal  sense-perception — 
Illustrations  quoted  from  figures  seen  at  dark  seances  and  "recognised" 
spirit  photographs  —  Further  illustrations  from  S.P.R.  Proceedings, 
R.  L.  Stevenson,  Dr.  J.  G.  Stoney,  Dr.  Beard,  Le  Bon — Levitation  of 
Home — Accounts  by  Robert  Bell  (in  Comhill),  Mr.  Crookes,  Master  of 
Lindsay,  and  others  analysed,  and  sensory  deception,  conditioned  by 
the  dim  light,  indicated  as  the  explanation — Elongation  of  Home — 
Account  by  the  Master  of  Lindsay — Recent  case  of  elongation  by  the 
Rev.  C.J.  M.  Shaw — Fire  ordeal  with  Home — Accounts  by  Mr.  Crookes 
— Similar  manifestation  through  another  medium  described  by  Mrs.  Tebb 
— Recent  cases  in  the  South  Seas  and  elsewhere — A  case  in  Tahiti  des- 
cribed by  Professor  Langley — Conclusion  that  all  these  manifestations 
are  due  to  trickery,  helped  by  illusion — The  conditions  of  a  dark  or 
semi-dark  seance  specially  favourable  to  illusion  —  Home  and  other 
mediums  possibly  gifted  with  unusual  power  to  inspire  such  illusions       .     244 

CHAPTER  V 

THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF  STAINTON  MOSES 

Predisposition  to  belief  in  the  marvellous  present  throughout  the  history  of 
mysticism — Successful  mediums  have  special  power  of  inspiring  confi- 
dence in  themselves  by  prepossessing  manner,  by  playing  on  the 
affections,  by  devotional  and  elevating  discourse — Social  position  and 
good  character  most  valuable  means  of  inspiring  confidence — Illustra- 
tions from  the  writer's  own  experience,  and  from  that  of  others,  of  this 
confidence  being  abused — William  Stainton  Moses — His  birth  and 
career — His  introduction  to  Spiritualism — Physical  manifestations  at  his 
circles — Testimony  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  and  the  medium  himself — 
His  communications  from  spirits,  through  writing  or  table-rapping — His 
Spirit  Teachings — Extracts  from  the  Teachings — Remarks  on  the 
problem  presented  by  Mr.   Moses*  life — Suggested  explanations  .         .     270 

CHAPTER  VI 

AUTOMATISM 

Mediums  not  commonplace  impostors — The  typical  medium  half  or  wholly 
believes  in  his  own  manifestations — Poltergeist  children,  magnetic 
somnambules  and  spirit  mediums  all  alike  belong  to  a  pathologic  type — 
This  fact  recognised  sooner  in  France  than  elsewhere — Nature  of  reflex 
action — Various  states  of  psychic  dissociation,  of  which  sleep  and  reverie 
are  most  familiar,  favourable  to  automatic  (reflex)  action — Crystal  visions 
comparable  to  dreams — Experiences  in  crystal  visions  of  Mrs.  Verrall, 
Mr.  Keulemans,  Miss  Freer,  and  others — Auditory  automatism — Motor 
automatism — Experiments  by  Professor  Jastrow,  Professor  Newbold,  Mr. 
Solomons,  and  others — Spontaneous  motor  automatism — Experiences  of 
Mr.  Tout — Personation  of  spirits — Experiences  of  Mr.  Le  Baron — In- 
voluntary prophetic  utterances — The  unknown  tongue        .  .         .     289 

CHAPTER  VII 

DREAM-CONSCIOUSNESS 

Developed  or  permanent  automatism  symptomatic  of  abnormality — Physical 
indications  of  such  abnormality — Psychical  indications — Continued 
dreaming — Professor  Janet's  account  of  Achille's  demoniac  possession — 

xii  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Another  case  of  Janet's ;  M.  Ler  and  his  spirit  control — ^Janet's  theory 
— Day-dreams — A  case  recorded  by  the  writer  ;  substitution  of  pseudo- 
possession  for  an  attack  of  hysteria — M.  Flournoy's  observations — M. 
Michel  Til's  automatic  messages — Flournoy's  study  of  Helene  Smith — 
The  reincarnation  of  Marie  Antoinette  and  Simandini — Visits  to  Mars 
and  converse  with  its  inhabitants — The  Martian  language — Helene's 
clairvoyance — Flournoy's  explanation  of  her  mediumship — Her  physical 
manifestations — The  problem  of  physical  manifestations  amongst  private 
mediums  generally — Can  these  actions  be  involuntary? — Instances  of 
involuntary  action  in  normal  life  in  kleptomania,  masked  epilepsy,  and 
various  states  of  secondary  consciousness,  especially  in  hysteria — ^Janet's 
case  of  Meb,  an  hysterical  patient,  and  her  "apports" — The  analogy  of 
post-hypnotic  suggestion — Danger  of  encouraging  physical  mediumship, 
as  tending  either  to  dishonesty  or  to  grave  abnormality       .  .         .     307 

CHAPTER  Vin 

THE  TRANCE  UTTERANCES  OF  MRS.   PIPER 

Evidence  for  community  of  sensation,  telepathy  and  clairvoyance  in  the 
past  dubious  and  insufficient — Additional  evidence  of  improved  quality 
accumulated  in  recent  years  by  S.P.R. — (a)  By  direct  experiments,  (3) 
by  collection  of  spontaneous  instances,  (c)  by  recording  trance  utterances 
of  Mrs.  Piper  and  others — History  of  Mrs.  Piper's  mediumship — Professor 
Shaler's  account  of  a  seance  with  her — Precautions  taken  against  fraud 
— Further  testimony  from  Professor  J,  E.  Carpenter  and  M.  Paul 
Bourget  —  Nature  of  the  information  furnished  —  Contrast  with  the 
"clairvoyance"  of  Alexis  Didier  and  Stainton  Moses — Close  resemblance 
to  revelations  of  Cahagnet's  subject,  Adele — Analysis  of  the  evidence, 
and  conclusion  that  it  points  to  supernormal  faculty  (telepathy)  but  not 
to  communication  from  the  dead  .  .  ...     329 

SUMMARY  AND  CONCLUSION 

Retrospect — Origins  of  Spiritualism  to  be  found,  on  the  one  hand,  in  Animal 
Magnetism  and  Alchemy,  on  the  other,  in  Poltergeists  and  witchcraft — Its 
beginnings  with  the  German  somnambules — Its  rapid  spread  in  America, 
helped  by  the  special  conditions  of  the  time  and  the  people — Its  slower 
growth  in  this  country — Involuntary  action  and  trance  personation  ex- 
plained by  modern  psychology — The  foundation  of  Spiritualism  now 
shifted — Mr.  Myers'  theory  of  transcendent  faculties  inherent  in  the  soul 
— The  strength  and  the  weakness  of  his  position — The  evidence  for  such 
faculties,  even  for  telepathy,  at  present  insufficient ;  but  the  case  calls 
for  further  investigation,  and  the  history  of  Mesmerism  furnishes  a  warn- 
ing against  hasty  judgments  .  .  .  ...     348 

Index        .  .  .  ,  ,  ,  ,        .    363 

MODERN    SPIRITUALISM 

BOOK     III 
SPIRITUALISM   IN   ENGLAND 

II. B 

t4 

SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

CHAPTER   I 
TABLE-TURNING  AND  TABLE-TALKING,  1853 

AS  we  have  already  seen,  the  mesmeric  movement  in 
England  ran  for  many  years  almost  entirely  on 
■■  rationalist  lines.^  The  Zoist,  indeed,  remained  as  the 
chief  organ  of  the  movement  up  to  1856,  and  the  purely 
naturalistic  views  therein  advocated  found  general  favour. 
Rumours  of  the  trance  utterances  of  A.  J.  Davis  and  of 
Cahagnet's  somnambules  had,  however,  reached  this  country, 
and  at  least  one  English  somnambule,  Emma,  the  subject 
of  Dr.  Haddock,  had  seen  visions  of  a  future  life  and  of 
spiritual  things  not  unlike  those  recorded  of  Adele  Maginot.^ 
Neither  Haddock  himself,  nor  Gregory,  who  discusses  the 
visions  and  compares  them  with  those  recorded  by  Cahagnet,^ 
is  prepared  to  accept  the  clairvoyant  utterances  as  authentic 
revelations ;  but  neither,  on  the  other  hand,  is  willing  to 
dismiss  them  as  unquestionably  subjective.  That  Haddock's 
own  mind  was  not  made  up  on  the  subject  he  frankly 
confesses ;  and  the  mere  fact  that  he  thinks  it  worth  while 
to  devote  several  pages  of  his  book  to  the  account  of  these 
ecstatic  visions  clearly  indicates  that  he  set  some  value  on 
such  records.  But,  at  any  rate,  if  some  of  the  English 
Mesmerists  in  the  early  fifties  held  it  an  open  question 
whether  such  clairvoyant  utterances  had  any  reference  to 
objective  realities,  there  was  as  yet  no  school  or  sect,  as 
in  America  and  Germany,  to  adopt  without  hesitation  the 
spiritualistic  interpretation  of  these  and  kindred  phenomena. 
It  was  not,  indeed,  until  1853  that  the  new  doctrine  obtained 

^  See  Book  I.  chap.  viii. 

2  See  Sovmolism  atid  Fsycheism,  2nd  edition  (1851),  pp.  181-8,  232,  etc. 

-'  Letters  on  Animal  Magnetism,  185 1,  pp.  223-7, 

4  SPIEITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

any  real  foothold  in  this  country.  In  October,  1852,  one 
Stone,  a  lecturer  on  the  recently  discovered  art  of  "  electro- 
biology" — a  process  for  inducing  hypnotism  by  gazing  at 
metallic  discs,  which  had  been  imported  into  Europe  from 
America  in  the  previous  year — brought  with  him  from  the 
United  States  the  first  Spiritualist  medium,  Mrs.  Hayden. 
Mrs.  Hayden  was  a  lady  of  some  education,  the  wife  of 
W.  R.  Hayden,  sometime  editor  of  the  Star  Spangled 
Banner.  Mr.  Hayden  accompanied  her  on  her  mission. 
A  few  weeks  later  another  medium,  Mrs.  Roberts,  accom- 
panied by  her  husband,  "  Dr."  Roberts,  came  to  London  also 
from  the  United  States.  Both  mediums  advertised  their 
professional  services ;  ^  and  the  former  lady  achieved  no 
small  social  success,  having  her  rooms  crowded  with  visitors, 
at  a  minimum  fee  of  half  a  guinea  each,  and  being  in  great 
demand  for  evening  parties  and  private  sittings. 

The  manifestations  at  these  professional  seances  consisted 
mainly  of  answers  to  questions,  frequently  put  mentally,  by 
means  of  the  raps.  The  procedure  was  the  same  as  that 
already  described  as  prevailing  in  America.^  The  questioner 
took  a  printed  alphabet  and  ran  his  pen  or  finger  down  it, 
until  a  rap  indicated  a  letter ;  the  proceeding  was  then  re- 
peated until  a  word  or  a  sentence  was  obtained.  Occasion- 
ally the  answers  were  given  by  tilting  of  the  table ;  there 
were  also  sometimes  rotation  and  other  movements  of  the 
table.  Involuntary  writing  was  rarely  resorted  to,  no  doubt 
because  answers  to  mental  questions  could  not  be  readily 
given  by  this  means.  Of  other  phenomena  at  this  period  we 
have  little  trace ;  the  alleged  movement  of  tables  without 
contact  rests  exclusively,  so  far  as  I  can  discover,  on  second- 
hand or  anonymous  evidence.^ 

Of  Mrs.  Hayden's  performances  we  have  many  accounts 
in  the  periodical  literature  of  the  time.  In  the  London 
Press,  generally,  as  might  have  been  anticipated,  the  per- 

1  Here  is  Mrs.  Roberts'  advertisement  on  the  front  page  of  the  Times  for 
April  i6th,  1853  :  "Spiritual  Manifestations  and  Communications  from  departed 
friends,  which  so  much  gratify  serious  enlightened  minds,  exemplified  daily 
at  .  .  ."  It  should  be  added  that  later  in  the  year,  as  we  learn  from  a  letter 
written  by  Hayden  to  the  New  York  Spiritual  Telegraph,  the  Ti7?ies  refused  to 
insert  such  advertisements.  ^  See  Book  II.  chap.  i. 

"  See,  e.g.,  Zoist,  vol.  xi.  p.  323,  where  the  Rev.  G.  Sandby  gives  an  account 
of  table-moving  without  contact,  related  to  him  by  a  clergyman,  whose  children 
were  the  mediums.  The  anonymous  author  of  A  Practical  Investigation  into 
the  Truth  of  Clairvoyance  (London,  1854),  mentions  that  he  had  obtained  in- 
voluntary writing  through  Mrs.  Hayden's  mediumship,  and  had  also  witnessed 
at  her  rooms  movements  of  the  table  without  contact.  But  no  details  are  given, 
and  the  writer  was  obviously  quite  uncritical. 

TABLE-TURNING  AND   TALKING        5 

formances  of  the  professional  medium  met  with  Httle  favour. 
Household  Words  was  first  in  the  field,  with  an  article  ridi- 
culing the  whole  matter,^  In  the  following  year  Blackwood's 
Magazine^  the  National  Miscellany^  and  other  papers  took  a 
similar  line ;  whilst  G.  H.  Lewes,  in  the  Leader^  showed  how 
the  trick  was  done,  and  related  that  by  carefully  emphasised 
hesitation  at  the  appropriate  letters  he  had  held  a  conversa- 
tion with  one  of  the  Eumenides,  receiving  much  information, 
not  to  be  found  in  any  classical  dictionary,  about  his  interlo- 
cutor's domestic  relations ;  and  had  induced  the  table  to 
confess,  in  reply  to  his  mental  questions,  that  Mrs,  Hayden 
was  an  impostor,  and  that  the  ghost  of  Hamlet's  father  had 
seventeen  noses. 

In  the  April  number  of  the  Zoist  is  an  article  by  an 
anonymous  correspondent,  describing  his  experiences  at 
Mrs.  Hayden's.  He  noted  that  when  the  alphabet  was 
placed  under  the  table,  so  as  to  hide  it  from  the  view  of  the 
medium,  the  "  spirits "  were  unable  to  give  correct  answers, 
and  satisfied  himself  that  there  was  no  other  intelligence  at 
work  than  that  of  the  medium  herself  The  raps  he  sup- 
posed to  be  produced  by  striking  the  edge  of  the  boot-sole 
against  a  chair-leg.  In  a  later  number^  Elliotson  himself, 
who  had  attended  two  or  three  sittings,  has  an  article  on 
"The  Departed  Spirits,"  in  which  he  endorses  his  contributor's 
views,  and  relates  further  failures  when  the  alphabet  was  con- 
cealed during  the  experiment.^ 

But  apart  from  Mrs.  Hayden's  fashionable  clients,  there 
were  many  persons,  and  some  not  inferior  in  critical  acumen 
probably  to  the  writers  just  cited,  who  found  themselves 
unable  to  explain  all  that  they  had  witnessed  by  such  simple 
methods.  An  article  appeared  in  Chambers  s  JournaQ  in 
which  the  writer,  understood  to  be  Robert  Chambers  himself, 
describes  a  visit  to  Mrs,  Hayden,  He  obtained  the  usual 
answers  under  the  usual  conditions,  but  adds,  "  I  have  seen 
the  alphabet  used  successfully  behind  the  medium's  back, 
when  only  visitors  were  present,"  Chambers  paid  visits  to 
two  other  mediums,  Mrs.  Roberts  and  a  young  woman,  the 
subject  of  a  mesmeric  "doctor,"  E.  Hardinge,  and  witnessed 
table-turning   and   automatic    writing.     He    obviously   feels 

^  Ghost  of  the  Cock  Lane  Ghost,  November  20th,  1852. 
I  May,  1853.  s  May  5th,  1853.  *  March  12th,  1853. 

°  Vol.  xi.,  July,  1853,  p.  igi,  etc. 

•*  Amongst  those  who  visited  Mrs.  Hayden  were  several  well-known  scientific 
men,  including  Professor  Huxley  (see  Life  and  Letters,  vol.  i.  p.  419;. 
'■  May  2ist,  1853. 

6  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

some  difficulty  in  formulating  an  opinion  on  their  perform- 
ances ;  but  on  the  whole  inclines  to  think  that  the  phenomena 
are  natural  and  by  no  means  remarkable,  and  the  mediums 
self-deceived.  In  a  note  written  a  few  weeks  later/  however, 
he  expresses  a  more  decided  opinion.  In  the  interval  the 
phenomena  had  occurred  in  his  own  family  circle,  where  he 
believed  trickery  out  of  the  question.  The  table  had  moved 
round  and  had  tilted  out  answers  to  questions  on  matters 
known  only  to  himself:  "I  am  satisfied,  as  before,"  he  writes, 
"that  the  phenomena  are  natural,  but  to  take  them  in  I 
think  we  shall  have  to  widen  somewhat  our  ideas  of  the 
extent  and  character  of  what  is  natural." 

Again,  in  the  Critic^  in  a  long  letter  signed  "  M.A., 
Cantab." — which  may  probably  be  interpreted  as  A.  W. 
Hobson,  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge — the  writer  ex- 
presses his  conviction  that  the  explanations  put  forward  by 
Lewes  and  others  are  clearly  inadequate.  This  opinion, 
however,  appears  to  be  founded  on  the  fact  that  correct 
answers  were  obtained  when  the  alphabet  was  held  in  such  a 
position  that  Mrs.  Hayden  could  not  see  the  letters  ;  but  it  is 
not  stated  whether  she  could  have  seen  the  hand  or  the  pen 
used  to  point  at  the  letters,  or  whether  Mr.  Hayden,  as  was 
commonly  the  case,  was  present  in  the  room. 

But  probably  the  weightiest  testimony  is  that  given  by 
Professor  de  Morgan.  In  a  letter  dated  July,  1853,  he  thus 
describes  his  experiences  : —  ^ 

"Mrs.  Hayden,  the  American  medium,  came  to  my  house,  and 
we  had  a  sitting  of  more  than  two  hours.  She  had  not  been  there 
many  minutes  before  some  slight  ticking  raps  were  heard  in  the 
table  apparently.  The  raps  answered  by  the  alphabet  (pointing  to 
the  letters  on  a  card),  one  after  the  other  (a  rap  or  two  coming  at 
the  letter),  to  the  name  of  a  sister  of  my  wife,  who  died  seventeen 
years  ago.  After  some  questioning,  she  (I  speak  the  spirit  hypo- 
thesis, though  I  have  no  theory  on  the  subject)  was  asked  whether 
I  might  ask  a  question.  '  Yes,'  affirmative  rap.  I  said,  '  May  I  ask 
it  mentally  ? '  '  Yes.'  '  May  Mrs.  Hayden  hold  up  both  her  hands 
w^ile  I  do  it  ? '  '  Yes.'  Mrs.  H.  did  so,  and  in  my  mind,  without 
speaking,  I  put  a  question,  and  suggested  that  the  answer  should  be 
in  one  word,  which  I  thought  of.     I  then  took  the  card^  and  got 

1  Chambers's  Journal,  ]nne  nth,  1853.  ^  May  i6th,  1853. 

"  Memoirs  of  Augustus  de  Morgajt,  pp.  221,  222.     London,  1882. 

■*  In  an  account  published  in  1863,  in  the  Preface  to  From  Matter  to  Spirit, 
page  xli.,  Mr.  de  Morgan  states  that  in  this  experiment  he  put  a  book  upright 
before  the  alphabet,  and  that  Mrs.  Hayden,  seated  six  feet  from  the  book,  "  could 
see  neither  my  hand  nor  my  eyes,  nor  at  what  rate  I  was  going  through  the 
letters."  It  does  not  appear  whether  this  later  account  is  based  on  contemporary 
notes. 

TABLE-TURNING  AND   TALKING        7 

that  word  letter  by  letter — C  HESS.  The  question  was  whether 
she  remembered  a  letter  she  once  wrote  to  me,  and  what  was  the 
subject?  Presently  came  my  father  {ob.  1816),  and  after  some  con- 
versation I  went  on  as  follows  : — 

"'Do  you  remember  a  periodical  I  have  in  my  head?'  'Yes.' 
'  Do  you  remember  the  epithets  therein  applied  to  yourself?  '  '  Yes.' 
'Will  you  give  me  the  initials  of  them  by  the  card?'  'Yes.'  I 
then  began  pointing  to  the  alphabet,  with  a  book  to  conceal  the 
card,  Mrs.  H.  being  at  the  opposite  side  of  a  round  table  (large) 
and  a  bright  lamp  between  us.  I  pointed  letter  by  letter  till  I  came 
to  F,  which  I  thought  should  be  the  first  initial.  No  rapping.  The 
people  around  me  said,  '  You  have  passed  it ;  there  was  a  rapping  at 
the  beginning.'  I  went  back  and  heard  the  rapping  distinctly  at  C. 
This  puzzled  me,  but  in  a  moment  I  saw  what  it  was.  The  sentence 
was  begun  by  the  rapping  agency  earlier  than  I  intended.  I  allowed 
C  to  pass,  and  then  got  D  T  F  O  C,  being  the  initials  of  the  con- 
secutive words  which  I  remembered  to  have  been  applied  to  my 
father  in  an  old  review  published  in  181 7,  which  no  one  in  the 
room  had  ever  heard  of  but  myself.  C  D  T  F  O  C  was  all  right,  and 
when  I  got  so  far  I  gave  it  up,  perfectly  satisfied  that  something  or 
somebody,  or  some  spirit,  was  reading  my  thoughts.  This  and  the 
like  went  on  for  nearly  three  hours,  during  a  great  part  of  which 
Mrs.  H.  was  busy  reading  the  Key  to  Uncle  Tom^s  Cabin,  which  she 
had  never  seen  before.  ..." 

Of  those  who  were  convinced  of  the  agency  of  spirits  we 
shall  speak  later.  But  there  were  other  persons  of  some 
weight,  such  as  Dr.  Daniel,  Sir  J.  Lillie,  Sir  Charles  Style, 
Dr.  Westland  Marston,  who,  although  unwilling  to  commit 
themselves  to  any  definite  theory,  yet  held  the  phenomena 
worthy  of  serious  investigation. ^ 

It  was  not,  however,  the  manifestations  of  professional 
mediumship,  necessarily  limited  in  their  area,  which  attracted 
most  attention  at  this  time.  An  epidemic  of  table-turning 
had  broken  out  on  the  Continent  in  the  autumn  of  1852,  and 
spread,  though  tardily,  to  this  country  in  the  early  months  of 
1853.  It  was  found  that  not  only  would  tables  and  hats 
rotate  and  execute  movements  of  various  kinds  without  the 
apparent  volition  or  control  of  those  taking  part  in  the 
experiments,  but  that  answers  to  questions — and  even  on 
occasion  information  not  apparently  known  to  any  of  those 
present — could  be  obtained  by  this  method,  a  tilt  of  the  table 
being  substituted  for  the  professional  medium's  rap.  Mrs. 
Hayden's   performances   had   been   confined    to   those   who 

^  See  Fads  and  Fantasies,  by  H.  Spicer  (pp.  14-16).  London,  1853  ;  and 
Mesmerism  ^proved  True,  by  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Townshend.     London,  1854. 

8  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

could  pay  her  price  for  a  sitting,  and  had  been  little  heard  of 
in  the  provinces.  But  table-turning  was  within  the  reach  of 
all,  and  seems  to  have  been  practised  as  assiduously  by  all 
classes  of  society  in  Bath,  Manchester,  or  Edinburgh,  as  in 
London  itself. 

The  table-turning  mania  reached  such  dimensions  that  in 
June  of  this  year  several  scientific  men,  who  had  for  the  most 
part  left  the  professional  medium  to  perform  unmolested, 
thought  it  desirable  to  intervene.  A  committee  of  four 
medical  men  held  some  seances,  the  results  of  which  they 
communicated  to  the  Medical  Times  and  Gazette.'^  Briefly 
they  found,  as  the  result  of  several  trials,  that  when  no  ex- 
pectations were  formed  of  any  probable  result,  and  the 
attention  of  those  sitting  round  the  table  was  diverted  by 
conversation  or  otherwise,  the  table  did  not  move  at  all. 
Again,  no  results  followed  when  half  the  sitters  expected  the 
rotation  to  take  place  in  one  direction  and  half  in  another.  But 
when  expectation  v^as  allowed  free  play,  and  especially  if  the 
direction  of  the  probable  movement  was  indicated  beforehand, 
the  table  began  to  rotate  after  a  few  minutes,  although  no 
one  of  the  sitters  was  conscious  of  exercising  any  effort  at  all. 
The  conclusion  formed  was  that  the  motion  was  due  to 
muscular  action,  mostly  exercised  unconsciously. 

In  the  early  part  of  the  same  month  a  conversazione  was 
held  in  the  Manchester  Athenseum,  under  the  presidency 
of  the  Rev.  H.  Jones,  for  the  purpose  of  table-turning. 
Seven  tables  were  employed,  of  which  four  were  made  to 
turn.  The  most  successful  operators  were  a  party  of  four 
ladies ;  and  Braid,  who  was  present,  suggested  that  the 
popular  theory  of  electricity  might  be  tested  by  placing  a 
circle  of  brass  wire  on  the  surface  of  the  table,  and  letting 
the  four  ladies  who  had  just  been  so  successful  in  causing 
the  table  to  rotate  when  their  fingers  rested  on  it  hold  each 
a  loop  of  the  wire  connected  with  the  coil  on  the  table.  The 
experiment  was  tried,  and  naturally  the  table  remained  at 
rest.  The  ladies  then  discarded  the  wire,  and  again  placed 
the  tips  of  their  fingers  on  the  wood,  when  the  table  moved 
as  before.'-^  In  an  appendix  to  his  Hypnotic  Therapeutics, 
dated  a  few  weeks  later,  Braid  refers  to  this  experiment 
and  the  other  proceedings  at  the  conversazione,  and  points 
the  moral  that  the  movement,  when  there  is  no  reason  to 
suspect  the  good  faith  of  the  operators,  is  probably  due  to 
unconscious  (ideomotor)  action.     He  adds  that   at   all    the 

1  June  nth,  1853. 

2  From  the  Manchester  Guardian,  quoted  in  the  Times,  13th  June,  1853. 

TABLE-TUKNING  AND   TALKING        9 

experiments  at  which  he  had  assisted  someone  had  always 
announced  beforehand  the  direction  in  which  the  table  might 
be  expected  to  move,  and  had  thus  helped  to  bring  the 
unconscious  expectations  of  the  sitters  into  unison. 

But  the  most  important  contribution  to  the  subject  was 
made  by  Faraday.^  Faraday,  like  other  thoughtful  men, 
was  aghast  at  the  hold  which  the  table-turning  mania  had 
gained  on  all  classes  of  society,  and  at  the  loose  thinking 
and  presumptuous  ignorance  which  the  popular  explanations 
revealed.  Amongst  the  various  theories  commonly  offered 
to  account  for  the  movements  of  the  table  he  mentions 
spirits,  electricity,  magnetism,  "  attraction "  of  some  kind, 
and  the  rotation  of  the  earth !  By  the  use  of  some  ingenious 
apparatus  Faraday  showed  conclusively  that  the  movements 
were  due  to  muscular  action,  and  to  that  alone,  exercised 
in  most  cases  without  the  consciousness  or  volition  of  the 
sitters.  Perhaps  the  most  effective  of  his  test  apparatus  was 
the  following.  He  prepared  two  small  flat  boards,  a  few 
inches  square,  placed  several  glass  rollers  about  the  thickness 
of  an  ordinary  pencil  between  them,  and  fastened  the  whole 
together  with  a  couple  of  indiarubber  bands  in  such  a 
manner  that  the  upper  board  would  slide  under  lateral 
pressure  to  a  limited  extent  over  the  lower  one.  A  light 
index,  consisting  of  a  haystalk  or  a  piece  of  paper,  was 
fastened  to  the  apparatus  so  as  to  betray  the  least  movement 
of  the  upper  board  on  the  lower  one.  It  was  found  that, 
in  all  cases,  the  upper  board  moved  before  the  lower  board, 
which  rested  on  the  table,  showing  that  the  fingers  of  the 
operator  moved  the  table,  and  not — as  the  sitters  themselves 
supposed  —  the  table  the  fingers.  But  the  most  striking 
proof  that  the  movement  was  due  to  a  muscular  effort  of 
which  the  performer  was  quite  unconscious  is  that  when 
the  sitters  learned  the  meaning  of  the  index  and  kept  their 
attention  fixed  upon  it,  no  movement  followed ;  "  when  the 
parties  saw  the  index,  it  remained  very  steady ;  when  it  was 
hidden  from  them,  or  they  looked  away  from  it,  it  wavered 
about,  though  they  believed  that  they  always  pressed  directly 
downward." 

Later  in  the  same  year  the  whole  subject  was  dealt  with 
by  Dr.  Carpenter,  in  the  Quarterly  Review^  and  the  same  ex- 
planation— the  unconscious  exercise  by  the  experimenter, 
under  the  influence   of  a  dominant   idea,  of   the  muscular 

^  See  his  letter  on  "  Table-turning  "  originally  published  in  the  Tiines  of  June 
30th,  1853,  reproduced  with  some  additional  matter  in  the  Aihemcuin  of 
July  2nd. 

10  SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

effort  necessary  to  bring  about  the  desired  result  —  was 
applied  not  merely  to  table-turning,  but  to  many  of  the 
phenomena  of  odylic  force  and  electro-biology,  including 
Mr.  Rutter's  magnetometer  and  Dr.  Mayo's  odometer.^ 

But  the  idea  of  discerning  a  mysterious  force  in  this 
drawing-room  diversion  was  too  easy  and  too  fascinating  to 
be  so  lightly  dismissed.  The  point  of  view  of  the  average 
muddle-headed  man  is  amusingly  illustrated  in  an  anonymous 
pamphlet  published  in  the  autumn  of  this  year,  entitled 
Table-turning  and  Table-talking  considered  in  connection  with 
the  dictates  of  reasofi  and  common  sense?  The  writer  finds 
himself  constrained  to  record  his  dissent  from  Faraday's 
explanation.  "  It  is  not,"  he  contends,  "  with  learned  theories 
we  wish  to  have  to  do  .  .  .  we  would  simply  bring  common 
sense  to  bear  on  these  strange  matters."  He  then  proceeds 
to  point  out — to  Faraday — that  "there  is  a  subtle  matter 
which  pervades  all  nature,"  known  in  some  of  its  manifesta- 
tions as  electricity.  It  is  true  we  know  very  little  about  it ; 
but  for  all  that,  or  perhaps  because  of  that,  it  seems  to  the 
writer  not  unreasonable  to  suggest  that  electricity  makes  the 
table  move.  A  more  apt  illustration  of  the  arrogance  of 
sheer  ignorance,  on  which  Faraday  had  animadverted,  could 
hardly  be  found.  But  it  was  with  most  persons,  perhaps, 
less  arrogance  than  indolence  which  led  to  the  rejection  of 
Faraday's  explanation.  It  involved  a  much  less  mental 
effort  to  ascribe  the  whole  business  to  a  mysterious  "  force," 
and  thus  relieve  the  mind  of  the  task  of  grappling  with  the 
problem  in  detail,  than  to  exercise  the  faculties  in  the 
attempt  to  understand  other  people's  experiments  in  the 
region  of  concrete  weights  and  measurements.  So  the  writer 
in  the  National  Miscellany^  already  referred  to,  who  had 
scoffed  at  Mrs.  Hayden's  performances,  is  satisfied  that  the 
phenomenon  of  table-moving  is  "  very  curious,  and  at  present 
unexplained  ;  it  is  supposed  to  have  some  connection  with 
magnetism,  or  electricity,  or  galvanism  ...  or  with  Reichen- 
bach's  odyle."  The  most  popular  pamphlet  on  the  subject, 
which  claims  to  have  gone  through  one  hundred  and  ten 
editions  in  the  course  of  the  year,  is  entitled  Table-turning 
by  Animal  Magnetism  demonstrated^^  and  founds  its  theory 
apparently  on  a  series  of  experiments  conducted  by  a  Mr. 
Bates,  of  the  Nautical  Academy,  who  found  that  the  move- 
ments of  the  table  were  facilitated  when  it  was  insulated  by 

"^  Quarterly  Review,  Sept.,  1853.     See  also  A  few  sober  words  of  Table-talk 
about  the  Spirits,,  etc.,  by  John  Prichard,  F.R.C.s.     Leamington,  1853. 
"  Bath,  1853.  3  London,  1853.     Anonymous. 

TABLE-TUKNING  AND   TALKING       11 

glass  tumblers  or  sheets  of  gutta-percha.  Again,  Mr.  Charles 
Koch,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,^  explains  the  movements  by  supposing 
that  the  circle  of  experimenters  constitutes  a  life-electric 
battery,  from  whom  the  table  becomes  charged  with  vital  or 
"  electro-odycal "  force,  and  is  thus  made  as  obedient  to  the 
will  as  a  member  of  the  human  body.^ 

It  need  not  be  supposed  that  Elliotson  and  his  colleagues 
were  backward  in  welcoming  this  striking  confirmation  of 
their  theories.  The  number  of  the  Zoist  following  that  in 
which  the  exposure  of  Mrs.  Hayden  occurred  contains 
articles  from  the  Rev.  G.  Sandby,  Rev.  C.  H.  Townshend, 
and  Elliotson  himself  on  the  table-turning  manifestations. 
Sandby  writes  from  Paris  to  say  that  the  whole  city  is 
excited  over  the  dancing  of  the  tables.  He  had  himself 
investigated,  and  considered  that  "the  alleged  facts  are 
established  beyond  a  doubt,  and  that  the  controversy  is  at 
an  end."^  He  points  out  that  the  motion  of  the  table  is 
constantly  produced  after  a  very  brief  interval,  so  that  un- 
conscious expectation  can  hardly  be  supposed  to  have  time 
to  operate ;  moreover,  not  only  is  there  no  consciousness 
of  muscular  exertion,  however  great  the  weight  moved,  and 
however  violent  the  movement,  but  the  mind  is  actively  on 
the  alert  to  guard  against  such  an  objection.  Further,  he 
points  out  that  all  agree  in  describing  the  curious  sensations 
in  the  fingers,  arms,  and  occasionally  the  head,  produced 
by  table-turning.  Sandby  himself  had  experienced  unusual 
sensations  in  the  tips  of  his  fingers.  He  concludes,  therefore, 
that  "  this  action  of  the  table,  induced  by  continued  contact 
with  a  chain  of  human  fingers,  is  nothing  but  simple 
Mesmerism,  developing  itself  in  an  unexpected  phase."* 

Townshend  follows  to  the  same  effect.  He  also  had  felt 
unusual  sensations  after  table-turning,  tingling  in  the  tips 
of  the  fingers,  and  a  peculiar  fatigue  as  if  he  had  been 
engaged  in  mesmerising.  He  is  satisfied  that  the  phenomena 
cannot  be  wholly  explained  by  muscular  action.  In  his 
book,  Mesmerism  proved  True,  published  a  few  months  later, 
he  expands  his  views  on  the  analogy  of  the  table-turning 

^  Table-moving  and  Table -talking  reduced  to  natural  causes.  Bath  and 
London.     No  date.     ?  1853. 

"  It  is  curious  to  find  Mr.  Maskelyne  rowing  in  this  galley.  In  an  interview 
published  in  the  Pall  Mall  Gazette  (April  20th,  1885),  the  correctness  of  which 
he  afterwards  acknowledged,  he  states  that  on  one  occasion,  without  the  presence 
of  a  medium,  he  and  a  few  friends  produced  movements  of  a  table  which  he  was 
satisfied  could  not  be  accounted  for  by  muscular  action  alone.  He  explicitly 
rejects  Faraday's  explanation,  and  inclines  to  believe  in  some  psychic  or  nerve 
force.  •'  Zoist,  vol.  xi.  p.  176.  ■*  Page  179. 

12  SPIRITUALISM   m   ENGLAND 

phenomena  with  those  of  Mesmerism,  and  even  suggests  that 
the  rappings  may  be  explained  by  "  some  irregular  dis- 
engagement of  Zoogen  from  the  System"  of  the  medium. ^ 
J.  W.  Jackson,  in  the  pages  of  the  Zoist,  offers  a  similar 
explanation  of  the  raps,  suggesting  that  they  are  probably 
" neuro-electric  or  odic  phenomena."- 

Elliotson,  though  more  cautious  in  forming  his  opinion, 
is  inclined  to  agree  with  those  expressed  by  his  friends.  He 
had  himself  met  with  little  success  in  his  attempts  to  in- 
vestigate the  phenomena ;  but  from  what  he  had  heard  from 
others,  and  especially  from  the  anomalous  physical  sensations 
described,  and  from  the  conviction  entertained  by  the  most 
honest  experimenters  that  the  movements  were  not  of  their 
making,  he  infers  that  "there  probably  is  true  movement 
of  the  tables  independent  of  muscular  force." ^  He  still, 
however,  apparently  adheres  to  his  earlier  opinion  that  the 
professional  rapping  mediums  were  fraudulent. 

There  is  obviously  no  great  difference  in  the  mental 
attitude  of  those  who  thus  adopted  the  phenomena  because 
they  lent  support  to  the  theory  of  Animal  Magnetism  and 
those  who  welcomed  them  as  illustrating  their  own  peculiar 
views  of  spiritual  agency.  Both  alike  exemplified  the  pre- 
potent influence  of  dominant  ideas  in  shaping  belief  And 
if  the  Spiritualist  interpretation  had  less  ostentation  of 
scientific  method,  and  its  exponents  were  at  times  less 
temperate  in  their  advocacy,  they  had  at  least  the  advantage 
of  expounding  a  theory  which  was  sufficiently  elastic  to 
include  the  whole  of  the  facts  to  be  explained.  This,  indeed, 
is  the  line  of  argument  which  appears  to  have  commended 
itself  to  Dr.  Charles  Cowan,  who  points  out  that  all  "the 
modern  scientific  solutions  " — and  in  these  scientific  solutions 
he  includes  the  various  electric,  magnetic,  and  odylic  theories 
just  described — are  inadequate  to  the  facts.  There  is  one 
cause  to  which  all  the  phenomena  point.  "  Satanic  Agency 
.  .  .  is  at  least  equal  to  the  production  of  the  effects,"  whilst 
by  the  testimony  of  Scripture  it  is  clearly  indicated  as  a 
vera  causa.'^ 

The  spiritualistic  interpretation,  indeed,  found  its  strongest 
advocates  in  an  unexpected  quarter.  There  was  a  little 
group  of  evangelical  clergymen,  some  of  them  already  dis- 
tinguished for  their  intemperate  attacks  on  Romanist 
doctrines,  who  hastened  to  discern   in  the    innocent  antics 

^   op.  cit.,  p.  197.  -  Zoist,  vol.  xi.  p.  427.  ^  Ibid.,  vol.  xi.  p.  196. 

"*  Thoughts  on  Satanic  Influence,  or  Modern  Spiriluaiism  considered. 
London,  1854. 

TABLE-TUKNING  AND   TALKING       13 

of  the  table  signs  of  the  coming  of  Antichrist.  On  the 
1 6th  of  June  the  Rev.  N.  S.  Godfrey,  of  Leeds,  with  his 
wife  and  his  curate,  held  a  meeting  for  table-turning  in  the 
presence  of  the  national  schoolmaster  and  others.  After 
various  unsuccessful  attempts  to  induce  the  table  to  con- 
fess that  it  was  moved  by  diabolic  agency,  Mr.  Godfrey 
continues : — 

"I  was  now  prepared  for  a  further  experiment  of  a  far  more 
solemn  character.  I  whispered  to  the  Schoolmaster  to  bring  a 
small  Bible,  and  to  lay  it  on  the  table  when  I  should  tell  him.  I 
then  caused  the  table  to  revolve  rapidly  and  gave  the  signal.  The 
Bible  was  gently  laid  on  the  table,  and  it  instantly  stopped !  We 
were  horror-struck." 

After  supper,  the  experiment  was  resumed,  and  the  follow- 
ing test  was  tried  :  "If  there  be  not  a  devil,  knock  twice ; 
to  our  horror  the  leg  slowly  rose  and  knocked  twice."  It 
need  hardly  be  said  that  these  appalling  disclosures  were 
made  public  without  delay.^ 

Thereafter  Mr,  Godfrey  held  two  or  three  more  sittings, 
the  results  of  which  are  detailed  in  a  later  pamphlet.  ^  On 
the  4th  of  July  the  table  admitted,  in  answer  to  leading 
questions,  that  it  was  moved  by  the  spirit  of  a  dead  man, 
a  lost  soul,  sent  from  hell  by  the  devil,  for  the  express 
purpose  of  deceiving  the  circle  there  assembled,  and  doomed 
to  return  to  hell  when  the  nightly  task  was  accomplished. 
In  answer  to  further  questions  it  was  explained  that  the 
spirit  who  had  manifested  at  the  previous  sitting  was  not 
a  human  spirit,  but  a  fallen  angel.  On  July  i8th  there  came 
one  who  claimed  to  be  the  spirit  of  a  parishioner  (whose 
name  was  given,  and  subsequently  verified  in  the  parish 
register),  dead  some  months  previously  and  buried  by  Mr. 
Godfrey  himself  This  spirit  confessed  that  he  had  only 
once  before  been  in  the  schoolroom  (where  the  stance  was 
held),  and  then  not  to  attend  Sunday-school,  but  for  the 
carnal  delights  of  a  tea -meeting.  In  earth  life  he  had 
generally  attended  the  Wesleyan  chapel,  but  now  deeply 
regretted  he  had  not  paid  more  heed  to  Mr.  Godfrey's 
counsel. 

Later  in  the  year  the  Rev.  E.  Gillson,  of  Bath,  again  after 
one  sitting,  published  the  results  of  his  experience.^     After 

^  Table-ntoving  tested,  and  proved  to  be  the  result  of  Satanic  Agency.  London 
and  Leeds,  1853.  ^  liable-turning,  the  Devil's  Modern  Masterpiece. 

^  Table-talking :  disclosures  of  Satanic  Wonders  and  Prophetic  Signs.  Bath, 
1853. 

14  SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

ascertaining  that  his  interlocutor  was  a  departed  spirit,  who 
expected  in  the  course  of  ten  years  to  be  bound  with  Satan 
and  all  his  crew  and  cast  into  the  abyss,  Mr.  Gillson  proceeds 
with  his  catechism  as  follows  : — 

"I  then  asked,  'Where  are  Satan's  headquarters?  Are  they  in 
England  ? '     There  was  a  slight  movement. 

"  '  Are  they  in  France  ? '     A  violent  movement. 

" '  Are  they  in  Spain  ? '     Similar  agitation. 

"  '  Are  they  at  Rome  ? '     The  table  seemed  literally  frantic." 

Another  clergyman  of  the  same  school,  the  Rev.  R.  W. 
Dibdin,  is  inclined  to  adopt  a  slightly  different  interpretation. 
The  spirits  at  work,  he  contends,  are  not  those  of  departed 
men  or  women,  but  of  devils,^  The  revelations  which  he 
received  in  answer  to  leading  questions  were  all  of  the  same 
general  type.  The  devils  all  confessed  the  Pope  as  the  true 
head  of  the  Church ;  recommended  prayer  to  the  Virgin 
Mary  ;  taught  that  Socinius  was  a  good  man,  and  Luther  the 
reverse ;  that  salvation  is  by  faith  and  works,  not  by  faith 
alone,  and  so  on. 

But  whether  spirits  of  men  or  devils,  all  these  clergymen 
were  agreed  that  the  motive  power  and  the  aim  were  alike 
diabolic.  The  inconceivable  Godfrey  even  hazards  the  con- 
jecture, "  Can  it  be  that  this  is  the  beginning  of  Satan's  last 
struggle,  that  on  the  imposition  of  hands  the  table  is  endued 
with  power  from  the  Devil,  as  the  Lord's  servants,  on  the  im- 
position of  hands,  were,  in  the  Apostles'  days,  endued  with 
power  from  on  high  ?     I  merely  ask,  '  Can  it  be  ?  ' "  ^ 

And  in  a  later  work^  he  elaborates  the  theory  that  the 
table-tilting  and  other  marvels  are  the  signs  foretold  in  the 
Bible  which  should  usher  in  the  reign  of  Antichrist,  and  finds 
in  the  various  economic  and  social  ideals  commonly  as- 
sociated with  Spiritualism  in  America  strong  confirmation  of 
his  suspicions.  "  To  prepare  the  way,"  he  writes,  "  for  that 
false  millennium,  nation  is  to  be  induced  to  rise  against  nation, 
and  kingdom  against  kingdom  ...  to  unite  mankind  in  a 
universal  Brotherhood,  and  establish  a  kingdom  in  the  name 
of  Love  and  Justice."  ^ 

A  brother  clergyman,  the  Rev.  F.  Close  (afterwards  Dean 
of  Carlisle),  gave  the  true  explanation  of  this  extraordinary 

1  Lecture  on  Table-turning  (delivered  Nov.  8th,  1853).  Reprinted,  London, 
1871. 

'^  The  Devil'' s  Modern  Masterpiece,  p.  51.     The  italics  are  Godfrey's  own. 
^  The  Theology  of  Table-turning,  Spirit-rappins^,  etc.,  1854. 
"  Op.  cit.,  pp.  111-12. 

TABLE-TURNING  AND   TALKING       15 

readiness  to  accept  these  trivial  performances  and  to  explain 
them  as  diabolic.  He  points  out  that  these  clergymen  be- 
longed to  a  school  which  for  generations  past  had  been  pre- 
occupied with  the  biblical  prophecies,  and  looking  incessantly 
for  the  signs  of  their  fulfilment.^  As  one  of  them  puts  it : 
"  I  regard  these  things  myself  as  signs  of  the  time.  /  have 
for  several  years  expected  some  decided  -manifestation  of  Satanic 
power."^  It  is  to  this  constant  looking  for  signs  and  wonders 
that  Close  attributes  various  previous  secessions  from  the 
orthodox  Churches,  especially  those  of  the  Plymouth  Brethren 
and  the  Irvingites.  That  it  was  responsible  for  the  attitude 
of  these  evangelical  clergymen  can  hardly  be  doubted.  One 
of  the  most  naive  expressions  of  this  attitude  is  to  be  found 
in  a  pamphlet  by  a  layman  of  the  same  school,  one  R.  C. 
Morgan,  published  apparently  about  this  time,  which,  like 
many  other  publications  of  the  kind,  reached  a  circulation  of 
several  thousands  of  copies.^  Morgan  begins  by  saying  that 
he  does  not  propose  to  inquire  whether  the  manifestations 
are  genuine  or  not,  or  even  whether  they  are  natural  or  not. 
He  contents  himself  with  asking  two  questions :  "  Are 
physical  manifestations  of  Satanic  ^ower  possible  ?  \^  pos- 
sible, is  it  probable  that  in  the  nineteenth  century  such  mani- 
festations should  appear?"  And  he  finds  no  difficulty  in 
giving  an  emphatic  affirmative  to  both  questions.  One  illus- 
tration of  his  method  of  argument  must  suffice.  He  quotes, 
as  one  of  the  signs  to  be  looked  for  in  the  last  days,  the 
following  passage  from  Nahum  : — ^ 

"The  chariots  shall  be  with  flaming  torches  in  the  day  of  his 
preparation,  and  the  fir  trees  shall  be  terribly  shaken.  The  chariots 
shall  rage  in  the  streets,  they  shall  justle  one  against  another  in  the 
broad  ways :  they  shall  seem  like  torches,  they  shall  run  like  the 
lightnings." 

He  then  tells  his  readers,  "  The  next  time  you  see  a 
railway  train  .  .  .  ask  yourself  if  this  is  not '  the  day  of  his 
preparation ' "  ;  and  points  out  in  a  note  that  railway  sleepers 
are  generally  made  of  fir,  and  that  the  carriages  of  a  train 
constantly  "  justle  "  one  another  in  coming  to  a  standstill. 

Before  taking  leave  of  Mr.  Godfrey  and  his  colleagues 
I    must   give   one   more   quotation.     The   phenomena,   that 

^   The  Testers  Tested;  or  Table-moving  .   .   .   not  diabolical.     London,  1853. 
^  Rev.  W.  Vincent,  in  a  Sermon  on  "Satanic  Influence,"  quoted  by  Close, 
op.  cit.,  p.  31. 

^  An  Inquiry  into  Table  Miracles.     Bath  and  London.     No  date. 
"  ii.  3.  4. 

16  SPIKITUALISM   IN   ENGLAND 

ingenious  writer  points  out,  "  appear  to  be  whatever  the 
investigator  supposes  them  to  be,"  ^  a  generalisation  which 
he  uses  in  disparagement  of  the  attempts  made  by  Faraday 
and  others  to  reduce  the  phenomena  to  physical  laws. 
Contemporary  critics,  however,  applied  the  same  principle 
to  his  own  experiments,  and  pointed  out  that  Gulliver's 
Travels  and  Hoyle  on  Whist  were  as  efficacious  as  more 
sacred  books  in  staying  the  gyrations  of  the  table,  if 
employed  with  fitting  solemnity.^ 

Beside  absurdities  such  as  these,  the  ordinary  Spiritualist 
interpretation  might  almost  seem  the  verdict  of  sober 
common-sense.  But  though,  as  already  said,  there  were 
many  who,  like  Robert  Chambers  and  de  Morgan,  had  been 
profoundly  impressed  by  what  they  had  seen  at  Mrs. 
Hayden's,  the  seed  then  sown  did  not  in  most  cases  bear 
fruit  until  some  years  later,  and  Spiritualism  found  at  this 
period  few  avowed  advocates.  One  of  the  earliest  converts 
was  Sir  Charles  Isham.  Another  was  Dr.  Ashburner,  who 
addressed  a  long  letter  in  defence  of  the  Spiritualist  position 
to  Mr.  G.  J.  Holyoake,  the  well-known  Secularist,  which 
appeared  in  the  Reasoner  in  June,  1853.^  Apart  from  the 
writer's  account  of  his  personal  experience,  to  be  quoted 
immediately,  the  letter  is  chiefly  interesting  for  an  attempt 
to  base  a  materialistic  explanation  of  spirits  on  the  hypo- 
thetical phenomena  of  odic  force  and  Animal  Magnetism. 
"  I  do  not  contend,"  he  writes,  "  for  immaterial  essences, 
for  my  limited  capacities  allow  me  to  conceive  the  most 
highly  refined  essence  to  be  only  a  form  of  material  being." 
A  train  of  thought  is,  he  explains,  composed  of  currents 
of  globules ;  and  the  human  will,  also  made  of  globules,  can 
be  seen  by  clairvoyants  streaming  visibly  from  the  brain. 
Ashburner  went  to  Mrs.  Hayden,  he  tells  us,  strongly 
prepossessed  against  the  subject.  He  watched  Mrs.  Hayden 
attentively,  however,  whilst  a  friend  was  receiving  a  com- 
munication, and  could  detect  no  sign  of  trickery.  But  it 
is  obvious  that  he  failed  to  realise  the  crucial  points  of  the 
experiment,  and  his  account  of  the  precautions  taken  does 
not  carry  conviction.     When  his  own  turn  came — 

"Having  successively  placed  myself  in  various  chairs,  in  order 
that  I  might  narrowly  watch  Mrs.  Hayden  in  all  her  proceedings, 
I  at  last  seated  myself,  relatively  to  her,  in  such  a  position  as  to  feel 

^   The  DeviVs  Modern  Masterpiece,  p.  47. 

'^  Townshend,  Mesmerism  proved  Trice,  p.  192;  Koch,  op.  cit.,  p.  10. 
^  This   letter,   or   the   greater   part    of  it,   is   reprinted  in    Dr.    Ashburner's 
Philosophy  of  Animal  Magnetism,  pp.  304-320.     London,  1867. 

TABLE-TUENING  AND   TALKING      17 

convinced  that  I  could  not  be  deceived ;  and,  in  fact,  I  was  at  last 
obliged  to  conclude  that  it  was  weakness  or  folly  to  suspect  her  of 
any  fraud  or  trickery.  .  .  . 

"In  order  to  obtain  an  experience  of  the  phenomena  in  the 
fairest  manner,  I  asked  Mrs.  Hayden  to  inform  me  whether  it  was 
requisite  to  think  of  one  particular  spirit  with  whom  I  wished  to 
converse.  'Yes.'  'Well,  I  am  now  thinking  of  one.'  It  was  the 
spirit  of  my  father  whom  I  wished  to  enlighten  me.  No  raps  on 
the  table.  I  had  anticipated  an  immediate  reply,  but  there  was 
for  a  while  none.  Mrs.  Hayden  asked  if  there  was  any  spirit 
present  who  knows  Dr.  Ashburner.  Immediately,  close  to  my 
elbow,  on  the  table  there  were  two  distinct  successions  of  gentle 
rapping  sounds.  The  next  question  was,  '  Was  the  spirit  he  wished 
to  converse  with  present  ? '  '  No.'  '  Was  there  any  one  present 
who  would  endeavour  to  bring  it?'  'Yes.'  'Are  the  spirits  who 
rap  near  Dr.  Ashburner  friends  of  whom  he  is  thinking  ? '  '  No.' 
'  Will  they  give  their  names  ? '  '  Yes.'  These  replies  were  signified 
by  rappings  to  questions  put,  some  audibly,  some  mentally.  Mrs. 
Hayden  suggested  that  I  should  take  up  the  alphabet,  which  was 
printed  on  a  card.  I  took  the  card  into  my  hand  and  pointed  at 
each  individual  letter  with  the  end  of  a  porcupine  quill — my  friend 
Mr.  Hoyland,  the  gentleman  of  the  house,  kindly  undertaking  to 
put  down  on  paper  for  me  the  letters  distinguished  by  the  raps. 
When  I  arrived  at  a  letter  which  the  spirit  desired  to  indicate,  a 
rapping  took  place ;  but  at  all  the  other  letters  there  was  a  complete 
silence.  In  this  manner  I  obtained  the  letters  successively  Ann 
Hurry,  the  name  of  one  of  the  most  beautiful  and  accomplished, 
as  well  as  pious  and  excellent  persons  I  had  ever  known.  I  had 
not  seen  her  since  1812.  She  married  two  years  after,  and  died  in 
1 81 5.  My  father  and  most  of  the  members  of  the  family  had  been 
on  terms  of  the  greatest  intimacy  with  several  branches  of  the 
Hurry  family,  and  I  had,  in  youth  and  childhood,  known  Ann  and 
her  cousins  as  companions  and  playfellows.  By  the  aid  of  the 
telegraphic  signals  I  have  endeavoured  to  describe  I  conversed  for 
some  time  with  the  charming  companion  of  my  early  years ;  I 
learned  very  interesting  particulars  relating  to  her  happy  abode  in 
the  spirit  world.  My  curiosity  had  been  excited  by  the  different 
sounds  produced  by  rappings  that  I  heard  close  to  those  made  by 
my  friend  Ann.  I  asked  for  the  name  of  the  spirit  they  repre- 
sented. The  name  which  came  out  by  the  letters  indicated  on  the 
alphabet  was  Elizabeth  Maurice,  another  companion  of  the 
childhood  of  myself  and  my  brother  and  sister — another  almost 
angelic  being  while  on  earth,  but  now  with  her  cousin  Ann,  an 
inhabitant  of  the  third  sphere  of  Paradise.  The  authoress  of  the 
*  Invalid's  Book '  and  some  other  works  testifying  to  a  pure,  gentle, 
and  refined  taste  conversed  with  me  awhile ;  and  at  last  a  louder 
and  more  decided  signal  was  made  to  me  from  the  middle  of  the 
table.     The  name  I  obtained  by  the  telegraphic  raps  was  that  of 

18  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

my  father.  I  asked  him  to  communicate  to  me  the  date  on  which 
he  quitted  this  world  for  the  spirit  home,  and  the  raps  indicated 
'  7tli  September,  1798.'  I  asked  him  where  the  event  took  place, 
and  I  obtained  the  answer,  'At  Bombay.'  I  asked  his  age  at  the 
time,  with  many  other  questions,  the  replies  to  which  were  all  quite 
correct.  I  kept  up  mentally  a  long  conversation  with  him  on 
subjects  deeply  interesting.  ..." 

The  seance  ended  with  a  communication  from  Dr.  Ash- 
burner's  father,  which  is  quoted  in  full.  At  subsequent  seances 
communications  are  alleged  to  have  been  given  indicating  a 
knowledge  of  Ashburner's  movements  and  private  affairs, 
and  full  conviction  shortly  followed. 

Another  convert  of  the  same  uncritical  temper  was  Robert 
Owen,  the  veteran  Socialist,  at  this  time  in  his  eighty-third 
year,  Owen  had  several  sittings  with  Mrs.  Hayden  and 
various  private  mediums,  at  which  he  received  communica- 
tions alleged  to  come,  amongst  others,  from  the  Duke  of 
Kent,  who  had  been  one  of  the  earliest  and  most  influential 
supporters  of  his  social  schemes.  The  man  who  in  middle 
life  had  not  hesitated  to  risk  the  ruin  of  all  his  hopes  by 
proclaiming  from  a  public  platform,  when  he  held  that 
honesty  required  such  an  avowal,  his  conviction  of  the  futility 
and  mischievousness  of  all  the  religions  of  the  world,  was 
not  likely  in  his  old  age  to  be  backward  in  proclaiming  his 
adhesion  to  a  new  gospel.  The  advent  of  a  spiritual  king- 
dom, based  upon  justice  and  brotherhood,  was  a  prospect 
which  had  filled  the  pious  Godfrey  with  horror.  But  Owen, 
throughout  his  fourscore  years,  had  been  looking  with  the 
simple  faith  of  a  child  for  the  coming  of  just  such  a 
millennium,  and  now  at  the  last  he  saw^  in  this  new  move- 
ment promise  of  a  fulfilment  ampler  than  he  had  dared  to 
dream.  He  hastened  to  publish,  in  the  columns  of  his 
organ,  the  Rational  Quarterly  Review,  a  formal  profession  of 
his  new  faith,  and  of  the  grounds  on  which  it  rested.^  And 
in  the  following  year  (1854)  he  brought  out  the  first  part  of 
The  New  Existence  of  Man  upon  EartJi,  the  scope  of  which  is 
sufficiently  indicated  by  its  opening  sentences  : — 

"  God  now  commands  all  nations,  through  the  new  manifestations 
of  Spirits  from  superior  Spheres,  to  prepare  for  universal  peace,  that 

■'  He  also  produced,  as  a  separate  pamphlet,  in  the  autumn  of  this  year,  a 
manifesto  entitled  The  Ftitiire  of  /he  Human  Race ;  or  a  great,  glorious,  and 
peaceful  Kevolutioti,  to  be  effected  through  the  agency  of  departed  spirits  of  good 
a7id  superior  men  and  women.  In  an  appendix  to  this  pamphlet  he  gave  de- 
tailed accounts  of  some  sittings  with  mediums,  in  continuation  of  those  already 
published  in  the  Rational  Re7)ieiv. 

TABLE-TUIINING  AND  TALKING       19 

man  may  commence  on  earth  a  new  existence,  for  which  the  late 
extraordinary  progress  in  material,  mental,  and  spiritual  knowledge 
has  been  the  forerunner.  .  .  .  The  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect 
will  accomplish  this  high  task  for  humanity." 

Scattered  throughout  the  country,  moreover,  there  appear 
to  have  been  other  converts  of  less  note,  though,  as  no 
Spiritualist  periodical  came  into  existence  until  two  years 
later,  it  is  difficult  to  obtain  full  information  at  this  period  as 
to  the  spread  of  the  movement.^  At  Keighley  there  was 
published  in  the  autumn  of  this  year  a  small  pamphlet, 
Table-moving  extraordinary,  or  a  Sermon  and  a  quantity  of 
poetry  given,  letter  by  letter,  by  table-rapping.  The  circle 
consisted  of  thirteen  persons,  apparently  all  men,  all  of 
whom  sign  the  account.  They  received  communications  by 
the  raps  from  various  persons  known  to  them  in  life,  and 
specially  from  one  John  Mason,  of  Embsay,  near  Skipton, 
described  as  "  a  most  respectable  individual,"  who,  when 
alive,  had  occasionally  preached  in  the  New  Church,  or 
Swedenborgian  chapel,  at  Keighley.  This  John  Mason,  by 
means  of  the  table,  gave  the  circle  a  sermon,  taking  as  his 
text  Revelation  xxii.  12.  The  sermon,  though  mercifully 
short  (it  occupies  less  than  four  pages  duodecimo),  since  it 
was  rapped  out  letter  by  letter  must  have  occupied  more 
time  in  delivery  than  its  intrinsic  merits,  when  considered 
in  cold  print,  would  seem  to  warrant.  At  other  sittings  some 
poetry  was  dictated  by  the  spirit  of  Robert  Burns,  but  in  a 
dialect  unknown  to  Scotland. 

It  will  be  noted  that  the  private  medium  in  this  case — 
John  Hardacre  by  name — had  not  advanced  so  far  as  to 
receive  communications  through  automatic  writing.  But 
though  writing  "  under  control "  had  not  yet  become  so 
prominent  a  feature  of  the  manifestations  as  it  was  destined 
to  become  later,  it  was  not  unknown  even  at  this  early 
period.  We  hear,  from  a  Spiritualist  source,  it  is  true,  of 
a  little  girl  of  four  at  Ealing  who  had  become  a  writing 
medium,  and  had  even  written  Latin,  though,  of  course, 
ignorant  of  that  language.^  Robert  Chambers,  in  the  article 
already  referred  to,  mentions  at  his  visit  to  Dr.  and  Mrs. 
Roberts  a  slate  and  pencil  lying  on  the  table,  though  they 
were   not   apparently   brought   into    use    on    that    occasion, 

^  In  May,  1853,  there  appeared  the  first  (and  last)  number  of  The  Spirit 
World,  proprietor,  W.  R.  Hayden.  This  is  the  only  periodical  of  which  I  can 
find  any  mention  at  this  time. 

-  Letter  from  W.  R.  Hayden,  dated  Sept.  23rd,  1853,  published  in  Tele- 
graph Papers,  vol.  ii.  p.  466  (New  York). 

20  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

At  his  visit  to  a  third  medium,  however,  a  "sickly  young 
woman"  of  English  birth,  he  obtained  answers  to  his 
questions  in  writing  which  was  alleged  to  be  automatic. 
The  commencement  of  the  proceedings  was  not,  indeed,  of 
good  omen.  Chambers  asked  the  gentleman  who  controlled 
the  stance  and  acted  as  magnetiser,  a  mesmeric  "doctor" 
named  Hardinge,  whether  he  might  not  ask  a  mental  ques- 
tion— a  common  practice  when  rapping  only  was  concerned. 
Permission  was  granted ;  but  the  "  spirit "  controlling  the 
medium  at  once  wrote  through  her  hand,  "  I  told  you  before, 
I  do  not  like  a  mental  question ;  ask  it  aloud."  When 
this  condition  was  complied  with  written  communications 
of  a  sermonlike  consistency  flowed  freely.  This  same  Dr. 
Hardinge,  in  the  early  part  of  the  following  year,  delivered 
a  course  of  lectures  at  the  Literary  and  Scientific  Institution, 
Portman  Square,  which  were  published  shortly  afterwards.^ 
From  these  lectures,  which  are  largely  of  an  autobiographical 
character,  we  learn  that  Hardinge  had  been  for  some  years 
a  lecturer  on  Mesmerism  and  Electrobiology,  and  that  he 
undertook  to  cure  epilepsy,  hysteria,  and  all  nervous  diseases. 
Dr.  and  Mrs.  Roberts,  the  American  mediums,  in  the  winter 
of  1852-3,  introduced  themselves  to  him  at  a  course  of 
lectures  he  was  then  giving  on  Electrobiology.  After 
witnessing  their  phenomena,  he  soon  became  convinced, 
was  taught  by  spirits  of  the  seventh  sphere  that  epilepsy 
was  demoniac  possession,  and  enabled  by  their  instructions 
to  cure  it.  Eventually  a  member  of  his  own  household — 
the  young  woman  referred  to  by  Dr.  Chambers,  who  later 
appears  on  the  stage  as  Mrs.  Hardinge — was  controlled  by 
the  spirits  of  various  dead  friends,  who  wrote  through  her 
hand.  Several  lengthy  communications  of  the  usual  type 
are  quoted  in  the  lectures.  At  the  time  when  Robert 
Chambers  paid  his  first  visit  Hardinge  had  with  him  another 
medium,  a  young  man  suffering  from  demoniac  possession, 
called  Julius  Hartegilligan.  The  demon  in  this  case  appears 
to  have  prevailed  against  Hardinge's  influence,  for  a  few 
weeks  later  Julius  Hartegilligan  made  his  appearance  at 
Cheltenham,  habited  in  a  white  linen  robe  girdled  with 
scarlet,  and  equipped  with  a  crimson  mantle  and  a  purple 
cap,  in  the  character  of  the  Jewish  Messiah,  and  thereafter 
disappeared  from  the  history  of  Spiritualism.- 

Hardinge    himself    appears    to    have    been    sincere,    and 

^  A  Course  of  Lectures,  etc.     London,  1854. 

2  Cheltenham  Free  Press  of  July  30th,  quoted  in  the  Family  Herald,  Sept. 
3rd,  1853. 

TABLE-TURNING  AND  TALKING      21 

Chambers'  brief  notice  of  him  corroborates,  as  far  as  it 
goes,  the  impression  derived  from  his  published  lectures, 
that  he  looked  upon  Spiritualism  less  as  a  means  of  making 
money  than  as  a  source  of  religious  consolation  and  of 
guidance  in  his  profession  as  a  mesmeric  healer. 

Apart  from  the  fact  that  his  book  gives  us  a  glimpse  of 
one  of  the  earliest  professional  writing  mediums  in  this 
country,  it  is  of  interest  because  it  would  appear  that  it  was 
largely  through  Hardinge  and  his  medium  that  Chambers' 
attention  was  drawn  to  the  subject.  Hardinge  records  a  visit 
paid  to  Chambers'  house,  Chilcotes,  Hampstead,  at  which  the 
usual  phenomena  were  obtained,  on  the  29th  April,  1853, 
immediately  after  the  writing  of  the  article  which  appeared 
in  Chambers  s  Journal  for  May.^ 

Mrs.  Hayden  returned  to  America  in  the  autumn  of  1853, 
and  the  amusement  of  table-turning,  which  had  already  lost 
the  attraction  of  novelty,  ceased  at  about  the  same  period  to 
attract  the  attention  of  society  and  the  Press.  So  little, 
indeed,  was  heard  of  it  after  1853  that  in  July  of  the  follow- 
ing year  the  Scottish  Review,  in  the  course  of  a  notice  of 
Dibdin's  book,  writes  of  it  as  "the  epidemic  which  has 
recently  prevailed  in  our  country,  and  which  has  now,  we 
trust,  so  nearly  run  its  course  that  we  may  treat  it  as  a 
matter  of  history." 

^  Chambers  never  lost  his  interest  in  Spiritualism,  though  his  position  as  a 
publisher  appears  to  have  prevented  him  from  taking  a  prominent  part  in  the 
movement.  In  later  years,  and  down  to  his  death,  in  1871,  he  witnessed  many 
marvels  through  the  mediumship  of  D.  D.  Home.  He  contributed,  indeed,  an 
anonymous  Preface  to  Home's  book,  Incidents  in  my  Life,  and  at  the  trial  Lyon 
V.  Home  he  made  an  affidavit  in  the  defendant's  favour. 

CHAPTER    II 

THE   INCUBATION   PERIOD,    1854-1859 

UT  the  triumph  of  the  Scottish  Reviewer  was  prema- 
ture. There  were,  indeed,  few  outward  signs  of  the 
movement  for  the  next  five  or  six  years.  At  the  out- 
set almost  the  only  publications  which  dealt  with  the  subject 
were  the  periodical  instalments  of  Robert  Owen's  New  Exist- 
ence of  Man  upon  Earth.  And  Owen's  interest  in  Spiritualism 
was,  after  all,  only  of  a  secondary  kind.  True  to  the  traditions 
of  a  lifetime,  he  valued  the  alleged  communications  with 
spirits  mainly  as  providing  an  additional  means  for  the  ad- 
vancement of  mankind  here  on  earth.  The  "  spirits "  who 
communicated  with  him,  as  he  is  himself  careful  to  point 
out,  consisted  chiefly  of  persons  who  had  been  prominent 
during  the  last  fifty  years  in  seeking,  by  their  actions  or  their 
writings,  to  promote  the  general  improvement  of  society, 
and  with  nearly  all  these — Jefferson,  Franklin,  Shelley, 
Chalmers,  Channing,  and  not  least,  the  Duke  of  Kent — Owen 
had  been  personally  acquainted.  The  questions  which  he 
submitted  to  these  spirits  dealt,  not  with  problems  of  spiritual 
cosmology,  or  the  occupations  of  the  seven  spheres,  but  with 
matters  of  immediate  practical  importance.  When  and  how 
should  he  publish  this  or  that  work?  To  whom  should 
copies  be  sent?  Who  should  be  invited  to  speak  at  the  forth- 
coming World's  Convention  ?  Who  to  assist  generally  in  the 
promotion  of  the  millennium  ?  "  Are  the  Queen,  Prince 
Albert,  the  King  of  the  Belgians,  the  Emperor  of  the  French, 
and  the  Emperor  of  Austria  the  proper  persons  to  form  a 
conservative  party  to  introduce  the  New  Dispensation  ?  "^ 

Even  at  the  World's  Convention  of  May,  1855,  "to 
inaugurate  the  commencement  of  the  millennium,"  the 
subject  of  Spiritualism  was  not  introduced.  A  band  of 
American  spirits,  through  the  mouth  of  J.  Murray  Spear, 
had,  indeed,  sent  an  address  to  be  read  at  the  Convention. 

^  New  Existence,  Part  VI.  {1855)  p.  xvii. 
22 

THE  INCUBATION   PERIOD  23 

The  address  was  entrusted  to  a  famous  medium,  P.  B.  Ran- 
dolph, who  presented  it  to  Owen,  together  with  his  own 
credentials,  on  the  day  before  the  meeting.  Owing  to  the 
stress  of  business  the  papers  remained  unread  until  after  the 
Convention,  and  Owen,  though  at  first  disposed  to  regret 
the  incident,  recognised  later  that  the  introduction  of  such 
a  subject  in  such  a  manner  might  have  prejudiced  the 
success  of  the  cause  which  he  held  most  at  heart.^ 

At  a  similar  Convention,  however,  held  on  the  same  day, 
the  14th  of  May,  in  the  following  year,  entitled  "  The  First 
Meeting  of  the  Congress  of  the  Reformers  of  the  World," 
detailed  plans  for  Homes  of  Harmony  emanating  from  the 
same  spiritual  source  appear  to  have  been  submitted  to  the 
audience.  These  Homes  of  Harmony  illustrated  a  new  order 
of  architecture,  based  upon  circular  or  curved  lines,  such 
as  govern  the  conformation  of  trees,  planets,  and  the  human 
body  itself  From  the  engravings  given  in  the  Millennial 
Gazette  they  appear  to  have  borne  some  resemblance  to  the 
first  rude  attempts  at  a  honeycomb  made  by  some  kinds 
of  undeveloped  bees."^ 

At  no  time,  therefore,  could  Owen  have  been  reckoned 
a  typical  Spiritualist ;  and  his  influence  on  the  movement, 
whatever  it  may  have  been,  was  cut  short  by  his  death  a 
year  or  two  later. 

During  these  six  years,  from  1854  to  1859,  in  marked 
contrast  to  the  extraordinary  literary  activity  which  charac- 
terised the  early  American  movement,  there  were  but  few 
publications  of  any  kind  from  avowedly  Spiritualist  sources  ; 
and  the  subject,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  attracted  little 
notice  in  the  outside  Press.  The  few  books  of  importance, 
which  appeared  for  the  most  part  during  the  years  1858  and 
1859,  will  be  noticed  in  the  latter  part  of  this  chapter.  The 
only  paper  devoted  to  the  new  movement  which  attained  any 
kind  of  permanence  was  the  Spiritual  Telegraph,  which  was 
first  published  in  Keighley  in  April,  1855,  under  the  title 
of  The  Yorkshire  Spiritual  Telegraph,  and  ran  until  the  end 
of  1859.  The  paper  changed  its  name  in  1857  to  the 
British  Spiritual  Telegraph,  and  during  the  last  few  months 
of  its  existence  was  published  in  London,  under  the  editor- 
ship, or  with  the  assistance,  of  William  Howitt.  There  were 
also  other  more  short-lived  periodicals,  of  which  the  most 
successful  was  The  Spiritual  Herald,  published  in  London 
under   the   auspices    of   some    Swedenborgian    Spiritualists. 

^  A'eiv  Exisleiice,  Part  VII.  pp.  74  ^"^  ^^'1- 

^  See  Robert  Owen's  AliUeniilal  Gazette,  July,  1856. 

24  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

The  Herald  lasted  from  February  to  July,  1856.  The 
Biological  Review  and  the  Spiritual  Messenger  were  also 
published  in  London  in  the  winter  of  1858-9,  and  lasted 
apparently  each  for  a  few  months  only.  The  first,  edited 
by  Kenneth  R.  H.  Mackenzie,  was  an  organ  of  Spiritualism, 
homoeopathy,  electro-dentistry,  astrology,  Mesmerism,  phreno- 
logy, "and  the  Finer  Physics  generally."  Its  chief  Spiritualist 
contributors  were  the  editor  and  Jacob  Dixon,  a  homoeo- 
pathic doctor  and  Mesmerist.  The  Spiritual  Messenger 
appears  to  have  been  the  private  speculation  of  one 
Carpenter,  a  Mesmerist  who  conducted  meetings  every 
Sunday  at  Greenwich,  at  which  a  trance  medium  discoursed, 
with  a  collection  afterwards.  The  subject-matter  of  all 
these  periodicals  consisted  largely  of  reports  of  trance 
discourses,  generally  with  some  name  of  the  distinguished 
dead  at  the  foot.  But  no  small  part  of  their  pages  was  filled 
with  excerpts  from  the  New  York  Spiritual  Telegraph  and 
other  American  papers.  And  generally  for  the  first  few 
years  the  lack  of  native  material  to  chronicle,  as  well  as  the 
lack  of  books  written  in  this  country,  was  compensated  by 
liberal  importations  from  America.  The  works  of  Davis, 
Harris,  Edmonds,  Tallmadge,  J.  Bovee  Dods,  Rogers,  and 
many  others  were  largely  read  and  quoted,  and  no  doubt 
did  much  to  form  opinion  and  prepare  for  the  ultimate 
spread  of  the  movement  on  this  side. 

But  America  sent  a  more  substantial  contribution  in  the 
persons  of  the  various  mediums  who,  during  these  first  years, 
emulating  the  example  of  Mrs.  Hayden,  visited  our  island. 
The  first  and  the  most  influential  of  these  missionaries  was 
Daniel  Dunglas  Hume,  or  Home,  as  he  afterwards  spelt  the 
name.  Home,  whose  acquaintance  we  have  already  made,^ 
came  to  England  in  April,  1855,  when  he  was  just  entering 
on  his  twenty-third  year.  According  to  his  own  account,  he 
was  born  in  Scotland,  but  had  spent  the  greater  part  of  his 
youth  and  early  manhood  in  America,  and  had  there  practised 
physical  mediumship  for  some  four  years  prior  to  his  coming 
to  this  country.  One  of  his  earliest  public  seances  took  place 
at  Mrs.   Hayden's  house  in  March,   185 1.^      When  he  first 

^  See  Book  II.  chap.  iii.  In  America  the  name  appears  always  to  have  been 
spelt  Hume ;  and  as  Hume  he  was  generally  known  to  his  English  clients  and 
friends  during  this  first  visit  to  our  country.  The  spelling  Home  was,  however, 
adopted  by  some  even  at  this  date,  and  later  came  into  general  use.  To  avoid 
confusion,  therefore,  I  have  thought  it  best  uniformly  to  adopt  this  spelling, 
especially  as  the  medium  himself  invariably  employed  it  later  in  life.  For 
further  details  on  this  change  in  the  spelling  of  the  name  see  below,  Book  IV. 
chap.  iii. 

'•*  D.  D.  Home,  Incidents  in  my  Life,  First  Series,  p.  9,  second  edition,  1864. 

THE  INCUBATION  PERIOD  25 

came  to  this  country  he  stayed  for  a  short  time  at  Cox's 
Hotel,  in  Jermyn  Street ;  later  he  went  as  a  guest  to  the 
house  of  Mr.  Rymer,  a  solicitor,  at  Ealing,  and  spent  the 
greater  part  of  the  remainder  of  this  year  with  that  gentle- 
man and  his  family,  giving  numerous  seances  to  Mr.  Rymer's 
friends  and  neighbours  and  to  various  persons  of  distinction 
who  sought  admittance.  He  claims — and  I  know  of  nothing 
which  indicates  the  contrary — that  neither  at  this  nor  any 
later  period  did  he  charge  any  fee  or  accept  any  stipulated 
remuneration  for  his  services  as  a  medium. 

The  phenomena  exhibited  at  these  seances  were  of  the 
same  general  character  as  those  at  ordinary  professional 
seances  in  America  at  this  time.  Raps  would  be  heard  on 
the  tables,  the  walls,  and  other  parts  of  the  room,  and  would 
give  communications  by  means  of  the  alphabet.  The  table 
would  move  violently,  and  frequently  rise  in  the  air ;  hand- 
bells, guitars,  and  concertinas  placed  under  the  table  would 
be  moved  about,  and,  in  the  case  of  the  last-named  instrument 
• — always  a  favourite  with  Home — a  tune  would  be  played  ; 
handkerchiefs,  watches,  and  other  articles  would  be  taken 
from  the  sitters  and  moved  about  the  room ;  touches,  as  of 
hands,  would  be  felt  on  the  knees  of  the  sitters,  and  on  their 
hands  as  they  rested  under  the  table.  More  rarely  hands 
would  be  seen  above  the  table,  this  last  manifestation  nearly 
always  taking  place  in  a  subdued  light.  I  can  find  no  record 
at  this  time  of  the  levitation  of  the  medium  (which  had 
already  taken  place  on  several  occasions  in  America)  nor  of 
the  fire-ordeal  and  other  more  marvellous  manifestations. 
At  this  date  Home's  performances  seemed  to  have  differed 
little  from  those  of  the  ordinary  professional  medium  in 
America :  there  is  no  single  manifestation  which  was  not  the 
common  property  of  the  members  of  the  guild.  Neverthe- 
less, the  majority  of  those  who  witnessed  the  marvels  offered 
to  them  appear  to  have  been  profoundly  impressed ;  and  in 
many  cases  the  impression  thus  produced  was  permanent. 
Benjamin  Coleman,  J.  S.  Rymer,  the  Croslands,  J.  J.  Garth 
Wilkinson,  and  many  others,  who  later  became  prominent  in 
the  English  movement,  owed  their  first  impulse  to  belief  to 
their  seances  with  Home  in  1855. 

Amongst  those  who  attended  some  of  the  early  seances 
were  Lord  Brougham  and  Sir  David  Brewster.  Owing  to  a 
garbled  account  of  what  took  place,  quoted  from  an  Ameri- 
can source,  having  appeared  in  an  English  newspaper,  the 
latter  thought  it  necessary  to  write  to  the  Morfimg  Advertiser 
and  furnish  his  own  version  of  the  occurrences,  a  version  sub- 

26  SPIRITUALISM   IN   ENGLAND 

sequently  endorsed  by  Lord  Brougham.  The  impression 
left  by  Brewster's  own  letter  and  by  the  correspondence 
which  followed  is  that  he  was  at  first  genuinely  puzzled  by 
some  of  the  things  which  he  saw,  and  that  the  opinion  which 
he  formed  at  the  moment  was  perhaps  more  favourable  than 
he  was  able,  on  later  reflection,  to  maintain,  or  willing 
publicly  to  admit.  Home  left  England  in  the  autumn  of 
1855,  3-"d  did  not  return  until  the  end  of  1859.^ 

In  1856  it  was  announced  that  the  celebrated  American 
medium,  P.  B.  Randolph,  had  been  deputed  by  the  Royal 
Circle  of  the  Spiritual  Heavens  to  repeat  his  visit  to  this 
country.  Early  in  the  following  year  he  appeared  at  the 
Charing  Cross  Spirit  Circle  and  delivered  a  trance  address, 
which  "  for  power  of  language  and  poetical  feeling  surpassed 
anything  of  the  kind  that  the  audience  had  ever  heard."  ^ 
He  appears  regularly  to  have  attended  the  meetings  of  the 
Charing  Cross  Circle,  sometimes  giving  trance  addresses, 
which  professed  to  be  inspired  by  Sir  Humphry  Davy  and 
others ;  sometimes  taking  part  in  dark  seances,  at  which 
lights  and  shadowy  forms  were  seen.^ 

In  the  following  year  Mr.  Samuel  Owen,  a  lecturer  on 
Spiritualism,  came  from  the  United  States  and  lectured  in 
various  halls  in  London  and  elsewhere.  Owen  also  con- 
ducted "  spirit-power"  circles,  and  advertised  that  he  was 
"prepared  to  attend  families  with  excellent  rapping  and 
tipping  mediums."^ 

Again,  early  in  1859  the  Rev.  T.  L.  Harris  announced  to 
his  congregation  in  New  York  that  he  had  now  developed 
into  the  third  apostolic,  or  missionary,  degree,  and  was 
deputed  to  visit  England  and  preach  there.  In  effect  he 
came  over  in  May,  1859,  and  was  introduced  to  a  London 
audience  on  the  23rd  of  that  month.  He  remained  in 
England  for  some  months,  lecturing  and  conducting  services 
in  London  and  various  provincial  centres.  He  had  ap- 
parently outgrown  his  earlier  extravagances,  already  referred 
to,^  and  had  not  yet  fully  formulated  his  later  and  equally 
extravagant  doctrines.  His  teachings  at  this  time  set  forth 
in  language  of  vague  grandiloquence  a  mystical  Christianity, 

^  Some  account  of  Home's  seances  in  England  in  1855  will  be  found  in  Book 
IV.  chaps,  iii.  and  iv. ,  which  deal  with  the  subject  of  his  mediumship  in  general. 
For  a  detailed  account  of  the  sitting  with  Brewster  see  below,  chap.  ix.  of  the 
present  book. 

'^   Yorkshire  Spiritual  Telegraph,  vol.  iii.  p.  125. 

^  Ibid.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  132,  148,  166,  vol.  iv.  p.  31. 

■^  British  Spiritual  Telegraph,  vol.  ii.  pp.  93,  97,  151. 

^  See  vol.  i.  p.  295  seq. 

THE  INCUBATION   PERIOD  27 

coloured  by  Swedenborgian  and  Spiritualist  additions.  It  is 
not  clear  that  he  exercised  any  deep  influence  on  the 
Spiritualist  movement  in  this  country.^ 

Apart  from  these  American  missionaries,  professional 
mediums  and  lecturers  on  Spiritualism  found  hardly  any 
representatives  in  England  during  this  period.  Physical 
mediumship  in  general  was  but  little  developed,  and  the 
class  of  professional  mediums  with  whom  we  have  become 
familiar  in  later  times — persons  who  are  willing  to  exhibit 
before  anyone  who  is  able  to  pay  the  prescribed  fee — had 
hardly  yet  begun  to  be  recognised.  Almost  the  only  in- 
digenous medium  of  any  pretensions  was  Mrs.  Marshall, 
who,  assisted  by  her  niece  and  occasionally  by  her  young 
son,  gave  from  1858  onwards  regular  seances,  which  appear 
to  have  been  open  to  all  comers.  Mrs.  Marshall's  perform- 
ances were,  indeed,  markedly  inferior  to  those  of  Home  and 
the  more  prominent  American  mediums  in  the  same  line ; 
but  such  as  they  were  they  appear  to  have  satisfied  her 
clients.  The  accounts  given  in  the  newspapers  of  the  time, 
though  meagre  and  wanting  in  precision,  serve  at  least  to 
give  a  general  idea  of  the  type  of  manifestations  and  of 
the  effect  produced  upon  those  who  witnessed  them.  A  man 
who  signs  himself  "  T.  I.  A.,"  writing  apparently  in  January 
or  February,  1859,  gives  the  following  description  of  a  seance 
at  which  he  had  just  been  present : — ^ 

"Having  for  some  time  past  heard  of  the  extraordinary  'Spirit 
manifestations '  which  are  daily  occurring  at  Mrs.  Marshall's,  I  was 
induced  last  evening  to  pay  her  a  visit,  and  I  now  send  you  an 
account  of  what  I  saw  and  heard,  thinking  the  details  may  prove 
interesting  to  your  subscribers.  I  was  accompanied  by  my  wife 
and  my  father,  and  there  were  two  gentlemen  besides  ourselves 
present,  together  with  Mrs.  Marshall  and  her  niece.  After  sitting 
at  a  table  for  a  few  moments,  it  was  suggested  that  we  should  throw 
our  pocket-handkerchiefs  under  the  table.  The  medium  (Miss  M.) 
then  took  a  piece  of  glass,  a  supply  which  we  ourselves  had  brought, 
to  ensure  the  certainty  of  no  collusion ;  and  having  smeared  it  over 
with  a  composition  of  oil  and  whitening,  she  held  it  for  a  few 
seconds  under  the  table,  and  upon  removing  it  the  words  'knot 
upon  knot '  were  plainly  written,  though  wrongly  spelled.  A  second 
afterwards  two  of  the  handkerchiefs  were  thrown  up  from  the 
floor,  knotted,  into  the  lap  of  a  gentleman  present  who  sat  beside 
me,  and  the  third  was  firmly  tied  up  in  a  bunch  under  the  table. 

^  See  British  Spiritual  Telegraph,  vol.  iii.  pp.  96,  104,  vol.  iv.  p.  1 1  ;  and 
various  lectures  published  as  separate  pamphlets  in  London,  Warrington,  and 
elsewhere. 

^  British  Spiritual  Telegraph,  vol.  iii.  pp.  109,  no. 

28  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

I  myself  saw  the  handkerchiefs  thrown  up,  and  collusion  was 
impossible.  My  father  then  asked  if  the  Spirits  present  were  good. 
The  answer  rapped  out  was  '  yes.'  He  then  asked,  '  Are  not  these 
communications  from  evil  spirits  ? '  The  reply  to  this  was  written 
on  one  of  the  glass  plates,  held,  as  mentioned  above,  by  the 
medium  under  the  table.  '  Do  you  think  the  devils  would  fight 
against  themselves  by  bringing  the  gospel  of  Christ?'  The  next 
question  was,  '  Do  you  believe  in  Christ  ? '  Answer  written  as 
before.  'Yes,  you  sinners.'  A  little  after  this  it  was  intimated 
that  a  spirit  friend  of  our  own  was  present.  My  father  then 
requested  if  it  would  write  on  the  glass  the  Christian  name  of 
his  mother,  who  left  this  world  many  years  since.  An  assent  was 
given,  and  upon  one  glass  was  written  Do^  on  another  ro^  and 
upon  another  thy,  thus  intimating  that  the  name,  which  no  one 
present  knew  except  my  father,  was  Dorothy.  Space  would  fail 
me  to  tell  you  every  written  communication  we  had,  as  they  must 
have  numbered  fifty.  We  had  manifestations  of  knocking  and 
table-moving  after  this;  the  table  was  several  times  moved  hori- 
zontally, a  foot  above  the  ground,  and  there  suspended  for  some 
seconds,  with  merely  the  hands  of  the  mediums  resting  upon  it. 
In  every  instance  of  this  kind  it  was  lowered  most  gently,  and 
not  allowed  to  drop  with  its  own  force.  The  knocks  would  come 
wherever  the  medium  placed  her  hands,  and  to  convince  my  father 
of  the  power  she  placed  her  hands  upon  his  hat  which  he  had 
put  on,  and  the  raps  were  distinctly  heard  upon  it,  and  my  father 
felt  the  vibration  of  each  tap.  Such  is  a  brief  and  meagre  account 
of  our  visit." 

The  raps,  the  movements  of  the  table,  and  the  knotted 
handkerchief  were  manifestations  of  frequent  occurrence  at 
Home's  seances  ;  the  writing  on  glass  is  of  interest  as  pre- 
senting the  rudimentary  form  of  that  slate-writing  which, 
later,  in  the  hands  of  Slade  and  Eglinton,  played  so  im- 
portant a  part  in  the  history  of  English  Spiritualism.^  The 
Marshalls,  naturally  enough,  found  imitators,  but  they  were, 
for  the  most  part,  on  a  humbler  scale,  and  were  content  to 
perform  anonymously  and  in  serai-private  circles.  Thus  we 
read  in  a  case  recorded  by  "  J.  D."  (Jacob  Dixon)  of  a  table 
standing  at  an  angle  of  forty-five  degrees  without  affecting  the 
position  of  a  tumbler  half  full  of  water,  which  had  been 
placed  upon  it;^  again,  we  hear  of  raps,  the  knotting  of  a 
handkerchief,  and  attempted  levitation  at  the  spirit-power 
circle,    Charing   Cross  ;^    of  spirit   lights   and   'apports'    of 

^  For  other  accounts  of  Mrs.  Marshall's  seances  see  British  Spiritual  Tele- 
graph,  vol.  iii.  pp.  27,  55,  vol.  iv.  pp.  157-9. 
2  Yorkshire  Spiritual  Telegraph,  vol.  ii.  p.  75- 
•^  Ibid.,  vol.  iv.  p.  36. 

THE  INCUBATION   PERIOD  29 

flowers  at  a  Keighley  circle.^  In  giving  a  list  of  manifesta- 
tions which  he  had  himself  witnessed,  Mr.  J.  Jones,  of 
Peckham,  a  prominent  London  Spiritualist,^  mentions  no 
phenomena  beyond  those  already  set  down.^ 

The  mediums  in  all  the  cases  cited,  as  in  nearly  all  in- 
stances at  this  time,  were  anonymous,  their  identity  being 
revealed  to  the  initiated  at  most  by  initials.  Probably  many 
of  these  persons  ultimately  became  professional  mediums, 
but  at  this  time  neither  they  nor  their  clients  were  willing, 
apparently,  to  take  the  risk  of  wider  publicity.  In  many 
cases  the  medium  shrank  even  from  so  much  exposure  as 
was  involved  in  attending  a  regular  circle,  such  as  the  Charing 
Cross  or  Keighley  Circles,  and  would  consent  to  perform 
only  in  the  congenial  environment  of  his  immediate  family  or 
household.  A  good  instance  of  this  kind  is  afforded  by  the 
history  of  a  youthful  medium  detailed  for  us  at  some  length 
in  the  pages  of  the  Yorkshire  Spiritual  Telegraph!^  Jacob 
Dixon  ("J.  D.")  was  a  homoeopathic  doctor  practising  in 
London,  who  had  for  many  years  studied  the  phenomena  of 
ecstasy  and  clairvoyance,  his  attention  having  been  first  led 
to  the  subject  through  seeing  a  patient  mesmerised  by 
Elliotson.  He  had,  as  he  tells  us  later,  become  convinced  by 
his  investigations  of  the  possibility  of  communication  with 
spirits.  At  the  height  of  the  excitement  caused  by  Mrs. 
Hayden's  visit  Dixon  happened  to  call  one  day  on  a  friend 
named  E.,  a  professional  phrenologist  and  healer.  E.  was 
at  the  moment  holding  a  stance,  the  medium  (and  only  other 
sitter)  being  a  little  errand  boy,  nine  years  old,  employed  by 
him.  With  the  permission  of  the  spirits,  Dixon  was  invited 
to  join  the  party.  He  received  through  raps  communications 
from  various  friends  and  relatives,  and  was  informed  that  his 
guardian  spirits  were  Job,  Enoch,  Noah,  and  Bacon.  Con- 
viction came  on  the  moment,  and  was  deepened  when  at 
later  sittings  the  raps  undertook  to  prescribe  for  Dixon's 
patients,  and  also  for  himself  Moreover,  an  epidemic  of 
cholera  in  the  autumn  of  1853  was  predicted,  to  a  day,  two 
months  before  its  occurrence.^ 

^  Bj-itish  Spiritual  Telegraph,  vol.  i.  p.  26.  See  also  Ibid.,  vol.  1.  p.  94;  vol.  iv, 
p.  180,  etc.  See  also  vol.  iv.  p.  118  for  an  account  by  Mr.  S.  Wilks,  Hon.  Secre- 
tary of  the  Hoxton  Spiritualist  Society,  of  the  vanishing  and  sudden  reappearance, 
under  spirit  power,  of  an  earring  belonging  to  his  wife.  But  the  phenomenon  in 
this  case  took  place  in  the  domestic  circle,  with  only  those  whom  Madame 
Blavatsky  called  the  '  domestic  imbeciles '  to  witness  it. 

"  Known  to  a  later  generation  of  Spiritualists  as  J.  Enmore  Jones. 

^  British  Spiritual  Telegraph,  vol.  ii.  pp.  87,  88. 

*  Vols.  iii.  iv.  (1856-7),  articles  by  "J.  D."      "How  I  became  convinced," 

*  Ibid.,  vol.  iii.  p.  135. 

30  SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

The  manifestations  consisted  exclusively  of  raps ;  and 
Dixon  remarked  that  there  was  some  excuse  for  the  sus- 
picions— suspicions  which  he  did  not  himself  share — of  the 
good  faith  of  the  medium  entertained  by  some  who  were 
admitted  to  the  circle,  since  the  lower  part  of  the  boy's  body 
was  "  much  exercised  "  whilst  the  sounds  were  being  made. 
Little  opportunity  was  offered,  however,  to  such  sceptics, 
since  the  spirits  rarely  permitted  anyone  but  E.  and  Dixon 
to  share  their  ministrations,  and  hardly  anyone  beyond  these 
two  was  permitted  a  second  visit.  In  the  course  of  the  few 
months'  sittings  recorded  by  Dixon  the  raps  indicated  from 
time  to  time  that  a  knife,  rabbits,  a  goat,  money  (for  his 
mother),  and  a  gun  were  to  be  presented  to  the  medium. 
All  these  commands  were  punctually  fulfilled  by  E.,  except 
that  Robert  Owen,  who  had  been  an  occasional  visitor,  fore- 
stalled him  in  purchasing  the  gun.  It  is  but  fair  to  state  that 
the  spirits  also  issued  commands — when  the  punishment  for  a 
serious  offence  committed  by  Dan  was  left  to  their  decision — 
that  the  boy  should  be  whipped;  and  that  later  they  pre- 
scribed schooling  for  him.  It  should  be  added  that  E.  and 
all  his  household,  including  the  medium  himself  and  an 
elder  sister,  were  originally  vegetarians,  but  the  raps  ulti- 
mately prescribed  a  meat  diet  for  all. 

It  will  be  noted  that  E.  gave  implicit  obedience  to  the 
commands  issued  through  the  raps,  a  feature  which  we  shall 
meet  with  frequently.  In  the  history  of  English  Spiritualism 
Dan  and  his  master  had  many  successors.^ 

Another  instance  of  exclusiveness  is  furnished  by  "  Jane," 
the  servant  of  Mrs.  de  Morgan.  "Jane"  was  a  young 
woman  who  came  to  Mrs.  de  Morgan  in  1854.  Mrs.  de 
Morgan  had  in  the  previous  year  paid  some  visits  to  Mrs. 
Hayden,  and  had  since  been  deeply  interested  in  the  question 
of  Spiritualism.  It  soon  proved  that  "  Jane  "  was  a  medium, 
her  mediumship  in  the  first  instance  taking  the  form  of  rap- 
ping and  table-moving.  But  whilst  "Jane"  was  generally 
successful  in  the  company  of  her  mistress,  her  powers  in  this 
respect  were  extremely  uncertain,  and  with  most  persons 
she  failed  altogether.  Moreover,  her  ability  to  produce  raps 
ceased  after  about  two  years  and  a  half,  and  was  never 
renewed." 

But,  after  all,  the  characteristic  manifestations  of  this  period 
were  not  these  sporadic,  and  to  later  critics  singularly  un- 
convincing, physical  phenomena.     That  the  performances  of 

^  This  medium,  Daniel  Offord,  afterwards  joined  the  Shakers  (see  Spiritual 
Magazine,  1872,  p.  344).  '-'  From  Matter  to  Spirit,  pp.  19-22. 

THE   INCUBATION   PERIOD  31 

Mrs.  Hayden  and  D.  D.  Home  had  served  to  arouse  wide- 
spread interest  in  the  subject  has  been  already  shown.  But 
it  may  be  doubted  whether  the  conviction  of  spiritual 
agency  would  have  been  produced,  in  any  person  whose 
judgment  would  be  worth  weighing,  by  the  rapping  of 
tables,  spirit  lights,  and  self-moving  concertinas.  At  any 
rate,  as  a  matter  of  historical  fact,  the  effect  of  these  phy- 
sical marvels  was,  in  nearly  every  instance,  supplemented 
by  manifestations  of  another  kind,  which  in  many  cases 
were  no  doubt  free  from  any  reasonable  suspicion  of  dis- 
honesty. It  is  to  the  extraordinary  outburst  of  subliminal 
or  automatic  activity — visions,  trance-speaking,  "  inspired " 
writing  and  drawing — at  this  period  that  we  must  look  for 
the  real  explanation  of  the  rapid  growth  of  Spiritualism 
in  England  during  the  next  generation.  By  many  pro- 
fessional mediums,  as  in  the  case  of  Home  and  Randolph, 
the  two  forms  of  manifestation  were  combined.  Mrs. 
de  Morgan's  "Jane"  subsequently  developed  the  power 
of  seeing  visions.  But  for  the  most  part  seeing  of  visions, 
automatic  writing  and  speaking,  were  not,  as  we  have 
already  had  occasion  to  note  in  the  case  of  American 
Spiritualists,  combined  with  any  form  of  physical  medium- 
ship,  except  the  movement  of  tables,  which  of  course 
does  not  necessarily  involve  deception.  Writing  mediums 
or  speaking  mediums  sprang  up  at  this  time  in  almost  every 
private  Spiritualist  circle,  Owen,  in  his  New  Existence  of 
Man  up07t  Earth}  published  many  communications  received 
by  him  from  private  inquirers  during  the  period  1853-5. 
Thus  Mr.  Fred.  Hockley,  of  Croydon,  shortly  after  the 
publication  by  Owen  of  his  confession  of  faith,  wrote  to  say 
that  he  (Hockley)  had  studied  the  subject  for  some  thirty 
years,  through  the  medium  latterly  of  a  young  girl  and  a 
mirror  or  crystal.  He  was  now  in  constant  communication  by 
these  means  with  the  Crowned  Angel  of  the  Seventh  Sphere ; 
and  was  instructed  by  the  "C.  A." — for  so  he  is  styled  through- 
out the  correspondence — to  write  to  Owen,  and  inform  him 
that  the  person  calling  himself  the  Duke  of  Kent  was  an 
evil  spirit,  an  impostor,  and  not  a  member  of  the  Fourth 
Circle  at  all.  Much  correspondence  ensued  throughout  the 
year  1854,  the  "C.  A."  being  so  anxious  for  Owen's  conversion 
that  at  length  he  indited  a  letter  commencing,  "  My  dear 
Mr.  Owen,"  to  which  Owen,  as  in  courtesy  bound,  forwarded 
through  Mr.  Hockley  a  formal  reply  subscribed,  "  To  the 
Crowned  Angel  of  the  Seventh  Sphere." 

'  Parts  vi.  and  vii. 

32  SPIRITUALISM   IN  ENGLAND 

In  the  same  year,  Mr.  H.  of  Luton,  a  Quaker,  sent  to 
Owen  an  account  of  his  circle,  at  which  communications 
were  commonly  received  in  writing  from  Milton,  Wesley, 
Shakespeare,  and  Franklin.  The  medium  in  this  case  was 
a  boy  between  twelve  and  thirteen.  A  specimen  of  Miltonic 
prose  and  several  fragments  of  Shakespearean  tragedies, 
printed  at  the  length  of  many  octavo  pages,  reveal,  it  may 
be  admitted,  the  workings  of  no  intellect  higher  than  that  of 
the  average  schoolboy.  But  there  is  no  reason  to  suspect 
the  schoolboy  of  dishonesty.  Here  is  an  entire  scene,  stage 
directions  and  all,  from  the  tragedy  entitled  The  Death  of 
Brennus : — 

"  Scene :  The  Seige  {sic)  of  Crosuim. 

Brennus:  On,  soldiers,  on. 

(After  an  obstinate  siege  of  six  months  Crosuim  is  taken  with  an 
immense  slaughter.) 
Scene  closes." 

Again,  the  P.  family,  writing  in  January,  1855,  furnish 
communications  on  the  Crimean  War  and  other  topics  of  the 
time  from  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  Nelson,  the  Marquis  of 
Anglesea,  Mehemet  Ali,  Robert  Burns,  and  others.^ 

There  was,  again,  a  little  group  of  Swedenborgians,  of 
whom  Elihu  Rich  was  the  spokesman,  who  met  regularly 
to  receive  instruction  through  the  trance  discourses  of  a 
seeress  named  Annie.  These  trance  utterances  began  at 
least  as  early  as  1854.  Here  is  an  extract  from  a  discourse 
delivered  in  June,  1854,  on  the  war,  as  reported  by  an 
anonymous  correspondent  in  the  Spiritual  Herald: — 

"  Good  and  truth  are  represented  by  England  and  France,  who 
will  fight  against  the  lust  of  dominion  grounded  in  the  false  repre- 
sented by  Russia;  but  it  appears  as  yet  that  they  make  but  little 
progress.  Your  guide,"  said  Annie,  "has  been  to  see  some  wise 
men  in  the  spiritual  world,  who  have  told  him  that  there  are  wars 
now  in  some  of  the  other  planets  of  our  solar  system.  I  can  only 
remember  one  name,  that  is  Saturn ;  the  places  at  war  there  are 
called  '  Ohiea  '  and  '  Alfea ' ;  their  war  originated  in  a  dispute  about 
two  words,  which  should  be  placed  on  the  right  side  and  which  on 
the  left.  Our  war  apparently  had  no  better  reason ;  the  cause 
seemed  as  trivial,  for  it  appeared  in  the  world  of  spirits  as  two  men 
fighting  for  a  cross  on  a  piece  of  paper. 

"This  war  corresponds  to  the  arrangement  of  the  societies  in  the 
Grand  Man  in  the  large  blood-vessel  descending  from  the  heart,  the 
Grand  Man  being  composed  of  all  societies  from  different  planets." 

1  New  Existence,  part  vi.  p.  93. 

THE  INCUBATION  PERIOD  33 

Here,  again,  is  a  characteristic  extract  from  the  seeress' 
description  of  a  vision,  given  two  years  later : — 

"  The  mountain  is  formed  of  one  large  ruby.  There  are  a  great 
many  trees  and  flowers  about  it,  divided  into  many  parts.  There 
are  angels  talking  about  the  Word  in  some  parts  of  the  mountain ; 
others  riding  upon  white  horses,  which  signifies  the  understanding 
of  the  Word ;  others  washing  their  hands  in  a  stream  of  water, 
which  signifies  purification  of  the  external  man.  Some  are  gather- 
ing fruits — they  are  delights  of  wisdom  from  the  Word ;  some 
gathering  flowers — they  are  arranging  truths  they  have  received  from 
the  Lord,  the  flowers  representing  the  truths. 

"There  is  a  beautiful  angel  coming  through  the  clouds.  The 
angel  has  brought  the  Word.  He  came  in  a  chariot  with  four  white 
horses.     The  chariot  is  pure  gold.     He  is  reading  the  Word : 

"  '  Stand  still,  ye  works  of  Jehovah, 

"  '  For  your  Maker  passeth  by  : 

'"Jehovah  will  breathe  upon  you  to  bless  you, 

"  *  But  keep  his  works  clean. 

"  '  Breathe  not  for  instruction, 

"  '  But  consider  your  doings ; 

"  'For  your  Maker  is  just,  wonderful,  and  mighty — 

" '  Jehovah  is  his  name.' "  ^ 

The  pages  of  the  Herald  and  the  Spivitual  Telegraph  are 
filled  with  records  of  similar  automatic  utterances  and  writings ; 
discourses  from  the  spirits  of  John  Edmundson  or  Alexander 
Hutchinson  ;  "  Pages  of  the  Paraclete,"  a  long  dissertation  on 
the  past  history  of  man  and  other  matters,  in  the  style  of 
A.  J.  Davis  or  Linton  ;  accounts  of  maps  and  drawings 
executed  under  spirit  influence  ;  of  visions  of  angels  holding 
scrolls.  Nor  were  our  English  mediums  less  fortunate  or 
more  modest  than  their  American  contemporaries.  Gold- 
smith, Addison,  Burns,  Sir  Walter  Scott,  Stanley,  and  Sir 
Robert  Peel  are  amongst  the  occasional  communicators, 
whilst  Benjamin  Franklin,  Shakespeare,  and  Shelley  seem  to 
have  discoursed  nightly.  A  Newcastle  circle  reported  that 
on  one  night  no  less  than  five  thousand  one  hundred  and 
eleven  spirits  had  attended  them,  of  whom  were  twenty 
Kings  and  seven  Queens  of  the  lineage  of  David,  King  of 
Israel.  David  himself  was  present,  and  amongst  the  lesser 
lights  were  Homer,  Cicero,  Demosthenes,  Luther,  Cranmer, 
and  John  Knox.^     At  a  later  meeting  Luther  undertook  to 

^  spiritual  Herald,  pp.  193-4.  For  some  further  account  of  this  seeress,  whose 
name  I  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain,  see  Notes  on  Certain  Forms  of  Spiritual- 
ism, by  "  E.  R."  (Elihu  Rich),  1858. 

"^   Yorkshire  Spiritual  Telegt-aph,  vol.  ii.  p.  44. 

II. — D 

34  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

teach  the  members  Latin,  King  David  promised  elementary 
lessons  in  Hebrew,  and  Noah  "  gave  some  very  interesting 
and  curious  details  respecting  the  state  of  the  antediluvian 
earth."  ^  Mr.  Shaw,  of  Bradford,  reported  that  he  had  up- 
wards of  three  hundred  pages  of  unpublished  spirit  manu- 
scripts ;  2  and  John  Scott,  of  Belfast,  gives  a  long  list  of 
discourses  received  from  names  great  in  the  history  of  man- 
kind.^ Some  of  the  communications  received  at  this  time,  as 
a  rule  orally,  were  in  "  unknown  tongues,"  the  translation 
being  furnished  by  the  medium  at  the  time.*  But  this  par- 
ticular manifestation  does  not  seem  to  have  been  so  frequent 
or  to  have  attracted  so  much  attention  as  in  America.^ 

To  the  reader  at  the  present  day,  familiar  as  he  probably 
is  with  the  idea  of  subconscious  mental  activity,  the  effect 
produced  by  trance  utterances  and  automatic  writing  on  the 
Spiritualist  of  forty  or  fifty  years  ago  is  hardly  intelligible. 
It  seems  worth  while,  therefore,  to  examine  more  closely  the 
process  of  reasoning  by  which  conviction  of  spiritual  agency 
was  produced,  in  the  typical  case  of  a  man  whose  attention 
was  first  drawn  to  the  subject  by  witnessing  and  hearing  of 
physical  manifestations,  and  who  finally  yielded  to  the  ac- 
cumulated evidence  of  trance-speaking  and  "  spirit  "-writing. 

The  late  Mr.  Thomas  Shorter,  author  of  Confessions  of 
a  Truth-Seeker^  and  some  years  later  editor  of  the  Spiritual 
Magazine,  will  serve  as  a  case  in  point.  Mr.  Shorter  was 
himself  in  many  ways  a  good  example  of  the  best  type  of 
middle-class  English  Spiritualists,  a  type  strongly  resembling 
that  exemplified  in  America  by  Judge  Edmonds,  Governor 
Tallmadge,  and  S.  B.  Brittan.  In  his  youth  he  tells  us  he 
had  been  carried  away  from  the  strict  evangelicalism  of  his 
childhood  by  the  wave  of  Socialist  and  humanitarian  senti- 
ment which  marked  the  middle  period  of  the  century.  For 
a  time  he  found,  like  others,  sufficient  satisfaction  for  his 
religious  instincts  in  working  for  the  good  of  his  fellows 
and  in  contemplating  the  coming  millennium.  Later  he  felt 
the  need  of  some,  it  may  be,  less  concrete  ideal,  and  his 
vague  aspirations  were  sharpened,  as  he  records,  by  an  un- 
foreseen and  most  painful  bereavement.  It  was  about  this 
time  that  he  first  heard  of  the  new  Spiritualist  movement. 
A  mind  so  situated  was  little  likely  to  be  critical,  and  Shorter 
shows  throughout  his  inquiries  a  simple  trust  in  the  honesty 
and  goodwill  of  the  mediums  whom  he  consulted  that  was 

^    Yorkshire  Spiritual  Telegraph,  vol.  iii.  p.  25.         "  Ibid.,  vol.  ii.  p.  80. 
2  Ibid.,  vol.  iv.  p.  162.  *  Ibid.,  vol.  iii.  p.  8,  vol.  iv.  p.  257. 

^  See  above,  Book  II.  chap.  iv.  ^  London,  1859. 

THE  INCUBATION   PERIOD  35 

hardly  surpassed  by  Robert  Owen  himself.  He  was  much 
impressed  at  the  outset  by  the  messages  conveyed  through 
the  tilting  of  a  table,  and  by  what  he  heard  of  the  perform- 
ances of  D.  D.  Home.  But  it  was  on  the  evidence  afforded 
by  the  mental  phenomena  that  his  faith  finally  rested.  Apart 
from  his  childlike  trust  in  the  good  faith  of  those  with  whom 
he  had  to  deal,  Shorter  was  by  no  means  well  equipped 
for  an  investigation  into  delicate  matters  of  evidence.  In 
questions  of  physical  science  and  of  philosophy  his  education 
was  probably  not  in  advance  of  the  middle-class  standard 
of  the  time,  a  standard  which,  as  Faraday  had  shown,  fell 
lamentably  short  of  what  was  required.  Shorter  thought 
little  of  Faraday ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  though  unable  to 
agree  with  his  conclusions,  he  considered  Dr.  Rogers,  the 
author  of  the  pretentious  and  muddle-headed  Philosophy 
of  Mysterious  Agents,  "by  far  the  ablest"  opponent  of 
Spiritualism.  1  Naturally,  Shorter  was  unable  to  see  the 
true  significance  of  the  automatic  movements  of  the  table, 
of  trance-speaking,  and  involuntary  writing.  He  was  satisfied 
that  all  these  actions  took  place  frequently  without  the 
conscious  participation  of  the  so-called  medium.  He  saw, 
or  believed,  that  the  intelligence  shown  in  much  of  the  trance- 
speaking  was  above  any  possessed  by  the  medium,  as  he 
knew  her  in  her  waking  hours.  He  saw,  moreover,  that  the 
intelligence  shown  was  not  the  result  merely  of  an  effort 
of  memory,  but  that  processes  of  reasoning  and  judgment 
went  on  without  apparently  the  knowledge  of  the  person 
who  was  used  as  a  mouthpiece.  The  theory  of  unconscious 
cerebration,  as  he  had  apprehended  it,  was  purely  mechanical. 
He  illustrates  it  by  supposing  an  automatic  chess-player. 
That  mental  acts  could  take  place  without  being  represented 
in  the  ordinary  working  consciousness  of  the  actor  was  to 
him  incredible.  To  admit  the  possibility  would  be,  he  con- 
tends, to  sap  the  foundations  of  theology,  to  violate  common 
sense,  and  to  contradict  the  whole  experience  of  mankind. 
If,  then,  intelligence  was  displayed  which  was  not  that  of 
the  person  speaking ;  if,  further,  the  intelligence  displayed 
qualities  higher  than  those  of  the  medium ;  if  occasionally 
it  betrayed  knowledge  or  showed  skill  not  possessed  by  the 
medium ;  if,  lastly,  the  intelligence  persistently  and  passion- 
ately claimed  to  represent  the  spirit  of  a  dead  man — was  it 
not  reasonable,  he  would  ask,  to  accept  this  intelligence  at 
its  own  valuation  ? 

Such  were  the  ideas,  more  or  less  crudely  expressed,  ac- 

^  Some  account  of  Rogers'  book  is  given  above,  vol.  i.  p.  288. 

36  SPIRITUALISM   IN   ENGLAND 

cording  to  the  understanding  and  education  of  the  witness, 
which  led  to  the  acceptance  of  various  automatic  utterances 
as  genuine  revelations  from  the  spirit  world.  Even  so  able 
a  man  as  Dr.  Garth  Wilkinson,  a  homoeopathic  physician, 
well  known  for  his  Life  of  Swedenborg,  was  more  or  less 
under  the  influence  of  the  same  beliefs.  He  had  himself 
published  in  1857  an  octavo  volume  of  "  impressional "  poetry 
of  some  merit,  1  and  in  the  same  year,  in  a  pamphlet  pro- 
posing to  treat  lunacy  on  the  homoeopathic  principle  by 
mild  doses  of  Spiritualism,  he  indicates  his  views  of  the  in- 
voluntary writing  and  drawing.  Of  these  automatic  manifes- 
tations he  speaks  as  "spirit-writing,"  "spirit-outflow,"  and 
defends  this  terminology  on  the  ground  that,  whether  pro- 
ceeding from  the  subject's  own  deeper  nature  or  from 
external  sources,  the  guiding  power  was  alike  spiritual.^ 

Another  instance  is  Mrs.  de  Morgan,  wife  of  the  well- 
known  Professor  of  Mathematics  already  referred  to.  Her 
book.  From  Matter  to  Spirit^  though  not  published  until 
1863,  deals  for  the  most  part  with  experiences  of  this  period 
from  1853,  when  she  first  went  to  Mrs.  Hayden's,  onwards. 
She  soon  discovered,  as  already  mentioned,  a  medium  in  her 
own  household  in  the  person  of  a  servant,  "  Jane."  But,  for 
Mrs.  de  Morgan  also,  the  interest  excited  by  rapping  and 
movements  of  tables  was  quickly  swallowed  up  in  the 
marvels  of  automatic  writing  and  speaking  and  the  seeing 
of  visions.  Members  of  her  own  family  and  her  friends  were, 
as  a  rule,  the  mediums  for  these  latter  manifestations.  Apart 
from  the  absolute  sincerity  and  earnestness  of  purpose  which 
mark  the  book,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  records  are  im- 
pressive. The  proof  that  the  drawings  and  writings  were  not 
merely  random  products  of  subterranean  mental  activities, 
and  the  visions  but  waking  dreams  of  the  medium,  is  made 
to  depend  upon  tests  which  at  the  best  must  seem  wholly 
inadequate.  Sometimes  similar  drawings  would  be  produced 
simultaneously  by  different  mediums ;  sometimes  two  seers 
would  see  independently  similar  visions ;  sometimes  the 
vision  of  one  would  correspond  with  the  writing  given 
through  the  hand  of  another ;  sometimes  a  seer  would 
recognise  in  a  photograph  the  face  of  some  deceased 
person  who  had  appeared  to  her  in  trance.^  Even  if  in- 
cidents such  as  these  had  been  of  the  nature  of  experiments, 
instead  of,  as  a  rule,  mere  observations  by  the  way,  and  if 

^  Improvisations  from  the  Spirit,  by  J.  J.  G.  W.     London,  1857. 
2  The  Homeopathic  Principle  applied  to  Insanity,  by  J .  J.  Garth  Wilkinson, 
M.D.     London,  1857.  '''  Op.  cit.,  pp.  36,  67,  68,  71,  81,  etc. 

THE   INCUBATION   PEKIOD  37 

they  had  been  recorded  with  the  utmost  precision  of  time 
and  circumstance,  they  could  still  hardly  be  held  to  justify 
the  momentous  conclusions  drawn  from  them. 

Mrs.  de  Morgan's  book  deals  chiefly  with  symbolism  and 
correspondences,  and  furnishes  an  adaptation  of  Sweden- 
borg's  philosophy  to  modern  Spiritualism.  But  this  aspect 
of  the  subject  bulks  still  more  largely  in  one  or  two  other 
books  of  the  time.  Mrs.  Newton  Crosland — known  as  an 
authoress  under  the  name  of  Camilla  Toulmin — published  in 
1857  an  account  of  her  experiences,  Light  in  the  Valley. 
Both  she  and  her  husband  had  attended  some  of  Home's 
circles,  and  had  witnessed  the  usual  phenomena.  But  Mrs. 
Crosland  appears  to  have  been  little  affected  by  the  physical 
manifestations,  and  dismisses  them  in  a  few  pages.  It  is  on 
the  various  phases  of  automatic  activity  which  displayed 
themselves  in  herself  and  in  her  friends  that  her  interest 
is  centred.  Communications  were  received  sometimes  by 
writing,  sometimes  by  drawing,  sometimes  by  visions,  direct 
or  through  the  medium  of  a  crystal.  Of  the  writing,  she 
tells  us  that  she  had  enough  to  fill  a  substantial  volume. 
Some  of  the  writing  was  in  the  mother  tongue.  But  much 
of  it  was  written  in  one  or  other  spirit  language.  Mrs. 
Crosland's  circle  included  many  writing  mediums  of  both 
sexes,  to  whom  were  given  by  the  spirits  symbolic  names, 
such  as  "  The  Rose,"  "  Comfort,"  "  Confidence,"  "  Expansion." 
The  last-named,  an  author  of  repute  and  a  graduate  of  Ox- 
ford, produced  a  drawing  of  a  wheel,  and  a  description  of  its 
symbolism  in  one  of  the  spirit  languages,  of  which  a  facsimile 
is  given  in  the  book.  After  the  writing  was  completed,  a 
translation  was  furnished.  It  frequently  happened,  Mrs. 
Crosland  tells  us,  that  those  who  wrote  the  spirit  language 
were  unable  to  translate  it,  but  that  a  translation  would  be 
furnished  by  another  hand.  No  attempt  seems  to  have  been 
made  to  analyse  the  seemingly  random  curves  and  angles  of 
which  the  so-called  "  spirit  language "  is  composed,  or  to 
show  that  it  had  really  any  consistency  or  significance. 
Among  things  terrestrial,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  speci- 
mens reproduced  in  the  book,  this  spirit  language  was  most 
like  to  a  sphygmograph  tracing.  The  following  extract 
from  a  lengthy  account  given  by  the  medium  "  Comfort "  of 
her  spiritual  development  suggests  that  its  "  interpretation " 
was  at  least  sometimes  ambiguous  : — 

"The  first  drawings  were  very  rude  indeed,  like  the  uncertain 
tottering  lines  of  a  child,  and  also  singularly  resembling  the  designs 
of  the  very  early  Italian  painters — heads  of   Christ,   angels,   and 

38  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

curious  female  figures  seated  within  spheres  and  hearts ;  and  always 
these  drawings  were  accompanied  with  strange  ornaments  of  spiral 
and  shell  forms,  with  dots  and  scroll-like  ciphers,  which  I  thought 
odd  at  the  time,  but  only  months  afterwards,  when  accidentally 
referring  to  them,  discovered  to  be  the  first  undeveloped  attempts 
at  writing  one  of  the  '  spirit  languages.' "  ^ 

But  more  remarkable  even  than  the  writings  vi^ere  the 
drawings  to  which  the  last  extract  refers.  These  drawings 
were  invariably  symbolic  ;  and  the  symbolism,  of  a  very 
intricate  character,  was  commonly  interpreted  at  the  time  by 
the  communicating  intelligence.  Here,  for  instance,  is  the 
interpretation,  given  through  the  hand  of  "  Rose,"  of  one  of 
the  simplest  of  these  drawings.  The  drawing  itself,  it  should 
be  explained,  had  been  produced  without  conscious  volition 
by  the  hand  of  a  gentleman  whose  spirit  name  was  "  Confi- 
dence." It  consisted  mainly  of  a  row  of  seven  circles,  with 
crosses  inscribed,  the  picture  being  filled  in  with  a  crescent 
moon,  a  sun,  a  heart,  wings,  crescents,  sphygmograph 
tracings,  etc. 

"  The  Seven  Days  of  Creation.  The  seven  spheres,  each  with  a 
cross,  represent  the  seven  days  of  creation,  each  day  with  its  cruci- 
fixion ;  each  successively  created  Being  a  suffering  Being. 

"The  largest  cross,  at  the  right  hand,  as  looked  at  from  the 
world,  is  the  first  crucifixion  of  God  Himself  in  His  outer  individual 
human  manifestation. 

"The  left  cross,  which  is  the  later,  and  at  the  present  time  the 
least  developed,  is  the  mental  manifestation,  evolving  from  which  is 
the  woman's  word,  the  outer,  the  inner,  and  the  innermost.  Then 
the  cross  disappears  entirely,  because  there  will  then  be  progression 
without  a  cross.  Now,  in  the  present  age,  it  is  a  progression  in, 
and  through,  and  with  a  cross. 

"  The  whole  creation  is  encompassed  by  an  undeveloped  triangle. 
The  universal  woman,  which  is  represented  by  the  large  half-moon, 
is  encompassed  by  the  undeveloped  triangle. 

"  The  wings  represent  the  influence  of  mind.  We  at  the  present 
time  are  in  the  sixth  day,  as  typified  by  the  wings  attached  to  the 
sixth  sphere. 

"  The  sun  with  a  face  in  it  is  a  symbol  of  the  whole  nature  of  the 
Divine  Powers  uniting  the  undeveloped  triangle  to  the  more  perfected 
triune  of  the  heart.  The  winged  heart  has  a  cross  in  its  upper  and 
in  its  lower  section,  showing  that  the  lowest  as  well  as  the  highest 
organization  must  be  polarized  to  God  by  crucifixion  or  suffering. 
The  spheres  in  each  section  of  the  heart  prove  that  the  lowest 
as  well  as  the  highest  natures  must  become  spherical  through 
suffering."^ 

^  Pages  127,  128.  '^  Pages  in,  11 2. 

THE  INCUBATION   PERIOD  39 

Many  of  these  drawings  were  extraordinarily  complex,  and 
crowded  with  minute  detail ;  moreover,  the  design  would 
frequently  be  changed  whilst  the  work  proceeded,  one  feature 
being  rubbed  out  and  another  substituted.  Hence  it  followed 
that  the  mere  external  interpretation  of  the  completed  draw- 
ing became  a  matter  of  some  difficulty,  and  left  a  certain 
freedom  for  individual  choice.  Thus,  of  one  detail  in  a 
complicated  picture  we  have  the  spirit  interpretation  in  this 
wise :  "  To  the  externally  minded  it  is  a  balloon,  but  to  the 
internally  minded  it  is  a  pair  of  lutes  proceeding  from  a 
sphere  of  light  and  united  by  the  martyr's  palm."  ^ 

Besides  these  drawings  there  were  many  visions  of  spiritual 
things.  There  were  also  coloured  auras  to  be  seen  round 
living  persons,  diverse  according  to  their  diverse  characters : 
the  Duke  of  Wellington  was  enveloped  in  an  aura  of  sapphire 
blue.  Moreover,  each  person  had  a  spiritual  emblem,  a  kind 
of  crest,  which  he  bore  about  with  him  visibly  to  the  spiritual 
eye.  Some  of  these  spirit  emblems  —  arrangements  of 
feathers,  circles,  arrow-heads,  stars,  triangles,  wings,  etc. — 
are  figured  in  the  book ;  and  the  authoress  suggests  that  in 
these  psychic  accompaniments  of  our  personality  we  have 
the  foundation  of  all  orders  and  regalia,  and  of  the  science 
of  earthly  heraldry. 

The  book,  in  short,  is  imbued  with  the  same  kind  of 
mystical  Christianity  which  we  have  already  seen  in  Mrs,  de 
Morgan's  work,  but  here  its  extravagances  are  less  restrained, 
and  a  personal  note  is  apparent  in  the  insistence  throughout 
the  symbolic  teachings  on  the  lofty  part  assigned  to  woman 
in  the  New  Moral  Order. 

From  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  brother  of  the  Dr.  Garth  Wilkin- 
son already  mentioned,  who,  under  the  signature  of  "Verax," 
had  given  his  testimony  to  Home  in  the  Morning  Advertiser, 
we  have  more  records  of  spirit-writing  and  of  symbolic 
drawings.^  In  August,  1856,  Wilkinson  had  lost  a  son,  a 
boy  of  eleven.  A  few  weeks  later  his  brother,  about  a  year 
older,  began  to  write,  and  afterwards  to  draw,  automatically. 
Soon  afterwards  Mrs.  Wilkinson  also  drew  with  great  freedom 
and  rapidity.  The  drawings  sometimes  represented  buildings 
or  scenes,  but  more  commonly  flowers.  These  flowers  were, 
however,  as  a  rule,  of  no  known  order.  Wilkinson  writes  of 
one  of  them,  "  It  is  a  beautiful  and  complex  shape,  and  looks 
as  if  it  might  well  have  an  existence  in  nature,  and  be  no 
small  addition  to  the  floral  world." 

^  Page  163. 

^  Spirit  Drawings:  a  P^.rsonal  Narrative,  by  W.  M,  Wilkinson.  London, 
1858, 

40  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

The  manifestations  did  not  stop  here.  In  a  few  weeks 
Wilkinson's  hand  was  impelled  to  write  the  "  interpretation  " 
of  drawings  produced  by  his  wife,  messages  from  their  dead 
son,  and  spiritual  discourses.  The  contagion  soon  spread. 
Wilkinson  mentions  that  of  seventeen  persons  of  his  ac- 
quaintance who  sat  down  to  write  automatically,  fifteen  were 
successful  almost  immediately.  Again,  in  January,  1858, 
Mr.  and  Mrs,  W.  Howitt,  who  had  already  through  Mrs.  de 
Morgan,  the  Croslands,  and  others,  witnessed  something  of 
the  spirit  manifestations,  paid  a  visit  to  the  Wilkinsons' 
house  at  Hampstead  and  inspected  the  drawings  produced 
by  Mrs.  Wilkinson,  all  of  which  had  been  carefully  preserved. 
A  few  days  later  William  Howitt's  hand  began  to  move,  and 
traced  with  a  pencil  rude  figures  on  the  paper.  Thereafter 
he  too  began  to  write,  and  for  some  months  received  nightly 
long  communications  from  the  spirit  world.  Both  he  and 
Mrs.  Howitt  also  produced  symbolic  drawings,  flowery,  archi- 
tectural, geometric,  or  resembling  oriental  arabesques.  To- 
gether with  these  drawings  were  written  the  spiritual 
interpretations  of  them.^ 

The  class  of  persons  who  claimed  by  spiritual  appointment 
to  be  evangelists,  prophets,  and  reformers,  of  whom  T.  L. 
Harris,  James  Scott,  and  J.  Murray  Spear  are  prominent 
American  examples,  was  not  without  its  representatives  at 
this  time,  though  here  they  attracted  less  attention,  and 
appear  to  have  had  few  disciples.  Of  the  Cheltenham  Shiloh 
we  have  spoken  in  the  preceding  chapter.  Another  visionary 
of  the  same  type,  who  was  indeed  at  one  time  in  correspond- 
ence with  Julius  Hartegilligan — or  "  Ecce  Homo,"  as  he  then 
styled  himself — was  Frank  Starr.  Starr  at  the  time  of  his 
first  experience  was  a  commercial  traveller  in  Norwich,  who 
had  apparently  dazed  himself  with  long  contemplation  of  the 
errors  of  the  Roman  Church,  the  near  coming  of  the  mil- 
lennium, and  the  wretched  state  of  the  poor.  One  of  his 
first  publications  was  a  pamphlet,  On  the  distressed  condition 
of  the  Operatives  of  Norwich?  In  June,  1850,  he  had  a 
vision  ;  he  entered  a  public-house  near  Greenwich  on  the  first 
Sunday  in  the  month  in  order  to  get  some  beer  and  bread 
and  cheese.  There  he  conversed  for  many  hours  on  the 
employment  of  the  poor  and  other  matters  with  twelve  men, 
whom  he  presently  discovered  to  be  angels.     At  the  end  of 

^  Pioneers  of  the  Spiritual  Reformation,  by  Mrs.  Howitt- Watts,  pp.  261-70. 
London,  1883. 

^  Referred  to  in  the  British  Spiritual  Telegraph,  vol.  iv.  p.  172.  I  have  not 
seen  the  original. 

THE  INCUBATION   PERIOD  41 

the  interview  their  leader  said,  "  Come,  let  us  anoint  him,  and 
set  him  forth  upon  his  high  mission,"  and  therewith  placed 
his  hands  upon  Starr's  head  .  .  .  On  his  return  to  Norwich 
Starr's  friends  had  him  placed  in  an  asylum  where,  according 
to  his  own  account,  he  deliberately,  by  instruction  of  the 
spirits,  feigned  madness.  He  was  further  comforted  during 
his  confinement  by  visions,  which,  to  his  great  astonishment, 
the  doctors  and  his  keeper  were  unable  to  share.  On  his 
release  and  recovery  he  published  an  account  of  his  visions 
and  his  sojourn  in  the  asylum,  and  later  gave  a  series  of 
lectures  on  his  experiences.^  The  books  are  singularly 
rambling  and  incoherent,  and  there  can,  I  imagine,  be  little 
doubt  that  they  record,  with  some  fidelity,  the  dreams  of  a 
mind  temporarily  unbalanced.  His  works  are  reviewed  in 
the  Spiritualist  papers  of  the  time,  but  he  seems  to  have 
found  no  followers.^ 

A  more  coherent  and  more  influential  visionary  was 
J.  G.  H.  Brown,  of  Nottingham.  Brown  appears  to  have 
been  a  professional  healer ;  at  any  rate,  he  advertised  that  he 
was  enabled  by  spiritual  power  to  cure  all  curable  diseases, 
and  was  willing  to  prescribe  by  letter  without  a  personal 
interview  and  without  a  fee.  He  was  also  in  person,  or  by 
proxy,  a  seer  of  visions,  and  his  published  spiritual  com- 
munications are  numerous,  including  Revelations  on  the  Late 
War ;  Important  Revelations  from  the  Spirit  of  Emmanuel 
Swedenborg  and  foseph  Smith ;  ^  and  A  Message  from  the 
World  of  Spirits ;  a  series  of  pamphlets  issued  at  monthly 
intervals  and  published  in  book  form  in  1857.  From  the 
last-named  work  we  learn  that  Brown  received  many  com- 
munications from  angels  and  archangels,  Gabriel,  Michael, 
Uriel ;  also  from  the  spirits  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington, 
H.R.H.  the  Duke  of  Kent,  Sir  John  Franklin,  Oliver  Crom- 
well, William  Palmer  (the  Rugeley  murderer),  and  many 
others.  The  book  contains  many  revelations  concerning  the 
planets  and  their  inhabitants,  and  is  enriched  with  a  map  of 
the   spirit   spheres,    showing   the    realms    of  eternal   glory. 

^  A  Midsummer  Morning's  Dream  and  The  Vision  of  Midsummer  Morning's 
Dream.  Norwich,  1854.  Lectures  on  Twenty  Years  of  a  Traveller's  Life. 
London,  1867  (?). 

^  See  Spiritual  Herald,  pp.    137-41.     British  Spiritual  Telegraph,  vol.  iv. 

pp.  75.  93,  171- 

^  The  full  title  continues  :  "  Shewing  the  sacred  and  Holy  Doctrine  as  set  forth 
by  Swedenborg,  whose  errors  are  proved  unimportant ;  the  Doctrine  of  Joseph 
Smith  being  proved  hypoc7-itical  and  delusive,  resulting  thf-ough  worldly  atnbition  ; 
as  described  in  revelations  from  the  spirits  of  both  men,  which  are  sanctioned  and 
confirmed  by  the  Great  Angel  Gabriel,"  by  J.  G.  H.  Brown,  medimn.  London. 
No  date.     (?)  1856. 

42  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

Further,  we  learn  that  in  September,  1854,  Brown  and  five 
friends  then  present,  with  seven  others  to  be  added  to  them, 
were  chosen  to  establish  the  true  principles  and  creed  of  the 
Universal  Church  of  Christ.  The  medium,  it  need  hardly 
be  said,  was  the  chief  of  these  thirteen  persons ;  in  a  later 
chapter  he  speaks  of  "  this  extraordinary  book,  written  by 
express  command  of  the  Supreme  Ruler  of  all  things  made 
through  his  Holy  Angels  to  me,  and  addressed  to  the  whole 
human  race."  ^ 

In  1857  Brown  founded  a  paper,  The  Community's  Journal 
and  Standard  of  Truths  devoted  to  the  new  evangel.  The 
opening  number  contains  an  address  to  the  members  forming 
the  community,  with  the  exordium  : — 

"We,  the  Spiritual  Circle  established  at  Nottingham,  having 
received  instructions  for  the  foundation  of  the  Great  Universal 
Organization,  by  enrolling  Members  who  will  pledge  themselves 
to  resist  all  worldly  delusions,  and  to  unite  their  energies  solely  for 
the  welfare  of  their  fellow-creatures,  and  the  glory  of  God." 

The  precise  aims  of  this  new  organisation  are  nowhere 
clearly  set  forth  ;  but  we  gather  that  it  was  designed  to 
restore  the  rights  of  the  down-trodden  working  classes,  to 
remove  all  tyranny  and  oppression,  to  secure  justice,  equality, 
and  freedom,  to  amend  the  laws  of  marriage  and  rent,  and 
generally  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  millennium,  by  calling 
upon  England,  "  tottering  beneath  the  groans  of  her  op- 
pressed people,"  and  on  the  tyrants  and  the  unrighteous 
generally,  to  repent,  and  take  heed  because  of  the  calamities 
which  should  fall  upon  the  earth  before  the  Second  Coming 
and  the  Millennial  Era.  The  Socialist  ideas  thus  presented 
are  not  unlike  Owen's,  but  the  whole  is  embittered  by  a 
strong  infusion  of  Hebraic  prophecy,  and  no  doubt  by  the 
jaundiced  nature  of  the  seer  himself  Characteristically, 
Brown  says  that  though  Owen's  work  is  moral  and  instruc- 
tive, his  spiritual  teachings,  since  they  are  not  at  one  with 
those  of  the  Nottingham  seer,  cannot  be  depended  on.^ 
Having  proved  them  for  five  years,  Brown  can  vouch  that 
his  own  spirits  are  celestial,  and  all  others  aerial  merely, 
or  worse.^ 

From  this  brief  sketch  it  will  have  become  apparent  that 
English  Spiritualism  prior  to  i860  differed  widely  in  many 
respects    not     only     from     contemporary     Spiritualism     in 

1  Op.  cit.,  p.  310.  ^  A  Message,  etc.,  p.  138. 

^  Community' s  Journal,  p.  211. 

THE  INCUBATION   PEEIOD  43 

America,  but  from  the  later  movement  in  this  country. 
As  compared  with  the  movement  in  America  the  differences 
are  chiefly  of  degree.  There  is  a  general  lack  of  life  and 
colour  on  the  English  side ;  all  phases  of  the  American 
propaganda  are  represented,  but  as  in  a  pale  reflection. 
And  there  is  a  marked  shrinking  from  publicity.  British 
Spiritualists  had  not,  as  yet,  the  courage  of  their  opinions. 
As  already  shown,  books  were  few,  periodicals  still  fewer, 
and  for  the  most  part  short-lived  ;  and  their  contents,  when 
not  quoted  from  American  sources,  are  very  generally 
anonymous.  A  like  anonymity  for  the  most  part  protected 
the  native  mediums. 

Partly,  no  doubt,  the  slow  progress  of  the  English  propa- 
ganda is  to  be  attributed  to  accidental  causes.  As  we  have 
already  seen,  during  the  period  of  the  Revolution  and  for 
some  years  afterwards  the  study  of  Animal  Magnetism  was 
almost  at  a  standstill  in  France.  So  the  preoccupation 
of  the  British  public,  during  a  great  part  of  the  period  now 
under  consideration,  with  its  external  concerns,  first  the 
Crimean  War,  and  later  the  Indian  Mutiny,  may  no  doubt 
be  partly  responsible  for  a  like  result  in  this  country. 

But  apart  from  this  temporary  preoccupation  and  from 
any  differences  of  national  temperament,  the  conditions  of 
an  old  and  long  -  settled  country,  with  its  authoritative 
standards  of  taste  and  belief,  and  its  comparatively  homo- 
geneous public  opinion,  finding  expression  through  a  power- 
ful Press,  would  in  any  case  have  operated  to  prevent  the 
new  belief  spreading  with  the  epidemic  rapidity  which  we 
have  witnessed  in  the  United  States.  Certainly  no  one 
would  at  this  time  have  ventured  to  estimate  the  number 
of  British  Spiritualists  in  millions.  This  view  of  the  case 
is  strengthened  if  we  consider  that  it  was  in  Yorkshire — 
a  county  which  had  previously  given  a  welcome  to  the 
Society  of  Friends,  to  the  Church  of  the  New  Jerusalem, 
and  to  various  forms  of  Dissent — that  Spiritualism  first 
established  itself;^  and  that  generally  the  provinces  seem 
to  have  shown  themselves  more  receptive  than  the  Metro- 
polis. In  London,  for  the  greater  part  of  the  period  under 
review,    there    was    no    Spiritualist    paper    and    no    stable 

^  Keighley,  the  chief  provincial  centre  of  English  Spiritualism,  had  apparently 
been  for  some  years  notable  for  the  activities  of  a  little  band  of  Secularists,  and 
it  was  among  these  Secularists,  of  whom  D.  W.  Weatherhead,  the  founder  of 
the  Yorkshire  Spiritual  Telegraph,  was  the  leader,  that  Spiritualism  found  its 
first  converts  (see  Westminster  Review,  January,  1862,  and  Spiritual  Magazine, 
187s,  p.  475.) 

44  SPIEITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

organisation.  We  hear,  indeed,  so  early  as  January,  1857, 
of  the  Charing  Cross  Spirit-Power  Circle,  of  which  John 
Jones,  of  Peckham,  was  the  chronicler.^  In  July  of  the 
same  year  this  seems  to  have  given  place  to  the  London 
Spiritualistic  Union,  with  W.  Turley,  a  lecturer  and  pro- 
fessional Spiritualist  agent,  as  secretary.^  Mr.  Jones,  how- 
ever, formally  separated  himself  from  this  body,  and  formed 
a  "Circle  of  Spheral  Harmony"  on  his  own  account.^  In 
Jul)/,  1858,  the  London  Spiritualistic  Union  gave  place  to 
the  London  Spiritualist  Union,  with  Dr.  Dixon  as  secretary.* 
But  it  was  not  until  February,  1859,  that  a  fairly  representa- 
tive committee  was  formed,  including  Ashburner,  Dixon, 
Jones,  Turley,  and  Shorter,  with  William  M.  Wilkinson 
as  secretary.^  A  public  library  of  Spiritualist  works  was 
also  formed  about  the  same  time  at  Dixon's  house.^ 

Again,  for  like  reasons,  there  was  little  tendency  in  this 
country  to  make  spirit  revelations  the  foundation  of  a  new 
creed.  Not  only  amongst  the  little  band  of  Swedenborgians 
and  Christian  mystics  whose  writings  we  have  just  been 
considering,  but  throughout  the  country.  Spiritualism  was 
regarded,  with  few  exceptions,  as  supplementing  rather  than 
as  supplanting  the  older  revelation.  Even  those  who,  like 
Shorter,  claimed  to  have  been  converted  from  unbelief  by 
this  means,  appear  as  a  rule  to  have  been  converted  to 
Christianity. 

As  compared  with  later  developments  in  this  country,  the 
salient  characteristic  is  the  attitude  of  the  believer  to  the 
phenomena  in  general,  and  especially  to  the  physical  phen- 
omena— an  attitude  of  naive  and  unquestioning  acceptance. 
There  were  no  tests ;  and  consequently  no  "  exposures." 
Accounts  of  seances  with  Home  or  Mrs.  Marshall  show, 
coupled  with  complete  ignorance  of  the  possibilities  and 
methods  of  fraud,  an  almost  ludicrous  confidence  in  the 
medium.  We  have  already  had  occasion  to  record  Dixon's 
conviction,  notwithstanding  suspicious  appearances,  of  the 
integrity  of  the  errand-boy  Dan ;  and  the  cheerful  obedience 
yielded  by  Dan's  master  to  the  spirits'  behests.  But  in  fact 
the  writers  of  the  period  lay  little  stress  upon  the  physical 
phenomena.  They  were  accepted  as  genuine,  but  com- 
paratively unimportant ;  and  few  thought  it  worth  while  to 
give    any    detailed    account    of    them.      Mrs.    Crosland,   as 

^    Yorkshire  Spiritual  Telegraph,  vol.  iii.  pp.  126,  131,  vol.  iv.  p.  13,  etc. 

^  British  Spiritual  Telegraph,  vol.  i.  p.  46. 

^  Ibid.,  vol.  i.  pp.  85,  112.  ^  Ibid.,  vol.  ii.  p.  165. 

*  Ibid.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  97,  98.  ®  Ibid.,  vol.  iii.  p.  190. 

THE  INCUBATION   PERIOD  45 

already  mentioned,  hurries  over  her  experiences  with  Home 
to  get  to  the  psychological  phenomena.  Shorter  mentions 
"  the  simple  fact  that  heavy  bodies  frequently  moved  without 
touch  or  contact";  and,  again,  gives  a  list  of  the  marvels 
which  he  had  seen,  including  tables  rising  from  the  floor, 
cantering  round  the  room,  and  tilting  at  an  angle  of  forty- 
five  degrees  with  all  the  objects  on  them  remaining  un- 
moved. But  he  gives  not  a  single  case  in  detail.^  And 
Mrs.  de  Morgan  thinks  "that  instances  of  tables  rising 
from  the  floor  to  the  height  of  three  or  four  feet  are  so 
well  attested"  that  it  is  hardly  necessary  for  her  to  refer  to 
them.2 

Attention  was  thus  concentrated  by  preference,  not  on  the 
actual  rappings,  or  the  movements  of  tables  and  chairs,  but 
on  the  content  of  the  messages  delivered  by  these  and  other 
means.  And  the  same  perfect  confidence  was  shown 
throughout.  In  the  case  of  the  automatic  writers,  drawing 
mediums,  and  seers,  whose  performances  are  chronicled  by 
Wilkinson,  Mrs.  Crosland,  and  others,  there  is  no  reason 
to  suppose  that  this  confidence — so  far  as  the  personal 
character  of  the  medium  is  concerned — was  as  a  rule  mis- 
placed. Automatism  of  the  kind  is  now,  no  doubt, 
sufficiently  recognised  as  a  genuine  manifestation.  But  with 
professional  mediums,  or  with  persons  whose  mediumship 
brought  them  any  advantage  in  coin  or  kind,  a  less  childlike 
trustfulness  might  have  been  good  for  the  souls  of  both 
parties.  When  the  raps  referred  to  "butiful  riting,"  where 
an  educated  mortal  would  have  spoken  of  beautiful  writing, 
the  explanation  offered,  that  the  spirits  were  forced  to 
accommodate  themselves  to  the  illiterate  organism  through 
which  they  worked,  gives  less  satisfaction  to  the  modern 
reader  than  it  apparently  gave  to  the  Spiritualist  of  the 
fifties.3  Or  again,  when  Jacob  Dixon  writes :  "  Matilda,  it 
has  been  given  me  to  understand,  is  the  name  of  my  Mother 
in  the  Spirit  World,"  a  less  robust  faith  suspects  that  the 
medium  had  employed  this  artifice  to  disguise  a  bad  shot 
at  the  proper  name.*  A  like  indulgence  was  accorded  even 
to  the  celestial  interlocutors.  Not  all  the  spirits,  obviously, 
who  claimed  to  be  Shelley,  Bacon,  or  Luther  could  have 
substantiated  their  claim.  But  the  early  Spiritualist  would 
not  therefore  have  felt  justified  in  suspecting  their  good  faith. 

■*  Confessions  of  a  Trutkseeker,  pp.  62,  91,  etc. 

^  From  Matter  to  Spirit,  p.  94. 

'^  See  e.g.  From  Matter  to  Spirit,  p.  23. 

*  British  Spiritual  Telegraph,  vol.  iii.  p.  279. 

46  SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

These  names,  no  doubt,  might  be  considered  "generic  terms 
for  some  species  of  intellectual  influence."^ 

Such  was  the  faith  of  the  early  English  Spiritualists.  In 
the  next  two  decades,  it  need  hardly  be  said,  this  faith  was 
more  than  once  rudely  shaken. 

^  From  Matter  to  Spirit,  p.  289. 

CHAPTER     III 
THE   AMERICAN   INVASION,    1860-1870 

IN  i860  the  movement  enters  upon  a  new  phase.  The 
next  twenty  years  constitute  the  classic  period  of 
English  Spiritualism.  From  this  date  onwards  the 
movement  is  continuously  represented  in  London,  as  well 
as  in  the  provinces,  by  one  or  more  periodicals  of  good 
standing  and  conducted  with  some  literary  ability.  The 
miscellaneous  publications  devoted  to  the  subject  rapidly 
increase,  and  for  the  most  part  the  veil  of  anonymity  is 
dropped.  More  and  more  attention  is  given  to  Spiritualism 
by  the  outside  Press ;  and  it  even  figures  in  caricature  and 
pantomime  as  a  subject  of  popular  interest.  The  number  of 
those  who  are  not  ashamed  to  confess  their  interest — a 
number  now  including  many  men  and  women  of  distinction 
in  various  departments — is  continually  growing.  In  a  word, 
the  movement,  emerging  from  the  semi-private  phase  which 
we  have  considered  in  the  last  chapter,  now  receives  a  late 
but  wide  and  ever-widening  publicity. 

This  change  is  coincident  with,  and  is  no  doubt  largely 
consequent  on,  the  greater  activity  of  professional,  and 
especially  of  physical,  mediumship.  Mrs.  Marshall  through- 
out this  period  was  giving  seances,  and  her  originally  scanty 
repertory  was  enriched,  especially  towards  the  end  of  the 
decade  now  under  review,  with  many  novel  and,  it  would 
seem,  highly  attractive  feats.  Home  had  returned  to  England 
with  undiminished  powers  in  the  winter  of  1859;  and  a  long 
succession  of  American  mediums,  of  whom  Squire,  Redman, 
Foster,  Colchester,  Conklin,  and  the  Davenport  Brothers 
were  the  most  conspicuous,  visited  our  shores  during  the  next 
ten  years. 

In  the  summer  of  i860  there  appeared  almost  simul- 
taneously in  two  leading  periodicals  articles  on  the  spirit 
manifestations.     The  writer  of  "  Modern  Magic,"  in  All  the 

47 

48  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

Year  Round}  then  conducted  by  Charles  Dickens,  had 
attended  a  seance  at  Mrs.  Marshall's  rooms  in  Red  Lion 
Street.  The  phenomena  which  he  witnessed — movements 
of  the  table,  raps,  sounding  of  a  guitar  and  a  bell  under  the 
table  or  in  the  dark — were  all,  he  is  convinced,  due  to 
trickery,  the  only  "  mediums "  in  the  case  being  Mrs, 
Marshall's  fingers  and  toes.  The  whole  performance  was 
a  "  dull  and  barefaced  imposition,"  and  he  hardly  knows 
whether  to  wonder  most  at  "the  unblushing  impudence  of 
the  actors  or  the  marvellous  credulity  of  the  spectators." 
Finally,  he  enters  an  indignant  protest  against  the  cruelty 
and  wickedness  of  those  who  gain  a  sordid  living  by  preying 
on  the  affection  and  reverence  paid  to  the  dead. 

A  writer  in  the  Cornhill  Magazine'}  afterwards  acknow- 
ledged to  be  Robert  Bell,  the  well-known  dramatist  and 
critic,  under  the  title  "  Stranger  than  Fiction,"  has  a  different 
story  to  tell.  He  also  had  visited  the  Marshalls  and  other 
mediums,  but  had  seen  things  which  he  was  satisfied  were 
"  beyond  the  pale  of  material  experiences."  After  recounting 
some  of  these,  he  ends  with  a  detailed  description  of  a  sitting 
with  Home.  The  company  sat  round  a  large  table,  placed 
near  the  window — the  part  next  the  window  being  left 
vacant.  Paper,  pencils,  an  accordion,  and  a  few  flowers  were 
placed  on  the  table.  All  the  lights  were  extinguished  by  the 
command  of  the  spirits,  and  the  room  was  illumined  only 
by  the  occasional  flicker  of  a  dying  fire  and  the  faint  grey 
light  coming  through  the  window.  At  this  stage,  the  writer 
says, 

"we  could  see,  but  scarcely  distinguish,  our  hands  upon  the  table. 
A  festoon  of  dull,  gleaming  forms  round  the  circle  represented  what 
we  knew  to  be  our  hands.  An  occasional  ray  from  the  window  now 
and  then  revealed  the  hazy  surface  of  the  white  sheets  \sc.  of  paper] 
and  the  misty  bulk  of  the  accordion." 

But  even  this  gloom  was  not  sufficiently  profound  for  the 
requirements  of  the  spirits,  for  presently  the  window-blind 
was  drawn  down  by  an  invisible  hand,  "  and  the  room  was 
thrown  into  deeper  darkness  than  before."  Then  and  then 
only  the  manifestations  began  :  hands  were  felt  under  the 
table,  touching  the  knees  and  pulling  the  clothes  of  the 
sitters  ;  a  handbell  was  rung  by  the  invisible  agency ; 

1  July  28th,  i860. 

^  August,  i860.  The  Cornhill  was  then  edited  by  Thackeray,  who  vouches 
for  the  good  faith  of  his  contributor. 

THE  AMERICAN  INVASION  49 

"  While  this  was  going  forward  the  white  sheets  were  seen  moving, 
and  gradually  disappeared  over  the  edge  of  the  table.  Long  after- 
wards we  heard  them  creasing  and  crumpling  on  the  floor,  and  saw 
them  returned  again  to  the  table;  but  there  was  no  writing  upon 
them.  In  the  same  way  the  flowers  which  lay  near  the  edge  were 
removed.  The  semblance  of  what  seemed  a  hand,  with  white,  long, 
and  delicate  fingers,  rose  up  slowly  in  the  darkness,  and  bending 
over  a  flower,  suddenly  vanished  with  it.  This  occurred  two  or 
three  times ;  and  although  each  appearance  was  not  equally  palpable 
to  every  person,  there  was  no  person  who  did  not  see  some  of  them. 
The  flowers  were  distributed  in  the  manner  in  which  they  had  been 
removed;  a  hand,  of  which  the  lambent  gleam  was  visible,  slowly 
ascending  from  beneath  the  cover  and  placing  the  flower  in  the 
hand  for  which  it  was  intended.  In  the  flower-stands  in  the 
adjoining  window  we  could  hear  geranium  blossoms  snapped  off, 
which  were  afterwards  thrown  to  different  persons. 

"Still  more  extraordinary  was  that  which  followed,  or  rather 
which  took  place  while  we  were  watching  this  transfer  of  the  flowers. 
Those  who  had  keen  eyes,  and  who  were  in  the  best  position  for 
catching  the  light  upon  the  instrument,  declared  that  they  saw  the 
accordion  in  motion.  I  could  not.  It  was  as  black  as  pitch  to  me. 
But  concentrating  my  attention  on  the  spot  where  I  supposed  it  to 
be,  I  soon  perceived  a  dark  mass  rise  awkwardly  above  the  edge 
of  the  table,  and  then  go  down,  the  instrument  emitting  a  single 
sound  produced  by  its  being  struck  against  the  table  as  it  went  over. 
It  descended  to  the  floor  in  silence ;  and  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after- 
wards, when  we  were  engaged  in  observing  some  fresh  phenomena, 
we  heard  the  accordion  beginning  to  play  where  it  lay  on  the 
ground." 

The  writer  then  expatiates  on  the  "divine  tenderness" 
of  the  w^ondrous  music  produced  by  the  accordion.  The 
climax  of  the  sitting  v^as  as  follows  : — 

"Mr.  Home  was  seated  next  the  window.  Through  the  semi- 
darkness  his  head  was  dimly  visible  against  the  curtains,  and  his 
hands  might  be  seen  in  a  faint  white  heap  before  him.  Presently 
he  said,  in  a  quiet  voice,  '  My  chair  is  moving — I  am  off  the  ground 
— don't  notice  me — talk  of  something  else,'  or  words  to  that  effect. 
It  was  very  difficult  to  restrain  the  curiosity,  not  unmixed  with 
a  more  serious  feeling,  which  these  few  words  awakened;  but  we 
talked,  incoherently  enough,  upon  some  indifferent  topic.  I  was 
sitting  nearly  opposite  Mr.  Home,  and  I  saw  his  hands  disappear 
from  the  table,  and  his  head  vanish  into  the  deep  shadow  beyond. 
In  a  moment  or  two  more  he  spoke  again.  This  time  his  voice  was 
in  the  air  above  our  heads.  He  had  risen  from  his  chair  to  a  height 
of  four  or  five  feet  from  the  ground.  As  he  ascended  higher  he 
described  his  position,  which  at  first  was  perpendicular,  and  after- 

II. — E 

50  SPIRITUALISM   IN   ENGLAND 

wards  became  horizontal.  He  said  he  felt  as  if  he  had  been  turned 
in  the  gentlest  manner,  as  a  child  is  turned  in  the  arms  of  a  nurse. 
In  a  moment  or  two  more,  he  told  us  that  he  was  going  to  pass 
across  the  window,  against  the  grey,  silvery  Hght  of  which  he  would 
be  visible.  We  watched  in  profound  stillness,  and  saw  his  figure 
pass  from  one  side  of  the  window  to  the  other,  feet  foremost,  lying 
horizontally  in  the  air.  He  spoke  to  us  as  he  passed,  and  told 
us  that  he  would  turn  the  reverse  way,  and  recross  the  window ; 
which  he  did.  His  own  tranquil  confidence  in  the  safety  of  what 
seemed  from  below  a  situation  of  the  most  novel  peril  gave  confi- 
dence to  everybody  else;  but,  with  the  strongest  nerves,  it  was 
impossible  not  to  be  conscious  of  a  certain  sensation  of  fear  or  awe. 
He  hovered  round  the  circle  for  several  minutes,  and  passed,  this 
time  perpendicularly,  over  our  heads.  I  heard  his  voice  behind  me 
in  the  air,  and  felt  something  lightly  brush  my  chair.  It  was  his 
foot,  which  he  gave  me  leave  to  touch.  Turning  to  the  spot  where 
it  was  on  the  top  of  the  chair,  I  placed  my  hand  gently  upon  it, 
when  he  uttered  a  cry  of  pain,  and  the  foot  was  withdrawn  quickly, 
with  a  palpable  shudder.  It  was  evidently  not  resting  on  the  chair, 
but  floating;  and  it  sprang  from  the  touch  as  a  bird  would.  He 
now  passed  over  to  the  farthest  extremity  of  the  room,  and  we  could 
judge  by  his  voice  of  the  altitude  and  distance  he  had  attained. 
He  had  reached  the  ceiling,  upon  which  he  made  a  slight  mark, 
and  soon  afterwards  descended  and  resumed  his  place  at  the  table. 
An  incident  which  occurred  during  this  aerial  passage,  and  im- 
parted a  strange  solemnity  to  it,  was  that  the  accordion,  which  we 
supposed  to  be  on  the  ground  under  the  window  close  to  us,  played 
a  strain  of  wild  pathos  in  the  air  from  the  most  distant  corner  of 
the  room."  ^ 

It  may  be  added  that  Dr.  Gully,  a  well-known  physician 
of  Malvern,  who  had  also  been  present  at  this  seance,  wrote 
in  October  of  the  same  year  to  the  Morning  Star,  corrobora- 
ting and  supplementing  the  account  given  by  the  writer  in 
the  Cornhill  Magazine? 

A  remarkable  testimony  to  Home's  ability,  whether  as 
medium  or  simply  as  conjurer,  is  the  position  which  he 
succeeded  in  maintaining  in  society  at  this  time,  and  indeed 
throughout  his  later  life,  and  the  respectful  treatment  accorded 
to  him  by  many  leading  organs  of  the  Press.  No  money 
was  ever  taken  by  him  as  the  price  of  a  sitting;  and  he 
seems  to  have  had  the  entree  to  some  of  the  most  aristocratic 
circles  in  Europe.  He  was  welcomed  in  the  houses  of  our 
own   and  of  foreign   nobility,  was  a  frequent  guest  at  the 

^  A  criticism  of  this  and  other  accounts  of  Home's  mediumship  will  be  found 
below,  Book  IV.  chaps,  iii.  and  iv. 

2  Dr.  Gully's  letter  is  quoted  in  full  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine,  1861,  p.  63. 

THE  AMEBIC  AN  INVASION  51 

Tuileries,  and  had  been  received  by  the  King  of  Prussia  and 
the  Czar.  Some  three  years  after  this  date,  when  he  pub- 
Hshed  the  first  volume  of  Incidents  of  My  Life,  the  Times 
accorded  him  a  review  three  columns  in  length,  giving  copious 
extracts  from  the  book,  and  inviting  in  courteous  terms  the 
author's  explanation  of  some  suspicious  circumstances  con- 
nected with  his  career.^  Home,  a  few  days  later,  in  vindicating 
his  character  refers  to  the  generous  treatment  accorded  to 
him.^  So  strong,  indeed,  was  his  position  that  he  was  able 
to  compel  an  ample  apology  from  a  gentleman  who  had 
publicly  expressed  doubts  of  the  genuineness  of  his  medium- 
istic  performances,^  and  to  publish  a  violent  and  spiteful 
attack  upon  Browning  on  the  occasion  of  the  publication  of 
Sludged  His  expulsion  from  Rome  in  1864  on  the  charge 
of  sorcery  gave  to  Home  for  the  time  an  international  import- 
ance. 

Another  prominent  medium  in  the  year  1861  was  J.  R.  M. 
Squire,  one  of  the  editors  of  the  Banner  of  Light,  an  American 
Spiritualist  paper  which  has  been  described  "  as  in  no  way 
surpassing  the  Saturday  Review."^  Squire  was  apparently 
introduced  to  London  society  under  Home's  auspices,  and 
later  in  the  year  was  presented  at  Court  by  the  American 
minister.  Like  Home,  he  seems  to  have  given  his  sittings 
without  payment.  His  performance  included  the  usual 
rapping,  movements  of  tables,  and  direct  writing ;  but  his 
specialty  is  described  as  follows  by  one  of  his  most  dis- 
tinguished converts,  the  late  Dr.  Lockhart  Robertson : — 

"Lifting  Weight  and  breaking  a  large  Table. — A  heavy  circular 
table,  made  of  birch  and  strongly  constructed,  was  lifted  a  somer- 
sault in  the  air  and  thrown  on  the  bed,  the  left  hand  only  of 
Mr,  Squire  being  placed  on  the  surface,  his  other  hand  held, 
and  his  legs  tied  to  the  chair  on  which  he  sat.  The  table  was 
afterwards  twice  lifted  on  to  the  head  of  the  writer  and  of 
Mr.  Squire.  Only  a  strong  force  applied  at  the  further  side  of  the 
circular  top  could  have  produced  this  result.  This  force  Mr.  Squire, 
as  is  evident  from  his  position  (standing  close  to  the  writer  at  one 
point  of  the  circle  with  his  hands  tied),  could  not  have  exerted.  The 
efiforts  of  the  writer  to  prevent  this  lifting  of  the  table  had  no  in- 
fluence on  the  strange  unseen  force  applied  to  lift  the  table  thus 
against  his  wish  and  force." 

'    Times,  gth  April,  1863.  "  Ibid.,  i6th  April,  1863. 

'   Captain  Noble,  in  the  Sussex  Advertiser  of  March  23rd,  1864.     The  letter 
of  apology  is  reprinted  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine,  1864,  p.  219. 
■*  Spiritual  Magazine,  1864,  p.  315. 
^  By  Dr.  Lockhart  Robertson,  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine,  i860,  p.  343. 

52  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

During  the  performance,  it  should  be  added,  the  circle, 
which  consisted  on  this  occasion  of  Dr.  Lockhart  Robertson 
and  two  friends,  Mr.  Critchett  and  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  were 
in  the  dark,  a  screen  being  placed  before  the  fire.^  If  Squire 
had  the  free  use  of  his  limbs,  or  of  some  of  them,  there  is 
nothing  to  forbid  the  supposition  that  he  performed  the  feat 
by  muscular  force  alone ;  indeed,  it  was  successfully  imitated 
under  those  conditions,  as  Howitt  himself  describes,  by  an 
eminent  English  surgeon.^  As  the  feat  was  always  performed 
in  darkness,  under  conditions  dictated  by  the  medium  himself, 
I  see  no  reason  to  doubt  that  Squire  was  able  to  use  as  many 
of  his  arms  and  legs  as  he  required.^ 

In  the  course  of  the  next  three  or  four  years,  from  i860  to 
1864,  several  American  exponents  of  a  new  form  of  medium- 
ship — Bly,  Redman,  Conklin,  Colchester,  and  Foster — visited 
our  island.  The  first-named,  indeed,  seems  to  have  attempted 
to  double  the  part  of  "  medium  "  and  exposer  of  Spiritualism  ; 
at  any  rate,  he  owned  to  performing  his  marvels  by  trickery.^ 
Neither  Redman  nor  Conklin  appears  to  have  attained  great 
fame  in  this  country.  Finally,  Colchester  and  Foster  were 
actually  detected  in  trickery  by  Spiritualists.^  Moreover,  the 
first-named  was  some  years  later  compelled  by  the  verdict 
of  an  American  jury  to  take  out  a  licence  as  a  juggler  ;^  and 
Foster's  moral  character  was  regarded  as  hopelessly  tainted.'^ 
Nevertheless,  as  the  very  persons  who  had  suspected  or 
detected  trickery  were  convinced  that  both  Colchester  and 
Foster  exhibited  at  times  genuine  spirit  manifestations,  and 
as  the  performances  of  the  latter,  especially,  are  constantly 
quoted  in  later  Spiritualist  works  as  remarkable  instances 
of  mediumship,  it  seems  worth  while  to  consider  them  in 
detail.  And  for  another  reason  these  records  of  Foster's  per- 
formances call  for  some  consideration.  They  were  regarded 
at  the  time,  and  are  still  regarded  by  many,  perhaps  by  most, 
Spiritualists  as  at  all  events  proofs  of  clairvoyance.     In  view 

^  Rep07't  of  the  Dialectical  Society,  pp.  249-50.  The  account  appeared  origin- 
ally in  the  Spiritual  Magazine,  April,  i860,  a  few  weeks  after  the  occurrence. 

'^  Spiritual  Magazine,  1863,  p.  173. 

^  There  is  nothing  in  the  account  given  to  forbid  the  supposition  that  Squire 
may  have  supplemented  his  muscular  powers  by  mechanical  means,  e.g.  by  a  rod 
concealed  in  his  sleeve,  or  by  a  hook  or  other  mechanical  support  attached  to  his 
person.  See  Dr.  Hodgson's  account  {Journal  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  vii.  pp.  49,  50)  of 
a  similar  apparatus. 

*  Spiritual  Magazine,  1861,  p.  92.  ^  Ibid.,  1862,  pp.  45,  153,  546. 

''  Quoted  from  American  papers  in  Spiritual  Magazine,  1865,  p.  464. 

''  In  Spiritual  Magazine,  1863,  p.  147,  the  editor  writes  that  he  has  received 
from  Judge  Edmonds  such  "sickening  details  of  his  criminality  in  another 
direction  that  ...  we  should  no  longer  soil  our  pages  with  his  mediumship," 

THE  AMERICAN   INVASION  53 

of  the  later  manifestations  through  Mrs.  Piper,  which  have  so 
far  resisted  all  attempts  at  hostile  analysis,  it  is  worth  while 
to  show  what  was  the  utmost  that  deliberate  fraud  could 
achieve  in  the  early  sixties. 

Attention  was  publicly  called  to  Foster's  mediumship  in 
the  spring  of  1862  by  an  article  in  the  Times,  written  in  a 
spirit  of  good-humoured  tolerance  which  would  much  surprise 
readers  of  that  austere  journal  at  the  present  time.  The  Times' 
special  correspondent  appears  by  no  means  sure  that  what 
he  saw  was  all  to  be  explained  by  conjuring,  and  at  any  rate 
was  satisfied,  if  it  were,  that  he  had  his  guinea's  worth.^  Even 
the  leader  -  writer  admits  that  some  of  the  feats  seem 
"  startling  and  inexplicable."  ^  On  the  reports  furnished  by 
most  contemporary  writers,  Foster's  performances,  like  those 
of  mediums  and  of  conjurers  generally,  may  well  have  seemed 
inexplicable.  Here,  for  instance,  is  a  fairly  full  account,  not 
indeed  of  what  actually  took  place,  but  of  what,  at  a  success- 
ful seance,  the  sitter  was  induced  to  think  had  taken  place. 
Mr.  H.  Spicer  called  upon  Foster  at  his  lodgings.  After 
some  conversation, 

"  Mr.  Foster  then  said  he  was  about  to  leave  the  room,  and 
desired  me,  when  left  alone,  to  tear  off  some  ten  or  twelve  slips  of 
paper,  write  upon  each  of  them  the  name  of  some  deceased  friend, 
roll  each  slip  up  so  tightly  as  to  be  a  mere  shapeless  lump  of  paper ; 
then  roll  up  as  many  more  as  I  pleased,  in  the  same  manner,  but 
blank,  and  mix  the  whole  together  in  a  heap  on  the  table.  Having 
given  these  instructions,  he  left  the  room,  closing  the  door,  and  went 
upstairs.  ...  I  then  wrote  down  the  names  of  six  or  seven  deceased 
friends  or  acquaintances,  purposely  including  one  or  two  with  whom 
the  lapse  of  years  had  made  my  thoughts  of  late  but  little  familiar ; 
rolled  up  the  strips  with  at  least  thirty  others  (blank)  and  flung  the 
whole  in  a  confused  heap  on  the  table,  so  as  to  be  completely  indis- 
tinguishable, even  to  myself.  Mr.  F.,  presently  returning,  handed 
me  the  pencil  and  alphabet,  and,  after  a  little  '  spirit '  jargon,  the 
written  slips  were  selected  from  the  rest,  and  the  names  they  bore 
spelled  out  [i.e.  by  the  raps]  with  unfailing  precision.  ...  In  reality 
I  myself  was  not  aware  of  the  name  contained  in  the  slip  under 
consideration  until  spelled  out.  Mr.  F.  afterwards  varied  his 
experiments  by  exhibiting  the  several  names  written  in  large  rosy 
characters,  as  though  scratched  with  a  bramble,  on  his  arm,  but 
these  may  be  set  aside  as  easily  producible  by  chemical  means ; 
and,  indeed,  I  have  heard  of  an  accomplished  young  lady  who  has 
declared  that  they  can,  with  a  little  practice,  be  produced  at  pleasure 
upon  any  arm,  and  who  proved  it  by  writing  them  on  her  own. 
Mr.   F.'s   remarks   upon   the   spiritual   agency   were   of   the   usual 

^  Times,  13th  March,  1862.  2  73/^. ^  i^th  March. 

54  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

character,  and  not  worth  recording.  But  to  revert,  for  a  moment, 
to  the  only  point  really  deserving  attention,  the  clairvoyant  reading, 
I  confess  I  am  at  a  loss  to  suggest  any  explanation  of  this  complete 
and  clever  mystery,  or  mystification,  excepting  that  it  is  clair- 
voyance."-^ 

If  this  w^ere  all,  it  would  be  difficult  to  suggest  an  explana- 
tion of  the  mystery.  But  Spicer,  like  other  "  good  "  sitters, 
omits  to  mention,  and  probably  did  not  at  the  time  regard  as 
of  any  importance,  some  actions  of  Foster's.  After  the 
seance  had  commenced,  and  at  intervals  during  its  progress, 
Foster  would  take  up  the  pellets  in  his  hands,  and  mix  them 
together — "  make  hay  of  them,"  as  a  correspondent  of  the 
Times  puts  it.^  Again,  he  probably  asked  his  sitter,  at  an 
early  period  of  the  sitting,  to  look  under  the  table,  and 
satisfy  himself  that  the  raps  were  not  produced  by  mechanical 
means  ;^  or  perhaps  he  held  a  piece  of  paper  and  a  pencil 
under  the  table,  and  tried  to  get  a  name  written  by  the 
spirits,*  or  drew  his  client's  notice  to  a  "  spirit  standing  behind 
his  chair." ^  It  only  becomes  clear  when  several  accounts  are 
pieced  together  and  compared  that  Foster  habitually  handled 
the  pellets  during  the  sitting,  thus  giving  himself  the  oppor- 
tunity of  abstracting  some  from  the  heap ;  and  that  he 
habitually  employed  one  device  or  another  to  distract  the 
attention  of  the  sitters  whilst  he  read  them.  The  account 
just  quoted  from  Spicer  affords  an  interesting  illustration  of 
the  methods  employed.  It  will  have  been  observed  that 
Spicer  was  recommended  to  include  several  blank  papers 
amongst  his  pellets.  This  particular  piece  of  advice  was  not 
tendered  when  there  were  several  sitters,  each  contributing 
three  or  more  pellets.  The  reason  is  obvious.  From  a  heap 
of  thirty  pellets  four  or  five  might  be  safely  abstracted  with- 
out much  risk  of  detection,  but  the  absence  of  even  one 
pellet  from  a  scanty  half-dozen  would  be  liable  to  attract 
attention.^ 

^  Strange  Things  Among  Us,  pp.  207-9,  by  H.  Spicer.     London,  1863. 

^  Times,  March  17th,  1862;  see  also  the  accounts  given  by  John  Jones  and 
Jacob  Dixon  of  sittings  with  Redman  {Spiritual  Magazine,  i860,  pp.  375,  378). 

^  Spiritual  Magazine,  1862,  p.  46. 

^  T.  P.  Barkas,  Outlines  of  Ten  Years'  Investigations,  p.  118. 

^  Letter  in  the  Times,  17th  March,  1862. 

'°  At  some  seances  given  in  America  in  1872  Foster  appears  to  have  discarded 
the  somewhat  clumsy  device  employed  in  the  sitting  with  Spicer  just  described. 
He  boldly  palmed  the  pellets,  and  substituted  others.  He  found  an  opportunity 
for  reading  the  pellets  by  continually  relighting  the  cigar  which  he  smoked 
throughout  the  sitting,  the  match  being  held  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  as  if  to 
shelter  it  from  a  draught.  At  the  critical  point  in  his  third  sitting  Mr.  Trues- 
dell,  the  sitter,  seized  the  pellets  on  the  table,  and  found  them  blank.     Foster 

THE  AMERICAN   INVASION  55 

A  feature  of  Foster's  seances  upon  which  much  stress  was 
laid  at  the  time  was  his  ability,  on  occasion,  to  name  and 
describe  spirits  whose  names  had  not  been  previously  written 
on  the  pellets.  The  chief  instances  which  I  have  come  across 
in  the  literature  of  the  time  are  concerned  with  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
William  Howitt  and  Colonel  Drayson  ;^  Dr.  Ashburner  and 
two  friends  ;^  and — on  the  occasion  of  a  visit  to  Newcastle, 
to  which  he  was  invited  by  T.  P.  Barkas — his  host  and  Dr. 
McLeod,  sometime  Secretary  of  the  Spiritualist  Associa- 
tion in  that  town.^  It  would  be  doing  less  than  justice  to 
Mr.  Foster's  undoubted  abilities  to  suppose  that  he  had 
neglected  any  opportunity  of  working  up  the  dossiers  of  the 
prominent  Spiritualists — and  all  the  persons  named  were 
prominent  in  the  movement — whom  he  was  likely  to  meet. 

The  writing  on  the  arm,  it  need  hardly  be  said,  may  be 
imitated  by  any  person  on  his  own  skin  with  a  blunt  pencil. 
And  it  is  noteworthy  that  some  sitters,  more  observant  than 
the  rest,  have  recorded  that  spasmodic  movements  and  con- 
tortions of  the  medium's  body  preceded  this  manifestation.'* 

Of  all  the  American  mediums  who  from  time  to  time 
during  the  last  half-century  have  visited  Europe  none,  per- 
haps, with  the  single  exception  of  Home,  have  achieved  so 
immediate  and  so  wide  a  fame  as  the  Davenport  Brothers. 
For  the  initiated,  indeed,  their  fame  had  already  preceded 
them.  Dr.  Loomis,  Professor  of  Chemistry  and  Toxicology 
in  the  Georgetown  Medical  College,  U.S.A.,  had  investi- 
gated the  manifestations  occurring  in  their  presence,  and 
had  published  his  conviction  that  they  were  produced  by  a 

then  appears,  after  a  little  persuasion,  to  have  owned  up.  (See  Bottom  Facts 
Concerning  Spiritzialism,  p.  133.     New  York,  1883.) 

^  Pioneers  of  the  Spit-itual  Reformation,  p.  275,  by  Mrs.  Howitt  Watts. 

^  Philosophy  of  Animal  Magnetism,  p.  320.  Ashburner  does  not  give  the 
names  of  his  friends. 

^  Outlines  of  Ten  Years'  Investigations,  pp.  111-31.  Barkas  gives  a  very  full 
and  unprejudiced  account  of  several  sittings  with  Foster,  conducted  under  fairly 
good  conditions,  and  reported  at  the  time  by  himself.  A  careful  study  of  these 
records  serves  to  strengthen  the  conclusion  indicated  in  the  text :  there  is  nothing 
recorded  by  Barkas  which  could  not  have  been  accomplished  by  a  smart  conjurer 
who  kept  his  wits  about  him  ;  and  his  failures  {e.g.  to  indicate  relationship  until 
he  had  had  hints  from  the  sitters)  are  extremely  significant. 

■*  Spiritual  Magazine,  1862,  p.  46  (see  also  p.  45,  letter  from  Jones  and 
Allman) ;  Titnes,  March  17th,  1862;  Barkas,  op.  cit.,  p.  114.  Truesdell  {op.  cit., 
p.  166)  describes  in  detail  how  Foster  actually  effected  the  writing  on  the  arm.  Car- 
penter ( ^z^ar/er/;/  Review,  Oct.,  1871)  suggests  that  Foster  read  the  names  written 
by  following  the  motion  of  the  top  of  the  pencil.  But  this  explanation  would 
obviously  not  fit  all  cases.  In  the  Seybert  Report  (pp.  142-6)  is  an  account  by 
Dr.  Furness  of  the  methods  employed  for  reading  pellets  by  J.  V.  Mansfield,  the 
"Spirit  Postmaster."  Mansfield's  methods  appear  to  have  been  much  clumsier 
than  Foster's. 

56  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

power  with  which  he  was  unacquainted.  His  report  was  re- 
produced at  length  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine}  Moreover, 
the  brothers  came  to  this  country  under  singularly  fortunate 
auspices.  They  brought  in  their  train  not  only  a  colleague 
named  Fay,  and  the  customary  business  manager.  Palmer, 
but  a  chaplain,  in  the  person  of  the  Rev.  J.  B.  Ferguson. 
Ferguson,  as  we  have  already  seen,^  was  a  man  of  consider- 
able ability,  high  standing,  and  unquestioned  sincerity.  He 
appears  to  have  accompanied  the  Davenports  in  order  at  once 
to  testify  to  their  good  faith  and  to  expound  the  philosophy 
of  Spiritualism.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  his  presence, 
and  the  guarantee  implied,  did  much  to  secure  that  favour- 
able prepossession  on  which,  as  we  shall  later  see  reason  to 
believe,  a  medium's  success  primarily  depends.^ 

The  brothers  were  introduced  to  representatives  of  the 
Press  at  a  meeting  held  at  the  house  of  Dion  Boucicault,  the 
dramatist,  at  the  end  of  September,  1864.  From  a  letter  to 
the  Standard^  we  quote  the  following  account  of  the  first 
part  of  the  proceedings  : — 

"...  I  was  there  from  the  beginning,  and  came  upon  the  field 
of  action  as  soon  as  the  walnut  cabinet  (made  very  like  a  clothes- 
press  or  wardrobe)  was  erected  on  its  trestles  at  one  end  of  the 
apartment,  with  its  back  to  the  chimney.  I  examined  it  and  found 
it  too  simple  in  construction  to  admit  of  any  concealed  machinery, 
and  merely  noted  that  the  three  doors  into  which  its  face  was 
equally  divided  fastened  on  the  inside  by  a  flat  and  easily  moved 
bolt,  and  that  the  middle  door  had  a  lozenge-shaped  aperture  in 
the  upper  portion,  curtained  from  the  inside  with  a  small  square  of 
dark  velvet.  At  sitting  height  round  the  inside  of  the  cabinet  was 
a  narrow  plank.  On  this  at  the  opposed  sides  the  Brothers  Daven- 
port took  their  seats  facing  each  other;  and  as  they  so  sat  the 
closing  of  the  door  nearest  either  hid  him  from  sight.  Any  two 
gentlemen  of  the  company  were  then  invited  to  bind  them  firmly 
with  ropes,  then  produced,  to  the  bench,  hand  and  foot,  as  well 
as  either  knew  how.  One  of  the  volunteers  who  presented  himself 
for  this  office  was  nautical,  and,  accordingly,  profound  in  the  matter 
of  knots.  He  had  no  doubt  of  the  perfect  rigidity  of  his  fastening, 
nor  indeed  had  the  other  gentleman,  nor  any  of  the  company  who 

1  1864,  p.  416.  2  Vol.  I.  p.  206. 

^  Several  of  the  newspaper  correspondents,  in  describing  the  Davenports' 
performances,  take  occasion  to  refer  to  Ferguson,  and  almost  invariably  with 
respect.  Thus  the  Lancet:  "  His  earnest  and  solemn  appeal  [to  the  audience  to 
consider  the  phenomena  seriously]  was  admirable";  and  again,  "a  somewhat 
weak-headed  but  right  honest  gentleman  "  {Lancet,  29th  Oct.,  1864).  Others  refer 
to  his  intellectual  abilities  ;  thus  Edwin  Arnold  in  the  Daily  Telegraph  (4th  Oct. 
1864):  "a  decidedly  remarkable  man,  as  those  who  encountered  him  in  meta- 
physical discussions  will  probably  acknowledge."  "*  3rd  Oct.,  1864. 

THE  AMERICAN   INVASION  57 

examined  the  complicated  ligatures  which,  passing  through  holes 
perforated  in  the  bench,  and  connecting  the  ankles  with  the  wrists 
of  the  patients,  seemed  to  render  all  free  motion,  at  any  rate  of 
arms  or  feet,  an  impossibility.  It  was  suggested  that  the  knees 
should  also  be  made  fastj  but  this  was  not  deemed  necessary.  A 
guitar,  a  fiddle  with  its  bow,  a  tambourine,  a  very  heavy  brass 
speaking-trumpet  .  .  .  and  two  handbells  .  .  .  were  placed  between 
the  prisoners,  and  apparently  out  of  their  reach.  The  two  side 
doors  were  then  bolted  from  the  inside  .  .  .  the  bolt  of  the  middle 
door  was  heard  to  be  drawn  from  inside,  hands  then  appeared  at 
the  lozenge-shaped  aperture,  one  from  each  side  of  the  cabinet,  as 
it  appeared,  and  jigged  flittingly  in  front  of  the  curtain,  which  was 
thrust  slightly  back.  The  hands  were  in  a  semi-obscurity,  the  gas 
by  which  the  room  was  lighted  having  been  slightly  lowered,  and 
the  arms  belonging  to  them  not  being  visible  from  the  smallness 
of  the  aperture,  they  looked  ghostly  enough  to  elicit  a  set  of  little 
awestruck  ejaculations  from  the  ladies  present." 

The  Times'  correspondent  entered  the  room  whilst  the 
cabinet  manifestations  were  still  in  progress,  and  his  account 
of  the  latter  part  of  the  sitting,  which  is  somewhat  fuller 
than  that  of  the  Standard,  is  given  below : — 

"When  I  entered  the  room  devoted  to  the  'manifestations'  I 
found  it  occupied  by  a  number  of  persons  who  attentively  listened 
to  a  strange  discordant  concert  held  within  a  wardrobe  placed  at 
the  end  furthest  from  the  door.  When  the  sounds  had  ceased  the 
wardrobe  was  opened,  and  three  compartments  were  discovered, 
two  of  which  were  occupied  by  the  Brothers  Davenport,  bound 
hand  and  foot  with  strong  cords,  like  the  most  dangerous  male- 
factors. The  centre  compartment  held  the  musical  instruments, 
and  on  each  side  of  this  sat  the  corded  brothers.  The  ostensible 
theory  is  that  the  Davenports,  bound  as  they  were,  produced  a 
combination  of  noises,  compared  to  which  the  performance  of  the 
most  obtrusive  German  band  that  ever  awakened  the  wrath  of  a 
Babbage  is  the  harmony  of  the  spheres.  The  cords  are  examined, 
the  wardrobe  is  closed,  the  instruments  are  replaced,  and  presently, 
through  an  aperture  in  the  centre  door,  a  trumpet  is  hurled  with 
violence.  The  wardrobe  is  reopened,  and  there  are  the  Brothers 
Davenport  corded  as  before. 

"A  change  takes  place  in  the  manner  of  the  performance. 
Hitherto  the  brothers  have  remained  incarcerated  in  this  box,  while 
the  audience  are  at  liberty.  They  now  leave  the  wardrobe  and  take 
their  place  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  where  they  are  firmly  bound 
to  their  chairs.  The  gentleman  who  officiates  as  their  lecturer  or 
spokesman  even  offers  to  drop  sealing-wax  on  the  knots,  and  requests 
anyone  of  the  company  to  impress  it  with  his  own  seal.  On  the 
evening  of  my  visit  this  offer  was  not  accepted,  but  the  fault,  if  any, 

58  SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

lay  with  the  investigators.  When  the  lights  had  been  extinguished, 
and  as  we  were  all  seated  round  the  room  with  hands  joined,  at  the 
request  of  the  lecturer,  a  most  extraordinary  'manifestation'  took 
place.  The  air  was  filled  with  the  sound  of  instruments  which  we 
had  seen  laid  upon  a  table,  but  which  now  seemed  to  be  flying 
about  the  room,  playing  as  they  went,  without  the  smallest  respect 
to  the  heads  of  the  visitors.  Now  a  bell  jingled  close  to  your  ear, 
now  a  guitar  was  struck  immediately  over  your  head,  while  every 
now  and  then  a  cold  wind  passed  across  the  faces  of  the  whole 
party.  Sometimes  a  smart  blow  was  administered,  sometimes  the 
knee  was  patted  by  a  inysterious  hand,  divers  shrieks  from  the 
members  of  the  company  indicating  the  side  on  which  the  more 
tangible  '  manifestations '  had  taken  place.  A  candle  having  been 
lighted,  the  brothers  were  seen  still  bound  to  their  chairs,  while 
some  of  the  instruments  had  dropped  into  the  laps  of  the  visitors. 
I  myself  received  a  blow  on  the  face  from  a  floating  guitar,  which 
drew  enough  blood  to  necessitate  the  employment  of  towel  and 
sponge. 

"A  new  experiment  was  now  made.  Darkness  having  regained 
its  supremacy,  one  of  the  brothers  expressed  a  desire  to  be  relieved 
of  his  coat.  Returning  light  showed  him  in  his  shirt-sleeves,  though 
his  hands  were  still  firmly  bound  behind  his  chair.  It  was  now 
stated  that  he  was  prepared  to  put  on  the  coat  of  any  one  of  the 
company  willing  to  'loan'  that  article  of  attire,  and  an  assenting 
gentleman  having  been  found,  the  coat,  after  a  short  interval  of 
darkness,  was  worn  in  proper  fashion  by  a  person  for  whom  it  had 
not  been  designed  by  the  tailor.  Finally,  the  brothers  desired  a 
release,  and  one  of  the  company,  certainly  not  an  accomplice, 
requested  that  the  rope  might  fall  into  his  lap.  During  the  interval 
of  darkness  a  rushing  sound  as  of  swiftly  drawn  cords  was  audible, 
and  the  ropes  reached  the  required  knees,  after  striking  the  face  of 
the  person  in  the  next  chair. 

"  Such  are  the  chief  phenomena,  which  are,  of  course,  referred 
by  the  operators  to  spiritual  agency.  To  sum  up  the  essential 
characteristics  of  the  exhibition,  it  is  sufficient  to  state  that  the 
brothers,  when  not  shut  up  in  the  wardrobe,  are  bound  while  the 
candles  are  alight,  perform  their  miracles  in  the  dark,  and  on 
the  return  of  light  are  found  to  be  bound  as  before.  The  in- 
vestigators into  the  means  of  operation  have  to  ascertain  whether 
the  brothers  are  able  to  release  themselves  and  resume  their  straitened 
condition  during  the  intervals  of  darkness,  and  whether,  even  if  this  is 
practicable,  they  can,  without  assistance,  produce  the  effects  described."  ^ 

The  Times  correspondent,  it  will  be  seen,  seems  by  no 
means  sure  that  w^hat  he  had  witnessed  were  merely  feats 
of    conjuring.      A    correspondent    of    the    Daily    Telegraph 

1   Times,  Sept.  30th,  1864. 

THE  AMERICAN  INVASION  59 

(understood  to  be  Mr. — now  Sir  Edwin — Arnold)  in  like 
manner  hesitates  whether  to  class  the  feats  as  representing 
"the  annihilation  of  what  are  called  material  laws,"  or  some 
extraordinary  physical  dexterity ;  and  whether  to  regard  the 
believers  in  Spiritualism  as  "the  embodiment  of  a  mutual 
and  colossal  self-deceit,  or  the  silent  heralds  of  a  social 
revolution  which  must  shake  the  world,"  ^ 

But,  generally  speaking,  whilst  editors  were  willing  to 
allow  their  correspondents  free  expression  of  opinion,  they 
were  disinclined  to  commit  themselves,  or  to  suggest  any 
explanation  beyond  conjuring,  though  it  is  obvious  in  some 
instances  that  the  alternative  of  a  new  force  was  not  looked 
upon  as  altogether  out  of  court.  Thus  the  Standard,  in  a 
special  article,  writes,  on  the  occasion  of  a  seance  later  in 
October,  that  the  phenomena  were  "far  more  answerable 
\ix.  than  on  a  previous  occasion]  to  the  pretensions  put 
forward  as  to  an  occult  cause  in  a  hitherto  undiscovered 
force  of  nature  " ;  though  maintaining  that,  until  a  more  com- 
plete examination  had  established  such  claim,  they  must  not 
be  regarded  as  other  than  conjuring  tricks.^ 

And,  indeed,  the  phenomena  did  strongly  suggest  conjuring 
tricks.  The  Lancet,  in  a  very  careful  and  curiously  open- 
minded  article,  insisted  on  the  extreme  difficulty  of  securing 
satisfactory  ligatures  under  any  circumstances,  and  especially 
with  the  cord  provided  by  the  Davenports  for  the  purpose. 
It  was  also  pointed  out  that  the  brothers  were  apparently 
"  possessed  of  great  physical  power  and  activity "  ;  that  in 
particular  their  hands  were  such  as  a  professional  conjurer 
might  envy ;  and  finally,  that  after  each  cabinet  performance 
one  or  both  brothers  betrayed  violent  action  of  the  heart, 
disturbed  respiration,  and  other  symptoms  consistent  with 
extreme  muscular  exertion.^  And  conjurers  were  not  long 
in  attempting  to  imitate  the  performance.  These  attempts 
were  not  always  conspicuously  successful.*  But  Tolmaque, 
or  Tollemarque,  who  gave  an  exhibition  at  a  private  house 
at  about  this  time,  succeeded  practically  in  doing  all  that 
the  Davenports  had  done,  and  under  similar  conditions,  so 
far  as  the  somewhat  vague  accounts  given  will  allow  us  to 
judge.  He  was  three  times  bound,  and,  on  at  least  one 
occasion,  by  persons  who  had  helped  to  tie  the  Davenports, 

^  Letter  from  "Master  of  Arts,"  Daily  Telegraph,  4th  Oct.,  1864. 

'  Oct.  24th,  1864.  See,  however,  the  leader  in  the  same  paper  of  the 
1st  Oct.  and  article  on  the  20th  Oct.  ;  the  leader  in  the  Morning  Star  of 
the  1 2th  Oct.,  etc.  ^  Lancet,  8th  Oct.,  1864. 

*  See,  for  instance,  the  account  given  in  the  Lancet  for  29th  Oct.,  1864,  of 
Anderson's  imitation. 

60  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

A  screen  was  placed  in  front  of  him,  and  the  instruments 
in  about  half  a  minute  began  to  play,  and  were  afterwards 
thrown  about  the  room.  Within  less  than  three  minutes  later 
Tolmaque  was  found  unbound.  He  succeeded  also  when 
bound  in  divesting  himself  of  his  coat ;  and  finally,  he  tied 
himself  up  again  in  less  time  than  he  had  taken  to  loosen 
his  bonds.^ 

It  is  probable,  as  the  Spiritualists  contended  at  the  time, 
though  they  furnished  no  trustworthy  authority  for  their 
contention,  that  Tolmaque,  Anderson,  and  other  contem- 
porary conjurers  did  not  succeed  in  releasing  or  in  binding 
themselves  with  the  same  rapidity  as  the  Davenports.^  But 
as,  on  the  hypothesis  of  trickery,  the  Davenport  Brothers 
had  been  practising  that  particular  feat  for  some  years,  and 
probably  started  with  exceptional  physical  qualifications  for 
its  performance,  it  was  hardly  to  be  expected  that  a  novice 
should  perfect  himself  in  a  week  or  two.  And  even  the 
Davenports  worked  under  strict  limitations.  After  a  success- 
ful season  in  London  they  went  to  the  provinces,  and  in 
Liverpool  met  with  disaster.  On  the  committee  appointed 
from  amongst  the  audience  on  the  first  night  were  two 
gentlemen  who  possessed  the  secret  of  a  special  knot,  called 
the  Tom  Fool's  knot.  This  knot  they  applied  to  the  wrists 
of  the  Davenport  Brothers.  Each  protested  that  the  knot 
was  unfairly  tight,  and  injured  the  circulation.  A  doctor 
summoned  to  the  platform  gave  it  as  his  opinion  that  no 
injury  to  the  circulation  was  to  be  apprehended,  and  that, 
in  view  of  the  smallness  of  the  mediums'  hands,  the  knot 
was  not  unnecessarily  tight.  The  Davenports  refused  to 
proceed  with  the  performance  under  such  conditions,  and 
Ferguson  was  ordered  to  cut  the  knots.  The  proceedings 
culminated  on  the  next  night  in  a  riot,  and  the  Davenports 
had  to  fly  from  the  town.  A  like  reception  awaited  them  at 
Huddersfield  and  at  Leeds,  whither  the  fame  of  Tom  Fool's 
knot  had  preceded  them.^  Their  career  in  England  was 
over  for  the  time  being,  and  the  next  three  years,  with  the 
exception  of  a  visit  to  Ireland,  were  spent  on  the  Continent. 

On  their  return  to  this  country  in  1868,  at  the  instance 
of  Mr.  Robert  Cooper,  a  fervent  admirer,  who  had  followed 

1   The  Builder,  22nd  Oct.,  1864. 

^  Mr.  Maskelyne  himself  admits  this.  He  states  that  he  practised  the  tricks 
for  six  weeks  before  reproducing  them  on  the  stage,  and  could  not  even  then  for 
some  time  equal  the  rapidity  of  the  Davenports'  performance  {Pall  Mall  Gazette, 
1 8th  April,  1885.) 

^  Liverpool  Daily  Post,  14th,  15th,  i6th  Feb.,  1865.  In  the  Post  of  the 
23rd  Feb.   a  picture  of  the  baffling  knot  is  given. 

THE  AMERICAN   INVASION  61 

in  their  train  over  the  continent,  the  judgment  of  the  Anthro- 
pological Society  was  sought  upon  their  claims  to  super- 
normal powers.  The  Society  agreed  to  appoint  a  committee 
of  investigation ;  and,  as  a  preliminary  step,  a  trial  seance 
was  held,  in  order  that  the  committee  might  determine  the 
conditions  of  the  subsequent  inquiry.  The  seance  was  a 
failure,  the  committee  reporting  that  "  there  were  no  '  mani- 
festations'  exhibited  which  were  not  capable  of  easy  expla- 
nation ;  the  performers  declining  to  comply  with  nearly  all 
the  suggestions  of  the  committee  as  to  tying."  The  com- 
mittee, however,  offered  to  proceed  with  the  investigation,  on 
the  conditions  that  they  should  themselves  supply  the  ropes 
and  other  materials,  should  be  allowed  to  hold  the  hands  of 
the  mediums  during  the  "  manifestations,"  to  apply  colouring 
matter  to  the  hands  either  of  mediums  or  "spirits,"  and  to 
open  the  door  of  the  cabinet  as  soon  as  a  spirit  hand  ap- 
peared.    The  conditions  were  declined.^ 

It  remains  only  to  add  that  when,  a  few  months  later, 
Messrs.  Maskelyne  and  Cooke  presented  at  the  Crystal 
Palace  a  performance  in  imitation  of  that  given  by  the 
Davenports,  some  Spiritualists,  amongst  them  Benjamin  Cole- 
man, who  was  one  of  those  most  familiar  with  the  Daven- 
ports' manifestations,  found  the  imitation  so  complete  that 
they  saw  no  escape  from  the  conclusion  that  Maskelyne  and 
Cooke  were  themselves  spirit  mediums.^ 

This  last  position  is  characteristic  of  Spiritualist  apologetics. 
All  the  stock  feats  of  the  mediums  of  this  period,  it  will  be 
seen,  with  the  possible  exception  of  Home,  could  be  per- 
formed by  practised  physical  dexterity,  and  were,  in  fact, 
with  more  or  less  complete  success,  imitated  by  such  means 
again  and  again.  The  narrow  margin  of  superiority  in  speed 
and  adroitness  which  was  all  that  Spiritualists  themselves 
ventured  to  claim  was  no  greater  than  the  inaccuracy  of 
credulous  and  untrained  witnesses,  or  the  longer  apprentice- 
ship of  the  medium-conjurer,  would  reasonably  account  for. 

But  these  considerations  had  as  little  effect  on  the  Spirit- 
ualists of  that  day  as  on  the  present  generation  of  believers. 
To  all  such  arguments  and  demonstrations  there  were  two 

^  The  correspondence  is  published  in  Htiman  Nature,  1 868,  pp.  393-6- 
'^  Human  Nature,  1869,  p.  303.  For  biographical  details  of  the  Brothers 
Davenport  and  an  account,  from  the  Spiritualist  standpoint,  of  their  tour  in 
Europe,  the  reader  should  consult  A  Biography  of  the  Brothers  Davenport,  by 
Dr.  T.  L.  Nichols  (London,  1864),  and  Spiritual  Experiences,  by  Robert  Cooper 
(London,  1867).  J.  W.  Truesdell  {Bottom  Facts,  pp.  228  et  seqq.)  describes  various 
rope-tying  tricks  and  the  methods  commonly  employed  by  mediums  for  escaping 
from  their  bonds. 

62  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

main  answers.  The  first,  which  was  adopted  by  some  whose 
zeal  outshone  their  knowledge,  has  been  voiced  by  Benjamin 
Coleman.  The  other,  which  has  been  commonly  held  at  all 
times  by  the  better  educated,  and  was  at  this  time  con- 
sistently advocated  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine  in  connection 
with  the  feats  of  Squire,  Foster,  and  the  Davenports,  began 
by  admitting  that  in  certain  circumstances  and  under  certain 
conditions  the  feats  performed  by  mediums  could  be  paralleled 
by  conjurers ;  nay,  more,  that  on  occasion  genuine  mediums 
supplied  a  temporary  failure  of  the  occult  power  by  trickery. 
But  it  was  contended  that  on  various  specified  or  unspecified 
occasions  the  conditions  and  the  circumstances  were  such  as 
to  make  trickery  impossible,  or  the  results  achieved  of  a 
nature  which  no  trickery  could  explain.  At  the  present  day, 
probably  every  believer  in  the  Spiritualist  phenomena  who 
is  capable  of  argument  defends  his  position  on  these  lines. 
The  contention  is  obviously  not  illogical ;  nor  to  my  thinking 
so  preposterous  as  many  critics  have  represented  it.  If  a 
man  has  occult  powers,  and  gains  his  livelihood  by  their 
exhibition,  it  is  not  a  prio^d  unlikely  that,  to  obviate  injury 
to  his  professional  prospects  and  disappointment  to  his  clients, 
he  will  sometimes  conceal  a  temporary  failure  by  adroit 
trickery.  The  only  fair  way  to  meet  the  Spiritualist  con- 
tention is  to  study  the  evidence  at  its  strongest.  But  the 
discerning  reader  will  probably  agree  that,  again  apart  from 
the  evidence  presented  by  Home's  seances,  no  presumption 
of  a  new  physical  agency  has  been  established  by  the  records 
hitherto  considered. 

CHAPTER    IV 
PRIVATE    MEDIUMSHIP,    1860-1870 

NATIVE  mediums  were  slow  to  follow  the  example  set 
by  their  American  colleagues.  For  the  greater  part 
of  the  decade  now  under  consideration  Mrs,  Marshall 
appears  to  have  been  the  only  professional  medium  in 
England  for  physical  manifestations.  It  is  hardly  necessary 
to  consider  her  performances  in  detail.  She  was,  in  fact,  the 
general  practitioner  of  the  movement,  dealing  for  the  most 
part  with  such  commonplace  phenomena  as  we  have  referred 
to  at  the  beginning  of  the  last  chapter,  but  able  on  occasion 
to  reproduce,  on  a  smaller  scale  and  with  less  distinction, 
most  of  the  manifestations  exhibited  by  specialists  such  as 
Home,  Foster,  or  Mrs.  Guppy.  During  some  part  of  1861 
and  1862  Madame  Besson,  a  professional  clairvoyant,  gave 
sittings  at  which  raps,  lights,  movements  of  furniture,  and 
other  physical  phenomena  occurred.  But  we  hear  no  more 
of  her  after  the  latter  year.^ 

Towards  the  end  of  the  decade  several  mediums  who 
afterwards  achieved  distinction  —  amongst  them  Heme, 
Williams,  and  Duguid,  and,  of  trance  mediums,  J.  J.  Morse 
— began  to  practise.  But  in  October,  1867,  the  editor  of 
Humati  Nature  can  find  in  London  only  two  professional 
mediums,  Mrs.  Marshall  and  Mr.  W.  Wallace,  to  whom  to 
refer  inquirers.^  And  even  in  December,  1869,  there  appear 
to  have  been  only  three  or  four  paid  mediums  in  London.^ 

But  throughout  the  period  there  were  numerous  private 
mediums,  by  whose  agency  tables  were  moved  and  raps  and 
other  phenomena  obtained.  For  the  most  part,  no  doubt, 
the  non-professional  mediums  exhibited  only  in  the  family 
circle.  There  were,  however,  several  instances  in  which  private 
persons  gave,  without  fee  or  reward,  regular  seances  to  their 
friends    and    to    inquirers    introduced    by   them,   at    which 

^  See  various  notices  of  her  seances  in  Spiritual  Magazine  for  1861  and  1S62. 
^  Human  Nature,  1867,  p.  400.  ^  The  Spiritualist,  vol.  i.  p.  12. 

63 

64  SPIRITUALISM   IN   ENGLAND 

physical  manifestations  of  various  kinds  were  exhibited. 
One  of  the  earliest  of  these  private  mediums  was  Mrs.  Everitt, 
the  wife  of  a  tailor,  living  in  Pentonville.  Mrs.  Everitt  had 
apparently  begun  to  give  seances  as  early  as  1855.^  But  her 
mediumship  seems  first  to  have  attracted  public  attention 
at  the  end  of  the  year  1867.^  The  sittings  were  generally 
prefaced  with  a  prayer,  or  the  reading  of  a  chapter  from  the 
Bible.  The  lights  were  then  extinguished  ;  there  were  move- 
ments of  the  table,  raps,  and  various  other  sounds  ;  occasion- 
ally lights  were  seen,  apparently  not  of  a  hallucinatory 
nature  ;  and  later,  the  "  direct "  spirit  voice  was  heard,  a  card- 
board tube  being  placed  near  the  medium  to  assist  this  par- 
ticular manifestation.  On  one  or  two  occasions  there  were 
faint  suspicions  of  trickery ;  but  for  the  most  part  the  per- 
formances seem  to  have  been  equally  satisfactory  to  the 
medium  and  to  her  guests.^ 

Another  private  medium  at  this  time  who  achieved  some 
distinction,  Mr,  Edward  Childs,  owed  his  initiation  to  Mrs. 
Everitt.  His  manifestations  consisted  chiefly  of  direct  writ- 
ing, spirit  voices,  and  flute-playing.*  Master  Willie  Turke- 
tine,  again,  an  intelligent  boy  of  thirteen,  would  sit  on  a 
corner  of  the  sofa  in  the  dark,  with  an  accordion,  a  triangle, 
a  musical  box,  a  tambourine,  and  other  instruments  of  music 
placed  near  him.  The  rest  of  the  company  sat  at  the  other  end 
of  the  room  and  held  each  other's  hands.  If  the  conditions 
were  favourable,  the  spirits  would  then  sing  and  play  on  the 
various  instruments.  Unfortunately  the  presence  of  strangers 
was  found  to  interfere  with  the  manifestations,  so  that  Master 
Turketine  seems  never  to  have  attained  the  eminence  which 
his  abilities  deserved.^ 

Another  interesting  private  medium  in  the  early  years  of 

^  Human  Nature,  1869,  p.  141. 

-  Ibid.,  1867,  p.  400;  Spiritual  Magazine,  1868,  pp.  83,  i8g. 

^  A  notice  appeared  in  the  Spiritual  Magazifie  for  May,  1869,  referring  to 
charges  of  trickery  against  Mrs.  Everitt,  but  no  details  are  given.  In  the  next 
month's  issue  the  medium  herself  indignantly  repudiated  the  charge.  Later  in  the 
same  year,  with  the  object  apparently  of  vindicating  the  medium's  character,  an 
account  of  a  successful  seance  was  published  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine,  with 
the  names  of  the  sitters  appended,  including  Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall  and  the 
Countess  de  Medina  Pomar  {Spiritjial  Magazi7ie,  1869,  p.  469).  For  other 
accounts  of  Mrs.  Everitt's  mediumship  at  this  time  see  Human  Nature,  1868, 
p.  387  ;  1869,  p.  419. 

^  See  Spiritual  Magazine,  1869,  pp.  266,  390,  566  ;  1870,  p.  323.  Spiritualist, 
1870,  p.  79,  etc. 

^  See  the  extraordinarily  naive  reports  of  the  boy's  performances  given  by 
W.  Hewitt,  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine,  1867,  p.  562,  and  1869,  p.  427.  The  other 
Spiritualist  journals  also  contain  accounts  of  this  audacious  youngster's  medium- 
ship. 

PRIVATE   MEDIUMSHIP  65 

this  decade  was  the  first  wife  of  Mr.  Samuel  Guppy,  the 
author  of  Mary  Jane}  In  this  lady's  presence  raps  were 
heard ;  a  guitar  was  played  under  the  table ;  lights  were 
seen  in  a  dark  room  glowing  at  the  tips  of  her  fingers,  which 
were  observed  to  smell  strongly  of  phosphorus  ;  and  coloured 
drawings  of  flowers  were  produced  under  the  table. 

But  it  was  Mr.  Guppy 's  second  wife  who  is  best  known  to 
fame.  In  the  autumn  of  1866  a  new  medium  appeared  in 
the  person  of  a  Miss  Nichol,  a  young  lady  then  living  with 
Mrs.  Sims,  sister  of  the  distinguished  naturalist,  Dr.  A.  R. 
Wallace.  Dr.  Wallace  had  at  this  time  been  investigating 
the  subject  of  Spiritualism  for  a  little  over  a  year,  and  had 
just  published  his  essay,  The  Scientific  Aspect  of  the  Super- 
natural? Miss  Nichol's  mediumship,  it  will  be  seen,  sprang 
up  in  a  congenial  environment  The  manifestations  began 
by  the  movement  of  various  objects  about  the  house,  gener- 
ally with  Mrs,  Sims  and  Miss  Nichol  as  the  only  witnesses. 
One  unusual  characteristic  about  the  early  phenomena 
attracted  Mrs.  Sims'  attention.  The  "  power  "  was  stronger 
the  fewer  the  witnesses,  and  strongest  of  all  in  an  empty 
room.     Thus  she  writes  : — 

"  These  phenomena  appear  to  me  rather  of  a  different  nature  to 
anything  we  have  ever  heard  of  or  seen  at  our  seances.  .  .  .  My 
friend's  power  does  not  seem  nearly  so  strong  when  we  sit  with  other 
persons  who  are  anxious  to  see  these  wonderful  phenomena.  Some, 
though  slight  mediums  themselves,  seem  to  lessen  the  power  rather 
than  strengthen  it.  On  leaving  the  room  empty  after  a  seance,  there 
is  no  counteracting  influence  at  work,  and  thus  the  spirits  have  more 
power  for  grand  manifestations.  We  have  never  had  anything  so 
great  happen  when  we  were  in  the  room  as  when  we  left  it  for  a  few 
minutes."^ 

Within  a  few  weeks,  however,  the  manifestations  assumed 
a  form  which  afterwards  became  very  familiar  in  Spiritualist 
circles.  Dr.  Wallace  himself  describes  the  new  develop- 
ment : — 

"On  Friday  morning,  December  14th,  my  sister,  Mrs.  S.,  had  a 
message  purporting  to  be  from  her  deceased  brother  William  to 
this  effect :  '  Go  into  the  dark  at  Alfred's  this  evening,  and  I  will 
show  that  I  am  with  you.'  On  arriving  in  the  evening  with  Miss 
N.,  my  sister  told  me  of  this  message.  When  our  other  friends, 
four  in  number,  had  arrived,  we  sat  down  as  usual,  but  instead  of 
having  raps  on  the  table  as  on  previous  occasions,  the  room  and  the 

^  Mary  Jane  ;  or,  Spiritualism  Chemically  explained,  with  Spirit  Drawings. 
London,  1863.  2  London,  1866.  ^  Spiritual  Magazine,  1867,  p.  51. 

II. — F 

66  SPIEITUALISM   IN  ENGLAND 

table  shook  violently ;  and,  finding  we  had  no  other  manifestations, 
I  mentioned  the  message  that  had  been  received,  and  we  all  ad- 
journed into  the  next  room,  and  the  doors  and  windows  being  shut, 
sat  down  round  a  table  (which  we  had  previously  cleared  of  books, 
etc.)  holding  each  other's  hands.  Raps  soon  began,  and  we  were 
told  to  draw  back  from  the  table.  This  we  did,  but  thinking  it 
better  to  see  how  we  were  placed  before  beginning  the  seance,  I 
rose  up  to  turn  on  the  gas,^  which  was  down  to  a  blue  point,  when, 
just  as  my  hand  was  reaching  it,  the  medium,  who  was  close  to  me, 
cried  out  and  started,  saying  that  something  cold  and  wet  was 
thrown  on  her  face.  This  caused  her  to  tremble  violently,  and 
I  took  her  hand  to  calm  her,  and  it  then  struck  me  this  was  done 
to  prevent  me  lighting  the  gas.  We  then  sat  still,  and  in  a  few 
moments  several  of  the  party  saw  faintly  that  something  was  appear- 
ing on  the  table.  The  medium  saw  a  hand,  others  what  seemed 
flowers.  These  became  more  distinct,  and  someone  put  his  hand 
on  the  table  and  said,  '  There  are  flowers  here  ! '  Obtaining  a  light, 
we  were  all  thunderstruck  to  see  the  table  half  covered  with  flowers 
and  fern  leaves,  all  fresh,  cold,  and  damp  with  dew,  as  if  they  had 
that  moment  been  brought  out  of  the  night  air.  They  were  the 
ordinary  winter  flowers,  which  are  cultivated  in  hot-houses  for  table 
decoration,  the  stems  apparently  cut  off  as  if  for  a  bouquet.  They 
consisted  of  fifteen  chrysanthemums,  six  variegated  anemones,  four 
tulips,  five  orange-berried  solanums,  six  ferns  of  two  sorts,  one 
Auricula  sinensis  with  nine  flowers,  thirty-seven  stalks  in  all."^ 

Dr.  Wallace's  account  of  this  stance  is  corroborated  by 
Mr.  H.  T,  Humphreys,  another  of  those  present.^ 

In  the  course  of  the  following  year,  as  the  medium's  power 
grew,  similar  manifestations  were  given  in  other  circles,  the 
most  notable  occasion  being  a  seance  on  the  14th  June  at 
Baron  de  Guldenstubbe's  house  in  London.  About  a  dozen 
persons  were  present,  most  of  them  well-known  Spiritualists, 
including  Mrs.  Makdougall  Gregory  (widow  of  the  Professor), 
Signor  Damiani,  Dr.  McLeod,  James  Burns,  the  Spiritualist 
publisher,  Robert  Cooper,  and  the  recorder,  William  Tebb, 
afterwards  well  known  for  his  anti-vaccination  propaganda. 
There  were  raps  and  other  phenomena,  but  the  climax  of  the 
seance  was  the  discovery  of  a  wreath  of  flowers  and  ferns  on 
the  head  of  Mademoiselle  de  Guldenstubbe.  This  manifesta- 
tion had  been  preceded  by  a  curious  ceremony.  Miss  Nichol, 
under  spirit  direction,  had  walked  ten  times  round  the  table 
— the  room  of  course  being  darkened — touching  each  member 

^  Dr.  Wallace,  it  will  be  observed,  has  not  stated  whether  the  room  was 
lighted  when  they  adjourned  to  it,  or  whether  they  had — as  may  perhaps  be 
inferred  from  this  passage — taken  their  places  in  the  dark. 

2  Spiritual  Magazme,  1867,  p.  51.  ^  Ibid.,  1867,  p.  144. 

PRIVATE  MEDIUMSHIP  67 

of  the  circle  as  she  passed,^  On  other  occasions  grapes,  fruit, 
bread,  even  Hve  eels  and  lobsters,  were  introduced  and  dis- 
tributed to  the  sitters."  In  the  same  year  we  find  the 
rudimentary  stage  of  a  manifestation  which  in  its  later  and 
more  highly  evolved  form  was  destined  to  make  the  name 
of  Mrs.  Guppy  famous  in  the  annals  of  Spiritualism.  On 
several  occasions  Miss  Nichol,  an  extremely  heavy  woman, 
was  lifted  bodily  on  to  the  table  without  the  attendant  circle 
being  aware  of  any  movement  on  her  part.  This  manifestation 
appears  always  to  have  taken  place  in  the  dark ;  but  Dr. 
Wallace  nevertheless  regards  it  as  "  a  test  experiment  perhaps 
even  more  conclusive  than  the  flotation  of  Mr.  Home."  ^ 

Miss  Nichol  was  shortly  afterwards  married  to  Mr.  Samuel 
Guppy,  and  resided  for  some  time  on  the  Continent,  returning 
to  England  in  the  autumn  of  1870. 

That  the  manifestations  witnessed  in  the  presence  of  Mrs. 
Guppy,  Mrs.  Everitt,  Mr.  Childs,  and  the  other  non-pro- 
fessional mediums  of  the  period  are  to  be  ascribed  to  any- 
thing beyond  the  familiar  mechanical  forces  I  see  no  reason 
to  believe.  It  seems  clear  that  there  was  nothing  in  the 
material  conditions  of  the  experiments  to  preclude  such 
agencies.  The  tests  imposed  upon  Foster  and  the  Davenport 
Brothers  were  no  doubt  in  most  cases  ludicrously  inadequate 
to  prevent  trickery.  But  at  any  rate,  the  investigators  were 
not  hampered  by  any  social  restraints  in  seeking  to  impose 
them.  It  was  difficult,  however,  for  Mrs,  Guppy's  personal 
friends  or  Mrs.  Everitt's  guests  to  enjoy  a  similar  freedom ; 
and  from  the  published  records  it  seems  clear  that  the  pre- 
cautions occasionally  taken,  with  the  permission,  if  not  at 
the  actual  suggestion,  of  the  medium  herself,  were  quite  in- 
effectual in  themselves,  and  were  carried  out  by  persons 
whose  training  and  temper  would  have  rendered  even  better- 
devised  precautions  of  little  value.  It  will,  I  think,  be  con- 
ceded by  any  impartial  person  who  reads  the  contemporary 
records  that,  notwithstanding  that  the  private  medium  pre- 
sumably lacked  the  long  training  in  feats  of  dexterity  which 
we  are  entitled  to  assume  in  the  case  of  professionals,  the 
physical  obstacles  in  the  way  of  fraud  at  these  private  seances 
were  quite  inconsiderable. 

^  Spiritual  Magazine,  1867,  p.  324. 

2  Ibid.,  1867,  pp.  346-9,  494;  1868,  p.  28,  etc. 

^  Spiritual  Magazine,  1867,  p.  255.  See  his  Miracles  and  Modern  Spiritual- 
ism, 2nd  edition  (1881),  pp.  132-7,  for  some  further  account  of  early  seances 
with  Miss  Nichol.  See  also  Experiences  in  Spiritualism,  by  Catherine  Berry, 
and  Evenings  at  Home  in  Spiritual  Seance,  by  Georgiana  Houghton  ;  also  The 
Spiritualist,  1 870,  pp.  92,  98,  etc. 

68  SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

The  hypothesis  of  fraud,  however,  presents  certain  moral 
difficulties.  No  doubt  to  a  boy  of  thirteen  the  excitement 
of  sitting  up  late  to  bamboozle  his  elders  may  have  seemed 
a  sufficient  recompense  for  his  trouble.  But  the  best-known 
private  mediums  at  this  period  and  later  have  not  been 
children,  and  in  the  case  of  adults  an  adequate  motive  cannot 
always  be  discovered.  Certainly  their  rewards  were  not  paid 
in  cash  down,  though,  no  doubt,  as  in  the  case  of  Home, 
there  may  sometimes  have  been  the  prospect,  and  even  the 
partial  realisation,  of  considerable  pecuniary  rewards.  But 
Mrs.  Guppy,  even  during  the  few  months  in  which,  as  Miss 
Nichol,  she  practised  as  a  professional  Mesmerist,  can  scarcely 
have  found  her  main  incentive  in  the  hope  of  gain.  On  the 
assumption  of  fraud,  the  mere  cost  of  the  flowers  lavished 
on  her  sitters  must  have  swallowed  up  any  probable  profit 
from  her  increased  mesmeric  clientele.  And  even  such  a 
motive  would  have  ceased  with  her  marriage.  Mrs.  Everitt, 
again,  was  in  quite  comfortable  circumstances.  Not  only 
did  she  receive  no  direct  payment  for  her  sittings,  but,  as  I  am 
assured  by  some  who  have  enjoyed  her  hospitality,  she  kept 
open  house  for  her  friends  and  for  the  strangers  invited  to 
witness  her  mediumship. 

Nor  is  it  easy  to  conceive  that,  for  a  perfectly  sane  mind, 
such  motives  as  the  hope  of  enhanced  social  prestige,  or  the 
mere  pleasure  of  deceiving,  would  have  sufficient  strength 
and  permanence.  The  unutterable  monotony  of  dark  seances 
continued  through  half  a  lifetime,  with  the  same  unvarying 
round  of  trivial  "phenomena,"  forces  us  to  look  for  some 
other  explanation  than  deliberate  and  spontaneous  fraud. 
It  is  probable  that  our  knowledge  of  the  subject  does  not 
at  present  admit  of  a  complete  explanation  being  furnished. 
But  some  indications  of  the  lines  on  which  an  explanation 
should  be  sought  can,  I  think,  be  found. 

The  decade  now  under  consideration  is  peculiarly  favourable 
for  a  wide  survey  of  the  evidence.  There  is,  m  the  first  place, 
an  abundance  of  literature,  periodical  and  other,  filled  with 
recitals  of  personal  experience.  Moreover,  towards  the  end 
of  the  period  the  Dialectical  Society  appointed  a  committee 
to  inquire  into  the  subject  of  Spiritualism,  and  a  large 
number  of  representative  believers  appeared  to  give  evidence 
before  them.  A  prominent  feature  in  all  these  recitals  by 
believers  of  their  personal  experience  is  the  frequency  of 
hallucinations  and  other  subjective  manifestations,  and  the 
perplexing  admixture  of  the  subjective  happenings  with 
occurrences    of   an    unquestionably    objective    kind.    Thus 

PRIVATE  MEDIUMSHIP  69 

Dr.  Hugh  McLeod  records  that  his  wife  and  daughter  are 
strong  mediums ;  that  not  only  do  they  see  spirits  daily, 
but  that  such  phenomena  as  bell-ringing,  loud  knockings, 
and  other  inexplicable  noises  were  at  one  time  of  common 
occurrence  in  his  house.  Dr.  McLeod  for  a  time  saw  nothing  ; 
but,  after  sitting  for  long  periods  with  his  wife  and  daughter 
in  the  dark,  he  seems  ultimately  to  have  shared  their  visions 
of  many-coloured  lights  and  spirit  forms.^  A  more  detailed 
account  of  an  experience  somewhat  similar  was  communi- 
cated to  the  Dialectical  Society  by  Mr.  F.  Fusedale : — 

"8,  Southampton  Row,  Holborn,  London,  W.C, 

"■July  gth,  1869. 

"...  my  wife  has  possessed  the  power  of  seeing  spirits  for 
years,  and  does  continue  to  see  them,  although  what  I  am  about  to 
relate  to  you  took  place  [some  two  or  three  years  ago].  I  may  say 
that  the  phenomenon  was  witnessed  by  my  wife,  her  sister,  a  girl 
then  about  twelve  years  old,  and  three  of  my  own  children,  a  boy 
about  eleven  and  two  girls  about  five  and  eight  years  respectively. 
The  commencement  of  these  extraordinary  manifestations  began  by 
the  moving  of  the  furniture  of  the  bedrooms  at  the  top  of  the  house, 
where  we  all  slept.  The  tables,  the  washstand,  and  the  looking- 
glass  were  constantly  being  moved  about  the  room,  and  the  looking- 
glass  and  ornaments  were  put  on  the  bed,  and  then  put  back  in 
their  places  again  without  ever  doing  any  injury  to  them ;  and  then 
began  the  rapping  downstairs,  on  the  chairs  and  tables,  and  all 
round  the  rooms ;  and  then  they  commenced  to  take  any  little 
things  of  the  children's  or  my  wife's,  and  hide  them  for  a  time  and 
then  return  them  again ;  and  the  children  and  my  wife  would  see 
the  things  they  took  (in  particular  a  brooch  of  my  wife's)  appear  to 
pass  through  solid  substances,  such  as  the  wall  or  the  doors,  when 
they  were  taken  from  them ;  and  they  would  take  things  out  of  the 
children's  hands,  as  if  in  play,  and  hide  them,  and  then  after  a  little 
time  return  them  again. 

"  After  this  another  phase  began.  They  all  began  to  see  spirits ; 
and  let  me  state  they  saw  both  good  and  evil  ones — the  good  were 
bright  and  the  evil  dark.  And  I  believe  I  am  not  going  beyond  the 
truth  when  I  state  that  for  six  months  we  never  sat  down  to  meals 
without  having  audible  evidence  of  their  presence  by  their  rapping 
on  the  table  and  chairs  we  were  sitting  on,  and  they  would  answer 
any  question  asked  them  by  replying  '  yes '  or  '  no '  in  the  usual 
way;  and  they  would  also  show  the  children  pictures  on  the  wall, 
and  they  would  look  in  rapture  on  what  they  saw.  Sometimes  the 
scenes  appeared  to  be  scenes  in  distant  lands,  for  they  would  write 

^  Spiritual  Magazine,  1866,  pp.  170,  171.  I  have  written  "seems  to  have 
shared,"  because  Dr.  McLeod,  who  gives  no  details,  does  not  expressly  state, 
what  his  narrative  implies,  that  he  himself  saw  any  of  these  things. 

70  SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

the  nature  of  the  scenery,  and  sometimes  scenes  from  the  spirit 
land.  .  .  .  And  they  all  used  to  show  them  graphical  scenes  in 
a  crystal,  or,  more  correctly  speaking,  simply  a  toy  ball  silvered 
taken  from  a  Christmas  tree;  ...  I  have  seen  them  so  engaged 
(I  mean  the  children)  for  half  an  hour  at  a  time,  the  scenes  con- 
stantly changing;  and  let  me  state  that  I  was  a  little  sceptical  at 
first  myself  about  what  they  saw,  but  they  (the  spirit  friends)  told 
me  they  would  show  me  a  scene  in  the  crystal  to  convince  me 
of  the  truth  of  what  they  said,  which  they  did  by  showing  me  a 
scene  in  the  Arctic  regions — a  ship  embedded  in  the  ice,  the  men 
on  board,  and  dogs  coming  to  them  on  the  ice — which  scene  the 
children  also  saw.  .  ,  .  They  would  also  guide  their  hands  to  write 
while  sitting  at  the  table,  merely  wdth  their  fingers,  without  pencil, 
and  if  the  others  sitting  beside  them  would  read  what  they  wrote 
they  said  it  appeared  in  illuminated  letters  on  the  table;  and  my 
wife  would  also  see  different  objects  on  the  table.  ...  I  have  also 
seen  the  chair  move  by  request  with  my  little  boy  sitting  on  it,  his 
legs  not  being  able  to  touch  the  floor,  more  than  half  across  the 
room  while  we  were  seated  round  the  table,  with  a  bright  lamp 
burning  at  the  time,  without  any  effort  on  his  part  or  any  human 
agency  being  near."  ^ 

We  have  here,  it  will  be  seen,  a  Poltergeist  of  the  charac- 
teristic type.  The  special  point  of  interest  is  that  the 
hallucinatory  experiences  claimed  by  Mrs.  Fusedale  and  the 
children  were  on  one  occasion  shared  by  Mr.  Fusedale 
himself." 

There  are  many  other  visual  experiences  of  a  similar  kind. 
Thus  the  Master  of  Lindsay  and  others  relate  that  they  saw 
visions  in  a  crystal  in  the  presence  of  Home.^     The   Hon. 

Mrs. and  others  saw  ghostly  figures  and  spirit  eyes  at 

a  seance  given  by  Home  in  her  own  house.*  That  these 
figures,  etc.,  were  hallucinatory  may  be  inferred  from  the 
express  statement  of  another  Spiritualist,  Mrs.  Honywood, 
who  w^as  present  at  the  same  seance,  that  she  could  not  see 
what  the  others  described  at  the  time.^  So,  at  a  seance  with 
Miss  Nichol  one  Whit  Sunday,  Miss  Houghton  tells  us  that 
she  saw  just  before  her  eyes  eight  tongues  of  flame.  From 
the  description  these  were  no  doubt  hallucinatory.^  It  is 
hardly  necessary  to  give  in  detail  instances  of  crystal  vision 

^  Dialectical  Society's  Report,  pp.  255-7. 

^  Of  course,  the  evidence  for  the  hallucinations  experienced  by  the  children, 
apart  from  the  question  of  their  good  faith,  is  second-hand,  and  Mr.  Fusedale's 
solitary  experience  of  the  same  kind  is  not  described  until  two  or  three  years 
after  the  event.  ^  Dialectical  Report,  pp.  206,  259. 

^  Jbid.,  p.  128.  ^  Ibid,,  p.  367. 

^  Evenings  at  Home  in  Spiritual  Siance,  vol.  i.  p.  135. 

PRIVATE  MEDIUMSHIP  71 

at  this  time ;  the  experience  was,  of  course,  a  very  common 
one. 

Again,  as  indicated  in  chapter  ii.,  many  seers  and  seeresses 
professed  habitually  to  see  coloured  auras  and  spiritual  em- 
blems round  their  friends,  Mrs.  de  Morgan  and  a  young 
companion  on  one  occasion  saw  a  vision  of  three  bright  heads 
over  a  clergyman  in  the  pulpit ;  ^  Miss  Houghton  occasionally 
saw  a  coloured  aura — violet  or  green — round  the  preacher, 
indicating  the  spiritual  sphere  to  which  he  belonged.^  Mr. 
Cromwell  Varley,  the  well-known  electrician,  describes  several 
spirits  which  appeared  to  him  at  times  of  death  or  serious 
illness.  Mrs.  Varley  also  occasionally  saw  spirits.^  Other 
persons  gave  accounts  of  occasional  apparitions  seen  by 
them.*  Miss  Anna  Blackwell  and  her  friends  appear  to 
have  seen  many  ghosts.  Here  is  an  extract  from  her  own 
experiences : — 

"  Of  the  many  spirits  whom  I  have  seen,  only  two  have  been 
those  of  persons  known  to  me  in  my  present  life;  one  of  these 
I  have  seen  once,  the  other  I  have  seen  eight  times.  One  evening, 
on  nearing  the  door  of  my  dressing-room,  I  suddenly  saw,  just 
before  me,  a  little  to  my  left,  what  looked  like  a  dark-haired  man, 
in  ordinary  dress,  in  the  act  of  passing  through  the  wall  in  front  of 
me.  His  head  was  slightly  thrown  back,  his  eyes  were  raised,  and 
his  face  wore  a  sad,  dreamy,  and  fixed  expression.  .  .  .  On  another 
occasion  I  saw  in  the  same  room,  standing  in  the  air  like  the 
'  saints  and  angels '  in  old  pictures,  a  group  of  eighteen  or  twenty 
handsome  young  men,  in  white  tunics,  with  red  belts  and  buskins, 
and  curious  red  hats,  with  'cream-bowl'  crowns  and  very  broad  brims, 
embroidered  with  gold,  and  set  on  so  slantingly  that  the  thin  line  of 
gold  on  the  edge  of  the  brims  produced,  round  each  head,  something 
like  the  effect  of  a  nimbus.  The  right  hand  of  each  grasped  a  stout 
crook,  taller  than  himself,  and  resting  on  the  ground.  They  looked 
as  though  they  had  halted  on  the  march ;  and  the  eyes  of  all  were 
fixed  upon  me  with  grave,  earnest,  and  rather  friendly  gaze.  After 
looking  at  them  for  a  few  seconds,  I  put  my  hands  to  my  eyes ;  and 
then,  looking  up  again  to  see  if  they  were  still  there,  I  saw  the  same 
group,  but  much  higher  up,  at  a  height,  apparently,  far  above  the 
ceiling  and  proportionally  fainter.  This  second  glimpse  was  only 
instantaneous;  and  though  I  looked  up  several  times  during  the 
evening  in  the  hope  of  seeing  them  again,  I  saw  nothing  more  of 
my  white-vestured  visitants."  ^ 

^  From  Matter  to  Spirit,  p.  71. 
^  Evenings  at  Home,  etc.,  vol.  i.  pp.  26,  27. 
*  Repo7-t  of  Dialectical  Society,  pp.  1 57  et  seq. 

^  See  also  evidence  of  Mr.  Simkiss,  Report,  p.  131  ;  Mrs.  Rowcroft,  p.   149  ; 
Mr.  Rowcroft,  p.  211.  ^  Dialectical  Report,  p.  332. 

72  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

Miss  Blackwell  describes  also  other  spiritual  visitants  to 
herself,  and  gives  many  accounts  of  ghostly  figures  seen  by 
her  friends.  The  late  Mrs.  Howitt  Watts  and  her  circle  also 
saw  many  apparitions,  mostly  of  persons  known  to  them. 
In  the  columns  of  the  Spiritual  Magazine  at  this  time  we 
find  numerous  records  of  death-wraiths,  ghosts  of  the  dead, 
and  other  apparitions.  Some  of  the  best-attested  specimens 
of  the  former  class  have  been  quoted  in  Phantasms  of  the 
Living} 

The  hearing  of  voices — that  is,  of  voices  so  far  externalised 
as  to  be  comparable  to  the  visions  just  described — was  a 
much  rarer  experience.  The  most  marked  case  in  the  litera- 
ture of  the  time  is  that  of  Mr.  Percival,  a  gentleman  who 
had  spent  some  time  in  an  asylum.^ 

Tactile  hallucinations  are  as  a  rule  too  trivial  or  too 
ambiguous  to  be  worth  recording.  But  one  curious  experi- 
ence may  perhaps  be  entered  under  this  heading.  The 
witness  is  again  Miss  Houghton,  who  writes  : — 

"  At  the  time  I  speak  of  it  frequently  occurred  to  me  while  I  was 
out  that  for  a  considerable  distance  my  feet  would  never  touch  the 
ground.  I  was  apparently  walking  like  anyone  else,  but  there  was 
a  space  between  me  and  the  earth.  Sometimes  it  would  be  done 
without  my  thinking  about  it,  and  I  would  suddenly  discover  what 
was  happening ;  at  other  times  I  would  ask  for  it,  and  was  never 
refused,  but  when  first  it  came  it  was  a  source  of  utter  astonish- 
ment."^ 

But  the  commonest  subjective  experiences  were  the  various 
forms  of  motor  automatism,  writing,  drawing,  speaking, 
hearing  of  the  "inner"  voice,  impressions  and  impulses  of 
various  kinds.*     Of  automatic  writing,  drawing,  and  speaking 

^  See,  for  instance,  Spiritual  Magazine,  i860,  pp.  280-5;  1861,  pp.  235,  544; 
1862,  p.  457. 

2  Dialectical  Report,  p.  222;  Spiritual  Magazhie,  i85o,  pp.  379,  384. 

^  Evenings  at  Home,  vol.  i.  p.  29.  As  these  experiences  are  alleged  to  have 
occurred  in  i86r  or  1862,  and  Miss  Houghton's  record  of  them  was  not  pub- 
lished until  1 88 1,  it  is  perhaps  more  probable  that  we  have  to  deal,  not  with 
a  sensory  hallucination  at  all,  but  with  a  hallucination  of  memory.  The  same 
remark  is,  of  course,  applicable  to  a  large  proportion  of  the  descriptions  of 
subjective  experiences  quoted  in  the  present  chapter.  When  the  account  is  not 
based  upon  any  contemporary  notes,  and  the  witness  is  without  training  and 
sometimes  incapable  of  accurate  observation,  it  is  impossible  to  say  to  what 
extent  the  experience  of  the  moment  may  have  become  transfigured  in  the 
retrospect. 

■*  I  have  thought  it  best  to  class  all  these  experiences  together,  because,  though 
it  is  likely  that  the  actual  experiences  may  have  been  of  very  different  kinds,  the 
descriptions  given  by  the  subjects  are  so  vague,  and  so  profoundly  coloured  by 
their  prepossessions,  that  it  seems  impracticable  to  classify  them  more  accurately. 

PRIVATE  MEDIUMSHIP  73 

the  specimens  cited  in  chapter  ii.  of  the  present  book  and 
in  chapter  v,  of  Book  II.  will  no  doubt  suffice,^  All  these 
forms  of  manifestation  continued  during  the  present  period, 
but  the  results  were  obviously  received  by  Spiritualists  in 
a  more  critical  temper.  As  already  noted,  a  large  part  of 
the  pages  of  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  was  devoted  to  inspired 
essays  and  trance  addresses ;  but  such  productions  rarely 
find  a  place  in  the  later  periodicals,  the  Spiritual  Magazine, 
Human  Nature,  or  the  Spiritualist.  Some  inspirational 
discourses  of  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge,  however,  were  published 
in  book  form  at  this  time.^  And  there  were  a  few  other 
"inspired"  publications:  Songs  of  the  Spirit,  by  H. ;  An 
Angel's  Message,  and  the  Divinum  Humanum,  by  a  Lady.^ 
We  read  also  of  essays  in  philosophy  written  through  the 
hand  of  a  boy  of  eleven  ;*  and  of  a  new  version  of  the 
Bible,  prepared  by  the  Nottingham  Circle,  of  which  J.  G.  H. 
Brown  was,  presumably,  the  mouthpiece.^  A  witness  before 
the  Dialectical  Society  describes  his  experiences  in  speaking 
with  "  tongues."  ^ 

Of  spirit-drawing,  again,  mostly  of  the  symbolical  kind, 
we  have  elaborate  accounts,  especially  from  Mrs.  Berry  and 
Miss  Houghton,  in  the  works  already  referred  to.  Of  the 
former  lady's  productions  we  learn  that,  though  they  con- 
veyed "  no  definite  ideas  "  to  the  spectator's  mind,  and  repre- 
sented nothing  in  the  animal,  vegetable,  or  mineral  kingdoms, 

^  Some  further  illustrations  are  given  below,  in  chap.  viii.  of  the  present 
book. 

^  Extemporaneous  Addresses,  London,  1866.  See  Spiritual  Magazine,  1865, 
pp.  398-400,  for  an  interesting  account  by  Mrs.  Hardinge  of  her  "  impressional " 
speaking. 

^  The  lady  in  question,  we  learn  from  the  Spiritual  Magazine  {1870,  p.  384), 
was  a  Miss  Fawcet,  who  died  in  1870.  Between  1855  and  her  death  she  pub- 
lished several  volumes  of  "spiritual  revealings,"  including,  besides  those  men- 
tioned in  the  text,  Primaval  Man  and  Ecce  Homo.  The  two  that  I  have  read 
are  more  nearly  akin  to  the  writings  of  Harris  than  of  A.  J.  Davis,  though  the 
latter  philosopher  has  incorporated  some  quotations  from  one  of  Miss  Fawcet's 
books  in  one  of  his  own  inspired  writings  (see  ante,  Vol.  I.  p.  168,  foot- 
note). Miss  Fawcet's  writings  present  a  mystical  Christianity  obviously  inspired 
by  Swedenborg.  Many  of  the  doctrines  and  much  of  the  phraseology  are 
characteristic  of  Swedenborg.  We  read  of  a  spiritual  within  the  natural  sense 
of  the  Bible  ;  that  the  biblical  narratives  were  not  literal  histories,  but  allegories  ; 
also  of  the  dependence  of  all  other  worlds  of  Creation  upon  our  earth. 
Characteristic  features  of  later  mysticism  appear  in  the  doctrines  of  spiritual 
counterparts  and  mystical  generation,  and  in  the  lofty  position  assigned  to 
woman  in  the  New  Dispensation — "Woman  is  the  handmaiden  of  Deity." 
There  is  some  curious  information,  almost  in  the  Swedenborgian  manner,  about 
the  inhabitants  of  other  worlds,  and  the  rather  odd  statement  that  the  form 
of  angels  and  of  perfected  human  spirits  is  invariably  spherical. 

*  See  Spiritual  Magazine,  1869,  p.  453. 

®  Ibid.,  1863,  p.  219;  see  account  of  Brown,  ante,  pp.  41-2. 

®  Dialectical  Report,  p.  183. 

74  SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

yet  their  technical  manipulation  was  inimitable.^  Two  of 
Miss  Houghton's  pictures  earned  the  distinction  of  being 
rejected  by  the  Royal  Academy ;  and  the  poor  lady  spent 
the  bulk  of  her  small  fortune  in  opening  a  public  exhibition 
of  her  spirit-drawings  at  a  small  gallery  in  Bond  Street.^ 

The  drawing,  writing,  and  speaking  were,  no  doubt,  often 
in  the  fullest  sense  automatic — the  action  being  both  un- 
conscious and  involuntary.  And  though  in  other  cases  the 
process  of  writing,  speaking,  etc.,  was  apparently  accom- 
panied by  some  degree  of  consciousness,  there  is  no  reason 
to  question  the  substantial  accuracy  of  the  "  medium's  "  state- 
ment, that  he  did  not  consciously  will  the  process,  and  could 
not  foresee  its  direction  or  its  final  result.  But  the  case  was 
different  when  the  motor  impulse  chose  less  deeply  worn 
channels.  Many  persons  of  unquestioned  integrity  have 
claimed  to  be  the  recipients  of  an  "  impression  " — sometimes 
alternatively  described  as  "  an  inner  voice,"  or  "  an  impulse  " 
— directing  a  certain  course  of  action.  Very  frequently  the 
resultant  action  was  concerned  with  healing  by  mesmeric 
passes.  Thus  Mr.  Lowenthal  before  the  Dialectical  Com- 
mittee : — 

"On  one  occasion  I  entered  a  room  in  a  hydropathic  establish- 
ment, and  a  gentleman  followed  me,  and  I  was  compelled  to  walk 
up  to  him  and  speak  to  him.  I  immediately  felt  all  sorts  of  ail- 
ments. I  at  once  told  him  to  sit  down,  and  commenced  walking 
round  him,  making  all  sorts  of  passes." 

The  subject  of  the  passes,  we  are  told,  felt  greatly  re- 
lieved.3 

Mrs.  Berry  records  similar  instances  in  her  own  experience.* 
Frequently  the  impression  prescribed  a  journey,  even  of  con- 
siderable length,  a  visit  to  a  friend,  the  purchase  of  a  book, 
or  other  article.  An  instructive  account  of  these  motor  im- 
pulses is  given  by  Miss  Houghton  in  the  book  already 
referred  to.  On  one  occasion,  being  anxious  to  find  her  way 
to  a  house  which  she  had  not  visited  for  several  years,  she 
entrusted  herself  to  spirit  guidance,  and  arrived  safely.^  Again, 
in  presence  of  Mr.  Spear,  she  was  impressed  to  personate 
the  dying  and  the  resurrection  of  St,  Stephen.^  One  evening 
her  guardian  spirits  (a  band   of  seventy  archangels)  guided 

^  Experiences  in  Spiritualism,  pp.  51,  167,  etc. 

^  Evenings  at  Home,  vol.  i.  p.  90.  In  the  Spiritual  Magazine,  1867,  p.  289, 
we  have  an  account  of  automatic  drawings  of  butterflies,  etc.,  by  an  artist  called 
Rippon.  "  Dialectical  Report,  p.  183. 

^  Experiences,  p.  177  ;  see  also  p.  22.  ^  Vol.  i.  p.  28.  "  Page  65. 

PRIVATE  MEDIUMSHIP  75 

her  hand  to  stir  some  arrowroot  which  had  curdled.^  Again, 
when  house-hunting  in  Paddington,  she  gave  herself  up  to 
the  guidance  of  the  spirits.  "  I  went  about,  from  street  to 
street,  asking  always  whether  I  should  turn  to  the  right  hand 
or  the  left."^  Eventually  a  house  was  found  by  this  means ; 
and  the  "  spirits  "  then  chose  the  wall-papers  and  carpets,  and 
superintended  the  hanging  of  the  pictures.^ 

Miss  Houghton's  case  was  by  no  means  exceptional.  I 
have  myself  known  Spiritualists  of  intelligence  and  capacity 
at  their  first  conversion  yield  themselves  wholly  for  a  time 
to  such  vague  "  impressions,"  until  the  folly  of  the  proceed- 
ing was  brought  home  to  them.  Most  educated  Spiritualists, 
however,  soon  recognise  that,  in  impressions  of  this  kind,  the 
involuntary  nature  of  the  impulse  (on  which,  in  their  view, 
the  proof  of  its  external  inspiration  depended)  could  not  be 
satisfactorily  tested  ;  and  saw  no  doubt  also  the  danger  of 
abandoning  themselves  to  the  guidance  of  such  random  im- 
pulses. Mr.  John  Jones  (J.  Enmore  Jones),  in  his  evidence 
before  the  Dialectical  Committee,  makes  no  mention  of  his 
earlier  impressional  experiences ;  nor  do  such  impressions 
bulk  at  all  largely  in  the  literature  of  the  time.  But  when, 
as  with  children  generally  and  with  some  adults,  the  power 
of  self-criticism  is  almost  wanting,  and  especially  when  there 
is  some  powerful  but  imperfectly  realised  motive,  such  as 
the  desire  to  attract  attention,  to  be  subserved,  it  is  easy  to 
see  how  half-conscious  impulses  of  this  kind  might  pass 
almost  insensibly  into  systematic  self-deception. 

In  brief,  if  we  take  a  wide  survey  of  the  evidence,  we  find 
that  at  this  period  there  was  a  marked  outbreak  of  what 
the  Spiritualists  called  mediumistic  powers  under  various 
forms,  in  persons  of  unquestioned  good  faith ;  and  that  these 
powers  were  readily  communicated  from  one  person  to  another. 
Nothing  is  more  noteworthy  in  the  records  of  the  time  than 
the  extraordinary  contagion  of  so-called  "  mediumship."  We 
have  seen  in  chapter  ii.  of  the  present  book  how  an  epidemic 
of  automatic  writing  and  drawing  spread  amongst  the  friends 
of  Mrs.  de  Morgan  and  Mrs.  Newton  Crosland,  and  how  a 
like  contagion  seized  Mr.  and  Mrs.  William  Howitt  after 
inspecting  the  spirit-drawings  in  the  Wilkinson  family.  Mr. 
Morell  Theobald,  in  turn,  was  "  initiated  into  writing  medium- 
ship  "  by  William  Howitt*     So  Miss  Houghton,  Mrs.  Berry, 

^  Page  71.  ^  Page  109. 

^  Page  III.  See  also  Mr.  John  Jones's  account  of  similar  spirit  impressions, 
British  Spiritual  Telegraph,  vol.  i.  pp.  109,  164,  and  J.  Murray  Spear's 
experiences  already  referred  to  (vol.  i.  p.  216). 

^  Spirit  Workers  in  the  Home  Circle,  p.  18. 

76  SPIKITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

and  other  automatic  writers  and  speakers  have  left  on  record 
that  their  mediumship  originated  in  a  suggestion  made  at  a 
chance  visit  to  Mrs.  Marshall  or  some  other  medium ;  and 
that  others  were  continually  inspired  by  their  example  to 
like  feats  of  automatism. 

Again,  it  is  pertinent  to  recall  the  fact — whatever  weight 
we  may  attach  to  it — that  physical  mediums  have  frequently 
claimed,  or  their  friends  have  claimed  on  their  behalf,  various 
hallucinatory  experiences.  Thus  Mrs.  Guppy  is  said  by  her 
father  to  have  seen  strange  figures  as  a  child  ;^  Home  claims 
to  have  seen  spiritual  forms  and  heard  voices  in  his  youth  ;^ 
and  Charles  Williams  has  described  similar  experiences,  one 
in  connection  with  his  dead  mother.^  Miss  Florence  Cook 
(Mrs.  Corner)  claims  to  have  seen  spirits  and  heard  voices 
from  childhood,*  and  Mrs.  Showers  tells  us  that  her  daughter 
Mary  as  a  child  would  constantly  converse  with  invisible 
interlocutors.^ 

Attention  has  already  been  drawn  to  the  close  analogy 
with  the  physical  phenomena  of  the  seance-room  presented 
by  those  spontaneous  outbreaks  of  bell-ringing  and  stone- 
throwing  which  from  time  to  time  perplex  a  country  village.^ 
And  I  have  elsewhere  shown  that  in  many  cases  the  author 
or  "medium"  of  these  disturbances  was  not  only  afflicted 
with  some  physical  or  mental  abnormality,  but  that  both  he 
and  the  witnesses  of  his  performances  appear  to  have  been 
liable  to  visual  and  auditory  hallucination.'^ 

It  seems  not  unreasonable  to  conclude,  therefore,  that 
mediums,  whether  professional  or  private,  physical  or  merely 
clairvoyant,  clairaudient,  or  inspirational,  have,  as  Spiritualists 
themselves  contend,  certain  common  characteristics ;  that 
private  physical  mediums  generally,  and  many  professionals, 
at  least  at  the  outset  of  their  career,  are  to  be  ranked  in  one 
class  with  amiable  enthusiasts  like  Miss  Houghton,  Mrs. 
Berry,  Mr.  Cromwell  Varley,  and  Miss  Anna  Blackwell ;  and 
that  all  alike,  again  in  accordance  with  the  Spiritualist 
contention,  may  be  to  some  extent  unconscious  of  their 
actions,  and  therefore  not  fully  responsible  for  them.  In 
modern  terminology,  the  medium,  whether  "physical"  or 
"  impressional,"  is  probably  a  person  of  unstable  nervous 
equilibrium,  in  whom  the  control  normally  exercised  by  the 

■*  spiritual  Magazine,  1867,  p.  213.         "  Incidents  in  My  Life,  first  series. 
^  Spiritual  Magazine,  1S67,  p.  524.         ■*  Ibid.,  1872,  p.  516, 
®  Spiritualist,  1873,  p.  488. 
*  See  Book  I.  chap,  ii.,  on  "Poltergeists." 

'  See  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  xii.  pp.  45-1 1 5,  and  Studies  in  Psychical  Research, 
chapter  on  "Poltergeists." 

PRIVATE  MEDIUMSHIP  77 

higher  brain-centres  is  liable,  on  slight  provocation,  to  be 
abrogated,  leaving  the  organism,  as  in  dream  or  somnambu- 
lism, to  the  guidance  of  impulses  which  in  a  state  of  unim- 
paired consciousness  would  have  been  suppressed  before  they 
could  have  resulted  in  action. 

Of  course,  the  deviation  from  the  normal  here  suggested 
may  be,  especially  at  the  owtset,  quite  inconsiderable ;  no 
greater,  indeed,  than  that  of  the  good  hypnotic  subject,  and 
probably  of  like  kind.  Now  most  persons,  probably,  at 
certain  times  and  under  certain  conditions,  are  amenable  to 
hypnotic  suggestion.  The  medium  then,  if  this  view  be 
accepted,  is  not  necessarily  on  the  road  to  insanity,  nor  even, 
in  any  considerable  degree,  abnormal.  Nor  would  the  possi- 
bility of  such  a  slight  deviation  from  the  normal  constitute 
a  serious  argument  either  for  or  against  the  possession  by  the 
medium  of  supernormal  powers,  although  it  renders  intelli- 
gible the  absence  of  adequate  motive  for  the  trickery  ap- 
parently practised.  It  is  not  difficult  to  conjecture  how  the 
beginnings  of  physical  mediumship  might  originate  in  the 
partly  conscious  exaggeration  of  an  automatic  impulse.  The 
wholly  involuntary  movements  of  the  muscles  which,  as 
Faraday  showed,  were  responsible  at  the  outset  for  the 
rotation  of  the  table,  might  develop  into  deliberate  pushing, 
without  perhaps  any  clear  consciousness  of  deception  on  the 
part  of  the  pusher.  At  some  point,  however,  in  the  career 
of  a  physical  medium  (unless  we  are  to  suppose  a  barrier 
between  the  seance  consciousness  and  that  of  ordinary  life, 
of  which  we  rarely  have  sufficient  evidence)  the  conviction 
of  cheating  must  surely  be  borne  in  upon  the  offender.  And 
it  is  difficult  to  believe,  except  on  the  extreme  assumption 
of  a  trance  consciousness  wholly  cut  off  from  the  normal  life, 
that  such  a  point  had  not  been  reached  before,  e.g.,  flowers 
and  vegetables  were  purchased  and  stowed  away  for  after- 
production  at  the  dark  circle.  Difficult,  but  perhaps  not 
impossible,  for  the  analogy  of  the  "post-hypnotic  promise" 
suggests  even  here  a  way  out.  We  have  experimental 
evidence  that  an  action  undertaken  by  the  trance  conscious- 
ness may  be  fulfilled  at  the  appointed  time  during  waking 
hours,  without  the  knowledge  of  the  waking  agent.  ^ 

^  The  question  of  the  moral  responsibility  of  the  private  medium  for  his 
physical  performances  will  be  further  considered  in  Book  IV.,  chaps,  v.,  vi., 
and  vii. 

CHAPTER    V 

PHYSICAL   MEDIUMSHIP   IN   GENERAL, 
1870  AND   ONWARDS 

HITHERTO,  it  will  be  seen,  the  class  of  professional 
physical  mediums  was  almost  unrepresented  in  this 
country.  After  the  departure  of  the  American  in- 
vaders there  remained  for  some  years  only  Mrs.  Marshall. 
In  the  meantime,  however,  as  shown  in  the  last  chapter,  a 
band  of  private  mediums  had  sprung  up,  and  others,  notably 
Miss  Cook  and  Miss  Showers,  were  shortly  to  come  on  the 
stage.  But  admission  to  their  circles  was,  by  the  necessities 
of  the  case,  restricted  to  the  few ;  and  those  inquirers  who 
were  not  fortunate  enough  to  acquire  the  entry  to  one  or 
other  of  these  private  circles  found  some  difficulty  in  obtain- 
ing the  evidence  which  they  desired.  A  new  medium,  Mr.  F. 
Heme,  had,  indeed,  so  early  as  January,  1869,  begun  to  give 
public  sittings,  but  the  manifestations  do  not  appear  to  have 
comprised  any  physical  phenomena.  Mr.  Heme  saw  spirits 
in  the  air,  and  described  the  colour  of  the  sitter's  aura,  who 
had  to  rest  content  with  such  second-hand  information.^ 

In  the  following  year  we  find  Heme  giving  a  sitting  at 
Dr.  Dixon's  house,  at  which  the  phenomenon  of  "  elongation  " 
appeared.^  J.  J.  Morse,  who  had  for  some  time  past  been 
delivering  addresses  in  the  trance,  is  also  recorded  to  have 
exhibited  about  the  same  time  similar  phenomena.^  But 
whilst  Mr.  Morse  thereafter  remained  exclusively  a  trance 
and  inspirational  medium,  Heme  soon  developed  other 
physical  manifestations.  Early  in  1871  he  joined  in  partner- 
ship with  Charles  Williams,  and  together  they  began  to  give 
public  seances  at  61,  Lamb's  Conduit  Street,  an  address 
familiar   to  London    Spiritualists  for  many  years  to   come. 

1  Sphitiialist,  Nov.  19,  1869;  Spirit  People,  p.  37,  by  W,  H,  Harrison. 
London,  1875,  ^  Spiritual  Magazine,  1870,  p.  399. 

"  Medium,  Aug.  19th,  1870. 

78 

PHYSICAL  MEDIUMSHIP  79 

The  manifestations  at  these  early  seances  consisted,  in  the 
light,  merely  of  raps  and  tilts  of  the  table.  When  the  lights 
were  extinguished,  however,  this  meagre  programme  was 
enlarged — there  were  spirit  voices,  the  touches  of  spirit  hands, 
spirit  lights,  flowers  spirit-borne,  floating  musical  instruments, 
and  much  displacement  of  the  lighter  furniture.^ 

Soon  other  native  mediums  appeared  to  share  the  spoil : 
Eglinton,  Monck,  Rita,  Miss  Wood  and  Miss  Fairlamb,  Miss 
Stokes ;  whilst  Miss  Kate  Fox  (afterwards  Mrs.  Jencken), 
Mrs.  Holmes,  Miss  (or  Mrs.)  Annie  Eva  Fay,  Messrs.  Bastian 
and  Taylor,  Dr.  Slade,  and  others  came  over  from  the 
United  States.  In  the  year  1870  a  new  private  medium, 
the  Rev.  W.  Stainton  Moses,  known  for  many  years  under 
the  pseudonym  of  "  M.A.  Oxon,"  made  his  d6but.  The 
manifestations  which  occurred  through  this  gentleman's 
mediumship,  including  almost  every  chronicled  variety  of 
physical  phenomena,  together  with  trance  writing  and  speak- 
ing, clairvoyance,  and  messages  from  the  dead,  will  be 
considered  in  a  later  chapter.^  Mrs.  Guppy,  Mrs.  Everitt, 
David  Duguid,  and  other  private  mediums  also  continued 
their  circles  ;  and  the  first-named  lady  especially  distinguished 
herself  by  her  patronage  of  her  professional  brethren,  Messrs. 
Heme  and  Williams,  who  held  their  first  public  sitting  under 
her  auspices.  On  the  other  hand,  Mrs.  Guppy  on  more  than  one 
occasion  assisted  in  exposing  or  embarrassing  rival  pretenders 
to  mediumship.^  She  subsequently  married  Mr.  Volckman, 
the  gentleman  who  seized  the  "  spirit "  at  Miss  Cook's  seance.* 

It  would  be  unprofitable  to  attempt  an  exhaustive  chronicle 
of  the  mediumistic  performances  of  the  last  thirty  years  in 
this  country.  Two  special  forms  of  manifestation — material- 
isation and  spirit  photography — will  be  dealt  with  in  some 
detail  in  the  two  following  chapters,  whilst  the  subject  of 
slate-writing  is  reserved  for  separate  treatment  hereafter.^ 
Apart  from  these  elaborate  performances  there  is  little  worthy 
of  note.  Heme  and  Williams'  early  seances,  already  referred 
to,  are  a  fair  type  of  the  evidence  for  spirit  operation  put 
before  the  ordinary  inquirer.  The  sittings  were  nearly  always 
held  in  the  dark,  or  under  illumination  so  faint  as  to  preclude 
any  possibility  of  accurate  observation ;  active  investigation 
on  the  part  of  any  too  curious  sitters  was  discouraged  by  the 

^  spiritualist,  15th  April,  1871 ;  Spiritual  Magazine,  1871,  pp.  183,  233. 

^  Book  IV.  chap.  v. 

^  See,  for  instance,  a  note  in  the  Spiritualist,  31st  July,  1874,  in  which 
Mrs.  Guppy  is  accused  of  having  suborned  a  youth  to  disturb  seances  given 
by  Mr.  Holmes  and  Mrs,  Bassett. 

*  See  below,  p.  103.  s  -^qq^  IV.  chap.  ii. 

80  SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

linking  of  hands ;  suspicious  sounds  were  drowned  by  the 
noise  of  the  musical-box  or  by  the  request  on  the  part  of 
the  "  spirits "  that  all  present  should  join  in  singing,  so  as  to 
promote  the  harmony  of  the  circle.  Finally,  the  phenomena 
presented  under  such  conditions  were  as  a  rule  palpably 
within  the  capacity  of  any  fairly  active  and  intelligent  mortal 
who  had  acquired  with  practice  some  manual  dexterity.  Out- 
side the  special  manifestations  to  be  considered  later,  there 
were  hardly  any  secrets  of  the  trade  to  be  learnt.  The  one 
item  which  could  be  considered  to  come  under  this  head 
was  the  method  practised  by  the  medium  for  releasing  his 
hands — or  more  generally  one  hand  only — from  the  grasp 
of  the  sitter  on  either  side.  This  trick  was  exposed  so  far 
back  as  1875  by  Moncure  Conway,^  and  has  been  well 
described  recently  by  Dr.  Hodgson  in  connection  with  the 
performances  of  Eusapia  Paladino.^ 

To  us  looking  back  on  these  earlier  records  the  marvel  is 
that  any  body  of  men  could  have  been  deceived  for  so  long 
by  trickery  so  cheap  and  clumsy.  Partly,  no  doubt,  the 
deception  was  helped  by  the  fact  that  there  were  here  and 
there  manifestations  whose  explanation  did  not  lie  on  the 
surface — such  as  the  performances  of  Foster,  Slade,  and 
Home.  But  the  real  secret  of  the  ready  credence  accorded 
for  more  than  two  decades  to  these  dark  stances  lies  in  the 
overwhelming  predisposition  to  belief  on  the  part  of  the 
assistants.  By  what  arts  of  the  medium,  aided  by  what 
causes  outside  the  medium's  control,  this  predisposition  to 
belief  was  produced,  is  a  question  which  will  receive  con- 
sideration in  a  later  chapter.  Of  its  prepotent  influence  at 
this  period  no  one  who  studies  the  literature  of  Spiritualism 
can  doubt.  The  ordinary  Spiritualist,  though  otherwise  not 
infrequently  shrewd  in  his  estimate  of  the  evidence,  some- 
times even  trained  in  scientific  observation,  could  hardly  be 
induced  to  entertain  the  idea  of  wilful  fraud.  At  one  of  the 
earliest  seances  at  the  rooms  of  Messrs.  Heme  and  Williams 
Mr.  W.  H.  Harrison,  the  editor  of  the  Spiritualist,  records 
that:  "The  name  of  a  spirit  was  then  written  rapidly  in 
large  phosphorescent  letters  in  the  air  near  Mr.  Williams. 
In  the  same  rapid  manner  the  spirits  next  began  writing 

'God  bless '  when  there  was  a  snap,  like  an  electrical 

discharge,  and  a  flash  of  light  which  lit  up  the  whole  room." 
At  the  end  of  the  sitting  a  slight  smell  of  phosphorus  was 
perceptible.  To  persons  of  a  less  unsuspicious  nature  than 
Mr.  Harrison,  the  incident  suggests  the   untimely  bursting 

1  Spiritual  Magazine,  1875,  p.  285.         ^  ggg  below,  Book  IV.  chap.  i. 

PHYSICAL  MEDIUMSHIP  81 

into  flame  of  the  head  of  a  common  lucifer  match.  But  this 
interpretation  does  not  appear  to  have  presented  itself  to  any 
of  those  present.^  Other  illustrations  of  the  same  state  of 
mind  will  be  given  in  the  next  chapter. 

In  the  present  chapter  it  is  proposed  briefly  to  describe 
some  of  the  more  striking  or  notorious  of  the  manifestations 
which,  during  these  years,  were  acclaimed  as  instances  of 
spirit  power.  Of  all  these  episodes,  perhaps  the  most  famous 
is  the  transit  of  Mrs.  Guppy.  The  following  account  appeared 
in  the  form  of  a  letter  in  the  Echo : — ^ 

"  I  attended  a  '  circle '  at  the  house  of  the  media,  Messrs.  Heme 
and  Williams,  last  Saturday  evening.  I  found  the  company  com- 
posed of  three  ladies  and  seven  or  eight  gentlemen,  including  the 
media,  a  few  of  whom,  like  myself,  had  never  attended  a  professional 
seance  before.  The  room  we  entered  was  on  the  first  floor,  and  was 
separated  from  a  smaller  room  at  the  back  by  folding  doors,  which 
were  now,  however,  thrown  open,  so  that  we  had  every  opportunity 
of  examining  the  inner  room.  The  only  articles  of  furniture  were 
a  table  with  a  musical-box  upon  it,  and  a  few  chairs.  There  was  a 
small  cupboard,  with  two  or  three  shelves  in  it,  which  we  saw  open, 
and  which  contained  nothing  beyond  one  or  two  miscellaneous 
articles.  Upon  our  sitting  round  the  table,  the  folding  doors  were 
closed  and  locked,  as  was  also  the  other  door  in  the  room,  and  I 
may  say,  as  we  were  sitting  before  eight  o'clock,  and  the  only 
window  in  the  room  was  darkened,  neither  of  these  doors  could 
be  opened  without  at  once  being  perceptible  in  the  room  by  the 
admission  of  a  ray  of  light.  The  seance  began  by  one  of  the 
media  saying  the  Lord's  Prayer,  the  company  repeating  it.  The 
musical-box,  which  only  played  sacred  music,  was  then  wound  up. 
Almost  immediately  we  saw  lights,  somewhat  similar  to  those  emitted 
by  glowworms,  floating  all  about  the  room.  The  musical-box  rose 
into  the  air,  and  continued  playing  while  hovering  over  our  heads 
and  going  first  to  one  corner  of  the  ceiling  and  then  to  another. 
We  then  heard  voices,  said  to  be  those  of  the  spirits  of  John  King 
and  Katie.  John  King's  voice  was  a  very  deep  one,  while  Katie's 
was  more  like  a  whisper,  but  perfectly  distinct.  If  you  could 
imagine  a  moth  flitting  about  a  room  on  a  summer  evening,  one 
moment  striking  the  ceiling  and  the  next  fluttering  round  your  head, 
endowed  with  the  faculty  of  whispering  to  you  in  its  eccentric  flight, 
you  would  be  able  to  form  a  good  idea  of  Katie's  performance. 

^  Spiritualist,  May  15th,  1872.  A  similar  incident  appears  to  have  occurred 
a  few  days  later,  with  Heme  and  Miss  Cook  as  mediums.  Several  incidents 
of  the  kind  are  recorded  in  these  earlier  years,  before  the  mediums  acquired 
sufficient  dexterity  in  manipulation  to  avoid  such  catastrophes. 

'^  June  8th,  1871.  Other  accounts  will  be  found  in  the  Medium,  June  15th  ; 
in  the  Spiritual  Magazine  for  July,  1871  ;  and  in  the  Spiritualist  for  June  15th. 
The  account  in  the  Spiritualist  is  signed  by  all  the  eleven  persons  present. 

II. — G 

82  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

When  asked  if  she  would  bring  us  something,  she  said,  '  Yes,  yes.' 
One  of  the  visitors,  in  a  joking  sort  of  way,  remarked,  '  I  wish  she 
would  bring  Mrs.  G[uppy].'  .  .  .  Upon  which  another  said,  '  Good 
gracious  !  I  hope  not ;  she  is  one  of  the  biggest  women  in  London.' 
Katie's  voice  at  once  said,  '  I  will,  I  will,  I  will,'  and  John's  rough 
voice  shouted  out,  'You  can't  do  it,  Katie,'  but  she  appeared  to 
chuckle  and  repeat,  'I  will,  I  will.'  We  were  all  laughing  and 
joking  at  the  absurdity  of  the  idea,  when  John's  voice  called  out, 
'  Keep  still,  can't  you  ? '  In  an  instant  somebody  called  out,  '  Good 
God !  there  is  something  on  my  head,'  simultaneously  with  a  heavy 
bump  on  the  table,  and  one  or  two  screams.  A  match  was  instantly 
struck,  and  there  was  Mrs.  G[uppy],  standing  on  the  centre  of  the 
table,  with  the  whole  of  us  seated  round  the  table,  closely  packed 
together,  as  we  sat  at  the  commencement.  John  King's  voice  shouted 
out,  'Well,  you  are  clever,  Katie.'  Both  doors  were  still  locked. 
Our  attention  was,  however,  directed  to  Mrs.  G[uppy],  who  appeared 
to  be  in  a  trance,  and  perfectly  motionless.  Great  fears  were  enter- 
tained that  the  shock  would  be  injurious  to  her,  supposing  it  to  be 
really  Mrs.  G[uppy],  and  not  some  phantom  in  her  image,  but  John's 
voice  called  out,  'She  will  soon  be  all  right.'  She  had  one  arm 
over  her  eyes,  with  a  pen  in  her  hand,  and  an  account-book  in 
her  other  hand,  which  was  hanging  by  her  side.  When  she  came 
round  she  seemed  very  much  affected  and  began  to  cry.  She  told 
us  that  the  last  thing  she  could  remember  was  that  she  was  sitting 
at  home,  about  three  miles  away,  making  up  her  week's  accounts  of 
household  expenditure,  and  that  Miss  N[eyland]  was  in  the  room 
with  her,  reading  the  paper.  The  ink  in  the  pen  was  wet,  and  the 
last  word  she  had  written,  or,  rather,  begun  to  write,  for  it  was  one 
or  two  letters  short  of  completion,  was  smeared  and  scarcely  dry. 
From  the  joking  remark  about  bringing  Mrs.  G[uppy]  to  the  time 
that  she  was  on  the  table  three  minutes  did  not  elapse.  The 
possibility  of  her  being  concealed  in  the  room  is  as  absurd  as  the 
idea  of  her  acting  in  collusion  with  the  media." 

The  editor  of  the  Echo  appends  a  note  to  this  letter, 
stating  that  the  writer  is  known  to  him  as  a  "  Manchester 
merchant  of  high  respectability." 

Several  of  the  party  at  the  conclusion  of  the  stance 
escorted  Mrs.  Guppy  to  her  house  at  Highbury.  They  there 
learnt  from  Miss  Neyland,  a  friend  of  Mrs.  Guppy's,  who  had 
come  out  as  a  medium  under  her  auspices,  that  an  hour  or 
two  previously  she  had  been  sitting  with  Mrs.  Guppy  near 
the  fire  making  up  the  accounts,  when  suddenly  looking  up 
she  found  that  her  companion  had  disappeared,  leaving  a 
slight  haze  near  the  ceiling.  Mr.  Guppy,  then  upwards  of 
eighty  years  of  age,  on  being  told  of  the  disappearance  of 

PHYSICAL  MEDIUMSHIP  83 

his  wife,  remarked  that  no  doubt  the  spirits  had  taken  her, 
and  shortly  afterwards  went  down  to  supper. 

From  other  accounts  we  learn  that  Mrs,  Guppy  suffered 
no  harm  from  her  adventure,  and  that  the  last  word  written 
in  the  account-book  was  "  onions," 

I  find  during  the  years  187 1-4  records  of  three  other 
similar  transportations.  Mrs,  Guppy,  or  Messrs.  Heme  and 
Williams,  or  all  three,  were  the  mediums  on  each  occasion  ; 
the  persons  transported  were  respectively  Mr.  Herne,^  Miss 
Lottie  Fowler,^  and  a  Mr.  Henderson.^  Again,  the  well- 
known  professional  medium.  Dr.  Monck,  is  reported  to  have 
been  transported  by  spirit  agency  from  Bristol  to  Swindon.^ 

I  will  not  weary  the  reader  with  other  descriptions  of 
levitations,  nor  attempt  to  recount  the  eels,  live  lobsters, 
strange  fruits,  and  showers  of  feathers,  with  which  the  guests 
at  Mrs,  Guppy's  seances  were  favoured.  But  the  following 
is  an  incident  somewhat  out  of  the  common.  Miss  Kate 
Fox,  one  of  the  original  "  Rochester  rappers,"  had  married, 
in  1872,  Mr,  H,  D,  Jencken,  a  London  barrister.  In  the 
early  spring  of  1874  Mrs,  Jencken  was  staying  with  her 
baby,  then  about  five  or  six  months  old,  at  Brighton,  One  day 
Mr,  Wason,  a  well-known  Spiritualist  from  Liverpool,  who 
shared  their  lodgings,  witnessed  the  following  portent.  I  quote 
his  own  words  : — 

"On  the  5th  of  this  month  [March]  I  was  in  Mr.  Jencken's 
apartments  at  3,  Lansdowne  Terrace  East,  Western  Road,  Brighton, 
while  Mrs,  Jencken's  baby  was  in  the  lap  of  the  wet  nurse,  near  the 
fire.  It  was  about  1.30  p.m.,  in  a  well-lighted  room  facing  south. 
Mrs.  Jencken  was  also  present. 

"Suddenly  the  nurse  exclaimed,  'Baby  has  got  a  pencil  in  his 
hand,'  but  as  she  did  not  then  add  that  the  pencil  had  been  placed 
in  the  child's  hand  by  invisible  agency,  I  paid  little  attention  to  the 
remark.  The  nurse  next  exclaimed,  '  Baby  is  writing  ! '  Upon  this 
Mrs.  Jencken  rushed  forwards  and  called  to  me  to  come  and  see. 
I  then  looked  over  Mrs.  Jencken's  shoulder  and  saw  the  pencil  in 
the  hand  of  the  child.  It  had  just  finished  writing,  and  Mrs. 
Jencken,  remembering  what  her  medical  man  had  told  her  about 
the  manifestations  injuring  the  baby's  health,  snatched  the  pencil 
out  of  the  child's  hand  in  a  very  excited  manner.  The  nurse,  who 
was  frightened,  said  that  'she  must  give  up  her  situation.'  Mrs. 
Jencken  told  her  that  '  she  might  go,'  but  afterwards  reasoned  her 
out  of  her  resolve. 

"  The  message  written  by  the  baby  was  : — 

^  Spiritual  Magazine,  July,  1871,  p.  289.       ^  Spiritualist,  15th  March,  1872. 
*  Spiritual  Magazine,  1874,  p.  22.  ■*  Ibid.,  1875,  p.  55. 

84  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

i(  ( 

I  love  this  little  child.    God  bless  him  !   Advise  his  father  to  go 
back  to  London  on  Monday  by  all  means. — Susan.' 
"Susan  was  the  name  of  my  departed  wife."^ 

A  facsimile  of  the  infant  medium's  writing  was  later 
published  in  the  Medium  and  Daybreak?  Mr.  Jencken  was 
afterwards  the  recipient  of  other  signs  and  wonders,  including 
a  Greek  sentence,  with  most  of  the  accents  and  breathings 
omitted,  written  by  direct  spirit  agency.^ 

In  the  summer  of  1874  a  new  medium  came  to  London 
from  America,  Mrs.  Annie  Eva  Fay,  who  achieved  a  certain 
distinction  in  having  been  the  subject  of  a  test  experi- 
ment by  Sir  W.  Crookes,  as  described  in  a  later  chapter.^ 
Mrs.  Fay's  mediumship  was  in  another  respect  remarkable ; 
the  gentleman  who  acted  as  her  business  manager  in  the  first 
instance  appears  subsequently  to  have  established  a  rival 
show,  at  which  he  explained,  with  practical  illustrations,  the 
secret  of  her  performances.  These  demonstrations  seem 
hardly  to  have  affected  the  Spiritualist  belief  in  the  medium's 
genuineness.^  Her  performance  was  of  the  same  general  type 
as  those  of  the  Davenport  Brothers.  The  following  extract 
shows  how  it  impressed  a  contemporary  Spiritualist : — 

"  Two  strong  staples  were  screwed  into  the  jamb  of  a  door  in  the 
corner  of  the  room,  and  a  curtain  about  six  feet  high  tacked  to  the 
side  of  it.  .  .  .  The  medium's  hands  were  secured  by  tying  tightly 
round  each  wrist  a  piece  of  strong  inch-wide  tape,  well  knotted.  Her 
hands  being  placed  behind  her,  the  ends  of  the  tape  were  tied 
together  and  sealed,  the  ends  being  secured  to  the  lower  staple; 
another  tape  was  passed  round  her  neck  and  firmly  tied  to  the  upper 
staple.  She  sat  on  a  music  stool,  her  feet  placed  on  a  cushion; 
these  were  tied  round  the  ankles  with  a  cord,  the  end  of  which  was 
held  by  a  lady  sitter.  The  gas  was  partially  turned  down,  a  bell, 
a  tambourine,  and  flageolet  having  been  placed  on  her  lap;  an 
assistant — one  of  the  party — held  the  curtain  before  the  medium, 
the  instruments  were  heard  for  a  minute  or  so,  were  then  thrown  on 
the  ground,  and  she  called  for  '  light ' ;  the  knots  were  found 
secure.  The  next  arrangement  was  the  tambourine  on  her  lap,  in 
which  was  placed  a  glass  of  water;  'light  down' — curtain  held 
before  her,  the  tambourine  heard ;  '  light ' — curtain  withdrawn,  and 
the  tumbler,  nearly  empty,  found  to  be  held  between  her  teeth; 
examination  of  knots.    Guitar  placed  on  her  lap,  which  was  twanged 

^  Spiritualist,  March  20th,  1874  ;  see  also  Spiritual  Magazine,  1874,  p.  186. 

^  8th  May,  1874.  ^  Medium,  loc.  cit.  ^  See  below,  chap.  ix. 

'  See  various  notices  of  Mrs.  Fay's  mediumship  in  the  Medium  for  1875.  It 
is  fair  to  add  that  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine  for  the  same  year  her  name  does  not 
seem  to  be  mentioned. 

PHYSICAL  MEDIUMSHIP  85 

and  shown  above  the  curtain;  'light' — all  secure.  ...  I  cannot 
help  making  the  reflection  that,  with  all  these  marvellous  manifes- 
tations, so  many  mediums  seem  to  be  totally  unimpressed  by  the 
gravity  of  their  mission."^ 

The  present  v^^riter  was  never  privileged  to  meet  Mrs.  Fay. 
In  September,  1877,  however,  he  attended  a  public  perform- 
ance given  at  Eastbourne  by  a  Miss  Nella  Davenport,  which  in 
its  essential  features  reproduced  Mrs.  Fay's  public  seances ; 
so  closely,  indeed,  that  with  a  few  exceptions — exceptions, 
however,  in  which  the  whole  secret  of  the  performance  will  be 
found  to  rest — he  can  endorse  the  description  quoted  from  the 
Medium,  both  of  the  method  of  tying  and  of  the  subsequent 
manifestations.  Briefly,  the  two  pieces  of  tape  which  passed 
round  the  medium's  wrists  were  tied  together,  and  another 
short  piece  of  the  same  tape  was  tied  across  the  point  of 
junction ;  ^  the  free  end  of  this  latter  piece  of  tape  was 
attached,  not  direct  to  the  lower  staple,  but  to  an  iron  ring 
three  or  four  inches  in  diameter  which  passed  through  it. 
On  the  particular  occasion  referred  to,  moreover.  Miss 
Davenport's  manager,  perhaps  not  rating  too  highly  the 
intelligence  of  a  provincial  audience,  announced  that  one 
of  the  committee  on  the  platform  would  be  allowed 
to  be  present  behind  the  curtain  during  the  performance. 
The  choice  fell  upon  myself;  I  was  blindfolded  and  placed 
standing  at  the  left  side  of  the  medium.  As  anyone  who 
has  taken  part  in  blind  man's  buff  is  aware,  it  is  practically 
impossible  effectually  to  blindfold  anyone  against  his  will. 
After  working  my  eyebrows  a  little  I  found  that  I  could 
without  difficulty,  by  raising  my  head  slightly,  get  a  glimpse 
of  the  medium's  hands  and  arms.  What  I  then  saw  I  have 
only  within  the  last  few  years  learnt  to  interpret  aright. 
Briefly,  I  saw  the  medium's  bound  hands,  or  one  of  them, 
rapidly  seize  the  rim  of  an  empty  bucket  which  lay  on  her 
knees  and  place  it  on  her  head.  The  whole  thing  lasted  only 
a  few  seconds,  and,  bound  as  she  was  by  wrists  and  neck 
to  the  two  staples  behind  her,  the  feat  for  many  years  seemed 
to  me,  despite  the  evidence  of  my  senses,  an  impossible  one. 
The  explanation  is,  no  doubt,  that  given  by  Mr.  Truesdell  in 
his  Bottom,  Facts  concerning  Spiritualism?  The  linen  bracelet 
on  the  medium's  right  wrist  slipped  up  her  slender  arm ;  the 

^  Letter  from  Mr.  Henry  Collen  in  Medium,  I2th  March,  1875. 

^  In  my  notes  of  the  performance  the  length  of  the  tape  between  the  wrists  is 
given  as  six  inches,  and  of  the  cross-piece  as  five  inches.  But  these  measurements 
are  conjectural ;  I  had  no  opportunity  for  actual  measurement. 

^  New  York,  1883,  pp.  238,  etc. 

86  SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

piece  of  tape  which  was  fastened  at  one  end  to  the  ring, 
at  the  other  end  to  the  Hnen  strip  connecting  her  wrists,  was 
made  to  slip  on  the  Hnen  strip  towards  the  left  wrist ;  add 
the  diameter  of  the  iron  ring,  and  it  will  be  seen  that 
Mrs,  Fay  and  her  imitators  had  at  least  a  foot  of  free  play 
for  the  right  hand — quite  enough  to  achieve  all  the  marvels 
reported  of  them.^ 

Another  noted  figure  at  this  time  was  David  Duguid,  the 
Glasgow  painting  medium.  Duguid  was  a  cabinet-maker  by 
trade,  who  in  1866  discovered  himself  to  be  a  medium.  At 
first  his  powers  were  manifested  in  raps  and  visions.  Later 
he  began  in  the  trance  to  paint,  with  his  eyes  apparently  fast 
closed.  This  painting,  it  was  claimed,  was  effected  under  the 
inspiration  of  Jacob  Ruysdael  and  Jan  Steen,  and,  in  fact, 
one  of  the  pictures  produced  was  obviously  a  copy  of  a 
well-known  work  by  the  former  of  those  artists — a  work 
so  well  known  that  an  engraving  of  it  had  appeared  in  a 
popular  publication,  CasseWs  Art  Treasures  Exhibitor?  A 
year  or  two  later,  as  the  medium's  powers  developed,  the  type 
of  manifestation  changed.  The  sittings  were  now  held  in 
the  dark,  and  the  spirits  of  the  Dutch  artists  produced  their 
paintings  direct,  and  no  longer  through  the  hand  of  the 
medium.  In  August,  1878,  by  the  courtesy  of  Mr.  H.  Nisbet, 
I  was  admitted  to  one  of  these  sittings.  Two  other  persons 
were  present,  besides  my  host,  the  medium,  and  myself. 

After  a  trance  address,  some  ordinary  photographer's  cards, 
carte-de-visite  size,  were  produced  by  the  medium.  The 
sitters  were  not  allowed  to  touch  these  cards,  lest  they  should 
interfere  with  the  personal  magnetism  with  which  the  cards 
were  saturated.  But  in  order  that  the  visitor  might  be  satis- 
fied that  no  substitution  was  practised,  a  small  corner  was 
torn  off  each  of  the  two  cards  selected  for  the  experiment, 
and  the  fragments  were  handed  to  me.  I  placed  them 
securely  in  my  pocket.  Duguid  then,  to  quote  my  con- 
temporary notes,  "  was  fastened  hands,  arms,  and  legs  to  the 
chair  by  silk  handkerchiefs,  with  adhesive  paper  on  the  ends." 
The  lights  were  then  extinguished,  so  that  the  only  light 
came  through  a  ground-glass  panel  in  the  door  from  a  small 
gas-jet  some  distance  off.  The  illumination  was  so  faint  that 
I,  sitting   in   the  circle  four  or  five  feet  from  the  medium, 

1  Mr.  Maskelyne  (interview  in  Pall  Mall  Gazette,  April  i8th,  1885)  gives 
a  slightly  different  explanation  of  the  trick,  viz.  that  Mrs.  Fay  contrived  that  the 
knot  on  the  right  wrist  should  be  a  slip  knot.  But  it  is  quite  probable  that  both 
explanations  are  correct,  and  that,  as  in  other  cases,  the  medium  had  more  than 
one  string  to  her  bow.  ^  Human  Nature,  1868,  p.  559. 

PHYSICAL  MEDIUMSHIP  87 

could  just  make  out  against  the  background  of  the  door  the 
dark  outline  of  his  head,  which  apparently  did  not  move 
throughout  the  experiment.  I  could  see  no  gleam  of  white 
from  the  cards  which  lay  on  the  table.  After  a  quarter  of 
an  hour  the  lights  were  turned  up,  and  two  small  oil- 
paintings,  one  circular,  about  the  size  of  a  penny,  the  other 
oval  and  slightly  larger,  were  found  on  the  two  cards.  The 
colours  were  still  moist,  and  the  fragments  in  my  pocket 
fitted  the  torn  corners  of  the  cards.  The  two  pictures, 
which  lie  before  me  as  I  write,  represent  respectively  a  small 
upland  stream  dashing  over  rocks,  and  a  mountain  lake  with 
its  shores  bathed  in  a  sunset  glow.  The  paintings,  though 
obviously  executed  with  some  haste,  were  hardly  such  as  one 
can  imagine  to  have  been  done  in  such  a  short  interval  and 
in  almost  complete  darkness.  For  many  years  I  was  quite 
at  a  loss  to  understand  how  the  feat  could  have  been  accom- 
plished by  normal  means.  The  explanation  which  I  have 
now  no  doubt  to  be  correct  is  an  extremely  simple  one. 
Duguid,  it  has  been  seen,  would  not  suffer  profane  hands 
to  touch  the  cards ;  and,  when  he  had  torn  off  the  corner 
of  a  card,  he  no  doubt  dropped  into  the  sitter's  hand,  not  the 
piece  torn  from  the  blank  card  on  the  table,  but  a  piece 
previously  torn  from  a  card  on  which  a  picture  had  already 
been  painted.^ 

In  the  middle  of  July,  1876,  there  came  to  London  a  new 
American  medium,  "  Dr."  Henry  Slade.  Slade,  whose  fame 
had  preceded  him  to  our  shores,  was  warmly  welcomed  by 
leading  Spiritualists.  Serjeant  Cox,  Dr.  Carter  Blake, 
Dr.  Wyld,  Mr.  W.  H.  Harrison,  and  others  had  successful 
sittings  with  him,  and  published  their  experiences.'-^  The 
following  extract  from  an  article  in  the  World^  gives  a  fair 
idea  of  the  phenomena  presented  : — 

"  A  highly- wrought  nervous  temperament,  a  dreamy  mystical  face, 
regular  features,  eyes  luminous  with  expression,  a  rather  sad  smile, 
and  a  certain  melancholy  grace  of  manner  were  the  impressions 

^  I  do  not  know  if  it  has  ever  been  proved  that  this  device  vi^as  actually  em- 
ployed by  Duguid  ;  but  it  is  obvious  that,  under  the  conditions  described,  it 
could  have  been  employed,  and  that  the  so-called  "  test "  was  therefore  worthless. 
In  some  later  experiments  in  spirit  photography,  with  Duguid  as  medium, 
Sir  W.  Crookes  and  others  failed  to  obtain  any  conclusive  results ;  but  I  under- 
stand that  suspicious  appearances  were  found  on  one  of  the  plates.  For  accounts 
of  Duguid's  mediumship  see  Human  Nature,  1868,  p.  556,  1872,  p.  90 ; 
Spiritual  Magazine,  1872,  p.  555  ;  and  Hafed,  Prince  of  Persia  (London,  1876). 
In  chapter  viii.  some  account  will  be  given  of  his  trance  communications. 

-  See  especially  the  Spiritualist  for  July  21,  1876,  and  onwards  ;  and  Experi- 
ments with  Dr.  Slade,  by  George  King ;  privately  printed,  no  date  (apparently 
1876).  3  30th  Aug.  1876. 

88         SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

conveyed  by  the  tall  lithe  figure  introduced  to  me  as  Dr.  Slade. 
He  is  the  sort  of  man  you  would  pick  out  of  a  roomful  as  an 
enthusiast.  He  at  once  invited  me  into  a  back  room  on  the  same 
floor,  in  the  centre  of  which  stood  a  small  table,  without  a  cloth  or 
other  covering.  We  were  now  alone  together,  the  door  was  closed, 
and,  responding  to  Dr.  Slade's  invitation,  I  seated  myself  at  one 
side  of  the  table,  he  also  sitting  at  it  sideways.  The  corner  of  the 
table  was  between  us.  The  table  was  about  five  feet  by  four,  had 
four  legs,  no  ledge  below  or  covering  upon  it.  It  would  be  difficult 
to  imagine  anything  simpler  or  more  aboveboard,  as  we  both  placed 
our  palms  upon  it. 

"Dr.  Slade's  long,  white,  nervous  fingers  had  scarcely  touched 
mine  when  a  violent  knocking  began.  The  doctor  became  visibly 
agitated.  There  is  no  mistaking  the  signs  of  genuine  agitation; 
and  I  may  say  at  once  that  Dr.  Slade's  own  transitions  of  ex- 
pression, his  excitement,  and  subsequent  exhaustion,  impressed  me 
as  strongly  as  anything  which  happened  during  this  curious  inter- 
view. '  You  are  a  medium,  sir,'  he  gasped ;  and  I,  feeling  like  the 
man  who  had  talked  prose  all  his  life  without  knowing  it,  smiled 
feebly,  as  if  to  say,  '  So  you've  found  me  out.'  The  knocking 
immediately  became  more  vehement,  and  the  doctor  declared  the 
spirit  (of  his  wife)  wished  to  pronounce  upon  my  claims  to  medium- 
ship.  There  were  a  couple  of  ordinary-looking  school  slates  lying 
near,  and  taking  one  of  these,  and  placing  on  it  loosely  a  tiny  piece 
of  common  slate-pencil,  bitten  from  a  stick  and  about  the  size 
of  a  grain  of  wheat,  the  doctor  held  the  slate  under  the  table  with 
one  hand,  saying  at  the  same  time,  'Is  this  gentleman  a  medium, 
Allie?'  The  words  were  hardly  spoken  before  there  was  a  sound 
of  writing,  followed  by  two  or  three  vigorous  taps.  The  slate  was 
looked  at,  and  '  He  is  not,'  in  a  flowing  hand,  was  written  on  it. 

"  Then  came  more  and  violent  knockings  at  the  table,  a  chair  at 
the  farthest  corner  from  Dr.  Slade  was  lifted  rapidly  in  the  air  and 
hurled  to  the  ground  without  visible  agency.  My  coat  and  trousers 
were  plucked  violently,  and  I  was  pinched  and  patted,  all  with  great 
rapidity,  and  in  quarters  which  it  seemed  absolutely  impossible 
Dr.  Slade  could  reach.  A  hand  appeared  and  disappeared  fitfully, 
but  with  unmistakable  reality,  close  to  me ;  and  when  the  slate  was 
produced  with  a  similar  crumb  of  pencil,  once  on  it  when  it  was 
held  under  the  table,  and  once  under  it  when  it  was  placed  on  the 
table,  messages  of  various  kinds  were  inscribed  rapidly  and  in 
different  handwritings.  One,  the  longest,  was  of  a  religious  character, 
and  inculcated  the  usual  religious  lessons.  Others  were  in  reply  to 
questions  in  which  I  pressed  hard  for  a  communication  on  some 
subject  which  could  be  only  known  to  myself.  Dr.  Slade  did  not 
discourage  this,  but  said,  'We  can  but  try;  write  the  name  of  the 
deceased  person  you  wish  to  communicate  with  on  the  side  of  the 
slate  I  cannot  see,  and  we'll  ask  if  he  be  present.'  I  did  so,  and 
the  answer  came  promptly  that (giving  the  initials  of  the  name 

PHYSICAL  MEDIUMSHIP  89 

1  had  written)  was  not  present.  I  tried  again,  writing  another  name. 
The  slate  was  held  under  the  table,  and  a  message  came  in  the  first 
person,  signed  with  the  Christian  name  in  fiiU  and  the  initial  of  the 
surname,  saying,  'I  cannot  write  more  at  present,'  or  something 
equally  vague." 

"  I  had  not,  and  have  not,  a  glimmering  of  an  idea  how  the  effects 
described  had  been  produced,  and  I  came  away  inexpressibly  puzzled 
and  perplexed." 

The  present  v^^riter  paid  a  visit  to  Slade  early  in  September 
of  this  year,  and  was  profoundly  impressed  v^ith  the  perform- 
ance.^ Moreover,  it  appeared  at  the  discussion  w^hich  followed 
the  reading  of  Professor  Barrett's  paper  at  the  British  Asso- 
ciation meeting  of  the  same  year,  that  several  men  of  science 
had  visited  Slade,  and  were  unable  to  explain  what  they  saw 
in  his  presence.  Lord  Rayleigh  mentioned  that  he  had  gone 
to  Slade  in  company  with  a  professional  conjurer,  who  had 
admitted  that  he  was  completely  puzzled.^ 

Slade's  triumphant  career,  however,  was  speedily  cut  short. 
On  the  1 6th  of  September,  1876,  within  a  few  days  of  the 
British  Association  meeting,  there  appeared  in  the  Times  a 
letter  from  Professor  Ray  Lankester  setting  forth  the  results 
of  a  visit  which  he,  in  company  with  Dr.  Donkin,  had  paid 
to  Slade  the  previous  day.  Having  satisfied  himself  at  a 
previous  visit,  by  close  observation  of  Slade's  movements  and 
general  demeanour,  that  the  medium  wrote  the  messages  with 
his  own  hand  upon  the  slate  while  it  was  being  held  under 
the  table.  Professor  Lankester  put  his  hypothesis  to  the 
test  by  snatching  the  slate  out  of  Slade's  hand  before  the 
ostensible  sound  of  writing  was  heard,  at  a  time  when,  pre- 
sumably, therefore,  the  spirits  had  not  begun  to  write.  As 
he  anticipated,  he  found  the  message  already  written.  No 
doubt  to  an  observer  in  Professor  Lankester's  position  the 
demonstration  of  fraud  left  nothing  to  be  desired.  He  had 
seen  the  movements  of  Slade's  arm  in  the  act  of  writing,  and 
had  found  the  writing  so  produced,  where  and  when  no 
writing  should  have  been.  But  the  Spiritualists  were  perhaps 
justified  in  not  accepting  the  incident  as  conclusive.  Slade 
defended  himself  by  asserting  that,  immediately  before  the 
slate  was  snatched  from  his  hand,  he  had  heard  the  spirit 
writing,  and  had  said  so,  but  that  his  words  were  lost  in  the 

^  See  my  article  in  Human  Nature  for  Oct.,  1876,  "A  Modern  Miracle." 
^  See  the  report  of  the  discussion  in  the  Glasgow  Herald,  Sept.  13th,  1876. 

90  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

confusion  which  followed.  If  we  grant  that  Slade's  testimony 
was  as  good  as  Professor  Lankester's  or  Dr.  Donkin's,  it 
was  difficult  summarily  to  dismiss  this  plea.  Moreover,  as 
Mr.  C.  C.  Massey  and  others  pointed  out/  the  exposure  was 
at  all  events  incomplete.  Slade's  best  "tests"  were  given 
when  the  slate  was  held  above  the  table  and  never  allowed 
to  be  out  of  the  observer's  sight ;  sentences  had  been  written 
under  such  conditions,  it  was  alleged,  on  the  sitter's  own  slate, 
brought  with  him  for  the  purpose,  or  even  on  the  inside  of  a 
double-folding  slate. 

Others  were  confident  that  their  messages  had  been  written 
on  the  upper  side  of  the  slate,  which  was  of  course  in- 
accessible to  Slade  when  pressed  tightly  against  the  table ; 
or,  again,  that  the  writing  had  been  produced  when  Slade's 
hand  was  not  in  contact  with  the  slate  at  all ;  that  Slade's 
nails  were  pared  so  close  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to 
have  held  a  fragment  of  slate  pencil  as  suggested  by  Pro- 
fessor Lankester ;  that  the  touches  and  movements  of  furniture 
were  such  as  could  not  have  been  effected  by  Slade's  hands 
or  feet ;  and,  finally,  that  pertinent  answers  had  been  given 
to  questions  written  on  a  slate  held  out  of  the  medium's  sight. 
Even  if  it  was  admitted  that  Dr.  Lankester  had  demonstrated 
trickery  on  the  occasion  in  question,  there  was  much  in 
Slade's  performance  that  remained  obscure :  the  explanation 
offered  was  not  effective.^ 

The  incident  had  a  disastrous  sequel  for  Dr.  Slade.  Pro- 
fessor Lankester  obtained  a  summons  against  him  for  unlaw- 
fully using  subtle  craft  to  deceive  certain  persons,  to  wit : 
E.  Ray  Lankester,  Henry  Sidgwick,  R.  H.  Hutton,  Edmund 
Gurney,  and  W.  B.  Carpenter.  After  a  hearing  which  lasted 
for  several  days  Slade  was  found  guilty,  and  sentenced  to 
three  months'  imprisonment  with  hard  labour.  He  appealed 
against  the  sentence.  The  appeal  was  heard  on  the  29th 
June,  1877,  the  prosecution  in  this  instance  being  undertaken 
by  the  Treasury.  The  conviction  was,  however,  quashed  at 
the  outset,  on  the  ground  that  the  words  "by  palmistry  or 
otherwise,"  which  appeared  in  the  statute,  had  been  omitted. 
Slade  at  once  left  the  country,  and  the  fresh  summons  which 
was  issued  at  the  instance  of   Professor  Lankester  on  the 

^  Letter  to  the  Times,  i8th  Sept.,  1876,  and  correspondence  on  following 
days. 

'^  Professor  Lankester  clearly  underrated  Slade's  skill,  and,  by  implication, 
the  intelligence  of  those  whom  Slade  deceived.  Mr.  Maskelyne  states  that  it 
cost  him  "a  few  weeks'  hard  practice"  to  imitate  Slade's  performances  {Pall  Mall 
Gazelle,  20th  April,  18S5). 

PHYSICAL  MEDIUMSHIP  91 

following  day  was  effectual  only  in  preventing  him  from  ever 
returning.^ 

I  will  conclude  this  chapter  by  citing  a  display  of  medium- 
ship  of  a  somewhat  different  type,  which  will  serve  as  an 
illustration,  extreme,  perhaps,  but  by  no  means  unparalleled, 
of  Spiritualist  manifestations  in  private  life,  and  of  the 
attitude  adopted  by  believers. 

Mr.  Morell  Theobald  was  at  the  time  of  which  I  speak 
a  well-known  Spiritualist.  He  had  been  for  some  years  a 
friend  and  near  neighbour  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Everitt,  and  had 
constantly  witnessed  direct  writing  and  other  manifestations 
through  their  mediumship.  Moreover,  the  gift  of  automatic 
writing  had  developed  in  members  of  his  own  family ;  his 
sister  had  published  a  record  of  spirit  communications  re- 
ceived through  her  hand  ;^  and  Mr.  Theobald  himself  had 
been  a  writing-medium  for  some  years,  having,  indeed,  been 
first  initiated  by  William  Howitt,  some  time  in  the  later 
fifties.^ 

In  the  early  part  of  1882  one  Mary  entered  Mr.  Theobald's 
service  as  cook.  It  soon  appeared  that  the  new  cook  pos- 
sessed mediumistic  powers  of  a  high  order,  and  she  was 
welcomed  into  the  family  and  treated  as  a  friend.  In  1883, 
on  the  occasion  of  the  housemaid's  leaving  Mr.  Theobald's 
service,  his  daughter  agreed  to  share  Mary's  room  and  to 
help  her  with  the  work  of  the  house.  Mary's  mediumistic 
powers  from  this  time  developed  rapidly.  She  had,  apparently, 
always  been  averse  to  early  rising,  and  unpunctual  breakfasts 
had  resulted.  Now,  in  the  autumn  of  1883,  the  spirits  re- 
lieved their  medium  of  the  most  irksome  portion  of  her 
domestic  duties ;  the  fires  were  lit  and  the  breakfast-table 
laid,  day  after  day,  by  unseen  agencies.  Soon  other  mani- 
festations followed ;  spirit-writings  were  found  on  walls  and 
ceilings,  in  locked  receptacles,  or  were  produced  under  test 
conditions  on  marked  paper  at  seances.  These  writings  were 
in  many  languages — English,  German,  Old  French,  Latin, 
Greek,  Hebrew,  Raratongan.  The  handwriting  was  described 
as  being  in  many  cases  so  small  as  to  defy  human  imitation. 
Amongst  the  numerous  spirits  who  communicated  in  this 
way  one  especially  calls  for  mention  :  Saadi,  a  poet  of  ancient 
Persia,  not  only  wrote  passages  from  his  own  poems,  and  gave 

^  The  subject  of  slate-writing  will  be  further  discussed  below,  Book  IV. 
chap.  ii. 

^  Heaven  opened ;  or.  Messages  for  the  bereaved  from  their  little  ones  in  Glory, 
by  F.  J.  T.     London,  1870. 

^  See  Mr.  Theobald's  account  in  Spirit  Workers  in  the  flomt  Circle,  p.  18. 

92  SPIEITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

a  brief  account  of  his  life,  with  dates  and  other  particulars, 
but  even  showed  himself  to  two  members  of  the  circle,  who 
reported  that  he  had  "  black  hair,  with  a  dark,  flowing  beard, 
penetrating  eyes,  and  a  lovely  face." 

Mr.  Theobald,  in  the  spring  of  1884,  kindly  afforded  to 
myself  and  a  fellow-member  of  the  Society  for  Psychical 
Research,  the  late  Mr.  Frank  S.  Hughes,  the  opportunity  to 
investigate  such  of  these  marvellous  occurrences  as  lent 
themselves  to  investigation.  We  could  not,  indeed,  be 
witnesses  to  the  laying  of  the  breakfast,  the  lighting  of  fires, 
or  the  performance  of  other  humble  domestic  offices  by  the 
invisible  agencies,  since  the  action  of  the  human  eye  was 
found  to  be  inimical  to  such  phenomena,  which  took  place, 
even  in  the  presence  of  the  master  of  the  house,  only  when 
his  back  happened  to  be  turned.  But  the  writings  on  the 
ceilings  and  the  walls  we  did  see,  and  noted  a  remarkable 
peculiarity  about  them.  When  the  writing  occurred  on  the 
woodwork  of  the  doorway  or  on  other  spots  accessible  to 
a  person  of  ordinary  stature,  mounted  on  a  chair,  the  letters 
were  regularly  formed  and  of  normal  size.  When  the 
writing  occurred  on  a  high  ceiling,  the  writing  was  much 
larger,  and  the  letters  straggling  and  irregular,  as  might  be 
the  case  if  the  writing  had  chanced  to  have  been  formed 
by  a  maid-servant  standing  in  uncertain  poise  on  a  step- 
ladder,  or  armed  with  pencil  attached  to  a  broomstick.^  We 
were  also  shown  the  exact  spot  where  the  spirit-writings 
were  wont  to  appear  in  a  locked  secretaire ;  and  my  com- 
panion, without  much  difficulty,  when  the  secretaire  was 
locked,  pushed  a  piece  of  paper  through  the  chink  in  the 
flap  and  caused  it  to  fall  on  the  same  spot.  Indeed,  Mr. 
Theobald  unwittingly  gave  important  testimony  as  to  the 
value  of  this  particular  "test."  Aware  of  the  difficulty  of 
getting  the  exact  test  sought,  he  had  nevertheless  ventured 
to  ask  the  spirits  to  write  on  a  manuscript  which  he  locked 

^  In  some  of  the  writings  which  are  reproduced  in  Mr.  Theobald's  book, 
already  alluded  to,  the  characteristics  referred  to  in  the  text  are  plainly  dis- 
cernible. Compare,  for  instance,  the  large,  irregular,  and  t7'emulous  writing 
of  the  first  sentence  reproduced  in  Plate  II.  (p.  141)  with  the  small  and  well- 
formed  writing  in  the  next  two  sentences.  The  first  sentence  was  written  on 
the  cornice  of  the  ceiling,  the  others  in  more  accessible  positions.  The  ceilings, 
it  may  be  mentioned,  are  eleven  feet  high  ;  the  house-steps  are  five  feet  eight 
inches  high  {op.  cit.,  p.  235).  But  Mr.  Theobald  says  (p.  141)  that  the  writings 
on  the  ceilings  are  "out  of  reach  of  anyone  to  do,  even  on  our  house-steps, 
which  I  mounted  in  order  to  try."  It  may  be  added  that  we  learn  from 
Mr.  Theobald  that  Mary  was  physically  incapable  of  standing  on  steps,  because, 
apparently,  she  suffered  from  vertigo.  But  no  evidence  is  offered  for  the  truth  of 
this  statement. 

PHYSICAL  MEDIUMSHIP  93 

up  in  the  secretaire  aforesaid.  The  "test"  given  was  some 
writing  on  another  piece  of  paper  subsequently  introduced 
into  the  secretaire,  and  found  in  the  position  above  described. 
"  I  seldom  get  exactly  what  I  seek,"  he  writes  in  reference 
to  this  incident,  "but  something  equally  satisfactory  in  the 
way  of  proof."  ^  Again,  we  were  shown  the  "  direct  spirit- 
writings  "  of  superhuman  fineness,  some  of  which  are  repro- 
duced in  Mr.  Theobald's  book,  and  we  satisfied  ourselves 
by  actual  experiment  that  any  educated  person  with  a  little 
time  and  patience  and  a  sharp  pencil  could  produce  with 
ease  writing  as  small  and  not  less  legible.  The  Latin  and 
Greek  had  many  mistakes ;  some  even  of  the  letters  in  the 
Greek  being  incorrectly  formed,  and  accents  and  breathings 
omitted.^  Nor  could  we  discover  that  in  any  case  the  "  test " 
conditions  under  which  these  writings  were  asserted  to  have 
been  produced  were  such  as  to  preclude  fraud  of  the  most 
obvious  kind. 

But  the  poetry  of  Saadi  still  remained  to  be  accounted  for. 
Whilst  I  was  puzzling  over  the  problem,  a  friend  placed  in 
my  hands  Part  VI.  of  Chambers's  Repository  of  Instructive 
and  Amusing  Tracts^  a  once  popular  and  widely  circulated 
series.  From  an  article  on  "  Persian  Poetry  in  the  Past " 
were  derived,  it  appeared,  all  the  translations  of  Persian 
poetry  quoted  by  the  Spirit  Saadi,  and  all  the  particulars 
of  his  life  and  death  which  he  had  vouchsafed  to  give  to  this 
nineteenth-century  domestic  circle.  It  seemed  hardly  worth 
while  to  revisit  earth  after  so  many  centuries  only  to  furnish 
information  which  was  accessible  to  any  English  schoolboy. 
But  there  were  some  interesting  variations  in  the  spirit 
poetry,  indicating  an  imperfect  understanding  of  his  subject 
on  the  part  of  their  author.  Moreover,  Saadi,  in  the  seclusion 
of  this  quiet  suburban  household,  had  ventured  to  claim  as 
his  own  a  poem  written  by  somebody  else.  But  even  this 
feat  was  surpassed  by  another  Persian  spirit  called  Wamik, 

^  Light,  1884,  p.  244. 

^  It  seemed  to  me,  from  a  close  inspection  of  the  original,  quite  clear  that  the 
Greek  sentence  shown  to  me  had  been  written  by  a  person  ignorant  of  the 
language.  I  pointed  out  to  Mr.  Theobald  at  the  time  (see  my  letter  in  Light 
of  Jan.  24th,  1885)  that  there  were  numerous  mistakes  in  spelling  and  in  the 
formation  of  the  letters.  Mr.  Theobald,  in  republishing  the  quotation  {Spirit 
Workers,  p.  213),  adopts  a  conjectural  interpretation  of  the  disputed  words. 
It  is  to  be  regretted,  since  the  matter  has  been  publicly  discussed,  and 
the  accuracy  of  his  treatment  challenged,  that  he  did  not  give  a  facsimile 
reproduction  of  this  quotation,  as  he  has  of  another  and  later  Greek  spirit- 
writing  [pp.  cit.,  Plate  VIII.,  p.  298).  The  "spirit"  has,  however,  profited 
by  my  criticism,  and  the  later  Greek  writing  is  much  less  open  to  unfavourable 
comment. 

94  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

who  gave  himself  out  as  Saadi's  friend,  and  communicated 
as  his  own  no  less  than  eighteen  lines  of  poetry,  signed 
"Wamik  Zerdusht,"  adding  the  interesting  information, 
"  Wamik  was  burnt  to  death  at  Abyssinia ;  he  lived  in  this 
life  before  636."  Here  was,  indeed,  news  from  the  spirit 
world,  for,  according  to  Sir  W.  Jones,^  Wamik  was  no  friend 
of  Saadi,  had  written  no  poetry,  and  had  no  claim  to  the 
name  Zerdusht,  having,  in  fact,  never  lived  in  this  life  at  all. 
For  Wamik  was  the  imaginary  hero  of  the  poem  to  which 
the  spirit  had  subscribed  his  name.^ 

The  result  of  the  investigations  made  by  Mr.  Hughes  and 
myself  I  communicated  in  a  series  of  letters  to  Light?  The 
editor  of  that  periodical  expressed  his  opinion  that  my 
"difficulties"  {i.e.  in  accepting  these  spiritual  revelations)  "arose 
wholly  and  solely  from  the  incomplete  and  hasty  investiga- 
tion" which  I  had  accorded  to  the  phenomena.  Mr.  Theobald's 
own  attitude  towards  criticism  is  summed  up  in  the  following 
extract  from  the  book  in  which,  some  years  later,  he  gave  the 
full  history  of  his  spiritual  experiences  in  the  home  circle. 
"  Such  phenomena,"  he  writes,  "  can  never  be  received  until 
faith  in  accredited  narrators  and  reliance  on  the  commonplace 
integrity  of  ordinarily  reputable  people  is  admitted  as  one 
of  the  canons  of  scientific  attestation."  * 

^  Quoted  in  the  tract  referred  to. 

2  Mr.  Theobald,  in  reply  to  this  criticism,  suggested — a  suggestion  borrowed, 
no  doubt,  from  a  more  famous  literary  controversy — that  the  poem  in  question 
was  not  written  by  Wamik,  its  hero,  but  by  another  person  of  the  same  name 
{op.  cit.,  p.  175). 

•*  January,  February,  March,  1885. 

■^  Op  cit.,  p.  291.  The  account  in  the  text,  which  is  reproduced,  with  some 
additions,  from  my  earlier  work,  Studies  in  Psychical  Research,  is  based  partly  on 
Mr.  Theobald's  book,  partly  on  his  letters  to  Light  in  1884  and  1885. 

CHAPTER  VI 
MATERIALISATION 

THE  crowning  achievement  of  later  Spiritualism,  the 
presentation  of  a  visible  and  palpable  figure,  purporting 
to  be  a  spirit  form  temporarily  materialised  for  the 
occasion,  was  late  in  its  appearance  on  the  stage  in  this 
country.  There  were,  indeed,  some  who  professed  to  have 
seen  spirit  forms  at  the  early  seances  ;  but  there  can  be  little 
doubt  that  in  some  cases  at  least,  since  they  were  not  visible 
to  all  the  sitters,  these  forms  were  hallucinations,  or  at  most 
hallucinatory  distortions  of  real  objects  imperfectly  seen 
in  the  dim  light.^  In  a  letter  published  in  the  first  number 
of  the  Spiritualist  (November,  1869)  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  relates 
that,  at  a  sitting  with  Home  as  medium,  he  saw  the  figure 
of  his  deceased  sister.  As  the  figure  was  apparently  visible 
to  others  also,  and  especially  as  it  was  not  in  the  first  instance 
recognised  by  Mr,  Hall,  it  is  possible  that  this  may  have 
been  a  case  of  spirit  impersonation  on  the  part  of  the 
medium.  But  the  details  given  are  not  sufficient  to  enable 
us  to  form  an  opinion. 

In  America,  however,  "materialised"  spirit  forms  made 
their  appearance  at  an  early  stage  in  the  history  of  the 
movement.  In  October,  i860,  Robert  Dale  Owen  held  a 
sitting  with  three  members  of  the  Underbill  family  (Mrs. 
Underbill,  the  medium  in  the  present  case,  was  one  of  the 
Fox  sisters),  at  which  a  veiled  and  luminous  female  figure 
presented  itself  and  walked  about  the  room.  In  January 
of  the  following  year  began  the  famous  series  of  sittings 
with  Kate  Fox  and  Mr,  Livermore,  a  New  York  banker. 
Mr.  Livermore,  when  prostrated  with  grief  at  the  recent 
loss  of  his  wife,  was  persuaded  by  Dr.  Gray,  one  of  the 
Spiritualist  pioneers  in  America,  to  endeavour  to  open  up 
communication  through  a  medium.  In  the  event  he  held 
nearly  four  hundred  sittings,  extending  over  six  years,  with 

^  See  above,  p.  70,  and  below,  Book  IV.  chap,  iv, 
9S 

96  SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

Kate  Fox.  At  the  earlier  sittings,  and  indeed  throughout 
the  entire  series,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  occasions 
on  which  one  or  more  trusted  friends,  such  as  Dr.  Gray,  were 
admitted,  Mr.  Livermore  sat  alone  with  the  medium,  and 
in  the  dark.  Under  these  exceptionally  favourable  conditions 
there  appeared,  clothed  in  shining  raiment,  a  female  figure, 
which  was  readily  recognised  by  the  sitter  as  that  of  his 
deceased  wife.  Later  Benjamin  Franklin  also  appeared,  and 
was  seen  by  Dr.  Gray  and  others.^ 

In  the  latter  part  of  1871  the  American  papers  contained 
accounts  of  sittings  held  with  a  new  medium,  Mrs.  Andrews, 
at  the  house  of  a  farmer  named  Keeler,  in  Moravia,  New  York, 
not  far  from  Auburn.  At  these  sittings  spirit  hands  and  faces 
were  shown  from  the  cabinet ;  and  spirit  forms,  frequently 
recognised  as  those  of  deceased  relations,  walked  about  the 
room  and  conversed  with  the  sitters. 

Simultaneously  with  the  receipt  in  England,  through  the 
Spiritualist  Press,  of  news  of  these  doings  came  the  publica- 
tion of  Dale  Owen's  book,  with  reports  of  the  earlier 
materialisations  already  referred  to.  English  mediums,  who 
had  not  hitherto  advanced  beyond  the  occasional  production, 
under  favourable  conditions,  of  arms  and  faces,  were  naturally 
put  upon  their  mettle  not  to  be  altogether  outdone  by  their 
American  colleagues.  Mrs.  Guppy  was  first  in  the  field. 
In  January,  1872,  a  meeting  was  held  at  Mr.  Guppy's  house, 
among  those  present  being  the  Countess  de  Medina  Pomar 
and  the  Hon.  Cholmondeley  Pennell.  The  mediums — Mrs. 
Guppy  and  another  lady,  unnamed — retired  to  the  cabinet, 
a  common  wooden  cupboard  fastened  against  a  corner  of  the 
room,  with  several  window-openings  cut  in  the  side  facing 
the  circle.  The  lights  were  extinguished,  but  moonlight  was 
allowed  to  enter  the  room  through  the  uncovered  windows. 
Under  these  conditions  the  faces  of  the  two  mediums  were 
thrust  through  one  of  the  lower  openings  of  the  cabinet,  and 
a  small  face,  "  as  white  as  alabaster,"  appeared  simultaneously 
at  an  upper  opening.  Neither  this  face  nor  a  similar  one, 
which  appeared  later,  were  recognised,  nor  did  they  speak 
or  make  any  movement  beyond  nodding  in  answer  to 
questions.  The  performance,  except  for  the  darkness  and 
the  presence  of  the  distinguished  guests,  seems  to  have  been 
rather  like  a  Punch  and  Judy  show,  and  was  not  regarded 
as  a  conspicuous  success.^ 

^  The  Debatable  Latid,  by  R.  D.  Owen,  pp.  366-408.     London,  187 1. 
^  Spiritualist,  1872,  p.  9.     An  account  of  a  seance  held  a  few  weeks  later, 
with  similar  results,  will  be  found  on  page  17. 

MATERIALISATION  97 

In  April  of  this  year  the  leading  professional  mediums, 
Messrs.  Heme  and  Williams,  took  up  the  subject,  and  at 
their  dark  seances  shadowy  forms  and  faces  began  to  appear 
and  move  about  the  room.  The  forms  were  rendered  visible 
in  the  partial  darkness  by  a  faintly  luminous  smoke  or 
vaporous  substance,  and  were  accompanied  by  a  smell  of 
phosphorus,  which  the  editor  of  the  Spiritualist  assures  us 
was  extremely  faint.^  But  it  was  a  new  medium,  Miss 
Florence  Cook — then  a  girl  of  sixteen — who  first  exhibited 
materialisation  in  its  full  development  in  a  good  light. 
Miss  Cook  attended  several  of  the  early  sittings  at  the  rooms 
of  Heme  and  Williams ;  and  later  she  and  Heme  had  some 
successful  materialisations  at  Mr.  Cook's  house  at  Hackney. 
From  this  point  Miss  Cook,  soon  discarding  Heme's  assist- 
ance, appears  to  have  given  regular  seances  on  her  own 
account.  At  the  outset  Miss  Cook  (at  the  present  time  a 
professional  medium  under  the  name  of  Mrs.  Corner)  took 
no  money  for  her  seances ;  and,  shortly  after  she  had  begun 
to  give  regular  sittings,  a  wealthy  citizen  of  Manchester, 
Mr.  Charles  Blackburn,  came  forward  and  undertook  to  pay 
her  an  annual  retaining  fee,  that  she  might  be  free  to  give  her 
services  when  required. 

In  this  manner  Miss  Cook  was  placed  in  much  the  same 
position  as  Mrs.  Guppy  and  other  non-professional  mediums. 
Though  receiving  a  substantial  payment  for  the  exercise  of 
her  gifts,  she  was  in  no  way  beholden  to  the  individual  sitters 
who  attended  her  circles.  They  were  invited  guests  of  herself 
or  her  family,  and  for  the  most  part  accepted  without  question 
the  restraints  imposed  by  that  condition.  The  following 
extracts  from  two  articles  which  appeared  in  the  Daily 
Telegraph  will  show  how  her  performances  appeared  to  a  con- 
temporary writer.^  After  describing  the  medium,  "a  pretty 
Jewish-like  little  girl,"  and  the  other  persons  present,  all 
members  of  the  medium's  family,  or  well-known  Spiritualists, 
the  writer  continues  :— 

"  A  sort  of  corner  cupboard  had  been  fitted  up  with  two  doors 
opening  in  the  usual  manner  from  the  centre,  and  an  aperture 
of  some  eighteen  inches  square  in  the  fixed  portion  at  the  top.  At 
this  I  was  told  the  faces  would  appear.  A  lamp  on  a  table  in  the 
other  corner  of  the  room  was  so  arranged  as  to  shed  a  bright  light 
on  this  opening,  whilst  it  left  the  rest  of  the  small  apartment  in  sub- 
dued, but  still  in  full  light.     I  examined  the  cupboard  or  cabinet 

^  Spiritualist,  1872,  p.  33. 

-  Daily  Telegraph,  Oct.  loth,  1872,  article  on  "Spirit  Faces,"  by  "Our 
Own  Commissioner." 

II. — H 

^h         SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAKI) 

carefully,  put  a  chair  in,  and  saw  little  Miss  Blank  carefully  shut  up 
inside,  like  a  pot  of  jam  or  a  pound  of  candles.  A  rope  was  put 
in  her  lap,  the  object  of  which  will  appear  anon,  and  we  all  sat 
round  like  a  party  of  grown-up  children  waiting  for  the  magic- 
lantern. 

"  We  were  told  to  sing,  and  so  we  did — at  least  the  rest  did,  for 
the  songs  were  spiritualistic  ones  for  the  most  part,  which  I  did  not 
know.  They  were  pretty,  cheerful  little  hymns,  such  as  '  Hand  in 
hand  with  Angels,'  '  The  Beautiful  River,'  and  Longfellow's  '  Foot- 
steps of  Angels.'  By-and-by  raps  inside  the  cupboard  door  told  us 
to  'open  sesame.'  We  did  so;  and  there  was  pretty  Miss  Blank 
tied  round  the  neck,  arms,  and  legs  to  the  chair,  in  a  very  un- 
comfortable and  apparently  secure  manner.  We  sealed  the  knots, 
shut  her  up  in  the  cupboard,  and  warbled  again.  After  some  delay 
a  face  rose  gently  to  the  aperture  rather  far  back,  but  presently 
came  well  to  the  front.  It  was  slightly  pale,  and  the  head  was 
swathed  in  white  drapery.  The  eyes  were  fixed,  and  altogether  it 
looked  ghostly.  It  remained  for  some  time,  disappeared  and 
reappeared;  and  the  lamp  was  turned  full  upon  it,  but  the  eyes 
never  lost  their  fixed  stare,  and  showed  no  symptom  of  winking. 
After  several  minutes  it  went  altogether.  The  doors  were  opened, 
and  little  Miss  Blank  was  found  still  tied,  with  seals  unbroken,  and 
to  all  appearance  in  a  deep  sleep.  .  .  .  After  a  good  deal  more 
singing  than  I  cared  about,  another  appearance  took  place  in 
obedience  to  the  command  of  the  doctor,  who  had  been  in  the 
East,  and  asked  to  see  a  Parsee  friend.  After  some  delay,  a  head 
appeared,  surmounted  by  a  turban,  and  with  a  decidedly  Eastern 
expression  of  countenance  and  dark  complexion.  It  did  not  satisfy 
the  doctor,  who  declared  that  the  face  bore  a  resemblance  to  the 
one  demanded,  but  that  the  headgear  was  not  en  regie.  This  was 
Tableau  No.  2.  ...  In  Scene  the  Third  the  face  was  quite 
different.  The  head  was  still  surmounted  by  white  drapery,  but 
a  black  band  was  over  the  forehead,  like  a  nun's  hood.  The  teeth 
were  projecting,  and  the  expressioii  of  the  face  sad.  They  fancied 
it  was  a  spirit  that  was  pained  at  not  being  recognised.  When  this 
face  disappeared,  Kate  came  again  for  a  little  while,  and  allowed  me 
to  go  up  to  the  cupboard  and  touch  her  face  and  hand,  after  first 
putting  to  me  the  pertinent  question,  '  Do  you  squeeze  ? '  On 
assuring  her  I  did  not  do  anything  so  improper,  the  manipulations 
were  permitted.  This  was  the  finale,  and  the  circle  broke  up  forth- 
with. The  gentleman  from  Manchester  was  delighted,  and  all  the 
Spiritualists,  of  course,  were  loud  in  their  commendations." 

In  the  following  year  the  same  writer  gives  an  account  of 
a  later  phase  of  the  manifestations  : — 

"  In  a  short  time,  however,  Katie — as  the  familiar  of  Miss  B.  was 
termed — thought  she  would  be  able  to  '  materialise '  herself  so  far  as 

MATERIALISATION  99 

to  present  the  whole  form,  if  we  arranged  the  corner  cupboard  so 
as  to  admit  of  her  doing  so.  Accordingly  we  opened  the  door,  and 
from  it  suspended  a  rug  or  two  opening  in  the  centre,  after  the 
fashion  of  a  Bedouin  Arab's  tent,  formed  a  semicircle,  sat  and  sang 
Longfellow's  '  Footsteps  of  Angels.'  Therein  occurs  the  passage, 
'  Then  the  forms  of  the  departed  enter  at  the  open  door.'  And,  lo 
and  behold,  though  we  had  left  Miss  B.  tied  and  sealed  to  her 
chair,  and  clad  in  an  ordinary  black  dress  somewhat  voluminous 
as  to  the  skirts,  a  tall  female  figure  draped  classically  in  white,  with 
bare  arms  and  feet,  did  enter  at  the  open  door,  or  rather  down  the 
centre  from  between  the  two  rugs,  and  stood  statuelike  before  us, 
spoke  a  few  words,  and  retired ;  after  which  we  entered  the  Bedouin 
tent  and  found  pretty  Miss  B.  with  her  dress  as  before,  knots  and 
seals  secure,  and  her  boots  on !  This  was  Form  No.  i,  the  first 
I  had  ever  seen.  It  looked  as  material  as  myself;  and  on  a  subse- 
quent occasion — for  I  have  seen  it  several  times — we  took  four  very 
good  photographic  portraits  of  it  by  magnesium  light.  The  diffi- 
culty I  still  felt,  with  the  form  as  with  the  faces,  was  that  it  seemed 
so  thoroughly  material  and  flesh  and  blood  like.''^ 

Whilst  Miss  Cook  was  still  giving  her  seances  a  new  private 
medium  came  on  the  stage.  Mrs.  Showers,  the  widow  of 
General  Showers,  was  living  at  Teignmouth,  with  one  daughter, 
Mary,  who  at  the  time  when  the  manifestations  began  was 
sixteen  years  old.  The  attention  of  the  family  was  called 
to  the  accounts  of  Spiritualism  in  London,  and  they  began 
to  hold  nightly  stances  for  themselves  in  the  spring  of  1872. 
The  tables  moved,  messages  were  spelt  out  by  the  raps,  and 
Miss  Mary  Showers  and  the  servant  Ellen  professed  to  see 
spirits  moving  about  the  room,  amongst  them  John  King  and 
Peter.  Direct  writing,  at  first  in  spiegel-schrift,  followed. 
Then  a  young  gentleman  named  H.  appeared  upon  the  scene. 
He  came  in  one  evening  to  bid  farewell  before  starting  for 
Australia.  At  his  entrance  the  dining-room  table  started  to 
run  across  the  room  by  itself.  Mrs.  Showers  tells  us  that, 
herself  by  this  time  accustomed  to  such  marvels,  she  tried 
to  divert  her  guest's  attention  by  suggesting  that  he  should 
dry  his  feet — it  being  a  wet  night — at  the  kitchen  fire.  Im- 
mediately after  his  departure  from  the  room  on  this  errand 
a  crash  was  heard,  and  Mrs.  Showers,  hastening  to  the  kitchen, 
found  Mr.  H.  standing  on  the  kitchen  floor  in  a  pool  of  soup. 
He  assured  her  that  the  saucepan  had  jumped  off  the  fire  at 
his  entrance.     Moreover,  two  large  dish-covers,  no  unusual 

^  Dai/y  Telegraph,  12th  Aug.,  1873.  Another  account  of  Miss  Cook's  early 
seances  will  be  found  in  Mr.  Dunphy's  article,  "  Modern  Mysteries,"  in 
London  Society,  Feb.,  1874. 

100        SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

occurrence  at  that  period,  Mrs.  Showers  tells  us,  were  seen 
to  be  suspended  from  the  bell  wires.  From  this  precarious 
eminence  they  shortly  descended  with  a  crash  on  the  china 
below.  Then  other  manifestations  of  the  usual  Poltergeist 
order  followed.  Mr.  H.'s  chair  was  snatched  away  from  him 
as  he  attempted  to  sit  down  at  table.  Sofa  cushions,  egg- 
cups,  flower-pots,  umbrellas,  pots  of  jam,  chairs,  ottomans, 
a  roll  of  lard,  and  other  things  flew  about  the  house.  Scraps 
of  paper,  inscribed  with  doggerel  rhymes,  fluttered  down 
from  the  ceiling.  Mr.  H.  developed  into  a  seeing  medium, 
and  recognised  John  King,  in  luminous  robe  and  turban,  and 
Peter,  in  a  shooting  coat,  sitting  on  the  sofa.  Mr.  H.  shortly 
afterwards  left  for  Australia,  but  the  spiritual  forces  continued 
to  develop.  Peter  now  communicated  with  Mrs.  Showers 
through  the  "  direct "  voice,  and  finally  promised  to  show 
himself  to  her  in  material  form,  through  the  mediumship  of 
Ellen,  the  servant.  Mrs.  Showers  was  bidden  to  leave  the 
room  whilst  the  materialisation  was  being  prepared  ; 

"As  I  turned  from  the  door,"  she  writes,  "the  blended  voices 
of  Peter  and  Ada  swelled  out  into  a  harmony  so  mournful  and 
sublime,  that  the  tears  involuntarily  started  into  my  eyes.  '  Oh,  my 
God ! '  I  exclaimed,  clasping  my  hands,  '  is  it  possible  that  these 
things  are  true,  and  that  the  majority  of  mankind  are  living  in  utter 
ignorance  of  them  ? '  Hardly  knowing  where  I  went,  I  walked  up 
and  down  the  garden  path  in  company  with  Lion,  who  carefully 
measured  his  pace  with  my  own,  in  evident  consciousness  of  my 
abstracted  mood,  until  the  now  solemn  and  almost  terrible  voice 
of  Peter  called  to  me  from  above :  '  Come  up,  but  turn  away  your 
eyes  at  first  from  the  aperture ;  stand  at  the  further  end  of  the  room 
and  only  approach  gradually,  as  I  tell  you.' 

"  I  did  as  Peter  directed,  and  soon  perceived  the  living,  animated 
countenance  of  a  young  man,  clad  in  a  dark,  flowing  mantle,  stand- 
ing at  the  aperture  a  few  feet  from  me.  He  had  a  long,  dark 
moustache,  and  his  face  was  rounder  and  fuller,  but  the  resemblance 
to  Ellen  was  nevertheless  plainly  discernible.  My  daughter,  how- 
ever, assured  me  that  Ellen  was  at  that  moment  lying  back  insensible 
in  her  chair." 

At  the  termination  of  the  sitting  Peter  prescribed  some 
good  wine  and  other  delicacies  for  the  medium's  supper.^ 

Shortly  after  the  publication  of  Mrs.  Showers'  account  of 
her  daughter's  mediumship  at  the  end  of  1873,  the  two  ladies 

^  spiritualist,  1874,  p.  43.  The  two  previous  letters  from  Mrs.  Showers,  on 
which  the  account  in  the  text  is  based,  will  be  found  in  the  same  paper,  1873, 
p.  487,  and  1874,  p.  30. 

MATEEIALISATION  101 

came  up  to  London  to  give  stances  to  many  representative 
Spiritualists.  At  first,  indeed,  the  manifestations  went  no 
further  than  the  presentation,  in  a  mildly  subdued  light,  at 
an  opening  between  the  curtains  of  the  cabinet,  of  a  face 
admitted  by  Spiritualists  themselves  to  bear  a  strong  resem- 
blance to  the  face  of  the  medium.  The  test  commonly 
employed  at  these  early  seances  to  guard  against  impersona- 
tion by  the  medium  had  been  devised  apparently  under  direct 
spirit  instruction.  By  the  side  of  the  medium  would  be 
placed,  at  the  beginning  of  the  seance,  in  the  cabinet  or 
curtained  recess,  a  sufficient  quantity  of  rope  or  tape  for 
Peter's  use.  At  a  signal  from  within  the  curtain  would  be 
drawn  aside,  and  the  medium  discovered  apparently  entranced, 
and  straitly  bound  by  that  dexterous  fiend.  Some  of  the 
company  would  then  impress  their  seals  upon  the  knots,  and 
the  curtains  would  again  be  drawn.^ 

When  by  means  of  this  and  similar  tests  the  honesty  of 
the  medium  was  held  to  be  sufficiently  vindicated,  all  pre- 
cautions were  at  some  of  the  later  seances  dispensed  with, 
to  permit  of  the  "spirit"  appearing  in  full  form  before  the 
spectators.  The  following  account  of  one  of  the  earliest  of 
these  full-form  manifestations  is  taken  from  a  letter  written 
by  Dr.  Richardson  to  the  Mediuvi  a?zd  Daybreak : — ^ 

"  At  a  private  seance  held  at  Mrs.  Showers's  residence,  March  19th, 
we  were  favoured  with  the  appearance  of  the  full  form  of  the  spirit 
calling  herself  '  Florence  Maple.'  I  requested  '  Peter,'  the  spiritual 
stage-manager,  to  allow  me  to  employ  what  I  had  been  impressed 
would  be  a  good  test  for  the  readers  of  these  notes,  viz.  to  make 
a  mark  with  chalk  or  charcoal  on  the  face  of  the  medium  before 
entrancement.  This  was  declined  on  the  alleged  ground  that  the 
mark  might  reappear  on  some  part  of  the  created  spirit  form,  and 
he  could  not  say  which  part.  This  I  knew  to  accord  with  reported 
experiences,  and  was  impossible  to  be  denied.  Being  fully  satisfied 
of  the  reality  of  former  manifestations,  all  present  decided  to 
dispense  with  the  tests  of  tying  and  sealing.  After  the  usual  lapse 
of  time,  occupied,  as  we  were  told,  by  entrancement,  'Florence' 
appeared  holding  aside  the  curtain.  She  was  robed  from  head 
to  foot  in  white ;  her  head-dress  was,  as  before,  net  or  tulle ;  her 
bodice,  sleeves,  and  skirt  were  of  soft  material,  described  by  the 
ladies  as  resembling  merino,  by  '  Florence '  as  being  cashmere. 
She  wore  white  pearl  buttons  in  place,  she  said,  of  gold,  which 
she  was  unable  to  procure.  We  all  noticed  the  extreme  pallor  of 
her  features,  the  open,  staring,  never-winking  eyes.  There  was  not 
so  great  a  resemblance  to  the  medium  as  formerly.     She  asked  to 

^  See  the  accounts  of  these  early  seances  given  in  the  Spirihialist,  1874, 
pp.  II,  74,  108,  etc.  ^  April  3rd,  1874. 

102        SPIEITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

examine  our  rings  and  jewellery,  and  expressed  herself  much  gratified 
at  being  allowed  to  handle  them.  Miss  Florence  Cook  was  present, 
and  was  permitted  to  look  into  the  curtained  recess.  She  stated 
that  she  saw  at  the  same  time  '  Florence '  the  spirit,  the  medium 
lying  back  in  her  chair,  and  a  third  form  dressed  in  a  grey  jacket 
as  a  man.  Her  viewing  the  group  was  attended  by  no  ill  con- 
sequences either  to  the  spirits  or  the  mortals,  and  demonstrates 
that  much  of  the  fear  on  this  ground  is  needless.  The  spirit 
'Florence'  kissed  the  human  Florence,  and  shook  hands  with  all 
of  us.  She  appeared  at  times  uneasy  about  the  light,  which  was 
a  lamp  on  the  mantelpiece,  burning  dimly,  and  objected  to  being 
scrutinised  too  closely.  The  wonderful  mediumship  of  Miss  Showers 
was  displayed  by  the  disregard  of  usual  rules  :  we  walked  about  the 
room,  and  Mrs.  Showers  absolutely  left  the  room  and  admitted  the 
servant  while  '  Florence '  was  in  full  view.  She  evinced  some  little 
nervousness  on  the  entrance  of  the  servant,  exclaiming,  '  I  do  not 
know  her.'  I  noted  the  height  of  '  Florence,'  and  found  it  to  vary. 
At  one  time  she  stood  six  to  eight  inches  taller  (by  subsequent 
measurement)  than  the  medium,  while  at  another  she  shrunk  in 
proportion  while  under  observation.  I  asked  if  she  had  bones.  She 
replied,  '  Yes ' ;  and  on  retiring  behind  the  curtain,  we  heard  certain 
noises  resembling  the  cracking  of  joints.  Of  course,  I  should  have 
liked  to  have  examined  her  anatomically,  but  was  met  with  a  cold 
refusal  even  when  I  asked  her  to  put  out  her  tongue  and  to  let  me 
feel  her  pulse.  After  a  conversation  extending  over  half  an  hour 
she  asked  if  we  were  gratified,  and  on  being  assured  that  we  were, 
she  replied,  '  Then  we  are  repaid ;  God  bless  you  all.' 

"W.  LiNDESAY  Richardson,  M.D. 
''March  20th,  1874." 

It  v\^ill  be  seen  that  at  these  early  form  manifestations 
practically  no  precautions  were  taken  against  trickery.  There 
was  nothing,  so  far  as  can  be  discovered,  to  throw  any 
hindrance  in  the  way  of  the  medium  if  she  chose  to  im- 
personate the  spirit  by  exhibiting  a  mask  through  the 
opening  of  the  curtain,  or  by  dressing  herself  up  and  walking 
about  the  room.  Nor  were  there  any  collateral  circumstances 
to  justify  belief  in  the  genuineness  of  the  manifestations. 

That  an  imposture  so  naive  and  so  flagrant  should  have 
escaped  detection  for  so  long  in  itself  requires  explanation. 
That  explanation  is,  no  doubt,  to  be  found  in  the  peculiar 
conditions  of  the  exhibition.  The  two  principal  performers 
were,  as  we  have  seen,  young  girls,  little  more  than  children 
in  years,  and  one  of  them  at  least  possessed  of  considerable 
personal  attractions.  The  performances  were  given  either  in 
a  private  house  in  presence  of  members  of  the  medium's  own 
family,  or  in  the  house  of  some  tried  and  trusted  Spiritualist. 

MATERIALISATION  103 

The  spectators,  carefully  selected  for  the  purpose,  were  all 
present  in  the  quality  of  favoured  guests,  and  chivalry  and 
good  manners  joined  in  imposing  restraints  upon  the  legitimate 
satisfaction  of  scientific  curiosity.  These  restraints  were  not, 
indeed,  always  effectual.  At  a  dark  seance  with  Miss  Cook 
one  William  Hipp  seized  the  hand  of  the  "  spirit "  which  was 
sprinkling  him  with  water,  and,  when  a  light  was.  struck, 
found  himself  firmly  grasping  the  hand  of  the  medium. 
Miss  Cook's  explanation,  that  she  had  instinctively  stretched 
her  hand  across  the  table  to  recover  a  flower  which  had  been 
removed  by  the  spirits  from  her  dress,  appears  to  have  given 
satisfaction  to  her  friends.^ 

On  December  9th,  1873,  a  seance  was  held  at  Mr.  Cook's 
house,  amongst  the  persons  present  being  the  Earl  and 
Countess  of  Caithness  and  the  lady's  son,  the  Count  (after- 
wards Duke)  de  Medina  Pomar.  One  of  the  invited  guests 
was  Mr.  W.  Volckman,  invited,  as  he  subsequently  explained, 
after  nine  months'  importunity,  only  when,  in  accordance  with 
a  hint  received  from  Mr.  Cook,  he  had  presented  the  youthful 
medium  with  a  present  of  jewellery.^  Mr.  Volckman,  "having 
for  forty  minutes  carefully  observed  and  scrutinised  the  form, 
features,  gestures,  size,  style,  and  peculiarities  of  utterance  of 
the  so-called  spirit,"  and  having  "  perceived  also  an  occasional 
tiptoeing  by  the  young  lady  as  if  to  alter  her  stature,"  became 
convinced  that  the  "  spirit "  was  no  ghost,  but  Miss  Florence 
Cook  herself.  He  therefore  rushed  forward  and  seized  first 
the  hand  and  then  the  waist  of  the  white-robed  figure.  Two 
of  the  medium's  friends  at  once  jumped  up  and  forcibly 
extricated  the  form  from  Mr.  Volckman's  grasp ;  the  gas  was 
extinguished  ;  "  Katie "  retreated  to  the  cabinet ;  and  "  after 
a  delay  of  about  five  minutes  .  .  .  the  cabinet  was  opened, 
and  Miss  Cook  found  in  black  dress  and  boots  with  the  tape 
tightly  round  her  waist  as  at  the  beginning  of  the  seance,  the 
knot  sealed  as  at  first  with  the  signet  ring  of  the  Earl  of 
Caithness."  Subsequently  the  medium  was  searched,  and  no 
white  drapery  was  found  on  her.^ 

The  editor  of  the  Medium  alone  blamed  the  conduct  of 
those  who  had  endeavoured  to  stifle  investigation.     But  most 

^  See  letter  in  Echo,  Jan.  3rd,  1874,  and  letter  by  Thomas  Ely  ton  in  the 
Spiritualist,  Jan.  i6th,  1874. 

^  Mr.  Volckman's  letter  to  the  Meditim  and  Daybreak,  Jan.  23rd,  1874. 

^  See  the  Spiritualist,  Dec,  1873,  and  Medium,  Jan.,  1874.  Another  of 
those  present,  Mr.  Dunphy,  in  describing  the  struggle  between  the  "spirit" 
and  Mr.  Volckman,  writes  that  "the  figure  appeared  to  lose  its  feet  and  legs  and 
to  elude  the  grasp,  making  for  that  purpose  a  movement  somewhat  similar  to  that, 
of  a  seal  '\r\  water"  {London  Society^  Feb.,  1874). 

104        SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

Spiritualists  reserved  their  indignation  for  Mr.  Volckman,  and 
were  no  whit  shaken  in  their  behef  in  the  genuineness  of 
Miss  Cook's  mediumship.  Indirectly  the  Spiritualist  position 
was,  indeed,  considerably  strengthened,  as  the  incident  was 
the  immediate  occasion  of  the  publication  in  the  Spiritualist 
journals  of  three  letters  from  Sir  William  Crookes,  giving  an 
account  of  his  own  experiences  with  the  same  medium.^ 

A  like  fate  befell  the  next  attempt  at  exposure.  Mrs.  and 
Miss  Showers  were  invited  on  the  2nd  of  April,  1874,  to  give 
a  materialisation  sitting  at  the  house  of  Serjeant  Cox. 
Serjeant  Cox  had  already,  as  he  tells  us,  seen  the  "spirits" 
"  Katie  "  and  "  Florence  "  moving  about  together  in  a  lighted 
room ;  had  seen  that  they  could  breathe,  talk,  perspire,  and  eat ; 
and  that  in  face,  complexion,  gesture,  and  voice  they  precisely 
resembled  the  two  mediums  who  were  asserted  to  be  lying 
entranced  behind  the  curtains.  At  the  s6ance  on  April  2nd, 
when  the  form  of  "  Florence "  appeared  in  the  aperture 
between  the  curtains,  Serjeant  Cox's  daughter,  Mrs.  Edwards, 
opened  the  curtains  wider ;  in  the  spirit's  struggles  to  prevent 
this,  the  head-dress  fell  off,  and  revealed  the  "  spirit's "  head 
as  that  of  Miss  Showers,  and  still  visibly  attached  to  the 
body  of  that  young  lady,  which  was  clothed  in  a  dark  silk 
dress.  Moreover,  the  chair,  where  the  medium  should  have 
been  sitting,  was  seen  to  be  empty.  Serjeant  Cox's  own 
explanation  was  that  the  medium  was  entranced  and  un- 
conscious of  her  impersonation  of  the  spirit.  This  ex- 
planation does  not,  of  course,  take  into  account  the  awkward 
fact  that  Miss  Showers  had  introduced  into  the  cabinet, 
presumably  in  her  waking  state,  some  white  drapery  where- 
withal to  clothe  the  spirit  form.^  Serjeant  Cox's  action  was 
not  well  received  in  Spiritualist  circles. 

The  professional  mediums,  as  already  indicated,  were  not 
slow  to  follow  the  lead  given  them  by  the  lady  amateurs. 
At  a  stance  held  in  the  rooms  of  Messrs.  Heme  and  Williams 
on  April  13th,  1872,  a  veiled,  nunlike  figure  was  seen  for  a 
few  seconds,  "not  very  distinctly."^  The  mediums  on  this 
occasion  were  sitting  in  the  circle ;  but  at  later  stances  a 
"  cabinet "  was  constructed,  and  the  spirit  form  would  then 
come  out  and  walk  amongst  the  audience. 

^  See  below,  chap.  ix. 

^  See  Cox's  letters  in  the  Mediutn  for  May  8th  and  22nd,  and  a  letter  from 
Mrs.  Showers  in  the  same  journal  for  May  15th,  1874;  also  letter  to  the 
Spiritualist,  May  15th,  1874;  see  also  editorial  comments  in  the  same  number, 
and  letter  from  Mrs.  Corner  in  the  following  week's  issue. 

^  Spiritualist,  May  15th,  1872.  For  another  account  of  these  early  seances  see 
Spiritzial  Magazine,  1875,  p.  367, 

MATERIALISATION  105 

During  the  years  1872-80  a  large  number  of  mediums 
appeared  for  this  form  of  manifestation,  and  the  columns  of 
the  Spiritualist  periodicals  were  filled  with  accounts  of  suc- 
cessful materialisation  seances.  Amongst  the  leading  ex- 
ponents, besides  those  already  mentioned,  were  Dr.  Monck, 
W.  Eglinton,  Miss  Lottie  Fowler,  the  Misses  Wood  and  Fair- 
lamb — the  official  mediums  of  the  Newcastle  Society — Mrs. 
Petty  and  her  sons,  boys  of  thirteen  and  seventeen,  Rita, 
Bastian  and  Taylor. 

It  would  be  tedious  as  unprofitable  to  consider  these  pro- 
fessional performances  in  detail.  The  procedure  was  in  all 
essentials  alike  in  every  case.  The  medium  would  be  placed 
apart  from  the  circle  in  a  "cabinet,"  the  cabinet  consisting 
sometimes  of  a  large  wooden  box,  like  a  sentry-box ;  some- 
times of  a  curtained  recess ;  sometimes  of  another  room, 
communicating  with  that  in  which  the  circle  was  seated  by 
a  curtained  doorway.  The  medium  would  generally  be  bound 
to  his  chair,  the  lights  lowered,  and  the  circle  would  then  be 
requested  to  talk,  sometimes  to  sing.  Occasionally  the 
silence  would  be  relieved  by  the  strains  of  a  musical-box. 
After  an  interval  of  varying  duration,  glimpses  of  white 
drapery  would  be  discerned,  in  the  semi-darkness,  at  the 
opening  of  the  curtains ;  and,  if  the  conditions  were  favour- 
able, one  or  more  spirit  forms,  who  for  the  most  part  affected 
turbans,  or  nondescript  headgear,  and  flowing  robes  of  various 
kinds,  would  walk  amongst  the  audience,  speak  to  them,  and 
occasionally  touch  favoured  individuals.  At  the  end  of  the 
evening  the  medium  would  be  found  in  deep  trance,  with  his 
bonds  unbroken.  There  is  no  recorded  case  in  which  medium 
and  spirit  have  been  seen  together,  by  competent  witnesses, 
under  unequivocal  conditions.  The  experiments  conducted 
by  Sir  W.  Crookes  and  the  late  Mr.  Cromwell  Varley  on 
various  mediums  furnish  us  with  the  nearest  approximation 
to  proof  of  the  separate  existence  of  medium  and  spirit. 

In  these  experiments,  as  will  be  shown  later  on,^  it  is 
possible,  if  not  always  to  explain  the  fraud  practised,  at 
least  to  see  where  the  opportunity  for  fraud  occurred.  But 
the  ordinary  Spiritualist,  untrained  in  any  kind  of  exact 
observation,  could  neither  unravel  the  mystery  himself  nor 
will  suffer  us  to  unravel  it  now.  When,  for  instance,  Signor 
Rondi  tells  us  that  in  a  private  house  he  spent  two  hours 
in  the  company  of  a  materialised  spirit,  was  allowed  to 
examine  and  even  to  touch  the  hands  and  feet  of  the  figure, 
and  thus  satisfy  himself  that  it  was  a  distinct  entity  from  the 

^  See  below,  chap,  ix. 

106        SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

medium,  and  finally  felt  the  hands  of  medium  and  spirit 
simultaneously,  he  leaves  us  no  doubt  unconvinced,  but 
unable  from  the  very  imperfection  of  the  record  to  explain 
the  matter.^ 

Again,  to  take  another  case  recorded  in  the  same  year,  the 
Hon.  J.  L.  O'Sullivan  describes  how,  through  the  mediumship 
of  Firman,  he  had  made  the  acquaintance  of  several  spirits — 
to  wit,  his  own  mother,  "  the  venerable  and  saintly  Glaucus," 
John  King,  and  two  lovely  girl  spirits,  Alexandrine  and 
Nathalie ;  that  these  spirit  figures  would  sometimes  rise  to  the 
ceiling,  sometimes  seem  almost  to  sink  through  the  floor ; 
and  that  occasionally  four  of  them  would  be  present  at  once, 
with  the  sleeping  form  of  the  medium  still  plainly  visible.^ 
We  don't  see  how  the  things  were  done,  but  we  remember 
that  Firman  had  already  been  detected  in  Paris  masquerading 
as  an  Indian  spirit,  and  had  left  his  mantle  in  the  hands 
of  the  lady  who  had  seized  him.'^ 

At  the  public  stances  for  materialisation,  where  the 
restraints  already  referred  to  as  withholding  the  sitters 
at  a  private  circle  from  too  probing  an  inquiry  would  no 
longer  operate,  charges  of  fraud  and  attempts  at  detection 
were  frequent,  and  would,  no  doubt,  have  been  yet  more 
numerous  but  for  the  full  conviction  which  the  earlier 
Spiritualists  had  of  the  honesty  of  the  mediums.  For  the 
ordinary  incidents  of  a  materialisation  seance,  and  especially 
the  perambulation  of  the  spirit  form  amongst  the  company, 
offered  opportunities  for  investigation  against  which  all  the 
precautions  devised  by  the  mediums  for  their  own  safety 
were  frequently  powerless.  Probably  from  the  outset  some 
care  was  exercised  in  the  admission  of  sitters ;  and  the  earlier 
mediums,  Heme  and  Williams,  Bastian  and  Taylor,  the 
Misses  Wood  and  Fairlamb,  the  Petty  family,  etc.,  preferred 
to  work  in  couples.  But  after  the  darkness  the  safeguard 
chiefly  relied  upon,  no  doubt,  was  the  holding  of  hands  by 
the  circle  ;  for  any  breach  of  this  condition  involved  the 
confederacy  of  at  least  two  sitters,  and  by  skilfully  disposing 
the  circle  in  accordance  with  spirit  direction,  the  medium 
could  nearly  always  prevent  the  contingency  of  two  strangers 
or  suspicious  persons  sitting  side  by  side.  Further,  the 
sympathies  of  all  those  who  believed,  or  were  in  any  degree 
disposed  towards  belief,  were  enlisted  on  the  side  of  law  and 
order  by  continual  insistence — in  itself  a  sufficiently  plausible 

^  spiritualist,  April  20th,  1877. 

2  Ibid.,  April  13th  and  May  4th,  1877. 

^  Proch  des  Spirites,  by  M.  Leymarie,  p.  45<. 

MATERIALISATION  1 07 

warning — on  the  grave  danger  which  must  result  to  the 
medium's  organism  from  any  violent  breach  of  the  conditions. 
Thus  protected  by  his  own  cunning  and  by  a  strong  body- 
guard of  volunteer  defenders,  the  medium  could,  as  a  rule, 
defy  the  attempts  of  the  solitary  intruder  to  confound  him. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  most  of  the  earliest  attempts  at  exposure 
were  inconclusive,  and  Spiritualists  had  some  justification  for 
ignoring  and  even  resenting  them.  Thus  in  August,  1874,  at 
a  seance  given  by  Bastian  and  Taylor,  a  lady  caught  Bastian's 
arm  where  a  spirit  hand  should  have  been.  According  to  the 
account  in  the  Medium,  since  Bastian  was  sitting  in  the  circle, 
within  arm's  length,  the  result  proved  nothing.^  Again,  in 
the  same  month,  at  Newcastle,  an  outsider  turned  the  light 
of  a  dark  lantern  on  the  circle,  and  claims  to  have  seen  one 
of  the  mediums  hurrying  back  to  her  seat.  But  the  evidence 
appears  not  to  have  been  clear,  and  a  summons  for  assault 
which  the  intruder  brought  against  two  members  of  the  circle 
was  dismissed  in  the  local  police  court,  on  the  ground  that 
the  conditions  on  which  the  would-be  exposer  was  admitted 
to  the  seance  had  been  violated  by  his  action.^  Again,  at 
a  seance  at  Arnheim  with  Bastian  and  Taylor,  an  electric 
lamp  was  suddenly  introduced,  and  a  moment's  glimpse 
obtained  of  Bastian  holding  a  guitar  in  his  hand  over  the 
heads  of  the  sitters.  But  Mr.  Riko,  the  editor  of  the  Medium, 
and  others  held  that  the  member  seen  was  a  spirit  hand 
in  the  act  of  dematerialising  and  sinking  back  into  the 
medium's  body.^ 

Later  in  the  same  year,  1875,  ^r.  St.  George  Stock  made 
an  heroic  attempt  at  exposure.  The  mediums  were  Heme 
and  young  Petty.  Mr.  Stock  had  possessed  his  soul  in 
patience  for  some  time,  whilst  enthusiastic  believers  loudly 
professed  to  see  both  mediums  and  spirits  together,  where 
he  could  see  only  two  white-robed  forms,  in  stature  and 
general  appearance  corresponding  to  the  two  mortals.  But 
unfortunately  Mr.  Stock  chose  his  opportunity  not  well. 
Whilst  the  white-robed  forms  were  still  before  the  curtain, 
and  the  conflict  between  faith  and  sight  was  most  acute,  he 
held  his  peace.  When  they  had  retired  and  the  seance  was 
about  to  end,  moved  by  a  momentary  impulse,  he  turned  up 
the  gas,  and  discovered  Heme  seated  in  his  chair  and  leaning 
forward.  Mr.  Stock,  whatever  grounds  he  may  have  had  for 
suspecting   fraud,   admits    his    failure    on    this    occasion    to 

^  Medium,  Aug.  14th,  1874. 

^  Newcastle  Daily  Chronicle,  2lst  Aug.,  1874;  Medium,  21st  Aug,,  1874; 
Spiritualist,  28th  Aug.,  1874.  ^Medium,  15th  Jan.,  1875. 

108        SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

demonstrate  it.^  Once  more,  when  Miss  Wood  was  giving 
a  seance  at  Blackburn,  in  the  autumn  of  1877,  the 
materialised  form  was  seized  and  found  to  be  the  medium 
herself.  Miss  Wood  "  protested  that  she  was  an  unconscious 
instrument  temporarily  in  the  hands  of  an  evil  power,"  and 
the  explanation  appears  to  have  been  accepted,^ 

These  repeated  discoveries,  however  individually  incon- 
clusive, could  not  fail  to  produce  some  effect  on  the  better- 
educated  persons,  at  any  rate,  who  took  an  interest  in  the 
movement.  The  columns  of  the  Spiritualist,  a  weekly  news- 
paper conducted  with  fairness  and  ability  by  W.  H.  Harrison, 
contain  during  the  years  1876  and  1877  numerous  editorials 
and  other  contributions  dealing  with  the  philosophy  of 
materialisation.  It  was  conceded  by  all  those  who  took  part 
in  the  discussion  that  the  evidence  for  the  actual  presentation 
of  a  material  form  distinct  from  that  of  the  medium  left  much 
to  be  desired.  It  was  indeed  suggested  that  such  a  form 
probably  existed  merely  as  a  temporary  emanation  from  the 
body  of  the  medium,  deriving  its  material  elements  wholly 
from  that  body ;  thus  medium  and  spirit  form  were  alike 
for  the  time  materialised  entities  in  a  condition  of  unstable 
equilibrium,  and  reciprocally  dependent,  in  such  sort  that 
when  the  rude  hand  of  the  sceptic  seized  the  spirit  form,  the 
question  "  whether  they  united  in  the  hands  of  the  observer 
or  in  the  cabinet  .  .  .  depended  upon  the  relative  proportion 
of  energy  in  the  two  forms  at  the  time  of  the  seizure."  ^  This 
ingenious  theory  was  not  allowed  to  pass  altogether  into  the 
background,  even  when,  with  the  progress  of  time,  it  became 
apparent  that  in  all  cases  this  hypothetical  coalition  took 
place  in  the  hands  of  the  observer,  and  not  in  the  cabinet. 

It  was  recognised  by  most  that  the  duplication  of  form  was 
rare.  Miss  Kislingbury,  the  Secretary  of  the  "  British  National 
Association  of  Spiritualists,"  went  so  far  as  to  state  that  the 
stricter  the  conditions,  the  rarer  the  genuine  phenomena.^  It 
was  even  suggested  by  some  Spiritualists  that  the  form  seen 
at  materialisation  seances  was  the  physical  body  of  the 
medium,   sometimes   transfigured    by  spirit   power   into   the 

^  See  his  letter  in  the  Medium  for  June  25th,  1875.  Mr.  Stock  later  considered 
that  he  had  received  satisfactory  evidence  of  a  "speaking  apparition"  distinct 
from  medium  (in  this  case  Mr.  Williams).  See  his  article  in  the  Spiritualist, 
April  20th,  1877,  and  his  letter  in  the  same  issue  containing  an  apology  to  Heme 
for  the  part  which  he  had  played  in  1875. 

^  Spiritualist,  Sept.  28th,  1877. 

■'  W.  H.  Harrison,  in  the  Spiritualist,  Dec.  29th,  1876. 

"'  "When  strict  test  conditions  are  imposed,  even  when  united  with  harmony 
and  good  feeling,  it  is  only  in  very  rare  instances  that  full-form  manifestations 
take  place. " —ii)>mV«a&/,  Dec.  22nd,  1876. 

MATERIALISATION  109 

likeness  of  another  body,  sometimes  in  propria  persona,  the 
medium  being  at  the  time  entranced  and  controlled  by  his 
spirit  guides.  For  the  supposed  "  transformation "  no 
evidence  is  offered  worth  consideration.  But  the  alternative 
theory  presented  no  special  difficulty.  It  was  admitted  that 
to  the  spirits  the  extrication  of  the  medium's  body  from  the 
most  cunningly  devised  bonds  was  an  easy  task.  And  there 
were,  no  doubt,  many  spiritual  intelligences,  especially  those 
of  sub-human  "  elementals,"  who  would  find  pleasure  in  thus 
practising  on  the  credulity  of  mortals.  Clearly,  then,  the 
only  satisfactory  evidence  of  materialisation  would  be  the 
simultaneous  presentation  of  the  "  form  "  and  the  medium  to 
the  eyes  of  the  circle ;  or,  failing  that,  irrefragable  proof 
of  the  presence  of  the  medium  in  the  cabinet  at  the  time 
when  the  spirit  form  was  outside.  To  Stainton  Moses  it 
appeared  that  evidence  of  the  kind  desired  was  afforded 
by  certain  experiments,  notably  those  of  the  Comte  de 
Bullet  with  Firman  already  referred  to ;  to  W.  H.  Harrison 
that  the  electrical  tests  employed  by  Mr.  Varley  and  Sir 
W.  Crookes  amounted  almost  to  a  demonstration.  But  all 
were  agreed  that  more  evidence  was  required. 

To  the  outsider  the  most  noteworthy  feature  in  the  discus- 
sion is  the  implied  belief  on  all  hands  in  the  honesty  of  the 
medium.  Policy  alone  would  no  doubt  have  dictated  such 
a  profession  of  faith.  But  the  accents  are  those  of  genuine 
conviction.  It  would  seem  that  to  Spiritualists  at  that  time 
the  idea  of  systematic  and  wholesale  imposture  on  the  part 
of  the  medium — even  such  unconscious  or  semi-conscious 
imposture  as  might  be  associated  with  a  hypnoid  state — had 
hardly  presented  itself  as  a  serious  possibility.  If  fraud  there 
were,  it  was  assumed  to  be  fraud  on  the  part  of  tricky 
elementals.^ 

^  In  an  editorial  article  in  the  Spiritualist  iox  28th  December,  1877,  Mr.  Harrison 
sums  up  the  position.  He  begins  by  pointing  out  that  there  are  two  well-marked 
classes  of  so-called  materialisations  :  (i)  Forms  with  flexible  features  commonly 
bearing  a  strong  resemblance  to  the  medium,  which  move  and  speak.  These  are 
the  forms  which  come  out  when  the  medium  is  in  the  cabinet.  (2)  Forms  with 
features  which  are  inflexible  and  masklike  (the  epithet  is  not  Mr.  Harrison's)  and 
which  do  not  move  about  or  speak.  Such  inflexible  faces  are  seen  chiefly  when 
the  medium  is  held  by  the  sitters,  or  is  in  full  view  of  the  circle.  Mr.  Harrison 
then  continues  :  "  W^e  have  patiently  watched  for  years  for  a  living,  flexible  face 
in  a  good  light,  which  face  bore  no  resemblance  to  that  of  the  medium,  and  was 
not  produced  on  his  or  her  own  premises.  Hitherto  this  search  has  been  prose- 
cuted without  success.  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace  and  Mr.  Crookes  have  witnessed 
a  great  number  of  form  manifestations,  without  once  recording  that,  off  the 
premises  of  the  medium,  they  have  seen  a  living,  flexible,  materialised  spirit  form, 
bearing  no  resemblance  to  the  sensitive.  Neither  has  Mr.  Varley  made  any  such 
record." 

no        SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

During  the  year  1878  the  Research  Committee  of  the 
"  B.  N.  A.  S."  set  itself  to  fill  up  the  gap  in  the  evidence  thus 
demonstrated.  Their  labours  met  with  some  apparent 
success.  A  cabinet  was  constructed  and  mounted  on  an 
apparatus  made  after  the  model  of  a  platform  weighing- 
machine,  with  an  automatic  recording  apparatus  attached.^ 
Mr.  Williams,  the  medium,  sat  in  the  cabinet,  the  seance- 
room  being  in  complete  darkness,  except  that  a  recorder  was 
shut  up  in  another  cabinet  with  a  lighted  lamp,  in  such  wise 
that  no  ray  from  it  should  relieve  the  gloom  in  which  the 
spectators  sat.  Under  these  circumstances  a  spirit  form  was 
seen,  heard,  and  felt  to  move  about  the  room,  giving  on 
various  occasions  tangible  proof  of  its  presence  at  a  distance 
of  ten  or  twelve  feet  from  the  cabinet.  The  times  of  these 
manifestations  were  carefully  noted,  and  were  found  to 
correspond  with  fluctuations  in  the  weight  recorded  by  the 
self-registering  apparatus,  the  extreme  limit  over  which  the 
variations  in  weight  extended  amounting  to  about  100  lbs. 
When  the  form  was  at  its  maximum  distance  from  the 
cabinet,  the  automatic  record  indicated  a  weight  of  about 
30  lbs.  Now  since  there  was  no  heavy  object  which  could 
have  been  placed  in  the  cabinet  during  the  absence  of  the 
medium,  it  was  contended  that  these  results  indicated  that 
part  of  the  bodily  substance  of  the  medium  had  been  with- 
drawn to  make  up  the  spirit  form,  whilst  part  remained  in  the 
cabinet,  and  affected  the  balance.  The  editor  of  the 
Spiritualist  appears  to  have  regarded  the  experiments  as 
conclusive.^ 

No  doubt  the  suggestion  of  a  transatlantic  sceptic  that  the 
medium  could  have  manipulated  the  recording  instrument 
may  be  dismissed  as  impracticable.^  But  the  experiment  as 
described  was  clearly  open  to  one  source  of  error.  The 
medium  had  only  to  fasten  the  suspended  cabinet  to  the  floor 
by  a  gimlet  or  a  piece  of  string  and  a  nail,  and  he  could 
move  about  the  room  as  he  pleased.  Some  fifteen  months 
later  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey  pointed  out  that  a  similar  series  of 
experiments  was  vitiated  by  the  neglect  to  guard  against  this 
possibility.^  That  this  form  of  fraud  did  not  suggest  itself 
at  the  time  to  Mr.  Harrison,  who  was  by  no  means  lacking 
in  shrewdness  or  the  capacity  to  weigh  evidence,  was  again 

'  It  is  to  be  noted  that  Miss  Cook— or  rather  "  Katie" — had  refused  to  accede 
to  Sir  W.  Crookes'  request  that  she  should  allow  herself  to  be  weighed  (see 
Spiritualist,  29th  Dec,  1876,  p.  257). 

^  See  his  articles  on  the  experiments.  Spiritualist,  May  3rd  and  17th  and 
June  7th,  1878. 

3  Ibid.,  June  14th,  1878.  ^  Ibid.,  17th  Oct.  and  14th  Nov.,  1879. 

MATERIALISATION  111 

due  probably  in  a  large  measure  to  the  extraordinary  confi- 
dence which  he  and  other  Spiritualists  seem  habitually  to 
have  placed  in  the  professional  medium. 

That  confidence  was,  however,  soon  rudely  shaken.  A  few 
months  after  the  results  of  the  weighing  experiments,  with 
all  due  scientific  appurtenances  of  charts  and  diagrams,  had 
appeared  in  the  Spiritualist,  Williams  and  his  new  colleague 
Rita  were  exposed  in  Amsterdam,  under  circumstances  which 
made  it  difficult  for  the  most  hardened  believer  to  lay  all  the 
blame  upon  the  spirits.  The  incident  took  place  in  the 
rooms  of  a  Spiritualist ;  the  members  of  the  circle  were 
Spiritualists  ;  and  it  was  aggrieved  and  indignant  Spiritualists 
who  made  the  facts  public.  Suspicion  had  been  aroused  ; 
one  of  the  sitters  clutched  at  the  spirit  form  of  "  Charlie,"  and 
grasped  Rita  by  the  coat  collar.  Up  to  this  point,  no  doubt, 
the  Spiritualist  theories  already  referred  to  were  elastic 
enough  to  cover  the  facts.  But  when  the  mediums  were 
searched,  there  were  found,  in  their  pockets  or  hidden  in 
various  parts  of  their  clothing,  on  Rita  a  nearly  new  beard, 
six  handkerchiefs,  assorted,  and  a  small  round  scent-bottle 
containing  phosphorised  oil,  bearing  a  resemblance  all  too 
convincing  to  "  Charlie's "  spirit-lamp ;  on  Williams  a  dirty 
black  beard  with  brown  silk  ribbon,  and  several  yards  of 
very  dirty  muslin — the  simple  ingredients  which  represented 
the  spiritual  make-up  of  the  repentant  pirate  John  King — 
together  with  another  bottle  of  phosphorised  oil,  a  bottle 
of  scent,  and  a  few  minor  properties. 

It  was  difficult  for  the  believer  to  lay  all  the  blame  upon 
the  spirits.  But  he  did  not  shrink  from  the  attempt ;  and 
that  dirty  muslin  was  washed  in  public  with  much  circum- 
stance. Harrison  began  by  suggesting  that  evil  spirits  some- 
times abetted  their  mediums  in  imposture,  and  that  the 
facts  pointed  to  Williams  and  Rita  being  under  some  strong 
control  on  the  disastrous  occasion.^  Mr.  Blackburn  opined 
that  the  spirits — as  was  their  wont — had  brought  in  the 
muslin,  etc.,  to  save  themselves  the  trouble  of  materialising 
it,  and  had,  in  their  hurry,  omitted  to  take  it  away  with 
them."  Other  experienced  Spiritualists  wrote  to  support 
this  view ;  and  Mr.  Gledstanes  suggested  that,  before 
concluding  that  his  favourite  medium  was  dishonest,  it  would 
be  best  to  consult  "  John  King  "  himself.^ 

But  if  the  Spiritualists  learnt  little  from  the  incident,  the 
general   public  profited  by  the  lesson.      From  this  episode 

^  spiritualist,  Sept.  20th  and  27th,  1878. 

2  Ijtiiei  in  Spiritualist,  Nov.  1st,  1878.  ^  Ibid.,  Oct.  25th,  1878. 

112        SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

may  be  said  to  date  the  decline  of  Spiritualism  in  this  country. 
Its  later  history  is  little  else,  indeed,  than  a  history  of  similar 
exposures.  One  other  example,  in  which  the  writer  was 
personally  concerned,  may  perhaps  be  quoted. 

In  the  year  1882  there  appeared  in  a  Spiritualist  journal^ 
an  account,  by  Mr.  J.  F.  Collingwood,  of  a  seance  held  under 
"  test "  conditions,  with  Miss  Wood,  a  well-known  Newcastle 
medium.  Mr.  Collingwood  saw  two  distinct  materialised 
spirit  forms  walking  about  the  room,  one  of  which — the  child 
form  of  a  little  Indian  girl  called  "Pocha" — touched  and  even 
kissed  some  of  the  sitters.  It  so  happened  that  I  had  myself 
attended  a  seance  with  the  same  medium,  held  under  the 
same  "  test "  conditions,  which,  briefly,  were  as  follows  :  Miss 
Wood  was  placed  in  a  cupboard,  the  door  of  which  had  been 
removed  and  the  entry  secured  by  passing  a  continuous  cord 
through  eye-headed  screws,  placed  at  short  intervals  along 
the  sides,  top,  and  bottom  of  the  doorway,  the  result  being 
a  kind  of  irregular  network,  with  meshes  whose  sides  varied 
from  five  to  ten  inches  in  measurement.  This  arrangement 
was  designed  to  prevent  Miss  Wood  from  leaving  the  cup- 
board. A  thick  curtain  was  drawn  across  the  corner  of  the 
room  at  an  angle  to  the  doorway,  so  as  to  leave  a  considerable 
space  between  the  network  and  curtain.  The  lights  were 
lowered,  and  after  a  short  interval  occupied  by  singing,  two 
figures — a  woman  and  "  Pocha,"  the  aforesaid  little  Indian 
girl — emerged  successively  from  the  curtain  and  moved  about 
in  the  semi-darkness.  The  figures  did  not  in  my  presence 
appear  together,  nor  did  either  of  them  touch  the  sitters. 
After  the  sitting  was  concluded  I  examined  the  network,  and 
found  by  actual  trial  that  it  was  quite  easy  to  creep  in  and 
out  without  injuring  the  meshes.  I  accordingly  wrote  to 
Light^"  communicating  my  discovery,  and  pointing  out  that, 
when  once  the  medium  had  come  through  the  network,  it 
would  have  been  quite  easy  for  her,  with  the  aid  of  a  little 
drapery,  to  produce  all  the  phenomena  which  had  been 
observed.  The  taller  of  the  two  figures,  on  this  hypothesis, 
would  be  Miss  Wood  standing  upright,  the  shorter,  Miss 
Wood  on  her  knees.  The  singing  would  effectually  drown 
any  noise  made  by  the  medium  in  creeping  through  the  net- 
work ;  the  presence  and  position  of  the  curtain  would  hide 
her  movements  during  the  operation  ;  whilst  the  more  than 
semi-darkness  would  render  detection  difficult. 

The  letter  was  intended,  not  as  a  demonstration  that  fraud 
had  been  committed,  but  as  a  protest  against  the  assumption 

^  Light,  July  29th,  1882.  2  Aug.  19th,  1882. 

MATERIALISATION  1 1 3 

that,  under  the  given  conditions,  fraud  was  impossible.  It 
met  with  a  somewhat  surprising  reception.  The  next  three 
numbers  of  the  paper  contained  nine  lengthy  letters — selected, 
as  the  editor  explained,  out  of  a  much  larger  number,  some 
of  them  too  personal  for  publication — from  indignant  Spirit- 
ualists. Not  one  of  the  writers  recognised  that  temperate 
criticism  of  the  kind  employed  was  legitimate  and  even  help- 
ful. Some,  indeed,  disputed  the  possibility  of  the  "tests" 
being  evaded  in  the  manner  I  described.  But  the  majority 
thought  it  a  sufficient  answer  to  describe  similar  phenomena 
obtained,  also  "  under  test  conditions,"  at  other  times  and  in 
other  circumstances.  One  writer  even  maintained  that  to 
take  any  precaution  against  fraud  was  superfluous  and  un- 
philosophical.     By  all  my  action  was  condemned. 

Then  came  a  dramatic  intervention.  The  last  of  the  letters 
appeared  in  Light  for  September  9th.  The  following  week 
came  a  communication  from  a  Spiritualist  narrating  that 
at  a  seance  held  at  his  house  a  few  days  previously  Miss 
Wood  had  been  detected  in  flagrant  imposture.  A  member 
of  the  circle  had  ventured  to  do  what  I  had  not  done.  He 
had  seized  the  child  form  of  "  Pocha,"  and  found  himself 
holding  Miss  Wood  on  her  knees,  partially  undressed,  and 
covered  with  muslin,  which  she  unsuccessfully  endeavoured 
to  conceal  about  her  person.  Again  Light  was  filled  with 
letters  in  defence  of  Miss  Wood.  A  main  feature  of  the 
defence,  as  before,  was  the  description  of  marvellous  pheno- 
mena at  previous  seances.  Various  alternative  explanations 
of  the  exposure,  as  in  the  case  of  Williams  and  Rita,  were 
suggested  :  that  the  sitters  had  made  a  mistake ;  that  the 
gentleman  who  seized  the  medium  had  brought  in  the  muslin 
himself;  that  Miss  Wood  was  possessed  by  an  evil  spirit  on 
the  occasion  in  question ;  and  finally,  that,  in  accordance  with 
Mr.  Harrison's  views,  when  the  form  is  seized  and  can  no 
longer  return  to  the  medium,  the  spirits,  in  order  to  secure 
the  medium  from  serious  injury,  are  obliged  to  bring  the 
body  to  the  form.  They  coalesce,  and  the  inquirer  who 
began  by  seizing  a  spirit  finds  that  his  grasp  has  closed  upon 
a  frame  of  flesh  and  blood.  This  last  theory,  it  should  be 
explained,  was  now  propounded  on  the  authority  of  a  spirit, 
who  had  communicated  it  to  the  correspondent.^ 

So  far,  then,  there  seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the 
so-called  spirit  form  was  in  all  cases  that  of  the  medium  or 

^  The  foregoing  account  of  Miss  Wood's  exposure,  and  of  the  events  which 
preceded  it,  is  taken  with  sHght  verbal  alterations  from  my  earlier  work,  Studies 
in  Psychical  Research. 

114        BPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

an  accomplice,  more  or  less  successfully  disguised.  Nor  were 
there  any  collateral  circumstances  tending  to  render  this  ex- 
planation doubtful.  Fragments  of  spirit  drapery — material- 
ised, ex  hypothesi,  for  the  occasion — were  sometimes,  at  the 
earlier  seances  in  this  country,  cut  off  and  presented  to  im- 
portunate admirers  ;  but  in  all  cases  they  proved  to  be  indis- 
tinguishable from  the  products  of  earthly  looms.^  Later  this 
theory  was  gradually  discredited,  and  it  was  freely  recognised 
by  Spiritualists  that  the  drapery  shown  on  materialised  forms 
had  been  borrowed  for  the  occasion,  either  by  the  spirits  or 
the  medium  "  under  control." 

Again,  as  already  shown,  the  face  of  the  spirit  form,  by 
the  testimony  of  Spiritualists  themselves,  in  most  cases 
strongly  resembled  the  face  of  the  medium,^  though  some 
believers,  admitting  this,  yet  professed  to  recognise  sub- 
stantial differences.^  Medium  and  spirit  were  never  seen 
together  in  unequivocal  circumstances  and  by  disinterested 
and  competent  witnesses ;  ^  under  the  like  circumstances  the 
"  direct "  voice  of  the  spirit  was  never  heard  speaking  at  the 
same  time  as  the  medium.^ 

At  the  early  seances  in  America,  as  already  mentioned, 
the  sitters  were  reported  to  have  constantly  "  recognised " 
the  spirit  forms.  Mr.  J.  W.  Truesdell  was  present  at  some 
of  the  sittings  given  by  Mrs.  And«*«en  in  Moravia,  and  has 
described  some  of  the  "recognitions"  of  which  he  was  a 
witness.  Thus  Mr.  T.  R.  Hazard  (a  well-known  Spiritualist) 
was  greeted  by  a  figure  purporting  to  be  his  mother.  Mr. 
Hazard  could  not  see  the  features  of  the  figure,  and  could 
not  recognise  the  voice ;  but  he  had  no  doubt  that  it  really 
was  his  mother,  founding  his  conviction  on  his  recognition  of 
the  Quaker  cap  and  bonnet  which  the  figure  wore.  This 
Quaker  cap  and  bonnet,  Mr.  Truesdell  tells  us,  had  already 
done  duty  in  a  similar  capacity  for  several  other  witnesses 
with  equal  success.^ 

^  See,  for  instance,  Spiritualist,  Sept.  15th,  1872,  letter  from  E.  Gunton ; 
May  1st,  1874,  editorial  article  ;  Spiritual  Magazine,  Dec.,  1872,  p.  549,  etc.,  etc, 

^  See,  in  addition  to  the  references  already  cited,  the  editorial  in  Spiritualist, 
May  loth,  1874,  and  the  account,  pp.  153-4,  below,  of  the  materialised  form  of 
"  Katie  "  photographed  by  Sir  W.  Crookes. 

^  See  e.g.  Mr.  Tapp's  letter  in  the  Spiritualist,  Feb.  6th,  1874. 

^  See  the  discussion  on  this  point  with  respect  to  Sir  W.  Crookes'  experiments 
with  Miss  Cook,  below,  pp.  153-5.  Mr.  Stock's  testimony  {Spiritualist,  April 
20th,  1877)  does  not  seem  really  pertinent.  Mr.  Stock  saw  and  spoke  with  the 
form  of  John  King,  while  Williams,  the  medium,  lay  on  the  floor  at  his  feet. 
But  Heme  and  Eglinton  were  both  present. 

^  See,  for  instance,  the  careful  historical  accounts  by  Mr.  W.  H.  Harrison,  the 
editor,  in  the  Spiritualist  for  Feb.  6th  and  May  ist,  1874,  etc.,  etc. 

^  Bottom  Facts  concerning  Spiritualism,  p.  83,  etc.     New  York,  1883. 

MATERIALISATION  1 1 5 

Of  the  famous  recognitions  at  the  Eddy  stances  we  have 
various  accounts,  to  correct  the  too  imaginative  history  given 
by  Colonel  Olcott.^  Thus  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey,  a  witness  who 
was  certainly  not  prejudiced  against  the  Spiritualist  position, 
attended  the  Eddy  seances  for  a  fortnight  in  1875.  This  is 
how  he  describes  the  nightly  incident  of  the  apparition  of  a 
deceased  relative  of  someone  present : — 

"  A  dusky  young  man  would  look  out,  and  we  had  to  say  in  turn, 
all  round  the  circle,  *  Is  it  for  me  ? '  When  the  right  person  was 
reached,  three  taps  would  be  given,  and  the  fortunate  possessor 
of  the  ghost  would  gaze  doubtfully,  upon  which  the  ghost  would 
look  grieved,  and  that  generally  softened  the  heart  of  the  observer, 

and  brought  about  a  recognition  in  the  remark,  '  Lor,  so  you  be .' 

And  that  sort  of  thing  went  on  night  after  night  at  the  Eddys'." ^ 

At  the  early  seances  in  this  country  the  faces  which  ap- 
peared were  occasionally,  if  rarely,  recognised  by  the  sitters 
as  those  of  deceased  relatives.  Thus,  at  a  sitting  held  on 
April  20th,  1872,  Mr.  Clifford  Smith  recognised  one  of  the 
spirit  faces  as  that  of  a  lady  to  whom  he  had  been  engaged. 
The  illumination,  however,  is  described  as  "dim,"  and  Mr, 
Smith,  to  judge  from  his  own  version  of  the  incident,  appears 
to  have  been  in  a  state  of  much  emotional  excitement. 
Moreover,  the  "recognition"  did  not  take  place  until  after 
the  spirit  form  had  addressed  Mr.  Smith  by  name  and 
claimed  acquaintance.^  At  a  seance  with  Mrs.  Holmes  as 
medium  a  face  appeared  which  was  recognised  by  Dr.  and 
Mrs.  Speer  and  the  latter's  brother  as  that  of  a  departed 
relative.  "M.A.  Oxon"  (Stainton  Moses),  who  also  contributes 
an  account  of  the  seance,  states  that  the  light  was  good,  and 
that  the  face  appeared  at  a  few  feet  from  the  sitters.  But 
the  details  given  are  not  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  judge  of 
the  value  of  the  "recognition."*  Again,  Serjeant  Cox,  at  a 
seance  in  January,  1873,  it  is  stated,  asked  of  a  spirit  face, 
"  Are  you  m.y  uncle,  Robert  Cox  ? "  and  the  face  bowed  an 
affirmative.^  But  as  Serjeant  Cox  himself  does  not  refer  to 
the  incident,  and  later  repeatedly  expressed  his  entire  dis- 
belief in  materialised  spirit  forms,  it  may  be  presumed  that 
the  recognition  was  premature.  Later,  such  recognitions  were 
reported  not  infrequently.^      I  have  myself  within  the  last 

1  People  from  the  Other  World,  by  H.  S.  Olcott.     Hartford  (Conn.),  1875. 

^  Spiritualist,  Dec.  29th,  1876  ;  see  also  D.  D.  Home,  Lights  and  Shadows  of 
Spiritualism,  pp.  260-4.  ^  Spiritualist,  May  15th,  1872. 

^  Spiritual  Magazine,  1873,  p.  So.         ^  Ibid.,  1873,  p.  81. 

^  e.g.  Mr.  J.  L.  O'Sullivan's  recognition  of  his  mother  at  Firman's  seances 
already  referred  to ;  Mr.  Coleman's  account  of  a  lady  recognising  her  husband 

116        SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

twenty  years  received  accounts  of  several  such  incidents  from 
persons  of  unquestioned  good  faith,  who  believed  themselves 
actually  to  have  seen  the  features  of  some  dead  friend.  In 
all  cases,  however,  the  light  was  dim,^  and  the  observers 
appear  to  have  been  in  some  emotional  stress. 

In  short,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  most  cases  the 
attendants  at  these  dark  seances  see  what  they  wish  to  see. 
Dr.  Horace  Furness  has  given  a  most  instructive  account  of 
his  experiences  at  materialisation  seances  in  America,  from 
which  I  quote  the  following  : — 

"At  another  seance  a  woman,  a  visitor,  led  from  the  cabinet  to 
me  a  materialised  spirit,  whom  she  introduced  to  me  as  'her 
daughter,  her  dear,  darling  daughter,'  while  nothing  could  be  clearer 
to  me  than  the  features  of  the  medium  in  every  line  and  lineament. 
Again  and  again  men  have  led  round  the  circle  the  materialised 
spirits  of  their  wives,  and  introduced  them  to  each  visitor  in  turn ; 
fathers  have  taken  round  their  daughters,  and  I  have  seen  widows 
sob  in  the  arms  of  their  dead  husbands.  Testimony  such  as  this 
staggers  me.  Have  I  been  smitten  with  colour-blindness?  Before 
me,  as  far  as  I  can  detect,  stands  the  very  medium  herself,  in 
shape,  size,  form,  and  feature  true  to  a  line;  and  yet,  one  after 
another,  honest  men  and  women  at  my  side,  within  ten  minutes 
of  each  other,  assert  that  she  is  the  absolute  counterpart  of  their 
nearest  and  dearest  friend,  nay,  that  she  is  that  friend.  It  is  as 
incomprehensible  to  me  as  the  assertion  that  the  heavens  are  green 
and  the  leaves  of  the  trees  deep-blue.  Can  it  be  that  the  faculty 
of  observation  and  comparison  is  rare,  and  that  our  features  are 
really  vague  and  misty  to  our  best  friends  ?  or  is  it  that  the  medium 
exercises  some  mesmeric  influence  on  her  visitors,  who  are  thus 
made  to  accept  the  faces  which  she  wills  them  to  see?  or  is  it, 
after  all,  only  the  dim  light  and  a  fresh  illustration  of  la  nuit  tons  les 
chats  S(ynt gris ?"^ 

We  shall  have  occasion  to  return  to  the  subject  of  recogni- 
tion in  the  next  chapter,  and  again  in  Book  IV.  chapter  iv. 

(Spiritualist,  14th  July,  1876);  Mr.  Ronald's  recognition  of  his  brother 
{Spiritualist,  April  20th,  1877,  letter  by  St.  George  Stock),  etc.  Remarkable 
accounts  have  recently  appeared  in  Light  (April,  1900,  and  later  dates)  of  seances 
with  Husk,  at  which  several  spirit  faces  have  been  shown  against  the  background 
of  a  luminous  slate,  and  in  each  case  recognised  by  one  or  other  of  those  present. 

•^  "The  recognisable  faces  of  deceased  persons  seem  to  be  formed  with  more 
difficulty,  and  in  all  cases  to  bear  less  light  than  the  faces  in  affinity  to  the 
medium.  .  .  .  The  recognisable  faces  have  less  life  in  them,  and  but  few  of  them 
can  talk."  (W.  H.  Harrison,  in  Spiritualist,  Feb.  ist,  1873.) 

"^  Seybert  Report,  p.  150.  The  bodies  of  drowned  persons  are  not  seldom 
erroneously  recognised.  For  a  striking  instance  see  Le  Bon,  Psychologie  des 
Foules,  p.  34. 

CHAPTER    VII 
SPIRIT   PHOTOGRAPHS 

THE  history  of  spirit  photography,  though,  in  this 
country  at  any  rate,  extremely  brief,  presents  several 
features  of  interest.  Like  most  other  types  of  mani- 
festation, it  originated  in  America.  So  early  as  October, 
1862,  Dr.  Gardner,  of  Boston,  announced  that  a  photographer 
of  that  city  named  Mumler  had,  in  taking  a  photograph  of 
himself,  obtained  on  the  same  plate  the  likeness  of  a  cousin 
dead  some  twelve  years  before.  In  the  course  of  the  next 
few  weeks  many  well-known  Spiritualists  flocked  to  Mumler's 
studio  and  obtained  "  spirit  photographs,"  some  of  which 
were  recognised  as  being  the  likenesses  of  deceased  friends. 
In  February  of  the  following  year,  however.  Dr.  Gardner 
discovered  that,  in  two  at  least  of  the  so-called  spirit  photo- 
graphs, a  living  person  had  sat  for  the  "  spirit."  Dr.  Gardner 
himself  and  most  other  Spiritualists  appear  still  to  have  been 
satisfied  that  some  of  the  photographs  were  genuine,  basing 
their  conviction  on  the  double  ground  that  many  of  the 
spirit  figures  had  been  recognised,  and  that  in  some  cases 
the  process  of  production  had  been  supervised  throughout 
by  expert  witnesses  without  trickery  being  detected. 

But  the  exposure  put  a  stop  to  the  trade  for  the  time,  and 
we  hear  -no  more  of  Mumler  until  1869,  when  he  reappeared 
in  New  York.  Within  a  few  weeks  of  his  commencing  opera- 
tions in  that  city  a  prosecution  was  instituted  against  him 
by  the  municipal  authorities.  The  prosecution,  however,  was 
unable — the  old  Boston  evidence  being  barred — to  bring 
forward  any  actual  proof  of  fraud ;  whilst  for  the  defence 
numerous  witnesses  appeared,  some  themselves  photographers 
who  had  investigated  and  failed  to  detect  trickery,  others, 
sitters  who  had  obtained  on  the  plate  portraits  of  deceased 
relatives.  In  the  event  Mumler  was  discharged  for  want  of 
evidence.^ 

1  spiritual  Magazine,  1862,  p.  562;  1863,  pp.  36,  82,  128,  182;  1869, 
pp.  226,  241. 

117 

118        SPIEITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

It  is  not  until  1872,  however,  that  we  find  any  record 
of  spirit  photography  in  this  country.  The  manifestation 
originated  about  the  same  time  as  the  materiahsations  dealt 
with  in  the  last  chapter,  and  through  the  same  instrumentality 
— that  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Guppy.  After  trial  in  the  domestic 
circle  for  some  weeks  without  success,  Mr.  Guppy  found  a 
photographer  named  Hudson  who,  with  the  assistance  of 
Mrs.  Guppy  or  some  other  medium,  was  able  to  produce 
spirit  pictures.  The  procedure  was  much  the  same  as  that 
followed  by  Mumler.  The  sitter  would  be  posed  in  front  of 
the  camera,  and,  if  the  operation  were  successful,  the 
developed  picture  would  present,  in  addition  to  his  own 
image,  another  figure,  in  most  cases  draped,  and  with  the 
features  blurred  or  only  partly  discernible. 

Hudson's  studio  was  at  once  besieged  by  eager  Spiritualists, 
and  numerous  testimonies  to  the  genuineness  of  the  results 
appeared  in  the  Spiritualist  papers.  Mr.  Slater,  an  optician, 
took  his  own  camera,  lenses,  and  plates,  and  watched  the 
process  throughout,  without  discovering  any  suspicious  cir- 
cumstance. Moreover,  though  most  of  the  spirit  faces  were 
more  or  less  veiled  in  white  drapery,  a  considerable  proportion 
were  unhesitatingly  recognised  by  the  sitters  as  the  likenesses 
of  friends.  But  very  shortly  the  bright  prospect  clouded. 
Mr.  Enmore  Jones,  a  well-known  Spiritualist,  who  had  in  his 
first  enthusiasm  described  the  instant  recognition  by  his  son 
of  an  imperfectly  discernible  profile  as  that  of  a  dead  sister, 
wrote  later  to  say  that  he  had  found  grounds  for  suspicion, 
and  that  on  further  inspection  he  was  satisfied  that  the 
likeness  was  not  that  of  his  daughter  or  of  any  member 
of  his  family.  And  worse  was  to  follow.  The  editor  of  the 
Spiritualist,  W.  H.  Harrison,  himself  a  practical  photo- 
grapher, another  Spiritualist  photographer,  Beattie,  and  other 
persons  soon  ascertained  that  fraud  had  been  used.  It  was 
observed,  on  a  close  scrutiny  of  the  pictures,  that  in  some 
cases  the  medium  had  dressed  up  to  play  the  part  of  ghost. 
In  many  there  were  signs  of  double  exposure,  the  pattern 
of  the  carpet  and  other  parts  of  the  background  showing 
through  the  legs  of  the  sitter,  as  well  as  through  those  of  the 
ghost.  Inspection  of  the  actual  negatives  again  revealed  that 
in  some  cases  they  had  been  tampered  with  in  the  attempt  to 
erase  these  tell-tale  marks,^ 

^  The  Spiritualist,  April,  May,  June,  July,  1872.  Hudson's  photographs  are 
now  difficult  to  obtain  ;  but  I  have  examined  a  few  specimens — the  property 
of  Mr.  Dawson  Rogers  and  the  Spiritual  Alliance — two  of  which  bear  clear 
marks  of  double  exposure,  the  background  in  each  case  being  visible  through  the 
dress  of  the  sitter. 

SPIRIT  PHOTOGRAPHS  119 

But  the  demonstration  produced  little  effect.  The 
Spiritualist  newspaper,  indeed,  ceased  to  pay  any  more 
attention  to  Hudson's  spirit  photography ;  but  its  contem- 
poraries, the  Spiritual  Magazine,  Human  Nature,  and  the 
Medium,  gladly  opened  their  columns  to  fresh  testimonies 
and  heated  vindications.  The  explanation  of  the  curious 
duplication  of  the  pattern  of  the  carpet  and  other  marks 
of  double  exposure  which  found  most  favour  with  believers 
was  of  a  sufficiently  ingenious  kind.  The  spirits  explained 
that  these  suspicious  appearances  were  due  to  refraction  ;  the 
spirit  aura,  the  presence  of  which  was  essential  to  the  success 
of  the  experiment,  differing  apparently  in  density  and  re- 
fracting power  from  the  ordinary  terrestrial  atmosphere.^ 
Hudson's  studio  was  more  thronged  than  ever,  and  Stainton 
Moses,  in  reviewing  two  years  later  the  evidence  for  spirit 
photography,  bases  his  case  largely  on  Hudson's  work,  and 
does  not  think  it  necessary  to  dwell  on  his  detected  frauds.^ 

The  conviction  entertained  by  most  Spiritualists  of  the 
authenticity,  in  general,  of  these  spirit  photographs,  a  con- 
viction shared,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  case  of  Mumler,  even 
by  some  who  admitted  that  fraud  had  been  occasionally 
practised,  rested  ultimately  upon  the  fact  that  many  of  the 
spirit  figures  were  claimed  by  the  sitters  as  recognisable  like- 
nesses of  their  friends.  How  untrustworthy  such  recognition 
may  be  is  made  evident  in  many  cases  out  of  the  mouths  of 
the  witnesses  themselves.  Enmore  Jones  repudiated  the 
recognition  of  his  dead  daughter  as  soon  as  he  became  aware 
of  suspicious  circumstances  in  the  production  of  the  photo- 
graph. A  well-known  Spiritualist,  Mrs.  Fitzgerald,  professed 
to  recognise  "unmistakably,"  by  the  contour  alone,  a  veiled 
and  draped  figure.^  A  sceptical  clergyman  is  reported  by 
Stainton  Moses  to  have  recognised  two  faces  which  were  so 
close  together  on  the  plate  that  "  although  the  features  were 
quite  different,  three  eyes  only  were  required  to  form  two 
perfect  faces."*  Stainton  Moses  himself  selects,  out  of  a 
hundred  and  eighty  photographs  by  Hudson  submitted  to 
him,  two — presumably  not  the  least  impressive — to  be  repro- 
duced as  illustrations  to  the  articles  referred  to.  Copies  of 
these  two  photographs  are  before  me  as  I  write.  One  of  the 
two  represents  an  upright  figure  with  the  whole  of  the  bust 
enveloped  in  white  drapery,  so  as  entirely  to  conceal  the  form. 

^  spiritual  Magazine,  1872,  p.  482;  Human  Nature,  1872,  p.  448. 
^  See  a  series  of  articles  by  "  M.A.,  Oxon.,"  published  in  Human  Nature,  for 
1874  and  1875.  3  Spiritual  Magazine,  1872,  p.  321. 

*  Human  Nature,  1874,  p.  429. 

120        SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

The  head  presents  a  three-quarter  face,  with  strongly  marked 
prominent  features.  The  upper  part  of  the  head  is  concealed 
by  a  dark  covering  which  may  be  a  skull-cap,  coming  low 
down  on  the  brow ;  the  white  drapery  referred  to  encroaches 
just  so  far  on  the  cheek  and  chin  as  to  leave  it  uncertain 
whether  there  were  whiskers  or  beard.  The  figure  was 
"  recognised  "  as  that  of  the  sitter's  father,  an  old  gentleman 
in  a  skull-cap.  It  is  undoubtedly  a  favourable  specimen  of 
the  spirit  photographer's  art.  But,  as  will  be  seen  from  the 
description,  so  little  of  the  face  is  exposed  to  view  that  any 
identification  must  be  of  a  very  doubtful  character.  The 
same  sitter  subsequently  "recognised"  a  portrait  of  a  dead 
sister  "by  the  manner  in  which  she  wore  her  hair  as  a  child." ^ 
But  the  other  photograph  selected  for  representation  is  still 
less  convincing.  There  are  two  spirits  on  the  plate,  a  closely 
veiled  (apparently)  female  figure,  with  its  back  half  turned 
towards  the  spectator,  and  a  baby  enhaloed  in  copious  white 
drapery.  Moses,  himself  one  of  the  sitters,  claims  that  both 
figures  were  recognised,  the  mother,  whose  face  is  invisible, 
by  her  glove,  the  child  by  its  features.  Presumably  when  the 
photograph  was  new — my  own  copy  has  faded  with  time — 
the  baby's  features  may  have  presented  something  more  dis- 
tinctive than  a  smooth  superficies  punctuated  by  two  black 
dots.  But  as  the  baby,  ex  kypothesi,  had  died  fifty  years  before 
at  the  age  of  seven  months,  the  validity  of  this  particular 
recognition  must  even  so  appear  questionable. 

But  fresh  evidence  was  soon  forthcoming  of  the  real  signifi- 
cance of  recognition  in  spirit  photography.  In  the  summer 
of  1874  ^  Parisian  photographer,  one  Buguet,  had  come  to 
London  and  produced  spirit  pictures.  These  pictures  were 
of  much  higher  artistic  quality  than  those  proceeding  from 
Hudson's  studio  ;  the  spirit  faces  were  in  most  cases  clearly 
defined,  and  were,  in  fact,  frequently  recognised  by  the  sitters, 
and  even  W.  H.  Harrison  failed  to  detect  any  trickery  in  the 
operation.^ 

Many  of  the  recognised  figures  were,  indeed,  those  of  well- 
known  personages.  Thus,  Allan  Kardec  appeared  on  the 
plate  when  his  widow  was  the  sitter ;  the  same  spirit  also 
appeared  with  Miss  Anna  Blackwell,  his  best-known  English 
disciple.     Miss  Blackwell  was  also  favoured  by  the  presence 

^  Human  Nature y  1874,  p.  395. 

2  Spiritualist,  June,  1874,  quoted  in  Human  Nature,  1875,  p.  14.  Harrison 
watched  the  operation  throughout,  but  was  not  allowed  himself  to  operate,  and 
for  the  identification  of  the  glass  plate  he  relied  upon  a  small  fragment  of  glass 
broken  off  by  Buguet.  I  suspect  that,  as  in  the  case  of  Duguid  already  referred 
to  (pp.  86-7,  above),  Buguet  found  here  an  opportunity  for  substitution. 

SPIEIT  PHOTOGRAPHS  121 

of  Charles  Dickens  and  of  King  Charles'  head.  Mr.  Gledstanes 
obtained  a  portrait  of  the  recently  deceased  Judge  Edmonds. 
Prominent  Spiritualists  like  Lady  Caithness,  her  son,  the 
Duke  de  Medina  Pomar,  and  the  Comte  de  Bullet,  obtained 
portraits  of  near  relatives.  Instances  of  this  kind  do  not 
in  themselves  afford  any  presumption  of  supernormal  power. 
Nor,  again,  is  it  difficult  to  account,  on  the  hypothesis  of 
trickery,  for  the  appearance  of  the  well-known  features  of 
Stainton  Moses  himself  on  the  sensitised  plate  in  Buguet's 
studio  in  Paris,  when  the  original  was,  as  he  tells  us,  lying 
in  his  bed  in  London  in  a  state  of  deep  trance.^  It  is  much 
more  remarkable  to  find  that  comparatively  obscure  persons, 
of  whom  it  is  unlikely  that  Buguet  could  have  heard,  should 
again  and  again  have  obtained  recognisable  portraits  of  their 
dead  friends.  Out  of  a  hundred  and  twenty  photographs  by 
Buguet  dealt  with  by  Stainton  Moses,  evidence  was  forth- 
coming of  recognition,  or  of  the  operation  being  produced 
under  test  conditions,  in  as  many  as  forty,  a  far  higher  pro- 
portion than  was  the  case  with  Hudson  or  Parkes. 

Stainton  Moses'  endorsement  of  Buguet's  claims  appeared 
in  Human  Nature  for  May,  1875.  I"  the  following  month 
Buguet  was  arrested  and  charged  by  the  French  Government 
with  the  fraudulent  manufacture  of  spirit  photographs.  When 
put  on  his  trial  Buguet  made  a  full  confession.  The  whole 
of  his  "spirit"  photographs  were,  he  stated,  produced  by 
means  of  double  exposure.  In  the  first  instance  he  employed 
his  assistants — of  whom  there  were  three  or  four — to  play  the 
part  of  ghost.  Later,  as  his  business  grew,  and  he  feared 
that  the  constant  repetition  of  the  same  features  might 
arouse  suspicion,  he  constructed  a  headless  doll  or  lay  figure, 
which,  variously  draped,  served  for  the  body  of  the  ghost. 
The  head  was  commonly  chosen  to  suit  the  expectations, 
where  these  were  expressed,  or  apparent  circumstances  of  the 
sitter ;  information  on  these  points  being  frequently  ex- 
tracted by  the  assistants,  who  received  the  visitors  on  their 
entrance.  The  lay  figure  and  a  large  stock  of  heads  were 
seized  by  the  police  at  the  studio.^ 

The  peculiar  interest  of  the  trial  did  not  consist,  however, 

^  Human  Nattire,  1875,  p.  97. 

^  A  verbatim  account  of  the  trial  will  be  found  in  a  book,  Proces  des  Spirites, 
published  in  Paris  in  1875  by  Madame  Leymarie.  M.  Leymarie,  editor  of  the 
Revue  spirite,  who  had  admittedly  suggested  to  Buguet  that  he  should  endeavour 
to  produce  spirit  photographs  like  those  of  Mumler,  was  put  on  his  trial  with 
Buguet,  and  was  in  the  event  condemned,  notwithstanding  his  protestations  of 
innocence,  to  a  like  punishment,  viz.  a  year's  imprisonment  and  a  fine  of  500 
francs. 

122        SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

in  these  paltry  revelations ;  for,  after  all,  Buguet  did  little 
to  improve  on  the  methods  inaugurated  by  his  predecessors. 
It  is  the  effect  produced  on  his  dupes  by  Buguet's  confession, 
and  the  display  of  his  trick  apparatus,  which  is  really  worthy 
of  attention.  Witness  after  witness — ^journalist,  photographic 
expert,  musician,  merchant,  man  of  letters,  optician,  ex- 
professor  of  history,  colonel  of  artillery,  etc.,  etc, — came 
forward  to  testify  on  behalf  of  the  accused.  Some  had 
watched  the  process  throughout,  and  were  satisfied  that 
trickery  had  not  been  practised.  Many  had  obtained  on  the 
plate  unmistakable  portraits  of  those  dear  to  them,  and 
found  it  impossible  to  relinquish  their  faith.  One  aftej: 
another  these  witnesses  were  confronted  with  Buguet,  and 
heard  him  explain  how  the  trick  had  been  done.  One  after 
another  they  left  the  witness-box,  protesting  that  they  could 
not  doubt  the  evidence  of  their  own  eyes.  Here,  chosen 
almost  at  random  from  many  similar  accounts,  is  the  testi- 
mony of  M.  Dessenon,  picture-seller,  aged  fifty-five.  After 
describing  how  he  had  obtained  in  the  first  instance  various 
figures  which  he  could  not  recognise,  he  continues  : — 

"  The  portrait  of  my  wife,  which  I  had  specially  asked  for,  is  so 
like  her  that  when  I  showed  it  to  one  of  my  relatives  he  exclaimed, 
'  It's  my  cousin.' 

"  The  Court.     Was  that  chance,  Buguet? 

Buguet.  Yes,  pure  chance.  I  had  no  photograph  of  Mme, 
Dessenon, 

The  Witness,  My  children,  like  myself,  thought  the  likeness  per- 
fect. When  I  showed  them  the  picture,  they  cried,  '  It's  mamma.' 
A  very  fortunate  chance  !  ,  .  .  I  am  convinced  it  was  my  wife. 

The  Court.     You  see  this  doll  and  all  the  rest  of  the  things  ? 

The  Witness.  There  is  nothing  there  in  the  least  like  the  photo- 
graph which  I  obtained. 

The  Court.     You  may  stand  down."^ 

Incidentally  there  were  two  or  three  curious  bits  of  evi- 
dence on  the  value  of  recognition  as  a  test,  A  police  officer 
stated  that  Buguet  showed  him  a  portrait  which  had  done 
duty  as  the  sister  of  one  sitter,  the  mother  of  a  second,  and 
the  friend  of  a  third,^  Again,  it  came  out  in  the  evidence 
that  a  very  clearly  defined  head  (reproduced  as  an  illustra- 
tion to  Moses'  articles  in  Human  Nature),  which  had  been 
claimed  by  M,  Leymarie  as  the  portrait  of  his  almost  lifelong 
friend,  M.  Poiret,  was  recognised  by  another  witness  as  an 
excellent  likeness  of  his  father-in-law,  still  living  at  Dreux, 

1  Prods  des  Spirites,  p.  33.  -  Ibid. ,  p.  23. 

SPIRIT  PHOTOGRAPHS  123 

and  much  annoyed  at  his  premature  introduction  to  the 
spirit  world.^ 

The  effect  of  the  exposure  on  English  Spiritualists  appears 
to  have  been  much  the  same  as  the  effect  on  Buguet's  actual 
dupes.  Stainton  Moses  remarked  that  the  prosecution  bore 
traces  of  clerical  origin,  that  the  judge  was  strongly  biassed, 
and  that  Buguet  was  obviously  a  genuine  medium,  who  had 
no  doubt  been  bribed  or  terrorised  to  make  a  spurious 
confession,  and  to  fabricate  a  box  full  of  trick  apparatus  for 
exhibition  at  the  trial.^  William  Howitt  saw  in  the  whole 
proceedings  further  evidence  of  an  organised  conspiracy  on 
the  part  of  the  Jesuits  to  overthrow  Spiritualism.  They  had 
in  this  instance,  he  pointed  out,  apparently  bribed  a  genuine 
medium  to  confess  to  imaginary  trickery,  as  a  few  years 
before  they  had  sent  one  of  their  own  emissaries,  Allan 
Kardec,  to  poison  the  pure  wells  of  the  new  truth  with  the 
pestilential  doctrine  of  reincarnation.^ 

However,  the  result  of  the  trial  was  undoubtedly  on  the 
whole  to  discourage  the  profession  of  spirit  photography, 
and  we  hear  little  more  of  it  in  this  country  after  1875. 

Of  other  alleged  instances  of  spirit  photography  at  this 
time,  one  only  deserves  serious  notice.*  Mr.  Beattie,  a 
practical  photographer,  who  had  already,  on  the  strength 
of  the  signs  of  double  exposure,  denounced  Hudson's 
spurious  pictures,  in  the  years  1874-5  carried  on  with  a 
few  friends  a  series  of  experiments  at  Bristol.  The  results, 
after  many  blank  seances,  were  the  production  of  a  number 
of  plates  exhibiting  curious  blotches  and  splashes  of  light, 
a  few  bearing  a  remote  resemblance  to  the  human  figure, 
but  the  majority  being  shapeless  and  unrecognisable. 
Judged  from  the  reproductions  which  I  have  seen,^  the  effects 
might  well  be  due  to  rays  of  light  being  admitted  through 
a  small  aperture  on  to  the  sensitised  plate  in  the  developing 
room.^      The  experiments  took   place   in   the   studio   of  a 

^  Prods  des  Spirites,  p.  42;  see  also  Human  Nature,  i875>  frontispiece. 
The  spirit  head  in  the  photograph  is  noticeably  flat,  thus  testifying  to  its  origin. 

^  Human  Nature,  1875,  pp.  334,  335.       ^  Spiritual  Magazine,  1875,  p.  346. 

^  I  omit  any  account  of  Parkes'  pictures,  partly  because  he  would  not  appar- 
ently allow  his  processes  to  be  thoroughly  supervised,  partly  because  so  very  few 
of  his  spirit  photographs  were  even  claimed  as  recognised.  See  the  article  by 
Mrs.  Sidgwick,  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  vii.,  and  Stainton  Moses'  articles  in  Human 
Nature. 

^  Some  of  these  photographs  are  reproduced  in  Aksakof's  Animismus  und 
Spiritismus,  vol.  i.     Leipzig,  1890. 

^  Or  the  blotches  might  be  due  to  the  use  of  a  strong  developer ;  or  conceiv- 
ably they  might  have  been  produced  by  smearing  the  negative  with  some  reagent 
— s.g.  a  soluble  sulphide — which  would  blacken  it.  From  the  reproductions 
referred  to  it  is  not  clear  that  the  white  blotches  have  any  spatial  relation  to  the 

124        SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

professional  photographer  named  Josty,  who  supplied  also  the 
apparatus  used,  and  who  received  payment  for  his  services. 
Josty  further  acted  as  medium  and  assistant  in  the  necessary 
operations.  From  the  evidence  published  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick, 
it  is  clear  that  Josty's  character  was  not  such  as  to  make 
trickery  on  his  part  a  very  improbable  explanation.^ 

The  profession  of  spirit  photography  has  languished  in  this 
country  since  1875.^  From  time  to  time  within  the  last  five- 
and-twenty  years,  however,  reputed  spirit  photographs  have 
been  obtained  by  private  persons  without  the  aid  of  a 
professional  medium  or  photographer.  Most  of  those  which 
I  have  seen  represent  mere  vague  fogs  or  splotches  of  light, 
and  were  no  doubt  caused  by  the  inadvertent  admission  of 
light  to  the  sensitised  plate,  whether  through  incapacity  on 
the  part  of  the  operator  or  some  undetected  defect  in  the 
apparatus.  In  a  case  which  was  brought  to  my  notice  lately 
the  supposed  ghost  was  apparently  to  be  attributed  to  an 
accidental  double  exposure  ;  there  were  faint  marks  of  double 
exposure  in  the  print. 

A  very  curious  ghost  photograph  attained  some  celebrity 
ten  years  ago.     A  lady,  on  the  5th  December,  1891,  took  a 

photograph  of  the  library  of  D Hall.     Six  months  later 

she  developed  the  plate  and  found  seated  in  a  large  armchair 
the  faint  but  clearly  discernible  figure  of  a  man.  Various 
friends  recognised  the  image  as  the  likeness  of  the  late  Lord 

D ,  the   owner   of  D Hall,  and  it  was  ascertained 

that  Lord  D had  actually  been  buried  on  the  day  the 

photograph  was  taken.  Professor  Barrett,  however,  who 
investigated  the  case,  showed  (i)  that  the  image  is  too  faint 
and  blurred  for  any  likeness  to  be  substantiated  ;  (2)  that  the 
plate  had  been  exposed  in  the  camera  for  an  hour  and  the 
room  left  unguarded  ;  (3)  that  actual  experiments  show  that 
an  appearance  such  as  that  on  the  plate  could  have  been 

figures  of  the  sitters,  i.e.  the  blotches  may  have  been  produced  before  the  plate 
was  put  into  the  camera. 

^  Proc.  S.  P.  P.,  vol.  vii.  p.  286,  on  "Spirit  Photography":  a  reply  to 
Dr.  A.  R.  Wallace,  by  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  article,  to 
which  I  have  been  much  indebted  in  the  preparation  of  this  chapter,  furnishes 
a  trenchant  analysis  of  the  chief  evidence  for  spirit  photography,  and  should  be 
referred  to  by  all  interested  in  the  subject. 

2  Boursnell  is  the  professional  who  has  attained  most  celebrity  in  Spiritualist 
circles  of  recent  years.  I  am  not  aware,  however,  of  any  evidence  entitling  his 
productions  to  serious  consideration.  Some  of  his  photographs  which  I  have  seen 
bear  unmistakable  marks  of  double  exposure — the  pattern  of  the  floorcloth  and 
the  drop-curtain  of  the  studio  being  visible  through  the  sitter's  legs,  etc.  One  of 
Boursnell's  spirit  pictures  represents  a  well-known  statesman,  in  which  the  head 
has  apparently,  as  in  Buguet's  productions,  been  cut  from  a  photograph,  the 
contour  being  heavily  draped  to  hide  the  sharp  edges  of  the  card. 

SPIRIT  PHOTOGRAPHS  125 

produced  if  a  man — there  were  four  men  in  the  house — had 
sat  in  the  chair  for  a  few  seconds  during  the  exposure, 
moving  his  head  and  Hmbs  the  while.  There  seems  no 
reason  to  doubt  that  in  fact  the  picture  was  so  produced, 
though  it  is  now  impossible  to  verify  this  hypothesis.^  A 
ghost  picture,  which  was  probably  caused  in  a  similar  way, 
was  shown  me  lately.  The  operator  had  been  photographing 
a  chapel.  On  developing  the  plate  he  observed  in  a  panel 
of  the  woodwork  a  faintly  discernible  face,  in  which  he 
recognised  the  features  of  a  young  acquaintance  who  had 
recently  met  with  a  tragic  death.  In  fact,  when  he  told  me 
the  story  and  showed  me  the  picture,  I  could  easily  see  the 
faint  but  well-marked  features  of  a  handsome,  melancholy  lad 
of  eighteen.  A  colleague,  however,  to  whom  I  showed  the 
photograph  without  relating  the  story,  at  once  identified 
the  face  as  that  of  a  woman  of  thirty.  The  outlines  are 
in  reality  so  indistinct  as  to  leave  ample  room  for  the 
imagination  to  work  in  ;  and  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt 
that,  as  in  the  ghost  of  the  library,  the  camera  had  merely 
preserved  faint  traces  of  some  intruder  who,  during  prolonged 
exposure,  stood  for  a  few  seconds  in  front  of  it.^ 

^  See  the  account  of  this  case  in  Froc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  xiv.  p.  234,  and  the 
subsequent  discussion  in  the  Journal  S.  P.  K.  for  February  and  the  following 
months,  1900. 

'■^  No  attempt  has  been  made  in  the  text  to  give  a  systematic  account  of  the 
various  kinds  of  fraud  or  accident  which  may  give  rise  to  reputed  spirit  photographs. 
Nor,  indeed,  does  such  a  systematic  exposition  of  the  possibilities  of  deception 
form  any  part  of  the  plan  of  this  book.  But  it  may  be  useful  briefly  to  enumerate 
some  of  the  leading  methods  suggested  or  actually  shown  to  have  been  employed. 

(i)  A  confederate  may  be  surreptitiously  introduced  and  stand  for  a  few 
seconds  behind  the  sitter  ;  (2)  the  figure  of  a  spirit  may  be  painted  in  sulphate 
of  quinine  or  other  fluorescent  substance  on  part  of  the  background  ;  (3)  the 
positive  may  be  printed  from  two  different  negatives  (this  last  is  a  clumsy  device, 
and  can,  of  course,  be  guarded  against  by  inspection  of  the  negative  at  the  time) ; 
(4)  the  negative  may  be  twice  exposed :  this,  as  explained  in  the  text,  is  the 
method  which  has  been  actually  adopted  by  most  spirit  photographers,  and,  if  care 
is  taken,  in  taking  the  picture  of  the  ghost,  that  only  that  part  of  the  plate  on 
which  the  ghost  is  to  appear  shall  be  exposed  to  the  light,  excellent  results  may  be 
obtained ;  (5)  in  some  cases,  where  old  glass  plates  are  used,  the  image  of 
a  previous  photograph  may  remain  on  the  glass  and  may  reappear  when  the 
positives  are  printed  off".  The  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer  has  called  my  attention  to  a  case 
in  which  a  faint  portrait  of  a  man  was  discerned  in  one  of  the  panes  of  glass  in  a 
greenhouse.  The  pane  had  apparently  come  from  a  photographic  studio 
{^British  Journal  of  Photography,  April    13th,    1900). 

The  above  are  the  chief  methods  by  which  a  clearly  defined  figure,  other  than 
that  of  the  ostensible  sitter,  can  be  introduced  on  to  the  plate.  But  (6)  a  trans- 
parency may  be  introduced  into  the  camera  itself,  between  the  lens  and  the  plate. 
Images  like  those  in  Mr.  Beattie's  photographs  might  conceivably  have  been 
produced  in  this  way ;  (7)  or  the  actinic  light  may  be  allowed  to  fall  upon  the 
plate  in  the  dark  room.  I  have  heard  of  cases  in  which  the  images  of  raised  glass 
letters  on  the  side  of  the  bath  have  been  imprinted  on  the  plate  during  the  process 
of  development. 

CHAPTER     VIII 
CLAIRVOYANCE   AND    TRANCE-SPEAKING 

OF  the  psychological  manifestations  of  later  Spiritualism 
there  is  little  to  be  said.  Prior  to  i860,  as  already 
shown,  trance  communications  and  inspirational  writ- 
ing and  drawing  had  played  the  leading  part  in  this  country 
in  the  spread  of  the  new  faith.  But  from  that  date  onward 
the  increasing  prevalence  of  physical  phenomena  drew  away 
attention  from  the  less  arresting  manifestations  of  the  trance. 
It  was  gradually  realised,  moreover,  by  the  more  sober- 
minded  Spiritualists  that  trance  manifestations  of  the  ordinary 
type  were  in  themselves  of  little  value  as  evidence  for  any 
external  agency.  The  communications  were  obviously  in 
most  cases  coloured  by  the  medium's  mind,  if  they  did  not 
actually  originate  there.  The  difficulty  of  obtaining  con- 
clusive answers  to  "  test "  questions  was  considerable  ;  and 
satisfactory  evidence  of  the  identity  of  the  so-called  spirit  com- 
municators was  still  more  rarely  forthcoming.  Thus  Mr.  W.  H. 
Harrison,  writing  in  1875,  states  that  he  had  on  two  occasions 
only  received  any  evidence  of  this  kind  worth  consideration, 
and  that  after  studying  trance  mediumship  for  some  months, 
he  had  been  forced  to  fall  back  on  the  physical  manifesta- 
tions for  the  proof  which  he  required.^  Dr.  A.  R.  Wallace 
admits  that  "  the  purely  mental  phenomena  are  generally  of 
no  use  as  evidence  to  non-Spiritualists."^  The  only  instances 
of  such  test  phenomena  quoted  in  Dr.  Wallace's  book  as 
coming  under  his  personal  observation  are  messages  spelt 
out  by  raps  at  seances  with  Mrs.  Marshall.^  For  illustrations 
of  clairvoyance  he  quotes  accounts  of  Dr.  Haddock's  som- 
nambule,  Emma,  and  the  performances  of  Adolphe  and 
Alexis  Didier.*  And,  speaking  generally,  in  the  recitals  of 
personal  experience  after  i860  a  small  and  rapidly  lessening 

^   spirit  People,  pp.  38,  39. 

'•^  Miracles  and  Modern  Spiriiualisni,  pp.  202,  203  (2nd  edition,  1881). 

^  Ibid.,  p.  129.  *  Ibid.,  pp.  60  et  seq. 

126 

TEANCE-SPEAKING  127 

share  is  assigned  to  the  subjective  phenomena  of  the  trance 
and  automatism.  The  three  hundred  pages  of  evidence 
pubHshed  in  the  Dialectical  Society's  Report  include  only  a 
few  brief  accounts  of  verified  spirit  messages,  or  even  of 
proofs  of  clairvoyance.^ 

Nevertheless,  in  the  years  1860-80,  and  indeed  up  to  the 
present  time,  automatic  writing  and  speaking  have  been 
abundant  in  private  circles ;  and  in  many  cases  within  my 
own  knowledge  manifestations  of  this  kind,  occurring  as  it 
were  spontaneously  in  the  family  circle  after  recent  bereave- 
ment, have  done  much  to  carry  conviction  of  intercourse 
with  the  spirit  world.  These  communications,  however,  rarely 
contain  anything  of  general  interest,  or  of  objective  value  as 
evidence,  and  the  subject  has  probably  been  sufficiently  con- 
sidered in  previous  chapters.^  There  have  also  been  numerous 
mediums  who  professed  clairvoyance.  Of  the  trance  com- 
munications of  Home  and  Stainton  Moses  we  shall  speak 
later.  Of  purely  professional  mediums  some  of  the  most 
notable  were  Miss  Lottie  Fowler,  Mrs.  Olive,  Mr.  Towns, 
Miss  Hudson,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Fletcher.^  Of  all  these 
Miss  Fowler,  an  American  by  birth,  enjoyed  the  highest 
reputation.  I  have  received  from  various  friends  accounts 
of  communications  received  from  her  which  certainly,  as 
described,  appeared  to  point  to  the  possession  on  her  part 
of  supernormal  powers  of  obtaining  information.*  But 
testimony  in  matters  of  this  kind  is  peculiarly  liable  to 
fallacy ;  and  the  investigators  of  the  Society  for  Psychical 
Research  have  failed  almost  completely  to  extract  any  evi- 
dence for  clairvoyance  or  thought-transference  having  even 
a  prima  facie  value  from  the  annals  of  English  Spiritualism 
prior  to  the  last  decade. 

But  apart  from  trance  messages  and  clairvoyance  of  the 
ordinary  type,  there  have  been  various  series  of  trance  com- 
munications  of   a   more   impersonal   character   which    have 

^  See  especially  the  evidence  of  Cromwell  Varley,  Hockley,  Signor  Datniani, 
Mrs.  Honywood,  and  the  Master  of  Lindsay. 

^  See  especially  chaps,  ii.  and  iv.  of  the  present  book. 

^  For  some  illustrations  of  the  mediumship  of  Miss  Fowler,  Mrs.  Olive,  and 
Miss  Hudson,  see  Where  are  the  Dead?  by  Fritz  (London,  1873).  Some  startling 
accounts  of  test  communications  received  through  Miss  Fowler  are  given  in  the 
Spiritualist  periodicals  between  1872  and  1874.  In  the  Spiritual  Magazine  (1874, 
pp.  36,  187,  286)  are  quoted  articles  which  appeared  in  the  Glasgow  Daily  News 
in  March  of  that  year,  in  which  the  "  Special  Commissioner  "  of  the  paper,  pre- 
sumably a  personal  stranger  to  Miss  Fowler,  describes  some  remarkable  pieces  of 
intimate  personal  history  given  to  himself  and  a  friend.  Hellenbach  {Eine  Philoso- 
phie  des  gesunden  Menschenverstandes)  bears  witness  to  Miss  Fowler's  clair- 
voyance. 

*  My  own  solitary  interview  with  Miss  Fowler  was  completely  unsuccessful. 

128        SPIRITUALISM   IN   ENGLAND 

been  supposed  by  Spiritualists  to  exhibit  supernormal  know- 
ledge. Two  of  the  most  striking  of  these  I  select  for  con- 
sideration. It  is  to  be  noted  that  each  of  the  mediums  con- 
cerned has  also  produced  physical  phenomena  of  a  kind  to 
imply  either  supernormal  powers  over  matter,  or  systematic 
fraud. 

In  1875  Mr.  T.  P.  Barkas  held  a  series  of  sittings  with 
a  trance  medium,  afterwards  well  known,  chiefly  for  her 
physical  phenomena,  as  Madame  Esperance.  A  selection 
of  the  results  was  published  a  few  years  later  in  the 
Psychological  Review}  and  again  in  Light?"  From  Mr.  Barkas' 
narrative  we  learn  that  the  sittings  were  given  freely.  The 
medium,  an  imperfectly  educated  woman,  would  answer  in 
the  trance  questions  put  to  her  by  the  sitter.  Before  Mr. 
Barkas'  advent  the  questions  had  been  of  a  miscellaneous 
character,  without  system  or  continuity,  and  the  records  had 
been  imperfectly  preserved.  Mr.  Barkas  conceived  the  idea 
of  putting  a  series  of  questions  in  various  branches  of  physical 
science,  and  received  answers  of  a  very  surprising  kind.  The 
answers  were  generally  relevant  to  the  question,  occasionally 
correct,  and  in  any  event  revealed  a  copious  and  bewildering 
technical  vocabulary.  Mr.  Barkas  claimed  that  in  view  of  the 
limited  education  of  the  medium,  and  the  circumstances  under 
which  the  answers  were  given,  the  scientific  knowledge  dis- 
played must  have  emanated  from  a  supernormal  source — 
presumably  from  the  spirits  of  the  dead  savants  who  pro- 
fessed to  speak  through  the  human  organism. 

On  a  superficial  examination  the  results  are  certainly 
difficult  to  explain.  But  if  we  read  Mr.  Barkas'  narrative 
closely  we  shall  note  (i)  that  the  medium  had  due  notice 
of  the  subject  on  which  she  was  to  be  questioned  :  "  I  was 
gratified,"  writes  Mr.  Barkas,  "when  I  proposed  to  the  con- 
trol to  take  up  questions  in  physical  science,  to  find,"  etc.^ 
(2)  Mr.  Barkas  has  published  not  all  the  answers  received, 
but  only  a  small  selection,  presumably  not  those  least 
calculated  to  support  his  argument.  (3)  Again,  it  is  quite 
clear  that  the  few  answers  published  have  been  edited,  though 
to  what  precise  extent  does  not  appear.  If  we  compare  the 
answers,  for  instance,  given  on  page  228  of  the  Psychological 
Review  with  the  version  of  the  same  answers  given  in  Light 
(February  21st  and  March  14th,  1885),  we  shall  find  numerous 
and  not  always  unimportant  discrepancies.  (4)  Lastly,  though 
many  of  the  answers  as  selected  and  edited  are  substantially 

1  Oct.,  1878.  2  Yeo.,  March,  April,  etc.,  1885. 

■^  Psychological  Review,  vol.  i.  p.  219. 

TEANCE-SPEAKING  1 29 

correct,  others  are  not  merely  erroneous,  but  contain  errors 
which  would  be  impossible  for  anyone  with  a  rudimentary 
understanding  of  the  subject. 

Thus,  at  a  seance  held  on  August  i6th,  1875,  Mr.  Barkas 
asked  the  following  question  : — 

"In  making  reed  organ  pipes  there  are  single  notes  that 
cannot  be  made  to  speak  correctly  without  having  a  small 
hole  bored  in  what  is  termed  the  '  boot '  of  the  pipe.  Why 
is  this  ?  " 

The  answer  is  given  :  Because  in  organ  pipes  the  sound  is 
made  to,  or  I  mean  the  air  is  made  to  vibrate,  by  issuing  from 
a  small  slit  and  striking  on  a  sharp  cutting  edge.  This  should 
be  done  in  every  case.  I  don^t  know  why  in  reed  organs  alone, 
since  it  would  be  an  advantage  in  every  case} 

The  answer  would  have  some  relevance  only  if  the  question 
had  referred  to  the  action  of  the  mouthpiece  of  the  pipe.^ 
Again,  at  the  seance  of  November  15th,  1875,  which  was 
devoted  to  questions  on  heat,  the  medium  is  asked  : — 

"  What  is  radiant  heat  ?  " 

The  answer  runs  :  Heat  given  off  from  an  invisible  source : 
heat  from  a  dark  object. 

To  appreciate  the  full  significance  of  this  answer  it  should 
be  understood  that  in  the  text-books  the  definition  of  radiant 
heat  is  commonly  followed  by  the  statement  that  heat  may 
be  radiated  from  dark  as  well  as  from  luminous  bodies. 

Or  take  this  question  :  "  Has  glass  or  rock  salt  the  greater 
dispersive  power  for  heat  ?  " 

Answer :  Glass  being  almost  athermanous  does  not  disperse 
the  heat,  but  rock  salt  is  the  most  diathermanous,  and  transmits 
all,  or  nearly  all,  luminous  and  obscure  rays? 

Again  the  answer  shows  a  failure  to  comprehend  the 
question.  The  conjunction  of  glass  and  rock  salt  no  doubt 
suggested  to  the  medium  an  answer  which  would  have  been 
relevant,  though  only  partially  correct,  if  the  question  asked 
had  been  different. 

In  a  dissertation  on  the  structure  of  the  ear  we  read  of 
"  a  series  of  filaments  known  as  otolithes  "  ;  *  and  later  on  we 
get  an  amazing  classification  of  all  chemical  compounds  under 
ten  heads,  viz.  acids,  oxides,  anhydrates,  hydrates,  chlorates, 
chlorides,  sulphides,  sulphates,  carbonates,  nitrates.^ 

1  Light,  14th  March,  1885. 

^  For  an  analysis  of  the  medium's  mistakes  in  acoustics  see  an  article  by 
Professor  Mathews,  in  the  Journal  of  the  S.  P.  R.  for  November,  1885. 
^  Psychological  Review,  Oct.,  187S,  p.  232. 
■»  Ibid.,  p.  233.  s  Ibid.,  p.  239 

II. — K 

ISO        SPIRITUALISM  IK  ENGLAND 

I  imagine  a  fairly  intelligent  schoolboy,  if  he  had  known 
beforehand  the  subject  of  his  viva  voce  examination,  and  had 
been  able,  as  Madame  Esperance  apparently  was,  to  suggest 
or  modify  the  questions,  or  when  hard  pressed  to  refuse  an 
answer,  above  all,  if  his  answers  had  been  selected  and 
touched  up  by  a  sympathetic  examiner, — such  a  schoolboy, 
I  imagine,  if  he  could  have  been  induced  to  cram  at  all,  would 
have  had  better  results  to  show  for  his  cramming.^ 

A  more  interesting  because,  apparently,  a  more  spontaneous 
case,  is  that  of  David  Duguid,  the  Glasgow  painting  medium, 
some  of  whose  performances  have  been  already  described.^ 
Duguid,  a  working  cabinet-maker  by  trade,  was  over  thirty 
when,  in  1865,  he  first  joined  a  Spiritualist  circle.  He  soon 
developed  the  power  of  painting  pictures  in  the  trance,  with 
his  eyes  apparently  fast  closed.  Mr.  H.  Nisbet,  the  Glasgow 
publisher,  at  whose  house  the  circle  was  held,  has  written  a 
biographical  notice  of  the  medium,^  from  which  we  learn  that 
Duguid  took  no  fee  for  his  seances,  and  that  strangers  were, 
for  some  years  at  any  rate,  admitted  freely  to  witness  the 
paintings  in  progress.  No  experiments  appear  to  have  been 
made  to  test  the  genuineness  of  the  trance,  nor,  indeed,  is 
there  any  test  which  can  be  relied  upon  in  such  cases,  though 
certain  persons  display  in  the  trance  symptoms  {e.g.  insensi- 
bility of  the  conjunctiva)  which  cannot  readily  be  feigned. 

From  Dr.  William  Anderson,  who  witnessed  the  perform- 
ance in  1866,  and  who  had  himself  no  doubt  that  the  medium 
was  really  entranced,  we  have  a  fairly  accurate  description 
of  what  took  place.^  For  the  convenience  of  the  spectator, 
the  easel  was  usually  placed  in  the  full  light  of  the  gas.  The 
medium,  apparently  in  deep  trance,  and  with  his  eyes  ap- 
parently closed,  would  paint  rapidly  and  effectively,  the  sub- 
jects being  for  the  most  part  landscapes,  lakes,  waterfalls,  etc. 
On  one  occasion,  when  the  light  was  reduced  to  a  feeble 
glimmer  and  a  screen  held  between  that  glimmer  and  the 
canvas,  the  medium  in  Dr.  Anderson's  presence  went  on 
working  at  the  picture,  introducing,  during  the  almost  com- 
plete darkness,  several  small  boats  on  the  surface  of  a  lake. 

^  The  Spiritualist  paper  Light  in  1890  contained  several  letters  signed 
"  Edina  "  giving  accounts  of  trance  communications,  purporting  to  come 
from  different  spirits  through  the  organism  of  the  writer's  daughter,  a  young 
woman  of  twenty-three.  The  result  of  a  careful  analysis  of  these  trance  com- 
munications will  be  found  in  iht  Journal  of  the  S.  P.  R.  for  July,  1891.  The 
analysis  showed  that,  in  every  case  which  could  conveniently  be  tested,  the 
information  given  was  either  incorrect,  or  was  such  as  could  be  obtained  from 
books  or  other  readily  accessible  sources.  ^  See  above,  pp.  86-7. 

^  See  the  Introduction  to  Hafed,  Prince  of  Persia.    Glasgow,  H.  Nisbet,  1876. 

*  Ibid.,  p.  3. 

TRANCE-SPEAKING  131 

On  the  whole,  the  description  given  is  consistent  with  the 
supposition  that  Duguid  was  really  entranced,  but  that  he 
used  his  normal  eyesight,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  entranced 
"clairvoyants"  who  figured  before  the  second  French  Com- 
mission ;  ^  or  it  is  permissible  to  suppose  that  the  extraordinary 
sense  of  space  relation  exhibited  in  certain  abnormal  states 
may  have  helped  the  manifestations.'^  It  is  not  until  we 
come  to  the  "direct  spirit  paintings"  executed  in  darkness, 
as  already  described,  that  we  are  confronted  with  the  alterna- 
tive of  preconcerted  fraud  or  occult  faculty. 

For  similar  reasons  I  am  disposed  to  regard  Duguid's 
trance  utterances  as  probably  not  involving  conscious  de- 
ception. The  spirit  artists  who  inspired  his  earlier  trances 
purported,  as  already  said,  to  be  Ruysdael  and  Steen,  In 
August,  1869,  however,  there  appeared  a  new  control,  Hafed, 
a  prince  of  Persia  in  the  early  days  of  the  Christian  era,  and 
the  interest  of  his  revelations  eclipsed  even  the  marvel  of  the 
spirit  paintings.  Throughout  a  hundred  sittings,  extending 
over  some  years,  the  spirit  of  Hafed  delivered  himself  of  a 
series  of  discourses,  dealing  with  his  own  experiences  on 
earth  and  with  the  wonders  of  the  spirit  spheres.  Of  princely 
birth,  Hafed  had  been  summoned  at  an  early  age  to  take 
command  of  his  country's  armies  in  an  expedition  against 
a  host  of  ruthless  Arab  invaders.  He  had  fought  and  been 
victorious,  had  loved,  married,  and  lost  his  wife.  He  was 
admitted  to  the  order  of  the  Magi,  and  ultimately  chosen 
Archmagus.  He  was  thus  enabled  to  furnish  the  Glasgow 
circle  with  detailed  descriptions  of  the  creeds  and  social  life 
of  ancient  Persia,  Tyre,  Greece,  Egypt,  Jud^a,  Babylon, 
and  many  other  long-perished  civilisations  which  the  Arch- 
magus visited  in  his  travels.  Incidentally  he  corrects  the 
history  and  chronology  of  Moses,  and  many  false  conceptions 
current  among  the  learned  concerning  the  ancient  world. 
But  all  this  is  introductory  to  the  climax  of  his  life.  His 
guardian  spirit  summoned  Hafed  and  two  brother  Magi  to 
go  to  Judsea  and  take  with  them  rich  gifts  to  greet  the  birth 

■•  See  above,  vol.  i.  p.  74,  and  pp.  141-5. 

"  The  best-known  example  of  this  singular  faculty,  which  almost  seems 
occasionally  to  usurp  the  sense  of  sight,  is  that  of  the  soldier  wounded  in  the 
Franco-Prussian  War,  who  could  fill  a  whole  sheet  of  paper  with  writing,  and 
then,  without  the  use  of  his  eyesight,  go  back  over  what  he  had  written,  dotting 
the  i's  and  making  erasures  and  amendments.  The  case  was  described  by  Huxley 
(following  Mesnet)  in  his  article  on  "  Human  Automatism."  Other  instances  of 
the  faculty  are  given  by  Braid,  Carpenter  {^Mental  Physiology,  edition  of  1876, 
p.  143),  W.  James  {Proc.  Am.  S.  P.  R.,  p.  554).  I  have  myself  seen  one  doubt- 
ful instance  of  it.  It  is  commonly  explained  as  a  special  development  of  the 
muscular  sense. 

132        SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

of  a  young  child  then  cradled  in  a  cattle  shed  in  the  city  of 
Bethlehem.  A  few  years  later  the  Persian  Magus  travelled 
with  the  young  child  in  Persia,  India,  and  many  other 
countries,  listening  to  his  young  companion  as  he  preached 
to  the  people,  and  wondering  at  the  miracles  performed  by 
him. 

In  the  end  the  aged  Persian,  after  conversing  with  Paul 
in  Athens,  and  himself  preaching  the  gospel  in  Venice  and 
Alexandria,  perished  in  his  hundredth  year  in  the  arena  at 
Rome. 

The  narrative  is  copiously  illustrated  with  "direct"  spirit 
drawings,  portraying  such  subjects  as  the  battle-scene  between 
the  hosts  of  Persia  and  Araby;  a  sea-fight  in  the  Persian 
Gulf;  Egyptian  and  Indian  temples;  Jesus  as  a  young  man 
recalling  to  life  the  spirit  of  a  dead  Hindoo ;  and,  finally,  the 
arena  at  Rome,  with  lions  and  martyrs. 

If  the  human  artist  was  in  fact  entirely  without  education 
in  such  matters,  the  drawings,  especially  those  concerned  with 
architectural  subjects,  are,  it  must  be  admitted,  not  without 
merit.  As  regards  the  discourses,  which  were  taken  down 
verbatim  by  Nisbet,  and  afterwards  revised  by  the  entranced 
medium,  the  style  is  surprisingly  good.  It  is  free  from  the 
pretentious  verbosity  of  Andrew  Jackson  Davis  and  others 
of  the  early  American  trance-speakers ;  it  is  grammatical 
throughout,  and  rarely  degenerates  into  rhapsody  or  mere 
sounding  verbiage.  Nor,  apart  from  the  nature  of  the 
subjects  treated,  is  there  anything  to  cause  offence  in  the 
narrative.  If  published  apart  from  its  accessories,  it  would 
perhaps  pass  muster  as  a  historical  romance,  the  most  didactic 
and  one  of  the  dullest  of  its  kind.  At  worst,  it  would 
probably  be  said  that  the  dramatic  interest  of  the  story  was 
not  sufficient  to  justify  the  historical  inaccuracies  and  im- 
probabilities ;  and  that  the  undoubted  sincerity  and  high 
moral  aim  of  the  writer  should  have  restrained  him  from  too 
familiar  handling  of  sacred  personalities.^ 

^  I  will  not  attempt  the  task  of  analysing  Hafed's  historical  and  other  errors. 
It  is  more  interesting,  for  our  present  purpose,  to  note  the  attempts  of  the  trance 
intelligence  to  justify  or  explain  away  discrepancies.  Thus  on  page  89  it  is  stated 
that  Cyrus,  when  still  a  youth,  met  Zoroaster,  and  was  instructed  by  him  in  the 
principles  of  true  religion.  On  its  being  pointed  out  to  the  control  that  Cyrus 
and  Zoroaster  were  not,  according  to  the  ordinary  chronology,  contemporaries, 
he  replied  that  Cyrus'  teacher  was  not  the  eponymous  founder  of  a  religion,  but 
another  person  of  the  same  name.  Again  (p.  82),  Ararat  is  described  as  a  moun- 
tain "near  the  Red  Sea."  It  was  pointed  out,  on  revision,  that  the  mountain 
now  known  as  Ararat  is  not  near  the  Red  Sea.  Hafed  replied  that  the  name 
was  wrongly  applied  by  modern  geographers.  * '  Such  mistakes, "  he  said, 
"were  easily  accounted  for  in  the  translation  of  the  original  records  from  one 

TRANCE-SPEAKING  133 

To  recognise  that  the  volume  is  in  fact  an  historical 
romance,  constructed  by  a  pious  and  half-educated  Scotch- 
man on  the  basis  of  his  studies  in  the  Bible  and  various 
popular  manuals,  is  not  to  impute  conscious  deception  to  its 
author.  But  the  question  of  the  responsibility  of  trance 
mediums  for  their  utterances  will  best  be  dealt  with  in  a  later 
chapter.^ 

A  book  published  in  1870,  Heaven  opened,  or  Messages  for 
the  bereaved  from  their  little  ones  in  Glory ^  which  excited 
some  attention  amongst  believers,  gives  a  fair  idea  of  the 
kind  of  spirit  messages  received  in  devout  circles  at  this 
time.  The  authoress  —  a  sister  of  Mr.  Morell  Theobald, 
already  referred  to — concealed  her  identity  under  the  initials 
"  F.  J.  T."  The  messages,  produced  by  automatic  writing, 
purported  for  the  most  part  to  proceed  from  the  spirits  of 
young  children,  relations  of  the  medium,  and  are  concerned 
with  the  glories  of  the  spirit  world,  described  in  language 
appropriate  to  young  children.  The  imagery  is  apparently 
borrowed  partly  from  the  Bible,  partly  from  current  fairy 
tales. 

Throughout  the  history  of  English  Spiritualism,  and  down 
even  to  the  present  day,  inspirational  speakers  have  played 
a  large  part  in  the  propaganda.  One  of  the  earliest  native 
speakers  of  distinction  was  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge,  afterwards 
Mrs.  Hardinge  Britten,  from  whose  work  on  American 
Spiritualism  I  have  had  occasion  to  quote  in  previous 
chapters.  Mrs.  Hardinge,  in  1865  and  onwards,  delivered 
eloquent  discourses  professedly  under  spirit  guidance,  and 
generally  on  subjects  chosen  at  the  meeting  by  a  committee 
from  the  audience.-" 

In  or  about  1870  Mr.  Morse,  still  one  of  the  best-known 
English  trance-speakers,  began  his  career.  His  eloquence 
is  referred  to  in  high  terms  by  Serjeant  Cox.  "  I  have  heard 
an  uneducated  barman,  when  in  a  state  of  trance,  maintain 
a  dialogue  with  a  party  of  philosophers  on  '  Reason  and 
Foreknowledge,  Will  and  Fate,'  and  hold  his  own  against 
them.     I    have   put   to  him  the  most  difficult  questions  in 

language  to  another."  Once  more  (p.  38),  Hafed,  preparing  to  do  battle,  spoke 
of  the  unsheathing  of  \iis  falcon.  It  was  suggested  to  him  that  perhaps  "fal- 
con" was  a  mistake  for  "falchion."  But  he  rejected  the  suggestion.  "The 
falcon,"  he  said,  "was  a  long,  straight,  two-edged  sword,  with  a  falcon's  head 
on  the  hilt." 

^  See  Book  IV.  chaps,  vi.  and  vii.,  especially  the  discussion  of  the  Reincarna- 
tion romance  of  "  Helene  Smith,"  the  medium  described  by  M.  Th.  Flournoy. 

^  London :  J.  Burns. 

^  See  her  Exiemporaneous  Ac^dresses,  First  ^ivd  Second  Series.  J^ondon,  1 865 
a,iiid  i8§^. 

134        SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

psychology,  and  received  answers  always  thoughtful,  often 
full  of  wisdom,  and  invariably  conveyed  in  choice  and 
eloquent  language.  Nevertheless,  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour 
afterwards,  when  released  from  the  trance,  he  was  unable  to 
answer  the  simplest  query  on  a  philosophical  subject,  and 
was  at  a  loss  for  sufficient  language  in  which  to  express 
a  commonplace  idea."^ 

But  the  supreme  example  in  this  line  was  an  American, 
Mrs.  Cora  L.  V.  Tappan  (later  Tappan-Richmond).  Under 
her  maiden  name  of  Scott  she  had  very  early  made  her 
appearance  in  the  Spiritualist  Movement.  As  a  child  of 
eleven  or  twelve  she  had  passed  some  months  in  Adin 
Ballou's  community  at  Hopedale.  Thereafter  she  had  been 
controlled  by  the  spirit  of  young  Ballou.  At  the  age  of 
thirteen  we  hear  of  her  addressing  public  audiences  in  Wis- 
consin. Three  years  later,  as  a  girl  of  sixteen,  she  went  to 
New  York,  and  from  that  time  onwards  she  became  famous 
throughout  the  States  as  a  Spiritualist  lecturer.  In  1873  she 
came  to  England,  and  received  an  enthusiastic  welcome. 
For  some  years  she  lectured  regularly,  or  at  frequent 
intervals,  in  this  country.  According  to  her  own  belief  in 
the  matter,  she  spoke  under  spirit  guidance.  Actually,  there 
can  be  little  doubt  that  her  utterances  were  in  large  measure 
unpremeditated,  and  that  she  was  not  herself  a  wholly 
conscious  or  voluntary  agent  in  their  production.  As  with 
her  predecessor,  Mrs.  Hardinge,  the  subject  of  the  lecture 
was  commonly  chosen  by  the  audience  after  the  lecturer  had 
entered  the  room.  But  though  no  opportunity  was  afforded 
for  preparing  a  discourse,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the 
subjects  chosen  by  a  committee  of  Spiritualists — since  the 
audience  had  met  together  for  edification  and  not  for  a 
scientific  test — were  naturally  connected  not  remotely  with 
the  great  issues  raised  by  Spiritualism.  And  since  Mrs. 
Tappan,  by  the  estimate  of  her  English  biographer,  had 
delivered  some  three  thousand  discourses  in  the  previous 
fifteen  years,  it  can  hardly  be  supposed  that  any  of  the  topics 
selected  were  altogether  unfamiliar  to  her.'  Let  it  be 
granted,  too,  that,  as  her  biographer  candidly  admits,  the 
quantity  of  the  eloquence  is  more  in  evidence  than  the 
quality  of  it.      But  when  all  discounts  have  been  made  the 

^  The  Mechanism  of  Man,  vol.  ii.  p.  301.  The  passage  is  quoted  in  Miracles 
and  Modern  Spiritualism,  p.  201,  by  Dr.  Wallace,  who  endorses  the  testimony 
given  by  Serjeant  Cox. 

^  Discourses  through  the  Mediu?nship  of  Mrs.  Cora  L.  V.  Tappan,  Introduc- 
tion, p.  xvii.     London,  1875. 

TRANCE-SPEAKING  135 

feat  must  still  remain  a  very  surprising  one.  That  the  flow 
of  verbiage  never  fails  is  a  small  matter :  Mrs.  Tappan's 
trance-utterances  surpass  those  of  almost  every  other  auto- 
matist  in  that  there  is  a  fairly  coherent  argument  throughout. 
Two  at  least  of  the  subjects  set  to  her  in  1874,  "The  Origin 
of  Man "  and  "  The  Comparative  Influence  of  Science  and 
Morality  on  the  Rise  and  Progress  of  Nations,"  may  be 
presumed  to  have  been  little  familiar.^  But  the  speaker 
is  never  at  a  loss.  In  the  first  case,  after  referring  briefly 
to  the  various  solutions  of  the  problem  given  by  ancient 
theologies,  she  states  the  theory  of  evolution,  and  after 
propounding  an  intelligent,  if  not  profound,  criticism  of  it, 
proceeds  to  develop  her  own  views  of  a  kind  of  immanent 
Pantheism.  Here  is  an  extract  from  her  criticism  of  the 
Darwinian  theory,  which  gives  a  fair  idea  of  her  reasoning 
powers : — 

"In  fact,  the  weak  points  in  the  Darwinian  theory  are  easily 
found  out  by  the  student  of  science  or  natural  philosophy.  One 
is,  that  he  makes  the  doctrine  of  the  theory  of  selection  and 
evolution  account  for  the  existence  of  distinctive  types.  In  our 
opinion  this  is  most  erroneous ;  there  is  no  such  process  going 
on  in  nature;  there  never  has  been  known  to  be  such  a  process 
in  nature  as  the  one  type  of  existence  ever  becoming  merged  into 
or  becoming  another  type.  There  is  no  change  going  on  in  the 
lower  orders  that  are  said  to  resemble  man  by  which  it  is  possible 
that  they  may  become  future  men.  The  gorilla  and  the  ape,  though 
resembling  man  in  appearance,  fail  to  resemble  him  in  any  dis- 
tinctive qualities  of  expressed  intelligence,  and  there  has  never  been 
known  in  the  history  of  the  world  a  specific  change  from  the  lower 
to  the  higher  degree  of  existence.  Besides,  that  which  is  said  to  be 
the  organic  and  continuous  property  of  evolution  applies  not  to  the 
change  and  transition  from  one  type  to  another  of  existence,  but  to 
the  perfection  and  development  of  the  type  already  formed ;  so  that 
if  Nature  does  select  her  types,  it  does  not  and  has  not  been  shown 
that  she  has  ever  confused  those  types,  interblent  them,  or  in  any 
way  lost  them,  but  persistently,  sacredly  preserved  the  germs  of 
every  specific  type  in  existence  up  to  the  present  time  " 

"But,  as  we  stated,  if  we  are  to  trace  man's  origin  we  must 
consider  him  in  his  complete  nature,  and  not  merely  in  his  physical 
nature.  It  is  sufficiently  easy — a  process  of  the  greatest  facility — 
to  trace,  with  the  scientific  data  that  are  in  the  world,  the  results 
of  natural   law  up   to  the   development  of  man — the   monad,  or 

^  Discourses,  etc.,  Part  I.  p.  179,  and  Part  II.  p.  383.  The  volume  includes 
5ome  fifty  long  discourses,  besides  minor  speeches  in  answer  to  questions,  etg. 

136        SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

distinctive  particle  which  exists  by  itself;  the  duad,  which  means 
two  monads  added  together,  makes  another  stage,  etc.,  etc.  These 
atoms  in  their  sixfold  nature,  constantly  changing  and  developing, 
are  fully  and  absolutely  empowered  by  the  law  of  existence  to 
develop  all  phases  of  physical  life  that  are  known.  But  atoms  are 
not  intelligent ;  monads,  duads,  triads  are  not  intelligent ;  molecules 
are  not  intelligent.  No  atom  or  atomic  structure  contains  within 
itself  that  which  is  the  final  source  and  cause  of  organisation ;  and 
when  the  physical  scientist  declares  that  he  has  discovered  the 
process  of  creation,  he  omits  the  one  power  of  creation  that  alone 
is  capable  of  solving  the  mystery."  ^ 

As  said,  the  reasoning  is  not  profound,  but  it  is  not  un- 
intelligent ;  and  the  rhythm  and  fluency,  no  doubt,  for  the 
audience  covered  any  gaps  in  the  logic.  If  we  scrutinise 
the  style  more  closely,  we  shall  find  that,  though  a  favourable 
specimen  of  its  kind,  it  yet  has  the  characteristic  defect  of 
the  automatic  utterance — a  redundancy  of  words  for  words' 
sake.  Note,  for  instance,  the  constant  duplication  of  words 
without  any  substantial  enlargement  of  meaning — "  science 
or  natural  philosophy";  "merged  into  or  becoming";  "change 
and  transition  "  ;  "  perfection  and  development "  ;  "  atom  or 
atomic  structure."  There  is  a  similar  barren  repetition  of 
phrases,  e.g.  "  It  is  sufficiently  easy — a  process  of  the  greatest 
facility "  ;  "  atoms  are  not  intelligent ;  monads  are  not  in- 
telligent "  ;  and  so  on. 

When  concerned  with  more  congenial  themes,  the  rhythmical 
quality  of  the  eloquence  and  its  invertebrate  structure  are 
alike  more  conspicuous.  Here,  for  instance,  is  the  peroration 
to  a  discourse  on  "The  Eternal  Progress  of  the  Human 
Spirit":— 

"  Are  these  the  themes  of  your  aspirations  ?  Then  what  wonder 
if  through  the  vistas  of  eternity  there  open,  broad  and  wide,  theme 
upon  theme  of  lofty  thought,  of  divine  aspiration,  of  glorious  work, 
of  everlasting  conquest !  It  is  not  that  man  shall  there  conquer 
matter,  and  build  gold  and  silver  temples,  and  the  idols  of  material 
worship.  It  is  not  that  the  hero  shall  slay  millions  of  human 
beings,  and  so  gain  what  is  called  earthly  fame.  The  paltry  excuses 
of  human  ambition,  the  small  needs  of  human  life,  the  imposing 
objects  of  your  being,  pale  and  disappear  before  the  higher  themes 
of  spiritual  meditation  and  of  eternal  advancement.  One  by  one 
the  vistas  of  that  divine  subject  open  to  your  gaze;  one  by  one  the 
hosts  that  are  marshalled  in  glorious  array  appear  before  your 
vision ;  one  by  one  the  ideas  of  eternal  progress  are  gained,  and 

1   Op.  cit.,  Part  I.  pp.  182,  183. 

THANCE-SPEAKING  137 

new  ideas,  new  mountains  of  knowledge,  present  themselves  for  you 
to  climb ;  one  by  one  the  stars  in  space,  the  planets  in  their  orbits, 
and  systems  and  constellations  pass  beyond  you ;  and  you  go  on 
and  on  through  the  eras  of  eternal  Hfe,  without  pause,  never  resting, 
never  tiring,  but  with  new-found  companies  of  knowledge  and 
wisdom  cleave  the  air  of  space  and  visit  the  habitations  of  the  most 
celestial  beings — angels,  archangels,  cherubim,  seraphim  !  Behold 
they  dawn  upon  you  with  their  wondrous  powers  and  matchless 
knowledge !  They  sing  the  songs  of  creation !  they  people  space 
with  their  thoughts  !  they  give  you  a  glimpse  of  their  life  !  and  on 
and  on  you  go,  ever  with  those  countless  myriads  of  hosts,  march- 
ing up  the  steep  of  eternity,  hand  in  hand,  heart  to  heart,  linked 
together  still  by  the  love  of  God  and  iDy  your  love  for  one 
another!"^ 

I  have  heard  Mrs.  Tappan's  eloquence  described  as  "  flatu- 
lent," and  I  am  not  prepared  to  dispute  the  aptness  of  the 
epithet.  A  more  salient  characteristic  is  its  extraordinary 
monotony.  We  are  not  perhaps  entitled  in  oratorical  efforts 
to  look  for  the  same  finish  that  we  expect  in  literary  essays 
of  a  more  considered  kind.  Certainly  v^e  shall  look  in  vain 
throughout  Mrs,  Tappan's  published  discourses  for  the  in- 
evitable word,  the  novel  simile,  the  polished  epigram.  The 
spirits  could  pour  forth  ore  rotundo,  but  knew  not  the  virtues 
of  compactness,  Mrs,  Tappan's  utterances  may,  as  some  of 
her  contemporaries  asserted,  have  been  jewelled,  but  her 
jewels  are  five  hundred  words  long,  and  they  do  not  sparkle. 
Again,  we  find  none  of  the  literary  artifices  by  which  ordinary 
speakers  are  wont  to  give  relief — there  is  no  antithesis,  no 
climax,  no  irony  or  humour  in  any  form.  And  the  dead  level 
of  style  reflects  a  dead  level  of  sentiment ;  there  is  no  scorn 
or  indignation,  no  recognition  of  human  effort  and  pain,  no 
sense  of  the  mystery  of  things.  The  style  is  clear,  as  jelly 
is  clear ;  it  is  the  protoplasm  of  human  speech,  and  it  is 
flavoured  throughout  with  mild,  cosmic  emotions. 

Frequently  at  the  close  of  an  address  Mrs.  Tappan  would 
recite  an  impromptu  poem,  again  on  a  subject  chosen  at  the 
moment  by  the  audience.  Some  of  these  poems  are  strikingly 
melodious,  and  it  is  interesting  to  note  how  the  melody 
continually  overpowers  the  sense.  In  the  first  two  of  the 
stanzas  which  follow,  for  instance,  quoted  from  a  poem  on 
"  Prayer,"  the  meaning  sought  to  be  conveyed  is,  it  will  be 
admitted,  less  conspicuous  than  a  certain  sonorous  quality 
which,  on  analysis,  is  found  to  be  largely  mechanical : — 

1   op,  cit.,  Part  II,  p.  140, 

138        SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

"  Like  the  stars  that  sweep  and  burn 
In  their  orbits  of  pure  flame, 
Where  God  kindled  in  the  urn 
Of  their  life  His  holy  name  ; 

"  Like  the  suns  with  points  like  swords, 
Flashing  up  the  steep  of  space, 
Leading  armies  without  words, 
By  the  light  from  God's  own  face  ; 

"  Each  world  filling  its  own  sphere, 
Each  star  keeping  perfect  time 
To  the  mandate  written  there. 
On  the  scrolls  of  heaven  sublime. 

"  To  the  planets  ye  may  turn. 

As  they  flash  and  toil  and  shine, 
For  a  lesson  ye  may  learn 
To  employ  each  gift  divine."^ 

Sometimes,  it  must  be  owned,  the  audience  were  rather 
exacting  in  their  tests.  There  is  an  heroic  attempt,  for 
instance,  at  a  poem  on  "  Cremation  "  -."^  that  the  poetic  afflatus 
should  have  failed  before  this  task  is  perhaps  no  matter  for 
surprise.  In  another  trial,  hardly  less  severe,  Mrs.  Tappan 
has  achieved  some  measure  of  success.  The  subject  set  was 
"  The  Future  of  England,"  and  the  result  was  a  poem,  by 
no  means  unmusical,  of  about  a  hundred  lines.  One  stanza 
may  perhaps  be  quoted  : — 

"What  is  it  that  upholds  her  but  the  chime 

Of  nations  that  die  out  when  she  appears  ? 

But  meanwhile  here  at  home  one  voice  she  hears. 
Wealth,  power,  greatness,  all  are  hers,  the  sway 

Of  high  supremacy  on  land  and  sea, 

All  power  and  purpose  of  true  industry. 
One  subtle  heart-drop  ebbing  day  by  day 

Despoils  her  of  her  life,  tears  from  her  those  who  toil, 
The  purpose  and  the  blood  with  which  to  stay 
Her  honour  in  some  future  darker  day — 

Bearers  of  burdens,  tillers  of  her  soil. 
She  keeps  her  greatness  and  her  line  of  kings. 
But  she  must  lose  the  deep  heart-murmurings 

Of  love  ;  the  very  strings  that  make  her  strong. 
The  sinews  and  the  arms  of  power, 
Are  slow  escaping  every  day  and  hour. 

Singing  in  distant  lands  their  freedom's  song."^ 

There  is  a  curious  indication  here  of  the  mechanical 
character  of  the  utterance.  The  word  "chime,"  meaningless 
in  its  context,  is  a  mere  echo  of  the  word  "  clime,"  which 
ends   the   preceding   stanza.      The  passage   as   a  whole   re- 

^  Op.  cit..  Part  I.  p.  62.         ■^  Part  L  p.  189.         ^  Part  II.  pp.  395,  396, 

TRANCE-SPEAKING  139 

presents  Mrs.  Tappan's  eloquence  at  its  best.  But  it  is 
difficult  to  avoid  the  suspicion  that  the  inspiration  proceeds 
from  purely  mundane  sources.  There  are,  indeed,  obvious 
reverberations  in  Mrs.  Tappan's  verse  from  contemporary- 
poets —  Mrs.  Browning,  Matthew  Arnold,  Swinburne,  and 
Rossetti ;  though  I  have  failed  to  find  any  actual  plagiarisms. 
Of  other  inspirational  works  at  this  time  there  is  little  to 
be  recorded.  T.  L.  Harris,  who  during  the  decade  1860-70 
appears  to  have  resided  chiefly  in  this  country,  delivered 
many  discourses,  inferior,  if  at  all,  only  to  Mrs.  Tappan's 
orations.  He  also  published  other  poems — The  Great  Re- 
public; or.  Poems  of  the  Sun}  Some  of  Harris'  earlier  poems 
had  been  described  by  William  Howitt,  in  the  course  of  a 
review  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine,  as  possessing  "scarcely 
less  than  Miltonic  grandeur  .  .  .  and  more  than  Miltonic 
splendour."^  A  later  notice  in  the  same  magazine,  in  review- 
ing The  Great  Republic,  gives  a  juster  appreciation  of  his 
work  in  general : — 

"The  charm  of  the  metre  and  the  clearness  of  the  ideas,  which 
extend  to  a  few  stanzas  .  .  .  rapidly  vanish  in  clouds.  .  .  .  The 
words  and  stanzas  go  on  as  sonorously  as  ever,  but  we  clutch  in  vain 
at  the  guiding  clue  of  reason.  .  .  .  All  is  a  phantasmagoria."  ^ 

In  1873  there  appeared  a  volume  by  Fred  Griffin,  entitled 
The  Destiny  of  Man}  The  preface  to  the  volume  obscurely 
hints  at  some  mysterious  origin,  and  we  learn  that  the  book 
was  openly  advertised  as  having  been  written  through 
planchette.  Less  melodious  than  the  productions  of  Harris 
or  Mrs.  Tappan,  the  poems  are  more  coherent,  but  unhappily 
quite  commonplace.  A  few  years  later  a  young  man  named 
Veitch  produced  some  poetry,  not  without  merit,  under  the 
inspiration  of  Chatterton.^  But  of  late  years  the  stream  of 
inspirational  poetry  seems  to  have  run  dry. 

^  London,  1S67.  "  i860,  p.  200, 

^  Spiritual  Magazine,  1868,  p.  73.  "^  Trtibner  and  Co.,  1873. 

^  See  the  Appendix  to  Home's  Lights  and  Shadows  of  Spiritualism,  where 
much  of  this  poetry  is  quoted. 

CHAPTER     IX 
SCIENCE   AND   SUPERSTITION 

IN    1872,  in  describing  some  recent  visits  paid  to  spirit 
mediums,  the  special  correspondent  of  the  Times  com- 
mented   on   the  extraordinary  vitality,  notwithstanding 
frequent  exposures,  of  the  Spiritualist  belief,  and  the  hold 
that  it  had  obtained  on  many  educated  minds : — ^ 

"  It  is  evident,"  the  reviewer  continues,  "  either  that  the  subject 
is  surrounded  by  unusual  difficulties,  or  that  in  this  matter  scientific 
men  have  signally  failed  to  do  their  duty  by  the  public,  which  looks 
to  them  for  its  facts.  We  believe  the  latter  to  be  the  case.  It  may 
be  said,  and  is  said  by  some,  that  Spiritualism  was  long  ago  in- 
vestigated, and  proved  to  be  a  mass  of  imposture  and  delusion ; 
but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  this  is  not  so,  for  there  has  never  been 
undertaken  an  inquiry  of  that  impartial,  authoritative,  and  thorough 
nature  which  alone  can  decide  a  prejudiced  controversy.  .  .  .  How- 
ever absurd  the  phenomena  and  paraphernalia  of  Spiritualism  may 
be,  the  sifting  and  settling  of  the  whole  matter,  once  and  for  all, 
would  be  a  practical  benefit,  for  which  the  age  would  thank  our 
savants  at  least  as  much  as  it  thanks  them  for  recondite  theories  and 
abstract  speculations,  half  of  which  are  only  laid  up  in  print  for  the 
next  generation  to  ridicule." 

And  again,  speaking  of  the  Dialectical  Committee's  Report, 
"  if  it  proves  nothing  else,  it  proves  that  it  is  high  time  com- 
petent hands  undertake  the  unravelling  of  the  Gordian  knot. 
It  must  be  fairly  and  patiently  unravelled,  and  not  cut  through. 
The  slash  of  an  Alexandrian  blade  has  been  tried  often  enough, 
and  has  never  sufficed."    ^ 

It  is  singular  that  the  writer  in  the  Times  completely 
ignores  a  systematic  investigation  by  a  competent  man  of 
science — Mr,  (now  Sir  William)  Crookes — then  proceeding, 
some  results  of  which  had  already  been  placed  before  the 
public.     But  in  his  main  argument  he  has  the   support  not 

^   Times,  26th  Dec,  1872. 

SCIENCE  AND   SUPERSTITION        141 

only  of  Mr.  Crookes  himself,  but  of  the  late  Professor  Balfour 
Stewart,  who  had  some  eighteen  months  previously  written : 
"  We  are  inclined  to  endorse  the  remark  of  Mr.  Crookes,  that 
men  of  science  have  shown  too  great  a  disinclination  to 
investigate  the  evidence  and  nature  of  these  alleged  facts, 
even  when  their  occurrence  has  been  asserted  by  competent 
and  credible  witnesses."  ^ 

Whether  men  of  science  were  justified  in  their  indifference 
— an  indifference  no  doubt  largely  fostered  by  the  belief  that 
the  craze  would  shortly  die  out  of  its  own  accord — is  fair 
matter  for  debate.  Certainly  the  results  achieved  by  the 
first  French  Commission  on  Animal  Magnetism  offered  little 
encouragement  for  interference.  And,  after  all,  most  scientific 
workers  could  fairly  plead  that  they  had  other  tasks  for  which 
they  were  better,  adapted.  But  the  euthanasia  of  super- 
stition, which  has  been  looked  for  in  each  succeeding  decade, 
still  delays  its  coming ;  and  to  this  delay  the  ill-informed  and 
injudicious  opposition  of  some  has  contributed  probably  as 
much  as  the  equally  injudicious,  if  not  equally  ill-informed, 
advocacy  of  others.  The  dealings  of  science  with  Spiritualism 
form  an  instructive  chapter  in  the  history  of  human  thought. 
Not  the  least  instructive  feature  of  the  chronicle  is  the  sharp 
contrast  between  the  tone  and  temper  of  those  men  of 
science  who,  after  examination,  accepted,  and  of  those  who,  with 
or  without  examination,  rejected  the  evidence  for  the  alleged 
physical  phenomena.  Those  who  held  themselves  justified  in 
believing  in  a  new  physical  force — for  de  Morgan,  Crookes, 
and  other  scientific  converts  did  not  at  the  outset,  nor  in 
some  cases  at  all,  adopt  the  Spiritualist  belief  proper — showed 
in  their  writings  a  modesty,  candour,  and  freedom  from  pre- 
possession, which  shine  the  more  conspicuously  by  comparison 
with  the  blustering  arrogance  of  some  of  the  self-constituted 
champions  of  scientific  orthodoxy.  The  ordinary  reader, 
whose  acquaintance  with  the  subject  was  confined,  for 
instance,  on  the  one  side,  to  the  scholarly  dissertation  by 
de  Morgan,  which  prefaces  his  wife's  book.  From  Matter  to 
Spirit — a  preface  which  is  perhaps  the  wisest,  as  it  is  un- 
questionably the  wittiest  utterance  on  the  subject — and,  on 
the  other,  to  the  unmannerly  letters  contributed  by  Tyndall 
to  the  Pall  Mall  Gazette  in  1868,  could  hardly  fail  to  be  pre- 
possessed in  favour  of  the  new  views.  Again,  the  obvious 
candour  of  Mr.  Crookes'  articles  in  the  Quarterly  Journal 
of  Science,  and  their  judicial  tone,  present  a  striking  contrast 
to  the  inaccuracy,  spiteful  depreciation,  under  the  shield  of 

^  Nature,  27th  July,  1S71. 

142        SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

anonymity,  of  other  men's  work  and  grotesque  self-assertion 
which  disfigured  Dr.  Carpenter's  criticisms.^  The  mere 
prospect  of  contact  with  Spiritualism  seems  to  have  exercised 
a  deteriorating  effect,  alike  on  the  mind  and  the  manners. 
Even  Faraday,  in  his  letter  of  June,  1861,  forgot  his  wonted 
modesty  and  courtesy ;  and  Huxley's  reply  to  the  Dialectical 
Society's  invitation  to  co-operate  with  them  is  a  clumsy  thrust 
altogether  unworthy  of  so  distinguished  a  gladiator. 

The  present  chapter  furnishes  an  outline  sketch  of  the 
dealings  of  scientific  men  in  this  country  with  the  alleged 
phenomena  of  Spiritualism  down  to  1882.  Faraday's  de- 
monstration of  the  part  played  by  unconscious  muscular 
action  in  table-turning,  referred  to  in  chapter  i.  of  the 
present  book,  formed  the  first  contribution  to  the  subject. 
Later,  apparently  in  June,  1855,^  Sir  David  Brewster  and 
Lord  Brougham  attended  two  sittings  with  D.  D.  Home. 
This  is  Brewster's  contemporary  account  of  the  first  sitting, 
dated  June,  1855,  extracted  from  his  private  diary : — 

"  Last  of  all  I  went  with  Lord  Brougham  to  a  stance  of  the  new 
spirit-rapper,  Mr.  Home,  a  lad  of  twenty,  the  son  of  a  brother  of 
the  late  Earl  Home.  .  .  He  lives  in  Cox's  Hotel,  Jermyn  Street ; 
and  Mr.  Cox,  who  knows  Lord  Brougham,  wished  him  to  have 
a  seance,  and  his  lordship  invited  me  to  accompany  him  in  order 
to  assist  in  finding  out  the  trick.  We  four  sat  down  at  a  moderately- 
sized  table,  the  structure  of  which  we  were  invited  to  examine.  In 
a  short  time  the  table  shuddered,  and  a  tremulous  motion  ran  up 
all  our  arms ;  at  our  bidding  these  motions  ceased  and  returned.  The 
most  unaccountable  rappings  were  produced  in  various  parts  of  the 
table ;  and  the  table  actually  rose  from  the  ground  when  no  hand  was 
upon  it.  A  larger  table  was  produced,  and  exhibited  similar  move- 
ments. ...  A  small  hand-bell  was  then  laid  down  with  its  mouth 
on  the  carpet  \  and,  after  lying  for  some  time,  it  actually  rang  when 
nothing  could  have  touched  it.  The  bell  was  then  placed  on  the 
other  side,  still  upon  the  carpet,  and  it  came  over  to  me  and  placed 
itself  in  my  hand.  It  did  the  same  to  Lord  Brougham.  These 
were  the  principal  experiments.  We  could  give  no  explanation  of 
them,  and  could  not  conjecture  how  they  could  be  produced  by 
any  kind  of  mechanism."  ^ 

In  September  of  the  same  year,  in  consequence  of  an 
erroneous  version  of  the  incident  having  appeared  in  some 

1  See  his  article  in  the  Quarterly  Review,  Oct.,  187 1. 

■•^  I  cannot  find  that  the  actual  date  of  the  seance  is  given  either  by  Brewster 
himself,  or  by  any  of  the  other  persons  who  have  published  accounts  of  the 
incident. 

2  The  Home  Life  of  Sir  D.  Brewster,  by  his  daughter,  Mrs.  Gordon,  pp.  257-8. 
Edinburgh,  1869. 

SCIENCE  AND  SUPEESTITION       143 

American  paper,  Brewster  wrote  a  letter  to  the  Morning 
Advertiser^  in  which  he  states  that  though  he  "could  not 
account  for  all "  that  he  witnessed  at  the  two  seances,  yet 
"  I  saw  enough  to  satisfy  myself  that  they  could  all  be 
produced  by  human  hands  and  feet."  ^  William  Cox,  at 
whose  hotel  the  first  sitting  had  taken  place,  and  Benjamin 
Coleman  at  once  wrote  to  the  Advertiser,  pointing  out  that 
Brewster's  present  version  of  the  matter  differed  materially 
from  that  given  by  him  in  their  presence  within  a  few  days 
of  the  first  sitting.  Brewster,  accordingly,  in  a  later  letter 
gave  a  full  description  of  the  sitting : — 

"At  Mr.  Cox's  house,  Mr.  Home,  Mr.  Cox,  Lord  Brougham,  and 
myself  sat  down  to  a  small  table,  Mr.  Home  having  previously 
requested  us  to  examine  if  there  was  any  machinery  about  his 
person,  an  examination,  however,  which  we  declined  to  make. 
When  all  our  hands  were  upon  the  table  noises  were  heard — 
rappings  in  abundance;  and,  finally,  when  we  rose  up  the  table 
actually  rose,  as  appeared  to  me,  from  the  ground.  This  result  I  do 
not  pretend  to  explain ;  but  rather  than  believe  that  spirits  made 
the  noise,  I  will  conjecture  that  the  raps  were  produced  by  Mr. 
Home's  toes,  which,  as  will  be  seen,  were  active  on  another 
occasion ;  .  .  .  and  rather  than  believe  that  spirits  raised  the  table, 
I  will  conjecture  that  it  was  done  by  the  agency  of  Mr.  Home's  feet, 
which  were  always  below  it. 

"Some  time  after  this  experiment  Mr.  Home  left  the  room  and 
returned,  probably  to  equip  himself  for  the  feats  which  were  to 
be  performed  by  the  spirits  beneath  a  large  round  table  covered 
with  copious  drapery,  beneath  which  nobody  was  allowed  to  look? 

"  The  spirits  are  powerless  aboveboard  ...  a  small  hand-bell, 
to  be  rung  by  the  spirits,  was  placed  on  the  ground  near  my  feet. 
I  placed  my  feet  round  it  in  the  form  of  an  angle,  to  catch  any 
intrusive  apparatus.  The  bell  did  not  ring;  but  when  taken  to 
a  place  near  Mr.  Home's  feet,  it  speedily  came  across  and  placed 
itself  in  my  hand.     This  was  amusing. 

"It  did  the  same  thing,  bunglingly,  to  Lord  Brougham,  by 
knocking  itself  against  his  lordship's  knuckles,  and,  after  a  jingle, 
it  fell.  How  these  things  were  produced  neither  Lord  Brougham 
nor  I  could  say,  but  I  conjecture  that  they  may  be  produced  by 
machinery  attached  to  the  lower  extremities  of  Mr.  Home."  ^ 

It  will  be  seen  that  in  the  interval  between  June  and 
October  Brewster's  mental  attitude  had  undergone  a  decided 

^  Morning  Advertiser,  Oct.  3rd,  1855. 

'•^  Home,  commenting  on  this  passage,  explains  that  he  was  seized  with  a  violent 
fit  of  coughing  and  left  the  room  to  get  a  handkerchief  {Incidents,  First  Series, 
p.  238).  ^  Advertiser,  Oct.  12th,  1855. 

144        SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

change,  and  that  he  now  finds  himself  able  to  "  conjecture " 
— at  a  distance  of  some  months  from  the  actual  facts — how 
the  things  were  done.  It  may  be  urged,  indeed,  that  this 
change  of  attitude  is  due  to  the  discovery  of  suspicious 
circumstances  at  the  second  seance,  described  in  the  same 
letter  to  the  Advertiser.  But  no  later  discoveries  of  the  kind 
can  explain  or  excuse  positive  discrepancies  between  the 
earlier  and  the  later  account  of  the  first  sitting.  In  the 
earlier  account  it  is  expressly  stated  that  the  bell  rang  on  the 
floor,  when  nothing  could  have  touched  it ;  in  the  later 
account  it  is  stated  that  the  bell  did  not  ring ;  and  various 
incidents,  tending  to  throw  suspicion  or  ridicule  on  the 
performance,  are  introduced  for  the  first  time  in  the  later 
account.  Suppose  the  positions  had  been  reversed,  and  that 
two  discrepant  accounts  of  the  same  seance,  the  later  account 
embellished  with  marvellous  details  which  found  no  place 
in  the  contemporary  version,  had  been  published  by  some 
preposterous  Spiritualist.  Brewster  would,  no  doubt,  for  our 
warning  and  edification,  have  pointed  the  obvious  moral ; 
and  perhaps,  if  the  names  are  changed,  the  moral  will  still 
serve.  But  the  Spiritualists  were  denied  their  revenge,  for 
Brewster's  diary  was  only  published  after  his  death. 

In  1863,  as  already  stated,  appeared  Mrs.  de  Morgan's 
book,  Fro7n  Matter  to  Spirit^  with  a  preface  by  her  husband. 
De  Morgan's  confession  of  faith  is  worth  quoting : — 

"  I  am  perfectly  convinced  that  I  have  both  seen  and  heard, 
in  a  manner  which  should  make  unbelief  impossible,  things  called 
spiritual  which  cannot  be  taken  by  a  rational  being  to  be  capable 
of  explanation  by  imposture,  coincidence,  or  mistake.  So  far  I  feel 
the  ground  firm  under  me.  But  when  it  comes  to  what  is  the  cause 
of  these  phenomena,  I  find  I  cannot  adopt  any  explanation  which 
has  yet  been  suggested.  If  I  were  bound  to  choose  among  things 
which  I  can  conceive,  I  should  say  that  there  is  some  sort  of  action 
of  some  combination  of  will,  intellect,  and  physical  power,  which 
is  not  that  of  any  of  the  human  beings  present.  But,  thinking  it 
very  likely  that  the  universe  may  contain  a  few  agencies — say  half 
a  million — about  which  no  man  knows  anything,  I  cannot  but 
suspect  that  a  small  proportion  of  these  agencies — say  five  thousand 
— may  be  severally  competent  to  the  production  of  all  the  phen- 
omena, or  may  be  quite  up  to  the  task  among  them.  The  physical 
explanations  which  I  have  seen  are  easy,  but  miserably  insufficient : 
the  spiritual  hypothesis  is  sufficient,  but  ponderously  difficult. 
Time  and  thought  will  decide,  the  second  asking  the  first  for  more 
results  of  trial.  "^ 

^  Pages  v.,  vi. 

SCIENCE  AND   SUPERSTITION       145 

This  extract  gives  a  fair  indication  of  de*  Morgan's  posi- 
tion. Briefly,  he  contends  that  the  Spiritualists — whatever 
we  may  think  of  their  conclusions — are  in  the  right  both  in 
their  spirit  and  their  method  ;  and  that  the  champions  of 
physical  science,  who  refuse  to  investigate  for  themselves,  and 
sneer  at  those  who  do,  on  the  ground  that  the  things  alleged 
are  impossible,  are  as  unquestionably  in  the  wrong.  For  him- 
self he  pins  his  faith  on  a  maxim  laid  down  by  Aristotle — 
TO.  Se  yevofxeva  (f>avepov  on  SuvaTO. '  ov  yap  eyevero,  el  f)v  aSvvaTa} 

For  us,  it  is  true,  the  effect  of  the  homily  is  liable  to  be 
impaired  because,  in  the  single  illustration  of  the  practical 
working  of  his  principle  which  he  allows  himself  to  give,  it  is 
unfortunately  obvious  that  the  homilist  has  been  gulled  by 
a  clever  adventuress.^ 

At  the  trial  of  Lyon  v.  Home,  in  1868,  extracts  from  this 
preface  were  read  in  court ;  and  testimony  was  also  furnished 
by  Cromwell  Varley,  Robert  Chambers,  Dr.  Gully,  and  other 
persons  of  scientific  repute.  This  provoked  a  retort  from 
Professor  Tyndall,  who,  whilst  the  trial  was  still  proceeding, 
wrote  to  the  Pall  Mall  Gazette^  a  letter  giving  an  account 
of  an  episode  in  which  Faraday  had  been  concerned  some 
years  previously.  According  to  Tyndall,  after  Faraday  had 
accepted  an  invitation  to  examine  the  manifestations  oc- 
curring in  Home's  presence,  the  investigation  fell  through 
because  the  conditions  required  by  Faraday  were  not 
accepted.  Tyndall's  account  of  the  incident  was  certainly 
inadequate,  if  not  actually  misleading,  as  appeared  when, 
in  response  to  a  challenge  from  Home,  the  original  corre- 
spondence between  Faraday  and  Sir  Emerson  Tennant  was 
published.  Faraday,  it  would  seem,  assented  with  reluctance 
to  entering  upon  the  proposed  investigation,  on  the  condition 
that  he  received  satisfactory  answers  to  a  string  of  questions, 
of  which  an  extract  will  suffice  to  show  the  purport : — 

"(7)  If  the  effects  are  miracles,  or  the  work  of  spirits,  does  he 
(Home)  admit  the  utterly  contemptible  character,  both  of  them  and 
their  results,  up  to  the  present  time,  in  respect  either  of  yielding 
information  or  instruction,  or  supplying  any  force  or  action  of  the 
least  value  to  mankind  ?  " 

From  the  whole  tone  of  the  letter  it  is  clear  that  Faraday 
had  made  up  his  mind  that  the  phenomena  were  delusive 
or  fraudulent,  and  Home  an  impostor,  and  that  he  had  no 

^  "  Now  things  which  have  happened  are  manifestly  possible :  for  if  they  had 
been  impossible,  they  would  not  have  happened." 

^  See  the  description  of  his  seance  with  Mrs.  Hayden,  quoted  above,  pp.  6,  7. 
3  May  5th,  186S. 

146         SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

desire  to  conceal  his  opinion.  Whether  Faraday's  conclu- 
sions were  justified  or  not,  no  philosopher  was  justified  in 
undertaking  an  inquiry  of  which  he  had  so  ostentatiously 
prejudged  the  issue ;  nor  could  the  subject  of  the  proposed 
inquiry  have  been  fairly  blamed  for  declining  a  trial  in  which 
the  judge  had  already  pronounced  sentence.  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  it  appears  that  the  proposal  was  declined  by  Robert 
Bell,  the  intermediary  in  the  matter,  without  even  consulting 
Home. 

The  letter  was  of  course  altogether  unworthy  of  Faraday's 
high  character  and  scientific  eminence,  and  was  no  doubt 
the  outcome  of  a  moment  of  transient  irritation.^  The  posi- 
tion taken  was  quite  indefensible.  It  would  have  been 
reasonable  for  Faraday  to  plead  that  his  time  was  too  much 
occupied  with  his  proper  work  to  undertake  a  task  of  this 
kind  ;  or  that  he  was  not  qualified  for  an  investigation  which 
confessedly  led  or  might  lead  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
physical  sciences.  But  to  enter  upon  a  judicial  inquiry 
by  treating  the  subject-matter  as  a  chose  jugee  was  surely 
a  parody  of  scientific  methods.  Faraday  either  had  grounds 
sufficient  for  condemning  Home,  or  he  had  not.  In  the 
former  case  an  inquiry  was  superfluous,  and  could  only  be 
mischievous ;  in  the  latter  Home  and  his  manifestations 
were  alike  entitled  to  strictly  neutral  treatment. 

But  if  illogical,  Faraday's  attitude  was  readily  intelligible. 
As  a  man  of  common  sense,  he  was  no  doubt  repelled  by  the 
follies  of  which  he  heard  ;  as  a  man  of  fastidious  honour,  he 
was  sickened  by  the  chicanery  undoubtedly  practised  in  many 
cases ;  as  a  man  of  deeply  religious  feeling,  he  was  shocked 
by  the  facile  irreverence  which  heard  celestial  revelations  in 
an  entranced  medium's  babble.  But  if  Faraday's  error  was 
a  venial  one,  Tyndall,  in  endorsing  his  master's  conduct  and 
following  his  example  after  its  errors  had  been  pointed  out 
to  him,  has  little  excuse.  "Faraday,"  writes  his  disciple, 
"  regarded  the  necessity  even  of  discussing  such  phenomena 
as  are  ascribed  to  Mr.  Home  as  a  discredit,  to  use  no  stronger 
term,  to  the  education  of  this  age.  Still  .  .  .  having  in  this 
spirit  satisfied  his  own  mind  that  these  reputed  spiritualistic 
phenomena  were  only  worthy  of  the  scorn  or  pity  of  all 
intelligent  persons,"  he  was  willing  to  investigate  them ! 
Naturally,  Tyndall's  own  offer  to  investigate  "in  the  same 
spirit "  was  not  accepted." 

^  This  was  the  view  taken  at  the  time  by  Mr.  F.  T.   Palgrave  {Pall  Mall 
Gazette,  May  i6th)  and  the  editor  {Pall  Mall  Gazette,  May  22nd,  1868). 
2  Pall  Mall  Gazette,  May  i8th,  1868. 

SCIENCE  AND   SUPERSTITION        147 

In  his  Fragments  of  Science  for  Unscientific  People}  Tyn- 
dall  furnishes  a  sample  of  his  mode  of  investigation.  The 
date  of  the  solitary  stance  which  he  describes  is  not  given, 
but  from  another  source  we  learn  that  it  took  place  in  the 
early  sixties,  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Newton  Crosland,^  The 
seance  was  a  failure ;  nothing  occurred  which  could  not  have 
been  effected  by  fraud  or  accident.  Tyndall  claims,  however, 
to  have  checked  one  or  two  intended  movements  of  the 
table ;  he  further  asserts  that  the  medium,  after  boasting  that 
she  was  so  sensitive  as  to  be  rendered  seriously  ill  by  the 
mere  presence  of  a  magnet  in  the  room,  failed  to  detect  a 
magnet  in  Tyndall's  pocket,  within  a  few  inches  of  her  person ; 
and  that  some  of  the  company  attributed  to  spirit  influence 
movements  and  sounds  which  were  actually  caused  by 
Tyndall  himself.  Tyndall's  account  of  the  sitting  is  quite 
possibly  correct,  but  we  have  only  his  own  word  for  it,  and 
the  fact  that  at  the  time  he  kept  his  experiments  and  obser- 
vations to  himself,  so  as  to  shut  out  all  possibility  of  corro- 
borative evidence,  gives  an  appearance  of  unfairness  to  his 
article  which  is  much  to  be  regretted.  As  we  have  already 
seen,  even  a  distinguished  physicist  is  liable,  like  ordinary 
mortals,  to  make  serious  mistakes  in  his  report  of  a  seance, 
and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  Tyndall's  version  of  the  evening's 
performance  was  challenged,  on  publication,  by  his  host.^ 

But  even  if  the  accuracy  of  the  narrative  is  admitted,  the 
propriety  of  publishing  it  is  dubious.  The  seance  was  ad- 
mittedly unsuccessful ;  no  fraud  was  actually  detected  ;  and 
it  hardly  seems  worth  while  to  have  written  an  article  to 
prove  that  some  Spiritualists  were  credulous  and  some 
mediums  imaginative.  But  when  dogs  are  to  be  beaten  any 
stick  will  serve.* 

In  1869,  however,  an  inquiry  on  an  extended  scale  was 
undertaken.  In  January  of  that  year  the  London  Dialectical 
Society  appointed  a  committee  to  investigate  the  alleged 
phenomena.  The  committee,  as  ultimately  constituted,  con- 
sisted of  some  thirty  odd  persons,  of  whom  the  most  notable 
were  A.  R.  Wallace,  Serjeant  Cox,  Charles  Bradlaugh,  H.  G. 
Atkinson,  Dr.  James  Edmunds,  and  several  other  physicians 
and  surgeons.  The  committee  invited  the  co-operation  of 
Professor  Huxley  and  G.  H.  Lewes,  but  both  declined,  the 

^  London,  1871.  ^  ggg  jjjg  Apparitions,  p.  24.     London,  1873. 

^  See  Crosland's  Apparitions. 

^  In  his  Spiritualism  ;  a  narrative  with  a  discussion  (Edinburgh,  1871),  P.  P. 
Alexander  devotes  an  appendix  of  several  pages  to  demonstrating  the  futility 
of  Tyndall's  arguments.     But  the  demonstration  is  hardly  needed. 

^ 

148        SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

former  on  the  ground  that  "supposing  the  phenomena  to 
be  genuine,  they  do  not  interest  me.  If  anybody  would 
endow  me  with  the  faculty  of  listening  to  the  chatter  of  old 
women  and  curates  in  the  nearest  cathedral  town,  I  should 
decline  the  privilege,  having  better  things  to  do."^ 

The  committee's  labours  extended  over  eighteen  months. 
Evidence,  oral  or  written,  was  received  from  a  large  number 
of  persons  who  believed  the  phenomena  to  be  genuine,  but 
the  committee  explain  that  they  had  "almost  wholly  failed 
to  obtain  evidence  from  those  who  attributed  them  to  fraud 
or  delusion."^  The  committee  further  investigated  the  matter 
experimentally  by  means  of  six  sub-committees,  who  were  at 
liberty  to  invite  mediums  and  other  persons  to  assist  in  their 
researches. 

In  the  event  the  committee  reported  that  the  great  majority 
of  their  number  had  themselves  witnessed  several  phases  of 
the  phenomena  without  the  presence  of  any  professional 
medium,  and  that  the  evidence  thus  obtained  appeared  to 
establish,  amongst  other  things,  the  occurrence  of  sounds  and 
movements  of  heavy  bodies  without  the  use  of  mechanical 
contrivance,  or  the  exertion  of  adequate  muscular  force.  In 
conclusion,  the  committee, 

"  taking  into  consideration  the  high  character  and  great  intelligence 
of  many  of  the  witnesses  to  the  more  extraordinary  facts,  the  extent 
to  which  their  testimony  is  supported  by  the  reports  of  the  sub- 
committees, and  the  absence  of  any  proof  of  imposture  or  delusion 
as  regards  a  large  portion  of  the  phenomena;  and  further,  having 
regard  to  the  exceptional  character  of  the  phenomena,  the  large 
number  of  persons  in  every  grade  of  society  and  over  the  whole 
civilised  world  who  are  more  or  less  influenced  by  a  belief  in  their 
supernatural  origin,  and  to  the  fact  that  no  philosophical  explanation 
of  them  has  yet  been  arrived  at,  deem  it  incumbent  upon  them  to 
state  their  conviction  that  the  subject  is  worthy  of  more  serious  and 
careful  investigation  than  it  has  hitherto  received."^  ,. 

Unfortunately  the  names  of  the  signatories  to  this  report 
are  not  given.  It  would  seem,  however,  that  at  least  two 
members  of  the  original  committee,  Charles  Bradlaugh  and 
Dr.  Edmunds,  were  unable  to  accept  the  finding  of  their 
colleagues.*  As  will  be  seen  from  the  names  quoted,  several 
prominent  members  were  already  committed,  not  indeed  to 
the  spirit  hypothesis,  but  to  a  belief  in  the  genuineness  of  the 
physical   phenomena ;    nor  does  it  appear  that  any  of  the 

^  Report  of  the  Dialectical  Society,  p.  229. 

^  Report,  p.  I.  ^  Ibid.,  pp.  5,  6.  *  Ibid.,  pp.  50  and  279. 

SCIENCE  AND   SUPERSTITION        149 

committee  had  special  qualifications  for  the  delicate  investi- 
gation which  they  had  undertaken.  Again,  though  reports 
are  printed  of  various  sub-committees,  together  with  detailed 
minutes  of  the  sittings,  the  names  of  the  experimenters,  and 
even  of  the  members  of  the  sub-committees,  are  furnished  in 
one  case  only :  Sub-Committee  No.  5,  which  included  Dr. 
Edmunds  and  Charles  Bradlaugh,  had  four  sittings  with 
Home,  but  the  phenomena  witnessed  were  feeble  and  incon- 
clusive. Moreover,  there  are  many  indications  that  the  work 
of  the  other  sub-committees  was  not  carried  on  under  suffi- 
ciently rigorous  conditions,  or  with  due  regard  to  accuracy. 

The  following  description  of  a  sitting  is  extracted  from  the 
Report  of  Sub-Committee  No.  i,  the  most  persevering  and 
most  successful  of  all  the  sub-committees  : — 

"On  an  occasion  when  eleven  members  of  your  sub-committee 
had  been  sitting  round  one  of  the  dining-tables  above  described  for 
forty  minutes,  and  various  motions  and  sounds  had  occurred,  they, 
by  way  of  test,  turned  the  backs  of  their  chairs  to  the  table,  at 
about  nine  inches  from  it.  They  all  then  knelt  upon  their  chairs, 
placing  their  arms  upon  the  backs  thereof.  In  this  position  their 
feet  were,  of  course,  turned  away  from  the  table,  and  by  no 
possibility  could  be  placed  under  it  or  touch  the  floor.  The  hands 
of  each  person  were  extended  over  the  table  at  about  four  inches 
from  the  surface.  Contact,  therefore,  with  any  part  of  the  table 
could  not  take  place  without  detection. 

"  In  less  than  a  minute  the  table,  untouched,  moved  four  times ; 
at  first  about ^w  inches  to  one  side,  then  about  twelve  inches  to  the 
opposite  side,  and  then,  in  like  manner,  four  inches  and  six  inches 
respectively. 

"  The  hands  of  all  present  were  next  placed  on  the  backs  of  their 
chairs,  and  about  a  foot  from  the  table,  which  again  moved,  as 
before,  five  times,  over  spaces  varying  from  four  to  six  inches.  Then 
all  the  chairs  were  removed  twelve  inches  from  the  table,  and  each 
person  knelt  on  his  chair  as  before,  this  time,  however,  folding  his 
hands  behind  his  back,  his  body  being  thus  about  eighteen  inches 
from  the  table,  and  having  the  back  of  the  chair  between  himself 
and  the  table.  The  table  again  moved  four  times  in  various 
directions.  In  the  course  of  this  conclusive  experiment,  and  in 
less  than  half  an  hour,  the  table  thus  moved,  without  contact  or 
possibility  of  contact  with  any  person  present,  thirteen  times,  the 
movements  being  in  different  directions,  and  some  of  them  according 
to  the  request  of  various  members  of  your  sub-committee. 

"  The  table  was  then  carefully  examined,  turned  upside  down  and 
taken  to  pieces,  but  nothing  was  discovered  to  account  for  the 
phenomena.  The  experiment  was  conducted  throughout  in  the  full 
light  of  gas  above  the  table."  ^ 

^  Report,  pp.  10,  II. 

150        SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

The  date  of  this  experiment  is  not  given  in  the  Report,  and 
in  the  detailed  minutes  of  the  sittings  there  is  no  experiment 
which  precisely  corresponds  with  that  above  quoted.  But 
sitting  No.  38,  of  December  28th,  1869,  ^13-7  be  presumed 
to  be  the  occasion  referred  to.  If,  however,  we  compare  the 
account  given  in  the  minutes,  and  presumably  written  at 
the  time,  with  that  quoted  from  the  Report,  we  find  several 
discrepancies,  of  which  the  more  important  are  (i)  that  only 
eight  members  are  mentioned  as  being  present ;  (2)  that  the 
second  series  is  stated  to  have  consisted  oi  four  movements, 
not  five,  as  in  the  Report ;  (3)  that  the  number  of  separate 
movements  at  the  third  trial  is  not  stated  ;  (4)  that  the  gas 
is  recorded  to  have  been  "turned  up  higher,  so  as  to  give 
abundance  of  light,"  after  the  first  eight  experiments,  from 
which  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  statement  in  the  Report, 
"  The  experiment  was  conducted  throughout  in  the  full  light 
of  gas,"  requires  some  modification.^ 

These  discrepancies  are  not,  perhaps,  in  themselves  serious  ; 
their  real  importance  lies  in  their  revealing  such  slovenliness 
in  the  recording  as  justifies  us  in  attaching  little  value  to  the 
record.  There  is  another  fact  which  throws  light  on  the 
character  of  the  investigation  and  the  qualifications  of  those 
who  took  part  in  it.  After  this,  the  most  successful  sitting 
of  the  series,  only  two  more  meetings,  each  unsuccessful  and 
each  attended  by  a  smaller  number  of  members,  are  recorded 
to  have  been  held.  What  manner  of  investigators  were 
these  who,  having  just  obtained  a  striking  demonstration 
of  the  action  of  a  new  force,  were  content  to  break  off  their 
experiments  without  making  repeated  attempts  to  obtain 
at  least  a  renewal  of  the  demonstration,  if  not  fresh  light 
on  the  nature  of  the  new  force  and  the  conditions  of  its 
operation  ! 

It  should  be  added  that  Serjeant  Cox,  in  his  evidence 
before  the  committee,^  describes  at  length  an  experiment 
at  which  some  remarkable  movements  of  the  table  were 
observed.  He  refers  to  this  experiment  as  "the  most  con- 
clusive evidence  myself  and  the  scientific  investigators 
\sc.  apparently,  the  sub-committee]  have  yet  had  of  motion 
without  contact."  Yet  this  remarkable  seance,  which  is  said 
to  have  taken  place  on  the  3rd  March,  1871,  is  not  referred 
to  in  the  Reports,  or  recorded  in  the  minutes,  of  any  of  the 
sub-committees ;  another  instance  of  the  slovenliness  which 
appears  to  have  characterised  throughout  the  proceedings  of 
the  committee. 

1  Report,  pp.  390,  391.  '^  Ibid.,  pp.  102,  103. 

SCIENCE  AND   SUPERSTITION        151 

The  work  done  by  the  Dialectical  Society  was,  no  doubt, 
of  value,  since  it  has  brought  together  and  preserved  for  us 
a  large  number  of  records  of  personal  experiences  by  re- 
presentative Spiritualists.  For  those  who  wish  to  ascertain 
what  Spiritualists  believed  at  this  time,  and  what  phenomena 
were  alleged  to  occur,  the  book  may  be  of  service.  But, 
except  in  the  Minority  Report  by  Dr.  Edmunds,  there  is  no 
trace  of  any  critical  handling  of  the  materials,  and  the  con- 
clusions of  the  committee  can  carry  little  weight. 

And  yet,  with  the  single  exception  of  the  work  done  by 
Mr,  Crookes,  described  below,  the  Report  of  the  Dialectical 
Society  represents  up  till  1882  the  only  attempt  in  this  country 
at  a  systematic  investigation,  by  any  man  or  body  of  men 
having  serious  pretensions  to  scientific  qualifications,  of  the 
phenomena  of  Spiritualism.  This  statement  is  not  intended 
to  disparage  the  value  of  the  testimony  of  men  like  Cromwell 
Varley,  Dr.  A.  R.  Wallace,  and  Lord  Lindsay  (the  present 
Earl  of  Crawford),  But  none  of  these  gentlemen  have 
published  any  record  of  systematic  investigations  on  scientific 
lines.  Dr.  Wallace,  in  his  Scientific  Aspect  of  the  Super- 
natural^ already  cited,  refrains  from  recounting  his  own 
experiences,  as  not  demonstrative,  and  contents  himself  with 
quoting  the  testimony  of  others.  Mr.  Varley's  evidence 
before  the  Dialectical  Committee  has  been  already  referred 
to,  and  an  isolated  experiment  of  his  own  with  Miss  Cook 
is  described  below.  Lord  Lindsay's  evidence  will  most 
conveniently  be  considered  in  connection  with  Home's 
mediumship,  to  which  it  almost  exclusively  relates.^ 

One  other  name  deserves  mention.  Dr.  Carpenter  claims 
for  more  than  a  dozen  years  to  have  taken  every  opportunity 
which  offered  for  investigating  "the  higher  phenomena  of 
Spiritualism."  ^  But  his  investigations  can  hardly  have  been 
exhaustive,  since  he  expressly  states  that  he  always  refused 
to  attend  a  dark  s6ance,  or  to  investigate  phenomena  which 
took  place  under  a  table.  No  doubt  Carpenter,  following  the 
example  of  Braid  and  Faraday,  did  good  service  in  demon- 
strating the  large  part  played  in  many  "  magnetic,"  "  odylic," 
and  minor  spiritualistic  phenomena  by  unconscious  expectation 
and  involuntary  muscular  action.  To  him  we  owe  also  not 
only  the  phrase  "unconscious  cerebration,"  but  a  lucid  analysis 
of  the  physiological  mechanism  of  planchette  writing  and 
other  automatic  manifestations.  But  of  the  physical  pheno- 
mena   of    Spiritualism    in    their    later    developments — and 

*  London,  1866.  ^  See  below,  Book  IV.  chaps,  iii.  and  iv. 

^  Quarterly  Review,  Oct.,  187 1. 

152        SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

especially  of  the  marvels  occurring  in  the  presence  of  Home — 
he  can  give  no  adequate  account.  He  was  content  to  write 
them  down  as  fraudulent,  without  in  most  cases  attempting, 
or  as  in  the  case  of  Crookes'  experiments  with  Home,  after 
attempting  with  conspicuous  ill-success,  to  demonstrate  how 
the  fraud  was  accomplished.  As  already  indicated,  the  effect 
of  his  really  relevant  criticism  was  impaired  by  the  extra- 
ordinary egotism  and  malevolence  which  he  displayed.^ 

In  an  article  published  in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science 
for  July,  1870,  Mr.  Crookes  announced  that  he  had  entered 
upon  a  systematic  investigation  of  the  physical  phenomena 
of  Spiritualism.  In  the  course  of  the  next  two  or  three 
years  he  published  in  the  same  periodical  articles  setting  forth 
some  of  the  results  of  his  investigations.  As  the  experi- 
ments described  in  these  articles  related  for  the  most  part  to 
manifestations  observed  in  the  presence  of  Home,  they  can 
most  conveniently  be  discussed  in  a  later  chapter,  in  connec- 
tion with  Home's  mediumship  in  general.^  In  the  early  part 
of  1874,  however,  Mr.  Crookes  was  led  into  a  further 
pronouncement  on  the  subject  of  Spiritualism.  At  a 
seance  with  Miss  Cook  as  medium,  held  in  the  previous 
December,  Mr.  Volckman,  who  had  borne  a  prominent  part 
on  the  committee  of  the  Dialectical  Society,  had,  as  already 
described,^  seized  the  supposed  spirit  form  of  "  Katie  "  as  she 
walked  about  the  room.  Mr.  Volckman  found  himself 
grasping  a  solid  and  strongly  reluctant  wrist,  and  held  on  to 
it  until  the  attacks  of  the  spirit  form,  aided  by  the  efforts 
of  two  of  the  sitters,  compelled  him  to  desist.  Mr.  Volck- 
man then  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  form  which  he  had 
seized  was  that  of  the  medium  herself  masquerading  as  a 

^  See  his  articles  in  the  Quarterly  Review  for  September,  1853,  and  October, 
187 1  ;  his  lectures  on  MesJ7ierism,  Spiritualism,  etc.,  published  in  1877  ;  and  the 
chapter  on  "  Unconscious  Cerebration,"  in  his  Physiology.  In  the  later  article  in 
the  Quarterly  he  writes  of  Cromwell  Varley  as  a  man  "  possessing  considerable 
technical  knowledge  .  .  .  but  his  scientific  attainments  are  so  cheaply  estimated 
.  .  .  that  he  has  never  been  admitted  to  the  Royal  Society."  Mr.  Varley  had 
been  elected  to  the  Fellowship  some  months  before  this  statement  appeared.  Of 
Mr.  (now  Sir  William)  Huggins  he  writes  as  "a  brewer,  a  scientific  amateur," 
lacking  "a  broad  basis  of  general  culture,"  and  "owing  his  success  to  his 
association  with  a  justly  distinguished  professor."  Mr.  Huggins  was  not  a. 
brewer ;  and  the  present  generation  can  judge  how  far  Carpenter's  spiteful 
depreciation  was  justified.  Mr.  Crookes  he  describes  as  a  "specialist  of  the 
specialists,"  an  investigator  whose  ability  was  "purely  technical,"  and  added, 
' '  We  speak  advisedly  when  we  say  that  (the  Fellowship  of  the  Royal  Society) 
was  conferred  on  him  with  considerable  hesitation."  When  this  latter  statement 
was  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  Council  of  the  Royal  Society,  that  body  passed 
a  special  resolution  regretting  its  publication,  on  the  double  ground  that  it  was 
incorrect  in  point  of  fact,  and  that  its  publication  was  a  breach  of  the  usages  of 
the  Society.  "  Book  IV.  chap.  iii.  ^  Above,  page  103. 

SCIENCE  AND   SUPERSTITION        153 

spirit.  In  the  newspaper  discussion  which  followed,  Mr, 
Crookes,  as  one  who  had  tested  and  satisfied  himself  of 
the  genuineness  of  the  materialisations  exhibited  in  Miss 
Cook's  presence,  felt  bound  to  intervene.  In  his  first  letter 
the  only  proof  offered,  beyond  the  assertion  of  his  own 
conviction,  of  the  independent  existence  of  the  spirit  form 
was  that,  on  one  occasion,  in  the  house  of  Mr.  Luxmoore, 
when  "  Katie "  was  standing  before  him  in  the  room, 
Mr.  Crookes  had  distinctly  heard  from  behind  the  curtain  the 
sobbing  and  moaning  habitually  made  by  Miss  Cook  during 
such  seances.^ 

The  evidence,  no  doubt,  left  something  to  be  desired,  and 
in  two  later  letters  Mr.  Crookes  essayed  to  supply  the 
deficiency.^  At  a  stance  at  his  own  house  on  March  I2th, 
1874,  "Katie,"  robed  in  white,  came  to  the  opening  of  the 
curtain  and  summoned  him  to  the  assistance  of  her  medium. 
Mr.  Crookes  followed  "immediately,"  and  found  Miss  Cook, 
clad  in  her  ordinary  black  velvet  dress,  lying  across  the  sofa. 
But  "Katie"  had  vanished,  and  he  did  not  actually  see  the 
two  forms  together.  Nor  did  he  apparently  ever  succeed  in 
seeing  the  faces  of  "  Katie "  and  Miss  Cook  simultaneously 
in  his  own  house.  Later,  however,  he  claims  to  have  seen 
their  forms  together,  in  a  good  light.  Miss  Cook  gave  a 
series  of  sittings  in  May  of  this  year  (1874)  ^t  Mr.  Crookes' 
house  for  the  purpose  of  allowing  "  Katie "  to  be  photo- 
graphed. The  sittings  took  place  by  electric  light,  and  five 
cameras  were  at  work  simultaneously.  Miss  Cook  would  lie 
down  on  the  floor  behind  a  curtain  with  her  face  muffled 
in  a  shawl,  and  "  Katie,"  when  ready,  would  appear  in  the  full 
light,  in  front  of  the  curtain.     Mr.  Crookes  adds  : — 

"I  frequently  drew  the  curtain  on  one  side  when  Katie  was 
standing  near,  and  it  was  a  common  thing  for  the  seven  or  eight  of 
us  in  the  laboratory  to  see  Miss  Cook  and  Katie  at  the  same  time, 
under  the  full  blaze  of  the  electric  light.  We  did  not  on  these 
occasions  actually  see  the  face  of  the  medium,  because  of  the 
shawl,  but  we  saw  her  hands  and  feet;  we  saw  her  move  uneasily 
under  the  influence  of  the  intense  light,  and  we  heard  her  moan 
occasionally.  I  have  one  photograph  of  the  two  together,  but 
Katie  is  seated  in  front  of  Miss  Cook's  head." 

Even  here,  it  will  be  seen,  full  proof  is  wanting.  Ap- 
parently  all    that    Mr.    Crookes    and    his    fellow  -  observers 

^  Letter  to  the  Spiritualist,  6th  Feb.,  1874. 

^  Ibid.,  April  3rd  and  June  5th,  1874.  All  three  letters  are  included  in  the 
reprint  of  Mr.  Crookes'  articles  from  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science,  published 
by  James  Burns,  under  the  title,  Researches  in  Spiritualism.     London  (no  date). 

154        SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

actually  saw,  besides  the  figure  of  "  Katie,"  was  a  bundle  of 
clothes  on  the  floor,  with  a  shawl  at  one  end,  a  pair  of  boots 
at  the  other,  and  something  like  hands  attached  to  it.  As 
"  Katie "  generally,  if  not  invariably,  appeared  barefooted, 
the  boots  presented  no  special  difficulty. 

Nor  do  the  photographs  themselves — some  of  which,  by 
the  courtesy  of  Sir  W.  Crookes,  I  have  lately  been  permitted 
to  examine — afford  more  conclusive  evidence.  It  was  ad- 
mitted even  at  the  time,  and  by  believers,  that  "  Katie's " 
appearance  differed  widely  on  different  occasions,  and  that 
at  many  stances  she  strongly  resembled  the  medium.  This 
was  unquestionably  the  case  during  these  photographic  ex- 
periments. Side  by  side  with  the  photographs  of  the  sup- 
posed "  Katie,"  Sir  W.  Crookes  has  placed  some  photographs 
taken  about  the  same  time,  and  under  as  nearly  as  may  be 
the  same  conditions,  of  Miss  Cook  herself.  The  likeness 
between  the  two  sets  is  unmistakable.  Nor  is  it  possible  to 
substantiate  any  real  difference  in  the  features.  The  ap- 
parently greater  breadth  of  the  "  spirit "  face  may  well  be  due 
to  the  fact  that,  whereas  Miss  Cook  wore  hanging  ringlets, 
"Katie's"  hair  is  effectually  concealed  by  the  drapery,  which  in 
most  cases  comes  down  over  the  forehead,  and  falls  in  two 
thick  folds  on  either  side  of  the  head,  something  like  the 
headgear  of  a  sphinx.  Again,  as  Miss  Cook,  when  photo- 
graphed, wore  her  ordinary  dress,  which  concealed  her  feet, 
the  apparent  difference  in  height  on  some  occasions  between 
herself  and  the  spirit  figure  cannot  be  relied  upon.  One 
piece  of  evidence  would,  indeed,  have  been  conclusive — that 
the  ears  of  the  spirit  form  should  have  appeared  intact,  for 
Miss  Cook's  ears  were  pierced  for  earrings.  But  the  en- 
circling drapery  effectually  concealed  both  the  ears  and  the 
hair  of  the  spirit  "  Katie." 

But  conclusive  evidence  of  the  simultaneous  appearance 
of  two  figures  was  at  length  obtained.  At  a  stance  held  on 
March  29th  Mr.  Crookes  reports : — 

"  Katie  ...  for  nearly  two  hours  walked  about  the  room  con- 
versing familiarly  with  those  present,  on  several  occasions  she  took 
my  arm  when  walking  .  .  .  Katie  now  said  she  thought  she  should 
be  able  this  time  to  show  herself  and  Miss  Cook  together.  I  was 
to  turn  the  gas  out,  and  then  come  with  my  phosphorus  lamp  into 
the  room  now  used  as  a  cabinet.  This  I  did,  having  previously 
asked  a  friend  who  was  skilful  at  shorthand  to  take  down  any  state- 
ment I  might  make  when  in  the  cabinet,  knowing  the  importance 
attaching  to  first  impressions,  and  not  wishing  to  leave  more  to 
memory  than  necessary.     His  notes  are  now  before  rne. 

SCIENCE   AND   SUPERSTITION        155 

"  I  went  cautiously  into  the  room,  it  being  dark,  and  felt  about 
for  Miss  Cook.  I  found  her  crouching  on  the  floor.  Kneeling 
down,  I  let  air  enter  the  lamp,  and  by  its  light  I  saw  the  young  lady 
dressed  in  black  velvet,  as  she  had  been  in  the  early  part  of  the 
evening,  and  to  all  appearance  perfectly  senseless ;  she  did  not 
move  when  I  took  her  hand  and  held  the  light  quite  close  to  her 
face,  but  continued  quietly  breathing.  Raising  the  lamp,  I  looked 
around  and  saw  Katie  standing  close  behind  Miss  Cook.  She  was 
robed  in  flowing  white  drapery  as  we  had  seen  her  previously  during 
the  seance.  Holding  one  of  Miss  Cook's  hands  in  mine,  and  still 
kneeling,  I  passed  the  lamp  up  and  down  so  as  to  illuminate  Katie's 
whole  figure,  and  satisfy  myself  thoroughly  that  I  was  really  looking 
at  the  veritable  Katie  whom  I  had  clasped  in  my  arms  a  few  minutes 
before,  and  not  at  the  phantasm  of  a  disordered  brain.  She  did 
not  speak,  but  moved  her  head  and  smiled  in  recognition.  Three 
separate  times  did  I  carefully  examine  Miss  Cook  crouching  before 
me  to  be  sure  that  the  hand  I  held  was  that  of  a  living  woman,  and 
three  separate  times  did  I  turn  the  lamp  to  Katie  and  examine  her 
with  steadfast  scrutiny  until  I  had  no  doubt  whatever  of  her  ob- 
jective reality." 

Mr.  Crookes  further  ascertained  on  this  occasion  that  a 
blister  on  Miss  Cook's  neck  was  w^anting  on  "  Katie's,"  and 
that  "  Katie's  "  ears  were  not  pierced  for  earrings. 

At  a  later  seance  held  on  the  21st  of  May,  Mr.  Crookes 
was  privileged  to  be  present,  behind  the  curtain,  at  the  fare- 
well meeting  between  Miss  Cook  and  "  Katie,"  and  saw  and 
heard  the  two  figures  conversing  together  for  several  minutes. 

There  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  on  these  two 
occasions,  at  any  rate,  the  figure  of  "  Katie,"  seen,  heard, 
and  touched  by  Mr.  Crookes  and  most  of  those  present, 
was  not  that  of  Miss  Cook  masquerading  as  a  spirit,  but 
was  a  separate  entity  of  some  kind.  Both  stances  were  in 
fact  held,  by  Miss  Cook's  special  invitation,  in  her  own  home 
and  in  presence  of  several  members  of  her  family,  and  the 
room  used  as  a  dark  cabinet  was  the  medium's  bedroom.^ 

^  See  various  letters  in  the  Spiritualist  and  the  Medium  in  the  early  part 
of  1874  referring  to  these  seances.  The  evidence  was  not  apparently  good 
enough  even  for  convinced  Spiritualists.  The  editor  of  the  Spiritualist  expressly 
states  that  the  seance  of  the  2ist  May  was  not  held  under  test  conditions 
{Spiritualist,  loth  July,  1874).  Mr.  J.  Enmore  Jones,  whose  acquaintance  we 
have  already  made  in  previous  chapters,  and  who  cannot  certainly  be  regarded 
as  unduly  exacting  of  evidence,  thought  the  conditions  at  this  final  series  of 
seances  by  no  means  satisfactory,  and  found  fault  with  Mr.  Crookes'  conduct 
of  the  one  seance  at  which  he  was  present  {Medium,  May  22nd,  1874).  And, 
finally,  Serjeant  Cox,  who  accepted  most  of  the  phenomena,  drew  the  line 
at  materialisation,  and  asked  for  more  precise  evidence  of  the  separate  appearance 
of  medium  and  spirit.  What  he  thought  of  Mr.  Crookes'  later  observations  may 
perhaps  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  when  challenged  in  the  columns  of  the 

156        SPIEITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

One  other  experiment  of  this  period  calls  for  mention.  In 
March,  1874,  Mr,  Cromwell  Varley,  F.R.S.,  the  well-known 
electrician,  applied  an  ingenious  electrical  test  to  Miss  Cook 
during  one  of  her  materialisation  seances.  The  medium, 
seated  in  an  inner  room  darkened  for  the  purpose,  was 
placed  in  a  circuit  connected  with  a  resistance  coil  and  a 
galvanometer,  the  two  instruments  being  in  the  outer  room 
in  full  view  of  the  sitters.  The  movements  of  the  galvano- 
meter were  shown  by  means  of  a  light  reflected  from  a 
mirror  on  to  a  large  graduated  scale.  The  free  ends  of  the 
wire  were  soldered  to  sovereigns,  which  were  fastened,  one 
to  each  of  the  medium's  arms,  by  means  of  elastic  bands, 
some  blotting-paper  moistened  with  nitrate  of  ammonia  being 
interposed  between  the  metal  and  the  skin  in  order  to 
improve  the  contact.  At  the  outset,  when  the  blotting-paper 
was  still  quite  moist,  the  needle  showed  a  deviation  of  about 
two  hundred  and  twenty  divisions  on  the  scale.  But  as  the 
moisture  gradually  evaporated,  and  the  resistance  therefore 
increased,  this  deviation  as  gradually  diminished,  until  at  the 
end  of  thirty-eight  minutes,  when  the  wires  were  finally 
removed  from  the  medium's  arms,  the  scale  showed  a 
deviation  of  one  hundred  and  forty-six  divisions  only.  As 
the  movement  of  the  needle  on  the  scale  was  fairly  regular, 
broken  by  no  such  sudden  and  extreme  fluctuations  as  must 
have  ensued  if  the  medium  had  removed  the  wires,  it  seems 
clear  that  the  wires  remained  attached  to  her  person  through- 
out. Yet  during  this  period  the  figure  "  Katie "  came  out 
before  the  expectant  circle,  waved  her  arms,  shook  hands 
with  some  of  her  friends,  and  wrote  in  their  presence. 

From  this  experiment  it  may  legitimately  be  inferred  that, 
if  "  Katie "  was  a  spirit,  whose  apparently  solid  form  was 
constructed,  in  accordance  with  the  Spiritualist  hypothesis, 
out  of  materials  drawn  from  the  body  of  the  medium,  the 
abstraction  of  the  required  materials  in  no  way  affected 
the  electrical  resistance  of  the  organism  drawn  upon.  So 
much  may  legitimately  be  inferred.  But  Mr.  Harrison,  the 
editor  of  the   Spiritualist,  in  printing  Mr.   Varley's   report, 

Medmm  (June  5th,    1874)  to  point  out  in  what  respect  they  fell  short  of  his 
demand  for  proof  on  this  point,  he  left  the  letter  unanswered. 

It  is  fair  to  point  out,  on  the  other  hand,  that,  as  already  indicated,  Mr. 
Crookes'  letters  on  the  "Katie"  appearances,  written  to  a  Spiritualist  journal, 
were  primarily  intended  as  a  vindication  of  the  character  of  a  young  woman 
whom  he  held  to  have  been  unjustly  attacked.  If  intended  as  a  serious  con- 
tribution to  science,  no  doubt  the  conditions  themselves  would  have  been  stricter, 
and,  for  the  satisfaction  of  scientific  readers,  the  whole  circumstances  of  the 
experiments  would  have  been  fully  described. 

SCIENCE  AND   SUPERSTITION        157 

adds  some  comments  of  his  own — comments  which,  he  states, 
met  with  the  approval  of  Mr.  Varley  and  Mr.  Crookes  (who 
had  also  been  present).  Mr.  Harrison  maintains  that  the 
experiment  proves  that  the  figure  seen  outside  the  curtain 
could  not  have  been  that  of  the  medium.  That  is  not  a 
legitimate  inference  from  the  facts  stated  in  Mr.  Varley's 
report.  To  make  it  so,  it  should  have  been  shown,  either 
that  the  wires  attached  to  the  medium  were  so  arranged  that 
it  would  have  been  impossible  for  her  to  leave  her  place 
without  breaking  the  circuit,  or  that  movements  such  as 
those  made  by  the  figure  "  Katie "  would  have  involved,  if 
"Katie"  were  actually  Miss  Cook,  with  the  wires  still  attached, 
more  violent  oscillations  of  the  needle  than  were  actually 
observed.  As  to  the  first  point,  there  is  no  indication  in  the 
report  that  the  wires  in  any  way  restricted  the  medium's 
liberty  of  movement,  at  any  rate,  in  the  direction  of  the  outer 
room.  As  to  the  second  point,  the  needle  oscillated,  when 
"  Katie "  waved  her  arms,  over  twenty-one  divisions  of  the 
scale ;  but  the  assumption  made  by  Mr.  Varley  that  the  act 
of  writing  (during  which,  of  course,  the  arms  would  experi- 
ence no  sudden  or  violent  motion)  would  necessarily  have 
involved  oscillation,  appears  to  have  been  purely  gratuitous. 
There  is  really  nothing  in  the  record  to  forbid  the  supposition 
that  Miss  Cook  left  her  seat  and  promenaded  as  "  Katie " 
with  the  wires  still  attached  to  her  arms.^  Reading  between 
the  lines,  we  are  forced  to  recognise  that  the  confidence 
expressed  by  scientific  witnesses  in  the  genuineness  of  these 
"materialisations"  is  inextricably  bound  up  with  their  con- 
fidence in  the  personal  integrity  of  the  medium,  and  Miss 
Cook's  later  career,  at  any  rate,  scarcely  allows  us  to  suppose 
that  such  confidence  was  ever  well  founded.^ 

A  modification  of  the  experiment  was  tried  a  year  later 
by  Mr.  Crookes  on  another  medium,  Mrs.  Fay.  The  in- 
vestigators sat  in  Mr.  Crookes'  laboratory,  in  front  of  a 
curtain.  In  the  library,  immediately  on  the  other  side  of 
the  curtain  (the  exact  distance  is  not  given),  the  medium 
was  seated  in  a  chair,  and  two  brass  handles,  wrapped  in  wet 
cloths,  were  given  her  to  hold,  the  circuit  being  thus  com- 
pleted. The  index  of  the  galvanometer  remained  practically 
constant  for  some  eight  minutes,  and  during  those  eight 
minutes  various  articles,  placed  in  the  library  at  a  considerable 

^  The  Spiritualist,  20th  March,  1874. 

^  Mrs.  Corner  (Miss  Cook)  was  seized  in  January,  1880,  when  personating  a 
spirit  (see  Spiritual  Notes,  Feb.,  1880;  Spiritualist  for  January  and  February 
of  same  year ;  and  my  Studies  in  Psychical  Research,  p.  23). 

158        SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

distance  from  the  medium,  are  reported  to  have  been  moved, 
a  hand  was  seen  thrust  through  the  curtain,  a  locked  desk 
was  opened,  and  so  on.  At  the  end  of  the  eight  minutes  the 
index  went  to  zero,  and  the  medium  was  discovered  in  a 
fainting  condition.  In  this  form  of  the  experiment  the 
manifestations,  if  performed  by  the  medium,  would  seem  to 
have  involved  a  movement  to  a  considerable  distance  away 
from  the  battery,  and  if  it  may  be  assumed  (for  it  is  not 
expressly  stated)  that  the  length  of  the  wires  or  their  mode 
of  attachment  would  not  have  permitted  that,  it  seems  clear 
either  that  the  movements  testified  to  were  effected  by  some 
extra-corporeal  agency,  or  that  the  medium  did  not  really 
link  herself  with  the  circuit  at  all,  but  placed  between  the 
handles  some  connecting  substance  of  a  resistance  approxi- 
mately equal  to  that  of  her  own  body. 

As  Mrs.  Fay,  no  doubt,  knew  of  the  earlier  experiments 
with  a  similar  apparatus,  the  supposition  that  she  brought 
with  her  a  small  resistance  coil  and  attached  it  to  the  handles 
presents  no  great  difficulty.^  As  the  circuit  was  actually 
broken  before  the  conclusion  of  the  experiment,  everything 
depends  upon  the  precautions  taken  at  the  outset  to  ensure 
that  the  medium's  body  was  actually  in  the  circuit.  This  is 
how  the  reporter,  Mr.  James  Burns,  the  editor  of  the  Medium, 
whose  report  is  endorsed  by  Mr.  Crookes  himself,  describes 
the  precautions  observed  : — 

"The  library  was  left  in  darkness,  except  a  little  light  from  the 
fire.  The  spectators  stood  in  a  circle,  round  the  apparatus,  in 
the  laboratory.  Before  the  curtain  in  the  doorway  was  drawn, 
Mrs.  Fay  was  asked  by  Mr.  Crookes  to  grasp  the  handles.  She 
did  so  at  fifteen  minutes  past  ten  o'clock.  The  streaks  of  light 
on  the  scale  at  once  ran  up  from  zero  to  two  hundred  and  twenty- 
one  divisions,  and  Mr.  Crookes,  assisted  by  Mr.  Bergheim,  read  the 
amount  of  resistance  at  5,600  B.A.  units.  Mr.  Crookes  returned  for 
a  moment  to  the  library  to  see  if  Mrs.  Fay  was  indeed  in  her  proper 
place,  and  the  report  was  satisfactory."  ^ 

From  this  account  it  would  not  appear  that  any  precautions 
were  taken  to  ensure  that  Mrs.  Fay's  hands  were  actually  in 

^  In  his  Mechanism  of  Man  (vol.  ii.  p.  446)  Serjeant  Cox  gives  an  account  of 
a  similar  seance  with  the  same  medium,  at  which  Messrs.  Huggins,  Galton,  and 
Crookes  were  present.  Cox  does  not  give  the  date  of  the  seance  ;  but  he 
distinctly  states  that  the  apparatus  was  quiie  new  to  the  medium.  If  Cox's 
statement  may  be  relied  upon,  the  meeting  described  by  him  must  have  taken 
place  before  that  described  in  the  text,  and  Mrs.  Fay  must  have  come  to  the 
latter  forewarned  of  the  precise  nature  of  the  test  to  be  imposed  upon  her. 

"  Medium  and  Daybreak,  March  I2th,  1875. 

SCIENCE  AND   SUPERSTITION       159 

the  circuit ;  if  a  resistance  coil  were  attached  to  the  handles, 
it  would  only  have  been  necessary  for  the  medium  in  the 
dim  light  to  approach  her  hands  close  to  them  during  Mr. 
Crookes'  momentary  inspection.  To  detect  trickery  of  the 
kind  probably  practised,  nothing  less  than  a  careful  inspection 
in  full  light  would  have  sufficed. 

At  the  meeting  of  the  British  Association  held  at  Glasgow 
in  1876,  in  the  Anthropological  Department,  presided  over 
by  Dr.  A.  R.  Wallace,  a  paper  was  read  by  Professor  W.  F. 
Barrett,  F.R.S.,  entitled  "  On  some  Phenomena  Associated  with 
Abnormal  Conditions  of  Mind."  In  this  paper  Professor 
Barrett  described  various  experiments  of  his  own  and  others 
tending  to  prove  what  the  Mesmerists  of  the  previous  genera- 
tion called  "community  of  sensation"  and  "clairvoyance."^ 
Professor  Barrett  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  results 
arrived  at  were  not  to  be  entirely  explained  by  hypersesthesia 
or  normal  suggestion.     In  his  own  words  : — 

"When  the  subject  was  in  the  state  of  trance  or  profound  hypnot- 
ism, I  noticed  that  not  only  sensations,  but  also  ideas  or  emotions 
occurring  in  the  operator  appeared  to  be  reproduced  in  the  subject 
without  the  intervention  of  any  sign,  or  visible  or  audible  communi- 
cation. ...  In  many  other  ways  I  convinced  myself  that  the  exist- 
ence of  a  distinct  idea  in  my  own  mind  gave  rise  to  some  image 
of  the  idea  in  the  subject's  mind :  not  always  a  clear  image,  but 
one  that  could  not  fail  to  be  recognised  as  a  more  or  less  distorted 
reflection  of  my  own  thought.  The  important  point  is  that  every 
care  was  taken  to  prevent  any  unconscious  muscular  action  of  the 
face,  or  otherwise  giving  any  indication  to  the  subject." 

This  presumed  mode  of  communication  between  one  in- 
dividual and  another,  without  the  intervention  of  any  known 
sense,  Professor  Barrett,  arguing  on  electrical  analogies,  was 
inclined  to  suggest  might  be  due  to  some  form  of  nervous 
induction. 

Passing  on  from  these  experiments,  the  reader  of  the  paper 
referred  briefly  to  the  physical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism. 
The  more  marvellous  phenomena,  such  as  levitation  and  the 
handling  of  red-hot  coals — which,  as  he  took  occasion  to 
point  out,  occurred  generally  in  darkness  or  a  subdued  light 
— he  was  inclined  to  attribute  to  hallucination.  But  his  own 
observation,  he  proceeded  to  state,  tended  to  show  that  not 
all  the  minor  physical  phenomena,  such  as  raps  and  move- 
ments of  furniture,  could  be  attributed  to  fraud.  He  had 
himself  witnessed  the  raps  in  broad  daylight,  out  of  doors, 

^  See  Book  I.  chaps,  ix.,  x. 

160        SPIRITUALISM   IN  ENGLAND 

under  conditions  which  seemed  to  him  to  make  trickery- 
impossible.  Professor  Barrett,  in  conclusion,  urged  the  ap- 
pointment of  a  committee  of  scientific  men  for  the  systematic 
investigation  of  the  phenomena  of  Mesmerism  and  Spiritual- 
ism. In  the  discussion  which  followed  not  only  Mr.  Crookes 
and  Dr.  Wallace,  but  Lord  Rayleigh  and  Colonel  Lane  Fox 
expressed  themselves  in  favour  of  some  further  investigation, 
being  convinced  from  their  own  observations  that  there  was 
something  to  investigate. 

No  action  was  taken  at  that  time  on  Professor  Barrett's 
suggestion,  a  result  for  which  the  exposure  a  few  days  later 
by  Professor  Lankester  of  "  Dr."  Slade — a  medium  whose 
performances  had  been  favourably  referred  to  by  more  than 
one  speaker  in  the  discussion  which  followed  the  reading  of 
the  paper — was  perhaps  mainly  responsible. 

Professor  Barrett,  however,  continued,  as  opportunity  per- 
mitted, his  investigations  of  the  subject ;  and  some  years 
later,  in  January,  1882,  a  conference,  as  described  in  the  next 
chapter,  was  held  at  his  invitation  in  London,  In  the  follow- 
ing month,  as  a  result  of  this  conference,  the  Society  for 
Psychical  Research  was  founded. 

CHAPTER     X 
GENERAL  SURVEY   OF  THE   MOVEMENT 

THE  growth  of  Spiritualism  in  this  country  was  by 
comparison  gradual.  We  have  already  seen  to  what 
extremes  the  early  devotees  in  America  were  led. 
The  course  of  Spiritualism  on  the  Continent,  and  more 
especially  in  France  and  Switzerland,  though  less  extrava- 
gant than  in  America,  was  marked  by  the  same  unfettered 
speculation.  In  Catholic  France  Spiritualism  naturally 
found  itself  under  the  ban  of  the  Church,  and  hence  its 
schools  appear  from  the  outset  to  have  been  non-Christian. 
Most  French,  and  indeed  ultimately,  most  continental 
Spiritualists — or  "  Spiritists,"  as  they  preferred  to  call  them- 
selves— followed  the  doctrine  of  Allan  Kardec.  M.  Rivail, 
to  give  him  his  true  name,  had  been  a  writer  on  educational 
subjects,  and  a  prominent  advocate  of  phrenology  and 
Animal  Magnetism.  In  1862,  or  earlier,  he  became  con- 
verted to  Spiritualism,  and  soon  received,  through  various 
clairvoyants,  a  full  exposition  of  a  new  gospel,  the  leading 
tenet  in  which  was  the  doctrine  of  Reincarnation.  In  a 
series  of  works,  Le  Livre  des  Esprits,  L Evangile  selon  le 
Spiritisme,  etc.,  based  upon  these  clairvoyant  revelations, 
Allan  Kardec  taught  the  new  doctrine  with  such  success 
that  his  books  sold  by  tens  of  thousands,  and  were  translated 
into  nearly  every  European  language. 

But  not  all  those  who  believed  in  the  phenomena  were 
disciples  of  Allan  Kardec.  Count  Agenor  de  Gasparin, 
whose  experiments  we  shall  have  occasion  to  consider  in  the 
next  book,  writing  from  a  Catholic  standpoint,  sought  to 
prove  that  the  physical  manifestations  were  to  be  attributed 
to  magnetism  or  some  kindred  force  given  off  from  the 
sitters.  His  friend  Thury,  professor  in  the  Academy  of 
Geneva,  proposed  for  the  hypothetical  new  mode  of  energy 
the  name  "ectenic"  force.  Du  Potet,  Szapary,  and  others 
of  the  old  Animal  Magnetists,  appear  also  to  have  held 
II.— M  161 

162        SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

that  the  phenomena  could  be  explained  on  purely  physical 
grounds,  though  du  Potet  himself  admitted  that  some  of  the 
manifestations  required  at  least  the  agency  of  intelligent 
cosmic  forces.^ 

Amongst  German  thinkers,  neither  the  doctrines  nor  the 
phenomena  won  so  ready  acceptance  as  in  France.  But  so 
early  as  1861  Maximilian  Perty,  a  doctor  of  philosophy 
and  professor  at  the  University  of  Berne,  published  a  treatise 
describing  the  phenomena,  and  attributing  them  to  the 
unconscious  exercise  of  occult  powers  latent  in  the  medium's 
own  organism.  To  account  for  some  of  the  mental  mani- 
festations, however,  he  is  forced  to  assume  the  existence  of 
planetary  spirits  (Geodaemon,  Heliodsemon,  etc.)  with  whom 
the  spirit  of  the  entranced  medium  may  on  occasion  enter 
into  communion.2  A  similar  theory  was  propounded  some 
years  later  by  a  more  famous  philosopher,  Edward  von  Hart- 
mann.  Hartmann  explained  the  physical  phenomena  as  due 
to  some  force  analogous  to  electricity  or  magnetism  emanat- 
ing from  the  medium's  body ;  but  held  that  the  mental 
manifestations  point  to  a  transcendental  origin.  He  suggests, 
in  short,  that  in  thought-transference  or  clairvoyance  the 
mind  of  the  seer  is  in  connection  with  the  Absolute,  and 
through  the  Absolute  with  other  individual  minds.^  Similar 
views,  with  various  modifications,  were  advocated  by  other 
continental  writers— Hellenbach,  du  Prel,  Aksakof,  d'Assier. 
Speaking  generally,  the  crude  views  of  the  early  American 
Spiritualists  were  transmuted  and  elaborated  by  European, 
and  especially  by  German  thinkers,  the  tendency  being  to 
bring  the  phenomena,  as  far  as  might  be,  into  line  with  known 
scientific  analogies  by  postulating  new  forces  or  new  ex- 
tensions of  familiar  forces,  resident  in  the  human  organism, 
rather  than  to  be  content  with  adopting  an  explanation  which 
is  practically  the  negation  of  all  explanations — the  operations 
of  spirits. 

In  this  country,  however,  the  movement  was  free  alike 
from  the  practical  extravagances  which  attended  its  begin- 
nings in  America,  and  for  the  first  few  years,  at  all  events, 
from  the  speculative  activity  which  characterised  its  progress 
on  the  Continent.  Up  till  i860,  as  already  shown,  the  move- 
ment in  this  country  was  almost  confined  to  the  provinces ; 
the  only  periodical  which  succeeded  in  establishing  itself  for 
more  than  a  few  months  was  published  at  Keighley :  there 

'   Trailt'  Complet  du  MagnHisnie  Animal,  pp.  480  et  scq.     Paris,  1856. 

'■^  Die  Mystischen  Erscheinungen  der  nienschlichen  Natur.,  etc.     Leipzig,  1861. 

^  Spiritisinus,  by  E.  von  tiartmann,  English  translation.     London,  1885. 

GENERAL  SURVEY  163 

was  no  prominent  centre  of  interest  in  London,  nor  had  any 
publication  of  importance  appeared,  in  the  Metropolis  or 
elsewhere.  Towards  the  end  of  the  decade  1850-60,  how- 
ever, a  small  group  of  literary  men  and  others  had  become 
interested  in  the  subject,  and  the  Spiritual  Magazine ^  which 
made  its  appearance  in  London  in  the  latter  year,  continued 
until  the  end  of  1875  to  be  the  leading  organ  of  English 
Spiritualism.  The  editors  of  the  new  periodical  for  the 
greater  part  of  its  career  were  Thomas  Shorter  and  W.  M. 
Wilkinson,  and  its  chief  contributor  William  Howitt.  It  was 
consistently  conservative  in  tone,  and  held  itself,  as  far  as 
possible,  aloof  from  the  various  reforming,  humanitarian,  and 
freethinking  movements  with  which  Spiritualism  had  been 
associated  in  America,  and  to  some  extent,  at  the  outset, 
in  this  country.  Under  the  scholarly  guidance  of  William 
Howitt,  the  new  review  left  Socialism,  phrenology,  and  the 
marriage  laws  alone,  and  confined  itself  to  recording  the 
sayings  and  doings  of  mediums  and  the  spread  of  the  new 
movement  in  this  and  other  countries.  In  its  earlier  years 
a  large  space  was  devoted  to  accounts  of  similar  visitations 
in  the  past,  especially  in  the  history  of  the  Christian  Church 
down  to  the  present  day. 

Throughout  its  career  less  stress  was  laid  upon  the  physical 
marvels  of  mediumship  than  on  the  trance  utterances  and 
assumed  revelations  proceeding  from  similar  sources,  and  on 
their  eschatological  implications.  But  here,  again,  William 
Howitt  and  his  friends  held  different  views  from  those 
generally  favoured  abroad,  and  later  in  this  country  also. 
By  the  London  school  the  spiritual  utterances  were  regarded 
as  supplementing  rather  than  as  supplanting  Christianity,  the 
doctrines  of  Swedenborg  serving  to  mediate  between  the  old 
revelation  and  the  new,  and  to  unite  them  into  one  apoca- 
lyptic whole.  The  following  passage  from  an  article  by 
Howitt  will  give  a  fair  idea  of  the  views  held  by  the 
conductors  of  the  Spiritual  Magazine : — 

"  Spiritualism,"  he  writes,  "  has  taught  what  the  soul  is  ;  what 
becomes  of  it  after  death ;  that  there  are  purgatorial  or  intermediate 
states ;  where  these  lie ;  that  there  is  progression  in  them ;  that  the 
dead  seek  for  our  prayers  and  sympathies ;  that  the  Communion 
of  Saints  is  real,  and  far  more  extensive  and  precious  than  was  ever 
before  conceived  of;  that  there  is  no  cessation  of  miracles  or 
prophecy  ...  it  has  taught  us  not  to  fear  death,  which  is  but  a 
momentary  passage  to  life ;  that  God  is  disciplining  the  human  race 
for  an  eventual  and  universal  restoration;  that  He  is  beginning  to 
teach  laws  of  matter  hitherto  unnoticed  by  the  acutest  men  of  gases 

164        SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

and  crucibles;  and  that,  above  all,  Spiritualism  teaches  us  the 
authenticity  of  the  Scriptures  now  so  violently  attacked,  and  their 
great  law  of  the  love  of  God  and  of  the  neighbour;  that  no 
Christianity  but  the  primitive  Christianity  is  worth  a  straw ;  and  that 
the  dry  bones  of  the  present  death-in-life  churches  must  receive  His 
fresh  breath  of  life  if  they  are  ever  to  live  again.  Finally,  it  teaches 
us  to  live  in  all  purity  of  thought  and  deed,  knowing  that  not  only 
the  ever-open  eye  of  God  is  constantly  upon  us,  but  those  of  an 
innumerable  company  of  angels  and  devils,  to  whom  we  are  as  well 
and  as  openly  known  as  to  our  own  consciences."^ 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  moderate  views  of  this 
little  band  of  Spiritualists  and  the  culture  and  literary 
gifts  of  their  leader  did  much  to  further  the  rapid  growth 
of  the  new  doctrine.  But  for  William  Howitt,  it  is  doubtful 
whether  the  movement  would  have  secured  either  so  early 
or  so  favourable  a  hearing  in  this  country. 

For  some  years  the  Spiritual  Magazine  practically  held 
the  field.  But  the  return  of  Home  to  this  country  in  1859 
and  the  invasion  of  American  mediums  during  the  next  few 
years  had  stimulated  public  interest  in  the  whole  question, 
and  especially  in  the  physical  aspect  of  the  phenomena. 
Moreover,  the  ferment  of  new  ideas,  which  had  produced 
such  striking  results  in  America,  was  not  without  its  influence 
in  England  on  minds  less  timid  or  less  fastidious  than  the 
conductors  of  the  Spiritual  Magazine.  Provincial  Spiritualism, 
which  had  until  the  close  of  1859  found  expression  in  the 
Spiritual  Telegraph,  remained  for  some  years  after  that  date 
inarticulate.  But  the  ferment  was  working  in  many  pro- 
vincial centres,  notably  at  Keighley  and  in  the  Yorkshire 
manufacturing  districts,  in  Manchester,  Nottingham,  and 
Glasgow.  In  1865  a  Convention  of  "Progressive  Spiritualists" 
assembled  at  Darlington,  and  in  the  following  year  at  New- 
castle. The  Secretary  of  the  Convention  on  the  latter 
occasion  was  Dr.  Macleod  of  that  city.  Some  of  the  speakers 
at  these  two  conventions  appear  to  have  displayed  marked 
hostility  to  Christianity ;  and,  generally,  the  views  expressed 
are  reported  to  have  represented  "a  pale  imitation  of  the 
pagan  phase  of  American  Spiritualism."  ^  In  1867  the 
Convention  met  in  London,  with  James  Burns  as  its  secretary. 
In  this  same  year  Burns  began  to  issue  a  new  monthly 
periodical,  Human  Nature,  to  serve  as  a  mouthpiece  of  the 
popular  movement.     The  character  of  the  new  magazine  can 

^  spiritual  Magazine,  1865,  p.  162.  See  also  1866,  pp.  90  and  139;  1873, 
p.  529.  '^  Ibid.,  1866,  p.  571. 

GENERAL   SURVEY  165 

be  inferred  from  its  sub-title,  "  A  Monthly  Journal  of  Zoistic 
Science  and  Intelligence,  embodying  Physiology,  Phrenology, 
Psychology,  Spiritualism,  Philosophy,  the  Laws  of  Health, 
and  Sociology."  In  later  years  "Popular  Anthropology" 
was  added  to  this  comprehensive  catalogue.  A  year  or  two 
later,  so  rapidly  did  the  popular  movement  grow,  Burns 
brought  out  a  weekly  paper.  The  Medium  and  Daybreak, 
absorbing  in  it  the  provincial  paper,  Daybreak,  which  had 
appeared  in  1868  under  the  editorship  of  the  Rev.  Page 
Hopps.^  The  Medium  and  Daybreak  for  years  had  the 
largest  circulation,  chiefly  in  the  provinces,  of  any  English 
Spiritualist  paper,  and  only  came  to  an  end  a  few  months 
after  the  death  of  its  publisher  and  founder  in  1895.  Lastly, 
by  the  irony  of  fate,  during  one  or  two  of  the  latter  years 
of  its  existence  Burns  also  published  the  Spiritual  Magazine 
in  addition  to  his  other  literary  ventures. 

The  popular  movement,  as  represented  by  Burns  and  his 
publications,  was  frankly  democratic  and  non-Christian.  In  the 
opening  number  of  Human  Nature  he  sneers  at  the  Spiritual 
Magazine  as  being  "  of  this  world  as  well  as  of  the  next," 
and  as  endeavouring  to  preach  Spiritualism  "  under  circum- 
stances with  which  it  would  be  creditable  for  the  priest  and 
Levite  to  be  connected."  And  throughout  his  career  Burns 
fought  manfully  against  conventions  and  respectabilities.  He 
was  in  his  own  person  a  teetotaller,  anti-tobacconist,  dietetic 
reformer,  phrenologist,  and  a  sturdy  champion  with  the  pen 
and  on  the  platform  of  these  and  many  kindred  movements. 
Whilst  his  enthusiasm  for  the  social  reforms  which  he 
advocated  was  genuine  and  fervent,  it  was  impossible  to  doubt 
the  sincerity  of  his  belief  in  Spiritualism  ;  but  equally  im- 
possible to  believe  him  as  ignorant  as  he  professed  himself 
of  the  manifold  wiles  and  trickeries  practised  by  physical 
mediums  within  his  doors  and  under  his  direct  patronage 
and  protection.  But  if,  not  once  or  twice  only,  his  blind- 
ness to  all  evidence  of  fraud  in  any  medium  whom  he  had 
befriended  may  have  seemed  too  deliberate,  those  who  knew 
him  best  can  believe  that  it  was  not  altogether  the  hope 
of  personal  advantage  or  the  reluctance  of  a  sensitive 
egotism  too  deeply  committed  for  retreat  which  closed  his 
eyes.  It  must  be  admitted,  too,  that  Burns  was  apt  to  regard 
and  to  denounce  his  rivals  in  business  as  renegades  to  the 
faith,  and  that  his   belief  in   the   cause  seemed  inseparable 

^  Mr.  Page  Hopps  had  been  converted  a  year  or  two  previously.  See  his 
pamphlet,  Six  Months^  Experience  at  Home,  by  "  Truthseeker,"  published 
in  1867. 

166        SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

from  his  belief  in  himself  as  its  champion.  Again,  according 
to  the  reproach  of  his  enemies,  he  lived  by  the  altar ;  but  the 
living  was  not  too  luxurious,  and  the  ministry  was  arduous 
and  unremitting.  I  have  eaten  of  Burns'  salt — as  a  seasoning 
to  Nichols's  "  Food  of  Health,"  or  some  other  dietetic 
phantasy — and  I  cannot  think  hardly  of  him.  With  all 
his  faults  he  radiated  a  contagious  enthusiasm,  and  the 
dark  little  shop  at  15,  Southampton  Row,  dignified  by  the 
name  of  the  "  Spiritual  Institution,"  remained  for  many  years 
the  chief  meeting-place  for  Spiritualists  in  the  Metropolis, 
and  the  centre  of  a  propaganda  the  more  active  because  it 
was  troubled  by  no  theological  scruple  or  philosophic  doubt. 

It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  columns  of  Burns'  papers 
were  always  open,  and  his  personal  help  always  ready,  for 
the  spokesmen  of  minorities,  the  smaller  the  better,  from  the 
advocates  of  divided  skirts  to  the  exponents  of  the  newest 
theologies.  The  grass-eating  atheists  of  Ham  Common,  who 
are  fabled  to  have  slept  with  their  toes  out  of  window,  would 
have  found  in  him  a  sympathetic  historian.^  His  taste  in 
theology,  and  presumably  the  taste  of  his  readers,  was,  it  will 
be  gathered,  eclectic.  Whereas  Howitt  and  Shorter  in  their 
writings  had  sought  for  evidence  of  the  workings  of  Spiritual- 
ism in  the  past,  either  amongst  pagan  faiths  so  ancient  as  to 
be  respectable,  or  else  in  the  history  of  the  various  Christian 
Churches  and  sects,^  contributors  to  Human  Nature  and  the 
Medium  inquired  by  preference  into  the  history  of  kindred 
movements  in  modern  times  outside  the  pale  of  the  Churches. 
We  find  in  those  pages  dissertations  on  the  faiths  of  the 
Mormons  and  the  Shakers ;  long  discussions  on  the  new 
reincarnation  doctrine  as  expounded  by  Allan  Kardec  and 
his  English  disciple,  Miss  Anna  Blackwell ;  reviews  of  the 
religious  teachings  of  Andrew  Jackson  Davis ;  critical  essays 
on  serpent  worship,  oriental  mythology  and  religious  sym- 
bolism generally ;  and  an  a  priori  demonstration  of  the 
existence  of  God,  by  Mr.  Gillespie,  of  Torbanehill.  Much 
attention  is  also  devoted  to  the  mysteries  of  Buddhism. 
Further,  as  we  have  already  seen,  Burns  was  the  publisher 
of  Hafed,  Prince  of  Persia.  He  also  set  about  the  reissue 
of  the  immortal  Anacalypsis  of  Godfrey  Higgins — an  author 
who  "  will  take  his  place  in  future  ages  with  Socrates,  with 
Plato,  with  Proclus.""     It  was  Burns,  again,  who  introduced 

^  Some  account  of  this  curious  sect  is  given  in  Light,  1882,  pp.  191  and  251. 
^  See  Howitt's  History  of  the  Supertiatural  (London,    1863),  and   Shorter's 
The  Two  Worlds.     London  (no  date). 
■^  Human  Nature,  1874,  p.  49  (Feb.). 

GENERAL   SURVEY  167 

to  an  astonished  world  the  Book  of  God,  being  the  Apocalypse 
of  Adam  I-Oannes,  a  work  which  essayed  to  trace  all  the 
religions  of  the  world  to  one  common  fount  of  inspiration, 
by  demonstrating  that  the  biblical  book  known  as  the  Book 
of  Revelation  was  actually  the  earliest  divine  message  de- 
livered by  the  man-fish  O-an,  and  the  foundation  of  the 
primitive  world-religion,  practised  in  the  beginning  by  the 
twenty-four  Ancients,  or  pre-Adamite  sultans.  The  Book  of 
God,  which  appears  to  belong  to  the  same  class  of  literature 
as  Madame  Blavatsky's  his  Unveiled,  was  published  anony- 
mously, but  is  understood  to  have  been  written  by  the  late 
Dr.  Kenealy. 

With  all  its  extravagances,  there  was  much  that  was 
genuinely  admirable  in  the  popular  movement  represented 
by  James  Burns  and  those  who  gathered  round  him.  It  was 
a  democratic  religious  revival,  characterised,  as  such  move- 
ments are  wont  to  be,  by  the  vigour  of  its  emotional  ex- 
pression, rather  than  by  the  subtlety  of  its  dialectic.  This 
is  how  a  thoughtful  onlooker  at  this  time,  Mr.  St.  George 
Stock,  writes  of  it : — 

"  The  religion  of  the  future  is  in  our  midst  already,  working  like 
potent  yeast  in  the  minds  of  the  people.  It  is  in  our  midst  to-day, 
with  signs  and  wonders,  uprising  like  a  swollen  tide  ...  To  its 
predecessors  [Spiritualism]  assumes  an  attitude  not  of  hostility,  but 
of  comprehension.  Though  new  in  its  form,  it  purports  to  have 
been  ever  in  the  world.  Christianity  it  represents,  not  as  a  finality, 
but  as  one — the  greatest,  indeed,  as  yet — of  those  many  waves  of 
spiritual  influx  which  have  ever  been  beating  in  upon  the  shores 
of  Time  from  the  dim  expanse  of  the  Eternal.  Christianity  has 
spent  its  force,  and  now  another  revelation  has  succeeded  it — a 
revelation  suited  to  the  needs  of  the  time."^ 

Again,  Mr.  Gerald  Massey,  another  of  the  early  converts, 
has  given  eloquent  expression  to  the  religious  effects  of  the 
belief  in  communion  with  spirits  of  the  dead  : — 

"  Spiritualism  will  make  religion  infinitely  more  real,  and  translate 
it  from  the  domain  of  belief  to  that  of  life.  It  has  become  to  me, 
in  common  with  many  others,  such  a  lifting  of  the  mental  horizon, 
and  letting  in  of  the  heavens — such  a  transformation  of  faith  into 
facts — that  I  can  only  compare  life  without  it  to  sailing  on  board 
ship  with  hatches  battened  down,  and  being  kept  a  prisoner,  cribbed, 
cabined,  and  confined,  living  by  the  light  of  a  candle,  dark  to  the 
glory  overhead,  and  blind  to  a  thousand  possibilities  of  being ;  and 
then,  suddenly,  on  some  splendid  starry  night  allowed  to  go  on  deck 

I  Attempts  at  Truth,  pp.  128,  133.     London,  1882, 

168        SPIEITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

for  the  first  time,  to  see  the  splendid  mechanism  of  the  starry 
heavens  all  aglow  with  the  glory  of  God,  to  feel  that  vast  vision 
glittering  in  the  eyes,  bewilderingly  beautiful,  and  drink  in  new  life 
with  every  breath  of  that  wondrous  liberty,  which  makes  you  dilate 
almost  large  enough  in  soul  to  fill  the  immensity  that  you  see  around 
you."^ 

As  regards  its  tenets,  what  has  been  already  said^  of  the 
beliefs  of  American  Spiritualists  will  apply  to  the  Spiritualist 
creed  as  represented  in  the  Medium  and  Daybreak.  The 
popular  movement  held  the  primitive  faith  in  spirits  of  dead 
men  and  women  as  the  agency  behind  the  phenomena.  The 
doctrines  of  Allan  Kardec  never  obtained  any  real  footing 
in  England.  His  only  prominent  disciple  appears  to  have 
been  Miss  Anna  Blackwell.^  Again,  the  belief  in  diabolism, 
so  prominent  in  the  early  days  of  Spiritualism  in  this  country, 
found  later  very  few  supporters.^ 

Another  aspect  of  the  movement  found  expression  in  the 
Spiritualist,  a  newspaper  which  appeared  towards  the  end 
of  1869,  under  the  editorship  of  W.  H.  Harrison,  a  journalist 
and  a  man  of  some  scientific  acquirements.  The  Spiritualist 
was  avowedly  intended  to  represent  the  scientific  element. 
It  essayed  primarily  to  record  the  phenomena,  to  analyse 
the  evidence,  and  discuss  the  explanations,  and  proposed 
to  defer  theological  and  Socialist  speculations  until  a  more 
convenient  season.  This  paper,  which  was  conducted  with 
fairness  and  ability  for  some  years,  did  in  effect  adopt  a  more 
critical  standpoint  than  any  of  its  predecessors  or  con- 
temporaries, and  did  contrive  to  keep  clear  of  theological 
controversy  and  irrelevant  humanitarian  enthusiasms.  As 
we  have  already  seen  (chapter  viii.)  the  editor  took  a 
prominent  part  in  exposing  the  trickery  practised  in  so- 
called  spirit  photography.  The  Spiritualist  and  its  readers 
were  associated  with  the  two  chief  organisations  formed  in 

^   Concerning  spiritualism  (1874?),  pp.  77,  78.         ^  Vol.  i.  pp.  299-303. 

^  See  the  essay  by  her  contributed  to  the  Dialectical  Society's  Report,  and 
various  articles  in  Human  Nature. 

*  For  an  exposition  of  the  diabolic  view  see,  in  addition  to  the  works  quoted 
in  chapter  i.  of  the  present  book.  Spiritualism,  the  work  of  Demo7is ,  by  the  Rev. 
John  Jones  (Liverpool,  1871) ;  Spirit- Rapping,  by  a  member  of  the  Catholic 
Apostolic  Church  (London  1855?) ;  Popular  Ideas  of  Immortality,  Rev.  William 
Ker  (London,  1865);  Spiritualis7)i  fairly  tried,  Rev.  E.  Nangle  (1861).  These 
works  are  merely  pamphlets,  and  none  of  them  possesses  any  intrinsic  importance. 
See  also  Dialectical  Report,  pp.  218,  220,  and  223,  evidence  of  Chevalier  and 
Hain  Friswell.  It  is  noteworthy  that  T.  L.  Harris,  in  some  of  his  writings, 
Modern  Spiritualism,  its  truths  and  its  errors  (London,  i860)  and  the  Arcana  of 
Christianity  (1867),  taught  that  the  spirits  who  communicated  were  vampires  and 
devils,  and  their  teachings  "emanations  from  the  hells." 

GENEEAL   SURVEY  169 

the  decade  1870-80  by  the  more  educated  section — the 
"  British  National  Association  of  Spiritualists "  and  the 
"  Psychological  Society  of  Great  Britain." 

The  British  National  Association  held  its  first  public 
meeting  on  April  i6th,  1874,  under  the  chairmanship  of 
Mr.  S.  C.  Hall.  Its  aims  are  defined  in  its  original  prospectus 
as  the  uniting  of  Spiritualists  of  all  shades  of  opinion  for 
mutual  aid  and  benefit,  and  the  promotion  of  systematic 
research  in  pneumatology  and  psychology.  Whilst  "  cordially 
sympathising  with  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ,"  the  Associa- 
tion proposed  to  hold  itself  entirely  aloof  from  all  dogmatism, 
religious  or  philosophical.  Its  list  of  vice-presidents  and 
council  included  most  of  the  best-known  names  in  con- 
temporary Spiritualism,  such  as  the  Countess  of  Caithness, 
Benjamin  Coleman,  Thomas  Everitt  (husband  of  the  medium 
of  that  name),  Dr.  Gully,  Dr.  Stanhope  Speer,  Mrs.  Ross 
Church  (Florence  Marryat),  Mrs.  Makdougall  Gregory  (widow 
of  the  Professor),  Dr.  Maurice  Davies,  Sir  C.  Isham,  Messrs. 
Jencken,  Newton  Crosland,  Desmond  Fitzgerald,  George 
Sexton,  the  Secularist  converted  to  Spiritualism  and  Chris- 
tianity,^ together  with  a  list  of  distinguished  foreigners.  But 
there  were  a  few  prominent  Spiritualists  who  held  aloof,  such 
as  William  Howitt,  Acworth,  and  J.  Enmore  Jones,  primarily 
on  account  of  the  non-Christian  character  of  the  Society. 
Howitt  voiced  his  dissent  in  an  eloquent  letter  in  which  he 
recounted  the  marvellous  progress  of  Spiritualism,  and 
claimed  that  it  had  conquered  the  world  under  patently 
divine  guidance  :  "  Spiritualism  is  a  theocracy.  By  theocratic 
power  and  government  it  has  hitherto  prevailed "  ;  and  in 
seeking  now  a  temporal  organisation.  Spiritualists  were 
repeating  the  sin  of  the  Jews  when  they  asked  for  a  king 
to  reign  over  them." 

James  Burns'  expression  of  dissent  was  more  complex 
in  character.  He  descried  a  spirit  of  time-serving  in  some 
of  the  advertisements  issued  by  the  new  organisation,  which 
avoided  the  word  Spiritualism  ;  "  worldlyism  "  in  the  fact  that 
a  leading  supporter  of  the  Society  dated  his  letters  from  the 
Reform  Club ;  and,  generally,  hostility  to  himself  and  the 
Spiritual  Institution  in  the  mere  proposal  to  found  any  other 
organisation  in  this  country.^ 

^  See  his  God  and  Inwiortality  Viewed  in  the  Light  of  Modern  Spiritualism 
(London,  1874),  and  the  series  of  tracts  called  "  Seed  Corn,"  published  by  him 
in  1872,  etc.  "  Spiritual  Alagazine,  1873,  p.  529,  etc. 

■^  See  the  editorials  in  the  Medium  for  30th  Jan.,  27th  Feb.,  6th  March, 
July,   etc.,    1874, 

170        SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

But  notwithstanding  some  opposition,  the  new  Association 
grew  and  flourished,  and  remained  for  some  years  the 
representative  body  in  EngHsh  Spiritualism.  It  estabHshed 
periodical  lectures,  discussions,  and  conferences ;  promoted 
seances  for  inquirers ;  and  did  its  utmost,  by  means  of  its 
Research  Committee,  to  advance  the  knowledge  of  the  subject. 
In  the  last  field  of  its  labours  it  cannot  be  said  to  have  met 
with  conspicuous  success,  for  it  unfortunately  appeared  that 
the  more  stringent  the  tests  the  less  striking  the  phenomena, 
until  a  point  was  reached  at  which,  the  precautions  being 
complete,  the  phenomena  ceased  altogether.^ 

In  April,  1875,  was  held  the  first  meeting  of  the  Psycho- 
logical Society,  with  Serjeant  Cox  as  its  President  and 
Mr.  F.  K.  Munton  as  Hon.  Secretary.  Other  prominent 
members  were  Mr,  C.  C.  Massey,  Mr.  Stainton  Moses 
("M.A.,  Oxon."),  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  Mr.  George 
Harris,  F.S.A.,  and  Mr.  W.   H.  Cofiin. 

The  aim  of  the  Society,  as  set  forth  in  the  president's 
inaugural  address,  was  the  scientific  investigation  of  "  psycho- 
logy," which  term  Serjeant  Cox  violently  appropriated  to 
designate  what  has  since,  for  want  of  a  better  name, 
been  termed  psychical  research.  The  Society,  it  was 
proposed,  should  proceed  "  first,  by  the  collection  of 
facts,  and  secondly,  by  discussion  upon  their  causes  and 
consequences."-  It  did  not,  in  effect,  proceed  far  in  either 
direction.  Its  founder  and  president  was  a  man  without  any 
real  knowledge  either  of  psychology,  as  commonly  under- 
stood, or  the  physical  sciences.  The  Proceedings'^  of  the 
Society,  a  thin  volume  with  reports  of  the  papers  and 
discussions,  contain  little  of  permanent  interest,  and  Cox's 
own  book,  as  will  be  seen  later,  derives  its  chief  value  from 
its  reflecting  with  tolerable  fidelity  the  metaphysics  of  the 
man  in  the  street.  The  Psychological  Society  came  to  an 
end  with  the  death  of  its  president  in  November,  1879. 

The  real  significance  of  the  Psychological  Society  consists 
in  its  representing  a  reaction  against  the  slovenly  acquiescence 
of  the  great  body  of  English  Spiritualists  in  the  belief  in 
spirits  of  the  dead  as  the  sufficient  and  exclusive  agencies 
in  the  production  of  the  phenomena.  That  reaction  had 
indeed  begun  some  years  before  the  inception  of  the 
Psychological  Society ;  just  as  in  the  American  movement 
there  had  been  from  the  outset  a  small  body  of  men  who, 

^  See  e.g.  Spiritualist,  1876.  pp.  248,  249  ;  1877,  p.  182. 

^  The  Province  of  Psychology,  the  inaugural  address  by  Serjeant  Cox.  London, 
1875.  ^  London,  1878. 

GENERAL  SURVEY  171 

whilst  accepting  the  facts  in  general,  were  disposed  to  refer 
them  to  exclusively  mundane  causes.  Many  of  the  older 
Mesmerists  took  the  view  that  the  raps,  the  movements  of 
furniture,  and  even  the  more  elaborate  manifestations  of 
physical  mediumship  could  be  attributed  to  a  neuro-vital 
or  odylic  force  radiating  from  the  sensitive,  and  directed  by 
his  unconscious  will.  We  have  seen  the  germ  of  this  theory 
in  the  attempts  made  by  Sandby  and  Townshend  to  explain 
the  table-rapping  performances  in  1853.-^  And  fifteen  or 
twenty  years  later  we  find  similar  views  expressed  by  others 
who  had  been  prominent  in  the  mesmeric  movement  of 
1840-50,  notably  J.  W.  Jackson,  author  of  Ecstatics  of  Genius^ 
and  H.  G.  Atkinson,  the  co-author  with  Harriet  Martineau 
of  Letters  on  Man's  Nature  and  Developmeitt?  Similar 
views  were  held  by  some  adherents  of  the  rather  shallow 
necessitarianism  which  prevailed  in  this  country  in  the  middle 
decades  of  the  century.  One  of  the  earliest  exponents  of 
the  agnostic  doctrine  was  Mr.  Samuel  Guppy,  a  gentleman 
who  has  been  already  referred  to  as  having  had  the  singular 
good  fortune  to  marry  in  succession  two  remarkable  physical 
mediums.  In  1863  Mr.  Guppy  published  Mary  Jane ;  or. 
Spiritualism  chemically  explained.  The  greater  part  of  the 
book  consists  of  a  discursive  and  humorous  exposition  of 
the  author's  views  on  things  in  general,  written  from  a  crudely 
materialistic  standpoint.  When,  as  he  tells  us,  the  book  was 
almost  ready  for  the  press,  he  became  converted,  through 
the  mediumship  of  his  first  wife,  to  a  belief  in  the  phenomena 
of  Spiritualism.  Reluctant  to  admit  the  existence  of  dis- 
carnate  spirits,  but  forced  to  recognise  intelligence  in  the 
manifestations  presented,  he  whimsically  named  the  unknown 
entity — which  answered  questions,  moved  tables,  and  drew 
pictures  at  his  bidding — "  Mary  Jane."  He  conceived  that 
"  Mary  Jane "  was  but  a  temporary  aggregate  of  odylic 
vapours  emanating  from  the  sensitive — a  person  whose 
organism  probably  contained  an  excess  of  phosphorus ;  that 
this  mass  of  odylic  vapours  could  think,  feel,  and  perceive,  rap 
and  move  tables  and  chairs ;  that  its  powers  of  perception 

^  See  above,  p.  ii. 

^  See  his  lecture  before  the  Glasgow  Association  of  Spiritualists,  delivered 
on  nth  May,  1868,  reported  in  Human  Nature  and  the  Spiritual  Magazine  for 
that  year. 

^  See  his  evidence  before  the  Dialectical  Committee  {Report,  p.  106)  and  his 
controversy  with  Jackson  and  others  in  Human  Nature  for  1868.  Others  were 
inclined  to  explain  the  apparent  physical  marvels  as  hallucinations  produced 
by  magnetic  influence  (see  Spiritualism  and  Animal  Magnetism,  by  G.  G.  Zerffi, 
Ph.D.     London,  1871). 

172        SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

transcend  those  possessed  by  the  human  organism  from  which 
it  proceeds,  because  the  odylic  entity  possesses  "  electrical " 
powers,  which  enable  it  to  see  through  brick  walls  and  closed 
boxes ;  and  that  the  high  thought,  philosophy,  and  profound 
knowledge  revealed  in  the  odylic  responses  point  to  the 
connection  of  the  odylic  fluid  with  "a  general  thought- 
atmosphere,  as  all-pervading  as  electricity,  which  possibly 
is  in  itself,  or  is  in  connection  with,  the  principle  of  causation 
of  the  whole  universe."  ^ 

Mr.  Guppy  was  not  a  professed  metaphysician,  but  merely 
a  garrulous  and  entertaining  old  gentleman.  Any  want  of 
scientific  precision,  however,  which  the  reader  may  find  in 
the  foregoing  statement  of  the  theory  was  fully  remedied 
in  the  more  elaborate  exposition  some  years  later  of  similar 
views  by  Mr.  Charles  Bray,  author  of  the  Philosophy  of 
Necessity  and  other  works.^  Mr.  Bray  begins  by  premising 
the  indestructibility  of  all  force,  and  its  convertibility.  Heat, 
electricity,  nervous  force,  and  "thought  or  mind,"  are  all 
modes  of  energy,  and  are  therefore  indestructible  in  quantity, 
and  reciprocally  convertible.  But  our  bodies  are  continually 
giving  off  thought  rays,  just  as  they  give  off  heat  rays. 
These  thought  emanations,  it  must  be  inferred,  are  not  lost 
to  the  universe ;  and,  indeed,  "  many  facts  now  point  to  an 
atmosphere  or  reservoir  of  thought,  the  result  of  cerebration, 
into  which  the  thought  and  feeling  generated  by  the  brain 
are  continually  passing."^  With  this  general  thought- 
reservoir  the  persons  called  spirit  mediums  may  be  presumed 
to  be  in  communication.  Through  the  interchange  of  those 
abundant  odylic  emanations,  which  are  the  special  character- 
istic of  such  persons,  they  receive  specific  impressions  from 
other  minds  and  become  clairvoyant ;  or,  again,  they  take 
cognizance  of  the  general  ideas  floating  about  in  the  thought- 
atmosphere,  and  become  "  inspired,"  It  is  to  be  noted,  says 
the  author,  in  proof  of  this  suggested  source,  that  in  clair- 
voyant revelations,  whether  of  Andrew  Jackson  Davis  or 
of  Swedenborg,  the  knowledge  displayed  "  in  no  case  exceeds 
the  combined  intellectual  power  of  the  whole  human  mind  "  * 
— a  proposition  which  there  need  be  no  hesitation  in  accepting. 
The  same  theory  obviously  affords  a  sufficient  explanation 
of  the  physical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  which  Mr.  Bray 
is  inclined  to  accept  as  genuine  in  the  main.  For  the  thought 
rays,  which  probably  began  as  heat  or  electric  waves,  can 

1   Op.  at,  p.  354. 

^  See  his  book,  On  Force,  its  mental  and  moral  correlates,  .  .   .  with  specula- 
tions on  Spiritualism.     London,  1866.         '^  Op.  cit.,  p,  79.         ■*  Op.  cit.,  p.  89, 

GENERAL  SURVEY  173 

without  difficulty,  through  the  mediation  of  the  sensitive's 
unconscious  cerebration,  be  converted  back  again  into  such 
grosser  modes  of  energy,  and  so  discharge  in  "  raps "  or 
produce  any  other  required  physical  effect,  even  to  the 
levitation  of  the  human  body.  'Twere  pity  such  an  admir- 
able machinery  should  be  left  without  oats  to  grind  ! 

But  the  most  ambitious  statement  of  the  "  animistic  "  view 
is  to  be  found  in  Serjeant  Cox's  book.  The  Mechanism  of 
Man}  Cox,  like  many  other  educated  Spiritualists  at  this 
date,  whilst  convinced  that  the  phenomena  exhibited,  whether 
physical  or  mental,  transcended  the  normal  faculties  of  the 
medium,  refused  to  regard  them  as  testifying  to  the  action 
of  spirits  of  the  dead.  His  own  theory  on  the  matter  may 
be  briefly  stated  as  follows :  The  universe  consists  of  matter 
and  non-matter,  there  being  nowhere  any  void.  Matter,  as 
we  know  it,  is  made  up  of  molecules.  Molecules  are  them- 
selves aggregations  of  still  smaller  particles  known  as  atoms ; 
but  atoms,  as  such,  make  no  impression  on  our  senses.  If 
molecular  matter  were  disintegrated  into  its  constituent 
atoms,  it  would  be,  as  far  as  our  physical  perceptions  are 
concerned,  annihilated.  It  seems  probable  that  the  whole 
of  the  universe,  outside  this  little  island  of  molecular  matter, 
is  made  up  of  free  atoms — or  of  atoms  combined  in  some 
other  form  than  the  molecular.  But  what  is  not  matter  is 
spirit ;  therefore  spirit  is  atomic,  or  non-molecular  substance, 
and  matter  can  be  changed  into  spirit,  or  vice  versa,  by  a 
simple  process  of  transcendental  chemistry. 

Now  the  mechanism  of  man  is  actuated  by  three  forces  or 
principles — Life,  Mind,  and  Soul.  Life  he  shares  with  the 
vegetable  kingdom.  Mind — which  is  to  be  strictly  dis- 
tinguished from  Soul — is  the  expression  of  the  activity  of 
the  brain.  "  Intelligence  is  not  a  visible  and  tangible  entity  : 
it  is  not  a  structure,  it  is  only  a  function.  Precisely  as 
digestion  is  a  function  of  the  stomach,  intelligence  is  a  func- 
tion of  the  brain."  ^  But  at  this  point  Serjeant  Cox  claims 
to  join  issue  with  the  materialists.  They  will  admit  nothing 
beyond  Life  and  Mind.  Cox  is  convinced  of  the  existence 
of  a   third  principle,  the  Soul,  whose  substance  "  is  vastly 

^  London,  1876.  The  full  title  runs:  The  Mechanism  of  Man:  an  answer 
to  the  question.  What  am  I?  a  popular  introduction  to  Mental  Physiology  and 
Psychology.  An  earlier  edition  of  the  same  work  had  been  published  under  the 
title  What  am  I?  but  the  account  given  in  the  text  of  Cox  s  peculiar  doctrines 
is  based  exclusively  on  the  later  and  more  fully  considered  work. 

^  Op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  p.  217-  Serjeant  Cox,  however,  elsewhere  describes  intelligence 
as  the  characteristic  attribute  of  the  soul,  and  of  that  alone  (see  e.g.  vol.  i.  p.  52  ; 
vol.  ii.  pp.  309-11). 

174        SPIRITUALISM  IN   ENGLAND 

more  refined  than  the  thinnest  gas,"  more  refined  even  than 
the  vapour  of  a  comet's  tail.  It  is  the  presence  in  man  of 
this  exquisitely  rarefied  substance  which  confounds  the 
materialist,  and  lifts  the  human  race  above  the  brutes  which 
perish.  It  would  be  tedious  to  recite  Cox's  proof  of  the 
existence  of  this  cometary  soul ;  one  incidental  item  of  evi- 
dence is  found  in  the  persistence  of  the  feeling  of  a  limb 
after  the  limb  itself  has  been  amputated.^  From  this  and 
other  considerations  it  is  inferred  that  the  soul  is  of  the  same 
shape  as  the  body,  and  permeates  every  part  of  it.  It  is  the 
virtue  emanating  from  the  soul — for  which  virtue  Cox  pro- 
poses the  name  Psychic  Force — which  is  the  effective  agent 
in  all  so-called  Spiritualist  manifestations.  In  clairvoyance 
the  soul  takes  direct  cognizance  of  the  world  without  and  the 
thoughts  of  other  minds.  Sometimes,  again,  the  soul-force 
will  radiate  from  the  finger-tips,  and  thus  endow  the  organism 
with  extra-corporeal  perceptions.  It  can  move  objects  at 
a  distance,  or  neutralise  the  force  of  gravitation,  and  permit 
the  psychic  to  float  in  the  air.  Or,  again,  it  will  surround  the 
material  body  with  an  invisible  envelope  which  will  enable 
the  psychic  to  handle  in  safety  red-hot  coals.  And  when 
released  from  the  body  this  cometary  soul  can  traverse  all 
space  with  the  rapidity  of  thought,  and  pass  through  solid 
walls  as  water  floAvs  through  a  sponge. 

As  a  contribution  to  philosophy  Serjeant  Cox's  work 
would  scarcely  be  worth  discussion.  The  real  importance 
of  the  book,  as  already  indicated,  lies  in  its  doubly  representa- 
tive character.  On  the  one  hand,  though  the  author  does  not 
share  their  views,  he  gives  articulate  expression  to  the  meta- 
physical conceptions  current  amongst  Spiritualists  generally, 
from  the  days  of  Andrew  Jackson  Davis  onwards.  What 
these  conceptions  were  we  have  already  seen  in  discussing 
early  American  Spiritualism.^  To  Ashburner's  definition 
of  a  train  of  thought  as  "  a  current  of  globules  of  highly 
refined  matter  "  we  may  now  add  Cox's  dictum,  "  if  the  Soul 
is  a  refined  Body,  and  it  must  be  that  or  nothing,"  Cromwell 
Varley's  hypothesis  that  thought  is  "  solid,"  ^  and  Hockley's 
view  that  things  seen  in  a  crystal  have  a  separate  existence 
and  are  spiritual  counterparts  of  the  real  objects.* 

But  Serjeant  Cox  also  represented  the  reaction  of  the 
more  intelligent  Spiritualists — the  name,  singularly  inappro- 

^  op.  cii.,  vol.  i.  p.  44S.  The  argument  is  borrowed  from  a  book,  The  Seat 
of  the  Soul  Discovered,  by  one  James  Gillingham,  a  surgical  mechanician. 
London  and  Chard,  1870.  "  Vol.  i.  pp.  301-2. 

^  Dialectical  Report,  p.  172.  *  Ibid.,  p.  187. 

GENERAL  SURVEY  175 

priate  in  this  connection,  is  the  only  one  which  the  English 
language  supplies — against  the  crude  belief  in  spirits  of  the 
dead  as  the  prime  agents  in  the  phenomena.  Partly  because 
of  the  unsatisfactory  nature  of  the  evidence  offered  for 
materialisation,  partly  through  the  failure  of  all  so-called 
tests  of  identity,  or,  again,  because  of  the  limited  nature  of 
the  intelligence  shown  in  most  so-called  spirit  communica- 
tions, and  their  obviously  subjective  character,  the  more 
critical  minds  had  begun  to  question  whether  the  spirit  of 
the  psychic  himself,  aided,  it  may  be,  on  occasion,  by  non- 
human  intelligences  of  various  kinds,  would  not  furnish  a 
more  probable  explanation  of  the  matter. 

This  scepticism  was  no  doubt  reinforced  by  a  revolt  against 
the  narrowness  of  the  Spiritualist  horizon.  The  revelations 
of  Andrew  Jackson  Davis  and  the  rhetoric  of  Mrs.  Tappan 
had  made  heaven  as  familiar  as  Yarmouth  beach,  and  about 
as  alluring. 

This  reaction  was  further  exemplified  by  the  foundation 
from  1876  onwards  of  various  schools  of  mystics,  either 
originating  directly  in  Spiritualism,  or  drawing  the  bulk  of 
their  adherents  from  that  source.  It  may  be  inferred,  from 
the  numerous  studies  of  contemporary  religious  movements, 
and,  in  particular,  of  Oriental  mythology  and  the  extant 
beliefs  of  India,  contained  in  the  earlier  volumes  of  Human 
Nature,  that  Spiritualists  in  general  were  dissatisfied  with  the 
singularly  uninspiring  creed  set  before  them  by  the  majority 
of  their  teachers.  So  that  when  in  1876  Colonel  Olcott  and 
Madame  Blavatsky  inaugurated  in  New  York  the  Theosophi- 
cal  Society,  they  found  many  in  this  country  ready  to  hear 
them.  The  new  gospel  professed  to  expound  the  esoteric 
tradition  of  Buddhism.  Whether  its  claims  in  this  respect 
could  be  substantiated  or  not  is,  from  the  present  standpoint, 
immaterial.  At  any  rate,  it  opened  more  spacious  horizons. 
Its  main  tenet  was  the  doctrine  of  reincarnation  ;  but  in 
the  pages  of  the  chief  exponent  of  Neo-Buddhism  in  this 
country,  Mr,  A.  P.  Sinnett,^  the  cycle  of  death  and  life 
appears  on  a  much  vaster  scale,  and  is  described  with  much 
greater  pretensions  to  scientific  precision  than  in  the  Livre 
des  Esprits.  For  the  continual  death  and  re-birth  which 
make  up  the  little  life  of  man — "  a  watch  or  a  vision,  between 
a  sleep  and  a  sleep  " — are,  according  to  the  Theosophist,  but 
the  representations  in  miniature  of  vaster  cosmic  pulsations, 
the  systole  and  diastole  of  the  universe.  These  are  the  days 
and  nights  of  Brahm,  when  the  whole  creation  slumbers  and 

^  See  his  Esoteric  Budi^'hism.     London,  1883. 

176        SPIRITUALISM  IN  ENGLAND 

wakes  again  to  renewed  activity.  And  through  the  long- 
drawn  chain  of  suns  and  circHng  planets,  through  all  the 
stupendous  cycle  of  the  ages,  throughout  the  waxing  and 
waning  of  all  things  from  life  to  nothingness,  and  back  again 
to  larger  life,  the  human  soul,  a  spark  of  the  Central  Fire, 
retains  its  identity,  and  bears  with  it  in  all  re-births  the 
inevitable  burden  of  Karma,  the  fate  which  each  man  by  his 
own  acts  and  thoughts  has  ordained  for  himself  Quisque 
suos  pativiur  manes.  The  man  is  the  thing  which  he  has 
made  :  he  reaps  now  a  crop  of  which  the  seed  was  sown  in 
another  age  and  a  distant  planet,  and  yet  sown  by  himself. 

This  is  not  the  place  to  give  an  account  of  the  Theoso- 
phical  movement,  with  its  counterfeit  miracles  and  chaotic 
apocalypses.  The  curious  in  such  matters  are  referred  to  the 
report  by  Dr.  Hodgson  presented  to  the  Society  for  Psychical 
Research.^  In  the  period  between  1876  and  1885  many 
Spiritualists  were  carried  away  by  the  glamour  of  Madame 
Blavatsky's  singular  personality,  and  the  attraction  of  the 
Asiatic  mysteries.  Moreover,  other  societies,  teaching  some- 
what similar  doctrines,  were  founded  in  England  about  this 
time.  There  was  a  British  Theosophical  Society,  under  the 
presidency  of  Dr.  George  Wyld,^  which  united  Theosophy 
with  Christianity.  There  was  the  Hermetic  Society,  whose 
founders  were  the  late  Dr.  Anna  Kingsford  and  Mr.  Edward 
Maitland.  The  Hermetic  Society  was  chiefly  concerned 
with  Kabbalistic,  Neo-Platonic,  and  Alexandrine  mysticism.^ 
There  was  also,  and,  I  believe,  still  is,  a  Christo-Theosophical 
Society  in  London. 

In  January,  1882,  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett  summoned  a 
conference  of  persons  who,  without  necessarily  endorsing  the 
Spiritualist  conclusions,  were  satisfied  that  there  was  a  prima 
facie  case  for  the  investigation  of  the  physical  phenomena 
of  Spiritualism,  and  such  apparently  kindred  matters  as 
ghosts,  thought-transference,  clairvoyance,  and  the  manifesta- 
tions of  mediumship  generally.  At  that  conference,  which 
met  in  the  rooms  of  the  British  National  Association  of 
Spiritualists,    it    was    resolved    to    form    an    association    for 

^  Proceedings,  vol.  iii. ,  1 885  ;  see  also  A  Modem  Priestess  of  Isis,  by  V.  S. 
Solovyoff,  translated  by  Dr.  Walter  Leaf  (London,  1895),  and  my  own  Studies 
in  Psychical  Research,  chap.  vi. 

'-^  See  his  Theosophy  and  the  Higher  Life  ;  or.  Spiritual  Dynamics.  London, 
1880. 

■^  For  an  exposition  of  the  doctrine  see  The  Perfect  Way ;  or,  the  Finding  of 
Christ  (London,  1882),  a  series  of  lectures  delivered  by  Dr.  Anna  Kingsford  in 
London  in  1881  ;  see  also  Edward  Maitland's  The  Soul,  and  how.  tt  found  me. 
London,  1877. 

GENERAL   SURVEY  177 

systematic  inquiry  into  these  phenomena,  and  the  new  Society 
was  named  the  "  Society  for  Psychical  Research."  It  began 
its  career  under  the  presidency  of  the  late  Professor  Henry 
Sidgwick,  and  its  first  council  included,  on  the  one  hand, 
men  like  Edmund  Gurney,  Professor  Barrett,  Professor 
Balfour  Stewart,  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Mr.  Richard  Hutton, 
who  had  not  identified  themselves  with  the  Spiritualist  move- 
ment ;  and,  on  the  other,  Messrs.  Stainton  Moses,  Dawson 
Rogers,  Morell  Theobald,  E.  T.  Bennett,  Dr.  George  Wyld, 
and  others  who  were  at  the  same  time  members  of  the 
Council  of  the  British  National  Association.  The  work  of  the 
Society  from  1882  to  the  present  time  will  be  considered  in 
some  of  its  aspects  in  the  next  book.  It  is  enough  to  say 
here  that  the  avowed  Spiritualists  who  joined  its  Council  in 
the  first  instance  have  all  since  dropped  off,  and  that,  generally, 
the  two  bodies  have  moved  on  lines  sufficiently  distinct  for 
the  most  part  to  prevent  even  the  semblance  of  rivalry.  The 
S.P.R.  has  consistently  maintained  its  original  attitude 
towards  the  subject ;  it  has  throughout  endeavoured  to  work 
by  scientific  methods  for  scientific  ends. 

Of  the  public  history  of  Spiritualism  in  later  years  there 
is  not  much  which  need  for  our  purposes  be  recorded.  As 
little  as  any  other  has  it  escaped  the  usual  fate  of  small  sects, 
internal  dissension,  and  the  clash  of  rival  egotisms.  After 
the  storms  which  waited  on  its  embarkation,  indeed,  the 
B.N.A.S.  for  a  little  time  voyaged  in  smooth  waters.  The 
excitement  of  the  new  venture  and  the  pressure  of  external 
events,  such  as  the  Slade  prosecution  and  various  exposures 
of  public  mediums,  no  doubt  held  the  Society  together.  But 
four  or  five  years  later  dissensions  arose.  The  editor  of  the 
Spiritualist,  W.  H.  Harrison,  had,  or  fancied  he  had,  occasion 
for  quarrel  with  Stainton  Moses,  then  and  for  many  years 
the  leading  figure  on  the  B.N.A.S.  Council.  In  the  middle 
of  1879  the  quarrel  became  irremediable,  and  the  advertise- 
ments of  the  Association  with  the  reports  of  its  public  pro- 
ceedings were  transferred  to  a  new  paper,  Spiritual  Notes, 
which  had  been  established  in  the  previous  year.  Spiritual 
Notes,  which  was  issued  monthly,  ran  until  the  end  of  1881 
concurrently  with  the  Spiritualist.  In  the  same  year,  1881, 
a  new  weekly.  Light,  also  under  the  favouring  auspices  of 
the  Association,  was  founded,  and  under  the  pressure  of  this 
competition  Harrison's  organ  was  driven  from  the  field. 
Light  has  continued  down  to  the  present  time  the  chief 
representative,  and  for  some  portion  of  this  period,  the  only 
London    organ    of    Spiritualism.      It    has    been    conducted 

II. N 

178        SPIRITUALISM   IN   ENGLAND 

throughout  with  fairness  and  moderation.  If  in  these  latter 
days  its  pages  furnish  rather  dull  reading,  the  fault  lies  less 
with  the  conductors  of  the  paper  than  with  the  uneventful 
career  of  the  movement  itself.  There  has  of  late  years  been 
little  to  record.  The  trance  communications  which  interested 
and  attracted  the  earlier  Spiritualists  have  not  indeed  ceased, 
but  they  are  no  longer  held  of  the  same  account.  During 
the  time  of  the  incubation  of  the  Theosophical  and  Hermetic 
Societies  the  columns  of  Light  were  filled  with  controversy 
and  philosophical  speculation.  But  that  source  of  copy  has 
also  dried  up.  Most  serious  of  all,  there  are  now  few 
phenomena,  and  especially  very  few  physical  phenomena 
to  record.  The  Theosophical  Society  and  the  Society  for 
Psychical  Research  led  away  many  who  were  actually  Spirit- 
ualists, or  might,  under  other  circumstances,  have  become 
so.  The  retirement  and  the  subsequent  death  of  Stainton 
Moses  robbed  the  movement  of  one  who  had  been  its  leading 
figure  for  many  years.  Others  of  the  old  champions  have 
been  carried  off  by  death,  and  no  new  ones  have  risen  to 
take  their  place.  Ten  years  ago  it  seemed  as  if  the  Spiritualist 
movement  was  about  to  die  out  from  sheer  lack  of  leaders, 
of  followers,  and — most  serious  defect  of  all — of  new  evidence 
for  its  claims.  Add  to  this  that  much  of  the  old  evidence 
had  been  seriously  shattered  by  the  investigations  carried  on 
by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick,  Dr.  Hodgson,  and  other  members  of 
the  S.P.R. 

But  within  the  last  decade  the  whole  aspect  of  the  problem 
has  changed  :  the  Spiritualist  movement  has  gained  fresh 
energy,  and  the  belief  which  it  represents,  if  not  more  firmly 
established,  can  at  any  rate  boast  that  its  claims  are  better 
founded  than  at  any  previous  period  of  its  history.  This 
result  is  mainly  due  to  the  prolonged  and  laborious  investiga- 
tion of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  utterances  conducted  by  Dr. 
Hodgson,  the  result  of  whose  labours  seems  to  him  and 
others  to  render  the  hypothesis  of  spirit  communication  in 
this  case  highly  probable.  But  a  contributory  cause  is  no 
doubt  to  be  found  in  the  seances  of  Eusapia  Paladino,  whose 
performances  have  been  endorsed  as  genuine  by  several 
continental  savants,  including  Charles  Richet,  Ochorowicz, 
Schiaparelli,  and  de  Rochas,  and  are  regarded  favourably 
by  more  than  one  prominent  man  of  science  in  this  country. 
The  consideration  of  this  new  evidence,  of  the  best-known 
foreign  experiments,  and  of  some  English  items  necessarily 
omitted  from  this  brief  historical  sketch,  will  be  the  main 
theme  of  the  next  book. 

BOOK     IV 
PROBLEMS  OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

PROBLEMS  OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

CHAPTER     I 
SOME   FOREIGN   INVESTIGATIONS 

THE  brief  historical  survey  of  the  movement  of  Modern 
Spiritualism  being  now  completed,  it  is  time  to  address 
ourselves  definitely  to  the  questions  which  we  put 
before  us  at  the  outset  of  the  inquiry.  Is.  the  belief  in 
spiritual  communication  justified  ?  and,  if  not  justified,  how 
are  its  origin  and  persistence  to  be  explained  ?  The  belief,  as 
we  have  seen,  purports  to  be  based  upon  two  distinct  classes 
of  facts,  respectively  psychological  and  physical.  As  regards 
the  first  class  of  evidence,  our  inquiries  have  shown  that, 
whilst  the  recorded  instances  of  trance  and  ecstasy  may 
be  regarded  as  in  the  main  free  from  deliberate  deception, 
the  acceptance  of  them  as  demonstrations  of  spiritual  agency 
rests  largely  upon  a  misconception.  Granted  that  the 
ecstatic  or  hypnotic  knows  not  what  he  does,  and  under- 
stands not  what  his  hand  indites,  it  does  not  follow  that  the 
action  and  the  utterance  are  due  to  the  promptings  of  an 
alien  intelligence. 

It  has  been  shown>  further,  that  the  argument  drawn  from 
the  involuntary  nature  of  the  subject's  action  has  been 
reinforced  by  considerations  of  another  kind.  Those  who 
have  assisted  at  exhibitions  of  ecstasy,  magnetic  clairvoyance, 
or  mediumistic  trance,  have,  generation  after  generation, 
testified  to  the  possession  by  the  subject  of  supernormal 
powers  of  divining  thoughts  or  perceiving  things  distant  and 
things  future.  The  mere  existence  of  such  a  belief,  descend- 
ing to  modern  times  from  a  nebulous  past,  no  doubt  in  itself 
proves  little.  Mystical  philosophers  have  never  been  at  a  loss 
for  facts  to  justify  their  speculations ;  and  in  matters  of  this 
kind  each  man  is  apt  to  find  what  he  seeks.     Moreover,  the 

i8i 

182        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

constant  stimulus  of  suggestion  from  the  spectators,  aided  by 
the  greater  acuteness  of  the  senses  frequently  experienced 
in  the  trance,  furnishes  a  sufficient  explanation  of  much  that 
at  the  time  may  well  have  seemed  inexplicable.  Neverthe- 
less, the  possible  existence  of  new  avenues  of  perception 
is  not  to  be  summarily  dismissed.  Some  evidence  has 
already  been  adduced  which,  partly  from  the  intellectual 
distinction  of  the  witnesses — Bertrand,  EUiotson,  Braid, 
de  Morgan — partly  from  the  excellence  of  the  record,  as  in 
the  case  of  Cahagnet,  seems  even  now  worthy  of  considera- 
tion. An  estimate  of  the  value  of  this  evidence,  augmented 
in  recent  times  by  the  researches  of  the  S.P.R.,  and  a  brief 
statement  of  the  conclusions  to  which  it  seems  to  point,  will 
be  given  below  in  chapter  viii. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  has  been  shown  that  the  so-called 
physical  phenomena  are  a  comparatively  modern  excrescence 
on  the  main  growth.  It  is  only  within  the  last  half-century 
that  they  have  attained  any  considerable  development.  The 
faith  in  the  communion  and  intervention  of  spirits  originated 
before  their  appearance,  and  will  probably  outlast  their  final 
discredit.  At  the  best,  whatever  effect  they  may  have  had 
in  advertising  the  movement  with  the  vulgar,  they  seem  to 
have  exerted  only  a  subsidiary  influence  in  inducing  belief 
with  more  thoughtful  men  and  women.  It  has  been  shown, 
moreover,  that  these  physical  manifestations  are  open  to 
suspicion  by  reason  of  their  pedigree  and  historical  relation- 
ships ;  that  they  bear  a  strong  resemblance  to  conjuring 
tricks ;  that  similar  phenomena  have  constantly  been  pro- 
duced fraudulently;  that  in  the  few  instances  where  the 
results  recorded  have  so  far  resisted  analysis,  they  are  yet 
legitimately  suspect  as  having  been  produced  under  condi- 
tions favourable  to  fraud,  and  in  the  presence  of  persons 
again  and  again  convicted  of  fraud ;  that  the  precautions 
taken  have  been  inadequate,  and  the  qualifications  of  the 
witnesses  in  most  cases  not  such  as  to  inspire  confidence  in 
their  ability  to  detect  trickery  of  the  kind  probably  prac- 
tised ;  and  that,  generally,  the  strongest  evidence  yet 
considered  for  the  genuineness  of  any  of  these  manifestations 
falls  far  short  of  the  standard  of  proof  which  is  required 
before  any  such  claim  can  be  admitted. 

Again,  objections  hardly  less  serious  to  the  acceptance 
of  these  alleged  marvels  will  be  found  in  two  considerations 
of  a  general  kind.  In  the  first  place,  if  the  physical  effects 
claimed  to  have  been  produced  are  not  due  to  known  physical 
causes,  we  have   to  assume,  not  one  new  force  capable  of 

SOME  FOREIGN  INVESTIGATIONS    183 

acting  upon  matter,  but  several.  Entia  non  sunt  multipli- 
canda  pr(Bter  necessitatein ;  but  it  would  be  too  scrupulous 
a  parsimony  to  delegate  to  one  new  mode  of  energy  all  the 
marvels  reported  at  Spiritualist  seances.  It  must  be  some- 
thing more  than  a  simple  push-and-puU  force,  or  a  new  form 
of  vibrating  energy,  which  should  account  for  transportations 
and  levitations,  the  materialisation  of  the  human  form,  the 
abnormal  resistance  to  fire  exhibited  by  Home  and  others, 
the  introduction  of  objects  into  closed  spaces  or  their  with- 
drawal from  the  same,  the  production  of  lights  and  musical 
sounds,  the  elongation  of  the  human  body,  the  tying  of 
knots  in  an  endless  cord,  the  alteration  of  weight  in  the 
balance,  and  so  on.  The  a  priori  presumption  of  fraud  as 
the  unique  and  all-sufficient  agent  is  enormously  strengthened 
by  a  mere  recital  of  the  list  of  duties  sought  to  be  imposed 
upon  the  hypothetical  psychic  force. 

The  other  general  objection  is  of  a  purely  negative 
character.  It  is  briefly  this  :  the  annals  of  Spiritualism 
offer  no  physical  phenomena  which  do  not,  in  the  last 
analysis,  depend  on  the  experimenter's  unaided  senses  for 
their  observation,  and  on  his  memory  for  their  record.  Sir 
W.  Crookes,  in  a  well-known  passage,  refers  to  this  charac- 
teristic of  the  evidence  in  existence  at  the  time  when 
he  wrote — a  generation  ago — and  indicated  the  rules  to 
which  scientific  proof  of  a  new  physical  force  should  con- 
form : — 

"  The  Spiritualist  tells  of  rooms  and  houses  being  shaken  even  to 
injury  by  superhuman  power.  The  man  of  science  merely  asks 
for  a  pendulum  to  be  set  vibrating  when  it  is  in  a  glass  case  and 
supported  on  solid  masonry. 

"  The  Spiritualist  tells  of  heavy  articles  of  furniture  moving  from 
one  room  to  another  without  human  agency.  But  the  man  of 
science  has  made  instruments  which  will  divide  an  inch  into  a 
million  parts,  and  he  is  justified  in  doubting  the  accuracy  of  the 
former  observations  if  the  same  force  is  powerless  to  move  the 
index  of  his  instrument  one  poor  degree. 

"The  Spiritualist  tells  of  flowers  with  the  fresh  dew  on  them, 
of  fruit,  and  living  objects  being  carried  through  closed  windows, 
and  even  solid  brick  walls.  The  scientific  investigator  naturally 
asks  that  an  additional  weight  (if  it  be  only  the  thousandth  part  of  a 
grain)  be  deposited  on  one  pan  of  his  balance  when  the  case  is 
locked.  And  the  chemist  asks  for  the  thousandth  of  a  grain  of  arsenic 
to  be  carried  through  the  sides  of  a  glass  tube  in  which  pure  water 
is  hermetically  sealed."  ^ 

^  Researches  in  Spiritualisni,  p.  6,  by  Vt^illiam  Crookes,  f.r  s. 

184        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

In  a  word,  the  man  of  science  demands  that  the  alleged 
effect  should  be  substantiated,  and  its  extent  precisely- 
measured,  by  means  of  recording  instruments,  so  contrived  as 
to  be  proof  against  fraudulent  manipulation — such  as  the 
locked  chemical  balance,  the  hermetically  sealed  tube,  the 
self-registering  thermometer,  the  photographic  plate. 

Now  when  Sir  W.  Crookes  wrote — some  thirty  years  ago — 
the  absence  of  any  evidence  of  this  kind,  though  a  serious 
defect,  was  scarcely  in  itself  suspicious.  The  alleged 
phenomena  had  for  the  most  part  up  to  that  time  been 
investigated  by  persons  without  scientific  training,  who  might 
be  supposed  not  to  be  aware  of  the  kind  of  proof  required. 
The  spirits,  or  the  "  ectenic  "  force,  could  not  have  failed  to 
meet  tests  which  had  never  been  demanded.  But  in  the 
generation  which  has  passed  since  then,  not  only  Sir.  W. 
Crookes  himself,  but  other  trained  and  capable  investigators, 
have  examined  the  subject,  have  witnessed  the  phenomena, 
have,  on  occasion,  propounded  tests  of  the  exact  kind 
indicated.  And  the  evidence  stands  now  where  it  stood 
when  the  words  were  written,  but  with  a  difference.  Com- 
petent witnesses  have  seen  things  which  neither  they  nor 
we  can  explain,  but  no  one  can  yet  point  to  the  fulfilment 
of  the  simple  test  proposed.  Eminent  persons  have  vouched 
for  movements  and  alterations  in  the  weight  of  heavy  bodies, 
but  the  balance  in  its  locked  glass  case  has  remained  un- 
affected. Flowers  and  fruit  and  Parian  statuettes  have 
continued  to  make  their  appearance  in  closed  rooms,  but 
the  least  particle  of  arsenic  has  not  yet  found  its  way  through 
the  walls  of  the  hermetically  sealed  tube.  Intense  cold  has 
been  felt  at  a  seance,  but  has  never  been  recorded  by  a 
self-registering  thermometer.  Many  novel  substances  have 
been  seen,  smelt,  and  handled  by  various  investigators,  but 
here  also  no  permanent  trace  has  been  preserved.  We  are 
dependent  on  the  observer's  recollection  of  fleeting  glimpses 
of  spirit  lights,  the  rustle  of  spirit  garments,  and  the  touch 
of  unknown  bodies  in  the  dark.  Strange  draperies,  delicious 
scents,  solid  luminous  bodies,  even  articulate  human  forms, 
have  been  produced  out  of  the  viewless  air,  and  into  the 
viewless  air  have  returned  unweighed,  unanalysed,  unrecorded 
on  phonograph  or  sensitive  plate,  on  balance  or  thermometer 
or  resisting  circuit.^ 

^  There  have,  of  course,  been  exceptions  to  this  generaHsation,  and  the 
exceptions  furnish  what  is  necessary,  if  anything  more  is  needed,  to  clinch  the 
conclusion.  It  would  be  superfluous  to  repeat  here  what  we  have  learnt  of 
spirit  garments  and  spirit  photographs,  but,  as  will  be  shown  later,  attempts  have 

SOME  FOREIGN   INVESTIGATIONS     185 

That  however  various  the  conditions,  and  however  diverse 
the  manifestations  of  the  alleged  new  force,  the  evidence  in 
all  cases  alike  falls  short  in  the  one  particular  which  alone 
could  make  it  conclusive,  furnishes  a  presumption  against  the 
genuineness  of  the  phenomena  which  has  in  the  course  of 
two  generations  accumulated  sufficient  strength  to  be  almost 
irresistible.  Rigidly  to  exclude  from  consideration  all  evidence 
which  fails  to  shift  the  burden  of  proof  from  the  eyes  and 
ears  of  the  investigator  to  the  dial  of  the  instrument  would 
perhaps  be  unwise,  for  we  are  dealing  with  forces  which, 
whatever  their  nature,  appear  to  depend  for  their  successful 
working  upon  certain  human  organisms,  and  the  mere  pro- 
pounding of  such  tests  as  those  indicated  may  conceivably, 
even  if  the  phenomena  are  genuine,  by  influencing  the 
imagination  of  the  medium  act  prejudicially  upon  the 
results.  But  assuredly  the  reality,  whether  of  spirits  or  of 
psychic  force,  will  never  be  substantiated  except  by  evidence 
which  conforms  to  this  requirement.  No  other  kind  of 
evidence  can  be  admitted  to  consideration  except  on  suffer- 
ance, nor  can  any  investigator  claim  a  hearing  who  does 
not  at  least  recognise  such  a  standard  as  that  at  which  all 
his  observations  and  experiments  should  aim.^ 

again  and  again  been  made  by  scientific  investigators  to  impose  conditions  which 
should  dispense  with  the  necessity  for  continuous  observation,  and  those  attempts 
have  been  foiled,  as  often  as  made,  by  the  ingenuity  of  the  medium.  Thus 
Slade  contrived  to  shirk  the  tasks  of  interlacing  two  solid  rings  cut  out  of  different 
woods,  of  tying  a  knot  in  a  continuous  ring  of  bladder,  of  converting  tartaric 
acid  into  its  homologous  racemic  acid.  He  did,  indeed,  profess  to  tie  knots  in 
a  sealed  cord  and  abstract  coins  from  a  closed  box,  but  only  after  opportunity  for 
substitution  had  been  afforded.  Investigators  have  repeatedly  left  in  Eglinton's 
possession  double  slates  so  fastened  that  they  could  not  be  opened  without 
detection,  and  hermetically  sealed  glass  tubes  with  tablets  and  pencil  enclosed,  but 
no  writing  has  been  obtained  under  such  conditions. 

^  A  homely  illustration  may  serve  to  make  the  argument  clearer.  That  the 
quarterly  accounts  from  the  grocer  should  reveal  on  scrutiny  occasional  mistakes 
in  arithmetic  would  not  necessarily  reflect  upon  the  tradesman's  honesty.  But 
if  such  mistakes  should  recur  regularly,  quarter  after  quarter,  for  more  than  half 
a  century,  and  always  in  favour  of  the  grocer,  it  would  require  a  large  charity  to 
regard  him  as  wanting  only  in  mathematics.  Physical  mediums  stand  to-day 
in  the  same  position  as  the  dishonest  grocer,  with  this  difference,  that  they 
can  retrieve,  if  not  their  own  character,  at  least  that  of  the  phenomena,  by 
presenting  one  flawless  statement  of  account. 

The  paramount  need  for  evidence  of  the  kind  indicated  in  the  text  has  been 
generally  recognised  by  the  leading  investigators  of  the  physical  phenomena. 
Sir  W.  Crookes'  testimony  has  been  already  quoted.  Dr.  Lodge,  in  1886, 
expressed  himself  as  "agreeing  with  Mr.  Gurney  in  considering  that  conditions 
which  do  not  exclude  the  necessity  for  continuous  close  observation  can  never  be 
completely  satisfactory"  {Journal  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  ii.  p.  290).  See  also  Mrs. 
Sidgwick's  discussion  of  the  question  {Proc.  S.  P.  P.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  70-72)  and 
Dr.  Hodgson's  criticisms,  from  this  point  of  view,  of  the  evidence  generally,  and 
especially  of  the  evidence  for  slate-writing  discussed  in  the  next  chapter. 

186        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

Before,  however,  an  adverse  verdict  is  definitely  recorded, 
it  is  proposed  to  give  an  account  of  some  of  the  best-known 
foreign  investigations,  and  to  consider,  at  greater  length  and 
more  critically  than  was  practicable  in  the  course  of  our  brief 
historical  survey,  some  items  of  English  evidence. 

Not  merely  will  this  further  inquiry  confirm,  it  may  be 
anticipated,  the  conclusion  already  indicated — that  the  so- 
called  physical  phenomena  are  due  wholly  to  fraud  on  the 
one  hand,  and  misinterpretation  or  misrepresentation  on 
the  other  —  but  undoubtedly  it  will  help  to  throw  light 
on  the  further  problem  how,  being  fictitious,  these  mani- 
festations have  yet  won  such  widespread  and  enduring 
acceptance.  The  original  source  of  the  belief  may  no  doubt 
be  traced  in  mediaeval  superstitions  and  in  the  general 
proneness  of  the  human  mind  to  the  marvellous.  That 
intellectual  indolence,  remarked  by  Faraday,  which  prefers 
the  easy  solution  of  a  miracle  to  the  mental  effort  involved 
in  the  attempt  to  grapple  with  a  problem  is  also  no  doubt 
largely  responsible.  And,  further,  the  spread  of  the  belief 
in  the  genuineness  of  these  spurious  marvels  was,  as  we  have 
seen,  helped  by  their  constant  association  with  the  genuine 
phenomena  of  the  trance. 

But  these  causes  hardly  seem  in  themselves  adequate  to 
account  for  the  singular  vitality  of  the  belief,  amongst  even 
educated  men,  in  face  of  repeated  and  flagrant  exposures 
of  trickery.  There  are,  as  will  be  shown,  two  special  causes 
which  are  mainly  responsible  for  a  belief  persistent  often  to 
the  extent  of  infatuation :  over-confidence  in  the  testimony 
of  the  senses  and  over-confidence  in  the  honesty  of  the 
medium.  Some  of  the  sources  of  error,  almost  peculiar  to 
an  investigation  of  this  kind,  ignorance  of  which  begets  over- 
confidence  in  the  testimony  of  the  senses,  will  be  illustrated 
in  chapters  i.-iv.  of  this  book,  in  the  cases  of  Eusapia 
Paladino,  Eglinton,  and  Home.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
history  of  Stainton  Moses,  recounted  in  chapter  v.,  will 
show  us  a  man  of  good  education,  recognised  social  position, 
and  unblemished  repute,  exhibiting  to  a  circle  of  intimate 
friends  feats  which,  to  one  who  cannot  share  their  confidence 
in  the  medium's  integrity,  must  pass  for  some  of  the  cheapest 
and   most  paltry  miracles  ever  offered  to  human  credulity.^ 

^  As  there  are  several  persons  still  living  who  were  on  terms  of  intimacy  with 
Mr.  Stainton  Moses,  one  or  two  of  whom  have  been  good  enough  to  extend 
some  measure  of  friendship  to  myself,  I  think  it  well  to  anticipate  the  fuller 
discussion  below  (chap,  v.)  by  stating  here  that,  apart  from  these  hardly  even 
dubious  manifestations,  I  know  of  no  reason  for  doubting  Stainton  Moses' 
personal  integrity.     To  myself,  after  as  full  a  study  of  the  case  as  I  have  been 

SOME  FOREIGN   INVESTIGATIONS     187 

In  chapters  vi.  and  vii.  an  attempt  will  be  made  to  analyse 
the  pathology  of  mediumship.  Chapter  viii.  will  give  a  brief 
estimate  of  the  evidence,  especially  as  exhibited  in  the 
trance  utterances  of  Mrs.  Piper,  for  thought-transference, 
clairvoyance,  and  communion  with  the  dead. 

In  the  first  instance  there  fall  to  be  considered,  less  how- 
ever from  their  intrinsic  value  as  evidence  than  because  they 
have  demonstrably  had  a  marked  effect  on  the  growth  of 
the  movement  at  large,  a  few  typical  cases  of  testimony  from 
foreign  sources.  Probably  the  earliest  investigations,  in 
Europe  at  any  rate,  by  men  of  any  scientific  attainments, 
which  resulted  in  a  verdict  favourable  to  the  phenomena, 
were  those  conducted  in  the  autumn  of  1853  by  Count 
Agenor  de  Gasparin.^  De  Gasparin,  a  late  convert  to 
Christianity,  was  concerned  primarily  to  prove,  in  the 
interests  of  revealed  religion,  that  the  raps  and  movements 
of  tables  which  were  agitating  the  mind  of  Paris  were  due 
neither  to  angels  nor  devils,  but  to  a  physical  force  emanating 
from  the  human  body  and  controlled  by  the  human  will. 
De  Gasparin  was  hardly,  perhaps,  himself  entitled  to  be 
called  a  man  of  science,  but  he  was  assisted  in  some  of  his 
experiments  by  M.  Thury,  a  professor  in  the  Academy  of 
Geneva  and  member  of  the  Societe  de  Physique  et  d' Histoire 
naturelle.  Thury  generally  confirms  de  Gasparin's  conclu- 
sions, and  proposes  the  name  "  ectenic  force  "  for  the  agency 
presumed  to  be  demonstrated.^  The  fact  that  the  ex- 
periences of  Thury  and  de  Gasparin  have  been  cited  by 
Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  as  amongst  the  best  attested  in  the  history 
of  Spiritualism  ;^  and  that,  more  recently,  Thury's  mono- 
graph, reinforced  by  personal  discussion  with  its  author,  has 
begot,  in  the  mind  of  so  acute  a  critic  as  M.  Flournoy, 
a  presumption  in  favour  of  the  physical  phenomena,  entitles 
their  work  to  our  fullest  consideration.* 

The  experiments  which  are  regarded  by  the  authors  as 
crucial  were  of  three  types :  (i)  A  table  was  suspended 
from  one  arm  of  a  balance,  with  a  counterpoise  on  the  other 

able  to  give,  it  seems  hardly  more  difficult,  in  sole  reliance  on  the  medium's 
honesty,  to  believe  in  the  phenomena  than  it  is,  on  the  sole  ground  of  the 
phenomena,  to  impugn  that  honesty.  The  solution  of  the  paradox  will,  no  doubt, 
as  indicated  below,  be  found  in  the  assumption  of  some  abnormal  division  of 
consciousness. 

^  Des  Tables  tournantes,  du  Surnatural  en  gen&al  et  des  Esprits.  Paris, 
1854. 

■■^  Les  Tables  tournantes  constdMes  au  point  de  vue  de  la  question  de  physique 
generate  qui  s'y  rattache.     Geneva,  l855' 

^  Article  "  Spiritualism"  in  the  Encyclopedia  Britannica. 

*  Des  hides  a  la  Planlte  Mars,  p.  356. 

188        PEOBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

arm,  in  such  a  way  that  the  force  required  to  move  the  table 
upwards  could  be  exactly  measured,^  Under  these  condi- 
tions upward  movements  of  the  table  were  observed, 
indicating  on  one  occasion  a  pull  of  4"27  kilos. 

(2)  After  a  table  of  the  ordinary  type  had  been  set  in 
violent  rotation  with  the  hands  of  the  assistants  resting  on  it, 
these  would  be  suddenly  removed  and  the  table  would  be 
observed  to  continue  its  rotation  for  two  or  three  revolutions, 
without  apparent  contact  from  those  present. 

(3)  Or,  again,  the  assistants  would  from  the  outset  link 
their  hands  together  above  the  surface  of  the  table,  near  to 
it,  but  without  actual  contact,  and  movements  of  the  table 
would  be  observed.  The  absence  of  contact  would  be 
assured,  sometimes  by  sprinkling  the  whole  surface  of  the 
table  with  flour  from  a  vine-sprinkler,  sometimes  by  the 
experimenters  watching  both  above  and  below  the  table.^ 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  results  depend  for  their  acceptance 
on  the  sufficiency  of  the  precautions  taken  to  exclude  action 
of  the  hands,  feet,  knees,  and  other  parts  of  the  person  below 
the  table.  These  precautions  appear  to  me,  so  far  as  can  be 
gathered  from  the  scanty  records,  to  have  been  wholly 
insufficient.  The  records  of  the  experiments  are  extremely 
brief,  and  hardly  any  detailed  accounts  of  individual  experi- 
ments are  given ;  the  names  of  the  assistants  nowhere 
appear ;  but  we  learn  that  the  persons  present  numbered  on 
some  occasions  as  many  as  twelve,  that  this  number  included 
several  servants  and  children,  and  that,  generally  speaking, 
the  children  were  found  to  be  more  successful  operators  than 
their  elders.^  Neither  de  Gasparin  nor  Thury  appear  to 
have  sufficiently  appreciated  the  possibilities  of  unconscious 
muscular  action  or  of  fraud ;  nor  the  extreme  difficulty 
of  detecting  the  kind  of  half-conscious  fraud  which  later 
experience  has  shown  that  children  and  young  persons  are 
prone  on  such  occasions  to  practise.  One  can  only  regret 
that  an  investigator  so  open-minded  and  so  conscientious 
as  Thury  should  not  have  had  opportunities  of  pursuing  his 
investigations,  in  which  case  it  is  possible  that  with  wider 
experience  he  would  have  come  to  different  conclusions. 

An  investigator  of  a  very  different  type  was  Baron  L.  de 
Guldenstubbe.^     He  had  been  for  some  years  interested  in 

^  It  was  prevented  from  moving  in  a  downward  direction  by  a  leg  which  just 
touched  the  ground. 

'^  The  most  detailed  account  of  the  precautions  taken  will  be  found  in  Thury's 
pamphlet,  pp.  15,  16.  ■'  Op.  cit.,  p.  28,  footnote. 

*  La  Reality  des  Esprits  et  le  phinomene  merveilleux  de  lei0'  Ecriture  directe, 
Paris,  1857. 

SOME  FOREIGN   INVESTIGATIONS     189 

Animal  Magnetism,  but  always  from  the  Spiritualist  stand- 
point ;  he  laughs  at  Humboldt  for  denying  that  the  conjunc- 
tion of  Saturn  in  1789  influenced  the  course  of  events  in 
France  in  that  year ;  and  at  scientific  men  in  general  for 
refusing  to  believe  that  the  will  of  the  operator  radiated  from 
his  body  as  a  material  effluence  in  the  process  of  magnetism.^ 
For  some  years  he  had  sought  an  irrefragable  demonstration 
of  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  When,  in  1850,  news  first 
reached  Paris  of  the  American  Spiritualist  movement, 
de  Guldenstubbe  believed  himself  to  have  found  what  he 
sought.  He  lost  no  time  in  forming  a  circle  at  his  own 
house,  amongst  the  assistants  being  M.  Roustan,  the  well- 
known  magnetist.  As  it  was  one  of  the  conditions  that  at 
these,  the  earliest  Spiritualist  circles  held  in  Paris,  the 
members  of  the  circle  should  join  hands,  but  the  medium  or 
mediums  be  left  absolutely  free,  we  are  not  surprised  to  read 
that  remarkable  phenomena  were  obtained,  such  as  raps, 
mysterious  noises,  and  movements  of  furniture. 

But  it  was  not  until  some  years  later  that  the  Baron 
obtained  the  crucial  proof  which  he  had  so  long  been 
seeking.  In  August,  1856,  urged  thereto  not  more  by 
rumours  of  the  recent  doings  at  Stratford,  Conn.,^  than  by 
the  recollection  of  Belshazzar's  feast  and  other  biblical 
precedents,  he  determined  to  try  for  direct  writing  "  without 
the  intervention  of  a  mediumr^  He  began  by  putting  paper 
and  pencil  in  a  small  locked  box,  of  which  he  carried  the 
key  on  his  own  person.  On  the  thirteenth  day  he  opened 
the  box,  and  found  some  written  characters  on  the  paper ; 
this  experience  was  repeated  ten  times  on  the  same  day. 
Later,  in  company  with  the  Comte  d'Ourches  and  other 
friends,  he  visited  churches,  cemeteries,  and  public  galleries, 
and  obtained  writing  on  pieces  of  paper  left  on  tombs  or  on 
the  pedestals  of  statues.  The  writings  so  obtained  were 
in  various  languages  —  Latin,  Greek,  Russian,  French, 
German,  English,  etc. — and  proceeded  not  only  from  the 
spirits  of  deceased  friends,  but  from  such  illustrious 
personages  as  Mary  Stuart,  St.  Paul,  Cicero,  Melchisedec, 
Plato,  and  Juvenal.  From  the  reproductions  published 
at  the  end  of  the  book  it  would  appear  that  the  French 
and  German  were  commonly  written  in  small,  regular,  and 
perfectly  legible  characters ;  in  the  Latin  and  Greek,  how- 
ever, the  letters  are  large,  irregular,  and  so  badly  formed 
that  it  is  difficult  to  feel  satisfied  that  the  scribe  was  really 
acquainted  with  those  languages. 

^  op.  cit.,  pp.  xvi,,  xvii.  '^  See  above,  vol.  i.  pp.  196-7.  '  Page  67. 

190        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

De  Guldenstubbe  gives  no  description  of  the  circumstances 
under  which  these  writings  were  obtained ;  and  it  might  be 
inferred,  from  his  silence  on  the  point,  and  from  the  phrase 
aheady  quoted,  that  he  and  his  personal  friends  were  alone 
at  the  time  of  the  experiments.  There  is  one  significant 
exception,  however.  After  relating  that  on  the  24th  Novem- 
ber, 1856,  at  his  own  apartments,  he  and  Baron  de  Brewern 
had  obtained  communications  from  Cicero  and  Plato,  he 
remarks  incidentally  that  before  the  commencement  of  the 
seance,  whilst  waiting  for  two  other  witnesses  who  failed 
to  keep  their  appointment,  the  furniture  had  begun  to 
creak,  and  that  the  tnediutn  then  placed  herself  at  the 
piano,  bidding  them  place  an  untouched  packet  of  paper  in 
a  particular  spot.  At  the  end  of  a  quarter  of  an  hour  the 
medium  stopped  playing,  the  packet  of  paper  was  opened, 
and  the  productions  of  Cicero  and  Plato,  together  with  some 
English  writing  signed  "  Spencer,"  were  revealed.  Later  we 
learn  that  the  spirits  themselves  frequently  prescribed  the 
place  and  time  for  the  experiments.^  From  this  incidental 
reference  it  may  perhaps  not  unjustly  be  inferred  that  a 
medium  may  also  have  been  present  at  the  other  experiments 
in  churches  and  galleries. 

In  any  case,  it  would  be  impossible  to  derive  from  experi- 
ences so  meagrely  and  uncritically  described  any  support 
for  the  Spiritualist  hypothesis.  Nevertheless,  the  publication 
of  Guldenstubbe's  book  created  a  profound  impression  in 
Spiritualist  circles,  alike  in  France  and  in  this  country, 
and  his  experiments  are  constantly  referred  to  by  the 
earlier  English  Spiritualists  as  striking  demonstrations  of 
spiritual  agency. 

Twenty  years  later  an  investigation  of  a  more  elaborate 
character,  and  under  the  auspices  of  men  of  recognised 
scientific  reputation,  was  undertaken  in  Germany.  The 
medium  in  this  case  also  was  best  known  for  the  production 
in  his  presence  of  "direct"  writing.  But  the  conditions  of 
the  experiments  are  described  in  some  detail,  with  the  names 
and  attestations  of  the  assistants  and  with  considerable 
display  of  scientific  method. 

Johann  C.  F.  Zollner,  Professor  of  Physical  Astronomy  in 
the  University  of  Leipsic,  in  the  years  1877-88,  with  the 
occasional  assistance  of  his  colleagues.  Professors  Scheibner 
and  Fechner,  and  of  Professor  Wilhelm  P.  Weber  and 
others,^  undertook  an  inquiry  into  the  phenomena  produced 

1  Op.  cit.,  pp.  83-5. 

^  Professor  Wundt  attended  two  or  three  of  the  sittings. 

SOME  FOREIGN   INVESTIGATIONS     191 

in  the  presence  of  "  Dr."  Slade.  That  Slade  had  been 
already  convicted  of  fraudulent  practices  may  be  conceded 
to  have  but  little  bearing  upon  the  matter  one  way  or  the 
other.  The  presumption  in  favour  of  fraud  as  the  explana- 
tion of  the  physical  phenomena  is  so  overwhelming  that  it 
is  not  appreciably  increased  by  a  demonstration  of  fraud  in 
any  particular  case.  In  short,  Slade's  past  may  be  left  out 
of  account,  and  Zollner's  recorded  observations  may  be 
considered  on  their  merits. 

ZoUner  was  at  the  time  enamoured  of  the  conception  of 
space  of  four  dimensions,  and  many  of  his  experiments  were 
designed  to  elicit  some  confirmation  of  his  theory  that  the 
spirits  lived  in  a  world  so  conditioned.  Thus,  in  four- 
dimensional  space  it  should  be  possible  to  produce  in  an 
endless  cord  a  simple  knot  such  as  under  ordinary  terrestrial 
conditions  would  require  the  use  of  the  free  ends  of  the  cord. 
On  the  1 6th  December,  1877,  accordingly,  Zollner  took  two 
pieces  of  new  hempen  cord  and  sealed  the  free  ends  of  each 
on  to  a  piece  of  cardboard.  Two  similar  cords  were  prepared 
in  like  manner  by  Weber.  On  the  following  day — the 
17th  December — at  10.30  a.m.,  the  investigators  met  in  the 
seance-room,  and,  to  quote  Zollner's  own  account — 

"  I  myself  selected  one  of  the  four  sealed  cords,  and  in  order 
never  to  lose  sight  of  it,  before  we  sat  down  at  the  table  I  hung 
it  around  my  neck — the  seal  in  front  always  within  my  sight. 
During  the  seance,  as  previously  stated,  I  constantly  kept  the 
seal — remaining  unaltered — before  me  on  the  table.  Mr.  Slade's 
hands  remained  all  the  time  in  sight ;  with  the  left  he  often  touched 
his  forehead,  complaining  of  painful  sensations.  The  portion  of 
the  string  hanging  down  rested  on  my  lap — out  of  my  sight,  it  is  true 
— but  Mr.  Slade's  hands  always  remained  visible  to  me.  I  particularly 
noticed  that  Mr.  Slade's  hands  were  not  withdrawn  or  changed 
in  position.  He  himself  appeared  to  be  perfectly  passive,  so  that 
we  cannot  advance  the  assertion  of  his  having  tied  those  knots  by 
his  conscious  will,  but  only  that  they,  under  these  detailed  circum- 
stances, were  formed  in  his  presence  without  visible  contact,  and 
in  a  room  illuminated  by  bright  daylight." 

For,  in  effect,  at  the  end  of  the  seance  the  cord  was  found 
to  have  four  knots  in  it  of  the  precise  kind  required.^ 

Zollner's  account  of  the  experiment,  it  will  be  seen,  is 
fairly  detailed.  But  there  is  one  detail  which  he  omits 
to   give — that    the    experiment    had    frequently   been    tried 

^  Transcendental  Physics,  translated  from  the  German  of  Zollner  by  C.  C. 
Massey,  pp.  17,  18.     London,  1880. 

192        PROBLEMS   OF   MEDIUMSHIP 

before  and  had  failed.  The  real  significance  of  this  fact 
(which  we  only  learn  from  an  incidental  reference  in  another 
volume  of  his  work,  and  in  a  different  connection)  is  that 
Slade  knew  what  was  expected  of  him,  and  had  the  oppor- 
tunity of  preparing  duplicate  cords.  All  that  was  then 
required  at  the  seance  would  be  to  effect  a  substitution  of  his 
own  prepared  cord  for  that  brought  to  the  seance  by  Zollner ; 
a  matter  which  to  an  expert  conjurer  would  present  little 
difficulty.^ 

Again,  if  we  posit  four-dimensional  space,  we  can  under- 
stand, by  analogy  with  space  of  three  and  two  dimensions, 
that  substances  could  be  removed  from  a  closed  (cubical) 
space  "  without  disturbance  of  the  three-dimensional  material 
walls."  ^  To  test  this  hypothesis  Zollner  had  enclosed  some 
pieces  of  money  in  small  cardboard  boxes,  which  were  after- 
wards securely  closed  by  gluing  strips  of  paper  round  them. 
On  the  5th  May,  1878,  in  broad  daylight,  these  boxes  were 
placed  on  the  table.  In  the  course  of  the  seance  a  five-mark 
piece  and  two  smaller  coins  successively  made  their  appear- 
ance on  a  slate  held  under  the  table,  and  the  cardboard  boxes 
on  being  opened  were  found  empty  except  for  two  small 
pieces  of  slate  pencil. 

As  a  commentary  on  this  performance  it  is  only  necessary 
to  state  that  the  experiment  had  been  tried  and  had  failed 
some  six  months  previously ;  that  the  boxes  had  not  been 
opened  in  the  interval ;  and  that  Zollner  had  kept  no  record 
of  the  values  or  the  dates  of  the  coins  enclosed.^  Again, 
opportunity  for  preparation  on  the  part  of  the  medium  and 
for  substitution  was  afforded. 

Zollner  frequently  explains  that  the  phenomena  were 
beyond  either  his  or  Slade's  control,  and  that  hence  he  could 
not  ensure  the  success  of  the  experiment  which  he  had 
previously  prepared,  though  the  spirits  generally  gave  him 
a  test  even  better  than  that  which  he  had  devised.  The 
following  is  one  of  the  instances  cited  in  proof  of  this  claim. 
Zollner  had  had  two  rings,  one  of  oak  and  one  of  alder, 
turned  from  the  solid  wood,  also  a  ring  cut  out  of  a  piece 
of  bladder.  He  had  hoped  that  the  spirits  would  tie  knots  in 
the  ring  of  bladder,  such  as  had  been  tied,  as  already  described, 

^  See  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  illuminating  discussion  of  this  point  (Proc.  S,  P.  R., 
vol.  iv.  p.  65,  footnote). 

^  A  description  at  once  humorous  and  intelligible  to  the  non-mathematical 
person  of  the  hypothetical  properties  of  space  of  four  dimensions  is  given  in  a 
little  book  called  Flat  land :  a  Romance  of  many  dimensions ,  by  a  Sqtiare,  pub- 
lished in  1884,  and  written,  it  is  understood,  by  Dr.  Edwin  Abbott. 

'■'  Transcendental  Physics,  p.  155. 

SOME  FOREIGN  INVESTIGATIONS    193 

in  the  sealed  cord,  and  that  they  would  interlace  the  seamless 
rings  of  wood,  in  each  case  furnishing  permanent  and  irre- 
fragable proof  of  superhuman  power.  What  actually  hap- 
pened was  that,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  seance  held  on  the 
evening  of  the  9th  May,  1878,  a  small  white  mark  was  dis- 
covered on  the  bladder  ring,  and  the  two  wooden  rings,  or 
two  others  like  them,  were  found  strung  on  the  leg  of  a  small 
wooden  table,  which  it  does  not  appear  that  Zollner — he  was 
alone  with  the  medium — had  examined  before  the  seance. 

Other  tests  were  refused  altogether.  Zollner  had  provided 
himself  with  spiral  snail-shells,  hoping  that,  in  four-dimensional 
space,  the  direction  of  the  spire  might  be  reversed ;  with  a 
tube  of  dextro-rotatory  tartaric  acid,  to  be  converted  into 
laevo-rotatory  racemic  acid  ;  with  a  hollow  bulb  of  blown 
glass,  into  which  a  piece  of  paraffin-wax  was  to  be  introduced 
by  spiritual  agency.  All  these  and  similar  tests  were  evaded 
or  declined. 

In  short,  so  far  as  we  can  judge  from  the  printed  records, 
the  precautions  taken  throughout  the  whole  series  of  perform- 
ances were  quite  inadequate  to  exclude  trickery,  and  the 
recital  is  so  artless  that  we  can  often  see,  as  we  read,  how 
the  trick  was  probably  done,  and  note  the  conjurer's  familiar 
devices  for  distracting  the  sitter's  attention  at  the  critical 
moment.^ 

The  so-called  "  experimental  investigations  "  (which,  seeing 
that  the  medium,  as  explained  by  Zollner  himself,  constantly 
declined  the  experiment  proposed  and  substituted  something 
else,  were  never  really  experimental)  are  worth  discussion 
only  because  of  the  scientific  distinction  of  those  who  took 
part  in  them,  and  the  credit  which  ZoUner's  reputation  in- 
evitably gained  for  the  manifestations  which  he  records,^ 

^  Note,  for  instance,  the  account  (Transcettdenial  Physics,  pp.  91,  92)  of  the 
miraculous  disappearance  and  reappearance  of  a  small  round  table.  Zollner  was 
sitting  alone  with  Slade.  The  small  table  had  inexplicably  disappeared.  They 
sat  in  intense  expectation  of  the  next  phenomenon,  when  "suddenly  Slade  again 
asserted  that  he  saw  lights  in  the  air  ;  although  I,  as  usual,  could  perceive  nothing 
whatever  of  the  kind,  I  yet  followed  involuntarily  with  my  gaze  the  directions  to 
which  Slade  turned  his  head,  during  all  which  time  our  hands  remained  constantly 
on  the  table  resting  on  each  other  \ubereinander  liegend\  .  .  .  Looking  up  in  the 
air  eagerly  and  astonished  in  different  directions,  Slade  asked  me  if  I  did  not 
perceive  the  great  lights.  I  answered  decidedly  in  the  negative  ;  but  as  I  turned 
my  head,  following  Slade's  gaze  up  to  the  ceiling  of  the  room  behind  my  back, 
I  suddenly  observed,  at  the  height  of  about  five  feet,  the  hitherto  invisible  table, 
with  its  legs  turned  upwards,  very  quickly  floating  down  in  the  air  upon  the  top 
of  the  card-table.  This  took  place  at  half-past  eleven  on  the  morning  of  the  6th 
May,  1878."  On  page  89  Zollner  tells  us  that  Slade  generally  saw  lights  in  the 
air  immediately  before  manifestations  of  this  kind. 

'  In  face  of  Zollner's  own  descriptions  and  unconscious  admissions,  it  hardly 
seems  necessary  to  discuss  the  question  whether  or  not  he  was,  at  the  time  of  the 

II. — O 

1&4        PROBLEMS  OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

An  investigation  conducted  by  some  American  men  of 
science  a  few  years  later  tended  towards  very  different 
conclusions.  Mr.  Henry  Seybert  left  to  the  University  of 
Pennsylvania  a  sum  of  money  to  found  a  chair  of  philosophy, 
with  the  condition  that  the  University  should  appoint  a 
Commission  to  investigate  Modern  Spiritualism.  The  Com- 
mission, which  began  its  labours  in  March,  1884,  included 
Dr.  Horace  Furness,  acting  chairman,  Dr.  Leidy,  Mr.  Coleman 
Sellers,  Dr.  Weir  Mitchell,  and  Professor  Fullerton,  the 
secretary,  to  whose  report  on  Zollner  reference  has  just 
been  made.  Each  member  of  the  Committee  severally  ex- 
pressed at  the  outset  his  entire  freedom  from  prejudice 
against  the  subject  of  the  investigation,  and  his  readiness 
to  accept  any  conclusion  warranted  by  the  facts.^  The 
Committee  complain,  however,  in  their  preliminary  report "" 
that  they  were  from  the  first  hampered  by  the  unwillingness 
of  mediums  to  submit  their  phenomena  to  investigation.  No 
private  mediums  could  be  found  to  offer  their  services,  and 
many  professionals  either  declined  altogether  to  assist  the 
Committee,  or  demanded  exorbitant  terms  and  freedom 
from  restrictions  such  as  would  prevent  fraud.  Under  these 
circumstances  the  Committee  were  practically  reduced  to 
attending  sittings  under  the  mediums'  own  conditions,  and 
keeping  their  eyes  open.  They  did,  in  effect,  have  sittings 
with  Slade,  Mrs.  Maud  Lord,  Mrs.  Patterson,  Mrs.  Fox 
Kane,  Keeler,  Dr.  Rothermel,  and  a  few  others ;  and  various 

experiments,  suffering  from  incipient  mental  derangement.  That  he  was  labour- 
ing under  strong  emotional  excitement,  that  he  was  possessed  with  the  idea 
of  obtaining  experimental  verification  for  his  hypothesis  of  four-dimensional 
space,  that  he  was  quite  ignorant  of  any  of  the  devices  of  conjurers,  and  that 
he  accepted  with  childlike  simplicity  whatever  Slade  chose  to  show  him — all 
this  is  evident  from  his  own  narrative.  As  regards  the  corroborative  testimony 
of  Professors  Fechner,  Scheibner,  and  Weber,  Professor  G.  S.  Fullerton,  who 
visited  Germany  on  behalf  of  the  Seybert  Commission,  in  1886,  had  interviews 
with  all  three  gentlemen  on  the  subject,  and  learnt  from  their  own  lips  that 
the  first  two,  at  any  rate,  though  disposed  to  think  that  what  they  saw  could  not 
be  attributed  to  jugglery,  were  not  convinced  of  any  supernormal  agency  in  the 
matter,  and  that  they  both  suffered  from  defective  eyesight,  and  rehed  more 
upon  Zollner's  powers  of  observation  than  their  own.  Professor  Weber,  indeed, 
maintained  his  belief  in  the  phenomena  as  genuine ;  but  in  weighing  his 
testimony  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  he  was  seventy-four  years  old  at  the 
time,  and  entirely  ignorant,  by  his  own  admission,  of  the  possibilities  of  jugglery 
(Preliminary  Report  of  the  Seybert  Commission,  pp.  104,  105). 

■^  Spiritualists  contend,  however,  and  not  apparently  without  justification,  that 
the  intentions  of  Mr.  Seybert  were  never  fairly  carried  out  ;  and  that  the  pre- 
possessions of  the  Committee  against  the  subject  under  investigation  are 
demonstrated  by  their  willingness  to  leave  the  inquiry  unfinished,  and  to  divert 
the  funds  entrusted  to  them  to  an  object  which  was  regarded  by  the  testator 
as  at  most  of  secondary  importance. 

2  Philadelphia,  1887.     No  subsequent  report  appears  to  have  been  issued. 

SOME  FOREIGN   INVESTIGATIONS     195 

members  of  the  Committee  attended  singly,  and  for  the 
most  part  anonymously,  at  seances  with  Mrs.  Thayer,  J.  V. 
Mansfield,  and  other  well-known  professional  mediums. 

It  would  be  unprofitable  to  recount  at  length  the  results 
of  the  Committee's  labours.  When  they  sought  to  impose 
such  conditions  as  would  render  fraud  impossible,  they  met 
either  with  a  blank  refusal  on  the  part  of  the  medium  or 
with  an  acquiescence  equally  barren  of  results.  The  record, 
however,  of  what  they  saw,  when  thus  reduced  to  passive 
observation  of  such  marvels  as  the  mediums  chose  to  exhibit, 
has  some  interest.  They  detected  without  serious  difficulty 
the  methods  by  which  Slade  and  other  slate-writing  per- 
formers produced  their  effects,  and  the  nature  of  the  imposture 
at  some  semi-dark  seances  with  Keeler  and  Rothermel.  In- 
dividual members  of  the  Committee  revealed  the  secrets  of 
materialisation  seances  and  the  means  by  which  sealed  letters 
or  closed  pellets  are  opened  and  read. 

With  the  exception  of  the  last  feat,  for  which  some 
dexterity  and  ingenuity  are  required,  the  mediumistic  per- 
formances described  are  remarkable  chiefly  for  the  puerile 
nature  of  the  deception.  It  is  difficult  to  realise  that  any- 
one could  be  taken  in  by  such  feeble  devices  as  those 
employed  at  these  latter-day  materialisation  seances,  or  by 
the  clumsy  legerdemain  of  Mr.  Pierre  Keeler,  who,  flanked 
on  one  hand  by  his  wife,  and  guarded  at  a  little  distance 
on  the  other  by  two  friendly  sitters,  contrived  under  the 
cover  of  semi-darkness  to  play  a  tambourine,  ring  a  bell, 
and  do  various  other  things  with  his  right  hand  whilst  sitting 
in  front  of  a  black-curtained  cabinet.  Even  Dr.  Slade,  the 
pioneer  of  slate-writing  in  this  country,  shows  himself  dis- 
tinctly inferior  in  skill  to  Eglinton. 

In  the  light  of  the  experience  already  gained,  it  may  now 
be  found  profitable  to  consider  more  in  detail  the  special 
difficulties  and  fallacies  incidental  to  the  investigation  of  the 
so-called  physical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism.  There  are 
two  main  sources  of  error  which  are  peculiar  to  this  inquiry : 
darkness,  and  the  difficulty  of  maintaining  continuous  obser- 
vation even  in  the  light. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  movement  dark  seances  have 
been  general.  Darkness  is  not,  perhaps,  in  itself  an  un- 
reasonable condition.  Light  is,  of  course,  a  mode  of  motion  ; 
in  photography,  in  bleaching  processes,  and  other  familiar 
reactions  we  can  see  that  light  produces  permanent  physical 
effects.     It  cannot  therefore  fairly  be  held  as  antecedently 

196        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

improbable  that  light  should  prejudicially  interfere  with  the 
operation  of  such  an  exquisite  physical  agency  as  is  supposed 
to  be  at  work  in  the  production  of  spiritualistic  phenomena. 
That  darkness  should  also  be  a  condition  peculiarly  favour- 
able to  fraud  may  be  merely  a  regrettable  incident  of  the 
investigation.  In  fairness  it  should  be  admitted  that  sensible 
Spiritualists  very  early  recognised  the  objection  to  dark 
seances,  but  they  have  hesitated  to  discard  altogether  a 
condition  so  constantly  and  imperatively  demanded  by  the 
medium  ;  and  have  preferred  rather  to  devise,  or  accept  from 
the  medium  and  his  friends,  precautions  against  trickery. 
Those  precautions — when  all  tests  have  not  been  of  set 
purpose  omitted — have  been  of  two  kinds.  It  may  be 
sought  to  prevent  the  medium's  active  participation  in  the 
production  of  phenomena,  on  the  one  hand,  by  placing  him 
in  a  locked  or  sealed  receptacle,  by  tying  him  to  a  chair, 
including  him  in  an  electric  circuit,  or  otherwise  securing  his 
person.  Of  the  value  of  precautions  of  this  kind,  especially 
as  adopted  at  "  materialisation  "  seances,  enough  has  perhaps 
been  said  in  previous  chapters.  The  example  of  the  Daven- 
port Brothers  will  serve  to  show  how  difficult  it  is  to  devise 
ligatures  which  will  baffle  an  expert  conjurer.  Many  Spirit- 
ualists themselves  have  recognised  this  difficulty.^ 

But  another,  and  in  the  view  of  most  investigators  a  more 
effectual  safeguard,  is  for  the  medium  to  sit  in  the  circle,  and 
for  one  or  more  of  those  present  to  hold  his  hands  and 
occasionally  his  feet.  How  convincing  this  test  of  "hand- 
holding"  still  appears  even  to  the  experienced  Spiritualist 
may  be  learnt  from  the  records  of  test  seances  to  be  found 
in  any  Spiritualist  newspaper.^ 

It  is  indeed  practically  impossible  for  the  novice,  and 
extremely  difficult  for  the  investigator  who  has  profited  by 
long  experience,  to  realise  the  extraordinary  ineffectiveness 
of  the  untrained  senses  in  detective  work  of  the  kind 
required.  Even  in  the  case  of  slate-writing  and  other 
performances  in  the  light,  when  the  observer  has,  if  he 
knows  how  to  use  them,  the  full  use  of  his  eyes,  the  lacunae, 

^  For  further  illustrations  of  the  ease  with  which  the  medium  can  evade 
almost  any  tests  imposed  whilst  he  or  she  remains  in  the  "cabinet,"  see  the 
Seybert  Report,  already  referred  to,  and  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick's  article,  "Results  of 
a  Personal  Investigation"  {Proc.  S.  P.  P.,  vol.  iv.  p.  75). 

^  In  some  contemporary  notes  of  a  dark  seance  with  the  medium  Rita,  which 
I  attended  in  June,  1879,  I  find  that  the  holding  of  the  mediurn's  hands  by 
those  on  either  side  of  him  seemed  to  me  a  sufficient  precaution  against  trickery. 
This  estimate  of  my  own  no  doubt  faithfully  reflected  the  views  of  Spiritualists 
generally  ;  as  is  indeed  obvious  from  the  fact  that  even  to  the  present  time  most 
persons  are  content  to  take  no  other  precaution. 

SOME  FOREIGN   INVESTIGATIONS     197 

as  shown  in  the  next  chapter,  are  many,  and  the  errors  of 
interpretation  almost  incredible.  But  in  the  dim  light 
demanded  at  the  typical  seance  the  eyes  are  at  best  all  but 
useless,  sometimes  actively  misleading.^ 

Again,  the  ear  under  the  most  favourable  circumstances 
is  an  uncertain  guide,  as  anyone  knows  who  has  tried  to 
locate  sounds  in  the  dark,  or  to  judge  of  their  distance  and 
origin.  At  the  dark  seance,  then,  the  observer  is  left  mainly 
to  the  guidance  of  the  sense  of  touch.  "  Seeing  is  believing, 
but  touching  is  the  truth,"  as  the  popular  adage  has  it ;  and 
because  the  sense  of  touch  is  occasionally  in  ordinary  life 
called  in  to  confirm  or  correct  the  judgment  of  the  higher 
senses,  its  deliverances  are  commonly  regarded  as  having 
a  special  and  superior  validity.  In  effect,  the  case  is  precisely 
the  reverse  of  this.  Except  in  rare  emergencies,  or  in  a  few 
processes  of  handicraft,  the  normal  man  has  not  to  depend 
for  guidance  or  information  on  the  unaided  sense  of  touch. 
In  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life  it  plays  a  limited  and  strictly 
subordinate  part.  When  called  upon  to  act  alone  it  is  in- 
effective, and  knows  not  its  own  ineffectiveness.  In  civilised 
man,  at  any  rate,  tactile  sensations,  partly  from  organic 
defect,  partly,  it  may  be,  from  want  of  cultivation,  are  vague, 
of  low  intensity,  and  rarely  susceptible  of  precise  measure- 
ment or  comparison.  The  judgments  founded  on  them  seem 
therefore  peculiarly  liable  to  be  determined  by  the  mental 
preoccupation  of  the  percipient,  or  by  suggestion  from  some 
other  source ;  and,  like  all  vague  stimuli  of  low  intensity, 
they  may  easily,  under  favourable  circumstances,  give  rise  to 
actual  hallucination.  Everybody  knows  the  story  of  Sir 
Humphry  Davy,  or  some  other,  exclaiming  "  How  heavy 
it  is ! "  when  handling  a  piece  of  the  newly  discovered  metal 
sodium ;  and  the  text-books  furnish  many  illustrations  of 
inadequate  or  erroneous  inferences  founded  on  tactile  im- 
pressions, such  as  the  single  pea  felt  as  doubled  when  placed 
between  two  crossed  fingers,  or  the  feeling,  which  persists 
long  after  the  withdrawal  of  the  actual  coin,  of  the  shilling 
pressed  by  the  conjurer  into  the  expectant  palm. 

It  is,  then,  upon  this  unexercised  and  uneducated  sense 
of  touch  that  the  investigator  at  a  dark  seance  has  to 
rely   almost   exclusively,  not   merely  to   inform    himself  of 

1  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  many  of  the  "visions"  seen  at  dark  seances 
are  due  to  hallucinatory  misinterpretations  of  actual,  but  faint,  visual  sensations, 
whether  of  external  origin  or  entoptic.  The  point  will  be  referred  to  later,  in 
chapter  iv.  A  good  example  of  an  illusion  conditioned  by  the  dim  light  at  one 
of  Eusapia's  seances  is  given  by  Miss  Alice  Johnson  {^Journal  S.  F.  R.,  Nov., 
1895,  p.  158). 

198        PKOBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

what  feats  are  being  performed,  but  also  to  guard  against 
the  medium's  complicity  in  the  performance.  How  entirely- 
inadequate  for  these  purposes  the  sense  of  touch  must  be 
may  be  learnt  from  the  recent  history  of  the  Italian  medium, 
Eusapia  Paladino. 

Eusapia  Paladino  has  been  a  medium  for  many  years/  and 
has  been  the  subject  of  experiments  by  several  groups  of 
observers,  which  have  been  reported  at  considerable  length 
in  the  continental  periodicals  devoted  to  Spiritualism.  Her 
name  first  came  prominently  before  the  English  public  in 
1893,  as  a  result  of  the  investigations  conducted  at  Milan 
in  the  previous  autumn  by  a  group  of  scientific  men — Pro- 
fessors Schiaparelli,  Brofferio,  Finzi,  Gerosa,  and  others. 
Charles  Richet  and  Lombroso  also  attended  a  few  of  the 
stances.  The  chief  manifestations  observed  in  the  light  were 
the  lifting  of  a  fairly  heavy  table,  with  the  medium  sitting 
at  one  end  of  it,  her  hands  being  held  and  the  lower  portion 
of  her  body  being  under  observation,  and  an  oscillation — to 
the  extent  of  some  17  lbs. — in  the  weight  indicated  by  the 
balance  when  Eusapia  was  sitting  on  the  platform  of  a  weigh- 
ing machine.  The  results  obtained  seemed  to  the  Committee 
inexplicable,  but  neither  form  of  experiment  succeeded  when 
stringent  precautions  were  taken  to  prevent  the  contact  of 
any  portion  of  the  medium's  dress,  with  the  leg  of  the  table 
in  the  one  case,  with  the  floor  on  which  the  balance  rested 
in  the  other.  The  Committee  expressed  themselves  satisfied 
that  the  results  were  not  due  to  mechanical  artifices,  but 
Richet,  in  a  separate  report,  arrived  at  a  more  cautious 
conclusion. 

It  is,  however,  primarily  the  phenomena  observed  in  the 
dark  circle  with  which  we  are  now  concerned — movements 
of  furniture  and  other  objects,  raps,  the  appearance  and 
touch  of  hands,  and  other  manifestations  of  familiar  types. 
To  the  Milan  Committee  these  also  seemed  all  but  conclusive  ; 
but  Professor  Richet  again  pointed  out  the  weak  spot  in  the 
evidence.  The  things  would  be  inexplicable  if  we  could 
be  sure  that  Eusapia  could  not  use  her  hands,  but  this  is  how 
her  hands  were  secured  : — 

"  Dans  les  experiences,  Eusapia  n'a  pas,  en  general,  la  main  tenue 
de  la  meme  maniere  a  droite  et  a  gauche.     D'un  cote,  on  lui  tient 

^  According  to  her  own  account,  she  was  born  in  1854.  We  read  in  the 
Spiritual  Magazine  ol  1872,  p.  287,  of  a  physical  medium  named  Sapia  Padalino 
(no  doubt  a  corruption  of  the  Italian  medium's  name),  who  would  write  with  her 
naked  finger,  leaving  marks  as  if  made  with  a  pencil.  The  trick  is  a  favourite 
one  with  Eusapia  in  recent  times.  See  also  Spiritualist,  1873,  p.  140;  Human 
Nature,  1872,  p.  222,  etc. 

SOME  FOREIGN   INVESTIGATIONS     199 

fortement  le  poignet  et  la  main ;  de  I'autre  cote,  au  lieu  d'avoir  la 
main  tenue  par  le  voisin,  elle  se  contente  de  poser  sa  main  sur 
la  main  du  voisin,  mais  de  la  poser  avec  tous  ses  doigts,  de  maniere 
qu'on  puisse  sentir  tres  distinctement  si  I'on  tient  la  main  gauche 
ou  droite. 

"  Voici  alors  ce  qui  passe :  Au  moment  on  va  commencer  le 
phenomene,  cette  main  qui  n'est  pas  tenue  par  le  voisin,  mais  se 
pose  sur  sa  main  (je  suppose  qu'il  s'agisse,  pour  simplifier,  de  la 
main  droite  d'Eusapia,  quoiqu'elle  opere  ainsi  tantot  a  droite,  tantot 
a  gauche),  cette  main  devient  tres  mobile,  presque  insaisissable : 
a  chaque  instant  elle  se  deplace,  et  pendant  une  fraction  minuscule 
de  seconde  on  ne  la  sent  plus ;  puis  on  la  sent  de  nouveau,  et  on 
peut  constater  que  c'est  toujours  la  main  droite."  ^ 

Professor  Richet  v^as  nevertheless  so  impressed  by  his 
experiences  that  eighteen  months  later,  in  the  summer  of 
1894,  he  invited  a  small  party  of  friends  to  a  series  of 
experiments  with  Eusapia  at  his  own  house,  on  the  He 
Roubaud,  near  Hyeres.  Amongst  those  who  attended  the 
investigation  were  Dr.  Ochorowicz,  Professor  Oliver  Lodge, 
and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.  The  things  observed  were  of 
the  same  general  character  as  those  recorded  at  Milan,  and 
at  hundreds  of  other  stances  with  other  physical  mediums 
for  the  last  fifty  years ;  that  is,  when  the  medium  was  sitting 
at  an  ordinary  table,  with  the  members  of  the  circle  ranged 
on  each  side  of  her  and  the  room  carefully  darkened  by  her 
directions,  a  musical  box  would  be  wound  up,  small  articles 
would  be  brought  from  distant  parts  of  the  room  and  placed 
on  the  table  in  front  of  the  investigators,  heavy  pieces  of 
furniture  would  occasionally  be  moved,  the  touch  of  hands 
would  be  felt,  shadowy  hands  occasionally  seen,  and  so  on. 

Apart  from  the  scientific  distinction  of  the  investigators, 
the  history  of  these  seemingly  trivial  performances  is  worthy 
of  note  (i)  because  a  contemporary  record  of  the  whole  pro- 
ceedings was  kept  by  a  note-taker  stationed  outside  the  room, 
but  within  hearing  of  all  that  took  place ;  (2)  because  the 
observers  named — none  of  them  without  previous  experience 
in  such  matters — professed  themselves  satisfied  that  the  pre- 
cautions taken  to  prevent  Eusapia's  physical  participation  in 
the  production  of  the  phenomena  were  sufficient. 

Even  if  the  medium  had  the  free  use  of  her  hands,  Pro- 
fessor Lodge  and  Mr.  Myers,  at  any  rate,  considered  that  it 
would  have  been  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  for  her  without 
leaving  her  seat  to  have  done  the  things  that  were  done  in 
their  presence  at  the  earlier  sittings.     At  the  later  meetings 

^  Annaks  des  Sciences  Psychiqnes,\i.xi.-Y^h.^  1S93,  p.  14. 

200        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

of  the  series,  however,  the  character  of  the  phenomena,  by 
the  general  testimony  of  the  observers,  appears  to  have 
deteriorated,  for  Mrs,  H.  Sidgwick,  who,  with  the  late  Pro- 
fessor Sidgwick,  attended  some  of  these  later  meetings,  was 
of  opinion  that  all  the  phenomena  which  she  witnessed  could 
have  been  produced  by  the  medium  if  her  hands  alone  had 
been  free,^ 

In  any  case,  the  proof  of  the  supernormal  agency  in  which 
Professor  Lodge  and  other  witnesses  were  disposed,  on  the 
strength  of  these  manifestations,  to  believe,  depended  primarily 
on  the  effectiveness  of  the  means  adopted  to  secure  the 
medium's  body  and  limbs.  For  if  the  medium  could  free 
a  hand,  or  even  on  occasion  a  foot,  the  question  whether  she 
could  by  the  use  of  those  limbs  overthrow  a  heavy  table,  or 
take  out  a  key  from  a  distant  door,  could  be  satisfactorily 
determined  only  by  exact  measurements  of  a  kind  for  which 
in  the  actual  conditions  there  was  apparently  no  opportunity.^ 

Now  there  is  a  time-honoured  device,  exposed  in  the 
seventies  by  Moncure  Conway,^  and  afterwards  by  Maskelyne* 
and  others,  by  which  mediums  at  dark  seances  succeed  in 
freeing  themselves  from  the  control  of  the  sitter.  It  may 
be  described  briefly  as  the  art  of  making  one  hand  (or  one 
foot)  do  duty  for  two.  Thus,  if  the  hand  is  to  be  freed,  the 
medium  will  contrive  that  one  at  least  of  her  neighbours  shall 

1  Journal S.  P.  R.,  Nov.,  1894,  p.  339. 

^  Dr.  Lodge's  report,  together  with  some  additional  comments  by  Mr. 
Myers  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  and  some  excerpts  from  the  detailed  notes  of  the 
sittings,  will  be  found  in  i\\e  Journal  S.  P.  R.  for  November,  1894.  From  these 
notes  it  appears  that  most  of  the  manifestations  occurred  within  the  immediate 
neighbourhood  of  the  medium,  and  none  can  be  said  demonstrably  to  have  taken 
place  outside  the  radius  of  the  possible  action  of  her  hand  or  foot,  especially  if 
either  were  armed  with  some  instrument,  such  as  a  lazy-tongs.  The  amount  of 
force  exerted  in  some  feats,  such  as  overthrowing  a  heavy  table,  was  no  doubt 
very  remarkable,  but  not  more  remarkable  than  the  extraordinary  muscular 
power  of  Eusapia's  left  hand,  as  demonstrated  by  Dr.  Lodge's  dynamometer. 
Eusapia  sent  the  index  to  210°  (indicating  a  force  of  168  lbs.) ;  none  of  the  rest 
of  the  party  at  the  time  got  beyond  152°,  though  Dr.  Lodge  can,  under  favour- 
able circumstances,  register  i70°  =  about  133  lbs.  apparently  [Journal  S.  P.  P., 
Nov.,  1894,  p.  326). 

Again,  the  writing  with  a  bare  finger  (in  the  light)  and  other  feats  of  writing 
markedly  resemble  conjuring  tricks ;  the  lifting  of  a  table  by  Eusapia  standing 
could  probably,  as  Dr.  Hodgson  pointed  out  and  as  Dr.  Lodge  admitted,  have 
been  effected  by  a  simple  mechanism  {Journal  S,  P.  P.,  March-April,  1895, 
p.  66) ;  the  bulging  {gonJle??iefii)  of  the  curtain  constantly  observed  at  seances 
with  Eusapia,  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  large,  vague,  semi-transparent 
shadowy  faces  seen  at  other  seances,  and  the  prolonged  blowing  of  the  medium 
cornfiie  pour  allumer  du  feu,  strongly  suggest  the  employment  of  a  collapsible 
bladder  (see  Fontenay,  Apropos  d'Etisapia  Paladino,  pp.  76,  77), 

•^  Spiritual  Magazine,  1875,  p.  285. 

*  See  an  interview  with  Mr.  Maskelyne  in  the  Pall  Mall  Gazette,  i8th  April, 
1885.     Mr.  Maskelyne  himself  was  for  a  time  deceived  by  the  substitution. 

SOME  FOEEIGN   INVESTIGATIONS     201 

have  control  only  of  a  part  of  her  hand.^  During  the  seance, 
by  a  series  of  convulsive  movements,  such  as  are  commonly 
observed  in  the  case  of  Eusapia,  and,  indeed,  in  mediums 
generally,  before  the  outburst  of  the  physical  manifestations, 
she  will  bring  her  two  hands  into  close  proximity  on  the 
table,  and  then,  at  a  favourable  moment,  will  withdraw  one 
hand,  leaving  the  other  in  contact  at  the  same  time  with  the 
hand  of  each  of  her  neighbours,  who  will  each,  of  course, 
believe  that  they  are  touching  a  different  hand.  Some  device 
of  the  kind,  it  may  be  inferred  from  the  description  already 
quoted  from  Professor  Richet,  Eusapia  had  employed  at  the 
Milan  investigation.  The  investigators  of  the  He  Roubaud 
were  not  ignorant  of  this  danger.  Both  hands  and  both  feet 
of  the  medium  were  held  or  controlled,  the  hands  as  a  rule 
being  held  by  the  hands  of  one  or  more  of  the  sitters,  the 
feet  controlled  either  by  the  hands  or  feet  of  an  investigator, 
or  by  a  piece  of  mechanism  devised  for  the  purpose.  More- 
over, the  investigators  frequently  took  occasion  to  assure 
themselves,  before  or  after  the  occurrence  of  a  manifestation, 
that  the  sitters  detailed  to  guard  the  several  parts  of  the 
medium's  person  were  not  neglecting  their  duty.  Neverthe- 
less, when  the  notes  of  some  of  the  sittings  reached  Dr. 
Hodgson,  he  pointed  out  that  the  precautions  described 
therein  did  not  expressly  exclude  trickery  of  the  kind  in- 
dicated. Briefly,  Dr.  Hodgson's  contention  was  that  mere 
general  statements  to  the  effect  that  Eusapia's  hands  and  feet 
were  held  throughout  the  sitting  give  us  no  assurance  that 
a  hand  or  a  foot  could  not  be  freed  for  fraudulent  purposes. 
Effectively  to  guard  against  trickery  at  a  dark  seance  it  is 
essential  that  the  investigators  should  fully  realise  the  precise 
nature  of  the  trickery  to  be  guarded  against,  and  should 
undertake  and  maintain  throughout  the  stance  express  pre- 
cautions against  such  trickery.  That  those  dangers  were 
exactly  realised  and  those  precautions  continuously  main- 
tained, the  report  did  not  show ;  in  place  of  explicit  descrip- 
tions of  the  method  of  holding,  the  notes  furnish,  for  the 
most  part,  bare  statements  to  the  effect  that  Eusapia's  hands, 
feet,  and  head  were  held  by  one  or  other  of  the  sitters.  Nor 
could  these  defects  in  the  contemporary  records  be  remedied 

^  This  partial  control  may  be  of  various  kinds :  either,  as  described  by  Richet, 
the  medium  may  place  her  fingers,  or  some  of  them,  07i  the  hand  of  the  sitter ; 
or,  as  in  Williams'  seances  in  London  at  the  present  time,  the  sitter  may  be 
allowed  to  grasp  two  fingers  only  of  the  medium's  hand  ;  or,  as  at  some  American 
seances,  the  medium  may  clasp  both  his  hands  upon  the  bare  arm  of  the  sitter, 
subsequently  withdrawing  one  and  making  the  remaining  hand,  widely  out- 
spread, do  duty  for  both  (see  Seybert  Report,  pp.  23,  83,  90). 

202        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

by  an  assertion  given  in  general  terms  some  months  after- 
wards of  the  investigators'  conviction  that  the  hands  were 
securely  held.^ 

The  next  act  was  of  a  dramatic  kind.  Eusapia  came  to 
this  country  in  the  summer  of  1895,  and  gave  a  series  of 
sittings  at  Mr.  Myers'  house  at  Cambridge.  At  these  sittings 
the  investigators  (including,  at  the  end  of  the  series,  Dr. 
Hodgson  himself)  satisfied  themselves  that  the  medium  did 
habitually,  by  devices  similar  to  those  above  described,  con- 
trive to  set  free  her  hand  or  foot,  or,  on  occasion,  her  head, 
and  that  the  great  bulk  of  the  feats  exhibited  at  Cambridge 
were  to  be  explained  in  this  way.^ 

As  already  said,  it  may  fairly  be  contended  that  the 
demonstration  of  trickery  on  the  part  of  a  medium,  even 
trickery  of  a  kind  which  implies  long  and  assiduous  practice, 
ought  not  seriously  to  prejudice  the  results  of  any  investiga- 
tion in  which  it  can  be  shown  that  adequate  precautions  had 
actually  been  taken  to  guard  against  such  trickery,  for  it  is 
not  antecedently  improbable,  on  the  assumption  that  the 
medium  is  endowed  with  supernormal  powers,  that  she  should 
occasionally  cheat. 

The  triumph  of  Dr.  Hodgson's  demonstration  lacked,  it 
must  thus  be  admitted,  something  of  completeness.  His 
argument  did  not,  and  from  its  nature  perhaps  could  not, 
convince  the  investigators  of  the  He  Roubaud.^  Professor 
Richet  and  his  colleagues  believed,  on  evidence  which  seemed 
to  them  at  the  time  sufficient  and  would  no  doubt  equally 
have  seemed  sufficient  to  any  other  investigators  who  had 
not  had  previous  personal  experience  of  the  kind  of  fraud 
probably  employed,  that  the  precautions  taken  were  effectual. 
Unfortunately  the  record  of  those  precautions,  as  shown,  is 
incomplete.  The  evidence  that  the  holding  was  effective  and 
continuous,  consists,  essentially,  in  the  recollection  of  a  series 
of  impressions  of  the  least  intellectual  of  our  senses.  Now 
tactile  impressions,  vague,  faint,  and  nameless  at  the  time, 
present  in  the  retrospect  no  picture  at  all  comparable  in 
precision  and  intensity  to  the  memories  of  things  actually 

'^  Journal  S.  P.  R.,  March-April,  1895,  p.  56.  Dr.  Hodgson's  criticism  and 
the  repUes  of  the  investigators  are  printed  at  length  in  this  number. 

"^  Journal  S.  P.  P.,  Oct.  and  Nov.,  1895. 

^  Mr.  Myers'  belief  was,  indeed,  shaken,  if  not  actually  overthrown  at  the 
time.  Later,  however,  as  a  sequel  to  some  sittings  held  with  Eusapia  in  Paris, 
in  December,  1898,  at  which  both  Myers  and  Richet  were  present,  these  two 
gentlemen  and  Dr.  Lodge  took  occasion,  at  a  general  meeting  of  the  S.  P.  R., 
held  in  the  following  January,  to  reaffirm  their  belief  in  the  genuineness  of  some 
at  least  of  the  physical  phenomena  occurring  in  the  presence  of  Eusapia  (see 
Journal  S.  P.  P.,  March,  1899,  pp.  34,  35). 

SOME  FOREIGN   INVESTIGATIONS     203 

seen  ;    and  how  fallacious,  at  the  best,  are  even  our  visual 
memories  will  be  shown  in  the  next  chapter. 

It  seems  a  legitimate  conclusion  that  all  the  feats  which 
could  be  explained  on  the  assumption  that  Eusapia  had  free 
use  of  any  limb  must  be  left  out  of  account.  The  remainder 
seem  neither  sufficiently  numerous  nor  sufficiently  striking 
to  justify  suspension  of  judgment.  The  margin  of  error  in 
circumstances  so  little  favourable  to  exact  observation  is 
necessarily  wide,  and  it  is  scarcely  unfair  to  assume  that  a 
proved  trickster  may  have  other  tricks  as  yet  undiscovered. 

In  fine,  if  we  decide  to  reject  the  evidence  in  favour  of 
Eusapia's  supernormal  powers,  that  decision  is  in  the  last 
analysis  justified,  not  by  the  completeness  of  the  explanation 
offered  by  Dr.  Hodgson,  which  is  necessarily  based  largely 
on  conjecture,  nor  by  the  apparent  lacuna  in  the  evidence, 
nor  by  any  specific  distrust  of  the  competence  of  the  dis- 
tinguished investigators  of  the  He  Roubaud.  The  justification 
is  that  the  results  attained,  even  when  vouched  for  by  such 
high  authority,  depending,  as  they  do,  on  observation,  and 
not  on  automatic  record,  are  not  sufficiently  free  from 
ambiguity  to  weigh  against  the  presumption  derived,  as 
indicated  in  the  early  part  of  this  chapter,  from  an  examina- 
tion of  all  previous  evidence  upon  the  subject.  Furthermore, 
as  will  be  shown  in  the  next  chapter,  the  presumption  is 
strengthened,  as  regards  these  particular  observations,  by 
the  reflection  that  other  experimenters,  inferior  perhaps  in 
general  competence,  but  placed  in  circumstances  much  more 
favourable  to  observation,  have  been  deceived  again  and  again 
by  devices  not  less  obvious,  when  explained.^ 

1  Not  the  least  instructive  feature  in  the  history  of  Eusapia  is  the  attitude  of 
some  other  continental  investigators  who  subsequently  held  sittings  with  her. 
In  the  autumn  of  1895,  immediately  after  the  Cambridge  fiasco,  Messrs.  Sabatier, 
de  Rochas,  Dariex,  de  Watteville,  and  others  had  a  series  of  six  sittings.  They 
had  been  furnished  by  Mr.  Myers  with  a  full  account  of  the  manner  in  which 
Eusapia  had  produced  fraudulent  phenomena  in  this  country  ;  but  they  failed 
to  profit  by  the  lesson.  Eusapia's  feet  were  still  "controlled,"  as  a  rule,  by 
being  placed  on  the  feet  of  the  investigator,  or  vice  versa ;  and  one  of  her  hands 
was  still  allowed  to  be  placed  on,  instead  of  being  held  by,  the  hand  of  her 
neighbour  ;  the  light  was  subdued  in  accordance  with  the  medium's  wishes  ;  and 
the  liberality  of  the  investigators  was  rewarded  by  an  abundance  of  the  usual 
manifestations  (Anna/es  des  Sciences  Psychiques,  Jan. -Feb.,  1896).  The 
chronicler  of  a  still  more  recent  series  of  sittings,  M.  de  Fontenay,  ostenta- 
tiously proclaims  his  contempt  for  the  meticulous  criticisms  of  Dr.  Hodgson, 
and  excuses  himself  from  the  intolerably  tedious  task  of  describing  in  detail 
the  precautions  taken.  The  reader  is  asked  to  accept  his  assurance  that  they 
were  "more  than  sufficient"  for  their  purpose  {Apropos  d^ Eusapia  Paladino  ; 
les  stances  de  Montfort  VAmaury,  2J-28  Juillet,  i8gj,  pp.  15,  28,  29,  etc. 
Paris,  1898). 

CHAPTER     II 
SLATE-WRITING 

MOST  readers  will,  it  is  likely,  have  little  difficulty  in 
accepting  the  conclusion  indicated  in  the  preceding 
chapter,  that  the  physical  phenomena  in  general  were 
due  to  fraud.  To  many,  indeed,  the  demonstration  will,  it 
is  to  be  anticipated,  have  appeared  superfluous.  If  we  appeal 
to  the  scientific  attainments  and  general  intelligence  of  some 
of  those  who  have  vouched  for  the  genuineness  of  the  physical 
marvels,  as  proof  that  the  trickery  was  not  so  obvious  as, 
after  the  explanation,  it  may  appear  to  have  been,  the 
rejoinder  that  men  of  general  culture  and  even  men  of 
science  are  not  specially  qualified  to  detect  conjuring  tricks 
carries  some  weight.  But  it  is  pertinent  to  point  out  that 
conjurers — even  eminent  conjurers — have  themselves  admitted 
the  genuineness  of  some  of  these  suspected  manifestations. 
Houdin's  testimony  to  the  clairvoyant  powers  of  Alexis  has 
already  been  quoted.^  Mr.  Maskelyne  has  put  it  on  record 
that  he  has  witnessed  movements  of  the  table  which  could 
not  in  his  judgment  have  been  produced  by  trickery  or  by 
unconscious  muscular  action,  and  which  forced  him  to  look 
for  an  explanation  in  some  "  psychic  or  nerve  force."  ^  And 
Samuel  Bellachini,  Court  conjurer  at  Berhn,  in  December, 
1877,  executed  a  solemn  declaration  before  a  notary  to  the 
effect  that  not  only  had  he  failed  to  discover  any  mechanical 
means  by  which  the  phenomena  occurring  in  Slade's  presence 
could  have  been  produced,  but  that  he  regarded  it  as  im- 
possible to  explain  these  occurrences  by  prestidigitation  of 
any  kind.^ 

Of  all  the  physical  phenomena  of  mediumship,  the  slate- 
writing  performances  of  such   men  as   Slade  and   Eglinton 

1  Vol.  i.  p.  143. 

2  "A  Chat  with  Mr.  Maskelyne," /"aZ/yl/a//  Gazette,  April  20th,  1885,  and  letter 
from  Mr.  Maskelyne,  in  the  issue  of  April  23rd. 

-  Quoted  in  ZoUner's  T7-anscendenial  Physics,  English  translation,  by  C.  C. 
Massey,  p.  261.     London,  1880. 

204 

SLATE-WRITING  205 

appear  to  have  proved  most  baffling  to  the  expert.  Mr. 
Harry  Kellar,  after  his  first  seance  with  Eglinton,  was  of 
opinion  that  the  slate-writing  "  was  in  no  way  the  result  of 
trickery  or  sleight-of-hand."  ^  Lord  Rayleigh  quoted  at  the 
British  Association  meeting  of  1876  the  testimony '  of  a 
professional  conjurer,  who  was  unable  to  explain  Slade's 
performances.^  Dr.  George  Herschell,  a  well-known  amateur 
conjurer,  after  some  months  of  practice  and  many  sittings 
with  Eglinton,  failed  to  rival  the  latter's  performances,  and 
expressed  his  opinion  that  they  could  not  have  been  due 
to  trickery  or  conjuring.^  Further  instances  of  professional 
or  amateur  prestidigitators  being  nonplussed  by  the  slate- 
writing  of  Eglinton  and  others  are  quoted  by  Mrs.  Henry 
Sidgwick  and  Dr.  Hodgson.*  Even  Mr.  Maskelyne  admits 
that  some  of  Slade's  devices  were  new  to  him,  and  that  it 
cost  him  "  a  few  weeks'  hard  practice  "  to  attain  proficiency  in 
them.^  That  Spiritualists  in  general  failed  to  discover  how 
these  feats  of  sleight-of-hand  were  accomplished  is  not 
perhaps  surprising ;  and  that,  so  failing,  they  should  im- 
mediately have  postulated  spirits  or  psychic  force  as  the 
active  agency,  is  of  course  in  accordance  with  precedents 
sanctioned  by  some  centuries  of  observance. 

Slade,  as  already  explained,  was  prevented  from  visiting 
England  after  1876,  and  his  performances  were  matter  only 
for  historical  investigation.  But  he  found  in  William  Eglinton 
a  competent  successor.  In  the  year  1886  about  a  hundred 
persons,  professed  Spiritualists  and  others,  many  of  them 
men  of  distinction  in  various  departments,  sent  reports  to 
the  Spiritualist  newspaper.  Light,  testifying  to  the  marvellous 
spirit-writing  on  slates  produced  in  Eglinton's  presence.  In 
the  history  of  the  movement  no  physical  manifestation  ever 
won  such  universal  recognition.  The  evidence,  indeed,  for 
this  particular  marvel  seemed  irrefragable.  As  Mr.  C.  C. 
Massey  wrote  in  1886:  "Many,  of  whom  I  am  one,  are  of 
opinion  that  the  case  for  these  phenomena  generally,  and 
for  'autography'^  in  particular,  is  already  complete."^  As 
evidence  of  the  position  which  Eglinton  held  in  the  estimation 
of  Spiritualists,  it  may  be  added  that  he  was  invited  in  the 

1  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  iv.  p.  411. 

"  Report  of  the  discussion  in  the  Glasgow  Herald,  Sept.  13th,  1876. 
^  Proc.  S.  P.  P.,  vol.  iv.  p.  97,  and  Journal,  July,  1886,  p.  354. 
^  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  59  and  412. 

•^  The  Supernatural  (?),  p.  194,  by  Dr.  Weatherly  and  Mr.  J.  N.  Maskelyne. 
1891  ;  see  also  Pall  Mall  Gazette,  April  20th,  1885. 

^  i.e.  "direct  "  writing,  of  which  slate-writing  was  the  best-known  form. 
7  See  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  iv.  p.  98. 

206        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

course  of  the  same  year,  1886,  to  read  a  paper  before  the 
London  Spiritualist  Alliance. 

Slate-writing,  then,  as  produced  at  Eglinton's  seances,  was 
by  the  general  consent  of  Spiritualists  ascribed  to  super- 
normal agencies.  The  manifestation  offered  special  facilities 
for  investigation  as  compared  with  most  other  kinds  of 
physical  phenomena,  inasmuch  as  it  was  produced  in  full 
light ;  was  fairly  constant  in  its  appearance,  instances  of 
completely  unsuccessful  seances  being  comparatively  rare ; 
and,  from  the  nature  of  the  experiment,  the  conditions 
presented,  or  seemed  to  present,  the  fullest  opportunity  for 
examination.  The  Society  for  Psychical  Research  had  for 
some  years  been  collecting  from  its  own  members  and  others 
accounts  of  Eglinton's  performances,  and  the  occasion  seemed 
fitting  for  a  crucial  test  of  the  pretensions  of  Spiritualism. 

Antecedently,  indeed,  apart  from  the  general  presumption 
against  the  operation  of  any  hitherto  unrecognised  agency 
in  nature,  there  were  special  grounds  for  suspecting  the  results 
in  this  particular  case  to  be  due  to  trickery.  Eglinton  had 
on  at  least  two  occasions  been  detected  in  fraudulently 
simulating  occult  phenomena.  In  1876,  at  a  time  when  he 
was  giving  materialisation  seances,  Archdeacon  Colley  and 
Mr.  Owen  Harries  had  discovered  in  his  portmanteau  some 
muslin  and  a  false  beard,  and  had  found  further  that  these 
actually  matched  some  fragments  of  drapery  and  hair  cut 
a  few  days  previously  from  the  spirit  form  of  "  Abdullah,"  the 
medium's  spirit  guide.^  Eglinton  had  also  co-operated  with 
Madame  Blavatsky  in  manufacturing  a  theosophic  miracle, 
the  "  astral "  conveyance  of  a  letter  from  a  ship  in  mid-ocean.'^ 
Moreover,  several  observers  claimed  to  have  seen  Eglinton 
actually  writing  on  the  slates  with  his  own  hands,  the  writing 
being  afterwards  exhibited  by  him  as  the  work  of  spirits. 
The  most  complete  record  of  the  kind  is  that  of  Professor 
Carvill  Lewis,  F.G.S.,  who  had  two  sittings  in  the  winter  of 
1886.^  By  purposely  turning  his  head  away  and  pretending 
to  divert  his  attention,  Professor  Lewis  was  able  not  only 
to  hear  Eglinton's  doings  as  he  wrote  on  the  slates,  unrolled 
a  piece  of  paper  on  which  a  question  was  written,  etc.,  but 
occasionally  to  see  the  movements  of  the  tendons  of  the 
wrist   in  the  act  of   writing,  and  other   signs   of   muscular 

^  '^QQ  Journal  S.  P.  R.,  June,  1886;  Medium  and  Daybreak,  ist  and  15th 
Nov.,   1878;  and  Spiritualist,   14th  Feb.    1879,  P-  83,  and  2ist  March,    1879, 

P-  135- 

"  See  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  iii.  p.  254,  and  Journal  S.  P.  R.,  June,  1886, 
p.  284. 

^  See  his  report,  in  Proc.  S.  P.  R,,  vol.  iv,  pp.  352,  etc. 

SLATE-WRITING  207 

action   on    his   part   necessary  for  the   performance   of   the 
trick. 

But  demonstration  of  occasional,  or  even  frequent,  trickery 
was  not  in  itself  sufficient.  As  already  said,  educated 
Spiritualists  have,  at  least  in  the  later  years  of  the  movement, 
been  willing  to  admit  sporadic  trickery  on  the  part  of 
genuine  mediums.  One  of  the  most  acute  and  most  candid 
of  those  who  have  professed  their  belief  in  the  physical 
phenomena,  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey,^  has  put  this  contention  in 
a  form  to  which  no  exception  can  reasonably  be  taken.  "As 
Eduard  von  Hartmann  has  pointed  out,"  he  writes,  "  occasional 
trickery  is  antecedently  to  be  expected  from  the  exigencies 
of  professional  mediumship,  having  regard  to  the  un- 
certainty with  which  the  true  force  is  developed.  And  the 
whole  theory  of  mediumship  points  to  influences  and 
conditions  which  must  result  sometimes  in  actual  deception, 
sometimes  in  the  mere  appearance  of  it."  ^  Even  more 
striking  is  the  testimony  to  the  same  effect  of  the  well-known 
conjurer,  "  Professor  Hoffmann "  (Mr.  Angelo  J.  Lewis). 
Professor  Hoffmann  was  requested  by  the  S.P.R,  to  report 
in  his  professional  capacity  upon  Eglinton's  performance. 
After  attending  twelve  sittings  (mostly  blank)  and  studying 
the  reports  furnished  by  others,  he  pointed  out  many  circum- 
stances suggesting  that  trickery  was  occasionally,  if  not  even 
systematically,  employed.  "  On  the  other  hand,"  he  writes, 
"  I  do  not  believe  the  cleverest  conjurer  could,  under  the 
same  conditions,  use  trickery  in  the  wholesale  way  necessary 
to  produce  all  these  phenomena  without  exposing  himself 
to  constant  risk  of  detection.  ...  If  conjuring  were  the 
only  explanation  of  the  slate-writing  phenomena,  I  should 
certainly  have  expected  that  their  secret  would  long  since 
have  become  public  property."  ^ 

Mr.  C.  C.  Massey,  in  the  article  from  which  I  have  already 
quoted,  puts  the  Spiritualist  case  at  its  strongest.  The  best 
mediumistic  manifestations,  he  contends,  are  not  comparable 
in  their  conditions  to  the  performances  of  conjurers.  The 
success  of  the  conjurer  depends  upon  his  being  able  to 
dictate  his  own  conditions,  and  upon  the  ignorance  of  the 
spectators  of  the  result  to  be  expected,  and  hence  of  the 
exact  point  or  process  which  they  have  to  observe.     It  is 

^  Mr.  Massey,  it  should  be  pointed  out,  is  not  a  Spiritualist  in  the  strict  sense 
of  the  term,  i.e.  he  does  not  believe  that  such  phenomena  as  slate-writing 
necessarily  involve  any  other  agency  than  the  psychic  force  of  the  medium. 

'^  Froc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  iv.  p.  94. 

3  lournalS.  P.  P.,  Aug.,  1886,  p.  373. 

208        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

because  of  this  ignorance  that  the  conjurer  finds  it  so  easy 
to  divert  attention  from  the  movements  essential  to  the 
success  of  the  trick.  At  a  mediumistic  seance  conducted 
by  competent  investigators,  and  especially,  Mr.  Massey 
claims,  at  a  slate-writing  seance,  the  investigators  can  dictate 
their  own  conditions ;  they  consequently  know  beforehand 
exactly  what  they  have  to  observe,  and  where  to  concentrate 
their  attention.  By  well-contrived  precautions,  in  fact,  the 
task  of  observation  can  be  reduced  to  "  a  single  fact  of  sense- 
perception,  or  at  most,  to  two  or  three  such  facts  well  within 
an  average  capacity  of  simultaneous  or  successive  attention."^ 
The  things  to  be  observed  at  a  seance  for  slate-writing — such 
is  the  Spiritualists'  contention — are  so  easy,  the  precautions 
to  be  taken  are  so  simple,  that  a  sane  witness  cannot  be 
mistaken  when  he  states  that  he  did  observe  such  facts,  or 
did  take  such  precautions.  If  we  refuse  to  accept  the 
testimony  of  such  a  witness,  the  refusal  must  logically  imply 
that  we  think  him  dishonest,  or  that  we  think  him  imbecile. 
As  an  instance  of  the  kind  of  testimony  which  imposes  upon 
those  who  reject  it  the  responsibility  of  choosing  between 
these  alternatives,  Mr.  Massey  cites  the  following  record 
of  his  own,  written  out  on  the  evening  of  the  day  on  which 
the  sitting  took  place.  Besides  Mr.  Massey  and  the  medium 
the  only  other  person  present  was  the  Hon.  Roden  Noel,  who 
corroborates  Mr.  Massey's  account : — 

"Mr.  Eglinton  now  laid  one  of  two  equal-sized  slates  (lof  inches 
by  7-|-)  flat  upon  the  other,  the  usual  scrap  of  pencil  being  enclosed. 
Both  slates  were  then,  as  I  carefully  assured  myself,  perfectly  clean 
on  both  surfaces.  He  then  forthwith,  and  withoict  any  previous 
dealing  with  them,  presented  one  end  of  the  two  slates,  held  together 
by  himself  at  the  other  end,  for  me  to  hold  with  my  left  hand,  on 
which  he  placed  his  own  right.  I  clasped  the  slates,  my  thumb  on 
the  frame  of  the  one  (|-inch),  and  three  of  my  fingers,  reaching 
about  four  inches,  forcing  up  the  lower  slate  against  the  upper  one. 
We  did  not  hold  the  slates  underneath  the  table,  but  at  the  side 
a  little  below  the  level.  Mr.  Noel  was  thus  able  to  observe  the 
position.  Mr.  Eglinton  held  the  slates  firmly  together  at  his  end, 
as  I  can  assert,  because  I  particularly  observed  that  there  was  no 
gap  at  his  end.  I  also  noticed  his  thumb  on  the  top  of  the  slates, 
and  can  say  that  it  rested  quite  quietly  throughout  the  writing,  which 
we  heard  almost  immediately,  and  continuously,  except  when  Mr. 
Eglinton  once  raised  his  hand  from  mine,  when  the  sound  ceased 
till  contact  was  resumed. 

"We  heard  the  sound  of  writing  distinctly,  yet  it  was  not,  I  think, 

^  Proc.  S.  P.  A'.,  vol.  iv.  p.  77. 

SLATE-WRITING  209 

quite  so  loudly  audible  as  I  remember  with  Slade.  When  the  three 
taps  came,  denoting  that  the  'message'  was  finished,  Eglinton 
simply  re??ioved  his  hand  from  the  slates,  leavifig  them  in  my  left 
hand,  also  quitting  contact  of  his  other  hand  with  my  left.  I  took 
off  the  upper  slate,  and  we  saw  that  the  inner  surface  of  one  of 
them  was  covered  with  writing,  20  lines  (118  words),  from  end  to 
end  written  from  the  medium,  and  one  line  along  the  side  by  the 
frame,  and  'good-bye'  on  the  other  side.  The  writing  was  in 
straight  lines  across  the  slate,  all  the  lines  slanting  from  left  to 
right"! 

We  may  agree  with  Mr.  Massey  that  the  long  message 
was  probably  not  written  by  the  medium  whilst  the  slate  was 
held  in  the  manner  described.  And  probably  not  only  to 
Mr.  Massey  himself,  to  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood,^  and  other 
typical  Spiritualists,  but  even  to  most  of  those  more  sceptical 
outsiders  who  were  then  engaged  on  a  critical  investigation 
of  the  subject,  the  task  demanded  of  the  sitter's  faculty  of 
attention  may  well  have  seemed  absurdly  easy.  We  may 
agree  to  put  aside  the  possibility  of  trick-slates  having  been 
used — not  because  such  slates  were  excluded  by  the  condi- 
tions of  the  experiment,  for  Eglinton's  own  slates  were  used, 
and  Eglinton  himself  placed  the  slates  in  position — but 
because  from  what  we  know  of  Eglinton's  methods  it  seems 
unlikely  that  he  would  have  exposed  himself  to  the  serious 
risk  of  detection  which  would  have  been  involved  in  his 
possession  of  trick-slates  of  the  kind  required.  Of  the  three 
assumptions — that  so  shrewd  an  observer  as  Mr.  Massey  had 
been  mistaken  in  his  definite  statement  that  both  surfaces 
of  both  slates  were  clean  prior  to  the  experiment ;  that  the 
word  "forthwith"  covered  an  interval  of  time  and  move- 
ments on  the  part  of  the  medium  which  gave  him  the  oppor- 
tunity of  substituting  a  prepared  slate ;  or  that  the  late 
Mr.  Roden  Noel  was  a  black  magician — the  last  would  to 
many  of  us  at  that  time,  and  certainly  to  the  present  writer, 
have  seemed  hardly  the  most  extravagant.  That  the  two 
first  suppositions  are  now  seen  to  be  not  only  possible,  but 
actually  to  involve  no  high  degree  of  improbability,  is  due 
mainly  to  the  critical  work  done  by  Dr.  Hodgson,  and  the 
admirable  pseudo-mediumship  of  the  late  S.  J.  Davey. 

The  prime  defect  in  the  evidence  for  the  physical  phenomena 

1  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  87,  88. 

^  "The  facts  are  of  so  simple  a  nature  that  they  could  as  well  be  observed 
by  any  ordinary  intelligence  as  by  the  most  scientific  member  of  the  Society  for 
Psychical  Research." — Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  in  ihcfournal  i>.  P.  P.,  Nov., 
1886,  p.  457. 

II. — P 

210        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

of  Spiritualism  pointed  out  in  the  preceding  chapter,  to  wit, 
that  so  far  it  has  rested  exclusively  on  experiments  demand- 
ing continuous  observation  from  the  investigators,  and  that 
all  attempts  made  to  dispense  with  this  condition  have  ended 
in  failure,  receives  further  illustration  from  the  history  of 
slate-writing.  Thus,  though  the  trial  has  frequently  been 
made,  no  observers  have  yet  succeeded  in  obtaining  writing 
on  slates  absolutely  secure — e.g.  by  adequate  sealing,  or  by 
being  enclosed  in  glass  or  wire-gauze — against  interference.^ 
But  to  meet  Mr,  Massey's  contention  that,  in  a  matter  so 
simple  as  slate-writing,  observation,  even  untrained  observa- 
tion, could  hardly  be  at  fault,  the  argument  was  now  carried 
a  step  further.  We  are  all  aware  how  different  will  be  the 
accounts  of  a  conjuring  trick  given  by  one  who  knows  the 
trick  and  one  who  does  not.  Dr.  Hodgson  gives  a  striking 
illustration  of  this.  He  had  once  watched  a  juggler  in  India 
performing  a  well-known  piece  of  legerdemain.  Seated  on 
the  ground  with  his  legs  crossed,  he  caused  some  small  figures 
and  coins,  which  were  lying  about  two  feet  from  him,  to  dance 
and  jump  about.  One  of  the  spectators,  an  English  officer, 
drew  a  coin  from  his  pocket,  which,  on  being  placed  on  the 
ground  with  the  others,  displayed  like  activity.  In  describing 
this  incident  that  same  evening,  in  Dr,  Hodgson's  presence, 
the  officer  stated  that  he  took  the  coin  from  his  pocket  and 
himself  placed  it  on  the  ground,  and  he  was  naturally  much 
amazed  at  the  agility  which,  without  apparent  cause,  it 
straightway  displayed.  But  Dr.  Hodgson  had  seen  that 
the  officer's  intended  action  had  been  baulked  of  execution 
by  the  juggler  himself,  who  leant  forward  and  took  the  coin 
from  its  owner's  hand  before  it  reached  the  ground.  In  that 
unobtrusive  movement  lay,  of  course,  the  possibility  of  the 
trick.  Here,  it  will  be  seen,  a  perfectly  honest  witness 
asserted — possibly,  as  Dr.  Hodgson  suggests,  through  mis- 
taking his  own  imagination  of  the  act  intended  for  the 
memory  of  an  act  actually  performed — that  he  had  taken 
a  definite  precaution,  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  he  had  not 
taken.  But  an  isolated  trick  of  a  wandering  juggler  makes 
a  far  smaller  demand  upon  the  powers  of  observation  than 
the  events  of  a  slate-writing  seance,  lasting  perhaps  a  couple 
of  hours.     To  observe  and  record  the  whole  course  of  such  a 

^  See  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  article  on  the  "Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism" 
{Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  70-2).  The  Seybert  Commission  made  numerous 
attempts  to  obtain  writing  on  sealed  slates,  but  in  each  instance  the  experiment 
was  either  declined  by  the  medium  or  remained  barren  of  results  {Report,  pp.  17, 
27,49,  66,  etc.). 

SLATE- WRITING  211 

seance,  crowded  with  minute  incidents,  each  equally  irrelevant 
to  the  uninitiated,  yet  containing  amongst  them  the  key  to 
the  seeming  miracle,  can  only  appear  an  easy  matter  to  those 
who  have  not  mastered  the  first  lesson  of  such  an  investigation 
— the  knowledge  of  their  own  incompetence.  Dr.  Hodgson 
has  put  it  on  record  that  he  has  spent  twelve  or  fourteen 
hours  in  recalling  and  writing  out  his  notes  of  a  single  such 
seance,  and  even  then  found  at  the  end  of  his  task  that  in  his 
first  draft  he  had  omitted  one  important  incident.^  Probably 
few  of  the  writers  whose  reports  he  set  himself  to  criticise 
had  for  their  part  spent  a  fifth,  or  even  a  tenth,  of  that  time. 

In  short,  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  Spiritualist  witnesses  had 
altogether  underestimated  the  difficulty  of  the  task  which 
they  had  set  themselves.  Even  the  "  single  fact  of  sense- 
perception  "  of  which  Mr.  Massey  speaks — say,  the  picture 
of  the  conjurer's  slate  on  the  table — can,  of  course,  be 
shown  in  analysis  to  be  a  highly  complex  structure,  in  which 
the  momentary  impression  made  upon  the  retina  is  fused  with 
reminiscences  of  other  sense-impressions,  tactile  as  well  as 
visual,  and  with  innumerable  subtler  reverberations,  into  a 
compound  not  less  difficult  to  resolve  into  its  elements  than 
any  of  the  complex  molecules  which  build  up  our  physical 
organism. 

But  when  we  have  to  deal  not  with  a  single  fact  of  sense- 
perception,  but  with  a  series  of  such,  or  rather  with  many 
simultaneous  and  inter-connected  series,  it  becomes  a  task  of 
almost  insuperable  difficulty  to  discriminate,  in  the  retrospect, 
the  actual  data  of  sense  in  the  final  product  as  elaborated 
by  our  own  processes  of  psychical  chemistry.  And  the 
difficulty  is  the  greater  because  for  the  most  part  unrecog- 
nised. As  Ribot  has  put  it :  "  Knowledge  of  the  past  may 
be  compared  to  a  picture  of  a  distant  landscape,  at  once 
exact  and  deceptive,  since  its  very  exactitude  is  derived 
from  illusion.""^  But  even  this  comparison  is  too  flattering. 
If  memory  were  a  faithful  register  only  of  things  actually 
heard  and  seen,  the  record  of  any  series  of  events  would 
be  a  mosaic  of  scattered  fragments,  many  ill-defined  and 
with  broken  edges,  some  with  their  relative  positions  not 
clearly  fixed,  and  the  whole  interspersed  with  deplorable 
lacunae.  What  the  memory  does  present  to  us  is  a  compact 
and  finished  picture,  with  smooth,  unbroken  surface,  in  which 
the  ragged  edges  have  been  trimmed,  the  ill-preserved  frag- 

^  See  his  article  on  "The  Possibilities  of  Malobservation,"  etc.  {Proc.  S.  P.  R., 
vol.  iv.  pp.  387,  388,  etc.). 

*  Diseases  of  Memory  (English  translation),  p.  6i.     London,  1S82. 

212        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

ments  have  for  the  most  part  dropped  out,  and  the  lacunae 
have  been  filled  up,  now  by  a  process  of  compression,  now 
by  the  intercalation  of  fragments  detached  from  other  parts 
of  the  picture,  or  even  of  new  pieces  manufactured  for  the 
purpose.  It  is  to  this  thing  of  shreds  and  patches,  this 
Wardour  Street  antiquity,  that  appeal  is  made  by  lovers  of 
the  marvellous. 

In  the  course  of  his  analysis  of  the  various  reports  before 
him,  some  presented  to  the  Society  by  its  members  and 
friends,  others  previously  published  in  Spiritualist  papers. 
Dr.  Hodgson  furnishes  examples  of  these  various  fallacies  of 
memory — omission,  substitution,  transposition,  and  inter- 
polation. Thus,  to  take  a  few  instances, "  Professor  Hoffmann  " 
himself,  in  his  original  report  of  his  sittings  with  Eglinton, 
omitted  to  mention  the  fact  that  Eglinton  had  in  the  course 
of  a  single  sitting  twice  dropped  his  slate  on  the  floor.  It 
was  not  until  he  had  given  further  study  to  the  matter  that 
he  realised  the  significance  of  the  incident  and  added  it  in 
the  proofs  So  Mr.  Davey,  whose  own  extraordinary  con- 
juring performances  will  be  described  later,  wrote,  at  an 
interval  of  a  few  weeks,  two  independent  accounts  of  the 
same  series  of  seances.  Comparison  of  the  two  records 
reveals  several  important  discrepancies.  He  omits  in  one 
account  to  mention  that  Eglinton  left  the  room  in  the  course 
of  the  proceedings ;  he  variously  describes  the  same  incident 
as  having  occupied  "upwards  of  a  minute"  and  "a  few 
seconds  "  ;  or,  again,  of  another  incident,  "  scarcely  a  minute  " 
and  "  instantly "  ;  he  inverts  the  order  of  certain  events  ;  in 
one  account  he  writes  of  the  slates  employed  in  such  loose 
terms  that  the  reader  is  led  to  infer  that  they  were  Davey's 
own,  when  in  fact  they  were  Eglinton's.^  Once  more,  the 
independent  accounts  furnished  by  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood 
and  Miss  Symons  of  the  same  sitting  betray  surprising 
discrepancies.  Mr.  Wedgwood  omits  altogether  several 
incidents  recorded  by  his  colleague,  notably  the  fact  that 
at  one  period  of  the  sitting  Eglinton  let  the  slate  drop  on 
the  floor.^  In  short,  by  a  careful  analysis  of  the  reports. 
Dr.  Hodgson  not  merely  demonstrates  the  untrustworthiness 
of  memory,  even  the  trained  memory,  in  such  matters,  but 
by  a  comparison,  where  possible,  of  different  accounts  of  the 
same  seance,  he  enables  us  to  obtain,  so  to  speak,  a  stereo- 
scopic view  of  the  procedure.  It  thus  appears  that  Eglinton 
habitually  left  the  room  during  a  sitting,  or  went  to  the  door 

J  Journal  S.  P.   A'.,  Dec,  1886,  p.  518. 

-  Ibid.,  Oct.  and  Nov.,  1886.        ^  Ibid.,]\x\\^,   1886. 

SLATE- WRITING  213 

to  interview  a  visitor  or  receive  a  message ;  that  he  habitually 
dropped  the  slate  on  the  floor ;  that  he  was  subject  to  a 
distressing  cold  in  the  head,  which  betrayed  itself  now  by 
a  sneeze,  now  by  a  cough,  now  by  the  exhibition  of  his 
handkerchief;  that  he  was  restless,  and  frequently  changed 
the  position  of  his  limbs,  and  especially  of  his  hands.  It 
further  appeared  that  many  of  the  sitters,  intent  upon  higher 
things,  or  merely  mindful  of  the  dictates  of  good  breeding, 
habitually  ignored  such  trivial  and  irrelevant  episodes.  But 
in  these  seemingly  insignificant  happenings  lay,  it  need 
hardly  be  said,  the  secret  of  Eglinton's  success.  A  sneeze 
or  a  cough  would  drown  the  snap  of  a  spring  lock,  or  the 
rustle  of  an  unfolded  paper ;  a  change  of  hand  would  cover 
a  change  in  the  position  of  the  slate ;  dropping  it  on  the 
floor  would  give  the  opportunity  for  substitution  ;  and  leaving 
the  room  would  admit  of  the  writing  of  a  message  or  a  hurried 
glance  at  an  encyclopaedia.^  But  to  attempt  to  show  in 
detail  how  the  results  were,  or  could  have  been,  attained, 
would  be  tedious  and  unnecessary.  It  will  be  more  profit- 
able to  follow  Dr.  Hodgson's  analysis  of  a  single  case. 

On  June  nth,  1885,  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  and  Mr.  J.  Murray 
Templeton  had  a  sitting  with  Eglinton.  This  is  an  account 
of  one  of  the  most  striking  incidents  of  the  seance  taken 
from  Mr.  Smith's  record,  which  was  written  on  the  following 
day : — 

"We  now  expressed  our  desire  to  get  something  written  which 
could  be  regarded  as  outside  the  knowledge  of  any  of  us — such  as 
a  certain  word  on  a  given  line  of  a  chosen  page  of  a  book.  .  .  . 

"  I  then  went  to  the  bookshelf,  took  a  book  at  haphazard,  without, 
of  course,  looking  at  the  title,  returned  to  my  seat,  placed  the  book 
upon  the  chair,  and  sat  upon  it  whilst  we  were  arranging  the  page, 
line,  and  word  to  be  asked  for.  This  point  Mr.  Templeton  and 
I  decided  by  each  taking  a  few  crayons  and  pencils  from  the  table 
by  chance,  and  counting  them ;  Mr.  Templeton  had  possessed  him- 
self of  eighteen  pieces  of  crayon,  and  I  had  seized  nine  pieces  of 
pencil,  we  found  on  counting  them.  We  therefore  decided  that  the 
'  controls '  should  be  asked  to  write  the  last  word  of  litie  1 8  on  page  9 
of  the  book.  This  article  I  now  produced,  and  laid  it  upon  one  of  my 
slates,  and  Mr.  Eglinton  held  the  two  close  beneath  the  underneath 
of  the  table — the  book,  of  course,  being  held  firmly  closed  between 
the  table  and  the  slate.  We  then  commenced  conversing;  in  the 
midst  of   Mr.   Eglinton's  own    remarks  the   writing  was  heard  to 

^  Sometimes  too  hurried,  as  in  the  case  cited  by  Professor  Carvill  Lewis,  when 
the  spirits  after  Mr.  Eghnton's  return  from  one  of  these  brief  absences  gave 
Albumina  (instead  of  Alumina),  as  one  of  the  constituents  of  the  mineral 
Idocrase  (Proc.  S.  P.  P.,  vol.  iv.  p.  355). 

214        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

commence.  For  about  twenty-five  seconds  he  was  talking,  and  the 
writing  continued  a  few  more  seconds  before  the  three  taps  came 
indicating  its  conclusion.  The  message  we  found  was  as  follows : 
'This  is  a  Hungarian  book  of  poems.  The  last  word  of  page  i8 
(page  9,  line  i8)  is  bunhoseded.' 

"After  we  had  observed  that  a  mistake  in  the  figures  had  been 
corrected  in  parenthesis,  I  opened  the  book  at  page  9,  and  we  found 
that  the  last  word  on  Hne  18  of  that  page  was  '  bunhodesed.' " 

The  vi^ord,  it  will  be  seen,  was  accurately  given  with  the 
exception  of  the  transposition  of  two  letters ;  and  we  are 
almost  inclined  to  agree  with  Mr.  Smith's  comment : — 

"As  a  test  experiment  I  think  this  may  be  regarded  as  a  very 
successful  and  crucial  one;  for  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that 
Mr.  Eglinton  can  have  committed  to  memory  the  exact  position 
of  every  word  in  every  book  on  his  bookshelves — containing  some 
two  hundred  books,  or  more." 

We  are  so  inclined,  that  is,  until  we  have  read  Mr.  Temple- 
ton's  version  of  the  same  incident : — 

"  Next,  the  final  and  most  crucial  test  was  proposed  by  Mr.  Eglin- 
ton. It  had  been  suggested  to  his  own  mind  by  a  former  test  of  my 
own,  in  which  I  had  wished  to  preclude  all  possibility  of  any  ex- 
planation such  as  thought-transference.  We  arranged  that  Mr. 
Smith  should  turn  to  the  bookshelves  behind  him,  choose  a  book 
at  random,  in  which  we  could  fix  upon  a  certain  word  in  a  certain 
line  of  a  given  page — which  word  was  to  be  written  for  us.  On 
taking  a  book,  Mr.  Smith  asked  Mr.  Eglinton  if  he  knew  what  it 
was.  Mr.  Eglinton  answered  'Yes,'  and  that  as  it  was  a  rather 
trashy  novel,  it  might  be  better  to  choose  another.  Mr.  Smith  then 
took  a  small  red-covered  book  from  the  opposite  shelf,  and  this 
Mr.  Eglinton  said  he  did  not  recognise.  As  the  theory  of  the 
medium's  mesmeric  influence  over  the  sitters  had  been  more  than 
once  put  before  me  as  a  not  impossible  explanation,  I  suggested  we 
should  fix  the  line  by  the  number  of  crayons  in  a  box  before  us, 
which  gave  us  the  eighteenth  line;  and  in  a  similar  way,  from  a 
separate  heap  of  slate  pencils,  we  obtained  the  number  9  for  page. 
The  last  word  in  the  line  was  chosen." 

From  Mr.  Templeton's  version  it  would  appear  (i)  that 
the  test  was  proposed  by  Eglinton  himself;  (2)  that  the  book 
was  not  chosen  entirely  "  at  haphazard  ";  (3)  that  the  line  and 
page  were  determined,  not  by  taking  at  random  a  handful 
of  pencils  and  crayons  from  larger  heaps,  but  by  taking  the 
actual  totals  of  those  articles  present  on  the  table.  From 
Mr.  Smith's  account  taken  alone  it  would  have  appeared  that 

SLATE-WHITING  215 

the  success  of  the  experiment  depended  on  Eglinton's  being 
able  to  open  and  read  the  book,  and  afterwards  write  down 
the  word  selected,  whilst  the  book  was  actually  being  held 
under  the  table.  That  Eglinton  did  occasionally  perform 
this  trick — a  favourite  one  at  his  seances — in  this  manner 
appears  from  the  account  by  Professor  Carvill  Lewis,  already 
referred  to.  But  from  Mr.  Templeton's  version  it  would 
seem  at  least  equally  probable  that  on  this  occasion  the  slate 
was  prepared  beforehand ;  that  Mr.  Smith's  hand  was  guided 
to  the  red-covered  book  of  his  second  choice  by  direction 
which  he  could  not  see  ;^  and  that  the  seeming  chance- 
medley  of  pencils  and  crayons  co-operated  to  the  same 
predestined  end.^ 

The  effect  produced  by  Dr.  Hodgson's  analysis  was  limited, 
however,  by  two  considerations.  In  the  first  place,  the 
amount  of  material  for  analysis  was  comparatively  small. 
To  reach  its  highest  effectiveness  the  method  required  two 
independent  accounts  of  the  same  seance,  written  by  persons 
whose  powers  of  observation  varied.  There  can  unfortunately 
be  little  doubt  that  with  most  of  Eglinton's  sitters  the  powers 
of  observation  showed  similar  deficiencies,  not  necessarily  to 
a  like  degree,  but  certainly  in  the  same  particulars.  Probably 
every  conjurer's  success  depends  on  his  ability  to  induce 
most  persons  on  most  occasions  to  overlook  or  forget  the 
crucial  incidents  of  the  performance.  It  is  matter  for 
congratulation  that  even  under  such  conditions  Dr.  Hodgson 
was  able  to  demonstrate  such  numerous  and  important 
discrepancies.  Again,  it  was  open  to  those  Spiritualists  who 
championed  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena  to  claim  that 
their  own  observations  were  free  from  these  evidential  defects, 
and  that  in  any  case  the  mere  demonstration  of  minor  dis- 
crepancies in  the  accounts  given  by  some  observers  was 
not  sufficient  to  prove  that  the  results  were  in  all  cases 
due  to  trickery. 

But  if  by  means  of  pure  legerdemain  slate-writing  and  all 
the  other  phenomena  of  Eglinton's  seances  could  be  success- 
fully produced,  and  produced  under  the  same  conditions, 
the  proof  of  fraud  might  be  held  complete.  Such  proof  had, 
indeed,  been  furnished  in  America  some  years  previously  by 

^  In  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  268-70,  Dr.  Hodgson  describes  the  methods 
actually  employed  by  Mr.  Davey  in  ' '  forcing  "  a  book  on  the  sitter  for  the  pur- 
pose of  this  trick. 

^  I  should  perhaps  state  that  I  have  known  Mr.  Smith  for  many  years ;  that 
antecedently  to  this  exhibition  I  should  have  described  him  as  possessing  powers 
of  observation  decidedly  superior  to  those  possessed  by  the  average  attendant  at 
Spiritualistic  seances,  and  that  I  am  of  the  same  opinion  still. 

216        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

Mr.  J.  W.  Truesdell,  as  described  in  his  Bottom  Facts  of 
Spiritualism}  At  a  seance  with  Slade  Mr.  Truesdell  had 
detected  the  medium's  foot  in  simulating  the  touch  of  a 
spirit  hand  ;  he  had  also  discovered,  before  the  seance  began, 
a  slate  with  a  prepared  message ;  had  stealthily  added  another 
message  of  his  own — "  Henry,  look  out  for  this  fellow  ;  he  is 
up  to  snuff. — Alcinda"  (Alcinda  being  the  name  of  Slade's 
"spirit  wife");  and  had  enjoyed  Slade's  discomfiture  when, 
at  the  appropriate  moment  of  the  seance,  the  unrehearsed 
message  came  to  light.  Thereafter  Truesdell  had  given 
sittings  on  his  own  account ;  had  written  messages  on  the 
sitter's  own  slate  in  the  full  light,  the  messages  being  written 
in  the  handwriting  of  deceased  friends  and  reproducing  facts 
buried  in  the  sitter's  consciousness.  How  those  marvels  were 
accomplished  Truesdell  tells  us  in  his  book. 

Amongst  those  who  had  been  most  impressed  by  Eglin- 
ton's  performances  was  an  associate  of  the  S.P.R.,  the  late 
Mr.  S.  J.  Davey,  to  whose  reports  of  his  early  seances  with 
that  medium  reference  has  already  been  made.  Davey  soon, 
however,  noticed  suspicious  movements  on  the  medium's 
part,  found  out  that  he  was  being  tricked,  and  thereafter, 
with  practice,  succeeded  in  imitating  the  slate-writing  perform- 
ance. Realising  the  importance  of  systematic  experiment 
on  the  subject,  Davey  placed  himself  in  the  hands  of  the 
Society,  and  with  Dr.  Hodgson  as  "  manager,"  came  out  as 
a  quasi-professional  conjurer,  adopting  an  assumed  name.^ 
Davey  worked,  indeed,  under  one  great  disadvantage  as 
compared  with  Eglinton.  Probably  nearly  all  those  who 
gave  testimony  in  favour  of  the  medium  had  gone  to  the 
seance  with  some  expectation  that  they  might  witness  a 
genuine  display  of  occult  powers.  "  Professor  Hoffmann," 
we  have  seen,  half  believed  in  the  occult  powers  even  after 
a  course  of  twelve  seances.  Now  an  expectation  of  this  kind, 
even  if  present  only  in  a  comparatively  faint  degree,  un- 
questionably tells  in  favour  of  the  performer.  It  was  found 
impossible,  without  actual  false  statements,  or  an  appeal  to 
the  emotions  which  would  have  been  hardly  less  repulsive, 
to  maintain  any  such  mystical  atmosphere  about  Mr.  Davey. 
It  is  therefore  probable  that  those  who  attended  his  per- 
formances were  in  a  more  critical  mood  than  most  of 
Eglinton's  clients.  In  some  cases  they  were  definitely  told 
beforehand  that   they  were  to  witness    simply  a   conjuring 

1  New  York,  1883. 

'^  Davey's  performance  was,   of  course,    entirely  gratuitous ;  he  received  no 
money  either  from  the  Society  or  from  his  "sitters." 

SLATE- WRITING  217 

display ;  this  was  the  case  in  the  one  seance  with  Davey 
which  I  personally  attended.  He  came  to  my  rooms  one 
evening  in  the  summer  of  1886  and  offered  to  give  a  seance, 
not  to  me — believing,  though,  I  am  satisfied,  without  justifica- 
tion, that  I  should  detect  the  modus  operandi — but  to  my 
brother.  Mr.  A.  Podmore  understood  that  he  was  merely 
to  see  some  conjuring.  This  is  his  account  of  the  matter, 
not  written,  unfortunately,  until  a  few  weeks  after  the 
incident : — 

''July,  1886. 

"A  few  weeks  ago  Mr.  D.  gave  me  a  seance,  and,  to  the  best 
of  my  recollection,  the  following  was  the  result.  Mr.  D.  gave  me  an 
ordinary  school  slate,  which  I  held  at  one  end,  he  at  the  other,  with 
our  left  hands ;  he  then  produced  a  double  slate,  hinged  and  locked. 
Without  removing  my  left  hand,  I  unlocked  the  slate,  and  at 
Mr.  D's  direction  placed  three  small  pieces  of  chalk — red, 
green,  and  grey — inside.  I  then  relocked  the  slate,  placed  the 
key  in  my  pocket,  and  the  slate  on  the  table  in  such  a  position  that 
I  could  easily  watch  both  the  slate  in  my  left  hand  and  the  other 
on  the  table.  After  some  few  minutes,  during  which,  to  the  best 
of  my  belief,  I  was  attentively  regarding  both  slates,  Mr.  D. 
whisked  the  first  away,  and  showed  me  on  the  reverse  a  message 
written  to  myself  Almost  immediately  afterwards  he  asked  me 
to  unlock  the  second  slate,  and  on  doing  so  I  found  to  my  intense 
astonishment  another  message  written  on  both  the  insides  of  the 
slate — the  lines  in  alternate  colours  and  the  chalks  apparently  much 
worn  by  usage. 

"  My  brother  tells  me  that  there  was  an  interval  of  some  two 
or  three  minutes,  during  which  my  attention  was  called  away,  but 
I  can  only  believe  it  on  his  word.  Austin  Podmore."  ^ 

Mr.  Davey  allowed  me  to  see  exactly  what  was  done,  and 
this  is  what  I  saw.  The  "  almost  immediately  "  in  the  above 
account  covered  an  interval  of  some  minutes.  During  this 
interval,  and,  indeed,  throughout  the  stance,  Davey  kept  up 
a  constant  stream  of  chatter,  on  matters  more  or  less  germane 
to  the  business  in  hand.  Mr.  A.  Podmore,  absorbed  by  the 
conjurer's  patter,  fixed  his  eyes  on  Davey's  face,  and  the 
latter  took  advantage  of  the  opportunity  to  remove  the  locked 
slate  under  cover  of  a  duster  from  under  my  brother's  nose 
to  the  far  end  of  the  room,  and  there  exchange  it  for  a 
similar  slate,  with  a  previously  prepared  message,  which  was 
then  placed  by  means  of  the  same  manoeuvre  with  the  duster 
in  the  position  originally  occupied  by  the  first  slate.     Then, 

^  Proc.  S.  P.  P.,  vol.  iv.  p.  416. 

218        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

and  only  then,  the  stream  of  talk  slackened,  and  Mr,  A. 
Podmore's  attention  became  concentrated  upon  the  slate, 
from  which  the  sound  of  spirit-writing  was  now  heard  to 
proceed.^  To  me  the  most  surprising  thing  in  the  whole 
episode  was  Mr.  A.  Podmore's  incredulity  when  told  that  his 
attention  had  been  diverted  from  the  slate  for  an  appreciable 
period. 

Of  many  similar  records  one  more  may  perhaps  be  quoted. 
The  following  account  is  selected,  not  because  the  experiment 
was  unusually  successful,  since  Davey  at  many  of  his  seances 
carried  out  the  "  test "  of  reproducing  a  passage  from  a  book 
selected  by  the  sitter,  but  because  the  sitter,  Mr.  J.  M.  Dodds, 
was  of  all  Mr.  Davey 's  sitters  perhaps  the  most  acute  and  the 
most  sceptical. 

Mr.  Dodds  writes  that  after  some  preliminary  experiments 
he  was  invited  to  choose  mentally  from  the  books  lining  the 
room  (about  a  thousand  in  number)  "any  one  with  a  clear 
title,"  to  select  a  page  and  line  by  means  of  two  random 
handfuls  of  slate-pencil,  and  then  to  wait  whilst  the  pencil 
between  the  locked  slates  wrote  the  line  indicated.  Mr. 
Dodds  explains  that  he  did  not  touch  the  book  mentally 
chosen,  and  was  careful  to  give  no  indication  of  his  choice. 
Nothing  happened  for  some  time.     Then,  he  continues ; — 

"After  a  short  rest  it  was  suggested  that  I  should  name  the  book, 
and  that  the  experiment  should  be  resumed  in  a  modified  form. 
The  problem  was  now :  Given  a  certain  book,  viz.  Taine  on  Intelli- 
gence, required  to  be  written  in  a  blank,  locked  slate,  lying  under 
our  hands,  a  quotation  unknown  to  anyone  present,  taken  from  a 
page  and  line  known  only  to  myself.  The  book,  of  course,  re- 
mained untouched  on  the  shelf.  We  sat  as  before,  with  the  slate 
under  our  hands  and  eyes.  I  concentrated  my  thoughts.  Mr. 
Davey  soon  appeared  to  reach  a  high  pitch  of  exaltation ;  his  arms 
and  body  became  subject  to  a  violent  frissonnement.  He  again 
appealed  to  his  ghostly  helpers,  and  on  this  occasion  his  efforts  were 
rewarded,  for,  in  a  few  minutes,  to  my  utter  amazement — Mr.  Davey's 
hands  and  your  own^  being  well  in  sight  and  unemployed — I  heard 
sounds  of  writing  within  the  slate,  which  continued  for  half  a  minute 
or  more.     On  unlocking  the  slate  I  found,  legibly  written,  a  quota- 

1  One  of  the  most  successful  devices  of  the  medium  to  divert  attention  from 
his  modus  operandi  is  the  imitation  of  the  sound  of  writing.  The  real  writing 
was,  it  need  hardly  be  said,  alike  by  the  medium  and  the  pseudo-medium,  either 
prepared  beforehand  or  produced  noiselessly  at  a  moment  when  the  sitter's 
attention  was  given  to  other  matters.  The  "sound  of  writing,"  on  which  the 
Spiritualist  writers  lay  so  much  stress,  never  probably  coincided  with  the  actual 
writing  :  it  generally  took  place  after  the  whole  trick  was  safely  accomplished. 
But  it  served  its  purpose. 

^  i.e.  Dr.  Hodgson's,  to  whom  the  account  was  furnished. 

SLATE- WRITING  219 

tion,  almost,  but  not  quite,  verbally  correct,  from  page  15  of  Taine's 
book,  begimiing  at  the  eighth  line.  Some  "  clear-obscure  "  remarks, 
which  I  at  once  interpreted  as  relating  to  a  friend  of  mine,  followed. 
"  I  had  thought  of  the  eighth  line  of  the  twenty-eighth  page.  The 
correspondence  was,  therefore,  not  exact,  the  line  only  being  correct. 
What  struck  me,  however,  was  not  the  coincidence  of  the  quotation, 
nor  the  gibberish  about  my  friend,  which  hinted  information  easily 
ascertainable  by  anyone  who,  like  Mr.  Davey,  had  met  him — it  was 
the  occurrence  of  what  the  evidence  of  my  senses  told  me  was 
writing  by  a  piece  of  inanimate  pencil  inside  a  locked  slate,  with  no 
conceivable  means  of  explanation !  For  a  moment  I  confess  I  was 
completely  staggered;  my  notions  of  causation  were  turned  topsy- 
turvy; visions  of  'magnetic  force'  and  'occult  action'  danced 
before  my  brain.  "^ 

In  this  case,  of  course,  the  writing  on  the  slate  had  been 
prepared  beforehand,  and  the  book  was  "forced"  on  Mr. 
Dodds.  I  have  watched  Mr.  Davey  arrange  the  books  in 
a  bookshelf  of  my  own  in  order  to  "  force "  some  particular 
volume  upon  the  sitter.  If  the  conjurer  is  allowed — as  we 
have  already  seen  the  spirit  medium  is  allowed — a  certain 
liberty  in  rejecting  unsuitable  books,  the  "  forcing  "  of  a  book 
under  such  conditions  is  a  feat  which  presents  a  fair  chance 
of  success,  and  which,  of  course,  when  successful,  creates  a 
profound  impression. 

Space  will  not,  unfortunately,  permit  of  further  descriptions 
of  Mr.  Davey's  marvels.  The  events  of  some  twenty  sittings, 
attested  in  many  cases  by  more  than  one  witness,  are  given 
at  length  in  the  Proceedings  S.  P.  R?  It  is  enough  to  say 
that  by  the  general  testimony  of  those  who  witnessed  his 
performances  he  rivalled,  if  he  did  not  actually  surpass,  the 
most  astonishing  feats  recorded  of  Slade,  Eglinton,  and  all 
their  tribe.  He  habitually  produced  "  spirit "  writing  on  the 
sitter's  own  slate ;  he  wrote  messages  in  double  slates  securely 
screwed  together  and  sealed  ;  in  locked  slates  of  which  the 
sitter  held  the  key ;  on  slates  brought  to  the  seance  carefully 
wrapped  in  brown  paper  and  tied  with  string,  the  fastenings 
remaining  apparently  intact  at  the  end  of  the  experiment ; 
he  wrote  messages  in  colours — green,  blue,  red,  or  white — 
chosen  beforehand  by  the  sitter ;  he  wrote  long  answers  on 
subjects  selected  by  the  sitter ;  passages  from  books  taken 
by  the  sitter  from  the  shelves,  sometimes  giving  even  the 
correct  line  and  page.  He  wrote  in  German  and  Spanish 
for  students  of  those  languages  ;    he  gave  an  Oriental  sitter 

^  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  iv.  p.  460.  ^  Vol.  iv.  pp.  416-87. 

220        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

the  Persian  spelling  of  his  own  name ;  he  exhibited  a  long 
message  in  Japanese  for  a  Japanese  marquis.  He  wrote 
down  numbers  in  response  to  the  sitter's  mental  request ;  and 
gave  details  of  private  family  history.  He  made  a  tumbler 
walk  across  the  table  under  the  full  glare  of  the  gas  ;  and 
small  pieces  of  chalk  to  move  of  themselves  and  describe 
geometrical  figures  at  the  unexpressed  wish  of  the  investigator. 
At  his  dark  seances  musical  boxes  floated  round  the  room, 
raps  were  heard,  cold  hands  felt ;  the  figures  of  a  woman  and 
a  bearded  man  in  a  turban  mysteriously  appeared  and  saluted 
the  company.  And  of  none  of  these  marvels  could  the 
witnesses  find  any  plausible  explanation,  so  much  so  that 
more  than  one  found  himself  forced  to  invoke  the  mysterious 
agency  of  magnetism,  electricity,  or  pneumatics. 

For  Mr.  Davey  enjoyed  to  the  full  that  immunity  from 
exposure  which  is  claimed  by  Spiritualists,  and  regarded  even 
by  some  conjurers,  as  evidence  for  the  exercise  by  mediums 
of  supernormal  powers.^  Davey,  with  one  doubtful  ex- 
ception, was  never  detected  in  trickery  by  any  of  his  sitters.^ 
But,  in  fact,  as  he  himself  pointed  out,^  and  as  we  have 
already  seen  in  the  case  of  Professor  Lankester's  attempted 
exposure  of  Slade,  it  is  by  no  means  easy  to  convict  a  slate- 
writing  medium  of  trickery.  If  he  dreads  the  acumen  of  his 
sitter,  he  can  always  give  a  blank  seance,  a  privilege  of  which 
Eglinton  freely  availed  himself  in  his  sittings  with  many 
members  of  the  S.P.R.  And  these  same  blank  sittings,  it 
should  be  noted,  were  often  quoted  in  Eglinton's  favour  by 
his  admirers,  on  the  assumption  that  a  conjurer  could  not 
venture  to  fail.  Even  if  the  medium  entertains  an  expert 
unawares,  the  expert  will  find  it  difficult — at  the  first  sitting, 
at  any  rate — to  do  more  than  conjecture  how  the  thing  is 
done.  The  discovery  of  a  prematurely  written  message  can 
always  be  passed  off  as  a  communication  produced  noiselessly 
by  the  spirits  without  the  knowledge  of  medium  or  sitter. 
Even  if  the  medium  is  seen  writing  and  caught,  as  Slade 
was,  with  the  message  half  finished,  the  proof  is  not  of  an 
overwhelming  kind,  and,  as  we  have  already  seen,  carries 
conviction  only  to  those  open  to  be  convinced.  For  there 
is  no  permanent  evidence  of  guilt,  as  in  the  materialisation 
fraud  ;    the   supreme  excellence   of    slate -writing,  from    the 

■*  Cf.  the  remark  already  quoted  from  Professor  Hoffmann's  report. 

^  The  exception  referred  to — the  premature  discovery  of  a  slate  with  a  written 
message — will  be  found  at  the  end  of  Mr.  Dodds'  report.  But  even  here, 
as  Dr.  Hodgson  points  out  [Proc,  vol.  iv.  p.  493),  a  professional  medium  would 
probably  have  found  it  not  difficult  to  satisfy  his  sitters  that  the  writing  was  a 
genuine  spirit  production.  ^  Proc.  S.  P.  M.,  vol.  iv.  p.  410. 

SLATE  WHlTINd  221 

medium's  standpoint,  is  that  at  its  best  it  requires  little  trick 
apparatus,  and  that  little  of  simple  character  and  trifling 
bulk.  The  medium  has  little  to  fear,  because  he  has  little 
to  conceal.^ 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  the  obvious  moral.  In  the 
last  chapter  we  learnt  something  of  the  treachery  that  lies 
in  the  dark  seance,  and  the  blind  guidance  of  the  sense  of 
touch.  From  the  present  study  we  may  gather  indications 
of  the  less  obvious  and  to  many  persons  still  incredible  short- 
comings of  the  most  trusted  and  least  untrustworthy  of  our 
senses.  The  untrained  eye  is  no  match  for  the  trained  hand 
of  the  conjurer.  The  kind  of  observation  demanded  of  the 
investigators  at  a  spiritualistic  seance — an  observation  which 
is  alive  to  the  various  artifices  employed  to  distract  it,  and 
which,  if  not  actually  unremitting,  is  at  least  aware  of  its 
own  lapses — is  a  quality  not  called  for  and  not  exercised  in 
the  investigations  of  the  physical  laboratory,  and  not  to  be 
acquired,  even  to  a  moderate  extent,  except  by  education 
of  a  very  special  kind.     As  we  have  seen,  even  professional 

^  A  full  description  of  the  methods  employed  by  Mr.  Davey  will  be  found  in 
the  notes  contributed  by  himself  and  Dr.  Hodgson  to  the  reports  of  seances  given 
in  Proc.  S.  P.  P.,  vol.  iv.,  and  in  the  article  by  Dr.  Hodgson,  "Mr.  Davey's 
Imitation  by  Conjuring  of  Phenomena  sometimes  attributed  to  Spirit  Agency  " 
(Proc.  S.  P.  P.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  253-310).  Most  of  Mr.  Davey's  slate-writing 
was  produced  in  one  or  other  of  two  ways.  Either  (i),  as  in  the  two  cases  cited 
in  the  text,  he  substituted  a  slate  with  a  message  already  written  for  the  slate 
which  the  sitter  had  carefully  cleaned  and  believed  himself  to  have  guarded 
intact.  This  was  the  method  commonly  employed  for  the  production  of  long 
messages  of  a  general  character.  Or  (2)  he  would  write  noiselessly  on  the  under 
side  of  a  slate  whilst  it  was  actually  being  held  under  the  table  by  the  hands  of 
the  sitter  and  himself.  In  the  latter  case  the  writing  would  be  produced  by 
means  of  a  fragment  of  pencil,  fixed  in  a  thimble,  which  he  had  slipped,  un- 
observed, on  one  of  his  fingers.  When  the  writing  was  completed  an  oppor- 
tunity would  be  found  for  reversing  the  slate  and  bringing  the  written  side  upper- 
most. This  naturally  was  the  method  used  for  producing  relevant  answers  to 
the  questions  asked  by  the  sitters.  Mr.  Davey  rarely  used  trick  slates,  preferring 
to  trust  for  his  effects  to  sleight  of  hand.  From  Dr.  Hodgson's  analysis  it  would 
seem  probable  that  the  methods  employed  by  Eglinton  were  closely  similar  to 
those  described.  But,  of  course,  in  the  case  of  both  performers  the  actual  pro- 
cedure was  necessarily  varied  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  moment,  and 
Davey  was  specially  skilful  in  taking  advantage  of  any  unsought  opportunities 
which  offered  themselves. 

Professional  slate-writers,  especially  in  America,  whose  sitters  are  for  the  most 
part  less  critical  than  those  who  attended  Davey's  seances,  employ  numerous 
devices  :  trick  slates  with  loose  flaps  ;  removable  coverings  of  slate-coloured  silk  ; 
locked  slates  with  sliding  hinges ;  revolving  surfaces  covered  with  slate-coloured 
silicate  paint ;  mirrors ;  trick  tables  ;  trap-doors  in  floor,  table,  door,  etc. ,  etc. 
Sympathetic  inks  may  also  be  used  to  produce  the  writing.  The  best  description 
of  the  various  tricks  employed  by  professional  slate-writers  will  be  found  in  a 
recent  book.  Spirit  Slate-writing  and  Kindred  Phenomena,  by  W.  E.  Robinson 
(New  York  and  London,  1899).  See  also  the  Seybert  Report,  and  an  article  in 
'Ca.^  Journal  S.  P.  P.  for  January,  1901,  by  the  Rev.  Stanley  Krebs,  describing 
some  slate-writing  seances  with  the  Bangs  sisters  in  Chicago. 

222        PEOBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

conjurers  may  prove  deficient  in  this  special  qualification. 
The  labours  of  Mr.  Davey  and  Dr.  Hodgson  should  compel 
us  to  admit  that  no  evidence  for  the  so-called  "  physical " 
phenomena  of  Spiritualism  can  be  regarded  as  satisfactory, 
which  at  any  point  depends  upon  continuous  observation  on 
the  part  of  the  investigator. 

It  remains  to  add  that  Mr.  Davey's  consummate  art  earned 
the  last  tribute  that  its  admirers  could  bestow — he  was  claimed 
by  Spiritualists  as  a  renegade  medium.^ 

^  "Unless  all  (Mr.  Davey's  performances)  can  be  so  explained,  many  of  us 
will  be  confirmed  in  our  belief  that  Mr.  Davey  was  really  a  medium  as  well  as 
a  conjurer,  and  that  in  imputing  all  his  performances  to  '  trick '  he  was  deceiving 
the  Society  and  the  public." — Letter  from  Dr.  A.  R.  Wallace,  F.  R.S.,  printed  in 
\hz  Jourtial  S.  P.  R.,  March,  1891. 

CHAPTER   III 
DANIEL   DUNGLAS   HOME 

WE  have  seen  in  the  last  chapter  how  a  juggler,  aided 
by  the  mystery  which  surrounds  a  medium,  and 
knowing  how  to  take  advantage  of  the  infirmities 
to  which  human  observation  and  testimony  are  liable,  could 
mislead  even  experts  into  the  belief  that  his  tricks  were  due 
to  powers  beyond  those  of  ordinary  humanity.  Now  we 
have  no  reason  to  credit  Eglinton  with  any  peculiar  aptitude 
for  the  profession  which  he  had  chosen.  Such  eminence  as 
he  attained  seems  to  have  been  due  as  much  to  good  fortune 
as  to  any  special  skill  or  astuteness  of  his  own.  He  was, 
in  fact,  an  impostor  of  a  sufficiently  commonplace  type.  We 
have  now  to  consider  a  medium  of  another  kind.  Charlatan 
and  adventurer,  helpless  sport  of  superhuman  forces,  or 
chosen  emissary  of  the  spirit-world,  commonplace  is  the 
last  epithet  that  could  justly  be  applied  to  Daniel  Dunglas 
Home.  Whatever  the  explanation  of  the  feats  ascribed  to 
him — and  they  are  more  varied,  more  striking,  and  better 
attested  than  any  others  in  the  history  of  the  marvellous — 
it  does  not  lie  on  the  surface.  In  Home  and  in  his  doings 
all  the  problems  of  Spiritualism  are  posed  in  their  acutest 
form  ;  with  the  marvels  wrought  by  or  through  him  the  main 
defences  of  Spiritualism  must  stand  or  fall. 

Daniel  Dunglas  Home,  or  Hume,  was,  by  his  own  account, 
born  near  Edinburgh  in  1833.^     Neither  in  his  original  auto- 

^  The  materials  for  an  account  of  Home's  life  and  mediumship  are  extremely 
abundant.  There  are,  in  the  first  place,  his  own  writings,  of  which  the  chief 
are  the  two  volumes  of  Incidents  in  My  Life  (First  Series,  1863  ;  Second  Series, 
1872)  and  the  Lights  and  Shadows  of  Spiritualistn,  1877.  There  are  two  works 
by  Madame  Home  (the  second  wife),  D.  D.  Home ;  his  Life  and  Mission,  1888, 
and  The  Gift  of  D.  D.  Home,  1890. 

Of  other  documents,  the  most  important  are  Researches  in  the  Phenomena 
of  Spiritualis7n,  by  W.  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  1 874  (a  reprint  of  various  articles  which 
had  appeared  in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science),  and  Notes  of  Seances  with 
D.  D.  Home,  by  the  same  author,  published  in  the  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  vi. 
pp.  98-127  ;  a  privately  circulated  volume  entitled  Experiences  in  Spiritualism, 

224        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

biography  nor  in  the  two  biographical  accounts  written  by 
his  second  wife  is  there  any  express  mention  of  his  father, 
and  this  omission,  coupled  with  his  own  statement  that  he 
was  adopted  at  an  early  age  by  his  mother's  sister,  affords 
strong  confirmation  of  the  rumour  that  his  birth  was 
illegitimate.^ 

When  Home  was  nine  years  old  he  appears  to  have  been 
taken  by  his  aunt  to  America,  and  to  have  lived  with  her  and 
her  husband  until  the  end  of  1850.  Then  the  rapping 
epidemic  which  had  broken  out  in  Hydesville  two  years 
previously  infected  young  Home,  and  he  left  his  aunt's  house 
and  went  out  into  the  world.  For  the  next  five  years  he  stayed 
in  one  household  or  another  in  New  York  and  elsewhere, 
giving  seances  and  apparently  receiving  hospitality  and  some 
measure  of  education  in  return.  It  does  not  appear  that 
at  this  or  any  other  period  he  ever  accepted  any  definite 
payment  in  money  for  his  services  as  a  medium.  Amongst 
those  who  attended  his  seances  at  this  period  were  the  poet 

by  Viscount  Adare  (the  present  Earl  of  Dunraven),  with  a  preface  by  the  late 
Earl,  containing  an  account  of  seventy-eight  seances  held  in  the  years  1867-8  ; 
the  evidence  included  in  the  Dialectical  Society's  Report ;  the  affidavits  given 
at  the  trial  Lyon  v.  Home  in  1868  ;  Evenings  with  Mr.  Home  and  the  Spirits, 
by  Dr.  J.  G.  Wilkinson,  1855  ;  Spirit  Manifestations,  by  J.  Snaith  Rymer,  1857  ; 
Spiritualism :  a  Narrative  with  a  Discussion,  by  Patrick  Proctor  Alexander, 
Edinburgh,  187 1  ;  the  correspondence  in  the  Morning  Advertiser  (London)  in 
October  and  November,  1855  ;  and  numerous  articles  in  the  Spiritualist  Press, 
especially  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  (New  York) ;  the  Yorkshire  Spiritual 
Telegraph  (Keighley),  1855-7 ;  the  Spiritual  Herald  (London),  1856 ;  the 
Spiritual  Magazine,  i860  and  onwards;  and  Human  Nature,  1867  and 
onwards.  There  are  also  references  to  Home  in  Hare's  book  on  The  Spirit 
Manifestations,  New  York,  1855  ;  Cox's  The  Mechanism  of  Man,  London,  1876  ; 
in  Spicer's  Sights  and  Sounds,  1853  ;  and  in  many  other  works  on  Spiritualism. 
Tho.  Journal  oi  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  for  July,  1889,  and  May,  1890, 
contains  some  valuable  additional  evidence  collected  by  the  late  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 
Further,  Mr.  Myers  was  allowed  by  Madame  Home  to  inspect  the  original  letters 
and  documents  which  are  quoted  in  that  lady's  Life  of  her  husband,  and  was 
able  to  satisfy  himself,  by  his  knowledge  of  the  writing  in  some  cases,  and  by  other 
indications,  that  the  letters  are  genuine  and  that  they  are  accurately  reproduced 
in  the  book. 

Some  of  the  facts  given  in  the  text  as  to  Home's  personal  characteristics  and 
manner  of  life  are  derived  from  information  supplied  to  me  by  persons  who  had 
known  him.  Of  these  I  desire  especially  to  acknowledge  my  indebtedness  to  Mr. 
Ion  Perdicaris,  who  was  kind  enough  to  give  me  orally  copious  details  of  his 
own  association  with  Home,  and  subsequently  to  correct  and  supplement  my 
memoranda  of  our  conversation.  No  one  living  is  probably  better  qualified 
to  speak  with  authority  on  Home's  early  life ;  Mr.  Ogden  and  Professor  Bush, 
who  experimented  with  Home  in  New  York  prior  to  his  departure  for  England 
in  1855,  were  friends  of  Mr.  Perdicaris'  family.  He  was  also  intimately  acquainted 
with  Home  and  with  many  of  Home's  circle  of  friends  in  this  country,  and 
for  some  years  even  undertook  the  expense  of  educating  Home's  young  son. 

1  In  a  footnote  to  the  Incidents  (Second  Series,  p.  48),  Home  states  that 
his  father  was  a  natural  son  of  Alexander  tenth  Earl  of  Home.  No  proof 
is  offered  of  this  statement. 

DANIEL   DUNGLAS   HOME  225 

Bryant,  Ward  Cheney,  Bishop  Clark  of  Rhode  Island,  Rufus 
Elmer,  S.  B.  Brittan  (editor  of  the  Shekinah  and  the  New 
York  Spiritual  Telegraph),  Judge  Edmonds,  Professor  Bush, 
Mr.  Ogden,  and  Mr.  J.  W.  Carrington.  The  three  gentlemen 
last  named  were  in  1855  members  of  a  small  committee  who 
subscribed  a  sum  of  money  to  send  Home  over  to  Europe, 
partly  for  the  benefit  of  his  health,  partly,  it  would  seem, 
as  a  missionary  of  Spiritualism. 

Home  arrived  in  England  in  the  spring  of  1855  ^^^^  went 
to  stay  at  Cox's  Hotel  in  Jermyn  Street,  having  brought 
introductions  to  the  proprietor,  a  man  of  scientific  tastes, 
from  his  friends  in  New  York.  He  spent  the  spring  and 
summer  of  this  year  as  a  guest,  now  of  Mr.  Cox,  now  of 
Mr.  J.  S.  Rymer,  a  solicitor,  at  his  house  at  Ealing,  and  gave 
numerous  seances.  Lord  Brougham,  Sir  D.  Brewster,  Robert 
Owen,  T.  A.  Trollope,  Sir  E.  Bulwer  Lytton,  Dr.  J.  Garth 
Wilkinson  and  others  being  amongst  the  privileged  witnesses. 

In  the  autumn  of  this  year  he  went  to  Italy,  and  spent 
the  next  few  years  on  the  Continent,  quartered  apparently 
for  the  whole  period  on  various  friends,  mostly  persons  of 
rank  and  wealth,  and  repaying  the  hospitality  which  he 
received  by  the  exercise  of  his  marvellous  powers.  He  was 
summoned  during  this  period  on  several  occasions  to  the 
Tuileries,  to  hold  sittings  with  the  Emperor  and  Empress  ; 
he  also  performed  before  the  Czar  of  Russia  and  many  other 
royal  and  noble  personages.  In  the  autumn  of  1859  he 
returned  to  this  country,  bringing  with  him  a  young  and 
charming  wife,  the  daughter  of  a  noble  Russian  family,  and 
possessed  of  a  moderate  fortune.  An  account  of  his 
mediumship  at  this  period  will  be  found  in  the  article  written 
by  Robert  Bell,  which  appeared  in  the  Cornhill  in  August, 
1860.^  For  the  next  ten  or  twelve  years  Home  seems  to 
have  resided  chiefly  in  London,  with  intervals  more  or  less 
prolonged  spent  upon  the  Continent.  In  1862  his  wife  died  ; 
and  Home,  who  appears  to  have  been  left  in  somewhat 
straitened  circumstances,  was  forced  to  eke  out  his  means  by 
giving  public  lectures  and  recitations.  In  1866  a  new 
society,  the  "  Spiritual  Athenaeum,"  was  founded  by  his 
numerous  friends,  mainly  in  order  to  give  Home,  as  salaried 
secretary,  a  fixed  position  and  a  livelihood.  In  the  autumn 
of  the  same  year  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  a  wealthy 
and  childless  widow,  Mrs.  Lyon.  Mrs.  Lyon  professed 
her  desire  to  adopt  Home,  and  presented  him  "  as  a  free  gift " 
with  a  sum  of  ;^24,ooo,  following  this  up  with  still  further 

^  See  above,  pp.  4S-50. 
11.— Q 

226        PROBLEMS  OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

benefactions.  Home  in  return  took  the  name  of  Home- 
Lyon.  In  the  course  of  a  few  months  Mrs.  Lyon  changed 
her  mind,  and  desired  to  revoke  her  gifts.  The  matter  came 
into  court  in  April,  1868,  the  case  being  noteworthy  from 
the  Spiritualist  standpoint  because  of  the  large  number  of 
affidavits  filed  by  persons  of  distinction  testifying  to  the 
reality  of  Home's  power.  No  definite  charge  of  fraud  or 
illicit  influence  was  proved  against  Home :  but  the  court  was 
not  satisfied  that  Mrs.  Lyon's  gifts  were  "  acts  of  pure  volition 
uninfluenced,"  and  judgment  was  given  in  her  favour.^ 

In  the  years  1870-2  Home  gave  a  long  series  of  sittings  to 
Mr.  (now  Sir  William)  Crookes.  In  the  autumn  of  1871  he 
had  married  for  the  second  time,  his  wife  being  again  a 
Russian  lady  possessed  of  some  fortune.  Shortly  after  this 
event  Home  seems  to  have  broken  with  nearly  all  his  friends 
in  this  country,  and  to  have  exercised  his  mediumship  more 
and  more  rarely.  He  spent  the  rest  of  his  life  mostly  on  the 
Continent,  and  died  after  a  long  and  painful  illness  in  June, 
1886,  the  immediate  cause  of  death  being  pneumonia. 

This  brief  sketch  of  Home's  career,  founded  as  it  is,  as 
regards  the  earlier  years,  mainly  on  material  written  or 
inspired  by  Home  himself,  needs  a  critical  supplement.  It 
seems  certain  that  Home  began  life  in  extreme  poverty,  and 
probably  as  an  illegitimate  child.  From  the  age  of  seventeen 
onwards  he  lived  by  the  exercise  of  his  mediumship,  none 
the  less  if  he  never  actually  received  payment  in  cash  down. 
Throughout  his  life,  first  in  the  Eastern  States  of  America 
and  later  in  every  country  of  Europe,  he  found  wealthy 
patrons  to  welcome  him  to  their  homes,  and  lavish  their 
hospitality  on  him.  Such  formal  education  as  he  received 
in  his  youth  was  paid  for  by  the  New  York  committee  to 
which  I  have  alluded.  When  Home  was  not  actually  a  guest 
in  their  houses,  his  patrons,  in  one  way  or  other — by  taking 
tickets  for  his  lectures,  by  commissioning  busts  from  him, 
by  subscribing  to  pay  his  debts,  by  making  him  presents 
of  costly  jewellery  —  managed  to  provide  for  his  wants. 
Mr.  Perdicaris  for  some  years  undertook  the  charge  of 
educating  his  only  son.  Home  thus  lived  not  merely  in  com- 
fort, but — a  thing  which  to  a  man  of  his  temperament  was 
probably  not  less  an  object  of  desire — he  lived  in  what  is 
commonly  called  the  "  best "  society,  the  society  of  persons 
of  rank,  wealth,  and  fashion,  and  occasionally  of  intellectual 
distinction. 

'  See  the  analysis  of  the  proceedings  by  Mr.  H.  Arthur  Smith,  author  of 
Principles  of  Equity,  in  the  Journal  S.  P.  R.  for  July,  1889. 

DANIEL  DUNGLAS   HOME  227 

It  is  to  be  noted  that  when  Home  first  came  to  England 
he  changed  his  name.  Prior  to  that  period  it  had  been  spelt 
Hume.  Possibly  the  explanation  of  the  change  may  be 
found  in  the  claim  already  referred  to,  of  kinship  with  the 
Earl  of  Home.^ 

Two  other  curious  features  in  Home's  career  should  be  re- 
corded as  having  some  possible  significance  in  their  bearing  on 
his  character.  Early  in  February,  1856,  according  to  his  own 
account,  after  due  warning  from  his  spirit  guides,  Home's 
mediumistic  powers  left  him.  Shortly  afterwards  he  was 
received  into  the  Church  of  Rome.  He  had  an  audience 
with  the  Pope,  and  was  even  at  one  time,  as  Madame  Home 
tells  us,  on  the  point  of  joining  a  monastic  order.  He  drew 
back,  however,  and  in  February  of  the  following  year,  being 
then  at  Paris,  he  resumed  his  mediumistic  performance,  on 
the  occasion  of  an  invitation  from  the  Tuileries.'^ 

In  December,  1855,  shortly  before  the  intermission  of  his 
powers.  Home,  returning  at  night  through  the  streets  of 
Florence,  reported  himself  to  have  been  attacked  by  a  man 
who  struck  at  him  with  a  dagger,  and  succeeded  only  in 
inflicting  a  slight  flesh  wound.^  Thirteen  years  later,  at  the 
time  of  the  trial  Lyon  v.  Home,  the  drama  was  repeated, 
but  on  a  stage,  it  must  be  admitted,  less  happily  chosen. 
The  midnight  assassin  and  the  murderous  stiletto  may  pass 
for  topical  melodrama  in  Italy,  but  they  degenerate  into  farce 
when  the  theatre  is  Jermyn  Street.  Home,  it  remains  to 
be  said,  in  London  as  in  Florence,  was  unaccompanied  at 
the  time  of  the  outrage :  the  wound  was  on  each  occasion 
happily  trivial,  and  the  perpetrator  was  never  discovered."^ 

In  person  Home  is  described  as  having  been  slight,  fair, 
and,  without  being  actually  handsome,  attractive  and  even 
distinguished-looking.  A  portrait  of  him  is  prefixed  to  the 
Life  by  Madame  Home,  and  there  is  a  threequarter-length 

^  Madame  Home  {Life,  p.  31)  states  that  the  supposed  change  of  name  was 
a  misconception ;  that  Home  himself  had  always  spelt  the  name  with  an  0,  and 
that  the  speUing  Hume  was  due  to  the  ignorance  of  American  journalists,  who 
were  misled  by  the  sound  ("Home"  was  pronounced  Hoom).  But  it  is  difficult 
to  reconcile  this  explanation  with  the  fact  that  the  name  is  spelt  Hume  in  every 
document  printed,  whether  in  America  or  England,  before  1855,  and  in  many 
belonging  to  that  year,  even  in  the  signature  of  the  medium's  own  letters  t,o 
newspapers.  See  e.g.  the  letter  to  the  Hartford  Times,  reprinted  in  the  York- 
shire Spiritual  Telegraph  for  October,  1855. 

■^  Life  and  Mission,  pp.  67-70.  ^  Incidents  (First  Series),  p.  92. 

^  Life  atid  Mission,  p.  269.  In  recent  times  defaulting  bank  managers, 
occasional  mail-cart  drivers,  and  at  least  one  lady  of  quality,  have  reported 
themselves  as  victims  of  outrages  curiously  similar.  Shelley,  it  will  be 
remembered,  appears  on  one  occasion  to  have  had  an  hallucinatory  experience  of 
the  kind. 

228        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

oil  painting  in  the  rooms  of  the  Spiritual  Alliance.  Here 
is  a  pen  portrait  of  him  by  one  of  his  earliest  American 
friends,  a  Miss  Ely,  extracted  from  a  contemporary  letter 
written  to  her  cousin  :  "  He  is  but  seventeen  years  old,  tall 
for  his  age,  fair  complexion,  hair  neither  red,  brown,  nor 
auburn,  but  a  complete  mixture  of  the  three — like  a  three- 
coloured  changeable  silk — rather  inclining  to  curl :  and 
beautiful  hair  it  is,  as  you  can  imagine :  a  large,  broad  fore- 
head, well-developed,  lively  grey  eyes,  nose  not  remarkable, 
and  a  handsome  mouth  and  teeth ;  easy  manners ;  very 
intelligent  for  his  age ;  perfectly  artless  and  very  affection- 
ate."^ Mr.  Perdicaris  described  him  to  me  as  "not  good- 
looking,  though  his  face  was  as  a  rule  pleasant  to  look  upon  ; 
very  vain  of  his  personal  appearance,  with  a  quite  innocent 
and  not  unpleasing  vanity.  Always  pleasing  manners,  very 
affectionate  towards  all — men,  women,  and  children  alike." 

Other  testimonies  which  I  have  received  orally  from 
persons  still  living,  or  which  are  to  be  found  scattered 
through  the  literature  of  Spiritualism,  confirm  generally  this 
view  of  his  character.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  pro- 
duced on  most  persons  the  impression  of  a  highly  emotional, 
joyous,  childlike  nature,  full  of  generous  impulses,  and  lavish 
of  affection  to  all  comers.  That  he  possessed  in  full  measure 
the  defects  of  his  temperament  there  can  be  as  little  doubt ; 
affections  so  lightly  given  were  liable  to  be  as  lightly  re- 
called :  vanity  seems  to  have  been  the  permanent  element 
in  his  character ;  he  basked  in  admiration ;  for  the  rest 
he  showed  throughout  a  disposition  to  take  life  easily, 
and  to  look  out,  in  the  American  phrase,  for  "  soft  jobs."  In 
short,  as  Mr.  Andrew  Lang  has  somewhere  described  him, 
"a  Harold  Skimpole  with  the  gift  of  divination."  The 
malignant  side  of  his  nature  showed  but  rarely,  and  then 
chiefly  in  his  attitude  towards  rival  mediums.  But  it  flashed 
out  when  his  vanity  was  injured ;  and  after  his  second 
marriage  he  treated  many  of  his  old  friends  with  indifference, 
and  some  with  marked  ingratitude.^ 

Amongst  Home's  social  accomplishments  it  must  be 
mentioned  that  he  was  a  good  performer  on  the  piano ;  and 
that  his  recitations,  whether  in  the  drawing-room  or  on  the 
platform,  are  said  by  competent  judges  to  have  been  dis- 

1  The  Gift  of  D.  D.  Home,  p.  66. 

■■^  The  most  careful  and  dispassionate  account  of  Home's  character  which 
I  have  seen  is  contained  in  a  letter  from  Miss  Louise  Kennedy — a  lady  who  only 
knew  him  in  his  later  years — written  in  July,  1891,  to  Mr.  Lang,  which  appeared 
in  Xh&  Journal  of  the  S.  P.  R.,  Jan.,  1894. 

DANIEL   DUNGLAS   HOME  229 

tinguished  by  brilliant  dramatic  faculty  and  power  of 
emotional  expression.  Even  on  those  who  were  brought 
only  into  momentary  contact  with  him  he  produced  commonly 
the  impression  of  frankness  and  sincerity:^  in  those  who 
stood  in  more  frequent  and  intimate  relations  with  him  the 
confidence  which  he  inspired  seems  to  have  been  unlimited. 
The  belief  in  the  honesty  of  the  performer  became  for  them 
hardly  less  instinctive  than  the  belief  in  the  trustworthiness 
of  the  senses  which  took  note  of  the  performance.  The 
trust  upon  which  other  mediums  relied  was  built  up  mainly 
by  adventitious  devices ;  with  Home  it  was  inspired  and 
maintained  by  the  charm  of  his  personality. 

But  there  were  two  other  causes  which  contributed  in  no 
small  degree  to  the  confidence  felt  in  Home's  integrity. 
Home  himself  professed  a  fervent  belief  in  his  own  mission 
as  a  teacher  of  the  truth  of  immortality  ;^  and  in  his  trances 
habitually  delivered  discourses  on  religious  themes.  The  late 
Lord  Dunraven,  in  the  preface  to  his  son's  series  of  letters 
on  Home's  mediumship,  writes  of  the  "  high  and  pure 
morality"  inculcated  at  Home's  seances,  and  describes  some 
of  the  trance  utterances  as  "  very  touching  and  beautiful. 
A  pure,  lofty,  and  religious  tone  more  or  less  pervades  them." 
Other  witnesses  have  written  to  the  same  effect.^ 

Again,  the  impression  produced  by  Home's  trance  sermons 
was    heightened    by    the    frequent    delivery    of  clairvoyant 

■^  See  e.g.  the  testimony  of  Robert  Bell,  in  the  Cornhill  article  already  referred 
to ;  Mr.  P.  P.  Alexander  (Spiritualism,  a  narrative  with  a  discussio7i,  p.  2). 
"The  impression  he  made  on  me  was,  on  the  whole,  favourable.  .  .  .  His 
manners  were  simple  and  quiet,  and  very  much  those  of  a  gentleman."  Sub- 
Committee  No.  5  of  the  Dialectical  Society,  which  included  Dr.  Edmunds  and 
Mr.  C.  Bradlaugh,  had  four  sittings  with  Home.  The  sittings  were  fruitless, 
but  the  committee  reported  that  "  Mr.  Home  afforded  every  facility  for  examina- 
tion, and  appeared  to  be  anxious  to  further  the  objects  which  the  committee  had 
in  view"  {Dialectical  Report,  p.  49).  Mr.  Bradlaugh  gave  independent  testi- 
mony to  the  same  effect  {Ibid.,  p.  279).  On  the  other  hand,  Hamilton  Aide 
{Nineteenth  Century,  April,  1890,  article  "  W^as  I  Hypnotised?")  could  find  "no 
glamour  of  esoteric  power,"  nor  "  subtle  fascination  "  about  Home  ;  and  thought 
him  "entirely  unimpressive  in  any  way." 

^  Thus,  in  speaking  of  the  effect  produced  on  T.  A.  Trollope  by  a  seance  at 
Ealing,  Home  writes :  "  W^hen  at  length  the  light  did  beam  upon  his  soul,  and 
the  chords  of  his  spirit  vibrated  in  unison  with  the  celestial  harmonies  that 
ushered  in  the  birth  of  faith  through  the  shadows  of  his  old  unbelief,  the  result 
was  too  much  for  his  stoicism,  and  the  tears  of  holy  joy  coursed  down  his  manly 
cheeks.  ...  It  was  an  impressive  scene,  and  an  occasion  of  deep  interest. 
There  are  many  such  in  the  life  of  a  spirit  medium."  (Letter  from  D.  D.  Home 
to  the  Hartford  Times  (U.S.A.),  quoted  in  the  Yorkshire  Spiritual  Telegraph, 
Oct.,  1855). 

^  See  also  Home's  own  writings,  e.g.  the  article  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine  for 
February,  i860,  comparing  the  rise  of  Spiritualism  to  that  of  Christianity ;  and 
the  chapters  on  the  "Higher  Aspects  of  Spiritualism,"  in  his  book  Lights 
and  Shadows  of  Spiritualism, 

230        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

messages,  purporting  to  proceed  from  dead  friends  of  one  or 
other  of  those  present,  and  often  showing  an  intimate  know- 
ledge of  the  past  history  of  the  persons  addressed.  Amongst 
the  English  and  American  witnesses  who  have  testified  to 
receiving  messages  of  this  kind  which  gave  details  of  a 
private  nature,  presumably  unknown  to  the  medium,  are 
S.  B.  Brittan,  Ward  Cheney,  Dr.  Garth  Wilkinson,  Dr.  Gully, 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall,  Mrs.  Nassau  Senior,  Mr.  P.  P. 
Alexander,  Mr.  J.  S.  Rymer,  the  present  Earl  of  Dunraven, 
Dr.  Hawksley,  and  others.  Mr.  Perdicaris  has  furnished 
me  with  two  or  three  additional  instances  in  his  own 
experience  of  a  very  remarkable  character.  I  have  not 
space  to  consider  the  evidence  for  this  clairvoyance,  nor  the 
possibilities  of  the  information  having  been  obtained  by 
normal  means.  The  whole  subject  of  these  alleged  com- 
munications from  the  dead  will  be  dealt  with  in  a  later 
chapter.  The  evidence,  at  any  rate,  in  the  case  of  Home, 
is  far  less  complete  than  in  the  case  of  the  later  medium, 
Mrs.  Piper,  or  than  the  evidence  already  considered  in  the 
chapter  on  Cahagnet's  somnambules.^  It  is  perhaps  sufficient, 
however,  to  raise  a  presumption  of  Home's  possession  of 
supernormal  powers.  But  our  concern  here  is  primarily  not 
with  the  authenticity  of  these  communications,  but  with  the 
undoubted  effect  produced  by  them  at  the  time  in  pre- 
disposing those  present  to  accept  Home's  physical  manifesta- 
tions as  genuine.^ 

Before  we  proceed  to  consider  the  physical  manifestations 
one  preliminary  remark  needs  to  be  made.  Home  was  never 
publicly  exposed  as  an  impostor ;  there  is  no  evidence  of  any 
weight  that  he  was  even  privately  detected  in  trickery.^     On 

^  Book  I.  chap.  vi. 

2  Many  of  these  trance  communications  are  quoted  at  length  in  Madame 
Home's  biographical  notices  of  the  medium.  But  the  more  important  were 
published  at  the  time,  in  the  Spiritualist  periodicals,  especially,  in  this  country, 
the  Spiritual  Magazine,  and  the  various  works  of  Alexander,  Wilkinson,  Rymer, 
etc.,  already  referred  to. 

3  The  late  F.  W.  H.  Myers  {Journal  S.  P.  R.,  July,  1889)  has  carefully 
examined  this  question.  Mr.  Browning  personally  explained  to  Mr.  Myers  that 
he  had  never  detected  Home  cheating,  and  that  the  only  definite  evidence  which 
he  could  show  for  his  opinion  that  Home  was  an  impostor  was  based  upon  a 
second-hand  rumour  that  Home  was  once  caught  in  Italy  experimenting  with 
phosphorus.  No  testimony  has  ever  been  adduced  which  even  remotely 
approached  first-hand  for  the  alleged  exposure  at  the  Tuileries. 

Mr.  Myers  also  prints  a  letter  from  a  gentleman  known  to  him,  written 
in  1889,  in  which  the  writer  relates  that  at  a  seance  held  in  1855  he  saw  plainly 
that  the  alleged  "spirit  hands"  were  supported  by  and  in  obvious  connection 
with  Home's  arms.  The  matter  was  not,  however,  mentioned  at  the  time,  and 
rests  now  on  the  unsupported  memory  of  events  which  took  place  thirty-four 
years  before  the  account  was  written  { Journal  S.  P.  R.,  July,  1889,  p.  121). 

DANIEL  DUNGLAS   HOME  231 

the  assumption — an  assumption  which  the  whole  course  of 
our  inquiries  up  to  this  point  compels  us  to  make — that  the 
alleged  physical  marvels  were  fraudulent,  this  unique  im- 
munity from  the  common  lot  of  mediumship  certainly  calls 
for  explanation.  Mainly,  no  doubt,  it  was  due  to  Home's 
peculiar  position  as  a  non-professional  medium  ;  to  the  fact 
that  his  sitters  were,  in  a  sense,  his  guests ;  and  that  he  him- 
self in  effect  selected  those  before  whom  he  would  consent  to 
perform.  Again,  we  cannot  exclude  the  possibility  that  there 
were  cases  in  which  imposture  was  actually  detected  by 
persons  who  refrained,  out  of  consideration  for  the  feelings  of 
their  friends,  or  from  the  fear  of  ridicule,  from  making  their 
discovery  public.  But  whatever  deductions  are  made  on  this 
score.  Home's  immunity  is  not  the  least  remarkable  feature 
of  his  career,  and  may  no  doubt  fairly  be  considered  as 
weakening  to  some  extent  the  general  assumption  referred  to. 
But  though  more  fortunate,  or  haply  more  deserving,  than 
his  fellows,  it  is  important  to  note  that  none  of  Home's 
manifestations  seem  to  have  been  peculiar  to  himself.  At 
the  outset  of  his  career,  indeed,  he  appears  to  have  won 
no  special  distinction  as  a  medium.  Raps  were  heard  at 
his  seances ;  tables  and  chairs  were  moved  about ;  the  room 
was  shaken,  bells,  accordions,  and  guitars  were  played  under 
the  table  or  even  at  a  distance  from  the  circle,  with  no  hand 
near  them  ;  spirit  voices  would  speak  through  the  medium ; 
spirit  hands  were  felt  under  the  tablecloth,  and  occasionally 
seen  above  it ;  spirit  lights  made  themselves  visible ;  and  the 
medium  himself  would  be  levitated.  But  all  these  perform- 
ances were  the  common  property  of  the  guild  ;  the  Fox 
girls,  Gordon,  Cooley,  E.  P.  Fowler,  Abby  Warner,  and 
even  Willis,  the  Harvard  divinity  student,  were  Home's 
rivals,  and  apparently,  in  the  estimation  of  his  contemporaries, 
at  least  his  equals  in  all  these  feats.  It  is  noteworthy  that 
Home  appears  to  have  attracted  comparatively  little  attention 
in  the  American  Press  before  his  journey  to  England.^ 

^  There  are,  however,  a  few  notices  in  the  New  York  papers  before  1855, 
some  of  which  are  quoted  in  the  Incidents.  See  especially  the  account  of  a 
seance  from  the  Shekinah,  New  York,  vol.  i.  p.  289,  quoted  in  the  Incidents 
(First  Series),  p.  24.  See  also  Telegraph  Papers,  vol.  iii,  pp.  211,  212 ;  vol.  vii. 
pp.  182,  261,  287  ;  vol.  viii.  p.  293.  That  Home's  seances  attracted  less  attention 
than  those  of  Gordon,  the  Foxes,  or  the  Koons  family  was  no  doubt  largely  due 
to  the  fact  that  his  performances  were  never  given  in  public  or  to  promiscuous 
circles.  It  should  be  noted,  as  bearing  upon  Home's  relations  to  other  mediums, 
that  after  his  second  visit  to  this  country  {1859-60)  he  associated  himself  for 
some  time  with  another  American  medium,  Squire,  and  that  they  even  gave  joint 
seances  (see  Spiritual  Magazine,  i860,  pp.  75,  88,  232,  etc.).  See  above, 
pp.  51-2,  for  some  account  of  Squire's  mediumship. 

232        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

His  seances  in  this  country  followed  for  the  most  part 
on  the  lines  sketched  above.  The  room  was  commonly 
illuminated  by  one  or  more  candles,  a  single  gas-burner,  or 
a  shaded  lamp,  so  that,  in  comparison  with  the  almost  com- 
plete darkness  insisted  on  by  other  mediums,  it  could  honestly 
be  described  as  well  lighted.  The  manifestations  would  then 
usually  begin  with  raps,  followed  shortly  by  a  quivering 
movement  of  the  table,  which  is  described  by  one  witness 
as  like  the  vibration  in  the  cabin  of  a  small  steamer  when  the 
engine  begins  to  work  ;  ^  by  another  as  resembling  "  a  ship 
in  distress,  with  its  timbers  straining  in  a  heavy  sea "  ;  ^  and 
in  a  finer  flight  of  imagination  is  characterised  by  another 
witness  as  "  literally  trembling,  as  if  every  vein  of  the  wood 
was  a  human  nerve."  ^  The  table  would  then  tilt  up,  move 
about,  or  "  float "  suspended  in  the  air ;  musical  instruments 
would  perform  in  the  convenient  obscurity  afforded  by  its 
shelter  ;  hands  would  be  felt  clasping  the  knees  of  the  sitters 
and  pulling  portions  of  their  dress ;  handkerchiefs,  flowers, 
and  other  light  articles,  and  even  heavy  bells,  would  be 
handed  about  the  circle,  under  the  table,  by  the  same  means. 
The  performance  would  be  interspersed  with  messages  rapped 
out  by  the  spirits,  or  delivered  through  the  mouth  of  the 
entranced  medium. 

At  this  point  the  sitting  would  commonly  terminate.  But 
if  the  conditions  were  judged  favourable  to  the  higher  mani- 
festations, the  lights  would  be  turned  out,  the  fire  screened, 
and  the  table  drawn  up  to  the  window,  the  company  sitting 
round  three  sides,  leaving  the  side  next  the  window  vacant, 
with  Home  sitting  at  one  end  of  the  vacant  space.  Hands 
would  then  be  seen,  outlined  against  the  faint  light  pro- 
ceeding from  the  window,  to  rise  over  the  vacant  edge  of  the 
table,  move  about  the  papers  lying  on  its  surface,  or  give 
flowers  to  the  sitters.  Afterwards  the  medium  would  be 
levitated.  An  account  of  a  typical  seance  of  this  kind, 
extracted  from  the  Cornhill  article  by  Robert  Bell,  will  be 
found  above.* 

^  spiritual  Magazine,  1861,  p.  224. 

2  Spiritiialis7n ,  by  P.  P.  Alexander,  p.  37.  This  imaginary  resemblance  was, 
as  will  be  seen  from  Mr.  Alexander's  account,  afterwards  worked  up  into  a 
striking  test  of  "identity." 

^  SpiritTial Magazine,  1 86 1,  p.  431. 

^  Pages  48-50.  Other  instances  of  seances  at  which  hands  appeared  under 
these  conditions — conditions,  it  should  be  remarked,  which  appear  always  to 
have  been  punctually  observed — are  given  in  Spiritual  Magazine,  i860,  pp.  233, 
266,  338,  370,  524  ;  Evenings  with  Home,  by  J.  G.  Wilkinson  ;  Dialectical 
Report,  p.  139  ;  Spi7-it  Maitifestations,  by  Rymer  ;  The  Spiritual  Herald,  p.  108, 
account  of  a  seance  by  "  H.  C."  (Mrs.  Helen  Clarke),  etc.,  etc. 

DANIEL   DUNGLAS   HOME  233 

Now  as  described  it  must  be  admitted  that  many  of  the 
phenomena  which  took  place  at  Home's  stances  seem 
inexplicable :  more  inexplicable  than  in  the  case  of  other 
mediums.  This  diiTerence  is  no  doubt  largely  due,  as  already 
indicated,  to  the  fact  that  Home's  manners  and  appearance, 
his  aloofness  from  the  professional  medium,  and  the  atmo- 
sphere of  smart  society  which  encompassed  him,  inspired 
a  confidence  which  encouraged  the  witnesses  of  his  marvels 
to  "  let  themselves  go."  The  discerning  reader  will  not  need 
to  be  told  that  Robert  Bell's  mood  when  he  sat  in  the  dark 
and  saw  the  spirit  hands,  was  not  that  of  dispassionate 
observation  ;  and  that  he  was,  alike  at  the  time  and  in  retro- 
spect, incapable  of  distinguishing  between  what  he  saw, 
heard,  or  felt,  and  what  he  inferred  from  those  sensations. 
But  Robert  Bell  was  a  much  better  witness  than  most.  He 
admits  that  the  room  was  very  dark,  and  that  Home's 
hands  were  visible  only  as  a  "  faint  white  heap "  ;  and  he 
did  not,  like  many  of  Home's  sitters,  profess  to  recognise 
the  spirit  hands  which  clasped  his  knees,  or  appeared  as 
a  transitory  gleam  of  white  at  the  far  edge  of  the  table. 
Nor  would  he,  it  is  likely,  have  regarded  as  a  proof  of  spirit 
intervention  an  incident  recorded  at  this  time  by  Mr.  En- 
more  Jones.  At  the  close  of  a  dark  seance,  part  of  a  bronze 
idol,  which  had  been  taken  to  pieces  by  the  spirits  and 
thrown  about  the  room,  was  missing,  and  could  not,  after 
prolonged  search,  be  discovered.  Home  came  to  the  rescue 
and  asked  the  spirits  to  guide  his  hands  to  the  hiding-place 
of  the  missing  article.  The  request  was  complied  with. 
Enmore  Jones  comments  on  the  incident,  "  It  confirmed  me 
in  the  beHef  that  our  spirit  friends  are  more  keen-eyed  than 
we,  that  they  hear  our  words,  and  can  control  even  our 
physical  organism."^ 

Unfortunately,  though  we  have  abundant  evidence  of  the 
intellectual  condition  of  the  witnesses,  we  can  rarely  find 
independent  accounts  given  in  sufficient  detail  to  enable  us 
to  prove  such  errors  of  interpolation  and  transposition,  etc., 
as  Dr.  Hodgson  was  able  to  point  out  in  the  accounts  of 
Eglinton's  performances.  One  case  may,  however,  be  quoted. 
The  account  which  appears  in  the  left-hand  column  below  is 
taken  from  J.  S.  Rymer's  pamphlet,  Spirit  Manifestations, 
published  in  1857;  it  professes  to  have  been  based  on  notes 
taken  at  the  time,  and  as  it  is  quoted  by  Home,-  it  may  be 
presumed  to  have  his  endorsement.     The  date  of  the  sitting, 

^  spiritual  Magazine,  i86i,  p.  480. 

'^  Incidents  (First  Series),  p.  69  ;  see  also  Gift  of  D.  D.  Home,  pp.  82,  83. 

234         PROBLEMS   OF   MEDIUMSHIP 

it  will  be  seen,  is  not  given.  The  account  of  the  same  sitting 
given  in  the  right-hand  column  is  by  Mr.  Thomas  Bailing 
Barlee,  of  Ealing,  and  is  quoted  from  a  letter  dated  23rd 
October,  1855,  which  was  published  in  the  Yorkshire 
Spiritual  Telegraph} 

Mr,  Rymer's  Account. 

"  One  evening  I  found  seated  at 
my  long  table  my  wife,  my  second 
son,  Mr.  Home,  and  two  friends. 
I  was  passing  through  my  room  to 
my  chamber.  I  stood  for  a  few 
moments  at  the  end  of  the  table 
— my  attention  was  immediately 
arrested  by  sounds  ;  it  was  stated 
to  be  my  little  boy,  who  had  passed 
away  some  years  ago.  I  asked  if 
he  recollected  how  pleased  he  was 
when  on  earth  to  place  me  a  chair 
on  my  return  home.  The  chair 
was  immediately  moved  round  the 
corner  of  the  table,  and,  by  no 
visible  agency,  it  was  placed  be- 
hind me,  and  I  sat  down  upon  it." 

(Here  follows  half  a  page  of 
argument  aimed  at  proving  that 
the  manifestation  could  not  have 
been  due  to  deception  or  illusion. 
The  account  then  continues  as 
given  below). 

"We  were  told  through  the 
alphabet  that  my  little  boy  was 
present  in  spirit.  I  had  heard  of 
spirit-writing  in  America.  Mr. 
Wolf,  of  Athens,  co.  Ohio,  writes  : 
'Writing  is  done  without  human 
hands  ;  the  hand  of  the  spirit  is 
visible  while  the  writing  is  done.' 
I  asked  if  the  unseen  boy  could 
write  as  on  earth ;  he  answered 
that  he  would  try.  I  then  took 
from  my  wife's  writing-desk  a 
sheet  of  notepaper,  clean,  and 
without  any  writing  on  it  of  any 
description.  I  borrowed  a  pencil 
from  a  lady  friend  who  was  at  the 
table — the  table  had  its  usual 
cloth  ;  on  the  cloth  I  placed  the 
paper  and  pencil  ;  both  moved  as 

Mr.  Barlee's  Account. 

"At  Mr.  Rymer's,  on  the  8th 
May,  Mrs.  Barlee  and  I  formed 
part  of  a  circle  of  fourteen.  Very 
soon  after  we  had  all  been  seated 
round  a  heavy  mahogany  dining- 
table,  large  enough  for  a  party  of 
twenty,  many  different  kinds  of 
raps  were  distinctly  heard,  and 
presently  the  brass  fastenings 
which  held  the  parts  of  the  table 
together  beginning  to  make  a 
rattling  noise,  Mr.  Hume  ex- 
claimed, 'The  spirits  are  actually 
trying  to  take  the  brass  fastenings 
out,  and  to  move  this  heavy  table,' 
which  was  really  the  case.  For 
soon  after,  hearing  the  brass 
fastenings  fall,  we  looked  under 
the  table,  and  there  found  two  of 
them  which  had  thus  been  taken 
out,  and  then  the  table  began  to 
move  about. 

"  At  the  time  all  this  was  going 
on,  the  hands  of  Mr.  Hume  and 
all  present  were,  as  usual,  laid 
upon  the  table,  and  I  am  convinced 
that  if  he  or  any  of  the  party  had 
attempted  to  deceive  us  or  had 
tried  to  take  out  the  brass  fasten- 
ings, and  throw  them  under  the 
table,  the  attempt  and  deception 
must  have  been  discovered.  Soon 
after  the  brass  fastenings  had  thus 
been  taken  out,  and  the  table  had 
been  moved  about,  without  any 
human  handling,  many  more  dis- 
tinct raps  were  heard,  and  as  they 
were  known  by  Mr.  Hume  and 
those  present  to  be  little  Watty 
(a  son  of  Mr.  Rymer's,  who  died 
when  about  thirteen  years  old), 
Mr.  R.  said,  'Dear  little  Watty 
knows  papa  is  always  delighted  to 
hear  his  merry  little  raps,  and  does 
Watty  think  he  could  write  some- 

^  Vol.  iii.  pp.  21,  22. 

DANIEL  DUNGLAS   HOME 

235 

if  by  a  breath  of  air  ;  the  brass 
fastenings  of  my  table  were  then 
displaced  one  by  one,  and  fell  to 
the  ground ;  the  table  was  opened 
or  pulled  out,  and  by  no  human 
agency ;  everyone  in  the  room 
was  seated  at  the  table,  and  had 
their  hands  on  its  surface.  I  then 
asked  if  I  should  place  the  pencil 
and  paper  on  the  table  near  the 
opening  under  the  cloth — three 
sounds  (yes)  ;  I  did  so,  and  im- 
mediately the  form  of  a  small 
hand  was  seen  under  the  cloth  ; 
it  was  felt  by  some  who  placed 
their  hands  upon  it ;  the  paper 
and  pencil  were  then  removed, 
the  form  of  the  hand  disappearing 
at  the  same  time.  In  a  few 
minutes  the  same  form  of  hand 
was  again  seen  replacing  the 
paper  and  pencil ;  the  alphabet 
was  called  for :  '  Dear  papa,  I 
have  really  done  my  very  best.' 
I  removed  the  paper  and  pencil, 
and  on  the  paper  was  written, 
'  Dear  papa,  dear  mama,'  and 
signed  'Watt.'  Watty  was  the 
name  of  my  child.  No  one  was 
aware  that  I  intended  to  ask  for 
this  to  be  done.  It  was  not  pre- 
arranged even  by  myself;  it  was 
the  thought  of  the  moment." 

thing  for  papa,  who  would  so  like 
to  have  some  of  dear  Watty's 
writing  ?' — when  the  raps  answered 
'  yes.' 

"  Mr.  Rymer  then  put  a  sheet  of 
notepaper  and  a  pencil  over  the 
tablecloth,  and  presently  I  saw  the 
paper  and  pencil  begin  to  move 
without  any  visible  handling,  and 
soon  after  I  saw  the  shadow  of 
a  finger  on  that  part  of  the  paper 
which  was  nearest  to  me,  just 
about  the  time  when  an  accordion 
which  was  on  the  table  began  to 
play.  Some  who  were  present 
saw  a  whole  hand  trying  to  take 
the  pencil  and  paper  up,  but  as 
my  attention  at  that  moment  was 
turned  to  the  music,  I  did  not  see 
the  hand.  Mr.  Hume  then  said, 
'  As  the  spirits  seem  inclined  to 
give  us  some  music,  let  us  hear 
that  first,  and  in  the  meantime, 
if  the  paper  and  pencil  are  put 
under  the  cloth,  I  have  no  doubt 
little  Watty  will  have  written  some- 
thing before  the  music  is  finished.' 
Mr.  Rymer  then  placed  the  pencil 
and  paper  under  the  tablecloth, 
and  the  accordion  soon,  with- 
out any  visible  handling,  played 
'  Home,  sweet  Home.'  (Here 
follows  a  description  of  the 
music).  After  the  accordion 
ceased,  Mr.  Rymer  said,  '  Now 
let  us  see  whether  httle  Watty 
has  written  anything  for  papa,' 
when  instantly  five  raps  came 
calling  for  the  alphabet,  and  then 
there  was  spelt, '  Dear  papa,  I  have 
done  my  very  best,'  and  on  Mr. 
Rymer's  taking  up  the  paper  he 
found  written  on  it,  '  Dear  papa, 
dear  mama.  Watt,'  and  on  com- 
paring the  handwriting  with  that 
contained  in  one  of  his  last  letters 
before  he  died,  it  was  found  to 
be  exactly  resembling  the  writing 
there,  particularly  the  capital 
letters." 

It  is  not  necessary  to  point  out  all  the  discrepancies  in 
these  two  accounts ;  it  will  be  sufficient  to  indicate  some 
of  the  most  important.     Mr.  Rymer  has  apparently  com- 

236        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

bined  the  events  of  two  separate  seances ;  this  will  account 
for  the  discrepancy  in  the  number  reported  to  be  present.^ 
Moreover,  Rymer's  account  of  the  order  of  the  manifesta- 
tions differs  materially  from  Barlee's — the  incident  of  the 
brass  fastenings  in  one  account  precedes,  in  the  other  follows, 
the  request  for  writing.  Rymer  omits  the  whole  business 
of  the  accordion  playing,  a  device,  no  doubt,  for  diverting 
attention  from  the  writing.  Barlee  makes  no  mention  of 
the  incident  recorded  by  Rymer,  the  removal  and  replacing 
of  the  paper  and  pencil.  Again,  according  to  Rymer,  he 
himself  suggested  that  the  paper  and  pencil  should  be  placed 
under  the  cloth ;  but  Barlee  tells  us  that  the  suggestion 
came  from  Home.  There  are,  of  course,  other  and  by  no 
means  unimportant  discrepancies. 

In  view,  then,  of  the  mental  condition  of  the  sitters  and 
the  fallibility  of  ordinary  testimony  on  these  matters  demon- 
strated in  the  last  chapter,  it  is  not  difficult  to  guess  how 
most  of  Home's  manifestations  were  accomplished.  It  may 
be  conceded  that  many  of  the  performances  were  held  in 
a  better  light  than  was  commonly  the  case  with  his  rivals ; 
and  that  the  medium's  hands  were  frequently  at  rest  on  the 
table  during  the  performance,  even  though  the  only  proof 
offered  of  this  latter  fact  may  have  been  the  presence  of 
"  a  faint  white  heap "  where  his  hands  should  be.  The 
medium's  feet  were  probably  responsible  in  most  cases  for 
the  playing  of  bells  and  guitar  under  the  table,  the  spirit 
touches,  spirit  hands,  peregrination  of  chairs,  floating  of 
tables,  and  the  rest  of  it.  His  knees  and  other  parts  of  his 
person  could  give  substantial  help  in  the  feats  where  more 
muscular  action  was  required.^  The  hands  seen  at  the  edge 
of  the  table  after  the  lowering  of  the  lights  and  other  pre- 
parations, call  for  no  special  explanation.  Similar  hands 
have  been  exhibited  again  and  again  by  fraudulent  mediums 
in  America  and  England,  and  have  been  exposed  to  the 
public  gaze  in  Dr.  Monck's  portmanteau.  It  is  to  be  noted 
that  Mr.  Crookes,  as  he  then  was,  appears  never  to  have  been 
favoured  with  this  particular  manifestation.  At  the  stances 
of  which  he  has  published  notes  hands  were  frequently  felt 
and  occasionally  seen  by  one  or  more  sitters,  but  never  so 

^  Home,  in  quoting  Rymer's  account  in  the  Incidents,  inserts  the  words,  "  on 
another  evening." 

-  Dr.  Edmunds,  who  examined  Home  on  the  occasion  of  his  sittings  with  the 
Sub-Committee  No.  5  of  the  Dialectical  Society,  reported  to  the  Committee 
"that  Mr.  Home  possessed  an  extremely  muscular  and  elastic  frame"  {Dialecii- 
cal  Report,  p.  47).  J.  E.  Boehm,  the  sculptor,  writes  of  Home's  "delicately 
formed  hands,  feet,  and  limbs  in  general "  {Life  of  Home,  p.  223). 

DANIEL   DUNGLAS   HOME  237 

unequivocally,  or  under  such  circumstances  of  elaborate  pre- 
paration, as  at  Home's  seances  in  i860  and  1861  with  ob- 
servers of  less  scientific  acumen. 

It  is  to  the  experiments  and  observations  made  by  the 
distinguished  physicist  that  we  must  now  turn  our  attention. 
In  an  article  published  in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science 
for  July,  1870,  Mr.  Crookes,  as  already  mentioned,^  announced 
that  he  had  been  for  some  time  past  engaged  in  investigating 
the  manifestations  commonly  called  spiritualistic.  Though 
by  no  means  prepared  to  accept  the  Spiritualist  hypothesis, 
he  had  seen  enough  to  satisfy  him  of  the  occurrence  of 
certain  physical  phenomena,  not  explicable  "  by  any  physical 
law  at  present  known."  But  he  pointed  out  that  the  pre- 
cautions hitherto  taken  against  fraud,  and  the  methods 
adopted  for  ascertaining  the  extent  and  the  reality  of  the 
effects  produced,  were  alike  insufficient.  What  those  methods 
and  precautions  should  be  he  indicated  in  a  passage  already 
quoted.^ 

A  year  later  he  was  able  to  announce  that  he  had  suc- 
ceeded in  experimentally  demonstrating  the  existence  of  a 
hitherto  unknown  force,  and  had  measured  the  effects  pro- 
duced.^ In  justification  of  his  claim  he  gave  a  detailed 
description  of  one  series  of  experiments  conducted  in  his 
own  laboratory  in  the  presence  of  four  other  persons,  two 
of  whom,  Dr.  (later  Sir  William)  Huggins  and  Serjeant  Cox 
attested  the  accuracy  of  his  report,  based  upon  notes  made 
at  the  time.  The  "  medium "  of  the  new  force  was  Daniel 
Dunglas  Home.  The  apparatus  employed  in  the  chief  ex- 
periment is  thus  described  : — 

"In  another  part  of  the  room  an  apparatus  was  fitted  up  for 
experimenting  on  the  alterations  in  the  weight  of  a  body.  It  con- 
sisted of  a  mahogany  board  36  inches  long  by  9I  inches  wide  and 
I  inch  thick.  At  each  end  a  strip  of  mahogany  i^  inches  wide  was 
screwed  on,  forming  feet.  One  end  of  the  board  rested  on  a  firm 
table,  whilst  the  other  end  was  supported  by  a  spring  balance  hang- 
ing from  a  substantial  tripod  stand.  The  balance  was  fitted  with 
a  self-registering  index,  in  such  a  manner  that  it  would  record  the 
maximum  weight  indicated  by  the  pointer.  The  apparatus  was 
adjusted  so  that  the  mahogany  board  was  horizontal,  its  foot  resting 
flat  on  the  support.  In  this  position  its  weight  was  3  lbs.,  as  marked 
by  the  pointer  of  the  balance. 

"  Before  Mr.  Home  entered  the  room  the  apparatus  had  been 
arranged  in  position,  and  he  had  not  even  the  object  of  some  parts 
explained  before  sitting  down." 

^  See  above,  p.  152.  ^  Above,  p.  183. 

^  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science^  July  1871. 

238        PKOBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

When,  after  some  preliminary  experiments  with  an  ac- 
cordion, attention  was  turned  to  the  apparatus,  Mr.  Home 
placed  his  finger  lightly  upon  the  extreme  end  of  the 
mahogany  board  furthest  from  the  balance,  Dr.  Huggins  and 
Mr.  Crookes  sitting  one  on  each  side  and  watching ;  under 
these  conditions  the  index  of  the  balance  moved  several 
times,  the  greatest  downward  pull  registered  being  6  Ibs.^  It 
was  particularly  noticed,  Mr.  Crookes  tells  us,  that  Home's 
fingers  were  not  at  any  time  advanced  more  than  i|  inches 
from  the  extreme  end  of  the  board — that  is,  not  outside  the 
point  of  support— so  that  it  was  physically  impossible  for 
any  pressure  of  his  fingers  to  have  produced  the  downward 
movements  of  the  board  shown  by  the  index.  Moreover, 
"his  feet  as  well  as  his  hands  were  closely  guarded  by  all 
in  the  room." 

The  few  scientific  men  who  ventured  any  public  criticism 
on  these  experiments  contented  themselves  for  the  most  part 
with  pointing  out  possible  defects  in  the  apparatus  employed, 
or  some  source  of  error  in  the  actual  conduct  of  the  experi- 
ments. Some  of  these  criticisms  appear  to  have  been 
founded  on  a  misunderstanding  of  the  facts ;  some,  in  them- 
selves perhaps  no  better  founded,  Mr.  Crookes  endeavoured 
to  meet  by  modifications  of  the  apparatus.^  But  there  were 
a  few  men  who,  equally  disinclined  apparently  to  believe,  on 
the  evidence  adduced,  in  the  genuineness  of  the  alleged 
manifestations,  or  in  the  incompetence  of  the  distinguished 
physicist  who  conducted  the  experiments,  propounded  yet 
another  solution  of  the  difficulty.  Professor  Balfour  Stewart, 
in  reviewing  in  Nature^  Mr.  Crookes'  article,  refers  to  the 
illusions  produced  by  Mesmerists  and  electro-biologists,  and 
conjectures  that  in  the  present  instance  the  observers  may 
have  been  hallucinated.  Again,  Mr.  E.  B.  Tylor,  enlarging 
an  idea  put  forward  by  Dr.  A.  R.  Wallace,  that  the  \yere-wolf 
superstition  might  have  been  due  to  mesmeric  influence 
exercised  by  certain  persons,  extended  it  to  spiritualistic 
marvels  in  general,  and  suggested  that  D.  D.  Home  and 
Mrs.  Guppy  might  be  were-wolves,  endowed  with  the  power 
of  acting  on  the  minds  of  sensitive  spectators.* 

There  are  perhaps  amongst  the  marvels  recorded  by 
credible  witnesses,  including  Mr.  Crookes  himself,  cases  in 

1  i.e.  the  index  showed  a  total  weight  of  9  lbs. 

2  See  Carpenter's  article  in  the  Quarterly  already  referred  to,  the  letters  from 
Sir  C.  Wheatstone,  Sir  G.  G.  Stokes,  and  others,  and  Mr.  Crookes'  repHes, 
quoted  in  his  Researches;  a  letter  in  Nature,  August  3rd,  1871,  from  J.  P.  Ear- 
waker,  etc.,  etc.  ^  July  27th,  1871.  ^  Nature,  29th  Feb.,  1872. 

DANIEL  DUNGLAS   HOME  239 

which  a  modified  form  of  this  hypothesis  would  seem  to  be 
the  only  alternative  to  believing  in  the  manifestation  of  a  new 
physical  forced  But  such  a  drastic  solution  is  hardly  required 
to  explain  the  recorded  movements  of  the  balance.  The 
experiment  as  it  stands,  even  without  the  modifications  intro- 
duced later  by  Mr.  Crookes  in  deference  to  his  scientific 
critics,  seems,  indeed,  conclusive  against  the  possibility  of 
Home's  affecting  the  balance  by  any  pressure  on  his  end 
of  the  board.  But,  tested  by  the  canons  laid  down  by  Mr. 
Crookes  himself  at  the  outset  of  his  investigations,  we  shall 
find  the  conditions  of  the  experiment  defective  in  one  im- 
portant particular.  Mr.  Crookes  had  shown  that  it  is  the 
province  of  scientific  investigation  not  merely  to  ascertain 
the  reality  of  the  alleged  movements  and  measure  their 
extent,  but  to  establish  their  occurrence  under  conditions 
which  render  fraud  impossible.  In  the  passage  quoted  on 
page  183  it  is  implicitly  recognised  that  such  conditions  are 
to  be  secured  by  eliminating  the  necessity  for  continuous 
observation  on  the  part  of  the  investigator.  The  proof  of 
the  thing  done  should  depend  upon  something  else  than  the 
mere  observation  of  the  experimenters,  however  skilled. 

Now  in  the  experiment  quoted  these  conditions  were  not 
fulfilled.  On  the  contrary,  we  are  expressly  told  that  all 
present  guarded  Home's  feet  and  hands.  It  is  pertinent  to 
point  out  that  a  duty  for  which  the  whole  company  were 
collectively  responsible  may  well  at  times  have  been  inter- 
mitted. Moreover,  Dr.  Huggins  and  Mr.  Crookes  had  to 
watch  the  balance  also,  and  Mr.  Crookes  had  to  take  notes. 
Again,  the  experiment  described  was  not  the  first  of  the 
kind  ;  it  occurred  in  the  middle  of  a  long  series.  It  is  indeed 
stated  that  Home  was  not  familiar  with  the  apparatus 
employed.  But  as  similar  apparatus  had  been  employed, 
probably  at  previous  trials  by  Mr.  Crookes  himself,  certainly 
by  earlier  investigators — amongst  them  Dr.  Hare,^  with  whose 
published  writings  on  Spiritualism  we  cannot  assume  that 
Home  was  unacquainted — the  statement  carries  little  weight. 
Further,  a  point  of  capital  importance,  there  had  apparently 
been  many  previous  trials  with  various  modifications  of  the 
apparatus  and  many  failures ;  in  Mr.  Crookes'  own  words, 
"  the  experiments  I  have  tried  have  been  very  numerous,  but 
owing  to  our  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  conditions  which 
favour  or  oppose  the  manifestations  of  this  force,  to  the 
apparently  capricious  manner  in  which  it  is  exerted,  and  to 

^  See  the  discussion  on  this  point  in  the  next  chapter. 

^  See  above,  vol.  i.  p.  234,  for  some  account  of  Hare's  experiments. 

240        PROBLEMS   OF   MEDIUMSHIP 

the  fact  that  Mr,  Home  himself  is  subject  to  unaccountable 
ebbs  and  flows  of  the  force,  it  has  but  seldom  happened  that 
a  result  obtained  on  one  occasion  could  be  subsequently- 
confirmed  and  tested  with  apparatus  specially  contrived  for 
the  purpose."^ 

The  real  significance  of  this  statement  is  that  Home — a 
practised  conjurer,  as  we  are  entitled  to  assume — was  in  a 
position  to  dictate  the  conditions  of  the  experiment.  By  the 
simple  device  of  doing  nothing  when  the  conditions  were 
unfavourable  he  could  ensure  that  the  light  (gas  in  the 
present  instance)  was  such  and  so  placed,  the  apparatus  so 
contrived,  and  the  sitters  so  disposed,  as  to  suit  his  purpose, 
and  that  in  the  actual  experiment  the  attention  of  the  in- 
vestigators would  necessarily  be  concentrated  on  the  wrong 
points.  Under  such  conditions,  as  ordinary  experience  shows, 
and  as  the  experiments  described  in  the  last  chapter  have 
abundantly  demonstrated,  five  untrained  observers  are  no 
match  for  one  clever  conjurer. 

The  word  "  untrained "  in  this  connection  may  seem  to 
require  justification.  Of  Sir  William  Crookes'  high  dis- 
tinction in  many  branches  of  physical  science  there  is  no 
need  to  speak  here.  But  his  previous  training  did  not  neces- 
sarily render  him  better  qualified  to  deal  with  problems 
differing  widely  from  those  presented  in  the  laboratory.  To 
put  it  bluntly,  if  Home  was  a  conjurer,  Mr.  Crookes  was 
probably  in  no  better  position  for  detecting  the  sleight-of- 
hand  than  any  other  man  his  equal  in  intelligence  and  native 
acuteness  of  sense.  Possibly  even  in  a  worse  position  ;  for 
it  may  be  argued  that  his  previous  training  would  prepare 
the  way  for  Home's  efforts  to  concentrate  attention  on  the 
mechanical  apparatus,  and  thus  divert  it  from  the  seemingly 
irrelevant  movements  by  which  it  may  be  conjectured  the 
conjurer's  end  was  attained. 

Moreover,  the  record  of  the  experiments  is  obviously  in- 
complete. The  date  is  not  given.  We  only  know  that  it 
took  place  before  June  8th,  1871,  the  date  of  Serjeant  Cox's 
attesting  letter.  Again,  the  amount  of  light  is  not  stated. 
There  is  only  a  brief  prefatory  statement  that  the  experi- 
ment  took   place   in    the   evening  and  that   the  room  was 

^  Researches,  p.  lo.  Further  on  he  remarks  with  reference  to  the  various 
experiments  recorded  in  the  article  :  "Although  space  will  allow  only  the  publi- 
cation of  the  details  of  one  trial,  it  must  be  clearly  understood  that  for  some 
time  past  I  have  been  making  similar  experiments  with  like  results.  The  meet- 
ing on  the  occasion  here  described  was  for  the  purpose  of  confirming  previous 
observations  by  the  application  of  crucial  tests,  with  carefully  arranged  apparatus, 
and  in  the  presence  of  irreproachable  witnesses"  (^/.  cil.,  p.  17). 

DANIEL  DUNGLAS  HOME  241 

lighted  by  gas.     If  we  turn  to  the  detailed  notes  of  selected 
experiments  undertaken  about  this  time  which  Mr.  Crookes 
contributed  to  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.  P.  R.}  we  shall  find 
that  this  particular  experiment  indeed  is  not  included,  but 
that  at  a  similar  experiment  which  took  place  a  few  weeks 
later  (June  21st)  the  light,  by  Home's  order,  was  so  diminished 
that  at  the  first  trial  "  there  was  scarcely  light  enough  to  see 
the  board  and  the  index  move."^     Moreover,  as  Lehmann 
has  pointed  out  in  his  criticism  of  this  experiment,^  it  seems 
probable  from  reading  these  fuller  notes  that  the  account 
published  in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science  represents  only 
a   part  of   what   took    place   at   the   seance.      Mr.   Crookes 
selected,  as  he  had  a  perfect  right  to  do,  and  published  only 
those  details  (including  the  temperature  of  the  room)  which 
to  the  man  of  science  seemed  relevant.     But,  as  we  have 
already  seen,  in  investigating  the  performances  of  conjurers 
even  the  most  intelligent  witness  is  apt  to  reject  as  irrelevant 
precisely  those  details  which  would  give  the  clue  to  the  trick. 
For  us,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  that  clue  may  be  found 
in  a  very  early  manifestation  of  Home's,  which  he  seems  to 
have  been  chary  of  repeating  in  his  later  years,  and  which 
Mr.  Crookes — I  infer  from  his  published  writings  on  the  sub- 
ject— had  never  seen.     In  the  accounts  of  the  early  physical 
phenomena  in  America   I  have  quoted  a  description  of  a 
seance  with  Home,  during  which  the  table  was  tilted  at  a 
precarious  angle,  without  the  displacement  of  various  small 
objects  which  rested  on  its  polished  surface.*     Lord  Adare 
(the  present  Earl  of  Dunraven)  was  favoured  with  one — and 
only  one — unequivocal  example  of  this  manifestation.^     But 
I  can  remember  no  other  detailed  account  of  a  similar  feat 
in  all  the  records  of  Home's  seances  in  this  country.®     This 
extremely  effective  exhibition  was,  I  take  it,  dropped  from 
Home's  repertory  for  prudential  reasons.     The  articles  were 
probably,  it  may  be  suggested,  held  in  position  when  the 
table  was  tilted  by  means  of  hairs  or  fine  threads  attached 
to  Home's  dress.     If  the  illumination  and  background  are 
properly  arranged,  a  dark  thread  is  practically  invisible  in 
such  a  case,  even  to  eyes  that  know  what  to  look  for.     Mr. 
Davey  used  to  employ  a  hair  or  thread  to   move  bits  of 

1  Vol.  vi.  p.  98,  etc.  '^  loc.  ciL,  p.  no. 

2  Aberglaube  und  Zauberei,  pp.  271-3.      Stuttgart,  1898, 
^  Vol.  i.  pp.  242-3. 

'  Experiences  in  Spiritualism,  pp.  i,  2.  A  similar  manifestation  is  briefly 
described  by  Madame  Home  as  having  taken  place  in  Paris  {Life,  p.  92). 

®  In  the  Yorkshire  Spiritual  I'elegraph,  vol.  iii.  p.  22,  Mr.  Barlee  briefly 
refers  to  a  similar  manifestation. 

II. R 

242        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

coloured  chalk  under  a  glass  tumbler,  when  the  eyes  of  all 
present  were  concentrated  upon  the  spot ;  and  would  even 
by  similar  means  cause  a  tumbler  to  glide  across  the  table. 
I  have  described  below  (pp.  272-3)  a  similar  trick,  for  which 
I  have  known  human  hair  to  be  employed.  The  risk  of 
using  threads  to  keep  small  objects  in  place  on  the  inclined 
table  is  obvious ;  a  suspicious  or  too  curious  sitter  might  at 
any  moment  discover  the  trick.  Or,  if  several  objects  were 
attached,  the  threads  might  become  entangled,  or  the  per- 
formance miscarry  in  other  ways.  But  if  a  single  loop  is 
used  the  risks  are  considerably  lessened  ;  and  if  the  experi- 
menters are  not  too  close  to  the  point  of  attachment  a 
movement  on  the  part  of  any  of  them  could  generally  be 
foreseen,  and  the  medium  would  have  time  to  let  go  one  end 
of  the  thread,  which  would  then  fall  to  the  ground  and  could 
be  drawn  in  at  leisure. 

It  is  by  the  use  of  such  a  thread,  I  venture  to  suggest, 
that  the  watchful  observation  of  Mr.  Crookes  and  his  col- 
leagues vi^as  evaded.  Given  a  subdued  light,  and  opportunity 
to  move  about  the  room — and  from  the  detailed  notes  of 
later  seances  it  seems  probable  that  Home  could  do  as  he 
liked  in  both  respects — the  loop  could  be  attached  without 
much  risk  of  detection  to  some  part  of  the  apparatus,  pre- 
ferably the  hook  from  which  the  distal  end  of  the  board  was 
suspended,  the  ends  being  fastened  to  some  part  of  Home's 
dress,  e.g.  the  knees  of  his  trousers,  if  his  feet  and  hands  were 
under  effectual  observation. 

There  are  some  other  rather  puzzling  movements  of  small 
objects  recorded  in  Mr.  Crookes'  detailed  notes  which  may 
yield  their  secret  to  the  same  clue  ;  in  particular,  the  floating 
of  a  small  lath.  Thus,  towards  the  end  of  the  seance  on 
June  2 1  St,  1 87 1,  after  having  got  up  to  inspect  the  balance 
and  registering  apparatus,  and  to  move  it  away  from  the 
table,  the  sitters  resumed  their  seats,  and  a  message  shortly 
came,  "  Hands  off  the  table  and  all  joined."  After  this  the 
record  proceeds  : — 

"  Just  in  front  of  Mr.  Home  and  on  the  table  was  a  thin  wooden 
lath  23I  inches  long,  i|  inches  wide,  and  f  inch  thick,  covered 
with  white  paper.  It  was  plainly  visible  to  us  all,^  and  was  one  foot 
from  the  edge  of  the  table.     Presently  the  end  of  the  lath,  pointing 

^  The  amount  of  light  is  not  stated.  It  had  been,  as  already  mentioned,  so 
faint  at  the  beginning  of  this  sitting  that  the  index  could  be  read  with  difficulty. 
Later  the  gas  was  turned  up ;  but  from  the  fact  that  Mr.  Crookes  thought  it 
necessary  to  state  that  a  white  object  two  feet  long  was  plainly  visible,  it  may, 
I  think,  fairly  be  inferred  that  the  illumination  was  sufficiently  subdued  to  allow 
of  the  feat  being  worked  in  the  manner  suggested  in  the  text. 

DANIEL  DUNGLAS   HOME  243 

towards  Mr.  Walter  Crookes,  rose  up  in  the  air  to  the  height  of  about 
ten  inches.  The  other  end  then  rose  up  to  a  height  of  about  five 
inches,  and  the  lath  then  floated  about  for  more  than  a  minute  in 
this  position  suspended  in  the  air,  with  no  visible  means  of  support. 
It  moved  sideways  and  waved  gently  up  and  down,  just  like  a  piece 
of  wood  on  the  top  of  small  waves  of  the  sea.  The  lower  end  then 
gently  sank  till  it  touched  the  table  and  the  other  end  followed. 

"Whilst  we  were  speaking  about  this  wonderful  exhibition  of 
force,  the  lath  began  to  move  again,  and  rising  up  as  it  did  at  first, 
it  waved  about  in  a  somewhat  similar  manner.  The  startling  novelty 
of  the  movement  having  now  worn  off,  we  were  all  enabled  to 
follow  its  motions  with  more  accuracy.  Mr.  Home  was  sitting  away 
from  the  table  at  least  three  feet  from  the  lath  all  this  time ;  he  was 
apparently  quite  motionless,  and  his  hands  were  tightly  grasped,  his 
right  by  Mrs.  Walter  Crookes  and  his  left  by  Mrs.  William  Crookes. 
Any  movement  by  his  feet  was  impossible,  as,  owing  to  the  large 
cage^  being  under  the  table,  his  legs  were  not  able  to  be  put  beneath, 
but  were  visible  to  those  on  each  side  of  him.  All  the  others  had 
hold  of  hands."2 

The  sittings  were  held  in  Mr.  Crookes'  dining-room,  and 
the  assistants  sat  round  the  dining-room  table.  The  occupa- 
tion of  the  sitters  with  the  balance  apparatus  immediately 
before  the  manifestation  would  have  afforded  Home  an  oppor- 
tunity for  adjusting  the  loops  of  thread  over  the  gaselier, 
whilst  the  injunction  to  join  hands  secured  him  from  any 
serious  risk  of  interruption. 

It  seems  possible,  therefore,  to  explain  the  great  bulk  of 
the  marvels  recorded  of  Home  by  a  combination  of  trickery 
on  the  one  side  and  unconscious  misinterpretation  on  the 
other.  But  it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  the  investigators  of 
a  generation  ago  could  have  been  deceived,  and  repeatedly 
deceived,  by  any  device  of  the  kind  suggested ;  and  if  we 
find  ourselves  unable  to  accept  Mr.  Crookes'  testimony,  we 
are  guided  to  an  adverse  decision  less  perhaps  by  any 
defects  which  have  been  demonstrated  in  the  particular 
evidence  here  presented  than  by  that  general  presumption 
against  the  operation  of  the  supposed  new  physical  energy 
which,  as  already  shown,  inevitably  follows  from  an  analysis 
of  all  the  cognate  evidence  accumulated  down  to  the  present 
day.^  Even  so  there  remain  a  few  manifestations  which  the 
hypothesis  of  simple  trickery  does  not  seem  to  fit.  Some  of 
these  marvels — the  levitations,  the  elongations,  and  the  fire- 
ordeal — will  be  dealt  with  in  the  next  chapter. 

^  An  upright  cylinder  of  about  two  feet  in  diameter  used  in  these  experiments 
to  isolate  the  accordion. 

^  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  iii.  ^  See  above,  p.  185. 

CHAPTER   IV 
WAS   THERE   HALLUCINATION? 

TO  persons  familiar  with  the  effects  of  suggestion  on 
hypnotised  subjects  the  idea  naturally  presented  itself 
that  the  more  marvellous  phenomena  reported  by 
attendants  at  spiritualistic  seances  might  be  ascribed  to 
hallucination.  As  we  have  seen  in  the  last  chapter,  such 
views  were  advanced,  among  others,  by  Professor  Balfour 
Stewart  and  Dr.  E.  B.  Tylor  to  explain  Mr.  Crookes'  ex- 
periences with  Home.  Later,  at  the  British  Association 
Meeting  of  1876,  the  theory  was  again  put  forward  tenta- 
tively by  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.  If  we  are  to  take  some 
of  the  accounts  given  by  witnesses  of  credit  and  intelligence 
as  accurately  representing  what  they  saw,  the  only  alternative 
to  a  wholesale  surrender  to  the  occult  forces  would  be  to 
postulate  a  not  less  wholesale  state  of  hallucination  on  the 
part  of  the  witnesses.  But  the  problem  is  never,  of  course, 
put  before  us  in  such  clear  and  unmistakable  terms.  How- 
ever brief  the  interval  between  the  event  and  its  record,  it 
is  sufficient,  as  we  saw  in  a  previous  chapter,  to  allow  scope 
for  the  action  of  the  constructive  faculties.  The  document 
with  which  we  have  to  deal  is  in  no  case  the  photographic 
record  which  it  purports  to  be,  but  a  work  of  art  of  more 
or  less  originality.  In  many  cases  we  can  recognise  that  the 
interval  is  of  sufficient  length  to  allow  the  prodigy  to  mature. 
Thus,  as  we  have  already  seen  in  the  Wesley  case,^  and  as 
we  may  see  in  any  modern  Poltergeist  story,  the  farther 
events  recede  in  time  the  larger  they  loom  in  the  imagination. 
Many  of  the  records  of  Home's  seances  appear  to  be  of  this 
kind.  Dr.  Thomas  Hawksley,  in  an  undated  letter  quoted 
by  Madame  Home,^  states  that  he  and  a  friend  visited  Home 

^  Vol.  i.  pp.  32  (ji'  seq. 

'^  Life,  pp.  186-9;  see  also  Journal  S.  P.  R.,  July,  1889,  p.  122.  The  letter 
is  said  by  Madame  Home  to  have  been  written  for  the  purpose  of  being  included 
in  her  book,  published  in  1888,  and  therefore  many  years  after  the  events  which 
it  relates. 

244 

WAS   THEEE   HALLUCINATION?      245 

one  day  in  broad  daylight,  that  his  friend  stood  on  a  heavy 
centre  claw  table,  and  that  table  and  man  were  lifted  eight 
inches  in  the  air,  whilst  Dr.  Hawksley  satisfied  himself  by 
passing  his  hand  under  the  castors  that  the  table  was  clear 
of  the  ground.  So  Mr.  Perdicaris  told  me  that  at  his  first 
sitting  with  Home,  which  took  place  in  1868,  in  his  mother's 
house  in  London,  Mr.  Perdicaris  himself,  his  mother,  Mrs. 
Mowatt  Ritchie  (an  invalid  on  sofa),  and  an  old  housekeeper 
were  sitting  round  a  table  with  Home,  there  was  a  gaselier 
over  the  table  with  three  jets  lighted  ;  "  suddenly  table,  sofa, 
chairs,  and  sitters  were  all  moved  several  feet  off,"  apparently 
by  supernormal  power. 

In  such  cases  as  these,  however  sober-minded  and  con- 
scientious the  witnesses,  it  is  easier  to  find  the  explanation 
of  the  marvel  in  a  fallacy  of  memory  than  in  a  fallacy  of 
sense.^  "  I  want  to  ask  your  advice,"  said  a  patient  to 
Professor  Janet,  "  how  can  I  distinguish  between  a  memory 
and  a  dream  ?  "  and,  indeed,  as  Janet  remarks,  the  question 
raises  a  very  delicate  problem.^  For  the  differences  between 
memory  and  imagination,  all-important  to  the  historian,  to 
the  psychologist  may  be  trivial  or  irrelevant.  Where  doubt 
on  the  subject  is  possible  it  is  not  by  introspection  that  we 
shall  learn  to  decide  between  them. 

But  when  the  interval  between  event  and  record  is  very 
brief,  the  assumption  of  a  fallacy  of  memory  of  this  extreme 
kind  cannot  seem  an  altogether  satisfactory  solution.  Take, 
for  instance,  the  following  narrative  by  the  Rev.  Thomas 
Colley  (afterwards  Archdeacon  Colley).  Mr.  Colley  was 
present  at  a  stance  on  September  25  th,  1877,  and  wrote  out 
his  account  of  it  the  same  evening.  The  medium  was  Dr. 
Monck,  and  the  sitting  apparently  took  place  in  a  private 
house : — 

"  Dr.  Monck,  under  control  of  •  Samuel,'  was  by  the  light  of  the 
lamp — the  writer  not  being  a  yard  away  from  him — seen  by  all  to 
be  the  living  gate  for  the  extrusion  of  spirit  forms  from  the  realm  of 
mind  into  this  world  of  matter ;  for  standing  forth  thus  plainly 
before  us,  the  psychic  or  spirit  form  was  seen  to  grow  out  of  his 
left  side.     First,  several  faces  one  after  another,  of  great  beauty, 

^  The  question  asked  by  Hamilton  Aide,  in  his  article,  "Was  I  Hypnotised?" 
{Nineteenth  Century,  April,  1890)  may  no  doubt  be  answered  in  tlie  negative. 
If  we  were  forced  to  take  Mr.  Aide's  narratiye  as  an  accurate  representation  of 
what  he  saw  at  a  sitting  with  Home,  we  might  be  hard  put  to  it  for  any  better 
explanation.  But  the  article  was  written  twenty  years  after  the  events  which  it 
records,  and,  though  the  author  speaks  of  "referring  to  his  note-book,"  bears 
internal  evidence  of  being  founded  mainly  on  memory. 

2  Nevroses  et  idies  fixes,  vol.  ii,  p.  168. 

246        PEOBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

appeared,  and  in  amazement  we  saw — and  as  I  was  standing  close 
up  to  the  medium,  even  touching  him,  I  saw  most  plainly — several 
times  a  perfect  face  and  form  of  exquisite  womanhood  partially 
issue  from  Dr.  Monck,  about  the  region  of  the  heart.  Then  after 
several  attempts  a  full-formed  figure,  in  a  nebulous  condition  at 
first,  but  growing  solider  as  it  issued  from  the  medium,  left  Dr, 
Monck,  and  stood  a  separate  individuality,  two  or  three  feet  off, 
bound  to  him  by  a  slender  attachment  as  of  gossamer,  which,  at 
my  request,  '  Samuel,'  the  control,  severed  with  the  medium's  left 
hand,  and  there  stood  embodied  a  spirit  form  of  unutterable  loveli- 
ness, robed  in  attire  spirit-spun — a  meshy  webwork  from  no  mortal 
loom,  of  a  fleeciness  inimitable,  and  of  transfiguration  whiteness 
truly  glistening." 

Later  in  the  evening,  w^hen  the  time  came  for  the  form 
to  retire,  the  gossamer  filament  again  appeared,  and  Mr. 
Colley  tells  us  that  he  saw  the  spirit  figure  sucked  back,  as 
by  a  psychic  waterspout,  into  the  body  of  the  medium,  and 
watched  the  angel  face  fade  and  finally  disappear.^ 

Mr,  Colley  does  not  state  how  much  light  the  lamp  gave, 
but  at  a  later  seance,  held  at  Dr.  Monck's  own  rooms,  with 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Colley  and  Mr.  Stainton  Moses  present,  the 
latter  describes  the  light  as  faint.^ 

It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  the  exquisite  spirit  form  which 
presented  itself  to  Mr.  Colley's  glowing  imagination  was 
merely  a  confection  of  masks,  stuffed  gloves,  and  muslin, 
actuated  by  a  jointed  rod,  but  we  cannot  help  remembering, 
if  Mr,  Colley  did  not,  that  articles  of  this  kind  had,  a  twelve- 
month previously,  been  found,  under  compromising  circum- 
stances, in  the  possession  of  Dr.  Monck,^ 

More  impressive,  because  written  with  greater  restraint, 
and  by  an  observer  of  a  more  critical  temperament,  is  the 
record  by  Mr,  St.  George  Stock  of  one  of  his  early  ex- 
periences. Mr.  Stock  narrates  that  in  March,  1872,  he  was 
persuaded  by  an  Oxford  friend  to  take  part  in  a  seance  at 
which  several  choir-boys  were  the  mediums.  Bits  of  paper 
and  stones  were  thrown  about  the  room,  and  one  or  two  of 
the  mediums  spoke  in  the  trance.  The  impression  left  upon 
Mr,  Stock's  mind  by  this  first  seance  was  that  the  phenomena 
were  genuine,  though  not  necessarily  of  spirit  origin,  and 
that  the  boys  were  innocent  of  trickery.     A  few  days  later 

1  Spiritualist,  Oct.  Sth,  1877, 

^  "  Faintly  lighted  by  a  very  small  paraffin  lamp,  which  was  placed  in  a  corner 
of  the  room  and  shaded"  {Spiritualist,  Oct.  26th,  1877). 

2  Spiritualist,  Feb.  9th,  1877. 

WAS  THEKE  HALLUCINATION?      247 

he  had  a  second  stance,  with  eight  choir-boys,  in  his  friend's 
room,,  the  host,  however,  not  being  present : — 

"We  took  tea  together  as  before.  Whilst  the  boys  were  still 
seated  round  the  table  I  rose  and  walked  to  the  mantelpiece,  turn- 
ing over  in  my  mind  how  I  should  broach  to  the  boys  my  intention 
of  examining  their  pockets.  There  were  four  candles  burning  on 
the  mantelpiece,  by  the  side  of  which  I  took  my  stand.  The  boys, 
as  I  have  said,  were  still  seated  round  the  table,  which  was  at 
a  considerable  distance,  and  were  chatting  together  about  some 
game  of  cricket.  Such  was  the  position  of  affairs  in  the  room, 
when  a  shower  of  folded  papers  descended  upon  me,  floating 
gradually  down,  as  if  dropped  very  gently.  One  of  them  alighted 
on  my  hand,  and  so  called  my  attention  to  the  rest.  They  did  not 
seem,  as  the  stones  did  [on  the  previous  occasion]  to  come  from 
or  through  the  ceiling,  but  rather  to  start  into  sudden  existence  in 
the  air  above  me.  It  was  physically  impossible  for  these  papers  to 
have  been  thrown  at  me  by  the  boys  at  the  table,  and  I  thought 
it  perfectly  ludicrous  after  this  to  propose  the  examination  I  had 
intended,  a  test  having  been  given  me  far  more  satisfactory  than  any 
I  could  have  devised,"^ 

The  account  is  based  upon  a  detailed  report  written  on  the 
following  day .2 

In  both  these  cases — unless  we  are  to  suppose  that  angelic 
forms  did  really  grow  out  of  Dr.  Monck's  body,  and  bits  of 
paper  did  really  fall  from  nowhere  before  Mr.  Stock's  eyes — 
it  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  we  have  to  do  with 
something  more  than  a  mere  fallacy  of  memory.  In  other 
words,  we  have  to  suppose  that  Mr,  Colley  and  Mr,  Stock 
were  hallucinated.  The  hypothesis  of  hallucination  in  such 
circumstances  requires,  no  doubt,  some  justification.  To 
most  persons,  it  may  be  surmised,  the  word  "  hallucination  " 
represents  a  rare  psychical  catastrophe,  a  kind  of  volcanic 
eruption  from  subterranean  depths,  symptomatic  at  the  lowest 
of  a  profound  disturbance  of  the  personality.  But  whilst,  on 
the  one  hand,  the  work  of  the  Census  Committee  of  the 
English  Society  for  Psychical  Research  has  shown  that 
sensory  hallucinations  are  compatible  with  ordinary  health 
and  sanity,  and  so  far  from  being  uncommon  that  about  one 
adult  Englishman  in  ten  can  recall  such  an  experience ;  on 
the  other  hand,  modern  psychology  recognises  in  such  sensory 
fallacies  only  the  product  of  familiar  mental  processes  pushed 
to  extremes.     For  it  can  be  shown  that,  even  in  normal  per- 

1  spiritualist,  Oct.  20th,  1876. 

'^  As  I  learn  from  a  private  letter  from  Mr.  Stock, 

248        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

ception,  part  only,  and  it  may  be  a  small  part,  of  what  we 
"perceive"  is  due  to  the  impression  actually  made  on  the 
external  sense-organ  ;  another,  and  it  may  be  a  larger  part, 
can  be  definitely  traced  to  the  reproduction  of  previous 
sensations,  some  similar,  some  disparate,  aroused  by  sub- 
conscious processes  of  association.  In  other  words,  a  con- 
siderable and  essential  part  of  all  that  we  claim  to  see  and 
hear  is  due  to  our  own  imagination  ;  or,  to  quote  a  well- 
known  paradox  of  Taine's :  "  Au  lieu  de  dire  que  I'hallucina- 
tion  est  une  perception  exterieure  fausse,  il  faut  dire  que  la 
perception  extdrieure  est  une  hallucination  vraie."^  And 
modern  psychologists  generally  incline  to  the  view  that 
between  what  we  call  true  perception  and  those  false  per- 
ceptions which  we  call  illusion  and  hallucination  there  is  no 
psychological  difference  at  all  comparable  in  importance  to 
the  practical  difference  between  fact  and  fancy ;  that  the 
false  perception  represents  in  many  cases  merely  a  slightly 
anomalous  reaction  to  sensory  stimuli ;  a  perception  in  which 
the  associative  processes  have  summoned  up  the  wrong  ideas.^ 
The  cause  of  this  anomalous  reaction  of  the  brain  to  the 
impression  made  upon  the  external  sense  organs  (let  us  say, 
the  retinal  impression,  since  we  are  here  concerned  mostly 
with  visual  hallucinations)  is  to  be  sought  commonly  in  the 
condition  of  the  brain  itself  at  the  moment.  Either  there 
is  some  general  dissociation  of  consciousness — a  dissociation 
which  may  range  from  acute  mania  down  to  hypnosis  or  the 
drowsiness  which  precedes  sleep — or  there  may  be  some  local 
disturbance  of  equilibrium  leading  to  the  undue  prominence 
of  certain  ideas,  that  is,  in  terms  of  psycho-physiology,  to 
tension  of  a  particular  group  of  cells.  It  is  this  last  condition, 
familiarly  known  as  expectant  attention,  which  is  probably 
responsible  for  most  of  the  sense  deceptions  of  normal  life. 
When  the  mind  is  full,  as  we  say,  of  a  particular  idea,  very 

^  De  V Intelligence,  4th  edition,  vol.  ii.  p.  13. 

"^  Whether  there  are  or  are  not  any  hallucinations  in  the  old  sense  of  the 
term,  i.e.  sensory  perceptions  originating  without  any  sensory  stimuli,  is  for  the 
present  purpose  immaterial.  One  of  the  latest  writers  on  the  subject,  Edmund 
Parish,  in  his  Hallucinations  and  Illusions  (Enghsh  translation,  London,  1897), 
claims  that  all  hallucinations  may  be  reduced  to  the  type  of  illusion  in  the  old 
sense,  i.e.  as  started  from  without  by  an  actual  sensory  stimulus.  Binet,  by  a 
different  line  of  reasoning,  arrives  at  the  same  conclusion.  W.  James  {Principles 
of  Psychology,  vol.  ii.  p.  115)  admits  that  hallucinations  are  often  only  extreme 
cases  of  the  perceptive  process,  in  which  the  secondary  cerebral  reaction  is  out 
of  all  normal  proportion  to  the  peripheral  stimulus  which  occasions  the  activity  ; 
but  he  is  inclined  to  believe  that  some  hallucinations  are  centrally  initiated.  In 
the  text  I  have,  for  the  sake  of  convenience,  used  hallucination  in  Parish's  sense, 
as  practically  equivalent  to  illusion  of  an  extreme  kind. 

WAS   THEKE   HALLUCINATION?      249 

slight,  and  otherwise  indifferent,  sensory  stimuli  are  liable 
to  call  up  that  idea ;  the  slighter  and  more  ambiguous, 
indeed,  the  sense  impression,  the  more  liable  is  it  to  be 
misinterpreted  in  accordance  with  the  dominant  idea.  Thus, 
when  expecting  to  meet  a  friend,  we  constantly  see  resem- 
blances to  him  in  the  faces  of  casual  strangers ;  or  again, 
as  we  have  already  seen,  in  the  dim  light  of  a  materialisation 
seance  the  sitters  are  ready  to  recognise  in  any  white-robed 
figure  the  spirit  of  mother,  sister,  or  wife.^ 

The  majority  of  the  sense  deceptions  which  we  meet  in 
the  investigation  of  Spiritualist  records  are  no  doubt  of  this 
type — quasi-hallucinatory  faces  superimposed  upon  the  faint 
outlines  presented  or  suggested  to  the  sense  of  sight  at  a 
dark  seance  or  in  a  spirit  photograph.^  There  is  a  professional 
medium  now  (1901)  performing  in  London,  at  whose  seances 
spirit  faces  are  reported  constantly  to  be  seen.  The  per- 
formance takes  place,  of  course,  in  the  dark  ;  the  faces  are 
shown  in  profile  against  the  background  of  a  faintly  illu- 
minated slate,  and  few  would  appear  to  pass  without  the 
tribute  of  recognition  from  one  or  other  member  of  the 
circle.  From  various  letters  which  have  appeared  in  Light^ 
it  would  seem  that  the  female  faces  which  are  seen  at  this 
medium's  seances  generally  have  the  lower  part  of  their  faces 
veiled  by  drapery,  so  as  to  conceal  the  mouth  and  chin.  But 
this  circumstance  does  not  appear  materially  to  affect  the 
recognition."^ 

That  in  some  cases  an  hallucinatory  image  is  actually 
presented  to  the  senses  of  the  witness  seems  probable.  The 
clearest  illustration  of  the  kind  known  to  me  is  furnished 
by  some  recent  exhibitions  given  by  a  non- professional 
medium.  The  lady  in  question  allows  certain  favoured 
persons  to  look  into  a  crystal,  inclosed  in  a  small  open  box, 
which  is  not  as  a  rule  allowed  to  leave  the  medium's  own 
hands.  At  the  back  of  the  crystal,  i.e.  at  the  bottom  of 
the  box,  the  seer  discerns  a  face  apparently  drawn  rather 
sketchily  in  outline,  in  black  and  white.  So  far  the  perform- 
ance would  seem  a  rather  transparent  trick.  But  it  is  the 
case  that  some  persons  have  recognised  in  these  sketchy  out- 
lines the  unmistakable  portraits  of  friends.  There  is  no 
verbal  suggestion  from  the  medium  ;  nor,  indeed,  could  verbal 
suggestion  be  directly  helpful,  since  the  likenesses  seen  are 

^  See  W.  James,  op.  cit.,  vol  ii.  p.  97. 

^  See  Book  III.  chaps,  vi.  and  vii. 

'^  See  e.g.  letter  from  "  T.  S.,"  9th  March,  1901. 

*  The  medium,  it  should  be  stated,  is  a  man. 

250        PEOBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

sometimes  of  persons  long  dead,  of  whom  the  medium  would, 
it  is  likely,  never  have  heard.^ 

Illusory  impressions  of  this  kind  represent,  it  seems  prob- 
able, the  simplest  form  of  hallucination,  the  form  which 
implies  the  least  disturbance  of  ordinary  consciousness,  and 
is  often  hardly  to  be  distinguished  from  the  normal  process 
of  perception. 

At  dark  seances  we  frequently  find  a  more  pronounced 
form  of  sense  deception,  approximating  to  the  type  of  "  pure  " 
hallucination.  Some  of  the  most  favoured  attendants  at 
Home's  circle  would  see  shadowy  figures,  which  were  un- 
mistakably of  an  hallucinatory  character.^  Similar  apparitions 
are  recorded  by  other  witnesses  with  other  mediums.  The 
clearest  account  of  the  phenomenon  which  I  have  seen  is 
contained  in  an  article  by  Professor  Harlow  Gale,  "A  Study 
in  Spiritistic  Hallucinations."  ^  The  subject  of  the  study, 
Dr.  S.,  a  private  medium  and,  apparently,  an  honest  man, 
gave  dark  seances  at  which  he  and  others  habitually  pro- 
fessed to  see  figures,  sometimes  of  sacred  personages,  some- 
times of  deceased  friends,  standing  near  them.  On  some 
occasions  they  even  claimed  to  shake  hands  with  the  figure, 
and  to  feel  the  material  contact.  Flowers  were  also  seen 
and  lights.  The  room  at  these  meetings  was  in  almost 
complete  darkness ;  and  each  seer  described  at  once  the 
figure  which  he  professed  to  see.  It  is  likely  that  the  starting- 
point  for  the  hallucination  was  furnished  by  the  patches  of 
light  which  came  through  crevices  in  the  door  and  window, 
or  by  the  retinal  light  or  other  sensation  proceeding  from  the 
eye  itself ;  and  that  the  image  was  completed,  as  is  probably 
the  case  in  nearly  all  hallucinations  of  this  kind,  under  the 
influence  of  direct  verbal  suggestion  from  the  medium  or  the 
original  seer.  A  dim  light  seems  to  be  essential  for  sense 
deceptions  of  this  nature ;  and  the  emotions  cultivated  at 
a  seance  prove  no  doubt  powerful  auxiliaries  in  their  pro- 
duction. 

A  good  illustration  of  similar  illusions  engendered  by 
expectancy,  and  conditioned  by  darkness,  is  given  by  Robert 
Louis  Stevenson.  In  his  voyages  in  the  South  Seas  he 
describes  how,  one  dark  night,  having  got  out  of  their  reckon- 

^  Amongst  those  who  have  described  to  me  this  performance,  and  have 
assured  me  that  they  have  "recognised"  faces  in  the  box,  are  the  late  Mr. 
F.  W.  H.  Myers,  and  Mr.  C,  a  Cambridge  graduate.  In  the  latter  case,  at 
any  rate,  the  visions  were  not  emotionally  inspired  ;  one  of  them  represented  a 
mere  casual  acquaintance,  another  a  college  tutor,  and  so  on. 

'^  See  the  references  quoted  at  the  end  of  this  chapter, 

s  .S'.  P.  R.  Proc,  vol.  XV.  p.  65. 

WAS  THERE   HALLUCINATION?      251 

ing,  all  on  board  were  anxiously  looking  out  for  the  coral 
island  which  was  their  goal : — 

"Islands  we  beheld  in  plenty,  but  they  were  of  'such  stuff  as 
dreams  are  made  on,'  and  vanished  at  a  wink,  only  to  reappear  in 
other  places;  and,  by-and-by,  not  only  islands,  but  refulgent  and 
revolving  lights  began  to  stud  the  darkness ;  lighthouses  of  the 
mind  or  of  the  wearied  optic  nerve,  solemnly  shining  and  winking 
as  we  passed.  "1 

Again,  we  meet  occasionally,  in  more  normal  circumstances, 
with  sensory  fallacies  of  a  marked  type,  where  the  imagina- 
tion, filled  with  a  dominant  idea,  reacts  upon  some  slight  or 
ambiguous  sense  impression  so  as  to  construct  a  complete 
hallucinatory  drama.  Thus,  in  a  case  published  in  the 
S.P.R.  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,  a  lady,  on 
hearing  a  sound  like  that  of  a  latch-key  in  the  front  door, 
straightway  saw  an  hallucinatory  figure  of  her  father,  accom- 
panied by  his  dog,  crossing  the  hall.^  The  following  case, 
quoted  in  the  same  report,  is  an  even  better  illustration  of 
the  hallucinatory  development  and  embellishment  of  a  slight 
and  fugitive  sense  impression  : — 

"Some  years  ago  a  friend  and  I  rode — he  on  a  bicycle,  I  on  a 
tricycle — on  an  unusually  dark  night  in  summer  from  Glendalough 
to  Rathdrum.  It  was  drizzling  rain,  we  had  no  lamps,  and  the  road 
was  overshadowed  by  trees  on  both  sides,  between  which  we  could 
just  see  the  skyline.  I  was  riding  slowly  and  carefully  some  ten 
or  twenty  yards  in  advance,  guiding  myself  by  the  skyline,  when 
my  machine  chanced  to  pass  over  a  piece  of  tin  or  something  else 
in  the  road  that  made  a  great  crash.  Presently  my  companion 
came  up,  calling  to  me  in  great  concern.  He  had  seen  through  the 
gloom  my  machine  upset  and  me  flung  from  it.  The  crash  had 
excited  the  thought  of  the  most  likely  cause  for  it,  and  .  .  ,  this 
involved  a  visual  perception  of  the  mind,  faint,  but  sufficient  on 
this  occasion  to  be  seen  with  sufficient  distinctness  when  not  over- 
powered by  objects  seen  in  the  ordinary  way  through  the  eyes."^ 

^  In  the  South  Seas,  edition  of  1900,  p.  142, 

2  S.  P.  R.  Proc,  vol.  X.  p.  181. 

"  "On  the  Limits  of  Vision,"  by  Dr.  J.  G.  Stoney,  Phil.  Magazine,  March, 
1894.  Sir  John  Herschel  gives  a  case  of  hallucination  experienced  by  himself, 
which  admirably  illustrates  the  action  of  long-established  association.  He  had 
been  watching  with  some  anxiety  the  demolition  of  a  familiar  building.  On 
the  following  day  at  evening,  but  whilst  the  light  was  still  pretty  good,  he  passed 
the  spot  where  it  had  stood.  "Great  was  my  amazement  to  see  it  as  if  still 
standing,  projected  against  the  dull  sky.  ...  I  walked  on,  and  the  perspective 
of  the  form  and  disposition  of  the  parts  appeared  to  change  ...  as  they  would 
have  done  if  real "  {Familiar-  Lectures  on  Scientific  Subjects,  p.  405). 

252        PEOBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

Again,  Beard  has  described  how  a  steamer  in  which  he 
was  crossing  the  Atlantic  collided  with  a  sailing  vessel.  It 
was  night,  and  the  cry  went  forth  that  the  steamer  was  stove 
in  and  the  bow  sinking.  All  eyes  were  turned  to  the  bow, 
and  to  all  it  appeared  to  be  sinking.  "  I  shall  never  forget," 
writes  Beard,  "how  it  gradually  lowered  in  the  darkness." 
But  in  fact  the  vessel  was  uninjured.^  Hallucinatory  mis- 
interpretations of  distant  objects  such  as  occasionally  occur 
at  sea  furnish  another  illustration  of  the  same  principle. 
Thus,  when  the  French  frigate  La  Belle  Poule  was  searching 
for  a  missing  consort,  the  watch  signalled  a  disabled  vessel, 
and  the  whole  crew  in  full  daylight  saw  a  raft  and  boats 
crowded  with  men.  A  boat  was  sent  to  the  rescue,  and 
found  only  a  few  floating  branches  of  trees."  Many  of  the 
recorded  apparitions  of  the  sea-serpent  have,  no  doubt,  a  like 
explanation. 

1  should  be  disposed,  then,  to  interpret  the  experiences 
of  Mr.  Colley  and  Mr.  Stock  quoted  above  as  illusions  or 
hallucinations  of  this  last  type.  Both  witnesses  were  cer- 
tainly under  the  influence  of  expectancy.  Mr.  Colley  had 
seen  materialised  figures  in  Dr.  Monck's  presence  before ; 
Mr.  Stock,  as  we  have  read,  had  witnessed  at  the  previous 
stance  bits  of  paper  and  stones  thrown  about  the  room,  and 
had  inclined  to  the  belief  that  these  movements  were  not  due 
to  trickery.  Both,  no  doubt,  at  the  seance  which  we  are  now 
considering  saw  something  for  which  they  could  not  account ; 
and  the  imagination,  supplementing  the  imperfect  data  of 
sensation,  as  the  imagination  supplements  sensation  in  every 
act  of  perception,  filled  in  the  picture  on  these  occasions  on 
lines  predetermined  by  the  previous  experiences  of  the 
witnesses. 

Probably  some  of  the  more  marvellous  feats  described  at 
Home's  seances  can  be  analysed  into  sensory  deceptions  of 
this  nature.  The  circumstances  were  peculiarly  favourable 
for  illusion  of  the  kind  supposed.  The  minds  of  the  witnesses 
were  attuned,  by  previous  exhibitions  of  minor  feats,  to  the 
proper  degree  of  receptivity.  The  nature  of  the  marvel  to 
be  looked  for  was  indicated  beforehand,  so  that  the  imagina- 
tion would  have  less  difficulty,  when  the  rough  sketch  was 
supplied,  in  completing  the  picture,  much  as  Dr.  Stoney's 
friend  constructed,  on  the  hint  of  a  noise,  a  complete  picture 

^  Quoted  by  J.  N.  Langley  in  a  lecture  on  "The  Physiological  Aspect  of 
Mesmerism,"  given  before  the  Royal  Institution,  March,  1884. 

2  Gustave  Le  Bon,  Psychologie  des  Foules.  Paris,  1895.  Le  Bon  quotes  the 
incident  from  the  Revue  Scientifique. 

WAS   THERE  HALLUCINATION?      253 

of  a  tricycle  accident.  Again,  this  last  illustration  presents 
a  near  parallel  in  another  respect  to  Home's  stances.  The 
light  was  in  most  cases  extremely  faint.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  a  sensory  deception  of  the  kind  supposed  occurs 
much  more  readily  when  the  original  sensation  is  vague  and 
ill-defined,  as  anything  seen  in  a  dim  light  must  be.^  The 
so-called  "  levitations "  of  Home  offer  probably  the  clearest 
examples  of  the  process. 

The  earliest  instance  of  Home's  "levitation"  occurred  in  the 
summer  of  1852,  at  the  residence  of  Mr.  Ward  Cheney,  in 
the  State  of  Connecticut.  An  account  of  this  levitation  will 
be  found  on  page  245,  vol.  i.  of  the  present  work.  It  will 
be  seen  from  the  instances  there  cited  that  the  feat  was  not 
peculiar  to  Home ;  at  least  one  professional  contemporary, 
Gordon,  had  given  exhibitions  of  the  same  kind.  In  Home's 
case  it  will  be  seen  that  the  performance  took  place  in  a 
room  previously  darkened,  ostensibly  for  another  purpose  ; 
and  the  evidence  that  the  medium  was  levitated  consisted  in 
his  own  statement  to  that  effect,  corroborated  by  the  palpable 
demonstration  of  his  boots  suspended  in  the  air.  Later,  we 
have  a  very  full  and  candid  account,  by  Robert  Bell,  of  a 
levitation  which  took  place  in  1860.^  In  this  case  also  the 
room  had  been  carefully  darkened  before  the  feat  was  at- 
tempted ;  and  the  evidence  for  the  fact  of  levitation  consisted 
in  the  sound  of  Home's  voice  in  the  air,  his  own  descriptions 
of  his  movements,  contact  with  his  boots  on  the  back  of  a 
chair,  and  an  appearance  as  of  his  person,  or  some  part  of 
it,  projected  against  the  dim,  grey  light  which  came  through 
the  blind  drawn  down  across  the  window. 

Most  of  the  recorded  levitations  of  Home  are  of  this 
character.  After  various  minor  manifestations  had  educated 
the  witnesses  to  the  proper  frame  of  receptivity,  the  lights 
would  be  extinguished,  and  the  room  reduced  to  almost 
complete  darkness.  Home  would  then  explain  that  the  spirits 
were  lifting  him  up  ;  his  voice  would  be  heard  as  if  high  in 
the  air ;  some  favoured  guest  would  be  allowed  to  grasp  his 
hand  or  foot ;  and  perhaps  a  dim  silhouette  of  his  legs  would 
be  seen  against  the  window-blind.  Thus,  to  take  a  few 
instances,  "J.  G.  C,"  in  an  account  of  a  seance  which  took 
place  apparently  early  in  i860,  records  : — 

"Shortly  after  this  a  very  curious  affair  took  place  .  .  .  Mr.  Home 
remarked,  '  I  feel  as  if  I  am  going  to  rise.'     The  room  was  quite 

^  For  the  psychological  explanation  of  the  superior  power  of  weak  sensations 
to  give  rise  to  hallucination  see  W.  James,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  83,  123,  etc. 
^  Cornhill  Magazine,  Aug.,  i860.     The  account  is  quoted  above,  pp.  49-50. 

254        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

dark.  He  said,  '  I  am  getting  up,'  and  as  I  was  only  a  few  feet  from 
him  I  put  out  my  hand  to  him.  I  indubitably  felt  the  soles  of  both 
his  boots,  some  three  feet  above  the  level  of  the  floor.  On  my 
doing  so  he  said,  '  Don't  touch  me,  or  I  shall  come  down.'  Of 
course,  I  instantly  desisted,  but  down  he  came.  In  less  than  five 
minutes  after  this  he  remarked,  '  I  am  again  ascending,'  and  from 
the  sound  of  his  voice  we  could  not  but  infer  that  he  was  actually 
rising  towards  the  ceiling  of  the  ante-room. "^ 

At  another  seance,  after  the  lights  had  been  put  out  and 
the  blinds  drawn  down,  a  similar  performance  took  place  in 
the  dark,  but  in  this  case,  at  the  request  of  one  of  the  sitters, 
"  he  was  floated  with  his  feet  horizontally  into  the  light  of 
the  window,  so  that  we  all  saw  his  feet  and  a  part  of  his  legs 
resting  or  floating  in  the  air  like  a  feather,  about  six  feet 
from  the  ground."-  On  another  occasion,  recorded  by  Mr. 
Wason,  the  main  evidence  for  the  levitation  consisted  in  the 
fact  that  the  witness  held  Home's  hand  in  the  dark  and 
moved  along  with  the  medium  for  about  six  paces  until  he 
fell  over  a  stool  .^ 

Of  levitations  which  are  said  to  have  taken  place  in  the 
light  we  have  two  accounts  by  Mr.  Enmore  Jones.  He 
records  that  on  one  occasion,  by  the  light  of  a  single  gas- 
burner  and  a  bright  fire.  Home  rose  vertically  in  the  air  until 
he  was  a  foot  above  the  floor.  No  details  are  given,  not  even 
the  date  of  the  seance.*  In  his  evidence  before  the  Dialecti- 
cal Society,  Mr.  Jones  stated  that  in  a  large,  well-lighted 
room  in  his  own  house,  he  and  all  his  family  saw  his  aged 
mother,  together  with  the  chair  she  sat  on,  rise  in  the  air 
until  her  knees  were  level  with  the  rim  of  the  table.^ 

Mr.  Crookes,  in  his  detailed  notes  of  sittings,  records  two 
cases  of  levitation  at  which  he  was  present.  On  July  30th, 
1 87 1,  shortly  after  the  gas  had  been  turned  out  and  spirit 
lamps  [z'.e.  lamps  burning  spirit]  substituted  : — 

"Mr.  Home  walked  to  the  open  space  in  the  room  between 
Mr.  I.'s  chair  and  the  sideboard,  and  stood  there  quite  upright  and 
quiet.  He  then  said,  '  I'm  rising,  I'm  rising,'  when  we  all  saw  him 
rise  from  the  ground  slowly  to  a  height  of  about  six  inches,  remain 
there  for  about  ten  seconds,  and  then  slowly  descend.  From  my 
position  I  could  not  see  his  feet,  but  I  distinctly  saw  his  head, 
projected  against  the  opposite  wall,  rise  up,  and  Mr.  Walter  Crookes, 

^  Spiritual  Magazine,  i860,  p.  89.  ^  Ibid.,  i860,  p.  268. 

*  ibid.,  i860,  p.  525.  •*  Ibid.,  1861,  p.  69. 

■^  Dialectical  Report,  p.  145.  In  a  letter  recounting  the  incident  which 
appeared  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine  (Sept.,  1868),  Mr.  Jones  gives  the  date  of  the 
seance  as  17th  July,  1868.     He  omits,  however,  to  date  his  letter. 

WAS   THERE   HALLUCINATION?      255 

who  was  sitting  near  where  Mr.  Home  was,  said  that  his  feet  were 
in  the  air.  There  was  no  stool  or  other  thing  near  which  could 
have  aided  him.  Moreover,  the  movement  was  a  continuous  glide 
upwards."^ 

On  April  21st,  1872,  we  have  the  following  record.  After 
various  minor  phenomena  had  occurred  : — 

"A  message  was  given,  '  Try  less  light,'  The  handkerchief  moved 
about  along  the  floor,  visible  to  all.  Mr.  Home  nearly  disappeared 
under  the  table  in  a  curious  attitude ;  then  he  was  (still  in  his  chair) 
wheeled  out  from  the  table,  still  in  the  same  attitude,  his  feet  out 
in  front  off  the  ground.  He  was  then  sitting  almost  horizontally, 
his  shoulders  resting  on  his  chair.  He  asked  Mrs.  Walter  Crookes 
to  remove  the  chair  from  under  him,  as  it  was  not  supporting  him. 
He  was  then  seen  to  be  sitting  in  the  air,  supported  by  nothing 
visible."^ 

If  Mr.  Enmore  Jones'  testimony  almost  constrains  us  to 
believe  in  hallucination,  in  the  instances  recorded  by  Mr, 
Crookes  it  seems  more  reasonable  to  suppose  that  Home  may 
have  found  opportunity,  in  the  intentionally  subdued  light, 
to  introduce  some  mechanical  support. 

The  most  noteworthy  of  all  the  cases  of  levitation  is  that 
which  took  place  on  December  i6th,  1868,  at  5,  Buckingham 
Gate,  London,  in  the  presence  of  the  Master  of  Lindsay 
(now  the  Earl  of  Crawford),  Viscount  Adare  (now  the  Earl 
of  Dunraven),  and  Captain  Wynne.  The  fullest  account  is 
that  of  the  Master  of  Lindsay,  written  on  July  14th,  1871. 
It  is  as  follows  : — 

"I  was  sitting  with  Mr.  Home  and  Lord  Adare  and  a  cousin 
of  his.  During  the  sitting  Mr.  Home  went  into  a  trance,  and  in 
that  state  was  carried  out  of  the  window  in  the  room  next  to  where 
we  were,  and  was  brought  in  at  our  window.  The  distance  between 
the  windows  was  about  seven  feet  six  inches,  and  there  was  not  the 
slightest  foothold  between  them,  nor  was  there  more  than  a  twelve- 
inch  projection  to  each  window,  which  served  as  a  ledge  to  put 
flowers  on.  We  heard  the  window  in  the  next  room  lifted  up,  and 
almost  immediately  after  we  saw  Home  floating  in  the  air  outside 
our  window.  The  moon  was  shining  full  into  the  room;^  my  back 
was  to  the  light,  and  I  saw  the  shadow  on  the  wall  of  the  window- 
sill,  and  Home's  feet  about  six  inches  above  it.  He  remained  in 
this  position  for  a  few  seconds,  then  raised  the  window  and  glided 
into  the  room  feet  foremost  and  sat  down."* 

^  Proc.  S.  P.  A'.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  118,  119.  ^  Ibid.,  p.  126. 

•^  The  seance  took  place,  as  said,  on  the  i6th  December,  1868,  two  days  after 
new  moon. 

^  The  letter  from  which  this  account  is   taken   originally   appeared  in  the 

256        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

Lord  Adare's  account  of  the  central  incident  is  as  follows  : — 

"We  heard  Home  go  into  the  next  room,  heard  the  window 
thrown  up,  and  presently  Home  appeared  standing  upright  outside 
our  window;  he  opened  the  window  and  walked  in  quite  coolly." 

Lord  Adare  adds  an  account  of  an  incident  at  which  he 
was  the  only  spectator.  After  the  levitation  he  had,  at 
Home's  request,  shut  the  window  in  the  next  room,  out  of 
which  Home  purported  to  have  been  wafted  by  the  spirits. 
On  returning  to  the  seance-room.  Lord  Adare  continues  : — 

"I  remarked  that  the  window  was  not  raised  a  foot,  and  that  I 
could  not  think  how  he  [Home]  had  managed  to  squeeze  through. 
He  arose  and  said,  '  Come  and  see.'  I  went  with  him ;  he  told  me 
to  open  the  window  as  it  was  before ;  I  did  so ;  he  told  me  to  stand 
a  little  distance  off;  he  then  went  through  the  open  space,  head 
first,  quite  rapidly,  his  body  being  nearly  horizontal  and  apparently 
rigid.  He  came  in  again  feet  foremost,  and  we  returned  to  the 
other  room.  It  was  so  dark  I  could  not  see  clearly  how  he  was 
supported  outside.  He  did  not  appear  to  grasp,  or  rest  upon  the 
balustrade,  but  rather  to  be  swung  out  and  in.  Outside  each 
window  is  a  small  balcony  or  ledge  nineteen  inches  deep  [i.e. 
apparently  nineteen  inches  wide],  bounded  by  stone  balustrades 
eighteen  inches  high."^ 

In  a  letter  written  to  Home,  dated  2nd  February,  1877, 
Captain  Wynne,  referring  to  this  occasion,  states  :  "  The  fact 
of  your  having  gone  out  of  the  one  window  and  in  at  the 
other  I  can  swear  to."^ 

spiritualist  newspaper,  and  was  afterwards  republished  in  a  pamphlet  entitled 
Psychic  Power — Spirit  Power :  Experimental  Investigation  (London,  1871).  In 
July,  1869,  Lord  Lindsay  gave  an  account  of  the  incident  to  the  Committee  of 
the  Dialectical  Society,  which  runs  as  follows  : — 

"  I  saw  the  levitations  in  Victoria  Street  when  Home  floated  out  of  the 
window.  He  first  went  into  a  trance  and  walked  about  uneasily ;  he  then  went 
into  the  hall.  While  he  was  away  I  heard  a  voice  whisper  in  my  ear,  '  He  will 
go  out  of  one  window  and  in  at  another.'  I  was  alarmed  and  shocked  at  the 
idea  of  so  dangerous  an  experiment.  I  told  the  company  what  I  had  heard  and 
we  then  waited  for  Home's  return.  Shortly  after  he  entered  the  room.  I  heard 
the  window  go  up,  but  I  could  not  see  it,  for  I  sat  with  my  back  to  it.  I,  how- 
ever, saw  his  shadow  on  the  opposite  wall ;  he  went  out  of  the  window  in  a 
horizontal  position,  and  I  saw  him  outside  the  other  window  (that  is  the  next 
room)  floating  in  the  air.  It  was  eighty-five  feet  from  the  ground"  (Report, 
p.  214). 

The  discrepancies  between  this  and  the  account  given  in  the  text  may  perhaps 
be  explained  as  due  to  inaccurate  reporting.  It  will  be  seen  that  both  accounts 
suggest,  without  expressly  stating,  that  Home  floated  outside  the  window  in  a 
horizontal  position,  whereas  Lord  Adare  states  that  Home  stood  upright. 

^    Lord  Adare's  testimony  to  this  incident,  in  its  original  form   difficult  of 
access,  will  be  found  quoted  in  Mrs.  Home's  Life,  p.  301. 
Life  of  D.  D.  Home,  p.  307. 

WAS  THERE  HALLUCINATION?      257 

It  is  to  be  noted  that,  as  we  learn  from  Lord  Adare's 
account,  there  was  no  hght  in  the  room  during  the  seance, 
except  such  as  came  through  the  window  (from  a  moon  two 
days  old) ;  that  Lord  Lindsay  had,  at  an  earlier  period  of 
the  evening,  seen  an  apparition  of  a  man  sitting  in  a  chair ; 
that  one  of  the  spirits  before  the  performance  had  announced 
what  it  was  proposed  to  do ;  and,  finally,  that  on  a  previous 
occasion  a  few  days  before,  in  presence  of  two  of  the  same 
witnesses,  Home  had  opened  the  same  window,  stepped  on 
the  ledge  outside,  and  remained  standing  there,  to  the  great 
alarm  of  Lord  Lindsay,  looking  down  at  the  street  some 
eighty  feet  below.^  The  medium  had  thus,  as  it  were,  fur- 
nished a  rough  sketch  of  the  picture  which  he  aimed  at 
producing. 

Whatever  the  nature  of  the  complex  illusion,  however, 
whether  of  sense  or  of  memory — or,  as  seems  likely,  of  both 
— it  is  certain  that  it  was  shared  in  the  retrospect  by  all  the 
three  persons  present.'^  Actually,  however,  the  collective  part 
of  the  illusion  is  seen  in  analysis  to  have  been  of  a  com- 
paratively unimpressive  kind.  From  Lord  Lindsay's  account, 
the  most  detailed  record  which  we  have  of  the  actual  levita- 
tion,  it  would  seem  that  Home,  probably  after  having  an- 
nounced that  the  spirits  were  about  to  carry  him  through 
the  air  from  one  window  to  another,  left  the  room.  A  sound 
was  heard,  which  may  or  may  not  have  been  due  to  the 
cause  which  it  suggested,  the  opening  of  the  window  in  the 
next  room.  Shortly  afterwards.  Lord  Lindsay,  who  had  his 
back  to  the  window,  saw  on  the  opposite  wall  a  shadow, 
thrown  by  the  faint  moonlight,  which  suggested  to  him  that 
Home  was  outside  the  window ;  and  he  appears  to  have 
accepted  the  assurance  of  the  "  spirits "  that  in  fact  the 
medium  had  been  conveyed  to  that  point  through  the  air 
from  the  window-ledge  of  the  adjoining  room.  Whether 
Lord  Adare  or  Captain  Wynne  had  their  eyes  turned  towards 
the  window,  or,  generally,  upon  what  impressions  of  sense 
they  based  their  conviction  that  Home  had  actually  been 
levitated,  does  not  appear.  Remembering  that  the  room  was 
lighted  only  by  a  moon  two  days  old,  we  are  clearly  not 
justified  in  attaching  more  weight  to  their  general  statements 

^  The  last  quoted  incident  rests  on  the  authority  of  a  letter  from  H.  D. 
Jencken,  printed  in  Human  Nature,  vol.  iii.  p.  50. 

^  Dr.  Carpenter,  with  that  disastrous  defect,  whether  of  candour  or  care, 
which  distinguished  so  many  of  his  public  utterances  on  the  subject  of  Spiritual- 
ism, assumed  that  the  third  witness,  Captain  Wynne,  had  not  shared  in  the 
illusion  (see  his  article  in  the  Contemporary  Review  for  Jan.,  1S76).  This  drew 
from  Captain  Wynne  the  corroborative  testimony  quoted  in  the  text. 

II. — S 

258        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

than  to  the  detailed  record  of  Lord  Lindsay.  How  much 
that  record  is  worth,  as  evidence  for  a  miracle,  the  reader, 
with  the  depositions  before  him,  may  judge  for  himself 

The  other  incident  presents  a  somewhat  different  problem. 
The  room  was  again  dark,  the  action  was  momentary,  and 
the  solitary  witness,  who  had  been  told  to  keep  his  distance, 
was  still  labouring  under  the  strong  excitement  induced  by 
the  previous  performance.  It  would  be  impossible  to  lay 
much  stress  upon  an  observation  made  under  such  circum- 
stances. 

Unlike  levitation,  the  phenomenon  of  elongation  was  a  late 
product  of  Home's  mediumship.  I  can  find  no  record  of  its 
appearance  before  1867.  During  that  and  two  or  three 
succeeding  years  several  exhibitions  were  given,  amongst 
the  witnesses  being  Mr.  H.  D.  Jencken,  General  Boldero, 
Mr.  Ion  Perdicaris,  Lord  Lindsay,  and  Lord  Adare,  The 
manifestation  generally  took  place  in  a  very  subdued  light. 
But  Mr.  Perdicaris  has  given  me  from  memory  an  account 
of  an  occasion  on  which  he  saw  Home  elongated  in  a  good 
light.  The  medium,  however,  on  this  occasion  stood  behind 
a  chair,  with  his  hands  resting  on  the  back,  and  the  elonga- 
tion amounted  to  a  few  inches  only.  Moreover,  we  have  no 
contemporary  record  of  the  incident.  So,  in  a  case  described 
by  H.  D.  Jencken  ("  Honestas  "),  when  Home  held  a  candle  in 
his  hand  whilst  undergoing  elongation,  the  apparent  increase 
of  stature  amounted  only  to  about  four  inches.^ 

Lord  Adare,  in  his  Experiences,  gives  several  instances  of 
elongation,  some  in  fairly  good  light ;  but  his  description  of 
the  manifestation  and  of  the  means  taken  to  ascertain  the 
reality  and  measure  the  extent  of  the  elongation  is  not  such 
as  to  produce  conviction.  The  most  striking  account  of  the 
phenomenon  is  furnished  by  Lord  Lindsay,  in  his  evidence 
before  the  Dialectical  Society's  Committee,  but  the  narrative 
was  written  some  time  after  the  event,  and  does  not  appear, 
since  the  dates  and  other  details  are  wanting,  to  have  been 
based  upon  contemporary  notes. 

The  following  is  an  extract  from  a  paper  written  by  Lord 
Lindsay,  read  before  the  Committee  on  the  6th  July,  1869  : — ^ 

"On  another  occasion  I  saw  Mr.  Home,  in  a  trance,  elongated 
eleven  inches.     I  measured  him  standing  up  against  the  wall,  and 

^  Human  Nature,  vol.  ii.  p.  6ii.  See  also  ibid.,  vol.  i.  pp.  427  and  578  ;  vol. 
ii.  pp.  29  and  30.  In  vol.  iv.  p.  140  is  a  diagram  showing  the  elongation  of  Home's 
hand.  See  also  the  accounts  by  Dr.  Hawkins  Simpson  and  General  Boldero 
{Journal  S.  F.  J?.,  1889,  pp.  123  and  125). 

'^  Dialectical  Society  s  Report,  p.  207. 

WAS  THERE  HALLUCINATION?      259 

marked  the  place;  not  being  satisfied  with  that,  I  put  him  in  the 
middle  of  the  room  and  placed  a  candle  in  front  of  him,  so  as  to 
throw  a  shadow  on  the  wall,  which  I  also  marked.  When  he  awoke 
I  measured  him  again  in  his  natural  size,  both  directly  and  by  the 
shadow,  and  the  results  were  equal.  I  can  swear  that  he  was  not 
off  the  ground  or  standing  on  tiptoe,  as  I  had  full  view  of  his  feet, 
and,  moreover,  a  gentleman  present  had  one  of  his  feet  placed  over 
Home's  insteps,  one  hand  on  his  shoulder,  and  the  other  on  his 
side  where  the  false  ribs  come  near  the  hip-bone." 

Later,  in  answer  to  questions.  Lord  Lindsay  supplemented 
his  evidence  as  follows  : — ^ 

"  The  top  of  the  hip-bone  and  the  short  ribs  separate.  In  Home 
they  were  unusually  close  together.  There  was  no  separation  of 
the  vertebra  of  the  spine ;  nor  were  the  elongations  at  all  like  those 
resulting  from  expanding  the  chest  with  air ;  the  shoulders  did  not 
move.  Home  looked  as  if  he  was  pulled  up  by  the  neck ;  the 
muscles  seemed  in  a  state  of  tension.  He  stood  firmly  upright  in 
the  middle  of  the  room,  and  before  the  elongation  commenced 
I  placed  my  foot  on  his  instep.  I  will  swear  he  never  moved  his 
heels  from  the  ground.  When  Home  was  elongated  against  the 
wall,  Lord  Adare  placed  his  foot  on  Home's  instep,  and  I  marked 
the  place  on  the  wall.  I  once  saw  him  elongated  horizontally  on 
the  ground;  Lord  Adare  was  present.  Home  seemed  to  grow  at 
both  ends,  and  pushed  myself  and  Adare  away." 

I  cannot  identify  in  Lord  Adare's  account  of  his  ex- 
periences either  of  the  occasions  referred  to  in  the  passages 
last  quoted. 

The  phenomenon  of  elongation  was  not  peculiar  to  Home. 
As  we  have  already  seen.  Heme  and  J.  J.  Morse  are  said 
to  have  been  elongated  in  1870.^  Lord  Adare  tells  us  that 
at  a  seance  at  which  Home  was  present  he  saw  a  young  lady 
elongated  to  the  extent  of  about  three  inches.^  And  I  have 
lately  received  an  account  of  an  elongation,  the  medium 
being  a  professional  clairvoyant  named  Peters,  which  took 
place  so  recently  as  May,  1900.  The  witnesses,  who  have 
all  signed  the  account  from  which  the  extracts  below  are 
taken,  were  the  Rev.  C.  J.  M.  Shaw,  his  wife,  and  brother. 
Peters  was  staying  in  Mr.  Shaw's  house,  and  at  a  sitting 
in  the  afternoon  hopes  had  been  held  out  of  some  remarkable 
manifestation  in  the  evening.  At  the  evening  sitting,  by 
direction  of  the  "control,"  the  shaded  standard  lamp  by 
which   the   room  was   lighted   was  turned   down  very  low. 

^  Report,  pp.  213,  214.  ^  See  above,  p.  78.  ^  Experiences,  p.  23. 

260        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

Mr.  C.  Shaw  and  his  brother  sat  in  easy-chairs  (seats  fourteen 
inches  from  the  ground)  on  either  side  of  the  medium,  who 
was  standing.  Mrs.  Shaw  sat  opposite,  facing  the  medium. 
Mr.  C.  Shaw's  account  continues  : — 

"  My  brother  placed  his  right  foot  on  the  medium's  left  foot,  and 
I  placed  my  left  foot  on  the  medium's  right  foot.  (The  medium  was 
wearing  ordinary  boots.)  And  then  my  brother  placed  his  right 
hand  and  I  my  left  hand  on  the  medium's  waist,  our  other  hands 
grasping  (at  first)  the  medium's  hands. 

"  The  medium's  height,  as  measured  by  myself  against  the  wall 
of  my  room,  is  5  feet  7^  inches.  The  medium  began  to  sway  back- 
wards and  forwards  (his  face  was  towards  Mrs.  Shaw),  sometimes 
falling  so  far  backward  that  the  back  of  his  head  nearly  touched  the 
ground.  He  then  began  to  sway  sideways — first  one  side,  then  the 
other — disengaging  his  hands  from  ours  and  placing  them  (below 
ours)  above  his  hips.  He  then  stretched  his  hands,  with  palms  open, 
towards  Mrs.  Shaw,  and  fingers  extended,  straight  out  above  his  head, 
and  with  his  head  thrown  back,  the  motion  from  side  to  side 
becoming  less  and  less  till  it  ceased  altogether,  appeared  to  be 
drawn  upwards  by  his  hands. 

"Both  my  brother  and  1  looked  to  see  that  we  were  still  on 
his  feet,  and  that  our  hands  were  on  his  waist;  we  were  both 
conscious  that  the  hands  we  had  placed  on  his  waist  were  being 
carried  up  as  the  elongation  gradually  took  place.  Keeping  our 
eyes  upon  him,  we  found  that  we  had  to  stretch  our  arms  to  their 
fullest  extent  (without  rising  from  our  seats)  to  retain  their  position 
on  his  waist.  On  my  attempting  to  rise  from  my  chair  the  'Indian' 
requested  me  to  remain  seated.  At  last  a  point  was  reached  when 
I  called  to  my  brother,  '  If  he  goes  any  higher  I  can't  reach,'  my 
arm  being  stretched  to  its  very  fullest  extent;  at  the  same  time 
I  was  conscious,  and  so  was  my  brother,  that  our  feet  were  still 
on  the  medium's  feet.  The  Red  Indian  (who  was  controlling)  called 
to  us  then  to  observe  his  hands,  one  arm  (the  hands  and  fingers 
were  open  and  extended)  being  quite  six  inches  longer  than  the 
other;  from  our  position  this  was  difficult  for  my  brother  and  me 
to  see,  but  was  quite  apparent  to  Mrs.  S.  Again  our  attention  was 
directed  to  the  fact  that  the  shorter  arm  had  been  elongated  to 
match  the  other.  We  had  now  arrived  at  the  limit  of  our  own 
powers  of  extension,  and  with  a  warning  from  the  Indian  the 
medium  collapsed  on  to  the  floor.  He  subsided  in  a  sitting  position 
on  the  floor  at  the  same  point  at  which  he  was  standing.  Mrs.  S., 
sitting  (in  front),  had  a  good  view  of  the  whole  process,  and  was 
able  to  note  the  elongation  with  reference  to  the  background. 
When  the  medium's  hands  were  first  raised  she  saw  them  against 
the  background  of  the  red  curtains  of  the  bow  window;  she  then 
noted  their  passing  the  line  which  marks  a  difference  of  six  inches 
between  the  ceiling  of   the  bow  window  and  that   of   the   room 

WAS  THERE  HALLUCINATION?      261 

(the  ceiling  of  the  bow  window  being  that  much  lower),  and  finally 
remarked  his  hands  against  the  background  of  the  ceiling  itself. 
Taking  into  consideration  the  distance  we  had  to  extend  our  arms 
to  keep  our  hands  on  his  waist,  one  would  judge  the  elongation 
to  have  been  at  the  very  least  a  matter  of  eighteen  inches. 

"There  was  no  breach  of  continuity  in  the  clothing  apparent  which 
one  might  have  expected.  After  the  sitting  the  medium  appeared 
much  fatigued,  still,  he  endeavoured  to  show  us  another  curious 
phenomenon.  Rubbing  his  face  violently  with  both  hands,  long 
streaks  of  light  became  visible  through  his  fingers;  this  I  clearly 
remarked,  but  it  was  not  noticed  by  the  others. 

"  We  have  tried  since  on  two  occasions  to  obtain  a  repetition  of 
the  phenomenon  of  elongation,  but  without  success. 

"  I  have  written  this  account  of  the  matter  as  it  presented  itself 
to  my  observation,  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  we  can  have  been 
deceived. 

"  I  may  say  that  the  medium  himself  drew  our  attention  to  the 
unusual  length  of  his  arms,  and  that,  as  far  as  our  knowledge  of 
him  goes,  we  have  never  had  anything  to  cause  us  to  doubt  his 
integrity.  The  medium  laid  down  no  conditions  whatever  (beyond 
requesting  that  the  lamp  be  turned  down)  before  commencing 
the  seance. 

"When  the  seance  commenced  at  9.30  the  medium  occupied  the 
chair  in  which  Mrs.  Shaw  afterwards  sat.  At  about  10.15,  ^^^ 
the  experiment  in  '  elongation,'  he  changed  his  position  and  stood. 

"The  only  chair  near  I  pushed  away  when  the  medium  began 
to  sway  backwards  and  forwards,  fearing  he  would  knock  himself 
against  it. 

"  The  curtains  of  the  bow  window  follow  the  shape  of  the  bow, 
and  were  distant  from  the  medium  at  his  back  quite  eight  feet,  and 
on  his  left  side  a  distance  of  about  five  feet,  a  small  inlaid  writing- 
bureau  with  sloping  lid  separating  him  from  the  edge  of  the  curtain 
on  his  left. 

"  After  the  medium  fell,  which  he  did  in  a  sitting  position  on  the 
floor,  with  his  knees  near  to  his  chin,  he  complained  of  discomfort, 
etc.,  and  stififness,  and  asked  if  'they  had  been  elongating  him.'"^ 

Hovi^  far  the  supposed  elongation  in  this  case  vv^as  pure 
illusion,  and  how^  far  it  may  have  been  due  to  trickery,  it  is 
difficult  to  conjecture.  But  the  description  of  the  medium's 
violent  swaying  movements,  and,  still  more,  his  attitude  at 
the  termination  of  the  experiment,  are  consistent  v/ith  the 
view  that  the  "  elongation "  was  effected  by  some  simple 
mechanism,  such  as  steel  stilts,  concealed  in  his  boots  and 

^  I  received  an  account  of  this  incident  verbally  from  Mr.  C.  J.  M.  Shaw 
in  November,  1900 ;  the  written  account  above  quoted  is  dated  6th  February, 
1901. 

262        PEOBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

trousers.  That  Home,  however,  used  concealed  apparatus 
of  the  kind  is,  I  should  think,  improbable.  The  evidence 
in  his  case,  either  from  want  of  detail,  length  of  time  between 
event  and  record,  or  the  attendant  circumstances,  such  as 
feebleness  of  illumination,  is  so  defective  that  it  is  easier 
to  attribute  the  results  recorded  to  illusion,  which  Home  may 
no  doubt  have  eked  out  on  occasion  by  such  devices  as 
slipping  his  feet  half  out  of  his  boots  and  standing  on  tip- 
toe, or  supporting  himself  on  convenient  articles  of  furni- 
ture. 

I  have  reserved  for  the  last  what  is  at  once  the  least 
readily  explicable  and  the  best  attested  of  all  the  phenomena 
presented  by  Home,  The  evidence  for  the  fire-ordeal  is 
abundant ;  it  is  in  some  cases  of  high  quality ;  and,  from 
the  nature  of  the  experiment,  the  illumination  of  the  room 
was  generally  more  adequate  than  in  the  case  of  the  levita- 
tions  and  elongations. 

Mr.  Crookes  thus  describes  two  occasions  on  which  he  was 
a  witness  of  the  fire-ordeal.  The  first  account  is  extracted 
from  a  contemporary  letter  to  Mrs.  Honywood,  describing 
a  seance  which  took  place  on  April  28th,  1871  : — 

"At  Mr.  Home's  request,  whilst  he  was  entranced,  I  went  with 
him  to  the  fireplace  in  the  back  drawing-room.  He  said,  '  We  want 
you  to  notice  particularly  what  Dan  is  doing.'  Accordingly  I  stood 
close  to  the  fire  and  stooped  down  to  it,  when  he  put  his  hands  in. 
He  very  deliberately  pulled  the  lumps  of  hot  coal  off,  one  at  a  time, 
with  his  right  hand,  and  touched  one  which  was  bright  red.  He 
then  said,  '  The  power  is  not  strong  on  Dan's  hand,  as  we  have  been 
influencing  the  handkerchief  most.  It  is  more  difficult  to  influence 
an  inanimate  body  like  that  than  living  flesh,  so,  as  the  circum- 
stances were  favourable,  we  thought  we  would  show  you  that  we 
could  prevent  a  red-hot  coal  from  burning  a  handkerchief.  We  will 
collect  more  power  on  the  handkerchief  and  repeat  it  before  you. 
Now!' 

"  Mr.  Home  then  waved  the  handkerchief  about  in  the  air  two  or 
three  times,  held  it  above  his  head,  and  then  folded  it  up  and  laid 
it  on  his  hand  fike  a  cushion ;  putting  his  other  hand  into  the  fire, 
he  took  out  a  large  lump  of  cinder  red-hot  at  the  lower  part,  and 
placed  the  red  part  on  the  handkerchief.  Under  ordinary  circum- 
stances it  would  have  been  in  a  blaze.  In  about  half  a  minute  he 
took  it  off  the  handkerchief  with  his  hand,  saying,  '  As  the  power  is 
not  strong,  if  we  leave  the  coal  longer  it  will  burn.'  He  then  put 
it  on  his  hand  and  brought  it  to  the  table  in  the  front  room,  where 
all  but  myself  had  remained  seated."^ 

^  Proc.  S.  P.  V?.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  103,  104. 

WAS  THERE  HALLUCINATION?      263 

The  next  account  is  from  Mr.  Crookes'  detailed  notes  of 
a  seance  which  took  place  on  the  9th  of  May,  1871.  At  the 
beginning  of  the  stance  the  room  was  lit  by  four  candles ; 
a  wood  fire,  somewhat  dull,  was  burning  in  the  grate.  After 
various  manifestations,  two  of  the  candles  were  extinguished. 
Mr.  Home  went  to  the  fire,  took  out  a  piece  of  red-hot  char- 
coal, which  he  placed  on  a  folded  cambric  handkerchief, 
borrowed  for  the  purpose  from  one  of  the  guests.  He  fanned 
the  charcoal  to  a  white  heat  with  his  breath,  but  the  hand- 
kerchief was  only  burnt  in  one  small  hole.^  After  this 
exhibition — 

"  Mr.  Home  again  went  to  the  fire,  and  after  stirring  the  hot  coal 
about  with  his  hand,  took  out  a  red-hot  piece  nearly  as  big  as  an 
orange,  and  putting  it  on  his  right  hand,  covered  it  over  with  his  left 
hand,  so  as  to  almost  completely  enclose  it,  and  then  blew  into  the 
small  furnace  thus  extemporised  until  the  lump  of  charcoal  was 
nearly  white-hot,  and  then  drew  my  attention  to  the  lambent  flame 
which  was  flickering  over  the  coal  and  licking  round  his  fingers ;  he 
fell  on  his  knees,  looked  up  in  a  reverent  manner,  held  up  the  coal 
in  front,  and  said,  '  Is  not  God  good  ?  Are  not  His  laws  wonder- 
ful?'"2 

Amongst  the  other  persons  who  have  left  on  record  their 
testimony  to  this  manifestation  are  Lord  Lindsay,  Lord 
Adare,  H.  D.  Jencken,  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  S.  C.  Hall,  W.  H. 
Harrison,  Mrs.  Honywood,  and  Miss  Douglas.^ 

From  the  several  accounts  published  it  would  appear  that 
an  exhibition  of  this  kind,  in  this  respect  indeed  resembling 
the  levitations  and  the  elongations,  was  only  vouchsafed  to 
a  few  privileged  and,  if  the  word  may  be  allowed  in  this 
connection,  "trained"  witnesses.  The  experiment  was  ob- 
viously a  delicate  one,  and  peculiarly  liable  to  miscarriage. 
Thus,  it  was  checked  on  one  occasion  by  one  of  the  witnesses 
starting  in  alarm  from  his  chair  ;^  on  another  by  the  irruption 
of  two  uninvited  witnesses;^  it  failed  on  two  occasions  at 
Glasgow  because  the  conditions  were  "too  positive,"  or  the 
witnesses  had  too  little  faith,^ 

It  is  to  be  remembered,  further,  that  though  Home  was  the 

^  Mr.  Crookes  tells  us  that  he  tested  the  handkerchief  afterwards  in  his 
laboratory,  and  found  that  it  had  not  been  chemically  prepared  to  resist  the 
action  of  fire.  ^  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  103. 

^  See  especially  the  Dialectical  Society s  Report ;  letters  from  "  Honestas " 
(H.  D.  Jencken)  in  Human  Nature,  vols,  ii.,  iii.,  iv. ;  Jourjial  S.  P.  R.  for  July, 
1889;  Spirit  People,  by  W.  H.  Harrison;  Miracles  and  Modern  Spiritualism, 
by  Dr.  A.  R.  V^allace,  p.  166,  etc.  ^  Life  of  Home,  p.  388. 

^  "Uninvited,"  that  is,  by  the  medium  {%t^  Journal  S.  P.  R.,  July,  1889, 
p.  126).  ®  Human  Nature,  vol.  iv.  pp.  91  and  132. 

264         PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

chief  exponent  of  this  feat  in  modern  times,  it  was  by  no 
means  peculiar  to  him.  In  the  annals  of  Spiritualism  there 
are  several  records  of  similar  manifestations  through  other 
mediums,  chiefly  in  America.  In  England  rivals  in  this  line 
were  rare ;  but  I  have  come  across  a  case  more  recent  than 
any  of  Home's.  In  a  letter  dated  June,  1882,  Mrs.  William 
Tebb  wrote  to  me  : — 

"  Only  on  Friday  I  was  in  a  circle  with  five  others,  when  one  fell 
apparently  in  deep  trance,  and  put  his  hands  over  a  flame  and  held 
them  for  some  time  without  apparent  injury.  He  also  held  the 
flame  close  to  his  eyes,  to  our  horror,  and  we  had  to  beg  for  the 
fire  test  to  be  stopped.  It  seemed  too  much  to  risk  the  eyesight 
in  such  a  way.  The  burning  of  the  hands  we  had  been  able  to 
bear.     The  man  afterwards  was  apparently  no  worse." 

But  outside  the  ranks  of  spirit  mediums  there  are  many 
recorded  instances.  We  need  not  go  back  to  the  Middle 
Ages  for  parallels.  In  the  eighteenth  century  similar  portents 
were  exhibited  both  among  the  Cevennois^  and  the  Convul- 
sionnaires  of  S.  Medard."  In  more  recent  times  there  have 
been,  and  no  doubt  still  are,  European  jugglers  who  can 
handle  red-hot  iron,  and  play  almost  incredible  tricks  with 
burning  substances.  Their  immunity  from  injury  is  under- 
stood to  be  due  to  careful  preparation,  the  use  of  alum  and 
other  chemical  substances,  and,  generally,  to  the  nice  adapta- 
tion of  means  to  ends.  But  besides  these  stage  performances, 
which  are  obviously  mere  feats  of  skill  and  endurance,  there 
is,  as  Mr.  Andrew  Lang  has  shown,  abundant  evidence  in 
modern  times  of  fire-ordeals  of  a  very  surprising  kind 
amongst  uncivilised,  or  differently  civilised  races.  We  have 
the  testimony  of  educated  Europeans,  who  have  not  only 
seen,  but  in  some  instances  have  actually  themselves  under- 
gone the  ordeal.  The  chief  evidence  comes  from  the  Society 
Islands,  Fiji,  New  Zealand,  Japan,  and  Southern  India.  In 
some  of  these  instances,  according  to  the  descriptions  given 

^  Mr.  John  Cavalier,  who  tells  the  story,  was  present  with  a  great  multitude 
and  saw  one  Clary,  habited  in  a  white  streight  frock,  mount  upon  a  pile  of  wood, 
light  it  himself,  and  remain  there,  the  flames  rising  above  his  head,  until  the 
wood  was  quite  spent  and  there  were  no  more  flames.  There  was  no  mark  of 
fire  on  his  hair  or  clothes  (A  Cry  from  the  Desart.     London,  1707,  p.  51). 

2  Marie  Sonet,  called  the  Salamander,  on  several  occasions,  in  the  presence 
of  Carre  de  Montgeron  and  others,  stretched  herself  on  two  chairs  over  a  blazing 
fire,  and  remained  there  for  half  an  hour  or  more  at  a  time,  neither  herself  nor 
her  clothing  being  burnt.  On  another  occasion,  however,  she  thrust  her  booted 
feet  into  a  burning  brazier,  until  the  soles  of  both  boots  and  stockings  were 
reduced  to  a  cinder,  her  feet  remaining  uninjured  (P.  F.  Mathieu,  Hhtoin  des 
Miracules,  etc.,  pp.  262-6.     Paris,  1864), 

WAS  THERE   HALLUCINATION?      265 

by  the  European  witnesses,  the  heat  was  very  great,  and  the 
period  during  which  the  subjects  were  exposed  to  it  relatively 
considerable.  The  insensibility  even  to  severe  pain  which 
accompanies  states  of  trance  and  ecstasy  would  no  doubt 
account  for  the  subjective  immunity  of  the  devotees ;  but  it 
will  hardly  explain  why  the  skin  of  the  bare  feet  and  legs 
was  not  scorched  by  the  heat  which,  in  some  cases,  according 
to  the  observers,  kindled  green  leaves  and  melted  solder 
on  a  thermometer  case.  A  recent  account,  however,  of  the 
fire-ordeal  in  Tahiti  witnessed  by  Professor  Langley,  of 
the  Smithsonian  Institution,^  suggests  that  the  marvellous 
elements  in  the  descriptions  given  by  previous  witnesses 
were  possibly  due  mainly  to  defective  observation.  In  Pro- 
fessor Langley's  presence  a  native  priest,  followed  by  many 
other  natives  and  ultimately  by  several  Europeans,  walked 
over  a  shallow  pit  filled,  to  the  depth  of  about  two  feet,  with 
stones,  the  lower  layers  of  which  were  unquestionably  red- 
hot  and  glowing.  But  Professor  Langley  observed  that  the 
topmost  layer  was  far  from  being  red-hot ;  that  some  of  the 
stones  could  even  be  touched  lightly  with  the  hand ;  and 
that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  performers  carefully  picked 
their  way,  choosing  apparently  the  coolest  places.  The  stones 
were  too  hot  for  the  Europeans  to  walk  over  barefooted,  but 
not  hot  enough,  it  would  seem,  to  injure  the  soles  of  their 
boots  or  the  hardened  native  skin.  Professor  Langley's 
conclusion  is  that  it  was  "a  most  clever  and  interesting 
piece  of  savage  magic,  but  not  a  miracle";  and  that  the 
success  of  the  performance  largely  depended  upon  the  chief 
priest's  choice  of  the  stones,  a  porous  basalt,  which  formed 
an  extremely  bad  conductor  of  heat.  This  last  observation 
is  of  interest  in  connection  with  Home's  feats,  for  wood, 
coals,  and  coal-cinders  form  also  very  bad  conductors,  as 
anyone  can  satisfy  himself  by  actual  experiment.  A  coal, 
red-hot  and  blazing  at  one  end,  may  be  held  in  the  bare 
hand  without  serious  inconvenience,  and  may  be  placed  on 
paper  without  burning  it.^  It  is  certainly  noteworthy  that 
the  particular  feat  of  Home's  mediumship  which  is  best 
attested  and  most  difficult  to  explain  should  meet  with 
corroborative  testimony  outside  the  pale  of  professional 
mediumship,  unless  we  stretch  that  word  to  include  Shamans, 
medicine-men,  and  Brahmin  priests.     But  it  is  to  be  feared 

^  Letter  in  Nature,  Aug.  22nd,  1901. 

-  From  the  pages  of  "  Uncle  Remus,"  no  mean  authority,  it  may  be  learnt 
that  negroes  will  take  up  a  live  coal  in  their  hands  to  light  their  pipes  withal. 

266        PKOBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

that  the  evidence  points  rather  to  a  skilfully  staged  illusion 
than  to  a  new  fact  in  Nature.^ 

On  the  whole  then,  while  the  evidence  at  present  adduced 
must,  I  submit,  be  held  insufficient  to  substantiate  the  preter- 
human or,  at  lowest,  preternormal  power  over  material  nature 
claimed  for  Home  and  other  mediums,  it  seems  possible  that 
the  marvels  reported  were  in  some  cases  something  more 
than  mere  conjuring  tricks.  At  a  conjuring  performance 
the  spectator's  judgment  is  fooled,  but  his  actual  perceptions 
are  probably  unimpaired ;  there  is  fallacy,  but  it  is  of  in- 
ference and  interpretation,  not  of  the  senses.^  In  the  per- 
formances, especially  of  Home,  there  appears  at  times  to 
have  been  an  actual  sense-deception,  of  the  type  which  is 
commonly  known  as  illusion  rather  than  hallucination ;  a 
sense-deception,  that  is,  in  which  the  foundation  is  laid  by 
impressions  received  from  the  world  without,  though  the 
superstructure  may  be  of  imagination  all  compact.  When 
Lord  Lindsay  and  his  friends  saw  Home  elongated  or  levi- 
tated, their  perceptive  faculties,  it  is  suggested,  were  misled, 
in  much  the  same  way  as  Dr.  Stoney's  friend  was  misled, 
when  he  saw  the  imaginary  tricycle  accident,  or  the  spectator 
at  a  materialisation  seance  when  he  greets  the  medium 
dressed  up  in  a  white  sheet  and  a  nightcap  as  his  grand- 

^  For  the  evidence  as  to  the  fire-ordeal  in  modern  times  see  Mr.  Lang's 
Modern  Mythology  (1897),  chap.  xii.  ;  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  xv.  p.  2,  article  by- 
Mr.  Lang  on  "The  Fire  Walk,"  and  the  references  there  given.  See  also 
Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques  for  July  and  August,  1899,  article  by  Dr.  Pascal 
on  "Les  Dompteurs  du  Feu";  3.nA  Journal  S.  P.  P.,  November,  1900.  The 
latter  contains  several  descriptions  of  the  feat  as  performed  in  India ;  and,  in 
one  or  two  of  the  instances  there  described,  it  would  appear  that  the  apparent 
immunity  of  the  devotees  may  have  been  due  to  careful  training  and  the  use  of 
certain  skilfully  devised  precautions.  But  it  is  difficult  to  account  in  this  way 
for  Colonel  Gudgeon's  experience,  who  walked  in  a  leisurely  way  and  barefooted 
with  three  other  Europeans  over  twelve  feet  of  stones  hot  enough  to  bake  bread  ; 
or  for  the  ceremony  at  Fiji  described  by  Dr.  T.  M.  Hocken,  F.L.S.  (both  these 
cases  are  quoted  in  Mr.  Lang's  article  above  referred  to).  In  an  article  by  R.  C. 
Caldwell  on  "  Demonolatry  and  Devil  Worship "  {Contemporary  Review,  Feb., 
1876)  a  case  is  recorded  in  which  the  fire  test  failed.  The  priest  in  this  case 
poured  a  cauldron  of  molten  lead  on  his  head,  and  died  a  few  days  later  from 
the  effects. 

^  It  is  possible,  however,  that  even  in  an  ordinary  conjuring  trick  there  may 
be  sensory  hallucination.  Thus,  when  the  conjurer  pretends  to  throw  the  borrowed 
ring  across  the  stage,  he  moves  his  arm  as  in  the  act  of  throwing,  and  straight- 
way a  responsive  tinkle  is  heard  from  the  basin  in  which  the  ring  is  supposed 
to  fall.  That  at  the  time  the  more  suggestive  spectators  actually  see  the  flash 
of  the  jewel  in  its  imaginary  transit  would  be  difficult  to  prove ;  but  it  is  certain 
that  many  of  them  will  be  found  afterwards  to  have  the  fallacious  memory  of 
having  seen  it.  See  Jastrow,  Fact  and  Fable  in  Psychology,  p.  117,  and  the 
article  by  Mr.  Triplett  on  the  "Psychology  of  Conjuring  Deceptions"  there 
quoted.  Mr.  Triplett  found  that  78  children  out  of  165  whom  he  tested  had 
the  hallucinatory  memory  of  seeing  a  ball  thrown  up  in  the  air  and  disappear. 

WAS  THERE   HALLUCINATION?      267 

mother,  or  as  the  French  sailors  were  deceived  when  they 
mistook  the  branch  of  a  tree  for  a  raft  crowded  with  their 
shipwrecked  comrades. 

The  conditions — the  subdued  light,  the  emotional  stress 
and  expectancy  of  the  sitters — were  propitious  for  sense- 
deceptions  of  this  kind ;  and  one  other  factor,  illustrated  by 
the  example  last  quoted,  may  also  have  contributed  to  the 
result.  The  group  of  French  sailors  no  doubt  assisted  and 
encouraged  each  other  in  the  erroneous  interpretation  of 
what  they  saw,  each  contributing  some  fresh  item  of  con- 
firmation or  enlargement.  Something  of  the  kind  seems 
liable  to  occur  in  any  group  of  persons  occupied  with 
common  objects  of  thought  or  dominated  by  a  common 
emotion.  The  ingenious  French  writer  from  whom  the 
illustration  is  borrowed  has  propounded  the  theory  that 
in  any  such  group  of  human  beings  there  is  a  psychic 
contagion  at  work  which  tends  to  produce  uniformity  in 
action  and  judgment.  And  not  only,  he  argues,  will  the 
resulting  acts  and  beliefs  tend  to  be  uniform,  but  they 
will  represent  the  instinctive  and  subconscious  rather  than 
the  rational  elements  of  the  individual  minds  composing 
the  group.  That  a  crowd  is  always  more  impulsive,  more 
credulous,  and  more  readily  suggestible  than  the  average  of 
the  individuals  composing  it  is  proved  by  the  epidemic 
enthusiasms  and  epidemic  hallucinations  which  are  recorded 
at  various  periods  of  the  world's  history  to  have  seized  upon 
large  groups  of  persons,  most  of  whom  probably  if  left  to 
their  individual  initiative  would  have  been  shrewd  enough 
or  inert  enough  to  resist  the  impulse.^  M.  Le  Bon's  theory 
was  not  apparently  suggested  by  experience  of  spiritualist 
seances ;  but  such  experience  certainly  lends  support  to  his 
speculations.  After  hours  of  waiting  in  the  semi-darkness, 
in  strained  expectation,  the  hesitancy  of  the  more  cautious 
sitters  may,  it  is  conjectured,  sometimes  be  overborne,  and 
the  unanimous  testimony  to  the  ensuing  marvels  reflect  the 
hasty  inferences  and  irresponsible  judgment  of  the  least 
critical  of  the  spectators. 

If  such  quasi-hallucinations  did  in  fact  occur  at  Home's 
seances,  his  unusual  success  in  producing  them  may  have 
been  due  to  one  of  two  causes,  or  to  both  in  combination  : 
to  his  own  impressive  power,  or  to  the  impressibility  of  his 
sitters.  As  regards  the  second  point,  it  has  already  been 
remarked  that  the  spectators  of  these  higher  marvels  were 

1  Gustave  Le  Bon,  Psychologic  des  Foules.     Paris,  1895. 

268        PEOBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

few,  and  obviously  selected  with  great  care.  The  success 
of  the  fire-ordeal  in  particular  appears  to  have  depended 
very  closely  on  the  quality  of  the  spectators.  Moreover, 
there  is  a  good  deal  of  evidence  to  show  that  those  who  were 
admitted  to  Home's  seances  were  highly  susceptible  to  sug- 
gestions of  various  kinds,  occasionally  taking  the  form  of 
actual  hallucination.  Both  Lord  Adare  and  the  Master  of 
Lindsay  constantly  saw  figures  which  were  unquestionably 
not  material  in  the  dim  light  of  the  seance-room.  The 
Master  of  Lindsay  and  others  saw  the  successive  colours  of 
the  rainbow,  and  afterwards  the  picture  of  a  landscape,  in 
a  crystal  placed  on  Home's  head  ;^  it  is  noteworthy  that  at 
one  of  the  sub-committee's  seances  with  Home  the  Master 
of  Lindsay's  left  arm  became  quite  rigid.-  Others  of  the 
attendants  at  Home's  seances  appear  to  have  been  hardly 
less  impressible.  The  Hon.  Mrs.  E.  and  others  saw  at  a 
dark  seance  troops  of  phantom  figures,  lights,  and  spirit  eyes, 
all  of  which  were  invisible  to  another  witness,  Mrs.  Hony- 
wood.^  Lady  D.  is  reported  to  have  seen  the  apparition 
of  a  magnificent  white  flower,  as  large  as  a  dinner-plate,  with 
long  purple  stamens.*  H.  D.  Jencken  mentions  having  seen 
strangers  to  Home  entranced  at  his  seances.^ 

There  are,  then,  some  grounds  for  supposing  that  the 
habitues  of  Home's  seances  exhibited  a  suggestibility  and 
a  tendency  to  hallucination  above  the  common.  Partly  this 
was  due,  it  is  likely,  to  peculiarities  of  temperament  in  the 
witnesses.  But  it  seems  possible  that  in  part  it  may  have 
been  due  to  some  power  possessed  by  Home  in  common 
with  other  mediums.  Madame  Blavatsky  appears  to  have 
possessed  on  occasion  the  power  of  causing  the  persons  in 
her  train   to  see  visions  and  dream  dreams.^     And  two  or 

1  Dialectical  Report,  pp.  206,  259. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  49.  Note  also  that  in  his  evidence  the  Master  of  Lindsay  stated 
that  in  youth  he  had  at  one  time  been  subject  to  the  hallucination  of  a  black 
dog  {Report,  p.  216). 

^  Ibid.,  pp.  128,  367. 

*  Ibid.,  p.  328.     The  evidence  in  this  case  is  second-hand. 

^  Human  Nature,  vol.  ii.  pp.  88  and  144.  H.  D.  Jencken  elsewhere  states 
that  on  one  occasion  Home,  after  passing  into  the  trance,  went  round  the  circle 
"mesmerising"  the  sitters.  He  then  announced  that  he  was  about  to  be 
elongated,  and  they  saw  him  elongated  accordingly  (quoted  in  Home's  Incidents 
in  my  Life,  Second  Series,  p.  177).  At  Mr.  Crookes'  seances  some  of  those 
present  saw  hands  which  were  invisible  to  Mr.  Crookes  himself;  and  General 
Boldero,  in  a  letter  to  his  wife,  describing  a  seance  with  Home,  writes  that  the 
ladies  said  they  saw  hands,  "  I  myself  saw  something,  but  cannot  exactly  describe 
what  it  was"  {S.  P.  R.  Journal,  July,  1889,  p.  125). 

"  See  a  Modern  Priestess  of  Isis,  Solovyoft",  translated  by  Walter  Leaf, 
pp.   79-81, 

WAS  THERE  HALLUCINATION?      269 

three  persons  have  testified  to  having  seen  hallucinatory- 
figures  and  heard  sounds,  which  may  also  have  been 
hallucinatory,  in  company  of  Miss  Freer.^  There  is,  then, 
some  evidence  for  the  view  that  a  medium's  equipment  may 
include  a  faculty  of  inducing  false  perception  in  his  clients. 

^  See  instances  given  in  The  Alleged  Hazmting  of  B House.     London, 

1899. 

CHAPTER    V 
THE   MEDIUMSHIP   OF   STAINTON   MOSES 

IN  the  last  chapter  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  show 
that,  whilst  the  grounds  for  inferring,  from  the  phenomena 
observed  in  the  presence  of  so-called  mediums,  the 
operation  of  a  new  physical  force  or  forces  are  manifestly 
insufficient,  the  effects  produced  in  certain  cases,  notably  by 
D.  D.  Home,  surpassed  those  which  can  reasonably  be 
attributed  to  conjuring,  as  that  word  is  commonly  understood. 
We  have  already  glanced  at  some  of  the  special  conditions 
which,  in  the  exceptional  cases  referred  to,  probably  helped 
to  generate  the  illusion  apparently  experienced  by  the 
spectators.  But  the  first  and  the  most  potent  of  these 
conditions  remains  to  be  considered — a  condition  present 
at  nearly  all  mediumistic  performances  and,  if  not  in- 
dispensable, at  least  by  the  testimony  of  Spiritualists  them- 
selves,^ conducive  to  successful  results — the  predisposition, 
to  wit,  to  believe  in  some  marvellous  power.  As  already 
indicated  in  the  discussion  on  Eglinton's  slate-writing 
performances,^  this  receptive  attitude  on  the  part  of  the 
spectators  gives  to  the  medium  an  incalculable  advantage 
over  the  ordinary  conjurer.  To  attempt  an  analysis  of  the 
causes  of  this  predisposition  to  belief  would  carry  us  beyond 
the  limits  of  the  present  work.  It  will  suffice  here  briefly 
to  point  to  the  evidence  for  its  existence,  even  in  persons 
who  were  wholly  unconscious  of  any  such  bias ;  and  to  note 
that  in  the  case  of  Spiritualism  there  were  many  contributory 
causes  beyond  the  mere  love  of  the  marvellous.  The 
attitude  of  the  spectators  is  perhaps  the  most  striking  feature 
in  the  history  of  Animal  Magnetism  and  Spiritualism.     We 

^  See  e.g.  Mr.  Massey  [Proc.  S.  P.  P.,  vol.  iv.  p.  98):  "It  is  antecedently 
probable  that  something  more  is  required  of  the  investigator  than  the  attributes 
of  a  fair-minded  judge — a  co-operation,  namely  .  .  .  which  shall  at  any  rate 
favour  and  not  repress  the  development  of  (psychic  force)  in  the  medium." 

'■^  Above,  p.  216. 

270 

WILLIAM  STAINTON   MOSES         271 

find  it,  to  go  no  further  back  than  the  early  years  of  the 
nineteenth  century,  in  the  unquestioning  acceptance  by 
Kerner  and  other  German  observers  of  the  dubious  feats 
performed  by  Madame  Hauffe  and  kindred  somnambules ; 
in  the  eagerness  shown  by  the  French  magnetisers,  from  Tardy 
du  Montravel,  Billot,  and  Deleuze,  down  to  Luys,  Gibier, 
Baraduc,  and  de  Rochas,  to  accept  apports,  radiant  fluids, 
magnetic  transfer,  exteriorisation  of  sensation,  and  any  other 
marvels  which  their  subjects  might  present  to  their  notice. 

So,  in  the  beginning  of  the  Spiritualist  Movement  in 
America,  Rogers,  J.  Bovee  Dods,  Richmond,  and  others, 
who  believed  in  psychic  force  only,  were  hardly  more 
exacting  of  evidence  for  the  monstrous  legends  to  which 
they  gave  credence  than  the  more  numerous  sect  who  saved 
themselves  much  mental  labour  by  referring  all  the  alleged 
marvels  to  spirits.  The  like,  as  we  have  shown,  may  be  said 
of  Bray,  Atkinson,  and  Serjeant  Cox  in  our  own  country, 
and  of  contemporary  observers  on  the  Continent.  We  find 
evidence  of  the  same  predisposition  in  the  constant  attribu- 
tion by  Spiritualists  of  mediumistic  powers  to  professional 
conjurers,  and  in  the  ingenious  hypotheses  put  forward  to 
explain  away  materialisation  fiascoes. 

The  benefit  of  this  half-conscious  expectation  of  the 
marvellous  was  extended,  of  course,  to  any  commonplace 
trickster  who  chose  to  call  himself  a  "  medium,"  but  from  the 
published  records  it  seems  clear  that  the  most  successful 
performers  have  been  those  who  possessed  special  gifts,  or 
employed  special  artifices,  to  enhance  this  latent  pre- 
disposition. We  have  already  dwelt  upon  the  personal 
fascination  which  seems  to  have  been  exercised  by  Home, 
and  the  blind  confidence  in  his  honesty  which  he  seems 
to  have  been  able  to  inspire.  A  prepossessing  manner  and 
an  effect  of  frankness  seem  to  have  characterised  Foster,'^ 
Slade,  and  his  manager,  Simmons,^  and  may  be  observed 
in  Duguid  and  many  living  mediums.  Again,  in  the  case 
of  young  girls  and  children,  personal  beauty  or  the  apparent 
ingenuousness  of  childhood  no  doubt  played  their  part  in 
disarming  criticism. 

More  potent  means  to  the  same  end  were,  for  most  minds, 
the  various  devices  employed  for  trading  on  the  affections  or 
exciting  the  religious  emotions.  Of  the  part  played  by 
personation  of  the  dead,  and  messages  to  the  bereaved  from 

^  See  various  accounts  of  interviews  with  Foster  printed  in  the  Spiritual 
Magazine  for  1862. 

^  See  e.g.  the  interview  with  Slade  in  the  World,  30th  Aug.,  1876. 

272        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

the  spirit  world,  it  is  not  necessary  to  speak.  But  the 
religious  bait,  though  rarely  so  conspicuous,  was  probably 
not  less  effective.  The  Davenport  Brothers,  as  we  have  seen, 
carried  in  their  train  the  Rev.  J.  B.  Ferguson,  an  eloquent 
preacher  and  enthusiastic  convert.  Many  mediums,  as  we 
have  seen  in  the  case  of  Home,  arrived  at  the  same  result 
by  interspersing  with  physical  phenomena  religious  rhapsodies 
and  exhortations  to  a  higher  morality. 

But,  after  all,  the  most  valuable  asset  of  a  medium  is  the 
trust  inspired  by  his  position  and  reputation.  Even  when 
repeated  exposures  had  made  it  difficult,  for  the  more 
intelligent  Spiritualist  at  any  rate,  to  uphold  through  evil 
and  good  report  the  honesty  of  the  professional  psychic, 
their  faith  in  the  private  medium  remained  for  long  unshaken. 
It  was  on  the  phenomena  occurring  in  the  presence  of  private 
mediums  that  the  late  Professor  Sidgwick  laid  most  stress, 
not  merely  because  of  the  presumption  against  the  existence 
in  their  case  of  that  laboriously  acquired  skill  in  legerdemain 
to  which  it  was  reasonable  to  attribute  the  performance 
in  the  case  of  professionals,  but  also,  and  mainly,  because 
of  the  absence  of  the  grosser  motives  to  fraud.^ 

An  attitude  of  receptivity  towards  marvels  occurring  in 
the  presence  or  through  the  agency  of  persons  of  presumed 
honesty  is  not  merely  natural,  but  within  limits  reasonable. 
My  own  experience  supplies  me  with  an  apt  illustration  of 
the  prepotent  influence  in  such  circumstances  of  a  belief  in 
the  good  faith  of  the  performer.  About  fifteen  years  ago^ 
some  persons  of  my  acquaintance  described  to  me  a  curious 
feat  performed  by  one  of  their  friends.     The  gentleman  in 

question,  Mr.  C ,  possessed,  they  assured  me,  a  peculiar 

magnetic  force,  which   enabled   him   to   exercise   attraction 

on  objects  made  of  iron.     I  was  invited  to  meet  Mr.  C 

a  few  days  later,  and  after  some  urgency  on  my  part  he 
consented  to  give  me  an  exhibition  of  his  powers.  Taking 
the  poker  from  the  hearth,  he  seated  himself,  and  placed  the 
poker  upright  between  his  outstretched  knees,  with  its  knob 
resting  on  the  ground.  The  poker  remained  at  first  poised 
in  a  vertical  position,  without  any  apparent  support,  and  then 
gently  inclined  to  one  side  or  the  other,  following  the 
guidance  of  a  finger  held  two  or  three  inches  above  it. 
I  accepted  the  phenomenon  in  all  good  faith,  as  an  instance 

'  See  bis  first  presidential  address  to  the  S.P.  R.  {Proc,  vol.  i.  p.  7),  also 
vol.  i.  p.  249  ;  iv.  p.  103,  etc. 

'^  I  have  unfortunately  destroyed  my  notes  of  this  incident,  and  relate  it  from 
memory. 

WILLIAM   STAINTON  MOSES         273 

of  a  hitherto  unsuspected  magnetic  power  latent  in  the 
human  organism  ;  and  it  was  not  until  some  days  later  that 
I  learnt  from  another  source  the  secret  of  the  trick — a  loop 
of  human  hair  attached  to  the  trousers  of  the  operator. 

In  this  case  the  attitude  of  unquestioning  acceptance 
which  I  displayed  was  due  mainly  to  the  assurance  pre- 
viously given  me  by  my  hosts  (one  at  least  of  whom,  as 
I  have  since  learnt,  was  in  the  secret)  that  the  performance 
was  not  of  the  nature  of  conjuring,  but  a  genuine  display  of 
abnormal  powers.  That  the  means  taken  in  this  instance 
to  prepare  my  mind  for  the  exhibition  went  beyond  the 
bounds  of  permissible  mystification  I  am  not  prepared  to 
say.  But  in  a  case  recorded  by  Professor  Sidgwick,  where 
a  trick  of  a  similar  nature  was  performed  on  many  occasions, 
in  presence  of  different  witnesses,  by  a  gentleman  of  good 
social  position  and  some  scientific  standing,  there  can  be 
no  question  that  the  limits  of  honour  and  fair  dealing  were 
overstepped.  The  performer,  not  content  with  repeated 
verbal  assurances  to  that  effect,  ultimately  signed  a  formal 
declaration  that  the  phenomena  had  "not  been  produced 
by  normal  means."  ^ 

In  these  two  cases  the  receptivity  of  the  spectators  was 
based  mainly  on  reliance  on  the  ordinary  laws  governing 
social  intercourse.  But  when  the  personal  vanity  of  the 
witness  is  more  directly  implicated,  as  in  the  case  of  a  master 
who  has  vaunted  the  marvels  performed  by  his  servant ; 
or  when,  as  between  near  relatives,  the  affections  are  strongly 
engaged,  this  receptivity  frequently  amounts  to  infatuation. 
A  striking  instance  of  this  frame  of  mind  is  given  by 
Sir  John  Forbes.^  One  A.  B.,  a  lawyer,  invited  Forbes  to 
test  the  clairvoyance  of  his  office  boy,  George  Goble. 
Forbes,  after  two  or  three  meetings,  conclusively  exposed 
the  trickery  employed,  and  Goble,  in  the  presence  of  his 
master  and  others,  confessed  the  imposture.  But,  after 
Sir  John's  departure,  the  boy  pretended  that  his  confession 
had  been  extracted  from  him  in  mesmeric  trance,  that  he  was 
innocent  of  conscious  imposture,  and  proceeded  to  demon- 
strate, to  his  master's  complete  satisfaction,  that  his  clair- 
voyant powers  were  in  the  main  genuine.^ 

^  Some  account  of  this  case  is  given  in  ihe  Journal  S.  P.  J?.,  July,  1S94. 

^  Illustralions  of  Modem  Mesmerism.     London,  1845. 

^  See  also  in  this  connection  the  account  given  by  Forbes  of  the  exposure  of 
the  deception  employed  by  Miss  Martineau's  servant  Jane  ;  and  compare  Miss 
Martineau's  own  comments  on  the  subject  {Autobiography,  third  edition,  vol.  ii., 
p.  198,  etc.)     Another  striking  illustration  is  given  above,  pp.  91-94- 

274        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

One  of  my  colleagues  on  the  Council  of  the  S.P.R.  has 
related  to  me  a  similar  case.  Some  years  since  he  was 
asked  to  investigate  the  mediumship  of  two  children.  After 
a  more  or  less  prolonged  inquiry  he  succeeded  in  ascertaining 
that  systematic  trickery  had  been  practised ;  trickery  of  an 
unusually  daring  and  complicated  kind,  involving  records 
of  a  permanent  nature  which  could  not  be  explained  away. 
He  obtained  confession  from  the  children,  and  laid  his 
proofs  before  the  father  and  elder  brother,  the  former  a  well- 
known  professional  man.  Their  confidence  in  the  children 
was  shaken  for  the  time ;  but  the  effect  lasted  only  for  a  day 
or  two,  and  then  the  habit  of  belief,  rooted  as  it  was  in  the 
affections,  resumed  possession.  In  my  own  experience  I 
have  met  with  more  than  one  case  of  the  kind,  (though 
I  am  unfortunately  withheld  from  giving  full  details)  in 
which,  conclusive  proof  having  been  obtained  of  fraud  on  the 
part  of  a  private  medium,  the  other  members  of  the  circle 
have  chosen  to  retain  their  belief  in  the  medium  and  his 
phenomena,  at  the  cost  of  deliberately  closing  eyes  and  ears 
to  the  incriminating  evidence. 

In  the  case  which  is  now  to  be  discussed  the  medium 
united  all  the  advantages  above  referred  to.  He  possessed 
the  friendship  and  perfect  trust  of  his  sitters ;  he  was  aided 
by  the  religious  emotions  inspired  by  his  trance  utterances  ; 
he  could  appeal  to  an  unstained  character  and  the  record  of 
a  life  of  honourable  activity. 

William    Stainton    Moses,  ^    known    for    many    years    to 

1  The  account  of  Stainton  Moses'  life  and  work  given  in  the  text  is  derived, 
apart  from  the  author's  personal  knowledge  of  the  subject  of  the  memoir  and 
conversation  with  some  of  his  friends,  from  the  following  sources  : — 

(a)  The  medium's  own  publications :  Psychography,  London,  1878 ;  Spirit 
Identity^  1879  ;  Higher  Aspects  of  Spiritualism,  1880  ;  and  the  Spv-it  Teachings, 
which,  originally  published  in  1883,  were  reprinted  after  his  death  in  a  Memorial 
Edition  (London,  1894),  with  a  short  biographical  notice  by  Mr.  Charlton  Speer, 
the  son  of  the  Dr.  Speer  mentioned  in  the  text.  This  latter  work  will  be  referred 
to  hereafter  as  the  Memorial  Edition. 

{b)  A  series  of  articles,  "  Records  of  Private  Seances,"  which  appeared  in  the 
Spiritualist  newspaper  Light  in  the  years  1892,  1893,  the  earlier  portion  being 
under  Moses'  own  editorship  and  supervision.  These  records  consisted  of 
contemporary  notes  of  the  seances  made  by  Mrs.  Speer,  and  of  portions  of 
Stainton  Moses'  own  fuller  and  more  finished  reports  of  the  same  sittings 

(<r)  Two  articles  by  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  in  Proceedings  S.  P.  i?.,  voxs.  ix.  and 
xi.,  entitled  "The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses."  In _  these  articles 
Mr.  Myers  included  much  evidence  heretofore  unpublished,  the  chief  items  being 
extracts  from  Mr.  Moses'  MS.  note-books,  testimonials  to  character,  and  reports 
of  seances  from  private  friends. 

{d)  From  1874  onwards  Mr.  Moses  was  a  frequent  contributor  to  the  various 
Spiritualist  periodicals,  chiefly  Human  Nature,  the  Spiritualist,  ^x\A  Light ;  but 
I  have  not  found  it  practicable,  from  the  limits  of  space,  to  refer  in  detail  to 
these  contributions. 

WILLIAM  STAINTON  MOSES         275 

Spiritualists  all  over  the  world  under  his  pseudonym  of 
"  M.A.,  Oxon.,"  was  born  in  November,  1839,  at  Donington/ 
in  Lincolnshire,  his  father  being  head  master  of  the  Grammar 
School  there.  At  Bedford  Grammar  School,  which  he 
entered  in  his  sixteenth  year,  he  carried  off  several  prizes, 
and  ultimately  an  exhibition.  He  matriculated  at  Exeter 
College,  Oxford,  at  Michaelmas,  1858,  taking  a  third  class 
in  Classical  Moderations  at  Michaelmas,  i860.  Shortly 
before  his  final  examination  his  health  unfortunately  broke 
down,  and  he  was  compelled  to  go  abroad  for  a  year  to 
recruit,  and  content  himself  with  a  pass  degree.  On  leaving 
Oxford  he  was  ordained,  and  from  1863  to  1870  acted  as 
a  curate,  first  in  the  Isle  of  Man  and  later  in  the  West  of 
England.  Towards  the  end  of  this  period  his  health,  never 
apparently  robust,  again  failed,  and  an  affection  of  the  throat 
finally  compelled  him  to  give  up  parish  work.  In  1870 
accordingly  he  came  up  to  London,  and  took  up  his  resi- 
dence with  some  friends.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Stanhope  Speer, 
acting  as  tutor  to  their  young  son.  In  1871  or  1872  he 
obtained  the  appointment  of  English  master  in  University 
College  School,  which  he  held  until  1889,  when  failing  health 
compelled  him  to  retire.  He  died  in  1892.  His  constitution 
during  the  last  few  years  of  his  life  appears  to  have  almost 
completely  broken  down.  He  suffered  from  extreme 
depression  and  nervous  prostration,  and  severe  neuralgic 
pains.  The  immediate  cause  of  his  death,  it  is  understood, 
was  Bright's  disease.  Alike  as  a  parish  clergyman,  a  school- 
master, and  a  private  tutor,  he  seems  to  have  discharged  his 
duties  efficiently  and  conscientiously,  and  to  the  day  of  his 
death  he  retained  the  respect  and  often  the  warm  regard 
of  those  who  were  brought  into  contact  with  him. 

But  the  foregoing  brief  account  expresses  but  one  side 
of  the  life  of  Stainton  Moses.  In  the  spring  of  1872,  at  the 
instance  of  his  friend  Mrs.  Speer,  he  read  R.  Dale  Owen's 
book.  The  Debatable  Land.  Much  impressed  with  what  he 
read,  he  visited  alone  or  in  company  with  the  Speers  various 
mediums,  Lottie  Fowler,  Williams,  and  Home  being  the  chief, 
and  sat  in  many  private  circles.  Soon  he  developed  medium- 
istic  powers  of  his  own,  which  manifested  themselves  first 
in  physical  phenomena,  later  in  automatic  writing.  He 
rapidly  came  to  the  front  of  the  spiritualistic  movement, 
took  a  large  part  in  founding  the  British  National  Associa- 

1  So  Mr.  Myers  {Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  ix.  p.  248).  In  the  Dictionary  of 
National  Biography  the  name  is  spelt  "  Dorrington."  There  are  places  of  either 
name  in  Lincolnshire. 

276        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

tion  of  Spiritualists,  served  on  the  Council  of  the  Psycho- 
logical Society,  and  until  1886,  when  he  resigned  because 
of  the  Society's  attitude  towards  Eglinton  and  other  public 
mediums,  on  that  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  and 
was  president,  from  1884  until  his  death,  of  the  London 
Spiritual  Alliance.  He  also  acted  for  many  years  as  the 
editor  of  Light.  It  may  be  claimed  for  him,  indeed,  that  he 
was  at  once  the  most  prominent  figure  in  the  domestic 
activities  of  the  Spiritualist  movement ;  the  ablest  and  most 
respected  champion  of  the  Spiritualist  position ;  and  in  his 
own  person  an  exponent  of  the  various  phases  of  medium- 
istic  power  second  only  to  Home  himself. 

Of  the  chief  events  of  Moses'  mediumship  we  have 
fortunately  very  full  records.  From  June,  1872,  he  sat 
regularly  for  some  years,  sometimes  as  frequently  as  four 
or  five  times  a  week,  with  his  two  old  friends.  Dr.  and 
Mrs.  Speer ;  Mr.  F.  W.  Percival  and  a  few  other  specially 
favoured  persons  being  from  time  to  time  admitted  to  the 
circle.  Of  the  happenings  at  these  circles  we  have  in  the 
first  place  an  account  by  the  medium  himself,  compiled, 
since  during  many  of  the  manifestations  he  was  entranced 
and  oblivious  of  what  was  taking  place,  largely  from  informa- 
tion supplied  to  him  by  the  other  witnesses  ;  we  have  also  an 
account  by  Mrs.  Speer,  somewhat  briefer  as  regards  the 
physical  phenomena,  but  adequate;  and  a  still  briefer  and 
more  fragmentary  record,  covering  a  portion  only  of  the 
period,  from  Dr.  Speer.  There  are  also  a  few  independent 
accounts  by  Mr.  Percival,  Mr.  Charlton  T.  Speer,  and  others, 
not  regular  members  of  the  circle.  These  documents  are 
fairly  concordant ;  the  most  noticeable  difference  being  that 
the  medium  himself  records  many  details,  which  do  not 
appear  in  the  other  accounts,  of  tests  and  corroborative 
circumstances.^ 

From  Mrs.  Speer's  account  it  would  appear  that  up  to  the 
middle  of  August,  1872,  the  phenomena  observed  consisted 
exclusively  of  raps  and  movements  of  the  table  with  con- 
tact.^ On  the  30th  July  the  raps  showed  intelligence  for  the 
first  time,  and  answered  the  questions  of  the  sitters.  On  the 
17th  of  August  of  the  same  year,  after  an  intermission  of 
about   two   weeks,    Moses   joined    the    Speers    at   Douglas, 

1  Two  or  three  instances  of  this  kind  are  quoted  in  the  footnotes  on  this  and 
subsequent  pages. 

^  Moses  [Light,  23rd  Jan.  1892)  records,  however,  that  on  the  12th  June, 
1872,  at  a  seance  at  which  Mrs.  Speer  and  her  two  cousins  were  present  with 
him,  well-marked  movements  of  the  table  were  observed  -without  contact  of  any 
kind. 

WILLIAM  STAINTON  MOSES         277 

Isle  of  Man.  That  evening  there  were  loud  and  frequent 
raps  at  the  seance,  and  forty-nine  spirits  announced  their 
presence.  On  the  following  morning,  Sunday,  "  a  butter- 
knife  was  lifted  out  of  a  deep  glass  butter-dish  and  thrown 
down  upon  the  table,  no  visible  hand  near  it."^  Later  in 
the  day  a  memorable  manifestation  took  place,  which  is  thus 
recorded  by  Dr.  Speer : — 

"On  Sunday  morning,  August  i8th,  1872,  my  wife  and  family, 
and  the  Rev.  W.  Moses,  who  had  only  arrived  on  Friday  night,  went 
to  St.  George's  Church,  Douglas,  Isle  of  Man.  On  returning  the 
latter  went  into  his  bedroom,  and  immediately  came  out  and  called 
me  to  witness  the  manner  in  which,  during  his  absence,  certain 
articles  of  toilet,  etc.,  to  wit,  a  writing-case,  a  fiy-book,  and  a  pocket 
note-book,  had  been  symmetrically  placed  on  the  centre  of  the  bed. 
We  at  once  noticed  the  crucial  appearance  exhibited  and  hazarded 
a  guess  as  to  the  intention  thereof.  We  left  the  room  and  shortly 
after  returned,  when  we  found  that  a  skull-cap  lying  on  the  chest  of 
drawers  had  been  placed  on  the  bed-post,  while  the  clerical  white 
collar,  which  Mr.  M.  had  removed  not  many  minutes  before,  had 
been  placed  like  a  halo  around  the  upper  portion  of  the  developing 
cross.  (It  should  here  be  noticed  that  our  express  surmises  as  to 
the  design  apparently  in  progress  were  confirmed  by  various  loud, 
distinct  raps  on  the  foot-board.)  We  again  left  the  room  for  a  time, 
and  found  that  now  the  lower  limb  of  the  cross  had  been  lengthened 
by  the  addition  of  two  ivory-backed  clothes-brushes.  We  descended 
to  dinner,  having  locked  the  door  and  taken  the  key  with  us.^  After 
dinner,  and  while  sitting  round  the  table  at  dessert,  the  conversation 
naturally  (on  the  children  leaving)  reverted  to  these  extraordinary 
proceedings,  when  immediately  manifestations  commenced  all  around 
Mr.  Moses — raps  on  the  table,  thuds  on  the  floor,  raps,  loud  and 
repeated,  on  the  back  of  his  chair.  A  tune  played  on  the  table 
with  my  fingers  was  accurately  imitated ;  the  table  with  all  on  it  was 
moved  out  of  its  place  and  everything  shaken.  This  was  put  a  stop 
to  by  request,  but  the  milder  phenomena  persisted,  and,  it  may 
be  said  once  for  all,  continued  till  nine  p.m.  Mr.  M.  suggested  that 
I  should  go  up  to  his  room  again.  I  did  so,  and  found,  on  unlocking 
the  door,  that  two  paper-knives  had  been  placed  like  rays  to  the 
right  and  left  of  the  cross-bar  of  the  cross.  I  again  locked  the  door, 
put  the  key  in  my  pocket,  and  came  downstairs.  In  about  half  an 
hour  we  returned  and  found  that  two  additional  articles  had  been 
appended.  We  again  left  and  locked  the  door,  and  on  return  after 
another  half-hour  the  cross  had  been  fully  developed  into  halo  and 
rays,  while  the  skull-cap  had  been  placed  above  all  as  in  a  crown."  ^ 

^  Mrs.  Speer,  in  Light,  Feb.  13th,  1892.  Moses  {ibid.)  says  the  butter-knife 
was  "thrown  on  the  table  under  the  eyes  of  us  all." 

^  Moses  says  {Light,  13th  Feb.,  1892)  that  Di:  Speer  locked  the  door  and  put 
the  key  in  his  pocket.  '^  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  ix.  p.  265. 

278        PROBLEMS  OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

Finally  a  piece  of  paper  and  pencil  were  left  in  the  room, 
and  a  monogram  containing  the  initials  of  two  friends  of  the 
medium's  was  subsequently  found  written  thereon. 

In  Mrs.  Speer's  records  of  the  following  day  we  find  the 
first  account  of  two  manifestations  which  were  specially 
characteristic  of  Moses'  mediumship : — 

"August  19th. — Mr.  S.  M.  and  Dr.  S.  sat  alone,  and  had  letters 
and  pamphlets  brought  to  them,  taken  from  the  room  in  which  I  was 
then  sitting  in  the  light.  Papers  and  gloves  were  thrown  upon  the 
table,  also  a  quantity  of  scent." 

At  later  seances  "  apports  "  of  this  kind  were  of  frequent 
occurrence ;  amongst  the  objects  so  introduced,  sometimes 
by  request  of  the  sitters,  sometimes  spontaneously,  were 
books,  opera-glasses,  gloves,  pincushions,  shells,  large  stones, 
snuff-boxes,  candlesticks,  a  chamois  horn,  and  Parian 
statuettes.  Seed  pearls,  cameos,  jewels,  and  other  precious 
objects  were  also  occasionally  brought  and  given  to  the 
sitters.  The  introduction  of  liquid  scent — sometimes  of 
familiar  perfume,  heliotrope,  jasmine,  verbena,  sandalwood, 
sometimes  unrecognised — was  again  a  frequent  feature  in 
the  seances  from  this  time  onwards.  Sometimes  it  would 
be  sprayed  through  the  air,  sometimes  poured  as  from  a 
vessel  into  the  upturned  hands  of  the  sitters ;  frequently 
it  would  be  found  oozing  from  the  medium's  head  and 
running  down,  like  the  precious  ointment  of  Aaron,  to  his 
beard. 

Under  the  30th  August  Mrs.  Speer's  diary  contains  the 
bald  record :  "  Many  things  were  brought  from  different 
parts  of  the  house  through  the  locked  doors  this  evening. 
Mr.  S.  M.  was  levitated,  and  when  I  felt  for  his  feet  they  were 
hanging  in  mid-air,  while  his  head  must  have  almost  touched 
the  ceiling."  ^  Dr.  Speer,  recording  a  "  levitation  "  at  a  later 
date  (Dec.  3rd,  1872),  contents  himself  with  remarking: 
"  Mr.  M.  was  floated  about,  and  a  large  dining-room  chair 
was  placed  on  the  table."  Mrs.  Speer  in  her  independent 
account  says,  "The  physical  manifestations  were  very  strong. 
Mr.  S.  M.  was  levitated."  She  adds  that  they  sat  in  firelight, 
the  stances  as  a  rule  being  held  in  darkness  more  or  less 
complete.^ 

^  Moses'  own  account  of  this  incident  {Human  Nature,  1874,  pp.  172,  173; 
Proc.  S.  P.  P.,  vol.  ix.  p.  261)  is  much  fuller.  He  records  that  he  was  fully- 
conscious  of  floating  about  the  room,  and  that  he  placed  a  pencil  firmly  against 
his  chest  and  marked  the  spot  opposite  to  him  on  the  wall  paper.  This  mark 
was  afterwards  ascertained  to  be  more  than  six  feet  from  the  floor. 

2  Light,  March  5th,  1892. 

WILLIAM  STAINTON  MOSES         279 

On  the  22nd  August  Moses'  hand  wrote  automatically, 
for  the  first  time  in  seance.  On  the  19th  of  the  following 
month  "direct"  writing  was  obtained.  A  piece  of  paper 
was  placed  under  the  table  in  the  dark,  and  when  the  gas 
was  lighted  a  message  was  found  signed  "  Imperator."^ 
Direct  writing  was  afterwards  obtained  on  several  occasions, 
amongst  the  spirits  who  thus  communicated  being  Charles 
Louis  Napoleon  Buonaparte, 

On  the  19th  December,  1872,  the  controlling  spirit, 
"  Imperator,"  spoke  (in  the  darkness)  in  the  direct  voice. 
Thereafter  this  manifestation  also  was  of  frequent  occurrence. 

On  December  31st  yet  another  new  manifestation  was 
vouchsafed.  Hitherto  the  medium  alone  had  been  privileged 
to  see  spirit  lights  and  phantom  forms  at  the  circle.  On  this 
occasion  both  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  saw  a  large  cross  of  light 
behind  the  medium's  head,  and  later  "  a  line  of  light  of  great 
brilliancy,  reaching  several  feet  high  and  moving  from  side 
to  side."^  This  column  of  light  was  seen  again  on  May  nth, 
1873.  But  on  May  25th  Mrs.  Speer  records  that  globe- 
shaped  lights  floated  about  the  room ;  and  from  this  date 
onwards  the  spirit  lights  ^een,  as  described  by  both  Dr.  and 
Mrs,  Speer,  were  mostly  globular,  about  the  size  of  an  orange, 
or  rather  larger.  Mrs.  Speer  first  describes  these  lights  in 
detail  in  notes  of  a  sitting  held  on  23rd  June,  1873  : — 

"This  evening  we  were  told  to  sit  for  spirit  lights.  We  sat  in 
a  large  upstairs  room  communicating  with  a  smaller  one ;  the  door 
between  the  rooms  was  left  open,  a  curtain  drawn  across,  and  a 
large  square  opening  made  in  it  at  the  top  part  of  the  curtain. 
Mr.  S.  M.  sat  in  the  small  room,  Dr.  S.  and  Mrs.  S.  in  the  larger 
one,  at  a  small  table  just  outside  the  curtain.  Mr.  S.  M.  was 
quickly  entranced,  and  remained  so  for  an  hour.  During  that  time 
many  beautiful  spirit  lights  appeared  through  the  aperture  of  the 
curtain ;  some  were  very  large,  and  shaped  like  the  egg  of  an 
ostrich  and  quite  as  large.  The  colour  varied;  some  resembled 
pure  moonlight,  others  had  a  blue  tinge,  while  others  were  dazzlingly 
bright.  They  suddenly  appeared  at  the  opening,  moved  around, 
and  then  vanished,  when  another  kind  would  come,  to  disappear 
in  the  same  mysterious  manner.  Musical  sounds  then  came  around 
us.  Both  rooms  were  often  quite  illuminated  through  the  bright- 
ness of  the  lights."^ 

^  Lights  13th  Feb.,  1892.  Moses  adds  {Light,  27th  Feb.)  that  before  placing 
the  paper  under  the  table  he  tore  off  a  corner  and  handed  it  to  Dr.  Speer,  in 
order  to  identify  the  paper  subsequently.  On  the  manner  in  which  this  ' '  test " 
can  be  evaded  see  the  account  of  a  similar  test  with  Duguid  (above,  pp.  86-7). 

'■^  Ibid.,  1 2th  March,  1892.  Dr.  Speer  adds,  "This  column  of  light  I  placed 
my  hand  upon,  as  seen  upon  the  wall"  {Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  ix.  p.  297). 

^  Ibid.,  30th  July,  1892. 

280        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

The  only  other  physical  phenomena  calling  for  special 
notice  are  the  musical  sounds.  At  first  the  only  sounds 
were  raps  and  blows.  But  in  the  early  months  of  1873 
"  electrical "  sounds  were  heard.  On  March  24th  Mrs.  Speer 
records  the  occurrence  of  a  sound  which  Dr.  Speer  likened 
to  the  notes  of  a  stringed  instrument  sounding  in  the  air.^ 
Thereafter  musical  sounds  developed  rapidly  in  frequency 
and  variety.  In  September,  1874,  Mrs.  Speer  gives  a  detailed 
catalogue  of  them,  enumerating  ten  or  more  varieties,  in- 
cluding the  harp,  tambourine,  fairy-bells,  and  various  stringed 
instruments,  and  ascribing  their  production  to  eight  different 
spirits.  Amongst  these  disembodied  musicians,  it  is  interest- 
ing to  note,  was  that  most  versatile  spirit  Benjamin  Franklin.^ 

From  this  brief  sketch  of  the  physical  manifestations  it 
will  be  clear  that  the  mediumship  of  Stainton  Moses,  in  this 
aspect  at  all  events,  added  nothing  to  the  evidence  for  Spirit- 
ualism. If  we  leave  out  of  the  account  for  the  moment  the 
difficulties  involved  in  the  supposition  that  a  man  of  his 
character  and  antecedents  should  lend  himself  to  trickery, 
there  is  nothing  in  the  manifestations  produced  in  his  presence 
to  suggest  any  other  explanation.  All  that  was  done  has 
been  done  again  and  again  by  fraudulent  mediums  and 
naughty  children,  and  done  under  conditions  much  less 
favourable.  Stainton  Moses  had  the  advantage  of  darkness 
more  complete  than  that  afforded  to  most  mediums.  For 
the  greater  part  of  the  long  period  under  review  his  only 
sitters  were  two  old  friends,  to  whom  the  bare  suspicion  of 
dishonesty  on  the  part  of  their  tried  and  trusted  fellow- 
worker,  the  man  whom  they  had  selected  to  be  the  tutor 
of  their  son,  would  have  seemed  a  monstrous  thing.  No 
tests  of  any  kind  were  imposed,  and  the  controlling  spirit, 
speaking  through  the  mouth  of  the  medium,  sternly  re- 
pressed any  attempt  in  that  direction.^  The  introduction 
of    strangers    was    also    discouraged ;  *    and    though   a    few 

1  Light,  nth  June,  1892.  ^  jMd.,  28th  Jan.,  1893.- 

^  Here  is  one  instance.  On  Sunday,  1st  December,  1872,  Dr.  Speer  had 
suggested,  whilst  a  spirit  message  was  being  rapped  out,  that  all  hands  should 
be  removed  from  the  table.  The  manifestations  at  once  ceased,  and  were  not 
resumed  that  evening.  "Imperator"  failed  to  attend  at  the  next  two  sittings; 
and  being  questioned  on  his  reappearance,  on  Sunday  the  8th,  as  to  the  reason  for 
his  silence,  "he  alluded"— to  quote  Mrs.  Speer's  notes — "to  the  time  when 
Dr.  S.  wished  for  a  test  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence.  The  medium  and  myself 
thought  it  unwise  and  unnecessary,  hence  the  inharmony.  We  then  asked, 
'Were  you  offended  with  Dr.  S.?'  'Yes'  (was  rapped  out  very  decidedly)" 
{Light,  5th  March,  1892). 

■*  See  Mrs.  Speer's  record  of  15th  December,  1872:  "'Imperator'  was  most 
indignant  that  we  had  allowed  a  stranger  into  our  seance-room." 

WILLIAM  STAINTON  MOSES         281 

favoured  persons  were  admitted  later,  their  presence  seemed 
to  exercise  an  injurious  influence  over  the  physical  manifesta- 
tions, so  that  the  phenomena  were  often  limited  to  elevating 
discourse  from  "  Imperator."^ 

It  was  hardly  to  be  expected  that  in  a  circle  constituted 
as  described  actual  proofs  of  fraud  should  come  to  light 
But  it  is  noteworthy  that  even  in  the  records  written  by  the 
Speer  family,  under  the  influence  of  a  strong  prepossession 
in  favour  of  the  medium,  there  are  many  suspicious  circum- 
stances. Thus  Dr.  Speer  records  that  on  one  occasion, 
stretching  out  his  hand  in  the  dark,  he  encountered  another 
hand  in  the  middle  of  the  table,  where  no  hand  should  have 
been  :  the  medium  ostensibly  sitting  at  some  distance  from 
the  table.^  The  spirit  lights  are  described  as  hard,  round, 
and  cold  to  the  touch,  a  description  consistent  with  the 
supposition  that  they  consisted  of  round  bottles  of  phos- 
phorised  oil.  At  some  of  the  early  seances  Dr.  and  Mrs. 
Speer  were  requested  to  rub  their  hands  together  quickly 
when  the  lights  appeared,  in  order  to  generate  power — a 
device  which  might  naturally  suggest  itself  to  a  trickster 
as  a  convenient  means  of  checking  the  impulses  of  unseason- 
able curiosity.^  It  is  to  be  noted  further  that  hands,  and 
occasionally  a  forearm,  were  seen  holding  the  lights.^  Again, 
in  a  passage  to  which  my  attention  was  directed  by  Dr. 
Hodgson,  we  have  the  record — by  the  medium  himself — of 
what  appears  to  have  been  a  miscarriage  to  the  bottle  of 
phosphorised  oil.  After  describing  the  appearance  of  several 
large  lights,  Mr.  Moses  writes  : — 

"Suddenly  there  arose  from  below  me,  apparently  under  the 
table,  or  near  the  floor,  right  under  my  nose,  a  cloud  of  luminous 
smoke,  just  like  phosphorus.  It  fumed  up  in  great  clouds,  until 
I  seemed  to  be  on  fire,  and  rushed  from  the  room  in  a  panic.  I 
was  fairly  frightened,  and  could  not  tell  what  was  happening.  I 
rushed  to  the  door  and  opened  it,  and  so  to  the  front  door.  My 
hands  seemed  to  be  ablaze,  and  left  their  impress  on  the  door  and 
handles.  It  blazed  for  a  while  after  I  had  touched  it,  but  soon  went 
out,  and  no  smell  or  trace  remained.  .  .  .  There  seemed  to  be  no 
end  of  smoke.  It  smelt  distinctly  phosphoric,  but  the  smell 
evaporated  as  soon  as  I  got  out  of  the  room  into  the  air."^ 

■^  See  especially  Mrs.  Spear's  records  of  the  seances  to  which  Mr.  Percival  was 
admitted  in  the  summer  of  1873. 
2  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  ix.  p.  314. 

•^  Light,  13th  Aug.,  1892  ;  Proc.  S.  P.  P.,  vol.  ix.  p.  323,  etc. 
'^  Ibid.,  13th  Aug.,  1892  ;  Proc.  S.  P.  P.,  vol.  ix.  p.  317,  etc. 
^  Ibid.,  vol.  xi.  p.  45. 

282        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

Again,  note  this  significant  episode,  recorded  by  Mr. 
Charlton  Speer  as  one  of  the  two  most  satisfactory  "test" 
incidents  in  his  experience  : — 

"  We  were  sitting  one  night  as  usual,  and  I  had  in  front  of  me, 
with  my  hand  resting  upon  it,  a  piece  of  notepaper  with  a  pencil 
close  by.  Suddenly  Stainton  Moses,  who  was  sitting  exactly 
opposite  to  me,  exclaimed,  '  There  is  a  very  bright  column  of  light 
behind  you.'  Soon  afterwards  he  said  that  the  column  of  light  had 
developed  into  a  spirit  form.  I  asked  him  if  the  face  was  familiar 
to  him,  and  he  replied  in  the  negative,  at  the  same  time  describing 
the  head  and  features.  When  the  seance  was  concluded  I  examined 
my  sheet  of  paper,  which  my  hand  had  never  left,  and  found  written 
on  it  a  message  and  the  signature."^ 

It  is  perhaps  fair  to  assume  that  v\rhen  Mr.  Speer's  atten- 
tion was  thus  directed  to  what  was  going  on  behind  his  back, 
he  momentarily  at  least  diverted  his  attention  from  the  paper 
on  which  his  hand  rested. 

Mr.  Moses  himself,  in  his  published  writings,^  was  wont 
to  attach  considerable  importance  to  the  evidence  for  the 
doctrines  of  Spiritualism  afforded  by  the  communications, 
ostensibly  from  the  spirits  of  deceased  persons,  received 
through  his  mediumship.  Of  communicators  who  thus 
claimed  to  furnish  definite  proof  of  their  identity,  Mr.  Myers, 
who  has  collected  the  evidence  under  this  head  in  a  con- 
venient form,  reckons  thirty-eight  in  all.^  Of  these  thirty- 
eight  persons  some  had  been  known  in  life  to  Moses  himself 
or  to  other  members  of  the  circle ;  some,  such  as  Bishop 
Wilberforce,  Swedenborg,  or  President  Garfield,  were 
historical  personages;  yet  others  were  individuals  of  no 
special  eminence,  and  without  any  apparent  point  of  contact 
with  Mr.  Moses  or  his  circle. 

In  one  important  particular  the  evidence  of  identity  in 
these  cases  is  superior  to  that  generally  furnished  through 
so-called  clairvoyant  mediums.  In  marked  contrast  to  the 
vague  generalities  which  commonly  pass  for  tests,  Mr.  Moses' 
spirits  were  prodigal  of  names,  dates,  and  other  concrete 
facts  which  lend  themselves  to  ready  verification.  Here  is 
ari  example:  "On  February  28th,  1874,  a  spirit  came  by 
raps  and  gave  the  name  '  Rosamira.'  She  said  that  she  died 
at  Torquay  on  January  loth,  1874,  and  that  she  had  lived  at 
Kilburn.^     She  stated  that  her  husband's  name  was  'Lan- 

^  Memorial  Edition,  Introduction,  p.  xviii. 

^  Especially  in  his  Spirit  Identity. 

^  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  xi.  pp.  64,  etc. 

*  Mr.  Moses  lived  for  some  years  at  Birchington  Road,  Kilburn. 

WILLIAM  STAINTON  MOSES         283 

caster ' " ;  and  added  later  that  his  christian  name  was 
"  Ben."  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  whole  of  these  particulars, 
given  at  the  seance  at  the  end  of  February,  are  to  be  found 
in  the  notice  of  the  death  in  the  Daily  Telegraph  of  January 
15th  preceding.^ 

The  case  is  typical.  Mr.  Moses'  spirits  habitually  furnished 
accurate  obituaries,  or  gave  such  other  particulars  of  their 
lives  as  could  be  gathered  from  the  daily  papers,  from  pub- 
lished biographies,  or  from  the  Annual  Register  and  other 
works  of  reference.  All  the  spirits,  indeed,  gave  their  names, 
with  one  exception — an  exception  so  significant  that  the 
case  is  worth  recording.  The  Pall  Mall  Gazette  for  February 
2 1st,  1874,  contains  the  following  item  of  intelligence:  "A 
cabdriver  out  of  employment  this  morning  threw  himself 
under  a  steam-roller  which  was  being  used  in  repairing  the 
road  in  York  Place,  Marylebone,  and  was  killed  im- 
mediately." Mr.  Moses  was  present  at  a  seance  that 
evening,  and  his  hand  was  controlled,  ostensibly  by  the 
spirit  of  the  unhappy  suicide,  to  write  an  account  of  the 
incident,  and  to  draw  a  rough  picture  of  a  horse  attached 
to  a  vehicle.  The  name  of  the  dead  man,  it  will  be  seen, 
does  not  appear  in  the  newspaper  account,  and  out  of  the 
thirty-eight  spirits  who  gave  proofs  of  their  identity  through 
the  mediumship  of  Mr.  Moses  this  particular  spirit  alone 
chose  to  remain  anonymous.^ 

No  account  of  the  life  of  Stainton  Moses  could  be  com- 
plete without  some  notice  of  his  Spirit  Teachings,  a  series  of 
automatic  writings  which  began  in  March,  1872,  and  con- 
tinued uninterruptedly  for  ten  years  from  that  date,  and  with 
lessened  frequency  down  to  the  time  of  his  death.  At  first 
cramped  and  hesitating,  the  writing  soon  came  to  flow 
readily,  and,  according  to  his  own  statement,  without  any 
conscious  intervention  on  the  part  of  the  mortal  penman. 
Indeed,  Moses  tells  us  that  he  was  able  to  read  a  book  or 
otherwise  occupy  his  mind  during  their  production.  The 
communications  were  in  different  handwritings  and  purported 
to  proceed  from  different  spirits,  of  whom  "Imperator,"  the 
guiding  spirit  at  the  physical  seances,  was  the  chief.  The 
original  writings,  which  fill  twenty-four  note-books,  were  left 
to   Moses'   literary    executors   at   his    death,   and    are   still, 

1  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  xi.  pp.  75  and  89. 

^  Ibid.,  vol.  xi.  p.  77.  In  a  former  work,  Studies  in  Psychical  Research,  pp. 
125-33,  I  have  given  a  detailed  analysis  of  these  alleged  spirit  messages  received 
by  Mr.  Stainton  Moses.  To  that  account  I  would  refer  the  reader  who  desires 
further  information  on  the  subject. 

284        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

I  believe,  preserved  for  inspection.  But  the  Spirit  Teachings 
published  in  his  lifetime  contained  copious  selections, 
especially  from  the  earlier  writings,  chiefly  those  given  in 
the  year  1873.  At  the  time  when  the  automatic  writings 
began  Stainton  Moses,  it  will  be  remembered,  had  but 
recently  left  behind  him  seven  or  eight  years  of  active  work 
as  a  parish  clergyman.  He  still  professed  Christianity,  and 
though  he  soon  ceased  to  wear  the  distinguishing  dress  of  an 
Anglican  priest,  the  title  "  Rev."  continued,  at  any  rate  for 
many  years,  to  be  prefixed  to  his  name  in  the  prospectus  of 
University  College  School  and  other  documents.^ 

Naturally,  therefore,  these  earlier  communications  purport- 
ing to  proceed  from  disembodied  spirits  were  occupied 
almost  exclusively  with  the  problems  of  theology  and 
eschatology.  "  Imperator,"  or  some  other  spirit,  writing 
through  the  medium's  hand,  would  expound  the  Spiritualist 
creed,  gently  leading  away  from  the  orthodox  Christian 
doctrine,  and  Mr.  Moses  in  his  own  proper  person  would 
question,  hesitate,  and  hint  doubts  as  to  the  lawfulness  and 
the  authority  of  the  new  teaching.  Throughout  the  years 
1872  and  1873  we  can  trace  in  the  automatic  writing  the 
gradual  widening  of  the  writer's  theological  views,  under 
a  guidance  which,  whether  proceeding,  as  the  communications 
asserted,  from  the  ministrations  of  an  angelic  fellowship,  or 
merely  the  reflection  in  his  own  inner  spirit  of  the  new 
beliefs  and  modes  of  thought  at  work  in  the  environment, 
did,  in  fact,  represent  influences  foreign  to  those  which  had 
hitherto  shaped  his  conscious  thought.  Here  is  an  extract 
from  a  discourse  written  by  "Imperator"  in  June,  1873, 
setting  forth  the  reign  of  law  in  the  world   to  come : — 

"  Immutable  laws  govern  the  results  of  deeds.  Deeds  of  good 
advance  the  spirit,  whilst  deeds  of  evil  degrade  and  retard  it. 
Happiness  is  found  in  progress,  and  in  gradual  assimilation  to  the 
godlike  and  the  perfect.  The  spirit  of  divine  love  animates  the  acts, 
and  in  mutual  blessing  the  spirits  find  their  happiness.  For  them 
there  is  no  craving  for  sluggish  idleness,  no  cessation  of  desire 
for  progressive  advancement  in  knowledge.  Human  passions  and 
human  needs  and  wishes  are  gone  with  the  body,  and  the  spirit  lives 
a  spirit  life  of  purity,  progress,  and  love.     Such  is  its  heaven. 

"We  know  of  no  hell  save  that  within  the  soul,  a  hell  which 
is  fed  by  the  flame  of  unpurified  and  untamed  lust  and  passion, 
which  is  kept  alive  by  remorse  of  agony  and  sorrow,  which  is 
fraught  with  the  pangs  that  spring  unbidden  from  the  results  of  past 

^  His  name  appears  as  Rev.  W.  Stainton  Moses  in  the  list  of  members  of  the 
S.P.  R.  for  1885,  the  last  year  of  his  membership. 

WILLIAM  STAINTON  MOSES         285 

misdeeds,  and  from  which  the  only  escape  lies  in  retracing  the  steps 
and  in  cultivating  the  qualities  which  shall  bear  fruit  in  love  and 
knowledge  of  God. 

"Of  punishment  we  know  indeed,  but  it  is  not  the  vindictive 
lash  of  an  angry  God,  but  the  natural  outcome  of  conscious  sin, 
remediable  by  repentance  and  atonement  and  reparation  personally 
wrought  out  in  pain  and  shame,  not  by  coward  cries  for  mercy 
and  by  feigned  assent  to  statements  which  ought  to  create  a 
shudder."  i 

The  matter  is,  no  doubt,  well  expressed,  and,  as  the  medium 
himself  said  of  the  discourse  from  which  the  extract  is  taken, 
it  seems  rational,  if  not  in  accordance  with  popular  con- 
ceptions of  Christian  doctrine.  But  it  needed  not  that  a 
spirit  should  descend  from  the  seventh  sphere — such  in  effect 
was  "  Imperator's"  position — to  preach  views  which  could  be 
heard  from  any  Unitarian  pulpit. 

Here  is  another  extract,  undated,  but  written  apparently 
a  little  later  in  the  same  year,  descriptive  of  the  triumph 
of  Spiritualism.   The  style  shows  "  Imperator"  at  his  best: — 

"We  tell  you,  friend,  that  the  end  draws  nigh.  It  shall  not  be 
always  so.  As  it  was  in  the  days  which  preceded  the  coming 
of  the  Son  of  Man,  as  it  has  been  in  the  midnight  hours  which 
precede  every  daydawn  from  on  high,  so  it  is  now.  The  night 
of  ignorance  is  fast  passing  away.  The  shackles  which  priestcraft 
has  hung  around  struggling  souls  shall  be  knocked  off;  and  in  place 
of  fanatical  folly  and  ignorant  Pharisaism  and  misty  speculation 
you  shall  have  a  reasonable  religion  and  a  divine  faith.  You  shall 
have  richer  views  of  God,  truer  notions  of  your  duty  and  destiny ; 
you  shall  know  that  they  whom  you  call  dead  are  alive  amongst  you; 
living,  as  they  lived  on  earth,  only  more  really ;  ministering  to  you 
with  undiminished  love;  animated  in  their  unwearying  intercourse 
with  the  same  affection  which  they  bore  to  you  whilst  they  were 
yet  incarned. 

"  It  was  said  of  the  Christ  that  He  brought  life  and  immortality 
to  light.  It  is  true  in  a  wider  sense  than  the  writer  meant.  The 
outcome  of  the  revelation  of  Christ,  which  is  only  now  beginning  to 
be  seen  amongst  men,  is,  in  its  truest  sense,  the  abolition  of  death,  the 
demonstration  of  immortality.  In  the  great  truth — man  never  dies, 
cannot  die,  however  he  may  wish  it — in  that  great  truth  rests  the  key 
to  the  future.  The  immortality  of  man,  held  not  as  an  article 
of  faith,  a  clause  in  a  creed,  but  as  a  piece  of  personal  knowledge 
and  individual  experience,  this  is  the  keynote  of  the  religion  of 
the  future.  In  its  trail  come  all  the  grand  truths  we  teach,  all 
the  noblest  conceptions  of  duty,  the  grandest  views  of  destiny, 
the  truest  realisations  of  life. 

■^  Memorial  Edition,  pp.  77}  7^* 

286         PROBLEMS   OF   MEDIUMSHIP 

"  You  cannot  grasp  them  now.  They  daze  and  bewilder  your 
spirit,  unaccustomed  to  such  a  glare.  But  mark  well,  friend,  brief 
space  shall  pass  before  you  recognise  in  our  words  the  lineaments  of 
truth,  the  aspect  of  the  divine.  +  Imperator."  ^ 

The  doctrines  taught  were,  of  course,  not  novel,  nor  such 
as  need  lay  claim  to  celestial  inspiration.  They  were  the 
common  property  of  a  considerable  group  of  thinkers  at  that 
time  who,  whilst  retaining  a  belief  in  a  future  life,  found 
themselves  unable  to  accept  the  popular  interpretation  of  the 
Christian  tradition  ;  they  are  to  be  found  in  particular  in  all 
the  Spiritualist  writings,  from  the  Great  Harmonia  of 
Andrew  Jackson  Davis  to  the  Debatable  Land  of  Robert 
Dale  Owen,  which  had  formed  the  medium's  propaedeutic 
in  mediumistic  lore.  With  Moses,  indeed,  as  a  man  of  good 
education,  the  ideas  are  clothed  in  more  becoming  form,  the 
whole  teaching  is  more  consistent  and  reasonable  than  with 
most  of  his  predecessors.  The  style  rarely  effervesces,  on 
the  one  hand,  with  sounding  rhetoric  and  sparkling  in- 
coherence, nor  degenerates,  on  the  other,  into  bald  common- 
place. The  writings  are  surprisingly  uniform  in  their  sober 
rationalism,  are  characterised  by  the  loftiest  ethical  pretensions 
and  by  something  like  genuine  religious  fervour.  But,  after 
all,  as  with  most  automatic  utterances,  the  thought  is  lacking 
in  definiteness,  as  the  language  in  which  it  is  embodied  is 
lacking  in  distinction.  We  meet  with  the  continual  repetition 
of  similar  sentiments,  clothed  in  almost  identical  words. 
After  a  {^'^  pages  of  the  kind  of  stuff  above  quoted  we 
find  we  are  no  forwarder  with  the  argument,  and  we  see 
no  particular  reason  why  "Imperator"  should  not  go  on 
for  ever,  like  a  recurring  decimal.  Of  mundane  literature 
the  Spirit  Teachings  most  resemble  sermons,  but  they  are 
not  amongst  the  best  of  their  class. 

Such,  in  brief,  were  the  works  of  the  Reverend  William 
Stainton  Moses.  It  remains  to  construct,  if  we  can,  an 
intelligible  conception  of  the  man.  It  seems  to  me  clear, 
as  I  have  tried  to  show,  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  nature 
of  either  the  physical  or  the  mental  phenomena  described 
to  require  the  operation  of  any  supernormal  agency.  And 
in  default  of  any  sufficient  evidence  from  other  sources  that 
physical  manifestations  of  this  kind  are  ever  due  to  such 
hypothetical  agencies,  it  seems  reasonable  to  conclude  that 
all  the  marvels  reported  at  the  seances  were,  in  fact,  produced 
by  the  medium's  own  hands  :  that  it  was  he  who  tilted  the 
table  and  produced  the  raps ;  that  the  scents,  the  seed  pearls, 
'  Memorial  Edition,  p.  133. 

WILLIAM   STAINTON   MOSES         287 

and  the  Parian  statuettes  were  brought  into  the  room  in  his 
pockets ;  and  that  the  spirit  hghts  were,  in  fact,  nothing  more 
than  bottles  of  phosphorised  oil.  Nor  would  the  feats 
described  have  required  any  special  skill  on  the  medium's 
part.  With  the  exception  of  the  spirit  lights — the  pre- 
paration of  which  in  the  circle  as  constituted  probably 
involved  little  risk — the  things  done  are  all  such  as  tricky 
children  and  novices  generally  have  practised  for  generations 
past  on  their  credulous  friends.  I  doubt  if  this  Moses 
could  have  competed  with  Jannes  and  Jambres. 

But  here  the  real  difficulties  of  the  case  begin.  That 
Stainton  Moses,  being  apparently  of  sane  mind,  should 
deliberately  have  entered  upon  a  course  of  systematic  and 
cunningly  concerted  trickery,  for  the  mere  pleasure  of  mysti- 
fying a  small  circle  of  friends,  or  in  the  hope  of  any  petty 
personal  advantage,  such,  for  instance,  as  might  be  found 
in  the  enhanced  social  importance  attaching  to  a  position 
midway  between  prestidigitator  and  prophet — this  is  scarcely 
credible.  The  whole  course  of  his  previous  life  as  a  hard- 
working parish  priest,  his  contemporary  career  in  the  world 
outside  as  a  successful  and  respected  schoolmaster,  the  ap- 
parently sincere  religious  feeling  shown  in  the  Spirit  Teach- 
ings, all  combine  to  contradict  such  a  supposition.  Nor  is 
it  readily  conceivable  that  such  a  petty  swindler  would  have 
carried  on  the  dull  details  of  his  chicanery  to  the  end,  and 
have  even  left  behind  him,  amongst  his  profitless  records, 
fresh  mystifications  whose  consummation  he  could  not  hope 
to  see.^ 

The  annals  of  apocryphal  literature  no  doubt  furnish  some 
kind  of  parallel.  The  author  of  the  Travels  of  Sir  John 
Mandeville  kept  his  secret  to  the  end  ;  John  Payne  Collier 
died  protesting  the  genuineness  of  his  second  folio ;  Poggio 
Bracciolini  and  his  contemporaries  never  revealed  the  mystery 
of  those  "  brown  Greek  manuscripts  "  which  it  was  their  good 
fortune  to  discover  in  such  suspicious  abundance.  All  these 
no  doubt  found  a  sufficient  reward  in  the  mystification  of 
their  public,  or  the  mortification  of  their  rivals.  But  such 
an  explanation  hardly  seems  to  fit  Stainton  Moses. 

It  is  scarcely  less  difficult  to  conceive  of  any  impersonal 
motive  for  such  prolonged  and  squalid  deception  which  could 
seem  adequate  to  a  sane  mind.  The  writers  of  apocryphal 
gospels  and  the  fabricators  of  monkish  charters  and  title- 

^  See  Mr.  Myers'  account  generally  of  the  communications  in  Mr.  Moses' 
note-books,  and  especially  some  messages  purporting  to  have  come  from  a 
recently  deceased  lady,  which  were  never  apparently  made  public  in  any  form  in 
the  lifetime  of  the  medium  (Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  96). 

288        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

deeds  sought  to  benefit  their  order  or  to  enforce  their  peculiar 
interpretations  of  the  truth ;  the  author  of  Icon  Basilike 
found  his  earthly  reward  in  a  bishopric.  If  we  may  trust 
the  evidence  of  the  Spirit  Teachings,  Moses'  mind  was  pass- 
ing, in  the  early  days  of  his  mediumship,  through  an  in- 
tellectual crisis  of  a  not  uncommon  kind.  Could  he  have 
hoped,  in  those  days  of  failing  ideals,  to  buttress  up  for 
others  by  fraud  a  faith  which  to  his  eyes  now  rested  on  too 
precarious  a  foundation  ?  Or,  conversely,  was  his  medium- 
ship  a  subtle  device  to  bring  discredit  upon  the  search  after 
evidence  of  a  future  life?  Neither  conjecture  is  of  a  kind 
to  carry  conviction. 

To  me  it  seems  frankly  impossible  to  construct  a  working 
hypothesis  on  the  premiss  that  Stainton  Moses  was  of  normal 
mind,  and  actuated  by  motives  which  appeal  to  normal  men. 
There  appears,  indeed,  to  have  been  little  trace  in  his  out- 
ward life,  at  any  rate  during  his  years  of  active  work,  of 
nervous  instability  or  obvious  abnormality  of  any  kind.  As 
a  schoolboy  he  is  known  to  have  been  a  somnambulist,  and 
it  is  on  record  that  on  one  occasion  he  was  seen  by  his 
brother  to  write  in  his  sleep  an  excellent  essay  on  a  subject 
which  had  been  set  to  him  for  the  morrow's  task.  Again, 
at  the  end  of  his  life,  during  a  period  of  extreme  nervous 
prostration,  he  became  a  victim,  like  many  other  mediums, 
to  the  drink  habit.  But  to  those  who  as  mere  acquaintances 
met  him  in  the  committee-room,  on  the  lecture  platform, 
or  in  ordinary  social  intercourse,  he  was  just  an  educated 
English  gentleman,  of  an  irritable  egotism,  a  somewhat 
ponderous  conversation,  and  perhaps  deficient  humour,  but 
in  no  way  transgressing  the  bounds  even  of  convention.^ 
And  yet  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  clue  to  the  enigma 
of  his  life  must  be  sought  in  the  annals  of  morbid  psycho- 
logy. The  question  will  be  further  considered  in  the  next 
two  chapters,  in  connection  with  the  history  of  other  notable 
mediums. 

^  My  own  personal  acquaintance  with  Stainton  Moses  was  but  slight.  I  had 
for  some  years,  from  1880  to  1886,  been  in  the  habit  of  meeting  him  on  com- 
mittees of  which  we  were  both  members,  and  had  spent  a  few  evenings  in  his 
company.  At  one  of  these — a  tete-a-tete  at  his  own  house — I  had  spent  two  or 
three  hours  in  discussing  the  phenomena  exhibited  through  his  mediumship, 
chiefly  the  automatic  writings ;  and  in  examining  some  of  the  note-books  in 
which  "  Imperator's "  utterances  were  recorded.  Mr.  Myers,  in  the  article 
already  referred  to  {Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  ix.  p.  245,  etc.),  quotes  testimonials  from 
Dr.  Eve,  late  Head  Master  of  University  College  School,  and  others  who  were 
brought  into  close  contact  with  Mr.  Moses,  showing  that  he  was  held  in  esteem 
and  regard  by  those  with  whom  he  worked.  I  have  received  like  testimony  from 
several  of  his  more  intimate  associates. 

CHAPTER    VI 
AUTOMATISM 

AFTER  this  brief  survey  of  the  strongest  evidence  so  far 
adduced  for  the  physical  phenomena  of  SpirituaHsm, 
the  reader  will  no  doubt  be  prepared  to  accept  the 
conclusion  provisionally  formulated  in  the  first  chapter  of  the 
present  book,  that,  with  certain  doubtful  exceptions  not 
sufficiently  numerous  or  important  to  weigh  heavily  in  the 
balance,  they  may  be  explained  by  trickery  or  muscular 
automatism  on  the  one  hand,  and  illusion  or  unconscious 
misrepresentation  on  the  other.  It  would  betray,  however, 
a  very  inadequate  conception  of  the  nature  of  the  movement 
to  dismiss  it  as  merely  one  more  instance  of  the  exploitation 
of  fools  by  knaves.  That  many  so-called  mediums  have 
been  knaves  of  a  commonplace  type  there  can  of  course 
be  little  question ;  in  particular,  many  of  the  American 
professionals  who  have  fattened  on  the  credulity  of  their 
victims  appear  to  have  taken  to  spirit-rapping  as  in  other 
circumstances  they  would  have  taken  to  card-sharping  or  the 
confidence  trick.  But  the  typical  mediums,  the  men  or 
women  who  have  risen  to  eminence  in  their  profession,  would 
not  come  under  any  such  familiar  formula.  If  knaves,  they 
seem  at  any  rate  to  have  shared  in  the  folly  of  their  dupes. 
It  is,  no  doubt,  in  this  fact  that  the  secret  of  their  power  lay. 
The  medium  succeeded  in  deceiving  others  because,  wholly 
or  partially,  he  at  the  same  time  deceived  himself;  and  he 
deceived  himself  because,  as  a  rule,  he  was  not  fully  aware 
of  what  he  was  doing.  The  exact  degree  and  nature  of  the 
medium's  moral  responsibility  for  any  particular  action  it  is, 
of  course,  impossible  to  define.  As  Huxley  said  of  the  cray- 
fish, to  know  how  a  medium  feels  and  thinks  one  must 
become  a  medium.  With  mediums  who  exhibit  exclusively 
in  the  trance,  if  the  trance  is  not  merely  assumed  as  a  blind 
— and  as   already   said,  it  is  rarely  possible   to   prove   the 

290        PEOBLEMS  OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

genuineness  of  a  trance  state — the  thaumaturgic  performance 
may  be  wholly  divorced  from  the  waking  consciousness.  On 
the  other  hand,  men  like  Slade  and  Foster  were  possibly 
as  responsible  for  their  actions — no  more  and  no  less— as 
any  other  charlatan  who  preys  upon  society.  ^  Again,  it  is 
not  easy  to  define  how  far,  and  in  what  directions,  medium- 
ship  involves  deviation  from  the  normal.  Some  mediums, 
no  doubt,  exhibit  various  symptoms  of  degeneracy ;  but  to 
no  greater  extent  than  could  probably  be  found  amongst 
criminals  or  vagabonds.  Others,  such  as  some  of  the  clair- 
voyants whose  claims  have  lately  been  investigated  by  the 
Society  for  Psychical  Research,  and  many  private  persons, 
show  on  a  superficial  acquaintance  no  other  external  sign  of 
deviation  from  perfect  sanity  than  is  implied  in  the  liability 
to  fall  into  spontaneous  trances.  Yet  some  of  these  trance 
mediums,  persons  of  good  education,  with  no  pecuniary 
motive,  and  indeed  no  very  obvious  motive  of  any  kind,  for 
fraud,  have  habitually  exhibited  physical  manifestations  of 
the  ordinary  kind.  To  suppose  that  they  cheat  for  the  mere 
fun  of  the  thing  might  be  a  satisfactory  solution  if  the 
performance  took  place  only  now  and  again.  But  when  the 
cheating  is  repeated  day  after  day  and  year  after  year,  the 
fun  must  surely  have  evaporated. 

If  we  revert  to  the  history  of  the  movement,  we  shall 
find  that  the  predecessors  of  the  latter-day  mediums  were 
distinctly  of  a  pathologic  type.  There  can  be  no  question 
that  the  children  who  acted  as  witch-detectors  were  the 
victims  of  their  own  diseased  imaginings,  and  would  in  these 
days  have  been  treated  for  hysteria.  The  naughty  little 
girls  and  boys  who  played,  and  still  play,  the  Poltergeist  in 
quiet  households  exhibit  in  many  instances  similar  morbid 
tendencies;^  and  the  "magnetic"  somnambules,  who  in  the 
early  years  of  the  last  century  served  as  the  first  inter- 
mediaries between  a  supposed  spiritual  world  and  our  own, 
suffered  from  many  ailments  real  and  imaginary.  The  spirit 
mediums  of  the  latter  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  were 
no  doubt  less  obviously  neurotic ;  and  as  the  movement 
progressed  there  was  a  larger  admixture  of  deliberate  and 
apparently  healthy  knavery.^    But  the  history  of  Spiritualism 

^  See  my  Studies  in  Psychical  Research,  pp.  159-60,  and  Proc.  S.  P.  P., 
vol.  xii.  p.  113,  for  some  account  of  the  signs  of  disease  and  abnormality 
observed  in  these  children. 

2  Indications  are  not  granting,  however,  that  even  the  most  apparently 
healthy  mediums  belong  to  a  degenerate  type.  Reference  has  already  been 
made  to  the  charges  of  criminality  brought  against  Foster  (above,  p.  52). 
Similar    charges   have   been   brought   against   Slade   (Truesdell,  Bottom    Facts, 

AUTOMATISM  291 

in  this  country,  as  given  in  the  earlier  chapters  of  the  last 
book,  shows  that  here  at  any  rate  the  professional  trickster 
was  an  exotic.  The  movement  began  with  table-turning, 
and  was  reinforced  and  kept  alive  by  various  private  persons, 
many  of  them  at  any  rate  of  unquestioned  good  faith,  whose 
mediumship  took  the  form  of  automatic  writing,  drawing, 
and  speaking,  and  the  seeing  of  visions.  If  private  medium- 
ship  had  ended  at  this  point  and  the  physical  phenomena 
had  been  confined  exclusively  to  persons  notoriously  practis- 
ing for  money,  the  problem  would  present  less  difficulty. 
But,  as  shown,  physical  mediumship  in  private  circles  soon 
went  beyond  mere  table-turning  and  spirit-rapping,  move- 
ments which  were  no  doubt  in  many  cases  spontaneous  and 
even  unconscious. 

Probably  throughout  the  history  of  the  movement,  as  at 
the  present  day,  private  mediums  who  exhibit  physical 
phenomena  of  a  kind  which  call  for  premeditation  or 
deliberate  effort  have  been  a  small  minority  as  compared 
with  the  number  of  presumably  innocent  persons  whose 
activities  stop  short  at  table-turning  or  trance-speaking. 
But  actually  the  case  is  too  frequent  to  be  lightly  dismissed 
as  accidental  or  unimportant.  Again  and  again  we  find 
persons,  removed  by  education  and  social  position  from  the 
ordinary  temptations  to  fraud,  who  are  engaged  in  the 
production  of  physical  manifestations  involving  elaborate 
and  systematic  deception.  In  default  of  any  adequate 
motive  for  their  conduct,  the  explanation  inevitably  suggests 
itself  that  automatic  movements  of  the  simpler  kind,  un- 
questionably involuntary  with  many  persons  in  their  earlier 
stages,  may  tend  to  pass  over  into  actions  of  a  more  com- 
plicated nature,  and  may  at  the  same  time  lose  something  of 
their  subconscious  character. 

Unfortunately  the  investigation  of  the  problems  of  private 
mediumship  is  hampered  by  two  considerations.  In  the  first 
place  many  of  the  mediums  concerned  are  still  living,  and 
a  certain  reserve  is  necessarily  imposed  upon  one  who,  like 
the  present  writer,  has  been  largely  dependent  for  his  know- 
ledge of  the  subject  upon  the  goodwill  of  the  persons 
investigated.  In  proof  of  the  statement  that  there  have  been 
actual  exposures  of  systematic  and  apparently  disinterested 

pp.  299-301)  and  against  one  or  two  mediums  in  this  country.  Gibier 
\Psychis7n,  pp.  164,  188.  New  Yorlc,  1900)  cites  several  instances  of  physical 
abnormality  and  sexual  aberration  amongst  mediums.  Eusapia  Paladino  is  said 
to  be  liable  to  attacks  of  hystero-epilepsy,  etc.  (Jules  Bois,  in  Le  Matin,  5th  Jan. , 
1902) ;  and  the  notorious  prevalence  of  the  drink  habit  amongst  mediums  points 
in  the  same  direction. 

292        PROBLEMS  OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

deception  by  private  persons,  the  details  of  which  it  is  not 
considered  advisable  to  publish,  I  am  permitted  to  cite 
in  support  of  my  own  personal  experience  the  testimony 
of  my  colleagues,  Professor  Barrett,  Dr.  R.  Hodgson, 
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson.  Reference 
should  also  be  made  to  an  account,  by  the  late  Professor 
Sidgwick,  of  a  case  of  "  Disinterested  Deception."  ^ 

The  case  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses  was  selected,  therefore,  as 
typical  of  private  mediumship  in  general,  not  merely  because 
the  material  was  more  abundant  and  the  variety  of  the 
phenomena  greater,  but  because  his  doings  were  open  to 
discussion  as  being  already  matter  of  history.  But  the 
selection  thus  enforced  had  one  obvious  disadvantage  which 
will  serve  to  illustrate  the  other  main  obstacle  to  investiga- 
tions of  this  kind.  Mr.  Stainton  Moses  had  never  been 
detected  in  trickery.  Exposure,  indeed,  of  the  methods 
employed  by  private  mediums  is,  for  reasons  which  need  not 
be  repeated,  difficult  to  ensure  and  seldom  complete.^ 

Probably  the  stage  performances  of  accomplished  tricksters 
like  the  Davenport  Brothers,  Slade,  and  Foster  have  diverted 
attention  from  the  real  nature  of  the  problem.  Even  such 
representatives  of  the  modern  psychology  as  Munsterberg^ 
and  Jastrow  ^  treat  of  the  subject  as  if  the  main  things  to  be 
explained  were  how  and  why  the  witnesses  were  deceived. 
But  Janet,^  Richet,  and  other  French  writers  have  recognised 
that  the  prior  question  is.  How  came  the  medium  to  deceive  ? 
No  doubt  the  essentially  pathological  nature  of  the  problem 
was  sooner  recognised  in  France  because  of  the  obvious 
affinity  of  certain  stages  of  mediumship  with  the  more 
startling  deviations  from  the  normal  to  be  found  in  such 
institutions  as  the  Salpetriere.  Amongst  English  writers 
Maudsley  has  seen  clearly  that  in  Spiritualism  there  are 
impostors  who  deceive  themselves,  finding  in  that  self- 
deception  their  most  potent  defence ;  and  that  in  this 
kind  of  imposture  there  are  manifold  gradations,  from 
trickery  which  is  almost  wholly  innocent  and  unconscious 

1  Journal S.  P.  R.,  July,  1894. 

2  In  most  "private"  circles,  whilst  thorough  investigation  is  precluded,  the 
precautions  adopted  against  possible  trickery  are  ludicrously  insufficient,  and 
sometimes  of  set  purpose  altogether  omitted.  The  belief  in  the  genuineness 
of  the  resulting  phenomena  in  such  cases  depends  upon  the  confidence  felt  by  the 
circle  in  the  good  faith  of  the  medium — a  consideration  which  is  clearly  irrelevant 
if  it  can  be  shown  that  the  medium  is  not  wholly  responsible  for  his  actions. 

"  Psychology  and  Life,  chapter  on  "Psychology  and  Mysticism."  New  York, 
igog.  ■*  Pact  and  Fable  in  Psychology.     Macmillan,  1901. 

»  V Automatisme  Psychologique,  2nd  edition,  1894,  pp.  376-419. 

AUTOMATISM  293 

to  premeditated  chicanery  hardly  to  be  distinguished  from 
any  other  form  of  vulgar  fraud.^ 

Modern  physiology  has  taught  us  to  look  upon  the 
cerebro-spinal  nervous  system  as  an  aggregation  of  nerve 
centres,  each  tending  to  react  in  its  own  way  in  response 
to  an  appropriate  stimulus  from  without.  The  organism 
is  perpetually  being  assailed  by  stimuli,  incentives  to  action, 
of  one  kind  or  another,  and  a  chaos  of  unrelated  and 
automatic  movements  would  ensue,  but  for  one  circumstance. 
The  aggregation  of  nerve  centres  is  not  simply  an  aggregate, 
but  a  hierarchy,  in  which  the  activities  of  the  lowest  centres, 
the  centres  in  which  the  response  to  external  stimuli  is  the 
most  immediate,  are  continually  checked  and  controlled  by 
the  higher,  the  whole  being  in  the  normal  man  under  the 
supreme  direction  of  those  highest  centres  which  correspond 
to  the  consciousness  and  volition  of  waking  life.  In  the 
amoeba  the  sensation  leads  to  an  immediate  motor  reaction. 
In  man  the  immediate  reflex  action  of  a  sensory  stimulus 
is  commonly  checked,  and  the  nerve  current,  instead 
of  discharging  itself  in  a  movement,  is  diverted  to  higher 
nerve  centres.  Thus  its  energy  may  be  expended  in 
irradiating  by  various  channels  through  the  network  of 
nerve  cells,  a  process  which  results,  on  the  psychic  side,  in 
calling  up  images  associated  with  the  original  sensation. 
Hence  it  comes  about  that  the  psychic  life  of  civilised  man 
stands  out  against  a  dim  background  of  suppressed  actions 
and  inchoate  ideas.  Few  of  us  in  waking  life  are  aware 
of  the  innumerable  faint  images  which  accompany  the  main 
stream  of  thought,  still  fewer  probably  of  the  remote  origin 
of  the  process  of  thought  itself  in  suppressed  speech,  or 
of  the  motor  activities  which  still  tend  to  accompany  that 
process.  For  the  normal  man  those  twilight  regions,  where 
hover  the  ghosts  of  actions  and  ideas  strangled  at  their  birth, 
lie  so  far  beyond  the  light  of  knowledge  that  hardly  even 
in  deliberate  introspection  can  he  catch  faint  glimpses  of 
them.  In  dreams  or  delirium  the  riotous  stream  of 
mechanically  associated  images  shows  us  what  our  thinking 
would  be  if  there  were  no  reflective  faculties  to  select  the 
serviceable  and  suppress  the  irrelevant  elements ;  whilst  the 
man  who  in  deep  reverie  "  thinks  aloud,"  or  follows  the  beat 
of  music  with  swaying  head  and  body,  or,  like  Sam  Weller, 

1  The  Pathology  of  Mind,  3rd  edition,  pp.  64,  65,  78,  etc.  Again,  the 
American  writer  Hammond  divides  mediums,  somewhat  too  sharply  perhaps, 
into  two  classes — the  dishonest  and  the  neurotic  {Spiritualism  and  Nervous 
Derangement.    London,   1876). 

294        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

painfully  indites  his  correspondence  with  tongue  as  well  as 
hand,  reminds  us  of  the  transmuted  muscular  activities  out  of 
which  some  factors  of  our  thinking  are,  in  the  last  analysis, 
fashioned. 

Now  sleep  and  reverie  are  the  most  familiar  examples 
of  certain  states,  as  yet  very  imperfectly  understood,  in 
which  the  equilibrium  of  the  psychic  life  is  upset.  Allied 
states  are  intoxications  of  various  kinds,  the  delirium  of 
fever,  hypnosis,  somnambulism,  and  other  spontaneous 
trances,  double  consciousness,  hysteria,  epilepsy,  and  all 
those  strange  forms  of  neurotic  affections  —  hysterical 
anaesthesia,  hysterical  paralysis,  amnesia,  aboulia,  and  the 
rest — which  have  been  investigated  during  the  last  two  or 
three  decades  by  various  groups  of  French  and  American 
observers.  Whether,  with  Professor  Pierre  Janet,  we  regard 
each  of  these  states,  beginning  with  ordinary  sleep,  as  con- 
stituting in  itself  a  falling  off  from  perfect  health  and  sanity,^ 
or  whether,  with  many  English  and  Continental  medical  men, 
we  argue  that  even  hypnosis  is  compatible  with  the  fullest 
mental  vigour,  is  not,  for  our  present  purpose,  of  material 
importance.  The  common  characteristic  of  all  these  states 
with  which  we  are  here  concerned  is  a  division  or  "  dis- 
sociation "  of  consciousness.  For  whereas  in  the  ordinary 
waking  life  all  the  activities  of  the  organism  are  consciously 
and  deliberately  subordinated  to  a  common  end,  in  these 
conditions  of  psychic  disequilibrium  a  part,  or  it  may  be  the 
whole,  of  our  activities  proceed  without  the  control,  and 
sometimes  without  the  knowledge,  of  the  central  personality. 

The  main  procession  of  ideas,  then,  is  accompanied  by 
innumerable  fainter  images,  which  flit  momentarily  through 
the  penumbra  of  consciousness.  In  other  words,  out  of  the 
innumerable  train  of  images  started  by  automatic  association 
the  attention  selects  a  few  only  on  which  to  focus  the 
consciousness,  and  lets  the  rest  pass  away  to  be,  as  a  rule, 
forgotten.  In  dreams,  however,  where  the  ruling  faculties 
are  asleep,  rejected  material  of  this  kind  comes  to  the  front. 
There  for  the  ordinary  man  the  matter  ends.  But  with  some 
persons  a  state  of  ecstasy  or  reverie  occurs  spontaneously 
or  can  be  induced  by  appropriate  means,  in  which  dream 
images  of  this  kind  appear.  Probably  crystal-gazing  or 
"  scrying "  is  the  most  effective,  as  it  is  one  of  the  oldest 
methods  for  inducing  this  state.     By  gazing  into  a  crystal 

^  See  UAutomatisme  Psychologique,  p.  137.  "  Un  individu  parfaitement 
sain  .  .  .  mais  aucun  homme  n'est  aussi  parfait :  mille  circonstances,  I'etat 
de  passion,  Vitat  de  sommeil,  I'ivresse  ou  la  maladie  diminuent  ou  detruisent,"  etc. 

AUTOMATISM  295 

some  persons  can  become,  as  it  were,  spectators  of  their  own 
dreams.^  Of  recent  years,  under  the  auspices  of  the  late 
Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  in  this  country,  a  number  of  persons 
have  made  trial  of  their  power  of  crystal-gazing  and  have 
recorded  the  results.  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  Professor  Pierre 
Janet,  Dr.  Morton  Prince,  Professor  Hyslop,  and  others  have 
also  contributed  observations  made  by  themselves  on  other 
persons.  In  many  cases  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the 
faculty  of  seeing  pictures  in  a  crystal  implies  no  greater, 
or  hardly  greater,  deviation  from  normality  than  the  faculty 
of  seeing  similar  pictures  in  dreams.  The  following  is  an 
abridged  account,  written  in  1892,  of  her  own  experiences 
by  a  competent  observer,  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall,  a  lecturer  at 
Newnham  College.^ 

Mrs.  Verrall  states  that  she  is  a  good  visualiser,  and  embodies 
most  of  her  ideas  in  pictorial  form.  The  mention  of  a  name 
instantly  calls  up  a  mental  picture.  She  sees  faces  in  the  fire  and 
shapes  in  the  clouds,  and  has  had  several  spontaneous  visual  impres- 
sions (quasi-hallucinations).  Cut  crystal,  polished  glass,  or  a  glass 
of  water  are  equally  efficacious  in  inducing  pictures,  but  a  dim  light 
is  found  to  be  preferable.  Mrs.  Verrall  believes  that  the  crystal 
picture  is  built  up  from  the  bright  points  of  light  reflected  in  the 
crystal ;  but  the  picture  once  formed  has  a  reality  and  a  spontaneity 
quite  unlike  an  imaginary  scene  called  up  voluntarily  with  closed 
eyes.  The  pictures  are  mostly  coloured,  but  occasionally  resemble 
black  and  white  sketches.  They  represent  animals,  human  beings, 
common  objects  (clock,  ring,  melon),  or  landscapes,  and  other 
scenes  real  and  imaginary.  In  but  a  small  proportion  of  cases  has 
Mrs.  Verrall  been  able  to  trace  the  origin  of  the  pictures  in  any 
recent  memories.     But  it  is  clear,  from  one  or  two  incidents  in  her 

^  In  some  persons  the  structure  of  thought  is  apparently  not  primarily  com- 
pounded of  visual  images,  but  of  images  derived  from  other  sensations,  usually 
auditory  or  motor.  And  experience  shows  that  there  are  very  wide  differences 
between  individuals  in  the  power  of  forming  visual  images.  The  classic  illustra- 
tion is  Mr.  Galton's  account  of  the  result  of  his  statistical  inquiry  on  mental 
imagery  {Inquiries  into  Human  Facility,  1883,  p.  83  et  seq.).  Mr.  Myers 
{Sensory  Automatism,  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  436-535)  gives  accounts, 
collected  from  various  sources,  of  the  systematised  visual  imagery  which  accom- 
panies thought  in  certain  persons.  But  in  crystal  vision,  as  in  dreams  and 
hallucinations  generally,  it  seems  to  be  the  floating,  half-developed,  unsystematised 
images  which  make'  their  presence  felt.  The  fullest  and  most  recent  account 
of  this  unsystematised  mental  imagery  underlying  our  psychical  life  which  I  have 
seen  is  contained  in  a  monograph  supplement  to  the  Psychological  Review  (New 
York,  May,  1898),  "  On  Mental  Imagery,"  by  Wilfrid  Lay.  Mr.  Lay  begins  by 
distinguishing  this  half-conscious  mental  imagery  from  (i)  what  is  commonly 
known  as  "imagination";  (2)  sensation;  (3)  visual  after-images;  (4)  mere 
memory  images.  Visual  images  appear  greatly  to  preponderate  as  a  rule.  In  his 
own  case  they  form  about  57  per  cent,  of  the  total,  auditory  images  numbering 
about  29  and  olfactory  about  6  per  cent. 

2  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  473-8. 

296         PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

experience,  that  the  pictures  in  the  crystal  may  represent  things 
seen  some  time  since  and  forgotten.  Thus,  on  August  25th,  1890, 
Mrs,  Verrall  saw  in  the  crystal  an  'ugly  clock  in  white  alabaster, 
round  face  on  hideous  stand,  dial  black,  letters  gold.'  She  made 
a  rough  sketch  of  the  clock,  but  could  not  identify  it.  A  fortnight 
later,  going  to  the  house  occupied  by  a  sister  of  one  of  her  servants 
(in  which  she  had  been  on  one  occasion  about  a  year  before),  she 
saw  on  the  mantelpiece  an  alabaster  clock  very  closely  resembling 
the  clock  of  her  vision.  That  the  real  had  served  as  the  prototype 
of  the  visionary  clock  is  rendered  more  probable  from  the  fact  that 
Mrs.  Verrall  had  special  reason  at  the  time  for  thinking  of  the  house 
in  connection  with  her  former  servant. 

Mrs.  Verrall's  crystal  visions  are  mostly  quite  trivial  and  pur- 
poseless; but  she  records  that  she  often  receives  from  the  crystal 
intimations,  not,  however,  pictorial,  reminding  her  of  things  which 
she  had  forgotten. 

Mrs.  Verrall's  experience  appears  to  be  fairly  typical.  The 
special  points  to  be  noticed  are  that  the  visions  are  quite 
unmistakably  real  at  the  time  of  their  appearance ;  so  real 
and  persistent,  indeed,  that  some  seers  find  it  possible  to 
employ  a  magnifying  glass  to  bring  out  the  details ;  that 
they  are  spontaneous,  and  often  can  neither  be  summoned 
nor  dismissed  at  w^ill ;  and  that  they  are  mostly  as  trivial 
and  purposeless  as  dreams.  No  doubt,  as  a  rule,  the  crystal 
pictures  are  simply  reproductions  or  reconstructions  of  recent 
experiences ;  but  w^ith  most  seers  it  is  only  a  small  pro- 
portion that  can  be  directly  traced  to  their  source.  There 
are  a  good  many  instances  on  record,  how^ever,  in  w^hich  the 
picture,  as  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  alabaster  clock,  has 
been  proved  to  be  a  more  or  less  imaginatively  altered 
reproduction  of  a  scene  long  passed  from  the  conscious 
memory ;  or  of  an  object  or  mental  image,  perhaps  of  recent 
occurrence,  which  never  reached  the  focus  of  consciousness 
at  all.  An  experimental  parallel  to  these  cases  can  be 
observed  in  hypnotic  subjects.  The  subject  when  awakened 
can  often  be  made  to  see  in  the  crystal  some  scene  suggested 
to  him,  without  retaining  any  recollection  of  whence  the 
suggestion  comes  ;^    or  will  even,  as  in  some  of  Professor 

^  Thus  in  a  recent  experiment  I  had  repeated  to  a  hypnotised  subject,  for  the 
purpose  of  testing  his  memory,  a  Latin  version  of  a  bit  of  English  doggerel : — 
"  Sanguinolentus  erat,  si  vera  est  fabula,  passer 
Cui  fuit  in  plumbo  sanguinolenta  donius,"  etc.,  etc. 

It  then  occurred  to  me  to  bid  him  see  in  a  looking-glass,  on  waking,  the  scene 
described  by  the  lines.  On  waking,  after  writing  some  of  the  lines  in  spiegel- 
schrift  {i.e.  writing  reversed  so  as  to  be  read  in  a  mirror),  he  took  up  the  glass 
which  had  been  used  by  me  for  interpreting  the  spiegel-schrift,  and  said  that  he 

AUTOMATISM  297 

Janet's  amnesic  patients,  furnish  by  this  means  to  his 
physician  useful  information  on  the  events,  long  since  wiped 
out  from  the  waking  consciousness,  which  caused  the  malady.^ 
As  in  the  present  chapter  it  is  proposed  to  deal  solely  with 
the  psychological  mechanism  of  crystal-seeing,  I  omit  for 
the  present  all  reference  to  the  alleged  telepathic  or  clair- 
voyant significance  of  many  of  these  visions. 

In  one  respect  Mrs.  Verrall's  experiences  are  exceptional, 
or  her  observation  more  critical  than  that  of  her  fellow-seers. 
She  believes,  it  will  be  seen,  that  the  bright  points  of  light 
seen  in  the  crystal  probably  act  as  points  de  repere  for  her 
visions.  Most  crystal-seers  do  not  recognise  such  an  origin. 
But  that  the  bright  polished  surface  of  the  glass  or  crystal 
does  act  in  some  way  as  a  stimulus  to  the  retina,  and  thus 
infuses  a  sensory  quality  into  the  vague  images  flitting 
through  the  twilight  of  consciousness,  there  can  be  little 
question.  The  fact  that  the  substances  commonly  used  for 
scrying — crystal,  glass,  water,  dark  polished  wood,  oiled  finger- 
nails, etc. — have  common  physical  characteristics  is  sufficient 
to  indicate  some  physical  effect.^  In  a  case  recorded  by 
Professor  Hyslop  the  seeress,  before  a  crystal  was  put  into 
her  hands,  had  been  in  the  habit  of  seeing  visions  on  the 
surface  of  sunlit  water.^  Mrs.  Verrall,  it  will  be  seen,  is  not 
apparently  aware  of  any  alteration  in  her  state  of  conscious- 
ness during  her  crystal  visions.  And,  indeed,  in  the  normal 
person  it  would  appear  that  the  disturbance  in  such  cases 
is  extremely  slight.  But  some  seers  of  visions  recognise  a 
subtle   change   in   consciousness   during   the  vision.      Thus 

saw  in  it  a  small  bird  of  some  kind — a  sparrow — and  some  straw  in  its  mouth  ; 
it  was  building  its  nest  in  a  gutter  or  spout.  The  vision  soon  faded ;  and  he 
seemed  to  have  no  idea  that  it  had  been  suggested  to  him  by  the  lines  quoted. 

^  See  Nevroses  et  Idees  fixes ;  also  M.  Janet's  remarks  at  the  London  Inter- 
national Congress'  of  Experimental  Psychology,  quoted  by  Mr.  Myers,  Proc. 
S.  P.  P.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  482,  483.  Miss  Goodrich-Freer  {Essays  in  Psychical 
Research.  London,  1899)  gives  some  interesting  illustrations  of  forgotten 
incidents  brought  to  light  by  the  crystal. 

'■^  A  shining  surface  is  not  absolutely  essential,  however  ;  blank  sheets  of  paper 
and  other  similar  objects  have  served  the  purpose. 

^  Proc.  S.  P.  P.,  vol.  xii.  p.  259.  W.  R.  Newbold  {Psychological  Review,  July, 
1895),  from  the  observation  of  various  cases  of  crystal-seeing,  draws  the  con- 
clusion that  the  visionary  scene  represents  the  reflex  response  of  the  retina 
and  lower  optical  centres  to  the  prolonged,  vague,  indeterminate  stimulus 
afforded  by  the  lustrous  surface  of  the  glass.  The  smoky  or  milky  clouds  seen 
by  most  crystal-gazers  represent,  according  to  him,  the  first  (mainly  retinal) 
reflex ;  and  this  first  amorphous  sensation  gradually  becomes  modified  by  the 
ideational  centres.  He  quotes  the  case  of  a  crystal-seer,  a  young  girl,  who 
describes  in  the  first  instance  a  grey  spot,  and  proceeds :  "  Then  the  grey  spot 
seems  to  sink  to  the  bottom  of  the  glass,  and  turns  and  whirls  about  slowly ; 
then,  of  course,  it  has  to  become  something. " 

298        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

Mr.    Keulemans,   a  well-known   scientific   draughtsman,  re- 
cords that : — 

"The  eye  of  a  bird,  during  the  slow  process  of  drawing  it,  forms 
a  capital  point  of  concentration  for  the  mind  and  consequent  dis- 
traction from  ordinary  flows  of  thought,  I  noticed  that  whenever 
strong  impressions  had  got  hold  of  my  mind  they  had  a  tendency 
to  develop  themselves  into  a  vivid  mind-picture  as  soon  as  my  eye 
and  attention  were  concentrated  upon  the  eye  in  the  drawing ;  and 
that  whenever  I  began  darkening  the  iris,  leaving  the  light  speck 
the  most  prominent  part,  I  would  slowly  pass  off  into  a  kind  of 
dream-state."! 

On  the  other  hand,  Miss  Good  rich-Freer  ("Miss  X.")  believes 
that  her  crystal  visions  occur  without  diminution  of  her 
conscious  activity.  But  in  the  case  of  her  spontaneous 
visions,  at  any  rate,  there  would  seem  to  be  some  disturbance 
of  the  psychic  equilibrium.  Here  is  an  account  by  a  friend 
who  was  present  during  one  of  Miss  Freer's  visions  : — 

"  'X.'  [Miss  Freer's  pseudonym]  and  I  were  dressing  to  go  [out] 
when  I  suddenly  noticed  that  her  eyes  were  fixed  on  the  window  in 
a  manner  I  knew  well,  and  have  long  learnt  to  associate  with  some- 
thing '■uncanny.''  I  waited  until  her  face  regained  its  normal  ex- 
pression, and  then  asked  what  she  had  seen  or  what  she  felt.  She 
turned  to  the  clock  and  said  in  a  dreamy,  far-away  tone,  'A  quarter- 
past  eleven — I  think  Mr.  C.  is  dead,  or  very  ill.'"^ 

In  this  case,  however,  the  vision  occurred  spontaneously ; 
and  in  Mr.  Keulemans'  case  the  reverie  was  apparently 
hastened  by  a  previously  existing  idea  struggling  for  ex- 
pression. It  is  likely  that  under  such  circumstances  the 
disturbance  of  consciousness  would  be  more  profound  than 
in  the  deliberately  induced  crystal  vision,  where  the  attention 
is  directed  beforehand  to  observing  and  recording  the  results 
of  the  experiment.^ 

^  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  viii.  p,  517. 

^  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  132  ;  see  also  Parish  (to  whom  I  owe  this  refer- 
ence), Hallucinations  and  Illusions,  p.  297  and  elsewhere,  on  the  indications  of 
dissociation  of  consciousness  accompanying  similar  visions.  Another  crystal-seer, 
"Miss  A.,"  writes  that  if  she  looks  long  in  the  crystal  her  eyes  water,  and  she 
has  "a  feeling  as  if  a  band  were  tied  round  my  head"  {Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  viii. 
p.  500). 

'^  For  other  accounts  of  crystal  vision  see  the  records  by  various  persons 
quoted  in  Mr.  Myers'  article  on  ' '  Sensory  Automatism  and  Induced  Hallucina- 
tion" already  referred  to  {Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  436-535)  ;  Miss  Freer's 
own  account  of  her  experience,  in  Essays  in  Psychical  Research  (Redway,  1899) ; 
an  article  by  Professor  Hyslop,  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  xii.  p.  259,  etc.  ;  "The 
Experimental  Study  of  Visions,"  by  Dr.  Morton  Prince,  Brain,  1898,  p.  529; 
Proc.  S.  P.  R. ,  vol.  xiv.  p.  366  ;  The  Making  of  Religion,  by  Andrew  Lang, 
Longmans  and  Co.,  1898,  chap,  v.,  on  "Crystal  Vision,  Savage  and  Civilised"; 

AUTOMATISM  299 

Of  other  conditions,  apart  from  disease,  which  favour  the 
production  of  sensory  hallucination,  probably  the  most  effica- 
cious are  those  incidental  to  a  Spiritualist  seance.  The  pro- 
longed darkness  in  itself  appears  to  act  as  a  stimulus  to  the 
retina ;  entoptic  phenomena  which  escape  notice  in  broad 
daylight  become  conspicuous  in  the  almost  complete  absence 
of  external  stimuli,  just  as  organic  sensations  from  the  viscera 
come  to  the  surface  in  dreams ;  or,  again,  streaks  of  light 
through  crevices,  or  faint  reflections  from  polished  surfaces 
become  the  starting-point  for  elaborate  sensory  figments. 
That  the  emotional  conditions  are  peculiarly  favourable  for 
sense-deception  has  been  already  pointed  out.  It  is  well 
known  that  vague  cloudy  lights  are  often  seen  at  dark 
seances,  and  that,  as  in  the  crystal  similar  photisms  generally 
usher  in  definite  pictures,  so  at  the  dark  seance  these  cloudy 
lights  may  precede  or  develop  into  the  appearance  of  definite 
human  forms.  Recently  various  critical  observers  have  re- 
corded results  of  this  kind  either  in  their  own  experience  or 
from  observations  of  others.^ 

By  whatever  means  induced,  this  power  of  seeing  visions 
seems  to  develop  rapidly  with  exercise,  to  such  an  extent 
that  the  subject  is  liable  to  be  constantly  hallucinated.  I 
have  known  several  Spiritualists  of  unquestioned  integrity, 
who  would  frequently  see  visions  and  phantasmal  figures, 
often  in  broad  daylight.  Most  successful  crystal-seers  have 
experiences  of  such  spontaneous  visions. 

In  dealing  with  clairaudience,  the  hearing  of  voices,  music, 
and  the  like,  we  do  not  find  any  such  wealth  of  material  to 
assist  our  analysis ;  nor,  indeed,  does  the  subject  lend  itself 
so  readily  to  systematic  investigation.  But  there  is  no 
reason  to  doubt  that  the  phenomena  have,  physiologically, 
the  same  origin  as  the  visions  which  we  have  just  been  con- 
sidering ;  that  the  voices  heard  are,  in  fact,  simply  the  result 
of  the  exaggerated  activity  of  lower  cerebral  strata,  released 
for  the  time  from  the  repressive  control  habitually  exercised 
by  the  higher  centres.^ 

Psychological  Review,  New  York,  July,  1895,  "The  Experimental  Induction  of 
Automatic  Processes,"  by  W.  Romaine  Newbold  ;  the  writings  of  Pierre  Janet ; 
an  article  on  "  Magic  Mirrors,"  etc.,  by  Andrew  Lang,  in  the  Monthly  Magazine 
for  December,  1901,  etc. 

^  See  especially  "A  Study  in  Spiritistic  Hallucinations,"  by  Professor  Hariow 
Gale,  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  xv.  pp.  65-90;  "Some  Psychical  Phenomena  bearing 
upon  the  Question  of  Spirit  Control,"  by  Principal  C.  H.  Tout,  ibid.,  vol.  xi. 
p.  309;  "A  Case  of  Psychic  Automatism,"  communicated  by  Professor  W. 
James,  ibid.,  vol.  xii.  p.  281. 

2  Mr.  Myers  {Proc.  S.  P.  R. ,  vol.  viii.  p.  492)  quotes  an  account  by  "  Miss  X."(Miss 
Freer)  of  auditory  hallucinations  (human  voices  and  musical  sounds)  induced  by 

300        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

If  we  turn  to  the  manifestations  of  motor  automatism — 
inspirational  writing,  drawing,  speaking,  movements  of  tables, 
rapping,  etc. — we  shall  find  a  like  explanation  indicated. 
That  our  ordinary  visible  and  conscious  activities  are 
habitually  attended  by  innumerable  suppressed  motor 
reflexes  is  less  easy  to  demonstrate  than  in  the  parallel  case 
of  faint  sensory  images.  Not  only  is  the  unconsciousness 
more  profound  in  the  one  case  than  in  the  other,  but,  for 
obvious  reasons,  no  organism  could  long  survive  in  which 
a  riot  of  unrestrained  motor  activities  at  all  comparable  to 
the  lawless  crowd  of  dream  images  was  liable  to  occur,  even 
occasionally.  To  find  a  parallel,  on  the  motor  side,  to  the 
phenomena  furnished  by  dreaming  on  the  sensory  side,  we 
have  to  look  to  our  hospitals  and  asylums.  Sudden  out- 
breaks of  mania,  and  especially  the  mania  which  follows 
a  violent  epileptic  attack,  are  plausibly  explained  as  due 
to  the  healthy  functioning  of  the  still  unimpaired  inter- 
mediate regions  of  the  cerebro-spinal  system  suddenly 
released  from  the  inhibitory  influence  of  the  cortical  centres, 
which  are  completely  exhausted  by  the  prior  paroxysms.^ 

But  even  in  normal  life  we  can  discover  traces  of  these 
imperfectly  strangled  activities.  All  thinking  in  the  civilised 
man  is  "  more  or  less  successfully  suppressed  action,  and,  as 
a  well-known  muscle-reader  expresses  it,  all  willing  is  either 
pushing  or  pulling."^  "Thinking  aloud"  may  be  regarded 
as  merely  an  atavistic  reversion  to  the  primitive  form  of 
thought ;  and  the  effort  to  concentrate  thought,  to  think 
strongly  on  a  concrete  matter,  e.g.  a  name  or  an  object,  tends 
constantly  to  produce  some  form  of  muscular  activity,  either 
subconscious  whispering  of  the  name  thought  of,  or  sub- 
conscious movement  in  the  direction  of  the  object.  It  is 
on  this  tendency  that  the  marvellous  success  of  professional 

holding  a  shell  to  the  ear.  W.  R.  Newbold  {Psychological  Review,  New  York, 
July,  1895)  rnentions  a  young  woman  in  whom  auditory  hallucinations  would  be 
excited  on  hearing  the  sound  of  water  running  from  a  spigot ;  also  a  paranoiac, 
who  complained  of  hearing  a  continuous  hissing,  which  sometimes  developed 
into  abusive  language ;  the  cause  was  ultimately  traced  to  a  chronic  inflamma- 
tion of  the  inner  ear  (see  also  Parish,  Hallucinations  and  Illusions,  pp.  70,  71). 
Auditory  hallucinations  are,  it  is  well  known,  comparatively  rare  amongst  sane 
persons.  The  hearing  of  voices — i.e.  clearly  externalised  voices,  as  distinguished 
from  the  "inner  voice" — is  not,  therefore,  so  common  a  form  of  mediumship  as 
the  seeing  of  visions  or  phantasmal  figures.  But  I  have  come  across  several 
instances  amongst  Spiritualists. 

^  See  Croonian  Lectures  on  the  Evolution  and  Dissolution  of  the  Nervous 
System,  by  Dr.  Hughlings-Jackson,  1884.  In  the  same  way  the  rats  seen  in 
delirium  may  be  regarded  as  the  outcome  of  the  still  healthy  intermediate  sensory 
centres  which  have  not  been  affected  by  the  disease. 

^  Jastrow,  Fact  and  Fable  in  Psychology,  p.  336. 

AUTOMATISM  301 

"  thought-reading,"  more  aptly  called  "  muscle-reading," 
depends. 

Of  late  years  some  critical  study  has  been  given  to  these 
involuntary  movements.  Professor  Jastrow  has  devised  an 
instrument,  a  modification  of  that  employed  in  the  case  of 
table-turning  by  Faraday,  for  recording  movements  of  the 
hand  and  body  when  the  mind  is  under  the  influence  of 
various  preoccupations.  He  has  set  his  subject  to  name 
a  list  of  colours,  think  of  a  given  locality,  or  count  the 
oscillations  of  a  pendulum ;  and  he  has  found  that  the 
record  of  the  slight  automatic  movements  of  head  and  hand 
tends  to  show  some  rough  correspondence  with  the  subject's 
mental  occupation  ;  there  is  movement  in  the  direction  of 
the  place  thought  of,  or  back  and  forward  movements  in 
sympathy  with  those  of  the  pendulum.^ 

Again  Professor  W.  R.  Newbold^  and  Mr.  Solomons  and 
Miss  Stein  ^  have  made  experiments  in  eliciting  automatic 
writing  and  speaking  from  normal  subjects.  The  results 
obtained  were  not  perhaps  very  striking ;  the  specimens 
of  automatic  writing  furnished  by  the  latter  observers,  in 
particular,  are  very  far  inferior,  in  fluency  and  in  intellectual 
content,  to  some  of  the  "  inspirational "  writings  which  we 
have  considered  in  previous  chapters.  But  the  experiments, 
nevertheless,  go  to  show  that,  even  in  perfectly  normal 
individuals,  there  is  a  general  tendency  to  movement  without 
conscious  motor  impulse,  for  sensory  ideas  to  pass  on  sub- 
consciously into  motor  reactions,  and  for  the  organism  to 
react  automatically  to  stimuli  such  as  that  afforded  by  a 
pencil  placed  in  the  hand  ;  that  such  normal  persons  may 
train  themselves  to  write  or  read  aloud,  whilst  the  main 
current  of  their  attention  is  otherwise  occupied,  in  such  wise 
that  they  may  be,  for  some  moments  at  a  time,  ignorant 
of  the  things  written  or  spoken  ;  and  that,  in  particular,  they 
may  be  entirely  unconscious  of  any  volition  of  their  own 
in  connection  with  the  movements  of  the  hand  in  writing. 
The  movement  in  such  cases  seems  to  the  owner  of  the  hand 

^  Fact  and  Fable  in  Psychology,  by  Joseph  Jastrow  (Boston,  U.S.A.,  1900). 
A  record  of  these  experiments  first  appeared  in  the  American  Journal  of 
Psychology,  vol.  iv.  (1892)  p.  398,  under  the  title  of  "A  Study  of  Involuntary 
Movements."  A  record  of  further  and  more  elaborate  experiments  on  similar 
lines,  and  tending  to  similar  conclusions,  will  be  found  in  an  article  by  Milo  A. 
Tucker,  in  vol.  viii.  p.  394  of  the  same  review. 

^  Psychological  Review ,  New  York,  July,  1895. 

2  Ibid.,  Sept.,  1896.  An  article  by  Miss  Stein  {ibid.,  May,  1898),  on 
"  Cultivated  Motor  Automatism,"  contains  an  account  of  some  later  experiments. 
But  none  of  her  subjects  seem  to  have  shown  spontaneity  in  the  automatic 
writing. 

302        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

extra-personal  ;  and  he  finds  himself  in  some  instances 
unable  to  distinguish  between  its  spontaneous  motions  and 
those  mechanically  imposed  upon  it  by  the  person  conducting 
the  experiment.  On  the  whole  these  results  go  to  prove  that 
though  the  various  motor  automatisms  which  we  have  to 
consider  in  the  case  of  spirit  mediums  may  be  regarded 
as  merely  exaggerated  illustrations  of  phenomena  constantly 
attendant  on  our  waking  life,  they  are  exaggerations  which 
will  rarely  be  found  under  ordinary  circumstances  in  perfectly 
normal  individuals.^ 

It  is  only  in  persons  predisposed  by  constitution  and 
temperament  to  such  exercises,  or  in  whom  the  psychic 
equilibrium  is  temporarily  upset  through  fatigue,  illness,  or 
some  strong  emotional  stress,  such  as  grief,  anxiety,  or  the 
excitement  produced  by  witnessing  similar  manifestations 
in  others,  that  the  automatic  movements  attain  any  notice- 
able development.  At  the  ordinary  spirit  seance,  as  already 
shown,  some  or  all  of  these  causes  are  in  operation.  The 
assistants  at  such  seances  constantly  feel  a  sensation  of  cool- 
ness on  their  hands,  see  vague  lights  in  the  surrounding 
darkness,  and  experience  spasmodic  twitchings  of  their 
hands  and  arms.  The  latter  soon  evolve,  under  favourable 
conditions,  into  automatic  drawing  and  writing  :  or  the 
nascent  medium  may  exhibit  involuntary  speech  with  or 
without  temporary  loss  of  consciousness.  Abundant  illustra- 
tions of  all  these  developments,  and  of  the  contagious  effect 
of  example,  have  been  given  in  preceding  chapters.  Of 
recent  years  there  have  been  several  critical  studies  of  the 
phenomena.  M.  Flournoy,  to  whose  work  further  reference 
will  be  made  later,  has  published  accounts  of  several  cases 
of  automatic  writing  observed  by  him.^  Mr.  Charles  Hill 
Tout,  principal  of  Buckland  College,  Vancouver,  has  fur- 
nished a  valuable  record  of  some  mediumistic  experiences  of 
his  own. 

1  As  Mr.  Solomons  and  Miss  Stein  found,  in  healthy  persons  automatic  action 
cannot  develop  beyond  a  certain  point,  because  it  is  continually  inhibited  by  the 
action  of  higher  centres.  "Our  trouble,"  they  write,  "never  came  from  a 
failure  of  reaction,  but  from  a  functioning  of  attention.  It  was  our  inability  to 
take  our  minds  off  the  experiment  which  interfered."  In  the  hysteric,  as  they 
point  out,  this  difficulty  does  not  exist,  because  he  finds  himself  unable  to  attend 
to  the  sensation,  his  arm  becomes  anesthetic,  etc.  The  superior  efficacy  of 
planchette  as  a  writing  instrument  when  the  hands  of  more  than  one  person  are 
placed  upon  it  may  be  due,  as  Mrs.  Sidgwick  has  suggested  to  me,  to  the  oppor- 
tunity thus  afforded  for  each  person  to  divert  his  attention  from  the  movement  of 
his  own  hands,  and  to  attribute  the  resulting  messages  to  the  hands  of  his 
colleague. 

2  Revue  Philosophiqiie,  Feb.,  1899,  "  Genese  de  quelques  pretendus  messages 
spirites,"  and  Des  Indes  a  la  planete  Mars.     Geneva,  1900. 

AUTOMATISM  303 

About  1892  Mr,  Tout  took  part  with  some  neighbours  in  a 
series  of  spiritualistic  seances.  Subjective  lights  were  occasionally 
seen  by  himself  and  one  other  member  of  the  circle.  The  ladies 
present  were  affected  with  spasmodic  twitchings  and  other  move- 
ments, sometimes  of  a  violent  character,  chiefly  in  the  fingers 
and  arms.  Mr.  Tout  felt  a  strong  impulse  to  imitate  these  motions, 
and  occasionally  gave  way  to  the  impulse,  though  never  to  such 
an  extent  as  to  lose  complete  control  of  his  limbs.  At  later  seances 
he  on  several  occasions  yielded  to  similar  impulses  to  assume  a 
foreign  personality.  In  this  way  he  acted  the  part  of  a  deceased 
woman,  the  mother  of  a  friend  then  present.  He  put  his  arm 
round  his  friend  and  caressed  him,  as  his  mother  might  have  done, 
and  the  personation  was  recognised  by  the  spectators  as  a  genuine 
case  of  "spirit  control."  On  another  occasion  Mr.  Tout,  having 
under  the  influence  of  music  given  various  impersonations,  was 
finally  oppressed  by  a  feeling  of  coldness  and  loneliness,  as  of 
a  recently  disembodied  spirit.  His  wretchedness  and  misery  were 
terrible,  and  he  was  only  kept  from  falling  to  the  floor  by  some 
of  the  other  sitters.  At  this  point  one  of  the  sitters  "made  the 
remark,  which  I  remember  to  have  overheard, '  It  is  father  controlling 
him,'  and  I  then  seemed  to  realise  who  I  was  and  whom  I  was 
seeking.  I  began  to  be  distressed  in  my  lungs,  and  should  have 
fallen  if  they  had  not  held  me  by  the  hands  and  let  me  back  gently 
upon  the  floor.  As  my  head  sank  back  upon  the  carpet  I  ex- 
perienced dreadful  distress  in  my  lungs  and  could  not  breathe. 
I  made  signs  to  them  to  put  something  under  my  head.  They 
immediately  put  the  sofa  cushions  under  me,  but  this  was  not 
sufficient — I  was  not  raised  high  enough  yet  to  breathe  easily — and 
they  then  added  a  pillow.  I  have  the  most  distinct  recollection 
of  a  sigh  of  relief  I  now  gave  as  I  sank  back  like  a  sick,  weak 
person  upon  the  cool  pillow.  I  was  in  a  measure  still  conscious 
of  my  actions,  though  not  of  my  surroundings,  and  I  have  a  clear 
memory  of  seeing  myself  in  the  character  of  my  dying  father  lying 
in  the  bed  and  in  the  room  in  which  he  died.  It  was  a  most  curious 
sensation.  I  saw  his  shrunken  hands  and  face,  and  lived  again 
through  his  dying  moments;  only  now  I  was  both  myself — in 
some  indistinct  sort  of  way — and  my  father,  with  his  feelings  and 
appearance."  ^ 

Throughout  his  impersonation  Mr.  Tout  never  seems  to 
have  completely  lost  consciousness  of  his  doings ;  and 
though  his  w^ords  and  actions  appeared  to  him  at  the  time 
outside  his  own  initiative,  he  is  satisfied  that  they  are  really 
to  be  explained  merely  as  the  dramatic  w^orking  -  out, 
by  some  half-conscious  stratum  of  his  own  personality,  of 
suggestions  made  at  the  time  by  other  members  of  the  circle, 

^  Proc.  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  pp.  309-16. 

304        PEOBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

or  received  in  prior  experiences  of  the  kind.  He  describes 
himself  as  pecuHarly  susceptible  to  suggestion,  and  as  having 
been  much  addicted,  in  his  earlier  years,  to  day-dreams  and 
the  weaving  of  romances. 

In  another  autobiographical  record  of  mediumship,  com- 
municated to  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.  P.  R.  by  Professor 
William  James,^  who  is  personally  acquainted  with  the 
author,  the  automatism  takes  a  more  extreme  development: — 

Mr.  Le  Baron  (pseudonym)  is  a  journalist,  and  has  published 
some  work  on  metaphysics.  In  1894  he  stayed  for  some  time  at 
an  American  Spiritualist  camp-meeting,  and  joined  a  circle  which 
held  seances  at  midnight  in  the  pine  woods  for  converse  with  the 
invisible  brethren.  At  one  of  these  meetings  Mr.  Le  Baron  became 
conscious  of  new  and  strange  sensations.  He  felt  his  head  drawn 
back  until  he  was  forced  flat  on  the  ground.  Then  "the  force 
produced  a  motor  disturbance  of  my  head  and  jaws.  My  mouth 
made  automatic  movements,  till  in  a  few  seconds  I  was  distinctly 
conscious  of  another's  voice — unearthly,  awful,  loud,  weird — bursting 
through  the  woodland  from  my  own  lips,  with  the  despairing 
words,  '  Oh,  my  people  ! ' "  Mutterings  of  semi-purposive  prophecy 
followed. 

A  few  days  later  he  spoke  again  in  the  same  involuntary 
manner  to  the  friend  with  whom  he  was  staying,  in  the  character 
of  her  recently  deceased  mother.  Again,  after  sleeping  in  the 
bed  for  some  years  occupied  by  his  friend's  father,  who  had  been 
lame,  he  awoke  lame,  and  limped  painfully  for  some  hours.  He 
soon  began  both  to  write  and  to  speak  sentences  of  semi-prophetic 
and  mystical  character,  such  as  "  He  shall  be  a  leader  of  the  host 
of  the  Lord " ;  "I  shall  be  in  thy  heart,  and  thou  shalt  answer  to 
My  voice."  He  learnt  to  converse  by  means  of  a  pencil  and  paper 
with  this  invisible  monitor,  which,  or  whom,  he  not  very  happily 
christens  "  the  psychophysical  spontaneity."  Various  journeys  were 
enjoined  upon  him — to  Stowe,  in  Vermont,  to  St.  Louis,  to  Seville, 
to  the  Emperor  of  China;  the  first  two  journeys  were  actually 
undertaken.  Later  he  learnt  that  he  was  the  reincarnation  of 
Rameses,  and  received  many  messages  concerning  his  high  mission. 
Finally,  it  was  given  to  him  to  speak  in  an  unknown  tongue,  and 
to  furnish  to  himself  translations  of  the  same.  Some  of  these 
fragments  were  written  down  at  the  time  by  himself;  others  were 
spoken  into  a  phonograph  in  the  presence  of  Professor  James  and 
Dr.  Hodgson.     Here  is  a  specimen,  together  with  its  translation : — 

'■'The  Unknowti  Tongue. — Te  rumete  tau.  Ilee  leteleele  luto  scele. 
Impe  re  scele  lee  luto.  Onko  keere  scete  tere  lute.  Ombo  te 
scele  to  here  te  kure.  Sinte  lute  sinte  Kuru.  Orumo  imbo  impe 
rute  scelete.     Singe,  singe,  singe,  eru.     Imba,  Imba,  Imba. 

1  Vol.  xii.,  pp.  277-98. 

AUTOMATISM  305 

"  Translation. — The  old  word !  I  love  the  old  word  of  the 
heavens !  The  love  of  the  heavens  is  emperor !  The  love  of  the 
darkness  is  slavery !  The  heavens  are  wise,  the  heavens  are  true,  the 
heavens  are  sure.  The  love  of  the  earth  is  past !  The  King 
now  rules  in  the  heavens  ! " 

That  these  utterances  were  involuntary,  and  that  their 
content  was  not  consciously  suggested  by  anything  in 
Mr.  Le  Baron's  experience  or  aspirations,  is  proved  not 
only  by  his  own  reiterated  statement  to  that  effect,  but  by 
the  fact  that  he  was  persistent  for  some  time  in  the  hope 
that  the  unknown  tongue  would  prove  to  be  a  real  language, 
with  analogies  to  some  form  of  primitive  human  speech ;  and 
that  he  spent  much  time  and  labour  in  endeavouring  to  find 
its  origin  in  Coptic  or  Romany  or  some  Dravidian  tongue. 
It  is  obvious,  however,  from  a  very  superficial  examination 
that  the  "  unknown  tongue "  is  not  a  language  at  all,  and 
that  its  elements  are  fragments  of  English  speech.  As  a 
work  of  art,  indeed,  it  is  far  inferior  to  the  "  Martian 
language"  employed  by  M.  Flournoy's  medium,  Helene. 
Again,  the  "  deific  verbiage "  and  psycho-automatic  rhetoric 
which  form  the  bulk  of  Mr.  Le  Baron's  involuntary  utterances 
are  scarcely  more  involved  and  pretentious,  and  distinctly 
more  melodious,  than  his  own  normal  style  as  exhibited  in 
the  record  before  us. 

The  two  cases  last  quoted  aptly  illustrate  two  stages  of 
automatic  action.  Mr.  Tout  yields  himself  to  the  impulse  to 
personation,  and  is  yet  half  conscious  that  he  is  acting  a  part. 
He  is  apparently  in  the  same  psychological  condition  as 
subjects  in  a  light  stage  of  hypnosis,  who  will  faithfully  fulfil 
the  hallucination  imposed  upon  them  by  the  hypnotist,  but 
will  be  partly  aware  all  the  time  that  they  are  making  them- 
selves ridiculous,  and  that  the  comedy  or  tragedy  which  they 
are  set  to  enact  is  but  an  affair  of  pasteboard  and  tinsel  after 
all.  There  seems  to  be  here  a  real  division  of  consciousness, 
the  one  part  acting  as  spectator  and  critic  of  the  performance 
directed  by  the  other.^  Traces  of  the  same  conflict  of 
separate  systems  of  ideas  occur  in  dreams,  and  it  is  said  to 
form  a  marked  feature  in  the  delirium  caused  by  haschisch.^ 

In  Mr.  Le  Baron's  case  we  reach  a  further  stage.  Not 
only  are  the  movements  more  completely  beyond  the  subject's 
control,  but  he  is  no  longer   conscious  that  they  originate 

^  See  Professor  James'  remarks  upon  this  point  {Principles  of  Psychology, 
vol.  ii.  pp.  605,  606). 

"  See  Parish,  Hallucinations  and  Illusions,  p.  45,  and  the  references  there 
cited. 

U. — X 

306        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

within  his  own  organism.  He  can,  indeed,  with  difficulty  be 
convinced  by  subsequent  analysis  and  reflection  that  the 
automatic  utterance,  and  the  intelligence  displayed  by  it,  are 
alike  derived  from  himself. 

In  both  these  cases,  it  is  to  be  noted,  the  disturbances  were 
of  a  temporary  character,  and  we  are  perhaps  entitled  to  infer 
that  they  had  their  origin  rather  in  the  special  circumstances 
in  which  the  subject  of  the  experience  found  himself  placed 
than  in  any  strong  predisposition  on  his  part  to  such  psychic 
disaggregation.  The  cases  furnish  good  examples  of  the 
type  intermediate  between  that  of  the  normal  man  and  that 
of  the  medium  born.  Most  mediums — at  least  most  private 
mediums — probably  belong  to  this  transition  type.  There  is 
perhaps  a  slight  instability  of  the  nervous  system  to  begin 
with,  but  it  is  only  the  accident  of  some  severe  personal  loss, 
or  the  companionship  of  Spiritualist  friends,  which  furnishes 
the  occasion  for  an  outburst  of  visions  or  automatic  writing ; 
and  when  the  occasion  has  passed,  the  automatism  lapses 
with  it. 

CHAPTER     VII 
DREAM-CONSCIOUSNESS 

IT  may  be  inferred,  then,  that  in  normal  persons  auto- 
matism will  not  easily  or  permanently  develop  outside 
certain  narrow  limits.  When  these  limits  are  rapidly 
overstepped ;  when,  as  in  numerous  cases  cited  in  preceding 
chapters,  the  automatic  writer  begins  with  little  practice  to 
write  sermons  and  poems,  or  draw  pictures  whose  prototypes 
are  found  neither  in  heaven  above  nor  in  the  earth  beneath ; 
when  the  visions  in  the  crystal  grow  into  substantial  spectres, 
obtruding  themselves  in  the  daylight — we  are  entitled  to 
assume  some  psychic  instability,  some  tendency  of  the 
central  nervous  system  to  split  up,  or  become  "  dissociated  " 
temporarily  or  permanently.  The  Continental  writers,  on 
whom  we  are  mainly  dependent  for  reports  of  first-hand 
systematic  observations,  have  drawn  their  conclusions  almost 
exclusively  from  the  study  of  cases  obviously  pathologic. 
In  these  the  psychical  symptoms,  the  division  of  memory 
and  of  consciousness,  the  mutually  independent  and  even 
antagonistic  centres  of  volition  in  the  same  organism,  are 
accompanied  by  physical  symptoms  of  a  pronounced  charac- 
ter. The  right  arm,  which  controls  the  convulsions  of  delirium 
and  prevents  the  left  hand  from  inflicting  bodily  injury  on 
the  patient,  is  itself  insensible  to  pricking,  pinching,  or 
thumping ;  the  hystero-paralytic,  whose  memory  is  split 
up  into  six  differing  and  mutually  exclusive  fragments, 
displays  six  corresponding  states  of  partial  paralysis  and 
anesthesia.  When  Leonie  the  Second,  or  Miss  Beauchamp 
the  Third,  befools  one  of  her  co-partners,  we  find  that  the 
physical  organism,  which  is  the  common  property  of  the 
partnership,  is  feeble  and  neurasthenic,  if  not  actually 
defective  in  some  sensory  equipment  or  muscular  activity. 
But  in  less  extreme  cases  it  is  more  difficult  to  detect  any 
physical  symptoms  corresponding  with  the  psychical  dis- 
sociation.     Janet,   however,   and   other    observers   agree   in 

307 

308        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

attributing  the  ignorance  which  the  apparently  normal 
automatist  commonly  shows  of  the  movements  made  by 
his  hand  to  partial  anaesthesia.^  Binet  has  shown  that  this 
partial  anaesthesia  of  the  moving  member  can  actually  be 
detected  by  mechanical  means ;  the  skin  of  the  writing  hand 
can  less  readily  distinguish  than  in  the  normal  state  the  two 
points  of  a  pair  of  compasses.^  And  W.  James  has  found 
that  the  writing  hand  is  sometimes  quite  insensible  to  pain.^ 

Again,  in  many  automatists  who  betray  no  more  marked 
sign  of  abnormality  than  the  liability  to  fall  into  spontaneous 
trances,  there  may  be  found  also  local  anaesthetic  patches 
on  the  skin,  sometimes  temporary  and  shifting,  sometimes 
apparently  lasting  unchanged  for  considerable  periods.  In 
the  trance  and  occasionally  at  other  times  there  will  be 
convulsive  movements,  contractions,  and  other  disturbances 
of  the  muscular  system.^ 

On  the  psychical  side  the  indications  of  disunion  in  the 
cerebral  hierarchy  are  easier  to  detect.  Binet,  indeed,  sees 
in  the  simplest  case  of  automatic  movement — as  when  the 
hand  keeps  on  repeating  pothooks  and  circles — the  rudi- 
ments of  a  secondary  personality.^  But  if  we  accept  the 
view  of  the  American  observers  cited  in  the  last  chapter, 
that  these  simpler  movements  are  to  be  explained  rather  as 
instances  of  normal  reflex  action  than  as  indicating  the 
existence  of  any  separate  system  of  ideas,  or  parasitic 
consciousness,  it  is  difficult  to  deny  the  participation  of  the 
higher  ideational  centres  in  the  movement  when,  for  instance, 
the  writing  shows  intelligence  not  apparently  inferior  to  that 
of  the  subject  in  his  ordinary  state.  The  real  difficulty  is  to 
explain  how  this  intelligence,  this  orderly  sequence  of  ideas, 

1  VAutomatisme  Psychologique,  pp.  372,  373.  Solomons  and  Stein  {Psy- 
chological Review,  Sept.,  1896)  claim  to  distinguish  three  sensory  elements  in 
our  knowledge  of  the  act  of  writing  a  word :  (i)  the  sense  of  effort ;  (2)  the 
feeling  of  the  motor  impulse ;  (3)  the  knowledge  of  the  completed  act  gained 
either  by  "return"  sensations,  mostly  tactile  and  muscular,  from  the  arm,  or 
by  the  sight  of  the  written  record.  It  is  with  the  disappearance  of  the  first  two, 
according  to  them,  that  the  feeling  of  personal  responsibility  for  the  act  ceases. 
When  the  subject  is  no  longer  conscious  of  having  willed  or  put  forth  effort,  he 
does  not  recognise  the  act  as  his  own.  But  other  writers  have  not  confirmed  this 
analysis. 

2  Alterations  of  Personality  (American  translation),  p.  242.     London,  1896. 

2  Proc.  Atnerican  S.  P.  R.,  p.  549.  I  have  recently  repeated  this  experiment 
with  complete  success  on  an  English  subject — a  well-educated  man  of  about 
thirty.  In  the  case  of  my  subject,  however,  both  hands  were  almost  completely 
numb  and  insensible  to  the  pain  of  pricks  and  pinches,  but  not  to  the  touch,  and 
they  continued  so  not  only  during  the  (post  hypnotic)  act  of  writing,  but  for  some 
minutes  afterwards. 

*  See  the  discussion  below,  on  the  case  of  M.  Flournoy's  medium,  Helene 
Smith.  ^  Op.  cit.,  p.  220,  etc. 

DREAM-CONSCIOUSNESS  309 

springs  up  ready-made,  without  any  conscious  preparation 
on  the  part  of  the  subject.  It  is  this  difficulty  which  has  led 
so  many  persons  to  find  the  explanation  of  their  own 
"  automatic  "  rhetoric  in  celestial  inspiration. 

The  explanation,  no  doubt,  is  that  in  such  cases  there  has 
been  subconscious  preparation — the  beginnings  of  a  second- 
ary consciousness.  We  find  in  a  remark  of  Mr.  Hill  Tout's 
a  clue  to  the  mystery  : — 

"  Building  and  peopling  chateaux  en  Espagne  was  a  favourite 
occupation  of  mine  in  my  earlier  days,  and  this  long-practised 
faculty  is  doubtless  a  potent  factor  in  all  my  characterisations,  and 
probably  also  in  those  of  many  another  full-fledged  medium." ^ 

It  is  probable  that  an  over-indulgence  in  day-dreams 
forms  the  first  indication  of  the  tendency  to  isolated  and 
unregulated  psychic  activity,  which  in  its  more  extreme  form 
may  develop  into  a  fixed  idea  or  an  obsession.  The  nature 
of  the  supposed  process  will  be  more  clearly  understood  if 
we  consider  its  workings  in  the  first  instance  under  circum- 
stances specially  favourable  for  its  development,  that  is,  in 
subjects  of  markedly  neurotic  temperament ;  and  then 
return  to  the  consideration  of  the  effect  of  similar  sub- 
conscious reveries  in  persons  of  more  stable  mental  constitu- 
tion. M.  Janet  has  traced  in  several  cases  this  gradual 
development  of  a  subterranean  day-dream  until  it  invades 
and  obscures  the  whole  waking  life.  One  of  the  most 
instructive  of  these  histories  is  that  entitled  "  A  Case  of 
Possession  "  : — ^ 

Achille  is  a  French  peasant  of  bad  family  history,  his  mother, 
in  particular,  and  her  family  having  been  given  to  drunkenness. 
Achille  himself  in  his  youth  was  feeble,  delicate,  and  timid,  but  not 
markedly  abnormal.  He  married  at  twenty-two,  and  all  went  well 
until  one  day  in  his  thirty-third  year,  after  returning  home  from  a 
short  absence,  he  became  afflicted  with  extreme  taciturnity,  and 
in  the  end  completely  dumb.  He  was  examined  by  various 
physicians,  who  successively  diagnosed  his  ailment,  one  as  diabetes, 
another  as  angina  pectoris.  Achille's  voice  now  returned,  he 
manifested  symptoms  appropriate  in  turn  to  either  malady,  and 
incessantly  bewailed  his  sufferings.  In  the  final  stage,  he  fell  into 
a  complete  lethargy,  and  remained  motionless  for  two  days.  At  the 
end  of  that  period  he  awoke  and  burst  into  a  fit  of  Satanic 
laughter,  which  presently  changed  into  frightful  shrieks  and  com- 
plaints that  he  was  tortured  by  demons.     This  state  lasted  for  many 

1  Proc.  S.  P.  P.,  vol.  xi.  p.  315. 

-  Nevroses  et  Idhs fixes,  vol.  i.  p.  377  et  seq. 

310        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

weeks.  He  would  pour  forth  blasphemies  and  obscenities ;  and 
immediately  afterwards  lament  and  shudder  at  the  terrible  words 
which  the  demon  had  uttered  through  his  mouth.  He  drank 
laudanum  and  other  poisons,  but  did  not  die ;  he  even  tied  his  feet 
together,  and  threw  himself  into  the  water,  ultimately  coming  safe 
to  land.  In  each  case  he  ascribed  his  deliverance  to  the  fact  that 
his  body  was  doomed  to  be  for  ever  the  abode  of  the  damned.  He 
would  describe  the  evil  spirits  which  tormented  him,  their  diabolic 
grimaces  and  the  horns  which  adorned  their  heads. 

Ultimately  he  came  under  Professor  Janet's  charge,  and  the 
latter  satisfied  himself  that  the  unhappy  man  had  all  the  signs  of 
genuine  possession  as  described  by  mediaeval  chroniclers;  that  his 
blasphemies  were  involuntary,  and  many  of  his  actions  un- 
consciously performed.  Janet  even  made  the  devil  write  at  his 
bidding — in  French  not  too  correctly  spelt — poor  Achille  the  while 
knowing  nothing  of  the  matter;  and  further  established  the  fact 
that  during  the  convulsive  movements  of  the  upper  part  of  his  body 
Achille's  arms  were  insensible  to  pricking  and  pinching — an  old- 
time  proof  of  demoniacal  possession.  In  the  end  this  most  guileful 
of  modern  exorcists  persuaded  the  devil,  as  a  proof  of  his  power 
over  the  unhappy  man,  to  send  poor  Achille  to  sleep ;  and  in  that 
suggested  sleep  M.  Janet  interrogated  the  demoniac,  and  learnt  the 
secret  of  his  malady.  He  had  been  acting  out  for  all  these  months 
the  course  of  a  most  unhappy  dream.  During  the  short  absence 
which  preceded  his  attack  he  had  been  unfaithful  to  his  wife. 
Possessed  with  a  morbid  terror  of  betraying  his  fault,  he  had 
become  dumb.  The  physicians  who  had  been  called  in  had 
unwittingly  suggested,  by  their  questions,  the  symptoms  of  one  or 
two  fatal  maladies,  and  his  morbid  dream-self  had  promptly  seized 
upon  the  hints,  and  reaHsed  them  with  surprising  fidelity.  In  the 
slow  development  of  his  uneasy  dream  the  time  came  for  the  man 
to  die;  and  after  death  there  remained  for  such  a  sinner  as  he 
nothing  but  damnation.  The  lesser  devils  stuck  nails  into  the 
flesh,  and  Satan  himself,  squeezing  through  the  holes  so  made, 
entered  on  an  ambiguous  co-tenancy  of  the  tortured  body. 

It  is  pleasant  to  record  that  the  skilful  exorcist  was  able  to 
dispel  the  evil  dream,  and  restore  the  sufferer  to  his  right  mind. 

It  v^ill  be  seen  that  here  we  have  a  veritable  schism  of 
consciousness ;  the  dream  state  intervening  in  the  ordinary- 
life  produces  the  illusion  of  a  double  personality,  u^hich  is 
interpreted,  according  to  the  tradition  once  prevalent 
throughout  Europe,  but  novi^  lingering  only  in  a  few  remote 
districts  and  in  a  few  enfeebled  intellects,  as  possession 
by  the  devil.  It  is  only  in  markedly  pathological  cases  that 
the  division  of  the  personality  is  so  complete,  and  the 
consequence  of  a  disordered  dream  so  grave.     But  even  in 

DREAM-CONSCIOUSNESS  3 1 1 

very  simple  cases  of  automatism  we  may  trace  the  beginnings 
of  the  cleavage;  and  the  illusion  of  an  alien  personality, 
as  we  have  seen  in  innumerable  instances,  is  of  very  rapid 
growth. 

Another  case  of  M.  Janet's  shows  us,  in  an  educated 
subject,  a  similar  example  of  double  personality  of  much 
slower  growth,  but  of  hardly  less  extreme  type.  In  this 
case  the  automatism,  beginning  with  manifestations  of  the 
ordinary  mediumistic  kind,  developed,  owing  no  doubt  to 
some  native  nervous  instability,  into  a  complete  obsession, 
under  which  the  unhappy  victim,  much  against  his  con- 
scious will,  committed  all  kinds  of  absurd  and  injurious 
actions. 

M.  Ler  at  the  time  of  the  observations  was  a  man  of  forty,  of 
good  intelligence  and  education,  actively  engaged  in  teaching,  and 
with  no  definite  ailment  in  the  past  beyond  a  tendency  to  neuras- 
thenia. When  about  thirty  years  old  he  became  interested  in 
Spiritualism,  and  soon  developed  as  a  writing  and  drawing  medium. 
Later  he  took  to  '  inspirational '  speaking.  At  a  still  later  stage  the 
automatic  manifestations,  which  had  at  the  outset  been  confined  to 
the  seance-room,  or,  at  least,  had  been  summoned  and  repressed 
at  will,  now  passed  beyond  the  control  of  the  unhappy  '  medium,' 
and  took  to  appearing  at  all  times  and  seasons.  Finally,  the  con- 
trolling 'spirit'  imposed  ridiculous  and  even  hurtful  commands 
upon  him.  When  the  victim  ventured  to  disobey  these  commands, 
a  curious  penalty  was  exacted  by  the  offended  spirit.  The  man's 
own  hand,  against  his  will,  tore  his  clothes,  broke  his  furniture,  and 
threw  his  papers  into  disorder.  At  the  stage  when  Professor  Janet's 
assistance  was  invoked  the  patient  had  begun  to  tear  up  bank- 
notes, and  had  on  one  occasion  thrown  himself  into  the  Seine.  In 
the  victim's  own  words,  '//  m'empeche  de  manger.  //  m'empeche 
de  boire  ....  //est  toujours  pres  de  moi,  et  //  chuchote  des 
menaces.  II  ne  faut  pas  en  rire,  car  //  les  execute  trop  souvent. 
//  m'a  deja  jete  a  le  Seine,  et  //  finira  par  me  tuer.'^ 

M.  Janet,  taking  such  cases  as  these  for  a  text,  interprets 
all  systematised  automatism,  and  especially  all  mediumship, 
as  examples  of  abnormally  developed    day-dreams.^     It  is 

^  Nevroses  et  Idies  fixes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  172-9- 

^Janet's  words  are:  "Je  crois  que  nous  sommes  tous  plus  ou  moins 
semblables  a  ces  tout  petits  [children  telling  each  other  stories]  et  que  nous 
aimons  a  nous  raconter  sans  cesse  de  belles  histoires  qui  nous  font  oubHer  la 
plate  realite  et  nous  donnent  le  courage  de  travailler  a  la  transformer.^  Mais 
cette  belle  histoire  .  .  .  nous  nous  la  racontons  bien  souvent  dans  la  journee 
meme  en  marchant,  en  mangeant,  en  accomplissant  un  travail  mecanique  qui  ne 
demande  pas  trop  d'attention,  des  ecritures,  des  dessins,  de  la  couture  surtout, 
nous  nous  parlons  sans  cesse  et  nous  continuons  ce  recit  interminable. 

"Souvent  meme  nous  sommes  ennuyes,  quand  les  necessites  de  la  vie  nous 

312        PROBLEMS  OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

probable  that  he  somewhat  exaggerates  the  prevalence, 
amongst  ordinary  adults,  of  indulgence  in  day-dreams  of 
the  kind  supposed.  Amongst  adult  Englishmen  the  practice 
can  hardly  be  supposed  a  common  one ;  and  some  statistics 
recently  published  in  the  American  Journal  of  Psychology 
indicate  that  whilst  most  children  and  a  large  proportion  of 
women  are  given  to  the  practice,  it  is  comparatively  rare 
amongst  men.^ 

But  probably  with  persons  of  strong  imagination,  and 
especially  with  those  of  feeble  health  or  character,  or  who 
retain  many  childish  characteristics,  the  habit  may  persist 
into  adult  life,  and  form,  as  George  Eliot  puts  it,  a  convenient 
mental  opiate. 

Nor,  again,  would  it  be  reasonable  to  infer  that  because 
M.  Ler  began  by  practising  mediumship,  and  ended  by 
becoming  a  victim  to  a  self-imposed  obsession,  that  all  who 
yield  themselves  to  similar  practices  incur  an  appreciable 
risk  of  a  like  fate.  It  would  be  more  in  accordance  with 
what  we  have  learnt  of  mental  pathology  to  surmise  that 
catastrophe  must  in  any  event  have  overtaken  M.  Ler,  and 
that  Spiritualism  in  his  case,  as  demoniac  possession  in  that 
of  Achille,  merely  furnished  a  suitable  embodiment  for  his 
delirium.  In  any  case  the  persons  on  whom  Janet's  ob- 
servations were  made  appear  to  have  been  neurotics  of  much 
more  advanced  types  than  are  commonly  met  with  in  this 
country.  In  the  following  case,  one  of  the  most  instructive 
which  I  have  come  across  in  my  own  experience,  the  idea 
of  spiritual  intercourse  and  its  incidental  practices,  so  far 
from  accelerating,  appears  actually  to  have  averted  a  serious 
crisis  by  providing  a  harmless  outlet  for  pent-up  nervous 
energies.^ 

Miss  A.  B.,  a  young  woman  of  about  thirty,  experienced  a 
sudden  and  demonstrative  attachment  for  a  man,  C.  D.,  living  in 
the  same  neighbourhood.  The  affair  attracted  some  unpleasant 
notoriety,  and  the  young  man,  who  had  apparently  acted  a  rather 

forcent  a  faire  attention  a  quelque  chose  de  reel,  et  nous  nous  batons  de  revenir  a 
cette  histoire  qui  se  deroule  en  nous  sans  effort,  d'une  maniere  si  facile  et  si 
agreable." — Nevroses  et  Id^es  fixes,  vol  i.  p.  393. 

1  Vol.  vii.  (1895),  p.  86,  "The  Continued  Story,"  by  Mabel  W.  Learoyd, 
The  exact  figures  are  : — 

Women.  Men. 

Yes.  No.  Yes.  No. 

Adults         .  .  .      100      ...      114  I  20      ...      128 

Children    .  .         .       41     ...       21         I         29     ...       23 

'•^  Dr.  Garth  Wilkinson,  as  already  stated  (above,  p.  36),  advocated  the 
practice  of  automatic  writing  as  actually  beneficial  in  certain  cases  of  insanity 
\The  Homceopathic  Principle  applied  to  Insanity,  London,  1857). 

DREAM-CONSCIOUSNESS  313 

passive  part  throughout,  abruptly  discontinued  the  acquaintance. 
Miss  A.  B.  continued,  however,  to  cherish  the  beUef  that  the  man 
had  been  influenced  by  the  maUce  of  her  enemies,  and  that  he 
was  still  profoundly  attached  to  her.  A  few  weeks  after  the  breach 
she  felt  one  evening  a  curious  feeUng  in  the  throat,  as  of  choking — 
the  prelude  probably,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  to  an  attack 
of  hysteria.  This  feeling  was  succeeded  by  involuntary  movements 
of  the  hands  and  a  fit  of  long-continued  and  apparently  causeless 
sobbing.  Then,  in  presence  of  a  member  of  her  family,  she 
became,  in  her  own  belief,  possessed  by  the  spirit  of  C.  D., 
personating  his  words  and  gestures  and  speaking  in  his  character. 
After  this  date  she  continually  held  conversation,  as  she  beUeves,  with 
C.  D.'s  spirit ;  "  he  "  sometimes  speaking  aloud  through  her  mouth, 
sometimes  conversing  with  her  in  the  inner  voice.  Occasionally 
"  he  "  wrote  messages  through  her  hand,  and  I  have  the  testimony 
of  a  member  of  her  family  that  the  writing  so  produced  resembled 
that  of  C.  D.  Occasionally  also  A.  B.  had  visions,  in  which  she 
claimed  to  see  C.  D.  and  what  he  was  doing  at  the  moment.  At 
other  times  she  professed  to  hear  him  speaking  or  to  understand 
by  some  inner  sympathy  his  feelings  and  thoughts. 

It  seems  clear  that  in  this  case  w^e  have  to  do  simply  with 
the  dream  of  an  hysterical  girl — a  device  by  which  the 
wounded  pride  is  salved  and  possibly  a  serious  nervous  crisis 
averted.  But  this  dream,  unlike  other  dreams,  is  not  con- 
fined to  the  hours  when  the  higher  centres  are  off  duty,  nor 
manifested  only  in  sensory  images ;  it  pervades  the  waking 
hours,  and  as  in  Achille's  case,  but  with  happier  results,  is 
acted  out  in  detail.  A  curious  feature  of  the  case  is  that 
A.  B.'s  dream  has  imposed  not  merely  on  herself,  but  also 
apparently  on  at  least  two  members  of  her  family.^ 

M.  Flournoy,  Professor  of  Psychology  in  the  University 
of  Geneva,  has  done  more  than  any  other  recent  writer  to 
elucidate  the  genesis  of  mediumship.  His  methods  and 
results  are  similar  to  those  of  Janet  and  the  French  School, 
but  he  has  had  the  advantage  of  studying  at  close  quarters 
subjects  of  a  less  abnormal  type  than  the  patients  at  the 
Salpetriere.  One  of  his  most  instructive  observations  is  on 
a  case  of  mediumship  belonging  to  the  transitional  type 
referred  to  at  the  end  of  the  next  chapter,  which  germinated 
in  a  few  days,  and  flowered  apparently  only  for  some  forty- 
eight  hours : — 

^  I  should  perhaps  state  that  I  received  the  account  of  the  episode  from  A.  B. 
herself  and  from  one  other  member  of  the  family.  I  could  discover  no  grounds 
for  their  belief  that  A.  B.'s  sensations  were  in  any  way  connected  with  C.  D.  ; 
for  it  is  impossible  to  attach  any  weight  to  the  imitation  of  a  handwriting  with 
which  A.  B.  was  perfectly  familiar. 

314        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

M.  Michel  Til  was  a  man  of  forty-eight,  well  educated  and  in 
good  health.  One  Friday  he  was  persuaded  by  some  Spiritualist 
friends  to  try  his  hand  at  automatic  writing.  He  succeeded  at  his 
first  attempt  in  obtaining  some  flourishes,  and  a  few  phrases  written 
in  a  hand  very  different  from  his  own.  He  continued  the  practice 
for  the  next  two  days ;  and  on  the  Sunday,  after  an  evening  spent 
with  the  "  spirits,"  he  passed  a  very  troubled  night.  An  inner  voice 
insisted  on  speaking  to  him,  promising  friendship  and  health,  and 
prophesying  a  magnificent  future  for  him  :  "  Tes  destinees  sont  benies, 
Je  serai  ton  guide  et  ton  soutien"  His  finger  took  to  tracing  similar 
phrases  on  the  wall  in  the  darkness. 

The  following  day  M.  Til  was  much  disturbed.  The  automatic 
movements  continued  incessantly  throughout  the  morning,  and 
finally  the  writing  conveyed  the  terrible  news  that  his  son  had  been 
detected  helping  himself  from  his  employer's  cigarette-box ;  that 
he  had  met  reproof  with  insolence,  and  had  been  given  notice  of 
dismissal.  The  distracted  parent  went  at  once  to  the  office  where 
his  son  was  employed.  The  head  of  the  firm  was  out,  but  the 
chief  clerk  assured  M.  Til  that  his  son's  character  was  excellent,  and 
that  they  had  no  fault  to  find  with  him.  Whilst  the  conversation 
was  proceeding,  M.  Til's  finger  traced  on  the  table  a  phrase  which 
proved  to  be :  "  Je  suis  navre  de  la  duplicite  de  cet  homme." 

The  unhappy  parent  could  not  be  satisfied  until  the  assurance 
of  his  son's  good  conduct  had  been  repeated  by  the  head  of  the 
firm  on  his  return ;  and  the  guilty  hand  then  wrote  :  "  Je  t'ai  trompe, 
Michel;  pardonne-moi." 

M.  Flournoy  puts  forward  the  following  explanation  of 
the  episode.  M.  Til  had  some  three  weeks  before  remarked 
that  his  son  smoked  a  good  many  cigarettes.  The  young 
man  had  explained  that  everybody  at  his  office  did  so,  and 
that  the  chief  left  his  cigarettes  about  everywhere,  so  that 
any  of  the  clerks  could  have  helped  themselves  if  they 
wanted  to.  The  latent  and  unacknowledged  uneasiness 
which  was  apparently  originated  by  this  remark  was  stimu- 
lated to  renewed  activity  by  a  chance  conversation,  just 
before  the  lying  message  was  received,  with  an  old  acquaint- 
ance, who  asked,  "  Is  your  son  leaving  his  place  ?  I  hear  Z. 
[the  employer]  has  a  vacancy  for  a  clerk,"  M.  Til's  psychic 
equilibrium  had  been  already  upset  by  the  previous  automatic 
messages,  and  the  disturbed  night  which  supervened  com- 
pleted the  mischief;  in  the  soil  thus  prepared  the  germ  of 
the  subconscious  drama  sprouted  and  grew  like  Jonah's 
gourd,  happily  to  wither  as  quickly.^ 

^  Revue  Fhilosophique,  Feb.  1899,  "  Genese  de  quelques  pretendus  messages 
spirites." 

DREAM-CONSCIOUSNESS  3 1 5 

Those  who  are  familiar  with  the  manifestations  of  modern 
Spiritualism  will  have  known  many  cases  of  similar  sporadic 
outbursts  of  automatism,  in  which  the  subject  for  a  time 
appeared  to  lose  control  of  his  personality,  and  was  only 
recalled  by  some  such  sudden  shock  as  in  M.  Til's  case.  The 
planchette  took  to  writing  obscenities  and  blasphemies,  the 
crystal  revealed  only  purposeless  horrors,  or  the  inner  voice 
sent  the  too  trustful  disciple  on  a  fool's  errand. 

In  his  latest  volume^  M.  Flournoy  has  given  the  results 
of  five  years'  observation  on  a  case  of  automatism  which  has 
been,  according  to  his  explanation  of  the  matter,  incubated 
for  the  greater  part  of  a  lifetime  : — 

Miss  Helena  Smith — the  name  is  fictitious — was  born  about 
1863.  Her  parents  are  well  educated  and  healthy,  by  no  means 
of  the  neurotic  or  psychopathic  type,  though  Mrs.  Smith  has  had 
in  the  course  of  her  life  two  or  three  hallucinatory  visions.  Helene 
herself  as  a  child  was  quiet  and  dreamy,  and  had  occasional  visions, 
but  was,  on  the  whole,  not  specially  remarkable.  She  is,  to  all . 
outward  appearances  at  the  present  time,  healthy,  even  to  robustness. 
From  the  age  of  fifteen  she  has  been  employed  in  a  large  commercial 
establishment  in  Geneva,  and  holds  a  position  of  some  responsibility. 
But  it  is  in  1892  that  her  real  history  begins.  In  that  year  she 
was  persuaded  by  some  friends  to  join  a  Spiritualist  circle.  It  soon 
appeared  that  she  was  herself  a  powerful  medium.  At  first  her 
mediumship  consisted  in  seeing  visions,  hearing  voices,  and  assisting 
in  tilting  the  table,  whilst  still  retaining  more  or  less  consciousness  and 
subsequent  memory  of  her  experiences.  Shortly  after  M.  Flournoy's 
admission  to  the  circle,  in  the  winter  of  1894-5,  Miss  Smith's 
mediumship  advanced  a  stage,  and  she  habitually  passed  at  the 
seance  into  a  trance  state,  retaining  subsequently  no  memory  of  her 
visions  and  doings  in  that  state.  Her  development  followed  at  first 
the  normal  course.  She  delivered  messages  of  a  personal  character 
to  her  sitters,  purporting  to  emanate  from  deceased  friends  and  the 
like.  She  offered  numerous  proofs  of  clairvoyance.  She  was  from 
time  to  time  controlled  by  spirits  of  the  famous  dead.  Some  of 
her  earliest  trances  were  under  the  guidance  and  inspiration  of 
Victor  Hugo.  Within  a  few  months,  however,  the  spirit  of  the 
poet — too  late,  indeed,  for  his  own  post-mortem  reputation,  for 
he  had  already  perpetrated  some  verses — was  expelled  with  ignominy 
by  a  more  masterful  demon  who  called  himself  Leopold.  The 
new-comer  was  at  first  somewhat  reticent  on  his  own  past,  and  when 
urgently  questioned  was  apt  to  take  refuge  in  moral  platitudes. 
Later,  however,  he  revealed  himself  as  Giuseppe  Balsamo,  Count 
Cagliostro.  It  then  appeared  that  in  Helene  herself  was  reincarnated 
the  hapless  Queen  Marie  Antoinette,  and  that  others  of  the  mortals 

'  Des  Indes  a  la  planet e  Mars,  1900. 

316        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

represented  Mirabeau,  Philip  of  Orleans,  and  the  Princess  de 
Lamballe.  Cagliostro,  "ce  cher  sorcier,"  attended  only  in  his 
discarnate  state.  Of  all  the  courtly  functions  then  held  in  nine- 
teenth-century Geneva,  with  all  their  ghostly  memories  of  past 
splendours  and  tragedies,  there  is  no  space  to  speak.  But  from 
M.  Flournoy's  spirited  description  it  is  clear  that  the  reincarnated 
queen  was  lacking  neither  in  wit,  grace,  nor  dignity. 

At  times  Helene's  memory  in  the  trance  went  back  to  a 
still  remoter  past.  As  Simandini,  daughter  of  an  Arab  sheikh  in 
the  fifteenth  century,  she  had  been  courted  by  the  princely  Sivrouka, 
lord  of  the  fortress  of  Tchandraguiri,  in  the  province  of  Kanara, 
Hindustan.  She  had  enjoyed  as  his  wife  many  years  of  married 
happiness,  relieved  by  the  chaste  but  passionate  devotion  of  the 
Fakir  Kanga,  and  had  finally  proved  her  fidelity  by  expiring,  in 
wifely  fashion,  amid  the  flames  of  her  lord's  funeral  pyre.  All  the 
scenes  of  this  forgotten  history  were  enacted  in  lifelike  tableaux 
before  M.  Flournoy  and  his  friends,  and  duly  interpreted  for  their 
benefit  by  the  serviceable  Leopold-Cagliostro.  It  should  be  added 
that  the  entranced  medium,  in  her  role  of  a  princess  of  the  Orient, 
wrote  a  sentence  or  two  in  passable  Arabic  and  spoke  a  few  words 
of  Hindustani. 

It  is  Helene's  extra-planetary  experiences,  however,  which  have 
excited  most  attention,  and  which  furnished  to  the  attendants  at  her 
circle  the  most  convincing  proofs  of  her  dealings  with  the  spiritual 
world.  In  November,  1894,  the  spirit  of  the  entranced  medium 
was  wafted — not  without  threatenings  of  sea-sickness — through  the 
cosmic  void,  to  arrive  eventually  on  the  planet  Mars.  Thereafter 
night  after  night  she  described  to  the  listening  circle  the  people 
of  our  neighbour  planet,  their  food,  dress,  and  ways  of  life.  At 
times  she  drew  pictures  of  the  inhabitants — human  and  animal — of 
their  houses,  bridges,  and  other  edifices,  and  of  the  surrounding 
landscape.  Later  she  both  spoke  and  wrote  freely  in  the  Martian 
language.  From  the  writings  reproduced  in  M.  Flournoy's  book 
it  is  clear  that  the  characters  of  the  Martian  script  are  unlike  any  in 
use  on  earth,  and  that  the  words  (of  which  a  translation  is  furnished) 
bear  no  resemblance,  superficially  at  least,  to  any  known  tongue. 
The  spirits — for  several  dwellers  upon  Mars  used  Helene's  organism 
to  speak  and  write  through — delivered  themselves  with  freedom  and 
fluency,  and  were  consistent  in  their  usage  both  of  the  spoken 
and  the  written  words.  In  fact,  Martian,  as  used  by  the  entranced 
Helene,  has  many  of  the  characteristics  of  a  genuine  language ;  and 
it  is  not  surprising  that  some  of  the  onlookers,  who  may  have 
hesitated  over  the  authenticity  of  the  other  revelations,  were 
apparently  convinced  that  these  Martian  utterances  were  beyond 
the  common  order  of  nature. 

Such  in  brief  outline  are  the  mediumistic  revelations  of 
Helene    Smith.      Under    M.   Flournoy's    deft    analysis    all 

DREAM-CONSCIOUSNESS  317 

pretensions  to  a  supramundane  origin  disappear.  The 
Martian  cycle  is,  in  his  view,  a  romance  pure  and  simple, 
the  first  germs  of  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  speculations 
of  Flammarion  and  others  as  to  the  possible  inhabitants  of 
that  planet.  The  descriptions  of  the  social  life,  the  dress, 
the  habits  of  the  Martians  are,  as  he  shows,  infantile  in  their 
simplicity;  the  landscapes  are  too  obviously  suggested  by 
Japanese  lacquer  and  Nankin  dishes.  And  the  language — 
marvellous  work  of  art — is  still  a  work  of  art,  the  creation 
of  a  mind  whose  mother-tongue  was  French.  The  vowel  and 
consonant  sounds  are  the  same  as  in  French ;  the  inflections, 
the  grammar,  the  construction  are  all  obviously  modelled 
on  French;  Martian  even  uses  a  double  word  for  the  negative 
{ke  ani=ne pas\  employs  the  same  word,  zi,  to  express  "the" 
{la)  and  "  there  "  {la) ;  and  so  on  in  innumerable  other  cases. 
In  fact,  the  so-called  Martian  language  is  such  a  language  as 
a  young  child  might  construct  by  substituting  for  each  word 
in  the  French  dictionary  an  arbitrary  collocation  of  letters, 
and  for  each  letter  a  new  and  arbitrary  symbol.  As  a  work 
of  art  it  is  infantile ;  as  a  feat  of  memory  it  is  prodigious. 
In  the  same  way  M.  Flournoy  shows  that  the  Arabic,  the 
Hindoo,  and  the  historical  elements  generally  of  the  other 
cycles  can  be  traced  to  sources  possibly,  in  some  cases 
patently,  open  to  the  medium. 

Again,  M,  Flournoy  finds  that  Helene's  clairvoyant 
messages  to  himself  dealt  almost  exclusively  with  periods 
and  incidents  with  which  Mrs.  Smith  was  familiar,  and  of 
which  Helene  might  well  have  heard  her  mother  speak.  Nor 
in  any  other  of  Helene's  trance  revelations,  some  of  which 
are  curiously  like  those  of  Madame  Hauffe  and  other  noted 
seeresses  in  the  past,  can  M.  Flournoy,  predisposed  though 
he  is  to  believe  in  the  possibility  at  least  of  telepathy,  find 
any  positive  proof  of  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  through 
supernormal  channels. 

Thus,  to  take  one  of  the  most  remarkable  cases.  At  a 
seance  held  in  1899  Helene  has  a  vision  of  a  village  and 
a  landscape  which  she  cannot  recognise,  and  an  old  man 
who  possesses  himself  of  her  hand,  and  writes  "  Chaumontet 
Syndic."  Later,  the  information  was  given  that  the  old  man 
was  Syndic  of  Chessenaz  in  1839.  At  another  stance  Helene 
wrote  a  message  of  three  lines  and  signed  it  "  Burnier,  Cur6 
de  Chessenaz." 

M.  Flournoy  made  inquiries,  and  found  that  there  is  a 
small  village  named  Chessenaz  in  Haute  Savoie,  about 
sixteen  miles  from   Geneva,  and    learnt   by  correspondence 

318        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

with  the  mayor  that  in  1839  ^^^  syndic  of  the  village  was 
one  Jean  Chaumontet,  and  the  cure  was  named  Burnier. 
Moreover,  the  names  written  through  Helene's  hand  pre- 
sented some  resemblance  to  the  authentic  signatures  of  these 
two  worthies  preserved  on  a  document  forwarded  by  the 
mayor  for  M.  Flournoy's  inspection.  Helene  stated  that  she 
had  never  been  in  Chessenaz ;  but  she  had  relations  in  a 
neighbouring  village  and  had  been  to  visit  them.  The  case 
cannot,  I  think,  be  regarded  as  affording  strong  evidence  of 
supernormal  faculty.^ 

A  case  of  this  kind  inevitably  suggests  that  the  facts  given 
at  the  seance  were  got  up  beforehand  for  the  purpose  of 
imposing  upon  the  sitters.  The  same  explanation  is  prima 
facie  indicated  in  some  others  of  Helene's  clairvoyant  mani- 
festations, such  as  some  of  the  personal  messages  given  to 
M.  Flournoy  and  others,  the  reproduction — obviously  by  a 
person  who  was  ignorant  of  either  language — of  fragments 
of  Hindoo  and  Arabic,  and  so  on.  But  M.  Flournoy  is 
absolutely  satisfied  of  the  good  faith  of  his  medium  ;  and 
his  five  years'  acquaintance  with  her  clearly  entitles  his 
opinion  on  the  matter  to  some  weight.  His  own  explana- 
tion of  these  incidents,  that  they  represent  probably  the 
revival  of  latent  memories,  is  consistent  with  his  view  of  the 
whole  case. 

Helene's  mediumship  is,  in  fact,  according  to  her  sympa- 
thetic chronicler,  simply  a  reversion  to  the  dreams  of  her 
childhood.  As  a  little  girl  she  was  quiet,  dreamy,  fond  of 
solitude,  and  very  timid.  Her  tendency  to  automatism 
showed  itself  in  various  ways ;  she  would  draw  with  a  pencil, 
or  compose,  with  bits  of  cloth,  fantastic  designs  in  an 
oriental  style ;  she  would  sit  in  her  chair  on  Sunday  after- 
noons and  see  vision  after  vision  arise  before  her  eyes — 
golden  landscapes,  ruins  standing  in  the  midst  of  a  desert, 
chimaeras  on  pedestals — foreshadowing,  no  doubt,  the  Hindoo 
and  Martian  scenery  of  her  later  trances.  The  child  saw 
also  several  apparitions  ;  one,  in  particular,  representing  a 
monk  in  a  brown  robe,  with  a  white  cross  on  his  breast,  who 
appeared  to  her  in  moments  of  terror  and  danger — when 
attacked  by  a  dog,  or  addressed  with  undue  freedom  by  a 
stranger.  In  her  later  years  Leopold-Balsamo-Cagliostro 
claimed  that  this  shadowy  protector  of  her  girlhood  was  none 
other  than  himself 

^  op.  cii.,  pp.  406-10.  M.  Flournoy  expresses  no  decided  opinion  about  this 
particular  case,  but  he  is  disposed,  without  dogmatising  on  the  subject,  to  take 
the  view  that  Helene  possesses  real  telepathic  and  clairvoyant  powers. 

DEE  AM-CONSCIOUSNESS  3 1 9 

Moreover,  it  appeared  that  Helene  as  a  child  was  some- 
what at  odds  with  her  surroundings.  Her  mother  thought 
her  unhappy,  her  father  and  brothers  that  she  was  proud 
and  despised  their  humble  circumstances.  There  seems  to 
have  been  some  truth  in  this  latter  accusation  ;  at  any  rate, 
it  is  recorded  that  on  one  occasion  she  asked  her  parents 
whether  she  was  really  their  own  child,  and  not  a  changeling. 
Discontented  thus  with  the  limited  horizon  offered  to  her, 
she  appears  to  have  turned  her  thoughts  inward,  and  in- 
dulged, as  children  will,  in  day-dreams.  The  growth  of  the 
dream  was  favoured  by  the  child's  love  of  solitude,  dis- 
inclination to  active  exertion  and  artistic  temperament.  In 
her  inner  life  she  became  a  queen,  and  escaped  at  will  into 
other  centuries  and  other  worlds.  The  habit  of  dreaming 
was  thus  formed,  and  much  of  the  material  which  appeared 
later  in  her  trances  was  no  doubt  accumulated  in  the  critical 
period  between  her  tenth  and  her  twentieth  years,  when  her 
reveries  and  hallucinations  appear  to  have  been  most  marked. 
After  the  latter  date  these  automatic  phenomena,  under  the 
pressure  of  external  circumstances,  and  her  absorption  in  her 
daily  occupations,  appear  to  have  been  in  abeyance,  until  the 
Spiritualist  stances  which  began  in  1892  gave  them  a  new 
impetus.  From  that  point  they  developed  rapidly ;  and  the 
store  of  dream  imagery  inherited  from  her  earlier  years  was 
enlarged  and  embellished  under  the  influence,  now  of  Allan 
Kardec,  or  Flammarion,  or  Dumas,  now  by  suggestions  of 
the  admiring  circle  who  attended  on  her  trances.  In  M. 
Flournoy's  view,  then,  we  have  in  Helene's  trances  a  reversion 
to  earlier  stages  of  consciousness.  The  Martian  cycle  is 
marked  out  as  the  earliest  of  these  childhood  reveries,  by 
the  naive  and  infantile  character  of  its  leading  conceptions, 
and  by  the  fact  that  the  Martian  "  language  "  shows  no  trace 
of  any  influence  but  French,  whereas  Helene  in  later  child- 
hood had  learnt  some  German.^  The  two  other  main  cycles 
afford  indications  not  only  of  a  later  stage  of  mental  develop- 
ment, but  of  historical  knowledge  acquired  probably  in  more 
recent  years.  Helene  in  the  trance  is  just  a  child  of  larger 
growth,  weaving  her  gorgeous  reveries  in  happy  oblivion  of 
the  commonplace  and  sordid  restrictions  of  her  waking  life. 
Just   as   in    pathological    states    of   the    physical    organism 

^  Op.  cit.,  p.  242.  M.  Flournoy  points  out  that  the  linguistic  faculty  shown 
in  the  construction  of  the  Martian  language,  of  which  faculty  little  trace  appears 
in  the  waking  Helene,  is  probably  derived  from  her  father,  who  had  a  great 
facility  for  the  acquisition  of  languages,  and  could  speak  five  or  six  European 
tongues  fluently  (p.  15). 

320        PEOBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

certain  groups  of  primitive  cells  may  multiply  and  produce 
various  morbid  growths,  "  de  meme,  en  psychologie,  il  semble 
aussi  que  certains  elements  recules  et  primitifs  de  I'individu, 
des  couches  infantiles  encore  douees  de  plasticite  et  de 
mobilite,  sont  particulierement  aptes  a  engendrer  ces  etranges 
vegetations  subconscientes,  sortes  de  tumeurs  ou  d'excrois- 
sances  psychiques,  que  nous  appelons  des  personnalites 
secondes."^ 

But  though  M.  Flournoy  finds  the  tumour  in  this  instance 
benign,  the  phenomenon  is  none  the  less,  as  he  points  out, 
pathological.  Physical  proof  of  Helene's  pathological  con- 
dition during  her  trance  is  to  be  found  in  various  disturbances 
of  the  muscular  system  (contractions,  convulsions,  and  in- 
voluntary movements  of  various  kinds),  partial  paralysis,  and 
local  anaesthetic  patches.  One  significant  symptom  is  the 
frequent  occurrence  of  complete  "allochiry" — a  confusion 
between  her  right  and  left  sides  of  such  a  nature  that  she 
will  persistently  look  for  her  pocket  on  the  left  side,  instead 
of  on  the  right ;  and  that  if  one  of  her  fingers  is  pricked 
or  pinched  behind  a  screen,  so  that  she  cannot  see  the  injured 
member,  it  is  the  corresponding  finger  of  the  other  hand 
which  is  agitated.^  This  curious  inability  to  distinguish 
between  the  right  hand  and  the  left  is  one  of  the  stigmata 
of  hysteria.^ 

Again,  though  Helene  in  her  adult  life  appears  to  be,  as 
a  rule,  quite  normal  and  healthy  outside  the  seance-room, 
and  manages  the  duties  of  her  post  to  the  satisfaction  of 
her  employers,  yet  fragments  of  the  subliminal  romances 
occasionally  intrude  themselves  into  hours  of  business — an 
irruption  of  subterranean  lava  into  the  peaceful  upper  strata 
of  her  being.  Thus  some  of  her  letters  contain  sporadic 
Martian  characters,  and  when  consulted  on  the  colour  of 
a  ribbon,  she  has  been  known  to  drop  into  poetry.'^     More- 

1  Op.  cit.,  p.  255.  2  Op.  cii.,  p.  61. 

^  Janet,  Nevroses  et  Idks fixes,  vol.  i.  p.  234,  etc. ;  Etat  nietital des Hysteriqties 
(1892),  p.  67. 

*  Here  is  the  quatrain  in  question — 

"  Les  nuances  de  ces  rubans 
Me  rappelent  mes  jeunes  ans 
Ce  bleu  verdS.  je  m'en  soumen 
Dans  mes  cheveux  alMt  si  bien." 

The  case  is  further  complicated  by  the  fact  that,  in  writing  an  account  of  the 
incident  to  M.  Lemaitre,  a  colleague  of  M.  Flournoy's  in  the  investigation, 
Helene  wrote  the  italicised  words  and  parts  of  words  in  the  script  appropriated 
by  the  seance-consciousness  for  Marie  Antoinette,  and  that  the  mental  vision 
which  accompanied  the  verses  belonged  obviously  to  the  "Royal  Cycle" 
(PP-   S3,  54)- 

DREAM-CONSCIOUSNESS  321 

over,  for  a  period  of  six  months,  when  she  was  suffering 
from  general  debility  and  menorrhagia,  and  unable  to 
attend  to  her  business,  the  automatic  manifestations  invaded 
her  waking  life  almost  to  the  point  of  actual  inconvenience.^ 

Miss  Smith's  mediumship  included  manifestations  of  all 
kinds.  The  physical  phenomena  were,  indeed,  few,  and 
ceased  at  an  early  period.  But  they  were  of  an  unequivocal 
character ;  they  resembled  closely  the  early  manifestations  of 
Mrs.  Guppy  and  other  noted  mediums,  and  it  is  conceivable 
that  under  favourable  circumstances  Helene's  mediumship 
might  have  developed  on  similar  lines.  The  earlier  circle  at 
which  these  phenomena  appeared  was,  however,  composed 
of  inharmonious  elements,  and  soon  broke  up.  After  the 
commencement  of  M,  Flournoy's  acquaintance  with  Helene 
the  physical  phenomena  appear  to  have  been  confined  to 
occasional  levitation  of  tables  and  transportation  of  flowers, 
etc.,  at  Helene's  own  home,  with  her  father  or  mother  as 
witnesses.  The  only  case  which  M.  Flournoy  cites  in 
detail  occurred  during  the  six  months'  illness  above  re- 
ferred to. 

At  the  earlier  seances,  however,  which  were  held  in  the 
dark,  besides  movements  of  the  table,  etc.,  there  were 
occasional  playing  on  a  piano  and  other  instruments  at 
a  distance,  and  "  apports."  The  "  apports  "  included  at  first 
flowers  of  various  kinds,  branches  of  trees,  a  leaf  of  ivy 
bearing  in  legible  characters  the  name  of  one  of  the  chief 
"  communicators  "  at  the  time.  Later,  when  Helene's  exotic 
and  oriental  visions  began,  the  "  apports "  changed  their 
character  correspondingly.  The  circle  now  received  shells 
filled  with  sand  and  still  wet  from  the  sea,  a  china  vase  full 
of  water  containing  a  rose,  Chinese  money,  etc.,  etc.^ 

Here,  then,  we  have  the  problem  of  physical  mediumship 
expressed  in  its  simplest  terms.  Miss  Smith  is  a  young 
woman  of  good  character :  she  has  none  of  the  ordinary 
motives   for  deception  :    an  acute  observer,  with  prolonged 

1  Pages  38,  47. 

^  Op.  cit.,  pp.  354-62.  As  regards  the  "apports,"  M.  Flournoy  contents 
himself  with  pointing  out  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  the  hypothesis  of  a  fourth 
dimension,  or  the  passage  of  matter  through  matter,  and  prefers  to  express  no 
opinion  as  to  how  the  things  came  into  the  circle,  which  sat,  naturally,  with 
closed  doors.  On  general  grounds,  however,  partly  because  of  the  experiments 
of  Thury,  Richet,  and  Crookes,  and  partly  no  doubt  because  of  his  conviction  of 
the  honesty  of  the  medium,  he  is  inclined  to  believe  in  the  possible  genuineness 
of  the  simpler  movements — levitation  of  furniture,  transportation  of  flowers 
and  oranges,  etc. — which  involve,  as  he  justly  remarks,  no  more  cumbrous 
hypothesis  than  that  of  a  force  radiating  from  the  medium  which  should  be 
capable  of  attracting  or  repelling  objects  in  the  neighbourhood. 

322        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

and  exceptionally  favourable  opportunities  for  observation, 
is  convinced  of  her  complete  honesty.  Yet  she  rolls  oranges 
about  the  floor  when  her  father  is  not  looking,  and  smuggles 
white  lilac  and  sea-shells  into  the  room  at  a  dark  seance. 
Miss  Smith  is  unquestionably  an  unconscious  and  involuntary 
agent  in  the  prolonged  drama  of  the  Martian  cycle.  She 
is  an  involuntary,  if  not  wholly  an  unconscious,  agent  when 
she  spouts  verses  from  behind  the  counter  in  answer  to  a 
customer.!  j^-  jg  difficult  to  suppose  that  these  other  actions 
were  altogether  knowingly  and  wilfully  undertaken.  But 
the  "  apports "  imply  a  prolonged  process  of  preparation  ; 
the  objects  had  to  be  selected  and  procured  beforehand, 
introduced  surreptitiously  into  the  seance-room,  and  pre- 
sented at  the  appropriate  moment  to  the  expectant  circle. 
If  the  whole  process  is  performed  automatically — or,  let  us 
say,  without  the  full  concurrence  of  will  and  consciousness — 
we  have  to  assume,  first,  that  the  programme  of  each  seance 
is  prepared  beforehand  in  some  subliminal  manufactory. 
The  elaborate  structure  of  Miss  Smith's  romances  would 
by  itself  indicate  some  previous  preparation,  and  we  have 
in  certain  cases  evidence  that  various  scenes  of  the  drama 
had  been  rehearsed  before  their  presentation  to  the  circle.^ 
We  have  further  to  suppose  that  this  process  of  subliminal 
preparation  may  include  the  performance,  during  waking 
life,  of  acts  more  or  less  completely  ignored  by  the  ordinary 
consciousness.  We  have  seen  that  Miss  Smith  unwittingly 
intercalates  fragments  of  Martian  or  royal  writing  into  her 
private  correspondence.  Could  she,  with  equal  innocence, 
put  a  bunch  of  white  lilac  or  a  china  vase  into  her  pocket 
before  the  seance  ? 

Many  analogous  cases  can,  of  course,  be  quoted  of  acts 
performed  in  obedience  to  an  impulse,  the  secret  springs 
of  which  are  hidden  from  the  knowledge  of  the  agent.  Even 
dreams  occasionally  exercise  a  more  or  less  unconscious 
influence  on  the  waking  life.  Tissie  narrates  a  case_  in 
which  a  man  repeatedly  committed  thefts  in  the  daytime 
in  reluctant  fulfilment  of  the  dream  of  the  night  before. 
More  worthy  of  credence  perhaps  is  an  instance  which  he 
relates  in  his  own  experience:  Walking  in  the  boulevard 
one  day,  he  found  himself  executing  an  involuntary  coup  de 

1  It  is  probable  that  these  --aking  automatisms  would  in  many  cases  almost 
instantly  fade  from  the  memory  if  there  were  no  external  cause — as,  in  this  case, 
the  injunction  to  note  down  at  once  an  account  of  such  incidents — to  fix  their 
trace  in  consciousness. 

■■^  See  M.  Flournoy's  remarks  on  this  point,  pp.  70-4. 

DREAM-CONSCIOUSNESS  323 

jarret,  and  traced  the  movement  to  the  vague  reminiscence 
of  a  recent  dream,  in  which  he  had  been  pushing  a  heavy 
handcart.^  Moll  gives  other  instances  of  dreams  inducing 
subsequent  action.'-^ 

Again,  when  the  nervous  system  is  enfeebled  by  disease, 
exhaustion,  or  old  age,  the  patient  may  commit  acts  now 
merely  trivial  and  purposeless,  now  actually  repugnant  to 
his  conscious  will,  as  in  coprolalia  and  kleptomania.  In 
certain  states,  such  as  masked  epilepsy,  the  patient  may 
continue  to  act,  to  all  outward  seeming,  in  an  intelligent 
manner,  though  he  himself  retains  no  subsequent  recollection 
of  what  he  has  done  or  said.  He  may  even  commit  crimes 
or  other  actions  foreign  to  his  ordinary  character.  Those 
rare  and  striking  cases  of  double  consciousness  and  multiplex 
personality  which  have  been  so  much  studied  of  late  years 
in  France  and  America  furnish  additional  illustrations.  But 
these  catastrophic  disturbances  of  consciousness  are  perhaps 
too  remote  from  ordinary  experience  to  throw  much  light 
upon  the  problem.  It  is  in  more  commonplace,  though 
hardly  more  familiar  regions,  in  the  facts  of  hysteria  on  the 
one  hand,  and  of  post-hypnotic  suggestion  on  the  other, 
that  we  find  the  strongest  support  for  the  interpretation  of 
physical  mediumship  above  indicated. 

In  the  hysterical  patient  we  see  the  same  exaggerated  self- 
consciousness  which  characterises  the  magnetic  somnambule 
and  her  successor,  the  spirit  medium.  In  both  the  master- 
impulse  is  the  desire  to  attract  attention,  sympathy,  and 
admiration.  The  young  woman  who  in  one  generation  and 
in  one  set  of  social  conditions  seeks  to  make  herself  the 
centre  of  her  little  world  by  an  imaginary  spinal  complaint, 
or  a  prolonged  exhibition  of  saintly  dying,  at  other  times 
and  in  other  circumstances  will  achieve  the  same  end  by 
surreptitiously  ringing  the  household  bells,  or  by  rapping 
on  the  legs  of  her  chair.  The  acts  of  the  hysteric,  again, 
are  like  those  of  the  medium  and  the  Poltergeist  child  in 
their  apparent  purposelessness.  The  servant  girl  who  sets 
fire  to  the  house,  or  the  baby,  with  no  other  aim  than  to  get 
herself  talked  about,  exhibits  hardly  greater  disproportion 
of  means  to  end  than  the  private  medium  who  keeps  up  the 
dull  farce  of  spirit  raps  and  spirit  voices  for  nearly  half 
a  century.  The  study  of  hysteria  paints  for  us  in  rather 
coarser  colours  just  such  a  weakening  of  the  moral  sense, 
such    an    inextricable    mingling    of    imposture   and   reality, 

^  Tissie,  Les  Reves,  pp.  154,  170,  etc.     Paris,  1890. 
^  Hypnotism  (English  trans.),  p.  202.     London,  1890. 

324        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

and  such  examples  of  unnatural  cunning  posing  under  the 
mask  of  innocence,  as  we  find  in  mediumship.  It  is  hardly- 
necessary  to  remind  the  reader  that  the  historical  cases  which 
are  claimed  by  Spiritualists  as  instances  of  possession  are 
classed  in  modern  text-books  as  exhibitions  of  hystero- 
epilepsy. 

The  view  of  hysteria  commonly  accepted  in  this  country 
regards  it  as  mainly  a  disease  of  the  will,  a  perversion  of 
the  moral  sense,  and  conceives  that  the  patient  knows  what 
he  is  doing,  and  can  be  taught,  by  moral  admonition  or 
judicious  neglect,  to  do  better.  But  the  records  of  the 
Salpetriere  and  similar  institutions  furnish  grounds  for  be- 
lieving that,  in  some  cases  at  any  rate,  the  eclipse  alike  of 
wit  and  will  may  be  more  complete  than  is  allowed  for  in  the 
common  view.  Janet  has  recently  described  a  case  from 
his  own  clinique,  which  admirably  illustrates  the  present 
discussion : — 

Some  two  years  back  a  young  woman  of  twenty-six,  Meb,  was 
brought  to  Janet  who  was  suffering  from  hallucinations  of  a  dis- 
tressing nature.  On  making  inquiry  into  the  previous  history 
of  the  patient,  he  found,  as  is  not  unusually  the  case,  that  the 
hallucinations,  which  had  persisted  for  many  years,  had  been 
originally  of  a  devotional  character.  Amongst  these  earlier  visions 
the  most  conspicuous  figure  was  Saint  Philomela,  whose  reality  was 
held,  not  only  by  the  patient  herself,  but  by  her  mother  and  aunt, 
as  incontestably  proved  by  certain  substantial  tokens — pebbles, 
feathers,  flowers,  and  small  pieces  of  cheap  jewellery — which  the 
saint  had  brought  with  her.  These  "apports"  were  sometimes  found 
lying  about  on  the  stairs  or  in  other  unlikely  spots,  as  if  fallen  there 
by  chance ;  sometimes  they  would  be  discovered  by  the  patient  in 
her  bedroom  on  waking  in  the  morning.  On  one  occasion  she  thus 
found  several  small  objects  arranged  so  as  to  form  a  cross ;  at 
another  time  a  pair  of  wings  was  stretched  out  on  the  eider-down 
quilt.  Occasionally,  again,  these  "apports"  made  their  appearance 
mysteriously  in  the  daytime  in  other  parts  of  the  house;  notably 
on  one  occasion  feathers  floated  down  from  the  ceiling  upon  the 
family  assembled  at  their  evening  meal. 

Janet  threw  Meb  into  the  hypnotic  sleep,  and  she  then  re- 
vealed the  secret  of  these  manifestations :  it  was  she  herself,  in  a 
state  of  natural  somnambulism,  who  had  arranged  little  pieces  of 
glass  in  the  form  of  a  cross ;  she  who  had  placed  pebbles  and  silver 
brooches  on  the  stairway;  she  who  had  put  a  stool  on  the  table 
and,  mounted  thereon,  had  lightly  fastened  small  feathers  from  her 
quilt  with  paste  to  the  ceiling  of  the  salle  a  manger^  so  that  the  heat 
of  the  lamp  might  bring  them  fluttering  down.  In  her  waking  state 
she  had  professed  to  share  the  surprise  which  these  portents  excited 

DREAM-CONSCIOUSNESS  325 

in  her  relations,  and  Janet,  after  careful  study  of  the  case,  is 
inclined  to  think  that  the  profession  was  genuine,  and  that  when 
awake  Meb  retained  no  recollection  of  her  skilful  preparations  for 
these  thaumaturgic  exhibitions.^ 

The  analogy  of  post-hypnotic  suggestion  lends  support 
to  Janet's  view  of  the  innocence  of  the  waking  Meb.  The 
hypnotised  subject,  at  the  request  of  his  operator,  will  com- 
monly undertake  in  the  trance  to  perform  actions,  even  of 
a  complicated  and  arduous  nature,  and  will  faithfully  perform 
his  promise  after  being  aroused  from  the  trance.  The  in- 
terval between  promise  and  fulfilment  may  vary  from  minutes 
to  months ;  the  enjoined  act  may  be  the  blowing  out  of  a 
candle,  the  mispronunciation  of  a  household  word,  a  mimic 
murder,  the  working  out  of  an  elaborate  arithmetical  calcu- 
lation, or  the  vision  and  salutation  of  a  phantasmal  figure. 
The  state  of  the  subject  during  the  performance  of  the 
enjoined  action  varies  very  widely.  In  some  cases  he  relapses 
into  a  state  indistinguishable  from  that  of  the  original  trance, 
and  immediately  after  the  performance  will  be  found  to  have 
forgotten  the  whole  incident.  In  other  cases,  though  the 
action  is  carried  out  with  full  consciousness,  and  the  agent 
is  not  even  at  a  loss  for  a  plausible  motive  for  his  conduct, 
the  real  source  of  the  impulse  is  entirely  hidden  from  him. 
In  yet  other  instances  it  would  seem  that  there  is  a  faint 
recollection  of  the  original  undertaking;  just  as  in  the 
earlier  trances,  as  already  pointed  out,  the  hypnotised  subject 
is  often  half  aware,  whilst  realising  some  suggested  illusion, 
that  he  is  acting  a  part.  So  Miss  Smith,  as  we  have  seen, 
was  vaguely  aware  of  the  absurdity  of  her  occasional  lapses 
into  poetry  during  business  hours.  In  the  early  stages  of 
automatism  there  is  often  a  conflict  between  the  idea  auto- 
matically suggested  and  the  normal  consciousness.  The 
subject  is  partly  conscious  of  what  he  is  doing,  but,  not 
knowing  why  he  does  it,  feels  as  if  he  was  not  personally 
responsible  for  the  thing  done.  Eventually,  if  the  auto- 
matism is  indulged,  it  is  conceivable  that  it  may  become 
systematised,  and  the  unconsciousness  thus  become  complete, 
as  we  have  reason  to  believe  it  frequently  is  in  the  case  of 
post-hypnotic  performance  of  suggestion. 

Whilst,  however,  cases  such  as  that  described  by  Janet 
have  a  direct  bearing  upon  our  present  problem,  we  should 
not  be  justified  in  pressing  the  analogy  too  closely.  Meb, 
as  Janet's  account  of  her  condition  shows,  was  an  hysteric  of 

^  Bulletin  de  T Institut  Psychologique  International,  Dec,  1901. 

326        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

a  comparatively  advanced  type,  much  farther  removed  from 
sanity  than  was  the  case,  apparently,  with  the  English  and 
American  mediums  whose  "  physical  phenomena "  we  have 
been  considering.  There  were  no  such  patent  indications  of 
abnormality  in  Home  or  Stainton  Moses,  or  even  in  Helene 
Smith,  as  would  permit  us  lightly  to  assume  that  "  apports  " 
and  other  phenomena  involving  prolonged  preparation  and 
considerable  forethought  could  have  been  produced  wholly 
without  the  participation  of  the  agent's  normal  consciousness. 
It  is  more  in  accordance  with  known  analogies  to  suppose 
that  the  medium  in  such  cases  yields,  perhaps,  innocently  at 
first  to  the  promptings  of  an  impulse  which  may  come  to  him 
as  from  a  higher  power,  or  that  he  is  moved  by  an  instinctive 
compulsion  to  aid  in  the  development  of  his  automatic 
romance ;  that,  like  a  child  of  larger  growth,  he  plays  his 
part  in  a  self-suggested  drama  with  something  of  the  free- 
dom from  moral  and  rational  limitations  which  characterises 
our  nightly  dreams,  but  with  something  also  of  that  double 
consciousness  which  warns  us,  even  in  dreams,  that  we  are 
playing  a  part.  In  any  case,  if  he  continues  to  abet  and 
encourage  this  automatic  prompting,  it  is  not  likely  that  he 
can  long  retain  both  honesty  and  sanity  unimpaired.  The 
man  who  looks  on  at  his  hand  doing  a  thing,  but  acquits 
himself  of  responsibility  for  the  thing  done,  can  hardly  claim 
to  be  considered  as  a  moral  agent ;  and  the  step  is  short  to 
instigating  and  repeating  a  like  action  in  the  future,  without 
the  excuse  of  an  overmastering  impulse. 

This,  or  something  like  it,  is  probably  the  history  of  the 
development  of  most  cases  of  private  "  physical  mediumship." 
How  far,  in  each  particular  case,  the  "medium"  may  be 
unconscious  of  the  action  at  the  moment,  or  free  from 
responsibility  for  the  whole  process  of  deception,  it  is,  of 
course,  impossible  for  any  external  observation  to  determine. 
But  that,  after  all,  is  a  question  of  ethics  rather  than  of 
psychology. 

In  Miss  Smith's  case,  whether  because  her  good  sense 
warned  her  of  the  danger,  or  possibly  because  her  feeling 
of  personal  dignity  (which  M.  Flournoy  assures  us  is  a  very 
prominent  feature  in  her  character)  was  outraged  by  acci- 
dentally becoming  aware  of  the  suspicions  of  her  good  faith 
entertained  by  some  members  of  the  circle,  or  from  some 
other  cause,  the  physical  phenomena  soon  ceased  at  her 
seances,  and  her  automatism  developed  on  less  equivocal 
lines. 

These    considerations    raise    an    issue   of    great    practical 

DKEAM-CONSCIOUSNESS  327 

importance,  how  far,  to  wit,  the  cultivation  of  what  may 
conveniently  be  called  mediumistic  powers  involves  the  risk 
of  injury  to  the  medium.  Probably  the  data  are  not  yet 
sufficient  to  admit  of  the  question  being  fully  answered. 
But  even  now  we  can  see  that  there  is  a  wide  distinction 
in  this  respect  between  the  psychological  and  the  physical 
manifestations.  Crystal-gazing  and  trance-speaking,  even 
when  practised  for  many  years,  appear  to  have  no  ill  effect. 
One  of  the  best  crystal-seers  of  my  acquaintance  is  a  lady 
in  robust  health,  mentally  and  physically.  Mr.  Lang  has 
given  similar  testimony  as  regards  the  crystal-seers  whose 
visions  he  has  described.^  Mrs.  Piper's  health  would  not 
appear  to  have  suffered  by  her  prolonged  course  of  trances. 
Helene  Smith  could  carry  on  nightly  conversations  with 
the  inhabitants  of  other  worlds,  and  retain  her  waking 
faculties  unimpaired.  At  a  large  meeting  of  Spiritualists  and 
their  friends  I  have  picked  out  two  well-known  "  clairvoyant" 
mediums,  one  of  them  a  lady  who  has  kindly  given  much 
of  her  time  for  purposes  of  investigation  by  some  of  my 
colleagues,  as  being,  of  all  the  company,  conspicuously  on 
the  best  terms  with  their  physical  organisms.  The  medium- 
istic seems  closely  akin  to  the  hypnotic  trance,  and  the 
automatic  phenomena  incident  to  the  two  states  are  almost 
precisely  parallel.  There  are  cases  in  which  men  and  women 
have  been  for  prolonged  periods  the  subjects  of  hypnotic 
experiment  without  apparent  injury  to  health,  intellect,  or 
character. 

On  the  whole,  then,  the  experience  so  far  gained  furnishes 
little  ground  for  apprehension  that  the  investigation  of 
psychological  phenomena  of  this  kind  in  adults,  if  con- 
ducted with  reasonable  prudence,  is  likely  to  have  injurious 
effects  on  the  subject.  But  the  case  is  different  when  we 
turn  to  physical  mediumship.  It  is  obvious,  on  any  view 
of  the  case,  that  the  departure  from  the  normal  involved 
in  the  production  of  physical  phenomena  is  much  greater. 
And  if  we  accept  the  view  here  presented,  that  such 
phenomena  are  invariably  fraudulent,  the  responsibility  which 
rests  on  those  who  invite  their  production  is  necessarily 
grave.  That  in  the  interests  of  knowledge  even  this  form 
of  moral  vivisection  cannot  be  defended,  I,  for  one,  should 
hesitate  to  affirm.  But  no  one  who  realises  the  true  signifi- 
cance of  the  facts  would  lightly  embark  upon  an  enterprise 
which  involves  the  risk  of  such  serious  moral  dangers.  To 
attend  the  seances  of  a  professional  medium  is  perhaps  at 

^  In  The  Making  of  Religion  (1898),  chapter  on  Crystal  Visions. 

328        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

worst  to  countenance  a  swindle ;  to  watch  the  gradual 
development  of  innocent  automatism  into  physical  medium- 
ship  may  be  to  assist  at  a  process  of  moral  degeneration. 

For  the  beginnings  of  such  automatism  are  like  the  be- 
ginnings of  disaffection  in  the  State.  Alike  in  the  corporeal 
and  in  the  political  hierarchy  certain  anarchic  elements  may 
free  themselves  from  constitutional  control,  and  work  out 
their  own  ends,  within  limits,  with  impunity.  In  a  fairly 
stable  constitution  those  limits  are  soon  reached,  and  the 
rebellious  elements  are  suppressed,  or  learn  to  acquiesce  in 
their  limitations.  When,  however,  from  stress  of  external 
circumstances  or  inherent  defect,  the  forces  of  control  are 
enfeebled,  the  contagion  of  disorder  may  spread  further,  and 
a  permanent  centre  of  rebellion  thus  be  formed — imperiuni 
in  imperio — which  may  grow  strong  enough  to  rival  and 
ultimately  even  to  overthrow  the  central  Government.  So, 
in  persons  of  unstable  nervous  system  it  would  seem  that 
these  automatic  manifestations  tend  to  develop  until  a  point 
is  reached  at  which  they  pass  beyond  the  control,  and,  it 
may  be,  even  beyond  the  consciousness  of  the  work-a-day 
self.  And  unless  we  are  prepared  to  admit  that  these 
dubious  phenomena  do  indeed  testify  to  the  working  of 
physical  energies  unknown  to  Science,  we  are  forced  to 
recognise  that,  however  trivial  and  innocent  may  seem  the 
first  steps  in  "physical  mediumship,"  where  the  good  sense 
of  the  medium  or  his  friends  does  not  intervene  to  stop  the 
further  development  of  the  manifestations,  they  must  end 
either  in  a  dishonesty  which  carries  less  disgrace  than  the 
dishonesty  of  the  market-place  only  because  the  victim  may 
be  supposed  not  wholly  responsible,  or  in  a  permanent  defect 
of  rational  control,  less  dangerous  no  doubt  than  recognised 
forms  of  mental  infirmity,  as  being  partly  feigned. 

CHAPTER     VIII 
THE   TRANCE   UTTERANCES   OF   MRS.   PIPER 

BY  the  admission  that,  while  the  so-called  physical 
phenomena  of  Spiritualism  afford  no  evidence  of  the 
action  of  any  physical  force  beyond  that  exerted  by 
the  human  muscles,  the  medium  himself  in  performing  the 
feats  may  be  a  not  wholly  conscious  or  voluntary  agent, 
the  ground  is  cleared  for  the  real  problem  of  Spiritualism. 
Inadequate,  as  we  have  endeavoured  to  show,  as  an  explana- 
tion even  of  the  physical  phenomena,  deliberate  fraud  is  seen 
to  be  preposterous  as  a  final  solution  of  what  are  con- 
veniently called  the  mental  manifestations.  Automatic 
oratory  and  crystal  vision  may  no  doubt  be  feigned,  and 
probably  are  constantly  feigned  for  trade  purposes.  But 
no  one  who  has  seriously  studied  the  evidence  at  first 
hand  can  doubt  that  the  entranced  subject,  at  any  rate,  has 
in  many  cases  powers  of  perception  and  apprehension  which 
are  beyond  those  exercised  by  normal  persons,  and  which 
cannot  be  deliberately  acquired  by  the  most  prolonged 
practice.  Even  the  professional  "  thought-reader "  who 
exhibits  his  powers  on  a  public  platform,  or  the  equally 
professional  "  sensitive "  who  performs  at  the  clinique  of 
some  Paris  physicians,  probably  owes  his  success  not  more 
to  training  than  to  natural  endowment.  And  where  trickery 
is  precluded  by  the  very  conditions  of  the  experiment  we 
often  find  indubitable  indications  of  some  preternormal 
receptivity  to  impressions.  The  manifestations  which  have 
been  supposed  to  afford  evidence  of  such  preternormal 
receptivity  in  mediumistic  or  sensitive  subjects  may  con- 
veniently be  classed  into  two  main  groups.  In  the  first 
group  are  included  those  cases  in  which  the  influence, 
whether  of  the  living  operator  or  of  inanimate  objects,  on 
the  sensitive  subject  is  apparently  exercised  at  close  quarters. 
Such  are  the  alleged  instances  of  community  of  sensation 

329 

330        PEOBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

described  by  the  earlier  Magnetists  in  this  country  and  on 
the  Continent ;  the  supposed  action  of  metals,  gems,  drugs, 
and  magnets ;  the  apparent  ability  of  the  sensitive  to  detect 
mesmerised  water  and  mesmerised  coins.     With  these  may 
also    be    grouped,    perhaps,    the    exhibitions    of    Phreno- 
Mesmerism,  where  the  subject  was   demonstrably  ignorant 
of    the    location    of    the    phrenological    organs,   and    most 
instances  of  clairvoyance  at  close  quarters,  or  seeing  objects 
with  closed  eyes,  as  described  in  the  reports  of  the  second 
French  Commission,  and  by  Townshend  and  other  English 
Mesmerists.     In    some  instances,  as   in  the   case  of  Major 
Buckley's   clairvoyants,  who  professed   to   be   able   to  read 
mottoes  in  sealed  nuts,  commonplace  trickery  is  probably  a 
sufficient  explanation.     In  other  cases,  the  nature  and  extent 
of  the  success  achieved,  and   the   ease  with  which    expert 
observers,  including  conjurers,  were  baffled,  force  us  to  look 
for  some  agency  more  equal  to  the  marvels  recorded.     No 
doubt    in    such    instances    the    results    may    generally    be 
attributed,  on  the  one  hand,  to  hyperaesthesia  of  the  senses 
of  touch,  hearing,  or  sight,  conditioned  by  the  somnambulic 
state ;  on  the  other  hand,  to  the  indications  furnished  by  the 
voice,  look,  gestures,  or  breathing  of  the  innocent  experi- 
menter.    Most  of  the  results  recorded  by  the  earlier  French 
Magnetists,   by    Reichenbach,   by    Elliotson    and    his    con- 
temporaries, may,  so  far  as  the  records  enable  us  to  judge,  be 
safely  attributed  to  the  effect  of  such  unconscious  suggestion 
acting  on  specially  receptive,  that  is,  generally,  hyperaesthetic, 
subjects.     Nor,    until    similar    results    are    obtained    under 
conditions  which  preclude   the  operation  of  suggestion  by 
normal    channels — and    I    have    failed    so    far    to   find    any 
record  of  such  experiments — need  we   look    for   any  other 
explanation  of  the  alleged  action  at  a  distance  of  metals, 
drugs,   and    magnets,   the   transference    of    sensibility,   and 
similar  marvels  vouched  for  by  modern  French  observers. 
In  a  few  rare  instances  in  the  past,  however,  as  I  have 
endeavoured    to    show   in   discussing   the   records    of    early 
Mesmerism,  especially   in   this   country ,i  the   results  would 
seem  to  go  beyond  anything  which,  in  the  stated  conditions, 
the  acumen  of  the  most  hyperaesthetic  sensitive  could  gather 
from  the  most  apocalyptic  of  experimenters.     It  is  not  easy 
thus  to  explain  all  manifestations  noted  by  P6t6tin,  Bertrand, 
and  Elliotson ;  it  is  still  more  difficult  to  suppose  that  Braid, 
who  was,  at  any  rate,  fully  alive  to  the  risks  of  unconscious 
suggestion,  should  in  his  experiments  in  Phreno-Mesmerism 

^  See  above,  Book  I.  chaps,  viii.  and  ix. 

UTTERANCES   OF  MES.   PIPEE       331 

have  so  flagrantly  neglected  the  precautions  which  he  was 
constantly  enforcing  on  others. 

In  the  second  group  are  placed  the  alleged  instances  of 
the  perception  of  distant  scenes  and  persons.  Clairvoyance 
of  this  kind  bulks,  as  we  have  seen,  very  largely  in  the  early 
history  of  Spiritualism.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  from 
1848  onwards  until  a  quite  recent  date,  whether  because  the 
observers  were  generally  lacking  in  scientific  training  and 
habits  of  accurate  observation,  or  because  the  spurious 
physical  phenomena  diverted  an  undue  share  of  interest 
to  themselves,  we  find  amongst  the  numerous  references  to 
clairvoyance  hardly  any  records  sufficiently  detailed  to  be 
worth  consideration.  Prior  to  1848  the  trance  utterances 
of  Cahagnet's  somnambules,^  and  some  of  the  clairvoyant 
descriptions  recorded  by  Gregory,  Haddock,  and  other 
English  Mesmerists  merit  most  attention.^ 

Speaking  generally,  however,  the  instances  alike  of  com- 
munity of  sensation  and  of  clairvoyance  at  a  distance 
recorded  by  the  older  observers  are  scarcely  sufficient  in 
themselves  to  afford  a  case  for  investigation.  The  observers 
were,  if  not  always  untrained,  in  almost  every  case  ignorant 
of  the  special  dangers  to  be  guarded  against  and  the  special 
precautions  necessary;  moreover,  the  conditions  and  surround- 
ings are,  for  the  most  part,  very  imperfectly  described,  and 
the  results  are  generally  vitiated  by  the  amiable  confidence 
professed  by  the  observer  in  the  good  faith  of  his  sensitive — 
a  confidence  which,  being  founded  on  experience  of  the 
sensitive  in  his  normal  state,  was,  as  we  now  know,  in  the 
actual  circumstances  irrelevant.  Again,  in  most  cases  of 
"  travelling "  clairvoyance,  we  are  told  too  little  of  the 
antecedents  and  general  circumstances  of  the  case,  or  of 
the  precautions,  if  any,  which  were  taken  to  ensure  that  the 
information  uttered  in  the  trance  could  not  have  reached 
the  clairvoyant  by  normal  means.  And,  finally,  except  in 
the  case  of  Cahagnet's  somnambule,  Adele,  the  records  are 
sporadic,  and  the  accounts  given,  which  have  obviously  been 
selected  and  preserved  because  of  their  special  excellence, 
may  merely  represent  the  few  lucky  hits  out  of  a  very  large 
number  of  barren  experiments.  I  have  already  pointed  out 
that  the  records  of  the  clairvoyance  shown  by  Alexis  Didier 
are  vitiated  by  considerations  of  an  analogous  kind,  Alexis 
being  able  to  choose  the  one  or  two  persons  to  whom  he 
furnished  successful  tests  out  of  the  large  number  present 
at  his  seance." 

^  Book  I.  chap.  vi.     ^  Book  I.  chap.  x.     ^  Vol.  I.  pp.  147-8. 

332        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

But  since  the  foundation,  in  1882,  of  the  Society  for 
Psychical  Research,  and  the  more  rigorous  methods  of  ex- 
periment inaugurated  by  Professor  W.  F,  Barrett  and  his 
colleagues,  the  problem  has  assumed  a  new  aspect  Within 
the  last  twenty  years  a  large  mass  of  evidence  has  been 
accumulated  for  the  operation  of  some  faculty  which  can 
take  cognisance  of  things  outside  the  scope  of  any  possible 
extension  of  the  known  senses.  This  hypothetical  faculty, 
which  is  assumed  to  represent  the  action,  unmediated  by  the 
external  sense-organs,  of  one  mind  or  brain  upon  another 
mind  or  brain,  has  been  provisionally  named  thought-trans- 
ference or  telepathy.  Space  will  not  permit  here  of  any  but 
the  briefest  reference  to  the  bulk  of  this  evidence.  It  may 
be  conveniently  grouped  under  three  main  heads. 

(i)  Experimental.  The  one  party  to  the  experiment,  who 
may  be  close  at  hand,  in  an  adjoining  room,  or  at  a  distance 
of  some  miles,  endeavours  to  impress  upon  the  other  party 
some  idea  with  which  his  own  mind  is  occupied  at  the 
moment — an  object  in  the  room,  a  number,  a  mental  picture, 
and  so  on.  In  a  few  rare  instances  the  agent  has  succeeded 
in  evoking  experimentally  an  apparition  of  himself  before 
the  distant  percipient. 

(2)  Spontaneous.  A  large  number  of  instances  of  appari- 
tions coinciding  with  death,  intimations  of  illness  and  acci- 
dent, have  been  critically  examined  and,  as  far  as  the  circum- 
stances would  permit,  verified  by  careful  inquiries,  inspection 
of  letters  and  diaries,  and  collation  of  other  corroborative 
testimony. 

(3)  Tra7tce  observations.  Within  the  last  ten  years  a  third 
source  of  information — the  trance  utterances  of  certain  clair- 
voyants— has  assumed  considerable,  and  may  ultimately 
assume  preponderant  importance.  Under  the  conditions 
observed  by  Dr.  Hodgson  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper,  the 
best-known  of  these  clairvoyants,  this  form  of  inquiry  more 
nearly  resembles  in  rigidity  and  precision  an  experimental 
investigation  in  the  laboratory  than  a  mere  record  of  spon- 
taneous mediumistic  outpourings. 

Mrs.  Piper  is  a  typical  medium.  By  a  fortunate  combina- 
tion of  circumstances  she  has  been  saved  from  the  temptation, 
to  which  nearly  every  other  clairvoyant  medium  of  note  has 
at  one  time  or  another  succumbed,  to  advertise  her  gifts  by 
resorting  to  physical  phenomena.^     For  many  years  past  her 

^  So  far  as  I  am  aware,  no  other  clairvoyant  medium  of  note  since  1848  has 
failed  at  one  time  or  another  to  exhibit  physical  phenomena,  if  only  to  the  extent 
of  table-rapping,  as  part  of  her  mediumistic  gifts.     Even  with  the  earlier  French 

UTTERANCES  OF  MUS.    PIPER       333 

trance  manifestations  have  been  the  subject  of  accurate  and 
continuous  observation  and  record,  and  have  no  doubt  in  the 
process  been  modified  by  the  constant  suggestions  received 
from  her  environment.  But  at  the  outset  she  appears  to 
have  represented  the  ordinary  phases  of  trance  mediumship 
as  exhibited  in  America  fifteen  or  twenty  years  ago.  In 
1885  she  came  under  the  observation  of  Professor  William 
James,  of  Harvard,  and  two  years  later  of  Dr.  Hodgson 
and  other  members  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical 
Research.  From  Dr.  Hodgson's  subsequent  inquiries  it 
would  appear  that  Mrs.  Piper  in  1 884  had  visited,  for  medical 
advice,  a  professional  clairvoyant,  whose  leading  control  pur- 
ported to  be  a  French  physician  named  Finne,  or  Finnett.  At 
her  second  visit  Mrs.  Piper  herself  became  entranced,  and  was 
controlled  by  an  Indian  girl  named  (inirabile  dictu)  Chlorine. 
Thereafter  other  controls  appeared  —  Mrs.  Siddons,  Bach, 
Longfellow,  Commodore  Vanderbilt,  Loretta  Ponchini.  A 
year  or  two  later,  when  she  was  first  seen  by  W.  James  and 
others,  a  French  doctor  had  succeeded  in  obtaining  almost 
exclusive  control.  The  name  of  this  French  doctor  was 
reported  to  be  Phinuit.  For  the  last  fifteen  years  Mrs.  Piper 
in  her  trances  has  been  under  the  almost  continuous  observa- 
tion and  supervision  of  members  of  the  S.P.R.,  chiefly  Dr. 
Hodgson,  and  nearly  all  her  utterances — especially  during 
the  latter  part  of  this  period — have  been  exactly  recorded. 
For  some  years  past,  moreover,  the  task  of  preserving  a 
complete  record  has  been  simplified,  as  the  revelations 
through  the  trance  have  for  the  most  part  been  given  through 
her  hand  in  writing,  instead  of  orally,  as  at  the  outset. 

Here  is  a  typical  illustration  of  one  of  her  trance  con- 
versations. The  case  is  chosen  partly  as  being,  by  exception, 
a  condensed  description  only,  and,  therefore,  short  enough 
to  quote,  partly  because  the  narrator.  Professor  Shaler,  of 
Harvard,  is  a  well-known  man  of  science,  and  by  no  means 

and  German  somnambules,  as  shown  in  Book  I.,  stone-throwing  and  other 
movements  of  objects  occasionally  appeared.  And  since  that  date  the  colloca- 
tion is  so  general  as  to  be  extremely  significant.  I  have  already  dwelt  at  length 
on  the  cases  of  Home  and  Stainton  Moses.  It  is  enough  to  say  here  that 
Stainton  Moses  appears  in  this  respect  to  be  typical  of  private  mediums  generally. 
The  chief  private  clairvoyants,  whose  experiences  have  been  recorded  by  the 
S.P.  R.,  have  also  been  on  occasion  mediums  for  physical  phenomena.  Some- 
times the  phenomena  have  been  recorded  elsewhere,  under  an  assumed  name ; 
sometimes  they  have  taken  place  only  in  the  family  circle  or  amongst  intimate 
friends,  and  have  not  been  made  public  at  all.  But  the  fact  of  their  occurrence 
in  such  circumstances,  where  the  operator  could  have  had  no  adequate  or  readily 
intelligible  motive  for  fraud,  affords  strong  confirmation  of  the  view  taken  in  the 
text  that  mediumship  is  a  pathologic  state. 

334        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

prepossessed  in  favour  of  Mrs.  Piper  or  the  hypothesis  of 
telepathy.  The  sitting  was  held  on  May  25th,  1894,  at  the 
house  of  Professor  James,  in  Cambridge,  Boston  ;  Professor 
Shaler,  with  his  wife  and  Professor  James,  who  was  taking 
notes,  being  present.  Professor  Shaler  writes  to  Professor 
James  on  June  6th  : — ^ 

"My  dear  James, — At  the  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  May  2Sth 
I  made  the  following  notes  : — 

"  As  you  remember,  I  came  to  the  meeting  with  my  wife ;  when 
Mrs.  Piper  entered  the  trance  state  Mrs.  Shaler  took  her  hand. 
After  a  few  irrelevant  words,  my  wife  handed  Mrs.  Piper  an  en- 
graved seal,  which  she  knew,  though  I  did  not,  had  belonged  to  her 
brother,  a  gentleman  from  Richmond,  Virginia,  who  died  about 
a  year  ago.  At  once  Mrs.  Piper  began  to  make  statements  clearly 
relating  to  the  deceased,  and  in  the  course  of  the  following  hour 
she  showed  a  somewhat  intimate  acquaintance  with  his  affairs,  those 
of  his  immediate  family,  and  those  of  the  family  in  Hartford,  Conn., 
with  which  the  Richmond  family  had  had  close  social  relations. 
The  statements  made  by  Mrs.  Piper,  in  my  opinion,  entirely  exclude 
the  hypothesis  that  they  were  the  results  of  conjectures,  directed 
by  the  answers  made  by  my  wife.  I  took  no  part  in  the  question- 
ing, but  observed  very  closely  all  that  was  done. 

"On  the  supposition  that  the  medium  had  made  very  careful 
preparation  for  her  sittings  in  Cambridge,  it  would  have  been 
possible  for  her  to  have  gathered  all  the  information  which  she 
rendered  by  means  of  agents  in  the  two  cities,  though  I  must 
confess  that  it  would  have  been  rather  difficult  to  have  done  the 
work. 

"  The  only  distinctly  suspicious  features  were  that  certain  familiar 
baptismal  names  were  properly  given,  while  those  of  an  unusual 
sort  could  not  be  extracted,  and  also  that  one  or  two  names  were 
given  correctly  as  regards  the  ceremony  of  baptism  or  the  directory, 
but  utterly  wrong  from  the  point  of  view  of  family  usage.  Thus 
the  name  of  a  sister-in-law  of  mine,  a  sister  of  my  wife's,  was  given 
as  Jane,  which  is  true  by  the  record,  but  in  forty  years'  experience  of 
an  intimate  sort  I  never  knew  her  to  be  called  Jane — in  fact,  I  did 
not  at  first  recognise  who  was  meant. 

"While  I  am  disposed  to  hold  to  the  hypothesis  that  the  per- 
formance is  one  that  is  founded  on  some  kind  of  deceit,  I  must 
confess  that  close  observation  of  the  medium  made  on  me  the  im- 
pression that  she  is  honest.  Seeing  her  under  any  other  conditions, 
I  should  not  hesitate  to  trust  my  instinctive  sense  as  to  the  truthful- 
ness of  the  woman. 

"  I  venture  also  to  note,  though  with  some  hesitancy,  the  fact 
that  the  ghost  of  the  ancient  Frenchman  who  never  existed,  but 
who  purports  to  control  Mrs.  Piper,  though  he  speaks  with  a  first- 

^  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  524,  525. 

UTTERANCES   OF  MRS.   PIPEK       335 

rate  stage  French  accent,  does  not,  so  far  as  I  can  find,  make  the 
characteristic  blunders  in  the  order  of  his  EngHsh  words  which  we 
find  in  actual  life.  Whatever  the  medium  is,  I  am  convinced  that 
this  '  influence '  is  a  preposterous  scoundrel. 

"I  think  I  did  not  put  strongly  enough  the  peculiar  kind  of 
knowledge  which  the  medium  seems  to  have  concerning  my  wife's 
brother's  affairs.  Certain  of  the  facts,  as,  for  instance,  those  relating 
to  the  failure  to  find  his  will  after  his  sudden  death,  were  very  neatly 
and  dramatically  rendered.  They  had  the  real  life  quality.  So,  too, 
the  name  of  a  man  who  was  to  have  married  my  wife's  brother's 
daughter,  but  who  died  a  month  before  the  time  fixed  for  the 
wedding,  was  correctly  given,  both  as  regards  surname  and  Christian 
name,  though  the  Christian  name  was  not  remembered  by  my  wife 
or  me. 

"  I  cannot  determine  how  probable  it  is  that  the  medium,  know- 
ing she  was  to  have  a  sitting  with  you  in  Cambridge,  or  rather 
a  number  of  them,  took  pains  to  prepare  for  the  tests  by  carefully 
working  up  the  family  history  of  several  of  your  friends.  If  she 
had  done  this  for  thirty  or  so  persons,  I  think  she  could,  though 
with  some  difficulty,  have  gained  just  the  kind  of  knowledge  which 
she  rendered.  She  would  probably  have  forgotten  that  my  wife's 
brother's  given  name  was  Legh,  and  that  of  his  mother  Gabriella, 
while  she  remembered  that  of  Mary  and  Charles,  and  also  that 
of  a  son  in  Cambridge,  who  is  called  Waller.^  So,  too,  the  fact 
that  all  trouble  on  account  of  the  missing  will  was  within  a  fortnight 
after  the  death  of  Mr,  Page  cleared  away  by  the  action  of  the 
children  was  unknown.  The  deceased  is  represented  as  still 
troubled,  though  he  purported  to  see  just  what  was  going  on  in  his 
family. 

"  I  have  given  you  a  mixture  of  observations  and  criticisms  ;  let 
me  say  that  I  have  no  firm  mind  about  the  matter.  I  am  curiously 
and  yet  absolutely  uninterested  in  it  for  the  reason  that  I  don't  see 
how  I  can  exclude  the  hypothesis  of  fraud,  and  until  that  can  be 
excluded  no  advance  can  be  made. 

"When  I  took  the  medium's  hand,  I  had  my  usual  experience 
with  them,  a  few  preposterous  compliments  concerning  the  clear- 
ness of  my  understanding,  and  nothing  more. 

"  Faithfully  yours, 

"  N.  S.  Shaler." 

The  foregoing  account,  though  of  course  not  so  valuable 
as  a  completer  record,  conveys  with  sufificient  accuracy  the 
impression  left  on  impartial  observers  by  a  fairly  successful 
interview^.     Professor  Shaler,  it  v^ill  be  seen,  is  confident  that 

^  Professor  Shaler's  argument  is  scarcely  sound.  On  the  assumption  that 
Mrs.  Piper  had  got  up  these  particulars  beforehand,  she  would  probably  have 
made  a  point  of  rem  ember  in f:;  the  unusual  names,  though  she  might  have  for- 
gotten, or  misapplied,  the  common  ones. 

336        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

the  information  given  about  family  affairs  was  too  detailed 
to  be  due  to  mere  guessing,  and  could  not  have  been  ex- 
tracted by  skilful  "fishing"  from  Mrs.  Shaler  and  himself 
There  remains  the  supposition  that  Mrs.  Piper  had  got  up 
the  information  beforehand,  for  the  express  purpose  of 
bringing  it  out  at  this  interview.  In  this  particular  case 
there  is  no  great  improbability  in  such  a  supposition.  The 
visit  to  Cambridge  (Boston)  had,  no  doubt,  been  decided 
on  some  time  beforehand.  Mrs,  Piper  could  easily  guess 
that  she  would  be  likely  to  meet  at  Professor  James'  house 
other  members  of  the  Harvard  Faculty ;  and  even  if  it  is 
assumed  that  the  precaution  generally  taken  at  these  seances 
— that  of  introducing  the  sitters  under  assumed  names — was 
duly  observed  in  this  case,^  Mrs.  Piper  would  no  doubt,  on 
the  hypothesis  of  fraud,  have  made  it  her  business  to  pro- 
cure beforehand  photographs  or  personal  descriptions  of  all 
the  likely  sitters.  Again,  such  a  source  of  the  information 
given  in  the  trance  would  be  in  accordance  with  precedent. 
Apart  from  the  general  presumption  in  favour  of  a  known 
cause,  fraud,  in  preference  to  an  unknown  cause — clair- 
voyance, telepathy,  or  spirits — we  have  evidence  that  fraud 
of  the  precise  kind  indicated  by  Professor  Shaler  has  been, 
and  probably  is  still  employed,  especially  by  American 
clairvoyants. 

Now  the  fact  that  nearly  all  those  who  have  had  sittings 
with  Mrs.  Piper  have  been  impressed  by  her  transparent 
honesty  is,  in  strictness,  irrelevant.  We  have  seen  that  many 
of  Foster's  and  Home's  sitters  were  equally  confident  of  the 
medium's  honesty,  and  that,  generally,  the  ability  to  impress 
his  clients  with  confidence  in  his  integrity  is  an  essential  part 
of  a  medium's  equipment.  Further,  it  should  be  remembered 
that  the  conviction  of  the  medium's  honesty  in  this  case 
is  founded  on  experience  of  Mrs.  Piper  in  her  waking  state, 
whereas  the  revelations  proceed  from  Mrs.  Piper  entranced. 
Nor  would  the  genuineness  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  if  it  could 
be  substantiated,  be  conclusive.  The  reproduction  in  a 
genuine  trance  of  knowledge  fraudulently  acquired  is  not 
more  difficult  to  believe  than  the  fraudulent  performance 
of  conjuring  tricks  in  a  state  of  trance.  It  is  more  to  the 
point  that  all  those  who  have  made  a  careful  study  at  first 
hand  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  utterances,  and  who  are  there- 
fore best  qualified  to  speak — Professor  W.  James,  Dr.  Hodg- 
son, Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  the  late  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Mrs,  H. 
Sidgwick,   Dr.   Walter   Leaf,  Professor   Romaine   Newbold, 

^  Professor  Shaler,  it  will  be  seen,  does  not  refer  to  this  point. 

UTTERANCES   OF  MES.    PIPER       337 

Professor  J,  H.  Hyslop — have  put  on  record  their  conviction 
that  the  results  attained  cannot  be  explained  by  fraud  or 
misrepresentation.  It  is,  unfortunately,  impracticable  within 
the  limited  space  at  my  command,  especially  in  view  of  the 
voluminous  nature  of  the  records,  to  give  here  a  fair  sample 
of  the  evidence  on  which  this  conviction  is  founded.  Two 
or  three  more  extracts  from  brief  descriptions  of  seances 
must  suffice.  For  fuller  information  the  reader  is  referred  to 
the  Proceedings  S.  P.  R.,  where  he  will  find  many  accounts 
of  seances  given  in  full,  and  to  Mr.  Myers'  forthcoming  book 
on  Human  Personality} 

Here,  for  instance,  is  an  account  by  Professor  J.  Estlin 
Carpenter,  of  Oxford,  of  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on 
13th  December,  1894.  The  sitting  again  took  place  at  the 
house  of  Professor  James,  who  prefaces  the  account  with 
the  following  note  : — ^ 

"  Mrs.  James  and  Mrs.  Piper  were  in  the  same  room  when 
Professor  J.  Estlin  Carpenter,  of  Oxford,  entered.  He  was  intro- 
duced as  Mr.  Smith  to  Mrs.  Piper,  and  withdrew,  speaking  to  her, 
to  the  end  of  the  room.  His  wife  then  entered,  and  was  greeted 
by  Mrs.  James  inadvertently  as  'Mrs.  Carpenter,'  which,  of  course, 
annuls  the  best  test  of  this  sitting." 

The  following  is  the  statement  by  Professor  Carpenter : — 

"Cambridge,  December  i^th,  1894. 

"  Dear  Professor  James, — I  had  a  sitting  yesterday  with  Mrs. 
Piper  at  your  house,  and  was  greatly  interested  with  the  results 
obtained,  as  they  were  entirely  unexpected  by  me.  Various  persons 
were  named  and  described  whom  we  could  not  identify  (my  wife 
was  present) ;  but  the  names  of  my  father  and  mother  were 
correctly  given,  with  several  details  which  were  in  no  way  present 
to  my  mind  at  the  time.     The  illness  from  which  my  father  was 

^  The  earliest  account  of  Mrs.  Piper  is  to  be  found  in  the  Report  on 
Mediumistic  Phenomena  by  Professor  W.  James  [Proc.  Am.  S.  P.  P.,  p.  102). 
The  accounts  of  her  trance  utterances  pubHshed  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  English 
Society  are  extremely  voluminous,  but  the  evidence  cannot  fairly  be  appraised 
without  an  attentive  study  of  at  least  some  of  these  records.  See  Proceedings 
S.  P.  R. ,  vol.  vi.  pp.  436-650,  containing  records  edited  respectively  by  the  late 
F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Dr.  Oliver  Lodge,  and  Dr.  Walter  Leaf;  vol.  viii.  pp.  1-167, 
containing  a  discussion  and  further  detailed  reports  of  sittings  edited  by 
Dr.  Hodgson  ;  vol.  xiii,  pp.  284-582,  a  further  report  and  records  by  Dr.  Hodg- 
son ;  vol.  xiv.  pp.  6-49,  a  further  record  by  Professor  Romaine  Newbold ; 
vol.  xvi.  (649  pages)  consists  of  a  report  and  record  of  a  series  of  sittings  by 
Professor  Hyslop.  There  are  critical  articles  on  the  subject  by  myself,  vol.  xiv. 
pp.  50-78,  by  Mrs.  Sidgvyick  and  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  vol.  xv.  pp.  16-38  and  39- 
52  respectively.      Further  material  is  awaiting  publication  in  the  Proceedings. 

^  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  528,  529. 

II. — Z 

338         PROBLEMS   OF   MEDIUMSHIP 

suffering  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  identified,  but  not  the 
accident  which  took  him  from  us.  A  penknife  which  I  happened 
to  have  with  me  was  rightly  referred  to  its  place  on  the  desk  in 
his  study,  and  after  considerable  hesitation  Mrs.  Piper  wrote  out 
the  word  organ  when  I  asked  concerning  other  objects  in  the  room. 
She  added  spontaneously  a  very  remarkable  item  about  which  I  was 
in  no  way  thinking,  viz,  that  on  Sunday  afternoons  or  evenings 
(her  phrase  was  '  twilight ')  we  were  accustomed  to  sing  there 
together.  She  stated  correctly  that  my  mother  was  older  than 
my  father,  but  died  after  him ;  and  she  connected  her  death  with 
my  return  from  Switzerland  in  a  manner  that  wholly  surprised  me, 
the  fact  being  that  her  last  illness  began  two  or  three  days  after 
my  arrival  at  home  from  Lucerne.  She  gave  the  initials  of  my 
wife's  name  rightly,  and  addressed  words  to  her  from  her  father, 
whose  first  name,  George,  was  correct.  She  also  desired  me  in  my 
father's  name  not  to  be  anxious  about  some  family  matters  (which 
have  only  recently  come  to  my  knowledge),  though  their  nature 
was  not  specified.  Finally,  though  I  should  have  mentioned  this 
first,  as  it  was  at  the  outset  of  the  interview,  she  told  me  that  I  was 
about  to  start  on  a  voyage,  and  described  the  vessel  in  general  terms, 
though  she  could  not  give  me  its  name,  or  tell  me  the  place  where 
it  was  going.  I  saw  enough  to  convince  me  that  Mrs.  Piper  possesses 
some  very  extraordinary  powers,  but  I  have  no  theory  at  all  as  to 
their  nature  or  mode  of  exercise. 

"  Believe  me,  faithfully  yours, 

"  J.  EsTLiN  Carpenter." 

Here,  again,  is  an  account  given  by  the  well-known  French 
author,  M.  Paul  Bourget,  who  paid  two  visits  to  Mrs.  Piper 
in  December,  1893.  The  account,  which  is  taken  from  the 
Figaro,  January  14th,  1895,  apparently  relates  to  the  first 
of  these  visits.^ 

"Mrs.  P. — me  tenait  les  mains,  et  elle  touchait  en  meme  temps 
une  toute  petite  pendule  de  voyage  ayant  appartenu  a  quelqu'un 
qu'elle  ne  pouvait  pas  avoir  connu, — un  peintre  qui  s'est  tue  dans 
des  circonstances  particulierement  tristes  de  folic  momentanee. 
Comment  arriva-t-elle  a  me  dire  et  cette  profession  de  I'ancien 
proprietaire  de  la  pendule  et  sa  folic,  et  le  genre  meme  de  son 
suicide?  Y  avait-il  une  communication  entre  mon  esprit  et  son 
esprit  a  elle,  dedouble  dans  cette  mysterieuse  personnalite  du 
docteur  Lyonnais?  Mes  mains,  qu'elle  tenait  entre  les  siennes,  lui 
revelaient-elles,  par  des  fremissements  perceptibles  a  I'hyperacuite 
de  ses  nerfs,  mes  impressions  sous  chacun  de  ses  mots,  et  avait-elle 
conserve,  dans  son  sommeil,  un  pouvoir  de  se  laisser  guider  par  ces 

■^  An  account  of  M.  Bourget's  second  visit  will  be  found  in  Proc.  S.  P.  P., 
vol.  xiii.  pp.  495-99- 

UTTERANCES   OF   MRS.    PIPER       339 

minuscules  jalons  ?  Ou  bien,  car  il  faut  toujours  reserver  une  place 
au  scepticisme,  etait-elle  une  comedienne  incomparable  et  qui 
devinait  raes  pensees  au  ton  seul  de  mes  questions  et  de  mes 
reponses?  .  .  .  Mais  non.  Elle  etait  sincere.  Les  physiologistes 
qui  I'ont  observee  dans  ses  crises  ont  trop  souvent  reconnu  le 
caractere  magnetique  de  son  sommeil  a  des  indices  mecaniques 
qui  ne  trompent  pas.  Tout  ce  que  je  peux  conclure  des  details 
reellement  extraordinaires  qu'elle  me  donna  a  moi,  un  etranger 
de  passage,  sur  un  disparu,  et  dont  je  n'avais  parle  a  personne  dans 
son  entourage,  c'est  que  I'esprit  a  des  precedes  de  connaitre,  non 
soupgonnes  par  notre  analyse." 

These  three  records  may  be  taken  as  fairly  typical.  The 
information  given,  it  will  no  doubt  be  admitted,  is  beyond 
the  scope  of  chance  coincidence,  or  of  skilful  conjecture 
based  upon  hints  let  drop  by  the  sitter  during  the  interview. 
On  the  supposition  that  Mrs,  Piper  worked  up  the  dossiers 
of  her  sitters  beforehand,  she  might  conceivably  obtain  her 
facts  in  various  ways — {a)  by  her  own  observations,  e.g.  by 
reading  private  letters  ;  ((5)  by  information  derived  from  other 
mediums ;  (c)  by  the  employment  of  private  inquiry  agents. 
Probably  all  these  methods  have  been  and  are  habitually 
employed  by  professional  clairvoyants.^  The  conviction 
entertained  by  those  who  are  best  qualified  to  judge  that 
Mrs.  Piper's  information  was  not  obtained  by  such  methods 
is  based  partly  on  the  precautions  employed,  partly  on  the 
nature  of  the  information  itself 

^  It  is,  of  course,  extremely  difficult  to  get  trustworthy  evidence  on  a  matter  of 
this  kind,  mainly  because  the  persons  whose  testimony  would  be  most  valuable — 
ex-mediums  and  ex-agents  of  mediums — are  by  the  nature  of  the  case  hopelessly 
discredited  as  witnesses.  I  have  met  a  man  who  professed  to  have  worked 
up  cases  for  Slade  and  others  in  this  country.  He  would  not  give  me  details 
except  for  payment,  and  obviously  testimony  of  that  kind  when  purchased 
would  be  of  even  less  value  than  when  tendered  gratuitously.  Truesdell 
{Bottom  Facts  of  Spiritualism,  p.  308,  etc.)  shows  how  the  thing  could  be  done. 
The  medium  or  his  agent,  in  the  capacity  of  a  book-canvasser,  etc.,  would 
thoroughly  work  a  given  town  or  district  and  make  notes  of  all  the  information 
gained,  and  would  return  a  few  months  later  to  reap  the  harvest  by  giving 
clairvoyant  sittings.  There  is  a  belief,  no  doubt  well  founded,  amongst  the 
more  clear-headed  American  Spiritualists  that  there  is  an  elaborate  organisation 
for  obtaining  and  interchanging  information  thus  acquired  amongst  all  the 
members  of  the  guild.  It  is  perhaps  in  this  way  that  we  may  explain  the 
peculiar  good  fortune  of  well-known  Spiritualists  in  obtaining  "tests."  Some 
of  Mrs.  Piper's  sitters  had  previously  visited  other  mediums ;  but  if  the  pre- 
cautions taken  to  prevent  her  knowing  the  names  of  the  sitters  were  effectual,  as 
they  probably  were  in  most  cases,  it  seems  hardly  likely  that  she  could  have 
utilised  any  information  thus  gained. 

Again,  except  in  this  country,  where  she  stayed  for  some  time  in  private 
houses  of  members  of  the  Society,  Mrs.  Piper's  opportunities  of  personally 
acquiring  information  by  surreptitiously  reading  letters  or  questioning  servants 
appear  to  have   been   extremely   limited.     But,  of  course,  it   must  always   be 

340        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

As  regards  the  first  point,  Mrs.  Piper  has  been  under  close 
scrutiny  and  supervision,  chiefly  by  Dr.  Hodgson,  for  many 
years,  and  no  suspicious  circumstance  of  any  kind  has  come 
to  Hght.  But  the  precaution  on  which  we  are  entitled  chiefly 
to  rely  is  that  nearly  all  her  sittings  for  more  than  ten  years 
past  have  been  arranged  beforehand,  again  mainly  by 
Dr.  Hodgson,  without  the  names  of  the  sitters  being 
communicated  to  her.  In  almost  every  case  the  sitter  has 
been  unknown  to  her  by  sight,  and  has  been  introduced  to 
her  under  the  pseudonym  of  "  Smith  " — the  incognito  being 
strictly  preserved,  at  any  rate  throughout  the  first  sitting. 

In  some  instances,  especially  in  this  country,  the  sitting 
was  improvised  for  the  benefit  of  a  chance  caller,  of  whose 
very  existence  Mrs.  Piper  can  hardly  be  supposed  to  have 
been  aware.  In  one  or  two  cases  the  sitter,  with  praise- 
worthy caution,  concealed  his  identity  even  from  Dr.  Hodgson. 
That  occasionally  during  this  long  term  of  years  carelessness 
or  malign  chance  may  have  offered  a  loophole  for  fraud  is, 
of  course,  not  improbable.  The  strength  of  Mrs.  Piper's  case 
lies  in  the  high  proportion  of  successful  sittings,  and  in  the 
extraordinarily  high  proportion  of  correct  statements  at  many 
individual  sittings — proportions  so  high  as  to  render  the 
hypothesis  of  fraud  very  difficult  to  sustain. 

An  argument  which  carries  hardly  less  weight  will  be 
found  in  the  nature  of  the  information  itself  Obviously, 
if  Mrs.  Piper  acquired  her  information  from  such  sources 
as  newspaper  obituaries,  registers,  and  tombstones,  or  as 
a  result  of  reading  private  letters  and  making  inquiries 
amongst  servants  and  tradespeople,  we  should  expect  that 
the  information,  taken  as  a  whole,  would  betray  its  origin. 
We  are  not  left  wholly  to  barren  speculation  in  the  matter. 
Amongst  the  records  of  clairvoyance  in  the  past  we  do  find 
some  which  more  or  less  clearly  point  to  such  an  origin,  and 
which  indicate  also  pretty  clearly  the  high-water  mark  of 
effort  in  this  direction.  There  are  three  clairvoyants  known 
to  us  whose  records  are  sufficiently  full  to  permit  of  some 
comparison  being  made.  These  three  are  Adele  Maginot, 
Alexis  Didier,  and  Stainton  Moses.^   Now  the  "clairvoyance" 

assumed  that  a  medium  will  avail  himself  of  opportunities  of  this  kind,  or  rather, 
will  make  it  his  business  to  seek  for  opportunities.  Truesdell  {op.  cit,,  p.  185,  etc.) 
describes  a  slate-writing  seance  of  his  own  where  he  was  enabled,  from  knowledge 
acquired  by  reading  a  private  letter  in  the  sitter's  greatcoat-pocket,  to  give  some 
surprising  "clairvoyant"  tests. 

^  Home  should  perhaps  be  added,  but  the  records  of  Home's  clairvoyance  are 
certainly  less  complete,  and  it  is  obvious  that  he  enjoyed  exceptional  opportunities 
for  acquiring  information  by  illicit  means. 

UTTERANCES   OF  MRS.   PIPER       341 

of  Stainton  Moses  consisted  almost  exclusively  of  the 
reproduction  of  names,  dates,  and  other  concrete  facts  in 
the  lives  of  the  persons  represented,  all  of  which  facts  could 
have  been  acquired  from  newspapers,  books,  and  other  public 
sources.  In  no  single  instance  are  we  forced  to  resort  to  any 
explanation  more  recondite  than  the  subconscious  repro- 
duction of  latent  memories.  The  case  of  Alexis  Didier  is 
typical  of  the  clairvoyance  of  his  time,  and,  indeed,  of 
"  travelling  "  clairvoyance  generally.  He  does  not  deal  much 
in  names  and  dates,  but  he  is  concerned  mainly  with  personal 
descriptions  of  living  persons,  of  houses  and  parks,  of  dogs 
and  other  domestic  animals,  and  more  rarely  of  quite  recent 
incidents.  Now  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  in  the  case  of 
Alexis  Didier,  at  any  rate,  fraud  was  not  only  conceivable, 
but  highly  probable ;  and  that  the  descriptions  of  places  and 
recent  events  are  precisely  the  things  which  a  private  inquiry 
agent  would  find  it  most  easy  to  supply. 

There  are,  indeed,  a  few  instances  in  which  Mrs.  Piper,  like 
Stainton  Moses,  has  given  in  her  trance  utterances  names  and 
other  facts  which  might  without  difficulty  have  been  obtained 
from  the  newspapers  or  similar  public  sources.  But  the 
information  in  these  cases  is  inaccurate  and  confused,  and 
the  obvious  comment  is  that  the  "  controls  "  of  the  English 
medium  managed  this  sort  of  thing  much  better.^  Again, 
Mrs.  Piper  is  very  vague  about  dates ;  she  prefers  to  give 
Christian  names  rather  than  surnames,  and  of  Christian 
names  the  commoner  rather  than  the  more  out  of  the  way ; 
she  rarely  attempts  to  give  descriptions  of  houses  or  places, 
and  her  attempts  in  this  direction  are  commonly  failures. 
In  other  words,  she  is  weakest  precisely  where  the  pseudo- 
medium  is  most  successful.  Her  real  strength  lies  in 
describing  the  diseases,  personal  idiosyncrasies,  thoughts, 
feelings,  and  character  of  the  sitter  and  his  friends ;  their 
loves,  hates,  quarrels,  sympathies,  and  mutual  relationships 
in  general ;  trivial  but  significant  incidents  in  their  past 
histories,  and   the   like.     Not  only  is   information    on   such 

^  The  cases  referred  to  are  those  of  the  Rev.  Robert  West,  where  the  full 
names  of  the  deceased,  the  place  of  his  burial,  and  the  text  on  his  tombstone 
were  correctly  given  ;   the  case  of  Porter  Brewster  Guernsey  (given  as  John 

Gerster),  of  Lake  City,  drowned  in  Lake  Pepin ;  the  case  of  William  N ; 

and  that  of  Gracie  X .     In  all  these  instances  many  correct  particulars  were 

given,  including  names  of  persons  and  places,  which  could  have  been  obtained 
from  newspapers,  but  the  information  was  curiously  confused  and  inaccurate, 
suggesting  rather  imperfect  reminiscence  of  information  casually  acquired  than 
the  deliberate  "getting  up"  of  the  case  for  fraudulent  purposes  (see  Froc. 
S.  P.  R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  35-43).  In  any  case,  these  four  cases  stand  apart  from 
the  general  bulk  of  Mrs.  Piper's  utterances. 

342        PROBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

points  as  these  more  difficult  to  acquire  by  normal  means, 
but  it  is  obviously  much  more  difficult  to  retain  in  the 
memory. 

But  if  in  their  general  character  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  utter- 
ances differ  widely  from  those  of  Stainton  Moses  and  Alexis 
Didier,  both  of  whom,  as  we  have  already  seen,  are  open, 
on  quite  other  grounds,  to  strong  suspicion  of  fraudulent 
practices,  they  bear,  on  the  other  hand,  a  strong  resemblance 
to  those  of  an  earlier  medium  against  whose  good  faith  no 
suspicious  circumstance  has  been  alleged — Ad^le  Maginot, 
the  somnambule  employed  by  Alphonse  Cahagnet.  Like 
Mrs.  Piper,  Adele  Maginot  appears  to  have  been  vague 
about  names  and  dates,  and  sparing  in  her  descriptions  of 
scenery  and  the  furniture  of  rooms.  But  in  all  that  pertained 
to  the  emotional  side  of  her  interlocutors'  reminiscences  her 
information  was  frequently  as  copious  as  it  was  apparently 
accurate.  She  would  describe  in  unmistakable  terms  the 
dress,  personal  appearance,  physical  and  moral  characteristics 
of  persons  whom  in  life  she  had  certainly  never  seen,  of 
whose  existence  she  can  hardly  have  been  aware.  The 
points  of  agreement  between  Ad61e's  revelations  and  Mrs. 
Piper's,  and  their  marked  differences  from  the  outpourings 
of  the  common  run  of  professional  clairvoyants,  seem  too 
marked  to  be  purely  accidental. 

Partly,  then,  from  the  stringent  nature  of  the  precautions 
taken  and  the  high  measure  of  success  nevertheless  achieved, 
partly  from  the  nature  of  the  revelations  themselves,  we  are 
led  to  the  conclusion  that  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  utterances 
indicate  the  possession  of  some  supernormal  power  of  appre- 
hension— at  lowest  the  capacity  to  read  the  unspoken,  and 
even  unconscious,  thoughts  and  emotions  of  other  minds. 
To  many  of  those  who  have  investigated  her  trances,  in- 
cluding Dr.  Hodgson  himself,  the  evidence  appears  to  go 
beyond  this,  and  to  point  to  communication  with  spirits  of 
the  dead.  Certainly  here,  if  in  any  case  in  the  whole  history 
of  Spiritualism,  is  such  evidence  to  be  found.  Many  of  the 
personalities,  or  pseudo-personalities,  who  speak,  write,  and 
act  through  the  organism  of  the  entranced  Mrs.  Piper 
present"  so  faithful  a  mimicry  of  the  persons  whose  names 
they  assume  as  to  have  prevailed  in  some  cases  over  the 
natural  reluctance  of  sceptical  outsiders.  The  most  effective 
of  these  impersonations  is  that  of  the  so-called  G.  P.  G.  P. 
was  a  young  journalist  and  author  of  some  repute,  an 
acquaintance  of  Dr.  Hodgson,  who  died  suddenly  from  the 
effects  of  an  accident  in  February,  1892.     A  few  weeks  after 

UTTERANCES   OF   MRS.   PIPER       343 

his  death  he  purported  to  possess  Mrs.  Piper's  organism,  and 
from  that  time  onwards  for  some  years  has  assumed  the  chief 
control,  has  carried  on  many  and  prolonged  conversations 
with  Dr.  Hodgson  and  others,  and  furnished  numerous  proofs 
of  his  knowledge  of  the  doings  and  affairs  of  the  person 
whom  he  represents.  He  has  made  reference  to  G.  P.'s 
manuscripts  and  personal  effects,  to  private  conversations 
which  took  place  before  his  death,  and  to  many  other  matters 
betraying  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  G.  P.'s  own  concerns 
and  those  of  his  friends.  One  of  the  most  striking  proofs 
of  identity  furnished  is  his  constant  recognition,  amongst 
the  nurnerous  persons  who  have  since  his  death  consulted 
Mrs.  Piper,  of  those  known  personally  to  G.  P.  when  alive. 
Not  only  so,  but  the  supposed  G.  P.  has  accorded  to  each  his 
due  measure  of  welcome,  whether  as  near  relation,  friend, 
or  mere  acquaintance.  Nor  is  Dr.  Hodgson  able  to  find  any 
instance  where  such  recognition  has  been  incorrectly  accorded. 
There  have  been  many  other  trance  personations  speaking 
through  Mrs.  Piper's  organism  which  have  been  accepted  by 
sitters  as  genuine  representations  of  deceased  friends. 

To  other  students  of  the  records,  including  the  present 
writer,  the  evidence  nevertheless  appears  at  present  insuffi- 
cient to  justify  the  Spiritualist  view,  even  as  a  working 
hypothesis.  It  would  be  impossible,  within  the  limits  of  our 
remaining  space,  to  set  forth  fully  the  reasons  for  regarding 
these  trance  personalities  as  illustrations  of  the  plastic  powers 
of  the  medium's  own  spirit,  rather  than  as  representing  alien 
intelligences.  But  the  case  is  open,  of  course,  though  to  a 
less  extent  perhaps  than  in  any  instance  previously  recorded, 
to  the  objection  that  the  emotional  state  of  the  sitters  in- 
evitably tends  to  bias  their  judgment ;  and  that  evidence  of 
identity  derived  from  gesture,  manner,  or  even  idiosyncrasy 
of  speech,  is  peculiarly  difficult  to  appraise  dispassionately. 
Again,  the  ordinary  characteristics  of  the  secondary  person- 
ality, as  observed  in  cases  where  the  agency  of  the  dead 
cannot  reasonably  be  invoked,  can  be  traced,  though  no  doubt 
more  skilfully  disguised  than  in  any  of  her  predecessors, 
through  most  of  Mrs.  Piper's  impersonations.  We  find  the 
same  tedious  and  childish  repetition  ;  the  same  lack  of  any 
sense  of  proportion  ;  the  tendency  to  dwell  on  the  concrete 
and  trivial ;  the  tentative  and  piecemeal  exhibition  of  in- 
formation, as  if  angling  for  signs  of  assent  or  dissent  from 
the  sitter;  extreme  suggestibility;  and,  above  all,^  disin- 
genuousness  and  reluctance  to  admit  ignorance  or  mistakes. 
No  doubt,  as  Dr.  Hodgson  argues  with  good  show  of  reason, 

344        PEOBLEMS   OF  MEDIUMSHIP 

none  of  these  suspicious  circumstances  are  inconsistent  with 
the  supposition  that  the  spirit  who  is  endeavouring  to  com- 
municate through  Mrs.  Piper's  organism  is  hampered  by  an 
imperfect  acquaintance  with  the  mechanism  to  be  operated, 
is  distracted  by  various  interruptions  from  both  the  earthly 
and  the  spiritual  side,  and  is  possibly  further  hindered  by  the 
very  fact  of  partially  resuming  the  vesture  of  mortality.  It 
must  be  conceded  to  Dr.  Hodgson's  ingenious  argument  that 
we  have  no  right  to  reject  these  utterances  as  unauthentic 
because  they  do  not  conform  to  our  preconceived  idea  of 
what  communications  from  the  dead  should  be.  It  is  im- 
possible, however,  to  disregard  their  general  resemblance  to 
other  manifestations  of  secondary  personality;  a  resemblance 
which  is  still  further  emphasised  by  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Piper's 
spirits,  like  those  of  her  predecessors,  indulge  in  a  good  deal 
of  vague  talk  about  the  conditions  of  planetary  life,  astral 
bodies,  and  other  matters  which  have  formed  the  common- 
place of  mediumistic  revelations  for  two  or  three  generations 
past. 

But,  after  all,  the  criterion  by  which  the  hypothesis  of 
spirit  intercourse  must  ultimately  be  tested  consists  in  the 
nature  of  the  information  furnished.  It  is  contended  that  in 
many  cases  the  information  given  through  the  hand  of  Mrs. 
Piper,  even  when  the  hypothesis  of  thought-transference 
from  distant  friends  is  exploited  to  the  full,  is  of  such  a 
character  that  it  cannot  plausibly  be  ascribed  to  any 
intelligence  but  that  of  the  spirit  from  whom  indeed  it  pur- 
ports to  proceed.  My  own  view  is,  briefly,  that  the  instances 
which  seem  to  point  to  some  external  source  of  inspiration 
are  neither  sufficiently  numerous  nor  sufficiently  free  from 
ambiguity  to  warrant  any  such  inference.  The  accurate 
appreciation  of  evidence  of  this  kind  is  an  almost  impossible 
task.  As  already  indicated,  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  utterances, 
though  less  cumbered  with  incoherence,  circumlocution,  and 
ambiguity,  designed  or  fortuitous,  than  those  of  her  pre- 
decessors, yet  contain  sufficient  alloy  to  make  the  extrication 
of  the  pure  metal  a  delicate  matter.  Her  trance  personality 
does  not  commonly  deal  in  precise  and  categorical  state- 
ments of  fact :  names  are  frequently  uttered  or  written  piece- 
meal and  in  tentative  form :  diseases  are  diagnosed  by 
symptoms  often  by  no  means  distinctive :  persons  are 
indicated  by  descriptions  of  a  dubious  kind  :  incidents  and 
relationships  are  shadowed  forth  by  obscure  and  inadequate 
hints.  In  a  word,  the  information  given  is  very  generally 
incomplete    or    of   uncertain    meaning,    and    needs    expert 

UTTERANCES   OF  MRS.   PIPER       345 

interpretation.  I  have  already  said  that,  taken  as  a  whole, 
the  evidence  produces  on  my  own  mind  the  almost  complete 
conviction  that  Mrs.  Piper  in  trance  is  possessed  of  some 
faculty  beyond  the  normal — a  faculty  at  the  lowest  of  tap- 
ping the  thoughts  of  her  interviewers.  But  beyond  that 
it  does  not  seem  to  me  safe  to  go.  Some  of  the  most 
successful  shots  may  be  ascribed  to  chance-coincidence, 
which  must  operate  to  some  extent  in  so  wide  a  field  :  many 
more  may  be  due  to  cunning  conjecture  and  inference  on 
the  part  of  the  entranced  medium,  whose  training  and 
experience  for  some  years  past  have  afforded  unprecedented 
opportunities  for  developing  any  native  gift  in  that  direction. 
But  the  most  serious  objection  is  that  the  difficulty  and 
uncertainty  of  interpretation  give  wide  scope  to  the  un- 
conscious bias  of  the  interpreter.  How  much  room  is  as 
a  matter  of  fact  left  for  difference  of  interpretation  may  be 
illustrated  by  a  single  example.  Dr.  J.  H.  Hyslop,  Professor 
of  Logic  and  Ethics  in  Columbia  University,  New  York,  has 
lately  published^  a  record  of  a  series  of  sittings  held  with 
Mrs.  Piper  in  1898  and  1899.  No  pains  have  been  spared  to 
make  the  record  complete.  His  report,  which  is  considerably 
longer  than  the  present  volumes,  contains  the  verbatim  record 
of  seventeen  sittings,  with  exhaustive  commentaries  on  the 
evidential  aspect  of  the  utterances,  and  accounts  of  experi- 
ments designed  to  elucidate  the  supposed  dif^culties  of 
trance  communication.  The  conclusion  at  which  Professor 
Hyslop  arrives,  after  an  investigation  in  which  no  item  of 
the  evidence  has  failed  to  be  weighed  and  analysed,  and  no 
possible  source  of  error  would  seem  to  have  escaped  con- 
sideration, is,  briefly,  that  the  explanation  which  best  fits  the 
facts,  and  the  only  explanation  so  far  adduced  which  fits 
them  all,  is  that  of  spirit  communication.  My  own  view, 
after  an  examination  less  exhaustive,  no  doubt,  but  by  no 
means  superficial,  is  that  these  last  recorded  trance  utterances 
of  .Mrs.  Piper  do  not  obviously  call  for  any  supernormal 
explanation.  I  cannot  point  to  a  single  instance  in  which 
a  precise  and  unambiguous  piece  of  information  has  been 
furnished  of  a  kind  which  could  not  have  proceeded  from  the 
medium's  own  mind,  working  upon  the  materials  provided 
and  the  hints  let  drop  by  the  sitter.  I  agree  with  Professor 
Hyslop  in  rejecting  telepathy  as  the  explanation  of  these 
latest  revelations,  not,  however,  as  being  inadequate,  but  as 

^  As  vol.   xvi.    of  the    Proceedings   of  the   Society   for   Psychical    Research, 
London. 

346         PROBLEMS   OF   MEDIUMSHIP 

being  superfluous.  I  do  not  ask  the  reader  to  accept  my 
judgment  on  the  case.  The  point  of  the  illustration  is  that 
a  subject  in  which  it  is  possible  for  two  honest  and  fairly 
competent  investigators  from  the  same  set  of  facts  to  deduce 
such  divergent  conclusions  is  clearly  not  yet  sufficiently 
advanced  to  serve  as  a  basis  for  any  but  the  most  modest 
generalisations. 

Once  more,  a  weighty  objection  to  accepting  Mrs.  Piper's 
trance  personalities  at  their  own  valuation  is  that  they  have 
again  and  again  failed  to  answer  the  test  questions  put  to 
them,  and  that  the  manner  of  their  failure  has  often  proved 
more  fatal  to  their  claim  than  the  failure  itself.  Thus,  the 
soi-disant  Hannah  Wild  on  several  occasions  dictated  what 
professed  to  be  a  copy  of  the  contents  of  a  sealed  letter 
written  by  the  real  Hannah  Wild  before  her  death,  for  the 
express  purpose  of  the  test ;  and  all  these  versions  were 
entirely  wide  of  the  mark.^  The  spirit  of  Stainton  Moses, 
asked  to  furnish  the  real  names  of  his  earthly  guides,^  which 
were  unknown  to  his  questioner,  professed  on  several 
occasions  to  give  the  names,  and  on  each  occasion  gave 
them  incorrectly.^  G.  P.  himself,  when  pressed  to  mention 
the  names  of  two  persons  associated  with  him  in  a  certain 
undertaking,  excused  himself  in  the  first  instance  on  the 
ground  that  the  test  would  be  unsatisfactory,  as  the  names 
were  known  to  one  of  those  present.  Later  he  gave  two 
names  which  were  not  correct* 

In  short,  these  trance  personalities,  though  more  lifelike 
and  better  informed  than  most,  appear  to  have  the  common 
failings  of  their  class.  It  is  impossible  to  believe  that  in. 
these  trance  utterances  we  are  listening  to  authentic  and 
unembarrassed  messages  from  the  dead.  Nor,  notwithstand- 
ing the  subtle  and  convincing  character  of  some  of  the 
impersonations,  and  the  fact  that  in  many  cases  the  informa- 
tion furnished  has  been  known  to  no  one  present,  possibly 
even  to  no  one  living,  is  it  easy  to  accept  the  hypothesis 
of  communion  with  the  dead  even  in  the  modified  form 
suggested  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick.^  What  evidence  could  be 
regarded   as  sufficient  to  prove  such  agency  it  is    difficult 

1  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  10-15. 

"  Rector,  Doctor,  Imperator,  Mentor,  etc.,  the  "guides"  of  Stainton  Moses, 
were  supposed  to  represent  historical  personages,  whose  names  had  been  revealed 
by  Moses  in  his  lifetime  to  two  or  three  intimate  friends  only. 

■'  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  XV.  pp.  23-4. 

■*  Jbii/.,  vol.  xiii.  p.  303. 

^  Ibid.,  vol    XV.  p.  37. 

UTTERANCES  OF  MRS.   PIPER       347 

to  say ;  on  the  facts  so  far  adduced  we  can  but  say,  ''  Not 
proven."  1 

^  Critical  examinations  of  the  evidence  afforded  by  Mrs.  Piper's  trance 
utterances  for  communication  with  spirits  of  the  dead  will  be  found  in  articles 
by  Dr.  Leaf  [Proc,  vol.  vi.  p.  558),  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  and  Mr.  Andrew  Lang 
(Proc,  vol.  XV.  pp.  16  and  39),  Marcel  Mangin  {Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques, 
July-Oct.,  1898).  All  these  writers,  it  should  be  pointed  out,  though  indisposed 
to  accept  the  spirit  hypothesis,  are  of  opinion  that  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  utterances 
cannot  be  explained  by  fraud.  Dr.  Hodgson's  own  account  of  the  genesis  of  the 
Phinuit  control  should  also  be  referred  to  {Proc,  vol.  viii.  p.  46). 

SUMMARY  AND   CONCLUSION 

THE  time  has  come  when  we  must  attempt  to  formulate 
an  answer  to  the  questions  which  we  set  before  us 
at  the  outset  of  our  inquiry.  In  the  course  of  our 
survey  we  have  seen  that  Modern  Spiritualism  in  its  present 
form  is  the  outcome  of  various  pre-existent  beliefs.  On  the 
one  hand,  it  stands  in  direct  historical  succession  to  that  cult 
of  Animal  Magnetism  which  prevailed  more  or  less  in  every 
civilised  country  from  the  days  of  Mesmer,  and  which 
attained  an  exceptional  development  in  America  in  the 
period  immediately  preceding  the  outbreak  of  the  Rochester, 
rappings.  The  doctrine  of  Animal  Magnetism  itself,  with 
its  hypothesis  of  radiant  effluences,  its  fantastic  analogies 
between  the  corporeal  and  mineral  magnet,  and  its  vague 
hints  of  kinship  with  the  stars,  we  traced  back  through 
the  sympathetic  system  to  the  long  tradition  of  the 
Alchemists.  The  various  psychological  manifestations,  how- 
ever, of  the  induced  trance,  which  these  cosmic  forces  were 
by  the  genius  of  Mesmer  invoked  to  explain,  find  their 
nearest  parallel,  not  in  the  practice  of  the  Alchemists,  but 
in  scattered  spontaneous  outbreaks  of  clairvoyance,  possession 
and  speaking  with  tongues;  in  the  crystal  visions  of  Dr.  Dee; 
in  the  healing  powers  of  Valentine  Greatrakes.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  true  ancestry  of  the  physical  phenomena 
of  Spiritualism,  which  are  but  scantily  represented  in  the 
annals  of  magnetism  and  religious  fanaticism,  is  to  be  sought 
in  a  system  of  belief  which  in  its  later  years,  at  any  rate, 
formed  the  characteristic  superstition  of  the  vulgar — in  witch- 
craft and  its  associated  phenomena. 

We  have  seen  that  the  hysterical  children,  who  in  the 
sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  played  a  leading  part 
in  the  discovery  and  conviction  of  witches,  habitually  re- 
inforced the  sinister  indications  afforded  by  their  self- 
suggested  fits  and  convulsions  by  the  employment  of 
various  mechanical  devices — the  vomiting  of  pins  and  other 
small  objects,  throwing  of  stones,  movements  of  furniture, 

348 

SUMMARY  AND   CONCLUSION       349 

and  occasional  surreptitious  levitations  of  themselves.  With 
the  passing  of  the  generations  these  mischievous  outbreaks, 
which  to  this  day  still  make  their  appearance  from  time 
to  time  not  only  amongst  the  uneducated,  gradually  changed 
their  external  form,  as  the  belief  of  the  spectators  ebbed  from 
witchcraft  to  possession,  and  from  possession  to  occult  forces. 
Mistress  Faith  Corbet,  the  two  little  modest  girls  of  John 
Mompesson,  Hettie  Wesley,  Mary  Jobson,  Angelique  Cottin, 
are  all  links  in  the  one  chain  of  evolution.  The  motive 
in  all  cases  appears  to  have  been  the  morbid  craving  for 
notoriety  and  excitement  on  the  part  of  a  sickly  child ;  the 
means  employed  vary  from  age  to  age  only  with  the  oppor- 
tunities offered  for  deception ;  the  explanations  adopted  by 
the  sympathetic  spectators  repeat  accurately  their  individual 
beliefs  and  temperament,  or  the  current  traditions  of  the 
country  and  the  time.  In  the  case  of  Faith  Corbet  and  the 
Drummer  of  Tedworth  the  effects  were  ascribed  to  the 
malignancy  of  witchcraft ;  in  the  Wesley  household,  as 
in  most  modern  outbreaks,  the  disturbances  were  supposed 
to  indicate  a  spirit  of  doubtful  character.  Mary  Jobson,  in 
the  eyes  of  Dr.  Clanny,  was  the  recipient  of  angelic  inspira- 
tion ;  whilst  the  performances  of  Angelique  Cottin  were 
ascribed  in  scientific  Paris  to  the  operation  of  electricity. 

For  generations  the  two  streams  of  superstition  had  pur- 
sued a  parallel  course  without  meeting.  The  learned  had 
believed  in  their  fluids,  the  vulgar  in  their  Poltergeists ;  but 
whilst  the  magnetic  somnambule  had  for  the  most  part 
eschewed  physical  phenomena,  the  naughty  children  had 
found  the  seeing  of  visions  and  trance-speaking  too  tame  to 
satisfy  their  ambitions.  With  the  introduction  of  Angelique 
Cottin  to  the  scientific  world  of  Paris  the  two  streams  had 
seemed  about  to  unite ;  but  it  was  not  actually  until  two  or 
three  years  later,  and  in  America,  that  their  fusion  became  an 
accomplished  fact. 

In  France,  the  land  of  its  birth,  Animal  Magnetism  had 
been  from  the  first  predominantly  naturalistic,  though  even 
in  France  there  had  been  a  few  men  who,  following  the 
example  of  the  great  Swedish  seer,  had  seen  in  the  trance 
an  open  gate  to  the  spiritual  world.  In  1847  this  inter- 
pretation received  strong  support  from  the  trance  utterances 
of  Cahagnet's  somnambules.  In  Germany  the  Spiritualist 
interpretation  had  found  many  and  enthusiastic  adherents, 
and  a  special  cult  had  been  founded  on  the  revelations  of  the 
so-called  Seeress  of  Prevorst.  In  England,  mainly  owing  no 
doubt  to  the  predominant  influence  of  Elliotson  and  to  the 

350        SUMMARY  AND   CONCLUSION 

association  of  the  new  science  with  a  materialistic  phrenology, 
the  naturalist  view  had,  as  in  France,  with  a  few  unimportant 
exceptions  prevailed. 

It  was  in  America,  however,  where,  as  in  England,  the 
cult  of  Animal  Magnetism  had  won  but  tardy  recognition, 
that  the  Spiritualist  interpretation  found  its  most  congenial 
soil,  and  attained  ultimately  its  fullest  development.  At 
first,  indeed,  the  chief  crop  consisted  of  pseudo-scientific 
theories  of  fluids  and  emanations,  framed  perhaps  on  more 
vigorous  lines  and  with  a  more  conspicuous  freedom  from 
the  trammels  of  fact  than  in  the  older  civilisations.  But  the 
times  were  peculiarly  favourable  to  growth  in  another 
direction.  Apart  from  the  conditions  inseparable  from  a 
new  and  rapidly  expanding  society,  with  a  people  of  quick 
intelligence,  but  lacking  as  yet  in  fixed  and  recognised 
standards  of  belief  and  culture,  the  temperament  of  the 
American  people  appears  to  have  been,  at  this  time  at  any 
rate,  especially  open  to  the  appeal  of  religious  or  humani- 
tarian enthusiasm.  In  the  decade  1840-50  two  such 
enthusiasms  had  caught  and  still  held  the  popular  imagina- 
tion. The  doctrine  of  the  Second  Advent  and  the  imminent 
millennium  had  been  preached  for  some  years  by  William 
Miller  in  New  York  and  neighbouring  States,  and  in  1843 — 
the  date  fixed  for  the  Second  Coming — his  followers  were 
reckoned  to  number  about  fifty  thousand.  Many  of  these 
lived  in  the  daily  and  almost  hourly  expectation  of  a  new 
heaven  upon  earth.  In  superficial  contrast  with  this  promise 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  the  scheme  of  Fourier  for  the 
reconstruction  of  human  societies  on  Socialist  lines  found  at 
the  same  time  a  ready  hearing.  The  Second  Adventist,  no 
doubt,  found  his  adherents  chiefly  amongst  the  more  ignorant 
members  of  the  community,  whilst  Brisbane  and  other  ex- 
ponents of  Fourierism  made  their  appeal,  as  we  have  seen, 
to  the  educated  classes.  But  in  whichever  guise  the  appeal 
came,  it  found  its  response  in  the  same  deep-seated  human 
instincts,  the  dissatisfaction  with  the  shortcomings  of  the 
present  social  state,  the  perennial  expectation  of  a  Golden 
Age  to  come. 

The  "  magnetic  clairvoyants  "  who  sprang  up  in  a  society 
thus  constituted  and  thus  prepared  inevitably  shared  the 
contagion  of  the  time.  They  soon  forsook  neuropathy, 
etherology,  and  pathetism,  to  discourse  at  large  of  spiritual 
influx  and  social  justice,  of  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth. 
We  have  seen  how  in  Andrew  Jackson  Davis  these  influences 
made  themselves  felt ;  the  Poughkeepsie  Seer  was  essentially 

SUMMARY  AND   CONCLUSION       351 

a  child  of  his  time.  Other  temporary  circumstances  com- 
bined to  swell  the  ranks  of  his  disciples  and  to  make  his 
appeal  more  effective  and  far-reaching.  The  Churches 
whose  sympathies  were  widest  and  their  doctrinal  bonds 
the  most  lax  naturally  contributed  most  to  the  new  move- 
ment. In  particular  the  Universalist  Church,  which  had 
been  preoccupied  for  a  generation  with  questions  concerning 
the  nature  of  the  future  life  and  its  relations  with  the  present, 
and  was  daily  losing,  through  the  divisions  of  opinion  on 
these  questions,  many  of  its  most  earnest  members,  furnished 
many  recruits  to  the  nascent  Spiritualism  of  Poughkeepsie. 

But  the  movement  even  so  seemed  at  one  time  about  to 
suffer  euthanasia,  as  so  many  kindred  movements  have  done. 
The  concrete  promises  of  an  imminent  social  reconstruction 
seemed  about  to  prevail  over  the  vaguer  and  more  remote 
ideals  of  the  clairvoyant  and  those  about  him.  By  the 
middle  of  1849  the  control  of  the  Univercoelum  had  already 
passed  from  their  hands,  and  that  organ  was  thenceforth 
devoted  to  the  spreading  of  the  new  hope  of  salvation  on 
mundane  lines,  by  means  of  co-operation  and  trades-unions. 
But,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  case  of  Edward  Irving's  con- 
gregation, expectations  of  spiritual  signs  and  wonders,  if 
sufficiently  definite,  are  apt  to  breed  their  own  fulfilment ; 
and  the  hopes  of  Davis,  Fernald,  Harris,  and  their  followers 
were  not  destined  to  remain  fruitless.  The  outbreak,  in  the 
spring  of  1848,  of  Poltergeist  manifestations  of  a  familiar 
type  in  a  rural  township  in  New  York  State,  their  rapid 
spread  in  neighbouring  towns,  and  their  reinforcement  two 
years  later  by  similar  performances  of  a  more  elaborate 
kind  in  the  house  of  a  Presbyterian  minister,  gave  the 
necessary  impulse.  All  the  vague  mystic  aspirations  and 
hopes  of  a  coming  revelation  crystallised  round  these  con- 
crete messages  from  the  Unknown,  and  by  the  middle  of 
1850  we  find  Modern  Spiritualism  fairly  started  on  its  career, 
with  some  half-dozen  organs  of  its  own,  edited  for  the  most 
part  by  those  who  had  gathered  round  the  Seer  of  Pough- 
keepsie. 

The  new  gospel  appealed  to  the  sympathies  of  men  in 
diverse  ways.  To  the  idly  curious,  the  mere  brute  appetite 
for  the  marvellous,  it  offered  signs  and  wonders ;  to  those 
whose  curiosity  was  of  a  more  instructed  kind  it  held  out 
hopes  of  new  developments  of  science,  a  science  which,  start- 
ing from  the  physical,  should  mount  up  towards  the  spiritual ; 
those  who  looked  only  for  an  earthly  Utopia  were  dazzled 
with  the  promise  of  the  speedy  fulfilment  of  their  dream ; 

352       SUMMARY  AND   CONCLUSION 

it  offered  consolation  to  the  mourner ;  and  to  all  some  hope 
of  light  on  the  mystery  of  the  universe.  The  movement 
was  thus  inspired,  in  its  beginnings,  with  a  genuine  enthu- 
siasm which  may  not  unfitly,  perhaps,  be  called  religious. 
With  all  their  imperfections,  the  early  apostles  of  Spiritualism 
in  America  seem  to  have  been  for  the  most  part  disinterested. 
Sometimes,  as  with  Spear,  Ferguson,  Warren  Chase,  Edmonds, 
and,  a  little  later,  Robert  Owen  in  this  country,  the  enthu- 
siasm was  of  a  high  type.  There  was  egotism,  no  doubt, 
but  the  objects  of  ambition  were  not  of  a  personal  kind. 
The  new  cult,  as  represented  by  its  leading  spokesmen,  was 
rarely  sordid.  Even  the  repulsive  extravagances  of  Thomas 
Lake  Harris  had,  at  the  worst,  something  of  idealism.  But 
the  limitations  of  the  new  gospel  betrayed  its  origin.  The 
epithet  "  religious,"  indeed,  seems  to  require  some  justification. 
If  the  prostration  of  the  heart  before  the  vision  of  Ideal 
Righteousness,  of  the  intellect  before  Supreme  Intelligence, 
is  essential  to  religion,  the  movement  was  so  far  not  religious. 
Its  prophets  held  their  offices  as  self-constituted  seers,  by  no 
ordinance  of  higher  powers.  The  universe  for  them  con- 
tained no  mystery;  their  vision  was  limited  by  the  monstrous 
shadow  cast  in  their  own  likeness  on  the  void.  Their  appeal, 
in  fact,  including  as  it  did  the  proffered  solace  to  bereaved 
affection,  was  of  an  almost  exclusively  mundane  character. 
They  held  out  the  promise,  not  of  new  knowledge  of  spiritual 
things,  as  "  spiritual "  has  been  interpreted  in  other  religious 
movements,  but  of  a  practicable  and  imminent  millennium, 
freed  from  the  fear  of  death,  and  continuing,  on  the  grey 
level,  through  indefinite  generations.  Their  gospel  aimed 
not  at  raising  earth  to  heaven,  but  at  bringing  down  heaven 
to  minister  to  the  needs  of  earth.  The  grace  and  beauty  of 
mediaeval  belief  had,  of  course,  long  since  vanished.  Spirit- 
ualists no  more  than  their  contemporaries  could  hope  to 
realise  the  poet's  vision  : — 

"With  white  feet  of  angels  seven 
Her  white  feet  go  glimmering, 
And  above  the  deep  of  heaven, 
Flame  on  flame  and  wing  on  wing." 

Probably  no  body  of  earnest  men  and  women  ever  pre- 
sented a  more  unlovely  picture  of  the  hereafter.  Yet  in 
spite,  or  perhaps  because  of  the  concreteness  of  its  ideals, 
and  the  parochial  limitations  of  its  chief  prophets,  the  new 
ideas  had  sufficient  motive  power  to  overrun  the  American 
continent. 

SUMMAEY  AND   CONCLUSION        353 

It  has  not  been  thought  necessary  to  dwell  at  length  upon 
the  more  repellent  side  of  the  movement  in  America,  the 
intrusion,  in  response  to  the  popular  demand  for  marvels,  of 
the  professional  charlatan,  and  the  rapid  concurrent  degrada- 
tion of  the  cult.  It  is  more  profitable,  from  the  present 
point  of  view,  to  study  the  growth  of  the  movement  in  this 
country.  Prior  to  1852  the  Spiritualist  interpretation  of  the 
utterances  of  magnetic  somnambules  had  found  here  but  few 
and  half-hearted  supporters.  The  irruption  in  the  autumn 
of  that  year  of  one  or  two  professional  rappers  from  America, 
and  the  concurrent  development  of  table-turning,  seem  to 
have  acted  mainly  by  stimulating  the  students  of  the  trance 
to  fresh  investigations,  and  by  making  known  the  phenomena 
of  automatism  to  a  wider  circle.  It  was  on  the  manifesta- 
tions of  trance -speaking,  automatic  writing,  and  similar 
manifestations  in  private  households,  not  on  the  fraudulent 
phenomena  of  the  professional  medium,  that  the  new  faith 
for  some  years  almost  wholly  depended  in  this  country. 
With  the  return  of  Home  from  the  Continent  in  1859,  and 
the  invasion  of  other  American  mediums  during  the  next 
few  years,  English  Spiritualism  entered  on  a  process  of 
popularisation  and  debasement  similar  to  that  which  it  had 
undergone  in  the  land  of  its  birth.  In  this  country,  however, 
the  process  was  of  much  more  gradual  development.  Pro- 
fessional mediumship  itself  was  of  slow  growth  here ;  it 
was  not  until  towards  the  end  of  the  decade  1860-70  that 
English  men  or  women,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  were 
found  to  rival  the  feats  of  Home,  Foster,  and  the  Davenports. 
And  it  is  noticeable  that  some  of  those  who  were  first  in  the 
field  were  young  girls,  in  whose  case  it  is  easier  to  take  the 
charitable  view  that  the  deception  had  its  origin  in  abnormal 
conditions  of  physique  and  temperament. 

Private  mediumship — the  production  of  spurious  marvels 
for  other  motives  than  those  of  direct  pecuniary  gain — 
formed  for  some  years  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of 
English  Spiritualism.  Again,  the  genuinely  religious  interest 
of  Howitt,  Shorter,  Mrs.  de  Morgan,  and  the  Wilkinsons, 
on  the  one  hand,  the  scientific  attainments,  on  the  other, 
of  men  like  Varley,  Crookes,  and  Wallace,  who  thought  the 
matter  worthy  their  serious  study,  tended  to  keep  things 
at  a  comparatively  high  level  of  thought  and  feeling.  The 
cult,  indeed,  in  this  country  has  never  attained  to  such 
dimensions  as  a  popular  movement,  nor  sunk  to  quite  so 
low  a  level  of  fatuity  and  imposture  as  the  latter-day 
American  Spiritualism.     This  result  is  no  doubt  partly  due 

II. — 2  A 

354       SUMMARY  AND   CONCLUSION 

to  the  legal  restrictions  which  have  operated  here  to  hinder 
the  exploitation  of  the  credulous,  partly,  no  doubt,  to  the 
influence  of  the  Press,  and  generally  to  the  difference  in 
social  conditions,  and  to  the  fact  that  there  have  always 
been  found  in  this  country  persons  of  credit  and  seriousness 
to  take  an  interest  in  the  subject. 

But  from  1870  onwards  various  causes  have  tended  to 
lower  the  general  character  of  the  movement.  First  amongst 
these,  no  doubt,  is  to  be  reckoned  the  growth  of  pro- 
fessionalism, and  concurrently  the  increasing  frequency  of 
public  exposures.  But  the  death  or  retirement  of  its  earlier 
champions  had  much  to  do  with  this  result.  The  little  band 
of  men  and  women  who  assisted  at  the  incubation  of 
Spiritualism  from  1855  onwards  gradually  died  or  lost  their 
active  interest  in  the  matter,  and  in  its  later  aspects 
Spiritualism  had  for  some  years  ceased  to  attract  men  of 
like  mind  to  replace  them. 

If  we  turn  now  to  the  evidence,  we  find  that  it  is  not 
primarily  on  the  discredited  physical  phenomena,  of  which 
enough  has  been  already  said  in  previous  chapters,  that  the 
belief  in  spirit  influence  or  occult  force  is  founded,  but  on 
manifestations  of  another  order,  of  which  these  feats  of  leger- 
demain form  an  incidental  and  dubious  accompaniment. 
Ecstasy,  possession,  somnambulism,  the  magnetic,  medium- 
istic,  or  hypnotic  trance  are  conditions  exhibiting  certain 
common  characteristics,  the  most  marked  being  that  the 
subject  loses,  more  or  less  completely,  control  over  his  actions 
and  consciousness  of  his  identity.  When  the  hand  acts  with- 
out the  knowledge  of  the  owner,  when  the  mouth  speaks 
words  foreign  to  the  thoughts  and  character  of  the  speaker,  the 
inference,  in  an  age  of  faith,  is  inevitable  that  the  utterance 
and  the  action  are  to  be  attributed  to  alien  spiritual  powers. 
The  nature  of  the  influence,  whether  diabolic  or  divine,  thus 
supposed  to  act  through  the  intermediary  of  the  ecstatic, 
reflects  accurately  current  traditions  and  beliefs.  Neurotic 
children  and  hysterical  nuns  have  been  possessed,  alike  in 
their  own  belief  and  in  that  of  the  spectators,  by  the  devil 
and  his  angels ;  the  proscribed  peasants  of  the  Cevennes  and 
the  members  of  Irving's  congregation  were  sustained  in 
times  of  tribulation  by  the  fancied  visitation  of  a  divine 
afflatus.  With  the  philosophic  Dr.  Dee  the  spirits,  themselves 
of  ambiguous  habitation,  held  discourse  neither  of  heaven 
nor  hell,  but  of  the  primseval  language,  of  magic,  and  the 
mystic  relations  of  numbers.  In  eighteenth-century  Paris, 
when  spirits  were  no  longer  fashionable,  the  somnambule's 

SUMMARY  AND   CONCLUSION       355 

visions  were  all  of  fluidic  emanations,  and  her  revelations 
were  concerned  with  the  subtle  interaction  of  animate  and 
inanimate  bodies. 

Modern  psychology  has  learnt  something  of  the  nature  of 
these  departures  from  normal  consciousness,  and  has  found 
their  analogues,  on  the  one  hand,  in  reverie,  sleep,  and 
automatism ;  on  the  other,  in  delirium,  hysteria,  and  other 
morbid  conditions.  Further,  it  has  explained  and  justified 
the  belief  in  an  alien  influence  held  by  the  patient  himself 
and  those  around  him.  For  together  with  the  division  or 
restriction  of  consciousness,  which  is  the  common  charac- 
teristic of  these  states,  there  is,  as  we  have  already  seen, 
a  concomitant  alteration  of  the  physical  basis  of  conscious- 
ness. Even  in  automatic  writing  the  automatist  is  frequently 
unconscious  of  the  movement  of  his  hand,  and,  learning 
what  has  been  written  in  the  same  manner  and  at  the  same 
time  as  the  other  spectators,  by  the  eye  alone,  he  tends 
to  regard  the  movements  of  his  hand  as  extra-personal. 
In  cases  of  trance  and  other  states  where  the  division  of 
consciousness  is  more  complete,  the  corresponding  physio- 
logical changes  are  unquestionably  more  far-reaching. 
Probably,  as  Ribot  has  suggested,  there  is  some  alteration 
in  that  complex  of  organic  sensibilities,  on  which  the  feeling 
of  personal  identity  may  be  presumed  largely  to  depend. 
The  subject  is  conscious  that  he  is  no  longer  the  same  man. 
A  good  illustration  of  the  manner  in  which  a  change  in  these 
obscure  sensations  may  suggest  a  change  of  personality  is 
afforded  by  Mr.  Hill  Tout's  experience,  quoted  above.^  His 
assumption  of  the  role  of  his  dying  father  appears  to  have 
been  primarily  inspired  by  his  own  feelings  of  physical 
weakness  and  depression.  Again,  in  spontaneous  trance 
or  in  deep  hypnosis  we  constantly  find  that  the  subject  refers 
to  his  waking  self  in  the  third  person.  He  feels  himself 
another  man,  and  naturally  assumes  another  name. 

In  these  obscure  physiological  changes,  then,  aided  by 
suggestion,  which  is  rarely  lacking,  from  the  spectators,^  is  to 
be  found  a  sufficient  explanation  of  the  constant  assumption 
by  the  entranced  subject  of  alien  personalities,  and  of  the 
claim  put  forward  on  his  behalf  for  external  inspiration. 
The  mere  fact  of  the  claim  being  made,  and  made  obviously 
in  good  faith,  is  no  evidence  for  its  authenticity. 

1  Page  303. 

^  The  question  "Who  are  you?"  commonly  addressed  to  the  performing  table 
or  planchette  is  obviously  well  calculated  to  call  spirits  from  the  vasty  deep.  See 
Professor  Patrick's  remarks  upon  this  point  in  his  article  on  "  Peculiarities  of  the 
Secondary  Personality"  {Psychological  Review,  New  York,  Nov.,  1898). 

356       SUMMARY  AND   CONCLUSION 

Nor,  again,  does  the  realistic  character  of  the  impersona- 
tion and  its  fidelity  to  the  facts  in  itself  furnish  any  better 
guarantee  of  the  claim.  The  hypnotised  subject  will  in  like 
manner,  at  a  hint  from  the  operator,  assume  any  required 
role  and  carry  it  out  with  dramatic  power  and  consistency. 
The  impersonation  by  Mademoiselle  H61ene  Smith  of 
Marie  Antoinette  and  Simandini,  or  by  Mrs.  Piper  of  the 
French  physician  Phinuit,  are  instances  of  the  extraordinary 
coherence  and  lifelike  quality  which  these  trance  creations 
may  assume  in  capable  hands.^ 

The  proof  that  the  intelligence  which  speaks  to  us  through 
the  mouth  of  the  apparently  unconscious  medium  is,  indeed, 
the  particular  spirit  which  he  professes  to  be  is  more  and 
more  clearly  seen  to  depend  less  on  the  evidence  afforded  by 
dramatic  personation  or  imitations  of  gesture,  intonations, 
and  other  external  characteristics,  than  on  similarity  of 
mental  content.  Nor  is  even  here  a  superficial  resemblance 
sufficient  to  justify  the  presumption  of  identity.  If  the 
entranced  medium  speaks  to  me  with  the  voice  of  my  dead 
friend,  uses  his  characteristic  gestures  and  phrases,  or  repro- 
duces his  handwriting,  we  may  be  dealing  merely  with  a 
pseudo-personality  created  by  the  subliminal  fantasy  of  the 
medium.  If  the  "control"  converses  with  me  on  subjects 
known  only  to  myself  and  my  friend,  there  is  still  the 
possibility  that  the  knowledge  displayed  may  have  been 
derived,  by  whatever  process  of  transmission,  from  my  own 
mind.  It  is  only  if  information  should  be  furnished  on 
matters  familiar  to  the  dead  but  unknown  to  the  medium, 
her  interlocutor,  or  any  living  mind,  that  we  are  entitled 
to  look  for  the  explanation  elsewhere. 

Whether  any  tests  of  the  kind  could  suffice  to  prove  the 
existence  of  discarnate  spirits ;  and,  again,  whether  in  face 
of  the  unknown  and  unimaginable  possibilities  of  deception 
in  that  presumed  other  world,  any  conceivable  proof  of 
personal  identity  should  suffice,  has  been  questioned  by 
competent   authorities.^     But   scepticism    on    the  first   head 

^  See  Dr.  Hodgson's  account  {Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  50)  of  the  genesis 
of  "Phinuit"  and  his  own  abortive  researches  into  that  eminent  physician's 
earthly  career.  Dr.  Hodgson  has,  I  understand,  of  late  years  modified  his  view 
as  to  the  exact  nature  of  the  Phinuit  personality ;  but  it  seems  hardly  open  to 
doubt  that  it  is  a  creation  and  not  a  reincarnation. 

'^  As  regards  the  first  contention,  take,  for  instance,  the  following  passage 
from  Miinsterberg :  "The  question  is  .  .  .  whether  departed  spirits  enter  into 
communication  with  living  men  by  mediums  and  by  incarnation.  The  scientist 
does  not  admit  a  compromise  ;  with  regard  to  this  he  flatly  denies  the  possibility  ; 
.  .  .  the  facts  as  they  are  claimed  do  not  exist,  and  never  will  exist "  {Psychology 

SUMMARY  AND   CONCLUSION       357 

exhibits,  perhaps,  some  confusion  of  thought,  on  the  second 
something  of  pedantry.  Proof  of  the  existence  of  other 
minds  outside  our  own,  even  in  this  world,  is  hardly  capable 
of  expression  in  logical  formulae ;  and  proof  of  the  existence 
of  spirits,  discarnate  but  not  necessarily  divorced  from  all 
material  embodiment,  might  conceivably  be  obtained,  of  like 
quality,  which  should  be  sufficient  to  produce  practical 
conviction.  And  if  there  are  spirits  at  all,  to  trust  them  on 
the  same  terms  as  we  trust  our  fellow-mortals  would  be  our 
most  prudent  as  it  would  be  our  only  practicable  policy. 

The  old  foundations  of  the  Spiritualist  belief,  then,  have 
been  undermined  by  recent  additions  to  our  knowledge. 
But  just  as  the  faith  might  have  seemed  to  be  tottering  to 
its  final  fall,  it  has  been  buttressed  anew  out  of  its  ruins,  and 
now  stands  to  the  eye  more  firmly  established  than  before. 
In  so  far  as  this  added  support  is  derived  from  the  laborious 
investigations  of  Dr.  Hodgson  and  his  colleagues  on  the 
trance  revelations  of  Mrs.  Piper,  Mrs.  Thompson,  and  other 
clairvoyant  mediums,  the  final  result  will  no  doubt  depend 
on  the  manner  in  which  the  trance  personalities  meet  the 
test  already  indicated.  If  in  the  course  of  the  next  two 
or  three  decades  attempts  to  obtain  information  which  is 
outside  the  knowledge  of  any  terrestrial  intelligence  meet 
with  as  little  success  as  they  have  met  with  up  to  the  present 
time,  it  will  seem  a  reasonable  conclusion  that  the  soi-disant 
spirits  are  only,  in  the  last  analysis,  creatures  of  the  medium's 
imagination.  If  the  test  is  satisfied,  a  notable  advance  will 
have  been  made  in  the  direction  of  proving  personal  im- 
mortality. 

But  an  argument  of  another  kind  has  assumed  prominence 
of  recent  years.  The  remarkable  speculations  of  the  late 
Frederic  Myers  have  gone  far  to  vindicate,  on  new  lines, 
the  Spiritualist  contention,  and  to  bring  it  once  more  as 
an  open  question  before  the  court  of  science.  The  special 
interest  of  his  theory  lies  in  its  assimilation  of  those  latest 
results  of  experimental  psychology,  which  on  a  superficial 
consideration  might  seem  fatal  to  the  claims  of  Spiritualism. 
To  offer  an  adequate  summary  of  Mr.  Myers'  views  within  the 
present  limits  of  space  would  be  impracticable,^  but  briefly 
and  baldly  stated  his  position  is  that  recent  investigations 
demonstrate,    below    the    superficial    consciousness    which 

and  Life,  pp.  252,  253).  On  the  second  point  see  F.  H.  Bradley,  in  the 
Fortnightly  Review  for  December,  1885,  on  "The  Evidences  of  Spiritualism." 

^  The  reader  is  referred  for  a  fuller  exposition  of  the  theory  to  Mr.  Myers' 
forthcoming  work,  Human  Personality  and  its  Survival  of  Bodily  Death. 

358        SUMMAEY  AND   CONCLUSION 

commonly  passes  for  the  whole  personality  of  the  man, 
the  existence  of  a  huge  psychic  organism,  as  yet  imperfectly 
expressed  in  terms  either  of  action  or  thought.  To  adopt 
his  own  simile,  our  work-a-day  consciousness  may  be  com- 
pared to  the  visible  spectrum  :  it  is  but  a  fraction,  and  a 
seemingly  accidental  fraction,  of  a  larger  whole.  Of  the 
invisible  portion  of  this  psychic  spectrum  orthodox  psycho- 
logy recognises  only  one,  and  that  the  inferior,  moiety.  Or, 
to  choose  what  is  perhaps  a  more  exact  simile,  consciousness 
is  regarded  by  psychologists  as  fulfilling  in  the  body  corporeal 
functions  similar  to  those  discharged  by  a  newspaper  in  the 
body  politic.  Each  represents  in  highly  condensed  form 
the  multifarious  operations  of  the  organism.  And  alike  in 
both  the  share  of  representation  accorded  to  any  particular 
activity  is  determined  by  its  need  rather  than  by  its  intrinsic 
importance.  Foreign  relations,  the  reaction  on  an  ever- 
changing  environment,  the  acquisition  of  new  knowledge, 
the  cultivation  of  new  modes  of  action,  and  interests  yet 
more  ephemeral  than  these,  fill  the  columns  of  the  newspaper 
as  they  occupy  the  field  of  our  waking  thoughts.  But  alike 
in  the  individual  and  in  the  public  consciousness,  the  activities 
on  which  the  whole  complex  mechanism  depend,  the  labours 
of  unnumbered  millions  in  the  vast  organisation  of  industry, 
the  ceaseless  movements  of  blood  and  lymph,  the  ceaseless 
growth  and  change  of  tissue,  all  the  things  which  are  too 
deeply  knit  up  with  the  essential  fabric  to  need  continual 
supervision  and  direction,  go  on  for  the  most  part  unrecorded. 
But  if  in  times  of  popular  disturbance  the  editor  should 
temporarily  abdicate  his  functions,  or  if  the  man  fall  into 
sleep  or  trance,  these  subterranean  activities  may  at  once 
become  articulate.  Mr.  Myers,  accepting  so  far  the  ordinary 
psychological  view  that  sleep  and  trance  introduce  us  to 
a  more  primitive  state  of  consciousness,  and  bring  us  nearer 
to  the  merely  organic  life  which  we  share  with  the  savage 
and  the  brute,  holds  that  in  these  lapses  from  waking  con- 
sciousness we  may  also  gain  glimpses  of  faculties  as  yet 
unexercised  and  unbreathed,  the  mere  existence  of  which 
is  proof  that  man  is  called  to  nobler  destinies  and  equipped  for 
a  larger  stage  than  this  material  life  can  furnish.  Only  in  these 
conditions  of  partial  psychic  dissolution,  or  on  rare  occasions 
of  stress  and  danger,  when  the  ordinary  machinery  of  the 
organism  is  unequal  to  its  task,  do  these  hidden  faculties 
make  their  power  and  presence  felt.  As  if  behind  the 
editorial  chair  there  should  stand  a  more  august  presence, 
content  for  the  most  part  to  delegate  its  office,  but  able. 

SUMMARY  AND   CONCLUSION       359 

when  the  need  is  urgent,  to  voice  and  direct  a  nation's 
policy. 

Now  the  strength  of  the  position  here  presented  Hes  in 
this,  that  it  makes  the  ordinary  Spiritualist  argument 
superfluous.  Mr.  Myers  does  not,  indeed,  reject  that 
argument.  Whilst  admitting  that  many,  perhaps  most,  of 
the  trance  personalities  are  but  dream-figures,  created  out 
of  the  subject's  own  fantasy,  he  finds  in  certain  cases  proof 
of  communion  with  spirits  of  the  dead.  But  if  his  main 
contention  is  well-founded.  Spiritualists  can  afford  to  dis- 
pense with  these  dubious  revelations.  Whether  or  not  the 
conditions  of  another  world  permit  its  denizens  to  hold 
halting  communication  with  those  here  is  a  question  of 
slight  and  transitory  import,  if  we  have  it  in  our  power  to 
demonstrate,  from  its  own  inherent  properties,  that  the  life 
of  the  soul  is  not  bound  up  with  the  life  of  the  body.  If  in 
states  of  trance  or  ecstasy  the  soul  has  knowledge  of  things 
distant  and  things  hidden,  can  foretell  the  future  and  read 
the  past  as  an  open  book,  it  seems  a  lawful  inference  that,  as 
such  faculties  have  assuredly  not  been  acquired  in  the  process 
of  terrestrial  evolution,  and  find  but  little  employment  or 
justification  here,  they  must  testify  to  a  world  of  higher  uses, 
and  an  evolution  not  conditioned  by  our  material  environ- 
ment. In  a  word,  such  faculties  must  be  regarded  not  as 
vestigial,  but  as  rudimentary ;  a  promise  for  the  future,  not 
an  idle  inheritance  from  the  past. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  the  theory  here  baldly  out- 
lined is  not  a  mere  philosophical  speculation  founded  on 
assumptions  which  are  incapable  of  verification,  but  a 
scientific  hypothesis,  based  on  the  interpretation  of  certain 
alleged  facts.  As  such,  we  have  to  consider  not  merely  the 
validity  of  the  inference,  but  the  authenticity  of  the  facts. 
It  is  from  this  quarter  that  Mr.  Myers'  position  is  most 
assailable.  That,  if  prevision,  retrocognition,  clairvoyance, 
and  other  transcendent  faculties  can  be  proved  to  inhere  in 
the  soul,  the  soul's  independence  of  the  body  is  made 
manifest,  need  not  perhaps  be  disputed.  But  the  evidence 
seems  at  present  far  from  sufficient  to  establish,  hardly 
sufficient  perhaps  to  justify  the  speculation. 

Taken  altogether,  the  evidence  for  clairvoyance,  prevision, 
and  the  other  supramundane  faculties  postulated  by  the 
theory  falls  far  short,  alike  in  bulk  and  in  quality,  of  the 
evidence  for  telepathy.  And  that  evidence,  as  we  know,  is 
in  common  estimation  held  as  insufficient.  Even  if  the 
operation  of  telepathy  should  be  as  clearly  demonstrated, 

360       SUMMARY  AND  CONCLUSION 

say,  as  that  of  the  cathode  rays,  it  does  not  follow  that  the 
transcendental  position  would  be  strengthened  by  the 
demonstration.  The  little  band  of  investigators — amongst 
them  Mr.  Myers  himself — who  are  mainly  responsible  for  the 
hypothesis  of  telepathy  have,  wisely  perhaps,  refrained  from 
committing  themselves  to  any  theory  of  its  mode  of  action. 
That  mind  should  affect  mind  (so  runs  their  cautious  state- 
ment of  the  problem)  in  a  new  mode  may  mean  no  more 
than  that  brain  can  act  upon  brain  by  means  of  ethereal 
vibrations  hitherto  unsuspected.  The  power  itself  may  be 
but  a  last  relic  of  our  discarded  inheritance  from  the  past, 
a  long-disused  faculty  dragged  from  the  dim  lumber-room 
of  a  primitive  consciousness,  and  galvanised  into  a  belated 
and  halting  activity. 

In  fine,  the  first  question  is  not  what  new  agencies  may  be 
inferred  from  the  facts,  but  whether  the  facts  justify  the 
inference  of  any  new  agency  at  all.  We  have  traced 
throughout  the  history  of  recent  mysticism,  from  the 
sixteenth  century  onwards,  the  prevalence  of  a  belief  in 
some  power  of  divining  the  unspoken  thoughts  of  other 
minds,  of  exercising  influence  by  the  unspoken  will,  of 
discerning  things  extraneous  to  the  scope  of  the  ordinary 
senses.  The  mere  existence,  however,  of  a  belief  in  such 
powers,  prevalent  throughout  the  civilised  world,  persisting 
from  generation  to  generation,  and  supported  by  an  ever- 
increasing  volume  of  testimony,  raises  but  a  faint  presump- 
tion that  the  belief  is  well-founded.  We  learn  from  the 
whole  history  of  witchcraft  and  kindred  superstitions,  and 
fromi  the  extraordinary  persistence  down  to  our  own  day, 
and  amongst  persons  of  some  scientific  attainments,  of  the 
belief  in  fluidic  emanations  from  magnets,  crystals,  drugs, 
and  other  substances,  that  belief  in  such  agencies  is  apt  in 
such  material  to  breed  its  own  justification. 

Moreover,  the  case  is  weakened  by  the  observation  that 
the  psychological  facts,  upon  which  the  belief  is  based,  have 
been  accompanied,  sporadically  at  first,  but  of  late  years 
with  increasing  frequency,  by  facts  of  another  kind,  obviously 
explicable  as  due  to  trickery  or  other  familiar  causes ;  and 
that  both  sets  of  facts  have  for  the  most  part  met  with  equal 
credence  from  contemporary  witnesses.  The  question,  there- 
fore, is  reduced  to  one  of  evidence.  The  task  before  us  is 
the  patient  analysis  of  the  existing  evidence,  and  the  attempt, 
preferably  by  direct  experiment,  to  acquire  new  evidence 
on  the  subject.  As  regards  the  historical  testimony  to  the 
transmission  of  thought  and   clairvoyance,  I    have   already 

SUMMARY  AND   CONCLUSION       361 

recorded  my  personal  conviction  that  it  amounts  to  very 
little.  I  have  thought  it  expedient  to  devote  some  space 
to  its  recital  and  analysis,  because  it  forms  a  necessary 
element  in  the  problem ;  but,  owing  to  the  defectiveness 
of  the  records  and  the  ignorance,  on  the  part  of  the  earlier 
observers,  of  now  recognised  sources  of  error,  we  can  have 
little  assurance  of  its  value.  It  is  only  because  of  the 
accumulation,  in  recent  years,  both  by  observation  and  by 
direct  experiment,  of  facts  pointing  in  the  same  direction, 
that  we  can  feel  justified  in  regarding  the  matter  as  an  open 
question ;  and  the  recent  evidence  loses  perhaps  more  than 
it  gains  by  juxtaposition  with  the  historical  records.  Mrs. 
Piper  would  be  a  much  more  convincing  apparition  if  she 
could  have  come  to  us  out  of  the  blue,  instead  of  trailing 
behind  her  a  nebulous  ancestry  of  magnetic  somnambules, 
witchridden  children,  and  ecstatic  nuns. 

But  the  study  of  the  past  furnishes  us  with  an  equally 
emphatic  warning  against  an  error  of  an  opposite  character. 
There  is  a  superstition  of  incredulity ;  and  the  memory 
of  that  discreditable  episode  in  the  history  of  science  in 
these  islands,  the  contemptuous  rejection  for  nearly  two 
generations  of  the  accumulating  evidence  for  hypnotic 
anaesthesia  and  kindred  phenomena,  should  suffice  to  teach 
us  that  even  the  extravagances  of  mysticism  may  contain 
a  residuum  of  unacknowledged  and  serviceable  fact.  We 
must  not,  for  the  second  time,  throw  away  the  baby  with 
the  water  from  the  bath. 

THE   END 

INDEX 

■'Achille,"  case  of,  described  by  Pro- 
fessor Janet,  ii.  309-10 
Action  at  distance,  i.  56,  57,  69,  98, 

117,  135 
Adare,  Lord  (third  Earl  of  Dunraven), 

i.  141,  146;  ii.  229 
Adare,  Lord  (fourth  Earl  of  Dunraven), 

ii.  230,  241,  255-9,  263,  268 
Adele  Maginot,  i.  83  seq. ;  ii.  340,  342 
Aksakof,  ii.  162 
Alchemists,  i.  5,  44-8;  ii.  348 
Alexander,  P.  P.,  ii.  230 
All  the   Year  Round  on  Spiritualism, 

ii.  48 
Allochiry  as  symptom  of  hysteria,   ii. 

320 
American  mediums  visit  England,  ii. 

26,  27,  47  seq. 
American  Spiritualism  contrasted  with 

EngHsh,  ii.  43-5 
Anaesthesia,  mesmeric,  first  observed, 

i.  71;  rejected  by  English  medical 

men,  i.    124-7  5   hysterical,  ii.    294. 

See  also  insensibility  to  pain 
Andrews,    Mrs.,    her    materialisation 

seances,  ii.  96,  114 
Animal  Magnetism.     See  Magnetism 
Animal  Electricity,  i.  63-4 
Animal  Heat,   de  Jussieu's  views  on, 

'•  57 
"Annie,"  her  trance  discourses,  ii.  32 
Antichrist  and  table-turning,  ii.  13  seq. 
Apologetics,  Spiritualist,  i.  200,  285  ; 

ii.  61-2 
"Apports,"  i.  81,   284;  ii.   28,  66-7; 

through   mediumship  of   S.    Moses, 

ii.    278;   with  "  Helene  Smith,"  ii. 

321 ;  a  case  of,  described  by  Janet, 

ii-  324-5 
Arabic  written  by  "  Helene  Smith,"  ii. 

316-17 
Arago  on  Angelique  Cottin,  i.  42 
Arnold,     Sir    Edwin,    on    Davenport 

Brothers,  ii.  59 
Ashburner,  Dr.,  i.  127,  131,  141,  302; 

ii.  55;  his  account  of  a  seance  with 

Mrs.  Hayden,  ii.  16,  18 

Ashtabula  Poltergeist,  i.  241-2 
Atkinson,  H.  G.,  i.  129,  131;  ii.  147, 

171 
Auburn,  N.Y.,  i.  182,  204,  295 
Aura,  spiritual,  ii.  39,  71,  78 
Automatic  record,  evasion  of,  by  spirit 

mediums,  ii.  183-5 
Automatic  writing  and  speaking,  i.  257 

seq.,  264-82;  ii.  35,  72-4,  126-39 
Automatism,  ii.  289  seq. ;  sensory,  ii. 

294-9;  motor,  ii.  300-6 
Automatism,  its  dangers,  ii.  328 

Bacon,  spirit  of,  i.  271 

Bailly,  i.  54,  59 

Ballou,   Adin,  i.    210,   218   seq.^   233, 

292,  302 
Baquet,  i.  54,  1 1 1 

Baraduc,  his  belief  in  fluids,  i.  48,  68 
Barkas,  T.   P. ,  on  Foster,  ii.  55 ;  on 

clairvoyance  of  Madame  Esperance, 

ii.  128  seq. 
Barlee,  T.  D.,  his  account  of  a  sitting 

with  Home,  ii.  234-6 
Barrett,   Professor  W.  F. ,  ii.  89,  292, 

332;  on  a  spirit  photograph,  ii.  124; 

his  paper  before  British  Association, 

ii.    159-60;   founder   of  S.P.R.,  ii. 

176  seq. ;    on    hallucination   as   ex- 
planation  of    physical    phenomena, 

ii.  244 
Bastian,  exposure  of,  ii.  107 
Bastie,  Dejean  de  la,  his  seance  with 

Adele,  i.  84-5 
Baxter,     Robert,     011     the     Irvingite 

"tongues,"  i.  8 
Beach  on  Stratford  Poltergeist,  i.  197, 

199 
Bealings  Bells,  i.  29-30,  41 
Beard,  Dr.,  on  a  case  of  hallucination, 

ii.  252 
Beardslee,   Lemuel  J.,  his  confession, 

i.  188,  190 
Beattie,  his  spirit  photographs,  ii.  118, 

123 
Beecher,  Rev.   C,  on  Spiritualism,  i. 

291,  301 

363 

364 

INDEX 

Belief,  predisposition  to,  ii.  80  seq. 

Bell,  Robert,  his  seance  with  Home, 
ii.  48-50,  225,  233,  253 

Bell,  Dr.,  i.  iii,  112 

Bellachini,  Samuel,  on  Slade's  per- 
formances, ii.  204 

Ben-Nathan,  Keleph,  i.  79 

Bennett,  E.  T.,  ii.  177 

Bergasse,  i.  51,  59,  iii 

Bernheim,  i.  131 

Berry,  Mrs.,  ii.  73,  74 

Bertrand,  A.,  i.  5,  57,  63,  67-71,  74, 
78,  119,  124,  140;  ii.  182,  330 

Besson,  Madame,  ii.  63 

Bezely,  Almira,  her  confession,  i.  188 

Billot,  his  letters  to  Deleuze,  i.  79-^1 

Binet,  A.,  ii.  308 

Bishop,  Irving,  his  thought-reading, 
i.  192 

Blackwell,  Miss  Anna,  ii.  168 ;  on  her 
visions,  ii.  71;  her  experiences  in 
spirit  photography,  ii.  120 

Blavatsky,  Madame,  ii.  175-6,  206,  268 

Boldero,  General,  ii.  258 

Book  of  God,  the,  ii.  167 

Boucicault,  Dion,  ii,  56 

Bourget,  Paul,  his  sitting  with  Mrs. 
Piper,  ii.  238-9 

Bourignon,  Antoinette,  i.  17-18 

Boyle,  Robert,  i.  49 

Bracciolini,  Poggio,  ii.  287 

Bradlaugh,  Charles,  ii.  147-8,  149 

Braid,  i.  115,  119-24,  133;  ii.  182;  his 
experiments  in  Phreno-Mesmerism, 
i.  122;  on  table-turning,  ii.  8 

Bray,  Charles,  his  theories  of  Spiritual- 
ism, ii.  172 

Brewster,  Sir  David,  i.  130;  ii.  225; 
his  seance  with  Home,  ii.  25,  142-4 

British  Association,  Glasgow  Meeting 
of,  ii.  159-60 

British  National  Association  of  Spirit- 
ualists, ii.  no,  169,  176,  177,  275 

British  Spiritual  Telegraph,  ii.  23 

British  Theosophical  Society,  ii.  176 

Brittan,  S.  B.,  i.  170  seq.,  204,  218, 
236  seq.,  245,  249,  268,  294,  300 

Britten,  Mrs.  Hardinge,  i.  248,  251, 
254,  265,267;  ii.  133 

Brodie,  Sir  Benjamin,  i.  112 

Brook  Farm,  i.  166,  210 

Brougham,  Lord,  ii.  25,  225;  his 
seance  with  Home,  ii.  142-4 

Brown,  J.  G.  H.,  his  revelations,  ii. 
41-2 

Bryant,  W.  CuUen,  i.  191 

Buchanan,  J.  R.,  i.  129,  225;  his 
hypothesis  of  "Nervaura,"  i.  iSS-6 

Buckley,  Major,  his  experiments  in 
clairvoyance,  i.  141-2;  ii.  330 

Buffalo  doctors,  their  exposure  of  the 

Fox  girls,  i.  184  seq. 
Buguet,  spirit  photographer,  ii.  1 20-3 
Burns,  James,  ii.  66,  164-7,  169 
Burr,  Chauncey,  i.  185,  189 
Bush,  Professor,  i.    159-60,  166,   167, 

168,  217,  239;  ii.  225 

Cahagnet,  Alphonse,  i.  81-91;  ii.  182, 

230,  331 

Caithness,  Lady,  ii.  121,  169 

Calhoun,  J.  C,  supposed  messages 
from,  i.  228-9 

Capron,  E.  W.,  his  history  of  Spiritual- 
ism, i.  179,  182,  191,  200,  227,  252, 
254,  302 

Carpenter,  Dr.,  on  table-turning,  etc., 
ii.  9,  90,  142,  15 1-2 

Carpenter,  Professor  J.  Estlin,  his 
sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  ii.  337-8 

Catalepsy,  i.  63 

Cevennes,  Tremblers  of,  i.  5-6,  ii.  264, 

354 
Chambers,  Robert,  ii.  5,  16,  19-21,  145 
Chapman,  John,  his  eulogy  of  A.   J. 

Davis'  philosophy,  i.  160 
Charcot,  i.  131 
Chase,  Warren,  i.   172,  203,  206,  210 

seq.,  225,  292 
Chenevix,  Richard,  i.  112 
Children,  part  played  by  in  witchcraft, 

i.  21-24;  ill  Poltergeist  cases,  i.  40 
Childs,  Edward,  ii.  64 
Chloroform,  discovery  of,  i.  125 
Christianity,  relation  of  Spiritualism  to, 

i.  164,  172,  217,  223-6,  299;  ii.  161, 

163^^5'.,  351 
Cincinnati  Brotherhood,  i.  1 75 
Clairaudience,  ii.  299 
Clairvoyance,  i.  63,  ()6,  69,  70,  71,  73, 

74>  79,  93, 97,  100,  loi,  106, 1 10, 1 16, 

123-4,  141-53,  251  seq. ;  ii.  126  seq., 

176,  182;   Home's,  ii.  230;  Moses', 

ii.  282-3 ;  Mrs.  Piper's,  ii.  329  seq. 
Clairvoyant  mediums,  i.  202 ;  ii.  52-S, 

63,  126  seq.,  290 ;  Major  Buckley's, 

i.  141 ;  ii.  330 
Clanny,    Dr.    Reid,    F.R.s.,   on   Mary 

Jobson,  i.  30-2 
Clergy,  attitude  of  American,  towards 

Spiritualism,  i.  291,  304 
Cloquet,  i.  126 
Close,  Rev.  F.  (Dean  of  Carlisle),  on 

table-turning,  ii.  14 
Cock  Lane  ghost,  i.  27 
Colchester,  an  American  medium,  ii.  52 
Coleman,  Benjamin,  ii.  25,  61,  62,  169 
Colley,  Archdeacon,  exposes  Eglinton, 

ii.  206 ;  his  seance  with  Dr.  Monck, 

ii.  245-6,  252 

INDEX 

365 

Collier,  John  Payne,  ii.  287 
CoUingwood,    Mr.    J.    F.,    on    Miss 

Wood's  materialisations,  ii.  112 
Collyer,  Dr.,  i.  129,  154 
Colquhoun,  J.  C,  i.  113 
Commission  of  1784  on  Animal  Mag- 
netism, i.  54  seq. ;  of  183 1,  i.  72-5 
Community    of    sensation,    i.     123-4, 

132-40;  ii.  329 
Confessions   of  witches,   i.    16-18;   of 

trickery  by  bewitched  persons,  i.  23 ; 

by  mediums,  i.  185-8;  ii.  273-4 
Conflict  of  consciousness,  ii.  305 
Conjurers  unable  to  explain  medium- 

istic  performances,  ii.  104-5 
Conjuring  tricks,  difficulty  of  accurately 

describing,  ii.  210 
Consciousness,  dissociation  of,  ii.  294; 

in  crystal  vision,  ii.  297-8;  physical 

symptoms  of,  ii.  307  seq.,  320 
Consciousness,  conflict  of,  in  hypnotism, 

ii-  305  >  355;  subliminal,  Mr.  Myers' 

views  on,  ii.  357-9 
Contagion  of  mediumship,  ii.  75-6 
Continuous    observation,    difficulty   of 

maintaining,  ii.   195,  201  seq.,  208, 

210  seq.,  2.11 
Convulsionaries   of    St.    Medard,    fire 

ordeal  amongst,  ii.  264 
Conway,   Moncure,   on   hand-holding, 

ii.  200 
Cook,  Miss  Florence,  ii.  76,  78,  97-9; 

exposure  of,  ii.  103 ;  her  sittings  for 

Sir  W.  Crookes,  ii.  152-5 
Cooper,  Robert,  ii.  60,  66 
Cooper,  Fenimore,  at  a  seance,  i.  191 
Corbet,  Mistress  Faith,  i.  21-2;  ii.  349 
Corner,  Mrs.     See  Miss  Florence  Cook 
Cornhill  Magazine,  account  of  seance 

with  Home,  ii.  48-50 
Costello,  Dr.,  his  testimony  to  Alexis, 

i.  147 
Cottin,  Angelique,  i.  41-3;  ii.  349 
Courtney,  W.  S.,  i.  300,  302 
Cox,  Serjeant,  ii.   87,   104,    115,   147, 
150,   170,   237;  on  Morse's   trance- 
speaking,   ii.    133;    his   theories   on 

psychic  force,  ii.  173-4 
Cox,  William,  and  Home,  ii.   142-4, 

225. 
Cracking  of  joints,  as  explaining  raps, 

i.  184  seq. 
Crawford,  Earl  of.     See  Lindsay. 
Crisis,  magnetic,  i.  54,  58,  65 
Crookes,  SirW.,i.  234;  ii.  140,  152-9, 
226,  236 ;  his  experiments  with  Miss 
Cook,  ii.  152-5;  his  experiments  with 
Miss  Fay,  ii.  157-9;  on  rules  to  be 
observed    in    investigation,    ii.    1S3 ; 
his  experiments  with  Home,  ii.  237- 

43 ;  on  Home's  levitations,  ii.  254-5 ; 

on  fire  ordeal  with  Home,  ii.  262-3 
Crosland,  Mrs.,  her  experiences,  ii.  37-9 
Crystal,  faces  shown  in,  by  medium,  ii, 

249-50 
Crystal-seeing,  i.  12-14;  ii.  69,  70,  268, 

294-9;  not  injurious,  ii.  327 
Culver,  Mrs.  Norman,  her  confession, 

i.  185  seq.,  190 

"  Dan,"  Jacob  Dixon's  medium,  ii. 
29-30 

Dancing  epidemic,  i.  257,  281 

Dark  seances,  i.  227;  ii.  79-80,  195 
seq. ;  hallucinations  at,  ii.  249-50,  299 

Davenport  Brothers,  i.  208;  ii.  ^^-iii 

Davenport,  Miss  Nella,  author's  ex- 
perience with,  ii.  85 

Davey,  S.  J.,  his  imitations  of  spirit 
slate-writing,  ii.  209,  216  seq.  ;  his 
experiences  with  Eglinton,  ii.  212; 
his  use  of  threads  in  conjuring,  ii. 
241-2 

David,  alleged  communications  from, 

"•  33-4 

Davis,  Andrew  Jackson,  i.  158-76,  204, 
223,  292,  294;  ii.  3,  166,  172,  350-1 ; 
on  Stratford  Poltergeist,  i.  196-200 ; 
his  inspired  speaking,  i.  265 ;  on  the 
"new  motor,"  i.  298;  his  attitude  to 
Christianity,  i.  299 

Davis,  Mary,  i.  293 

Dawson,  Ellen,  her  clairvoyance,  i.  148 

Day-dreaming  as  explanation  of  me- 
diumship, ii.  309,  312  seq. 

Day,  Horace,  on  Stratford  Poltergeist, 
i.  199 

Dee,  Dr.,  i.  12-14;  ii-  348)  354 

De  Gasparin,  Count,  ii.  161,  187-8 

De  Guldenstubbe,  ii.  66;  his  experi- 
ments in  "direct"  writing,  ii.  188-90 

De  Jussieu,  his  report  on  Animal  Mag- 
netism, i.  56-9 

Deleuze,  i.  64-6,  79,  and  Billot,  i.  79-81 

De  Morgan,  Mrs.,  ii.  30,  36,  45,  71,  144 

De  Morgan,  Professor,  his  testimony  to 
clairvoyance,  i.  148-50,  189;  ii.  182; 
on  the  raps,  ii.  6;  his  preface  to 
From  Matter  to  Spirit,  ii.  141,  144 

De  Rochas,  ii.  178,  271 

D'Eslon,  i.  52,  54,  112 

Devils,  belief  in,  i.  3,  4,  11,  50,  79 

Dexter,  Dr.,  i.  225;  his  automatic 
writing,  i.  266;  and  Edmonds,  their 
book  on  Spiritualism,  i.  271 

Diabolism,  ii.  168 

Diagnosis  of  diseases  by  somnambules, 
i-  61,  63,  92 

Dialectical  Society,  ii.  68,  127,  147  seq,, 
258-9 

366 

INDEX 

Dibdin,  Rev.  R.  W.,  ii.  14 

Didier,  Alexis,  i.  143-8;  ii.  331,  340-1 

Digby,  Sir  Kenelm,  i.  46 

"Direct"    spirit- writing,    de    Gulden- 

stubbe's  experiments,  ii.  i88-go 
Dissociation    of    consciousness.       See 

Consciousness 
Divining  rod,  i.  100 
Dixon,  Jacob,  ii.  24,  28-30,  44,  45 
Dodds,    Mr.  J.   M.,    his   seance   with 

Davey,  ii.  218-19 
Dods,    Rev.    J.    Bovee,   his   theory  of 

vital  electricity,  i.  155,  289 
Drapery,  spirit,  ii.  114 
Drawing,  automatic,  i.  216;  ii.  36-40, 

73-4 
Drayson,  General,  ii.  55 
Dreams  compared  with  crystal  visions, 

ii.   294-5 ;  prompting  to  subsequent 

action,  ii.  322-3 
Dubois,  Dr.,  i.  86-7 
Duguid,    David,    ii.    63,    79,   271 ;  his 

spirit    painting,    ii.    86-7;    author's 

experience  with,  ii.  86-7 ;  his  trance 

revelations,    ii.     13 1-2;    his    trance 

painting,  ii.  130 
Duke  of  Kent,  alleged  communications 

from,  ii.  18,  22,  31 
Dunkers,  i.  218 

Dunraven,  Earl  of.     See  Adare,  Lord 
Du   Potet,   his   seance  with  Adele,  i. 

86-7;  his  visit  to  London,  i.    113; 

his  views  on  Spiritualism,  ii.  161 

Ectenic  force,  ii.  161,  187 

Eddy,  Dr.,  on  universalism,  i.  218-19 

Eddy,  Ira  B.,  case  of,  i.  304 

Eddy  seances,  ii.  115 

Edmonds,  Judge,  i.  223  seq.,  230  seg., 
251,  253,  300;  ii.  225;  on  the 
"tongues,"  i.  258  seq.,  289;  his 
allegorical  visions,  i.  280 ;  and 
Dexter,  their  book  on  Spiritualism, 
i.  271 

Edmonds,  Laura,  i.  224,  258 

Edmunds,  Dr.,  ii.  147,  148,  151 

Eglinton,  W.,  ii.  79,  105,  204  seq. 

"Electric"  girls,  i.  41-3,  28S 

Electricity  as  explanation  of  the  raps, 
i.  289-90,  302;  as  explanation  of 
table-turning,  ii.  8 

Electrobiology,  ii.  4,  20 

EUiotson,  Dr.,  i.  113,  131-2,  138,  154; 
ii.  29,  182,  330,  349;  his  experi- 
ments with  the  Okeys,  i.  113-15,  134; 
on  table-turning,  ii.  5,  11 

Elliott,  C.  W.,  i.  194,  199,  227,  232,  288 

Elongation,  alleged,  of  Heme  and 
IMorse,  ii.  78;  of  Home,  ii.  258-9; 
of  Peters,  ii.  259-61 

Ely,  Miss,  on  Home,  ii.  228 

Endless  cord,  alleged  tying  of  knots  in, 
ii.  191 

Engledue,  Dr.,  i.  116,  128;  experi- 
ments of  1.  137-8 

Ennemoser,  i.  99 

Epworth  Parsonage  Poltergeist,  i.  32-9 

Eschenmayer,  i.  108 

Esdaile,  Dr.,i.  116,  117,  123,  125,  131, 

^34-5 
Esoteric  Buddhism,  ii.  175 
Esperance,  Madame,  her  clairvoyance, 

ii.  128  seq. 
Everitt,  Mrs.,  ii.  64,  79,  91 

Failure,  the  medium's  privilege  of,  ii. 
220 

Faraday,  i.  112;  ii,  186;  on  table- 
turning,  ii.  9;  on  Home,  ii.  145-6 

Faria,  Abbe,  i.  71 

Fay,  Miss  Annie,  ii.  85,  157-9 

Ferguson,  Rev.  J.  B.,  i.  206  seq,,  217, 
255-7;  ii.  56 

Fernald,  W.  M.,  i.  170,  172,  173,  204, 
217,  300 

Fire  ordeal,  i.  249 ;  ii.  262-66 ;  with 
Home,  ii.  262-3;  ^t  present  day,  ii. 
264-6 

Firman,  ii.  106 

Fishbough,  Rev.  W.,  i.  158-9,  167, 
169,  189,  218 

Fits  of  bewitched  subjects,  i.  22-4 

Flournoy,  Professor,  on  de  Gasparin's 
experiments,  ii.  187 ;  a  case  of  auto- 
matic writing,  ii.  302,  313-4;  on  case 
of  "Helene  Smith,"  ii.  315-26;  on 
physical  phenomena  through  Helene, 
ii.  321-2 

Fludd,  i.  44-8 

Fluids,  belief  in,  i.  44-8,  289;  ii.  354, 
360 

Foissac,  i.  72,  75 

Forbes,  Sir  John,  and  George  Goble, 
ii.  273 

Foster,  ii.  52-5,  271,  290 

Fourier,  i.  209,  212;  ii.  350 

Fowler,  E.  P.,  i.  233,  236-40,  285 

Fowler,  Lottie,  ii.  83,  105,  127,  275 

Fox  girls,  i.  179  seq.,  227-9,  232,  252, 
286;  ii.  231 

Fox,  Kate,  her  sittings  with  Mr.  Liver- 
more,  ii.  95-6.    See  also  Mrs.  Jencken 

FrankHn,  Benjamin,  i.  54,  55,  235; 
spirit  of,  i.  192,  252,  268,  269;  ii.  22 

Fraud,  exposures  of,  i.  284  seq. ;  ii.  89, 
273;  at  materialisation  seances,  ii. 
103,  104,  107  seq.,  113  seq.;  dis- 
interested, author's  experience  of, 
ii.  272;  Professor  Sidgwick  on,  ii. 
273;  examples  in  the  past,  ii.  287-8 

INDEX 

367 

Fraud  by  children,  ii.  274 

Free  love,  accusations  of,  i.  292  seq. 

Freer,  Miss  Goodrich,  ii.  269,  297,  298 

French,  Mrs.,  i.  282 

FuUerton,  Professor,  ii.  194 

Furness,  Dr.  Horace,  ii.  116,  194 

Fusedale,  F.,  his  experiences,  ii.  69-70 

G.  P.,  alleged  control  of  Mrs.   Piper, 

ii.  342-3,  346 
Gale,  Professor  Harlow,  on  hallucina- 
tions, ii.  250,  299 
Galton,  F.,  on  visual  imagery,  ii.  295 
Garrison,  W.  Lloyd,  i.  214,  225,  229-30 
Gaule  on  witch  confessions,  i.  18 
Ghosts,  i.  101-2 
Gibier,  Dr.,  on  abnormality  in  mediums, 

ii.  291 
Gillson,  Rev.  E.,  on  table-turning,  ii.  13 
Glanvil  on  witchcraft,  i.  21 ;  account  of 

"  Drummer  of  Tedworth,"  i.  26-7 
Godfrey,  Rev.  N.  S.,  on  table-turning, 

ii.  13  seq. 
Gordon,  the  medium,  i.  232,  234,  243, 

244,253 
Grandier,  Urbain,  i.  4-5 
Gray,  Dr.,  i.  232,  243,  249 
Greatrakes,  Valentine,  i.  48-50;  ii.  348 
Greek,  written  by  spirits,  ii.  84,  91,  93, 

189;  spoken  in  trance,  i.  259 
Greeley,  Horace,  i.  183,  210 
Gregory,  Mrs.,  ii.  169 
Gregory,  Professor,  i.  116,  117-24,  130, 

131,  132;  ii.  3,331;  his  testimony  to 

clairvoyance,  i.  15 1-2 
Gridley,  Dr.  J.  A.,  i.  220  seq.,  265,  299 
Grimes,    Professor,    his    hypothesis   of 

etherium,  i.  155,  158 
Gully,  Dr.,  ii.  230;  his  account  of  a 

seance    with     Home,    ii.     50;     his 

affidavit  at  Home's  trial,  ii.  145 
Guppy,  Mrs.,  i.  81 ;  ii.  65-7,   76,  79; 

transit  of,  ii.  81 ;  her  materialisation 

seances,  ii.  96 ;  her  spirit  photographs, 

ii.  118 
Guppy,  Samuel,  ii.  65  ;  his  Mary  Jane, 

ii.  171 
Gurney,  Edmund,  ii.  90,  177 

Haddock,  Dr.,  i.  116,  124;  ii.  3,  331 ; 

his  experiments,  i.  136,  152-3 
Hafed,  Prince  of  Persia,  ii.  13 1-2 
Hahn  and  Slawensik  Poltergeist,  i.  28-9 
Hall,  Dr.  Marshall,  on  mesmeric  anaes- 
thesia, i.  126-7 
Hall,  S.  C.,  ii.  95,  169,  230,  263 
Hall,  Spencer  T.,  i.  116,  128,  130 
Hallock,  Dr.  R.  T.,  i.  242;  on  case  of 

levitation,  i.  245 
Hallucinations,  auditory,  ii.  72 ;  tactile, 

ii.  72;  in  witchcraft,  i.  19;  in  Polter- 
geist cases,  i.  31 ;  ii.  70,  76;  in  con- 
nection with  physical  mediumship, 
ii.  76;  as  explanation  of  physical 
phenomena,  ii.  159,  238,  244-69; 
le  Bon  on,  ii.  267;  seen  at  Home's 
seances,  ii.  70,  268;  induced,  ii. 
266-9  {see  also  Crystal  Vision);  at 
dark  seances,  ii.  299 ;  census  of,  by 
S.  P.  R.,  ii.  247,  251 

Hammond,  Dr.,  ii.  293 

Hammond,  Rev.  C.,  i.  217,  227;  his 
Piigritnage  of  Thomas  Paine,  i.  269 
seq. 

Hand-holding,  as  precaution  against 
fraud,  ii.  196 ;  with  Eusapia  Pala- 
dino,  ii.  198  seq. ;  Moncure  Conway 
and  Maskelyne  on,  ii.  200 

Hardinge,  a  mesmeric  "  doctor,"  ii.  5, 
20,  21 

Hare,  Professor,  i.  217,  225,  233-6, 
260,  290,  300,  301,  306;  ii.  239 

Harmonial  philosophy,  the,  i.  160,  169 

Harmony,  Societies  of,  i.  53,  59 

Harris,  Thomas  Lake,  i.  170,  171,  173, 
204,  210,  218,  223,  294,  300;  ii.  26; 
his  inspirational  poetry,  i.  276  seq. ; 
ii-  i39j  351 ;  his  allegorical  visions,  i. 
280;  and  Mountain  Cove  Community, 
i.  295  seq, 

Harrison,  W.  H.,  ii.  80,  87,  108,  no, 
III,  263;  on  spirit  photographs,  ii. 
1 18-20 ;  on  clairvoyance,  ii.  126;  on 
Cromwell  Varley's  experiments,  ii. 
1 56-7 ;  as  editor  of  the  Spiritttalist, 
ii.  168,  177 

Hartegilligan,  Julius,  ii.  20 

Hartmann,  E.  von,  ii.  162,  207 

Hauffe,  Frederica.  See  Seeress  of  Pre- 
vorst 

Hawksley,  Dr.  Thomas,  his  experiences 
with  Home,  ii.  244 

Hayden,  Mrs.,  i.  189,  190,  307;  ii.  4 
seq. 

Hazard,  Mr.  T.  R.,  his  recognition  of 
his  mother,  ii.  114 

Healing  mediums,  i.  203,  281 ;  ii.  20 

Healing  of  the  Nations,  i.  273  seq. 

Hebrew  written  by  spirits,  i.  237-40 

"  Helene  Smith,"  Professor  Flournoy's 
medium,  ii.  315  seq.,  356;  her  visits 
to  Mars,  ii.  316;  her  clairvoyance, 
ii.  317-18;  her  physical  phenomena, 
ii.  321 ;  her  day-dreams,  ii.  319;  her 
pathological  symptoms,  ii.  320 

Hell,  the  Jesuit,  i.  52 

Hellenbach,  ii.  162 

Hermetic  Society,  the,  ii.  176,  178 

Heme,  F.,  ii.  63,  78  seq.,  83,  97-104, 
107 

368 

INDEX 

Herschell,  Dr.  George,  on  Eglinton's 

slate-writing,  ii.  205 
Herschel,   Sir  John,  a  case  of  hallu- 
cination, ii.  251 
Hewitt,  S.  C,  i.  298  seq. 
Hiatt,  T.  S.,  on  Mountain  Cove  Com- 
munity, i.  296 
Hieroglyphs,  spiritual,  i.  195,  197 
Hind-ustani,  spoken  by  "  Helene  Smith," 

ii.  316-17 
Hoax  played  on  Sunderland,  i.  205 

Hockley,  F.,  ii.  31,  174 

Hodgson,  Dr.  R.,  ii.  176,  178,  205, 
292;  on  Eusapia  Paladino,  ii.  201-3; 
his  investigations  in  slate-writing,  ii. 
209  seq. ;  his  account  of  an  Indian 
juggling  trick,  ii.  210;  on  fallacies 
of  memory,  ii.  212,  235;  on  Mrs. 
Piper,  ii.  332,  Z'V^  seq.,  357 

"Hoffmann,  Professor,"  on  Eglinton's 
slate-writing,  ii.  207,  212 

Holland,  Dr.  Henry,  i.  112 

Hollo  way,  i.  112 

Home,  D.  D.,  i.  242,  244,  248,  285, 
286,  307;  ii.  24,  47,  95,  271,  275, 
326,  336,  353;  Robert  Bell's  seance 
with,  ii.  48-50 ;  seance  with  Brewster 
and  Brougham,  ii.  142-4;  trial  of 
Lyon  v.,  ii.  145,  2|6 ;  before  Dialecti- 
cal Society,  ii.  149;  biographical 
sketch,  ii.  224-6;  parentage,  ii.  224; 
conversion  to  Roman  Catholicism, 
ii.  227;  alleged  outrages  on,  ii.  227; 
personal  description  of,  ii.  227-8; 
his  clairvoyance,  ii.  230;  never  de- 
tected in  fraud,  ii.  230;  physical 
phenomena,  ii.  231  seq. ;  his  table- 
tilting,  i.  243;  ii.  241,  244-5;  hallu- 
cinations seen  at  his  seances,  ii.  70, 
250,  252,  268;  his  levitations,  i. 
244-5 ;  ii-  253-8 ;  his  fire-ordeal,  ii. 
262-3 

Honywood,  Mrs.,  ii.  263 

Hopedale  Community,  i.  166,  210,  220 

Hopkins,  Matthew,  the  witch-finder, 
i.  19 

Hopps,  Rev.  Page,  ii.  165 

Houdin,  Robert,  his  testimony  to  clair- 
voyance of  Alexis,  i.  143 

Houghton,  Miss,  ii.  72-5 

Howitt,  William,  i.  40;  ii.  55,  91,  139, 
163,  169;  on  Buguet's  trial,  ii.  123 

Hudson,  spirit  photographer,  ii.  118-20 

Huggins,  Sir  W.,  ii.  237  seq. 

Hughes,  F.  S.,  ii.  92 

Hughlings-Jackson,  Dr.,  ii.  300 

Human  Nature,  ii.  164  seq. 

Human  spirits,  belief  in,  i.  15 

Hume,  D.  D.     See  Home. 

Hutchinson  on  witchcraft,  i.  22 

Hutton,  Richard,  ii.  90,  177 

Huxley,  Professor,  his  reply  to  Dialec- 
tical Society,  ii.  148 

Hydesville,  i.  179 

Hypersesthesia,  i.  133,  137,  143;  ii.  330 

Hyslop,  Professor,  on  crystal-seeing; 
ii.  295,    297,  298;    on  Mrs.    Piper, 

ii-  337,  345 
Hysteria,  as  safety  valve,  ii.  312-13;  its 

analogies  with  mediumship,  ii.  323 

seq. 
Hysterical   fits  of  bewitched   persons, 

i.   22-4;   ii.  290;  of  Mary  Jobson, 

i.  30-2 

Imagination,   influence  of,  i.    119-20; 

1 57-8 
"  Imperator,"  alleged  control  of  W.  S. 

Moses,  ii.  283  seq. 
Indian  tongues  spoken  in  trance,  i.  4, 

257  seq. 
Induced  trance  first  observed,  i.  56,  60 ; 

characteristics  of,  ii.  294,  354 
Inhibition,  ii.  293-4,  299  seq. 
Insanity  induced  by  Spiritualism,  i.  304 
Insensibility  to  pain  in  ecstasy,  i.  5,  7 ; 

in   magnetic    trance,    i.    71,    124-7; 

discredited  by  medical  men,  i.  125-7  ; 

Dr.  Marshall  Hall  on,  i.  126-7 
Insensitive  patches  as  witch  marks,  i.  20 
Inspirational  speaking,  i.  216,  264  ^e^., 

279-80;  ii.  134^^^. ;  writing,  i.  172-4, 

279-80;  ii.  130^-1?^.,  301 
Irving,  Edward,  i.  7-1 1,  109;  ii.  354 
Isham,  Sir  Charles,  ii.  16,  169 

Jackson,  J.  W.,  i.  131;  ii.  12,  171 
Jago,  Mr.,  experiments  of,  i.  138-9 
James,  Henry,  i.  210,  291,  302 
James,  Professor  William,  ii.  304,  308 ; 

on  Mrs.  Piper,  ii.  333,  336 
Jane,  Mrs.  de  Morgan's  servant,  ii.  30, 36 
Janet,  Professor  Pierre,  ii.  245,  292, 
294,  295,  297,  307;  on  two  cases  of 
"possession,"  ii.  309-12;  on  day- 
dreaming, ii.  311-12;  on  allochiry, 
ii.    320;    on   a   case   of   "apports," 

ii-  324-5 
Jastrow,   Professor,    ii.    292,   300;   his 

experiments    in    motor-automatism, 

ii.  301 
"Jeffery,"   the  Wesley  Poltergeist,  i. 

32-9 
Jencken,  H.  D.,  ii.  258,  263,  268 
Jencken,  Mrs.  (Catherine  Fox),  ii.  79i 

83,  169;  her  confession,  i.  188 
Jobson,  Mary,  i.  30-2 ;  ii.  349 
Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  ii.  292 
Jones,  J.  Enmore,  ii.  29,  44,  75,  118, 

169,  233,  254 

INDEX 

369 

Josty,  spirit  photographer,  ii.  124 
Jung-Stilling,  i.  94,  95,  97 ;  his  propo- 
sitions, i.  96,  109 
Jupiter's  "spiritual  spheres,"  i.  301 

Kane,  Mrs.  (Margaretta  Fox),  ii.  194; 
her  confession,  i.  188 

"Kardec,  Allan,"  ii.  161,  166,  168 

"  Katie, "  photographs  of,  by  Sir  William 
Crookes,  ii.  153-4 

Keeler,  Pierre,  ii.  194-5 

Keighley,  Spiritualist  manifestations  at, 
ii.  19,  162,  164 

Kellar,  Harry,  on  Eglinton's  slate- 
writing,  ii.  205 

Kelly,  Edward,  i.  12-14 

Kenealy,  Dr.,  ii.  167 

Kerner,  Justinus,  i.  99-109 

Keulemans,  Mr.,  his  induced  hallucina- 
tions, ii.  298 

Kiantone  Community,  i.  292 

Kieser,  i.  93,  95,  98 

"King,  John,"  i.  248;  ii.  81,  99,  lOO, 
106,  III 

Kingsford,  Dr.  Anna,  ii.  176 

Kislingbury,  Miss,  ii.  108 

Kleptomania,  ii.  323 

Kluge,  i.  92-94,  95 

Koch,  Dr.  Charles,  on  table-turning, 
ii.  II 

Koons'  spirit-room,  i.  246  seq.^  286 

La  Fontaine,  i.  1 14-15,  128 

Lancet,  the,  on  Mesmerism,  i,  1 14-15, 
124,  127 

Lang,  Andrew,  i.  27 ;  on  Home,  ii. 
228;  on  fire-ordeal,  ii.  264,  266;  on 
crystal-gazing,  ii.  295,  298,  327 

Langley,  Professor,  on  fire-ordeal  in 
Tahiti,  ii.  265 

Lankester,  Professor  Ray,  on  Slade, 
ii.  89  seq. 

Latin  spoken  or  written  in  trance,  i.  5, 
7,9,257,  262;  ii.  19,  189 

Lavoisier,  i.  54,  62 

Lay,  Wilfrid,  on  mental  imagery,  ii.  295 

Laycock,  T.,  clairvoyant  subject,  i.  142 

Leaf,  Dr.  Walter,  on  Mrs.  Piper,  ii.  336 

"Le  Baron,"  Mr.,  his  mediumistic 
experiences,  ii.  304-5 

Le  Bon,  a  case  of  hallucination ;  ii.  252  ; 
on  collective  hallucinations,  ii.  267 

Legislation  against  mediums,  i.  305 

Lehmann,  his  criticism  of  Sir  William 
Crookes'  experiments,  ii.  241 

Levitation,  in  witchcraft,  i.  23 ;  at 
Stratford  (Conn.),  i.  196;  at  Spirit- 
ualist seances,  i.  243-6;  ii.  28,  49, 
67;  of  Home,  i.  244-5;  ii.  253-8; 
of  W.  S.  Moses,  ii.  278 

II. 2    B 

Lewes,  G.  H.,  ii.  5,  147 

Lewis,  Professor  Carvill,  on  Eglinton's 
slate-writing,  ii.  206,  215 

Liebeault,  i.  131 

Light,  the  Spiritualist  newspaper,  ii. 
177-8 

Lights  at  Moses'  seances,  ii.  279 

Lincoln,  Abraham,  i.  225 

Lindsay;  Master  of  (Earl  of  Crawford), 
ii.  151,  263,  268;  on  Home's  levita- 
tions,  ii.  255-8;  on  Home's  elonga- 
tion, ii.  258-9 

Linton,  Charles,  his  inspirational  writ- 
ings, i.  272  seq. 

"Little  Georgia  Magnet,"  i.  43 

Livermore,  Mr. ,  his  seances  with  Kate 
Fox,  ii.  95-6 

Llewellyn,  Colonel,  his  testimony  to 
Alexis'  clairvoyance,  i.  146 

Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  on  the  "Little 
Georgia  Magnet,"  i.  43;  on  Eusapia 
Paladino;  ii.  i<)<)seq. ;  on  Mrs.  Piper, 

ii-  336 
Lombroso,  Professor,  ii.  198 
London      Medical     and      Chirurgical 

Society,  its  attitude  to  Mesmerism, 

i.  126-7 
London  Spiritualist  Alliance,  ii.  276 
Longdon,  Mary,  i.  23 
Loomis,  Professor,  ii.  55 
Loudun,  epidemic  possession  at,  i.  4-5 
Loutherbourg,  i.  112 
Lowenthal,  Mr.,  on  his  motor  impulses, 

ii.  74  .      , 
Lucas,  his  seance  with  Adele,  i.  88-9 
Luys,  Dr.,  i.  48,  68 
Lyon,  Mrs.,  ii.  225-6 
Lyon  V.  Home,  trial  of,  ii.  145 
Lyric  of  the  Morning  Land,  i.  277-8 
Lytton,  Sir  E.  Bulwer,  ii.  225 

Mackenzie,  Kenneth,  ii.  24 

Macleod,  Dr.,  ii.  55,  66,  69,  164 

Magnet,  as  used  by  the  alchemists,  i. 
44-5;  supposed  influence,  on  som- 
nambules,  i.  41,  92,  11 7-19;  ii.  330 

Magnetic  fluid,  Mesmer's  views,  i.  51-2; 
visible  to  somnambules,  i.  61-2,  65, 
92;  ii.  290;  identified  with  "de- 
phlogisticated  air,"  i.  62;  regarded 
as  a  physical  agent,  i.  62,  65,  w^- 
15,  1 16-19,  154-6 

Magnetism,  Animal,  ii.  10  seq.,  161  ; 
its  discovery,  i.  51;  as  precursor  of 
Spiritualism,  ii.  348 

Mahan,  Rev.  Asa,  i.  190,  192,  194, 
203,  249 

Mahan,  J.  T.,  his  clairvoyant  revela- 
tions, i.  175 

Mainauduc,  de,  i.  112 

370 

INDEX 

Maitland,  Edward,  ii.  176 

Mansfield,  J.  V.,  i.  260 

"  M.A.,Oxon."   See  Moses,  Rev.W.  S. 

Mapes,  Professor,  i.  225,  249 

Marcillet,  i.  143-8 

Marion,  Elie,  discourses  in  trance,  i.  6 

Mars  visited  by  "  Helene  Smith,"  ii.  316 

Marshall,  Mrs.,  ii.  27-8,  44,  48,  63,  78; 
account  of  sitting  with,  ii.  27-8 

"  Martian  language,"  ii.  316-17 

Martineau,  Harriet,  i.  128-9;  her  testi- 
mony to  clairvoyance,  i.  153 

Marvell,  Andrew,  i.  49 

Mary  Jane,  ii.  17 1-2 

Maskelyne,  his  imitation  of  Davenport 
Brothers,  ii.  61 ;  claimed  as  spirit 
medium,  ii.  61 ;  on  rope-tying,  ii.  86; 
on  Slade's  performance,  ii.  90;  on 
hand-holding,  ii.  200 ;  on  table-turn- 
ing, ii.  204 

Massey,  C.  C.,  ii.  90,  no;  on  recog- 
nition, ii.  115,  170;  on  slate- writing, 
ii.  205,  207 

Massey,  Gerald,  on  religion  of  Spiritual- 
ism, ii.  167 

Materialisation,  i.  249 ;  ii.  95  seq. 

Materialistic  explanation  of  spirit,  i. 
301-2;  ii.  16,  171-4 

Mather,  Cotton,  on  witch-marks,  i.  20 

Mattison,  his  criticism  of  Spiritualism, 
i.  288 

Maudsley,  Dr.,  ii.  292 

Maxwell  the  alchemist,  i.  44-8 

Mayo,  Dr.  Herbert,  i.  114 

Mechanism  of  Man,  The,  ii.  173-4 

Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society,  Lon- 
don, its  attitude  to  Mesmerism,  i. 
126-7 

Medina  Pomar,  Duke  of,  ii.  121 

Medium  and  Daybreak,  The,  ii.  165 

Meier,  i.  94,  97 

Memorial  to  U.S.  Congress,  i.  306 

Mental  questions  answered  by  rapping 
mediums,  i.  190  seq.  ;  ii.  4  seq. 

Mesmer,  i.  44,  47,  51-4,  m;  his 
propositions,  i.  51-2 

Mesmeric  hospital  in  Calcutta,  i.  125 

Mesmerism,  its  origin,  i.  51 ;  belief  in, 
prepares  the  way  for  Spiritualism, 
i.  202  seq. ,  287 ;  discredited  by 
Spiritualism,  i.  131 

Messages  from  the  Spirit  Life,  i.  274 

Metals,  supposed  action  at  a  distance, 
i.  92,  100,  1 13-14,  1 18-19,  134 

Millennium,  expectations  of,  i.  172-3; 
ii.  14,  22,  42,  350 

Millerism,  i.  217;  ii.  350 

Mirande,  his  seance  with  Adele,  i.  89 

Mitchell,  Dr.  Weir,  ii.  194 

Moira,  witches  of,  i.  17-18 

Moll,  on  dreams  prompting  to  action, 
ii.  323 

Monck,  Dr.,  ii.  83,  105 

Moor,  Major,  on  Bealings  Bells,  i. 
29-30,  41 

Morgan,  R.  C,  on  table-turning,  ii.  15 

Morse,  J.  J.,  i.  265;  ii.  63,  78,  133 

Mosaicall  Philosophy  of  Fludd,  i.  45-7 

Moses,  Rev.  W.  S.,  ii.  79,  177,  186, 
246,  292,  326;  on  recognition,  ii. 
115;  on  spirit  photographs,  ii.  1 19-21, 
123,  170;  his  life,  ii.  275-6;  his 
mediumship,  ii.  276  -  88  ;  alleged 
spirit  communications,  ii.  282-3, 
340-1 ;  inspirational  writings,  ii. 
283-6;  and  Mrs,  Piper,  ii.  346 

Motor  impulses,  ii.  74-5j  3^4 

Mountain  Cove  Community,  i.  295  seq. 

Miiller,  Auguste,  i.  94,  97 

Mumler,  spirit  photographer,  ii.  117 

Miinsterberg,  ii.  292,  356 

Munton,  F.  K.,  ii.  170 

Muscle-reading,  ii.  301 

Musical  sounds  at  Moses'  seances,  ii. 
280 

Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  i.  177;  on  Eusapia 
Paladino,  ii.  199  seq. ;  on  Moses' 
mediumship,  ii.  282;  on  crystal- 
gazing,  ii.  295  seq. ;  on  Mrs.  Piper,  ii. 
336 ;  his  belief  in  spirit  intercourse, 
ii.  357-60 

Nasse,  i.  95 

Natty,  a  spirit,  i.  280 

Nature's  Divine  Revelations,  i.  159-68, 
203,  214 

Neptune,  alleged  discovery  of  the 
planet  by  clairvoyance,  i.  162-3 

Nervengeist.     See  Psychic  body 

Newbold,  Professor  W.  R. ,  on  crystal- 
seeing,  ii.  297  ;  his  experiments  in 
motor-automatism,  ii.  301 ;  on  Mrs. 
Piper,  ii.  336 

New  Existence  of  Man  upon  Earth,  by 
Robert  Owen,  ii.  18,  22,  31-2 

New  Haven  Journal  ori  Stratford  Polter- 
geist, i.  195,  198 

"  New  Motor,"  i.  298  seq. 

Newnham,  i.  117,  121,  128 

Newton,  Rev.  A.,  i.  275 

New  York  Tribune,  account  of  seance 
in,  i.  191 

Nichol,  Miss.     See  Mrs.  Guppy 

Nichols,  T.  L.,  i.  210 

Noel,  Hon.  Roden,  his  testimony  to 
slate-writing,  ii.  208 

North  American  Review,  i.  262,  290, 
303 

Number  of  Spiritualists,  estimate  of, 
i.  291,  303 

INDEX 

371 

Ochorowicz,  ii.  178;  and  Eusapia  Pala- 
dino,  ii.  199  seq. 

Odyle,  i.  1 18-19,  203,  242,  287,  306; 
ii.  16;  as  explanation  of  table-turn- 
ing, ii.  10.  1 7 1-2 

Okays,  the,  i.  1 13-15.  124-5,  132,  134 

Olcott,  Colonel,  ii.  i75 

Oneida  Community,  i.  166,  292 

O'SuUivan,  Hon.  J.  L.,  his  seances 
with  Firman,  ii.  106 

Owen,  Robert,  i.  209;  ii.  18,  22,  30-2, 
225,  351 

Owen,  R.  Dale,  his  seances  with  Mrs. 
Underhill,  ii.  95 

Owen,  Samuel,  American  lecturer,  ii.  26 

Page,  Professor,  his  experiments,  i.  193, 

288 
Painting  in  trance,  i.  280-1 ;  ii.  130 
Paladino,  Eusapia,  i.  42,  286;  ii.  80, 

178,  198-203 
Paracelsus,  i.    3,    14,    44-8,  275;    his 

doctrine  of  signatures,  i.  45 
Paris,  Deacon,  i.  6 
Parish,  on  dissociation  of  consciousness, 

ii.  298 
Partridge,  Charles,  i.  232,  242,  248 
Pathetism,  i.  157,  173,  288 
Percival,  F.  W.,  ii.  276 
Perdicaris,  Ion,  ii.  226,  228,  230,  245, 

258 
Perkins'  metallic  tractors,  i.  112 
PersonaHty,   secondary,    ii.    308    seq., 

323  seq. ;  physical  basis  of,  ii.  355 ; 

of  Mrs.  Piper,  ii.  343  seq. 
Perty,  Maximilian,  ii.  162 
Peters,  alleged  elongation  of,  ii.  259-61 
Petetin,  i.  63-4,  66 ;  ii.  330 
Phelps,  Rev.  Dr.,  i.  194  seq.,  203 
Phelps,  Professor  Austin,  i.  196 
"Phinuit,  Dr.,"  Mrs.  Piper's  control, 

ii-  333.  356 
Photographs,  spirit,  ii.  117  seq. 
Phreno- Magnet,   the,   i.    1 16,   128-30, 

Phreno-Mesmerism,  i.  121-3,  128-30, 
154-7;  ii.  330;  Braid's  experiments 
in,  i.  122,  133 

Physical  phenomena,  i.  14;  in  witch- 
craft, i.  23  ;  ii.  348-9 ;  in  Poltergeist 
cases  and  electric  girls,  i.  25-43;  ii^ 
somnambulism,  i.  80,  81,  102-6;  in 
America,  i.  283  seq. ;  comparatively 
recent,  ii.  182  ;  postulate  several  new 
modes  of  energy,  ii.  183-6;  general 
defects  in  evidence  for,  ii.  183-5; 
of  "Helene  Smith,"  ii.  321;  in 
private  mediumship,  ii.  63  seq.,  291-2 

Pigeaire,  Mdlle.,  i.  142 

Pilgrimage  of  Thomas  Paine,  i.  269  seq. 

Piper,  Mrs.,  her  trance  utterances,  i. 

284;  ii.  178,  327,  329  seq. ;  357,  361 ; 

history  of  her  mediumship,  ii.  332-3 
Plagiarism  charged  against  A.  J.  Davis, 

i.  166-8 ;  in  inspirational  writing,  i. 

279 
Podmore,    Austin,    his     seance    with 

Davey,  ii.  217 
Poetry,    inspirational,   i.    277-80;    ii. 

138-9 
Points  de  replre  in  crystal  vision,  ii.  297 
Poltergeists,    i.    25-43,    288;    ii.    244, 

290 ;  a  legacy  from  witchcraft,  i.  25 ; 

investigations  of  S.  P.  R.,  i.  40;   as 

precursor  of  Spiritualism,  ii.  349,  351 
Poltergeist  children,  ii.  323 
Possession,  divine,   i.   5,  7;    Professor 

Janet  on  two  modern  cases,  ii.  309-12 
Post-hypnotic  suggestion,  ii.  323  seq. 
Poughkeepsie  Seer.     See  Davis,  A.  J. 
Prediction  in  somnambulism,  i.  61,  66, 

73 

Prescott,  Miss,  1.  112 

Press,  attitude  of  American,  towards 
Spiritualism,  i.  290 

Priestley,  Joseph,  and  the  Wesley  letters, 
i.  32 ;  and  phlogiston,  i.  62 

Primitive  language,  i.  13-14,  108-9, 
262 

Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  on  crystal-seeing, 
ii.  295,  298 

Private  mediumship,  ii.  63-77,  91-4, 
272,  291-2,  323  i-*^.,  353 

"  Progressive  Spiritualists,"  Conven- 
tion of,  ii.  164 

Psychic  body,  i.  95,  107;  ii.  173-4 

Psychic  force,  ii.  174 

Psychical  Research,  Society  for,  ii.  178, 
182,  276,  290,  337;  on  Poltergeists, 
i.  40;  on  clairvoyance,  i.  74,  142; 
on  thought-transference,  i.  94;  ii. 
332;  on  Theosophy,  ii.  176;  found- 
ing of,  ii.  177;  on  slate-writing,  ii. 
206  seq. ;  on  census  of  hallucinations, 
ii.  247,  251 

Psychological  Society,  the,  ii.  170 

Putnam,  Allen,  i.  280 

Puysegur,  i.  54,  57,  58,  60-2,  66,  112, 
132 

Randolph,  P.  B.,  American  medium, 

ii.  23,  26 
Rapping,  i.  102;  descriptions  of,  i.  189; 

investigated   by   Buffalo   doctors,   i. 

184 ;    machinery   for    producing,    i, 

188;  at  Hydesville,  i.   173  seq.;  in 

England,  ii.  4 
Rappists,  the,  i.  218 
Rapport,  between  witch  and  her  victim, 

i.  22 ;  between  physician  and  patient, 

372 

INDEX 

i.  46-7;    in  Animal    Magnetism,  i. 

60-1,  65,  69,  73,  98;  in  Spiritualism, 

i.  192 
Rayleigh,  Lord,  ii.  89,  160,  205 
Recognition,  at  materialisation  seances, 

ii.  1 14-16, 249 ;  of  spirit  photographs, 

ii.  117  seq, ;  of  Mrs.  Piper's  controls, 

ii.  342-4 
Rehn,  Isaac,  on  levitation,  i.  243 
Reichenbach,    Baron   von,    i.    I17-20, 

132;  ii.  330 
Reincarnation,  ii.  i6i,  315  seq. 
Religious  aspect  of  Spiritualism,  ii.  352 
Reverie,  induced,  ii.  294 
Ribot,  on  fallaciousness  of  memory,  ii. 

211;  on  physical  basis  of  conscious- 
ness, ii.  355 
Rich,  Elihu,  ii.  32 
Richet,    Charles,    ii.     178,    292;    on 

Eusapia  Paladino,  ii.  198,  203 
Richmond,  B.  W.,  i.  203,  236  seq.,  250 
Rita,  exposure  of,  ii.  iii 
Rivail,  M.     See  Allan  Kardec 
Roberts,  Mrs.,  rapping  medium,  ii.  4, 

5,  19 
Robertson,   Dr.  Lockhart,  his  seance 

with  Squire,  ii.  51-2 
Rochester,  N.Y.,  i.  179,  182,  183 
Rogers,  Dawson,  ii.  177 
Rogers,  Dr.  E.  C,  i.  203,  250;  ii.  35; 

his  Philosophy  of  Mysterious  Agents, 

i.  288 
Romer,  Dr.,  i.  198 

Rondi,  Signor,  on  a  case  of  materiali- 
sation, ii.  105 
Rosicrucians,  i.  14 
Ruggles,    A.   D.,    American  medium, 

i.  261 
Rymer,  J.   S.,  ii.    25,  225,   230;  his 

sitting  with  Home,  233-6 

Saadi,  spirit  of,  ii.  91,  93 

St.  Medard,  Convulsionaries  of,  i.  6  seq. 

St.  Paul,  alleged  communications  from, 

i.  268,  295 
Salem  witches,  i.  17,  19,  21,  22 
Sandby,  Rev.  G.,  i.  128,  131,  146;  on 

table-turning,  ii.  il 
Scents,    introduction    of,     at    Moses' 

seances,  ii.  278 
Scott,   J.   D.,   i.   204;   and  Mountain 

Cove  Community,  i.  295  seq. 
Scottish  Review  on  table-turning,  ii. 

21,  22 
Scratching  bed  with  toes,  i.  23,  26-7,  3 1 
Seeress  of  Prevorst,  i.  99-109 
Sexton,  George,  ii.  169 
Seybert  Commission  on  Spiritualism, 

ii.  194-5 
Shakers  and  Spiritualism,  i.  209 

Shakespeare,  alleged  communications 
from,  i.  272-3 

Shaler,  Professor,  his  sitting  with  Mrs. 
Piper,  ii.  333-5 

Shaw,  Rev.  C.  J.  M.,  on  a  case  of 
alleged  elongation,  ii.  259-61 

Shekinah,  the,  i.  204,  236 

Shorter,  Thomas,  ii.  34-5,  44,  163 

Showers,  Miss,  ii.  76,  78,  99-102;  ex- 
posure of,  ii.  104 

SidgwJck,  Professor  Henry,  ii.  90, 177; 
on  private  mediumship,  ii.  272 ;  on 
disinterested  fraud,  ii.  273 

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry,  ii.  178,  205, 
292;  on  spirit  photographs,  ii.  124; 
on  de  Gasparin's  experiments,  ii. 
187;  on  Eusapia  Paladino,  ii.  200; 
on  Mrs.  Piper,  ii.  336,  346 

Signatures,  doctrine  of,  i.  45 

Sinnett,  A.  P.,  ii.  175 

Slade,  Dr.,  his  slate-writing,  ii.  87i-if^. ; 
204-5,  271 ;  prosecution  of,  ii.  290; 
sittings  with  Zollner,  ii.  190-3 ; 
his  evasion  of  tests,  ii.  192-3;  the 
Seybert  Commission  on,  ii.  195;  ex- 
posure by  Truesdell,  ii.  216 

Slate- writing,  i.  248;  ii.  204  seq.  ; 
various  methods  employed,  ii.  221 

Slawensik  Poltergeist,  i.  28-9 

Sleep,  as  deviation  from  sanity,  ii.  294; 
at  distance,  induction  of,  i.  135-6 

Smith,  Clifford,  his  recognition  of 
fiancee  at  a  seance,  ii.  115 

Smith,  G.  A. ,  his  seance  with  Eglinton, 
ii.  213-15 

Socialism,  its  connection  with  Spiritual- 
ism, i.  164,  166,  169,  172-6,  20^ seq., 
292;  ii.  42 

Solomons  and  Stein,  experiments  in 
motor-automatism,  ii.  301 

Sorcery,  accusations  of,  i.  64,  79 

Space  of  four  dimensions,  ii.  191-3 

Spear,  John  Murray,  i.  214  seq.,  218, 
292 ;  ii.  22 ;  his  inspirational  writ- 
ings, i.  274  seq. ;  his  missions  of  heal- 
ing, i.  281,  294;  and  the  new  motor, 
i.  298  seq. 

Speer,  Mr.  Charlton,  ii.  276,  282 

Speer,  Dr.  Stanhope,  ii.  115,  169,  275 
seq. 

Spheres,  spiritual,  i.  301 

Spicer,  Henry,  i.  189;  account  of  a 
seance,  i.  193;  his  seance  with 
Foster,  ii.  53-4 

Spirit-control  as  excuse  for  fraud,  i. 
200,  285 

Spirit,  material  nature  of,  i.  301-2 ;  ii. 
16,  171-4 

Spirit  Teachings,  by  W.  S.  Moses,  ii. 
283-6 

INDEX 

373 

Spiritual  counterparts,  i.  294 

Spiritual  Herald,  ii.  23,  32 

Spiritual  Magazine,  ii.  163 

Spiritual  Notes,  ii.  177 

Spiritual  Philosopher,  on  Stratford  Pol- 
tergeist, i.  196,  204  seq. 

Spiritual  Telegraph  (N.Y.),  i.  204,  248 

Spiritualism  at  Stockholm  in  1788,  i. 
76;  in  France,  i.  78-91 ;  in  Germany, 
1,92-110;  characteristics  of  American 
movement,  i.  299  seq. ;  attitude  to 
Christianity,  i.  299;  legislation 
against,  in  America,  i.  305 ;  memo- 
rial to  Congress,  U.S.A.,  i.  306; 
slow  progress  in  England,  ii.  I,  43, 
45 ;  religious  aspect  of,  ii.  352 ;  de- 
cline of,  in  England,  ii.  354 ;  evidence 
for,  ii.  354  seq. 

Spiritualist,  the,  ii.  108,  168,  177 

Spiritualists,  numbers  of,  i.  291,  303 

Squire,  J.  R.  M.,  seance  with,  ii.  51 

Starr,  Frank,  his  visions,  ii.  40-1 

Stein  and  Solomons,  their  experiments 
in  motor-automatism,  ii.  301 

Stevenson,  R.  L.,  a  case  of  hallucina- 
tion, ii.  250-1 

Stewart,  Professor  Balfour,  ii.  141, 177, 
238 

Stewart,  Dr.  Duncan,  i.  125 

Stock,  Mr.  St.  George,  ii.  107;  on 
religion  of  Spiritualism,  ii.  167 ;  ac- 
count of  a  seance,  ii.  246-7,  252 

Stockholm,  Spiritualists  at,  in  1788, 
i.  76 

Stockwell  Poltergeist,  i.  27-8 

Stomach,  seeing  with,  i.  61,  63-4,  74 

Stone,  the  electro-biologist,  ii.  4 

Stone-throwing  in  witchcraft,  i.  23 ;  in 
somnambulism,  i.  102-3 

Stoney,  Dr.  J.  G.,  a  case  of  hallucina- 
tion, ii.  251 

Stratford  (Conn.)  Poltergeist,  i.  194  seq. 

Subconscious  muscular  action  as  ex- 
planation of  table-turning,  ii.  8  seq. 

Subliminal  consciousness,  Mr.  Myers' 
views  on,  ii.  358-9 

Suggestion,  i.  67,  119-20;  post  hyp- 
notic, ii.  323  seq. 

Sun-circles,  i,  107-8 

Sunderland, .  Laroy,  i.  129,  154,  168, 
204  seq.,  217,  225;  his  theory  of 
Pathetism,  i.  156-8,  173;  on  Strat- 
ford Poltergeist,  i.  196-8;  on  levita- 
tion,  i.  243 ;  his  attitude  to  Christi- 
anity, i.  300 

Swedenborg,  Emanuel,  i.  15,  ^^6,  78, 
81,  95,  109,  158,  166,  172,  192,  209, 
268, 271 ;  Swedenborgianism,  its  rela- 
tion to  Spiritualism,  i.  291,  300;  ii. 
23,  32,  37 

Symons,  Miss,  her  seance  with  Eglin- 

ton,  ii.  212 
Sympathetic  medicine,  i.  46-8 
Szapary,  ii.  161 

Table-tilting,  Home's  performance,  i. 

243;  ii.  28,  241-2 
Table-turning,  ii.  7  ^^1' 
Tahiti,  fire-ordeal  in,  ii.  265 
Taine  on  hallucination,  ii.  248 
Tallmadge,  Governor,  i.  228,  272  seq. , 

303 
Tamlin,  Mrs.,  i.  182,  202,  227 
Tanchou,  Dr.,   on   Angelique  Cottin, 

i.  41-2 
Tappan,    Mrs.,    i.    265;    her   trance- 
speaking,  ii.  134-9 
Tardy  de  Montravel,  i.  61,  6^,  79,  92 
Tebb,  Mrs.  W.,  a  case  of  fire-ordeal, 

ii.  264 
Tedworth,  the  Drummer  of,  i.  26-7 
Telegraphy,  spiritual,  i.  252-3 
Telepathy,  evidence  for,  ii.  332 ;  defini- 
tion of,  ii.   359-60.     See  Thought- 
transference 
Templeton,   J.   M.,    his   seance    with 

Eglinton,  ii.  213-15 
Theobald,   Miss,    her  trance-writings, 

ii-  133 

Theobald,  Morell,  ii.  75,  177;  on  his 
experiences,  ii.  91-4 

Theosophical  Society,  ii.  I7S-6,  178 

Theosophy,  i.  107 

Thompson,  Mrs.,  ii.  357 

Thought-transference,  i.  5-6,  9;  in 
witchcraft,  i.  23;  in  alchemy,  i.  47; 
in  magnetic  trance,  i.  63,  65,  69,  70, 
85.  87,  90,  93,  94,  no,  133,  140, 
150;  by  mediums,  i.  190  seq.,  242, 
251;  ii.  176,  182,  329;  Professor 
Barrett  on,  ii.  159 

Threads,  use  of,  in  conjuring  tricks, 
ii.  241-2,  272-3 

Thury,  Professor,  ii.  161 ;  his  experi- 
ments, ii.  187-8 

Tiffany,  Joel,  i.  292,  300,  303  __ 

Tivies  on  Davenport  Brothers,  ii.  57-8 ; 
on  Foster's  mediumship,  ii.  53;  on 
need  of  investigating  Spiritualism, 
ii.  140 

Tissie  on  dreams  prompting  to  action, 
ii.  322 

Tolmaque,  his  imitation  of  the  Daven- 
port Brothers,  ii.  59-60 

"Tongues,"  speaking  and  writing  in, 
i.  4-1 1,  207,  257  seq.;  ii.  34,  37-9, 
73,  304-S 

Touch,  sense  of,  its  fallibility,  ii.  197 

Tout,  C.  H.,  his  experiences,  ii.  302-4, 
355 ;  on  day-dreaming,  ii.  309 

374 

INDEX 

Townshend,  Rev.  C,  i.  Ii6,  121,  124, 
128,  131;  ii.  330;  experiments  of, 
i.  135,  137,  142;  testimony  to  clair- 
voyance, i.    147;   on   table-turning, 

ii.  9 

Transference  of  sensibility,  ii.  330 

Tremblers    of    the    Cevennes.      See 
Cevennes 

Truesdell,  J.  W.,  his  Bottoni  Facts 
concernmg  Spiritualism,  ii.  85,  114; 
his  imitation  of  slate-writing,  ii.  216 

Turketine,  Master  Willie,  ii.  64 

Tylor,  E.  B.,  ii.  238 

Tyndall,  Professor,  ii.  141,  145;  ac- 
count of  a  seance,  ii.  147 

Underbill,   Mrs.  (Leah  Fox),  i.    179, 

181 
Univercalum,   i.    171-6,    203-4,   218; 

ii-  351 
Universalism  and  Spiritualism,  i.  217 
seq.  ;  ii.  35 1 

Van  Ghert,  a  case  of  clairvoyance,  i.  93 

Varley,  Cromwell,  ii.  71,  145,  151,  174; 

his  experiments  with  Miss  Cook,  ii. 

^56-7  .... 
Veitch,  his  inspirational  poetry,  ii.  139 
Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  her  experiences 

in  crystal-seeing,  ii.  295-7 
Visions  in  trance,  i.  280-1 
Volckman,  ii.  79 ;  exposes  Miss  Cook, 

ii.  103,  152 

Wakley,  Thomas,  i.  114-15,  1 24 
Wallace,  Dr.  A.  R.,  ii.  147,  151,  238; 

on  clairvoyance,   ii.   126;   on   Mrs. 

Guppy,  ii.  65-7 
Ward,  Mr.  Squire,  i.  1 26 
Warner,  Abby,  i.  304 

Washington,  spirit  of,  i.  268,  269 

Wedgwood,  Hensleigh,  ii.  170,  209, 
212 

Werner,  Heinrich,  i.  104 

Wesermann,  i.  94,  no 

Wesley,  John,  and  the  Epworth  Polter- 
geist, i.  32-9 ;  ii.  349 

Wesley,  Samuel,  account  of  the  Epworth 
disturbances,  i.  34 

Wild,  Hannah,  and  Mrs.  Piper,  ii.  346 

Wilkinson,  J.  Garth,  i.  210;  ii.  25,  36, 
225,  230 

Wilkinson,  W.  M.,  ii.  39-40,  44,  163, 
263 

Will,  action  of,  in  hypnotism,  i.  57>  65, 

73 
Williams,  Abigail,  and  Salem  witches, 

i.  21 
Williams,  Charles,  ii.  63,  76,  "J^  seq., 

97,   104,  no,  275;  exposure  of,  ii. 

Ill 
Wisconsin  Phalanx,  i.  2 10  seq. 
Witchcraft,  i.  16-24 
Witch  confessions,  i.  16- 1 8 
Witch-marks,  i.  16,  20 
Wood,   Miss,    ii.    105,    108;    author's 

experience  with,   ii.   112;  exposure 

of,  ii.  113 
Writing,  automatic,  i.  264  seq, ;  ii.  4, 

19,  20,  31  seq. 
Writing  on  arm  by  Foster,  ii.  55 
Wyld,  Dr.  George,  ii.  87,  176,  177 
Wynne,  Captain,  ii.  255-6 

Yorkshire  Spiritual  Telegraph,  ii.  23 

Zoisi,  i.   115,   120,  121,  124,  128,  130, 

131,  154;  ii.  3,  5 
Zdllner,  Professor,  his  experiments  with 

Slade,  ii.  190-3 

PLYMOUTH 

WILLIAM   BRENDON  AND  SON 

PRINTERS 

A  CATALOGUE  OF  BOOKS 

AND    ANNOUNCEMENTS    OF 

METHUEN  AND  COMPANY 

PUBLISHERS  :  LONDON 

36  ESSEX  STREET 

WC. 

CONTENTS 

ANNOUNCEMENTS,      . 
GENERAL   LITERATURE,  . 

METHUEN'S  STANDARD  LIBRARY, 

BYZANTINE  TEXTS, 

LITTLE  LIBRARY,    . 

LITTLE  GUIDES,       . 

LITTLE  BIOGRAPHIES, 

LITTLE  BLUE  BOOKS 

LIBRARY  OF  DEVOTION, 

OXFORD  COMMENTARIES, 

HANDBOOKS  OF  THEOLOGY 

churchman's   LIBRARY, 

churchman's  BIBLE,      . 

8-27 
27 
27 
28 
28 
28 
29 
29 
29 
29 
29 
30 

PAGE 

LEADERS  OF  RELIGION,              .           .  30 

SOCIAL  QUESTIONS  OF  TO-DAY,      .  30 

UNIVERSITY  EXTENSION  SERIES,    .  3I 

COMMERCIAL  SERIES,      .           .           .  3I 

CLASSICAL  TRANSLATIONS,    .            ,  3I 

SCHOOL  EXAMINATION  SERIES,        .  32 
METHUEN's   junior  SCHOOL-BOOKS,       32 

TEXTBOOKS  OF  TECHNOLOGY,          .  32 

FICTION, 32-38 

THE  FLEUR  DE  LIS  NOVELS,  .            .  39 

BOOKS  FOR  BOYS  AND  GIRLS,             .  40 

THE  NOVELIST,         ....  40 

METHUEN's  SIXPENNY  LIBRARY,    .  40 

OCTOBER   1902 

October  1902 

Messrs.    Methuen's 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

THE  COMPLETE  WORKS  OF  CHARLES  LAMB.     Edited 

by  E.  V.  Lucas.     With  numerous  Illustrations.     In  Seven  Volumes. 

Demy  2ivo.     "js.  6d.  each. 

This  new  edition  of  the  works  of  Charle    and  Mary  Lamb,  in  five  volumes  (to  be 

followed  by   two   volumes  containing   the   Letters),   will   be  found   to  contain   a 

large  quantity  of  new  matter  both  in  prose  and  verse — several  thousand  words  in 

all.     Mr.  E.  V.  Lucas,  the  editor,  has  attempted  in  the  notes,  not  only  to  relate 

Lamb's  writings  to  his  life,  but  to  account  for  all  his  quotations  and  allusions — 

an  ideal  of  thoroughness  far  superior  to  any  that  previous  editors  have  set  before 

themselves.     A  Life  of  Lamb  by  Mr.  Lucas  will  follow  next  year. 

THE   LIFE  AND    LETTERS   OF  OLIVER   CROMWELL. 

By  Thomas  Carlyle.     With  an  Introduction  by  C.  H.  Firth, 

M.A,,  and  Notes  and  Appendices  by  Mrs.  S.  C.  Lomas.      Three 

Volumes,     6s.  each.  [Meihuen^s  Standard  Library. 

This  edition  is  brought  up  to  the  standard  of  modern  scholarship  by  the  addition  of 

numerous  new  letters  of  Cromwell,  and  by  the  correction  of  many  errors  which 

recent  research  has  discovered. 

CRITICAL  AND  HISTORICAL  ESSAYS.  By  LORD 
Macaulay.  Edited  by  F.  C.  Montague,  M.A.  Three  Volumes. 
Crown  Zvo.     6s.  each.  {3Iethuen's  Standard  Library. 

The  only  edition  of  this  book  completely  annotated. 

IN  MEMORIAM,  MAUD,  AND  THE  PRINCESS.  Edited 
by  J.  Churton  Collins,  M.A.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

[Alethuen's  Standard  Library. 

THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION.  By  Thomas  Carlyle. 
Edited  by  C.  R.  L.  Fletcher,  Fellow  of  Magdalen  College,  Oxford. 
Three  Volumes.     Crown  Svo.     6s.  each. 

\_Methuen^s  Standard  Library. 
This  edition  is  magnificently  equipped  with  notes. 

LORD  STRATHCONA:  The  Story  of  His  Life.  By 
Beckles  Willson.     Illustrated.     Demy  Svo.     "js.  6d. 

OTHELLO.    Edited  by  H.  C.  Hart.    Demy  Svo.    ss.  6d. 

[The  Arden  Shakespeare. 

ROBERT  HARLEY,  EARL  OF  OXFORD.     By  E.  S.  ROSCOE. 

Illustrated.     Demy  8710.     "js.  6d. 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Announcements        3 

WALTER  RALEIGH.  By  Miss  J.  A.  Taylor.  With  12 
Illustrations.     Cloth,  y.  6d.  ;  leather,  45.  net, 

[Little  Biographies. 

LORD  TENNYSON.  By  A.  C.  Benson,  M.A.  .  With  12 
Illustrations.     Cloth,  y.  6d.  ;  leather,  /[s.  itet. 

[Little  Biographies. 

ERASMUS.  By  E.  F.  H.  Capey.  With  Illustrations.  Cloth, 
3^.  6d. ;  leather,  4J  net.  [Little  Biographies. 

CHRISTMAS  BOOKS.  By  W.  M.  Thackeray.  Edited  by 
Stephen  Gwynn.     Pott  8vo,  cloth,  \s.  6d.  net ;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 

[The  Little  Library, 

ESMOND.  By  W.  M.  Thackeray.  Edited  by  Stephen 
Gwynn.  Two  Volumes.  Fott^vo,  cloth,  is.  bd.  net ;  leather,  2s.  6d. 
net.  [The  Little  Library. 

CHRISTMAS  BOOKS.  By  Charles  Dickens.  Edited  by 
Stephen  Gwynn.  Two  Volumes.  Pott  8vo,  cloth,  is.  6d.  net ; 
leather,  zs.  6d.  net.  [  The  Little  Library. 

THE  INGOLDSBY  LEGENDS.  Edited  by  J.  B.  Atlay. 
Two  Volumes.     PottZvo,  cloth,  is.  6d.  net ;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 

[The  Little  Library. 

A  LITTLE  BOOK  OF  ENGLISH  SONNETS.  Edited  by 
J.  B.  B.  Nichols.     Pott  Svo,  cloth,  is.  6d.  net ;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 

[  The  Little  Library. 

THE  SCARLET  LETTER.  By  Nathaniel  Hawthorne. 
Edited  by  Percy  Dearmer.  PottZvo,  cloth,  is.  6d.  net ;  leather, 
2s.  6d.  net. 

[The  Little  Library. 

THE  INHERITANCE.  By  Susan  Ferrier.  Two  Volumes. 
Pott  Svo,  cloth,  IS.  6d.  net ;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 

[The  Little  Library. 

PARIS.     By  HiLAiRE  Belloc.      Illustrated.     Crown  Zvo.     bs. 

CORNWALL.  By  A.  L.  Salmon.  Illustrated  by  B.  C. 
Boulter.     Pott  8vo,  cloth,  y.  ;  leather,  2^.  6d.  net, 

[  The  Little  Guides. 

KENT.  By  G.  Clinch.  Illustrated  by  F.  D.  Bedford. 
Pott  Svo,  cloth,  y.  ;  leather,  3^.  60'.  net.  [  The  Little  Guides. 

BRITTANY.  By  S.  Baring  -  Gould.  Illustrated  by  J. 
Wylie.     Pott  Svo,  cloth,  31.  ;  leather,  y.  6d.  net. 

[The  Little  Guides. 

THE  ENGLISH  LAKES.  By  F.  G.  Brabant,  M.A.  Illus- 
trated by  E.  H.  New.     Pott  Svo,  cloth  i^s.  ;  leather,  4^.  bd.  net 

[The  Little  Guides. 

4         Messrs.  Methuen's  Announcements 

ON  COMMANDO.  By  D.  S.  van  Warmelo.  With  Portrait. 
Crown  Zvo.     3^  (id. 

THE  BRUNT  OF  THE  WAR.  By  Emily  Hobhouse.  With 
Map  and  Illustrations.     Crown  Svo. 

THE  HEART  OF  JAPAN.     By  C.  L.  Brownell.    Illustrated. 
Crown  Svo.     6s. 
A  lively  description  of  Japan  and  the  Japanese. 

OLD  PICTURE-BOOKS.  By  A.  W.  Pollard,  M.A.  With 
many  Illustrations.     Demy  Svo.     ys.  6d.  net. 

A  KEY  TO  THE  TIME  ALLUSIONS  IN  THE  DIVINE 
COMEDY.     By  G.  Pradeau.    With  a  Dial.    Small  quarto,    y.  6d. 

THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  PERSIA.  By  Captain  Donald 
Stuart.     With  a  Map.     Crown  Svo.     6j. 

THE   VISIT   TO    LOxNDON.     Described  in  verse  by  E.  V. 

Lucas,  and  in  coloured  pictures  by  F.  D.  Bedford.     Small  ^0.    6s, 

This  charming  book  describes  the  introduction  of  a  country  child  to  the  delights  and 

sights  of  London.     It  is  the  result  of  a  well-known  partnership  between  author  and 

artist. 

THE  BOOK  OF  THE  COUNTRY  AND  THE  GARDEN. 
By  H.  M.  Batson.  Illustrated  by  F.  Carruthers  Gould  and  A. 
C.  Gould.     Demy  Svo.     los.  6d. 

MODERN  SPIRITUALISM.      By  Frank  PODMaRE.      Two 

Volumes,     Svo.     21s.  net. 

ANCIENT  COFFERS  AND  CUPBOARDS  :  Their  History 
and  Description.  With  many  Illustrations.  By  Fred  Roe. 
Quarto.     £2,  V-  «^'^- 

THE  INNER  AND  MIDDLE  TEMPLE.  By  H.  H.  L. 
Bellot,  M.A.     With  numerous  Illustrations.     Crown  Svo.    6s.  net. 

sidelights  ON  THE  GEORGIAN  PERIOD.  By  George 
Paston.     With  many  illustrations.     Demy  Svo.      los.  6d. 

THE  AUTOBIOGRAPHY  OF  A  'NEWSPAPER  GIRL.'  By 
Elizabeth  L.  Banks,  Author  of  '  Campaigns  of  Curiosity. '  With 
Portrait.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

THE  DEVOTIONS  OF  ST.  ANSELM.      Edited  by  C.  C.  J. 

Webb,  M.  A.     Pott  Svo,  cloth,  2s.  ;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 

[  The  Library  of  Devotion. 

THE  DEVOTIONS  OF  BISHOP  ANDREWES.     By  F.  E. 

Brightman,  M.A. ,  of  Pusey  House,  Oxford.      Crown  Svo.     6s. 

THE  AMERICAN  COTTON  INDUSTRY  :  A  Study  in  Work 
and  Workers.  By  T.  M.  YouNG.  Crown  Svo,  cloth,  2s,  6d.;  paper 
boards,  \s,  6d. 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Announcements         5 

COMPARATIVE  THEOLOGY.     By  J.  A.  MacCulloch. 

CrcwnSvo.     6s.  \The  Churchman^ s  Library. 

SECOND  STRINGS.  By  A.  D.  Godley,  M.A.  F'cap.  Zvo. 
2s.  6d. 

A  volume  of  light  verse. 

Educational    Books 

DESIGNING  AND  WEAVING.  By  A.  F.  Barker.  Illus- 
trated.    Demy  Zvo. 

AGRICULTURAL  GEOLOGY.  By  J.  E.  Marr,  F.R.S.  With 
numerous  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo. 

ARITHMETIC  AND  MENSURATION  FOR  THE  WORK- 
SHOP AND  TECHNICAL  SCHOOL.  By  C.  T.  Millis, 
M.I.M.E.,  Principal  of  the  Borough  Polytechnic  College.  With 
Diagrams.     Crown  Svo. 

EASY  DICTATION  AND  SPELLING.  By  W.  Williamson, 
B.A.,  Headmaster  of  the  West  Kent  Grammar  School,  Brockley. 
jFca/>.  Svo.     IS, 

THE  ROSE  READER.  By  Edward  Rose.  With  Four 
coloured  and  other  Illustrations.  Crown  Svo.  2s.  6d.  And  in  4 
Parts.     Parts  I.  and  11.,  6d.  each;  Part  in.,  Sd.  ;  Part  IV.,  lod. 

JUNIOR  ENGLISH  EXAMINATION  PAPERS.  By 
W.  Williamson,  B.A.,  Headmaster  West  Kent  Grammar 
School,  Brockley.     Fcap.  Svo.     \s.        [Junior  Examination  Series. 

JUNIOR  ARITHMETIC  EXAMINATION  PAPERS.  By 
W.  S.  Beard,  Headmaster  Modern  School,  Fareham.  Fcap.  Svo. 
is.  \ Junior  Examination  Series, 

THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  Edited  by  A.  E.  Rubie, 
M.A.,  Headmaster  Royal  Naval  School,  Eltham.     Crown  Svo.     2s. 

[Methuen's  Junior  School  Boohs. 

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  LUKE.  Edited  by 
W.  Williamson,  B.A.,  Headmaster  of  the  West  Kent  Grammar 
School,  Brockley.  CrownSvo.    ls.6d.  [Methuen's  Juttior  School  Books. 

A  JUNIOR  FRENCH  GRAMMAR.  By  L.  A.  Sornet  and 
M.  J.  Acatos,  Modern  Language  Masters  at  King  Edward's  School, 
Birmingham.  [Methuen' s /unior  School  Boohs. 

THE  STUDENTS'  PRAYER  BOOK.  Part  i.  Morning 
and  Evening  Prayer  and  Litany,  Edited  by  W.  H. 
Flecker,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,  Headmaster  of  the  Dean  Close  School, 
Cheltenham.      Crown  Svo.     2s.  6d. 

6         Messrs.  Methuen's  Announcements 

A  JUNIOR   CHEMISTRY.     By  E.  A.  Tyler,  B.A.,  F.C.S., 

Science   Master   at   Framlingham  College.     With   73   Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.     2s.  6d.  {Methuen^s  Junior  School  Books. 

JUNIOR  ALGEBRA  EXAMINATION  PAPERS.    By  S.  W. 
Finn,  M.A.     Crown  8vo.     is. 

Zbc  Xittle  :fi3Iue  JBoofts  tor  Cbll5ren 

Edited  by  E.  V.  Lucas. 
Illustrated.     Square  Fcap.  Svo.     2s.  dd. 
Messrs.  Methuen  are  publishing  a  series  of  children's  books  under 
the  above  general  title.     The  new  volumes  are  : 

A  SCHOOL  YEAR.     By  Netta  Syrett. 

THE  PEELES  AT  THE  CAPITAL.     By  T.  Hilbert. 

THE  TREASURE  OF  PRINCEGATE  PRIORY.    By  T.  Cobb. 

Fiction 

TEMPORAL  POWER :  A  Study  in  Supremacy.    By  Marie 

CORELLI.     Crown  8vo.     6s. 
THE  SEA  LADY.     By  H.  G.  Wells.     Crown  Bvo.    6s. 
A  FIVE  YEARS'  TRYST  AND  OTHER  STORIES.     By  Sir 

Walter  Besant.     Crown  8vo.     6s. 
THE    HOLE    IN    THE    WALL.     By  Arthur  Morrison, 

Author  of  *  A  Child  of  the  Jago,'  etc.     Crozvn  8vo.     6s. 
OLIVIA'S  SUMMER.     By  Mrs.  M.  E.  Mann,  Author  of  '  The 

Patten  Experiment.'     Crown  8vo.     6s. 
A  BAYARD  FROM  BENGAL.     By  F.Anstey,  Author  of  Vice 

Versa.'    Illustrated  by  Bernard  Partridge.     Crown  8vo.   y.  6d. 
THE  WHITE  WOLF   AND   OTHER  FIRESIDE  TALES. 

By  '  Q. '     Crown  8vo.     6s. 
THE  RIVER.     By  Eden  Phillpotts.     Crown  8vo    6s. 
A  ROMAN  MYSTERY.   By  Richard  Bagot.    Crown  8vo.  6s. 
JAIR  THE   APOSTATE.     By  A.   G.  Hales.     Illustrated  by 

A.  H.  BUCKLAND.     Crown  8vo.     6s. 
FELIX.      By  R.  Hichens,  Author  of  'Flames,'  etc.      Crown 

8vo.     6s. 
CHILDREN  OF  THE  BUSH.     By  Harry  Lawson.     Crown 

8vo.     6s. 
THE    FOUNDING    OF    FORTUNES.     By  Jane  Barlow, 

Author  of  '  Irish  Idylls.'     Crown  8vo.     6s. 
THE   CREDIT    OF   THE    COUNTY.      By  W.   E.  NORRIS. 

Illustrated  by  N.  Tenison.     Crown  8vo.     6s. 
THE  LIGHTNING  CONDUCTOR:  Being  the  Romance  of  a 

Motor  Car.     By  Mr.  and  Mrs.  C.  N.  Wlliamson.    Crowit  8vo.    6s. 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Announcements        7 

HONEY.    By  Helen  Mathers,  Author  of  '  Comin'  thro'  the 
Rye.'     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

HOLY  MATRIMONY.     By  DOROTHEA  Gerard,  Author  of 
'  Lady  Baby. '     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

MISS  QUILLET.     By  S.  Baring-Gould,  Author  of  'Mehalah.' 
Illustrated  by  G.  Grenville  Manton.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

BARBARA'S   MONEY.    By  Adeline  Sergeant,  Author  of 
•The  Story  of  a  Penitent  Soul.'     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

JIM  TWELVES.    By  W.  F.  Shannon,  Author  of  'The  Mess 
Deck. '     Crown  Svo.     3^.  6d. 

THE    ADVENTURES    OF    SIR    JOHN    SPARROW.      By 
Harold  Begbie.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

THE    FATE   OF   VALSEC.    By  J.   Bloundelle  Burton. 
Crown  Svo.     6s. 

PAPA.     By  Mrs.  C.  N.  Williamson,  Author  of  'The  Barn- 
stormers. '     Crown  Svo.    6s. 

MRS.  CLYDE.     By  Julien  Gordon.     Crown  Zvo.    bs. 

THE    BRANDED    PRINCE.       By    Weatherby    Chesney, 
Author  of 'John  Topp,  Pirate.'     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

A  PRINCESS  OF  THE  HILLS.    By  Mrs.  Burton  Harrison. 
Illustrated.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

THE    TWICKENHAM    PEERAGE.     By  Richard   Marsh, 
Author  of  '  The  Beetle.'     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

THE    PUPPET    CROWN.      By  HAROLD   Macgrath.     Illus- 
trated.    Crown  Svo.    6s. 

WITH  ESSEX   IN    IRELAND.     By  the  Hon.  Emily  Law- 
less.    Cheaper  Edition,     Crown  Svo.     6s. 
A  cheaper  edition  of  a  book  which  won  considerable  popularity  In  a  more  expensive 
form  some  years  ago. 

THE     INCA'S     TREASURE.      By    Ernest     Glanville. 
Illustrated  by  A.  H.  Buckland.     Crown  Svo.    is.  6d. 

Ube  Bovelist 

Messrs.  Methuen  are  issuing  under  the  above  general  title  a  Monthly 
Series  of  Novels  by  popular  authors   at  the   price  of  Sixpence.     Each 
Number  is  as  long  as  the  average  Six  Shilling  Novel. 
No.  XXXII.  THE  KLOOF  BRIDE.    By  Ernest  Glanville. 

/IDetbuen's  Sijpenn^  Xibrar^ 

THE  MILL  ON  THE  FLOSS.    By  George  Eliot. 
PETER  SIMPLE.    By  Captain  Marryat. 
MARY  BARTON.-    By  Mrs.  Gaskell. 
PRIDE  AND  PREJUDICE.   By  Jane  Austen. 
NORTH  AND  SOUTH.    By  Mrs.  Gaskell. 
JACOB  FAITHFUL.    By  Captain  Marryat. 
SHIRLEY.    By  Charlotte  Bronte. 

A  CATALOGUE  OF 

Messrs.    Methuen's 

PUBLICATIONS 

Part  I. — General  Literature 

Jacob  Abbot.  THE  beechnut  BOOK. 
Edited  by  E.  V.  Lucas.  Illustrated. 
Square  Fcap  Zvo.     zs.  6ei. 

[Little  Blue  Books. 

W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.  See  Bennett  and 
Adeney. 

.ffischylus.  AGAMEMNON,  CHOEPHO- 
ROE,  EUMENIDES.  Translated  by 
Lewis  Campbell,  LL.D.,  late  Professor  of 
Greek  at  St.  Andrews.     5J. 

[Classical  Translations. 

G.  A.  Aitken.    See  Swift. 

William  Alexander,  D.D.,  Archbishop  of 

Armagh.  THOUGHTS  AND  COUN- 
SELS OF  MANY  YEARS.  Selected 
from  the  ^vritings  of  Archbishop  Alex- 
ander.    Square  Pott  Zvo.    zs.  6d. 

St.  Anselm,  THE  DEVOTIONS  OF. 
Edited  by  C.  C.  J.  Webb,  M.A.  Pott  Zvo. 
Cloth,  2S.  ;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 

[Library  of  Devotion. 

Aristophanes.  THE  FROGS.  Translated 
into  English  by  E.  W.  Hu.ntingford,  M.A., 
Professor  of  Classics  in  Trinity  College, 
Toronto.     Crown  Zvo.     ss,  6d. 

Aristotle.  THE  NICOMACHEAN 
ETHICS.  Edited,  with  an  Introduction 
and  Notes,  by  John  Burnet,  M.A.,  Pro- 
fessor of  Greek  at  St.  Andrews.  Demy  Zvo. 
1 5 J.  net. 

'We  have  seldom,  if  ever,  seen  an  edition 
of  any  classical  author  in  which  what  is  held 
in  common  with  other  commentators  is  so 
clearly  and  shortly  put,  and  what  is  original 
is  (with  equal  brevity)  of  such  value  and 
interest. ' — Pilot. 

J.  B.  Atldns.  THE  RELIEF  OF  LADY- 
SMITH.  With  16  Plans  and  Illustrations. 
Third  Edition.     Crown  ivo.     6s. 

St.  Augustine,  THE  CONFESSIONS  OF. 
Newly  Translated,  with  an  Introduction 
and  Notes,  by  C.  Bigg,  D.D.,  late  Student 
of  Christ  Church.  Third  Edition.  Pott 
Zvo.     Cloth,  2S  ;  leather,  zs.  6d.  net. 

[  Library  of  Devotion. 

'  The  translation  is  an  excellent  piece  of 

English,  and  the  introduction  is  a  masterly 

exposition.    We  augur  well  of  a  series  which 

begins  so  satisfactorily.' — Times. 

Jane  Austen.  PRIDE  and  preju- 
dice. Edited  by  E.  V.  Lucas.  Tivo 
Volumes.  Pott  Zvo.  Each  volume,  cloth, 
IS.  6d.;  leather,  zs.  6d.  net.  [Little  Library. 

NORTHANGER  abbey.  Edited  by  E. 
V.Lucas.  Pott  Zvo.  Cloth,JS.6d.;  lea/her, 
zs.  6d.  net.  [Little  Librarj-. 

Constance  Bache.  BROTHER  MUSI- 
CIANS. Reminiscences  of  Edward  and 
Walter  Bache.  With  16  Illustrations. 
Crown  Zvo.     ds.  net. 

R.  S.  S.  Baden-Powell,  Major-General. 
THE  DOWNFALL  OF  PREMPEH.  A 
Diary  of  Life  in  Ashanti,  1895.  With  21 
Illustrations  and  a  Map.  Third  Edition. 
Large  Crown  Zvo.     ts. 

THE  MATABELE  CAMPAIGN,  1896. 
With  nearly  100  Illustrations.  Fourth  and 
Cheaper  Edition.    Large  Crown  Zvo.     ts. 

Graham    Balfour.      THE     LIFE     OF 

ROBERT  LOUIS  STEVENSON.  Second 
Edition.  Two  Volumes.  Demy  Zvo,  zy. 
net. 

'  The  biographer  has  performed  his  labour 
of  love  with  exemplary  skill,  with  unfailing 
good  taste,  and  with  an  enthusiastic  admira- 
tion for  the  genius  of  the  writer  and  a  whole- 
souled  affection  for  the  man.' — 

Daily  Telegraph. 

'  The  story  has  all  the  charm  of  a  revela- 
tion. It  is  written  with  admirable  taste  and 
simplicity.'— /'»//  Mall  Gazette. 

General  Literature 

'  Mr.  Balfour  has  done  his  work  extremely 
well — done  it,  in  fact,  as  Stevenson  himself 
would  have  wished  it  done,  with  care  and 
skill  and  affectionate  appreciation.  His 
own  personal  tribute  in  the  last  chapter  of 
the  second  volume  is  an  admirable  piece  of 
writing,  the  tribute  of  a  relative  and  admirer, 
but  none  the  less  faithful  and  discerning.' — 
IVesttninster  Gazette. 

S.  Baring-Gould,  Author  of '  Mehalah,'  etc. 
THE  LIFE  OF  NAPOLEON  BONA- 
PARTE. With  over  450  Illustrations  in 
the  Text,  and  12  Photogravure  Plates. 
Gilt  top.     Large  quarto.     36^. 

'The  main  feature  of  this  gorgeous 
volume  is  its  great  wealth  of  beautiful 
photogravures  and  finely-executed  wood 
engravings,  constituting  a  complete  pic- 
torial chronicle  of  Napoleon  I.'s  personal 
history,' — Daily  Telegraph. 

THE  TRAGEDY  OF  THE  C^SARS. 
With  numerous  Illustrations  from  Busts, 
Gems,  Cameos,  etc.  Fifth  Edition. 
Royal  Zvo.     z$s. 

'A  most  splendid  and  fascinating  book 
on  a  subject  of  undying  interest.^  It  is 
brilliantly  written,  and  the  illustrations  are 
supplied  on  a  scale  of  profuse  magnificence. ' 
— Daily  Chronicle. 

A  BOOK  OF  FAIRY  TALES.  With 
numerous  Illustrations  and  Initial  Letters 
by  Arthur  J.  Gaskin.  Second  Edition. 
Crown  ivo.    Buckram.    6s. 

OLD   ENGLISH  FAIRY  TALES.     With 
numerous  Illustrations  by  F.  D.  Bedford. 
Second  Edition.     Cr.  ?:V0.     Buckram.     6s. 
'A  charming  volume.' — Guardian. 

THE  CROCK  OF   GOLD.     Fairy  Stories. 
Crown  %vo.     ds. 
'Twelve  delightful  fairy  tales.' — Punch. 

THE  VICAR  OF  MORWENSTOW:  A 
Biography.  A  new  and  Revised  Edition. 
With  Portrait.     Crown  ?,vo.     3J.  6d. 

A  completely  new  edition  of  the  well- 
known  biography  of  R.  S.  Hawker. 

DARTMOOR:  A  Descriptive  and  Historical 
Sketch.  With  Plans  and  numerous  Illus- 
trations.    Crown  Sz'o.    6s. 

'  A  most  delightful  guide,  companion  and 
instructor. ' — Scotsman. 

THE  BOOK  OF  THE  WEST.  With 
numerous  Illustrations.  Two  volumes. 
Vol.  I.  Devon.  Second  Edition.  Vol.  11. 
Cornwall.  Second  Edition.  Crown  Zvo. 
6s.  each. 

'  Bracing  as  the  air  of  Dartmoor,  the 
legend  weird  as  twilight  over  Dozmare  Pool, 
they  give  us  a  very  good  idea  of  this  en- 
chanting and  beautiful  district.' — Guardian. 

A 

A  BOOK  OF  BRITTANY.  With  numerous 
Illustrations.     Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

Uniform  in  scope  and  size  with  Mr. 
Baring-Gould's  well-known  books  on  Devon, 
Cornwall,  and  Dartmoor. 

OLD  COUNTRY  LIFE.  With  67  Illustra- 
tions.    Fifth  Edition.    Large  Cr.  Zvo.    6s. 

AN  OLD  ENGLISH  HOME.  With  numer- 
ous Plans  and  Illustrations.    Cr.  Zvo.     6s. 

HISTORIC  ODDITIES  AND  STRANGE 
EVENTS.     Fifth  Edition.     Cr.  Zvo.    6s. 

YORKSHIRE    ODDITIES    AND 

STRANGE    EVENTS.      Fifth  Edition. 
Crown  Zvo.     6s. 
STRANGE  SURVIVALS  AND    SUPER- 
STITIONS.  Second  Edition.    Cr.Zvo.    6s. 

A  GARLAND  OF  COUNTRY  SONG: 
English  Folk  Songs  with  their  Traditional 
Melodies.  Collected  and  arranged  by 
S.  Baring-Gould  and  H.  F.  Sheppard. 
Demy  ^to.    6s. 

SONGS  OF  THE  WEST:  Traditional 
Ballads  and  Songs  of  the  West  of  England, 
with  their  Melodies.  Collected  by  S. 
Baring  -  Gould,  M.A.,  and  H.  F.  Shep- 
pard, M.A.  In  4  Parts.  Parts  I.,  IL, 
in.,  3J.  each.  Part  IV.,  SJ.  In  One 
Volume,  French  Morocco,  151-. 

'  A  rich  collection  of  humour,  pathos, 
grace,and  poetic  fancy.  '—Saturday  Review. 

S.  E.  Bally.  A  FRENCH  COMMERCIAL 
READER.  With  Vocabulary.  Second 
Edition.     Crown  Zvo.    2j. 

[Commercial  Series. 

FRENCH  COMMERCIAL  CORRE- 
SPONDENCE. With  Vocabulary.  Third 
Edition.     Crown  Zvo.     zs- 

[Commercial  Series. 

A  GERMAN  COMMERCIAL  READER. 
With  Vocabulary.     Cro7vn  Zvo.     zs. 

[Commercial  Series. 

GERMAN  COMMERCIAL  CORRE- 
SPONDENCE.  With  Vocabulary.  Crown 
Zzo.     2S.  6d.  [Commercial  Series. 

W.   E.   Barnes,    D.D.     ISAIAH.     Two 

Volumes.     Fcap.  Zvo.  zs.  net  each.   Vol.  i. 
With  Map.  [Churchman's  Bible. 

Mrs.  P.  A.  Barnett.    A  LITTLE  BOOK 

OF      ENGLISH      PROSE.       Pott   Zvo. 

Cloth,  IS.  6d.  net ;    leather,  zs.  6d.  net. 

[Little  Library. 
R.  R.  N.  Baron,  M.A.    FRENCH  PROSE 

COMPOSITION.      Crown    Zvo.    zs.    6d. 

Key,  y.  net. 

H.  M.  Barron,  M.A.,  Wadham  College, 
Oxford.  TEXTS  FOR  SERMONS  ON 
VARIOUS  OCCASIONS  AND  SUB- 
JECTS. With  a  Preface  by  Canon  Scott 
Holland.     Crown  Zvo    y.  6d. 

iO 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Catalogue 

C.  F.  Bastable,  M.  A. ,  Professor  of  Econ- 
omics at  Trinity  College,  Dublin.  THE 
COMMERCE  OF  NATIONS.  Second 
Edition.     Crown  Zvo    2S.  6d. 

[Social  Questions  Series. 

H    M.  BatSOn.     See  Edward  FitzGerald. 

A.  Hulme  Beaman.  PO  N  S  AS  I N  O  RU  M  ; 
OR,  A  GUIDE  TO  BRIDGE.  Second 
Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.     2S. 

A  practical  guide,  with  many  specimen 
games,  to  the  game  of  Bridge. 

Peter  Beckford.  THOUGHTS  ON 
HUNTING.  Edited  by  J.  Otho  Paget, 
and  Illustrated  by  G.  H.  Jalland.  Demy 
8vo.     loj.  6d. 

WiUiam  Beckford.    THE  HISTORY  OF 

THE  CALIPH  VATHEK.  Edited  by  E. 
Denison  Ross.  Pott  Bvo.  Cloth,  is.  6d. 
net;  leather,  zs  6d.  net.       [Little  Library. 

H.  C.  BeecMng,  M.A.     See  Tennyson. 

Jacob  Belunen.  THE  SUPERSENSUAL 
LIFE.  Edited  by  Bernard  Holland. 
Fcaj>.  8vo.     -^s.  6d. 

W.  H.  Bennett,  M.A..  A  PRIMER  OF 
THE  BIBLE.  Second  Edition.  Crown 
Sz'o.      2S.  6d. 

'The  work  of  an  honest,  fearless,  and 
sound  critic,  and  an  excellent  guide  in  a 
small  compass  to  the  books  of  the  Bible.' 
— Manchester  Guardian. 

W.  H.  Bennett   and  W.  F.  Adeney.     A 

BIBLICAL  INTRODUCTION.  Crown 
8i'o.     ys.  6d. 

'  It  makes  available  to  the  ordinary  reader 
the  best  scholarship  of  the  day  in  the  field 
of  Biblical  introduction.  We  know  of  no 
book  which  comes  into  competition  with  it.' 
— Manchester  Guardian. 

k.  C.  Benson.  M.A.  THE  LIFE  OF 
LORD  TENNYSON.  With  12  Illustra- 
tions. Fcap.  8vo.  Cloth,  3.?.  dd.  ;  Leather, 
4J.  net,  [Little  Biographies. 

R.  M.  Benson.  THE  way  of  HOLI- 
NESS: a  Devotional  Commentary  on  the 
119th  Psalm.     Crown  Zvo.     $s. 

M.  Bidez.     See  Parmentier. 

C.  Bigg,  D.  D.  See  St.  Augustine,  X  Kempis, 
and  William  Law. 

C.  R.  D.  Biggs,  B.D.  THE  EPISTLE  TO 
THE  PHILIPPIANS.  Edited  by.  Fcap. 
8vo.    js.6d.net.  [Churchman's  Bible. 

'  Mr.  Biggs'  work  is  very  thorough,  and 
he  has  managed  to  compress  a  good  deal  of 
information  into  a  limited  space.' 

— Guardian. 

T.  Herbert  Bindley,  B.D.     THE  OECU- 
MENICAL  DOCUMENTS    OF    THE 
FAITH.     With  Introductions  and  Notes. 
Croivn  8z'0.     6s. 
A  historical  account  of  the  Creeds. 

William  Blake.     See  Little  Library. 

B.  Blaxland,  M.A.  THE  SONG  OF 
SONGS.  Being  Selections  from  St.  Ber- 
nard. Pott  8vo.  Cloth,  zs.  ;  leather,  zs. 
6d.  net.  [Library  of  Devotion. 

George  Body,  D.D.  THE  SOUL'S  PIL- 
GRIMAGE :  Devotional  Readings  from 
his  published  and  unpublished  writings. 
Selected  and  arranged  by  J.  H.  Born, 
B.D.     Pott8vc.     zs.6d. 

A.  Boisragon,  Captain.  THE  BENIN 
MASSACRE.  Second  Edition.  Crown 
8vo.     -^s.  6d. 

Cardinal  Bona.  A  GUIDE  TO  eter- 
nity. F^dited  with  an  Introduction  and 
Notes,  by  J.  W.  Stan  bridge,  B.D.,  late 
Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Oxford.  Pott 
8vo.     Cloth,  zs. ;  leather,  zs.  6d.  net. 

[Library  of  Devotion. 

F.  C.  Boon,  B.A.  A  commercial 
GEOGRAPHY  OF  FOREIGN- 
NATIONS.     C)-own  8~jo.     zs. 

[Commercial  Series. 

George  Borrow.    LAVENGRO.    Edited 

by  F.  HiNDEs  Groome.  Two  Volumes. 
Pott  8vo.  Each  7'olu}ne,  cloth,  is.  6d.  net ; 
leather,  2S.  6d.  net.  [Little  Library. 

J.  Ritzema  Bos.  AGRICULTURAL 
ZOOLOGY.  Translated  by  J.  R.  Ains- 
WORTH  Davis,  M.A.  With  an  Introduction 
by  Eleanor  A.  Ormerod,  F.E.S.  With 
15s  Illustrations.     Cr.  8vo.     3.?.  6d. 

C.  G.  Botting,  B.A.  JUNIOR  LATIN 
EXAMINATION  PAPERS.  y^cM  8vo.t.s. 

[Junior  Examination  Series. 

E.  M.  Bowden.  THE  EXAMPLE  OF 
BUDDHA  :  Being  Quotations  from 
Buddhist  I/iterature  for  each  Day  in  the 
Year.      Third  Edition.     161110.     zs.  6d. 

E.  Bowmaker.  THE  HOUSING  OF 
THE  WORKING  CLASSES.  Crown 
Sz'O.     zs.  6d.  [Social  Questions  Series. 

F.  G.  Brabant,  M.A.  SUSSEX.  Illus- 
trated by  E.  H.  New.  Pott  8vo.  Cloth, 
y.  ;  leather,  y.  6d.  net.        [Little  Guides. 

'  A  charming  little  book  ;  as  full  of  sound 
information  as  it  is  practical  in  conception." 
— A  thettcpum. 

'  Accurate,  complete,  and  agreeably  writ- 
ten ' — Literature. 

Miss  M.  Brodrick  and  Miss  Anderson 
Morton.  A  CONCISE  HANDBOOK 
OF  EGYPTIAN  ARCHEOLOGY. 
With  many  Illustrations.  Croivn  Svo.  y.Gd. 

General  Literature 

1 1 

E.  W.  Brooks.     See  F.  J.  Hamilton. 

0.  Browning,  M.A.   A  SHORT  HISTORY 

OFJMEDIrEVAL  ITALY,  a.d.  1250-1530. 

In  Two  Volumes.     Crown  Zvo.    5J.  each. 

Vol.  I.  1250-1409. — Guelphs  and  Ghibellines. 

Vol.  II.   1409-1530.— The  Age  of  the  Con- 
dottieri. 
J.  Buchan.     See  Isaak  Walton. 
Miss  BuUey.     See  Lady  Dilke. 

John  Bunyan.    THE  PILGRIM'S  PRO- 
GRESS.      Edited,  with  an  Introduction, 
byC.  H.  FiSTH,  M.A.     With  39  Illustra- 
tions by  R.  Anning  Bell.     Cr.  Svo.     6s. 
'The  best  "  Pilgrim's  Progress.'" — 

Educational  Tintes. 

G.  J.  Burcll,  M.A.,  F.R.S.  A  MANUAL 
OF  ELECTRICAL  SCIENCE.  With 
numerous  Illustrations.     Cromii  Sr'o.     3jr. 

[University  Extension  Series. 

Gelett  Burgess.    GOOPS  and  how  to 

BE  THEM.  With  numerous  Illustrations. 
Small  ^to.     6s. 

E.  Bum,  B.D.,  Examining  Chaplain  to 
the  Bishop  of  Lichfield.  AN  INTRO- 
DUCTION TO  THE  HISTORY  OF 
THE  CREEDS.     Demy  Zvo.     los.  6d. 

[Handbooks  of  Theology. 

'  This  book  may  be  expected  to  hold  its 
place  as  an  authority  on  its  subject.' — 
Spectator. 

J.  H.  Burn,  B.D.,  F.R.S.E.  A  MANUAL 
OF  CONSOLATION  FROM  THE 
SAINTS  AND  FATHERS.  Pott  Zvo. 
Cloth,  IS.  ;   leather,  zs.  6d.  net. 

[Library  of  Devotion. 

Robert  Burns.  THE  POEMS  OF 
ROBERT  BURNS.  Edited  by  Andrew 
Lang  and  W.  A.  Craigie.  With  Portrait. 
Second  Edition.     Demy  Zvo,  gilt  top.     6s. 

J.  B.  Bury,  LL.D.     See  Gibbon. 

Alfred  Caldecott,  D.D.  THE  PH'L- 
OSOPHY  OF  RELIGION  IN  ENG- 
LAND AND  AMERICA.  Demy  Zvo. 
\os.  dd.  [  Handbooks  of  Theology. 

'  Dr.  Caldecott  treats  the  subject  as  we 
have  long  hoped  it  would  eventually  be 
treated.' — Church  Times. 

'  A  lucid  and  informative  account,  which 
certainly  deserves  a  place  in  every  philo- 
sophical library.' — Scotsman. 

D.  S.  CalderWOOd,  Headmaster  of  the  Nor- 
mal School,  Edinburgh.  TEST  CARDS 
IN  EUCLID  AND  ALGEBRA,  In  three 
packets  of  40,  with  Answers.  t.s.  each.  Or 
in  three  Books,  price  id.,  id.,  and  3^. 

R.  M.  and  A.  J.  Carlyle,  M.A.    BISHOP 

LATIMER.  With  Portrait.  Crown  Zvo. 
2S.  6d,  [Leaders  of  Religion. 

C.  C.  Channer  and  M.  E.  Roberts. 
LACE-MAKING  IN  THE  MIDLANDS, 
PAST  AND_  PRESENT.  With  16  full- 
page  Illustrations.     Crown  Zvo.     2s.  6d. 

'  An  interesting  book,  illustrated  by  fasci- 
nating photographs. ' — Speaker. 

Lord  Chesterfield,  THE  LETTERS  OF, 

TO  HIS  SON.  Edited,  with  an  Intro- 
duction, by  C.  Strachey,  and  Notes  by 
A.  Calthrop.  Two  Volumes.  Croiun  Zvo. 
6s.  each.  [Methuen's  Standard  Library. 

F.  W.  Christian.  THE  CAROLINE 
ISLANDS.  With  many  Illustrations  and 
Maps.     Demy  Zvo.     iis.  6d.  net. 

Cicero.     DE  ORATORE  I.     Translated  by 

E.  N.  P.  Moor,  M.A.    Crown  Zvo.    3J.  6d. 

[Classical  Translations. 

SELECT  ORATIONS  (Pro  Milone,  Pro 
Murena,  Philippic  n.,  In  Catilinam).  Trans- 
lated by  H.  E.  D.  Blakist.  n,  M.A.,  Fellow 
and  Tutor  of  Trinity  College,  Oxford. 
Crown  Zvo.     $s.         [Classical  Translations. 

DE  NATURA  DEORUM.  Translated 
by  F.  Brooks,  M.A.,  late  Scholar  of  Balliol 
College,  Oxford.     Crown  Zvo.     3J.  6d. 

[Classical  Translations. 

DE  OFFICIIS.  Translated  by  G.  B. 
Gardiner,  M.A.     Crown  Zvo.     is.  6d. 

[Classical  Translations. 

F.  A.  Clarke,  M.A.  BISHOP  KEN.  With 
Portrait.     Crown  Zz'o.     3 J.  6d. 

[Leaders  of  Religion. 

E.  H.  Colbeck,  M.D.  DISEASES  OF  THE 
HEART.  With  numerous  Illustrations. 
Demy  Zvo.     \2S. 

W.  G.  CoUingWOOd,  I^I.A.  THE  LIFE 
OF  JOHN  RUSKIN.  With  Portraits. 
Cheap  Edition.     Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

J.  C.  Collins,  M.A.     See  Tennyson. 

\V.  E.  Collins.  M.A.  THE  BEGINNINGS 
OF  ENGLISH  CHRISTIANITY.  With 
Map.     Crown  Zvo.     3s.  6d. 

[Churchman's  Library. 

A.  M.  Cook,  M.A.     See  E.  C.  Marchant. 

R.  W.  Cooke-Taylor.    THE  FACTORY 

SYSTEM.     Croivn  Zvo.     is.  6d. 

[Social  Questions  Series. 

Marie  Corelli.  the  passing  of  the 

GREAT_  QUEEN  :  A  Tribute  to  the  Noble 
Life  of  Victoria  Reg  ina.     Small /ito.     ts. 

A  CHRISTMAS  GREETING.   Sm.  ^to.    is. 

Rosemary  Cotes.    DANTE'S  GARDEN. 

With  a  Frontispiece.  Second  Edition. 
Fcap.  Zvo.  cloth  is.  6d.  ;  leather,  ^s.  6d. 
net. 

12 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Catalogue 

Harold  Cox,  B.A.  LAND  NATIONAL- 
IZATION.   Crown  Zvo.    2S.  td. 

[Social  Questions  Series. 

W.  J.  Craig.     See  Shakespeare. 

W.  A.  Craigie.  A  PRIMER  OF  BURNS. 
Crown  ^vo.     ■zs.  6d. 

Mrs.  Craik.  JOHN  HALIFAX,  GEN- 
TLEMAN, Edited  by  Annie  Mathe- 
SON.  T7U0  Volumes.  Pott  Zvo.  Each 
Volume,  Cloth,  is.  td.  net ;  leather,  is.  6d. 
net.  [Little  Library. 

Eichard  Crashaw,  THE  ENGLISH 

POEMS  OF.  Edited  by  Edward  Hut- 
ton.  Potf&vo.  Cloth,  Ts.6d.  net ;  leather, 
2S.  6d.  net.  [Little  Library. 

F.  G.  Crawford.    See  Mary  C.  Danson. 

C.  G.  Crump,  M.A.     See  Thomas  Ellwood. 

F.  H.  E.  Cunliffe,  Fellow  of  All  Souls'  Col- 
lege, Oxford.  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE 
BOER  WAR.  With  many  Illustrations, 
Plans,  and  Portraits.  In  2  vols.  Vol.  l.,i$s. 

E.  L.  Cutts,  D.D.  AUGUSTINE  OF 
CANTERBURY.  With  Portrait.  Crown 
Zvo,     ^s.  6d.  [Leaders  of  Religion. 

The  Brothers  DalzieL     A  RECORD  OF 

FIFTY  YEARS'  WORK.  With  150IIIUS- 
trations.     Large  ^to,    zis.  net. 

The  record  of  the  work  of  the  celebrated 
Engravers,  containing  a  Gallery  of  beauti- 
ful Pictures  by  F.  Walker,  Sir  J.  Millais, 
Lord  Leightonj  and  other  great  Artists. 
The  book  is  a  history  of  the  finest  black-and- 
white  work  of  the  nineteenth  century. 

'  The  book  is  abundantly  illustrated,  and 
shows  what  wood  engraving  was  at  its  best.' 
— Scotsman. 

'  A  store  of  genial  reminiscences.  The 
designs  of  the  various  masters  are  exquisitely 
engraved.  A  worthy  record  of  a  period  that 
is  gone.' — Standard. 

a.  W.  Daniell,  M.A.  BISHOP  WILBER- 
FORCE.  With  Portrait.  Croivn  %vo. 
3j.  dd.  [Leaders  of  Religion. 

Mary  C.  Danson  and  F.  G.  Crawford. 

FATHERS  IN  THE  FAITH.  SmallZvo. 
\s.  6d. 

Dante  Alighieri.     LA  COMMEDIA  DI 

DANTE.  The  Italian  Text  edited  by 
Pagk;t  Toynbee,  Litt.D.,  M.A.  Demy  Zvo. 
Gilt  top,     Zs.  dd.     A  Isa,  Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

[Methuen's  Standard  Library. 

THE  INFERNO  OF  DANTE.  Trans- 
lated by  H.  F.  Cary.  Edited  by  Paget 
Toynbee,  Litt.D.,  M.A.  PottZvo.  Cloth, 
\s.  6d.  net ;  lea-ther,  as,  6d.  net. 

[Little  Library. 

THE  PURGATORIO  OF  DANTE. 
Translated  by  H.  F.  Cary.  Edited  by 
Paget  Toynbee,  Litt.D.,  M.A.  Pott%vo. 
Cloth,  IS.  6d.  net;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 

[Little  Library. 
THE    PARADISO    OF    DANTE.     Trans- 
lated by  H.  F.  Cary.     Edited  by  Paget 
Toynbee,  Litt.D. ,  M.A.    Postivo.    Cloth, 
I  J.  6d.  net ;  leather,  ■zs.  6d.  net. 

[Little  Library. 
See  also  Paget  Toynbee. 

A.  C.  Deane.  Edited  by.  A  LITTLE 
BOOK  OF  LIGHT  VERSE.  Pott  8vo. 
Cloth,  is.  6d.  net ;  leather,  2J.  6d.  net. 

[Little  Library. 
Leon  Delbos.    THE  METRIC  SYSTEM. 
Croi^vn  Zvo.     q.s. 

A  theoretical  and  practical  guide,  for  use 
in  schools  and  by  the  general  reader. 

Demosthenes :      THE     OLYNTHIACS 

AND  PHILIPPICS.  Translated  upon  a 
new  principle  by  Otho  Holland.  Crown 
8vo,    2t,  6d. 

Demosthenes.    AGAINST  CONON  AND 

CALLICLES.  Edited  with  Notes  and 
Vocabulary,  by  F.  Darwin  Swift,  M.A. 
Pea/,  Zvo,    2S, 

Charles  Dickens. 

THE  ROCHESTER  EDITION. 

Crown  Zvo.    Each  Volume,  cloth,  3J.  dd. 

With  Introductions  by  George  Gissing, 

Notes  by  F.  G.  Kitton,  and  Topographical 

Illustrations. 

THE  PICKWICK  PAPERS.  With  Illustra- 
tions by  E.  H.  New.     Two  Volumes. 

'  As  pleasant  a  copy  as  any  one  could 
desire.  The  notes  add  much  to  the  value  of 
the  edition,  and  Mr.  New's  illustrations  are 
also  historical.  The  volumes  promise  well 
for  the  success  of  the  edition.' — Scotsman. 

NICHOLAS  NICKLEBY.  With  Illustra- 
tions by  R.  J.  Williams.     Two  Volu?nes. 

BLEAK  HOUSE.  With  Illustrations  by 
Beatrice  Alcock.     Two  Volumes. 

OLIVER  TWIST.  With  Illustrations  by  E. 
H.  New. 

THE  OLD  CURIOSITY  SHOP.  With 
Illustrations  by  G.  M.  Brimelow.  Two 
Volumes. 

BARNABY  RUDGE.  With  Illustrations  by 
Beatrice  Alcock.     Two  Volumes. 

G.  L.  Dickinson,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  King's 
College,  Cambridge.  THE  GREEK  VIEW 
OF  Life.  Second  Edition.  Crown  Zvo. 
2S.  6d.  [University  Extension  Series. 

H.  N.  Dickson.  F.R.S.E.,  F.R.Met.  Soc. 
METEOROLOGY.  The  Elements  of 
Weather  and  Climate.  Illustrated.  Crown 
ivo.    2s.  6d.    [University  Extension  Series, 

General  Literature 

13 

Lady  Dilke,  Miss  Bulley,  and  Miss  Whit- 
ley. WOMEN'S  WORK.  Crown  8w. 
2f.  dd.  [Social  Questions  Series. 

P.  H.  Ditchfield,  M.A.,  F.S.A.   ENGLISH 

VILLAGES.    Illustrated.     Crown  Zvo.   6s, 
'A  book  which  for  its    instructive  and 
pictorial  value  should  find  a  place  in  every 
village  library.' — Scotsman. 

'  One  of  the  best  books  on  village  anti- 
quities we  have  seen.' — Outlook. 

THE  STORY  OF  OUR  ENGLISH 
TOWN  S.  With  Introduction  by 
Augustus  Jessop,  D.D.  Second  Edition. 
Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

OLD  ENGLISH  CUSTOMS:  Extant  at 
the  Present  Time.  An  Account  of  Local 
Observances,  Festival  Customs,  and  Ancient 
Ceremonies  yet  Surviving  in  Great  Britain. 
Crown  Svo     6s, 

W.  M.  Dixon,  M.A.  A  PRIMER  OF 
TENNYSON.  Second  Edition.  Cro-.vn 
Zvo.    2S.  6d, 

'  Much  sound  and  well-expressed  criticism. 
The  bibliography  is  a  boon.' — Speaker, 

ENGLISH  POETRY  FROM  BLAKE  TO 
BROWNING.  Second  Edition.  Crown 
Zvo,     zs,  6d. 

[University  Extension  Series. 

E.  Dowden,  Litt.D.     See  Shakespeare. 

J.  Dowden,  D.D.,  Lord  Bishop  of  Edin 
burgh.  THE  WORKMANSHIP  OF 
THE  PRAYER  BOOK:  Its  Literary 
and  Liturgical  Aspects.  Second  Edition. 
Crown  Zvo.     3J.  6d. 

[Churchman's  Library. 

S.  R.  Driver.,  D.D.,  Canon  of  Christ  Church, 
RegiusProfessorofHebrew  in  the  University 
of  Oxford.  SERMONS  ON  SUBJECTS 
CONNECTED  WITH  THE  OLD 
TESTAMENT.     CrawnZvo.    6s. 

'  A  welcome  companion  to  the  author's 
famous  "Introduction."' — Guardian, 

S.  J.  Duncan  (Mrs.  Cotes),  Author  of 
'A  Voyage  of  Consolation.'  ON  THE 
OTHER     SIDE     OF     THE     LATCH. 

Second  Edition,    Crown  Sr'c.     6s. 

J.  T.  Dunn,  D.Sc,  and  V.  A.  Mundella. 

GENERAL  ELEMENTARY  SCIENCE. 

With  114  Illustrations.    Crown  Zvo.    3^.  6rf. 

[Methuen's  Science  Primers. 

The  Earl  of  Durham.   A  report  ON 

CANADA.     With  an  Introductory  Note. 
Demy  Zvo.    -js.  6d.  net, 

A  reprint  of  the  celebrated  Report  which 
Lord  Durham  made  to  the  British  Govern- 
ment on  the  state  of  British  North  America 
in  1839.  It  is  probably  the  most  important 
utterance  on  British  colonial  policy  ever 
published. 

W.  A.  Dutt,  NORFOLK.  Illustrated  by 
B.  C.  Boulter.  Pott  Zvo.  Cloth,  3s.; 
leather,  ^s.  6d.  net.  [Little  Guides. 

Clement  Edwards.     RAILWAY 

NATIONALIZATION.        Crown    Svo, 
zs.  6d.  [Social  Questions  Series. 

W.  Douglas  Edwards.     COMMERCIAL 

LAW.   Crown  Zvo.   2S,  [Commercial  Series. 

H.  E.  Egerton,  M.A.  A  HISTORY  OF 
BRITISH  COLONIAL  POLICY.  Detity 
Zvo.     12s.  6d. 

'It  is  a  good  book,  distinguished  by 
accuracy  in  detail,  clear  arrangement  of 
facts,  and  a  broad  grasp  of  principles.' — 
Mancheiter  Guardian. 

Thomas  EUwood,  THE  HISTORY  OF 
THE  LIFE  OF.  Edited  byC.  G.  Crump, 
M.A.     Cro-um  Zvo.     6s. 

[Methuen's  Standard  Library. 
This  edition  is  the  only  one  which  con- 
tains the  complete  book  as  originally  pub- 
lished.    It  has  a  long  Introduction  and  many 
Footnotes. 

E.  EngeL  A  HISTORY  OF  ENGLISH 
LITERATURE :  From  its  Beginning  to 
Tennyson.  Translated  from  the  German. 
Demy  Zz'o.     ys.  6d.  net. 

This  is  a  very  complete  and  convenient 
sketch  of  the  evolution'of  our  literature  from 
early  days.  'The  treatment  is  biographical 
as  well  as  critical,  and  is  rendered  more 
interesting  by  the  quotation  of  characteristic 
passages  from  the  chief  authors. 

W.  H.  Fairbrother,  M.A.  THE  PHILO- 
SOPHY OF  T.  H.  GREEN.  Second 
Edition,     Crown  Zvo.     31.  6d. 

Susan  Ferrier.  MARRIAGE.  Edited  by 
Miss  Goodrich  Freer  and  Lord  Iddes- 
LEIGH.  Two  Volumes.  Pott  Zvo.  Each 
volume,  cloth,  is.  6d.  net;  leather,  2s.  6d. 
net.  [Little  Library. 

C.  H.  Firth,  M.A.  CROMWELL'S  ARMY: 
A  History  of  the  English  Soldier  during  the 
Civil  Wars,  the  Commonwealth,  and  the 
Protectorate.     Croiun  Zvo.     js.  6d. 

An  elaborate  study  and  description  of 
Cromwell's  army  by  which  the  victory  of 
the  Parliament  was  secured.  The  '  New 
Model'  is  described  in  minute  detail,  and 
the  author,  who  is  one  of  the  most  dis- 
tinguished historians  of  the  day,  has  made 
great  use  of  unpublished  mss. 

G.  W.  Fisher,  M.A.  ANNALS  OF 
SHREWSBURY   SCHOOL.    With 

numerous  Illustrations.  Demy  Zvo.   los.  6d. 

Edward  FitzGerald.  THE  RUBAIYAT 
OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.  With  a  Com- 
mentary  by  H.  M.  Batson,  and  a  Biography 
of  Omar  by  E.  D.  Ross.     Cs. 

14 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Catalogue 

E.    A.    FitzGerald.     THE    HIGHEST 

ANDES.  With  2  Maps,  51  Illustrations, 
13  of  which  are  in  Photogravure,  and  a 
Panorama.     Royal  %vo.     30J.  net. 

W.  Warde  Fowler.   M.A.      See  Gilbert 

White. 

J.  F.  Fraser.  ROUND  THE  WORLD 
ON  A  WHEEL.  With  100  Illustrations. 
Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

'A  classic  of  cycling,  graphic  and  witty.' 
— Yorkshire  Post. 

W.  Frencll,  M.A.,  Principal  of  the  Storey 
Institute,  Lancaster.  PRACTICAL 
CHEMISTRY.  Part  i.  With  numerous 
Diagrams.     Crown  Zvo.     is.  dd. 

[Textbooks  of  Technology. 
'  An    excellent    and    eminently  practical 
little  book.' — Schoolmaster. 

Ed.    von   Freudenreich.     DAIRY 

BACTERIOLOGY,  A  Short  Manual  for 
the  Use  of  Students.  Translated  by  J.  R. 
AiNSwoRTH  Davis,  M.A.  Second  Edition. 
Revised,    Crown.  Svo.     2s.  6d. 

H.  W.  Fulford,  M.A.  THE  EPISTLE 
OF  ST.  JAMES.  Edited  by.  Fca^.  87v. 
IS.  6d.  net.  [Churchman's  Bible. 

Mrs.  Gaskell.  CRANFORD.  Edited  by 
K.  V.  Lucas.  PottZvo.  Cloth,  xs.  (sd.  net; 
leather,  2S.  6d.  net.  [Little  Library. 

H.  B.  George,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  New  College, 
Oxford.  BATTLES  OF  ENGLISH 
HISTORY.  With  numerous  Plans,  'jyiird 
Edition.     Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

'  Mr.  George  has  undertaken  a  very  useful 
task — that  of  making  military  affairs  in- 
telligible and  instructive  to  non-milit.-iry 
readers — and  has  executed  it  with  a  large 
measure  of  success.' — Times. 

H.  de  B.  Gibbins,  Lltt.D.,  M.A.  IN- 
DUSTRY IN  ENGLAND:  HISTORI- 
CAL OUTLINES.  With  5  Maps.  Second 
Edition.    Demy  Zvo.     lof.  6d. 

A  COMPANION  GERMAN  GRAMMAR. 
Crown  Zvo.     is.  6d. 

THE  INDUSTRIAL  HISTORY  OF  ENG- 
LAND. Eighth  Edition.  Revised.  With 
Maps  and  Plans.     Crown  Svo.     31. 

[University  Extension  Series. 

THE  ECONOMICS  OF  COMMERCE. 
Crown  Svo.     is.  6d.        [Commercial  Series. 

COMMERCIAL  EXAMINATION 
PAPERS.     Crown  Svo.    is.  6d. 

[Commercial  Series. 

BRITISH  COMMERCE  AND  COLONIES 
FROM  ELIZABETH  TO  VICTORIA. 
Third  Edition,     Crown  Svo.    2s. 

[Commercial  Series. 

ENGLISH  SOCIAL  REFORMERS 
Second  Edition.     Crown  Svo.     is.  6d. 

[University  Extension  Series. 

H.  de  B.  Gibbins,  D.Litt.,  M.A.,  and  R.  A. 
Hadfleld,  of  the  Hecla  Works,  Sheffield. 
A  SHORTER  WORKING  DAY.  Croum 
Svo.     2s.  6d.  [Social  Questions  Series. 

Edward  Gibbon.  THE  DECLINE  AND 
FALL  OF  THE  ROMAN  EMPIRE. 
A  New  Edition,  edited  with  Notes, 
Appendices,  and  Maps,  by  J.  B.  Bury, 
LL.D.,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin. 
In  Seven  Volumes.  Demy  Svo.  Gilt  top. 
Ss.  6d.  each.     Also,  Crown  Svo.     6s.  each. 

'  At  last  there  is  an  adequate  modern 
edition  of  Gibbon.  .  .  .  The  best  edition 
the  nineteenth  century  could  produce.' — 
Manchester  Guardian. 

'  A  great  piece  of  editing.' — Academy, 

MEMOIRS  OF  MY  LIFE  AND  WRIT- 
INGS. By  Edward  Gibbon.  Edited, 
with  an  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  G. 
BiRKBECK  Hill,  LL.D.    Crown  Svo.    6s. 

'  An  admirable  edition  of  one  of  the  most 
interesting  personal  records  of  a  literarj'  life. 
Its  notes  and  its  numerous  appendices  are  a 
repertory  of  almost  all  that  can  be  known 
about  Gibbon.' — Manchester  Guardian. 

E.  C.  S.  Gibson,  D.D.,  Vicar  of  Leeds. 
THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  With  Introduction 
and  Notes.     Demy  Svo.     6s._ 

[Commentaries  on  the  R.V. 

'  The  publishers  are  to  be  congratulated 
on  the  start  the  series  has  made.' — Times. 

'  Dr.  Gibson's  work  is  worthy  of  a  high 
degree  of  appreciation.  To  the  busy  worker 
and  the  intelligent  student  the  commentary 
will  be  a  real  boon  ;  and  it  will,  if  we  are 
not  mistaken,  be  much  in  demand.  The 
Introduction  is  almost  a  model  of  concise, 
straightforward,  prefatory  remarks  on  the 
subject  treated.' — Aihentfum. 

THE  XXXIX.  ARTICLES  OF  THE 
CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND.  With  an 
Introduction.  Third  and  Cheaper  Edition 
in  One  Volume.     Demy  Svo.     12s.  6d. 

[Handbooks  of  Theology. 
'  We  welcome  with  the  utmost  satisfaction 
a  new,  che.iper,  and  more  convenient  edition 
of  Dr.  Gibson's  book.  It  was  greatly  wanted. 
Dr.  Gibson  has  given  theological  students 
just  what  they  want,  and  we  should  like  to 
think  that  it  was  in  the  hands  of  every 
candidate  for  orders.' — Guardian, 

THE  LIFE  OF  JOHN  HOWARD.  With 
12  Illustrations.  Po/t  Svo.  Cloth,  ^s.; 
leather,  3^.  6d.  net.         [Little  Biographies. 

See  also  George  Herbert. 

General  Literature 

15 

George  GiSSing.     See  Dickens. 

A.  D.  Godley,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Magdalen 
College,  Oxford.  LYRA  FRIVOLA. 
Third  Edition.    F'cajt,  8ve.     zs.  6d. 

VERSES  TO  ORDER.   Cr.  8w.    zs.  6d.  net. 
Miss  GoOdrich-Freer.     See  Susan  Ferrier. 

P.  Anderson  Graham,     THE  RURAL 

EXODUS.    Crown  8z/o.     zs.  6d. 

[Social  Questions  Series. 

r.  S.  Granger,  M.A.,  Litt.D.  PSYCH- 
OLOGY. Second  Edition.  Croiun  Zvo. 
zs.  6d.  [University  Extension  Series. 

THE  SOUL  OF  A  CHRISTIAN.  Crown 
Svo.     6s. 

A  book  dealing  with  the  evolution  of  the 
religious  life  and  experiences. 

'  A  remarkable  hooh.' —Gias^ozv  Herald. 

See  also  University  Extension  Series. 

E.M'QueenGray.  GERMAN  PASSAGES 
FOR  UNSEEN  TRANSLATION. 
Crown  5vo.     zs.  6d. 

P.  L,  Gray,  B.Sc,  formerly  Lecturer  in 
Physics  in  Mason  University  College,  Bir- 
mingham. THE  PRINCIPLES  OF 
MAGNETISM  AND  ELECTRICITY  : 
an  Elementary  Text-Book.  With  181  Dia- 
grams.   Crown  Svo.     ^s.  6d. 

G.  BUCkland  Green,  M.A.,  Assistant  Master 
at  Edinburgh  Academy,  late  Fellow  of  St. 
John's  College,  Oxon.  NOTES  ON 
GREEK  AND  LATIN  SYNTAX.  Crown 
Svo.    3^.  6d. 

Notes  and  explanations  on  the  chief  diffi- 
culties of  Greek  and  Latin  Syntax,  with 
numerous  passages  for  exercise. 

E.  T.  Green,  M.A.  THE  CHURCH  OF 
CHRIST.     Crown  Svo.    6s. 

[Churchman's  Library. 

R.  A.  Gregory.  THE  VAULT  OF 
HEAVEN.  A  Popular  Introduction  to 
Astronomy.  With  numerous  Illustrations. 
Crown  Svo.     zs.  6d. 

[University  Extension  Series. 

W.  Hall  Griffin,  M.A.  SELECTIONS 
FROM  THE  EARLY  POEMS  OF 
ROBERT  BROWNING.  Edited  by. 
Pott  Svo.  Cloth,  IS.  6d,  net ;  leather, 
zs.  6d.  net. 

C.  H.  Grinling.  A  HISTORY  OF  THE 
GREAT  NORTHERN  RAILWAY, 
1845-95.  With  Illustrations.  Demy  Svo. 
los.  6d. 

'  Mr.  Grinling  has  done  for  a  Railway  what 
Macaulay  did  for  English  History.'— ?"/;« 
Engineer. 

F.  Hindes  Groome.     See  George  Borrow. 

M.  L.  Gwynn.  A  BIRTHDAY  BOOK. 
Royal  Svo.     \zs. 

This  is  a  birthday-book  of  exceptional 
dignity,  and  the  extracts  have  been  chosen 
with  particular  care. 

Stephen  Gywnn.    See  Thackeray. 

John  Hackett,  B.D.  A  HISTORY  OF 
THE  ORTHODOX  CHURCH  OF 
CYPRUS.  With  Maps  and  Illustrations. 
Demy  Svo.  15s.  7iet. 

A.  C.  Haddon,  Sc.D.,  F.R.S.  HEAD- 
HUNTERS,  BLACK,  WHITE,  AND 
BROWN.  With  many  Illustrations  and  a 
Map.     Demy  Svo.     iss. 

A  narrative  of  adventure  and  exploration 
in  Northern  Borneo.  It  contains  much 
matter  of  the  highest  scientific  interest. 

R.  A.  Hadfield.   See  H.  de  B.  Gibbins. 

R.  N.   Hall  and  W.   G.    Neal.     THE 

ANCIENT  RUINS  OF  RHODESIA. 
With  numerous  Illustrations.  Demy  Svo. 
zis.  net. 

This  book  contains  descriptions  of  two 
hundred  ruins  of  temples  and  forts,  and  of 
their  types  and  apes  of  architecture.  It 
describes  also  the  Sabsean  and  Phoenician 
occupations  of  Rhodesia ;  King  Solomon's 
gold,  ancient  burials,  ancient  gold-mining, 
etc.  It  is  profusely  illustrated,  and  contains 
many  maps  and  plans. 

F.  J.  Hamilton,  D.D.,  and  E.  W.  Brooks. 

Z.^CHARIAH  OF  MITYLENE.     Trans- 
lated into  English.   Demy  Svo.   izs.6d.net. 
[Byzantine  Texts. 

D.  Hannay.  A  SHORT  history  OF 
THE  ROYAL  NAVY,  From  Early. 
Times  to  the  Present  Day.  Illustrated. 
Two  Volumes.  Demy  Svo.  -js.  6d.  each. 
Vol.  I.    1200-1688. 

A.T.  Hare,  M.A.  THE  CONSTRUCTION 
OF  LARGE  INDUCTION  COILS.  With 
numerous  Diagrams.     Demy  Svo.     6s 

Clifford   Harrison.      READING    AND 
READERS.     Fcap.  Svo.     zs.  6d. 
'  An  extremely  sensible  little  book.' — • 

Manchester  Guardian. 

Sven  Hedin,  Gold  Medallist  of  the  Royal 
Geographical  Society.  THROUGH  ASIA. 
With  300  Illustrations  from  Sketches  and 
Photogr.iphs  by  the  Author,  and  Maps. 
Two  Volumes.     Royal  Svo.     36J.  net. 

'One  of  the  greatest  books  of  the  kind 
issued  during  the  century.  It  is  impossible 
to  give  an  adequate  idea  of  the  richness  of 
the  contents  of  this  book,  or  of  its  abounding 
attractions  as  a  story  of  travel  unsurpassed 
in  geographical  and  human  interest.  Much 
of  it  is  a  revelation.  Altogether  the  work 
is  one  which  in  solidity,  novelty,  and  interest 
must  take  a  first  rank  among  publications 
of  i  ts  class. ' —  Times. 

i6 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Catalogue 

T.  F.  Henderson.   A  little  book  of 

SCOTTISH   VERSE.     PottZvo.    Cloth, 
IS.  6ci.  net ;  leather,  2S.  dd.  net. 

[Little  Library. 
See  also  D.  M.  Molr. 

W.E.Henley.    ENGLISH  LYRICS. 

Crown  Zvo.     Gilt  top.     y.  6d. 

W.  E.  Henley  and  C.  Whibley.    A  BOOK 

OF    ENGLISH     PROSE.     Crown    Zvo. 
Buckram,  gilt  top.     ts, 

H.  H.  Henson,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  All  Souls', 
Oxford,  Canon  of  Westminster.  APOS- 
TOLIC CHRISTIANITY  :  As  Illustrated 
by  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  to  the  Corinthians. 
Cro2un  Zvo.    6s. 

LIGHT  AND  LEAVEN  :  Historical  and 
Social  Sermons.    Crown  Zvo.    6s. 

DISCIPLINE  AND  LAW.  Fcap.  Zvo. 
2S,  id. 

George  Herbert.     THE    TEMPLE. 

Edited,  with  an  Introduction  and  Notes, 
by  E.  C.  S.  Gibson,  D.D.,  Vicar  of  Leeds. 
Pott  Zvo.  Cloth,  2S.  ;  leather,  2S.  6d.  net. 
[  Library  of  Devotion. 
This  edition  contains  Walton's  Life  of 
Herbert,  and  the  text  is  that  of  the  first 
edition. 

Herodotus :  EASY  SELECTIONS.  With 
Vocabulary.  By  A.  C.  Liddell,  M.A. 
Fcap.  Zvo.     IS.  6d. 

W.  A.  S.  Hewins,  B. A.  ENGLISH  trade 
AND  FINANCE  IN  THE  SEVEN- 
TEENTH    century.     Cro7vnZvo.^ 

[University  Extension  Series. 

T.  Hubert.  THE  AIR  GUN:  or,  How 
the  Mastermans  and  Dobson  M.-ij'or  nearly 
lost  their  Holidays.  Illustrated.  Square 
Fcap.  Zvo.    2S.  6d.  [Little  Blue  Books. 

Clare  Hill,  Registered  Teacher  to  the  City  and 
Guilds  of  London  Institute.  MILLIN- 
ERY, THEORETICAL,  AND  PRAC- 
TICAL. With  numerous  Diagrams. 
Crown  Zvo.     2S. 

[Textbooks  of  Technology. 

Henry  Hill,  B.A.,  Headmaster  of  the  Boy's 
High  School,  Worcester,  Cape  Colony.  A 
SOUTH  AFRICAN  ARITHMETIC. 
Crown  Zvo.     3^.  6d. 

This  book  has  been  specially  written  for 
use  in  South  African  schools. 

G.  Birkbeck  Hill.  LL.D.     See  Gibbon. 

Howard  C.  Hillegas.  with  the  boer 

FORCES.     With  24  Illustrations.     Second 
Edition.     Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

S.  L.  Hinde.  THE  FALL  OF  THE 
CONGO  ARABS.  With  Plans,  etc.  Demy 
Zvo.     \2s.  6d. 

L.  T.  HobhOUSe,  Fellow  of  C.C.C,  Oxford. 
THE  THEORY  OF  KNOWLEDGE. 
Demy  Zvo.    2-s.s. 

J,  A.  Hobson,  M.A.  PROBLEMS  OF 
POVERTY :  An  Inquiry  into  the  Indus- 
trial Condition  of  the  Poor.  Fourth 
Edition.     Crown  Zvo.     2s.  6d. 

[Social  Questions  Series  and  University 
Extension  Series. 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEM- 
PLOYED.    Crown  Zvo.     2s.  6d._ 

[Social  Questions  Series. 

T.  Hodgkin,  D.C.L.  GEORGE  FOX, 
THE  QUAKER.  With  Portrait.  Crown 
Zvo.     y.  6d.  [Leaders  of  Religion. 

Chester  Holcombe.    THE  REAL  CHIN- 

ESE  QUESTION.     Cro^vn  Zvo.    6s. 

'  It  is  an  important  addition  to  the 
materials  before  the  public  for  forming  an 
opinion  on  a  most  difficult  and  pressing  pro- 
blem.'—  Times. 

Sir  T.  H.  Holdich,  K.C.I.E.  THE 
INDIAN  BORDERLAND  :  being  a  Per- 
sonal Record  of  Twenty  Years.  Illustrated. 
Demy  Zvo,     15J.  net. 

'  Interesting  and  inspiriting  from  cover  to 
cover,  it  will  assurediy  take  its  place  as  the 
classical  work  on  the  history  of  the  Indian 
frontier.' — Pilot. 

Canon  Scott  Holland.     LYRA  apos- 

TOLICA.  With  an  Introduction.  Notes 
by  H.  C.  Beeching,  M.A.  PottZvo.  Cloth, 
2s.;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 

[Library  of  Devotion. 

G.  J.  Holyoake.    THE  CO-OPERATIVE 

MOVEiMENT  TO-DAY.  Second  Edition. 
Crown  Zvo.     2s.  6d. 

[Social  Questions  Series. 

Horace:  THE  ODES  AND  ERODES. 
Translated  by  A.  Godlev,  M.A.,  Fellow  of 
Magdalen  College,  Oxford.  Crown  Zvo. 
2S.  [Classical  Translations. 

E.  L.  S.  Horsburgh,  M.A.  WATERLOO : 
A  Narrative  and  Criticism.  With  Plans. 
Second  Edition.    Crown  Zvo,    5 j. 

'A  brilliant  essay  —  simple,  sound,  and 
thorough.' — Daily  Chronicle. 

THE  LIFE  OF  SAVONAROLA.  With 
Portraits  and  Illustrations.  Fcap.  Zvo. 
Cloth,  3J-.  6d.  ;  leather,  ^s.  net. 

[Little  Biographies. 

R.   F.   Horton,   D.D.      JOHN    HOWE. 

With  Portrait.     Crown  Zvo.    3J.  6d. 

[Leaders  of  Religion. 

Alexander  Hosie.  MANCHURIA.  With 
Illustrations  and  a  Map.  DemyZvo,  ios.6d. 

t:ct. 

General  Literature 

17 

G.  Howell.    TRADE  UNIONISM— NEW 

AND  OLD.     Third  Edition.     Crown  8e'^. 
IS.  6d.  [Social  Questions  Series. 

H.  G.  Hutchinson.  THE  GOLFING  PIL- 
GRIM.    Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

A.  W.  Hutton,  M.A.  CARDINAL  MAN- 
NING. With  Portrait.  Crown  Svo.  3s. 
6d.  [Leaders  of  Religion. 

See  also  Tauler. 

Edward  Hutton.     See  Richard  Crashaw. 

R.  H.  Hutton.  CARDINAL  NEWMAN. 
With  Portrait.     Crown  ^vo.     3^.  6d. 

[Leaders  of  Religion. 

W.  H.  Hutton,  M.A.  THE  LIFE  OF  SIR 
THOMAS  _  MORE.  With  Portraits. 
Second  Edition.     Crown  Zvo.    zs, 

WILLIAM  LAUD.  With  Portrait.  Second 
Edition,     Crown  Zvo.     3J.  6d. 

[Leaders  of  Religion. 

Henrik  Ibsen.  BRAND.  A  Drama.  Trans- 
lated by  William  Wilson.  Third  Edition. 
Crown  ?ivo.     3s.  6d, 

Lord  Iddesleigh.     See  Susan  Ferrier. 

W.  R.  Inge,  M.  A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Hert- 
ford College,  Oxford.  CHRISTIAN  MYS- 
TICISM. The  Bampton  Lectures  for  1899. 
Detny  Svo.     12s.  6d.  net. 

'  It  is  fully  worthy  of  the  best  traditions 
connected  with  the  Bampton  Lectureship.' — 
Record. 

k.  D.  Innes,  M.A.  A  HISTORY  OF  THE 
BRITISH  IN  INDIA.  With  Maps  and 
Plans.     Crown  Zvo.     ^s.  6d. 

i' Written  in  a  vigorous  and  effective  style 
...  a  thoughtful  and  impartial  account.' — 
Spectator. 

'  Mr.  Innes  has  done  a  difficult  piece  of 
work  well.  He  has  taken  the  history  into 
his  mind;  given  it  shape,  feature,  and 
vitality  there  ;  therefore  it  comes  alive  and 
fresh  from  his  mind.' — Scotstnan. 

S.Jackson,  M.A.  A  primer  of  BUSI- 
NESS. Third  Edition.  Crown  Zvo. 
IS.  6d.  [Commercial  Series. 

F.  Jacob,  M.A.  JUNIOR  FRENCH 
EXAMINATION  PAPERS.  Eca/.  Zvo. 
IS.  [Junior  Examination  Series. 

J.  Stephen  Jeans.     TRUSTS,   POOLS, 

AND  CORNERS.     Crown  Zvo.     2S.  6d. 
[Social  Questions  Series. 

R.  L.   Jefferson.     A    NEW  RIDE  TO 

KHIVA.     Illustrated.     Cro^un  Zvo,    6s. 

£.  JenkS,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Law  at  Uni- 
versity College,  Liverpool.  ENGLISH 
LOCAL  GOVERNMENT.  Cro7un  Zvo. 
2s,  6d.  [University  Extension  Series. 

C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.    See  Pascal. 

Augustus  Jessopp,  D.D.  JOHN  DONNE. 

With  Portrait.     Crown  Zvo.     3s.  6d. 

[Leaders  of  Religion. 

F.  B.  Jevons,  M.A.,  Litt.D.,  Principal  of 
Hatfield  Hall,  Durham.  EVOLUTION. 
Crown  Zvo.    3s.  6d,   [Churchman's  Library. 

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 
HISTORY  OF  RELIGION.  Second 
Edition,     Demy  Zvo.     jos.  6d. 

[Handbooks  of  Theology. 
_  '  The  merit  of  this  book  lies  in  the  penetra- 
tion, the  singular  acuteness  and  force  of  the 
author's  judgment.  He  is  at  once  critical 
and  luminous,  at  once  just  and  suggestive. 
A  comprehensive  and  thorough  book.' — 
Birtnin^kam  Post. 

Sir  H.  H.  Johnston,  K.C.B.     BRITISH 

CENTRAL  AFRICA.  With  nearly  200 
Illustrations  and  Six  Maps.  Second 
Editioft.     Crown  ^to.     \Zs.  net. 

H,  Jon6s.    A  GUIDE  TO  PROFESSIONS 
AND  BUSINESS.     Cro7vn  Zvo.  _  is.  6d. 
[Commercial  Series. 

F.  W.  Joyce,  M.A.  THE  LIFE  OF  SIR 
FREDERICK  GORE  OUSELEY.  js.  6d. 

Lady  Julian  of  Norwich.  REVELA- 
TIONS OF  DIVINE  LOVE.  Edited  by 
Grace  Warrack.    Crozun  Zvo.    6s. 

A  partially  modernised  version,  from  the 
MS.  in  the  British  Museum  of  a  book  which 
Dr.  Dalgairns  terms  '  One  of  the  most 
remarkable  books  of  the  Middle  Ages.'  Mr. 
Inge  in  his  Bampton  Lectures  on  Christian 
Mysticism  calls  it  '  The  beautiful  but  little 
known  Revelations.' 

M.  Kaufmann.     SOCIALISM    AND 

MODERN  THOUGHT.  Crown  Zvo. 
2-s'-  ("i-  [Social  Questions  Series. 

J.  F.  Keating,  D.D.    THE  AGAPE  AND 

THE  EUCHARIST.    Crown  Zvo.    y.  6d. 

John  Keble.    THE  christian  year. 

With  an  Introduction  and  Notes  by  W. 
Lock,  D.D.,  Warden  of  Keble  College. 
Illustrated  by  R.  Anning  Bell.  Second 
Edition.  Fcap.  Zvo.  3J.  6d ;  padded 
morocco,  $s. 

'  The  present  edition  is  annotated  with  all 
the  care  and  insight  to  be  expected  from 
Dr.  Lock.' — Guardian. 

LYRA  INNOCENTIUM.  Edited,  with 
Introduction  and  Notes,  by  Walter  Lock 
D.D.,  Warden  of  Keble  College,  Oxford! 
Pott  Zvo.  Cloth,  2S.  ;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 
[Library  of  Devotion. 
'  This  sweet  and  fragrant  book  has  never 
been  published  more  attractively.' —    . 

Academy. 

A3 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Catalogue 

THE  CHRISTIAN  YEAR.  With  Intro- 
duction  and  Notes  by  Walter  Lock, 
D.D.,  Warden  of  Keble  College.  Second 
Edition.  Pott  8vo.  Cloth,  2S.  ;  leather,  ■zs. 
(jd.  net.  [Library  of  Devotion. 

Thomas  A  Kempis.    THE  IMITATION 

OF  CHRIST.  With  an  Introduction  by 
Dean  Farrar.  Illustrated  by  C.  M. 
Gere.  Second  Edition.  Fcap.Zvo.  ■},s.td. 
net;  padded  morocco,  5 J. 

'Amongst  all  the  innumerable  English 
editions  of  the  "Imitation,"  there  can  have 
been  few  which  were  prettier  than  this  one, 
printed  in  strong  and  handsome  type,  with 
all  the  glory  of  red  initials.' — Glasgow 
Herald. 

THE  IMITATION  OF  CHRIST.  A  Re- 
vised Translation  by  C.  Bigg,  D.D.,  Canon 
of  Christ  Church.  With  an  Introduction. 
Crown  %vo.     3^.  (>d. 

A  new  edition,  carefully  revised  and  set 
in  large  type,  of  Dr.  Bigg's  well-known 
version. 

'Dignified,  harmonious,  and  scholarly.' 
— Church  Review. 

THE  IMITATION  OF  CHRIST.  A  Re- 
vised Translation,  with  an  Introduction  by 
C.  Bigg,  D.D.,  late  Student  of  Christ 
Church.  Second  Edition.  PottZvo.  Cloth, 
■2.S.  ;  leather,  is.  6d.  net. 

[Library  of  Devotion. 

A  practically  new  translation  of  this  book 

which  the  reader  has,  almost  for   the  first 

time,  exactly  in  the  shape  in  which  it  left 

the  hands  of  the  author. 

James  Houghton  Kennedy,  D.D.,  Assist- 
ant Lecturer  in  Divinity  in  the  University 
of  Dublin.  ST.  PAUL'S  SECOND 
AND  THIRD  EPISTLES  TO  THE 
CORINTrHIANS.  With  Introduction, 
Dissertations  and  Notes.     Cro%vn  Zvo.  ts. 

C.  W.  Kimmins,  M.A.  THE  CHEM- 
ISTRY OF  LIFE  AND  HEALTH. 
Illustrated.     Crown  Zvo.     2s.  6d. 

[University  Extension  Series. 

A.  W.  Kinglake.     EOTHEN.    with  an 

Introduction  and  Notes.  Pott  Zvo.  Cloth, 
IS.  6d.  fiet ;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 

[Little  Library. 

Eudyard  Kipling.     BARRACK -ROOM 

BALLADS.  73rd  Thousand.  Crown  Zvo. 
6s.  ;  leather,  6s.  7iet. 

'  Mr.  Kipling's  verse  is  strong,  vivid,  full 
of  character.  .  .  .  Unmistakable  genius 
rings  in  every  line.' — Times. 

'  The  ballads  teem  with  imagination,  they 
palpitate  with  emotion.  We  read  them  with 
laughter  and  tears  :  the  metres  throb  in  our 
pulses,  the  cunningly  ordered  words  tingle 
with  life  ;  and  if  this  be  not  poetrj',  what 
is  ?  '—Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

THE     SEVEN     SEAS.      62nd  Thousand. 

Crown    ?>vo.      Buckram,   gilt   top,    6s.  ; 

leather,  6s   net. 

'  The  Empire  has  found  a  singer  ;  it  is 

no  depreciation  of  the  songs   to  say  that 

statesmen  may  have,  one  way  or  other,  to 

take  account  of  them.' — 

]\ranchester  Guardian. 
T.  G.  Kitton.     See  Dickens. 
W.  J.  Knox  Little.     See  St.  Francis  de  Sales. 

Charles  Lamb,   THE  ESSAYS  OF  ELI  A. 

With  over  100  Illustrations  by  A.  Garth 
Jones,  and  an  Introduction  by  E.  V.  Lucas. 
Demy  8vo.    tos.  6d. 

'  This  edition  is  in  many  respects  of 
peculi.ir  beaut j'.' — Daily  Chronicle. 

'  It  is  in  every  way  an  admirable  edition 
and  the  illustrations  are  delightful.' — 

Literature. 
EI.IA,    AND    THE    LAST    ESSAYS   OF 
ELIA.     Edited  by  E.  V.  Lucas.     Pott  8vo. 
Cloth,  IS.  6d.  net ;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 

[Little  Library. 

THE  KING  AND  QUEEN  OF  HEARTS  : 

An  1805  Book  for  Children.     Illustrated  by 

William  Mulready.     A  new  edition,   in 

facsimile,  edited  by  E.  V.  Lucas,     ts.  6d. 

This  little  book  is  a  literary  curiosity,  and 
has  been  discovered  and  identified  as  the 
work  of  Charles  Lamb  by  E.  V.  Lucas. 
It  is  an  exact  facsimile  of  the  original 
edition,  which  was  illustrated  by  Mulready. 

Professor     Lamhros.        ECTHESIS 

CHRONICA.  Edited  by.  Detny  Zvo. 
ys.  6d.  net.  [Byzantine  Texts. 

Stanley  Lane-Poole.     THE   LIFE    OF 

SIR  HARRY    PARKES.     A   New  and 
Cheaper  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     6s. 
A    HISTORY     OF     EGYPT     IN     THE 
MIDDLE  AGES.      Fully  Illustrated. 
Crown  8vo.     6s. 

F.  Langbridge,  M.A.  BALLADS  OF  THE 
IjRAVE  :  Poems  of  Chivalry,  Enterprise, 
Courage,  and  Constanc}'.  Second  Edition, 
Crown  Svo.     2S.  6d. 

The   book  is  full  of  splendid  things.' — 
IVorld. 

William  Law.    A  SERIOUS  CALL  TO  A 

DEVOUT  AND  HOLY  LIFE.  Edited, 
with  an  Introduction,  by  C.  Bigg,  D.D., 
late  Student  of  Christ  Church.  Pott  Svo. 
Cloth,  2s. ;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net, 

[Library  of  Devotion. 
This  is  a  reprint,  word  for  word  and  line 
for  line,  of  the  Editio  Princcps. 

G.  S.  Layard.  the  LIFE  OF  MRS. 
LYNN  LINTON.  Illustrated.  Demy 
8t'(7.     12^.  6d. 

'  Mrs.  Lynn  Linton  is  here  presented  to 
us  in  all  her  moods.  She  lives  in  the  book ; 
she  is  presented  to  us  so  that  we  really 
know  her.' — Literature. 

General  Literature 

19 

Captain  Melville  Lee.   A  history  of 

POLICE    IN    ENGLAND.      Crown  Svo. 
7J.  6d, 

'  A  learned  book,  comprising  many  curious 
details  to  interest  the  general  reader  as  well 
as  the  student  who  will  consult  it  for  exact 
information.' — Daily  News, 

'  The  book  rests  on  accurate  research  and 
gives  avast  array  of  facts  and  statistics.' — 
Glasgow  Herald. 

V.  B.  Lewes,  M.A.  AIR  AND  WATER. 
Illustrated.     Crown  Sz'O.     2S.  td. 

[University  Extension  Series. 

Walter  Lock,  D.D.,  Warden  of  Keble  Col- 
lege. ST.  PAUL,  THE  MASTER- 
BUILDER.     Cro%vn  8z/o.     3^.  td. 

See  also  Keble  and  Oxford  Commentaries. 

JOHN  KEBLE.  With  Portrait.  Cro^imi 
Svo.     3i.  6d.  [Leaders  of  Religion. 

E.  V.  Lucas.  See  Jane  Austen  and  Mrs. 
Gaskell  and  Charles  Lamb. 

Lucian.  SIX  DIALOGUES  (Nigrlnus, 
Icaro-Menippus,  The  Cock,  The  Ship,  The 
Parasite,  The  Lover  of  Falsehood).  Trans- 
lated by  S.  T.  Irwin,  M.A.,  Assistant 
Master  at  Clifton ;  late  Scholar  of  Exeter 
College,  Oxford.     Crown  ivo.     ^s.  6d. 

[Classical  Translations. 

L.   W.    Lyde,    M.A.      A  COMMERCIAL 
GEOGRAPHY  OF  THE  BRITISH  EM- 
PIRE.    Third  Edition.     Crown  Svo.     zs. 
[Commercial  Series. 

Hon.  Mrs.  Lyttelton.     WOMEN    AND 

THEIR  WORK.     Crown  Svo.     2s.  6d. 

'Thoughtful,  interesting, practical.' — 

Guardian. 
'The  book  is  full  of  sound  precept  given 
with  sympathy  and  wit.' — Pilot. 

3.  E.  B.  M'Allen,  M.A.  THE  PRINCIPLES 
OF  BOOKKEEPING  BY  DOUBLE 
ENTRY,     Crown  Svo.     zs. 

[Commercial  Series. 

F.  MacCunn.  JOHN  KNOX.  With  Por- 
trait.    Crown  Sz'o.     3^.  6d. 

[Leaders  of  Religion. 

A.  M.  Mackay.  THE  CHURCHMAN'S 
INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD 
TESTAMENT.     CroTim  Svo.     3^.  6d. 

[Churchman's  Library. 
'The   book    throughout     is     frank     and 
courageous. ' — Glasgow  Herald. 

Laurie  Magnus,  M.A.  A  primer  of 
WORDSWORTH.    Crown  Svo.    is.  6d. 

J  P.  Mahaffy,  Litt.D.  A  HISTORY  OF 
THE  EGYPT  OF  THE  PTOLEMIES. 
Fully  Illustrated.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

F.  W.  Maitland.  LL.D.,  Downing  Professor 
of  the  Laws  of  England  in  the  University  of 
Cambridge.  CANON  LAW  IN  ENG- 
LAND.    RoyalSvo.     ^s.  6d. 

H.  E.  Maiden,  M.A.  ENGLISH  RE- 
CORDS. A  Companion  to  the  History  of 
England.     Crown  Svo.     ^s.  6d. 

THE  ENGLISH  CITIZEN:  HIS  RIGHTS 
AND  DUTIES.     Crown  Svo.     is.  6d. 

E.  C.  Marchant,  M.A. ,  Fellow  of  Peterhouse, 
Cambridge,  and  Assistant  Master  at  S  t.  Paul's 
School.  A  GREEK  ANTHOLOGY. 
Crowti  Svo.     3^.  6d. 

E.  C.  Marchant,  M.A.,  and  A.  M.  Cook, 

M.A.        PASSAGES      FOR      UNSEEN 
TRANSLATION.     Crown  Svo.     ^s.  6d. 

'  We  know  no  book  of  this  class  better 
fitted  for  use  in  the  higher  forms  of  schools.' 
— Guardian. 

J.  E.  Marr,  F.R.S.,  Fellow  of  St.  John's 
College,  Cambridge.  THE  SCIENTIFIC 
STUDY  OF  SCENERY.  Illustrated. 
Crown  Sz'O.    6s. 

'  A  volume,  moderate  in  size  and  readable 
in  style,  which  will  be  acceptable  alike  to 
the  student  of  geology  and  geography,  and 
to  the  tourist.' — Athencsum. 

A.  J.  Mason._  THOMAS  CRANMER. 
With  Portrait.     Crown  Svo.     -^s.  6d. 

[Leaders  of  Religion. 

George  Massee.    THE  evolution  of 

PLANT    LIFE:     Lower    Forms.       With 
Illustrations.     Crown  Svo.     zs.  6d. 

[University  Extension  Series. 

C.  F.  G.  Masterman,  M.A.  TENNYSON 
AS  A  RELIGIOUS  TEACHER.    Crown 

Svo.     6s. 

'A  thoughtful  and  penetrating  apprecia- 
tion, full  of  interest  and  suggestion.' — 
li'^orld. 

Annie  MatheSOn.     See  Mrs.  Craik. 

Emma  S.  Mellows.  A  SHORT  STORY 
OF  ENGLISH  LITERATURE.     Crown 

Svo.     3J.  6d. 

'A  lucid  and  well-arranged  account  of 
the  growth  of  English  literature.' — Pall 
Mall  Gazette. 

L.  C.  Miall,  F.R.S.     See  Gilbert  White. 

E.  B.  Michell.  THE  ART  AND  PRAC 
TICE  OF  HAWKING.  With  3  Photo- 
gravures by  G.  E.  Lodge,  and  other 
Illustrations.    Demy  Svo.     los.  6d. 

20 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Catalogue 

J.  a.  MillaiS.  THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS 
OF  SIR  JOHN  EVERETT  MILLAIS, 
President  of  the  Royal  Academy.  With  319 
Illustrations,  of  which  9  are  Photogravure. 
2  vols.    Royal  ivo.     20s.net. 

'  This  splendid  work.' — World. 

'  Of  such  absorbing  interest  is  it,  of  such 
completeness  in  scope  and  beauty.  Special 
tribute  must  be  paid  to  the  extraordinary 
completeness  of  the  illustrations.' — Graphic. 

J.  G.  Milne,  M.A.  A  HISTORY  OF 
ROMAN  EGYPT.  Fully  Illustrated. 
Crown     Svo.     6s. 

P.  Chalmers  Mitcliell,  M.A.  OUTLINES 
OF  BIOLOGY.  Illustrated.  Second 
Edition.    Crown  Svo.    6s. 

A  text  •  book  designed  to  cover  the 
Schtdule  issued  by  the  Royal  College  of 
Physicians  and  Surgeons. 

D,  M.  Moir.  MANSIE  WAUCH.  Edited 
by  T.  F.  Henderson.  Pott  Svo.  Cloth, 
IS.  6d,  net ;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 

[Little  Library. 

H.  E.  Moore.  BACK  TO  THE  LAND : 
An  Inquiry  into  the  cure  for  Rural  Depopu- 
lation.    Crown  Svo.     zs.  6d. 

[Social  Questions  Series. 

W.  R.  Morfill,  Oriel  College,  Oxford.  A 
HISTORY  OF  RUSSIA  FROM  PETER 
THE  GREAT  TO  ALEXANDER  II. 
With  Maps  and  Plans.  Crown  Svo.  7s.  6d. 
This  history,  is  founded  on  a  study 
of  original  documents,  and  though  neces- 
sarily brief,  is  the  most  comprehensive 
narrative  in  existence.  Considerable_  atten- 
tion has  been  paid  to  the  social  and  literary 
development  of  the  country,  and  the  recent 
expansion  of  Russia  in  Asia. 

R.  J,  Moricb,  late  of  Clifton  College. 
GERMAN  EXAMINATION  PAPERS 
IN  MISCELLANEOUS  GRAMMAR 
AND  IDIOMS.  Fifth  Edition.  Crown 
Svo.     2J.  6d. 

[School  Examination  Series. 

A  Kby,  issued  to  Tutors  and  Private 
Students  only,  to  be  had  on  application 
to  the  Publishers.  Second  Edition. 
Crown  Svo.     6s.  net. 

Miss  Anderson  Morton.    See  Miss  Brod- 

rick. 

H.    C.    G.    MOUle,  D.D.      CHARLES 

SIMEON.     With  Portrait.     Crown  Svo. 

y.  6d.  [Leaders  of  Religion. 

M.   M.  Pattison    Muir.    M.A.      THE 

CHEMISTRY  OF  FIRE.  The  Ele- 
mentary Principles  of  Chemistry.  Illus- 
trated.    Crown  Svo.     Q.s.  6d. 

[University  Extension  Series. 

V.  A.  Mundella,  M.A.    SeeJ.  T.Dunn. 

W.  G.  Neal.    See  R.  N.  Hall. 

H.  W,   Nevinson.     LADYSMITH:    The 

Diary  of  a  Siege.  With  16  Illustrations  and 
a  Plan.    Second  Edition.    Crown  Svo.    6s. 

James  Northcote,  R.A.,  the  conver- 

SATIONS  OF,  AND  JAMES  WARD. 
Edited  by  Ernest  Fletcher.  With  many 
Portraits.     Demy  Svo.     Jos.  6d. 

'  Mr.  Fletcher's  book  will  range  and  rank 
with  Hazlitt's.'—Glode. 

'  Every  reader,  with  any  taste  for  art,  will 
find  the  book  engross'ms.'— Yorkshire  Post. 
A.  H,  Norway,  Author  of '  Highways  and  By- 
ways in  Devon  and  Cornwall.'  NAPLES  : 
PAST  AND  PRESENT.  With  40  Illus- 
trations by  A.  G.  Ferard.    Crown  Svo.    6s. 

Standish  O'Grady.     THE  STORY  OF 

IRELAND.     Crown  Svo.     2s.  6d. 

Mrs.  Oliphant.  THOMAS  CHALMERS. 
With  Portrait.     Crown  Svo.     3J.  6d. 

[Leaders  of  Religion. 

C.  W.  Oman,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  All  Souls', 
Oxford.  A  HISTORY  OF  THE  ART 
OF  WAR.  Vol.  II.:  The  Middle  Ages, 
from  the  Fourth  to  the  Fourteenth  Century. 
Illustrated.     Demy  Svo.    21s. 

'  The  whole  art  of  war  in  its  historic  evolu- 
tion has  never  been  treated  on  such  an 
ample  and  comprehensive  scale,  and  we 
question  if  any  recent  contribution  to  the 
exact  history  of  the  world  has  possessed 
more  enduring  value.'— X»<«'/r  Chronicle. 

Prince  Henri  of  Orleans.    FROM  TON- 

KIN  TO  INDIA.  Translated  by  Hamley 
Bent,  M.A.  With  100  Illustrations  and  a 
Map.    Crown  \to,  gilt  top.     25J. 

R.  L.  Ottley,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Magdalen 
College,  Oxon.,  and  Principal  of  Pusey 
House.  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE 
INCARNATION.  Second  and  cheaper 
Edition.    Demy  Svo.     12s.  6d. 

[Handbooks  of  Theology. 
'  A  clear  and  remarkably  full  account  of 
the  main  currents  of  speculation.  Scholarly 
precision  .  .  .  genuine  tolerance  .  .  . 
intense  interest  in  his  subject— are  Mr. 
Ottley 's  merits.' — Guardian. 

LANCELOT  ANDREWES.  With  Por- 
trait.   Crown  Svo.    3s.  6d. 

[Leaders  of  Religion. 

J.  H.  Overton,  M.A.  JOHN  WESLEY. 
With  Portrait.    Crown  Svo.    3s.  6d. 

[Leaders  of  Religion. 

M.    N.    Oxford,    of    Guy's    Hospital. 
HANDBOOK   OF   NURSING.     Crown 
Svo.     3^.  6d. 

'  The  most  useful  work  of  the  kind  that 
we  have  seen.  A  most  valuable  and  prac- 
tical manual.'— Manchester  Guardian. 

General  Literature 

21 

W.  C.  C.  Pakes.    the  science  of 

HYGIENE.    With  numerous  Illustrations. 
Detny  ^vo.     15J. 

'  A  thoroughgoing  working  text-book  of 
its  subject,  practical  and  well-stocked.' — 
Scots7nan. 

Prof.  Leon  Parmentier  and  M.  Bidez. 

EVAGRIUS.      Edited    by.      Demy  ?,vo. 
10^.  td.  net.  [  Byzantine  Texts. 

H.  W.  Paul.    See  Laurence  Sterne. 

E.  H.  Pearce,  M.A.   THE  annals  of 

CHRIST'S    HOSPITAL.       With    many 
Illustrations.     Demy  8vo.     js.  td. 

'A  well-written,  copious,  authentic  his- 
tory.'— Times. 

R.  E.  Peary,  Gold  Medallist  of  the  Royal 
Geographical  Society.  NORTHWARD 
OVER  "THE  GREAT  ICE.  With  over  800 
Illustrations.  2  vols.  Royal  Zvo.  32s.  net. 
'His  book  will  take  its  place  among  the 
permanent  literature  of  Arctic  exploration.' 
— Times. 

Sidney  Peel,  late  Fellow  of  Trinity  College, 
Oxford,  and  Secretary  to  the  Royal  Com- 
mission on  the  Licensing  Laws.  PRACTI- 
CAL LICENSING  REFORM.  Second 
Edition.     Crown  8vo.     is.  6d. 

M.  PeruginL  SELECTIONS  FROM 
■WILLIAM  BLAKE.  Pott  Svo.  Cloth, 
IS.  6d.  net;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 

[Little  Library. 

J.  P.  Peters,  D.D.  the  old  testa- 
ment AND  THE  NEW  SCHOLAR- 
SHIP.   Crown  Svo.    6s. 

[Churchman's  Library. 
'  Every  page  reveals  wide  reading,  used 
with  sound  and  scholarly  judgment." 

— Manchester  Guardian. 

W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  Pro- 
fessor of  Egyptology  at  University  College. 
A  HISTORY  OF  EGYPT,  prom  the 
Earliest  Times  to  the  Present  Day. 
Fully  Illustrated.  In  six  volu7nes.  Crown 
Svo.    6s.  each. 

'  A  history  written  in  the  spirit  of  scientific 
precision  so  worthily  represented  by  Dr. 
Petrie  and  his  school  cannot  but  promote 
sound  and  accurate  study,  and  supply  a 
vacant  place  in  the  English  literature  of 
Egyptology. '—  Times. 

Vol.  I.  Prehistoric  Times  to  XVIth 
Dynasty.     Fourth  Edition. 

Vol.  ii.  The  XVIIth  and  XVIIIth  Dy- 
nasties.    Third  Edition. 

Vol.  IV.  The  Egyit  of  the  Ptolemies. 
J.  P.  Mahaffy,  Litt.D. 

Vol.  v.     Roman  Egypt.    J.  G.  Milne,  M.A. 

Vol.  VI.  Egypt  in  the  Middle  Ages. 
Stanley  Lane-Poole,  M.A. 

RELIGION  AND  CONSCIENCE  IN 
ANCIENT  EGYPT.  Fully  Illustrated. 
Crown  Svo.     2S.  6d. 

SYRIA  AND  EGYPT,  FROM  THE  TELL 
EL  AMARNA  TABLETS.  Crown  Svo. 
2S.  6d. 

EGYPTIAN  TALES.  Illustrated  by  Trist- 
ram Ellis.  In  Two  Volumes.  Crown  Svo. 
3^.  6d.  each. 

EGYPTIAN  DECORATIVE  ART.  With 
120  Illustrations.     Crown  Svo.    y.  6d. 

'  In  these  lectures  he  displays  rare  skill 
in  elucidating  the  development  of  decora- 
tive art  in  Egypt.' — Times. 

Philip  Pienaar.    WITH  STEYN  AND 

DE  WET.  Second  Edition.  Crown  Svo. 
3J.  6d. 

A  narrative  of  the  adventures  of  a  Boer 
telegraphist  of  the  Orange  Free  State 
during  the  war. 
PlautUS.  THE  CAPTIVI.  Edited,  with 
an  Introduction,  Textual  Notes,  and  a  Com- 
mentary, by  W.  M,  Lindsay,  Fellow  of 
Jesus  College,  Oxford.  Demy  Svo.  los.  6d, 
net. 

For  this  edition  all  the  important  mss. 
have  been  re-collated.  An  appendix  deals 
with  the  accentual  element  in  early  Latin 
verse.    The  Commentary  is  very  full. 

'A  work  of  great  erudition  and  fine  scholar- 
ship. ' — Scotsman. 
THE  CAPTIVI.    Adapted  for  Lower  Forms, 
by  J.  H.  Freese,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  St. 
John's,  Cambridge,     is.  6d. 

J.  T.  Plowden-Wardlaw,  B.A.,   King's 

College,  Cambridge.  EXAMINATION 
PAPERS  IN  ENGLISH  HISTORY. 
Crozvn  Svo.    zs.  6d. 

[School  Examination  Series. 

M.  C.  Potter,  M.A.,  F.L.S.  A  TEXT- 
BOOK OF  AGRICULTURAL  BOTANY. 
Illustrated.  2nd  Edition.  Crown  Svo. 
4^.  6d.  [University  Extension  Series. 

L.  L.  Price.  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College, 
Oxon.  A  HISTORY  OF  ENGLISH 
POLITICAL  ECONOMY.  Third 
Edition.         Crown  Svo.     2S.  6d. 

[University  Extension  Series. 

"Q,"  THE  GOLDEN  POMP.  A  Proces- 
sion of  English  Lyrics.  Arranged  by  A.  T. 
QuiLLER  Couch,  Crown  Svo.  Buckram. 
6s. 

R.  B.  Rackham,  M.A.  THE  ACTS  OF 
THE  APOSTLES.  With  Introduction 
and  Notes.     Demy  Svo.     12s,  6d. 

[Commentaries  on  the  R.V. 

A  really  helpful  book.    Both  introduction 

and  commentary  are   marked  by  common 

sense  and  adequate  knowledge.  '■ — Guardian. 

22 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Catalogue 

B.  W.  Randolph,  D.D.,  Principal  of  the 
Theological  College,  Ely.  THE  PSALMS 
OF  DAVID.  With  an  Introduction  and 
Notes.  Pott  Zvo.  Cloth,  2S. ;  leather, 
2j.  6d.  net.  [Library  of  Devotion. 

A  devotional  and  practical  edition  of  the 
Prayer  Boole  version  of  the  Psalms. 

Hastings  Rashdall,  M.  A. ,  Fellow  and  Tutor 
of  New  College,  Oxford.  DOCTRINE 
AND  DEVELOPMENT.   Crown  Zvo.  6s. 

W.  Reason,  M.A.  UNIVERSITY  AND 
SOCIAL  SETTLEMENTS.  Crown  Svo. 
as.  dd.  [Social  Questions  Series. 

Charles  Richardson.     THE  ENGLISH 

TURF.  With  numerous  Illustrations  and 
Plans.    Demy  Svo.     i$s. 

'  From  its  sensible  introduction  to  its  very 
complex  index,  this  is  about  the  best  book 
that  we  are  likely  for  some  time  to  see 
upon  the  subject  with  which  it  deals." — 
Athenaeum. 

M.  E.  Roberts.    See  C.  C.  Channer. 

A.  Robertson,  D.D.,  Principal  of  King's 
College,  London.  REGNUM  DEI.  The 
Bampton  Lectures  of  igoi.  Demy  Svo, 
I2S.  6d.  net. 

'  A  notable  volume.  Its  chief  value  and 
interest  is  in  its  historic  treatment  of  its 
great  theme.' — Daily  News. 

'  It  is  altogether  a  solid  piece  of  work  and 
a  valuable  contribution  to  the  history  of 
Christian  thought.' — Scotsman. 

Sir G.  S.  Robertson,  K. C.S.I.  CHITRAL : 
The  Story  of  a  Minor  Siege.  With  numer- 
ous Illustrations,  Map  and  Plans.  Second 
Edition.    Demy  Zvo.     los.  6d. 

'A  book  which  the  Elizabethans  would 
have  thought  wonderful.  More  thrilling, 
more  piquant,  and  more  human  than  any 
novel." — Newcastle  Chronicle. 

J.  W.  Robertson-Scott.   THE  PEOPLE 

OF  CHINA.  With  a  Map.  Crown  Svo. 
3X.  6d, 

A.  W.  Robinson,  M.A.  THE  EPISTLE  TO 
THE  GALATIANS.  Explained.  Eca^. 
Svo.     IS.  td.  net,  [Churchman's  Bible. 

'  The  most  attractive,  sensible,  and  in- 
structive manual  for  people  at  large,  which 
we  have  ever  seen.' — Church  Gazette. 

CecUia Robinson.    THE  MINISTRY  OF 

DEACONESSES.  With  an  Introduction 
by  the  Lord  Bishop  of  Winchester.  Crowjt 
Svo.     3s.  6d. 

G,  Rodwell,  B.A.  NEW  TESTAMENT 
GREEK.  A  Course  for  Beginners.  With 
a  Preface  by  Walter  Lock,  D.D.,  Warden 
of  Keble  College.    Fca/.  Svo,    zs,  td. 

Edward  Rose.     THE  ROSE  READER. 

With  numerous  Illustrations.  Crown  Svo. 
■zs.  6d.  Also  in  4  Parts.  Parts  I.  and II. 
6d.  each  ;  Part  III.  Sd. ;  Part  IV.  lod. 

A  reader  on  a  new  and  original  plan. 

The  distinctive  feature  of  this  book  is  the 
entire  avoidance  of  irregularly-spelt  words 
until  the  pupil  has  thoroughly  mastered 
the  principle  of  reading,  and  learned  its 
enjoyment.  The  reading  of  connected  sen- 
tences begins  from  the  first  page,  before  the 
entire  alphabet  is  introduced. 

E.  Denison  Ross,  M.A.  See  W.  Beckford, 
A.  W.  Kinglake,  and  F.  H.  Skrine. 

A.  E.  Ruble,  M.A.,  Head  Master  of  the 
Royal  Naval  School,  Eltham.  THE  GOS- 
PEL ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MARK. 
Edited  by.  With  three  Maps.  Crown  Svo. 
IS.  6d.        [Methuen's  Junior  School  Books. 

W.  Clark  RusselL  THE  LIFE  OF 
ADMIRAL  LORD  COLLINGWOOD. 
With  Illustrations  by  F.Bkangwyn.  Fourth 
Edition.    Crown  Svo.     6s. 

'  A  book  which  we  should  like  to  see  in 
the  hands  of  every  boy  in  the  country." — 
Si,  James's  Gazette. 

Viscount  St.  Cyres.  THE  LIFE  OF 
FRAN9OIS  DE  FENELON.  Illus- 
trated.    Demy  Svo.     jos.  6d. 

'  A  work  of  high  historical  and  lively  in- 
terest."— Outlook. 

'A  most  interesting  life  of  a  most  interest- 
ing personage. " — Scotsman. 

'  We  have  in  this  admirable  volume  a  most 
valuable  addition  to  our  historical  portrait 
gallery." — Daily  News, 

St.  Francis  de  Sales.    ON  THE  LOVE 

OF  GOD.  Edited  by  W.  J.  Knox-Little, 
M.A.  Pott  Svo.  Cloth,  2S.  ;  leather, 
2S.  6d.  net.  [Library  of  Devotion. 

J.  Sargeaunt,  M.A.  ANNALS  OF  WEST- 
MINSTER SCHOOL.  With  numerous 
Illustrations.    Demy  Svo.     qs.  6d. 

C.  Sathas.  THE  HISTORY  OF 
PSELLUS.    Demy  Svo.    15J.  ttet. 

[Byzantine  Texts. 

H.G.  Seeley,  F.R.S.  DRAGONS  OF  THE 
AIR.  With  many  Illustrations.  Crown 
Svo.    6s. 

A  popular  history  of  the  most  remarkable 
flying  animals  which  ever  lived.  Their  rela- 
tions to  mammals,  birds,  and  reptiles,  living 
and  extinct,  are  shown  by  an  original  series 
of  illustrations.  The  scattered  remains  pre- 
served in  Europe  and  the  United  States  have 
been  put  together  accurately  to  show  the 
varied  forms  of  the  animals.  The  book  is  a 
natural  history  of  these  extinct  animals 
which  flew  by  means  of  a  single  finger. 

General  Literature 

23 

V.  p.  Sells,  M.A.  THE  MECHANICS 
OF  DAILY  LIFE.  Illustrated.  Crojun 
87/(7.     2j.  6d.    [University  Extension  Series. 

Et:inund  Selous.  TOMMY  SMITH'S 
ANIMALS.  Illustrated  by  G.  W.  Ord. 
Second  Edition.     Fcap.  Zvo.     7.S.  6d. 

'  A  quaint,  fascinating  little  book  :  a  nur- 
sery classic' — Athentsutn. 

William  Shakespeare. 

THE  ARDEN  EDITION. 

'  No  edition  of  Shakespeare  is  likely  to 
prove  more  attractive  and  satisfactory  than 
this  one.  It  is  beautifully  printed  and  paged 
and  handsomely  and  simply  bound.' — 

St.  James's  Gazette. 

Demy  Zvo.  3^.  6d.  each  volume.  General 
Editor,  W.  J.  Craig.  An  Edition  of 
Shakespeare  in  single  Plays.  Edited  with 
a  full  Introduction,  Textual  Notes,  and 
a  Commentary  at  the  foot  of  the  page.  The 
first  volumes  are  : — 

HAMLET.  Edited  by  Edward  Dowden, 
Litt.D. 

ROMEO  AND  JULIET.  Edited  by 
Edward  Dowden,  Litt.D. 

KING  LEAR.     Edited  by  W.  J.  Craig. 

JULIUS    CAESAR.      Edited  by  M.    Mac- 

MILLAN,  M.A. 

THE    TEMPEST. 

Luce. 

Edited    by    Morton 

A.  Sharp.  VICTORIAN  POETS.  Crmvn 
Svo.     2S.  dd.     [University  Extension  Series. 

J.  S.  ShedlOCk.  THE  PIANOFORTE 
SONATA  :  Its  Origin  and  Development. 
Cro-cvii  1>vo.    5^. 

'  This  work  should  be  in  the  possession  of 
every  musician  and  amateur.  A  concise 
and  lucid  history  and  a  very  valuable  work 
for  reference.' — A  thettcEum. 

Arthur  Sherwell,  M.A.    LIFE  IN  WEST 

LONDON.  Third  Edition.  Cro7vnZvo. 
zs.  6d.  [Social  Questions  Series, 

F    H,  Skrine  and  E.  D.  Ross.    THE 

HEART  OF  ASIA.  With  Maps  and 
many  Illustrations  by  Verestchagin. 
Large  Crown  Svo.     Jos.  6d.  net. 

'  This  volume  will  form  a  landmark  in  our 
knowledge  of  Central  Asia.  .  .  .  Illuminat- 
ing and  convincing.' — Times. 

Evan  Small,  M.A.  THE  EARTH.  An 
Introduction  to  Physiography.  Illustrated. 
Cro7vn  Zvo.     ss.  6d. 

[University  Extension  Series. 

NOWell  C.  Smith,  Fellow  of  New  College, 
Oxford.  SELECTIONS  FROM 
WORDSWORTH.  Pott  Zvo.  Cloth, 
IS.  6d.  net;  leather,  zs.  6d.  net. 

[Little  Library. 

Sophocles.  ELECTRA  AND  AJAX. 
Translated  by  E.  D.  A.  Morshead,  M.A., 
Assistant  Master  at  Winchester,     zs.  6d. 

[Classical  Translations. 

R.  Southey.  ENGLISH  SEAMEN 
(Howard,  Clifford,  Hawkins,  Drake,  Caven- 
dish). Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by 
David  Hannay.  Second  Edition.  Crown 
Svo.    6s. 

'  A  brave,  inspiriting  book.' — Black  and 
White. 

C.  H.  Spence,  M.A.,  Clifton  College.  HIS- 
TORY AND  GEOGRAPHY  EXAM- 
INATION PAPERS.  Second  Edition. 
Crown  8vo.    2s.  6d. 

[School  Examination  Series. 

W.  A.  SpOOner,  M.A.,  Fellowof  New  College, 
Oxford.  BISHOP  BUTLER.  With  Por- 
trait.    Crown  Svo.    ^s.  6d. 

[Leaders  of  Religion. 

J.  W.  Stanbridge,  B.D.,  Rector  of  Bainton, 
Canon  of  York,  and  sometime  Fellow  of  St. 
John's  College,  Oxford.  A  BOOK  OF 
DEVOTIONS.  Pott  Svo.  Cloth,  2s.; 
leather,  is.  6d.  net.      [Library  of  Devotion. 

'  It  is  probably  the  best  book  of  its  kind. 
It  deserves  high  commendation.' — Church 
Gazette. 

See  also  Cardinal  Bona. 

'Stancliffe.'  GOLF  DO'S  AND  DONT'S. 
Fcap.  Iivo.     \s. 

A.  M.  M.  Stedman,  M.A. 

INITIA  LATINA:  Easy  Lessons  on  Ele- 
mentary Accidence.  Fifth  Edition.  FcaJ>. 
Zvo.     IS, 

FIRST  LATIN  LESSONS.  Sixth  Edition. 
Crown  &VO.     zs. 

FIRST  LATIN  READER.  _  With  Notes 
adapted  to  the  Shorter  Latin  Primer  and 
Vocabulary.  Sixth  Edition  revised.  iSmo. 
IS.  6d. 

EASY  SELECTIONS  FROM  CAESAR. 
Part  I.  The  Helvetian  War.  Second  Edi- 
tion.    iSmo.     js. 

EASYSELECTIONSFROM  LIVY.  Part  i. 
The  Kings  of  Rome.  jSmo.  Second  Edi- 
tion,    js.  6d. 

EASY  LATIN  PASSAGES  FOR  UNSEEN 
TRANSLATION.  Eig-hth  Edition. 
Fcap.  %vo.     IS,  6d. 

EXEMPLA  LATINA.  First  Lessons  in 
Latin  Accidence.  With  Vocabulary.  Crown 
St'o.     is. 

24 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Catalogue 

EASY  LATIN  EXERCISES  ON  THE 
SYNTAX  OF  THE  SHORTER  AND 
REVISED  LATIN  PRIMER.  With 
Vocabulary.  Eighth  and  Cheaper  Edition, 
re-written.  Crown  Zvo.  is.  6d.  Key, 
3J.  net.     Original  Edition.     2S.  6d. 

THE  LATIN  COMPOUND  SENTENCE  : 
Rules  and  Exercises.  Second  Edition. 
Crown  Zvo.    is.  6d.    With  Vocabulary,    zs. 

NOTANDA  QUAEDAM  :  Miscellaneous 
Latin  Exercises  on  Common  Rules  and 
Idioms.  Fourth  Edition.  Fcap.Zvo.  is.6d. 
With  Vocabulary,     zs.     Key,  zs.  net. 

LATIN  VOCABULARIES  FOR  REPETI- 
TION :  Arranged  according  to  Subjects. 
Tenth  Edition.    Fcap.  Zvo.     \s.  6d. 

A  VOCABULARY  OF  LATIN  IDIOMS. 
iSmo.     Second  Edition,     is. 

STEPS  TO  GREEK.  Second  Edition,  re- 
vised,    liino.     IS. 

A  SHORTER  GREEK  PRIMER.  Crown 
Zvo.     IS.  6d. 

EASY  GREEK  EXERCISES.  By  C.  G. 
BoTTiNG,  B.A.     Crown  Zvo.     zs. 

EASY  GREEK  PASSAGES  FOR  UNSEEN 
TRANSLATION.  Third  Edition,  revised. 
Fcap.  Zvo.     IS.  6d. 

GREEK  VOCABULARIES  FORREPETI 
TION.  Arranged  according  to  Subjects, 
Third  Edition.     Fcap.  Zvo.     is.  6d. 

GREEK  TESTAMENT  SELECTIONS 
For  the  use  of  Schools.  With  Introduction 
Notes,  and  Vocabulary.  Third  Edition 
Fcap.  Zvo.     zs.  6d. 

STEPS    TO    FRENCH.      Ftytk    Edition 

iZmo.     Zd. 
FIRST  FRENCH  LESSONS.    Fifth  Edi 

tion,  revised.     Crown  Zvo.     is. 

EASY  FRENCH  PASSAGES  FOR  UN 
SEEN  TRANSLATION.  Fourth  Edi 
tion,  revised.     Fcap.  Zvo.     is.  6d. 

EASY  FRENCH  EXERCISES  ON  ELE 
MENTARY  SYNTAX.  With  Vocabulary 
Second  Edition.  Crown  Zvo.  zs.  6d.  Key 
2S.  net. 

FRENCH  VOCABULARIES  FOR  RE- 
PETITION :  Arranged  according  to  Sub- 
jects.    Tenth  Edition.    Fcap.  Zvo.     is. 

FRENCH  EXAMINATION  PAPERS  IN 
MISCELLANEOUS  GRAMMAR  AND 
IDIOMS.  Eleventh  Edition.  Crown  Zvo. 
zs.  6d.  [School  Examination  Series. 

A  Key,  issued  to  Tutors  and  Private 
Students  only,  to  be  had  on  application 
to  the  Publishers.  Fifth  Edition. 
Crozun  Zvo.     6s.  net. 

GENERAL    KNOAVLEDGE    EXAMINA- 
TION PAPERS.  Fo7irth  Edition.  Crown 
Zvo.     zs.  6d.      [School  Examination  Series. 
Key  {Second  Edition)  issued  as  above. 
js.  net. 

GREEK   EXAMINATION   PAPERS    IN 

MISCELLANEOUS  GRAMMAR  AND 

IDTOMS.      Sixth  Edition.      Crown  Zvo. 

zs.  6d.  [School  Examination  Series. 

Key  {Second  Edition)  issued  as  above. 

6s.  net. 

LATIN    EXAMINATION    PAPERS    IN 

MISCELLANEOUS  GRAMMAR  AND 

IDIOMS.   Eleventh  Edition.    Crown  Zvo. 

zs.  6d.  [School  Examination  Series. 

Key  {Fourth  Edition)  issued  as  above. 

6s.  net. 

R.  Elliott  Steel,  M.A.,  F.C.S.  THE 
WORLD  OF  SCIENCE.  Including 
Chemistry,  Heat,  Light,  Sound,  Magnetism, 
Electricity,  Botany,  Zoology,  Physiologj', 
Astronomy,  and  Geology.  147  Illustrations. 
Second  Edition,     Crown  Zvo.     zs.  6d. 

PHYSICS  EXAMINATION  PAPERS. 
Crown  Zvo.     zs.  6d. 

[School  Examination  Series. 

C.  Stephenson,  of  the  Technical  College, 
Bradford,  and  F.  SuddardS,  of  the  York- 
shire College,  Leeds.  ORNAMENTAL 
DESIGN  FOR  WOVEN  FABRICS. 
Demy  Zvo.    Secojid  Edition,     "js.  6d. 

J.   Stephenson,  M.A.    THE    CHIEF 

TRUTHS  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN 
FAITH.     Crown  Zvo.     3^.  6d. 

An  attempt  to  present  in  clear  and  popular 
form  the  main  truths  of  the  Faith.  The 
book  is  intended  for  lay  workers  in  the 
Church,  for  educated  parents  and  for 
teachers  generally. 

Laurence  Sterne.     A  SENTIMENTAL 

JOURNEY.  Edited  by  H.  W.  Paul. 
Pott  Zvo.  Cloth,  is.  6d.  net;  leather, 
zs.  6d.  net.  [Little  Library. 

W.  Sterry,  M.A.    annals  of  eton 

COLLEGE.  With  numerous  Illustrations. 
Demy  Zvo.     ts.  6d. 

R.  L.  Stevenson.  THE  LETTERS  OF 
ROBERT  LOUIS  STEVENSON  TO 
HIS  FAMILY  AND  FRIENDS. 
Selected  and  Edited,  with  Notes  and  Intro- 
ductions, by  Sidney  Colvin.  Sixth  and 
Cheaper  Edition.    Crown  Zvo.     izs. 

Library  Edition.  Demy  Zvo.  zvols.  zss.net. 

'. '  Irresistible  in  their  raciness,  their  variety, 
their  animation  ...  of  extraordinary 
fascination.  A  delightful  inheritance,  the 
truest  record  of  a  "richly  compounded 
spirit "  that  the  literature  of  our  time  has 
preserved.' — Times. 

General  Literature 

25 

VAILIMA  LETTERS.  With  an  Etched 
Portrait  by  William  Strang.  Third 
Edition.    Crown  Zvo.     Buckram.    6s. 

THE  LIFE  OF  R.  L.  STEVENSON.  See 
G.  Balfour. 

E.  D.  Stone,  M.A.,  late  Assistant  Master  at 
Eton.  SELECTIONS  FROM  THE 
ODYSSEY.    Fcap.  8w.     is.  6d. 

Charles  Strachey.     See  Chesterfield. 

A.  W.  Streane,  D.D.   ecclesiastes. 

Explained.    Fcap.  8vo.     is.  6d.  net. 

[Churchman's  Bible. 
'  Scholarly,  suggestive,  and   particularly 
interesting. ' — Bookman. 

Clement  E.  Stretton.    A  HISTORY  OF 

the    MIDLAND    RAILWAY.       With 
numerous  Illustrations.   DemyZvo.    I'zs.dd. 

H.  Stroud,  D.Sc,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Physics 
in  the  Durham  College  of  Science,  New- 
castle-on-Tyne.  PRACTICAL  PHYSICS. 
Fully  Illustrated.    Crown  ?iVO.    3^.  6d. 

[Textbooks  of  Technology. 

F.  SuddardS.     See  C.  Stephenson. 

Jonathan  Swift.  THE  JOURNAL  TO 
STELLA,  Edited  by  G.  A.  Aitken. 
Crown  ivo.     6s. 

[Methuen's  Standard  Library. 

J.  E.  Symes,  M.A.  THE  FRENCH 
REVOLUTION.     Crown  Zvo.     2j.  6d. 

[University  Extension  Series. 

Tacitus.  AGRICOLA.  With  Introduction, 
Notes,  Map,  etc.  By  R.  F.  Davis,  M.A., 
late  Assistant  Master  at  Weymouth  College. 
Crown  Svo.     2S, 

GERMANIA.     By  the  same  Editor.     Crown 

&V0.      2S. 

AGRICOLA  AND  GERMANIA.  Translated 
by  R.  B.  TowNSHEND,  late  Scholar  of 
Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  Crown  Zvo. 
as,  6d,  [Classical  Translations. 

J.Tauler.  THE  INNER  way.  Being 
Thirty-six  Sermons  for  Festivals  by  John 
Tauler.  Edited,  with  an  Introduction. 
By  A.  W.  HuTTON,  M.  A.  Pott  Zvo.  Cloth, 
2s. ;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 

[Library  of  Devotion. 

E.  L.  Taunton.    A  HISTORY  OF  the 

JESUITS  IN  ENGLAND.     With   Illus- 
trations.   Detny  Zvo.     21s.  net. 

'A  history  of  permanent  value,  which 
covers  ground  never  properly  investigated 
before,  and  is  replete  with  the  results  of 
original  research.  A  most  interesting  and 
careful  book.' — Literature. 

F.  G.    Taylor,    M.A.      COMMERCIAL 

ARITHMETIC.     Third  Edition.    Cro^vn 
Zvo.     IS.  6d.  [Commercial  Series. 

T.  M.  Taylor,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Gonville  and 
Caius  College,  Cambridge.  A  CONSTI- 
TUTIONAL AND  POLITICAL  HIS- 
TORY OF  ROME.  Crown  Zvo.  js.  6d. 
'  We  fully  recognise  the  value  of  this 
carefully  written  work,  and  admire  especially 
the  fairness  aadsobrietyofhis  judgment  and 
the  human  interest  with  which  he  has  in- 
spired a  subject  which  in  some  hands  be- 
comes a  mere  series  of  cold  abstractions.  It 
is  a  work  that  will  be  stimulating  to  the 
student  of  Roman  history.' — Athenerutn. 

Alfred,  Lord  Tennyson,    THE  EARLY 

POEMS  OF.  Edited,  with  Notes  and  an 
Introduction,  by  J.  Churton  Collins, 
M.A.     Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

[Methuen's  Standard  Library. 

Also  with  ID  Illustrations  in  Photogravure 
by  W.  E.  F.  Britten.    Demy  Zvo.    10s.  6d. 

An  elaborate  edition  of  the  celebrated 
volume  which  was  published  in  its  final  and 
definitive  form  in  1853.  This  edition  con- 
tains a  long  Introduction  and  copious  Notes, 
textual  and  explanatory.  It  also  contains 
in  an  Appendix  all  the  Poems  which  Tenny- 
son afterwards  omitted. 

MAUD.  Edited  by  Elizabeth  Words- 
worth. Pott  Zvo.  Cloth,  IS.  6d.  net; 
leather,  2s.  6d.  net.  [Little  Library. 

IN  MEMORIAM.  Edited,  with  an  Intro- 
duction and  Notes,  by  H.  C.  Beeching, 
M.A.  Pott  Zvo.  Cloth,  is.  6d.  net; 
leather,  2s.  6d.  net.  [Little  Library. 

THE  EARLY  POEMS  OF.  Edited  by  J. 
C.  Collins,  M.A.  PottZvo.  Cloth,  is.  6d. 
net;  leather,  2s.  6d.  7iet.       [Little  Library. 

THE  PRINCESS.  Edited  by  Elizabeth 
Wordsworth.  Pott  Zvo.  Cloth,  is.  6d. 
net;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net.      [Little  Library. 

Alice  Terton.  LIGHTS  AND  SHADOWS 
IN  A  HOSPITAL.     Crown  Zvo.    3s.  6d. 

W.  M.  Thackeray.   VANITY  FAIR. 

With  an  Introduction  by  S.  Gwynn.  Three 
Volumes,  Pott  Zvo,  Each  volume,  cloth, 
IS.  6d,  net ;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 

[Little  Library. 
PENDENNIS.       Edited    by    S.    Gwynn. 
Three  Volumes.     Pott  Zvo,    Each  volume, 
cloth,  IS.  6d.  net ;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 

[Little  Library. 
F.  W.  Theobald,  M.A.     INSECT  LIFE. 
Illustrated.     Crown  Zvo.     is.  6d. 

[University  Extension  Series. 

A.  H.  Thompson.  CAMBRIDGE  AND 
ITS  COLLEGES.  Illustrated  by  E.  H. 
New.  Pott  Zvo,  Cloth,  3s.:  leather, 
2S.  6d,  net.  [Little  Guides. 

'  It  is  brightly  written  and  learned,  and 
is  just  such  a  book  as  a  cultured  visitor 
needs. ' — Scotsman, 

26 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Catalogue 

Paget  Toynbee,  LittD.,  M.A.     See  Dante. 

DANTE  STUDIES  AND  RESEARCHES. 
Detny  Zvo.     los.  6d.  net. 

THE  LIFE  OF  DANTE  ALIGHIERI. 
With  12  Illustrations.  Second  Edition. 
Fcap.  Zvo.  Cloth,  3^.  dd.;  leather,  ^s. 
net.  [Little  Biographies. 

Herbert  Trencb.   DEIRDRE  WED :  and 

Other  Poems.     Croivn  Svo.     $s. 

Pmiip  Trevor  (Dux).  THE  LIGHTER 
SIDE  OF  CRICKET.     Crown  Svo.    6s. 

'A  wholly  entertaining  book.' — Glasg^ow 
Herald. 

'  The  most  welcome  book  on  our  national 
game  published  for  years." — County  Gentle- 
man. 

G.  E.  Troutbeck.    WESTMINSTER 

ABBEY.     Illustrated  by  F.  D.  Bedford. 

Pott  Zvo.      Cloth,  3f. ;   leather,  3^.  dd.  net. 

[Little  Guides. 

A    delightful    miniature    hand-book.' — 

Glas§;oiv  Herald. 

'  In  comeliness,  and  perhaps  In  complete- 
ness, this  work  must  take  the  first  place.' — 
Academy. 
'  A  really  first-rate  guide-book.' — 

Literature. 

Gertrude  TuckweU.    THE  STATE  AND 
ITS  CHILDREN.     Crown  Svo.     is.  6d. 
[Social  Questions  Series. 

Louisa  Twining.    WORKHOUSES  AND 

PAUPERISM.     Crown  Svo.    2S.  6d. 

[Social  Questions  Series. 

6.  W.  Wade,  D.D.     OLD  TESTAMENT 

HISTORY.     With  Maps.    Crown  Svo.    6s. 

'  Careful,  scholarly,  embodying  the  best 

results   of  modern   criticism,    and    written 

with  great  lucidity.' — £jcafniner, 

Izaak  Walton.  THE  LIVES  OF  DONNE, 
WOTTON,  HOOKER,  HERBERT  and 
SANDERSON.  With  an  Introduction  by 
Vernon  Blackburn,  and  a  Portrait.  3^.  6d. 

THE  COMPLEAT  ANGLER.  Edited  by 
J.  BuCHAN.  Pott  Svo.  Cloth.  IS.  6d.  net  ; 
leather,  2s.  6d.  net.  [Little  Library. 

Grace  Warrack.  See  Lady  Julian  of  Nor- 
wich. 

Mrs.  Alfred  Waterhouse.     A  LITTLE 

BOOK  OF  LIFE  AND  DEATH.  Edited 
by.  Pott  Svo,  Cloth,  is.  6d.  net;  leather, 
IS,  6d.  net.  [Little  Library. 

C.  C.  J.  Webb,  M.A.     See  St.  Anselm, 

F.  C.  Webber.  CARPENTRY  AND 
JOINERY.  With  many  Illustrations. 
Second  Edition.    Crown  Sz'o.    2>^.  6d. 

'An  admirable  elementary  text-book  on 
the  subject.'— ^w/W^r. 

Sidney  H.  Wells.  PRACTICAL  ME- 
CHANICS. With  75  Illustrations  and 
Diagrams.  Second  Edition.  Crown  Svo. 
2S.  6d.  [Textbooks  of  Technology. 

J.  Wells,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Wadham 
College.  OXFORD  AND  OXFORD 
LIFE.  By  Members  of  the  University. 
Third  Edition.     Crown  Svo.     3J.  6d. 

A  SHORT  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  Thira 
Edition.    With  3  Maps.     Cr.  Svo.     y.  6d. 

This  book  is  intended  for  the  Middle  and 
Upper  Forms  of  Public  Schools  and  for 
Pass  Students  at  the  Universities.  It  con- 
tains copious  Tables,  etc. 

'  An  original  work  written  on  an  original 
plan,  and  with  uncommon  freshness  and 
vigour. ' — Speaker. 

OXFORD  AND  ITS  COLLEGES.     Illus- 
trated  by  E.   H.  New.     Fourth  Edition. 
Pott  Svo.    Cloth,  3J. ;  leather,  3^.  6d.  net. 
[Little  Guides. 
'An  admirable  and  accurate  little  treat- 
ise, attractively  illustrated.' — World. 

F.  Weston,  M.A. ,  Curate  of  St.  Matthew's, 
Westminster.  THE  HOLY  SACRIFICE. 
Pott  Svo.     6d.  net. 

Helen  C.  Wetmore.  THE  LAST  OF  the 
GREAT  SCOUTS  ('  Buffalo  Bill').  With 
Illustrations,     Detny  Svo.     6s. 

'  A  narrative  of  one  of  the  most  attractive 
figures  in  the  public  eye.' — Daily  Chronicle. 

C.  WMbley.     See  Henley  and  Whibley. 

L  Whibley,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Pembroke 
CoUeRe,  Cambridge.  GREEK  OLIGAR- 
CHIES: THEIR  ORGANISATION 
AND  CHARACTER.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

G.  H.  Whitaker,  M.A.  THE  EPISTLE 
OF  ST.  PAUL  THE  APOSTLE  TO 
THE  EPHESIANS.  Edited  by.  Fcap. 
Svo.     IS.  6d.  net.  [Churchman's  Bible. 

Gilbert  White.     THE  NATURAL  HIS- 
TORY   OF    SELBORNE.       Edited    by 
L.    C.    MiALL,    F.R.S.,    assisted    by  W. 
Warde  Fowler,  M.A.    Cro7vn  S210.    6s. 
[Methuen's  .Standard  Library. 

E.  E.  Whitfield.  PRECIS  WRITING 
AND  OFFICE  CORRESPONDENCE. 
Crown  Svo,     2s.  [Commercial  Series. 

COMMERCIAL  EDUCATION  IN 
THEORY    AND    PRACTICE.      Cro^vn 

Svo,    $s. 

An  introduction  to  Methuen's  Commercial 
Series  treating  the  question  of  Commercial 
Education  fully  from  both  the  point  of  view 
of  the  teacher  and  of  the  parent. 

[Commercial  Series. 

Miss  Whitley.     See  Lady  Dilke. 

General  Literature 

27 

W.    H.    Wilkins,    B.A.     THE    ALIEN 

INVASION.     Crmvn  Sva.     us.  6d. 

[Social  Questions  Series. 

J.  Frome  Wilkinson,  M.A.  MUTUAL 
THRIFT.    Crown  8w.     2j.  6d._ 

[Social  Questions  Series. 

W.  Williamson.  THE  BRITISH  GAR- 
DENER.   Illustrated.    X>t:»iy  Svo.    10s.  6d. 

W. Williamson,  B.A.  JUNIOR  ENGLISH 
EXAMINATION  PAPERS;  J'ca^.  8w. 
IS.  [Junior  Examination  Series, 

A  JUNIOR  ENGLISH  GRAMMAR.  With 
numerous  passages  for  parsing  and  analysis, 
and  a  chapter  on  Essay  Writing.  Crown 
Zvo.     2S.    [Methuen's  Junior  School  Books. 

A  CLASS-BOOK  OF  DICTATION 
PASSAGES.  Siixh  Edition.  Crown  Zvo. 
IS.  6d.         [Methuen's  Junior  School  Books. 

EASY  DICTATION  AND  SPELLING. 
Fcap.  Svo.     IS. 

E.  M.  Wilmot-Buxton.    THE  MAKERS 
OK  EUROPE.     Cro7i'nS7'o.     y.6d. 
A  Text-book  of  European    History    for 
Middle  Forms. 

Richard   Wilton,   M.A.,  Canon   of  York. 
LYRA  PASTORALIS:  Songs  of  Nature, 
Church,  and  Home.     Pott  Zto.     2s.  dd. 
A  volume  of  devotion^il  poems. 

S.  E.  Winbolt,  M.A.  Assistant  Master  in 
Christ's  Hospital.  EXERCISES  IN 
LATIN  ACCIDENCE.  Crown  Zvo.  \s. 
bd. 

An  elementary  book  adapted  for  Lower 
Forms  to  accompany  the  Shorter  Latin 
Primer. 

C.  A.  Windle,  F.R.S.,  D.Sc.  SHAKE- 
SPEARE'S  COUNTRY.  Illustrated  by 
E.  H.  New.  Second  Edition,  Pott  Svo. 
Cloth,  3.9.;  leather,  ^s.  dd.  net. 

[Little  Guides. 

B, 

'  One  of  the  most  charming  guide  books. 
Both  for  the  library  and  as  a  travelling 
companion  the  book  is  equally  choice  and 
serviceable. ' — Academy. 

THE  MALVERN  COUNTRY.  Illustrated 
by  E.  H.  New.  Pott  Zvo.  Cloth,  y.; 
leather,  3^.  dd.  net.  [Little  Guides. 

Canon  Winterbothami  M.A.,  B.Sc,  LL.B. 

THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN  HERE 

AND  HEREAFTER.    Crown^Zvo.  y.dd. 

[Churchman's  Library. 

J.  A.  E.  Wood.  HOW  TO  MAKE  A 
DRESS.  Illustrated.  Second  Edition. 
Crown  Zvo.     is.  td. 

[Text  Books  of  Technology. 

Elizabeth  Wordsworth.     See  Tennyson. 

Arthur  Wright,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Queens' 
College,  Cambridge.  SOME  NEW 
TESTAMENT  PROBLEMS.  Crown 
Svo.     6s.  [Churchman's  Library. 

Sophie  Wright.  GERMAN  VOCABU- 
LARIES FOR  REPETITION.  Pea/. 
Svo.     IS.  6d, 

A.  B.  Wylde.  MODERN  ABYSSINIA. 
With  a  Map  and  a  Portrait.  Demy  Svo. 
i^s.  net. 

G.  Wyndham,  M.P.    THE  POEMS  OF 

WILLIAM  SHAKESPEARE.  With  an 
Introduction  and  Notes.  Demy  Svo.  Buck- 
ram, gilt  top.    iQS.  td. 

'  We  have  no  hesitation  in  describing  Mr. 
George  Wyndham's  introduction  as  a 
masterly  piece  of  criticism,  and  all  who  love 
our  Elizabethan  literature  will  find  a  very 
garden  of  delight  in  it. ' — Spectator. 

W.  B.  Yeats.  AN  ANTHOLOGY  OF 
IRISH  VERSE.  Revised  and  Enlarged 
Edition.     Crown  Svo.     3J.  iid. 

Metbuen's  StanDarD  Xibrarg 

Crown  Svo.     6s. 

Life   and   writings.     By 
Edited  by  G.    Birkbeck   Hill, 

MEMOIRS  OF  MY 
Edward  Gibbon. 
LL.D. 

THE  Decline    and   fall   of    the    Ro.man 

Empire.    Edited    by  J.    B.     Bury,    LL.D.      /« 

Seven  Vohttnes.       Also,    Demy  ^vo.        Gilt  to^. 

Zs.  td.  each. 
The  Natural  History    of   Selborne.     By 

Gilbert  White.     Edited  by   L.   C.    Miall,   F.R.S., 

Assisted  by  W.  Warde  Fowler.  M.A. 
THE  History  of  the  Life  of  Thomas  Ell- 

WOOU.    Edited  by  C.  G.  Crump,  M.A. 

La  Commedia  Di  Dante  Alighierl  The  Italian 
Text.  Edited  by  Paget  Toynbee.  Litt.D.,  M.A. 
Also,  Demy  Svo.     Gilt  top.    Ss.  M. 

The  EarlyPohms  OF  Alfred.  LordTennyson. 

Edited  by  J.  Churton  Collins,  M.A. 

The  Journal  to  Sthlla.  By  Jonathan  Swift. 
Edited  by  G.  A.  Ailken,  M.A. 

The  Letters  of  Lord  Chesterfield  to  his 
Son.  Edited  by  C.  Strachey,  and  Notes  by  A. 
Calthrop.     1-wo  yohtnies. 

aSgsantlne  Zcits, 

ZACHARIAH  of  Mitvlene.     Translated  by  F.  J. 

Hamilton,   D.D.,  and  E.  W.  Brooks.     JJemy  Svo. 

12s.  6it.  jtet. 
EVAGRIUS.     Edited  by  Li^on    Parmentier  and   M. 

I:idez.     DemvSvo.     icJ-.  67.  ».v.'. 

Edited  by  J.  B.  BURY,  M.A.,  Litt.D. 

The  History  of  FSELLUS.    Edited  by  C.  Sathas. 

Demy  bvo.    i$s.  net. 
ECTHESIS  Chronica.    Edited  by  Professor  Lamb- 

ros.     Oemy  Si  o.    is.  td.  net. 

28 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Catalogue 

^be  Xtttle  Xibratg 

With  Introductions,  Notes,  and  Photogravure  Frontispieces. 
Pott  8vo.     Each  Volume,  cloth,  is.  (>d.  net ;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 

'Altogether  good  to  look  upon,  and  to  handle.'— (?«//co/t. 

'A  perfect  series.' — Pilot. 

'  It  is  difficult  to  conceive  more  attractive  volumes.'— 6"/.  James's  Gazette. 

'  Very  delicious  little  books.' — Literature. 

'  Delightful  editions.' — Record. 

VANITY  FAIR.    By  W.   M.  Thackeray.     Edited  by 
S.  Gwynn.     Three  yalumes. 

Pendennis.    By  W.  M.  Thackeray.    Edited  by  S. 
Gwynn.     Three  Volutnes. 

John  Halifax,   Gentleman.     By   Mrs.   Craik. 

Edited  by  Annie  Matheson.    Two  Volumes. 
PRIDE  AND  Prejudice.    By  Jane  Austen.    Edited 

by  E.  V.  Lucas.    Two  Volumes. 

NORTHANGER   ABBEY.    By  Jane  Austen.    Edited 
by  E.  V.  Lucas. 

THE  Princess.    By  Alfred.  Lord  Tennyson.   Edited 
by  Elizabeth  Wordsworth. 

Maud.     By    Alfred,    Lord   Tennyson.     Edited   by 
Elizabeth  Wordsworth. 

LV  Memoriam.    By  Alfred,  Lord  Tennyson.   Edited 
by  H.  C.  Beeching,  M.A. 

TheEarlypoemsof  Alfred,  Lord  Tennyson. 

Edited  by  J.  C.  Collins,  M.A. 

A    LITTLE    BOOK    OF    ENGLISH    LYRICS.       With 
Notes. 

The  Inferno  of  Dante.    Translated  by  H.  F. 
Gary.    Edited  by  Paffet  Toynbee,  Litt.D.,  M.A. 

The  PURGATORIo  of  Dantb.    Translated  by  H. 

F.  Gary.    Edited  by  Paget  Toynbee,  Litt.D.,  M.A. 

The  Paradiso  of  Dante.    Translated  by  H.  F. 
Gary.    Edited  by  Paget  Toynbee,  Litt.D.,  M.A. 

A  Little  Book  of  Scottish  Verse.   Edited  by 

T.  F.  Henderson. 

A  Little  Book  of  Light  Verse.   Edited  by  A. 

G.  Deane. 

Selections  from  Wordsworth. 
Nowell  G.  Smith. 

Edited  by 

The  English  Poems  of  Richard  Crashaw. 
Edited  by  Edward  Hutton. 

Selections  from  William  Blake. 
M.  Peruguii. 

Edited  by 

With  an  Introduction 

By   Mrs.   GaskelL     Edited  by  E.  V. 

EOTHEN.    By  A.  W.  Kinglake. 
and  Notes. 

Granford. 
Lucas. 

A  Little  Book  of  English  Prose.  Edited  by 
Mrs.  p.  A.  Barnett. 

LAVENGRO.  By  George  Borrow.  Edited  by  F. 
Hindes  Groome.     Two  Volumes. 

The  History  of  the  Galiph  Vathek.  By 
William  Beckford.    Edited  by  E.  Denison  Ross. 

The  Compleat  angler.  By  Izaak  Walton. 
Edited  by  J.  Buchan. 

MARRIAGE.  By  Susan  Ferrier.  Edited  by  Miss 
Goodrick .  Freer  and  Lord  Iddesleigh.  Two 
Volumes. 

ELIA,  AND  THE  LAST  ESSAYS  OF  ELIA.  By  Charles 
Lamb.    Edited  by  E.  V.  Lucas. 

A  Sentimental  Journey.  By  Laurence  Sterne. 
Edited  by  H.  W.  Paul. 

A  Little  Book  of  Life  and  Death 
Mrs.  Alfred  Waterhouse. 

Mansie  Wauch. 
F.  Henderson. 

Edited  by 
By  D.  M.  Moir.    Edited  by  T. 

Zhc  Xittle  ©uiDcs 

Pott  8vo,  cloth,  3J.;  leather,  y.  6d,  net. 

OXFORD  AND  ITS  COLLEGES.      By  J.  Wells,  M.A. 
Illustrated  by  E.  H,  New.    Fourth  Edition, 

CAMBRIDGE  AND  ITS  COLLEGES.    By  A.  Hamilton 
Thompson.    Illustrated  by  E.  H.  New. 

The  Malvern  Country.    By  B.  C.  A.  Windle, 
D.Sc,  F.R.S.    Illustrated  by  E.  H.  New. 

SHAKESPEARE'S  COUNTRY.     By  B.  C.   A.  Windle, 

D.Sc,  F.R.S.     Illustrated  by  E.  H.  New.    Second 

Edition. 
SUSSEX.     ByF.G.  Brabant,  M.A.   Illustrated  by  E. 

H.  New. 
WESTMINSTER    ABBEY.      By    G.    E.    Troutbeck. 

Illustrated  by  F.  D.  Bedford. 
NORFOLK.    By  W.  A.  Dutt.     Illustrated  by  B.  C. 

Boulter. 

Xittle  asiograpblcs 

Fcap.  8vo.     Each  volume,  cloth,  y.  6d.  ;  leather,  i^s.  net. 

Thb  Life  of  Dante  Alighieri.  By  P.iget 
Toynbee,  Litt.D.,  M.A.  With  12  Illustrations. 
Second  Edition, 

The  Life  of  Savonarola.  By  E.  L.  S.  Hors- 
burp-h.  M.A.     With  Portraits  and  Illustrations. 

THE  LIFE  OP  John  Howard.    By  E.  G.  S.  Gibson, 
D.D.,  Vicar  of  Leeds.    With  12  Illustrations. 

THE  LIFE  OF  Lord  Tennyson.    By  A.  C.  Benson, 

M.A.     With  12  Ilhistratinns. 

General  Literature 

29 

C^be  l-ittic  Mue  JBoofis  for  CbilDren 

Edited  by  E.  V.  LUCAS. 
Illustrated.     Square  Fcap.  ^vo.     2s.  (yd. 
'  Very  elegant  and  very  interesting  volumes.' — Glasgoiv  Herald. 
'A  delightful  series  of  diminutive  volumes.'— W^or/rf. 
'The  series  should  be  a  favourite  among  juueniles.' — Observer. 

The  Castaways  of  Meadowbank.    By  T.  Cobb. 

The  Beechnut  Book.    By  Jacob  Abbott.    Edited  by  E.  V.  Lucas. 

The  Air  Gun.    By  T.  Hilbert. 

Z\iz  Xlbrarg  of  Devotion 

With  Introductions  and  (where  necessary)  Notes, 
Pott  Svo,  cloth,  2s.  ;  leather,  2s.  6d.  net. 
'This  series  is  excellent.' — The  late  Bishop  of  London. 
'  Well  worth  the  attention  of  the  Clergy.' — The  Bishop  of  Lichfield. 
'  The  new  "  Library  of  Devotion  "  is  excellent.' — The  Bishop  of  Peterborough. 
' Charming. ' — Record.  '  Delightful.' — Church  Bells. 

THE  Confessions  of  St.  Augustine.  Edited  by 

C.  Bigg,  D.D.     Third  Edition. 

The  christian  Year. 
D.D.    Second  Edition. 

Edited  by  Walter  Lock, 

Edited  by  C.  Bigg, 

Edited  by  J.  W.  Stan- 

A  Book  of  Devotions. 

bridge,  B.D. 

Lyra  InnocentiUM.  Edited  by  Walter  Lock,  D.D. 

A  Serious  Call  to  a  Devout  and  Holy  Life. 
Eilited  by  C.  Bigg,  D.D.    Second  Edition, 

the  Temple.    Edited  by  E.  C.  S.  Gibson,  D.D. 

A  GUIDE  to  Eternity.     Edited  by  J.  W.  Stan- 
bridge,  B.D. 

Edited  by  B.  W.  Ran 

The  Psalms  of  David. 

dolph,  D.D. 

Lyra  Apostolica.  Edited  by  Canon  Scott  Holland 
and  H.  C.  Beeching,  M.A. 

THE  Inner  Way.    Edited  by  A.  W.  Button,  M.A. 

the   Thoughts  of  Pascal.     Edited  by  C.  S. 

Jerram,  M.A. 

Edited  by  W.  J.  Knox- 

A  Manual  of  Consolation  from  the  Saints 

AND  Fathers.    Edited  by  J.  H.  Burn,  B.D. 
The  Song  of  Songs.    Edited  by  E.  Blaxland,  M.A, 
THE  Devotions  of  St.  Anselm.    Edited  by  C. 

C, J.  Webb,  M.A. 

ZTbe  Commentaries  on  tbe  TReviseD  lUersion 

General  Editor,  WALTER  LOCK,  D.D.,  Warden  of  Keble  College, 
Dean  Ireland's  Professor  of  Exegesis  in  the  University  of  Oxford. 
The  Book  of  Job.     Edited  by  E.  C.  S.  Gibson,  |  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles.     Edited  by  R.  B. 
D.D.    Demy  ^vo.    6s.  '         Rackhani,  M.A.    Demy  Zvo.    lis.  6d. 

DanDboofts  of  C^beologi? 

General  Editor,  A.  ROBERTSON,  D.D.,  Principal  of  King's  College,  London. 
The  XXXIX.  Articles  of  the  Church  of 
England.      Edited    by    E.   C.   S.   Gibson,  D.D. 

Third  and   Cheaper   Edition    in    One    Volume. 
Demy  Zvo.     I2J.  dd. 

An  Introduction  to  the  History 
of  Religion.  By  F.  B.  Jevons,  M.A.,  Litt.D. 
Second  Editien.    Demy  Svo.    los.  6d. 

THE  Doctrine  of  the  Incarnation.  By  R.  L. 
Ottley,  M.A.  Second  and  Cheaper  Edition.  Dtfny 
Svo     \zs.  6d. 

An  Introduction  to  the  History  of  the 
Creeds.  By  A.  E.  Burn,  B.D.  Demy  8v».  los. 
6d. 

The  philosophy  of  Religion  in  England  and 
America.  By  Alfred  Caldecott,  D.D.  Demy 
Svo.    los.  64. 

XLbc  Cburcbman's  Xibrar^ 

General  Editor,  J.  H.  BURN,  B.D.,  F.R.S.E.,  Examining  Chaplain  to  the 
Bishop  of  Aberdeen. 

the  Beginnings  of  English  Christianity 
By  W.  E.  Collins,  M.A.  With  Map.  CroTvn  Svo. 
3s.  6d. 

Some  New  Testament  Problems.  By  Arthur 
Wright,  M.A.    Cro-W7i  Svo.    6s. 

The  Kingdom  of  Heaven  Here  and  Here- 
after. By  Canon  Winterbotham,  M.A.,  B.Sc, 
LL.B.     Crown  Svo.    3J,  6d. 

The  workmanship  of  the  Prayer  Book  ;  Its 
Literary  and  Liturgical  Aspects.  By  J.  Dowden, 
D.D.    Second  Edition.    Crown  tvo.    3s,  6d. 

Evolution.      By    F.    B.    Jevons,    M.A.,   Litt.D. 
Crown  Svo.    3J.  6d, 

THE  Old  Testament  and  the  New  Scholar- 
ship.   By  J.  P.  Peters,  D.D.    Crown  Svo.    6s. 

The  Churchman's  introduction  to  the  Old 

Testament.     Edited  by  A.  M.   Mackay,  B.A. 

Cro7un  Svo.    3s.  6d. 

THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST.     By  E.  T.  Green,  M.A 

Crown  Svo.    6s, 

30 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Catalogue 

tTbe  Cburcbman'6  asible 

General  Editor,  J.  H.  BURN,  B.D.,  F.R.S.E. 

Messrs.  Methuen  are  issuing  a  series  of  expositions  upon  most  of  the  books  of 
the  Bible.  The  volumes  are  practical  and  devotional,  and  the  text  of  the 
Authorised  Version  is  explained  in  sections,  which  correspond  as  far  as  possible 
with  the  Church  Lectionary. 

THE  Epistle  to  the  GALATIANS.  Explained  by 
A.  W.  Robinson,  M.A.    Fcaf.  Svo.     \s.  6ii,  net. 

ECCLESIASTES.  Explained  by  A.  W.  Streane,  D.D. 
Fcaf.  Zvo.     IS.  bd.  net. 

THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  Explained 
by  C.  R.  D.  Biggs,  D.D.    Fcap.  Bvo.     is.  6d.  net. 

THE  EPISTLE  OF   ST.  jAMES.      Edited  by  H.  W. 

EuUord,  M.A.    Fcap.Zvo.     is.6ii.net. 
ISAIAH.      Edited  by  W.  E.  Barnes,  D.D.,  Hulsaean 

Professor  of  Divinity.  7'wo  P'oliimes.    a^.  net  each. 

Vol.  I.    With  Map. 
THE  Epistle  of  St.  Paul  the  Apostle  to  the 

Hphesians.     Edited  by  G.  H.  Whitaker,  M.A 

IS.  6J.  net. 

XcaJ)er6  of  'IReligiou 

Edited  by  H.  C.  BEECHING,  M.A.      With  Portraits. 

Crown  8vo. 

3S.  6d. 

A  series  of  short  biographies  of  the  most  prominent  leaders  of  religious   life 
and  thought  of  all  ages  and  countries. 

The  following  are  ready : — 

Cardinal  Newman.    By  R.  H.  Hutton. 
John  Wesley.    By  J.  H.  Overton,  M.A. 
Bishop  Wilberforce.    By  G.  W.  Daniell,  M.A. 
Cardinal  Manning.    By  A.  W.  Hutton,  M.A. 
CHARLES  Simeon.    By  H.  C.  G.  Moule,  D.D. 
John  Keble.     By  Walter  Lock,  D.D. 
THOMAS  CHALMERS.    By  Mrs.  Oliphant. 
LANCELOT  AnDrewes.    By  R.  L.  Ottley,  M.A. 
Augustine  of  Canterbury.    By  E.  L.  Cutts, 
D.D. 

Other  volumes  will  be 

William  Laud.    By  W.  H.  Hutton,  M.A. 

JOHN  KNOX.     By  F.  MacCunn. 

John  Howe.    By  R.  F.  Horton,  D.D. 

BISHOP  Ken.     By  F.  A.  Clarke,  M.A. 

George  Fox,  the  Quaker.     By  T.   Hodgkin 

D.C.L. 
John  Donne.    By  Augustus  Jessopp,  D.D. 
Thomas  Cranmer.    By  A.  J.  Mason. 

Bishop  Latimer.     By  R.  M.  Carlyle  and  A.  J. 
Carlyle,  M.A. 

Bishop  Butler.    By  w.  A.  Spooner,  M.A. 
announced  in  due  course. 

Social  (Questions  of  ZTosDa^ 

Edited  by  H.  de  B.  GIBBINS,  Litt.D.,  M.A. 
Crown  Svo.     2s.  6d. 

Trade  Unionism— New  and  Old.    By  G.  Howell. 

Third  Fdition. 
THE  Co-operative  Movement  To-Day.    By  G. 

J.  Holyoake.    Second  lidition. 
MUTUAL  THRIFT.    By  Rev.  J.  Frome  Wilkinson, 

M.A. 
PROBLEMS  OF  POVERTY.     By  J.  A.  Hobson,  M.A. 

Fourth  Edition. 
THE  COMMERrE  OF  NATIONS.    By  C.  F.  Bastable, 

M.A.    Second  Edition. 
THE  ALIEN  Invasion.    By  W.  H.  Wilkins,  B.A. 
THE  RURAL  EXODUS.    By  P.  Anderson  Graham. 
Land  nationalization.    By  Harold  Cox,  B.A. 
A  SHORTER  WORKING  DAY.     By  H.  de  B.  Gibbins 

and  R.  A.  Hadfield. 
BACK   TO   THE   LAND :    An    Inquiry    into    Rural 

Depopulation.    By  H.  E.  Moore. 
TRUSTS,  POOLS,   AND  CORNERS.      By  J.  Stephen 

Jeans. 

The  FACTORY  SYSTEM.     By  R.  W.  Cooke-Taylor. 

THE  STATE  AND    ITS    CHILDREN.      By  Gertrude 

Tuckwell. 
WOMEN'S  WORK.     By  Lady  Dilke,  Miss  BuUey,  and 

Miss  Whitley. 

SOCIALISM     AND     MODERN     THOUGHT.       By    M. 

Kauffmann. 
THE   HOUSING    OF  THE  WORKING  CLASSES.     By 

E.  Bowmaker. 

THE  Problem  of  the  Unemployed.  By  J.  A. 
Hobson,  B.A. 

LIFE  IN  West  London.  By  Arthur  Sherwell,  M.A. 
Third  Edition. 

RAILWAY  Nationalization.  By  Clement  Ed- 
wards. 

Workhouses  and  Pauperism.  By  Louisa  Twin- 
ing. 

University  and  Social  Settlements.    By  W. 

Reason,  M.A. 

General  Literature 

31 

anivcrsit^  Bi'tension  Scries 

Edited  by  J.  E.  SYMES,  M.A., 
Principal  of  University  College,  Nottingham. 
Crown  8vo.     Price  [with  some  exceptions)  2s.  6d. 
A  series  of  books  on   historical,  literary,   and  scientific   subjects,  suitable   for 
extension   students   and   home-reading    circles.       Each    volume    is    complete    in 
itself,  and   the   subjects  are  treated  by  competent  writers  in  a  broad  and  philo- 
sophic spirit. 

The  following  Volumes  are  ready : — 

THE  CHEMISTRY  OK  FiRE.      By  M     M.  Pattison 

Muir,  M.A.    Illustrated. 
A  Text-Book  OF  Agriculural  Eot.a.ny.    By 

The  iNDUSiKiAL  History  OF  England.  By  H. 
de  B.  Gibbius,  l.itt.D.,  M.A.  Jiig-htk  Edition. 
Revised.    With  Maps  and  Plans.    3^. 

A  History  of  English  political  Economy. 
By  L.  L.  Price,  M.A.     Third  Edition. 

Problems  of  Poverty.  By  J.  A,  Hobson,  M.A. 
Fourth  Edition. 

Victorian  Poets.    By  A.  Sharp. 

THE  French  Revolution.    By  J.  E.  Symes,  M.A. 

psychology.  By  S.  F.  Granger,  M.A.  Second 
Edition. 

THE  Evolution  of  Plant  Life:  Lower  Forms. 
By  G.  Massee.    Illustrated. 

Air  and  AVater.  By  V.  B.  Lewes,  M.A.  Illus- 
trated. 

The  chemistry  of  Life  and  Health.  By  C. 
W.  Kimmins,  M.A.     Illustrated. 

The  Mechanics  of  Daily  Life.  By  V.  P.  Sells, 
M.A.    Illustrated. 

English  Social  Reformers.  By  H.  de  B. 
Gibbins,  Litt.D.,  M.A.    Second  Edition. 

English  Trade  and  Finance  in  the  Seven- 
teenth Century.    By  W.  A.  S.  Hewins,  B..\. 

M.  C.  Potter,   M.A.,  F.L.S. 
Edition,    i^.  Gd. 

Illustrated.    Second 

THE  Vault  of  Heaven.  A  Popular  Introduction 
to  Astronomy.  By  R.  A.  Gregory.  With  numerous 
Illustrations. 

A  Manual  of  Electrical  Science.    By  George 
J.  Burch,  M.A.,F.R.S.    Illustrated,    y. 

THE  Earth.      An  Introduction    to    Physiography. 
By  Evan  Small,  M.A.    Illustrated. 

Insect  Life.      By  F.  W   Theobald,  M.A.      lUub- 

Irated. 
English  Poetry  from  Blake  to  Browning. 

By  W.  M.  Dixon,  M.A.    Second  Edition. 

English  Local  government.    By  E.   lenks, 

M.A. 
The  Greek  View  of  Life.    By  G.  L.  Dickinson. 
Second  Edition. 

Commercial  Scries 

Edited  by  H.  de  B.  GIBBINS,  Litt.D.,  M.A. 

A  Primer  of  Business.     By  S.  Jackson,   M.A. 
Thiyd Edition,     is.  td. 

Commercial  Arithmetic.     By  F.   G.    Taylor, 

M.A.     Third  Edition,     ts.bd. 

French  Commercial  Correspondence.    By  s. 

E.  Bally.    Wiih  Vocabulary.     Third  Edition.    7s. 
German  Commercial  Correspondhnce.     By 

S.   E.   Bally.    With  Vocabulary,    zs.  6d. 
A  French  Commercial  Reader.    By  S.  E.  Bally. 

With  Vocabulary.    Second  Edition.    2s. 
Precis  Writing  and  office  Correspondence. 

By  E.  E.  Whitfield,  M.A.    2s. 
AGuiuetoProfessions  and  Business.    By  H. 

Jones.     IS.  6d. 
The  Principles  of  Book-keeping  nv  Douki.k 

Entry.    By  J.  E.  B.  M'Allen,  M.A.    Crown  8vo. 

Commercial  Education  in  Theory  and 
Practice.  By  E.  H.  Whitfield,  M.A.  Crown 
Bvo.    $s. 

An  introduction  to  Methuen's  Commercial  Series 
treating  the  question  of  Conmiercial  Education  fully 
from  both  the  point  of  view  of  the  teacher  and  of 
the  parent. 

British  Commerce  and  Colonies  from  Eliza- 
beth to  Victoria.  By  H.  de  B.  Gibbms, 
Litt.D.,  M.A.     J hird Edition.    2S. 

Commercial  Examination  papers.  By  H.  de 
B.  Gibbins,  Litt.D.,  M.A.    js.  6d. 

THE  Economics  of  Commerce 
Gibbins,  Litt.D.,  M.A.    is.  6d. 

A  German  Commercial  Reader. 
With  Vocabulary.    2S. 

A  Commercial  Geography  of  the  British 

Empire.    By  L.  W.  Lyde,  M.A.     Third  Edition. 

By  H.   de   B. 
By  S.  E.  Bally. 

Commercial  I,AW.     By  W.  Douglas  Edwards.     2s. 

A     Commercial     Geography     of    I'ukhu.n 

Nations.     By  F.  C.  Boon,  B.A.    Crown  &V0.    2s 

Classical  ^translations 

Edited  by  H.  F.  Fox,  M.A. ,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Brasenose  College,  O.xford. 

.iCSCHYLUS— Agamemnon,  Choephoroe,  Eumenides, 

Translated  by  Lewis  Campbell.  l.L.D.    SJ. 
Cicero— De  Oratore  I.      Translated  by  E.    N.   P. 

Moor,  M.A.    3J-.  dd. 
Cicero — Select  Orations  (Pro  Milone,  Pro  Mureno, 

Philippic  II.,  in  Catilinam).    Translated  by  H.  E. 

D.  Blakiston,  M.A.    s-r- 
Cicero— De   Natura   Deorum.      Translated   by  F. 

Brooks,  M.A.     %s.  6d. 
Cicero— De  Officiis.    Translated  by  G.  B.  Gardiner, 

M.A.    Crown  8vo.    ss.  6d. 

Horace— The  Odes   and    Epodes.      Translated  by 

A.  Godlcy,  M.A.    2s. 
LUCTAN — Six  Dialogues  (Nigrinus,  Icaro-Menippus. 

The  Cock,  The  Ship,  The  Parasite,  The  Lover  of 

Falsehood).      Translated    by   S.   T.   Irwin,  M.A. 

3s.  6d. 
Sophocles— Electra  and  Ajax.     Translated  by  E. 

D.  A.  Morshead,  M.A.    2S.  6d. 
Tacitus— Agricola   and    Germania,    Translated  by 

R.  B.  Townshend.    2S.  6d. 

32 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Catalogue 

^ctbuen's  junior  ScbooI^JSoofts. 

Edited  by  O.  D.  Inskip,  LL.D.,  and  W.  Williamson,  B.A. 

A  Class-Book  of  Dictation  Passages.    By  W. 
Williamson,  B.A.    Sixth  lidition.    Cnrwn.  Z'vo.  \s. 

THE  Gospel  According  to  St.  Mark.    Edited 
by  A.  E.  Rubie,  M.A.,  Headmaster  of  the  Royal 

Naval  School,  Eltham. 
Swa.    xs.  dd. 

With  Three  Maps.   Cro- 

A  Ju.N'iOR  English  Grammar.  By  W.  Williamson, 
B.A.  With  numerous  passages  for  parsinjj  and 
analysis,  and  a  chapter  on  Essay  Writing.    Crown 

8V0.      12S, 

A  JUNIOR  Chemistry.     By  E.  A.  Tyler.  B.A., 

F.C.S.,  Science  Master  at  Framlingham  College. 
With  73  Illustrations.     Crcnun  Svo.    ss.  6d, 

Scbool  Bjaminatfon  Series 

Edited  by  A.  M.  M.  STEDMAN,  M.A.     Crown  2,vo.     zs.  6d. 

FRENCH  Examination  Papers.     By  A.  M.  M. 
Stednian,  M.A.    Eleventh  lldilioti. 
A  KEY,  issued  to  Tutors  and  Private  Students 
only,  to  be  had  on  application  to  the  Publishers. 
Fifth  liditio':.    Crtnvn  Zvo.    6s.  net. 
LATIN   Examination  Papers,     By  A.   M.   M. 
Ste<lman.  M.A.    Eleventh  Edition. 
Key  (Fourth  Edition)  issued  as  above.    6j.  net. 
Creek  Examination    Papers.     By  A.   M.  M. 
Stedman,  M.A.    Sixth  Edition. 
KEY  {Second  F.dition)  issued  as  above,    ds.  net. 
German  E.xamination  Paphrs.    By  R.  J.  Morich. 
Fifth  Edition. 
KEY  {Second  Edition)  issued  as  above.    6j.  net. 

History  and  Geography  E.xam  ination  Papers. 
By  C.  H.  Spence,  M.A.,  Clifton  College.  Second 
Edition. 

By  R.  E.  Stce 

General  Knowledge  E.xamination   Papers. 
By  A.  M.  M.  Stedman,  M.A.    Fourth  Edition. 
Key  (Second  Edition)  issued  as  above,    ■js.  net. 

EXAMINATION  PAPERS  IN  ENGLISH  HISTORY.  By 
J.  Tait  Plowden-Wardlaw,  B.A.  CrtwnSvo.  2S.6d. 

^ecbnologs— '2;e£tbooft6  of 

Edited  by  W.  GARNETT,  D.C.L.,  and  Professor  J.  WERTHEIMER,  F.I.C. 
FiiHy  Illustrated. 

PRACTICAL  PHYSICS, 

Crown  Svo.     js.  6d. 
MILLINERY,  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL, 

Clare  Hill.     Crown  &vo.    2J. 

HOW   TO  MAKE  A  Dress.      By  J.   A.  E.  Wood. 

Second  Edition.  Cro7un  Zvo.  is.  bd. 
Carpentry  and   Joinery.     By  F.  C.  Webber. 

Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  y.  6d. 
Practical  Mechanics.     By  Sidney   H.  Wells. 

Second  Edition.    Crown  2ro.    3s.  6d. 

practical  Chemistry.    By  W, 
Crown  Sva.    Part  I.    ts.  6d. 

By  H.  Stroud,  D.Sc,  M.A. 

By 

French,   M.A. 

Part   II. — Fiction 

Marie  Corelli's  Novels. 

Crown  8vo.    6s.  each. 

A     ROMANCE     OF     TWO     WORLDS. 

Twenty-  Third  Edition. 
VENDETTA.     Eighteenth  Edition. 
THELMA.     Twenty-Seventh  Edition. 
ARDATH:  THE  STORY  OF   A   DEAD 

SELF.     Thirteenth  Edition. 
THE  SOUL  OF  LILITH.    Eleventh  Edit. 
WORMWOOD.     Twelfth  Edition. 
BARABBAS:  A  DREAM   OF   THE 

WORLD'S  TRAGEDY,      Thirty-Eighth 

Edition. 
'  The  tender  reverence  of  the  treatment 

and  the  imaginatiye  beauty  of  the  writing 

have  reconciled  us  to  the  daring  of  the  con- 
ception.     This    "Dream    of   the  World's 

Tragedy"  is  a  lofty  and  not  _  inadequate 

paraphrase  of  the   supreme  clirnax  of  the 

inspired  narrative.'— 2?«3//«  Review, 
THE    SORROWS    OF    SATAN.      Forty 
Sixth  Edition. 

'  A  very  powerful  piece  of  work.  _.  .  . 
The  conception  is  magnificent,  and  is  likely 
to  win  an  abiding  place  within  the  memory 

of  man.  .  .  .  The  author  has  immense  com- 
mand of  language,  and  a  limitless  audacity. 
. .  .  This  interesting  and  remarkableromance 
will  live  long  after  much  of  the  ephemera] 
literature  of  the  day  is  forgotten.  ...  A 
literary  phenomenon  .  .  .  novel,  and  even 
sublime.' — W.  T.  Stead  in  the  Rtvitiu 
of  Reviews. 
THE  MASTER  CHRISTIAN. 

[165//4  Thousand. 
'It  cannot  be  denied  that  "The  Master 
Christian  "  is  a  powerful  book  ;  that  it  is  one 
likely  to  raise  uncomfortable  questions  in 
all  but  the  most  self-satisfied  readers,  and 
that  it  strikes  at  the  root  of  the  failure  of 
the  Churches — the  decay  of  faith — in  a 
manner  which  shows  the  inevitable  disaster 
heaping  up  .  .  .  The  good  Cardinal  Bonpr6 
is  a  beautiful  figure,  fit  to  stand  beside  the 
good  Bishop  in  "  Les  Misirables."  It  is  a 
book  with  a  serious  purpose  expressed  with 
absolute  unconventionality  and  passion  .  .  . 
And  this  is  to  say  it  is  a  book  worth  read- 
ing.'— Examiner. 

Fiction 

33 

Anthony  Hope's  Novels. 

Crown  Svo.  6s.  each. 
THE  GOD  IN  THE  CAR.  Ninth  Edition. 
'  A  very  remarkable  book,  deserving  of 
critical  analysis  impossible  within  our  limit ; 
brilliant,  but  not  superficial ;  well  con- 
sidered, but  not  elaborated ;  constructed 
with  the  proverbial  art  that  conceals,  but 
yet  allows  itself  to  be  enjoyed  by  readers 
to  whom  fine  literary  method  is  a  keen 
pleasure.'—  The  Worid. 

A  CHANGE  OF  AIR.    Sixth  Edition. 

'A  graceful,  vivacious  comedy,  true  to 
human  nature.  The  characters  are  traced 
with  a  masterly  hand.' — Times. 

A  MAN  OF  MARK.    Fifth  Edition. 

'  Of  all  Mr.  Hope's  books,  "  A  Man  of 
Mark"  is  the  one  which  best  compares  with 
"The  Prisoner  of  Zenda."' — National  Ob- 

THE   CHRONICLES   OF  COUNT 
ANTONIO.     Fifth  Edition. 

'It  is  a  perfectly  enchanting  story  of  love 
and  chivalry,  and  pure  romance.  The 
Count  is  the  most  constant,  desperate,  and 

modest  and  tender  of  lovers,  a  peerless 
gentleman,  an  intrepid  fighter,  a  faithful 
friend,  and  a  magnanimous  I'oe.' — Guardian. 

PHROSO.     Illustrated  by  H.   R.  Millar. 
Sixth  Edition. 

'  The  tale  is  thoroughly  fresh,  quick  with 
vitality,  stirring  the  Wood.'— i'<.  Jttmts's 
Gazettt. 

SIMON  DALE.  Illustrated.  SixtkEdition. 
'  There  is  searching  analysis  of  human 
nature,  with  a  most  ingeniously  constructed 
plot.  Mr.  Hope  has  drawn  the  contrasts 
of  his  women  with  marvellous  subtlety  and 
d  el  icacy . ' —  Timet. 

THE  KING'S  MIRROR.  Third  Edition. 
'  In  elegance,  delicacy,  and  tact  it  ranks 
with  the  bes  of  his  novels,  while  in  the  wide 
range  of  its  portraiture  and  the_  subtilty 
o£  its  analysis  it  surpasses  all  his  earlier 
ventures  ' — Spectator. 

QUISANTE.    Third  Edition. 

'  The  book  is  notable  for  a  very  high  liter- 
ary quality,  and  an  impress  of  power  and 
mastery  on  every  page.' — DailyChronicle. 

Lucas  Malet's  Novels. 

Crown  Zvo. 

COLONEL   ENDERBY'S  WIFE.     Third 

Edition, 
A  COUNSEL  OF   PERFECTION.      New 

Edition. 
LITTLE  PETER.     Second  Edition,     -^s.  (>d. 
THE  WAGES  OF  SIN.   Thirteenth  Edition. 
THE  CARISSIMA.    Fourth  Edition. 

THE    GATELESS     BARRIER.      Fourth 
Edition. 

'  In  "  The  Gateless  Barrier"  it  Is  at  once 
evident  that,  whilst  Lucas  Malet  has  pre- 
served her  birthright  of  originality,  the 
artistry,  the  actual  writing,  is  above  even 
the  high  level  of  the  books  that  were  born 
before.' — Westminster  Gazette. 

6s.  each. 
THE    HISTORY  OF    SIR    RICHARD 
CALMADY.    Seventh  Edition.   A  Limited 
Edition  in  Two  Volumes.    Crown  Svo.    12s. 

'  A  picture  finely  and  amply  conceived. 
In  the  strength  and  insight  in  which  the 
story  has  been  conceived,  in  the  wealth  of 
fancy  and  reflection  bestowed  upon  its 
execution,  and  in  the  moving  sincerity  of  its 
pathos  throughout,  "Sir  Richard Calmady" 
must  rank  as  the  great  novel  of  a  great 
writer. ' — Literature. 

'  The  ripest  fruit  of  Lucas  Malet's  genius. 
A  picture  of  maternal  love  by  turns  tender 
and  terrible. ' — Spectator, 

'  A  remarkably  fine  book,  with  a  noble 
motive  and  a  sound  conclusion.' — Pilot. 

W.   W.    Jacobs'   Novels. 
Crown  Svo. 

MANY  CARGOES.    Twenty-Sixth  Edition. 
SEA  URCHINS.    Ninth  Edition. 
A     MASTER     OF     CRAFT.      Illustrated. 
Fifth  Edition. 

'  Can  be  unreservedly  recommended  to 
all  who  have  not  lost  their  appetite  for 
wholesome  laughter." — Spectator. 

'  The  best  humorous  book  published  for 
many  a  day.' — Black  and  White, 

2,s.  6d.  each. 

LIGHT  FREIGHTS. 
Edition. 

Illustrated.     Fourth 

'  His  wit  and  humour  are  perfectly  irresis- 
tible. Mr.  Jacobs  writes  of  skippers,  and 
mates,  and  seamen,  and  his  crew  are  the 
jolliest  lot  that  ever  sailed.' — Daily  News. 

'  Laughter  in  every  page.' — Daily  Mail, 

34 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Catalogue 

Gilbert  Parker's  Novels. 
Crown  Svo.     6s.  each. 

PIERRE  AND  HIS  PEOPLE.    Fifth  Edi- 
tion. 

'  Stories  happily  conceived  and  finely  ex- 
ecuted.     There  is  strength  and  genius   in 
Mr.  Parker's  style.' — Daily  Telegraph. 
MRS.  FALCHION.     Fourth  Edition. 
'  A  splendid  study  of  character. ' — 

A  thenteum. 
THE    TRANSLATION    OF  A  SAVAGE. 
Second  Edition. 

THE    TRAIL   OF   THE  SWORD.    Illus- 
trated,   Seventh  Edition. 

'A  rousing  and  dramatic  tale.  A  book 
like  this  is  a  joy  inexpressible.' — 

Daily  Chronicle. 
WHEN  VALMOND  CAME  TO  PONTIAC: 
The    Story  of   a  Lost    Napoleon.     Fifth 
Edition. 

'  Here  we  find  romance — real,  breathing, 
living  romance.  The  character  of  Valmond 
is  drawn  unerringly.' — Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

AN  ADVENTURER  OF  THE  NORTH | 
The  Last  Adventures  of  'Pretty  Pierre. 
Second  Edition. 

'  The  present  book  is  full  of  fine  and  mov- 
g  stones  of  the  great  North.' — Glasgow 

mus- 

ing 

Herald. 
THE  SEATS  OF  THE  MIGHTY. 
trated.     Eleventh  Edition. 

'  Mr.  Parker  has  produced  a  really  fine 
historical  novel.' — Athenieum. 

'  A  great  book.' — Black  and  White. 
THE    BATTLE   OF    THE    STRONG:  a 
Romance  of  Two  Kingdoms.     Illustrated. 
Fourth  Edition. 

'  Nothing  more  vigorous  or  more  human 
has  come  from  Mr.  Gilbert  Parker  than  this 
novel. ' — L  iterature. 
THE    POMP    OF    THE    LAVILETTES. 
Second  Edition,     -^s.  M. 

'Unforced  pathos,  and  a  deeper  know- 
ledge of  human  nature  than  he  has  displayed 
before.  '—Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

Arthur  Morrison's  Novels 
Crown  Zvo.     6s.  each. 

MEAN    STREETS.      Fifth 

TALES     OF 
Edition. 

'  A  great  book.  The  author's  method 
is  amazingly  effective,  and  produces  a 
thrilling  sense  of  reality.  The  writer  lays 
upon  us  a  master  hand.  The  book  is  simply 
appalling  and  irresistible  in  its  interest.  It 
is  humorous  also ;  without  humour  it  would 
not  make  the  mark  it  is  certain  to  make.' — 
World. 

A  CHI  LD  OF  THE  JAGO.  Fourth  Edition. 
'The  book  is  a  masterpiece.' — Pall  Mall 
Gazette. 
TO  LONDON  TOWN.    Second  Edition. 
'This  is  the  new  Mr.  Arthur  Morrison, 
gracious    and    tender,     sympathetic    and 
human.' — Daily  Telegraph. 
CUNNING  MURRELL. 

'  Admirable.  .  .  .  Delightful  humorous 
relief  ...  a  most  artistic  and  satisfactory 
achievement. ' — Spectator. 

Eden  Phillpott's  Novels. 

Crown  Svo. 

LYING  PROPHETS. 

CHILDREN  OF  THE  MIST. 

THE  HUMAN  BOY.     With  a  Frontispiece. 
Fourth  Edition, 

'  Mr.  Phillpotts  knows  exactly  what 
school-boys  do,  and  can  lay  bare  their  in- 
most thoughts  ;  likewise  he  shows  an  all- 
pervading  sense  of  humour.' — Acadeviy. 

SONS    OF    THE    MORNING.       Second 
Edition. 

'  A  book  of  strange  power  and  fascina- 
tion.'— Morning  Post. 

6s.  each. 

THE  STRIKING  HOURS.  Second  Edition. 
'  Tragedy    and     comedy,     pathos      and 
humour,   are  blended   to  a  nicety  in  this 
volume. ' —  World. 

'  The  whole  book  is  redolent  of  a  fresher 
and  ampler  air  than  breathes  in  the  circum- 
scribed life  of  great  towns.' — Spectator. 

FANCY   FREE.     Illustrated.     Second  Edi- 
tion.    Crown  Svo.     6s. 

'  Of  variety  and  racy  humour  there  is 
plenty.' — Daily  Graphic. 

S.  Baring-Gould's  Novels. 
Crown  Svo.    6s.  each. 

ARMINELL.    Fifth  Edition. 
URITH.    Fifth  Edition. 
IN  THE  ROAR  OF  THE  SEA. 
Edition. 

Seventh 

MRS.  CURGENVEN  OF  CURGENVEN. 

Fourth  Edition. 
CHEAP  JACK  ZITA.    Fourth  Edition. 
THE  QUEEN  OF  LOVE.    Fifth  Edition. 

Fiction 

35 

MARGERY  OF  QUETHER.    Third 

Edition. 
JACQUETTA.     Third  Edition. 
KITTY  ALONE.    Fifth  Edition. 
NO^MI.     Illustrated.    Fourth  Edition. 
THE    BROOM-SQUIRE.    Illustrated. 

Fourth  Edition. 
THE      PENNYCOMEQUICKS.        Third 

Edition. 

DARTMOOR  IDYLLS. 

GUAVAS    THE    TINNER.       Illustrated. 

Second  Edition. 
BLADYS.     Illustrated.    Second  Edition. 
DOMITIA.     Illustrated.    Second  Edition. 
PABO  THE  PRIEST. 
WINIFRED.     Illustrated.     Second  Edition. 
THE   FROBISHERS. 
ROYAL   GEORGIE.    Illustrated. 

Robert  Barr's  Novels. 
Crown  8vo.     6s.  each. 

IN  THE  MIDST  OF  ALARMS.      Third 
Edition. 

'_A  book  which  has  abundantly  satisfied  us 
by  its  capital  humour.' — Daily  Chronicle. 
THE  MUTABLE  MANY.    Second  Edition. 
'  There  is  much  insight  in  it,  and  much 
excellent  humour." — Daily  Chronicle. 
THE  COUNTESS  TEKLA.   Third  Edition. 
'  Of  these  mediaeval  romances,  which  are 
now     gaining     ground     "  The     Countess 
Tekla"  is  the  very  best  we  have  seen.' — Pall 
Mall  Gazette. 

THE  STRONG  ARM.     Illustrated.    Second 

Edition. 
THE  VICTORS. 

'Mr.  Barr  has  a  rich  sense  of  humour.' — 
Onlooker. 

'  A  very  convincing  study  of  American 
life  in  its  business  and  political  aspects.' — 
Pilot. 

'  Good  writing,  illuminating  sketches  of 
character,  and  constant  variety  of  scene  and 
incident. ' —  Titties. 

Andrew  Balfour.      BY    stroke    OF 

SWORD.      Illustrated.      Fourth  Edition. 
Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

'  A  recital  of  thrilling  interest,  told  with 
unflagging  vigour.' — Globe. 

S.  Baring  Gould.    See  page  34. 
Robert  Barr.    See  above. 

George  Bartram,  Author  of  '  The  People  of 
Clopton.'  THE  THIRTEEN  EVEN- 
INGS.    Crown  Zvo.     ts. 

Margaret   Benson.      SUBJECT    TO 

VANITY.     CroumZvo.     3s.  6d. 

J.  Bloundelle  Burton,  Author  of  'The 

Clash  of  Arms.'    THE   YEAR   ONE:  A 
Page  of  the    French    Revolution.      Illus- 
trated.    Crowtt  Szfo.     6s. 
See  also  Fleur  de  Lis  Novels. 
Ada     Cambridge,    Author    of    '  Path     and 
Goal."    THE  DEVASTATORS.     Crown 
Szio.    6si 
See  also  Fleur  de  Lis  Novels. 
Bernard  Capes,  Author  of  'The  Lake   of 
Wine.'     PLOTS.     Cro7i'n  Sva.     6s. 

'  The  stories  are  excellently  fanciful  and 
concentrated  and  quite  worthy  of  the 
author's  best  work.' — Morning'  Leader. 

'  Ingenious  and  original.  This  is  a  book 
to  turn  to  once  and  again. ' — Morning  Post. 

Weatherby   Cbesney.     JOHN    TOPP: 

PIRATE.     Second  Edition.    Crown  Zvo. 
6s. 

A  book  of  breathless  adventure. 
'Arousing  pleasant  story.' — Athenauttt. 

THE    FOUNDERED    GALLEON. 
Crown  Svo,    6s. 

'  An  ingenious  tale  of  the  sea  and  particu- 
larly exciting.' — World. 

'  A  healthy,  straightforward  tale,  breezy 
and  cheerful." — Manchester  Guardian. 

J.  Maclaren  Cobban.   THE  KING  OF 

ANDAMAN  '     A      Saviour    of    Society. 
Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

WILT  THOU  HAVE  THIS  WOMAN. 
Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

See  also  Fleur  de  Lis  Novels. 
E.  H.  Cooper,  Author  of '  Mr.  Blake  of  New- 
market.' A  FOOL'S  YEAR.  Crown  Zyo.  6s. 

'  A  strikingly  clever  story,  with  pictures 
of  sporting  society  convincingly  true." — 

Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

Marie  Corelli.    See  page  32, 

L.  Cope Cornford.  CAPTAIN  JACOBUS: 

A  Romance  of  the  Road.    Cr.  Svo.     6s. 

See  also  Fleur  de  Lis  Novels. 
S.  E.  Crockett,  Author  of '  The  Raiders," etc. 
LOCHINVAR.      Illustrated.     Second 
Edition.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

'  Full    of   gallantry  and  pathos,  of  the 
clash  of  arms,  and  bright-ened  by  episodes  of 
humour  and  love." — IVesttninster  Gazette. 
THE  STANDARD  BEARER.  Cr.  Svo.  6s. 

'  A  delightful  tsXc.'— Shaker. 

'  Mr.  Crockett  at  his  best." — Literature. 
B.    M.    Croker,    Author    of  '  Peggy  of  tht 
Bartons. '     ANGEL.      Second   Edition. 
Crown  St'O.     6s. 

'An  excellent  story.  Clever  pictures  of 
Anglo-Indian  life  abound.  The  heroine  is 
daring  and  delightful." — 

Manchester  Guardian. 

See  also  Fleur  de  Lis  Novels. 

36 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Catalogue 

C.  E.  Denny.    THE  ROMANCE  OF  UP- 
FOLD  MANOR.     Crown  Zvo.     6s. 
'  A  fine  tragic  story.' — IVeekly  Register. 
'  There  is  picturesqueness  and  real  feel- 
ing.'— St.  James's  Gazette. 
A.     Conan    Doyle,    Author    of    'Sherlock 
Holmes,'     '  The    White     Company,'    etc. 
ROUND  THE  RED  LAMP.       Eighth 
Edition.     Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

'  The  book  is  far  and  away  the  best  view 
that  has  been  vouchsafed  us  behind  the 
scenes  of  the  consulting-room.' — Illustrated 
London  News, 

Sara  Jeannette  Duncan  (Mrs.  Everard 

Cotes),  Author  of  'A  Voyage  of  Consola- 
tion.' THOSE  DELIGHTFUL 
AMERICANS.  Illustrated.  Second  Edi- 
tion.    CroT^vn  Zvo.      6s. 

_'  A  rattling  picture  of  American  life, 
bright  and  good-tempered  throughout.' — 
Scotstftan. 

'  The  humour  is  delicious.' — Daily  Mail. 

C.  F.  Embree.  A  HEART  OF  FLAME. 
Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

'  Alire  with  the  pulsing  and  clamorous  life 
of  the  wild  folk  and  wild  actions  with  which 
it  deals.  A  striking,  well-conceived  piece  of 
■work.'— Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

'An  admirable  story,  well  told.  The 
characters  are  full  of  life,  and  Ramoncita  is 
really  a  delicious  little  creature.' — Morning 
Pott. 

'The  figure  of  Ramoncita,  the  heroine,  a 
Mexican  girl  of  15,  is  charming — a  sketch 
romantic  and  delicately  drawn.' — Man- 
chester Guardian. 

J.  H.  Findlater.  THE  GREEN  GRAVES 
OF  BALGOWRIE.  Fourth  Edition 
Croiiin  Zi'O.     6s. 

'  A  powerful  and  vivid  story.' — Standard. 

'A  beautiful  story,  sad  and  strange  as 
truth  itself.' — Vanity  Fair. 

'  A  singularly  original,  clever,  and  beauti- 
ful story.' — Guardian. 

'  Reveals  to  us  a  new  writer  of  undoubted 
faculty  and  reserve  force.' — Spectator. 

'  An  exquisite  idyll,  delicate,  affecting, 
and  beautiful.  — Black  and  White. 

See  also  Fleur  de  Lis  Novels. 

Mary  Findlater.     A   NARROW  WAY. 

Third  Edition.     Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

OVER    THE    HILLS     Second  Edition. 

Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

See  also  Fleur  de  Lis  Novels. 
Tom    Gallon,  Author  of  'Kiddy.'      RICK- 

ERBY'S  FOLLY.    Crown  Zvo.     6s. 
Dorothea  Gerard,  Author  of 'Lady  Baby.' 
THE  MILLION.     Crown  Zvo.    6s. 
THE     CONQUEST     OF     LONDON. 
Second  Edition.     Croiun  %vo.     6s. 
THE  SUPREME  CRIME.    Cr.  Zvo.    6s. 

See  also  Fleur  de  Lis  Novels. 

Algernon  Gissing.  THE  KEYS  OF  THE 
HOUSE.     Crown  Zvo_.     6s. 

'A  story  of  absorbing  interest.' — Liver- 
pool Mercury. 

'  The  book  is  carefully  built  up,  piece  by 
piece.  The  figure  of  Brant  himself  moving 
among  his  people  in  his  lonely  parish  of  the 
hills  IS  one  that  long  remains  with  the 
reader. ' — Daily  Telegraph. 
George  Gissing,  Author  of  '  Demos,'  '  In  the 
Year  of  Jubilee,'  etc.  THE  TOWN 
TRAVELLER.  Second  Edition.  Crown 
Zvo.    6s. 

See  also  Fleur  de  Lis  Novels. 

Ernest  Glanville.    THE  KLOOF  BRIDE. 

Crown  Zvo.     3J-.  6d. 

THE  LOST  REGIMENT.      Crown  Zvo. 
2S.  6d. 

THE  DESPATCH  RIDER.    Crown  Zvo. 
3J.  6d. 
Lord  Ernest  Hamilton.    MARY  HAMIL- 
TON.    Third  Edition.     Crown  Zvo.    6s. 

'  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  we  have  in 
"Mary  Hamilton "  a  most  fascinating  story 
— the  most  stirring  and  dramatic  historical 
romance  that  has  come  in  our  way  for  a  long 
time.' — Illustrated  London  News. 

Robert  Hichens,  Author  of  'Flames, 
etc.  THE  PROPHET  OF  BERKELEY 
SQUARE.  Second  Edition.  Crown  Zvo. 
6s. 

'  One  continuous  sparkle.     Mr.  Hichens 
is  witty,  satirical,  caustic,  irresistibly  hum- 
orous. ' — Birmingham  Gazette. 
TONGUES  OF  CONSCIENCE.    Second 
Edition.     Croiun  Zvo.     6s. 
See  also  Fleur  de  Lis  Novels. 

John  Oliver  Hobbes.  Author  of  'Robert 
Orange.'  THE  SERIOUS  WOOING. 
Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

'  Mrs,  Craigie  is  as  brilliant  as  she  ever 
has  been  ;  her  characters  are  all  illuminated 
with  sparkling  gems  of  description,  and  the 
conversation  scintillates  with  an  almost 
bewildering  blaze.' — Athenc^um. 

Anthony  Hope.    See  page  33. 

Violet  Hunt.  THE  HUMAN  IN- 
TEREST.    Cro-mni  Zvo.    6s. 

C.  J.  Cutcliflfe  Hjme,  Author  of  '  Captain 
Kettle.'  PRINCE  RUPERT  THE 
BUCCANEER.  With  8  Illustrations. 
Second  Edition.  Crown  Sr'o.  6^. 
MR.  HORROCKS,  PURSER.  Cro7i<n 
Zvo.    6s. 

'  Mr.  Horrocks  is  a  good  second  to  the  un- 
approachable Captain  Kettle.' — Academy. 

'  Mr.  Horrocks  is  sublime.' — Manchester 
Guardian, 

'  The  Purser  is  a  diverting  discovery,  and 
his  adventures  are  related  with  vigour,' — 
Daily  Chronicle. 

W.  W.  Jacobs.     See  page  33. 

Fiction 

37 

Henry   James,    Author    of  'What    Maisie 

Knew."     THE    SACRED    FOUNT. 

Croiun  Zvo.     6s. 

THE    SOFT    SIDE.         <^ecend  Edition. 

Croiun  Zvo.    (>s. 
C.  F.  Keary.     THE   JOURNALIST. 

Crown  Svo.     6s. 

norence  Finch  KeUy.    WITH  HOOPS 

OF  STEEL.     Cromn  Svo.     6s._ 

'  Every  chapter  is  filled  with  exciting 
incidents. ' — Morning  Leader. 

'  A  daring  and  brilliant  story  of  adventure. 
The  novel  teems  with  life  and  character, 
with  life  which  is  always  within  an  ace  of 
death,  and  character  which  curiously  blends 
the  ruffian  and  the  hero.' — Scotsman. 

Hon.  Emily  Lawless.      TRAITS    AND 

CONFIDENCES.     Crown  Zvo      6s. 
See  also  Fleur  de  Lis  Novels. 
E.  Lynn  Linton.    THE  TRUE  HISTORY 
OF  JOSHUA  DAVIDSON,  Christian  and 
Communist.      Eleventh  Edition.      Crown 
Zvo.      IS. 

Charles  K.  Lush.    THE  AUTOCRATS. 

Crown  8vo.     6s. 

'A  clever_  story  of  American  life.  Its 
atmosphere  is  convincing  and  striking.' — 
Vanity  Fair. 

'Eminently  readable  with  clever  photo- 
graphs of  American  social  life.' — Standard. 

S,  Macnaughtan.    THE  FORTUNE  OF 

CHRISTINA NACNAB.   CrownZvo.   6s. 
A.      Macdonell,       the      STORY      OF 
TERESA.    Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

'  Varied  and  clever  characterisation  and 
close  sympathy  with  humanity.' — IFest- 
minster  Gazette. 

'  The  book  is  bracing  as  the  moor  itself. 
It     has    a    threefold     interest — its      keen 
characterisation,   its  psychological  insight, 
and  its  philosophy  of  life.' — Pilot. 
Lucas  Malet.     See  page  33. 
Richard  Marsh,  Author  of  '  The  Seen  and 
the  Unseen.'     BOTH   SIDES    OF   THE 
VEIL.     Second  Edition.     Crown  Zvo.     6s. 
'  Here  we  have  Mr.  Marsh  at  his  best.' — 
Globe.  See  also  Fleur  de  Lis  Novels. 

A.  E.  W.  Mason,  Author  of  '  The  Courtship 
of  Morrice  Buckler,'  'Miranda  of  the  Bal- 
cony,'etc.  CLEMENTINA.  Illustrated. 
Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

'  A  romance  of  the  most  delicate  ingenuity 
and  humour  .  .  .  the  very  quintessence  of 
romance. ' — Spectator. 
L.  T.  Meade.     DRIFT.     Crown  Zvo.    6s. 
'  Well    told,    and    full   of    incident    and 
character. ' —  IVorld. 

'  A  powerfully-wrought  story. ' — Birming- 
ham Post. 

'A  powerful  storj-,  which  treats  of  the 
drifting  of  a  man  of  high  intellectual  gifts.' 
— Court  Circular. 

Bertram  Mitford.  THE  SIGN  OF  THE 
SPIDER.    Fifth  Edition. 

F,  F.  Montresor,  Author  of  '  Into  the  High- 
waysand  Hedges.'  THE  ALIEN.  Second 
Edition.     Crown  Zvo.    6s. 

'  Fresh,  unconventional,  and  instinct  with 

human  sympathy. ' — Manchester  Guardian. 

'  Miss  Montresor  creates  her  tragedy  out 

of    passions    and    necessities    elementarily 

human.     Perfect  art.' — Spectator. 

Arthur  Morrison.    See  page  34. 

W.  E.  Norris.     THE   EMBARRASSING 
ORPHAN.     Crown  Zvo.     6s. 
See  also  Fleur  de  Lis  Novels. 

Alfred  Ollivant.  OWD  BOB,  THE  GREY 
DOG  OF  KENMUIR.  Fifth  Edition. 
Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

'Weird,  thrilling,  strikingly  graphic' — 
Punch. 

'  We  admire  this  book  ...  It  is  one  to 
read  with  admiration  and  to  praise  with 
enthusiasm.' — Bookman. 

'  It  is  a  fine,  open-air,  blood-stirring  book, 

to  be  enjoyed  by  every  man  and  woman  to 

whom  a  dog  is  dear.' — Literature. 

E.  Phillips  Oppenheim.     MASTER  OF 

MEN.    Second  Edition.    Crown  Zvo.    6s. 

Gilbert  Parker.   See  page  34. 

James  Blythe  Pattoru     BIJLI,    THE 

DANCER.     Crown  Zvo.    6s. 

MaxPemberton.  THE  FOOTSTEPS  OF 
A  THRONE.  Illustrated.  Second  Edi- 
tion.    Croiun  Zvo.     6s, 

'A  story  of  pure  adventure,  with  a  sensa- 
tion on  every  page. ' — Daily  Mail. 
I  CROWN  THEE  KING.     With  Illus- 
trations by  Frank  Dadd  and  A.  Forrestier. 
Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

'A  romance  of  high  adventure,  of  love  and 
war.     It  is  a  story  of  true  love,  of  indomit- 
able will,  and  of  steadfastness  that  nothing 
can  withstand.' — Daily  News. 
'  A  stirring  tale.' — Outlook. 

Eden  Phillpotts.    See  page  34. 

Walter  Rasrmond,  Author  of  'Love  and 
Quiet  Life.'  FORTUNE'S  DARLING. 
Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

Edith  Eickert.  OUT  OF  THE  CYPRESS 
SWAMP.  _  Crown  Zvo.    6s. 

'  A  tale  in  which  a  note  of  freshness  and 
individuality  is    struck,  and    the    delicate 
question  of  colour  is  handled  with  originality 
and  power.     It  has  fine  thrilling  moments.' 
— Spectator. 
'  The  whole  story  is  admirably  told.     Not 
even  in  "  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin  "  is  there  any- 
thing more  exciting  than  the  bloodhound 
chase  after  the  hero.' — Tatler. 
W.    Pett    Ridge.      LOST    PROPERTY. 
Second  Edition.     Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

'  The  story  is  an  interesting  and  animate 

38 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Catalogue 

picture  of  the  struggle  for  life  in  London, 
with  a  natural  humour  and  tenderness  of  its 
own. ' — Scots7nan. 

'A  simple,  delicate  bit  of  work,  which 
will  give  pleasure  to  many.  Much  study  of 
the  masses  has  made  him,  not  mad,  but 
strong,  and — wonder  of  wonders — cheerful.' 
—  Times. 

A  really  delightful  life  history  of  a 
London  foundling.  Once  more  we  have  to 
thank  Mr.  Pett  Ridge  for  an  admirable 
study  of  London  life. ' — Sj>ectator, 

Mrs.  M.  H.   Eoberton.      A  GALLANT 

QUAKER.     Illustrated.     Crown  ?,vo.    6s. 

'  It  is  a  strong  story  of  love  and  hate,  of 

religious  excitement  and  calm  faith.' — Leeds 

Mercury. 

W.  Clark  RusseU.  MY  DANISH  SWEET- 
HEART. Illustrated.  Fourth  Edition. 
Crown  8va,    6s. 

Grace  Ehys.      THE   WOOING    OF 

SHEILA.  Second  Edition.  CrownSvo.  6s. 
'  A  really  fine  book.  A  book  that  deserves 
to  live.  Sheila  is  the  sweetest  heroine  who 
has  lived  in  a  novelist's  pages_  for  many  a 
day.  Every  scene  and  every  incident  has 
the  impress  of  truth.  It  is  a  masterly  ro- 
mance, and  one  that  should  be  widely  read 
and  appreciated.' — Morning  Leader, 

W.SatclielL  THE  LAND  OF  THE  LOST. 
Crown  8vo.    dr. 

'An  exciting  story  .  .  .  the  plot  and 
passion  are  managed  with  skill,  and  the 
author  shows  himself  a  master  of  the  art  of 
depicting  human  character.' 

— Glasg^ow  Herald. 

Adeline  Sergeant.  Author  of '  The  Story  of 
a  Penitent  Soul.'  A  GREAT  LADY. 
Crown  Svo.    6s. 

THE  MASTER  OF  BEECHWOOD. 
Cro-wn  Svo.     6s. 

'  A  pleasant  and  excellently  told  story, 
'  natural  and  fresh.' — Glasgow  Herald. 

'  A  wholesome  novel,  with  plenty  of 
incident. ' — Spectator. 

W.  F.  Shannon.     THE  MESS  DECK. 

Crown  Svo.    3^.  6d. 

Helen  Shipton.  THE  STRONG  GOD 
CIRCUMSTANCE.     Crown  8vo.    6s. 

Annie  Swan.    LOVE  GROWN  COLD. 

Second  Edition.      Crown  Zvo.     5^. 

'One  of  the  strongest  books  that  the 
author  has  yet  given  us.  We  feel  that  the 
characters  are  taken  from  life.  _  The  story 
is  told  with  delicacy  and  restraint.' — Daily 
News. 
Benjamin  Swift,  Author  of  'Siren  City.' 
SORDON.     Crown  Zvo.    6s. 

'Handled    with    a    skill    and    a    power 

that  are  almost  unfailing.  The  book  is 
thorough! jr  good,  1 1  absorbs  as  much  by  its 
ingenuity  ip  the  use  of  material  as  by  the 
force  of  its  imagination.' — Academy, 

'  The_  author  tells  his  story  with  great 
dramatic  intentness,  with  simplicity,  and 
strength.' — Daily  News. 

'  A  remarkable,  venturesome,  painful,  and 
interesting  book.  The  story  is  beautifully 
told_;  it  is  rare  pleasure  to  read  such  writing, 
so  simple,  finely  balanced,  graceful,  refined, 
yet  forcible." — World, 

Paul  Waineman.    A  HEROINE  FROM 

FINLAND.     Crown  Zvo.     6s. 

'  Fresh  in  subject  and  treatment.' 

— Academy. 

'An  idyll  of  country  life  which  has  the 
charm  of  entire  novslty  and  freshness.' — 
Morning  Leader. 

'  This  tale  of  Russian  and  Finnish  life  is  a 
most  readable  and  enthralling  one.  "The 
story  is  simple  yet  strong,  and  reveals 
intimate  knowledge  of  Finnish  life  and 
manners.' — Scotstnan. 

'  A  delightful  story.'— Daily  Express. 

'This  lovely  tale.' 

— Manchester  Guardian. 

'A_  vivid  picture  of  pastoral  life  in  a 
beautiful  and  too  little  known  country.* 

—Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

R.  B.  Townshend.  LONE  PINE :  A  Ro- 
mance of  Mexican  Life.    Crown  Svo.    6s. 

H.  B.  Marriott  Watson.  THE  SKIRTS 
OF  HAPPY  CHANCE.  Illustrated. 
Second  Edition,    Crown  Svo.    6s. 

'  Mr.  Watson's  light  touch,  his  genuine 
sense  of  humour,  his  ingenuity,  and,  above 
all,  his  polished  and  clear-cut  style  will  pro- 
vide genuine  entertainment ' — Pilot, 

H.  G.  Wells.  THE  STOLEN  BACILLUS, 
and  other  Stories.  Second  Edition.  Crown 
Svo.    6s. 

THE  PLATTNER  STORY  and  Others. 
Second  Edition    Crown  Svo.     6s. 

Stanley  Weyman,  Author  of '  A  Gentleman 
of  France.'  UNDER  THE  RED  ROBE. 
With  Illustrations  by  R.  C.  Woodville. 
Seventeenth  Edition.     Crown  Svo.     6s, 

'  Every  one  who  reads  books  at  all  must 
read  this  thrilling  romance,  from  the  first 
page  of  which  to  the  last  the  breathless 
reader  is  haled  along.  An  inspiration  of 
manliness  and  courage.' — Daily  Chronicle. 

Zack,  Author  of  '  Life  is  Life.'  TALES  OF 
DUNSTABLE  WEIR.     Crown  Svo,    6s. 

'"Zack"  draws  her  pictures  with  great 
detail;  they  are  indeed  Dutch  interiors  in 
their  fidelity  to  the  small  things  of  life.' — 
Westminster  Gazette. 

Fiction 

39 

TTbe  ipleur  be  Xts  1Flov>els 

Crown  8vo.     3^.  6d. 
Messrs.  Methuen  are  now  publishing  popular    Novels  in  a  new  and  most 
charming  style  of  binding.      Ultimately,  this   Series   will  contain   the  following 
books ; 

Andrew  Balfour. 

To  Arms ! 
Vengeance  is  Mine. 

M.  C.  Balfour. 

THE  Fall  of  the  Sparrow. 

Jane  Barlow. 

The  Land  of  the  shamrock. 
a  creel  of  irish  stories. 
FROM  THE  East  unto  the  West. 

J.  A.  Barry. 
IN  THE  Great  Deep. 

E.  F.  Benson. 

The  Capsina. 

DODO  :  A  Detail  of  the  Day. 

The  Vintage. 

J.  Bloundelle-Burton. 

In  THE'  Day  of  adversity. 

Denounced. 

The  Clash  of  Arms. 

Across  the  Salt  Seas. 

Servants  of  Sin. 

Mrs.  Caff3m  (Iota). 

ANNE  MAULEVERER. 

Ada  Cambridge. 

PATH   AND   GOAL. 

Mrs.  W.  K.  CUfford. 

A  WOMAN  ALONE. 

A  Flash  of  Summer. 

J.  Maclaren  Cobban. 

THE  ANGEL  OF  THE  CO\-ENANT. 

Julian  Corbett. 

A  BUSINESS  IN  GRr.AT  WATERS. 

L.  Cope  Comford. 

Sons  of  Adversity. 

Stephen  Crane. 

WOUNDS  IN  THE  RAIN. 

B.  M.  Croker. 

A  STATE  Secret. 
Peggy  of  the  bartons. 

Hope  Dawlish. 
A  Secretary  of  Legation. 

A.  J.  Dawson. 

Daniel  White. 

Evelyn  Dickinson. 

A  Vicar's  Wife, 
the  Sin  of  Angels. 

Harris  Dickson. 

The  Black  wolf's  Breed. 

Menie  Muriel  Dowie. 

-  THE  Crook  of  the  bough. 

_  Mrs.  Dudeney. 

The  Third  floor. 

Sara  Jeannette  Duncan. 

A  Voyage  of  Consolation. 
The  Path  of  a  Star. 

G.  Manville  Fenn. 

An  Electric  Spark. 
The  Star  Gazers. 
Eli's  Children. 
A  DOUBLE  Knot. 

Jane  H.  Findlater. 
A  Daughter  of  strife. 
Rachel. 

Mary  Findlater. 

Betty  Mitsgrave. 

Jane  H.  and  Mary  Findlater. 

tales  that  are  told. 

J.  S.  Fletcher. 

The  Paths  of  the  Prudent, 
The  builders. 

M.  E.  Francis. 

Miss  Erin. 

Mary  Gaunt. 

Kirkham's  Find. 

Deadman's. 

The  Moving  Finger. 

Dorothea  Gerard. 

Things  that  have  happened. 

R.  Murray  Gilchrist. 

Willowbrake. 

George  Gissing. 

The  Crown  of  Like. 

Charles  Gleig. 

BuNTER's  Cruise. 

S.  Gordon. 

A  Handful  of  exotics. 

C.  F.  Goss. 

The  Redemption  of  David  Corson. 

E.  M'Queen  Gray. 

MY  Stewardship. 
Els  A. 

Robert  Hichens. 

BYEWAYS. 

I.  Hooper. 

THE  Singer  of  Marly. 

Emily  Lawless. 

Hurrish. 
Maelcho. 

Norma  Lorimer. 

MiRRY-ANN. 

JosiAH's  Wife. 

Edna  Lyall. 

Derrick  Vaughan,  novelist. 
Hannah  Lynch. 

An  Odd  Experiment. 

Richard  Marsh. 

The  Seen  and  the  Unseen. 
Marvels  and  mysteries. 

W.  E.  Norris. 

Matthew  Austin. 

His  Grace. 

The  Despotic  Lady. 

Clarissa  Furiosa. 

Giles  lngilby. 

An  Octave. 

Jack's  Father. 

A  Deplorable  Affair. 

Mrs.  Oliphant. 

Sir  Robert's  Fortune. 
The  two  Marys. 
The  Lady's  Walk. 
The  Prodigals. 

Mary  A.  Owen. 

The  Daughter  of  alouette. 

Mary  L.  Tendered. 

AN'  Enclishmax, 

40 

Messrs.  Methuen's  Catalogue 

Mrs.  Penny. 
A  FOREST  Officer. 

R.  Orton  Prowse, 

The  Poison  of  Asps. 

Eichard  Pryce. 

Time  and  the  woman. 
The  Quiet  Mrs.  Fleming. 

W.  Pett  Ridge. 

A  SON  OF  THE  STATE. 
SECRETARY  TO  BAYNE,  M.P. 

Morley  Roberts. 

THE  PLUNDERERS. 

Marsliall  Saunders. 

Rose  a  Charlitte. 

W.  C.  Scully. 

THE  White  Hecatomb. 

BETWEEN  SUN  AND  SAND. 

A  VENDETTA  OF  THE  DESERT. 

R.  N.  Stephens. 

AN  Enemy  to  the  King. 
A  Gentlema.n  Player. 

E.  H.  Strain. 

Elmslie's  Drag-Net. 

Esm6  Stuart. 

A  Woman  of  Forty. 
Christalla. 

Duchess  of  Sutherland. 

One  Hour  and  the  next. 

Benjamin  Swift. 

SIREN  City. 

Victor  Waite. 

Cross  Trails. 

Mrs.  Walford. 

Successors  to  the  Title. 

Percy  White. 

A  Passionate  Pilgrim. 

Mrs.  C.  N.  Williamson. 

The  Adventure  of  Princess  Sylvia. 

X.  L. 

aut  Diabolus  aut  nihil. 

The  Icelander's  Sword.    By  S.  Barine-Gonld. 
Two  Little  Children  and  Ching.   By  Edith  e. 

Cuthell. 
TODDLEBEN'B  HERO.    By  M.  M.  Blake. 
Only  a  Guard-Room  Dog.    By  Edith  E.  Cuthell. 
The  Doctor  of  the  JULIET.     By  Harry  Colling- 

wood. 
Master  Rockafellar's  Voyage.    By  W.  Clark 

Russell, 

:fiSoohs  for  JSogs  an&  (Bfrls 

Crown  8z'o.    y.  td. 

Syd  Belton  :  Or,  the  Boy  who  would  not  go  to  Sea 

By  G.  Manville  Fenii. 
The  Red  Grange.    By  Mrs.  Molesworth. 
The  Secret  of  Madame  de  Monluc.    By  the 

Author  of '  Mdle.  Mori." 
DUMPS.    By  Mrs.  Parr. 
A  Girl  of  the  People.    By  L.  T.  Meade. 
Hepsy  Gipsy.    By  L.  T.  Meade,    zj.  6rf. 
The  Honourable  Miss.    By  L.  T.  Meade. 

XTbe  IRovellst 

Messrs.  Methuen  are  issuing  under  the  above  general  title  a  Monthly  Series 
of  Novels  by  popular  authors  at  the  price  of  Sixpence.  Some  of  these  Novels 
have  never  been  published  before.  Each  rumber  is  as  long  as  the  average  Six 
Shilling  Novel.  The  first  numbers  of  '  The  Novelist  '  are  as  follows 

I.  Dead  Men  Tell  no  Tales.     By  E.  w. 

Hornung. 
IL  Jennie  Baxter,  Journalist.    By  Robert 
Barr. 

III.  The  INCA'S  Treasure.   By  Ernest  Glanville. 

IV.  A  Son  of  the  State.    By  W.  Pett  Ridge. 
V.  Furze  Bloom.     By  S.  Baring-Gould. 

VI.  BUNTER's  Cruise.    By  C.  Gleie. 
VII.  THE  Gay  Deceivers.    By  Arthur  Moore. 
VIII.  Prisoners  of  War.   By  A.  Boysou  Weekes. 
IX.  Out  of  print. 

X.  Veldt  and  Laager  :  Tales  o(  the  Transvaal. 
By  E.  S.  Valentine. 
XI.  THE    Nigger    Knights.      By   F.  Norreys 

Connel. 
XII.  A  Marriage  at  Sea.    By  W.  Clnrk  Russell. 

XIII.  THE     pomp     of     the     LAVILETTES.       By 
Gilbert  Parker. 

XIV.  A  Man  of  Mark.     By  Anthony  Hope. 

XV.  THE  CaRISSIMA.     By  Lucas  Malet. 
XVI.  The  Lady's  Walk.    By  Mrs.  Oliphant. 

XVII.  Derrick  Vaughan.    By  Edna  Lyall.. 
XVin.  IN  THE  Midst  of  alarms.    By  Robert 
Barr. 
XIX.  His  Grace.    By  W.  E.  Norris. 

XX.  Dodo.  By  E.  F.  Benson. 
XXI.  Cheap  Jack  Zita.     By  S.  Baring-Gould. 
XXII.  WHEN  'VALMOND  CAME  TO.PONTIAC.  By 
Gilbert  Parker. 

XXIII.  The  Human  Boy.     By  Eden  Phillpotts. 

XXIV.  The  Chronicles  of  Count  Antonio. 

By  Anthony  Hope. 

XXV.  By  Stroke  of  Sword.     By  Andrew 

Balfour. 
XXVI.  Kitty  alone.     By  S.  Barincr-Gould. 
XXVII.  Giles  INGILBy.    By  W.  E.  Norris. 
XXVIII.  Urith.     By  S.  Barine-Gould. 
XXIX.  THE   TOWN   Traveller.     By  George 
Gissing. 
XXX.  Mr.  Smith.    By  Mrs.  Walford. 
XXXI.  A  CHANGE  OF  Air.     By  Anthony  Hope. 

^etbuen'5  Sijpenns  Xibrarg 

A  New  Series  af  Copyright  and  non-CopyrightBooks 

THE    MATABELE    Campaign.      By  Major-General 

Baden-Powell. 
The  Downfall  of  Prempeh.    By  Major-General 

Baden-Powell. 
MY  DANfSH  SWEETHEART.    By  W.  Clark  Russell. 
IN    THE    ROAR    OF    THE      SEA.     By   S.    Baring- 

Gould. 
PEGGY  OF  THE  BARTONS.     By  B.  M.  Croker. 
THE  GREEN  GRAVES  OF   Balgowrie.     By  Jane 

H.  Findlater. 
THE  STOLEN  BACILLUS.     By  H.  G.  Wells. 
MATTHEW  AUSTIN,    By  W.  E.  Norris. 

THE    CONQUEST     OF     LONDON.       By    Dorothea 

Gerard. 
A  Voyage  Of  Consolation.    By  Sara  J.  Duncan. 
The  Mutable  Many.    By  Robert  Barr. 
BEN  HUR.     By  General  Lew  Wallace. 
Sir  Robert's  Fortune.    By  Mrs.  Oliphant. 
The  Fair  God.   By  General  Lew  Wallace. 

Clarissa  furiosa.    By  w.  e.  Norris. 

Noemi.     By  S.  Earing-Gnuld. 
The  throne  of  David.    By  J.  H.  Ingraham. 
ACROSS    THE    SALT    SEAS.       By    J.     Bloundelle 
Button. 

^^ 

i 
1 

n''^ 

.:  1 

-  4 

A
