HANDBOUND
AT  THE


C.1VJXJ


9

VIKING   CLUB  TRANSLATION   SERIES— VOL.   II.


BElfcer  or  poetic

COMMONLY     KNOWN     AS

S^EMUND'S     EDDA


PART    I.— THE     MYTHOLOGICAL     POEMS.


EDITKD   AND   TRANSLATED   WITH    INTRODUCTION    AND    NOTES

BY

OLIVE     BRAY.


ILLUSTRATED    BY

W.     G.    COLLINGWOOD.


PRINTED    FOR    THE    VIKING    CLUB,  £

KING'S    WEIGHHOUSE     ROOMS,     LONDON.  G^

y\


PRINTED    BY   TITOS  WILSON,    KENDAL.


PT
7224

Es.Bj

V.I


CONTENTS.


Introduction    -  -

Grimnismal  :     The  Sayings  of  Grirnnir  the  God  in  Torment

Alvissmal :     The  Wisdom  of  All-wise

Vaf}>ruJ>nismdl :     The  Words  of  the  Mighty  Weaver

Havamal :     The  Words  of  Odin,  the  High  One     -

Hymiskvtya  :     The  Lay  of  Hymir    -

PrymskviJ>a :     The  Lay  of  Thrym    -

Skirnismal :     The  Story  of  Skirnir  -

Grotigaldr;  Fjolsvinnismal :     Day-spring  and  Menglod

Harbar}>slj6)> :     Greybeard  and  Thor

Rigsjmla  :     The  Song  of  Rig

Voluspa  en  Skamma  :     The  Vala's  Shorter  Soothsaying    -

Hyndlulj6|> :  .  The  Lay  of  Hyndla"

Baldrs  Draumar :     Baldr's  Dreams  -

Lpkasenna  :     Loki's  Mocking

Fragments  from  the  Snorra  Edda

Voluspa  :     The  Soothsaying  of  the  Vala

Bibliography   -

Indexes  .-...-.


LIST     OF     ILLUSTRATIONS.

Page

Title :  The  Tree  of  Yggdrasil  i

Odin  in  Torment  2

The  Chariot  of  the  Sun  3

All-wise  answers  Thor  -  24

Sun  shines  in  the  Hall                        -  25

Vidar  (motive  from  the  Gosforth  Cross)  38

Odin's  last  words  to  Baldr    -  39

The  Stranger  at  the  Door     -  -  60

Odin's  Self-sacrifice    -                          -  -  61

Thor  slays  the  Ox  (motive  from  a  cross-base  at  Carlisle)        -  112

Thor's  Fishing  -  113

Loki's  flight  to  Jotunheim     -  -  126

Thrym's  \Vedding-feast  -  127

The  Lovesickness  of  Frey       -  -  138

Skirnir's  message  to  Gerd      -  -  139.

Groa's  Incantation      -  -  156

Day-spring  finds  Menglod      -  157

Thor  threatens  Greybeard      -  -  181

Greybeard  mocks  Thor  -  182

Rig  in  Great-grandfather's  Cottage  -  2Q2

The  Crow  warns  Kon  -  203

Heimdal  and  his  Nine  Mothers                      -  -  218

The  Vision  of  the  Mighty  One  -  219

Freyja  awakes  Hyndla  -  224

The  Ancestry  of  Ottar  225

Odin  rides  to  Hel      -  -  238

The  Death  of  Baldr  239

Loki  taunts  Bragi      -  -  244

Loki  Bound  (motive  from  the  Gosforth  Cross)  -  245

Skadi's  longing  for  the  Mountains   -  -  270

Njord's  desire  of  the  Sea       -  -  271

Ragnarok  (motive  from  the  Heysham  hogback)       -  -  276

The  Restoration  (motive  from  the  Heysham  hogback)        -  277


INTRODUCTION


A  translation  is  only  a  compromise  at  best,  and  effected  with  a
sense  of  resting  in  defeat.  It  has  therefore  always  some  need
of  apology,  especially  to  those  who  are  already  acquainted  with  the
original,  and  for  a  work  which  is  entitled  to  a  high  place  in  inter-
national literature.  Such  place  we  claim  for  the  Edda,  not  only  as
the  fountain  head  of  Germanic  mythology  and  tradition,  but  for  its  own
beauty  of  expression — the  art  of  the  Scandinavian  poets.  They  sent  it
forth  long  since  armed  with  winged  words  and  girded  with  power,  and
only  for  want  of  speech  in  different  tongues  has  it  remained  so  little
recognised.  Two  previous  renderings  into  English  by  Thorpe  and
York  Powell  might  well  have  proved  its  worth,  but  the  first  was
allowed  to  fall  out  of  print  while  interest  was  only  beginning  to
awaken,  and  the  second  is  included  in  the  Corpus  Poeticum  Boreale
with  other  less  worthy  material  in  a  form  that  cannot  appeal  to  the
general  reader.  Both  have  been  used  in  preparing  the  present  book,
which  is  offered  less  to  scholars  and  students  than  to  all  who  have
sufficient  taste  for  mythology,  and  understanding  of  old  lore,  to  recog-
nise the  truth  and  beauty  which  are  not  expressed  in  precisely  the
forms  and  language  of  to-day  ;  but  who  are  also  insistent,  like  our-
selves, that  old  books  are  not  true  because  of  their  age,  nor  old  lamps
beautiful  unless  they  can  be  polished  anew.  To  satisfy  truth  and  for
fear  of  doing  injustice  to  the  original,  we  have  endeavoured  to  keep
the  translation  as  literal  as  possible,  though  ambiguity  in  the  original
occasionally  necessitates  interpretation  by  a  somewhat  freer  rendering.
Where  we  have  failed  to  catch  the  spirit  of  the  Icelandic  or  to  find
for  it  worthy  English  expression,  we  hope  that  the  illustrations  will
suggest  that  a  wealth  of  beauty  is  waiting  to  be  represented  in  modern
art  by  the  painter  as  it  was  pictured  of  old  by  the  Icelandic  poets.  For
their  style  is  so  essentially  graphic  without  being  descriptive  that  the
more  familiar  we  are  with  their  works  the  more  difficult  does  it  seem

to  translate  them  into  words  instead  of  colour  and  form.

A  A


ii  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

Saemund's  Edda  bears  a  title  under  which  its  first  editor  would
have  failed  to  recognise  it.  Saemund,  a  well-known  Icelandic  scholar
of  the  twelfth  century,  had  no  part  in  its  composition,  although,
according  to  popular  tradition,  he  was  the  author  of  a  work  on
mythology.  Nor  was  the  name  of  Edda  given  to  it  before  the  seven-
teenth century  :  we  find  this  word  attached  to  a  collection  of  mythical
stories  made  by  the  great  Icelandic  historian,  Snorri  Sturluson  (1181-
1241).  Its  earliest  meaning  was  "  great-grandmother,"  and  it  is  thus
used  in  Rigsjmla ;  what  were  the  intermediate  steps  in  sense  develop-
ment we  little  know,  but  "  great-grandmother's  stories "  like  "  old
wives'  tales  "  was  deemed  by  some  sceptic  a  fitting  title  for  Snorri's
account  of  the  Old  Norse  gods  and  goddesses  of  Asgarth ;  and  it  was
deemed  equally  suitable  by  Bishop  Brynjolf  Sveinsson  (1643)  for  the
more  venerable  work  which  from  that  time  was  called  Saamund's  or
the  Poetic  Edda.*

It  exists  in  several  MSS.,  none  of  which  were  brought  to  light
before  the  Icelandic  Renaissance  of  the  seventeenth  century.  The
finding  of  the  first  and  most  complete  MS.  was  somewhat  dramatic,
and  resembled  the  long  awaited  discovery  of  the  planet  Neptune.
Magnus  Olafsson  had  suggested  the  former  existence  of  a  more
"  ancient  Edda,"  and  we  soon  find  this  hypothetical  work  regarded  in
the  light  of  a  hidden  treasure  of  wisdom  and  ancient  lore,  of  which  all
existing  fragments  were  but  "the  bare  shadow  and  the  footprint."  We
know  nothing  of  how  it  was  tracked  and  at  last  discovered,  but  by
1643  the  Codex  Regius  was  in  the  hands  of  Bishop  Brynjolf.  This
most  important  MS.,  known  as  R,  is  in  the  Copenhagen  library :  it  is
an  octavo  volume  consisting  of  five  parchment  sheets  belonging  to  the
thirteenth  century,  and  containing  nearly  all  the  poems  given  below.
The  others  are  found  in  MSS.  of  the  fourteenth  century,  which  were
brought  to  light  by  the  same  scholars.  The  Codex  Arnamagnaeanus
(A)  supplied  Baldrs  Draumar ;  the  Codex  Wormianus  includes  Rigs-
]mla  with  Snorri's  Edda;  Hyndluljo)?  is  found  in  one  of  the  great  Saga
books,  the  Flateyjarb6k ;  Grogaldr  ok  Fjolsvinnismal  are  only  known
in  paper  MSS.  of  the  seventeenth  century.

*  Many  scholars,  however,  incline  to  the  theory  put  forth  by  Mr.  Eirikr  Magnnsson
in  his  paper  on  Edda  (Saga  book  of  the  Viking  Club,  vol.  i.,  p.  219),  that  the  name,
whatever  later  meanings  may  have  been  given,  meant  originally  "  the  book  of  Oddi"  or
Codex  Oddensis  ;  and  that  Edda  is  merely  a  feminine  form,  agreeing  with  bok,  ofOddi,
the  home  of  Snorri,  where  his  love  for  history  and  literature  first  was  kindled.


INTRODUCTION.  in

Thus,  with  a  few  modern  additions,  Saemund's  Edda  is  an  early
collection  of  much  older  lays,  some  mythical  and  some  heroic :  the
mythical  lays  only  are  given  here,  although,  as  regards  style  and
authorship,  no  line  of  distinction  can  be  drawn  between  them.  Brief
passages  in  prose  have  been  added  at  some  later  period  ;  the  poems
themselves  belong  to  somewhat  different  dates,  and  show  the  work  of
different  hands;  some  are  fragmentary,  and  have  suffered  from  re-
arrangement and  interpolation ;  all  are  more  or  less  obscure.  They
point  back  to  lost  traditions,  forgotten  creeds,  and,  it  is  suggested,  a
wealth  of  early  poetic  literature  and  mythology  which  are  common  to
the  Germanic  race  :  they  lead  us  forward  also  to  the  more  intelligible
account  of  Snorri's  prose  book,  which  is  the  earliest  commentary  on
the  subject.  This  cannot  rank  with  the  primitive  sources  of  tradition
except  in  so  far  as  it  quotes  old  fragments  from  lost  poems  and  strophes
of  those  found  in  the  Edda.  Christian  and  foreign  influence,  the
orderly  mind  of  the  scholar,  the  shaping  hand  of  the  artist  have  left
their  traces  behind.  In  one  or  two  cases  we  can  even  correct  his
misinterpretations  where  an  earlier  and  perhaps  grander  myth,  less
understood  in  the  narrow  light  of  mediaeval  learning  than  by  the
broader  and  more  comparative  knowledge  of  to-day,  has  become  over-
grown by  some  later  fairy  tale.  We  are  obliged,  however,  to  rely  on
Snorri's  version  where  all  other  explanation  is  wanting  for  gaps  and
obscurities  in  the  poems ;  indeed  there  is  little  else  to  throw  light  upon
the  subject.

Iceland  has  a  magnificent  prose  literature  in  the  Sagas  of  the
thirteenth  century,  which  are  records  of  the  old  Norse  kings,  stories  of
family  life  in  Iceland  or  the  mother  country,  and  Viking  expeditions
both  romantic  and  historic.  They  treat  of  times  past  when  the  mytho-
logy of  the  Edda  was  still  living,  but  they  show  only  the  cult  and
worship  of  the  principal  deities — Odin,  Thor,  and  Frey — who  differ
widely  from  the  heroic  beings  of  the  myths.  The  skalds  or  court
poets,  save  Ulf  Uggason  and  Thiodwolf,  rarely  chose  such  subjects  for
their  songs,  but  in  praising  their  lords  they  made  use  of  a  poetic
diction  based  on  mythical  lore,  and  full  of  allusions  which  sometimes
bear  out  what  is  written  in  the  Edda,  though  often  too  obscure  to  be
of  much  service.  The  only  other  contemporary  source  of  information
is  a  not  very  reliable  history  of  Denmark  by  Saxo  Grammaticus  (1185
A.D.),  who,  to  honour  his  native  land  the  more,  has  stolen  the  traditions
of  neighbouring  peoples,  and  brought  the  Old  Norse  gods  upon  the


w  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

scene  as  heroes  only,  or  as  vanquished  foes.  It  is  the  unwritten
literature,  the  folk-lore  and  fairy  tales  of  Germanic  nations  and  of
other  races,  which  often  supply  us  with  the  motive,  and  help  us  to  an
understanding  of  the  Eddie  myths.

But  the  poems  are  not  so  obscure  as  they  appear  at  first  sight ;
when  taken  together  and  compared  and  fitted  one  into  the  other  they
become  intelligible  and  reveal  much  concerning  themselves,  their  nature
and  their  history.  From  internal  evidence  alone  we  must  seek  an
answer  to  the  question :  "  When  and  where  were  they  composed  ?  "
The  MSS.,  as  we  have  seen,  belong  to  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth
centuries,  but  the  poems  themselves  are  clearly  older.  An  atmosphere
of  heathendom  pervades  them,  and  suggests  a  time  before  1000  A.D.,
when  Christianity  was  established  in  Iceland :  the  evidence  of  lan-
guage, the  Icelandic  dialect,  and  of  metre  shows  on  the  other  hand
that  they  were  not  written  earlier  than  the  ninth  century,  when  the
Old  Norse  tongue  underwent  definite  changes.  Between  these  dates
therefore,  850-1000  A.D.,  it  is  now  generally  agreed  that  the  Edda  was
composed.  During  this  period  the  Icelanders,  in  their  intercourse
with  Norway  and  in  Viking  expeditions  or  more  peaceful  settlements
in  the  British  Isles,  had  every  opportunity  of  drawing  from  all  the
mediaeval  springs  of  language  and  literature,  and  the  question  has  now
become  "  How  far  do  the  poems  belong  to  Iceland  and  the  North  ?  "
Altogether,  Olsen  thinks;  Finnur  Jonsson  gives  them  to  Norway  ;  but
in  contrast  to  the  early  critics,  who  held  these  myths  and  legends  as  the
heirloom  of  the  whole  Germanic  race,  the  tendency  is  now  to  regard
them  as  mainly  borrowed  from  Christian,  classical,  and  other  foreign
sources.  Thus  Bugge  and  Vigfusson  will  not  allow  that  they  belong
to  the  North  at  all,  but  rather  to  the  West,  where  they  were  composed
under  the  influence  of  international  literature  by  settlers  in  the  British
Isles.  This  theory  cannot  be  wholly  accepted,  but  their  researches
have  at  least  shown  that  the  vocabulary  and  descriptions  of  life  are  not
exclusively  Icelandic  or  even  Northern,  and  they  enable  us  to  view
the  poems  in  better  perspective.  Few  traces  will  be  found  of  the
immediate  history  of  the  Icelanders,  their  settlement  in  the  ninth
century,  their  life  as  depicted  in  the  sagas  with  its  strange  mixture  of
law  at  home  and  lawlessness  abroad.  The  stage  of  the  Edda  is  filled
with  kings  and  earls  such  as  those  who  once  ruled  in  Norway  or
figured  in  heroic  legends  of  the  past.  Strange  fables,  old-world  charms
and  saws,  where  wisdom  works  by  spells  and  knowledge  is  immersed  in


INTRODUCTION.  v

magic  lore,  barbarous  customs,  savage  heathen  rites  all  harmonise  in
the  picture  of  an  earlier  life,  and  suggest  that  the  writers  were  repeating
the  traditions  of  their  mother  country,  or  even,  as  Jessen  holds,  those
of  the  primitive  Germanic  race.  It  is  only  when  we  come  to  the
individual  style  and  treatment  that  the  setting  becomes  truly  Northern:
the  kennings  used,  the  descriptive  details,  the  atmosphere  and  scene  alike
are  characteristic  of  Iceland  ;  and  here  we  meet  with  foreign  words
such  as  plug,  plough ;  tresc,  tress ;  which  show  the  influence  of
European  civilisation  and  mediaeval  romance.  The  myths  likewise  in
their  broad  outlines  do  not  belong  to  Iceland  alone,  but  to  other
Scandinavian  countries,  and  to  Germany  and  England.  Odin  or
Woden,  Thor,  Hel,  Frigg,  Tyr  were  known  to  all  the  tribes,  as  were
dwarfs  and  elves  ;  even  the  Jotun,  a  being  so  familiar  in  the  Edda,  is
met  in  old  English  as  a  monster,  "  eoten."  Their  presentation,  how-
ever— Hel,  no  longer  as  the  underworld,  but  a  northern  land  of  mist
and  cold,  the  Jotuns,  who  have  become  Frost  giants,  and  Odin  as  the
War-father,  a  Viking  in  spirit — can  only  be  creations  of  the  Icelandic
poets  ;  while  the  conception  of  a  new  world  and  higher  Powers  and
the  figure  of  Baldr  betoken  the  near  approach  of  Christianity.  It
seems  most  reasonable,  therefore,  to  adopt  Mogk's  theory  that  the
poems  were  composed  mainly  on  old  themes  which  had  been  brought
from  the  mother  country  into  Iceland,  where  they  took  their  present
form  with  traces  of  Old  English  and  Celtic  influence.

But  the  wealth  of  interest  in  the  Edda  has  been  disclosed  by  the
manifold  researches  and  conjectures  of  different  scholars  pursuing
each  his  own  theory,  perhaps,  to  extinction  :  Uhland,  Hoffory,  Miillen-
hoff,  tracing  the  delicate  outlines  of  some  nature  myth  ;  Grimm  and
Max  Miiller  finding  links  in  mythology  and  Heinzel  in  poetic  form
between  the  Indo-Germanic  nations;  Rydberg  attempting,  without  even
attaining  complete  success,  to  prove  that  one  grand  historic  saga  and  a
few  heroic  forms  of  Germanic  origin  are  the  source  of  all  the  late  and
varying  traditions  ;  Schwartz,  Mannhard,  Meyers,  distinguishing  the
fancies  born  of  superstition  from  the  religious  creeds  of  more  developed
man ;  Kauffmann  and  Fraser  revealing  how  once  savage  rites  are  still
remembered  and  transfigured  in  poetic  myths.  But  no  one  has  done
more  towards  proving  the  value  of  the  Edda  than  Bugge,  who  has
shown  that  all  its  interests  in  literature,  history,  mythology,  religion
are  not  drawn  from  one  barren  source  alone,  but  from  the  wisdom  of
the  world.


VI  THE    POETIC    EDDA.

Partly  for  this  reason,  because  its  interests  are  too  wide  and  deep
to  yield  themselves  at  once,  and  partly  because  the  Edda  has  suffered
too  much  from  the  chances  and  changes  of  time,  we  offer  suggested
expl. i nations  of  the  different  poems  for  readers  who  are  not  previously
acquainted  with  Eddie  literature.  We  should  like  to  have  avoided  all
the  vexed  questions  which  leave  their  scars  behind  and  spoil  appre-
ciation of  the  art  and  spirit  of  the  work  ;  but  too  often  these  questions
ask  themselves,  and  the  many  possible  answers  give  depth  and  large-
ness to  the  subject.  To  those,  however,  who  would  read  it  without
commentary  we  offer  the  translation  only,  with  notes  of  reference
between  corresponding  passages  which  may  possibly  serve  as  guides  in
following  the  right  thread,  and  occasionally  find  an  end  for  a  story
begun  ;  though  they  will  not,  nor  will  any  commentary,  unravel  all  the
tangles  in  the  Edda.

For  mythology  itself  is  a  tangled  garden  of  thought  unless  it  has
undergone  complete  transformation  in  the  hands  of  the  artist.  It  is
nothing  less  than  the  mind  of  the  nation  laid  bare,  which,  like  the
mind  of  the  individual,  discloses  a  mass  of  inconsistent,  incongruous
ideas,  childish  notions,  mature  thoughts,  fleeting  fancies,  high  imagin-
ings, borrowed  opinions,  lying  side  by  side,  all  stamped  by  past
experience,  but  never  blended  into  unity.

It  is  for  some  artist  or  historian  to  reveal  the  mind  of  his  nation  ;
if  a  true  artist,  his  own  sense  of  beauty  will  discover  something  which
is  immortal  and  which,  like  the  sculpture  of  the  Greeks,  he  can  leave
in  fixed  abiding  forms ;  if  a  true  historian,  he  will  disclose  some  one
phase  or  stage  of  development ;  or  if  a  prophet,  he  will  declare  the
ideals  of  his  .nation,  and  show  mythology  in  the  light  of  religion.  But
no  such  influence  has  given  unity  to  the  mythology  of  the  North.  The
Edda  discloses  only  a  mixture  of  rational  and  irrational  ideas,  folk-
lore, and  fairy  tale.  Savage  heathen  ritual,  symbolic  acts,  and  mystic
legends  are  found  as  different  expressions  of  the  same  human  instinct,
and  even  associated  with  the  same  deity.  For  the  gods  themselves  are
continually  changing  their  characters  and  forms ;  well  defined  one
moment,  the  next  they  are  shifting,  shapeless  beings,  sometimes
appearing  as  types  of  thought,  statuesque  and  classic  in  repose,  or  as
natural  forces  in  tKeir  workings,  full  of  almost  human  life  and  passion.
We  seek  in  vain  for  the  Indo-Germanic  Heaven  or  Sky  god,  by  which
is  meant  no  unalterable  personality  who  lives  on  in  tradition  from
age  to  age,  but  merely  the  conception  of  an  over-ruling  power,  now


INTRODUCTION.  vil

inhabiting,  now  symbolising,  and  now  identified  with  the  heaven  itself.
Odin,  the  Wind  god,  the  High  One,  is  set  on  his  throne  as  the  All-
father  whom  all  other  gods  obey  and  serve,  but  soon  we  find  him
parting  with  his  weapons  or  attributes  of  Heaven  god — his  sword  of
light  to  Heimdal  or  to  Frey,  his  thunderbolt  to  Thor.

We  could  scarcely  hope  for  unity  in  a  mythology  which  is  handed
down  in  old  wives'  tales  and  scattered  fragments  of  art ;  but  in  a  work
as  poetic  as  the  Edda,  and  a  collection  which  was  almost  co-existent
with  the  myths  themselves,  we  might  have  looked  for  some  funda-
mental idea,  some  one  aspect  whether  of  art  or  history  or  religion,  in
which  they  would  present  themselves.  But  we  have  already  pointed
out  that  the  Edda  is  too  diffuse  in  its  interest  to  confine  itself  to  one
side  of  life  :  it  is  like  some  old  building  in  which  many  hands  and
many  ages  have  taken  part :  its  charm  lies  in  all  its  varied  features  and
claims,  and  to  follow  the  poems  in  an  appreciative  way  we  are  obliged
to  dip  into  a  world  of  fancy  and  emerge  into  one  of  fact,  only  to  plunge
and  be  lost  in  mysteries  of  thought :  a  specialist  will  find  no  satis-
faction in  studying  it,  nor  can  he  appreciate  its  merits.  To  con-
sider its  myths  as  in  any  way  representative  of  Old  Norse  religion
would  lead  us  very  far  astray.  They  hint  now  and  then  at  acts  of
worship,  sacrifice  and  rites,  but  the  narrative  or  dialogue  is  never
interwoven  with  prayers  or  hymns  of  praise,  and  seldom  broken  by
moral  teaching.  The  connection  between  the  mythology  and  the
religion  of  the  people  is  obscure,  and  probably  very  slight ;  for  the
poet's  hand  has  been  at  work,  adding  grace  and  humour,  reinterpreting
in  the  light  of  fancy  rather  than  of  truth.  History  also,  after  tracing
with  delight  some  ancient  custom,  distinguishing  Scandinavian  features
from  Germanic  origins,  and  filling  in  a  background  of  contemporary
life  in  the  Viking  period,  rejects  the  rest  as  fiction.  And  art  will  not
forbear  to  criticise  a  cycle  of  poems  which  show  a  total  lack  of  unity,
which  are  manifestly  by  different  authors  and  of  different  dates,  full  of
obscure  allusions,  half  forgotten  tales,  discrepancies,  inequalities  of
style.  But  here  censure  will  be  lost  in  praise  of  the  almost  unique
qualities  of  the  individual  poems — the  dramatic  power,  suggestiveness,
humour  which  seldom  appears  conscious  of  itself,  vigour  and  swift-
ness of  expression,  where  word  follows  hard  after  word  with  a  kind  of
impetuous  eagerness,  and  where  all  the  force  of  the  ballad-writer  is
often  combined  with  the  grace  of  a  finished  artist.  Nor  will  admira-
tion pause  :  for  there  is  colossal  grandeur  about  the  whole  subject


vin  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

which  inspires  reverence  and  awe,  a  material  grandeur,  such  as  men
loved  and  feared  until  civilisation  taught  them  the  minuteness,  and
also  the  pettiness  of  life,  an  entire  contrast  to  the  intellectual  delicacy
of  the  Greeks,  and  yet  a  mythology  even  more  fitted  than  theirs  for  an
epic  poem.  The  Germanic  ideal  naturally  expressed  itself  in  large
heroic  action  ;  its  huge  forms  and  simple  outlines  allow  infinite  space
for  the  play  of  power,  and  a  skilful  hand  might  have  wrought  these
poems  into  an  epic  cycle  as  fine  and  much  stronger  than  the  Arthurian
legend.  Hut  they  approach  most  nearly — in  fact,  only  for  want  of  the
one  shaping  hand,  they  just  miss  being — the  mightiest  drama  that  has
ever  been  written.  The  characters  Odin,  Baldr,  Loki,  Njord,  Frey,
Freyja  are  capable  of  infinite  development  ;  they  possess  even  now  all
the  steadfastness  of  the  type,  all  the  life  of  the  individual  ;  they  are
godlike  in  their  power  and  majesty  ;  they  are  girt  about  with  the
freshness  and  vigour,  the  tenderness  and  youth,  the  breadth  and
atmosphere  which  belongs  to  them  as  forces  of  nature,  and  yet  they
are  intensely  human  in  their  passions,  in  their  actions,  and  their
speech.

It  is  indeed  as  we  pass  from  the  drama  and  get  closer  and  closer
to  a  representation  of  life  itself  that  a  principle  of  unity  appears  in  the
Edda.  It  is  seen  at  last  in  a  thread  which  is  woven  through  all  the
poems — that  of  Fate,  or  rather  Weird  ;  for  the  power  of  Germanic
mythology  is  not  the  Fate  which  takes  revenge  on  the  individual  and
which  can  be  seen  to  interpose  in  the  fortunes  of  men ;  it  is  a  sweeping
world-force  set  free  by  the  first  born  beings,  the  Jotuns,  and  left  to
work  itself  out  in  the  life  of  the  universe.  It  knows  no  law  except
that  of  consequence,  and  obeys  no  impulse  except  that  of  nature.  It
is  Weird  which  renders  the  meeting  of  Menglod  and  Dayspring  as
inevitable  as  the  sunrise  at  dawn  ;  Gerd  must  surrender  to  Frey  as
earth  must  ever  respond  to  the  wooing  of  summer;  Thor  will  recover
his  hammer  as  surely  as  spring  will  return.  But  Weird  is  seen  at
work  on  a  yet  mightier  scale  in  the  whole  cycle  of  the  Edda.  It  is  as
inevitable  for  the  JEsir,  the  war  gods,  to  perish  as  it  is  for  all  imperfect
ideals  to  be  shattered  ;  and  they  are  destroyed,  before  even  the  coming
of  mightier  powers,  as  a  result  of  their  own  weakness  and  folly,  and  by
forces  which  they  have  long  held  at  bay.  At  intervals  in  the  poems
Doom  is  foretold,  the  Weird  motive  is  heard.  But  only  in  Voluspd
does  there  seem  any  conscious  attempt  to  trace  its  power  through  all
the  history  of  the  gods.  This  poem  stands  first  in  the  Codex  Regius,


INTRODUCTION.  IX

a  place  which  it  merits,  for  it  is  the  grandest  of  all  the  works  in  the
Edda,  and  is  necessary  for  a  full  comprehension  of  the  spirit  which
moves  and  lives  throughout,  and  the  unity  which  binds  all  the  frag-
ments together.  But  it  is  full  of  allusions  whose  significance  is  not
understood  except  by  those  already  familiar  with  the  various  myths
and  their  interpretations.  For  this  reason,  and  because  the  attitude  of
the  writer  is  essentially  one  of  summing  up  and  estimating  the  value
of  old-world  thoughts  in  the  light  of  new,  we  have  placed  it  last.  The
other  poems  have  been  arranged  where  possible  in  their  right  sequence
in  the  history  of  the  gods,  but  more  often,  for  they  are  seldom  closely
related,  to  introduce  scenes  and  characters  most  conveniently  to  the
reader.  This  scheme  is  perhaps  made  clearer  by  the  explanatory
notes.  Grimnisnrwl  stands  first,  for  in  it  we  meet  with  much  that
is  most  characteristic  of  Old  Norse  mythology,  the  chief  gods  and
goddesses,  their  homes,  the  rude  war-faring  life  in  Valholl,  the  Val-
kyries, and  the  great  World-tree,  Yggdrasil.  Odin,  the  All-father,  is
shown  in  the  manifold  forms  in  which  he  must  henceforth  be  recog-
nised. Alvissmal  and  VafJ>ru]>nismdl  complete  the  description  of
cosmology,  and  make  us  familiar  with  the  inhabitants  of  different
worlds  and  the  history  of  the  earliest  times.  These  poems  place  us  at
the  outset  in  a  right  attitude  towards  the  type  of  mythology  found  in
the  Edda :  its  myths  have  their  place  in  evolutionary  history  among
those  drawn  by  the  poets  from  a  religion  in  the  transition  stage
between  a  worship  of  nature  and  of  more  anthropomorphic  gods.  In
H&vamal,  the  High  One  reveals  himself  by  relating  the  mysteries  of
his  own  experience  and  the  wisdom  he  has  gained.  HymiskviJ?a,
Thrymskvtya,  and  Skirnismal  are  less  didactic  narratives  of  Thor  and
Frey,  told  with  a  simple  love  for  old  themes,  and  still  in  touch  with
nature  myths  ;  but  in  the  next  poems  Fjolsvinnismal,  RigsJ>ula,  Hynd-
luljoj?  and  HarbardsljoJ>,  the  myth  is  associated  with  some  new  theme,
and  used  merely  as  a  setting  ;  veiled  meanings  suggest  themselves,
and  the  gods  have  become  more  conventional  forms.  Their  power  is
waning,  and  in  Baldrs  Draumar  and  Lokasenna  the  Weird  motive  is
heard  waxing  stronger  and  louder,  proclaiming  the  near  approach  of
Doom  or  Ragnarok,  for  once  more  the  Icelandic  word  is  required  to
express  a  Doom  which  is  but  the  last  of  life's  issues.  The  first  of
these  poems,  with  its  tone  of  solemn  warning,  is  like  a  return  to  faith
in  the  old  gods ;  the  second,  with  the  mocking  laughter  of  a  sceptic,
reviews  and  criticises  their  history  and  their  characters.  Voluspa  also

B  13


x  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

is  a  retrospect,  but  seen  with  a  tender  discerning  eye,  and,  as  we  have
noticed,  an  attempt  to  find  unity  and  truth.

The  text  has  been  included  more  for  the  sake  of  comparison  with
the  English  than  for  the  use  of  scholars  and  students.  The  version  is
based  on  that  of  Gering  (Padeborn,  1904),  whose  spelling  and  metrical
corrections  have  generally  been  adopted.  The  spelling  is  to  some
extent  simplified:  '0"  is  used  both  for  the  *i'  umlaut  of  'o'  and  the
*u'  umlaut  of  'a' ;  'ce'  represents  the  'i'  umlaut  of  '6' ;  the  '«'  umlaut
of  'a'  is  neglected  as  in  all  later  MSS.  Different  readings  of  the  more
important  passages  are  noted  below  with  the  same  abbreviation  of  names
which  are  found  in  the  best  German  commentaries.  Emendations
and  all  changes  in  order  of  strophes  are  also  noted  with  a  reference  to
the  MSS.  as  given  by  Detter  and  Heinzel  (Leipzig,  1903),  whose
edition,  it  should  be  observed,  is  arranged  in  half  lines.

No  precise  attempt  has  been  made  in  the  translation  to  render
the  original  metre,  which  follows  strict  laws  of  its  own  ;  the  long  line
is  divided  by  caesura  into  half  lines,  which  are  connected  by  alliterative
staves  falling  on  the  most  emphatic  words,  and  occasionally  by  rhyme.
Two  forms  of  strophe  are  found :  the  Fornyr]?islag  resembles  most
nearly  the  oldest  epic  metre  of  the  Germanic  race;  it  is  used  in
Voluspa,  Thrymskvtya,  and  other  epic  lays,  and  consists  of  four  such
lines  as  described  ;  the  Ljo)?ahattr,  which  is  peculiar  to  Old  Norse,  has
greater  rhythm  and  flexibility  ;  variety  is  given  by  the  alternation  of
long  lines  with  and  without  caesura.  It  is  more  suitable  for  the
dramatic  poems  like  Skirnismal,  or  for  dialogue  as  in  Lokasenna.
Alliteration  has  been  retained  or  introduced  where  possible,  and  the
rhythm,  which  is  hard  for  modern  ears  to  catch,  has  been  slightly
emphasised — all,  we  freely  admit,  resulting  in  a  compromise  which
satisfies  neither  the  new  nor  the  old,  but  which  seems  the  only  means
of  introducing  the  one  to  the  other.

It  is  with  great  hesitation  that  a  translation  (based  mainly  on
suggestions  by  Detter,  Gering,  Finnur  J6nsson,  Vigfusson,  and  other
authorities)  has  been  given  of  the  names,  many  of  which  are  of
doubtful  meaning.  By-names  often  seem  to  be  used  only  for  the  sake
of  alliteration  ;  in  such  cases  (Grm.,  st.  8)  it  has  sometimes  been  con-
sidered advisable  to  substitute  the  better  known  title.  On  the  other
hand,  we  ourselves  have  occasionally  introduced  a  familiar  by-narne
for  metrical  convenience.  In  every  case,  however,  the  text  will  supply
the  original  form  even  to  those  unacquainted  with  Icelandic.  Where


INTRODUCTION.  xi

the  meaning  of  the  names  is  wholly  obscure  they  are  given  in  their
original  form  in  the  translation;  'd'  is  adopted  for  Icelandic  ')>,'  or
'th,'  since  this  has  been  done  in  previous  versions,  and  a  few  names,
such  as  Odin,  which  have  already  become  familiar  to  English  readers,
are  retained.  The  nominative  case  ending  V  ('/,'  '»')  is  dropped
except  in  the  case  of 'tV — as  Fenrir  ;  or  where  V  forms  part  of  the
stem — as  Baldr.

We  would  here  express  our  gratitude  to  Prof.  Ker,  Mr.  W.  G.
Collingwood,  and  Mr.  A.  F.  Major,  whose  corrections  and  suggestions
have  been  of  inestimable  value  in  the  translation,  commentary,  and
general  plan  of  the  work.

THE     SAYINGS     OF     GRIMNIR.


It  has  been  suggested  that  Grimnismal  is  one  of  the  oldest  poems
in  the  collection,  and  it  may  well  have  been  such  in  its  original  form,
for  there  is  a  grand  simplicity  in  expression  and  an  absence  of  any
seemingly  borrowed  ideas.  It  touches  only  on  the  main  features  of
Old  Norse  mythology,  and  has  no  knowledge  of  later  stories  which
grew  up  around  the  separate  gods  and  goddesses,  and  which  form  such
frequent  subjects  of  allusion  by  the  poets,  supplying  them  with  a
wealth  of  obscure  poetical  imagery.  But  the  confused  arrangement,
which  we  have  altered  only  for  the  sake  of  giving  more  sequence  to  the
ideas,  and  such  details  as  those  which  surround  the  original  conception
of  the  World  Tree,  suggest  revision  and  interpolation,  and  give  ground
for  the  supposition  that  the  poem  as  it  stands  is  of  late  origin,  and  an
attempt  to  revive  a  belief  in  the  old  religion  by  the  teaching  of  old
myths.  The  setting  of  the  poem,  too,  bears  the  mark  of  a  different
and  more  skilful  hand.  It  is  wonderfully  dramatic  in  contrast  to  the
quiet  rehearsal  of  old-world  knowledge  and  traditional  lore.  Odin  and
Frigg  appear  first  as  humble  peasants,  who  give  shelter  to  the  sons  of
a  certain  King  Hraudung.  Next  the  Sky  god  is  pictured  in  Heaven,
sitting  on  his  throne  of  Window-shelf,  from  whence  he  can  view  all
the  worlds.  "Odin,"  says  Snorri,  "is  highest  and  first  born  among
gods.  He  rules  over  all  things,  and  the  other  gods,  however  mighty,
serve  him  as  children  serve  their  father."  Beside  him  is  Frigg,  his
wife,  who  is  also  a  power  of  the  sky,  and  perhaps  the  ruler  of  the
clouds.  The  scene  changes,  and  Odin  is  found  once  more  upon  earth


Xli    .  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

as  a  stranger  at  Geirrod's  doors.  He  appears  in  the  form  best  known
to  men — grey-bearded,  and  clad  in  blue  mantle  and  broad-brimmed
hat,  but  he  is  unrecognised  by  Geirrod.  Here  the  poem  opens  with
the  tortured  god  sitting  between  the  fierce  heat  of  two  fires,  craving  for
one  draught  of  water  from  Agnar's  hands  to  cool  his  parched  lips
before  he  can  answer  the  questions  of  his  tormentors  concerning  the
secret  and  holy  places  of  the  world.  From  time  to  time  the  narrative
is  broken  by  a  cry  from  the  god — to  his  faithful  Valkyries,  who  even
now  bear  refreshing  ale  to  the  Chosen  warriors  in  Valholl — to  his
kinsmen  who  are  assembling,  as  was  their  wont,  to  drink  in  the  sea
halls  of  Mgir.  How  he  is  at  last  delivered  from  his  painful  situation
is  left  uncertain,  owing  to  the  obscurity  of  sts.  42  and  45.

To  a  like  skilful  hand  belong  the  magnificent  strophes  in  which
Grimnir  reveals  himself  to  Geirrod  as  Odin,  the  highest  god ;  where
the  poet  shows  him  as  the  One,  who  in  different  ages  and  for  different
beings  has  many  aspects  and  many  names.  In  his  character  as
Heaven  god,  he  is  Odin,  Wafter,  Tree-rocker,  Wind-roar  ;  as  ruler  in
Asgarth.  they  call  him  the  High  One,  Equal-ranked,  Third  Highest.
He  is  the  life  and  source  of  all  things — the  Maker,  the  All-father.  He
rules  the  World  as  the  Watcher  from  Window-shelf.  He  comes  forth
from  Valholl  as  the  Death-father,  and  goes  to  battle  as  War-father,
Host-leader,  Helm-bearer.  To  evil  giants  he  appears  as  the  Dread
One,  Bale-worker,  Flashing-eyed,  Flaming-eyed.  Both  gods  and  men
know  the  Wanderer,  Grey-beard,  Long-beard,  Broad-hat.  As  Well-
comer  he  has  many  a  love  adventure ;  as  Hoodwinker,  Form-changer,
Wizard,  he  is  the  great  master  of  magic.  He  is  moreover  the  god  of
culture,  the  Sage  and  Wise  One,  the  Counsellor  or  Poet  who  has  won
the  Song-mead,  and  even  bestowed  the  gift  of  poesy  upon  men.  This
glorious  monotheistic  hymn  reminds  us  of  some  Indian  poet  singing  of
Krishna,  "  countless  mystic  forms  unfolding  in  one  Form."  In  such
Protean  fashion  the  supreme  god  of  every  mythology  has  the  right  to
change  his  shape,  and  assume  the  powers  and  attributes  of  lesser  beings.
It  is  unusual,  however,  for  an  old  Northern  mythologist  to  show  such
appreciation  of  this  truth.  He  is  usually  content  with  presenting  a
god  now  in  this  light,  now  in  that,  and  each  of  the  different  poems
which  relate  to  Odin  will  reveal  him  more  fully  in  some  one  of  the
above  characters.  Here  the  "  Masked  One  "  has  veiled  his  god-head
and  suffered  torment  in  order  to  instruct  and  enlighten  mankind.

Grimnir  begins  his  recital  of  old  lore  by  enumerating  the  homes  of


INTRODUCTION.  xin

the  gods,  which  usually  correspond  with  the  characters  of  their  owners.
All  the  principal  deities  are  mentioned  except  Frigg,  who,  as  we  are
told  elsewhere,  has  her  dwelling  in  the  "  Halls  of  Moisture,"  where
perhaps  she  rules  the  clouds.  Loki  also  is  omitted,  for  the  airy  fire
demon  had  no  resting  place  until  he  was  bound  in  the  underworld.
Odin  is  here  the  War-father,  who  shows  the  true  Viking  spirit  of  an
old  Norse  hero.  His  home  is  Valholl,  the  Hall  of  the  Slain,  described
in  sts.  8-10,  20-24.  ^  's  seen  from  afar,  standing  high  in  Asgarth,
overshadowed  by  Yggdrasil,  and  surrounded  by  the  air  river  Thund,
which  roars  and  thunders  when  the  dead  are  brought  through  by  the
Valkyries.  This  dwelling  is  reserved  for  the  chosen  sons  of  Odin  who
have  been  slain  in  strife;  other  dead  folk  pass  to  the  underworld  of  Hel.
Snorri  says,  drawing  his  information  mainly  from  this  passage  and  other
extant  poems,  "  all  the  warriors  who  have  fallen  in  battle  since  the
beginning  of  the  world  come  to  Odin  in  Valholl.  A  great  host  is  there
assembled,  and  more  shall  gather  ;  yet  they  will  seem  too  few  when
Fenrir,  the  Wolf,  is  let  loose  at  Ragnarok,  the  Doom  of  the  gods.  They
have  for  food  the  flesh  of  a  sooty-black  boar  called  Saehrimnir,  which
will  never  be  consumed,  however  great  the  throng  in  Valholl.  Each  day
he  is  boiled  in  Eldhrimnir  (the  fire-smoked  cauldron)  by  Andhrimnir
(the  sooty-faced  cook),  and  every  evening  he  becomes  whole  again.
But  Odin  partakes  not  of  the  same  food  as  his  Chosen  Warriors.  He
gives  the  portion  from  his  table  to  two  wolves,  Greed  and  Ravener,  for
he  himself  needs  no  food,  but  wine  is  his  meat  and  drink.  Two  ravens
sit  perched  on  his  shoulder,  and  whisper  to  him  tidings  of  what  they
have  seen  and  heard.  Thought  and  Memory  are  their  names.  He
sends  them  flying  each  day  over  all  the  world,  and  at  breakfast-time
they  return.  Thus  he  is  made  ware  of  the  things  which  come  to  pass,
and  is  called  by  mortals  the  Raven  god.  The  Chosen  Warriors  have
a  drink  which,  like  their  food,  is  never  failing ;  but  they  drink  not
water,  for  how  should  All-father  bid  kings  and  earls  and  other  mighty
men  to  his  halls  and  give  them  nought  but  water  ?  A  great  price
would  it  seem  to  those  who  had  suffered  wounds  and  death  to  get  such
a  draught  for  their  pains.  But  there  stands  a  she-goat  called  Heidrun
over  the  roof  of  Valholl,  biting  leaves  from  the  Shelterer's  boughs.
Mead  flows  from  her  teats  into  a  vessel  so  huge  that  all  the  Chosen
Warriors  can  drink  their  fill.  When  they  are  not  drinking  they  hold
sport.  Each  morning  they  put  on  their  war-gear  and  take  their
weapons,  and  go  forth  into  the  court-yard  and  there  fight  and  lay  one


xiv  THE    POETIC    EDDA.

another  low,  and  play  thus  till  breakfast-time,  when  they  go  back  and
sit  them  down  to  drink."  These  daily  conflicts,  it  would  seem>  are
but  a  preparation  for  the  last  great  conflict  at  Ragnarok.  Valholl  as
a  paradise  is  the  ideal  of  the  West  in  contrast  to  that  of  the  East.  It
is  no  home  of  rest,  but  one  of  conflict  and  strenuous  endeavour,  where
the  warriors  tight  on  higher  planes  the  same  battles  that  they  fought
upon  earth,  still  with  the  same  hope  of  achievement  and  honour,  still
with  a  delight  in  the  struggle  itself,  which  is  never  finished.  Even  the
alternating  periods  of  bliss  have  no  resemblance  to  the  passive  Nirvana
state,  but  arc;  like  the  ale  which  the  Old  Norsemen  drank  at  their  revels,
deep  and  intoxicating  draughts  of  active  material  enjoyment.

In  st.  7  Odin,  as  husband  of  Saga  the  seeress,  is  a  god  of  wisdom,
and  perhaps  the  by-name  which  we  omitted,  Hr6pt,  the  One  who
Utters,  was  used  with  intent.  But  the  story  attached  to  it  is  unknown.
It  is  perhaps  only  another  version  of  the  Mimir  myth,  where  the  god
draws  his  wisdom  from  sacred  waters  (p.  287).  Full  of  pictorial  beauty
is  the  scene  of  Odin  and  Saga  drinking  peacefully  from  the  fount  of
knowledge.

Three  sons  of  Odin  are  mentioned :  Thor  (st.  4),  who,  as  wielder
of  the  great  thunder-hammer,  owns  the  Home  of  Strength  ;  Vidar  (st.
17),  called  by  Snorri  "the  silent  god,"  who  lives  in  wild  Wood-home;
and  Baldr  (st.  12),  whose  dwelling-place  is  fair  and  shining  as  his  face,
and  pure  as  the  heart  of  him  who  is  the  best,  and  the  most  loved  of  all
the  gods.

Two  gods,  Ull  and  Forseti  (sts.  5  and  15),  play  little  part  in  Old
Norse  mythology,  but  were  well  known  among  other  Germanic  tribes.
Ull,  as  the  great  archer,  owns  the  land  of  yew-trees  which  were  used
for  making  bows.  He  is  called  Ollerus  by  Saxo,  and  is  said  to  have
been  given  both  the  name  and  kingdom  of  Odin  when  the  latter  was
banished  for  practising  magic.  Forseti  is  the  son  of  Baldr  and  Nanna.
His  cult  may  be  traced  among  the  Frisians.  In  Heligoland,  which  is
called  by  Latin  writers  "  Forsiti's  land,"  the  god  had  his  temple  and
holy  places,  and  the  people  told  legends  of  a  culture  hero,  sprung  from
the  gods,  who  came  once  and  taught  them  justice  and  "  Frisian  right."

The  owner  of  Vala-shelf  (st.  6)  is  not  clearly  indicated.

Many  obscure  myths  have  attached  themselves  to  the  name  of
Heimdal,  who  was  primarily  a  god  of  light.  As  such  "  he  is  warder  of
the  gods,  and  sits  at  the  end  of  heaven  to  guard  the  bridge  Bifrost
against  the  giants."  Loki  taunts  him  with  this  arduous  life  (p.  263),


INTRODUCTION.  xv

but  he  had  also  his  pleasant  home  of  Heaven-hill.  Frey  and  Freyja,
with  their  father  Njord,  belong  to  the  gentler  tribe  of  gods  called
Wanes  (Vanir),  distinguished  from  the  war-gods,  or  ^Esir.  Frey  (st.  5),
as  god  of  summer  fruitfulness,  dwells  in  a  home  of  sunshine  among  the
elves.  Freyja  (st.  14),  who  has  here  assumed  the  powers  of  Frigg,
rules  in  Folk-field  ;  while  Njord,  the  peaceful  sea-god,  has  made  his
home  in  Noatun  beside  the  ocean.

One  dwelling-place,  Sound-home  (st.  n),  is  not  found  in  Asgarth,
the  gods'  realm,  but  in  Jotunheim,  or  Giant-land,  which  is  always
associated  with  the  stirring,  sounding  elements  of  nature.  The  famous
story  of  Thiazi  and  his  daughter  Skadi  is  given  later  on.

After  describing  his  own  home  and  the  joyous  life  there,  Grimnir,
tortured  by  fiery  heat,  calls  to  mind  the  cool,  rushing  waters  which
flow  from  Roaring  Kettle,  the  central  fountain  of  the  world,  which
brings  him  to  the  holiest  of  all  places,  the  Doomstead  of  the  gods,
where  they  assemble  daily  to  hold  council  and  judgment.  Here  also
are  two  other  fountains — the  well  of  Mimir,  whence  Odin  draws  his
wisdom,  and  the  well  of  Weird,  with  the  Norns  who  dwell  beside  it
shaping  the  lives  of  men.  Overhead  rises  the  World-tree  Yggdrasil,
which  Grimnir  has  just  called  by  the  name  which  in  his  torment  most
appealed  to  him — the  Shelterer.  He  remembers  now  its  sufferings :
the  fair,  green  boughs  which  stretch  over  the  heavens,  and  whence  fall
the  dews  of  life,  are  being  gnawed  by  spiteful  harts ;  the  roots,  springing
no  man  knows  how  deep,  are  torn  by  the  fierce  dragon  of  the  under-
world ;  and  the  mighty  stem  which  rises  like  the  central  column  of  the
universe,  rots  and  suffers  from  decay.  In  all  ages  and  among  many
peoples  has  been  traced  this  reverence  for  a  tree — first,  as  the  embodi-
ment of  the  tree-spirit,  the  home  of  vegetative  life  ;  and,  lastly,  as
typifying  the  source  of  spiritual  life.  Yggdrasil  is  sometimes  the
World  Tree,  which  embraces  the  Universe  of  space  and  time.  Here,
behind  the  poetic  fancies,  which  are  peculiar  to  Old  Norse  mythology,
it  stands  in  grand  outlines  as  the  symbol  of  all  creation — groaning  and
travailing  together  in  death,  but  quickened  and  renewed  with  never-
failing  life.

A  well-ordered  scheme  of  Old  Norse  cosmology  meets  with  a
difficulty  in  st.  31.  'The  realms  of  Hel,  of  Jotunheim,  and  of  mankind,
which  lie  beneath  the  three  roots  of  Yggdrasil,  are  there  clearly  con-
ceived as  on  one  level  and  bordering  on  each  other,  but  elsewhere  (pp.
240,  291)  Hel  is  stated  to  be  underground.  Other  passages  suggest


XVT  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

that  there  was  a  confusion  between  an  old  Germanic  idea  of  Hel  situated
beneath  the  earth  and  the  Scandinavian  notion  of  Hel  and  Jotunheim
in  the  bleak  and  terrible  regions  of  the  north  and  east,  divided  from
Midgarth,  the  home  of  men,  and  Asgarth,  the  home  of  gods,  by  great
rivers  which  flowed  from  Roaring  Kettle.

It  is  now  that  Odin  (st.  36)  cries  aloud  to  his  war-maidens,  the
Valkyries.  They  are  Choosers  of  the  Slain,  winged  beings  who  attend
the  conflict,  who  slay  the  "  fey  "  or  doomed  ones,  and  bring  them  to
Odin's  hall.  A  song  worthy  of  these  battle-maidens  is  given  to  them
in  Nj£ls  Saga  : —

Let  us  wind,  let  ns  wind  the  web  of  darts  !
fare  we  forth  to  wade  through  the  host
where  our  friends  are  crossing  weapons.
Let  us  wind,  let  us  wind  the  web  of  darts
where  the  banners  of  the  warriors  are  streaming  !

And  thus  weaving  the  web  of  war,  they  foretell  who  shall  stand  and
who  shall  fall  on  the  bloody  field.  Their  more  peaceful  office  is  to
serve  the  Chosen  Warriors  at  their  feast  in  Valholl.

Grimnir  then  resumes  his  narrative.  Still  craving  for  coolness
and  shelter  from  the  burning  heat,  he  tells  of  the  weary  Sun  horses,
refreshed  in  their  labours  by  a  delicious  chill  which  is  given  by  the
gods  to  lighten  their  toil ;  of  earth,  protected  by  a  mysterious  shadow-
maker  whose  nature  is  unknown  ;  of  Sun  herself,  "who  fares  swiftly  as
one  in  fear,"  but  has  a  home  of  refuge  where  she  may  hide  herself  from
her  tormentor,  the  grim  wolf  Skoll.

The  next  strophes  which  recount  the  creation  of  the  world  are  best
considered  with  the  Words  of  the  Mighty  Weaver,  where  they  are  also
found  (p.  47).  43  and  44  have  little  bearing  on  the  context.  The
story  of  the  Wielder's  sons  is  famous  in  Old  Norse  mythology,  and  a
frequent  topic  of  allusion.  Snorri  relates  how  Loki,  the  mischief-
maker,  had  once  cut  off  the  golden  hair  of  Sif,  the  Thunderer's  wife,
and  to  appease  the  latter  had  gone  down  to  the  dwarf  race  called  Dark
elves,  the  Wielder's  sons,  and  persuaded  them  to  forge  her  a  wig  of
gold.  They  made  this  with  other  treasures  so  wonderful  that  Loki,
never  weary  of  stirring  up  strife,  wagered  his  head  with  two  dwarfs
called  Brokk  the  Badger  and  Sindri  the  Sparkler  that  they  could  not
make  aught  as  fine.  Thereupon  the  twain  set  to  work  and  forged
three  treasures,  although  Loki  sought  to  hinder  them,  and  changed


INTRODUCTION.  xvn

himself  into  a  fly,  which  settled  upon  Brokk  and  stung  him  as  he  was
blowing  the  furnace.  When  all  were  complete  Loki  and  the  dwarfs
brought  the  treasures  to  Asgarth  to  settle  the  wager,  and  "  the  gods
went  to  their  thrones  of  doom  to  hear  the  judgment  of  Odin,  Thor,  and
Frey,  which  none  could  gainsay."

The  work  of  the  Dark  elves  was  first  set  forth,  and  to  Odin  Loki
gave  Gungnir,  the  spear  which  never  failed  to  hit  the  mark ;  and  to
Thor  the  golden  hair  for  Sif,  "which  would  grow  into  the  flesh  as  soon
as  it  was  placed  upon  her  head;"  and  to  Frey  the  ship  Skidbladnir,
"  which  was  followed  by  a  fair  wind  when  the  sails  were  set  where-
soever it  went.  It  was  so  huge  that  all  the  gods  could  find  room  in  it
with  their  weapons  and  war  gear,  and  yet  one  could  fold  it  up  like  a
cloth  and  put  it  in  one's  pocket."  Then  Brokk  brought  out  his
treasures,  and  gave  to  Odin  the  ring  called  Draupnir,  saying  that  eight
rings  would  drop  from  it  every  ninth  night ;  to  Frey  he  gave  the  Boar
which  could  run  through  air  and  sea,  by  night  and  day,  swifter  than
any  steed,  for  never  was  night  so  dark  nor  the  underworld  so  murk  but
there  was  light  enough  to  go  on  from  the  gleaming  of  its  golden
bristles.  But  the  hammer  which  was  called  Mjoilnir,  Brokk  gave  to
Thor,  and  told  him  that  he  might  strike  with  it  as  hard  as  he  willed,
no  matter  what  lay  before  him,  and  the  hammer  would  not  fail ;  that
if  he  hurled  it  away  it  would  never  miss  the  mark,  nor  fly  so  far  but  he
would  find  it  there  when  he  felt  with  his  hand;  moreover  that  it  would
become  so  small  that  he  could  hide  it  if  he  liked  in  his  bosom.  There
was  but  one  flaw  in  the  hammer ;  it  was  somewhat  short  in  the
handle.  Then  the  gods  gave  judgment  that  Mjoilnir  was  the  best  of
all  treasures,  and  the  mightiest  weapon  of  defence  against  the  Frost
giants.

Perhaps  Meyers  is  right  in  tracing  an  Indo-Germanic  myth  in
this  tradition  of  the  dwarf  forgers  ;  they  were,  like  the  Cyclopes  of
Greek  mythology  and  the  air  beings  of  the  Vedas,  personifications  of
natural  forces,  who  wrought  weapons  to  aid  the  gods  in  subduing  the
ruder  and  more  hostile  powers.  Most  precious  in  each  case  was  the
thunder-hammer  or  thunder-bolt.

Bifrost  (st.  44)  is  a  bridge  between  heaven  and  earth,  which,
Snorri  says,  is  woven  out  of  the  colour  of  the  rainbow.  Its  name
signifies  the  "  trembling  way,"  from  its  nature  as  light.  It  will
scarce  bear  Thor,  and  must  be  broken  at  Ragnarok.  Sleipnir,  Odin's
eight-footed  steed,  is  seen  in  Baldr's  Draumar ;  Bragi,  the  mythical

C  C


Kvm  THE    POETIC    EDDA.

poet,  at  the  great  banquet  scene  of  Lokasenna ;  Garm,  the  Hel  hound,
with  his  loud  baying,  announces  Doom  to  the  gods.  This  strophe
sounds  like  a  conventional  Song  of  Saws  with  which  Grimnir  ends  his
recital.


THE     WISDOM     OF     ALL-WISE.


In  Alvissmal  we  pass  from  the  fearful  scene  of  a  god  in  anguish  to
the  elf-land  of  poetic  fancy.  Here  the  author  is  little  bound  by
traditional  ideas,  but  may  exercise  all  his  imagination  and  skill  in
describing  nature,  who  has  ever  fresh  beauties  to  offer  and  fresh
poetic  themes.  In  two  particulars  only  has  he  borrowed  from  mytho-
logy— he  shows  himself  familiar  with  all  mythical  beings  in  the  worlds
of  the  Edda,  and  he  has  taken  for  the  setting  of  his  poem  some  possibly
well-known  story  which  told  how  Thrym,  the  daughter  of  Thor,  was
pledged  to  a  dwarf  by  the  other  gods  in  the  absence  of  her  father.  This
dwarf,  All-wise,  is  discovered  hastening  to  the  home  of  his  betrothed,
rejoicing  too  soon  at  the  good  fortune  which  has  won  him  a  bride  born
of  gods.  Thus,  lost  in  love-musing,  he  is  met  by  a  rude  and  way-worn
traveller — Thor  returning  on  foot  from  some  weary  journey  into  the
land  of  giants.  All-wise  does  not  recognise  the  father  of  his  bride,  and
is  much  injured  at  the  harshness  of  Thor's  address.  He  has  doubtless,
if  such  vanities  are  permitted  to  dwarfs,  clothed  himself  in  his  best  as  a
bridegroom,  and  now  he  is  taunted  with  the  disfigurements  of  his  race,
the  pallor  of  beings  who  may  never  see  the  sun,  and  the  shortness  of
stature  which  gives  rise  to  fear  and  hatred  of  their  giant  foes.  Swelling
with  pride  he  stands  upon  his  rights,  and  even  answers  the  irony  of  the
ill-clad  wanderer  by  admiring  his  rich  attire.  But  the  god  of  Thunder
declares  himself,  and  the  dwarf  seeks  to  propitiate  him  by  a  display  of
wisdom.  Thor  detains  him  in  conversation — strange  behaviour  in  one
whose  wonted  speech  is  brief  and  stern — until  the  sun  has  risen  and
All-wise  is  turned  into  stone,  which  is  the  fate  of  all  foolish  dwarfs
who  are  caught  by  the  first  morning  beam  above  ground.

Thor  questions  All-wise  on  the  different  names  which  are  given  to
objects  of  nature  by  the  beings  of  different  worlds,  all  of  whom  are
well  known  to  Old  Norse  mythology,  and  reappear  so  constantly  that
it  will  be  worth  our  while  to  make  their  closer  acquaintance.


INTRODUCTION.  xix

Mankind  occupy  Midgarth,  the  middle  dwelling  of  Germanic
cosmology,  between  Heaven  and  Hel.  The  gods  born  of  Odin's  race,
or  adopted  as  his  children,  have  their  home  in  Asgarth.  In  this  poem
and  elsewhere  they  are  called  ^Esir,  to  distinguish  them  from  the
'other  god  tribe,  the  Wanes.  The  Jotuns  are  best  known  as  giants,
but  this  name  little  describes  their  true  character.  They  appear  some-
times, it  is  true,  as  three-headed  monsters  who  walk  the  earth  in
anthropomorphic  form,  much  like  the  giants  of  Grimm's  fairy  tales.
They  are  seen,  too,  as  beautiful  human  creatures,  such  as  Skadi,  who
know  the  loves  and  sorrows  of  human  kind.  But  in  Old  Norse
tradition  they  still  retain  something  of  what  they  have  lost  in  the  folk-
lore of  other  Germanic  tribes — their  original  character  as  wild  forces
of  nature,  born  before  the  controlling,  ordering  power  of  the  gods  had
been  established.  As  such  they  are  akin  to  the  Titans,  or  the  Fomors
of  Celtic  mythology.  Their  home  was  once  in  the  storm,  in  the
waters,  amid  the  tumultuous  elements ;  but  by  the  poets  of  the  Edda
they  have  already  been  given  a  fixed  habitation,  Jotunheim,  a  waste
and  desolate  realm  situated  in  the  north  or  the  east.  Skadi  alone  still
dwells  in  Sound-home.  As  beings  of  nature  they  are  clearly  shown
in  the  Frost  giants,  and  the  Mountain  giants,  in  Hymir,  lord  of  the
dusky  sea,  in  Skoll  and  Hati,  the  wolves  of  darkness,  and  the  giant
eagle  who  makes  the  wind.  They  are  the  great  opponents  of  the  gods,
but  not  all,  for  some  have  lent  their  powers  to  be  used  with  skill  and
purpose  for  the  good  of  all  living  things,  ^gir,  ruler  of  the  sea  in  its
milder  moods,  provides  the  gods  with  drink,  and  is  even  numbered
among  them.  Mimir  gives  a  draught  to  Odin  from  his  fount  of  wisdom.
The  Norns  who  dwell  by  the  Tree  of  Fate  are  weaving  strands  of  life.
Asgarth  itself  is  built  by  a  giant  smith.  Odin  learns  the  fate  of  Baldr
from  a  giantess,  and  seeks  giant  maidens  as  his  wives;  for  the  gods  can-
not dispense  with  the  power  of  the  Jotuns.  They  are  dependent,  more-
over, on  another  race  of  beings,  the  dwarfs,  who  forge  their  treasures  and
cunning  weapons.  For  this  myth  also  we  must  seek  an  explanation  in
the  instinctive  beliefs  or  intuitions  which  man  keeps  with  him  from  his
earliest  days  till  superstitious  fancy  ends  in  knowledge — his  sense  of
unity  with  Nature,  the  feeling  that  earth  and  air  are  filled  with  a  life
in  some  way  akin  to  his  own,  but  made  visible  only  in  its  workings.
The  dwarfs  and  elves  are,  in  contrast  to  the  Jotuns,  the  secret,  silent
forces,  unseen  agents  who  toil  beneath  the  ground  and  possess  the
hidden  treasures  of  the  earth  ;  or  creatures  of  air,  who  make  their


xx  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

homes  in  mountains,  woods,  and  fields,  and  who  appear  in  such  fairy
form  that  "beautiful  as  an  elf"  became  a  customary  phrase  in  different
tongues.  Snorri  speaks  of  the  Dark  elves  or  dwarfs  and  the  Light
elves  who  inhabit  Elf-home  and  those  future  realms  of  Paradise  which
he  calls  Far-blue  and  Long-life.  In  early  folk-lore  they  were  usually
beneficent  beings,  and  their  presence  was  held  as  a  safeguard  to  men  ;
but  later  on,  through  Christian  antagonism  to  all  heathen  superstition,
they  were  regarded  as  malevolent  sprites,  and  became  confused  with
evil-working  trolls.

Of  the  other  races  mentioned,  the  Powers  and  High  Powers  are
mysterious  ;  the  word  "  regin  "  is  often  used  for  the  gods,  from  whom
they  are  here  distinguished.  Hel-folk  are  the  dead  who  have  not
perished  in  war,  and  who  have  therefore  no  place  in  Valholl,  but  must
pass  to  those  regions  of  the  underworld  called  Hel,  which  in  later
tradition  was  given  to  a  goddess  of  that  name.

Thor  questions  All-wise  concerning  thirteen  different  objects  which
fall  into  pairs — Earth  and  Heaven,  Moon  and  Sun,  Clouds  and  Wind,
Calm  and  Sea,  Fire  and  Wood,  Corn  and  the  Ale  which  is  brewed
from  barley.  Night  alone  is  without  her  fellow  Day,  either  because
dwarfs  may  not  see  him,  or  because,  too  soon,  he  will  appear.  Each
object  is  described  in  six  different  terms,  such  as  might  be  used  by  the
inhabitants  of  the  different  worlds,  though  to  us  their  fitness  is  not
always  apparent.  Sometimes,  however,  they  show  careful  discrimina-
tion on  the  part  of  the  poet.  Men  use  the  more  ordinary  names,  and
Thor  also  employs  these.  Elves  call  Heaven  the  Fair-roof,  because  it
stretches  over  their  home  in  the  air.  Jotuns  call  Moon  the  Hastener,
for  he  is  pursued  always  by  one  of  their  own  kindred,  the  great  wolf
Hati,  while  dwarfs  who  are  permitted  to  look  on  his  soft  light  call  him
the  "  Shimmerer ; "  but  Sun,  who  plays  hide  and  seek  with  them,  is
the  Dallier's  playmate.  The  synonyms  do  not  belong  to  the  ordinary
poetic  diction  of  skalds;  but  with  a  dainty  touch  and  a  delicate  play  of
language  the  poet  of  Alvissmal  employs  an  art  which  is  clearly  his  own,
showing  individual  love  and  observation  of  nature.

THE    WORDS   OF   THE    MIGHTY   WEAVER.


Vafjmijmismal,  like  Alvissmal,  is  a  song  of  nature,  but  more  in
accordance  with  traditional  ideas.      It  is  a  poetical  interpretation  of


INTRODUCTION.  xxi

Old  Norse  mythology,  which  has  suffered  change  from  that  existent
among  the  people  with  its  unquestioning  belief  in  elves  ;md  giants,
dwarfs  and  trolls  as  veritable  beings  who  h°lped  and  hindered  their
doings;  for  Day  and  Night,  Winter  and  Summer  are  here  the  wonderful
giants  of  a  fairy  tale  ;  Rimy-mane  and  Shining-mane  are  never  found
in  folk-lore,  nor  the  great  eagle  who  makes  the  wind.

The  most  life-like  figure  in  the  poem  is  that  of  Mighty  Weaver,  a
giant  sage,  unutterably  old  and  unutterably  wise;  the  personification  of
all  Experience,  who  sits  on  his  throne  throughout  the  ages,  waiting  to
be  questioned  by  those  who  dare  enter  his  presence.  In  Old  Norse
tradition  there  are  no  legends  of  inspired  prophets  who  in  visions  have
been  allowed  to  look  into  the  future  of  the  world,  or  of  singers  who
have  been  given  utterance  in  divine  madness.  The  mysteries  of  nature
are  hidden  deep  in  her  own  bosom,  and  shared  only  by  those  beings
who  are  nearest  akin  to  her  and  draw  their  wisdom  from  its  source,  or
those  who  by  long  familiarity  have  learned  her  ways.  Knowledge
must  be  sought  from  bird  or  beast,  from  souls  of  the  dead  who  have
gone  back  to  their  home  in  nature,  but  above  all  from  the  giants,  that
ancient  race  who  were  born  even  before  the  earth,  and  were,  made  of
like  substance.  There  was  one  other  way,  indeed,  though  scarce
permitted,  in  which  it  was  deemed  possible  to  attain  wisdom,  through
magic  spells  such  as  those  used  by  witches  when  they  "sat  dut,"
enchanting  like  the  Vala  (p.  287),  and  compelled  the  night  powers  to
give  up  their  secrets.

Odin  has  now  resolved  to  contend  with  the  giant  whose  knowledge
is  a  race  heritage ;  but  Frigg  is  fearful  as  to  the  issue,  for  the  contest
is  no  mock  one.  Odin,  though  a  god,  is  not  all-wise  by  nature,  but
has  to  learn,  borrow,  buy,  and  even  steal  his  wisdom.  Disguised  as
Riddle-reader  he  enters  the  giant's  hall,  and  stands  on  the  floor  with
an  assumption  of  humility  until  he  has  proved  his  right  to  sit  beside
the  Mighty  Weaver.  If  the  latter  had  known  the  nature  of  his  guest
he  would  scarce  have  asked  the  Wind  god  concerning  powers  of  the
sky  and  the  steeds  of  light  and  darkness,  which  Odin  well  knows.
Day  and  Night  in  this  form,  as  we  have  already  noticed,  are  only  a
late  invention  of  poets,  though  they  were  undoubtedly  objects  of  super-
stition among  Germanic  races,  and  sometimes  conceived  as  animals.
In  German  poetry  Day  is  a  beast  or  bird  who  tears  the  clouds  of
darkness  with  his  claws;  in  Anglo-Saxon  he  is  a  raven  who  "blithe-
hearted  announces  the  joy  of  heaven."  The  language  used  in  all  time


xxn  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

to  describe  the  ever-recurring  phenomena  of  day  and  night  show  that
they  were  felt  as  living  personalities,  whose  presence  was  not  merely
visible,  but  could  be  heard  in  its  mysterious  movements.  In  Old
EngKsh,  Day  glides  and  climbs,  clangs  and  hastens  and  pushes  on  ;  in
modern  English,  it  still  breaks  and  peeps.  In  German,  it  gathers
strength  (erstarket)  or  turns  aside  (ervendet).  Night  sinks  and  falls,
and  in  Anglo-Saxon  wears  a  shadow  helm.  The  Old  Norse  lay  of
Sigrdrifa  has  a  greeting  to  dawn,  which  sounds  like  an  ancient  hymn
and  prayer  for  divine  aid  : —

Hail  Day,         hail  sons  of  Day,

hail  Night  and  the  daughter  of  Night  !

With  eyes  of  blessing         behold  us  now
and  grant  us  victory  who  sit  here.

Sun  and  Moon  belong  to  Part  II.  of  this  poem,  but  may  be
mentioned  here,  for  they  have  undergone  a  change  corresponding  to
that  of  Day  and  Night.  Caesar  notes  their  worship  among  the  old
Germans,  whose  religion,  in  a  period  better  known,  was  far  removed
from  any. pure  nature-worship,  and  one  in  which  Sun  and  Moon  no
longer  play  any  prominent  part.  Their  humiliation  is  recounted  by
Snorri  in  a  myth.  The  gods  were  wroth  because  the  Sun  and  Moon  took
to  themselves  such  mighty  names,  and  set  them  in  their  places  in  heaven
where  they  could  only  move  on  their  appointed  course.  Sol  or  Sunne
is  still  a  goddess,  the  sister  or  companion  of  the  Moon  god.  She  is
drawn  in  her  chariot  by  the  horses  Early-woke  and  All-fleet,  and  is
pursued  by  the  wolf  Skoll,  while  Mani,  who  rules  the  changes  of  the
moon  called  Ny  and  Ni  (st.  25,  Grim.),  is  followed  by  Hati.  But  the
glory  of  Sun,  the  myths  which  tell  of  her  ever-renewed  conflicts  and
triumphs  over  darkness,  her  wealth  and  her  bounty  have  been  trans-
ferred to  the  more  anthropomorphic  gods  Baldr,  Odin,  Frey,  and
Freyja,  who  each  in  turn  represent  the  sun  deity.

Though  openly  deprived  of  their  dominion,  traces  of  Sun  and
Moon  worship  linger  in  old  customs  and  folk-lore.  The  power  of
Moon,  though  somewhat  impersonal,  is  apparent  in  superstitious
practises,  which  have  hardly  died  out.  His  waxing  and  waning  was
regarded  as  influential  for  good  and  ill  on  the  doings  of  mankind.
That  which  required  growth  and  increase  was  undertaken  while  he
was  waxing ;  money  was  counted,  weddings  took  place,  and  seed  was
planted  which  bore  fruit  above  ground.  But  with  the  waning  Moon


INTRODUCTION.  xxtn

timber  was  felled,  grass  was  mown,  charms  were  used  against  pesti-
lence, and  the  seed  planted  whose  fruit  ripened  beneath  the  ground.

St.  27  is  the  only  passage  in  the  poems  which  speaks  of  Winter
and  Summer  as  personal  beings,  though  at  one  time  they  were  doubt-
less regarded  as  such.  The  custom  of  crowning  a  May  king  or  queen,
and  the  expulsion  of  Winter,  represented  by  a  victim  or  an  effigy,  are
recollections  of  the  days  when  both  were  powers  who  had  to  be  pro-
pitiated and  coerced  by  ceremonies  and  magic.  The  conflict  between
Winter  and  Summer  has  become  in  the  Edda  a  struggle  between  the
gods  and  the  Jotuns,  and  especially  one  between  Thor  and  the  Frost
giants.

The  last  question  of  the  giant  (st.  17)  concerns  the  future.  When
this  is  answered  he  admits  the  wisdom  of  his  guest,  and  invites  him
to  a  seat  on  the  throne.  But  Riddle-reader  has  so  far  only  proved
himself  equal  to  his  opponent ;  he  must  now  show  himself  superior.
The  first  questions  are  comparatively  easy.  Who  should  know  better
than  the  old  giant  how  earth  was  framed  from  his  forefather,  Ymir.
In  the  beginning,  relates  Snorri,  there  was  nought  but  Muspell-home,
the  world  of  fire  in  the  south,  and  Mist-home,  the  region  of  ice  and
snow,  in  the  north,  and  between  them  the  yawning  Deep  called  Gin-
nunga  Gap.  Then  Ymir,  the  first  Jotun,  was  born.  He  arose  from
the  melting  poison-drops  of  the  chill  river  Stormy-billow,  which  flowed
southward  towards  Muspell-home.  In  due  time  he  begot  children
(st.  33),  but  before  long  arose  another  race  of  nobler  kind.  Once  when
the  cow  cajled  Audumbla  was  licking  salt  from  a  rock  there  appeared
a  man's  hair,  then  his  head,  and  at  length  his  whole  form.  This  was
Bur,  father  of  Bor,  whose  son  by  the  giantess  Bestla  was  Odin.  Thus
the  gods  were  born  or  evolved,  like  those  of  many  other  mythologies,
after  a  first  imperfect  creation.  They  slew  Ymir,  and  made  the  world
out  of  his  mighty  frame ;  while  all  the  other  giants  were  drowned  in
his  blood  except  Bergelm,  who  was  laid  in  some  mysterious  object
(here  rendered  as  cradle,  st.  35),  and  thus  saved  from  the  flood.  Snorri
has  many  details  which  are  not  given  in  Vafj>ru|>nismal,  and  modern
critics  have  still  further  completed  a  picture  of  the  deluge,  with  Bergelm
floating  on  its  bloody  billows  in  a  Noah's  ark,  perhaps  of  Scandinavian
type  ;  or,  translating  Icelandic  lu)>r  as  flour-bin,  of  a  great  world-mill
in  which  the  giants  were  ground  up  for  the  making  of  the  world.*

^ce  Rydberg,  pp.  387-395 ;  Hamlet  iu  Icelaud,  by  I.  Gullancz,  pp.  xi.-xvi.


xxiv  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

But  the  poem  is  aware  of  no  such  studied  myth  ;  it  alludes  vaguely  to
some  great  epoch  when  the  everlasting  war  began  between  the  gods
and  the  Jotuns,  when  natural  powers  were  first  made  subject  to  god-
like ends.

The  Mighty  Weaver  has  now  proved  his  knowledge  of  giant-
lore,  and  is  asked  concerning  the  history  and  life  of  the  gods.  He
remembers  the  first  great  war  between  their  kindred  races,  the  gentle
Wanes  or  gods  of  culture  and  the  war-like  Msir  (see  also  p.  283),  which
ended  with  exchange  of  hostages  and  the  admittance  of  Njord  among
the  JEsir.

He  knows  top,  as  well  as  humble  earth-folk,  that  when  the  wind  is
heard  roaring  overhead  on  stormy  nights,  Odin,  the  lord  of  Valholl,
the  Victojry  Father,  is  holding  sport  with  his  Chosen  warriors.  This
most  famous  of  Old  Norse  myths  is  not  peculiar  to  Scandinavia.  It
,is  found  in  Britain  in  connection  with  King  Arthur,  and  among  the
superstitions  of  Somerset,  where,  however,  a  somewhat  close  resem-
blance suggests  direct  borrowing  from  Old  Norse  sources.*  More
original  is  the  wide-spread  superstition  among  German  peasants  of  the
Furious  Host  or  Wild  Hunt  which  was  heard  passing  through  the  air,
led  by  an  old  man,  sometimes  visible  in  his  broad-brimmed  hat,  who
rode  a  white  or  black  horse,  and  was  called  by  the  name  of  Wode  or
Wote.  Both  versions  have  arisen  from  the  blending  of  different  ideas.
The  souls  of  those  who  died  appeared  to  be  withdrawn  into  the  world
of  nature  from  whence  they  had  come  ;  in  woods,  by  streams,  among
mountains  their  presence  was  detected,  and  they  dwelt  in  companion-
ship with  elves  and  watersprites,  but  most  of  all  they  haunted  the  air.
Odin  as  Wind  god  became  lord  of  these  spirits,  but  especially  of  the
.dead  warriors,  since  he  was  also  the  god  of  battle,  and  those  slain  on
the  field  were  dedicated  to  him  and  called  "  guests  of  Odin."  His
valkyries,  as  we  have  already  mentioned,  used  to  ride  through  the  air
at  his  bidding,  and  choose  from  the  battlefield  those  who  were  worthy
of  a  summons  from  the  War-god.

The  questions  now  become  more  abstruse.  They  touch  on  the
future  history  of  the  world,  and  the  reign  of  new  powers  after  the
Great  Doom,  which  is  foretold  in  the  Soothsaying  of  the  Vala.  Even
in- the  present  untroubled  lay,  which  seems  only  to  rejoice  in  the  life  and

*  As  shown  by  the  Rev.  C.  W.  WhistUr,  Saga  Book,  vol.  it.,  part  ».,  pp.  46,  48,  49;
vol.  v.t  part  »'.,  p.  146.


INTRODUCTION.  xxv

powers  of  nature,  Weird  is  already  visible  to  the  giant,  he  knows  its
end.  But  there  is  one  secret  which  he  does  not  know,  and  which  all
have  failed  to  divine,  a  secret  hidden  between  god  and  god,  which  Odin
whispered  in  Baldr's  ear,  as  he  laid  him  on  the  bale-fire,  in  words  which
only  the  dead  could  hear.  The  very  question  reveals  the  personality  of
the  god  ;  the  Weaver  admits  his  defeat ;  and  it  is  shown  that  Odin  has
thus  far  attained  all  the  knowledge  which  can  be  won  by  experience
and  learned  by  tradition.  In  the  next  poem  it  will  be  seen  how,  in
mysterious  fashion,  he  attains  the  wisdom  which  more  properly  belongs
to  him  as  a  god.


THE     WORDS     OF     ODIN,     THE     HIGH     ONE.


Another  poem  introducing  some  of  the  more  remarkable  and
interesting  myths  is  Havam&l,  or  The  Words  of  the  High  One.  It  has
been  subjected  to  almost  more  discussion  than  any  other  poem  of  the
Edda,  but  all  the  ingenuity  of  critics  and  scholars  has  not  cleared
it  from  mystery  and  confusion.  It  has  served  rather  to  show  how
superficial  and  fragmentary  is  our  knowledge  of  the  history,  the  myths,
and  the  soul-life  of  the  early  Germanic  races.  For  although  this  poem,
with  its  wisdom  of  yesterday  and  to-morrow,  myths  which  are  purely
Scandinavian,  ideas  which  can  only  be  Christian,  may  belong  to
different  periods,  it  seems  to  be  archaic  in  the  main.  The  same  half
obsolete  words  occur  in  the  various  parts,  and  the  teaching  is
traditional,  proverbial,  such  as  might  have  been  handed  down  by  word
of  mouth.  Moreover,  Odin  or  Woden  appears,  not  as  the  War-father
of  the  Skalds,  but  in  his  more  universal  character  as  the  god  of  culture.
As  such  he  was  best  known  to  all  the  Germanic  tribes  and  to  the
Romans,  who  identified  him  with  their  god  Mercury — Wednesday  or
Woden's  day  corresponding  with  "  dies  Mercurii."

The  varying  metre  and  style  of  the  poem,  its  discrepancies,  and
abrupt  changes  of  subject  prove  it  to  be  a  collection  of  once  separate
fragments.  Attempts  have  been  made  to  distinguish  between  these,  but
there  are  only  three  well-marked  divisions  :  I  (st.  1-108),  the  Guest-
rules,  in  which  are  included  ethical  laws  and  Odin's  love  adventures;  2
(st.  108-136),  the  Counselling  of  Stray  Singer;  3,  Odin's  quest  after  the
runes.  Parts  II.  and  III.  are  linked  together  by  the  entrance  of  Stray

D  D


xxvi  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

Singer  into  both,  and  all  the  three  by  a  poetical  fiction  in  which  it  is
assumed  that  Odin,  the  High  One,  is  speaker  throughout,  and  that  the
precepts  are  given  with  divine  authority.  It  is,  indeed,  in  the  person
of  Odin  himself  that  a  real  unity  can  be  claimed  for  the  poern.  It
would  seem  that  its  final  author,  who  was  more  teacher  than  poet,
possibly  a  Christian  monk  with  a  taste  for  antiquarian  knowledge,  had
a  mind  not  merely  to  collect  the  wise  sayings  of  heathen  lore,  but  to
show  forth  Odin,  the  heathen  god,  in  a  higher  and  more  spiritual
aspect  than  that  of  the  War-father.  He  had  none  of  the  poetic
imagination  of  the  author  of  Grimnismal,  to  picture  in  rainbow  strophes
the  manifold  nature  of  the  god.  In  a  loose  and  inartistic  way  he  has
associated  traditional  sayings  and  mythical  stories,  freely  admitting  the
later  and  more  Christian-seeming  ideas  to  a  place  beside  the  old.  He
has  not,  however,  altogether  failed  in  his  aim.  For  notwithstanding
the  signs  of  Christian  influence,  which  have  caused  the  poem  to  be
rent  in  pieces  by  criticism  and  held  as  a  haphazard  collection  of
fragments  new  and  old,  Odin  reveals  himself  still  a  heathen,  and
emerges  from  a  web  of  heathen  thought  steeped  in  .the  magic  of  old
charms  and  runes.  In  the  whole  teaching  of  the  poem,  which  is
filled  with  sober  beauty  and  wisdom,  there  is  no  creed  save  that  of
humanity.

In  Part  I.  Odin  comes  as  guest  to  a  hall,  and,  it  is  assumed,  gives
friendly  counsel  to  those  assembled  within.  In  his  character  of  Wind-
wanderer  he  often  passes  thus  unrecognised  through  all  the  worlds.
With  Loki  and  Honir  he  is  often  found  adventuring  in  Giant-land,  and
comes  to  the  dwellings  of  men  calling  himself  "  Gest."  The  Sagas
tell  how  he  visited  many  kings  and  rulers  of  Norway  under  this  title.
To  the  Christian  king  Olaf  the  Holy  he  was  an  object  of  terror  and
hate,  as  the  dread  heathen  god  of  enchantments  who  still  lived  and
could  be  exorcised  only  by  the  more  potent  spell  of  the  mass-book.

"  Far  have  I  fared,  much  have  I  ventured,"  said  Odin,  and  it  was
thus  as  wanderer,  beggar,  guest,  that  he  learned  the  ways  of  the  world
and  the  hearts  of  men.  Laws  of  love,  friendship,  and  war  are  expressed,
often  with  epigrammatic  humour,  sometimes  with  a  tender,  half-pitying
knowledge  of  life.  The  first  Part,  and  the  advice  given  to  Stray  Singer
in  the  second,  are  full  of  sayings  and  maxims  which  agree  almost  word
for  word  with  the  wisdom  of  Solomon  or  other  ethical  teachers,  for
they  are  of  the  nature  of  those  simple  truths  which  take  up  their  abode
with  mankind  so  soon  as  he  has  learned  humanity  and  fellowship.


INTRODUCTION.  xxvn

But,  unlike  the  teaching  of  the  Eastern  prophet,  there  is  nothing
of  rt-ligious  duty,  no  aspiring  after  an  ideal  of  perfection.  The  sober
precepts  of  common  sense  are  never  interrupted  by  sudden  upward
soarings  and  yearnings  of  passion.  The  wisdom  of  Odin,  in  this  Part,
is  the  wisdom  drawn  from  experience.

Historically,  the  poem  is  of  immense  value.  We  are  taken  far
back  into  real  life,  and  meet  people  no  longer  in  a  world  of  myth  and
speculation,  but  on  the  firm  ground  of  daily  existence.  Customs,
manners,  social  duties,  and  relations  are  brought  before  us,  corre-
sponding closely  sometimes  with  what  Tacitus  wrote  in  the  Germania
about  the  race  in  the  first  century,  and  it  is  seen  from  his  descriptions
that  sts.  n,  17,  41,  allude  to  what  was  especially  characteristic  of  the
old  Germans.  St.  155  also  refers  to  a  curious  practice  mentioned  by
him.  The  German  warriors  advanced  to  meet  their  foes,  like  the
giant  Hrym  (p.  293),  with  shields  lifted  to  the  level  of  their  lips  as  a
sounding  board  for  their  song.  They  sung  gently  at  first,  letting  the
sound  swell  out  until  it  became  like  the  roar  of  the  sea,  inspiring
terror  and  rousing  their  own  courage.  Other  customs  are  typically
Northern.  The  word  for  court  mentioned  in  st.  61  is  \>ing,  a  name  for
the  great  assembly  or  parliament  of  the  Norsemen,  which  was  most
democratic  in  character.  Here  were  settled  the  laws  of  the  land,  and
private  cases  were  tried  with  no  lack  of  ceremony  and  red  tape,  though
matters  frequently  ended  in  a  duel  or  a  free  fight  between  the  two
parties.

In  st.  8.4  we  come  to  the  love  quests  of  Odin,  in  which  the  High
One  has  descended  from  his  height,  and  laid  all  dignity  aside.  His
love  is  not  even  the  idealised  love  of  the  mediaeval  knight  errant,  but
like  that  of  Zeus,  the  pastime  of  the  god.  There  may  once  have  been
some  underlying  motive  in  these  tales  of  Odin  and  his  giant  wives,
explaining  his  conduct  as  that  of  some  fickle  power  of  nature,  but  here
he  figures  only  as  the  favourite  of  the  skalds,  the  love  adventurer,  who
knew  as  well  as  any  the  chances  and  mischances  of  love.  We  may
imagine  that  our  author  selected  one  of  these  skaldic  poems  which
contained  the  famous  story  of  how  Odin  won  the  art  of  poesy  for  men
by  making  love  to  the  giantess  Gunnlod,  but  unfortunately  for  the
dignity  of  the  god,  he  included  also  the  other  episode  with  Billing's
daughter.  But  here,  too,  he  may  be  intending  to  record  one  of  the
most  important  incidents  in  Eddie  mythology,  which  led  to  the  birth
of  Vali,  Baldr's  avenger.  We  have  allusion  in  the  Edda  (pp.  159,  243)


xxvm  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

to  Odin's  courtship  of  Rind.  Saxo  Grammaticus  tells  more  fully  of
his  ardent  wooing  in  a  story  which  so  closely  resembles  the  above  as  to
suggest  that  Billing's  nameless  daughter  is  Rind,  although  the  one  is
seemingly  of  dwarf  Rind,  the  other,  according  to  Saxo,  a  giantess.*
The  tale  of  this  crafty  maiden,  who  thrice  outwitted  Odin,  is  here  told
in  delicately  suggestive  scenes,  enlivened  by  amused  disappointment  or
passionate  regret,  according  as  we  choose  to  regard  it.

For  the  explanation  of  the  other  story  Snorri's  help  is  required,
although,  as  usual,  we  find  a  myth  so  disguised  by  later  additions  that
any  interpretation  is  doubtful.  In  the  peace  treaty  between  JEsir  and
Wanes  the  gods  created  a  wise  being  called  Kvasir,  who  was  slain  by
certain  dwarfs,  and  from  whose  blood  was  brewed  the  mead  of  poetic
inspiration  called  Soul-stirrer.  This  passed  into  the  hands  of  Suttung,
a  giant  of  the  underworld,  who  gave  it  into  the  care  of  his  daughter
Gunnlod  to  guard  deep  down  in  the  earth.  Odin,  in  the  character  of
Bale-worker,  hired  himself  to  Suttung's  brother,  and  was  promised  the
mead  as  his  wage.  He  must  fetch  it,  however,  for  himself,  and  after
boring  his  way  through  the  rock  with  Rati,  the  awl,  he  gained  admit-
tance to  Gunnlod.  Three  nights  he  lay  with  her,  and  three  draughts
she  gave  him  of  the  mead,  in  which  he  drank  the  whole.  Then,
disguised  as  an  eagle,  he  bore  it  safely  to  Asgarth,  despite  the  giant
who  followed  so  hard  after  him  that  a  few  drops  of  the  precious  liquid
were  spilt,  and  thenceforth  deemed  worthy  only  for  the  makers  of
bad  poetry.  Snorri  does  not  finish  the  story,  nor  tell  how  the  Frost-
giants  came  storming  to  Asgarth  knowing  that  Bale-worker  was  there
who  had  stolen  the  mead.  It  was  thus  that  poesy  was  won  for  gods
and  men,  and  was  given  the  name  so  often  used  by  skalds,  "  Odin's
craft "  or  "  Odin's  drink ; "  and  thus,  as  ever,  a  great  power  is  first
found  in  possession  of  the  Jotuns,  and  must  be  won  by  the  gods  before
it  becomes  serviceable  to  man.  In  Soul-stirrer  we  meet  with  the  most
primitive  ideas :  a  drink  producing  a  divine  madness  is  found  among
many  peoples,  and  familiar  is  the  notion  that  intellectual  or  spiritual
powers  can  be  gained  by  drinking  the  blood  of  their  owners.

Odin's  discourse  is  now  broken  off  by  the  writer  of  Part  II.,  who
states  that  while  listening  in  the  most  sacred  spot,  the  Well  of  Weird,
he  was  able  to  see  and  near  what  went  on  in  the  world  of  men  and  in
the  High  One's  hall,  where  Odin  was  giving  instruction  to  a  mythical

••'•  Mr.  A.  F.  Major  has  pointed  out  that  this  theory  of  Rydoerg's  has  some  foundation.


INTRODUCTION.

poet  called  Loddfafnir  or  Stray  Singer.  But  the  Well  of  Weird  is  the
fount  of  Wisdom,  known  to  all  poets  and  seers,  a  secret  place  of
communion  with  the  divine,  where  all  the  strands  of  life — present,  past,
and  future — are  revealed,  and  the  writer  is  merely  claiming  divine
authority  for  his  words  by  the  use  of  mythological  language.  He
describes  inspired  moments  when  things  hidden  to  others  were  made
known  to  him.  The  counsel  to  Stray  Singer  is  of  much  the  same
character  us  the  last  set  of  maxims,  though  in  expression  they  seem
less  archaic.  Especially  when  compared  with  strophes  such  as  80-82,
84,  86,  they  sound  more  like  skaldic  verses  than  the  saws  of  old  time,
which  are  again  heard  in  the  charms  of  st.  136.

Very  different  in  tone  is  the  solemn  opening  of  Part  III.  In  the
midst  of  halt-humorous,  half-serious  words  of  warning  and  advice,  a
recital  of  love  tales  and  charms,  we  come  suddenly  upon  this  awful  and
mysterious  scene  of  a  god  offering  himself  in  sacrifice  upon  the  World
Tree  in  order  to  attain  the  maturity  of  his  wisdom  and  power.

The  whole  passage  is  full  of  mystery,  which  we  have  not  attempted
to  elucidate  by  rearrangement  or  ingenious  translations.  Nor  is  this
the  place  to  discuss  the  vexed  question  as  to  whether  (with  all  the
earlier  authorities)  in  some  old  and  mystic  legend  we  are  entering  the
very  sanctuary  of  heathendom,  or  whether  (with  Bugge,  Meyer,  Golther)
it  is  merely  a  scene  borrowed  from  the  Christian  sacrifice,  where  Tree
and  spear  must  be  identified  with  cross  and  lance.  There  is  no  other
record  of  the  deed  in  Northern  mythology  except  an  old  song  from  the
Shetland  Isles,  quoted  by  Bugge  in  confirmation  of  his  own  theory ;
whether  it  is  genuinely  archaic  we  cannot  say  : —

Nine  days  he  hang  pa  da  rutless  tree,
For  ill  wis  da  folk,  in  gud  wis  lie.
A  bludy  maet  wis  in  his  side,
Made  wi  a  lance  'at  wid  na  hide.
Nine  lang  nichts  in  da  nippin  rime
Hang  he  dare  wi'  his  neked  limb.
Some  dey  leuch,
Bitt  idders  gret.

This,  without  doubt,  is  a  description  of  the  crucifixion,  but  leads

*  On  the  discovery  of  this  song,  see  article  by  Dr.  Karl  Blmd,  Saga  Book,  vol.  ».,
p.  166.


xxx  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

to  no  conclusion  as  to  which  of  the  two  has  borrowed  its  details  from
the  other.  The  sacrifice  depicted  resembles  in  many  points  the  human
sacrifices  that  were  offered  to  Odin.  In  this,  if  we  may  take  that  of
King  Vikar  described  in  Gautreks  S.,  c.  7,  as  typical,  the  victim  was
hung  on  the  branch  of  a  tree  and  stabbed  with  a  spear,  which  is  as
intimately  associated  with  Odin  as  the  hammer  with  Thor.*

There  will  be  better  hope  of  an  explanation  of  this  passage,  or  at
least  of  more  fruitful  .result,  when  the  discussion  no  longer  centres
around  the  exact  meaning  of  Yggdrasil,  and  of  the  "  windy  tree."

The  labours  of  research  will  then  perhaps  be  given  to  finding  the
origin  of  a  strange  and  world-wide  legend,  without  which  no  mythology
seems  complete.  This  legend,  in  outline,  is  of  a  god — call  him  Odin,
Baldr,  Osiris,  Ishtar,  Adonis — who  must  be  sacrificed  or  voluntarily  die
in  order  that  he  may  rise  again  in  fulness  of  power,  or  even  give  place
to  some  new  god.  Sometimes  it  is  clear  that  he  typifies  the  beneficent
powers  of  nature,  whether  as  the  sun  or  the  spring  or  summer  fruitful-
ness  ;  but  occasionally,  as  here,  his  significance  is  more  doubtful.
When  our  knowledge  of  comparative  mythology  is  extended,  and  when
all  these  legends  have  been  arranged  in  due  order,  beginning  with  the
early  superstitious  rite  of  savages,  ending  with  the  reinterpreted  idea  of
philosophy,  some  rightful  place  will  then  be  claimed  for  the  myths  of
Baldr  and  of  Odin.

The  sacrifice  of  the  god  was  made  for  the  sake  of  attaining  the
Runes.  By  this  word  is  usually  understood  the  letters  of  the  old  Ger-
manic alphabet,  but  its  earliest  meaning  must  have  been  something
softly  spoken,  whispered,  or  "  rounded  "  in  the  ear ;  it  was  especially
used  for  those  metrical  charms  which  preserved  from  all  danger  whoso-
ever whispered  or  chanted  them.  As  civilisation  advanced  and  the  art
of  writing  was  learned,  these  charms  were  inscribed  in  characters  cut
in  stone  or  wood,  and  thus  seemed  to  lend  to  the  characters  themselves
a  magic  power.  The  transmission  of  thought  by  writing  must  have
seemed  strange  and  supernatural  to  the  uninitiated,  and  the  name  of
runes  was  soon  applied  to  letters  of  the  alphabet.

Among  many  nations  of  the  past  there  has  been  a  lawful  and
unlawful  use  of  the  supernatural,  a  distinction  between  "white  magic"
and  "  black  magic."  To  the  latter  class  belonged  the  evil  spells  which


*  See  "  Cult  of  Otkin,"  by  H.  M.  Chudwick.


INTRODUCTION.  xxxi

one  man  wrought  for  the  destruction  of  another  (st.  150).  Such
practice  of  magic  was  the  unpardonable  sin  in  the  old  ethical  code  of
the  Germans,  and  was  punished  by  burning.  According  to  Saxo,  Odin
himself  was  banished  for  a  while  from  Asgarth  because  he  won  Rind,
his  giant  wife,  by  magic  craft.  But  the  use  of  supernatural  power  was
permitted  in  prayer,  or  in  the  divine  rites  performed  by  priests ;  and  in
this  passage  runes  also  seem  to  have  been  a  lawful  agent  through  which
a  power  above  nature  could  be  compelled  and  used  by  the  individual.
Kauffmann  suggests  that  runes  of  this  kind  were  mystic  names  for
objects  which  expressed  their  essence  and  being,  and  which  gave  con-
trol over  nature  to  the  initiated.

In  strophes  138,  139,  are  recorded  Odin's  attainment  of  three
kinds  of  wisdom  upon  which  he  grew  and  throve:  I,  the  runes;  2,
Mimir's  wisdom,  for  which  he  pledged  his  eye  ;  3,  Soul-stirrer,  the
mead  of  song.  With  regard  to  the  last  it  is  clear  that  we  have  here
some  variant  and  perhaps  older  myth  than  that  of  103-108.  A  passage
in  the  heroic  poem  of  Sigrdrifumal,  although  it  cannot  be  fully
explained,  throws  suggestive  lights  on  the  subject,  and  shows  the
intimate  connection.of  the  threefold  wisdom  and  the  purpose  of  Odin's
sacrifice.  With  the  help  of  moisture  from  Hoddrofnir — that  is,  a
draught  from  Mimir's  well — Odin  is  said  to  have  read,  graved,  and
thought  out  the  runes.  Then  they  were  cut  off  and  mingled  with
Soul-stirrer,  or  the  gift  of  song,  and  "  sent  on  far  ways,  where  they
are  found  with  the  gods,  and  found  with  the  elves,  some  with  Wanes,
and  some  with  men."  In  the  different  accounts  there  seems  to  be  one
fundamental  idea.  By  self-sacrifice  and  toil  Odin  drew  a  shapeless  and
unordered  knowledge  from  nature  upon  which  he  grew  and  throve,  and
then  gave  it  back  through  the  medium  of  his  divinity  interpreted  and
rendered  serviceable  to  all  beings.  It  is  unlikely  that  the  earliest
thinkers  ever  arrived  at  a  defined  notion  of  this  kind,  but  they  uttered
in  the  language  of  fairy  tale  their  belief  that  the  gods  were  saving,
ordering  powers  who  stood  between  them  and  nature.

With  the  spells  which  begin  in  st.  145  there  is  change  of  tone  and
style,  suggesting  that  they  belong  to  a  once  separate  poem.  St.  158,
where  Odin  can  hardly  be  the  speaker,  seems  to  confirm  this  view.
The  second  poem  was  added  to  supply  the  "  nine  mighty  rune-songs  "
alluded  to  in  st.  139,  although  eighteen  are  thus  given.  The  songs
mentioned  below,  whose  words  are  unknown,  must  have  been  such  as
those  sung  by  Groa  to  Day-spring  (p.  159),  or  like  the  old  Merseburger


xxxn  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

Spruche,  which  is  found  in  a  German  MS.  of  the  tenth  century.      In
this  Odin  or  Wodan  heals  the  foot  of  Baldr's  foal,  singing  : —

Bone  to  bone,         blood  to  blood,
limb  to  limb  as  if  they  were  limed.

St.  158  seems  the  utterance  of  the  poet  himself,  if  Mullenhoffs
explanation  is  correct,  that  Folk-stirrer  is  the  dwarf  who  day  by  day  is
surprised  and  vanquished  by  the  dawn,  and  who  in  some  wondrous
song  of  praise  announces  the  conquering  powers  of  light  and  life.  The
poet  himself  claims  knowledge  of  this  mystic  song  to  give  dignity  to
his  own.

The  reappearance  of  Stray  Singer  in  st.  162  is  a  clumsy  device  of
the  author  to  unite  th.e  different  parts,  and  st.  164  an  epilogue  such  as
those  with  which  skalds  were  wont  to  end  their  recitals.

THE     LAY     OF     HYMIR.


Hymiskvtya  has  been  chosen  to  introduce  and  illustrate  the
character  of  Thor,  because  it  shows  him  in  truer  though  less  familiar
aspect  than  the  famous  Lay  of  Thrym.

Two,  or  perhaps  three,  motives  are  combined  in  this  lay.  The
first  recounts  how  Thor  fetches  the  great  cauldron  for  the  gods  to
drink.  They  are  all  assembled,  after  their  hunting  expedition,  to
consult  the  oracle,  and  learn  where  they  shall  make  their  banquet.
According  to  old  Germanic  custom  the  twigs,  which  have  been  sprinkled
with  sacrificial  blood  and  graven  with  runes,  are  cast  on  a  cloth,  and  by
the  manner  of  their  falling  it  is  shown  to  the  gods  that  they  will  find
plenty  in  the  halls  of  y£gir.  It  is  a  momentous  occasion,  for  not  only
have  they  chosen  their  banqueting-room  for  all  time,  but  they  must  win
the  alliance  of  the  wild  sea-giant  -fligir,  who  from  henceforth  will  be
numbered  among  them  ;t\nke  g°d  of  ocean  in  its  gentler  moods.  His
fierce  wife  Ran,  who  rem^atuiostile  and  catches  drowned  men  in  her
net,  is  well  known  to  skald^tters^so  his  nine  children,  the  waves.

Thor,  a  strange  ambassaW  the  peace,  is  sent  to  greet  the  giant,
who  is  found  sitting  on  the  rofc^l,  a  di"e  in  proud  contemplation  of  his
daughters,  the  merry,  sparkling^ter  clas  tumbling  one  over  the  other

in  their  sport,  when  his  peace  r\ •»  by  the  harsh  voice  of  the

Thunderer  demanding  the  wealth  cv  'or  the  gods.  Small  wonder

that  he  takes  offence,  and  bids  them^"^-  cauldron  for  their  drink.


INTRODUCTION.  xxxni

As  usual,  the  wants  of  the  gods  must  be  supplied  by  the  Jotuns ;
the  only  kettle  large  enough  is  in  possession  of  the  Frost-giant  Hymir.
Who  shall  be  sent  on  this  new  errand  but  much-enduring  Thor  ?  He
sets  forth  with  Tyr,  who  is  here  called  "  kinsman  of  giants,"  but  else-
where the  son  of  Odin,  though  perhaps  only  one  of  the  chosen  sons  of
the  War-father.  Speedily  they  harness  Thor's  famous  goats  Tooth-
gnasher  and  Tooth-grinder,  and  swiftly  they  drive  to  the  borders  of
Giant-land  where  the  rumbling  car  and  goats  must  be  left  behind,
while  they  cross  the  river  which  flows  between  Asgarth  and  Jotunheim,
and  fare  on  foot  to  Hymir's  halls.  The  Frost-giant  refuses  to  give  up
the  great  kettle  until  Thor  has  proved  his  might  by  breaking  a  cup  of
wondrous  strength,  and  this  the  god,  not  without  help  from  the  friendly
wife,  at  last  performs.  Thus,  having  won  the  cauldron,  Thor  and  Tyr
return  to  the  banquet.

But  while  they  are  still  in  Jotunheim  another  episode  is  introduced
— that  of  Thor's  fishing  expedition.  He  has  consumed  all  Hymir's  store
of  provisions  with  an  appetite  like  that  which  he  displays  in  the  courts
of  Thrym,  and  therefore  volunteers  to  go  fishing  the  next  day.  In  a
manner  characteristic  of  the  god,  whose  deeds  are  all  on  colossal  scale,
he  fares  to  the  wood  and  slays  the  biggest  ox  he  can  find,  called  Heaven-
hitter,  to  provide  the  fishing  bait.  Thor  has  designs  upon  a  nobler  prey
than  mere  fish  or  even  whales,  and  he  compels  the  reluctant  giant  to
row  further  and  further  out  to  sea  ;  but  Snorri,  who  has  already  sup-
plied some  of  the  particulars,  must  be  allowed  to  describe  this  incident
in  his  graphic  manner  : — "  They  made  such  way  that  soon  Hymir  said
that  they  had  reached  the  place  where  he  was  wont  to  stop  and  fish.
But  Thor  was  fain  to  row  much  further,  and  they  fared  swiftly  onward
with  vigorous  strokes.  Presently  Hymir  said  that  they  were  so  far  out
now  that  it  would  be  perilous  to  stay  on  account  of  the  great  World
Serpent,  called  Midgarth's  Worm.  But  still  Thor  declared  that  he
must  row  on  a  while  and  did  so,  while  the  giant  waxed  sullen  and  was
filled  with  gloom.  At  length  Thor  laid  up  his  oars,  and  made  ready  a
fishing  line  exceedingly  strong,  with  a  hook  no  slighter  and  not  a  whit
less  strong.  He  baited  it  with  the  ox-head  and  cast  it  overboard,  where
it  sank  to  the  bottom.  Now  in  truth,  it  may  be  said,  that  the  World
Serpent  was  beguiled,  for  he  opened  wide  his  jaws  and  gaped  at  the
ox-head,  and  the  hook  stuck  fast  in  his  gums.  As  soon  as  he  became
aware  of  this,  he  lashed  out  and  tugged  so  furiously  that  Thor's  hands
slid  over  the  gunwale.  Then  was  the  Thunderer  wroth.  He  girt  him

E  E


xxxiv  THE    POETIC    EDDA.

with  all  his  pod's  might,  and  stamped  so  hard  that  with  both  his  feet
he  leapt  through  the  bottom  of  the  boat,  and  found  himself  standing
on  the  ground.  He  pulled  the  monster  up  to  the  gunwale,  and  it  may
well  be  said  that  none  has  ever  seen  a  more  fearful  sight  than  this —
when  Thor  set  eyes  on  the  serpent,  and  the  serpent  glared  back  at  him
from  below  and  breathed  out  poison.  'Tis  said  that  Hymir  changed
hue  and  grew  pale,  for  he  was  appalled  when  he  beheld  the  serpent
and  saw  the  waves  flowing  into  the  boat.  At  the  very  moment  when
Thor  raised  his  hammer  aloft,  the  giant  groped  for  his  knife  and  cut
the  line  in  twain  over  the  side,  and  the  serpent  sank  back  into  the  sea.
Thor  threw  his  hammer  after  it  and,  some  say,  struck  his  head  off,  but
others  say,  with  truth,  that  the  World  Serpent  still  lives  and  lies
beneath  the  sea."  Snorri  goes  on  to  tell  how  Thor  slew  the  giant,
which  would  not  have  suited  our  present  author's  design,  who,  as
already  noticed,  completes  the  first  story  and  introduces  an  episode
to  which  Snorri  refers,  another  of  Thor's  adventures,  which  occurred
when  he  was  on  his  way  to  Utgarth-loki.  He  had  stopped  for  the
night  at  a  peasant's  (probably  Egil,  mentioned  in  st.  5)  where,  as  usual-
he  killed  his  goats  for  the  evening  meal,  but  ordered  the  bones  to  be
carefully  preserved.  The  peasant's  son,  however,  broke  one  to  get
at  the  marrow,  and  in  the  morning  when  Thor  brought  his  goats  to
life  again  by  hallowing  the  bones  with  his  hammer,  one  of  the  animals
was  found  to  be  lame.  The  peasant  trembled  when  he  saw  the
Thunderer  grow  wroth,  and  draw  his  bushy  brows  down  over  his  eyes.
In  atonement  he  was  obliged  to  give  his  children,  Thialfi  the  Digger
and  Roskva  the  Swift  One,  to  be  thenceforth  the  servants  of  Thor.  In
the  poem,  st.  39,  this  takes  place  on  the  return  journey  with  the
cauldron.

At  first  sight  the  Lay  of  Hymir  seems  to  have  lost  its  connection
with  mythology  and  to  be  a  mere  fairy  tale  about  giants  who  are  real
giants,  and  heroes  with  human  appetites  and  human  passions.  Common
fairy  tale  motives  are  introduced,  such  as  the  good  wife  who  conceals
guests  from  her  husband  and  betrays  his  secrets.  The  writer  scarcely
regards  his  story  from  a  humorous  or  artistic  point  of  view,  but,  like
some  child,  he  tells  it  with  a  simple  air  of  conviction,  and  a  delight  in
the  incidents  which  obscure  the  original  nature  myth.  But  the  outlines
of  this  nature  myth  may  still  be  traced,  the  more  clearly  because  of
the  faithful  repetition  of  strange  and  impossible  facts.  It  is  the  story
of  how  the  god  of  Thunder  goes  to  release  the  storm  clouds  from  their


INTRODUCTION.  xxxv

winter  bondage  and  brings  them  into  summer  realms,  filled  with
summer  showers  of  rain.  Explanation  might  also  be  found  for  some
of  the  details — the  cup  which  had  to  be  broken  is  perhaps  the  ice-
bound sea — but  there  is  so  much  which  is  mere  fancy  that  further
interpretation  becomes  dangerous.  It  is  mainly  through  combining
the  separate  adventures  of  Thor  that  the  poet  has  secured  for  his  fairy
tale  a  high  place  among  the  mythological  poems.  For,  whether
consciously  or  unconsciously,  he  has  given  us  the  most  complete
picture  of  Thor,  the  god.

The  latter,  as  son  of  Odin  and  Jord,  'is  the  offspring  of  Heaven
and  Earth,  and  his  character  is  twofold — human  and  divine.  Thor,
whose  name  is  derived  from  \unor  (thunder),  shows  himself  to  men  in
the  aspect  of  a  heaven  god  when  they  hear  the  rushing  of  his  chariot
wheels  in  the  storm,  and  in  the  lightning  see  the  swift  blow  of  his
hammer;  for,  like  Indra,  Zeus,  and  Jupiter,  he  is  armed  with  the
destructive  thunderbolt.  But  though  terrible  in  his  might,  he  is  feared
only  by  evil  beings.  To  those  who  ally  themselves  with  the  gracious
gods  his  appearance  is  ever  welcome,  for  it  means  that  the  winter
powers  are  dispersed,  and  in  his  fierce  accents  they  hear  the  promise  of
summer  rain.  Among  the  gods  he  is  protector  of  Asgarth  and  Mid-
garth.  The  giant  forces  of  nature  quail  before  him,  and  even  Loki,
the  elusive  fire-demon,  is  obedient  to  his  word.  In  such  form  he  is
shown  in  the  myth  of  the  cloud  cauldron.

But  Thor  is  rightly  called  by  the  poets  a  "  Son  of  Earth."  He  is
the  most  human  of  all  the  gods,  a  Hercules  in  Old  Norse  mythology,
who  is  continually  exerting  himself  in  the  service  of  man.  We  can
see  his  mighty  form  striding  over  the  wastes  of  Jotunheim,  where
endless  labours  and  conflicts  with  the  giants  demand  his  presence.
Rude  featured,  with  gleaming  eyes  beneath  his  bushy  brows,  with
quivering  red  beard,  clad  in  toil-worn  garb,  for  ever  attempting  the
impossible — to  unbind  earth,  to  empty  ocean,  to  conquer  old  age,  he  is
alike  glorious  in  victory  and  defeat.  It  is  this  figure  which  is  presented
to  us  in  Thor's  fishing  adventure,  and  in  the  various  incidents  of  the
poem.  One  after  another,  he  proves  himself  equal  to  the  tests  of  the
giant — he  slays  the  oxen  ;  unaided,  he  lands  the  boat,  and  bears  home
the  tackle  and  the  whales ;  he  breaks  the  cup,  and  finally  carries  off
the  cauldron.  But  all  these  are  only  stupendous  human  tasks,  proofs
of  mere  physical  strength  and  daring  ;  yet  more  human  is  Thor  in  his
failure  to  catch  the  World  Serpent  and  in  his  baffled  rage,  which  is


THE     POETIC     EDDA.

childish  rather  than  godlike.  Perhaps  it  was  this  weakness,  this
striving  to  perform  the  impossible,  and  inability  to  admit  defeat — for
once  again  Thor  met  with  the  Serpent — that  appealed  to  the  Old
Norse  seafarers  and  peasants,  and  made  him  their  favourite  among
the  gods.

Not  only  is  this  myth  characteristic  of  the  North,  but  also  the
manner  in  which  it  is  told  or  rather  pictured  in  scenes,  while  the  curtain
is  allowed  to  drop  over  all  the  uninteresting  details.  With  the  Saga
writers  a  national  method  of  story-telling  grew  into  a  self-conscious,
artistic  style,  but  they  never  surpassed  the  poet  of  Hymir's  Lay  in
impressionistic  realism.  The  entrance  of  the  Frost-giant,  with  the
icicles  clinging  to  his  beard,  is  like  the  sudden  blast  of  the  wintry
storm  ;  sudden,  too,  and  alarming  is  the  fall  of  the  row  of  mighty
cauldrons,  and  the  shivering  of  the  ice  cup  into  a  thousand  pieces.
But  most  striking  of  all  is  the  majestic  picture  of  the  Thunderer  as  he
strides  forth  with  the  great  cloud  kettle  upon  his  head.  It  is  one
which  Carlyle  loved  to  recall: — "Thor,  after  many  adventures,  clapping
the  pot  on  his  head  like  a  huge  hat,  and  walking  off  with  it — quite  lost
in  it,  the  ears  of  the  pot  reaching  down  to  his  heels — a  kind  of  vacant
hugeness,  large  awkward  gianthood,  characterises  that  Norse  system ;
enormous  force,  yet  altogether  untutored,  stalking  helpless  with  uncer-
tain strides."

The  language  of  the  poem  is  rude ;  words  and  sentences  are  ill-
strung,  and  the  use  of  clumsy  epithets  make  it  difficult  to  translate
without  losing  its  almost  savage  vigour  and  life.  But  in  the  original
the  strength  and  simplicity  have  a  wild  attractive  power,  and  render  it
a  favourite  in  Northern  literature.


THE     LAY     OF     THRYM.


In  Thrymskvij>a  we  come  to  one  of  the  best  known  and  best  sung
of  all  the  Scandinavian  myths.  Strong  and  vigorous  like  Thor  striding
into  Jotunheim,  crisp  and  clear  as  a  northern  snow-scene  in  the
sunlight,  this  narrative  poem  is  very  perfect  of  its  kind,  and  needs
but  little  explanation.  Like  the  more  modern  Saga  writers,  the
author  shows  an  appreciation  of  the  spirit  and  peculiar  qualities  ol
Scandinavian  literature  which  appear  in  the  Lay  of  Hymir.  But  his


INTRODUCTION.

;iri;nigement  and  choice  of  details  is  made  with  more  conscious  design.
He  handles  his  subject  as  an  artist,  and  plays  with  it  as  a  humourist ;
throughout  retaining  a  simplicity  and  rudeness  which  is  strong,  but
never  crude.

Thor  is  discovered  in  helpless  plight,  his  red  beard  quivering  in
impotent  rage,  a  Thunder-god  searching  vainly  for  his  thunder-hammer,
"  which  the  Frost-giants  and  Mountain-giants  well  know  when  they
see  it  uplifted,  and  small  wonder,  for  many  a  head  has  it  broken  of
their  forefathers  and  their  kindred."  But  now  it  is  stolen,  and  none
must  be  told  the  dire  secret  except  Loki,  the  mischievous  fire-god  and
the  swiftest  of  all  messengers,  who  on  this  occasion  uses  his  cunning
in  the  service  of  the  gods,  and  soon  discovers  the  lost  treasure.  The
hammer,  like  the  thunderbolt  of  superstition,  which  is  silent  during
the  winter  months,  is  deep  hidden  below  the  earth  in  the  keeping  of
the  Frost-giant  Thrym ;  nor  will  he  surrender  it  until  he  has  seen  the
fair  Spring-goddess  Freyja  coining  as  bride  to  his  dark  realms  like  the
sunshine  which  she  impersonates.  He. has  never  yet  beheld  the  bright
maiden,  though  he  may  have  heard  her  light  footfall  overhead.  Thor
hastens  to  her  court  and  bids  her  at  once  put  on  her  bridal  veil,  not
dreaming  that,  with  Asgarth  in  danger  and  the  precious  hammer
stolen,  she  will  refuse  to  go  meekly  into  Jotunheim.  But  she  is  not  so
poor  spirited,  and  flies  into  a  rage  as  god-like  as  that  of  Thor  himself
when  the  great  sea-serpent  refused  to  be  caught  upon  his  fish-hook.
Thor  must  himself  fetch  the  hammer.  Then  Heimdal  who,  though
one  of  the  warlike  JEsir,  is  as  wise  and  far-seeing  as  the  Wanes,
counsels  that  Thor  should  deceive  the  Frost-giant  disguised  as  Freyja.
In  this  scene  one  can  almost  hear  the  laugh  that  goes  through  Asgarth
at  the  rueful  picture  of  the  Thunderer  thus  decked  with  jewels  and
feminine  trifles,  his  sturdy  figure  draped  in  woman's  weeds.  Thrym
seems  to  accept  his  strange  bride  without  expressing  surprise,  perhaps
because  Frost-giants  and  Spring-goddesses  have  seldom  a  chance  of
meeting.  But  Thor  can  control  his  appetite  as  little  as  his  temper,
and  the  giant  wonders  much  at  its  capacity.  He  wonders  yet  more
when  he  stoops  to  kiss  her,  and  sees  beneath  the  veil  those  flaming
eyes,  half  hidden  by  the  bushy  brows.  The  wedding,  however,  must
be  completed.  The  hammer  which  hallowed  the  wedding  feast  of  man
is  brought  forth,  and  Thor  seizing  it  becomes  once  more  the  god — and
summer  is  first  announced  by  the  crashing  thunder  peal.

This  poem  is  worthy  of  all  praise  for  its  realism  and  humour ;   but


xxxviii  THE    POETIC     EDDA.

it  is  responsible,  with  others  of  its  kind,  for  the  comic,  even  ridiculous
figure  which  has  always  passed  for  Thor.  In  the  ruder  Lay  of  Hymir
the  heroic  outlines  of  the  god  are  more  clearly  discerned.  The  nature
myth  too,  suggested  above,  would  be  unrecognisable,  if  Thor  and  his
hammer  had  not  elsewhere  played  such  parts.  Mjollnir  is  one  of  the
mythical  treasures  forged  by  the  dwarfs.  A  belief  in  it  was  not  con-
fined to  Old  Norse  mythology,  for  it  appears  in  many  traditions  and
fairy  tales  of  Germany.

Two  other  famous  objects  are  mentioned — Freyja's  feather  coat  in
st.  3,  and  her  necklace  called  Brisinga-men  in  st.  12.  If  the  story  of
the  last  could  be  reconstructed,  it  might  prove  to  be  one  of  the  most
poetical  in  mythology.  It  is  undoubtedly  old,  though  it  may  not,  as
Miillenhoff  suggests,  date  back  to  Indo-Germanic  times.  It  was
known  in  England,  the  earliest  reference  to  it  being  in  Beowulf,  and
in  Denmark,  where  Saxo  mentions  it  as  the  property  of  Frigg.  In
the  S6rla)?attr  we  have  the  following  story : — Once  Freyja,  mistress
of  Odin,  spied  a  necklace  lying  in  a  cave.  It  was  the  work  of  certain
dwarfs,  perhaps  the  Brisings,  and  when  she  looked  at  it  she  longed  to
possess  it.  They  promised  to  give  it  her  if  she  would  stay  with  them
four  nights,  and  this  she  did.  Odin  was  angry  when  he  discovered  it,
and  caused  Loki  to  steal  the  necklace  from  her  chamber,  and  would
only  give  it  back  to  her  on  condition  that  she  stirred  up  war  between
two  kings,  whence  the  legend  of  the  "  Everlasting  Battle."  The  poet
Ulf  Uggason  tells  in  the  following  lines  of  the  battle  between  Loki
and  Heimdal : — "  The  famous  and  skilled  one  of  the  bridge  of  the
Powers  (Bifrost)  wrestled  with  the  evil  and  cunning  son  of  Farbauti
(Loki)  at  Singastone,  ere  the  mighty  son  of  nine  mothers  gained  the
shining  necklace  of  sea-stones."

What  is  the  meaning  of  this  fragmentary  tale  ?  The  shining
necklace  must  have  been  a  symbol  of  light,  especially  the  light  cast
upon  the  ocean  waves.  We  can  scarcely  venture,  like  some  critics,
to  define  it  as  the  moon,  the  morning  and  evening  star,  or  the
rainbow.*  It  belonged  to  the  Sun  goddess,  whether  called  Freyja,
Frigg  (wife  of  the  heaven  god),  or  Gefjon,  for  that  the  three  were
originally  one  is  suggested  by  the  frequent  confusion  between  them,  in
Saxo,  in  S6rla)?attr,  and  in  Ls.,  st.  20,  21.  But  Brisinga-men  in  Old
Norse  tradition  is  th£  property  of  Freyja,  who  is  also  called  Mardoll,

*  See  Z./.d.  A.  30,  p.  220;  (Bugge)  Arkivf.n.fil.  IV.,  p.  121 ;  E.  Mogk,  p.  140.


INTRODUCTION.  xxxix

or  Sea-shining,  and  Menglod,  the  Necklace-glad.  Freyja  loses  her
necklace,  and  Heimdal,  the  god  of  light,  wins  it  back  for  her  in  some
conflict  with  darkness,  which  was  possibly  confused  with  the  last  fight
between  Loki  and  Heimdal  at  the  Doom  of  the  gods,  or  it  may  have
given  rise  to  this  latter  incident,  which  is  only  told  by  Snorri.  Mtillen-
hoff  pursues  the  myth  of  Brisinga-men  through  the  story  of  Hildr  and
Hogni,  and  other  heroic  lays  which  belong  to  more  recent  times.


THE     STORY     OF     SKIRNIR.


The  Song  of  Skirnir,  like  those  of  Thrym  and  Hymir,  is  a  simple
narrative  poem,  but  less  severe  in  its  outlines.  It  is  full  of  sentiment,
and  even  romantic  in  its  love  motive,  while  a  soft-tinted  nature  myth
still  clings  to  it,  and  lends  a  mysticism  which  is  absent  in  the  others.

It  is  the  spring-time,  and  Frey,  the  lord  of  light  and  heat,  longs
to  embrace  Gerd,  the  fair  earth,  and  to  draw  her  away  from  her  father's
wintry  halls,  that  together  they  may  bring  forth  the  rich  summer  fruits.
Whom  shall  he  send  as  his  herald  but  Skirnir,  the  Light-bringer,  to
bear  the  first  greeting  of  the  Sun  to  Earth  after  the  long  winter
darkness  in  the  North  ?  But  Earth  is  wilful  and  reluctant ;  hardly  will
she  forsake  her  frost-bound  halls.  She  dallies  with  the  first  tender
caresses  and  bribes,  until  the  Sun  grows  fierce  and  impatient,  and  her
heart  melts  in  love  to  him  who  had  once  seemed  as  alien  to  her  as  the
sunr.'mer  warmth  to  the  winter  cold.

The  story  is  told  in  true  Northern  fashion  in  a  series  of  dramatic
scenes — Frey,  discovered  alone  in  the  hall,  wandering  aimless  and
love-sick,  and  refusing  speech  with  his  kind  ;  Skirnir,  holding  speech
with  his  horse,  sustaining  his  courage  in  the  fear  and  mystery  of  the
night  journey;  his  parley  with  Gerd  in  words  aflame  with  such  passion
that  one  sees  his  slight  form  quivering,  and  hears  his  voice  rise  higher
and  higher  as  he  passes  from  gentle  pleading  to  fierce  denunciation.

The  curse  itself  pictures  the  hell  of  Northern  belief,  which  is
widely  different  from  the  fiery  kingdom  of  other  mythologies.  It  is  a
far  stretching  waste,  hemmed  in  by  snow-clad  mountains,  bleak  and
cold,  dark  and  desolate  of  all  inhabitants  save  three-headed  monsters
or  eagles  rending  corpses,  and  the  dim  form  of  Frost-giants  stalking  to
and  fro,  and  binding  all  things  in  their  chains  of  ice.  Small  wonder


XL  THE    POETIC    EDDA.

that  Gerd  is  threatened  with  raving  madness  in  this  lonely  land,
without  speech  with  human  kind,  without  love,  without  the  good  cheer
which  gladdens  winter  in  the  North.

There  are,  however,  indications  that  this  poem  is  not  exclusively
Icelandic  or  Norwegian.  The  romance  and  sentiment  are  more  fully
expressed  than  is  usual.  One  or  two  familiar  forms  and  objects  suggest
that  the  author  had  a  knowledge  of  international  literature,  and  the
best  known  motives  of  legend  and  mythology.  There  is  the  watcher
who  greets  Skirnir,  the  newcomer,  and  demands  the  reason  of  his
coming  ;  magic,  flickering  flames  are  one  of  the  perils  of  the  way  ;  the
sword  which  he  borrowed  from  Frey  must  have  been  one  like  that  in
Beowulf,  or  that  of  Sigurd  or  other  ancient  weapons,  forged  with
magic  craft,  and  graven  with  stories  of  old  battles  and  runes  of  pro-
tection and  victory.  The  golden  apples  of  youth,  which  were  the
property  of  Idun,  and  either  borrowed  or  stolen  by  Skirnir,  are  Fcarcely
known  to  the  Edda,  though  mentioned  by  Snorri.  They  were  a  fruit
little  known  in  Norway  and  Iceland,  and  the  poet,  it  seems,  also  has
been  borrowing,  perhaps  from  the  golden  apples  of  the  Hesperides.
More  peculiar  to  the  North  is  another  object,  the  ring  Draupnir,
which  was  forged  by  the  dwarfs.  It  belongs  to  Odin,  and  the  allusion
shows  that  Baldr  is  already  slain.  All  the  different  treasures  are
symbols  of  light,  growth,  fertility,  and  other  beneficent  powers,  and
the  passing  of  them  from  hand  to  hand  is  commonly  found  in  the
myths  of  polytheism,  where  no  god  is  ever  truly  individualised,  but  is
apt  to  melt  away  in  shadowy  outlines,  assuming  the  form  and  attri-
butes of  some  other  god,  unless  indeed,  like  Thor,  he  has  become  so
anthropomorphic  as  to  have  lost  already  something  of  his  god-head.

Frey,  the  hero  of  the  story,  was  better  known  in  Sweden  than  in
other  northern  lands.  There  he  was  worshipped  as  the  highest  god  ;
temples  were  built,  and  yearly  sacrifices  were  offered  to  him.  Frey's
cult,  though  perhaps  less  evident  in  folk-lore,  is  more  noticeable  in
history  than  that  of  Odin.  He  was  especially  regarded  as  the  patron
of  harvests,  and  in  this  aspect  he  is  known  to  the  Eddas.  Snorri
says: — "  Frey  rules  over  the  rain,  and  the  shining  of  the  sun  and  the
growth  of  fruits  in  the  ground."  Hence  the  symbols  of  fertility  and
lipht  which  Skirnir  is  allowed  to  carry  with  him,  and  hence  too  the
gods'  gift  of  Elf-home  to  Frey,  where  the  elf-folk  work  his  kindly  will
in  nature  (see  Grm.,  st.  5).  In  this  poem  his  more  original  character
is  apparent.  He  is  the  Sun-god  who  awakens  earth  out  of  her  winter


INTRODUCTION.  XLI

sleep,  too  weak  at  first  to  melt  her  frozen  heart  (st.  4) ;  and  Skirnir  is
not  merely  his  messenger,  but  himself  in  disguise.  The  sword  or  sun-
beam which  he  sent  as  gift  to  the  earth  maiden  is  now  lost  for  ever  to
the  gods,  and  in  the  possession  of  their  giant  foes.  At  Ragnarok  he
will  seek  for  it  in  vain  (see  Lok.,  st.  42).  But  here,  as  everywhere,
there  is  a  discrepancy  between  the  myth  and  its  nature  interpretation  ;
the  symbol  in  the  one  must  pass  away,  but  year  by  year  the  power  of
which  it  is  the  emblem  will  be  renewed.


DAY-SPRING     AND     MENGLOD.


Gr6galdr  and  Fjolsvinnism&l  are  found  in  several  MSS.,  none
older  than  the  seventeenth  century,  as  two  separate  poems,  but  they
have  been  associated  for  many  reasons.  The  one  without  the  other  is
fragmentary ;  together  they  give  a  story  which  is  told  in  a  Danish
ballad  of  the  sixteenth  century  called  "  Young  Svendal."  In  the  first
part  the  hero  is  starting  forth  upon  a  dangerous  mission  ;  in  the
second  he  has  accomplished  his  journey,  and  arrived  upon  the  scene  of
action,  where  he  attains  his  object.  No  details  are  given  of  the  perils
of  the  way,  but  it  is  not  even  necessary  to  assume  that  the  strophes
recounting  them  have  been  lost,  for  a  sudden  dramatic  opening,  a  swift
passing  over  of  incidents,  are  sufficiently  common  in  the  Edda,  and
require  only  some  brief  line  of  explanation,  such  as  "  Then  Day-spring
fared  into  Jotunheim."  Here  and  there  are  found  connecting  links
between  the  poems.  The  object  of  search  in  Part  I.  is  menglofrtm,
those  joyous  with  necklaces  (st.  4)  ;  and  Day-spring,  in  Part  II.,  wins
Menglo\>,  the  Necklace-glad.  If,  as  most  authorities  take  it,  both  are
proper  names,  the  identification  is  complete.  In  st.  14  is  prophesied'
Day-spring's  dispute  with  the  giant  warder  Much-wise.  The  same
motive  runs  through  the  whole  action,  which  from  beginning  to  end  is
ruled  by  destiny.  In  st.  4  of  Part  I.  and  st.  47  of  Part  II.  this  is
openly  expressed — "The  issue  must  follow  fate,"  "The  doom  of  Weird
may  no  wight  withstand."  In  no  poem  is  the  Weird  motive  heard
more  clearly,  in  none  is  it  more  distinctly  seen  to  work  in  obedience  to
natural  law.

Menglod  is  often  met  in  fairy  tales  as  the  princess  who  sits  on  a
glass  mountain,  and  is  won  by  a  princely  lover  ;    but  with  the  help  of

F  F


XLII  THE    POETIC    EDDA.

"  Young  Svendal,"  the  story  can  be  reconstructed  in  its  more  original
form.  Day-spring  has  been  sent  by  his  step-mother  to  seek  Menglod,
a  fair  giant-maiden  who  owns  a  shining  necklace,  and  is  of  such
renown  that  she  has  long  been  sought  by  lovers  in  vain.  Day-spring
comes  for  help  to  his  own  mother's  grave,  and  stands  calling  her  at
the  doorway,  for  she  has  promised  to  aid  him  with  the  wisdom  of  the
dead.  She  comes  forth  reluctantly,  like  all  who  are  compelled  by  love
or  enchantments  to  re-enter  their  old  haunts,  and  standing  at  the  gates
of  the  tomb,  she  sings  him  magic  songs  to  render  him  victorious  in  all
the  difficulties  which  lie  before  him  ;  bonds  shall  not  hold  him,  foes
shall  not  slay  him,  bitter  frosts  on  the  mountains,  storms  on  the  sea,
mists  on  the  night  journey,  even  the  spirits  of  dead  women  shall  not
dismay  him — one  thing  alone  can  hinder  his  desire,  the  doom  of
Weird,  which  nor  gods  nor  men  can  withstand.  The  charms  which
she  sings  are  rune  songs,  such  as  Odin  knew,  and  one  which  he  had
even  used  to  win  his  giant-wife  Rind.  This  scene  between  Gr6a  and
her  son  is  characteristic  of  the  attitude  of  the  Old  Norsemen  towards
their  dead,  who  were  still  regarded  as  a  power  for  good  or  evil  in  their
lives,  and  whose  constant  presence  among  the  living  was  loved  or
feared,  but  never  a  matter  of  wonder,  or  an  occurrence  different  in  kind
from  the  ordinary  events  of  life.  This  supernatural  influence  had  to
be  met  with  one  of  a  corresponding  nature  ;  hence  the  charms  and
spells  cut  in  runes  which  men  used  against  one  another  and  to  combat
difficulties.

Here  ends  the  first  fragment ;  before  the  opening  of  the  second  a
long  interval  has  elapsed,  during  which  Day-spring  has  endured  untold
perils,  and  prevailed  through  the  spell  songs  of  his  mother.  He
has,  moreover,  though  this  incident  is  veiled  in  mystery,  met  with
Menglod  (st.  5  and  49),  and  has  lost  her.  She  sits  waiting  for  him
on  the  mountain  top,  knowing  that  he  will  come  back  ;  and  he  is
seeking  her,  with  the  assurance  that  he  can  break  down  every
barrier  between  them.  The  next  scene  opens  abruptly  ;  Day-spring
has  arrived  in  the  gloom  of  night  at  his  journey's  end.  In  the
dim  flickering  light  of  magic  flames  he  sees  the  giants'  hall  rising  up
before  him,  and  in  front,  passing  to  and  fro,  is  outlined  the  dark  figure
of  the  warder.  The  ring  of  fire  has  here  a  deeper  signification  than
the  wonted  circle  through  which  the  princes  of  romance  had  to  pass  to
their  princess  ;  it  is  inherent  in  the  myth.  Day-spring  hails  Much-
wise  the  watcher,  and  is  refused  admittance  ;  but  he  will  not  now  turn


INTRODUCTION.  XLIII

back,  his  love  is  almost  within  sight,  and  he  stands  conversing  with
Much-wise  under  the  assumed  name  of  Wind-cold.  Gradually  he
leads  up  to  a  revelation  of  his  true  name,  before  which  all  barriers  will
fall  and  leave  the  way  open  to  Menglod,  his  beloved,  who  is  destined
for  him  alone.  He  questions  Much-wise  concerning  all  that  lies  in
front  of  him,  and  one  by  one,  interwoven,  the  obstacles  are  seen.
Outside  is  the  fiery  ring  of  flames,  and  round  the  castle  a  huge  rock-
wall  with  but  one  entrance,  the  barred  gate  called  Sounding-clanger.
Yggdrasil,  the  tree  of  life  and  fate,  stands  overshadowing  all  things ;
and  in  its  boughs  sits  Golden-comb  or  Wood-snake,  the  cock  whom  the
giants  watch  in  dread,  for  when  he  crows  their  Doom  will  be  at  hand.
Fierce  dogs  are  guarding  the  courts,  and  can  be  eluded  only  when
feasting  on  Wood-snake's  wings ;  but  Wood-snake  himself  can  be
slain  by  a  magic  wand  alone,  which  is  in  the  keeping  of  the  giantess
Sinmara,  and  she  will  not  lend  it  except  for  a  tail  feather  from  that
same  cock.  Thus  the  chain  of  difficulties  is  complete.  But  still  Day-
spring  asks  concerning  Ember,  the  flaming  hall,  built  by  wondrous
beings  (of  whom  we  know  only  Loki  the  fire-god  and  Delling  the  dwarf
of  dawn),  until  he  comes  to  Menglod  herself.  A  contrast  to  the  ruthless
spirit  of  Old  Norse  literature  and  to  all  other  descriptions  in  the  Edda
is  this  patient  figure — a  tender,  gracious  woman,  waiting  and  yearning
in  heart  for  her  lover,  but  shedding  meantime  contentment  and  peace
on  those  around.  Day-spring  at  last  reveals  his  name,  and  they  meet
like  the  lovers  of  all  time,  first  with  trembling  doubt,  "  Will  she  have
me?"  and  "-Is  it  he?  "  then  with  the  certainty  that  they  have  known
and  have  been  destined  for  one  another  through  all  eternity.

The  whole  scene  is  so  complete  in  its  human  passion  that  it  seems
almost  superfluous  to  ask  for  any  further  interpretation  ;  but  those
which  suggest  themselves  are  so  natural  and  fitting  that,  just  seen,
they  fade  away  in  delicate  ethereal  colours,  and  form  a  background  of
opalescent  light.

The  underlying  allegory  which  Cassel  suggests  is  not  wholly  false,
although  far-fetched  in  some  of  its  details.  The  idealist  sets  forth  in
search  of  perfect  love  and  beauty,  which  he  sees  far  off  on  some  high
mountain  top,  and  longs  to  gain.  The  difficulties  appear  insurmount-
able to  those  who  strive  with  them  in  the  spirit  of  worldly  wisdom,  but
to  him  who  follows  the  true  instincts  of  his  heavenly  nature  they  give
way,  and  he  attains.

Much  also  may  be  said  for  the  view  which  sees  in  this  myth  only


XLIV  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

another  presentation  of  that  concerning  Gerd  and  Skirnir,  the  oft-
repeated  wooing  of  the  imprisoned  earth  by  a  summer  god.  If,  how-
ever, the  interpretation  lies  in  natural  phenomena,  it  must  be  the  one
suggested  by  the  names.  It  is  a  radiant  light  picture — Day-spring  or
Day-hastener,  child  of  Sun-bright,  comes  as  Wind-cold  (the  cool,  fresh
breeze  which  springs  up  at  dawn),  to  wed  Menglod  on  the  mountain
tops ;  while  she,  the  bright  sun  goddess  and  her  shining  necklace  are
well  known  to  us  as  Freyja  and  Brisinga-men.  The  sudden  revealing
of  Day-spring  is  that  earliest  moment  in  the  dawn  which  can  be  called
day  rather  than  night.  Still  a  few  moments  pass  before  Sun  herself
comes,  and  the  inevitable  meeting  takes  place  between  her  and  the
Day.  No  myth  so  poetical  and  so  fitting  could  be  told  of  this  union,
as  that  of  two  predestined  souls.

We  cannot  well  compare  the  poem  or  associate  it  with  any  other
in  the  Edda.  It  is  different  in  spirit,  more  romantic,  more  tender,
with  a  passion  which  cannot  be  limited  to  any  one  age  or  locality.
Everything  tends  to  show  that  it  is  of  late  origin.  The  writer  makes
frequent  use  of  the  peculiar  type  of  synonym  known  as  the  "  kenning,"
in  which  some  other  person  or  object  is  employed  to  represent  and
describe  the  particular  one  in  view.  The  name  of  a  god  or  goddess
serves  often  as  a  general  term  for  man  or  woman  ;  thus  Eir  (st.  28),
who  in  the  Prose  Edda  is  a  goddess  of  healing,  means  only  a  fair
woman,  in  the  present  case  a  giantess.  The  old  mythology  had
become  a  conventional  system,  technical  rather  than  imaginative ;  and
names  which  once  belonged  to  personal  beings  had  lapsed  into  mere
words  expressing  abstract  qualities.  The  question  of  poetic  diction  is
of  importance  here,  for  it  is  possible  that  many  difficult  passages  could
be  explained  in  this  light.  St.  18,  as  we  have  given  it,  alludes  to
Golden-comb,  who  will  first  announce  Doom  to  all  giants  and  giant-
wives  ;  but  if  the  names  of  Surt  and  Sinmara  must  be  retained,  the
passage  is  meaningless  to  any  modern  reader.  Not  only  in  language
and  sentiment  does  the  writer  stand  apart  from  the  other  poets  of
mythology,  but  his  knowledge  of  its  most  famous  objects  is  defective
and  obscured.  The  mistletoe  which  Loki  plucked  (st.  26)  seems  con-
fused with  Golden-comb  and  the  Doom  of  the  World  ;  the  cock  itself,
who  has  his  station  in  the  scene  of  dawn,  resembles  the  Christian
symbol  of  watchfulness,  whose  cry  dispels  the  power  of  darkness.  The
description  of  Yggdrasil,  with  its  fruits  which  are  instrumental  in  the
birth  of  men,  is  so  different  from  the  old  Tree  of  life  and  fate  that  some


INTRODUCTION.  XLV

critics  have  denied  their  identity.  The  nature  myth  itself  seems  to
wear  a  modern  garb,  quite  unlike  the  old-fashioned  and  improbable
stories  of  a  less  critical  age.


GREYBEARD     AND     THOR.


Harbarj>slj6}>  is  one  of  the  old  flyting  scenes  which  are  so  familiar
in  the  sagas  of  history  and  romance,  where  hero  mocked  hero,  hurling
frank  abuse  across  the  hall  in  language  which  might  be  softened,  but
was  little  disguised  by  a  rude  strophic  form.  Two  such  flytings  are
recounted  among  the  gods — the  present  scene,  and  the  more  famous
one  in  ^Egir's  halls  (p.  245).  There  is  a  wide  difference  between  the
clumsy  dialogue  of  the  first  with  its  mixture  of  prose  and  metre,  and
the  polished  strophes  of  the  second.  The  wit  is  of  a  different  texture.
Here  it  is  rude  and  forcible,  but  sometimes  merely  abusive ;  there  it  is
keen,  artistic,  swift  and  sparkling  as  Loki  himself.  No  one  has  yet
been  able  to  discover  any  definite  principle  in  the  metre  of  Harbar)?slj6j>.
We  have  therefore  made  Thor  speak  in  Fornyrjnslag,  abrupt  and
trochaic  like  the  harsh-spoken  god,  while  Greybeard  uses  the  more
musical  Ljo|>ahattr.  As  in  the  Song  of  Rig,  mythology  is  used  to  out-
line a  sketch  of  social  life,  but  once  again  the  contrast  is  striking.  Old
world  stories  and  nature  myths  serve  but  to  illustrate  topical  allusions.
The  gods  themselves  are  mere  exponents  of  different  social  ideals.  In
treatment  of  their  characters  and  in  the  real  humour  of  the  situation
the  author  redeems  himself  for  any  lack  of  brilliance  in  the  dialogue,
but  the  skit,  for  it  can  be  called  nothing  less,  presents  little  attraction
to  us,  although  it  may  have  seemed  witty  enough  to  contemporaries,
who  knew  all  the  obscure  traditions  of  the  poem,  and  shared  the  intense
feeling  and  bitterness  which  underlie  its  humour.  For  us  the  colours
are  faded,  and  the  stories  half  forgotten.

We  can,  however,  still  recognise  certain  features  of  history  and
mythology.  The  historical  background,  indeed,  scarcely  needs  to  be
recalled,  for  it  is  ever  present  with  us — that  of  struggle  between  the
aristocracy  and  the  people.  This  began  at  a  much  earlier  date  in
Norway  and  Sweden  than  among  other  mediaeval  nations,  and  had  a
more  immediate  and  decisive  result.  The  Viking  who  had  tasted  the
sweets  of  freedom  in  his  wild  seafaring  life  refused  to  submit  to


tHfe     POETIC     EDDA.

dependence  when  a  "  bondi "  at  home.  Tyranny  had  once  been
enforced  by  the  right  of  conquest,  and  feudalism  strove  to  maintain  it
by  the  authority  of  law,  successfully  for  a  while  in  the  South,  but
vainly  in  the  North.  Strife  on  the  battlefield,  strife  at  the  Thing,  and
strife  in  skaldic  verse  between  class  and  class  was  the  order  of  the
day.

The  two  figures  on  either  side  of  the  stream,  though  caricatures
of  the  gods  as  we  are  wont  to  meet  them,  are  easy  to  recognise.  A
weary  traveller  arrives  on  the  banks  of  the  fjord  which  flows  between
him  and  his  home.  Unwilling  to  wet  himself  by  wading  through  the
flood,  he  hails  a  ferry-man  whom  he  spies  over  by  the  further  shore.
But  the  latter,  an  old  man  with  a  grey  beard  and  a  tongue  which
might  have  learned  to  wag  more  kindly,  in  a  spirit  of  pure  contradiction
refuses  to  aid  the  traveller.  Both  reveal  their  names.  Greybeard
shows  an  intimate  knowledge  of  the  other's  antecedents  in  the
uncomplimentary  dialogue  which  follows,  and  the  story  ends  where  it
began,  with  Thor  raging  on  the  further  shore,  vainly  longing  to  get
within  reach  of  his  tormentor,  who  has  just  described  the  length  and
weariness  of  the  journey.

Thor  shows  the  same  character  that  we  know  well  in  other  poems.
Had  he  called  himself  by  some  other  title  he  would  not  have  escaped
recognition,  and  could  scarce  have  gone  in  disguise  as  Greybeard
suggests — a  veiled  reminder  of  how  Thor  once  wore  woman's  weeds.
Rude  in  his  appearance  and  harsh  in  his  speech  as  when  he  met  All-
wise  the  dwarf,  straightforward  and  simple  in  his  thoughts  and  actions,
he  takes  literally  the  sneer  of  Greybeard  when  told  that  his  mother  must
be  dead  or  she  could  scarce  have  thus  neglected  his  appearance.  He
has  just  been  engaged  in  the  never-ending,  somewhat  thankless  task,  of
fighting  the  giants.  Many  of  the  labours  which  he  proudly  boasts  and
the  failures  with  which  he  is  taunted  are  well  known.  The  battle  with
Hrungnir,  mentioned  in  st.  15,  is  one  of  the  world-famed  contests  of
Old  Norse  mythology,  and  is  told  by  Snorri  in  Skaldskaparmal.  It
happened  that  the  giant  Hrungnir,  whose  name,  like  that  of  other
Jotuns,  means  the  Sound-maker,  and  whose  head  and  heart  were  of
stone,  had  been  invited  to  feast  with  the  gods  in  Asgarth.  There
they  plied  him  with  drink  till  he  grew  boastful  and  threatened  to
destroy  them  all  save  Freyja  and  Sif,  whom  the  giants  had  oft  tried  to
win.  At  last  the  gods  grew  weary  of  such  mighty  words  and  uttered
the  name  of  Thor,  who  was  then  warring  in  Jotunheiui.  Forthwith


INTRODUCTION.  XLVII

entered  the  Thunderer,  all  wrathful,  swinging  his  hammer  and  asking,
"  Who  had  let  a  crafty  Jotun  drink  ale  with  the  gods?  who  had  made
peace  with  Hrungnir  that  he  was  now  within  Valholl?  and  why  was
Freyja  thus  filling  the  ale-cup  as  she  was  wont  at  the  gods'  banquet  ?  "
Then  answered  Hrungnir,  and  looked  at  Thor  with  no  friendly  eyes,
"  Odin  bade  me  drink  with  him  in  Valholl,  and  he  is  surety  for  me."
Thor  refrained  for  the  moment  from  slaying  Hrungnir,  and  accepted
his  challenge.  Armed  and  thirsting  for  battle  they  came  to  the
appointed  spot — Hrungnir  with  Mokkr-kalfi,  a  giant  made  out  of  clay,
to  support  him  ;  Thor,  with  his  trusty  servant  Thjalfii.  His  arrival
on  the  scene  is  thus  described  by  Thjodulf : —

The' son  of  Earth,  with  swelling  heart,

drove  forth  unto  the  play  of  swords,

and  Moon's  path  rumbled  beneath  him.

Before  him  blazed  all  the  realms  of  space  :

the  ground  was  dashed  with  hail,  and  earth  rent  asunder,

as  the  mighty-hoofed  goats  of  his  chariot

drew  him  forth  to  the  meeting  with  Hrungnir.

Then  Baldr's  brother  spared  not  the  rocky  foe,

while  the  mountains  trembled  and  were  cloven,

and  ocean  blazed.

Thor  slew  Hrungnir,  while  Thjalfi  despatched  the  clay  giant.
The  god  was  wounded  by  a  stone  splinter,  which  stuck  fast  in  his  head.
He  besought  the  giantess  Groa  to  extract  it  by  singing  a  charm  over
him,  but  she  forgot  the  charm  in  her  joy  when  she  heard  that  Thor
had  brought  back  her  lost  husband,  Aurvandil,  in  a  basket  from  the  icy
realms  of  the  North — safe  except  for  one  toe,  which  had  been  frozen
and  thrown  up  into  the  sky  to  make  the  morning  star.

Many  incidents  in  this  story  have  been  interpreted  by  Uhland.
Hrungnir  is  the  stony  ground  which  vainly  resists  the  thunder  showers.
Mokkr-kalfi  is  the  less  stubborn  clay,  which  submits  to  Thjalfi  the
Delver ;  Groa  is  nature's  power  to  heal  the  rents  and  sears  that  have
been  made  in  the  storm  conflict ;  and  Aurvandil,  whose  name  belongs
to  the  morning  star  in  Old  English,  is  a  summer  being  imprisoned  in
Jotunheim  during  the  winter,  perhaps  some  constellation  which  is  seen
with  joy  when  it  appears  on  the  horizon  as  the  herald  of  summer.  Our
poet  seems  to  have  confused  him  with  Thiazi  (st.  19),  whose  death  was
a  yet  more  famous  event  in  the  chronicles  of  Asgarth.  Thor,  however,


XLVIII  THE    POETIC    EDDA.

played  little  part  in  it,  and  the  full  account  is  best  reserved  for  the
appearance  of  Idun,  in  Lokasenna.  In  both  incidents  Thor  is
redeeming  the  faults  of  other  gods — of  Odin,  who  had  invited
Hrungnir  ;  of  Loki,  who  had  stolen  Idun.  The  deeds  of  st.  29,  37,  39
are  unknown  ;  but  they  were  all  of  like  nature — the  destruction  of
Jotuns,  and  their  yet  more  terrible  wives.  St.  39  has  perhaps  some
connection  with  Geirrod's  daughters  (see  p.  275).  St.  26  is  an  allu-
sion to  one  of  the  most  humorous  of  Thor's  adventures  which  Snorri
recounts,  although  "  it  is  not  well  for  mortals  to  speak  of  those
powers  which  the  Thunderer  could  not  subdue."  He  was  journeying
once  with  Loki  and  Thjalfi,  whom  he  had  just  taken  for  his  servant
(see  p.  xxxiv.).  Presently  they  came  unawares  into  the  land  of
Utgarth-loki,  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth,  and  there  many
wonderful  things  befell  them.  One  night  they  sought  rest  in  a  large
and  empty  hall-,  but  about  midnight  they  were  disturbed  by  a  great
rumbling  and  earthquake.  "  Then  Thor  arose,  and  called  his  com-
panions. They  groped  around  them,  and  found  on  the  right  of  the
hall  about  half-way  down  an  outhouse,  where  they  entered.  Thor  sat
him  down  in  the  door,  while  the  others,  who  were  sore  afraid,  went
further  within.  But  he  kept  a  grip  on  the  handle  of  Mjollnir,  for  he
had  a  mind  to  defend  himself."  So  the  night  passed,  and  in  the
morning  the  adventurers  found  that  their  hiding  place  had  been  the
thumb  of  a  giant's  glove.  This  giant,  Utgarth-loki  himself,  is  called
by  various  names — Fjalar  (the  Dissembler)  and  Skrymir.  He  plays
many  tricks  on  the  three  companions,  and  unwittingly  they  race  with
thought  and  wild  fire,  strive  with  ocean  and  with  old  age,  and
inevitably  suffer  defeat ;  but,  as  we  have  noticed,  defeat  without  dis-  .
honour  was  the  privilege  of  Thor.  Throughout  the  poem  the  author
shows  a  complete  understanding  of  the  god's  nature,  as  seen  in  its
human  aspect,  from  the  side  which  made  him  loved  by  the  Norwegian
and  Icelandic  peasant's.  He  was  the  companion  of  their  labours  when
they  prepared  and  softened  the  hard  earth.  He  hallowed  their  soil,  he
blessed  their  marriage  feasts  with  his  hammer,  and  showed  himself
ever  the  friend  of  churls,  as  Odin  was  the  patron  of  lords  and  earls.

This  brings  us  to  the  figure  on  the  other  side  of  the  stream,  who
gives  only  the  name  of  Greybeard.  Some  critics  have  suggested  that
he  is  Loki,  the  mocking  demon,  who  knows  better  than  any  the  mis-
demeanours of  the  other  gods,  and  who  now  reviles  Thor  as  he  reviles
them  all  at  ^Egir's  banquet.  But  the  name  alone  reveals  him  as


INTRODUCTION.  XLIX

Odin  in  his  usual  disguise  of  a  grey-bearded  old  man,  unrecognised
by  Thor.  The  deeds  mentioned  can  very  rarely  be  identified  with
those  told  in  other  poems,  but  they  are  such  as  belonged  to  Odin  in
his  various  characters.  As  god  of  war,  he  is  seen  with  battle-flag  and
reddened  spear,  wasting  the  fair  meadows  of  All-green  (16),  rousing
hatred  between  nation  and  nation,  and  inciting  men  to  slay  one
another  (24).  As  love-adventurer  he  keeps  secret  trysting  with  the
gold-bright  maiden  (30),  who  perhaps  is  Billing's  crafty  daughter
(p.  87),  and  well  he  knows  how  to  gain  the  love  of  women  with  fair
speeches  and  a  false  heart.  As  master  of  magic  he  does  not  scorn  to
win  giant  maidens  by  spells  like  those  he  had  practised  on  Rind
-(p.  159),  or  by  sporting  aloft  with  dark  witch  riders  at  night  (20).  He
has  attained  knowledge  in  his  usual  way,  by  fair  means  or  foul  (st.  20),
and  from  all  beings,  even  the  dead  (44)  whom,  like  the  Vala,  he  has
called  up  from  the  grave.

Thus  a  contrast  is  drawn  between  Thor,  the  patron  of  the  hard-
working tillers  of  the  soil,  and  Odin,  the  god,  and  here  the  repre-
sentative, of  the  aristocratic  and  cultured  classes,  whose  lives  were
given  to  love-making  and  expeditions  of  plunder  and  war.  "  Odin  has
earls  who  fall  on  the  battlefield,  Thor  has  the  race  of  thralls."  The
oppression  of  the  rich  couid  never  be  "  atoned  for  by  a  ring,"  nor  the
strife  of  classes  settled  by  arbitration  (42).  Thor's  bitter  reply  to  this
mocking  suggestion,  "  Where  didst  thou  learn  such  scornful  speeches!"
seems  to  give  voice  to  the  discontent  of  the  people,  which  is  evidently
shared  by  the  poet,  who  leaves  us  in  little  doubt  as  to  his  own  views  in
the  portraits  which  he  has  drawn  of  the  gods.  That  of  Odin  is  blood-
thirsty, lustful,  unscrupulous,  not  unlike  the  fiend  and  sorcerer  that  he
became  to  early  Christians,  while  they  still  half  believed  in  him  as  a
god.  Thor,  on  the  other  hand,  is  not  painted  in  such  dark  colours.
He  is  caricatured,  and  stands  no  longer  equipped  with  all  his  god's
might,  the  grand  outlines  showing  beneath  the  rough  exterior ;  he  is
only  pathetic  in  his  discomfiture,  and  even  ridiculous,  the  uncouth
m  giant  who  lives  on  in  popular  notions  of  to-day.  But  the  sympathy  of
the  poet  is  always  with  Thor.  He  is  still  shown  as  the  Warder  of
Midgarth,  whose  lot  is  to  redeem  the  faults  of  others;  and  he  still
retains  a  mortal  glory  which  was  ever  his  in  defeat.

One  reproach  of  Odin's  is  mysterious  and  unexplained  (34).  Thor
is  accused  of  having  once  broken  faith,  which  he  does  not  deny.  Does
this  refer  to  an  incident  in  mythology,  such  as  Thor's  slaying  of  the

G  G


L  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

giant  smith  in  Asgarth,  to  whom  the  gods  were  bound  by  oath  (see
Introd.  to  Vsp.) ;  or  is  it  some  topical  allusion  to  an  occasion  when  the
people  had  turned  against  their  leaders,  and  betrayed  them  to  a  foe  ?

If  the  realism  of  this  scene  is  at  times  too  great  for  the  dignity
of  the  gods,  they  are  at  least  viewed  in  an  aspect  little  known  to
modern  readers  of  mythology.  The  presentation  of  Thor  and  Odin  as
familiar  types,  if  we  may  trust  our  poem,  shows  in  what  light  they
were  regarded  by  the  masses,  what  place  they  occupied  in  the  hearts
of  men.  Thor  was  their  protector  ;  he  was  the  author  of  all  that  was
good  and  kindly  in  nature,  and  was  worshipped  less  from  awe  than
from  love.  Odin,  on  the  other  hand,  was  feared,  and  perhaps  hated,
by  the  peasants  for  his  destructive  violence  as  war-god,  and  for  his
magic  wonder-working  power,  which  was  as  little  comprehensible  to
them  as  the  culture  which  lay  beyond  their  range.  Just  for  a  moment,
by  the  hand  of  a  sceptic,  the  curtain  seems  withdrawn,  and  we  look
into  the  obscurity  of  past  thought,  and  see  something  of  the  relation-
ship between  the  mythology  and  the  religion  of  the  people.


THE     SONG    OF     RIG.


Rigsjmla  is  not  included  in  any  of  the  best  MSS.  of  Saemund's
Edda,  but  only  in  the  Codex  Wormianus  with  the  Prose  Edda.  Partly
for  this  reason,  and  because  its  connection  with  Heimdal,  the  god  of
light,  seems  obscure  and  improbable,  the  poem  is  sometimes  put  aside
as  a  late  invention  of  the  skalds.  It  is  without  doubt  a  skaldic  song,
one  of  those  lays  which  were  sung  in  the  hall  by  a  court  poet  in  praise
of  his  royal  master,  whose  descent  he  traces  from  the  gods.  Unfor-
tunately the  final  strophes  are  missing,  or  we  should  perhaps  learn  the
name  of  this  king  of  famous  race.  Harald  the  Fair-haired  has  been
suggested,  and  the  date  of  composition  is  certainly  that  of  the  Viking
period.  But  the  poet  is  evidently  not  drawing  on  his  own  imagina-
tion, except  for  details.  The  art  of  the  skald  lay  in  taking  some  old
theme  and  singing  it,  like  an  old  melody,  with  variations  to  suit  the
occasion.

The  myth  in  question  tells  how  once  of  old  the  god  Heimdal,  who
was  not  wont  to  leave  the  seat  where  he  kept  watch  in  heaven,  came
to  earth  as  a  kingly  being  called  Rig.  He  is  described  as  passing


INTRODUCTION.  U

through  ail  the  world,  and  visiting  first  the  dwelling  of  the  serf  and
thrall,  then  that  of  the  peasant  landowner,  and  lastly  the  hall  of  the
rich  and  nobly  born.  To  each  home  he  brings  the  birth  of  children,
who  are  reared,  who  pursue  occupations,  and  who  wed  according  to
their  station.  From  the  highest  rank  of  the  earls  is  born  a  king,  who
is  given  the  name  of  Rig.  Thus  Heimdal  is  the  originator  of  different
classes  ol  men,  but  kings  especially  have  their  right  to  claim  descent
from  the  god.

Snorri  knows  nothing  of  this  story,  but  the  Vala  (p.  277)  speaks  of
Heimdal  as  the  father  of  all  "holy  kindreds,"  and  in  the  "Shorter
Soothsaying,"  although  no  name  is  mentioned,  he  is  called  "  the  kins-
man allied  to  all  races."

The  attempt  to  explain  the  myth  any  further,  and  to  identify  Rig,
as  Rydberg  has  done,  with  Skef  or  Scyld,  the  culture  hero  of  the
Germanic  race,  is  unsatisfactory.  The  motive,  indeed,  is  common,  for
it  is  primitive  and  world  wide  ;  and  some  such  myth  arose  everywhere
(see  introd.  to  Hdl.)  when  man  began  to  wonder  whence  he  had  come,
and  why  he  was  man  with  a  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.  Not  having
yet  learned  his  kinship  with  the  ape,  he  invented  a  race  founder,  some-
times a  god  in  human  form.  He  made  up  stories  which,  oft  repeated,
were  soon  told  as  true,  and  were  believed  because  they  took  place  so
"  long  ago  " — of  a  culture  hero  who  came  to  be  king  over  men,  to
awaken  them  out  of  their  first  sleep  of  ignorance,  and  teach  them  to
rule  nature  by  wisdom  and  knowledge,  until,  as  in  the  poem,  wisdom
itself  became  regarded  as  the  divine  inheritance  of  kings.  Sometimes
the  scene  is  more  poetical  than  the  green  roads  and  the  hasty  striding
figure  of  Rig.  Scyld,  the  Danish  hero,  came  as  a  child  drifting  in  a
boat  to  shore,  and  when  he  had  accomplished  his  work  he  passed  back
to  unknown  regions  beyond  the  sea.  "  From  the  great  deep  to  the
great  deep  "  King  Arthur  came  and  went  in  mystic  fashion.

But  the  present  poet  has  another  end  in  view  than  dreaming.  He
is  answering  man's  next  question,  which  was  in  truth  the  demand  of
his  socialistic  countrymen — "  Who  thus  made  men  of  high  and  low
degree  ?  "  "  They  were  born  so,"  is  his  answer,  and  he  shows  by
mythic  lore  that  such  an  order  was  established  by  divine  autnority.
His  contempt  for  the  low-born  seems  to  indicate  that  he  would  not
change  it  if  he  could.

The  political  setting  of  the  poem  has  already  drawn  it  out  of
the  realms  of  fancy  upon  historical  ground;  and  in  its  details,  the


Ui  THE    POETIC    EDDA.

description  of  the  customs  and  manner  of  life  among  the  different
classes,  it  is  most  valuable.  Some  features  of  life  which  the  poet
depicts  are  out  of  date,  as  though  he  were  going  back  to  an  older
period,  or  were  very  conservative  in  his  views.

The  first-born  son  (st.  6)  is  Thrall.  The  Old  Norse  thralls  were
serfs,  little  better  than  slaves,  who  could  be  sold  at  the  will  of  their
master.  In  the  Viking  period  they  were  often  prisoners  of  war.  It
was  sometimes  possible  for  them  to  obtain  freedom,  but  never  any
share  in  the  government,  or  influence  in  the  popular  assembly.  As
their  names  indicate,  their  social  condition  and  occupations  were  very
low.  Great-grandfather's  table  is  set  with  coarse  brown  bread  and
broth,  which  are  the  best  that  he  can  lay  before  his  guest.

In  the  home  of  Grandfather  and  Grandmother  there  is  more
comfort;  their  appearance  and  clothing  are  neat,  and  even  ornamental;
their  work  and  that  of  their  children  requires  skill;  the  son  who  is
born  to  them  has  a  fair  and  ruddy  skin,  his  bride  does  not  travel  on
foot,  and  she  is  graced  by  a  wedding  veil.  Churl  in  st.  18,  which  is  a
cognate  form  of  Icelandic  "  Karl,"  does  not  give  a  true  idea  of  the
position  of  the  latter,  who  here  represents  the  class  of  free-born
peasant  proprietor  called  "  bondi  "  or  "  bui,"  a  name  which  was  given
to  his  offspring,  and  which  was  used  in  Viking  days  to  designate  the
emigrants  to  Iceland.  These  formed  a  kind  of  hereditary  aristocracy,
self-governed,  and  absolutely  independent.  The  Karl  of  this  passage
scarcely  takes  so  high  a  position,  but  belongs  to  an  earlier  age.

Mother  and  father  are  found  (st.  21)  in  a  lordlier  dwelling;  she  has
no  task  but  to  admire  and  adorn  her  fair  white  neck  and  arms  ;  his
work  is  the  honourable  pursuit  of  warfare,  and  the  fashioning  of
weapons.  They  have  a  son,  Earl,  with  bright  eyes  and  shining  hair,
who  lives  the  glorious  life  of  a  conqueror,  distributing  spoils  and  wealth
among  his  dependents.  Yet  more  than  Churl  he  belongs  to  ancient
days,  and  resembles  one  of  the  great  lords  who  are  mentioned  in
Hyndla's  Lay,  or  those  who  give  rise  to  the  epithets  used  by  poets,
"  the  ring-breaker  "  and  "  gold-giver."  The  Old  Norse  ideal  was  fixed
before  the  rise  of  any  kind  of  feudal  rule  ;  the  power  of  earls  passed
into  the  hands  of  the  collective  butndr,  and  they  too  become  subject  to
the  laws  and  customs  of  the  Thing.

Earl  weds  the  fair  daughter  of  Ruler,  and  their  children — Sou,
Offspring,  Descendant,  &c. — are  required  only  to  inherit  the  rights  and
follow  the  customs  which  belong  to  their  noble  birth.  But  to  ivon  the


INTRODUCTION.  LIU

youngest,  who  becomes  a  king,  is  given  a  higher  heritage,  not  of  his
father  Jarl,  but  from  Rig,  who  bestows  his  own  name  upon  him,  and
endows  him  with  the  wisdom  of  gods.  He  shares  their  powers,  he
Icarus  to  understand  and  use  the  sacred  runes,  he  interprets  nature,
and  is  alone  the  true  son  of  Heimdal  and  the  father  of  all  kings.

This  poem  has  little  beauty  and  grace,  but  a  quaint  charm  in  the
original.  The  swift  movement  of  the  metre  keeps  time  with  the
striding  march  of  Rig,  and  throughout  there  is  an  air  of  superiority
which  disdains  all  the  polish  and  delicacies  of  art  for  so  fine  a
theme.


THE     LAY     OF     HYNDLA.


The  Shorter  Soothsaying  is  included  hi  the  MS.  with  the  Lay  of
Hyndla,  but  is  now,  by  general  consent,  regarded  as  a  distinct  poem.
The  main  theme  of  Hyndla  is  the  recitation  of  a  family  history,  but
suddenly,  with  an  abrupt  change  of  style,  the  subject  passes  to  a
genealogy  of  mythical  beings;  then  again  it  reverts  to  the  original
theme.  Snorri  quotes  from  this  interpolation  (st.  6)  as  though
from  some  old  and  famous  song,  and  mentions  as  his  authority  a
poem  called  "The  Shorter  Soothsaying  of  the  Vala" — "Voiuspa  mni
skommu."  We  may  assume  therefore,  though  in  opposition  to  Sijinons
and  certain  other  critics,  that  it  is  a  iragment  of  a  lost  and  much  older
work,  which  dealt,  like  the  greater  Soothsaying,  with  the  history  of  the
gods.

Someone,  as  in  Baldr's  Dreams,  is  holding  converse  with  a  witch,
called  up  perhaps  from  the  dead.  The  unknown  questioner  desires  to
know  the  origin  and  kinship  of  all  mythical  beings.  He  asks  tirst
concerning  the  god  s  race,  and  learns  that  once,  before  tne  death  of
Baldr,  the  /Esir  were  twelve  in  number.  Here  a  gap  in  the  poem
leaves  their  names  unrecorded,  but  they  may  be  conjectured  troui
descriptions  by  Snorri  and  in  Lokasenna  of  the  full  assembly  in  ^Egir's
halls.  At  these  banquets  were  present  Odin,  Thor,  Heimdal,  Tyr,
Vidar,  Vali,  Forseti,  Uil,  Hcenir,  Bragi,  and  Loki,  who,  with  baldr,
make  the  twelve.

Another  passage  is  missing  which  should  tell  how  the  Wanes —
Njord,  Frey,  and  Freyja — came  among  the  other  gods,  and  throughout


LiV  THE    POETIC    EDDA.

there  is  such  confusion  and  want  of  sequence  that  it  is  only  possible  to
make  the  poem  explicit  by  grouping  the  strophes  with  the  help  of
familiar  allusions.

The  questioner  would  next  learn  whence  came  other  powers  beside
the  ruling  gods,  those  tumultuous  forces  ever  warring  with  them,  the
Jotuns;  those  wise  women,  the  Valas,  who  could  interpret  dreams  and
foretell  the  future ;  and  whence  all  wizards  and  witches  and  monsters
like  the  great  wolf  Fenrir,  and  prodigies  such  as  Odin's  eight-footed
steed  Sleipriir  ?  The  answers  to  these  questions  are  unfortunately
often  too  dark  to  understand,  or  tell  us  only  what  is  known  from  other
sources.  One  awful  being  (st.  8),  the  mother  of  all  witches,  was
born  in  mysterious  fashion  from  a  burning  heart,  which  Loki,  as  fire-
god,  had  devoured.  She,  it  has  been  suggested,  is  the  same  as  Golden-
draught,  who  was  burned  and  reburned  in  Odin's  hall,  and  who  was
the  causer  of  the  first  war  between  gods  and  Wanes  (p.  183).

In  alluding  to  Loki,  who  is  half  god,  half  giant,  the  questioner
has  turned  once  more  to  higher  beings,  and  the  birth  of  One  is  related,
whose  name  is  not  mentioned,  but  who  is  easily  recognised  as  Heimdal.
The  description  agrees  with  what  is  told  oi  him  elsewhere,  and  belongs
to  his  character  as  a  god  of  nature.  Heimdal,  although  he  plays  a
considerable  part  in  the  Jidda,  is  only  half  revealed  to  us,  ana  his
nature  not  clearly  understood.  He  is  seldom  named  by  the  skaldic
poets;  no  sacrifices  were  offered  to  him,  no  temples  built  for  his
worship,  he  had  no  place  in  the  hearts  oi  men.  Merely  to  ascribe  a
late  origin  to  his  myth  is  not  sufficient  explanation  ior  this  strange
silence  about  a  god  so  well  known  to  the  iidda.  The  myths  which
encircle  him  point  back  by  their  very  contradictions  to  one  who  has
lived  through  different  ages  in  the  changing  thought  and  fancy  of
mankind.  i  heir  wonders  are  accepted  only  because  they  belong  to
the  past.  "  Heimdal,"  says  Snorn,  "  is  called  the  White  god.  He  is
great  and  holy.  Sometimes  he  is  called  Golden-tooth,  tor  his  teeth
are  of  gold.  His  steed  is  Goldy-lock,  and  his  dwelling  place  is  Heaven-
hill,  by  the  bridge  bifrost.  He  is  warder  of  the  gods,  and  sits  at  the
end  of  heaven  guarding  the  bridge  against  the  Mountain  giants.  He
needs  less  sleep  than  a  bird ;  he  can  see,  by  night  as  well  as  by  day,  a
hundred  miles  around  him.  He  hears  grass  growing  on  the  earth  and
wool  on  the  backs  of  sheep,  besides  all  else  that  makes  more  sound.
He  owns  the  trumpet  Gjailar-horn,  whose  blast  is  heard  throughout
the  worlds."  Thus  shown  as  the  dazzling  god  of  light,  he  is  un-


INTRODUCTION.  LV

approachable;  far  seen,  aloof,  he  sits  on  his  mountain  throne,  guarding
Bifrost  where  the  niinbmv  reaches  heaven.  He  is  no  less  mysterious
in  his  birth,  which  Snorri  also  describes,  quoting  from  some  lost
"  Song  of  Heimdal  "  :-

Child  am  I  of  mothers  nine,
of  sisters  nine  the  son.

These  maidens,  from  their  names  in  st.  12,  are  ocean  waves,  and
it  is  again  as  the  god  of  light  that  he  is  born  at  the  world's  edge  on  the
horizon  where  the  sky  meets  the  earth  and  sea.  It  is  there  at  sunrise
that  he  drinks  of  the  crimson  splendour  which  is  like  the  blood  of
sacrifice  offered  to  the  gods.

Heimdal  stands  apart  from  other  deities  in  the  Edda.  He  is  less
human,  except  when,  as  Rig,  he  passes  through  the  world  of  men  and
becomes  the  kinsmen  of  all  peoples.  His  epithet  of  the  "  richest
ruler"  belongs  to  him  perhaps  as  owner  of  the  wide  and  glorious
dwelling  place  of  Heaven-hill.  The  expression  "  weapon-famed  "  is
here  translated  "  armed  with  glory,"  because  it  must  be  derived  from
the  sword  of  piercing  sun  rays  which  is  usually  the  possession  of  the
Heaven  god  in  mythology,  but  which  Heimdal  may  well  borrow  as  the
god  of  light.  In  the  above  mentioned  "  Lay  of  Heimdal  "  his  sword  is
mentioned  as  being  made  of  a  "  man's  head,"  and  the  skaldic  poets
use  "  Heimdal's  sword  "  as  a  synonym  for  the  head.  These  obscure
allusions,  for  which  even  Snorri  vouchsafes  no  explanation,  suggest
that  even"  in  his  day  the  traditions  about  Heimdal  were  already  half
lost  and  forgotten.

All  the  revelations  so  far  have  been  of  the  past ;  the  Vala  now
becomes  prophetic.  She  foretells  the  fearful  signs  and  wonders  in
nature,  the  "  long  dread  winter "  (p.  55)  which  shall  herald  the  fulfil-
ment of  Weird  with  the  Doom  of  the  first  ruling  powers,  the  gods  of
war,  and  the  coming  of  the  new  Power,  some  say  of  Christianity,  but
whose  nature  is  here  kept  secret,  like  other  hidden  things — "  the
Mightiest  One's  old  mysteries,"  the  runes  which  Odin  knew  alone,  the
words  which  he  whispered  into  Baldr's  ear.

How  then  was  this  mythical  fragment  united  to  the  less  exalted
theme  of  Ottar's  genealogy,  which,  if  it  were  not  for  the  myth  in  which
it  is  framed,  should  belong  to  the  heroic  lays  ?  Perhaps  the  author
of  Hyndla's  Lay  had  in  his  possession  the  old  "  Soothsaying,"  and
purposed  to  write  a  corresponding  genealogy  of  earthly  beings,  enume-


LVI  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

rating  those  great  Germanic  heroes  of  legend  and  saga  whom  he  deemed
worthy  of  immortality.  He  lingers  with  old-fashioned  love  for  the  list
of  mighty  names,  feeling  that  they  are  in  danger  of  perishing  for  ever
in  these  degenerate  days  when  the  power  of  the  nobility  is  being  seized
by  the  middle  class  bondi.  Now,  while  they  are  yet  fresh  in  the
memories  of  men,  let  these  names  be  recorded,  and  their  worth  attested
by  association  with  those  of  the  gods.

As  the  hero  of  his  subject  the  writer  takes  Ottar  the  Simple,  a
chieftain  who  is  unknown  to  history,  but  who  seems  to  have  belonged
to  the  famous  family  of  Hordaland.  He  is  here  identified  with  Od,  the
human  lover  of  Freyja,  whose  story  is  thus  told  by  Snorri  : — "  Freyja
was  wedded  to  a  mortal  called  Ottar,  and  their  daughter  Hnoss,  the
Treasure,  is  so  beautiful  that  all  things  fair  and  costly  are  named  after
her.  But  Ottar  went  far  away,  and  Freyja  followed  him  weeping,  and
her  tears  were  of  red  gold  "  (st.  32).  Ottar  of  the  poem  has  wagered
his  inheritance  with  another  unknown  personage,  Angantyr,  that  his
descent,  could  he  only  trace  it,  is  the  nobler.  Freyja  is  willing  to
help  her  favourite,  and  she  takes  him  with  her  disguised  as  Golden-
bristle,  the  famous  boar  which  belonged  to  Frey.  They  seek  Hyndla,
who,  like  other  valas  or  witches,  dwells  in  a  cave,  and  rides  forth  upon
a  wolf  at  night.  She  is  a  giantess,  and  thus  knows  all  the  history  of
mankind.  But  as  such  she  must  be  propitiated  by  a  goddess,  and
Freyja  promises  to  win  her  the  favour  of  Odin,  the  War-father,  who  at
times  can  be  so  gracious  ;  Thor  too,  the  enemy  of  giant-wives,  shall  be
appeased  by  sacrifice  such  as  men  offered  to  the  gods.

Hyndla  suspects  the  presence  of  Ottar,  but  Freyja  denies  it,  and
in  answer  to  questions  of  the  latter  she  rehearses  the  generations  of
kings  while  they  ride  through  the  night,  and  Ottar's  heart  must  beat
with  pride  as  she  marshals  forth  the  host  of  his  dead  forbears.  It  is
shown  how  he  is  allied  to  the  most  ancient  and  noble  races,  and  heroes
who  can  trace  their  line  back  to  the  gods.  To  us  all  these  great  names
mean  nothing,  or  merely  call  up  shadowy  figures  in  the  land  that  lies
between  history  and  romance.  But  recited  in  ancient  days  by  the
skalds,  before  the  warriors  and  women  gathered  in  the  hall,  the  famous
race  names  of  Skjoldung,  Skilfing,  Odling,  Yngling  were  full  of  deep
meaning,  and  expressed  their  ideal  of  glory  in  heroic  deeds.

The  Skjoldungs  are  ancient  mythical  figures  who  centre  round  the
birth  cradle  of  the  Germanic  race.  In  the  various  Old  English,  Ice-
landic, and  Danish  sources,  which  do  not  always  agree  in  their  details,


INTRODUCTION.

is  found  the  legend  of  an  old  culture  hero,  deemed  perhaps  a  god  in
human  form.  He  came  as  a  child  drifting  over  the  sea  in  a  boat,
surrounded  by  treasures,  with  a  sheaf  of  corn  from  which  he  took  his
name  Skef,  though  the  poem  Beowulf  has  transferred  the  legend  to  his
son  Scyld.  The  boat  approached  a  land  called  Skania,  where  Skef
rescued  a  people  in  great  misery,  and  taught  them  to  cultivate  their
territory  and  defend  it  against  the  enemy.  He  died  in  old  age,  leaving
Skjold  or  Scyld  to  inherit  the  kingdom,  and  was  sent  forth  once  more
over  the  sea  in  a  boat  no  less  richly  endowed  than  when  he  came,
"  but  no  man,"  it  is  said,  "  knew  who  received  the  precious  burden."
From  Skjold  came  the  Skjoldungs,  or,  as  we  learn  from  Beowulf,  the
Danes,  whose  home  was  Leira  in  the  island  of  Seeland.  Skef  or  Sceaf
in  Old  English  genealogies  is  the  ancestor  of  the  Angles  and  Saxons.
With  him  we  must  identify  Skilvir,  also  said  to  be  the  father  of  Skjold,
the  progenitor  of  the  Skilfings,  another  name  for  the  Swedes.

But  who  are  the  Ynglings  ?  Ing  or  Yng  is  also  a  great  race-hero,
and  ancestor  of  the  Swedes  and  Angles.  In  the  poem  Ynglinga-tal,
the  name  Yngling  and  Skilfing  is  used  interchangeably.  Thus  Yng
must  be  identical  with  Skilvir,  and  Skilvir,  as  we  have  seen,  is  the
same  as  Scef,  or,  according  to  Beowulf,  Skjold.  All  this  confusion
leads  us  back  to  one  mythical  founder  of  the  Germanic  race,  from
whom  all  the  tribes  claimed  their  descent,  and  whom  they  remembered
as  a  culture  hero,  who  had  raised  them  from  a  state  of  savagery,  and
seemed  to  them  in  later  days  as  the  son  of  a  god  (see  Rydberg,  pp.  89,

90-95).

Then  Hyndla  turns  to  Ottar's  immediate  family,  and  those  with
which  it  is  connected.  The  first  great  hero  mentioned  is  Halfdan  the
Old  (st.  18).  He  was  the  king  of  Denmark,  and  one  of  the  patriarchs
of  the  Germanic  race,  known  to  Saxo  Grammaticus  and  to  the  author
of  Beowulf.  His  most  famous  achievement  was  the  slaying  of  Sigtrygg,
a  mythical  king.  He  sacrificed  to  the  gods  in  order  to  obtain  long  life,
but  he  was  granted  no  more  than  "  a  man's  life  "  of  three  hundred
years,  and  the  promise  that  no  ignoble  offspring  should  be  born  in  his
line — hence  Ottar  would  desire  to  claim  kinship  with  him  (Skald-*
skaparmal).

The  twelve  berserk  brothers  of  st.  23,  sons  of  Arngrim  and  Eyfora,
belong  to  Hervarar  Saga,  and  their  chieftain  Angantyr  is  the  principal
figure  in  one  of  the  finest  of  the  Old  Norse  heroic  poems.  The  word
berserk  had  its  origin  in  a  superstitious  belief  that  some  men  were

H  H


LVIII  THE    POETIC    EfcDA.

"  hamramr,"  or  able  to  change  their  forms,  and  become  bears  or
wolves,  and  were  hence  called  berserks  or  were-wolves.  Later  on*
the  name  was  given  to  those  wild  beings  who  from  time  to  time  were
seized  by  fits  of  madness  and  rage,  when  they  seemed  possessed  of
more  than  human  strength,  and  wrought  fearful  deeds  in  battle.  The
saga  in  question  tells  of  a  magic  sword  called  Tyrfing  which  came  into
the  hands  of  Angantyr.  It  had  been  forged  by  dwarfs,  and  stolen
from  them ;  therefore  a  curse  followed  it,  and  though  it  might  serve  its
bearer  well  for  a  lifetime,  it  would  at  last  bring  him  to  death.  The
viking  brothers  ranged  over  land  and  sea,  till  in  consequence  of
Angantyr's  love  for  Ingibjorg  they  met  in  battle,  and  fell  before,  two
warriors,  Odd  and  Hjalmar,  in  the  island  of  Samsey.  Hervor,
Angantyr's  warlike  daughter,  had  inherited  the  berserk  spirit,  and
presently  it  came  upon  her.  She  armed  herself  like  a  warrior,  and
went  forth  to  seek  Tyrfing  from  her  father's  grave.  Fearlessly  she
passed  through  the  haunted  land  with  its  magic  flickering  flames  until
she  stood  on  the  howe,  crying  : —

Harvard,  Hjorvard,         Hrani,  Angantyr  !
Wake  where  ye  rest         the  tree-roots  under
with  helm  and  byrnie,         shield  and  harness,
sword  keen-whetted         and  reddened  spear  !
All  are  they  come,         the  sons  of  Arngtim,
death-thirsting  warriors,         to  dust  of  earth  ;
and  not  one  comes  forth         of  Eyfora's  offspring
in  Munavagi         to  speak  with  me  : —

till  at  length,  while  the  whole  land  was  aflame  with  enchanted  fires,
the  grave  opened,  and  she  won  her  heritage  from  the  dead.

St.  25  scarcely  requires  explanation.  With  the  mention  of  the
famous  but  ill-starred  Niflung  and  Volsung  races,  a  note  of  warning
comes  into  the  poem.  This  great  saga  is  so  widely  known  and  has
been  so  oft  repeated  that  it  no  longer  belongs  only  to  the  people  of  the
North,  who  told  it  first  and  best  in  written  form.  Jormunrek  married
•  Svanhild,  daughter  of  Sigurd;  he  caused  his  wife  to  be  trampled  to
death  by  wild  horses  in  consequence  of  a  slander,  and  her  brothers
sought  to  avenge  the  deed.  In  the  history  ol  the  Latin  writer  Jornandes
he  is  Ermanric,  a  mighty  king  of  the  Goths  in  the  fourth  century,  who
was  conquered  in  battle  by  the  Huns.  Again  he  is  known  in  Saxo's
chronicle  as  the  Danish  king,  Jarmeric,  and  is  mentioned  in  Beowulf


INTRODUCTION.  LIX

as  Eormenric.  Under  slightly  different  names,  the  same  story  of  the
sister's  death  and  the  brother's  vengeance  is  told  in  connection  with
Ermanric  and  Jarmerik.  We  have  clearly  one  of  the  Germanic  race
heroes,  remembered  by  all  the  different  tribes  after  their  separation.
St.  29  alludes  to  another  famous  saga,  and  mentions  the  instigator  of
one  of  the  greatest  legendary  battles  of  the  North.  Ivar  was  a
descendant  of  Angantyr  (st.  28)  ;  he  conquered  and  slew  Hrorek,  king
of  Sweden,  whose  daughter,  Aud  the  Deep-thoughted,  he  had  married.
She  fled  with  her  little  son  Harald  and  married  Radbard,  king  of
Russia  ;  their  son  was  Randver.  Harald  Battle-tusk  lived  to  be  king
over  the  Danes.  In  his  old  age,  desiring  a  glorious  death,  he  challenged
Sigurd-ring,  king  of  the  Swedes,  to  meet  with  him  at  Bravellir.  There
took  place  a  combat  of  world-wide  renown,  which  is  described  by  Saxo,
who  delights  in  the  slaughter  and  bloodshed  like  some  old  Viking.
Kings,  princes,  earls,  nobles,  chieftains  from  all  Germanic  tribes,
gathered  upon  the  field ;  thousands  fell  on  either  side,  and  the  Swedes
were  victorious.

After  this  passage  followed  the  old  fragmentary  poem,  placed
there,  not  perhaps  by  the  author  of  Hyndla's  Lay,  but  by  some  later
copyist  who  was  ignorant  of  the  old  genealogies,  and  knew  little  of  the
distinctions  between  gods  and  men.

The  scene  now  returns  to  Freyja  and  Hyndla,  whose  ride  is  ended.
Hyndla  would  be  left  to  sleep  in  peace  once  more,  and  bids  Freyja  hie
homewards  on  her  wild  night  journey,  with  the  darkness  lit  up  only  by
the  flickering  of  enchanted  fires  like  those  which  surrounded  Hervor,
and  ever  haunt  the  places  of  the  dead.  Freyja's  mocking  request  to
pass  the  ale-cup  to  her  boar  is  the  acknowledgment  of  Ottar's  presence;
the  dialogue  between  her  and  Hyndla  grows  dramatic  and  breathless,
ending  with  a  curse  from  the  witch  and  a  blessing  from  the  goddess
upon  Ottar.

The  rearrangement  of  strophes  which  is  given  in  the  translation
has  been  made  with  the  help  of  a  prose  paraphrase  in  Orvar-Odds
Saga.  It  agrees  in  most  points  with  that  suggested  by  Gering.  The
few  recognised  names  have  suggested  the  family  groups.

BALDR'S     DREAMS.


In  Baldr's  Dreams  for  the  first  time  we  meet  face  to  face  with


LX  THE    POETIC    EDDA.

the  most  sublime  and  beautiful  figure  in  Old  Norse  mythology,  one
who  is  universally  known,  for  the  tenderness  and  pathos  of  his  story
appeal  to  modern  sympathies  ;  moreover,  has  ever  proved  a  source  of
inspiration  to  modern  critics,  who  make  for  darkness  and  mystery  as
the  moth  makes  for  the  light.  All  endeavours  have  failed  to  unravel
the  secret  of  his  personality,  and  to  trace  it  to  any  one  source  in
history  or  mythology.

This  poem  belongs  to  a  closing  chapter  in  the  history  of  the  gods.
Baldr's  death  is  the  great  tragedy  which  foreshadows  their  Doom.  No
facts  are.  recorded  of  him  in  his  lifetime;  here  and  there  in  some
passing  allusion  he  enters  a  poem  and  flits  across  its  pag^s  like  some
gleaming  ray  of  light,  but  only  in  his  death  does  he  become  the  most
human  and"  tender  and  best  loved  of  all  the  gods.  From  the  poetic
Edda  alone  we  learn  little  concerning  him,  and  Snorri  must  be  allowed
to  fill  in  the  gaps  with  his  own  version  of  the  story.

Baldr  was  the  son  of  Odin  and  Frigg.  Unlike  Thor,  he  had  no
kinship  with  earth ;  both  of  his  father  and  mother,  he  was  born  of
heaven.  "He  was  the  best  among  the  gods,  and  praised  by  all  beings.
He  was  so  fair  to  behold  and  so  bright  that  a  glory  streamed  from  him,
and  no  white  herb,  even  though  it  were  the  whitest  of  all  herbs,  could
compare  with  the. whiteness  of  Baldr's  brow.  He  was  the  wisest  of
gods,  the  fairest  spoken  and  the  most  pitiful,  and  yet  of  such  nature
that  none  might  overrule  his  judgments.  His  home  was  in  the  heavens
called  Broad-beam,  where  nought  unclean  might  enter."

Nothing  further  is  told  of  Baldr's  life,  nor  what  part  he  played  in
the  history  of  the  gods;  how  he  shared  in  their  warring  and  striving,
but  not  in  their  sinning  ;  for  of  him  "  there  is  nought  but  good  to
tell."  He  must  have  had  a  love  story  which  recounted  the  wooing
of  Nanna,  his  fair  wife,  who  must  perish  with  him  ;  but  now,  in  this
poem,  we  hear  that  Baldr,  while  still  youthful,  has  had  evil  dreams  and
forseen  his  fate.  Perhaps,  like  some  old  Norse  hero,  his  fylgja  has
stood  before  him — that  shadowy  spirit  who  follows  each  man,  but  is
seen  only  at  the  sunset  of  life.  All  the  gods  gather  in  alarm  and  hold
council,  but  none  can  tell,  though  all  can  guess,  the  meaning  of  Baldr's
Dreams.  Odin  is  sent  down  to  Hel  to  seek  tidings  from  a  Vala,  who,
as  one  of  the  dead,  has  power  to  trace  the  workings  of  Weird  before
and  behind.  He  rides  thither  by  the  same  road  which  Herrnod  took
afterwards  and  on  the  same  steed,  his  own  eight-footed  Sleipnir,  and
stands  calling  on  the  Vala  until  she  obeys  the  spell  of  the  Master


INTRODUCTION.  LXI

Magician,  and  comes  forth  from  the  grave.  He  must  have  used  incan-
tations such  as  those  "  diabolical  songs "  which  are  said  by  Latin
historians  to  have  been  sung  by  the  heathen  at  night-time  to  call  up
their  dead,  and  were  so  sternly  prohibited  by  the  Church.

The  Vala  is  heard  in  speech  with  Odin.  Her  words  are  not  the
mere  fortune-telling  of  a  witch,  but  like  the  oracle  of  old  she  pro-
nounces the  doom  of  Baldr.  The  Weird  motive  now  sounds  in  the
poem,  and  continues  like  a  grim  undertone  throughout  as  the  Vala
interprets  one  by  one  the  visionary  pictures  of  Baldr's  dreams.  He
has  first  seen  the  interior  of  a  great  hall  being  prepared  for  the  recep-
tion of  an  honoured  guest;  the  benches  are  strewn,  the  mead  cup  is
filled  and  overlaid  with  the  bright  shield,  and  all  the  place  adorned  as
though  for  the  coming  of  some  king.  'But  Baldr  has  guessed  that  this
is  Hel's  abode,  and  is  troubled.  Now  Odin  learns  the  name  of  this
expected  king,  and  wrothfully  asks  who  would  dare  thus"  to  slay  his
son,  the  best  loved  among  all  the  gods?  He  is  answered  that  no  dread
Frost-giant  or  Mountain-giant,  but  one  among  themselves  will  shoot
the  fatal  shaft.  Who  then  shall  avenge  the  deed  before  ever  Baldr  is
laid  on  the  bale-fire  ?  The  father's  anger  is  appeased  when  he  is  told
that  the  giantess  Rind  shall  bear  him  a  mighty  child,  who  shall  work
vengeance  on  the  author  of  the  Woe.

The  Vala  is  next  questioned  on  the  second  vision  which  Baldr
has  seen — a  mourning  world,  maidens  weeping  and  in  wild  despair
casting  their  veils  to  the  winds.  Why  does  she  now  break  out  in  fierce
indignant  reproaches,  and  know  that  her  tormentor  is  Odin  ?  None
living  save  a  god  could  thus  see  into  the  future,  and  perhaps  as  a
dweller  in  the  underworld  she  resents  the  attempt  which  will  be  made
to  deprive  Hel  of  its  victim.  Then  Odin,  with  mocking  fury  and
refusal  to  believe  the  prophecy  of  the  Vala,  bears  the  dread  tidings
home  to  Asgarth.  But  she  has  the  last  word,  reminding  him  how  even
the  gods  must  suffer  Doom ;  for  all  their  after  efforts,  the  devices  of  the
fond  mother  to  save  her  son,  are  only  a  hopeless  striving  against  Weird.
Here  Snorri  takes  up  the  story: — "The  gods  resolved  to  ask  protection
for  Baldr  against  all  harm,  and  Frigg  took  an  oath  from  fire  and  water,
from  iron  and  all  metals,  from  rocks  and  earth  and  trees,  from  poison
and  serpents  that  they  would  spare  Baldr.  When  this  was  done  and
made  known,  it  became  the  sport  of  Baldr  and  the  gods  to  make  him
stand  up  at  their  meetings  while  some  shot  at  him,  some  struck  him,
and  some  cast  stones ;  but  whatever  they  did  he  was  unharmed,  and


LXII  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

they  deemed'it  a  glorious  feat — save  Loki,  son  of  Leaf-isle,  who  was
ill  pleased.  He  went  in  the  likeness  of  a  woman  to  Fen  Halls,  where
Frigg  dwelt,  who  asked  what  all  the  gods  were  doing  at  their  assembly.
The  woman  made  answer  that  they  were  shooting  at  Baldr,  but  that
nought  harmed  him.  Said  Frigg — '  Nor  weapons  nor  trees  will  hurt
Baldr,  for  I  have  taken  an  oath  from  them  all.'  And  the  woman  asked
— '  Have  all  things  taken  the  oath  to  spare  Baldr  ? '  Frigg  answered
— '  There  grows  indeed,  to  the  west  of  Valholl,  a  tender  shoot  called
the  Mistletoe,  which  seemed  too  young  to  ask  an  oath  from.'  Then
all  in  a  moment  the  woman  vanished.  But  Loki  went  and  plucked  the
Mistletoe,  and  joined  the  gathering  of  the  gods.  There  was  one,  Hod,
who  stood  without  the  circle,  for  he  was  blind.  Loki  asked — '  Why
art  thou  not  shooting  at  Baldr  ?  '  and  he  answered — '  Because  I
cannot  see  where  he  stands,  and  moreover  I  am  without  weapon.'
'Thou  must  do  as  the  others,'  said  Loki,  'and  show  honour  to  Baldr.
Shoot  now  this  wand ;  I  will  show  thee  where  he  stands.'  So  Hod
took  the  Mistletoe,  and  aimed  as  Loki  showed  him.  The  shaft  flew
and  pierced  Baldr,  who  fell  dead  to  the  earth,  and  'tis  deemed  the
direst  shot  that  ever  was  shot  among  gods  and  men.  When  Baldr  had
fallen,  speech  failed  the  gods  and  likewise  power  in  their  hands  to  lift
him.  Each  looked  at  the  other,  and  all  were  of  one  mind  about  him
who  had  wrought  the  deed,  but  they  could  not  seek  revenge  there,  for
it  was  a  holy  place  of  peace.  When  the  gods  sought  to  speak  there
was  only  sound  of  weeping,  and  the  one  could  not  tell  his  sorrow  to
the  other.  But  the  greatest  sorrow  was  to  Odin,  for  he  best  fore-knew
what  loss  and  woe  had  befallen  the  gods  with  the  death  of  Baldr.
When  at  length  they  had  come  to  themselves  again,  Frigg  asked  who
among  them  all  desired  to  win  her  grace  and  favour,  and  would  ride
the  Hel  road  and  seek  if  haply  he  might  find  Baldr,  and  offer  ransom
to  Hel  that  she  should  let  him  return  home  to  Asgarth.  And  Hermod,
the  Eager-hearted  son  of  Odin,  was  chosen  for  the  journey.  Then
gliding  Sleipnir,  the  steed  of  Odin,  was  brought  forth,  and  Hermod
mounted  and  rode  swiftly  away.  But  the  gods  took  the  body  of  Baldr
to  send  it  floating  out  to  sea.  His  vessel,  called  Ring-horn,  was  the
greatest  of  all  ships,  and  when  the  gods  sought  to  launch  it  forth  and
kindle  the  bale-fire  thereon  for  Baldr,  it  could  nowise  be  stirred.  So
they  sent  to  Jotunheim  after  the  giantess,  fire-shrivelled  Hyrrok,  who
came  riding  on  a  wolf,  using  serpents  for  the  reins.  When  she  had
dismounted  Odin  called  four  berserks  to -mind  the  steed,  but  they


INTRODUCTION.  LXIII

could  not  hold  it  until  they  had  felled  it  to  the  ground.  Hyrrok  went
forward  to  the  prow,  and  in  one  push  she  launched  the  boat  with  such
force  that  sparks  flew  from  the  rollers,  and  the  whole  ground  was
shaken.  Then  was  the  Thunderer  wroth  !  He  seized  his  hammer,
and  would  have  broken  her  head  it  all  the  other  gods  had  not  asked
mercy  for  her.  Then  they  bore  forth  the  dead  torm  of  Baldr  and  laid
it  in  the  vessel,  and  when  his  wife  Nanna,  Nep's  daughter,  beheld  it
her  heart  broke  from  sorrow,  and  she  died.  She  too  was  laid  on  the
bale-tire,  and  the  flame  was  kindled.  Thor  stood  by,  and  hallowed  the
pile  with  Mjollnir.  At  his  feet  ran  a  dwarf  called  Lit,  and  Thor
spurned  it  with  his  loot  into  the  tire,  and  it  was  burned.  All  manner
of  folk  came  to  the  burning  of  Baldr.  First  came  Odin,  and  with  him
Frigg  and  the  valkyries  and  his  ravens  Hugin  and  Munm.  Frey  came
driving  in  a  car  drawn  by  the  boar  called  Golden- bristle  or  Fierce-tang,
and  Heimdal  riding  the  steed  Golden-lock.  Freyja  was  there  with  her
cats.  Thither  came,  too,  a  host  of  Frost-giants  and  Mountain-giants.
Then  Odin  laid  on  the  bale-tire  that  ring  called  Draupnir,  which  is  of
such  value  that  therefrom  fall  eight  like  rings  every  ninth  night.  And
Baldr's  steed  was  led  to  the  bale-tire  in  all  its  trappings.  Meanwhile
Hermpd  rode  nine  whole  nights  through  dales  so  dark  and  deep  that
he  could  see  nought  till  he  came  to  the  loud  roaring  river  Gjallar,  and
rode  over  the  echoing  Gjallar- bridge,  which  is  thatched  with  shining
gold.  There  the  maiden  called  Modgud  keeps  watch.  She  asked
Hermod  his  race  and  name,  and  told  him  how  yesterday  tive  phantom
troops  had  ridden  over  the  bridge,  '  but  under  thee  the  bridge  echoes
full  as  loud,  nor  hast  thou  the  hue  of  a  dead  man.  Why  art  thou
riding  on  the  Hel-road  ? '  He  answered — '  I  must  needs  ride  to  Hel,
and  seek  Baldr ;  hast  thou  seen  aught  of  him  on  the  Hel-road  ?  '
'  Baidr,'  said  she,  '  has  ridden  over  the  Gjallar-bridge ;  downward  and
northward  lies  the  way  to  Hel.'  So  Hermod  rode  on  till  he  came  to
the  Hel-gates.  There  he  sprang  from  horseback,  tightened  his  saddle-
girths,  and  mounting  again  he  spurred  his  steed  so  fiercely  that  it  leapt
high  over  the  gates,  and  not  so  much  as  touched  them  with  its  heels.
Then  he  rode  onward  to  the  hall,  where  he  dismounted  and  entered.
He  saw  there  his  brother  Baldr  sitting  on  the  high  seat,  and  he  stayed
the  night.  In  the  morning  he  besought  Hel  to  let  Baldr  ride  home
with  him,  and  told  her  how  great  mourning  there  was  among  the  gods.
Hel  said  that  she  would  make  trial  whether  Baldr  was  as  much  beloved
as  men  said — '  If  all  things,  both  quick  and  dead,  in  all  the  worlds,


LXIV  THE    POEtlC    EDDA.

shall  weep  for  Baldr,  then  shall  he  fare  home  to  the  gods,  but  if  aught
refuse,  let  Hel  keep  what  she  has.'  Then  Hermod  arose,  and  Baldr
brought  him  forth  from  the  hall,  and  gave  him  the  ring  Draupnir  to
bear  to  Odin  as  a  token  of  remembrance,  while  Nanna  sent  a  veil  to
Frigg  and  a  golden  veil  to  Fulla.  Then  Hermod  went  his  way  home
to  Asgarth,  and  told  them  all  the  things  which  he  had  seen  and
heard."

The  rest  of  Snorri's  account  and  how  Baldr  could  not  be  delivered
is  given  with  the  Fragments  (p.  273).

Other  Icelandic  sources  of  this  myth  are  found  in  allusions  of  the
skalds,  and  in  the  description  of  the  bale-fire  in  Hus-drapa  by  Ulf
Uggason.  Throughout  there  is  little  discrepancy  and  confusion  ;
indeed,  if  a  knowledge  of  Baldr  had  been  confined  to  the  North,  he
might  have  rested  in  peace.  But  other  nations  claim  to  have  known,
and  perhaps  worshipped  him;  the  Old  English  trace  their  descent
from  Baeldseg,  son  of  Wodan  ;  in  Germany  they  knew  him  as  a  hero,
Phol  (Mersburger  Spruche)  ;  in  Denmark  strange  rites  were  observed,
with  burning  of  rings  at  Baldershagi  (Friftofssaga).  In  the  latter
country  alone,  however,  do  we  find  any  legend  corresponding  to  the
above.  Saxo  relates  how  Hotherus,  a  Swedish  king,  wooed  and  won
Nanna,  a  Norwegian  princess;  but  Balderus  also  loved  her,  and  the
two  princes  long  fought  for  the  maiden,  until  the  latter  was  slain  by  a
magic  sword.  In  this  account  Hod  appears  as  the  hero  of  the  story,
and  is  beloved  by  Nanna.  Baldr  is  the  villain,  and  like  other  Old
Norse  gods  he  is  degraded  by  Saxo  to  a  demi-god.  He  is  invulnerable
to  all  weapons  except  the  sword  which  Hotherus  wins  from  the  wood-
spirit,  Miming.  In  certain  features  the  Danish  story  may  be  regarded
as  the  older  version  ;  it  is  less  exalted  in  tone,  and  nearer  to  folklore
than  to  literature.  Loki's  share  in  the  deed,  Hermod's  ride  to  Hel,
and  the  weeping  for  Baldr  are  probably  late  additions  to  the  myth.

As  to  whether  the  sword  or  the  mistletoe  is  the  older  weapon  it  is
difficult  to  decide.  A  fateful  object  with  which  the  life  of  a  hero  is
bound  up  is  a  common  motive  in  mythology  or  fairy  tale ;  sometimes  it
is  a  sword  or  a  wand,  sometimes  a  charmed  drink,  or  even  some  beast
or  bird.  In  Voluspa  (st.  32)  the  mistletoe  is  described  in  this  light,
and  if,  as  Frazer  suggests,  Baldr  does  indeed  represent  the  tree  spirit
of  an  oak,  then  his  life  may  be  said  to  reside  in  the  fair  and  slender
plant  which  remains  green  in  winter  when  the  oak  tree  seems  to  die.

The  dead  Baldr  has  suffered  yet  more  than  the  living.     A  helpless


INTRODUCTION.  LXV

victim,  the  prey  of  critics,  he  has  been  rent  asunder,  and  his  whole  life
story  distributed  in  fragments  to  the  different  sources  whence  it  came
— nature  myths,  primitive  worship,  poetic  fancy,  legendary  history,
Christian  influence,  classical  lore.  Theorists  on  all  these  topics  have
taken  Baldr  as  trheir  subject  and  encircled  his  name  with  hybrid  myths,
and  drawn  new  pictures  of  his  death  scene.  Almost  worthy  of  him  is
that  of  the  glorious  sun-god  who  perishes  daily,  or  perhaps  yearly,  and
with  him  his  wife,  the  summer  fruit  and  blossom ;  or  that  in  which  he
is  seen  as  the  incarnate  spirit  of  nature's  growth  and  life,  which  seems
to  die  during  the  winter  months,  but  which  in  the  spring  time  will  be
born  anew.  This  interpretation  of  Baldr  as  a  tree  spirit,  and  of  his
death  as  the  poet's  description  of  a  heathen  rite,  is  fully  discussed  by
Frazer  in  "  The  Golden  Bough."  He  shows  how  universal  among
nations  was  the  offering  of  a  human  victim,  not  in  sacrifice  to  some
special  deity,  but  in  the  performance  of  a  magic  drama  by  which  men
sought  to  assist  nature  through  imitation  of  her  work.  Savage  and
primitive  peoples  have  often  thought  to  make  rain  and  sunshine  by
sprinkling  water  and  lighting  fires ;  so  too,  in  spring  time,  the  death  of
the  old  tree  spirit  and  the  birth  of  the  new  might  be  enacted  and
furthered  by  human  representatives.  It  is  true  that  many  legends  and
customs  may  be  interpreted  in  this  light,  but  it  does  not  serve  to  explain
the  Baldr  myth.  There  are  no  grounds,  nor  any  details  in  his  history,
even  with  the  ingenious  use  of  the  mistletoe,  by  which  Baldr,  as  we
know  him,  can  be  transformed  into  a  tree  spirit.

Another  picture  of  ancient  ceremonial  is  drawn  by  Kauffman.  In
this  scene  Baldr  is  brought  forth  as  the  scapegoat :  for  men  deemed  it
possible  to  expel,  not  merely  the  decaying  spirit  of  vegetative  life,  but
all  the  evils,  physical  and  moral,  which  assailed  them.  To  serve  this
purpose  a  scapegoat  was  chosen  to  bear  the  ills  of  humanity.  In  early
days  his  person,  reserved  for  a  special  end,  was  sacred  and  tabooed.
No  dishonour  was  attached  to  his  vocation,  and  the  higher  the  victim,
who  might  be  a  king  or  even  a  god,  the  more  efficacious  was  the
sacrifice.  Subsequently  the  scapegoat  was  degraded,  and  became  an
object  of  shame,  who  was  chosen  from  among  criminals  and  outcasts,
as  in  the  Pharmakion  at  Athens,  where  a  human  victim  was  sacrificed
as  late  as  the  fifth  century.  May  there  not  have  been  a  time  among
the  German  nations  when  Baldr,  the  most  innocent  and  lovable  of  all
the  gods,  was  sacrified  in  yearly  ceremony  for  his  kind  and  for
humanity  ?  Whatever  the  truth  may  be  as  to  the  origin  of  the  myth,

I  I


LXVi  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

it  is  certainly  as  a  scapegoat  that  he  figures  in  the  Edda.  Weird  was
fast  overtaking  the  old  faulty  war-gods,  and  the  first  victim  was
innocent  Baldr.

Both  these  last  theories  recall  acts  of  ancient  ritual.  We  come
now  to  another  in  which  Baldr  is  the  impersonation  i>f  an  idea,  the
conception  of  a  Christ  in  Old  Norse  religion,  which  arose  from  the
need  of  humanity  for  a  god  divine  in  his  beauty  and  goodness,  but
human  in  his  suffering  and  death.  This  suggestion,  however,  demands
too  great  a  power  of  abstraction  from  an  uncultured  people  ;  it  only
explains  the  final  form  of  the  Baldr  myth  as  reinterpreted  by  a  later
age.  Bugge  was  certainly  of  that  opinion  when  he  attempted  to  show
that  the  death  scene  as  given  in  the  Edda  is  only  a  copy  of  the
Christian  sacrifice.  Loki  represents  Lucifer,  and  Hod  the  blind
Longinus  as  they  were  conceived  in  the  traditions  of  the  Middle  Ages.
Just  as  the  eye  is  beginning  to  grow  accustomed  to  this  transformation
scene,  and  to  recognise  familiar  features  and  real  correspondence,  it
changes  anew,  and  Baldr,  passing  into  Balderus,  becomes  Achilles;
Hod  or  Hotherus  is  seen  as  Paris,  and  Nanna  as  CEnone.  There  is
this  truth  in  Bugge's  theory,  that  the  first  conception  of  Baldr  must
have  undergone  gradual  transformation  with  a  nation's  developing
thought,  and  assumed  in  some  degree  the  form  and  colour  of  external
influences.  But  it  is  difficult  to  follow  a  change  so  sudden  and
complete.

The  common  sense  theory  which  sifts  fact  from  fiction  has  given
us  one  other  picture  of  Baldr.  From  the  dim  background  of  history  he
steps  forth,  some  old  king  who  seems  more  like  a  god  when  thus  beheld
in  the  twilight  of  past  days.  His  name,  which  means  a  lord  or  prince,
seems  to  confirm  an  explanation  which  always  has  the  semblance  of
probability.  But  the  hero  chosen  by  a  primitive  race  for  such  honours
was  usually  a  glorious  conqueror  or  a  benefactor  of  mankind,  not
the  pathetic  victim  of  a  fruitless  sacrifice.  If  the  myth  has  its
source  in  history,  Saxo's  more  human  love  story  must  be  the  earlier
version.

Let  us  return,  however,  to  the  first  picture.  Baldr  stands  invul-
nerable still.  No  hailing  shower  of  commentary  or  weapon  of  research
has  destroyed  the  beauty  and  reality  of  the  figure  which  Snorri  and  the
Icelandic  poets  have  drawn.


INTRODUCTION.  LXVII

LORI'S     MOCKING.


"There  is  one,"  writes  Snorri,  "who  is  numbered  among  the  gods,
although  some  call  him  their  reviler,  and  the  shame  both  of  gods  and
men.  His  name  is  l-oki,  or  Lopt,  the  Rover  of  Air,  son  of  the  Jotun
Fierce-beater.  His  mother  is  called  Leaf-isle  or  Pine-needle,  and  his
brothers  are  Byleipt  and  Hel-dazzler.  Loki  is  beautiful  and  fair  of
face,  but  evil  of  mind  and  fickle  in  his  ways.  He  is  more  versed  in  the
art  of  cunning  than  others,  and  is  crafty  in  all  things.  Oft  he  brings
the  gods  into  great  plight,  and  delivers  them  oft  by  his  wily  counsel."
This  bright  elusive  figure,  like  a  spark  of  the  fire  which  he  personifies,
kindles  with  life  and  humour  every  tale  into  which  he  enters,  appearing
and  reappearing  in  different  forms,  a  god  in  his  power,  and  a  devil  in
his  deeds.  He  well  deserves  a  place  among  the  portraits  which  art
has  drawn  of  the  latter  personality.  No  stormy  power  of  evil  like  the
Satan  of  Paradise  Lost,  he  yet  provokes  war  in  heaven,  and  snares  by
his  tempting  the  wives  of  gods.  His  rebellion  is  more  dangerous  to
them  than  a  wild  assertion  of  the  individual,  for  he  is  the  undermining
instrument  of  fate.  Compared  too  with  Mephistopheles,  Loki,  rich  in
human  life  and  mirth  and  beauty,  finds  more  victims  among  men  than
the  cold  seducer  of  the  spirit.  In  all  the  more  familiar  myths  of  Snorri's
Edda  he  appears  a  purely  Scandinavian  figure,  of  late  origin  and  possibly
moulded  by  Christian  influence  ;  but  in  the  poems  he  may  be  traced
back  to  some  old  Germanic  fire  god,  perhaps  called  "Logi,"  flame,  who
lent  his  name  and  attributes  to  Loki,  the  "  ender  "  or  destroyer  of  the
gods.  However  this  may  be,  his  double  nature  and  the  poetical  con-
tradictory myths  which  are  told  concerning  him  find  explanation  in
his  origin  as  a  fire  god.  Fire  is  mighty,  beneficent,  life-restoring,  swift,
and  beautiful  to  the  eye  ;  such  character  has  Loki  when,  as  Lodur,  he
bestows  the  gift  of  warmth-  and  goodly  hue  on  man,  when  he  fetches
Idun  out  of  Jotunheim,  and  appears  a  god  of  wondrous  beauty.  But
fire  may  also  be  cruel,  treacherous,  fierce,  and  destroying ;  and  was  it
not  Loki  himself  who  enticed  Idun  out  of  Asgarth,  who  betrayed
Freyja,  mocked  the  gods  at  their  banquet,  worked  the  death  of  Baldr,
and  led  the  Hel  hosts  at  the  Doom  ?  In  all  his  mythical  adventures
Loki  appears  sometimes  as  the  friend  of  the  gods,  and  especially  as  the
companion  of  Odin  and  Hcenir,  and  sometimes  in  alliance  with  the


LXVIII  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

giants.  He  commits  some  folly  or  crime,  he  bring  the  gods  into
danger,  and  then  by  his  power  and  cunning  h'e  extricates  them  and  is
forgiven,  until  he  works  the  evil  which  can  never  be  atoned  or  remedied
—the  death  of  Baldr.  After  this  he  must  suffer  punishment  till
Ragnarok.

"  Loki's  Mocking "  is  the  best  poem  of  its  kind  in  the  whofe
collection  of  the  Edda.  Continually  striving  after  more  and  more
vivid  representation,  Old  Norse  art  has  at  last  attained  its  perfection  in
an  inimitable  dramatic  poem,  where  the  whole  interest  is  centred  in
living  personality.  The  characters  are  drawn  in  masterly  fashion  with
a  neat,  crisp  touch  ;  the  dialogue  is  racy,  humorous,  forcible,  and  has
a  bitterness  which  flavours  the  whole.  Much  skill  is  shown  in  "the
introduction  of  new  speakers,  with  their  ever  varying  tones,  and  quick
repartees.  The  author  is  never  didactic ;  he  has  no  end  in  view  beyond
this  comedy  of  the  fallen,  discredited  gods — or  is  it  not  rather  their
tragedy  ?  For  although  the  collective  poems  of  the  Edda  do  not  give
us  a  complete  history  of  the  gods,  and  the  "earlier  ones  do  not  even
suggest  the  somewhat  ethical  light  in  which  it  is  here  presented,  this
idea  of  tragedy  is  not  a  purely  modern  interpretation.  The  poet  of
Voluspa  regards  the  fall  of  the  gods  as  the  result  of  their  warring,  the
retribution  of  Weird :  the  distinctive  feature  in  the  new  wcrld  is  its
peacefulness.  The  present  poet  has  his  own  notion  of  the  sequence  of
events.  This  is  clearly  one  of  the  latest,  and  the  gods,  as  shown  by
him,  are  so  degenerate  that  they  can  exist  no  more.  The.  banquet
scene  is  a  crisis  in  their  history.  The  Vala  of  the  preceding  poem  had
spoken  the  doom  of  Baldr.  In  her  solemn  accents  was  heard  the  first
note  of  warning,  and  Loki,  with  wild  mocking  words,  pronounces  judg-
ment on  the  rest.

They  are  gathered  for  peaceful  converse  in  the  sea  halls  of  JEgir,
recalling  with  quiet  satisfaction  or  intoxicated  Joy  their  old  deeds  of
glory,  when  in  bursts  a  fierce  intruder,  the  fiery  Loki,  half  demon  in
his  spite  and  cunning,  half  god  in  his  beauty  and  might.  Truths  bitter
and  shameful  he  hurls  at  them,  and  they  shrink  condemned  before  his
unwelcome  revelation,  and  give  him  place  at  their  banquet.  'One  by
one  he  singles  out  the  gods,  and  spares  not  the  goddesses,  and  the
sting  of  each  accusation  lies  in  its  truth.  Bragi  the  poet,  so  ready  in
speech,  is  doubtless  a  boaster  and  a  coward  like  the  singer  Hunferth  in
"  Beowulf;  "  it  is  well  known  that  Odin,  the  High  One,  has  degraded
himself  by  working  magic,  that  Frigg.is  unfaithful,  that  Frey  has


INTRODUCTION.  LXIX

parted  with  his  sword  to  buy  Gerd,  that  Thor  was  outwitted  by
Utgarth-Loki.  Heimdal  and  Tyr  he  can  taunt  only  with  their
sufferings;  in  Baldr  he  can  find  no  stain,  yet  boasts  that  he  himself
was  author  of  the  crime  whereby  the  god  was  slain.  But  Loki,  though
invincible  in  his  words,  cannot  stand  before  Mjollnir,  and  on  the
.entrance  of  the  Thunderer  in  god-like  wrath,  with  a  few  parting  gibes
the  hateful  intruder  takes  flight.  It  is  a  wild  picture  of  disillusion-
ment, painted  in  lurid  colours,  which  are  intensified  by  recalling  the
gloomy  scene  which  comes  before,  the  tragedy  of  Baldr's  death,  and
that  which  follows  the  extinction  of  the  banquet  lights,  the  punishment
of  Loki,  and  the  fulfilment  of  Doom — for  so  events,  as  of  a  story
already  complete,  seem  to  have  shaped  themselves  in  the  poet's  mind.
It  is  a  last  gathering  before  the  round  table  of  the  war-gods  is  dis-
solved. The  very  conception  of  a  Baldr  had  been  their  condemnation,
for  it  was  the  birth  of  a  new  ideal.  Here  the  sceptic  leaves  them,
stripped  of  all  their  old  glory,  shown  as  fickle,  shadowy  beings — the
ever-changing  gods  of  nature.

For  it  is  in  this  light  that  the  poem  must  be  interpreted — as
a  much  obscured  picture  of  elemental  forces.  Loki  figures  through-
out as  the  destructive  fire-demon,  from  his  strife  with  the  peaceful
hearth  fire  on  entering  to  the  last  curse  which  he  hurls  upon  JEgir.
Most  of  his  taunts  and  accusations  may  thus  be  explained,  except
in  passages  such  as  st.  17  and  52,  where  the  myths  of  Idun  and
Skadj'are  unknown.  Frey  and  Freyja,  whose  names  are  masculine
and  feminine  forms  of  the  same  word  (lord  and  lady),  are  in  their
origin  different  aspects  of  the  same  Sun  deity ;  hence  their  close
union  as  brother  and  sister  and  as  husband  and  wife,  but  nothing
further  is  known  of  some  myth  alluded  to  in  st.  30,  which  must  have
grown  up  to  explain  it.  Hence,  too,  the  loss  of  Frey's  sword  in  the
sunbeam  which  he  sent  to  Gerd,  or  earth  (st.  42).  Njord  also  (st.  34)
appears  in  the  character  of  a  peaceful  sea  god;  "who,"  says  Snorri,
"dwells  in  Ship-home  ;  he  rules  the  way  of  the  wind,  and  stills  the,  sea
and  slakes  the  fire  flame.  He  is  not  of  Msir  race,  but  he  was  fostered
in  the  land  of  Wanes,  who  gave  him  as  hostage  to  the  gods,  and  took
in  exchange  one  who  is  called  Hcenir.  Thus  peace  was  made  between
the  gods  and  Wanes."  Loki,  in  st.  36,  accuses  Njord  of  what  is
recounted  of  him  in  Ynglinga  Saga,  that  before  he  came  among  the
JEsir  he  was  married  to  his  sister,  who  bore  him  a  son  and  daughter,
and  Freyja.  As  such  a  union  was  not  permitted  among  the


LXX  THE     POETIC    EDDA.

he  now  declares  Frey  to  be  the  son  of  Skadi.  His  after  history,  how
he  was  sent  on  by  the  gods  as  hostage  into  Jotunheim,  and  was  kept  a
prisoner  there  during  the  long  winter  months  like  ocean  itself  when
held  in  bondage  by  the  frost,  is  told  by  Snorri,  and  given  with  the
Fragments  (p.  271).  As  sea  god,  too,  Hymir's  daughters,  the  glacier
streams,  poured  themselves  into  his  mouth  (st.  34).

Drawn  from  some  nature  myth  must  be  the  allusions  of  st.  26.
Odin,  as  heaven  god,  has  a  wife  of  like  nature,  Frigg ;  but,  in  less
exalted  character,  he  is  also  the  husband  of  the  Earth  goddess,  Jord.
Does  Frigg  allow  herself  to  be  wooed  by  Odin's  brothers  Vili  and  Ye",
who  are  again  different  aspects  of  himself,  as  the  cloud  goddess,  who  is
made  the  sport  of  the  wind  in  all  its  moods  ?  Frigg's  unfaithfulness  in
Ynglinga  Saga  is  told  as  traditional  history  of  Odin,  the  race  founder ;
it  occurred  during  his  banishment.  Not  he  alone  appears  under
varying  forms  as  a  nature  god,  but  Frigg  and  Freyja  have  their
shadowy  image  in  Gefjon  (st.  2),  mentioned  by  Snorri  as  a  "maiden
who  is  served  by  such  as  die  unwed."  Here,  like  Frigg,  she  has  fore-
knowledge of  fate,  and  like  Freyja  she  owns  the  famous  necklace
(p.  131),  which  was  won  by  Heimdal,  "  the  fair  youth  "  (st.  20),  from
Loki,  who  had  stolen  it.

Idun,  the  wife  of  Bragi,  appears  but  this  once  in  the  poems.
Snorri  says — "  She  keeps  in  her  casket  those  apples  whereof  the  gods
eat  when  they  wax  old,  and  which  make  them  young  again  ;  thus  they
have  given  a  great  treasure  into  the  keeping  of  Idun,  which  once  was
well  nigh  lost."  These  words  recall  one  of  the  most  famous  incidents
in  the  history  of  the  gods,  which  involved  the  slaying  of  Thiazi  (st.  50)
and  Njord's  periods  of  exile.  Loki,  when  journeying  with  Odin  and
Hcenir,  had  once  been  made  prisoner  by  the  giant  Thiazi,  and  was
released  only  on  promise  of  betraying  Idun  to  the  giants,  who,  like
Freyja,  was  coveted  by  them  as  a  summer  goddess.  He  enticed  her
out  of  Asgarth  by  saying  he  had  found  apples  as  wondrous  as  her  own.
"  Then  there  was  walling  among  the  gods  at  the  loss  of  Idun,  and  ere
long  they  waxed  grey-haired  and  old.  They  gathered  in  council,  and
each  asked  the  other  what  he  knew  last  concerning  Idun,  and  it  was
found  that  she  was  last  seen  going  forth  from  Asgarth  with  Loki."
The  latter,  to  save  his  life,  donned  Freyja's  falcon  plumes  and  flew  into
Jotunheim,  and  fetched  back  Idun  in  the  form  of  a  nut.  Thiazi  pur-
sued him  as  an  eagle,  and,  just  missing  him,  flew  into  a  fire  which  the
gods  had  kindled  outside  the  walls  of  Asgarth.  His  wings  were  burnt,


INTRODUCTION.  i.xxi

and  there  he  was  slain.  Skadi,  his  daughter,  demanded  vengeance,  and
would  make  peace  only  on  two  conditions — one,  that  the  gods  should
make  her  laugh,  which  only  Loki  could  do  by  acting  the  part  of  a
buffoon  ;  secondly,  that  she  should  choose  a  husband  among  them,  and
she  chose  Njord  (p.  271).

Even  more  famous  than  this  occurrence  was  the  binding  of  Fenrir
by  Tyr,  the  god  who  accompanied  Thor  in  his  quest  after  the  cauldron.
According  to  Snorri,  "he  is  the  best  and  bravest  hearted  of  all  the
gods,  who  rules  victory  in  battle."  It  appears  from  his  name  that  he
once  owned  a  more  distinguished  place  than  that  of  war-god.  Sanskrit
dyam,  Greek  Zeus,  Latin /wpiter,  Old  High  German  Ziu,  Old  English
7'wesday,  Old  Norse  Tyr,  are  all  derived  from  the  same  Germanic  root
div,  to  shine,  which  must  originally  have  belonged  to  the  Heaven  god.
Snorri  relates  how  Loki  had  three  terrible  children  by  the  giantess
Sorrow-bringer — Fenrir,  the  World-serpent,  and  Hel.  "All-father  bade
the  j^ods  bring  them  to  him,  and  he  cast  the  Serpent  into  the  deep,  where
it  lies  encircling  all  lands,  and  grown  so  huge  that  it  bites  its  own  tail.
Hel  he  cast  into  Mist-home  ;  and  the  Wolf  was  reared  at  home.  Tyr
alone  had  courage  to  approach  him  with  food.  And  when  they  beheld
how  he  waxed  mightier  each  day  they  remembered  the  prophecy,  how.
it  was  foretold  that  lie  should  work  their  woe.  And  after  they  had
taken  counsel  together  they  forged  a  very  strong  fetter  called  Landing,
and  brought  it  to  the  Wolf  and  bade  him  try  his  strength  upon  it.
Seeing  that  it  was  not  over  mighty,  Fe'nrir  let  the  gods  bind  him  as
they  willed,  and  at  his  first  struggle  the  fetter  was  broken.  Thus  he
loosed  himself  from  Laeding.

"  Then  the  gods  forged  another  fetter,  twice  as  strong,  which  they
called  Dr6mi,  and  bade  the  Wolf  try  his  strength  upon  this,  and  told
him  that  he  would  become  famed  for  his  might  if  a  chain  of  such
forging  would  not  hold  him.  Fenrir  knew  well  how  strong  was  the
fetter,  but  he  knew  likewise  that  he  had  waxed  mightier  since  he  broke
Laeding.  Moreover,  it  came  into  his  mind  that  one  must  needs  risk
somewhat  for  the  sake  of  fame,  and  he  allowed  himself  to  be  bound.
When  the  gods  said  they  were  ready  Fenrir  shook  himself,  and  loosened
the  fetter  till  it  touched  the  ground  ;  then  he  strove  fiercely  against  it
and  spurned  it  off  him,  and  broke  it  so  that  the  pieces  flew  far  and
wide.  Thus  Fenrir  freed  himself  from  Dr6mi.

"  Then  were  the  gods  filled  with  fear  and  deemed  they  would  never
be  able  to  bind  the  Wolf,  and  All-father  sent  Skirnir,  Frey's  shining


LXXII  THE    POETIC    EDDA.

courier,  down  te  the  Underworld,  where  dwelt  the  Dark  Elves  or
dwarfs,  who  forged  for  him  the  fetter  called  Gleipnir.  Out  of  six
things  they  wrought  it — the  footfalls  of  cats,  the  beards  of  women,  the
roots  of  mountains,  the  sinews  of  bears,  the  breath  of  fi>h,  and  the
spittle  of  birds.  It  was  soft  and  smooth  as  a  silken  band,  yet  strong
and  trusty  withal."

The  Wolf  would  consent  to  be  bound  only  with  this  fetter  on
conditiort  that  one  among  the  gods  would  lay  a  hand  in  his  mouth.
"  And  each  god  looked  at  the  other,  and  weened  that  here  was  choice
of  two  ills;  but  none  made  offer  until  Tyr  put  forth  his  right  hand,
and  laid  it  in  the  Wolf's  mouth."  So  they  bound  Fenrir,  and  watched
him  struggle,  while  the  fetter  grew  tighter  and  sharper,  "  and  they
laughed,  one  and  all,  save  Tyr  alone,  who  lost  his  hand."  But  this
attempt,  as  with  Baldr,  to  stay  the  course  of  Weird  is  in  vain,  and  the
Wolf  will  remain  bound  only  till  Ragnarok.

St.  60  alludes  to  that  luckless  journey  of  Thor's  into,  Jotunheim
(p.  xlviii.),  when  he  was  so  many  times  outwitted  by  Utgarth-loki,  who
is  here  called  Skrymir.  On  this  occasion  the  giant  had  offered  to  carry
the  provisions  of  the  gods  with  his  own,  and  he  bound  them  up  so
lightly  that  Thor  could  not  loosen  the  knot.

This  poem  is  a  review  of  the  whole  life-history  of  the  gods.  It
recalls  all  the  main  events  which  took  place  in  their  midst,  it  indicates
the  part  played  by  each  character ;  but  the  sceptical  attitude  of  the
writer  can  best  be  seen  by  comp'aring  it  with  the  dignity  and  pathos  of
the  poem  which  follows  Snorri's  Fragments,  Voluspa.  The  Fragments
themselves  have  already  been  explained,  where  possible,  by  similar
passages  in  the  Poetic  Edda.


THE     SOOTHSAYING     OF     THE     VALA.


In  Voluspa  the  gods'  history  is  reviewed  once  more  from  begin-
ning to  end,  this  time  by  one  who  sees  it  in  its  truest  light — the  artist.
Just  touched,  as  it  seems,  by  later  influence  and  new  ideals,  this  poem
cannot  be  taken  as  primitive,  or  as  the  work  of  one  who  held  the
mythical  fancies  as  religious  beliefs.  The  old  gods  have  had  their  day,
their  story  is  complete  ;  but  once  more  it  is  told  before  it  is  forgotten,
in  an  age  when  their  nature  and  strivings  are  yet  understood.  Some


INTRODUCTION.  LXXIII

poet,  who  has  seen  truth  in  the  beauty  of  these  old-world  tales,  has
endeavoured  to  give  them  a  unity  which  is  still  retained  in  spite  of  all
after  meddling  with  his  work.  It  is  seen  in  the  thread  which  runs  like
a  guiding  principle  throughout — the  bond  of  Weird  which  weaves  itself
inch  by  inch  out  of  the  acts  of  gods  and  men.  As  we  have  shown,  this
poem  is  the  conscious  recognition  of  a  principle  which  must  exist  in  any
mythology  founded  on  a  religion  of  nature.  For  this  reason  it  needs
to  be  read  both  first  and  last — first,  because  it  sums  up  and  inter-
prets the  other  poems;  and  last,  because  without  a  previous  knowledge
of  its  myths  the  Vala's  words  can  scarcely  be  understood.  Even  with
such  knowledge  as  we  have  already  gathered  some  passages  cannot  be
explained,  owing  to  lost  connections  and  forgotten  incidents  ;  others
because  their  difficulty  arises  from  the  nature  of  mythology  itself,  with
its  rational  and  irrational  ideas,  its  blendings  of  poetry  and  superstition,
and  the  thoughts  of  one  age  with  those  of  another.  But,  as  the  poet
himself  has  seen,  little  beauty  and  no  truth  can  be  revealed  in  the
detailed  rehearsal  of  myths  by  which  men  have  sought  to  represent  the
mysteries  of  life.  He  has  given  rather  the  spirit  in  which  they  tried  to
grasp  them.  The  Old  Norsemen  turned  a  serious  face  towards  life,
and  refused  to  regard  it  either  as  a  playground  or  a  home  of  rest ;  it
was  essentially  a  field  of  endeavour  and  of  strife  between  man  and
nature,  god  and  Jotun,  powers  of  good  and  evil.  All  this  is  echoed  in
the  struggle  of  the  gods  with  Weird,  the  power  and  deep  war-notes  of
the  poem,  the  solemnity  of  tone  which  is  relieved  at  times  by  a  quiet
rejoicing  in  the  mere  movement  and  activities  of  life.  Peculiar,  too,
was  the  attitude  of  the  Norseman  towards  the  supernatural.  Mysteries
to  him  were  not  further  mystified  by  speculation  or  emotion,  but  as
such  they  were  left  and  took  their  place  among  the  factors  of  his  daily
life,  where  all  else  was  tangible  and  definite  to  the  eye.  We  can  well
imagine  such  an  attitude  of  mind  arising  among  men  who  had  been
brought  to  dwell  in  a  land  where  nature  is  full  of  mystery,  and  who
were  forced  to  live  a  practical  and  strenuous  life  in  conflict  with  powers
only  half  understood.  Loneliness  and  dim  perils  of  ice  and  snow
became  a  part  of  their  every-day  existence.  Hence  the  atmosphere
and  setting  of  the  poem — its  background,  dim  and  misty,  grey  and
subdued  in  tone,  lit  only  by  aurora  gleams  of  imagination  ;  and  its
foreground,  with  the  well-defined  and  vivid  pictures.

Characteristic,  too,  is  the  figure  of  the  Vala,  so  called  probably,

K  K


LXXIV  THE    POETIC    EDDA.

though  the  point  is  much  disputed,  from  the  staff  which  she  carried.*
She  was  a  wandering  prophetess,  who,  clad  in  her  fur  cap  and  her
dark  robes,  went  from  house  to  house,  foretelling  and  divining  hidden
things.  The  power  of  second  sight  which  she  claimed  was  common,
not  only  to  such  as  she,  but  to  many  a  good  housewife  in  Icelandic
sagas.  But  while  those  so  gifted  knew  only  of  trivial  matters,  inter-
preted dreams  and  omens,  advised  and  warned,  this  Vala,  addressing
all  kindreds  of  the  earth,  reveals  the  fate  and  history  of  the  world.
Like  the  witch  in  Baldr's  Dreams,  she  has  been  called  up  from  the
dead,  and,  like  the  Mighty  Weaver,  she  is  one  of  those  primaeval  beings
who  remember  all  things  ;  and  she  recalls  in  visionary  scenes,  one  by
one,  the  great  events  of  time.  Snorri  has  vainly  attempted  to  bring
sequence  and  order  into  his  corresponding  description,  and  has  invented
details  which  spoil  the  grandeur  of  that  given  by  the  Vala.  For  want
of  better  authority,  however,  we  are  often  obliged  to  rely  upon  him  for
explanations.

She  tells  first  of  the  creation.  In  the  beginning  was  chaos,  when
as  yet  there  was  no  heaven  or  earth — only,  in  the  north,  a  region  of
snow  and  ice ;  and,  in  the  south,  one  of  fire  and  heat,  with  a  yawning
gap  between,  from  which  life  arose  in  the  form  of  Ymir,  the  stirring,
rustling,  sounding  Jotun,  followed  by  others  of  his  kind,  born  out  of
the  elements,  and  as  yet  hardly  to  be  distinguished  from  them.  Then
the  gods  were  born,  who  forthwith  made  war  upon  these  giant  powers,
and,  half  subduing  them,  they  ordered  the  universe  with  its  worlds  of
gods  and  elves,  of  dwarfs  and  giants,  of  men — the  living  in  Midgarth,
the  dead  in  Hel,  all  held  in  the  sheltering  embrace  of  a  great  World
Tree  ;  but  from  whence  sprang  this  Tree,  or  when  and  how  it  grew,
not  even  the  giants  could  tell.

Sun,  Moon,  and  stars  were  set  in  heaven,  and  when  Sun  turned
her  face  towards  Earth,  and  shone  upon  its  "  threshold "  stones,
it  brought  forth  fruit,  and  its  bare  surface  was  overspread  with
green.  But  as  yet  the  paths  of  the  heavenly  bodies  had  not  been
decreed.  What  did  Sun  do  in  her  perplexity  ?  How  did  she  fling  her
right  hand  over  the  rim  of  heaven  ?  Did  she  appear  to  the  spectator
to  glide  cm  towards  the  right,  and  linger  in  the  northern  heavens
without  knowing  the  hall  of  her  setting  ?  Did  she  face  round  from  the

*  Zsf.d.a.,  vol.  v.,  p.  42;  Norsk.  Hist.  Tidsskr.,  vol.  iv.,  p.  169;    Golther,  />.  652,
But  cf  Vigfusson,  p.  721 ;  Anz.f.d.  Alt.,  xii,  p.  49,  note.


INTRODUCTION.  LkxV

south,  and  marching  back  eastward,  fling  her  own  right  hand  over  the
horizon,  and  set  in  the  east  ?  Or  have  we  in  St.  5  a  description  of  the
midnight  sun  dipping  for  a  moment  below  the  horizon,  and  then  rising
to  put  to  shame  Moon,  who  had  not  yet  learned  his  secret  influence
over  the  destiny  of  man,  and  the  stars,  who  knew  not  their  courses  ?
For  the  first  time  the  gods  gathered  in  council  in  their  holy  place  by
the  Well  of  Weird  to  order  this  matter ;  again  they  met  to  rescue  the
humble  dwarf  folk,  who  had  been  left  half  created  as  the  maggots
which  crawled  out  of  Ymir's  flesh.  They  were  given  human  form  and
a  share  in  creative  power,  but  all  their  work,  the  forging  of  secret
treasures,  they  must  do  beneath  the  ground.

Then  followed  the  greatest  act  of  creation,  concerning  which  the
gods  held  no  council,  for  it  came  to  pass  in  the  course  of  destiny.
When  Sun,  obeying  the  law  of  her  own  being,  had  first  shone  upon
the  world,  vegetative  life  was  quickened  in  the  earthy  matter }  now  the
gods  once  faring  on  their  homeward  way  bestowed,  each  after  his  own
nature,  gifts  upon  two  barren  trees,  and  human  life  was  awakened,
with  individuality  and  a  soul.  Odin,  as  the  Wind  god,  gave  them
breath,  which  has  ever  been  held  as  the  emblem  of  the  spirit,  or  even
as  spirit  itself.  Hoenir,  of  whom  little  is  known,  except  that  he  was
wise  (see  below),  gave  an  understanding  mind.  Loki  (here  called
Lodur),  the  fire-god,  gave  warm  blood  and  the  bright  hue  of  life,  «

Meanwhile,  what  Snorri  calls  the  "golden  age"  was  passing,  when
the  gods  were  building  the  fair  homes  mentioned  by  Griinmr,  rejoicing
in  their  work,  in  their  play,  and  doubtless,  too,  in  their  love.  It  must
have  been  then  that  Bragi  wooed  Idun  with  fluent  tongue,  that  Baldr
wedded  Nanna,  that  Thor's  heart  was  given  to  Sif  the  golden-haired,
the  most  guileless  among  all  the  goddesses.

But  soon  this  peaceful  age  was  broken.  The  first  shadow  of  Doom
fell  as  three  mighty  maidens  passed  from  Jotunheim,  and  sat  them
down  beneath  the  tree  Yggdrasil.  These  fair  Norns,  who  wrote  the
past  and  present  on  their  tables  and  laid  down  the  future  lots  of  men,
are  later  forms  of  Weird,  personified  as  a  grim  goddess  of  fate,  and
known  to  all  Germanic  races.

Then  swiftly  followed  the  first  war  among  kindred  races  of  the
gods,  the  Msir  and  the  Wanes.  From  the  last  more  cultured  tribe
there  came  a  witch  called  Golden-draught  among  the  warlike  .Ksir.
Two  things  she  taught  this  simple  folk — the  lust  for  gold,  and  the  use  of
magic.  The  last  was  deemed  an  unpardonable  sin  among  Germanic


LxxVi  THE    POETIC    EDDA.

nations,  and  was  punished  by  burning.  In  like  manner  the  JEsir  sought
to  destroy  Golden-draught  by  burning  her  in  Odin's  hall ;  but  in  vain,
for  as  many  times  as  they  burned  her  she  was  born  anew  (p.  liv.).
War  broke  out  and  the  Wanes  demanded  were-gild,  and  a  council  of
peace  was  helcl ;  but  the  War-father  arose,  and  hurling  his  spear  gave
the  signal  for  strife  to  rage  anew.  It  ended  in  the  storming  and
destruction  of  Asgarth  by  the  Wanes.  Here  a  gap  in  the  poem  or  a
timely  clouding  of  the  Vala's  vision  hides  the  shame  and  defeat  of  the
gods.  In  'Ynglinga  Saga  (iv.)  it  is  told  as  legendary  history  that  after
a  while  both  sides  became  weary  of  a  war  in  which  victory  fell  now  to
the  one  and  now  to  the  other,  and  in  which  the  countries  of  both
were  spoiled.  So  they  held  a  peace  meeting,  and  made  a  truce  and
exchanged  chieftains.  The  Wanes  sent  their  noblest,  Njord,  with  his
children  Frey  and  Freyja  ;  and  the  ^Esir  sent  Hcenir,  who  was  deemed
well  fitted -to  be  a  ruler,  and  with  him  they  sent  also  one  of  great
understanding,  Mirriir,  in  exchange  for  Kvasir,  the  wisest  among  the
Wanes.  •  Hcenir  was  made  a  chief  in  Wane-home.  When  the  people
found  that  he  could  give  no  counsel  without  Mimir,  but  said  on  all
occasions — "  Let  others  decide,"  they  thought  themselves  cheated  by
the  vEsir,  and  cut  off  Mimir's  head  and  sent  it  to  Odin.  He  smeared
it  with  herbs,  and  sang  rune-songs  and  gave  it  power  of  speech,
through  which  he  learned  many  secret  things.  According  to  Snorri,
Kvasir  was  a  wondrous  being  fashioned  by  all  the  gods,  from  whose
blood  the  Song-mead  was  brewed  (p.  xxviii.).  In  both  accounts  the
details  are  evidently  of  late  invention.  This  war  between  strength  and
valour  on  the  one  side,  art  and  skill  on  the  other,  is  like  a  shadowy
recollection  of  a  time  in  history,  when  the  barbaric  children  of  the
North  were  dazzled  by  Roman  gold  and  Roman  civilisation.  But  such
a  strife,  with  the  first  weakening  of  the  war  powers,  was  inevitable  in
the  story  of  the  gods.*

Immediately  following  this  incident,  it  would  seem  from  the  allu-
sion of  the  Vala  (st.  25),  took  place  an  event  which  Snorri  recounts —
a  fierce  struggle  with  the  Jotuns,  and  a  crafty  attempt  on  their  part
to  win  Freyja,  the  summer-goddess,  who  had  just  been  brought  to
Asgarth.  The  gods  were  in  need  of  a  builder  to  raise  anew  the  walls
of  their  dismantled  city,  which  by  the  last  war  had  been  left  open  to


*  For  the  war  between  the  gods  and  Wanes,  see  article  by  Dt.  and  HI.  ;   Beit.,  vol.
xviii,  p.  542.


INTRODUCTION.  Lxivll

the  inroads  of  Frost  and  Mountain-giants.  A  craftsman  appeared  and
offered  to  do  the  work  in  three  half  years,  but  asked  as  his  payment
Freyja,  and  with  her  the  Sun  and  Moon.  At  the  evil  counsel  of  Loki,
and  seemingly  in  the  absence  ot  Thor,  they  agreed  to  his  demands  if
he  could  finish  the  work  in  a  single  winter,  before  the  first  day  of
summer,  otherwise  his  reward  would  be  forfeited.  He  worked  night
and  day  with  the  help  of  his  giant  horse  Svadilfari,  and  the  walls  were
well  nigu  complete  when  it  still  wanted  three  days  before  the  summer.
Then  the  gods  took  counsel,  and  questioned  one  another  "  who  had
thus  planned  to  send  Freyja  as  bride  into  Jotunheim,  who  had  filled
all  the  sky  and  heaven  with  darkness  by  taking  thence  the  sun  and
moon  ?  "  It  is  this  scene  which  the  poem  describes,  but  it  tells
nothing  of  what  is  learned  from  Snorri  that  "  the  gods  knew,  one  and
all,  that  he  must  have  counselled  this,  who  ever  counsels  ill,  Loki,  the
son  of  Leaf-isle."  Then  they  laid  hands  upon  him,  and  made  him
swear  to  deliver  them  out  of  their  plight ;  and  he  did  this  by  changing
himself  into  a  mare,  and  enticing  Svadilfari  away  into  the  woods.
"  And  when  the  craftsman  saw  that  he  could  not  finish  the  work  he
flew  into  a  Jotun-rage,  and  the  gods  knew  now  for  certain  that  it  was
one  of  the  Mountain-giants  who  had  come  among  them ;  and  oaths
were  disregarded  and  Thor  was  called,  who  came  even  as  swiftly.
Then  was  Mjollnir  raised  aloft,  and  the  craftsman  received  his  wage ;
but  he  returned  not  into  Jotunheim  with  the  Sun  and  Moon,  for  at  the
first  blow  his  skull  was  broken  into  pieces,  and  he  was  sent  down  to
Mist-hel  beneath."  Once  more  a  scene  of  shame  is  veiled,  for  the
gods  had  broken  faith  with  the  Jo  tuns  in  trying  to  undo  their  own
lolly.

When  the  Vala  resumes,  a  new  part  of  the  poem  has  begun,  and
her  words  become  more  mysterious.  She  is  revealing  now  no  longer
old  tidings  heard  or  things  remembered,  but  secret  knowledge  which
she  has  won  at  night  time  when  she  "sat  out"  enchanting  and  holding
commune  with  the  spirits  of  nature.  On  some  such  occasion,  it  seems
that  Odin  has  come  to  consult  with  her,  but  when  this  occurred  or
whether  she  is  rehearsing  a  past  incident  is  not  made  clear.

She  proves  first  her  power  to  foretell  the  future  by  showing  that
her  knowledge  penetrates  to  the  holiest  secrets  of  the  gods.  She
knows  of  their  pledges — Heimdal's  hearing,  Odin's  eye,  and  Baldr's
life.  Heimdal  can  hear  grass  growing  in  the  earth,  and  wool  on  the
back  of  sheep.  Is  it  his  ear  which  he  has  hidden  in  the  sacred  well


Lxxviri  THE    POETIC    EDDA.

beneath  Yggdrasil  to  obtain  this  wonderful  power  which  he  needs  in
his  watch  against  the  Mountain-giants  ?  And  why  has  Odin  pledged
his  eye  to  Mimir  ?  This  last  question  can  be  answered  only  by  tracing
back  the  history  of  Mimir.  In  German  tradition  he  is  a  wise  teacher
and  wonderful  smith,  who  instructed  Siegfried  and  \Veland;  according
to  Snorri,  he  is  Hcenir's  companion,  whom  the  Wanes  beheaded,  and
who  became  the  friend  and  counsellor  of  Odin ;  in  the  Poetic  Edda  he
is  also  closely  associated  with  the  god,  whose  wisdom,  as  we  have
seen,  is  not  the  natural  attribute  of  his  divinity,  but  is  drawn  from  all
sources.  Giants,  Valas  from  Hel,  ravens  in  the  air  instruct  him,  but
his  friend  of  friends  is  Mimir,  the  Deep-thinker,  with  whom  he  takes
counsel  at  the  Doom.  Mimir  is  a  giant  in  the  older  Edda,  and  guardian
of  a  sacred  well  of  Wisdom,  or  rather,  at  an  earlier  date,  that  well
itself,  from  whose  source  or  head  flowed  the  moisture  used  in  the
writing  of  the  runes  (p.  xxxi.),  and  in  whose  waters  Odin  has  pledged
his  eye  to  gain  insight  into  hidden  things.  A  further  interpretation,
which  Miillenhoff  suggests,  belongs  to  a  still  older  stratum  of  thought
— a  nature  myth  of  the  sun  drawing  precious  moisture  from  the  sea,
and  in  return  casting  its  own  reflection,  its  second  eye,  into  the  deep.
Sun  and  sea,  thus  mutually  dependent  together,  give  nourishment  to
the  world,  as  Odin  and  Mimir  together  bestow  their  wisdom.

In  st.  32  is  mentioned  the  third  and  yet  more  mysterious  pledge,
Baldr's  life  and  fate,  which  are  bound  up  with  the  mistletoe  (p.  Ixiv.).  But
the  description  of  the  Vala  is  now  growing  more  and  more  visualised,
and  she  herself  can  scarce  interpret  the  floating  pictures  which  represent
now  some  future,  now  some  present  scene.  She  is  looking  into  all
the  different  worlds — Earth,  where  the  Valkyries  are  speeding  to  the
battlefields  of  men;  Asgarth,  where  beside  Valholl  the  fateful  mistletoe
is  already  high  upgrown  ;  the  cave  where  she  foresees  the  torment  of
Loki ;  Hel,  where  evil  men  are  suffering  the  penalty  of  their  misdeeds ;
Jotunheim,  with,  its  feasting-hall  of  giants ;  dark  dwarf-land,  where
no  sun  nor  moon  can  penetrate,  lit  only  by  the  glowing  forge  fires  of
.these  active  beings  ;  and  again  eastward  into  Jotunheim,  where  Skoll
was  fostered,  the  dark  wolf-son  of  Fenrir,  who  tollows  the  fleeing  Sun
goddess  across  the  heavens  until  he  clutches  her  in  the  west,  and  stains
all  the  sky  at  sunset  with  crimson  like  the  blood  of  men  (p.  xvi.).

All  these  grim  sights  have  in  them  something  fearful  and  ill-
omened  ;  the  shadow  of  fate  is  growing  darker,  the  Weird  motive  is
heard  more  and  more  clearly.  Now  the  true  "  spaedom  "  of  the  Vala


INTRODUCTION.  LXXIX

begins ;  she  has  turned  to  the  future,  and  foretells  the  Doom  of  the
gods.  But  she  grows  less  visionary ;  the  scene  is  a  twilight  glimpse  of
dawn  ;  she  can  only  see  dimly,  and  she  is  listening — to  the  crowing  of
the  cocks  in  Giant-land,  in  Asgarth,  and  in  Hel,  and  following  the
long  expected  signals  of  alarm  she  hears  a  rumbling  through  all  Jotun-
heim  as  the  giant-enemies  of  the  gods  bestir  themselves  for  battle  ;  the
clashing  of  weapons  in  Valholl  as  the  War-sons  of  Odin  awake  and
pour  forth  through  the  five  hundred  doorways,  while  the  gods  are
gathering  at  the  doomstead  and  holding  speech  together  ;  in  Hel,  the
rending  of  chains — Fenrir  has  broken  loose,  Loki  is  free.  She  hears
the  gleeful  song  of  the  giants'  warder  answered  by  Heimdal  with
the  roaring  blast  of  Gjalla-horn,  which  sounds  through  all  the  worlds.
In  the  earth,  too,  among  men,  she  hears  wars  and  rumours  of  wars,
crashing  of  shields  and  swords ;  from  below  comes  the  groaning  of
the  imprisoned  dwarfs ;  and  throughout,  at  intervals,  waxing  louder
and  wilder,  the  deep  baying  of  the  Hel-hound,  Garm.  Amid  this
tumult  she  catches  another  sound,  more  fearful  still,  the  shivering  and
rustling  of  the  great  Ash,  the  Tree  of  Fate,  as  it  quivers,  but  does  not
fall — and  yet  one  other  sound,  a  voice  in  the  storm,  the  murmur  of
words :  Odin  is  holding  speech  with  Mimir.

Now  light  falls ;  once  more  the  Vala  can  see ;  the  foes  are
gathering  from  all  quarters  on  the  great  battlefield,  which  measures  a
hundred  miles  each  way.  From  the  east  come  Frost  and  Mountain-
giants  ;  from  the  south  come  Fire-giants ;  from  the  north  the  Hel-
hosts,  and  Loki ;  from  the  west  must  come  the  gods,  led  by  Odin,  with
all  his  Chosen  warriors.

In  single  combats  the  last  battle  is  depicted.  Weird  is  triumphant.
A  second  time  must  the  Heaven-goddess  weep,  when  the  War-father  is
devoured  by  Fenrir,  though  vengeance  quickly  follows,  and  the  Wolf
falls  before  Vidar ;  Frey,  who  has  parted  with  the  sword  which  waged
itself,  is  destroyed  by  the  Fire-giant  Surt ;  Thor  meets  once  more  with
the  World  Serpent,  and  still  glorious  in  defeat,  he  slays  and  is  slain.
Thus  the  war-gods  perish,  and  fire  consumes  the  world.

Throughout  this  passage  the  tone  of  the  poem  has  changed.
Solemn  and  meditative  at  first,  or  rippling  blithely  on  through  each
fresh  disclosure  of  life,  it  has  grown  abrupt  and  stormy  with  the
strivings  of  Weird  to  fulfil  itself.  Now  again  it  changes  to  a  tone  of
peaceful  exultation,  which  heralds  the  restitution  of  all  things.  There
is  nothing  visionary  now,  or  mystic,  in  the  scene.  It  is  a  calm,  fresh


LXXX  THE    POETIC    EDDA.

morning  after  the  night  of  storm ;  all  nature  is  at  rest ;  life  is  resumed.
Seldom  do  we  find  in  old  poetry  so  realistic  a  description — the  green
earth  is  still  bathed  with  moisture  ;  the  rushing  of  waterfalls  is  heard  ;
the  living  eagles,  in  contrast  to  the  pale-beaked  monster  of  st.  50,  seek
their  wonted  food  in  mountain  pools.  The  gods  are  come  again,  but
not  all,  for  the  rule  of  the  war-gods  is  at  an  end,  and  their  home  of
battle  will  henceforth  be  the  dwelling-place  of  peace.  It  is  a  con-
tinuation of  a  former  existence,  without  labour  and  without  strife;
old  sports  are  renewed,  old  achievements  are  not  forgotten,  old  mysteries
are  disclosed.  Powers  of  evil  depart,  and  there  comes  a  new  god.  But
here  fresh  mysteries  appear,  and  must  wait  for  solution  by  a  later  poet
who  seeks,  like  the  present  one,  to  explain  existent  myths  in  the  light
of  a  higher  creed.


4  GRIMNISMAL.

6}?inn  ok  Frigg  sdtu  i  Hltyskjalfu  ok  sa  urn  heima  alia.  6)>inn
malti:  'Ser  Jm  Agnar  fostra  )>inn,  hvar  hann  elr  born  v\\>  gygi  i  hellinum  ?
En  Geirr6J?r  fostri  minn  er  konungr  ok  sitr  nu  at  landi.'  Frigg  segir:
'Hann  er  matntyingr  sa,  at  hann  kvelr  gesti  sina,  cf  honum  J>ykkja
ofmargii  koma.'  6|>inn  segir,  at  J?at  er  in  mesta  lygi ;  J>au  ve}>ja  um
)>etta  mal.  Frigg  sendi  eskimey  sina  Fullu  til  Geirr6J>ar.  Hon  baj>
konung  varaz,  at  eigi  fyrgorjn  hanum  fjolkunnigr  ma)>r  sa  er  ]?ar  var
kominn  i  land,  ok  sag)>i  J?at  mark  a,  at  engi  hundr  var  sva  olmr  at  a
hann  mundi  hlaupa.  En  J?at  var  enn  mesti  h6gomi,  at  Geirr6J>r
konungr  vairi  eigi  matg6J?r;  ok  ]>6  laetr  hann  handtaka  )?ann  mann  er  eigi
vildu  hundar  a  ra]?a.  Sa  var  i  feldi  bldm  ok  nefndiz  Grimnir  ok  sagj?i
ekki  fleira  fra  ser,  ]>6tt  hann  vaeri  at  spur);r.  Konungr  let  hann  pina  til
sagna  ok  setja  milli  elda  tveggja,  ok  sat  hann  )?ar  atta  naetr.  Geirro)?r
konungr  atti  )?a  son  tiu  vetra  gamlan  ok  het  Agnarr  eptir  bro)?ur  hans.
Agnarr  gekk  at  Grimni  ok  gaf  hanum  horn  fullt  at  drekka  ok  sag)>i,  at
konungr  gorj?i  ilia,  er  hann  let  pina  hann  saklausan.  Grimnir  drakk
af ;  ]>a  var  eldrinn  sva  kominn,  at  feldrinn  brann  af  Grimni.  Hann
kva}?:

T.     Heitr  est,  hripu]?r !        ok  heldr  til  mikill ;

gongumk  firr,  funi !
loj;i  svi]>nar,         ]>6t  a  lopt  berak,
brinnumk  feldr  fyrir.

2.  Atta  nsetr        satk  milli  elda  her,

svat  mer  manngi  mat  n£  bau)?,
nema  einn  Agnarr,        es  einn  skal  ra|?a
GeirroJ^ar  sunr  Gotna  landi.

3.  Heill  skaltu  Agnarr  !     alls  J?ik  heilan  bi]?r

Veratyr  vesa ;

ejns  drykkjar        J?u  skalt  aldregi
betri  gjold  geta.


THE    SAYINGS    OF    GRIMNIR.  5

Odin  and  Frigg  were  sitting  once  on  Window-shelf,  gazing  out
over  all  the  world.  Said  Odin : — "  Seest  thou  Agnar,  thy  fosterling,
how  he  begets  children  with  a  giantess  in  a  cave  ?  But  Geirrod,  my
fosterling,  is  a  king,  and  rules  over  the  realm."  "  He  is  such  a  meat-
grudger,"  answered  Frigg,  "  that  he  starves  his  guests  when  he  deems
that  too  many  are  come  into  his  halls'."  Odin  swore  that  this  was  the
greatest  lie,  and  they  wagered  on  the  matter.  Frigg  sent  her  hand-
maiden Fulla  to  Geirrod  to  bid  the  king  beware  lest  an  enchanter,  who
had  come  into  the  land,  should  bewitch  him,  and  she  gave  them  this
sign  whereby  he  might  be  known :  no  dog,  however  fierce,  would  assail
him.  Men  had  lied  greatly  in  saying  that  Geirrod  was  not  hospitable,
but  for  all  that  he  caused  a  certain  guest  to  be  seized,  whom  the  dogs
would  not  attack.  He  came  clad  in  a  blue  mantle,  calling  himself
Grimnir,  the  Masked  One,  and  would  tell  nought  beside,  however  much
they  asked  him.  Then  the  king  ordered  him  to  be  tortured  till  he  should
speak,  and  they  set  him  in  the  midst  between  two  fires,  and  eight  nights
he  sat  there.  Geirrod's  son,  who  was  ten  years  old,  and  named  Agnar
after  the  king's  brother,  went  up  to  Grimnir  and  gave  him  to  drink  out
of  a  brimming  horn,  saying  that  the  king  had  done  ill  thus  to  torture
him  without  cause  ;  and  Grimnir  drank.  At  length,  when  the  fire  had
waxed  so  nigh  that  his  mantle  burned  upon  him,  he  spake : —

1.  Fierce  art  thou,  fire  !         and  far  too  great ;

flame,  get  thee  further  away  !
my  cloak  is  scorched        though  I  hold  it  high  ;
my  mantle  burns  before  me.

2.  Eight  nights  have  I  sat        betwixt  the  fires,

while  no  man  offered  me  food,

save  only  Agnar,        the  son  of  Geirrod,

who  alone  shall  rule  the  realm.

3.  Blest  be  thou,  Agnar        the  God  of  all  beings

shall  call  a  blessing  upon  thee :
for  one  such  draught        thou  shalt  never  more
so  fair  a  guerdon  win.


2. — Rule  the  realm  or  land  of  the  Goths,  a  name  used  in  a  general  sense  for
warriors  or  a  nation.


GRIMNISMAL.


4.  Land  es  heilagt         es  ek  liggja  s€

asum  ok  olfum  noer :
enn  i  prityheimi         skal  p6rr  vesa,
unz  of  rjufask  regin.

5.  Ydalir  heita         J?ars  Ullr  hefr

ser  of  gorva  sali ;
Alfheim  Frey         gafu  i  ardaga
tivar  at  tannfe.

6.  Beer's  enn  }>ri]>\,        es  blij>  regin

silfri  J?6k)>u  sali  :
Valaskjalf  heitir         es  velti  ser
ass  i  ardaga.

7.  Sokkvabekkr  heitir  enn  fj6r]n,         enn  far  svalar  knegu

unnir  glymja  yfir  :

|>ar  )?au  6]?inn  ok  Saga         drekka  of  alia  daga
gloj?  or  gollnum  kerum.

8.  Gla)?sheimr  heitir  enn  fimti         )>ars  en  gollbjarta

Valholl  vty  of  J^rumir  ;
en  J?ar  Hroptr         kyss  hverjan  dag
vapndau)?a  vera.

9.  Mjok  es  au)?kent         )>eims  til  6|nns  koma

salkynni  at  sea :

skoptum's  rann  rept,         skjoldum's  salr  J>aki]?r,
brynjum  of  bekki  strait.

IO\  Mjok  es  au);kent        )?eims  til  0)?ins  koma

salkynni  at  sea :

vargr  hangir         fyr  vestan  dyrr
ok  drupir  orn  yfir.


THE    SAYINGS    OF    GRIMNIR.
(The  Twelve  Homes  of  the  Gods.)

4.  Holy  is  the  land        which  yonder  lies

near  the  world  of  gods  and  elves  :

in  the  Home  of  Strength         shall  the  Thunderer  dwell,
even  till  the  Powers  perish.

5.  Yew-dale  is  called         the  realm  where  Ull

hath  set  him  a  hall  on  high  ;
and  Elf-home  that         which  the  gods  gave  Frey
as  tooth-fee  in  days  of  yore.

6.  A  third  home  is  there         whose  hall  is  thatched

with  silver  by  blessed  Powers  ;
Vala-shelf         that  seat  is  named,
which  was  founded  in  former  days.

7.  The  fourth  is  Falling-brook  ;        there,  for  ever,

the  chill  waves  are  rushing  over  ;
while  day  by  day        drink  Odin  and  Saga,
glad-hearted,  from  golden  cups.

8.  The  fifth  is  called  Glad-home,         and  gold-bright  Valholl,

spacious,  lies  in  its  midst  :
there  Odin  shall  choose         his  own  each  day
of  the  warriors  fallen  in  war.

9.  'Tis  easily  known         by  all  who  come

to  visit  Odin's  folk  ;

with  shafts  'tis  raftered,         with  shields  'tis  roofed,
with  byrnies  the  benches  are  strewn.

10.    'Tis  easily  known         by  all  who  come

to  visit  Odin's  folk  ;

there  hangs  a  wolf        'fore  the  western  door,
and  an  eagle  hovers  over.


5-—  Frey,  Elf-home,  see  Introd.  to  Skm.  and  Ls.  st.  43.  Tooth  fee,  gift  to  a  child
at  teething.  7.  —  '•  Falling-brook  V  :  Sokkvabekkr  has  usually  been  rendered  Sinking-
bench  ;  Detter  suggests  the  above.  8.—  Odin,  here  called  Hropt  :  See  Introd.


GRIMNISMAL.

11.  prymheimr  heitir  enn  se'tti,         es  pjazi  bj6,

sa  enn  amatki  jotunn  ;
en  nu  Ska|?i  byggvir,         skir  brityr  go)>a,
fornar  toptir  foj>ur.

12.  Bretyablik  'ru  en  sjaundu,         en  )>ar  Baldr  hefr

s£r  of  gorva  sali  :
a  }>vi  landi         es  ek  liggja  veit
frcsta  feiknstafi.

13.  Himinbjorg  'ru  en  attu,         en  ]>ar  Heimdall  kve]?a

.     .     .     valda  veum  :
)>ar  vor)>r  go]?a         drekkr  i  VECFU  ranni
la?r  enn    o>


14.  Folkvangr  's  enn  niundi,         en  ]>ar  Freyja

sessa  kostum  i  sal  :
halfan  val         hon  kyss  hverjan  dag
en  halfan  6)>inn  a.

15.  Glitnir  's  enn  tiundi,        hann  es  golli  studdr

ok  silfri  )>ak]?r  et  sama  :
en  }>a.r  Forseti         byggvir  flestan  dag
ok  svajfir  allar  sakar.

16.  Noatun  'ru  en  elliftu,         en  )>ar  Njor)>r  hefr

s€r  of  gorva  sali  :
manna  ]?engill         enn  meinsvani
hatimbru]?um  horgi  rac]>r.

17.  Hrisi  vex         ok  havu  grasi

Vicars  land  Vij>i  :

en  ]?ar  mogr         of  l?fzk  af  mars  baki
froskn  at  hefna  fo)?ur.


THI      MAYINGS    OF    GKIMNIK.  9

11.  The  sixth  is  Sound-home,         where  Thiazi  bode,

that  fearful  Jotun  of  yore  ;
now  Skadi  dwells,         fair  bride  of  gods,
in  her  father's  former  home.

12.  The  seventh  is  Broad-gleam  ;         there  hath  Baldr

set  him  a  hall  on  high,

away  in  the  land         where  I  ween  are  found
the  fewest  tokens  of  ill.

13.  The  eighth  is  Heaven-hill ;         world-bright  Heimdal

rules  o'er  its  holy  fanes  :

in  that  peaceful  hall         the  watchman  of  gods
glad-hearted  the  good  mead  quaffs.

14.  The  ninth  is  Folk-field;         Freyja  rules  there

choice  of  seats  in  the  hall :
one  half  the  dead         she  chooses  each  day
but  half  the  War-father  owns.

15.  The  tenth  is  Glistener         pillared  with  gold,

and  eke  with  silver  roofed ;

there  Forseti  dwells         nigh  the  long  day  through,
the  Judge,  and  soothes  all  strife.

16.  The  eleventh  is  Noatun  ;         Njord  in  that  haven

hath  built  him  a  hall  by  the  sea ;
a  prince  of  men,         ever  faultless  found,
he  holds  the  high  built  fanes.

17.  With  brushwood  grows,         and  with  grasses  high,

Wood-home,  Vidar's  land ;

from  his  steed  that  son         of  Odin  shall  show  him
strong  to  avenge  his  sire.

n. — Thiazi,  Skadi,  see  Ls.  st.  50  and  Introd.  Jotun  or  giant ;  J  in  Icelandic  is
pronounced  like  Y  ;  so  also  Frcyja,  Njord.  14. — Freyja  seems  here  to  stand  for  Frigg,
wife  of  Odin,  u'lw  shared  the  slain  with  him.  16. — Njord  in  that  haven;  the  sug-
gested meaning  for  Noatun  is  "Ship-haven,"  see  Fragments  from  Sn.E,  and  Saga-book,
»v.,  797,  192.  17.— Vidar,  see  Vm.  st.  53  :  Vsp.  st.  54.  C


lo  GRIMNISMAL.


18.  (21)     pytr  pund,         unir  pjo)?vitnis

fiskr  fl6J>i  i :

drstraumr        Jjykkir  ofmikill
valglaumi  at  vaj>a.

19.  (23)     Fimm  hundru)>  golfa        ok  of  fjorum  togum

hykk  Bilskirni  me]?  bugum  ;
ranna  )>eira        es  ek  rept  vita
mins  veitk  mest  magar.


20.  (22)     Valgrind  heitir        es  stendr  velli  a

heilog  fyr  helgum  durum  ;
forn's  su  grind,         en  |>at  fai'r  vitu,
hve's  i  las  of  lokin.

21.  (24)     Fimm  hundru]?  dura        ok  of  fjorum  togum

hykk  a  Valhollu  vesa  ;

atta  hundru)^  einherja         ganga  or  einum  durum,
|?as  Ipeir  fara  vij?  Vitni  at  vega.

22.  (18)     Andhrimnir        laetr  i  Eldhrimni


fleska  bazt  :         en  ]>at  fair  vitu,
vi)>  hvat  einherjar  alask.

23.  (19)     Gera  ok  Freka        se)?r  gunntamtyr

hro)?ugr  Herjafo)?r:
en  v\y  vin  eitt        vapngofugr
O]?inn  ED  lifir.


18.  —  The  rearrangement  of  strophes,  which  is  not  an  attempt  at  restoration,  but  made
for  the  sake  of  clearness,  is  indicated  by  figmes  in  parenthesis  corresponding  to  the  strophe
numbering  of  R.


THE    SAYINGS    OF    GRIMNIR.  u

(The  Sky-road  to  Valholl.)

18.  The  Thunder-flood  roars,        while  sports  the  fish

of  the  mighty  Wolf  therein  ;
o'erwhelming  seems        the  flow  of  that  stream
for  the  host  of  slain  to  wade.

19.  Halls  five  hundred         and  forty  more

hath  the  Lightning-abode  in  its  bendings,
of  all  the  high  roofed         houses  I  know,
highest  is  that  of  the  Thunderer.

(Valholl.)

20.  Death-barrier  stands,        the  sacred  gate,

on  the  plain  'fore  the  sacred  doors ;
old  is  the  lattice        and  few  have  learned
how  it  is  closed  on  the  latch.

21.  Doors  five  hundred,         and  forty  more

I  ween  may  be  found  in  Valholl ;
and  eight  hundred  Chosen         pass  through  each  one
when  they  fare  to  fight  with  the  Wolf.

22.  There  Sooty-face  boils        in  Sooty-flame

the  boar  called  Sooty-black  ;
'tis  the  best  of  fare,         which  few  have  heard
is  the  chosen  warriors'  food.

23.  Glorying,  the  battle-wont         Father  of  Hosts

feeds  Ravener  and  Greed,  his  wolves  ;
but  on  wine  alone         ever  Odin  lives,
the  Weapon-famed  god  of  war.

18. — Thunder-flood. — The  river  name  Thund  may  thus  be  connected  with  Id.
Jmnor  by  the  suffix  ]?  (V),  or,  meaning  Swollen,  with  Id.  ]>indan  (B).  The  fish  of  the
mighty  Wolf  is  according  to  G.  the  sun,  or  prey  of  the  wolf  of  darkness,  st.  39 :  she  shines
in  the  heavens  till  swallowed  by  Fenrir  ;  see  Vm.  46.  Cf.  Dt.  HI.  who  translate  the
Wolfs  flood  or  stream  which  flowed  from  his  jaws,  and  connect  the  passage  with  the
storming  of  Asgarth  by  the  Wanes  mentioned  in  Vsp.  24.  21.— See  Vsp.  st.  43.  23,
24. — Wolves,  ravens  :  these  particulars  are  taken  from  Sn.E.,  who  had  evidently  othtr
sources  than  Grm.for  his  description.


12  GRIMNISMAL.

24.  (20)     Huginn  ok  Muninn         fljuga  hverjan  dag

jormungrund  yfir:

oumk  of  Hugin         at  hann  aptr  ne  komi,
?6  seumk  meirr  of  Munin.


25.  Hetynin  heitir  geit         es  stendr  hollu  &.  [Herjaf6j>rs]

ok  bitr  at  Lfcraj^s  limum  ;
skapker  fylla         hon  skal  ens  skira  mja]>ar,
knaat  su  veig  vanask.

26.  Hjortr  heitir  Eik|>yrnir        es  stendr  hollu  a  [Herjafo|>rs]

ok  bitr  af  Lf6ra|>s  limum  ;
en  af  hans  hornum         drypr  i  Hvergelmi,
}>a)>an  eigu  votn  oil  vega.

27.  Si]?  ok  Vty,         Ssckin  ok  JEk'm,

Svol  ok  Gunn]?ro,         Fjorm  ok  Fimbutyul,

Rin  ok  Rinnandi,
Gipul  ok  Gopul,         Gomul  ok  Geirvimul,

J>sor  hverfa  of  hodd  go)?a  ;
J?yn  ok  Vin,         poll  ok  Holl,

Gra]?  ok  Gunn]>orin.

28.  Vin  a  heitir,         onnur  Vegsvinn,


Nyt  ok  Not,         Nonn  ok  Hronn,
SliJ?  ok  Hri>,         Sylgr  ok  Ylgr,
Vty  ok  Van,         Vond  ok  Strond,
Gjoll  ok  Leiptr,         )>fcr  falla  gumnum
en  falla  til  Heljar  he|?an.

29.  Kormt  ok  Ormt         ok  Kerlaugar  tvsfcr,

}>eer  skal  porr  va)?a
dag  hverjan,         es  hann  dcema  ferr

at  aski  Yggdrasils  ;
)>vit  asbru         brinnr  oil  loga,
heilog  votn  hloa.

27,  28.—  Interpolations  B,  A/A,  5,  /.


THE    SAYINGS    OF    GRIMNIR.  13

24.  Ravens,  Hugin  and  Munin,        of  Thought  and  Memory

wing  the  wide  world  each  day :
I  tremble  for  Thought,         lest  he  come  not  again,
yet  for  Memory  more  I  fear.

(The  Waters  of  the  World.)

25.  Sky-bright  o'er  Valholl         stands,  the  goat,

who  gnaws  the  Shelterer's  boughs ;

she  fills  a  bowl         with  the  shining  mead  :

'Tis  a  draught  which  runs  not  dry.

26.  Oak-thorn  o'er  Valholl         stands,  the  hart,

who  gnaws  the  Shelterer's  boughs  ;
run  drops  from  his  horns         into  Roaring-kettle
whence  flow  all  floods  in  the  world.


29.     Kormt  and  Ormt         and  the  Bath-tubs  twain,
these  must  the  Thunderer  wade,

when  he  fares  each  day         to  his  throne  of  doom
under  Yggdrasil's  ash ;

thence  Bifrost  burns,         the  bridge  of  the  gods,
and  the  mighty  waters  well.


27,  28. — The  names  contained  in  these  strophes  do  not  all  bear  interpretation  and  seem
to  belong  to  existing,  not  mythical,  rivers,  some  of  which  were  to  be  found  in  Britain.


i4  GRIMNISMAL.


30.     Gla]?r  ok  Gyllir,         Gler  ok  Sketybrimir,

Silfrintoppr  ok  Sinir,
Gisl  ok  Falhofnir,         Golltoppr  ok  L6ttfeti,

]>eim  rtya  fosir  joum
dag  hverjan,         es  dcema  fara
at  aski  Yggdrasils.


31.  priar  rcetr        standa  a  )>ria  vega

und  aski  Yggdrasils :

Hel  byr  und  einni,         annarri  hrimjmrsar,
)>rij7Ju  menskir  menn.

3IA.  Orn  sitr        a  asks  limum

es  vel  kvefya  mart  vita ;
oglir  einn        honum  augna  i  milli
Velprfolnir  vakir.

32.  Ratatoskr  heitir  ikorni         es  rinna  skal

at  aski  Yggdrasils ;
arnar  or]?         hann  skal  ofan  bera
ok  segja  Ntyhoggvi  ntyr.

33.  Hirtir  'u  auk  fjorir         |?eirs  af  heefingar  &

gaghalsir  gnaga  :


Damn  ok  Dvalinn,     .     .
Duneyrr  ok  Dyra)>r6r.


31  A. — Not  found  in  the  MSS.,  hut  reconstructed  from  the  prose  of  Sn.  E  by  G.S.Mk,
Mh.


THE    SAYINGS    OF    GRIMNIR.  15


30.  Glad  One,  Goldy,         Gleamer,  Race-giant,

Silvery-lock  and  Sinewy,
Shiner,  Pale-hoof,        Gold-lock,  Lightfoot,

these  are  the  steeds  which  the  gods  ride,
when  they  fare  each  day        to  their  thrones  of  doom

under  Yggdrasil's  ash.

(The  World  Tree's  torments.)

31.  There  are  three  roots  stretching        three  divers  ways

from  under  Yggdrasil's  ash  :

'neath  the  first  dwells  Hel,      'neath  the  second  Frost  giants,
and  human  kind  'neath  the  third.

3 1 A.  An  eagle  sits        in  the  boughs  of  the  ash,

knowing  much  of  many  things  ;
and  a  hawk  is  perched,        Storm-pale,  aloft
betwixt  that  eagle's  eyes.

32.  •    Ratatosk  is  the  squirrel         with  gnawing  tooth

which  runs  in  Yggdrasil's  ash  :
he  bears  the  eagle's        words  from  above
and  to  Fierce-stinger  tells  below.

33.  There  are  four  harts  too,        who  with  heads  thrown  back

gnaw  the  topmost  boughs  of  the  tree :
Dainn  the  Dead  One.     Dvalin  the  Dallier,
Duneyr  and  Dyrathror.


3I._Yggdrasil's  ash,  the  World  Tree;  see  Vsp.  st.  2,  19;  Hav.  st.  137.  Human
kind. — These  are  the  dead  folk  whose  dwelling  is  in  the  underworld  (see  Vsp.  st.  52),  not,
as  Snorri  suggests,  the  living.  We  are  repeatedly  told  that  Yggdrasil  springs  from  under
the  earth.  (Dt.  HI.)  Hel,  see  Bdr.  st.  /.


16  GRLMNISMAL.

34.  Ormar  fleiri  Hggja         und  aski  Yggdrasils,

an  of  hyggi  hverr  6svij?ra  apa  :
Goinn  ok  Moinn.         |>eir'u  Grafvitnis  synir,

Grabakr  ok  Grafv6llu)>r,
Ofnir  ok  Svafnir         hykk  at  EC  skyli

mei)?s  kvistu  ma.

35.  Askr  Yggdrasils         drygir  erfijn

meira  an  menn  viti :
hjortr  bitr  ofan,         en  a  hlijm  funar,
skerjnr  Ntyhoggr  ne|?an.


36.     Hrist  ok  Mist         vilk  at  me"r  horn  beri,

Skeggjold  ok  Skogul ;
Hildr  ok  pruj>r,         Hlokk  ok  Herfjotur,

Goll  ok  Geironul,
Randgri)?  ok  Ra);gri}»         ok  Reginleif,

]?£er  bera  einherjum  61.


37.  Arvakr  ok  Alsvtyr         )>eir  skulu  upp  he]?an

svangir  sol  draga ;

en  und  ]?eira  bogum         falu  blty  regin,
jfcsir,  isarn  kol.

38.  Svalinn  heitir,         hann  stendr  solu  fyrir,

Skjoldr  skinanda  go]?i :
bjorg  ok  brim         veitk  at  brinna  skulu,
ef  hann  fellr  i  fra.

39.  Skoll  heitir  ulfr        es  fylgir  enu  skirleita

go)?i  til  Varnar-vtyar,
en  annarr  Hati,         Hro)>vitnis  sunr,
skal  fyr  hei)?a  brujn  himins.

39. — Varnar-vij^ar  Dt.  HI.,  Isarnvi]?ar  S,  G,  varna  vij?ar  R  A.


THE    SAYINGS    OF    GRIMNIR.  17

34.  More  serpents  lie  under        Yggdrasil's  ash

than  a  witless  fool  would  ween —
Coin  and  Moin,        the  offspring  of  Grave-monster,

Grey-back  and  Grave-haunting  worm,
Weaver  and  Soother,         I  ween  they  must  ever

rend  the  twigs  of  the  tree.

35.  Yggdrasil's  ash        suffers  anguish  more

than  mortal  has  ever  known,
on  high  gnaw  harts,        it  rots  at  the  side,
and  Fierce-stinger  rends  it  beneath.

(Then  cries  he  from  the  fire-torment.)

36.  Would  that  Hrist  and  Mist        would  bear  me  a  horn  !

my  Valkyries,  Axe  and  Spear-point,
Bond  and  War-fetter,         Battle  and  Might,

Shrieker  and  Spear-fierce  in  strife ;
Shield-fierce,  Counsel-fierce,         Strength-maiden — all

who  bear  ale  to  the  Chosen  in  War.

(Sun  and  Earth.)

37.  Early-woke,  All-fleet,         hence  must  these  horses

wearily  draw  up  the  sun,

but  under  their  withers         the  gods,  gracious  Powers,
an  iron-coolness  have  hid.

38.  There  is  one  called  the  Cooler        who  stands  'fore  the  Sun,

a  shield  from  the  shining  goddess :
the  mountains  I  ween,         and  the  stormy  sea
will  flame  if  he  fall  from  thence.

39.  Skoll  is  the  wolf  called      who  hunts  the  bright  sun-goddess

even  to  the  Sheltering  grove  ;

a  second  fares,  Moon-hater,         offspring  of  Fenrir
in  front  of  that  fair  bride  of  heaven.


35. — Fierce-stinger,  the  dragon  of  the  underworld  ;  set  Vsp.  st.  39.  36. — Val-
kyries, or  war  maidens  of  Odin  ;  see  Vsp.  st.  31.  39. — Skoll,  Moon-hater,  wolves  of
darkness  ;  see  Vsp.  st.  40.  Fenrir,  the  great  Wolf  who  swallows  Odin  ;  see  Vsp.  st.  53.

D


i8  GRIMNISMAL.

40.  Or  Ymis  holdi         vas  jor)>  of  skopu]?,

en  or  sveita  sscr,

bjorg  or  beinum,         ba)>mr  or  hari
en  or  hausi  himinn.

41.  (40)     En  or  bans  broum         gor)m  blij>  regin

mtygar)?  manna  sunum,
en  or  hans  heila         voru  )>au  en  harj?m6)?gu
sky  oil  of  skopu)?.


42.  (41)     Ullar  hylli         hefr  ok  allra  go)>a

hverrs  tekr  fyrstr  a  funa ;
)>vit  opnir  heimar         verj>a  of  dsa  sunum,
)?as  hefja  af  hvera.


43.  (42)     Ivalda  synir         gengu  i  ardaga

Sktyblajmi  at  skapa,
ski  pa  bazt         skirum  Frey,
nytum  Njar)?ar  bur.

44.  (43)     Askr  Yggdrasils         hann  es  osztr  vij?a,

enn  Ski);bla|>nir  skipa,
6j?inn  asa,         en  joa  Sleipnir,
Bifrost  brua,         en  Bragi  skalda,
Habrok  hauka,         en  hunda  Garmr.


40,  41. — One  strophe  R.


THE    SAYINGS    OF    GRIMNIR.  19

40.  From  the  flesh  of  Ymir        the  world  was  formed,

from  his  blood  the  billows  of  the  sea,
the  hills  from  his  bones,         the  trees  from  his  hair,
the  sphere  of  heaven  from  his  skull.

41.  (40)     Out  of  his  brows        the  blithe  Powers  made

Midgarth  for  sons  of  men,
and  out  of  his  brains         were  the  angry  clouds
all  shaped  above  in  the  sky.

(The  Kettle  is  taken  off  the  fire  in  Geirrod's  hall.)

42.  (41)     The  favour  of  Ull        and  of  all  the  Powers

to  him  touching  first  the  fire  !
For  gods  can  enter         the  homes  of  men

when  the  kettle  is  raised  from  the  hearth.

(The  Treasures  of  the  World.)

43.  (42)     Went  the  Wielder's  sons         of  old  to  build

Skidbladnir  the  wooden  bladed,
best  of  all  ships,         for  the  bright  god  Prey,
ever  bountiful  son  of  Niord.

44.  (43)     Yggdrasil's  ash,         'tis  the  best  of  trees,

but  Skidbladnir  of  ships,
Odin  of  gods,         Sleipnir  of  steeds,
Bifrost  of  bridges,         Bragi  of  skalds,
Habrok  of  hawks         and  Garm  of  hounds.


40. — Ymir,  a  Jotun,  the  first  born  of  beings ;  see  Vm.  st.  21,  29.  41. — Midgarth  :
In  Old  English  poems  also  the  earth  is  called  Middle-garth.  42. — So  understood  by  the
Copenhagen  edition  (1848).  When  the  kettle  is  taken  off  the  gods  can  sec  Odin  through
the  roof  opening,  come  to  his  rescue,  and  then  hold  a  triumphal  feast  ;  see  st.  45  (G.  J.  L.).
Dt.  HI.  explain  it  in  connection  with  the  strophe  -following.  The  house  was  set  open  to
guests  at  meal-time,  and  he  who  thus  first  invited  a  god  and  kindUd  the  friendly  hearth
fire  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  benefactors  of  the  race.  43. — The  Wielder's  sons  are
rival  forgers  of  the  Sparkler's  race;  see  Vsp.  st.  37.  44.— Skidbladnir,  see  Saga-
book,  iv.,  192,  193.


20  GRIMNISMAL.


45.  (44)     Svipum  hefk  nu  ypt        fyr  sigtiva  sunum,

vty  )>at  skal  vilbjorg  vaka  :
ollum  &sum         )>at  skal  inn  koma
^Egis  bekki  a
JEgis  drekku  at.

46.  (50)     Olr  est,  Geirro)>r  !         hefr  )m  ofdrukkit,


miklu'st  hnugginn,         es  }>u'st  minu  gengi
ollum  einherjum  ok  Ojnns  hylli.

47.  (51)     Fjoty  ]>€r  sag)?ak,         en  J>u  fdtt  of  mant :

of  )?ik  vela  vinir ;
rmeki  liggja         ek  s€  mins  vinar
allan  i  dreyra  drifinn.

48.  (52)     Eggm6]?an  val        nu  mun  Yggr  hafa,

)>itt  veitk  lif  of  lijnt ;
ufar'u  disir        nu  kndtt  O]>m  sea,
nalgask  }>u  mik,  ef  megir !


49-  (45)     H6tumk  Grimr        h£tumk  Gangleri,

Herjan  ok  Hjalmberi,
pekkr  ok  ]7ri>i,        pu>r  ok  U)>r,
Helblindi  ok  Har,

50.  (46)     Sa)?r  ok  Svipall        ok  Sanngetall,

Herteitr  ok  Hnikarr,
Bileygr,  Baleygr         Bolverkr,  Fjolnir,
Grimr  ok  Grimnir,         Glapsvtyr,  Fjolsvi)jr,
(47)     Si^hottr,  Styskeggr,         Sigfo]?r,  Hniku)?r,
Alfo)?r,  Valfo|?r,         Atrtyr,  Farmatyr  :
einu  nafni         h6tumk  aldrigi,
siz  me)?  folkum  f6rk.

46. — This  strophe,  as  the   alliteration  shows,  is  in  fornyr|?islag,  but  imperfect,
H*  G.  S.


THE    SAYINGS    OF    GRIMNIR.  21

(Grimnir  reveals  himself  as  Odin.)

45.  (44)     Now  my  face  have  I  shown         to  the  war-god's  sons,

therewith  shall  help  awake,

and  the  gods  shall  gather,        all  glad,  to  the  bench
in  ^Egir's  feasting  hall.


46.  (50)     Dulled  with  ale  art  thou,  Geirrod,     too  much  hast  thou  drunk,

of  great  treasure  art  thou  deprived,
bereft  of  my  help,        and  of  all  chosen  warriors,
even  the  favour  of  Odin.

47.  (51)     Much  have  I  told  thee,         but  little  thou  mindest,

by  tricks  thou  hast  been  betrayed  :
ere  long  shall  I  see        thy  sword,  good  friend,
lying  all  bathed  in  blood.

48.  (52)     Thy  days  are  run  out,        the  Dread  War-father  owns

him  who  is  slain  by  the  sword :
the  spirits  are  hostile,        behold  now !  'tis  Odin  ;
more  nigh  shalt  thou  come  if  thou  canst.

(He  makes  known  his  names.)

49.  They  have  called  me  Hood- winker,        called  me  Wanderer,

Helm-bearer,  Lord  of  the  Host,
Well-comer,  Third  Highest,  Wave,  and  Slender,
High  One,  Dazzler  of  Hel.

50.  They  have  called  me  Soothsayer,        True  and  Fickle,

On-driver,  Eager  in  War,

Flashing-eyed,  Flaming-eyed,      Bale-worker,  Shape-shifter,
Veiled  One,  Masked  One,        Wile-wise  and  Much-wise,
Broad-hat,  Long-beard,         War-father,  On-thruster,
All-father,  Death-father,         On-rider,  Freight-wafter —
ne'er  was  I  called        by  one  name  alone

since  I  passed  through  the  people  of  men.

45. — jEgir's  feasting  hall,  see  Ls.


22  GRIMNISMAL.

•

51.  (48)     Grimnir  h£tumk        at  Geirro}>ar,

en  Jalkr  at  Asmundar,
en  J>d  Kjalarr,         es  ek  kjalka  dro,
pror  )>ingum  at,         Vi)?urr  at  vigum,
6ski  ok  6mi,         Jafnhar,  Biflindi,

Gondlir  ok  Harbar)>r  me]>  gojmm.

52.  (49)     Svijmrr  ok  Svtyrir         es  ek  het  at  Sokkmimis

ok  dutyak  enn  aldna  jotun,
j?as  ek  Mi)>vitnis        vask  ens  meera  burar
or)?inn  einbani.

53.  (53)     6|nnn  nu  heitik,         Yggr  3)>an  hetk,

hetumk  pundr  fyr  ]>at,
Vakr  ok  Skilfingr,         Vafu)?r  ok  Hr6ptatyr,

Gautr  ok  Jalkr  me]>  goj>um,
(54)     Ofnir  ok  Svafnir,         es  hykk  at  orjmir  se
allir  af  einum  mer.

Geirro)>r  konungr  sat  ok  haf)>i  sver|>  um  kne  s€r  ok  brug|?it  til  mi|?s.
En  er  hann  heyr)n  at  O]?inn  var  )?ar  kominn,  ]?a  sto)?  hann  upp  ok  vildi
taka  6)nn  fra  eldinum.  Sver)?it  slapp  or  hendi  hanum  ok  vissu  hjoltin
ni)>r.  Konungr  drap  foeti  ok  steyptiz  afram,  en  sver|>it  sto)?  i  gognum
hann,  ok  fekk  hann  bana.  6)>inn  hvarf  ]?a,  en  Agnarr  var  )>ar  konungr
lengi  styan.


51. — ViJ?urr  at  vigum  A,  not  found  in  R.

L   \         .   :SJ


THE    SAYINGS    OF    GRIMNIR.  23

51.  They  called  me  Grimnir,        the  Masked  one,  at  Geirrod's,

Jalk  was  I  named  at  Osmund's,
Keeler  once,        when  I  drew  the  sledge,
Thror  in  council,         in  strife  the  Stormer,
Wish-giver,  Wind-roar,         Tree-rocker,  Equal-ranked,

Grey-beard  and  Wizard  of  gods.

52.  They  called  me  Sage        and  Wise  when  I  duped

the  old  Jotun  who  dwells  'neath  the  earth,
and  slew  single-handed         the  glorious  son
of  that  monster  who  owned  the  Mead.

53.  They  call  me  now  Odin,         but  erewhile  the  Dread  One,

Thund  was  I  called  before  that,
Watcher  and  Shaker,         Wafter  and  Counsellor,

Maker  and  Jalk  among  gods,
Weaver  and  Soother,        names  which  I  deem

come  all  from  Myself  alone.

King  Geirrod  was  sitting  by  with  a  half-drawn  sword  across  his
knees.  When  he  knew  that  Odin  was  there,  he  rose  up  desiring  to
remove  the  god  from  the  fire.  But  as  he  did  so  the  sword  slipped  out
of  his  hand  point  upwards,  while  losing  his  feet  he  fell  forward  upon
it,  and  was  pierced  through  and  slain.  Then  Odin  vanished,  and
Agnar  was  left  to  rule  long  time  as  king.


51. — Tree-rocker,  Odin  as  Wind  god.  Another  meaning  suggested  for  Biflindi  is
Shield-shaker.  52. — The  old  Jbtun,  Suttung,  who  owned  the  Song-mead;  see  Hav.
St.  102.


ALVfSSMAL.

Alviss  kvaj? :

1.  '  Bekki  bretya         nu  skal  bntyr  me)?  m£r,

heim  i  sinni  snuask ;
hratat  of  msegi         mun  hverjum  )?ykkja,
heima  skalat  hvil)?  nema.'

p6rr  kva)?:

2.  '  Hvat's  ]?at  fira  ?        hvi  'stu  svd  folr  umb  nasar  ?

vastu  i  nott  me)?  nai  ?
)?ursa  liki        )?ykkjumk  d  ]>€r  vesa,
estat  \u  til  brii)?ar  borinn.'


Alvissmdl.— In  R,  No.  77.    Cited  in  8n.E.


THE    WISDOM    OF    ALL-WISE.

All-wise.

1.  Ere  long  shall  a  bride        deck  the  bench  beside  me,

we  will  hasten  home  together :
swift  in  my  wooing        shall  I  seem  to  all  beings,
but  at  home  none  shall  hinder  my  peace.

Thor.

2.  What  being  art  thou        so  pale  of  hue  ?

Hast  dwelt  to-night  with  the  dead  ?
A  likeness  to  giants        I  trow  hangs  o'er  thee ;
thou  wast  not  born  for  a  bride !


26  ALVISSMAL.

Alviss  kvaj>:

3.  '  Alviss  ek  heiti,         byk  fyr  }dr\>  nepan,

ak  und  steini  staj? ;
vagna  vers         emk  a  vit  kominn  :
breg)>i  engi  fostu  heiti  firar.'

porr  kva]? :

4.  '  Ek  mun  breg)?a,         }>vit  ek  bruj?ar  a

flest  of  raj?  sem  fa)?ir ;
vaskak  heima,         )>as  J?er  heitit  vas,
sa  einn  es  gjofir  me]?  go|?um.'

Alviss  kva)> :

5.  '  Hvat's  }>at  rekka         es  i  ra)>um  telsk

fljo]?s  ens  fagrgloa  ?
fjarrafleina  )?ik         munu  fair  kunna:
hverr  hefr  baugum  Jnk  borit  ?  '

porr  kvaj>:

6.  '  Ving)?6rr  heitik,         ek  hef  vi)?a  ratat,

sunr  emk  Stygrana ;

at  osatt  minni         skaltu  )?at  et  unga  man  hafa
ok  )?at  gjafor)?  geta.'

Alviss  kva)? :

7.  '  Sattir  )?inar         es  vilk  snimma  hafa

ok  ]?at  gjafor)?  geta ;
eiga  viljak         heldr  an  an  vesa
]?at  et  mjallhvita  man.'

porr  kvaj? :

8.  '  Meyjar  astum         muna  )?er  ver]?a,

visi  gestr !  of  varit,

ef  or  heimi  kannt         hverjum  at  segja
allt  )?ats  viljak  vita.

4.— Gjofir,  R,  B.  HI.      Gjof's,  G.  H.  at  fd  einn  J?6r  gjafor]?,  G».  S.


THE     WISDOM     OF    ALL-WISE.
All-wise.

3.  I  am  All-wise  who  dwell         far  under  the  Earth,

I  hide  in  a  rock  for  my  home  ;

I  look  for  the  Thunderer,         Lord  of  the  goat-wain :
let  none  break  a  firm-sworn  vow.

Thor.

4.  I  will  break  it,  who  rule         o'er  the  bride  as  father ;

he  alone  among  gods  is  the  giver :
I  was  far  from  home         when  that  fair  maid  of  mine
was  promised  thee  ever  as  bride.

All-wise.

5.  What  hero  is  this,         who  holds  in  his  power

that  fair  glowing  maiden  as  gift  ?

Like  a  far-straying  arrow,         none  knows  who  thou  art,
nor  whence  all  the  wealth  which  thou  wearest.

Thor.

6.  Winged-thunder  am  I,         wide  have  I  wandered,

son  of  Sigrani  Long-bearded  :

ne'er  with  my  will         shalt  thou  win  the  young  maiden
and  get  thee  a  wife  among  gods.

All-wise.

7.  Thy  good-will  then         must  I  speedily  gain

and  win  me  a  wife  among  gods  :
I  would  liefer  hold         in  my  arms  than  lack
that  snow-white  maiden  as  mine.

Thor.

8.  The  maiden's  love         thou  shalt  not  lack,

stranger,  who  seemest  wise  !
if  thou  canst  tell         out  of  every  world
all  that  I  long  to  learn.

3. — The  goat-wain,  Thor's  chariot ;  see  Hym.  st.  7,  38,  Introd.  jw*.       6. — Sigrani,
a  name  for  Odin  in  his  form  of  an  old  man  with  a  long  beard.


28  ALVISSMAL.

g.     '  Seg  mer  ]?at,  Alviss  !         611  of  rok  fira

vorumk,  dvergr  !  at  vitir  :
hve  su  jorj>  heitir        es  Hggr  fyr  alda  sunum,
heimi  hverjum  i  ?  '

Alviss  kvaj>:

10.  '  J6rj>  heitir  me|>  monnum,         en  me]>  asum  fold,

kalla  vega  vanir,
igrcen  jotnar,         alfar  groandi,
kalla  aur  uppregin."

porr  kva)?:

11.  '  Seg  mer  )?at,  Alviss  !         611  of  rok  fira

vorumk,  dvergr  !  at  vitir :
live"  sa  himinn  heitir        enn  Ymi  kendi
heimi  hverjum  i  ?  '

Alviss  kva)> :

12.  '  Himinn  heitir  me]?  monnum,         en  hlyrnir  me\>  go]>um,

kalla  vindofni  vanir,
uppheim  jotnar,         alfar  fagra  rrcfr,
dvergar  drjupan  sal.'

porr  kva)>:

13.  '  Seg  mer  j?at,  Alviss !        oil  of  rok  fira

vorumk,  dvergr  !  at  vitir  :
hversu  mani  heitir,         sas  menn  sea,
heimi  hverjum  i  ? '

Alviss  kva]> :

14.  '  Mani  heitir  me}?  monnum,         en  mylinn  mej>  gojnim,

kalla  hvel  helju  i,
skyndi  jotnar,         en  skin  dvergar,
kalla  alfar  drtala.'


ii. — Enn  Ymi  kendi,  S's  suggestion  for  the  unknown  erakendi  o/B,     14. — Mylinn
E,  mylinn,  MSS.  of  Sn.  E.,  G.  S.  //.,  HI.


THE    WISDOM    OF    ALL-WISE.  29

g.    Tell  me  this,  All-wise,        since  thou  art  learned

in  the  ways  of  all  beings,  I  ween  :—
how  is  Earth,  which  lies  spread         before  sons  of  men,
named  by  the  wights  of  all  worlds.

All-wise.

10.  Earth  'tis  named  among  men,        but  Field  among  gods,

Wanes  call  it  ever  the  Way ;
Jotuns,  Fair  Green,        elves,  the  Grower,
high  Powers  call  it  Clay.

Thor.

11.  Tell  me  this,  All-wise,         since  thou  art  learned

in  the  ways  of  all  beings  I  ween  :—
how  is  Heaven,  which  once        was  born  of  Ymir
named  by  the  wights  of  all  worlds  ?

All-wise.

12.  Heaven  'tis  named  among  men,        Time-teller  among  gods,

Wanes  call  it  Weaver  of  Wind,
Jotuns,  Overworld,        elves,  the  Fair  Roof,
dwarfs,  the  Dripping  Hall.

Thor.

13.  Tell  me  this,  All-wise,        since  thou  art  learned

in  the  ways  of  all  beings,  I  ween  : —
how  is  the  Moon        which  men  behold
named  by  the  wights  of  all  worlds  ?

All-wise.

14.  Moon  'tis  named  among  men,        the  Ball  among  gods,

but  the  Whirling  Wheel  in  Hel,

of  Jotuns,  the  Hastener,        of  dwarfs,  the  Shimmerer,
'tis  Year-teller  called  of  elves.


II. — Born  of  Ymir,  see  Grm.  st.  40;   Vm.  st.  21  and  Introd.


30  ALVfsSMAL.

p6rr  kvap:

15.  '  Seg  mer  )>at,  Alviss !         oil  of  rok  fira

vorumk,  dvergr  !  at  vitir  :
hve  su  sol  heitir,         es  sea  alda  synir,
heimi  hverjum  i  ? '

Alviss  kva)> :

16.  '  S')l  heitir  mej>  monnum,         en  sunna  mej>  gojmm,

kalla  dvergar  Dvalins  leika,
eyglo  jotnar,         alfar  fagra  hvel,
alskir  asa  synir.'

porr  kva)> :

17.  '  Seg  mer  |?at,  Alviss !         oil  of  rok  fira

vorumk,  dvergr !  at  vitir :
hve  )>au  sky  heita,         es  skurum  blandask,
heimi  hverjum  i  ? '

Alviss  kva)> :

18.  '  Sky  heita  me}>  monnum,         en  skurvan  me)>  go|>um,

kalla  vindflot  vanir,
urvan  jotnar         alfar  ve)>rmegin,
kalla  i  helju  hjalm  hulij>s.'

porr  kva]? :

19.  '  Seg  mer  ]>a.t,  Alviss !         611  of  rok  fira

vorumk,  dvergr  !  at  vitir  :
hve  sa  vindr  heitir,         es  vtyast  ferr,
heimi  hverjum  i  ?  '


THE    WISDOM    OF    ALL-WISE.  31

Thor.

15.  Tell  me  this,  All-wise,         since  thou  art  learned

in  the  ways  of  all  beings,  I  ween  :—

how  is  Sol  which  the  sons        of  men  behold

named  by  the  wights  of  all  worlds  ?

All-wise.

16.  Sol  'tis  named  among  men,         but  Sun  among  gods,

dwarfs  call  it  Dallier's  playmate,
Ever-glowing,  the  Jotuns,         Fair  wheel,  the  elves,
All-shine,  the  children  of  gods.

Thor.

17.  Tell  me  this,  All-wise,         since  thou  art  learned

in  the  ways  of  all  beings,  I  ween  : —

how  are  Clouds  of  the  sky,        that  with  showers  are  mingled,
named  by  the  wights  of  all  worlds  ?

All-wise.

18.  They  are  clouds  among  men,         Shower-promise  to  gods,

Wind-floater  called  of  Wanes,
Rain-omen  of  Jotuns,         Storm-might  of  elves,
Helm  of  the  Hidden  in  Hel.

Thor.

19.  Tell  me  this,  All-wise,         since  thou  art  learned

in  the  ways  of  all  beings,  I  ween  :
how  is  the  Wind         which  wanders  wide
named  by  the  wights  of  all  worlds  ?


14. — Ball,  a  doubtful  word.  G.  V.  suggest  Fire.  Hastener.  because  pursued  by  a
wolf ;  see  Grm.  st.  39.

16. — Dallier's  playmate.  The  sun  makes  sport  of  dwarfs  who  are  caught  above
ground  at  dawn  ;  st.  35.


32  ALVISSMAL.

Alviss  kva}> :

20.  '  Vindr  heitir  me}?  monnum,         en  vafu]?r  me]?  go]?um,

kalla  gneggju}?  ginnregin,
cepi  jotnar,         alfar  dynfara,
kalla  i  helju  hvi]?u]?.'

porr  kva]?:

21.  '  Seg  mer  ]?at,  Alviss !         611  of  rok  fira

vorumk,  dvergr !  at  vitir :
hve  ]?at  logn  heitir,         es  liggja  skal,
heimi  hverjum  i  ? '

Alviss  kva)> :

22.  '  Logn  heitir  mej?  monnum,         en  Iscgi  me]?  go)?um,

kalla  vindslot  vanir,
ofhly  jotnar,         alfar  dagsefa,
kalla  dvergar  dags  veru.'

porr  kva]?:

23.  '  Seg  mer  J>at,  Alviss !        611  of  rok  fira

vorumk,  dvergr  !  at  vitir :
live"  sa  marr  heitir,        es  menn  roa,
heimi  hverjum  i  ? '

Alviss  kva)> :

24.  '  Sser  heitir  me]?  monnum,         en  silsbgja  me]?  go]?um,

kalla  vag  vanir,

alheim  jotnar,         alfar  lagastaf,
kalla  dvergar  djiipan  mar.'

J?6rr  kva)?:

25.  '  Seg  mer  ]?at,  Alviss  !        oil  of  rok  fira

vorumk,  dvergr  !  at  vitir :
hv6  sa  eldr  heitir,        es  brinnr  fyr  alda  sunum,
heimi  hverjum  i  ? '

24. — Silsfegja,  G.  /. ;  sil-aegja,  C. ;  silegja,  E,  B.


THE    WISDOM    OF    ALL-WISE.  33

All-wise.

20.  Wind  'tis  named  among  men,        but  Waverer  of  gods,

the  wise  Powers  call  it  Whinnier,
Jotuns,  the  Howler,        elves,  Roaring  Rider,
in  Hel  'tis  called  Swooping  Storm.

Thor.

21.  Tell  me  this,  All-wise,        since  thou  art  learned

in  the  ways  of  all  beings,  I  ween  : —
how  is  the  Calm,        ever  wont  to  rest,'
named  by  the  wights  of  all  worlds  ?

All-wise.

22.  Calm  'tis  named  among  men,         Sea-rest  among  gods,

Wanes  ever  call  it  Wind-lull,
Jotuns,  the  Swelterer,        elves,  Day-soother,
dwarfs,  the  Refuge  of  Day.

Thor.

23.  Tell  me  this,  All-wise,        since  thou  art  learned

in  the  ways  of  all  beings,  I  ween  : —
how  is  the  Sea        which  is  sailed  of  men,
named  by  the  wights  of  all  worlds  ?

All-wise.

24.  Sea  'tis  named  among  men,        Wide  Ocean  of  gods,

Wanes  call  it  flowing  Wave,
Jotuns,  Eel-home,        elves,  the  Water-stave,
by  dwarfs  'tis  called  the  Deep.

Thor.

25.  Tell  me  this,  All-wise,        since  thou  art  learned

in  the  ways  of  all  beings,  I  ween  :
how  is  Fire,  which  burns         before  men's  sons,
named  by  the  wights  of  all  worlds  ?

20. — Waverer,  one  of  Odin's  names  as  Wind-god.          24. — Wide  Ocean,  others
suggest  Silent  Water.

F


34  ALVISSMAL.

^P*

Alviss  kva)? :

26.  '  Eldr  heitir  mej?  monnum,         en  me|>  asum  funi,

kalla  vag  vanir,

freka  jotnar,         en  forbrenni  dvergar,
kalla  i  helju  hro)?u|?.'

porr  kva]? :

27.  '  Seg  mer  ]?at,  Alviss  !         oil  of  rok  fira

vorumk,  dvergr !  at  vitir  :
hve  sa  vi]?r  heitir,         es  vex  fyr  alda  sunum,
heimi  hverjum  i?'

Alviss  kva]? :

28.  '  Vi]?r  heitir  me]?  monnum,         en  vallar  fax  me)>  go)?um,

kalla  hli)?)>ang  halir,
eldi  jotnar,         alfar  fagrlima,
kalla  vond  vanir.'

porr  kva]? :

29.  '  Seg  mer  J?at,  Alviss !         oil  of  rok  fira

vorumk,  dvergr !  at  vitir  :
hve  su  nott  heitir,         en  Norvi  kenda,
heimi  hverjum  i  ? '

Alviss  kva)>:

30.  '  Nott  heitir  me)?  monnum,         en  njol  me]?  gojmm,

kalla  grimu  ginnregin,
61jos  jotnar,         alfar  svefngaman,
kalla  dvergar  draumnjorun.'

porr  kva)>:

31.  '  Seg  mer  )?at,  Alviss !         611  of  rok  fira

vorumk,  dvergr !  at  vitir :
hv6  ]>at  sa}?  heitir,         es  sa  alda  synir,
heimi  hverjum  i?'

26.— Vdg,  Mb.  H.J.;  vag,  E,  B.  Gv.  HI.;  v£gin,  S.  G.      Freka,  Gv.  S.  G.  ;
frekan,  E,        28. — Fax,  so  most  authorities  for  far,  E.


THE     WISDOM     OF    ALL-WISE.  35

All-wise.

26.  Fire  'tis  named  among  men,        but  Flame  among  gods,

Wanes  call  it  leaping  Wave,
Jotuns,  the  Havener,         Hel-folk,  the  Racer,
dwarfs,  the  Burning  Bane.

Thor.

27.  Tell  me  this,  All-wise,        since  thou  art  learned

in  the  ways  of  all  beings,  I  ween :
how  is  Wood  which  waxes        before  men's  sons
named  by  the  wights  of  all  worlds  ?

All-wise.

28.  Wood  'tis  named  among  men,         Wold-locks  among  gods,

by  heroes  Sea-weed  of  the  hills,
Jotuns,  Life-feeder,         elves,  the  Fair-limbed,
Waves  ever  call  it  Wand.

Thor.

29.  Tell  me  this,  All-wise,        since  thou  art  learned

in  the  ways  of  all  beings,  I  ween :
how  is  Night  who  is  born,         the  daughter  of  Norr,
named  by  the  wights  of  all  worlds  ?

All-wise.

30.  She  is  Night  among  men,         but  Mist  among  gods,

the  high  Powers  call  her  Hood,
the  Jotuns,  Unlight,         elves,  the  Sleep-joy,
dwarfs,  the  Goddess  of  Dreams.

Thor.

31.  Tell  me  this,  All-wise,         since  thou  art  learned

in  the  ways  of  all  beings,  I  ween  : —
how  is  Seed  which  is  sown        by  the  sons  of  men
named  by  the  wights  of  all  worlds  ?

28. — Heroes,  the  dead  warriors  in  Hel,  Icelandic  halir,  is  used  elsewhere  for  the
dead  folk  (See  Vm.  st.  43)' and  has  probably  the  same  meaning  here.


36  ALVJSSMAL.

Alviss  kvap:

32.  '  Bygg  heitir  me)>  monnum,         en  barr  me}>  gojmm,

kalla  voxt  vanir,
scti  jotnar,         alfar  lagastaf,
kalla  i  helju  hnipinn.'

porr  kvap:

33.  '  Seg  mer  )>at,  Alviss  !         oil  of  rok  fira

vorumk,  dvergr !  at  vitir :
hve  }>at  61  heitir,         es  drekka  alda  synir,
heimi  hverjum  i?'

Alviss  kvaj? :

34.  '  Ol  heitir  me]>  monnum,         en  me|>  asum  bjorr,

kalla  veig  vanir,

hreina  log  jotnar,         en  i  helju  mjo|>,
kalla  sumbl  Suttungs  synir.'

porr  kvaj?:

35.  '1  einu  brjosti        ek  sak  aldrigi

fleiri  forna  stafi ;

talum  miklum         ek  kve)?  tseldan  )?ik  :
uppi  est,  dvergr !  of  daga)?r,
nu  skinn  sol  i  sail.'


THE    WISDOM    OF    ALL-WISE.  37

All-wise.

32.  Tis  named  Barley  among  men,        but  Bear  among  gods,

Wanes  call  it  Growth  of  the  ground,
Jotuns,  Food-stuff,        elves,  the  Sap-staff,
Hel-dwellers,  Drooping  Head.

Thor.

33.  Tell  me  this,  All-wise,         since  thou  art  learned

in  the  ways  of  all  beings,  I  ween  : —  *

how  is  Ale  which  sons        of  men  drink  oft
named  by  the  wights  of  all  worlds  ?

All-wise.

34.  Ale  'tis  named  among  men,        but  Beer  among  gods,

the  Stirring  Draught  of  Wanes,
of  Jotuns,  Clear-flowing,        of  Hel-folk,  Mead,
by  the  Sons  of  Suttung,  Feast.

Thor.

35.  Not  e'er  have  I  found        in  the  bosom  of  one

more  learning  of  olden  lore  ;

but  with  wiles  art  thou  duped,         thus  dallying  here,
while  dawn  is  upon  thee,  dwarf !
Behold  !  Sun  shines  in  the  hall.

(All-wise  the  dwarf  is  turned  into  stone.)
33.— Bear  is  an  old  word  for  barley,  and  cognate  with  the  Icelandic  barn


VAFPRtfPNISMAL.

OJnnn  kva}> :

1.  '  Ra)>  mer  nu,  Frigg !         alls  mik  fara  tijnr

at  vitja  Vafyrujmis ;

forvitni  mikla         kvej?k  mer  a  fornum  stofum
vty  enn  alsvinna  jotun.'

•

Frigg  kvap  :

2.  '  Heima  letja         mundak  Herjafo)?r

i  gorjmm  go)?a ;

)?vit  engi  jotun         hug)>ak  jafnramman
sem  Vaf]?ru|mi  vesa.'

Vaf  |?ru)?nismdl.— In  R,  No.  3,  st.  20  to  the  end  in  A,  cited  in  Sn.  E.


THE    WORDS    OF    THE    MIGHTY    WEAVER,

Odin.

1.  Now  counsel  me,  Frigg        for  I  fain  would  seek

the  Mighty  Weaver  of  words.
I  yearn  to  strive         with  that  all-wise  giant
in  learning  of  olden  lore.

Frigg.

2.  Nay,  Father  of  Hosts  !         I  fain  would  keep  thee

at  home  in  the  garth  of  the  gods ;
no  giant  I  deem         so  dread  and  wise
as  that  Mighty  Weaver  of  words.


40  VAFpRUpNISMAL.

6j>inn  kvap:

3.  '  Fjolj>  ek  for,         fjoty  freista|>ak,

fjol}?  of  reyndak  regin  ;
hitt  viljak  vita         hv£  Vafyrujmis
salakynni  s€.'

Frigg  kva)> :

4.  '  Heill  }>u  farir !         heill  aptr  komir !

heill  }>u  a  sinnum  s6r!
cej>i  }>er  dugi,         hvars  skalt,  Aldafoj>r !
or)?um  mfcla  jotun.'


5.  For  J?a  O}>inn         at  freista  or)>speki

]?ess  ens  alsvinna  jotuns  :
at  hollu  hann  kvam         ok  atti  Hyms  fa)>ir,
inn  gekk  Yggr  )?egar.

6)nnn  kva]?:

6.  '  Heill  J?u,  Vaf)>ruj>nir !         nu'mk  i  holl  kominn,

a  )?ik  sjalfan  at  sea ;
hitt  viljak  fyrst  vita,         ef  )>ij  fr6)?r  se"r
e)?a  alsvi|?r,  jotunn  ! '

Vafyrujmir  kva)? :

7.  '  Hvat's  }>at  manna        es  i  minum  sal

verpumk  or]?i  a  ?
ut  ne  komr         orum  hollum  fr^

nema  ]?ii  enn  snotrari  ser.'

i

6)>inn  kvaj?:

8.  '  Gagnra)?r  heitik,        nu'mk  af  gongu  kominn

]>yrstr  til  ]>inna  sala  ;
la]?ar  )>urfi — hef  ek  lengi  farit —
ok  andfanga,  jotunn  ! '

5. — Hyms,  J  for  Ims  B,  A  where  the  alliteration  Jails.        8. — Gagnrd]?r,  B,  A,
emended  to  the  more  usual  gangrdbr  by  R.  G.


THE     WORDS     OF    THE     MIGHTY     WEAVER.        41

Odin.

3.     Far  have  I  fared         much  have  I  ventured,

oft  have  I  proved  the  Powers  ;
this  now  must  I  know         how  the  house-folk  fare
in  the  Mighty  Weaver's  home.


4.     Then  safely  go,         come  safely  again,

and  safely  wend  thy  way  :
may  thy  wit  avail  thee,         Father  of  beings,
when  thou  weavest  words  with  the  giant  !


5.  Then  Odin  went         to  prove  with  words

the  wisdom  of  the  all-wise  giant :

he  reached  the  hall         of  the  Jotun  race  ;

the  Dread  One  entered  forthwith.

Odin.

6.  Hail,  Mighty  Weaver  !         here  in  this  hall

I  have  come  thyself  to  see ;
and  first  will  try         if  thou  art  in  truth
all-wise  and  all-knowing,  Giant.

Weaver.

7.  What  man  is  here,         who  dares  in  my  hall

to  throw  his  words  at  me  thus  ?

thou  shalt  ne'er  come  forth         again  from  our  courts
if  thou  be  not  the  wiser  of  twain.

Odin.

8.  Riddle-reader  I  am  called,         I  come  from  my  roaming

thirsty  here  to  thy  halls,
in  need  of  welcome         and  kindly  greeting,
long  way  have  I  wandered,  Giant.


42  VAFpRUpNISMAL.

Vafyru)>nir  kva)> :

9.      '  Hvi  }m  J>a,  Gagnraj>r  !         mE61isk  af  golfi  fyrir  ?

farjm  i  sess  i  sal  !

|>a  skal  freista,        hva}>arr  fleira  viti,
gestr  e)>a  enn  gamli  jmlr.'

O)>inn  kvaj) :

10.      '  Oau)>ugr  ma)?r,         es  til  au)>ugs  komr,

mroli  ]?arft  e)?a  ]?egi !
ofrmrolgi  mikil         hykk  at  ilia  geti
hveims  vty  kaldrifja]7an  komr.'


Vafyntynir  kva)> :

11.  '  Seg  m£r,  Gagnra)?r !         alls  Jm  6,  golfi  vill

]?ins  of  freista  frama  :
hve  sd  hestr  heitir         es  hverjan  dregr
dag  of  drottmogu  ? '

O|nnn  kva)?:

12.  '  Skinfaxi  heitir        es  enn  skira  dregr

dag  of  drottmogu ;

hesta  baztr         ]?ykkir  me)?  Hrei)>gotum,
ey  lysir  mon  af  mari.'

Vafj?ru|mir  kvaj?:

13.  '  Seg  )?at,  Gagnra)?r !         alls  ]>u  &  golfi  vill

)>ins  of  freista  frama  :
hv6  sa  j6r  heitir         es  austan  dregr
n6tt  of  nyt  regin  ?  '


THE     WORDS     OF     THE     MIGHTY     WEAVER.

Weaver.

9.     Why  speak,  Riddle-reader,         standing  thus  ?

take  here  thy  seat  in  the  hall ;
and  soon  shall  be  seen         who  knows  the  more,
stranger  or  ancient  sage.

Odin.

10.  Let  the  penniless  wretch         in  the  house  of  the  rich

speak  needful  words  or  none  :
prating,  I  ween,         works  ill  for  him
who  comes  to  the  cold  in  heart.

I.

(The  Proving  of  Riddle-reader.)

Weaver.

11.  Say,  Riddle-reader!         since  on  the  floor

thou  fain  wouldst  show  thy  skill,
how  the  Steed  is  called         which  draws  each  Day
over  the  children  of  men.

Odin.

12.  'Tis  Shining-Mane        who  draws  bright  Day

over  the  children  of  men  ;
they  hold  him  best         of  steeds  in  the  host ;
streams  light  from  his  mane  evermore.

Weaver.

13.  Say,  Riddle-reader !         since  on  the  floor

thou  fain  wouldst  show  thy  skill,
how  the  Steed  is  called        who  forth  from  the  east
draws  Night  o'er  the  blessed  Powers.


44  VAFpRUpNISMAL.

6}>inn  kva)>:

14.  '  Hrimfaxi  heitir        es  hverja  dregr

n6tt  of  nyt  regin  ;
meldropa         fellir  morgin  hvern,
J?a)>an  komr  dogg  of  dali.'

Vafyrujmir  kva)? :

15.  '  Seg  )>at,  Gagnra]?r  !         alls  Jm  a  golfi  vill

Jnns  of  freista  frama  :

hv6  su  a  heitir         es  deilir  mej>  jotna  sunum
grund  auk  mej?  gojmm  ?  '

0]?inn  kva)> :

16.  '  Ifing  heitir  a         es  deilir  me]?  jotna  sunum

grund  auk  mety  gojmm  ;
opin  rinna         hon  skal  of  aldrdaga,
ver)>rat  iss  a  a.'

Vaf)?ruJ?nir  kva]? :

17.  '  Seg  ]?at,  Gagnra|?r !         alls  )m  a  golfi  vill

)nns  of  freista  frama  :
hve  sa  vollr  heitir        es  finnask  vigi  at
Surtr  ok  en  svasu  go)>  ? '

6)>inn  kvai\> :

18.  '  Vigrtyr  heitir  vollr        es  finnask  vigi  at

Surtr  ok  en  svasu  go}> ;
hundraj?  rasta         hann's  a  hverjan  veg,
sa's  ]?eim  vollr  vita)?r.'

Vaf )>ru)mir  kva]^ :

19.  '  Fr6J?r  est,  gestr !         far|?u  a  bekk  jotuns,

ok  msclumsk  i  sessi  saman  !
hofjn  vefta         vit  skulum  hollu  i,
gestr !  of  ge]?speki.'


THE     WORDS     OF     THE     MIGHTY     WEAVER.        45

Odin.

14.  'Tis  Rimy- Mane        who  draws  evermore

each  Night  o'er  the  blessed  Powers;
he  lets  fall  drops         from  his  bit  each  dawning ;
thence  comes  dew  in  the  dales.

Weaver.

15.  Say,  Riddle-reader  !         since  on  the  floor

thou  fain  wouldst  show  thy  skill,
how  the  River  is  called         which  parts  the  realm
of  the  Jotun  race  from  the  gods.

Odin.

1 6.  That  River  is  I  ling         which  parts  the  realm

of  the  Jotun  race  from  the  gods  ;
free  shall  it  flow         while  life  days  last  ;
never  ice  shall  come  o'er  that  stream.

Weaver.

17.  Say,  Riddle-reader  !         since  on  the  floor

thou  fain  wouldst  show  thy  skill,
how  the  Field  is  called         where  in  strife  shall  meet
dark  Surt  and  the  gracious  gods.

Odin.

f8.     War-path  is  the  Field         where  in  strife  shall  meet

dark  Surt  and  the  gracious  gods :
a  hundred  miles        it  measures  each  way ;
'tis  the  Field  marked  out  by  Fate.

Weaver.

19.     Wise  art  thou,  stranger,         but  come  now  and  sit

by  my  side  on  the  Jotun's  seat ;
let  us  talk  and  wager         on  wisdom  of  mind
our  two  heads  here  in  the  hall.

(Odin  seats  himself  by  the  giant.)

16. — Ifing  is  probably  the  river  mentioned  in  Arbl.,  st.  2.        17. — Surt,  a  fire  giant  ;
set  st.  50  and  Vsp.  st.  52,  53,  Ls.  st.  42.


46  VAFpRUpNISMAL.


6)>inn  kva)> :

20.  '  Seg  }>at  et  eina,         ef  J^itt  cej^i  dugir

ok  ]>u,  Vafyrujmir  !  vitir :
hva)>an  jor)>  of  kvam         e)?a  upphiminn
fyrst,  enn  fro}>i  jotunn  ?  '

VafJ?rii)?nir  kva)> :

21.  'Or  Ymis  holdi         vas  jor]?  of  skopu)?

en  or  beinum  bjorg,

himinn  or  hausi         ens  hrimkalda  jotuns,
en  or  sveita  sser,'

6}>inn  kvaj? :

22.  '  Seg  \>at  annat,        ef  )ntt  os)?i  dugir

ok  }>u,  Vafj?ru)?nir !  vitir  :
hva)?an  mani  of  kvam,         s&s  ferr  menn  yfir,
e)?a  sol  et  sama  ? '

•

Vafyrujmir  kvaj> :

23.  '  Mundilferi  heitir         hann  es  Mdna  fa]?ir

ok  sva  Solar  et  sama ;
himin  hverfa        )?au  skulu  hverjan  dag
oldum  at  artali.'

6j?inn  kva)>:

24.  '  Seg  )?at  et  J?r^Ja>         a^s  fik  svinnan  kve)?a,

ef  ]>u,  Vaf  J>ru)?nir !  vitir  :
hva)>an  dagr  of  kvam,         sas  ferr  drott  yfir,
ej>a  nott  me)?  nijmm  ? '


THE     WORDS    OF    THE     MIGHTY    WEAVER.        47

II.

(The  Proving  of  the  Mighty  Weaver.)

Odin.

20.  Answer  well  the  first,         if  thou  hast  the  wit,

and  knowest,  Mighty  Weaver,—

•     from  whence  the  Earth         and  the  heavens  on  high,
wise  Giant,  came  once  to  be.

Weaver.

21.  From  the  flesh  of  Ymir         the  world  was  formed,

from  his  bones  were  mountains  made,
and  Heaven  from  the  skull         of  that  frost-cold  giant,
from  his  blood  the  billows  of  the  sea.

Odin.

22.  Answer  well  the  second,        if  thou  hast  the  wit,

and  knowest,  Mighty  Weaver,—
whence  Moon  hath  come        who  fares  over  men,
and  whence  Sun  hath  had  her  source.

Weaver.

23.  The  Mover  of  the  Handle        is  father  of  Moon,

and  the  father  eke  of  Sun,
round  the  heavens        they  roll  each  day
for  measuring  of  years  to  men.

Odin.

24.  Answer  well  the  third         if  thou  hast  the  wit,

and  knowest,  Mighty  Weaver, —
whence  Day  arose        to  pass  o'er  the  race,
and  Night  with  her  waning  Moons.

21. — Ymir,  the  first-born  of  Jutuns  ;  see  st.  29,  Grm.  st,  40,  Vsp.  st.  3.  22. —
Moon,  sun,  see  Grm.  st.  31.  23. — Mover  of  the  handle.  This  mysterious  being
Mundilferi  is  not  mentioned  elsewhere.  Rydberg  traces  a  belief  that  the  heavens  were
turned  by  a  gigantic  world  mill.  (Teutonic  Mythology,  p.  397).


48  VAFpRUpNISMAL.

Vafyrujmir  kva)? :

25.  '  Dellingr  heitir,         hann  es  Dags  fa)?ir,

en  Nott  vas  Norvi  borin  ;
ny  ok  nij>         sko)?u  nyt  regin
oldum  at  artali.'

O)?inn  kva)? :

26.  '  Seg  )?at  et  fjor)?a,         alls  )?ik  fro|>an  kve)>a,

ef  )>ii,  Vaf]>ru|>nir  !  vitir:
hva)>an  vetr  of  kvam         e)?a  varmt  sumar
fyrst  me)?  fro]?  regin  ? '

Vafyrujmir  kvaj> :

27.  '  Vindsvalr  heitir,         hann  es  Vetrar  fa)?ir,

en  Svosu|?r  Sumars ; '
[Vindsvals  fa)>ir         var  Vasu|?r  of  heitinn,
oil  es  su  aett  til  otul.]

OJ?inn  kva]? :

28.  '  Seg  ]?at  et  fimta,         alls  )?ik  froj?an  kve]?a,

ef  J?u,  VafJ?ru)?nir  !  vitir:
hverr  asa  elztr         ej?a  Ymis  ni)?ja
yr)?i  i  ardaga  ? '

Vaf)?ru)?nir  kva)>:

29.  '  Orofi  vetra,         a)?r  vgeri  jor)?  skopu]?,

)?d  vas  Bergelmir  borinn  ;
pntygelmir         vas  ]?ess  fa]?ir,
en  Aurgelmir  afi.'

(3j?inn  kva)? :

30.  '  Seg  )?at  et  setta,         alls  ]?ik  svinnan  kve)?a,

ef  )?u,  Vaf)?ru|?nir !  vitir :
hva)?an  Aurge,lmir         kvam  me)?  jotna  sunum
fyrst,  enn  fro)?i  jotunn  ?  '


27. — 7V/«  gap  in  B,  <A«s  supplied  by  B.t  who  paraphrases  the  prose  of  Sn.E.


THE     WORDS     OF    THE     MIGHTY     WEAVER.        49

Weaver.

25.  There  is  one  called  Dawning,        the  father  of  Day,

but  Night  was  born  of  Norr;

new  and  waning  moons         the  wise  Powers  wrought
for  measuring  of  years  to  men.

Odin.

26.  Answer  well  the  fourth,         if  thou  hast  the  wit,

and  knowest,  Mighty  Weaver, —
whence  Winter  came        and  warm  Summer  first
the  wise  Powers  once  among.

Weaver.

27.  There  is  One  called  Sweetsouth,         father  of  Summer,

but  Wind-cool  is  winter's  sire,
the  son  was  he        of  Sorrow-seed  ;
all  fierce  and  dread  is  that  race.

Odin.  »

28.  Answer  well  the  fifth,         if  thou  hast  the  wit,

and  knowest,  Mighty  Weaver  : —
who  was  born  of  gods        or  of  Jotun  brood,
the  eldest  in  days  of  yore  ?

Weaver.

29.  Untold  winters        ere  Earth  was  fashioned

roaring  Bergelm  was  born  ;
his  father  was  Thrudgelm         of  Mighty  Voice,
loud-sounding  Ymir  his  grandsire.

Odin.

30.  Answer  well  the  sixth,         if  thou  hast  the  wit,

and  knowest,  Mighty  Weaver,—
whence  came  Ymir,         loud-sounding  Jotun,
the  first  of  thy  race,  wise  Giant.

25. — Norr,  seeAlv.st.  29.  zg.—In  this  passage  Ymir  is  called  Aurgelmir;  "gelmir"
in  all  these  names  seems  to  signify  the  roaring,  rushing  sound  of  the  elemental  powers  in
chaos.

H


50  VAFpRUpNISMAL.

Vafyrujmir  kva)>:

31.  '  6r  Elivagum         stukku  eitrdropar,

svd  6x  unz  or  var)>  jotunn  ;
[J?ar  6rar  sottir         kvamu  allar  saman,
]?vi's  J?at  se  allt  til  atalt.']

6]>inn  kva)> :

32.  '  Seg  )?at  et  sjaunda,        alls  J?ik  svinnan  kve]>a,

ef  )m,  Vafyntynir !  vitir :
hv6  sa  born  of  gat         enn  aldni  jotunn,
es  hann  hafyit  gygjar  gaman  ?  '

Vafyrujmir  kva)>:

33.  '  Und  hendi  vaxa         kva)?u  hrim)?ursi

mey  ok  mog  saman  ;
fotr  vi}>  foeti         gat  ens  fr6J?a  jotuns
sexhof]?a)?an  sun.'

a  O)?inn  kvaj? :

34.  *  Seg  )>at  et  atta,        alls  )?ik  svinnan  kve)>a,

ef  ]?u,  Vaf)>ru)?nir !  vitir :
hvat  fyrst  of  mant        e)?a  fremst  of  veizt  ?
J?u  'st  alsvi]?r,  jotunn  ! '

Vafyrujmir  kva|? :

35.  '  Orofi  vetra        a)?r  veeri  jor)>  of  skopu]?,

)>a  vas  Bergelmir  borinn ;
]>at  ek  fyrst  of  man,        es  sa  enn  frojn  jotunn
a  vas  lu]?r  of  lagijr.'

OJ?inn  kva|> :

3&      '  Seg  )?at  et  niunda,         alls  ]>ik  svinnan  kvej>a,

ef  }>u,  Vafj?ruJ)nir !  vitir :
hva)?an  vindr  of  komr         sas  ferr  vag  yfir  ?
£  menn  hann  sjalfan  of  sea.'

31,  lines  3,  4.— Missing  in  R  A.     Supplied  from  r  by  B.  Gv.  L.  C.J.  G.  S.


THE    WORDS    OF    THE    MIGHTY    WEAVER.        51

Weaver.

31.  From  Stormy-billow        sprang  poison-drops,

which  waxed  into  Jotun  form,
and  from  him  are  come        the  whole  of  our  kin  ;
all  fierce  and  dread  is  that  race.

Odin.

32.  Answer  well  the  seventh,        if  thou  hast  the  wit,

and  knowest,  Mighty  Weaver, —
how  that  ancient  Being        begot  his  children
who  knew  not  joy  of  a  giantess.

Weaver.

33.  'Tis  said  that  under        the  Frost-giant's  arm

grew  a  boy  and  girl  together ;
foot  with  foot  begot         of  that  first  wise  giant,
and  a  six-headed  son  was  born.

Odin.

34.  Answer  well  the  eighth,         if  thou  hast  the  wit,

and  knowest,  Mighty  Weaver, —

what  mindst  thou  of  old,         and  didst  earliest  know  ?
since  I  ween  thou  art  all  wise,  giant !

Weaver.

35.  Untold  winters        ere  Earth  was  shaped,

roaring  Bergelm  was  born  ;
I  mind  me  first        when  that  most  wise  giant
of  old  in  a  cradle  was  laid.

Odin.

36.  Answer  well  the  ninth,         if  thou  hast  the  wit,

and  knowest,  Mighty  Weaver, —

whence  comes  the  Wind         which  fares  o'er  the  waves,
but  which  never  man  hath  seen.

31. — Stormy-billow,  a  mythical  river  between  Asgard  and  Jotunheim;  see  Hym.
st.  5,  Sn.E.  c.  5.  35. — Cradle.  Icelandic  lnj>r  has  various  meanings — meal-bin
box,  boat,  ark;  see  Introd.


52  VAFpRUpNISMAL.

Vafyntynir  kvaj> :

37.  '  Hrcesvelgr  heitir         en  sitr  a  himins  enda,

jotunn  i  arnar  ham  ;
af  hans  vs6ngjum         kve)>a  vind  koma
alia  menn  yfir.'

O)?inn  kva)? :

38.  '  Seg  )?at  et  tiunda,          alls  j?u  tiva  rok

611,  Vafyrujmir  !  vitir  :

hva]?an  NjorJ>r  of  kvam         me]?  asa  sunum —
hofum  ok  horgum         hann  rge)?r  hundmorgum-

ok  vasat  hann  asum  alinn  ? '

Vafyrujmir  kva]? :

39.  '  I  Vanaheimi         skopu  hann  vis  regin

ok  seldu  at  gislingu  go]>um  ;
i  aldar  rok         hann  mun  aptr  koma
heim  me)?  visum  Vonum.'

6j?inn  kva]>:

40.  '  Seg  )?at  et  ellifta,         alls  \ik  svinnan  kve}>a,

ef  \u,  Vafyru\niv !  vitir :

hverir'u  yta.r        es  0}>ins  tunum  i

hoggvask  hverjan  dag  ?  '

Vaf]?ruJ?nir  kvaj? :

41.  '  Allir  einherjar         6)?ins  tunum  i

hoggvask  hverjan  dag ;
val  )?eir  kjosa         ok  ri)?a  vigi  fra,
sitja  meirr  of  sattir  saman.'


40.— In  R  A  the  strophe  runs  Seg)>u  |?at  ellifta,       hvar  )fta  tunum  i,  followed  by
41  II.  2,  3,  4,  which  are  again  repeated  in  41,  emended  to  agree  with  24,  34,  36,  G.  H.  S.


THE     WORDS     OF    THE     MIGHTY    WEAVER.        53

Weaver.

.

37.  Corpse-swallower  sits        at  the  end  of  heaven,

a  Jotun  in  eagle  form  ;

from  his  wings,  they  say,         comes  the  wind  which  fares
over  all  the  dwellers  of  Earth.

Odin.

38.  Answer  well  the  tenth,         since  all  tidings  of  gods

thou  knowest,  Mighty  Weaver, —
whence  Niord  first  came         mid  the  ^Esir  kin-
courts  and  altars         he  owns  in  hundreds —

who  was  not  reared  in  their  race.

Weaver.

39.  In  Wane-home  once         the  wise  Powers  made  him

and  gave  him  as  hostage  to  gods ;
in  the  story  of  time         he  shall  yet  come  home
to  the  wise  foreseeing  Wanes.

Odin.

40.  Answer  well  the  eleventh,        since  they  call  thee  wise,

if  thou  knowest,  Mighty  Weaver —
who  are  the  beings         who  thus  do  battle
in  the  dwellings  of  Odin  each  day  ?

Weaver.

41.  All  the  Chosen  Warriors        are  waging  war

in  the  dwellings  of  Odin  each  day :
they  choose  the  slain,         ride  home  from  the  strife,
then  at  peace  sit  again  together.


37. — Corpse-swallower  is  perhaps  identical  with  the  raven  of  Vsp.  47.  38,  39. —
JEsir,  WaiTes.  These  are  the  two  races  of  the  gods  ;  for  their  war,  see  Vsp.  st.  21-24  and
Introd.  to  Vsp.  41. — Chosen  Warriors,  see  Grin.  st.  21.


54  VAFpRUpNISMA'L.

6)>inn  kva)>  :

42.  '  Seg  )>at  et  tolfta,         hvi  }>u  tiva  rok

oil,  Vaf  j>ru)mir  !  vitir  :
fra  jotna  runum         ok  allra  go)>a
segir  ]>u  et  sannasta,
enn  alsvinni  jotunn  !  '

Vafyrujmir  kva]>:

43.  '  Fra  jotna  runum         ok  allra  go)ra.

ek  kann  segja  satt,
J?vit  hvern  hefk         heim  of  komit  :
niu  kvamk  heima         fyr  Niflhel  ne)>an,

hinig  deyja  [or  helju]  halir.'


44.  '  Fjol)?  ek  for,         fjol)?  ek  freista]?ak,

fjolj?  of  reyndak  regin  :
hvat  lifir  manna,         )>as  enn  mfcra  li)>r
fimbulvetr  me]?  firum  ?  '

Vafyrujmir  kvai\>  :

45.  '  Lif  ok  Lifyrasir,         en  ]?au  leynask  munu

i  holti  Hoddm'imis  ;
morgindoggvar        ]>a.u  ser  at  mat  hafa
en  )?a]>an  af  aldir  alask.'

OJ?inn  kvaj>:

46.  '  FjolJ?  ek  for,        fjolj?  ek  freista)?ak,

fjol]?  of  reyndak  regin  :
hva)>an  komr  sol         a  enn  sl^tta  himin
]?as  )>essi  hefr  Fenrir  farit  ?  '


THE    WORDS    OF    THE     MIGHTY    WEAVER.       55

Odin.

42.  Answer  well  the  twelfth,         how  all  the  story

of  the  Powers  thou  knowest,  Weaver.—
Canst  thou  truly  tell  me        the  secrets  of  Jotuns
and  all  the  gods,  wise  giant  ?

Weaver.

43.  Most  truly  I  can        tell  thee  the  secrets

of  Jotuns  and  all  the  gods ;
since  I  have  been         into  every  world,
even  nine  worlds        to  Mist-Hel  beneath

whither  die  the  dead  from  Hel.

Odin.

44.  Far  have  I  fared,         much  have  I  ventured,

oft  have  I  proved  the  Powers :

what  beings  shall  live        when  the  long  Dread  Winter
comes  o'er  the  people  of  earth  ?

Weaver.

45.  Life  and  Life-craver,        who  hidden  shall  lie

in  the  boughs  of  Yggdrasil's  Ash  :
morning  dews        they  shall  have  as  meat ;
thence  shall  come  new  kindreds  of  men.

Odin.

46.  Far  have  I  fared,         much  have  I  ventured,

oft  have  I  proved  the  Powers :

whence  comes  a  new  Sun        in  the  clear  heaven  again
when  the  Wolf  has  swallowed  the  old.

43. — Nine  Worlds.  Nine  was  a  mystic  number  ;  Hdv.  137,  Skm.  21,  39,  6-c.  In
Ah.  are  mentioned  worlds  of  &sir,  Wanes,  giants,  dwarfs,  elves,  men,  and  the  dead  in
Hel,  but  nine  are  never  enumerated;  Cf.  Vsp.  2.  44. — Dread  Winter  or  Fimbul-vetr
is  the  sign  of  the  coming  doom  of  the  gods  (st.  51)  mentioned  by  Snorri ;  see  also  Hdl.  st.
16.  45. — Yggdrasil  is  suggested  by  Hodd-mimir's  wood ;  Cf.  Mimameid  Fj.  st.  14
18,  and  Introd.  Hdv.,  which  is  clearly  the  World  tree.  46. — The  Wolf,  Fenrir.


56  VAFpRUpNISMAL.

Vafyntynir  kva)>  :

47.  '  Eina  dottur         berr  Alfrojmll,

aj>r  henni  Fenrir  fari  ;
su  skal  rtya,         ]>as  regin  deyja
mojmr  brautir  msbr.'

6)nnn  kvaj?  :

48.  '  Fjol]>  ek  for,         fjolj?  ek  freista}>ak,

fjolj?  of  reyndak  regin  :
hverjar  'u  meyjar        es  Itya  mar  yfir,
?ar  fara  ?  '

Vafyrujmir  kvaj>:


49.  '  priar  Ylfyir        falla  ]>orp  yfir

meyja  M6g)?rasis,

hamingjur  einar        )>E6rs  i  heimi  'ru,
]>6  \&r  me]?  jotnum  alask.'

6)?inn  kva]?:

50.  '  Fjol]?  ek  for,         fjoty  ek  freista)?ak,

fjol]?  of  reyndak  regin  :

hverir  ra]?a  sosir         eignum  go)?a,

|?as  sloknar  Surta  logi  ?  '

Vaf  j?rti)mir  kva]?  :

51.  '  Vtyarr  ok  Vdli         byggva  v6  go)?a,

]?ds  sloknar  Surta  logi  ;
M6J?i  ok  Magni         skulu  Mjollni  hafa
Vingnis  at  vig)?roti.'


49-—  fro)nr,  HI.  G.  H.J..    j^joj^ar,  E  A.


THE    WORDS    OF    THE     MIGHTY    WEAVER.        57

Weaver.

47.  One  daughter  alone        shall  that  Elf-beam  bear

before  she  is  swallowed  by  the  Wolf ;
and  the  maid  shall  ride         on  the  mother's  path
after  the  Powers  have  perished.

Odin.

48.  Far  have  I  fared,        much  have  I  ventured,

oft  have  I  proved  the  Powers :
who  are  those  maidens        who  pass  o'er  the  sea
wandering,  wise  in  mind  ?

Weaver.

49.  There  fly  three  troops        of  Mogthrasir's  maidens

and  hover  o'er  homes  of  men ;
the  only  guardian        spirits  on  earth,
and  they  are  of  Jotuns  born.

Odin.

50.  Far  have  I  fared,         much  have  I  ventured,

oft  have  I  proved  the  Powers :

who  shall  afterwards  hold         the  wealth  of  the  gods
when  the  fire  of  dark  Surt  is  slaked  ?

Weaver.

51.  In  the  fanes  of  the  gods         shall  dwell  Vidar  and  Vali

when  the  fire  of  dark  Surt  is  slaked ;
to  Modi  and  Magni        shall  Mjollnir  be  given
when  to  Thor  comes  the  end  of  strife.


49. — Mogthrasir  is  unknown.  The  interpretation  "  Son-craver  "  suggested  by  G.  is
doubtful.  51. — Vidar,  see  Grm.  17,  Vsp.  54,  and  Vali,  both  sons  of  Odin;  set  Bdr.  st.
11.  Modi,  see  Hym.  st.  35,  and  Magni,  see  Hrbl.  st.  9;  both  sons  of  Thor.  Mjollnir,
Thor's  hammer ;  see  Iprk.  and  Introd.  To  Thor  comes  the  end  :  he  is  slain  by  the
World -serpent,  Vsp.  st.  56.  He  is  here  called  Vingnir ;  set  A  lv.,  st.  6.

1


58  VAFpRUpNISMAL.

OJ>inn  kva]? :

52.  '  Fjol)?  ek  for,         fjolj?  ek  freistaj^ak,

fjolj?  of  reyndak  regin  :

hvat  verj?r  6jmi         at  aldrlagi,

)>as  of  rjufask  regin  ? '

Vafyrujmir  kva]? :

53.  '  Ulfr  gleypa         mun  Aldafo)?r,

J?ess  mun  Vtyarr  vreka ;
kalda  kjapta         hann  klyfja  mun
*  vitnis  vigi  at.'

6)>inn  kva)?:

54.  '  Fjolj?  ek  for,         fjol]>  ek  freistaj^ak,

fjolj?  of  reyndak  regin  :
hvat  maclti  0|?inn,         a)>r  a  bal  stigi,
sjalfr  i  eyra  syni  ?  '

Vafyrujmir  kva)> :

55.  '  Ey  manni  ]?at  veit,         hvat  jm  i  ardaga

sag)?ir  i  eyra  syni :
feigum  munni         mseltak  mina  forna  stafi

auk  of  ragna  rok.
Nu  vi)?  OJ?in         deildak  or)?s)?eki,

J?u'st  sc  visastr  vera.'


THE     WORDS     OF    THE     MIGHTY     WEAVER.       59

Odin.

52.  Far  have  I  fared,         much  have  I  ventured,

oft  have  I  proved  the  Powers :
what  foe  shall  bring,        at  the  Doom  of  gods,
to  Odin  the  end  of  life  ?

Weaver.

53.  Fenrir  shall  swallow        the  Father  of  men,

but  this  shall  Vidar  avenge  :

with  his  sword  he  shall  cleave        the  ice-cold  jaws
of  the  mighty  monster  in  strife.

Odin.

54.  Far  have  I  fared,         much  have  I  ventured,

oft  have  I  proved  the  Powers :
what  spake  Odin's  self         in  the  ear  of  his  son,
when  Baldr  was  laid  on  the  bale  fire  ?

Weaver.

55.  That  no  man  knows,         what  Thou  didst  speak

of  old  in  the  ear  of  thy  son.
Thus  with  fated  lips         have  I  uttered  old  lore

and  told  the  great  Doom  of  the  Powers  ;
for  I  have  striven  in  word-skill         with  Odin's  self ;

thou  art  ever  the  wisest  of  all.

54.— See  Bdr.,  st.  No.  JO.


i.     Gattir  allar,

a]>r  gangi  fram,
umb  skoj?ask  skyli,
umb  skygnask  skyli ;

]?vit  ovist  es,

hvar  6vinir

sitja  a  fleti  fyrir.


Hdvamdl.— In  R  No.  2  ;  cited  in  Sn.  E.


THE   WORDS   OF  ODIN
THE    HIGH   ONE.

(Wisdom  for  Wanderers  and
Counsel  to  Guests.)


i.


At  every  door-way,
ere  one  enters,

one  should  spy  round,

one  should  pry  round,
for  uncertain  is  the  witting
that  there  be  no  foeman  sitting,

within,  before  one  on  the  floor.


The  High  One,  a  name  for  Odin ;  see  Grm.  st.  49.


62  HAVAMAL.

2.  Gefendr  heilir !         gestr's  inn  kominn  ;

hvar  skal  sitja  sja?
mjok  es  bra|>r         sas  £  brondum  skal
sins  of  freista  frama.

3.  Elds  es  J^orf        J>eims  inn  es  kominn

auk  a  kne  kalinn  ;
matar  ok  vaj>a         es  manni  )>6rf
J>eims  hefr  of  fjall  farit.

4.  Vatns  es  ]>6rf         )>eims  til  verj>ar  komr,

J>erru  ok  ]>j6)>laj?ar,
goj>s  of  os)?is         ef  ser  geta  mr&tti
or]>,  ok  endr]7ogu.

5.  Vits  es  ]?6rf         )?eims  vi]?a  ratar,

drclt  es  heima  hvat ;
at  augabrag)>i         ver)>r  sas  etki  kann
auk  me])  snotrum  sitr.

6.  At  hyggjandi  sinni         skylit  ma)>r  hrresinn  vesa,

heldr  gtutinn  at  gej?i ;
)?as  horskr  ok  ]?6gull         komr  heimisgar)>a  til,

sjaldan  ver]?r  viti  vorum.
)?vit  6brig]?ra  vin         fser  ma]?r  aldrigi,

an  manvit  mikit.

7.  Enn  vari  gestr,         es  til  verj>ar  komr,

Jmnnu  hljo}>i  J>egir,
eyrum  hly)?ir,         en  augum  sko|?ar  :
sva  nysisk  fro]?ra  hverr  fyrir.

8.  Hinn  es  sscll         es  ser  of  getr

lof  ok  liknstafi ;

6d£ella  er  vty  ]?at         es  ma]?r  eiga  skal
annars  brjostum  i.

2. — £  brondum,  B.;   a  brautum,  paper  MSS.  and  K.  D.  M.


THE     WORDS     OF     ODIN     THE     HIGH     ONE.         63

2.  Hail,  ye  Givers  !        a  guest  is  come  ;

say  !  where  shall  he  sit  within  ?
Much  pressed  is  he         who  fain  on  the  hearth
would  seek  for  warmth  and  weal.

3.  He  hath  need  of  fire,        who  now  is  come,

numbed  with  cold  to  the  knee  ;
food  and  clothing        the  wanderer  craves
who  has  fared  o'er  the  rimy  fell.

4.  He  craves  for  water,         who  comes  for  refreshment,

drying  and  friendly  bidding,
marks  of  good  will,         fair  fame  if  'tis  won,
and  welcome  once  and  again.

5.  He  hath  need  of  his  wits         who  wanders  wide,

aught  simple  will  serve  at  home  ;

but  a  gazing-stock         is  the  fool  who  sits

mid  the  wise,  and  nothing  knows.

6.  Let  no  man  glory         in  the  greatness  of  his  mind,

but  rather  keep  watch  o'er  his  wits.
Cautious  and  silent  let  him  enter  a  dwelling  ;

to  the  heedful  comes  seldom  harm,
for  none  can  find  a  more  faithful  friend

than  his  wealth  of  mother  wit.

7.  Let  the  wary  stranger        who  seeks  refreshment

keep  silent  with  sharpened  hearing ;
with  his  ears  let  him  listen,         and  look  with  his  eyes ;
thus  each  wise  man  spies  out  the  way.

8.  Happy  is  he        who  wins  for  himself

fair  fame  and  kindly  words  ;
but  uneasy  is  that         which  a  man  doth  own
while  it  lies  in  another's  breast.


'  X


64  HAVAMAL.

9.  Sa  es  ssoll         es  sjalfir  of  a

lof  ok  vit  mej>an  lifir,
]?vit  ill  ra]>         hefr  ma)>r  opt  )>egit
annars  brj6stum  or.

10.  Byr)>i  betri         berrat  majjr  brautu  at,

an  s€  manvit  mikit ;

au)>i  betra         j^ykkir  J?at  i  okunnum  sta)>,
slikt  es  vala)>s  vera.

11.  Byr)>i  betri        berrat  maj?r  brautu  at,

an  s6  manvit  mikit ;
vegnest  verra        vegra  hann  velli  at,
an  se  ofdrykkja  61s.

12.  (n)     Esa  sv£  gott,         sem  gott  kve]?a,

61  alda  sunum,

Jwt  (sera,  veit,         es  fleira  drekkr,
sins  til  ge)?s  gumi.

13.  (12)     6minnis  hegri  heitir         sas  of  otyrum  )?rumir,

hann  stelr  ge]?i  guma ;
j?ess  fugls  fjo)?rum        ek  fjotra)>r  vask
i  gar}?i  Gunnla)?ar.

14.  (13)     Olr  ek  varj?,        var)>  ofrolvi

at  ens  fro}?a  Fjalars ;
]?vi's  6l)?r  bazt,        at  aptr  of  heimtir
hverr  sitt  ge|>  gumi.

15.  (14)     pagalt  ok  hugalt         skyli  )?j6)?ans  barn

ok  vigdjarft  vesa ;

gla)>r  ok  reifr        skyli  gumna  hverr
unz  sinn  bi)?r  bana.


.— The  strophe  numbering  of  R  is  marked  in  brackets.


THE    WORDS    OF    ODIN    THE     HIGH     ONE.        65

9.     Happy  is  he        who  hath  in  himself

praise  and  wisdom  in  life;
for  oft  doth  a  man         ill  counsel  get
when  'tis  born  in  another's  breast.

10.  A  better  burden         can  no  man  bear

on  the  way  than  his  mother  wit :
'tis  the  refuge  of  the  poor,         and  richer  it  seems
than  wealth  in  a  world  untried.

11.  A  better  burden         can  no  man  bear

on  the  way  than  his  mother  wit :
and  no  worse  provision         can  he  carry  with  him
than  too  deep  a  draught  of  ale.

12.  Less  good  than  they  say         for  the  sons  of  men

is  the  drinking  oft  of  ale  :

for  the  more  they  drink,         the  less  can  they  think
and  keep  a  watch  o'er  their  wits.

13.  A  bird  of  Unmindfulness         flutters  o'er  ale  feasts,

wiling  away  men's  wits  :

with  the  feathers  of  that  fowl         I  was  fettered  once
in  the  garths  of  Gunnlod  below.

14.  Drunk  was  I  then,         I  was  over  drunk

in  that  crafty  Jotun's  court.
But  best  is  an  ale  feast         when  man  is  able
to  call  back  his  wits  at  once.

15.  Silent  and  thoughtful         and  bold  in  strife

the  prince's  bairn  should  be.
Joyous  and  generous         let  each  man  show  him
until  he  shall  suffer  death.


13.— Gunnlod  ;  st.  104.  14.— That  crafty  Jotun,  Suttung  ;  st.  102.  The  name
Fjalar  in  the  text  also  belongs  to  Thor's  famous  opponent  ;  see  Hrbl.  st.  26.  Possibly  it
is  here  used  in  a  general  sense  for  any  Jotun.

K


66  HAVAMAL.

16.  (15)     6snjallr  ma)>r         hyggsk  munu  ey  lifa,

ef  vij>  vig  varask,
en  elli  gefr         hanum  engi  fri)>,
}>6t  hanum  geirar  gefi.

17.  (16)     Kopir  afglapi,         es  til  kynnis  komr,

)>ylsk  hann  umb  e]>a  )>rumir;
alt  es  senn,         ef  hann  sylg  of  getr,
uppi's  )?a  ge]>  guma.

18   (17)     S£  einn  veit         es  vi)?a  ratar

auk  hefr  fjolj>  of  farit,
hverju  ge]?i         styrir  gumna  hverr
sas  vitandi  's  vits.

19.  (18)     Haldit  ma)>r  a  keri,         drekki  ]>6  at  hofi  mjo|>,

mseli  ]?arft  e]?a  ]>egi ;
6kynnis  )?ess         var  )?ik  engi  ma)?r,
at  )>u  gangir  snimma  at  sofa.

20.  (19)     Gra)?ugr  hair,         nema  ge)>s  viti,

etr  ser  aldrtrega ;

opt  feer  hlscgis,         es  me]?  horskum  komr,
manni  heimskum  magi.

21.  (20)     Hjarjnr  ]?at  vitu,         nscr  )>£er  heim  skulu,

ok  ganga  )>a  af  grasi ;
en  6svi)?r  ma)>r        kann  eevagi
sins  of  mal  maga.

22.  (21)     Vesall  ma)?r         ok  ilia  skapi

hleer  at  hvivetna ;

hitki  hann  veit,         es  hann  vita  )>yrfti,
at  hann  esa  vamma  vanr.

23.  (22)     Osvtyr  ma)?r        vakir  of  allar  nsetr

ok  hyggr        at  hvivetna ;
j>a  es  mo|?r        es  at  morni  komr,
allt  es  vil  sem  vas.


THE     WORDS     OF    ODIN     THE     HIGH     ONE.        67

16.  A  coward  believes        he  will  ever  live

if  he  keep  him  safe  from  strife :
but  old  age  leaves  him         not  long  in  peace
though  spears  may  spare  his  life.

17.  A  fool  will  gape         when  he  goes  to  a  friend,

and  mumble  only,  or  mope  ;

but  pass  him  the  ale  cup         and  all  in  a  moment
the  mind  of  that  man  is  shown.

18.  He  knowrs  alone         who  has  wandered  wide,

and  far  has  fared  on  the  way,
what  manner  of  mind         a  man  doth  own
who  is  wise  of  head  and  heart.

19.  Keep  not  the  mead  cup         but  drink  thy  measure  ;

speak  needful  words  or  none :
none  shall  upbraid  thee         for  lack  of  breeding
if  soon  thou  seek'st  thy  rest.

20.  A  greedy  man,         if  he  be  not  mindful,

eats  to  his  own  life's  hurt :

oft  the  belly  of  the  fool         will  bring  him  to  scorn
when  he  seeks  the  circle  of  the  wise.

21.  Herds  know  the  hour         of  their  going  home

and  turn  them  again  from  the  grass ;
but  never  is  found         a  foolish  man

who  knows  the  measure  of  his  maw.

22.  The  miserable  man         and  evil  minded

makes  of  all  things  mockery,

and  knows  not  that         which  he  best  should  know,
that  he  is  not  free  from  faults.

23.  The  unwise  man         is  awake  all  night,

and  ponders  everything  over ;
when  morning  comes         he  is  weary  in  mind,
and  all  is  a  burden  as  ever.


68  HAVAMAL.

24.  (23)     Osnotr  ma)>r        hyggr  ser  alia  vesa

vtyhkejendr  vini ;

hitki  hann  fi)?r,         )?6t  of  hann  far  lesi,
ef  me)?  snotrum  sitr.

25.  (24)     Osnotr  ma)?r         hyggr  ser  alia  vesa

vi)?hl£&jendr  vini ;
)?a  )?at  fi)?r,         es  at  j?ingi  komr,
at  a  formselendr  fa.

26.  (25)     6snotr  ma)?r        )?ykkisk  allt  vita,

ef  a  ser  i  va  veru  ;

hitki  hann  veit,         hvat  hann  skal  vi)?  kve)?a,
ef  hans  freista  firar.

27.  (26)     6snotr  ma)?r,         es  me)?  aldir  komr,

]>at  es  bazt  at  J>egi ;
engi  |?at  veit,         at  hann  etki  kann,

nema  hann  mseli  til  mart.
Veita  ma]?r         hinns  va3tki  veit,

]?6t  hann  mseli  til  mart.

28.  (27)     Fr6)>r  sa  )?ykkisk         es  fregna  kann

ok  segja  et  sama ;
eyvitu  leyna         megu  yta  synir
)ws  gengr  of  guma.

f

29.  (28)     CErna  mselir         sas  £cva  )?egir

sta)?lausu  stafi ;

hra]?m£clt  tunga,         nema  haldendr  eigi,
opt  ser  ogott  of  gelr.

30.  (29)     At  augabragjn         skala  maj>r  annan  hafa,

]>6t  til  kynnis  komi ;
margr  fro)?r  ]?ykkisk         ef  freginn  esat,
ok  nai  j^urrfjallr  j^ruma.

31.  (30)     Fr6J>r  ]?ykkisk         sas  flotta  tekr

gestr  at  gest  ha;)min  ;
veita  gorla         sas  of  verj?i  glissir
]?6t  me)?  gromxim  glami.


THE    WORDS    OF    ODIN     THE     HIGH    ONE.        69

24.  The  unwise  man         weens  all  who  smile

and  flatter  him  are  his  friends,
nor  notes  how  oft         they  speak  him  ill
when  he  sits  in  the  circle  of  the  wise.

25.  The  unwise  man         weens  all  who  smile

and  flatter  him  are  his  friends ;
but  when  he  shall  come         into  court  he  shall  find
there  are  few  to  defend  his  cause.

26.  The  unwise  man         thinks  all  to  know,

while  he  sits  in  a  sheltered  nook  ;

but  he  knows  not  one  thing,         what  he  shall  answer,
if  men  shall  put  him  to  proof.

27.  For  the  unwise  man         'tis  best  to  be  mute

when  he  comes  amid  the  crowd,
for  none  is  aware        of  his  lack  of  wit

if  he  wastes  not  too  many  words ;
for  he  who  lacks  wit         shall  never  learn

though  his  words  flow  ne'er  so  fast.

28.  Wise  he  is  deemed         who  can  question  well,

and  also  answer  back  :
the  sons  of  men         can  no  secret  make
of  the  tidings  told  in  their  midst.

29.  Too  many  unstable         words  are  spoken

by  him  who  ne'er  holds  his  peace ;
the  hasty  tongue         sings  its  own  mishap
if  it  be  not  bridled  in.

30.  Let  no  man  be  held        as  a  laughing-stock,

though  he  come  as  guest  for  a  meal :
wise  enough  seem  many         while  they  sit  dry-skinned
and  are  not  put  to  proof.

31.  A  guest  thinks  him  witty         who  mocks  at  a  guest

and  runs  from  his  wrath  away ;
but  none  can  be  sure         who  jests  at  a  meal
that  he  makes  not  fun  among  foes.


70  HA'VAMAL.

32.  (31)     Gumnar  margir        erusk  gagnhollir,

en  at  vir)>i  vrekask  ;
aldar  r6g         ]?at  mun  ae  vesa,
orir  gestr  vty  gest.

33.  (32)     Arliga  ver^ar        skyli  maj>r  opt  £6,

nema  til  kynnis  komi  :
sitr  ok  snopir,         kfctr  sem  solginn  s€,
ok  kann  fregna  at  fou.

34.  (33)     Afhvarf  mikit         es  til  ills  vinar

]?6t  a  brautu  bui,

en  til  g6)>s  vinar        Hggja  gagnvegir,
]>6t  s6  firr  farinn.

35-    (34)     Ganga  skal,         skala  gestr  vesa

ey  i  einum  sta)> ;
Ijiifr  verj?r  leij^r,         ef  lengi  sitr
annars  fletjum  a.

3^>.   (35)     Bu  es  betra,        ]>6t  litit  se,

hair  es  heima  hverr ;
J?6t  tvsor  geitr  eigi         ok  taugreptan  sal,
|>at's  |>6  betra  an  been.

37.   (36)     Bu  es  betra,        \>bi  litit  s6,

hair  es  heima  hverr  ;
blojmgt's  hjarta         )?eims  bifta  skal
ser  i  mal  hvert  matar.

38-    (37)     Vapnum  sinum         skala  ma)?r  velli  a

feti  ganga  framarr,
]?vit  ovist's  at  vita,         neer  ver)?r  a  vegum  uti

geirs  of  }?6rf  guma.

\
39.    (38)     Fannkak  mildan  mann         e]?a  sva  matargoj?an,

at  vaerit  J^iggja  J?egit,
e)?a  sins  fear         svagi  gjoflan,
at  leij?  s€  laun  ef  )>egi.


33.— Nema,  R,  Dt.  HI.;  ne  dn,  B.  Gv.  S.  G.        39.— Gjoflan,  G.  B.  Gv.  Mk.


THE     WORDS     OF     ODIN     THE     HIGH     ONE.        71

32.  Oft,  though  their  hearts        lean  towards  one  another,

friends  are  divided  at  table ;

ever  the  source        of  strife  'twill  be,

that  guest  will  anger  guest.

33.  A  man  should  take  always         his  meals  betimes

unless  he  visit  a  friend,

or  he  sits  and  mopes,        and  half  famished  seems,
and  can  ask  or  answer  nought.

34.  Long  is  the  round         to  a  false  friend  leading,

e'en  if  he  dwell  on  the  way ;
but  though  far  off  fared,         to  a  faithful  friend
straight  are  the  roads  and  short.

35.  A  guest  must  depart        again  on  his  way,

nor  stay  in  the  same  place  ever ;
if  he  bide  too  long         on  another's  bench
the  loved  one  soon  becomes  loathed.

36.  One's  own  house  is  best,         though  small  it  may  be  ;

each  man  is  master  at  home ;

though  he  have  but  two  goats        and  a  bark-thatched  hut
'tis  better  than  craving  a  boon.

37.  One's  own  house  is  best,        though  small  it  may  be,

each  man  is  master  at  home ;
with  a  bleeding  heart        will  he  beg,  who  must,
his  meat  at  every  meal.

38.  Let  a  man  never  stir        on  his  road  a  step

without  his  weapons  of  war ;

for  unsure  is  the  knowing         when  need  shall  arise
of  a  spear  on  the  way  without.

39.  I  found  none  so  noble         or  free  with  his  food,

who  was  not  gladdened  with  a  gift,
nor  one  who  gave        of  his  gifts  such  store
but  he  loved  reward,  could  he  win  it.


72  HAVAMAL.

40.  (39)     Fear  sins         es  fcngit  hefr

skylit  ma)>r  |>6rf  )>ola  ;

opt  sparir  leijmm         )>ats  hefr  ljufum  hugat,
mart  gengr  verr  an  varer.

41.  (40)     Vapnum  ok  vajnim         skulu  vinir  gle)>jask,

)>at's  £  sjolfum  synst ;

vtyrgefendr  [ok  endrgefendr]         erusk  vinir  lengst,
ef  )>at  btyr  at  ver]?a  vel.

42.  (41)     Vin  sinum         skal  ma)>r  vinr  vesa

ok  gjalda  gjof  vty  gjof,
hlatr  vi)>  hlatri         skyli  hollar  taka,
en  lausung  vty  lygi.

43.  (42)     Vin  sinum         skal  ma)>r  vinr  vesa,

)>eim  ok  )?ess  vin,

en  ovinar  sins         skyli  engi  ma)>r
vinar  vinr  vesa.

44.  (43)     Veiztu,  ef  vin  dtt         j?anns  ]>u  vel  truir,

ok  vill  af  hdnum  gott  geta,
ge]?i  skalt  vij?  ]>a.nn  blanda         ok  gjofum  skipta,
fara  at  finna  opt.

45.  (44)     Ef  att  annan         )?anns  ]?u  ilia  truir,

vill  af  hanum  ]>6  gott  geta,
fagrt  skalt  vty  |>ann  msela,         en  flatt  hyggja
ok  gjalda  lausung  vi)?  lygi.

46.  (45)     pat's  enn  of  )>ann         es  jm  ilia  truir,

ok  jeer's  grunr  at  bans  gej>i :
hleeja  skalt  vi}>  ]>eim         ok  of  hug  maMa,
glik  skulu  gjold  gjofum.

47.  (46)     Ungr  vask  forjmm,         for  ek  einn  saman,

)>a  varj>k  vilfr  vega  ;
au)?ugr  Jjottumk         es  ek  annan  fann  :
ma)>r  es  manns  gaman.


THE    WORDS    OF    ODIN     THE     HIGH     OKE.        73

40.  Let  no  man  stint  him         and  suffer  need

of  the  wealth  he  has  won  in  life ;
oft  is  saved  for  a  foe        what  was  meant  for  a  friend,
and  much  goes  worse  than  one  weens.

41.  With  raiment  and  arms         shall  friends  gladden  each  other,

so  has  one  proved  oneself ;
for  friends  last  longest,         if  fate  be  fair,
who  give  and  give  again.

42.  To  his  friend  a  man         should  bear  him  as  friend,

and  gift  for  gift  bestow,
laughter  for  laughter        let  him  exchange,
but  leasing  pay  for  a  lie.

43.  To  his  friend  a  man         should  bear  him  as  friend,

to  him  and  a  friend  of  his  ;

but  let  him  beware         that  he  be  not  the  friend
of  one  who  is  friend  to  his  foe.

44.  Hast  thou  a  friend         whom  thou  trustest  well,

from  whom  thou  cravest  good  ?

Share  thy  mind  with  him,         gifts  exchange  with  him,
fare  to  find  him  oft.

45.  But  hast  thou  one         whom  thou  trustest  ill

yet  from  whom  thou  cravest  good  ?
Thou  shalt  speak  him  fair,         but  falsely  think,
and  leasing  pay  for  a  lie.

46.  Yet  further  of  him         whom  thou  trusted  ill,

and  whose  mind  thou  dost  misdoubt ;
thou  shalt  laugh  with  him         but  withhold  thy  thought,
for  gift  with  like  gift  should  be  paid.

47.  Young  Was  I  once,         I  walked  alone,

and  bewildered  seemed  in  the  way  ;
then  I  found  me  another        and  rich  I  thought  me,

for  man  is  the  joy  of  man.

L>


74  HAVAMAL.


48.  (47)     Mildir,  froeknir         menn  bazt  lifa,

sjaldan  sut  ala,

en  osnjallr  ma|?r         uggir  hotvetna,
sytir  &  gloggr  vi)?  gjofum.

49.  (48)     Va)>ir  minar        gaf  ek  velli  at

tveim  tr£m6nnum  ;

rekkar  j?at  ]>6ttusk         es  |?eir  ript  hofyu  :
neiss  es  nokkvtyr  hair.

50.  (49)     Hrornar  ]>o\\         sus  stendr  ]?orpi  a,

hlyrat  borkr  n€  barr ;
sva  es  ma)?r         sas  manngi  ann,
hvat  skal  hann  lengi  lifa  ?

51.  (50)     Eldi  heitari         brinnr  mej?  ilium  vinum

fripr  fimm  daga,

en  J?a  sloknar,         es  enn  s^tti  komr,
ok  versnar  vinskapr  allr.

52.  (51)     Mikit  eitt         skala  manni  gefa,

opt  kaupir  i  litlu  lof ;
me)>  holfum  hleifi         ok  me)?  hollu  keri
fengumk  felaga.

53.  (52)     Litilla  sanda         litilla  sseva :

litil  eru  ge}>  guma ;
)?vit  allir  menn         ur]>ut  jafnspakir,
holf  es  old  hvar.

54.  (53)     Me)>alsnotr        skyli  manna  hverr,

&va  til  snotr  s€ ;
)>eim  era  fyr)?a         fegrst  at  lifa,
es  vel  mart  vitu.

53.— Hvar,  B's  emendation,  Dt.  HI.  L. ;   hvar,  R,  H.  G.  J.  S.        54.— Era,  Dt.
HI.  ;  er,  E,  G.  H.


THE     WORDS     OF     ODIN     THE     HIGH     ONE.         75

48.  Most  blest  is  he        who  lives  free  and  bold

and  nurses  never  a  grief,
for  the  fearful  man         is  dismayed  by  aught,
and  the  mean  one  mourns  over  giving.

49.  My  garments  once         I  gave  in  the  field

to  two  land-marks  made  as  men  ;
heroes  they  seemed         when  once  they  were  clothed  ;
'tis  the  naked  who  suffer  shame !

50.  The  pine  tree  wastes         which  is  perched  on  the  hill,

nor  bark  nor  needles  shelter  it ;
such  is  the  man         whom  none  doth  love ;
for  what  should  he  longer  live  ?

51.  Fiercer  than  fire        among  ill  friends

for  five  days  love  will  burn  ;

but  anon  'tis  quenched,         when  the  sixth  day  comes,
and  all  friendship  soon  is  spoiled.

52.  Not  great  things  alone         must  one  give  to  another,

praise  oft  is  earned  for  nought ;
with  half  a  loaf         and  a  tilted  bowl
I  have  found  me  many  a  friend.

53.  Little  the  sand         if  little  the  seas,

little  are  minds  of  men,

for  ne'er  in  the  world         were  all  equally  wise,
'tis  shared  by  the  fools  and  the  sage.

54.  Wise  in  measure         let  each  man  be  ;

but  let  him  not  wax  too  wise ;
for  never  the  happiest        of  men  is  he
who  knows  much  of  many  things.

49. — Two  land-marks,  so  V.  explains  two  tree-men.  50. — On  the  hill  or  in  the
open.  Icelandic  borp  has  this  meaning,  beside  the  more  common  one  of  hamlet;  G.
The  context  makes  it  quite  clear  that  an  unsheltered  spot  is  intended,  but  as  the  Norwegian
pine  flourishes  on  the  hill  and  dies  out  among  houses,  we  may  perhaps  infer  that  the  poem
did  not  originate  in  Norway.  51. — Five  days,  the  old  week  before  the  Christian  week
of  seven  days.  53. — Many  useless  suggestions  have  been  made  to  explain  this  strophe^
which  is  perhaps  only  a  general  reflection  on  the  vanity  of  human  nature.


76  H^VAMAL.


55-    (54)     Me)>alsnotr        skyli  manna  hverr,

sova  til  snotr  s€ ;

)>vit  snotrs  manns  hjarta         ver}>r  sjaldan  glatt,
ef  sa's  alsnotr  es  a.

56.  (55)     Me]>alsnotr         skyli  manna  hverr,

ecva  til  snotr  s6 ;
orlog  sin         viti  engi  fyrir,
^eim's  sorgalausastr  sefi.

57.  (56)     Brandr  af  brandi         brenn  unz  brunninn  es,

funi  kveykisk  af  funa ;
ma)>r  af  manni         ver|?r  at  mali  ku)?r,
en  til  dcelskr  af  dul.

58.  (57)     Ar  skal  risa         sas  annars  vill

fe  e)?a  fjor  hafa  ;

liggjandi  ulfr         sjaldan  leer  of  getr
n6  sofandi  maj>r  sigr.

59-    (58)     Ar  skal  risa         sas  a  yrkjendr  fa

ok  ganga  sins  verka  a  vit ;
mart  of  dvelr        J?anns  of  morgin  sefr,
halfr  es  au]?r  und  hvotum.

60.  (59)     purra  ski]?a        ok  ]?akinna  nspfra,

]?ess  kann  maj?r  mjot,
)?ess  vi)?ar         es  vinnask  megi
mal  ok  misseri.

61.  (60)     jTveginn  ok  mettr         rtyi  ma)?r  )>ingi  at,

J>6t  se"t  vffidr  til  vel ;

skua  ok  br6ka         skammisk  engi  ma)>r,
n€  bests  in  heldr,
Jjot  hann  hafit  go)?an.

57,  line  3. — R,  Dt.  HI.  /.,  maj?r  manni  ver]?r  af  mali  kuj?r,  A/A.  G.  H.  S.


THE     WORDS     OF     ODIN     THE     HIGH     ONE.        77

55.     Wise  in  measure        should  each  man  be ;

but  let  him  not  wax  too  wise ;
seldom  a  heart        will  sing  with  joy
if  the  owner  be  all  too  wise.


56.  Wise  in  measure        should  each  man  be,

but  ne'er  let  him  wax  too  wise :
who  looks  not  forward         to  learn  his  fate
unburdened  heart  will  bear.

57.  Brand  kindles  from  brand         until  it  be  burned,

spark  is  kindled  from  spark,
man  unfolds  him         by  speech  with  man,
but  grows  over  secret  through  silence.

58.  He  must  rise  betimes         who  fain  of  another

or  life  or  wealth  would  win  ;
scarce  falls  the  prey        to  sleeping  wolves,
or  to  slumberers  victory  in  strife.

59.  He  must  rise  betimes        who  hath  few  to  serve  him,

and  see  to  his  work  himself ;
who  sleeps  at  morning         is  hindered  much,
to  the  keen  is  wealth  half-won.

60.  Of  dry  logs  saved        and  roof-bark  stored

a  man  can  know  the  measure,
of  fire-wood  too        which  should  last  him  out
quarter  and  half  years  to  come.

61.  Fed  and  washed         should  one  ride  to  court

though  in  garments  none  too  new ;
thou  shalt  not  shame  thee         for  shoes  or  breeks,
nor  yet  for  a  sorry  steed.


78  HAVAMAL.

62.  (61)     Snapir  ok  gnapir,         es  til  s&var  komr,

orn  a  aldinn  mar ;

sva  e?  ma|>r         es  me)>r  morgum  komr
ok  a  formEclendr  fa.

63.  (62)     Fregna  ok  segja         skal  fr6J?ra  hverr,

sas  vill  heitinn  horskr ;
einn  vita,         n6  annarr  skal,
]>)6\>  veit,  ef  )>rir  'u.

64.  (63)     Riki  sitt         skyli  ra)>snotra  hverr

i  hofi  hafa ;

)?a  ]?at  fi)?r         es  mej>  frceknum  komr,
at  engi's  einna  hvatastr.

65.  (64)    [Gsetinn  ok  geyminn         skyli  gumna  hverr

ok  varr  at  vintrausti]
or]?a  J^eira,         es  ma]?r  6)?rum  segir,
opt  hann  gjold  of  getr.

66.  (65)     Mikilsti  snimma         kvamk  i  marga  sta)>i,

en  til  sty  i  suma ;

61  vas  drukkit,         sumt  vas  61agat :
sjaldan  hittir  leif?r  i  \\\>.

67.  (66)     Her  ok  hvar         mundi  mer  heim  of  bo)?it,

ef  ]?yrftak  at  malungi  mat
e)>a  tvau  Iser  hengi         at  ens  tryggva  vinar,
J>ars  hafyak  eitt  etit.

68.  (67)     Eldr  es  baztr         me]?  yta  sunum

auk  solar  syn,

heilyndi  sitt         ef  maj?r  hafa  nai'r,
an  vty  lost  at  lifa.


65,  lines  i  and  2. — A  blank  in  R  is  thus  supplied  by  the  paper  A/SS.,  B.  C.  T.  S.


THE     WORDS     OF     ODIN     THE     HIGH     ONE.        79

62.  Like  an  eagle  swooping         over  old  ocean,

snatching  after  his  prey,
so  comes  a  man         into  court  who  finds
there  are  few  to  defend  his  cause.

63.  Each  man  who  is  wise         and  would  wise  be  called

must  ask  and  answer  aright.

Let  one  know  thy  secret,         but  never  a  second, —
if  three  a  thousand  shall  know.

64.  A  wise  counselled  man         will  be  mild  in  bearing

and  use  his  might  in  measure,
lest  when  he  come        his  fierce  foes  among
he  find  others  fiercer  than  he.

65.  Each  man  should  be  watchful         and  wary  in  speech,

and  slow  to  put  faith  in  a  friend.
For  the  words  which  one         to  another  speaks
he  may  win  reward  of  ill.

66.  At  many  a  feast         I  was  far  too  late,

and  much  too  soon  at  some ;
drunk  was  the  ale         or  yet  unserved  :
never  hits  he  the  joint  who  is  hated.

67.  Here  and  there  to  a  home         I  had  haply  been  asked

had  I  needed  no  meat  at  my  meals,

or  were  two  hams  left  hanging         in  the  house  of  that  friend
where  I  had  partaken  of  one.

68.  Most  dear  is  fire         to  the  sons  of  men,

most  sweet  the  sight  of  the  sun  ;

good  is  health         if  one  can  but  keep  it,

and  to  live  a  life  without  shame.


62. — The  meaning  of  this  strophe  is  sonit-u-hat  obscure,  but  perhaps  the  idea  is  that
the  eagle,  wont  to  seek  his  food  in  the  quiet  mountain  pools,  is  baffled  in  face  of  the  stormy
sea;  see  Vsp.  59.  66. — Hits  the  joint ;  or,  as  we  should  say,  hits  the  nail  on  the
head.


80  HAVAMAL.

69.  (68)     Esat  ma)>r  alls  vesall,         )>6t  se  ilia  heill ;

sumr's  af  sunum  sccll,
sumr  af  framdum,         sumr  af  i€  oernu,
sumr  af  verkum  vel.

70.  (69)     Betra's  lifjmm         an  s6  61ifjmm,

ey  getr  kvikr  ku  ;

eld  sak  upp  brinna         au)?gum  manni  fyrir,
en  uti  vas  dau)?r  fyr  durum.

71.  (70)     Haltr  rij?r  hrossi,        hjorj;  rekr  handarvanr,

daufr  vegr  ok  dugir ;
blindr  es  betri        an  brendr  se,
nytr  mangi  nas.

72.  (71)     Sunr  es  betri,         )?6t  se  sty  of  alinn

ept  genginn  guma ;

sjaldan  bautarsteinar         standa  brautu  naer,
nema  reisi  ni)?r  at  ni]?.

73.  (72)     Tveir'u  einherjar,         tunga's  h6fu]?s  bani ;

erumk  i  hejrin  hverjan         bandar  vscni.
Nott  ver]?r  feginn         sas  nesti  truir,

skammar'u  skips  rar

hverf  es  haustgrima ;
fjoty  of  vi]?rir         a  fimm  dogum,

en  meira  a  manajn.

74-    (73)     Veita  maj>r         hinns  vsetki  veit :

margr  verj^r  af  6}?rum  api ;
ma)>r  es  au)?ugr,         annarr  6au)?ugr,
skylit  J?ann  vsetkis  va.

70. — An  s6  61if)>(im,  R's  emendation,  B.  Gv.  Mh  G.  G.  H.  S.J.;  ok  seellifyum,  R,
Dt.  HI.  Mb.  L.  73.— Einherjar,  A/A.  G.  H.  S.  ;  eins  herjar,  R,  Dt.  HI.  74.— Af
ojjrnm,  -R.  K.  D.  Mk.  B.  M.  ;  aflo)>rum  R  ;  af  16)?rum  HI.  ;  af  au]?i  um,  H.  G.  S.  ;
af  aurum,  Gv.  V.  J.


THE    WORDS    OF    ODIN    THE     HIGH    ONE.        81

69.  Not  reft  of  all         is  he  who  is  ill,

for  some  are  blest  in  their  bairns,
some  in  their  kin        and  some  in  their  wealth,
and  some  in  working  well.

70.  More  blest  are  the  living        than  the  lifeless,

'tis  the  living  who  comes  by  the  cow ;
I  saw  the  hearth-fire  burn         in  the  rich  man's  hall
and  himself  lying  dead  at  the  door.

71.  The  lame  can  ride  horse,         the  handless  drive  cattle,

the  deaf  one  can  fight  and  prevail,

'tis  happier  for  the  blind        than  for  him  on  the  bale-fire,
for  no  man  hath  care  for  a  corpse.

72.  Best  have  a  son        though  he  be  late  born

and  before  him  the  father  be  dead  :
seldom  are  stones        on  the  wayside  raised
save  by  kinsmen  to  kinsmen.

73.  Two  are  hosts  against  one,        the  tongue  is  the  head's  bane,

'neath  a  rough  hide  a  hand  may  be  hid  ;
he  is  glad  at  night  fall         who  knows  of  his  lodging,

short  is  the  ship's  berth,

and  changeful  the  autumn  night,
much  veers  the  wind        ere  the  fifth  day

and  blows  round  yet  more  in  a  month.

74.  He  that  learns  nought        will  never  know

how  one  is  the  fool  of  another,
for  if  one  be  rich        another  is  poor
and  for  that  should  bear  no  blame.


72. — Stones,  Icelandic  bautarsteinar  were  monumental  stones  set  upon  the  high
road,  many  thousands  of  which  are  preserved,  some  with  runic  inscriptions.  73. — This
agrees  with  the  Icelandic  proverb :  A  man's  band  may  oft  be  found  beneatti*a  wolf-
skin ;  but  others  understand  :  There  is  cbanee  of  a  fist  from  under  a  cloak.

M


82  HAVAMAL.

75.  (74)     Deyr  fe",        deyja  fnendr,

deyr  sjalfr  et  sama,
en  or)?stirr        deyr  aldrigi
hveims  s6r  g6j>an  getr.

76.  (75)     Deyr  f6,        deyja  frsendr,

deyr  sjalfr  et  sama  ;
ek  veit  einn         at  aldri  deyr :
d6mr  of  dau)?an  hvern.

77.  (76)     Fullar  grindr         sak  fyr  Fitjungs  sunum,

mi  bera  vanarvol ;
sva  es  auj?r         sem  augabrag)?,
hann  es  valtastr  vina.

78.  (77)     6snotr  ma)>r,        ef  eignask  getr

fe  ej?a  fljo)?s  munug)?,
metna)?r  Jroask,        en  manvit  aldri,
fram  gengr  hann  drjiigt  i  dul.

79.  (78)     pat's  }>a.  reynt,        es  at  runum  spyrr,

enum  reginkunnum  :
)?ejms  gor)?u  ginnregin,
ok  fajn  fimbul)?ulr,

]?a  hefr  bazt  ef  ]?egir.


80.  (79)     At  kveldi  skal  dag  leyfa,        konu  es  brend  es,

mEeki  es  reyndr  es,         mey  es  gefin  es,
is  es  yfir  komr,        61  es  drukkit  es.

81.  (80)     1  vindi  skal  vi)>  hoggva,        ve]>ri  a  sjo  roa,

myrkri  vty  man  spjalla,  morg  'ru  dags  augu ;
a  skip  skal  skrtyar  orka,  en  a  skjold  til  hlifar,
mseki  hoggs,  en  mey  til  kossa.


THE    WORDS    OF    ODIN    THE     HIGH     ONE.        8<

75.  Cattle  die        and  kinsmen  die,

thyself  too  soon  must  die,
but  one  thing  never,         I  ween,  will  die, —
fair  fame  of  one  who  has  earned.

76.  Cattle  die        and  kinsmen  die,

thyself  too  soon  must  die,
but  one  thing  never,         I  ween,  will  die,—
the  doom  on  each  one  dead.

77.  Full-stocked  folds        had  the  Failing's  sons,

who  bear  now  a  beggar's  staff:
brief  is  wealth,          as  the  winking  of  an  eye,
most  faithless  ever  of  friends.

78.  If  haply  a  fool         should  find  for  himself

wealth  or  a  woman's  love,
pride  waxes  in  him         but  wisdom  never
and  onward  he  fares  in  his  folly.

79.  All  will  prove  true        that  thou  askest  of  runes —

those  that  are  come  from  the  gods,

which  the  high  Powers  wrought,      and  which  Odin  painted
then  silence  is  surely  best.


(Maxims  for  All  Men.)

80.  Praise  day  at  even,         a  wife  when  dead,

a  weapon  when  tried,         a  maid  when  married,
ice  when  'tis  crossed,         and  ale  when  'tis  drunk.

81.  Hew  wood  in  wind,         sail  the  seas  in  a  breeze,

woo  a  maid  in  the  dark,         — for  day's  eyes  are  many,-
work  a  ship  for  its  gliding,         a  shield  for  its  shelter,
a  sword  for  its  striking,         a  maid  for  her  kiss ;

79.— Runes,  st.  139,  141.


84  HAVAMAL.

82.  (81)  Vi]>  eld  skal  61  drekka,  en  ;i  isi  skrtya,
magran  mar  kaupa,  en  ma>ki  saurgan,
heima  best  feita,  en  hund  a  bui.


83.  (82)     Meyjar  or)mm         skyli  manngi  trua,

ne  )>vis  kve)>r  kona ;

)?vit  a  hverfanda  hv6li         voru  )>eim  hjortu  skopu)>
ok  brig)?  i  brjost  of  lagty.

84.  (83)     Brestanda  boga,         brinnanda  loga,

ginanda  ulfi,         galandi  kraku,
rytanda  svini,         r6tlausum  vi]?i,
vaxanda  vdgi,         vellanda  katli,

85.  (84)     flj Uganda  fleini,         fallandi  baru,

isi  einnscttum,         ormi  hringlegnum,
bru|>ar  be)?malum         e)>a  brotnu  sverj^i,
bjarnar  leiki        e)?a  barni  konungs,

86.  (85)     sjukum  kalfii,         sjalfra)?a  ]>rseli,

volu  vilmffili,         val  nyfeldum —
(86)     brojmrbana  sinum,         |?6t  a  brautu  mceti,
husi  halfbrunnu,         hesti  alskj6tum —
J>a's  jor  6nytr,         ef  einn  fotr  brotnar : —
ver)>it  ma|>r  svd  tryggr,         at  ]>essu  tru'i  ollu.

87.  (85)     Akri  arsdnum         trui  engi  ma)>r

ne  til  snimma  syni :
ve}>r  ra?)?r  akri,         en  vit  syni,
hsett  es  J?eira  hvart.

88.  (87)     Sva's  frtyr  kvenna         es  fldtt  hyggja,

sem  aki  jo  6bryddum         a  isi  halum,
teitum,  tv^vetrum,         ok  se  tamr  ilia,
e\>a  \  byr  6)?um         beiti  stjornlausu,
e)?a  skyli  haltr  henda        hrein  i  }>afjalli.


THE    WORDS    OF    ODIN    THE    HIGH    ONE.        85

82.     Drink  ale  by  the  fire,        but  slide  on  the  ice ;

buy  a  steed  when  'tis  lanky,         a  sword  when  'tis  rusty ;
feed  thy  horse  neath  a  roof,        and  thy  hound  in  the  yard.


83.  The  speech  of  a  maiden        should  no  man  trust

nor  the  words  which  a  woman  says ;
for  their  hearts  were  shaped        on  a  whirling  wheel
and  falsehood  fixed  in  their  breasts.

84.  Breaking  bow,        or  flaring  flame,
ravening  wolf,        or  croaking  raven,
routing  swine,  or  rootless  tree,
waxing  wave,  or  seething  cauldron,

85.  flying  arrows,        or  falling  billow,
ice  of  a  night  time,        coiling  adder,
woman's  bed-talk,        or  broken  blade,
play  of  bears        or  a  prince's  child,

86.  sickly  calf        or  self-willed  thrall,
witches  flattery,        new-slain  foe,

brother's  slayer        though  seen  on  the  highway,
half  burned  house,        or  horse  too  swift —
useless  were  it        with  one  leg  broken —
be  never  so  trustful        as  these  to  trust.

87.  Let  none  put  faith        in  the  first  sown  fruit

nor  yet  in  his  son  too  soon  ;
whim  rules  the  child        and  weather  the  field,
each  is  open  to  chance.

88.  Like  the  love  of  women         whose  thoughts  are  lies
is  the  driving  un-roughshod        o'er  slippery  ice

of  a  two  year  old,         ill-tamed  and  gay ;

or  in  a  wild  wind  steering        a  helmless  ship,

or  the  lame  catching  reindeer        in  the  rime-thawed  fell.


86  HAVAMA'L.


89.    (88)     Bert  ek  nu  mscli         )>vit  ek  bsfyi  veit,

brig)?r  es  karla  hugr  konum  ;
]>&  ver  fegrst  msclum,         es  ver  flast  hyggjum,
)?at  taelir  horska  hugi.

90.  (89)     Fagrt  skal  msela         ok  i€  bj6J>a

sas  vill  fljo]?s  ast  fa,
liki  leyfa         ens  Ijosa  mans  :
sa  feer  es  friar.

91.  (90)     Astar  firna         skyli  engi  ma^r

annan  aldrigi ;

opt  fa  a  horskan,         es  a  heimskan  ne  fa,
lostfagrir  litir.

92.  (91)     Eyvitar  firna         es  ma)?r  annan  skal

Bess's  of  margan  gengr  guma ;
heimska  or  horskum         gorir  hol)?a  sunu
sa  enn  matki  munr.

93.  (92)     Hugr  einn  )>at  veit,         es  byr  hjarta  nser,

einn's  hann  se"r  of  sefa ;
ong  es  s6tt  verri         hveim  snotrum  manni
an  s6r  ongu  at  una.


94.  (93)     pat  ek  ]>&  reynda,         es  ek  i  reyri  sat

ok  vsettak  mins  munar  ;
hold  ok  hjarta         vorumk  en  horska  m£er,
)?eygi  at  heldr  hana  hefik.

95.  (94)     Billings  mey         ek  fann  be)?jum  a

solhvita  sofa ;

jarls  yn)?i         )?6ttumk  etki  vesa,
nema  vi}>  )?at  lik  at  lifa.


THE     WORDS     OF     ODIN     THE     HIGH     OtfE.        87
(Lessons  for  Lovers.)

89.     Now  plainly  I  speak,         since  both  I  have  seen  ;

unfaithful  is  man  to  maid  ;

we  speak  them  fairest         when  thoughts  are  falsest
and  wile  the  wisest  of  hearts.

90. — Let  him  speak  soft  words         and  offer  wealth

who  longs  for  a  woman's  love,
praise  the  shape         of  the  shining  maid —
he  wins  who  thus  doth  woo.

91. — Never  a  whit        should  one  blame  another

whom  love  hath  brought  into  bonds :
oft  a  witching  form         will  fetch  the  wise
which  holds  not  the  heart  of  fools.

92.  Never  a  whit        should  one  blame  another

for  a  folly  which  many  befalls  ;

the  might  of  love         makes  sons  of  men

into  fools  who  once  were  wise.

93.  The  mind  knows  alone         what  is  nearest  the  heart

and  sees  where  the  soul  is  turned :
no  sickness  seems        to  the  wise  so  sore
as  in  nought  to  know  content.

(Odin's  Love  Quests.)

94.  This  once  I  felt         when  I  sat  without

in  the  reeds,  and  looked  for  my  love ;
body  and  soul  of  me         was  that  sweet  maiden
yet  never  I  won  her  as  wife.

95.  Billing's  daughter         I  found  on  her  bed,

fairer  than  sunlight  sleeping,

and  the  sweets  of  lordship         seemed  to  me  nought
save  I  lived  with  that  lovely  form.


89. —  Odin    has   hail   many   love  adi'tiiturcs  in  disguise;   see  ftrbl.  st.  16,  18   30.
95. — Billing,  a  dwarf.


HAVAMA'L.


96.    (95)  *  Auk  nser  aptni         »kaltu,  6}?inn  !  koma,

ef  ]>u  vill  ]>er  maela  man  ;
allt  eru  6skop,         nema  einir  viti
slikan  lost  saman.'


97.    (96)     Aptr  ek  hvarf         ok  unna  )?6ttumk,

visum  vilja  fra ;

hitt  ek  hug)>a,         at  ek  hafa  mynda
ge)>  hennar  allt  ok  gaman.


g8.   (97)     Sva  kvam  ek  naest,         at  en  nyta  vas

vigdrott  oil  of  vakin  ;

me)?  brinnondum  Ijosum         ok  bornum  vtyi —
sva  var  mer  vilstigr  vita)?r.

99.    (98)     Auk  naer  morni,         es  ek  vas  enn  of  kominn,

]>a  vas  saldrott  of  sofin  ;
grey  eitt  fannk  J?d        ennar  go]m  konu
bundit  beftum  a.

100.    (99)     Morg  es  go)>  maer,         ef  gorva  kannar,

hugbrigj?  vij?  hali :
j?a  ek  )?at  reynda,        es  et  ra)>spaka

teyg)?ak  a  flasr^ir  fljoj?  ;
hd)>ungar  hverrar        leitajri  mer  et  horska  man,

ok  hafyak  J?ess  veetki  vifs.


101.    (100)     Heima  gla)>r  gumi        ok  vi]?  gesti  reifr

svi)?r  skal  of  sik  vesa ;
minnugr  ok  malugr,         ef  hann  vill  margfroj?r  vesa,

opt  skal  g6]>s  geta ;

(101)     fimbulfambi  heitir        sds  fatt  kann  segja,
]?at's  6snotrs  a)?al.


THE    WORDS    OF    ODIN     THE     HIGH     ONE.

96.  '  Yet  nearer  evening        come  thou,  Odin,

if  thou  wilt  woo  a  maiden  :
all  were  undone        save  two  knew  alone
such  a  secret  deed  of  shame.'


97.     So  away  I  turned        from  my  wise  intent,

and  deemed  my  joy  assured,
for  all  her  liking        and  all  her  love
I  weened  that  I  yet  should  win.


When  I  came  ere  long        the  war  troop  bold
were  watching  and  waking  all :

with  burning  brands        and  torches  borne
they  showed  me  my  sorrowful  way.


99.     Yet  nearer  morning         I  went,  once  more, —

the  housefolk  slept  in  the  hall,
but  soon  I  found        a  barking  dog
tied  fast  to  that  fair  maid's  couch.


100.     Many  a  sweet  maid        when  one  knows  her  mind

is  fickle  found  towards  men  :
I  proved  it  well        when  that  prudent  lass

I  sought  to  lead  astray  :
shrewd  maid,  she  sought  me         with  every  insult

and  I  won  therewith  no  wife.


(Odin's  Quest  after  the  Song  Mead.)

101.     In  thy  home  be  joyous        and  generous  to  guests
discreet  shalt  thou  be  in  thy  bearing,

mindful  and  talkative,         wouldst  thou  gain  wisdom,
oft  making  mention  of  good.

he  is  '  Simpleton  '  named        who  has  nought  to  say,

for  such  is  the  fashion  of  fools.

N


go  HAVAMAL.

102.  (102)     Enn  aldna  jotun  sottak,         nu  emk  aptr  of  kominn,

fatt  gatk  )>egjandi  |>ar ;
morgum  orjmm         meeltak  i  minn  frama
i  Suttungs  solum.

103.  (104)     Rata  munn         letumk  rums  of  fa

auk  of  grjot  gnaga,
yfir  ok  undir         sto)mmk  jotna  vegir,
sva  haettak  hofyi  til.

104.  (103)     Gunnlo)>  gofumk         gollnum  stoli  a

drykk  ens  dyra  mjaj>ar;
ill  tygjold         I6tk  hana  eptir  hafa
sins  ens  heila  hugar,
sins  ens  svara  sefa.

105.  Vel  keypts  litar        hefk  vel  notit,

fas  es  fr6Jmm  vant ;
)wt  6)>rorir        es  nu  upp  kominn
a  alda  ves  jaj>ar.

106.  Ifi  'rumk  a,         at  vserak  enn  kominn

jotna  gorjnim  or,

ef  Gunnla]?ar  n6  nytak,         ennar  go)m  konu,
)?eirars  logjmmk  arm  yfir.

107.  Ens  hindra  dags        gengu  hrim)?ursar

[Hava  rd)>s  at  fregna]
Hava  hollu  i ;

at  Bolverki  spur)?u,         ef  vseri  me)?  bondum  kominn
e)?a  hef)?i  Suttungr  of  soit.


107,  line  2.— MA.  Gv.  Mk.  G.  S.  J.  agree  that  this  line  is  an  interpolation,  as  it
spoils  both  sense  and  metre.


THE    WORDS    OF    ODIN    THE     HIGH    ONE.        91

102.  I  sought  that  old  Jotun,        now  safe  am  I  back,

little  served  my  silence  there  ;
but  whispering  many        soft  speeches  I  won
my  desire  in  Suttung's  halls.

103.  I  bored  me  a  road  there        with  Rati's  tusk

and  made  room  to  pass  through  the  rock ;
while  the  ways  of  the  Jotuns        stretched  over  and  under
I  dared  my  life  for  a  draught.

104.  'Twas  Gunnlod  who  gave  me         on  a  golden  throne

a  draught  of  the  glorious  mead,
but  with  poor  reward         did  I  pay  her  back
for  her  true  and  troubled  heart.


105.  In  a  wily  disguise         I  worked  my  will ;

little  is  lacking  to  the  wise,

for  the  Soul-stirrer  now,        sweet  Mead  of  Song,
is  brought  to  men's  earthly  abode.

106.  I  misdoubt  me  if  ever         again  I  had  come

from  the  realms  of  the  Jotun  race,
had  I  not  served  me         of  Gunnlod,  sweet  woman,
her  whom  I  held  in  mine  arms.

107.  Came  forth,  next  day,         the  dread  Frost  Giants,

and  entered  the  High  One's  hall :

they  asked — was  the  Baleworker         back  mid  the  Powers,
or  had  Suttung  slain  him  below  ?


102. — Suttung,  a  giant  of  the  underworld,  For  Snorri's  version  of  this  story,
see  Introd.  and  cf.  Grm.  st.  52.  103. — Rati  or  the  Gnawer,  a  tool.  105. — The
Soul-stirrer,  st.  139.  One  of  Odin's  characters  is  that  of  Song-giver  to  man ;  see  st.
141,  759,  Introd.  and  Hdl.  st.  3.  107.  — Baleworker,  the  name  which  Odin  had  given
himself  in  disguise.


92  HAVAMAL.

108.  Baugety  6)>inn         hykk  at  unnit  hafi,

hvat  skal  bans  trygjmm  trua  ?
Suttung  svikvinn         hann  I6t  sumbli  fra
ok  grcetta  Gunnlo]?u.


109.  Mai's  at  )>ylja        Jmlar  st6li  a :

Ur]?ar  brunni  at

sak  ok  )?ag]>ak,        sak  ok  hugj?ak,
hlyddak  a  manna  mal.

no.  of  runar  heyr]?ak  doema,         n€  of  ra]?um  }>og]>u

Hava  hollu  at,
Hava  hollu  i ;
heyr]>ak  segja  sv^.

in.    (no)     Rajmmk  \€r,  Loddfdfnir!         en  Jm  ra)>  nemir,
njota  mundu,  ef  nemr,
}>€r  munu  g6J>,  ef  getr :
nott  ]>u  risat         nema  a  njosn  s6r
e)>a  leitir  }>6r  innan  ut  sta)?ar.

112.  (in)     Ra)?umk  ]?6r,  Loddfafnir  !         en  ]>u  ra]>  nemir,

njota  mundu,  ef  nemr,
}>6r  munu  go)?,  ef  getr :
fjolkunnigri  konu         skalta  i  faj?mi  sofa,
svat  hon  lyki  ]?ik  lij?um.

113.  (in)     Hon  sva  gorir,         at  J>u  gai'r  eigi

]>ings  ne  ]?j6]?ans  mals  ;
mat  ]m  villat         n6  mannskis  gaman,
ferr  ]>u  sorgafullr  at  sofa.

109.— Manna  mal,  R  Dt.  Hl.J.;  hava  mal,  M/.  S.  G.  H.  Mk.


THE    WORDS    OF    ODIN    THE     HIGH    ONE.        93

108.  A  ring-oath  Odin         I  trow  had  taken —

how  shall  one  trust  his  troth  ?
'twas  he  who  stole        the  mead  from  Suttung,
and  Gunnlod  caused  to  weep.

(The  Counselling  of  the  Stray-Singer.)

109.  'Tis  time  to  speak         from  the  Sage's  Seat ;

hard  by  the  Well  of  Weird
I  saw  and  was  silent,         I  saw  and  pondered,
I  listened  to  the  speech  of  men.

no.     Of  runes  they  spoke,        and  the  reading  of  runes

was  little  withheld  from  their  lips  :
at  the  High  One's  hall,         in  the  High  One's  hall,
I  thus  heard  the  High  One  say  : —

in.     I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,         accept  my  counsels,
they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,
they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them :
rise  never  at  night  time        except  thou  art  spying
or  seekest  a  spot  without.

112.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,         accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,
they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them  :
thou  shalt  never  sleep        in  the  arms  of  a  sorceress,
lest  she  should  lock  thy  limbs ;

113.  So  shall  she  charm         that  thou  shalt  not  heed

the  council  or  words  of  the  king,
nor  care  for  thy  food         or  the  joys  of  mankind,
but  fall  into  sorrowful  sleep.

108. — Stray-Singer,  the  meaning  of  Loddfafnir  is  not  yet  fully  decided  ;  see  Introd'
log. — Well  of  Weird,  the  most  sacred  spot  in  the  world,  where  the  gods  meet  in
council  under  Yggdrasil ;  see  Grm.  st.  30,  Vsp.  st.  19.


94  HAVAMAL.

114.  (112)     Ra)>umk  ]>€r,  Loddfafnir  !         en  j?u  rtty  nemir,

nj6ta  mundu,  ef  nemr,
)>er  munu  go]>,  ef  getr  :
annars  konu         teyg  }>6r  aldrigi
eyrarunu  at.

115.  (113)     Rajmmk  ]>€r,  Loddfafnfr !         en  }>u  ra)>  nemir,

njota  mundu,  ef  nemr,
}>€r  munu  go)?,  ef  getr  :
a  fjalli  e)?a  fir)?i         ef  )>ik  fara  ttyir,
fasktu  at  vir)>i  vel.

116.  (114)     Ra)>umk  )?6r,  Loddfafnir  !         en  ]>u  raj?  nemir,

njota  mundu,  ef  nemr,

}>er  munu  go)>,  ef  getr :
illan  mann         Idttu  aldrigi

6hopp  at  )>er  vita,
]?vit  af  ilium  manni         fgfer  ]>u  aldrigi

gjold  ens  g6]?a  hugar.

117.  (115)     Ofafla  bita         ek  sa  einum  hal

or]>  illrar  konu :

flara)>  tunga        var]?  hanum  at  fjorlagi,
ok  }>eygi  of  sanna  sok.

118.  (116)     Rajmmk  )?er,  Loddfdfnir  !         en  }>u  ra}>  nemir,

njota  mundu,  ef  nemr,

\ir  munu  g6}>,  ef  getr :
veiztu  ef  vin  att         )>anns  ]>u  vel  truir,

far)>u  at  finna  opt,
)>vit  hrisi  vex        ok  hdvu  grasi

vegr  es  vsetki  tro]?r.

119.  (117)     Rajmmk  J?6r,  Loddfafnir !         en  J>u  ra)?  nemir,

nj6ta  mundu,  ef  nemr,
]>6r  munu  go}>,  ef  getr  :
go)>an  mann         teyg  ]>er  at  gamanrunum
ok  nem  liknargaldr  me)?an  lifir.


THE    WORDS    OF    ODIN     THE     HIGH    ONE.        95

114.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,        accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,
they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them  :
seek  not  ever        to  draw  to  thyself
in  love-whispering  another's  wife.

115.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,        accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,
they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them  :
should  thou  long  to  fare        over  fell  and  firth
provide  thee  well  with  food.

116.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,        accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,

they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them  :
tell  not  ever        an  evil  man

if  misfortunes  thee  befall,
from  such  ill  friend        thou  needst  never  seek

return  for  thy  trustful  mind.

117.  Wounded  to  death,        have  I  seen  a  man

by  the  words  of  an  evil  woman  ;

a  lying  tongue        had  bereft  him  of  life,

and  all  without  reason  of  right.

118.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,        accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,

they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them  :
hast  thou  a  friend        whom  thou  trustest  well,

fare  thou  to  find  him  oft ;
for  with  brushwood  grows        and  with  grasses  high

the  path  where  no  foot  doth  pass.

119.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,        accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,
they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them  :
in  sweet  converse  call        the  righteous  to  thy  side,
learn  a  healing  song  while  thou  livest.


96  HAVAMAL.

120.  (118)     Ra}mmk  }>6r,  Loddfafnir  !         en  )m  ra]>  nemir,

njota  mundu,  ef  nemr,

}>6r  munu  g6]>,  ef  getr  :
vin  J>inum         ves  )m  aldrigi

fyrri  at  flaumslitum ;
sorg  etr  hjarta,         ef  }>u  segja  n€  na'ir

einhverjilm  allan  hug.

121.  (119)     Rajmmk  \>6r,  Loddfafnir  !         en  ]?u  raj?  nemir,

njota  mundu,  ef  nemr,
]>6r  munu  g6J>,  ef  getr :
orjmm  skipta        j?u  skalt  aldrigi
vij?  6svinna  apa ;

122.  (119)     |>vit  af  ilium  manni         mundu  aldrigi

g6]?s  laun  of  geta,

en  g6]?r  ma)?r        mun  }>ik  gorva  mega
liknfastan  at  lofi.

123.  (120)     Sifjum's  ]?a  blandat,        hverrs  segja  rstyr

einum  allan  hug  :

allt  es  betra        an  se  brig]?um  at  vesa,
esat  vinr  es  vilt  eitt  segir.

124.  (121)     Rajmmk  )>er,  Loddfafnir  !         en  }>u  rty  nemir,

nj6ta  mundu,  ef  nemr,
}>6r  munu  g6]>,  ef  getr  :

]?rimr  or)?um  senna        skalta  j?6r  vty  verra  mann  ;
opt  enn  betri  bilar,
]?as  enn  verri  vegr.

125.  (122)     Rajnimk  j?6r,  Loddfafnir  !         en  ]>u  ra)>  nemir,

njota  mundu,  ef  nemr,

J>e"r  munu  g6J>,  ef  getr :
skdsmijr  )?u  vesir         n6  skeptismi];r,

nema  j?6r  sjolfum  s6r  :
skcr's  skapaj^r  ilia         e)?a  skapt  s6  rangt,

J>4's  }>6r  bols  be}?it.


THE     WORDS     OF     ODIN     THE     HIGH     ONE.        97

1 20.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,        accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,

they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them :
be  never  the  first         with  friend  of  thine

to  break  the  bond  of  fellowship ;
care  shall  gnaw  thy  heart         if  thou  canst  not  tell

all  thy  mind  to  another.

121.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,         accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,
they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them  :
never  in  speech         with  a  foolish  knave
shouldst  thou  waste  a  single  word.

122.  From  the  lips  of  such         thou  needst  not  look

for  reward  of  thine  own  good  will  ;
but  a  righteous  man         by  praise  will  render  thee
firm  in  favour  and  love.

123.  There  is  mingling  in  friendship         when  man  can  utter

all  his  whole  mind  to  another;
there  is  nought  so  vile         as  a  fickle  tongue;
no  friend  is  he  who  but  flatters.

124.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,         accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,
they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them  :
strive  not  in  three  words         with  a  man  worse  than  thee ;
oft  the  worst  lays  the  best  one  low.


125.     I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,         accept  my  counsels,
they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,
they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them :

be  not  a  shoemaker         nor  yet  a  shaft  maker
save  for  thyself  alone  :

let  the  shoe  be  misshapen,         or  crooked  the  shaft,

and  a  curse  on  thy  head  will  be  called.

O


HAVAMAL.

126.  (123)     Rajmmk  )>e"r,  Loddfafnir !         en  Jm  ra>  nemir,

nj6ta  mundu,  ef  nemr,
}>&r  munu  g6)>,  ef  getr :
hvars  bol  kannt,         kvejm  ]>er  bolvi  at
ok  gefat  fiondum  frty.

127.  (124)     Rajmmk  ]>6r,  Loddfdfnir!         en  }>u  ra)>  nemir,

nj6ta  mundu,  ef  nemr,
]>6r  munu  g6)>,  ef  getr :
illu  feginn         ves  ]>u  aldrigi,
en  lat  |>er  at  g6)m  getit.

128.  (125)     Ra|mmk  }>6r,  Loddfafnir  !         en  ]>u  ra)>  nemir,

nj6ta  mundu,  ef  nemr,

)>6r  munu  g6)>,  ef  getr :
upp  lita         skalattu  i  orrostu —
gjalti  glikir        ver]?a  gumna  synir —

styr  }>itt  of  heilli  halir.

129.  (126)     Ra)>umk  }>6r,  Loddfafnir  !         en  J>u  raj?  nemir,

nj6ta  mundu,  ef  nemr,

]?6r  munu  g6|>,  ef  getr :
ef  vill  ]>6r  g6)?a  konu         kvefta  at  gamanrunum

ok  fd  fognu]?  af,
fogru  skalt  heita        ok  Idta  fast  vesa ;

letyisk  manngi  g6tt,  ef  getr.

130.  (127)     Rajmmk  }>€r,  Loddfafnir !         en  }>u  ra\>  nemir,

njota  mundu,  ef  nemr,

J?er  munu  g6]?,  ef  getr :
varan  btyk  ]>ik  vesa         ok  eigi  ofvaran  ;
ves  vty  61  varastr         ok  vi]>  annars  konu
ok  vij?  ]?at  et  ]>ri)>ja,         at  }>'\k  ]?j6far  ne  leiki.

131.  (128)     RaJ»umk  }>6r,  LoddfAfnir !         en  ]>u  ra)>  nemir,

njota  mundu,  ef  nemr,
]>€r  munu  go|>,  ef  getr :
at  haj>i  n€  hlatri         haf|>u  aldrigi
gest  n€  ganganda ;


THE    WORDS    OF    ODIN    THE    HIGH    ONE.        99

126.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,         accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,
they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them  :
when  in  peril  thou  seest  thee,         confess  thee  in  peril,
nor  ever  give  peace  to  thy  foes.

127.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,         accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,
they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them :
rejoice  not  ever        at  tidings  of  ill,
but  glad  let  thy  soul  be  in  good.

128.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,        accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them  :
they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them :
look  not  up  in  battle         when  men  are  as  beasts,
lest  the  wights  bewitch  thee  with  spells.


129.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,         accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,

they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them  :
wouldst  thou  win  joy         of  a  gentle  maiden,

and  lure  to  whispering  of  love,
thou  shalt  make  fair  promise,         and  let  it  be  fast,—

none  will  scorn  their  weal  who  can  win  it.

130.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,         accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,

they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them :
I  pray  thee  be  wary,         yet  not  too  wary,

be  wariest  of  all  with  ale,
with  another's  wife,         and  a  third  thing  eke,

that  knaves  outwit  thee  never.

131.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,         accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,
they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them  :
hold  not  in  scorn,         nor  mock  in  thy  halls
a  guest  or  wandering  wight.


ioo  HAVAMAL.

132.  opt  vitu  ogorla         j?eirs  sitja  inni  fyrir,

hvers  )?eir'u  kyns  es  koma.
Esat  ma)?r  sva  go)?r,         at  palli  ne  fylgi,
n6  sva  illr,  at  einugi  dugi.

133.  Rajmmk  )?er,  Loddfafnir !         en  )?u  raj)  nemir,

njota  mundu,  ef  nemr,

)?er  munu  g6)?,  ef  getr :
at  harum  )?ul         hlac^u  aldrigi,

opt's  gott  J?ats  gamlir  kve)?a  ;
opt  or  skorpum  belg         skilin  or)?  koma

)?eims  hangir  me)?  ham

ok  skollir  me)?  skram

ok  vafir  me)?  vilmogum.

131.     Ra)>umk  )?er,  Loddfafnir !         en  )?u  ra)?  nemir,
njdta  mundu,  ef  nemr,
]>6r  munu  g6)?,  ef  getr  :
gest  n£  geyja         ne  a  grind  hrokkvir,
get  )?u  valu)?um  vel.

135.  Ramt's  )?at  tre         es  ri)?a  skal

ollum  at  upploki :
baug  )?u  gef,         e)?a  J?at  bi)?ja  mun
)?er  Ises  hvers  a  li)?u.

136.  Ra)?umk  )?6r,  Loddfafnir !         en  )?ii  ra)?  nemir,

njota  mundu,  ef  nemr,

)>er  munu  go)?,  ef  getr  :

hvars  61  drekkr,         kjostu  )?er  jar)?armegin —
[)?vit  jor)?  tekr  vi)?  6l)?ri,         en  aldr  vi)?  sottum,
eik  vi)?  abbindi,         ax  vi)?  fjolkyngi,
vi)?  haulvi  hyrogi,         heiptum  skal  mana  kve)?ja,
beiti  vi)?  bitsottum,         en  vi)?  bolvi  runar — ]

fold  skal  vi)?  flo)?i  taka.

136.— Vi)?  haulvi    hyrogi,   V.'s  emendation,  S. ;    haull  vi)?  hyrogi,  B, ;    holl  vi)?
hyrogi,  /.  G.  H.  Gv.


THE    WORDS    OF    ODIN     THE     HIGH     ONE.      101

132.  They  know  but  unsurely        who  sit  within

what  manner  of  man  is  come :

none  is  found  so  good         but  some  fault  attends  him,
or  so  ill  but  he  serves  for  somewhat.

133.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,         accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,

they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them :
hold  never  in  scorn         the  hoary  singer;

oft  the  counsel  of  the  old  is  good ;
come  words  of  wisdom        from  the  withered  lips

of  him  left  to  hang  among  hides,

to  rock  with  the  rennets

and  swing  with  the  skins.

134.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,         accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,
they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them :
growl  not  at  guests        nor  drive  them  from  the  gate
but  show  thyself  gentle  to  the  poor.

135.  Mighty  is  the  bar        to  be  moved  away

for  the  entering  in  of  all.
Shower  thy  wealth,        or  men  shall  wish  thee
every  ill  in  thy  limbs.

136.  I  counsel  thee,  Stray-Singer,        accept  my  counsels,

they  will  be  thy  boon  if  thou  obey'st  them,
they  will  work  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them :
when  ale  thou  quaffest         call  upon  earth's  might —

'tis  earth  drinks  in  the  floods.

[Earth  prevails  o'er  drink,        but  fire  o'er  sickness,
the  oak  o'er  binding,         the  earcorn  o'er  witchcraft,
the  rye  spur  o'er  rupture,        the  moon  o'er  rages,
herb  o'er  cattle  plagues,        runes  o'er  harm.]

133. — Rennets,  in  Iceland  the  maw  rennets  of  a  calf  were,  and  are  still  hung  up  to
dry,  and  used  for  curdling  milk.  136. — Deals  with  magic,  and  belongs  to  the  spell
songs  rather  than  here.


102  HAVAMAL.


137-  (134)     Vejtk  at  hekk         vindga  metyi  a

nabtr  allar  niu,
geiri  unda)>r        ok  gefinn  (tyni,

sjalfr  sjolfum  m6r,
a  }>eim  mei|»i,         es  manngi  veit,

hvers  hann  af  rotum  rinn.

138-  d35)     Vi}>  hleifi  mik  stcldu         n<§  vi|?  hornigi ;

nysta  ek  m\>r :

namk  upp  runar,         cepandi  namk ;
fell  ek  aptr  }?a)>an.

139-  (J36)     FimbulljoJ?  niu         namk  af  enum  frsegja  syni

B6l)>orns  Bestlu  fojmr ;
ok  drykk  of  gatk,         ens  dyra  mja]?ar
ausenn  6)?r6ri.

140.    (137)     pa  namk  frsevask         ok  fr6]?r  vesa

ok  vaxa  ok  vel  hafask  :
orj>  mer  af  or)>i         or]?s  leita)>i,
verk  m€r  af  verki  verks.


141.  (138)     Runar  munt  finna         ok  ra)>na  stafi,

mjok  stora  stafi,
mjok  stinna  stafi

es  fa)>i  fimbul|?ulr        ok  gorjm  ginnregin,
es  reist  Hroptr  ragna  :

142.  (139)     6}>inn  me)?  asum,         en  fyr  olfum  Damn,

Dvalinn  dvergum  fyrir,
Alsvtyr  jotnum  fyr         en  fyr  yta  sunum
reistk  sjalfr  sumar.

137.— Vindga,  R,  H.  G.  S.  Dt.  HI. ;  vinga  meij>i,  /.  /  vinga-mei]?i,  C.  138. —
Sseldu,  E.  Magnusson,  G.;  seldu,  R.  For  comments  on  these  strophes,  see  B.  Stud.,
E.  Magnusson,  "  Odin's  Horse,"  and  Chadwick  "  Cult  of  Odin."  142. — Alsvihr,  paper
MSS.,  G.  S.  R.  ;  asvij>r,  R  ;  en  fyr  yta  sunum,  Mk.  S.  H.  G.,  missing  R.


THE     WORDS     OF     ODIN     THE     HIGH     ONE.       103

(Odin's  Quest  after  the  Runes.)

137.  I  trow  I  hung        on  that  windy  Tree

nine  whole  days  and  nights,
stabbed  with  a  spear,        offered  to  Odin,

myself  to  mine  own  self  given,
high  on  that  Tree        of  which  none  hath  heard

from  what  roots  it  rises  to  heaven.

138.  None  refreshed  me  ever        with  food  or  drink,

I  peered  right  down  in  the  deep ;
crying  aloud         I  lifted  the  Runes,
then  back  I  fell  from  thence.

139.  Nine  mighty  songs         I  learned  from  the  great

son  of  Bale-thorn,  Bestla's  sire ;
I  drank  a  measure         of  the  wondrous  Mead,
with  the  Soulstirrer's  drops  I  was  showered.

140.  Ere  long  I  bare  fruit,        and  throve  full  well,

I  grew  and  waxed  in  wisdom ;
word  following  word,         I  found  me  words,
deed  following  deed,  I  wrought  deeds.


141.  Hidden  Runes  shalt  thou  seek        and  interpreted  signs,

many  symbols  of  might  and  power,

by  the  great  Singer  painted,        by  the  high  Powers  fashioned,
graved  by  the  Utterer  of  gods.

142.  For  gods  graved  Odin,        for  elves  graved  Dam,

Dvalin  the  Dallier  for  dwarfs,
All-wise  for  Jotuns,         and  I,  of  myself,
graved  some  for  the  sons  of  men.

137. — A  windy  Tree,  this  must  be  Yggdrasil.  The  same  words  are  used  with  regard
to  it  tinder  the  name  of  Mimir's  tree  ;  see  Fj.  st.  14.  138. — Back  I  fell,  the  attainment
of  the  runes  had  released  him  from  the  tree.  139. — Mimir,  who  was  a  Jutun  and
Odin's  teacher,  is  presumably  the  son  of  the  giant  Bale-thorn,  the  grandfather  of  Odin
(RydbergJ,  although  his  name  is  not  given  here.  142. — All-wise,  this  giant  is  unknown,
unless  identical  with  Much-wise  ;  see  Fj.


104  HAVAMAL.


143.  (140)     Veiztu  hve  rista  skal,         veiztu  hv6  r&)>a  skal  ?

veiztu  hv6  fa  skal,  veiztu  hve  freista  skal  ?
veiztu  hv£  btyja  skal,         veiztu  hv£  biota  skal  ?
veiztu  hv6  senda  skal,         veiztu  hv6  soa  skal  ?

144.  (141)     Betra's  6beJ>it         an  s6  ofblotit,

ey  se'r  til  gildis  gjof ;
betra's  osent         an  s£  ofsoi't


Svd  pundr  of  reist         fyr  |>j6)>a  rok,

)?ar  hann  upp  of  reis,         es  hann  aptr  of  kvam.


145.  (142)     pau  ljo)>  kannk         es  kannat  J>j6)>ans  kona

n6  mannskis  mogr :
hjolp  heitir  eitt,         en  )>at  )?6r  hjalpa  mun

vi]>  sokum  ok  sorgum  ok  sutum  gorvollum.

146.  (143)     pat  kannk  annat         es  J?urfu  yta  synir

)>eirs  vilja  leeknar  lifa


147.  (144)     pat  kannk  et  |>rij>ja,         ef  m^r  ver|?r  )?6rf  mikil

hapts  vty  heiptmogu :
eggjar  deyfik         minna  andskota,
bitat  )>eim  vdpn  n6  velir.

148.  (145)     pat  kannk  et  fj6r)>a,         ef  m6r  fyr)?ar  bera

bond  at  boglimum :
sva  ek  gel,         at  ek  ganga  m&,
sprettr  af  fotum  fjoturr,
en  af  hondum  hapt.


THE     WORDS     OF     ODIN     THE     HIGH     ONE.       105


143.  Dost  know  how  to  write,  dost  know  how  to  read,
dost  know  how  to  paint,  dost  know  how  to  prove,
dost  know  how  to  ask,  dost  know  how  to  offer,
dost  know  how  to  send,  dost  know  how  to  spend  ?

144.  Better  ask  for  too  little        than  offer  too  much,

like  the  gift  should  be  the  boon ;
better  not  to  send        than  to  overspend.


Thus  Odin  graved         ere  the  world  began  ;
Then  he  rose  from  the  deep,         and  came  again.

(The  Song  of  Spells.)

145.  Those  songs  I  know,         which  nor  sons  of  men

nor  queen  in  a  king's  court  knows ;
the  first  is  Help         which  will  bring  thee  help
in  all  woes  and  in  sorrow  and  strife.

146.  A  second  I  know,         which  the  son  of  men

must  sing,  who  would  heal  the  sick.


147.  A  third  I  know :         if  sore  need  should  come

of  a  spell  to  stay  my  foes ;

when  I  sing  that  song,         which  shall  blunt  their  swords,
nor  their  weapons  nor  staves  can  wound.

148.  A  fourth  I  know :  if  men  make  fast

in  chains  the  joints  of  my  limbs,
when  I  sing  that  song         which  shall  set  me  free,
spring  the  fetters  from  hands  and  feet.


i44.--Odin,  here  called  by  his  name  Thund,  the  meaning  of  which  is  unknown  ;   see

Grm.  st.  .  3.

P


I06  HAVAMAL.

149.  (146)     pat  kannk  et  fimta,         ef  s6k  af  fari  skotinn

flein  i  folki  va)?a  :

flygra  svd  stint,         at  ek  sto)>vigak,
ef  ek  hann  sjonum  of  se"k.

150.  (147)     pat  kannk  et  setta,         ef  mik  sscrir  )>egn

a  rotum  ras  vtyar  :

ok  )?ann  hal,         es  mik  heipta  kve)>r,
eta  mein  heldr  an  mik.

151.  (148)     pat  kannk  et  sjaunda,         ef  sek  havan  loga

sal  of  sessmogum :

brinnrat  sva  breitt,         at  ek  bjargigak ;
)?ann  kannk  galdr  at  gala.

152.  (149)     pat  kannk  et  atta,         es  ollum  es

nytsamlikt  at  nema :
hvars  hatr  vex         me]?  hildings  sunum,
]?at  mak  bceta  bratt.

153.  (150)     pat  kannk  et  niunda,         ef  mik  nau^r  of  stendr

at  bjarga  fari  minu  a  floti :
vind  ek  kyrri         vagi  a,
ok  svsefik  allan  see.

154.  (151)     pat  kannk  et  tiunda,         ef  ek  s€  tunri]?ur

leika  lopti  a :

ek  sva  vinnk,         at  }>ser  villar  fara
sinna  heim  hama,
sinna  heim  haga.

155.  (152)     pat  kannk  et  ellifta,         ef  skalk  til  orrostu

lei)>a  langvini :

und  randir  gelk,         en  )>eir  me]?  riki  fara
heilir  hildar  til,
heihr  hildi  fra,
koma  )>eir  heilir  hva]?an.


THE    WORDS    OF    ODIN    THE     HIGH     ONE.      107

149.  A  fifth  I  know :        when  I  see,  by  foes  shot,

speeding  a  shaft  through  the  host,
flies  it  never  so  strongly         I  still  can  stay  it,
if  I  get  but  a  glimpse  of  its  flight.

150.  A  sixth  I  know  :         when  some  thane  would  harm  me

in  runes  on  a  moist  tree's  root,
on  his  head  alone        shall  light  the  ills
of  the  curse  that  he  called  upon  mine.

151.  A  seventh  I  know  :         if  I  see  a  hall

high  o'er  the  bench-mates  blaming,
flame  it  ne'er  so  fiercely         I  still  can  save  it,—
I  know  how  to  sing  that  song.

152.  An  eighth  I  know  :         which  all  can  sing

for  their  weal  if  they  learn  it  well ;
where  hate  shall  wax        'mid  the  warrior  sons,
I  can  calm  it  soon  with  that  song.

153.  A  ninth  I  know:         when  need  befalls  me

to  save  my  vessel  afloat,
I  hush  the  wind         on  the  stormy  wave,
and  soothe  all  the  sea  to  rest.

154.  A  tenth  I  know  :         when  at  night  the  witches

ride  and  sport  in  the  air,

such  spells  I  weave        that  they  wander  home
out  of  skins  and  wits  bewildered.


155.     An  eleventh  I  know :         if  haply  I  lead

my  old  comrades  out  to  war,

I  sing  'neath  the  shields,        and  they  fare  forth  mightily
safe  into  battle,
safe  out  of  battle,
and  safe  return  from  the  strife.

154.— The  witches,  or  "  hedge-riders"  who  could  change  their  shapes  or  skins  (Icel.
hama),  were  thus  deprived  of  their  magic  powers.


Io8  HAVAMAL.

156-  (r53)     Pat  kannk  et  tolfta          ef  sek  a  tr6  uppi

vafa  virgilna:

sva  ek  rist         ok  i  runum  fak,
at  sa  gengr  gumi
ok  mselir  vij>  mik.

157-  (*54)     Pat  kannk  et  )?rettanda,         ef  skalk  J?egn  ungan

verpa  vatni  a :

munat  hann  falla,         )>6t  i  folk  komi,
hnigra  sa  hair  fyr  hjorum.

158.  (155)     pat  kannk  et  fjogrtanda,         ef  skalk  fyrj?a  li)>i

telja  tiva  fyrir :

asa  ok  alfa         ek  kann  allra  skil,
far  kann  osnotr  sv&.

159.  (156)     pat  kannk  et  fimtanda,         es  gol  pj6)»roerir

dvergr  fyr  Dellings  durum  :
afl  gol  hann  asum,         en  olfum  frama,
hyggju  Hroptat^.

160.  (157)     pat  kannk  et  sext&nda,         ef  vilk  ens  svinna  mans

hafa  ge)?  allt  ok  gaman  :
hugi  ek  hverfi         hvitarmri  konu
ok  snyk  hennar  ollum  sefa.


161.    (158)     pat  kannk  et  sjautjanda,         ef


svd  ek at  mik  seint  mun  firrask

et  manunga  man.

162.    (158)     Lj6J?a  )?essa         mundu,  Loddfafnir !

lengi  vanr  vesa,
|>6t  J>e*r  g6)?  s6,        ef  J?u  getr,
nyt,  ef  )?u  nemr,
)>6rf,  ef  ]>u  )?iggr.


THE    WORDS    OF    ODIN    THE    HIGH    ONE.      109

156.     A  twelfth  I  know:        if  I  see  in  a  tree

a  corpse  from  a  halter  hanging,
such  spells  I  write,        and  paint  in  runes,
that  the  being  descends  and  speaks.


157.  A  thirteenth  I  know:         if  the  new-born  son

of  a  warrior  I  sprinkle  with  water,
that  youth  will  not  fail        when  he  fares  to  war,
never  slain  shall  he  bow  before  sword.

158.  A  fourteenth  I  know :        if  I  needs  must  number

the  Powers  to  the  people  of  men,
I  know  all  the  nature        of  gods  and  of  elves
which  none  can  know  untaught.

159.  A  fifteenth  I  know,        which  Folk-stirrer  sang,

the  dwarf,  at  the  gates  of  Dawn  ;

he  sang  strength  to  the  gods,        and  skill  to  the  elves,
and  wisdom  to  Odin  who  utters.

160.  A  sixteenth  I  know :         when  all  sweetness  and  love

I  would  win  from  some  artful  wench,
her  heart  I  turn,        and  the  whole  mind  change
of  that  fair-armed  lady  I  love.

161.  A  seventeenth  I  know  :         so  that  e'en  the  shy  maiden

is  slow  to  shun  my  love.


162.     These  songs,  Stray-Singer,         which  man's  son  knows  not,
long  shalt  thou  lack  in  life,  [obey'st  them,

though  thy  weal  if  thou  win'st  them,         thy  boon  if  thou
thy  good  if  haply  thou  gain'st  them.


156. — Cf.Bdr.st.3.          157.— Sprinkle  with  water,  an  old  heathen  rite  of  puri-
fication ;  see  flj>.  st.  6.         159. — Folk-stirrer,  this  dwarf  is  not  mentioned  elsewhere.


no  HAVAMAL.

163.  (159)     pat  kannk  et  attjanda,         es  ek  seva  kennik

mey  n6  manns  konu —
allt  es  betra         es  einn  of  kann,

J>at  fylgir  lj6J?a  lokum —
nema  J>eiri  einni,         es  mik  armi  verr

ej>a  min  systir  s€.

164.  (160)     Nu  'ru  Hava  mal         kve)?in  hollu  i,

allj?6rf  yta  sunum,
6)?6rf  jotna  sunum ;
heill  sas  kvaj? !         heill  sas  kann  !
njoti  sas  nam  !
heilir  J^eirs  hlyddu  !


THE    WORDS    OF    ODIN    THE     HIGH     ONE.      in

163.  An  eighteenth  I  know :        which  I  ne'er  shall  tell

to  maiden  or  wife  of  man,
save  alone  to  my  sister,        or  haply  to  her

who  folds  me  fast  in  her  arms ;
most  safe  are  secrets        known  to  but  one —

the  songs  are  sung  to  an  end.

164.  Now  the  sayings  of  the  High  One        are  uttered  in  the  hall
for  the  weal  of  men,         for  the  woe  of  Jotuns,

Hail,  thou  who  hast  spoken  !         Hail,  thou  that  knowest !
Hail,  ye  that  have  hearkened !      Use,  thou  who  hast  learned !


HYMISKVIPA.

1.  Ar  valtivar        vetyar  namu

ok  sumblsamir,         a]?r  sa)?ir  yr)>i,
hristu  teina        ok  a  hlaut  sou  :
fundu  at  ^Egis         orkost  hverjan.

2.  Sat  bergbui         barnteitr  fyrir
mjok  glikr  megi         Mistorblinda ;
leit  i  augu         Yggs  barn  i  )>ra :

'  pu  skalt  asum         opt  sumbl  gorva.'


The  motive  of  this  illustration  is  from  a  pre-Norman  monument  at  Tullie  House,
Carlisle.  Hymiskvijja,  in  E  No.  7  and  A  i.— Hverjan,  B.  G.  S.  H.  Dt.  for
hverja,  R  L.  F.  Magnusson,  Hold.  2.— Mistorblinda,  F.  Magnusson,  R.  Gv. ;
miskorblinda,  R.


THE    LAY    OF    HYMIR.

i.     Of  old  when  the  war-gods        their  prey  had  won  them,
in  mood  for  feasting,        and  still  unsated,
they  shook  divining  twigs,        scanned  the  blood  drops,
and  found  all  dainties        in  ^Egir's  halls.


2.     As  the  rock-giant  sat
and  seemed  in  likeness
came  Thor  and  looked
'  Make  now  a  goodly


in  his  wave-brood  rejoicing,
the  son  of  Mist-blind,
in  his  eyes  with  threatening
feast  for  the  gods  ! '


i. — Divining  twigs,  the  oracle;  see  Vsp.  st.  63.  -dSgir,  a  sea  god,  had  nine
daughters,  and  "  .<Egir's  children  "  was  a  poetical  synonym  for  the  waves  ;  see  Grm.  st.
45  ;  Ls.  and  Introd.


H4  HYMISKVIpA.


Onn  fekk  jotni         or)>b£cginn  hair,
hug)>i  at  hefndum         hann  nrcst  vi)>  go)?
ba.]>  Sifjar  ver        s€r  fcera  hver,
'  )>anns  ollum  yj?r        61  of  heitak.'

Ne  J?at  mattu         mgerir  tivar
ok  ginnregin         of  geta  hvergi,
unz  af  trygjmm         Tyr  Hlorri|>a
dstra}?  mikit        einum  sag)>i :


5.  '  Byr  fyr  austan         Elivaga

hundviss  Hymir        at  himins  enda :
a  minn  faj?ir         moj?ugr  ketil,
rumbrugj^inn  hver,        rastar  djupan.'

p6rr  kvaf:

6.  '  Veiztu  ef  |?iggjum        ]?ann  logvelli  ?  '

Tyr  kvaj? :
'  Ef,  vinr !  velar        vit  gorvum  til.'

7.  (6)     F6ru  drjugum        dag  |>ann  framan

Asgarj^i  fra,         unz  til  Egils  kvamu ;
hir)>i  hafra        horngofgasta ;
hurfu  at  hollu        es  Hymir  atti.

8.  (7)     Mogr  fann  ommu        mjok  letya  s6r,

haf)?i  hof J»a        hundru)?  niu ;
en  onnur  gekk        algollin  fram
briinhvit  bera         bjorveig  syni :

7. — Strophe  numbering  of  R  in  brackets.


THE    LAY    OF    HYMIR.  115

3.  But  the  harsh-voiced  hero        angered  the  giant,
who  forthwith  pondered        revenge  on  the  Powers ;
He  bade  the  Thunderer        bring  him  a  cauldron—

'  Wherein  for  all  of  you        ale  I  may  brew  ; '

4.  The  glorious  gods,        the  holy  Powers
such  vessel  as  this        could  nowhere  find ;
till  Tyr  the  trusty  whispered  in  secret
words  of  friendly  counsel  to  Thor.

Tyr.

5.  '  There  dwells  to  the  east        of  Stormy  Billow

the  all-wise  Hymir,         at  heaven's  end,

my  fierce-souled  father,        who  owns  the  kettle,

the  broad-roomed  cauldron,        a  full  mile  deep.'

Thor.

6.  '  Dost  know  can  we  win        that  water-seether  ?  '

Tyr.
'  If  we  use  wiles        thereto,  my  friend  ! '

7.  So  forth  they  drove        through  the  live-long  day
till  they  came  from  Asgarth         to  Egil's  home.
He  stalled  the  goats        of  the  splendid  horns,

while  they  turned  to  the  hall        which  Hymir  owned.

8.  Unsightly  seemed        to  Tyr  his  granddam
for  heads  she  had         nine  hundred  in  all ;
but  another  came        all  golden  forth,
fair-browed,  and  bearing        to  her  son  the  ale-cup.


4. — Tyr,  the  god  of  war,  is  usually  called  the  son  of  Odin ;  see  Ls.  st.  38.  5. —
Hymir,  a  frost  giant,  who  binds  the  wintry  sea.  7. — Egil  is  probably  the  giant
mentioned  in  st.  39.  The  goats,  called  Tooth -gnasber  and  Tooth-cracker,  drew
Thor's  chariot  ;  st.  39.


u6  HYMISKVIPA.


9.      (8)   '  Attntyr  jotna !        ek  viljak  ykkr
hugfulla  tvd        und  hvera  setja :
es  minn  fri         morgu  sinni
gloggr  vij>  gesti,        gorr  ills  hugar.'

10.  (9)     En  vaskapa)>r        var)>  stybuinn

har)>ra.)>r  Hymir         heim  af  vetyum  :

gekk  inn  i  sal,         glum)m  joklar,

vas  karls  es  kvam         kinnskogr  frorinn.

Frilla  kva)> :

11.  (10)   '  Ves  heill,  Hymir  !         i  hugum  g6)?um  :

nti's  sunr  kominn         til  sala  )>inna
sas  vit  vsettum         af  vegi  longum  ;
fylgir  h&num         Hr6]?rs  andskoti,
vinr  verli)?a,         Veorr  heitir  sa.

12.  (n)     Se)m  hvar  sitja        und  salar  gafli !

svd  for|?a  s^r,        stendr  siil  fyrir.'
Sundr  stokk  sula         fyr  sj6n  jotuns,
en  afr  i  tvau         dss  brotna)?i.

13.  (12)     Stukku  atta,         en  einn  af  )>eim

hverr  har]?sleginn  heill,  af  }>o\\i ;
fram  gengu  )>eir,  en  forn  jotunn
sj6num  leiddi  sinn  andskota.

14.  (13)     Sagjnt  hanum         hugr  vel  )>as  sd

gygjar  groeti         a  golf  kominn  :
J?ar  varu  )>j6rar        }>rir  of  teknir,
bajj  senn  jotunn         sjo)>a  ganga.

12.— Afr,  G.  S.  Gv.  Sv.J.;   dj>r,  R  A.


THE     LAY    OF     HYMIR.  117

Hymir's  wife.

9.  '  Kinsman  of  giants  !         fain  would  I  hide  you
'neath  yon  cauldrons,         though  bold  of  heart ;
for  my  lord  and  master         ofttimes  shows  him
mean  to  strangers,         moved  soon  to  wrath.'

10.  Long  tarried  that  monster,         fierce-mooded  Hymir,
ere  he  came         from  his  hunting  home.

He  entered  the  hall,        and  icicles  clashed—
all  frozen  was  the  bushy         beard  on  his  chin.

Wife.

11.  '  Hail  to  thee,  Hymir !         Be  gracious  in  mood  :

for  here  in  thy  halls         is  come  our  offspring
whom  long  we  awaited         from  distant  ways;
and  with  him  fares         the  foe  of  giants,
the  friend  of  man,         whose  name  is  Warder.

12.  '  Dost  see  where  they  hide,         the  hall-gable  under,

sheltering  themselves         with  a  pillar  between  ? '

But  the  column  was  shattered         at  the  glance  of  the  giant,

the  mighty  rafter         was  reft  asunder  :

13.  Down  from  the  beam         eight  cauldrons  crashed,
one,  hard-hammered,        alone  was  whole.

Then  forth  they  stepped,        but  the  ancient  Jotun
ever  followed        the  foe  with  his  eyes.

14.  For  evil  whispered        his  mind  when  he  saw
the  bane  of  giant-wives         stand  on  the  hearth  ;
yet  took  they  soon         of  the  oxen  three,

and  Hymir  bade  them         cook  forthwith.


ii. — Warder.  Thor  always  appears  as  the  defender  of  mankind  against  the  giants  ;
see  Hrbl.  st.  23.  In  this  stanza  Hrod,  otherwise  unknown,  is  specified,  but  his  name  is
doubtless  used  in  a  general  sense.  14. — Bane  of  giant-wives,  see  Hrbl.  23.


n8  HYMISKVIPA.

15.  (14)     Hverjan  I6tu         hotyi  skemra

auk  a  seyjri         si|>an  bam :

at  Sifjar  verr,         a)>r  sofa  gengi,

einn  mej>  ollu         yxn  tva  Hymis.

16.  (14)     potti  harum         Hrungnis  spjalla

ver)>r  Hlorrtya         vel  fullmikill :
'  Munum  at  apni         6J?rum  ver)>a
vty  vei^imat         v6r  J?rir  lifa.'

17.  Veorr  kvazk  vilja        a  vdg  roa,
ef  ballr  jotunn        beitur  gefefi.


Hymir  kva|> :

18.  (15)   '  Hverf  til  hjar)?ar,        ef  hug  truir,

brj6tr  bergdana !         beitur  scekja :
)?ess  vsentir  mik,         at  J>e"r  myni
ogn  af  oxa        au)>feng  vesa.'

19.  (16)     Sveinn  sysliga        sveif  til  skogar,

)?ars  uxi  st6)>        alsvartr  fyrir  :
braut  af  )>j6ri        ]mrs  ra)?bani
hatun  ofan         horna  tveggja.


Hymir  kva)> :

20.   (17)   '  Verk  J^ykkja  Y\n        verri  miklu
kj6la  valdi,        an  kyrr  sitir.'


21.    (18)     Ba]>  hlunngota        hafra  dr6ttinn
dttrunn  apa         utar  foera ;
en  sa  jotunn         sina  taljn
litla  fysi         lengra  at  roa.


THE     LAY    OF     HYMIR.

15.  Each  one  left  they         less  by  a  head,

and  laid  them  soon         on  the  seething  tire ;
then  ere  he  slumbered         the  Thunderer  ate,
himself  alone,         of  the  oxen,  twain.

16.  But  Hymir  the  hoary        friend  of  Hrungnir
deemed  too  ample        the  meal  of  Thor :

'  To-morrow  at  eve        shall  we  three  have  nought
save  our  hunting  spoil        whereon  to  sup.'

17.  Spake  Thor,  and  said        he  would  fish  in  the  sea,
if  the  fierce-souled  giant        would  find  him  bait.


119


18.


19.


Hymir.

'  Go,  if  thou  darest,        slayer  of  rock-giants,
seek  thy  bait         from  the  herd  thyself :
for  such  as  thou         I  ween  'twill  seem
that  bait  from  an  ox        were  easy  to  win.'


Forthwith  sped  Thor,
and  soon,  all  swart,
then  over  its  horns
struck,  and  sundered


bold  youth,  to  the  wood
stood  an  ox  before  him ;
the  slayer  of  Jotuns
the  head,  high-towering.


Hymir.

20.  '  Methinks  thou  art  worse        by  far  afoot
than  at  table  sitting,         Steerer  of  barks !


21.     Then  the  Lord  of  goats,        bade  the  low-born  churl
drive  the  launched  sea-horse         further  from  shore  ;
but  little  he  wished,        that  wary  giant,
to  row  any  further        over  the  ocean.


16. — Hrungnir,  a  giant  of  great  renown  ;  Hrbl.  st.  15  and  Introd.


120  HYMISKVIpA.

22.  (19)     Dr6  mg&rr  Hymir         mo)mgr  hvali

einn  a  ongli  upp  senn  tva  ;
en  aptr  i  skut  UJ?ni  sifja)>r
Veorr  vi)?  velar  vaj?  gorj>i  se"r.

23.  (20)     Egndi  a  ongul         sas  oldum  bergr

orms  einbani  oxa  hotyi :
gein  vty  agni  sus  go]?  fia
umbgjor]?  ne)?an  allra  landa.

24.  (21)     Dro  djarfliga         daj^rakkr  p6rr

orm  eitrfan  upp  at  bor)>i ;
hamri  kni)?i  hdfjall  skarar
oflj6tt  ofan  ulfs  hnitbrojmr.

25.  (22)     Hreingolkn  hlumj^u,         en  holkn  ]>utu,

for  en  forna         fold  oil  saman  :


sok)>isk  si]?an         sa  fiskr  i  mar.

26.  (22)

6teitr  jotunn,         es  aptr  roru  :
svat  at  ar  Hymir         etki  malti,
veif)?i  roe)?i         vej?rs  annars  til.

Hymir  kva)?:

27.  (23)    '  Mundu  of  vinna         verk  halft  vij?  mik,

at  )?u  flotbrusa         festir  okkarn,
e)?a  heim  hvali         haf  til  bcejar
ok  holtri]>a         hver  i  gognum.'


27. — The  reversal  of  lines  2  and  3  and  the  transposition  of  line  4,  which  comes  after
28,  line  4,  in  B,  A,  was  made  by  Gv.  H.  S.


THE    LAY    OF    HYMIR.  121

22.  Alone  the  famous  and  fierce-souled  Hymir
caught  on  his  hook  two  whales  at  once ;
but  aft  in  the  stern  the  son  of  Odin
fashioned  with  craft  his  fishing  line.

23.  Lone  Serpent-slayer,        and  Shield  of  Men,
he  baited  his  hook        with  the  head  of  the  ox,
and  he  whom  the  gods  hate        gaped  thereat,
the  Girdle  lying        all  lands  beneath.

24.  Then  Thor  drew  mightily         —swift  in  his  doing—
the  poison-glistening         snake  to  the  side.

His  hammer  he  lifted         and  struck  from  on  high
the  fearful  head        of  Fenrir's  brother.

25.  Moaned  the  wild  monster,         the  rocks  all  rumbled,
the  ancient  earth         shrank  into  itself.


Then  sank  the  serpent        down  in  the  deep.

26.     So  cheerless  was  the  giant         as  back  they  rowed
that  for  a  while         not  a  word  he  spake  ;
then  anew  he  turned        the  tiller  of  thought.


Hymir.

27.    '  Now  half  the  work         shalt  thou  share  with  me
or  moor  thou  fast         our  floating  steed,
or  bear  the  whales         to  the  dwellings  home,
all  through  the  hollows         of  the  wooded  hills.


23. — The  Girdle   is  the  World-serpent,  called  also  Midgarth's  worm.     He  is  one

of  Loki's  children  ;  see  \'sp.  st.  55,   Vsp.  en  skamma  st.  8.          24. — Fenrir,  the  famous

Wolf;  see  Vsp.  st.  54,  Vsp.  en  skammu  st.  8.         26. — Hymir  has  formed  a  fresh  scheme

for  defeating  Thor  (Dt.).      G.  and  others  understand  simply  that  he  has  turned  the  boat

towards  land.

R


122  HYMISKVIPA.

28.  (24)     Gekk  H16rribi,        greip  a  stafni,

vatt  meb  austri  upp  logfaki ;
einn  meb  arum  ok  austskotu
bar  til  bcejar  brimsvin  jotuns.

29.  (25)     Ok  enn  jotunn         of  afrendi

bragirni  vanr         vib  J)6r  senti :

kvabat  mann  ramman,         bot  roa  kynni

kropturligan,         nema  kalk  bryti.

30.  (26)     En  Hlorribi,         es  at  hondum  kvam,

bratt  l£t  bresta         brattstein  gleri :
s!6  sitjandi         sulur  i  gognum,
baro  bo  heilan         fyr  Hymi  siban.

31.  (27)     Unz  J>at  en  fri|>a        frilla  kendi

astraj?  mikit         eitt  es  vissi :
'  Drep  vty  haus  Hymis  !         hann's  har)>ari
kostm6]?s  jotuns         kalki  hverjum.'

32.  (28)     Har)>r  reis  d  kne        hafra  drottinn,

fcer|>isk  allra         i  asmegin :

heill  vas  karli         hjalmstofn  ofan,

en  vinferill         valr  rifna]?i.

Hymir  kva)» :

33-    (29)   '  Morg  veitk  mseti         m6r  gengin  fra,
es  kalki  s6k         6r  kneum  hrundit ; '
karl  or)?  of  kvaj> :         '  knakak  segja
aptr  sevagi :         ]>u  ert,  otyr  I  of  heitt.

34«    (30)     pat's  til  kostar,         ef  koma  m£ettij>
ut  6r  6ru         olkjol  hofi.'
Tyr  leita)?i         tysvar  hroera,
st6}>  at  hvaru         hverr  kyrr  fyrir.


33. — Jm  ert  61J>r  of  bet,  R ;   heitt,  A  (p.pt.  of  heita,  to  brew),  Sv.  G.  L.  C.  J.
B.  suggests  )?ui  er  abr  of  h6t,  Gv.  B.  S.


THE     LAY     OF     HYMIR.  123

28.  Then  the  Thunderer  rose,         laid  hold  on  the  stem,
he  landed  the  boat        with  the  water  therein,

and  the  ocean-swine,         with  the  baler  and  oars
himself  he  bore        to  the  giant's  home.

29.  But  still  the  Jotun,         stubborn  as  ever,
questioned  anew         the  Thunderer's  might.

'  I  deem  none  strong,         row  he  ne'er  so  well,
save  he  who  hath  power        to  break  my  cup.'

30.  Then  the  Storm  god,  swift,        when  it  came  to  his  hands
dashed  into  pieces         a  pillar  of  stone  :

yea,  sitting,  he  hurled         the  cup  through  the  columns
but  whole  'twas  borne         to  Hymir  again.

31.  At  length  the  fair  mistress        with  friendly  words
made  known  the  secret        she  only  knew :

'  Strike  at  Hymir's  skull,         the  food-filled  giant's,
'tis  harder  than  ever        a  wine  cup  was.'

32.  Then  rose  to  his  knees        the  strong  Lord  of  goats,
and  girt  him  with  all         the  might  of  the  gods  ;
still  sound  above         was  the  head  of  Hymir,
shattered  below         was  the  shapely  wine  cup.

Hymir.

33.  '  Gone  already         I  trow  is  my  treasure,

when  I  see  the  cup         now  cast  by  thee  kneeling.'
So  spake  the  churl —         "  I  can  say  never  more,
'  Ale  in  my  cauldron         now  art  thou  brewed.'  "

34.  '  But  'tis  yet  to  prove        if  ye  can  bear

the  mighty  vessel         forth  from  our  court.'—
Twice  in  vain        sought  Tyr  to  move  it ;
ever  unstirred        the  cauldron  stood.


HYMISKVIPA.

35-    (31)     FaJ>ir  M6}>a        fekk  a  )>remi

ok  i  gognum  st6  golf  nij?r  i  sal ;
hofsk  a  haufu)*  hver  Sifjar  verr,
en  a  hfclum  hringar  skullu.

36.    (32)     Forut  lengi,         a)?r  lita  nam
aptr  6)>ins  sunr         einu  sinni :
sa  or  hreysum         mety  Hymi  austan
folkdr6tt  fara         fjolhofya^a.

37-    (33)     H6fsk  af  her)>um         hver  standandi,
veifjn  Mjollni         mor)?gj6rnum  fram  ;

ok  hraunhvali         hann  alia  drap.

38.  (34)     Forut  lengi,         aj?r  Hggja  nam

hafr  HlorriJ?a         halfdau]?r  fyrir;
vas  skser  skokuls         skakkr  a  beini  :
)?vi  enn  Isevisi         Loki  of  olli.

39.  (35)     En  6r  heyrt  hafi}>         — hverr  kann  of  |?at

go)?malugra         gorr  at  skilja  ? —

hver  af  hraunbua         hann  laun  of  fekk,

es  bse)>i  gait         born  sin  fyrir.

40.  (36)     prottoflugr  kvam         a  )>ing  go)?a

ok  haf)?i  hver  J>anns  Hymir  dtti ;
en  vear  hverjan  vel  skulu  drekka
otyr  at  ^Egis  eitt  hormeiti]?.


38.— Skger,  Gv.  R.  S.  H.  J. ;    skirr,  R  A,  HI.  40.— Eitt  hormeitij>,  B  A,

B.  HI.  K.  D.  S.  Sv.  Gv.,  a  doubtful  word  ;  eitr  hormeili,  /.  Thorkelsson,  G.


THE     LAY    OF    HYMIR.  125

35.  Then  the  Father  of  Wrath        laid  hold  on  the  rim
and  heaved  the  cauldron         high  on  his  head,
against  his  heels         the  handles  clinked,

as  across  the  hearth        he  strode  down  the  hall.

36.  Far  had  they  fared        ere  Odin's  son
had  turned  him  once,         to  look  behind

and  eastward  saw         from  the  cairns  forthcoming
with  Hymir,  a  war-host        hundred  headed.

37.  From  his  shoulders  raised  he        the  resting  cauldron,
swung  he  Mjollnir,         death-craving  hammer,

and  the  monsters  all         from  the  mountains  slew.


38.  But  they  fared  not  far         ere  the  Thunderer's  goat
had  laid  him  down         half  dead  in  the  way ;

for  lame  in  the  leg        was  the  shaft-bound  steed, —
'twas  the  work  of  Loki,         crafty  in  wiles.

39.  But  ye  have  heard —        for  who  knows  it  better
of  sages  learned        in  the  lore  of  the  gods  ? —
what  amends        made  the  dweller  in  wastes,
who  paid  to  the  Thunderer        both  his  bairns.

40.  Swelling  with  might        to  the  meeting  of  gods

came  Thor  with  the  cauldron        which  Hymir  had  owned,
and  the  Holy  Ones  ever        shall  well  drink  ale
each  harvest  of  flax        in  the  Sea-god's  hall.


35. — Wrath  or  Modi.  This  son  is  mentioned  in  Vm.  st.  51.  39. — The  dweller
in  wastes,  or  mountain  giant  (presumably  Egil),  belongs  to  another  story  of  Thor's
adventures  tn  Jotunheim;  see  Introd.


PRYMSKVIFA.

1.  Vretyr  vas  Ving)?6rr         es  vaknajn
ok  sins  hamars         of  saknajn  ;
skegg  nam  hrista,         skor  nam  dyja,
rfy  Jar]?ar  burr         umb  at  J^reifask.

2.  Auk  )>at  or]?a         alls  fyrst  of  kva)> :
'  Heyr  nu,  Loki !         hvat  nii  msolik,

es  engi  veit        jar^ar  hvergi

ne  upphimins :         ass's  stolinn  hamri !


.     Gengu  fagra         Freyju  tuna,

ok  hann  )>at  or|?a         alls  fyrst  of  kva]? :
'  Muntu  mer,  Freyja !        fja)?rhams  lea,
ef  minn  hamar         msettak  hitta  ? '


Jnymskvijja,  in  E  No.  9.


THE    LAY    OF    THRYM.

1.  Wroth  was  the  Thunderer         when  he  awakened
aud  missed  his  hammer,         the  mighty  Mjollnir.

His  beard  was  quivering,         his  locks  were  shivering,-
as  he  groped  around  him —         the  Son  of  Earth.

2.  '  List  now,  Loki,         to  this  I  shall  tell  thee  !'—

these,  first  of  all         his  words,  he  spake —
'  no  wight  in  high  heaven         or  earth  yet  weens  it : —
The  god  of  Thunder         is  reft  of  his  hammer.'

3.  Then  sought  they  the  shining  .      halls  of  Freyja,
and  these,  first  of  all         his  words,  spake  Thor :

'Wilt  than,  Freyja,         lend  me  thy  feather-coat,
that  perchance  I  may         find  my  hammer  ?  '


i. — Mjollnir,    the    Crusher,    Thor's   thunder  hammer;   see  Vm.  51,   Ls.  st.  57.
Earth,  or  Jord,  a  wife  of  Odin  ;  see  Ls.  st.  26,  Hrbl.  56.


128  PRYMSKVIPA.

Freyja  kvaj? :

4.  '  Munda  ek  gefa  }>er         )?6t  vscri  or  golli,

ok  ]>6  selja         at  vs6ri  or  silfri.'
Flo  }?a  Loki,         fja)?rhamr  dun]?i,
unz  fyr  utan  kvam         asa  gar)>a
ok  fyr  innan  kvam         jotna  heima.

5.  (4)     prymr  sat  a  haugi,         Jmrsa  drottinn,

greyjum  sinum         gollbond  snori
ok  morum  sinum         mon  jafna)>i.

prymr  kva)?:

6.  (5)   '  Hvat's  me))  asum,         hvat's  me]?  olfum  ?

hvi'st  einn  kominn         i  jotunheima  ?  '

Loki  kva]?  :

'  lilt's  me)?  asum,         illt's  me}>  olfum  !
hefr  H16rri)?a         hamar  of  folginn  ?  '

prymer  kva)> :

7.  (6)  '  Ek  hefi  H16rri]>a         hamar  of  folginn

atta  rostum         fyr  jor)>  ne]>an  ;
hann  engi  maj?r        aptr  of  heimtir,
nema  fceri  m6r         Freyju  at  kvsen.'

8.  (7)     F16  ]?d  Loki,         fja)>rhamr  dun]?i,

unz  fyr  utan  kvam         jotna  heima
ok  fyr  innan  kvam         asa  gar|>a  ;
mcetti  pori         mi|?ra  gar|?a,
ok  hann  )>at  orj^a        alls  fyrst  of  kva|? :


9-

(8)   '  Hefr  eyrindi
segj>u  a  lopti
opt  sitjanda
ok  liggjandi

sem  erfij^i  ?
long  ttyindi  !
sogur  of  fallask
lygi  of  bellir.'

4. — The  strophe  numbering  of  R  is  marked  in  brackets.


THE     LAY    OF    THRYM.  129

Freyja.

4.  '  I  would  give  it  thee        though  'twere  golden,

still  would  I  grant  it        though  'twere  silver !'
Away  flew  Loki, —         the  feather-coat  rustled, —
till  he  came  without        the  dwellings  of  Asgarth,
came  within         the  Jotun  realms.

5.  Thrym  sat  on  a  mound,         the  lord  of  giants,
for  his  grayhounds  twisting         golden  circlets,
smoothing  over        the  manes  of  his  steeds.

Thrym.

6.  '  How  do  the  gods  fare  ?         how  do  the  elves  fare  ?

Why  alone  art  come         into  Jotunheim  ?  '

Loki.

'  111  do  the  gods  fare,         ill  do  the  elves  fare.
Speak  !  hast  thou  hidden         the  Thunderer's  hammer  ? '

Thrym.

7.  '  Yea,  I  have  hidden         the  Thunderer's  hammer

eight  miles  under,         deep  in  the  earth  :
and  never  a  being         back  shall  win  it
till  he  bring  me        as  bride  fair  Freyja.'

8.  Away  flew  Loki,        the  feather-coat  rustled,

till  he  came  without         the  realms  of  the  Jotuns,
came  within         the  garths  of  the  gods.
There  'midst  the  courts        the  Thunderer  met  he,
and  these,  first  of  all         his  words,  spake  Thor.

9.  '  Hast  thou  had  issue         meet  for  thy  labour  ?

Tell  out  aloft         and  at  length  thy  tidings.
For  oft  when  sitting         a  tale  is  broken  ;
oft  when  resting         a  lie  is  spoken.'

5.— Thrym's  name,  like  that  of  other  Jutuns,  signifies  noise ;  see  Vm.  st.  29.


I3o

Loki  kva)>  :

10.    (9)    '  Hefk  erftyi         ok  eyrindi  :

prymr  hefr  hamar,         ]?ursa  dr6ttinn  ;
hann  engi  ma]?r        aptr  of  heimtir,
nema  hanum  fceri         Freyju  at


11.  Gengu  fagra         Freyju  at  hitta,

ok  hann  ]?at  or)>a         alls  fyrst  of  kva]?
'  Bitt  ]?ik,  Freyja  !         brityar  lini,
vit  skulum  aka  tvau         i  jotunheima.'

12.  Vrety  varf>  Freyja         ok  fnasajn,
allr  asa  salr         undir  bif^isk,
stokk  ]?at  et  mikla         men  Brisinga  :

'  Mik  veizt  ver)>a        vergjarnasta,
ef  ekk  me)?  }>6r        i  jotunheima.'

13.  Senn  varu  sesir        allir  d  ]?ingi
ok  asynjur        allar  d  mali,

ok  of  )>at  re\>u         rikir  tivar,
hv6  H16rri]?a         hamar  of  scetti.

14.  pa  kva]>  Heimdallr,         hvitastr  asa  —
vissi  vel  fram         sem  vanir  aj>rir  —  :
Bindum  por  )>a         bruj^ar  lini,

han  et  mikla         men  Brisinga  !

15.  Latum  und  hanum         hrynja  lukla
ok  kvennva)?ir         of  kn6  falla,

en  a  brjosti         brei)?a  steina,

ok  hagliga         of  hofu]?  typpum  !  '

16.  pa  kva)>  )?at  porr,         )?ru]>ugr  ass  :
'  Mik  munu  a^sir        argan  kalla,

ef  bindask  lartk         bru)?ar  lini.'


THE    LAY    OF    THRYM.  131

Loki.

10.  '  I  have  had  toil         and  issue  also.

Thrym  has  thy  hammer,         lord  of  giants :

never  a  being         back  shall  win  it

till  he  bring  him         as  bride  fair  Freyja.'

11.  Forthwith  went  they         to  find  fair  Freyja,
and  these,  first  of  all         his  words,  spake  Thor  :

'  Bind  thee,  Freyja,         in  bridal  linen,
we  twain  must  drive         into  Jotunheim.'

12.  Wroth  then  was  Freyja;         fiercely  she  panted;
the  halls  of  Asgarth         all  trembled  under,
burst  that  mighty         necklet  of  Brisings.

'  Know  me  to  be         most  wanton  of  women
if  I  drive  with  thee         into  Jotunheim.'

13.  Straight  were  gatherecj         all  gods  at  the  doomstead  ;
goddesses  all  were         in  speech  together ;

and  the  mighty  Powers         upon  this  took  counsel,
how  the  Thunderer's  hammer         they  should  win  again.

14.  Spake  then  Heimdal,         of  gods  the  fairest ; —
even  as  the  Wanes         could  he  see  far  forward —

'  Come  bind  we  Thor         in  bridal  linen,
let  him  wear  the  mighty         Brisinga-men.

15.  Let  us  cause  the  keys         to  jingle  under  him,
weeds  of  a  woman         to  dangle  round  him,
and  over  his  breast         lay  ample  jewels,
and  daintily  let  us         hood  his  head.'

16.  Spake  the  Thunderer         of  gods  the  sturdiest :
'  Womanish  then         the  Powers  will  call  me

if  I  let  me  be  bound         in  bridal  linen.'


12. — Necklet   of   Brisings.      This  famous  mythological  treasure,  called  Brisinga-
nieu,  like  many  others,  was  won  from  the  dwarfs  ;  see  IntroJ.


132  pRYMSKVIpA.

17.  pa  kva)?  J>at  Loki,         Laufeyjar  sunr :
'  pegi  ]>u,  p6rr !         )>eira  or)?a  :

J>egar  munu  jotnar         Asgar]?  bua,
nema  jnnn  hamar         J?6r  of  heimtir.'

18.  Bundu  por  )>a         bru)>ar  lini
auk  enu  miklu         meni  Brisinga.

19.  (i8j     L6tu  und  hanum         hrynja  lukla

ok  kvennva)>ir        of  kn6  falla,
en  a  brjosti         brei)>a  steina,
ok  hagliga         of  hofu]?  typj^u.

20.  (19)     pa  kva.\>  ]?at  Loki,         Laufeyjar  sunr  :

'  Munk  auk  me)>  ]?er         ambatt  vesa,
vit  skulum  aka  tveer         i  jotunheima.'

21.  (20)     Senn  varu  hafrar         heim  of  vreknir,

skyndir  at  skoklum,         skyldu  vel  rinna
bjorg  brotnuj?u,         brann  jor)?  loga,
6k  OJ?ins  sunr        i  jotunheima.

22.  (21)     pa  kva)>  )?at  prymr,         }?ursa  drottinn  :

'  Standi]?  upp,  jotnar  !         ok  strai}?  bekki :
nii  foeri}?  m6r         Freyju  at  kvscn,
Njar]?ar  dottur        or  Noatunum.

23.  (22)     Ganga  her  at  gar)?i         gollhyrndar  kyr,

oxn  alsvartir,         jotni  at  gamni :
fjoljj  ak  mei)?ma,         fjol)?  ak  menja,
einnar  Freyju         ^vant  J>ykkjumk.'

24.  (23)     Vas  )?ar  at  kveldi         of  komit  snimma

auk  fyr  jotna        61  fram  borit ;
einn  at  oxa,         atta  laxa,
krasir  allar        j?£ers  konur  skyldu,
drakk  Sifjar  verr         said  Jmu  mja)?ar.

22.— Foeri)>,  R ;  foera,  B.  G.  H.  S.  J.


THE     LAY    OF    THRYM.  133

17.  Spake  then  Loki,         the  son  of  Laufey :

'  Silence,  Thor !         with  words  so  witless  !
Soon  shall  the  Jotuns        dwell  in  Asgarth
unless  thou  get  thee        again  thy  hammer.'

18.  Then  bound  they  Thor         in  bridal  linen,
eke  with  the  mighty         Brisinga-men.

19.  They  caused  the  keys        to  jingle  under  him,
weeds  of  a  woman         to  dangle  round  him,
and  over  his  breast        laid  ample  jewels

and  daintily        they  hooded  his  head.

20.  Spake  then  Loki,        the  son  of  Laufey :

'  I  will  fare  with  thee         as  thy  serving-maiden  :
we  twain  will  drive  into  Jotunheim.'

21.  Forthwith  the  goats        were  homeward  driven,
sped  to  the  traces, —        well  must  they  run  !
Rent  were  the  mountains,         earth  was  aflame ;
fared  Odin's  son         into  Jotunheim.

22.  Spake  then  Thrym,        the  lord  of  giants :

'  Stand  up,  Jotuns  !         and  strew  the  benches  !
Now  shall  ye  bring  me        as  bride  fair  Freyja,
daughter  of  Njord,         from  Noatun.

23.  '  Golden-horned  kine        are  found  in  my  dwellings

and  oxen  all  swarthy,  the  joy  of  the  giant.
I  own  many  treasures  I  rule  many  riches,
and  Freyja  alone  to  me  seems  lacking.'

24.  Swiftly  drew        the  day  to  evening,

borne  was  the  ale  cup        forth  to  the  Jotuns,
Thor  ate  an  ox         and  eight  whole  salmon,
with  dainties  all        as  should  a  damsel,
three  full  cups        of  mead  he  quaffed.


17.— Loki,  see  Ls.  and  Introd.      Lgufey,  or  Leaf-isle,  Loki's  mother;   also  called
Art/,  or  Pine-needle,  by  Snorri.


134  PRYMSKVIPA.

25.  (24)     pa  kva}>  J?at  prymr,         ]?ursa  dr6ttinn :

'  Hvar  satt  bntyir         bita  hvassara  ?
sakak  bru}>ir         bita  bretyara,
He"  enn  meira  mjoj?         mey  of  drekka.

26.  (35)     Sat  en  alsnotra         ambatt  fyrir,

es  orj?  of  fann         vi)>  jotuns  mali :
'  At  vsetr  Freyja         atta  nattum,
sva  vas  6)?fus         i  jotunheima.'

27.  (26)     Laut  und  linu,         lysti  at  kyssa,

en  utan  stokk         endlangan  sal :
'  Hvi  'ru  ondott         augu  Freyju  ?
)?ykkjumk  or  augum         eldr  of  brinna.'

28.  (27)     Sat  en  alsnotra         ambatt  fyrir,

es  orj?  of  fann         vi|?  jotuns  mali :
'  Svaf  vsetr  Freyja         atta  nattum,
sva  vas  6)>fus         i  jotunheima.'

29.  (28)     Inn  kvam  en  arma         jotna  systir,

bins  brujrfear         bi)?ja  )?or|?i :

*  Lat  ]>€r  af  hondum         hringa  rau}?a,
ef  6)?lask  vill         astir  minar

astir  minar        alia  hylli.'

30.  (29)     pa  kva]>  J>at  prymr,         )>ursa  drottinn  :

*  Berty  inn  hamar         bru]?i  at  vigja,
leggi)>  Mjollni         i  meyjar  kne,
vigij?  okkr  saman         Varar  hendi  !  '

31.  (30)     H16  H16rriJ?a         hugr  i  brjosti,

es  har))huga))r        hamar  of  ]?ek)>i ;
prym  drap  fyrstan,         Jmrsa  drottin,
ok  aett  jotuns         alia  lamjn.


27.— Eldr,  a  word  missing  in  R  supplied  by  paper  A/SS.  I


THE     LAY    OF    THRYM.  135

25.  Spake  then  Thrym,         the  lord  of  giants,
1  Didst  ever  see  damsel         eat  so  bravely  ?

Ne'er  have  I  seen  one         bite  so  boldly,
nor  a  maiden  quaff        more  cups  of  mead  ! '

26.  All  crafty  sat  by        the  serving-maiden,
who  answer  found         to  the  giant's  asking  :

'  Nought  has  Freyja         these  eight  nights  eaten,
so  sore  her  yearning         for  Jotunheim.'

27.  Stooped  then  Thrym         'neath  the  veil,  to  kiss  her,
back  he  leapt        the  hall's  whole  length  :

'  Why  are  fair  Freyja's         eyes  so  fearful  ?
Meseems  from  those  eyes         a  fire  is  flaming.'

28.  All  crafty  sat  by         the  serving-maiden,
who  answer  found         to  the  giant's  asking  :

'  Not  a  whit  has  Freyja        these  eight  nights  slumbered,
so  sore  her  yearning         for  Jotunheim.'

29.  In  came  the  wretched        sister  of  Jotuns
and  dared  to  beg         for  a  bridal  token  :

'  Take  the  red  rings         from  off  thy  fingers
if  thou  wilt  win  thee         mine  affection,
mine  affection,         all  my  favour !  '

30.  Spake  then  Thrym,         the  lord  of  giants  :

'  Bring  in  the  hammer,         the  bride  to  hallow.
Mjollnir  lay         on  the  knee  of  the  maiden  !
Hallow  us  twain         with  the  hand  of  the  Troth-goddess ! '

31.  Laughed  in  his  breast         the  heart  of  the  Thunderer;
strong  was  his  soul         when  he  spied  his  hammer.
He  first  smote  Thrym,         the  lord  of  giants,

and  all  the  Jotun's         kindred  crushed.


27. — Eyes  so  fearful.  When  Thor  was  angry  he  let  his  bushy  brows  drop  over  his
eyes  "  so  that  you  could  scarce  get  a  glimpse  of  them  "  (Snorri).  30. — Thor  was  called
on  by  the  old  Norse  peasants  to  bless  their  marriage  feasts  with  his  hammer.  Troth-
goddess,  or  Var,  was  the  guardian  of  oaths  ami  plightings.


PRYMSKVIPA.

32.    (31)     Drap  ena  oldnu        jotna  systur
hinas  bru)?fear        of  be\>it  haf)>i :
h6n  skell  of  hlaut         fyr  skillinga,
en  hogg  hamars         fyr  hringa  fjolj*.

(32)     Sva  kvam  6]?ins  sunr        endr  at  hamri.


THE     LAY     OF    THRYM.  137

32.     Smote  he  the  ancient         sister  of  Jotuns,—
her  who  had  begged         for  a  bridal  token.
She  got  but  a  stroke         in  the  place  of  shillings ;
Mjollnir's  mark         and  never  a  ring.

And  thus  Thor  won  him        again  his  hammer.


SKIRN1SMAL

Freyr  sonr  Njar)>ar  hafyi  einn  dag  sez  i  Hli)?skjalf  ok  sa  um  heima
alia ;  hann  sa  i  jotunheima  ok  sa  J>ar  mey  fagra,  |?a  er  hon  gekk  fra
skala  fo)mr  sins  til  skemmu.  par  af  fekk  hann  hugs6ttir  miklar.
Skirnir  h<§t  skosveinn  Freys ;  NjorJ>r  ba]>  hann  kve)?a  Frey  mal?.  pa
maelti  Ska]?i :

i.  '  Ris  nu,  Skirnir!         ok  gakk  at  bei|?a

okkarn  mala  mog,

ok  )>ess  at  fregna,         hveim  enn  fro|?i  s€
ofreij>i  afi.'

Skirnismil.— In  R,  No.  5;  st.  1-27  in  A.


THE    STORY    OF    SK1RNIR.

Once  Frey,  son  of  Njord,  had  seated  himself  on  Window-shelf,
and  was  gazing  out  over  all  worlds.  When  he  looked  into  Jotunheim
he  beheld  a  fair  maiden  going  from  her  father's  hall  to  the  bower,  and
at  the  sight  of  her  he  was  seized  with  great  sickness  of  heart.

Now  Prey's  servant  was  called  Skirnir,  and  Njord  bade  him  ask
speech  of  his  master ;  and  Skadi,  wife  of  Njord,  said  : —

I.     Rise,  bright  Skirnir  !         run  thou  swiftly,

and  beseech  our  son  to  speak :
ask  the  wise  youth         to  answer  thee  this,
'gainst  whom  his  wrath  is  aroused.


Frey,  set  Introd.  and  Ls.t  st.  42.       Njord,  set  Ls.t  st.  34.
high  seat.      Skirnir's  name  means  the  Light-bringer.


Window.shelf,  Odin's


140  SKIRNISMAL.

Skirnir  kva]> :

2.  '  Illra  orj>a         erumk  6n  at  ykrum  syni,

ef  gengk  at  nrufela  vi)>  mog,
ok  J>ess  at  fregna,         hveim  enn  froj>i  se
ofrei)>i  afi.'

Skirnir  kva)?:

3.  '  Segj?u  j?at,  Freyr,         folkvaldi  goj?a  !

auk  ek  vilja  vita :
hvi  einn  sitr         endlanga  sali,
minn  drottinn  !  of  daga  ?  '

Freyr  kva|> :

4.  '  Hvi  of  segjak  }>€r,         seggr  enn  ungi !

mikinn  mo)?trega  ?
\>vit  alfrojjull         tysir  of  alia  daga,
ok  )>eygi  at  minum  munum.'

Skirnir  kva)>:

5.  '  Muni  |?ina         hykkak  sva  mikla  vesa,

at  meY,  seggr !  n6  segir ;
)>vit  ungir  saman         vdrum  i  ardaga,
vel  maettim  tveir  truask.1

Freyr  kvaj> :

6.  '  I  Gymis  gor)>um        ek  sd  ganga

m^r  tij^a  mey ;
armar  lystu,         en  af  J?a)>an
allt  lopt  ok  logr.

7.  Msfer's  m6r  tfyari        an  manni  hveim

ungum  i  ardaga ;
asa  ok  alfa         )?at  vil  engi  ma)>r,
at  vit  samt  sem.


THE    STORY    OF    SKIRNIR.  141

Skirnir.

2.  If  I  seek  for  speech         with  him,  your  son,

ill  words  I  shall  haply  win,
if  I  ask  the  wise  youth         to  answer  me  this,
'gainst  whom  his  wrath  is  aroused.

(Skirnir  (to  Frey).

3.  Tell  me  truly,  Frey,         thou  ruler  of  gods,

what  I  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips :
why  sitt'st  thou  lone         in  the  hall,  my  lord,
lingering  the  live-long  day  ?

Frey.

4.  How  shall  I  ever         own  to  thee,  youth,

the  great  heart's  burden  I  bear  ?
the  Elf-light  shines         each  day  the  same,
but  works  not  yet  my  will.

Skirnir.

5.  Scarce  are  the  longings         of  thy  love  so  great

but  I  trow  thou  canst  tell  them  to  me ;
we  were  young  together        in  days  of  yore,
we  twain  may  well  trust  each  other.

Frey.

6.  In  the  courts  of  Gymir,        the  frost-giant,  saw  I

that  maiden  most  dear  to  me ;
light  shone  out         from  her  arms  and  thence
all  the  air  and  sea  were  ashine.

7.     She  is  dearer  to  me        than  ever  was  maiden

to  youth  in  days  of  yore  :
but  none  among  all        the  gods  and  elves
hath  willed  that  we  twain  should  wed.

4. — Elf-light,  a  name  for  the  sun  from  its  power  over  dwarfs  or  elves;   set  Alv.t
St.  16.


142  SKlRNISMAL.

Skirnir  kvaj> :

8.  '  Mar  gef  m£r  j>a,         ]?anns  mik  of  myrkvan  beri

visan  vafrloga,

ok  )>at  sver|>,         es  sjalft  vegisk
t  vty  jotna  sfctt.'

Freyr  kva)> :

9.  '  Mar  \>6r  )>ann  gefk,         es  )?ik  of  myrkvan  berri

visan  vafrloga,

ok  ]>at  sverj>,         es  sjalft  mun  vegask,
ef  sa's  horskr  es  hefr.'

Skirnir  maelti  vty  hestinn :

10.  '  Myrkt  es  uti,        mal  kve)?k  okkr  fara
urig  fjoll  yfir,
)>ursa  ]?j6]?  yfir ;

baj>ir  vit  komumk,         e)?a  okkr  baj^a  tekr
enn  amatki  jotunn.'

Skirnir  rei)>  i  jotunheima  til  Gymis  gar)?a.  par  varu  hundar  olmir
ok  bundnir  fyr  skij?sgar]?s  hli)?i  )?ess  er  um  sal  Ger}>ar  var.  Hann  reij>
at  J?ar  er  fehir)?ir  sat  a  haugi  ok  kvaddi  hann :


11.  '  Seg  )>at,  hirj>ir !        es  }>u  a  haugi  sitr

ok  var]?ar  alia  vega :

hve  at  andspilli         komumk  ens  unga  mans
fyr  greyjum  Gymis  ? '

Hirjrir  kva)> :

12.  '  Hvart  est  feigr        e)>a  estu  framgenginn,

?

andspillis  vanr        ]>u  skalt  £  vesa
go)?rar  meyjar  Gymis.'


THE    STORY    OF    SKIRNIR.  143

Skirnir.

8.  Give  me  steed  to  bear  me        safe  through  the  dim

enchanted  flickering  flame,
and  the  sword  which  wages        war  of  itself
'gainst  the  fearful  Jotun  folk.

Frey.

9.  Here  is  steed  to  bear  thee        safe  through  the  dim

enchanted  flickering  flame,
and  the  sword  which  wages         war  of  itself,
if  he  who  bears  it  be  bold.

Skirnir  (speaking  to  the  horse).

10.     Dark  'tis  without !         'tis  time,  I  ween,

to  fare  o'er  the  dewy  fells :

'mid  the  throng  of  giants         we  shall  both  win  through,
or  the  awful  Jotun  have  both.


Then  Skirnir  rode  into  Jotunheim  to  the  dwellings  of  Gymir,
where  fierce  dogs  were  chained  up  before  the  gate  of  the  enclosure
which  surrounded  Gerd's  hall.  He  rode  up  to  a  herdsman  who  was
sitting  on  a  mound,  and  said  : —

11.  Speak,  thou  herdsman,         who  sitt'st  on  a  mound

and  watchest  every  way  !

How,  for  Gymir's  hounds,        shall  I  e'er  hold  speech
with  that  Jotun's  youthful  maid  ?

Herdsman.

12.  Either  doomed  art  thou,         or  one  of  the  dead

going  forth  to  the  halls  of  Hel  !
never  a  word        shalt  thou  win,  I  ween,
with  Gymir's  goodly  maid.

8,  9.— The  sword,  set  Ls.,  st.  42;  Vsfi.,  st.  53.  12. — Going  forth  to  the  halls
of  Hel,  see  Introd.  to  Bdr,


144  SKIRNISMAL.

Skirnir  kvaj> :

13.  '  Kostir'u  betri         heldr  an  at  klokkva  s6

hveims  fuss  es  fara ;
einu  dcegri         vorumk  aldr  of  skapaj>r
ok  allt  lif  of  lagit.'

Ger)>r  kva)> :

14.  '  Hvat's  )>at  hlymja         es  ek  hlymja  heyri  til

ossum  ronnum  i  ?
jor)>  bifask,         en  allir  fyrir
skjalfa  gar|>ar  Gymis.'

Amb6tt  kva]? :

15.  '  Major's  her  uti,         stiginn  af  mars  baki,

jo  Uetr  til  jar]?ar  taka.'

Ger]?r  kva)? :

16.  '  Inn  bi|?  hann  ganga         i  okkarn  sal

ok  drekka  enn  mscra  mjo)> ;
]?o  ek  hitt  oumk,         at  her  uti  s6
minn  br6]?urbani.'

Ger]?r  kva)? :

17.   '  Hvat's  ]>at  alfa         n6  asa  suna

n6  vissa  vana  ?

hvi  einn  of  kvamt         eikinn  fur  yfir
or  salkynni  at  sea  ?  '

Skirnir  kva}> :

18.   '  Emkak  alfa         n€  dsa  suna

ne  vissa  vana :

}>6  einn  of  kvamk         eikinn  fur  yfir
y|?ur  salkynni  at  sea.


THE     STORY    OF     SKIRNIR.  145

Skirnir.

13.  A  wiser  choice        than  to  whine  makes  he

who  is  ready  to  run  his  race :
my  time  was  set        to  a  certain  day
and  my  length  of  life  decreed.

Gerd  (within  the  hall).

14.  What  is  the  clanking        and  clashing  of  sounds

which  echoing  I  hear  in  our  halls  ?
Trembles  the  earth        and  before  it  all
the  courts  of  Gymir  are  shook.

A  Serving-maid.

15.  See  !  A  man  without !         He  is  sprung  from  his  steed,

which  he  now  lets  graze  on  the  grass.

Gerd.

16.  Bid.him  come  in ;         let  him  enter  our  halls,

let  him  quaff  the  glorious  mead  !
Yet  I  fear  me  much         lest  that  man  without
the  slayer  of  my  brother  should  be.

Gerd  to  Skirnir  (who  has  entered).

17.  Who  comes,  nor  of  elves'         nor  of  gods'  race  seeming,

nor  yet  of  the  all-wise  Wanes  ?
why  hast  fared  alone        through  the  raging  fire
to  visit  the  folk  in  our  hails  ?

Skirnir.

18.  I  come,  nor  of  elves'         nor  of  gods'  race  am  I,

nor  yet  of  the  all-wise  Wanes ;
yet  have  I  fared        through  the  raging  fire
to  visit  the  folk  in  your  halls.

16. — Slayer  of  my  brother.  F rcy  slew  the  giant  Belt,  who  was  perhaps  Gerd's
brother ;  but,  according  to  Snorri,  this  was  ujter  the  loss  of  his  sword,  for  he  used  a
stag's  horn  ;  see  Vsp.,  st.  53.

U


rn»     -iaii  ^fitt        B^rirflt^ijaiBiL
isa -mniit  *s:    rfsror    ^sx,

3C  :•».  Jfe'  ?3ey  s&an:


r5*^r:         tuSKst  ucescr  f^or  hrr


""•"'  T.-~'      ^'  "  '"


rffefe^"


-      .   :~


-


-    .


•-.    -.      -  •-.  ........      -  -  ^v


x  -  X  •-

*

'      :  v

>.    ,  ....  ^          >          ^        .

^  ^^^^^R  ^l  ^WOW  ^^^^KsS  '  ^

V          v-   A-'-     -          •  <


""


148  SKIRNISMAL.

Skirnir  kvab :

25.  'S6r  bu  benna  msfeki,  m»r!         mj6van,  malfan,

es  hefk  i  hendi  he"r  ?

fyr  bessum  eggjum         hnigr  sa  enn  aldni  jotunn,
verbr  binn  feigr  fabir.

26.  Tamsvendi  bik  drepk,         en  ek  bik  temja  mun,

mser  !  at  minum  munum  ;
bar  skalt  ganga,         es  bik  gumna  synir
siban  sova  sea.

27.  Ara  )>ufu  a         skaltu  ar  sitja,

horfa  [heimi  or,  snugga]  heljar  til ;
matr  s6  )?er  lei]?ari         an  manna  hveim
enn  frani  ormr  me\>  firum.

28.  At  undrsjdnum  verjnr,         es  J?u  6t  komr,

a  ]>ik  Hrimnir  hari,    •
a  ]?ik  hotvetna  stari ;

vtykunnari  ver|?ir        an  vor)?r  mej?  go)mm  ;
gapi  )?u  grindum  fra.

29.  (30)     Tramar  gneypa        )>ik  skulu  gorstan  dag

jotna  gorlpum  i ;
til  hrim]?ursa  hallar         J>u  skalt  hverjan  dag

kranga  kostalaus,

kranga  kostavon.
grdt  at  gamni         skaltu  i  gogn  hafa,

ok  letya  me)>  tarum  trega.


30.    (31)     Me)?  )mrsi  J?rih6fj?u|mm         J>u  skalt  sc  nara

ej>a  verlauss  vesa ;
)>itt  ge)>  gripi,         |>ik  morn  morni !
ves  sem  Distill         sas  )>runginn  vas
i  onn  ofanver|?a.


yg.—Tht  strophe  arrangement  of  R  A.  is  marked  in  brackets.         30.— bitt,  R,  Dt.
HI. ;  bik,  B.  G.  H.  S.


THE     STORY     OF    SKIRNIR.  149

Skirnir.

25.  See'st  thou  this  sword,  maiden,         slender,  rune-graven,

which  here  I  hold  in  my  hand  ?
Before  its  keen  edge        shall  fall  that  old  Giant, —
thy  father  is  doomed  to  death.

26.  With  a  taming  wand         I  will  touch  thee,  maid  !

and  win  thee  soon  to  my  will.

I  will  send  thee  far  off        where  thou  shalt  be  seen
never  more  by  the  sons  of  men.

27.  On  an  eagle's  mound        shalt  thou  sit  from  morn,

gazing  out  of  the  world  toward  Hel :
thy  food  shall  seem  loathlier        than  bright-hued  serpent
seemed  ever  to  man  among  men.

[on  thee,

28.  Sight  of  wonder  when  thou  walkest,        all  beings  shall  stare

and  the  Frost  Giant  fix  thee  with  his  eye !
Known  wider  than  Heimdal        the  Watchman  of  gods,
thou  shalt  gape  through  the  gates  of  Hel.


29.     Trolls  shall  torment  thee        from  morn  till  eve

in  the  realms  of  the  Jotun  race,
each  day  to  the  dwellings        of  Frost  giants  must  thou

creep  helpless,  creep  hopeless  of  love ;
thou  shalt  weeping  have        in  the  stead  of  joy,

and  sore  burden  bear  with  tears.


30.     With  a  three-headed  giant        must  thou  abide

or  lack  ever  husband  in  life.
Care  shall  lay  hold        on  thy  heart  and  mind,

thou  shalt  waste  with  mourning  away,
as  a  thistle  shalt  be         which  hath  thrust  itself  up
in  the  latter  season  full  late.

27. — An   eagle,   Corpse-swallower,   who  sits  at  the  end  of  heaven;    Vm.,  st.  37.
30.— The  latter  season,  so  Dt.  HI.    Others,  a  loft,  under  the  roof.


150  SKIRNISMAL.

31.    (35)     Hrimgrimnir  heitir  Jmrs        es  )nk  hafa  skal

fyr  nagrindr  ne)>an :
par  }>6r  vilmegir         a  vtyar  r6tum

geita  hland  gefi :

(36)     ce)>ri  drykkju         fd  )m  aldrigi,
mser  !  af  Jrinum  munum,
mser !  at  minum  munum  !


32.  (29)     T6pi  ok  6pi,         tjosull  ok  6]?oli

vaxi  }>6r  tar  me]>  trega  ;
sezktu  ntyr,         mun  ek  segja  \iv
svaran  susbreka
ok  tvinnan  trega.

33.  Vretyr's  )?er  6}nnn         vreijjr's  J>er  asa  bragr,

]nk  skal  Freyr  fiask,
en  firinilla  mger !         es  )?u  fengit  hefr
gambanvretyi  go)?a.

34.  Heyri  hrimjmrsar,         heyri  jotnar,

Suttunga  synir,
sjalfir  asli]?ar :

hv^  fyrby)?k,         hv6  fyrbannak
manna  glaum  mani,
manna  nyt  mani.

\

35-    (32)     Til  holts  ek  gekk        ok  til  hras  vi|>ar,
gambantein  at  geta :


gambantein  ek  gat.


THE    STORY    OF    SKIRNIR.  151

31.     The  Frost-hooded  giant         shall  hold  thee  fast

beneath  the  doors  of  the  dead ;
at  the  tree's  roots  there        shall  wretched  thralls

give  thee  foul  water  of  goats ;
and  other  draught        shalt  thou  never  drink,

at  thy  wish,  maiden,  with  my  will,  maid.


32.     Sit  thee  down  !  I  will  further        woes  two-fold  bespeak  thee,

a  whelming  wave  of  care.

May  madness  and  shrieking,         bondage  and  yearning,
burden  thee,  with  trouble  and  tears.


33.  Wroth  is  Odin  !         Wroth  is  the  Thunderer !

Frey  too  shall  hate  thee,  I  trow :
thou  evil  maiden,        well  hast  thou  earned
the  awful  anger  of  the  gods  !

34.  Hear  now,  Jotuns,         Frost-giants  hear  me,

Suttung's  sons  'neath  the  earth,
ye  god-folk,  too !         how  I  ban  and  forbid

man's  love  to  the  maiden,  man's  joy  to  the  maid.


35.     I  went  to  the  forest        to  find  and  fetch

a  magic  wand  of  might ;
to  a  green-wood  tree,        and  I  got  me  there
this  mighty  magic  wand.


31. — At  the  tree's  roots.  Presumably  Yggdrasil's  root  stretching  over  Jotunheim  ;
(Nd.  D.Alt,  xxx.).  33. — Thunderer.  Thor  is  here  called  prince  of  gods.  These
three — Odin,  Thor,  and  Frey — are  usually  ranked  together,  and  appear  as  the  chief  gods
in  temple  worship.  34. — Sutting,  a  giant  of  the  underworld;  see  Hdv.,  st.  102.
35. — A  green-wood  tree,  see  Hdv.,  st.  150.


I52  SKIRNISMAL.

36.  (36)     purs  ristk  )>6r        ok  |?ria  stafi  :

ergi  ok  ce}>i  ok  6)>ola ;
sva  ek  ]>at  af  rist,         sem  ek  j?at  a  reist,
ef  gorvask  )>arfar  J?ess.'

Ger)>r  kva)> :

37.  '  Heill  ves  heldr,  sveinn  !         ok  tak  vi)>  hrimkalki

fullum  forns  mja)>ar :
)?6  hafyak  getlat,         at  myndak  aldrigi
unna  vaningja  vel.'

Skirnir  kva]> :

38.  'Eyrindi  min        viljak  611  vita,

a]?r  rtyak  heim  he)?an  :
nsfer  J?u  at  }>ingi         munt  enum  |?roska
nenna  Njar)?ar  syni.'

Ger^r  kva)> :

39.  '  Barri  heitir,         es  vit  baejri  vitum,

lundr  lognfara :

en  ept  nsetr  niu         |?ar  mun  NjarJ?ar  syni
Ger)>r  unna  gamans.'

pd  reij)  Skirnir  heim.      Freyr  sto}?  uti  ok  kvaddi  hann  ok  spurj>i
ti}>inda :


40.  'Seg  mer  }?at,  Skirnir!        aj>r  verpir  so)>li  af  mar

ok  stigir  feti  framarr :
hvat  ]>u  arna)>ir         i  jotunheima
|?ins  e)?a  mins  munar  ?  '


THE    STORY    OF    SKIRNIR.

36.  I  have  cut  thee  a  giant,        and  carved  thee  three  staves,

lust  and  raving  and  rage.

Even  as  I  cut  them  on         so  can  I  cut  them  off,
if  haply  I  have  the  will.

(Gerd  offers  him  a  foaming  cup.)

37.  Be  gracious  rather,  youth  !         Take  now  this  rimy  cup

filled  with  famous  old  mead.
Little  I  thought        that  ever  in  life
I  should  love  a  Waneling  well.

Skirnir.

38.  All  my  errand        will  I  know  to  the  end

before  I  ride  homeward  hence.
When  wilt  thou,  maiden,         meet  at  the  trysting
the  stalwart  son  of  Njord  ?

Gerd.

39.  Pine-needle  is  the  wood        of  peaceful  faring,

we  twain  know  well  the  way  :
there  shall  Gerd  bestow        on  the  son  of  Njord
her  heart's  love  nine  nights  hence.

Then  Skirnir  rode  home.      Frey  was  standing  without,  and  he
greeted  him  and  asked  for  tidings.

Frey.

40.  Speak,  Skirnir!  Cast  not        saddle  from  the  steed,

and  stir  not  one  step  hence  :
what  hast  thou  won         of  thy  will  and  mine
in  the  realms  of  the  Jotun  race  ?


36. — Giant  :  Icelandic  burs.  The  name  of  some  object  was  given  to  each  runic
Utter,  and  here  the  symbol  b  would  represent  burs.  37. — Waneling.  Prey's  father
NjiJrd  was  a  Wane ;  see  Ls.,  st.  35  ;  Vm.,  st.  39.


154  SKIRNISMAL.

Skirnir  kva)> :

41.  'Barri  heitir,         es  vit  baj>ir  vitum,

lundr  lognfara :

en  ept  nsetr  niu         J>ar  mun  Njar)>ar  syni
Ger)?r  unna  gamans.'

Freyr  kva)>  :

42.  '  Long  es  nott,         langar'u  tvser,

hv6  of  )?reyjak  ]?riar  ?
opt  me'r  manner         minni  |?6tti


THE     STORY     OF     SKIRNIR.  155

Skirnir.

41.  Pine-needle  is  the  wood         of  peaceful  faring,

we  twain  know  well  the  way:
there  shall  Gerd  bestow        on  the  son  of  Njord
her  heart's  love  nine  nights  hence.

Freyl

42.  Long  is  one  night, —         long  are  two  nights —

how  shall  I  live  through  three !
Shorter  a  month         has  seemed  to  me  oft
than  waiting  this  half  night  here.


GR0UGALDR.


Svipdagr  kva]> :

1.  'Vaki  J?ti,  Groa  !         vaki  J?ti,  g6J>  kona !

vekk  ]>ik  dau)>ra  dura :
ef  ]>at  mant,         at  jnnn  mog  bgfe]>ir

til  kumbldysjar  koma.'

\

Gr6a  kvaj? :

2.  '  Hvat's  nti  ant         minum  einga  syni,

hverju  'st  bolvi  borinn  :

es  ]>u  m6|?ur  kallar        es  til  moldar  es  komin
ok  6r  Ij6)?heimum  li)?in  ?  '

Gr6galdr. — In  paper  MSS.  of  the  seventeenth  century.


DAY-SPRING    AND    MENGLOD.

PART    I. — THE   SPELL-SONGS  OF  GROA.

Son.

1.  Wake  thou,  Groa,         wake,  sweet  woman,

at  the  doors  of  the  dead,  awake !

Thy  child,  thou  bad'st  me,         — dost  thou  not  mind  thee?-
come  to  the  cairn  of  thy  grave.

Groa.

2.  What  sorrow  grieves  thee,         mine  only  son,

with  what  burden  art  overborne,

that  thou  callest  thy  mother         who  is  turned  to  dust
and  gone  from  the  folk-world  forth  ?


158  GRdUGALDR.

Svipdagr  kva)>  :

3.  'Lj6tu  leikbor)>i         skaut  fyr  mik  en  laevisa  kona

sus  fajjmajn  minn  fojmr :
)>ar  ba)>  mik  koma,         es  kva;mtki  veit,
moti  Menglo)m.'

Gr6a  kvaj? :

4.  '  Long  es  for,         langir'u  farvegar,

langir'u  manna  munir;
ef  )>at  ver)>r,         at  ]m  )>inn  vilja  bi|?r,
ok  skeikar  j>6  Skuldar  at  skopum.'

Svipdagr  kva)>  :

5.  '  Galdra  mer  gal         )>&s  g6]?ir'u,

bjarg  ]m,  mo]?ir  !  megi :
a  vegum  allr         hykk  at  ek  ver)?a  muna,
)?ykkjumk  til  ungr  afi.'

Groa  kvaj?  :

6.  '  pann  gelk  ]>6r  fyrstan,         ]?ann  kve)?a  fjolnytan,

]>ann  gol  Rindr  Rani :
at  of  6x1  skjotir         |>vis  }>er  atalt  J>ykkir;
sjalfr  lei)>  sjalfan  )?ik  !

7.  pann  gelk  }>€r  annan,         ef  ]>u  drna  skalt

viljalauss  d  vegum :

Ur)>ar  lokur        haldi  }>6r  ollum  megum,
es  )m  d  sman  s6r !

8.  pann  gelk  )>er  enn  )?rij?ja,         ef  ]>6r  j?jo)?aar

falla  at  fjorlotum  :

til  heljar  he]?an         snuisk  Horn  ok  Ru)>r,
en  ]?verri  £  fyr  )>£r.

^.— Kvffemtki,  B.  G.  S.  Gv.  J. ;  kve)>ki,  MSS.  4.— Menglo)?ii,  a  proper  name
G.  B.  Gv.  S.  C.;  inengl6|>ii(nr,  MSS.,  K.  R.  M.  HI.  J.  7.— A  sman,  MSS.,  Dt-
and  HI.  ;  a  sinnum,  Gv.  G.  S.  8.— Fjorlotum,  MSS.,  HI.  J.,  life-spring— from  fjor,
life,  and  lota,  energy  ;  Fjor-lokum,  B.  Gv.  S.  G,


DAY-SPRING    AND     MENGLOD.  159

Son.

3.  A  fearful  task         hath  that  false  woman  set  me,

who  fondly  my  father  hath  clasped :
she  hath  sent  me  where  none        may  go,  to  seek
the  gay-necklaced  maiden  Menglod.

Groa.

4.  Long  is  the  faring,        long  are  the  pathways,

long  are  the  loves  of  men  :
well  it  may  be         that  thou  gain  thy  will,
but  the  end  must  follow  fate.

Son.

5.  Sing  me  spell-songs,        sweet  and  strong  ones  !

Mother,  shield  me  thy  child  !
Dead  on  the  way        I  ween  I  shall  be,
for  I  feel  me  too  young  in  years.

Groa.

6.  I  sing  thee  the  first        — well  it  serves,  they  say —

which  Rindr  sang  to  Ran  :

be  thy  burden  too  heavy,         may  it  fall  from  thy  back
and  may  self  lead  self  at  will.

7.  I  sing  thee  the  second :         if  haply  thou  strayest

joyless  on  journeys  far,

may  the  web  of  Weird         be  around  thy  way
and  save  thee  from  shameful  plight.

8.  I  sing  thee  the  third  :         if  mighty  streams

with  their  waters  o'erwhelm  thy  life,
may  those  floods  of  Hel        flow  back,  and  dry
be  the  paths  before  thy  feet.

6. — Rindr,  another  name  for  Odin  as  husband  of  the  giantess  Rind  (Bdr.,  st.  11),
who  is  here  called  Ran.  Odin  long  wooed  her  in  vain,  and  won  her  at  last  by  enchant-
ments (Saxo  Grammaticus) ;  cf.  the  same  use  of  the  masculine  and  feminine  forms  in
Fjorgynn  and  Fjorgyn  ;  see  Ls.,  st,  26.  7. — Weird  or  Urd,  the  goddess  of  fate  ;  see
Vip.,  20.  8. — Floods  of  Hel,  here  called  Horn  and  Kud,  not  mentioned  in  the  list  of
the  rivers  which  flow  from  Roaring-kettle  ;  see  Grin.,  st.  28,  29.


160  GROUGALDR.

9.  pann  gelk  )>er  enn  fjor)>a,         ef  }>ik  fiandr  standa

gorvir  a  galgvegi :
hugr  )>eim  hverfi         til  handa  )?er
ok  snuisk  til  satta  sefi.

10.  pann  gelk  )>er  enn  fimta,         ef  \>€r  fjoturr  ver)>r

borinn  at  boglimum  :

leysigaldr         laetk  ]?er  fyr  legg  of  kvejnnn,
ok  stokkr  }>a.  lass  af  limum,
en  af  fotum  fjoturr.

11.  pann  gelk  J>er  enn  s<§tta,         ef  a  sjo  komr

meira  an  menn  viti :
lopt  ok  logr         gangi  )?er  i  lu]?r  saman
ok  16  }>er  &  f rij?drj  ugrar  farar.

12.  pann  gelk  J>er  enn  sjaunda,         ef  }>ik  soekja  korar

frost  a  fjalli  ha  :

hraevakul)>i         megit  )>inu  holdi  fara,
ok  haldi  J?er  lik  at  li|?um.

13.  pann  gelk  )>er  enn  atta,         ef  )>ik  uti  nemr

nott  a  niflvegi  :

at  Jnd  firr  megi         }>er  til  meins  gorva
kristin  dau)>  kona.

14.  pann  gelk  J?er  enn  niunda,         ef  vty  enn  naddgofga

orjmm  skiptir  jotun  :

mals  ok  mannvits         s6  )?er  d  munn  ok  hjarta
gn6ga  of  gefit.

15.  Far  )?u  nu  seva         ]>a.s  fora)?  )>ikkir

ok  standit  )>er  mein  fyr  munum  !
*****
a  jar}?f6stum  steini        st6)>k  innan  dura,
meban  ]?6r  galdra  g61k.


io.— Leysigaldr,  B.  Gv.  S.  G.  J. ;  leifnis  elda,  MSS.          11.— Lopt,  Gv.  S.  G. ;
logn,  MSS.        14.— Munn  ok,  B.  Gv.  S.  G.  C. ;  minnis,  MSS.


DAY-SPRING     AND     MENGLOD.  161

9.     I  sing  thee  the  fourth  :         if  foes  should  lurk

in  ambush,  armed  for  thy  death,
be  their  hearts  forthwith         toward  thee  turned
and  their  minds  be  moved  to  peace.

10.     I  sing  thee  the  fifth  :         if  men  maKe  fast

a  charm  on  the  joints  of  thy  limbs,
that  loosening  spell         which  I  sin^  o'er  thy  legs
shall  break  fetters  from  hands  and  feet.


11.  I  sing  thee  the  sixth  :         if  thou  fare  o'er  seas

mightier  than  men  do  know,
may  wind  and  wa\e  for  thee         work  thy  boat,
and  make  peaceful  thy  path  o'er  the  deep.

12.  I  sing  thee  the  seventh  :         if  thou  art  assailed

by  frost  on  the  rimy  fell,
may  thy  flesh  not  die         in  the  deadly  cold  ;
be  thou  sound  in  life  and  limb.

13.  I  sing  thee  the  eighth  :         if  night  o'ertake  thee,

wandering  on  the  misty  way,

none  the  more  may  ghosts         of  Christian  women
have  power  to  work  thy  woe.

14.  I  sing  thee  the  ninth  :         when  thou  needs  must  stand

in  speech  with  that  spear-famed  giant,
may  words  and  wisdom         to  lips  and  heart
in  abundance  be  bestowed.

15.  May  thou  ne'er  be  led,         where  danger  lurks,

may  harm  not  hinder  thy  will !
*****
At  the  doors  I  stood,         on  an  earth-bound  stone,
while  I  sang  these  sonj^s  to  thee.


13. — Ghosts  of  Christian  women.  This  line  must  have  b:e<t  written  in  h.-athen
days,  when  Christianity  was  regarded  as  a  mysterious  power  of  evil.  14. — That
spear-famed  giant  must  be  Much- wise,  the  warder  of  Menglod's  halls.


162  FJOLSVINNSMAL.

16.  M6)mr  or)?         berjm,  mogr !  he]>an

ok  lat  |>er  i  brjosti  bua !
i|>»n6ga  heill         skalt  of  aldr  hafa,
me)>an  min  or]>  of  mant.'


FJOLSVINNSMAL

1.  fttan  gar)>a         hann  sa  upp  of  koma

|>ursa  J>j6|>ar  sjot.

Svipdagr   kva)>  :

(2)    '  Hvat's  )>at  flag|>a,         es  stendr  fyr  forgor)>um
ok  hvarflar  umb  hscttan  loga  ?  '

Fjolsvtyr   kva|?  :

2.  (i)    'Hvers  }>u  leitar         ej?a  hvers  d  leitum  est,

e)>a  hvat  vilt,  vinlauss  !  vita  ?
urgar  brautir         arnajm  aptr  he)?an  !
dttat  h£r,  verndarvanr  !  veru.'

Svipdagr   kvaj>  :

3.  *  Hvat's  J>at  flag]?a,         es  stendr  fyr  forgarjn

ok  by]?rat  li)?6ndum  \o}>  ?

Soemjjaror|>a  lauss         hefr  j?d,  seggr !  of  lifat,
ok  haltu  heim  he]?an  ! '

Fjolsvtyr   kva)>  :

4.  *  Fjolsvtyr  ek  heiti,         en  ek  a  fro|?an  sefa,

]?eygi  emk  mins  mildr  matar  :
innan  gar]?a         \>u  komr  aldrijii,
ok  drif  |NI  nu  vargr  at  vegi ! '


I.— This  transposition  from  MSS.  made  by  B.  Mb.  Gv.  C.  G.


DAY-SPRING    AND     MENGLOD.  163

16.     Child,  bear  with  thee        a  mother's  words,

let  them  abide  in  thy  breast !
Wealth  enough         in  life  thou  shalt  win
if  thou  keepst  my  counsel  in  mind.


PART    II. — THE   SAYINGS  OF   MUCH-WISE.

1.  Stood  Day-spring  without         the  walls,  and  saw

loom  high  the  Jotuns'  home.

Day-spring.

What  monster  is  that         who  guards  the  threshold,
and  prowls  round  the  perilous  flames  ?

Much-wise.

2.  Whom  dost  thou  seek  ?         Of  whom  art  in  search  ?

What,  friendless  wight,  wouldst  thou  learn  ?
Back  wander  hence         on  thy  dewy  way ;
not  here  is  thy  haven,  lone  one  !

Day-spring.

3.  What  monster  is  that        who  guards  the  threshold

and  bids  not  welcome  to  wanderers  ?
Lacking  all  seemly         speech  wert  thou  born  ;
hence,  speaker,  hie  thee  home  !

Much-wise.

4.  Much-wise  I  am  called,         for  I  am  wise  in  mind,

though  none  too  free  with  my  food.
Here  in  the  courts        shalt  thou  never  come ;
get  thee  hence  like  a  wolf  on  thy  way  !


164  FJOLSVINNSMAL.

Svipdagr   kva}>  :

5.  '  Augna  gamans         fysir  aptr  at  fa,

hvars  getr  svast  at  sea  :
gar)?ar  gloa         ]>ykkjumk  of  gollna  sail,
h6r  mundak  6}>li  una.'

FjolsviJ>r   kva)?  :

6.  '  Seg  mer,  hverjum         estu,  sveinn  !  of  borinn

e)?a  hverra'st  manna  mogr  ? '

Svipdagr   kvaj?  :

'  Vindkaldr  heitik,         Varkaldr  h£t  minn  fa)>ir,
J?ess  vas  Fjolkaldr  faj^ir.

7.  Seg  mer  ]?at,  Fjolsvi)?r  !         es  ek  ]?ik  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita  :

hverr  h6r  r£ej?r        — ok  riki  hefr —
eign  ok  au)>s6lum  ? '

Fj6lsvi)?r   kva)?  :

8.  '  Mengloj>  of  heitir,         en  hana  m6j>ir  of  gat

vij?  Svafn)?orins  syni  :
h6n  her  rse)>r        —ok  riki  hefr —
eign  ok  au)?s6lum.'

Svipdagr  kva)>  :

\

9    'Seg  m6r  j?at,  Fjolsvi|>r  !         es  ek  ]>ik  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita  :

hvat  su  grind  heitir,         es  mej>  goj^um  sout
menn  at  meira  fora)?  ? '


5. — Aptr  at  fa,  HI.  and  F.  adopt  this  conjecture  on  the  margin  of  the  MS3.      Aptr
fin,  MSS.,  B.  S.  L.  Gv.        8.— Svafnjjorins,  S.     Svafrjjorins,  Dt.  and  HI.


DAY-SPRING     AND     MENGLOD.  165

Day-spring.

5.  Longs  the  lover  again         for  the  light  of  his  eyes,

with  his  sweet-heart  back  in  sight :
glowing  are  the  walls         of  that  golden  hall  ;
I  would  fain  make  here  my  home.

Much- wise.

6.  Tell  me,  bold  youth,         from  whom  thou  art  sprung,

son  of  what  being  wert  born  ?

Day-spring.

They  call  me  Wind-cold,         the  son  of  Spring-cold,
whose  father  was  Fierce-cold  named.

7.  Now  answer  me,  Much-wise,        this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips :
who  here  doth  rule         and  hold  in  power
the  wealth  and  wondrous  halls  ?

Much-wise.

8.  There  is  one  called  Menglod,         who  of  her  mother

was  born  to  Sleep-thorn's  son :

'tis  she  doth  rule         and  hold  in  power

the  wealth  and  wondrous  halls.

Day-spring.

9.  Now  answer  me,  Much-wise,        this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips :
what  is  that  gate  called  ?         Ne'er  among  gods
was  more  fearful  barrier  found.


5. — This  strophe,  like  49,  suggests  thut  Svipdagr  and  Menglod  have  met  before.


166  FJOLSVINNSMAL.

Fjolsvtyr  kva)?  :

10.  'prymjjjoll  hon  heitir,         en  hana  J>rir  gorjm

Solblinda  synir ;

fjoturr  fastr         verj?r  vij?  faranda  hverjan,
es  hana  hefr  frd  hlijn.'

Svipdagr  kvaj?  :

11.  'Seg  mer  J?at,  Fjdlsvi)?r  !         es  ek  )?ik  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita  :

hvat  sa  gar]?r  heitir,         es  mej>  go)>um  sout
menn  et  meira  fora]>  ? '

Fjolsvtyr  kva]?  :

12.  '  Gaststropnir  heitir,         en  ek  hann  gorvan  hefk

or  Leirbrimis  limum  ;
sva  hefk  studdan,         at  hann  standa  mun
£e  me|>an  old  lifir.'

Svipdagr  kvaj?  :

13.  (19)    'Seg  mer  J?at,  Fjolsvi)7r!         es  ek  |?ik  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita  :

hvat  ]>at  barr  heitir,         es  bretyask  of
lond  611  limar  ? '

Fjolsvtyr  kvajj  :

14.  (20)    '  MimameiJ^r  hann  heitir,         en  |?at  mangi  veit,

hvers  hann  af  rotum  rinnr ;
vty  J>at  hann  fellr,         es  fsestan  varir :
fleerat  hann  eldr  n6  jam.'


12. — Gast-stropnir,  Dt.  and  HI.;  Gat-stropnir,  B.  Gv.  F.;  Gastropnir,  most
MSS.  13-18.—  The  transposition  of  these  strophes,  suggested  by  Mdller,  adopted  by
S.  G.,  gives  more  sequence  to  S.'s  questions.


DAY-SPRING     AND     MENGLOD.  167

Much-wise.

10.  Sounding-clanger         the  gate  is  called,

wrought  by  three  sons  of  Solblind.
Fast  is  the  chain         to  each  wanderer  who  seeks
to  lift  that  door  from  the  latch.

Day-spring.

11.  Now  answer  me,  Much-wise,         this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips  :
what  is  that  wall  named  ?         Ne'er  among  gods
was  more  fearful  barrier  found.

Much-wise.

12.  Guest-crusher  'tis  called  ;         from  the  Clay-giant's  limbs

I  built  that  barrier  myself :
so  fast  have  I  set  it         that  firm  'twill  stand,
for  ever  while  life  shall  last.

Day-spring.

13.  Now  answer  me,  Much-wise,         this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips :
what  is  that  tree,         which  far  and  wide,
spreads  limbs  over  every  land  ?

Much-wise.

14.  'Tis  the  tree  of  Mimir,         but  no  man  knows

by  what  roots  it  rises  to  heaven  :
'twill  fall  at  last         by  what  least  one  weens,
for  nor  fire  nor  weapons  will  wound  it.


10.- -Solblind  or  Snn-blinded  must  be  a  dwarf  name  for  one  who,  like  All-wise
(st.  35),  fears  the  light,  and  whose  children  are  forgers  like  Brokk  and  Sindri  ;  see  Vsp.
37,  Grm.  st.  43,  and  Introd.  12. — The  Clay-giant  or  Leirbrimir.  From  the  giant
Ymir  or  Brimir  (Vnt.,  st.  21 )  was  made  the  whole  framework  of  earth,  and  the  expres-
sion is  only  a  poetical  term  for  the  solid  ground.  14. — The  tree  of  Mimir,  Yggdrasil  ;
see  \  'sp.  19,  29  ;  Vm.  45.  Mimir' s  well,  likf  that  of  Weird,  was  situated  beneath  it,  and
here,  in  Giant-home,  the  tree  would  be  called  his.


1 68  FJOLSVINNSMAL.

Svipdagr  kva]>  :

15.  (21)    'Seg  me'r  )?at,  FjolsviJ>r!         es  ek  ]?ik  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita  :

hvat  af  mojn  verj>r        }>ess  ens  mscra  vtyar,
es  hann  flserat  eldr  n€  jarn  ?  '

Fjolsvtyr  kva)>  :

16.  (22)    'tit  af  bans  aldni         skal  a  eld  bera

fyr  killisjukar  konur :
utar  hverfa  )?ess         }>eirs  innar  skyldu,
sas  hann  me}?  monnum  mjotuj^r.'

Svipdagr  kvaj?  :

17.  (23)    'Seg  me"r  )?at,  Fjolsvi)?r  !         es  ek  )>ik  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita  :

hvat  sa  hani  heitir,         es  sitr  i  enum  hava  vijn,
allr  vty  goll  gloi'r  ?  '

Fjolsvi]?r  kva}>  :

18.  (24)    '  Vi]?ofnir  heitir,         en  hann  stendr  ve)>rglasi

a  mei]?s  kvistum  Mima  :
einum  ekka         ]?ryngr  hann  orofsaman
Surt  ok  Sinmoru.'

Svipdagr  kva)>  :

19.  (13)    'Seg  me"r  ]?at,  Fjolsvi)>r!         es  ek  )>ik  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita :

hvat  )>eir  garmar  heita,         es  gifrir  rata
gorjmm  fyr

16. — G.,    |>ess    ]?eirs    innar    skyli,    S. ;    ]>az    |>aer    innar    skyli,    Dt.   and   HI.
Mjotu|?r,  Dt.  and  HI.  suggest  mj6tvij?r;  see  Vsp.,  2.  18.— Snrt   ok,   G.  S.  Gv. ;

snrtar,  B. ;    surtar,  MSS.      Sinmoru,  G.  B.  Gv.  S.J.;  sinmantn,  MSS.          19,  lines
3  and  4. — These  lines  are  corrupt,  and  the  exact  wording  has  not  been  determined.


DAY-SPRING     AND     MENGLOD.  169

Day-spring.

15.  Now  answer  me,  Much-wise,         this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips:
what  befalls  the  fruit         of  that  famous  tree
which  nor  fire  nor  weapons  will  wound  ?

Much-wise.

16.  The  fruit  thereof         must  be  laid  on  the  fire

for  the  weal  of  travailing  women  ;
they  shall  then  come  out         who  had  been  within.
To  mankind  'tis  the  giver  of  life.

Day-spring.

17.  Now  answer  me,  Much-wise,         this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips :
what  cock  sits  perched         in  yon  lofty  tree,
who  is  glistening  all  with  gold  ?

Much- wise.

18.  Wood-snake  he  is  called,         who  storm-bright  sits

in  the  boughs  of  Mimir's  Tree  :
with  one  long  dread         he  galls  beyond  measure
giant  and  giant-wife.

Day-spring.

19.  Now  answer  me,  Much-wise,         this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips :
what  fierce  hounds  watch         in  front  of  the  courts
ravening  and  roaming  around  ?


16. — Giver  of  life,  or,  according  to  another  reading,  the  Fate-tree,  as  in  Vsf>.,  st.  2.
17. —  Wood-snake,  a  poetical  name  for  bird.  This  cock  may  be  Golden  Comb,  u-ho
wakes  the  gods  at  the  coming  of  the  giants  (Vsp.,  st.  43),  and  is  hence  the  dread  of  giant
and  giant-wife,  or,  more  probably ,  Fjalar  (Vs(>.,  st.  42),  who  sits  "in  the  roosting  tree,"
and  sounds  the  first  note  of  doom.  The  names  of  Surt  and  Sininara,  found  in  the  text,

are  used  in  a  general  sense.

Z


I7o  FJOLSVINNSMAL.

Fjolsvi]?r  kvaj>  :

20.  (14)    'Gifr  heitir  annarr,         en  Geri  annarr,

ef  }>u  vill  J>at  vita  :
ver]>ir'u  oflgir,         er  }>eir  varj?a,
unz  rjufask  regin.'

Svipdagr  kva)>  :

21.  (15)    'Seg  mer  ]>at,  Fjolsvij>r  !         es  ek  J>ik  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita:

hvart  S6"  manna  nekkvat         )?ats  megi  inn  koma,
me)>an  sdkndjarfir  sofa  ? '

Fjolsvi]?r  kva]>  :

22.  (16)    'Missvefni  mikit         vas  )>eim  mjok  of  lagit,

sij?ans  )?eim  vas  varzla  vitu)? :
annarr  of  na?tr  sefr,         en  annarr  of  daga,
ok  komsk  ]?a  vsctr,  ef  kvam.'

Svipdagr  kva)?  :

23-  (T7)    '  Seg  mer  ]>at,  Fjolsvi]?r  !         es  ek  yik  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita  :

hvart  s6  matar  nekkvat         J>ats  menn  hafi,
ok  hlaupi  inn,  mej?an  eta  ? '

Fj6lsvij?r  kva)?  :

24.  (18)    '  V£engbra)?ir  tvser         liggja  i  ViJ?ofnis  lij?um,

ef  )?u  vill  )>at  vita  :

J>at  eitt's  sva  matar,         at  ]?eim  menn  of  gefi,
ok  hlaupi  inn,  me]>an  eta.'

Svipdagr  kvaj?  :

25.  '  Seg  m6r  |?at,  Fjolsvi)?r  !         es  ek  J>ik  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita  :

hvait  s6  vapna  nekkvat,         )?ats  knegi  Vi]?ofnir  fyrir
hniga  a  Heljar  sjot  ? '

20.— S.  G.,  var]?ir  ellifu,  MS8.,  D<.  am<  HI.  J.  B.


DAY-SPRING     AND     MENGLOD.  171

Much-wise.

20.  One  is  called  Greed,        the  other  Glutton,

if  haply  thou  wouldst  hear :
mighty  warders         they  are  who  watch
for  aye  till  the  Powers  perish.

Day-spring.

21.  Now  answer  me,  Much-wise,         this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips :
is  there  never  a  being         may  pass  within

while  the  fierce  hounds  are  held  in  sleep  ?

Much-wise.

22.  Division  of  sleep         was  ever  their  lot

since  'twas  given  them  to  guard :
sleeps  one  by  night,         and  the  other  by  day,
and  none  who  comes  may  win  through.

Day-spring.

23.  Now  answer  me,  Much-wise,         this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips  :
is  there  no  food         which  man  can  find  them
and  dart  through  the  doors  while  they  feast  ?

Much-wise.

24.  There  lie  two  wings         in  the  Wood-snake's  sides,

if  haply  thou  wouldst  hear:

this  alone  is  that  food         which  if  man  can  find,
he  shall  dart  through  the  doors  while  they  feast.

Day-spring.

25.  Now  answer  me,  Much-wise,         this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips:
is  there  no  weapon         to  strike  the  Wood-snake
down  to  the  halls  of  Hel  ?

20. — Mighty  warders,  or,  if  another  reading  is  taken,  eleven  warders  there  are
who  watch,  nanifd  perhaps  in  at.  .!  I.


172  FJOLSVINNSMAL.

FjolsviJ>r


26.  '  Lsevateinn  heitir,         es  gor)>i  Loptr  ruinn

fyr  nagrindr  nej?an  ;
i  Ssogjarns  keri         liggr  hja  Sinmoru,
ok  halda  njar)>lasar  niu.'

Svipdagr  kva)>  :

27.  'Seg  m6r  )?at,  Fjolsvi]?r  !         es  ek  )>ik  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita  :
hvart  aptr  komr         sas  eptir  ferr
ok  vill  J>ann  tein  taka  ?  '

Fjolsvi^r  kva)>  :

28.  'Aptr  mun  koma         sas  eptir  ferr

ok  vill  |>ann  tein  taka,
ef  }>at  frerir,         sem  fair  eigu,
eiri  aurglasis.'

Svipdagr  kva}>  :

29.  '  Seg  mer  |?at,  Fjolsvtyr  !         es  ek  }>ik  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita  :

hvart  s6  mseta.  nekkvat,         )>ats  menn  hafi,
ok  ver]?r  }>vi  en  folva  gygr  fegin  ?  '

Fjolsvtyr  kvaty  :

30.  '  Lj6san  lea         skaltu  i  lu)>r  bera

|>anns  liggr  i  Vtyofnis  volum,
Sinmoru  at  selja,         a)?r  h6n  som  telisk
vapn  til  vigs  at  lea.'

26.  —  Sa'gjarns,  R.  M.;  saegjarns  or  segiarns,  MSS.  ;  seig-jarn,  B.


DAY-SPRING     AND     MENGLOD.  173

Much-wise.

26.  Tis  the  Wounding  Wand         which  Loki  plucked

beneath  the  doors  of  the  dead  :
Sinmara  keeps  it         with  nine  fast  locks,
shut  in  Sea-lover's  chest.

Day-spring.

27.  Now  answer  me,  Much- wise,         this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips :
comes  he  ever  again,         who  goes  to  seek,
and  craves  to  win  that  wand  ?

Much-wise.

28.  He  shall  come  again         who  goes  to  seek

and  craves  to  win  that  wand ;

if  he  brings  the  treasure         which  none  doth  own,
the  gold-bright  goddess  to  please.

Day-spring.

29.  Now  answer  me,  Much-wise,         this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips :

is  there  no  treasure         which  man  can  take

to  rejoice  that  pale-hued  giantess  ?

Much-wise.

30.  In  its  quill  must  thou  bear         the  bright  sickled  plume,

which  was  taken  from  Wood-snake's  tail,
and  give  to  Sinmara         ere  she  will  grant  thee
that  weapon  of  war  to  use.


26. — The  Wounding  Wand  must  be  the  mistletoe  with  which  Baldr  was  slain.
Snorri  tcils  us  that  it  grew  to  the  west  of  Vallhtill ;  see  Bdr.,  st.  9.  Sinmara:  This
giantess  is  only  mentioned  in  st.  18,  where  she  is  coupled  with  Surt,  as  though  his  wife.
28. — Gold-bright  goddess.  A  poetical  term  for  woman.  30. — Quill,  a  suggestion  for
Ititr,  which  mean*  case  or  box  ;  but  whose  significance  is  here  doubtful.


174  FJOLSVINNSMAL.

Svipdagr  kvaj?  ;

31.  'Seg  me'r  ]>at,  Fjolsvi^rl         es  ek  J>ik  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita :

hvat  s£  salr  heitir         es  slunginn  es
visum  vafrloga  ? '

Fjolsvi)?r  kvaj>  :

32.  '  Hyrr  hann  heitir,         en  hann  lengi  mun

a  brodds  oddi  bifask  ;
aujjranns  }>ess         munu  of  aldr  hafa
fre"tt  eina  firar.'

Svipdagr  kvaj?  :

33.  '  Seg  mer  )?at,  Fjolsvtyr !         es  ek  \>ik  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita :

hverr  )>at  gor)?i,         es  fyr  gar)?  sdk
innan  asmaga  ? '

FjolsviJ^r  kva|>  :

34.  'Uni  ok  Iri,         Bari  ok  Ori,

Varr  ok  Vegdrasill,
Dori  ok  Uri,  Dellingr,  Atvar)>r,
Li)?skjalfr,  Loki.'

Svipdagr  kva}>  :

35.  '  Seg  m^r  )?at,  Fjols\  i)>r  !         es  ek  )?ik  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita  :

hvat  )>at  bjarg  heitir,         es  ek  se  bru|>i  a
)?ruma  ?  '


Fjolsvtyr  kva|? :

36.    '  Lyfjaberg  heitir,         en  }>at  hefr  lengi  verit

sjukum  ok  sarum  gaman  :
heil  verj?r  hver,         \>6t  hafi  +  £rs  sott,
ef  |>at  klifr,  kona.'


32.— Hyrr,  MSS.,  K.  M.  Dt.  and  HI.  B;    Lyr,  Gv.  S.  G.          34.— Atvar)>r.  at
varjter,  ok  var)>ar,  MSS.     Li)?skjalfr,  HI.  M.  B,  C.


DAY-SPRING     AND     MENGLOD.  175

Day-spring.

31.     Now  answer  me,  Much-wise,         this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips:
what  hall  is  yonder,         all  girt  around
by  enchanted  flickering  flames  ?

Much-wise.

32.  Ember  'tis  called         and  long  must  it  quiver

as  though  on  the  spear's  point  set ;
far  tidings  only,         throughout  all  time,
man  hears  of  this  wondrous  hall.

Day-spring.

33.  Now  answer  me,  Much-wise,         this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips :
what  beings,  born         of  the  gods  have  built
what  I  saw  inside  the  court  ?

Much-wise.

34.  Uni  and  Iri,         Bari  and  Ori,

Var  and  Vegdrasil,
Dori  and  Uri,         Delling,  Atvard,
Lidskjalf  and  Loki  were  these.

Day-spring.

35.  Now  answer  me,  Much-wise,         this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips :
what  hill  is  that        on  whose  height  I  see
yon  wondrous  Woman  resting  ?

Much-wise.

36.  'Tis  the  Hill  of  Healing  ;         long  hath  it  held,

for  the  sick  and  sorrowful,  joy  :
each  woman  is  healed         who  climbs  its  height,
even  of  year-long  ills.

35. — Dori,  Ori,  and  Delling  are  dwarfs  (see  Vsfr.,  st.  15;  Vm.,  st.  25);  Loki,
the  god.  The  others  are  unknown  ;  their  names  do  not  seem  to  indicate  their  powers  like
those  of  st.  38.


176  FJOLSVINNSMAL.

Svipdagr  kva|>  :

37.  'Seg  m6r  J>at,  Fj6lsvij>r!         es  ek  ]?ik  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita:

hvat  J>rer  meyjar  heita,         es  fyr  MenglaJ>ar  kneum
sitja  sattar  saman  ?  '

Fjolsvij?r  kvaj> :

38.  '  Hlif  heitir  ein,         onnur  Hlifyrasa,

)>rij?ja  pjo]>vara,

Bjort  ok  Blij>,         Bli]?r  ok  Fri)>,
Eir  ok  Aurbo)>a.'

Svipdagr  kva]? :

39.  '  Seg  mer  j>at,  Fjolsvi|?r  !         es  ek  )?ik  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita  :

hvart  ]>xr  bjarga         ]>eims  biota  }>&r,
ef  gorvask  |>arfar  |>ess  ? '

Fjolsvtyr  kva)?  :

40.  '  Bjarga  svinnar         hvars  menn  biota  |wer

a  stallhelgum  sta|? :

ey  sva  hatt  fora)?         komr  at  holj>a  sunum,
hverjan  or  nau)>um  nema.'

Svipdagr  kva|> :

41.  'Seg  m6r  )>at,  Fjolsvi]?r!         es  ek  )nk  fregna  mun

auk  ek  vilja  vita  :

hvart  se  manna  nekkvat,         ]>ats  knegi  a  Mengla|>ar
svdsum  armi  sofa  ? '

Fjolsvtyr  kva)> :

42.  '  Vsfetr's  ]?at  manna,         es  knegi  £  Mengla)>ar

svasum  armi  sofa,

nema  Svipdagr  einn,         hdnum  vas  en  s61bjarta
bntyr  at  kvan  of  gefin.'

40. — Bjarga  svinnar,  B.  Gv.  G.  F.  /. ;  sumur  hvar,  MSS.


DAY-SPRING    AND     MENGLOD.  177

Day-spring.

37.  Now  answer  me,  Much-wise,        this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips :
who  are  the  maidens,        at  Menglod's  knees
all  gathered  in  peace  together  ?

Much-:  wise.

38.  They  are  spirits,  Sheltering,         Shielding  giants,

Guarding  warriors  in  war,
Bright  and  Tender,         Blithe  and  Peaceful,
Gentle,  Generous  maids.

Day-spring.

39.  Now  answer  me,  Much-wise,        this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips :
will  they  shelter  all        who  make  offering  to  them,
if  need  thereof  arise  ?

Much-wise.

40.  Those  Wise  Ones  shelter        where  men  make  offering

in  the  sacred  altar-stead  :
no  peril  so  mighty        can  man  befall
but  they  save  him  soon  from  need.

Day-spring.

41.  Now  answer  me,  Much-wise,        this  that  I  ask

and  fain  would  learn  from  thy  lips :
is  there  never  being        in  the  world  may  lie
in  Menglod's  soft  arms  sleeping  ?

Much-wise.

42.  There  is  never  being        in  the  world  may  lie

in  Menglod's  soft  arms  sleeping
save  Day-spring,  to  whom         of  yore  was  given
that  sun-bright  maiden  as  bride.


2  A


i78  FJOLSVINNSMAL.

Svipdagr  kva)>  :

43.  '  Hritt  a  hur)>ir,         lattu  hli|>  rum  !

h6r  matt  Svipdag  sea ;
]>6  vita  far,         ef  vilja  muni
Menglo}>  mitt  gaman.'

Fjolsvtyr  kvaj? :

44.  '  Heyr)>u,  Menglo)> !         h6r  es  ma]>r  kominn,

gakk  £  gest  sea  !

hundar  fagna,         bus  hefr  upp  lokizk  :
hykk  at  Svipdagr  sei.'

Menglo]?  kva)>  :

45.  '  Horskir  hrafnar         skulu  )?er  a  ham  galga

slita  sjonir  or,

ef  )?at  lygr,         at  he"r  se  langt  kominn
mogr  til  minna  sala.


46.  Hva)>an  jm  f6rt,         hvaj^an  \>u  for  gorjrir,

hv^  )?ik  h^tu  hiu  ?

at  sett  ok  nafni         skalk  jartegn  vita,
ef  ek  vas  )>er  at  kvan  of  kve)>in.'

Svipdagr  kva)>  :

47.  'Svipdagr  heitik,         Solbjartr  h^t  fa)?ir,

]>aj>an  vrakumk  vindar  kalda  vegu  ;
Ur)?ar  or|?i         kve)?r  engi  ma|?r,
]>6t  se  vty  lost  lagit.'


Menglo)>

48.    '  Vel  ]>u  nu  kominn  !         hefk  minn  vilja  bejnt,

fylgja  skal  kvej>ju  koss;
forkunnar  syn         mun  flestan  gla|?a,
hverrs  hefr  vi}>  annan  ^st.


DAY-SPRING    AND    MENGLOD.  17$

Day-spring.

43.  Fling  open  the  door,         make  wide  the  gate,

Day-spring  is  here,  behold  !
Yet  hie  thee  first,         and  find  if  in  truth
Menglod  longs  for  my  love.

Much-wise  to  Menglod.

44.  Hearken,  Menglod,        a  guest  is  here  !

Come  thou  this  stranger  behold  !
The  hounds  are  joyous,        the  hall  hath  opened.
'Tis  Day-spring,  well  I  ween  !

Menglod.

45.  Now  may  fierce  ravens         rend  thine  eyes  out,

high  on  the  gallows  hanging,
if  falsely  thou  sayest         that  from  far  away
conies  Day-spring  here  to  my  halls  !

To   Day-spring.

46.  Whence  hast  thou  come,         whence  made  thy  way,

how  do  thy  home-folk  call  thee?
Show  race  and  name        ere  I  know  that  to  thee
in  truth  I  have  been  betrothed.

Day-spring.

47.  Day-spring  am  I,        the  child  of  Sun-bright,

by  winds  on  my  chill  way  wafted  ;
the  doom  of  Weird         may  no  wight  withstand
e'en  though  meted  amiss.

Menglod.

48.  Now  welcome  art  thou  !         My  will  is  won  ;

with  greeting  comes  the  kiss.
Never  sweeter  is  sight        of  heart's  desire
than  when  one  brings  love  to  another.

47. — The  doom  of  Weird,  see  Spell-songs,  st.  4.


FJOLSVINNSMAL.

49.  Lengi  satk         Lyfjabergi  a,

betyk  pin  doegr  ok  daga  :
nu  ]?at  varj?         es  ek  vaett  hefi,

at  aptr  kvamt,  mogr !  til  minna  sala.

50.  prar  hafyar        es  ek  hef  til  )?ins  gamans,

en  }>u  til  mins  munar;
nu's  )>at  satt,         es  vit  slita  skulum
«evi  ok  aldr  saman.'


49.— Ly^abergi,  B.  Gv.  C.  G.  S. ;  liufu  bergi,  M8S.     At  aptr  kvamt :  at  )>u  ert
aptr  kominn,  MS8.


DAY-SPRING    AND    KfENGLOD.  161

49.  Long  have  I  sat        on  the  Hill  of  Healing,

awaiting  thee  day  by  day  ;
till  that  I  looked  for         at  length  is  come, —
thou  art  back,  youth,  here  in  my  halls.

50.  Yearnings  had  I         oft  for  thy  heart,

nn  i  thou  didst  long  for  my  love :
now  all  is  made  sure,         we  twain  shall  share
together  the  days  of  time.


HARBARPSLJtiP.

Porr  f6r  6r  austrvegi  ok  kom  at
sundi  einu ;  6J>rum  megum  sundsins
var  ferjukarlinn  mej>  skipit.  Porr
kallajn :


1.  'Hverr  es  sa  sveinn  sveina,         es  stendr  fyr  sundit  handan  ? '

Ferjukarlinn  kva)> :

2.  '  Hverr  es  s&  karl  karla,        es  kallar  of  vaginn  ?  '


H4rbar)>slj6j>.— In  R,  No.  6,  st.  J9,  lin»  4,  to  end  in  A.


GREYBEARD    AND    THOR

As  Thor  was  journeying  from  the
Eastern  Land  of  the  Jotuns  he  came
to  a  sound.  On  the  other  side  was  a
ferryman  with  his  boat.

Thor.

1.  What  swain  of  swains         art  thou  who  thus
on  yonder  side  of         the  sound  art  standing  ?

Greybeard.

2.  Tell  me  rather        what  carle  of  carles
thus  calls  across  the  wave.


Prose.  —Presumably  Odin  in  disguise  ;  see  Introd.


184  HARBARpSLj6p.

P6rr   kvaj>  :

3.  'Fer)m  mik  of  sundit !         fcejnk  ]>ik  d  morgin  :

meis  hefk  a  baki         ver]?ra  matr  enn  betri.
At  ek  i  hvity,         a)>r  ek  heiman  for,
sildr  ok  hafra  :        sa\>r  emk  enn  ]>ess.'

Ferjukarlinn  kva]> :

4.  'Arligum  verkum  hrosar  )>u  ver)>inum;         veiztattu  fyrirgorla:

dopr  eru  J>in  heimkynni,         dauj>  hykk  at  )?in  m6)»ir  se.'


Porr  kva|>  :

5.  'pat  segir  }m  nu,         es  hverjum  ]?ykkir

mest  at  vita,         at  min  m6Jnr  dau]?  s6.'

Ferjukarlinn  kva)>  :

6.  'peygi  es  sem  }>u         )?rju  bu  go)?  eigir:

berbeinn  J>u  stendr        ok  hefr  brautinga  gorvi  ;
|>atki  at  )?u  hafir  broekr  )>inar  !  '


Porr

7.  'Styr)?u  hingat  eikjunni  !         ek  mun  }>&r  stoj>na  kenna  ;

e)?a  hverr  d  skipit         es  ]>u  heldr  vty  landit  ?  '

Ferjukarlinn  kvaj?  :

8.  '  Hildolfr  sa  heitir,         es  mik  halda  ba)>,

rekkr  enn  ra]?svinni,         es  byr  i  Ra)7seyjarsundi  ;
ba)>at  hann  hlennimenn  flytja         e]?a  hrossa  J>jofa,
g6)?a  eina         ok  }>a.s  ek  gorva  kunna.
Seg)>u  til  nafns  )nns,         ef  }>u  vill  of  sundit  fara.


GREYBEARD     AND    THOR.  185

Thor.

3.  Row  me  over!  A  meal         this  morn  I'll  pay  thee,
choicer  fare        thou  shalt  never  find  thee.

Here  on  my  back         there  hangs  a  basket ;
in  peace  I  ate,         myself,  ere  I  started,
herrings  and  goat's  flesh,        and  still  am  I  sated.

Greybeard.

4.  As  a  morning's  work        thou  dost  boast  thy  meal ;
but  thou  art  not  all  forseeing  :

filled  with  care        at  home  are  thy  kindred,
dead  I  trow  is  thy  mother.

Thor.

5.  Worst  of  all  tidings         art  thou  telling,

when  thou  sayest  me  now        that  dead  is  my  mother.

Greybeard.

6.  At  least  thou  lookst  not         like  one  who  owns
a  lot  of  three  fair  lands  ;

bare-legged  thou  standest,         clad  like  a  beggar,
and  not  even  breeks  hast  thou  on.

Thor.

7.  Steer  the  bark  hither  !         I  will  show  thee  a  haven.
Who  owns  yon  boat        which  by  the  brink  thou  boldest  ?

Greybeard.

8.  Battle-wolf  bade  me —        wise-counselled  hero,
who  dwells  in  Counsel-Isle  Sound —

to  keep  it  and  ferry        nor  rogues  nor  robbers
but  the  worthy  and  those  I  know  well.
Now  shalt  thou  tell  me         thy  name  if  thou  fain
wouldst  hither  fare  o'er  the  flood.

3. — Herrings  and  goat's  flesh.  For  Thor  as  a  fisherman,  see  Hym.,  st.  17-25.  He
usually  ate  his  goats  for  supper,  and  restored  them  to  life  in  the  morning ;  see  Introd.
Hym.  This  rendering  of  bafra  seems  more  probable  than  the  more  common  alternative
oats;  for  Thor's  meal  of  goat's  flesh  was  famous,  and  a  burlesque  like  the  present  poem
would  be  incomplete  without  some  allusion  to  it.  8. — Battle-wolf,  meaning  himself,  the
patron  of  war.

2  B


186  HARBARPSLJOP.

P6rr   kva)>  :

9.    'Segja  munk  til  nafns  mins,         ]>6t  ek  sekr  seak,
ok  til  alls  6)>lis  :         ek  em  O|>ins  sunr,
Meila  br6j?ir,         en  Magna  fa)?ir,
]?ru)>valdr  go)>a ;         vi)>  p6r  knattu  he"r  doema.
Hins  viljak  nu  spyrja,         hvat  JMJ  heitir.'

Ferjukarlinn  "kva)> :

10.  'H£rbarj>r  ek  heiti.         hylk  of  nafn  sjaldan.'

Porr   kva)>  :

11.  '  Hvat  skaltu  of  nafn  hylja,  nema  ]>u  sakar  eigir  ? '


kvaj>  :

12.  'En  }>6t  ek  sakar  eiga,         fyr  slikum  sem  }>u  est

munk  for)?a  ]>6        fjorvi  minu,
nema  ek  feigr  seV

Porr   kvaj>  :

13.  'Harm  Ijotan         mer  )?ikkir  i  ]mi  at  va)>a,

of  vaginn  til  Jrin         ok  vseta  ogur  minn  ;
skyldak  launa  kogursveini  )>inum         kanginyrj?i,
ef  ek  komumk  of  sundit.'

Harbar|?r  kva)?  :

14.  'He"r  munk  standa        ok  )rin  he]?an  bi|?a;

fanntattu  mann  enn  harj>ara         at  Hrungni  dau]?a

p6rr   kva)?  :

15.  'Hins  vildu  nu  geta,         es  vit  Hrungnir  deildum,

sa  enn  stontygi  jotunn,         es  6r  steini  vas  h6fu)?it
]>6  I6tk  hann  falla        ok  fyrir  hniga. —
Hvat  vanntu  )>a  me)?an,  Harbar]?r  ? '


12,  lines  i  and  2. — Transposed  G.  from  J?&  mun  ek  forjja  fjorvi  minu  fyr,  <5-c.,  E.


GREYBEARD     AND    THOR.  187

Thor.

9.     Were  I  outlawed,  yet        my  name  would  I  tell  thee,
eke  my  race.         I  am  son  of  Odin,
the  brother  of  Meili,         and  father  of  Magni,
gods'  Strength-wielder  ;         thou  speak'st  with  Thor.
Fain  would  I  know  now         thy  name  and  kinship.

Greybeard.

10.  They  call  me  Grey-beard  ;         'tis  seldom  I  care
to  hide  my  own  name  from  any.

Thor.

11.  Wherefore  shouldst  thou         not  show  thy  name,
except  thou  have  cause         of  strife  with  thy  foemen  ?

Greybeard.

12.  Have  I  cause,  'gainst  such         as  thee  will  I  hold
my  life  unless  I  be  doomed.

Thor.

13.  Sore  shame  'twould  be         to  wet  my  burden
in  wading  thus         thro'  the  water  toward  thee.
Those  mocking  words         would  I  pay  thee,  mannikin,
could  I  but  reach         yon  side  of  the  sound  now.

Greybeard.

14.  Here  I  stand  and  await  thee !       Ne'er  metst  thou  with  sturdier
hero  since  Hrungnir  was  slain,

Thor.

15.  Dost  tell  how  we  once  fought,         I  and  Hrungnir,
that  hard-hearted  giant         whose  head  was  rock-hewn  ?
Yet  did  he  fall         and  bow  before  me.

What,  the  while,  wast  thou         working,  Greybeard  ?

9. — Meili.  Nothing  is  known  concerning  this  son  of  Odin.  Magni  or  Might,  see
Vm.t  st.  51.  10. — Greybeard.  Odin's  wonted  disguise  was  that  of  a  t^rey -bearded
old  man.  n. — Cause  of  strife,  see  G.  gloss.  14. — Hrungnir.  The  slaying  of  this
giant  was  one  of  Thor's  famous  deeds  ;  see  Hym.,  st.  16.


188  HARBARPSLJOP.

Harbar]?r


16.  '  Vask  me]?  Fjolvari         fimm  vetr  alia

i  eyju  ]?eiri         es  Algrcen  heitir  ;
vega  v€r  )>ar  kn&ttum         ok  val  fella,
margs  at  freista,         mans  at  kosta.'

p6rr   kva]?  :

17.  '  Hversu  snunujm  y]?r  konur  y]>rar  ?  '

H&rbar]>r  kva]>  :

18.  '  Sparkar  attum  ver  konur,         ef  oss  at  spokum  yrj^i  ;

horskar  attum  ve"r  konur,         ef  oss  hollar  va>ri  :

)?ser  or  sandi         sima  undu

ok  or  dali  djupum         grund  of  grofu

Var]?k  ]?eim  einn  ollum         ofri  at  ra)?um,

hvildak  hja  )?eim  sy  strum  sjau

ok  haf]?ak  gej?  )?eira  allt  ok  gaman.

Hvat  vanntu  )>a  me)?an,  porr  ?  '

P6rr   kva)?  :

19.  '  Ek  drap  pjaza,         enn  )>ru|>m6j>ga  jotun,

upp  ek  varp  augum         Alvalda  sunar

a  )>ann  enn  hei)?a  himin  ;

J>au  eru  merki  mest         minna  verka,

)>aus  allir  menn  sij^an  of  se\

Hvat  vanntu  me)?an,  Harbar)>r  ?  '

Harbar]?r   kva)?  :

20.  '  Miklar  manv6lar         ek  hafya  vi)?  myrkrij^ur,

}>ds  ek  v6lta  }>&r  fra  verum  ;

har]>an  jotun         hug)?ak  Hl^barj?  vesa  :

gaf  hann  mer  gambantein,

en  ek  velta  hann  6r  viti.'


GREYBEARD     AND    THOR.  189

Greybeard.

16.  I  dwelt  with  Wary-wise        five  whole  winters
in  the  island  called  All-green.

Battles  we  fought  there         and  felled  the  doomed,
much  daring,  and  wiling  women.

Thor.

17.  Got  ye  weal  or  woe         from  those  wives  of  your  winning  ?

Greybeard.

18.  Merry  wives  had  we  owned         had  they  borne  them  wisely ;
shrewd  wives,  had  they  shown  them  true  :

all  out  of  sand         they  spun  them  ropes

and  dug  from  the  deep  dales  earth.

Yet  slyest  was  I,         who  with  seven  sisters  slept,

and  won  all  their  liking  and  love.

What,  the  while,  wast  thou         working,  Thunderer  ?  '


Thor.

19.     Slew  I  Thiazi,        son  of  All-wielder,

strong-souled  Jotun,         and  flung  his  eyes  up
where  men  shall  behold         in  the  shining  heavens
the  tokens  great         of  my  deeds  hereafter.
What,  the  while,  wast  thou         working,  Greybeard  ?


Greybeard.

20.     I  had  dealings  in  love         with  the  dark  witch-riders,
from  their  husbands  I  wiled  them  away  :
stout  giant  seemed  Hlebard         till  his  wand  he.  gave  me
and  I  wiled  him  out  of  his  wits.


16. — Wary-wise,  unknown.         19. — Thiazi.     See  I.s.,  st.  50,  and  Introd.  ;   Vsp.  en
skamnta,  st.  3,


igo  HARBARPSLJOP.

P6rr   kvaj> :
21.    '  Ilium  huga  launa)>ir  }>u  ]?a  g6J>ar  gjafar.'

Harbar)>r  kva)?  :

22..  '  pat  hefr  eik         es  af  annarri  skefr :
of  sik  es  hverr  i  sliku.
Hvat  vanntu  me)>an,  p6rr  ?  '

P6rr   kvaj> :

•

23.  '  Ek  vas  austr        ok  jotna  bar)>ak
bru)?ir  bolvisar        es  til  bjargs  gengu  :
mikil  mundi  sett  jotna,         ef  allir  lif|?i,
vsetr  mundi  manna         und  mi]?garj?i.
Hvat  vanntu  mej>an,  Hdrbar)>r  ? '

Harbar)7r  kra)> :

24.  '  Vask  a  Vallandi         ok  vigum  fylg)>ak,

attak  j  of  rum,         en  aldri  ssettak.
6)>inn  d  jarla         )>as  i  val  falla,
en  porr  &  Arabia  kyn.'

porr   kva)>  :

25.  'Ojafnt  skipta         es  ]>u  mundir  me)>  asum  lij?i,

ef  }>u  gfettir  vilgi  mikils  vald.'

Hdrbar)?r  kva)>  :

26.  *p6rr  d  afl  oerit,         en  etki  hjarta :

af  hrsbzlu  ok  hugbley|?i         vas  }>er  i  hanzka  tro}>it
[ok  )>6ttiska  ]>u  \>a  p6rr  vesa ;]
•hvarki  ]>u  j?a  )?or)?ir         fyr  hrE&zlu  )>inni
hnjosa  ne  fisa,         svat  Fjalarr  heyr)?i.'


GREYBEARD     AND    THOR.  191

Thor.

21.  Then  spite  for  those  goodly        gifts  thou  gavest  ?

•

Greybeard.

22.  Let  one  oak  take        what  it  scrapes  off  another,
and  let  each  man  seek  his  own.

What,  the  while,  wast  thou         working,  Thunderer  ?

Thor.

23.  Slew  I  the  evil        wives  of  Jotuns,

far  in  the  east,  .     as  they  fled  to  the  mountains :
were  they  all  left         in  the  land  of  the  living,
huge  would  have  been  now         the  host  of  giants,
and  never  a  man         would  there  be  in  Midgarth.
What,  the  while,  wast  thou        working,  Greybeard  ?

Greybeard.

24.  In  the  Land  of  the  Slain         I  warred  and  stirred  up
princes  to  strife  without  peace.

Odin  has  earls         who  fall  on  the  battlefield,
Thor  has  the  race  of  thralls.

Thor.

25.  Unfairly  wouldst  thou        divide  the  slain
among  gods  if  power        too  great  were  given  thee !

Greybeard.

26.  Strength  enough  has  the  Thunderer,         nought  of  daring  ;
from  fear  and  faintness  of  heart

thou  wert  thrust,  I  ween,         in  a  glove-thumb  once,
and  scarce  couldst  deem  thyself  Thor  :
lest  Fjalar  should  hear  thee,         for  fright  thou  durst  not
sneeze  nor  stir  a  hair.

26. — Fjalar,  a  giant,  otherwise  known  as  Utgard-loki  ;  set  Introd.


IQ2  HARBARPSLJOP.

porr   kva)>  :

27.  '  Harbar)>r  eiin  ragi !         ek  munda  j?ik  i  hel  drepa,

ef  ek  martta  seilask  of  sund.'        •

Hdrbar]?r  kva)>  :

28.  '  Hvat  skyldir  j?u  of  sund  seilask,         es  sakar'u  alls  ongvar  ?

Hvat  vanntu  j?a,  porr  ? '

•

p6rr   kvaj? :

29.  '  Ek  vas  austr        ok  ana  varj>ak,

J?as  mik  sottu         ]>eir  Svarangs  synir ;

grj6ti  }>eir  mik  bor)?u,         gagni  ur)m  }>eir  J>6  litt  fegnir,

ur)m  J^eir  mik  fyrri         frij^ar  at  bij?ja.

Hvat  vanntu  |?a  me)>an,  Harbar)?r  ? '

Harbar]?r  kvaj?  :

30.  'Ek  vas  austr         ok  vij?  einhverja  doem)>ak,

16k  ek  vty  ena  linhvitu         ok  laun)?ing  ha]?ak,
gladdak  ena  gollbjortu,         gamni  mser  un)?i.'


porr  kva)>  :

31.  '  G6}>  attuj?  6r  mankynni  |?ar  )?a.'

Harbar)?r  kva)>  :

32.  '  Li]?s  ]?ins  veerak  )?a  )?urfi,  porr  !         et  ek  helda  j?eiri  enni

linhvitu  mey.'

porr  kva]?  :

33.  '  Ek  munda  }?er  ]?a  \>a.t  veita,         ef  ek  vij>r  of  kvremumk.'


GREYBEARD     AND     THOR.  193

Thor.

27.  Greybeard,  thou  craven  !         Could  I  but  stretch

o'er  the  sound  I  would  smite  thee         soon  into  Hel-home.

Greybeard.

28.  Why  shouldst  thou  stretch         o'er  the  sound  and  smite  me  ?
No  reason  have  we  for  wrath.

What,  the  while,  wast  thou         working,  Thunderer  ?

Thor.

29.  Eastward  held  I         the  flood  of  Ifing
against  the  sons         of  Svarang  the  Whelmer ;

with  stones  they  beset  me         but  small  gain  got  they
and  first  were  found         to  ask  peace  of  foemen.
What,  the  while,  wast  thou         working,  Greybeard  ?

Greybeard.

30.  In  the  East  I  dallied         with  one,  my  chosen  ;
I  played  with  that  linen-fair  lass,

kept  secret  trysting,         and  gladdened  the  gold-bright
maiden,  merry  in  the  game.

Thor.

31.  Glad  meetings  of  love        had  ye  there  with  maidens  ?

Greybeard.

32.  Need  had  I  then         of  help  from  Thor,
to  have  kept  that  linen-fair  lass.

Thor.

33.  Fain  would  I  give  it  thee         could  I  but  get  there.


29. — Ifing.     The  name  is  not  mentioned  in  the  text,  but  it  may  be  assumed  that  the
river  is  that  which  flowed  between  the  realms  of  gods  and  giants  ;  see  Vm.  16.

aC


194  HARBARPSLJOP.


Harbar)?r  kva)>  :

34.  '  Ek  munda  )>6r  |>a  trua,         nema  j>u  mik  i  trygj>  veltir.

Porr    kva)>  :

35.  '  Emkat  ek  sd  hsolbitr        sem  hu)>sk6r  forn  a  var.'

Harbarj?r  kvaj>  :

36.  '  Hvat  vanntu  me)>an,  p6rr  ?  '

p6rr    kva]>  ;

37.  'Bruj?ir  berserkja         barj>ak  i  Hl^seyju,

)?£er  hof)?u  verst  unnit        vilta  }>']6}>  alia.'


Harbar)?r
38.   '  Klseki  vanntu  }?d,  ]?6rr  !        es  )?u  d  konum  bar)>ir.'


porr

39.  'Vargynjur  varu  J>sfer,         en  varla  konur;

skeldu  skip  mitt         es  ek  skor)>at  hafyak  ;
ceg\>u  m6r  larnlurki,         en  eltu  pjalfa.
Hvat  vanntu  me)>an,  Harbar)?r  ?  '

HdrbarJ^r  kvaj?  :

40.  '  Ek  vask  i  hernum        es  hingat  gorjnsk

gnsefa  gunnfana,         geir  at  rj6)>a.'

Porr   kva|>  :

41.  'pess  vildu  nu  geta,  es  J?u  fort  oss  61jufan  at  bjojra..'


42.   *  Boeta  skal  )>er  )?at  )>a        munda  baugi,

sem  jafnendr  unnu        ]?eirs  okkr  vilja  ssetta.'


GREYBEARD     AND    THOR.  195

Greybeard.

34.  Fain  would  I  now        put  trust  in  thy  faith,
wert  thou  not  wont  to  betray  me.

Thor.

35.  No  heelbiter  I,        like  an  old  shoe  in  spring-time!

Greybeard.

36.  What,  the  while,  wast  thou        working,  Thunderer  ?

Thor.

37.  Slew  I  berserk-wives        in  the  Isle  of  JEgir  ;
vile  things  wrought  they,         all  men-folk  wiling.

Greybeard.

38.  A  base  deed  then        wast  thou  doing,  Thunderer —
waging  war  with  women  !

Thor.

39.  She- wolves  were  they,        and  scarcely  women.
My  ships  laid  up         on  the  shore  they  shattered,

with  clubs  they  threatened  me,         Thialfi  chased  they.
What,  the  while,  wast  thou        working,  Greybeard  ?

Greybeard.

40.  To  raise  the  war  flag        and  redden  the  spear,
hither  I  came  in  the  host.

Thor.

41.  Wouldst  tell  how  with  hate        thou  cam'st  to  harm  us  ?

Greybeard.

42.  Let  a  ring  make  atonement        as  the  daysmen  meted,
who  sought  to  set  us  at  peace.

34. — Wont  to  betray  me.     This  rendering  seems  justified  by  the  ensuing  st. ;   see
Introd.         37. — .<Bgir,  here  called  by  his  other  name  H16r.


196  HARBARPSLJOP.

P6rr   kvaj>  :

43.  '  Hvar  namtu         ]?essi  en  hncefiligu  or}?,

es  ek  heyr]?a  aldri         in  hnoefiligri  ? '

H&rbar|>r  kva)>  :

44.  '  Nam  ek  at  monnum         ]>e'\m  enum  aldrcenum

es  bua  i  heimis  haugum.'

Porr   kva)>  :

45.  'pa  gefr  }>u         gott  nafn  dysjum,

es  Jm  kallar  j?ser  heimis  hauga.'

Hdrbar|?r  kva)?  :

46.  '  Sva  dcemi  ek  of  slikt  far.'

porr   kva)>  :

47.  '  Or|?kringi  |?in         mun  ]?6r  ilia  koma,

ef  ek  rse]?  a  vag  at  va]?a ;

ulfi  hsera         hykk  )?ik  cepa  munu,

ef  }>u  hlytr  af  hamri  hogg.'

Hdrbar)?r  kva)>  :

48.  '  Sif  d  hor  heima,         bans  mundu  fund  vilja,

)>ann  mundu  ]?rek  drygja,         J>at  es  }>€r  skyldara.'


p6rr   kvaj? :

49.    'Mselir  }>u  at  munns  ra)>i,         svat  me"r  skyldi  verst  J?ykkja,
hair  enn  hugblau^i !         hykk  at  }>u  ljugir.'

44. — Haugum  ;  45,  bauga,  B.  Gv.  G.  S.  C.  J.     Skogum,  skogu,  R.


GREYBEARD     AND    THOR.  197

Thor.

43.  Where  didst  thou  learn         those  scornful  speeches  ?
Never  were  words         more  wounding  said  me.

Greybeard.

44.  I  learnt  them  once         from  ancient  beings
who  dwell  in  the  hills  of  home.

Thor.

45.  Fair  name  for  cairns         to  call  them  home-hills !

Greybeard.

46.  'Tis  even  as  I  think         concerning  such  things.

Thor.

47.  Sorely  thy  skill         in  words  should  serve  thee,
could  I  but  wade        to  thee  through  the  water.
Louder,  I  ween,         than  a  wolf  wilt  thou  howl

if  haply  thou  get'st         a  stroke  from  my  hammer.

Greybeard.

48.  Sif  has  a  lover,         thy  wife  at  home,
art  thou  not  eager  to  meet  him  ?

That  a  deed  of  daring         now  must  thou  do,
a  work  which  well  befits  thee.

Thor.

49.  Faint-heart !  Speak'st  thou         as  worst  meseems,
by  the  cojunsel  of  thy  lips ;         for  I  trow  thou  liest !


44.— Hills  of  home,  the  ancestral  graves.  48. — Sif  s  lover,  is  Loki ;    see  Ls.,

st.  54.


ig8  HARBARPSLJOP.

Harbar)>r  kva|> :

50.   'Satt  hykk  mik  segja;         seinn  estu  at  for  )>inni;

langt  mundir  }>u  nu  kominn,  J>6rr !         ef  }>u  litum  fcerir.'


P6rr  kva}>  :

51.  'Harbar)>r  enn  ragi  !         heldr  hefr  )>u  nii  mik  dvatyan.'

H6rbar)>r  kva]>  :

52.  'Asa)>6rs        hugj>ak  aldri  mundu

glepja  farhir)>i  farar.'


P6rr

53.    '  Ra)>  munk  ]?er  nii  ra]?a  :         r6  )?u  hingat  b&tinum  ;
hsettum  hoetingi,         hittu  fo]?ur  Magna  !  '


kvaj?  :

54.  *  Far)>u  firr  sundi  !        }>6r  skal  fars  synja.'

p6rr   kvaj?  :

55.  '  Visa  )>6  m6r  nii  lei]>ina,         alls  )>ii  vill  mik  eigi  of  vaginn

ferja  !  '

Harbar)?r  kva)?  :

56.  '  Litit  es  at  synja,         langt  es  at  fara  :

stund  es  til  stokksins,         onnur  til  steinsins,
haltu  sva  til  vinstra  vegsins,         unz  ]>u  hittir  Verland.
par  mun  Fjorgyn         hitta  p6r  sun  sinn
ok  mun  hon  kenna  hanum  attunga  brautir        til  6j>ins

landa.'

P6rr   kvaj?  :

57.  '  Mun  ek  taka  |>angat  i  dag  ?  '


GREYBEARD    AND    THOR.  199

Greybeard.

50.  Truly  I  ween  that         my  words  are  spoken  :
too  slow  art  thou  in  thy  travelling.

Far  on  thy  way        hadst  thou  fared  now,  Thor,
if  thou  hadst  but  gone  in  disguise.

Thor.

51.  Greybeard,  thou  craven  !        Too  long  thou  delay'st  me.

Greybeard.

52.  I  had  ne'er  weened  boatman         would  hinder  the  way
of  Thor,  the  Thunderer  of  gods.

Thor.

53.  Now  will  I  counsel  thee ;         come  in  thy  boat  hither  ;
fetch  Magni's  father,        and  cease  we  from  mocking.

Greybeard.

54.  Hie  thee  hence        away  from  the  sound  !
The  ferry  to  thee  is  refused.

Thor.

55.  Show  me  a  path  then,        since  thou  wilt  not
ferry  me  over        the  flood  betwixt  us.

Greybeard.

56.  Tis  little  to  withhold,        'tis  far  to  fare
a  while  to  the  stock  and  the  stone :

thus  shalt  thou  hold        to  the  left-hand  path,

till  thou  light  on  the  Land  of  Men ;

there  will  Earth  meet  her  son        and  show  him  the  way

of  his  race  to  the  realms  of  Odin.

Thor.

57.  Shall  I  to-day  reach        the  dwellings  of  Odin  ?

56. — Earth,  or  Jord,  who  is  here  called  Fjbrgyn,  is  one  of  Odin's  wives  ;   see  Ls.,
ft.  26.


200  HARBARPSLJOP.

Harbar)>r  kva)>  :

58.  'Taka  vi\>  vil  ok  erfi)>i

at  uppvesandi  solu,  es  ek  get  )>ana.'

POIT   kva)?  :

59.  '  Skamt  mun  nu  mal  okkat,       alls  ]?u  mer  skcetingu  einni  svarar  ;

launa  munk  )>£r  farsynjun,         ef  vit  finnumsk  i  sinn  annat.'


Harbarj?r
60.    '  Far^u  nu  ]?ars  J?ik  hafi  allan  gramir  !  '


58.— )?dna,  E,  B.  Gv.J.  C. ;  )?a-na,  G.


GREYBEARD     AND    THOR.  201

Greybeard.

58.  With  weariness  and  toil         when  the  dew  is  wet
at  sunrise,  I  ween,  thou  wilt  win  them.

Thor.

59.  Short  be  our  speech  now,         with  but  jeering  thou  answerest.
When  we  meet  next  I'll  pay  thee        for  denying  me  passage.

Greybeard.

•

60.  Hie  thee  hence        away  where  the  fiends
may  seize  thee,  body  and  soul !

58. — When  the  dew  is  wet,  B's  interpretation  ;  about  that  time,  G.


a   D


RfGSFULA.

Sva  segja  menn  i  fornum  sogum,  at  einhverr  af  asum,  sa  er
Heimdallr  h6t,  f6r  fer)>ar  sinnar  ok  fram  me)?  sjovarstrondu  nokkurri,
kom  at  einum  hiisaboe  ok  nefndiz  Rigr.  Eptir  )>eiri  sogu  er  kvae)>i
)>etta  :

1.  AT  kvo)?u  ganga        grcenar  brautir
oflgan  ok  aldinn        as  kunnigan,
ramman  ok  roskvan         Rig  stiganda,

2.  Gekk  meirr  at  ]>a.t         mij>rar  brautar ;
kvam  harm  at  htisi,         hur)>  vas  d  gaetti ;
inn  nam  ganga,         eldr  vas  a  golfi,
hj6n  sdtu  )?ar         bar  at  ami.

Ai  ok  Edda        aldinfalda.

Rigsjmla.— In  W.        2.— At  ami,  R.  S.  H.  G.  Gv. ;   af  ami,  W,  HI.  J.


THE   SONG    OF    RIG.

It  is  told  in  the  sagas  of  old  .time  that  a  certain  god  called
Heimdal  was  passing  on. his  way  along  the  sea  shore  when  he  came  to
a  farm.  He  entered,  calling  himself  Rig  according  to  the  story  which
thus  relates :

I. — THE  BIRTH  OF  THRALL.


i.


Once  walked,  'tis  said,
mighty  and  ancient,
strong  and  vigorous,


the  green  ways  along,
a  god  most  glorious ;
striding,  Rig.


2.


Ever  on  he  went        in  the  middle  of  the  way,
till  he  came  to  a  house        with  door  unclosed.
He  entered  straight ;        there  was  fire  on  the  floor
and  a  hoary  couple         sitting  by  the  hearth,
Great-grandfather  and  mother        in  ancient  guise.


Heimdal.—  Set  Vsp.  en  skamma,  st.  14  ;   Grm.  13  and
called  his  children.       Rig  or  King.  —  A  Celtic  word.


.,  st.  1,  where  nun  art


204  RIGSPULA.

3.  Rigr  kunni  J>eim         raj>  at  segja,
meirr  settisk  hann         mif>ra  fletja,
en  a  hlij>  hvara         hjon  salkynna.

•

4.  pa  tok  Edda         okkvinn  hleif,

Jwngan  ok  J?ykkvan,         }>runginn  sa}>um  ;
bar  meirr  at  J>at         mtyra  skutla,
so]?  vas  i  bolla,         setti  a  b']6\>.

5.  (4)     Reis  upp  )>a}>an,         re"zk  at  sofna;
(5)     Rigr  kunni  j?eim         raj?  at  segja,

meirr  lag)>isk  hann         mi}?rar  rekkju,
en  a  hlij?  hvara         hjon  salkynna.
par  vas  at  J>at         j?riar  na3tr  saman,
gekk  meirr  at  ]?at         mi)?rar  brautar,
li)m  meirr  at  )>at         mdnu)?r  niu.

6.  J6)>  61  Edda,        josu  vatni,
horvi  svartan         h^tu  prsfel.

Hann  nam  at  vaxa         ok  vel  dafna,
•  vas  }>ar  a  hondum         hrokkit  skinn,

kropnir  knuar,         .     .     .     .    ..

fingr  digrir,         fulligt  andlit,
lutr  hryggr,         langir  hselar.
(7)     Nam  meirr  at  }?at         megins  of  kosta,
bast  at  binda,         byrjrar  gorva,
bar  heim  at  )>at         hris  gorstan  dag.

7.  par  kvam  at  garj>i         gengilbeina,
orr  vas  a  iljum,         armr  solbrunninn,
ni)?rbjugt  es  nef,         nefndisk  pir.

8.  Meirr  settisk  hon         mi)>ra  fletja,
sat  hja  henni         sunr  huss,
roeddu  ok  ryndu,         rekkju  gor)>u

ok  pir         )>rungin  doegr.


4,  line  4.  —  Followed  by  a  line  in  W,  transposed  to  st,  15.         5.  —  Strophe  numbering
vf  W  is  marked  in  brackets.


THE    SONG    OF     RIG.  205

3.  Well  knew  Rig        how  to  give  them  counsel,
he  sat  him  down         in  the  middle  of  the  floor,
with  the  home-folk  twain         upon  either  side.

•

4.  Great-grandmother  fetched        a  coarse-baked  loaf,
all  heavy  and  thick         and  crammed  with  husk:
she  bore  it  forth         in  the  middle  of  the  dish,
with  broth  in  a  bowl,         and  laid  the  board.

5.  Thence  Rig  uprose,         prepared  to  rest ; —
well  he  knew        how  to  give  them  counsel —
he  laid  him  down         in  the  middle  of  the  bed
and  the  home-folk  twain         upon  either  side.
Thus  he  tarried         three  nights  together,
then  on  he  strode        in  the  middle  of  the  road
while  thrice  three  moons        were  gliding  by.

6.  Great-grandmother  bore        a  swarthy  boy  ;

with  water  they  sprinkled  him,        called  him  Thrall.

Forthwith  he  grew        and  well  he  throve,

but  rough  were  his  hands         with  wrinkled  skin,

with  knuckles  knotty         and  fingers  thick  ;

his  face  was  ugly,         his  back  was  humpy,

his  heels  were  long.         .     .     .     .     .

"  Straightway  'gan  he        to  prove  his  strength,
with  bast  a-binding         loads  a-making,
he  bore  home  faggots        the  livelong  day.

7.  There  came  to  the  dwellings        a  wandering  maid,
with  wayworn  feet,         and  sunburned  arms,

with  down-bent  nose, —         the  Bond-maid  named.

.    8.     She  sat  her  down         in  the  middle  of  the  floor ;
beside  her  sat         the  son  of  the  house :
they  chatted  and  whispered,         their  bed  preparing —
Thrall  and  Bond-maid —        the  long  day  through.

6. — Sprinkled  him  with  water,  see  Hdv.,  st.  157.  Thrall,  the  lowest  class,  who
were  little  better  than  .slaves.  7. — Wandering.  The  other  brides  (st.  18  and  30)
cam*,  not  on  foot,  but  driving  to  their  husbands.


206  RIGSpULA.

9.    (8)     Born  alu  |?au,         bjuggu  ok  un)m  ;
hykk  at  h£ti         Hreimr  ok  Fjosnir,
Klurr  ok  Kleggi,         Kefsir,  Fulnir,
Drumbr,  Digraldi,         Drottr  ok  Hosvir,
Liitr,  Leggjaldi :         log)>u  gar]?a,
akra  toddu,         unnu  at  svinum,
geita  gsettu,         gr6fu  torf.

10.    (9)     Dcetr  varu  )>£&r         Drumba  ok  Kumba,
Okkvinkalfa        ok  Arinnefja,
Ysja  ok  Ambatt,         Eikintjasna,
Totrughypja         ok  Tronubeina :
]?a)>an  eru  komnar        )>rsela  settir.


11.  (10)     Gekk  Rigr  at  )>at        r6ttar  brautir;

kvam  hann  at  hollu,         hur]>  vas  d  ski)?i ;
inn  nam  ganga,         eldr  vas  a  golfi  :
Afi  ok  Amma        attu  bus.

12.  (10)     Hjon  satu  ]?ar,         heldu  a  syslu:

ma)?r  telg]?i  ]>ar         mei]?  til  rifjar ;
vas  skegg  skapat,         skor  vas  fyr  enni,
skyrtu  )?r6ngva,        skokkr  vas  a  golfi.


13.  (n)     Sat  )>ar  kona,        sveig]?i  rokk,

breiddi  fajjm,         bjo  til  va)?ar ;
(12)     sveigr  vas  a  hofjri,         smokkr  vas  a  bringu,
dukr  vas  a  halsi,         dvergar  a  oxlum.

14.  Rigr  kunni  )>eim         rd]?  at  segja,
meirr  settisk  hann         mtyra  fletja,
en  a  hli^  hvara        hjon  salkynna.

n,  line  4. — Transposed  from  st.  13  by  S.  B.  G.         14,  lines  2  and  3. — Not  found
in  W ;  supplied  from  other  parts  of  the  poem,  B.  S.  G.


THE    SONG    OF    RIG..  207

9.     Joyous  lived  they        and  reared  their  children.
Thus  they  called  them  :         Brawler,  Cowherd,
Boor  and  Horsefly,         Lewd  and  Lustful,
Stout  and  Stumpy,         Sluggard,  Swarthy,
Lout  and  Leggy.        They  fashioned  fences,
they  dunged  the  meadows,         swine  they  herded,
goats  they  tended        and  turf  they  dug.

10.     Daughters  were  there, —        L°ggv  and  Cloggy,
Lumpy-leggy,        and  Eagle-nose,
Whiner,  Bondwoman,         Oaken-peggy,
Tatter-coat        and  the  Crane-shanked  maid.
Thence  are  come        the  generations  of  thralls.


II. — THE   BIRTH  OF  CHURL.

11.  Ever  on  went  Rig        the  straight  roads  along
till  he  came  to  a  dwelling         with  door  unclosed ;
he  entered  straight ;        there  was  fire  on  the  floor ;
Grandfather  and  Grandmother        owned  the  house.

12.  The  home-folk  sat  there        hard  aworking  ;
by  them  stood        on  the  floor  a  box ;

hewed  the  husband        wood  for  a  warp-beam  ;
trim  his  beard        and  the  locks  o'er  his  brow,
but  mean  and  scanty        the  shirt  he  wore.

13.  The  wife  sat  by  him         plying  her  distaff,
swaying  her  arms        to  weave  the  cloth,

with  snood  on  her  head        and  smock  on  her  breast,
studs  on  her  shoulders,        and  scarf  on  her  neck.

14.  Well  knew  Rig        how  to  give  them  counsel ;
he  sat  him  down         in  the  middle  of  the  floor,
and  the  home-folk  twain         upon  either  side.


15.  pa  t6k  Amma


f  fram  setti  h6n         fulla  skutla,
vas  kalfr  so)?inn         krasa  baztr.
Reis  fr&  borj>i,         re"zk  at  sofna,
Rigr  kunni  ]>eim         ra)>  at  segja,
meirr  lag]?isk  hann         mtyrar  rekkju,
en  a  hlij?  hvara         hj6n  salkynna.

16.  par  vas  at  J>at         J>riar  nsctr  saman,

gekk  meirr  at  )?at         mtyrar  brautar,
\tyu  meirr  at  )>at         manu]?r  niu.

T7-  (J5)     Jo)7  ol  Amma,        josu  vatni,

kollujju  Karl ;         kona  sveip  ripti
rau)>an  ok  rj6]>an,         rijmjm  augu.
Hann  nam  at  vaxa         ok  vel  dafna,
oxn  nam  temja,         ar)>r  at  gorva,
bus  at  timbra         ok  hlojmr  smtya,   .
karta  at  gorva         ok  keyra  plog.

18.  (16)     Heim  oku  j?d         hanginluklu,

geitakyrtlu,  giptu  Karli ;

Snor  heitir  sti,  settisk  und  ripti,

bjuggu  hj6n,  bauga  deildu,

breiddu  blsejur  ok  bii  gor|?u.

19.  (16)     Born  olu  ]>au,         bjuggu  ok  un|?u ;

h6t  Hair  ok  Drengr,         Hotyr,  pegn  ok  Smij>r,

Bretyr,  Bondi,         Bundinskeggi,

Bui  ok  Boddi,         Brattskeggr  ok  Seggr.

20.  (16)     Enn  h^tu  sva         6|?rum  nofnum  :

Sn6t,  Bru)?r,  Svanni,  Svarri,  Sprakki,
Fljo)?,  Sprund  ok  Vif,  Feima,  Ristill :
J>a)?an  eru  komnar  karla  settir.

15,  lines  3  and  4. — Transposed  from  st.  4,  B.  S.  G.  J.         16,  line  2. — Not  found  in
W ;  supplied  B.  S.  G,


THE    SONG     OF    RIG.  209

15.     Grandmother  set  forth         plenteous  dishes  ;
cooked  was  the  calf,        of  dainties  best.
Thence  Rig  uprose        prepared  to  rest.—
Well  he  knew        how  to  give  them  counsel —
he  laid  him  down         in  the  middle  of  the  bed
and  the  home-folk  twain         upon  either  side.


16.  Thus  he  tarried        three  nights  together,
then  on  he  strode        in  the  middle  of  the  road
while  thrice  three  moons        were  gliding  by.

17.  A  child  had  Grandmother,        Churl  they  called  him,
and  sprinkled  with  water        and  swathed  in  linen,
rosy  and  ruddy,        with  sparkling  eyes.

He  grew  and  throve,        and  forthwith  'gan  he
to  break  in  oxen,        to  shape  the  harrow,
to  build  him  houses        and  barns  to  raise  him,
to  fashion  carts        and  follow  the  plough.

18.  Then  home  they  drove        with  a  key-hung  maiden
in  goat-skin  kirtle,        named  Daughter-in-Law.
They  wed  her  to  Churl        in  her  bridal  .linen  :
the  twain  made  ready,         their  wealth  a-sharing,
kept  house  together,        and  joyous  lived.

19.  Children  reared  they        thus  they  called  them  :
Youth  and  Hero,        Thane,  Smith,  Yeoman,
Broad-limb,  Peasant,         Sheaf-beard,  Neighbour,
Farmer,  Speaker        and  Stubbly-beard.

20.  By  other  names        were  the  daughters  called  :
Dame,  Bride,  Lady,         Gay,  and  Gaudy,
Maid,  Wife,  Woman,        Bashful,  Slender.
Thence  are  come        the  kindreds  of  churls.

17. — Churl  or  karl,  tht  fret-born  peasant  proprietor.

2  £


210  RIGSPULA.


21.  (17)     Gekk  Rigr  J>aJ>an         rettar  brautir,

kvam  hann  at  sal,         su)>r  horf  jm  dyrr ;
vas  hur)>  hnigin,         hringr  vas  i  gsetti,
gekk  inn  at  )>at :         golf  vas  strait.
Satu  hj6n,         sousk  i  augu,
Fa]?ir  ok  M6)>ir,         fingrum  at  leika.
Sat  husgumi         ok  snori  streng,
aim  of  bendi,         orvar  skepti ;
en  huskona         hug)>i  at  ormum,
strauk  of  ripti,         sterti  ermar,
keistr  vas  faldr,         kinga  a  bringu,
•styar  slcejmr         serk  blafaan,
briin  bjartari,         brjost  Ijosara,
hals  hvitari         hreinni  mjollu.

4

22.  (18)     Rigr  kunni  )?eim         raj?  at  segja,

meirr  settisk  hann         mi|>ra  fletja,
en  a  hli]?  hvara         hj6n  salkynna.

23.  (19)     pa  tok  M6)?ir         merk)?an  duk,

hvitan  af  horvi,         hul)?i  bjo)? ;

h6n  tok  at  |?at         hleifa  Jmnna,

hvita  af  hveiti,         ok  hutyi  duk.

Fram  setti  h6n         fulla  skutla

silfri  var]?a,         setti  a  bj6)?,

fa'in  fleski,         fogla  steik]?a ;

vin  vas  i  konnu,         varj^ir  kalkar,

drukku  ok  dosmjm,         dagr  vas  d  sinnum.

24.  (21)     Rigr  kunni  )?eim         ra)>  at  segja,

reis  hann  at  )>at,         rekkju  gor)?i ;
meirr  lag)>isk  hann         mi)?rar  rekkju,
en  a  hlij?  hvara         hj6n  salkynna.

21. — Keistr  vas  faldr,  C.  G.  S. ;  keisti  falld,  W.        24,  lines  3  and  4. — Not  found
in  W  ;  supplied  B.  G.  S.


THE     SONG     OF     RIG.  211

III. — THE  BIRTH  OF  EARL.

21.  Still  on  went  Rig        the  straight  roads  along

till  he  came  to  a  hall        whose  gates  looked  south.

Pushed  was  the  door  to,        a  ring  in  the  post  set :

he  forthwith  entered        the  rush-strewn  room.

Each  other  eyeing,        the  home-folk  sat  there —

Father  and  Mother, —         twirling  their  fingers.

There  was  the  husband,         string  a-twining,

shafting  arrows         and  shaping  bows :

and  there  was  the  wife         o'er  her  fair  arms  wondering,

smoothing  her  linen,         stretching  her  sleeves.

A  high-peaked  coif         and  a  breast-brooch  wore  she,

trailing  robes          and  a  blue-tinged  sark.

Her  brow  was  brighter,         her  breast  was  fairer,

her  throat  was  whiter         than  driven  snow.

22.  Well  knew  Rig         how  to  give  them  counsel ;
he  sat  him  down         in  the  middle  of  the  floor,
and  the  home-folk  twain         upon  either  side.

23.     Then  took  Mother        a  figured  cloth,

white,  of  linen,         and  covered  the  board ;

thereafter  took  she         a  fine-baked  loaf,

white,  of  wheat         a.nd  covered  the  cloth  :

next  she  brought  forth         plenteous  dishes,

set  with  silver,        and  spread  the  board

with  brown-fried  bacon         and  roasted  birds.

There  was  wine  in  a  vessel         and  rich-wrought  goblets ;

they  drank  and  revelled         while  day  went  by.

24*     Well  knew  Rig         how  to  give  them  counsel ;
he  rose  ere  long         and  prepared  his  couch  :
he  laid  him  down         in  the  middle  of  the  bed,
and  the  home-folk  twain         upon  either  side.


21. — Pushed  to:  Icelandic  hnigin,  is  usually  rendered  open  in  this  passage,  but
Vigfusson's,  the  door  was  down  or  shut,  suggests  a  contrast  to  the  humbler  dwellings  ;
st.  2,  1  /.  The  ring  was  for  the  visitor  to  "  tirl "  at,  as  in  old  ballads.


212  RIGSPULA.

25.  (22)         par  vas  at  ]>at        Jmar  nsfetr  saman,

gekk  meirr  at  J?at        mtyrar  brautar,
Ityu  meirr  at  J>at         manu)>r  niu.

4

26.  (23)      •  Svein  61  M6J>ir,         silki  vafjn,

j6su  vatni,        Jarl  I6tu  heita  ;
bleikt  vas  bar,        bjartir  vangar,
otul  varu  augu         sem  yrmlingi.

27.  (24)         Upp  6x  )>ar        Jarl  a  fletjum,

lind  nam  skelfa         leggja  strengi,
aim  at  beygja,         orvar  skepta,
fleini  fleygja,         frokkur  dyja,
hestum  rij?a,         hundum  verpa,
sver)?um  breg^a,        sund  at  fremja.

28.  (25-27)    Kvam  )>ar  6r  runni         Rigr  gangandi,

Rigr  gangandi,        rUnar  kendi  ;
sitt-gaf  heiti,        sun  kvezk  eiga,
)>ann  ba]?  eignask        6)?alv6llu,
6]?alv6llu,        aldnar  byg]?ir.

29.  (28)         Rety  meirr  }>a.]>a.n         myrkvan  vi)>,

h^lug  fjoll,        unz  at  hollu  kvam.
Skapt  nam  dyja         skelfyi  lind,
hesti  hleyp)>i        okhjorvibrd;
vig  nam  vekja,         voll  nam  rj6)?a,
val  nam  fella,         va  til  landa.

(29)  Re)>  einn  at  |>at         atjan  buum,

(30)  au]?  nam  skipta,         ollum  veita  :
metymar  ok  mosma,         mara  svangrifja  ;
hringum  hreytti,         hjo  sundr  baug.


3°'  (31)         ^^u  serir        urgar  brautir,

kvamu  at  hollu         J?ars  Hersir  bjo  ;
mey  atti  hann         mj6fingra)?a,
hvita  ok  horska  :         he"tu  Ernu.

30.—  Mey  6tti  hann,  B.  Gv.  G,  S.J.  C.;  moetti  hann,  W,


THE     SONG     OF     RIG.  213

25.  Thus  he  tarried        three  nights  together;
then  on  he  strode        in  the  middle  of  the  road
while  thrice  three  moons        were  gliding  by.

26.  Then  a  boy  had  Mother  ;        she  swathed  him*  in  silk,
and  with  water  sprinkled  him  ;        called  him  Earl.
Light  were  his  locks,        and  fair  his  cheeks,
flashing  his  eyes        like  a  serpent's  shone.

27.  Grew  Earl  forthwith        in  the  halls  and  'gan
to  swing  the  shield,         to  fit  the  string,

to  bend  the  bow,  to  shaft  the  arrow,

to  hurl  the  dart,  to  shake  the  spear,

to  ride  the  horse,  to  loose  the  hounds,

to  draw  the  sword,        and  to  swim  the  stream.

28.  Forth  from  the  thicket        came  Rig  a-striding,
Rig  a-striding,        and  taught  him  runes,

his  own  name  gave  him, —        as  son  he  claimed  him,
and  bade  him  hold    .    the  ancestral  fields, —
the  ancestral  fields —        and  the  ancient  home.

29.  Then  on  rode  Earl        through  the  murky  wood,
through  the  rimy  fells        till  he  reached  a  hall.
His  shaft  he  shook,        his  shield  he  brandished,
his  steed  he  galloped,        his  sword  he  drew ;
war  he  wakened,         the  field  he  reddened,

the  doomed  he  slew,         and  won  him  lands —
till  alone  he  ruled        over  eighteen  halls.
Gold  he  scattered        and  gave  to  all  men
treasures  and  trinkets        and  slender-ribbed  horses ;
wealth  he  strewed        and  sundered  rings.

30.  Along  dewy  roads        his  messengers  drove

till  the  hall  they  reached        where  Ruler  dwelt.
A  daughter  owned  he,        dainty  fingered,
fair  and  skilful,         Erna  called.

30. — Erna.    No  satisfactory  meaning  has  been  suggested  for  this  name.


214  RfGSpULA.

31.  (32)      Btyu  hennar        ok  heim  6ku,
giptu  Jarli,         gekk  und  lini  ;
saman  bjuggu  )>au         ok  ser  un\>u,
settir  j6ku         ok  aldrs  nutu.


32.  (33)     Burr  vas  enn  elzti,         en  Barn  annat,
J6J?  ok  Aj?al,         Arfi,  Mogr,
Ntyr  ok  Nij>jungr         (namu  leika)
Sunr  ok  Sveinn         (sund  ok  tafl)  ;
Kundr  het  einn,         Konr  vas  enn  yngsti.

33-  (34)     Upp  6xu  )>ar        Jarli  bornir,
hesta  tomjm         hlifar  bendu,
skeyti  sk6fu,         skelfjm  aska.
En  Konr  ungr         kunni  runar,
Eefinrunar        ok  aldrrunar ;
meirr  kunni  hann         monnum  bjarga,
eggjaf  deyfa,         eegi  lefegja.
Klok  nam  fogla,         kyrra  elda,
sefa  of  svefja,         sorgir  l&gja ;
afl  ok  eljun         atta  manna.

34.  (34)     Hann  vi]>  Rig  Jarl         runar  deildi,

•      brogjmm  beitti         ok  betr  kunni ;
)>a  6)?la)jisk         ok  eiga  gat
Rigr  at  heita,         runar  kunna.

35.  "  Rei]?  Konr  ungr         kjorr  ok  skoga,

kolfi  fleyg)?i,         kyr]?i  fogla ;

J?&  kva]?  ]?at  kraka,         sat  a  kvisti  ein  :
'  hvat  skalt,  Konr  ungr !         kyrra  fogla  ?
•  Heldr  msottty  6r         hestum  ri]?a


[hjorum  of  breg)?a]         ok  her  fella.


35. — S.   H.  think  five  half  lines  are   missing.      Hjorum  of  bregj?a  supplied  by
B.  Gv.  S.  J.


THE    SONG    OF    RIG.  215

31.  They  wooed  her  and  brought  her        home  a-driving  ;
to  Earl  they  wed  her         in  veil  fine- woven  :
husband  and  wife        lived  happy  together,

their  children  waxed        and  life  enjoyed.

IV. — THE  BIRTH  OF  KING.

•  •

32.  Heir  was  the  eldest,         Bairn  the  second,

Babe,  Successor,         Inheritor,  Boy,
Descendent,  Offspring,         Son,  Youth,  Kinsman ;
Kon  the  kingly        was  youngest  born.


33.  Forthwith  grew  up        the  sons  of  Earl ;

games  they  learned,        and  sports  and  swimming,

taming  horses,         round  shields  bending,

war  shafts  smoothing.        ash  spears  shaking ;

but  King  the  youngest         alone  knew  runes,

runes  eternal        and  runes  of  life.

Yet  more  he  knew, —        how  to  shelter  men,

to  blunt  the  sword-edge        and  calm  the  sea :

he  learnt  bird  language,        to  quench  the  fire  flame,

heal  all  sorrows        and  soothe  the  heart  ;

strength  and  might        of  eight  he  owned.

34.  Then  he  strove  in  runes        with  Rig,  the  Earl,
crafty  wiles        he  used  a/id  won,

so  gained  his  heritage,        held  the  right  thus
Rig  to  "be  called        and  runes  to  know.

35.  Young  King  rode  once        through  thicket  and  wood,
shooting  arrows        and  slaying  birds,

till  spake  a  crow,        perched  lone  on  a  bough :
'Why  wilt  thou  thus        kill  birds,  young  King  ?
'Twould  fit  thee  rather        to  ride  on  horses,
to  draw  the  sword        and  to  slay  the  foe.

32. — Kon  is  the  masculine  of  kona,  a  woman.  It  is  a  word  only  found  in  poetry
applied  to  men  of  gentle  or  royal  birth.  The  poet  plays  upon  its  resemblance  to  konungr,
a  king,  and  suggests  a  false  derivation  from  kon  and  ungr,  the  young  in  order  to  show
that  Kon  rose  to  the  highest  rank  and  became  Rig,  the  king;  st.  34.  33,  line  2.—
Transposed  from  32.  For  the  power  of  runes,  see  Hdv.  st.  145-163  and  Introd.


216


36.     A  Danr  ok  Danpr        dyrar  hallir,
ce)>ra  6}>a\         an  6r  hafty ;
)?eir  kunnu  vel         kj61  at  rtya,
egg  at  kenna,         undir  rjufa.'     .


THE    SONG    OF    RIG.  417

36.    'Dan  and  Damp  have  dwellings  goodlier,

homesteads  fairer  than  ye  do  hold  ;

and  well  they  know  the  keel  to  ride,

the  sword  to  prove  and  wounds  to  strike.1     .     .     .


36. — Dan  and  Damp  appear  as  Danish  kings  in  the  historical  sagas.  The  end  of
this  poem  is  missing,  which  tells  o/Kon's  descendants,  and  probably  of  his  invasion  and
conquest  of  Denmark.


2  F


VOLUSPA    EN    SKAMMA,


.  (28)


Varu  ellifu
Baldr  es  hn6
j?ess  I6zk  Vali
es  sins  br6]?ur


scsir  tatyir,
vi)>  bana)>ufu ;
ver]?r  at  hefna,
slo  handbana.


2.  (29)    Vas  Baldrs  fa]?ir        Burs  arf J>egi


3.  (29)    Freyr  atti  Ger)>i,        vas  Gymis  dottir,
jotna  aettar         ok  AurboJ>u  :
J?a  vas  pjazi         J?eira  freendi,
skautgjarn  jotunn,         vas  SkaJ?i  dottir.

This  poem,  found  after  st.  29  in  F,  is  generally  regarded  as  an  independent  work  ;
B.Mh.  G.  S.  H.J.  i.— The  strophe  numbering  of  Hdl.  in  F  is  marked  in  brackets.
Line  4  is  followed  by  alt's  ]?at  sett  ]?in  Ottar  heimski ;  F.


THE    VALA'S    SHORTER    SOOTHSAYING

1.  Eleven  only         the  war  gods  numbered
when  Baldr  sank         on  the  bale  fire  down  ;
but  Vali  showed  him         strong  to  avenge  it
and  slew  ere  long        his  brother's  slayer.

2.  Father  of  Baldr        was  Odin,  Bur's  son.


3.      Frey  wedded  Gerd  ;         she  was  Gymir's  daughter,
and  Aurboda's         of  Jotun  race  ;
Thiazi  also         came  of  their  kindred,
the  shape-shifting  giant,         Skadi's  sire.

Vala  or  Witch,  see  Bdr,  st.  4.  i.— Vali,  see  Bdr.,  st.  11 ;  Vm.,  st.  51.  ^.—
Bur  means  son,  e.g.  of  Buri,  the  first-born  of  the  god's  race,  and  according  to  Snorri,  the
grandfather  of  Odin ;  see  Vsp.  st.  4  and  Introd.  to  Vm.  3. — Gerd,  see  Skm.  Aur-
boda,  or  Moist  ure-bringer  ?  Thiazi  took  the  form  o  an  eagle  ;  see  Ls.  st.  50,  Introd.,
and  Hrbl.  st.  19.


220  VOLUSPA     EN     SKAMMA.

4.  (30)    Mart  segjum  J>6r         ok  munum  fleira ;

vorumk  at  viti  sva,         vilt  enn  lengra  ?

5.  (31)    Hetyr  ok  Hrossftofr         Hrimnis  kindar.

6.  (31)    Eru  volur  allar         frd  Vtyolfi,

vitkar  allir         frd  Vilmetyi,

en  setyberendr         fra  Svarthofya,

jotnar  allir         fra  Ymi  komnir.

7.  (32)    Mart  segjum  )>6r        ok  munum  fleira  ;

vorumk  at  viti  sv&,         vilt  enn  lengra  ?

8.  (38)    6l  ulf  Loki         v\}>  Angrbojm,

en  Sleipni  gat  vty  Svajnlfera;
eitt  }>6tt\  skars  allra  feiknast,
]?at  vas  brojmr  frd  Byleists  komit.

9.  (39)    Loki  at  hjarta —        lindi  brendu

fann  halfsvi|?inn         hugstein  konu — ;
var]?  Loptr  kvijmgr        af  konu  illri :
J?a)>an's  &  foldu        flag)?  hvert  komit.

10.  (34)    Mart  segjum  ]>er        ok  munum  fleira ;
vorumk  at  viti  sva,        vilt  enn  lengra  ?

ii-  (35)    Var)?  einn  borinn         i  ardaga

rammaukinn  mjok         ragna  kindar;
niu  baru  )>ann,         naddgofgan  mann,
jotna  meyjar         vi|>  jar|?ar  )>r6rn.

12.  (35)    Hann  Gjolp  of  bar,         hann  Greip  of  bar,
bar  hann  Eistla         ok  Eyrgjafa,
hann  bar  Ulfrun         ok  Angeyja,
ImTpr  ok  Atla         ok  larnsaxa.

5. — For  the  transposed  lines,  see  Hdl.  28-         6. — Also  found  in  Wr.


THE     VALA'S     SHORTER    SOOTHSAYING.          221

4.  Much  have  I  told  thee,        yet  more  I  remember;

needs  must  one  know  it  thus, —         wilt  thou  yet  further  ?

5.  Witch  and  Horse-thief         are  sprung  from  Rime-bringer,

6.  All  the  Valas        sprung  from  Forest-wolf,
all  the  wizards         sprung  from  Wish-giver,
all  the  sorcerers         sprung  from  Swart-head  ;
and  all  the  Jotuns         come  from  Ymir.

7.  Much  have  I  told  thee,         yet  more  I  remember;

needs  must  one  know  it  thus, —         wilt  thou  yet  further  ?

8.  Woe-bringer  bore         the  wolf  to  Loki,
with  Swadilfari         begat  he  Sleiphir.

But  one  was  deemed         the  deadliest  of  all —
the  monster  brood         from  Loki  born.

9.  When  the  heart  of  a  woman—         home  of  love —
he  ate  half-burned         with  linden  wood,

and  bore  ere  long         a  loathly  being

whence  witches  all         in  the  world  are  sprung.

10.      Much  have  I  told  thee,        yet  more  I  remember ,

needs  must  one  know  it  thus, —         wilt  thou  yet  further  ?

n.      One  was  there  born         in  days  of  old,

girt  with  great  power,         of  the  kindred  of  gods.
Nine  giant  maidens         bore  that  being
armed  with  glory        on  the  rim  of  earth.

12.      Yelper  bore  him,         Griper  bore  him,

Foamer  bore  him,         Sand-strewer  bore  him,
She-wolf  bore  him,         Sorrow-whelmer,
Dusk  and  Fury         and  Ironsword.

6. — Ymir,  see  Vm.  st.  21.  8. — Woe-bringer,  or  Angrbo]?a,  a  giantess,  who  was
the  mother  of  Fenrir,  the  World  Serpent  and  Hel  (Sn.  E.).  Sleipnir,  see  Bdr.,  st.  2.
g. — This  strophe  is  perhaps  explained  by  I'sp.  st.  21,  when  the  gods  burn  Golden-draught,
the  witch  who  is  ever  born  anew.  11-14. — No  name  is  mentioned  in  the  text,  but  these
strophes  clearlv  refer  to  Heimdal  01  Rig  ;  see  Introd.,  Vsp.  st.  7,  and  Rb.


222  VOLUSPA     EN     SKAMMA.

13.  (36)    Sa  vas  aukinn        jarj>ar  megni,

svalkoldum  sse         ok  sonardreyra.

14.  (41)    Var)?  einn  borinn         ollum  meiri,

sa  vas  aukinn         jarj>ar  megni ;
|>ann  kve)>a  stilli         storu^gastan,
sif  sifja)>an,         sjotum  gorvollum.

15-  (37)    Mart  segjum  )?6r         ok  munum  fleira;
vorumk  at  viti  sva,         vilt  enn  lengra  ?

16.  (40)    Haf  gengr  hrijmm         vi)>  himin  sjalfan,

Ityr  lond  yfir,         en  lopt  bilar  ;

J?a)>an  koma  snjovar         ok  snarir  vindar,

}?a's  i  ra]?i,         at  regin  of  |?rj6ti.

17.  (44)    pa  komr  annarr        enn  matkari,

|?6  ]?orik  eigi         ]?ann  at  nefna ;
fai'r  sea  nu         fram  of  lengra,
an  6)>inn  mun         ulfi  moSta.

14. — After  16  in  F  ;  placed  after  13  by  Gv.  S.  G.,  who  connect  it  with  11.


THE     VALA'S    SHORTER    SOOTHSAYING.          223

13.  He  was  girt  with  all         the  power  of  Earth,

of  the  ice-cold  sea,        and  of  sacred  swine-blood.

14.  He  was  the  One  born         greater  than  any ;
girt  with  all         the  power  of  Earth.

Men  call  him  ever         the  richest  ruler,
Rig,  the  kinsman        of  every  race.

15.  Much  have  I  told  thee,         yet  more  I  remember,

needs  must  one  know  it  thus, —         wilt  thou  yet  further  ?

16.  The  sea  shall  rise         in  storms  to  heaven

it  shall  sweep  o'er  the  land         and  the  skies  shall  yield

in  showers  of  snow         and  biting  blasts

at  the  Doom  of  the  Powers,        the  gods  of  war.

17.  There  shall  come  hereafter        another  mightier
whose  name  I  dare  not         now  make  known :
few  there  are        who  may  see  beyond

when  Odin  fares        to  fight  with  the  Wolf.


17. — Another  mightier  probably  anticipates  the  coming  of  Christianity.


HYNDLULJdP.

Freyja   kva)> :

1.  'Vaki,  mser  meyja  !         vaki,  min  vina  !

Hyndla  systir,         es  i  belli  byr  !
nu's  rokkr  rokkra :         rtya  vit  skulum
til  Valhallar,         til  ves  heilags.

2.  Btyjum  Herfo|>r         i  hugum  sitja ;
hann  geldr  ok  gefr         goll  verjmngu  :
gaf  Herm6}n         hjalm  ok  brynju,

en  Sigmundi         sver)>  at  |>iggja.


Hyndluljo]?. — In  F.  and  W.      Freyja  kva)?,  etc.,  is  supplied.     The  speeches  are  not
assigned  in  the  MSS.


THE    LAY    OF    HYNDLA.

Freyja.

1.  Wake,  maid  of  maidens,         friend,  awaken,
sister  Hyndla,         in  a  rock-hole  biding !

Comes  the  gloom  of  gloaming,         we  twain  together
must  ride  to  Valholl,         the  holy  dwelling.

2.  The  War-father  bid  we         be  mild  in  his  mood,
who  grants  and  gives         to  his  followers  gold  ;
he  gave  to  Hermod         a  helm  and  byrnie

and  to  Sigmund  gave         a  sword  to  take.

2. — Hrrmod  belongs  to  some  lost  tradition.  He  appears  now  as  a  god  and  now  as  a
hero.  In  the  Prose  Edda  he  is  the  son  of  Odin  (see  Introd.  Bdr.)  ;  in  the  old  English
poem  of  Beowolf  he  is  a  Danish  King,  mighty  and  beneficent  in  his  youth,  but  a  blood-

a  Q


226  HYNDLULJOP.

3.  Gefr  sigr  sonum,         en  sumum  aura,
mrclsku  morgum         ok  mannvit  firum  ;
byri  gefr  brognum         en  brag  skoldum,
gefr  mannsemi         morgum  rekki.

4.  por  mun  biota,         ]>ess  munk  bi)>ja,
at  £  vi)>  y\k         einart  lati  ;

}>6's  hanum  otitt         vij>  jotuns  bru)>ir.

5.  Nu  tak  ulf  jnnn         einn  af  stalli,
lat  hann  rinna         mej>  runa  minum.

Hyndla    kvaj?  :

seinn  es  goltr  )>inn         go]?veg  tro)?a,
vilkak  mar  minn         msetan  hloe)>a.'

6.  '  Fla  est,  Freyja  !         es  freistar  min,

visar  augum         a  oss  )>anig,
es  hefr  ver  j>inn         i  valsinni,
Ottar  unga,         Innsteins  bur.'

Freyja  kvaj? :

7.  '  Dulin  est,  Hyndla  !         draums  setlak  ]>ir,

es  kve)>r  ver  minn         i  valsinni,
)>ars  goltr  gloar         gollinbursti,
Hildisvini,         as  mer  hagir  gorjm
dvergar  tveir         Damn  ok  Nabbi.

8.  Sennum  vit  6r  sodium  :         sitja  skulum
auk  of  jofra         sfettir  dcema  ;

gumna  ]?eira         es  fra  goj^um  kvamu


4. — Mun,  Sv.  S.J.;  mun  hon,  F.  5,  lines  i  and  2. — These  lines  are  assigned
to  Freyja  by  B.  Gv.  H.  HI. ;  to  Hyndla,  G.  Sitfirock.  Lines  3  and  4. — Spoken  by
Hyndla,  B.  Gv.  Dt.  HI. ;  by  Freyja,  G.  S.  /.,  who  have  minn  for  Jrinn.


THE     LAY     OF     HYNDLA.  227

3.  To  some  grants  he  wealth,         to  his  children  war-fame,
word-skill  to  many         and  wisdom  to  men  :

fair  winds  to  sea-farers,         song-craft  to  skalds,
and  might  of  manhood         to  many  a  warrior.

4.  To  Thor  will  I  offer         and  this  will  I  ask  him,
to  bear  him  truly        ever  toward  thee,

e'en  though  foe        of  the  wives  of  Jotuns.

5.  Now  of  thy  wolves         take  one  from  the  stall
and  swift  let  him  run        by  the  side  of  my  boar.

Hyndla.

Nay !  loth  is  thy  swine,         to  tread  the  gods'  way,
nor  will  I  burden         my  noble  beast.

6.  False  art  thou,  Freyja  !         thou  fain  wouldst  tempt  me ;
thine  eyes  betray  thee  ;         thou  turnest  ever

to  where  on  the  Dead's  way         thy  lover  is  with  thee, —
Ottar  the  youthful,         Instein's  son.

Freyja.

7.  Dull  art  thou,  Hyndla !         I  trow  thou  art  dreaming,
when  thou  deemst  my  lover         is  here  on  the  Dead's  road,
where  Golden-bristle,         the  boar,  is  glowing,

the  swine  of  battle         which  once  they  made  me,
Dain  and  Nabbi,         the  crafty  dwarfs.

8.  Let  us  now  strive         in  our  saddles  sitting,

and  hold  converse  o'er         the  long  long  lines  of  kings,
heroes  all        who  are  come  from  the  gods.


thirsty  tyrant  when  old,  who  is  deserted  by  his  subjects.  Sigmund,  father  of  Sigurd  (st.
25).  At  a  wedding  feast  Odin  entered  and  thrust  his  sword  into  a  tree  from  which  only
Sigmund,  the  gods'  favourite,  could  draw  it.  3. — Song-craft  to  skalds,  see  Hdv.,  st.
105,  139.  6. — The  Dead's  way  :  A  road  by  which  the  dead  warriors  went  to  Valhull.
Ottar  :  The  story  of  Freyja's  human  lover  Ottar  or  Odd  is  told  by  Snorri.  7. — The
boar  :  Frey  owned  the  boar  called  Golden-bristle,  which  was  forged  by  the  dwarfs  ;  see
Introd.  Grm.  Freyja,  according  to  Snorri,  rode  on  a  cat.  Dam,  the  Dead  one,  is
mentioned  in  Vsp.


228  HYNDLULJOP.

9.     (8)     peir  hafa  veftat         Vala  malmi,
Ottarr  ungi         ok  Angantyr  :
skylt's  at  veita,         svat  skati  enn  ungi
fojmrleify  hafi         ept  fraendr  sina.

10.  Horg  me"r  gor)>i         of  hlaVinn  steinum —
nu  es  grj6t  )>at         at  gleri  or)?it — ,

(10)     rauj?  i  nyju         nauta  blo)>i  ;
£  tru)n  Ottarr         a  asynjur.

11.  Nu  lat  forna         ni]?ja  tal|?a

ok  upp  bornar         sottir  manna  :
hvat's  Skjoldunga,         hvat's  Skilfinga,
hvat's  O\>linga,         hvat's  Ynglinga,
hvat's  hotyborit,         hvat's  hersborit,
mest  manna  val         und  mtygarjn  ?  '

Hyndla   kva)?  :


12.  'pii  est,  Ottarr!         borinn  Innsteini,

en  Innsteinn  vas         Alfi  gamla,
Alfr  vas  Ulfi,         Ulfr  Sahara,
en  Ssefari         Svan  enum  rau)?a.

13.  Mojmr  attir         menjum  gofga,
hykk  at  heti         Hledis  gy]?ja  ;

Fro)>i  vas  fa)?ir,         en  t  Friaut  mojnr  :
oil  ]?6tti  fctt  su         me}>  yfirmonnum.

14.  (17)     Vas  Hildigunn         hennar  moj^ir,

Svavu  barn         ok  Scckonungs  ;
allt's  |?at  e6jtt  )?in,         Ottarr  heimski !
var)>ar  at  viti  sva,         vilt  enn  lengra  ?


ii. — Hvat's  Ojrtinga,  B.  Gv.  H.  C.  S.  C.,  missing  in  F  ;  ynglinga/or  ylfinga,  F  ;
see  st.  20.  13. — M6]?ur  attir,  Sv.  S.  G.  ;  atti  fajjir  J?inn,  F,  HI.  /.  14,  etc. —
The  rearrangement  of  strophes  has  been  made  for  the  sake  of  clearness  in  the  translation
to  show  the  probable  connection  of  names  in  Ottar's  line.  The  numbers  in  brackets,  F.


THE     LAY    OF     HYNDLA.  229

g.     Ottar  the  youthful,  and  Angantyr—

on  this  have  wagered  their  wealth  of  gold  ;

needs  must  I  help  the  youthful  hero

to  hold  the  heritage  after  his  fathers.

10.  He  built  me  an  altar         with  stone  o'erlaid ;
like  glass  all  riven         is  that  rock  with  fire,

for  he  reddened  it  oft         with  the  fresh  blood  of  oxen  ;
aye  to  the  goddesses         Ottar  was  true.

11.  Come  now  let  ancient         kinsman  be  numbered,
and  let  be  told         the  long  lines  of  men  :

who  is  of  Skjoldungs,         who  of  Skilfings,
who  is  of  Athlings,         who  of  Ynglings,
who  is  freeborn,        who  is  gentleborn,
choicest  of  all        the  men  under  Midgarth  ?

Hyndla.
(6ttar's  race.)

12.  Thou  art  Ottar,         born  of  Instein  ;
Instein  came         from  Alf  the  Old,

Alf  was  from  Wolf,         Wolf  from  Seafarer,
and  Seafarer  sprang         from  Swan  the  Red.

13.  Thou  hadst  a  mother         shining  in  jewels,
Hledis,  I  ween,         she  was  named,  the  priestess;
her  father  was  Frodi,        and  Friaut  her  mother.
All  of  this  race        among  lords  are  reckoned.

14.  Hildigunn  was        the  mother  of  Friaut;
child  was  she         of  Svafa  and  Sea-king.
All  this  race  is  thine        Ottar  the  Simple  !

Needs  must  one  know  it  thus,         wilt  thou  yet  further  ?

9. — Gold  is  here  called  foreign  metal.     Icelandic  Valsk  ;   English  Welsh  originally
meant  foreign.         n. — Skjoldings,  etc.,  see  Intrud.  fur  these  traditional  race  names.


230  HYNDLULJOP.

15.  (19)     Ketill  vas  vinr  J>eirar,         Klypps  artyegi,

vas  mo|>urfa]7ir         m6jmr  )>innar  ;
J?ar  vas  Fr6J>i         fyrr  an  Kari,
enn  eldri  vas         Alfr  of  getinn.

16.  Nanna  vas  nsbst  ]?ar         Nokkva  dottir,
vas  mogr  hennar  magr  }nns  fojmr  ;
fyrnd  es  su  mj»g)>,         fram  telk  lengra  :
allt's  )?at  sett  )?in,  Ottarr  heimski !

17.  Isolfr  ok  Asolfr         6lmo)?s  synir
ok  Skurhildar         Skekkils  dottur,
skalt  til  telja         skatna  margra :
allt's  )>at  eett  Jrin,        6ttarr  heimski !


18.  (14)     Ali  vas  a)?r         oflgastr  manna,

Halfdanr  fyrri         hsestr  Skjoldunga  ;
frseg  voru  folkvig         ]>aus  framir  gorj^u,
hvarfla  ]>6ttu  bans  verk         me)?  himins  skautum.

19.  (15)     Efldisk  vi}>  Eymund,         oeztan  manna,

en  Sigtrygg  slo         mej?  svolum  eggjum  ;
atti  Almveigu,         cezta  kvenna,
61u  ok  dttu         atjan  sunu.

20.  (16)     pa]?an  Skjoldungar,         ]?a)?an  Skilfingar,

]?a]?an  0}>lingar,  }>aj>an  Ynglingar,

|>a)?an  hol)?borit,  )?aj?an  hersborit,

mest  manna  val  und  mi)>gar)M  ;

allt's  j^at  sett  Yin,  Ottarr  heimski !

21.  (18)     Dagr  atti  poru         drengja  m6)mr,

olusk  i  £ett  )?ar         ceztir  kappar  :
Fra|?marr  ok  Gyr]?r        ok  Frekar  bd)?ir,
Amr  ok  Josurmarr,   ^     Alfr  enn  gamli :
var]?ar  at  viti  sva,         vilt  enn  lengra  ?

15<_peirar)  5.  G.;   J>eirra,  F.         16,  line  3. — Followed  by  a  repetition  of  24,  line
3,  F.


THE     LAY    OF    HYNDLA.  231

15.  Klyp's  son  Ketil         was  spouse  of  Hildigun  ;
he  was  the  father        of  thy  mother's  mother.
Older  than  Karl         yet  was  Prodi,

but  Alf  was  of  all         the  eldest  born.

16.  Next  came  Nanna,         the  daughter  of  Nokkvir;
her  son  was  thy  father's         brother  by  wedlock.
Old  is  that  kindship,         still  on  will  I  tell  thee,
for  all  this  race  is  thine,         Ottar  the  Simple.

17.  Isolf  and  Osolf         were  sons  of  Olmod,

and  born  of  Skurhild,         daughter  of  Skekkil.
Thou  shalt  reckon  back         to  many  a  chieftain.
All  this  race  is  thine        Ottar  the  Simple  !

(Halfdan's  Race.)

18.  Far  back  was  Ali,         mightiest  of  men  :
Halfdan  before  him         highest  of  Skjoldungs,
whirled  were  his  deeds         round  the  skirts  of  heaven,
great  wars  of  nations         the  chieftains  waged.

19.  He  joined  him  to  Eymund,         highest  of  heroes ;
Sigtrygg  slew         with  the  icy  sword-edge,
wedded  Almveig,         loftiest  of  ladies ;

so  he  begat  him         sons  eighteen.

20.  Thence  are  the  Skjoldungs,         thence  the  Skilfings,
thence  are  the  Athlings,         thence  the  Ynglings,
thence  are  freeborn,         thence  are  gentleborn,

all  the  choicest         of  men  under  Midgarth.
All  this  race  is  thine,         Ottar  the  Simple ;

21.  Dag's  wife  was  Thora,         mother  of  warriors ;
reared  in  that  race         were  the  mightiest  heroes,
Fradmar  and  Gyrd,         and  both  the  Wolf-cubs,
Josurmar,  Am,         and  Alf  the  Old.

Needs  must  one  know  it  thus,         wilt  thou  yet  further  ?

18. — Halfdan,  a  mythical  King  of  Denmark.  19.— Eymund,  King  of  Novgorod
and  father  of  Almveig  (Skaldskmj.  21.— Dag,  son  of  Halfdan,  father  of  Arngrim
(st.  22).


232  HYNDLULJOP.


22.  (23)     \)eir  i  Boltn  austr  bornir  varu

Arngrims  synir  ok  Eyfuru  ;

brokun  berserkja,  bols  margskonar,

of  lond  ok  of  log  sem  logi  foeri :

/

23.  (25)     Hervar]>r,  Hjorvarfyr,         Hrani,  Angantyr,

Bui  ok  Brami,         Barri  ok  Reifnir,
Tindr  ok  Tyrfingr,         tveir  Haddingjar  :
allt's  )>at  sett  jnn,         Ottarr  heimski  !

24.  (22)     Gunnarr  balkr,         Grimr  harj^skafi,

jarnskjoldr  porir,         Ulfr  ginandi  ;
kunnak  baj>a         Brodd  ok  Horvi,
varu  )>eir  i  hirj>         Hrolfs  ens  gamla.


25.  (27)     peir  varu  gumnar        gojmm  signa^ir,

allir  bornir         Jormunreki,
(24)     Sigur)?ar  magi,          —  hlyj?  sogu  minni  !—
folkum  grims         es  Faini  va.

26.  (25)     Sa  vas  visir         fra  Volsungi

ok  Hjordis         fra  Hraujmngi,

en  Eylimi         fra  O}?lingum  :

allt's  J>at  ectt  Yin,         Ottarr  heimski  !

27.  (26)     Gunnarr  ok  Hogni         Gjuka  arfar

ok  et  sama  Guj?run,         systir  ]>eira :
eigi  vas  Got]>ormr         Gjuka  settar,
}>6  vas  bro)>ir         beggja  )?eira  :
allt's  ]?at  sett  Jnn,         Ottarr  heimski !

22,  line  i. — B.  G.  S. /.'s  emendation  to  agree  with  Orvar  Odd's  S.,  ani  6mi  varu
bornir,  F.  Line  ^.—Followed  by  allt's,  etc.,  F,  om.  G  S.J.  23,  line  i. — Supplied
from  Orvar  Odds  S.,  C.  14,  and  Hervarar  S.,  B.  Gv.  H.  C.  G.  S.J.  24. — B.  suggests
this  transposition,  because  Grim  and  Thorir  are  mentioned  at  Hrolfs  Court  in  Forn.  S.,
III.,  57,  G.  H.  S.  /.  25,  lines  i  and  2.— Transposed  by  B.  G.  H.  S.  J.


THE     LAY     OF     HYNDLA.  233

(The    Berserks.)

22.  Born  in  Bolm         in  the  eastern  land
were  Arngrim's  sons         and  Eyfora's;
woes  unnumbered         the  berserks  worked,
like  the  faring  of  fire        o'er  land  and  sea.

23.  Hervard,  Hjorvard,         Hrani,  Angantyr,
Bui  and  Brami,         Barri  and  Reifnir,
Tind  and  Tyrfing,         and  Haddungs  twain.
All  this  race  is  thine,         Ottar  the  Simple  !

24.  Gunnar  Battle-wall,         Grim  Strongminded,
Thorir  Iron-shield,         Wolf  the  Gaper ;
Brod  and  Horvi,  once  I  knew  them,
both  in  the  train  of  Hrolf  the  Old.

(The  Volsung  race.)

25.  Given  to  the  gods         were  the  warrior  sons,
all  the  children         of  Jormunrek,

the  kinsman  of  Sigurd —         list  to  my  saga  !—
Fear  of  Nations,         who  Fafnir  slew.

26.  That  ruler  was  born         of  the  race  of  Volsungs,
and  Hjordis  came,         his  mother,  of  Hraudungs,
and  Eylimi,         her  sire,  of  Athlings.

All  this  race  is  thine,         Ottar  the  Simple !

27.  Gunnar  and  Hogni         were  sons  of  Gjuki ;
Gudrun  their  sister,         was  eke  his  offspring  ;

but  not  of  their  kin         was  Guthorm  Battle-snake,
though  of  the  twain         he  was  held  the  brother.
All  this  race  is  thine,         Ottar  the  Simple  !

22-23. — The  story  of  Angantyr  and  the  famous  berserks  is  told  in  Hervarar  S.  and
Orvar  Odds  S.  .24. — Hrolf,  probably  Half,  a  famous  King  of  Gauta-land,  and  hero
of  Hdlfs  S.  25. — Jbrmunrek,  the  heruicised  Ermanric,  King  of  the  Goths  in  the  fourth
century.  Sigurd,  the  hero  of  the  Vulsunga  S.,  and  later  Niebelungen  lied.  27. — Gjuki,
of  Niflung  race,  a  King  of  the  Burgundians.  Guthorm,  his  stef>son,  slew  Sigurd  at
the  desire  of  Hrynliild.

2H


234  HYNDLULJOP.

28.  (31)     Haki  vas  Hvejmu         hoti  baztr  sona,
en  Hvejmu  Vas         HjorvarJ?r  faj?ir


29.  (27)     Haraldr  hilditonn  borinn  Hrcereki

slongvanbauga,  sunr  vas  hann  AuJ>ar,

AuJ?r  djupujjga  Ivars  d6ttir,

en  RaJ?barJ>r  vas  Randv^s  fa)?ir  :

allt's  )?at  sett  |>in,  Ottarr  heimski ! '


Freyja  kvaf> :

30.  'Berminnisol         minum  gelti,

svat  611  muni         or)?  at  tina,
)?essa  roe)>u,         a  J>ri|>ja  morni,
]?as  )?eir  Angantyr        attir  rekja.'

Hyndla   kva|>  :

31.  '  Snu]?u  braut  he]?an  !         sofa  lystir  mik,

far  fdtt  af  me'r         fri|?ra  kosta  :
hleypr,  e|?lvina  !         uti  a  nattum,
sem  me]>  hofrum         Hei]?run  fari.

32.  Rannat  at  O)>i  ey  |>reyjandi :
skutusk  }>&r  fleiri  und  fyrirskyrtu  ;
hleypr,  e]?lvina  !  uti  a  nattum,
sem  me)>  hofrum  Hei)?run  fari.'

Freyja  kva]>  :

33.  'Ekslseeldi         of  iviftu,

svat  eigi  komsk         obrend  he)>an.

28.— Transposed  by  E.G.  S.J.


THE    LAY    OF    HYNDLA.  235

28.      Best  was  Haki        of  Hvedna's  children  ;
the  father  of  Hvedna        was  Hjorvard.


(Race  of  Harald  War-tooth.)

29.      Born  from  Aud         was  Harald  War-tooth,
son  of  Hrderik,         Slinger  of  Rings.
Aud  Deep-thoughted        was  Ivar's  daughter,
and  Randver  the  son         of  Radbard  born.
All  this  race  is  thine,        Ottar  the  Simple  !


Freyja.

30.  To  my  boar  now  bear         the  ale  of  memory,
so  shall  he  tell  forth         all  this  tale

when  the  third  morn  comes,         and  with  Angantyr
he  shall  trace  back  the  mighty         men  of  their  race.

Hyndla.

31.  Hie  away  hence!         for  I  fain  would  sleep,
and  few  fair  words         shalt  thou  win  from  me.
Thou  gaddest  forth,         good  friend,  at  nights
like  a  she-goat  straying         bold  among  bucks.

32.  Yearning  ever         thou  h.ist  followed  Odd;
many  a  sweetheart         has  slept  in  thine  arms.
Thou  gaddest  forth,         good  friend,  at  nights
like  a  she-goat  straying         bold  amonx  bucks.

Freyja.

33.  I  will  strike  tire         about  thee,  giantess,
so  that  unburnt         thou  hie  not  hence.


29. — Harald  War-tooth,  a  King  of  Denmark.  Hruirik,  a  King  of  Sweden,
husband  of  Aud.  The  saga  of  these  mythical  personages  is  told  in  Sogubrut  and  by  Saxo
Graminaticus.  31. — A  she-goat :  The  name  of  the  mythical  goat  Heidnui  (Grm.,  st.
25)  is  here  used  in  a  general  sense.


236  HYNDLULJOp.

Hyndla  kva|> :

'Hleypr,  e]>lvina!         uti  £  nattum,
sem  me]?  hofrum         Hei]?run  fari.'

34.  '  Hyr  s6k  brinna         en  hau)?r  loga,

verj>a  flestir         fjorlausn  j?ola  :
her  Ottari         bjor  at  hendi
eitrblandinn  mjok,         illu  heilli !
Hleypr,  e)?lvina  !         uti  a  nattum
sem  me]?  hofrum         Hei]?run  fari.'

Freyja  kvaj>  :

35.  'Or]?heill  )?in  skal         ongu  ra)?a,

|?6t,  bru}>r  jotuns  !  bolvi  heitir  ;
hann  skal  drekka  dyrar  veigar,
bi]?k  6ttari  oil  go]?  duga.'


THE    LAY    OF    HYNDLA.  237

Hyndla.

Thou  gaddest  forth,        good  friend,  at  nights
like  a  she-goat  straying         bold  among  bucks.

34.  Lo  !  all  around  us         the  earth  is  flaming  !
Many  must  render        their  lives  as  ransom.
Bear  now  the  ale-cup         to  Ottar's  hand,
all  mingled  with  poison         and  omens  of  ill.
Thou  gaddest  forth,        good  friend,  at  nights
like  a  she-goat  straying         bold  among  bucks.

Freyja.

35.  The  word  of  thine  omen         shall  work  no  evil,
albeit  thou  cursest,         vile  wife  of  Jotuns ;
sweet  shall  the  draught  be        that  Ottar  drinks,
for  I  pray  all  the  Powers        to  shield  him  well.


BALDRS    DRAUMAR.

1.  Senn  varu  sesir         allir  a  j>ingi
ok  asynjur        allar  a  mali,

ok  of  }>at  re}>u         rikir  tivar,

hvi  vseri  Baldri         ballir  draumar.

2.  Upp  reis  6]>inn,        aldinn  gautr,
auk  a  Sleipni  so|?ul  of  lag)>i ;
reij?  ni)?r  J>a)?an         Niflheljar  til,
moetti  hvelpi  es  or  helju  kvam.

3.  (2)     Sa  vas  blo)?ugr         of  brjost  framan

ok  galdrs  fo)?ur         go  of  lengi ;
(3)     fram  rei)>  O)?inn         foldvegr  dun)?i,
hann  kvam  at  havu         Heljar  ranni.


Baldrs  Draumar. — In  A.         3. — Strophe  numbering  in  A  marked  in  brackets.


BALDR'S    DREAMS.

1.  Straight  were  gathered        all  gods  at  the  doomstead,
goddesses  all  were        in  speech  together  ;

and  the  mighty  Powers         over  this  took  counsel, —
why  to  Baldr        came  dreams  forboding.

2.  Up  rose  Odin         the  ancient  creator ;

he  laid  the  saddle         on  gliding  Sleipnir,
and  downward  rode         into  Misty  Hel.
Met  him  a  hound         from  a  cavern  coming ;

3.  all  its  breast        was  blood-besprinkled,
long  it  bayed         at  the  Father  of  Spells.
Onward  he  rode,         the  Earth's  way  rumbled,
to  the  lofty  hall         of  Hel  came  Odin.

2.— Sleipnir:  Odin's  eight-footed  steed;  see  Vsp.  en  skamma,  st.  8.  Misty. Hel:
The  dwelling  place  of  the  goddess  Hd,  daughter  of  Loki  and  Angrbofya ;  see  Vsp.  en
skamma,  st.  8,  Ls.  Introd.  A  hound :  Garm  ;  see  Vsp.  44.  3. — The  father  of  spells
or  magic,  as  in  Hdv.  Odin  sang  some  such  song  as  that  mentioned  in  Hdv.,  st.  156.


240  BALDRS     DRAUMAR.

4.  p£  rety  6)>inn         fyr  austan  dyrr,
]?ars  hann  vissi         volvii  letyi,

(4)  nam  vittugri         valgaldr  kvej>a,
unz  nau)>ug  reis         nas  orj>  of  kva)? :

5.  (4)    '  Hvat's  manna  )>at         m£r  6kunnra

es  hofumk  aukit         erfitt  sinni  ?

(5)  vask  snivin  snj6vi         ok  slegin  regni
ok  drifin  doggu,         dau}»  vask  lengi.'

OJrinn  kvaj>  :

6.  '  Vegtamr  heitik,         sunr  emk  Valtams  ;

seg  mer  6r  helju,         ek  mun  6r  heimi  :
hveim  eru  bekkir         baugum  sanir.
flet  fagrliga         floij?  gulli  ? '

Volva  kvsi\>  :

7.  (6)    *  H£r  stendr  Baldri        of  brugginn  mjoj>r,

skirar  veigar,         liggr  skjoldr  yfir ;

en  dsmegir         i  ofvaeni.

Nau]>ug  sag|>ak,         nii  munk  )>egja.'

O]?inn   kva)>  :

8.  (6)    'pegjat,  volva!        )>ik  vilk  fregna,

unz  alkunna,         vilk  enn  vita  :
hverr  mun  Baldri         at  bana  verj>a
ok  6)nns  sun         aldri  rsena  ?  '

Volva    kvaj>  :

9.  (7)    '  H6|>r  berr  havan         hr6)?rba)?m  ]?inig,

hann  mun  Baldri         at  bana  verj?a
ok  O)>ins  sun         aldri  rsena.
Nau)?ug  sag|?ak,         nu  munk  )»egja.'

6.— FloiJ?,  B.  G.  S.;  ftfy,  A.


fcALDR'S     DREAMS.  241

4.  Round  he  rode         to  a  door  on  the  eastward
where  he  knew         was  a  witch's  grave.

He  sang  there  spells  of  the  dead  to  the  Vala  ;
needs  she  must  rise—  a  corpse — and  answer :

5.  'What  man  is  this         to  me  unknown,

who  torment  adds        to  my  toilsome  way  ?

I  was  snowed  on  with  snow,        and  dashed  with  rain,

I  was  drenched  with  dew,         I  have  long  been  dead.'

Odin.

6.  '  They  call  me  Way  wont         I  am  son  of  Warwont ;

tell  me  tidings  of  Hel,  I  will  tell  of  the  world.
For  whom  are  the  benches  strewn  with  rings,
for  whom  is  the  fair  dais  flooded  with  gold  ? '

Vala.

7.  '  Here  stands  for  Baldr         brewed  the  mead,

the  shining  cup,  the  shield  lies  over,
but  the  gods'  race  all  are  in  despair.
Needs  have  I  spoken,  now  will  I  cease.'

Odin.

8.  'Cease  not,  Vala  !         still  will  I  ask  thee,

I  must  see  yet  onward         till  all  I  know : —
who  will  be         the  slayer  of  Baldr,
who  Odin's  son         will  of  life  bereave? '

Vala.

9.  '  Hod  shall  bear  thither         the  high-grown  Fame-bough,

he  will  be        the  slayer  of  Baldr,
yea,  Odin's  son         will  of  life  bereave.
Needs  have  I  spoken,        now  will  I  cease.'

6. — Way  wont :  Odin  as  wanderer;  Cf.  Gangleri,  Grm.,  st.  49.        9.— The  Fame-
bough  or  mistletoe  which,  according  to  Snorri,  Loki  puts  "into  the  hands  of  blind  Hud  ;

see  Vsp.  32,  Ls.  st.  28,  Fj.  st.  26.

2  I


242  BALDRS     DRAUMAR.

Oj?inn    kva]>  :

10.  (7)     'pegjat,  volva  !         }>ik  vilk  fregna,

unz  alkunna,         vilk  enn  vita:

hverr  mun  heiptar  [HeJ>i]         hefnt  of  vinna

ej>a  Baldrs  bana         a  bal  vega  ? '

Volva   kvaj?  :

11.  (8)     '  Rindr  berr  Vala         i  vestrsolum,

sa  mun  Ojnns  sunr         einnsettr  vega ;
bond  of  )nrgerat         ne  hofu)>  kembir,
a)?r  a  bdl  of  berr         Baldrs  andskota.
Naujmg  sag}>ak,         nu  munk  )>egja.'

O)?inn    kva|?  :

12.  (8)     '  peg] at,  volva  !         ]>ik  vilk  fregna,

unz  alkunna,         vilk  enn  vita :
(9)      hverjar'u  meyjar         es  at  muni  grata
ok  a  himin  verpa         halsa  skautum  ?  '

Volva   kvaj?  :

13.  (10)    'Estat  Vegtamr,         sem  ek  hugj?a,

heldr  est  OJ>inn,         aldinn  gautr ! '

OJ?inn    kvaj?  :

'Estat  volva         n6  vis  kona,
heldr  est  ]?riggja        Jmrsa  moj?ir  ! '

Volva   kva)>  :

14.  (ii)    '  Heim  rty,  6)?inn  !         ok  ves  hr6jmgr :

sva  komir  manna         meirr  aptr  a  vit,
es  lauss  Loki         lij?r  or  bondum
ok  i  ragna  rok         rjufendr  koma.'

14. — Ok  i  ragna  rok,  B.  G.  S.,  A  ;  ok  ragna  rok,  Dt.  and  HI.


BALDR'S    DREAMS.  243

Odin.

10.  'Cease  not,  Vala,         still  will  I  ask  thee,

I  must  see  yet  onward         till  all  I  know  : —
who  shall  work  revejige         for  the  woe  on  Hod,
and  lay  on  the  bale  fire         Baldr's  foe  ? '

Vala.

11.  ' Rind  shall  bear  Vali         in  the  western  halls;

he,  Odin's  son,         shall  fi^ht  one  night  old.
Nor  hand  will  he  wash,         nor  head  will  he  comb
till  he  lay  on  the  bale  fire         Baldr's  foe.
Needs  have  I  spoken,         now  will  I  cease.'

Odin.

12.  'Cease  not,  Vala,         still  will  I  ask  thee,

I  must  see  yet  onward         till  all  I  know : —

who  are  the  maidens         who  weep  at  will,

and  up  toward  heaven         their  neck  veils  fling  ?  '

Vala.

13.  'Not  Waywont  art  thou        as  I  had  weened,

but  thou  art  Odin,        the  ancient  creator ! '

Odin.

'  No  Vala  art  thou        nor  woman  wise,
but  of  three  giants        thou  art  mother  ! '

Vala.

14.  '  Ride  homeward,  Odin,         glorying  in  thy  gain  !

for  thus  shall  no  being         ever  meet  me  more,

ere  Loki  roves        from  his  fetters  free,

and  the  Destroyers  come        at  the  Powers'  great  Doom.'

it.— Rind,  the  giant  wife  of  Odin;  see  Gi,'.,  st.  6.  Vali,  see  Vm.  57;  Vsp.  en
skamma,  st.  1.  12.— Their  neck  veils  :  Icelandic,  balsa  skautum,  is  of  uncertain
meaning.  Skaut  is  used  for  sheet,  corner,  quarter  of  the  heavens,  sail,  part  of  a
woman's  dress.  Dt.  inclines  to  the  above ;  G.,  sail  corners.  //  the  expression  is
nautical,  Wimmcr  suggests  that  the  maidens  are  wave  daughters  of  &gir  ;  see  Hym.,st.  2.


LOKASENNA.

FRA     1EGI     OK     GOPUM.

ir,  er  ojmi  nafni  h6t  Gymir,  hann  hafyi  buit  dsum  61,  )>6  er
hann  hafj?i  fengit  ketil  inn  mikla,  sem  nu  er  sagt.  Til  |>eirar  veizlu
kom  6]>inn  ok  Frigg  kona  bans.  porr  kom  eigi,  Jmiat  hann  var  i
austrvegi.  Sif  var  J?ar,  kona  J)6rs  ;  Bragi  ok  I)?unn  kona  bans.  Tyr
var  j?ar,  hann  var  einhendr:  Fenrisulfr  sleit  bond  af  hanum,  \&  er
hann  var  bundinn.  par  var  Njor]?r  ok  kona  bans  SkaJ^i,  Freyr  ok
Freyja,  Vtyarr  sonr  6j?ins.  Loki  var  )>ar,  ok  |?j6nustumenn  Freys
Byggvir  ok  Beyla.  Mart  var  )?ar  asa  ok  alfa.  -^Egir  atti  tw^  ]>jonustu-


Lokasenna,  —  In  "Si,  No,  8.


LOKI'S    MOCKING

AT     THE     BANQUET     OF     ,EGIR.

,  who  is  also  called  Gymir  (the  Binder),  bade  the  gods  to  an
ale  feast  after  he  had  got  possession  of  the  great  cauldron — as  already
told  To  this  banquet  came  Odin  and  Frigg,  his  wife.  Thor  came
not  because  he  was  journeying  in  the  East-country,  but  his  wife  Sif
was  there,  and  Bragi,  with  his  wife  Idun  ;  Tyr  also,  who  was  one-
handed,  because  the  wolf  Fenrir  had  torn  off  the  other  hand  while  the
gods  were  binding  him.  There  were  Njord  and  his  wife  Skadi,  Frey
and  his  servants  Barley  and  Beyla,  Freyja,  Vidar,  the  son  of  Odin,
with  many  other  gods  and  elves ;  there,  moreover,  was  Loki.  ^gir
had  two  servants — Nimble-snatcherand  Fire-stirrer.  Shining  gold  was

As  already  told. — See  Hm.        East-country,  or  Jutunheim.


246  LOKASENNA.

menn  :  Fimafengr  ok  Eldir.  par  var  lysigull  haft  fyrir  elds  Ij6s ;
sjalft  barsk  )>ar  61 ;  J>ar  var  gri]?sta)>r  mikill.  Menn  lofujm  mjok  hversu
go)>ir  jjjonustumenn  JEgis  varu.  Loki  matti  eigi  heyra  )>at,  ok  dra)>
hann  Fimafeng.  pa  skoku  cesir  skjoldu  sina  ok  oep)>u  at  Loka  ok  eltu
hann  braut  til  sk6gar,  en  ]>eir  faru  at  drekka.  Loki  hvarf  aptr  ok  hitti
uti  Eldi ;  Loki  kvaddi  hann  :

Loki   kva)> :

1.  'Seg  ]?at,  Eldir!         svat  |>u  einugi

feti  gangir  framarr :
hvat  he"r  inni         hafa  at  olmalum
sigtiva  synir  ? '

Eldir  kva]?:

2.  'Of  vapn  sin  doema         ok  of  vigrisni  sina

sigtiva  synir :

asa  ok  alfa        es  he"r  inni  'rti
mangi's  )?6r  i  orTpi  vinr.'

Loki  kva]? :

3.  '  Inn  skal  ganga         ^Egis  hallir  i

a  ]?at  sumbl  at  sea ;
joll  ok  dfu         fosrik  asa  sunum
ok  blentk  ]?eim  meini  mjojj.'

Eldir  kva]?:

4.  'Veiztu,  ef  inn  gengr         ^gis  hallir  i

a  J?at  sumbl  at  sea,

hr6Jn  ok  r6gi         ef  )m  eyss  a  holl  regin,
a  ^iT  inunu  ]?erra  ]?at.'

Loki  kva]> :

5.  'Veizt  )>at,  Eldir!         ef  vit  einir  skulum

saryrjmm  sakask,

auj?ugr  ver]?a         munk  i  andsvorum,
ef  )?u  mselir  til  mart.'


LORI'S    MOCKING.  247

used  in  the  hall  for  the  light  of  fire,  the  ale  bore  itself,  and  the  place
was  held  as  a  holy  peace-stead.  Men  praised  ^Egir's  servants,  and
said  oft  how  good  they  were ;  but  Loki  could  not  brook  this,  and  he
slew  Nimble-snatcher.  The  gods  all  shook  their  shields  and  cried  out
against  Loki,  and  chased  him  away  to  the  woods,  and  then  betook
themselves  again  to  drink.  But  Loki  turned  back,  and  finding  Fire-
stirrer  standing  without,  he  hailed  him  : —

Loki.

1.  Tell  me,  Fire-stirrer —        but  whence  thou  standest

move  not  a  single  step —
what  are  the  sons        of  the  war-gods  saying
o'er  the  ale-cup  here  within  ?

Fire-stirrer.

2.  Of  their  weapons  are  speaking       the  sons  of  the  war-gods,

they  boast  of  their  battle-fame  ;

but  'mid  gods  and  elves         who  within  are  gathered,
not  one  is  thy  friend  in  his  words.

Loki.

3.  I  shall  now  enter         the  halls  of  JEgir

this  banquet  to  behold  :

mockery  and  strife         will  I  bring  to  the  god's  sons,
and  mingle  sorrow  with  their  mead.

Fire-stirrer.

4.  Know,  if  thou  enter        the  halls  of  Mgir

this  banquet  to  behold,

if  reproach  and  slander         on  the  blest  Powers  thou  pour
they  shall  wipe  out  thy  words  upon  thee.

Loki.

5.  Know  thou,  Fire-stirrer,         if  we  twain  must  fight

together  with  wounding  words, —
if  thou  talk  too  freely        thou  soon  shalt  find  me
in  answering  ready  and  rich.


24$  LOKASENNA.

Styan  gekk  Loki  inn  i  hollina,  en  er  ]>eir  sa,  er  fyrir  varu,  hverr
inn  var  kominn,  ]?6gnujni  J>eir  allir.

Loki  kvaj>  :

6.  '  pyrstr  ek  kom         )>essar  hallar  til,

Loptr,  of  langan  veg,
asu  at  bij>ja,         at  mer  einn  gefi
mseran  drykk  mja)>ar.

7.  (6)     Hvi  )>egi|?  ^r  svd,        )>rungin  go]?  !

at  6r  msela  ne  megu)>  ?
sessa  ok  sta]?i         veli|>  m€r  sumbli  at,
ej?a  heitij?  mik  he]?an.'

Bragi  kvaj>  :

8.  (7)    '  Sessa  ok  sta]?i         velja  )>6r  sumbli  at

sesir  aldrigi  ;

J?vit  sesir  vitu,         hveim  )>eir  alda  skulu
gambansumbl  of  geta.'

Loki  kva)>  :

9.  (8)    '  Mant  )?at,  6}?inn  !         es  vit  i  ardaga

blendum  b\6]>i  saman  ?
olvi  bergja         \izi  eigi  mundu,
nema  okkr  vaeri  bajmm  borit.'


10.    (9)    *  Ris  )>a,  Vtyarr  !        ok  Idt  ulfs  fojmr

sitja  sumbli  at,

si}?r  oss  Loki  kvejn         lastastofum
is  hollu  i.'


7. — Strophe  numbering  of  R  t«  brackets.


LORI'S     MOCKING.  249

Then  Loki  entered  the  hall,  and  when  those  assembled  saw  who
was  come  in  they  all  became  silent.

Loki.

6.  Thirsty  come  I,        the  Rover  of  Air,

to  this  feasting  hall  from  afar ;
I  would  ask  the  gods         to  give  me  but  one
sweet  draught  of  the  mead  to  drink.

7.  Why  all  silent        ye  sullen  gods  ?

Can  ye  speak  no  single  word  ?

Make  me  room  on  the  bench,       give  me  place  at  the  banquet,
or  bid  me  hie  homeward  hence.

Bragi.

8.  Nor  place  at  the  banquet        nor  room  on  the  bench

the  gods  shall  give  to  thee  ;
well  they  know         for  what  manner  of  wight
they  should  spread  so  fair  a  feast.

Loki.

9.  Mindest  thou,  Odin,        how  we  twain  of  old

like  brothers  mingled  our  blood  ?
Then  saidst  thou  that  never        was  ale-cup  sweet
unless  'twere  borne  to  us  both.

Odin.

10.     Rise  up,  Vidar,        and  give  the  Wolf's  father

bench-room  at  the  banquet,
lest  Loki  shame  us        with  scornful  speeches
here  in  .<Egir's  halls.


8. — Bragi,  the  god  of  poetry.  9. — The  mingling  of  blood  sealed  a  brotherhood  in
arms.  Loki,  Odin,  and  Hcenir  were  companions  in  many  strange  adventures.  10. —
Vidar,  see  Grm.  77;  Vsfi.,  st.  54.  Loki  was  the  father  of  Fenrir,  see  st.  39 ;  Vsp.  en

skamma,  st.  8.

2  K


25o  LOKASENNA.

pa  st6|>  Vtyarr  upp  ok  skenkjn  Loka  ;  en  a)>r  hann  drykki,  kvaddi
hann  asuna  :

n.  (10)    '  Heilir  sfesir,        heilar  asynjur

ok  611  ginnheilug  goj>  !
nema  einn  ass         es  innar  sitr,
Bragi,  bekkjum  a.'

Bragi  kva|>  :

12.  (n)   'Mar  ok  mseki        gefk  |>er  mins  fear

ok  bcetir  sva  baugi  Bragi,
styr  )>u  asum         ofund  of  gjaldir  ;
gremjat  go]?  at  )>6r  !  '

Loki  kva|>  :

13.  (12)    '  J6s  ok  armbauga        mundu  se  vesa

beggja  vanr,  Bragi  !
asa  ok  alfa        es  h£r  inni  'rti
j?u'st  vi)>  vig  varastr
ok  skjarrastr  vty  skot.'

Bragi  kva]?  :

14.  (13)    'Veitk,  ef  fyr  utan  veerak,         sem  fyr  innan  emk

Mgis  holl  of  kominn,
haufu)>  y\tt        bsferak  i  hendi  m6r  :
I6tak  ]>6r  )>at  fyr  lygi.'

Loki  kva)>  :

15.  (14)    'Snjallr  est  i  sessi,         skalta  sva  gora,

Bragi,  bekkskrautuj^r  !
vega  )>u  gakk,        ef  }>u  vreij?r  sei'r  !
hyggsk  v£etr  hvatr  fyrir.'


kvaj?  :

16.  (15)    'Bi)>k  ]?ik,  Bragi  !         barna  sifjar  duga

ok  allra  oskmaga,

at  ]>u  Loka  kve]?jat         lastastofum
hollu  i,'


LORI'S    MOCKING.  251

Then  Vidar  arose  and  poured  out  ale  for  Loki,  who  thus  greeted
the  gods  before  he  drank  : —

11.  Hail,  ye  gods,         and  goddesses,  hail  !

hail  all  ye  holy  Powers  ! —
save  only  one         who  sits  within,
thou,  Bragi,  upon  the  bench  !

Bragi.

12.  Steed  and  sword         from  my  store  will  I  give  thee

and  reward  thee  well  with  rings
lest  thou  pour  thy  hate         on  the  gracious  Powers.
Rouse  not  their  wrath  against  thee !

Loki.

13.  Nor  steeds  nor  rings        wilt  thou  ever  own

as  long  as  thou  livest,  Bragi :
thou  art  wariest  in  war,         and  shyest  at  shot
of  all  gods  and  elves  herein.


Bragi.

14.  Were  I  without  now        even  in  such  mood

as  within  the  halls  of  ^Egir,

that  head  of  thine         would  I  hold  in  my  hand  : —
'twere  little  reward  for  thy  lie !

Loki.

15.  Bold  seemst  thou  sitting,        but  slack  art  thou  doing,

Bragi,  thou  pride  of  the  bench  !
Come  forth  and  fight         if  in  truth  thou  art  wroth ;
a  bold  warrior  bides  not  to  think.

Idun.

16.  Nay  Bragi,  I  beg         for  the  sake  of  blood-kindred,

and  of  all  the  war-sons  of  Odin,

•

upbraid  not  Loki         with  bitter  speeches
here  in  ^Egir's  halls.

16. — Idun,  Bragi's  wife.     The  myth  of  st.  17  is  unknown.


252  LOKASENNA.

Loki  kva)>  :

17.  (16)    'pegi  |>u,  Ijnmn  !         ]?ik  kve}>k  allra  kvenna

vergjarnasta  vesa,

siztu  arma  Jnna         lag)>ir  itr)>vegna
umb  )>inn  bro)mrbana.'

Ijnmn  kva)> :

18.  (17)    '  Loka  ek  kve)?ka         lastastofum

/Egis  hollu  i ;

Braga  ek  kyrri         bj6rreifan  :
vilkak  at  vrei]?ir  vegisk.'

Gefjun  kvajj :

19.  (18)    '  Hvi  it  sesir  tveir         skuluj?  inni  her

saryrjmm  sakask  ?

Loka  J?at  veit,         at  hann  leikinn  es
ok  hann  fjorg  oil  fiar.'

Loki  kva]? :

20.  (19)    'pegi  ]>u,  Gefjun  !         J>ess  munk  nu  geta,

hverr  J?ik  glap)>i  at  ge]?i :
sveinn  enn  hviti         )>6r  sigli  gaf
ok  ]?u  lag)?ir  leer  yfir.'

6)?inn  kva]? :

21.  (20)    '(Err  est,  Loki!        ok  orviti,

es  ]>u  feer  )>er  Gefjun  at  gremi :
]>vit  aldar  orlog         hykk  at  oil  of  viti
jafngorla  sem  ek.'

Loki  kva}> :

22.  (21)    'pegi  }>u,  O)?inn  !         ]>u  kunnir  aldri

deila  vig  me}?  verum  :
opt  )?u  gaft         j?eims  gefa  n6  skyldir
enum  slsevurum  sigr.'

19.— Loka,  Gv.  S.  G.;  Lopzki,  R.      Fiar,  Kolbing,  S.  G.;   fria,  E;   fia,  Sv.  J.
zo.— Hverr  };ik,  Gv.  S.  G. ;  er  )?ik,  E.


LORI'S    MOCKING.  353

Loki.

17.  Silence,  Idun  !         I  swear,  of  all  women

thou  the  most  wanton  art ;

who  couldst  fling  those  fair-washed        arms  of  thine
about  thy  brother's  slayer.

Idun.

18.  I  blame  thee  not,  Loki,        with  bitter  speeches

here  in  ^Egir's  halls.

I  seek  but  to  sooth        the  ale-stirred  Bragi,
lest  in  your  fierceness  ye  fight.

Gefjon.

19.  Wherefore,  ye  gods  twain        with  wounding  words

strive  ye  here  in  the  hall  ?

Who  knows  not  Loki,        that  he  loathes  all  beings
and  mocks  in  his  madness  of  soul  ?

Loki.

20.  Silence,  Gefjon  !         I  will  tell  that  tale

of  him  who  once  stole  thy  heart, —
that  fair  swain  who  gave  thee        a  shining  necklace,
him  thou  didst  hold  in  thine  arms.

Odin.

21.  Wild  art  thou,  Loki,        and  witless  now,

thus  rousing  Gefjon  to  wrath  !
I  ween  she  knows        all  the  fate  of  the  world
even  as  surely  as  I.

Loki.

22.  Silence,  Odin  !         When  couldst  thou  ever

rule  battles  of  men  aright  ?

Oft  hast  thou  given        to  them  who  had  earned  not,
to  the  slothful  victory  in  strife.

20. — Gefjon  is  only  mentioned  here  in  the  Poetical  Edda.      The  myth  is  usually  told
i>/  Freyju ;  see  \rk  st.  12  and  Introd.


254  LOKASENNA.

6]>inn  kva)>:

23.  (22)    '  Veizt,  ef  ek  gaf         )>eims  gefa  ne  skyldak,

enum  slsDvurum  sigr :
atta  vetr         vastu  fyr  jorj>  nej>an
kyr  molkandi  ok  kona
ok  hefr  )>ar  born  of  borit,
ok  hugjjak  )>at  args  a)>al.'

Loki  kva)> :

24.  (23)    'En  jnk  stya         kva]>u  Sdmseyju  i,

.      ok  drapt  a  v6tt  sem  volur :
vitka  liki        fortu  ver^j6|?  yfir,
ok  hugj^ak  )>at  args  a]?al.'

Frigg  kva]? :

25.  (24)    '  Orlogum  ykkrum         skyli)?  aldrigi

segja  seggjum  frd :

hvat  it  sesir  tveir        <lryg]?u)?  i  ardaga,
firrisk  gfe  forn  rok  firar.'

Loki  kvaj> :

26.  (25)    '  pegi  jm,  Frigg  !         Jm'st  Fjorgyns  mscr

ok  hefr  sfe  vergjorn  verit,
es  ]?a  V6  ok  Vilja         I6ztu  )?€r,  ViJ>ris  kvsen  !
ba)?a  i  baj>m  of  tekit.'

Frigg  kva)? :

27.  (26)    '  Veizt,  ef  inni  sfettak         ^Egis  hollum  i

Baldri  glikan  bur,
lit  ne  kvsemir        fra  Asa  sunum,
ok  vseri  at  )?er  vrei|?um  vegit.'


LORI'S    MOCKING.  255

Odin.

23.  Know,  if  ever  I  gave        to  them  who  had  earned  not,

to  the  slothful  victory  in  strife,
eight  winters  wert  thou        below  in  the  earth

like  a  maiden,  milking  kine,
and  there  thou  gavest         birth  to  bairns, —

which  I  weened  was  a  woman's  lot.

Loki.

24.  But  thou  in  Samsey        wast  weaving  magic

and  making  spells  like  a  witch :

thou  didst  pass  as  wizard        through  the  world  of  men,—
which  I  weened  was  a  woman's  way.

Frigg.

25.  Tell  ye  to  no  man         the  shameful  tale

of  the  deeds  ye  did  of  old, —
how  ye  two  gods  wrought        in  ancient  time ; —
what  is  gone  is  best  forgot.

Loki.

26.  Silence,  Frigg !  who  hast        Earth's  spouse  for  a  husband,

and  hast  ever  yearned  after  men  !
V6  the  holy,         and  Vili  the  lustful

both  lay  in  thine  arms,  wife  of  Odin.

Frigg.

27.  Know,  if  I  had  but         in  ^Egir  halls,

a  son  like  my  Baldr,  the  slain,  [gods

thou  wouldst  ne'er  come  whole        through  the  host  of  the
but  fiercely  thou  shouldst  be  assailed.

23. — This  strophe  perhaps  alludes  to  another  version  of  the  myth  of  Vsp.  en  skamma,
st.  9.  24. — Samsey,  modern  Samsu,  north  of  Funen.  26,  line  i. — This  line  has
often  been  misunderstood,  by  Snorri  and  later  critic*.  The  literal  thou  art  Fjorgynn's
maid  has  been  rendered  thou  art  Fjbrgynn's  daughter.  But  Fjorgynn  is  only  another
name  for  Odin  in  his  character  as  the  husband  of  Fjbrgyn  or  Jord,  the  Earth,  and  mother
of  Thor.  V6  and  Vili,  the  brothers  of  Odin,  may  also  be  taken  as  different  aspects  of  the
same  god.  The  name  used  in  the  text  for  Odin  is  Vidrir,  the  Stonner  ;  see  Grm.,  st.  51.


256  LOKASENNA.

Loki   kva)> :

28.  (27)    '  Enn  vill  J>u,  Frigg  !        at  ek  fleiri  telja

mina  meinstafi :
ek  }>vi  r£}>,        es  )>u  rij>a  s6rat
si]?an  Baldr  at  solum.'

Freyja  kvaj? :

29.  (28)    '  CErr  est,  Loki !        es  }>u  y)>ra  telr

Ij6ta  letystafi :

orlog  Frigg         hykk  at  oil  viti,
]>6t  hon  sjolfgi  segi.'

Loki  kva]? :

30.  (29)   'pegi  ]>u,  Freyja!        )>ik  kannk  fullgorva,

esa  )>6r  vamma  vant :
asa  ok  alfa        es  h6r  inni  'rti
hverr  hefr  horr  )>inn  verit.'

Freyja  kva)>:

31.  (30)    '  Fid's  )>er  tunga,        hykk  at  \>6r  fremr

myni  6gott  of  gala  ;
vrei)>ir'u  ]?6r  gfesir        ok  asynjur,
hryggr  munt  heim  fara.'

Loki  kvaj? :

32.  (31)    '  pegi  )?ii,  Freyja  !        \>&'st  fordse^a

ok  meini  blandin  mjok  :
siz  Jrik  at  brcej^r  )?inum        stoj^u  blty  regin,
ok  mundir  ]?a,  Freyja  !  frata.'

Njorj^r   kva)?  :

33-  (32)    'pat's  va  litil,        }>6t  ser  vers  fai

varjnr,  h6ss  e|?a  hvars  ;
undr's  at  ass  ragr        es  h6r  inn  of  kominn
ok  hefr  sa  born  of  borit.'

32.— Stojw,  B.  Gv.  H.  Sv.  G.  S.  J. ;  styu,  R.


LORI'S     MOCKING.  257

Loki.

28.  Wouldst  have  me,  Frigg,         tell  a  few  more  yet

of  these  shameful  stories  of  mine  ?

'Twas  I  wrought  the  Woe,         that  henceforth  thou  wilt  not
see  Baldr  ride  back  to  the  halls.

Freyja.

29.  Mad  art  thou,  Loki,         to  tell  thus  the  shame

and  grim  deeds  wrought  by  you  gods !
Frigg  knows,  I  ween,         all  the  fate  of  the  world  ;
though  she  whispers  thereof  to  none.

Loki.

30.  Silence,  Freyja  !         Full  well  I  know  thee

and  faultless  art  thou  not  found ;
of  the  gods  and  elves        who  here  are  gathered
each  one  hast  thou  made  thy  mate.

Freyja.

31.  False  thy  tongue  is  !         Too  soon  'twill  sing

its  own  song  of  woe,  as  I  ween.
Wroth  are  the  gods,         and  the  goddesses  wroth,
rueful  thou  soon  shalt  run  home.

Loki.

32.  Silence,  Freyja  !        Thou  art  a  sorceress

all  with  evil  blent :

once  at  thy  brother's         the  blithe  gods  caught  thee,
and  then  wast  thou  frightened,  Freyja !

Njord.  .

33.  Small  harm  it  seems        if  haply  a  woman

both  lover  and  husband  have  ;
but  behold  the  horror         now  in  the  halls,
the  vile  god  who  bairns  hath  borne  !

28. — The  only  allusion  in  the  Poetical  Edda  to  Loki's  share  in  the  death  of  Baldr  ;
see  Bdr.  Introd.  Possibly  it  only  refers  to  Loki's  refusal  to  weep  (Nd.  Dalt.,  41  j.
29. — By  you  gods  :  so  Gering  and  Dt.  HI.  take  y|>ra.  32. — No  such  myth  of  Frey  or
Freyja  is  mentioned  elsewhere.  z  L


258  LOKASENNA.

Loki   kvaj?  :

34-  03)    PeS'  l>u,  Njor)>r!         }>u  vast  austr  he]>an

gisl  of  sendr  at  goj>um  ;
Hymis  meyjar         hofj>u  }>ik  at  hlandtrogi
ok  jje'r  i  munn  migu.'

Njor}>r    kva}?  :

35-  (34)    'Su  erumk  likn,         es  vask  langt  he^an

gisl  of  sendr  at  go)mm  :
)>a  ek  mog  gat         )>anns  manngi  fiar,
ok  J?ykkir  sa  asa  ja)>arr.'

Loki  kva)>  :
36.  (35)    '  Hsett  nu,  Njor^r !        haf  a  h6fi  ]>ik  I

munkak  Jnd  leyna  lengr :
vty  systur  J?inni         gaztu  slikan  mog
ok  esa  j>6  6nu  verr.'

Tyrr  kvaj? :

37-  (36)   '  Freyr  es  baztr        allra  baldrij>a

asa  gor]?um  i ;

mey  ne  grcetir         n6  manns  konu,
ok  leysir  or  hoptum  hvern.'

Loki  kva)? :

38.  (37)    '  pegi  |>u,  Tyr !         }>u  kunnir  aldri

bera  tilt  me)>  tveim  :
bandar  hcegri         munk  hinnar  geta
es  J?e"r  sleit  Fenrir  fra.'

Tyrr   kva)> :

39-  (38)    '  Handar  emk  vanr,        en  Jm  Hro)wtnis,

bol  es  beg^ja  J?ra :

ulfgi  hefr  ok  vel        es  i  bondum  skal
bij>a  ragna  rokkrs.'

34.— At  go|;um  :  B.  suggests  af  go]?um,  but  at  is  occasionally  used,  as  here,  to
denote  source  (Dt.).  G.  and  others  take  it  in  the  ordinary  meaning  to,  and  understand
an  allusion  to  Vm.  39.


LORI'S     MOCKING.  259

Loki.

34.  Silence,  Njord  !         Thou  wast  eastward  sent

as  hostage  from  hence  by  the  gods  ;
there  into  thy  mouth         flowed  the  maids  of  Hymir
and  used  thee  as  trough  for  their  floods.

Njord.

35.  Yet  was  I  gladdened         when  sent  afar,

as  hostage  from  hence  by  the  gods  ;
there  a  son  I  got  me,         the  foe  of  none,
and  highest  held  among  gods.

Loki.

36.  Silence  now,  Njord  !         Set  bounds  to  thy  lying  ;

I  will  no  longer  let  this  be  hid —
with  thine  own  sister         that  son  thou  gottest,
though  he  is  not  worse  than  one  weened.

Tyr.

37.  Nay  !   Frey  is  the  best         of  all  bold  riders

who  enter  the  garths  of  the  gods  ;
nor  wife  nor  maiden         he  makes  to  weep,
but  he  breaks  the  prisoner's  bonds.

Loki.

38.  Silence,  Tyr  !         Who  in  truth  couldst  never

bring  good  will  betwixt  twain  ;
the  tale  will  I  tell         of  that  right  hand
which  Fenrir  reft  from  thee  once.

Tyr.

39.  If  I  want  for  a  hand         for  thy  Wolf-son,  thou  ;

we  both  bear  burden  of  want :

and  'tis  ill  with  the  Wolf         who  must  bide  in  bonds
till  the  twilight  come  of  the  Powers.

34. —  Njord  figures  here  in  his  character  of  sea  god ;  see  Fragments  from  Sn.  £\
36. — A  son,  presumably  got  with  the  giantess  Skaiii,  but  in  Ynglinga  S.  it  is  stated  that
Njord  was  married  to  his  sister,  and  had  a  son  and  daughter,  Frey  and  Freyja,  before
even  he  was  sent  as  hostage  by  the  Wanes  to  the  &sir.  38. — See  Introd.  39. —
Twilight  of  the  Powers  or  Ragna  rokr :  This  is  the  only  use  of  rokr  in  the  poems,  which
has  given  rise  to  the  phtase  "twilight  of  the  gods."  The  more  usual  form  was  rok  or  fate.


260  LOKASENNA.

Loki   kva)> :

40.  (39)    'pegi  j>u,  Tyr  !         ]?at  varj>  J>inni  konu,

at  hon  &tti  mog  vi]>  me"r ;
oln  ne"  penning         hatyir  J>u  )>ess  aldrigi
vanre"ttis,  vesall ! '

Freyr   kva)>  :

41.  (40)    '  Ulf  s6k  liggja         ar6si  fyrir,

unz  of  rjufask  regin  ;
\>vi  munt  nscst,         nema  nu  |?egir,
bundinn,  bolvasmtyr !  '

Loki   kva)? :

42.  (41)    'Golli  keypta         leztu  Gymis  d6ttur

ok  seldir  )>itt  svd  sver]? ;
en  es  Muspells  synir         ri]?a  Myrkvty  yfir,
veizta  }>&,  vesall !  hv6  vegr.'

Byggvir  kva]? :

43.  (42)    '  Veizt,  ef  6]>\i  settak         sem  Ingunar-Freyr,

ok  sva  sacllikt  setr,

mergi  smsera  mol)?ak         ]?a  meinkraku
ok  lem)?a  alia  i  li)>u.'

Loki  kvaj? :

44.  (43)    '  Hvat's  )?at  et  litla,         es  ek  )>at  loggra  s^k,

ok  snapvist  snapir  ?
at  eyrum  Freys         mundu  set  vesa
auk  und  kvernum  klaka.'


LORI'S     MOCKING.  261

Loki.

40.  Be  silent,  Tyr,        while  I  tell  of  the  son

whom  thy  wife  got  once  by  me :
not  even  a  penny        or  ell  of  cloth

didst  thou  get  for  thy  wrong,  poor  wretch  !

Frey.

41.  I  see  Fenrir  lying        at  the  mouth  of  the  flood  ;

he  shall  bide  till  the  Powers  perish ;
and  thou,  mischief-maker,         shalt  meet  with  like  fate
if  thou  hold  not  herewith  thy  peace.

Loki.

42.  Wealth  gav'st  thou,  Frey,         for  Gymir's  maid,

thou  didst  sell  thy  sword  for  Gerd ;
but  how  shalt  thou  fight         when  the  sons  of  fire
through  the  Murk-wood  ride,  poor  wretch  ?

Barley.

43.  Were  I  of  Ing's  race        even  as  Frey —

owned  I  a  land  blest  as  Elfhome —
I  would  crush  like  marrow        yon  croaker  of  ill,
and  break  all  his  bones  into  bits.

Loki.

44.  What  is  that  wee  thing        whining  and  fawning,

snuffling  and  snapping,  I  see  ?
Ever  at  Frey's  ear,        flattering  and  chattering,
or  murmuring  under  the  mill !


40. — A  lost  myth.  41. — The  flood,  called  Vamm  or  Van  by  Snorri,  is  a  river  of
Hel  proceeding  from  the  moisture  which  flowed  out  of  Fenrir 's  jaws  while  the  great  Wolf
lay  bound  in  torture.  42. — Frey  is  slain  by  Surt,  the  Fire-giant,  at  the  Doom  of  the
gods  ;  see  Vsp.  54.  Gymir,  Gerd,  see  Skm.  43. — Ing  was  the  half  divine  ancestor  of
the  Germanic  race  who  gave  his  name  to  the  Ynglings  or  Swedes  (Hdl.,  st.  1 J)  and  to
the  Ingvines  mentioned  by  Tacitus.  In  Sweden  he  became  associated  with  Frey,  who
h-iis  there  the  chief  god.  Elf-home,  see  Grm.,  st.  5.


262  LOKASENNA.

Byggvir  kva)?  :

45.  (44)    'Byggvir  heitik,         en  mik  bra)?an  kve)?a

go)>  oil  ok  f»urnar  ;

Jm  emk  h6r  hrojnigr,         at  drekka  Hropts  megir
allir  61  saman.'

Loki  kva)> :

46.  (45)    'pegi  )?u,  Byggvir!         ]>u  kunnir  aldri

deila  me)?  monnum  mat  ;
J?ik  i  flets  strai         finna  n€  mattu,
J?a  es  vagu  verar.'

Heimdallr  kva)?  :

47.  (46)    '  Olr  est,  Loki !         svat  ]?u'st  orviti,

hvi  n6  lezkat,  Loki  ?
]?vit  ofdrykkja         veldr  alda  hveim,
es  sina  msclgi  n€  manat.'

Loki  kvaj?  :

48.  (47)    'pegi  ]>u,  Heimdallr!         }>&r  vas  i  ardaga

et  Ijota  lif  of  lagit :
6rJ?gu  baki         ]?u  munt  EC  vesa
ok  vaka  vorj?r  go]?a.'

Ska]?i  kva]?  :

49.  (48)    '  Lett's  ]>€r,  Loki  !         munattu  lengi  sva

leika  lausum  hala ;

)wt  J?ik  a  hjorvi  skulu         ens  hrimkalda  magar
gornum  binda  go)?.'

Loki  kvaj?  :

50.  (49)    'Veizt,  ef  mik  d  hjorvi  skulu         ens  hrimkalda  magar

gornum  binda  go)? :
fyrstr  ok  ofstr         vask  at  fjorlagi,
\nirs  ver  a  pjaza  Jm'fum.'


LORI'S     MOCKING.  263

Barley.

45.  Barley,  I  am  named,         too  bold  and  brisk

I  am  called  by  gods  and  men  !
Here  am  I  glorying         that  Odin's  sons
all  are  drinking  ale  together !

Loki.

46.  Silence,  Barley-corn  !         Never  couldst  thou

even  serve  meat  among  men  :

and  when  they  fought         thou  couldst  scarce  be  found,
safe  'neath  the  bed-straw  hiding.

Heimdal.

47.  So  drunk  art  thou,  Loki,         thou  hast  lost  thy  wits ;

why  wilt  thou  not  cease  from  thy  scoffing  ?
Ale  beyond  measure         so  masters  man
that  he  keeps  no  watch  on  his  words.

Loki.

48.  Silence,  Heimdal !         That  hard  life  of  thine

was  settled  for  thee  long  since :
with  weary  back         must  thou  ever  bide,
and  keep  watch,  thou  warder  of  gods !

Skadi.

•

49.  B4ithe  are  thou,  Loki,         but  brief  while  shalt  thou

with  free  tail  frolic  thus :
ere  long  the  gods        shall  bind  thee  with  guts
of  thy  rime-cold  son  to  a  sword.

Loki.

50.  If  in  truth  the  gods         shall  bind  me  with  guts

of  my  rime-cold  son  to  a  rock,

know  that  first  and  last         was  I  found  at  the  death
when  we  set  upon  Thiaxi,  thy  sire.


49. — A   sword :   we  are  told  by  Snorri  that  Loki  is  bound  to  three  sharp  stones.
50. — Thiazi  if  as  slain  by  Thor ;  see  Hrbl.,  st.  19  ;   Vsp.  en  skamma,  st.  3.


264  LOKASENNA.

Ska)>i  kvaj>  :

51.  (50)    '  Veizt,  ef  fyrstr  ok  ofstr         vast  at  fjorlagi,

)>as  er  a  pjaza  J>rifu)> :
fra  veum  minum         ok  vongum  skulu
J>e"r  so  kold  ra)>  koma.'

Loki  kva)> :

52.  (511    'Lettari  i  malum         vastu  vty  Laufeyjar  sun,

)?as  ]>u  l^zt  mer  a  be)?  J>inn  bo)?it :
getit  ver)>r  oss  sliks,         ef  ver  gorva  skulum
telja  vomm  enn  var.'

pd  gekk  Sif  fram  ok  byrla|n  Loka  i  hrimkalki  mjo)>  ok  maelti

53-  (52)    *  Heill  ves  nu,  Loki !         ok  tak  \ty  hrimkalki

fullum  forns  mja)?ar,
heldr  hana  eina         latir  me]>  asa  sunum
vammalausa  vesa.'

Hann  t6k  vty  horni  ok  drakk  af :

54.  (53)    '  Ein  }m  VEerir,         ef  ]>u  sva  vserir

vor  ok  grom  at  veri :
einn  ek  veit,         svat.ek  vita  Jjykkjumk
h6r  ok  af  Hlorrtya

ok  vas  )»at  sa  enn  Isevisi  Loki.  •-

•

Beyla  kvaj?  :

55»  (54)   '  Fjoll  oil  skjalfa,        hykk  a  for  vesa

heiman  Hlorri|>a;
hann  rstyr  TO        ]?eims  roegir  her
goj>  611  ok  guma.'

Loki  kva)> :

56.  (55)   'pegi  )>u,  Beyla!        J^u'st  Byggvis  kvsen

ok  meini  blandin  mjok  ;
dkynjan  meira         kvama  me)?  asa  sunum,
oil  est,  deigja  !  dritin.'


LORI'S     MOCKING.  1265

Skadi.

51.  If  first  and  last        thou  wert  found  at  the  death

when  ye  set  upon  Thiazi,  my  sire,
know  that  in  house         or  home  of  mine
shall  be  shown  thee  little  love !

Loki.

52.  Milder  were  thy  words        to  Loki  once

when  thou  badst  him  come  to  thy  bed ;
for  such  tales,  I  ween,         will  be  told  of  us  twain,
if  we  own  all  our  acts  of  shame.

Then    Sif  came   forth,   and   poured   out   mead   for   Loki  in  the
foaming  cup.

Sif.

53.  Hail  now,  Loki  !         quaff  this  rimy  cup

filled  with  the  old  mead  full.
At  least  grant  that  I,         of  the  kindred  of  gods
alone  am  free  from  all  fault.

Loki  took  the  horn  and  quaffed : —

54.  Thou  alone  wert  blameless         hadst  thou  in  bearing

been  sly  and  shrewish  with  men ;
but  Thor's  wife  had  one  lover        at  least,  as  I  know,
even  Loki  the  wily-wise.

Beyla.

55.  All  the  fells  are  quaking,         fast  is  the  Thunderer

faring,  I  trow,  from  home  !

He  will  soon  bring  to  silence         him  who  thus  slanders
all  beings  here  in  the  hall.

Loki.

56.  Silence,  Beyla,         wife  of  Barley-corn

all  with  foulness  filled  !

Ne'er  'mid  the  gods         came  one  so  uncouth,
thou  bond-maid  stained  and  soiled.

52. — Atwthei  /os/  myth.        53. — Sif,  Thor's  wife ;  see  Introd.  to  Gm.  HrM.,  st.  48.

2  M


266  LOKASENNA.

p£  kom  porr  at  ok  kva)> :

57-  (56)    'pegi  )>ti,  rog  vjfcttr  !         j>e"r  skal  minn  )>ru|>hamarr

Mjollnir  mal  fyrnema;
(57)     her|>aklett         drepk  J>e"r  halsi  af,

ok  ver]>r  )>a  ]>inu  fjorvi  of  farit.'

Loki  kvaj> :

58.  '  Jar]>ar  burr         es  her  nu  inn  kominn  :

hvi  |>rasir  J>u  sva,  porr  ?
en  |>a  }>or\r  ]>u  etki         es  skalt  vi)>  ulf  Vega,
ok  svelgr  hann  allan  Sigfo]>ur.'

porr  kva)> :

59.  'pegi  }>u,  rog  vffcttr!         )?6r  skal  minn  )>ru]>hamarr

Mjollnir  mal  fyrnema ;
upp  }>6r  verpk         ok  d  austrvega,
si|>an  ]?ik  manngi  sdr.'

Loki  kva)> :

60.  '  'Austrforum  )>inum         skaltu  aldrigi

segja  seggjum  frd :

siz  i  hanzka  |mmlungi         hnuk]?ir  ]?u,  einheri !
ok  ]>6ttiska  p6rr  vesa.'

porr  kva]> :

61.  '  pegi  J>u,  rog  vacttr !         |>6r  skal  minn  }>ruj>hamarr

Mjollnir  mal  fyrnema ;
hendi  hregri         drepk  )>ik  Hrungnis  bana,
svat  |>er  brotnar  beina  hvat.'

Loki  kvaty  :

6?.  '  Lifa  tctlak  mer        langan  aldr,

j^ottu  hoetir  hamri  me"r  ;
-    skarpar  alar        )?6ttu  ]?er  Skrymis  vesa
ok  mattira  nesti  naa
ok  svalztu  hungri  heill.'

58. — Burr :  A  word  is  missing  in  R,


LOKI'S     MOCKING.  267

Then  came  the  Thunderer  in,  and  spake : —

57.  Silence,  vile  being  !         My  hammer  of  might,

Mjollnir,  shall  spoil  thee  of  speech.
I  will  strike  that  rock-head         from  off  thy  shoulders,
and  soon  will  thy  life-days  be  spent.

.  Loki.

58.  'Tis  the  Son  of  Earth        who  enters  the  hall !

Why  dost  thou  threaten  so,  Thor  ?
Ne'er  wilt  thou  venture        to  fight  with  the  Wolf ;
he  shall  swallow  the  War-father  whole.

Thor.

59.  Silence,  vile  being  !         My  hammer  of  might,

Mjollnir,  shall  spoil  thee  of  speech.
I  will  drive  thee  forth         to  the  eastern  land
and  no  man  shall  see  thee  more.

Loki.

60.  Of  thy  eastern  journeys         never  shouldst  thou

tell  unto  men  the  tale ;

how  once  in  a  glove-thumb         thou,  warrior,  didst  crouch,
and  scarce  couldst  think  thyself  Thor.

Thor.

61.  Silence,  vile  being  !         My  hammer  of  might,

Mjollnir,  shall  spoil  thee  of  speech  ;

this  right  hand  shall  smite  thee         with  Hrungnir's  slayer,
till  each  bone  of  thee  shall  be  broke.

Loki.

62.  Though  haply  thou  threat'nest         with'thy  hammer  of  might,

long  will  my  life  be,  I  ween ;

sharp  were  Skrymir's  thongs,         mindst  thou,  when  starving
thou  couldst  not  get  at  the  food  ?


268  LOKASENNA.

porr  kvap  :
63.    'pegi  )>u,  rog  vccttr  !         J>er  skal  minn  pruj'hamarr


Mjollnir  mal  fyrnema  ;
Hrungnis  bani         mun  |>er.i  hel  koma
fyr  nagrindr  nepan.'

Loki  kvap  :

64.  '  Kvapk  fyr  asum,         kvapk  fyr  asa  sunum

pats  mik  hvatti  hugr  ;
en  fyr  p6r  einum         munk  lit  ganga,
)>vit  ek  veit  at  vegr.

65.  01  gorpir,  JEgir  !         en  |>u  aldri  munt

styan  sumbl  of  gora  :
eiga  Yin  611,         es  h6r  inni  es,
leiki  yfir  logi
ok  brinni  )?6r  a  baki  !  '

En  eptir  J>etta  falz  Loki  i  Franangrs  forsi  i  lax  liki,  J>ar  toku  asir
hann.  Hann  var  bundinn  mej>  J7ormum  sonar  sins  Narfa,  en  Vali  sonr
bans  var|?  at  vargi.  Skaj?i  tok  eitrorm  ok  festi  upp  yfir  annlit  Loka  ;
draup  |>ar  or  eitr.  Sigyn  kona  Loka  sat  par  ok  belt  munnlaug  undir
eitrit,  en  er  munnlaugin  var  full,  bar  hon  ut  eitrit  ;  en  mepan  draup
eitrit  a  Loka.  pa  kiptiz  hann  sva  hart  vi)?,  at  J?a]?an  af  skalf  jorp  oil  :
pat  eru  nu  kallapir  landskjalftar.

Prose.—  Narfa,  en  Vali,  W,  r,  S.  ;  Nara,  en  Narfi,  R.


LORI'S    MOCKING.  269

Thor.

63.  Silence,  vile  being  !         My  hammer  of  might,

Mjollnir,  shall  spoil  thee  of  speech.
With  Hrungnir's  slayer         I  will  smite  thee  to  Hel,
down  'neath  the  gates  of  the  dead.

Loki.

64.  He  fore  sons  and  daughters         of  gods  have  I  spoken,

even  as  I  was  moved  by  my  mind  :
now  at  length  I  go,         and  for  thee  alone,
for  well,  I  ween,  thou  wilt  fight.

65.  Thou  hast  brewed  thine  ale,         but  such  banquet,  -fligir,

never  more  shalt  thou  make.

May  flames  play  high        o'er  thy  wealth  in  the  hall
and  scorch  the  skin  of  thy  back !


Then  Loki  went  forth  and  hid  himself  in  Franang's  stream  in  the
form  of  a  salmon,  where  the  gods  caught  him  and  bound  him  with  the
guts  of  his  son  Narfi.  But  his  other  son  Vali  was  turned  into  a  wolf.
Skadi  took  a  poisonous  snake  and  fastened  it  up  over  Loki,  so  that
poison  dripped  from  it  upon  his  face.  Sigyn,  his  wife,  sat  by,  and
held  a  basin  under  the  drops.  And  when  the  basin  was  full  she  cast
the  poison  away,  but  meanwhile  the  drops  fell  upon  Loki,  and  he
struggled  so  fiercely  against  it  that  the  whole  earth  shook  with  his
strivings,  which  are  now  called  earthquakes.


FRAGMENTS  FROM  THE  SNORRA  EDDA.

i.

En  Ska)>i,  dottir  jotuns,  tok  hjalm  ok  brynja  ok  oil  hervapn  ok
ferr  til  Asgar)>s  at  hefna  foj?ur  sins ;  en  aesir  bu)>u  henni  saett  ok  yfir-
bcetr,  ok  et  fyrsta,  at  hon  skal  kj6sa  ser  mann  af  asum  ok  kjosa  at
fotum,  ok  sja  ekki  af  fleira.  Pa  sa  hon  eins  manns  fcetr  forkunnarfagra
ok  maelti :  )?enna  kys  ek,  fatt  mun  Gott  a  Baldri !  en  )?at  var  Njor|>r  or
Noatunum.  ( Bragarce\>ur  LVI.)  NjorJ>r  a  J?a  konu  er  Ska)>i  heitir,
dottir  Pjaza  jotuns.  Ska)>i  vill  hafa  bustap  )?ann  er  haf)?i  faj?ir  hennar,
J?at  er  a  fjollum  nokkurum  ]>ar  sem  heitir  Prymheimr :  en  Njor)>r  vill
vera  naer  sjo.  Pau  ssetuz  a  )?at,  at  )>au  skyldu  vera  niu  na>tr  i  Prym-
heimi  en  |>a  )?rjar  at  Noatunum.  En  er  Njorj?r  kom  aptr  til  Noatuna
af  fjallinu,  J?a  kva)?  hann  }?etta  :

(i)     '  Lei)>  erumk  fjoll,         vaska  )>ar  lengi  a,

nsetr  einar  niu ;
ulfa  }>ytr        ]>6ttumk  illr  vesa
hja  songvi  svana.'


FRAGMENTS    FROM    SNORRI'S    EDDA.

I. — HOW    NjORD    WAS   MADE    SKADl'S   SPOUSE.

Then  Skadi,  daughter  of  the  giant  Thiazi  [when  she  heard  ho\v
the  gods  had  slain  her  father],  donned  helm  and  byrnie  and  all  her
weapons  of  war,  and  went  to  revenge  him  in  Asgarth.  For  the  sake
of  peace  they  offered  her  as  weregild  the  choice  of  a  spouse  among  the
gods,  but  in  her  choosing  she  should  behold  no  more  than  their  feet.
And  when  she  saw  that  the  feet  of  one  were  exceeding  fair  and  shapely,
she  cried  : — "Him  will  I  choose,  for  scant  is  the  blemish  in  Baldr;"
but  lo !  it  was  Njord  out  of  Noatun.  Thus  he  took  to  wife  Skadi,
daughter  of  the  Jotun  Thiazi.  She  would  fain  keep  the  dwellings
of  her  father  among  the  mountains  in  the  land  called  Sound-home,  but
Njord  desired  to  be  near  the  sea,  so  they  made  agreement  thus  : — nine
nights  they  should  dwell  in  Sound-home,  and  afterwards  three  in
Noatun.  But  when  Njord  came  back  to  Noatun  from  the  mountains,
he  said : —

'  Hateful  the  hills  !         though  not  long  I  lingered,

nights  only  nine  I  dwelt  there ;
the  howling  of  wolves         was  ill.  meseemed,
beside  the  song  of  the  swans.'


272         FRAGMENTS    FROM    THE    SNORRA    EDDA.
Pa  kva]?  Ska)>i  ]?etta  :

(2)     '  Sofa  ne  makat         sscvar  be)>jum  d

fogls  jarmi  fyrir :
sa  mik  vekr,         es  af  vtyi  komr,

morgin  hverjan  mar.' — Gylfaginuing  xxiii.

II.

Hana  (Gnd)  sendir  Frigg  i  ymsa  heima  at  eyrindum  sinum.  Hon
a  )?ann  best  er  rennr  lopt  ok  log,  ok  heitir  Hofvarpnir.  Pat  var  eitt
sinn  er  hon  reij>,  at  vanir  nokkurir  sa  reij>  hennar  i  loptinu,  )>a  maelti
einn  :

(1)  '  Hvat  )?ar  flygr,         hvat  }?ar  ferr

e]>a  at  lopti  li|>r  ? '

Hon  svarajn  :

(2)  '  N<§  ek  flyg,        }>6  ek  fer

auk  at  lopti  \ty :
a  Hofvarpni         J>eims  Hamskerpir,

gat  vi|?  Gar)?rofu.' — Gylfaginning  xxxv.

III.

PVI  naest  sendu  aesir  um  allan  heim  eyrindreka  at  bij>ja,  at  Baldr
vseri  gratinn  or  helju,  en  allir  gor]?u  ]?at  :  menninir  ok  kykvendin  ok
jor|>in  ok  steinarnir  ok  tr6  ok  allr  malmr :  sva  sem  ]>ii  munt  set  hafa,  at
)>essir  hlutir  grata  )?a  er  J?eir  koma  6r  frosti  ok  i  hita.  Pa  er  sendi-
menn  foru  heim  ok  hof]?u  vel  rekit  sin  eyrindi,  finna  )?eir  i  belli  nok-
kurum  hvar  gygr  sat,  hon  nefndiz  pokk ;  ]?eir  bij^ja  hana  grata  Baldr
or  helju.  Hon  svarar  :

'  Pokk  mun  grata         ]?urrum  tarum

Baldrs  balfarar ;

kviks  n6"  dau]?s         nautka  karls  sonar,
haldi  hel  )MS  hefir.'

En  )>ess  geta  menn,  at  )?ar  hafi  verit  Loki  Laufeyjar  sonr  er  flest
hefir  illt  gort  me]?  asum.


FRAGMENTS     FROM     SNORRI'S     EDDA.  273

And  Skadi  spake  thus : —

'  Sleep  I  could  not        on  ocean's  couch

for  the  wailing  cry  of  the  gull  :
from  the  wide  sea  faring,         that  bird  awoke  me
when  he  came  each  day  at  dawn.'

II. — CONCERNING  THE  GODDESS  GNA.

Frigg  sends  Gna,  the  Floater,  on  errands  into  many  worlds.  She
rides  a  horse  called  Hoof-flinger  which  fares  through  the  sky  and  over
the  sea.  Once  as  she  was  passing,  certain  of  the  Wanes  saw  her  riding
in  the  air,  and  one  said  : —

'  What  flies  there,         what  fares  there,
what  flits  there  aloft  ?  '

And  she  made  answer  : —

'  I  fly  not,         yet  am  faring,

and  I  flit  here  aloft,

high  on  the  Hoof-flinger,         who  was  of  Hedge-breaker
born,  and  the  Fine-flanked  steed.'

III. — How  THE  WORLD  WEPT  FOR  BALDR.

The  gods  sent  messengers  throughout  all  the  world  to  plead  that
Baldr  might  be  wept  out  of  Hel.  And  all  beings  wept ;  men  and
living  creatures,  the  e:irth  and  rocks  and  trees  and  metals — even  as
such  things  weep  when  after  being  fast  bound  with  frost  they  become
warm.  When  the  messengers  had  well  done  their  errand  they  returned
and  found  a  certain  giantess  called  Thokk  sitting  in  a  cave.  They
bade  her  weep  Baldr  out  of  Hel,  but  she  answered  : —

'  Thokk  shall  weep         with  dry  tears  alone

that  Baldr  is  laid  on  the  bale-fire :
Never  joy  have  I  had         from  man  living  or  dead  :
let  Hel  hold  fast  what  she  hath.'

Thus  they  knew  that  Loki,  son  of  Laufey,  had  been  there,  who
was  ever  wont  to  work  most  evil  among  the  gods.

2   N


274         FRAGMENTS    FROM    THE    SNORRA    EDDA.

IV.

Pa  for  Porr  til  ar  )?eirar  er  Vimur  heitir,  allra  a  mest.  Pa  ?penti
hann  sik  megingjorjmm  ok  studdi  forstreymis  Gri]?arvol,  en  Loki  helt
undir  megingjar)>ar ;  ok  )>a  er  P6rr  kom  £  mtyja  ana,  )?a  6x  sva  mjok
din,  at  uppi  braut  a  6x1  honum.  P&  kva)>  P6rr  ]>etta  :

1  Vaxat  nu,  Vimur !         alls  mik  )?ik  va)>a  ttyir

jotna  gar)>a  i :

veiztu  ef  vex,         at  |?a  vex  m^r  asmegin
jafnhatt  upp  sem  himinn.'

En  er  Porr  kom  til  Geirroj^ar,  |?a  var  Veim  felogum  visat  fyrst  i
gestahus  til  herbergis,  ok  var  )>ar  einn  st611  til  satis,  ok  sat  ]?ar  Porr.
Pa  var)?  hann  ]?ess  varr,  at  stollinn  for  undir  hanum  upp  at  raefri ;  hann
stakk  Grtyarveli  upp  i  raptana  ok  \6t  sigaz  fast  a  stolinn ;  var|>  )?a
brestr  mikill  ok  fylgjri  skrakr ;  )?ar  hof)?u  verit  undir  stolinum  doetr
Geirro)?ar  Gjolp  ok  Greip,  ok  haf)?i  hann  brotit  hrygginn  i  ba|>um.  Pa
kva}>  porr:

'  Einu  sinni         neyttak  alls  megins

jotna  gorjmm  i :

J?as  Gjolp  ok  Greip         Geirro)>ar  doStr,
vildu  hefja  mik  til  himins.'

V.

f  Asgar]?i  fyrir  durum  Valhallar  stendr  lundr  sa  er  Glasir  er
kalla)?r,  en  lauf  hans  allt  er  gull  rautt,  sva  sem  h^r  er  kve)>it,  at

'Glasir  stendr         me)?  gullnu  laufi
firir  Sigtys  solum.'


FRAGMENTS     FROM     StfORRt'S    EDDA.  275

IV. — How  THOK  M  i:w  THE  DAUGHTERS  OF  GEIRROD.

When  Thor  was  faring  once  into  Jotunheim  he  came  to  the  river
Vimur,  of  all  rivers  the  greatest.  There  he  girt  him  with  his  belt  of
stivnt;tli.  ami  Ir.mt  on  Gridar's  staff  as  he  went  down-stream.  Loki
held  on  under  the  belt.  When  Thor  had  come  into  the  midst  of  the
flood  it  had  risen  so  high  that  it  flowed  over  his  shoulders.  Then  he
spake : —

'  Wax  not,  Vimur,         I  needs  must  wade  thee

to  reach  the  Jotun-realms ;
know  !  if  thou  wax         forthwith  shall  wax
my  god's  might  high  as  heaven.'

And  when  Thor  had  reached  Geirrod's  court,  he  and  Loki  were
taken  to  lodge  in  the  guest-house.  There  was  but  one  stool  there,  and
Thor  sat  down  upon  it.  But  presently  he  became  aware  that  it  was
rising  up  to  the  roof  under  him.  He  thrust  Gridar's  staff  against  the
rafters  and  pushed  the  stool  down,  and  then  came  a  great  crash,  and  a
shriek  was  heard ;  for  the  daughters  of  Geirrod — Yelper  and  Gripper —
had  been  under  the  stool,  and  both  their  backs  were  broken.  Then
spake  Thor : —

'  Once  only  I  used         my  god's  might  all

in  the  realms  of  the  Jotun  race  ;
When  Yelper  and  Gripper,         Geirrod's  maids,
would  have  raised  me  high  to  heaven.

V. — THE  GLISTENER.

In  Asgarth,  before  the  gates  of  Valholl,  there  stands  a  wood  called
Glistener,  whose  leaves  are  all  of  red  gold,  as  here  is  written  : —

'  Glistener  stands         with  golden  leaves
in  front  of  the  War-father's  halls.'


VOLUSPA.

i.     Hlj6j>s  bij?k  allar         helgar  kindir,
meiri  ok  minni         mogu  Heimdallar :
viltu  at  ek,  Valf6J7r,         vel  fyr  telja
forn  spjoll  fira         )?aus  fremst  of  mank.


2.     Ek  man  jotna
]?as  for)mm  mik
niu  mank  heima,
mjotvi)>  msbran


ar  of  borna
fcedda  hofyu,

niu  i  vi)n,
fyr  mold  nej'an.


3.     Ar  vas  alda         )?ars  Ymir  byg)>i,

vasa  sandr  ne  sser         ne  svalar  unnir ;
jorj?  fannsk  seva         ne  upphiminn,
gap  vas  ginnunga,         en  gras  hvergi.


Voluspd.— In  E  H,  No.  1 ;  cited  in  Sn.  E.  i.— B.  S.  Gv.  H.,  vildu  Valfo]>rs

v6l,  Dt.  HI. ;  vildu  at  ek  Valfo)>r  vel,  E ;  viltu  .  .   .  valfo}>rs,  H.        2.— 1  vij?i :  Dt.

makes  this  suggestion  with  hesitation  for  ivfyi,  E.  3. — Ginnunga,  S.  G.  Dt.  HI.
Ginnunga,  Mk.,  a  proper  name.


THE    SOOTHSAYING    OF   THE    VALA.

1.  Hearing  I  ask        all  holy  kindreds,
high  and  low-born,        sons  of  Heimdal !
Thou  too,  Odin,        who  bidst  me  utter
the  oldest  tidings        of  men  that  I  mind !

(The  World's  beginning.)

2.  I  remember  of  yore        were  born  the  Jotuns,
they  who  aforetime        fostered  me  :

nine  worlds  I  remember,        nine  in  the  Tree,

the  glorious  Fate  Tree        that  springs  'neath  the  Earth.

3.  'Twas  the  earliest  of  times        when  Ymir  lived ;
then  was  sand  nor  sea        nor  cooling  wave,

nor  was  Earth  found  ever,        nor  Heaven  on  high,
there  was  Yawning  of  Deeps        and  nowhere  grass :


i. — Sons  of  Heimdal  or  Rig,  hence  men  are  called  holy;  see  /?JJ.  2. — Nine
worlds;  see  Vm.,st,43.  Fate  Tree,  Yggdrasil ;  see  st.  19;  Grm.,  st.  31 ;  Hdv.,  st.
137  ;  Fj.,  st.  14.  3.— Ymir  ;  see  I'm.,  st.  21,  29.


278  VOLUSPA.

4.  Af>r  Burs  synir  bjojmm  of  ypj^u
}>eir  es  mi)?gar}>  maeran  skopu  ;
s6l  skein  sunnan  a  salar  steina,
Tpa  vas  grund  groi'n         groenum  lauki.

5.  Sol  varp  sunnan,         sinni  mana,
hendi  hcegri         umb  himinj6J>ur;
sol  n6  vissi,         hvar  sali  atti,
stjornur  ne  vissu,         hvar  sta)?i  attu,
mani  ne  vissi,         hvat  megins  atti.


6.     pa  gengu  regin  oil         a  rokstola,
ginnheilug  go}>,         ok  of  J?at  gaittusk
natt  ok  ntyjum         nofn  of  gafu,
morgin  hetu         ok  mi]?jan  dag,
undorn  ok  aptan,         arum  at  telja.


7.  Hittusk  aosir         a  I|?avelli

J>eirs  horg  ok  hof        hatimbru)?u  ;
afla  log)?u,         au)?  smi)?u)7u,
tangir  .skopu         ok  t61  gor)?u.

8.  Tefldu  i  tuni,         teitir  varu —

vas  ]>eim  vattergis        vant  6r  golli-
unz  )?riar  kvamu         )?ursa  meyjar,
amatkar  mjok,         or  jotunheimum.


9.     pa  gengu  regin  611         a  rokstola,

ginnheilug  go)>,  ok  of  j^at  gscttusk  :
hvern  skyldi  dverga  drott  of  skepja
6r  Brimis  bloj^i  ok  or  blam  leggjum.

9. — Hvern,  Dt.  ;  hverr,  R :  The  sense  evidently  requires  the  accusative  case.


THE     SOOTHSAYING     OF     THE     VALA.          '  279

4.  ere  the  sons  of  the  god         had  uplifted  the  world-plain,
and  fashioned  Midgarth,         the  glorious  Earth.

Sun  shone  from  the  south,         on  the  world's  bare  stones —
then  was  Earth  o'crgrown         with  herb  of  green.

5.  Sun,  Moon's  companion,         out  of  the  south
her  right  hand  flung         round  the  rim  of  heaven.
Sun  knew  not  yet         where  she  had  her  hall ;

nor  knew  the  stars         where  they  had  their  place;
nor  ever  the  Moon         what  might  he  owned.

(Ordering  of  Times  and  Seasons.)

6.  Then  went  all  the  Powers         to  their  thrones  of  doom—
the  most  holy  gods—         and  o'er  this  took  coun-el :

to  Night  and  the  New-Moons         names  they  gave:
they  named  the  Morning,         and  named  the  Mid-day,
Afternoon,  Evening,         —to  count  the  years.

(The  Golden  Age  till  the  coming  of  Fate.)

7.  Gathered  the  gods         on  the  Fields  of  Labour  ;
they  set  on  high         their  courts  and  temples  ;
they  founded  forges,         wrought  rich  treasures,
tongs  they  hammered         and  fashioned  tools.

8.  They  played  at  tables         in  court,  were  joyous, —
little  they  wanted         for  wealth  of  gold. —

Till  there  came  forth  three         of  the  giant  race,
all  fearful  maidens,         from  Jotunheim.

(Creation  of  the  Dwarfs.)

9.  Then  went  all  the  Powers         to  their  thrones  of  doom, —
the  most  holy  gods,—         and  o'er  this  took  counsel :
whom  should  they  make         the  lord  of  dwarfs

out  of  Ymir's  blood,         and  his  swarthy  limbs.

4. — The  sons  of  the  god,  or  sons  of  Bur  ;  see  Vsp.  en  skamma,  st.  2.  6. —
Thrones  of  doom,  beneath  Yggdrasil ;  see  Grm.,  st.  30.  8.— All-fearful  maidens:
Cf.t  this  stanza  with  60,  61 ;  the  Norns,  st.  20.  9.— Ymir  is  here  called  Brimir.


280  VOLUSPA.

10.  par  vas  M6tsognir         msfeztr  of  or)>inn
dverga  allra,         en  Durinn  annarr;
\>e'\r  mannlikun         morg  of  gor]?u
dvergar  i  jorjni,         sem  Durinn  sag)>i.

11.  Nyi  ok  Ntyi,         Nor)>ri  ok  Su]>ri,
Austri  ok  Vestri,         Alftofr,  Dvalinn,
Nar  ok  Nai'nn,         Nipingr,  Dai'nn,
Bifurr,  Bafurr,         Bomburr,  N6ri,
Ann  ok  6narr,         Ai,  Mj6J>vitnir.

12.  Viggr  ok  Gandalfr,         Vindalfr,  prai'nn,
pekkr  ok  p6rinn,         pror,  Vitr  ok  Litr,
Nyr  ok  Nyra)>r,         nii  hefk  dverga—
Reginn  ok  Rtysvtyr—         r^tt  of  tatya.

13.  Fili,  Kili,         Fundinn,  Nali,
Heptifili,         Hannarr,  Sviurr,
Frar,  Hornbori,         Frcegr  ok  Loni,
Aurvangr,  Jari,         Eikinskjaldi.

14.  Mai  es  dverga  i  Dvalins  li)n
Ijona  kindum  til  Lofars  telja  ;
j?eir  es  sottu  fra  salar  steini
Aurvanga  sjot  til  Joruvalla.

15.  par  vas  Draupnir        ok  Dolg)>rasir,
Har,  Haugspori,         Hl^vangr,  Gloiinn,
Dori,  6ri,         Dufr,  Andvari,

Skirfir,  Virfir,         Skafi)?r,  Ai.

16.  Alfr  ok  Yngvi,         Eikinskjaldi,
Fjalarr  ok  Frosti,         Fi)>r  ok  Ginnarr  ;
)>at  mun  sb  uppi,         me}?an  old  lifir,
langni]?ja  tal         til  Lofars  hafat.


H.J6. — Regarded  by  most  authorities  as  an  interpolation.          14. — LiJ?i,  Dt.  and
HI. ;  lij>i,  R.


THE     SOOTHSAYING     OF    THE    VALA.  281

10.  Mead-drinker  then        was  made  the  highest,
but  Durin  second        of  all  the  dwarfs ;

and  out  of  the  earth        these  twain-shaped  beings
in  form  like  man,        as  Durin  bade.

11.  New  Moon,  Waning-moon,         All-thief,  Dallier,
North  and  South        and  East  and  West.
Corpse-like,  Death-like,         Niping,  Damn,
Bifur,  Bafur,         Bombur,  Nori,

Ann  and  Onar,        AI,  Mead-wolf.

12.  Vigg  and  Wand-elf,        Wind-elf,  Thrai'nn,
Thekk  and  Thorin,         Thror,  Vit,  and  Lit,

Nyr  and  Regin,         New-counsel,  Wise-counsel,—
now  have  I  numbered        the  dwarfs  aright.

13.  Fili,  Kili,         Fundin,  Nali,
Heptifili,         Hannar,  Sviur,

Frar,  Hornbori,         Fraeg  and  Loni,
Aurvang,  Jari,         Oaken-shield.

14.  'Tis  time  to  number         in  Dallier's  song-mead
all  the  dwarf-kind         of  Lofar's  race, —

who  from  earth's  threshold,         the  Plains  of  Moisture,
sought  below         the  Sandy-realms.

15.  There  were  Draupnir        and  Dolgthrasir,
Har  and  Haugspori,         Hlevang,  Gloin,
Dori,  Ori,         Duf,  Andvari,

Skirfir,  Virfir,         Skafid,  Ai.

16.  Elf  and  Yngvi,         Oaken-shield,
Fjalar  and  Frost,         Fin  and  Ginar.
Thus  shall  be  told         throughout  all  time
the  line  who  were  born         of  Lofar's  race.

11-16. — A  translation  of  these  obscure  names  has  only  been  given  where  it  seems  to
suggest  the  character  of  the  dwarfs.  14. — Dallier's  song-mead  is  thus  taken  by  Dt.
and  HI.  as  a  synonym  for  poetry  ;  cf.  Snorri's  "  Dallier's  drink."  Dallier  is  a  dwarf
well  known  in  the  Edda,  and  is  chosen  to  represent  his  race  who  brewed  the  mead  (Sn.E.),
This  dwarf  migration  from  the  earth's  surface  is  also  suggested  by  Dt,  and  HI,

2  O


282  VOLUSPA.


17.  Unz  j>rir  kv&mn         6r  ]>vi  lij>i
oflgir  ok  astkir         resir  at  husi ;
fundu  a  landi  litt  megandi
Ask  ok  Emblu         orloglausa.

18.  Ond  ne"  attu,  6}>  ne"  hofyu,
la  ne"  larti         n€  litu  go)>a  ;

ond  gaf  O|>inn,         6|>  gaf  Hoenir,
Id  gaf  Lojnirr         ok  litu  go|?a.


19.  Ask  veitk  standa,  heitir  Yggdrasil,
bar  ba|>mr  ausinn  hvita  auri ;
)?a|>an  koma  doggvar         es  i  dali  falla,
stendr  fc  of  groenn         Ur]?ar  brunni.

20.  pa|>an  koma  meyjar         margs  vitandi
j?riar  6r  ]>eim  sal         es  und  ]?olli  stendr  ;
Ur]>  h^tu  eina,         a]?ra  VerJ?andi,
skaru  a'ski^i,         Skuld  ena  )>ri]?ju  ;
}>&r  log  log)?u,         j?ecr  lif  kuru

alda  bornum,         orlog  seggja.


21.     pat  man  folkvig         fyrst  i  heimi,
es  Gollveigu         geirum  studdu
ok  i  hollo  Hars         hana  brendu,
|?rysvar  brendu         |>rysvar  borna,
opt  osjaldan — :         ]>6  enn  lifir.


19.— Heitir  Yggdrasil,  R  H  W  U  ;  Yggdrasils,  r,  H.  G.  Sv.  Magn.  21.— Man,
Mh.  S.  /.;  man  hon,  R.  H.  has  the  third  person,  as  in  st.  27,  28,  29,31,  32,  35,  38
39.


THE    SOOTHSAYING    OF    THE    VALA.  283

(Creation  of  Men.)

17.  Then  came  three  gods         of  the  jEsir  kindred,
mighty  and  blessed,         towards  their  home.
They  found  on  the  seashore,         wanting  power,
with  fate  unwoven,         an  Ash  and  Elm.

18.  Spirit  they  had  not,         and  mind  they  owned  not, —
blood,  nor  voice        nor  fair  appearance.

Spirit  gave  Odin,         and  mind  gave  Honir,
blood  gave  Lodur,        and  aspect  fair.

(The  Tree  of  Life  and  Fate.)

19.  An  ash  I  know  standing,         'tis  called  Yggdrasil,
a  high  tree  sprinkled         with  shining  drops ;
come  dews  therefrom         which  fall  in  the  dales ;
it  stands  ever  green        o'er  the  well  of  Weird.

20.  There  are  the  Maidens,         all  things  knowing,
three  in  the  hall         which  stands  'neath  the  Tree.
One  is  named  '  Weird,'         the  second  '  Being ' —
who  grave  on  tablets —         but  '  Shall '  the  third.
They  lay  down  laws,         they  choose  out  life,
they  speak  the  doom        of  the  sons  of  men.

(The  War  of  the  Gods.)

21.  I  remember  the  first         great  war  in  the  world,
when  Golden-draught         they  pierced  with  spears,
and  burned  in  the  hall         of  Odin  the  High  One ;
thrice  they  burned  her,         the  three  times  born, —
oft,  not  seldom —         yet  still  she  lives.


17. — Elm:  the  meaning  of  Icelandic  embla  is  doubtful.          18. — Hbnir  :  a  god  of
wisdom.      Lodur  probably  stands  for  Loki,  for  these  three  were  always  companions.
20. — Weird,  see  Gg.,  st.  7.        21. — The  story  of  this  war  between  the  /Esir  ami  Wanes
is  n.ver  fully  told,  but  is  the  subject  of  constant  allusions;   see    I'm.,  Jy.     Golden
draught,  see  V'sp.  en  skamma,  st.  9.


284  VOLUSPA.

22.  Hei|?i  he"tu         hvars  husa  kvam
volu  velspaa,         vitti  ganda  ;

sei)>  hvars  kunni,         sei|>  hugleikin,
a>  vas  angan         illrar  bru]?ar.

23.  pa  gengu  regin  oil  a  rokstola,
ginnheilug  go)?,  ok  of  ]?at  gacttusk
hvart  skyldu  eesir  afraj?  gjalda
e)>a  skyldu  go}>  oil  gildi  eiga.

24.  Fleygjn  6]>inn         ok  i  folk  of  skaut :
)?at  vas  enn  folkvig         fyrst  i  heimi ;
brotinn  vas  borjweggr         borgar  asa,
knattu  vanir  vigska        vollu  sporna.


25.     pa  gengu  regin  oil         a  rokstola,

ginnheilug  go}>,         ok  of  ]>at  g^ttusk
hverr  lopt  hef)?i         lavi  blandit
ej^a  sett  jotuns         O)?s  mey  gefna.


26.     |"6rr  einn  )>ar  va
hann  sjaldan  sitr
a  gengusk  ei)>ar,
mal  611  meginlig


jmmginn  mo]?i —
es  slikt  of  fregn-
or]>  ok  sosri,
es  a  me)7al  foru.


27.     Veit  Heimdallar         hljoj?  of  folgit
und  heijwjnum         helgum  ba)>mi ;
a  s6  ausask         aurgum  forsi
•  af  ve}>i  ValfoJ^rs :         vitu}>  enn  e)?a  hvat  ?


42. — Hugleikin,  H.  B.  Gv. ;  hon  leikinn,  R,  M.  L.


THE    SOOTHSAYING    OF    THE    VALA.  285

22.  Men  called  her  '  Witch,'       when  she  came  to  their  dwellings,
flattering  seeress ;         wands  she  enchanted,

spells  many  wove  she,         light-hearted  wove  them,
and  of  evil  women         was  ever  the  joy.

23.  Then  went  all  the  Powers        to  their  thrones  of  doom,
the  most  holy  gods,         and  o'er  this  took  counsel :
whether  the  JEsir        should  pay  a  were-gild

and  all  Powers  together        make  peaceful  offering.

24.  But  Odin  hurled        and  shot  'mid  the  host ;

and  still  raged  the  first         great  war  in  the  world.
Broken  then  were        the  bulwarks  of  Asgard,
the  Wanes,  war  wary,        trampled  the  field.

(War  with  the  Jotuns.)

25.  Then  went  all  the  Powers        to  their  thrones  of  doom,
the  most  holy  gods,         and  o'er  this  took  counsel :
who  all  the  air         had  mingled  with  poison

and  Freyja  had  yielded         to  the  race  of  Jotuns.

26.  Alone  fought  the  Thunderer         with  raging  heart —
seldom  he  rests         when  he  hears  such  tidings.
Oaths  were  broken,         words  and  swearing,

all  solemn  treaties         made  betwixt  them.

(The  Secret  Pledges  of  the  Gods.)

27.  I  know  where  Heimdal's         hearing  is  hidden
under  the  heaven-wont         holy  tree,

which  I  see  ever  showered         with  falling  streams        [what  ?
from  All-father's  pledge.          —Would  ye  know  further,  and


22. — Witch,  of  Vala.  23. — Lines  2  and  3  are  thus  understood  by  HI.  25. —
For  Snorri's  account,  see  Introd.  Freyja  is  here  called  the  bride  of  Ud  or  Ottar ;  see
Udl


286  VOLUSPA.

28.     Ein  sat  uti,         es  enn  aldni  kvam
Yggjungr  asa         ok  i  augu  leit.


Hvers  fregnij>  mik,         hvi  freistij;  min  ?

/  •*

29.  Allt  veit,  Ojrinn  !         hvar  auga  fait,

i  enom  ms&ra         Mimis  brunni ;
drekkr  mjoj>  Mimir         morgin  hverjan
af  vej>i  Valfo|?rs  :         vitu)>  enn  e^a  hvat  ?

30.  Val|>i  Herfo)>r         hringa  ok  men
fyr  spjoll  spaklig         ok  spa  ganda.


s&  vitt  ok  vitt        of  verold  hverja.

31.  Sa  valkyrjur         vitt  of  komnar,
gorvar  at  ri)>a         til  Got}?j6}>ar  :
Skuld  belt  skildi,         en  Skogul  onnur,
Gu)?r,  Hildr,  Gondul         ok  Geirskogul.
Nu  'ru  talj^ar         nonnur  Herjans,
gorvar  at  rij>a         grund  valkyrjur.

32.  Ek  sa  Baldri         blo)?gum  tivur,
6)?ins  barni         orlog  folgin  :
stoj>  of  vaxinn         vollum  hseri
mar  ok  mjok  fagr         t  mistilteinn.

33.  Varj?  af  meij>i         es  meer  syndisk
harmflaug  hsottlig  :         H6)?r  nam  skjota  ;
Baldrs  bro)>ir  vas         of  borinn  snimma,
sa  nam  O]?ins  sunr        einnsettr  vega.

34.  po  hendr  icva         n6  hofo}?  kembj^i,
a)>r  a  bal  of  bar         Baldrs  andskota ;
en  Frigg  of  gret         i  Fensolum

va  Valhallar :         vituj?  enn  e]?a  hvat  ?

3o.— Fyr  spjoll,  Gv. ;  fekk  spjoll,  E.  Mh.  G.  S.  J. ;   fespjbll,  B.  C.  Sv.  R.  ;   fe
spioll,  R


THE     SOOTHSAYING     OF     THE     VALA.  2*7

28.     I  sat  lone  enchanting         when  came  the  Dread  One,
the  ancient  god,         and  gazed  in  my  eyes:
'  What  dost  thou  ask  of  me  ?         why  dost  thou  prove  me  ?


29.  All  know  I,  Odin, —         yea,  where  thou  hast  hidden
thine  eye  in  the  wondrous         well  of  Mimir,

who  each  morn         from  the  pledge  of  All-father

drinks  the  mead  "          —Would  ye  know  further,  and  what  ?

30.  Then  Odin  bestowed  on  me         rings  and  trinkets
for  magic  spells         and  the  wisdom  of  wands.

I  saw  far  and  wide         into  every  world.


31.  From  far  I  saw         the  Valkyries  coming
ready  to  ride        to  the  hero  host.

Fate  held  a  shield,         and  Lofty  followed
War  and  Battle,         Bond  and  Spearpoint.
Numbered  now         are  the  Warfather's  maidens,
Valkyries,  ready        to  ride  o'er  Earth.

32.  I  saw  for  Baldr,         the  bleeding  god,

the  child  of  Odin,         his  doom  concealed.
High  o'er  the  fields,         there  stood  upgrown,
most  slender  and  fair,         the  mistletoe.

33.  And  there  came  from  that  plant,        though  slender  it  seemed,
the  fell  woe-shaft         which  Hod  did  shoot.

But  Baldr's  brother         was  born  ere  long  ;
that  son  of  Odin         fought  one  night  old;

34.  for  never  hand         he  bathed,  nor  head,
ere  he  laid  on  the  bale-fire         Baldr's  foe.

But  Frigg  long  wept         o'er  the  woe  of  Valholl

in  Fen's  moist  halls          —Would  ye  know  further,  and  what  ?


28. — Heirndal's  hearing  was  celebrated.  Dt.  and  HI.  thus  correct  the  hitherto
accepted  translation  horn  of  Id.  hljoj).  29. — Mimir,  a  water  giant.  He  is  the  wise
teacher  and  counsellor  of  the  gods,  although  a  Jiitiin  ;  see  Hdv.,  st.  139.  32'34- —
See  Bdr,,  st.  8-12.  34. — Fen's  moist  halls  :  the  home  of  Frigg,


288  VOLUSPA.


35.  Hapt  sa  Hggja  und  hvera  lundi
la-gjarns  liki  Loka  a)>ekkjan  ;
)?ar  sitr  Sigyn  )>eygi  of  sinum

ver  vel  glyjuj? :  vitu)>  enn  e}?a  hvat  ?

36.  A  fellr  austan         of  eitrdali

soxum  ok  sver)>um  :         Slij>r  heitir  su.


37.  Stoj>  fyr  nor]>an         d  Ni]?av6llum
salr  6r  golli         Sindra  a>ttar,

en  annarr  st6]>         a  Okolni
bj6rsalr  jotuns,         sa  Brimir  heitir.

38.  Sal  sa  standa        s6lu  fjarri
Nastrondu  a,         nor]?r  horfa  dyrr;
fellu  eitrdropar         inn  of  Ijora,

sa  's  undinn  salr         orma  hryggjum.

39.  Sa  ]?ar  va)?a        )>unga  strauma
menn  meinsvara        ok  morjjvarga
ok  ]?anns  annars  glepr        eyrarunu ;
)>ar  so  Ni]?h6ggr         na'i  framgengna,
sleit  vargr  vera :         vitu)>  enn  e]?a  hvat  ?

40.  Austr  sat  en  aldna         i  Jarnvi]>i
ok  fceddi  )?ar         Fenris  kindir;
ver]?r  af  ollum         einna  nekkverr
tungls  tjugari         i  trolls  hami.

41.  Fyllisk  fjorvi         feigra  manna,
ry)>r  ragna  sjot         raujmm  dreyra  ;
svort  ver)?a  solskin         of  sumur  eptir,
ve)?r  oil  valynd  :         vitu]>  enn  e\>a  hvat  ?


THE     SOOTHSAYING     OF    THE     VALA.  289

(Vision  into  Hel  and  Jotunheim.)

35.  I  saw  lying  bound         in  Cauldron-grove
one  like  the  form        of  guile-loving  Loki.
And  there  sat  Sigyn,        yet  o'er  her  husband
rejoicing  little.        — Would  ye  know  further,  and  what  ?

36.  From  the  eastward  a  flood,        the  Stream  of  Fear,
bore  swords  and  daggers        through  Poison-dales.


37.  To  the  northward  stood        on  the  Moonless  Plains,
the  golden  hall         of  the  Sparkler's  race ;

and  a  second  stood         in  the  Uncooled  realm,
a  feast-hall  of  Jotuns,         '  Fire,'  'tis  called  :

38.  and  far  from  the  sun         I  saw  a  third

on  the  Strand  of  Corpses,         with  doors  set  northward  :
down  through  the  roof        dripped  poison-drops,
for  that  hall  was  woven        with  serpents'  backs.

39.  I  saw  there  wading        the  whelming  streams
wolf-like  murderers,         men  forsworn,

and  those  who  another's        love-whisperer  had  wiled.

The  dragon,  Fierce-stinger,        fed  on  corpses,

a  wolf  tore  men.        — Would  ye  know  further,  and  what  ?

40.  Far  east  in  Iron-wood        sat  an  old  giantess,
Fenrir's  offspring        she  fostered  there.
From  among  them  all        doth  one  come  forth,
in  guise  of  a  troll,        to  snatch  the  sun.

41.  He  is  gorged,  as  on  lives        of  dying  men  ;

he  reddens  the  place         of  the  Powers  like  blood.

Swart  grows  the  sunshine         of  summer  after,

all  baleful  the  storms.        — Would  ye  know  further,  and  what  ?

35. — Set  Ls.  prose  ending.  37. — The  Sparkler:  a  dwarf  and  forger  of  the  gods'
treasures;  see  Grm.,  st.  43.  39. — Fierce-stinger,  see  Grm.,  st.  35.  40. — Ironwood  :
a  famous  mythical  forest  in  Jotunheim.  Fenrir's  offspring  :  Skoll,  who  pursiuil  the  sun,
and  Hati,  who  followed  the  moon  ;  see  Grm.,  st.  39.

2   P


2go  VOLUSPA.


42.  Sat  bar  a  haugi  ok  sl6  horpu
gygjar  hirbir,  t  glabr  Eggb£r  ;
g6l  of  hanum  i  gaglvibi
fagrraubr  hani  sas  Fjalarr  heitir.

43.  G61  of  asum  Gollinkambi,
sa  vekr  holba  at  Herjafobrs  ;
en  annarr  gelr         fyr  jorb  nej^an
s6trau|?r  hani  at  solum  Heljar.

44.  Geyr  nu  Garmr  mjok         fyr  Gnipahelli,
festr  mun  slitna,         en  freki  rinna  !
fjolj?  veitk  frce)?a,         fram  s6k  lengra
umb  ragna  rok,         romm  sigtiva.

45.  Brce]?r  munu  berjask         ok  at  bonum  verj>ask,
munu  systrungar         sifjum  spilla  ;

hart's  i  heimi,         h6rd6mr  mikill  ;
skeggjold,  skalmold,         skildir  'u  klofnir,
vindold,  vargold,         aj^r  verold  steypisk  ;
mun  engi  ma]?r         6)?rum  ]?yrma.

46.  Leika  Mims  synir,         en  mjotvij?r  kyndisk
at  enu  gamla         Gjallarhorni ;

hatt  blsess  Heimdallr,         horn's  a  lopti,
mselir  OJ^inn         vij?  Mims  hofu|>.


44. — Veitk,  /.  Sv.  G.  ;  veit  hon,  R. ;  so  aho  st.  49,  58.        46. — Mjotvi|?r,  Dt.  and
HI.  (notes)  ;  mjotujjr,  R,  etc.        47. — Losnar  in  H  is  followed  by

hrge)?ask  allir  4  helvegum
£br  Surtar  ban  sevi  of  gleypir.


THE     SOOTHSAYING    OF    THE    VALA.  291

(Signs  of  Doom.)

42.  Sits  on  a  mound         and  strikes  his  harp

the  gleeful  Swordsman,         warder  of  giant-wives;
o'er  him  crows        in  the  roosting  tree
the  fair  red  cock         who  Fjalar  is  called.

43.  Crows  o'er  the  gods        the  Golden-combed  ;

he  wakes  the  heroes         in  War-father's  dwellings ;
and  crows  yet  another        beneath  the  earth,
a  dark  red  cock         in  the  halls  of  Hel.

44.  Loud  bays  Garm        before  Gaping- Hel ;

the  bond  shall  be  broken         the  Wolf  run  free.

Hidden  things  I  know  ;        still  onward  I  see

the  great  Doom  of  the  Powers,        the  gods  of  war.

45.  Brothers  shall  fight        and  be  as  murderers ;
sisters'  children         shall  stain  their  kinship.

'Tis  ill  with  the  world ;  comes  fearful  whoredom,

a  Sword  age,  Axe  age,  — shields  are  cloven,

a  Wind  age,  Wolf  age,  ere  the  world  sinks.

Never  shall  man  then  spare  another.

46.  Mim's  sons  arise  ;        the  Fate  Tree  kindles
at  the  roaring  sound        of  Gjalla-horn.
Loud  blows  Heimdal,        the  horn  is  aloft,
and  Odin  speaks        with  Mimir's  head.


42. — The  gleeful  Swordsman  is  the  warder  of  Jotunheim,  and  corresponds  with
Heimdal,  the  watchman  of  the  gods.t  43. — The  Golden-combed,  see  Fj.,  st.  17.
44. — Garm,  the  Hel  hound  ;  see  Bdr.,  st.  2.  He  and  Tyr  fight  and  slay  one  another
(Sn.  £.)•  Gaping-hel,  Icelandic  Gnipa-hel,  is  descriptive  of  the  craggy  rock  entrance
which  forms  the  month  of  Hel.  The  Wolf,  see  Ls.  39.  46. — Mini  or  Mimir :  his  sons
must  be  the  waters  of  the  well,  or  the  streams  that  flow  from  it.  Compare  s-Egir  and
Hymir's  daughters  ;  Hytn.  st.  2,  Ls.  st.  34.  The  story  of  Mimir's  head  is  told  in  Yng-
linga  S.  (see  Introd.J,  but  here  an  earlier  form  of  the  myth  is  implied,  in  which  the  head
is  a  well-spring  of  wisdom.  The  Fate  Tree  :  the  unemended  mjotujjr  of  the  MSS.  has
suggested  various  renderings — the  judge  appears;  fate  approaches.


VOLUSPA.

47.  Ymr  aldit  tr6,         en  jotunn  losnar,
skelfr  Yggdrasils         askr  standandi,

48.  Hvat's  me}>  asum  ?         hvat's  me]?  olfum  ?
gnyr  allr  jotunheimr,         Eesir'u  a  }>ingi ;
stynja  dvergar         fyr  steindurum,
veggbergs  visir :         vituj?  enn  e]>a  hvat  ?

49.  Geyr  nii  Garmr  mjok         fyr  Gnipahelli,
festr  mun  slitna,         en  freki  rinna !
fjolj?  veitk  frce]?a,         fram  sek  lengra
umb  ragna  rok,        romm  sigtiva.


50.  Hrymr  ekr  austan,  hefsk  lind  fyrir  ;
snysk  jormungandr  i  jotunmojn  ;
ormr  knyr  unnir,  en  ari  hlakkar,
slitr  na'i  ni)?f6lr ;  Naglfar  losnar.

51.  Kjoll  ferr  nor]>an ;         koma  munu  Heljar
of  log  ly]>ir,         en  Loki  styrir  ;

fara  fiflmegir         me)?  freka  allir,
)?eim  es  br6|?ir         Byleists  i  for.

52.  Surtr  ferr  sunnan         me]?  sviga  Isevi,
skinn  af  sver]?i         s61  valtiva  ;
grjotbjorg  gnata,         en  gifr  hrata,
tro]?a  halir  helveg,        en  himina  klofnar.

53.  pa  komr  Hlinar         harmr  annarr  fram,
es  6]?inn  ferr        vty  ulf  vega,

en  bani  Belja        bjartr  at  Surti :
]?&  mun  Friggjar         falla  angan.


48.— Placed  here  by  B.  G.  S.;  fallows  51  in  R.  51.— Norman,  B.  N.  G.  Sv.  Mh.
J. ;  austan,  B  and  other  MSS.  Heljar,  B.  N.  G.  Sv.  Mh.  J.  ;  Muspellz,  R  and  other
MSS.


THE    SOOTHSAYING    OF    THE    VALA.  293

47.  Groans  the  Ancient  Tree,        Fenrir  is  freed,—
shivers,  yet  standing,        Yggdrasil's  ash.

48.  How  do  the  gods  fare,        how  do  the  elves  fare  ?
All  Jotunheim  rumbles,        the  gods  are  in  council ;
before  the  stone  doors        the  dwarfs  are  groaning,

a  rock-wall  finding         —Would  ye  know  further,  and  what  ?

49.  Loud  bays  Garm         before  Gaping-hel :

the  bond  shall  be  broken,        the  Wolf  run  free.

Hidden  things  I  know ;        still  onward  I  see

the  great  Doom  of  the  Powers,        the  gods  of  war.

(Gathering  of  the  Destroyers.)

50.  Drives  Hrym  from  the  East        holding  shield  on  high  ;
the  World-serpent  writhes        in  Jotun-rage;

he  lashes  the  waves  ;        screams  a  pale-beaked  eagle,
rending  corpses,        the  Death  boat  is  launched.

51.  Sails  the  bark  from  the  North  ;        the  hosts  of  Hel
o'er  the  sea  are  coming,        and  Loki  steering,
brother  of  Byleist,        he  fares  on  the  way

with  Fenrir  and  all        the  monster  kinsmen.

52.  Rides  Surt  from  the  South         fire,  bane  of  branches,
sun  of  the  war  gods,        gleams  from  his  sword.
The  rock-hills  crash,        the  troll-wives  totter,

men  flock  Helward,        and  heaven  is  cleft.

(The  last  battles  of  the  Gods.)

53.  Soon  comes  to  pass        Frigg's  second  woe,
when  Odin  fares        to  fight  with  the  wolf ;
then  must  he  fall,        her  lord  beloved,

and  Beli's  bright  slayer        must  bow  before  Surt.

47. — Fenrir,  not  Loki.  must  be  intended  by  Jotun  of  the  text,  for  Loki  was  always
reckoned  among  the  gods.  50. — Hrym,  the  leader  of  the  Frost-giants.  A  pale-beaked
eagle,  Corpse-swallower ;  see  Vm.  37.  Death-boat  or  Naglfar,  the  Nail-ferry,  said  by
Snorri  to  be  made  oj  the  nails  of  dead  men.  51. — Byleist  is  unknown  except  as  Loki's
brother.  52.— Surt,  see  Vm.,  st.  53.  53.— Beli's  bright  slayer,  or  Frey.  Beli,
Snorri  tells  us,  was  a  giant  whom  Frey  slew  with  a  stag's  horn  for  lack  of  the  sword
which  he  had  given  for  Gerd  ;  see  Skin.  st.  16,  Ls.  st.  42.


294  VOLUSPA.

54.  Komr  enn  mikli         mogr  Sigfojmr,
Vtyarr,  vega         at  valdyri ;

Ijctr  megi  hvej>rungs         mund  of  standa
hjor  til  hjarta  :         )>a's  hefnt  foj^ur.

55.  Komr  enn  mEcri         mogr  H16j>ynjar ;


gengr  6]>ins  sunr         ormi  mceta.

56.     Drepr  af  mo]>i  mij?gar)>s  veur ;

munu  halir  allir  heimstoj?  ry]?ja  ;

gengr  fet  niu  Fjorgynjar  burr

neppr  fra  na)?ri  ntys  6kvi)mum.


57.  Sol  t6r  sortna,        sigr  fold  i  mar,
hverfa  af  himni         heij>ar  stjornur ;
geisar  eimi         ok  aldrnari,

leikr  har  hiti         vi}>  himin  sjalfan.

58.  Geyr  nu  Garmr  mjok         fyr  Gnipahelli,
festr  mun  slitna,         en  freki  rinna  !
fjol]?  veitk  frce)>a,         fram  sek  lengra
umb  ragna  rok,        romm  sigtiva.


59.  Se"k  upp  koma        6}>ru  sinni
jor|>  or  segi         i]?jagrcena ;
falla  forsar,         flygr  orn  yfir,
sas  a  fjalli         fiska  veijnr.

60.  Finnask  sesir        a  tyavelli

ok  of  mold]?inur         matkan  dcema,
ok  minnask  |?ar         a  megindoma
ok  a  Fimbultys        fornar  runar.

55,  lines  3  and  4. — A  trace  of  these  missing  lines  is  found  in  H,  but  the  reading  is
doubtful : —  ginn  lopt  yfir        lif>r  frdnn  ne)?an

— G.

59.— S£k,  G. ;  ser  hon,  R.  H.  ;  so  also  st.  64.


THE     SOOTHSAYING     OF    THE     VALA.  295

54.  Comes  forth  the  stalwart        son  of  the  War-father,
Vidar,  to  strive        with  the  deadly  beast ;

lets  he  the  sword        from  his  right  hand  leap
into  Fenrir's  heart,        and  avenged  is  the  father.

55.  Comes  forth  the  glorious        offspring  of  Earth,
Thor,  to  strive         with  the  glistening  Serpent.


56.  Strikes  in  his  wrath         the  Warder  of  Midgard,
while  mortals  all        their  homes  forsake  ;

nine  feet  recoils  he,         the  son  of  Odin,

bowed,  from  the  dragon         who  fears  not  shame.

(The  End  of  the  World.)

57.  The  sun  is  darkened,         Earth  sinks  in  the  sea,
from  heaven  turn         the  bright  stars  away.
Rages  smoke        with  fire,  the  life-feeder,
high  flame  plays        against  heaven  itself.

58.  Loud  bays  Garm         before  Gaping-hel,

the  bond  shall  be  broken,        the  Wolf  run  free ;

hidden  things  I  know ;        still  onward  I  see

the  great  Doom  of  the  Powers,        the  gods  of  war.

(The  new  World.)

59.  I  see  uprising        a  second  time
earth  from  the  ocean,        green  anew  ;
the  waters  fall,        on  high  the  eagle
flies  o'er  the  fell        and  catches  fish.

60.  The  gods  are  gathered        on  the  Fields  of  Labour  ;
they  speak  concerning         the  great  World  Serpent,
and  remember  there        things  of  former  fame

and  the  Mightiest  God's        old  mysteries.

55. — The  Serpent,  see  Hym.,  st.  23.


296  VOLUSPA.

61.     par  munu  eptir        undrsamligar
gollnar  toflur         i  grasi  finnask
)>ajrs  i  ardaga         attar  hoffm.


62.  Munu  6sanir         akrar  vaxa,

bols  mun  batna,         mun  Baldr  koma,
bua  Holpr  ok  Baldr        Hropts  sigtoptir,
vel  valtivar  :         vituj>  enn  e)>a  hvat  ?

63.  pd  kna  Hcenir         hlautvif?  kj6sa


ok  burir  byggva         brce)?ra  Tveggja
vindheim  vtyan  :         vitu)?  enn  e|>a  hvat  ?

64.     Sal  sek  standa         s61u  fegra,
golli  |>ak)?an         d  Giml6  :
)>ar  skulu  dyggvar        dr6ttir  byggva
ok  of  aldrdaga        yn]?is  nj6ta.


65.     Komr  enn  riki         at  reginddmi
oflugr  ofan         sds  ollu  rstyr.


65.     Komr  enn  dimmi  dreki  fljugandi,

na.\>r  frann  nej?an  frd  Ni)?afj6llum  ;

bersk  i  fjo]?rum  — flygr  voll  yfir —

Ni]?h6ggr  nai ;  nu  mun  sokkvask.


62.— Vel  valtivar,  R,  Dt.,  HI. ;  v6  valtiva,  R.  G.  H.  S.         65,  lines  i  and  2.—
Found  only  in  H.


THE    SOOTHSAYING    OF    THE    VALA.  297

61.     Then  shall  be  found        the  wondrous-seeming
golden  tables        hid  in  the  grass,
those  they  had  used        in  days  of  yore.


62.  And  there  unsown        shall  the  fields  bring  forth  ;
all  harm  shall  be  healed  ;         Baldr  will  come —
Hod  and  Baldr        shall  dwell  in  Valholl,

at  peace  the  war  gods.       — Would  ye  know  further,  and  what  ?

63.  Then  Honir  shall  cast         the  twigs  of  divining,
and  the  sons  shall  dwell         of  Odin's  brothers

in  Wind-home  wide.          —Would  ye  know  further,  and  what  ?


64.  I  see  yet  a  hall         more  fair  than  the  sun,
roofed  with  gold         in  the  Fire-sheltered  realm  ;
ever  shall  dwell  there  '      all  holy  beings,

blest  with  joy         through  the  days  of  time.

(Coming  of  the  new  Power,  passing  of  the  old.)

65.  Comes  from  on  high        to  the  great  Assembly
the  Mighty  Ruler        who  orders  all.


66.     Fares  from  beneath        a  dim  dragon  flying,
a  glistening  snake        from  the  Moonless  Fells.
Fierce-stinger  bears        the  dead  on  his  pinions
away  o'er  the  plains. —         I  sink  now  and  cease.

62. — Valholl,  called  here  the  victory  halls  of  Hropt  (Odin).  63. — The  twigs,  set
Hym.,  st.  1.  64. — Fire-sheltered  realm,  Icelandic  (Giml6  from  gim,  fire,  and  h!6,
shelter;  Dt.  and  HI.),  which  has  often  been  translated  jewelled  ;  but  the  above  meaning
shows  this  hall  in  contrast  to  the  others  of  st.  37  and  38.


2Q


BIBLIOGRAPHY

WITH    LIST    OF    ABBREVIATIONS.


I.

MSS.    OF    THE    EDDA.

R  CODEX  REGIUS  OF  THE  ELDER  EDDA,  a  parchment
MS.  of  the  I3th-i4th  centuries,  in  the  Copenhagen  Library.
Facsimile  by  Finnur  Jonsson,  1896.

A     CODEX  ARNAMAGN^ANUS,  parchment  of  the  I4th  century,
containing  fragments  of  Vm.,  Grm.,  Hym.,  Skm.,  Hrbl.,  Bdr.
Copenhagen.
H     HAUKSB6K,  parchment  of  the  I4th  century,  containing  Volnspa.

Copenhagen.

r       CODEX  REGIUS  OF   SNORRA  EDDA,  a  parchment  of  the
I4th  century,  containing   a   few   strophes   quoted  from    the
Saemundar  Edda  and  unknown  sources.
U     CODEX  UPSALIENSIS  OF   SNORRA   EDDA,  a  parchment

MS.  of  the  I4th  century.     Upsala.
W    CODEX   WORMIANUS    OF   SNORRA   EDDA,  a  parchment

of  the  late  I4th  century,  containing  R]>.     Copenhagen.
F      FLATEYJARBOK,  a  parchment  of  the  I4th  century,  containing

Hdl.  Copenhagen.

B,  C,  B,  L,  N  O,  S,  St.  Paper  MSS.  of  the  iyth  century,  containing
Gg.  and  Fj.

II.

EDDIC     POEMS.
Alv.        Alvissmal.
Bdr.       Baldrs  Draumar.
Fj.          Fjolsvinnsmal.
Gg.         Grougaldr.
Grm.      Grimnismal.
Hav.       Havamal.
Hdl.       Hyndluljo)>.     .
Hrbl.     Harbar)>slj6J>.


Hym.
Ls.

Hymiskvtya.
Lokasenna.

RJ>.
Skm.

Rigsjnjla.
Skirnismal.

Vm.
'    Vsp.
prk.

Vafyrujmismal.
Voluspa.
prymskvi]7a.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.  299

III.
TEXTS    AND    TRANSLATIONS.

B.  S.  Buggc,  "  Saemundar  Edda  bins  fr6}>a  "  (Christiania,  1867).

Text.

/.'/;/.  F.  W.  Bergmann,  Hrbl.  (Strassburg,  187^),  Gg.  and  Fj.  (1874),
Bdr:  (1875),  R\>.  and  Hdl.  (1876),  Hav.  (1877),  Alv.,
prk.,  Hym.,  Ls.  (1878).  Text  (greatly  emended)  and
translation.

C.  Vigfusson  and  York   Powell,   "  Corpus    Poeticum    Boreale  "

(Oxford,  1883).     Text  and  translation.

D.  F.  E.  C.  Dietrich,  "  Altnordisches  Lesebuch  "  (Leipzig,  1864).

Text,  selections.

Dt.  &       F.  Better  and  R.  Heinzel,  "  Ssemundar  Edda,"  vol.  i  (Leipzig,
HI.  1903).     Text.

E.  L.  Etmuller,  "  Altnord.     Lesebuch"  (Zurich,   1861).     Text,

selections.

F.  H.  S.  Falk,  "  Oldnorsk  Laesebog  "  (Christiania,  1889).     Text,

selections.

•

1;.  \liitftt.  F.  Magnusen,  "  Den  aeldere  Edda,  etc.  "'(1821-23).     Text.

G.  H.  Gering,  "  Die  Lieder  der  alteren  Edda"  (Padeborn,  1904).

Text.

H.  Gering,  "  Die  Edda  "  (Leipzig,  1892).     Translation.

H.  K  Hildebrand,  "  Lieder  der  alteren  Edda  "  (Padeborn,  1876).

Text.

Hold.  A.  Holder  and  A.  Holtzmann  (Leipzig,  1875).  Text  and
translation.

H.  A.  Heusler,  "  Voluspa"  (Berlin,  1887).     Text  and  translation.

/.  Finnur  Jonsson,  "Saemundar  Edda"  (Reykjavik,  1905).  Text.

K.  Copenhagen  Edition  (1787-1828).

L.  H.  Liining,  "  Die  Edda"  (Zurich,  1859).     Text.

M.  P.  A.  Munch,  "Den  aeldere  Edda"  (Christiania,  1847).     Text.

Mb.  Th.  Mobius,  "  Edda  Saemundar  "  (Leipzig,  1860).     Text.


THE     POETIC     EDDA.

Jl.  R.  Rask,  "  Edda  Saemundar"  (Stockholm,  1818).

S.  B.  Sijmons,  "Die  Lieder  der  Edda"  (Halle,  1888),  vol.  2.

.    Text.

Simr.       K.  Simrock,  "Die  Edda,  die  altere  u.  die  jiingere"  (Stuttgart.
.  1882).     Translation.

Th.  B.  Thorpe,  "  The  Edda  of  Saemund  the  Learned  "  (London,

1866).     Translation.

W.  L.  Wimmer,   "  Oldnordisk   Laesebog  "    (Copenhagen,    1889).

Text,  selections.

IV.
GLOSSARIES.

D.  Dietrich  :  glossary  to  "  Lesebuch."     See  D.  III.

E.  Etmiiller.     See  E.  III.

G.  Gering, "  Vollstandiges  Worterbuch  zu  den  Liedern  der  Edda"

(Halle,  1903).

F.Magn.F.  Magnusen,  Lexicon,  1821.
L.  Liining  :  glossary  to  text.     See  L.  III.

N.  M.  Nygaard :  glossary  to  text  (Bergen,  1882).

F.  G.  Vigfusson,  "Icelandic-English  Dictionary"  (Oxford,  1874).
Wk.         E.  Wilken,  Glossar.     (Padeborn,  1883).     An  abridged  edition

has  been  made  of  this  work.

V.
COMMENTARIES.


(i) — GENERAL  WORKS.
Anderson.     "Norse  Mythology"  (1875).

Bugge,  S.  "  Home  of  the  Eddie  Poems"  (1899).  "  Studien  iiber  die
Entstehung  der  nordischen  Gotter-  u.  Heldensagen "  (German
trans,  by  O.  Brenner,  Munchen,  1889).


BIBLIOGRAPHY.  301

Craigie,  W.  A.     "Religion  of  the  Ancient  Scandinavians"   (London,
1906).

Cox,  G.  W.     "  Mythology  of  the  Aryan  Nations  "  (London,  1870).

Detter,  F.  and   R.   Heinzel.      "  Anmerkungen  "  to  text,  vol.  2.     See
Dt.  HI.  in  III.

Frazer,  J.  G.     "The  Golden  Bough  "  (1900).

Faraday,  Winifred.     "  The  Divine  Mythology  of  the  North  "  (London,
1902).

Gering,  H.     Introduction  to  translation.     See  G.  in  III.
Golther,  W.  "  Handbuch  der  Germanischen  Mythologie  "  (Leipzig,  1895).
'Grimm,  J.     "  Deutsche  Mythologie,"  trans,  by  J.  S.  Stallybrass,  1883.
Holzmann,  A.     Commentary  to  text.     See  Hold,  in  III.

J6nsson,   F.      "  Den  oldnorske  ok  oldislandske   Literaturs  Historic."
Copenhagen.

Kauffmann,  F.     "  Northern  Mythology  "  (1900).
Ker,  W.  P.     "  Epic  and  Romance  "  (London,  1897).
Lang,  A.     "  Myth,  Ritual  and  Religion  "  (London,  1887).
Meyer,  E.  H.     "  Germanische  Mythologie"  (2nd  edition,  1903).
Mogk,  E.     "  Germanische  Mythologie  "  (2nd  edition,  Strassburg,  1907).
Miiller,  Max.     "Chips  from  a  German  Workshop,"  vol.  4  (1868).

Petersen,   H.      "  Uber  den   Gottesdienst   u.   den    Gotterglauben  des
Nordens  wahrend  der  Heidenzeit  "  (Copenhagen,  1876).

Rydberg,  A.  V.     "  Teutonic  Mythology,"   English  version  by  R.  B.
Anderson  (London,  1889).

Saxo  Qrammaticus.     "  Danish  History."     Books  i — ix  trans,  by  Elton
(London,  1894).

Sijmons,  B.     Introduction  to  text,  vol.  I.     See  S.  in  III.

Ten  Brink.     "  Quellen  u.  Forschungen,"  vol.  10.

York  Powell,  F.     Introduction  and  Excursus  to  text.     See  C.  in  III.

Weinhold.     "  Altnordische  Leben."


302  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

(2) — SPECIAL  SUBJECTS.

Bergmann.  Commentary  on  Hdrbar}>sljo}>,  Grougaldr,  Fjolsvinnsmdl,
Baldrsdraumar,  Rigs\>ula,  Hyndlulj6\>,  Hdvamdl,  Alvissmdl,  ]>ryms-
kvi\>a,  Hymiskvtya,  Lokasenna.  See  Bm.  III.

Cassel,  P.     "  Eddische  Studien  "  (1856)  on  Fjolsvinnsmdl.
Chadwick,  H.  M.     "  The  Cult  of  Othin,"  1899.
Better,  F.     "  Die  Voluspd."

Frauer.  "  Die  Walkyrien  der  skandinavisch-germanischen  Cotter-  u.
Heldensagen."

Heusler,  A.  "  Weissagen  der  Seherin."  Voluspd,  translation  and
commentary.

Hoffory.  J.     "  Eddastudien  "  1889  on  Voluspd.
Kauffmann.     "  Balder  "  1902.
Meyer,  E.  H.     "  Voluspd  "  1889.

Magnusson,  E.  "  Odin's  Horse  Yggdrasill  "  1895.'  "  On  disputed
passages  in  Hdvamdl"  (Proceedings  of  the  Cambridge  Phil.  Society,
1885).  "  Edda  :  its  Derivation  and  Meaning  "  (Saga-Book  of  the
Viking  Club,  Nov.  1895  ;  separate  issue  :  London,  1896).

Rupp,  Th.  "  Eddische  Studien,"  1869,  on  Fjolsvinnsmdl,  Baldr,  and
Freyja.

Siecke,  E.  "  Mythologische  Briefe,"  1901.  Criticism  of  Uhland's
study  of  Thor.

Uhland.     "  Mythus  von  Thor,"  1836.

Weinhold.  "  Die  Riesin  der  germanischen  Mythus  "  (in  the  Acad.  der
Wissensch.  Wien.  xxvi.,  p.  233-306).

Wilkinson.     Voluspd.

SEE   ALSO   THE   FOLLOWING    PERIODICALS  : —

•

Z.f.d.A.     ZEITSCHRIFT  FUR  DEUTSCHES  ALTERTHUM

(*P.P.  4650,  1856,  &c.).
Vol.  iii.,  p.  385.     Explanatory  notes  on  Hdvamdl,  by  Dietrich.

:;:  To  facilitate  reference  to  these  works,  we  have  given  their  number,  shelf-mark  and
date  in  the  British  Museum  Library.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.  303

Vol.  v.      Interpretations  of  Voluspd,   Havamdl,  Grimniswdl,    Vaf\>nty-
nismdl,  by  K.  Mtillenhoff.

Vol.  xxx.,  p.  217.    On  Freyja  as  a  sun-goddess ;  myth  of  Brisingar-men,
by  Mttllenhoff.

p.    132.      Skirnismdl,   commentary   and     rearrangement     of
strophes,  by  F.  Niedner.

Vol.  xxxvi.,  p.  278-295.      Notes  on  Iprymskvtya,  Voluspd,  Hdr  barest jo]>,
Skirnismdl,  by  Niednec.

Vol.  xxxviii,  p.  i.     Ymir  as  a  personification  of  earth,  by  R.  M.  Meyer.
Vol.  xli.,  p.  32.     On  doubtful  passages  in  Voluspd,  by  Niedner.

p.  305.     On  Baldr  and  Hod,  criticism  on  Bugge's  hypothesis,
by  Niedner.

Vol.  xlii.,  p.  277.     Fylgienglauben,  by  Rieger.

Vol.  xlvi.,  p.  509.     On  the  historical  origin  of  Grimnismdl,  by  Much.

Anz.  f.d.  Alt.     ANZEIGER  FUR  DEUTSCHES  ALTERTHUM

(P.P.  4650).

Vol.  xviii.     Criticism  of  Rydberg's  Teutonic  Mythology,  by  Meyer.

Ark.  f.n.  Fil.     ARKIV.  FUR  NORDISK  FILOLOGI
(P.P.  5044,  e.  1883,  &c.).'

Vol.  vi.,  p.  108.     Rydberg  criticised  by  Detter.
Vol.  ix.,  p.  221.     Notes  on  Havamdl,  by  Olsen.
Vol.  x.,  p.  26.     Svipdagsmdl,  by  Falk.

Z.f.d.Ph.    ZEITSCHRIFT  FUR  DEUTSCHE  PHILOLOGIE
(P.P.  5043,  af.  1869,  &c.).

Vol.  iii.,  p.  1-84.     On  the  Home,  Date,  and  Characteristics  of  Edda,  by
Jessen.

Vol.  xviii.,  p.  156-297.     The  myth  of  Fenrir  and  Garm  shown  as  origi-
nating in  a  star-myth,  by  Wilken.

Vol.  xxiii.,  p.  i.     The  original  Voluspd,  by  Wilken.


304  THE     POETIC     EDDA.

Vol.  xxxi.  On  the  Wonders  in  the  Edda,  a  study  of  Magic  and  Runes,
R.  M.  Meyer.

Beit.    BEITRAGE  ZUR  GESCHICHTE  DER  DEUTSCHEN
SPRACHE  (12,962,  o,  1874,  &c.).

Vol.  xii.,  p.  383.  On  the  late  historical  origin  of  the  god  Bragi,  by
Mogk.

Vol.  xviii.,  p.  542.  On  the  correspondence  between  the  War  between
gods  and  Wanes,  and  Saxo's  history  of  Fridlevus,  by  Detter  and
Heinzel.

Vo.  xix.     Odin  not  Loki  the  author  of  Baldr's  death,  by  Detter.

Germ.     GERMANIA  (P.P.  4652,  1850,  etc).

Vol.  xxiii.,  p.  155.  Sif  as  a  sun-goddess,  by  Blaas  ;  p.  406-440,
Hymiskvtya.

Vol.  xxiv.,  p.  46-64.  On  Voluspd  and  the  missing  strophes  in
Vaf]>ru)mismal,  by  Edzardi.

Vol.  xxvii.,  p.  330-9.  Frigg  as  the  goddess  of  springs  and  wells,  by
Edzardi.

Vol.  xxviii.,  p.  17.     On  Hyndluljty.

Act.  Germ.    ACTA  GERMANICA  (12963  dd.  40,  1890).
Vol.  i  on  Loki.


INDEX.


i. — ICELANDIC  TEXT.


Afi,  206.
Agnarr,  2,  4,  22.
Ai,  a  peasant,  202.
Ai,  a  dwarf,  280,
Aldafo)>r,  40,  58.
Alfajrir,  20.
Alfheimr,  6.
Alfr,  230.

-  a  dwarf,  280.
Alfr  enn  gamli,  son  of  Dagr,  230.

-  son  of  Ulfr,  228.
Alfrojnill,  56,  140.
Algrcen,  188.

All,  230.
Allvaldi,  188.
Almveig,  230.
Alsvi)>r,  a  horse,  16.

-  a  giant,  102.
Alviss,  24-36.
Al}>j6fr,  280.
Ambatt,  206.
Amma,  206,  208.
Amr,  230.
Andhrimnir,  10.
Andvari,  280.

Angantyr,  Ottar's  rival,  228,  234.

-  a  berserk,  232.
Angeyja,  220.
Angrbo)?a,  220.

Ann,  280.
Arfi,  214.
Arinnefja,  206.


Arngrimr,  232.
Arvakr,  16.
AsaJ>6rr,  198.
Asgarj>r,  114,  132,  274.
Askr,  282.
Asmundr,  22.
As61fr,  230.
Atla,  220.
Atrtyr,  20.
Atvar}>r,  174.

Aurboj>a,  one  of  Menglod's  hand-
maidens, 176.

-  wife  of  Gymir,  218.
Aurgelmir,  48.
Aurvangr,  280.
Austri,  280.
Au)>r  djupu}>ga,  234.
AJ>al,  214.

Bafurr,  280.

Baldr,  8,  218,  238-242,  254,  ^56,

270,  272,  286,  296.
B&leygr,  20.
Bari,  174.
Barn,  214.
Barri,  a  berserk,  232.

-  a  grove,  152,  154.
Beli,  292.
Bergelmir,  48,  50.
Bestla,  102.
Beyla,  244,  264.
Biflindi,  22.

*  R


306


THE     POETIC     EDDA.


Bifrost,  18.
Bifurr,  280.
Bileygr,  20.
Billingr,  86.
Bilskirnir,  10.
Bjort,  176.
B%  176,
Bltyr,  176.
Boddi,  208. .
B61m,  232.
B6ndi,  208.

Bragi,  18,  244,  248,  250,  252.
Brami,  232.
Brattskeggr,  208.
Bretyablik,  8.
Bretyr,  208.
Brimir=Ymir,  278.
—  a  hall,  288.
Brisingar,  130,  132.
Broddr,  232.
Bntyr,  208.
Bui,  son  of  Karl,  208.

a  berserk,  232.

Bundinskeggi,  208.
Burr,  son  of  Karl,  214.

the  god,  218,  278.

Byggvir,  244,  260,  262,  264.
Byleistr,  220,  292.
Bolverkr,  20,  90.
Botyorn,  102.
Bomburr,  280.

Dagr,  Day,  46,  48.

-  a  warrior,  280.
Dainn,  a  hart,  14.

a  dwarf,  102,  226,  280.

Danpr,  216.
Danr,  216.


Dellingr,  48,  108.

Dellingr,  possibly  same  as  above,

175.

Digraldi,  206.
D61g]?rasir,  280.
Dori,  174,  280.
Draupnir,  280.
Drengr,  208.
Drumba,  206.
Drumbr,  206.
Drottr,  206.
Dufr,  280.
Duneyrr,  14.
Durinn,  280.
Dvalinn,  a  hart,  14.

a  dwarf,  30,  102,  208.

Dyra)?r6r,  14.

Edda,  202,  204.
Eggjje'r,  290.
Egill,  114.
Eikinskjaldi,  280.
Eikintjasna,  206.
Eik)>yrnir,  12.
Eir,  176.
Eistla,  220.
Eldhrimnir,  10.
Eldir,  246.
Elivagar,  50,  114.
Embla,  282.
Erna,  212.
Eyfura,  232.
Eylimi,  232.
Eymundr,  230.
Eyrgjafa,  220.

Fafnir,  232.
Falh6fnir,  14.


INDEX.


307


Farmatyr,  20.

Faj>ir,  210.

Feima,  208.

Fenrisulfr,    Fenrir,   54,  56,   244,

258,  288.
Fensalir,  286.
Fill,  280.

Fimafengr,  244,  246.
Fimbultyr,  294.
Fimbuljml,  12.
Fitjung,  82.
Fi|>r,  280.
Fjalarr=Suttung,  64.

giant,  190.

dwarf,  280.

cock,  290.

Fjosnir,  206.
Fjolkaldr,  164.
Fjolnir,  20.
Fjolsvtyr,  giant,  162-176.

-  Odin,  20.
Fjolvarr,  188.
Fjorgyn,  198,  294.
Fjorgynn,  254.
Fjorm,  12.
F1J6K  208.
Folkvangr,  8.
Forseti,  8.
Franangrsfors,  268.
Frar,  280.
Fra)>marr,  230.
Freki,  10.

Freyja,  8,  126-134,  226,  244,  256.
Freyr,  6,  18,  138-154,  218,  244,

258,  260.
Friaut,  228.
Frigg,  4»  38,  244,  254,  256,  272,

286,  292.


Frty,  176.

Frosti,  280.

Fr6j>i,  grandfather  of  Ottar,  228.

Fr6}>i,  230.

Frsegr,  280.

Fulla,  4.

Fulnir,  206.

Fundinn,  280.

Gagnra}>r,  40-44.
Gandalfr,  280.
Gangleri,  20.
Garmr,  18,  290,  292,  294.
Garj>rofa,  272.
Gastropnir,  166.
Gautr,  22.
Gefjun,  252.
Geirro|?r,  jotun,  274.

-  king,  2,  4,  20,  22.
Geirskogul,  286.
Geirvimul,  12.
Geironul,  16.
Geri,  wolf,  10.

dog,  170.

Gerj?r,  142-154,  218.

Gifr,  170.

Giml6,  296.

Ginnar,  280.

Gipul,  12.

Gisl,  14.

Gjallarhorn,  290.

Gjuki,  232.

Gjoll,  12.

Gjolp,  mother  of  Heimdall,  220.

daughter  of  Geirroj^r,  274.

GlapsviJ?r,  20.
Glasir,  274.

Glaj>r,  14.


308


THE    POETIC    EDDA.


Gla|>sheimr,  6.
Gler,  14.
Glitnir,  8.
Gloinn,  280.
Gna,  272.

Gnipahellir,  290,  292,  294.
Goinn,  16.
Gollinkambi,  290.
Golltoppr,  14.
Gollveig,  282.
Gotar,  4.
GotJ>ormr,  232.
GojjjTJdfar,  286.
Grabakr,  16.
Grafvitnir,  16.
GrafvolluJ>r,  16.
Gra)>,  12.
Greip,  220-274.
Grimnir,  Grimr,  2,  4,  20,  22.
Grimr  harjjskafi,  232.
Grty,  274.
Groa,  156.
Gunnar  balkr,  232.
Gunnar,  232.
Gunnlo|>,  64,  90,  92.
Gunn]?orin,  12.
GunnJ>ro,  12.
Guj?r,  286.
Gu)>run,  232.
Gyllir,  14.

Gymir,  140,  146,  218,  260.
244.


Gyr)>r,  230.
G611,  16.
Gomul,  12.
Gondlir,  22.
Gondul,  286.
Gopul,  12.


Habr6k,  18.

Haddingjar,  232.

Haki,  234.

Halfdanr,  230.

Hair,  208.

Hamskerpir,  272.

Hannar,  280.

Har,  Odin,  20,  90,  92,  no,  282.

—  dwarf,  280.
Haraldr  Hilditonn,  234.
Harbar}>r,  22,  186-200.
Hati,  16.
Haugspori,  280.
Heimdallr,  8,  130,  202,  262,  276,

284,  290.
Hei)?r,  220.

vala,  284.

Hei]?run,  12,  234,  236.
Hel,  goddess,  14,  238,  272.

-  a  region,  12,  28-38,  54,  170,

192,  240,  272,  292.
Helblindi,  20.
Heplifili,  280.
Herfjotur,  16.
Herfo]?r,    Herjaf6J?r,    10,    12,   38,

224,  286,  290.
Herjan,  20,  286.
Herm6J?r,  224.
Hersir,  212.
Herteitr,  20.
Hervar)?r,  232.
Hildigunn,  228.
Hildisvini,  226.
Hildolfr,  184.
Hildr,  16.
Himinbjorg,  8.
Hjalm-beri,  20.
Hjordis,  232.


Hj6rvar|>r,  berserk,  232.
Hjovarj>r,  possibly  same  as  above,

234.

Hlebarjir,  188.
Hindis,  228.
H16sey,  194.
Hl£vangr,  280.
Hlif,  176.
-Hlityrasa,  176.
Hlin,  Frigg,  292.
Hltyskjalf,  4,  138.
Hlorrtyi,  114,  118,  122,  124,  128,

130,  134,  264.
H16J>yn,  294.
Hlokk,  16.
Hnikarr,  20.
Hniku)?r,  20.
Hoddmimir,  54.
H6fvarpnir,  272.
Horn,  158.
Hornbori,  280.
Hrani,  232.
Hraujmngr,  king,  2.

chieftain,  232.

Hreimr,  206.

Hretygotar,  42.

Hrimfaxi,  44.

Hrimgrimnir,  150.

Hrimnir,  148,  220.

Hrist,  16.

Hri)>,  12.

Hr61f  enn  gamli,  232.

Hr6j?tatyr,  22,  108.

Hr6ptr,  6,  102,  262,  296.

Hrossfa6fr,  220.

Hr6j>r,  116.

Hr6j>vitnir,  16,  258.

Hrungnir,  118,  186,  266,  268.


Hrymr,  292.
Hrcesvelgr,  52.
Hraerekr,  234.
Hronn,  12.
Hve)?na,  234.
Hveralundr,  288.
Hvergelmir,  12.
Huginn,  12.
Hymir,  114-124,  258.
Hymr,  40.
Hyndla,  224-236.
Hyrr,  174.
Hoenir,  282,  296.
Hogni,  232.
H611,  12.
Hol^r,  208.
Horvir,  232.
Hosvir,  206.

larnsaxa,  220.
Ifing,  44.
Im)>r,  220.
Ingunarfreyr,  260.
Innsteinn,  226,  228.
Iri,  174.
fsolfr,  230.
Ivaldr,  18.
Ivarr,  234.
tyarvollr,  278,  294.
IJmnn,  244,  250,  252.

Jafnhar,  22.
Jalk,  22.
Jari,  280.
Jarl,  212,  214.
Jarnvi)?r,  288.
J6J>,  214.
Jormunrekr,  232.


THE     POETIC     EDDA.


Jor|>,  126,  266.
Josurmarr,  230.

Kari,  230.
Karl,  208.
Kefsir,  206.
Kerlaugar,  12.
Ketill,  230.
Kjalarr,  22.
Kili,  280.
Kleggi,  206.
Klur,  206.
Klyppr,  230.
Konr,  214.
Kumba,  206.
Kundr,  214.
Kormt,  12.

Laufey,  132,  264,  272.
Leggjaldi,  206.
Leiptr,  12.
Leir-brimir,  166.
L£ttfoti,  14.
Lif,  54.
Lifyrasir,  54.
Litr,  280.
Li]?skjalfr,  174.
Loddfafnir,  92-100,  108.
Lofarr,  280.

Loki,  124,  126-134,  174,  220,  242,
244-268,  272,  274,  288,  293.
L6ni,  280.

Loptr,  172,  220,  248.
L6j?urr,  282.
Liitr,  206.
Lyfjaberg,  174-180.
Lsera)>r,  12.
L&vateinn,  172.


Magni,  56,  186,  198.

Mani,  46.

Meili,  186.

Mengloj>,  158,  164,  176,  178.

Mimametyr,  166.

Mimir,  Mim,  168,  286,  290.

Mist,  16.

Mistorblindi,  112.

Mi)>garJ?r,  18,  190,  228,  230,  278.

Mijwitnir,  22.

Mjollnir,  56,  124,  134,  266,  268.

Mjojwtnir,  280.

Moinn,  16.

M6tsognir,  22,  280.

M6)>i,  56,  124.

M6]?ir,  210,  212.

Mundilferi,  46.

Muninn,  12.

Muspell,  260.

Myrkvif>r,  260.

Mogr,  214.

M6g]?rasir,  56.

Nabbi,  226.

Naglfar,  292.

Nainn,  280.

Nali,  280.

Nanna,  230.

Nar,  280.

Narfi,  268.

Nastrond,  288.

Niflhel,  54,  238.

Nipingr,  280.

Ni)?afj611,  296.

Ni))avellir,  288.

Ntyhoggr,  14,  16,  288,  296.

Ni)>i,  280.

NiJ>jungr,  214.


INDEX.


,  214.
NjorJ>r,  8,  52,  138,  244.  256,  258,

270.
NjarJ>ar  burr,  sunr,  Frey,  18, 152,

154-

Njar)>ar  d6ttir,  Freyja,  132.
N6atun,  8,  132,  270.
N6H,  280.
Norj'ri,  280.
N6tt,  34,  46,  48.
Njfi,  280.
N^r,  280.
Nyra)>r,  280.
Nyt,  12.
Nokkvi,  230.
Norm,  12.
Norr,  34,  48.
Not,  12.

Ofnir,  snake,  16.

Odin,  22.

6kolnir,  288.
Omi,  22.
Onarr,  280.
6ski,  22.
Ottarr,  226-236.

OJ>inn,  4-10,  18-22,  40,  52,  58,  88,
92,  102,  150,  igo,  198,  222,
238,  242,  244,  248,  252,  282,
284,  286,  290,  292.

O|>ins    barn,    sunr-Baldr,    146,
240,  286.

•  sifja)>r-Thor,  120.

•  sunr-Thor,   124,  132,   136,
186,  294.

sunr,  Vali,  286.

6|>r=6ttar,  234,  284.
6}>r6rir,  90,  102.


Randgrty,  16.
Randvdr,  234.
Ranr,  158.
Ratatoskr,  14.
Rati,  90.
Ra)>bar)>r,  234.
Ra)>gri}>,  16.
R£)>seyjarsundt  184.
Ra)?svi|>r,  280.
Reginn,  280.
Reginleif,  16.
Reifnir,  232.
Rigr,  202-216.
Rigr  Jarl,  214.
Rin,  12.

Rindr,  158,  242.
Rinnandi,  12.
Ristill,  208.
Ru)>r,  158.

Saga,  6.

Samsey,  254.

Sanngetall,  20.

Sa)?r,  20.

Seggr,  208.

Sif,  196,  244,  264.

Sifjar  verr,  Thor,  114,  118,  124,

132.

Sigfa]>ir,  20,  266.

mogr  Sigfo)?ur=Vi)>arr,  294.

Sigmund,  224.

Sigtrygg,  230.

Sigtyr,  274.

Sigur)?r,  232.

Sigyn,  268,  288.

Silfrintoppr,  14.

Sindri,  288.

Sinir,  14.


312


THE     POETIC     EDDA.


Sinmara,  168,  172.

Sty,  12.

Sigrani,  26.

Styhottr,  20.

Styskeggr,  20.

Sk&ftyr,  280.

SkaJ>i,  8,  138,  218,  244,  262,  264,

268,  270,  272.
Skeggjold,  1 6.
Sketybrimir,  14.
Skekkil,  230.
Skilfingar,  228,  230.
Skinfaxi,  42.
Skirnir,  138-154.
Skirvir,  280.
Sktyblajmir,  18.
Skjoldr,  1 6.
Skoldungar,  228,  230.
Skrymir,  266.
Skuld,  norn,  158,  282.

valkyrie,  286.

Skurhildr,  230.

Skogul,  16.

Skoll,  16.

Sleipnir,  18,  220,  238.

Slty,  12.

Sltyr,  288.

Smtyr,  208.

Sn6t,  208.

Snor,  208.

S61,  46.

Solbjartr,  178.

Solblindi,  166.

Sprakki,  208.

Sprund,  208.

Strond,  12.

Sumarr,  48.

Surtr,  44,  56,  168,  292.


Suttungr,  36,  90,  92,  150.
Sityri,  280.
Svadilfari,  220.
Svafnir,  Odin,  22.

16.

SvafnJ>orinn,  164.
Svalinn,  16.
Svanni,  208.
Svanr  enn  rauj?i,  228.
Svarangr,  192.
Svarri,  208.
Svarthotyi,  220.
Svdva,  228.
Svadilfari,  220.
Sveinn,  212,  214.
Svipall,  20.
Svipdagr,  176;  178.
Sviurr,  280.
Svi]?rir,  22.
Svi)>urr,  22.
Sv6suj>r,  48.
Svol,  12.
Sylgr,  12.
Ssefari,  228.
Ssegjarn,  172.
Ssekin,  12.
Saekonungr,  228.
Sgehrimnir,  10.
Sokkmimir,  22.
Sokkvabekkr,  6.


Tindr,  232.

Tronubeina,  206.

Tveggi,  296.

Tyr,  114,  122,  144,  258,  260.

Tyrfingr,  232.

Totrughypja,  206.


INDEX.


313


Ulfr,  Fenrir,  58,  260.

-  father  of  Alfr,  228.

-  ginandi,  232.
Ulfrun,  220.
Ullr,  6,  18.

Uni,  174.

Uri,  174.

UrJ>r,  92,  158,  178,  282.

UJ»r,  20.

Vafu)>r,  22.

Vafyrujmir,  38-58.

Vakr,  22.

Valaskjalf,  6.

Valfo)>r,  20,  276,  284,  286.

Valgrind,  10.

Valholl,  6,  10,  224,  274,  286.

Vali,  the  god,  56,  218,  242.

-  Loki's  son,  268.
Valir,  228.
Valland,  190.
Valtamr,  240.

Van,  12.

Vanaheimr,  52.

Vanir,  28-36,  52,  144,  272,  284.

Var,  134-

Varnavij>r,  16.

Varkaldr,  164.

Varr,  174.

Vasu]>r,  48.

V<§,  254.

Vegdrasill,  174.

Vegsvinn,  12.

Vegtamr,.  240-242.

Veorr,  116,  120.

Veratyr,  4.

Verland,  198.

Ver);andi,  282.


Vestri,  280.

Vetr,  48.

Ve)>rf6lnir,  14.

Vif,  208.      .

Vigrtyr,  44.

Viggr,  280.

Vili,  254.

Vilmei)?r,  220.

Vimur,  274.

Vin,  12.

Vindalfr,  280.

Vindkaldr,  164.

Vindsvalr,  48.

Ving)>6rr=Thor,  26,  126.

Vingnir,  56.

Virfir,  280.

Vitnir,  10.

Vitr,  280.

Vi\>,  12.

Vij>arr,  8,  56,  58,  244,  248,  250,

294.
Vtyi,  8.

ViJ>ofnir,  168,  170,  172.
Vi}?61fr,  220.
Vi)?rir,  254.
Vi];urr,  22.
VaengbraJ?ir,  178.
Volsungr,  232.
Vond,  12.

Ydalir,  6.    '

Yggr,  20,  22,  40,  112.

Yggdrasill,  12-18,  282,  292.

Yggjungr,  286.

Yrnir,  18,  28,  46,  48,  220,  276.

YngHngar,  228,  230.

Yngvi,  280.

Ysja,  206.


3*4


THE     POETIC     EDDA.


pegn,  208.
pekkr,  Odin,  20.

-  dwarf,  280.
pir,  204.
pj&lfi,  194.

pjazi,  8,  188,  218,  262,  264,  270.
pj6j?numa,  12.
pjo)>reyrir,  108.
Pjo)>vara,  176.
pj6)?vitnir,  10.
p6ra,  230.
porinn,  280.
porir,  232.

p6rr,  6, 12, 120, 122, 130,  132, 182-
200,  226,  244,  266,  274,  284.
prainn,  280.
pri)?r,  20.
pror,  Odin,  22.

dwarf,  280.

prujjgelmir,  48.


prityheimr,  6.
prymgjoll,  166.
Prymheimr,  8,  264.
Prymr,  128-134.
Praol,  204.
Pund,  10.
pundr,  22,  104.
Pu]>r,  20.
Pyn,  12.
Pokk,  272.
Poll,  12.

JEgir,  20,  112,  124,  244  et  seq.
JEkin,  12.

01m6J?r,  230.
Okkvinkdlfr,  206.
Ormt,  12.
0)>lingar,  228,  230,  232.


2. — TRANSLATION.


a  sea  giant,  21,  113,  195,
245-269.

^Esir,  the  race  of  gods,  distin-
guished from  Wanes,  53,  283,
285.

Agnar,  brother  of  Geirrod,  3,  5.

son  of  Geirrod,  5,  23.

Ai,  name  of  two  dwarfs,  281.

Alf,  kinsman  of  Ottar,  231.

Alf  the  Old,  son  of  Dag  and
Thora,  231.

grandfather  of  Ottar,  229.

Ali,  kinsman  of  Ottar,  231.

All-father,  Odin,  21,  285,  287.

All-fleet,  a  horse,  17.

All-green,  an  island,  189.


All-thief,  a  dwarf,  281.

All-wielder,  a  giant,  father  of
Thiazi,  189.

All-wise  (Alviss)  a  dwarf,  25-37.
(Alsvtyr)  a  jotun,  103.

Almveig,  wife  of  Halfdan,  231.

Am,  son  of  Dag  and  Thora,  231.

Andvari,  a  dwarf,  281.

Angantyr,  Ottar's  rival,  229,  235.
-  a  berserk,  233.

Ann,  a  dwarf,  281.

Arngrim,  father  of  twelve  ber-
serks, 233.

Asgarth,  dwelling  of  the  ^Esir  or
gods,  115,  129,  131,  133,  271,
275.  285.


INDEX.


315


Ash,  the  first  man,  283.

Athlings,  a  mythical  lace,  229,
231,  233.

Atvard,  one  of  the  builders  of
Menglod's  hall,  175.

Aud,  mother  of  Harald  War-
tooth,  235.

Aurboda,  mother  of  Gerd,  219.

Anrvang,  a  dwarf,  281.

Babe,  son  of  Earl,  215.

Hafur,  a  dwarf,  281.

Bairn,  son  of  Earl,  215.

Baldr,   the  god,  son  of  Odin,  9,

59,  219,  239-243,   255,   257,

271,  273,  287,  297.
Bale-thorn,  a  giant,  grandfather

of  Odin,  103.

Bale-worker,  Odin,  21,  91.
Bari,  a  builder  of  Menglod's  hall,

175-
Barley,  Frey's  servant,  245,  261,

263,  265.

Barri,  a  berserk,  233.
Bashful,  daughter  of  Churl,  209.
Bathtubs,  two  rivers,  13.
Battle,    (Hildr)    a    valkyrie,    17,

287.

Battle-wolf,  a  ferryman,  185.
Being,  one  of  the  Norns,  283.
Beli,  a  giant  slain  by  Frey,  293.
Bergelm,  forefather  of  all  Jotuns,

49»  51-

Bestla,  a  giantess,  mother  of
Odin,  103.

Cauldron-grove,  Loki's  prison,
289.


Chosen  Warriors,  heroes  of  the
battle  field  bidden  to  Valholl
by  Odin,  n,  17,  53.

Churl,  son  of  Rig  and  Grand-
mother, father  of  all  freeborn
peasants,  209.

Clay-giant,  Ymir,  167.

Cloggy,  daughter  of  Thrall,  207.

Cooler,  shelterer  from  the  sun,  17,

Corpse-like,  a  dwarf,  281.

Corpse-swallower,  a  giant  eagle,
maker  of  the  wind,  53.

Counsel-fierce,  a  Valkyrie,  17.

Counsel-isle-sound,     home     of
Battle-wolf,  185.

Counsellor,  Odin,  23.

Cow-herd,  son  of  Thrall,  207.

Crane-shanked  maid,  daughter  of
Thrall,  207.

Dag,  a  chieftain  of  Halfdan's  race,

231.
Dain,  a  hart,  15.

-  an  elf  or  dwarf,  103,  281.
Dallier,  a  dwarf,  31,  103,  281.

a  hart,  15.

Dame,  daughter  of  Churl,  209.
Damp,  a  chieftain,  217.
Dan,  a  chieftain,  217.
Daughter-in-law,   wife  of   Churl,

209.
Dawning,  Dawn,  father  of  Day,

49,  109.
Day,  personification  of  Day,  47,

49-.
Day-spring,  Menglod's  lover,  163,

177,  179.
Dazzler  of  Hel,  Odin,  21.


3i6


THE     POETIC     EDDA.


Dead's  Way,  road  to  Valholl,  227.
Death-barrier,  the  gate  of  Valholl,

ii.

Death-father,  Odin,  21.
Death-like,  a  dwarf,  281.
Delling,  a   builder  of  Menglod's

hall,     probably      the     same

being  as  Dawning,  175.
Descendent,  son  of  Earl,  215.
Dolgthrasir,  a  dwarf,  281.
Doom  of  the  gods  or  Ragnarok,

59,  243,  259,  291,  293,  295.
Dori,  175,  281.
Draupnir,  a  dwarf,  281.
Dread  One,  Odin,  21,  23,  41,  287.
Duf,  a  dwarf,  281.
Duneyr,  a  hart,  15.
Durin,  a  dwarf,  281.
Dusk,  one  of  Heimdal's  mothers,

221.

Dvalin,  Dallier,  a  hart,  15.
Dwarfs,  29  et  seq.,  103,  279,  281,

293-
Dyrathror,  a  hart,  15.

Eager  in  War,  Odin,  21.
Eagle-nose,  dau.  of  Thrall,  207.
Earl,  son  of  Rig  and  Mother,  213,

215.

Early-woke,  a  horse,  17.
Earna,  wife  of  Earl,  213.
Earth,  a  goddess,  wife  of  Odin

and    mother    of  Thor,    127,

199,  255,  267,  295.
East,  a  dwarf,  281.
Eastern    land,   the  East,   Jotun-

heim,   giant-land,    183,   193,

245,  281,  293.


Egil,  a  giant,  father  of  Thjalfi,


Elf,  a  dwarf,  281.

Elf-beam,  Elf-light,  the  sun,  57,

141.
Elf-home,     Prey's    dwelling,    7,

261.

Elm,  the  first  woman,  283.
Elves,  7,  29  et  seq.,  103,  109.
Ember,  Menglod's  hall,  175.
Equal-ranked,  Odin,  23.
Eyfora,  wife  of  Arngrim,  233.
Eylimi,   a   hero   of   the    Athling

race,  233.
Eymund,  a  chieftain,   Halfdan's

ally,  231.

Fafnir,  a  dragon  slain  by  Sigurd,

233-
Falling-brook,  home  of  Odin  and

Saga,  7.
Fame-bough,  the  mistletoe  shot

by  Hod,  241.

Farmer,  son  of  Churl,  209.
Fate,  a  Valkyrie,  287.
Fate-tree,  Yggdrasil,  291.
Father,  a  nobleman,  211.
Father  of  Beings,  Odin,  41.
Father  of  Hosts,  Odin,  n,  39.
Father  of  Men,  Odin,  59.
Father  of  Spells,  Odin,  239.
Father  of  Wrath,  Thor,  125.
Fear,  a  river,  289.
Fenrir,  the  great  Wolf;    son  of

Loki,  17,  59,  121,  245,  259,

261,  289,  293,  295.
Fen's  Moist  halls,  Frigg's  home,

287.


INDEX.


317


Fickle,  Odin,  21.

Fields  of  Labour,  first  home  of
the  gods,  279,  295.

Fierce-cold,  grandfather  of  Day-
spring,  165.

Fierce-stinger,    the   dragon    who
gnaws  the  roots  of  Yggdrasil,  .
15,  17,  289,  297.

Fili,  a  dwarf,  281.

Fin,  a  dwarf,  281.

Fine-flanked-steed,    grandsire   of
Gna's     horse,     Hoof-flinger,

273-
Fire,  feasting  hall  of  the  Jotuns,

289.
Fire-sheltered-realm,    habitation

of  the  good  after  Ragnarok,

297.
Fire-stirrer,  ^Egir's  serving-man,

245.  247.
Fjalar,  a  giant  who  hoodwinked

Thor,  called  by  Snorri   Ut-

gard-loki,  191.
Fjalar,  a  cock,  291.
-  a  dwarf,  281.
Flaming-eyed,  Odin,  21.
Flashing-eyed,  Odin,  21.
Foamer,     one     of     Heimdal's

mothers,  221.

Folk-field,  home  of  Freyja,  9.
Folk-stirrer,  a  dwarf,  109.
Forest- wolf,  forefather  of  all  Valas,

221.

Forseti,  a  god,  9.
Fradmar,  son  of  Dag,  231.
Franang's-stream,  where  Loki  hid
in  the  form  of  a  salmon,  269.
Fraeg,  a  dwarf,  281.


Frar,  a  dwarf,  281.

Freight-wafter,  Odin,  21.

Frey,  a  god,  son  of  Njord,  7,  19,

I39-I55»  219,  245,  259,  261,

293.     (See  Njord,  son  of).
Freyja,   a   goddess,   daughter  of

Njord,  9,  127,  135,  227,  245,

257,  285.

Friaut,  Ottar's  grandmother,  229.
Frigg,  a  goddess,  wife  of  Odin,

5.   39.   245,   255,   257,    273,

287.
Frodi,  a  hero  of  Ottar's  line,  231.

Ottar's  grandfather,  229.

Frost,  a  dwarf,  281.
Frost-giants,  15,  51,  91,  149,  151.
Fulla,  Frigg's  handmaiden,  5.
Fundin,  a  dwarf,  281.
Fury,  one  of  Heimdal's  mothers,

221.

Gaping-hel,  the  rock-entrance  of
Hel,  291,  293,  295.

Garm,  the  watch-dog  of  Hel,
19,  291,  293,  295.

Gaudy,  daughter  of  Churl,  209.

Gay,  daughter  of  Churl,  209.

Gefjon,  a  goddess,  253.

Geirrod,  a  Jotun,  275.

King  of  the  Goths,  3,  5,

21,  23.

Generous,  one  of  Menglod's  hand-
maidens, 176.

Gentle,  one  of  Menglod's  hand-
maidens, 176.

Gerd,  a  giant  maiden,  daughter
of  Gymir,  wooed  by  Frey,
143-155,  219,  261.


3i8


THE     POETIC     EDDA.


Ginar,  a  dwarf,  281.

Girdle  (the),  the  World-serpent,

121.

Gjallahorn,  HeimdaPs  horn,  291.
Gjuki,  King  of  the  Goths,  233.
Glad-home,  Odin's  dwelling,  7.
Glad-one,  a  horse,  15.
Gleamer,  a  horse,  15.
Glistener  (Glasir),  a  grove  in  front

of  Valholl,  275.

-  (Glitnir),    Forseti's

mansion,  9.
Gloin,  a  dwarf,  281.
Glutton,   a   watch-dog   of    Men-

glod's  hall,  171.
Gna,  a  goddess,  273.
Goin,  a  serpent,  17.
Golden-bristle,  Freyja's  boar,  227.
Golden-comb,  a  cock,  291.
Golden-draught,  a  Vala,  283.
Gold-lock,  a  horse,  15.
Goldy,  a  horse,  15.
Grand-father,  a  free-born  peasant,

207.
Grand-mother,  mother  of  Churl,

207,  209.
Grave-haunting  worm,  a  serpent,

17-

Grave-monster,  a  serpent,  17.
Great-grand-father,  a  thr.all,  203.
Great-grand-mother,    mother    of

Thrall,  203,  205.
Greed,  a  watch-dog  of  Menglod's.

hall,  171.

one  of  Odin's  wolves,  n.

Grey-back,  a  serpent,  17.
Grey-beard,  Odin,  23,  187-201.
Gridar;  a  giantess,  275.


Grimnir,  Odin,  3,  5,  23.

Grim    Strongminded,  a    berserk,

233.

Griper,  one  of  HeimdaPs  mothers,
221.

Gripper,  one  of  Geirrod's  daugh-
ters, 275.

Groa,  the  dead  mother  of  Day-
spring,  157.

Guarding-warriors,  one  of  Men-
glod's  handmaidens,  177.

Gudrun,  daughter  of  Gjuki  and
wife  of  Sigurd  the  Volsung,

233-
Guest-crusher,  the  rocky  barrier

in   front  of  Menglod's    hall,

167.
Gunnar  Battle-wall,  a  berserk,

233-
Gunnar,  son  of  Gjuki,  brother  of

Gudrun,  233.
Gunnlod,  a  giantess,  guardian  of

the  Mead,  65,  91,  93.
Gymir,  JEgir,  245.
a    frost-giant,    father    of

Gerd,  141-147,  219,  261.
Gyrd,  son  of  Dag,  231.
Guthorm   Battle-snake,   step-son

of  Gjuki,  233.
Habrok,  a  hawk,  19.
Haddings,  two  berserks,  233.
Haki,  son  of  Hvedna,  235.
Halfdan,  a  king,  of  the  Skjoldung

race,  231.

Hannar,  a  dwarf,  281.
Har,  a  dwarf,  281.
Harald  War-tooth,  King  of  Den-
mark, 238.


INDEX.


Haugspori,  a  dwarf,  281.
Heaven-hill,  Heimdall's  home,  9.
Hedge-breaker,  a  horse,  273.
Heimdall,  watchman  of  the  gods,

9,   131,  203,  263,  277,   285,

291.

Heir,  son  of  Earl,  215.
Hel,  a  goddess,  15,  239,  273.
home  of  the  dead,  29-37,  55,

159,  171,  193,  241,  273,  291,

293-

Helm-bearer,  Odin,  21.

Heptifili,  a  dwarf,  281.

Hermod,  a  warrior,  given  sword
and  armour  by  Odin,  225.

Hero,  son  of  ChurP,  209.

Hervard,  a  berserk,  233.

High  One  (the),  Odin,  21,  91,  93,
in,  283.

Hildigun,     Ottar's    great-grand-
mother, 229,  231.

Hill  of  Healing,  the  mountain  on
which  Menglod  sat,  175,  181.

Hjordis,  a  lady  of  the  Hraudung
race,  233.

Hjorvard,  a  berserk,  233,  235.

Hlebard,  a  giant,  189.

Hledis,    a    priestess,    mother   of
Ottar,  229.

Hlevang,  a  dwarf,  281.

Hod,  a  god,  slayer  of  Baldr,  241,
243,  287,  295.

Hrenir,  a  god,  283,  295.

Hogni,  son  of  Gjuki,  brother  of
Gudrun,  233.

Home  of  Strength,  Thor's  dwell-
ing, 7-

Hoodwinker,  Odin,  21.


Hoof-flinger,  Gna's  horse,  273.
Hornbori,  a  dwarf,  281.
Horse-thief,  a  giant,  son  of  Rime-

bringer,  221.
Horvi,  a  warrior  in  the  train  of

Hrolf  the  Old,  233.
Hrani,  a  berserk,  233.
Hraudung,     a     king,     father    of

Agnar  and  Geirrod,  3.
Hraudungs,  a  race,  233.
Hrist,  a  Valkyrie,  17.
Hroerik,  a  king,  father  of  Harald

War-tooth,  235.
Hrolf  the  Old,  a  chieftain,  233.
Hrungnir,  a  giant  slain  by  Thor,

119,  187,  267,  269.
Hrym,  one  of  the  giant  destroyers

at  Ragnarok,  293.
Hugin,  a  raven,  13.
Hvedna,   daughter    of    Hjovard,

235-
Hymir,    a    frost-giant,    115-125,

259-
Hyndla,  a  giantess,  225-237.

Idun,  a*  goddess,  wife  of  Bragi,

245,  251,  253.
Ifing,the  river  between  the  realms

of  giants  and  gods,  45,  193.
Ing,    a    mythical    race   founder,

261.

Inheritor,  son  of  Earl,  215.
Innstein,    father   of  Ottar,    227,

229.
Iri,  a  builder  of  Menglod's  hall,

175-

Ironsword,     one     of     Heimdal's
mothers,  221.


320


THE     POETIC     EDDA.


Iron -wood,  a  forest  in  Jotunheim,

289.
Isolf,  a  hero  of  Ottar's  line,  231.

Jalk,  Odin,  23.

Jb'rmunrek,   King  of  the    Goths,

233-

Josurmar,  son  of  Dag,  231.
Jotuns,  29-37,  45,  51,  55,  57,  103,

133,  143,  219,  221,  275,  277,

285,  289.

Kari,  a  warrior  of  Ottar's  line,

231.

Keeler,  Odin,  23.
Ketil,  great  grandfather  of  Ottar,

231.
King,  the  most  famous  of  Earl's

sons,  215.

Kinsman,  son  of  Earl,  215.
Klyp,  great  grandfather  of  Ottar,

231.

Kon,  King,  215.
Kormt,  a  river,  13.

Lady,  daughter  of  Churl,  209.

Land  of  Men,  199.

Land  of  the  Slain,  the  battlefield,

191.

Laufey,  Loki's  mother,  133,  273.
Leggy,  son  of  Thrall,  207.
Lewd,  son  of  Thrall,  207.
Lidskjalf,  a  builder  of  Menglod's

hall,  175.
Life,  Life-craver,  the  new  beings

born  after  Ragnarok,  55.
Light-foot,  a  horse,  15.
Lightning-abode,  Thor's  hall,  n.


Lit,  a  dwarf,  281.

Lodur,  a  god,  283.

Lofar,  a  dwarf,  281.

Lofty,  a  Valkyrie,  287.

Loggy,  daughter  of  Thrall,  207.

Loki,  a  god,  father  of  Fenrir,  Hel
and  the  World-serpent,  125,
127-137,  173,  175,  221,  243,
245-269,  273,  275,  289,  293.

Long-beard,  Odin,  21,  27.

Loni,  a  dwarf,  281.

Lord  of  the  Host,  Odin,  21.

Lord  of  goats,  Lord  of  the  goat's
wain,  Thor,  27,  119,  123.

Lout,  son  of  Thrall,  207.

Lumpy-leggy,  daughter  of  Thrall,
207.

Lustful,  son  of  Thrall,  207.

Magni,  a  god,  son  of  Thor,  57,

187,  199.
Maker,  Odin,  23.
Maid,  daughter  of  Churl,  209.
Masked  One,  Odin,  21,  23.
Mead      (the)  =  Soul-stirrer,     the

song-mead,  23,   91,  93,  103.
Mead-drinker,  a  dwarf,  281.
Mead-wolf,  a  dwarf,  281.
Meili,  a  god,  Thor's  brother,  187.
Memory,  a  raven,  13.
Menglod,   a  giantess  or  goddess

wooed  by   Day-spring,    159,

165,  177.179-
Midgarth,    man's    dwelling,    the

Earth,    19,    191,    229,    231,

279,  295.

Might,  a  Valkyrie,  17.
Mightiest  god,  Odin,  295.


INDEX.


321


Mighty  Weaver,  a  giant  who  con-
tends with  Odin,  39-59.

Mimir,  a  giant,  guardian  of  the
well  of  wisdom,  287,  291.

Mimir's  Tree,  Yggdrasil,  167,
169.

Mist,  a  Valkyrie,  17.

Mist-blind,  a  Jotun,  113.

Mist-hel,  home  of  the  dead,  55,

239-
Mjollnir,  Thor's  hammer,  57, 125,

135.  i37»  265,  267.
Modi,  Wroth,  son  of  Thor,  57.
Mogthrasir,  Son-craver,  a  Jotun,

57-

Moin,  a  serpent,  17.
Moon,  47.

Moon-hater,  a  wolf,  17.
Moonless  Plains,  Fells,  regions  of

the  underworld,  289,  297.
Mother,  mother  of  Earl,  211,  213.
Mover  of  the  Handle,  father  of

Moon,  47.
Much-wise,  a  giant,  163-177.

Odin,  21.

Munin,  a  raven=Memory,  13.
Murk-wood,  through  which   the

Sons   of  Fire  ride  to  Rag-

narok,  261.

Nabbi,  a  dwarf,  227.

Nali,  a  dwarf,  281.

Nanna,   a  kinswoman   of  Ottar,

231-

Narfi,  son  of  Loki,  269.
Neighbour,  son  of  Churl,  209.
New-counsel,  a  dwarf,  281.
New-moon,  a  dwarf,  281.


Night,   personification   of  night,

35.  47»  49-
Nimble-snatcher,  one  of  ^igir's

serving  men,  245,  247.
Niping,  a  dwarf,  281.
Njord,  a  god,  a  hostage  from  the

Wanes,  9,  19,  53,  133,  139,

245,  257,  259,  271.

(son  of)  =  Frey,  153,  155.

Noatun,    Njord's   home,   9,   133,

271.

Nokkvir,  father  of  Nanna,  231.
Nori,  a  dwarf,  281.
Norr,  father  of  Night,  35,  49.
North,  a  dwarf,  281.
Nyr,  a  dwarf,  281.

Oaken-peggy,  daughter  of  Thrall,

207.

Oaken-shield,  a  dwarf,  281.
Oak-thorn,  a  hart,  13.
Odin,  the  god,  5,  7,  n,  19-23,  41,
53.  59»  83>  89,  93,  103,  105,
109,  151,  191,  199,  219,  223,
239-245,   249-255,  277,  283,
285,  287,  291,  293.
See  also  All-father,  Bale-worker,
Counseller,  Dazzler  of  Hel,  Death-
father,  Dread  One,  Eager  in  War,
Equal-ranked,  Father  of  Beings,
Father  of  Hosts,  Father  of  Men,
Father  of  Spells,  Fickle,  Flaming-
eyed,  Flashing-eyed,  Grey-beard,
Grimnir,  Helm-bearer,  High  One,
Hood-winker,  Jalk,  Keeler,  Long-
beard,     Maker,     Masked     One,
Mightiest  god,    Much- wise,   On-
driver,     On-rider,     On-thruster,


322


THE     POETIC     EDDA.


Riddle-reader,  Rindr,  Sage,
Shaker,  Shape-shifter,  Sigrani,
Singer  (the  great),  Slender,
Soother,  Sooth-sayer,  Stormer,
Third-highest,  Thror,  Thund,
Tree-rocker,  True,  Utterer  of
gods,  Veiled  One,  Wafter,  Wan-
derer, War-father,  War-wont,
Watcher,  Wave,  Way-wont,
Weaver,  Well-comer,  Wile-wise,
Wind-roar,  Wise,  Wish-giver,
Wizard.
Odin's  brother's,  Vili  and  Ve,

297.

Odin's  son  =  Baldr,  147,  241,  287.
Odin's  son=Thor,  121-125,  133,

187,  295.
Odin's  sons,  the  chosen  warriors,

251,  263.

Odin's  son,  Vali,  287.
Olmod,  a  kinsman  of  Ottar,  231.
Onar,  a  dwarf,  281.
On-driver,  On-rider,  On-thruster,

Odin,  21.
Ori,  a  dwarf,  builder  of  Menglod's

hall,  175,  281.
Ormt,  a  river,  13.
Osmund,  a  giant  ?  23.
Osolf,  a  hero  of  Ottar's  line,  231.
Ottar,  Freyja's  lover,  227-237.

Pale-hoof,  a  horse,  15.

Peaceful,  one  of  Menglod's  hand-
maidens, 177.

Peasant,  son  of  Churl,  209.

Pine-needle,  a  grove,  153,  155.

Plains  of  Moisture,  the  surface  of
the  earth  ?  281.


Powers,  High  Powers,  the  gods,
7,  17,  19,  29,  35,  41-49,  53,
59»  83,  103,  171,  223,  247,
279,  285.

Race-giant,  a  horse,  15.

Radbard,  a  hero  of  Harald  War-
tooth's  line,  235.

Ran,  one  of  Odin's  wives  ?  159.

Randver,  a  hero  of  Harald  War-
tooth's  line,  235.

Ratatosk,    the   squirrel   gnawing
Yggdrasil,  15.

Rati,  an  awl,  91.

Ravener,  a  wolf,  n.

Regin,  a  dwarf,  281.

Reifnir,  a  berserk,  233.

Riddle-reader,  Odin,  41-45.

Rig=Heimdal,  203-217,  223.

Rime-bringer,  a  Frost-giant  ?
father  of  Witch  and  Horse-
thief,  221.

Rimy-mane,  a  horse  of  Night,  45.

Rind,  a  giantess,  159,  243.

Rindr,  Odin  as  husband  of  Rind,

159-
Roaring-kettle,  a  spring,  whence

flow  the  rivers  of  Hel,  13.
Rover  of  Air,  Loki,  249.
Ruler,  father  of  Erna,  213.
Runes  (the),  103.

Saga,  a  goddess,  wife  of  Odin,  7.
Sage,  Odin,  23.
Samsey,  an  island,  255.
Sand-strewer,  one  of  Heimdal's

mothers,  221.
Sandy-realms.home  of  dwarfs,28i.


INDEX.


323


Sea-farer,  one  of  Ottar's  fore-
fathers, 229.

Sea-god,  ;£gir,  125.

Sea-king,  one  of  Ottar's  fore-
fathers, 229.

Sea-lover,  a  giant,  173.

Serpent  (the),  the  World-serpent,
son  of  Loki,  295.

Serpent-slayer,  Thor,  121.

Shaker,  Odin,  23.

Shall,  one  of  the  Norns,  283.

Shape-shifter,  Odin,  21.

Sheaf-beard,  son  of  Churl,  209.

Shelterer  (the),  Yggdrasil,  13.

Sheltering    Spirit,    one   of   Men-
glod's  maidens,  177.

Sheltering-grove,  a  wood,  the
refuge  of  Sun,  17.

She-wolf,     one    of    Heimdal's
mothers,  221.

Shield-fierce,  a  Valkyrie,  17.

Shield  of  Men,  Thor,  121.

Shielding-giants,  one  of  Men-
glod  s  maidens,  177.

Shiner,  a  horse,  15.

Shining-mane,  the  horse  of  Day,

43-

Shrieker,  a  Valkyrie,  17.

Sif,  wife  of  Thor,  197,  245,  265.

Sigrani,  Odin,  27.

Sigmund,  son  of  Volsung,  225.

Sigtrygg,  a  warrior  slain  by  Half-
dan,  231.

Sigurd,  son  of  Sigmund,  slayer  of
Fafnir,  233.

Sigyn,  wife  of  Loki,  269,  289.

Silvery-lock,  a  horse,  15.

Sinewy,  a  horse,  15.


Singer  (the  great),  Odin,  103.

Sinmara,  a  giantess,  173.

Skadi,  daughter  of  the  giant
Thia^i,  wife  of  Njord,  9,  139,
219,  245,  263,  265,  269-273.

Skafid,  a  dwarf,  281.

Skekkil,  a  kinsman  of  Ottar,  231.

Skidbladnir,  a  ship,  19.

Skirfir,  a  dwarf,  281.

Skilfings,  a  mythical  race,  229,
231.

Skirnir,  Prey's  servant,  139-155.

Skjoldungs,  a  mythical  race  born
of  Skjold,  229,  231.

Skoll,  a  wolf,  17.

Skrymir,  a  giant  (=Fjalarp.  191),
267.

Skurhild,  daughter  of  Skekkil,
231-

Skybright,  a  goat,  13.

Slayer  of  Jotuns,  Slayer  of  Rock-
giants,  Thor,  119.

Sleep-thorn,  grandfather  of  Men-
glod,  165.

Sleipnir,    Odin's  horse,   19,  221,

239-
Slender,  daughter  of  Churl,  209.

Odin,  21.

Sluggard,  son  of  Thrall,  207.
Smith,  son  of  Churl,  209.
Solblind,  a  dwarf?  167.
Son,  son  of  Earl,  215.
Son  of  Earth,  Thor,  267.
Soother,  Odin,  23.

a  serpent,  17.

Soothsayer,  Odin,  21.
Sooty-black,  a  boar,  n.
Sooty-face,  a  cook,  n.


324


THE     POETIC     EDDA.


Sooty-flame,  a  cauldron,  n.
Sorrow-seed,  a  Jotun,  grandfather

of  Winter,  49.
Sorrow-whelmer,   one   of  Heim-

dal's  mothers,  221.
Soul-stirrer,   the  song-mead,  91,

103.
Sound-home,    Thiazi's   dwelling,

9-
Sounding-clanger,  the  barrier  in

front  of  Menglod's  hall,  167.
South,  a  dwarf,  281.
Sparkler,  a  dwarf,  forger  of  trea-

sures, 289.

Speaker,  son  of  Churl,  209.
Spear-fierce,  a  Valkyrie,  17.
Spear-point,  a  Valkyrie,  17,  287.
Spring-cold,  father  of  Wind-cold

(Day-spring),  165.
Steerer  of  barks,  Thor,  119.
Storm-god,  (Thor),  123.
Storm-pale,  a  hawk,  15.
Stormer,  Odin,  23.
Stormy-billow,    the     river    from

which  Ymir  was  formed,  51,


Strand   of  corpses,   a   region  in

Hel,  289.

Stray-singer,  a  poet,  93-101,  109.
Strength-maiden,  a  Valkyrie,  17.
Strength-wielder,  Thor,  187.
Stout,  son  of  Thrall,  207.
Stubbly-beard,  son  of  Churl,  209.
Stumpy,  son  of  Thrall,  207.
Successor,  son  of  Earl,  215.
Summer,  personification  of  sum-

mer, 49.
Sun,  a  goddess,  17,  47,  55,  279.


Sun-bright,  father  of  Day-spring,

179.

Surt,  a  fire-giant,  45,  57,  293.
Suttung,    a  giant,  owner  of  the

song-mead,  37,  91,  93,  151.
Svafa,   mother  of  Hildigunn,  of

Ottar's  line,  229.
Svarang,  a  water-giant,  193.
Sviur,  a  dwarf,  281.
Swadilfari,    a    mare,    mother   of

Sleipnir,  221.
Swan  the  Red,  ancestor  of  Ottar,

229.
Swart-head,  father  of  all  sorcerers,

221.
Sweet-south,  father  of  Summer,

49-
Swordsman,    watchman    of    the

giants,  291.

Tattet-coat,   daughter  of  Churl,
207.

Tender,  one  of  Menglod's  maid-
ens, 177.

Thane,  son  of  Churl,  209.

Thekk,  a  dwarf,  281.

Thialfi,  Thor's  servant,  195.

Thiazi,  a  Jotun-father  of  Skadi,
9,  189,  219,  263,  265,  271.

Third  Highest,  21.

Thokk,  a  witch,  273.

Thor,  the  god,  57,  113-125,  127-
137,  183-201,  227,  245,  265-
269,  275,  295.
See  also  Father  of  Wrath,  Lord

of  goats,  Lord  of  the  goat's  wain,

Odin's  son,  Serpent-slayer,  Shield

of  men,  Slayer  of  Jotuns,  Slayer


INDEX.


325


of   Rock-giants,    Son   of    Earth,
Steerer    of     barks,     Storm-god,
Strength  -  wielder,       Thunderer,
\\\irder,  Winged  Thunder.
Thora,    wife  of  Dag,  mother  of

many  heroes,  231.
Thorin,  a  dwarf,  281.
Thorir  Iron-shield,  a  berserk,  233.
Thram,  a  dwarf,  281.
Thrall,    father    of    the    race    of

thralls,  205.
Thror,  Odin,  23.

a  dwarf,  281.

Thrudgelm,  a  Jotun,  son  of  Ymir,

49.
Thrym,  a  Jotun,  who  stole  Thor's

hammer,  129-135.
Thund,  Odin,  23.
Thunderer,  Thor,  7,  n,  13,  27,

115-127,   127-137,   151,   189-

195,  199,  265,  267,  285.
Thunder-flood,  a  river,  n.
Tind,  a  berserk,  233.
Tree   (the),   Yggdrasil,  103,  277-

283,  293.

Tree-rocker,  Odin,  23.
Troth-goddess     of     oaths      and

plightings,  135.
True,  Odin,  21.
Tyr,  god  of  war,   115-123,   245,

259,  261.
Tyrfing,  a  berserk,  233.

Ull,  a  god,  7,  17.
Uncooled-realm,     a     region     in

Jotunhcim,  289.
Uni,  one  of  the  builders  of  Men-

glod's  hall,  175.


Uri,  one  of  the  builders  of  Men-

glod's  hall,  175.
Utterer  of  gods,  Odin,  103.

Valas,  wise  women,  221,  241-243,

277-297.
Vala-shelf,    home  of  one  of  the

gods, — Odin  ?  7.

Valgrind,  the  gates  of  Valholl,  n.
Valholl,  Odin's  dwelling,  7,   n,

13,  225,  275,  287,  297.
Vali,   a   god,   son   of  Odin    and

Rind,  57,  219,  243.

son  of  Loki,  269.

Valkyries,    Odin's    war-maidens,

17,  287.
Var,  one  of  the  builders  of  Men-

glod's  hall,  175.
Ve,  brother  of  Odin,  255.
Vegdrasil,  one  of  the  builders  of

Menglod's  hall,  175.
Veiled  One,  Odin,  21.
Vidar,  a  god,  son  of  Odin,  9,  57,

59,  245,  249,  251,  295.
Vigg,  a  dwarf,  281.
Vili,  brother  of  Odin.  255.
Vimur,  a  river,  275.
Virfir,  a  dwarf,  281.
Vit,  a  dwarf,  233.
Volsungs,  the  race  born  of  Vol-

sung,  233.

Wafter,  Odin,  23.

Wand-elf,  a  dwarf,  281.

Wanderer,  Odin,  21.

Wanes,  a  race  of  gods,  29-37,  53>

131,  M5>  273,  285.
Wane-home,land  of  the  Wanes,53.


326


THE     POETIC     EDDA.


Waneling,  son  of  a  Wane,  here

Frey,  son  of  Njord,  152.
Waning-moon,  a  dwarf,  281.
War,  a  Valkyrie,  287.
War-father,    Odin,   9,     21,    225,

267,  275,  287,  291.
-  (son  of)  =Vidar,  295.
War-fetter,  a  Valkyrie,  17.
War-path,  the  battle-field  at  Rag-

narok,  45.

War-wont,  Odin,  241.
Warder,  Thor,  117,  295.
Wary-wise,  a  warrior,  189.
Watcher,  Odin,  23.
Watchman    of    gods,    Heimdal,

149.

Wave,  Odin,  21.
Way- wont,  Odin,  241.
Weaver,  Odin,  23.

a  serpent,  17.

Weird,  one  of  the  Norns,  93, 159,

179,  283.

Well-comer,  Odin,  21.
West,  a  dwarf,  281.
Whiner,  daughter  of  Thrall,  207.
Wielder,  a  dwarf,  19.
Wife,  daughter  of  Churl,  209.
Wile-wise,  Odin,  21.
Wind-cold,  Dayspring,  165.
Wind-cool,  father  of  Winter,  49.
Wind-elf,  a  dwarf,  281.
Wind-home,  home  of  the  sons  of

Vili   and   Ve,   in    the    New

World,  297.
Window-shelf,    Odin's    seat,    5,

139-

Wind-roar,  Odin,  23.
Winged-thunder,  Thor,  27.


Winter,  personification  of  winter,

49-

Wise,  Odin,  23.
Wise-counsel,  a  dwarf,  281.
Wise  Ones,   iMenglod's  maidens,

177.

Wish-giver,  Odin,  23.
Witch,  a  giantess,  ?  daughter  of

Rime-bringer,  221.

Golden-draught,  285.

Wizard,  Odin,  23.

Woe-bringer,  a  giantess,  mother

of  Fenrir,  221.
Wolf   (the),    Fenrir,    n,   55,  57,

223,  249,  259,  267,  291-295.
Wolf,  great-grandfather  of  Ottar,

229.

Wolf-cubs,  sons  of  Dag,  231.
Wolf  the  Gaper,  a  berserk,  233.
Woman,    a   daughter   of    Churl,

209.

Wood-home,  Vidar's  home,  9.
Wood-snake,    a   cock,   169,  171,

173-
World-serpent,   the   encircler   of

the  world,  son  of  Loki.     See

also  Girdle,  293,  295.
Wounding-wand,    the    mistletoe,


Yari,  a  dwarf,  281.

Yelper,  one  of  Heimdal's  mothers,

221.
a   giantess,    daughter    of

Geirrod,  275.

Yeoman,  son  of  Churl,  209.
Yewdale,  home  of  Ull,  7.


INDEX.  327

Yggdrasil,    the  World-tree.     See  Ynglings,  a  race  descended  from

also  Fate-tree,  13-19,  55,  283,  Yng,  229,  231.

293.  Yngvi,  a  dwarf,  281.

Ymir,   the   first-born    of  Jotuns.  Youth,  son  of  Churl,  209.

See  also  Clay-giant,   19,  29,  -  son  of  Earl,  215.

47,  49,  221,  277,  279.


in  LSI  ii  vi  <**-^  •    own


PT     Edda  Saemundar

7234      The  Elder  or  Poetic  Edda

E5B7

v.I


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
