A First Book of Jurisprudence for Students of the Common Law (Frederick Pollock, 1896)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1896 first edition (https://archive.org/details/cu31924018009542).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

A  first  book  of  jurisprudence  f or  studen

3  1924  018  009  542


Cornell  University
Library


The  original  of  this  book  is  in
the  Cornell  University  Library.

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924018009542


FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE


A  FIEST  BOOK


OP


JUBISPBUDENCE


FOE  STUDENTS  OF  THE  COMMON  LAW


BY

Sik  FEEDEEICK POLLOCK,  Baet.

BABRISTER-AT-LAW

M.A., HON. LL.D. EDIN., DUBLIN  AND  HARVARD

CORPUS  CHRISTI  PROFESSOR  OP  JURISPRUDENCE  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD

LATE FELLOW  OF  TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE

CORRESPONDING  MEMBER  OF  THE INSTITUTE OF  FRANCE


MACMILLAN AND CO.,  Ltd.

NEW  YORK  : THE  MACMILLAN  CO.
1896

All  rights  reserved


PREFACE

This  book  is  not  intended  to  lay  out  a  general
system  of  the  philosophy  of  law,  nor  to  give  a
classified  view  of  the  whole  contents  of  any  legal
system,  and  it  does  not  profess  to  compete  with  the
many  works  which  have  aimed  at  one  or  both  of
those  objects.  It  is  addressed  to  readers  who  have
laid  the  foundation  of  a  liberal  education  and  are
beginning  the  special  study  of  law.  Such  a  reader
finds,  in  the  new  literature  he  has  to  master,  a
number  of  leading  conceptions  and  distinctions
which  are  assumed  to  be  familiar,  and  are  so  to
lawyers,  but  which,  for  that  very  reason,  are  not
often  expressly  stated,  still  less  often  discussed,
and  hardly  ever  explained.  He  has  not  only  to
discover  for  himself,  often  with  much  bewilder-
ment, the  actual  contents  of  legal  terms,  but  to
realise  the  legal  point  of  view  and  the  legal  habit
of  mind. Law  seems  to  the  layman,  at  first  sight,


vi  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

to  make  much  of  trifles  and  to  disregard  greater
matters.  Again,  some  speculative  problems  are
capable  of  giving  much  trouble  in  the  actual
practice  and  administration  of  the  law,  while  others
are  seldom  or  never  heard  of  in  court ;  and  it  is
hard  for  the  layman  or  the  novice  to  distinguish
the  two  kinds.  In  this  as  in  other  sciences  every-
one must  make  his  way  through  the  stage  of
confusion  and  illusion  in  his  own  fashion.  But,
though  it  is  his  own  work  which  no  one  else  can
do  for  him,  it  is  possible  for  those  who  have  passed
beyond  that  adventure  to  be  ready  with  a  helping
hand  and  a  warning  voice.

In  the  first  part  of  this  book  I  have  tried  to  set
forth,  in  language  intelligible  to  scholars  who  are
not  yet  lawyers,  so  much  of  the  general  ideas
underlying  legal  discussions  as  appeared  needful
for  the  removal  of  the  most  pressing  difficulties.
Not  much  will  be  found  about  constitutional  or
criminal  law ;  not  because  I  underrate  their  actual
importance,  but  because  they  do  not,  as  a  rule,  so
much  require  this  kind  of  explanation,  and  their
exceptional  problems,  when  they  do  occur,  are  too
hard  for  novices,  and  are  best  left  for  a  riper  stage.
Quotation  and  criticism  of  other  modern  writers'
opinions  have  been,  with  rare  exceptions,  purposely


PREFACE  vil

avoided as useless and distracting to those  for
whom  I  mainly  write. Any  detailed  acknowledg-
ment of my obligations will therefore not be
expected. Among  the  authors  of  past  generations
I  owe most,  so far  as  I can  judge,  to  Savigny ;
among recent  and  living ones  to  Maine,  Ihering,
and  my  friend  Mr.  Justice  Holmes  of  Massachusetts.
Learned  readers  and  advanced  students  will  easily
see  that  the  philosophy  of  the  English  or  "analytical"
school  is not  mine ; nevertheless  I  have  learned
much  from  Hobbes,  and  hold  acquaintance  with  his
work  at first  hand  indispensable  for  all English-
speaking  men  who  give  any  serious  consideration
to the theoretical part  of  either  politics  or law.
It  may  be  that  I  love  Hobbes  a  little  too  well  to
be perfectly  just to his successors, who, to my
thinking,  have often got more praise than they
deserved  for  repeating  Hobbes's  ideas  in  clumsier
and  really  less exact words. But, as I am not
undertaking  a  critical  estimate,  this  is  but  a  matter
of personal taste, and of no  .  importance to the
reader.

While  I  have  endeavoured  to  be  as  clear  as
possible,  I  have  not  attempted  to  make  funda-
mental and  difficult  problems  look  easy.  The
cheap facility that comes of gliding  over hard


viii  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

places  can  only  be  found  a  dear  bargain  in  the
end.  Sometimes  I  have  allowed  myself  to  devote
a  few  sentences  or  even  a  paragraph  to  readers  who
have  to  some  extent  mastered  the  language  and
methods  of  philosophy.  This,  I  hope,  will  not  be
unwelcome  to  such  as  have  taken  honour  degrees
in  classics,  especially  in  the  Oxford  School  of
Ziterae  Humaniores.

The  second  part  of  the  book  aims  at  an  end  not
really  dissimilar  in  kind,  but  it  is  more  practical
and  more  exclusively  addressed  to  students  of  the
Common  Law,  the  system  according  to  which
justice  is  administered  in  almost  every  part  of
the  English-speaking  world  except  Scotland  and
(if  that  be  a  real  exception)  Louisiana.  Like  the
Eoman  law,  that  system  is  embodied  in  a  special
and  technical  literature  governed  by  its  own
authoritative  conventions,  accessible  only  through
its  own  apparatus  of  reference,  and  available  for
any  practical  purpose  only  on  condition  of  under-
standing its  peculiar  methods.  The  use  of  law-
books and  the  appreciation  of  legal  authorities  can
be  fully  learned  only  by  assiduous  practice;  but
here,  again,  it  has  long  seemed  to  me  that  some-
thing can  be  done  to  lighten  the  first  steps  of  the
beginner,  and  this  is  what  I  have  tried  to  do. No


PREFACE  ix

practical  art  can  really  be  taught ;  one  man  can
only  help  another  to  learn ;  but  it  is  common
experience  that  such  help  will  often  save  a  great
deal  of  trouble.  Certainly  no  man  ever  learned
to  shoot  by  being  lectured  on  the  construction  of
a  rifle,  and  yet  such  lectures  are  a  regular  part  of
musketry  instruction.  So  far  as  I  know,  the
experiment  has  never  been  made,  in  the  case  in
hand,  for  the  same  purpose  or  in  any  very  similar
manner,  though  different  parts  of  the  subject  have
been  touched  upon  by  several  writers,  both  English
and  American,  on  legal  studies  and  literature,  and
notably  by  Kent.  Possibly  a  connected  account  of
the  sources  and  authorities  of  English  law,  as  they
have  come  to  be  in  modern  practice,  may  be  of
interest  to  some  of  the  Continental  scholars,  especi-
ally Frenchmen,  who  of  late  years  have  brought
admirable  industry  and  intelligence  to  bear  on  our
methods  of  conducting  both  political  and  judicial
affairs.  But  I  have  written,  in  the  first  place,  for
our  own  learners  of  the  Common  Law  on  both  sides
of  the  ocean,  and  my  work  stands  to  be  judged  by
their  proof  in  using  it.  If  they  find  it  useful  I  shall
be  well  content,  even  more  content  than  if  I  should
perchance  convince  a  mature  philosopher  or  econo-
mist that  the  science  of  law  has  some  right  to  exist.


x  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

It  will  be  seen  that  "the  two  parts  of  the  book,
are  to  some  extent  independent  of  one  another ;  and
any  reader  who  so  chooses  can,  without  much
inconvenience,  disregard  the  logical  order  of  gener-
ality and  take  the  second  part  first.  However  that
may  be,  the  combination  of  the  two  in  one  volume,
and  the  preference  of  English  examples  and  illustra-
tions in  the  first  part,  are  intended  as  a  protest
against  the  habit  of  regarding  "jurisprudence"  as
something  associated  with  a  little  knowledge  of  the
laws  of  every  country  but  one's  own.

Some  chapters  and  parts  of  chapters  have
already  been  printed  in  the  Harvard  Law  Review,
for  whose  hospitality  I  hereby  return  my  best
thanks,  and  others  in  the  Law  Quarterly  Review.

F.  P.


CONTENTS
PART  I

SOME GENERAL LEGAL NOTIONS

CHAPTER  I

The  Nature  and  Meaning  of  Law


PAGE

3

Rules  of  Civic  Conduct

7

Legal  Profession  not  necessary

8

. 10

Moral  and  Natural  Law

. 12

Law  of  Nations ... . .

. 13

Extended  Senses  of  "Law"  .

16

. 21

Law  as  "Will  of  the  State"

26

CHAPTER  II

Justice  according  to  Law

Conditions  necessary  for  Existence  of  Law

Justice

Order  as  Fundamental  Principle  .


28
30
32


FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE


Singular  Sovereign  Acts

Normal  Marks  op  Law  : — Generality
Equality
Certainty

Scientific  Nature  of  Law

Relation  of  Law  to  Morals  .

Legal  Responsibility  without  Moral  Fault

Development  of  Law  necessarily  Artificial


PAGE

33

35
36
39
44
46
50
52


CHAPTEE III


The  Sdbject-Matter  of  Law


Duties  of  Subjects  .

Duty,  Positive  and  Negative

No  Duty  without  Right.

Can  the  State  have  Duties  ?

Wrong ....

Auxiliary  Rules  of  Law

Rules  of  Evidence  and  Procedure

Substantive  and  Adjective  Law .


55
56
62
63
67
72
75
77


CHAPTEE IV


Divisions  of  Law


Formal  Nature  of  Legal  Classification . .  79

Impersonal  and  Personal  Duties  or  Rights . .  80
Personal  Duties  dependent  on  Will  of  Parties  or

prescribed  by  Law 86,  87

Public  and  Private  Law 90

The  State  as  a  Party 94

Law  as  regarding  Persons,  Things,  Actions . .  97

Equality  of  Persons  in  Modern  Law ....  99


CONTENTS

CHAPTER  V

Persons

Relation  of  Persons  to  Things
Natural  and  Artificial  Persons  .
Disabilities  op  Natural  Persons  .
Incapacities  of  Artificial  Persons
Corporate  Duties  and  Eights


PAGE

105
108
113
116
119


CHAPTEE VI

Things,  Events,  and  Acts

Things  as  Subject-Matter  of  Rights  and  Duties .  121

Corporeal  Things 122

Intangible  Elements  of  Wealth 123

Things  as  the  Potentiality  of  Rights . .  129

Summary 130

Events  and  Acts 132

"Acts  of  the  Law"  and  '"Acts  in  the  Law" . .  135

Intention  and  Motive 138

External  Motive 143

Internal  Motive 145

Act,  Intention,  and  Consequences . . 146,  147

Unintended  Consequences 151

Duties  as  dependent  on  Acts,  Intention  and  Consent  152

Liabilities  independent  of  Intent ...  155
Extent  of  Liability  for  Consequences . . .158

CHAPTER VII

Relation  of  Persons  to  Things  :  Possession  and
Ownership

General  Notion  of  Property. .  159

Title . . .  163

Ownership. . . .  166


xiv  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

Possession,  Ownership,  Real  Rights

Possession  as  Evidence  of  Title .

Possession  as  Origin  of  Title

Possession  historically  prior  to  Ownership

Prescription  and  Limitation  of  Actions

Servitudes  or  Easements

Incorporeal  exclusive  Rights

Debts  and  other  Obligations  as  Property  .


PAGE

.  168
171,  173
.  174
176
.  178
.  180
.  187
.  191


CHAPTER VIII

Claims  of  Persons  on  Persons  :  Kelation  op
Obligations  to  Property

Personal  Duties 193

Personal  Obligations  in  Early  and  Modern  Law 195,  197

Contracts  for  Sale .  199

.  202
.  203
.  205
.  207
.  210
212


Contracts  for  Payment
Transferable  Contracts  .
Negotiable  Instruments  .
Shares  and  Stocks .
Contractual  Rights  as  Property  .
Rights  arising  from  Wrongful  Acts


PAET II

LEGAL AUTHORITIES AND THEIR USE


CHAPTER I

The  Express  Forms  of  Law

Forms  of  stating  Law 218

Command 220

Maxim 221

Interpretation 224

Case-Law  and  other  Systems  of  Interpretation .  227


CONTNETS  xv

CHAPTER II

The  Sources  of  English  Law

PAGE

"Written  and  Unwritten  Law 233

Written  :  Original  and  Delegated  Legislation  . .  233

Unwritten  :  Judicial  and  Non-Judicial  Exposition .  235

Unwritten  Law  and  Custom  . . .  238

The  "Custom  of  the  Realm" ....  240
Equity  Jurisdiction  in  England ... .243

CHAPTER III

Sovereignty  in  English  Law

The  Supremacy  of  Parliament . . .  246

Acts  of  Parliament  not  Judicially  Disputable  .  253
Sovereignty  Distinguished  from  ultimate  Political

Power ...  255

CHAPTER  IV

Custom  in  English  Law

Custom  :  What  it  Means ... . .  263

Conditions  of  Talidity 264

Ancient  :  Examples 266

Rules  now  merged  in  General  Law . .  267

The  Law  Merchant  .... .  268

Local  . . ....  272

CHAPTER V

Law  Reports

What  are  Reports 274

Origins  in  England  :  Bracton . .  .277

The  Year  Books .  278


xvi  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

PAGE

Anglo-French  and  its  Degradation . . . .281
Commencement  of  Modern  Reporting .... 289

The  Law  Reports 293

English and American Case-Law  : its estimated

Bulk . 294

Use  of  Authorities 297


CHAPTER  VI

Case-Law  and  Precedents

Authority  of  Decisions 299

Early  Statements . 301

Modern  Usage  :  Co-ordinate  Authority . . .  304

Manifest  Error 306

Decisions  confirmed  by  long  Usage . . .  306

Courts  of  Appeal 308

House  of  Lords  :  whether  bound  by  its  own  Decisions  311

Judicial  Committee  of  the  Privy  Council  . . .  317

Court  for  Crown  Cases  Reserved ....  319

Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  ....  319

Decisions  in  other  Common  Law  Jurisdictions . .  320

Nisi  Prius  Decisions . 322

Roman  and  Foreign  Law 325


CHAPTER VII

Ancient  and  Modebn  Statutes


Ancient  Acts  of  Parliament  :  how  Framed
Professional  Jealousy  of  Statute  Law
Degeneration  of  Workmanship  in  Tudor  Period
Modern  Reforms ...
Codification ....


329
331
332
335
341


PART  I

SOME  GENERAL  LEGAL  NOTIONS


1st


CHAPTEE  I


THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF  LAW


We  find  in  all  human sciences that  those  ideas  Difficulty

.  of  the  most

which  seem  to  be  most  simple  are  really  the  most  general
difficult  to  grasp  with  certainty  and  express  with  sciences.
accuracy.  The  clearest  witness  to  this  fact  is
borne  by  the  oldest  of  the  sciences,  Geometry.  No
difficulty  whatever  is  found  in  defining  a  parabola,
or  a  circle,  or  a  triangle.  When  we  come  to  a
straight  line,  still  more  when  we  speak  of  a  line
in  general,  we  feel  that  it  is  not  so  easy  to  be
satisfied.  And  if  it  occurs  to  us  to  ask  the
geometer  what  is  the  relation  of  his  "leDgth
without  breadth"  to  the  sensible  phenomena  of
space,  matter,  and  motion,  we  shall  find  ourselves
on  the  verge  of  problems  which  are  still  too  deep
for  all  the  resources  of  mathematics  and  meta-
physics together. A philologist will be ready


4  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

enough  with  his  answer  if  we  question  him  on  the
Greek  or  the  Slavonic  verb.  If  we  ask  him  what
is  a  verb  in  general  we  may  have  to  wait  a  little,
and  if  we  ask  him  to  account  for  language  itself
we  shall  find  ourselves  again  in  a  region  of  doubt
and  contention.  It  is  not  surprising,  then,  that  the
student  approaching  the  science  of  law  should  find
the  formal  definiteness  of  its  ideas  to  vary  inversely
with  their  generality.  No  tolerably  prepared  candi-
date in  an  English  or  American  law  school  will
hesitate  to  define  an  estate  in  fee  simple :  on  the
other  hand,  the  greater  have  been  a  lawyer's
opportunities  of  knowledge,  and  the  more  time  he
has  given  to  the  study  of  legal  principles,  the
greater  will  be  his  hesitation  in  face  of  the
apparently  simple  question,  What  is  Law  ?
No  com-  In  fact,  a  complete  answer  to  this  question  is

theory  not  possible  unless  and  until  we  have  a  complete
without  theory  of  the  nature  and  functions  of  human
theory  o^  society.  Yet  we  cannot  afford  to  wait  for  such  a
butap-'  theory,  for  we  are  born  into  a  social  and  political
general?6 wm^  fr°m  which  we  cannot  escape. Eule,  custom,

needful.  and  law  beset  us  on  eve,T  side-  Even  if  at  this  or
that  point  we  go  about  to  defy  them  we  cannot
ignore  them ;  and  the  possible  points  of  revolt,  as
reflection will show, are  really  but  few  even  in


I THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF  LAW 5

such  kinds  of  life  as  are  called  lawless.  "We  have
to  abide  the  law  whether  we  will  or  no;  and  to
abide  it,  on  the  whole,  in  obedience  rather  than  in
resistance.  The  French  Eevolution  seemed,  and  in
many  respects  was,  a  fundamental  catastrophe  :  but
it  appeared,  as  things  resumed  a  settled  frame,  that
a  large  proportion  of  French  institutions,  traditions
of  policy,  and  positive  laws  too,  had  survived  the
Eevolution.  If  then  we  are  to  obey  with  under-
standing, we  must  endeavour  to  understand  so
much  as  is  needful  for  the  purpose  in  hand,
relying  on  the  most  approximately  certain  data  that
we  can  command.

Man  cannot  live  alone ; the  individual  cannot  Society

cannot

do  without  the  family ;  and  although  family  groups  exist  with

•  i  ™> ■  ou*  rule15

can  be  conceived  as  independent  and  self-sufficing,  0f  social

order.

the  family  has  from  very  early  times  been  in  like
manner  part  of  a  larger  society,  whether  it  be  a
clan,  a  tribe,  or  a  nation,  with  which  it  is  bound
up.  No  society  can  continue  without  some  uniform
practice  and  habits  of  life.  Individual  impulse  has
to  be  subordinated  to  this  need;  and  this  sub-
ordination is  a  never-ending  process.  Hence  there
must  be  rule  and  constraint ;  and  not  the  less  so
because,  in  one  sense,  the  aims  of  the  society  and


6  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

of  the  individual  coincide.  On  the  whole  and  in
the  long  run  the  interest  of  the  individual  is  that
society  should  exist.  This  is  obviously  true;  but
it  is  far  from  obviously  true,  indeed  it  seems  not
to  be  true,  that  his  interest  coincides  always  or
everywhere  with  the  interest  of  the  society  whereof
he  is  a  member,  either  as  it  really  is  or  as  it  seems
to  be  to  those  who  conduct  its  affairs.  Society
comes  into  existence  because  its  members  could  not
live  without  it;  but  in  continuing  to  exist  it
forthwith  aims  at  an  ideal,  and  that  ideal  is  for  the
society  and  not  for  the  individual  member.  The
need  for  internal  order  is  as  constant  as  the  need
for  external  defence.  No  society  can  be  stable  in
which  either  of  these  requirements  substantially
fails  to  be  provided  for ;  and  internal  order  means
a  great  deal  more  than  the  protection  of  individuals
against  wilful  revolt  or  wanton  lawlessness.  Ex-
press and  definite  forms  of  association  are  required
for  the  fulfilment  of  these  purposes  and  the  main-
tenance of  a  perpetual  succession  from  one  genera-
tion of  men  living  in  society  to  another.  When
established,  these  forms  embody  and  preserve  the
individual  character  of  every  self-maintaining
community.  In  the  sum  of  such  forms,  as  express-
ing and  determining  in  each  case  the  conditions  of


I THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF  LAW 7

collective  life  and  well-being,  we  have  the  State.
We  say  well-being  with  reference  to  the  ideal  and
not  with  reference  to  the  actual  success  attained.
Some  States  have  secured  the  well-being  of  their
members  much  better  than  others,  and  the  less
successful  ones  may  be  called  relatively  bad,  or  in
some  cases  even  very  bad.  Still  an  inferior  social
organisation,  though  measurably  worse  than  other
and  better  forms,  is  immeasurably  better  than  none.

Further,  if  the State  is  to  be  permanent,  we  The  state

needs  rules

need  more  than  the  existence  of  some  kind  of  binding  on
social  rule.  We  conceive  many  rules,  the  common  such.
and  fundamental  ones  in  matters  of  right  and
wrong,  for  example,  to  be  binding  on  men  simply
as  rational  and  social  beings,  without  regard  to
any  positive  institutions.  But  this  will  not  suffice
for  the  State,  which  is  an  association  for  living
together  in  definite  ways.  There  must  be  rules
binding  the  members  of  the  State  not  merely  as
human  or  rational,  but  as  members  of  that  State ;
and  this  is  not  affected  by  the  fact  that  to  some
extent,  perhaps  to  a  large  extent,  such  rules  include
the  matter  of  universal  or  more  highly  general
duties  which  are  of  antecedent  and  independent
force.  Wherever  any  considerable  degree  of  civil-
isation has  been  reached,  we  find  means  appointed


8  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

by  public  authority  for  declaring,  administering,
and  enforcing  rules  of  this  kind.  In  dealing  with
these  rules,  as  with  all  others,  both  the  persons
administering  them  and  those  whose  interests  are
affected  have  to  attend  not  only  to  the  rules  or
principles  themselves,  but  to  the  conditions  under
which  they  become  applicable,  the  mode  in  which
they  are  applied,  and  the  consequences  of  their
Such  rules application. The  sum  of  such  rules  as  existing  in

make  up  .

law.  a  given  commonwealth,  under  whatever  particular

forms,  is  what  in  common  speech  we  understand
by  law;  the  publicly  appointed  or  recognised
bodies  which  administer  such  rules  are  courts  of
justice.  By  justice,  in  this  usage,  we  mean  not
only  the  doing  of  right,  or  the  duty  thereof,  as
between  man  and  man,  but  the  purpose  and  en-
deavour of  the  State  to  cause  right  to  be  done.

Law  not  In  modern  times  and  in  civilised  countries  we

neoessa-

riiypro-  nnd  the  work  of  courts  of  justice  carried  on  by
or  official,  permanent  officers ;  it  is  a  special  kind  of  work,
and  the  knowledge  of  law  is  a  special  kind  of
knowledge  which  can  be  acquired  only  by  a  pro-
fessional training.  Law  has  developed  an  art  and
a  science  of  its  own  just  as  much  as  medicine.
These  conditions  are  now  so  usual  that  we  might
easily  think  them  necessary ;  but  they  are  not  so


I THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF  LAW 9

Law  and  legal  justice  can  exist  without  a  profession
of  judges  or  advocates ;  and  where  a  legal  profession
exists,  its  divisions,  and  the  relation  of  its  branches
to  one  another,  have  varied  and  still  vary  to  a
wide  extent  in  highly  civilised  countries  and  down
to  our  own  times.  Thus  at  Eome  under  the  later
Bepublic  and  the  early  Empire  there  was  a  class
of  highly  skilled  advocates,  and  under  the  Empire
there  was  something  like  a  Ministry  of  Justice,  but
for  a  long  time  there  was  nothing  answering  to  the
ordinary  judicial  establishments  of  modern  States.
In  England  it  does  not  appear  that  before  the
Norman  Conquest  there  was  any  distinct  legal
profession  at  all,  and  in  the  succeeding  Anglo-
Norman  period  there  were  professional  or  at  any
rate  skilled  judges,  but  no  professional  advocates.
In  Iceland,  about  the  same  time,  there  was  a  highly
technical  system  of  law 1 ;  courts  were  regularly
held,  and  their  constitution  was  the  subject  of
minute  rules ;  and  there  were  generally  two  or
three  persons  to  be  found  who  had  the  reputation
of  being  more  skilled  in  law  than  their  neighbours.
Yet  with  all  this  there  were  neither  judges  nor
counsellors  in  our  modern  sense. It  is  the  ad-

1  There  is  quite  enough  to  support  this  statement  apart  from
the  elaborate  pleadings  set  out  in  the  present  text  of  the  Njals
Saga,  which  are  believed  to  be  of  much  later  introduction.


10  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

ministration  of  justice  with  some  sort  of  regularity
that  marks  the  existence  of  law,  not  the  complete-
ness of  the  rules  administered,  nor  any  official
character  of  those  who  administer  them.

There  has  heen  much  discussion  about  the
relation  of  custom  to  law.  Custom,  except  in
distinctly  technical  applications  which  are  really
part  of  a  developed  legal  system,  seems  to  have  no
primary  meaning  beyond  that  of  a  rule  or  habit  of
action  which  is  in  fact  used  or  observed  (we  may
perhaps  add,  consciously  used  or  observed)  by  some
body  or  class  of  persons,  or  even  by  one  person.  It
was  the  "  custom  "  of  Hamlet's  father  to  sleep  in  his
orchard  of  the  afternoon.  In  the  Morte  d' Arthur
we  constantly  read  of  a  "  custom  "  peculiar  to  this
or  that  knight ;  for  example,  Sir  Dinadan  had  such
a  custom  that  he  loved  every  good  knight,  and  Sir
Galahalt,  "  the  hault  prince,"  had  a  custom  that  he
would  eat  no  fish.  And  it  is  still  correct,  though
less  common  than  it  was,  to  use  the  word  in  this
manner.  Often  custom  is  the  usage-  of  some  class
or  body  less  extensive  than  the  State,  such  as  the
inhabitants  of  a  city,  the  members  of  a  trade.  But
it  can  have  a  scope  much  wider  than  the  limits  of
the  State.  The  Church,  which  of  course  is  not
bounded  by  any  State,  and  in  the  medieval  view


i  THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF  LAW  11

could  not  be,  had  her  own  customs  and  refused  to
let  any  secular  power  pass  judgment  on  their
validity.  No  constant  relation  to  law  or  judicial
authority  can  be  predicated  of  custom.  It  may  or
may  not  be  treated  as  part  of  the  law.  Much  law
purports  to  be  founded  upon  custom,  and  much
custom  has  certainly  become  law.  The  extent  to
which  this  has  happened,  and  the  manner  in  which
it  has  been  brought  about,  are  matters  of  history  in
the  legal  system  which  each  particular  State  has
developed  or  adopted.  We  shall  have  to  return  to
this  when  we  consider  the  sources  and  forms  of  the
law  of  England.  So  far  the  word  "  custom "  may
be  said  to  suggest  the  notion  of  potential  or  in-
cipient legality.  But  on  the  other  hand  much
custom  is  quite  outside  the  usual  sphere  of  law.
Still  the  word  has  a  certain  ethical  force  tending  to
confine  its  use  to  those  habits  which  the  persons
practising  them  recognise  as  in  some  way  binding.
Such  are,  to  take  a  conspicuous  example,  customs
of  tribes  and  castes  which  have  a  religious  character.
"  Customary "  carries  more  weight,  though  it  may
be  only  a  little  more,  than  "usual1."  In  the
weakest  case  we  mean  by  custom  a  little  more  than

1  See  Littr6, s.v.  Coutume. Perhaps  this  tendency  is  more
marked  in  French  than  in  English.


12  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

habit,  for  one  may  have  habits  of  an  automatic  or
mechanical  kind  of  which  one  is  barely  or  not  at
all  conscious.  It  is  hardly  needful  to  add  that  a
great  deal  of  law,  at  any  rate  of  modern  law,  has
not  any  visible  relation  to  pre-existing  custom.

"Practice,"  in the modern  usage of  the  legal

profession,  signifies  a  particular kind of custom,

namely,  that  by  which  a  court  of  justice  regulates

the  course  of  its  own  proceedings.

Moral  law, We  have  used  the  word  Law,  so  far,  without

natural  law  .  .  .  T .

or  law  of  any  epithet,  the  sense  in  which  we  nave  used  it
being  that  which  is  commonly  understood  where
nothing  in  the  context  requires  a  different  one.
But  the  word  has  other  usages  more  or  less  analog-
ous to  the  principal  meaning.  Moral  law  is  the
sum  of  the  rules  of  conduct  which  we  conceive  to
be  binding  on  human  beings,  generally  or  with
regard  to  the  circumstances  of  a  particular  society,
so  far  forth  as  they  are  capable  of  discerning
between  right  and  wrong ;  but  it  may  also  mean
the  rules  to  which  the  members  of  a  particular
society  are  actually  expected,  by  the  feelings  and
opinions  prevalent  in  that  society,  to  conform.
Sometimes  the  distinction  between  actual  and  ideal
rules  of  conduct  is  marked  by  speaking  of  moral
rules,  or  of  "  positive  morality,"  when  we  mean  the


i  THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF  LAW  13

rules  accepted  in  fact  at  given  times  and  places,
but  of  "  natural  law  "  or  "  law  of  nature  "  when  we
mean  such  rules  as  are  universally  accepted,  or  in
our  opinion  ought  so  to  be.  Positive  morality  may
be,  and  in  many  times  and  places  is  known  to  have
been  or  still  to  be,  contrary  to  universal  morality  or
natural  law.  The  supposed  duty  of  a  Hindu  widow
to  burn  herself  with  her  husband's  corpse  is  a
striking  example.

The  rules  observed,  or  generally  expected  so  to  Law  of

nations.

be,  by  the  governments  of  civilised  independent
States  in  their  dealings  with  one  another  and  with
one  another's  subjects  are  called  the  Law  of  Nations,
or  International  Law.  We  are  not  called  upon  to
consider  here  whether  they  are  more  nearly  analog-
ous to  the  law  administered  by  courts  of  justice
within  a  State,  or  to  purely  moral  rules,  or  to  those
customs  and  observances  in  an  imperfectly  organised
society  which  have  not  fully  acquired  the  character
of  law,  but  are  on  the  way-  to  become  law.  This
last  mentioned  opinion  is  my  own ;  but  I  do  not
deem  this  a  fit  place  for  dwelling  upon  it.  The
whole  matter  is  much  disputed,  and  cannot  be
effectually  discussed  without  assuming  a  good  deal
both  of  law  and  of  the  history  of  law  to  be  known.
Bodies  of  rule  or  custom  existing  in  a  limited


14  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

Extended  section  of  a  community,  and  enforced  by  the
"  law "  for  opinion  of  that  section  within  itself,  are  often
social  called laws : as when we speak of  the laws of

honour,  or  the  laws  of  etiquette.  It  is  to  be
remembered  that  in  medieval  Europe  the  "law
of  arms"  was  for  the  persons  affected  by  it  a
true  and  perfect  law,  having  its  courts,  judges,
and  compulsory  sentences.  In  modern  times  this
use  of  the  word  seems  to  be  avowedly  metaphorical.
Sometimes  we  hear  of  "  the  code  of  honour,"  which
cannot  be  justified  even  as  a  metaphorical  license :
a  code,  as  we  shall  see  later,  being  essentially  a
collection  of  articulate  and  definite  rules  or  state-
ments, and  generally  purporting  to  proceed  from
\  a  definite  authority.

In  English  we  use  the  word  Law  in  a  con-
crete sense  to  mean  any  particular  rule,  having
the  nature  of  law  in  the  abstract  sense,  which  is
expressly  prescribed  by  the  supreme  power  in  the
State,  or  by  some  person  or  body  having  authority
for  that  purpose,  though  not  generally  supreme.
A  law,  in  this  sense,  is  the  exercise  of  a  creative
or  at  least  formative  authority  and  discretion;  the
power  that  made  it  might  conceivably  have  chosen
to  make  it  otherwise.  The  rule  is  such  because
a  definite  authority  has  made  it  so ;  it  lay  in  the


i  THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF  LAW  15

lawgiver's  hand  what  it  should  be.  There  is  an
element,  at  least,  of  origination.  Application  of
existing  principles,  however  carefully  worked  out,
and  however  important  it  may  be  in  its  results,  is
not  within  the  meaning.  Therefore,  although  declara-
tions of  legal  principles,  or  interpretations  of  express
laws,  by  courts  of  justice  may  well  be  said  to  form
part  of  the  law,  and  so  to  be  law  in  the  abstract
sense,  we  cannot  say  of  any  such  declaration  or
interpretation  that  it  is  "a  law."1  When  we  are
using  the  term  in  this  concrete  sense  it  is  not  only
correct  enough  for  ordinary  political  purposes,  but
correct  without  qualification,  to  say  that  "  Laws
are  general  rules  made  by  the  State  for  its  sub-
jects." 2  The  plural  "  laws  "  is  ambiguous,  and  the
context  must  determine  in  which  sense  it  is  used.
It  may  cover  both  meanings,  as  when  we  speak  of
"the  laws  of  England"  as  including  the  whole
body  of  English  law,  both  what  has  been  enacted
by  Parliament  and  what  is  derived  from  other
sources.  It  is  quite  possible  for  the  administration
and  development  of  "law"  and  the  production  of

1  When  some  part  of  the  general  law  has  been  designated  by
the  context,  it  may  afterwards  be  referred  to  as  "a  law,"  i.e.  a
portion  of  law,  without  reference  to  its  being  an  express  enactment
or  not,  as  if  we  say,  ' '  The  law  of  slander  by  spoken  words  is  not
a  reasonable  law. "

2  Kaleigh,  Elementary  Politics,  ch.  v.  init.


16  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

concrete  "  laws "  to  be  in  the  same  hands  to  a
greater  or  less  extent.  Thus  a  decision  of  an
English  Superior  Court  is  law  unless  and  until
reversed  or  overruled  by  a  higher  Court;  a  rule
of  procedure  made  by  the  Judges  under  the  powers
conferred  on  them  by  the  Judicature  Acts  is  a
law,  though  English-speaking  lawyers  do  not
commonly  call  it  so,  because  it  is  more  convenient
to  use  the  appropriate  term  "Eule  of  Court."  In
like  manner  an  Act  of  the  Imperial  Parliament,
or  an  Order  in  Council,  or  an  Ordinance  made  by
the  Legislature  of  a  Crown  Colony,  is  a  law,  though
almost  always  called  by  the  more  specific  nama
"Laws "in  This  concrete  usage  is  extended  to  all  sorts
sense  of  of  express  rules  made  and  recorded  for  the
rules  in  guidance  of  human  action  in  all  sorts  of  matters,
judicial  b°t.li  serious  and  otherwise.  Clubs  and  societies
have  their  laws;  there  are  laws  of  cricket  and
laws  of  whist.  As  might  be  expected,  the  dis-
tinction between  the  concrete  and  the  abstract
sense  is  not  always  exactly  observed  in  popular
usage.  One  might  say  without  impropriety :  "  It
is  a  law  of  journalism  that  an  editor  shall  not
disclose  the  authorship  of  an  unsigned  article  with-
out the  writer's  consent,"  although  "  rule "  or
"  custom  "  would  be  more  accurate.


I  THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF  LAW  17

It  is  proper  to  note  that  the  ambiguity  of  the  English

"law"  in-

word  law  seems  peculiar  to  English  among  the  eludes
chief  Western  languages.  Law  in  the  abstract,  the  "iex."
sum  of  rules  of  justice  administered  in  a  State  and
by  its  authority,  is  ius  in  Latin,  droit  in  French,
diritto  in  Italian,  Becht  in  German.  For  the  ex-
press rule  laid  down  by  an  originating  authority
these  languages  have  respectively  the  quite  distinct
words  lex,  hi,1  legge  (the  French  and  Italian  words
being  modern  forms  of  the  Latin  one),  Gesetz.
Thus  an  Englishman  tends,  consciously  or  not,
to  regard  enacted  law  as  the  typical  form ;  it  is
hard  for  him  not  to  identify  laws  (as  the  plural  of
"  a  law ")  with  Law.  Frenchmen  and  Germans,
on  the  other  hand,  are  more  likely  to  regard  hi
or  Gesetz  as  merely  a  particular  form  of  droit  or
Becht,  and  not  necessarily  the  most  important  form.

On the other hand, these Latin and other  "ius,"etc.

include

names  for  law  in  the abstract  (ius,  droit,  diritto,  "law "and

"right."

Becht)  correspond  also  to  our  distinct  English  word

i  In  some  French  phrases  droit  and  loi  run  into  one  another,
e.g.  "homme  de  loi."  "Droit  naturel"  and  "loi  naturelle,"
"droit  des  gens,"  and  "loi  des  nations,''  are  convertible  terms.
The  like  laxity  as  between  lex,  leges,  and  ius  is  common  in
medieval  Latin. In  German,  so  far  as  I  know,  Becht  and  Gesetz  ,

are  never  interchangeable.  Gesetz  means  a  rule  which  is  in  fact,
not  only  by  right  or  wrong  philosophic  construction,  "set"  by
a  definite  authority,  and  even  in  figurative  uses  this  primary
meaning  is  not  lost  sight  of.

C


18  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

right  in  its  substantive  use. This  leads  to  verbal

ambiguities,  and gives occasion for confusions of

thought,  which  are  perhaps  not  less inconvenient

than  any  consequences  of  law  having  to  stand  for

both  ins  and  lex  in  our  language.

Extended  From  the  concrete  use  of  the  word  lav:  we  have

use  of

"law "in by  extension  the  term  "law"  or  "laws  of  nature"

scientific

termino- in  the  language  of  natural  philosophy,  or  science

logy.

as  it  is  now  commonly  called,  though  in  truth  it
is  but  one  kind  of  science.  Here  the  word  has  a
wholly  distinct  meaning  from  those  we  have  hitherto
mentioned.  It  signifies  any  verified  uniformity  of
phenomena  which  is  capable  of  being  expressed  in
a  definite  statement,  and  by  "the  laws  of  nature"
we  mean  the  sum  of  such  uniformities  known  or
knowable — in  other  words,  the  uniformity  of  nature
as  a  whole.  Doubtless  this  language  originally
implied  a  belief  that  uniformity  in  nature,  whether
general  or  particular,  is  due  to  will  and  design  in
some  way  analogous  to  those  of  human  princes  and
rulers ;  but  it  has  long  ceased  to  have  any  such
implication  as  a  matter  of  necessity  or  even  of
common  understanding.1  No  one  thinks  of  Grimm's
Law,  or  other  "  laws  of  phonetics,"  as  anything  but

1  Cp.  Mr.  John  W.  Salmond  on  "The  Law  of  Nature,"  L.  Q.  B
xi.  121.  142.


I THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF  LAW 19

compendious  expressions  of  more  or  less  generally
observed  facts  in  human  speech,  or  in  particular
groups  of  languages.  Further,  this  meaning  has
been  carried  back  into  the  region  of  moral  and
political  science,  as  when  we  speak  of  the  laws  of
political  economy  or  history.  We  may  even  say,
if  we  please,  though  it  would  hardly  be  elegant,
that  the  laws  of  history  are  exemplified  in  the
history  of  law,  thus  using  the  word  in  the  primary
and  the  derivative  sense  in  the  same  sentence.
Here  the  term  has  quite  lost  its  ethical  associations ;
in  fact  those  who  insist  most  strongly  upon  the
ethical  element  of  law  in  its  primary  sense  are
perhaps  those  who  are  most  likely  to  object  to  this
usage.  Such  a  phrase  as  laws  of  political  economy,
laws  of  history,  laws  of  statistics,  has  no  depend-
ence whatever  on  any  conception  of  a  tribunal  or
a  lawgiver,  or  of  doing  justice.  It  signifies  only
the  normal  results,  as  collected  by  observation  or
deduced  by  reasoning,  of  conditions,  and  (where
human  action  is  concerned)  habits  and  motives,
assumed  to  exist  and  to  have  effect.  Whether  we
like  those  results  or  not ;  whether  and  to  what
extent  the  conditions  are  within  the  control  of
deliberate  human  action  ;  and  in  what  direction,  if
at  all,  we  shall  endeavour  to  modify  the  conditions


20  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

or  counteract  the  results, — may  be  matters  deserving
to  be  most  carefully  weighed :  but  they  belong  to
a  different  order  of  considerations.  Physicists  have
studied  what  are  called  the  laws  of  electricity  till
it  has  become  possible  to  light  our  houses  with
electric  lamps.  The  occupier  of  a  house  so  lighted
can  turn  those  laws  to  account  whenever  he  pleases,
and  for  so  long  as  he  pleases,  provided  that  every-
thing is  in  order,  and  in  that  sense  he  can  control
them.  But  his  reasons  for  wanting  or  not  wanting
to  light  up  a  particular  room  at  this  or  that  hour
have  nothing  to  do  with  electrical  science.  The
fact  that  a  stone  lies  on  the  ground  is  an  example
of  the  "  law  of  gravity."  My  desire  to  pick  it  up,
followed  by  the  act  of  picking  it  up,  does  not  affect
the  "  law," — in  other  words,  that  particular  aspect
of  the  uniformity  of  nature, — in  any  way :  it  only
varies  the  example.  A  well-to-do  man  going  abroad
lets  his  house  to  a  friend  at  a  nominal  rent :  the  "  laws
of  political  economy  "  have  nothing  to  say  to  this  :
the  transaction  is  not  such  an  one  as  economists  con-
template. In  short,  the  "  laws  of  nature  "  are,  for  the
lawyer  and  moralist,  matters  not  of  law  at  all  in  their
sense,  but  of  pure  fact.  And  this  applies  equally
to  the  so-called  laws  of  human  action  in  so  far  as
human  action  is  a  subject  of  scientific  observation.


I THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF  LAW 21

We may  now leave aside the secondary  and  Law  in  its

.  .  i)i  i oorapul-

denvative  meanings  of  "  law  "  or  "  laws, '  and  attend  sory
only  to  such  rules  as  are  recognised  and  administered  Sanctions.
in  a  commonwealth,  and  under  its  authority,  as
binding  on  its  members.  Thus  far  we  have  said
nothing  about  the  enforcement  of  the  rules.  In
a  modern  civilised  State  it  is  well  understood  that,
if  resistance  is  made,  the  power  of  the  State,  or
such  part  thereof  as  may  be  needful  for  the  pur-
pose, will  be  put  forth  to  overcome  it.  Only  the
commonest  knowledge  of  affairs  and  events,  as  they
occur  day  by  day,  is  required  to  assure  us  that  the
commission  of  acts  forbidden  by  law,  or  disobedience
to  the  orders  of  a  court  of  justice,  is  likely  to  have
unpleasant  consequences  in  various  degrees  and
kinds,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  case  and  the
system  of  law  and  government  existing  at  the  time
and  place,  and  that  much  work  and  thought  are
spent  on  behalf  of  the  State  in  making  that  like-
lihood approach  as  near  as  may  be  to  certainty.
Common  knowledge  no  less  informs  us,  it  is  true,
that  the  public  servants  of  even  the  most  highly
organised  State  do  not  attain  constant  or  uniform
success  in  this  endeavour.  Some  offenders  escape
and  some  laws  are  disregarded.  But  the  State  is,
on  the  whole,  prepared  to  compel  its  members  to


22  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

obey  the  law,  and  does,  on  the  whole,  exercise  an
effective  compulsion ;  that  is  to  say,  it  will  and
can  make  compliance  with  the  law  preferable  to
disobedience  for  most  men  on  most  occasions,  by
the  application  of  fitting  means  through  its  officers
appointed  for  that  purpose.  If  this  much  cannot
be  affirmed  in  a  given  society  at  a  given  time  (say
a  minor  South  American  republic  when  a  revolution
is  at  its  height),  that  society  is  in  a  condition  of
political  anarchy  for  the  time  being,  or  at  least  the
functions  of  the  State  are  suspended.  In  fact  we
find  the  will  and  power  to  enforce  the  law  by
public  authority  to  be  stronger  in  proportion  as
the  commonwealth  is  more  settled,  more  prosperous,
and  more  refined.  "  The  magistrate  beareth  not
the  sword  in  vain."  Hence  it  is  natural  for  men
living  in  a  civilised  State  to  regard  this  public  will
and  power  of  causing  the  law  to  be  observed  as
belonging  to  the  very  essence  of  law.  The  appointed
consequences  of  disobedience,  the  sanctions  of  law
as  they  are  commonly  called,  seem  to  be  not  only
a  normal  element  of  civilised  law,  but  a  necessary
constituent.  Law  without  a  sanction,  and  that
sanction  in  the  hands  of  the  State,  can,  in  this  way
of  thinking,  easily  appear  like  a  contradiction  in
terms.


i  THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF  LAW  23

Any  such  view,  however,  will  be  found  hard  to  Enforce-
ment of
reconcile  with  the  witness  of  history. For  we  find,  law  by  the

•j>  i.  i  i  State  is

it  we  look  away  from  such  elaborated  systems  as  relatively
those  of  the  later  Eoman  empire  and  of  modern
Western  governments,  that  not  only  law,  but  law
with  a  good  deal  of  formality,  has  existed  before
the  State  had  any  adequate  means  of  compelling
its  observance,  and  indeed  before  there  was  any
regular  process  of  enforcement  at  all.  We  have
already  vouched  the  Icelandic  Sagas  to  show  that
law  can  do  without  a  legal  profession :  we  may
vouch  them  to  show  no  less  clearly  that  it  can
do  without  a  formal  sanction.  More  than  this,
we  find  preserved  among  the  antiquities  of  legal
systems,  and  notably-  in  archaic  forms  and  solem-
nities, considerable  traces  of  a  time  when  the  juris-
diction of  courts  arose  only  from  the  voluntary
submission  of  the  parties :  and  this  not  only  as
between  subject  and  subject,  but  as  between  a
subject  and  the  State 1.  We  need  not  doubt  that
effectual  motives  for  submission  could  be  brought,
sooner  or  later,  to  bear  on  unwilling  subjects.  The
man  who  did  not  submit  himself  to  law  could  not
claim  the  benefit  of  the  law ;  there  was  no  reason

1  The  history  of  English  criminal  procedure  affords  at  least  one
striking  illustration  ;  but  I  purposely  avoid  a  digression.


24  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

why  every  man's  hand  should  not  be  against  him.
Outlawry,  now  all  but  obsolete  even  in  name,  was
the  formal  expression  of  the  archaic  social  rules  by
which  law  was  gradually  made  supreme.  Again,
archaic  procedure  shows  us  a  period  in  which  a
suitor  may  obtain  judgment,  but  must  execute  the
judgment  for  himself.  The  most  the  State  will
do  for  him  is  to  come  eventually  to  his  aid  if  the
adversary  or  the  adversary's  friends  continue  to
deny  him  right.  In  the  meantime  private  force
holds  the  ground,  but  the  winning  suitor's  private
force  is  lawful  and  the  loser's  is  unlawful.

At  this  stage  the  State  can  hardly  be  said  to
provide  any  sanction  of  its  own ;  it  only  gives
moral  support  and  coherence  to  sanctions  already
existing  in  a  vague  form.  Conversely,  one  of  the
first  signs  of  the  reviving  power  and  solidity  of  the
State  in  the  early  Middle  Ages  was  the  jealous
restriction  of  private  force,  even  when  the  claimant
who  sought  his  ends  by  might  had  full  right  on  his
side.  Iniuste  and  sine  iudicio  became  convertible
terms.  It  is  wrong  to  do  oneself  right  without
judgment  and  public  authority.

In  one  sense  we  may  well  enough  say  that  there
is  no  law  without  a  sanction.  For  a  rule  of  law
must  at  least  be  a  rule  conceived  as  binding;  and


I  THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF  LAW  25

a  rule  is  not  binding  when  any  one  to  whom  it
applies  is  free  to  observe  it  or  not  as  he  thinks  fit.
To  conceive  of  any  part  of  human  conduct  as
subject  to  law  is  to  conceive  that  the  actor's  freedom
has  bounds  which  he  oversteps  at  his  peril.  One
or  more  courses  of  action  may  be  right  or  allowable ;
at  least  one  must  be  wrong.  Now  what  is  felt  to
be  wrong  is  felt  to  call  for  redress.  This  may  be
direct  or  indirect,  swift  or  tardy;  but  in  the  mere
sense  and  apprehension  of  redress  to  come,  however
remote  and  improbable  it  may  seem,  and  however
uncertain  the  manner  of  it  may  be,  we  have  already
some  kind  of  sanction,  and  not  the  less  a  sanction
because  its  effect  may  be  precarious.  All  this
applies  to  moral  no  less  than  to  legal  rules.
Taken  thus  largely,  there  are  sanctions  of  infinite
degrees  from  obscure  monitions  of  conscience  to
general  and  open  reprobation,  or  even  acts  of
violence  prompted  by  the  indignation  of  one's
fellow-men * ;  and,  if  we  pass  from  the  moral  and
social  to  the  legal  sphere,  from  some  small  expense
or  disadvantage  in  the  conduct  of  a  lawsuit,  or
some  small  penalty  for  delay  in  performing  a
public  duty,  to the  severest  penalties  of  criminal

1  Such  acts  may  or  may  not  be  justifiable,  and  the  rule  enforced
may  or  may  not  be  itself  right  from  the  point  of  view  of  universal
morality. This  does  not  concern  us  here.


26  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

jurisdiction.  But  in  a  modern  State  the  sanction
of  law  means  both  for  lawful  men  and  for  evil-
doers something  much  more  definite.  It  means
nothing  less  than  the  constant  willingness  and
readiness  of  the  State,  in  the  persons  of  its  magis-
trates and  officers,  to  use  its  power  in  causing
justice  to  be  done ;  and  this  in  respect  not  only
of  the  main  duties  enforceable  by  law,  but  of  an
immense  number  of  incidental  and  at  first  sight
arbitrary  rules  and  conditions.
Law  and  In short the conception of law,  many  of  its

the  "will

of  the ideas,  and  much even of its form,  are prior in
State."

history to the official intervention of the State,

save  in  the  last  resort,  to  maintain  law.  True  it
is  that  in  modern  States  law  tends  more  and  more
to  become  identified  with  the  will  of  the  State  as
expressed  by  the  authorities  intrusted  with  the
direction  of  the  common  power.  But  to  regard
law  as  merely  that  which  the  State  wills  or  com-
mands is  eminently  the  mistake  of  a  layman,  as
one  of  the  greatest  modern  jurists  has  hinted  x ;
■  and,  we  may  add,  of  a  layman  who  has  not  con-
sidered the  difference  between  modern  and  archaic
societies,  or  the  political  and  social  foundations
of  law.  For  most  practical  purposes  the  citizens
1  Ihering,  Geist  des  romischen  Rechtes,  i.  37  (ed.  1878).


i  THE  NATURE  AND  MEANING  OF  LAW  27

of  a  State,  and  to  a  considerable  extent,  though
not  altogether,  lawyers  and  magistrates  also,  have
not  to  concern  themselves  with  thinking  what  those
foundations  are.  Their  business  is  to  learn  and
know,  so  far  as  needful  for  their  affairs,  what  rules
the  State  does  undertake  to  enforce  and  administer,
whatever  the  real  or  professed  reasons  for  those
rules  may  be.  Moreover,  criminal  law,  which  is
eminently  imperative,  is  that  branch  of  law  which
appeals  most  to  the  popular  imagination,  and  fills
the  largest  place  in  .popular  notions  of  legal  justice.
Again,  the  unexampled  activity  of  the  legislative
power  in  modern  States  has  largely  increased  the
sphere  of  express  enactment.  All  these  causes
have  made  it  possible  and  even  plausible  to  regard
law  not  only  as  being  embodied  in  the  commands
of  a  political  sovereign,  but  as  consisting  of  such
commands  and  being  nothing  else.  They  have  not
altered  the  fundamental  facts  of  human  society ;
and  the  merely  imperative  theory  of  legal  institu-
tions remains  as  one-sided  and  unphilosophical  as
it  was  before.  Law  is  enforced  by  the  State
because  it  is  law;  it  is  not  law  merely  because
the  State  enforces  it.  But  the  further  pursuit  of
this  subject  seems  to  belong  to  the  philosophy  of
Politics  rather  than  of  Law.


CHAPTEE II

JUSTICE ACCORDING TO LAW

Conditions  The  only  essential  conditions  for  the  existence  of

for  exist-  .

ence  of law  and  legal  institutions  are  the existence  of  a

law  :  pos-  ,  ,

sibie  ano- political community and the recognition by its

malous  .....  .  .

cases.  members  of  settled  rules  binding  upon  them  m  that
capacity.  Those  conditions  are  present  in  all
societies  of  men  who  are  not  mere  savages.  Even
among  civilised  men,  on  the  other  hand,  they  may
be  suspended  in  particular  circumstances.  We
can  get  one  example  by  supposing  a  boat's  crew
from  a  wrecked  ship,  made  up  of  different  nation-
alities .in  about  equal  proportions,  to  land  on  an
island  in  the  high  seas  which  is  neither  occupied
nor  claimed  by  any  civilised  Power.  Such  a  party
would,  it  is  conceived,  be  remitted  to  what  was  once
called  "the  state  of  nature,"  aided  by  whatever
conventions  they  might  agree  upon  as  appropriate


chap,  ii  JUSTICE  ACCORDING  TO  LAW  29

to  their  situation.  A  lawyer  wouki  probably
advise  tbem  to  consider  themselves  as  still  under
the  law  of  the  ship's  flag,  but  it  is  difficult  to  say
that  this  or  any  other  law  would  have  any  real
authority  apart  from  the  agreement  of  the  whole
party.  Practically  the  law  of  nature,  or  in  less
ambiguous  terms  the  common  rules  of  civilised
morals  and  the  dictates  of  obvious  expediency,
would  have  to  suffice  for  the  present  need.  Again,
it  is  not  very  difficult  for  civilised  men  to  find
themselves,  without  any  violent  accident,  in  places
where  it  is  hard  to  say  whether  any  and,  if  any,
what  law  prevails  in  the  ordinary  sense.  Take
the  case  of  an  English  or  American  traveller,  or  an
Englishman  and  an  American  travelling  together,  in
the  region  of  the  Khaibar  Pass  beyond  the  British
frontier  post  at  Fort  Jamrud  and  before  Afghan
territory  is  reached.  Certainly  they  are  not  subject
to  the  law  of  British  India;  still  less,  if  possible,
to  the  law  of  Islam  as  applied  in  Afghanistan.
Yet  the  persons  and  property  of  those  who  go  up
the  Pass  on  the  appointed  days  and  with  the
proper  escort  are  really  safer  than  they  would  be
in  some  parts  of  almost  any  European  or  American
city.  But  peculiar  phenomena  of  this  kind,  which
are transitory accidents as compared with the


30  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

ordinary  course  of  civilised  life,  do  not  affect  the
normal  formation  and  effects  of  civilised  law,  nor
throw  any  light  on  its  origin.  If,  on  the  other
hand,  a  new  social  combination  which  at  first  sight
may  have  been  precarious  becomes  permanent,  its
members  acquire,  either  •  by  convention  or  by  sub-
mission to  an  existing  jurisdiction,  some  permanent
form  of  government  and  law.  The  inchoate  stages
of  this  process  (which,  in  fact,  has  taken  place  in
various  parts  of  the  world,  such  as  the  extreme
Western  States  of  America,  within  living  memory)
are  interesting  in  their  own  way,  but  are  hardly
within  the  province  of  the  lawyer.  Settled
rules  and  recognised  jurisdiction  are  the  lawyer's
tests.
Justice.  Law  presupposes  ideas,  however  rudimentary,  of

justice.  But,  law  being  once  established,  just,  in
matters  of  the  law,  denotes  whatever  is  done  in
express  fulfilment  of  the  rules  of  law,  or  is  approved
and  allowed  by  law.  Wot  everything  which  is  not
forbidden  is  just.  Many  things  are  left  alone  by
the  State,  as  it  were  under  protest,  and  only
because  it  is  thought  that  interference  would  do
more  harm  than  good.  In  such  things  the  notion
of  justice  has  no  place :  the  mind  of  the  State  is
rather expressed by Dante's "guarda e passa."


ii  JUSTICE  ACCORDING  TO  LAW  31

The  words  "  just "  and  "  justice,"  and  corresponding
words  in  other  tongues,  have  never  quite  lost  ethical
significance  even  in  the  most  technical  legal  context.
The  reason  of  this  (unduly  neglected  by  some
moderns  for  the  sake  of  a  merely  verbal  and
illusive  exactness)  is  that  in  the  development  of
the  law  both  by  legislative  and  by  judicial  processes
appeal  is  constantly  made  to  ethical  reason  and  the
moral  judgment  of  the  community.  Doubtless  the
servants  of  the  law  must  obey  the  law,  whether
specific  rules  of  law  be  morally  just  in  their  eyes
or  not :  this,  however,  is  only  saying  that  the
moral  judgment  we  regard  is  the  judgment  of  the
community,  and  not  the  particular  opinion  of  this
or  that  citizen.  Further,  some  conflict  between
legal  and  moral  justice  can  hardly  be  avoided,  for
morality  and  law  cannot  move  at  exactly  the  same
rate.  Still,  in  a  well-ordered  State  such  conflict  is
exceptional  and  seldom  acute.  Legal  justice  aims
at  realising  moral  justice  within  its  range,  and  its
strength  largely  consists  in  the  general  feeling  that
this  is  so.  Were  the  legal  formulation  of  right
permanently  estranged  from  the  moral  judgment  of
good  citizens,  the  State  would  be  divided  against
itself.

We  may  better  realise  the  fundamental  character


32


FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE


sion,  the
funda-
mental
character
of  law.


Order,  not  of  law  by  trying  to  conceive  its  negation  or  opposite.
This  will  be  found,  it  is  submitted,  in  the  absence
of  order  rather  than  in  the  absence  of  compulsion.
An  exercise  of  merely  capricious  power,  however
great  in  relation  to  that  which  it  acts  upon,  does
not  satisfy  the  general  conception  of  law,  whether
it  does  or  does  not  fit  the  words  of  any  artificial
definition.  A  despotic  chief  who  paid  no  attention
to  anything  but  his  own  whim  of  the  moment  could
hardly  be  said  to  administer  justice  even  if  he  pro-
fessed to  decide  the  disputes  of  his  subjects.  The
best  ideal  picture  I  know  in  literature  of  what
might  be  called  natural  injustice,  the  mere  wanton-
ness of  power,  is  exhibited  in  the  ways  of  Setebos
as  conceived  by  Eobert  Browning's  Caliban}  In
the  same  master's  Pippa  Passes,  the  song  of  the
ancient  king  who  judged  sitting  in  the  sun  gives  a
more  pleasing  though  not  a  more  perfect  image  of
natural  or  rather  patriarchal  justice.  Absence  of
defined  rule,  it  must  be  remembered,  is  not  the  same
thing  as  the  negation  of  order.  The  patriarch  may
not  do  justice  according  to  any  consciously  realised
rule,  and  yet  his  decrees  are  felt  to  be  just,  and
will  go  to  the  making  of  rules  of  justice  for  pos-
terity.


1  "  As  it  likes  me  each  time  I  do  :  so  He.'


li  JUSTICE  ACCORDING  TO  LAW  33

It  is  true  that  even  in  highly  civilised  States  we  Relation  of

.  ■  r.  . singular

meet  with  occasional  or  singular  acts  of  sovereign  acts  of
power  which  are  outside  the  regular  course  of  power  to
justice  and  administration,  and  which  nevertheless
must  be  counted  as  laws.  In  form  they  do  not
differ  from  the  ordinary  acts  of  the  law-making
authority ;  and  in  substance  they  are  laws  in  so  far
as  they  affect  in  some  way  the  standing  of  individual
citizens  before  the  law,  must  be  regarded  and  acted
upon  by  the  judges  and  other  public  servants  of  the
State,  and  will  at  need  be  put  in  force  by  the
executive.  In  some  of  these  cases  there  is  really
nothing  abnormal  except  the  form  of  the  transaction.
What  began  with  being  a  special  exercise  of  supreme
power  for  a  special  occasion  has  settled  into  a
routine  which,  though  in  form  legislative,  is  in
substance  administrative  or  judicial,  or  partly  the
one  and  partly  the  other.  Such  is  the  case  in  this
country  with  the  private  Acts  of  Parliament  by
which  railway  and  other  companies  are  incorporated
and  have  powers  of  compulsory  purchase  and  the
like  conferred  on  them.  So,  before  the  establish-
ment of  the  Divorce  Court,  the  dissolution  of
marriages  by  a  private  Act  of  Parliament  was  a
costly  and  cumbrous  proceeding,  but  still  of  a
judicial  kind. In  these  and  similar  cases  the  form


31  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

of  legislation  has  been  rendered  necessary  by-
historical  or  constitutional  accident.  Sometimes,
again,  the  purpose  of  these  extraordinary  legislative
acts  is  to  relieve  innocent  persons,  and  those  who
may  have  to  derive  titles  to  property  from  them,
from  the  consequences  of  some  venial  .failure  to
comply  with  the  requirements  of  law.  Marriages
between  British  subjects  have  often  been  celebrated
in  good  faith,  but  in  fact  without  authority,  by
British  Consuls  and  other  official  persons  in  remote
parts  of  the  world,  and  on  the  error  being  discovered
Acts  of  Parliament  have  been  passed  to  give  validity
to  marriages  so  celebrated.  Acts  of  indemnity
have  much  the  same  nature,  so  far  as  they  relate  to
the  neglect  or  omission  of  requirements  which  have
come  to  be  regarded  as  merely  formal.  When  the
Test  Acts  were  in  force  there  was  an  annual  Act  of
Indemnity  for  the  relief  of  those  public  officers
(being  in  fact  the  great  majority)  who  had  not
performed  and  observed  all  the  conditions  which  at
one  time  had  been  supposed,  and  for  a  time  possibly
were,  needful  precautions  for  securing  the  Protestant
succession  to  the  throne.  Lastly,  that  which  in
form  is  an  act  of  legislation  may  be  a  more  or  less
thinly  disguised  act  of  revolution,  civil  war,  or
reprisal against unsuccessful revolution. Acts  of


n  JUSTICE  ACCORDING  TO  LAW  35

attainder  are  the  best  English  example  in  this  kind.1
All  these  matters  have  their  own  historical  and
political  interest :  but  we  have  nothing  to  learn
from  them  about  the  normal  contents  and  operation
of  legal  institutions.  The  Eoman  name  of  privilegia
marks  them  off  as  standing  outside  the  province  of
regular  and  ordinary  law.

Let  us  pass  on,  then,  to  consider  what  are  the  Normal

marks  of

normal  and  necessary  marks,  in  a  civilised  common-  law :

.  Generality.

wealth,  of  justice  administered  according  to  law.
They  seem  capable  of  being  reduced  to  Generality,
Equality,  and  Certainty.  First,  as  to  generality,
the  rule  of  justice  is  a  rule  for  citizens  as  such.
It  cannot  be  a  rule  merely  for  the  individual :  as
the  medieval  glossators  put  it,  there  cannot  be  one
law  for  Peter  and  another  for  John.  Not  that
every  rule  must  or  can  apply  to  all  citizens ;  there
are  divers  rules  for  divers  conditions  and  classes
of  men.  An  unmarried  man  is  not  under  the
duties  of  a  husband,  nor  a  trader  under  those  of
a  soldier.  But  every  rule  must  at  least  have
regard  to  a  class  of  members  of  the  State,  and  be
binding  upon  or  in  respect  of  that  class  as  deter-
mined by  some  definite  position  in  the  community.

1  They  must  be  carefully  distinguished  from  impeachment,  which
is  a  regular  process  known  to  the  law,  though  an  unusual  one.


36  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

This  will  hold  however  small  the  class  may  be,
and  even  if  it  consists  for  the  time  being  of  only
one  individual,  as  is  the  case  with  offices  held
by  only  one  person  at  a  time.  Certain  rules  of
law  will  be  found,  in  almost  every  country,  to
apply  only  to  the  prince  or  titular  ruler  of  the
State,  or  to  qualify  the  application  of  the  general
law  to  him.  In  England,  again,  the  Prince  of
Wales,  as  Duke  of  Cornwall,  is  the  subject  of  rules
forming  a  singular  exception  to  the  general  law
of  property ;  and  the  Lord  Chancellor  has  many
duties  and  powers  peculiar  to  his  office.  But  these
rules  are  not  lacking  in  the  quality  of  generality,
for  in  every  case  they  apply  not  to  the  individual
person  as  such,  but  to  the  holder  of  the  office  for
the  time  being.  They  may  be  anomalous  with
regard  ■  to  the  legal  system  in  which  they  occur ;
and,  like  other  rules  of  law,  they  may  or  may
not  be  expedient  on  the  particular  merits  of  each
case.  They  are  not  in  any  necessary  conflict  with
the  principles  of  legal  justice  merely  because  they
are  of  limited  or  unique  application.

Next,  the  rule  of  generality  cannot  be  fulfilled
unless  it  is  aided  by  the  principle  of  equality.
Eules  of  law  being  once  declared,  the  rule  must
have  the  like  application  to  all  persons  and  facts


ii  JUSTICE  ACCORDING  TO  LAW  37

coming  within  it.  Eespect  of  persons  is  incom-
patible with  justice.  Law  which  is  the  same  for
Peter  and  for  John  must  he  administered  to  John
and  to  Peter  evenly.  The  judge  is  not  free  to
show  favour  to  Peter  and  disfavour  to  John.  As
the  maxim  has  it,  equality  is  equity.1  So  much
is  obvious  and  needs  no  further  exposition.  But
it  may  be  proper  to  point  out  that  the  rule  of
equality  does  not  exclude  judicial  discretion.  Often-
times laws  are  purposely  framed  so  as  to  give  a
considerable  range  of  choice  to  judicial  or  executive
officers  as  to  the  times,  places,  and  manner  of
their  application.  It  is  quite  commonly  left  to
the  judge  to  assign,  up  to  a  prescribed  limit,  the
punishment  of  proved  offences :  indeed,  the  cases
in  which  the  court  is  deprived  of  discretion  are
exceptional  in  all  modern  systems.  Apart  from
capital  offences,  there  are  only  one  or  two  cases
in  English  criminal  law  where  a  minimum  punish-
ment is  imposed,  and  none,  it  is  believed,  where
there  is  no  discretion  at  all.  Certain  remedies
and  forms  of  relief,  in  matters  of  civil  jurisdiction,
are  said  to  be  discretionary  as  contrasted  with
those  which  parties  can  demand  as  their  right.
Still,  a  judicial  discretion,  however  wide,  is  to  be

1  The  working  use  of  the  maxim  is  not  quite  so  simple  as  this.


38  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

exercised  without  favour  and  according  to  the  best
judgment  which  the  person  intrusted  with  the
discretion  can  form  on  the  merits  of  each  case.1
Differences  of  personal  character  and  local  circum-
stances are  often  quite  proper  elements  in  the
formation  of  such  a  judgment,  but  any  introduction
of  mere  personal  favour  is  an  abuse.  We  still
aim  at  assigning  equal  results  to  equal  conditions.
Judicial  discretion  is  not  an  exception  to  the
principle  of  equality,  but  comes  in  aid  of  it  where
an  inflexible  rule,  omitting  to  take  account  of
conditions  that  cannot  be  denned  beforehand,  would
really  work  inequality.  This  implies  that  only
such  conditions  are  counted  as  are  material  for  the
purposes  of  the  rule  to  be  applied.  Of  course  no
two  persons  or  events  can  be  fully  alike.  What
rules  of  law  have  to  do  is  to  select  those  conditions
which  are  to  have  consequences  of  certain  kinds :
which  being  done,  it  is  the  business  of  the  courts
to attend to all those conditions, and, saving


1  In  various  eases  where  the  risk  of  discretion  being  perverted
by  outside  influence  or  pressure  has  seemed  greater  than  that. of
spontaneous  partiality,  the  holders  of  discretionary  power  or
authority  are  deliberately  exempted  from  being  called  on  to  give
an  account  of  their  reasons.  In  such  cases  the  discretion  is  said
to  be  not  judicial,  but  absolute.  Examples :  the  protector  of  a
settlement,  the  governing  bodies  of  schools  under  the  Public
Schools  Act.


ii  JUSTICE  ACCORDING  TO  LAW  39

judicial  discretion  where  it  exists,  not  to  any
others.  A  plaintiff  who  argues  his  case  in  person
may  be  tedious  and  offensive,  but  the  judge  must
nevertheless  do  him  justice  as  fully  as  if  his
argument  were  excellent.  This  may  seem  too
obvious  for  statement  in  England,  but  there  are
parts  of  the  British  Empire  where  it  is  not,  or
within  recent  times  was  not,  so.  Suppose,  on  the
other  hand,  it  were  a  rule  of  law  that  no  man  who
wore  a  white  hat  before  May -day  could  take  a
legacy  within  the  year.  It  would  not  be  competent
to  any  court  to  say  that,  as  between  A  and  B,
rival  claimants  for  the  same  legacy,  the  legacy
should  be  paid  to  A,  notwithstanding  that  he  had
worn  a  white  hat  in  April,  because  he  was  a  poor
man  and  more  in  want  of  money  than  B.  The
law  cannot  make  all  men  equal,  but  they  are  equal
before  the  law  in  the  sense  that  their  rights  are
equally  the  subject  of  protection  and  their  duties
of  enforcement.

Further,  as  the  requirement  of  generality  leads  Certainty :
to that  of equality, so does the requirement of  character
equality  lead  to  that  of  certainty,  which  brings  in
its  train  the  whole  scientific  development  of  law.
We  must  administer  a  general  rule,  and  administer
it  equally. There  can  be  no  law  without  generality;


40  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chav.

there  can  be  no  just  operation  of  law  without
equality.  But  we  cannot  be  sure  of  a  rule  being
equally  administered  at  different  times  and  in  the
cases  of  different  persons  unless  the  rule  is  denned
and  recorded.  Justice  ought  to  be  the  same  for
all  citizens,  so  far  as  the  material  conditions  are
the  same.  Now  to  carry  out  this  idea  the  dispenser
of  justice  ought  to  be  adequately  furnished  with
two  kinds  of  information.  He  should  know  what
is  accustomed  to  be  done  in  like  cases,  and  when-
ever new  conditions  occur  he  should  know,  or  have
the  means  of  forming  a  judgment,  which  of  them
are  material  with  a  view  to  legal  justice,  and  which
are  not.  Moreover,  there  must  be  some  means  of
securing  an  approximate  uniformity  of  judgment;
otherwise  judges  and  magistrates  of  all  degrees  will
make  every  one  a  law  of  his  own  for  himself,  and
the  principle  of  equality  will  not  be  satisfied.
Justice  dealt  out  according  to  the  first  impression
of  each  particular  case,  the  "natural  justice"  of
an  eastern  king  sitting  in  the  gate,  is  tolerable  only
when  the  community  is  small  enough  for  this
function  to  be  in  the  hands  of  one  man,  or  very
few,  and  its  affairs  are  simple  enough  for  offhand
judgments  not  to  produce  results  of  manifest  in-
equality. This is  as  much as to  say  that in  a


ii  JUSTICE  ACCORDING  TO  LAW  41

civilised  commonwealth  law  must  inevitably  become
a  science.  The  demand  for  certainty  becomes  more
exacting  as  men's  affairs  become  more  complex,  and
the  aid  of  the  courts  is  more  frequently  sought.
Trade  and  traffic,  in  their  increasing  volume,  speed,
and  variety  of  movement,  raise  new  questions  at
every  turn,  and  men  expect  not  only  to  get  their
differences  settled  for  the  moment,  but  to  have
solutions  which  will  prevent  the  same  difficulties
from  giving  trouble  again.  How  far  would  natural
justice  carry  us,  for  example,  towards  a  settlement
of  the  problems  involved  in  making  contracts  by
letter,  telegraph,  or  telephone  ?  Hence  law  becomes
an  artificial  system  which  is  always  gathering  new
material.  The  controverted  points  of  one  generation
become  the  settled  rules  of  the  next,  and  fresh
work  is  built  up  on  them  in  turn.  Thus  the  law
is  in  a  constant  process  of  approximation  to  an
ideal  certainty  which,  by  the  nature  of  the  case,
can  never  be  perfectly  attained  at  any  given  moment.
Every  one  who  has  studied  the  law  knows  that  the
approximation  is  apt  to  be  a  rough  one,  and  is
exposed  to  many  disturbing  causes.  We  shall  see
something,  in  the  latter  part  of  this  work,  of  the
methods  by  which  it  is  effected  in  the  system  of
the Common Law. Meanwhile it is to be re-


42  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

membered  that  the  political  sciences  do  not  claim
to  be  exact  in  either  a  speculative  or  a  practical
point  of  view.  For  the  practical  purposes  of  a
State  governed  according  to  law,  that  degree  of
certainty  suffices  which  will  satisfy  the  citizens
that  the  law  works  on  the  whole  justly  and  without
favour ;  and  in  archaic  societies  not  only  is  a  pretty
rough  kind  of  certainty  sufficient,  but  no  other  is
possible.
Certainty  Eules  of  law  have  to  be  applied to  the  facts

of  law

limited  by ascertained by  the  tribunal. Now the facts are

attainable  ,  .

certainty often in  dispute ; indeed  those  cases  are  a  small

of  facts.  . .  .  -i t\v>

minority  where  there  is  a  real  difference  between
the  parties,  and  that  difference  turns  merely  upon
the  application  of  the  law  to  undisputed  facts.1
And  the  process  of  forming  a  judgment  as  to  the
truth  of  the  facts,  where  conflicting  accounts  are
offered,  is  itself  an  approximate  one  at  best  for
human  faculties.  In  early  stages  of  legal  institu-
tions we  find  that  there  is  hardly  so  much  as  a
serious  attempt  in  this  direction ;  the  matters  at
issue  are  disposed  of  by  methods  which  seem  to
us  at  this  day  •  not  only  artificial  and  inadequate,

1  Much  of  the  work  done  by  the  machinery  of  justice  consists
in  enforcing  just  claims  to  which  there  is  no  defence  ;  but  mere
refusal  or  neglect  to  pay  one's  debts  without  compulsion  of  law
does  not  constitute  a  real  matter  in  difference.


n  JUSTICE  ACCORDING  TO  LAW  43

but  out  of  all  relation  to  any  grounds  of  reasonable
conclusion.  The  task  would  indeed  seem  to  have
been  thought  above  the  power  of  mortals.  Ordeal
in  its  various  forms  is  a  direct  appeal  to  super-
natural aid  in  the  supposed  incompetence  of  human
understanding.  Proof  by  oath,  where  the  oath  is
conclusive,  a  procedure  of  which  the  medieval
"  compurgation  "  is  the  best  known  example,  is  the
same  thing  in  a  milder  form.  Wherever  and  so
long  as  the  facts  cannot  be  ascertained  with  any
precision,  there  is  no  occasion  for  precise  or  elaborate
rules  of  law.  The  law  cannot  be  more  finely
graduated  than  the  means  of  ascertaining  facts ;
and  the  judicial  investigation  of  facts  with  some-
thing approaching  completeness  and  exactness  dates
only  from  relatively  modern  times.  Hence  the
development  of  law  is  largely  bound  up  with  the
development  of  procedure.  As  improved  procedure
enables  the  law  to  grapple  with  complex  facts,  the
aspirations  of  lawyers  and  citizens  are  enlarged,
and  they  are  by  no  means  content  to  aim  at  the
minimum  of  certainty  which  will  ensure  public
acquiescence  in  the  justice  of-  the  State,  and  a
tolerable  average  of  obedience.  On  the  contrary,
they  will  aim  (as  men  do  in  every  science  and  art,
when  once  they  become  seriously  interested  in  it)


U  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

at  an  ideal  maximum.  But  even  in  the  most
advanced  polity  we  shall  find  now  and  then  that
the  subtilty  of  forensic  and  judicial  thought  outruns
the  possibilities  of  effectual  inquiry  and  adminis-
tration. Questions  are  sometimes  put  to  juries
which  it  is  hardly  possible  for  any  one  not  learned
in  the  law  to  see  the  point  of.
Law  a  In  assuming  a  scientific  character,  law  becomes,

science:  and  must  needs  become,  a  distinct  science.  The
extensive  division  of  science  or  philosophy  which  comes
nearest  to  it  in  respect  of  the  subject-matter  dealt
with  is  Ethics.  But,  though  much  ground  is
common  to  both,  the  subject-matter  of  Law  and
of  Ethics  is  not  the  same.  The  field  of  legal  rules
of  conduct  does  not  coincide  with  that  of  moral
rules,  and  is  not  included  in  it ;  and  the  purposes
for  which  they  exist  are  distinct.  Law  does  not
aim  at  perfecting  the  individual  character  of  men,
but  at  regulating  the  relations  of  citizens  to  the
commonwealth  and  to  one  another.  And,  inas-
much as  human  beings  can  communicate  with  one
another  only  by  words  and  acts,  the  office  of  law
does  not  extend  to  that  which  lies  in  the  thought
and  conscience  of  the  individual.

The  possible  coincidence  of  law  with  morality
is  limited,  at  all  events,  by  the  range  of  that  which


ii  JUSTICE  ACCORDING  TO  LAW  45

theologians  have  named  external  morality.  ^The
commandment,  "Thou  shalt  not  steal,"  may  be,  and
in  all  civilised  countries  is,  legal  as  well  as  moral :
the  commandment,  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet,"  may  be
of  even  greater  importance  as  a  moral  precept,  but
it  cannot  be  a  legal  one.  Not  that  a  legislator
might  not  profess  to  make  a  law  against  covetous-
ness,  but  it  would  be  inoperative  unless  an  external
test  of  covetousness  were  assigned  by  a  more  or
less  arbitrary  definition ;  and  then  the  real  subject-
matter  of  the  law  would  be  not  the  passion  of
covetousness,  but  the  behaviour  defined  as  evincing
it.1  The  judgment  of  law  has  to  proceed  upon
what  can  be  made  manifest,  and  it  commonly  has
to  estimate  human  conduct  by  its  conformity  or
otherwise  to  what  has  been  called  an  external
standard.  Action,  and  intent  shown  in  acts  and
words,  not  the  secret  springs  of  conduct  in  desires
and  motives,  are  the  normal  materials  in  which
courts  of  justice  are  versed,  and  in  the  terms  of
which  their  conclusions  are  worked  out  and  de-
livered. With  rare  exceptions,2  an  act  not  other-

1  The  saying  ascribed  (it  seems  apocryphally)  to  Dr.  Keate  of
Eton:  "  Boys,  if  you're  not  pure  in  heart,  I'll  flog  yon,"  exemplifies
in  a  neat  form  the  confusion  of  external  and  internal  morality.

2  Those  exceptions  are  perhaps  of  an  accidental  and  not  very
substantial  kind ;  but,  after  all  corrections  and  allowances,
"  malice  "  does  sometimes  in  English  law  mean  evil  motive,  such


46  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

wise,  unlawful  in  itself  will  not  become  an  offence
or  legal  wrong  because  it  is  done  from  a  sinister
motive,  nor  will  it  be  any  excuse  for  an  act
contrary  to  the  general  law,  or  in  violation  of  any
one's  rights,  to  show  that  the  motive  from  which
it  proceeded  was  good.  If  the  attempt  is  made
to  deal  with  rules  of  the  purely  moral  kind  by
judicial  machinery,  one  of  two  things  will  happen.
Either  the  tribunal  will  be  guided  by  mere  isolated
impressions  of  each  case,  and  therefore  will  not
administer  justice  at  all;  or  (which  is  more  likely)
precedent  and  usage  will  beget  settled  rule,  and
the  tribunal  will  find  itself  administering  a  formal
system  of  law,  which  in  time  will  be  as  technical,
and  appeal  as  openly  to  an  external  standard,  as
any  other  system.  This  process  took  place  on
a  great  scale  in  the  formation  of  the  Canon  Law,
and  on  a  considerable  scale  in  the  early  history
of  English  equity  jurisdiction.
Law  can-  Besides  and  beyond  the  limitation  of  the  field

not  enforce „  ■

ail  moral  or  law  to  external  conduct,  there  are  many  actions

may  some-  ail<i kinds of conduct condemned by morality

on  the '  which  for  various  reasons  law  can  either  not  deal

standard.  witn at a11 or can deal with only in an inci-

as  personal  enmity  or  vindiotiveness. For  farther  consideration
of  intention  and  motive  see  ch.  vi.,  p.  138  below.


n  JUSTICE  ACCORDING  TO  LAW  47

dental  and  indirect  manner.  It  would  be  the
vulgarest  of  errors  (as  we  have  already  hinted)  to
suppose  that  any  kind  of  approval  is  implied  in
many  things  being  left  to  the  moral  judgment  of
the  community  and  to  such  pressure  as  it  can
exercise.  Law  does  not  stand  aside  because  law-
givers or  judges  think  lightly  of  such  things,  but
because,  whether  from  permanent  or  from  transitory
causes,  the  methods  of  legal  justice  are  not  appro-
priate for  dealing  with  them,  and  the  attempt  to
apply  those  methods  would,  so  far  as  it  could  be
operative  at  all,  probably  do  more  harm  than  good.
At  the  same  time  rules  of  law  may  well  have,  in
particular  circumstances,  an  effective  influence  in
maintaining,  reinforcing,  and  even  elevating  the
standard  of  current  morality.  The  moral  ideal
present  to  lawgivers  and  judges,  if  it  does  not  always
come  up  to  the  highest  that  has  been  conceived,  will
at  least  be,  generally  speaking,  above  the  common
average  of  practice ;  it  will  represent  the  standard
of  the  best  sort  of  citizens.  This  is  especially
the  case  in  matters  of  good  faith,  whether  we  look
to  commercial  honesty  or  to  relations  of  personal
confidence.  With  few  exceptions,  the  law  has,
in  such  matters,  been  constantly  ahead  not  only
of  the  practice  but  of  the  ordinary  professions  of


48  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

business  men.  We  have  similar  results  on  a
more  striking  scale  when  a  law  which  is  not
indigenous  brings  in  with  it  the  moral  standards
on  which  it  is  founded.  Thus  a  good  deal  of
European  morality  has  been  made  current  in  India
by  the  Anglo-Indian  codes  ;  and  European  morality
itself  has  been  largely  moulded  not  only  by  the
teaching  of  the  Christian  Church,  but  by  the  formal
embodiment  of  that  teaching  in  both  ecclesiastical
and  secular  laws.  The  treatment  of  homicide  by
early  English  criminal  law  was  founded  on  the
extremely  strict  view  taken  by  the  Church  of  the
guilt  of  bloodshedding ;  and  the  extinction  of
duelling  in  this  country  seems  to  be  due,  in  no
small  part,  to  the  steady  refusal  of  English  law
to  regard  killing  in  a  duel,  even  without  any
circumstances  of  treachery  or  unfairness,  as  any-
thing else  than  murder.  We  are  not  speaking
here  of  the  mere  fact  that  persons  abstain  from
unlawful  conduct  through  dread  of  the  legal  con-
sequences, a  fact  which,  taken  by  itself,  has  no
moral  significance  at  all.
Legal  rules Again,  rules  of  law  differ  from  rules  of  morality

in  things

morally in  excess  as  well  as  in  defect. It  is  needful  for  the

indifferent.

peace  and  order  of  society  to  have  definite  rules  for
a  great  many  common  occasions  of  life,  although  no


ii  JUSTICE  ACCORDING  TO  LAW  49

guidance  can  be  found  in  ethical  reasoning  for
adopting  one  rule  more  than  another.  There  is  no
law  of  nature  that  prescribes  driving  on  either  the
right  or  the  left-hand  side  of  the  road,  as  is  plainly
shown  by  the  fact  that  our  English  custom  to  take
the  left-hand  side  is  the  reverse  of  that  which  is
observed  in  most  other  countries.  But  in  a  land  of
frequented  roads  there  must  be  some  fixed  rule  in
order  that  people  who  meet  on  the  road  may  know
what  to  expect  of  one  another.  And,  the  rule
being  once  fixed  either  way  for  the  sake  of  general
convenience,  we  are  bound  in  moral  as  well  as  in
legal  duty  to  observe  the  rule  as  we  find  it.  On
much  the  same  footing  are  the  rules  which  require
particular  forms  to  be  observed  in  particular  trans-
actions, for  the  purpose  of  making  the  proof  of
them  authentic  and  easily  found,  or  in  the  interest
of  the  public  revenue,  or  for  other  reasons.  There
are  not  many  such  cases  in  which  the  form  actually
imposed  by  the  law  can  be  said  to  be  in  itself  the
only  appropriate  one,  or  obviously  much  better  than
others  that  might  be  thought  of.  But,  since  it  has
been  thought  fit  to  require  some  form,  it  is  necessary
that  some  one  form  should  be  authorised.  Here,
too,  the  choice  between  courses  which  in  themselves
were  morally  indifferent  is  determined  by  the  law,


certain
cases.


50  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

and  thenceforth  it  is  the  moral  as  well  as  the  legal
duty  of  every  one  concerned,  if  he  will  act  as  a  good
citizen  and  a  prudent man,  to do  things  in  the
appointed  manner  and  form.
Legal  But  there  is  more  than  this. As  in  many  cases

responsi-  ,

Miity-with-  acts  and  conduct  that  are  morally  blameworthy  must

out  moral  .  ,  .  . .  ,

fault  in  go  quit  of  anything  the  law  can  do,  so  in  many  cases,
on  the  other  hand,  persons  are  exposed,  for  reasons
of  public  expediency,  to  legal  responsibilities  which
may  or  may  not  be  associated  with  moral  fault,  and
which  cannot  be  avoided  even  by  the  fullest  proof
that  in  the  particular  case  the  person  who  is  answer-
able before  the  law  was  morally  blameless.  A  man
may,  of  course,  make  himself  answerable  by  his  own
promise  for  many  things  independent  of  his  moral
deserts  or  even  wholly  beyond  his  control :  but  we
are  here  speaking  of  liability  not  assumed  by  the
party's  own  act  and  consent,  but  imposed  by  a  rule
of  law  which  does  not  depend  on  any  one's  assent
for  its  operation.  Thus  a  man  is  liable  in  most
civilised  countries  for  the  wrongful  acts  and  defaults
of  his  servants  in  the  course  of  their  employment,
whatever  pains  he  may  have  taken  in  choosing
competent  servants  and  giving  them  proper  in-
structions. Obviously  this  is  a  hard  rule  for  the
employer  in  many  cases ;  but  its  existence  in  every


ii  JUSTICE  ACCORDING  TO  LAW  51

system  of  law  shows  that  in  the  main  it  is  felt  to
be  just.  Again,  both  Koman  and  English  law  have
made  owners  of  buildings1  responsible,  in  various
degrees,  for  their  safe  condition  as  regards  passers-
by  in  the  highway,  or  persons  entering  them  in  the
course  of  lawful  business ;  and  this  without  regard
to  the  amount  of  the  owner's  personal  diligence  in
the  matter.  Again,  questions  often  arise  between
two  innocent  persons,  of  whom  one  or  other  must
bear  the  loss  occasioned  by  the  wrongful  act  of  some
one  from  whom  redress  cannot  be  obtained ;  as
when  a  man  who  has  obtained  goods  by  fraud  from
their  owner  sells  them  to  an  unsuspecting  third
person,  and  then  absconds,  leaving  nothing  behind
him.  Here  the  original  owner  and  the  buyer  may
be  equally  free  from  fault,  but  they  cannot  both
have  the  goods,  and  the  price  cannot  be  recovered.
Hardship  to  one  or  the  other  is  inevitable.

In  all  these  cases  the  loss  or  damage,  as  between
the  two  innocent  parties  who  are  left  face  to  face,
may  be  considered  as  accidental.  The  rule  of  law
has  to  determine  as  best  it  can  on  which  side  the
loss  shall  fall ;  and,  since  by  the  hypothesis  neither
party  has incurred moral  blame,  and this is the

1  This  is  by  no  means  the  full  measure  of  the  rule  in  our  law.
For  simplicity's  sake  only  part  of  it  is  now  stated.


52  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

very  cause  of  the  difficulty,  it  is  plain  that  the  rules
of  ordinary  social  morality  will  afford  no  guidance.
We  have  to  resort  either  to  considerations  of  general
public  expediency,  or,  if  no  obvious  balance  of
convenience  appears  either  way,  to  the  purely
technical  application  of  rules  already  settled  in  less
obscure  matters.  And  this  last  method  is  not  a
mere  evasion  of  the  problem,  but  is  a  reasonable
solution  so  far  as  no  stronger  reason  can  be  assigned
to  the  contrary.  For  the  principle  of  certainty
requires  that  a  rule  once  settled  shall  be  carried
out  to  its  consequences  when  no  distinct  cause  is
shown  for  making  an  exception  or  revising  the  rule
itself.  If  any  sense  of  hardship  to  the  individual
citizen  remains  after  these  considerations  have  been
weighed,  and  it  has  also  been  observed  that  citizens
have  an  equal  chance  of  benefit  as  well  as  burden
under  special  rules  of  this  kind,  it  may  be  said  that
exposure  to  this  kind  of  liability  is  part,  and  not  a
large  part,  of  the  price  which  the  individual  has  to
pay  the  State  for  the  general  protection  afforded  by
its  power,  and  the  general  benefit  of  its  institutions.
Thus  neither  the  work  nor  the  field  of  legal
science  can  be  said  to  coincide  with  those  of  any
other  science.  And  the  development  of  this,  as  of
all  other  distinct  branches  of  science,  can  be  carried


ii  JUSTICE  ACCORDING  TO  LAW  53

on  only  by  the  continuous  effort  of  persons  who
make  it  the  chief  object  of  their  attention  in
successive  generations.  This  has  been  recognised
in  the  institutions,  both  practical  and  academical,
of  all  civilised  nations.  A  civilised  system  of  law
cannot  be  maintained  without  a  learned  profession
of  the  law.  The  formation  and  continuance  of
such  a  learned  class  can  be  and  has  been  provided
for,  at  different  times  and  in  different  lands,  in  various
ways  which  it  does  not  now  concern  us  to  mention
in  detail.  It  is  not  necessary  for  this  purpose
that  the  actual  administration  of  justice  should  be
wholly,  or  with  insignificant  exceptions,  in  the
hands  of  persons  learned  in  the  law,  though  such  is
the  prevailing  tendency  of  modern  judicial  systems.
It  is  enough  that  the  learned  profession  exists,  and
that  knowledge  of  the  law  has  to  be  sought,  directly
or  indirectly,  in  the  deliberate  and  matured  opinion
of  its  most  capable  members.  And  the  activity  of
modern  legislation  makes  little  or  no  difference  to
this :  for  we  are  not  now  speaking  of  the  general
policy  of  the  lawgiver,  which  in  a  free  country  is
and  must  be  determined  not  by  any  one  class,  but
by  the  people  through  their  representatives.  The
office  of  the  lawyer  is  first  to  inform  the  legislature
how  the  law  stands,  and  then,  if  change  is  desired


54  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE chap,  ii

(as  to  which  he  is  entitled  to  his  opinion  and  voice
like  any  other  citizen),  to  advise  how  the  change
may  best  be  effected.  Every  modern  legislature  is
constantly  and  largely  dependent  on  expert  aid  of
this  kind.  A  well -framed  Act  of  Parliament,
whatever  amount  of  novelty  it  may  contain,  is  as
much  an  application  of  legal  science  as  the  con-
sidered judgment  of  a  court.  Legislation  under-
taken without  legal  knowledge  is  notoriously
ineffectual,  or,  if  not  ineffectual,  apt  to  create  new
troubles  greater  than  any  which  it  cures.  There  is
no  way  by  which  modern  law  can  escape  from  the
scientific  and  artificial  character  imposed  on  it  by
the  demand  of  modern  societies  for  full,  equal,  and
exact  justice


CHAPTEE III

THE SUBJECT-MATTEB OF LAW

Eules  of  law  being  the  rules  which  are  deemed  Contents
binding  on  members  of  the  State  as  such,  and  are  duties  of
administered,  as  and  because  thus  binding,  by-
courts  of  justice,  we  have  next  to  see  of  what  kind
are  the  contents  of  those  rules.  It  seems  that  we
may  describe  them,  in  the  most  general  terms,  as
the  duties  of  subjects  under  the  common  authority
of  the  State,  together  with  the  conditions  by  which
those  duties  are  defined  and  made  capable,  of
application.  We  speak  here  of  subjects,  not
citizens.  For  there  are  members  of  the  State  who
by  reason  of  natural  or  conventional  disability
(which  may  be  temporary  or  permanent)  do  not
enjoy  full  political  rights :  and  there  are  strangers
who  dwell  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time  in  the
jurisdiction  of  the  State  without  being  or  becoming


56  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

members  of  it.  Persons  in  either  of  these  positions,
as  they  are  admitted  to  the  benefit  and  protection
of  the  laws,  are  likewise  expected  to  conform  to
them :  that  is  to  say,  they  are  not  the  less  subjects
because  they  are  not  or  cannot  be  citizens.  It
would  not  be  correct,  however,  to  say  that  alien
residents  within  a  State  are  altogether  subject  to
the  same  duties  as  citizens ;  for  they  may  be  and
often  are  exempt  from  some  duties  on  particular
grounds  of  policy,  and  from  others  because  they  are
not  capable  of  the  office  or  station  to  which  those
duties  are  annexed.  Hereafter  we  shall  find  it
convenient  to  use  the  term  "  citizen  "  as  including
all  subjects  unless  the  stricter  meaning  is  indicated.
Duty,  posi- We  ascribe  duty  to  any  one  who  is  bound  by  a  rule.

tive  and

negative.  Every  such  person  s  duty  is  to  conform  to  the  rule.
If  the  rule  is  one  which  courts  of  justice  administer,
the  duty  is  a  legal  one.  Such  duties  alone  being
within  our  present  scope,  it  will  be  understood  that
others  are  not  included  in  the  term  unless  it  is
expressly  qualified :  similarly  of  rights.  Duty  may
be  active  or  positive — that  is,  the  rule  may  require  a
person  bound  by  it  to  do  something  in  the  way
either  of  some  definite  action  or  of  a  continued
course  of  action.  A  parent  is  bound  to  maintain
his  children,  a  debtor  to  pay  his  debt  at  the  proper


in  THE  SUBJECT-MATTER  OF  LAW  57

time,  or  when  demanded.  Or  it  may  be  a  passive
or  negative  duty — that  is,  the  rule  may  forbid
something  .from  which  a  person  bound  by  it
must  abstain.  Thus  we  must  all  abstain  from  theft
and  other  criminal  offences ;  and  in  the  sphere  of
voluntary  choice  negative  undertakings  are  common,
as  when  an  actor  engaged  for  a  particular  theatre
binds  himself  not  to  act  elsewhere,  or  a  retiring
partner  not  to  compete  with  the  firm.  A  positive
duty  may  carry  negative  duties  with  it  as  a
necessary  accompaniment.  If  Peter  has  bound  him-
self by  a  lawful  contract  to  sell  his  house  to  John,
he  must  hand  over  possession  to  John  at  the  proper
time,  and  in  the  meantime  he  must  not  sell  or
convey  the  house  to  any  one  else.  Performance
is  the  more  appropriate  word'  for  the  fulfilment  of
positive  duties,  observance  for  negative  ones ;  but
this  nicety  of  language  is  not  always  regarded.

Strictly  speaking,  law  cannot compel  the  per-  Only  nega-

'  .  .  tive  duties

formance  of  positive  duties.  A  negative  duty  can  are  strictly
be  directly  enforced  by  physical  constraint,  or  by  abie.
otherwise  depriving  a  man  of  the  means  of  action.
But  a  positive  duty  can  be  enforced  only  in  an
indirect  manner,  by  attaching  such  consequences
to  non-performance  as  to  make  performance  in
most cases and for most  persons the  preferable


58  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

course.  In  this  sense  a  man  may  and  often  does
act  under  compulsion  of  law,  but  he  cannot  really
be  compelled  to  act.  Where  the  performance  con-
sists in  the  payment  of  money  which  the  party
bound  has  sufficient  means  to  pay,  or  in  the
delivery  of  specific  property  which  is  in  his  pos-
session, it  may  be  within  the  power  of  the  law  to  do
what  he  ought  to  have  done — that  is,  to  take  from
the  debtor's  property  the  amount  due  and  pay  it  to
the  creditor,  or  to  put  a  purchaser  in  possession  of
the  property  to  which  he  is  entitled,  or  otherwise
as  the  case  may  be.  How  far  this  can  be  done  in
any  particular  system  of  law  depends  not  only  on
what  is  physically  possible,  but  on  the  authorised
methods  of  procedure  and  execution.  Similarly
there  may  be  power  (and  there  is  now  in  England)
to  appoint  some  one  to  do  any  formal  act  which
ought  to  be  done  by  the  party,  and  which  he
refuses  to  do.  But  a  performance  requiring  per-
sonal skill,  such  as  the  singing  of  a  part  in  an
opera,  or  the  painting  of  a  picture,  obviously  cannot
be  compelled  by  any  normal  human  power.  Again
the  observance  of  a  negative  duty  cannot  become
impossible  except  by  an  actual  breach,  which  may
or  may  not  render  subsequent  observance  impossible
according to the nature of the facts : but the


in  THE  SUBJECT-MATTER  OF  LAW  59

possibility  of  an  active  duty  being  performed  is
subject  to  many  accidents,  which  moreover  may  be
beyond  the  parties'  control.  If  a  man  has  promised
to  pay  a  thousand  pounds  six  months  hence,  and
has  lost  all  his  property,  with  or  without  his  own
fault,  before  the  day  comes,  it  is  plain  that  his
creditor  cannot  be  paid.  Ex  nihilo  nihil  Jit.  Again
the  performance  of  any  duty  that  involves  personal
skill  or  attention  may  be  frustrated  by  illness  or
other  misadventure  disabling  the  party.  These
matters,  however,  belong  to  the  machinery  of  law
and  the  adjustment  of  remedies  rather  than  to  the
elementary  substance  of  duties  and  rights.

Eight  is  the  correlative  of  duty. As  duty  is  a  Right:
burden  imposed  by  law,  so  right  is  freedom  allowed  mmate  as
or  power  conferred  by  law. Every  right  implies  0r  deter-
duty  somewhere : but  it must  be  noted  that  we  claim  or
speak  of  right sometimes in  a determinate and  power-
sometimes  in an  indeterminate  sense. For  it  is
commonly  said  that  a  man  has  a  right  to  be  free
from assault and unwarranted imprisonment, to
deal  with  things  belonging  to  him  (within  certain
limits)  as  he  will,  and  so  forth :  and  whatever  tends
to abridge legal freedom or interfere with its
exercise  is  said  to  diminish  a  man's  rights,  or  to
be  an  invasion  of  them. These  rights have  not


60  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

answering  to  them  any  particular  determinate  duty
of  this  or  that  citizen ;  nevertheless  they  are  more
than  bare  liberty  or  power.  The  fact  that  I  can  do
as  I  please  until  some  superior  force  or  irremovable
obstacle  hinders  me  is  a  merely  natural  fact,  and
law  has  nothing  to  say  to  it.  So  far  as  actual
power  or  freedom  from  restraint  in  doing  this  or
that  act  is  concerned  (say,  taking  fish  in  a  par-
ticular month,  or  travelling  to  London  to  give
evidence  before  a  Eoyal  Commission),  it  is  all  one
whether  there  is  no  law  bearing  on  the  matter,  or
a  law  which  disallows  the  act  if  done  in  some  other
way  or  at  some  other  time,  but  allows  it  now  and
thus,  or  a  law  which  encourages  it,  as  by  authorising
payment  of  a  witness's  travelling  expenses.  The
act  may  be  right  in  the  popular  and  rudimentary
sense  of  not  being  forbidden,  but  freedom  has  not
the  character  of  legal  right  until  we  consider  the
risk  of  unauthorised  interference.  It  is  the  duty
of  all  of  us  not  to  interfere  with  our  neighbour's
lawful  freedom.  This  brings  the  so-called  primitive
rights  into  the  sphere  of  legal  rule  and  protection.
Sometimes  it  is  thought  that  lawful  power  or  liberty
is  different  from  the  right  not  to  be  interfered  with ;
but  for  the  reason  just  given  this  opinion,  though
plausible,  does  not  seem  correct. There  is  more


in  THE  SUBJECT-MATTER  OF  LAW  61

than  this  when  any  subject  wrongfully  meddles
with  another's  person  or  property;  he  forthwith
incurs  the  specific  duty  of  making  just  compensation,
and  the  other  acquires  the  specific  right  of  calling
for  the  same.  This  right  is  not  merely  freedom,
but  a  definite  claim,  the  power  of  getting  one's  due
by  process  of  law :  it  is  what  our  law  calls  a  right
of  action.  On  the  other  side  the  duty  is  no  longer
general,  but  has  regard  to  a  determinate  claim  of
some  one  interested  in  its  performance ;  it  loses  in
extension  but  gains  in  intension.  There  is  not  only
a  right  but  a  claim,  not  only  duty  but  liability.

Generally  the  power  of  enforcing  a  rule  of  law
belongs  to  those  for  whose  sake  it  exists,  and  as
against  whom  it  has  been  broken.  But  the  power
and  the  benefit  need  not  be  co-extensive.  In  many
branches  of  law  the  State,  through  its  public
officers,  assumes  the  power  of  setting  the  law  in'
motion,  sometimes  exclusively,  sometimes  con-
currently with  the  person  aggrieved :  sometimes
any  citizen  whatever  is  authorised  to  take  pro-
ceedings of  his  own  motion.  It  would  not  be
correct,  however,  to  say  that  right  is  more  extensive
than  duty  in  such  cases :  rather  the  same  facts
may  produce  several  duties  or  liabilities.  There
seems  to  be  no  valid  reason  against  ascribing  rights


62  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

to  the State  in all  cases where its officers are
enjoined or  authorised  to take steps for causing
the  law  to  be  observed,  and  breakers  of  the  law
to  be  punished.
No  duty  If  this  last  statement  is  accepted,  there  will  be

without  .  .  -ill

right,  no  occasion  to  say,  as  is  often  said,  that  there  are

some  duties without  any correlative rights. Doubtless

without there are duties without any determinate rights

ate  corre- corresponding to them : indeed,  this is the  case,

rights. m  any  "view,  with  the  negative  duties  which  we  owe

to  the  community  at  large. For  my  duty  not  to

damage other  people's goods,  for  example,  is  one

duty,  not  millions  of  separate  duties  owed  to  every

one  who  has  anything  to  be  damaged,  or  in  respect

of  every  separate  chattel  of any  value. Positive

duties  of  a  public  kind,  such  as  the  duty  of  paying

taxes,  or  serving  on  a  jury,  or  aiding  to  keep  the

peace  when  called  on  by  an  officer  of  justice,  are

in the same plight. So are duties towards, or

rather in respect of  irrational animals,  inasmuch

as  they  cannot  exercise  rights ; :  and  so  were  duties

in  respect  of  slaves  in  systems  of  law  which  recog-

1  If  there  were  any  purpose  to  be  served  by  it,  there  would  be
no  more  difficulty  in  enabling  proceedings  to  be  taken,  by  a  legal
fiction,  in  the  name  of  an  animal  as  plaintiff  or  prosecutor  than
there  was  in  taking  formal  criminal  proceedings  against  animals,
of  which  there  are  many  medieval  examples.


in  THE  SUBJECT-MATTER  OF  LAW  63

nised  slavery.  Under  any  of  these  conditions  it
seems  more  reasonable  and  more  in  accordance
with  the  current  usage  of  speech  to  say  that  the
right  correlative  to  the  duty  is  in  the  hands  of  the
State  than  to  say  that  there  is  none.  "Where  the
State  acts  in  the  manner  of  a  creditor  and  for  the
direct  benefit  of  the  public  revenue,  as  in  collecting
taxes,  still  more,  where  it  acquires  and  deals  with
specific  property  in  the  way  of  buying,  holding,
and  selling,  it  seems  that  the  State  has  rights  in
the  fullest  sense.  But  this  cannot  be  adequately
considered  without  reference  .to  the  doctrine  of
legal  personality.

Whether the State can  have  duties  has been  Can  the

•  •  ■ State  have

a  point  fruitful  of  discussion,  though  the  point  duties?
is  perhaps  of  no  great  practical  importance.  It
is  clear  that  the  person  or  body  holding  supreme
political  power  in  a  commonwealth .  (assuming
that  there  is  such  a  person  or  body)  has  only
to  use  that  power  to  be  legally  free.  No  less
clear  is  it  by  experience  that  while  claims  against
the  State  are  made  in  various  ways  more  difficult
to  maintain  than  claims  against  private  members
of  the  State,  yet  in  the  practice  of  civilised
nations  claims  which  are  in  substance  against
the State are dealt with by courts of justice,


64  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

and  lead,  if  the  claim  is  made  good,  to  redress
being  granted  out  of  public  funds.  But  this  is
compatible  with  the  view  that  the  State  submits
these  questions  to  its  own  tribunals  only  as  a
matter  of  grace  and  favour,  though  the  grace  may
be  so  customary  that  citizens  look  on  it  as  a
political  and  moral  right.  And  that  is  certainly
the  view  which  the  forms  and  rules  of  our  own
law  have  embodied.  Moreover,  we  said  that  the
primary  mark  of  rules  of  law  is  to  be  binding  on
citizens  as  such.  The  State  is  not  a  citizen  nor
an  aggregation  of  citizens,  and  a  system  of  law
can  quite  well  exist  without  the  State  ever  being
considered  to  be  legally  bound  towards  a  citizen.
All  jurisdiction,  nevertheless,  appears  to  have  begun
in  consent,  and  all  government  ultimately  rests  on
consent;  not  in  the  sense  that  it  was  ever  founded
by  express  convention,  but  that  no  government
can  in  the  long  run  be  carried  on  against  the
dissent  of  an  effective  majority.  Therefore  it  seems
hard  to  say  that  the  State  cannot  by  its  own
consent  be  really  subject  to  rules  of  law  so  long
as  that  consent  is  in  force.  In  practice  individual
citizens  may  count  on  the  submission  of  the  State
to  its  own  tribunals  (whatever  the  extent  of  it  may
be)  not  being  arbitrarily  revoked. The  security  is


in  THE  SUBJECT-MATTER  OF  LAW  65

the  same,  in  the  last  resort,  that  we  have  for  the
due  administration  and  enforcement  of  the  ordinary
law  binding  on  subjects.  Moreover,  persons  and
bodies  representing  the  State  in  various  departments
of  its  functions  may  well  come  before  the  law  in
a  position  not  necessarily  distinguishable  from  that
of  ordinary  citizens.  But  this  again  brings  us  to  the
question  of  legal  personality  which  still  lies  ahead.

According  to  that  view  of  the  nature  of  law
which  regards  it  as  the  command  of  a  supreme
political  authority  and  nothing  else,  it  is  difficult
to  ascribe  rights,  and  barely  possible  to  ascribe
duties,  to  the  State.  But  as  we  do  not  consider
such  a  view  to  rest  on  any  sound  foundation,  we
are  not  concerned  here  with  its  consequences.  If
we  accept  Hobbes's  derivation  of  the  State  and
all  civil  order  from  an  original  covenant  by  which
every  man  surrendered  his  natural  right  or  power
into  the  hands  of  a  sovereign  person  or  body  from
whom  all  law  thenceforth  proceeds,  we  must  accept
likewise  the  consequences  which  Hobbes  deduced
and  set  forth  once  for  all : 1  otherwise  not.

It  seems  at  first  sight  a  paradox  to  say  that  Can  a  man

have  rights

a  man  can  have  rights  against  himself. The  moral  against

himself?

duties  which  are called self-regarding are  so  far

1  Leviathan,  ch.  xxvi.,  op.  oh.  xxix.


66  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

recognised  by  criminal  law  that  some  of  the  grosser
breaches  are  punishable ;  but  one  cannot  claim
redress  from  oneself,  in  other  words  a  right  of
action  against  oneself  is  not  possible.  Again  a
man  may  in  the  exercise  of  his  lawful  freedom
confer  many  rights  on  others  which  limit  that
exercise  in  various  ways  and  for  periods  of  varying
duration ;  but  the  duties  are  binding  on  him  just
because  the  rights  are  not  in  his  own  control  but
belong  to  the  other  parties.  Yet  it  is  conceivable
and  possible  that  a  man  should  initiate  compulsory
proceedings  against  himself :  as  when,  as  the  law
of  some  countries  now  allows,  a  drunkard  enters
of  his  free  will  a  licensed  institution  for  the
treatment  of  dipsomania,  and,  having  so  entered
it,  may  lawfully  be  detained  for  a  certain  time
notwithstanding  any  attempted  revocation  of  his
consent.  In  such  a  case  the  patient  is  after  a
sort  his  own  accuser  and  judge ;  and  as  this
power  of  self-restraint  is  conferred  for  his  own
benefit,  we  cannot  but  allow  that  he  exercises  a
right.  Both  the  right  and  the  corresponding  duty
of  submitting  to  the  self-imposed  restraint  are
called  into  existence  by  the  party's  own  option.
From  the  moral  point  of  view  we  should  say
that a man in this condition is really  divided


in  THE  SUBJECT-MATTER  OF  LAW  67

against  himself,  and  that  the  law,  taking  notice
of  this  abnormal  fact,  enables  him  to  strengthen
his  better  against  his  worser  self.  In  ethics  all
duties  have  regard  to  oneself  in  some  sense.  As
there  is  no  necessary  question  of  an  external
tribunal,  even  the  most  informal,  or  of  external
acts  or  consequences,  there  is  no  real  difficulty
about  this.  If  we  speak  of  "  duty  towards  God,"
we  introduce  an  approach  to  the  legal  conception
of  duty;  the  Supreme  Being  (or,  in  polytheistic
religions,  a  superior  being  determined  as  appropriate
to  the  occasion  by  particular  functions  or  attributes)
taking  the  place  of  an  external  human  lawgiver,
or  of  the  State.  '  And  in  fact  it  may  be  observed
that  moral  rules  which  belong  exclusively  or
eminently  to  definite  religious  systems  have  ever
tended  to  assume  a  formal  and  legal  character.
Ethical  feeling  (where  it  survives  this  treatment)
has  to  be  satisfied  and  reinforced  by  counsels  of
perfection  and  other  forms  of  aspiration  to  an
ideal  beyond  and  outside  the  rules.

Wrong is in morals the contrary of right.  Wrong.
Eight action  is that  which moral  rules  prescribe
or commend, wrong action is that which they
forbid. For legal purposes anything is wrong
which  is  forbidden  by  law; there  is  wrong  done


68  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

whenever  a  legal  duty  is  broken.  A  wrong  may
be  described,  in  the  largest  sense,  as  anything
done  or  omitted  contrary  to  legal  duty,  considered
in  so  far  as  it  gives  rise  to  liability.  Hence  the
existence  of  duty,  as  it  involves  right,  involves
also  the  possibility  of  wrong;  logically  no  more
than  the  possibility,  though  we  know  too  well  that
all  rules  are  in  fact  sometimes  broken.  Duty,
right,  and  wrong  are  not  separate  or  divisible
heads  of  legal  rules  or  of  their  subject-matter,
but  different  legal  aspects  of  the  same  rules
and  events.  There  may  be  duties  and  rights
without  any  wrong;  this  happens  whenever  legal
duties  are  justly  and  truly  fulfilled.  There
cannot,  of  course,  be  a  wrong  without  a  duty
already  existing,  but  wrongs  also  create  new
duties  and  liabilities.  Strictly  speaking,  therefore,
there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  a  distinct  law
of  wrongs.  By  the  law  of  wrongs  we  can  mean
only  the  law  of  duties,  or  some  class  of  duties,
considered  as  exposed  to  infraction,  and  the  special
rules  for  awarding  redress  or  punishment  which
come  into  play  when  infraction  has  taken  place.
There  is  not  one  law  of  rights  or  duties  and
another  law  of  wrongs.  Nevertheless  there  are
some  kinds  of  duties  which  are  more  conspicuous


in  THE  SUBJECT-MATTER  OF  LAW  69

in  the  breach  than  in  the  observance.  The  natural
end  of  a  positive  duty  is  performance.  A  thing
has  to  be  done,  and  when  it  is  duly  done  the
duty  is,  as  we  say,  discharged;  the  man  who
was  lawfully  bound  is  lawfully  free.  We  con-
template performance,  not  breach.  Appointments
to  offices  are  made,  or  ought  to  be,  in  the  expecta-
tion that  the  persons  appointed  will  adequately
fulfil  their  official  duties.  When  I  take  a  ticket
from  London  to  Oxford,  I  hope  and  expect  that
the  railway  company  will  convey  me  safely  and
punctually  to  Oxford.  The  same  may  be  said  of
negative  duties  which  are  annexed  to  positive
ones,  or  have  been  assumed  by  the  party's  own
undertaking.  But  when  we  come  to  negative
duties  imposed  by  the  general  law,  we  find  our
attention  directed  to  the  event  of  their  violation.
For  the  elementary  duties  we  owe  to  all  men
have  no  natural  end  short  of  life's  end  itself.
An  honest  man  is  always  observing  the  duty  of
not  stealing,  and  has  never  done  observing  it  so
long  as  he  lives  honestly.  There  is  nothing  to
fix  the  mind's  eye  to  one  moment  of  negative
observance  more  than  another.  Dramatic  incidents
of  resistance  to  temptation  make  no  difference  in
the legal view. A  man  can do  no more  than


70  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

observe  the  rule,  and  ought  to  do  no  less,  whatever
the  additional  moral  merit  of  resisting  temptation
may  be.  Therefore  it  is  the  breach  of  such  duties
that  gives  us  a  defined  point  of  concentration,  and
in  practice  we  approach  the  conception  of  the  duty
through  the  fact  of  the  wrong  done.  Again  the
term  wrong  suggests  not  only  a  right  violated,  but
some  one's  right,  in  the  full  and  determinate  sense
of  that  word,  to  redress ;  although  what  is  really
correlated  to  the  injured  person's  right  to  redress
is  not  the  wrong  itself,  but  the  new  duty  and
liability  arising  from  it.  Thus  we  have  in  English
usage  a  tendency,  first  to  limit  the  word  wrong,  in
legal  speech,,  to  cases  where  a  general  duty  is
broken,  and,  further,  to  use  it  by  preference  in
cases  where  the  enforcement  of  the  law  rests
with  the  injured  person  in  the  first  instance,  or
altogether,  and  not  with  the  officers  of  the  State.
Great  authors  in  our  law,  Hale  and  Blackstone,
have  spoken  of  "  Public  Wrongs,"  but  it  is  more
usual  to  speak  of  crimes  or  offences.
Arrange-  We  may  shortly  sum  up  the  result  of  the  pre-

ment  by

duties  or ceding  discussion  by  saying  that  there  is  no  harm

rights.  .

in  taking  the  conception  of  Duty  for  our  clue  or
basis  of  classification  .in  dealing  with  some  groups
of  legal  rules,  that  of  Eight  in  dealing  with  others,


in  THE  SUBJECT-MATTER  OF  LAW  71

and  for  others  again  that  of  Wrong,  determined  by-
reference  either  to  the  duty  disregarded  or  to  the
right  violated.  The  matter  is  essentially  one  of
convenience.  Only  we  must  remember  that  in  this
we  are  not  dividing  the  actual  contents  of  legal
rules,  but  distinguishing  aspects,  and  making
sometimes  one  and  sometimes  another  prominent  as
it  suits  us.  Duty  and  Eight  are  not  really  more
divisible  in  law  than  action  and  reaction  in
mechanics.  Hence  it  would  seem  that  such  topics
of  discussion  as  whether  a  system  of  law  should
be  arranged  under  heads  of  duties  or  heads  of  rights
are  at  best  of  secondary  importance,  and  cannot  lead
to  conclusions  of  any  universal  validity.  The
practical  lawyer's  instinct  is  to  regard  anxious
dwelling  on  these  topics  with  a  certain  impatience,
an  impatience  that  may  be  said  to  border  on
contempt.  If  he  is  pressed  for  reasons,  and
ventures  to  give  them  offhand,  his  reasons  are
perhaps  more  likely  to  be  bad  than  good.  Yet
reflection  appears  to  show  that  in  this  as  in  many
other  cases  the  practical  instinct  is  in  the  main
justified,  although  it  may  be  long  before  the
justification  is  made  explicit  in  a  form  that  will
satisfy  philosophers.  Experience  builds  better  than
it  knows.


72  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

So  far  as  it  is  worth  while  to  indicate  any-
general  preference  in  classification,  and  other  things
being  equal,  duties  appear  to  come  in  the  natural
and  logical  order  before  rights,  for  it  is  of  the
essence  of  law  to  assign  rules  of  conduct,  and  a
rule  of  conduct  which  did  not  affirm  some  kind  of
duty  would  not  be  a  rule.  This  is  more  clearly
seen  in  the  case  of  moral  rules.  No  one  would
think  of  treating,  morality  as  a  system  of  rights.
However  that  may  be,  tbere  is  more  than  duties
and  rights  to  be  taken  into  account  before  we  have
covered  the  subject-matter  of  jurisprudence :  and
this  to  such  an  extent  that  we  should  still  be  left
very  far  from  a  complete  system  of  law  if  we  were
furnished  with  an  exhaustive  list  of  all  the  legal
rules  which  can  be  said  in  any  natural  sense  to
declare  duties  or  affirm  rights.  Duties  and  rights
are  mere  disjointed  parts  of  an  organism,  so  to
speak,  until  we  know  how  they  are  connected  with
the  acts  and  events  of  human  life.  They  are
attached  to  certain  persons ;  they  have  their  modes
of  beginning  and  of  continuance  assigned  by  rules
of  law,  and  there  are  other  rules  according  to  which
they  cease.  A  mere  detached  knowledge  of  the
contents  of  legal  rules  would  be  of  little  use
without knowing  the  conditions  which determine


in  THE  SUBJECT-MATTER  OF  LAW  73

their  application.  In  order  to  have  any  real
working  acquaintance  with  a  system  of  law  we
must  inquire,  not  only  what  duties  and  rights  are
recognised,  but  how  rights  are  acquired  and  lost;
what  rights  are  capable  of  transfer,  and  how ;  by
what  acts  and  events  duties  are  imposed ;  how  far
and  in  what  ways  duties  can  be  transmitted ;  and
how  they  are  discharged.  The  conditions  defining
these  things  are  therefore,  as  mentioned  at  the
beginning  of  this  chapter,  an  integral  part  of  the
subject-matter  of  law,  and  the  rules  which  declare
them  are  among  the  most  important.  Some
branches  of  the  law  may  be  said,  indeed,  almost  to
consist  of  rules  of  this  kind.  They  set  forth  the
conditions  on  which  rights  and  duties  depend,  but
they  do  not  for  the  most  part  declare  any  right  or
duty  in  the  first  instance.  When  a  man  attains
full  age  is  a  very  practical  question,  and  the
statement  that  in  England  every  one  under  the
age  of  twenty-one  years  is  an  infant  is  certainly
a  proposition  of  law ;  but  it  does  not  state  any
duty  or  right.  Legal  capacity  is  not  a  right,  still
less  is  the  want  of  it  a  wrong.  Persons  dealing
with  infants  are  subject  to  risks  and  duties  which
may  be  learnt  from  other  sources ;  the  rule  only
tells  us  who  is  an  infant. Again,  we  are  all  bound


74  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

to  respect  the  rights  of  ownership ;  owners  are  also
subject  to  a  variety  of  special  duties.  To  bring  the
legal  rules  of  conduct  into  relation  with  actual  facts
we  have  to  know  how  people  become  owners,  and
how  ownership  and  other  interests  in  property  are
transferred.  It  is  often  much  easier  to  know  what
are  the  owner's  rights,  whoever  he  may  be,  than  to
know  who  the  owner  is.  Again,  every  man  is
bound  to  pay  his  debts,  and  this,  viewed  from  the
other  side,  is  the  creditor's  right  to  be  paid.  But
what  is  to  happen  if  the  debtor  dies,  or  the  creditor  ?
What  becomes  of  the  duty  and  the  claim?  In  the
literature  of  English  law  the  exposition  of  this  and
other  incidental  matters  fills  two  large  but  by  no
means  diffuse  volumes,  well  known  to  lawyers  as
"  Williams  on  Executors."  Without  a  body  of  rules
to  determine  title  and  succession  the  law  of  pro-
perty would  be  in  the  air.  Especially  does  this
hold  in  that  most  important  and  difficult  part  of  the
law  of  property  which  deals  with  Possession.  In
almost  every  branch  of  the  law  Possession  may  have
far-reaching  and  decisive  consequences.  The  legal
idea  of  Possession,  though  based  on  elementary
facts  of  human  nature  and  society  (or  rather,
perhaps,  because  so  based),  is  among  the  highest  and
hardest  we  have  to  grapple  with. But  the  practical


in  THE  SUBJECT-MATTER  OF  LAW  75

consequences  in  a  given  system  of  law  depend
largely  on  the  rules  that  determine  how  possession
is  acquired,  transferred,  and  lost.  Ultimately  rules
of  this  kind  enable  us  to  fix  the  duties  and  rights
of  parties  in  the  particular  cases.  They  exist  for
the  sake  of  ascertaining  rights  and  duties.  But
they  do  not,  in  the  first  instance,  affirm  any  specific
right  or  duty.  "We  may  conveniently  call  them
"  determining ''  rules  when  we  desire  to  speak  of
them  by  a  compendious  name.

Further,  rules of  law  are rules in and for a  Rules  of

6Vi(T.611C6

living  commonwealth,  active  and  operative  precepts,  and  pro-

C6(llLr6

not  merely  contemplative  propositions.  In  Professor
Holland's  happy  phrase,  law  has  to  deal  with  rights
in  motion  as  well  as  at  rest.  Duties  have  to  be
enforced  and  rights  have  to  be  vindicated.  Beyond
this,  modern  courts  of  justice  devote  much  of  their
best  labour  and  skill  to  quiet  non-contentious  or
not  fully  contentious  work  of  which  the  public  at
large,  with  its  dramatic  and  criminalist  view  of
legal  proceedings,  is  almost  unaware.  The  adminis-
trative business  of  courts  of  equity  and  probate
jurisdiction  is  of  this  kind.  Such  work  is  directed
to  defining  and  preserving  the  rights  of  parties
rather  than  enforcing  them.  In  many  cases  there
is no  hostile  contention  at all; the  parties  only


76  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

want  to  be  certified  what  their  rights  are.  In
these  processes,  as  well  as  in  the  coarser  and  more
conspicuous  ones  of  litigation  between  adversaries,
duties  and  rights  are  constantly  modified  and
transformed.  One  duty  or  set  of  duties  is  dis-
charged or  extinguished  and  another  arises.  After
judgment  given  the  duties  and  claims  are  not
the  same  as  before.  There  is  a  new  duty,  that
of  satisfying  the  judgment.  And  herein  the  State,
through  its  judicial  and  executive  officers,  has
its  own  active  and  more  or  less  independent  part,
at  least  in  all  modern  systems.

Thus  we  need  a  whole  machinery  of  auxiliary
rules 1  to  guide  the  citizen  in  seeking  the  aid  of
courts  of  justice,  and  to  regulate  the  powers  and
discretion  of  the  court  itself.  In  criminal  affairs
the  need  is  no  less.  The  commonwealth  is
supreme  and  can  punish  offenders,  but  it  must
punish  according  to  law.  Nay,  we  require  security
that  penal  law  shall  be  abundantly  just.  It  is
better  that  some  offenders  should  go  scot-free  than
that condemnation and punishment should seem

1  Procedure  has  been  judicially  described  as  "the  mode  of  pro-
ceeding by  which  a  legal  right  is  enforced,  as  distinguished  from
the  law  which  gives  or  defines  the  right,  and  which  by  means
of  the  proceeding  the  Court  is  to  administer, — the  machinery  as
distinguished  from  its  product : "  Lush  L.J.  in  Poyser  v.  Minors
(1881).,  7  Q.B.  Div.  329,  333.


in  THE  SUBJECT-MATTER  OF  LAW  77

arbitrary.  When  we  consider  a  system  of  law
from  the  citizen's  point  of  view  rather  than  the
lawyer's,  as  a  material  element  in  the  political
stability  of  the  commonwealth,  we  may  almost
say  that  certainty  in  procedure  is  more  important
than  certainty  in  the  substance  of  law.

We  see  then  that  the  mere  sum  of  existing  Substan-
•  duties  and  rights  is  not  the  law,  nor  even  a  Adjective
separable  or  working  portion  of  the  law.  It  is
but  one  element,  the  positive  or  static  element
as  one  might  call  it.  In  order  to  build  up  the
organic  life  of  law  we  have  need  of  the  genetic
element,  the  principles  which  determine  the  positive
rules  in  their  concrete  application  to  persons,  acts,
and  events;  and  of  the  dynamic  element,  the  rules
whereby  legal  consequences  are  made  manifest
and  worked  out.  Positive  rules  of  law  tell  us
what  is  just ;  determining  rules  (which  we  might
also  call  the  law  of  Title,  using  that  word  in  the
largest  sense)  point  out  what  is  the  justice  of  the
case  in  hand ;  the  rules  of  procedure  show  us  how
justice  is  to  be  done.

What  we  have  spoken  of  as  the  positive  law  of
duties  and  rights  is  commonly  called  Substantive
Law.  The  law  of  ''  determining ''  rules,  which  has
not in English any technical or generally ac-


78  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE chap,  hi

cepted  name,  is  usually  and  conveniently  treated
as  auxiliary  to  the  substantive  law,  and  attached,
for  purposes  of  exposition  and  reference,  to  its
various  heads.  Thus  the  Law  of  Vendors  and
Purchasers  (that  is,  of  land  and  interests  in  land,
as  the  term  is  always  understood  among  English-
speaking  lawyers) 1  is  dealt  with  as  a  branch  of
the  law  of  Real  Property.

For  equally  good  reasons  of  convenience  Pro-
cedure is  dealt  with  as  a  topic  apart.  Codes  of
civil  and  criminal  procedure  are  in  force  in  the
majority  of  civilised  countries,  including  British
India.  Here  in  England  we  have  the  substance
of  a  code  of  civil  procedure,  though  not  the  name,
in  the  Rules  of  the  Supreme  Court.  Procedure,
considered  in  its  relation  to  substantive  law,  has
been  conveniently  called  Adjective  Law  by  modern
writers.

1  It  would  be  natural  enough,  for  a  continental  jurist  left  to
himself  in  an  English  law  library  to  turn  to  a  treatise  on  Vendors
and  Purchasers  in  the  expectation  of  finding  something  about
the  sale  of  goods,  or  to  a  treatise  on  the  Contract  of  Sale  for
information  about  the  transfer  of  land  in  English  -  speaking
countries.  In  either  case  he  would  be  signally  disappointed.
The  reasons  of  this  are  historical  and,  from  the  philosophic  point
of  view,  accidental.


CHAPTER IV


divisions  of  law-


It  is  not  possible  to  make  any  clear-cut  division  of  Divisions

of  legal

the  subject-matter  of  legal  rules. The  same  facts  ciassifica-

•  K  T  1  ti 0I1 are

are  often  the  subject  or  two  or  more  distinct  rules,  formal,  not
and  give  rise  at  the  same  time  to  distinct  and
different  sets  of  duties  and  rights.  The  divisions
of  law,  as  we  are  in  the  habit  of  elliptically  naming
them,  are  in  truth  divisions  not  of  facts  but  of
rules ;  or,  if  we  like  to  say  so,  of  the  legal  aspects
of  facts.  Legal  rules  are  the  lawyer's  measures  for
reducing  the  world  of  human  action  to  manageable
items,  and  singling  out  what  has  to  be  dealt  with
for  the  time  being,  in  the  same  way  as  number  and
numerical  standards  enable  us  to  reduce  the  con-
tinuous and  ever  changing  world  of  matter  and
motion  to  portions  which  can  be  considered  apart.
Thus  rules  of  law  can  no  more  give  us  a  classifica-


80  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

tion  of  human  acts  or  affairs  than  the  rules  of
arithmetic  can  give  us  a  classification  of  numerable
things.  In  scholastic  terms,  the  divisions  of  law
are  not  material  but  formal.  Practising  lawyers  do
not  concern  themselves  much  with  divisions  of  a
high  order  of  generality.  They  have  to  think,  in
the  first  place,  of  speedy  and  convenient  reference,
and  the  working  arrangements  of  professional
literature  are  made  accordingly.  So  the  types  in  a
printing  office  are  arranged  not  in  order  to  illustrate
the  relations  of  spoken  sounds  or  the  history  of  the
alphabet,  but  so  that  the  compositor  may  lay  his
hand  most  readily  on  the  letters  which  are  oftenest
wanted.  Ambitious  writers  have  sometimes  gone
to  work  as  if  it  were  possible  to  reduce  the  whole
contents  of  a  legal  system  to  a  sort  of  classified
catalogue  where  there  would  be  no  repetitions  or
cross  references,  and  the  classification  would  explain
itself.  Ambition  on  that  scale  is  destined  to  dis-
appointment by  the  nature  of  things.
Classical  Some general  divisions in the  science of  law

or  r6C6ivG(i

divisions :  have  been  made  classical  by  the  method  adopted  in
and  per-  the  Institutes  of  Justinian,  and  by  the  subsequent
duties  or  development  given  to  the  Eoman  ideas  by  com-
11  "'  mentators  and  modern  jurists. One  such  division,

which  has  been  made  explicitly  prominent  only  in


iv  DIVISIONS  OF  LAW  81

recent  times,  is  now  commonly  marked  by  the  terms
in  rem  and  in  -personam.  Some  duties  and  rights
consist  in  a  claim  of  one  certain  person  upon
another ;  the  duty  and  the  correlated  right  are  alike
determinate.  In  these  cases  the  duties  and  rights
are  said  by  modern  writers  to  be  in  personam.
Other  duties  and  rights  do  not  import  any  such
definite  correlation.  When  we  put  ourselves  in  the
position  of  duty,  we  find  no  certain^  person  having
the  right;  when  we  put  ourselves \|n  the  position  of
right,  we  find  no  certain  person  owing  the  duty.
These  impersonal  rights  and  duties,  regarding  all
one's  fellow-subjects  or  a  class  of  them,  are  said  to
be  in  rem.  We  have  already  seen  something  of  this
in  endeavouring  to  fix  the  conception  of  legal  right.
The  reason  why  we  cannot  well  use  the  English
adjectives  "  real "  and  "  personal "  for  this  purpose
is  that  they  are  already  appropriated  to  special
technical  uses  with  which  this  would  clash.  It
would  be  free  from  objection,  however,  to  speak  of
personal  and  impersonal  duties  or  rights.

The most obvious  and  typical  example  of  an  Transition

from  in

event  creating  rights in  personam is a contract,  rem  to  in

,,  ,  . .  personam:

John  and  Peter  agree  that  John  shall  sell  nis  house  contract,

to  Peter  on  certain  terms. This  gives  John  and  ownership.

Peter  certain  rights  against  each other;  they  are

G


82  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

bound  to  one  another  by  a  tie  of  mutual  claims
existing  between  them  and  between  them  only.
This  definite  relation  of  claim  and  duty  was  called
an  obligation  by  the  Eoman  lawyers,  and  is  still  so
called  everywhere,  save  that  in  English-speaking
countries  an  unfortunate  habit  has  arisen  of  using
'•  obligation  "  in  a  lax  manner  as  co-extensive  with
duties  of  every  kind.1  Now  let  Peter  pay  John  the
purchase  money,  and  John  do  all  proper  acts  for
completing  the  sale.  Suppose,  to  simplify  the
illustration,  that  John  has  received  the  money  in
coin,  and  Peter  has  entered  into  the  house  and
occupies  it.  Peter  is  owner  of  the  house,  and  John
and  all  other  persons  are  under  the  duty  of  respect-
ing his  rights  as  owner,  that  is,  of  abstaining  from
trespass  and  the  like.  The  money  is  John's,  and
Peter  and  all  other  persons  must  respect  John's  owner-
ship of  the  money  by  not  stealing  it  or  otherwise
meddling  with  it  in  any  unauthorised  way.  These
rights  have  no  determinate  corresponding  duties,
only  the  general  duty  of  all  men  not  to  trespass,
steal,  and so forth. That duty in turn is not

1  In  English  law  the  word  formerly  had  a  much  more  restricted
meaning,  namely  the  special  kind  of  contract  also  called  a  bond.
But  the  English  name  ' '  bond  "  is  now  always  or  almost  always
used  for  this,  and  it  is  convenient  to  restore  "obligation"  to  its
Roman  sense,  for  which  there  is  no  synonym.


iv  DIVISIONS  OF  LAW  83

correlated  to  Peter's  or  John's  rights  more  than  to
those  of  any  other  owner.  Dominium  is  the  Eoman
term  for  the  rights  of  an  owner  against  all  the
world :  and  the  contrast  of  dominium  and  obligatio
is  the  nearest  approach  that  can  be  made,  in
classical  Eoman  language,  to  the  distinction  marked
by  the  modern  terms  in  rem  and  in  personam.

Let  us  now  take  a  further  step.  Eobert,  a  obligation
stranger,  wantonly  or  out  of  spite  breaks  a  window  doing.
in  Peter's  house.  He  has  disregarded  the  general
duty  of  respecting  other  men's  property,  and  he
incurs  a  new  duty,  that  of  making  compensation  to
Peter.  It  may  be  that  he  is  also  liaWe  to  fine  or
imprisonment  for  the  disturbance  of  public  order
involved  in  his  wrongful  act,  but  that  is  a  distinct
and  different  matter.  On  the  other  side,  Peter  has
a  personal  and  determined  right  against  Eobert..  A
legal  bond  of  liability  and  claim  has  been  created ;
that  is  to  say,  there  is  an  obligation.  If  Peter
comes  out  of  the  house  at  the  moment  when  Eobert
breaks  the  window,  loses  his  temper,  and  knocks
down  Eobert,  he  has  in  turn  broken  in  Eobert's
person  the  general  duty  of  not  assaulting  one's
fellow-subjects :  for  the  right  of  action  he  has
acquired  against  Eobert  is  a  right  to  redress  by
lawful  means  only,  of  which  means  knocking  down


84  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

the  wrong-doer  on  the  spot  is  not  one  in  this  case.
Eobert  may  not  be  held  entitled  to  much  compensa-
tion, but  he  is  entitled  to  some.  Here  is  yet
another  obligation,  the  liability  being  on  Peter  and
the  claim  with  Robert ;  and  it  results  from  a  breach
of  the  most  general  kind  of  duty,  a  duty  correspond-
ing to  a  so-called  "  primitive  "  right.
Personal  Obligation  does  not  however  include  the  whole

duties  .

other  than  of  duties  and  rights  in  personam.  There  are
personal  relations  recognised  by  law  and  having
important  legal  consequences,  but  outside  the  legal
conception  of  obligation.  Peter,  let  us  assume,
lives  in  the"  house  with  his  wife  Joan,  and  they
have  children.  Peter  and  Joan  owe  duties  to  one
another  which  they  cannot  owe  to  any  one  else;
and  the  same  may  be  said  (omitting  minor  distinc-
tions in  this  place)  of  the  duties  existing  between
Peter  and  his  children.  But  these  duties  are  not
reckoned  as  obligations :  for  they  cannot  be  ex-
pressed as  definite  claims,  and  their  performance
cannot  be  reduced  to  any  definite  measure.  They
are  fully  discharged  only  when  the  relation  out  of
which  they  arise  has  come  to  an  end :  in  the  case
of  marriage  by  death,  or,  in  systems  •  of  law  where
divorce  is  allowed,  by  divorce.  In  the  case  of
parental  relations  the  normal  mode  of  determination


iv  DIVISIONS  OF  LAW  85

is  the  attainment  of  full  age  by  the  child  (which,
however,  often  has  not  that  effect  in  archaic  systems,
and  had  not  in  the  classical  Eoman  law),  to  which
many  systems  add  marriage  in  the  case  of  daughters,
and  adoption  into  another  family.

Eelations  of  this  kind,  moreover,  are  intimately
associated  with  moral  duties  which  are  not  capable
of  legal  definition  and  perhaps  not  of  precise  de-
finition at  all.  Lying  thus  on  the  borderland  of
morality  and  law,  they  give  rise  in  law  to  duties
and  rights  which  resemble  obligations  in  being
personal,  but  differ  from  obligations,  and  resemble
duties  and  rights  in  rem,  in  not  being  capable  of
exhaustion  by  definite  assignable  acts,  or  by  any
number  of  such  acts.  The  resulting  duties  are
determinate  as  to  persons,  but  not  determinate  as
to  contents.

Duties  which  are  impersonal  or  in  rem,  answer,
as  we  have  seen,  partly  to  particular  and  acquired
rights  of  other  persons,  such  as  owners,  partly  to
the  so-called  primitive  rights  which  are  universal.
They  may  be  duties  to  all  one's  fellow-subjects  or
only  to  some  of  them.

Impersonal  duties  and  rights  are  always  attached  Creation  of

duties  and

by  rules  of  law  to  some  condition  or  state  of  facts,  rights  by

will  of

Whether  the  conditions  are  to  any  extent  under  the  parties.


86  FIRST  BOOK  0? '  URISPRTJDENCE  chap.

control  of  the  parties  or  not,  the  legal  consequences
are  what  the  law  makes  them.  By  the  mere  fact
of  being  a  citizen  or  subject  one  is  entitled  to  a
certain  measure  of  personal  security,  freedom  to
follow  one's  lawful  calling,  and  so  forth.  By  the
fact  of  becoming  an  owner  one  acquires  the  rights
and  faculties  of  an  owner,  such  as  the  law  declares
them  to  be.  One  may  choose  to  avail  oneself  of
them  or  not,  but  one  cannot  alter  them.  If  one
could,  one  would  be  able  to  impose  new  duties  on
one's  fellow-citizens  without  their  consent,  in  fact
to  make  new  law  for  one's  own  benefit.  But  this
would  contradict  the  fundamental  purpose  of  law  and
justice.  It  is  exactly  what  they  aim  at  preventing.
Personal  Personal  duties  and  rights,  on  the  other  hand,

duties  .

dependent may  not  only  arise  from  acts  or  the  parties,  but  be

parties. directly  created  and  determined  by  their  will. The

parties  to  an  agreement  not  only  confer  and  assume

duties  by  their  voluntary  act,  but  by  the  same  act

prescribe  what  the  duties  shall  be.

The  same  remark  applies  to  transactions  in-
volving agreement  and  obligation,  though  not
usually  included  under  the  name  of  contract,  such
as  the  creation  of  trusts  in  English  law.  The
parties  can  make  a  law  for  themselves  just  because
their  dispositions  are  personal  to  themselves,  and  do


iv  DIVISIONS  OF  LAW  87

not  impose  or  affect  to  impose  any  new  duties  on
their  fellow-subjects  at  large.

Personal  duties  are  also  prescribed  by  rules  of  Personal

•  duties

law  and  attached  to  acts or  relations  of parties,  prescribed

by  law.

Sometimes  they  are  contemplated  by  the  parties,
though  not  within  their  control,  and  sometimes  not.
Thus  in  the  case  of  marriage  and  other  family
relations  the  legal  consequences  are  contemplated
and  accepted,  but  cannot  be  framed  and  varied  at
the  will  of  the  parties  like  the  duties  created  by  a
commercial  contract.1  In  many  cases  where  duties
resembling  those  created  by  contract  are  imposed
by  law  (where  in  Eoman  terms  there  is  obligation
quasi  ex  contractu),  they  are  such  as  it  is  considered
that  a  just  man,  on  being  fully  informed  of  the
facts,  would  in  the  circumstances  willingly  assume.
The  most  familiar  example  in  this  kind  is  the  duty
of  returning  a  payment  made  by  mistake.  Where
obligation  arises  from  a  merely  wrongful  act,  the
liability  is  of  course  not  desired  by  the  wrong-doer,
and  is  contemplated,  if  at  all,  as  an  evil  (from  his
point  of  view)  to  be  endured  only  so  far  as  it
cannot  be  avoided.

1  This  does  not  apply  to  incidental  dispositions  of  property
such  as  are  made  by  marriage  settlements.  These  may  well  be
treated,  as  in  our  law  they  are,  as  matters  of  agreement  largely
within  the  control  of  the  parties.


FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE


Liability
by  breach
of  agree-
ment.


We  have  not  yet  mentioned  another  way  in
which  personal  duties  and  liabilities  arise,  namely
from  the  breach  of  antecedent  personal  duties
created  by  agreement.

Every  such  breach  of  duty  is  in  some  sense
wrongful ;  and  it  is  contrary  to  the  original  inten-
tion of  the  parties.  Agreements  are  made  in  order
to  be  performed,  not  to  be  broken.  It  is  even
possible  to  regard  the  breach  of  a  promise  as  a
wrong  in  the  strictest  sense,  a  trespass  or  deceit.1
Still  there  is  a  good  deal  of  difference.  Duties
under  agreement  may  easily  be  broken  without  any
wrongful  intention.  Performance  may  be  prevented
by  misadventure  (which  is  not  always  an  excuse
even  if  the  party  be  not  in  fault),  or  there  may  be
honest  and  serious  diversity  of  opinion  as  to  what
is  really  due.  Then,  although  parties  do  not  desire
their  agreements  to  be  broken,  it  would  be  incorrect
to  say  that  they  never  contemplated  it;  for  they
often  make  special  provision  for  such  an  event,  and
even  fix  beforehand  the  amount  or  scale  of  the
compensation  to  be  paid.  Thus  it  appears  that  the
duty  of  compensation  in  case  of  non-performance  is
fairly  regarded  as  incident  and  supplementary  to
the  primary  duty  of  performance.  In  practice  and
1  This  is  fully  exemplified  in  the  history  of  the  Common  Law.


iv  DIVISIONS  OF  LAW  89

practical exposition it  would not be convenient,

indeed  it  would  hardly  be  possible,  to  separate  the

legal  results  of  breach  of  contract  from  the  rules

determining  what  are  the  duties  and  rights  of  the

parties  before  any  breach.

From  the  point  of view  of a modern  lawyer  import-
ance of
conversant  with  modern  habits  of  life  and  business,  distinction

t •  between

it may  well seem that the distinction between  seif-pre-

scri"b6cl

duties  and  rights  prescribed  by  the  parties  them-  and  other
selves  and  those  prescribed  by  the  law  is  really  of
greater  importance  than  that  which  looks  only
to  their  impersonal  or  personal  character.  The
relations  recognised  by  law  can  be  divided,  with  no
great  apparent  inequality  as  to  quantity  or  value  in
human  affairs,  into  those  which  arise  from  contract
(or  voluntary  dispositions  analogous  to  contract)
and  those  which  are  independent  of  contract.  And
the  distinction  is  at  first  sight  so  clear  as  to  seem
unmistakable.  But  the  history  of  the  law  shows
us  that  an  absolutely  clear-cut  division  is  not  to  be
had,  even  so,  between  the  facts  and  relations  to
which  our  rules  apply.

The  description  of  legal duties and rights as  RorAan

meaning  of

being  in  rem  or  in  personam  is  usually  and  correctly  "aftion."
said  to  be  unauthorised  by  classical  Latin  usage.
Eoman lawyers spoke  of "actiones,"  not  "iura,''


90  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

being  in  rem  or  in  personam.  But  it  should  be
remembered  that  in  Eoman  usage  "  action  "  included
what  we  now  call  a  "  right  of  action,"  any  determin-
ate claim  to  some  form  of  legal  redress.  "  Action  "
was  defined  as  a  man's  right  of  obtaining  by
process  of  law  what  is  due  to  him,  not  as  the
process  itself.  ''  Nihil  aliud  est  actio  quam  ius
quod  sibi  debetur  iudicio  persequendi." *  Hence
the  modern  usage  is  not  so  wide  apart  from  the
Eoman  as  it  appears  at  first  sight  to  be.
Public  and A classical division accepted by almost all

Private  .  .  .  -,-,,.  t.  •

Law.  systematic  writers  is that  of Public and Private

Law.  No  rule  of  law  can  be  said,  in  the  last
resort,  to  exist  merely  for  the  benefit  of  the  State
or  merely  for  the  benefit  of  the  individual.  But
some  departments  of  legal  rules  have  regard  in  the
first  instance  to  the  protection  and  interests  of  the
commonwealth,  others  to  those  of  its  individual
members.

In  the  former  case  the  public  interest  is  im-
mediate ;  it  can  be  directly  represented  by  the
proper  officers  of  the  State,  and  vindicated  by
them  in  the  name  of  the  State,  or  of  its  titular
head :  in  the  latter  the  interest  of  the  individuals
whose  rights  are  affected  comes  in  the  first  line ;

1  Celsus,  D.  44,  7,  de  obi.  et  act.  51.


iv  DIVISIONS  OF  LAW  91

it  is  protected  by  the  law,  but  the  parties  interested
are  left  to  set  the  law  in  motion.  Eules  of  private
law  may  be  said  to  have  remained  in  a  stage  where
all  rules  of  law  probably  were  in  remote  times :
that  is  to  say,  the  State  provides  judgment  and
justice,  but  only  on  the  request  and  action  of  the
individual  citizen  :  those  who  desire  judgment  must
come  and  ask  for  it.  Accordingly  the.  special  field
of  such  rules  is  that  part  of  human  affairs  in  which
individual  interests  predominate,  and  are  likely  to
be  asserted  on  the  whole  with  sufficient  vigour,  and
moreover  no  public  harm  is  an  obvious  or  necessary
consequence  of  parties  not  caring  to  assert  their
rights  in  particular  cases.  In  the  law  of  contract
and  its  various  commercial  developments  these
conditions  are  most  fully  satisfied ;  though  even
here  considerations  of  "public  policy,"  to  use  the
accustomed  English  term,  are  by  no  means  absent.
In  the  law  of  family  relations  and  of  property
motives  of  legitimate  private  interest  have  a  consider-
able part,  but  they  are  not  so  uniformly  operative
that  they  can  be  treated  as  adequately  guarding  the
interest  of  the  commonwealth.  Hence  we  find  that
theft  and  certain  other  forms  of  misappropriation
and  fraud,  and  even  certain  kinds  of  breach  of
contract,  are  punishable as public offences. The


92  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

general  security  of  property  has  to  be  considered  as
well  as  the  chances  of  restitution  in  each  case,
which  often  are  so  slender  that  the  person  robbed
or  defrauded  has  no  sufficient  motive  of  self-interest
for  vindicating  the  .law.  When  we  come  to  bodily
safety,  the  public  interest  balances,  or  in  some  cases
even  outweighs,  the  private.  Wrongs  of  violence
are  in  all  civilised  legal  systems  dealt  with  as
offences  against  the  commonwealth,  in  addition  to
the  rights  to  redress  which  may  be  conferred  on  the
individual  injured.  Incorporeal  personal  wrongs,
such  as  defamation,  afford  a  kind  of  neutral  ground
where  the  rights  of  the  State  and  of  individuals
have  about  equally  free  play  in  modern  law.  There
fall  more  specially  under  rules  of  public  law  the
duties  and  powers  of  different  authorities  in  the
State,  making  up  what  is  usually  known  as  the  law
of  the  Constitution ;  also  the  special  bodies  of  law
governing  the  armed  forces  of  the  State,  and  the
administration  of  its  other  departments;  laws
regulating  particular  trades  and  undertakings  in
the  interest  of  public  health  or  safety;  and  in
short  all  State  enterprise  and  all  active  interference
of  the  State  with  the  enterprises  of  private  men.
We  say  active  interference.  For  there  are  many
dispositions in particular departments  of private


iv  DIVISIONS  OF  LAW  93

law  which  are  founded  on  reasons  of  public  policy,
but  are  left  for  the  parties  who  may  profit  or  be
relieved  by  them  to  bring  to  the  notice  of  the
Courts.  Of  this  kind  are  certain  special  restrictions
on  freedom  of  contract.  In  countries  under  the
common  law  the  State  does  not  interfere  of  its  own
motion  to  prevent  an  agreement  from  being  enforced
on  the  ground  that  it  is  "  in  restraint  of  trade."
On  the  other  hand  there  are  many  legislative
enactments  which  expressly  or  by  necessary  impli-
cation forbid  certain  kinds  of  contracts  to  be  made.
Such  enactments  appear  to  belong  to  public  law,
though  it  is  often  convenient  or  necessary  to
consider  them  in  connection  with  the  rules  of
private  law  whose  usual  operation  is  excluded  or
limited  by  them.

To  public  law,  too,  belong  all  the  minor  penal
enactments  incident  to  constitutional  and  depart-
mental legislation.  But  public  law  does  not  even
here  hold  the  field  alone,  for  the  same  legislation
which  creates  new  public  duties  and  imposes
penalties  may  well,  under  specified  conditions,  also
confer  new  rights  to  redress  on  individuals  either
expressly  or  as  a  consequence  of  principles  recog-
nised by  the  courts.

The  extent and  effect of  any  such principles


94  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

cannot  be  laid  down  beforehand :  it  depends  on
the  forms,  methods,  and  history  of  the  particular
system  of  law  which  is  being  administered.  In  our
law  the  violation  of  a  public  duty  may  often  give
a  right  of  action  to  a  citizen  who  has  thereby
suffered  damage,  but  this  is  by  no  means  an
universal  or  necessary  result.1

It  will  be  seen  therefore  that  the  topics  of
public  and  private  law  are  by  no  means  mutually
exclusive.  On  the  contrary  their  application  over-
laps with  regard  to  a  large  proportion  of  the  whole
mass  of  acts  and  events  capable  of  having  legal
consequences.
The  state  Sometimes the  distinction  between  public  and

as  a  party.

private  law  is  made  to  turn  on  the  State  being  or
not  being  a  party  to  the  act  or  proceeding  which
is  being  considered.  Only  dealings  between  subject
and  subject,  it  is  said,  form  the  province  of  private
law.  But  this  does  not  seem  quite  exact :  unless
indeed  we  adopt  the  view,  which  has  already  been
rejected,  that  the  State  is  wholly  above  law  and
legal  justice,  and  neither  duties  nor  rights  can
properly  be  ascribed  to  it.  Many  valuable  things
both  immovable  and  movable  are  held  and  em-
ployed .  for  the  public  service :  palaces,  museums,
1 Ward  v.  Hotos  (187S),  4  App.  Ca.  13.


iv  DIVISIONS  OF  LAW  95

public  offices,  fortifications,  ships  of  war,  and  so
forth ;  in  some  countries  railways  and  all  the  various
furniture  and  appurtenances  of  these.  Whether
they  are  held  in  the  name  of  the  State  itself,  or
of  the  head  of  the  State,  or  of  individual  officers
of  the  State  or  persons  acting  by  their  direction,
is  a  matter  of  detail  which  must  depend  on  the
laws  and  usages  of  every  State,  and  may  be  deter-
mined by  highly  technical  reasons.  In  substance  the
State  is  and  must  be,  in  every  civilised  community,
a  great  owner  of  almost  every  kind  of  object.  Now
the  rights  attaching  to  the  State  in  this  respect,  or
to  the  nominal  owners  who  hold  on  the  State's
behalf,  need  not  differ  from  those  of  any  private
owner,  and  in  English-speaking  countries  they  do
not.  They  can  be  and  are  dealt  with  by  the
ordinary  courts  in  the  same  way  as  the  rights  of
any  citizen,  and  according  to  the  ordinary  rules  of
the  law  of  property  for  the  preservation  and  manage-
ment of  the  kind  of  property  which  may  be  in
question.  Again  many  persons  have  to  be  employed,
and  agreements  to  be  made  with  them;  and  these-
transactions  are  judged,  so  far  as  necessary,  by  the
ordinary  rules  of  the  law  of  contract.  Now  the  rules
mentioned  not  only  belong  to  private  law  but  are  at
its  centre ;  they  are  the  most  obvious  examples  of


96  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

what  private  law  includes.  It  would  be  strange  to
say  that  they  become  rules  of  public  law  because  the
property  and  undertakings  in  question  are  public.
The  true  view  seems  to  be  that  the  State,  as  an
owner  and  otherwise,  can  make  use  of  the  rules  of
private  law,  and  become  as  it  were  a  citizen  for
the  nonce,  though  ultimately  for  public  purposes.
Use  of  Sometimes  the  law  of  nations  is  brought  under

"public"

and  the  head  of  public  law ;  this  is  plausible  according

"  private  "

by  writers to  the  test  of  the  State  being  a  party,  which,  how-
cm  Inter-
national ever,  we  have  not  accepted. It  is  enough  to  say

Law.

here  that  the  duties  of  independent  States  to  one
another,  whatever  may  be  the  extent  of  their
analogy  to  legal  duties,  are  not  legal  duties  or  the
subject  of  legal  rules  in  the  sense  now  under
consideration.  On  the  other  hand  there  is  in
modern  law  a  body  of  principles  and  rules  by  which
the  courts  are  guided  in  deciding,  on  occasion,  how
far  they  are  bound  to  take  notice  and  make  applica-
tion of  rules  belonging  to  foreign  systems  of  law ;
as  where  different  stages  of  a  transaction  have
taken  place  in  different  jurisdictions.  These  rules
apply  largely  to  matters  of  private  law,  and  the
principles  are  not  confined  to  any  particular  local
system.  Differences  of  opinion  exist  among  the
learned,  and the opinions of  different writers or


IV  DIVISIONS  OF  LAW  97

schools  may  prevail  with  the  tribunals  of  different
countries :  but  it  is  recognised  on  all  hands  that
uniformity  is  desirable,  and  is  to  be  aimed  at  as
far  as  possible.  Hence  the  sum  of  such  rules  is
now  commonly  called  Private  International  Law.
This  term  has  been  much  discussed,  and  by  some
competent  persons  vehemently  disapproved,1  but  it
would  not  be  to  the  present  purpose  to  enter  upon
the  controversy,  which  assumes  an  advanced  know-
ledge of  law.  What  is  here  sought  is  merely  to
make  a  common  modern  term  intelligible.

Another classical division adopted by the  Eoman

division

Institutes  of  Justinian  from  Gaius  is that  which  of  law


treats  the  whole  body  of  law  (that  is,  legal  rules)  Persons,

as  relating  either  to  Persons,  Things,  or  Actions.2  Actions.

"  Omne autem ius quo utimur vel ad personas

pertinet  vel  ad  res  vel  ad  actiones."

To  a  certain  extent  this  division  coincides  with

the division already noted of Substantive and

Adjective  law. The  law  of  Actions  is  the  body  of

rules  determining  the  modes  and  processes  of  legal

redress  ; it  is  equivalent  to  what  modern  writers

call  the  law  of  Procedure,  but  with  some  addition

of  the  law  of  Eemedies  :  for,  as  pointed  out  above,

1  See  Holland,  Jurisprudence,  ch.  xviii.

*  Cp.  Maine,  Marly  Law  and  Custom,  ch.  xi.,  and  Dr.  Moyle's
introduction  to  the  first  book  of  the  Institutes.

H


98  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  ohap.

the  Komans  hardly  distinguished  the  right  to  a
certain  kind  of  redress  from  the  process  of  obtaining
it.  So  far  there  is  nothing  calling  for  fresh  ex-
planation ;  it  is  to  be  remembered,  however,  that,  as
Maine  has  pointed  out,  the  distinction  of  substantive
from  adjective  law  must  in  ancient  times  have
involved  a  much  higher  effort  of  abstraction  than
we  can  easily  realise  now.  When  we  consider  the
further  division  of  substantive  law  into  law  of
Persons  and  law  of  Things,  we  are  struck  by  the
fact  that  the  division,  though  not  in  terms  confined
to  private  law,  has  in  fact  been  so  confined  by  the
usage  of  both  ancient  and  modern  expounders.  It
will  appear  shortly  that  there  is  good  reason  for
this.

Practical  Like  the  other  divisions  we  have  been  consider-

point
of  the ing,  this  is  a  division  of  legal  rules,  not  of  the  facts

division.

to  which  they  apply.  It  seems  to  be  closely  related
to  the  practical  questions  which  arise  or  may  arise
when  a  man  feels  aggrieved  and  thinks  of  seeking
redress.  Persons  between  whom  there  is  a  dispute;
a  thing  which  is  the  subject  of  dispute ;  some  form
of  action  for  resolving  the  dispute  by  process  of
law :  these  are  the  common  elements  of  litigation
between  parties.  This  evidently  does  not  apply
to  crimes,  or  to  all  private  wrongs  ;  but  the  applica-


iv  DIVISIONS  OF  LAW  99

tion  is  quite  wide  enough  to  support  a  classification
which  in  truth  is  only  a  rough  one.  Do  the
persons  concerned  fall  under  any  rules  of  law
limiting  or  specially  modifying  their  capacity  or
liability  ?  What  rights  are  recognised  by  law  with
regard  to  .the  subject-matter  in  question  ?  Can  it
be  owned,  or  exclusively  enjoyed  ?  One  of  the
parties,  perhaps,  claims  by  sale  or  bequest :  could
the  thing  be  given  by  will  ?  could  the  sale  invest
him  with  the  rights  he  claims  to  exercise  ?  What,
on  the  whole,  is  the  resulting  duty  or  liability?
Then,  supposing  the  rights  of  the  parties  to  be
settled,  what  are  the  available  remedies  ?  What
is  the  active  form,  so  to  speak,  of  the  legal  result  ?
or  in  English  legal  phrase,  what  is  the  cause  of
action?  Can  compensation  be  recovered  in  money,
or  is  there  any  other,  and  what  form  of  redress  ?

The  distinction  between  law  relating  to  persons  Persons

are  prima

and  law  relating  to  things  may  seem  to  the  modern  fade  equal

in  modern,

reader,  perhaps,  not  to  be  a  real  one,  or  not  one  but  not  in

f  T-i i  •  /i  ancient,

ot  the  first  importance.  lor  things  (whatever  we  law.
include  in  the  conception  of  a  thing,  which  we
are  not  yet  considering)  can  plainly  have  no  place
in  legal  rules  except  in  connection  with  the  duties
and  rights  of  persons.  The  material  world  as  such
is absolutely  irrelevant  to  jurisprudence. Every


100  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

rule  of  law  must  to  this  extent  have  to  do  with
persons.  And  in  modern  Western  law  we  find  that
one  person  is  very  like  another,  and  differences
between  persons  tend  to  be  reduced  to  a  minimum.
In  fact  we  can  nowadays  be  tempted  to  regard  the
law  of  persons  as  identical  with  the  law  of  family
relations,  in  which  the  irreducible  differences  of
persons,  as  we  may  call  them,  resulting  from  the
conditions  of  sex  and  age,  are  of  necessity  most
prominent.  But  in  archaic  societies  it  is  not  at
all  to  be  assumed  that  persons  are  alike.  Nowadays
we  presume  every  man  to  have  the  full  legal  rights
of  a  citizen  in  the  absence  of  apparent  reason  to  the
contrary.  If  any  man  is  not  capable  of  buying  and
selling,  suing  and  being  sued,  in  his  own  name  and
on  his  own  responsibility,  there  must  be  something
exceptional  about  him.  Undischarged  bankrupts,
for  example,  are  not  a  very  large  proportion  of
our  adult  population.  But  at  Eome  in  the  time
of  Cicero  or  even  of  the  Antonines  a  prudent  man
could  not  presume  anything  about  a  stranger's  legal
capacities.  A  person  of  respectable  appearance  who
spoke  Latin  was  not  necessarily  even  free.  We
know  that  serious  doubt  whether  a  man  was  free
or  not  was  quite  possible.  If  he  was  a  slave,  he
had  no  legal  rights ;  he  was  not  a  person  at  all  in


iv  DIVISIONS  OF  LAW  101

the  eye  of  the  law.  If  he  was  free,  he  might  still
be  a  freedman,  or  a  foreigner  (not  to  speak  of
minuter  distinctions).  If  he  was  a  Eoman  citizen
he  might  still  have  a  father  living,  and  be  under
that  father's  power ;  again,  he  might  have  been
emancipated  or  adopted.  He  might  belong,  in
short,  to  any  one  of  several  conditions  of  men,
each  having  its  distinct  and  proper  measure  of
legal  capacities.  For  a  Eoman  of  the  Eepublic,
and  even  of  the  Empire  down  to  Justinian's
time  and  later,  the  question,  "With  what  kind
of  person  have  I  to  do  ? "  had  a  very  clear  and
prominent  legal  meaning,  and  no  question  could
be  more  practical.

Modern  authors  have  not  arrived  at  any  general
agreement  either  as  to  the  precise  meaning  of  the
law  relating  to  persons  in  the  Eoman  classification
(if  indeed  the  meaning  ever  was  precise),  or  as  to
what  topics  are  conveniently  included  under  such
a  head  at  the  present  day.  There  is  however  a
general  tendency  to  regard  the  law  of  persons  as
supplementary  to  the  general  body  of  legal  rules.
We  are  apt  to  ask  first,  not  what  are  the  respective
capacities  of  the  parties  in  the  matter  in  hand,  but
what  are  the  rights  of  the  matter  assuming  all
parties to  be  of  full  ability. Then  we consider,


102  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

as  a  possible  accident  in  the  case,  whether  any  one
is  under  any  disability,  or  to  any  extent  exempt
from  responsibility,  by  reason  of  some  special
personal  condition.  In  books  meant  for  practical
use  this  method  is  commonly  followed,  the  dis-
abilities and  immunities  of  infants,  married  women,
and  so  forth,  being  explained  with  reference  to
the  department  of  law  or  class  of  transactions
which  is  the  subject  of  exposition.

Exposition Another  principle  of  division  frankly  based  on

u er  ■  •  •

General convenience of exposition is that by which, in

and  Special

Parts. dealing  either  with  a  whole  body  of  law  or  with

a  substantial department  thereof,  those  principles

and  rules  which  are  found  in  all  or  most  portions

of  the  subject,  so  that  they  may  be  said to  run

through it, are disposed of before the  ,  several

branches  are  entered  upon. Such  principles and

rules may relate to the nature of duties and

rights in themselves, to the conditions of  their

origin, transmission, and extinction {title,  as we

have  already  used  the  word),  or  to the  remedies

applicable. The  setting  forth  of  these  matters  in

advance,  so  as  to  avoid  repetitions and  awkward

digressions  in the  subsequent detailed  treatment,

is called, after the modern German usage, the

General Part of the work in hand. In the


iv  DIVISIONS  OF  LAW  103

Special  Part  the  several  topics  are  dealt  with  in
order,  and,  the  general  principles  having  already
been  stated,  only  those  rules  are  discussed  which
are  peculiar  to  the  subdivision  in  hand,  or  are
in  some  peculiar  way  modified  in  their  applica-
tion to  its  contents.  Thus  Savigny's  great  work
on  Eoman  law  is  only  the  "  General  Part "  of  his
projected  system.  Well  framed  legislative  acts
on  large  subjects  usually  proceed  in  some  such
manner  from  the  general  to  the  special.  Thus
the  Indian  Penal  Code  has  chapters  of  "  General
Explanations,"  "  Punishments,"  and  "  General  Ex-
ceptions" (that  is,  the  causes  for  which  acts
otherwise  criminal  are  justified  or  excused),  which
come  before  the  definitions  of  particular  offences.
The  "preliminary"  part  of  Sir  James  Stephen's
Digest  of  the  (English)  Criminal  Law  is  a  well
marked  General  Part.  Again  the  first  six  chapters
of  the  Indian  Contract  Act  contain  what  a  Con-
tinental writer  would  call  the  General  Part  of  the
law  of  contract,  namely,  rules  of  law  by  which
the  formation,  validity,  and  effect  of  all  kinds  of
contracts  alike  are  governed  in  British  India.  The
other  chapters,  which  deal  with  sale,  agency,  and
other  species  of  contracts,  might  be  called  the
Special Part of the Act. Notwithstanding the


104  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE chap,  iv

obvious  advantages  of  this  method,  it  has  only
gradually  and  of  late  years  come  into  use  among
English  lawyers ;  I  do  not  say  in  name,  which  is
of  little  moment,  but  in  substance.  The  late
Mr.  Leake's  excellent  and  accurate  Digest  of  the
Principles  of  the  Law  of  Contracts  is,  however,
a  complete  and  systematic  General  Part  for  that
subject.  Where  a  wide  field  has  to  be  covered,
the  method  may  well  be  applied  on  a  smaller
scale  to  subdivisions  within  the  general  scheme.
It  is  hardly  needful  to  remark  that  it  is  by  no
means  necessarily  confined  to  legal  exposition;
but  it  is  specially  appropriate  for  legal  writings,
including  legislation,  by  reason  of  the  number  of
technical  ideas  and  rules  of  various  degrees  of
generality  which,  in  working  out  any  topic,  have
to  be  constantly  assumed  as  within  the  reader's
knowledge.


CHAPTEE V


PERSONS


Law  necessarily  deals with duties and  rights of  Relation

of  persons

persons.  Those  duties  and  rights  are  determined  to  things.
by  the  relations  of  persons  to  each  other,  depending
partly  on  their  acts  and  partly  on  events  indepen-
dent of  them,  and  connecting  those  persons  either
immediately  or  through  the  medium  of  what  we
may  call,  provisionally  and  vaguely,  the  possible
objects  of  common  or  conflicting  interest.  Using
"  things "  as  a  compendious  equivalent  for  this
last  phrase,  we  may  say  that  persons  are  brought,
by  the  operation  of  acts  and  events,  into  relations
with  things  and  with  one  another :  that  is  to  say,
relations  capable  of  begetting  duties,  rights,  and
claims ;  for  the  science  of  law  regards  none  others.
Claims  are  satisfied  by  Kennedies,  the  various  forms
of  legal  redress :  and  the  benefit  of  the  appropriate


106  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

remedy,  the  "  fruits  of  judgment "  as  we  often  say,
is  meted  out  according  to  the  rules  of  Procedure.
From  this  point  of  view  we  get  another  way  of
looking  at  the  division  of  law  as  relating  to
Persons,  Things,  and  Actions  which  we  lately
noticed.  It  is  not  proposed  however  to  consider
here  whether  this,  or  something  like  it,  may  have
been  in  the  mind  of  the  Eoman  lawyers,  though
they  did  not  distinguish  the  general  ideas  from
the  special  forms  assumed  by  them  in  the  law  of
Eome.  We  shall  proceed  in  our  own  fashion  to
use  this  clue  for  the  better  apprehension  of  some
of  the  leading  ideas  of  jurisprudence.  It  seems
a  convenient  course  to  start  from  the  following
questions  as  being  necessary  and  elementary.  Who
and  what  are  the  subjects *  of  duties  ?  and  how
brought  into  relation  with  the  possible  matter  of
duties  ?  Of  what  does  that  matter  consist  ?  How
are  the  data  for  determining  the  existence  of  duties
ascertained;  and,  when  ascertained,  how  are  the
duties  enforced  ?  Further,  there  is  after  all  these
a  question  of  great  practical  importance,  namely :
In  what  forms  is  the  law  made  known  ?  This
last  one,  however,  does  not  seem  to  admit  of  any

1  The  word  is  here  used,  of  course,  in  the  logical,  not  the
political  sense.


v  PERSONS  107

answer  in  general  terms  that  can  be  of  much
practical  benefit :  and  we  shall  deal  with  it  apart,
and  with  special  reference  to  the  authorities  of
the  Common  Law,  in  the  second  part  of  this  work.
In  like  manner  it  is  not  assumed  that  the  other
questions  all  stand  on  the  same  line  in  this  regard.
Eules  of  evidence  and  procedure  are  largely  deter-
mined by  national  and  historical  conditions  which,
■though  not  really  arbitrary,  cannot  be  accounted
for  by  universal  principles.

First  then  we  have  to  inquire,  not  what  were  what  is  a

Psrson  ^

the  capacities  of  persons  in  Eoman  law,  or  what
they  are  in  English  law,  but  what  a  person  is ;
that  is,  what  are  the  necessary  marks  of  a  person
in  law.  Duties  and  rights  belong  to  persons.
Persons  are  the  subjects  of  rights  and  duties :  and,
as  the  subject  of  a  right,  a  person  is  the  object
of  the  correlative  duty,  and  conversely.  The  sub-
ject of  a  right  has  been  called  by  Professor  Holland
the  person  of  inherence,  the  subject  of  a  duty  the
person  of  incidence.  "  Entitled  "  and  "  bound  "  are
the  terms  in  common  use  in  English,  and  for  most
purposes  they  seem  adequate.  Every  full  citizen
is  a  person :  other  human  beings,  namely  subjects
who  are  not  citizens,  may  be  persons.  But  not
every  human  being  is  necessarily  a  person,  for  a


108  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

person  is  capable  of  rights  and  duties,  and  there
may  well  be  human  beings  having  no  legal  rights,
as  was  the  case  with  slaves  in  ancient  law.1
Doubtless  any  such  institution  is  repugnant  to
the  spirit  of  modern  laws,  and,  since  the  abolition
of  slavery  in  America,  we  can  hardly  find  an
example  in  Western  civilised  countries :  but  we  are
now  examining  what  is  conceivable  and  possible,
not  what  is  desirable  or  now  prevalent.  A  person
is  such,  not  because  he  is  human,  but  because
rights  and  duties  are  ascribed  to  him.  The  person
is  the  legal  subject  or  substance  of  which  rights
and  duties  are  attributes.  An  individual  human
being,  considered  as  having  such  attributes,  is  what
lawyers  call  a  natural  person.
Natural  Is not a  person,  then,  simply  a  human  being

and  arti-  '  °

ficial  considered  as  capable  of  rights  and  duties  ? No,  for

persons.

there  are  persons  in  law  which  are  not  individual

human  beings. Not  only  man  is  social,  but  within

a  society  men  act  collectively,  presenting  a  solid

front,  so to speak,  to society  at  large. Groups,

permanent or temporary, behave as individuals.

There  arise  in  this  manner  collective  capacities  and

responsibilities which  the  law  personifies  for  con-

1  The  Roman  lawyers  did  sometimes,  but  rarely,  use  persona
so  as  to  include  slaves  :  Gai.  i.  §  48,  followed  by  I.  i.  8,  see  Moyle's
Inst.  p.  87,  2nd.  ed.


v  PERSONS  109

venience.  We  have  artificial  persons,  or,  as  we  say
in  the  Common  Law,  corporations.  Not  that  it  is
an  affair  of  mere  convenience.  It  would  seem
that  in  the  history  of  institutions  collective  rights
and  responsibilities  were  antecedent  to  those  of
the  individual :  and  under  archaic  systems  of  law,
as  in  Hindu  and  to  some  extent  in  Slavonic
society,  we  can  still  find  the  individual  hardly
disengaged  from  the  bonds  of  the  family.  How-
ever that  may  be,  we  constantly  need  in  modern
law  the  conception  of  an  artificial  person,  a  subject
of  duties  and  rights  which  is  represented  by  one
or  more  natural  persons  (generally,  not  necessarily,
by  more  than  one),  but  does  not  coincide  with
them.  It  has  a  continuous  legal  existence  not
necessarily  depending  on  any  natural  life;  this
legal  continuity  answers  to  some  real  continuity
of  public  functions,  or  of  special  purposes  recog-
nised as  having  public  utility,  or  of  some  lawful
common  interest  of  the  natural  persons  concerned.1

The  action  of  an  artificial  person,  be  it  observed,
is  not  a  merely  legal  or  technical  one.  We  make
use  of  it  every  day  for  the  common  purposes  of

1  It  would  be  extremely  interesting  to  trace  the  history  of  the
Roman  idea  of  wnimersitas  and  of  its  revival  in  European  and
English  medieval  law.  Such  a  task  is  of  course  beyond  the  scope
of  the  present  undertaking.


110  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

life,  and  in  applications  going  far  beyond  those
which  courts  of  justice  admit.  We  ascribe  a
single  will  and  responsibility  to  the  Ministry  of  the
day,  to  voluntary  associations  and  (what  perhaps
is  most  curious  of  all)  to  a  newspaper.  In  some
cases  the  artificial  person  of  common  speech  may
be,  or  may  approximately  coincide  with,  an  arti-
ficial person  in  law  too.  Thus  in  England  a
newspaper  may  possibly  belong  (and  nowadays
often  does)  to  a  company  incorporated  under  the
Companies  Acts ;  and  railway  companies  are  with-
out exception,  I  believe,  corporations.  In  other
cases,  as  that  of  the  Ministry,  there  can  be  no
question  of  collective  legal  personality.  But  we
never  trouble  ourselves,  for  extra-legal  purposes,
to  think  of  this.
Nations  In  political  discourse  we  so  constantly  personify

personified.  ....

nations  that  we  almost  forget  the  artificial  character
of  our  language :  and  yet  the  unrestrained  use  of
metaphor  in  politics  is  quite  capable  of  grave
consequences.  The  essential  truth  involved  in
speaking  of  France  or  the  United  States  as  a
person  is  that  the  governors  of  a  civilised  nation
expect  the  nation  to  have  the  benefit  of  engage-
ments made  with  their  predecessors,  and  in  turn
are  expected  by  the  governments  of  other  nations


v  PERSON'S  111

to  answer  for  the  public  acts  of  their  predecessors
as  well  as  for  their  own.  "Without  the  corporate
idea  of  "perpetual  succession"  and  continuous
responsibility  there  could  be  no  stability  or  con-
fidence in  dealings  between  nations.  Whatever
goes  beyond  this  may  run  into  dangerous  fancies ;
as  when  the  results  of  social  and  economic  con-
ditions in  the  foreign  enterprises,  say  of  Eussians
or  Englishmen,  are  set  down  to  a  national  passion
of  enmity,  or  design  of  deliberate  ambition,  like
those  with  which  we  are  familiar  in  individuals.
To  charge  or  credit  "  France  "  or  "  Austria  "  with
particular  habits  or  dispositions  is,  at  best,  to  make
a  statement  about  the  traditions  of  policy  which
are  known  by  experience  to  prevail  in  the  public
affairs  of  that  country :  at  worst  it  is  to  make
wide  assertions  about  the  collective  character  of
a  multitude  of  people,  including  many  and  diverse
types,  and  far  too  numerous  for  any  one  man  to
be  even  superficially  acquainted  with  at  first  hand.
Sometimes  countries  and  populations  are  personified
in  this  manner  which  contain  internal  elements  of
extreme  diversity,  and  have  not  or  have  never
had  any  true  national  unity ;  as,  on  a  great  scale,
India,  and,  on  a  smaller  one,  Ireland.  In  such
a  case  the  metaphor  is  a  degree  more  remote,  and


112  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

the  danger  of  fallacy  (commonly  by  taking some
part  or  parts  for  the  whole)  is  greater. But  these
matters  lie  beyond  the  province  of  law.
Corpora-  In  the  Common  Law  we  call  artificial  persons

tions.

corporations.  Their  existence  is  necessary  to  avoid
the  tedious  and  cumbrous  processes  which  would
otherwise  be  required  for  the  carrying  on  of  joint
undertakings  in  which  a  large  number  of  citizens
are  or  may  be  interested.  It  is  a  natural  follow-
ing out  of  the  same  reasons  to  limit  by  law,  as
is  done  in  England,  the  number  of  persons  who
may  carry  on  business  jointly  without  incorporation.
Firms.  '  We have  in an ordinary  partnership firm  an

example  of  artificial  personality  lying  just  on  the
borders  of  social  or  commercial  convention  and  law.
The  firm  is  a  person  by  mercantile  usage:  it  is
always  and  everywhere  treated  in  business  accounts,
correspondence,  and  so  forth,  as  a  person  distinct
from  the  individual  partners.  In  English-speaking
countries  it  is  quite  common  for  a  firm  to  go  on
using  a  name  which  has  long  ceased  to  be  borne
by  any  individual  partner;  though  elsewhere  this
is  not  generally  allowed.  As  to  making  the  firm
a  person,  legal  usage  is  not  uniform.  In  Scottish
law,  and,  I  believe,  on  the  Continent  of  Europe
generally  the  firm  is  recognised  as  a  person: in


v  PERSONS  113

the  Common  Law  it  is  not.  In  classical  Eoman
law  we  are  hardly  within  sight  of  such  a  question,
for  the  prevailing  ideai  is  still  the  management
of  common  property,  and  the  idea  of  joint  interest
in  a  joint  enterprise  is  only  beginning  to  emerge.

The  greatest  of  artificial  persons,  politically  The  state.
speaking,  is  the  State.  But  it  depends  on  the
legal  institutions  and  forms  of  every  commonwealth
whether  and  how  far  the  State  or  its  titular  head
is  officially  treated  as  an  artificial  person.  In
England  we  now  say  that  the  Crown  is  a  corpora-
tion :  it  was  certainly  not  so  when  the  king's
peace  died  with  him,  and  "  every  man  that  could
forthwith  robbed  another."  1

We  have  next  to  speak  of  the  legal  capacities  Legal

capacities.
of persons. They tend to equality in modern

systems,  as  we  said above,2  but some inequality

remains  and  must  remain.

First  as  to  natural  persons. There  are  physical  Of  natural

persons  :

conditions  necessarily  affecting  ■  the  powers  of  the  physical
individual  to  manage  and  be  answerable  for  his
own  affairs.  Normally,  we  all  have  to  pass
through  tender  age  and  adolescence,  or,  in  the
Common  Law  term  for  the  whole  period  before
full age,  infancy. When a man or woman is

1  A.  S.  Chron.  anno  1135.  2  P.  100.

I


114  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

of  full  age  must  be  ascertained  by  the  positive
rales  of  the  system  of  law  in  question.  The
prescribed  age  has  varied  in  different  systems
from  eighteen  years  (or,  exceptionally,  less)  to
twenty -five,  which  I  think  is  the  superior  ex-
treme. The  Common  Law  term  of  twenty -one
years  is  a  reasonable  mean.  Full  age  may  be
fixed  at  different  periods  for  different  purposes :
thus  ability  to  marry  without  the  consent  of
one's  parents,  if  living^  may  be  postponed  (as  it
is  in  France)  to  a  later  age  than  general  ability
to  manage  one's  affairs.  Abnormally,  people  may
be  disabled  by  insanity  at  any  age ;  the  ascer-
tainment of  insanity,  its  effects  in  excluding
responsibility,  and  the  administrative  measures
necessary  or  proper  for  preserving  the  property
of  insane  persons  and  checking  abuses,  have  to
be  provided  for  by  every  system  of  law  in  its
own  way.  So  far  as  general  principles  are
involved  they  belong  mainly  to  public  law.
Causes  of  Another  class  of  personal  distinctions  rests  on

variation  .

in  sex  and the  constitution  of  the  family. Such  distinctions

relations, are,  in  part,  ultimately  grounded  on  the  physical

difference  of  sex,  and  on  moral  differences  assumed

by the law to accompany it. In private law

married  women  undergo  some  loss  of  legal  capacity


v  PERSONS  115

in  all  or  almost  all  systems  of  law,1  while  in
some  systems  all  women  are  or  have  been  under
disabilities.  In  public  law,  and  in  every  known
system  so  far  as  public  law  goes,  all  women  are
under  some  disabilities  and  are  exempt  from
some  duties,  that  of  military  service  for  example,
where  it  exists  as  a  general  duty  of  citizens.
"We  find,  on  the  other  hand,  variations  of  personal
capacity  derived  from  family  relations  which  belong
only  to  some  particular  type  or  stage  of  family
institutions.  The  subjection  of  adults  to  paternal
power  among  Eoman  citizens,  the  limited  capacities
of  a  member  of  a  Hindu  "joint  family,"  may  be
taken  as  examples.

Further,  there  are  special  personal  disqualifica-  Special
tions or diminutions of legal capacity  in every  cations,
system of law. Some of these have a penal  otherwise.
character,  or at least savour of preventive and
compulsory discipline : such are the disabilities
of convicts, bankrupts, and (in some systems)
declared spendthrifts. Others are attached to
certain public offices or positions for reasons of

1  The  prohibition  of  bigamy,  which  applies  to  married  men  as
well  as  women  in  modern  law,  has  never  been  reckoned  as  a  point
of  legal  incapacity  ;  by  marriage  the  original  capacity  is  not  de-
stroyed but  fulfilled.  So  no  one  would  say  that  a  sitting  member
of  Parliament  had  lost  his  capacity  of  being  elected.


116


FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE


CHAP.


policy  not  dishonourable  to  the  individual.  Such
are  in  England  the  disqualifications  of  clergymen,
and  of  persons  holding  various  offices,  to  sit  in
Parliament.  In  modern  law  these  disqualifications
(or  exemptions,  which  no  less  occur)  are  almost
or  wholly  confined  to  public  law.1  But  in  the
Middle  Ages  a  man  could  renounce  his  whole
legal  personality,  public  and  private,  become  as
it  was  called  "civilly  dead,"  by  entering  one  of
the  regular  orders  of  religion,  and  this  may
possibly  be  so  still  in  some  of  the  jurisdictions
where  the  Eoman  Catholic  religion  is  exclusively
or  principally  recognised  by  the  State,  and  its
monastic  and  other  societies  of  professed  religious
persons  have  an  official  standing.  "We  are  not
aware  that  the  institution  survives  in  any  of  the
greater  States  of  Europe.

Passing  to  artificial  persons  we  find  that  their
capacities  are  not  subject  to  most  of  the  causes
of  variation  which  affect  those  of  natural  persons.

from  those  .  .

of  natural  Obviously  a  corporation  cannot  be  an  mtant  or
insane.  It  may  be  insolvent ;  it  is  the  common
experience  of  our  own  time  that,  as  an  idle  rhymer

1  This  would  seem  to  he  the  grain  of  truth  in  the  strange  view
taken  by  those  writers  who  have  rejected  the  distinction  between
Public  and  Private  Law,  and  treated  Public  Law  as  a  branch  of  the
Law  of  Persons.


Artificial
persons  :
their  in-
capacities
different


v  PERSONS  117

once  "wrote,  "  ■winding-up  cometh  to  limited  things."
For  reasons  of  practical  convenience,  however,  in-
solvent corporations  are,  in  England  at  any  rate,
dealt  with  by  special  forms  of  procedure  differing
from  those  used  in  cases  of  individual  bankruptcy.
Corporate  capacity,  on  the  other  hand,  is  subject
by  its  nature  to  restraining  conditions  from  which
the  acts  of  natural  persons  are  free.

First,  an  artificial  person  can  act  only  by  means  Limitation

.... by  need  of

of  some  natural  person  or  persons  having  authority  agency.
to  represent  it,  "  actorem  sive  syndicum "  as  the
Eomans  said ;  a  railway  company  must  act  through
its  board  of  directors,  and  the  like.  Hence  a
corporation  can  do  nothing  which  cannot  be  done
by  an  agent.  The  full  importance  of  this  cannot
be  shown  here,  for  the  exposition  would  have  to
assume  some  detailed  knowledge  of  law.  But  it
is  a  matter  of  universal  principle  that  there  can  be
no  real  agency  to  do  an  obviously  unlawful  act.
Hence  follows  a  restriction  on  corporate  responsibility
which  must  be  specially  noted.

Secondly, then, a corporation cannot commit  Corpora-

'  tions,  how

crimes,  for  it  cannot  authorise  them. If  the  mem-  far  liable

for  wrongs.

bers  or  representatives  of  a  corporation  affected
to  authorise  a  criminal  act  in  its  name,  they
would  merely  make  themselves  liable  as  individuals.


118  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

To  put  an  extreme  case,  if  the  East  India  Company
had  rebelled  against  the  Crown,  not  the  Company
but  the  directors  would  have  been  guilty  of  high
treason.  But  a  corporation  may  have  positive
duties  imposed  on  it  by  public  law,  and  may  incur
penalties  (though  not  criminal  punishment  in  the
strict  sense)  by  failure  or  neglect  in  that  respect.
Such  duties  may  be  directly  imposed  on  a  corpora-
tion in  connection  with  the  special  purposes  for
which  it  is  constituted,  or  as  an  equivalent  for
privileges  granted  by  the  State ;  or  the  corporation
may  incur  them  by  carrying  on  a  trade  or  business
to  which  they  are  attached  by  the  general  law.
Further,  a  corporation  may  be  liable  for  civil  wrongs
committed  by  its  agents  in  the  course  of  their
employment,  just  as  a  natural  person  may  be ;  and
on  principle  there  appears  to  be  no  reason  why,
consistently  with  the  general  idea  of  artificial
personality,  it  should  not  be  liable  to  the  same
extent  This  is  certainly  the  doctrine  of  the
Common  Law,  though  in  some  points  it  is  not  yet
wholly  settled  in  England.

Thirdly,  many  corporations  are  created  expressly
for  special  purposes,  and  their  powers  are  limited
to  the  execution  of  those  purposes,  and  what  is
reasonably  incident  thereto. This  is  the  case  with


v  PERSONS  119

most  corporations  in  modern  times,  and  there  has
even  been  a  tendency  to  suppose  the  principle
nniversal.  Practically  such  cases  almost  always
fall  under  some  special  legislative  rule :  but  the
interpretation  of  such  rules  has  been  doubtful
enough  to  leave  room  for  controversies  of  principle.

A  corporation  has  distinct  rights  and  duties  not  Corporate

.  .  duties  and

only  as  against  persons  outside  it,  but  as  against  its  rights :

.  mi  i  t  n-i  formation

own  members,  lney  can  be  its  creditors  or  debtors,  of  corpo-
On  the  other  hand  its  debts  and  claims  against
other  persons  are  not  the  same  as  theirs.  "  Si  quis
universitati  debetur,  singulis  non  debetur,  nee
quod  debet  universitas  singuli  debent."  x  This  is  a
necessary  consequence  of  the  corporation  being  a
distinct  person  in  law.  How  far  the  individual
members  can  derive  profit  from  corporate  property
or  business,  or  be  liable  to  contribute  to  the  pay-
ment of  corporate  debts,  has  to  be  determined  by
the  particular  system  of  law  and  the  constitution  of
the  particular  corporation.  The  formation  of  cor-
porations, again,  is  a  matter  of  positive  regulation ;
though  it  may  be  taken  as  a  principle  of  general
jurisprudence  that  the  authority  of  the  State  is
requisite.  Such  authority  may  be  conferred  once
for  all,  as  regards  a  class  of  corporations,  by  general
1  Ulpian,  D.  3,  i,  quod  cuiuscunque  universitatis,  7,  §  1.


120  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE chap,  v

enabling  legislation,  and  this  has  been  done  in
England  by  the  Companies  Acts.  Municipal  cor-
porations and  a  limited  number  of  trade  gilds  appear
to  have  been  the  only  kinds  of  corporations  known
to  the  classical  Eoman  law.1  Nowadays  the  import-
ance and  necessity  of  corporations  for  carrying  on
the  affairs  of  modern  life  meets  us  at  every  turn.

1  D.  cod.  tit.  1.


CHAPTEE  VI

THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS

The  question  what  is  a  Thing  is  much  less simple  Things  as

.  subject-

than  the  question  what  is  a  Person. Eoman  law  matter  of

-n  •  n  rights  and

will  tell  us  that  some  things  are  corporeal  and  duties.
others  incorporeal;  the  Common  Law  will  tell  us
that  some  things  are  in  possession  and  others  in
action.  The  Eoman  division  is  easier  on  a  first
view;  the  English  one  is  no  doubt  subtler,  less
clearly  defined,  and  more  difficult  for  beginners  to
grasp.  It  is  therefore  commonly  assumed  that  the
Eoman  conception  is  rational  and  the  English  is
not.  We  must  have  a  little  patience  before  we  are
ready  to  form  an  opinion.

A  thing  is,  in  law,  some  possible  matter  of  rights
and  duties  conceived  as  a  whole  and  apart  from  all
others,  just  as,  in  the  world  of  common  experience,
whatever  can  be  separately  perceived  is  a  thing.


122  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

The  kind  of  "  things  "  with  which  we  are  most
familiar  are  material  sensible  objects  which  can  be
dealt  with  in  the  way  of  manual  use.  No  difficulty
occurs  in  treating  a  house,  a  book,  or  a  sheep,  as
things.  As  borrower  of  a  book,  I  have  the  right
of  keeping  the  book  for  the  agreed  time,  or  until
re-demanded,  and  the  duty  of  returning  it.  The
book  is  plainly  not  the  same  as  my  rights,  or  any
one's,  regarding  the  book,  or  the  sum  of  all  possible
rights.  It  would  still  be  a  real  book  if  it  belonged
to  nobody.  We  are  not  now  considering  what  the
possible  rights,  of  ownership  or  otherwise,  may  be.
We  take  it  provisionally  as  common  knowledge  that
an  owner  who  has  not  parted  with  any  of  his  rights
has  large  powers  of  use  and  disposal  over  the  thing
owned,  powers  which  are  indefinite  even  though
they  may  be  limited  in  certain  directions  by  rules
of  law.

There  is  no  trouble,  again,  in  extending  this
notion  of  a  "  thing "  to  an  aggregate  of  material
things,  such  as  land  with  a  house  and  other  build-
ings on  it,  a  library  with  all  the  books  in  it,  a  flock
of  sheep.  Any  of  these  aggregates  may  be  treated
as  a  single  thing  if  we  find  it  convenient.  Physical
continuity  is  in  no  way  essential  to  the  identity  and
singleness  of  the  rights  existing  over  material  objects.


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  123

Physical  discontinuity  makes  it,  no  doubt,  easier  to
separate  those  rights  and  form  new  combinations ;
but  easier  only  in  degree.  One  sheep  may  be  bought
and  driven  off  from  the  flock  ;  one  chair  out  of  a
set  may  be  sold  or  given  away.  But  also  when  the
sheep  becomes  mutton  each  leg  of  mutton  may  have
a  separate  owner ;  and  a  chimney  in  a  house  may
be  repaired  and  the  old  materials  taken  by  the
builder  in  part  payment,  or  a  whole  wing  of  the
house  may  be  rebuilt  and  the  materials  sold  in
lots.

So  far  we  have  spoken  of  things  (as  Littleton
said)  whereof  a  man  may  have  a  manual  occupa-
tion, possession,  or  receipt.1

But  many  elements  of  wealth  are  not  tangible,  intangible

elements  of

as  we  know  without  assuming  any  special  know-  wealth.
ledge  of  law.  The  worth  of  five  sovereigns  is  in
the  gold;  the  worth  of  a  five-pound  note,  and  the
reason  why  we  can  get  five  sovereigns  for  it,  is
in  the  credit  of  the  Bank  of  England.  Whatever
debts  are  owed  to  an  individual,  a  firm,  or  a  cor-
poration in  the  course  of  business  are  part  of  the
assets  of  the  business.  Nay  more,  the  goodwill
of  a  business,  which  is  merely  the  right  to  go  on
using  the  old  name,  coupled  with  the  expectation
1  Litt.  §  10.


124  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

that  custom  will  still  follow  the  name,  is  often
of  great  pecuniary  value.

Then  we  have  exclusive  rights  which,  though
not  merely  personal,  are  only  remotely  connected
with  any  tangible  thing,  and  consist  in  the  legal
power  of  excluding  others  from  competition  in
respect  of  their  subject-matter.  One  may  have
an  exclusive  right  to  take  fish  in  a  certain  piece
of  water,  to  ferry  passengers  across  a  river  for
hire  at  a  certain  place,  to  make  and  sell  a  new
machine  or  instrument,  to  multiply  and  sell  copies
of  a  book  or  a  print.  .  Again  we  may  have  rights
over  tangible  things  which  belong  to  others ;  rights
of  way  over  land,  rights  of  using  or  detaining  goods
by  way  of  loan,  hire,  or  pledge,  and  others.  These
rights  can  be  and  are  regarded  in  law  as  having
distinct  and  measurable  values,  and  whatever  has
such  value  is  a  thing,  though  not  a  bodily  and
sensible  thing.  These  benefits  can  be  part  of  a
man's  inheritance  or  goods,  of  his  "  estate  and
effects,"  to  use  the  largest  term  known  to  our  law ;
they  are  capable  of  transmission  and,  for  the  most
part,  of  voluntary  alienation.  We  must  recognise  as
things,  in  fact,  all  objects  of  exchange  and  commerce
which  are  recognised  by  the  usage  of  mankind.

It  is  often  said  that  such  things  have  no  being


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  125

save  in  contemplation  of  law : the  Koman  phrase  Not  merely

PTP&t"  11  l'P  S

is  "in  iure  consistunt."  But  this  (although  it  of  law.
contains  a  truth,  as  we  may  see  hereafter)  is  not
accurate  as  a  general  statement.  There  may  be
"groups  of  advantages,"  to  use  Professor  Holland's
happy  term,  which  have  an  appreciable  value  ,
though  the  law  does  not  recognise  them.  Im-
perfect rights  of  the  nature  of  copyright,  for
example,  might  exist  outside  the  law  by  usage
and  courtesy.  Such  rights  did  in  fact  exist  in
the  United  States  to  a  certain  extent  before  the
Copyright  Act  of  1891,  as  regards  English  books
made  over  to  American  publishers ;  and  they  had
a  certain  value  to  the  American  publisher,  and
consequently  to  the  British  author,  although  they
were  wholly  unprotected  by  law,  and  (as  events
showed)  precarious  in  fact.  The  goodwill  of  a
business,  again,  would  still  have  a  commercial
value  if  it  were  less  efficiently  protected  by  law
than  it  is ;  and  it  would  probably  by  no  means
lose  the  whole  of  its  value  even  if  it  were  not
protected  at  all.  The  law  began  to  protect  it
when  it  became  notoriously  valuable  and  not
before.  Hence  it  seems  that  in  the  case  of
incorporeal  things  the  advantage  or  "group  of
advantages "  enjoyed  or  to  be  enjoyed  in fact  is


126  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

the  true  subject-matter  of  the  right,  and  corre-
sponds to  the  tangible  object  which  we  call  a
corporeal  thing  as  distinct  from  the  rights  exercised
over  it.  Of  course  the  value  of  an  incorporeal
thing  may  be  largely  due  to  its  recognition  and
protection  by  the  law,  and  some  incorporeal  things
may  be  called  creatures  of  the  law.  But  no  one
will  suppose  that  the  value  of  tangible  property
would  not  also  be  diminished  if  the  law  should
cease  to  punish  theft,  or  to  decide  questions  of
title.  The  parallel  therefore  seems  to  hold  good
notwithstanding  the  possible  anomalies  of  extreme
cases.
The  legal  At  this  point  it  may  be  worth  considering,  at

nature  of

corporeal the  risk  of  an  apparent  paradox,  whether  corporeal

things.

things  themselves  are  so  corporeal  as  we  think
at  first.  For  a  material  object  is  really  nothing
to  the  law,  whatever  it  may  be  to  science  or
philosophy,  save  as  an  occasion  of  use  or  enjoy-
ment to  man,  or  as  an  instrument  in  human  acts.
In  fact  there  are  parcels  of  terrestrial  matter
which  are  not  things  in  the  law.  Of  some  such
parcels,  on  grounds  of  necessary  convenience,  we
have  to  say  "  communia  sunt  omnium,"  the  water
of  the  high  seas  for  example ;  of  other  such  we
say,  for reasons of religion or state,  "  nullius in


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  127

bonis  sunt."  This  is  much  easier  to  illustrate
from  the  Eoman  law  than  from  our  own ;  for  the
Common  Law  abhors  a  vacuum  of  property :  *  a
statement  which  the  reader,  unless  he  be  already
learned  in  the  law,  must  provisionally  take  for
granted.  A  thing  which  belongs  to  nobody  is
of  no  legal  importance  until  something  happens  to
bring  a  person  into  relation  with  it,  and  make  it
the  subject-matter  of  enforceable  rights.  An  old
iron  pot  thrown  away  and  dropped  at  the  bottom
of  a  canal,  for  example,  might  well  be  no  more  to
the  law  than  if  it  were  in  another  planet.  If  it  is
something  to  the  law,  it  is  because  the  local  law
may  happen  to  provide,  as  ours  does,  that  abandon-
ment shall  not  wholly  destroy  or  suspend  the
legal  qualities  of  a  chattel  which  has  once  been
a  thing  of  value.  So  that  on  the  whole  perhaps
we  have  good  ground  for  saying  that  the  "  thing "
of  legal  contemplation,  even  when  we  have  to  do
with  a  material  object,  is  not  precisely  the  object
as  we  find  it  in  common  experience,  but  rather
the  entirety  of  its  possible  legal  relations  to
persons.  We  say  entirety,  not  sum,  because  the
capacity  of  being  conceived  as  a  distinct  whole
is a necessary  attribute of an individual thing.

1  Holmes,  The  Common  Law,  p.  237.


128  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

What  the  relations  of  a  person  to  a  thing  can  be
must  depend  in  fact  on  the  nature  of  the  thing
as  continuous  or  discontinuous,  corporeal  or  in-
corporeal, and  in  law  on  the  character  and  the
extent  of  the  powers  of  use  and  disposal  which
particular  systems  of  law  may  recognise.  A  man
who  has  copyright  in  a  book  can  alienate  but
cannot  destroy  the  copyright,  though  he  may
choose,  on  some  scruple  of  conscience  against
monopoly  in  spiritual  benefit,1  not  to  exercise  his
right  or  reap  the  profit  of  it.  The  owner  of  an
unique  manuscript  can  destroy  it  in  fact,  but  the
law  might  conceivably  forbid  him  to  do  so,  and
probably  would  if  the  obvious  interest  of  those
to  whom  things  of  unique  value  belong  were
not  thought  to  be  sufficient  security  against  wanton
destruction.  Land,  though  it  can  be  wasted  or,
in  some  situations,  flooded,  cannot  be  destroyed  in
the  same  sense  as  ordinary  chattels ;  and  some  few
chattels,  such  as  the  harder  kinds  of  gems,  may  be
considered  indestructible,  so  far  as  ordinary  accidents
are  concerned,  as  compared  with  perishable  goods
and  even  with  relatively  lasting  materials  of
common use. Through all the range of natural

1  Count  Lyof  Tolstoi  not  long  ago  disclaimed  all  interest  in
the  copyright  of  his  works  for  some  such  reason.


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  129

and  legal  diversities,  however,  a  thing  remains,
for  the  lawyer's  purposes,  that  which  is  attributed
by  law  to  the  natural  or  conventional  thing  in
regard  to  the  rights  and  duties  of  persons.

Here,  then,  we  seem  to  have  a  necessary  point  Things  as

the  poten-

of  contact  between  law  and  philosophy.  The  tiaiity  of
lawyer  as  well  as  the  metaphysician  is  driven,
when  he  takes  to  thorough-going  analysis,  to  face
idealism.  What  we  commonly  call  things  are
resolved  by  philosophical  analysis  into  possibilities
or  occasions  of  perception.  The  idealist  boldly
says  that  the  esse  of  material  things  is  percipi.
So  we  may  say  that  in  contemplation  of  law  the
esse  of  things  is  haberi  or  in  bonis  esse.  That  only
is  a  thing  which  can,  in  the  widest  sense,  be
owned :  it  must  be  the  subject-matter  of  rights
that  the  law  will  recognise.  An  ownerless  thing
is  for  the  lawyer  pretty  much  what  a  "thing  in
itself"  is  for  the  philosopher.  A  res  nullius  is
as  void  of  legally  intelligible  contents  as  is  a  Ding
an  sich  of  intelligible  contents  of  any  kind.  It
is  merely  negative  and  irrational ;  the  very  notion
of  it  excludes  it  from  the  world  of  rational  import.
"We  can  see  in  it,  at  most,  the  potency  of  a  future
legal  significance.  The  "books  in  my  closet,"  in
Berkeley's  famous  example,  are  merely  the  poten-


130  FIEST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

tiality  of  the  books  I  shall  see  when  I  open  the
closet.  And  so  the  ownerless  abandoned  thing,
in  systems  which  admit  the  extinction  of  property,
is  the  mere  potentiality  of  possession  or  ownership
to  come,  whether  the  thing  itself  be  buried  treasure
or  a  worthless  tin  pot.  There  is  a  legal  vacuum
till  the  act  of  an  occupier  or  finder  restores  the
thing,  so  to  speak,  to  the  world  of  legal  reality.
Hence,  if  we  find  in  a  particular  system  of  law
rules  which  are  astute  even  to  refinement  to
prevent  this  state  of  vacuum,  there  is  no  reason
to  treat  such  an  endeavour  as  absurd.  In  fact
the  old  masters  of  the  Common  Law  did  take
the  line  of  abhorring  vacant  possession  or  property,
and  put  forth  extreme  ingenuity  to  avoid  admitting
it.  "  The  law  must  needs  reduce  the  properties
of  all  goods  to  some  man." l  Without  contending
that  they  were  consciously  led  by  any  philosophic
reason,  one  may  be  allowed  to  think  that,  whether
by  scientific  instinct  or  by  good  fortune,  they
showed  themselves  on  this  point  at  least  as  good
philosophers  as  the  Eoman  lawyers.
Summary.  For  the  present  purpose  it  is  enough  to  know
that  in  any  case  the  legal  notion  of  a  thing  must
extend  far  beyond  those  objects  which  are  "  things  "
1  Doct.  and  Stud.  dial.  ii.  c.  51.


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  131

in  the  popular  sense  as  being  capable  of  physical
apprehension  and  use.  Artificial  aggregates  of
material  objects,  like  a  library  or  a  flock  of  sheep,
are  only  the  first  step  in  the  extension.  We  have
to  include  all  distinct  elements  of  wealth,  though
not  tangible  or  sensible,  which  can  be  the  source
of  profitable  use  or  benefit  to  any  certain  person.
The  copyright,  say  of  Jowett's  Plato,  is  as  much
a  thing  as  a  bound  volume  of  the  book ;  railway
shares  are  as  much  things  as  the  rolling  stock
of  the  line.

How  a  particular  thing  can  be  used  and  en-
joyed is  a  matter  of  fact  conditioned  by  its  nature
and  qualities,  and  this  whether  the  thing  be  cor-
poreal or  incorporeal,  save  that  an  incorporeal  thing
may  consist  merely  in  the  power  or  right  of  having
some  strictly  limited  advantage,  using  a  particular
path  for  example,  while  the  possessor  of  a  corporeal
thing  has  indefinite  though  not  infinite  ways  of
manifesting  his  control  over  it.  Questions  may
arise  as  to  what  forms  of  use,  and  how  much  use,
the  law  will  recognise  as  proof  of  effective  and
exclusive  control.  The  use  and  enjoyment  remain
in  themselves  matters  of  pure  fact.  But  we  can
speak  with  certainty  of  the  rights  of  a  possessor
or  owner  only  when  we  know  what  powers  of  use


132  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

and  disposal  are  recognised  by  the  law ;  not  only
how  things  can  be  used,  but  how  they  may  be,
and  how  they  may  or  must  not  be.
Events  and  Things  are  brought  into  relation  with  Persons  by
Events  and  Acts,  which  are  in  the  world  of  law
that  which  motion  is  in  the  world  of  matter.
A  great  number,  indeed  the  far  greater  number
of  events  and  acts  are  obviously  of  no  legal  import
whatever.  The  falling  of  an  apple  from  a  man's  own
tree  on  his  own  ground  makes  no  difference  in  any
one's  rights ;  and  for  the  owner,  if  he  is  on  the  spot,
to  pick  it  up  or  not  to  pick  it  up,  to  eat  or  not
to  eat  it,  is  an  exercise  of  his  lawful  discretion
which  from  a  legal  point  of  view  is  equally  in-
different. But  it  is  impossible  to  say  of  almost
any  event  or  act  that  it  cannot  have  legal  import-
ance. A  very  small  change  of  circumstances  will
make  all  the  difference  in  this  respect.  Let  that
apple  fall  from  a  branch  projecting  a  few  feet
beyond  the  owner's  boundary,  and  come  to  rest
on  a  neighbour's  land.  Here  is  matter  for  question-
ing at  once.  Whose  is  the  apple  now  ?  Does  it
still  belong  to  the  owner  of  the  tree  ?  If  so,  may
he  go  on  his  neighbour's  land  to  take  it,  or  must
he  ask  for  it  ?  Or  does  it  belong  to  the  neighbour
on  whose  land  it  has  fallen  ?  if  so,  unconditionally


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  133

or  subject  to  any  and  what  conditions  as  to  com-
pensating the  former  owner?  If  a  trespasser
comes  and  takes  the  apple,  whom  has  he  wronged  ?
All  these  questions,  mostly  trifling  in  the  particular
case  suggested,  but  representing  points  which  in
other  eases  may  be  capable  of  involving  great
interests,  have  to  receive  distinct  consideration,
and  may  be  not  only  distinctly  but  differently
answered  in  different  systems  of  jurisprudence.
Walking,  again,  is  a  necessary  and  most  common
act  of  all  persons  who  have  the  use  of  their  legs ;
and  so  long  as  a  man's  legs  take  him  where  he
has  a  right  to  be  it  is  indifferent  to  the  law.  That
it  may,  on  the  other  hand,  involve  trespass,  though
oftentimes  a  merely  nominal  and  innocent  trespass,
is  common  experience  to  most  people  who  have
walked  in  the  country  without  strictly  confining
themselves  to  high  roads  and  beaten  paths.

Every  act  may  be  said  to  be,  in  a  large  sense,  Distinction

of  acts  from

an  event. But  it  is  convenient  to  use  the  word  events.
"  event "  only  for  that  which  happens  or  at  least
may happen1 in the course of nature without

1  As  to  events  which  may  or  may  not  be  produced  by  human
action  it  is  often  immaterial  for  many  purposes  to  consider  whether
in  fact  they  were  so  or  not.  The  rights  which  arise  on  a  man's
death  afford  one  obvious  example.  It  is  hardly  needful  to  add
that  for  our  purpose  only  those  acts  count  as  such  which  can  be


134  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

being  directly  determined  by  human  intervention.
It  is  proper  to  note  that  in  archaic  systems  of
law  the  part  played  by  acts,  as  compared  with
events,  is  far  less  than  it  becomes  in  modern
systems.  For  in  early  times,  or,  to  speak  more
exactly,  in  early  stages  of  civilisation,  the  range
accorded  to  individual  will  and  discretion  is  but
a  narrow  one.  Disposal  of  property  by  will,  for
example,  is  a  relatively  modern  institution,  and
unrestricted  power  so  •  to  dispose  of  it,  for  example
to  the  exclusion  of  a  surviving  wife  or  children,
is  not  found  at  this  day  in  countries  where  the
Eoman  law  has  set  the  rule  in  matters  of  inherit-
ance. Now  the  death  of  a  man  holding  valuable
property  is  an  event  which  must  necessarily  have
some  legal  effect;  for  the  lands  or  goods  which
remain  must  belong  to  some  one,  be  it  the  State
or  one  or  more  individual  persons,  natural  or
corporate.  In  a  system  where  dispositions  by  last
will  are  not  recognised,  the  event  of  death  at  once
calls  into  operation  the  fixed  rules  of  law,  whatever
they  may  be,  which  determine  the  succession  to
the  deceased  person's  estate.  In  a  system  where
a certain  share  cannot  be  alienated  by  will  from .

referred  to  a  human  agent.  Such  facts  as  a  horse  running  away,
a  dog  biting  a  man,  are  not  acts  but  merely  events.


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  135

a  man's  children,  the  will  of  a  man  who  dies
leaving  children,  so  far  as  it  disposes  of  what  he
has  power  to  dispose  of,  is  an  act  which  takes
effect  upon  the  event  of  his  death.  So  far  as  he
has  not  exercised  his  disposing  powers,  and  so  far
as  concerns  the  portion  of  his  estate  which  he
cannot  dispose  of,  the  rights  of  his  successor  or
successors  are  determined  by  the  rules  of  law.
Where  full  powers  of  testamentary  disposition
exist,  and  an  owner  has  exercised  them  as  to  the
whole  of  his  property,  the  event  of  his  death  calls
his  act  of  disposition  into  play,  and  has  not,  as
regards  what  was  comprised  in  that  act,  any  other
operation.1  So  far  as  he  has  not  exercised  his
rights,  the  event  of  his  death  operates  as  in  the
cases  before  put.

Where  changes  are  worked  in  the  legal  rights  "Acts  of

the  law,"

and  interests  of  persons  by  rules  of  law  not  de-  and  "acts

.  in  the  law."

pendent  on  the  will  of  any  party,  this  is  often
and  conveniently  said  to  be  an  "act  of  the  law"
as  contrasted  with  an  "act  of  parties,"  although
the contrast  is  not  logically  quite  exact. Eules

1  We  are  now  speaking  only  of  succession  under  a.  will  as  an
alternative  to  intestate  succession.  The  devolution  of  property
in  which  limited  interests  have  been  created  may  depend  on
previous  acts  of  parties,  or  on  rules  of  law,  or  partly  on  the  one
and  partly  on  the  other.  It  is  sufficient  and  preferable,  for  the
purpose  in  hand,  to  take  the  simplest  example.


136  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

of  law  have  to  determine  the  legal  results  of  acts
and  events  alike.  But  in  many  transactions  the
rules  leave  a  wide  freedom  to  the  parties  of  appoint-
ing at  their  own  pleasure  what  the  result  shall
be;  the  law  makes  itself,  in  fact,  the  instrument
of  their  intentions,  and  in  a  manner  stands  aside.
As  the  Twelve  Tables  said :  "  Cum  nexum  faciet
mancipiumque,  uti  lingua  nuncupassit  ita  ius
esto."  ^

The  phrase  "  act  in  the  law  "  may  conveniently
be  used  for  an  act  of  parties  which  is  fitted  and
designed  to  have  a  distinct  legal  effect,  and,  although
it  occurs  with  a  wider  application,  it  seems  desirable
to  restrict  it  to  this  meaning,  for  which  we  have
not  otherwise  any  compendious  English  expression.

We  might  also  speak  if  we  chose  of  "  events
in  the  law,"  meaning  events  producing  some  legal
effect ;  but  since  jurisprudence  takes  notice  of
events  only  so  far  forth  as  they  can  have  legal
effect,  it  will  almost  always  be  superfluous  to  use
any  such  phrase.

The  arising  of  liability  to  suffer  punishment,
or  to  pay  compensation  or  otherwise  submit  to
civil  redress,  by  reason  of  a  merely  wrongful  act,
is  not  commonly  spoken  of  as  an  act  of  the  law,
though the  liability and the corresponding right


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  137

to  redress  are  of  course  fixed  by  law  as  much  as

the  accrual  of  a  right  of  inheritance  or  the  like.

The  reason  is  that  the  contrast  between  an  act  of

the  law  and  an  act  of  parties  is  not  here  applicable.

A merely  wrongful act cannot  be  an  act  in  the

law.

There is  no  need  or  occasion  for  us  to  enter  Acts  con-
sidered as
here  on  the  psychological  definition  of  an  act. It  voluntary

or  other-
concerns  us  as  lawyers  to  know  not  so  much  what  wise.

philosophers  will  call  an  act  as  of  what  kinds  of
acts,  and  to  what  purpose,  the  law  takes  notice.
Generally  speaking,  the  law  has  regard,  only  to
such  acts  as  are  voluntary  and  manifest.  This  is
a  necessary  consequence  of  the  nature  of  legal
justice.  The  judgment  of  law  must  not  only  be
but  appear  just,  and  can  deal  only  with  that  which
is  capable  of  proof.  The  secret  counsels  and  re-
solves of  a  man's  mind  are  voluntary,  but  not
manifest;  the  movements  of  a  man's  limbs  when
he  gesticulates  in  a  troubled  dream,  or  walks  in
his  sleep,  are  manifest  but  not  voluntary.  Perhaps
these  last  are  not  properly  to  be  called  acts  at  all ;
in  any  case  they  are  not  on  the  footing  of  normal
acts.  How  far,  if  at  all,  they  can  be  a  source  of
liability  to  the  apparent  actor  may  be  a  question  of
no  small  difficulty ;  but  in  fact  cases  of  this  kind


1-38  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

are  of  such  infrequent  occurrence1  in  the  affairs  of
justice  that  it  would  be  quite  out  of  place  to  dwell
upon  them  in  a  general  survey  of  legal  ideas  and
categories.  As  to  acts  of  the  mind  which  are  not
directly  manifested  in  outward  performance,  the  law
will  not  generally  take  account  of  them,  both  be-
cause they  cannot  be  certainly  known,  and  because
no  certain  result  can  be  assigned  to  them.  Bodily
motions,  on  the  other  hand,  may  be  executed  under
direct  mechanical  constraint,  without  or  against  the
person's  will,  as  if  a  man's  hand  should  be  forcibly
guided  to  make  a  signature  or  mark.  Such  motions
are  not  acts  at  all,  and  are  mentioned  here  only
because  former  writers  have  thought  it  needful  or
proper  to  mention  them  by  way  of  abundant  caution.
It  is  enough  for  us  to  attend  to  voluntary  acts  as
they  are  commonly  known  and  understood.

In  considering  voluntary  acts  with  regard  to
the  agent's  responsibility,  it  is  usual  to  distinguish
between  intention  and  motive.  Intention  is  the
wish  or  desire  accompanying  an  act,  and  having
regard  not  only  to  the  act  itself,  but  to  the  con-
sequence or  consequences  to  be  produced.  Thus
intention  includes  will,  but  also  covers  much  more

1  To  the  best  of  my  knowledge  there  is  not  in  the  whole  mass
of  English  reported  decisions  any  authority  governing  such  cases.


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  139

than  is  commonly  understood  by  that  term.  It  is
needless  to  draw  the  line  for  any  purpose  not
strictly  philosophical.  Near  and  obvious  con-
sequences are  for  all  common  purposes  reckoned
part  of  the  act  itself,  as  we  shall  see  more  at  large
presently.  Thus  when  I  press  the  button  of  an
electric  door-bell,  we  say  that  I  ring  the  bell;  in
other  words  the  sounding  of  the  bell  is  included
in  my  act,  though  it  really  depends  on  conditions
quite  beyond  my  control,  such  as  the  electrical
apparatus  being  in  order.  My  intention  extends
to  procuring  the  door  to  be  opened,  being  admitted
if  my  friends  are  at  home,  leaving  a  card  or  message
if  they  are  out,  or  otherwise  as  the  nature  of  my
errand  may  be.

Motive  is,  unhappily,  a  more  ambiguous  word.1  Motive  as

specific

Sometimes  we  mean by  "  motive "  the  desire  for  desire

•  inducing

a  particular  result  which  induces  a  person  to  act  action.  .,
in  a  manner  fitted  to  bring  about  that  result.  We
speak  here  only  of  those  motives  which  are  effectual.
For  possible  grounds  of  action  which  are  considered
and  rejected,  and  therefore  do  not  enter  into  the
determination  of  any  act,  are  plainly  beyond  the
scope  of  legal  judgment. Now,  so  far  as  desire  of

1  Bentham  was  troubled  by  its  multifariousness,  Principles  of
Morals  and  Legislation,  ch.  x.  #  1,  ss.  iv.  -vi.


140  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

this  or  that  particular  result  is  concerned,  it  would
seem  that  nothing  can  be  present  in  a  man's  motives
(that  is,  effectual  motives)  which  is  not  also  present
in  his  intention.  For  his  intention,  however  far  it
extends,  is  determined,  point  for  point,  by  his
desires.  The  desired  and  intended  consequences
of  an  action  must  be  commensurate  with  the  desires
that  prompted  it.  Every  representation  of  a  pre-
ferred object  in  contemplation  has  its  active
equivalent  in  the  formed  intention.  In  delibera-
tion we  work  backwards  from  the  ultimate  object
to  the  intermediate  meaDS,  and  end  with  the
immediate  act  to  be  done :  in  will  or  intention  we
start  from  the  immediate  act  and  look  forward  to
the  desired  consequences.  This  was  clearly  seen
by  Aristotle,  who  points  out  that  the  contents  of
deliberation  (the  weighing  of  motives)  and  choice
(the  formation  of  intention)  are  the  same,  except
that  in  choice  the  matter  of  deliberation  is  finally
determined ;  intention  is  the  sum  of  what  is  chosen
as  desirable  among  the  objects  of  desire : 1  the  two
processes  are  in  reverse  order,  for in  deliberation

1  fHovXevrbii  5£  koX  irpoaLperbv  rb  avrb,  ifMfV  a^xapur/ihov  ijSrj  to
Trpoaiperdv  rb  yap  iic  rrjs  fiovXijs  irpoKpidiv  irpoaiperbv  iariv.  Eth.
Nic.  m.  iii.  17.  Aristotle  looks  to  the  active  process  of  the
mind  (f3oi\r)cns,  Trpoalpeas)  where  we  look  to  the  materials  or  result
of  the  process  (motive  or  desire,  intention).  It  is  not  ohvious  that
Aristotle's  way  is  the  worse.


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  141

we  proceed  from  the  ultimately  desired  end  back
to  the  means,  until  we  come  to  the  step  we  shall
have  to  take  to  start  the  train  of  consequences,
while  in  intention  the  actual  order  of  the  expected
events  is  represented,  proceeding  from  the  step
first  taken  through  the  consequences  to  the  farthest
result  expected  and  desired.1  A  tradesman,  for
example,  wishes  to  improve  his  business.  He  forms
the  design  of  taking  a  shop  in  a  better  quarter ;
and,  as  this  involves  doing  all  things  necessary  for
that  purpose,  he  comes  down  from  the  general  idea
to  planning  the  details.  In  the  execution  he  must
work  the  other  way,  going  through  the  series  of
acts  to  realise  the  main  purpose.  First,  he  sees
or  writes  to  an  agent,  then  goes  to  view  a  vacant
shop;  then,  if  it  suits  him,  negotiates  for  a  lease,
executes  the  lease,  enters  into  possession,  and  trades
at  the  new  address.  Finally,  if  his  forecast  is
justified,  he  has  the  improved  custom  which  he
began  by  desiring.  On  the  whole  then  a  man
cannot  intend  what  he  has  not  chosen,  although  he
may  be  driven  to  choose,  as  the  least  of  inevitable
evils,  a  course  which  he  dislikes  in  itself.  The
means  to  some  desired  end  often  have  undesirable

1  Eth.  Nic.  ill.  iii.  11,  12 ;  I  adopt  Mr.  Stewart's  rendering  of
rb  irpurov  aXriov  (Notes  on  the  Nie.  Eth.,  Oxford,  1892).  Cp.  Sully,
Outlines  of  Psychology,  2nd  ed.  589.


U2  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

features  which  are  tolerated  for  the  sake  of  the
end.  No  voyage  can  be  wholly  free  from  perils
of  the  sea ;  no  traveller  can  explore  a  new  country
without  known  and  unknown  dangers ;  no  great
work  of  engineering  can  be  executed  without  some
risk  to  life  and  health.1  Every  one  would  make
his  work  perfectly  safe  if  he  could,  hut  the  risk
that  remains  after  taking  all  reasonable  and  practic-
able precautions  has  to  be  accepted  though  not
welcomed.  There  is  a  difference,  again,  between
drawbacks  which  are  a  necessary  part  of  a  proposed
course,  and  those  which  are  only  more  or  less
probable  incidents ;  in  the  former  case  an  action
repugnant  in  some  ways  is  nevertheless  decided
upon,  as  where  a  well-grown  tree  is  cut  down  for
the  sake  of  light  or  space ;  in  the  latter  there  is
only  the  taking  of  adverse  chances,  as  where  a
mountaineering  party,  rather  than  abandon  an  ex-
pedition, crosses  a  couloir  liable  to  be  swept  by
falling  stones.
Motive  as  So  far  we  have  taken motive  in  the  sense  of

constant

moral  dis- external  motive,  as  it  may  be  called,  the  particular
inducement  to  a  course  of  action. But  "  motive  "


1  Qui  veut  la  Jin  veut  les  moyens  is  a  general  truth  in  this
qualified  sense  :  one  might  add  as  a  gloss,  inAme  quand  il  voudrait
autre  chose.


position.


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  143

can  also  mean  internal  motive,1  the  general  moral
quality  or  disposition  of  the  agent  which  is  a
constant  element  as  compared  with  particular
inducements,  and  gives  weight  in  his  deliberation
to  this  or  that  inducement.  The  effect  of  general
moral  quality  or  disposition  in  the  process  of
deliberation  and  choice  is  for  many  purposes  more
important  than  the  average  or  objective  value  (so
far  as  there  is  any)  of  things  reputed  desirable.
And  this  seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  "motive"
preferred  by  the  best  modern  authors  when  exact
distinction  is  required.  In  ordinary  language,  when
we  speak  of  the  motives  for  an  action,  we  are  for
the  most  part  consciously  or  unconsciously  taking
external  and  internal  motives  together.  Internal
motive,  or  the  general  disposition  from  which  an
act  proceeds,  is  obviously  not  capable  of  proof  by
the  facts  of  a  particular  case  alone.

If  we are asked,  therefore,  how  far the law  External

, . .  „  .  .  'motive  is

regards  motive  as  distinct  from  intention,  we  must  often  con-
answer with the counter-question : External or  law.
internal  motive  ? There  is  no  doubt  that  the  law
does  take  account  of  external  motive  as  embodied
in  intention. Motive  in  this  sense,  the  desire  or

1  All  motive  is  internal  in  one  sense,  for  it  can  operate  only  in
consciousness. But  it  is  enough  that  the  distinction  be  intelligible.


144  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

purpose  operative  in  the  agent's  choice,  is  often
capable  of  proof,  and  may  be  material  to  show  the
intention  with  which  an  act  was  done :  and  in  cases
where  the  question  is  by  whom  an  act  was  done,
the  presence  or  absence  of  motive — that  is,  the  fact
or  probable  appearance  that  a  given  person  desired
an  end  which  the  act  was  fitted  to  attain,  or  the
absence  of  any  such  appearance — is  constantly
discussed,  and  may,  in  the  absence  of  direct  evidence,
have  great  weight.  In  a  case  of  unlawful  wound-
ing the  prisoner's  intent  to  do  grievous  harm  may
appear  not  only  from  the  nature  of  the  weapon,  the
circumstances  of  the  attack,  and  the  like,  but  from
previous  declarations  of  ill-will  towards  the  person
attacked.  Similar  considerations  apply  in  cases
where  we  have  to  consider  whether  there  has  been
an  intentional  act  of  a  given  person  at  all.  The
first  Lord  St.  Leonards  was  known  to  have  made  a
will ;  the  will  was  not  forthcoming  after  his  death  ;
proof  of  its  contents  was  however  forthcoming,  and
was  admitted.  It  had  to  be  decided  whether  Lord
St.  Leonards  had  destroyed  the  will  with  the  inten-
tion of  revoking  it,  or,  on  the  contrary,  it  had  been
secretly  stolen ;  and  it  was  shown  that  his  conduct
and  expressed  feelings,  down  to  the  last  days  of  his
life,  had  been  those  of  a  man  who  believed  the  will


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  145

to  be  in  existence  and  wished  it  to  take  effect. On

this  evidence  the  will  was  established.1 A  more

familiar example of the same  .principle is the

admission  of  evidence  of  good  character  in  criminal

cases.

Internal motive,  on  the  other hand,  is  not  a  internal

normal  matter  of  judicial  proof  or  condition  of  legal  aminabie

consequences  in  particular  cases,  though  it  may  be  exceptional

taken  into  account  by  legislation,  or by  what is

called  the  policy  of  the  law  on  the  one  hand  and

judicial discretion  on  the  other. Offences  which

commonly  proceed from  a  depraved  or  dangerous

moral  habit  may  be  liable  on  that  account  to  more

severe  punishment ;  and  lighter  sentences  will  be

passed (so far as consistent with the safety of

society)  on  those  who  break  the  law  not  from  greed,

lust,  or  malice,  but  by  some  perversion  of  natural

affection  or  benevolence. A  man  who  steals  food

for  his  hungry  children  is  a  thief  as  well  as  one  who

steals  money  to  buy  liquor  and  get  drunk,  but  they

will  hardly  be  punished  alike  under  a  system  which

leaves  any  discretion  .to  the  judge. The  positive

definitions  and  judgments  of  law,  as  distinct  from

judicial discretion,  do not as  a  rule attempt to

1  Sugden  v.  Lord  St.  Leonards  (1876),  1  P.D.  154.  Some  of
the  very  important  matters  involved  are  passed  over  as  not
relevant  for  the  present  illustration.

L


146  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

consider  internal  dispositions.  Acts  can  be  proved
and  their  consequences  traced;  the  springs  of
conduct  are  for  the  most  part  hidden.  In  some
exceptional  cases,  however,  the  disposition  from
"which  an  act  proceeds  is  taken  into  account  as
distinct  from  the  intention.  The  word  "malice,"
when  it  means  anything  more  than  the  intention
of  doing  an  unlawful  act,  seems  to  be  the  specific
mark  of  such  cases  in  the  language  of  the  Common
Law.1
Com-  It has  already  appeared  in  the  course  of  the

intention,  foregoing  explanation  that  intention  is  almost
always  manifold  and  complex.  Most  acts  are  done
with  a  view  to  a  series  of  results,  of  which  some  or
one  are  generally  subordinate  to  some  other  result
or  group  of  results  for  the  sake  of  which  the  action
is  undertaken,  and  which  is  commonly  called  its
end  or  purpose.  A  man  writes  with  the  proximate
intent  of  setting  down  certain  words  and  sentences ;
if  he  is  writing  a  book,  he  has  the  further  intent
that  they  may  be  printed  and  published,  and  his
ultimate  and  principal  ends  may  be  to  instruct  or
amuse  those  who  read  the  book,  to  procure  gain  or

1  There  is  no  doubt,  I  think,  that  malicious  prosecution  and
some  other  analogous  wrongs  do  form  an  exceptional  class  of  this
kind.  In  recent  times  the  tendency  has  been  rather  to  extend
than  to  narrow  it.


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  147

reputation  to  himself,  to  advance  the  interests  of
his  party  or  to  promote  some  undertaking  which  he
has  at  heart,  or  all  or  some  of  these  things  may  be
desired  by  him  in  equal  or  various  degrees.  A
householder  is  aroused  in  the  night  by  the  sound  of
footsteps  which  he  believes  to  be  a  robber's,  and
fires  a  shot  out  of  the  window.  His  immediate
intent  is  to  discharge  the  gun  or  pistol.  His
further  intent  is  to  scare  away  the  thief,  and  to
summon  to  his  aid  any  constable  or  other  true  man
who  may  be  within  hearing ;  these  are  two  con-
sistent and  simultaneous  but  distinct  purposes.

For  simplicity's  sake  we  commonly  reckon  the  Proximate

conse-

immediate  and  usual  consequences  of  an  act,  when  quences

reckoned

to  all  appearance  they  are  intended  and  follow  as  as  part  of
intended,  as  part  of  the  act  itself,  and  we  speak
of  intention  only  with  reference  to  the  farther
consequences.  In  the  act  of  shooting,  for  example,
the  man's  own  act  stops,  if  we  are  to  speak  with
strict  precision,  at  pulling  the  trigger,  but  the
discharge  of  the  gun  in  the  direction  given  to
the  barrel  by  the  man's  aim  is  counted  as  part
of  the  act.  This  is  well  illustrated  in  an  early
passage  of  that  curious  and  discursive  book,
Abraham  Tucker's  Light  of  Nature.

In speaking of action,  besides  the  several  co-existent


148  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

motions  and  several  successive  volitions  before-mentioned,
we  ordinarily  comprehend  several  operations  of  other  agents
acting. in  a  series  towards  compleating  the  purpose  we  had
in  view,  provided  we  conceive  them  necessarily  consequent
upon  our  volition.  Thus  when  Eoger  shot  the  hawk  hover-
ing over  his  master's  dove-house,  he  only  pulled  the  trigger,
the  action  of  the  spring  drove  down  the  flint,  the  action  of
the  flint  struck  fire  into  the  pan,  the  action  of  the  fire  set
the  powder  in  a  blaze,  that  of  the  powder  forced  out  the
shot,  that  of  the  shot  wounded  the  bird,  and  that  of  gravity
brought  her  to  the  ground.  But  all  this  we  ascribe  to  Eoger,
for  we  say  he  brought  down  the  felon ;  and  if  we  think  the
shot  a  nice  one,  applaud  him  for  having  done  a  clever  feat.
So  likewise  we  claim  the  actions  of  other  persons  for  our
own,  whenever  we  expect  they  will  certainly  follow  as  we
shall  direct.  When  Squire  Peremptory  distrained  his
tenant  for  rent,  perhaps  he  did  no  more  than  write  his
orders  in  a  letter,  this  his  servant  carried  to  the  post,
the  postman  conveyed  it  into  the  country,  where  it  was
delivered  to  the  steward,  who  sent  his  clerk  to  make  the
distress.  Yet  we  ascribe  the  whole  to  the  Squire's  own
doing,  for  we  say  he  distrained  his  tenant,  and  call  it  a
prudent  or  a  cruel  act,  according  as  we  think  of  the
circumstances  of  the  case.

Hence  the  law  maxim,  he  that  does  a  thing  by  another,
does  it  himself;  which  though  valid  in  Westminster  Hall
will  not  hold  good  in  the  schools  of  metaphysics,  for  there
we  shall  find  nothing  an  act  of  the  mind  that  is  not  the
immediate  product  of  her  volition.  But  for  the  uses  of
prudence  and  morality  we  must  recur  back  again  to  the
common  language,  because  we  cannot  judge  of  the  merits  of
men's  doings  without  taking  the  consequences  into  our  idea
of  the  action.  Pulling  a  trigger  or  drawing  characters  upon
paper,  are  neither  good  nor  bad,  right  nor  wrong,  considered
in  themselves  ;  but  as  the  trigger  so  pulled  shall  occasion


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  149

the  slaughter  of  a  man,  or  of  some  vermin,  or  only  a  bounce
in  the  air  ;  as  the  characters  so  drawn  shall  tend  to  the
necessary  security  of  our  property,  or  to  bring  a  hardship
upon  our  neighbour,  or  shall  carry  no  meaning  at  all,  we
pronounce  the  action  prudent  or  idle,  moral  or  wicked.1

Hence,  as  Tucker  discerned  more  plainly  than
some  later  writers,  it  is  useless  for  lawyers  to
consider  voluntary  acts  as  if  they  stopped  at
the  surface  of  the  human  body,  or  to  distinguish
between  will  and  intention  by  reference  to  nervous
and  muscular  motions.  We  take  the  notion  of
Will  as  we  find  it  in  common -sense  morality,
resisting  temptations  to  digress  on  the  right
hand  into  speculative  ethics  or  on  the  left  hand
into  psycho-physiology.  So  taking  it,  we  can
use  the  extension  of  will  to  natural  and  in-
tended external  consequences  as  a  mere  harmless
convenience  of  language  and  of  compendious
thinking.

When we come to remoter consequences of  Remote

•  n i  i  i  conse-

acts they rapidly become complex, so that at  quences  as
first sight it is by no means clear which of  with
them  were  intended or foreseen and  which not,
and then we may  have to fall back on other
evidence of  what the person acting did at the
outset  intend and  desire. A  man  comes  out  of

1  The  Light  of  Nature  Pursued,  ch.  ii.  ad  fin.


150  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

his  house  carrying  a  stick;  after  walking  a  few
steps  he  turns  back,  opens  the  door,  goes  in,
and  comes  out  again  with  an  umbrella.  We
may  guess  that  he  returned  to  fetch  an  umbrella
because  he  thought  the  sky  looked  rainy.  But
this  is  only  one  guess  and  may  not  be  the  right
one.  He  may  not  have  had  any  thought  of  being
rained  upon  or  any  intention  of  protecting  himself
from  rain.  Perhaps  he  thought  he  would  take  the
umbrella  to  be  mended.  Perhaps  he  went  back
for  something  quite  different,  and  then  took  up
the  umbrella  rather  than  the  stick  by  distraction
or  mere  accident.  The  connection  of  act  and
intent  is  already  remote  and  precarious,  even  in
so  simple  a  case,  unless  we  have  some  independent
guidance  for  our  judgment.
Archaic  Even  manifest  intention  is  hardly  treated  as  a

law  dis-
regards possible  or  proper  subject-matter  of  judicial  proof
intention.

in  archaic  systems  of  law. Where  the  analysis  of

general  conceptions,  if  any  there  be,  is  of  a  crude

and rudimentary  kind,  and  the  methods  of  proof

are  cumbrous  and  of  inflexible  formality,  there  are

no means of apportioning liability  for acts  with

regard to  the actor's intent. Early law fastens

on  some  particular  external  quality  of  an  act,  and

makes  that  the  decisive  test. Thus  in  the  modern


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  151

Common  Law  the  difference  between  murder,  the
capital  or  more  culpable  degree  of  homicide,  and
manslaughter,  the  less  culpable,  involves  not  only
the  notion  of  intention  but  considerable  refinements
on  it.  But  originally  "  murder  "  meant  nothing  but
secret  killing,  especially  by  poison  or  witchcraft.

It  is  common  knowledge  that  consequences  of  Unin-

.  .  „  ' tendedcon-

an  act  which  are  manifestly  intended  often  do  not  sequences
follow,  and  unintended  consequences  do ;  as  where  without
one  throws  a  cricket  ball  at  the  wicket,  or  a  stone  quences.
at  some  object  chosen  at  random,  and  misses ;
where  a  soldier  roused  in  camp  by  a  night  alarm
seizes  his  pistol  and,  firing  in  haste,  shoots  his  own
toes  instead  of  the  supposed  enemy ;  where  a  man
trying  to  open  a  locked  door  with  the  proper  key
finds  that  the  pipe  of  the  key  is  choked  or  the  lock
is  out  of  order,  and  the  like.  We  must  by  no
means  suppose  that  ineffectual  intentions  are  of  no
importance  in  law,  for  such  intentions  may  well  be
the  ground  of  liability  for  more  than  one  reason.
Attempts  to  commit  offences  are  commonly  punish-
able, and  the  menace  of  bodily  violence  in  act  is  a
complete  civil  injury  by  our  law,  though  it  may
stop  short  of  the  actual  application  of  force ;  or,
as  we  say  in  technical  language,  assault  without
battery  is  actionable. The  highest  crime  known  to


152  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

the  law,  that  of  high  treason,  is  singularly  enough
denned  in  its  first  branch,  namely,  that  of  compass-
ing or  imagining  the  death  of  the  king,  his  consort,
or  their  son  and  heir-apparent,  as  consisting  in
intention;  so  that  even  complete  execution  of  the
design  is  only  evidence  of  the  intention  which
constitutes  the  offence.  But  this  appears  to  be  a
historical  curiosity  of  the  law  not  fitted  to  illustrate
any  general  principle.

We  may  now  take  a  summary  view  of  the  ways
in  which  acts  can  produce  responsibility,  in  other
words  create  duties  and  corresponding  rights.  A
great  number  of  acts  are  in  themselves  merely
indifferent  to  the  law,  that  is  to  say,  do  not  work
any  change  in  existing  duties  or  rights.  We  say
"  in  themselves "  because  not  every  act  which  can
be  done  with  immediate  impunity  is  rightful  or
approved,  and  the  distinction  between  acts  allowed
as  rightful  and  acts  and  conduct  barely  tolerated
can  be  and  is  applied  in  the  administration  of
justice  in  various  indirect  ways.
Acts  Acts  which  do  create  or  modify  rights  do so

involving  .

intention  either  with  or  without  the  intention  of  the  parties.
If  the  legal  consequences  are  designed  and  intended
by  the  parties,  the  act  is  an  act  in  the  law  in  the
sense  before  explained. In  abnormal cases  there


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  153

may  be  the  appearance  of  an  act  in  the  law  with-
out the  reality,  as  where  a  party,  by  reason  of
fraud  or  otherwise,  wholly  misconceives  the  nature
and  proper  effect  of  the  act  he  purports  to  do.
Particular  transactions,  again,  may  be  forbidden  or
restrained  by  positive  rules  of  law,  so  that  acts
disregarding  those  rules  (a  ceremony  of  marriage
within  the  prohibited  degrees,  for  example)  have  no
legal  effect.  Many  acts  in  the  law  require  the
concurrent  intention  of  two  or  more  parties,  which
is  called  consent.  Consent  must  be  both  real  and
lawful  for  the  act  to  be  valid.

Again,  consent  ought  to  be full and  free ; it  imperfect

consent.

is  not  enough  that  there  is  any  sort  of  consent.
Quite  real  consent  may  be  brought  about  by
compulsion  or  fraud,  and  the  act,  though  not  a
nullity,  may  be  liable  to  be  deprived  of  its  effect  if
disputed  in  the  interest  of  the  party  who  has  been
coerced  or  deceived.  Similar  rules  apply,  to  some
extent,  to  those  acts  where  only  the  intention  of
one  person  is  in  question,  of  which  dispositions  by
will  are  the  most  important.  We  do  not  enlarge
on  these  matters,  for  we  are  now  considering  only
what  are  the  possible  effects  of  acts,  not  examining
the  conditions  that  determine  what  effect  particular
kinds  of  acts  are  to  have. But  there  is  one  dis-


154  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

tinction  to  be  mentioned  which  is  of  great  import-
ance in  almost  every  branch  of  private  law.

Void  and  An  act  that  is  incapable  of  taking  effect  accord-

voidable  .  . , , .-. ,

acts.  mg to its apparent purport is said to be  void.1

One  which  may  take effect,  but  is liable  to be

deprived  of  effect  at  the  option  of  some  or  one  of

the  parties,  is  said  to  be  voidable. A  voidable  act

can be objected to only  by  the party  specially

entitled  to  dispute  it,  or  some  one  standing  in  his

place,  and,  so  far  and  so  long  as  no  such  objection

has  been  made,  it  must  be  treated as valid and

effectual. Moreover the power of objecting is

limited in certain ways out of regard for the

interests  which  other  persons  may  have  acquired  in

good  faith  on  the  strength  of  an  apparently  valid

act. In  this  manner  acts  of  disposal  or  consent

which were not binding in the  first  instance  as

between  the  parties  may  be  completely  binding  as

between  a  party  whose  consent  has  been  induced

by  fraud,  or  the  like,  and  an  innocent  third  person.

We  must  be  careful  not  to  say  that  a  void  act

can  have  no  legal  effect  at  all. It  cannot  produce

its  intended or  apparent  effect,  but  it  may  have

serious effects which were not intended. A

1  It  does  not  follow  that  an  act  void  in  its  primary  intention
may  not  have  some  effect  in  some  other  capacity.


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  155

ceremony  of  marriage  between  two  persons  of
whom  one  is  already  married  to  a  living  wife  or
husband  is  a  nullity  so  far  as  concerns  the
pretended  marriage,  but  it  will  generally  constitute
the  offence  of  bigamy.

The  law  generally  aims  at  giving  effect,  so  far  as  Formal

conditions

possible,  to  the  lawful  acts  and  intentions  of  parties,  of  validity.
But  it  is  needful  for  security's  and  certainty's  sake
that  intentions  of  altering  existing  rights  and
making  dispositions  for  the  future  be  sufficiently
manifested,  and,  with  this  object  in  view,  the  laws
of  all  countries  require  particular  forms  to  be
observed  in  particular  kinds  of  acts.  These  re-
quirements are  not  so  much  restraints  upon  in-
dividual freedom  as  safeguards  for  its  full  and
deliberate  exercise.  To  some  extent,  however,  offi-
cial records  of  acts  may  be  ordained,  and  regis-
tration made  directly  or  indirectly  compulsory,  in
the  paramount  interest  of  the  State.  Among  the
possible  objects  of  such  regulation  are  the  securing
of  duties  payable  to  the  public  revenue,  the  super-
vision of  the  property  and  affairs  of  corporations,
and  the  certainty  and  publicity  of  titles  to  property.

Acts  and  events  may  produce  liability  without  Liabilities

not  in-

the  intention  of  any  party  in  various  ways. Among  tended.
such  acts  are,  of  course,  crimes  and  active  wrongs ;


156  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

but  involuntary  liability  has  a  much  wider  scope,
for  it  likewise  occurs  in  many  cases  where  there  is
only  a  technical  default  or  no  default  at  all.  A
man  to  whom  a  payment  is  made  by  mistake  incurs
the  duty  of  repaying  the  money,  but  he  has  done  no
wrong  and  has  not  broken  any  duty  unless  and
until,  on  being  informed  of  the  facts,  he  refuses  to
repay.  Persons  in  certain  situations,  again,  have  to
answer  for  accidental  damage  caused  by  things
under  their  control  even  if  the  accident  was  inevit-
able. Here  there  may  be  said  to  be  a  breach  of
duty,  but  only  because  the  law,  for  special  reasons,1
has  in  these  cases  imposed  an  absolute  and  unquali-
fied duty  of  preventing  one's  property  from  doing
harm.  Thus  a  man,  if  he  keeps  a  wild  animal,  does
so  at  his  peril,  and  persons  dealing  with  other
things  which  are  accounted  especially  dangerous  are
under  the  like  rule.  In  the  case  of  breach  of
contract  the  duty  broken  or  not  performed  has  been
imposed  on  the  party  by  his  own  consent  and  will,
and  therefore  the  question  is  generally  not  whether
he  was  to  blame,  but  only  what  he  undertook and


1  In  many  cases  the  historical  origin  of  exceptional  rules  of  law
has  very  little  to  do  with  the  reasons  that  can  be  assigned  for
upholding  them  in  modern  times.  But  where  an  archaic  rule  has
continued  in  force  to  our  own  time  without  any  serious  opposition,
we  must  presume  that  at  least  plausible  modern  reasons  exist.


vi  THINGS,  EVENTS,  AND  ACTS  157

whether  he  failed  ;  and  if  he  did  fail,  from  what-
ever cause,  to  fulfil  his  undertaking,  he  is  liable.
Here,  however,  the  liability,  although  not  exactly
intended,  was  contemplated,  and,  in  the  event  of
failure  to  perform  the  promise,  accepted  beforehand.

We  may  take  these  last  mentioned  classes  of  cases  Degrees  of

involun-

together,  as  differing  much  in  other  respects,  but  tary
having  this  much  in  common,  that  the  liability  does
not  depend  on  any  ethical  judgment  of  the  party's
conduct.  So  taking  them,  we  may  reckon  them
as  comprising  the  most  positive  and  artificial
grounds  of  liability.  The  next  degree  is  where  the
party  has  come  under  some  duty  of  using  diligence,
and  has  brought  about  damage  to  a  fellow-citizen  by
falling  short  of  the  measure  of  diligence,  ''  due  care
and  caution  "  as  it  is  often  called,  which  the  circum-
stances are  deemed  to  require  of  a  reasonable  man.
This  ground  of  liability  is  what  the  Common  Law
calls  Negligence  and  the  Eoman  law  Culpa.  We
have  to  develop  and  apply  this  idea  partly  in
criminal  law,  and  to  some  extent,  though  not  in  the
first  line,  in  the  law  of  contract  (since  many  kinds
of  contracts  involve  an  undertaking  to  use  due  care
and  caution),  but  chiefly  in  the  law  of  civil  wrongs.
Then  we  have  the  cruder  and  simpler  forms  of
wrong-doing  where  there  is  not  merely  failure  in


158  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE chap,  vi

a  positive  duty,  or  culpable  shortcoming,  but  a
distinctly  wrongful  intention.  Here  the  liability
may  be  said  to  rest  on  obvious  principles  of-  natural
as  well  as  positive  law.  The  common  sense  of
justice  would  be  shocked  if  the  law  did  not  give
effect  to  it.  Whether  this  shall  be  done  in  the
region  of  civil  or  criminal  law,  or  peradventure
in  both,  can  be  determined  only  with  regard  to
the  civilisation  and  institutions  of  each  particular
commonwealth.
Liability  It  has  been  found  a  matter  of  no  small  difficulty,

for  oon-  >  ...  ... ,  t •

sequences,  both  in  principle  and  in  the  application  of  the
principles  to  particular  cases  as  they  occur,  to  de-
termine how  far  a  man  shall  be  held  answerable  for
the  less  obvious  and  direct  consequences  of  his  acts.
Questions  of  this  kind  are  referred  by  English-
speaking  lawyers  to  the  head  of  "  remoteness  of
damage."  It  is  held  that  the  actor,  where  he  is
liable  at  all,  must  answer  consequences,  whether
intended  or  not,  so  far  as  they  are  "  natural  and
probable,"  that  is,  according  to  the  opinion  now
generally  accepted  and  applied,  so  far  as  a  reason-
able man  in  his  place  and  with  his  means  of  know-
ledge would  have  foreseen  them.  The  subject  can
be  profitably  studied  or  expounded  only  by  going  into
much  more  detail  than  would  be  convenient  here.


CHAPTEE VII

RELATION  OF  PERSONS  TO  THINGS  : POSSESSION
AND  OWNERSHIP

"We  have  now  surveyed  in  the  rough  the  materials  on  General

notion  of

which  law  has  to  work,  that  is  to  say,  persons  and  property.
things,  and  the  medium  by  which  they  are  brought
into  intelligible  relations,  that  is  to  say,  events  and
acts.  The  relations  of  persons  to  things  in  law  have
to  be  determined  in  accordance  with  the  facts  of
life ;  and  in  daily  life  the  importance  of  things  is
that  they  can  be  used  and  enjoyed.  What  we  call
the  law  of  Property  is,  in  the  first  place,  the
systematic  expression  of  the  degrees  and  forms  of
control,  use,  and  enjoyment,  that  are  recognised  and
protected  by  law.  Possibly  it  may  turn  out  to
cover  more,  if  we  give  the  widest  acceptable  sense
to  the  word  Property;  but  it  is  this  at  the  very
least.


160  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

Control  As  a  matter  of  fact,  one  may  have  the  benefits

ment. J  of  use  and  enjoyment  in  many  degrees.  So  far
as  we  take  only  the  present  into  account,  exclusive
and  effective  control  of  a  thing  is  the  highest  degree
possible,  for  this  includes  power  to  deal  with  the
thing,  within  the  bounds  of  what  its  nature  allows,
at  one's  will  and  pleasure.  In  the  notion  of
effectiveness  we  must  include  such  continuance  as
will  give  time  (though  very  little  time  may  be
enough)  for  the  choice  and  execution  of  what
shall  be  done.  And  we  must  further  include
some  practical  freedom  in  these  respects.  The
man  who  fields  a  ball  at  cricket  and  instantly
throws  it  up  to  the  wicket  has,  for  a  second  or
two,  control  of  the  ball  which  is  physically  both
exclusive  and  effective;  but  so  soon  as  we  look
beyond  the  bare  physical  facts,  we  see  that  he
has  no  use  of  it  for  himself  and  little  or  no
discretion  as  to  what  he  shall  do  with  it,  and
does  not  think  of  having  any.  Nobody  would
think  of  saying  that  the  ball  belongs  to  him.
He  holds  or  detains  the  ball  for  a  few  moments,
but  not  as  his  own  or  for  his  own  benefit;  to
use  the  proper  "  word  of  art,"  as  English  lawyers
say,  he  does  not  possess  it.  Different  things  are
capable of very different kinds and degrees of


vii  RELATION  OF  PERSONS  TO  THINGS  161

physical  control,  and  the  question  whether  effective
and  exclusive  control  is  shown  in  a  particular  case
must  he  considered  with  regard  to  the  qualities  of
the  thing  and  the  manner  in  which  such  things  are
hahitually  used  and  enjoyed.  It  may  he  a  question
of  some  difficulty.  When  it  is  so,  the  fault  is
not  with  the  law  hut  with  the  nature  of  things.

There  are  also  many  modes  of  enjoyment  which  Enjoyment

without

are  not  exclusive,  or  not  continuous,  or  partial  in  control.
extent,  or  which  fall  short  of  general  control  in
more  than  one  of  these  ways.  One  may  turn
one's  beasts  out  on  a  common;  here  the  en-
joyment is  or  may  he  continuous,  but  it  is
not  exclusive.  One  may  have  the  sole  use  of
shooting  or  fishing  over  some  other  person's  land
or  water;  here  the  enjoyment  is  exclusive  but
not  continuous.  One  may  be  accustomed  to  take
water  from  a.  certain  well  in  common  with  other
persons ;  this  is  a  benefit  neither  exclusive  (save
as  to  the  use  of  the  tackle  during  the  actual
operation  of  drawing  water)  nor  continuous.  One
may  be  accustomed  to  pass  and  repass  over  a
neighbour's  land;  this  is  a  partial  enjoyment  of
the  uses  of  his  land.  It  is  not  a  continuous
enjoyment  by  its  own  nature,  and  it  is  not
exclusive if other persons or the neighbouring

M


162  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

landowner  himself  also  make  use  of  the  path.
We  have  said  nothing  yet  about  legal  rights.
All  this  can  be  observed  as  matter  of  fact
without  considering  what  the  law  has  to  say  to
it,  if  anything.  All  these  greater  and  lesser
conveniences  might  exist  with  a  certain  amount
of  customary  uniformity  and  even  with  a  certain
amount  of  practical  security  if  there  were  no
law  of  property  at  all.  What  the  law  has  to
do  is  to  confirm  and  protect,  so  far  as  is  thought
proper,  the  relations  of  control,  use,  and  enjoy-
ment, which  exist  or  may  exist  in  fact.  That
a  man  who  is  peaceably  enjoying  land  or  goods
shall  not  be  disturbed  by  mere  wanton  greed  or
spite  may  be  taken  as  an  elementary  need  of
society.  What  more  the  law  can  and  should
do  may  stand  over.  Possession  —  actual  and
peaceable  use  of  things  as  one's  own — must  be
protected  to  some  extent.

But  this  is  not  all.  Present  enjoyment  and
power  of  enjoyment  are  not  the  sum  of  man's
power  over  things,  either  of  what  he  has  or  of
what  he  desires.  Animals  may  generally  not
see  beyond  the  present;  savages  may  sometimes
not  look  farther.  Man,  as  a  member  of  a  family
and  a  commonwealth,  looks  forward  and  outward.


vii  RELATION  OF  PERSONS  TO  THINGS  163

He  wants  not  only  to  use  and  enjoy,  but  to  put
or  leave  others  in  his  place,  and  himself  to  take
the  place  of  others,  in  a  regular  and  orderly
manner.  He  must  be  able  to  traffic  as  a  seller
or  as  a  buyer,  to  give  or  to  receive  bounty,  to
continue  the  name  and  wealth  of  his  ancestors,
to  leave  the  world  with  the  assurance  that  they
may  be  continued  in  his  posterity.  For  these
ends  law  must  do  much.  They  might,  even
without  law,  not  wholly  fail  to  be  compassed
after  some  sort,  but  the  result  would  be  poor
and  precarious.  And  what  the  law  must  do
is  much  more  than  the  protection  of  existing
occupation  and  enjoyment.  Not  only  use  but
disposal  is  now  in  question;  and  we  cannot
protect  the  disposal  of  land  and  goods  without
regulating  it.  Conflicting  claims  have  to  be
dealt  with ;  we  must  have  rules  for  knowing
what  dispositions  are  effectual,  which  among
many  claims  are  rights  entitled  to  prevail.

We  pass  beyond  the  mere  defence  of  possession,  Title.
and  we  have  to  adjudge  on  which  side  is  the  better
right  to  possess  and  enjoy  the  subject  of  dispute.
It  has  to  be  considered  not  only  whether  a  man
has  been  deprived  of  possession,  "  disseised  "  in  the
language  of  the  Common  Law,  but  who  is  the  right


164  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

heir,  whether  there  has  been  a  perfect  sale,  whether
a  will  can  stand.  In  one  word,  possession  is  a
matter  of  fact,  or  at  least  founded  in  fact ;  whereas
title,  as  the  absolutely  or  relatively  best  right  to  a
thing  which  may  be  in  dispute,  is  matter  of  law,
not  only  denned  but  created  by  law.  The  law  may
restrain  powers  of  use ;  it  must  determine  powers
of  disposal.  When  we  get  beyond  actual  control
and  occupation,  the  extent  of  our  power  over  things
is  what  the  law  declares  it  to  be.  "A  man,"  as
Littleton  said,  "  cannot  have  a  more  large  or  greater
estate  of  inheritance  than  fee  simple." 1  This  does
not  mean  that  having  an  estate  to  oneself  and  one's
heirs  is  in  the  Common  Law  the  technical  expression
of  the  utmost  conceivable  degree  of  disposing  power.
Littleton  could  Jiot  have  meant  this,  in  fact,  for
when  he  wrote  these  words  a  tenant  in  fee  simple
could  not  leave  his  land  by  will  except  in  a  few
places  where  local  custom  allowed  it.  The  words
mean  exactly  what  they  say,  namely,  that  the
powers  of  use  and  disposal,  such  as  they  are,
which  are  incident  to  an  estate  in  fee  simple
are,  as  regards  whatever  can  be  the  subject  of
freehold  tenure,  the  highest  known  to  the  law.

Still  more  is  this  the  case  with  regard  to  partial
1  Litt.  §  11.


vii  RELATION  OF  PERSONS  TO  THINGS  165

and  limited  modes  of  enjoyment. When  a  man  Partial

modes  of

claims  to  have  the  use  of  his  neighbour's  land  in  enjoyment

defined  by

some  way, — to  ride  across  it,  to  get  water  from  a  law.
well,  to  cut  firewood,  to  dig  gravel, — the  first  question
is  what  rights  of  that  kind  the  law  will  recognise.
The  measure  and  the  value  of  such  rights  depend
on  their  legal  definition.  We  may  say  of  them  for
this  reason — not  because  they  are  incorporeal,  which
has  already  appeared  not  an  adequate  ground1 —
that  "in  iure  consistunt."  One  step  farther,  and
we  come  to  claims,  not  of  any  direct  use  or  profit
to  be  had  by  one's  own  acts,  but  to  restrain  a
neighbour  from  acts  which,  if  done  in  the  use  of
his  own  land  or  goods,  would  in  some  way  diminish
our  use  or  enjoyment  of  what  belongs  to  us.  A
claim  not  to  have  one's  windows  darkened  by  new
building  is  a  common  example,  and  perhaps  the
most  striking.  Here  everything  depends  on  the
rule ;  we  do  not  know  whether  there  can  be  any
right  or  legal  interest  at  all  until  we  know  whether
occupation  of  a  house  is  ever,  and  if  so  when  and
on  what  conditions,  deemed  to  carry  with  it  the
power  of  objecting  to  have  the  windows  darkened.
The  English  rules  as  to  "ancient  lights"  have,  in
fact, not been received in the United States

1  P.  125  above.


166  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

generally,  so  that  the  law  and  practice  of  the  two
countries  are  quite  different.  Light,  or  the  benefit'
of  light,  is  in  itself  not  a  thing  at  all  in  the  legal
sense  any  more  than  it  is  matter  in  the  sense  of  the
physicist ;  and  the  question  is  how  far  the  enjoyment,
in  some  definite  manner  and  measure,  of  that  "which  in
itself  is  common  to  all  the  world  can  or  does  give  rise
to  definite  rights  to  be  free  from  interruption  in  such
enjoyment.
Ownership.  Ownership  may  be  described  as  the  entirety  of
the  powers  of  use  and  disposal  allowed  by  law.
This  implies  that  there  is  some  power  of  disposal,
and  in  modern  times  we  should  hardly  be  disposed
to  call  a  person  an  owner  who  had  no  such  power.1
If  we  found  anywhere  a  system  of  law  which  did
not  recognise  alienation  by  acts  of  parties  at  all,
we  should  say  not  that  the  powers  of  an  owner
were  very  much  restricted  in  that  system,  but  that
it  did  not  recognise  ownership.  The  term,  however,
is  not  strictly  a  technical  one  in  the  Common  Law,2

1  For  this  reason  I  cannot  think  it  quite  correct  to  say  that
' '  irresponsible  possession,  protected  by  a  remedy  ayailing  against
all  others,  makes  ownership  "  (Williams,  Real  Property,  14th  ed.
p.  10).  It  does  so  if  possession  is  a  root  of  title  ;  but  that  is  a
new  and  important  condition.

2  It  occurs  in  modern  Acts  of  Parliament,  sometimes  with  the
result  of  producing  difficulties.  See  Arrow  Shipping  Co.  v.  Tyne
Commissioners,  1894,  A.C.  508.  "  True  owner"  has  a  distinct
meaning.


vii  RELATION  OF  PERSONS  TO  THINGS  167

we  shall  presently  see  why.  We  must  not  suppose
that  all  the  powers  of  an  owner  need  be  exerciseable
at  once  and  immediately ;  he  may  remain  owner
though  he  has  parted  with  some  of  them  for  a
time.  He  may  for  a  time  even  part  with  his
whole  powers  of  use  and  enjoyment,  and  suspend
his  power  of  disposal,  provided  that  he  reserves,
for  himself  or  his  successors,  the  right  of  ulti-
mately reclaiming  the  thing  and  being  restored
to  his  power.  This  is  the  common  case  of  hiring
land,  buildings,  or  goods.  Again,  the  owner's
powers  may  be  limited  in  particular  directions
for  an  indefinite  time  by  rights  as  permanent  in
their  nature  as  ownership  itself.  Such  is  the
case  where  the  owner  of  Whiteacre  has  a  right
of  way  over  his  neighbour's  field  of  Blackacre.
As  this  example  shows,  what  is  thus  subtracted
from  one  owner's  powers  is  generally  added  to
another's.  In  short,  the  owner  of  a  thing  is  not
necessarily  the  person  who  at  a  given  time  has
the  whole  power  of  use  and  disposal ;  very  often
there  is  no  such  person.  We  must  look  for  the
person  having  the  residue  of  all  such  power  when
we  have  accounted  for  every  detached  and  limited
portion  of  it;  and  he  will  be  the  owner  even  if
the  immediate  power  of control and  use  is  else-


168  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

where.  In  the  same  way  a  political  sovereign  does
not  lose  his  independence  merely  because  he  has
made  a  treaty  by  which  he  has  agreed  to  forego
or  limit  the  exercise  of  his  sovereign  power  in
particular  respects.1
Distinction We  are  now  in  a  position  to  take  note  of  the

of  posses-
sion, manner  in  which  ownership  differs  from  possession

ownership,  1  » i  t  ■

real  rights,  on  the  one  hand,  and  limited  rights  over  particular
things  (iura  in  re  aliena)  on  the  other.  Possession
in  fact — the  effective  and  exclusive  control  of  a
thing — is  prior  to  ownership  and  indeed  to  every
legal  rule  and  idea.  The  facts  which  we  call  actual
or  physical  possession  would  still  exist  in  a  society
where  there  was  no  recognition  of  individual  pro-
perty. But  possession,  as  a  fact,  is  interesting  to
lawyers  only  so  far  as  legal  results  and  incidents
may  attach  to  it ; 2  and  to  give  definite  rights  to
a  possessor  because  he  is  in  possession  is  to  admit
individual  rights  of  exclusive  use  and  enjoyment.
We  say  because  he  is  in  possession.  A  system  of
law  which  merely  forbade  personal  violence  might
incidentally  protect  possession  so  far  as  any  one
who  used  actual  violence  in  dispossessing  another

1  Mighell  v.  Sultan  o/Johore,  1894,  1  Q.B.  149,  C.A.

2  Cp.  Possession  in  the  Common  Law  (by  Mr.  Justice  Wright
and  the  present  writer),  p.  10,  and  see  the  first  chapter  of  that
book  for  detailed  discussion.


vii  RELATION  OF  PERSONS  TO  THINGS  169

might  thereby  render  himself  liable  to  a  penalty  or
damages.  This  wovdd  not  be  saying  anything  of
possession  except  that  it  was  not  a  crime  which
deprived  the  possessor  of  his  ordinary  personal
rights,  or  a  condition  in  itself  odious  to  the  law.
Still  less  does  this  involve  any  connection  of  pos-
session with  title.  When  possession  as  such  is
regarded  as  a  proper  subject  of  protection,  that  is  to
say,  when  dispossession  without  just  cause  (apart
from  any  "violence  or  physical  damage  incidental  to
the  act)  is  treated  as  calling  for  a  remedy,  then  the
relation  to  ownership  becomes  apparent.  If  a
person  out  of  possession  is  to  have  a  standing-point
at  all,  possession  must  be  capable  of  being  wrongful
as  well  as  rightful.  There  must  be  rights  to
possess,  or  to  be  put  in  possession,  that  can  be
severed  from  present  possession.  There  must  be
room  for  conflicting  claims  to  possession,  and  rules
for  deciding  which  of  two  claimants  has  the  better
right  to  possess  the  thing  in  dispute.

Now  this  brings  us  to  very  close  quarters  with  Right  to

.  possess.

ownership. For  ownership,  as  the  entirety  of  legal

powers  of  use  and  disposal,  must  include,  as  the

most  important  of  those  powers,  in  fact,  as  the  one

thing  by  which  alone  the  rest  can  be  made  effective,

the  right  to  maintain  or  claim  possession ;  a  right


170  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

which,  though  it  may  be  suspended  or  deferred,
cannot  be  wholly  dissociated  from  an  owner's
relation  to  the  thing  owned.1  Again,  ownership  is
most  commonly  and  completely  manifested  in  actual
possession  and  use.  To  deal  with  a  thing  at  one's
will  is  to  deal  with  it  like  an  owner;  in  the
absence  of  manifest  reason  to  the  contrary,  we
suppose  that  a  man  is  or  claims  to  be  owner  of
anything  over  which  he  exercises  indefinite  control.
Thus  active  possession  is  a  normal  index  of  owner-
ship (though  by  no  means  the  only  one  even  in
common  life),  and  the  right  to  possess  (whether
immediate  or  not)  is  a  necessary  incident  of  owner-
ship, or  may  perhaps  rather  be  called  ownership
itself  in  its  active  or  dynamic  aspect.  One  who  is
out  of  possession  and  has  a  rightful  claim  to  possess
has  need  of  the  law's  assistance.  When  he  has
recovered  possession,  he  has  not  any  need  to  ask
the  law  to  do  more  for  him.  Once  in  possession
he  can  deal  with  his  own  in  any  lawful  manner.
Value  of  Hence  it  is  commonly  sufficient  for  an  owner


possessory

remedii

owners.


' ' ll"  ' ;  1  It  may  be,  by  reason  of  legal  rules  having  lagged  behind  the

facts  of  life  and  the  convenience  of  mankind,  that  the  facts  are  at
last  recognised  only  with  the  help  of  artifices  or  fictions.  There
may  be  nominal  owners  who  cannot  exercise  any  right  of  ownership
for  their  own  benefit.  Separation  of  beneficial  interest  from  legal
title  has  occurred  in  both  Roman  and  English  law.  But  there  is
no  need  to  dwell  on  this  now.


vii  RELATION  OF  PERSONS  TO  THINGS  171

to  rely  on  his  right  to  possession ;  and  as  it  is
commonly  easier  to  prove  the  less  right  than  the
greater,  not  to  speak  for  the  present  of  the  manner
in  which  this  works  out  in  detail,  it  is  often  prefer-
ahle  to  claim  possession  only.  Nay  more,  it  is
possible  for  ownership  to  be  sufficiently  guarded  for
all  practical  purposes  by  a  system  of  remedies
which  omits,  or  has  come  to  omit,  any  such  solemn
and  express  form  of  asserting  ownership  as  that  to
which  the  Eomans  emphatically  gave  the  name  of
Vindication.  In  the  Common  Law  this  has  actually
happened.  For  some  centuries  all  practical  remedies
for  the  recovery  of  both  land  and  goods  have  been
possessory,  and  property  has  meant,  for  judicial
purposes,  the  right,  or  the  best  right,  to  possess.
Conversely,  that  which  a  man  was  entitled  to
possess  not  only  was  correctly  described  by  him
in  pleading  as  res  sua,  but  could  not  be  described
in  any  other  way.1

But  this leads us to a further development.  Possession

as  evidence

Possession  and  use  being  the  common  outward  0f  title,
signs  of  ownership,  it  is  reasonable  to  presume,  in
the  absence  of  proof  to  the  contrary,  that  existing
peaceable  possession  is  rightful,  and  further  to  infer
ownership  from  the  right  to  possess  which  we  have
1  Holmes,  The  Common  Law,  p.  242.


172  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

thus  presumed.  Hence  we  treat  the  actual  pos-
sessor not  only  as  legal  possessor  but  as  owner,  as
against  every  one  who  cannot  show  a  better  right.
As  English  lawyers  say  concerning  interests  in  land,
possession  is  prima  facie  evidence  of  seisin  in  fee:
that  is,  not  of  legal  possession  or  seisin  alone,  but
of  seisin  coupled  with  the  largest  powers  of  use  and
disposal  allowed  by  law.  Then,  if  we  regard  the
possessor  as  being  rightfully  in  the  exercise  of
control,  we  must  allow  him  the  powers  of  an  owner
within  the  limits  of  his  apparent  right.  Not  only
his  acts  of  use  and  occupation  but  his  acts  of
disposal  must  be  valid  against-  every  one  who
cannot  make  out  a  superior  claim.  And  when  the
superior  claim,  if  any  such  there  be,  ceases  to  be
available,  the  rights  founded  on  possession  will  be
indistinguishable  from  the  rights  of  ownership.  In
the  case  of  movable  goods  which  pass  from  hand
to  hand  without  formality  this  becomes  obvious,  for
in  that  case  possession  is  often  not  merely  the
natural  and  usual  proof  of  ownership,  but  the  only
proof.  "We  have  come  then  to  distinctly  recognising
possession  as  an  origin  of  ownership,  a  "  commence-
ment of  title "  as  our  law  calls  it.  Again  we  see
that  not  only  we  have  thus  to  recognise  it,  but
a system  of law  can get  on  without  recognising


vii  RELATION  OF  PERSONS  TO  THINGS  173

any  other  origin. Continuous  possession is  quite

capable  of  being,  not  merely  a  possible  foundation

of  ownership,  but  its  only  foundation  and  evidence.

And  this,  once  more,  is  exactly  what  has  happened

in  the  Common  Law. With  very  few  exceptions,1

possession  traced  through  a  chain  of  lawful  transfer,

or  succession  for  a  time  long  enough  to  exclude  any

reasonable  apprehension  of  adverse claims,  is  the

only  acceptable  proof  of  title  in  this  country.

So  far  we  have  assumed  that  the  possessor  starts  Defects  of

title.

from  what  the  Eomans  called  a  "  just  cause "  of
possession :  he  has  purchased  from  some  one  who
was  apparently  entitled,  or  has  entered,  after  the
former  holder's  death,  as  the  nearest  heir  known  or
reasonably  supposed  to  be  living,  or  as  the  person
answering  a  description  by  which  the  next  taker  of
the  estate  has  been  pointed  out  in  a  settlement  or
will.  In  any  one  of  these  and  such  like  matters,
error,  though  exceptional,  is  possible.  Some  element
of  due  form  may  have  been  lacking ;  a  man  not  heard
of  for  many  years  may  have  been  alive ;  an  obscure
disposition  may  have  been  wrongly  interpreted.
Where  innocent  cause  of  error  exists,  it  is  easy  to
allow  (not  to  go  into  details)  that  the  defect  shall

1  As  where  particular  lands  have  been  bestowed  and made
inalienable  by  Parliament  as  a  reward  for  signal  public  service.


174  FIEST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

be  curable  by  lapse  of  time,  and  tbat  in  tbe  mean-
while the  possessory  title  shall  be  respected  by  the
world  at  large  as  if  it  were  perfect.  Hugh,  a  mere
stranger,  shall  not  disturb  Giles  or  Giles's  heirs  and
assigns  with  impunity  merely  because  Peter  may
have  had  better  right  than  Giles.
Wrongful  Now  let  us  take  the  harder  case  of  a  possession


as  origin  of  begun  by  wrong. With  or  without  a  more  or  less

risrlits

plausible  claim  of  right  Peter  has  turned  out  John,
disseised  him  as  our  fathers  said,  whereas  John's
title  is  really  the  better.  Thus  Peter  starts  without
any  legal  merits  in  his  own  person,  whether  he  is
or  not  morally  excusable.  John  will  of  course
have  his  remedy,  subject  to  whatever  rules  of  law
require  parties  to  assert  their  rights  within  due
time.  Peter,  having  gained  actual  possession,  must
be  protected  against  mere  extraneous  violence.  That
is  required,  as  we  have  already  noted,  for  the  pre-
servation of  peace  and  order.  If  Peter  has  done
wrong  in  taking  possession,  redress  is  for  the  true
owner  to  seek,  punishment  (if  any)  for  the  State  to
inflict.  But  is  a  person  who  comes  into  Peter's
place  as  heir  or  purchaser,  or  the  successors  of
any  such  person,  to  be  no  better  off?  We  have
allowed  that  the  apparently  rightful  possessor  is  to
be  treated  as  owner  for  purposes  of  disposition  as


vn  RELATION  OF  PERSONS  TO  THINGS  175

well  as  use.  Now  this  principle  is  admitted  partly
for  his  own  benefit  and  protection,  but  also  for  the
benefit  and  protection  of  those  who  may  deal  with
him  as  owner  on  the  strength  of  his  apparently
rightful  title.  Considering  then  the  position  of  a
dispossessor,  we  have  to  bear  in  mind  that  the
wrongfulness  of  his  possession  is  by  no  means
always  or  necessarily  apparent  to  those  who  may
come  after  him  by  purchase  or  otherwise.  They
may  be  and  often  will  be  no  less  deserving  than  the
successors  of  an  apparent  owner  whose  possession
began  with  just  cause.  Hence  it  is  reasonable  to
protect  them  in  the  same  manner  Us  against  every
one  who  can  show  no  better  right.  In  so  doing  the
law  must  take  its  chance  of  protecting  some  persons
who  are  undeserving.  But  the  deserving  ones,
those  who  deal  in  good  faith  with  persons  reasonably
appearing  to  be  entitled,  are  the  majority,  and  it  is
better  to  favour  some  unjust  than  to  vex  many  just
occupiers.  Thus  there  is  nothing  anomalous  in
accepting  possession,  without  regard  to  its  actual
origin,  as  founding  a  right  which,  though  subject  to
whatever  better  rights  may  exist,  is  invested  as
against  the  world  at  large  with  all  the  incidents  of
ownership  except  the  power  of  using  any  remedy
that,  like  the  Eoman  Vindication,  is  appropriated


176  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

to  the  full  right  of  ownership.  The  possessor  is  in
a  relative  sense  an  owner ;  possession,  in  our  English
phrase,  is  a  root  of  title.  Beati  possidentes  is  a  true
maxim  of  law,  not  a  mere  empirical  expression  of  the
natural  advantages  arising  from  actual  occupation.
Historical The  foregoing  explanation  is  of  course  analytical

priority  of

possession and  taken  from  a  modern  point  of  view. Histonc-

to  owner- ...  .  . .  .  .

ship.  ally  the  main  outline  of  the  process  is  much  simpler,

though  the  details  are  extremely  complex.  The  notion
of  possessing  is  really  both  much  easier  and  much
earlier  than  that  of  owning.  Archaic  habits  of  thought
find  the  utmost  difficulty  in  conceiving  ownership
as  severed  from  possession,  or  a  transfer  of  anything
as  being  effectual  without  something  like  a  visible
transfer  of  control,  a  physical  delivery  or  induction.
So  far  as  there  is  any  conception  of  ownership,  it  is
realised  only  through  possession.  The  Eoman  law
of  dominium  is  essentially  modern  law.  Nay,  more,
the  history  of  our  own  system  shows  us  a  stage  of
legal  thinking  in  which  the  rights  of  an  owner  out
of  possession  can  be  dealt  with  only  by  ascribing  to
him  a  sort  of  fictitious  possession.  English  law
cannot  deny  that  an  occupying  farmer  is  possessed
of  the  farmyard  as  well  as  of  the  pigs,  ducks,  and
geese  therein,  but  it  asserts\  that  the  landlord  is
seised  of  the  freehold ;  and  seisin,  as  even  our  later


vii  RELATION  OF  PERSONS  TO  THINGS  177

books  of  authority  will  tell  us,  was  originally  nothing
but  possession.1  In  the  case  of  feudal  tenures,
where  a  freeholder  owes  rent  and  services  to  an
overlord,  the  lord  is  said  to  be  seised  of  the  rent  by
actual  receipt  of  any  part  of  it ;  and  refusal  or
failure  to  pay  such  rent  when  duly  demanded,  was  a
disseisin,  entitling  the  lord  to  bring  the  same  form
of  action — an  "  assize  of  novel  disseisin  " — as  a
freeholder  who  had  been  physically  turned  out  of
possession.2  Where  there  was  not  and  could  not  be
actual  possession,  medieval  lawyers  endeavoured  to
find  something  as  like  it  as  possible.  They  had  at
last  to  face  the  need  of  doing  without,  but  the  effort
was  a  severe  one.  Eights  which  "  lie  in  grant "  as
distinct  from  "  livery,"  that  is,  which  can  be  trans-
ferred by  written  grant  only — the  grant  neither
requiring  nor  admitting  a  visible  handing  over  or
induction — have  always  been  regarded  in  the
Common  Law  as  comparatively  weak  and  precarious.
Only  within  half  a  century  has  English  legislation
authorised  the  transfer  of  immovable  property  in
possession  without  either  a  real  or  a  fictitious
"livery."  We  shook  off  the  medieval  bond  of
materialism  as  late  as  1845,  when  Parliament  had
the  courage  to  declare  that  corporeal  hereditaments

1  Co.  Litt.  17  a.  2  Ibid.  §  233.

N


178  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

should  "  lie  in  grant  as  well  as  in  livery,"  so  as  to
enable  the  immediate  freehold  to  be  dealt  with  by
simple  deed.1
Preserip-  Possession,  we  have  just  seen,  may  have  all  or

tion  and  .

limitation  most  of  the  advantages  of  ownership  against  every
one  but  the  true  owner,  in  other  words  it  may
confer  a  relatively  good  title.  But,  moreover,  it
may  be  enabled  by  lapse  of  time  to  become  an
absolute  title.  Possession  may  ripen  into  owner-
ship ;  and  this  result  may  be  produced  either
positively  by  the  law  declaring  that  the  possessor  is
fully  entitled  after  a  certain  time,  or  negatively  by
depriving  adverse  claimants  of  their  remedies  if  dur-
ing a  certain  time  they  omit  to  exercise  them.  The
former  operation  of  lapse  of  time  is  properly  called
Prescription,  sometimes  "  positive  prescription  " ;  the
latter,  sometimes  called  "  negative  prescription,"  is
familiar  in  English  law  as  the  limitation  of  actions,
and,  as  a  general  principle  of  remedial  justice,  is  not
confined  to  claims  for  the  recovery  of  land  or  other
property.  As  regards  the  acquisition  of  property,
the  transformation  of  possession  into  ownership  (or
at  all  events  an  indisputable  right  to  possess)  is
obviously  most  necessary  and  important  in  a  system
where  continuous  possession  with  an  apparently
1  8  &  9  Vict.  c.  106.


vii  RELATION  OF  PERSONS  TO  THINGS  179

rightful  title  is  the  principal  or  only  proof  of
ownership.  In  a  system  -where  ownership  is
capable  of  direct  proof  and  official  confirmation,  as
by  a  registry  of  titles  to  land,  the  importance  of  pos-
session and  prescription  tends  to  diminish,  and  might
even  conceivably  become  a  vanishing  quantity.1

Further  historical  and  comparative  details  would  Univer-
sality of

be  out  of  place  here. Perhaps  we  have  been  too  the  prob-
lems.

much tempted  in  that  direction  already. But  it

may  be  worth  remarking  in  general  terms  that  the
relations  of  possession  and  ownership  in  Eoman
and  English  law,  the  difficulties  arising  out  of
them,  and  the  devices  resorted  to  for  obviating
or  circumventing  those  difficulties,  offer  an  amount
of  resemblance  even  in  detail  which  is  much  more
striking  than  the  superficial  and  technical  differ-
ences. We  cannot  doubt  that  these  resemblances
depend  on  the  nature  of  the  problems  to  be  solved
and  not  on  any  accidental  connection.  One  system
of  law  may  have  imitated  another  in  particular
doctrines  and  institutions,  but  imitation  cannot
find  place  in  processes  extending  over  two  or  three
centuries,  and  whose  fundamental  analogies  are
externally  disguised  in  almost  every  possible  way.

1  Maine,  Early  Law  and  Custom,  352-358  ;  Land  Transfer  Act,
1875,  §  21,  and  see  Sir  H.  Elphinstone  thereon  in  Law  Quart.
Rev.  xi.  357,  362.


180  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

Analogies  How far  can the notions of ownership and

ship  in  possession  apply  to  those  partial  rights  over  another
man's  belongings  (I  purposely  use  a  vague  and
inartificial  word)  which  are  an  increment  of  owner-
ship on  the  active  and  a  subtraction  from  it  on
the  passive  side  ?  Andrew,  as  owner  of  Whiteacre,
has  a  right  of  way  over  Peter's  estate  of  Black-
acre.  This  is  what  Eoman  law  calls  a  servitude;
Whiteacre  is  the  "dominant"  and  Blackacre  the
"servient"  tenement.  English  law  calls  it  an
easement:  in  modern  times  we  have  borrowed  the
terms  "  dominant "  and  "  servient "  from  Boman
or  Bomanised  authorities,  and  use  them  freely.
Peter  and  his  heirs  are  bound  to  let  Andrew  and
his  heirs  pass  and  repass  by  that  way.  So  far
Peter's  ownership  is  less ;  not  only  because  Andrew
and  his  successors  in  title  have  the  right  to  use
Peter's  land  for  a  limited  purpose,  but  because
Peter  and  his  successors  cannot  close  or  divert
the  way  without  their  consent.  Just  so  far,  on
the  other  hand,  the  range  of  Andrew's  ownership
is  increased.  Is  it  correct  to  call  him  owner  of
the  easement  ?  He  is  owner  of  Whiteacre  with
the  advantage  of  the  easement ;  that,  however,  is
not  quite  the  same  thing;  and  we  must  find  a
closer  test. If  he could deal  with the  right  of


vn  RELATION  OF  PERSONS  TO  THINGS  181

way  as  a  separate  thing,  set  it  going  by  itself  as  it

were,  so  that  some  day  John,  who  has  nothing  to

do  with  "Whiteacre,  could  claim  the  right  of  way,

and  William, or  whoever  might  hold  Whiteacre,

could not, that would he a distinct ownership

indeed. But this  is just  what  neither  English

nor  Eoman  law  will  allow  to  be  done. As  Lord

Cairns  said,  "  There  can  be  no  easement  properly

so called  unless there  be  both  a  servient  and a

dominant  tenement.  .  .  . There can  be  no such

thing according  to our  law,  or according  to  the

civil  law,  as what  I may  term an easement  in

gross." 1 Andrew can transfer a right of way

across  Blackacre  only  by  transferring  his  ownership

of  Whiteacre; and  if  John  has,  as  he  may  have,

a  personal  right,  unconnected  with  ownership  of  any

other land,  to use the same  way,  John cannot

transfer  that  right  at  all.

Easements and other limited  rights over the  Nosepar-

ate  posses-
property  of  others appear  to  be as  incapable  of  sory  rights

separate  and  independent  possession  as  of  separate  tudes.

and  independent  ownership ;  and  this,  as  to  many

of  them,  for  the  additional  reason  that  the  use  and

c

enjoyment  of  them  are  not  exclusive.

A  man  who  has  a  right  of  way  for  walking  or
1  Bangeley  v.  Midland  B.  Co.  (1868),  L.R.  3  Ch.  306,  811.


182  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

driving  has  neither  the  power  nor  the  intention
to  prevent  other  people  from  walking  or  driving
the  same  way.  Such  persons  as  may  do  so  with-
out right  or  leave  are  trespassers  not  against  him
but  against  the  owner  of  the  soil.  A  person  who
actually  obstructs  the  use  of  the  way  may  commit
wrongs  against  both  the  owner  of  the  soil  and  the
person  or  persons  having  a  right  of  way,  but  not
the  same  wrong.  It  must  be  remembered,  how-
ever, that  an  exclusive  right  of  occupation,  though
temporary  and  for  a  limited  purpose,  will  confer
possession  while  it  lasts.1  And  rights  of  enjoy-
ment which  are  exclusive  though  partial  are  allowed
the  benefit  of  possessory  remedies  in  the  Common
Law,2  and  in  that  sense  may  be  said  to  be  capable
of  quasi-possession,  and  to  be  founded  on  a  control
of  the  thing  enjoyed,  which,  though  partial  and
intermittent,  is  real  and  exclusive  so  far  as  it  goes.
Lapse  of  time  is  available  for  the  acquisition  of
easements  by  showing  continuous  enjoyment  of  the
advantage  in  question,  whatever  it  may  be,  as
incident  to  the  possession  of  the  dominant  tene-
ment, not  as  being  or  manifesting  a  distinct  posses-

1  Crosby  v.  Wadsworth  (1805),  6  East  602,  8  R.R.  566,  and  see
the  Preface  to  that  volume.

2  Authorities  cited  in  Pollock  and  Wright  on  Possession,  pp.
35-6.


vii  RELATION  OF  PERSONS  TO  THINGS  183

sion.  This  follows  from  the  principles  just  stated.
Whether  a  de  facto  enjoyment  of  an  apparent
easement  really  goes  along  with  the  title  or  appar-
ent title  to  a  certain  tenement  can  be  known,  in
the  absence  of  documentary  proof,  only  by  the
occupation  of  the  tenement  being  coupled  with  the
enjoyment  of  the  way  over  another  tenement,  or
whatever  other  advantage  it  may  be,  for  such  time
as  the  law  deems  sufficient :  of  which  time,  again,
the  length  has  to  be  fixed  by  a  positive  rule.  It
is  not  necessarily  the  same  length  of  time  that
would  suffice  to  make  out  a  title  by  possession  to
the  alleged  dominant  tenement  itself.  General
policy  would  seem  to  require  stricter  conditions
of  prescription  in  the  case  of  servitudes.  For  the
tenements  themselves  must  (in  our  law  at  any
rate)  belong  to  somebody ;  but  it  is  not  necessary
that  there  should  be  any  servitude  at  all  between
them.  The  claimant  of  a  servitude  is  claiming  to
enlarge  his  own  powers  in  an  exceptional  though  a
recognised  manner,  and  to  cut  short  those  of  his
neighbour.  Hence  the  acquisition  of  easements  by
lapse  of  time  may  well  be  purposely  made  rather
difficult.  In  the  law  of  Scotland,  indeed,  a  definite
origin  has  to  be  shown  in  every  case,  and  acquisi-
tion  by  mere lapse of time is not allowed at


184  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

all.1  Where  a  time  is  allowed  and  fixed  by  law  as
capable  of  having  that  effect,  it  seems  on  principle
that  before  the  expiration  of  that  time  there  is  no
right  of  any  sort,  and  that  it  would  be  fallacious
to  suggest  that  there  can  be  a  quasi -possessory
interest  deemed  worthy  of  protection  against  a
mere  stranger,  though  not  as  against  the  alleged
servient  tenement  itself.2  It  may  be  added  that  a
theoretical  right  to  assert  such  an  interest  could
seldom  if  ever  have  any  useful  operation  for  the
claimant.  For  the  third  person  interfering  with
the  enjoyment  of  an  inchoate  easement  could
always  take  the  line  of  asserting  that  he  had
acted  in  the  interest  and  by  the  authority  of  the
owner  against  whom  the  easement  was  in  process
of  being  acquired.  And  it  would  be  that  owner's
interest  to  ratify  the  act,  since  the  acquisition  of  an
adverse  right  would  thus  be  interrupted,  and  the  in-
terruption put  on  record,  in  the  most  effectual  manner,
and  with  the  least  amount  of  trouble  to  himself.
Negative  It  would  lead  us  top  far  if  we  were  to  approach

servitudes

or  ease- the  various  questions  of  principle  raised  by  those

1  The  fiction  of  a  lost  grant  in  the  Common  Law  may  be  said
to  represent  a  nominal  saving  of  the  same  principle  ;  the  apparent
compromise  being,  however,  a  virtual  abandonment.  But  this
is  too  technical  and  difficult  a  matter  to  be  dwelt  on  here.

2  This  is  almost  certainly  so  in  our  law.  See  Holmes,  The
Common  Law,  p.  241.


ments.


vii  RELATION  OF  PERSONS  TO  THINGS  185

adjuncts  or  outworks  of  immovable  property  which
consist  merely  in  a  right  to  restrain  a  neighbour
from  doing  something  on  his  own  land.  Ex-
cavating the  soil  so  as  to  let  down  a  building  on
the  adjacent  estate  is  one  example  of  such  acts.
Eights  to  be  free  from  disturbance  due  to  a  neigh-
bour's acts  done  on  his  own  land,  and  not  otherwise
unlawful,  may  be  considered  in  a  particular  system
of  law  either  as  "  natural  rights "  annexed  to
ownership  and  not  needing  to  be  established  by
any  special  proof,  or  as  "  negative  easements "  for
which  some  definite  origin  other  than  the  character
and  contiguity  of  the  two  tenements  must  be
shown.  In  either  case  enjoyment  of  such  rights
can  offer  at  most  a  partial  and  imperfect  analogy
to  possession.  For  the  legal  idea  of  possession
and  its  consequences  is  founded  on  a  situation
not  only  of  use  and  enjoyment  but  of  effective
control.  In  these  cases,  however,  the  person  who
profits  by  his  neighbour's  forbearance  to  let  down
the  adjacent  ground,  to  erect  buildings  which
block  his  lights,  and  so  forth,  obviously  has  no
natural  control  in  the  matter  at  all :  for  he  can
exercise  control  only  within  his  own  boundaries.
His  power  is  just  whatever  power  the  law  may
give  him  of  claiming  redress  by  legal  process  in


186  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

the  event  of  disturbance.  Again  the  generality
or  impersonality  of  true  possession  is  wanting,  for
there  is  nothing  which  is  enjoyed  and  nothing  which
can  be  protected  as  against  the  world  at  large.
The  only  real  subject  of  possession  is  the  tenement
to  which  advantages  of  this  kind  may  be  incident.
Monopolies  One  step  further  brings  us  to  monopolies  and
franchises  which  resemble  "  natural  rights "  or
"  negative  easements "  in  the  characters  just  men-
tioned, or  some  of  them,  but  are  distinct  incorporeal
things  not  annexed  to  any  corporeal  thing.  As
we  have  already  pointed  out,1  such  rights  are
capable  of  having  a  perfectly  definite  value  and
being  dealt  with  as  objects  of  commerce.  An
exclusive  right  to  ferry  passengers  across  a  river
at  a  particular  place  may  be  taken  as  an  ancient
example  of  the  class.  Copyright  in  a  book,
performing  right  in  a  play,  the  right  to  a  trade-
mark, are  familiar  in  modern  business  and  litiga-
tion. Here  there  is  something  more  like  possession
than  in  the  case  of  negative  easements ;  for  there
are  the  will  and  the  legal  power  to  exclude  the
world  at  large  from  interference  or  competition
with  the  exclusive  privilege,  whatever  it  may  be.
But  still  the  legal  power  is  not  modelled  on  any

1  See  p.  131  above.


vii  RELATION  OF  PERSONS  TO  THINGS  187

natural  power.  Apart  from  the  right  to  set  the
law  in  motion  and  procure  the  application  of
coercive  legal  process,  the  author  or  publisher  of
a  book  has  no  control  in  fact  over  the  multipli-
cation of  copies  by  unlicensed  persons ;  rather
publication  involves,  as  matter  of  fact,  the  abandon-
ment of  any  previously  existing  control.  Still  less
can  it  be  said  that  the  printer  of  a  pirated  edition
has  usurped  or  entered  upon  the  author's  rights.
He  has  merely  committed  a  wrongful  act;  he  has
not  acquired  anything  analogous  to  the  "estate
by  wrong"  of  an  intruder  on  land.  On  the
whole  it  seems  that  the  analogies  of  possession
cannot  be  safely  or  profitably  applied  to  rights
of  this  kind.1

There  is  no  reason,  however,  why  such  rights  Extension

of  owner-
should  not  have  mcidents  modelled  on  those  which  ship  to

•  o  in-  incorporeal

attach  to  ownership  m  the  case  of  corporeal  things,  franchises.
Without  such  mcidents,  in  fact,  they  would  be
of  comparatively  little  value.  Eights,  however
profitable,  which  cannot  be  transferred  by  sale
are  a  cumbrous  investment,  even  for  a  man's  own
lifetime;  rights  which  will  not  pass  by  succession

1  Illegitimate  extensions  of  the  idea  of  possession  were  common
in  the  continental  speculation  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  not  un-
known in  England.  See  Co.  Litt.  113  6 ;  Dernburg,  Pandekten,
i.  §  191.


188  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

or  bequest  are  useless  as  a  provision  for  a  man's
family.  We  find,  in  fact,  that  these  incorporeal
rights  and  advantages,  patents,  trade-marks,  copy-
rights, and  the  like,  are  transferable  and  alienable,
as  nearly  as  may  be,  after  the  manner  of  corporeal
things  of  value.  Still  there  is  only  an  approxima-
tion to  ownership,  for  there  is  not  any  general
power  of  use  or  enjoyment,  only  the  receipt  of
profits  increased  by  the  particular  advantage  of
competition  being  excluded.  A  patentee  has  not
any  right  to  do  what  he  could  not  have  done
without  a  patent,  but  the  right  to  prevent  other
people  from  competing  with  him  in  the  manu-
facture and  sale  of  his  invention.  The  language
about  "  property  in  ideas "  used  by  some  modern
writers  appears  to  be  founded  on  a  confusion  of
essentially  different  conceptions.  A  monopoly  in
the  reproduction  of  particular  forms  of  literary  or
artistic  representation,  or  the  performance  or  the
manufacture  and  sale  of  a  new  invention,  of  a
musical  or  dramatic  work,  is  that  which  it  has
been  made  by  law,  or  possibly,  in  some  cases,  by
usage  outside  law,1  and  it  is  not  anything  else.
Whether  the  law  shall  confer  such  monopolies
on  authors  and  inventors,  to  what  extent  in  point

1  See  p.  125  above.


vii  RELATION  OF  PERSONS  TO  THINGS  189

of  duration  and  otherwise,  and  subject  to  what
conditions,  is  a  question  of  expediency  on  which
little,  if  any,  light  seems  to  be  thrown  by  the
institution  of  ownership  in  corporeal  things,  not-
withstanding that  the  analogy  has  been  dwelt  upon
as  a  valid  one  by  some  considerable  authorities.1

The right of preventing the publication of  Right  to

privacy  dis-

unpublished  materials  is  of  a  different  kind;  in  tmguished.
English  authorities  it  is  commonly  derived,  as
regards  manuscripts,  original  drawings,  and  the  like,
from  an  owner's  general  right  of  restraining  the
world  at  large  from  any  kind  of  unauthorised  inter-
meddling with  his  property.  Yet  this  principle
is  hardly  sufficient  for  all  cases.  There  is  no
doubt  that  the  receiver  or  holder  of  a  private
letter  may  not  publish  it  without  the  writer's
consent,  although  there  is  also  no  doubt  that  the
paper  may  be  his  property  for  all  other  purposes ;
he cannot be  required,  for example,  as between

1  Much  discussion  of  the  principles  involved  in  the  question
of  "copyright  at  common  law"  maybe  found  in  the  great  case
of  Jefferys  v.  Boosey  (1854),  ;4  H.L.C.  815,  where,  however,  it  is
unavoidably  mixed  up  with  points  of  detail  arising  on  the  facts.
The  arguments  for  and  against  the  existence  of  such  a  right  are
most  distinctly  put  in  the  opinions  of  Erie,  J.,  Maule,  J.,  and
Coleridge,  J.  (pro) ;  and  Pollock,  C.B.,  Lord  Brougham,  and  Lord
St.  Leonards  (contra).  The  negative  conclusion  is  now  generally
accepted  by  lawyers.  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  whose  philosophy
of  political  and  legal  institutions  really  belongs  to  the  eighteenth
century,  has  consistently  maintained  the  older  view.


190  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

himself  and  the  writer,  to  preserve  it.  We  have
then  to  say  that  a  letter  is  given  by  the  writer
to  the  receiver  under  an  implied  condition  that
it  is  not  to  be  published  without  the  writer's  con-
sent. But  it  is  hard  to  see,  on  any  accepted  legal
principles,  how  such  a  condition  can  be  enforced
against  any  third  person  into  whose  hands  the
letter  may  come.  There  is  much  to  be  said  for
the  suggestion  recently  made  in  America,  and
supported  with  great  ability  and  ingenuity  by  its
authors,  that  every  citizen  is  entitled  to  a  certain
measure  of  privacy  in  his  own  affairs,  as  a  branch
of  the  general  right  to  personal  immunity;  that
this  right,  as  applied  to  the  communication  of
one's  thoughts  or  sentiments  to  the  public,  is  not
limited  to  cases  where  the  expression  of  them
happens  to  be  embodied  in  some  tangible  record
such  as  a  manuscript  or  drawing ;  and  that  it  is
independent  of  the  right  of  property  in  any  such
tangible  object.1  Of  course  there  is  no  objection
to  the  right  of  property,  where  it  does  happen
to  be  available,  being  used  in  aid  of  the  more
general  and  personal  right ;  and  as  this  is  the  safer
course  when  it is  possible,  a  long time  may  yet

1  "The  Right  to  Privacy,"  by  Samuel  D.  Warren  and  Louis  D.
Brandeis,  Barv.  Law  Rev.  iv.  193.


vii  RELATION  OF  PERSONS  TO  THINGS  191

elapse  before  the  fundamental  question  is  decided

either  by  authority  or  by  a  consensus  of  reasoned

opinion.

There  are  yet  other  incorporeal  things  to  which  incor-
poreal
the  analogy  of  ownership  is  largely  applied. In  property

consisting

the  language  of  common  life  and  business  we  have  in  obliga-
tions.
no  difficulty  and  n»  sense  of  incongruity  in  saying

that  a  man  owns  or  possesses  money  in  the  funds,
railway  shares  or  debentures,  or  other  investments
which  really  consist  in  a  claim  to  interest  or  to  a
share  of  profits  in  proportion  to  the  capital  sum
invested.  Nowadays  it  is  not  usual,  and  may  seem
hardly  natural,  to  call  a  merchant  the  owner  of  the
debts  growing  due  to  him  in  the  course  of  his
business;  there  is  no  doubt,  however,  that  such
debts  count  as  a  part  of  his  property;  they  are
assets ;  they  may  well  form  a  considerable  part
of  all  he  is  worth.  And  in  the  case  of  many
securities  and  investments  there  is  a  true  posses-
sion and  ownership,  of  the  documents  by  which
the  right  of  the  holder  is  proved.  What  is
more,  in  some  cases,  namely,  those  of  negotiable
instruments,  ownership  or  even  possession  of  a
material  document  is  the  only  normal  proof  of
right  to  the  payment  secured  or  promised  by
its terms. Thus the resemblance to ownership


192  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE chap,  vii

of  corporeal  goods  is  very  strong  at  first  sight.
But,  before  we  can  judge  how  far  this  resem-
blance holds,  we  must  consider  more  closely  the
nature  of  the  rights  arising  out  of  claims  of
one  definite  person  against  another,  or,  in  the
accustomed  term  of  the  Eoman  lawyers,  obliga-
tions. We  have  already  touehed  in  a  general
way  on  the  distinction  between  impersonal  and
personal  duties.  It  is  now  time  to  attend  to
its  principal  consequences.


CHAPTEE VIII

CLAIMS  OF  PERSONS  ON  PERSONS  :  RELATION  OF
OBLIGATIONS  TO  PROPERTY

In the  last  chapter  we  spoke  of  rights  available  Personal

duties

against the  world at  large. Mutual  duties and  definite  or

.  .  ,  „  indefinite.

rights  between  certain  persons  and  groups  of
persons,  not  shared  by  the  world  at  large,  like-
wise exist  by  law  and  custom  in  all  settled
communities.  They  may  be  seen  at  once  to
fall  into  two  classes,  namely,  those  which  are
definite  and  those  which  are  indefinite.  The
relations  of  husband  and  wife  and  parent  and
child  give  rise  to  duties  and  claims  which  are
strictly  personal.  But  these  are  not  separate
and  independent  duties.  They  are  incident  to
the  continuous  relation  of  the  parties ;  they
cannot  be  exhausted  by  any  enumeration  of
particulars ; and  they  cannot be brought to an


194  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

end  except  by  the  expiration  or  determination
of  the  personal  relation  to  which  they  are
incident.  The  advantages  and  benefits  arising
from  them  are  not  recognised  by  law,  not  by
modern  law  at  any  rate,  as  a  possible  subject-
matter  of  sale,  barter,  or  traffic  of  any  kind,  or
of  adequate  pecuniary  estimation.1  Hence  those
advantages  and  benefits,  however  important  to
individuals  and  to  society,  are  not  things  in
the  legal  sense.  Besides  all  this  the  family
relations  belong,  to  a  large  extent,  to  the  sphere
of  moral  as  distinct  from  that  of  legal  justice
and  right.  Courts  of  law  can  deal  only  with
the  grosser  infractions  and  shortcomings  that
occur  in  family  affairs.  It  is  true  that  the
Church  of  Eome  has  attempted,  and  in  the
Middle  Ages  did  habitually  accomplish,  a  great
extension  of  formal  doctrine  and  jurisdiction  as
regards  marriage  and  sexual  morality  generally
The  results  are  matter  of  history,  and  appear,
to  the  English  lay  mind  at  any  rate,  to  stand  as
warning  rather  than  as  example.

Family  relations and the duties arising from
them  present,  in  short,  analogies  to  the  rights  of

1  The  remedies  allowed  by  the  Common  Law  for  violation  of
marital  or  parental  rights  are  directed  only  to  certain  incidents  of
the  right,  not  the  right  as  a  whole.


viii  CLAIMS  OF  PERSONS  ON  PERSONS  195

property  and  possession  on  the  one  hand,  and  to
rights  created  by  agreement  of  parties  on  the  other ;
but  they  are  also  marked  by  essential  differences
which  place  them  apart,  and  make  it  dangerous
to  trust  any  such  analogies  for  the  purpose  of.
deducing  consequences.

The  other  great  class  of  duties  and  rights
taking  effect  between  ascertained  persons  are
those  which  have  regard  to  some  definite  per-
formance or  observance  to  be  rendered  by  one
party  to  another.  When  we  say  that  the
performance  or  observance  is  definite,  we  mean
that  it  is  definite  enough  for  the  law  to  pro-
nounce, in  case  of  dispute,  whether  it  is  duly
fulfilled  or  not,  and  also  to  set  a  pecuniary
value  upon  it.  These  distinctions  have  already
been  pointed  out  in  considering  the  current
divisions  of  legal  rules.1

At  first  sight  it  would  seem  that  a  claim  with  Obligations

. merely

a  corresponding  duty,  subsisting  between  two  definite  personal  in

early  law.

persons,  concerns  those  two  persons  only,  and  the
rights  constituting  or  flowing  from  such  a  claim
cannot  have  any  resemblance  to  the  rights  of  an
owner.  This  is  in  fact  the  view  taken  in  all  or
almost all early  systems of law. Eoman law,

1  Ch.  iv.  p.  79  above.


196  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

though  modified  in  practice  in  the  later  classical
period,  never  ceased  on  principles  to  treat  obliga-
tions as  having  an  essentially  personal  character.
The  benefit  of  what  is  due  to  one  by  agreement
•  cannot  be  made  over  to  a  third  person  in  any  of
the  ways  in  which  corporeal  things,  or  limited
rights  over  them,  are  conveyed.1  For  the  debtor,
it  is  said,  cannot  become  bound  to  a  new  creditor
without  his  own  consent,  that  is,  without  a  new
agreement  or  "  novation."  If  I  want  to  assign  my
rights,  I  must  get  my  debtor  and  the  new  creditor
to  make  a  fresh  contract.  Perhaps  this  view  was
not  always  a  merely  technical  or  logical  one.  For
most  archaic  laws,  including  those  of  Eome,  gave
a  creditor  enormous  powers  of  self-redress,  even  to
imprisoning  and  practically  enslaving  the  debtor  in
default  of  payment.2  Under  such  a  system  the
personal  character  and  temper  of  the  creditor  might
obviously  be  no  less  important  to  the  debtor  than
the  debtor's  honesty  or  means  of  payment  to  the
creditor. Apart from this reason, however, the

1  Obligationes  quoquo  modo  contractae  nihil  eorum  recipiunt :
nam  quod  mini  ab  aliquo  debetur,  id  si  velim  tibi  deberi,  nullo
eorum  modo  quibus  res  corporales  ad  alium  transferuntur  id  effieere
possum. — Gai.  ii.  38.

2  Muirhead,  Hist.  lntr.  to  the  Private  Law  of  Rome,  155,  and
references  there  given  for  early  Germanic  law.  Similar  powers
are  found  in  Asiatic  customs.


vin  CLAIMS  OF  PERSONS  ON  PERSONS  197

strictly  personal  view  of  obligations  created  by-
agreement  is  appropriate,  in  the  unqualified  form
of  the  classical  Eoman  doctrine,  only  to  a  world
where  there  is,  we  need  not  even  say  no  credit  or
no  money,  but  no  common  measure  of  values.  In
modern  law  we  have  to  distinguish  for  this  purpose
between  different  kinds  of  contracts,  namely,  those
which  are  for  special  performances  or  services,  those
which  are  for  the  transfer  of  property,  and  those
which  are  for  the  payment  of  money ;  and,  within
this  last  class,  those  which  are  only  for  the  settle-
ment of  private  affairs  and  those  which  are  intended
to  create  exchangeable  value.

Some  agreements  are  really  such  that  they  can  Personal

contracts  in

be  performed  only  between  the  original  parties,  modern
inasmuch  as  they  involve  the  exercise  of  personal
skill  in  a  specially  designated  manner,  or  mutual
relations  of  personal  confidence,  or  both.  Examples
of  this  are  undertakings  to  execute  a  work  of
literature  or  art,  and  agreements  to  enter  into
active  partnership  in  a  business  requiring  special
knowledge  or  training.  Obviously  the  rights
arising  out  of  such  transactions  are  neither  proper
nor  practicable  objects  of  exchange.  Not  proper,
because  the  person  who  is  bound  is  generally  more
or  less  influenced  by  personal  considerations. It  is


198  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

by  no  means  to  be  assumed  that  a  painter  who  has
undertaken  to  paint  a  picture,  say  for  the  town-hall
of  his  native  city,  would  have  chosen  to  paint  it
for  a  stranger  on  the  same  terms,  or  at  all.  Not
practicable,  because  the  right  to  a  special  and
personal  performance  is  valuable  only  to  a  limited
class  of  persons  or  to  one  person,  even  when  that
kind  of  performance  is  so  far  in  general  request  as
to  have  a  market  of  its  own  and  an  ascertainable
market  value.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  knowing
approximately  for  what  price  a  good  tailor  will
make  a  suit  of  clothes ;  but  when  a  man  has  been
measured  for  a  suit  of  clothes,  the  right  to  have
that  particular  suit  is  not  worth  the  tailor's  price,
or  anything  like  it,  to  any  one  but  himself.  Again
the  price  of  a  railway  ticket  (that  is,  of  the  railway
company's  undertaking  to  carry  one,  with  due  care,
and  on  other  express  and  implied  terms  of  recip-
rocal duty,  between  the  specified  stations)  is  as  fixed
as  any  price  can  be ;  but  a  railway  ticket  from
Oxford  to  Plymouth  is  in  fact 1  worthless  to  a  man
at  Oxford  who  does  not  want  to  go  to  Plymouth.

1  As  things  are  :  but  conditions  may  well  be  conceived  (e.g.  a
system  of  State  or  municipal  railways  with  uniform  ' '  zone  "  fares,
and  tickets  available  over  a  considerable  time  for  any  one  of  several
lines)  under  which  railway  tickets  might  become  an  auxiliary
currency  as  postage  stamps  now  are  to  a  certain  extent.


vin  CLAIMS  OF  PERSONS  ON  PERSONS  199

Or,  to  go  back  to  more  personal  relations,  the
services  of  a  qualified  conveyancing  clerk  are  worth
much  in  a  solicitor's  office,  but  would  be  worth
nothing  in  an  engineer's.  In  all  these  cases,
therefore,  the  person  entitled  to  the  performance
or  service,  whatever  it  may  be,  cannot  be  said  to
be  in  a  position  like  an  owner's.  The  performance
will  give  him  some  advantage  or  profit,  something
that  he  wants  and  has  a  value  for,  or  he  would  not
have  bargained  for  it ;  perhaps  it  will  make  him
the  owner  of  a  thing  not  only  valuable  to  himself
in  the  way  of  personal  use  or  pleasure,  but  having
a  considerable  value  in  exchange,  as  in  the  case  of
a  picture  to  be  painted.  But  in  the  meantime  he
has  nothing  under  his  own  control,  and,  except  by
some  unusual  accident,  nothing  that  he  can  count
on  being  able  to  dispose  of.

Next  let  us  consider  those  agreements  which  are  Contracts

for  sale :

directed  to  a  change  of ownership  as  their  main  their  con-

■  piti  nection

object :  that  is,  agreements  for  sale  and  purchase,  with
Here  we  have  a  connection  with  owners'  rights,  and  "

a  very  close  one.  A  buyer  of  a  specific  thing  who
has  paid,  or  is  ready  and  willing  to  pay,  or  to
whom  credit  has  been  given  by  the  seller,  may  call
at  any  moment  for  the  thing  he  has  bought.  Or
he may  direct  the seller to deal  with  it  on  his


200  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

behalf,  to  make  it  over  to  some  third  person  for
example,  provided  that  the  seller  is  not  put  to  any-
cost  or  risk  beyond  what  was  undertaken  by  the
original  agreement.  In  short  the  buyer  has  every
lawful  disposing  power,  though  he  may  not  be  able
to  prevent  the  seller  from  playing  false  before
possession  of  the  thing  has  been  actually  trans-
ferred. The  seller  on  the  other  hand  has  no  longer
any  rightful  active  interest  in  the  thing ;  he  holds
it  only  for  the  buyer.  So  the  step  from  enforcing
concluded  agreements  to  transfer  property  to  re-
garding the  transfer  itself  as  complete  by  virtue  of
the  agreement  is  an  easy  and  short  one,  and  has
been  made  in  more  than  one  system  of  law.  In
modern  France  a  contract  for  the  sale  of  corporeal
things,  whether  movable  or  immovable,  passes  the
property  forthwith  as  between  the  parties.  This  is
also  the  rule  of  the  Common  Law  (though  not  of
very  ancient  date)  as  regards  goods.  With  regard
to  land  the  king's  judges  at  Westminster,  true  to
Germanic  principles  and  in  conformity  (probably
unconscious)  with  Eoman  maxims,  held  otherwise,
but  the  more  subtle  and  expansive  justice  of  the
Chancellors  made  its  honour  and  profit  of  their
adherence  to  the  old  ways.  The  king's  equity
administered  by  his  Chancellor,  which  became  in


viii  CLAIMS  OF  PERSONS  ON  PERSONS  201

course  of  time  the  settled  law  of  the  Court  of
Chancery,  was  ready  to  compel  the  seller  to  make
good  his  agreement  and  convey  the  land  to  the
ready  and  willing  buyer.  But  it  did  more ;  it
treated  the  buyer  in  the  meantime  as  owner  for  all
substantial  purposes.  It  looked  on  him  as  having
an  "equitable  estate"  in  the  land,  not  a  mere
personal  claim.  The  buyer  has  an  interest  which
he  can  resell,1  settle  on  his  family  in  his  lifetime,
or  dispose  of  by  will.  He  has  everything  except
the  complete  security  of  an  owner  as  against  the
world  at  large :  the  Court  of  Chancery  could  not
give  him  the  "  legal  estate "  which  only  a  real
delivery  of  legal  possession,  or  something  equivalent,
can  take  from  one  holder  and  confer  on  another.
The  barrier  that  stands  between  an  "  equitable
owner"  and  full  ownership  is  the  risk  of  being
displaced  by  a  "  purchaser  for  value  without  notice,"
to  whom  the  property  is  sold  or  made  a  security  by
the  fraud  or  other  fault  of  the  legal  and  apparent
owner,  but  without  any  fault  or  neglect  of  the
purchaser's.2 Subject  to  that  risk,  the  man  who

1  See  Wood  v.  Griffith  (1818).  1  Sw.  43,  18  R.R.  18.

2  Details  of  our  doctrine  on  these  matters,  a  subtle  doctrine,  but
a  just  and  salutary  one  in  the  main,  would  be  out  of  place  here.
Pilcher  v.  Bwwlin$  (1872),  L.R.  7  Ch.  259,  contains  the  leading
authoritative  exposition  of  the  principles.


202  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

has  an  effectual  right  by  contract  to  be  made  the
owner  of  real  estate  in  countries  under  the  Common
Law  has  the  rights  and  advantages  of  property
without  waiting  for  the  actual  transfer.  Accord-
ingly the  benefit  of  an  obligation  whose  object  is  the
transfer  of  property  not  only  has  a  definite  value
and  is  property  in  the  larger  sense,  but  cannot  have
the  name  of  property  refused  to  it  even  in  the
stricter  sense.
Contracts  Let  us  now  proceed  to  contracts  whose  object  is

for  pay-
ment, to  make  a  man  owner  not  of  goods  or  land  having

an  ascertainable  value,  but  of  the  medium  and
measure  of  exchangeable  values  itself :  in  other
words,  contracts  for  the  payment  of  money.  The
right  to  call  for  a  certain  sum  of  money,  supposing
that  payment  can  be  counted  on,  is  as  useful  and
valuable,  except  for  merely  "  petty  cash "  transac-
tions, as  the  money  itself.  In  many  ways  and  on
many  occasions,  indeed,  it  is  even  more  useful.
And,  like  the  money  itself,  it  must  be  taken,  for  all
purposes  capable  of  reduction  to  general  statement
or  rule,  and  therefore  for  legal  purposes  amongst
others,  to  have  the  same  value  for  every  one.
Therefore  it  is  by  its  nature  an  exchangeable
commodity.  Men  of  business  will  treat  it  as  such,
and  the  law  of  modern commercial States must


vm  CLAIMS  OF  PERSONS  ON  PERSONS  203

recognise  it  as  such,  even  at  the  cost  of  doing
apparent  violence  to  principles  derived  from  a
different  kind  of  experience.  The  Common  Law,
before  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  was
slow  to  bring  itself  into  line  with  the  usage  of
mankind ;  but,  under  the  impulse  given  in  a  critical
period  by  Lord  Mansfield's  genius,  the  expansion,
when  it  came,  was  swift  and  full.1  Credit  has
become  currency  in  law  as  well  as  in  fact.

"We  have  said  that  payment  of  the  debt  must  be  Special

forms  of

assumed  as  practically  certain ;  or,  to speak  more  transfer-
able con-
exactly,  the  risk  of  default  must  at  most  be  small  tract.

enough  to be  outweighed by  the  convenience of

doing  business  between  distant  places  without  the

risk and  cost of constantly transmitting coined

metal  or  bullion. Now  this  risk  and  cost,  which

are  considerable  even  at  the  present  day,  were  so

great in  the Middle  Ages  that  a very  moderate

standard  of  credit  might  well  suffice  to  make  the

use  of  credit  preferable. But  there  must  be  some

means  of  keeping  credit  at  a  fairly  uniform  working

level  by  excluding  disputes  in  matter  of  fact. No

man  will  take  a  book  debt  due  to  a  tradesman  as

1  The  French  doctrine  of  negotiable  instruments,  having  been
prematurely  codified,  is  still  much  less  advanced  from  a  mercantile
point  of  view  than  the  English  or  Anglo-American;  See  Chalmers
on  Bills  of  Exchange,  Introduction,  at  pp.  liv.  lv.,  4th  ed.  1891.


204  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

equivalent  to  the  nominal  amount  of  the  bill.
Apart  from  the  trouble  of  collection  and  the  possible
doubt  whether  the  customer  will  pay,  there  may-
be undisclosed  grounds  of  difficulty.  If  it  be  a
tailor's  bill,  the  customer  may  object  that  the
clothes  do  not  fit ;  if  a  bookseller's,  there  may  be  a
claim  for  abatement  on  the  score  of  imperfect  or
wrongly  described  copies ;  and  the  like,  with  endless
variety  of  particulars,  in  other  cases.  Hence  a
debt  which  is  to  be  the  foundation  of  truly  and
freely  exchangeable  value  must  be  unconditionally
acknowledged,  and  evidenced  in  an  understood
form  which  marks  it  off  beyond  mistake  from
debts  liable  to  extraneous  causes  of  dispute.
Again  there  must  be  clear  and  ready  means  of
letting  the  debtor  know  whom  he  is  to  pay.  This
is  needful  in  the  interest  of  all  parties.  For  it  is
"  a  rule  of  general  jurisprudence,"  as  was  said  by  a
great  master  of  law,  "  that  if  a  person  enters  into  a
contract,  and,  without  notice  of  any  assignment,
fulfils  it  to  the  person  with  whom  he  made  the
contract,  he  is  discharged  from  his  obligation."1
Further,  the  obligation  must  be  reinforced  by  the
custom  and  public  opinion  of  the  class  of  persons
most  concerned,  namely,  merchants.  About  the
1  Willes,  J.,  in  De  Nicholls  v.  Saunders,  L.R.  5  C.P.  at  p.  594.


vin  CLAIMS  OF  PERSONS  ON  PERSONS  205

second  quarter  of  the  fourteenth  century  the
ingenuity  of  Mediterranean  traders  provided  for
all  these  requirements  by  establishing  the  main
features  of  bills  of  exchange,  out  of  which  the
whole  system  of  modern  credit  has  grown.1  Eisk
of  the  parties  originally  or  ultimately  liable  being
insolvent  can,  of  course,  not  be  wholly  eliminated,
though  measures  of  precaution  and  mitigation  are
possible.  Eisks  of  fraud  and  forgery  likewise  exist,
but  these  differ  only  in  degree  from  the  risk  of  tak-
ing bad  money  when  one  is  dealing  with  hard  cash.

But it is not enough to give the ordinary  Negotiable
incidents  of  property  to  commercial  obligations  if  ments  and
they  are  to  be  effective  instruments of  commerce  rency™1
and  adjusters  of  mutual  credits. A  currency  must
have  more  than  the  common  capacity  of  passing  by
transfer. It  must  pass  without  discussion  of  the
holder's  ownership,  so  long  as  it  is  genuine. The
very purpose  of current coin is not merely  to
measure  values,  but  to  free  the  receiver  of  a  pay-
ment from  having  to  trace  back  the  payer's  right
to  what  he  hands  over. Such  is  the  real  difference
between  sale  and  barter :  and  so  needful  to  current
money  is  this  quality  of  dispensing  with  proof  of  title,

1  See  examples  and  references  collected  by  Mr.  E.  Jenks,  "  Early
History  of  Negotiable  Instruments,"  Law  Quart.  Rev.  x.  73  sqq.


206  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

or,  as  our  ancestors  would  have  said,  neither  requiring
nor  admitting  warranty,  that  it  is  assumed  in  every
system  of  law  as  being  too  elementary  to  call  for
definition  or  authority.  Credit  has  been  put  on  an
equal  footing  with  metallic  currency  in  this  respect
by  making  bills  of  exchange  and  other  like  docu-
ments not  only  transferable  but  negotiable.  Paper
money  and  other  instruments  payable  to  bearer  are
transferable  not  like  ordinary  goods,  but  like  the
coin  which  they  potentially 1  represent,  and  the
right  to  receive  what  is  expressed  to  be  due  passes
with  the  document  and  is  inseparable  from  it.
Thus  we  have  a  large  and  most  important  class  of
incorporeal  things,  and  moreover  things  consisting
in  obligation,  which  are  not  only  alienable,  but
more  fully  and  freely  alienable  than  almost  every
kind  of  corporeal  things,  and  so  connected  with
particular  corporeal  things — namely,  the  negotiable
documents  themselves — that  possession  of  such  a
thing  in  good  faith  and  for  value  conclusively
determines  the  right.  Although  this  does  not
make  it  correct  to  say  that  the  holder  of  a  bill  of

1  Potentially  because  negotiable  paper  can  actually  represent
nothing  but  credit,  however  good  the  credit  may  be.  The
promise  of  the  Bank  of  England  to  pay  £5  is  as  good  as  £5  in
gold,  but  still  a  promise.  And  this  remains  true  even  when  we
are  bound  by  law  to  accept  that  promise  as  "legal  tender."


viu  CLAIMS  OF  PERSONS  ON  PERSONS  207

exchange  has  a  thing  in  possession  (for  the  actual
piece  of  paper,  being  valuable  only  for  the  sake  of
the  incorporeal  right  which  it  represents,  does  not
count  as  a  corporeal  thing  of  value),1  the  fact  of
rights  arising  from  contract  being  thus  intimately
associated  with  possession  and  physical  delivery
shows  how  far  modern  developments  of  business
have  taken  us  from  the  old  personal  and  inalienable
character  of  obligations.

Another  kind  of  alienable  obligations  are  those  Shares  and

other

which constitute the great bulk of permanent  modern

~  ,  . . forms  of

investments.  Government  and  other  securities,  invest-
joint-stock  shares,  and  the  like,  are  nothing  else
(apart  from  any  eventual  liability  to  which  they
may  expose  the  holders  in  some  cases)  than  the
right  to  receive  a  fixed  rate  of  interest  or  annuity,
or  a  dividend  or  share  of  profits  not  fixed,  but
often  capable  of  approximate  estimation  beforehand.
Such  rights  are  as  much  property  as  the  capital
invested;  whether  they  are  a  good  equivalent  for

1  On  the  other  hand  the  offence  of  theft  was  defined  at  a
relatively  early  stage  in  the  history  of  English  law,  and,  as
defined,  involved  a  wrongful  change  of  possession  in  a,  corporeal
thing  of  value.  The  result  of  different  parts  of  the  law  remaining
in  such  different  states  of  development  was  that,  until  a  remedy
was  provided  by  legislation,  no  taking  of  documents  whose  sole
value  was  in  "their  evidentiary  character"  could  be  theft:  an
absurd  but  not  a  capricious  result. — See  Pollock  and  Wright  on
Possession,  233-5.


208  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

it  is  a  question  of  fact  with  which  legal  principle
has  nothing  to  do.  In  fact  we  commonly  regard  a
holder  of  stock  or  shares  as  still  having  the  capital,
and  think  of  the  interest  or  dividends  as  being  the
fruits  of  capital  in  the  same  way  that  rent  and
agricultural  profits  are  the  fruits  of  land.  And
this  is  substantially  true  for  economic  purposes,  but
legally  the  capital,  as  the  investor's  capital,  does
not  exist :  it  has  become  the  firm's  or  company's
capital.1  In  the  same  way  every  one  who  keeps  a
banking  account  will  talk  of  his  money- at  the  bank,
though  he  has  really  parted  with  whatever  has
been  paid  in,  and  his  balance  is  simply  a  balance
of  unsecured  debt  from  the  banker.  More  gener-
ally, it  is  said  with  truth  that  "  the  lender  of
money  thinks  the  money  lent  still  belongs  to  him,
and  that  the  borrower  has  acquired  only  the  right
to  use  it  temporarily " ; 2  and  this  conception  was
the  predominant  one  in  early  law  and  procedure,  as
our  old  English  forms  of  action  abundantly  witness.
An  overdue  debt  was  treated  as  a  thing  which  the

1  The  case  of  stock  in  the  public  funds  is  even  stronger ;  there
the  fundholder  is  entitled,  in  law  and  in  fact,  only  to  certain
annual  payments.  There  is  no  right  to  repayment  of  the  principal
sum  at  any  assignable  time  or  under  any  assignable  conditions :
"the  principal  is  a  purely  fictitious  amount ;  it  is  merely  a  cipher
by  which  the  interest  is  computed." — C.  Sweet  in  L.Q.B.  x.  303.

2  Langdell,  Summary  of  Contracts,  §99.


vin  CLAIMS  OF  PERSONS  ON  PERSONS  209

borrower  unjustly  withheld  from  the  lender,  as  he
might  have  kept  a  borrowed  horse  or  "  held  over  "
in  the  occupation  of  a  piece  of  land.  Possession
of  land  and  payment  of  money  were  claimed  in
precisely  similar  forms  of  words.  Here  popular
archaism  reinforces  the  modern  business  way  of
treating  affairs.  With  the  great  majority  of  in-
vestors in  either  the  public  funds  or  the  debentures
or  shares  of  a  company  the  difficulty  would  be,  not
to  persuade  them  that  their  interests  are  really
property,  but  to  make  them  understand  how  there
can  be  anything  about  so  simple  a  fact  that  needs
explanation.  Such  interests  are  alienable  and  are
largely  bought  and  sold  every  day ;  they  are  often
the  staple  of  men's  estates,  and  are  made  the
provision  of  families.  In  some  cases  permanent
securities 1  are  not  only  alienable  but  negotiable ;
such  cases  are  exceptional  in  English  usage,  but  by
no  means  uncommon  in  America.

Accordingly  rights  to  performance  or  payment


1  The  difference  between  lending  on  the  security  of  an  under-
taking (as  on  debentures)  and  adventuring  one's  money  in  the
undertaking  (as  in  ordinary  shares)  is  of  minor  importance  for  our
general  purpose.  Here  we  must  say  "securities":  ordinary
shares  or  stock  cannot  be  negotiable  for  want  of  a  definite  and
unconditional  promise  to  pay.  If  not  fully  paid  up,  they  involve
a  contingent  liability  which  would  make  another  fatal  obstacle  to
their  being  negotiable  as  distinct  from  transferable.

P


210  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

Rights created  by  agreement  are  things  in  contemplation

created  by

contract  of  law,  so  far  as  they  have  a  value  for  the  person
property:  entitled,  which  courts  of  justice  will  define  or
as  to  other  recognise  as  defined  by  the  parties.  And,  beyond
'  this,  definite  rights  arising  from  agreement  not  only
are  things,  but  can  be  made  exchangeable  things,
property  in  the  fullest  sense,  if  such  is  the  intention
of  the  parties,  and  if  that  intention  is  recognised  by
rules  of  law  as  deserving  encouragement  on-  grounds
of  general  convenience.  Obligations  independent
of  the  consent  of  parties  remain  to  be  considered
under  the  same  aspect.  The  right  in  these  cases
may  be  a  right  either  to  specific  restitution  in  some
form,  or,  as  it  is  much  more  commonly,  to  compen-
sation in  money.  Private  rights  to  receive  fixed
sums  of  money  by  way  of  compensation  or  forfeiture
are  also  possible,  but  in  modern  law  not  very
frequent.1  In  any  of  these  alternatives  the
plaintiff's  right  is  at  least  capable  of  being  assessed
in  terms  of  money ;  he  will  get  money  or  money's
worth.  He  is  better  off,  by  an  assignable  amount,
than  if  his  right  were  not  recognised  by  law.2  So
far  there  does  not  appear  any  reason  for  refusing  to

1  In  our  law  stipulations  for  fixed  penalties  or  "liquidated
damages"  are  constantly  treated  as  only  fixing  a  maximum
compensation.

2  See  Dr.  Moyle's  Justinian,  2nd  ed.  p.  189.


vin  CLAIMS  OF  PERSONS  ON  PERSONS  211.

include  obligations  of  this  kind  in  the  category  of
things.  If  they  were  further  recognised  by  law,
like  pecuniary  rights  created  by  agreement,  as
possible  objects  of  exchange  and  traffic,  there  could
be  no  hesitation  about  including  them.  But  they
are  distinctly  not  so  recognised.  It  is  not  thought
good  for  justice,  peace,  or  fair  dealing  that  hostile
rights  of  action  should  be  marketable.  This
principle  is  found,  I  believe,  in  all  civilised  laws ;
it  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  rules  of  the  Common
Law  against  "  maintenance  "  and  "  champerty,"  rules
which  at  first  sight  look  technical  and  even
capricious,  but  which  were  called  forth  by  real
dangers  and  abuses.  No  doubt  it  may  be  hard  to
draw  the  line  between  a  genuine  sale  of  property
with  a  title  more  or  less  capable  of  doubt  and  the
sale  of  a  speculative  lawsuit.  Our  ancestors  were
disposed  to  draw  it  by  requiring  actual  possession
as  a  condition  of  effectually  dealing  with  property,
or  in  the  case  of  incorporeal  things  the  nearest
possible  equivalent  of  possession.  Whether  modern
lawyers  can  accept  so  trenchant  a  solution  or  not,
the  line  still  has  to  be  drawn  somewhere;  and
rights  and  interests  that  fall  on  the  wrong  side  of
it  will  not  be  lawful  objects  of  commerce.

In  the  case,  then,  of  claims  arising  from  wrong-


212  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

Rights ful acts,  or  from  acts or events not necessarily
from  wrongful  in  themselves  but  having  like  effects  under

acts  are  particular  rules  of  law,  we  have  to  ask  whether
changeable  rights  valuable  to  the  person  entitled,  but  not
whethOTto  alienable,  are  to  be  considered  as  things.  Perhaps
this  is  a  question  of  terms  more  than  of  substance.
There  is  no  doubt  that  Eoman  lawyers,  though  they
would  have  been  shocked  at  the  notion  of  treating
rights  to  sue  for  injuries  as  exchangeable  property,
did  regard  them  as  things  of  some  kind ;  and  they
seem  to  be  included  in  the  "  things  in  action "  of
the  medieval  Common  Law,  so  far  as  it  has  any
denned  terminology.  Modern  usage  may  tend,  on
the  other  hand,  to  treat  not  only  some  present
intrinsic  worth  but  some  worth  in  exchange,  and
therefore  capacity  of  exchange,  as  essential  to  the
notion  of  a  thing.  On  this  view  the  right  to
recover  damages  or  obtain  restitution,  though
valuable,  is  not  a  thing  at  all.  The  contrast
between  such  duties  and  rights  as  are  created  or
accepted  by  the  will  of  the  parties,  or  defined  as  in
accordance  with  what  is  deemed  to  be  the  will  of
reasonable  parties,  and  such  as  are  imposed  by  rules
of  law  without  regard  to  the  will  of  the  parties,  has
already  been  mentioned,  and  attention  has  been
called  to  its  increasing  importance  in  modern  affairs.


vin  CLAIMS  OF  PERSONS  ON  PERSONS  213

It  would  attain  a  further  degree  of  recognition,  as
it  were  an  added  emphasis,  if  the  view  now
suggested  were  generally  adopted,  and,  instead  of
saying  with  the  Eomans  that  certain  things  have
not  exchangeable  value  or  are  not  allowed  to  be
exchanged,  we  said  that  whatever  has  not  lawful
exchangeable  value,  be  it  corporeal  or  incorporeal,
is  not  a  thing  in  the  eye  of  the  law.


PART  II

LEGAL  AUTHOEITIES  AND  THEIE  USE


CHAPTEE I


THE EXPEESS FOEMS OF LAW


Law, for  the  practical purposes of  lawyers and  Law  can  be

known

citizens,  means  (as  m  effect  we  said  earlier)  the  only  as
sum  of  those  rules  of  conduct  which  courts  of
justice  enforce,  the  conditions  on  which  they  become
applicable,  and  the  manner  and  consequences  of
their  application.  This  is  a  matter  of  fact  not  in
any  way  dependent  on  the  view  that  we  may  take
of  the  political  and  ethical  foundations  of  govern-
ment and  positive  law,  still  less  on  the  correctness
or  adequacy  of  any  philosophical  definition  of  law
in  general  by  which  views  of  that  kind  are  formu-
lated. The  rules  of  law,  like  those  of  every  other
science  and  art,  have  to  be  brought  to  our  knowledge
by  means  of  articulate  statements.  But  in  this
case  the  form  of  such  statements  is  of  peculiar
importance.


218  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  CHAr.

Forms  of  The  express  forms  in  which  we  come  to  know

stating  law.  •nit

any  system  of  law  may  be  generally  classified  thus :

A.  Command.

B.  Maxim  or  text.

C.  Interpretation.

We  take  this  as  a  classification  of  observed
facts,  and  without  regard,  for  the  immediate  purpose
in  hand,  to  the  controverted  question  on  which  we
have  already  touched,1  but  which  belongs  really
not  to  jurisprudence  but  to  the  philosophy  of
politics,  whether  and  to  what  extent  positive  law
can  be  accounted  for  as  a  whole  by  the  express  or
implied  command  of  the  sovereign  power  in  the
commonwealth.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that,  in
point  of  form,  some  statements  of  law  are  commands
and  others  are  not.  The  former  (A)  may  con-
veniently be  called  imperative,  the  latter  (B  and  C)
discursive.

Commands.  Command  purports  to  proceed  from  and  to
express  the  will  of  some  power  claiming  obedience
and  expecting  to  be  obeyed.2

Maxims.  A  legal  maxim  or  text  may  or  may  not  purport

1  Part  I.,  ch.  i.

2  These  are  not  the  same  thing.  During  a  great  part  of  the
eighteenth  century  the  Pretender  claimed  the  obedience  of  English-
men as  his  subjects,  but  experience  proved  that  he  could  not  in
fact  expect  the  majority  of  them  to  obey  him.


i  THE  EXPRESS  FORMS  OF  LAW  219

to  be  derived  either  directly  or  remotely  from  the

command  of  a  legislator.

Interpretation  is  the  scientific  process  of  applying  interpreta-
tion.
legal  rules  in  detail. It  necessarily  assumes  the

existence and authority1  of the rules which it

explains  and  applies. It  may  or  may  not  claim  or

possess  authority  of  its  own.

"  Written  law,"  as  the  phrase  is  commonly  used,  Written

law.
does  not  mean  rules  of  law  expressed  in  writing,

but  what  we  have  called  imperative  law,  an  express

precept  which  not only  declares  or  contains,  but

in  its  very  words  constitutes  the  law.

''  Unwritten law " includes all discursive ex-  Unwritten

law.

pressions  of  law,  however  carefully  they  may  be
reduced  to  writing,  and  whatever  their  professional
authority  or  weight  may  be.  Thus  an  Act  of
Parliament,  a  by-law  of  a  local  authority,  the
articles  of  an .  incorporated  company,  are  written
laws ;  a  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal,  delivered
after  consideration,  and  printed  in  the  current
reports,  is  "  unwritten  "  law.  The  term,  though
easily  misunderstood,  and  at  first  sight  paradoxical,

1  Such  assumption  may  be  limited  or  relative,  as  when  English
Protestant  judges  interpret  Roman  canon  law,  e.g.  in  a  Maltese
marriage  case ;  or  it  may  be  for  argument's  sake  only,  as  when  it
is  sought  to  show  that  a  proposed  rule  cannot  be  law  because  it
leads  to  absurd  consequences.


220  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

is  not  improper.  For  the  words  of.  the  judgment,
however  precise,  are  still  an  exposition  of  the  law
and  not  the  law  itself.  Only  the  principle  ex-
pounded and  applied  by  the  court  is  law ;  the
words  in  which  it  is  explained  are  not  binding  on
any  one.

Let  us  now  mark  somewhat  more  closely  the
special characters of the forms of law we have
noted.
Command: A.  Command,  in  the  way  of  systematic  legisla-

aotual  or .  .

legendary,  tion,  has  been  said  to  be  the  form  of  law  which
tends  to  prevail  in  modern  times.  Be  that  as  it
may,  we  cannot  say  that  any  other  form  is  more
ancient.  Archaic  law,  so  far  as  preserved  to  us,
is  quite  commonly  thus  expressed.  The  Ten  Com-
mandments and  the  Twelve  Tables,  widely  separated
as  they  are  in  place  and  time,  are  the  most  familiar
examples.  "  Hominem  mortuum  in  urbe  ne  sepelito
neve  urito  "  is  the  precursor  in  form  as  in  substance
(whether  the  real  motive  of  the  prohibition  were
sanitary  or  religious)  of  our  latest  Public  Health
Acts.

Not  only  this,  but  there  is  a  marked  tendency
even  in  relatively  modern  times  to  refer  existing
rules  of  law  and  customs,  though  not  preserved  in
any  authentic  form  of  words,  to  the  express  institu-


i •  THE  EXPRESS  FORMS  OF  LAW  221

tion  of  some  heroic  person  of  a  former  generation.
One  of  the  first  signs  of  revived  English  feeling
after  the  Norman  Conquest  was  a  demand  for  the
restoration  of  laws  of  Edward  the  Confessor  which
had  never  been  made.  In  like  manner  trial  by
jury  had  barely  taken  anything  like  its  modern
shape  when  pious  antiquaries  began  to  ascribe  it
to  the  ordinance  of  King  Alfred.  All  the  ancient
Hindu  law-books,  and  some  that  are  not  very
ancient,  profess  to  represent  the  utterance  of  some
inspired  sage.

B. Legal  maxims and texts are  produced,  in  Maxim:
different ways and in different stages of legal  guished
development,  by  the  practical  needs  of  suitors  and  man,i  anci
of  lawyers  after  a  distinct  legal  profession  has  come  tion.
into  existence.

A  maxim  is  a  phrase  embodying  some  legal  idea
of  common  application  in  a  concise  and  portable
form.  It  is  a  symbol  or  vehicle  of  the  law,  so  far
as  it  goes ;  it  is  not  the  law  itself,  still  less  the
whole  of  the  law,  even  on  its  own  ground.  One
of  the  commonest  mistakes  of  beginners  and  laymen
is  to  take  a  maxim  for  an  authentic  and  complete
expression  of  the  law,  and  go  about  to  deduce
consequences  from  its  words  as  if  it  were  a  modern
Act  of  Parliament. The  mistake  was  pointed  out


222  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

many  centuries  ago  by  Paulus,  and  not  many  years
ago  by  Lord  Esher.

"  Eegula  est  quae  rem  quae  est  breviter  enarrat.
Non  ex  regula  ius  sumatur,  sed  ex  iure  quod  est
regula  flat." 1

''  I  detest  the  attempt  to  fetter  the  law  by
maxims.  They  are  almost  invariably  misleading :
they  are  for  the  most  part  so  large  and  general  in
their  language  that  they  always  include  something
which  really  is  not  intended  to  be  included  in
them." 2

Another  common  mistake  is  to  cite  maxims  as
if  they  contained  the  reason  or  explanation  of  the
rules  embodied  by  them,  whereas  they  seldom
explain  anything,  and  are  almost  always  subject  to
implied  exceptions  and  limitations.  Thus  the
sentence  Qui  facit  per  alium  facit  per  se.  may  be
useful  as  a  reminder  that  acts  of  a  servant  about
his  master's  business  are  (within  certain  limits)
imputed  to  the  master  so  as  to  make  him  answer-
able for  them,  whether  they  were  in  fact  authorised
by  the  master  or  not.  But  it  does  not  make  the
rule  in  any  way  more  intelligible,  or  throw  any
light  on  its  origin. Sic  utere  tuo  ut  alienum  non

1  D.  50,  17,  de  reg.  iur.  1.

2  Lord  Esher,  M.R.,  Yarmouth  v.  France  (1887),  19  Q.B.  Div.
653.


i  THE  EXPRESS  FORMS  OF  LAW  223

laedas  is  a  precept  of  law  in  the  nature  of  a  maxim ;
it  holds  largely  but  by  no  means  universally,  for
though  a  man  may  not  altogether  "  do  what  he  will
with  his  own,"  there  are  many  things  he  may  do
without  being  bound  to  save  his  neighbours  harm-
less from  any  loss  or  inconvenience  that  may  result.
What  the  maxim  really  tells  us  is  that  the  law
does  set  some  limits,  in  the  interest  of  the  neighbours
and  mankind  at  large,  to  an  owner's  use  of  his
property  for  his  own  purposes,  and  every  owner
must  keep  within  those  limits  at  his  peril.  The
maxim  does  not  profess  to  tell  us  what  they  are.
In  fact  we  have  here  two  maxims  or  proverbs  which
are  in  verbal  conflict,  either  of  them  taken  alone
and  literally  being  far  too  wide ;  if  we  take  them
together  they  roughly  limit  one  another.

A  certain  number  of  legal  texts  not  being  the  Growth  of

.  authentic

direct  utterance  of  any  supreme  power  or  lawgiver  texts.
are  nevertheless  regarded  as  more  or  less  authentic
statements  of  the  law.  Such  texts  have,  for  the
most  part,  been  originally  nothing  but  private
comment  or  interpretation;  often  they  have  been
the  work  of  persons  who  expressly  disclaimed  any
pretension  to  speak  with  authority,  as,  in  our  own
country,  Littleton.  In  some  cases  authority  has
been conferred on them  by  special acts of the


224  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

sovereign  power ;  the  great  example  of  this  is  the
treatment  of  the  writings  of  the  classical  Eoman
lawyers  which  have  come  down  to  us  in  the  Digest
of  Justinian.  In  other  cases  private  writings  have
been  approved  and  relied  on  by  lawyers  and  judges
until  they  have  acquired  an  intrinsic  value,  and
their  statements  are  accepted  as  authentic  or  at
least  presumably  correct.  This  has  happened  with
the  English  law-texts  known  as  "  books  of  authority,"
of  which  we  shall  say  more  at  a  later  stage,
interpreta- 0.  Interpretation is the process  of fixing  the

tion :  its

necessity,  application  of  legal  principles  in  concrete  cases,
whether  the  principles  be  laid  down  in  precise  and
imperative  terms  by  a  lawgiver,  or  implied  in  a
current  rule  which  has  to  be  sought  in  "  unwritten  "
law.  Some  such  process  is  required  by  the  multi-
tude and  variety  of  human  affairs,  and  it  is  not
necessarily  connected  with  any  imperfection  in  the
law  itself.  If  the  lawgiver  says  "  thou  shalt  do  no
murder,"  it  has  to  be  settled  what  killing  is  murder.
If  he  says  "  thou  shalt  not  steal,"  it  has  to  be
settled  what  kinds  of  taking  or  appropriation  are
theft.  And  although  it  may  at  first  seem  easy  to
untrained  common  sense  to  pronounce  that  some
acts  are  within  the  prohibition  of  the  law  and  others
are  not,  there  will  and must  be cases near  the


I  THE  EXPRESS  FORMS  OP  LAW  225

border-line  which  are  not  obviously  on  either  one
side  or  the  other.  This,  moreover,  remains  true  in
some  measure,  however  carefully  and  with  whatever
amount  of  detail  the  law  be  laid  down.  What  is
called  the  rule  against  perpetuities  in  our  own  law —
a  modern  rule  of  a  highly  refined  system — limits  the
time  during  which  the  full  and  final  destination  of
interests  in  property  within  the  rule  may  be  kept
in  suspense.  In  the  course  of  the  eighteenth
century  the  limit  was  decided  to  be  "  a  life  or  lives
in  being,  and  one  and  twenty  years  afterwards."
These  are  Blackstone's  words.1  Fully  two  genera-
tions after  Blackstone  wrote  the  question  arose,  and
had  to  be  decided,  whether  these  one  and  twenty
years  did  or  did  not  involve  reference  to  an  actual
minority  of  some  person.  Although  the  rule  had
never  been  so  laid  down,  there  were  plausible
grounds  for  thinking  that  such  was  its  meaning,  as
any  one  who  knows  the  history  of  the  doctrine,  or
knows  enough  law  to  make  himself  acquainted  with
it,  may  readily  satisfy  himself.  The  House  of  Lords
decided  that  the  twenty-one  years  were  an  absolute
term  "  in  gross  "  and  need  not  have  regard  to  any
minority.2

Every  question  of  interpretation  may  be  reduced

1  Comm.  ii.  174.  2  Cadell  v.  Palmer  (1833),  1  CI.  &  F.  372.

Q


226  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

ultimately  to  this  form :  Given  a  rule  of  law  that
conditions  generically  described  as  A  produce  a
certain  legal  liability  or  other  consequence  X,  does
the  specific  fact  or  group  of  facts  n  fall  within
the  genus  A  ?

Inasmuch  as  no  general  rule  can  anticipate  all
possible  questions  of  this  kind,  the  need  of  inter-
pretation is  not  in  itself  any  reproach  to  the  law.
Eather  law  without  interpretation  is  but  a  skeleton
without  life,  and  interpretation  makes  it  a  living
body.1

It  may  with  equal  verbal  correctness  be  affirmed
in  one  sense,  and  denied  in  another,  that  interpreta-
tion (whether  performed  by  judges  or  by  text-
writers)  makes  new  law.  The  question  may  be
important  in  a  purely  philosophical  discussion  of
law,  but  for  any  other  purpose  it  is  like  discussing
whether  the  John  Milton  who  wrote  Samson
Agonistes  was  really  the  same  John  Milton  who
wrote  Zycidas.

The  construction  of  written  documents,  whether
of  public  authority  or  binding  as  between  private
persons,  is  a  special  branch  of  interpretation,  and  a
highly  important  one,  but  must  by  no  means  be
supposed  to  be  the  whole  of  it.  Individual  actions,
1  Cp.  Sohm's  Institutes  of  Boman  Law,  §  8.


I  THE  EXPRESS  FORMS  OF  LAW  227

or  a  course  of  conduct,  may  be  the  subject  of  inter-
pretation no  less  than  words.

Interpretation  may  be  carried  on,  and  its  results  Divers

methods  of

preserved  for  use,  in  more  than  one  way,  and  in  fact  interpreta-
tion :  case-
there  have  been  considerable  differences  of  method  law.

according  to  time,  place,  and  the  system  of  law  in
force.  In  England,  and  countries  which  have  derived
their  law  from  England,  or  come  under  the  influence
of  English  judicial  habits,  the  decisions  of  superior
courts  of  justice,  and  the  reasons  given  for  them,  are
chiefly  relied  on  for  this  purpose,  and  are  treated  as
having  eminent  and  all  but  exclusive  authority.  A
judgment  prepared  by  an  English  judge  and  delivered
in  an  actual  case  before  the  court,  or  even  delivered
without  preparation,  is  on  a  quite  distinct  footing
from  any  opinion  which  the  same  judge  may  express
out  of  court  on  the  same  subject,  say  in  a  published
treatise  on  that  branch  of  the  law.  The  judicial
deliverance  is  of  authority,  unless  and  until  it  be
reversed  or  overruled  by  a  higher  court ;  that  is,  other
judges  will  follow  it  in  similar  cases  when  they
occur.  The  extra-judicial  opinion,  however  carefully
formed  and  expressed,  is  a  mere  repertory  of  argu-
ments ;  lawyers  may  find  them  useful,  judges  may
find  them  convincing  and  decide  accordingly ;  but
the  opinion,  as  an  opinion,  is  not  binding  on  any


228  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

one.1  We  shall  explain  more  fully  in  a  subsequent
chapter  the  details  of  English  judicial  usage  as  to
the  following  of  decided  cases.  It  is  eminently  a
matter  of  practical  usage,  established  for  something
like  six  centuries  in  England,  though  we  cannot
point  to  any  definite  time  when  it  was  first  adopted,
and  there  has  been  in  proportion  to  its  importance
but  little  formal  statement  or  discussion  of  it.  Case-
law  is  now  the  usual  term  for  the  law  declared  and
developed  by  judicial  decisions,  and  embodied  in
published  reports  of  them.
Roman  Familiar  as  this  system  is  to  all  English  lawyers

system  of

authoiita- and  (to  a  certain  extent)  men  of  affairs  who  are

tive  writ-
ings, not  lawyers,  and natural as it  may  appear,  it  is

by  no  means  the  only  possible  way  of  producing

a  body  of  scientific  material for  the guidance  of

lawyers in advising their clients,  and judges in

deciding  the  clients'  cases  when  brought  into  court.

There  may  be  a  considerable  legal  literature,  and

something  like  what  English  lawyers  call  authority,

without the actual  decisions of courts of  justice

being regarded as binding in subsequent cases,

1  "There  is  one  notion  often  expressed  with  regard  to  works
written  or  revised  by  authors  on  the  bench,  which  seems  to  me  in
part  at  least  erroneous,  the  notion,  I  mean,  that  they  possess  a
quasi-judicial  authority." — Preface  to  "Fry  on  Specific  Performance,"
cited  by  Kekewich,  J.,  Union  Bank  v.  Munster  (1887),  37  Ch.D.,
at  p.  54.


i  THE  EXPRESS  FORMS  OF  LAW  229

or  having  any  influence  at  all  on  professional
opinion.  Such  was  the  state  of  Roman  law  in
the  republican  period  ;  and  under  the  Empire  it
was  probably  the  combination  of  judicial  with
legislative  functions  in  the  Emperor's  person  that
caused  his  judicial  deliverances  to  be  accepted  as
authentic  declarations  of  the  law.  The  ordinary
judges  were  not  professional  lawyers,  nor  (in  the
earlier  period)  permanent  officers  of  the  State;
therefore  their  decisions  were  of  no  particular
weight,  and  the  scientific  development  of  law  was
carried  on  not  in  court,  but  (as  we  should  say)  in
chambers,  by  the  leading  lawyers,  and  in  the  books
and  commentaries,  perhaps  originally  meant  only
for  private  use,  which  they  produced.  The  founda-
tion of  the  Corpus  Juris  was  laid  not  in  the  de-
cisions of  courts  but  in  the  opinions  and  discussions
of  advocates.  As  this  book  is  not  an  introduction
to  Roman  law,  we  purposely  say  nothing  of  the
steps  by  which  the  published  opinions  of  the
principal  Roman  jurists  acquired  a  character  of
positive  authority,  and  ultimately,  so  far  as  selected
and  preserved  by  Justinian,  became  "  written
law." 1

The pure Roman system,  as  we  may  call  it,

1  See  Sohm,  Institutes  of  Roman  Law,  §§  15,  16.


230  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

Modem  f,  of  interpretation  founded  on  extrajudicial  opinion
has  Hot  prevailed  to  any  great  extent  in  modern
times.  In  most  continental  countries  the  decisions
of  the  courts  are  referred  to  and  used  in  argument
or  discussion,  though  the  courts  are  distinctly  not
bound  to  follow  previous  decisions.  Exactly  speak-
ing, decisions  have  neither  more  nor  less  authority
in  France,  Germany,  or  Italy  at  the  present  day
than  the  opinions  of  learned  persons  expressed
in  any  other  form.  In  France,  accordingly,  it  is
not  uncommon  to  cite  the  judgment  of  a  foreign
tribunal  administering  what  is  really  the  same
law ;  for  example,  the  construction  put  on  an
article  of  the  Code  Napolebn  by  a  Belgian  court:
and  there  would  be  no  formal  objection  to  citing
for  the  same  purpose  a  judgment  of  our  own
Judicial  Committee  on  appeal  from  Mauritius  or
the  Province  of  Quebec.  In  practice,  however,
it  is  found  that  wherever  decided  cases  are  made
accessible  by  regular  reporting  their  influence  tends
to  gain  on  other  forms  of  "scientific  law,"  and
jurisprudence  to  assume  a  more  distinctly  national
character.

Political  and  administrative  changes  which
strengthen  the  courts,  increase  the  proportion  of
enacted to customary  law,  and magnify the im-


I  THE  EXPRESS  FORMS  OF  LAW  231

portance  of  particular  judicial  centres,  have  the
like  effect.  This  has  heen  notably  the  case  in
Germany  during  the  last  generation.  It  is  quite
possible  that  before  the  end  of  the  century  modern
German  law  may  practically  consist  of  codes  or
statutes  and  case-law.

As  matter  of  history,  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  Effects  of

royal

that  our  own  peculiar  and  definite  system  of  case-  authority

in  England

law  is  due  to  the  early  assertion  of  supreme
authority  in  matters  of  justice  by  the  king's  courts,
and  to  suits  being  brought,  on  the  one  hand,  from
every  part  of  the  kingdom  before  a  comparatively
small number of judges having their "  certain  .

place " *  at  Westminster,  and,  on  the  other  hand,
dealt  with  in  every  part  of  the  kingdom  by  the
same  judges  on  their  circuits.

It  would  not  be  appropriate  here  to  discuss
the  relative  advantages  of  the  English  (or,  as  it
should  now  be  called,  Anglo-American)  and  the
continental  usage.  With  the  continental  method
it  is,  or  ought  to  be,  easier  to  correct  anomalies
and  reverse  or  arrest  wrong  tendencies  before  they
become  inveterate.  With  ours  the  law,  when  once
denned  by  authority  on  any  point,  is  or  ought
to  be  more  certain.  On  the  other  hand,  when
1  The  well-known  phrase  of  Magna  Carta,  c.  17.


232  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE chap,  i

case-law  has  taken  a  wrong  turn,  the  correction
of  it  by  express  legislation,  at  any  rate  with  our
English  parliamentary  procedure,  is  both  an  incon-
venient and  an  uncertain  operation.


CHAPTER II


THE SOURCES OE ENGLISH LAW

[Compare  Kent's  Commentaries  on  American  Law,  with  0.  W.
Holmes's  notes,  vol.  i.  Lects.  xx.  xxi.  xxii.]

The sources from  which the law  of England is  Written

and  un-

derived  may  be  distributed  under  the  two  great  written
heads  of  that  which  is  "  written  "  or  enacted,  and
that  which  is  "unwritten"  or  not  enacted.  The
following  statement  is  intended  to  exhibit  facts
which  exist  and  can  be  verified  apart  from  any
controverted  question  in  the  philosophy  of  law.

A. Enacted Written:

original
By  or^maOegislative  authority :  and

delegated

Acts  of  Parliament.  legislation.

By  delegated  legislative  authority  :

Orders  in  Council,  Eules  of  Court,
by-laws  and  regulations  of  local
governing  bodies,  railway  and  other


234  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

public companies, made in the
exercise of powers conferred by
Parliament,  Statutes  of  Universities
and  Colleges,  and  the  like.
By customary authority (now of little
importance).1
It is necessary,  in constitutional law,  to  dis-
tinguish delegated  authority  from  the  kind  of  authority
which,  though  created  by  the  Imperial  Parliament,
and  in  point  of  strict  law  revocable  or  variable  by
its  act  alone,  is  not  delegated  but  rather  devolved.
The legislatures of  British  India  and  of  (at  any
rate)  the  self-governing  British  colonies  derive  their
powers  from  Acts  of  Parliament,  and  those  powers
are  limited  in  certain  ways,  but  such  a  legislature
is not a mere  delegate  or  agent  of  the  Imperial
Parliament. Its powers are plenary within the
appointed  limits ;  so  long  as  these  are  not  exceeded,
there is no restriction on the  manner in which
the power may be exercised. A town council
cannot  delegate  the  making  of  by-laws  to  the  town
clerk,  nor  a  railway  company  to  the  traffic  manager ;
the  university  could  not  enact  that  the terms  of
a  statute  should  be  settled  by  the  vice-chancellor

1  By-laws  of  local  inferior  courts  made  by  virtue  of  a  custom
are  believed  to  be  the  only  examples  of  this  class.


ii  THE  SOURCES  OF  ENGLISH  LAW  235

and  the  registrar.  But  a  colonial  legislature
has  plenary  powers  within  the  bounds  of  its  own
competence,  and  can,  within  these  hounds,  confer
delegated  or  discretionary  authority  in  the  same
manner  as  the  Imperial  Parliament  itself.  This
rule,  moreover,  applies  to  the  Provincial  Legis-
latures established  in  Canada  by  the  British
North  America  Act  as  well  as  to  the  Dominion
Parliament.1

The  legislative  or  quasi-legislative  acts  of  bodies
and  persons  duly  exercising  authority  derived  from
Parliament  have  of  course  the  force  of  law  as
regards  all  persons  whom  they  concern.  "Every
by-law  is  a  law,  and  as  obligatory  to  all  persons
bound  by  it,  that  is,  within  its  jurisdiction,  as  any
act  of  parliament,  only  with  this  difference,  that
a  by-law  is  liable  to  have  its  validity  brought  in
question,  but  an  act  of  parliament  is  not."  2

B. Not  Evaded Unwritten:

judicial

Declarations  and  expositions  of  law  are  andnon-
a.  Judicial, namely the decisions of the  exposition.
superior  courts  of  justice  and  the  reasons
assigned  for  them.

1  India :  B.  v.  Bwrah  (1878),  3  App.  Ca.  889,  904.  Ontario :
Hodge  v.  E.  (1883),  9  App.  Ca.  117,  132.  New  South  Wales :
Powell  v.  Apollo  Candle  Co.  (1885),  10  App.  Ca.  282,  289.  New
Zealand:  Ashbury  v.  Ellis  (1893),  A.C.  339.

2  Holt,  C.J.,  in  City  of  London  v.  Wood,  12  Mod.  at  p.  678.


236  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

b.  Nbn -judicial,  namely  in  (i) "books of
authority "  (a limited and exceptional
class) :  (ii)  writings  not  of  authority,  but
which  may  help  towards  the  formation
of  authority.
No  general  description  can be  given  of  what
constitutes  a  "book  of  authority." It  is  a  matter
of  judicial  custom  and  professional  tradition. We
have already  seen  that  being  written  by  a  judge
does  not  make  a  book  authoritative. Some  books
which  are  highly  esteemed,  and which it is not
improper to cite in  argument,  are still short of
having  authority  in  the  professional  sense;  Black-
stone  is  the  leading  example. Sir  Michael  Foster's
treatise on Crown  Law,  first  published in 1762,
only  three  years  before  Blackstone's  Commentaries,
is  said  to  be  the  latest  book  to  which  authority  in
the  exact  sense  can  be  ascribed.
Official  It  will  be  observed  that  there  is  a  practical  differ-

character

of  written ence  of  some  importance  between  our  "  written  "  and

law.

"  unwritten "  materials,  depending  on  the  manner
in  which  they  are  produced.  "Written"  law,
generally  speaking,  bears  a  political  and  official
stamp.  It  is  the  work  of  statesmen,  members  of
parliament,  public  officers,  or  the  executive  officers
of  bodies  whose  functions  are  recognised  and  regu-


ii  THE  SOURCES  OF  ENGLISH  LAW  237

lated  by  the  Legislature  as  being  of  a  public
character.  Those  who  undertake  the  framing
either  of  Bills  introduced  in  Parliament,  or  of
subordinate  acts  of  legislation,  municipal  by-laws,
college  statutes  and  so  forth,  may  and  often  do
seek  the  assistance  of  skilled  lawyers  to  express
their  intentions  in  proper  form;  but  there  is  no
security  that  this  shall  be  done.  If  it  is  done,
there  is  no  security,  in  the  case  of  Acts  of  Parlia-
ment at  any  rate,  that  it  may  not  be  undone  at
the  last  moment  by  amateur  amendments.  The
work  of  legislators  may  be  and  ought  to  be  scientific,
but  it  is  not  essentially  so.

"  Unwritten  law  "  is  the  work  of  trained  lawyers,  Profes-
and its character  is necessarily  professional and  character
scientific. It deals largely in technical terms,  written
"terms  of  art"  as  our  law-books  call  them,  which
laymen are not expected to understand. The
"  general  reader "  who  should  take  up  at  random,
for  example,  a  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
in the current  number  of  the  Law  Reports,  or  a
case  from  the  early  part  of  the  century  in  a  volume
of the Revised  Reports, would have no right to
expect  it  to  be  more  intelligible  or  interesting  to
him  than  a  modern  technical  treatise  on  engineering
or chemistry. Doubtless there is no branch of


238  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

human  affairs  with  which  courts  of  law  may  not
have  to  deal ;  and  an  intelligent  layman  who  tries
the  supposed  sortes  juridicae  may  have  a  fair  chance
of  lighting  upon  something  that  concerns  his  own
business,  or  is  connected  with  some  well  known
piece  of  history,  or  is  otherwise  of  obvious  public
interest;  but  still  it  is  only  a  better  chance  than
other  kinds  of  technical  works  outside  his  own
special  knowledge  would  offer  him.  A  little  re-
flection will  show  that  law  could  not  be  systematic
on  any  other  conditions.  Like  other  sciences,
jurisprudence  professes  to  be  intelligible  to  those
who  can  and  will  learn  it.  As  in  other  sciences
and  arts,  there  is  no  short  cut  that  will  serve
instead  of  learning  and  experience.1
Relation  of  Another  distinction  to  be  noted  is  in  the  nature
lawTo  eD  0I"  tne  authority  on  which  "  written "  and  "  un-
custoni.  written  "  law  claim  ultimately  to  rest.  In  modern
experience  "  written "  or  enacted  law  proceeds,
immediately,  or  by  derivation,  from  the  express
will  of  the  supreme  legislative  authority.  Such
exceptions  as  may  now  be  found  are  of  no  practical
importance. Law  which is not enacted consists

1  No  opinion  is  expressed  here  on  the  distinct  question  how
far,  and  for  what  reasons,  the  training  of  English  lawyers  in
recent  times  has  been  more  cumbrous  and  less  efficient  than  it
ought  to  be.


ii  THE  SOURCES  OF  ENGLISH  LAW  239

partly,  but  by  no  means  wholly  nor  even  chiefly,  in
the  interpretation  of  public  enactments  which  are
in  themselves  laws  binding  on  all  whom  they  con-
cern, and  of  private  documents  which  the  parties
concerned  have,  under  the  sanction  or  allowance
of  the  general  law,  made  a  law  to  themselves.
This  does  not  account  for  the  great  proportion  of
our  case-law  which  does  not  profess  to  interpret
any  written  law,  whether  original  or  derivative,  but
professes  on  the  contrary  to  develop  and  apply
principles  that  have  never  been  committed  to  any
authentic  form  of  words.  Such  principles  are  said
to  be  customary,  and  are  described  as  "general
customs,  which  are  the  universal  rule  of  the  whole
kingdom,  and  form  the  common  law,  in  its  stricter
and  more  usual  signification." *  The  courts  also
recognise  and  enforce,  under  certain  conditions  and
limitations,  "particular  customs  or  laws  which
affect  only  the  inhabitants  of  particular  districts."  2
"  Leges  et  consuetudines  regni "  has  been  a  regular
collective  name  of  English  law  since  the  latter  half
of  the  twelfth  century  at  latest,3  in  other  words
ever  since  our  law  has  had  any  terminology  of  its
own ;  in  the  fourteenth  century  "  lex  et  consuetudo

1  Blackstone,  Comm.  i.  67.  2  lb.  74.

3  See  the  Prologue  to  Glanyill.


240  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

regni  nostri "  was  so  well  established  as  meaning
the  Common  Law  that  it  could  be  seriously  argued
(though  without  success)  that  it  was  bad  pleading
to  apply  the  term  to  law  made  by  a  statute.1  The
very  name  Common  Law  seems  to  imply  some  kind
of  reference  to  general  usage  and  acceptance  as
being  the  ultimate  claim  of  the  law  upon  the
individual  citizen's  allegiance.  In  short,  the  Common
Law  is  a  customary  law  if,  in  the  course  of  about
six  centuries,  the  undoubting  belief  and  uniform
language  of  everybody  who  had  occasion  to  consider
the  matter  were  able  to  make  it  so.  To  this
day  "  coutume "  is  the  nearest  equivalent  that
learned  Frenchmen  can  find  for  its  English  name.
Within  the  present  century  speculative  doubts
have  become  current  among  English  writers,  not
so  much  whether  the  Common  Law  is  the  custom
of  England  as  whether  it  is  possible  for  any  law
to  be  customary.  Nothing  will  be  added  here  to
what  has  already  been  said  in  the  former  part  of
this  book.
The  There  is  reason  to  think,  as  matter  of  history,

"  custom

of  the that  in  the  critical  period  when  the  foundations  of

realm,"

and  the  i  YB 19  Ed n g24_ "Consuetudo  regni  Angliae"  might

judges.  be  used>  as  by  the  scribe  quoted  in  Mr.  Horwood's  Preface  to  Y.B.

32  &  33  Ed.  I.  p.  xxxiii.,  where  we  should  now  say  "practice."

But  the  distinction  between  substantive  law  and  practice  is  modern.


ii  THE  SOURCES  OF  ENGLISH  LAW  241

English  law  were  assured,  from  the  reign  of  Henry
II.  to  that  of  Edward  I.,  the  king's  judges  had  no
small  power  of  determining  what  customs  should
prevail  and  be  received  as  the  "  custom  of  the
realm,"  and  that  they  exercised  it  freely.  Thus  at
the  end  of  the  twelfth  century  primogeniture  does
not  yet  appear  as  the  general  law  of  inheritance  in
England,  but  only  as  a  custom  appropriate  to
military  tenures  of  land,  and  occurring  indeed  in
non-military  tenures,  but  there  competing,  on  equal
terms  at  best,  with  equal  division  among  sons  or
even  the  preference  of  the  youngest  son.  By  the
end  of  the  thirteenth  century  we  find  it  established
as  the  general  rule,  and  any  other  order  of
succession  treated  as  exceptional.  We  can  hardly
resist  the  inference  that  it  had  grown  by  the  steady
encouragement  of  the  judges.  At  the  same  time
there  is  not  much  reason  to  doubt  that  the  judges
fairly  represented  the  effective  desires  and  forces
of  society  at  large.  If  there  is  any  doctrine  of
the  medieval  Common  Law  that  might  be  plausibly
suspected  of  being  an  artificial  creation,  it  is  the
vehement  presumption  against  agreements  and  com-
binations tending  to  "  restraint  of  trade."  But  this
doctrine  occurs  in  the  strongest  form,  as  early  as
the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century,  in  the  records


242  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

of  a  municipal-  court  in  which  the  king's  judges  had
no  part.1

The  current  description  of  Common  Law  as  the
custom  of  the  realm  is  not,  then,  to  be  dismissed
as  unhistorical.  We  have  only  to  remember  that
the  king's  judges  undertook,  from  an  early  time,
to  know  better  than  the  men  of  any  particular
city  or  county  what  the  custom  of  the  realm  was.
Indeed  it  is  plain  that  local  inquiries,  in  whatever
manner  made,  could  inform  them  only  of  local
usage ;  and  that,  so  far  as  general  usage  really  did
exist  or  tend  to  exist,  the  king's  judges  and  officers
were  the  only  persons  who  had  sufficient  oppor-
tunities of  knowing  it ;  for  judicial  circuits  and
personal  attendance  on  the  king  in  his  constant
journeys  made  them  familiar,  in  the  regular  course
of  their  duties,  with  all  parts  of  the  country.
More  knowledge  of  England  as  a  whole  must  have
been  collected  at  the  king's  court  than  could  have
been  found  anywhere  else.  Being  thus  taken
charge  of  from  its  birth  by  a  strong  centralised
power,  and  developed  under  the  hands  of  trained
professional judges and advocates, the Common

1  Lett  Jurisdiction  in  Norwich  (Selden  Society),  1892,  p.  52,
a.d.  1299-1300:  "De  omnibus  candelariis  pro  quadam  oon-
vencione  inter  eos  facta,  videlicet  quod  nullus  eonun  venderet
libram  candele  minus  quam  alter."


THE  SOURCES  OF  ENGLISH  LAW  243

aw  rapidly  became  a  specialised  branch  of  learning
orked  out  by  rule,  "  scientific "  law  as  the
ontinental  writers  say.  Much  of  the  usage
hich  determined  its  form  was,  by  the  nature  of
le  case,  professional  and  official  usage.  The
ethods  and  practice  of  the  Anglo -Norman
iancery#could  not  have  much  to  do  with  English
istom  in  any  popular  sense.  But  the  "lex  et
•nsuetudo  regni  nostri"  is  still  there  as  a  whole,
id  resting  on  the  same  foundation,  whatever  may
j  the  proportions  of  lay  and  learned,  popular  and
ficial  elements  in  any  given  part  of  it.
The body of rules called Equity, and ad-  Origii

. .  equifr

mistered  formerly  by  the  Court  of  Chancery,  jurisd
id  one  or  two  local  courts  in  privileged  juris-  Engia
ctions,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  king's  ordinary
urts  at  Westminster,  is  no  longer  a  separate
stem.  As  matter  of  convenience,  however,  it  is
ill  chiefly  though  not  exclusively  administered
the  Chancery  Division  of  the  High  Court  of
istice,  and  studied  by  a  section  of  the  Bar  who
ake  it  their  special  business.  And  it  still
esents,  as  much  as  ever,  a  distinct  historical
oblem,  one  might  almost  say  an  unique  one.
5  matter  of  history  no  one  has  ever  ascribed  the
[gin of English Equity  to  either legislation  or


244  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

custom.  It  is  derived  from  the  king's  ancient
power  of  doing  justice  at  his  discretion,  and  hy
special  means  in  cases  where  the  ordinary  means
of  justice  failed,  a  power  admitted  from  very  ancient
times  down  to  the  seventeenth  century.  This  power
is  what  Maine  has  called  "  a  supplementary  or
residuary  jurisdiction  in  the  king." *  Lambarde,
more  than  two  centuries  earlier,  described  it  as
the  king's  "  own  regal,  absolute,  and  extraordinary
pre-eminence  of  jurisdiction  in  civil  causes,"
committed  by  the  king  to  his  Chancellor.2  In
course  of  time  it  became  well  understood  in  what
kinds  of  cases  the  king,  or  rather  his  Chancellor
and  other  learned  persons  about  the  Chancellor,
would  think  the  remedies  of  the  Common  Law
inadequate.  Eelief  in  the  Chancery  ceased  to  be
a  privilege  or  bounty  of  royal  grace,  and  became
the  right  of  the  subject.  When  the  benefit  of  the
king's  equity  was  once  a  matter  of  right,  it  was
inevitable  that  the  rules  of  equity  should  become
as  methodical  as  any  other  part  of  the  law.
Blackstone  could  already  say  with  truth  that  "  the

1  Early  Law  and  Custom,  p.  164.

2  Archeion,  p.  63,  ed.  1635.  What  Lambarde  calls  "  the  true
moderation  of  jurisdiction  absolute  "  is  discussed  by  him  in  later
chapters.  His  opinion  is,  briefly,  that  the  King  in  Council  may
not  contravene  the  Common  Law,  but  may  supplement  it.


ii  THE  SOURCES  OF  ENGLISH  LAW  245

system  of  our  courts  of  equity  is  a  laboured
connected  system,  governed  by  established  rules
and  bound  down  by  precedents." 1  Much  fuller
development  in  the  same  direction  took  place  in
the  generations  following  Blackstone.  Our  equity
jurisprudence,  to  use  the  accustomed  phrase,  has
been  formed  altogether  by  the  work  of  learned
persons  having  a  great  deal  of  real  power  at  their
disposal,  and  consciously  using  that  power  to
produce  a  systematic  doctrine.  It  therefore  answers
the  description  of  "  scientific  law "  more  exactly
than  any  other  part  of  our  English  legal  materials,
and  perhaps  more  exactly  than  any  other  modern
form  of  "  unwritten  "  law.

We  may  now  find  it  useful  to  examine  more
closely  the  view  taken  by  English  lawyers  of  the
seat  and  power  of  the  ultimate  legislative  authority
(sovereignty  as  it  is  called  by  our  modern  publicists)
and  of  the  authority  and  reception  of  custom.

1  Comm.  iii.  432.  This  tacitly  corrects  the  loose  passage  in
the  chapter  on  the  Nature  of  Laws,  i.  62,  where  however  "  equity  "
means  judicial  discretion  if  it  means  anything.


CHAPTEE III


SOVEREIGNTY IN ENGLISH LAW


The  According  to  modern  law  and  practice  there  is  no

supren
of  Pari
ment.


supremacy  .

of  Parlia- doubt  that  Parliament,  or  to  speak  more  technically,


the  Queen  in  Parliament,  is  sovereign  in  England,
and  no  other  person  or  body  has  the  attributes  of
sovereignty.  "The  one  fundamental  dogma  of
English  constitutional  law  is  the  absolute  legis-
lative sovereignty  or  despotism  of  the  King  in  Par-
liament." *  That  is  to  say,  Parliament  is  the  one
authority  capable  of  making,  declaring,  and  amending
the  law  of  England  without  reference  to  any  other
authority  and  without  any  legal  limit  to  its  own
power.  Ever  sjnce  there  has  been  an  English
monarchy  it  has  been  understood  that  the  king  had
powers  of  legislation,  and  that  they  ought  not  to  be
exercised  without  advice.2 Prom  the  thirteenth  cen-

1  Dicey  on  the  Laiv  of  the  Constitution,  4th  ed.  1893,  p.  136.

2  Leges  namque  Anglicanas  licet  nou  scriptas  leges  appellari  non


in  SOVEREIGNTY  IN  ENGLISH  LAW  247

tury  onwards  it  was  understood,  in  particular,  that
new  taxes  could  not  be  imposed  without  the  con-
sent of  Parliament,  but  other  points  long  remained
vague.  In  later  times  it  has  been  definitely  settled
that  the  only  competent  advice  and  consent  for  all
legislative  purposes  are  those  of  the  Lords  spiritual .
and  temporal  and  Commons  in  Parliament  assembled.
Later  still  it  has  become  an  undisputed  proposition
that  no  bounds  can  be  assigned  in  point  of  law  to
the  legislative  power  exercised  with  that  authority.

The  earliest  definite  statement  of  the  modern
doctrine  appears  to  be  Sir  Thomas  Smith's  in  his
Commonwealth  of  England,  written  as  the  book  itself
states,1  in  1565,  and  intended  mainly  for  the  use
of  Continental  readers.2  The  book  was  published
only  in  1583.

"  The  most  high  and  absolute  power  of  the  realm  sir  Thomas
of  England  consisteth  in  the  Parliament.  . .  .  That
which  is  done  by  this  consent  is  called  firm,  stable
and  sanctum,  and  is  taken  for  law. The  Parliament


videtur  absurdum.  .  .  eas  scilicet  quas  super  dubiis  in  consilio
definiendis,  procerum  quidem  consilio  et  principis  accedente
auctoritate,  constat  esse  promulgatas. — Glanvill,  Prol.

1  Ad  fin.

2  Learned  persons  resorting  to  England  seem  to  have  used  it  as
a  kind  of  guide-book.  See  the  Elzevir  edition  of  the  Latin  text,
1641,  furnished  with  an  itinerary  and  other  matter  to  the  same
purpose.


248  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

abrogateth  old  laws,  maketh  new,  giveth  order  for
things  past  and  for  things  hereafter  to  be  followed,
changeth  right  and  possessions  of  private  men,
legitimateth  bastards,  establisheth  forms  of  religion,
altereth  weights  and  measures,  giveth  form  of  suc-
cession to  the  crown,  defineth  of  doubtful  rights
whereof  is  no  law  already  made,  appointeth  subsidies,
tailes,  taxes,  and  impositions,  giveth  most  free  pardons
and  absolutions,  restoreth  in  blood  and  name,  as  the
highest  court  condemeth  or  absolveth  them  whom
the  prince  will  put  to  trial.  And  to  be  short,  all
that  ever  the  people  of  Eome  might  do  either  Cen-
turiatis  Comitiis  or  Tributis,  the  same  may  be  done
by  the  Parliament  of  England ;  which  representeth
and  hath  the  power  of  the  whole  realm,  both  the
head  and  body.  For  every  Englishman  is  intended
to  be  there  present  either  in  person  or  by  procura-
tion and  attorney,  of  what  pre-eminence,  state,
dignity  or  quality  soever  he  be,  from  the  prince  (be
he  king  or  queen)  to  the  lowest  person  of  England.
And  the  consent  of  the  Parliament  is  taken  to  be
every  man's  consent."  1

Here  we  have  the  first  exposition  by  any  English
writer,  if  not  by  any  European  one,  of  the  notion  of
sovereignty  in  its  modern  amplitude. Almost  simul-
1  T.  Smith,  Commonwealth  of' England,  bk.  ii.  ch.  ii.


m  SOVEREIGNTY  IN  ENGLISH  LAW  249

taneously  Bodin,  writing  in  Trance,  denned  "maiestas"
to  the  same  effect,  and  argued,  as  Hobbes  did  after-
wards, that  in  England  sovereignty  belonged  to  the
king  alone.  It  may  well  be  supposed  that  Sir
Thomas  Smith,  while  he  was  employed  as  ambas-
sador to  the  French  court,  had  Bodin's  work  in  some
way  communicated  to  him,  although  it  was  not
actually  published  before  1577,  in  which  year  Smith
died.  Apparently  Sir .  Thomas  Smith  was  anxious
both  to  make  it  clear  to  Frenchmen  that  the  king
of  England  was  not  absolute,  and  to  ascribe  to
Parliament  at  least  as  much  authority  as  any  French-
man could  ascribe  to  the  king  of  France.  It  must
be  remembered  that  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  who  was  the
first  Eegius  Professor  of  Civil  Law  at  Cambridge,
was  not  a  common  lawyer  but  a  civilian.  He  was
familiar  with  the  Eoman  adage,  Quod  pi'incipi  placuit
legis  haoet  vigorem,  and  was  determined,  it  seems,  to
show  his  Continental  colleagues  in  Eoman  learning
that  we  had  as  good  a  sovereign  as  any  of  theirs.
He  saw  the  importance  of  the  point  as  clearly  as
Hobbes  did  seventy  years  later,  and,  using  his  in-
sight with  greater  political  wisdom,  boldly  put,  not
the  king  alone,  but  the  King  in  Parliament,  in  the
place  of  the  Eoman  Emperor.  In  this  he  was  some-
what before  his  age. His  view  is  amply  justified


250  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

by  all  modern  constitutional  writers.  Blackstone
expressly  declares  that  the  sovereignty  of  the  British
constitution  is  lodged  in  Parliament,1  and  that  it  is
"  the  place  where  that  absolute  despotic  power  which
must  in  all  governments  reside  somewhere,  is  in-
trusted by  the  constitution  of  these  kingdoms";
after  which  he  almost  repeats  Sir  Thomas  Smith's
language.2  But  in  Sir  Thomas  Smith's  own  time
the  sages  of  the  Common  Law  would  hardly  have
agreed  with  him.  Their  opinion  seems  to  have
been  that  not  only  the  king  was  subject  to  the  law,
but  the  law  was  in  some  way  above  Parliament.
Some  fundamental  principles  of  law  and  justice,
never  defined  but  generically  described  as  "  common
right,"  were  sacred  against  the  legislature,  and  if
Parliament  were  to  transgress  them  it  would  be  the
right  and  the  duty  of  the  judges  to  pay  no  attention
to  such  enactments.
Blackstone.  Coke  enounced  this  opinion  with  his  usual
vehemence  and  even  more  than  his  usual  inaccuracy
or  disingenuousness  in  reading  his  own  particular
opinion  into  the  authorities,  on  which  he  professed
to  rely.3 He  found,  as  will  appear  below,  nominal

1  Comm.  i.  51.  2  lb.  160,  161.

3  Bonham's  Ca.  8  Rep.  118  a :  "It  appears  in  our  books  that  in
many  cases  the  common  law  will  control  acts  of  parliament  and
sometimes  adjudge  them  to  be  utterly  void ;  for  when  an  act  of


in  SOVEREIGNTY  IN  ENGLISH  LAW  251

followers  down  to  the  eighteenth  century.  Black-
stone,  however,  while  in  one  place  he  makes  a
nominal  concession  to  the  "law  of  nature,"  uses
quite  other  language  when  he  comes  to  the  practical
side  of  English  institutions.  He  denies  in  particular
what  he  has  seemed  to  admit  in  general ;  he  will
hear  nothing  of  any  human  authority  being  em-
powered to  control  the  Parliament  of  Great  Britain,
and  explains  away  the  sayings  of  his  predecessors
as  meaning  only  that  Acts  of  Parliament  are  to  be
construed  in  a  reasonable  sense  if  possible.  It  is
worth  while  to  compare  the  passages.

"  It  [the  law  of  nature]  is  binding  over  all  the
globe,  in  all  countries,  and  at  all  times ;  no  human
laws  are  of  any  validity,  if  contrary  to  this." *

"Acts  of  parliament  that  are  impossible  to  be
performed  are  of  no  validity ;  and  if  there  arise  out
of  them  collaterally  any  absurd  consequences,  mani-

parliament  is  against  common  right  and  reason,  or  repugnant,  or
impossible  to  be  performed,  the  common  law  will  control  it  and
adjudge  such  act  to  be  void  ;  and  therefore  in  8  Ed.  III.  30.  .  .  .
Herle  saith,  some  statutes  are  made  against  law  and  right,  which
those  who  made  them  perceiving,  would  not  put  them  in  execu-
tion.'' The  italicised  words  are  a  mere  gloss  of  Coke's  own.  What
Herle  did  say,  as  reported,  is  "  lis  sont  ascuns  statutes  faitz  que
eeluy  mesme  qui  les  fist  ne  les  voleit  pas  mettre  en  fait."  Plenty  of
modern  statutes  have  been  inoperative  in  practice,  not  because  the
common  law  controlled  them,  but  because  they  were  in  fact  un-
workable.

1  Oomm.  i.  41.


252  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

festly  contradictory  to  common  reason,  they  are,  with
regard  to  those  collateral  consequences,  void.  I  lay
down  the  rule  with  these  restrictions;  though  I  know
it  is  generally  laid  down  more  largely,  that  acts  of
parliament  contrary  to  reason  are  void.  But  if  the
parliament  will  positively  enact  a  thing  to  be  done
which  is  unreasonable,  I  know  of  no  power  in  the
ordinary  forms  of  the  constitution  that  is  vested
with  authority  to  control  it :  and  the  examples
usually  alleged  in  support  of  this  sense  of  the  rule
do  none  of  them  prove  that  where  the  main  object
of  a  statute  is  unreasonable  the  judges  are  at  liberty
to  reject  it ;  for  that  were  to  set  the  judicial  power
above  that  of  the  legislature,  which  would  be  sub-
versive of  all  government.  "  1

"  True  it  is  that  what  the  parliament  doth,  no
authority  upon  earth  can  undo." 2  No  case  is
known,  in  fact,  in  which  an  English  court  of  justice
has  openly  taken  on  itself  to  overrule  or  disregard
the  plain  meaning  of  an  Act  of  Parliament.  The
example  given  for  illustration's  sake  is  that  an  Act
making  a  man  judge  in  his  own  cause  would  be
void.  Thus  Holt  said :  "  If  an  Act  of  Parliament
should  ordain  that  the  same  person  should  be  party
and  judge,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  judge  in  his
1  Comm.  i.  91.  2  lb.  i.  161.


in  SOVEREIGNTY  IN  ENGLISH  LAW  253

own  cause,  it  would  be  a  void  Act  of  Parliament ;
for  it  is  impossible  that  one  should  be  judge  and
party,  for  the  judge  is  to  determine  between  party
and  party,  or  between  the  government  and  the
party ;  and  an  Act  of  Parliament  can  do  no  wrong,
though  it  may  do  several  things^that  look  pretty
odd."1  But  this  opinion  has  never  been  acted  upon  ;
and  indeed  the  example  is  not  wholly  fortunate,  for
the  settled  rule  of  law  is  that,  although  a  judge
had  better  not,  if  it  can  be  avoided,  take  part  in  the
decision  of  a  case  in  which  he  has  any  personal
interest,  yet  he  not  only  may  but  must  do  so  if  the
case  cannot  be  heard  otherwise.2  Nowadays  the
objection  of  personal  interest  in  the  judge  commonly
presents  itself  in  the  form  of  the  judge  being  a
shareholder  (for  his  own  behoof  or  as  trustee)  in
some  railway  or  other  public  company  whose  matters
are  before  him ;  and  it  is  also  commonly  waived  by
the  parties.3

It  is  now  quite  well  understood  that  the  judges  Acts  of

ht-.t  Parliament

will  not  discuss  the  validity  of  an  Act  of  Parliament,  not  judici-
ally dis-

1  City  of  London  v.  Wood,  12  Mod.  at  p.  687.  pntable.

2  Tor  a  curious  early  illustration,  too  long  for  the  text,  see  the
ncrte  at  the  end  of  this  chapter,  p.  261.

3  For  a  reported  example  see  Eeedie  v.  L.  &  N.  W.R.  Co.
(1849),  4  Ex.  244,  20  L.J.  Ex.  65,  where  Parke,  B.  stated  that,
being  interested  in  the  defendant  company,  he  took  part  in  the
case  only  at  the  request  of  counsel  on  both  sides.


254  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

They  will  not  even  entertain  allegations  that  a
private  Act  was  obtained  by  fraud  or  improper
practices.  If  Parliament  has  been  deceived,  the
remedy  is  with  Parliament  alone.  Within  our  own
time  the  late  Mr.  Justice  Willes,  a  great  master  of
the  Common  Law,  and  always  ready  on  fitting
occasions  to  maintain  the  dignity  of  the  law  and  its
officers,  laid  this  down  in  the  plainest  terms.  An
attempt  had  been  made  to  found  an  argument  on
the  suggestion  that  a  local  railway  company's  Acts
had  been  obtained,  in  effect,  by  a  fraud  on  Parlia-
ment.

"  It  is  further  urged,"  said  Willes,  J.,  "  that  the
company  is  a  mere  nonentity,  and  there  never  were
any  shares  or  shareholders.  That  resolves  itself  into
this,  that  Parliament  was  induced  by  fraudulent  re-
citals to  pass  the  Act  which  formed  the  company.
I  would  observe,  as  to  these  Acts  of  Parliament,
that  they  are  the  law  of  this  land ;  and  we  do  not
sit  here  as  a  court  of  appeal  from  Parliament.  It
was  once  said — I  think  in  Hobart1 — that,  if  an  Act
of  Parliament  were  to  create  a  man  judge  in  his  own
case,  the  Court  might  disregard  it. That  dictum,

1  In  Day  v.  Savadge,  Hob.  87  ;  "Even  an  Act  of  Parliament
made  against  natural  equity,  as,  to  make  a  man  judge  in  his  own
ease,  is  void  in  itself ;  for,  jura  naturae  sunt  immutabilia,  and  they
are  leges  legum. "


m  SOVEREIGNTY  IN  ENGLISH  LAW  255

however,  stands  as  a  warning,  rather  than  an  author-
ity to  be  followed.  We  sit  here  as  servants  of  the
Queen  and  the  legislature.  Are  we  to  act  as  regents
over  what  is  done  by  parliament  with  the  consent
of  the  Queen,  lords  and  commons  ?  I  deny  that  any
such  authority  exists.  If  an  Act  of  Parliament  has
been  obtained  improperly,  it  is  for  the  legislature  to
correct  it  by  repealing  it :  but,  so  long  as  it  exists
as  law,  the  Courts  are  bound  to  obey  it.  The
proceedings  here  are  judicial,  not  autocratic,  which
they  would  be  if  we  could  make  laws  instead  of
administering  them." 1

The  sovereignty  of  Parliament  being  undisputed,  Distinction

of  legal

we  have  to  bear  in  mind  exactly  what  we  under-  sovereignty

from  ulti-

stand  by  it  for  an  English  lawyer's  purposes. No  mate  poii-
„  . _ ..  .  . tical  power.

power  less  than  the  Queen  m  Parliament  is  sovereign,

for  that  is  the  only  power  which  can  issue  supreme

and  uncontrolled  legal  commands. Parliament  as  a

whole,  and  Parliament  alone,  can  make  and  alter

the  law  of  the  land  without  reference  to  any  other

authority. Moreover, we are not concerned, as

students  of  the  sources  of  English  law  in  general,

with  the  manner  in  which  the  action  of  the  supreme

legislature  is  determined. As  matter  of  form,  this

1  Lee  v.  Bude  and  Torrington  Ry.  Go.  (1871),  L.E.  6  C.P.  at
p.  582.


256  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

belongs  to  the  special  study  of  the  English  constitu-
tion and  of  the  law  and  practice  of  Parliament.  As
matter  of  substance,  the  consideration  of  political
power,  of  its  practical  seat  and  ultimate  sources,
would  take  us  out  of  the  field  of  jurisprudence
proper  and  into  that  of  politics  and  constitutional
history.  It  is  now  generally  recognised  that  the
majority  of  the  House  of  Commons  has  and  exercises,
for  all  substantial  intents,  political  supremacy  in
these  kingdoms.  It  cannot  directly  govern  at  all ;
it  cannot  legislate  without  the  concurrence  of  the
House  of  Lords  and  the  Crown.  The  Crown,  how-
ever, can  act  only  on  the  advice  of  Ministers,  and
the  Ministers  of  the  Crown  are  chosen  from  the
party  which  commands  a  majority  in  the  House  of
Commons.  That  majority,  so  long  as  it  holds  to-
gether, can  cause  its  will  to  be  observed,  on  the
whole,  in  every  department  of  government.  Or,  to
put  the  same  thing  in  a  negative  form  which  is
perhaps  more  accurate,  it  is  not  possible  for  the
Government  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  be  carried
on  by  any  lawful  means  in  continuous  opposition  to
the  majority  of  the  House  of  Commons.  '  But  this
does  not  touch  the  doctrine  of  legal  sovereignty.
The  power  which  can  ultimately  determine  the  bent
of  legislation,  or  control  the  execution  of  existing


in  SOVEREIGNTY  IN  ENGLISH  LAW  257

laws,  but  cannot  itself  legislate,  is  not  a  legal  but  a
political  power.  Now  the  majority  of  the  House  of
Commons,  as  we  said,  does  not  govern  or  legislate.
The  House  of  Commons  itself  has  no  power  whatever
of  issuing  any  direct  legal  commands  except  so  far
as  it  can  do  so  for  the  purpose  of  regulating  its  own
procedure  and  discipline,  and  enforcing  its  own
privileges.  It  may  practically  make  a  statute  in-
operative by  refusing  to  vote  the  supplies  necessary
for  putting  the  statute  in  execution  (a  thing  which
has  been  known  to  happen),  but  it  cannot  alter  one
letter  of  the  text.  This  is  not  what  we  understand
by  sovereignty  in  the  legal  sense.

It  has  been  said  by  one  or  two  modern  writers
that  the  electors  who  return  members  to  the  House
of  Commons  are  sovereign.  This  involves  a  still
greater  confusion  of  thought  than  attributing
sovereignty  to  the  House  of  Commons  when
elected.  The  persons  chosen  by  the  voters  at  a
general  election  will  certainly  form  that  part  of
the  legislature  in  which  the  controlling  political
power  resides.  But  that,  as  we  have  seen,  does
not  make  them  sovereign,  much  less  does  it  make
the  electors  sovereign.  In  fact  the  electors  are  not
legislators  or  anything  like  legislators.  They  have
not  the  power  of  issuing  any  legal  commands  at  all.


258  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

An  identical  resolution  passed  by  the  electors  of
every  constituency  in  England,  or  a  large  majority
of  the  constituencies,  at  the  time  of  a  general
election  or  at  any  other  time,  might  be  a  very
notable  political  event.  But  it  would  certainly
have  no  legal  force  whatever.  It  would  create  no
kind  of  legal  authority,  justification  or  excuse,  and
no  court  of  justice  would  be  entitled  (much  less,
bound)  to  pay  any  attention  to  it.  As  Cornewall
Lewis  long  ago  rightly  said,  "  The  right  of  voting
for  the  election  of  one  who  is  to  possess  a  share  of
the  sovereignty  is  itself  no  more  a  share  of  the
sovereignty  than  the  right  of  publishing  a  political
treatise  or  a  political  newspaper." *
Cases  of  Although the whole theory  of  Sovereignty  is

complex

or  divided modern,  and  in  fact  could  not  have  been  definitely

sovereignty  .,,  ■,■,*,,  ...

held  or  expressed  before  the  principal  states  of
modern  Europe  had  acquired  a  strong  and  consoli-
dated government,  writers  on  the  philosophy  of  law
and  politics  have  readily  fallen  into  the  way  of
assuming  that  civilised  government  cannot  exist,  or
can  exist  only  in  an  imperfect  manner,  unless  there
is  some  definite  body  in  the  State  to  which  sove-
reignty can  be  attributed. Thus  Blackstone 2  says :

1  Remarks  on  the  Vise  and  Abuse  of  some  Political  Terms,  Lond.
1832,  p.  43.  2  Comm.  i.  49.


in  SOVEREIGNTY  IN  ENGLISH  LAW  259

However  they  [existing  forms  of  government]  began,
or  by  what  right  soever  they  subsist,  there  is  and  must  be
in  all  of  them  a  supreme,  irresistible,  absolute,  uncontrolled
authority,  in  which  the  jura  sumrna  imperii  or  the  rights  of
sovereignty  reside.

Blackstone's  language  is  well  enough  suited  to
the  facts  that  can  be  observed  in  the  longitude  of
Oxford  or  of  Paris,  and  it  probably  did  not  occur
to  him  to  look  much  farther.  Even  in  Blackstone's
time,  however,  there  might  have  been  some  trouble
in  discovering  the  jura  summa  imperii  in  the
constitution  of  the  Holy  Boman  Empire,  which
was  then  living  in  a  decrepit  old  age,  but  living
still.  In  our  own  time,  if  we  extend  our  view
eastward  to  Bern,  or  as  far  west  as  Washington
or  Ottawa,  we  may  find  reason  to  think  that  Black-
stone  laid  down  the  supposed  necessity  of  an
absolute  uncontrolled  authority  in  terms  altogether
too  peremptory  and  universal.  It  would  not  be
appropriate  here  to  enter  on  the  problems,  whether
legal  or  political,  that  are  raised  by  the  institutions
of  federal  governments  like  those  of  the  United
States  and  Switzerland,  and  in  a  less  complicated
degree  by  those  of  countries  where,  as  in  the
Netherlands,  or  an  individual  American  State  within
the  Union,  such  as  the  Commonwealth  of  Massa-
chusetts or  the  State  of  Illinois,  the  constitution  is


260  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

in  fact  defined  by  a  fundamental  written  instrument,
and  the  terms  of  that  instrument  cannot  be  altered
by  the  process  of  ordinary  legislation.  In  all  such
cases  the  ordinary  legislative  body  is  in  a  position
much  like  that  of  the  legislature  in  a  self-governing
British  colony.  We  can  hardly  say  that  it  is  in
no  sense  sovereign,  for  within  the  bounds  of  its
competence  it  knows  no  human  superior.  But
since  its  competence  has  assigned  and  known
bounds,  we  cannot  attribute  sovereignty  to  it  in
the  same  sense  in  which  sovereignty  is  attributed
to  the  British  Parliament.  Where  there  is  a  rigid
constitution,  to  use  the  convenient  term  introduced
by  Mr.  Bryce  and  Mr.  Dicey,1  there  cannot  be  any
one  body  in  permanent  existence  or  habitual  activity
which  possesses  unlimited  sovereignty.  The  nearest
approach  to  Parliamentary  sovereignty  as  we  have
it  in  England  must  be  sought,  in  every  such  case,
wherever  the  ultimate  power  of  altering  the  written
constitution  is  placed  by  the  constitution  itself.
In  the  United  States,  for  example,  this  amending

1  A.  V.  Dicey,  The  Law  of  the  Constitution.  Mr.  Dicey  is,  I
believe,  the  first  writer  who  has  clearly  pointed  out  that  the  vital
difference  is  not  between  federal  and  centralised  governments.  It
is  true  that  a  federal  constitution  must  be  rigid,  or  it  will  not  be
truly  federal.  But  a  non-federal  state  may  equally  well  have  a
rigid  constitution,  though  it  need  not ;  and  many,  probably  the
majority,  have.


in  SOVEREIGNTY  IN  ENGLISH  LAW  261

power  is  exerciseable  only  with  the  consent  of
three-fourths  of  the  States  expressed  either  by  their
legislatures  or  in  special  conventions,  and,  moreover,
no  State  can  be  deprived  of  its  equal  suffrage  in
the  -Senate  without  its  own  consent.1  The  English
doctrine  of  absolute  sovereignty  is  not  capable  of
being  usefully  applied  to  constitutions  of  this  type.
In  fact  it  is  a  generalisation  from  the  "  omnipotence  "
of  the  British  Parliament,  an  attribute  which  has
been  the  offspring  of  our  peculiar  history,  and
may  quite  possibly  suffer  some  considerable  change
within  times  not  far  distant.  Such  a  constitution
as  that  of  the  United  States  or  of  Switzerland  may
be  said  to  give  a  definite  meaning  to  the  sovereignty
of  the  people,  as  opposed  to  the  power  or  caprice
of  transitory  majorities.

Note  to  p.  253

A  case  on  the  privileges  of  the  Chancellor  of  Oxford
is  reported  at  considerable  length  in  the  Year  Book  of  8
Hen.  VI.,  p.  18.  The  question  was  whether  a  certain
charter  of  Eichard  II.  purported  to  empower  the  Chancellor
to  act  as  judge  in  cases  where  he  was  himself  a  party,  and
if  it  did,  whether  such  a  grant  was  good.  At  p.  20,  Eolf,
of  counsel  for  the  Chancellor,  is  reported  to  have  said  : —

"Jeo  vous  dirai  un  fable  [in  medieval  usage  'fable'
is  merely  'story,'  whether  believed  by  the  speaker  to  be

1  Const,  of  U.  S.,  Art.  v.


262  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE chap,  hi

true  or  false] :  En  ascun  temps  fuit  un  Pape,  &  avoit  fait
un  grand  offence,  &  le  cardinals  vindrent  a  luy  &  disoyent
a  luy,  Peccasti,  &  il  dit,  Judica  [sic]  me  :  &  ils  disoyent,
non  possumus,  quia  caput  es  Ecclesiae,  judica  te  ipsum  :
Et  l'Apostol'  [apostolicus,  a  common  synonym  for  the  Pope]
dit,  Judico  me  cremari  :  &  fuit  combustus  :  &  en  cest  cas
il  fuit  son  juge  demesne,  &  apres  fuit  un  Sainct :  &  issint
n'est  pas  inconvenient  que  un  home  soit  [son]  juge  demesne,"
etc.

How  this  tale  came  into  England  I  know  not.  The
legend  of  a  Pope  having  deposed  himself  was,  however,
current  in  the  Middle  Ages.  It  first  appears  in  the  apocry-
phal acts  of  the  Council  of  Sinuessa,  where  Marcellinus
is  said  to  have  abdicated  or  deposed  himself  for  the  sin  of
idolatry  (see  Dollinger,  Die  Papstfabeln  des  Mittelalters,  p.
48).  That  story  was  re -told  in  an  elaborate  form  by
Bonitho,  an  Italian  writer  of  the  eleventh  century,  and  the
same  Bonitho  used  it,  with  only  slight  variations  of  language,
to  describe  the  fact,  in  itself  undoubted,  of  Gregory  VI.'s
deposition  for  simony  at  the  synod  of  Sutri,  a.d.  1046.
No  other  chronicler  confirms  the  alleged  circumstances,  and
Bonitho  seems  to  have  introduced  them  from  the  older
legend  for  the  purpose  of  supporting  the  doctrine  that  the
Pope  is  not  subject  to  any  earthly  jurisdiction.  According
to  all  other  witnesses,  Gregory  VI.  was  in  fact  deposed  by
the  Emperor :  see  JarFe"  in  Monumenta  Gregoriana,  Bill.
Eer.  Germ.  ii.  599.  But  one  or  two  modern  writers  seem
to  think  Bonitho's  story  had  some  foundation  in  fact :  Bax-
mann,  Die  Politik  der  Papste,  ii.  206.


CHAPTEE IV


CUSTOM IN ENGLISH LAW


We  have  already  seen  (p.  239)  that  "leges  et  c
consuetudines  regni"  was  an  accepted  name  for  &
the  Common  Law  as  a  whole  from  an  early  time.1
In  a  more  limited  sense,  in  which  we  more
usually  meet  with  it  in  modern  books,  custom
signifies  an  addition  or  exception  to  the  general  law
of  the  land,  established  by  allowed  usage  within
certain  local  bounds.  The  allowance  of  such  special
customs  is  subject  to  conditions  which,  according  to
Sir  John  Davis's  report,  were  carefully  defined  early
in  the  seventeenth  century  by  the  king's  judges  in
Ireland,  when  it  was  decided  that  "  Tanistry,"  the
Irish  custom  of  inheritance,  had  been  abrogated  by
the  introduction  of  English  law.  The  statement  is
not  strictly  of  authority,  but  it  has  been  commonly

1  Cp.  Mr.  F.  A.  Greer's  article  on  "Custom  in  the Common
Law,"  Law  Quart.  Rev.  ix.  153.


264  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

quoted  in  England  as  a  correct  exposition  of  the
Common  Law.

Custom,  as  understood  in  law,  is  usage  which  hath
obtained  the  force  of  law,  and  is  in  truth  a  binding  law  for
the  particular  place,  persons  and  things  concerned.  Such
custom  cannot  be  established  by  grant  of  the  king  nor  by
Act  of  Parliament,  but  is  ius  non,  scriptum  and  made  solely
by  the  people  of  the  place  where  the  custom  is  received.
For  where  people  find  a  certain  act  good  and  beneficial,  and
apt  and  suitable  to  their  disposition,  they  put  the  same  in
practice  from  time  to  time,  and  so  by  repetition  of  such  acts
a  custom  is  made,  and  being  used  from  time  whereof  memory
runs  not,  obtains  the  force  of  law.  ...  In  short,  custom  is  a
reasonable  act,  iterated,  multiplied  and  continued  by  the
people  from  time  whereof  memory  runs  not.1

Conditions The  general  conditions  required  for  the  validity

of  validity.

of  a  local  custom  are  the  following : —

1.  The  custom  must  be  reasonable,  that  is,  it
must  not  be  repugnant  to  any  fundamental  principle
of  justice  or  law.  A  custom  is  void  which  purports
to  enable  an  officer  of  a  corporation  to  give  a  con-
clusive certificate  in  a  matter  in  which  the  corpora-
tion is  interested.2  Customary  rights  exerciseable
over  land  must  be  in  some  way  limited  so  that
they  cannot  be  used  to  the  total  exhaustion  or
destruction  of  the  land  in  point  of  value.

2.  The  custom  must  have a reasonable com-

1  Sir  J.  Davis,  81,  32 ;  cp.  Blackstone,  Oomm.  i.  74,  77.
2  Day  v.  Savadge,  Hob.  85.


iv  CUSTOM  IN  ENGLISH  LAW  265

mencement. This  means  that  it  must  be  capable  of
being  referred  to  a  possible  legal  origin.

3.  It  must  be  certain.  For  if  it  could  not  be
reduced  to  certainty,  there  would  not  be  any
binding  rule.

4.  It  must  be  ancient.  This  condition  does
not  seem  wholly  consistent  with  the  doctrine  that
custom  is  made  by  popular  consent ;  for  if  so,  why
should  not  new  rules  be  made  for  new  circumstances
by  general  consent  expressed  in  habitual  action  ?
The  historical  explanation  is  that  the  commence-
ment of  "  legal  memory "  was  left  standing  at  a
fixed  date  by  mere  accident  or  inertia.1  But  perhaps
the  matter  is  of  no  considerable  importance  in  prac-
tice ;  for  the  truth  is  that  in  modern  times  there  is
a  demand  for  express  regulation  as  soon  as  there  is
any  decided  bent  of  opinion.  Except  in  matters
outside  the  scope  of  positive  law,  the  formation  of
custom  belongs  to  an  archaic  stage  of  legal  history.

5.  The  usage  which  establishes  a  custom  must
be  continuous,  that  is,  free  from  interruption  by
acts  inconsistent  with  the  right  claimed  by  force  of
the  custom;  and  it  must  be  exercised  as  of  right,
that  is,  the  custom  must  be  regarded  by  the  persons
concerned  as  a  binding  rule  and  not  a  matter  of

1  Blackstone,  Comm.  ii.  31,  and  Christian's  note.


266  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

individual  choice. Continental  writers  express  this
requisite  by  the  term  opinio  necessitatis}
Examples  True  ancient  customary  law  of  this  kind  is  to

of  ancient

custom.  be  found  in  local  customs  of  inheritance  and
customary  tenures  ;  also  some  local  jurisdictions  had
singular  privileges  and  incidents  even  in  relatively
modern  times.  Down  to  the  middle  of  the  seven-
teenth century  the  men  of  Halifax  had  a  customary
jurisdiction  extending  to  capital  felonies,  and  in-
cluding the  execution  of  the  sentence  by  means  of
a  "primitive  guillotine."  The  procedure  dated  in
substance  from  a  time  before  the  institution  of  the
petty  jury.2  v  Perhaps  the  only  customary  judicial
privileges  of  any  importance  that  still  survive  are
those  of  the  City  of  London.  Many  boroughs  have
peculiar  local  customs  as  to  the  tenure  and  convey-
ance of  land  within  the  borough,  and  sometimes
these  diverge  very  widely  from  the  rules  of  the
Common  Law.3

Local  customs  of  cultivation  such  as  are  associated

1  Blackstone,  i.  78,  adds  that  there  cannot  be  two  inconsistent
customs  in  the  same  matter  :  which  seems  'superfluous  in  principle.
It  is  really  a  point  of  pleading  only.  See  9  Co.  Rep.  586  :  the
defendant  must  expressly  traverse  the  plaintiff's  claim  and  not
merely  allege  a  right  in  himself  inconsistent  with  it.

2  See  Sir  James  Stephen's  account  of  this  in  his  History  of  the
Criminal  Law  of  England,  i.  265.

3  Busker  v.  Thompson  (1846),  4  C.B.  16  L.J.  C.P.  57,  where
the  Court  did  not  decide  on  the  validity  of  the  custom.


iv  CUSTOM  IN  ENGLISH  LAW  267

with  the  term  "Lammas  land"  are  also  typical
examples  of  this  kind.  There  is  every  reason,  to
believe  that  in  many  cases  they  are  really  of  high
antiquity.  Customs  of  this  class,  however,  have  in
many  modern  cases  had  effect  given  to  them,  not  as
true  local  laws,  but  as  having  been  tacitly  adopted
as  terms  or  conditions  of  an  agreement.  This  will
be  further  mentioned  below.

The  importance  of  local  customs  is  steadily
diminishing  in  modern  practice,  except  so  far  as  it
may  be  needful  to  rely  on  custom  in  establishing
rights  of  common  and  the  like,  which  of  late  years
(since  about  1865)  have  been  brought  into  con-
siderable prominence  again.

Another  use  of  the  term  "  custom  "  is  to  denote
rules  that  once  formed  an  exceptional  body  of  law,  se?se  of

r  J  rules  now

but  have  been  adopted  within  historical  times  as  inc°rPor;

*■  ated  in  the

part  of  the Common  Law. Sometimes  it  is  also  general

^  law.

applied  to  the  reception  of  a  special  law,  as  civil  or
canon  law,  within  particular  jurisdictions ;  in  this
connection  it  either  means  nothing  but  the  practice
of  the  court  exercising  such  jurisdiction,  or  it  is  an
euphemistic  device  to  avoid  any  plain  admission  of
the  fact  that  the  Common  Law,  the  law  of  the
king's  superior  courts,  was  at  one  time  only  one
among  several  systems  of  law  claiming  obedience


Custom  in


268  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

each  within  its  own  sphere.1  In  the  medieval
conception  of  legal  order,  custom  might  just  as  well
be  personal  as  local;  it  might  be  the  usage  of  a
trade  or  condition  of  men  as  well  as  of  a  manor  or
a  city.  There  was  nothing  strange  in  calling  even
individual  habits  and  predilections  by  the  name  of
custom.2  In  one  case,  to  use  Blackstone's  words,
"  a  particular  system  of  customs  used  only  among
one  set  of  the  king's  subjects,"  namely  merchants,
and  "  called  the  custom  of  merchants,  or  lex  mer-
catoria," 3  has  been  adopted  into  the  general  law  and
become  an  extremely  important  part  of  it.
The  law  At  the  very  time  that  Blackstone  was  putting

his  Commentaries  into  their  finished  form,  in  the
earliest  years  of  the  reign  of  George  III.,  this  pro-
cess was  being  accomplished.  In  the  Middle  Ages
we  hear  of  the  Law  Merchant  as  something  different
from  the  Common  Law,  which  is  administered  by
special  tribunals  under  the  authority  of  the  Chan-
cellor, especially  for  the  benefit  of  foreign  merchants
resorting  to  England.* At  that  time  the  "  custom

1  Blackstone,  Comm.  i.  79,  80.

2  See  this  in  Sir  T.  Malory's  Morte  d' Arthur,  passim.

3  Comm.  i.  75.

4  "This  suit  is  brought  by  an  alien  merchant,  who  has  come
here  by  safe. conduct,  and  he  is  not  bound  to  sue  according  to  the
law  of  the  land  for  to  await  the  trial  by  twelve  men  and  other
formalities,  but  he  shall  sue  here  [before  the  King's Council  in


merchant.


iv  CUSTOM  IN  ENGLISH  LAW  269

of  merchants"  meant  the  actual  usage  of  the
European  commercial  world  as  it  then  was,  which
was  not  too  large  a  world  to  have  pretty  uniform
rules  and  understandings.  In  the  seventeenth
century  we  find  actions  on  bills  of  exchange  brought
in  the  king's  courts,  and  the  custom  of  merchants
specially  pleaded  as  a  kind  of  personal  law  binding
upon  the  parties.  Thus  it  came  before  the  ordinary
tribunals,  but  as  a  thing  to  be  specially  proved  in
every  case.1  Only  in  the  eighteenth  century  the
decisive  step  was  taken  of  treating  the  rules  of  the
law  merchant  as  within  the  knowledge  of  the  judges,
like  the  general  law  of  the  land,  after  they  had  once
been  recognised  by  considered  decision.  Proof  was
now  neither  required  nor  allowed.  "When  once
solemnly  settled,  no  particular  usage  shall  be  ad-
mitted to  weigh  against  it,"  said  Lord  Mansfield  in
1761,  declining  to  make  any  question,  upon  evidence
of  this  or  that  merchant's  opinion,  of  the  negotiable

the  Star  Chamber],  and  it  shall  be  determined  according  to  the
law  of  nature  in  the  Chancery  .  .  .  [and  the  King's  jurisdiction
over  them  is]  secundum,  legem  naturae,  called  by  some  the  Law
Merchant,  which  all  the  world  over  is  an  universal  law."  So
Booth,  Bishop  of  Durham  and  Chancellor,  is  reported  to  have  said
in  1474  :  Y.B.  13  Ed.  IV.  9,  pi.  5.  (This  is  the  case  in  which  the
doctrine  of  larceny  by  a  bailee  "  breaking  bulk  "  was  introduced. )

1  The  early  history  of  the  Law  Merchant  in  England  is  still  far
from  perfectly  known.  Mr.  John  Maodonell's  Introduction  to
Smith's  Mercantile  Law,  ed.  1890,  gives  the  best  general  account.


270  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

quality  of  a  bill  payable  to  order  and  indorsed  over
without  express  restriction.  "People  talk  of  the
custom  of  merchants,"  added  Sir  Michael  Foster.
"This  word  Custom  is  apt  to  mislead  our  ideas.
The  Custom  of  Merchants,  so  far  as  the  law  regards
it,  is  the  Custom  of  England  ...  we  should  not
confound  general  customs  with  special  local  cus-
toms." *  It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  this  decision
was  reported  by  none  other  than  Blackstone  himself.
Not  quite  a  generation  later  (1787),  Justice
Buller  said  in  a  renowned  mercantile  case : 2

Before  that  period  [i.e.  about  1750]  we  find  that  in
courts  of  law  all  the  evidence  in  mercantile  cases  was  thrown
together  ;  they  were  left  generally  to  a  jury  [i.e.  the  rules
were  treated  as  matter  of  usage  to  be  proved  by  evidence,
without  distinction  of  law  and  fact],  and  they  produced  no
established  principle.  From  that  time  we  all  know  the
great  study  has  been  to  find  some  certain  general  principles
which  shall  be  known  to  all  mankind,  not  only  to  rule  the
particular  case  then  under  consideration,  but  to  serve  as  a
guide  for  the  future.  Most  of  us  have  heard  these  principles
stated,  reasoned  upon,  enlarged,  and  explained,  till  we  have
been  lost  in  admiration  at  the  strength  and  stretch  of  the
human  understanding.

More than  a century  has passed since these

1  Edie  v.  East  India  Co.  1  W.  Bl.  295.

2  Lickbarrow  v.  Mason,  1  Sm.  L.C.  10th  ed.  at  p.  685.  The
case  is  given  only  in  an  abridged  statement  in  1  Revised  Reports,
425 :  see  the  reasons  for  this  course  in  Mr.  Campbell's  note  at
p.  427.


:v  CUSTOM  IN  ENGLISH  LAW  271

words  were  spoken,  and  the  development  of  the
law  merchant  as  part  of  the  Common  Law  of
the  English-speaking  world  has  continued  without
ceasing.  Being  thus  embodied  in  our  system  of
Legal  precedents,  it  has  inevitably  lost  something
Df  its  closeness  of  touch  with  actual  mercantile
practice.  It  is  as  much  "  scientific  "  as  any  other
branch  of  English  case-law,  and  the  reasoning  of
brained  lawyers  on  the  settled  rules  of  the  law
merchant  does  not  always  bring  out  results  which
appear  to  men  of  business  to  satisfy  the  require-
ments of  commerce.  Yet  the  ancient  character  of
the  law  merchant  has  not  wholly  disappeared,  for
evidence  of  living  general  usage  is  still  admissible
to  add  new  incidents  to  its  contents  provided  that
they  do  not  contradict  any  rule  already  received.1
Thus  the  whole  law  of  bankers'  cheques  (which  only
of  late  years  have  become  common  outside  English-
speaking  countries)  is  founded  on  comparatively
recent  usage.2  In  this  department  the  rule  of
antiquity  has  no  place.

1  Cur.  perCockbum,  C.J.,  in  Ex.  Ch.  Goodwinv.  Eobarts  (1875),
L.R.  10  Ex.  337,  346,  352-3.  The  decision  was  affirmed  by  the
House  of  Lords,  1  App.  Ca.  476,  but  this  point  was  not  expressly
dealt  with.

2  L.R.  10  Ex.  351.  Even  among  English-speaking  men  of
business  there  are  divergences  in  modern  practice.  Thus  the  use
of  crossed  cheques  is  unknown  in  the  United  States.


272  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

Usage  of  In  yet  another  class  of  eases  we  meet  with  the

the  country

or  of  trade  word  "  custom." This  is  where  a  general  and  well

read  into

contracts  understood  usage  in  a  particular  district,  'or  among
persons  carrying  on  a  particular  kind  of  business,  or
dealing  in  a  particular  market,  has  been  allowed,
not  indeed  to  impose  a  positively  binding  law,  but
to  affect,  and  sometimes  to  affect  very  materially,
the  interpretation  of  contracts  made  by  parties  who
are  presumed  to  have  done  their  business  with  tacit
reference  to  such  usages.  Proof  of  a  "  custom  of
the  country "  or  "  custom  of  trade "  is  admissible
not  merely  to  determine  the  meaning  of  expressions
used  in  a  special  sense,  but  to  add  whole  new  terms
to  contracts.1  This  perhaps  goes  near,  in  some
applications  of  the  principle,  to  evading  the  con-
ditions required  for  the  establishment  of  customs  in
the  strict  sense ;  although  it  seems  to  have  been  at
one  time  supposed  that  those  conditions  must  be
satisfied.2  But  the  principle,  as  now  understood,  is
simply  to  give  effect  to  the  intention  of  the  parties,
and  any  indication  of  a  contrary  intention  will
exclude  the  so-called  customary  construction  of  the


1  See  authorities  referred  to  in  Anson,  Law  of  Contracts,  8th.  ed.
264,  265.

2  In  the  leading  case  of  Wigglesworth  v.  Dallison,  Doug.  201,
1  Sm.  L.C.  10th  ed.  528,  the  usage  relied  on  and  upheld  by  the
Court  was  pleaded  as  an  ancient  custom.


iv  CUSTOM  IN  ENGLISH  LAW  273

terms,  or  customary  additional  terms,  as  the  case
may  be.  The  present  writer  has  suggested  elsewhere
that  it  might  be  better  not  to  use  in  this  connection
the  word  "custom"  or  at 'least  to  speak  by  pre-
ference of  "  usage."  1  We  have  here  to  do  with  a
canon  of  interpretation,  not  with  a  distinct  source
of  law.

1  Principles  of  Contract,  6th  ed.  p.  240. Sir  W.  Anson  (loc,  cit. )
appears  purposely  to  avoid  the  word  "  custom."


CHAPTEE V


LAW REPORTS

[Cp.  "The  Reporters  arranged  and  characterised  with  incidental
remarks."  By  John  William  Wallace.  4th  ed.  by  F.  F.  Heard,
London,  1882,  cited  as  Wallace  on  tlie  Reporters  ;  Kent's  Comment-
aries, Lect.  xxi.  ;  and  Dr.  H.  B  runner's  "  Essay  on  the  Sources
of  the  Law  of  England  "  in  the  Introduction  to  HoltzendorfFs
Encyklopadie  der  Rechtsioissenschaft,  translated  by  W.  Hastie,
Edinburgh,  1888.  Accounts  of  the  better  known  reporters  may  be
found  under  their  names  in  the  National  Dictionary  of  Biography,
and  also,  as  to  those  who  were  or  afterwards  became  judges,  such
as  Sir  Edward  Coke,  in  Foss's  Biographia  Juridica,  London,  1870].

What  are Coke,  in the Preface to the Sixth Part of his

reports.

Reports,  suggests  that  Moses  was  the  first  reporter.
The  case  of  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad,  narrated
at  the  beginning  of  the  27th  chapter  of  the  Book
of  Numbers,  is  not  cited  by  him  in  this  connection,
though  he  cites  it  elsewhere 1  to  show  that  "  in  this
point,  as  almost  in  all others,  the Common  Law

1  Ratcliff's  Ca.  3  Rep.  40a,  b:  "This  case  seemed  of  great
difficulty  to  Moses,  and  therefore,  for  the  deciding  of  that  question,
Moses  consulted  with  God."


chap,  v  LAW  REPORTS  275

was  grounded  on  the  law  of  God."  Ehat  case  is
stated  with  great  clearness,  and  expressly  as  a
binding  precedent,  and  moreover  it  was  actually
vouched  within  quite  recent  years  by  the  Jews  of
Aden  when  they  petitioned  the  Government  of
India  to  be  excluded  from  the  Indian  Succession
Act.1  Law  reports,  however,  cannot  exist  in  any
proper  sense  unless  and  until  the  habit  of  relying
on  decided  cases  for  guidance,  and  bringing  them
before  the  courts  in  argument,  has  become  well
settled.  The  Eoman  lawyers,  as  we  have  said,
relied  (with  strictly  limited  exceptions)  not  on
decisions  but  on  opinions.  Accordingly  the  litera-
ture of  Eoman  law  contains  nothing  answering  to
our  reports ;  while  a  few  volumes  of  collected
arguments  and  opinions  like  those  of  Fearne  and
Hargrave  are  the  nearest  analogy  we  can  show  to
one  important  class  of  the  materials  out  of  which
the  Corpus  Juris  was  framed.  Eeports,  again,
must  be  distinguished  from  the  official  records  of
the  court  itself.  These  are  kept  for  the  purpose  of
establishing  the  rights  of  parties  in  each  particular
case,  or  justifying  whatever  acts  may  have  to  be
done  in  execution  of  the  judgment.  They  are  not
intended,  in  the  first  line,  for  the  general  use  or
1  Mr.  (now  Sir)  C.  P.  Ilbert  in  Law  Quart.  Rev.  v.  367-68.


276  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

instruction  of  lawyers,  and  they  may  or  may  not
indicate  on  their  face  the  reasons  of  any  decision
or  the  points  of  law  that  were  in  issue.  The
Botuli  Curiae  Regis  published  by  the  Eecord  Com-
mission in  1835,  and  the  supplemental  publication
of  Eolls  of  Eichard  I.'s  time,  edited  by  Mr.
Maitland,1  carry  us  as  far  back  in  the  records  as
1194.  These  are  the  earliest  consecutive  judicial
records  known  to  exist  anywhere.  Narratives  of
legal  proceedings,  on  the  other  hand,  occur  in
chronicles  as  incidents  in  the  general  history.
Thus  the  chronicler  of  a  religious  house  naturally
made  mention  of  lawsuits  in  which  the  interests  of
the  house,  or  of  the  order,  were  involved.  Notices
of  this  kind  may  be  of  considerable  value :  Mr.  M.
M.  Bigelow  has  collected  a  goodly  number  of  them
in  his  Placita  Anglo-Normannica?  Still  they  are
not  reports  as  the  term  has  been  used  by  English-
speaking  lawyers  for  three  centuries  or  more.  Ee-
porting  begins  when  cases  are  collected  of  set
purpose  for  professional  use  and  study,  and  may  be
said  to  be  full-grown  when  learned  persons  make  it
their  business  to  attend  the  courts  and  take  notes,

1  Publications  of  the  Pipe  Roll  Society  for  1891.

2  Placita  Anglo-Normannica :  law  cases  from  William  I.  to
Eichard  I.  preserved  in  historical  records.  By  Melville  Madison
Bigelow,  London,  1879.


v  LAW  REPORTS  277

for  that  purpose,  of  such  cases  as  appear  to  them
likely  to  be  useful.

The  book  now  known  as  Bracton's  Note  book,  Origins  in
and  edited  by  Mr.  F.  W.  Maitland,1  may  perhaps  Bracton's
fairly  be  reckoned  a  book  of  reports.  If  so,  we
may  claim  for  Bracton,  under  whose  direction  and
for  whose  use  it  was  almost  certainly  compiled,  the
honour  of  having  been  the  first  of  our  reporters  as
well  as  the  first  methodical  English  text-writer.
The  contents  of  this  book  "  may  be  briefly  described
as  transcripts  of  entries  on  the  judicial  rolls  of  the
first  twenty-four  years  of  Henry  III.," 2  that  is,
from  A.D.  1218  onwards.  Entries  of  this  early
period  give  us,  for  reasons  which  are  part  of  the
substantive  history  of  the  law,  much  fuller  infor-
mation as  to  what  really  happened  in  court  than
the  more  elaborate  and  formal  pleadings  of  the
later  common-law  system.  The  only  thing  which
need  make  us  hesitate  to  call  the  Note  Book  a  book
of  reports  is  the  absence  of  any  indication  that  it
was  meant  to  be  communicated  to  the  profession  in
general,  or  used  by  Bracton  himself  otherwise  than

1  Bracton's  Note  Book.  A  collection  of  cases  decided  in  the
King's  Courts  during  the  reign  of  Henry  III.,  annotated  by  a
lawyer  of  that  time,  seemingly  by  Henry  of  Bratton.  Edited  by
F.  W.  Maitland.  London  :  Cambridge  University  Press  "Warehouse,
1887. 3  vols.

2  Maitland,  op.  cit.  i.  63.


278  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

as  material  for  his  treatise  on  the  laws  of  England.
It  is  really  half  way  between  reporting  and  the
"  common  placing "  of  later  times.  Much  later,
and  in  a  roundabout  fashion,  part  of  the  matter
contained  in  the  Note  Book  passed  into  English
legal  literature.  Mr.  Maitland  has  shown  that  the
cases  of  Henry  III.'s  reign  noted  in  Fitzherbert's
Abridgment,  the  main  repertory  of  case-law  for
sixteenth  century  lawyers,  were  derived  from  the
Note  Book.1
The  Year  There  is  no  proof that reports of cases were

Books.  ...

taken  down  at  the  time,  for  ordinary  professional
use,  before  the  late  years  of  the  thirteenth  century.
Sir  John  Davis,  in  the  Preface  Dedicatory  to  his
Reports  (1628),  accepted  as  literal  history  what
Chaucer  says  of  the  Serjeant-at-law  in  the  Prologue
to  the  Canterbury  Tales  :

In  termes  had  he  case  and  domes  all,

That  from  the  time  of  king  Will,  were  i-fall.

But  we  must  take  this  as  a  poetic  and  humorous
exaggeration ;  for  if  Chaucer's  contemporaries  had
really  possessed  anything  like  a  set  of  reports  going
back  to  the  twelfth  century,  it  is  not  very  likely
that they would have all perished, and most

1  Bracton's  Note  Book,  i.  p.  117.


v  LAW  REPORTS  279

unlikely  that  we  should  not  have  heard  of  their
existence  from  any  other  writer.1  From  the  year
1292  we  have  a  series  of  reports  of  cases  decided,
partly  by  Edward  I.'s  judges  on  their  circuits  "  in
eyre,"  partly  before  the  Courts  at  Westminster.
By  good  fortune  these  reports  of  Edward  L's  reign
remained  unprinted  until  within  recent  times.  They
were  edited  by  the  late  Mr.  Horwood  with  excellent
care  and  skill,  and  furnished  with  an  English
translation.  Here,  and  in  Mr.  Nichols's  edition  of
the  contemporary  text-book  known  as  Britton — a
model  of  such  work — a  student  may  best  make
himself  familiar  with  the  Anglo-French  which  was
the  official  language  of  the  Courts  down  to  the
fourteenth  century,  and  in  which  reports  were
written  as  late  as  the  close  of  the  seventeenth.  The
language  of  Britton  and  the  earlier  Year  Books  is  far
from  being  corrupt  French  or  a  mere  jargon.  For
quite  three  centuries  after  the  Norman  Conquest
French  was  the  current  speech  of  gentlefolk  in
England.  Being  transplanted  into  England  from
Normandy,  and  continuing  to  live  as  a  true  French
dialect,  it  developed  genuine  peculiarities  of  its
own,  as  Dr.  Murray  has  shown  in  his  Introduction
to  the  Oxford  English  Dictionary,  and  Mr.  Skeat  in
1  Cp.  Horwood,  Preface  to  Year  Book,  30  &  31  Ed.  I.,  p.  xvi.


280  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

the  second  volume  of  his  work  on  English  Philology
(1891). When  Chaucer's  Prioress  spoke  French

After  the  scole  of  Stratford  atte  Bowe

she  was  not  aiming  at  Continental  French ;  she  was
naturally  using  the  Anglo-French  in  which  she  had
been  brought  up. But  the  following  line  :

For  French,  of  Paris  was  to  her  unknowe

seems  to  show  that  the  transfer  of  the  English  con-
nection with  France  from  Normandy  to  Aquitaine,
and  the  development  of  her  Continental  power  and
policy  under  the  Plantagents,  were  in  Chaucer's
time  fast  assimilating  the  French  of  England  to  the
standard  of  France.  It  was  old-fashioned  and
perhaps  even  slightly  ludicrous  to  speak  Anglo-
French  in  good  society,  and  the  dialect,  condemned
to  linger  in  an  obscure  and  artificial  life,  became
ungrammatical  and  poverty-stricken,  and  expired
in  the  latest  reports  of  the  Kestoration  period  as
an  ignominious  jumble  of  corrupt  French  eked  out
with  Latin  and  English.  Before  proceeding  to  any
further  account  of  the  Year  Books,  it  may  be  useful
to  give  a  specimen  of  the  language  in  its  several
stages.


LAW  REPORTS  281


Living  Anglo-French,  Thirteenth  Century, Y.B. 20  Anglo -■

_ , _ .  _ „,  „  „  _ „  French  and

Ed.  I.  (a.d.  1292),  pp.  192-3.  itsde-

gradation.
Howard  [arguing]. Sire,  par  ceu  fet  ne  put  yl  vocher  ;

par  la  resone  ke  al  oure  qant  ce  fet  fut  fet,  sy  fut  le  Roy

Henri,  ke  dunke  fut,  en  prison :  e  desicom  le  governour  e

le  chef  de  leis  fut  en  prisone,  sy  fut  la  ley  en  prisone,  issi  ke

a  eel  oure  qant  le  fet  &c.  ne  aveit  yl  nule  ley  ;  par  quey  le

fet  et  le  feffement  est  nul  en  sei.

Sir,  he  cannot  vouch  by  this  deed  ;  for  the  reason  that

at  the  time  when  this  deed  was  made,  King  Henry  [III.],

who  then  was,  was  in  prison  :  and  inasmuch  as  the  governor

and  the  head  of  Law  \leis  =  leges,  sc.  leges  Angliae]  was  in

prison,  the  law  itself  was  in  prison  :  so  that  at  that  time

when  the  deed  [was  made]  there  was  no  law  :  therefore  the

deed  and  the  feoffment  is  void  in  itself  (Horwood's  Transl.).

This,  it  will  be  seen,  is  pure  and  grammatical
French.  The  language  of  the  treatise  Le  Court
de  Baron,  probably  of  the  early  fourteenth  century,
published  by  the  Selden  Society,  is  very  similar.

Decaying  Anglo-French,  Sixteenth  Century,  Y.B.  12
Hen.  VIII.  (a.d.  1520),  p.  3.  (The  question
was  whether  it  was  a  trespass  to  take  "  unum
canem  vocatum  a  blood-hound.")

Newport  and  Newdigate  [arguing].  Semble  que  toutes
fois  ou  on  a  ascun  tort  ou  damage,  la  ley  done  a  luy  un
remedy,  et  ceo  per  voye  daccion  ;  donq  icy,  il  y  ad  fait  a  moy
damage  per  cet  prisel,  car  coment  que  cet  chien  soit  chose
de  plaisir,  uncore  il  est  profitable  pur  hunting,  ou  pur  ma
recreacion. Oar  si  j'ay  un  popingay  ou  thrush,  que  charite


282  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

et  refraisohe  mes  esprits,  ceo  est  grand confort  a  moy,  et
donq  si  ascun  prend  ceo  de  moy,  il  fait  a  moy  grand  tort.

It  seems  that  whenever  a  man  has  wrong  or  damage,
the  law  gives  him  a  remedy,  and  that  by  way  of  action  :
here  then  is  damage  done  to  me  by  this  taking,  for  although
the  dog  be  an  object  of  [mere]  pleasure,  yet  he  is  profitable
for  hunting,  or  for  my  amusement.  For  if  I  have  a  popin-
jay or  thrush  which  doth  sing  and  refresh  my  spirits,  this  is
great  comfort  to  me,  and  so  if  any  one  take  it  from  me,  he
doth  me  great  wrong.

Here  the  French  is  an  artificial  version  of  what
was  really  said  in  English  in  Court.  The  grammar
and  inflections  are  degraded  (the  contracted  termina-
tions often  prevent  one  from  seeing  exactly  how  far
the  degradation  had  gone),  and  now  and  then  the
reporter  puts  in  an  English  word  rather  than  be
at  the  pains  of  finding  the  French  equivalent,  but
still  it  may  be  called  French  of  a  sort.  The  French
of  Plowden's  Reports  (a.d.  1578)  is,  if  anything,
better  than  that  of  the  latest  Year  Books ;  Plowden,
however,  was  an  exceptionally  learned  writer.  The
same  may  be  said  of  Sir  John  Davis,  in  whose
reports  of  Irish  cases,  dating  from  the  early  part
of  the  seventeenth  century,  the  language  is  not
sensibly  better  or  worse.  By  this  time  it  was  a
purely  conventional  written  language,  and  probably
no  attempt  was  made  to  observe  any  true  French
pronunciation when there was occasion to read


v  LAW  REPORTS  283

passages  from  the  Year  Books  or  early  Statutes
in  Court,  or  when  arguments  were  conducted  in
law -French  in  the  Inns  of  Court,  as  they  still
sometimes  were  as  late  as  the  Eestoration.1

Degenerate  Anglo-French  or  "  law-French." Seven-
teenth century. Eolle's  Reports,  i.  p.  189.

Coke  :  Ceo  n'est  d'estre  fait  nisi  request  soit  fait,  come  si
jeo  soie  oblige  a  paier  un  somme  al  jour  certein  sur  request
ceo  n'est  ascun  dutie  devant  request  (R.  [i.e  reporter]-
Quaere  ceo  car  Haughton  semble  a  disallower  ceo,  car  il
shake  son  capit  [sic]  al  ceo).

Dyer's  Reports,  188&,  in the  notes added  in ed.
1688.

Pas.  37  Eliz.  Carnes  drew  his  sword  sur  le  stairs  de  Court
de  Requests  que  est  hors  de  view  de  ascun  des  Courts,  &  la
si  son  indictment  ad  estre  bien  drawn  il  duist  aver  le
punishment  come  icy.

Richardson,  ch.  Just,  de  C.  Banc  al  Assises  at  Salisbury
in  Summer  1631.  fuit  assault  per  prisoner  la  condemne
pur  felony  que  puis  son  condemnation  ject  un  Brickbat  a  le
dit  Justice  que  narrowly  mist,  &  pur  ceo  immediately  fuit
Indictment  drawn  per  Noy  envers  le  prisoner,  &  son  dexter
manus  ampute  &  fix  al  Gibbet  sur  que  luy  mesme  immediate-
ment  hange  in  presence  de  Court.

This,  it  is needless to  point out,  is  the last
stage  of corruption. All  pretence  of  conformity
to French  grammatical  forms or  of  preserving  a
1  Dugd.  Orig.  Jurid.  p.  209.


284  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

substantially  French  vocabulary  has  disappeared.
"Patres  conscripti  took  a  boat  and  went  to
Philippi "  is  as  much  Latin  as  this  stuff  is  French.
Such  a  jargon  had  nothing  left  for  it  but  to
perish.
The  folio  The  Year  Books  which  were  printed  earlier  than

Year  Books

those  of  Edward  I.  have  fared  much  worse.  They
were  published  at  various  dates  from  1561  onwards,
but  the  collected  folio  edition  of  1678-9  has  super-
seded the  earlier  ones  for  all  purposes  except  those
of  the  curious  bibliographer.  It  is,  however,  any-
thing but  conformable  to  the  modern  standard  of
editing  or  satisfactory  in  use.  The  size  is  cumbrous,
and  the  Gothic  type,  which  was  retained  in  law-
books, for  no  sensible  reason,  long  after  Eoman
type  was  generally  adopted,  is  unpleasant  to  the
eye.  Words  that  were  abbreviated  in  the  MSS.
are  printed  in  the  same  fashion,  and  moreover
there  is  great  reason  to  doubt  whether  the  MSS.
were  read  and  reproduced  with  adequate  care
either  in  the  matter  of  abbreviations  or  otherwise.
A  new  critical  edition  would  be  a  great  help  to
the  historical  study  of  the  Common  Law,  and
might  quite  possibly  throw  light  on  principles
which  have  not  ceased  to  be  of  practical  importance,
but  there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  near  prospect


v  LAW  EEPORTS  285

of  it.  Meanwhile  the  reports  of  several  years  of
Edward  III.  which  were  not  included  in  the  old
editions  have  heen  edited  by  Mr.  L.  0.  Pike  in
the  Eecord  Office  Series,  in  continuation  of  Mr.
Horwood's  work.  Five  volumes  (1883-91)  have
so  far  been  published.  Mr.  Pike's  and  Mr.  Hor-
wood's labours  now  make  it  possible  for  a  student
to  acquaint  himself  with  the  language  and  style  of
the  Year  Books  much  more  readily  than  he  could
have  done  a  generation  ago.  The  Year  Books  are
not  elementary  reading,  and  are  not  very  often
referred  to  in  court  nowadays,  though  oftener
than  they  were  fifty  or  sixty  years  ago.  Many
lawyers  in  good  business  have  never  read  a  word
of  them,  and  would  barely  know  how  to  refer  to
them.  Yet  some  knowledge  of  them  is  needful  for
every  one  who  wishes  to  know  the  law  as  a  scholar
and  not  merely  as  a  practitioner;  and  those  who
pay  special  attention  to  the  law  of  real  property
not  unfrequently  find  such  knowledge  useful  in
practice.-  Kent's  opinion,  expressed  less  than
seventy  years  ago,1  that  the  Year  Books  "  are  not
worth  the  labour  and  expense  either  of  a  new
edition  or  a  translation  "  has  been  refuted,  instead

1  His  Preface  to  the  first  volume  of  Commentaries  on  American
Law  is  dated  23rd  November  1826.


286  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

of  being confirmed,  by subsequent experience on
both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.

The  reports  in  the  Year  Books  have  every
appearance  of  being  notes  taken  in  court  and
written  out  without  much  revision;  there  is  no
trace  of  the  judges  or  officers  of  the  courts  having
been  consulted,  or  the  records  inspected,1  or  the
spelling  of  proper  names  verified.  According  to
a  professional  tradition  which  was  accepted  by
Bacon  and  Plowden,  and  must  in  their  time  have
been  capable  of  first-hand  verification,  the  Year
Books  were  the  work  of  official  and  paid  reporters
appointed  by  the  Crown ;  which  does  not  seem
inconsistent  with  the  rough  quality  of  the  work.
It  must  be  remembered  that  even  in  the  time  of
Henry  VIII.  printing  does  not  appear  to  have  been
contemplated  by  the  reporters.  Bacon  endeavoured,
and  with  apparent  success  for  a  time,  to  have  the
institution  of  official  reporters  revived,  but  next
to  nothing  came  of  it.2  We  are  not  told  why  the
system  of  the  Year  Books,  such  as  it  was,  had  come
to  an  end.

1  See  Bro.  Ab.  Executor,  pi.  22,  for  an  example  of  the  actual
judgment  in  a  case  being  misreported.

2  Wallace  on  the  Reporters,  pp.  270-1 ;  cp.  the  Preface  to  1  Douglas.
The  order  made  in  1617  for  the  re-establishment  of  official  reporters
may  be  seen  in  Rymer's  Foedera,  vol.  xvii.  p.  27.  The  reports  were
to  be  reviewed  by  the  judges  and  submitted  to  the  Chancellor.


v  LAW  REPORTS  287

When unofficial reports were first  printed,  it  The  earlier

private

was  with  apologies  and  professed  reluctance.  The  reports.
learned  reporter  assures  us  that  he  took  notes  in
court  only  for  his  own  use,  but  his  friends  must
needs  borrow  and  copy  them ;  then  he  was  en-
treated to  publish ;  and.  while  he  was  hesitating,
he  learnt  that  some  bookseller  would  bring  out  a
piratical  and  probably  corrupt  edition  if  he  did  not
without  more  loss  of  time  bring  out  an  authentic
one.  Such  is  Plowden's  story  in  the  Preface  to  his
Reports,  dated  1578,  which  served  as  a  model  for
many  others.  Doubtless  MS.  notes  of  cases  were
freely  handed  about  among  barristers  and  students,
as  lecture-notes  are  to  this  day  in  the  universities ;
Coke  alludes  to  this  practice  when  he  says  in  the
Preface  to  the  First  Part  of  his  own  Reports — "  I  like
not  of  those  that  stuff  their  studies  with  wandering
and  masterless  reports."  As  late  as  1765  Sir  James
Burrow  wrote  in  the  Preface  to  his  Reports — "  I
found  myself  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  either  de-
stroying or  publishing  these  papers  (which  were
originally  intended  for  my  own  private  uses  and  not
for  public  inspection)."  Later  still,  in  1789,  Kirby
of  Connecticut,  the  father  of  American  reporters,
declared  that  he  "  had  entered  upon  this  business
in  a  partial  manner,  for  private  use." Dyer's  Re-


288  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

ports,  first  published  in  1585,  fifteen  years  before
the  earliest  of  Coke's,  are  the  leading  example  of
posthumous  collections  made  up  from  materials  not
published  by  the  reporter  in  his  lifetime.  Such
collections  have  been  of  the  most  various  degrees
of  merit.  Wallace  on  the  Reporters  is  the  best
guide  to  a  critical  appreciation  of  the  earlier  books
of  reports.

It  may  be  said  in  general  terms  that  the  work
of  the  Elizabethan  reporters  exhibits  technical
merit  of  a  high  order,  though  it  cannot  be  said  to
be  rich  in  literary  skill,  and  the  reporter's  private
opinions  are  introduced  in  a  manner  and  to  an
extent  we  should  now  think  unwarranted.  Com-
parison of  different  reports  of  the  same  case  may
be  found  to  suggest  that  some  reporters,  and
especially  Coke,  went  very  far  in  editing  the
resolutions  of  the  court  in  accordance  with  their
own  notions  of  what  was  correct.  In  the  seven-
teenth century  the  merits  of  reporting  fell  off  sadly ;
and  the  "  thin  squadron  of  flying  reports "  that
came  forth  in  the  latter  part  of  that  century  and
the  earlier  years  of  the  eighteenth  are  with  few
exceptions  of  poor  quality,  and  certainly  include
the  worst  work  of  the  kind  ever  done.  Lord  Holt
on  one  occasion  was  moved  to  say  of  a  specially


v  LAW  REPORTS  289

bad  example — "  See  the  inconveniences  of  these
scambling  reports ;  they  will  make  us  appear  to
posterity  for  a  parcel  of  blockheads."1  While
the  Year  Books  are  now  more  used  and  cited  than
they  were  fifty  years  ago,  references  in  court  to  the
minor  reporters  of  the  Commonwealth  and  Kestora-
tion  times  have  become  exceedingly  rare.  From
the  end  of  the  Year  Books  to  the  last  quarter  of
the  eighteenth  century,  that  is,  for  more  than  two
centuries,  there  was  no  continuous  provision  for
reports  being  taken  or  preserved  at  all.

Sir  James  Burrow's  Reports,  dating  from 1756  Commenoe-

ment  of

and  first published  in  1765  (which  was  also  the  modern

reporting.

year  of  publication  of  Blackstone's  Commentaries),
may  be  considered  the  earliest  of  the  modern  type.
From  that  time  the  Court  of  King's  Bench  and  its
successors  have  never  wanted  a  reporter ;  we  can
go  back  year  by  year  without  a  break  from  the
current  Queen's  Bench  Division  part  of  the  Law
Beports  to  the  first  volume  of  Burrow.  In  the
Court  of  Common  Pleas  ■  and  in  Chancery  the
succession  was  established  a  score  of  years  later,
and  in  the  Court  of  Exchequer  (then  much  below
the  others  in  dignity  and  repute)  only  many  years
later  still. Burrow  had  something  to  say  of  his

1  2  Ld.  Raym.  1072.
U


290  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

method  of  reporting,  but  the  Preface  to  Douglas's
Reports  (by  Sylvester  Douglas,  afterwards  Lord
Glenbervie),  written  in  1782,  contains  the  earliest
deliberate  discussion  of  the  reporter's  office  and  art
with  which  I  am  acquainted.  During  the  century
which  followed  the  commencement  of  Sir  James
Burrow's  Reports,  law  reporting  was  carried  on  by
the  private  enterprise  of  publishers  and  of  the
barristers  who  prepared  the  reports  under  agree-
ments with  them.  The  reports  in  each  court  were
a  separate  publication,  and  sometimes  two  rival
series  were  carried  on  in  the  same  court;  and
besides  these  there  were  legal  periodicals  which
collected  reports  from  all  the  courts  and  published
them  more  promptly  and  cheaply,  though  in  a  less
elaborate  form,  than  the  reports  known  as  "  regular ''
or  "  authorised."

These  epithets  do  not  mean,  in  English  pro-
fessional usage,  that  the  judges  make  themselves
answerable  for  the  accuracy  of  the  report  in  detail,
or  undertake  not  to  dispute  its  accuracy,  but  only
that  the  judges  are  willing  to  give  the  reporter  such
assistance  as  they  can  by  revising  their  oral  judg-
ments and  furnishing  copies  of  their  written  ones
before  publication.  It  was  formerly  understood
that an  "  authorised "  reporter  had  some sort of


v  LAW  REPORTS  291

moral  claim  to  the  exclusive  benefit  of  these
privileges  in  the  court  to  which  he  was  attached,1
but  of  late  years  many  of  the  judges,  if  not  all,
have  given  equal  facilities  to  two  or  more  competing
sets  of  reports,  in  which  case  they  must  all  be
deemed  to  be  equally  authorised.  It  is  hard  to  say
when  the  practice  of  judges  revising  their  own
reported  judgments  for  publication  was  first  heard
of,  or,  became  usual.  But  it  seems  certain  that  it
had  not  arisen  in  1782,  for  at  that  date  Douglas,
in  the  Preface  to  his  Reports,  dwelt  in  some  detail
on  the  precautions  he  had  taken  to  ensure  accuracy,
but  did  not  speak  of  having  received  or  sought  any
assistance  from  the  judges.  Attempts  were  made
in  the  eighteenth  century,  as  may  be  read  at  large
in  Wallace's  book,  to  establish  a  kind  of  judicial
scale  of  merit  among  published  reports,  and  not
only  to  discountenance  but  to  forbid  the  citation
of  sundry  books  of  inferior  repute.  This  kind  of
censorship  was  obviously  liable  to  abuse,  and  has
long  been  obsolete.  It  is  now  understood  that  the
only  indispensable  condition  for  any  report  of  a
decided  case  being  admitted  to  citation  is  that  it
must  be  vouched  for  on  the  face  of  it  by  a  member

1  See  Sir  John  Romilly's  letter  as  to  the  position  of  Mr.  Beavan
as  authorised  reporter  in  the  Rolls  Court,  published  in  the  Preface
to  34  Beav.  at  p.  8  ;  see  also  Law  Quart.  Rev.  vi.  342,  n.


292  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

of  the  Bar  who  was  present  at  the  decision.  But
in  case  of  divergence  between  different  reports  of
the  same  judgment,  the  "  authorised "  report  is
taken  to  represent  the  deliberate  expression  of  the
judge's  opinion :  for  a  judge  may  say  things  in  the
course  of  an  argument,  and  even  in  judgments
delivered  without  preparation,  which  he  does  not
wish,  on  reflection,  to  be  permanently  recorded.1

Even  in  the  early  part  of  this  century  it  was
still  not  uncommon  to  refer  to  private  notes  re-
maining in  MS.  in  order  to  supplement  or  correct
the  older  reports.2  Such  an  occurrence  is  now
most  rare,  if  indeed  it  is  known  at  all.  The  records
of  the  court  itself,  however,  always  may  be  and
pretty  often  are  referred  to  when  it  is  material  to
verify  the  exact  form  of  a  judgment  or  order  which
does  not  appear  in  terms  in  the  published  report.
In  many  American  States,  and  in  some  British
possessions,  the  judges  of  superior  or  appellate
courts  are  required  by  law  to  give  their  judgments


1  James,  V.-O,  in  Leather  Cloth  Co.  v.  Lorsont,  L.R.  9  Eq.  at
p.  351.

2  See  Lord  Eldon's  remarks  in  Sidney  v.  Miller  (1815),  14  R.R.
at  p.  250  :  "He  had  not  been  able  to  find  anything  amongst  his
own  manuscript  cases,  but  he  had  been  favoured  by  Mr./  Eden  with
a  manuscript  note  of  Lord  Northington's  of  what  Lord  Hardwicke
said  in  Brown  v.  Jones  ;  and  which  the  Lord  Chancellor  read  to  the
Bar."


v  LAW  REPORTS  293

in  writing.  This  makes  the  reporter's  office  much
easier,  for  orally  delivered  judgments,  however
excellent  in  substance,  usually  need  a  considerable
amount  of  editing  to  bring  them  into  an  acceptable
written  form.

The  reports  issued  by  disconnected  private  enter-  Founda-
prise  were,  with  few  exceptions,  good  enough  in  the  Law
substance,  and  some  were  very  good  indeed ;  but
they  were  costly,  bulky,  and  dilatory,  and,  as  Lord
Justice  Lindley  has  said,  "  the  waste  of  labour,
time,  and  money  was  prodigious."1  In  1863  the
English  Bar  took  the  matter  into  their  own  hands,
and  the  labours  of  a  committee  appointed  to  consider
what  could  be  done  resulted  in  the  establishment
of  the  Council  of  Law  Eeporting,  a  directing  body
which  represents  the  Inns  of  Court,  and  now  also
the  General  Council  of  the  Bar.

From  1865  onwards  the  Law  Reports  have  been
carried  on  by  the  Council  in  the  interest  of  the
profession  as  a  co-operative  and  self-supporting
enterprise.2 The  example  set  by  the  English  Law

1  Law  Quart.  Rev.  i.  138.  More  detail  will  be  found  there,  and
in  the  late  Mr.  Daniel's  History  and  Origin  of  the  Law  Reports,
London,  1884,  of  which  the  Lord  Justice's  article  was  a  review.

2  Most  of  the  existing  "authorised  "  reporters  joined  the  staff  of
the  Law  Reports  at  once  ;  a  few  of  them  held  out  for  a  year  or  two,
hut  one  may  say  broadly  that  the  Law  Reports  absorbed  and  super-
seded the  old  ' '  authorised  "  reports  with  remarkable  completeness
and  with  all  but  universal  approval. It  was  no  part  of  the  scheme,


294  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap

Keports  was  in  course  of  time  followed  in  Ireland,
and  to  a  certain  extent  in  British  India.  Arrange-
ments analogous,  in  varying  degrees,  to  those  of  the
English  "  authorised  "  reports  exist  in  the  Federal
and  State  jurisdictions  of  the  United  States,  and
in  the  larger  self-governing  British  Colonies.  In
America  "  the  reporters  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the
United  States  and  of  most,  perhaps  of  all,  the  State
Courts  of  last  resort,  are  public  officials  duly  elected
or  appointed," *  and  accordingly  the  reports  are
constantly  described  as  official,  a  term  which  English
lawyers  have  avoided.
Bulk  of  Sir  Edward  Coke,  in  the  Preface  to  the  Third

English

and  Ameri-  Part  of  his  Beports,  estimated  the  number  of  volumes

can  case-  ...

law.  of  reports  then  in  existence  at  fifteen. About  the

beginning of the eighteenth century  "  a  country

lawyer  who  was  afterwards  advanced  to  the  seat  of

justice  "  is  said  to  have  complained  that  "  when  he

was  a  student  he  could  carry  a  complete  library  of

books in  a  wheelbarrow, but that they were so

wonderfully increased in  a few years that they

could  not  then  be  drawn  in  a  waggon." 2 Now  the

however,  to  set  up  an  official  monopoly  of  reporting,  and  other
competing  series  continued  and  still  continue  to  be  published,  and
to  be  preferred  to  the  Law  Reports,  for  various  reasons,  by  a  certain
number  of  the  profession.

1  Wambaugh,  The  Study  of  Gases,  2nd.  ed.  1894,  p.  109.

2  Pref.  to  5  Mod.  p.  xi.


v  LAW  REPORTS  295

waggon  would  be  as  much  out  of  date  as  the  wheel-
barrow. The  volumes  of  reports  are  something
over  eighteen  hundred  if  we  count  English  reports
alone,  and  come  to  two  thousand  if  we  add  the  Irish
ones.  It  is  said  that  the  various  jurisdictions  of  the
United  States  have  already  produced  something  like
double  this  number.  Making  a  rough  allowance  for
the  reports  of  British  India  and  the  English-speaking
Colonies,  we  shall  not  be  far  wrong  in  saying
that  on  the  whole  there  are  now  in  print  not  far

from  eight  thousand  volumes  of  reported  decisions.1

1  Cp.  Dillon,  Laws  and  Jurisprudence  of  England  and  America,
Boston,  Mass.  1894,  p.  265.  The  statement  as  to  American  reports
is  founded  on  the  estimate  there  given  ;  but  Judge  Dillon  gives  for
the  English  ones  a  much  larger  number  than  I  have  obtained  as  the
result  of  an  independent  verification.  It  does  not  appear  from
what  source  his  figure  of  2944  volumes  as  existing  in  1881  was
derived.  My  own  round  numbers  to  the  end  of  1895  are:  English
"regular"  reports  from  the  Year  Books,  inclusive,  1000  volumes
Law  Reports  and  other  periodical  reports,  625  ;  Crown  Cases,
Criminal  Law  Reports,  and  State  Trials,  170  ;  other  reports  of
special  classes  of  cases,  about  30  :  total  1825.  Irish  reports,
185 ;  Scottish  (which  belong,  however,  to  a  different  system  of
law),  290.  This  makes  for  the  United  Kingdom  a  total  of  about
2300.  There  are  some  reports  of  County  Court  cases,  but  these
ought  not  to  be  reckoned,  as  the  decisions  of  inferior  courts  may  not
be  quoted  as  authority.  The  same  may  be  said  of  a  mass  of
individual  reports  of  separate  cases,  collections  of  celebrated  trials,
and  so  forth,  which  might  considerably  swell  the  total  if  admitted,
but  of  which  only  a  small  proportion  are  properly  authenticated
reports  of  authoritative  decisions.  Inclusion  of  such  publications
may  perhaps  account  for  the  largeness  of  the  estimate  adopted  by
Judge  Dillon.  The  Revised  Reports,  now  in  their  25th  volume,
are  not  counted  here,  as  they  are  not  an  addition  to  the  existing
reports,  but  a  reprint  omitting  obsolete  matter.


296  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

Of  course  no  one  can  pretend  to  be  familiar  with
more  than  a  small  fraction  of  this  enormous  litera-
ture. In  practice  a  modern  lawyer  is  content  to  know
the  current  authorities  of  his  own  generation  and
country,  and  within  his  own  range  of  work,  and  a
select  number  of  the  older  decisions  on  principles  of
general  importance.  All  the  reported  English  case3
likely  to  be  wanted  for  any  ordinary  professional
purpose  at  this  day  might  probably  be  contained  in
about  one  hundred  and  fifty  volumes  of  the  size  of
the  Law  Eeports,  and  the  number  which  any  one
man  has  found  it  needful  or  useful  to  read  carefully
might  possibly  fill,  at  a  rough  guess,  twenty  or
twenty-five  such  volumes.

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  even  among  the
earlier  books  many  cases  are  reported  twice  or
oftener  by  different  reporters,  and  in  modern  times
we  have  series  of  rival  reports  which,  although  they
differ  more  or  less  in  their  selection  of  cases,  have  a
great  part  of  their  matter  in  common.  Thus  the
total  substance  of  reported  cases  is  not  quite  so  huge
as  it  seems.  But  it  is  sometimes  needful,  if  there  is
doubt  as  to  the  facts  or  as  to  the  exact  language
used  by  the  court,  to  compare  all  the  known  con-
current reports  of  a  case,  and  therefore  it  cannot
be  said  of  any  volume  of  the  reports,  even  those  of


v  LAW  REPORTS  297

inferior  authority,  that  a  lawyer  may  not  at  some
time  have  to  refer  to  it.

The peculiar difficulties of studying Anglo-  Use  of

authorities.

American  law  lie,  on  the  whole,  not  so  much  in  the
actual  amount  of  reading  that  is  required  (which  is
probably  not  greater  than  in  the  case  of  any  other
learned  or  literary  calling)  as  in  the  dispersion  of
the  materials,  the  rapid  accession  of  new  matter  and
obsolescence  of  old,  and  the  elaborate  apparatus  of
reference  rendered  necessary  by  these  conditions,
which  can  itself  be  used  with  full  effect  only  after  a
certain  amount  of  professional  training  and  experi-
ence. Every  student  should .  accustom  himself  as
soon  as  possible  to  the  process  of  ascertaining  and
verifying,  with  the  help  of  the  various  indexes  and
digests,  the  authorities  available  on  a  given  point  of
law.  lists  of  the  English  reports,  and  the  abbrevia-
tions by  which  they  are  commonly  referred  to,  may
be  found  in  Fisher's  Digest  and  other  works  of
reference,  and  in  some  of  the  law  booksellers'
catalogues.  A  new  and,  it  is  believed,  a  complete
or  very  nearly  complete  one  was  issued  by  the
Council  of  Law  Eeporting  in  1895. x

1  "  Tables,  Alphabetical  and  Chronological,  of  all  Reports  of  Cases
decided  in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland  .  .  .  with  a  List  of  the
usual  Modes  of  Citation,  compiled  under  the  direction  of  the
Council,"  by  Arthur  Cane. London :  Wm.  Clowes  and  Sons,  Ltd.,


298  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE chap,  v

Let  the  student,  above  all,  remember  that  in  our
law  text-books  are  not  authorities,  with  the  excep-
tion, which  in  usual  practice  is  seldom  material,  of
the  limited  number  of  old  books  by  private  writers
to  which  authority  in  the  proper  sense  has  been
ascribed.  Unverified  notes  or  extracts  should  never
be  trusted  ;  neither  is  it  safe  to  assume  that  extracts
from  a  case  in  even  the  most  careful  and  learned  of
text-books,  though  correct  so  far  as  they  go,  and
apparently  relevant,  will  suffice  for  the  purpose  in
hand.  The  text-writer's  purpose  may  not  be  the
same  as  yours,  and,  if  it  were,  the  court  may  not
agree  with  him  that  the  passages  he  has  selected
are  the  only  relevant  ones.  First-hand  acquaintance
with  the  authorities  themselves  is  the  only  safe  way.

We  shall  now  proceed  to  inquire  more  precisely
than  we  have  yet  done  in  what  sense  decided  cases
are  of  authority  in  our  courts,  and  by  what  rules
or  understandings  the  inconvenience  of  different
authorities  being  found  to  be  in  conflict  is  provided
against  or  diminished.

1895.  This  includes  not  only  reports  fully  published  before  1865,
but  serial  reports  commenced  before  that  date,  and  continued  after-
wards. It  does  not,  however,  include  the  periodical  reports  of
cases  in  all  the  courts  which  have  for  many  years  been  published  in
connection  with  legal  newspapers.  One  cannot  be  sure  that  this
or  any  other  list  accounts  for  all  the  obscure  minor  reports,  but  it
is  more  than  sufficient  for  all  practical  purposes.


CHAPTER VI

CASE-LAW  AND  PRECEDENTS

[Blackstone,  Oomm.  i.  69-73  ;  Kent,  Gomm.  Lect.  xxi. ;  The  Laws
and  Jurisprudence  of  England  and  America,  by  John  F.  Dillon.
Boston,  Mass.  1894  (Leots.  viii.  and  x. )  ;  Judicial  Precedents :  a
short  Study  in  Comparative  Jurisprudence,  by  J.  C.  Gray,  Harv.
Law  Rev.  ix.  27  ;  The  Study  of  Oases,  by  Eugene  Wambaugh,  2nd
ed.  Boston,  Mass.  1894],

As  regards  the  authority  of  decided  cases  (which  in  Authority

of  de-
modern  times means, for all practical purposes,  cisions:  its

degrees.

reported  cases),  we  have  to  consider  whether  they
proceed  from  a  superior  court  of  original  jurisdiction,
or  from  a  court  of  appeal  which  is  itself  subject  to
a  further  appeal,  or  from  a  court  of  last  resort,  that
is,  a  court  where  decisions  cannot  he  reviewed  by
any  other  tribunal.  The  decisions  of  an  ordinary
superior  court  are  binding  on  all  courts  of  inferior
rank  within  the  same  jurisdiction,  and,  though  not
absolutely  binding  on  courts  of  co-ordinate  authority
nor on that  court  itself,  will  be  followed  in the


300  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

absence  of  strong  reason  to  the  contrary.  The
strongest  of  such  possible  reasons  is  disregard,  by
the  decision  dissented  from,  of  some  still  higher
authority.

The  decisions  of  a  Court  of  Appeal  are  binding
on  all  courts  of  co-ordinate  rank  with  the  court
below,  and  generally,  according  to  English  practice,
on  the  Appellate  Court  itself.

As  regards  a  court  of  last  resort,  its  decisions
are  certainly  binding  on  all  courts  of  lower  rank.
Usage  differs  on  the  point  whether  such  a  court
shall  treat  itself  as  bound  by  its  own  decisions.
The  House  of  Lords  has  gone  farthest  in  this
direction ;  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,
on  the  other  hand,  has  more  than  once  openly
reversed  its  own  previous  doctrine ;  some  other
tribunals  of  last  resort  have  not  dissented  from
their  own  former  conclusions  except  in  very  special
circumstances,  but  have  also  not  disclaimed  the
power  of  doing  so.

Few  definite  statements  have  been  made  on  the
subject  by  persons  speaking  with  authority,  and
indeed  there  has  not  been  much  explicit  statement
of  any  kind ;  and,  in  England  at  all  events,  there
has  been  no  attempt  to  regulate  the  usage  of  the
courts  by  legislation. What  is  here  said  is  intended


vi  CASE-LAW  AND  PRECEDENTS  301

to  express  the  recognised  practice  and  tradition  with
such  approximate  exactness  as  the  nature  of  the  case
admits  of.  We  shall  now  illustrate  the  practice  by
examples  of  its  judicial  declaration  or  discussion.

As  early  as  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century  Early

statements

Bracton,  as  we  have  seen,  collected  and  cited  de-  and  dis-
cussion.
cisions;  but there is nothing to warrant us in

saying  that  he  regarded  them  as  positively  binding

on  the  judges  in  similar  cases  arising  later. Early

in  the  fourteenth  century,  however,  we  find  Herle

(perhaps  the  same  William  de  Herle  who  became

a  judge  in  1320,  and  Chief  Justice  of  the  Common

Pleas  seven  years later) impressing  on  the  court

before  whom  he  argues  that  their  decision  will  be

received as authority,  and therefore ought to be

carefully  considered,  "  for  the  judgment that  you

shall  now  make  in  this  matter  will  be  used  hereafter

in  every  quare  non  admisit  in  England."  x

This  appears  to  have  expressed  a  view  generally

admitted, for otherwise we should not  find the

remark  so  pointedly  reported  without  any  note  of

dissent  from  the  court,  the  opposing  counsel,  or  the

reporter himself. A century and a half later

1  Year  Book,  32  Ed.  I.  ed.  Horwood,  p.  33.  The  question  (of
which  no  decision  is  reported)  was  whether  a  plea  of  three  distinct
and  independent  objections  to  a  clerk's  eligibility  for  presentation
to  a  church  was  allowable  or  not.


302  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

(a.d.  1454)  we  find  Prisot,  Chief  Justice  of  the
Common  Pleas,1  laying  down  from  the  Bench  how
inconvenient  it  would  be  for  the  court  to  disregard
the  judgments  of  earlier  date.  The  question  was  on
the  construction  of  a  statute,  and  one  reason  given
is  that  the  judges  who  were  nearer  to  the  date  of
the  statute  were  more  likely  to  understand  it
rightly;  but  the  general  importance  of  adhering
to  precedent  is  also  insisted  upon.  The  young
apprentices  of  the  law,  Prisot  says,  will  give  no
faith  to  their  books,  if  points  which  they  find  many
times  laid  down  in  their  books  are  now  to  be  de-
cided the  other  way.2  A  year  later  we  find  Prisot,
in  a  discussion  among  the  judges  in  the  Exchequer
Chamber,  apparently  maintaining  the  authority  of
precedent  against  a  majority  of  his  colleagues.  The
judges,  as  reported,  seem  to  contradict  themselves
at  different  stages  of  the  proceedings,  but  at  all
events  the  question  whether  the  court  was  free  to
dissent  from  a  recent  decision  of  its  own  or  not  was
discussed,  in  the  presence  of  the  Bar,  but  without
hearing  any  fresh  arguments  from  them,  with  con-

1  In  Wallace  on  the  Reporters,  4th  ed.  p.  100,  the  date  of  this
case  is  erroneously  given  as  1444,  and  consequently  (it  would
seem)  Prisot,  who  was  appointed  in  1449  and  was  never  a  puisne
judge,  is  described  as  Mr.  Justice  Prisot  and  stated  to  have  been
afterwards  promoted.  2  33  Hen.  VI.  41«.


vi  CASE-LAW  AND  PRECEDENTS  303

siderable  animation,  and  the  reasons  given,  so  far  as
we  can  collect  them  from  an  evidently  imperfect
report,  are  such  as  might  well  be  given  at  this  day.1
Fortescue,  Chief  Justice  of  the  King's  Bench,  seems
to  have  said  at  one  time  that  he  must  acquiesce  in
a  series  of  decisions  which  he  did  not  approve,
although  no  judge  would  in  his  opinion  so  decide  if
the  point  were  new.  But  on  the  same  page  he  is
stated  (whether  by  the  reporter  himself,  or  in  an
aside  of  Prisot  to  counsel,  is  not  clear)  to  have  said
that,  if  there  had  been  such  a  decision  as  supposed,
he  did  not  believe  the  point  had  been  adequately
argued  or  considered,  and  therefore  did  not  feel
bound  to  pay  much  regard  to  such  a  judgment :
and  this  seems  to  have  been  his  latest  opinion,
for  Prisot's  contention  was  ultimately  overruled.2
Prisot  appears  to  have  given  the  date  of  the  case  he
relied  upon  ("il  alleg'  deins  quel  an.")

Coke's  general  statement,  in  the  Preface  to  the
Tenth  Part  of  his  Reports,  that  in  olden  times  the
Serjeants  and  apprentices  of  the  law  "  never  cited
any  book,  case,  or  authority  in  particular  "  is  there-

1  34  Hen.  VI.  24.

2  The  Year  Book  report  is  made  almost  unintelligible  by  an
erroneous  statement  of  the  final  result,  which  is  corrected  in  Bro.
Ab.  Executor,  pi.  22,  on  the  authority  of  the  record  as  vouched  by
the  Court  in  23  Hen.  VIII.  (a  year  for  which  there  is  not  any  Year
Book  in  print).  The  law  was  already  settled  :  see  6  Ed.  IV.  1,  pi.  1.


304  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  •  chap.

fore  too  wide  as  it  stands  in  English ;  the  contem-
poraneous Latin  text,  however,  has  "  vix  unquam,"
which  leaves  room  for  exceptional  cases.1  According
to  Coke  the  common  form  was  "  it  is  held  "  or  "  it
is  agreed  in  our  books/'  "  it  has  been  decided  in  full
court,"  and  the  like.  We  must  not  forget  the
mechanical  difficulty  of  citing  any  "  book,  case,  or
authority  in  particular,"  before  the  invention  of
printing;  it  was  not  an  insuperable  difficulty,  for
some  medieval  manuscripts  are  very  well  indexed ;
but  it  was  not  a  trifling  one.
Modem  Having  thus  shown  that  the  principles which

usage :  as

to  co- now  guide  our  courts  in  following  precedents  were

ordinate

authority,  in  existence  four  centuries  and  a  half  ago,  we  may
come  at  once  to  the  most  modern  utterances  on  the
subject.  Sometimes  it  has  been  thought  that
judges  are  positively  bound  to  follow  decisions  of
"  co-ordinate  authority,"  that  is,  the  decisions  of
courts  of  equal  rank  and  exercising  the  same
jurisdiction,  unless  obviously  contrary  to  higher
authority  or  the  weight  of  previous  equal  authority.
This  was  the  view  taken  by  the  late  Sir  George

Jessel  in  the  earlier  part  of his  judicial career.2

1  In  the  great  ease  of  larceny  by  breaking  bulk,  in  1473,
Y.B.  13  Ed.  IV.  9  (translated  in  Pollock  and  "Wright  on  Possession,
pp.  134-137),  Brian,  C.-J.,  appears  to  have  quoted  particular
cases  much  as  we  do  now.

2  Be  Harper  and  G.KB.  Co.  (1875),  L.R.  20  Eq.  at  p.  43.


vi  CASE-LAW  AND  PRECEDENTS  305

But  some  years  later,  having  learnt  that  the  Court
of  Appeal  did  not  consider  a  judge  of  first  instance
to  be  so  strictly  bound,  he  held  himself  free  to
discuss  previous  decisions  of  co-ordinate  authority
on  their  merits,  admitting,  however,  that  "  there  is
perhaps  nothing  more  important  in  our  law  than
that  great  respect  for  the  authority  of  decided  cases
which  is  shown  by  our  tribunals,"  and  that  the
decision  of  a  tribunal  of  co-ordinate  jurisdiction
ought  to  be  followed  "  where  it  is  of  respectable
age  and  has  been  used  by  lawyers  as  settling  the
law." 1  Before  the  Judicature  Acts  the  different
Superior  Courts  of  Common  Law,  the  Queen's
Bench,  Common  Pleas,  and  Exchequer,  treated  one
another's  decisions  with  respect,  but  not  as  authorities
precluding  discussion.2  It  is  by  no  means  clear
that  they  even  held  themselves  positively  bound  by
their  own  decisions  while  the  judges  who  had
pronounced  them  were  living.3

1  Be  Eallett's  Estate  (1879),  13  Ch.  D.  at  p.  712 ;  Osborne  v.
Rvwlett  (1880),  il.  at  p.  779.

2  Cp.  Vaughan  383,  where  the  language  is  wide.  If  Vaughan,
C.-J.,  really  said  that  a  judge  can  never  be  bound  to  follow  an
authority  with  which  he  personally  does  not  agree,  he  disregarded
the  uniform  practice  of  English  courts.  The  language  of  Brett,
M.R.,  9  P.D.  at  p.  98,  seems  to  go  a  little  too  far  the  other  way.
There  is  no  doubt  of  the  fact  that  the  old  Courts  in  Westminster
Hall  often  took  independent  lines.

3  Dallas,  C.-J.,  seems  to  imply  the  contrary  in  Christie  v.  Lewis
(1821),  2  Brod.  &  B.  426,  23  R.R.  491.

X


306  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

Correction Occasionally  cases  are  reported  which  (whether

of  manifest

error. by  some  real  mistake  at  the  time,  or  through  some

omission or misstatement in the report) are,  as

they stand reported, manifestly contrary to the

rules  of  law  as  settled  and  generally  understood,  or

to the uniform  tendency  of other decisions,  the

"  current  of authority "  as it  is called. Even  a

court of first instance may disregard obvious

aberrations  of  this  kind. It  need  not  and  should

not throw  the duty  of correcting them on the

Court  of  Appeal.1

Respect  for Where a decision,  or still more a series of

decisions

often  acted  decisions  to  the  same  effect,  has  been  accepted  for

upon.

law  and  acted  upon  by  many  persons,  and  especially

where  a  rule  thus  arrived  at  has  become  a  guide  to

lawyers  and their clients in their dealings with

property,  the  Courts,  even  Courts  of Appeal,  are

slow  to  interfere  with  the  rule,  and  it  may  perhaps

be upheld although modern research has shown

that  it  was  originally  founded  on  a  mistake;  for

the  reversal  of a  rule that has been commonly

acted upon might well produce an amount of

inconvenience greater than any advantage that

could  be  expected  from  the  restoration  or  establish-

1  e.g.  Re  Klcebe  (1884),  28  Ch.  D.  at  p.  180,  where  Pearson,  J.,
said  of  a  solitary  decision  of  this  kind:  "It  is  unfortunate  that
the  case  was  ever  reported."


vi  CASE-LAW  AND  PRECEDENTS  307

ment  of  a  rule  more  correct  in  itself.  In  this
sense  it  is  said  that  "  communis  error  facit  ius." 1
Even  an  erroneous  construction  of  a  statute  may
stand  unreversed  if  it  has  become,  on  the  plausible
authority  of  a  series  of  decisions,  "  a  law  which
men  follow  in  their  daily  dealings." 2  For  this
reason  the  constant  practice  of  conveyancers  has
great  weight  in  support  of  a  decision  upon  which  it
is  founded,  and  this  even  in  a  court  of  last  resort.3

Indeed  Lord  Eldon  said  without  qualification  that
in  its  own  subject-matter  "  the  practice  of  convey-
ancers amounts  to  a  very  considerable  authority  "  : i
and  in  the  same  case  Lord  Eedesdale  pointed  out
that,  if  it  were  not  so,  there  would  be  great  risk
of  defeating  the  intentions  of  parties  who  had
naturally  left  it  to  their  skilled  advisers  to  express
those  intentions  in  a  proper  form,  and  whose
advisers  had  used  accustomed  forms  in  the  sense
regularly  attached  to  them  in  the  profession.5  In
this  eminently  scientific  branch  of  the  profession,


1  Stourbridge  v.  Droitwich  (1871),  L.R.  6  Q.B.  pp.  769,  775.

2  Jessel,  M.R.,  in  Ex  parte Willey  (1883),  23  Ch.  Div.  at  p.
127  ;  and  in  Wallis  v.  Smith  (1882),  21  Ch.  Div.  at  pp.  265,  266.

3  Lord  Hatherley  in  Bain  v.  Fothergill  (1874),  L.R.  7  H.L.  pp.
158,  209.

4  Smith  v.  Earl  Jersey  (1821),  3  Bligh  at  p.  444,  22  R.R.  at
p.  43.

6  3  Bligh  at  pp.  461-62,  22  R.R.  at  pp.  55,  56.


Appeal.


308  FIRST  BOOK  OP  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

who  are  as  it  were  the  Sappers  of  the  Bar,  judicial
interpretations  of  the  law,  notably  the  law  of  real
property,  are  apt  to  be  more  freely  criticised  than
elsewhere.
Courts  of  Decisions of a Court of  Appeal (in English

practice  since  1875,  the  one  Court  of  Appeal
established  by  the  Judicature  Acts)  are  binding  on
all  courts  of  inferior  authority  within  the  same
jurisdiction.  The  Judicial  Committee  of  the  Privy
Council  has  declared  it  to  be  convenient  and
desirable  for  colonial  courts  to  accept  the  decisions
of  the  English  Court  of  Appeal  as  authoritative  on
the  construction,  not  only  of  English  Acts  of
Parliament  which  a  colonial  court  may  have  to
apply,  but  of  colonial  statutes  repeating  in  terms
(as  often  happens)  the  provisions  of  such  Acts.1

It  follows  that  a  Court  of  Appeal  not  only  can
reverse  or  vary  decisions  from  which  an  appeal  is
brought,  but  can  overrule  previous  decisions  of
courts  below  which  have  not  been  appealed  from,
that  is,  can  declare  or  give  it  to  be  understood  that
they  were  erroneously  decided  and  are  no  longer  to
be  followed  as  authority.  The  Court  of  Appeal  in
England  does  not  hold  itself  free  to  depart  from
its  own  considered  decisions  or  (according  to  its
1  Trimble  v.  Hill  (1879),  5  App.  Ca.  342,  344.


vi  CASE-LAW  AND  PRECEDENTS  309

latest  utterances) 1  from  those  of  the  courts  of  like
authority,  namely  the  Exchequer  Chamber  and  the
Court  of  Appeal  in  Chancery,  which  existed  before
it.  Quite  lately  the  court  has  acted  on  this  view.2
But  it  has  held  itself  not  bound  by  the  result  of  a
former  case  in  which  the  judges  present  were
equally  divided ;  for  in  such  a  case  "  there  is  no
authority  of  the  Court  as  such." 3

Decisions  of  an  appellate  court  of  last  resort  are  Courts  of

inqf  TP^ort

binding  on  all  courts  from  which  an  appeal  lies  to
it,  and,  of  course,  on  all  tribunals  inferior  to  them.
So  far  what  has  been  said  of  a  Court  of  Appeal  in
general  is  applicable.  But  the  further  question
arises  whether  a  court  from  which  there  is  no
appeal  shall  hold  itself  free  to  review  its  own
former  decisions  or  not. It  may  be  said  on  the

1  In  1880  a  different  view  was  held  :  "As  a  rule,  this  Court
ought  to  treat  the  decisions  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Chancery  as
binding  authorities,  but  we  are  at  liberty  not  to  do  so  where  there
is  a  sufficient  reason  for  overruling  them  "  :  Mills  v.  Jennings,  13
Ch.  Div.  639,  648.  In  the  last  resort  the  House  of  Lords  agreed
with  the  Court  of  Appeal  and  overruled  the  earlier  decision  ;  they
had  not,  of  course,  to  decide  whether  the  Court  of  Appeal  was
strictly  entitled  to  disregard  it  or  not :  Jennings  v.  Jordan  (1881),
6  App.  Ca.  698.

2  "We  cannot  overrule  Vint  v.  Padget  (2  De  G.  &  J.  611),
for  that  was  the  decision  of  a  Court  co-ordinate  in  jurisdiction
with  ourselves "  :  Lord  Herschell,  L.C.  in  Pledge  v.  Carr  '95,  1
Ch.  at  p.  52.  Cp.  Lavy  v.  London  Comity  Council  '95,  2  Q.B.
(Lindley,  L.-J.).

3  The  Vera  Cruz,  No.  2  (1884),  9  P.D.  96,  98,  101.


310  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  CHAr.

one  side  that  even  the  highest  court  may  err,
and  that  if  it  cannot  amend  its  own  errors  upon
better  information  or  reasoning  they  may  never
be  corrected  at  all;  for,  legislative  methods  and
procedure  being  what  they  are  and  must  be,  it  is
for  the  most  part  idle  to  count  on  legislation  for
this  purpose.  On  the  other  side  it  is  said  that
certainty  in  the  rules  of  law  by  which  men  have
to  guide  themselves  is  of  greater  importance  than
arriving  at  the  rule  which  is  best  in  itself  or
most  logically  harmonious  as  part  of  a  system.
This  seems  a  good  reason  why  a  court  of  final
appeal  should  not  decide  without  full  deliberation,
and  should  be  slow  to  disturb  any  doctrine  it  has
once  laid  down  or  approved,  but  hardly  a  sufficient
reason  why  it  should  disclaim  any  power  of  correct-
ing its  own  errors  in  case  of  need.  In  the  absence
of  an  express  constitutional  provision,  or  an  unbroken
tradition  accepted  as  part  of  the  judicial  constitution,
it  is  obvious  that  all  such  a  court  can  really  do  is
to  declare  from  time  to  time  what  it  considers  the
proper  usage,  and  act  accordingly  in  particular
cases.  The  members  of  the  court  at  a  given  time
cannot  make  its  usage  a  strict  law  for  those  who
succeed  to  their  authority  hereafter.

At  present  it  seems  to  be  the  accepted  view


vi  CASE-LAW  AND  PRECEDENTS  311

though  it  is  certainly  of no  great antiquity  and  House  of

•  i  n  ■  o  •  Lords

rests  chiefly  on  the  repeated  assertions  of  one  judge,  deems  it-
Lord  Campbell, that  the House of Lords  in  its  by  its  own

rip  pi  ci  nil

judicial  capacity  should  hold  itself  absolutely  bound
by  its  own  former  decisions.  In  1801  Lord  Eldon
seems  to  have  thought  that  the  House  was  not
so  bound,  for  he  said :  "  A  rule  of  law  laid  down
by  the  House  of  Lords  cannot  be  reversed  by  the
Chancellor  .  .  .  the  rule  of  law  must  remain  till
altered  by  the  House  of  Lords."1  But  in  1827>
speaking  in  the  House  of  Lords,  he  said  the  House
was  bound  by  a  certain  previous  decision  of  its  own
on  a  like  subject-matter,  unless  there  were  special
circumstances  to  take  the  case  in  hand  out  of  the
governing  principle.2  In  1852  Lord  St.  Leonards
and  Lord  Campbell  differed  on  the  point,  Lord  St.
Leonards  gave  it  as  his  own  opinion,  addressing  the
House,  "  that  although  you  are  bound  by  your  own
decisions  as  much  as  any  court  would  be  bound,  so
that  you  could  not  reverse  your  own  decision  in  a
particular  case,  yet  you  are  not  bound  by  any  rule
of  law  which  you  may  lay  down,  if  upon  a  subsequent
occasion  you  should  find  reason  to  differ  from  that
rule ;  that  is,  that  this  House,  like  every  court  of

1  Perry  v. Whitehead,  6  Vea.  at  pp.  547-48.

2  Fletcher  v.  Sondes,  1  Bli.  N.S.  at  p.  249.


312  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

justice,  possesses  an  inherent  power  to  correct  an
error  into  which  it  may  have  fallen."1  Lord
Campbell  declined,  though  with  expressions  of
deference,  to  concur  in  this :  "  Because,"  he  said,
"according  to  the  impression  upon  my  mind,  a
decision  of  this  High  Court,  in  point  of  law,  is
conclusive  upon  the  House  itself,  as  well  as  upon
all  inferior  tribunals.  I  consider  it  the  constitutional
mode  in  which  the  law  is  declared,  and  that  after
such  a  judgment  has  been  pronounced  it  can  only
be  altered  by  an  Act  of  the  Legislature."2  For
otherwise,  he  argued,  the  rights  of  the  Queen's
subjects  would  be  in  a  state  of  uncertainty.  In
the  particular  case  the  House  avoided  facing  the
difficulty  by  treating  a  previous  decision,  from
which  they  did  in  substance  depart,3  as  having
proceeded  on  questions  of  fact.  But  in  1860  Lord
Campbell,  having  become  Chancellor,  repeated  his
opinion  in  the  most  positive  terms.  The  statement
was  at  the  time  gratuitous,  nor  was  it  altogether
accepted.4

1  Bright  v.  Button,  3  H.L.C.  at  p.  388.  2  lb.  at  pp.  391-92.

3  Lord  Justice  Lindley  (on  the  Law  of  Companies,  pp.  764,
765)  does  not  scruple  to  say  that  in  Bright  v.  Sutton  the  House  of
Lords  repudiated  that  decision,  or  to  describe  it  as  overruled.

4  A.-G.  v.  Dean  and  Canons  of  Windsor,  8  H.L.C.  at  pp.  391-
93  ;  Lord  Kingsdown,  at  p.  459,  reserved  his  opinion  whenever  the
question  should  really  arise.


vi  CASE-LAW  AND  PRECEDENTS  313

A  year  later,  in  a  case  which  Lord  Campbell  Beamish  v.

Beamish.

seems  to  have  had  present  to  his  mind  on  the
occasion  last  mentioned,  he  advised  the  House,
against  his  own  opinion  of  the  history  and  authori-
ties bearing  on  the  case,  that  it  was  bound  by  the
result  of  a  previous  appeal  in  which  the  decision
appealed  from  was  affirmed,  or  rather  stood
unreversed,  by  reason  of  the  House  of  Lords  being
then  equally  divided.  In  1843  it  had  been  held,
in  this  not  highly  convincing  manner,  that  by  the
old  common  law  of  England  the  presence  of  a  priest
was  necessary  to  the  civil  if  not  canonical  validity
of  a  marriage :  an  opinion  which  in  1861  was
believed  by  a  majority  of  the  House  of  Lords  and
the  judges  who  advised  them,  and  is  now  believed
by  most  competent  scholars,  to  be  without  any  real
historical  foundation.1  When  the  question  came
again  before  the  House  of  Lords,  the  late  Mr.
Justice  Willes  virtually,  though  not  professedly,
demonstrated,  in  a  full  and  most  learned  opinion,
that  the  supposed  difference  between  the  law  of
England  and  that  of  the  rest  of  Western  Christen-
dom was  imaginary.  His  reasons  convinced  Lord
Campbell  and  Lord  Wensleydale,  but  Lord  Campbell

1  R.  v.  Millis,  12  CI.  &  F.  534  ;  see  Mr.  Maitland's  note  in
Pollock  and  Maitland's  Sist.  Eng.  Law,  ii.  370.


314  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

declared  himself  not  at  liberty  to  act  on  his  con-
viction. He  said :

If  it  were  competent  to  me,  I  would  ask  your  Lordships
to  reconsider  the  doctrine  laid  down  in  the  The  Queen  v.
Millis,  particularly  as  the  judges  who  were  then  consulted
complained  of  being  hurried  into  giving  an  opinion  without
due  time  for  deliberation,  and  the  Members  of  this  House
who  heard  the  argument,  and  voted  on  the  question,  "  That
the  judgment  appealed  against  be  reversed,"  were  equally
divided  ;  so  that  the  judgment  which  decided  the  marriage
by  a  Presbyterian  clergyman  of  a  man  and  woman,  who  both
belonged  to  his  religious  persuasion,  who  both  believed  that
they  were  contracting  lawful  matrimony,  who  had  lived
together  as  husband  and  wife,  and  who  had  procreated
children  while  so  living  together  as  husband  and  wife,  to  be
a  nullity,  was  only  pronounced  on  the  technical  rule  of  your
Lordships'  House,  that  where,  upon  a  division,  the  numbers
are  equal,  semper  prcesumitur  pro  negante.

But  it  is  my  duty  to  say  that  your  Lordships  are  bound
by  this  decision  as  much  as  if  it  had  been  pronounced
nemine  dissentiente,  and  that  the  rule  of  law  which  your
Lordships  lay  down  as  the  ground  of  your  judgment,  sitting
judicially,  as  the  last  and  supreme  Court  of  Appeal  for  this
empire,  must  be  taken  for  law  till  altered  by  an  Act  of
Parliament,  agreed  to  by  the  Commons  and  the  Crown,  as
well  as  by  your  Lordships.  The  law  laid  down  as  your
ratio  decidendi,  being  clearly  binding  on  all  inferior
tribunals,  and  on  all  the  rest  of  the  Queen's  subjects,  if  it
were  not  considered  as  equally  binding  upon  your  Lordships,
this  House  would  be  arrogating  to  itself  the  right  of  altering
the  law,  and  legislating  by  its  own  separate  authority.

Lord Wensleydale said, more shortly, that,
having  been  one of  the  judges  who advised the


vi  CASE-LAW  AND  PRECEDENTS  315

House  in  JR.  v.  Millis,  he  felt  great  doubts  at  the
time ;  and  he  implied  that  those  doubts  were  now
rather  increased ;  but  the  question  must  be  taken
as  "  finally  and  irrevocably  settled  by  this  House."
Accordingly  the  House  proceeded  to  the  further
inference  (doubtless  a  necessary  one  if  the  original
doctrine  were  right)  that  the  priest  required  by  the
law  laid  down  in  JR.  v.  Millis  is  a  third  person,  and
the  rule  is  not  satisfied  by  the  intending  husband
being  in  priest's  orders  and  performing  the  marriage
ceremony  for  himself.  It  may  seem  startling  that
questions  of  legitimacy  and  property  should  be
treated  as  irrevocably  settled  by  the  result  of  an
equal  division  of  the  House  of  Lords,  on  argument
and  information  admittedly  imperfect  with  regard
to  the  history  of  the  law;  that  result,  moreover,
depending  on  the  accident  of  the  form  in  which  the
appeal  was  presented :  but  so  they  were.1

Lord Campbell's  doctrine  has been recognised  Later
more  than  once  in  later  years,  though  there  has  not  in  House
been  any  such  striking  occasion for  applying it.
Thus Lord Wensleydale spoke of the decisions
of  the House as "no doubt binding upon your
lordships and upon all inferior tribunals,"2 and

1  Beamish  v.  Beamish  (1861),  9  H.L.C.  274.
2  Mersey  Docks  Trustees  v.  Gills  (1866),  L.R.  1  H.L.  93.  125.


316  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

Lord  Blackburn  has  said :  "  When  it  appears  that  a
case  clearly  falls  within  the  ratio  decidendi  of  the
House  of  Lords,  the  highest  Court  of  Appeal,  I  do
not  think  it  competent  even  for  this  House  to  say-
that  the  ratio  decidendi  was  wrong." 1  And  Lord
Halsbury  has  spoken  of  the  House  as  "  a  tribunal
from  which  there  is  no  appeal  and  which  is  bound
by  its  own  decisions,"  and  whose  previous  decisions
it  is  therefore  useless  to  examine  on  the  ground  of
convenience.2  It  has  been  perceived,  indeed,  that
however  much  the  House  of  Lords  may  declare
itself  infallible  in  a  juridical  sense,  it  may  never-
theless be  found  that  different  reported  decisions  of
the  House  are  not  easy  to  reconcile  :  a  tribunal
which  will  not  overrule  itself  de  iure  may  sometimes
forget  its  own  former  reasons  and  contradict  itself
de  facto.  This,  or  something  so  like  it  as  to  appear
so  to  Lord  Blackburn,  has  been  known  to  happen.
All  that  can  be  said  is  that  decisions  of  the  court
of  final  appeal  are  not  to  be  treated  as  conflicting
without  unavoidable  necessity,3  but  if  no  reasonable

1  Houldsworth  v.  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  (1880),  5  App.  Ca.  317,
335 :  to  same  effect  Harris  v.  G.  W.R.  Co.  (1876),  1  Q.B.D.  at  p.
528.

2  Barley  Main  Colliery  Co.  v.  Mitchell  (1886),  11  App.  Ca.
127,  134.

3  Lord  Selborne  in  Caledonian  Railway  Co.  v.  Walker's  Trustees
(1882),  7  App.  Ca.  at  p.  275.


vi  CASE-LAW  AND  PRECEDENTS  317

exercise  of  ingenuity  can  reconcile  them,  "  the  later

and  more  deliberate  decision  "  ought  to  be  followed.1

No  other  court  of  last  resort  has  gone  quite  so  Usage  of
P ...... .. .....  ■  Judicial

far,  it  is  believed,  in  disclaiming  power  to  correct  Committee,
itself.  The  Judicial  Committee  of  the  Privy
Council  has  held  itself  free  to  reconsider  a  question
which  it  had  formerly  been  compelled  to  decide  ex
parte,  and  had  decided,  on  such  consideration  as  was
then  practicable,  against  the  party  who  failed  to
appear.  In  the  result  the  previous  declaration  was
confirmed,  but  after  full  argument,  in  which  the
point  was  treated  as  open  and  discussed  on  its
merits.  Their  lordships,  it  is  true,  drew  a  distinc-
tion between  cases  deciding  civil  rights  and  cases
involving  penal  consequences.  They  said  :  "  In  the
case  of  decisions  of  final  Courts  of  Appeal  on
questions  of  law  affecting  civil  rights,  especially
rights  of  property,  there  are  strong  reasons  for
holding  the  decision,  as  a  general  rule,  to  be  final
as  to  third  parties.  The  law  as  to  rights  of  property
in  this  country  is  to  a  great  extent  based  upon  and
formed  by  such  decisions.  When  once  arrived  at,
these  decisions  become  elements  in  the  composition
of  the  law,  and  the  dealings  of  mankind  are  based

1  Lord Blackburn in Caledonian Railway Co. v. Walker's
Trustees  (1882),  7  App.  Ca.  at  p.  302.


318  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

upon  a  reliance  on  such  decisions."  But  they  were
careful  to  avoid  any  following  of  Lord  Campbell's
dogmatism,  for  they  added:  "Even  as  to  such
decisions  it  would  perhaps  be  difficult  to  say  that
they  were,  as  to  third  parties,  under  all  circum-
stances and  in  all  cases  absolutely  final,  but  they
certainly  ought  not  to  be  reopened  without  the  very
greatest  hesitation."  1

This  judgment  of  the  Judicial  Committee  was
delivered  by  Lord  Cairns,  then  Lord  Chancellor.  It
would  seem  that  he  was  not  prepared  to  accept
Lord  Campbell's  self-denying  ordinance  for  the
House  of  Lords  in  its  full  extent:  the  Judicial
Committee  could  not,  of  course,  properly  express
any  opinion  as  to  what  the  House  of  Lords  ought  to
do  in  exceptional  cases  :  but  the  Judicial  Committee,
advised  by  Lord  Cairns,  certainly  did  act  in  a
different  spirit  from  the  House  of  Lords  advised  by
Lord  Campbell.  In  fact  the  Judicial  Committee
had  gone  very  near  to  overruling  itself  many  years
earlier,  in  1842,  though  it  was  then  said  that  the
previous  opinion  dissented  from  was  "in  some
degree  extrajudicial." 2

1  Bidsdale  v.  Clifton  (1877),  2  P.D.  276,  see  at  pp.  306,  307.

2  Kielleyv.  Carson,  4  Moo.  P.O.  63,  91,  not  following  Beaumont
v.  Barrett,  1  Moo.  P.C.  59.  Lord  Campbell  took  part  in  this
decision.


vi  CASE-LAW  AND  PRECEDENTS  319

On  the  other  hand  the  Court  for  Crown  Cases  Of  Court

t>  i  • i  ■  •  *°r  Crown

Reserved  (which  in  its  own  jurisdiction  is  of  last  Cases

resort)  has  followed  a  previous  decision  of  the  same

Court,  though  some  at  least  of  the  judges  present

were  not  satisfied  with  that  decision,  on  the  express

ground  that  it  was  binding.1

The  old  Superior  Courts  of  Common  Law  did  The  Com-
mon Law
not  hold  themselves  absolutely  bound  by  their  own  Courts

before
previous  decisions  in  certain  matters  as  to  which  1875.

they  had  a  peculiar  and  ultimate  jurisdiction.2  In-
deed it  is  not  quite  clear,  as  already  mentioned,
that  they  held  themselves  so  bound  in  ordinary  cases.

The  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  has  American

Courts  of

never  held  itself  bound  by  its  own  decisions,  and  last  resort

.  i  n  .  n°t  bound

has,  m  fact,  completely  reversed  a  recent  previous  by  their
opinion  in  at  least  one  celebrated  group  of  cases  cisions.
within  recent  times.3  The  court  was  divided,  but
no  member  of  the  dissenting  minority  suggested
that  the  former  decision  was  not  open  to  review ;
and  it  is  not  an  American  but  a  British  publicist
who  has  observed  that  "  the  reversal  by  the  highest
court  in  the  land  of  its  own  previous  decision  may

1  R.  v.  Glyde  (1868),  L.E.  1  C.C.R.  139,  144.

2  Hadfield's  Ca. (1873),  L.R.  8 C.P.  306  ; see  especially  per
Bovill,  C.-J.,  at  p.  313.

3  The  Legal  Tender  Cases  (1870),  12  Wallace,  457. And  see
J.  C.  Gray  in  Sam.  Law  Rev.  ix.  40.


320


FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE


CHAP.


Decisions
in  other
common-
law  juris-
dictions
not  author-
ity.


have  tended  to  unsettle  men's  reliance  on  the
stability  of  the  law." 1  "Whatever  may  be  thought
of  the  action  of  the  court  on  this  particular  occa-
sion, it  seems  clear  that  a  tribunal  which,  like  the
Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  is  not  unfre-
quently  called  upon  to  decide  great  political
controversies  under  judicial  forms  could  not  tie
itself  down  to  Lord  Campbell's  rule  without  risk
of  inconveniences  far  graver  than  any  that  can
result  from  the  opposite  course.  The  like  under-
standing prevails  in  State  Courts,  though  the
reasons  for  it  may  not  there  be  so  strong.  A  very
learned  American  writer  states  it  as  well  known
that  "  the  highest  courts  of  the  respective  States,
as  well  as  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,
all  consider  that  they  have  the  power  to  depart
from  their  former  rulings,  however  inexpedient  it
may  be  to  exercise  it." 2

Decisions  on  the  same  or  an  analogous  point,
given  by  a  court  administering  the  same  or  sub-
stantially the  same  law,  but  in  a  different  jurisdic-
tion, have  never  been  treated  as  binding  by  English
Courts.  They  may  be  treated  with  respect,  in
some  cases  with  very  great  respect,  but  an  English


1  Bryce,  The  American  Commonwealth,  3rd  ed.  1893,  i.  270.
3  J.  C.  Gray,  Sarv.  Law  Rev.  ix.  40.


vi  CASE-LAW  AND  PRECEDENTS  321

court  is  not  bound  to  follow  them,  and  indeed  is
bound  not  to  follow  them  if  it  thinks  them  in-
correct. The  decisions  of  the  Judicial  Committee
on  appeal  from  colonies  where  the  Common  Law
prevails  are  the  most  conspicuous  example.  At
least  once  the  Court  of  Appeal  has  dissented  from
the  conclusion  of  the  Judicial  Committee  on  an
important  point  of  mercantile  law.1  Such  dissent,
however,  is  uncommon,  as  might  be  expected ;  the
more  usual  relation  was  expressed  by  Lord  Esher
in  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  1878  :  "Though  those
decisions  are  not  authorities  which  bind  us,  we  are
always  glad  to  be  able  to  follow  them."  2

The  judgments  of  Irish  courts,  of  the  leading
American  courts,  especially  the  Supreme  Court  of
the  United  States,  and  of  Scottish  courts  so  far
as  they  deal  with  principles  of  general  jurisprudence
or  mercantile  law  common  to  the  two  countries,  are
held  entitled  to  the  same  kind  of  regard.3 In  the

1  Leash  v.  Scott  (1877),  2  Q.  B.D.  pp.  376,  380.  So  as  to  decisions
on  appeal  from  the  old  Admiralty  Court,  see  L.R.  6  Q.B.  p.  736.

2  Acatos  v.  Burns,  3  Ex.  D.  pp.  282,  291.  Still  less,  of  course,
are  dicta  in  the  Judicial  Committee  binding,  see  A.  G.  v.  Jacobs
Smith,  '95,  1  Q.B.  at  p.  483.

3  See  perBramwell,  B.,  in  Osborn  v.  Gillett,  L.R.  8  Ex.  97  ;  per
Cockburn,  C.-J.,  in  Scaramanga  v.  Stamp,  5  C.P.D.  p.  303;  per
Lord  Esher,  M.R.,  in  The  Bernina,  12  P.D.  p.  77,  and  per  Lord
Herschell  in  S.C.  norn.  Mills  v.  Armstrong  in  H.L.,  13  App.  Ca.  10  ;
as  to  Scottish  decisions  Johnson  v.  Raylton,  7  Q.B.D.  p.  438.

Y


322  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

United  States,  reciprocally,  modern  English  de-
cisions, though  nowhere,  of  course,  having  positive
authority,  are  constantly  cited  and  discussed ;  indeed
in  most  States  they  are  oftener  cited  than  the
decisions  of  any  other  State.  And  in  any  one
State  the  decisions  of  every  other  State  have  only
what  may  be  called  a  persuasive  as  distinct  from
a  binding  authority.  For  all  practical  purposes,
however,  it  may  be  said  that  a  rule  of  general  law
which  has  been  laid  down  or  approved,  to  sub-
stantially the  same  effect,  in  the  House  of  Lords
and  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States
is  the  law  of  the  English-speaking  world  wherever
it  has  not  been  excluded  or  varied  by  express  legis-
lation.

Decisions  given  in  Ireland  by  Lord  Eedesdale
and  by  Sir  Edward  Sugden,  afterwards  Lord  St.
Leonards  and  Chancellor  of  Great  Britain,  have
been  treated  as  positive  authority  in  the  English
Court  of  Chancery;  but  this  is  an  exceptional
tribute  to  the  eminence  of  those  particular  judges.
Msi  Prim Decisions  of  a  judge  sitting  alone  at  "  Nisi  Prius,''

decisions.

given  by  way  of  direction  to  the  jury,  can  seldom
be  founded  on  full  and  sufficient  argument,  and  by
the  nature  of  the  proceedings  they  have  to  be
arrived  at  without  opportunity  for  much  considera-


vi  CASE-LAW  AND  PRECEDENTS  323

tion.  Such  decisions  have  therefore  never  been
allowed  the  same  weight  as  those  of  courts  which
are  able  to  deliver  considered  judgments.  Mr.
Justice  Best  said  of  a  ruling  of  Lord  Kenyon's :
"  No  man  can  entertain  a  higher  respect  for  the
memory  of  that  noble  and  learned  judge  than  I
do ;  but  Nisi  Prius  decisions  coming  even  from
him,  unless  they  have  been  acted  upon  by  succeed-
ing judges  sitting  in  banc,  are  entitled  to  very
little  consideration." 1  The  practice  of  reporting
Nisi  Prius  rulings  has  been  abandoned  for  many
years,2  but  many  of  the  older  ones  have  become
good  authority  by  subsequent  approval,  and  some
of  them  are  the  only  definite  reported  authority
for  points  of  law  now  received  as  not  only  settled
but  elementary.

Perhaps  the  best  expressed  justification  of  our  Rationale
system  of  ascribing  positive authority  to  decided  system,
cases  is  in  an  opinion  given  to  the  House  of  Lords
by  Sir  James  Parke,  afterwards  Lord  Wensleydale.

Our  Common  Law  system  consists  in  the  applying  to  new-
combinations  of  circumstances  those  rules  of  law  which  we
derive  from  legal  principles  and  judicial  precedents  ;  and
for the sake of attaining uniformity, consistency and

1  Parton  v.  Williams  (1820), 22  R.R.  at  p.  422 ;  3  B.  &  Aid.
at  p.  341.

2  Foster  and  Finlason's  Heports,  ending  in  1867,  appear  to  be
the  latest  series  of  this  kind.


324  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

certainty,  we  must  apply  those  rules,  where  they  are  not
plainly  unreasonable  and  inconvenient,  to  all  cases  which
arise  ;  and  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  reject  them,  and  to
abandon  all  analogy  to  them,  in  those  to  which  they  have
not  yet  been  judicially  applied,  because  we  think  that  the
rules  are  not  as  convenient  and  reasonable  as  we  ourselves
could  have  devised.  It  appears  to  me  to  be  of  great  im-
portance to  keep  this  principle  of  decision  steadily  in  view,
not  merely  for  the  determination  of  the  particular  case,  but
for  the  interests  of  law  as  a  science.1

It  would  be  too  much  to  say  that  the  system  of
the  Common  Law  secures  complete  uniformity  or
consistency.  Courts  are  not  only  liable  to  errors
of  judgment,  but  may  be  imperfectly  informed.
But  probably  it  is  more  successful  in  these  respects
than  any  other  system.  No  doubt  it  appears  more
complex  and  artificial,  but  it  will  be  found  on
examination  that  in  other  systems  the  complications
are  not  so  much  avoided  as  concealed  or  shifted.
Either  a  large  undefined  discretion  must  be  left  to
the  judge  in  every  case,  and  uniformity  given  up
even  as  an  ideal,  or  a  mass  of  judicial  or  extra-
judicial exposition,  or  both,  must  accumulate — as
has  actually  happened,  for  example,  in  France — and
form  in  course  of  time  a  storehouse  of  conflicting
opinions,  all  capable  alike  of  being  cited  and  used

1  Per  Parke,  J.,  Mirehcmse  v.  Rennett  (1833),  1  CI.  &  F.  pp.  527,
546.


vi  CASE-LAW  AND  PRECEDENTS  325

in  argument,  but  none  of  them  authoritative  or  final.
Where  the  two  systems  have  come  into  competition,
as  they  have  done  in  the  Province  of  Quebec,  the
Cape  Colony,  and  other  British  possessions  origin-
ally settled  under  Continental  systems  of  law,  the
method  of  ascribing  exclusive  authority  to  judicial
decisions  has  invariably,  so  far  as  I  know,  been
accepted.

The  more  or  less authoritative  expositions of  Use  of

,  .  Roman

Eoman  law,  or  of  any  foreign  system,  by  ancient  or  and  foreign
modern  writers,  may  be  cited  by  way  of  illustration
in  courts  administering  the  Common  Law,  but  only
on  their  intrinsic  merits,  and  they  can  be  usefully
cited  only  on  questions  of  principle  where  there  is
no  apparent  reason  for  the  law  being  different  in
different  countries ;  and  even  then  it  is  seldom
desirable  to  rely  on  them  in  argument  except  in
the  absence  of  appropriate  authority  in  our  own
books.  There  is  one,  and,  so  far  as  I  know,  only
one  classical  case  of  the  opinion  of  a  Eoman  lawyer,
as  embodied  in  the  Digest,  being  used  and  avowedly
followed  by  an  English  Court  of  Common  Law  in  a
purely  English  litigation.  In  1843  the  Court  of
Exchequer  Chamber  had  before  it  a  new  and
important  point  on  the  rights  of  adjacent  landowners
to  the  use  of  underground  waters. There  was  no


326  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

English  authority  definitely  dealing  with  the  point,

and  the  Digest  of  Justinian  was  freely  cited  in

argument. The  Court  thought  the  English  cases,

though  not  decisive,  were  against  the  existence  of

the  right  claimed  by  the  plaintiff,  and  added :

The  Roman  law  forms  no  rule,  binding  in  itself,  upon  the
subjects  of  their  realms  ;  but,  in  deciding  a  case  upon
principle,  where  no  direct  authority  can  be  cited  from  our
books,  it  affords  no  small  evidence  of  the  soundness  of  the
conclusion  at  which  we  have  arrived,  if  it  proves  to  be
supported  by  that  law,  the  fruit  of  the  researches  of  the
most  learned  men,  the  collective  wisdom  of  ages,  and  the
groundwork  of  the  municipal  law  of  most  of  the  countries
in  Europe.1

And  a  fragment  of  Ulpian  vouching  and  approv-
ing an  opinion  of  Marcellus  was  declared  to  be
"  decisive  upon  the  point  in  favour  of  the  defend-
ants." It  is  obvious  that,  as  our  modern  authorities
became  fuller,  cases  where  it  is  needful  or  desirable
to  recur  to  the  Corpus  Juris  are  less  and  less  likely
to  present  themselves.  Even  in  jurisdictions  which
as  matter  of  history  are  outside  the  Common  Law,
for  example  in  Admiralty  cases,  the  general  usage
is  now  not  to  go  beyond  our  own  reported  decisions.

Chief  Justice  Holt's  famous  exposition  of  the
law of bailments in Coggs v. Bernard? is not

1  Acton  v.  Blundell,  12  M.  &  W.  pp.  334,  353.

2  2  Ld.  Raym.,  909,  1  Sm.  L.C.  10th  ed.  p.  167.


vi  CASE-LAW  AND  PRECEDENTS  327

analogous  to  the  Exchequer  Chamber's  open  citation
of  the  Digest.  For,  although  Holt's  material  was
largely  Roman,  and  he  must  have  known  it,  he
took  it  not  directly  from  Justinian,  but  indirectly
through  Bracton,  whom  he  seems,  conformably  to
the  medieval  tradition  of  the  king's  judges,1  rather
to  avoid  regarding  as  a  writer  having  positive
authority  in  the  law  of  England.  "This  Bracton
I  have  cited  is,  I  confess,  an  old  author;  but  in
this  his  doctrine  is  agreeable  to  reason,  and  to
what  the  law  is  in  other  countries."  The  Institutes
are  just  referred  to  by  way  of  illustration.2

The  administration  by  English  authority  of  those  Foreign
foreign  systems  of  law  which  actually  prevail  in  British
particular  British  possessions,  as  does  French  law
in  the  Province  of  Quebec  and  in  Mauritius,
Roman-Dutch  law  in  the  Cape  Colony,  and  (in
certain  departments)  the  personal  law  of  Hindus,
Mahometans,  and  others  in  British  India,  is
altogether  a  different  matter.  In  those  jurisdictions
the  law  of  England  is  itself  properly  speaking,  a
foreign  law  which can  be  cited  only  by  way  of

1  "The  whole  court  said  that  Bracton  was  never  held  for  an
authority  in  our  law." — Fitzh.  Abr.  Garde,  pi.  71.  This  statement
must  rest  on  some  private  tradition :  it  is  not  in  the  Year  Book
report  referred  to  in  the  margin  of  Fitzherbert.

2  1  Sm.  L.C.  10th  ed.  at  p.  175  ;  similarly  at  pp.  176,  180.


328  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE chap,  vi

illustration.  But  the  tendency  of  both  advocates
and  judges  in  all  jurisdictions  is  to  use  and  rely  on
the  books  with  which  they  are  most  familiar,  even
if  they  be  not  properly  entitled  to  be  treated  as
having  authority  in  the  law  discussed  and  applied
by  the  court.  It  would  seem  at  first  sight  rather
difficult  to  import  English  technical  notions  into
the  administration  of  Hindu  or  Mahometan  law,
conducted  with  professed  regard  for  the  native
principles  and  authorities  of  each  system.  But
experience  has  shown  that,  with  the  best  intentions,
the  difficulty  is  to  avoid  doing  this.  And  the
tendency  is  by  no  means  confined  to  British  or
English-speaking  lawyers.  I  have  seen  an  opinion
of  a  distinguished  French  advocate  on  a  case  arising
in  Peru,  in  which  he  simply  assumed  the  French
Civil  Code  to  be  applicable.  In  fact  the  Peruvian
Code  on  that  head  of  law  was  practically  a  transla-
tion of  the  French  Code,  but  the  learned  Frenchman
did  not  refer  to  this  at  all,  nor  did  he  appear  to
have  made  any  inquiry  or  verification.


CHAPTER VII

ANCIENT AND MODEEN STATUTES

[Reports  of  the  Statute  Law  Commissioners  from  1835. T.  E.
Holland,  Essays  upon  the  Form  of  the  Law,  London  1870.]

The  actual  procedure  of  Parliament  or  of  any  Ancient

Acts  of

other  legislative  assembly  is  a  matter  of  eonstitu-  Parliament,

liow  framed

tional  law  not  to  be  considered  in  this  work.  But
the  place  of  legislation  among  the  sources  of  law  is
very  different  from  what  it  was  in  the  Middle  Ages,
and  a  student  may  easily  be  misled  if  he  carries
back  into  medieval  history  notions  derived  from  the
constant  and  systematic  working  of  our  modern
legislative  machinery.  In  the  Middle  Ages  legisla-
tion was  not  the  primary  business  of  Parliament,
and  the  rule  that  the  king  cannot  legislate  without
Parliament  was  established  only  by  degrees.  Early
statutes,  therefore,  are  of  a  mixed  character,  con-
taining both  legislative  and  administrative  provisions.
We  can  hardly  separate  the  declaration  of  new  law


330  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

from  the  enforcement  of  old,  the  establishment  of
novel  remedies  for  novel  mischiefs  or  newly  detected
shortcomings  from  the  king's  executive  instructions
to  his  officers.  The  King  in  his  Council  is  alike
ready  to  make  fresh  rules,  to  provide  fresh  machinery
for  the  better  working  of  existing  rules,  and  to  dis-
pense justice  in  extraordinary  cases.  Law-making  is
not  yet  regarded  as  a  distinct  branch  of  sovereign
power,  external  to  the  judicial  authority,  requiring
strict  and  literal  obedience,  but  entitled  to  nothing
more.  Hence  there  is  a  notable  contrast  between
ancient  and  modern  statutes.  "  The  former,"  said
the  Criminal  Law  Commission  of  1835,  "  often  con-
tain little  more  than  the  enunciation  of  a  general
principle  of  law,  leaving  the  Courts  to  work  out  and
establish  the  provisions  necessary  for  carrying  the
law  into  effect,  whilst  in  modern  statutes  the  opposite
extreme  appears  to  have  been  followed ;  and  the
enactments  are  expressed  with  much  useless  circum-
locution, and  are  overloaded  with  minute  provisions,
details,  and  repetitions."  Again,  the  wording  of  the
statutes  was  not  finally  settled  by  Parliament  itself,
but  entrusted  to  a  smaller  body  of  the  king's  learned
counsellors  and  judges.  In  1305  Hengham,  Chief
Justice  of  the  Common  Pleas,  cut  short  an  argument
of  counsel  on  the  construction  of  the  second  Statute


vii  ANCIENT  AND  MODERN  STATUTES  331

of  Westminster  with  the  remark :  "  None  of  your

glosses  on  the  Statute  ;  we  know  it  better  than  you,

for  it  was  our  work." x Hengham  was  Chief  Justice

of  the  King's  Bench  in  1285,  when  the  statute  was

passed,  and  would  naturally  be  one of  the  chief

persons  consulted. In  later  times  the  judges  have

treated  Acts  of  Parliament  as  proceeding  from  a

wholly external and unjudicial authority. Coke,

in  the  Prefaces  to  his  Reports  and  elsewhere,  gave

utterance to  the  feeling  that  Acts  of  Parliament

which  meddle  with  the  Common  Law  (that  is,  with

the  judicial  development  of  it  by  the  courts)  are  on

the  whole  likely  to  do  more  harm  than  good. His

criticism  did  not  spare  even  the  statutes  of  Edward  I.

This  feeling,  which  may  now  be  called  traditional,  Profes-
sional
is  not  due  merely  to  blind  professional  dislike  of  jealousy

•  in  n  ■ 1 °f  statute

change.  There  is  real  danger  of  both  the  principles  law.
and  the  administration  of  the  law  being  impaired
by  the  well  meant  adventures  of  amenders  who  are
not  sufficiently  informed  to  understand  the  difficulties
of  their  task,  and  who  have  not  the  skill  needed  for
its  adequate  execution.  Both  the  matter  and  the
form  of  legislation  depend  on  the  will  of  the
legislator,  and  in  almost  all  English-speaking  com-

1  "  Ne  glosez  point  le  statut ;  nous  le  savoms  meuz  de  vous,  qar
nous  les  feimes"  :  7.  B.  33-35  Ed.  I.,  ed.  Horwood,  p.  83.


332  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

munities  legislative  power  has  been  exercised  by
assemblies  which  cannot  well  be  learned  as  a  whole,
and  which  may  or  may  not  be  disposed  to  take
the  advice  of  competent  persons  as  to  the  workman-
ship of  their  productions.
Degenera- In  fact  the  statutes  of  Edward  I.,  framed,  as  we

tion  of

workman- have  seen,  by  learned  men  who  treated  the  resolu-

ship  in  and m

after  Tudor  tions  of  Parliament  as  instructions  leaving  them  a

period.

discretion  as  to  form,  are  clear  and  businesslike.
If  they  are  obscure  to  posterity,  it  is  because  the
language  and  matter  are  no  longer  familiar,  not  by
reason  of  bad  work.  The  great  statute  of  "Quia
Emptores,"  which  is  still  embodied  in  the  law  not
only  of  England  but  of  most  lands  settled  from
England,  concludes  by  defining  what  are  now  called
the  "  extent "  and  the  "  commencement "  of  its
operation  with  precision  that  modern  draftsmen
have  restored  only  in  our  own  time.1  Diffuse
language  and  slovenly  drafting  became  the  rule  in
the  Tudor  period,  concurrently  with  an  enormous
increase  of  legislative  activity.  The  Crown  had
discovered  that  Parliament  could  be  used  as  a
revolutionary engine of  despotic authority under

1  Et  sciendum  quod  istud  statutum  locum  tenet  de  terris
venditis  tenendis  in  feodo  simpliciter  tantum,  et  se  extendit  ad
tempus  futurum,  et  incipiet  locum  tenere  ad  festum  sancti  Andree
proximo  futurum.


tii  ANCIENT  AND  MODERN  STATUTES  333

constitutional  forms,  and  it  was  used  without  spar-
ing, but  also  without  any  method  being  elaborated.
When  an  enactment  of  ambitious  design  and  wide
application,  like  the  Statute  of  Uses,  was  found
inadequate  for  its  purposes,  the  failure,  together
with  the  various  unintended  consequences  and
complications,  was  almost  entirely  left  to  itself.  In
this  period  ordinary  legislation  was  dwarfed  to  a
considerable  extent  by  proceedings  which  were
legislative  in  form,  but  in  fact  political  acts  of  State,
Such  as  the  series  of  statutes  which  carried  out  the
abolition  of  Papal  supremacy  and  the  reconstitution
of  the  Church  of  England.

In  the  seventeenth  century,  too,  constitutional
questions  had  the  upper  hand.  From  the  Stuart
reigns  we  have  perhaps  half  a  dozen  Acts  of  Parlia-
ment which  have  left  a  permanent  mark  on  the
ordinary  civil  law  between  subject  and  subject.1
Thus  the  formal  art  of  legislation  received  no  con-
sideration and  made  no  progress  at  all  for  more
than  two  centuries.  Eapid  increase  in  the  bulk  of
legislation  is  a  conspicuous  feature  of  the  eighteenth
century,  but,  as  in  the  sixteenth  century,  the  quality
of  the  work  becomes  worse  rather  than  better  as  the

1  The  Statutes  of  Limitation  of  Actions  (James  I.)  and  those  of
Wards  and  Liveries,  Frauds,  and  Distributions  (Charles  II.)  are,  I
believe,  the  only  important  ones.


334  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

quantity  turned  out  is  greater.  It  is  true  that  in
the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century  there  was  a
good  deal  of  useful  amendment  of  legal  procedure,
afterwards  forgotten  just  because  it  had  done  its
business  without  trouble  ;  but  the  enlightened  judges
or  chancellors  who  procured  this  to'  be  done  left
posterity  to  rest  on  their  labours,  and  no  school  or
tradition  of  good  workmanship  was  founded.  About
the  end  of  the  last  century  the  only  art  of  the
parliamentary  draftsman  was  to  pile  up  as  many
words  as  possible,  significant  and  insignificant,  on
the  chance  that  in  their  multitude  the  intention
of  the  enactment  might  find  safety.  Perhaps  the
style  and  structure  of  Acts  of  Parliament  were  at
their  very  worst  in  the  generation  immediately  pre-
ceding the  Eeform  Act  of  1832.  The  Copyright  Act
of  1842  is  among  the  latest  legacies  of  the  bad  old
style  of  drafting,  and  a  more  flagrant  specimen
could  not  easily  be  found.  Improvement  began
only  when  the  burden  was  becoming  intolerable.
Bacon's  Proposals  for  systematic  reform  had  not  been

proposals  ,  .

for  reform,  wanting,  indeed,  from  the  time  when  the  mischief

was  first  felt. Sir  Nicholas  Bacon,  the  father  of

Francis  Bacon,  formed  a  plan  of  this  kind  as  early

as  1557,1  and  his  more  illustrious  son  put  forward

1  See  the  Report  of  the  Statute  Law  Commission,  1835.


vii  ANCIENT  AND  MODERN  STATUTES  335

in  1616  a  carefully  considered  "  Proposition  touch-
ing the  compiling  and  amendment  of  the  laws  of
England." 1  Many  of  his  ideas  anticipate  the  work
of  modern  law  reformers,  and  some,  though  not  all,
have  been  more  or  less  carried  out  in  our  own  time.
He  desired  to  have  a  digest  of  ancient  legal  rules
(for  convenience,  not  as  an  authoritative  text),  and
revised  editions  of  the  Statutes  and  the  Year  Books,
omitting  obsolete  matter.  He  did  not  recommend
the  framing  of  a  new  "  text  law '' — what  we  should
now  call  a  code — of  the  Common  Law :  "  I  dare
not  advise,"  he  said,  "  to  cast  the  law  into  a
new  mould."  Coke,  no  friend  of  Bacon's,  gave  a
limited  approval  to  the  scheme,  so  far  as  related  to
consolidation  and  amendment  of  statutes,  in  the
Preface  to  the  Fourth  Part  of  his  Reports.  Nothing
was  done,  however,  for  more  than  two  centuries
afterwards.

The movement whose great monuments in  Modem

statute

political history are the first Eeform Bill and  law  com-
missions
the  Municipal Corporations  Act at  last  gave an  andre-

oo  •  ■  ■  »  • vision.

effectual  impulse  m  this  direction  also. A  series

1  Letters  and  Life,  ed.  Spedding,  vi.  61.  An  earlier  draft  of
the  same  project  is  also  preserved,  op.  cit.  v.  84.  The  Aphorisms
appended  to  book  viii.  of  the  "De  Augmentis"  (in  Phil.  Works,
vol.  i.)  have  been  cited  by  modern  Continental  as  well  as  English
writers,  and  contain  much  that  is  still  of  value.


336  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

of  Commissions  considered  the  consolidation  and
improvement  of  the  criminal  law  and  of  statute
law  generally  during  many  years  from  1834  onwards.
The  positive  results  obtained  were  for  a  considerable
time  so  scanty  as  to  seem  altogether  inadequate  to
the  labour  expended.  Nevertheless  we  can  now
see  that  the  labour  was  not  thrown  away,  for  it
bore  fruit  surely,  though  slowly,  in  the  course  of
the  next  generation.1  The  improvements  effected
within  the  last  fifty  years,  have  not,  it  is  true,  yet
made  the  form  of  English  legislation  perfect.  Over
and  over  again  the  most  competent  critics  have
lamented  the  want  of  a  final  revising  hand.  Many
troubles  and  blunders  would  have  been  saved  if
Parliament  could  have  entrusted  the  last  touches
of  draftsmanship  to  some  permanent  and  impartial
expert  body.  The  function  of  removing  obvious
blemishes  of  form  is  at  present  not  regularly  com-
mitted to  any  one,  and  the  House  of  Lords  can
exercise  it  only  occasionally  and  partially.  Political
difficulties  have  so  far  been  insuperable,  and  not
only  elegance  but  even  clearness  of  language  has

1  The  Reports  extend  from  1834  to  1845.  There  was  a  Board
for  the  Revision  of  the  Statute  Law  from  1854  to  1859,  which
made  extensive  preparations  but  was  prevented  (it  seems  by
differences  of  opinion  in  details)  from  completing  anything.
References  to  its  publications  may  be  found  in  Professor  Holland's
Essays  upon  the  Form  of  the  Law,  p.  117.


vii  ANCIENT  AND  MODERN  STATUTES  337

often  to  be  knowingly  sacrificed  to  the  exigencies
of  working  a  Bill  through  Committee  in  the  House
of  Commons  with  as  little  contentious  discussion
as  possible.  With  all  drawbacks,  however,  the
improvements  effected  are  such  as  would  have
seemed  impossible  to  a  lawyer  of  Blackstone's  or
Eldon's  time.  Obsolete  and  merely  temporary  or
otherwise  expired  enactments  are  now  systematically
repealed  by  Statute  Law  Kevision  Acts,  and  the  pro-
cess has  been  brought  down  to  Acts  of  the  year  1881.
The  revised  edition  of  the  Statutes  which  has  been
made  possible  by  this  process,  together  with  the
official  Index,  which  is  periodically  re-issued,  and
embodies  the  latest  alterations  down  to  its  date,
enables  us  to  ascertain  with  comparative  ease  what
legislation  is  actually  in  force  on  any  given  topic.1
The  Interpretation  Act  of  1889,  which  superseded
a  similar  but  much  less  complete  and  workmanlike
statute  of  1850  known  as  "Lord  Brougham's  Act,"
has  ensured  reasonable  conciseness  and  approximate
uniformity  in  the  wording  at  any  rate  of  Acts  of
Parliament  introduced  by  Ministers  and  prepared
in  the Parliamentary  Counsel's Office,  which has

1  But  the  student  must  not  suppose  that  the  Statutes  at  large
have  become  a  superfluous  ornament  in  a  library.  Reference  to
repealed  and  obsolete  Acts  is  often  necessary  for  practical  as  well
as  historical  purposes.

Z ■


338  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

been  raised,  chiefly  by  the  work  of  Lord  Thring
while  he  was  at  its  head,  to  the  rank  of  a  distinct
and  important  State  department.  The  chief  danger
of  downright  bad  drafting  is  now  in  private  members'
amendments.
The  Clauses  In  1845  the  provisions  usually  inserted  in  special
dation  Acts  forming  public  companies,  and  authorising
them  to  acquire  land  for  their  works,  were  embodied
once  for  all  in  the  Companies  Clauses,  Lands  Clauses,
and  Eailways  Clauses  Consolidation  Acts,  "as  well
for  the  purpose  of  avoiding  the  necessity  of  repeat-
ing such  provisions  in  each  of  the  several  Acts
relating  to  such  undertakings  as  for  ensuing  greater
uniformity  in  the  provisions  themselves." 1  It  is
said  that  in  the  first  seven  years  after  this  system
came  into  operation  it  saved  100,000  folio  pages
of  print.  Allowing  something  for  the  increasing
rate  of  commercial  development  in  the  time  that
has  since  elapsed,  the  saving  down  to  the  present
date  may  well  be  estimated  at  not  less  than  a
million  pages.  This  admirable  and  beneficent
invention,  which  everybody  now  takes  as  a  matter
of  course,  was  due  to  Mr.  Booth,  then  the  Speaker's
Counsel.  In  our  own  time  the  same  system  has
been  applied,  with  slight  modification,  to  the  Mutiny
1  These  words  are  identical  in  the  preamble  to  each  of  the  Acts.


vil  ANCIENT  AND  MODERN  STATUTES  339

Act.  The  Army  Act,  1881,  stands  permanently
on  the  Statute-book,  and  is  continued  in  force  by
an  annual  Act.  Vain  repetition  of  the  provisions
for  the  government  and  discipline  of  the  army  is
thus  avoided,  while  the  constitutional  control  of
Parliament  is  as  effectively  maintained  as  ever.

Many  considerable  bodies  of  statute  law  have  Consoiida-

t  t i  ■  .  ting  and

been  consolidated  at  various  times,  and  in  some  codifying
cases  the  consolidating  Acts  are  really  codes  to
the  extent  of  the  subjects;  dealt  with.  The  first
notable  example  of  this  process  was,  I  believe,  the
Merchant  Shipping  Act  of  1854;  just  forty  years
later  this  and  the  later  Acts  on  the  same  matters
were  consolidated  in  the  Merchant  Shipping  Act,
1894,  which  fills  292  pages  in  the  Law  Eeports
edition  of  the  Statutes.  Other  groups  of  Acts
relating  to  various  branches  of  public  law, — Public
Health,Inland  Eevenue,and  others, — which  formerly,
by  their  intricacy  and  the  number  of  partial  repeals
and  amendments,  presented  great  difficulties  even
to  experts,  have  from  time  to  time  been  brought
together  in  an  orderly  fashion.  More  than  this,  a
certain  number  of  well  settled  portions  of  our
general  commercial  law  have  been  declared  in
statutory  form,  codified  in  fact,  with  the  general
approval  of  men  of  business  and  acquiescence  of


340  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

lawyers.  Bills  of  Exchange  and  other  negotiable
instruments  were  thus  dealt  with  in  1882,  Partner-
ship in  1890,  the  Sale  of  Goods  in  1893.  So  far
these  codifying  measures  have  worked  quite  smoothly
and  have  given  rise  practically  to  no  litigation ;
that  is  to  say,  the  cases  decided  on  their  construc-
tion have  been  very  few,  and  of  those  almost  all  have
been  on  questions  of  principle  which  the  Acts  had
left  open  because  the  existing  law  left  them  open,
and  which  would  equally  have  called  for  a  decision
in  a  jurisdiction  where  no  such  statute  existed.
Our  statutory  criminal  law  remains,  in  point  of
form  at  least,  in  a  relatively  backward  condition,
notwithstanding  the  laudable  endeavours  of  the
late  Sir  James  Stephen  and  others.  Many  portions
of  it,  and  some  of  the  most  important,  are  unavoid-
ably entangled  with  controversial  matter  of  several
kinds,  so  that  non-contentious  amendment  seems
extremely  difficult.  Yet  the  Italians  have  suc-
ceeded, under  a  system  of  parliamentary  government
not  widely  different  in  principle  from  our  own,  in
passing  a  new  and  thoroughly  revised  Penal  Code.
Here  we  can  only  note  the  fact  that  England  has
made  no  advance  on  the  Criminal  Law  Consolidation
Acts  of  1861,  which  are  not  codifying  Acts  because
they  assume  knowledge  of  a  great  deal  of  unwritten


vii  ANCIENT  AND  MODERN  STATUTES  341

law;  for  example,  the  definitions  of  murder,  man-
slaughter, and  larceny.  Broadly  speaking,  the
administration  of  our  criminal  law — what  the  French
call  pinaliU — is  now  mostly  if  not  wholly  reduced
to  the  written  form :  the  substance  of  it  is  not.

Lord  Westbury's  elaborate  project  for  a  Digest  Codifica-
of  the  whole  law,  which  seemed  to  promise  great
things  a  generation  ago,  and  came  to  an  end  in
1870,  need  be  mentioned  here  only  for  the  purpose
of  showing  that  it  has  not  been  overlooked.  It
not  only  failed  of  its  immediate  purpose,  but  failed
to  leave  any  considerable  result,  save  that  two  of
the  gentlemen  employed  to  prepare  specimens  of
the  proposed  digest  converted  their  work  into
meritorious  and  useful  text-books  of  the  ordinary
type,  which  went  through  several  editions.1  To
the  present  writer,  at  any  rate,  it  seems  that  the
example  of  the  Anglo-Indian  Codes 2  has  been  more
practical  and  fruitful.  Codification  was  forced
upon  British India by  the necessities of Indian

1  One  of  these  is  Goddard  mi  Easements:  the  Preface  to  the
fourth  edition  contains  an  account  of  the  Digest  of  Law  Com-
mission, which  is  now  omitted  in  the  fifth  (1896).

2  Edited  by  Dr.  Whitley  Stokes,  Oxford,  1887.  See  his  Intro-
duction for  a  short  history  of  codification  in  India.  See,  too,  Sir
Courtenay  Ilbert's  articles,  "  Indian  Codification,"  Law  Quart.  Rev,
v.  347  ;  "Sir  James  Stephen  as  a  Legislator,"  ib.  x.  222  ;  and  an
article  of  my  own  on  the  Life  of  Sir  James  Stephen  in  the  National
Review  for  August  1895.


342  FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE  chap.

government,  and  the  experiment  has  on  the  whole
been  remarkably  successful.  There  is  no  reason
why  it  should  not  succeed  in  England  when  public
education  is  sufficiently  advanced  to  demand  it,
and  competent  English  lawyers  are  set  to  do  the
work  instead  of  discussing  whether  it  is  possible.
For  the  commercial  parts  of  our  unwritten  law
codification  is  already  accepted  in  principle,  and
has  been  carried  into  execution  in  some  important
branches.  The  further  extension  of  the  process  is,
in  my  opinion,  no  longer  doubtful  in  principle,  but
only  in  time  and  opportunity.  But  the  question
involves  so  much  controversial  matter,  and  is  so  far
from  elementary,  that  it  cannot  properly  be  pursued
in  this  work.  In  the  United  States  there  is  quite
as  much  difference  of  opinion  as  here,  and  the
discussion  has  been  complicated  by  premature  and
over-ambitious  legislation,  or  attempts  at  legislation,
in  some  of  the  States.1  Meanwhile  the  improve-
ments in  form  which  are  effected  in  this  country
are  for  the  most  part  followed,  after  no  long
interval,  by  substantially  identical  legislation  in  the
English-speaking  colonies.  The  consideration  that
statutory consolidation and amendment of the

1  See  Judge  John  F.  Dillon's  Laws  and  Jurisprudence  of
England  and  America,  Leot.  ix. ,  for  a  summary  of  American  facts
and  opinions.


vii  ANCIENT  AND  MODERN  STATUTES  343

Common  Law  in  this  country  are  likely  to  be
taken  as  an  example  by  great  part  of  the  English-
speaking  world  is  a  reason  for  proceeding  with  the
utmost  caution  and  employing  the  very  best  learn-
ing and  skill  that  can  be  secured  for  the  work.  It
is  no  reason  for  leaving  a  great  and  beneficial  work
undone,  but  rather  for  keeping  it  constantly  in
view,  and  advancing  it  as  occasion  serves.


INDEX


"  Action,"  Roman  meaning  of,  89
Action, right  of, for  breach  of

public  duty,  94

"  Act  of  the  law,"  meaning  of,  135

"  Act  in  the  law,"  meaning  of,  136

Acts,  distinguished  from  events,

134

under  what  conditions  regarded

by  law,  132,  137
void  and  voidable,  154
Acts  of  Parliament,  see  Statutes
Agreement,  breach  of,  88
Aliens,  position  of,  56
Anglo -French,  use  and  degrada-
tion of,  279-284
Aristotle on  intent and  motive,

140
Artificial  persons,  109
corporations,  112
firms,  112
the  State,  113
capacity  of,  116
Attempt  to  commit  offence,  151
Authority,  delegated  and  devolved,
234
use  of,  297

text-books  are  not,  297
Auxiliary  rules,  72

Bacon, Feancis, his proposals

for  law  reform,  335
Blackstone  on  the  supremacy  of

Parliament,  251
"  Books  of  authority, "  236
Bracton's  Note  Book,  277


Capacity,  of  natural  persons,  113
disqualification  of,  115
of  artificial  persons,  116
Case-law,  227

in  England,  231
Chancellor,  early  jurisdiction  of,

244
Codification,  340
Colonies,  special  laws  of,  327
Common Law, relation of, to

custom,  242
Commons, House of, 'political

supremacy  of,  256
Consent,  valid,  conditions  of,  153
Consequences,  proximate  and  re-
mote, 149,  158
unintended,  151,  158
Constitution,  law  of  the,  92
Contract,  breach  of,  88

importance  of,  in  modern  law,

89
involving  personal  skill,  197
for  sale,  199
for  payment,  202
how supplemented by local
custom,  272
Conveyancers,  practice  of,  307
Copyright in books, 125, 128,

186-189
Corporation, an  artificial  person,
109,  112
liability  of,  for  wrongs,  117
created  by  express  or general
authority  of  State,  119
Corpus  Juris,  Justinian's,  229


346


FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE


Court  for  Crown  Cases  Reserved,

319
Courts  of  Appeal,  308
Criminal  Law  Commission,  reports

of,  330,  336
Custom,  nature  of,  10

relation  of  Common  Law  to,  240

legal  meaning  of,  263

conditions  of  its  validity,  264

ancient,  266

of  merchants,  269

local,  272

Damage,  remoteness  of,  158
Debt,  archaic  notion  of,  208
Decisions, Continental Courts
generally  not  bound  by,  230

authority  of,  299

manifest  error  in,  306

of  Court  of  Appeal,  308

of  House  of  Lords,  309-316

of  Judicial  Cbmmittee,  317,  321

of  Supreme  Court  of  U.S.,  319

at  Kisi  Prius,  322

reasons  for  ascribing  authority
to,  323
Discretion,  judicial,  37
Duty,  positive  and  negative,  56,  69

performance  of,  how  far  compell-
able, 58

none  without  right,  62

of  State,  63

personal,  80-84

public,  90
Duties,  relation  of,  to  rights,  71

created  by  acts,  152

Easements,  165

relation  of,  to  ownership, 180

sqq.
negative,  185
Equitable  estate,  201
Equity,  origin  of,  243
Ethics  not  co-extensive  with  law,
44
must deal  with outward  acts,
45
Events,  132,  133
Evidence,  archaic  notions  of,  43
rules  of,  75


Family,  personal  duties  incident
to,  193

relations,  84,  87
Fee  Simple,  Littleton  on,  164
Form,  rules  of,  49

of  acts,  rules  as  to,  155

General  Part,  meaning  of,  102

Hobbes,  his  theory  of  the  State,

65
House  of  Commons,  see  Commons,

House  of
of  Lords,  see  Lords,  House  of

Infancy,  114

Intention, distinction of, from
motive,  138

proof  of,  144

complexity  of,  146

disregarded  in  archaic  law,  150
International  Law,  13
Interpretation  of  law,  219,  224
Ireland, decisions in, how far
authority,  321,  322

Judge,  when  one  can  be,  in  his
own  cause,  253
not  above  Parliament,  255
Judicial  and  extra-judicial  opinions

227
Judicial  Committee,  decisions  of,
317
not  binding  in  English  Courts,
321
Justice,  relation  of,  to  law,  30
natural,  12,  40

Law,  not  completely  definable,  4

constituted  by  rules  of  civic
conduct,  7

can  exist  without  legal  pro-
fession, 9

moral  and  natural,  12

of  nations,  13

of  honour,  etc.,  14

abstract  and  concrete  senses  of,
15

as  extrajudicial  rule  of  conduct,
16


INDEX


347


Law  in  scientific  language,  18
ambiguity  of  the  English  word,

17
sanctions  of,  22,  24
as  "  will  of  the  State,"  26
of  nature,  29

its  relation  to  moral  justice,  31
order  as  fundamental  principle

of,  32
relation of,  to special  acts of

sovereignty,  33
the  regular  marks  of :
generality,  35
equality,  37
certainty,  39
a  distinct  science,  44
cannot  enforce  all  moral  rules,

46
artificial  development  of,  52
contents  of,  55
enforcement  of,  57,  61
whether  "binding  on  State,  64
auxiliary  rules  of,  72
substantive  and  adjective,  77
divisions  of,  79
public  and  private,  90,  94
of  the  constitution,  92
of  nations,  96
Roman  divisions  of,  97
equality  of  persons  in,  99
meaning  of  "person"  in,  107
"acts  of,"  135
forms  of,  218

written  and  unwritten,  219,  233
sources  of,  233
customary,  239
"Law French," see Anglo-
French
Law  Merchant,  268
Law  Reports,  The,  293
Legislation,  improvements  in  form

of,  336
Liability, legal,  may  be  without

moral  blame,  50
Limitation  of  actions,  178
Littleton  on  fee  simple,  164
Lords,  House  of,  whether  bound
by  its  own  decisions,  310

Mabeiage,  common  law  of,  313


Maxims,  218,  221

Monopolies,  186

Morality,  influence  of  law  upon,

47
"Motive,"  meaning  of,  139,  143
distinguished from intention,

138
internal  and  external,  143

Nations,  personification  of,  110
Nature,  "laws"  of,  18,  29
Negligence,  157
Negotiable  instruments,  205
Nisi  Prius,  decisions  at,  322
"  Novation,"  meaning  of,  196

Obligation,  meaning  of,  82
personal  duties  outside,  84

Obligations,  personal  in  early  law,
195
arising  from  wrongful  acts,  212

Ownership,  166-168

Parliament,  supremacy  of,  246

Acts of, not judicially dis-
putable, 253
Perpetuities,  rule  against,  225
Person,  in  law,  what  is,  107
Persons,  equality  of,  in  law,  99

presumption of their equal
rights,  100

relation  of,  to  things,  105

natural,  108,  113

artificial,  109
Personam,  duties  and  rights  in,  81
Pope,  legendary  self-deposition  of,

261
Possession,  74

nature and results of, 162,
168,  176

right  to,  163,  169

as  evidence  of  title,  171

wrongful,  174

by temporary  or  partial  use,
182
Practice,  in  legal  sense,  what,  12
Precedent, medieval importance

of,  301,  302
Prescription,  178

application  of,  to  easements,  183


348


FIRST  BOOK  OF  JURISPRUDENCE


"  Private  International  Law,"  97
"  Private  Law,"  meaning  of,  91
Privy  Council,  see  Judicial  Com-
mittee
Procedure,  judicial  definition  of,

76,  n
Property,  159

Common  Law  abhors vacuum

■  of,  130

incorporeal,  191

transfer  of,  by  contract,  200
Public  Law,  meaning  of,  90

Rem,  duties  and  rights  in,  81
Reports, nature and origin of,
275
modern  type  of,  289
estimated  number  of,  295,  n
"Restraint  of  Trade," antiquity

of  the  doctrine,  241
Right,  meanings  of,  17,  18

indeterminate or determinate,

59
can  a  man  have,  against  him-
self ?  65
acquisition and transfer of,
73
Rights,  in  rem  and  inpersormm,  81

incorporeal,  124
Road,  rule  of,  49
Roman  Law,  divisions  of,  97
inequality  of  persons  in,  100
use  of,  by  English  Courts,  325
Rules  of  Court,  78

Sanction  of  law,  22
Scotland,  courts  of, standing of
their  decisions in England,
321
Smith, Sir Thomas, on the
supremacy  of  Parliament,  247
Sovereignty,  246

distinguished from ultimate

political  power,  255-257
divided,  258
State,  nature  and  function  of,  6,
7
relation  of  to  law,  7,  26
sanction  of  law  by,  22


State,  duties  of  subjects  to,  55
enforcement  of  law  by,  61
claims  against,  63
whether bound by rules of

law,  64
as  party  to  proceedings,  94
as owner exercising private

rights,  95
as  artificial  person,  113
Statutes,  medieval,  329

degeneration in workmanship

of,  332
modern,  framing and  revision

of,  336,  337
consolidating,  339
codifying,  340
"  Subject " a  wider term than

"citizen,"  55

Text-books  are  not  authorities,

298
Thing,  what  it  is,  121

whether  non-transferable  right
is,  212
.Things,  legal  nature  of,  129

relation  of,  to  persons,  132
Title,  meaning  of,  164

derived from possession, 171,
174
Tucker,  Abraham,  cited,  147

United  States,  English  theory
of  sovereignty  not  applicable
to,  261
Supreme  Court  of,  319,  321

Vindication,  in  Roman  Law,  171
175

"Void"  distinguished  from  "void-
able," 154

"Written" and "unwritten"

law,  219,  236
"Wrong,"  legal  meaning  of,  67
Wrongs,  law  of,  how  far  there  can
be,  68
of  violence,  92

Year  Books,  the,  278,  284


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  Clark,  Limited,  Edinburgh.
