Marguerite Porete (trans. Clare Kirchberger), The Mirror of Simple Souls (1927)
==========================================================================
Porete's mystical treatise on the annihilation of the soul in God — the book for which she was burned as a heretic in 1310. A cornerstone of medieval women's mysticism. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

THE MIRROR OF SIMPLE
SOULS


By an unknown French mystic of the
thirteenth century


Translated into English by
M. N.


Now first edited from the MSS.


CLARE KIRCHBERGER


London
Burns Oates and Washbourne Ltd.
Publishers to the Holy See


PEC EEE EC TPE EE


MeaMecMeaMea Mere MacMeashent
he.
Wnt
ROA
nS
ae
[PRET AP Ip AP APRS PARTE ERED HE


3


tH F.13


M679
8514<¢


NIHIL OBSTAT :
Georeius D. SmitH, S.T.D.,


Censor deputatus.


IMPRIMATUR :
EpM. Can. SURMONT,


Vicarius generalis.


WESTMONASTERII,


Die 31% Octobris, 1927.


First printed in 1927


Made and Printed in Great Britain


@ fe * -
; awe ed © oe? ee ee, a
° ie & * « es «Se
hae ICR ve San . ¢ o °
evee sy eee ’ e ee
ee . ee eta" 10 %s "eras du lon een
« wee * ave +
Cea ie 8 et a | °
ve es « © tee ¢ °
: @e ©ee 8 ee we .
. - ee “ee eee


LOQLL-OOLE-OOLEOOL
Kasuceccoreccoteacee.


TABLE OF CONTENTS


PAGE


INTRODUCTION 5 A cUliysd
‘TRANSLATOR’S PROLOGUE $ 2 ee ie
AUTHOR’S PROLOGUE . : : 2 Ixy


THE MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS
DIVISION I


CHAPTER
rt. An exhortation to a soul to ascend to the
stairs of perfection, and how this book
may be understood A ; : I


DIVISION II


1. For whom this book has been made, and of
the perfection that is needful to ail them


that will be saved = ‘ F 6
2. Of the counsel of perfection and of the ;
laud of charity . ‘ P 5 7


DIVISION III


. Of the life naughted, and of nine points of
the soul that liveth in that life, and how
she willeth nothing that cometh by mean 9
. How this soul hath six wings as have the
seraphin, and what she doth with them IO
Vv


on


N


CONTENTS


Io.


II.


CHAPTER


35
4.


How this soul-taketh leave of virtues


Of certain things that the soul recketh not
of, and how she is lost in the Right
High by plenty of knowing and become
naught in her understanding, and where-
to she is come by that


. How a soul that is mortified of all outward


desires can no more speak of God; and
how it is meant, that this soul hath taken
leave of virtues, and how such souls be
become free; and what the greatest tor-
ment is that a creature may suffer in this
life


. How these free souls have nothing of will,


and what their continual usage is


. How Love taketh one of these souls for all,


for to speak more readily, and of certain
works of virtue that this soul hath no
desire to; and of what the [most] perfect
giftis that God giveth to creatures


. Of the proper names of this soul, and how


the true contemplative should have no
desire . :


. Of the first point that is spoken of afore,


of the soulin life naughted; how none
may find her, and how this is worthy
and of true meekness


Of the second point, that is, how this soul
saveth her by faith without works, and
how this is understood . :


How this soulis alone inlove, and how she
doeth naught for God, nor she leaveth
naught for God, and how these three
points be meant ;

Vi


PAGE
rt


T5


t7


20


22


26


28


29


31


CONTENTS


CHAPTER


12.


Te:


14.


15.


16.


vie


18.


19.


20.


21.


How none may teach this soul, nor none
may rob her, and how this sixth point
is understood . 4 t


Of the eighth point, that is, that none may
give to her, and how this is understood,
and of theineffableness of God . Z

Of the ninth point, thatis, how this soulhath
no will, and how this [is] meant

Of the perfection of them that live after
the counsel of Reason; and of the per-
fection of these souls that Fine Love
leadeth - “ A

Howthissoul hath all and she hath naught;
she wotall and she wot naught; and of the
Sacrament of the Altar; and how this
soul willeth all and she willeth naught
and how this is understood é F

How these souls so set their thoughts in the
Trinity and be so divine that they rest
them not in things that be passing or made


How this soul giveth to nature all that it
asketh without grudging of conscience,
and howthisis meant . ‘ ‘

How these souls have no heaviness at heart
for things that they take; and of the peace
that they have in taking the needfulness
of nature : 2 ° F

How these souls can no more speak of God
and what their custom is 5 ;

What knowledge, faith," hope and charity
have of these souls, and who hath the very
knowledge of them, and how virtues be
commanded for the souls, and not the
souls for the virtues, and of mortifying
willand desire. ° ; 3

Vil


PAGE


33


34
38


41


46


5I


54


55)
=i


58


CONTENTS


CHAPTER

22. What the perfect being is that God giveth
to creatures; and how none knoweth
these souls but God that is within them


DIVISION IV


1. How it is meant that this soul hath taken
leave of virtues; and of a land of this soul;
and of the desire that they that live ‘‘ in
will and desire?’ must have :


2. Of the two staffs that this free soul leaneth
her upon; and how she is more drunk
of that she never drank nor never shall
drink, than of that she hath drunk


3. Of the freedom of these souls, and how
they do nothing that is against the peace
of inwardness . ° 5 :


4. How that consolations that comfort the
souls by feeling of sweetness, it profiteth
not a soul, but meditation of pure love;
and how that hath only one neem
and what that meaning is


5. Of the joy of those souls, and of the ac-
cordance of will of the beloved and the
soul; and of the union oflove . :


6. What it means that this soul doth no
thing that is against the peace of her in-
ward being, and of an Sean there-
upon . ;


7. How this soul findeth God in all things;


and of the incomprehensibleness of
God . 5


Vili


PAGE


61


63


(oj! 9's


7O


74


76


el


CONTENTS


CBAPTER PAGE
8. A complaint of this soul, and of the com-
fort that love giveth her, and how she is
not sufficed nor appeased in that which
love telleth her; but wherein she is
sufficed, comforted, and appeased; and
wherein she hath the full substance of

her demands . 7 . ; 81


9. How it is more in this soul and better, she
loveth that which is in her beloved that
she hath not, nor never shall have, than
that she hath in possession; and how
the body for his boisterousness and flesh-
liness cannot speak of the takings of


the spirit F - 85
Io. Of the gifts that this soul hath reoees of
her beloved, and what her usage is : 88
DIVISION V


I. Of the visions that this soul hath had, and
how no human body may see them;
and how they that know their nothing-
ness shall do naught; and what it be-
hoveth them to do who cannot come to
the knowing of their naught; and of the
defaults of this soul, and by whom Foss
be acquitted . go


2, How God hath loved this re 2 adrardte
beginning, and shall without end; and
of the obedience of reason to this soul;
and of the accordance of the will of
God and of this soul; and of her peace
and of perfect charity and of cig
= of conscience . 93
3. How all that this soul hath said, is said of
love by this soul, and of this loss oftime 97
ix A 2


CONTENTS


CHAPTER


4.


Io


26 I . e
. Of two beholdings ofthis soul, and how they


What ordinance is, and how that the Deity


felt not what the manhood of Jesu Christ —


suffered, and how in all things behoveth
to have discretion


. Who be perfectly wise, and who be dipped


in meekness, and how this soulis become
naught in her beholding; and how she is
dead to all feelings inward and outward,
and what case that soul is in, in time of
this usage ,


. Howthis soulis not with herself and where


she is; and how by naught witting and
naught willing she hath ali é


- How this soul by all giving hath all re-


ceived. 3


. Of the being of this soul. Of the usage of


a soul that languoreth for love, and in
what point a soul is, that is dead in love ;


and of the profit and peace of naught
willing ,


. How these souls that this book deviseth be


come to the knowing of their naught;
and how by that, they be come into be-
lieving of “more,” and how this is meant
Of the peace of this soul; and how sheis all
free by naughtwilling; and ofthe diversity
of naught willing and well willing
Of the union of love


that will understand this book must be
dead of all deaths ;


DIVISION VI


- Of them that be perished, and in what, and


of what, and for what
x


PAGE


99


IOI


102


106


108


IIo


113
117


I2I


124


CONTENTS


DIVISION VII


CHAPTER
1. Of them that be marred, and what differ-
ence is between the sone | and the
marred F


2. Of aswift opening and of a haath shutting
that the Far Night giveth to this soul;
and what this Far Night is


3. Ofthe three lives of the soul, which be Bbih
in mortifying of three things—viz., of
sin, of nature, and of spirit, and how this
soul is alway without-her 6

4. Of the first death that a soul must die ere
she come to the second life—viz., the death
of sin, and which complexion hath best
help to understanding . y

5. Of a question that Love asked: Which is te
most noble; the soul in gladness of glory,
or the soul that is oned to this glory?
And how they that have the feelings of
this book must keep it secret, and a little
touching of the seventh state

6. What this Far Night is, and of the es
ing thatit givethtothesoul .

7. Of the three deaths by the which ak
souls come to the life aforesaid .


DIVISION VIII


I. Who be they that sit in the mountain, and
what things shame, dread, and reason do
to this soul

2. What power the freedom of love theo atid
whereof this soul is most glad ;


3. Of the country that this soulisin .
X1


PAGE


128


131


133


135


137


139


140


145


146
147


CONTENTS


CHAPTER
4. How the usage of reason is full of travail,
and where this free soul refresheth her .


5. [In] what manner they seek God that be
governed by reason, and where this soul
seeketh him, and what this soul-is


6. How this soul doeth no more work for God,
nor for herself, nor for her even-Chris-
tian, and how this i is meant


7. Of the mischief that Lucifer and they er
accorded to him came to, by reason of
their evil will . .


8. Why love hath called these wee in ois
book by the name of “‘ Soul’’; and to
whom the name of Souls properly per-
taineth; and to whom the name of
Spirit; and of the . surmounted. life
and who be perfected 7 in it; and what is
the proper name of this Soul .


9. Of the Transfiguration of our Lord, and
why he did it but before three of his
disciples; and why it was done in the
mountain, and why he bade them not
show it till his Resurrection


ro. Of Mary Magdalen and St Peter and St
John, and how God worketh yet in souls
as he did in them, that well ere them
thereto :


11. How they that will come to peace aha
freedom must ever be ready and eble to
receive the sending of grace; and what
it is to them if they refuse it


Xil


PAGE


149
154
156


158


159


163


165


167


CONTENTS
DIVISION IX


CHAPTER PAGE
1. A great rebuke that love giveth to them
that refuse the sending of God, and
how they be therefore encumbered of
themselves all their lifetime, and how
they might have been unencumbered,
and by what means and for howlittle . 169
2. Of certain means whereby they that be
marred and in life of spirit may come
over to the Being that is next the Being
of this soul which hath attained the
highest Being; and in what case the


soul is in the time of that Being i 172
3. How these souls be never feeble nor
encumbered of themselves r 177


4. How this soul hath perceived the coast of

the country where she ought to be fi 178
5. Of the debts of this soul, and how they be

paid, and by whom, and who is his next

neighbour : 178
6. How this soul is a rine of devise love:

and how she seeth that she is naught,

and how this naught giveth her all # 180
7. Of two things that this soul doeth not,

which maketh her to have peace; and

how she is no more encumbered of

things that she doeth without her, than

if she did it not; and who be perfectly

Viger 8G 181
8. Of four costs that this stl is Hae sed

of; how she hath lost her name by

union of love and is turned about to love,

and how yet there is more high than

this; how none may understand this

book but they that love hath made

tite LODus. 4 . 183

xiii


CONTENTS


CHAPTER


9.


Io.


II.


I2.


£3;


14.


15.
16.


Of the rudeness of them that be governed
by reason, and how this soul will no
more follow their counsel P 3

How this soul is free and consumed by
mortality, and brent in the burning
fire of charity; and how this soul seeketh
no more God by outward works. Of the
marvel that Reason hath of this, and of
the peace of Mary and the trouble of
Martha ¢ 5 ; .


Of the death of Reason by the strong speech
of this soul; and how Love asketh in
the stead of Reason “‘ Who is Mother to
Reason and to other virtues ?” and how it
is meekness and which meekness it is


How this soul is free of all, and how she
hath so planted her will in the Trinity,
that she may not sin unless she unplant it

What it behoveth them to do that be in
life of spirit, to come to lordship and
sovereignty F a ,

How they that be in life of spirit must
alway do the contrary of their pleasaunce
if they will have peace, and how they
that be free must do all that pleaseth
them or else they shall lose peace. What
thing it is that giveth this soul and is
most noble being that may be had in
this life 5 ‘ cs


What thing it is that hath given this soul
freedom in enduring of things . 3
Of the peace of this divine life, and how
Mary Magdalen had it when she was in
the desert. And how our Lady had it


always, and what the language of this
life is a ;


XiV


PAGE


187


189


193


196


198


200


203


204


CONTENTS


CHAPTER
17. How and by what means they that stand


18.


in desire may come to rest of spirit;
and of three things of the divine life
and of the innocence that is gotten by
this life : é ‘
Of the most high Being that the naked,
naughted, or clarified souls be in


DIVISION X


. Of three things whereby it may be known


that the soul is not come to peace, but
is begging; and what paradise is


. How it is [to be] understood that the


thief was in paradise that day that he
died and our Lord went not into heaven
before his Ascension .


DIVISION XI


. How they that sit all in freedom do rest


themselves in pure naught without
thought


. What thing they do that be in Being above


their thoughts .


DIVISION XII


. How they that be of all things in sove-


reignty know and feel the life that this
book speaketh of, and none but they


DIVISION XIII


. What great difference is between some


angels and others, and also of the souls
that this book speaketh of, compared
with others that be not such; and how
they think themselves to be best


XV


PAGE


206


207


209 >


211


213


214


216


218


CONTENTS


CHAPTER
2. Of three words wherein the perfection of


a.


Io.


13 6


12.


this clear life is fulfilled 3
How this soul seeketh no more God; and
what thing it is that taketh from her
love of herself. And of the Book of
Life and the opening thereof . 4


. Of three beholdings that one should have


to come to peace. And how we should
not set little by a default done against
Goda


- How it is understood that the righteous


man falleth seven times a day .


. How this soul will say the sum of her


demands, and how she knoweth not
her own askings. And of the two causes
that maketh her to say that she will say
the sum of her demands 5


. What a soul oweth to God for one default,


and whereto it is brought by a default .


. What art it is that giveth science in


creatures and of the ravishing of love,
and of the peace of naught willing


. Of this bounty of God and the working


thereof


How we must draw within us all the life
that our Lord Jesus Christ himself led
and preached, according to our power;
and whereto we shall come by it i

Whether a creature may dwell in life and be
alway without her. And when a soul is
without herself and whereof she liveth
when she is without her ‘ :

How this soul joyeth some time without
her feeling; and of three things that
maketh her to have joy; and of the
blindness of reason ; : :


XVI


PAGE


219


220


222


224


228


230


235
238


241


242


244


CONTENTS


CHAPTER

13. How this soul is the salvation of creatures
to the glory of God, and how this is
meant : : ; ,


DIVISION XIV


1. Ofthe promise that this soul made to speak
of seven estates, and how the first is the
keeping of the commandments of God .


2. Of the second state, which is in following
the counsel that our Lord gave to come
to perfection . 3


3. Of the third state, which is in doing the
works of perfection with affection of
love and in mortifying the will; by
obedience to follow other men’s wills

4. Of the fourth state, which is in the relin-
quishing all outward works through the
sweetness that is felt by highness of love
in contemplation ; | ;

5. Of the fifth state, which is when a soul
departeth from her will in putting it
in God by a spreading ravishing of the
moving of divine light 4 4

6. Of the sixth state, whichis when a soul is of
all things made free, pure, and clarified .


7. Of the seventh estate 3


DIVISION XV


1. How this book, that is made right high and
great by words, seemeth right little and
low to them that be fallen of love into
naught, and by whom it was made


XVii


PAGE


246


251


252


253


255


256


260
262


263


CONTENTS


DIVISION XVI
CHAPTER


I. Of the very addressing of Fine Love. And
of the praising of this soul, and how, by
having no more of will, she is above the
law, but not against the law . :


DIVISION XVII


I. Ofsecrets that this soul speaketh of, whereof
the Trinity prayeth her to leave for deem-
ing of others that be governed by desire,
reason, dread, will : 3 <

2. Of certain things that this soul would be
departed from, by the which she was
servant, and of the love(?) that she is
come to; and how the divine beholding
hath but one entent and of the peace of
that food that love giveth her . A


DIVISION XVIII


1. Of what abundance of grace our Blessed
Lady had in the womb of her mother,
and of certain beholdings that be con-
venable for the marred, to come to the
being that this book speaketh of :

2. Of the beholdings that this soul had in this
foresaidlife . 3 3 :

3. How the beholding of the goodness of God
and her wretchedness sent this soul to
meditation. And of the privy speech that
she had to God in her meditation


DIVISION XIX
. Of the answer that this soul gave of the
three things to which she answered not


afore. And of the martyrdom of will
and love : y : :


i


XViil


PAGE


265


267


269


271


276


278


284


CONTENTS


CHAPTER
2. How the affection of tenderness of love that
the soul feeleth in “‘ life of spirit’? which
she weeneth it to be in God, is in herself,
and of the profit of naught witting


DIVISION XX


1. How this soul is in her highest perfection
when Holy Church taketh no ensample of
her. And what holy Church is. And
of three things that causeth this soul that
she hath no dread : °


2. Of the worthiness of the bounty of God,
and of the union that maketh between
God and this soul P F


Notes : a : - :


xix


PAGE


287


290


292


299


OMNIBUS IN CHRISTO DILECTIS


“To the worschip of God and of tham that be
made free of God; and to the profite of tham that
ne bene, that yet schall be, and God wille.”


Mirror.


INTRODUCTION


MSS. AND TEXT


HE Mrrror OF SIMPLE SOULS, here for

the first time printed, came to light in

1911, when Mr. J. A. Herbert, Keeper
of MSS. in the British Museum, pointed it
out to Miss E. Underhill, in a MS. purchased
for the British Museum at the Amherst sale
(now MS. Adds. 37790). Miss Underhill
wrote an account of the work which appeared
in the Fortnightly Review, 1911, and published
some extracts in No. 8 of the Porch in the
same year. Ata later date Miss Hope Allen
discovered another MS. in the Bodleian
(Bodl. 505), and a third in the Library of
St John’s College, Cambridge (MS. 71),
together with a Latin translation made from
the English version, by Richard Methley
of Mount Grace, Yorks, extant in MS. 221
of Pembroke College, Cambridge.

Up to date no further English MSS. have
appeared, nor has any trace been found of
the thirteenth-century French original of
which the Mirror is a translation.

The three English MSS. all belong to the

Xxi


INTRODUCTION


second third of the fifteenth century, and
Bodley 505 is almost contemporary with
MS. Adds. 37790, but the dialect is slightly
more northern and retains some older forms.
It appears also that the scribe had access to
an older MS. with different readings and
occasionally additional matter, and these
readings correct the British Museum version.
Therefore the Bodley MS. has been chosen
as the basis of this text.

The book is divided by all the scribes into
long sections, approximately the same, but
Bodley further subdivides into chapters, and
in a late fifteenth-century hand there are -
added analyses of the subject-matter of these
chapters, written on small scraps of paper
and pasted in the margin opposite the capital
letters which denote the chapter divisions.
We cannot determine whether these analyses
belonged to the earlier MS. of the book, but
it seems improbable, for there is no indication
of them either in the British Museum or
Cambridge, or the Latin MSS. We have,
however, retained them as affording a valuable
indication of the general drift of the argument, _
and as elucidating the unpunctuated chaos
of the British Museum MS.

The Cambridge MS. belongs also to the
mid-fifteenth century. It is in a better hand
than either of the others, and is both beauti-
fully written and illuminated. It appears to

XXii


INTRODUCTION


follow the same version as the British Museum
copy, is divided into large sections, but
though the occurrence of many illuminated
capitals might indicate chapter heads, these
are not specifically numbered or analysed, nor
do they correspond wholly with the Bodleian
arrangement. Variants of reading are un-
important.

The Latin version (MS. Pembroke 221) of
the late fifteenth century made by Richard
Methley from the English is interesting.
In his original Prologue, this writer mentions
the Prologue of the English translator, stating
that he was unknown to him, “in anglicum
idioma nescio quis eundem transtulit’; he
does not latinise this English prologue, but
merely sums up the gist of the remarks,
omitting all the personal details which con-
stitute its charm. Further, he discards the
M. N. glosses without mention or apology,
and adds his own glosses and illustrations
from Scripture, sometimes by way of marginal
notes, at other times as an expansion of the
text. They are less explanatory and practical
than the M. N. glosses, and consist largely of
quotations from Dionysius and the Victorines.
He is also much concerned to repudiate any
charge of heresy that may have formulated
in the mind of readers.*


* Pembroke MS. 221 has a note at the head of
the firstleaf attributing the original work to “‘ Russh-


XXlil


INTRODUCTION


&i By the kindness of Monsignor Auguste
Pelzer, of the Vatican Library, and of Dom
Philibert Schmitz, O.S.B., I am able “to
state that besides the Cambridge Latin text
four other Latin translations are known and
one Italian MSS. Three of these are in
the Vatican,* and it appears that they are
translations from the lost French text, and
differ considerably from Methley’s version
made from the English translation. A
curious point is that these MSS. quote the
Author’s Prologue ‘“‘ Ego creatura,” at the
end of the text, but without any indication


broke qui fuit prior de ordine cartusiensi et hunc
libellum primo composuit.” An impossible pro-
position, as the original was sent to be censored to
Godefroi de Fontaines, c. 1303 (he died 1306), and
Ruysbroeck was born only c. 1293. This confusion
in the mind of our North-country monk may be due
to similarity of doctrine in some points—.e., the
dark night, the valley of peace, etc. By the middle
of the fifteenth century the works of the Flemish
school were of nigh repute among English mystics.

Richard Methley (b. 1451) died as vicar of
Mount Grace, Charterhouse, in 1528. He left,
besides this work and his translation of the Cloud of
Unknowing, a small autobiographical opuscule,
Trinity College, Cambridge, MS. 1160. It is a
devout sketch of the daily life of the Carthusian
monk, together with his own aspirations, fears,
and experiences. .

* MSS. Vat. Lat. 4355; Rossian, 4; Chisian,
Ghiv-85°


XXiV


INTRODUCTION


that it forms an epilogue or a misplaced
prologue. Richard Methley translates it at
the head of his text. It is, nevertheless,
from Methley’s version of the Author’s
Prologue that we derive certain definite
indications concerning the three censors who
are less fully characterised in the Vatican
MSS.*

The present text is based on the Bodley
version as containing older readings. It has
been collated with the British Museum and
both English and Latin Cambridge MSS.
Some of the readings have been elucidated by
reference to the Latin version of Richard
Methley, who, it was hoped, might have
known the exact value of contemporary
mystical phrases, and whose Latin renderings
shed much light on the syntax of an un-
punctuated English MS.

The spelling has been modernised and
occasional alterations made in the structure
of the sentences, together with various
minor omissions and changes, all of which,
however regrettable, seemed necessary in
order to present the reader with an intelligible


* “ Frater johanne de querayne.” This is not
_in Vat. Lat. 4355. ‘‘Dompnus Franco cancellarius,
abbathie de Viliers”’ (rendering for English “‘ cantor”
also absent from Latin MS. 4355). Pere E. Moreau,
S.J., assures me that no trace of any Franco, cantor
or cancellarius, can be found inthe documents relat-
ing to the Abbey of Villiers.

xXxXV


INTRODUCTION


version. An attempt has been made to
retain as much as possible of the original,
but it will be understood that exigencies of
sense, of space, and of doctrinal expediency
have modified what, in any case, does not
claim to be a critical text.


The editor wishes to acknowledge a great
debt of gratitude to all who have kindly
assisted in preparing this edition. Much is
due to Miss E. Underhill; Mgr. Pelzer, of the
Vatican Library; Miss Hope Allen; Mr. J. A.
Herbert, of the British Museum; to the


Librarians of Bodley; of Pembroke and .


St John’s College, Cambridge, who kindly
lent MSS.; to Miss Ruffer, Miss M. Daunt,
and many others.

A special tribute of thanks is due to the
General Editor of the Series, Dom R. Hudles-
ton, O.S.B., and to the Very Rev. Fr. R. H.
Steuart, S.J., who have kindly read the MSS.,
and have made valuable suggestions with
great generosity and courtesy.


THE MIRROR


THE MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS is a treatise
of some 60,000 words, on the progress of the
soul from the earlier stages of the spiritual
life to its highest and rarest experiences.
The treatment is didactic and psychological ;

XXV1


INTRODUCTION


the author describes not his personal ex-
perience but the characteristic of a typical
soul—*‘ of these souls we will take one for
all, to speak the more readily ” (I, vii). He
throws this method into relief by choosing
the form of a dialogue, in which the charac-
ters are the personified qualities, Love,
Virtue, Reason, Holy Church, etc. This
form he owes to his age, which delighted in
the highly sophisticated discussions of the
Puys and the Courts of Love, and which in
drama turned from the earlier Mystery plays
to the Morality. Many verse “Mirrors of
the World,” and other didactic poems, are
found in the French literature of the time,
but no vernacular prose treatises of this
dimension, still less of this nature, religious
and mystical, are known to have existed.
The originality of the form and the boldness
of the outlook combine to distinguish the
Mirror from the Latin treatises on the
spiritual life, current in the religious world
of the twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth
centuries. Gerson, who is the next French
author to write on these matters, always fuses
the devotional, the ascetic and the mystical,
according to the older method, but our
author has some instinct at least of the dis-
tinction between the species and their right
relation to each other. This can be conveyed
through the dramatic form, more convinc-
XXVii


INTRODUCTION


ingly, perhaps, than in a methodical treatise.
Nothing of this kind exists in French litera-
ture until we come to the spiritual writings
of the early seventeenth century, and the


mystical parts of St Francis de Sales’ Amour
de Dieu.


THE FORM


The form derives, perhaps, from the verse
Jeu-Partis. These were verse competitions
produced at the Puys, in which some question
is mooted and alternate sides are taken by
two or more characters. Generally the
subject is proposed on one side, and the
opponent chooses his argument and defends
it on the humaner line of reasoning. The
proposer takes the superficial rationalist and
often satirical point of view, and at the end
an appeal is made to the Judge of the Court,
who sums up and solves the problem.
Topical questions and allusions are frequent;
the chief characters are often Amour, Raison,
Courtoisie, Jolive Pensée.* The method is
also that of the scholastic disputations at the .
Sorbonne, and reflects the interest of a society
delighting in sophistry and intellectual subtle-
ties of every kind. To have applied this
mode to the consideration of the mystical
life, shows an ingenuity not altogether un-
worldly.

* Groeber, Grundriss der romanischen Philologie.

XXVili


INTRODUCTION


THE AUTHOR


We cannot determine with any exactness
who was the author of the Mirror, nor has
anything further come to light since Miss
Underhill, in 1911, conjectured that he may
have been a secular priest or a Carthusian
living on the borders of Flanders and France
in the last third of the thirteenth century.
He refers to a river, flowing through many
countries, called the Meuse or Oise. This,
together with the fact that two of the three
censors to whom he sent his work belonged
to the locality of Liége and Querayne, and
that the third, though a Master of Arts at
the Sorbonne, was also a Canon of Liége,
and intimately connected with ecclesiastical
affairs in that city, seems to establish the
nationality of the author and the locality
where the work was put forth.

He was certainly in touch with the learned
world of his day, deeply read in mystical
theology, and experienced in questions of
scholastic philosophy. His chief sources
- seem to have been St Augustine, Clement
of Alexandria, Dionysius the Areopagite,
with the commentaries of the Victorines.
He is greatly indebted to Richard of St Victor
and to the author of the “‘ Letter tothe Brethren

XXIX


INTRODUCTION


of Mons Dei.” Certain passages in this
letter give almost verbally the ideas and the
expression of some of the most original
passages in the Murror. Perhaps Gerson
when he fulminated against the “‘ letter ”’
and those who exaggerated its doctrines, had
our author in mind.

Whoever he may have been, he forms a
link between the Flemish mystics of the
fourteenth century, and the older scholastics
and. theologians who wrote on prayer in the
eleventh and twelfth centuries.

It would appear that the heretical influences
from the South of France and Germany were
already spreading northwards, and manifest-
ing themselves in Flanders and the Nether-
lands when Eckhart began to preach. The
sermons of Eckhart, Suso and Tauler, and
their school were as much intended to combat
heresy as to edify the spiritual laity. Our
author is a little before their time, but he may
have witnessed a beginning of the preaching
movement within the Religious Houses, to
which the public was attracted. The forma-
tion of the lay-societies of devout people
was beginning and had, in South Germany,
made considerable progress, but the Mirror
belongs to the end of the thirteenth century,
and is therefore before the birth of the
Deventer and Windesheim groups. The
similarity in point of view is, however, clear,

XXX


INTRODUCTION


and as we have seen, the Englishman who
in the late fifteenth century translated the
Mirror into Latin believed the work to have
been composed by Ruysbroeck. He was
haply ignorant of the fact that the author
sent his “‘ inspired ”’ treatise for approbation
to one “Dr. Venerabilis Godfridus de Fon-
tanis,” Master of Theology at the Sorbonne,
who flourished c. 1286-1303, and who appears
to have died in 1306, when Ruysbroeck was
a child of thirteen. This establishes the
approximate date of the composition. Of
Godfrey of Fountains we know a good deal.
He was evidently in a position and of a
character to stamp the work favourably or
the reverse; his approbation is guarded, sober,
balanced. We know that his sympathies
were partly Thomistic, but on the points
which affected the work he still adhered to the
older scholasticism. As an opponent of the
Mendicants his approbation formed a valuable
counterpart to that of the Franciscan Friar,
Fr. John of Querayne, whose judgement,
in virtue of his “life of perfection,” was
unassailable.

The third censor was Don Frank, Cantor
of the Abbey of Villiers, whose interests
(perhaps because of his office) were in
scriptural interpretation. The list of monks
of that house during the late twelfth century
show several named ‘“ Frank,” but Pére

XXX1


INTRODUCTION


Moreau, S.J., assures me that there are no
traces of identification with the person
described in our text.

The opinion of all these censors is to the
same effect, that the book was sound theolog-
ically, but laid itself open to misinterpreta-
tion at the hands of superficial and unlearned
men. Moreover, they agreed that the fair
promises of so high a spirituality might lead
the unwise to adopt a course more exacting
in its claims than they could foresee, and to
which, not being called by God, they should
certainly never attain. The boldness and ©
humour of the Fleming seems to have pleased
his censors, and their verdict appears to have
satisfied him. His book, however, must have
been carefully guarded—as was prescribed—
for no trace of the vernacular version is to
be found to this day, and we have only the
English version and the Latin translation
made from it by Richard Methley, together
with the various Latin versions in the Vatican,
made from the original French version.
There is also an Italian translation.

The dangers which the thirteenth-century
critics foresaw, and against which they warned
the author, were thoroughly fought out in
the late fourteenth century, and again in
the seventeenth century. The position of
the Church in these matters is now so clear,
that for Catholics the warnings against

XXxii


a’


INTRODUCTION


Pantheism and Quietism are superfluous.
But that is not the case with the wide circle
of readers who do not recognise the Church’s
authority, and in this age those heresies are
more widespread and flagrant than in the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. With this
in view, explanatory notes have been added
calling attention to difficult passages, the
interpretation of which might otherwise have
been left to the reader’s own discretion. It
is hoped that these notes will not appear
unduly didactic and intrusive in matters of
Spiritual interpretation.


‘TRANSLATOR


To pass from the question of authorship
to that of the identity of the translator is to
sail from one unknown sea into another.
How did the MS. reach England? Who
was the humble and spiritually minded M.N.,
who undertook the work of translation, and
whose careful glossing in the direction of
orthodoxy seems to have redeemed the English
version from the fate of its original? We
only know what he tells us in his simple and
devout Prologue. Richard Methley, writing
acentury later, states that the English trans-
lator was unknown to him, and treats his work
with scant consideration and sympathy.
He cannot, therefore, have been an out-

XXXILi B


INTRODUCTION


standing personality in the Carthusian Order.
Perhaps he was one of the unknown four-
teenth-century mystics who wrote as disciples
of Rolle or Walter Hilton. His language is
midland with some northern characteristics,
and the book seems to have been written
towards the end of the fourteenth century;
for this, as well as for reasons of style and
thought, he seems more akin to Hilton in
prudence and balance, though the tone of
his Prologue, and of the devotional out-
pouring which forms an epilogue, recall the


abundant fervour and simple tenderness of


the followers of Richard Rolle, the group of
writers of whom William of Nassington is
chief.

It is possible that the French MS. reached
England through the agency of a group of
persons who accompanied Queen Philippa
of Hainault to England in 1327. Chief of
these was Walter de Manny, who, with
Michael of Northbrook, Bishop of London,
was co-founder of the London Charterhouse.
Michael of Northbrook had visited Flanders
as a young clerk, before his active career in —
the service of Edward III brought him there. -
as a statesman; and the early documents and
charters of the London Charterhouse make it
clear that there was communication between
the houses in Flanders and the new foun-
dation, in the establishment of which the

XXXIV


INTRODUCTION


Bishop had a larger share than is commonly
known. It is scarcely conceivable that we
should attribute to Michael of Northbrook
the translator’s device ‘‘ M. N.”’; his character,
occupation, and date of death (1361) render
such an hypothesis unlikely, but not im-
possible.

It has, however, been suggested with more
probability, that “if the Mirror did get into
England through a Carthusian door, it may
have been on the occasion of the foundation
of the Charterhouse at Shene in 1414, when
a number of monks from various Flemish
Charterhouses were sent over to help fill the
cells (forty in number, an altogether unpre-
cedented size for a Charterhouse), the English
houses being unable to furnish a sufficient
quota.”


CONTENT


The content of this treatise need not here
be fully analysed. The division into XX
Distinctiones, or Divisions, and the sub-
division into chapters, is more arbitrary than
systematic; nevertheless the work falls into
_ three parts, of which Divisions I-V; VI-

XVII; XVIII-XX mark the approximate
boundaries.

Divisions I-V contain the chief doctrines
set forth in all their vigorous originality, and
the method is chiefly descriptive. Here the

XXXV


INTRODUCTION


dialogue is between Love (the judge and
master of ceremonies in the disputation),
“‘ this Free Soul,” and Reason; and the point
at issue is the freedom of the soul from
fettering conditions in the highest stages of
the spiritual life. After the description of
the habits, the point of view of the free soul,
her aloneness and peace in God, her inde-
pendence of judgement born of true depen-
dence on God (Division III), follows the
explanation of her attitude towards the
pursuit of virtues, and an outline of what
freedom from desire and will imply in the
spiritual life (Divisions IV and V). Here
the doctrine of the Areopagite is brought
into practical application, and Division IV,
chapters viii and ix, and Division V, chap-
ters v, vi, viii, x, contain some of the
distinctive theories which mark the book.
The doctrine of not being with herself, and
naught willing, which first appeared as a
method towards peace of soul, is now seen as
part of God’s claim upon the soul and as a
passive purgation. We have come to a stage ©
when intensive mortification of the soul
and spirit is described and shown as God’s
action rather than the soul’s endeavour, and
as resulting in a deepening experience of
union with God (chap. xi), and the Division
ends with a renewed warning concerning the
fewness of those who will understand, and
XXXVI


INTRODUCTION


the condition of participating in “this life”’;
“they only understand it whom fine love
teacheth. ... But him behoveth to be
dead and mortified of all deaths, that finely
should understand it.”

The VIth Division, the second part of the
book (VI-XVII), in which the description
of the nature of the “‘ free soul” is mingled
with sundry recapitulations, is illustrated
partly from reminiscences of earlier mysti-
cal works—St Bonaventure, St Augustine,
Richard of St Victor. Divisions VI and VII
classify souls as “‘ perished,” and ‘‘ marred,”
as distinct from those in “‘ life of spirit ”—and
later this latter type is again distinguished
from those ‘“‘ free souls ” in the highest life.
The gist of this teaching seems to be from
Clement of Alexandria (Strom. IV and VI),
but it is mingled with the doctrine of the
“far night ’’ (which we shall discuss later),
and which seems here to mark the soul’s full
entry into the passive state of Quiet, experi-
ence of Rapture or Ecstasy (Division XI).

The soul feels all to be done for her and in
her by God himself. As the knowledge of
her “‘ naught” deepens, her knowledge of
God’s “bounty ” grows. There are chapters
in which this theme is sung with an intensity
of fervour that can find no expression but
the constant reiteration of simple phrases
such as “‘ of him, by him, for him. . . of his

XXXVil


INTRODUCTION


bounty, by bounty given... mynaught.. .,’
until the text is in danger of becoming un-
readable through the monotony of these
recurrences, but they are akin to the famous
night-long prayer of St Francis, “‘ My God,
O my God.” Indeed the last sections of the
book drop the doctrinal and expository tone,
and become prayer and aspiration.


’


It will be seen that the second part of the
book, from Division VI approximately, is
more obscure, more subtle in thought, often
monotonous in expression and repetition
of phrase and word. No doubt this is the
part of which the translator warned us that
“the French boke . . . is yuel writen and
in sum places for defaute of words and
silables the reson is awaye.’’ He has exer-
cised his discretion, but in these latter ob-
scurities, thinking that prudence was the
better part of valour, has often translated word
for word, so that the hopeless obscurity of
his English version occasionally yields some
light if it be translated back literally into Old .
French. Not even so, in many cases, can I
claim to understand, or to offer more than
a guess for my version of the text.

This second part deals with the highest
States, not merely by description, but it takes
up some of the previous points of controversy
and shows them in relation to the further

XXXVili


INTRODUCTION


experience acquired. If, therefore, a certain
monotonous sameness is felt, it will yield to
reflection, and we shall find that new ground
is really covered, and that the familiar lines
of thought are gathered up in a new method
of approach, and issue in a noble consumma-
tion. Thechapters of the last three Divisions
are amongst the finest in the whole work
and may be considered autobiographical.
(Divisions XVITII-XX.)

It is after the Death of Reason (though the
writer allows her to reappear unawares once
or twice) that the method changes. The
difficult Division XIII is a commentary and
exegesis on some of the former points, cul-
minating in a dialogue in which Love takes
the soul to task and presses home sharply
the bitter points, once directed against
Reason, but now aimed at the soul, in whom
all self-love must be naughted. Then
follows, in Division XIV, a summing-up of
the seven degrees or estates; it recalls the
first chapter of the treatise, but is an
interesting summary of St Augustine’s seven
stages in the De Quantitate Animae, treated
with the free originality we have learnt to
expect of our author. Divisions XV, XVI,

‘and XVII are short interludes, an apology

for himself, and an exhortation to discreet

secrecy put into the mouth of the Blessed

Trinity. Between these themes is fitly set
XXXIX


INTRODUCTION


the plea of Fine Love, that she is above the
Law but not against the Law. Division
XVIII takes a new form. The soul, ful-
filled of God, breaks out into rapturous
praise and aspirations of love (indeed all the
latter part of the book is characterised by the
triumphal emergence of the affective powers),
and is led by Truth, first through a short
series of “‘ contemplations,”’ given as a means
for the liberation of the ‘‘ marred souls ”
from their self-centredness. Then follows
a piece of autobiography. The soul de-
scribes the last stage of her spiritual journey,
the nature of the fierce conflict to which Love
puts her love, and the final issue. Psycho-
logically these pages are unsurpassed, though
the form is unequal. The soul describes her
own rapturous protestations to Love, and is
brought up sharp by three penetrating claims
for which she was unprepared. Then comes
the final breakdown of selfhood, the death
of “affection of spirit.” The personal
poignancy has survived the diffuseness of
the other pages, and comes down to us °
through the centuries, echoing first the
bitterness of Rama and then the triumph of
the Magdalen. ‘‘ Thus my will is martyred
and my love martyred, ye have them to
martyrdom brought. ... I thought some-
time alway to have lived of love, by desire
of good will. Now be these two things
xl


INTRODUCTION


ended in me.” Righteousness and Mercy
ask how they may comfort her, and what
help she would have; and she refuses all
help but God himself—who Is, and she is
Naught. God himself offers her that she
should take what she desires and have her
own will. And she will not have her will,
for she is naught and hath no will. She is
content with what God is in himself. “I
will nothing that is not of the bounty of love.”
This is the key to freedom, and then “ the
outpouring of the divine love shewed me, by
divine light, an highful opening approaching
to the Truth, that shewed me suddenly him
and me. Him so high and me so low that
I might no more from thence rise, nor help
of myself have, and that was best.” This is
the established state that later writers call
Spiritual Marriage. Two further chapters
summarise the teaching to be drawn from
the whole work, and especially the last
incidents; and a wonderful little mystical
lyric, anticipating the method of St John of
the Cross, concludes the book. This analysis
should encourage the reader over those long
passages where admittedly scholastic subtle-
ties and monotonous repetitions threaten
to overwhelm our interest, and where we
recognise at times that the doctrinal dangers
we have already noted are accentuated rather
than diminished.
xli B2


INTRODUCTION


There is a certain rhythm in this latter part
of the work, in the alternate descriptions of
the condition of the free souls and that of
the ‘‘ marred.”’ A balance is kept where the
tendency is to emphasise the lyrical side
(cf. St Fohn of the Cross, two last books).
The contradictions of doctrine are only
superficial, if wé keep in mind the distinc-
tions made earlier between the four (not
three) classes, the perished, the marred,
those in life of affection of spirit, and those
free souls united to God by love.


AUTHOR’S SOURCES


Our author is clearly more influenced by
Franciscan than scholastic philosophy, a
follower of St Augustine and St Bonaventure.
What he owed to Dionysius Areopagita came
to him through the Victorines; but he is, on
the whole, untouched by the new scholas-
ticism that was formulated by St Thomas,
and had not as yet dominated the thought of
the schools. The main idea of his work is
the glorification of love above intellectual
knowledge; of the immediate knowledge of
God above the rational—reason. Goodness
and goodwill is set above knowing. This is
carried to the extreme in his contemptuous
attacks on that Reason which is “‘ litteral,”’
and in his glorification of not-knowing and

xlii


INTRODUCTION


not-willing, culminating in the experience of
the Dark Night.

Nevertheless he is far from depreciating
Understanding, as a separate faculty from the
rationalising Reason, and the tenor of his
argument brings him into line with the great
mystics who have held together the value of
Knowledge and the value of Love as means
towards the apprehension of God. It is
significant that, in the last stage, he is led by
Truth. When all feeling of Love and
Desire is dead, an act of cognition is still
possible ‘‘ shewed me,” etc. when the last
revelation is afforded (see p. 286).

This description marks him as an Augusti-
nian who holds the possibility of the im-
mediate vision of God; and though he may
have learned much from St Bernard’s affec-
tive theology, he does not accept the theories
of his mystical theology. Perhaps some of
the irony of the method of “ beholdings ”
proper for “‘ the marred ”’ was intended for
a school of thought that fostered imaginative
meditation.

To the follower of St Bernard, however,
who wrote the letter to the “ Brethren of
Mons Dei,” he owed much. Whether he him-
self was a monk of this or of a Charterhouse
in the same locality, we cannot tell. It is
possible, and his views are much illuminated
by a comparison with those of the writer of

xliii


INTRODUCTION


the “Letter.” It is the easiest of his
literary sources to trace. The following
passages will suffice as examples, both of the
doctrine to which objection might be made,
and of the vindication offered.


LETTER TO THE BRETHREN OF MONS DEI
(M.P.L. 184, pp. 297-300).


« “There is another resemblance with God
which is much more perfect than that which
is effected through the practice of virtue.
It is that which has already been to some
extent spoken of, which is so special that it
is no longer the resemblance, but the unity
of the mind with God, since man becomes
one thing with God; one same mind, not
only through the unity of the same will, but
by a certain closer union of the will...
which removes from the soul the power of
willing otherwise than God. This union
is called unity of the mind, not only because
the Holy Spirit brings it about and guides
therein the mind of man, but because it is the
Holy Spirit himself, God-love. It is through
this Spirit, who is the love of the Father and
the Son, that are produced the sweetness,
the gentleness, the caresses and embrace,
and all that there may be in common
between these two divine Persons in this
sovereign unity of the truth and truth of
xliv


INTRODUCTION


unity. The same thing happens (in suo modo)
in a manner, in the union of man with God, as
in that which unites the Son substantially
with the Father, and the Father with the
Son. In the embrace of the Father and the
Son it is, as it were, the Holy Spirit which is
intermediary. In this ineffable and un-
thinkable way man merits to become of God,
yet not God, for that which God 1s by nature,
man 1s by Grace.”

This passage, which is safeguarded from
error by the last clause, precedes another in
which the idea of the impeccability of the
soul is more strongly and more dangerously
expressed.

But this also has its echoes in the Mzrror,

“The unity of the mind with God, in the
man who keeps his heart raised to heaven,
is the state of the perfection of the will which
tends towards God. It is realised when not
only does he no longer will other than God
wills, but is so advanced in love that he is
not able to will other than God wills, For
to will what God wills is to be already like
him; to be unable to will except what God
wills, is to be already what God is, in whom
to be and to will are one and the same
thing.”

The foregoing paragraph must not neces-
sarily be interpreted as teaching the im-
peccability of the soul in these highest states ;

xlv


INTRODUCTION


the writer may not have been thinking of sin,
but of all the positive aspects of man’s re-
lationship to God, in which unity of will may
be freely exercised; such as desire for union,
prayer, and the aspirations of Love.

Our author is therefore clear of the danger
of those sects that abounded in South France,
Italy and Lower Germany, both at his time
and later in the fourteenth century, whose
teaching exalted Love and Unknowing;
sometimes at the expense of morality, more
frequently in defiance of authority, and
independent of ecclesiastical organisation
and sacramental principles. How far the
influence of Eckhart had already penetrated
we cannot tell; he must have begun to preach
before this book was written. It is im-
possible to estimate the influence of the
Mirror on that susceptible Flemish-Franco
borderland in that age of spiritual fervour,
the early fourteenth century. Certainly
there are unmistakable points of contact
between its teaching and that of the Brethren
of the Common Life, Ruysbroeck, Eckhart,
Suso—even the Gottesfreunde. In England
we can only hazard conjectures. The MSS.
occur in collections of versions of the chief
fourteenth-century English mystics, and at
least three of the four books belonged to the
Charterhouses of London and Yorkshire.
This fact suggests that, if the work was not

xlvi


INTRODUCTION


popular, it was at least appreciated by those
whose opinion might be valued. An examina-
tion of the original work of Richard Methley,
the Latin translator of the Mirror, shows that
he had hardly imbibed the teaching of his
author. However expert he may have been
in handling the glosses of the Areopagite
and in commenting on the Mirror, his own
mind reflects dreads and delights of an
elementary kind. He has not passed the
stage of visions and auditions, and reminds
us at his best of the sweetness of Rolle’s
Love of Jesus, at his worst of the Cornish:


“‘ Ghosties, and ghoulies,
And long-leggity beasties,
And things that go Bump in the night.”


Yet this proves nothing. We may surmise,
moreover, that the English translator’s fears
were not ungrounded, and that, if plain
Englishmen found the Frenchman’s treatise
beyond their grasp in the first version he
produced, the second may have met with
similar fate. No doubt the form of the
dialogue between personified abstract qualities
was not as familiar in England as in France,
and the subtleties of the scholastic mind,
though equally represented at Oxford and
Cambridge, may have been further removed
from the English Charterhouses and those
who perused these treatises.
xlvil


INTRODUCTION


THE DOCTRINAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE
“© MIRROR ””


Certain points in the doctrine of the Mirror
call for special comment, in that they seem
to contribute something to the history of
mystical theology.

First we take the ‘‘ Far night,” the experi-
ence described by the Areopagite as a dark
knowing of God. This has been admir-
ably analysed by Dom Justin McCann, in
his Introduction to the Cloud of Unknowing,
in this series. In view of this no further
analysis is needed. I would only venture to
add that, whereas the Areopagite represents
the Darkness as a necessary mode of knowing
God, to be attained by an elevation of the
mind, laborious at times, the author of
the Mirror regards the darkness as being
of a temporary nature, arising when the
spiritual life is well advanced, and being
intermittent in its first approaches. To it
he attributes certain purgative and illumina-
tive effects which become more marked as
advance is made. Though he describes the
ensuing complete passivity of the soul as
belonging chiefly to the times of prayer, it
would appear that, at the end of the journey,
there is some sort of identification of the soul
with “the gentle far night,” in its complete
union with God (cf. Division XII, chap. ii).

xviii


INTRODUCTION


If this is the case, we have an analysis
which differs considerably from the earlier
conceptions of the followers of the Areopa-
gite, as it does from the English mystics and
from those of the Gregorian school. Further,
it seems to be a transition towards the ideas
of St John of the Cross. St John definitely
assigns a painful significance to the Dark
Night, he regards it as a means of purgation,
intervening between the stages of illumina-
tion. He has derived from the same sources
as our author those distinctions of “ flesh,
psyche (i.e., mind and will), spirit,” regarded
as states of the soul, from and in which she
needs purgation; and accordingly distin-
guishes the Dark Night as being first of the
senses, then of the soul, lastly of the spirit.

Our author resembles the English mystics
in his conception that the far night is not
necessarily painful. No doubt the mentality
of the northern race found the “ stilling of
the intellect ” less trying than did the Latin
races.

It has been pointed out that St John of
the Cross has in these matters been influenced
by scholastic theology, but our author lived
in the day when St Thomas was still lecturing
and writing, and it must have been shortly
after his death that the Mirror was sent
to Godfrey of Fountains for censorship.
Godfrey of Fountains was in the forefront

xlix


INTRODUCTION :


of the virulent controversy concerning
St Thomas’s teaching, which broke out at
the Sorbonne and at Oxford between 1280
and 1300. He held a middle course steadily
between the extreme Thomism of the
Dominican party and the hostile opposition.
The Mirror provides many illustrations of
the conflict then raging, notably the obscure
passage concerning the Sacrament “‘if it be
brayed in a mortar,” which possibly refers
to controversy over the nature of the
Eucharist. No doubt other points will occur
to the reader familiar with scholastic theology.

In any case, our author was not the type of
the simple unlettered monk, but combined
with his mystical knowledge a keen appre-
ciation of the intellectual issues which are
one aspect of the spiritual problem he set
himself to describe.

If it may be said that the “ work of the
intellect” im prayer spoils prayer, that does
not apply to the habitual state of the mind
at other times than those of prayer, and the
best vindication of mystical union is a life
intensely fruitful in some direction. The
sphere and mode of this activity is com-
paratively insignificant.

Therefore the ardours of intellectual specu-
lation at the Sorbonne at the end of the
thirteenth century are known to our author;
he has assimilated speculations that we find

1


INTRODUCTION


hard to grasp, and he relates them to his
subject, not for a display of learning, but
simply because certain problems of the
spiritual life do naturally evoke questions
that have been handled in the schools, and
the synthesis of the intellectual problems is
frequently to be found in a spiritual law.
Hence some of the satiric humour, the utter
contempt for the spirit which would interpret
the whole of life in syllogisms, and regulate
the spiritual course by the laws of scholastic
logic.

The humour at the expense of Reason that
characterises this work, is at times a double-
edged sword, but more generally it is a
persistent contempt for rationalistic inter-
pretations, which is quite distinct from and
compatible with a real acceptance of the
rational point of view.

The scheme of the Threefold Ascent, as
expounded by Love and the Free Soul, is a
vindication of the valid rational factor; and
there may be significance in the passage
where, rejoicing over the death of Reason
(the rationalistic figure), Love claims that she
herself will now put the questions to the
Soul which Reason would have asked, and
she does in effect argue awhile from the
rationalist point of view until, later, rational-
ism merges into illumined Reasonableness. ‘}

That right Reason is a part of Love is clear

li


INTRODUCTION


from the latter part of the book, where it is
shown that even laggards in the spiritual
life may yet “arrive,” and also that some
souls are definitely called by the methods of
Reason (the personage reappears), and must
follow their own perceptions, albeit inferior,
in order to come to the ultimate possession
of God.

The parallelism between our author’s
doctrine of the Dark Night and that of St
John of the Cross admits of further analy-
sis. The snares and pitfalls into which the
soul may fall, both with regard to spiritual
phenomena, such as visions and auditions,
and with respect to the manifold defects or
shortcomings of Faith, Hope and Charity,
are analysed by St John in a systematic form,
but are found in our treatise woven into the
web of the work. The method is more
descriptive, allusive, with the art and art-
lessness of an earlier generation. Notwith-
Standing the apparent want of system and
diffuseness of the Mirror, some trace of a
method can be found. We shall seek it less
in any close sequence of the divisions and
chapters than in a certain interior rhythm.
A reader has complained of the perpetual
recurrence of certain themes to the point of
satiety. Further investigation leads to the
discovery that the movement is not a cyclical
repetition, but an ascending spiral leading

lii


INTRODUCTION


from earth to heaven. As the soul mounts,
the same panorama is unfolded again and
again, but the point of view continually
changes; and with each step of the ascent our
eye has command over a wider landscape.
The same features reappear. We describe
them afresh, as our new point of vantage
shows them in a fresh relation to their
immediate surroundings, and then to the
further and more distant scene of which they
are a part. As our ascent progresses the
details of familiar buildings are less easily
discerned, they are hidden in surrounding
greenery, and that itself is merged in the
plain, and the plain tends to merge into the
hills, till at last range beyond range of
hills fixes and stills our vision. Yet the eye
still catches the earlier sequences; almost
mathematically she apprehends them now.
They swim into the retina, to be instantly
classified by experimental knowledge, and
most speedily dismissed in the search for the
ultimate, ever-increasing joy of the mountain
ranges. Beyond these we know we shall
never see, but the freshness, newness and joy
thereof shall remain for ever inexhaustible.
Some such illustration will explain the
rhythm of our work and the recurrences of
theme, the appropriation of the thought of
forerunners, and will vindicate our author
from the charges of padding and plagiarism
liii


INTRODUCTION


that have been levelled at him—and at so
many of the medieval creators.

We have spoken of the influence of the
Areopagite on our author. The recurring
antithesis between knowledge and unknow-
ing, willing and not-willing, being and not-
being (in earlier chapters and also Divi-
sion IX, chap. vi), are some of the character-
istics chiefly elaborated in the Mirror. The
author as a Latin and a member of the
north-eastern race of Frenchmen, whose
temperament, practical and logical, carries
with it a predisposition to argumentative
speculation, applies the paradoxes inherent
in the Dionysian system not only to the
method of prayer and the attainment of
God—as does the author of the Cloud—but
to the whole life of the individual. The
Mirror is one for the whole “soul”;
“simple ” that is—“ single.” It is a guide
to perfect prayer and a “form of perfect
living ” rolled into one. This is the origin-
ality in an age when religious treatises were
either ascetic or speculative, and when the
mystical life was sometimes studied as a
department of philosophy, or seen only
through the eyes of moralists, or even de-
graded by the interpretation of heresy and
self-indulgence.

The difficulty arises when our author,
following the Dionysian doctrine as inter-

liv


INTRODUCTION


preted by Erigena and the Victorines,
emphasises the monistic tendencies, and
verges on Pantheism and on its corollary
Quietism. There are passages in the MS.
which may be construed in this sense, and
these have been fully annotated in their place.
The general impression is against this reading,
and the passages in the Prologues and on
pp. 54, 66 and pp. 155, 184 are quite definite
in guarding against such an interpretation.
The humour and common sense that mark
the treatment throughout is a significant
indication of the real sanity of the author’s
point of view. Allowance must be made
for exaggeration incident to the literary form;
for a Latin tendency to stress the speculative
element and express it unduly; and for a
dramatic touch of conscious bluff, a protest
against conventionalism.

The attacks against Reason and the virtues,
regarded in this light, are at once seen in due
proportion. Moreover, the originality of the
book lies in the fact that the author dismisses
in a few pages the whole subject of ascetic
discipline, which as a rule forms the main
part of the spiritual treatises of the epoch.
He begins where others leave off, and
assumes an acquaintance with and loyal
adherence to those principles of Christian
ascesis which are the basis of the monastic
and of the spiritual life generally. The

lv


INTRODUCTION


mystical life is the fruit of these, and our
author is careful to show that he addresses
himself only to those souls who are called to
the higher life. We know that the teaching
of St Bernard in the addresses on the Canticles
and the treatises by Richard of St Victor
cannot have been intended for the uninitiated,
and, moreover, both St Teresa and St John
of the Cross suffered the same accusations
as were evidently brought against the theories
of our author. The last speeches of the
“free soul,” taken in conjunction with all
that has been said, do not convey an impres-
sion of heretical pantheism (cf. also Divi-
sion III, chap. xviii). As to the accusation
of Quietism, we may probably safely take
the humorous comment of Richard Methley
in his later translation of the passage de-
scriptive of the last stages of the soul’s journey
(p. 293). We are told “‘ There she prayeth
not, all work is forbidden her, and she is in
the simple being of the Deity.” This is
glossed as follows: “‘ If the soul never did any
work she would not have written this book |
for our edification; but it is to be understood,
as I have said before, as being for a short
time ”’ (7.e., when the soul is at prayer).


If we have seemed to stress the possible
defects and dangers of our treatise, it has
been done with a view to forestall the critic.

lvi


INTRODUCTION


The reader will distinguish for himself its
beauties and excellences, the happy origin-
ality of expression, the rare subtlety and depth
of thought, and its spiritual elevation. It is
not too much to say that, in this period, it is
unique both in form and in content. None
of the single English fourteenth-century
spiritual treatises cover the whole ground
which our author treats systematically, yet
not with that arid, methodical precision
that mars much of the later spiritual treatises.
The descriptive treatment is foremost and
successful. In England the translation must
have fallen between Rolle’s work and that
of Julian of Norwich, and have been con-
temporary with the Cloud and Hilton.
Throughout, the method of English mystics
is unsystematic, descriptive, and more sug-
gestive than doctrinal, except in the case of
Hilton’s Scale of Perfection. The Cloud of
Unknowing comes nearest to the teaching of
our author concerning prayer, but does not
include in its range the variety of problems
which underlie the teaching of the Mzrror
and establish its value as a guide to the


interior life.
C. KIRCHBERGER.


IN ANNUNTIATIONE B.M.V.
1927.


lvii


com ination arene ier ;
sole “bite pr Peel


tani is fe
bateldbag WW yrainsy i any


; saves: ‘ont Te Roiecew EH


QYOZDAXLZOGNE DAR
- BS OSCGASOCGASOSGLA


TRANSLATOR’S PROLOGUE


To the worship and laud of the Trinity be this
work begun and ended. Amen.


THE PROLOGUE


HIS book, the which is called The

Mirror of Simple Souls, 1, most un-

worthy creature and outcast of all
other, many years gone wrote out of French
into English after my simple learning,* in
hope that, by the grace of God, it should
profit those devout souls that shall read it.
This was forsooth mine intent. But now
I am stirred to labour it again new, for,
because I am informed that some words
thereof have been mistaken, therefore, if
God will, I shall declare those words more
openly; for though Love declare those points
in the same book, it is but shortly spoken,
and may be taken otherwise than it is meant,
by them that,read it suddenly and take no
further heed; therefore [if] such words be
twice opened it will be more of audience,t

* MS. “lewd kunning.”
+ Profitable, Rene uSae be
ix


TRANSLATOR’S PROLOGUE


and so, by grace of our Lord good God, it
shall the more profit to the auditors. But
with the first time and now, I have great dread
to do it, for the book is of high divine matters
and of high ghostly feelings, and cunningly
and full dimly* it is spoken. And I am a
creature right wretched and unable to any
such work, poor and naked of ghostly fruits,
darkened with sins and faults, environed and
wrapped therein ofttimes, the which take
awayt my taste and my clear sight, [seeing]
that I have little of ghostly understanding
and less of the feelings of divine love.
Therefore I may say the words of the
prophet: My teeth be not white to bite of this
bread, but [may] Almighty Jesu, God that
feedeth the worm and giveth sight to the
blind and wit to the unwitty, give me grace
of wit and wisdom in all times wisely to govern
myself, following alway his will, and [may
he] send me clear sight and true understand-
ing, well to do this work to his worship and
pleasaunce; profit also and increase of grace
to ghostly lovers, that be disposed and -
calledt to this high election of the freedom
of soul.

O ye that shall read this book, do ye as
David saith in the psalter: Gustate et videte,§
that is to say Taste and see. But why trow

* MS. “ mistily.” + MS. “ binemeth me.”
+ MS. “cleped.” § Ps. xxxiv 8.
Ix


TRANSLATOR’S PROLOGUE


ye he said Taste first ere than he said see?
For first a soul must taste ere it have very
understanding and true sight of ghostly
workings of divine love. O full naked and
dark, dry and unsavoury be the speakings
and writings of these high ghostly feelings of
the love of God, to them that have not tasted
the sweetness thereof. But when a soul is
touched with grace—by which she has tasted
somewhat of the sweetness of this divine
fruition, and begins to wade and draweth
the draughts to her-ward—then it savoureth
the soul so sweetly that she desireth greatly
to have of it more and more, and pursueth
thereafter. And then the soul is glad and
joyful to hear and to read of all thing that
pertaineth to this high feeling of the workings
of divine love, by nourishing and increasing
her love and devotion to the will and pleasing
of him that she loves, God, Christ Jesu.

Thus she entereth and walketh in the way
of illumination, that she might be taught
into the ghostly influences of the divine work
of God, there to be drenched* in the high
flood, and oned to God by ravishing of love,
by which she is all one spirit with her spouse.

Therefore to these souls that be disposed
to these feelings, Love hath of himself made
this book in fulfilling of their desire, and
often he layeth the nut and the kernel within

* 7,¢,, drowned.
Ixi


rat ents zee ae
ae) th it os ah "
a it at el ah
Meroe ovis a es iD,
AOR OHTA aMsgolOr ‘Apaskeen
ech won sok. pasty: ed SHES
bar), bod. alpak algmie ie.


fies. dee aes Rr BRORS 8a ak Saks


.)
=


GPBE EP EE EE Se Ee SP


AUTHOR’S PROLOGUE


CREATURE made of the Maker, by me

that the maker hath made, [do make]

» of him this book. Why it is I know not,

nor I keep not wit. For why? I owe it
not;* it sufficeth me that it is [so], wherein
I may know the divine wisdom. And in
hope, I here them salute, by the love of peace
of charity, in the High Trinity, that will
warrant it,t seeing in them the witness of
their living by record of clerks that have read
this book.

The first was a Friar Minor of great name
for life of perfection, men called him Frere
John of Querayn; he said: ‘‘ We send you
this by these letters of love, receive it for
courtesy, for Love prayeth it you: to the
worship of God and of them that be made
free of God, and to the profit of them that
be not [so], but, God willing, yet may be.”

_ Hesaid soothly,+ that this book is made by
the Holy Ghost. And though all the clerks
* 7.e., “For why? it is not my business.” Cf. St

Augustine, Confessions, I, i-iii.

+ z.e., Who will give approval to the book.

+ Truly; and so throughout.

Ixv C


AUTHOR’S PROLOGUE


of the world heard it, unless they understood
it, that is to say, except they had high ghostly
feelings and this same working, they shall not
wit what it means. And he prayed for the
love of God that it be wisely kept, and that
but few should see it. And he said thus,
that it was so high that himself might not
understand it.

And after him a monk of the Cistercians’
[Order] read it, that was named Dom Frank,
Cantor of the Abbey of Villiers: and he said
that it proved well by the Scriptures, that it
is all truth, that this book saith. ‘

And after him read it a Master of Divinity, °
that was named Master Godfrey of Foun-
tayns: and he blamed it not, no more did the
others; but he said thus, that he counselled
not that many* should see it, and for this
cause, because they might leave their own
working+ and follow this calling, to the
which they should never come; and so they
might deceive themselves. For it is made
of a spirit so strong and cutting, that there
be but few such or none. But nevertheless.
the soul comes never to divine usagest before

*SMSt ffeles?

+ i.e., their own way of spiritual living.

+ Usages=habit and practices of devotion. Also
a spiritual state. The contrast throughout is be-
tween the elementary practices and the higher ones,


‘Divine usages”; or it means the higher state im-
‘7 LU S > &
posed by God, “ Divine usage.


Ixvi


AUTHOR’S PROLOGUE


she have [attained to] this usage, for all other
human usages be under these usages; this is
divine usage, and none other but this. For
the peace of auditors was this proved.*
And for your peace we say it [unto] you, for
this seed should bear holy fruit in them that
hear it and be worthy.


* 7.e., this approbation was obtained.


Ixvii


-

a -

¥

B

:

— =
|

;

S


—— ee


af


thats it wis: 60. ligase
tier
Am’
ied (epadic. —
ous af the Vode Ges Vike <=.
(he fpruved well ler Aes oo

i Sl tradhy, thar past ‘talth, lo ee
And Ae es hun comticn Mesa’ =
ms CAmeS IS Cadtrey ae oh

' . by [ bay ae wh are) sae he ~

ta ie be Sand Tol, EY Ge ae ‘
ios, hoe ones”. ole ae woe


< g Ayaameas Big)
ee “ee ” at ~ ; iv
a ae atcouts sites ota ed 2a
hh foceiv: abensttves * Fores
—— h Sip" Bo SIPS & RS Cut ENgs: Kae
7 a [ome ae
he soul hex ticyer 46 Apevia aan
eS bate’ eee —
es thas coves. Wey: la ected eeupe ee
- maces Beagle my eS dew one


VAG RNOAGORNOAGORUATOEN
SOSASEOTAEOPAS OSL


THE
MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS


DIVISION I


CHAPTER I


AN EXHORTATION TO A SOUL TO ASCEND TO THE
STAIRS OF PERFECTION, AND HOW THIS
BOOK MAY BE UNDERSTOOD


SOUL touched of God, dissevered
() from sin, in the first estate of grace,

ascend by divine grace into the seventh
estate of grace, where the soul hath her
fullhead of perfection by divine fruition in
life of peace. And among you, actives and
contemplatives, that to this life may come,
hear now some crumbs* of the clean love,
of the noble love, and of the high love of the
free souls, and how the Holy Ghost hath
his sail in his ship.

““T pray you,” saith Love for love, “ that
ye hear it by study of your inward subtle
understanding with great diligence; else

* MS. “some mites.”
I


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 1


they shall misunderstand it, all those that read
it or hear it.”

Now hearken by meekness among you, at
the beginning of this, a little ensample of
love of the world, and understand it into
divine love.

There was in old time a lady, the which
was a king’s daughter of great worthiness
and noble nature, that dwelt in a strange land.
So it befell that this lady heard tell of the
great courtesy and of the great largesse of
King Alexander; and anon she loved him
for his noble gentleness and for his high


renown. But this lady was so far from this - 7


great lord, in whom she had laid her love,
that she might neither have him nor see him.
Wherefore she was full oft discomforted,
for no love but this sufficed unto her,
and when she saw [that] this far love—to
her so nigh—was so far from her, she
sought to comfort herself of him by
imagination of some figure, that might bear
the likeness of him that she loved, for
whom she felt her heart full oft wounded. .
And then she had painted an image, that
presented that king’s semblance as nigh as
she might, whom she loved, and by the
sight of this image, with other usages, she
was eased: and thus she appeased herself
by the presentation of [that] love, whereby
she was updrawn.
2


Ch. 1] SIMPLE SOULS


“ Soothly,” saith the soul that had this
book written, “ this I say for me: so fare I.
I hear speak of a king of great might that for
courtesy and great largesse is a noble Alexan-
der. But so far is he from me and I from
him,” saith this soul, “‘ that I cannot take
comfort of myself: and to call* me he gave
me this book, the which presenteth some
usages of the love of himself. But neverthe-
less I dwell not in freedom of peace, though
I have his image, but I am in a strange land,
far from the peace, wherein these noble
lovers of this lord dwell that be all perfect
and pure, and by the gifts of this lord made
free, with whom they dwell.” Here shall
I tell you how: not that we be lords, free
of all, but that his love for us maketh us
free.t


M. Ye auditors of this book, take keep of
these words that say “‘ not that we be lords
free of all ’’; for whilst we be in this world,
we may not be free of all, that is to say,
we may not be departed continually from
all spots of sin. But when a soul is drawn
into herself from all outward things, so
that love worketh in the soul—by which
the soul is for a time departed from all


* MS. ~ clepe.”
+ MS. “ not we lords free of all, but love of him
for us.”
3


THE MIRROR OF [Divide


sin, and is oned to God by union—then is
the soul free, for that time of union, full
little time [though] it is. And when she
cometh down therefrom, then is she thrall,
falling or fading. To this accordeth holy
writ, where that it saith: Septies in die cadit
justus.* But this falling of the righteous
is more merit than sin, because of the good
will that standeth unbroken, and is oned
to God. A creature may be inhabited by
grace in freedom for ever; but to stand
continually in freedom, without sin, it
may not, for the instability of the sensuality
that is always flitting. And therefore the
falling is credited+ to the sensuality, and
not to the holy souls that perfectly have
set their will in God, by which love maketh
them free for the nobility of his work;
therefore it may well be said, ‘“‘ not that
we be lords free of all, but his love for
us [maketh us free].” WN.


So hear now a little for to show you how
love may do all without any misdoing. Thus .
saith Love for us: that there be six beings of
noble being; that creatures receive being, if
they dispose them to all beings, ere they
come to perfect being; as I shall tell you,


* Prov. xxiv 16.
| MS. “itis aretid the falling.”


4


Ch. 1 SIMPLE SOULS


before this book, of the takings of love,
end.*


x This very difficult sentence may perhaps be
paraphrased somewhat as follows: ‘‘ There be six
[ways of] being [among] noble [modes of] being;
that creatures receive being (z.¢e., existence) before
they come to perfect being, if they dispose themselves
for all these modes of being; as I shall tell,” etc.

Takings —ideas, conceptions, ways, happenings,
and so throughout.


5 (aie:


DIVASLON AL


CHAPTER I


_ FOR WHOM THIS BOOK HAS BEEN MADE, AND
OF THE PERFECTION THAT IS NEEDFUL TO
ALL THEM THAT WILL BE SAVED ~


“§ MONG you children of Holy
Church,” saith she, “‘ for you have


I made this book, that it should the _


more avail you [to] the life of perfection and
the being of peace; to which creatures may
come by virtue of perfect charity, to whom
this gift is given of all the Trinity, which in
this book ye hear devised, of the under-
standing of Love at question of Reason.”
“Begin we here,” saith Love, “at the
commandments of Holy Church, by which
every creature may in this book learn wisdom
by the help of God, that commandeth us to_
love him with all our heart, with all our soul,
and with all our virtue, and ourselves as we
ought and our even-Christian* as ourselves.
That we love him with all our heart, is that
our thoughts be alway verily in him. And
with all our soul, is that, upon our life, we
* 7.e., fellow-Christians.


Ch.2] MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS


should not say but truth. And with all our
virtue, is that we should do all our works
purely for him. And ourselves as we ought,
is that, in doing of this we look not to our
own profit, but to the perfect will of him,
God, Christ Jesu. And our even-Christian
as ourselves, is that we should not think,
nor say, nor do against our even-Christian,
otherwise than we would they did to us.
These commandments be to all needful to
salvation, of less life may none have grace.


CHAPTER II


OF THE COUNSEL OF PERFECTION AND OF THE
LAUD OF CHARITY


A YOUNG man [there] was on a time that
said to our Lord Jesu Christ that he had kept
himself from the time he was a child unto
that time. And our Lord answered him and
said: One thing yet faulteth thee. If thou wilt
be perfect, go and sell all thou hast and give it
all to poor and then suex me and thou shalt
have treasure in heaven.t This is counsel of
perfection of virtues, who that holdeth well
this teaching, he is in very charity. i
Charity obeyeth to nothing that is made,
but [only] to love. Charity has nothing of
* Sue=Fr. suivez, follow.
+ Mark x 21.
a


MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS _ [Div. 2


her own, not so much that she will ask [for
any|thing that is hers. Charity leaveth her
own work and goeth to do others’. _ Charity
asketh none allowance of creatures for [any]
thing that she doth for them. Charity hath
no shame, nor dread, nor dis-ease. She is
so rightwise that she may not flit for nothing
that [be]falleth.

Charity recketh not of [any]thing that is
under the sun, all the world is her relief.
Charity giveth to all, all that she has of value.
Herself she withholdeth not, and oft promiseth
thing that she hath not, for the great largesse
of herself, in hope that he, that most giveth,
most with him dwelleth. Charity is so wise
a merchant that she winneth over all where
others lose, and escapeth from perils where
others perish, unto plenteous multiplying of
that that is in love. Whoso hath perfect
charity he is mortified in affection of [the]
life of spirit,* by works of charity.


* i.e, spiritual life in highest degree. Cf.
Division XIV, chap. vi, and Division XIX, chap. ii.


GPG a ae te Bee


DIVISION III


CHAPTER I


OF THE LIFE NAUGHTED, AND OF NINE POINTS
OF THE SOUL THAT LIVETH IN THAT LIFE,
AND HOW SHE WILLETH NOTHING THAT
COMETH BY MEAN


A NOTHER life [there] is that we call


peace of charity in life naughted.

“Of this,” saith Love, “we will
speak in asking a soul. That none may her
find. That saveth her by faith without
work. That is alone [or all one] in love.
That doth naught for God. Nor she leaveth
naught for God. Nor no one may teach her.
Nor none may give [to] her nor take away
[from her]. Nor hath she naught of will.
-Ah, who shall give to this soul,” saith Love,
“ this [thing] that is lacking to her, for it was
never given nor never shall be given.”

This soul hath six wings as have the
seraphins, and also she willeth nothing that
cometh by means.* ‘This is the proper being
of seraphins; there is no mean between their
love and the divine love, they have alway

* 7.e., by any intermediary.
9


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


tidings without mean. So hath this soul
that seeketh not divine science among the
masters of the world, but the world and
herself inwardly despiseth. Ah God, how
great a difference [there is] between the gift
given by the mean of the loved to the lover,
in comparison with the gift given without
mean, of the loved to the lover.


CHAPTER II


HOW THIS SOUL HATH SIX WINGS AS HAVE
THE SERAPHIN, AND WHAT SHE DOTH
WITH THEM


Tus book saith sooth of the soul, that saith
she has six wings. With twain she covereth
the face of our Lord; that is to say, the more
that this soul hath of the knowing of the
divine bounty, the more she knoweth that
she knoweth not the mere wittance of a mote
in regard of his bounty, the which is not
comprehended but of himself. And with
twain she covereth his feet; that is, that the .
more this soul hath knowing of the suffering
that Jesu Christ suffered for us, the more
perfectly she knoweth that she knoweth not,
with regard to that [which] he suffered for
us, the which is not known but of him. And
with ‘twain she flieth, and so dwelleth in
understanding and in sitting. That is, that
10


Ch. 3] SIMPLE SOULS


all that she coveteth and loveth and prizeth,
it is of the divine bounty. These be the
wings that she flieth with. And [she] so
dwelleth in standing, for she is alway in
sight of God; and sitting, for she dwelleth
alway in the divine will of God. Whereof
should this soul have dread though she be
in the world ? And [though] the world, the
flesh and the enemy, the fiend, and the four
elements, the birds of the air and the beasts
of the earth tormented her and despised her
and devoured her, if it might so be, what
might she lose, if God dwelled with her ?
Oh, is he not Almighty? Yes, without
doubt, he is all might, all wisdom, and all
goodness: our Father, our brother and our
true friend; he is without beginning and shall
be without ending, he is without compre-
hending but of himself, and without end was,
is, and shall be, three persons and one God
only. . “ Such is the Beloved of our souls,”
saith this soul.


CHAPTER III
HOW THIS SOUL TAKETH LEAVE OF VIRTUES


“ THE soul of such love,” saith Love himself,
“may say thus to virtues: “I take leave of
you.” To which virtues this soul many a
day hath been servant.”

II


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


“IT assent, Lady Love,” saith this soul;
“ so [I] was then, but now, your courtesy has
delivered me in this way out of this bondage.”’*

Therefore I say, ‘‘ Virtues, I take leave of
you for evermore. Now shall mine heart
be more free and more in peace than it hath
been before. I wotf well your service is
too travailous. . . . Sometime I laid mine
heart in you without any dissevering; ye wot
well this; I was in all thing to you obedient.
Oh I was then your servant, but now I am
delivered out of your thraldom. Well, I wot,
I laid all mine heart in you, so long I have
endured great servitude in which I have
suffered many grievous torments, and many
pains endured. It is marvel that I am
escaped with the life, but now I trouble
not,t since it is thus, that I am departed out
of your control, wherein many a night and
day I have been, [so] that never was I free
until now that I am departed from you; and
therefore in peace I dwell.”


M. ‘Touching these words that this soul
saith: “‘ She taketh leave of virtues,’ Love
declareth, but yet I am stirred here to say
more to the matter, as thus: First: when


* MS. “ daunger.”


t+ Wot or wit or wist =know; wittance or witting
= knowledge.


+ MS. “ make no fors.”
ies


Gh./3] SIMPLE SOULS


a soul giveth herself to perfection she
laboureth busily day and night to get
virtues, by counsel of reason, and striveth
with vices at every thought, at every word
and deed that she perceiveth cometh of
them, and busily searcheth [out] vices,
them to destroy. Thus the virtues be
mistresses, and every virtue maketh her
to war with its contrary, the which be
vices. Many sharp pains and bitterness
of conscience feeleth this soul in this war.
And these pains and passions be not only
in the exercise of the spirit, by putting away
vices in getting of virtues, but they be also
of bodily exercise by commandments of
virtues and by counsel of reason; to fast
and wake, and to do penance in many
sundry wises, and forsake all her own
pleasures and all lusts and likings; and in
the beginning of all this, it is ofttimes
full sharp and full hard. But this she did
all by commandments of virtues that were
first ladies and mistresses of this soul.
And she was subject to them all the while
that she felt this pain and war within
_ herself. But so long one may bite on the
bitter bark of the nut, that at last one shall
come to the sweet kernel.
Right so, ghostly to understand, it
fareth by those souls that be come to
peace. They have so long striven with


13


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


vices and wrought by virtues, that they
may come to the nut kernel, that is, to the
love of God, which is sweetness. And
when the soul hath deeply tasted this love,
so that this love of God worketh and hath
his usages* in her soul, then the soul is
wondrous light and gladsome, and that is
no marvel, for the sweet taste of love
driveth out from the soul all pains and
bitterness and all doubts and dreads.
Then is she mistress and lady over the
virtues, for she hath them all within
herself, ready at her commandment, with-
out bitterness or painfulness of feeling to
the soul. And then this soul taketh leave
of virtues [in respect] of the thraldom and
painful travail of them that she had before,
and now she is lady and sovereign, and
they be subjects. When the soul wrought
by commandment of virtues, then the
virtues were ladies and she subject. And
now that the virtues work by command-
ment of this soul, they be subjects to this
soul, and this soul is lady over virtues. -
And thus it is meant that this soul taker

leave of virtues.t N.


* 7.e., “ his habitual working.”
T See note at end of text, infra, p. 299.


14


Ch. 4] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER IV


OF CERTAIN THINGS THAT THE SOUL RECKETH
NOT OF, AND HOW SHE IS LOST IN THE
RIGHT HIGH BY PLENTY OF KNOWING
AND BECOME NAUGHT IN HER UNDER-
STANDING, AND WHERETO SHE IS COME
BY THAT


“Tus soul,” saith Love, ‘ recketh not of
shame nor of worship, nor of poverty nor of
riches, nor of ease nor of dis-ease, nor of love
nor of hate, nor of hell nor of paradise.”

“ O Love, for God,” saith Reason, “ what
is this to say that ye have said?” “ What
is this to say ?”’ saith Love. ‘“‘ Wot they and
none other to whom God hath given the
understanding: for no Scripture teacheth it,
nor may man’s wit comprehend it, nor
travail of creatures nor desert may not reach
it. But it is a gift given of the Right High,
in whom this creature is lost by plenty of
knowing, and becometh naught in her under-
standing.”


M. O these words seem full strange to the
readers, that say the soul is lost in the Right
High by plenty of knowing, and becometh
naught in her understanding. And not
only these words but also many more other
words that be written before and after


1)


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


seem fable or error, or hard to understand.
But for the love of God, ye readers, judge
not too soon, for I am certain that whoso
readeth over this book by good avisement
twice or thrice and is disposed to the
same feelings, they shall understand it
well enough. And though they be not
disposed to those feelings, yet they shall
think it is all well said. But whoso taketh
the naked words of Scriptures* and leaveth
the meaning, he may lightly err. WN.-


And this soul that is become naught, she
wotteth all and she wotteth naught, and she
willeth all and she willeth naught.

“* Ah, what may this be, Lady Love,” saith
Reason, “that this soul may thus will, as
this writing saith, that before hath said that
she hath no will 2” ~

‘OQ Reason,” saith Love, “it is not her
will, this that she willeth, but it is the will
of God, all that she willeth; for this soul
taketh not the lead in love, that thus should
make her will by any desire, but Love leadeth
in her [which] her will hath taken, and doth »
his will of her.”

Now worketh love in her without her, so
that no dis-ease with her may dwell.


* 7... writings generally. |


16


Ch. 5] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER V


HOW A SOUL THAT IS MORTIFIED OF ALL OUT-
WARD DESIRES CAN NO MORE SPEAK OF
GOD; AND HOW IT IS MEANT, THAT THIS
SOUL HATH TAKEN LEAVE OF VIRTUES,
AND HOW SUCH SOULS BE BECOME FREE;
AND WHAT THE GREATEST TORMENT IS
THAT A CREATURE MAY SUFFER IN THIS
LIFE


“Tus soul,” saith Love, “can no more
speak of God, for she is naughted of all
outward desire and of all the affections of
the spirit, so that [which] this soul doth, she
doth it by usage of good custom, or by com-
mandments of Holy Church, without any
desire; for will is dead which gave her desire.

“ Ah Love,” saith Reason, that under-
standeth eagerly and leaveth the sweetness,
“what wonder is it, though this soul be
deprived of the feelings of grace, of desire,
of spirit, since she hath taken leave of virtues,
which manners giveth to all good souls ?
without which virtues none may be saved,
nor come to the life of perfection, and who
hath them may not be deceived; and this
soul hath taken leave of them; is she out of
her wit that speaketh thus ?”

“Oh without fail, nay,” saith Love, “ for


17


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


this soul hath better [than] all virtues, and
more than any other creature. But she hath
not the usages of them, for she is not with
them* as she was wont. No, and God will,”
saith Love, “she hath been servant long
enough, now [is she] to become free from this
time forward.”

** Eh, Love,”’ saith Reason, ‘“‘ when was she
servant 2”

“‘ When she took the leadt in love and in
the obedience of thee and of other virtues,”
saith Love. ‘“‘ These souls,” saith Love,
““that such be, have so long led in love and
in obedience of virtues, that they be become
ieeean

** And when be these souls become free ?”
saith Reason.

““ When love dwelleth and leadeth in them,
and virtues serve them without any under-
standing or painfulness in these souls.”


* *“Ts not with them” seems to mean, “is not
absorbed in eager pursuit of them,” or concerned
regarding her state in respect of virtue, as above.
It-is the eagerness which is blamed. The use of
this phrase with her, or for her, denotes throughout
a self-centred activity, and is contrasted with true
selflessness by the term without her.

tT MS. “‘ledid.” Throughout “leading” or
““meuing ”—.e., moving—is used to express an
impulsive self-direction of the soul even in good
directions. The ideal is when ‘‘ Love leadeth in
her,” or God is said to ‘‘ move” the soul into him-
self, etc.

18


Ch. 5] SIMPLE SOULS


** Soothly, Love,” saith Reason, “‘ these
souls that thus become free, they have many
a day known what control cando. And who
would ask them, ‘ What is the greatest torment
that a creature may suffer 2?’ they would say,
‘It is to take the lead in love and in obedience
of virtues’; for it behoveth them give to
virtues all that they ask, whatever it cost to
nature; and they ask worship, honour, heart,
body, life. This is to say, that the soul that
hath given them all this, and nothing hath
left to comfort nature with (that hardly the
rightful man shall be saved) would then
thus become sorrowful, be in hell and tor-
mented unto the day of judgement, so that
she might be in certainty, then to be saved.
This is sooth,” saith Love, ‘‘ under such
control live they, that these virtues have
power over.”

“‘ But these souls that I speak of, have the
virtues put at point;* for they do nothing for
them, but the virtues do all that the souls
will, without control or withstanding, for
these souls be their mistresses.”’


* 7.e., made perfect.


19


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


CHAPTER VI


HOW THESE FREE SOULS HAVE NOTHING OF
WILL; AND WHAT THEIR CONTINUAL
USAGE IS


Wuo that asketh these free souls sure and
peaceable, if they would be in purgatory ?
they say ‘“ Nay.” If they would [while yet]
living be certified of their salvation ? they say
“Nay.” If they would be in Paradise ?
they say “‘ Nay.” “ Eh! what would they >”
They have nothing of will to will this, and,
if they did will it, they would descend from
love. For he that is, hath their will, [and
he] knoweth what is good for them, and
that sufficeth them without knowing or being
sure. ‘‘ These souls,” saith love, ‘‘ live of
knowing of love and of hearing.” This is
[the] continual usage of these souls without
departing them [therefrom]: for knowing
and love and magnifying dwelleth in them.
These souls, that be such, cannot find the
good nor the evil, nor have knowing of
themselves to make judgement whether they
be converted or perverted.


20.


Ch. 7] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER VII


HOW LOVE TAKETH ONE OF THESE SOULS FOR
ALL, FOR TO SPEAK MORE READILY, AND
OF CERTAIN WORKS OF VIRTUE THAT THIS
SOUL HATH NO DESIRE TO; AND OF WHAT
THE [MOST] PERFECT GIFT IS THAT GOD
GIVETH TO CREATURES


“Or these souls,” saith Love, “we will
take one for all, to speak the more readily.
This soul desireth not despite nor poverty,
nor tribulation nor dis-ease, nor masses nor
sermons, nor fastings nor orisons, and she
giveth to nature all that she asketh without
grudging of conscience.”


M. This is to say, that this soul is oned
with God, and, whiles she standeth in
that union, she hath no will, nor work, nor
no desire, she thinketh of nothing that is
beneath that [union]. Also, another under-
standing there is, and that is this. First,
when creatures give themselves to per-
fection, they set all their desire and all
their purpose* in these points aforesaid,
and all their labour by fervour of love,
in which they work and [take the] lead.
They desire for God’s sake, despite,
* MS. “ entencions.” + 2.e., contempt.

21


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


poverty, tribulation, dis-ease, masses and
sermons, fastings and orisons, and [they]
take from nature all her asking, in
refusing all thing that is lusty and pleasant
to the flesh; for by this way, and by sharp
contrition, souls must go, before they
come to these divine usages. And when
they have tasted of these sweet draughts
of heavenly influences, it savoureth them
so well that they attend fully thereto.
And then love, of her courtesy, worketh in
these souls and maketh them cease from
that first labour; [yet] not from the deed,*
to leave the work undone for evermore, but
from that manner of labour in doing of
it, as thus. When Love worketh in the
soul and holdeth in her the sparkles of
his bright beams, she understandeth well
by clarity of that light and by sweetness
of that liquor that she hath drunk, [that]
the work of love is more worth and draweth
more to the union in God than doth her
own work. Therefore she taketh it as
for the most worthy and setteth by that ©
principally, so that all theirt attendance
and all their business that was before in
their other outward works is now set to


* 7.e., but not cease from the acts of virtue.

+ The change from the singular to the plural
pronoun is in the MS.; the reference is from the
one soul to that ‘‘ class of souls.”


22


Ch. 7] SIMPLE SOULS


follow this. But yet also she doth the
other, as by usage of good custom, as Love
saith, in this book, “‘ that by usage of good
custom this soul doth these outward
works.” But she doth it without desire
and without that kind of usage that she
had before, in labouring by outward
impulses;* but fully she attendeth in all
that she may to the usages of love, which
be all divine and upward. So whatever
this creature doth, it is oned to Love,
[so] that it is Love that doth it. And thus
she suffereth Love to work in her; there-
fore this, that Love saith, that these souls
“ desire not masses nor sermons, fastings
nor orisons,”’ it should not be so taken that
they should leave [them] undone. He
were purblind that would take it in this
wise; but all such words in this book must
be taken ghostly and divinely. For these
souls naughtt themselves so by very


* MS. “ Foreign wills” Commands or impulses
that seem to come to her from without herself
(foreign). With this is, perhaps, combined the
sense that the soul labours according to the interior
commands that urge her to act contrary to herself
and her natural inclinations or wills—z.c., foreign,
non-natural wills or commands. But she attends
to the practices of love, which are interior and God-
ward, not concerned with outward things.

+ Deny, humble, make themselves nothing,
annihilate themselves, and so throughout the text.


23


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


meekness, that they make themselves as
no-one, for sin is no-thing, and they hold
themselves but sin; therefore in their own
beholding they do . . . naught, but God
doth in them his works. Also these souls
have no proper will* nor desire, they have
wholly planted it in God, so that they may
nothing will nor desire, but God willeth
in them and maketh them to do his will.
Thus they do nothing as in their own
sight and judgement, but God doth all
thing that good is. And she giveth to
nature all her asking without grudging
of conscience. Now God forbid that
any be so fleshly [as] to think that this
should mean, to give to nature any lust
that draweth to fleshly sin, for God knoweth
well that it is not so meant. For sin must
be had in conscience,} will a man or nil
he so, in the time or after. This may
every creature well wit that hath any wit
and discretion; for this I say of truth, that
these souls that be such as this book
deviseth, they be so mortified from such
wretchedness and so enlumined with grace,
and so arrayed with the love of God, that
it quencheth all fleshly sin in them, and
driveth mightily down all bodily and
ghostly temptations. ‘Thus Love, that is,
* 7.e., no will of their own.
Tt See note at end of text, infra, p. 300.


24


Ch. 7] SIMPLE SOULS


God the Holy Ghost, worketh graciously
in these persons, in whom he holdeth his
school and arrayeth them so with fair
flowers of his high noblesse, that there
may no spots nor blemishes* in them
abide. N.


She hath no caret for anything that she
lacketh, except at the time when she is in
want. This burden of heaviness may no
one lose except he be an innocent.

“ Before God!” saith Reason, “what is
this to say ?”

“< T answered thee, here before,”’ saith Love,
“and still I tell thee that all the masters of
natural wit, nor all the masters of scriptures,
nor all those that take the lead in love and
in obedience of virtues, understand it not;
thereof be right sure,” saith Love, “ but
those only, without more, whom fine love so
leadeth.”’£

“ But whoso found such souls, they could
tell thee the truth an they would; but I
am not in pledge that men may understand
it, except only those whom fine love leadeth.
This gift is given,” saith Love, “ sometime
in a moment of time. Whoever hath it [let
him] keep it, for it is the most perfect gift

* MS. “ dragges.”


+ i.e., she is not troubled, anxious.
+ MS. “ demeneth.”


25


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


that God giveth to creatures. This is a
scholar of divinity; she sitteth in the valley
of meekness and in the plain of truth and in
the mountain of love, there she resteth her.”


CHAPTER VIII


OF THE PROPER NAMES OF THIS SOUL, AND HOW
THE TRUE CONTEMPLATIVE SHOULD HAVE
NO DESIRE


“* AH, Love,” saith Reason, ‘‘ name this soul


by her right name; give the ‘Actives’ some ~


knowing.” And Love nameth her by thus
many names. (1) The right marvellous.
(2) And the unknown. (3) The most inno-
cent of the daughters of Jerusalem. (4) She
on whom all Holy Church is founded.
(5) The [en]lightened of knowing. (6) The
worshipped of love. (7) The union of
hearing. (8) The naught in all things for
meekness. (9) The peaceable in divine
being, by divine will, by nothing willing of
will. (10) The fulfilled. (11) And [she ©
who is] called without fail by the divine
goodness, of the work of the Trinity.
(12) Forgettelle is her name.


M. Forgettelle is her name, for it is her
manner much to comprehend and soon to
forget. She comprehendeth much when
she beholdeth God, how worthy and

26


Ch. 8] SIMPLE SOULS


glorious he is, and how powerful he is in
all his works.

She seeth well then, that God by his
high majesty, he is in all. Furthermore,
she seeth how good and merciful, benign
and meek he is in all things, and in this
beholding full often love cometh to her
with his ravishing darts and woundeth her
so sweetly that she forgetteth all that she
afore saw and wist. Also, she com-
prehendeth much, what time she is oned
to God; then in a moment of time she
forgetteth herself and all other thing that
was afore thought. Thus she compre-
hendeth much and soon forgetteth. WN.


These twelve names Love giveth her.
“Now soothly this is right,” saith Pure
Courtesy, “‘ that these be her right names.”

“Ah, Love,” saith Reason, “you have
named this soul by many names, so that the
Actives may have some knowing, at the least
by hearing of the right noble names [by
which] you have named her. Now I pray
you, for the ‘ Contemplatives,’ ”’ saith Reason,
“« who always desire to increase in knowledge
of the divine bounty.”

“‘ They be ill constrained, Reason,’’* saith
Love, “‘ to that which thou sayest.”


* i.e., they will be with difficulty persuaded to
that which Reason, etc.


27


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


M. As who saith, the true contemplatives
should have no desire, but plant it all in
divine will of God, and knit their wills
wholly in him to his will, and have no
proper will nor desire, but will perfectly
the divine will of God. For by right, the
contemplatives should pass the state of
scholars, as masters of divinity be passed
schools. N.


CHAPTER IX


OF THE FIRST POINT THAT IS SPOKEN OF AFORE,
OF THE SOUL IN LIFE NAUGHTED; HOW
NONE MAY FIND HER, AND HOW THIS IS
WORTHY AND OF TRUE MEEKNESS


“Au, Lady Love,” saith Reason, “‘ expound
now the nine points, for your courtesy, to
the desirous contemplatives that be and dwell
ever in desire of love, which nine points you
rehearsed here afore; of her that fine love
asketh, in whom love dwelleth and is set in
life naughted, by which the soul is molten
in pure love.”

“The first point, Love,” saith Reason,
“is that which you have said; that none may
find her.”

“It is truth,” saith Love,.“ this is, that

28


Ch. 10] SIMPLE SOULS


this soul knows of herself but one thing, and
that is [that she is] the root of all evils and the
abundance of all sins without number, with-
out weight and without measure, and sin is
naught and less than naught, and a hundred
of horrible faults, under less than naught.
And by this understanding is she [made]
naught with regard to that which is of her
[nature].* Then may not this soul here
be found, for this soul is so naughted by
meekness that it seemeth [to] her there is no
creature that ever sinned that is so worthy
to have torment and confusion without end,
as she, by her true judgement, if God would
take vengeance of one of a thousand of her
faults. ‘This meekness is true meekness and
profit in a soul naughted, and none other
but this.


CHAPTER X


OF THE SECOND POINT, THAT IS, HOW THIS
SOUL SAVETH HER BY FAITH WITHOUT
WORKS, AND HOW THIS IS UNDERSTOOD


THE second point is that this soul saveth her
by faith without works.
“ Ah, Love,” saith Reason, ‘‘ what is this
to say 2”
* MS. “as of that that is of her:” possibly for,
** with regard to all that is of her nature.”
29 D


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


“« That is,” saith Love, ‘‘ that such a soul
that is naughted, hath so great inward know-
ing, by the virtue of faith, that she is thus
called in her inwardness to sustain that which
faith hath ministered to her of the might
of the Father, of the wisdom of the Son, and
of the goodness of the Holy Ghost. [So] that
nothing wrought may dwell in her thought
but passeth swiftly, for the other calling hath
taken the house of this naughted soul. This
soul can no more work. Oh soothly she hath
enough of faith without work to believe that
God is good, without comprehending. Thus ~
she saveth her by faith without work, for ~
faith surmounteth all works [by the] witness
of Love herself. |


M. Holy Writ saith, Unde sapiens justus ex
fide vivit.* Comprehend! This is to
say, that righteous man liveth of faith and
so do these souls.

But this, “‘ that they save themselves by
faith without works,” and “ that they can
no more work,” it is not meant that they.
cease from all good works for evermore,
and never do any work, but sit in sloth and
idleness of soul and body; for those who
take it so, they misunderstand it; but
it is thus. God is enhabited in themt
and worketh in them, and these souls


* Hab. ii 4. + t.e., God inhabits them.
30


Ch. 11] SIMPLE SOULS


suffer him [to] work his divine works in
them. What this work is, and how it is,
love showeth it in this book; and whatever
the bodies of these souls do of outward*
deeds, the souls that be thus high set, take
not so great regard to these works that
they save themselves thereby, but only
trust to the goodness of God, and so they
save them by faith, and believe not nor
trust not in their own works, but in all,
in God’s goodness.t WN.


CHAPTER XI


HOW THIS SOUL IS ALONE IN LOVE, AND HOW
SHE DOETH NAUGHT FOR GOD, NOR SHE
LEAVETH NAUGHT FOR GOD, AND HOW
THESE THREE POINTS BE MEANT


‘Tye third point,” saith Love, “is this.
That she is alone in love.”” This is that she
hath no comfort nor affection, nor hope in
[any] creature that is made, in heaven or in
earth, but only in the goodness of God.
“This soul,” saith Love, ‘‘ beggetht not of

* MS. “ foreign.”

+ In addition to M. N.’s interpretation of the


passage, it may be remembered that the author
probably referred to the mode of prayer of those


- souls, as will appear later. Cf. also Division XX,


chap. li.
+ Beggeth—.c., seeketh, craveth, desireth.


31


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


creatures: this is the phoenix that is alone
in love, so that of him she remembereth.”’

“The fourth point is this, that this soul
doeth naught for God.”

“ Ah, for God,” saith Reason, “ what is
this to say ?”

“< This is,” saith Love, “ that God maketh
no to-do about his work, and this soul then
hath not ‘to-do’ about that [with which]
God hath not ‘to-do.? Nor of herself she
recketh not, but God considereth ‘her, and
him she loveth so much that herself she
cannot love.”

“This soul,” saith Love, “hath so great —
faith in God, that she hath no dread to be
poor, for as much as her love is rich; for faith
teacheth her that right so as she hopeth of
God, right such shall she find him, and thus
hopeth she.

“The fifth point is this, that this soul
leaveth not, for God, to do anything that
she would do.”

“¢ Ah, Love,” saith Reason, “‘ what is this
to say ?”

“This is,” saith Love, “that this soul may ~
not do [aught] but the will of God, nor may
she will aught else; and for this she leaveth
naught for God, for she hath not in her
inward thought anything that is against God,
and for this cause she leaveth naught for
God.”


32


Ch. 12] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER XII


HOW NONE MAY TEACH THIS SOUL, NOR NONE
MAY ROB HER, AND. HOW THIS SIXTH
POINT IS UNDERSTOOD


“ THE sixth point is this, that none may her
teach.”’

“Now for God,” saith Reason, ‘‘ Lady
Soul, say what this is !”

“This is to say,” saith Love, “that this
soul is of such great knowledge that though
she had all the knowing of all the creatures
that ever had been and shall be, she would
think it naught, as in regard of* that which
she loveth, which was never known nor never
shall be known. She loveth more that
which is in God, which was never given
nor never shall be given, than she doth that
which she hath and which she shall have.
For though she had all the knowing that all
the creatures have that be and shall be, “ It
is naught,”’ saith this soul, ‘‘ as compared to
that which is, which may not be said.”

“* The seventh point,” saith Love, “ is this,
that men may not rob her. Oh! what
might they rob her of ? for though she were
robbed of worship, honour, friends, heart,
body, and life, yet would they not rob her

* 7.e., in comparison with.


33


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


of anything if God with her dwell; then may
no creature rob her of aught, by no strength
that they have.”


CHAPTER XIII


OF THE EIGHTH POINT, THAT IS, THAT NONE
MAY GIVE TO HER, AND HOW THIS IS UNDER-
STOOD, AND OF THE INEFFABLENESS OF
GOD


“THE eighth point, Reason,” saith Love,
‘* is that men may give her naught.” “‘ Give,”
saith Love, ‘‘ what might they give her?
Though they gave her all that ever was given
and shall be given, it would be naught com-
pared with that which she loveth and shall
love.”

“ But God himself, Lady Love,” saith
this soul, “‘ loveth in me and shall love.”

“* Save your reverence, that wot I not.
We say this,” saith she, “for the auditors
of this book, that God loveth better [where
there is] the more of himself [in a man], than
[where there is] less of himself.”’*

‘* Oh, there is no less of himself,” saith this
soul, ‘“‘ there is but all, and this I may say,
and soothly say.”

“I say,” saith Love, “that though this


* MS. ‘ God loveth better the more of him in
him, than the less of himself.”


34


Ch. 13] SIMPLE SOULS


soul had all the knowing, the love, and the
hearing, that ever was given or ever shall be
given, of the divine Trinity, it should be
naught in comparison with that which she
loveth and shall love; nor this love may not
be attained nor reached.”

“Oh, without fail no, sweet Love,” saith
this soul, “‘ [even with regard to] the least
point of my love, without ‘ more’; for there
is none other God but he that none may know,
which may not beknown. Nosoothly! No,
without fail, no !”’ saith she, “‘ he only is my
God, of whom none can say one word, nor
all those of paradise one only point attain
nor understand, for all the knowing that
they have of him. And in this ‘more’ to
all fulfilling, is enclosed,” saith she, “the
sovereign [im]mortality of the love of my
spirit.* For that is all the glory of the love
of my soul and shall be without end. And
all those that never understood this point
be full little to her,” saith this soul, “in
comparison with the ‘more great’ whereof
we speak not. I would speak, and I know
not what to say, but nevertheless, Lady


* And in the perfect fulfilment of this ‘“ more”
—i.e., in God, Himself, in the heavenly will, the
supreme immortality of the love of my spirit is
enclosed, pledged, fulfilled. That is, the soul finds
her highest capacity fulfilled in the contemplation
of God, who is the ‘* more,” etc.


35


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


Love,” saith she, “‘ my love is of such a kind
that I love better to hear gabbing* of you,
than if men told me nothing of you.

“Without fail I do so, for all that I say of
your goodness, is but gabbing; but this gab-
bing is of you forgiveable. Lord, they fail to
say well of you, that alway speak of you, and
never say nothing of your goodness. This
I tell you, right of myself; I cease not to say
[this] of you to that which men say to me
[being] questioned and in [my] thoughts.

““Soothly, whatever men say, neither they
nor I can say aught of your goodness, but .
the more I hear said of you, the more I am
abashed. Then [7.e., for] this is a great
villainy that men do me, to wit, that men
should tell me something of the goodness of
you. Yet they be deceived that trust in
it, for I am certain that men cannot speak
[rightly]. And if God will, I shall no more
be deceived; I will no more hear gab of your
divine goodness.”’ +


* Gabbing—.e., boasting, fine talk. A warning -
against spiritual extravagances. ‘
+ The soul protests against the exaggerated
** spiritual talk’ of others, urging first that these
speak too little of God’s goodness, and saying that
this is the point she emphasizes whenever men
question her, or when she thinks of God. Though,
indeed, all that they or she can say is a folly which
humbles her more deeply, and she perceives again
that ‘‘talk about God” is nothing but waste of


36


Ch. 13] SIMPLE SOULS


M. This is an usage in Love’s game, by
which these souls have then so clear sight
in divine beholdings, that it seemeth to
them that all which they or others say, it is
but gabbings in respect of the high good-
ness and great nobleness that is in God;
which may not be known except by himself
for the magnitude of greatness. ‘Therefore
they think that neither they nor others can
nor may speak [thereof]; but all is gab-
bing, for as much as they may not reach
to a point of the fullhead of soothfast-
ness. N.


*<T will no more,” saith this soul to God,
“hear gab of your divine goodness, if I have
life to fulfil the takings* of this book, of
which Love is mistress, that biddeth me that
I determine all my takings, for as oft as I
ask anything for myself of Love, by that, shall
I be ‘ with’ me in life of spirit in the shadow
of the sun, where may not be seen the subtle
imaginations of the drawings of the divine
love of the divine generation.”

“Oh, what say I >” saith this soul, “ all
it is naught though I all had, in comparison
- with that I love in him, which he giveth to
none but himself, which he must withhold


time. She resolves to do so no more, and trust
wholly to intimate converse with God.
* 7.e., ideas; Lat. MS. accepciones.


37 D2


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


for his divine righteousness. Then, say I,
that this is truth, that men may give me
naught, whatever thing that it may bes’

“And this complaint, Reason,”’ saith the
soul, “that ye hear me complain, it is mine
all and my best in well-understanding. Oh,
what a sweet meaning [is this]; for God’s love
understand it all! for Paradise is no other
thing than this same, to understand.”


CHAPTER XIV


OF THE NINTH POINT, THAT IS, HOW THIS SOUL ~
HATH NO WILL, AND HOW THIS [IS] MEANT


‘Tye ninth point,” saith Love, “is this,
that this soul hath no will.’’*

Oh, without fail, no; for all that she
willeth in consenting of will, it is that which
God wills that she should will. “And that
willeth she,” saith Love, “in order to fulfil
God’s will, and not her own. And this may
she not will [in] her [own strength], but it is
the will of God that willeth in her, so that this.
soul hath no will but the will of God, [which]
maketh her will all that she ought to will.”

Hear and understand, ye auditors of this
book,*+ the true understanding of these words,

* For a note on willing and not willing, see In-
troduction.


+ This passage reads like an M.N. gloss, though
it is not so marked.
38


Ch. 14] SIMPLE SOULS


and what that is that this book saith, in so
many places: that a soul naughted hath
naught of will, nor naught may have, nor
naught may will. And in this the divine
will perfectly is fulfilled. Nor may the
soul have her full sufficiency of divine love,
nor [may] divine love [have it] of the soul,
until such time as the soul be in God and God
in the soul, of him, by him, in this being,
by divine [indwelling], and then the soul
hath all her sufficiency.

** Soothly, yea,”’ saith the understanding
of Reason, ‘‘ but it seemeth that the ninth
point saith all the contrary, which saith that
the soul naughted willeth naught with regard
to that which she would will; nor may she
have that which God wills that she will.*
And that her will is naught in respect to
her [own] sufficiency, which never was given
her, nor never shall be given her.”

“From this,’ saith Reason, “‘ I under-
stand that the soul willeth a will, and God
willeth that she will a will, which she may
not have; and by this she suffers loss, and
hath not satisfaction.” t


* This may mean that she has “‘ no will’’—~.e.,
she is indifferent concerning her own satisfaction,
or that her will is made naught—2. é., She is denied
her satisfaction.

+ MS. ‘‘and this hase of failance and not of
suffisance.”

39


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


“Tt seemeth, Lady Love,” saith the
understanding of Reason, “that this ninth
point maketh me thus to understand the
saying of this book, which saith forsooth
that the free soul hath no will, nor naught
may have, nor naught may will, nor the divine
Trinity will not that she have; and this book
saith that she hath in all things, by divine
love, full sufficiency.”

“QO understanding of Reason,” saith this
naughted soul, “‘ how rude thou art! Thou
takest the shell or the chaff, and leavest the
kernel or the grain. Thine understanding
is so low that thou mayest not reach so high
as behoveth them that well would have the
understanding of the Being that we speak of.
But the understanding of divine love, that
taketh the lead in a naughted soul which is
made free, understandeth it without erring,
for she is [of] the same [nature].”

“‘ © thou understanding of Reason,”’ saith
the highness of the understanding of Love,
“‘ ynderstand now the rudeness of thy mis-
understanding. If this naughted lady willeth ©
the will of God, the more that she willeth
it, the more she would will it; and that
may she not, on account of the littleness
of [the] creature, for God withholdeth the
greatness of his divine righteousness. But
God willeth that she will this, and that she
have such [a] will. For such [a] will is [a]


40


Ch 15] SIMPLE SOULS


divine will, and this divine will giveth Being
to free creatures. For the divine will that
God maketh to will in them, draweth in
them beams of divine knowings and the
feelings of divine love and the union of
divine magnificence and laud. And then,”
saith Love, to this creature, “‘ how may this
soul will, when clear knowledge knoweth
that there is a Being among the Beings,
which is most noble of all Beings, which
creatures may not have unless they have
it by the ‘not-willing’?’’*

*“ Now,” saith Love, ‘‘ hath Reason heard
the answer of his questions, save where it
saith, that the free soul hath in her a lack
of sufficiency. But this I say to her, whereby
to will the divine will: soothly, the more that
she willeth it, the less hath such [a] will of
this her [own] satisfaction, and this same
[will] is the only [pure] will of God and the
soul’s glory.”


CHAPTER XV


OF THE PERFECTION OF THEM THAT LIVE AFTER
THE COUNSEL OF REASON; AND OF THE
PERFECTION OF THESE SOULS THAT FINE
LOVE LEADETH

‘““Au, Love,” saith Reason, “you have

done our prayer for the actives and the con-

* See Introduction.


41


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


templatives, and now I pray you to declare
and expound to the common people, these
double* words that be hard to understand,
to their understanding; [so] that some, by
adventure, may come to this Being, by
which this book may show to all the
very light of truth and the perfection of
charity of those who preciously be called
and chosen of God and sovereignly be loved
of him.”

“ Reason,” saith Love to this, “I will
answer for the profit of those for whom
thou makest to us this piteous request. |
Reason,” saith Love, ‘‘ where be these double °
words that thou prayest me to discuss for
the auditors of this book, who live in ‘ will
and in desire,’} the which book we call The
Mirror of Simple Souls >”

“To this I answer, Lady Love,” saith
Reason, “‘ for this book saith great marvels
of this soul, which saith she recketh not of
shame nor of worship, nor of poverty nor
of riches, nor of ease nor of dis-ease, nor of
love nor of hate, nor of hell nor of paradise. -
And also it saith, that this soul hath all, and —
she hath naught; she wotteth all and she
wotteth naught; she willeth all and she


* 7.e., ambiguous, difficult.

+ 7.e.. whose spiritual life is still governed by
“‘ will and desire.” Cf. teaching of St John of the
Cross.

42


Ch. 15] SIMPLE SOULS


willeth naught. Nor desireth she,” saith
Reason, “‘ despite nor poverty, nor no martyr-
dom nor tribulations, nor sermons, nor
fastings, nor orisons. And she giveth to
nature all his askings without grudging of
conscience. Without fail, Love,” saith
Reason, “‘ this may none understand by mine
understanding, unless they learn it of you
by your teaching; for my counsel is—as the
best that I can counsel—that men [should]
desire despite and poverty and all manner
of tribulation, masses and sermons, fastings
and orisons. And that men [should] remain
in dread of all manner of loves whatever
they be, on account of perils that might
happen; and that men [should] desire
Paradise sovereignly, and also that men
should fear of going to hell, and that they
refuse all manner of worships* and temporal
things, and all kinds of ease, taking away
from nature all that she asketh, save only
that without which they might not live,
after the ensample of suffering that our Lord
Jesu Christ suffered. This is the best that
I can counsel,” saith Reason, “ to all those
that live under mine obedience. And
therefore I say that none shall understand
this book [according to] mine understanding,
unless they understood it by the virtue of
Faith, and by the strength of Love, that be
* 7.e., honours.


43


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


my mistresses, for I am obedient to them in
all. And yet,” saith Reason, “thus much
I say, that who hath these two cords in his
heart—the light of faith and the strength
of love—he hath leave to do what pleaseth
him, [as] witness God himself, who saith
to the soul: ‘Love! love! and do what ye
will.’ ”

“ Reason,” saith Love, ‘‘ thou art full wise
concerning things that appertain to thee.
Thou wouldest have answers to these words
aforesaid, and thou askest what it is? It
is well asked, and,” saith Love, “I will
answer thee to all thy askings.”’ d

“ Reason,” saith Love, “‘I certify thee
that these souls, whom Fine Love leadeth,
they have as lief* shame as worship, and
worship as shame; and poverty as riches and
riches as poverty; and torments of God and
of his creatures, as comforts of God and of
his creatures; and to be hated as loved and
loved as hated; and hell as paradise and
paradise as hell; and little estate as great, and
great estate as little. This is to say, in.
sooth, that they neither will nor not-will,
any of these prosperities nor any of these
adversities; for these souls have no will but
[for the] thing that God willeth in them.
And the divine will calleth not these perfectT

* j.e., they are as willing to have.
+ MS. “ surmounted.”


44


Ch. 15] SIMPLE SOULS


creatures, with such encumbrances* as we
have here devised. I have said before,”
saith Love, “that these souls have as lief
[to endure] all manner of adversities of heart,
for body and for soul, as prosperities, and
prosperities as adversities. This is sooth,’
saith Love, “ if it come to them, since their
will is not the cause: the souls know not
- where the end lieth, nor for what cause God
will find their salvation, nor the salvation of
their even-Christians, nor for what reason
God will do righteousness or mercy, nor for
what cause God will. give to the soul the
excellent gifts of the goodness of his divine
nobility. And for this reason, the free soul
hath no will to will nor not-to-will, but only
to will the will of God, and suffer in peace
his divine ordinance.”

* “ Encumbrances ”—i.c., hindrances, spiritual
unguietness. The divine will does not call these
exalted souls (not perfect yet, but having vocations
to perfection) with (i.e., does not call them onwards
in the way of union), if they retain these encum-
brances of desire and anxiety.


45


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


CHAPTER XVI


HOW THIS SOUL HATH ALL AND SHE HATH
NAUGHT; SHE WOT ALL AND SHE WOT
NAUGHT; AND OF THE SACRAMENT OF
THE ALTAR; AND HOW THIS SOUL WILLETH
ALL AND SHE WILLETH NAUGHT, AND HOW
THIS IS UNDERSTOOD


“YET Love,” saith Reason, “stand by my
question, for this book saith, that this soul
hath all and she hath naught.”

“Tt is sooth,” saith Love, “ for this soul
hath God in her by divine grace, and whoso
hath God, hath all. And it saith, that she
hath naught, for all that this soul hath of God
in her by divine grace, it seemeth [to] her
naught. Nor is it more in comparison with
that which she loveth, which is in him; which
he giveth to none but to himself.* And by


* The soul’s possession of God in herself seems
to her nothing compared with the fulness of the
transcendent life of the Trinity as it exists in itself.
It is this life of God in himself which is the object ~
of her worship and love, and her treasure being
thus hid with Christ in God, even the possession of
God within herself becomes a secondary “‘ love.”’

It is because the soul’s very Being is thus focussed
in the divine life that she can be indifferent to all
lower material and spiritual ‘‘ desires and wills”;
indifferent as to whether pain or pleasure, morti-
fication or prosperity befall her.


46


Ch. 16] SIMPLE SOULS


this understanding this soul hath all and she
hath naught, she knoweth all and she
knoweth naught. She knoweth all,” saith
Love, “by virtue of faith, that God is
Almighty, all wisdom and all goodness, and
that God the Father hath done the work of
the Incarnation and the Son also, and the
Holy Ghost also. So that God the Father
hath joined and oned human nature to the
person of God the Son, and God the Son
hath joined it to the person of himself, and
God the Holy Ghost hath joined it to the
person of God the Son. So that God the
Father hath in him only one nature, [a]
nature divine; and God the Son hath in him
two natures, that same nature divine, and
[a human] nature of soul and body. And
God the Holy Ghost hath in him this same
nature divine. ‘This to believe, this to say,
and this to think, is true contemplation.
He is one might, one wisdom, and one will:
and only one God in three persons, and three
persons in one God. This God is over all in
his divine nature, but themanhood is in heaven
glorified and joined to the divine person of
the Son, and [beside that] only in the holy
Sacrament of the Altar. This divinity and
this manhood, true Christians receive when
the holy Sacrament is ministered unto them.
How truly this manhood dwelleth with them,
Faith teacheth it, and this clerks know.”


47


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


*“ And we shall tell you,” saith the Light
of Faith, “ how this humanity dwelleth with
them, as thus by [a] similitude: Take this
sacrament and put it in a mortar with
other things, and pound this sacrament so
that you may not see nor feel [aught] of
the person that you have put in. I tell you
forsooth,” saith Faith, ‘‘ that it 7s not now,
since it may not be seen nor felt.”” To this
you may answer, “‘ Where has it then gone >?”
“Nay,” saith Truth, “ it was, and now it is
not, understand wholly of the humanity.
Then may ye ask if it went as it came. I


tell you,” saith Truth, “that the humanity


of Christ Jesu neither cometh nor goeth.”
“And how may this be?” saith Temptation.


M. It is thus that the manhood of Christ
Jesu never cometh nor goeth. But by
his divinity and by his divine might, and
by the virtue of his holy word, the host
turneth into his precious body of flesh
and blood.

His glorious body that is in heaven and
knit to the divine person of the Son, -
cometh not down into the host, but the
host turneth into him, as it is aforesaid.
So that it is verily his own precious body,
that for us suffered death: thanked and
worshipped be he ever therefor. Thus
the divine might hath ordained this worthy
sacrament. WN. 48


Ch. 16] SIMPLE SOULS


“The saints that be in heaven should see
him in none other likeness than we ourselves
do if they saw him in such a likeness [1.e., in
the Host] as we see him; but they see by
understanding of spirit. For, to see the
humanity of Jesu Christ in the Sacrament
of the Altar, glorified, except by the under-
standing, that doth not appertain to the glory
of those in glory. Therefore they see him
not glorified, except by understanding, and
we see him by virtue of faith, contradicting
therein the reasoning of our wits [which tell
us] that we see but bread, nor feel nor savour
nor smell [aught else]. But our faith with-
saith* all that and believeth verily and soothly,
without any doubt, that it hath not whiteness
nor taste nor smell, but [is] the precious body
of our Lord Christ Jesu, very God and man.
Now we see him by faith. So do not they of
glory, for they that be glorified use not of
faith: they see not by faith as we do. In
this secret, the divine Trinity hath ordained
the holy Sacrament of the Altar to nourish
and to sustain holy Church,” saith the soul
of Faith, illumined by the divine Trinity.
“Such is the ordinance of the Sacrament of
the Altar in [the] knowing of him [according
to] my belief, through divine might.”

‘¢ Marvel not,” saith Courtesy, “of the
goodness of Love, though we, for love, tell

* 7.e., denies.


49


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


you these things. For I tell you truly, that
none may come to [a] deep foundation, nor
to high edification, unless they reach it by
the discrimination of great natural intelli-
gence, and by the gladness of the understand-
ing of the spirit. And, moreover, a creature
may not seek to know too much by asking*
the divine will; for the understanding that
giveth light, showeth to the soul [the] being
that she loveth. And the soul that receiveth
by light of understanding the nighing and the
knitting,} in the accord of union in plenteous
love, seeth the being where she aims at having


her dwelling place; heareth gladly the light


of knowing,t that bringeth her tidings of
love; and then she would be made the same,
so that she had but one will in love, and that
is the sole will of him that she loveth.”

““ Reason,” saith Love, “‘ I answer thee, for
I have said, that a soul that is made free
knoweth all; and she knoweth naught. She
knoweth by the virtue of faith that which she
needeth to know for salvation; and she
knoweth naught, for she knoweth naught of .

* 7.e., by questioning.

+ “‘ The nighing and the knitting ”—7.e., the being
made near and the union.

+ Note the mixed metaphor, “seeingthebeing . . .
hearing the light of knowing’’; the identification of
light with sound as the medium of the divine com-


munication is suggestive, and may be paralleled from
other mystics. Cf. Rolle’s Fire of Love.


50


Ch. 17] SIMPLE SOULS


that which God hath in him, of him, for him,
that he giveth to none but himself. T hen
by this understanding this soul knoweth all
and she knoweth naught. She willeth and
she willeth not. For this soul,” saith Love,
“ willeth so perfectly the will of God, that
she cannot will and may not will but the will
of God. Insuch fa] prison love hath reclused
her. And she willeth naught, for it is so
little this that she willeth and that God willeth
in her, in comparison with this that she would
will, which she may not have, [namely] that
[which] God wills her to have [ultimately].*
And this [also, namely] that her will is
naughted in respect to her sufficiency, which
was never given nor never shall be given;
that is the meaning of willing the will of God,
as it is said before, then by this understanding
this soul willeth all and she willeth naught.


CHAPTER XVII


HOW THESE SOULS SO SET THEIR THOUGHTS IN
THE TRINITY AND BE SO DIVINE THAT
THEY REST THEM NOT IN THINGS THAT
BE PASSING OR MADE


Tus daughter of Sion desireth neither masses
nor sermons, fastings nor orisons.


* i.¢., His love—ultimately, and moreover her
will.
51


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


““ Why so ?” saith Reason. ‘“‘ Lady Love,
it is the food of holy souls !”

*“Tt is true for them that crave,’’* saith
Love, ‘‘ but this soul craveth not, for she
hath in her inwardnesst no nature to desire
anything that is outside herself. Now
understand, Reason,’”’ saith Love, ‘‘ why do
such souls desire these things aforesaid, since
it is so, that God is over all, without that, as
well as with all that.

“This soul hath neither thought, word, nor
work, except for the exercise of the divine
grace of the Trinity; she is not troubled on
account of sin that she ever did, nor for the
suffering that Christ Jesu suffered for her,
nor for sin, nor for distress§ that her even-
Christian have.” ||

“* Ah God,” saith Reason, ‘‘ what is this


* Crave, desire, and long spiritually.

T 2.e., disposition.

£ z.e., God is sovereign in any case, without all
the extra labours of love by which souls seek to
prove their loyalty. He is served without it as well
as withit.

§ MS. “disease.” Throughout dis-ease =dis-
tress, trouble, anxiety.

|| This statement of the degree of indifference to
be reached by the soul is put in an extreme and
provocative form to call forth a challenge. Some-
thing must be allowed throughout for the form of
the jeu-parti or dialogue in which the opposite sides
are stated in the most extreme terms. Here the
answer of Love silences adverse criticism.


§2


Ch. 17] SIMPLE SOULS


to say? Love! teach me the understand-
ing, who hast given me peace concerning
my other questions !”

“ This is,” saith Love, “ that this is not
with her,* nor may she have this of herself,
for her thought is set in that [which is]
peaceable, that is, in the Trinity. She may
not thence move nor have dis-ease, as long
as her beloved is at ease, though any [should]
fall into sin, nor for sin that ever was done.
It displeaseth her will, and so it doth God;
it is his own displeasure that to this soul
giveth such displeasure. In sooth,” saith
Love, “ but the Trinity hath in him no dis-
ease for such displeasing, no more hath this
soul that in him is set and by him led. But
if this soul, that is thus high set, might help
any of her even-Christians, she would help
them at their need with all her might. But
the thoughts of this soul be so divine, that
they rest not so much in things that be passing
nor made, as to conceive any dis-ease for
[them] in her inwardness, since God is good
beyond [all] comprehending.”


* She is not preoccupied; the thoughts stated
above are not always in her mind, nor does this come
to her of herself.


53


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


CHAPTER XVIII


HOW THIS SOUL GIVETH TO NATURE ALL THAT
IT ASKETH WITHOUT GRUDGING OF CON-
SCIENCE; AND HOW THIS IS MEANT


THIS soul giveth to nature all that he asketh
without grudging of conscience, for all
covetousness* of nature is mortified in these
creatures; and therefore the law of our Lord
Jesu Christ is within such life enclosed, and
the divine gifts be above this law. ‘‘Thisis |
sooth,” saith Love, “ that this soul sets not »
so much prize nor love on temporal things,
that she could win [anything] in refusing
nature’s askings; wherefore then should she
make [it a matter of] conscience, to give
nature that which is his due? But such
nature is so well ordered by its conjunction
in union with the divine love, to which the
will of this soul is joined, that she asketh
nothing that is against the ordinance of the
divine righteousness. But these creatures.
that be thus excellent, that men dare not
speak openly in special of their ways, by the


* MS.“ properties ”’—probable translation of O.F.
propriété—the technical term for self-love, covetous-
ness, spirit of proprietorship. Cf. here Rom. vii
and vili, and seventeenth-century use of term in
Fénelon.

54


Ch. 19] SIMPLE SOULS


use of which these souls have Being, unto
good understanding; but mis-sayers taste
not of such understanding. I have said
before,” saith Love, “that men dare not
speak openly of their usages; without fail,
no ! on account of the simple understanding
of other creatures who might to their damage
misunderstand it.”


CHAPTER XIX


HOW THESE SOULS HAVE NO HEAVINESS AT
HEART FOR THINGS THAT THEY TAKE; AND
OF THE PEACE THAT THEY HAVE IN TAKING
THE NEEDFULNESS OF NATURE


< THESE souls,”’ saith Love, “that such be, as
in this book is devised, which toucheth some
thing of their usages; they have by righteous-
ness of their being—which is the pure divine
being—such condition, that if they had
naught and were certain that they should
live unto the day of judgement, they might
not have heaviness of heart one hour, for
thing that faileth them, nor spend a time to
seek work for that which faulteth them, for
all the gold of the world; except ata time when
nature hath a need [in] which it is lacking,
[that they may] give to nature that which is
his. And if they have anything, these that
be such, few folks wit where they be, but it


55


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


behoveth that there be [men who] by the
goodness of God, in whom is all bounty,
[should supply something] to sustain the
faith of Holy Church.* And if they wist
that others had more need than they, of
thing which they have, they would not deny
it them, though they were certain that never
should grow wheat nor corn nor other
sustenance. This is sooth,” saith Love,
“of this let no one doubt, such is their
nature by pure righteousness and such
righteousness is divine righteousness, which
to this soul giveth a portion.” d

“This is right,” saith Divine Right, “ it »
behoveth that all righteousness in her be
fulfilled. And it withdraweth if she with-
holdeth anything that is hers from the
perfection of peace of charity in which she
lieth; all this is her right food. Why should
such souls have conscience to take that which
they lack, and that which is theirs, when
they have need? It were to such souls a
default of innocence and encumbering of
peace, wherein this soul resteth from all.
things. Who is he that hath [a] conscience —

* These souls do not allow themselves to be
anxious concerning that which they lack, nor go out
of their way to supply their own needs unless it be
a real necessity of Nature. Even if they have some
possessions, they themselves are hidden from men.


But it is necessary that some men should supply the
needs of those who live by Faith in Holy Church.


56


Ch. 20] SIMPLE SOULS


to take the four elements that he needeth—
the light of the welkin, the heat of the fire,
the moisture of the water, and of the earth
that sustaineth us? We take the service of
the four elements in all the manners that
nature hath need, without grudging of
reason, as we do other things. These souls
use of all things made, of which nature hath
need, with such peace of heart as they do
of the earth, that they go upon.”


CHAPTER XX


HOW THESE SOULS CAN NO MORE SPEAK OF
GOD AND WHAT THEIR CUSTOM IS


« Try have a good foundation,” saith Love,
“ and high edification that resteth them of all
things. Such creatures, they can no more
speak of God, no more than they can say
where God is. No more can they say truly
what good God is. For whosoever it be
that speaketh of God, when he will, and to
whom he will, and where he will, he may
doubt.’’*

“This is sooth, without fail,” saith this
soul, “nor did he feel the true tidings of


* The excess of “‘ speaking about” God leads to
dissipation of spirituality and a reactionary mood
of aridity in the emotions and doubt in the intellect
ensues.

57


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 3


divine love that maketh the soul at all times
abashed without her perceiving [it];* for the.
very tidings, refined, purified by divine love
which are without [the intervention of
creatures] and given of the Maker to the
creature, truly take away such usages. For
this is the custom of such souls, much to
comprehend and soon to forget by the
subtlety of the Beloved.”


CHAPTER XXI


WHAT KNOWLEDGE, FAITH, HOPE AND CHARITY
HAVE OF THESE SOULS, AND WHO HATH THE ~
VERY KNOWLEDGE OF THEM, AND HOW
VIRTUES BE COMMANDED FOR THE SOULS,
AND NOT THE SOULS FOR THE VIRTUES,
AND OF MORTIFYING WILL AND DESIRE


“AH, Holy Trinity,” saith Faith, Hope, and
Charity, ‘‘ where be these perfected souls, that
be such as this book deviseth ?. What be they,
and what do they? Teach it us, for love,
that all wot, and so shall we appease them that
be dismayed or marvelled to hear this book,
for all Holy Church would marvel,” say these
three divine virtues, “‘ if she heard it.”


* That communication of divine Love is made
to the soul in such a hidden way that she does not
perceive it—but the fruit is that humility which
rejects those habits of “ talking about God.”


58


Ch. 21] SIMPLE SOULS


“ T leave it,” saith Faith himself.

“ Sooth,” saith Love, “ that ‘ Holy-Church-
the-little,’ that is governed by reason [would
marvel], but not that ‘ Holy-Church-the-
great,’ of [ours], saith divine Love, “* which
is governed by us.’”’”*

“ Now tell me,” saith Love to the three
divine virtues, “‘ why ask ye of us, what
these souls be and where they be, and what
they do ?

“ Truly,” saith Love, “ but if ye know that
no one can find them whom God hath made;
and where they be, ye know all three,” saith
Love, “for ye be with them in all moments
of time.t (Because ye three be to us good.)
And what they do, ye know also; but what
they be, as for to speak of their value and of
their dignity that know neither ye nor they,
then may Holy Church not know.”


* The distinction is not to be interpreted literally
or of any divisions in Holy Church. The author
refers probably to a rough classification of “* ration-
alists”’? and “ mystics”? among the teachers and
disciples within the general body of the Church—
each regarding itself as an electa ecclesia. ‘The
dramatic humour of the writer must be allowed for
in this and some subsequent passages.

+ Itis enough to know that God has hidden these
souls—yet are others near them, for they are always
“among us,” unknown. The following phrase
seems to be a parenthesis addressed by such souls
to others—‘ for these three modes of hiddenness
are a benefit to us.”

a9


THE MIRROR OF . [Div. 3


“Oh, for God,” saith Reason, ‘‘ who
knoweth then ?”

“« That [knoweth] only God,” saith Love,
“who hath made them and bought them;
and ofttimes this may so be wrought [in
them] that by his love alone they be both
fulfilled and naughted and forgotten.”’

“Why,” saith Love, “marvelleth Holy
Church, though the virtues serve the high
heavenly souls, and why should they not?
Are not all these virtues allowed, written and
commanded for the souls, and not the souls
for the virtues ? so that such virtues be made
to serve the souls, and these souls be made
to obey God and to receive the singular °
gifts God giveth to no creature that in desire
and in will dwelleth? Therefore who-
soever would have these gifts let him flee
desire and will, for otherwise they may not
have them.

**And why,” saith Love, “‘knoweth not
Holy Church* these Queens, King’s daugh-
ters, King’s sisters, King’s spouses? for
it may not be that Holy Church knew
them perfectly unless Holy Church were.
within their souls. And nothing that is —
wrought entereth within these souls, but
only that God who hath made them; so that
none knoweth such souls but God eich is
within these souls.”

* 7.e., does not Holy Church recognise.
60


Ch. 22] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER XXII


WHAT THE PERFECT BEING IS THAT GOD GIVETH
TO CREATURES; AND HOW NONE KNOWETH
THESE SOULS BUT GOD THAT IS WITHIN
THEM


** An, Lady Love,” saith Reason, “ be not
displeased, for yet I must have one more
question. And unless ye tell it me, I shall
be abashed* of this which ye say; [namely],
that none knoweth these souls but only
God that made them.”

“ Reason,” saith Love, “what is thy
question ?”

** T shall tell it you,” saith Reason. ‘‘ This
book saith thus, that none knoweth these
souls but God that is within their souls.
And it saith in another place before, that
none can find them, nor know them but they
whom Fine Love leadeth, and whoever should
find such souls he could say the truth thereof.
<< Then seemeth it,” saith Reason, “‘ that they
that be such, [would] know them that be
such, if they were where these be >”

“This is sooth,” saith Love, ‘‘ for these
that be such, if they were where these be,
they should know their fellows by their
usages, but most by the virtue of the gift
that is given them, which is singular.”

* Confounded by.
61 E


MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS _ [Div. 3


“ Singular !” saith Reason. “Oh, without —
fail! Singular is it, for I have in the hearing
thereof singular marvel !”*

“Reason,” saith Love, “one word hath
twain understandings, for though these that
be such have knowledge of the usages of
these souls, and that it is the most perfect
being that God giveth to creatures, never-
theless know they not these souls, nor the
dignity of them, for none knoweth them, but
only that Lord God that made these souls.”


* There seems to be a play on words, singular
meaning first, exceptional, unique, and then strange.


62


EDOLY DOLE DOLL DOL
FOOLS OSLSOTLAL OSS


DIVISION IV


CHAPTER I


HOW IT IS MEANT THAT THIS SOUL HATH TAKEN
LEAVE OF VIRTUES; AND OF A LAND OF
THIS SOUL; AND OF THE DESIRE THAT THEY
THAT LIVE ‘SIN WILL AND DESIRE’? MUST
HAVE


a LOVE,” saith Reason, “ yet I pray
() you to have another question; for
this book saith, that this soul hath
taken leave of virtues for evermore, and you
say that the virtues be always with such souls,*
and more perfectly than with any other.
These be two contrary words as meseemeth,”’
saith Reason; ‘“‘I cannot understand them.”’
“T shall satisfy thee,” saith Love; “this
is the truth, that this soul hath taken leave
of virtues, as concerning the exercise thereof,
and of all the desires that they ask; but the
virtues have not taken leave of the souls,
for they are always with them and perfectly
obedient to them. And in this sense taketh
the soul leave of them, and [yet] are they

* Cf. note supra, p. 18.

+ Cf, note are Pp. 299.

3


THE MIRROR OF (Div. 4


always with these souls; for I make an en-
sample [of it], as thus: If a man serve a
master, he is with him whom he serveth,
but his master is not with him. And if it
so fall that he gaineth much of his master,
and learneth so well that he is more rich
and more wise than the master, and is held
better and more worthy than he be, then
he that was master to him, seeth for certain
that he that was his servant is more worth,
and is more able* in all manner ways than
he, and dwelleth with him for to obey to him
in all. Right thus ought ye to understand
of these souls and of virtues. For at the
beginning, this soul did all that it might of
heart and of body, all that reason taught her
which was at that time mistress. And she
told her alway, that she should do all that the
virtues would, without any withstanding,
unto the death. So that Reason and the
other virtues were ladies and mistresses over
the soul. And this soul was truly obedient
unto all that they would command. Thus
must a soul do first in her beginning, if she
would live spiritual life. And now this soul
hath so much won and learned of virtues,
that she is above the virtues ;+ for such souls
have in them all that the virtues can teach,
and much more, without comparison. For
* MS. “more can.”
+ Above=in command of.


64


Ch. 1] SIMPLE SOULS


this soul hath in her the mistress of virtues,
who is called divine Love; which hath led
her, in them, in all, and [hath] oned her to
him, so that she is not ‘ with’ herself, nor
‘ with’ virtues.”

“With whom, then?” saith Reason,
which-would-by-asking-learn.

* At my will, Reason,” saith Love, “‘ who
have turned her wholly to me.”

“And what be ye, Love ?’’-saith Reason;
“be ye not a virtue with us, except that ye
are above us ?”

“Tam God,” saith Love. ‘‘ For Love is
God and God is Love; and this soul is God
by condition of love; and I am God by nature
divine. And this is hers by righteousness of
love, so that this precious beloved of me is
learned and led of me without her [working];
for she is turned to me in me. And such
end,” saith Love, “‘ taketh nurture.*

“This is the eagle} that flieth high; so

* And this is the end of nurture—7.e., upbringing.
The Latin version has: Et talis docta, dicit dilectio,
doctrina capit.

+ Cf. Dionysius Areopagita, Heavenly Hierarch.,
chap. xv, section viii (tr. Parker): ‘‘ The repre-
sentation of the eagle denotes the kingly and soar-
ing and swift in flight, and quickness in search of
the nourishment which makes strong, and wariness
and agility and cleverness, and the unimpeded,
straight, and unflinching gaze towards the bounteous


and brilliant splendour of the Divine rays of the sun,
with the robust extension of the visual power.”


65


THE MIRROR OF (Div. 4


right high and yet more high than doth any
other bird, for she is feathered with fine
love, and she beholdeth above others the
beauty of the sun. And the beam and the
brightness of the sun and the heat thereof
give her as food the gum of the high cedar.

““* And then,’ saith this soul to her caitiff
wretched nature, that so many a day hath
made her in servitude to dwell: ‘Dame
Nature,’ saith: she, ‘I take leave of you,
love is me nigh that holdeth me free of him,
against all, without dread.’

“Then,” saith Love, “she feareth* not
for tribulation, nor ceaseth} for consolation,
nor groweth less for what is taken from her.+ °
She is common to all, by largesse of pure
charity. And she asketh not of none, because
of the nobility and courtesy of her pure
bounty [with] which God hath fulfilled her,
by himself. And she is in all times demure
without heaviness, and glad without disso-
lution, for God hath in this soul hallowed
his name, and the divine Trinity hath there
his house.”

“© ye little [ones], who in will and in
desire dwell,” saith this soul, “take the
spoils§ of your food, and desire that ye might
be such, for he that desireth the least, unless


* MS. “ effrayeth.” + MS. “ stinteth.”
+ MS. ‘‘ aminuseth not for substraction.”
§ MS. * prey.”

66


Ch. 2] SIMPLE SOULS


he desire the most, it is not worthy that God
do to him the best of his goodness, on account
of the slackness of his poor courage. All
those that so live, they be always enfamined
or hungried.”


CHAPTER II


OF THE TWO STAFFS THAT THIS FREE SOUL
LEANETH HER UPON; AND HOW SHE IS
MORE DRUNK OF THAT SHE NEVER DRANK
NOR NEVER SHALL DRINK, THAN OF THAT
SHE HATH DRUNK


“Tus free soul,’ saith Love, “ leaneth
her upon two staffs,* the one on the right
side, and the other on the left side. On
these two staffs she is strong against her
enemies, as is a castle upon a hill, or that
is surrounded with water, which naught
may wash away.T
“The one of these two staffs that this soul
resteth on to keep her from her enemies,
is that she keepeth the gifts of her riches, that
is, the true knowledge that she hath of the
poverty of herself. This is the left staff,
the which she leaneth on alway at all times;
this is to her, great strength.
“‘ And the second staff, on the right side, is
* MS. “ potente”—1.e., crutch.
+ MS. ‘it may myn.”
67


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 4


the upraised knowledge of the Deity that this
soul receiveth and keepeth firmly. Upon
these two staffs she is apeased,* and taketh
no count of her enemies, neither on the right
side nor on the left side.

“ But she is abashed,”’ saith Love, “‘ by the
knowledge of her poverty, which she hath
of herself, that it seemeth her that it is a
humiliationt before all the world, as it is to
her.t And also she is drunk of the knowing
of the divine bounty, by the pure grace of
the Deity, of which she is always drunk, and
of the beholding thereof, fulfilled with laud
and hearing of divine love; not drunken of
that which she hath drunk, but she is right »
drunk, and more drunk, of that which she
never drank nor never shall drink.’’§

“Ah for God, Love,” saith Reason,
‘“‘ what is this to say, that this soul is drunk
of that she never drank nor never shall drink ?


* 7.e., made peaceful.

+ MS.“‘ embaschement.”

£ Or, ‘‘ that it is to all the world a humiliation, as
it is to her inmost being.”

§ The mystical exaltation of the soul proceeds
not so much from what she has already experienced
of the divine love, but from the knowledge of the
infinite possibilities of the content of the divine
being and his love. Here, again, the emphasis is
on faith rather than experience. She is inebriated
by her contemplation of the divine satisfaction of
the Trinity, which results from the perfect inter-
communion of the Three Blessed Persons.


Ch. 2] SIMPLE SOULS


It seemeth to me,” saith Reason, ‘‘ as I may
understand these words, that it is a greater
thing to this soul to be drunken of that which
her love drinketh and shall drink of the
divine tun* of his own bounty, than of that
which she hath not drunk and never shall
drink; for she is drunken of the drink that he
drinketh of the divine fausett of thesametun.”’

“ Tt is right,” saith Love, ‘‘ that the ‘ most’
has made her drunk;t not indeed that she
hath drunken of the ‘most,’ as it is said before;
but she hath it, for as much as her love hath
it; for there is between him and her no dis-
severance nor contrariety of nature what-
soever, through any discord of love. Love
maketh in her of righteousness this union,
that hath made her drink of the most of his
highest drink, and [it] never shall be other-
wise. It may well be that there be many
fausets in a tun, but the most clear wine and
the most fresh and profitable and the most
delectable and the most inebriating without
fail, is the wine of the sovereign fauset, of
which none drinketh but the Trinity. And
it is of this fauset, without which she


* Tun=measure.

+ Fauset=the tap of the cask, hence the Fountain.

+ A play on words, the ‘‘ most,”’ a word for wine,
ale; also, as will occur again later, used for God—
who is the more and most in relation to the lesser
revelations of himself.


69 E2


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 4


drinketh,* that a naughted soul is drunk !
a free soul, drunk !a forgotten soul, drunk !—
but right drunk and more than drunk! of
that she never drank nor never shall drink.
Hear this if ye understand it.

“‘ Now, there is in this tun of divine drink,
many fausets; this knoweth the manhood
that is knit to the person of God the Son,
who. drank of the most noble wine next the
Trinity. And the Virgin Mary drank » of
the one after, and of the most high drink
is this noble Lady inebriated. After them
drank the burning seraphins, with whose
wings these free souls fly.” j

“ Ah God,” saith Holy Church, “ how it +
behoveth her to attend and cleanly keep
herself, the soul that thus high flieth ada


CHAPTER III


OF THE FREEDOM OF THESE SOULS, AND HOW
THEY DO NOTHING THAT IS AGAINST THE
PEACE OF INWARDNESS


““Sycu souls,” saith Love, “have the mind
and the understanding and the will low, by
meekness and right perceiving, of knowing
by subtlety of wit in divine [things], and

* Itis of this measure (which she does not actually


drink =without which) that a naughted soulis drunk.
+ Cf. Dion. Areop., de hierarchiis celest.


7O


Ch. 3] SIMPLE SOULS


[are] right free in all places, of the love of
the Deity.”

“Ah, Love!” saith Reason, ‘“‘ when are
these souls in the right freedom of pure
love ?”

** When they have no desire,” saith Love,
“nor no feeling, nor in any time, affection
of spirit; for whosoever maketh use of such
practices, they be full far from the peace of
freedom, where few folk suffer them to
dwell. Nor do they do nothing,” saith
Love, “‘ that is against the peace of their in-
ward being, and thus they are in peace, in
the ordinance of Love.

““'The persons that are such, they are thus
called and fulfilled, that they have within
them no craving of anything. And without
them they have the beams of the divine
sun; they keep cleanness of heart, and none
but they. ‘These souls,” saith Love, “ have
knowing of the ‘more,’ without having
knowing, so they may not crave nor have
sufficiency of the least thing. Such souls
be all one in all things, and equable* in all
things, for they do not unfree} their being,
for nothing that may them fall;{ for right


* MS. “‘ common.”

+ z.e., repent of, grieve for their state whatever
itis.

+ These souls are all one in all things, and equable
in all things, and they are not troubled about their


FL


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 4


as the sun hath of God his light and shineth
upon all thing without taking any unclean-
ness in him, right so have these souls their
being, of God, and in God, without taking
any uncleanness in them for thing that they
see or hear.”

“Bh, Love,” saith Reason, “do these
souls feel no joy in their inwardness; nor in
their outwardness >”

“ No,” saith Love, “right as thou saidest,
for the nature of them is mortified, and the
spirit dead; for all willis from them departed;
thus live they, thus be they, in such a death
according to the divine will.”

“Now, Reason,” saith Love, “ understand «
thy question. He that brenneth hath no
cold, nor he that drinketh hath no thirst, and
this soul,” saith Love, “is so burnt in the
furnace of fire of love, that she is become
fire; so that she feeleth no fire, for she herself
is fire, by the virtue of love that hath brought
her into himself, by fine love. This fire
brenneth of him in him, in all places and in
all moments of time, without taking any
substance from Will, but of himself. For he
who feeleth [any thing] of God, through any
substance that he seeth or heareth outside


condition whatever may befall them, “ forthynken
not” =repent of, are displeased at; Bod. has “un-
freeth not.”


72


Ch. 3] SIMPLE SOULS


himself, or by effort that he maketh of
himself, that,* is not all fire, but there is
substance [mixed] with this fire. For the
labour of man and the desire to have some
substance outside himself, to increase his love,
that is but some shadowing or glimmering
of knowing of the bounty of God.t They
that burn with this fire aforesaid, without
seeking substance to have or to will, see so
clearly in all things, that they appraise the
things according as they ought to be appre-
ciated; for such a soul hath no substance in
her that might blemish her clear sight, since
she is made one [and] naughted by virtue of
very meekness; and she is open to all largesse
of perfect charity, and she is all one in God,
by the divine action of pure fine love.


* t.e., the emotional reaction from hearing or
reading about God or from seeing good things con-
nected with the service of God.

+ This fire of love so often described by mystical
writers is carefully distinguished here from all
psycho-physical phenomena. The author points
out that the natural human desire for devotion and
increase of love, for some outward assurance of God’s
love and demonstration of our human love, leads to
natural efforts which may procure some such pheno-
mena, experienced as fire. But these “ substantial ””
experiences are unsubstantial compared with the
purely spiritual “‘ fire,” that seeks no outward pheno-
mena, but issues in a spiritual and clear knowledge
and valuation of things as they are. This is achieved
only when the soul is purified from sin and open
to allin true charity.

73


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 4


“ This soul loveth no more anything in
God, nor never shall love, how good soever it
be, but only for God and because God. wills it.
Thus she loveth God in all things and all
things for God; so that for this love is this
soul alone, or all-one in the pure love of the
love of God. Such a soul is so clear in
knowing, that she seeth herself not in God,
nor God in herself.”


CHAPTER IV


HOW THAT CONSOLATIONS THAT COMFORT THE
SOULS BY FEELING OF SWEETNESS, IT
PROFITETH NOT A SOUL, BUT MEDITATION ©
OF PURE LOVE; AND HOW THAT HATH
ONLY ONE MEANING, AND WHAT THAT
MEANING IS


“Now understand the remnant, Lords
hearing, Lords loving! by a meditation of
[the] love [that is] without [the] hearing
[that cometh from] creatures, by such medita-
tion that souls receive in love without desiring
any of his gifts, which men call consolations -
that comfort souls, by feeling of sweetness
in prayer. These teach not the soul, nor
any other usages, but pure love; for he who
would have the comforts of God by feelings
oe consolation, he breaketh the price of fine
ove.


74


Ch, 4] SIMPLE SOULS


“ MEDITATION OF PURE LOVE” hath but
only one purpose, and that is this, that she
loveth alway truly, without willing any
guerdon. And this may not the soul do
unless she be outside herself;* for true love
ought not to desire any consolations that
come of excess [of desire].t No truly!
Meditation of pure love knoweth well more-
over that she ought not to occupy herself
so, but to follow his work:{ that is, to will
perfectly the will of God. And she must
let God work and be disposed || to his will,
for they that have a will that God should
do their will, willing to feel his comforts,
they trust not perfectly in his sole bounty,
but in the gifts of his riches that he hath to
give.”

“ Without fail,’ saith this soul, ‘‘ he ‘that
loveth well, he thinketh not either of taking
nor of asking, but of giving, without anything
withholding, that he may love truly. For
in him who that hath two purposes at one
time, the one lessens§ for the other. There-


x i.e., separated from self-interest, interest centred
in herself. + MS. “ of her abuse.”

+ MS. “ busy her so.”

§ Keep her attention fixed upon, occupy herself
with the work God is doing, as well as doing the work
he has given her to do. Cf. John vi 29.

|| MS. Bod. “‘ aworth of.” MS. British Museum, ~
“ alane of.”

g MS. “‘ lassith.”


75


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 4


fore true love hath but only one purpose, and
that is that she might alway love truly. For
of the love of her Beloved hath she no doubt,
that he doth that which is best. And she
followeth this, and she doth that which she
ought to do, and she willeth only one thing,
and it is that the will of God be alway in her
done.”

‘** She is right,” saith Love, ‘‘ for this is
all. She may not will by her own will, for
her will is not with-her, but it is [without any
leading thither], in him that she loveth.
And this is not her work, but it is the work
of all the Trinity that worketh in this soul
at his will.” 4


CHAPTER V


OF THE JOY OF THOSE SOULS AND OF THE AC-
CORDANCE OF WILL OF THE BELOVED AND
THE SOUL; AND OF THE UNION OF LOVE


*“*TuHIs soul,’ saith Love, ‘“‘swimmeth in
the sea of joy, that is, in the sea of delights,
streaming with divine influences. She feeleth
no joy, for she herself is joy. She swimmeth
and is drowned in joy, for she leadeth in joy
without feeling any joy. So is joy in her
that she herself is joy, by the virtue of joy
that hath brought her into him. Now is
the will of the Beloved and the will of this
76


Ch. 6] SIMPLE SOULS


soul turned into one, as fire and flame, for
love hath this soul all drawn into him.”

“ Ah, right, sweet, pure, divine Love,” saith
this soul. ‘‘ What a sweet union is this,
that I am drawn into the thing that I love
more than me; thereby have I lost my name
for loving, who so little may love! Thus
am I drawn into the thing that I love more
than me, that is, in Love, for I love only
Love.”’


CHAPTER VI


WHAT IT MEANS THAT THIS SOUL DOTH NO
THING THAT IS AGAINST THE PEACE OF
HER INWARD BEING, AND OF AN EXAMPLE
THEREUPON


“© Lapy Love,” saith Reason, “tell us what
it means, this that ye say: that then is the
soul in her right freedom of pure clean love,
when she doth no thing that is against the
asking of peace of her inward being ?”

“<T shall tell you,” saith Love, “‘ it is that
she doth nothing for aught that may fall,
that is against the perfect peace of her spirit.
This,” saith Love, ‘‘ the very innocents do.*
And the being, which we speak of, is very
innocence. Reason,” saith Love, “I give
thee an ensample, Behold the child that is
a very pure innocent. Doth he anything

* Very innocents =“ babes.”


77


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 4


or ceaseth he* to do [it], for high or for low,
except it please him >?”

“I grant well, Love,” saith Reason. “I
am wise of my question.’


M. This ensample that Love maketh of the
innocents that they do nothing nor leave
to do, for high nor for low, except it please
them, it meaneth, that these creatures
should not do for one or for another what-
ever might unrest the quiet of their spirits.
For these spiritual souls that be lovers of
God, to whom Love speaketh in the person
of one, to be understood for all; they are
so led and updrawn by the work of the
Holy Ghost, that they may not suffer that
anything touch them but the pure touch-
ings of love or things which lead thereto.
Nor may their spirit endure that the body
obey with [considered] deliberation, to
[set about] doing anything of the outward
works that might hinder this divine love,
or the usages that are the means thereof,
and lead towards this pure love. So they
stand to attend [upon], and wait to follow
the Lord’s work, who is sovereign master;
for if they do the contrary, truly, it will
unrest them. And therefore love biddeth
them that they do nothing that may break
the peace and rest of their spirits. N.

* MS. “‘ leaveth.” . y+ =instructed as to.


78


Ch. 7] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER VII


HOW THIS SOUL FINDETH GOD IN ALL THINGS,
AND OF THE INCOMPREHENSIBLENESS OF
GOD


“ Au, Lady Love,” saith Reason, “1 pray
you that ye summon* and call this soul to
hearken all that may be said to her, of him
that is all in all things.”

“This wot she,” saith Love, “for there
she findeth him alway; for a thing must be
found where it is. And for this, that he is
all by all, this soul,” saith Love, “‘ findeth
him over all, so that because of this, all things
are to this soul convenient; for she findeth
nothing but that she findeth God.

“ Now, Reason,” saith Love, “why wilt
thou that I call. or summon this soul to hear
of God, all that may be said ?”

“ Ror this,’ saith Reason, “ that she may
dwell in her being of innocence without
moving to hear you speak.” T

<¢ And shall I tell thee a truth 2” saith Love.
“TI certify thee, Reason,” saith Love, “‘and
trust me fully, that all that this soul hath


* MS. “assume.” O. Fr. sommer ?

+ She will not “ go forth” from her retirement
to hear you speak, by her own motion—only if you
call and summon her.

Ba


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 4


heard of God and all that might be said, is
not worth speaking of compared to that
which is in him, that never was said nor
never shall be, and may not be said: and that
is some thing that I have said, may not be
said. But yet more,” saith Love, “in order
to increase the joy and the sorrow of the soul,
and to remind her of all her graces.* Lady
Soul,” saith Love, “I tell you one thing for
all, and passing that, desire no more to hear,
for ye shall lose your pains; that all creatures
—this is to understand without none putting
out—that be and shall be, in the vision of the
sweet face of your spouse, have not com-
prehended of him, nor shall comprehend, «
in truth, nor in knowing, nor in love, nor in —
hearing, anything.”

“Ah, Love,” saith this soul, “‘ what shall
Ido? Certainly I believed never any thing
better than this that ye have told me right
now. But one thing, Lady Love, I would
tell you gladly, if I might.”

““ Sweet soul,” saith Love, “‘ now tell me
your desire, for I will hear it.”


* MS. “‘ takings.”


80


Ch. 8] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER VIII


A COMPLAINT OF THIS SOUL; AND OF THE
COMFORT THAT LOVE GIVETH HER, AND
HOW SHE IS NOT SUFFICED NOR APPEASED
IN THAT WHICH LOVE TELLETH HER, BUT
WHEREIN SHE JS SUFFICED, COMFORTED,
AND APPEASED; AND WHEREIN SHE HATH
THE FULL SUBSTANCE OF HER DEMANDS


* An right, sweet Love,” saith this soul that
is abashed, “for God, tell me wherefore
thought he to make me, and buy me again
unto redemption, in order to give me so
little, who hath so much to give ?—But it
dare not be said of anything that he wills
to do !—I know,” saith this soul, “that if
ever I had anything to give, I would not give
him so small a portion;* I that am naught
and he is all. Certainly, I might not with-
hold from him, but I should give him all,
if I had whereof to give. And that little that
I had of worth, I have not withholden it from
him, but all fully I have given him, body,
heart, and soul; this knoweth he. Now I
have given him all, so that I have not whereof
to give: it seemeth well by this that I would
gladly give him if I had anything to give.
And he that hath taken all that I have of
worth, he gave it me; and he hath all with-
* MS. “ do to him so little parting.”
81


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 4


holden! Eh, Love! for God’s [sake], is
this the manner of Love ?”

** Ah, sweet soul,”’ saith Love, ‘‘ you know
better than you say; for if you have given
him all, that is the best that may befall you,
for you have given him nothing but that was
his before you gave it him; and now, behold
what you have done for him !”

* Sweet Love,” saith this soul, ““ you say
sooth, I may not nor will not deny it.”

“© right sweet soul,” saith Love, “‘ what
would you that he gave you? Are you
not his creature? Will you have of your
beloved a thing that appertaineth not to ©
him to give, nor for you to take? Appease -
you, Lady Soul, if you believe me, for
there is none other thing than this for
you [to do] but that you should have the
gift of creature, soothly such as belongeth
to you to have.”

*“Ah, Lady Love,” saith this soul, ‘this
said you not to me when I knew you first.
You said to me that in the company of
Beloved and lover, there is no lordship
nor sovereignty—but there is! This I may.
clearly see since the one hath all and the
other hath naught, in regard of his all.
But if I.might. amend it, I would amend it,
and if I had as much might as he* hath,


* MS. “as ye be of worth.” An obscure passage
in MSS.
82


Ch. 8] SIMPLE SOULS


I would love him as much as you are
worth !”

** Ah right sweet soul,” saith Love, “ ye
may no more say! Now appease yourself!
For your will sufficeth to your Beloved,
and here he sendeth you word by me, that
ye may be certain of this that I shall tell you.
He shall love nothing without you, nor you
also love nothing without him! This is a
great privilege, and this sufficeth you, sweet
soul, if you believe me.”

“Ah, Lady Love,” saith this soul, “ for
God, be still of this, for truly I may not
cease, even to save all the world, if it might
be. For wit well this; I have nothing more
of worth than this, for nothing that I love
sufficeth me; for if it sufficed me this that
I love, I should descend from that little
that I have of love. But one thing sufficeth
me, Lady Love, that I shall tell you,” saith
this soul, ‘‘ that he that loveth more than
me—and I do not love myself except for
him—hath in him, that which ye have said,
that none knoweth but he only.* And since
I love him more than me, and he is the ful-
filled of all goodness, my Lord, my God, and


*x Love attempts to comfort “‘this soul”? by the
promise of great rewards for her present sense of
loss, but the soul refuses this. Her only comfort
is in the knowledge of the “sufficiency” of her
Beloved, according to Pure Love.


83


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 4


mine all, this is my comfort altogether,”’ saith
this soul. ‘“‘ For if I be discomforted of that
which I lack, I am recomforted againward,
in that he lacketh nothing. Within him, he
hath the abundance of all goodness without
any failing. This is the fulhead and the
substance of my peace, and the true rest of
my thought, for I love not myself but for
him. And since I love not myself but for him,
there faileth me nothing whatever, as I have
said afore.

**O without fail, no ! in good understand-
ing! Before this time I have had a desire
to hear speak of him, for no creature might
tell me of him, but that I heard it gladly .
with a good will. But Love hath now told
me the truth, and biddeth me pacify myself;
for all that men may tell me is naught in
comparison with that which is in him, which
may not be said, And more may nothing
avail me to hear of him than this, that my
love is not comparable to the least thing
that men may compare to him, wherefore my
love findeth none end in loving him, and
hath alway new love of him in him who is.
all love, however great he be! This is the
end of that,’ saith this soul, ‘‘ that men
can tell me naught, nor can I pacify myself
in this which Love saith of him; so that
I say to all, I have the full satisfaction of all
my questions in this, that men can tell me


84


Ch. 9] SIMPLE SOULS


naught! and such is the Beloved of my soul,”
saith the soul herself.*

“ Ah God! think how these souls endure
in their wit !”’ saith Discretion.

“TJ know well,” saith this soul, ‘‘ that Love
herself maketh them to endure, that is
mistress of this work.”


CHAPTER IX


HOW IT IS MORE IN THIS SOUL AND BETTER SHE
LOVETH THAT WHICH IS IN HER BELOVED
THAT SHE HATH NOT, NOR NEVER SHALL
HAVE, THAN THAT SHE HATH IN POSSES-
SION; AND HOW THE BODY FOR HIS
BOISTEROUSNESS AND FLESHLINESS CANNOT
SPEAK OF THE TAKINGS OF THE SPIRIT


“7 HAVE said before,”’ saith this soul, “ that
nothing faulteth me,f since that my love hath
all in him, of his rightwise nobleness, without
beginning and shall have without end.
Eh! what faulteth me then? I love not
myself nor him, nor all his works, but only


* This passage is extremely obscure in the MS.
It seems to imply a final defiance on the part of the
soul. She is glad almost that her Beloved is such
a one that men can tell her nothing adequate of him,
and even Love’s consolations fail to satisfy her high
conception of Pure Love. These passages should
be compared with Fénelon’s writings on Disinterested
Love.

+ 2.¢., is lacking.


85


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 4


for him. And that is more mine which he
hath—which I have not nor shall not have
—than is this which I have and shall have in
possession of himself.”

** Prove this !”’ saith Reason.

“‘ This is easy to prove,” saith this soul;
*“* see here the proof! I love better in sooth,
by an hundred thousand fold,” saith the
soul, “‘ one of the abundant goods that dwell
in him, than I do the gifts that I have and
shall have of him in possession. And for
this, I love better that which is in him out* of
mine understanding, than that which is in
him within mine understanding. And for
this reason that is more mine which he.
knoweth and I know not, than this which
I know and which is mine. For there where
is most of my love, there is most of my
treasure. And for this, I love better the
‘most’ of him that never I shall know, than
I do mine which I know. And therefore
is that ‘more’ mine, because the ‘ most’ of
my love [is in it]:+ witness of love himself!


* 7.¢., beyond.

t+ “The most” is the greater part of God, un-
known and unknowable; the soul loves better _
the infinitely greater hidden Deity than that small
part of him of which she has had experience.
“Where her treasure is, there is her love also,”
and therefore the hidden treasure is more truly
hers, ““the more is mine, because the most of my
love is in it.”

86


Ch. 9] SIMPLE SOULS


This is the end,’* saith this soul, “‘ of the
peace of my spirit. For one thing, Lady
Love, I will say, that if it might so be that one
of his creatures had in himself [by God’s
gift] as much power and will to give me joy
and glory—as all those receive of his
[heavenly] court—unless he himself properly
gave it me, I should refuse it without end,
rather than [that] I should take it or desire
it of any other, than of himself. Soothly
no, not for to have it evermore, for I might
not! Thus, of himself, he hath taken me, I
can have no ‘ will’ because of him; thus itis !

“‘O right sweet Love,” saith this soul, “ for
God’s [sake] suffer me, for I am all abashed
for him! Oh, what ask I of him? I wot
forsooth, that no more than men may tell
the waves of the sea, when the wind bloweth
hard and strong, no more may any creature
write or say the comprehendings of the spirit,
how little it comprehendeth of God. This
is sooth, for the body is too boisterous and
fleshly for to speak of the takingst of the
spirit. But men say in the world: better
is worth somewhat than naught.t Right so,
I tell you,” saith this soul, ‘that is better
and more worth to hear thing that is written
and said of God than if men heard naught.”


* 7.e., the sum. + 7.e., conceptions.
+ The medieval equivalent of “A bird in the
hand,” etc.


87


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 4


CHAPTER X


OF THE GIFTS THAT THIS SOUL HATH RECEIVED
OF HER BELOVED, AND WHAT HER USAGE IS


‘““O my Beloved,” saith this soul, ““ how can
I keep my wits* when I think on the gifts
of your bounty, the which you have given
me. You have given to my soul the vision
of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost, that my soul shall see without end.
Then since I shall see so high a thing as is the
Trinity, there shall not be taken from me the
knowing of the angels and of souls. And
since so great a thing is given me in gift,»
there shall not be withholden from me the
vision of the little [thing]; this is to [be]
understood of all those things that be less
than God. Ah, my soul,” saith this soul,
‘* what have you doneforme? Soothly, Lord,
I am so abashed of that which I know, that
I cannot but abash myself. I have none
other usage nor none other usage may have, so
overcometh me this knowledge continually.”


M. Take heed of these words, that the soul
saith, that she hath none other usage} nor
none other may have. That is to say,

_ * MS. “ how shall I dwell in my wits,” Lat. guam

insaniam,. . °
T 2.e., devotional practice.


Ch. 10] SIMPLE SOULS


during the time of that usage; for indeed
every usage standeth for the time of its
working; not that the soul is continually
in them, for that may not be. But every
usage is had* one after another, as love
worketh and as dispositions come and go,
but these usages are inhabited in the soul
and used customarily. Therefore it is
said in such terms as “ alway,” “ thus,”
‘in this wise.” Many such other words
in this book must be taken [thus]. N.


* Practised.


89


elle


DTV ASLO, ey.


CHAPTER I


OF THE VISIONS THAT THIS SOUL HATH HAD,
AND HOW NO HUMAN BODY MAY SEE
THEM; AND HOW THEY THAT KNOW
THEIR NOTHINGNESS SHALL DO NAUGHT;
AND WHAT IT BEHOVETH THEM TO DO
WHO CANNOT COME TO THE KNOWING
OF THEIR NAUGHT; AND OF THE DEFAULTS
OF THIS SOUL, AND BY WHOM THEY BE_
ACQUITTED


() LORD, though I had no other reason


to abash me than this, that you have

given to my soul the vision of all the
Trinity and of angels and of souls, that you
have not given to your precious body that is
knit and oned to the nature of the Father,
in the Person of the Son;* it would be a
marvel that I may see so much! For, Lord,
it is so great a thing to see the angels and the
* This seems to mean that our Lord had not the
beatific vision when he becameincarnate. St Thomas
taught that our Lord had the beatific knowledge in
the highest degree, beyond that of angels and the


blessed, from the moment of the Incarnation (In-
carnation, X, 2-4),
go


Ch.1}] MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS


souls to whom you have given the vision of
your face, that no human body is worthy to
see so great a thing, as be the angels and the
souls. Then may not the body see the
Trinity, since it may not see the angels and
the souls. And, Lord, this gift you have
‘given to my spirit, as long as you shall be
God.

“O for God, Love,” saith this soul, “‘ tell
me what I shall do, who have this in my
knowledge ?”

“1 shall tell you,” saith Love, “and
passing that, ask me no more! If you know
perfectly your naught,* you shall do naught.
And this naught shall tell you all. And if
you may not perfectly come to knowing your
naught, that is, [the] truth as far as you are
able, then it behoveth you to do something
in truth, according to the best that you may
do, or you shall destroy,” saith Love, “ that
same thing which you have conceived in
your spirit. If God hath drawn you into him,
it doth not become you,” saith Love, “ to
forget what you were, when he made you
first, and what you have been since—if you
took heed of your works—and what you are
and shall be, except [for] that which is of
God in yourself.”

‘“¢ Ah, Lord,” saith this soul, “‘ I am certain
that I have nothing more availing than are

* 7.e., nothingness, and so throughout,


gl


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 5


my horrible faults, for which faults you have
suffered death, to give me life. For, Lord,
my weening* is this, and it is truth, that
though none had sinned but I alone, you
would have bought my soul with your love,
late laid on cross for me, by the use of powers
ordained to destroy my sin. Then thus, my
Beloved, you have suffered all that you have
suffered in your sweet humanity for me, as
much as if none had sinned but I alone!
Lord, all this, I tell you, for me only! So
that I say, for as much passing this, as I have
naught that availeth, so much do you avail,
better than the best of mine, for which you
are given.

“And thus well you know, that I may
naught do and I am so greatly indebted.
O Lord God, right courteous and large and
free, acquit me of this debt, you that have
power all things to do!

“* Ah, without fail,”’ saith this soul, ‘‘ Lord,
so shall you do, and henceforward I will
your perfect will, in all things.”


* Opinion.


92


Ch. 2] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER II


HOW GOD HATH LOVED THIS SOUL WITHOUT
BEGINNING AND SHALL WITHOUT END;
AND OF THE OBEDIENCE OF REASON TO
THIS SOUL; AND OF THE ACCORDANCE OF
THE WILL OF GOD AND OF THIS SOUL;
AND OF HER PEACE AND OF PERFECT
CHARITY; AND OF GRUDGING OF CON-
SCIENCE


‘“<O RIGHT sweet Love,” saith this soul, “ grant
me my possession that I have of the Trinity.”

“Now tell your thought,” saith Love,
“for you ought not to hide it.”

“ Ah, Lady Love,” saith this soul, “ ye
have told me that he that is in him [and] of
him, shall be without beginning and without
end; that he shall never have anything with-
out me nor I without him.”

“This is sooth,” saith Love, “I am
pledge* of this.”

“Then,” saith this soul, ‘“‘ since he shall
never without end have nothing without me,
then right so, he loved never nothing without
me. And since it is so, that he shall be in
me, without end by love, right so have I been
loved of him without beginning.”

“Took what you say, Lady Soul!” saith


* MS. “ borrow.”


93 F


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 5


Reason; “ have you forgotten that it is so,
that it is not long agone, that you were not;
for God, right sweet soul, look that you err
not |” ;

“Tf J err in this holding, Love,”’ saith this
soul, “‘ you err with me, who make this to be
believed, to be thought and to be said.”

““ Now prove it, Lady Soul !”’ saith Reason,
“‘ this, that you have said.”

“ O Reason,” saith this soul, “‘ how blinded
thou art, and what trouble they have who by
thy counsel live! Reason,” saith this soul,
“ if I shall be loved without end, of the three
Persons in Trinity, I have been loved of them
already without beginning. For as well as
he shall love me without end, of his bounty,’
so have I been in the knowledge of his
wisdom, that I should be made by the work
of his divine might. Right as God is—that
is, without any beginning—so have I been
in his divine knowing, that I shall be without
end. Then,” saith the soul, “he loved of
his goodness the work that he should do in
me, of his divine might.”

“This is sooth,” saith Love, ‘‘ he is—and
never withheld [love] no more than he doth
now.”’*

““ Now may you hear, Reason,”’ saith this
soul, “‘ the witness of Love.”

“You shall be still now, for me, Lady

* An obscure passage in the MSS.


94


Ch. 2] SIMPLE SOULS


Soul,” saith Reason, “ since love leadeth you
and you not love; this is to say that love is
in you and maintaineth you and leadeth and
doth his will of you, without you. I dare no
more meddle of you since love governeth you,
but I promise,* Lady Soul, to you from
henceforth, peace and obedience with all my
might; for do it I must by strength, for Love
willeth it. I may not be there-against, but
I yield me to you in all,” saith Reason.

“ Now be the debts well returned:t} this
is right,” saith the soul, “for the great
nobility and courtesy of my spouse willeth
not to leave me in your service; neither in
yours nor others [leaveth he] his spouse, who
has learned of him; for he is the Spouse most
frees”?

“This is sooth, sweet soul,” saith Love,
“ 7 grant it you.” :

“Ah, for God, Lady Soul,” saith Reason,
“ think, say and do what you will, for Love
granteth it you !”

“© Reason,” saith this soul, “ how rude
thou art! If Love granteth me this, why
should he not? it is his own proper deed.
I have no ‘deed’ in me of myself, except
he do it himself, my Beloved in me. And
you, Reason, do you marvel of this ?” saith
the soul, “‘ that he willeth what I will. And

* MS. “ behote.”
+ “ The tables turned.”
95


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 5


will it he must, for I will not but only what
he willeth in me; and what he willeth that
I will. In this he hath set me of his cour-
tesy; that he willeth this that I will, nor he
willeth nothing that I unwill. So that by
this I have peace, Reason !” saith this soul,
““and we have, between him and me, true
accord.

“* O right sweet master of this work,” saith
this soul, “‘ how may I have this peace, who
know the great loss of my time ? Ah, Sire,
without fail I may, for your courtesy oweth
it me and your noblesse, since you have
peace, that I should have it also. So that
I witness, my beloved Lord, that you have
well quitted me of my debt, for I find no~™
thing in which I find not peace, however it
befall or hath fallen concerning my sins,
your peace dwelleth with me. O thou Lord
God !” saith this soul, ‘“‘ my sins may none
know in this world, as they be, in hideous
figure, save you. But they in heaven shall
have it in their knowing, all those that there
shall be; not to my confusion but to my
great glory; for this, my sweet God, that by
those sins in which I have made you wrath,
your mercy shall be known and your great
largesse, full of courtesy, shall be felt.”

** Sooth,”’ saith Love, “‘ the which courtesy
giveth peace in conscience to this soul,
whatever she doeth or leaveth to do.”

96


Ch. 3] SIMPLE SOULS


“Give, Lord,” saith this soul, “ to will
your will perfectly, for to will perfectly your
will is perfect charity.”

“ And who hath alway in his will perfect
charity, he should no more have grudging of
conscience,” saith Love, “for grudging of
conscience is naught else but a default of
charity. Nor for no other thing was the soul
made, but for to have in her without end the
being of pure charity.”


CHAPTER III


HOW ALL THAT THIS SOUL HATH SAID, IS SAID
OF LOVE BY THIS SOUL, AND OF THIS
LOSS OF TIME


“QO my Lord God,” saith this soul, “ what
have I said of you !”

“ Think,” saith Love, “‘ and see if you can
know your words.”

“ Ah, Lady Love,”’ saith this soul, “ you
have given me the knowing, and behold it
here! Naught is of such a nature, that
naught must benaught. Then it behoveth,”
saith this soul, “ that I be in certainty that
this which I have said is less than naught.
But this that is said in me or by me, is of
divine knowing, Lady Love,” saith this soul,
“ you have said it, in me and by me, of your

OF


THE MIRROR OF [Div.'5


bounty, for my profit! To you be the glory,
and to us the merit. This belongeth not to
auditors that hear this book.

“© Jatest loved in all moments for me!
O courteous without measure, this ought to
seem well to me,” saith this soul, “ when you
will meekly suffer. O Lord, you will suffer
more gladly and meekly than any creature
may say it, notwithstanding my faults that
be without number, and without recovering
of this loss [of time], for mercy that is in you;
for it behoveth you to keep your justice. It
may not be that time lost may ever be re-
gained, and as oft as I have retired or with-
drawn myself from loving and knowing and
lauding and thanking you, so many moments ©
of time I have been idle, and into these great
defaults lam fallen. O Lord, lama deepness
of darkness, and in this darkness you will
put me in, there dwell not the gifts of that
grace of which love hath devised* us.”

“ Devised !”? saith this soul, “‘all that love
hath said of this grace, by me, creature, it is
but japings, in comparison with his work.”

““O sweet soul,” saith Reason, “‘ I have
well heard this that ye have said; more gladly
heard I never thing, so that I understand
perfectly,” saith Reason, “ Lady Love, that
this may none do but you alone, of whom
this gift is given.”

* O.F. deviser; to recount, narrate.


98


Ch. 4] SIMPLE SOULS


“ Sooth,”’ saith Love, “ of such a person
that is the Holy Ghost himself [is this gift
given.]”

“Therefore I say,” saith Reason, “ that
I may not understand it; but meseemeth
that this which this soul doth, is so well
done,” saith Reason, “‘ that I will serve her
in all as her poor servant. And I acknow-
ledge that I may have no greater joy nor
greater worship than to be servant to this
soul.”

“* Do you know this ?” saith Love, “ you
could do no better than to know this !”


CHAPTER IV


WHAT ORDINANCE IS, AND HOW THAT THE
DEITY FELT NOT WHAT THE MANHOOD
OF JESU CHRIST SUFFERED, AND HOW IN
ALL THINGS BEHOVETH TO HAVE DIS-
CRETION


“ Ay right sweet soul,” saith Reason, “* what
shall I do for my people that I have to govern,
that shall no more see of this soul’s ordinance*
in her outward usages ?”

“Why ?” saith Love, “is there other
ordinance but this >?”

“‘ Nay,” saith Reason, “ not for them that
see nor for them that be chosen in this

* 7.e,, method.


99


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 5


assize: but of such be few in earth, I dare well
say.”

“Now, Reason,” saith Love, “ what
callest thou ordinance >?”

“1 call ordinance,” saith Reason, “ the
life of works of virtues [lived] continuously,
by thy counsel and that of Discretion, after
the ensample of our Lord Jesu Christ.”

‘“‘ Reason,” saith Love, ‘“‘ this which the
manhood of Jesu Christ suffered, the Deity
felt it not. Right so J tell thee,” saith Love,
“by ensample of this soul, it fareth with her.
This which thou speakest of virtues and of
the reason,” saith Love, “‘ this soul recketh
naught of; she may better do, forlove worketh .
in her who hath led her into him, so that she °
herself is love. And Love hath in him no
discretion. In all things it behoveth to
have discretion, except in love. I give thee
an ensample. [It is as] if a lord would
have tribute in his land because men owed
it him by rights; for the lord owes not tribute
to his servants, but the servants owe it to
their lord. Right so I tell you, Reason,”
saith Love, ‘‘all things owe me tribute.
There be works of virtues, counselled of:
reason, ended by discretion; but they alone
that be updrawn of love and led by love,
they owe nothing but love; they are there-
fore as much quit as love hath quitted them.”


I0O


Ch. 5] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER’ Y.


WHO BE PERFECTLY WISE, AND WHO BE DIPPED
IN MEEKNESS, AND HOW THIS SOUL IS
BECOME NAUGHT IN HER BEHOLDING; AND
HOW SHE IS DEAD TO ALL FEELINGS IN-
WARD AND OUTWARD, AND WHAT CASE
THAT SOUL IS IN, IN TIME OF THIS USAGE


“T CALL,” saith Love, “ this soul perfectly -
wise, among my chosen—but little folk
cannot praise nor know of worthy value.”

“ Ah, Lady Love,” saith Reason, “whom
call ye wise ?”

“Those that are dipped* in meekness,”
saith Love.

“Who be those that be dipped in meek-
ness ?”’ saith Reason.

“They,” saith Love, “ that in nothing are
wrong, and know that they are in nothing
right. They that be in this knowing of their
wrong and of their right, see so clearly, that
they see themselves under all creatures in
filth of sin; and that the enemy is servant to
sin. And this soul hath long seen that she
is under sin and serveth sin and without
comparison, passing all creatures, is naught.
And that she is less than naught under them,
without any comparison, as between herself

x Possibly ‘‘ deeped.”
tenga i Aah


°


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 5


and them, so much evil is of her [nature] and
of her works. And because of this behold-
ing, is this soul become naught, and less than
naught in all her beholdings. She hath long
heard say, by the Holy Ghost, that God
setteth the least little at the most high
[worth], of his sole bounty, and therefore,
this soul hath no distress because of sin that
she ever did, nor hope on account of thing that
she might do, but only in the goodness of
him that is her Beloved. And the hid treasure
of his sole goodness hath so, in inwardness,
annihilated her,* that she is dead to all feelings
both inward and outward, so that such a soul
doth no more ‘ works,’ for God nor for her
soul. She hath wholly lost her wits,y} in”
this usage, so that she cannot seek God nor
find him in her soul, nor lead herself.”


CHAPTER VI


HOW THIS SOUL IS NOT WITH-HERSELF AND
WHERE SHE IS; AND HOW BY NAUGHT
WITTING AND NAUGHT WILLING SHE
HATH ALL


“ Tus soul,” saith Love, “fis not with-her-
self, and. she is excused for everything; and
he in whom she is, made his work for him-
Msi inentised.”’ O.F. anéantt.
+ 2.e., powers of reflection in the time of prayer.
eCSy &) 102


Ch. 6] SIMPLE SOULS


self; he hath her well acquit—witness of God
himself,” saith Love, “that is the worker
of this work, to the profit of this soul, which
is not with-herself.’’*

“* Ah, Love,” saith Dread, “‘ where is this
soul then, that is not with-herself ?”

*“'There where she loveth,” saith Love,
** without her witting,t and therefore liveth
this soul without grudging of conscience,
She doth nothing by her inward [guiding],
for whoso doth anything by the moving of
his inwardness, he is not,”’ saith Love, ‘‘ with-
out-himself, for he is with-himself, and hath
nature and reason with him. And he that
is dead of love,”’ saith Love, “‘ feeleth neither
reason nor nature, so that this soul willeth
none of all the states of Paradise, though
men laid them all in her choice. Nor they
unwillt none of all the torments of hell.
Though it were all at their pleasure to choose
any of these aforesaid, they desire not nor they
will not none of these.”

“Ah, what then, for God >” saith Holy
Church.

“This that she is,’’ saith Love, “in her
knowing.”

“And what is this ?” saith Holy Church.


* The reader is reminded of the interpretation of
“being with herself,” and the qualifying interpretation
of “* naught willing ” (pp. 18, 44, 53, 109).

+ Being conscious. + t.e., refuse.


103


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 5


“Right sweet Holy Ghost, teach it us !*
for this word passeth our scriptures, and so
we may not understand it by Reason, this
that you say. And she hath so abashed us,”
saith Holy Church, “that we dare not be
against her !”

“¢ Oh, Holy Church,” saith the Holy Ghost,
“ will you wit what this soul wot and what
she willeth? I shall tell it you,” saith the
Holy Ghost. ‘She wot but one thing,
that is, that she wot naught; and she willeth
but one thing, that is, that she willeth naught;
and this naught witting and naught willing
giveth her,’ saith the Holy Ghost, “all
the treasure fulfilled, that is closed in the |
Trinity, without end. ‘‘ Not,” saith the Holy ~
Ghost, ‘“‘ by nature divine, for that may not
be, but by the strength of love, for that be-
hoveth to be.” T

“Now Holy Church,” saith Love, “here
you have heard why this soul hath all.”

“ Sooth !” saith the Holy Ghost, “all
that I have received of the Father and of the
Son, who knoweth that she hath all that I
have,” saith the Holy Ghost, ‘‘ and the Father
and the Son have nothing but that I have it:
in me. Then hath this soul in her,” saith -
the Holy Ghost, “the treasures fulfilled of
the Trinity and enclosed within her.”

* See note infra, p. 300.
+ Introduction, pp. xliv-xlv.
104


Ch, 6] SIMPLE SOULS


“Now since it is thus,” saith Holy Church
to the Holy Ghost, “ it behoveth the Trinity
to dwell and live in her.”

“This is right,” saith the Holy Ghost,
“<< for as much as she is dead to the world, and
the world dead to her, that the Trinity
[should] inhabit her.”

“© very God, Holy Ghost!” saith Holy
Church.

“Sooth,” saith Love, ‘‘ Holy-Church-
under-this-Holy-Church ! for such souls,”
saith Love, “be properly called ‘Holy
Church,’ for they sustain and teach and
nourish all Holy Church. Not only they,”
saith Love, “but all the Trinity, through
them. This is sooth,” saith Love, “ of this
let none doubt.

“ Now, ‘Holy-Church-under-this-Holy
Church,’ ” saith Love, “‘ what will you say of
these, that be thus so much* above you, you
that use in all after the counsel of Reason ?”

“We will say,” saith Holy-Church-the-
less, “‘ that these souls be in life above us,
for Love dwelleth in them. And Reason
dwelleth in us. Love leadeth them, and
Reason leadeth us. But this is not against
us,” saith Holy-Church-the-little, “ but we
praise them among the glosses of our scrip-
tures.” T

* MS. “as best.”
+ See note infra, p. 301.
105


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 5


CHAPTER VII


HOW THIS SOUL BY ALL GIVING HATH ALL
RECEIVED


“* An, Lady Love,” saith Reason, ‘‘ we would
pray you if it pleased you, more openly to
speak of those gifts that the Holy Ghost
giveth to such souls, of his pure goodness;
so that no creature may be the worse,*
through her rudeness, by hearing of the
divine school.”

“© Reason,” saith Love, “alway thou
art rude and blind, thou and all the disciples ©
of thy doctrine; for he is full blind that hath
things before his eyes and seeth them not;
and thus seem ye!”

““T have said,” saith the Holy Ghost,
“that I shall give to this soul all that I
have given,” saith the Holy Ghost. “ It is
promised her of all the Trinity and granted
of his bounty, in the knowledge of wisdom
without beginning, all that we have. And
this is good reason,” saith the Holy Ghost,
‘that we withhold from such souls nothing .
that we have. For this soul,” saith the
Holy Ghost, “hath given us all that she
hath of worth, and the same that we have,
she herself hath given us by manner of

* MS. “‘ have damage.”
106


Ch. 7] SIMPLE SOULS


speech; for it is said, and sooth it is, that
good will is accounted for deed.’

“ And this soul,” saith the Holy Ghost,
“ig of such condition, that if she had in her
the same that we have, she would yield it to
us; all this—as we have it—without willing
any guerdon in heaven nor in earth, but right
according to our will alone.

“ Now We have all this,” saith the Holy
Ghost, “ of our very divine condition, and
this she hath given us by way of a ‘ partie,’*
that is, a thing in love of good will, in a
gamet of holy meaning. And for this,”
saith the Holy Ghost, “ that this soul hath
given us all that she hath, and all things that
she hath not also, by way of.a ‘ game,” it
behoveth,” saith the Holy Ghost to Holy
Church, “‘ that she be given that which We
have, by justice of love. We have in us,”
saith the Holy Ghost, “ this that is ours by
nature divine, and she hath it from us in her,
by justice of love, whatever she may bet”
saith the Holy Ghost.

“© Lord,” saith Holy Church, “ we
understand it and believe it forsooth, that
these be the gifts of your worthy noblesse,
in reward of love; for love may not be
rewarded at any time except with love.”


* “ By manner of partie,” a share, side of a game.
See supra, pp. xxviii and 302.
+ MS. “ dalliance.”
107


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 5


CHAPTER VIII


OF THE BEING OF THIS SOUL. OF THE USAGE
OF A SOUL THAT LANGUORETH FOR LOVE,
AND IN WHAT POINT A SOUL IS, THAT IS
DEAD IN LOVE; AND OF THE PROFIT AND
PEACE OF NAUGHT WILLING


“Tus soul,” saith Love, ‘‘ hath of old said
and heard that there is nothing that is so
great knowledge as is temperance; nor so
great riches as is sufficiency; nor so great
strength as is love. This soul,” saith Love,
“hath her mind and understanding and will,
low; all is one being, this is in God. And °
this Being giveth her being without know- |
ing nor feeling, nor willing any being, but
only the ordinance of God. This soul,” saith
Love, “‘ hath many a day languored for
love.”

“© Lady Love,” saith Reason, “‘ what is
the practice of a soul that languoreth for
love ?”

‘“* She warreth at vices,’
seeking virtues.”

** Ah, soothly Love,” saith this soul, “this
is a great war, and a perilous! Ah, right
sweet Love,” saith this soul, ‘‘ such life may
well discreetly be called languor and life of
war.”


>


saith Love, “ by


108


Ch. 8] SIMPLE SOULS


“ Now she hath so much enlanguored for
love,” saith Love, “that she is dead in love.”

“Ah, Lady Love,” saith Reason, EST Or
God, tell us this, in what point is a soul, that
is dead in love >”

“ She hath,” saith Love, “ taken end* at
the world, and the world hath taken end at
her. And so she liveth in God, and there
may not the vices find her. She is so ful-
filled in God that neither world nor flesh
nor enemy may grieve her, for they may not
find her in her works. So that this soul
liveth in the rest of peace, for created things
are naught to her. And because of this peace,
the soul liveth in the world without grudging
of conscience. Such a soul hath nothing of
‘will’; for this being should be our being,
for we have nothing more availing before
God than this, that we leave our will for his
will, and that we give perfectly our will to his
will, without willing anything but only the
measure of his work, according to the order-
ing of his bounty.”

“ To this I hold me,”’+ saith this soul, “here
I lack nothing since I will naught; for none
hath so much perfect peace as they only that
have naught of will.”

“That wit ye, Lady Soul,” saith Love.

“ Ah, without fail, so do I, Lady Love,”
saith this soul, “for I have perceived it by
* 7.e., bid farewell. + 2.e., I accept this.

109


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 5


certain proofs that I must be dead,* and so
am I.”’+

They have no will that nothing will, and
this soul hath her will given so that she hath
naught whereof to will, but the will of him
to whom she hath given her will. Such
folk live in freedom of charity that have
nothing of will: whosoever should ask them,
what they would? in sooth they would say,
** Nothing !”’


CHAPTER IX


HOW THESE SOULS THAT THIS BOOK DEVISETH BE
COME TO THE KNOWING OF THEIR NAUGHT; |
AND HOW BY THAT THEY BE COME INTO
BELIEVING OF ‘‘ MORE,” AND HOW THIS
IS MEANT


‘THESE that be such as this book deviseth, are
come to the knowing of their naught; that
is to say, they may not know of their naught
by any thing that is in them, for their knowing
is too little to know their loss; and so they
are come by believing of “‘more.’£ And
see here the knowledge of their believing !.


* 7.e., mortified.

yt An obscure passage in MS. “for myn pe his,
me has y caste. . . .”

£ 7.e., come by putting their trust in the ‘‘ more,”
which is God himself,


IIo


Ch. 9] SIMPLE SOULS


It is this, that men may know naught. No,
though men knew as much as men shall know
in heaven, or that might, passing that, be
compared by the comparison of a part; so
that all this that men shall know, were naught
in regard of the whole to which men com-
pared it. They might not put in this com-
parison, either his power or his wisdom or
his bounty, but without more, the knowing
of one sole spark of his pure bounty. Also
it should be naught, as in regard of the least
part that dwelleth in him, that is not known
but by him. That is, to understand it
better, that whoso knew of him all that is
said, it should be naught as in regard of the
great knowledge that dwelleth in him beyond
our knowing. ‘The least part of his bounty
is so great, in sooth, that men might com-
pare, by manner of speech, all that they
could, it should be naught in regard to the
greatness of the least part of his bounty.
We have not one spark of him in comparison
with the all of him.

“ Ah, ah, Lord God,” saith this soul,
“ what shall the soul do that this believeth
of him ?”

“© She shall do naught,” saith God, “ but
I shall do my work in her without her. For
by the knowing of her naught, and by the
believing in me [comes] the putting her at
naught, that she may naught do. So that

III


Lee eee eee eS eee ee


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 5


the knowing of this naught compared with
the greatness of all, hath acquitted her and
made her free, that she lacketh nothing.
No soothly! for as much as she willeth
naught.”

Now is this soul come to knowing of
“ more,” truly in this only, that she knoweth
not of this naught-in-God, compared with
the all-of-him.*

“Mercy God,” saith Reason, “dare we
call ‘ naught’ anything that is in God ?”

“Yea, and God wills,”’} saith this soul.

“How then soothly is this will naught,
that is given and shall be given of him to us ?
even though we had the same, that is said
in this writing, by comparison, if it might:
be so, [that] all should be naught in regard
of the greatness of one spark of his bounty,
that dwelleth in the knowing of him, beyond
our knowledge. Ah, ah,” saith then this
Soul, ‘‘ how great, then, is the All of him,
when this may be said of the least of him!
O right sweet Love,” saith this soul, “‘ that
only wit ye, and that sufficeth me.”

** Now ye wit how this soul is come into
believing of ‘more,’ and now shall I tell you,”
saith Love, “how she is come into knowing
of her naught; by this, that she knoweth


* She does not even know her own “ naught ”’
in God, because she is absorbed in contemplation of
his All. t MS. An God wills =if.

II2


Ch. Io] SIMPLE SOULS


that neither she nor others know [anything]
of her horrible defaults as compared to that
which is in the knowing of God.”


CHAPTER X


OF THE PEACE OF THIS SOUL; AND HOW SHE IS
ALL FREE BY NAUGHT WILLING; AND OF
THE DIVERSITY OF NAUGHT WILLING
AND WELL WILLING


“ Tus soul,” saith Love, “ hath not with-
held any will within her, she is fallen into
naught-willing and into certainty of naught-
witting, and this naught-willing and naught-
witting hath stilled and wholly pacified her.
This soul,” saith Love, “‘ holdeth the counsel
of the Gospel that saith: ‘Have the eye
simple, and so shall ye not sin.’* And this
soul is at peace concerning all that God
suffered for her, for she hath true intentiont
in all her purposes, and peaceable rest con-
cerning the deeds of her even-Christian.
For in all things wherein she abandoneth
judging, she maketh no judgement, except
always for the best.t This soul hath in all
places her peace, for she beareth always peace
with her, so that for this peace, all places


* Cf. Matt. vi 22 and Luke xi 34.
+ MS. “ entente.”
+ z.e., her judgements are always charitable.


113


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 5


be convenient to her, and all things also. So
that this soul sitteth without moving herself,
in the seat of peace, in the work of life, in
virtues of good conscience, and in freedom
of perfect charity; thus is she all free.

“Then willeth she naught,” saith Love,
* since she is made free; for he is not free
that anything willeth according to the will-
ing of his inwardness, how well soever he
willeth; for so much he is servant to himself,
that he hath a will that God do his will, to
his own worship. And he that this other
[thing] willeth, willeth it not, but only to fulfil
the will of God in himself and in others.
But for those folk,” saith Love, ‘‘ that work
by their wills, they refuse God the realm.”

“Eh, without fail,” saith Reason, “so
do they [indeed] !”

** So do they [refuse to yield themselves],”
saith this freed soul, “ but they ought to do
so, or they should lose all the little cattle*
that they have.”

** This is sooth, Lady Soul,” saith Reason,
“J grant it you.”

“These folk,” saith Love, ‘“ that work
thus by their wills, be not quit from thraldom...
But that is without their witting, for they
ween they be, and for that weening they are
content with their state.”

“They have so much pleasure in their

* Little cattle =small profit.
114


Ch. 10] SIMPLE SOULS


doings,” saith this soul, “that they ween*
there be no better, and that deceiveth them
from coming to better; thus they stand,
within,+ in their good wills.”

“ Such folk,” saith Love, “be never
fulfilled.”

“No, in soothness,” saith this soul, “* for
because their wills dwell with them, they be
servants to their wills. Into this servitude |
enter they,” saith this soul, “ that in all,
they believe and follow these two virtues,
Reason and Dread, for they nourish Will.
But they alone be free,” saith this soul,
that be free; whom Faith and Love govern,
for they rest from all servitudes, without
having dread of things redoubtable or desire
of any very delectable [thing].

“ This soul hath no will, nor is she troubled
about what God may do, but only that she
do his will alway. For this soul,” saith
Love, “ recketh not of hell, nor of paradise,
nor of thing that is made, she neither willeth
nor unwilleth anything that is here said.”

“Oh, what then, for God?” saith Holy-
Church -the - little - with -all-his- rude-scrip-


turef
“‘ Nothing,” saith Love, “she willeth
* Ween=deem, consider. + 7.e., enclosed.


+ With-all-his-rude-scripture—7.e., with all his
mere rational, literal scripture, as apart from the
understanding that comes by meditation and love.


115


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 5


naught. But this exercise seemeth to them
that [exercise] will, to place them in great
debt on account of the neglect of multiple
opportunities of love.* And that is no
marvel, but without fail none will believe
how great loss this is to them, to whom this
seemeth strange.”

“‘ Such folks,” saith this soul, “‘ be so blind,
that great things seem little to them.”

“Tt is sooth, this that ye say, right sweet
soul,” saith Love, ‘“‘ for right as the work
of God is more than the work of man, right
so is more worth this naught-willing in
God, than well-willing for God! Yea! in
sooth,” saith Love, ‘though they might
through this well-willing for God do miracles .
and receive every day martyrdom, it is,”
saith Love, “‘ nothing in comparison to that,
for as much as Will dwelleth in them.t

“No,” saith Love, “though they were
every day through this Will, ravished to
see the Trinity, with Saint Paul the Apostle :4
let me not speak of it,” saith Love, “ for
I may not!’’§

*x MS. “great rerages of many multipliances of
ove.

TCL © Corsxiii3. + Cf. 2 Cor. xii I-5.

§ Love breaks offinimpatience! “ Though these -
self-seeking souls were rapt into the Trinity every
day, yet they do not understand anything; it is
nothing compared to the simple dependence of not-
knowing and not-willing.”


II6


Ch. 11] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER XI
OF THE UNION OF LOVE


Tuts soul is printed in God, she hath taken
his very imprint, by union of love, in the
manner that the wax taketh the form of the
seal, so hath this soul taken the print of God
and his very likeness.

This soul saith thus: ‘‘ However well God
loveth meas he hath showed by his divine
work and the suffering of his manhood, he
loveth me not,” saith this soul, “against
himself. Though he died for all and took
flesh and blood of mankind, this was to
witness thereby to his bounty, for he owed
me this since his Divine will willed it.
Because of this,”’ saith this soul, “he loveth
me not against himself; for though all these
that the Trinity hath wrought in his [know-
ledge] should have been damned without
end; Jesu Christ, the Son of God the Father,
hath not, in sooth, granted to save all.”

“Oh, ah me!” saith this soul, “from
whence came it to me this to say? Eh, does
not every man know that this may not be ?
but ye Love, say it yourself !”*

* This extremely obscure passage seems to be a


plea for free will. God’s image imprinted on the
soul does not force the soul to yield up “the


117


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 5


“Dear friend,” saith the Person of God
the Father, “‘ this ought to be done to mine
eldest daughter, who is out of my realm,* so
that she may know the secrets of my Son
through the love of the Holy Ghost, that
to this soul hath given this [knowledge] from
him.”

“Tt behoveth,” saith Love, “that this
soul be like to the Deity, for she is drawn
into him, so she hath taken his very form,
which to her was granted without beginning,
and given of him that alway hath loved her.”

“© Love,” saith this soul, “‘ he only hath
made me [to be] no-one; and this naught of
this none hath put me in a low deepness,
under less than naught, without measure; .
and the knowing of my naught hath given
me all, and this naught and this all,” saith
this Soul,” hath taken prayer from me. I
pray not.”

“© what do ye then, right sweet soul, tell
us?” saith Holy-Church-the-little-with-all-
his-rude-scripture,


realm.”? The corollary is apparently the argument
for “predestination,” which the soul puts forward.
strongly in order to contradict it immediately—
according to the method of the jew-parti. God the
Father shows that this soul that dwells in “‘ will,” -
and cannot otherwise be forced to give up will, can
be won by this “imprint”? of love made by the
Holy Ghost.
* Cf. supra, p. 114.
118


Ch. 11] SIMPLE SOULS


“T rest me in peace,” saith this naked
naughted soul, “all in the courtesy of his
sole bounty, without turning me to one single
desire, notwithstanding all the riches that
he hath in him. This is the end,”’ saith this
soul, “of my work, always naught to will.
And forasmuch as I will naught,”’ saith this
soul, “I am a solitary soul, and separate
from myself,* and all free. And when I will
anything,” saith this soul, “then am I with
myself so, and have I lost freedom, but when
I will naught, and have all lost out of my
will, then faileth me nothing; free-being is
my maintainer.t I will naught of none \”?

“‘ Ah, right precious sweet being,” saith
Love, “that hast all usages lost, and by this
lost usage, hast ceased from all methods;
for in sooth, these usages and this loss be
made in the naughting of your soul, and in
this naught, ye swoon,” saith Love, “ and
dwell dead. But ye shall love, my friend,”
saith Love, ‘‘ in his will, for in you he hath
made his chamber secret, it pleaseth him
there to dwell. O right well born,” saith
Love, “to this precious day’s eye,§ and ye
F x MS. « An alone soul and without me and all
Tec

+ i.e., liberty is my sole support. I need no
other.

MS. “ usage withholden.”


§ The Latin version has a marginal note: * helio-
tropium, a flour that height a deysy or merygold.”’


119


THE MIRROR OF [Div. §


are truly in free [hold] dwelling, where none
entereth except he be of your lineage without
bastardise.

“ This soul,” saith Love, “‘ is entered into
the flood or waves of divine love. Not,”
saith Love, “ by the efforts to reach to divine
knowledge, for it may not be that any under-
standing, however illumined, might attain
to any of the influences of divine love; but
the love of this divine soul is conjunct, clad,
and arrayed in this ‘more’ of this passing
divine love. Not by the reaching out of the
understanding of love, but by the reaching
and attaining of more praise* of right passing
love. This soul,” saith Love, “ is so arrayed
with the clothings of this passing peace
wherein she liveth and endureth, and was, —
and is, and shall be, without her being. For
right thus,” saith Love, “as the iron is
clothed with fire and hath lost its own sem-
blance by the greater strength of that which
hath turned it unto itself, right so is the
soul clothed of the ‘ more,’ and is all turned
and drawn into this ‘more,’ for the [sake
of the] love of ‘ more,’ of heavenly amiable
peace, without paying of duty.t This
soul,” saith Love, “liveth in the sweet
country of passing peace, there is nothing
that may help nor grieve them that live


* MS. “ heres.”
+ MS. “ truage,” O.F. treuage, tax, impot.
I20


Ch. 12] SIMPLE SOULS


there, neither creature wrought, nor thing
given, nor nothing that God commandeth.”

‘“< Bh, what then, for God ?” saith Reason.

“ This, that never was, nor is, nor shall be
given, that none here maketh,” saith Love,
“this hath put her at naught. Except for
this, that is, praise of the thing that is, she
willeth no help nor sparing, nor of his might,
nor of his wisdom, nor of his bounty.”

“ This it is,” saith this soul, “‘ that faulteth
me not, and this hath given me peace. I live
but with the peace that is gotten or born of
these two gifts in my soul, without thought.
This might I not do except he had given
it me. This is mine all and my best; and
the virtue of this gift maketh me have one
being, one will, one love, and one work in
two natures. Such power hath the union
of the unity of [the] divine indwelling.”


CHAPTER XII


OF TWO BEHOLDINGS OF THIS SOUL, AND HOW
THEY THAT WILL UNDERSTAND THIS BOOK
MUST BE DEAD OF ALL DEATHS


“ Tyis soul,” saith Love, “ suffereth the
dead to bury the dead, and the marred* to


* Marred, Latin translation propedii. Later on
the contrast of “‘ perished, marred, and those in life
of spirit” is fully worked out. Cf. Division VI


121


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 5


work the works of virtues. And. so: resteth
she, of less and more, that is, of all thing.
The ‘ most ’ showeth to this soul her naught,
without covering, and that showeth her the
almightful in the bounty of divine righteous-
ness. So beholdeth she the deep by the
deep, and by the high, the highful and sure
one; for they do ever unite the all and the
nothing,* as long as she hath it in her be-
holding.”

“ Ah, right sweet soul, deep in lowness,
full of entire meekness, and right clean and
pure in the pleasure of plain truth, and by
love of passing ‘more’ alone perfected,
except for them of your demesne,” saith
Reason, “tell us what these dark words, -
that fine love toucheth, mean.”’ .

** Reason,” saith this soul, “ this that is
said to you, ye hear it, but never ye under-
stand it! And so have your questions
lengthened} this book, through the examples
that cannot be explained but in plain and
hasty words. But your questions have made
them long, because ye have need thereof
yourself, and for your disciples,£ those of
your household who have fly’s hearts !” _


following. The “ marred ”’ stands for the class that
work out their salvation by the ways of virtues.
* MS. “ one all and none.”
+ MS. “ shent.”
~ MS. “‘nourisch’’ =those under her care, ‘‘ ward.”
I22


Ch. 12] SIMPLE SOULS


“You have opened [it],’’* saith Love,
“so that Reason and all his scholars may
not be there against.”

“ That this seemeth not well said to them,
however much it be according to under-
standing, this is sooth,” saith this soul, but
they only understand it whom fine love
teacheth, and they only wot what this book
meaneth. But him behoveth to be dead,
and mortified of all deaths, that finely should
understand it,” saith this soul, “for none
tasteth of this life unless he be dead of all
deaths.”


* 7.e., explained it.


123


Beer Grae ae


DIVISION VI


CHAPTER I


OF THEM THAT BE PERISHED, AND IN WHAT,
AND OF WHAT, AND FOR WHAT


“ ®H, treasurer soul!” saith Reason,

A “for God, tell us of how many
deaths behoveth you to die, ere that

ye understand finely this book ?” ‘

“ Ask it of Love,” saith this soul, “‘ for
she knows the truth.”

“‘ Ah, Lady Love,” saith Reason, “‘ mercy !
tell it us! Not for me, nor for my disciples,
but for them that have taken leave of me,
that this book may bear light—if God will !”

“‘ Reason,” saith Love, “‘ those under your
teaching have yet much to do [to come to the
understanding] of the two deaths in which this
soul is dead, but the third death understand- ~
eth none alive, but they of the mountain.”

“© Lady Love,” saith Reason, “tell us
this, what folk be they of the mountain ?”

“They have not in earth,” saith Love,
“shame nor worship nor dread for thing
that may befall.”

“Eh,” saith Reason, “ Lady Love, for

124


Ch.1] MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS


God, answer us our questions, ere you say
anything more; for I am a-wondered to hear
the life of these souls.”

“* Reason,” saith Love, “they that see
this book, that have the being of this life,
understand it well—save this, that it be-
hoveth them expound the glosses. But
some things shall I expound to thy questions.
There be,” saith Love, ‘“‘ two manner of
people that live the life of perfection, by
the works of virtues, in affection of the life
of spirit. This is the life [of the first] of
them, who in all, mortify the body, in doing
works of charity. And they have so great
pleasure in their works, that they have no
knowing that there is any better being than
the being of works of virtue and deaths of
martyrdom, and they desire to persevere
in this by help of meditations fulfilled with
prayers, in multiplied means of good will,
‘alway. And because of the opinion that
these people hold thus, that this is the best
of all beings that may be, therefore this
people,” saith Love, ‘“‘ be blinded, and so
they perish in their works. Because of the
sufficiency that they have in their doings,
this people,”’ saith Love, ‘“‘ be called Kings;
but this is a being where everyone is blinded ;
but, without fail, those that have two eyes
take them* for servants,”’ saith this soul, “‘ but

* 7.e., the Kings.
125 G


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 6


that is without their knowing. They fare
like the crow that weeneth there be none
so fair a bird in the wood as his bride, the
crow. Right so I tell you,” saith this soul,
“¢ of these that live in desire alway, they hold
that there is no Being that attaineth to the
Being of desire, wherein this people be
always and will to dwell, for they may not
believe that there is any so good. And
therefore they perish in the way, that suffice
themselves so in this, which desire and will
giveth them.”

““O God,” say the Virtues, “‘ Lady Love,
who shall bear us witness, of this that you
say, that those who live all by our own
counsel, perish 2 So say none of the Masters
of us,”* say the Virtues to Love. “ We
understand this well, that it is said of evil
Christians; for we hope fully that none may
perish who in all things do our teaching, by
help of desire, which giveth a true feeling
of Jesu Christ. This we believe perfectly,
without doubt, Lady Love !” say the Virtues.

“You say sooth in this,” saith Love,
‘“* but in the understanding lieth the mystery;
for therein lieth the winning of divine love.”

““ We believe it, Love!” say the Virtues,
“‘ but this is not of our office, that we should
understand it. We be excused, provided

* 7.e., the authorities in the ascetical or mystical
books.

126


Ch. 1] SIMPLE SOULS


we believe you by the understanding that
we have; for we be made of you, to serve
such souls.”

** Oh, without fail,”’ saith this soul to Vir-
tues, ‘‘ it is well said, men may well believe
you, and therefore I tell you,” saith this
soul, “‘ and all those that hear this book, that
whoso serveth a poor lord, since a long time,
poor allowances shall he have, and little
wages. Right so fareth it by Virtues; they
have well acknowledged it in hearing of you
all, that they understand not the Being of
fine love !”

“* And for this, I tell you,” saith this soul,
““how should the Virtues teach the subject
a thing that they have not, nor never shall
have? But whoever will understand it and
learn how they perish who dwell in Virtues,
[let him] ask it of Love. Soothly of that
Love that is Mistress of Knowing, not of
that Love that is Daughter of Knowing,
for she knoweth never; but of that Love
that is Mother of the Knowing of Divine
Light. She knoweth the All; and the More
of All, in which More, the free soul is rested

-and dwelleth; she may not otherwise do, but
in the All make dwelling.”

“Now have ye heard, who are the
“perished,’ and in what, and of what, and for
what.”


727


ZOOLTOOLEODLEZ ON
EES SS LOO LOOK


DIVISION VII


CHAPTER’T


OF THEM THAT BE MARRED, AND WHAT DIF-
FERENCE IS BETWEEN THE PERISHED AND
THE MARRED


OW we will tell you also which be
N the marred. These be they who are

servants and merchants and seekers;
but they be more wise than they that be”
perished.*

“© Lady Love, that all things maketh
light, tell us,” saith this soul, “ why they
work in Virtues as well as the perished, and
serve them, and feel and desire and run by
burning of cutting desire in the work of the
spirit? And so do the perished as the
marred do.t Where is that ‘best,’ for


* These distinctions are based on a Patristic treatise
which I have so far failed to identify. It is, in
general, the doctrine of Clement of Alexandria, In
Stromata. :

+ Marred, Latin translation, propediti, for which
Ducange gives impedire, cohibere; O.S. merrian, to
cause to stumble; O.E. merrar, to hinder, stop,
compress; hence the sense of spoil and ruin. The
marred life is a life hindered and arrested in the early
stages by this adherence to a self-centred pursuit of

128


>


Ch.1] MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS


which ye allow them more than the
perished ?”’

““ Where is it ?”’ saith Love. ‘“ They have
indeed a being, and that a right good being,
to come to the best being that we speak of,
to which the perished can have no succour.”


M. This word “ perished,” may not be
taken for perishing of the perdition of soul,
that they should not be saved, but it is to
mean, right as Love saith, they lean so
upon their own works, weening that it is
best so, that they continue to follow none
other, and therefore they may not attain
to the highest; but for the least they
lose the best, therefore he calleth them
“perished ”; not for the works, but for
their satisfaction [in them]. WN.


“OQ Love of divine Love,” saith this free
soul, ‘‘ now tell us why these marred have
so great wit beyond what the perished have,
for they have the same usage except in that
wit alone for which ye praise them above
the other.”

“‘ Ror this,” saith Love, “‘ that they hold
that there is a better being than is their


the “ Virtues.” It may come to mean spoilt, ruined;
but this treatise shows that, even on its own lines, by
a modification of method, it may still be raised to
perfection. Cf. Division IX, chaps. ii and xiii; and
chap. iv of Division VII.

129


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 7


being, and these know well that they have
no knowing of that better being. This they
believe, and this believing giveth them so
little satisfaction in their being, that they
hold themselves as caitiffs, and as marred.*
And so they are, without fail, as compared
to the free being of the Settled, that never
move. And because they hold themselves as
marred, they ask oftentimes by the way,
by burning desire, of her that wot, that
is, Damsel Knowing-enlumined-of-divine-
grace; and these have little of their questions.
This wit they that have been marred. She
teacheth them the right way royal, by the »
country of not-willing, that is the true ad-
dress. And those who thus address them-
selves wot if I say the truth. And this
people that thus be marred, hold themselves
for caitiffs, and so they be, but they may
come to the free being, the which we speak
of, by the teaching of this divine light, of
whom these little [ones] that be marred, ask
the dressing of their way.”

“ Little ?” saith Reason, “ yet little 2”

“Yea, yet little,’ saith the Holy Ghost,
“in sooth, as long as they make askings
either of Knowing or of Love, or do anything
that may be in love,t or in knowing, or in
craving, for no wise man prayeth without

* 7.¢., spoilt.
+ 2.e., with motives of self-seeking love, etc.
130


Ch. 2] SIMPLE SOULS


cause, nor careth he for that which may not
be.* Therefore it may well be said, that
they be little that often ask, but those be
lords that nothing ask nor crave, for all
beings, whatever they be, are but as strong
as a reed,t and a default as compared to the
sovereign Being of naught-willing; where
the free in their right being may not remove,
nor will, nor nothing ask, for nothing that
men may do; but give all that they may, to
_ love truly and keep.”


CHAPTER II


OF A SWIFT OPENING AND OF A HASTY SHUTTING
THAT THE FAR NIGHT GIVETH TO THIS
SOUL; AND WHAT THIS FAR NIGHT IS


* Au, God,” saith Reason, ‘‘ what thing hath
aneantisedt these souis ?”

“< This,”’ saith Love, “‘ they give all that
God holds worthy. He that is thus, is
neither perished nor marred. But she is
settled in the fifth state§ with her Beloved,


* j.e.,if he asks it implies he has it not, and there-
fore he is “little.” Careth=takes trouble.

+ MS. “the maintenance of a resche.”

+ i.e., destroyed, annihilated. O.F. anéantz.

§ These “‘ estates’ refer to St Augustine’s Seven
Degrees of preparation for the knowledge of God
in De Quantitate Animae. The fifth is “‘ peace of


131


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 7


there faulteth her nothing. And so is she
oft into the sixth state ravished; only a little
while it endureth, for this is a work of the
Beloved, which is a swift opening and a
hasty shutting; in that state may none long
dwell. He had never mother that of this
can speak.

‘“* From this ravishable opening, and at the
spreading of this opening, the soul hath
taken her shutting and abideth in the peace
of this work, right free and noble, and dis-
charged of all encumbrances and of all
things, as long as the peace endureth that -
is given in this opening. And after the °
shutting, she keepeth herself freely in the
fifth estate without falling into the fourth,
for in the fourth estate is will, and in the
fifth estate is none. And because the fifth
estate, of which this book speaketh, hath
naught of will, the soul dwelleth there, after
the work of the far night. This is an high,
heavenly ravishing, which is a swift opening
and an hasty shutting. None may believe,”
saith Love, “‘the peace on peace of this,:
unless he be the same.”

Understand these words for love, auditors
of this book, and principally of this ‘ far


soul, tranquillity. The sixth, Entrance into light,
temporary. The seventh, Contemplation proper,
habitual.”


132


Ch. 3] SIMPLE SOULS


night,’ that we call celestrum esclistrum,* a
manner of a swift opening and a hasty shut-
ting, that taketh the soul in the fifth estate,
and putteth her in the sixth estate, as long
as the work endureth. This is another than
the fifth, but little while it dureth in the
sixth, then is she again put in the fifth.

“* She marvelleth,”’ saith Love, “‘ at the work
of the far night. This is none other thing
but very glory of heaven. It dwelleth not
long in any creature, but only in the space
of its moving, and therefore is this gift noble
and good,” saith Love that doeth this work.
“ Before the soul indwelleth, in the time of
my work,” saith Love, “when I work it,
it is so delicious that truth calleth it, glorious
food. But none may be fed with this
heavenly meat that in desire dwelleth.”’


CHAPTER III


OF THE THREE LIVES OF THE SOUL, WHICH BE
BORN IN MORTIFYING OF THREE THINGS—
VIZ., OF SIN, OF NATURE, AND OF SPIRIT, AND
HOW THIS SOUL IS ALWAY WITHOUT-HER


‘“* THESE souls,” saith Love, “‘ govern a
country, they be well above and all without
them. At the first beginning, this soul lived
* O.F. esclistre celestre, heavenly lightning, or ray
of heavenly brightness.
133 G2


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 7


in the life of grace, the which life of
grace is born in the death of mortifying sin.
And after,” saith Love, “ she lived in the
life of spirit, which life of spirit is born in the
death of mortifying nature. And now she
liveth of the life of glory, the which life of
glory is born in the death of mortifying the
spirit.*

“This soul,”’ saith Love, “ that liveth of
the life of glory, is alway without-her.”

“© Love,” saith Reason, “‘ when is this
soul without-her and when is she with-her ?”

‘““ She is without-her,”’ saith Love, “* when


she is in nothingness, neither in God, nor -


in herself, nor in her even-Christian, but
in the naughting that this far night worketh
in her. Concerning the approach of this
work that is so precious and noble; even as
men may no more speak of the opening of
the movings of glory that the gentle far
night giveth, so no more can this soul tell
of this precious shutting. Then doth she
forget by the deadening of this working,
which this naughting yieldeth to herself.”

“© God,” saith this soul, “the that
might comprehend the profit of one moment
of this naughting, what a great lord he were!”

“This is sooth,” saith Love, ‘* he should
be the same [kind of person].”’


* Cf. St John of the Cross.
134


Ch. 4] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER IV


OF THE FIRST DEATH THAT A SOUL MUST DIE
ERE SHE COME TO THE SECOND LIFE—
VIZ., THE DEATH OF SIN, AND WHICH
COMPLEXION HATH BEST HELP TO UNDER-
STANDING


“ Tp -ye have heard in this book high matters,”
_ saith this soul to the auditors of this book,
“let it not displease you concerning this,
though I speak of a little thing, for I must
do it if I am to fulfil the [explanation of the]
takings in the fulness of my purpose. Not,”
saith she, ‘‘ for them that have attained, but
for them that have not, that shall—so God
will; but always they shall missay, till they
be the same.—I come again to my matter.”
“Reason,” saith Love, “ ye ask of us, of
how many deaths it behoveth one to die
before he come to this life? I speak,”
saith Love, “ of three deaths, into which they
enter, ere the soul may into this life be born.
The first is the death of sin, as it is before
said. Then, the soul ought to die entirely,
so that there dwell not in her neither colour,
nor savour, nor smell of nothing that God
forbiddeth in the Law. And they that thus
die be folks who live by grace. And that
sufficeth them to salvation, together with


135


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 7


this, namely, that they keep themselves from
all that God forbiddeth, and do that which
God commandeth. O right noble folks,
naughted and upraised* by conjunction of
union with divine love, let it not displease
you if I touch something for them that be
little! I shall speak enough afterwards of
your being. For it falleth oftentimes that
when white and black are come together, the
one may be seen the better from the other;
for white seemeth more white by black, and
black by white. O haste you to understand,
ye that be chosen and called to this sovereign _
being, for it is a full great way between the ©
first estate of life of grace to the last estate
of life of glory, which the gentle far night
giveth. I have said,” saith Love, “ that
ye [should] understand it and that ye haste
you thereto, for without strong understand-
ing, subtle and right noble, none may reach
it. ‘Thesanguine have help by nature, to this,
and those who are hasty, of fervent will, of
the burning desire of the spirit, the ‘choleric;
[all these] have help in this, by nature. And.
when these two natures thus accord, and
the third nature that must join to these two
natures without end, be righteousness, [then]
this is the gladness of glory that draweth them
by nature into his nature, by rightwiseness.
This accordance is finely noble.”
* MS. “ uphanused.”
136


Ch. 5] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER V


OF A QUESTION THAT LOVE ASKED: WHICH IS
THE MOST NOBLE; THE SOUL IN GLADNESS
OF GLORY, OR THE SOUL THAT IS ONED
TO THIS GLORY 2? AND HOW THEY THAT
HAVE THE FEELINGS OF THIS BOOK MUST
KEEP IT SECRET, AND A LITTLE TOUCHING
OF THE SEVENTH STATE


*“T ASK you a question: which is the most
noble of these twain, the soul in gladness of
that glory which draweth the soul, and
embellisheth it by obedience to its nature,
or that soul that to this glory is oned ?”

““T know not,” saith the soul that this
first wrote, ‘“‘ but Love, you yourself, say
it for me! I may not amend you. Excuse
me, for jealousy of love, and work of charity
in which I am encumbered, have made this
book, to the end that ye that read this book
without abiding,* may at least share the same
in will, if ye have it not yet.t And if ye be
disencumbered of all things, and be folk
without will, in life [desirable], tell few
your understandings of the things of this
book.”

* Hastily.

+ i.e., may participate by will and desire if there
is no actual experience yet of the state described.


137


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 7


“‘ T have said,” saith Love, “ that this is a
life of more high understanding, one beyond
the other without comparison, for right as
it is a little comparison to say a drop of
water compared with all the sea, the sea
is full great against the drop; even so it is,
to speak of the first estate of grace, as com-
pared with the second, and right so of the
second compared to the others; it hath
naught of comparison. Just as I have made
a little ensample afore, the better to under-
stand, of the sea and of a drop, yet not
therefore is there any so great estate in the |
four estates, but the soul [nevertheless] doth °
live in great servitude therein; but the fifth
is freed by charity, for it is uncumbered of
all things, and the sixth is glorious, because
of the openings of the swift movings of glory,
which the gentle far night giveth. And that
is none other thing than some gleam that
God willeth that the soul have of his glory
[itself], which she is to have without end.
So, of his bounty, he [giveth] the shewing
of the seventh estate to which the sixth -
giveth being. And this showing is given so
swiftly that the person to whom this gift
is given hath, at the time, no perceiving’ of
her gift.”

‘What marvel is it,” saith this soul,
“though I perceive it not? for in the time
that this gift was given, I was, by bounty

138


Ch. 6] SIMPLE SOULS


divine, of the same nature as the gift itself.
And it should be given me without end, if
my body had left my soul.”

“There is no need for that,” saith the
Spouse of this soul himself.


CHAPTER VI


WHAT THIS “‘ FAR NIGHT” IS, AND OF THE
KNOWING THAT IT GIVETH TO THE SOUL


“ T pave, by my far night, sent letters to you;
but none asketh, ‘ What is this far night °”
When he showeth his glory to the soul, his
works may not be told! But this—What
the far night is? It is the Trinity himself,
that showeth the same movings of the Trinity
itself. The Trinity openeth to this soul
and showeth her of his glory, of which none
can speak but he, the same. And. the soul
to whom this far night hath given this gift,
hath so great knowing of God and of herself,
and of all things that she seeth in God’s
being, by divine knowing. And the light
of this divine knowing taketh from her the
knowing of God’s self, and of herself, and
of all things.”*

* The divine “ray” (rastro, apparitio) gives
knowledge of God’s essence and of the soul’s nothing-
ness, so blinding, that afterwards the soul is left


without conscious knowledge of God or herself. The
distinction is between the flash of immediate know-


139


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 7


“This is sooth,” saith this soul, ‘“‘ there
is No more; but when God wills that I know
him, it taketh the knowledge of him from
me; for otherwise,” saith this soul, “ should
I no knowing have of him. And I see that
I know myself, and that taketh from me also
the knowing of myself, for otherwise might
I no knowing have of myself.”

“This is sooth,” saith Love, ‘‘ what you
say, Lady Soul. There is nothing more
profitable, nor more sure to have than to
know this.”


CHAPTER VII


OF THE THREE DEATHS BY THE WHICH THESE
SOULS COME TO THE LIFE AFORESAID


*“ Now, Reason,” saith Love, “‘ understand !
I come again for a little, touching to our
matter. This people that we have spoken
of that be dead from deadly sin and be in
life of grace have no scruples; but they
acquit them towards God only of that which ©
he commandeth. They desire, indeed,
worship, and sorry be they if men despise


ledge and the ensuing darkness, or unconsciousness
or state of oblivion, or disinterested self-forgetful-


ness, all of which are the very conditions of further
knowledge.


140


Ch. 7] SIMPLE SOULS


them, but they keep themselves from vain-
glory and from impatience that leadeth to
death of sin. They love riches, and sorry
be they when they be poor, and if they be
rich, sorry be they when they lose; but
always they keep themselves from the death
of sin; for they will not love their riches
against the will of God, neither in winning
them nor in losing them. And they love
ease and rest for their pleasures, but they
keep themselves from the inordinances
thereof. These folk be dead from deadly
sin and born to the life of grace.”

“Eh, without fail,’ saith this soul in
freedom, “these folks be little in earth,
and right little in heaven and uncourteous !
Wit it well!”

“OQ Lady Soul,” saith Reason, “‘ beware
what you say! We dare not say that any
is little, whom God shall look upon without
end.”’

** Sooth it is,” saith Love, “a hand may
not write the littleness of them as compared
with the greatness of those that be dead of
the death of nature and live of the life of
spirit.”

“<I believe it well,” saith Reason, “ and
so do they. They believe me well, but they
will do nothing; they say to me,” saith
Reason, “‘ that they are not obliged thereto
unless they wish it; for God hath not com-


I4I


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 7


manded it to them but counselled it, without
more.”

“‘ They say sooth,” saith this soul, ‘these
most uncourteous [ones |!”

“Oh, without fail,” saith our Lord Jesu
Christ, “‘ uncourteous be they! They have
forgot that anything that I did for them
sufficed me not unless I had done all
that mine humanity might bear, unto the
death.”

“Ah, right sweet Lord Jesu Christ !”
saith the soul, ‘‘do not trouble yourself
thereof, nor displease yourself, for these |
souls be so for themselves, and with them- °
selves, that they forget you, for the little-
ness of themselves, in which they suffice
themselves.”

“Oh,” saith Love, “‘ without fail it is
great villainy !”

“This people,” saith this soul, ‘be
merchants; in the world they be called
thralls, for thralls they be, for it behoveth
not to any gentleman to be able to meddle
with merchandise, nor to be one of them. .
But I shall tell you,” saith this soul, ““ wherein
I am. appeased concerning this people; in
this, Lady Love, that they be out of the
court of your secrets, right as a churl is out
of a gentleman’s court, in judgement at
Paris, for there may none be admitted unless
he be of gentle lineage and nameable in the

142


Ch. 7] SIMPLE SOULS


king’s court.* And in this I rest me,” saith
this soul, “‘ for even so, they be driven out of
the court of your secrets, there where these
others be called, who never forget the works
of your sweet courtesy, that is, the despites
and poverties, and the torments unsufferable
that ye have suffered for us; they forget
never the gifts of your sufferings, it is alway
as a mirror and ensample to them.”

“To these folks,” saith Love, “are
ordained all necessary things, for God com-
mandeth them in the Gospel. These,”
saith Love, ‘‘ be much more courteous than
be the other foresaid, and nevertheless,”
saith Love, “ yet be they: little; so little that
none can see it, as compared with the great-
ness of them that be dead of life of spirit,
and be in the life of glory. Of this life
tasteth none unless he be dead of the life of
spirit.”

“ These souls,” saith Truth, “ bear the
flower of the love of the Deity. There is
no meant between them and the Deity, nor
no mean desire they; these souls may not
suffer the thanking of any earthly love, nor

* The exclusion of “ non-gentlemen” from the
king’s court, and the reference to the system at Paris
helps to substantiate the evidence for a French
original. The Latin translation has: de curia vest-
rorum archanorum expulsi sunt, rusticus est extra curia
generosi in iudicio apud parisis.

+ i.e., intermediary.

143


MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS _ [Div. 7


the love of divine feelings, for the pure
divine love that this soul hath to Love.”

“This sole power* of love,”’ saith Love,
“* giveth her the deepness, the rest, and the
stillness, and also it giveth her the flame and
the burning of the working of love; witness
of Love himself.

** This is sooth,”’ saith Love, “ this love
of which we speak is the union of love,
and fire enflamed that burneth without
smoke; she dare not dread, for now worketh
her Beloved.”’

Now have ye heard something of these


three deaths by the which these souls come ~ ;


to these three lives.
* MS, “ only daunger.”


144


a a,


DIVISION VIII


CHAPTER I


WHO BE THEY THAT SIT IN THE MOUNTAIN,
AND WHAT THINGS SHAME, DREAD, AND
REASON DO TO THIS SOUL


ea OW I shall tell you who those be

that sit in the mountain above the

wind and the rains. These be they
that have in earth neither shame nor worship,
nor dread for thing that befalleth. Such
folks,” saith Love, ‘“ be folks full sure, their
gates be open, and within none may grieve,
nor can any work of charity come to naught ;*
such folks sit in the mountain, and none
other but they.”

“ Oh for God,” saith Reason, ‘‘ Lady Love,
this tell us. What shall become of Shame,
that is the fairest daughter that Meekness
hath; and Dread also, she who, to this lady,
hath done so many fair services? And I
ask,”’ saith Reason, “ for I never slept when
she of me had need. Alas,”’ saith Reason,
“ shall we now be put out of her house
because that she is come to lordship ?”

*x MS. “ ne dare downfall.”


145


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 8


.““ Nay,” saith Love, “ye shall. dwell as
of her household all three, but it shall be at
her gate, for her gate shall have three porters,
so that if any will in her house do aught
that is against love, that each of you defend*
it. And in none other usage than in this
only point, show not the door at which ye
be porters, that it do you not confusion; for
in other point ye shall not be heard, but in
this one only point, if it so befall that she be
brought so low that she have of this need.”


CHAPTER II


WHAT POWER THE FREEDOM OF LOVE HATH,
AND WHEREOF THIS SOUL IS MOST GLAD


THIS creature is naked, and she is clothed
with the life of glory that we have spoken
of. Also, she is naked from her body, for
as the skin [of an animal] is made naked of
bodily clothing, right so is her spirit naked
from her body, so that it is not in the body,
for the sensuality of her body is worn away
and delivered. by divine works. So that
this soul is naked, and is in the sweet country
unknown, more verily than she is in her
proper body, there where she giveth life,
such power hath the freedom of love.

* Perhaps “forbid,” translated literally from
Fo detend:;3

146


Ch. 3] ; SIMPLE SOULS


“ Ah, right sweet divine love,” saith Holy-
Church-the-little, in birth right little !|—“‘it
shall not be long thereto, that it shall come
to an end.”

Saith this soul, “‘ Then shall be great
gladness !”

“Now,” saith Reason to this soul, “ tell
me whereof ye be most glad !”

“Lady Love,” saith this soul, “ shall
say it for me.”

“Of this,” saith Love, “that she hath
taken leave of you and of other virtues.
Now she is so upheld and so entered into
divine election, that she beginneth to speak
where you take your end. But this election
is not put in writing of men’s hands, but
of the Holy Ghost, who writeth this election
marvellously in the soul, and the soul is
thereunto precious parchment. There is
the divine school held with closed mouth,
that no wit of man may put into speech.”


CHAPTER III
OF THE COUNTRY THAT THIS SOUL IS IN


“ An, Love,” saith Reason, “say among us
something of the country where this soul


_ dwelleth.”


“Thus it is,” saith Love, ‘“‘ where this
soul is, of him, in him, for him; that is,
147


THE MIRROR OF | [Div. 8


without receiving from any, but purely from
him. Now is this soul,” saith Love, “in
him, of him, for him; that is, without receiv-
ing any but only from him.”

“Then is she in God the Father,” saith
Truth, ‘for we know well that there is no
person in the Trinity that hath not received
something from another person beside his
own person, save only the person of God
the Father.”

“Ye say sooth,” saith Love, “for God
the Father hath divine might in him without
receiving might of any other but of himself.


And he giveth to his Son the same that he .


hath in himself, and the Son receiveth it from
the Father, and is equal to him. Now, of
the Father and of the Son is the Holy Ghost,
one person in Trinity. And he waxeth not,*
but 7s; for otherwise is the Son of the Father,
and otherwise is the Holy Ghost of the Father
and of the Son. This soul,”’ saith Love,
“is taken in and put in her due place, knit
and oned in the high Trinity so she may not
will but the divine will, by the divine work.
of all the Trinity. And a ravishing deep
light toucheth her and pierceth her and
feedeth her of the most nigh.’


* Waxeth =becomes.
+ Possibly ‘* high.”


148


Ch. 4] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER IV


HOW THE USAGE OF REASON IS FULL OF TRAVAIL,
AND WHERE THIS FREE SOUL REFRESHETH
HER '


Tuts Soul saith thus: “‘ Ah, ye right little
people, rude and ill-mannered,”’ saith she.

“To whom speak ye 2” saith Reason.

“To all those,” saith she, ‘‘ that live by
your counsel, that be so bestial and so assed,
that I am obliged for their rudeness to
make answer [in] my language, that they
take not death in that state of life, where I
am of him, in him, without craving or beg-
ging. I say that I am obliged to answer
fin] my language, what I have learned of
secrets at the secret court of God, where
courtesy is law, and love measure, and bounty
is food. The sweetness draweth me, the
beauty pleaseth me; what, then, can I desire
more, than to live at peace ?”

““O right sweet flower without lack,”
saith Reason. “What do you think con-
cerning our usages ?”’

““ Meseemeth,”’ saith this soul, “‘ that it is
a travail full of synagogues; their labours
are all to gain their bread, and their susten-
ances. And this synagogue that our Lord
Jesu Christ bought with his precious Body,

149


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 8


that heareth not the bestiality of those who,
in this travail, please themselves thus.*
But these [others] need certainty, and Jesu
Christ will not lose them, as he himself hath
assured them, by his death, and by the
evangelists, and by their scriptures, where
that folks of labour refresh themselves.”

“Oh, where do you refresh yourself, right
sweet Lady Soul, tell us!” saith Reason,
“ye that do nothing of labour in this syna-
gogue, but by love and faith that be above
these other gifts 2”

“No, soothly,” saith this soul, “I am


of that acquit; [in] other ways I refresh -


myself, that are so far from that doing, that
it may not be laid in comparison, nor put in
speech. In God is this choice, but it is not
of Time, where mine may not attain to his.”


M. Lo, the free soul saith that she ad-
dresseth her in other ways than they of
labour do; and this is so far from that
doing, that it may not be put into speech.
In God is this choice, but it is not of |
Time. This is in the time of ravishing
and union in God; it hath nothing of
Time, for it lasteth but a little while in any
creature here in this world, for the corrup-
tion of the flesh hindereth it, so that the
soul may not long here abide. So then,


x MS. ‘‘ thus savour.”
150


Ch. 4] SIMPLE SOULS


heretics may not it attain, for their sensu-
ality will not suffer it.

Also, a heretic [soul] may not attain to
him for all the wit and understanding that
she hath or might have, she may not reach
to the knowing of his might, nor of his
wisdom, nor of his goodness. Thus a
heretic may not reach him in no wise.

Right thus, all such words must be
declared within themselves [by them] that
read this book. For [concerning] these
dark words and high matters darkly spoken
in this writing, [this] is done for to make
the souls of the readers that be disposed to
ghostly feelings to circle and ensearch
by subtlety of wit, to come to these divine
understandings, by the which they may
be the more able to receive and follow
these heavenly usages of God’s work.

In divers places of this book the free
soul reproveth, in a manner, those that
be ghostly, that stand alway in labours and
in such manner [of] doing outwardly, and
will no further seek inwards, [to this
purpose], that they should stint sometimes,
and follow these restful usages of pure
love. Thus saith the prophet in Holy
Writ: Stint ye sometime and behold God,*
as who saith, ‘Rest sometime from your
x Ps, xlv 11, Vacate et videte quoniam ego sum

Deus.


151


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 8


own works of outward labours, and behold
God how good he is, and suffer him to
work in you.” Also this soul that sitteth
full high in the seat of peace, she saith
that she prayeth not. This is not to be
understood that this soul prayeth never,
but in sundry practices that she hath,
she prayeth never as thus. These souls
of this disposition be drawn at other times
to behold God’s privy works, his judge-
ments, and his providences. Then with
true love they print so their wills in God’s
will, by meek obedience, that they cannot


pray in this time for themselves, nor for i


none other. It pleaseth them best that
it be as God will have it done, [even]
though they might, by their prayer, have
it any otherwise, they offer all unto his
divine ordering and will. Also in other
usages that be all inward, they pray not
neither, but it all prayeth afore God.*
But yet they pray in common, by the rule
and ordinance of Holy Church, and in
all things unite alway their will to his |
will, who hath made and bought them.
But they never do bodily works, nor they
may not during the time of such divine
usages.| Therefore it must be taken,


* 7.e., itis all prayer before God.
+ The ‘‘bodily works” refer to works of piety
over and above that which is commanded—.e., extra


152


Ch. 4] SIMPLE SOULS


as for the time always, of the usages.
Thus this book must be taken as concern-
ing these “usages.” For such usages
and such touches, such movings and such
beholdings these souls have, as it is
written in this book, and many more,
forsooth, as ye may well conceive. And
now I shall stint of my words unless there
be more need. I have answered those
points that have been mistaken, according
to my simple learning. Another should
have done it much better. I pray you
all that read this book, have me excused,
for that I am simple and unlearned and
may not do but ignorantly. Amend ye
my defaults, and if any word I have said
tendeth to any goodness, to the profit
of souls, to God only be the worship
from whom all goodness cometh. Non
nobis Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo
da gloriam.* N.


fastings, vigils, penances, hearing of many masses,
saying of many vocal prayers. Cf. earlier part of
the book. It is distinctly stated that this abstention
from “ bodily works” is the fruit of that particular
“ state ’? into which the soul has been led, and applies
strictly only to the soul, while it is in this condition
—i.e., ‘ usage.’” The word “ usage’? means some-
times the habitual practices of devotion at any one
point of the soul’s development, sometimes the
condition itself, “‘ a divine usage” as implying God’s
act in the soul. * Ps. cxili9.


153


THE MIRROR OF 7 [Div. 8


““Now, Reason,” saith this soul, ‘“ you
asked me where I address myself ?. To him
only,” saith this soul, “‘ that is so strong that
he may never die, whose doctrine may not
be written, nor by works of ensamples
showed, nor by doctrine sounded. He
wist without beginning that I should believe
him well, without witnessing. It is right
great villainy to covet any witness in love.
This seemeth to me, that so as love is, he
is to me witness enough, if I would have
more witness than him, I should not be
believing him.”

“Ah, Lady Soul,” saith Reason, “ ye
have two laws, yours and ours. Yours for
love and ours for belief; therefore say what
ye will !”? saith Reason, “‘ and call our wards,
‘ beast’s asses.’ ””


CHAP TERAY:


[IN] WHAT MANNER THEY SEEK GOD THAT BE
GOVERNED BY REASON, AND WHERE THIS
SOUL SEEKETH HIM, AND WHAT THIS
SOUL IS


** SucH folks,’’ saith this soul, “ that I call
asses, seek God in creatures and by hills
and dales, and beg and crave; and paradise
is not wrought by that, neither by men’s
words nor by scriptures. O, without fail,”


154


Ch. 5] SIMPLE SOULS


saith this soul, ‘“‘ in these folks Benjamin is
not born, for Rachel liveth yet and she must
die in the birth of Benjamin. For till
Rachel be dead Benjamin may not be born
and brought forth. It seemeth well that
these folks that thus seek him by hills and
dales and valleys, hold that God is subject
to his sacraments and to his works. And
they that are thus burdened say little and
have heaviness of heart,’ saith this soul.
‘until they have their usages. But those
have a good time and profitable who seek
him neither by more nor less, nor on plains,*
nor on mountains, but have him in all places,
by union of the gift of will.”

“OQ right well born!” saith Reason,
“where seek ye him ?”

“1 find him over all,” saith this soul,
“he is one Deity, one only God in three
Persons. This is God over all and there,”
saith this soul, ‘‘ I find him.”

““O sweet Lady of us,” saith Reason,
“tell us what ye be that speak thus ?”

“JT am,” saith this soul, “ this that I am;
of the grace of God that am I only, and none
other thing than that which God is, in me.
And God is also this same [thing], that he is
in me. For best is best beloved and is
what [he] is. Then am J not, if I am only
that which is; and none is but God; and for

* MS. “ causils.”


ISS


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 8


this I find nothing but God, wherever that
I look, for none is but he, sooth to say.”

This soul liveth not in Truth, that is the
Deity, but Truth liveth in her, who hath all
sayings in her fulfilled.

“This is sooth,” saith Love, “for all
others than these make answer through
want of simplicity, but only these naked
[souls] forget and have naught to answer.”


CHAPTER VI


HOW THIS SOUL DOETH NO MORE WORK FOR
GOD, NOR FOR HERSELF, NOR FOR HER *
EVEN-CHRISTIAN, AND HOW THIS IS MEANT


“Tus soul,” saith Love, “‘ doeth no more
work for God nor for herself, nor for her
even-Christian, even as it is said before in
this book. But God, who can all things do,
doth it, if he will, and if he will not, she
recketh no more of the one than of the other;
all is one to her. And this, the beams of
divine knowing work in this soul, which
draw her out of herself, without her [help],
into a divine peace débonnair, felt by a
gladsome swimming love of the most High,
the jealous one, who giveth her, in all places,
masterful freedom.”

“‘ Jealous,” saith this soul, “so seemeth
it well by his works, who hath robbed me

156


Ch. 6] SIMPLE SOULS


of all myself and hath put me into divine
plesaunce* without me, and this union of
fulfilled peace joineth and conjoineth me
by the sovereign highness of the creation
of the other equal memberf of that union,
who is divine. God is divine; so have I a
being that is divine.”

“When this soul,” saith Love, “is thus
drawn out of herself, without herself, by
God, for him, in him, in this divine work,
she cannot never work works of charity of
human body;{ nor can any who attains to
this work.”

“O understand holily,” saith this soul,
“the sweet words of Love, for these words
be hard to understand for them that desire
the meaning of the gloss.”

“This is sooth,” saith Love, ‘‘ for work
of creatures may not be compared to divine
work made of God in creatures, of his
bounty, for creature.”


* A place for taking pleasure, hence garden,


orchard.
+t MS. “ pared.”
+ Planned by merely human foresight.


157 H


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 8


CHAPTER VII


OF THE MISCHIEF THAT LUCIFER AND THEY
THAT ACCORDED TO HIM CAME TO, BY
REASON OF THEIR EVIL WILL


“Q Gop,” saith this soul, ‘‘ how far is the
country of the Perished and the country
of the Marred from the country of freeness
and of fulfilled peace, there where the ~
Settled dwell !”

<< That is sooth,” saith Love, “‘ and I shall
say one word soothly,” saith this soul,
‘against ‘ Will,’ in which the perished and
the marred dwell, that lead life of perfection.
In heaven when the divine Trinity made
the angels of the courtesy of his divine
noblesse, some were evil, on account of
their perverse election in agreeing to the
evil will of Lucifer, who desired to have, by
his nature, that which he might not have
but by divine grace. And anon, as they
willed this, of their forfeited will, they lost
the Being of bounty. Now they be in hell
without being, and shall be, without recover-
ing the mercy of seeing God. And thus
their will, which they had chosen, made them
lose this high vision by giving their will to
that which they could not attain. Now,
behold, to what head they are come.”

158


Ch. 8] SIMPLE SOULS


“ Alas, alas,” saith Truth, “why love
we will, since such loss is made by will ?”

“T shall tell thee,” saith Love, ‘“‘ why a
soul hath will; because it liveth yet in spirit.
She sitteth in that life, therefore she hath
will.”


CHAPTER VIII


WHY LOVE HATH CALLED THESE SOULS IN THIS
BOOK BY THE NAME OF “ SOUL”’; AND
TO WHOM THE NAME OF SOULS PROPERLY
PERTAINETH; AND TO WHOM THE NAME
OF SPIRIT; AND OF THE SURMOUNTED LIFE
AND WHO BE PERFECTED IN IT; AND WHAT
IS THE PROPER NAME OF THIS SOUL


“AH God,” saith Reason, “ Lady Love,
tell me why ye have so often named ‘ soul,’
this chosen, beloved of yours, from the
beginning of this book unto this time, since
ye say that the marred persons have will, be-
cause they live yet in life of spirit? And ye
have so oftentimes named this noble creature
by so little a name as is ‘soul,’ which
is a less name than the name of ‘spirit,’ ”’
saith Reason; “‘ this marvelleth me !”

“Now wit it well,” saith Love, “it is
well asked, for in the understanding lieth
all the meaning, and therefore hearken now,
Reason,” saith Love. “All those that live


159


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 8


in life of grace, in fulfilling the command-
ments, and so live as to be satisfied in that,
these have name of ‘ soul’ soothly, and not
name of ‘ spirit,’ but name of ‘soul’ for the
life of grace that they stand in. For all the
orders of angels have not one same name—
if any would name their greatest name—
and yet be they all angels. But the first
angels have not the name of seraphins, but
of angels, and the seraphins have both the 3
one name and the other; understand without
saying* what this means! Even so, I tell
you, they who keep the commandments
and be in that feeling, they have the name of ©
‘soul,’ and not of ‘spirit’ Their right
name is ‘soul,’ for these folks be full far
from the life of spirit. And then is a soul
all spiritual when the body and the will is
all mortified. The joys of these folks are
to have poverties and tribulations, and then
it is the time of ‘spirit.2. And yet in all
this time is not the spirit perfectly dead
while the wills [still] have their powers by
inward feelings.t Nor unto this time is the
spirit perfectly dead until it have lost the
feeling of his love, and the will is dead that
gave her life. And in this death and naked-


* j.e., without further explanation.

+ So long as the powers and feelings of the soul
are active, the “‘ death of the spirit” is not fully
accomplished.


160


Ch. 8] SIMPLE SOULS


ness be the wills perfectly fulfilled by
sufficiency of the divine pleasure. And in
this death is born the perfect life, that is
then made all free in gloriousness.”’

“O for God Almightful,” saith Truth,
““ Lady divine Love, shew me one perfect in
this Being.”

** Gladly,” saith Love, ‘‘ and unless she be
such as I shall tell you, Truth,” saith Love,
“IT command you that you answer her that
she is ill-arrayed to speak to me in my secret
chamber, where none entereth unless they
be thus arrayed, as ye shall hear me say.

““ Howsoever great she be, she is nothing,
who loveth or desireth of me,” saith Love,
“‘ whether to lose me or to win me, except
it be only for my pleasure; for otherwise she
is with herself, and not with me [at all]. But
the Espoused of me may not be with herself,
for though she had done as much sin as all
the creatures of the world have done, and has
as many gifts of grace as all those of paradise
have, and that all this good and all this evil
were shown before all this people, this lady
should have neither shame nor worship in
her thereof; nor will to justify herself.* And
if she had,” saith Love, ‘‘ she would be for
herself and with herself, and not for me nor
with me at all. Whatever joy or sorrow they
of my paradise have, though men see their

* MS. “ answer.”


161


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 8


sins or though they receive of me gifts of
glory, they have no will to make answer or
show for none of these two.

“ Ah, without fail, no | they leave it to the
Master and are disposed* to show it or to
hide it, all at his will, And right so do the
souls of which we speak, that be vessels of
this election, to whom God showeth and
giveth his noble gifts.”

“Now, Reason,” saith Love, “you ask
of us, why we have this soul so little a
name named, as is ‘ Soul.’ Reason!” saith
Love, ‘‘for the rudeness of thee, have I so _
oftentimes named her by her surname, for:
most [men] understand a thing by its surname,
therefore it is to us now helpful, and yet shall
be. But her right name is perfectly noble.
She hight} ‘ pure heavenly spirit of peace,’
for she sitteth in the deepness of the valley;
there she seeth the highness of the mountain,
and, then, in a state of faith,{ she gazeth upon
the mountain of highness, that it may not
there downfall. There hath the wise brought
her to unite [her with] his treasure, that is,
the gifts of the divine generation, and this
unity giveth her the peace and the food, holy
and marvellous, in the glorious country,
there where the lovers of God dwell. There
dangers may no more appear, but glorious

* MS. “ aworth.” + @.e., is named.
+ MS. ‘‘ put in credence.”
162


Ch. 9] SIMPLE SOULS


life is had. This is the continual food,”
saith Love, “‘ of my chosen spouse. This is
Mary of peace, for alway she hath the peace
of peace, for her Beloved appeaseth her.
Therefore is she Mary. Martha is much
encumbered; most wise is she not: for her
encumbering troubleth her; she is far from
the life of peace. For wit it for sooth, that
they whom encumbrances trouble, be full
far from this life that we have spoken of.”


CHAPTER IX


OF THE TRANSFIGURATION OF OUR LORD, AND
WHY HE DID IT BUT BEFORE THREE OF HIS
DISCIPLES; AND WHY IT WAS DONE IN THE
MOUNTAIN, AND WHY HE BADE THEM
NOT SHOW IT TILL HIS RESURRECTION


“Now, for love,’ saith Understanding of
divine light, “‘ tell me, among you, who have
somewhat to answer, what ye understand by
this.”

“« And we shall tell you,” say the souls of-
wit-of-nature, ‘‘ what we understand by this.
We understand,” say they, “‘that when Jesu
Christ transfigured himself on the Mount of
Tabor, he had with him but three of his
disciples, and he forbade them that they
should not speak of what they had seen, till
he were arisen.”

163


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 8


“This is well said,’ saith the free soul,
to them of-wit-of-nature, “for by that which
thus [ye] answer, ye have given me the staff
that I shall overcome you with.”

‘“* Now I ask you,” saith this soul, ** why
God did this >”

“He did it for us,” saith the soul that to
this answereth, ‘“‘ and since he teacheth us
this, why then do we it not ?”

‘Ah, cheap, cheap,” saith the free soul,
“how beastly* be your understandings; ye
take the chaff and leave the grain. And I
tell you that when Jesus Christ transfigured
him before three of his disciples, he did it :
for this, that ye should wit well, that few
folks see the brightness of his transfiguration,
and that he showeth it not but to his special
lovers. And for this had he three, that yet
it may be had, when God giveth it to his
creatures by fervour of burning charity.
Now ye wit why there were but three. And
now I shall tell you why it was done in the
mountain. For this, that none may not see
the divine ‘secret things, as long as he is.
[engrossed] in temporal things, that are less
than God is. Now I shall tell you why God
forbade them that they should not speak of
that they had seen, till he were arisen. And
this is, that ye should have no vainglory, for
unto that time none ought to speak. And

* Béte, stupid.
164


Ch. 10] SIMPLE SOULS


thus much I certify you,” saith this soul,
“without doubt, who hath anything to
answer, he hath something to show; else he
hath naught to answer,” —


CHAPTER X


OF MARY MAGDALEN AND ST PETER AND ST
JOHN, AND HOW GOD WORKETH YET IN
SOULS AS HE DID IN THEM, THAT WELL
DISPOSE THEM THERETO


“Ou, for God, behold the sinful repentant
Magdalen, what shame or glory had she,
that God said to her, that she had chosen
the better part and the most sure, and that
her Beloved said it should never be taken
from her. [What shame had she] of this
that her sins be known before all the people,
by such witnesses as be the Evangelists ?
For God threw out of her seven fiends. She
hath no shame before anyone but him against
whom she had sinned, for she was so upraised
and drawn, that she had naught in her other
than what was of him. And what shame or
glory hath St Peter for this, that God raised
the dead by his work, though he had denied
him three times? And what shame hath
John the Evangelist, or what glory of this,
that God showed him his privities? And
he made the true Apocalypse [concerning
165 elke


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 8


God], after that he was banished, who be-
fore had been at the taking, where Jesus
Christ was taken. I hold,” saith this soul,
“ that they to whom God did all this, had of
it neither shame nor worship, nor desire to
answer that this befell them by reason of
what God did by them or for them—nor
for other people, if this was their judgement.

“These be examples enough to under-
standers, to understand the remnant thereof,
what this means; and for none other folks
is this book written, but for them that under-
stand it.

“ T have said,” saith this soul, “‘ that for ,
this that God did to them, they had neither
shame nor worship, nor will of themselves
to answer for any; this ye see well.”

“ Ah, without fail,’ saith Truth, “ they
had no occasion for it, for they were unen-
cumbered of themselves.”

“‘ Oh,” saith this soul, “‘ since it is so that
God did them this, is he not yet the same,
hath he made an end with them of the gifts
of his bounty ?”’*

“Oh, without fail, no,’ saith Courtesy.
‘“‘ His divine bounty may not suffer him [to
do so]. It ariseth from no other thingt
but that [the soul] was not yet there,{ as


* Cf. 1 Cor. ii 7 seq.
+ MS. “ne haleth not at.” Il ne tient a?
+ MS. “ that”? =in that state.

166


Ch. 11] SIMPLE SOULS


compared to the great gifts that he hath to
give, and the same that never was given nor
said of mouth, nor of heart thought, [may be
had] if anyone desired this, and could dispose
himself thereto.”


CHAPTER XI


HOW THEY THAT WILL COME TO PEACE AND
FREEDOM MUST EVER BE READY AND
ABLE TO RECEIVE THE SENDING OF GRACE;
AND WHAT IT IS TO THEM IF THEY RE-
FUSE IT


“* On, understand it by love, I pray you, how
love hath much to give, and he maketh none
end of it. He maketh in a moment of two
things, one. But one thing it pleaseth me
to say,” saith this soul, ‘‘ not for them that
be settled, they have no need, for it does not
concern them; but for them that are not,
that yet shall be, they must trouble, for it is
for them to take heed that they be upon their
guard or waiting, if so be that love sendeth
them anything of the same that he hath
ordained for them, that they refuse it not,
for nothing that may fall.

“ At what time that it be, let them not
ever refuse what love sendeth, for to do the
message of the will of love, by letters ensealed

167


MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS  [Div. 8


of his signet. Right so as do the angels of
the third hierarchy; for this wit well, and I
do them well inform, all those to whom love
sendeth his message, that if they refuse them
at any point there where the virtues would
have them, by the inward working of virtues
that should have lordship over the body,
and [if] they refuse them in this point, they
shall never make their peace with the
Sovereign that the message sendeth, but that
they shall be taken and troubled in knowing,
and encumbered of themselves for default of
trust, for love saith that in great need men
may know their friend. :
“ Now answer this; unless he help him
then, when shall he help him ? tell me, for
love, when shall he help him, unless he help
him when he hath most need? And though
I think thereon,” saith Love, ‘‘ what marvel
is it? It behoveth me to keep the peace of
my divine righteousness and yield to every
[man] that which is his. Not,” saith Love,
** everything that is.”


168


See Be


DIVISION IX


CHAPTER I


A GREAT REBUKE THAT LOVE GIVETH TO THEM
THAT REFUSE THE SENDING OF GOD, AND
HOW THEY BE THEREFORE ENCUMBERED
OF THEMSELVES ALL THEIR LIFETIME, AND
HOW THEY MIGHT HAVE BEEN UNEN-
CUMBERED, AND BY WHAT MEANS AND
FOR HOW LITTLE


ss OW understand, auditors of this

book,” saith Love, “the gloss of

this book, for the thing is as much
worth as it is appreciated. And all that
men have need for, is needful, and no more.
And when I desired [it],’? saith Love,
“and when it pleaseth me, and was
necessary to you, I hold need [to be] this,
that I desired it—ye refused me by as many
messages as I sent you. But none knew
it,” saith Love, “but I alone. I sent you
the Thrones for to answer you and to
summon you, and the Cherubin to en-
lumine you and the Seraphin for to embrace
or kiss* you. By all these messengers I sent

* MS. “ beclippe.”
169


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 9


to you,” saith Love, “that made you wit
my will of the Beings where I would have had
you, and ye alway refused it. And when
I saw that,” saith Love, “I left you in your
waywardness to your [own] knowledge.
But if ye had heard me,” saith Love, “ ye
had been wholly another, by your own
record. But ye should well wit, and all ye
in life encumbered by your own spirit’s self,
that never shall you be without some en-
cumbering, and all for this,” saith Love,
“that ye would not obey my messengers
and Virtues when I would it. I sent by
many messengers to make you free both body |
and spirit. And for this,” saith Love, “ you
would not when I sent to you by the sensitive
Virtues and by mine angels. Therefore,
I show you I may not by right give you the
freedom that I have, for Right may not do
it. And if you had,” saith Love, ‘* obeyed
when I called you by the wills of Virtues
that I sent you, you had had by rights the
freedom that Ihave. Ah, soul!’’ saith Love,
“how you are encumbered by your self!”

“Yea, soothly,” saith this soul, “my
body is in feebleness and my soul in dread,
and often I have heaviness,” saith she, “* will
I or nill I of these two natures, that the far-
off freedom I may not have.”

** Ah, soul, alas !” saith Love, “‘ what evil
ye have for little gain! and all for this that

170


Ch. 1] SIMPLE SOULS


you obeyed not the teachings of perfection,
in which I urged you to disencumber your-
self in the flower of your youth. And always
you would not yet move yourself, nor nothing
would you do, but alway refused my mes-
senger* that I made you wit, by the noble
messengers that ye have heard; and such
folk,” saith Love, ‘‘be encumbered of
themselves unto their death day.

“Oh, without fail,’ saith Love, ‘“‘ and if
they had willed, they had been delivered
of that in which they are in right great
servitude, at little profit, and they shall
[continue to] be so as compared to the other.
And if they had heard me, they had been
delivered for right little; for so little,” saith
Love, “‘ as [merely] to give themselves [up]
there where I would have had them, [even]
as I showed them, by the Virtues whose
office this is. I say,” saith Love, “ they
had been all free of soul and body, if they had
done my counsel by the Virtues that said
my will concerning what was necessary for
them before I delighted myself in them, with
all my freedom. And because they did it
not, they all abide in this [state] that ye have
heard ‘with’ themselves. Thus think the
free naughted [souls] and arrayed with
delights, that see by themselves, the servitude
of the others; for the very sun shineth in the

* MS “sondis.”


171


THE MIRROR OF (Div. 9


light of them, so they see the motes within
the sunbeam, by the brightness of the sun
and of the beam. And when this sun is in
the soul and this beam and this brightness,
the body hath no more feebleness, nor the
soul dread, for the very Sun of Righteousness,
when he did his miracles on earth, never
healed soul without the body; but he healed
both body and soul; and right so he doeth
yet, but he doeth it to none that hath no
faith in the same.”’

Now see how worthy, and strong and right
free is she, and of all things disencumbered,
whom Faith and Love govern; but none —
may come to this unless Faith hallow him.


CHAPTER II

OF CERTAIN MEANS WHEREBY THEY THAT BE
MARRED AND IN LIFE OF SPIRIT MAY
COME OVER TO THE BEING THAT IS NEXT
THE BEING OF THIS SOUL WHICH HATH
ATTAINED THE HIGHEST BEING; AND IN
WHAT CASE THE SOUL IS IN THE TIME
OF THAT BEING


“* 7 HAVE said,” saith Love, “ that they whom

I have summoned by their own inwardness

to obey the perfection of virtues, who ought

to have done so, that they dwell unto the

time of death encumbered of themselves,
172


Ch. 2] SIMPLE SOULS


though they travail every day with them-
selves to fulfil the perfection of the apostles,
by study of reason and of goodwill, they
shall never be unencumbered of themselves,
neither of body nor of soul. No soothly,”
saith Love, “since the running fancies*
of their inward arguments giveth it them not.
It may not to them come, for all that ever
is done of them, it is all encumbrances to
them. This wit all they who undertake
works of themselves without the fervour
of the willing of their inwardness.”’

‘“‘ For thus I say it,’”’ saith this free soul,
“to all them that live in study of life of
perfection, that they be on their guard and
keep themselves that they refuse not the
askings of the fervent desires of the will
of the spirit, as clearly as they feel them,
whereby they may have the better [life]
after those lives that be called ‘ life marred ’
and ‘life of spirit’; that they may come
to this life that never worketh nor asketh:
for the settled can [have] no better than
this.

“T say,” saith Love, “that they be on
their guard, that is to say, that those which
stand in the state of the twain first lives of
perfection, that they follow duly and dili-
gently all the good stirrings and fervours
that the soul willeth and desireth, as much

* MS. “ rennyng conceits.”


173


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 9


as they may, for it is needful for them to do
so if they will have the better [life] after-
wards; for the former lives be but maiden
servants that array the house against the
coming of the great Being, to lodge* the
state that is the freedom of not-willing,
in which the soul is of all points freed.
To this come they that give all, for all who
give all, have all and not else. And thus
much,” saith this free soul, ‘“‘ I will say to
them that be marred, that they keep the
peace, and fulfil perfectly the will and the
fervour of cutting desire of the work of their
spirit, as I have said, in holding their wits _
so close,t that they have nothing by work —
of deliberation beyond the will of the spirit,
so that they may reach to these rightful
works, that is most nigh the being that we
have spoken of. Where the eldest born
daughter of the high King is set, there
faileth her nothing of gentleness. And
this lady,’’ saith Love, “hath this being
attained, the which is most highest and most
worthy and most noble. And I shall tell
you how,” said Love, ‘‘ there is not so much ©
as the quantity of a point in her that is not
fulfilled by me, so that nothing created may
dwell in her thought. And she hath piety
* MS. “‘ harborowe.”’


+ MS. short; in holding back their conscious
reflections upon their state. j


174


Ch. 2] SIMPLE SOULS


in her, but not of appearance,* and never-
theless,”’ saith Love, ‘“‘ piety and courtesy be
not from this soul departed, when there is
time of need.”

“That is right,” saith this soul, “no
more is it from Jesus Christ by whom I have
life.» When that his precious soul was
glorified, as soon as she was knit to the body
of the manhood and to nature divine in the
Person of the Son, there dwelled in him
pity and courtesy. And he who is courteous
loveth not but that thing that he ought to
love. He loveth not the spiritual things,
who loveth temporalities. Nor he loveth
never divinely who loveth bodily. They
that love the Deity feel little of the humanity
—during the time of that usage. Never was
a soul knit, nor oned, nor divinely fulfilled,
that feeleth bodily things. Of what should
the inwardness of these souls feel? for God
does not move himself, nor does she move
herself.”


M. Now understand by nobleness of under-
standing the gloss of these words. The
meaning of these words that the soul
saith, that her inwardness feeleth not,
she moveth not herself, it is meant for
the time of ravishing in union. There
be three manners of unions that devout


* MS. “ of semblance.”


175


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 9


souls feel, in sundry dispositions, but I
mean of the highest, that is best; and that
is the union where, through ravishing of
love, the soul is knit and oned to God,
so that God and the soul is one spirit.
For St Paul saith: it is not two spirits,
God and the soul, that is thus oned to
him, but it is all one spirit in time of this
union.* Of what, then, should her in-
wardness feel in the time of this union,
or [how] should she herself move herself ?
Oh, she may not do it, for she is all molten
in God for the time. Ah, this blessed
oneness lasteth but a little while in any |
creature that is here in deadly life, for the «
corruption of naturet may not suffer it.
But it may oft be had by the goodness
of God, who is the worker of this work
in souls where he vouchsafes [it]. To him
be offered all glory and praisings to ever-
lasting laud.

Lo ye that study this book, thus ye must
within yourselves gloss such dark words.
And if ye cannot come soon to the under-
standing thereof, offer it meekly up to.
God, and by the custom of oft reading
thereon, ye shall come thereto. A few
words more I say in this book, to bring
you into the way, notwithstanding that I

ACR Y Corivitnye
+ MS. “ Sensuality of mankind.”
176


Ch. 3] SIMPLE SOULS


was purposed before to have glossed no
more. God grant us alway to do his
pleasing and bring us to him when it is
his will. WN.


CHAPTER III


HOW THESE SOULS BE NEVER FEEBLE NOR
ENCUMBERED OF THEMSELVES


“ An God,” saith Reason, ‘‘ what these souls
be ! certainly through baptism be they never
openly feeble,”* saith Reason, “nor encum-
bered of themselves.”’

“Oh,” saith this soul, ‘no soothly no,
love destroyeth not, but she keepeth and
nourisheth and feedeth all those that trust
in her. Sun and darkness and seas be ful-
filled. I sing,” saith this soul, “ [at] one time,
song, [at] other time, unsong, and all for
them that yet shall be free; so that they may
here, in this book, learn some point of free-
dom and what thing behoveth them before
they come thereto.”


* MS. “certis at baptism apertly be they never
feeble,”


ayy *


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 9


CHAPTER IV


HOW THIS SOUL HATH PERCEIVED THE COAST
OF THE COUNTRY WHERE SHE OUGHT
TO BE


“Tus soul hath perceived by divine light
the coasts of the country where she ought to
be. She passeth the sea to gather the shoots*
of the high cedar; for none taketh nor at-
taineth to this cedar unless they pass the
high sea, in naughting their wills unto the
waves. Understand ye lovers what this is.”


CHAPTER V


OF THE DEBTS OF THIS SOUL, AND HOW THEY
BE PAID, AND BY WHOM, AND WHO IS HIS
NEXT NEIGHBOUR


“* T HAVE said,” saith Love, ‘‘ that this soul is
fallen of me into naught, and less than naught
without number. For right as God is not
to be comprehended as to his might, so is
this soul in infinite debt for but one hour in
time, without more, that she had will, against
him. So that she oweth him, without
default, the debt of that which his will willeth ;
and so many times as she hath willed to rob
* MS. “ ympes.”’
178


Ch. 5] SIMPLE SOULS


God of his will, she is in debt as much as his
will is worth.”

“ Ah, visible and insufferable debt,” saith
this soul, “who shall pay this debt? Ah,
Lord, certainly you; for your plenteous
goodness,* that is swimming and flowing
full of courtesy, may not suffer but that I be
quit by you, God of love, for you have my
debts paid in a moment !”

“The right sweet Far Night} hath sup-
pliedt the last penny of my debt. And
I say to him, ‘As much care have ye for
me as I for you, though I gave you as
much as you have, for such is the largesse
of your divine nature.’ ‘So willeth he,’ so
saith this gentle Far Night, that is my
counsel.{ These two debts, the one and the
other, be henceforward all one, for this
is the counsel of my next neighbour, and
thereto I consent.”

“ © clean, pure Lady Soul,” saith Reason,
“‘ who is your next neighbour ?”

“‘ His Exalting Ravishing that uptaketh me


* MS. “ bounty,” and so throughout. The sense
is sometimes goodness, sometimes a “‘ favour.”

+ The Far Night is here impersonated and stands
for Counsel in a mock pleading atlaw. The meaning
seems to be that the soul’s experience of the “‘ dark
night ”’ has freed her from any kind of positive guilt
of sin, and also from the debt of “‘ omissions.”

+ MS. “hath brought.”

§ MS. “avant parlour.”


179


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 9


and throweth me in the very midst* of
divine love, in which,” saith this soul, “ I am
drowned. ‘Then is it right that he sustain
me of himself, for I am laid in him; I must
stint,” saith this soul, ‘“‘for I may not
tell it.

“* No soothly,”’ saith Love, “‘ no more than
the sun may stayt or dwell, no more may
this soul say of this life as compared to that
which—truth to say—truly is,”


CHAPTER VI


HOW THIS SOUL IS A SPRING OF DIVINE LOVE, ,
AND HOW SHE SEETH THAT SHE IS NAUGHT,
AND HOW THIS NAUGHT GIVETH HER ALL


‘* Au, Lady Soul,” saith Abashings, ‘‘ ye be
a continual spring of divine love, of the which
spring of divine love waxeth the well. of
divine knowing, and the streams of divine
laud.”

‘‘And of this spring of divine love, the
well of divine knowing and of the streams of
divine lauding, I remain,” saith this confirmed
soul, ‘‘ perfectly in his divine will.”

‘“ Now hath this soul,” saith Love, “ her
right name of Naught, in which she moveth,
for she seeth that she is naught, and that she

* MS. “ midst of middle.”
+ MS. “ shut,” evidently O.F. ferme.
180


Ch. 7] SIMPLE SOULS


hath not of aught, neither of her nor of her
even-Christian, nor of God himself. For
she is so little, that she may not herself find,
and all thing wrought is so far from her, that
she may not feel it, and God is so great that
she may nothing of him comprehend. And
because of this naught, she is fallen into
certainty of naught-knowing and into cer-
tainty of naught-availing, and into certainty
of naught-willing. And this naught, which
we speak of,” saith Love, “ giveth her the
all, and otherwise might she not have it.”


CHAPTER VII


OF TWO THINGS THAT THIS SOUL DOETH NOT,
WHICH MAKETH HER TO HAVE PEACE; AND
HOW SHE IS NO MORE ENCUMBERED OF
THINGS THAT SHE DOETH WITHOUT HER,
THAN IF SHE DID IT NOT; AND WHO BE
PERFECTLY FREE


“THs soul,” saith Love, “is imprisoned
and fettered and holden in a country of entire
peace, for she is there in full sufficiency.
There she shippeth and saileth and floateth
and swimmeth, and is filled of divine peace
without the moving of her inwardness and
without the work of her outward doing. For
these twain aforesaid unmake this peace,
if it may so befall; but not of this soul, for
181


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 9


she is in sovereignty. Nothing may grieve
her, nor nothing encumber. If she do
anything by her outward wits, that is always
without her; and if God do his work in her,
[then] it is, of himself in her, without herself,
for him. No more is this soul encumbered
of anything that she doth, than is her angel
of the keeping of her. For no more be the
angels encumbered to keep us than if they
kept us not; neither is this soul [encumbered]
any more by what she doth, than if she did
it not. For she hath naught of herself, she
hath all given freely without any ‘ for-why ?”
in him that is all. For she is lady beyond the ©
thought of her youth, and Sun that shineth, ~
heateth and nourisheth life of being, dis-
covereth her from her former being. ‘This
soul,” saith Love, “‘ hath not held* doubt nor
trust.”

“ Eh, what then, for God ?”’ saith Reason.

* Certain confidence,” saith Love, “ and
true agreementt to will only [and wholly] the
— ordering; thus it is that she is perfectly
ree?


* Not “‘ held,” etc.; not given herself up to feelings


of either doubt or confidence.
t MS. “accordance”; Latin affinitatem.


182


Ch. 8] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER VIII


OF FOUR COSTS THAT THIS SOUL IS MADE FREE
OF; HOW SHE HATH LOST HER NAME BY
UNION OF LOVE AND IS TURNED ABOUT
TO LOVE, AND-HOW YET THERE IS MORE
HIGH THAN THIS; HOW NONE MAY
UNDERSTAND THIS BOOK BUT THEY THAT
LOVE HATH MADE IT FOR


Or four costs* behoveth a bondman to have
before he might be free and called a gentle-
man; and right thus it is in the understand-
ing of this spiritual doing.

The first cost that this soul which is free
hath, is this, that she hath no grudging of
conscience, though she work not the work
of virtues. Ah, for God! understand it,
ye that hear this, if ye may! How might
Love have this usage concerning all the
works of virtues, since work ceaseth when
love hath this usage ?

The second cost is, that she hath nothing
of will, no more than have the dead in graves,
but only the divine will of God. This soul
recketh not nor hath heart of righteousness,


* Cost —treasure, something costly. The bond-
man must have the four precious “‘ costs ”’ before he
is fit to be freed.

183


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 9


nor of mercy.* She planteth all in the sole
will of him that moveth her in him; this is
the second cost by which the soul is made
free.

The third cost is, that she holdeth this;
that even as God could no more will aught
but goodness, so she believeth that she could
not will other than his divine will. Love hath
arrayed her so with himself, that it maketh
her thus to hold of herself. For he, of his
bounty, hath turned her into this favour by
goodness. Also of his love hath he, unto
this love, by love, turned her. And of his


will, hath her in his will, by divine will, ~


purely turned. She is of him, in him, for
him, thus led; and this holdeth she, otherwise
she should not be free of all costs.

Understand the gloss, auditors of this
book! Where the stream or the flood lieth
that drowneth the. thought. This is then
when she is in being; in the which God
maketh her to have [a] being; there hath she
given her will, so that she may not will but
the will of him that hath led her of himself,
for him, unto his bounty. And she that is
thus free of all costs, liveth in sovereignty,
and there she loseth her name and is drowned,
and in this drowning left of him, in him, for
him, in himself. So loseth she her name,

* 7.e., she is not set on apportioning justice or
mercy.


184


Ch:8] SIMPLE SOULS


right as doth a water that cometh out of the
sea,* that is called Oise or Meuse, and when
it entereth into the sea it loseth its name and
its courses by which it ran in many countries
in doing its work; and ceaseth in the sea.
There it resteth itself and hath lost its labour ;
and right so soothly it is of this soul. In
order to gloss the meaning ye have of this
and for this, enough ensamples; how this
soul cometh to the sea and doth her labour
and how she stinteth in the sea, there hath
she lost her name and her labour. She hath
no name but the name of him, in whom she
is perfectly moved, that is, in Love. That
is the spouse of her joyt which hath drawn
the thought wholly into him. She is, then,
this that is. And that soundeth marvellous
to her; then is she marvellous and Love is
her pleasure, the which Love delighteth her.

Now is this soul without name, save the
name of the very Union where Love moveth
her. Right as the Water that we have
spoken of, that hath the name of the sea—for
it is sea as soon as it is entered into the sea—
it is not drawn to anything contrary by any
nature of the ground.t Also, no matter


* 7.e., out of a lake. This is a well-known illus-
tration in the Dionysian School.

+ MS. “the dispens of her play”; Lat., hic
eius est ludi sponsus.

+ A reference to some thirteenth-century law of
gravitation?


185


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 9


maketh of it nor of the sea aught but one
thing, not twain, but one; and right so it is
of her of whom we speak. For Love hath
drawn all her nature into him, that Love and
this soul are all one thing; not twain, for that
were discord, but only one, and therefore
this is a good “accord.” “It is right,” saith
Love, “‘ that this soul that thus is free of these
four costs, that she ascend afterwards to
sovereignty.”

‘* Ah, Love,” saith Reason, “‘is there yet
anything more high ?”

“Yea,” saith Love, “‘ this that is her next
neighbour. For when she is thus free of
these four costs and noble* by all the free- °
doms that of her be descended—for no churl
is accepted} in this marriage—this soul that
is thus noble, falleth then,” saith Love,
“into dismay that is called naught, thinking
of the far-off results of what is near; that is
her most nigh neighbour. And then liveth
this soul,” saith Love, “‘ not in the former
life of grace, nor in the life of spirit, but
gloriously and divinely; for God hath hal-
lowed her in this point by himself, and.
nothing contrary to goodness may befall
her.”


* MS. “ gentle : O.F. gentil =noble.
Tt MS. “‘ taken.”
+ An obscure panes, MS. ‘“‘thinking of the
fartake of nigh. .
186


Ch. 9] SIMPLE SOULS


Understand holily, all as it is; so may God
give you alway being without removing !
This I say to the persons for whom Love hath
made this book, to him for whom I have
written it. But among you that have not
been such, nor be, nor shall be, ye trouble
yourselves in vain, if ye will understand it.
He who is not this, tasteth not this. [For
it is to be] in God without being, [for] in
God’s self 7s being. Understand the gloss !
He that is lame of limbs may not well go, nor
the feeble may not swim.

** Ah, without fail,’ saith Reason, “‘ this is
well said; [he who is] cumbered, encum-
bereth [others].”’


CHAPTER IX


OF THE RUDENESS OF THEM THAT BE GOVERNED
BY REASON, AND HOW THIS SOUL WILL NO
MORE FOLLOW THEIR COUNSEL


Tuus then speaketh this soul, abashed by
naught-thinking, by this far night of night;
who in peace delighteth herself. “* Soothly,”
saith she, ‘“‘ they that be governed by reason,
the rudeness nor the cumberings of them no
man may say. By their teachings it appear-
eth; it is the work of an ass and not of a man,
if any man would hear them. But God hath
kept me well,” saith this soul, “from such
187


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 9


lore of Reason’s disciples; they shall not hold
me in their counsel, nor their doctrine will I
no more hear; I have been long therein
holden, sometime I thought it was good, it
is not now my best; of that, they know
nothing; for a little wit may not put a price
[upon a] thing of worthy value, nor under-
stand anything unless reason be master
thereof; and if they did understand it any
time, it is not often. And therefore, I say,”
saith this soul, “that their rudeness I will
no more hear: let them tell me nothing, for
I can no more suffer it. I have neither ways
nor means;* to God this work pertaineth, |
who doth in me his works: I owe him no °
work since himself worketh. If I [put in]
mine, I should unmake his, and for this cause
the work and teaching of the disciples of
Reason would harm me. If I believed
them, in such dread I should abandon this
work, by their counsel. They follow [after]
to attain a thing that is impossible, but I
excuse them for their intention.


* MS. “I have not of what, nor for what *’: Fr,
Fe n'ai pas de quoi ni pourquot. ;


188


Ch. ro] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER X


HOW THIS SOUL IS FREE AND CONSUMED BY
MORTALITY, AND BRENT IN THE BURNING
FIRE OF CHARITY; AND HOW THIS SOUL
SEEKETH NO MORE GOD BY OUTWARD
WORKS. OF THE MARVEL THAT REASON
HATH OF THIS, AND OF THE PEACE OF
MARY AND THE TROUBLE OF MARTHA


“Tus soul,” saith Love, “‘ is free and right
free, surmounted free of tree, crop and root,
and of all its branches. Her lot hath this
of freedom, ended of every cost; there hath
she her full purity. She answereth to none,
nor oweth she to do so, unless he be of her
lineage, this is to say, unless it be according
to her disposition within herself. This soul
findeth none that calleth her, nor none that
she answereth to, nor her enemy hath no
more answers from her.”

“This is right,” saith this soul, “ since
I draw God to me, it behoveth that he support
me. God his bounty, he may not lose.”

“This soul,” saith Love, ‘‘ is consumed
by mortality, and brent in the burning fire
of charity, and the powder of her not cast
nor thrown, but given into the high sea by
naught-willing of will. She is right gentle
and noble in prosperities, and highly noble

189 I


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 9


in adversities, and excellent noble in all
places that she is in.”

“ She who is such,” saith this soul, “‘ she
seeketh no more God by penances, nor by
no sacraments of Holy Church, nor by
thoughts nor by words, nor by works, nor
by holy creatures, nor by creatures of above,*
nor by righteousness, nor by mercy, nor by
glory, nor by divine knowing, nor by divine
love, nor by divine praise and laud.”

“ Ah, Lord God,” saith Reason, “ what
saith this creature at first? This is all
deadly !+ What shall my disciples say ?
I know not what to say nor what to answer, _
to excuse this !” ‘

“Oh, what marvel is it,” saith this soul,
“< these folks of thy nursing be on foot without
going, and have hands without work, and
mouths without speech, and eyes without
sight, and ears without hearing, and reason
without reason, and body without life, and
heart without understanding, as long as they
have this being, and therefore it is marvel
upon marvel [to them].”’

“Yea, soothly,”’ saith Love, “this is to
them right marvellous marvels; for they be
full far from the country where these others
have these usages of high worthiness. But
they that be such as we speak of, that be in

* 7.¢e., supernal beings.
+ MS, “slaying.”
190


Ch. Io] SIMPLE SOULS


the country in which God liveth himself,
they have not marvel thereof.”

“No, forsooth,” saith this soul that is
free, “for it were a point of villeinage,* and
I shall tell you how. Ifa king give to one of
his servants that truly hath served him a
great gift, by which the servant were rich all
the days of his life after, and never [had] to
do service more, why should a wise man
marvel at this, or why should he blame the
king for his gift, and the freedom of the
gift ?”

“Nay,” saith Courtesy, “a wise man
marvelleth not of thing that is done, that
pertaineth to be done, but alloweth it and
praiseth it and loveth it; and if he marvel,
he showeth in that, that he doeth that which
he ought not to do. But the servile hearts
that be not wise, that know not for default
of wit what honour and courtesy is, nor what
the gifts be of a noble lord, they have thereof
great wonder, and that is no marvel !”

“They have causet in themselves,’
Truth, “‘ as ye have heard before.”

“* Ah, for God,” saith Nobility-of-unity of
the freed soul, “ why should anyone marvel
that hath any wit in him? If I say great
things or mean these things, or though I have
by all, of all, in all, my full sufficiency, my

* MS. “‘vilayn”’—7.e., a matter of the law of
villeins. {1 Fr. de quoi =reason.


I9I


>


saith


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 9


Beloved is great, who great gifts giveth and
maketh it all at his will. He is fulfilled
abundantly of all goodness of himself. And
I am full enlumined and abundantly fulfilled
of abundance of delights, by holding his
divine bounty in me, without seeking him
by the paps of his consolations,* as this book
deviseth,”’ saith this soul. ‘“‘ He calleth me
to peace, without fail.”

“Tt is right,” saith pure Courtesy. ‘Sit
fitteth the Beloved since he is worthy, that he
of his bounty call his lover to peace.”

Martha is troubled, peace hath Mary.
Praised is Martha, but more Mary. Mary _
hath but one intention in her, and that only:
one intent maketh her to have peace, and
Martha in many intentions, have ofttimes
unrest. And therefore a free soul may only
have one intention. She heareth oft, this
soul, things that she heareth not, and is full
ofttimes where this soul is not, and feeleth
ofttimes that which she feeleth not. “I
hold,” saith she, “for this, mine [own
which] I shall not let go; it is in my will,
befall what may; for he is with me, then it
were a default if I [let myself be] dismayed.”


* MS. “ assommementis,” Lat. consolationes.


192


Ch. 11] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER XI


OF THE DEATH OF REASON BY THE STRONG
SPEECH OF THIS SOUL; AND HOW LOVE
ASKETH IN THE STEAD OF REASON ‘‘ WHO
IS MOTHER TO REASON AND TO OTHER
VIRTUES 2”? AND HOW IT IS MEEKNESS
AND WHICH MEEKNESS IT IS


“THIS soul,” saith Love, “ is lady of virtues,
daughter of deity, sister of wisdom, and the
spouse of love.”

*‘ Soothly,” saith this soul, “‘ but this
seemeth to Reason a marvellous language,
and that is no wonder, for it shall not be
long until he shall not be; but I was,”’ saith
this soul, “‘ and am, and shall be without
failing; for love hath neither beginning, nor
comprehending, nor end; and I am [nothing]
but love, how might I then have end? It
may not be.”

“* Ah, God,” saith Reason, “‘ how dare any
say this! I dare not hear it. I fall, Lady
Soul; soothly my heart faileth me to hear
you. I have no life.”

** Alas, alas! why had this death not been
long ere this time,” saith this soul, “ for
until this [death had been] I might not freely
hold mine heritage. And this that is mine is
that [whereby] I fell* you with love and

* _.e., kill, MS. “‘ fall,”
193


THE MIRROR OF (Div. 9


wound you to death. Now is Reason dead,”
saith this soul.

“Then shall I say,” saith Love, “ this
which Reason should say if she were alive in
you and which she should ask of you, our
Beloved,” saith Love to this soul, which is
Love and none other thing than Love.

These sayings, then, that Love saith to this
creature, of his divine bounty, have thrown
Reason and the works of virtues under his
feet, and to death brought [them], without
recovering. ‘Now I say that [which] Reason
should say. She should ask,” saith Love,
“who is mother of her, and of the other
virtues that be of her germain.”* :

“And these, be they mothers of none ?”
saith this soul.

“Yes,” saith Love, “all the virtues be
mothers.”

“* And of whom 2” saith this soul.

““ Of peace and of holiness,” saith Love.

“Then be all the virtues that be germain
to Reason mothers of holiness >”’ saith this
soul.

“ Sooth,” saith Love, “of that holiness
that Reason understandeth, but of none
other.”

“ And who is then mother of virtues ?”
saith this soul.

‘“‘ Meekness,” saith Love, “ but not that

*x Germain —akin = First cousin.


194


Ch. 11] SIMPLE SOULS


meekness that is meekness by works of virtue.
She is germain sister of Reason. I say
‘ sister,’ because it is a greater thing to be
mother than child; this ye see well; and
nearer is kin than stranger.”

** Oh,” saith this soul that speaketh in the
person of Reason, “‘ then is that meekness that
is mother of these virtues but a daughter.
Who is this, and of whence cometh she, that
is mother of so great a lineage as be the
virtues, and tutor* to feelings, when virtues
be mothers? Who is ancestort to this
feeling ? Can none tell whence this line
cometh ?”

“No,” saith Love, “they that know
cannot put it into speech.”

“This is sooth,” saith this soul, “ but I
shall add here to this what I shall say.
This meekness that is tutor and mother is
daughter of divine majesty. She cometh of
the divine deity, where the mother is
ancestor of these branches,{ whose root is
of such great fruitfulness.{ We still our-
selves, speech overwhelmeth it. She hath
given the stock and the fruit of her root and
branches. Therefore near lieth the peace
of the far night, which disencumbers her of


x MS. “‘ taye,’’ Lat. MS. tutor.
$f MSE ENS

£ i.e., by Mother Right.

§ MS. ‘* fructifiances.”’


195


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 9 —


work; speech and thought it maketh all
shadow; for her far night disencumbereth
her so that nothing shadoweth her.”


CHAPTER XII


HOW THIS SOUL IS FREE OF ALL, AND HOW SHE
HATH SO PLANTED HER WILL IN THE —
TRINITY, THAT SHE MAY NOT SIN UNLESS
SHE UNPLANT IT


‘* THIS: soul; saith: Love, .“1s.-quit o£}
services, for she liveth in freedom. Whoso
serveth, he is not free; whoso feeleth he is
not dead, whoso desireth he would [have],
whoso would [have], he beggeth. And
whoso beggeth, he hath a lack* of divine
sufficiency. But they that be truly alway
upholden and taken of love and naughted
by love, and all overspread of love, they have
no heart but on love, even though they should
suffer evermore torments and endure them,
though the torments were as great as God
is great in bounty. Never loved the soul
finely that doubteth that this be not true.
“This soul hath given all by freedom of
nobility of the work of the Trinity. In the
same Trinity this soul planteth so deeply
her will, that she may not sin, unless she
unplant it. For she hath nothing wherewith
* MS. “‘ of falliance.”


196


Ch. 12] SIMPLE SOULS


to sin, for without will may no creature sin.
Now ye dare not reck of sin if she leave her
will there where she hath planted it, that is,
in him who hath given it her freely, of his
bounty; thence will she not take it, but
there she planteth it all wholly, freely,
without any ‘for-why? And not for her
[sake], but for him, for two things. One is
because it is good, and the second is, because
he willeth it. Up to this time hath she no
peace fully, steadfastly, nor peaceably, till
she be of her will purely departed. These
that such be resemble always a drunken
[man], for the drunken man, he is no more
afeared for anything that is coming to him,
whatever adventure may befall him, than if
it came not to him. And if he be [afeared],
he is not all fully drunk.

“And also if this soul have anything
wherewith to will, it is ill planted. She may
yet fall if she be assailed with adversities
or with prosperities. Then is she not whole,
for she is not naked. No, since she hath
wherewith to will or to unwill, or to withhold
her will.”


197 12


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 9


CHAPTER XIII


WHAT IT BEHOVETH THEM TO DO THAT BE IN
LIFE OF SPIRIT, TO COME TO LORDSHIP
AND SOVEREIGNTY


“ AND yet I will thus much say,” saith Love — |


to all those that be in life of spirit, “‘ that if —
it be asked of them, let them do the asking


of the desire of their inwardness, in following _
the works of perfection by the study of reason,.


willing or not. For if they will, by this
they may be and shall come to the being
that we have spoken of, and shall yet be
lords of themselves and of heaven and earth.”

‘**And how, Lord ?”? saith Reason that
to this cannot answer.

“ By this way,” saith this soul that is
free; “if she holdeth all without care or
without heart* and all giveth without heart,
and all taketh without heart, and all hath
without heart; and if her heart feel it, this
is she not.” >

““T have said,” saith Love, “ that they do
the asking of their inwardness, if it be asked,
for otherwise I command it them not; and
if they leave all the will of their outwardness


* 7.e., without setting her heart on what she does,
gives, suffers, etc.


tT See note infra, p. 301.


198


Ch. 13] SIMPLE SOULS


for the inward life of spirit, they shall yet
come to all lordship and sovereignty.”

“Oh,” saith the spirit that this same
seeketh in life marred,* “‘ tell me how 2”

“ Forsooth,” saith this soul that standeth
in freedom, “none can see it but he only
that zs this thing in creatures, of his bounty
for creature. But this I shall tell you,”
saith this free soul, “‘ what behoveth a
creature ere he come thereto. It behoveth
him perfectly to do the contrary of his will
in appeasing the virtues up to the throat,
and hold this point without falling [away,
namely, that] the spirit have alway lordship
without contrariosity.”’

“Ah God,” saith Truth, “‘ how sick is the
body of the heart, where such a spirit is.”

“ Soothly I say,” saith this free soul,
“that it behoveth to have such inward
working in life marred, this is to say, in life
of spirit, so that it destroyt the humours of
all sickness, in a swift moment. Such
physician hath Fervour-of-spirit.”’+

* Latin MS. perditiva.

+ MS. ‘* waste.”

+ The contradiction is again only superficial.
In this life of spirit—for these souls so called, there
must still be active mortification of all that affects
the will; the spirit must overcome the will as well
as the flesh.


Truth protests with the observation that such
a spirit will sorely wear out the body. The only


199


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 9


“This is sooth,” saith Love, ‘‘ whoso
that doubteth in this, if he had assayed,* he
should wit the sooth.”


CHAPTER XIV


HOW THEY THAT BE IN LIFE OF SPIRIT MUST
ALWAY DO THE CONTRARY. OF THEIR
PLEASAUNCE IF THEY WILL HAVE PEACE,
AND HOW THEY THAT BE FREE MUST DO
ALL THAT PLEASETH THEM OR ELSE THEY —
SHALL LOSE PEACE. WHAT THING IT IS_
THAT GIVETH THIS SOUL AND IS MOST
NOBLE BEING THAT MAY BE HAD IN THIS
LIFE


“* Now I shall tell you,” saith Love, ‘‘ of the
soul in freeness, and also of them of the
life which we have spoken of, that we call
life of spirit, it may have no peace unless
the body do alway the contrary of its will.
This is to be understood, that these folks
do the contrary of that which delighteth
them. For otherwise, else, they should


answer is that many wearinesses and humours of
sickness are often put to flight by a fresh sharp
act of additional physical mortification. This is
the prescription of Fervour-of-Spirit, and Love
appeals to the experience of those who have tested
it by trial. 1
* Assay =try.
200


Ch. 14] SIMPLE SOULS


fall into loss of this life, unless they do
alway the contrary of their pleasure. And
they that be free have to do all the contrary,
for right as them behoveth in life of spirit
to do all the contrary of their will, unless
they will lose peace, [so] behoveth it in life
that is free, to do all that pleaseth them,
unless they will lose peace.* If they be
come into the state of freedom, that is, if
they be fallen} from virtues into Love, and
from Love into Naught, they do nothing
except it please them; and if they do [other-
wise], they rob themselves of peace, freedom,
noblesse. For until then is not the soul
wholly refined, until she do that which
pleaseth her and that she be grudging of
doing the contrary of her pleasaunces. That
is right,’ saith Love, ‘“‘ for her will is ours,
she hath passed the Red Sea, and her enemies
therein left. Her pleasing is our will, by
the purity of unity of the will of the Deity,
wherein we have enclosed her. Her will
is ours, for she is moved from grace into
perfection; from works of Virtues and from


* This freedom, the highest state of the soul,
implies a perfect union of will with God, so that the
desires are transformed, and only that which pleases
God is desirable. This has often been established
in the case of the saints. Obviously no deductions
in favour of self-indulgence are to be drawn from this
passage by those who have not attained that state.

+ Fallen, here and following =moved, changed.

201


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 9


Virtues into Love; and from Love into
Naught, and from Naught into clarifyings*
of God, who seeth with eyes of his majesty;
who in this point hath enlightened her by
himself, and [she] is so left in him, that she
neither seeth him nor herself. If she saw
herself in this divine bounty she should be
for herself;+ but he seeth this bounty in her
who wist this of her before she was. When
he gave her of his bounty then he made her
lady. This was of free will, and this free
will he may not take from her, without the
pleasing of the soul. Now he hath it without °
any ‘ for-why >’ right in such a way as he
had it before she was lady thereover. Now
naught is but he; no one [is] loved but he;
for none zs but he. This calleth her alone,
this maketh her a lone soul, and the all,
sole, alone[ness] of his own being giveth
her that point, that is the most noble being
that any creature may have, in this life of
perfection. And under this there be five
[beings] in which men must live according
to the perfection of the callt of every [man], -
before a soul may have this, which is the
sixth, which is most profitable and best and
the most noble and the most gentle of all


* 7,e., illumination.
+ ‘‘ For herself,”’ cf. note on “‘ with herself,” p. 18
Here =attached to her own interests.
+ MS. ‘‘ asking,’? God’s asking—z.e., vocation.
202


Ch. 15] SIMPLE SOULS


the other five. And in paradise is the
seventh, that is made perfect without any
lack. And thus doeth God of his bounty
in his creatures, his divine works. The
Holy Ghost inspireth where he will and is
marvellous in his creatures.”


CHAPTER XV


WHAT THING IT IS THAT HATH GIVEN THIS
SOUL FREEDOM IN ENDURING OF THINGS


“Au, Lord,” saith this soul, “‘ ye have so
much suffered for us and can so much work
in us, by you, of you, for us, that these other
works have taken their end in us, but that
is right little refined.* Now work in us,
by you, of you, for us, without us, thus
Lord as it pleaseth you. For as for me
henceforward, I make no fors, I disencumber
myself of you, both of myself and of mine
even-Christian. Thus I shall tell you how
I relinquish you and me and mine even-
Christian, everyone, in witting of your
divine wisdom, in the streams of your divine
might, in the governance of your divine
bounty, for your sole will. And this sole
thing of love, led, cleared, and clarified by
divine majesty, hath of all things given me
enduring freedom, without breaking,” saith
* MS. ‘“‘tempred.”
203


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 9


the soul that is thus called, ‘‘ for else it were
no gift unless it were without failing. Now
understand, if ye have this gift !”


CHAPTER XVI


OF THE PEACE OF THIS DIVINE LIFE, AND HOW
MARY MAGDALEN HAD IT WHEN SHE WAS
IN THE DESERT. AND HOW OUR LADY HAD
IT ALWAYS, AND WHAT THE LANGUAGE
OF THIS LIFE IS


** Now I say to them that serve,” saith this, |


soul, “to bring them into life of freedom,
I owe it not. His love is not served in this,
nor is this naught*—it may not be. And
when such [a soul] is naught, then liveth
God himself in this creature without breaking
the peace of his creature. The peace of this
life of divine life, it suffereth not to be thought
of, nor spoken, nor written. And this love
is without work of body, and without work
of heart, and without work of the spirit, for
divine work hath fulfilled the law. Reason
praiseth the Magdalen for she sought Jesu
Christ, but love stilleth him. This forget
not, for she failed when she sought divine
life, but when she was in [the] desert, love

* The sense seems to be that these “‘ other souls ”’
have not attained to the “‘ naughted life ”—and so his


love may not be best served by them—“ that may
not be.”


204


Ch. 16] SIMPLE SOULS


took her and annihilated* or naughted her,
and in her wrought. Then had she love
in her of him without herself; she lived then
of divine life, which made her have glorious
life. And then she drew God to her without
seeking him. She had no need to seek
when love had taken her. But when she took
love, she sought him by desire of will, in
feeling of her spirit. That was human and
not clean, pure, divine, for she was then
marred and not Mary.t She wist not when
she sought him, that God was all, by all, in
all, she had not then sought him. I have
found none that alway did this, but the
Virgin Mary. Never had she will according
to the senses, nor work of spirit, but [she
had] the will of the Deity in work divine.
This was and is, and shall be her divine
beholding, her divine love, her divine peace,
and her divine lauding; altogether her labours
and all her rest, to will only the divine will,
and therefore she had glorious life enclosed
within the soul of her mortal body without
any intermediary.{§ The language of this
divine life is close silence of the divine love;
she hath wist this afar off, and of long known,
that there is nothing more divine than alway
to will the divine will.”


* MS. “ aneantized ” =made her nothing.
+ Is this a play on words “‘ marred ” and “ mar-
tha’ed ’’? + MS. “ deadly.” § MS. entredeus.
205


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 9


CHAPTER XVII


HOW AND BY WHAT MEANS THEY THAT STAND
IN DESIRE MAY COME TO REST OF SPIRIT;
AND OF THREE THINGS OF THE DIVINE
LIFE AND OF THE INNOCENCE THAT IS
GOTTEN BY THIS LIFE


“O YE that stand in desires and be not yet
come to the rest of spirit, work and travail
busily, and naught yourselves, for none may
rest him in highful rest that is alway restful- °
able, unless he be afore awearied, I am thereof
sikker.* Therefore let the virtues have that
that is theirs of the cutting wills, of the
fervours of affection of your spirit, till they
have acquit you of the debt that ye owe to
Jesu Christ. Himself saith in the Gospel:
Whoever believeth in me, he shall do such
works as I do, and yet more greater shall he
do.t Where lieth the gloss of these words, ;
Task you? In this, not till then when one
hath paid to Jesu Christ all that he oweth
him may he have the peace of the divine
country where life dwelleth. God give you
hastily from your natural perfection to come
to this, where that is pleasure and harmony$
of the powers of the soul, and of all thing
* 7.é., sure. T John xiv 12.
+ MS. “‘ accordance of the mights.”?
206


Ch. 18] SIMPLE SOULS


sufficiency. Thus it behoveth to be, for
there be the three [kinds] of divine life, that
we call the glorious life, and the being which
love giveth us of his bounty formed, that
leadeth in soul the first day that it attaineth
to earth, that is innocence, which Adam lost
in Paradise terrestre by disobedience: the
pain dwelt with him and Jesu Christ took it.
Then it is good, right, and reason, that true
innocence dwell with us. The very inno-
cents are never right nor never wrong, they
feel all naked, that have not anything to
answer. All [men] answer and all fail to
agree,* by the sin of Adam, but the innocents
have not whereof to answer.”


CHAPTER XVIII


OF THE MOST HIGH BEING THAT THE NAKED,
NAUGHTED, OR CLARIFIED SOULS BE IN


THE country of virtues that the marred
work in is full far from the country of
forgetting and all-naked, naughted, or clarified
souls, that be in the most high being. There
the soul is abandoned in God for him, in
him, of himself. Then is he not sought
nor praised nor adoredt by these creatures,


* MS. “‘ unaccorden.”

+ He is not praised by any direct and conscious
effort of the soul, but by indirect modes of love and
praise, of which the soul is largely unconscious,

207


MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS _ [Div. 9


but only by that which they may not know
nor love nor adore. This is the fulfilling
of all their love and the last denial of their
way. The last, it accordeth with the first,
for it discordeth not. This is right, since
she hath run that she rest herself in that
place; for she may do all that she will, by
the true bounty of his divine being. And


she may do all that she will without making — |


a return for his gifts, who, of his proper
being, hath set her thus. Why should it
not ? for this gift is also all that he is in —
himself, who giveth it to this soul, and this:
gift moveth her purely into himself. This
is Love’s self. And Love may do all that
she will. So may not Dread, nor Discretion,
nor Reason,—wit it forsooth—nothing gain-
sayeth Love. This soul seeketh not the
fulness* of her understanding, but God
seeth it in her without breaking her.} Thus
have the aforesaid virtues naught to answer.

Then saith she to him thus:

* MS. “the playne.” Fr. plein ?

+ Without having to pope the shell that it
may appear,


208


FADO ROAGORCAG ORCA ORS
SOOASOOLZEOCIAS OSS


DIVISION X


CHAPTER I


OF THREE THINGS WHEREBY IT MAY BE KNOWN
THAT THE SOUL IS NOT COME TO PEACE,
BUT IS BEGGING; AND WHAT PARADISE IS


¥ GOD that all [things] canst, O Lord
that all thing knowest, O my Be-


loved that availeth for all, do what-
ever ye will. Sweet Father, I cannot |
Sweet Master, I know not! Sweet Beloved,
I am naught. And therefore I will naught.
And if any say thus ‘Ah, for God, let us [suffer]
nothing of ours nor of none other than of
him henceforward to be within us, which it
behoveth God with his bounty to put out,’
this is a begging creature, that by her empti-
ness seeketh God in creatures. Soothly,
she findeth the deed that she willeth and that
she herself doeth.* But truly, she that
findeth him, suffereth him to do his will
and his divine works in her without her own


* She finds what she seeks, and by her own activity
procures the spiritual consolation she desires, and
does the work herself; but it is not God to whom she
attains.

209


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 10


working. But one that seeketh and findeth
not dwelleth enfamined of that which she
asketh. And when she seeth this, thus saith
to herself, that she will seek him. And
so she doth in that she asketh him afresh
by her wit, by understanding, of the most
high and pure thought, and there she seeketh;
this is a begging creature also. And if she
think that we shall write more explicitly
than other creatures have written, it is beg-
ging, this that she hears, for she would that
her even-Christian found God in themselves —
by writings and by words. This is to say '

and to be understood, that she would that
her even-Christian were made perfect in the
manner that she deviseth, specially all those
to whom she hath good will.* Thus to do
and thus to say, is begging; for in doing this,
and in saying this, and in dwelling thus, and
in willing this, she remaineth a beggar—wit
this forsooth—and encumbered of herself.
And all because she beggeth of them for


* The author exhausts the snares into which the
soul may fall by “ desires.’ He warns against
spiritual curiosity seeking even in the “ explicit
writing ” of his own book for knowledge which is
to come from God alone. This often is disguised
as zeal for our neighbour’s spiritual welfare, and so
constitutes a further error by involving them in the
love of creatures. Further, the soul enlists sympathy
and borders upon pride, when she thus “ enlightens ”
others—* she beggeth of them for whom she does it.’


210


Ch. 2] SIMPLE SOULS


whom she doeth it.” “Certainly,” saith
Love; “ but this doth not the high soul of
peace that liveth of glory, even of glory’s
self in paradise, all alone; for paradise is not
other thing than God himself.”


CHAPTER II


HOW IT IS [TO BE] UNDERSTOOD THAT THE
THIEF WAS IN PARADISE THAT DAY THAT
HE DIED AND OUR LORD WENT NOT INTO
HEAVEN BEFORE HIS ASCENSION


Wuy was the thief in paradise as soon as the
soul was departed from this body, and Jesu
Christ, God’s Son, ascended not into heaven
before the Ascension, and the thief was in
paradise on that same day? But will ye
wit how this may be; for it had to be, for
God had promised it him. This means,
he saw God who is paradise; for paradise is
not [any] other thing than to see God. And
this doeth she in sooth, at all times when she
is unencumbered of herself. [She is] not
glorified, for the body is tied to this creature,
but divinely and gloriously, for the inward-
ness is perfectly delivered of all creatures.
So liveth she without intermediary* by the


* MS. “ mean.”
211


MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS _[Div. 10


life of glory, and is in paradise without being.*
Gloss these words if ye will understand it
or ye shall misunderstand it, for it hath some
likeness to the oppositet [for those] who
understand not the fulness of the gloss; and
likeness is not truth, but Truth is truth and
nothing else.


* The soul disencumbered of her selfhood sees
God and lives by the power of the life of glory without
intermediary means. To be in that state is to be in
paradise, though she is not there in a physical state;
or possibly “‘ she is in paradise without [conscious-
ness] of any particular state (being).”’

t MS. *‘ semblance of the contrary.”


212


A anil


DiV I SLON. XS


CHAPTER I


HOW THEY THAT SIT ALL IN FREEDOM DO REST
THEMSELVES IN PURE NAUGHT WITHOUT
THOUGHT


H, what had he in thought, who this
A book made ?* ‘This same, that the
righteous God it seemeth that he
cannot come again. This is to understand,
that he would that creatures begged as he
doth in other creatures.t Certainly, do it
they must, before they come to perfect
freedom of all points.
“T am deficientt and naught may take,”


*x This phrase and the following seem to be the
work of the Translator. There is no indication how
far he has paraphrased and interpolated the original.
Possibly largely throughout; at least the difference
noticeable in the second part of the book from
Division VI may be due to the predominance of his
remarks.

+ Seems to mean that God desires that creatures
should dweillin the same silent passivity towards him
and others as he himself does in his hidden life
within us. They should “beg” as much as he
does—.e., not at all.

+ MS. “ all short.”

213


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 11


saith this soul that wrote this book. “I am
as foolish in the time that I make it—except
that love maketh it for me at my request—
as he should be that would shut the sea
in the compass of his eye and bear the world
upon the point of a rush, and light the sun
with a shadow! I am more a fool than he
that this would do, when I put so precious*
a thing in speech, that may not be said, nor
written. I encumber myself with writing
these words, but thus I take my recourse to
come to my strength and succour and to my |
last crowning crown, of the being of which °

we have spoken of; which sitteth all in
freedom, that is, when a soul resteth in pure
naught without thought; for till then she
may not be free.”


CHAPTER II


WHAT THING THEY DO THAT BE IN BEING
ABOVE THEIR THOUGHTS


“AH God,” saith Reason, “‘ what do they
that be in being, above their thoughts ?”
““They marvel themselves,’’+ saith Love,

“ of him that is in the mount of their moun-
tain, and they abash themselves of the same,
that is, of the deepness of their valley, by a

* MS. “ price.”

t+ Wonder, used actively.

214


Ch. 2] SIMPLE SOULS


naught-thinking, which is shut and ensealed
in the most pure and secret closet of this
excellent soul. For none may open, nor
unseal, nor shut when it is opened—this
precious shutting and this noble opening—
unless the gentle Far Night, of right far,
and of right nigh, shut it and open it; who
beareth the key,* for none other beareth it,
nor may bear it.” T

* Apoc. iii 7.

+ The personification of the “ far night ”’ here is
consistent with the style of these later portions, and
indicates merely that the ‘‘ dark night ”’ is the means
by which the soul attains to God in a state beyond
conscious thought.


215


GPBP CP GP SESE GP Se


DIVISION XII


THE ONLY CHAPTER


HOW THEY THAT BE OF ALL THINGS IN SOVER-
EIGNTY KNOW AND FEEL THE LIFE THAT
THIS BOOK SPEAKETH OF, AND NONE BUT
THEY


MONG you ladies to whom God hath «
given this life of his divine bounty
abundantly, without any withholding

—not only this life without more, that we speak
of, but that other with this, which never
man spake of—ye shall know in this book
your estate. And them that be not nor
never were, nor shall be, feel not this being.
They know it not nor they may not, nor they
shall not, they be not of the lineage that we
speak of. Wit it forsooth, no ! for the angels
of the first order be not seraphins, nor may
not be, for God gave them not the being of
seraphins. But they that be in God, by
whom they shall become,* know this thing,
and feel it by strength of the lineage of which
they are and shall be more stronger than
they be.

* 7.e., by whom they shall be more fully.

216


Ch.1] MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS


And these folks, that we speak of, that be,
and shall be, wit it well, know altogether that
they be of the lineage. Then these folks are
they who, by their state, are in sovereignty
over all things, for their spirit is the most high
and noble of the orders of angels wrought
and ordained. Now these folks have, of all
the orders, the most high mention for the
spirit, and the most noble complexion*
by nature, when they are sanguine or choleric;
that is, not melancholic nor phlegmatic; for
of the gifts of fortune, these be the best to
have; yet they hold all to be best, according
to their will and their necessity, for them-
selves and for their even-Christian, without
anxiety of conscience.


* 7.e., best disposition


217


VABONOAGOROAZONOAG OE
SOSGAS OGLE OGLE OGA


DIVISION XHI


CHAPTER I


WHAT GREAT DIFFERENCE IS BETWEEN SOME
ANGELS AND OTHERS, AND ALSO OF THE
SOULS THAT THIS BOOK SPEAKETH OF,
COMPARED WITH OTHERS THAT BE NOT
SUCH; AND HOW THEY THINK THEM- ~
SELVES TO BE BEST w


OW hear among you, the great per-
N fection of the naughted souls, these

which we have spoken of. “It is
said,” saith Love, “‘ and I say it myself, that
there is also as great difference among angels
of some orders compared with others, as
there is of men and asses. This is easy to
trow,* for any who should open the divine
wisdom. Let none ask me why, unless ye
will err, but believe it, for this is truth. And
right as it is of some angels compared with
others, as ye have heard say, right so it is
by grace of the naughted souls that we speak
of, as compared with all those that be not.
He is right well born that is of that lineage,
those be folks royal, their hearts are so

* Trow =believe.
218


Ch.2] MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS


excellent noble, and of such great worthiness
and wisdom that they may not do thing of
little value, nor begin thing without attaining
the crown.

“These folks be the least that may be, as
in their own sight, witness of God himself,
who saith that the least shall be the most
in the kingdom of heaven.* It ought to be
believed; they believe it verily that be such.
But who believeth a thing which he is not ?
Soothly none, for the truth of believing
is in the being of him who believeth. And so
he that thus believeth is the same that this
ig Atze.d ds ‘Si least, ”?),7?


CHAPTER II


OF THREE WORDS WHEREIN THE PERFECTION
OF THIS CLEAR LIFE IS FULFILLED


SHE, this soul is no more troubled concerning
herself or others, or God himself; weening
that she is not; so that she is not [indeed].
Understand the gloss. This weening that
she is not, is in her will, which is not hers
for herself.

In these three words is fulfilled all the
perfection of this clear life. Therefore I
say clear, seeing that she surpasseth the
blind naughting; the blind naughted sus-

* Matt. xviii4.
219


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 13


taineth her feet, [but] the clearness is the
most noble and the most gentle [state].
She wotteth not of anything that is, for she
is not; but God wot in her, of him, for her,
of himself.


CHAPTER III


HOW THIS SOUL SEEKETH NO MORE GOD; AND
WHAT THING IT IS THAT TAKETH FROM
HER LOVE OF HERSELF. AND OF THE
BOOK OF LIFE AND THE OPENING THEREOF


Tuts lady seeketh no more of God, there is
no more to do [about it]. He faileth her
in naught that she should seek him; why
then should she seek him? He is with her,
she hath him, and if he faileth her, I know
not why she should seek, since he lets
himself be sought.*

“Oh,” saith this soul, “ why should I do
anything that my Beloved doeth not, he
wanteth nothing. Why then should I want
anything ? In this I [should] love myself
if I lacked anything since he lacks nothing.
He lacks naught; then, I lack naught, and
this point taketh from me the love of myself,
and giveth me him without mean and
without withstanding. I have said this,”

* 7.e., if he wills not to be found, why should she
seek him ?

220


Ch. 3] SIMPLE SOULS


saith this soul, ‘‘that he wants naught.
Why then should I want? Heseeketh naught,
why then should I seek? He thinketh not,
why then should I think? I shall not do it,
Reason,” saith this [soul] naughted and
clarified by default of love of herself. ‘‘ My
works that be done, these have yedone. And
so shall ye do if ever I know you, but I reck
not of you. I have done all.”

** Right when ?” saith Reason.

“ Right then,” saith she, “‘ when love hath
opened me his book, for his book is of such
condition, that what time that love openeth
the book, the soul wot all and hath all, all
works of perfection it hath in her fulfilled,
at the opening thereof. And this opening
hath made me have so clear sight,” saith
this soul, “‘ that it hath made me yield that
which is his, and to take that which is mine.
This namely is alway of himself, and I am
not. Then it is very right that I have not
myself. And the light of the opening of
this book hath made me find mine [own]
and to dwell in that. I have not so much of
being that may make me be of him. And
thus hath Right yielded me mine [own]
by rights, and showed me a ‘ naught ’>—that I
amnot. And it would be right, that I should
have myself no more; this Right is written
within the book of life.

“Thus it is [concerning] this book, and

221 K


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 13


myself,” saith this soul, who was of God
and of creatures. ‘‘ When he made them,
he willed it of his divine bounty, and all
was done in the same moment of his divine .
might, and all ordained of his divine wisdom.”


CHAPTER IV


OF THREE BEHOLDINGS THAT ONE SHOULD HAVE ~
TO COME TO PEACE. AND HOW WE SHOULD
NOT SET LITTLE BY A DEFAULT DONE
AGAINST GOD


‘Now for God,” saith this soul, ‘ behold
what he hath done and what he doth, and
what he shall do. ‘Then shall ye have peace,
stillness and rest of peace in peace; and of
such peace [as is] raised above corruption,
if ye dwell in the risen peace. Ah God,
what great words these be; whoso should
understand the truth of the gloss 2”

“Ah God,” saith Understanding of the
soul naughted, ‘‘am I not enough in prison
of corruption, where I am obliged to be;
will I or nil I; though I allow me not to the
cart of correction ?*

** Oh, what a great pity it is when wicked-
ness hath the victory over goodness. And

x **T allow me not,” do not willingly submit to
the punishment of the cart of correction—7.e., to be


dragged through the streets in the public criminal’s
cart, or beaten at the cart’s tail.


222


Ch. 4] SIMPLE SOULS


right so it is of body and of spirit. The spirit
is made of God, the body is formed of God.
Now these two natures are joined and knit
together by nature and by justice, in corrup-
tion. In the fount of baptism these two
natures are put together without corruption,
by the divine justice that hath made these
two natures. And when a fault overcometh
this complexion and this [new] creation,
which is made of the divine goodness, this
seemeth not a little thing however little
that fault may be. And then, this fault
troubleth us unto bitterness and driveth
to a madness* against ourselves. [Though]
it is not wilful, it is not a little thing this,
since it pleaseth not the divine will, but
displeaseth him.”

“Ah God,” saith Knowing of Divine
Light, “‘ who is he that dare call this little ?
He who calleth it little, I hold he was never
well illuminated, nor never shall be unless
he amend him. For he hath greatly offended
in this, that he putteth the displeasing of
our Lord in such reckless heed.”


* MS. “‘ hortleth to a woodnesse.”’

+ The whole passage is very obscure. The author
explains that, since Baptism remedies the corruption
of original sin, we naturally feel distressed at any
further actual sin, however venial, but this distress
should not be allowed to drive us to “a bitter spirit
against ourselves.”” Nevertheless, even a venial sin
is not a small matter since it displeases God.


223


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 13


CHAPTER V


HOW IT IS UNDERSTOOD THAT THE RIGHTEOUS
MAN FALLETH SEVEN TIMES A DAY


Ir is much to say of such a servant that
serveth his Lord well at all points in all thing,
that he knoweth that which might best please —
the will of his Lord.

** Oh,” saith this soul, that helpeth herself
by this same [thing], “‘ now I have some of _
that which Holy Writ saith, ‘that the
righteous man falleth seven times a day.’* —
He is well enlightened} who understandeth
that this [sin] is not a case for correction,£
for the word ‘ correction ’ is used when men
fall into fault by the consenting of their will.
And corruption is the fleshliness of the
complexion of our bodies; it seemeth else,
by this tale, that I have not free will, if I
must sin against my will seven times a day.
It is not so with God’s grace,”’ saith this
soul, “‘ for it must be that God is not God,
if virtues be taken from me maugre me.§
For no more than God may sin, who cannot
will it, no more may I sin if my will will it


* Prov. xxiv 16.

tT MS. “ yclered.”’

t A legal term: 1m causa correctionis.

§ z.e., against my will. Fr. malgré.
224


Ch. 5] SIMPLE SOULS


not, such freedom hath my sum* given of
his pure bounty, by love.”


M. The “summe” of this soul is the know-
ing that she hath of the goodness of God,
and this goodness of God, which is the
Holy Ghost, worketh in her and gave her
free will. WN.


“And if I willed it, why should he not
suffer it, else should his power take from me
freedom. But his goodness may not suffer
his power to unfree me of free will, in no-
wise. This is [how] no power taketh from
me my will, if my will will not assent thereto.
Now hath his goodness by pure bounty
given me free will by bounty; he hath not
given me a greater thing of all that he hath
made for me. He presenteth this to me
which he hath made of his courtesy, and if
he take it again, he doth me no wrong.
But my free will, freely hath given it me;
that, he may. not take from me, unless it
please my will.

““The supportt of the love of his bounty
hath given me this nobility by love; then
may not the strength of evil take from me
the freedom of my will, if I will not; thus ye
may see how freely he hath given me my will.


x MS. “the summe of me” =my sum and
summa, he who is the sum of all, to me.
+ MS. “ uppressure.”
225


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 13


““ T have said here before,”’ saith this soul,
“that he hath given me no more but my
free will. How may one understand by this
saying that he hath not given me all? Since
he hath given me nothing but free will, it
breaketh the other things. But so hath he
given me, that he may nothing withhold
from me, for love asketh that; else it were
not love of [the] Beloved, unless it were of —
such a [kind]. For in this, that he hath
given me free will, of his pure bounty, he
hath given me all—if my will will it; he |
holdeth nothing from me, I am thereof
sikker.”

“* Ah how, for God ?”’ saith Dread.

“Tn this,’ saith this soul, ‘‘ that I give
him freely my will, without any withholding,
purely for his bounty and because of his
sole will, just as he gave it me of his gift,
for a profit to me, of his divine bounty.

** Now I have said,”’ saith this soul, “ that
God would not be God, if my will were taken —
from me against my will. This is sooth,
that there is nothing more certain than this, _
that God is not God if my will be taken from
me, except my will will it. This is full far
from that which is said, that the righteous
falleth seven times a day, into a case for
correction.”

‘* But I shall tell you,” saith Truth, “‘ what
it means this that Holy Church saith, that the

226


Ch. 5] SIMPLE SOULS


righteous man falleth seven times a day.
This is to understand when the will of the
righteous hath given the inclination* without
any [actual transgression]f to fulfil the fault.
For by the inclination of the sin of Adam
the body is frail, and enclining to faults,
for it enclineth oft to tend towards a lesser
thing than is the goodness of God. And
this Holy Writ calleth ‘ falling,’ for so it is.
But the righteous keepeth him from con-
senting to the fault, which might increase
by such inclination, so that his falling, in
which the righteous falleth by inclination
to-fore said, is more virtue to him than vice,
because of the will that dwelleth free by
rejecting the fault, as it is said before; now
may ye understand how the righteous falleth
from high to low. And how that falling,
though it be low, is more virtue than vice.

““ Now understand, since it is so, that the
righteous falleth seven times a day, then
must it be that he riseth seven times, or he
may not of the falling seven times arise !
He is blessed that often falleth for he is such
a one that cometh soothly from thence
whither none goeth unless he have the name
of righteous. But more righteous is he
that alway abideth where stableness is. But
this may not alway be had, as long as the

* MS. “ entente.”
+ MS. “ other breaking.”
227


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 13


soul hath company of the body in this world.
But this falling maketh not peace to be less,
by troubling the conscience, [so] that the
soul liveth not in peace by the gifts that be
given her from above.* So may not the
virtues be against virtues, but above them.
If this may not be then were God subject
to his virtues, and the virtues should be
against the soul; but they have being from
our Lord, for the profit of the [soul].”’


CHAPTER VI


HOW THIS SOUL WILL SAY THE SUM OF HER
DEMANDS, AND HOW SHE KNOWETH NOT
HER OWN ASKINGS. AND OF THE TWO
CAUSES THAT MAKETH HER TO SAY THAT
SHE WILL SAY THE SUM OF HER DEMANDS


“Now,” saith she, “‘ I shall tell the sum of
my questions and these my questions shall
be by the Sum fulfilled. Nevertheless,”
saith the soul, “‘ lest any should say that I
know the questions that I ask, [it is not so];
for all the nine orders of angels, nor all the
saints that be in these orders, know it not;
then witteth it well the tenth estate, that is
in the glory without being, and none of these
nine orders.”

* 7.e., the peace does not come from the possession


of the virtues or from the gifts of God, but from
God himself.


228


Ch. 6] SIMPLE SOULS


““ When none of the nine orders wot it not,
what wit ye, Lady Soul >” saith Reason.

“So doth God [set],” saith Love, ‘“ by
divine nature, the drawings of his love in her,
who formeth her questions in her without
[her] witting. And her questions be out
of all creature’s knowledge, where creatures
may have no knowing thereof.”

“What marvel is it,” saith this soul, “ if
they wit it not; why should any wit it, but he
of whom I am, that in me is the same [one],
and he is the secret of love that is between
[us] made, where my love is enclosed,
without me? This drawing, his bounty
maketh for me, who giveth me alway new
love; but of this that he doeth in me, of him,
for me; nor of that which I ask without my
asking, by the ondrawing of his pure nature,
I may not wit,” saith his soul, “‘nor [may]
all those of glory [wit], but he only that is
one in Deity and triple in Persons.”

“*But,”’ saith Love, ‘‘that which he hath
said, that she shall tell the sum of her
questions, is this, that if any have this which
she shall say, in sooth, he hath that which
none may tell the whole of, nor think [it],
except he that alway worketh it in her, of
his work, without her work, of his divine
goodness. ‘This is to say, without the work
of this soul, and therefore saith she, that
she shall tell the sum of her demands, that

229 K2


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 13


a soul may not suffer herself to be deceived
for nothing that may fall, but that she keep
this, and this is, that she see these twain
[things].

‘* The first thing is that she see this alway,
if she see aught: what she was when God
made her out of naught—[into] aught—
and that she be sikker in certainty that she is
none other than that, as far as she herself is -
concerned, nor never shall be; without this
[doth] she never [arrive] at the divine bounty.

*‘'The second thing is: that she see what —
she hath done with the free will that God hath. —
given her; then shall she see that she hath
taken from God himself his will, in one
only moment of consenting to sin. This
is to be understood, that God wot all, and
whoso consenteth to do sin, he taketh from
God his will; this is sooth, for he doeth that
which God willeth not, and is against his
divine bounty.”


CHAPTER VII


WHAT A SOUL OWETH TO GOD FOR ONE DEFAULT,
AND WHERETO IT IS BROUGHT BY A
DEFAULT


** Now,” saith this soul, ‘“‘ behold the debt

of one only misdoing; for in sooth, she oweth

of twain who hath twice fallen into sin.”
230


Ch. 7] SIMPLE SOULS


“Two times,” saith the Light of the soul,
“soothly, no more than men may number
how often I have drawn my breath, no more
may my sins be numbered. How ofttimes
I have taken from God his will! for as often-
times as I have had will against his will,
I have lost will and withdrawn and with-
holden it from himself, who hath given it me
freely, of his bounty. For [concerning] one
thing well done; if God desired a greater
good which a creature might do, if it were
asked [of him] and he do it not, he sinneth.
Behold what ye owe then for one of your
faults, so shall ye see that ye owe as much to
God for one of your faults, as his will is
worth, which ye have taken from him, by
doing of your will. But now, behold, that
ye may better understand what thing is the
will of God. It is in the whole Trinity,
which is one Will; then is the will of God in
Trinity robbed by one default !

“Ah Love, we shall make partie for the
stupid* understanders. Take we this soul
that is best, that could now be richest and
would be quit of her debt that she oweth to
God, and pay him neither more nor less,
but this that she oweth him for one fault
alone. There should nothing abide with
her, for she hath naught nor never had, as
of herself, anything, but [it] hath had a will

* MS. “ bestials ”’—+.e., Fr. béte, stupid.
231


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 13


to do a fault. So there dwelleth with her
nothing to sustain her, but she must be
reduced from strength to naught before she
be quit of this fault only, if the debt of justice
should be paid. Oh, what might then be
said, if a man would say the sooth of all the
other sins, of which there is no number,
when he might say this of one. fault alone,
if he wanted justice and said that it must be;
for it is safe* by right and none other thing
but right.”

“Now soul,” saith this soul to herself, _
“ if ye have all this that this writing deviseth, «
say we not more, but all is his by debt, ere
I be quit of this one debt alone. What owe
I then for all mine other defaults and sins,
that none witteth but Truth, who is judge,
to whom I owe this debt. And ere I owed
anything, naught I was, and naught I had,
this ye see well. And God gave me will
for to follow this will of his goodness, for to
win him himself; and I have robbed him of
it in doing of my own} will. Also, I have
[together] with my poverty, the great filth
of sin and of sins, which none knoweth but
Truth alone.

““O God, O God,” saith this soul, ‘‘ what
am I now, when I was naught before I owed


* MS. “selven,”” sauf ?
+ MS. “ proper,” with sense of own or self-wil!.
Cf. below.


232


Ch. 7] SIMPLE SOULS


anything; what am I now? When I was
nothing, before I owed to my God anything
by the work of self-will, and yet should I
have nothing ere I were quit of one of my
faults, without more, though I had the same
that this book speaketh of, where it speaketh
of the argument* of which ye have heard!
Now I have not in me neither this nor that,
nor may I have. And though I had it,
ye see well what I should be, when I were
quit of one sin. Now have I never aught,
nor naught may I will, as of myself; nor none
may give me anything wherewith to pay my
debts. Ah, Truth,” saith this soul, “‘ what
am I? Teil me.”

“Ye were naught,” saith Truth, “‘ before
ye had anything forfeited to me, of this
which I gave you; now ye be another, for
ye be worse than naught,” saith Truth,
“at all times, when ye have willed other
than my will. This is sooth,” saith Truth,
“for Truth is truth and nothing else.”

“ J take it of you, Truth,” saith this soul.
“IT know nothing better than this, that if
God would take justice for one of my sins
without mercy, I should have torment and
pain without end, according to his power.
But, Lord, though that ye be righteousness,
and truth, and judge,” saith this soul that
hath misdone, ‘‘O King full of debonnairety,

x MS. “partie.”
233


THE MIRROR OF . [Div. 13


Pity and Mercy, that be your sisters germain,
sweet and courteous, dwell with you to
acquit me of my debts! And in this I
appease me,” saith this soul. ‘* And which-
ever of these sisters falleth to me, I reck not,
whether it be Righteousness, or Truth, Mercy
or Pity. I have no care,” saith she, “ which
lot I fall [into] of these four. All is one to
me, without joy and without heaviness, for
I cannot see that he neither increaseth nor
diminisheth by the justice that he taketh of
me; nor by mercy that he doth to me, and _
so fare I. I have no joy of the one nor -

misease of the other, since my Beloved in
this neither loseth nor winneth. All is one
to me concerning him that is one; and this
point maketh me one or else I should anon
be twain. If my will were set on the one
more than the other, whether of mercy or of
righteousness, then were I ‘ with’ myself,
and so should I be twain. The Son of God
is my mirror in this, for God the Father gave
his Son our Saviour to be an ensample to us.
There is none other way of beholding of
this aforesaid gift, but only to look upon* the
doing of our Saviour; for the Son bought us
with his death by very obedience, to fulfil
his Father’s will. He had none other
beholding in that doing, but the will of God


* MS. “‘ see ’’—i.¢., to watch intently the Lord’s


action.
234


Ch. 8] SIMPLE SOULS


his Father solely. And God’s Son is our
ensample; we ought in this beholding to
follow him, for we should will solely in all
things the will of God, and so shall we be
the sons of God the Father, to follow the
ensample of Jesu Christ his Son. Ah God,
what a good beholding this is! I have no
possession in this doing.* Not that it were
possible for me to sin if my will will not;
then be we of his will, of which he hath fully
set us in full possession. This is, he dwelleth
with us without seeking, why seek we him
any more? We have him, he is with us.
Why take we him not without seeking ?
Whoso seeketh thing that he hath, doth so
for default of knowing; he that so doeth
hath not the art which giveth science in
creatures.”


CHAPTER VIII


WHAT ART IT IS THAT GIVETH SCIENCE IN
CREATURES AND OF THE RAVISHING OF
LOVE, AND OF THE PEACE OF NAUGHT
WILLING


“WuatT is art that giveth science in crea-
tures 2”? saith this soul that seeketh.


* MS. “none in possession’’=sense of pro-
prietorship.
+ i.e., knowledge of the created world.


235


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 13


“It is a far gone mind,’’* saith Love,
“by which understanding groweth, that
giveth knowing to a soul more perfectly
of a thing that men say, than of a thing she
saith herself, howsoever good the sayings be
in all she saith. For why? Those that
understand rest, and the speakers labour,
and knowing may not suffer labour, for
labour is a less good. For this art is human
and cometh of nature, [namely], to attain
the fullness of its takings, but this other is
without more, the sole work of God. And —
the inward mind is the substance of the:
soul, and the understanding is the work of the
soul, and the knowing is the sum of the soul.
This knowing is of the substance of under-
standing of love in this life, that harboureth
in her all the life of goodness, and setteth her
in this good seat in a high place, through love.

“And so love leadeth in her, which giveth
her this being, and she leadeth in naught
and not in love; for a soul is ‘ with’ herself,
that leadeth in love. That love maketh a
soul see that she taketh the lead in her pride
and jollity; for Nature is ‘ with’ this love;

* 7.e., either an advanced mind or, I think, a mind
that hath gone far off (7.e., into the far night) in which
it receives infused knowledge and comes to under-
stand the problems of the created world, especially
by a silent listening to the teachings of others, behind


which she discerns more than she might herself
express.


236


Ch. 8] SIMPLE SOULS


they have this in being, somewhat to give
and to take, and so is the soul dangerous
and fierce. In such being it departeth from
meditations, for this is the being of con-
templation which withholdeth and voideth
thoughts; but this soul that leadeth in naught,
and love leadeth in her, doth this in herself,
without herself. For she hath no more of
her that might make her glad or heavy.
Fine* thoughts have no more lordship in
her. She hath lost the usage of her wits;t
not her wits, but the usage of them; for love
hath ravished her from the place that she
was in by leaving [the stirrings of] her wits,
for love hath taken from her the former
usages.

‘And this is the fulfilling of her pilgrimages.
And hastily she taketh the stirrings of her
wills, and fasteneth it in him that she loveth.
And there she is betaken into the high sea,
and so she liveth without her proper will,
and sitteth in being above her counsel, for
otherwise she should be reproached of the
sovereign that putteth her there ‘without’
herself. For else, she should have war
with Love, that is, the Holy Ghost. For
[in] reproaches of the Father, and threaten-
ings of the Son, there is nothing [found] of

* MS. “jolly.” Fr. joli? or perhaps merry.

+ i.e.. of conscious reflection in the time of
prayer.

237


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 13


the oil of peace. That surpasseth all those
that lead in will; but these, that lead in full
sufficiency, they have full much peace and
delights which their love giveth them by
union of love; more than these other have,
for war is with them that have anxieties.
In such war be they often, those who lead
in will, how good soever the works be that
will doth.

“But the divine bounty hath not to
reproach her that hath peace, who leadeth
in not-willing, and hath offered the will there _
where it was before she had will.” ;

“Ah God,” saith the soul that is free,
“how well is this said; but it behoveth that
God do this without me, [even] as he made
me without me, of his divine bounty.”


CHAPTER IX


OF THIS BOUNTY OF GOD AND THE WORKING
THEREOF


“Now am I,” saith this soul, “ wrought
of him without myself, for work passing
me and the strong works of virtues, they for
me and I for him, till I be in him. And thus
I may not rest in him, that is God, unless he
set me so without myself, of him, right as
he made me without me, by himself. This
238


Ch. 9] SIMPLE SOULS


is the uncreated goodness* that he hath
made created; so leadeth goodness un-
wrought, the goodness that he hath wrought.

‘Now hath Bounty unwrought free will
as his property ;t and he giveth us also, of his
bounty, free will coming out of his might,
without any ‘for-why?’, but for ourselves
as a gift of his goodness. Now have we will
coming out of his bounty and out of his
might, for to be more free, as he hath will
of his might and of his proper freedom.t
And the divine goodness saw that we were
in the way of pestilence and perdition by the
free will that he had given us. And this
will is come out of his goodness and it is
given us by his grace. Thus was knit
human nature to divine goodness in the
person of the Son, for to pay the ransom of
our debts that we have misdone by our sinful
will. Now may I see by this where I ought
to be, namely, that I should resort there
where I was, in that point that I was, within
the One. And that I be of him so beloved,
as he is Who Is; and as naked as I was when


* MS. “bounty unwrought.” Bounty used
throughout where I write favour, goodness, grace.

+ i.e., attribute.

+ Just as God hath will, so we have will that we
may be more free, but it proceeds from his goodness
and power; but God’s will is an attribute of his
powerandfreedom. This passage marks the author’s
Augustinian training.


239


THE MIRROR OF | [Div. 13


I was that which I am not. And this it
behoveth me to be, if I will have my own;
otherwise I may not have it. Gloss this
if ye will, if ye can; and if ye cannot, ye
must leave it. Never shall ye be so deeply
naughted if ye have that by which ye cannot
behold;* for otherwise I understand it not.
If his goodness give you this beholding, I
unwill it not, it is that [which] it is.
** This is goodness enduring,} that yieldeth
by nature of charity, the outpoured gift of
all his bounty, and this bounty enduring.
engendereth bounty agreeable. From these
two cometh the love amiable of the Beloved
in souls. And by this love amiable these
souls behold alway the Beloved.”


* Tf you possess that “‘ something’? which makes
you incapable of understanding this. Note that it
is the possession of a faculty, not its absence, which
makes ‘‘ them that have, have not.”

t MS.“ bounty permanable.”


240


Ch. 10] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER X


HOW WE MUST DRAW WITHIN US ALL THE LIFE
THAT OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST HIMSELF
LED AND PREACHED, ACCORDING TO
OUR POWER; AND WHERETO WE SHALL
COME BY IT %


Tuts book showeth by thoughts of partie,*
by works of perfection, by demands of reason,
that it behoveth us to draw unto us all the
life that Christ Jesu himself led and preached
to us, according to our power; for he said
of far, thus: Whosoever believeth in me, he
shall do such works as I do and yet more
greater shall he do.t And this must we do
ere we have the victory over ourselves.
And if we do this, to our power, we shall
come to this, that we shall have it all, by
putting out of us all thoughts of partie, all
works of perfection, and all demands of
Reason. And then shall the Deity do in
us, for us, without us, his divine works.
He is that is. Pure is that which is of him,
in love. And therefore see we ourselves,
that we have naught of ourselves; see we
also this, without knowing of ourselves.
This to be in us, is very Being.
x See note infra, p. 302.
+ John xiv 12.
241


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 13


CHAPTER XI


WHETHER A CREATURE MAY DWELL IN LIFE
AND BE ALWAY WITHOUT HER. AND
WHEN A SOUL IS WITHOUT HERSELF AND
WHEREOF SHE LIVETH WHEN SHE _ IS
WITHOUT HER ms


I ask of clarified and enlumined [souls] that
lead otherwise than those before [named] do,
if any creature of mankind may dwell in_
life and be alway “‘ without’ them ? If these
twain cannot tell it, none shall tell it:me,
for none knoweth it unless he be of the
lineage. Truth speaks for them at our
questioning, and love declareth it, that say
that then is a soul naughted “‘ without ”’
her, when she hath no feeling of nature, nor
no work of inwardness, nor shame, nor
worship, nor dread of nothing that may
befall, nor none affection hath. The divine
goodness is no more entertained by Will,
but is in all times without will.* And then
is this soul naughted by height outside
herself, that is, that God sufficeth her.
Then doth she all without her. And though
she do all without her, what marvel is it
that she is no more “for” her. Then


* All this must be qualified by comparison with
other passages.


242


Ch. 11] SIMPLE SOULS


liveth she of divine substance. There is
one substance enduring, one fruition agree-
able, one conjunction amiable. The Father
is substance enduring. The Son is fruition
agreeable. The Holy Ghost is conjunction
amiable, and the conjunction amiable is
of the substance enduring and of the fruition
agreeable, by divine love of unity, which
engendereth of [his] goodness, reflecteth
his ardour in unity and unity in divine love.
This divine love engendereth in a naughted
soul, in a soul freed, in a soul clarified,
substance enduring, fruition agreeable, con-
junction amiable. Of this substance en-
during, the memory [is] of the substance of
the Father. And of this fruition agreeable,
the understanding [is] of the wisdom of the
Son. And of this conjunction amiable,
the wills [are] of the goodness of the Holy
Ghost. This goodness of the Holy Ghost
conjoineth her in love of the Father and of
the Son. This conjunction putteth a soul
in a being, without her being, which is being.
This being is the Holy Ghost himself, that
is the love of the Father and of the Son.
This Love, the Holy Ghost, swimmeth in a
soul and is poured out in abundance of
delights, of a gift right high that is given of
upraised ravishing, by knitting of union
of the sovereign Beloved, that giveth himself
simply and simple her maketh. And he


243


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 13


giveth himself simply to show that there is
none but he whence all things have being.

And this cometh of love in light of divine
lauding, and maketh one willing, one love
and one work in two natures. One, accord-
ing to goodness, by conjunction of the strength
and stirring of union of love. ‘* This doth
my Beloved,” saith this soul that is such,
‘and thus are the spreadings of divine love —
without any want. Of this divine love the —
divine will useth in me, for me, and without
my beholding.” [So] saith this soul in her
Beloved, that is full perfect love. So she.
seeketh nothing, nor anyone, by choice, to
help her, but taketh his and hers as honey
of Sion’s salve.”


CHAPTER XII


HOW THIS SOUL JOYETH SOME TIME WITHOUT
HER FEELING; AND OF THREE THINGS
THAT MAKETH HER TO HAVE JOY; AND
OF THE BLINDNESS OF REASON


Tus soul rejoiceth herself sometimes in the
supreme part of him, without her feeling,
willing nothing of other[s] than of [him who
is] her nearest. For she perceiveth in her
spirit, and not without witting, what is the
way by which he cometh to the gate, where
she is oned to his will. And her joy of his


244


Ch. 12] SIMPLE SOULS


goodness in recalling the bounties of her
salvation, it beareth her light into. the
supreme place, where she is oned to her
Spouse, and this pleaseth her in his pleasure.
Then is she of that place whence she is.
_ The salvation of her even-Christian is her
pleasure, and that is oned to her will. Her
joy of his bounty and the recording of the
deeds of his bounty, maketh her also to have
joy, without feeling of Reason.

Now perceiveth Reason that she hath joy,
and goeth and saith to her that she hath sin
thereof, that she maketh joy of that for which
her even-Christians weep. Reason judgeth
after that which she knows. She would
alway truly do the work of those things
that appertain to her and she is purblind,’
that she may not so highly see; therefore
maketh she to the soul this complaint.
Purblind is Reason, ye may well see. For
nothing may see the high divine things,
but that which ought everlastingly to be.
Therefore by right, Reason may not see this,
for his being must fail and [come to an] end.

“Eh, who saith it ?” saith the high exalted
Spirit that is no more under Reason’s control.
“God hath nowhere to put his goodness,”
saith she, “ unless he put it in me, for one
may have no greater ‘ rascal ’* to be made

* j.¢., low-born creature to be ennobled. MS.
“* rascail that is made gentil.”


245


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 13


noble by him, nor can he have any [better
place] where he may put all. And through
this I am the salvation of creatures and the
glory of God.”


CHAT TERS Xrr


HOW THIS SOUL IS THE SALVATION OF CREA-
TURES TO THE GLORY OF GOD, AND HOW
THIS IS MEANT*


“THIS I shall tell you how and for why and’
in what? For this, that I am the greatness
and the sum of. all evils. For as I hold of
my proper nature this which is evil, then
am I all evils; and he is the greatness of all
goodness that holdeth in him of his proper
nature all goodness. Now am I all evils
and he is all goodness, and to the most poor
ought the alms from his equals to be done,
or else there is taken from him the thing
that should be his of right. And God may
do no wrong, for this does not befit him.
Then is his bounty mine by the cause of
my necessity and for the justice of his pure


* In this and the preceding chapter the French
tendency to spin out ideas to their utmost logical
conclusion is very marked. Here clearly the ex-
pression outruns the mystical intuition on which it
is based.


246


Ch. 13] SIMPLE SOULS


bounty. Now, since I am all evils, and he
is all goodness, it behoveth me to have all
his goodness before all mine evil be stanched,
nor with less may not my poverty be sufficed.*
And his goodness may not suffer it since
he hath so much of worth, that I should
dwell a beggar. And a beggar must I be
[according to the measure of my] strength,
unless he give me all his goodness, since I
am all wickedness. For less than the great
fullhead of his all-goodness may not sustain
my need, nor fulfil the deepness of my own
wickedness. And thus I have in me by his
pure bounty, his goodness divine and have
had without beginning, and shall have with-
out end.

“Ror always have I been, in [the] witting
of his divine wisdom, of the will of his pure
divine bounty, of the work of his divine might;
and otherwise this were a fable, if it were
not right, thus for me, to use that which I
say, [namely], that I am the salvation of all
creatures and the glory of God. Also, as
Jesu Christ is buyer of the people by his
death, and the laud of God the Father,
right so am I, because of my wickedness,
the salvation of mankind, and the glory of
God the Father. For God the Father hath
given to his Son all his goodness, and this
bounty of God is given to be known to

* MS. “ pass.”
247


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 13


mankind by the death of Christ Jesu his
Son; and this Son is the magnificence of
the Father everlastingly and the buyer of
mankind.

“Right so, tell I you,” saith this soul,
“that the Father hath spread and given all
his bounty in me. And this goodness is
given to mankind to be known by my wicked-
ness. Then am I the laud of God ever-—
lastingly and the salvation of mankind, for
the salvation of all creatures is none other
thing than knowing of the bounty of God. |
And since all shall have by me the knowing: |
of the goodness of God, and this goodness
of God doth me this bounty of his favour,
then the goodness of God by me shall be
known. This bounty by me* God knew
had never been known, neither was my
wickedness. And since by my wickedness
God is. known and also his divine bounty,
and since the soul’s salvation is no other
thing than to know the divine bounty,
then am I the cause of the salvation of all
creatures, for the goodness of God is known
by me.

“And since the bounty by me is known,
I am his glory and his laud, for none other
thing is his glory nor his laud, but the know-
ing of his divine bounty.. And I am cause
of that. For the bounty of his pure nature

* 7.e., reflected through me.


248


Ch. 13] SIMPLE SOULS


is known by the wickedness of my cruel
nature. Greater reward* have I not in
having his bounty, than that it regards my
wickedness. Then may I no more be without
bounty, for I may not my wickedness lose.
And this point he hath assured me of without
doubt by his pure bounty. And solely the
nature of my wickedness hath arrayed me
also of this gift. Not work of bounty that
ever I did, nor that ever I might do; that
giveth me neither comfort nor hope, but my
wickedness only, for I have by them this
certifying.

“Ye have heard in this writing here, how
I have all his bounty. Then am [I the
salvation, by union of love, which he is;
for the most strong moveth into himself the
most feeble. This union is right delicious;
that wot they who have assayed it. There is
no pearl of the eye so dangerous when one
putteth into it the iron or stone, which is its
death, as is divine love, if one do against him.
His being is always in the perfect plain of
his pure will.

““ Now may ye understand how my wicked-
ness causeth [me] to have his bounty by
choice, for my necessity. For God suffereth
some time some evil to be done for greater
good that afterward shall grow. For all
those that be planted of the Father and come

* MS, ‘‘ advantage.”


249


MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS _[Div. 13


into this world be descended of perfect into
imperfect, that they may attain to the more
perfect. And then the wound is opened,
to heal where it is hurt. Without their
witting, these folks be meeked of God him-
self, who is Almight.”’


250


DIVISION XIV*


CHAPTER I


OF THE PROMISE THAT THIS SOUL MADE TO
SPEAK OF SEVEN ESTATES, AND HOW THE
FIRST IS THE KEEPING OF THE COM-
MANDMENTS OF GOD


i PROMISED,” saith this soul, “con-
I cerning the takings of love to say
some things of the seven estates that

we call Beings, for so it is. And these be
the degrees by which men ascend from the
valley to the top of the mountain that is so
separate that it seeth God only. And every
degree hath in it its proper time of abiding.” T
“The first estate is that a soul is touched
of God by grace, and dissevered from sin,
with intention according to her power to
keep the commandments of God that he
commandeth in the law, up[on] pain of death.
And the soul beholdeth with great dread
that God hath commanded her to love him
with all her heart and her even-Christian
as herself. This seemeth to this soul labour

* See note infra, p. 302.
+ MS. “ his full assise.”’
251


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 14


enough for her, of all that she can do though
she lived a thousand year; to keep well the
commandments according to her might.

“In this point I found myself,” saith this
free soul, “such a day I saw sometime.
Now ye that stand so, be not dismayed of
coming to a more high, no more shall he
[be dismayed] if he have a gentle heart
within, full of noble courage; but little hearts
dare not great things take, nor ascend high,
for default of love. These folk be but
cowards that so do. Oh, what marvel it is.
they lead in dread, which suffereth them not
that God work in them !”’


CHAPTER II


OF THE SECOND STATE, WHICH IS IN FOLLOWING
THE COUNSEL THAT OUR LORD GAVE TO
COME TO PERFECTION


“THE second is that a soul behold what God
counseileth to his special lovers, passing that
that he commandeth. And he is no good
lover that disposeth himself not to fulfil all
that, by which he wist he might best please
to his beloved. And then she, this creature
aforesaid, seeth herself above all men’s
counsels to follow the works of mortifying
nature, in despising riches, delights, and
worships, to fulfil perfection of the evangel,
252


Ch. 3] SIMPLE SOULS


of which Christ Jesu is an ensample. And
in this doing she may have no bitterness, nor
by this may she not have dulness nor feeble-
ness of body; no more also may the soul
that of him is updrawn.”


CHAPTER III


OF THE THIRD STATE, WHICH IS IN DOING THE
WORKS OF PERFECTION WITH AFFECTION
OF LOVE AND IN MORTIFYING THE WILL;
BY OBEDIENCE TO FOLLOW OTHER MEN’S
WILLS


‘Tye third is that a soul attend to the affec-
tion of love of works of perfection, by which
her spirit burns by desires, accepting the love
of these works to multiply in her. And what
doth the subtlety of her thought ? but make
it seem to the understanding of her loving
affection, that she cannot make offering to
her Beloved that might comfort her, but of

the thing that he loveth. For other gift
is not of price in love, than the thing most
beloved of the Beloved. And, therefore,
the will of this creature loveth only works of
goodness, by fervour of grace, in taking all
labours in which she may her spirit feed.
Then it seemeth her by righteousness of
- truth that she loveth not but works of good-
ness, for she wot not what to give to love


253 L


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 14


unless she makes sacrifice of this; for no
death might be to her so great martyrdom
as the abstinence of these foresaid works
that she loveth, for this is the delight of her
pleasure and the life of the will that she
nourisheth in her of him. After this she
relinqu[ish]eth these works in which she
hath this delight and putteth to death the
will that she hath of this life and obligeth—
herself to do the martyrdom of her will, by
obedience to the will of others, in abstaining
the works of her will, in fulfilling the will of
others, her will for to destroy. And this is
right hard, more hard without comparison
than be the twain before. For it is more
hard to overcome the works of the will of the
spirit, than it is to overcome the will of
the body [in order] to do the will of the spirit.
And thus it behoveth her to lead, in breaking
herself, for to enlarge the place where Love
would have his being; and to encumber her-
self with many beings, so as to Leas|enenin sa
herself to attain her being.”


254


Ch. 4] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER IV


OF THE FOURTH STATE, WHICH IS IN THE
RELINQUISHING ALL OUTWARD WORKS
THROUGH THE SWEETNESS THAT IS FELT
BY HIGHNESS OF LOVE IN CONTEMPLATION


“THe fourth is, that a soul is drawn by
highness of love into delight of thought by
meditation, and relinquisheth all labours out-
ward, and of obedience to others, by high-
ness of love in contemplation. Then the
soul is dangerous, noble, and delicious, in
which she may not suffer that anything touch
her but the touchings of pure delight of love,
in the which she is singularly gladsom and
jolly, and it maketh her proud, of abundance
of love.

“Then showeth she the privities of her
heart that maketh her very tender and to melt
in sweetness of love and by concord of union
whereby she is put in possession of these
delights. And then holdeth the soul that
there is none higher life than to have this,
of which she hath lordship; for love hath
so greatly fed her with his delights that
she wot not that God hath any greater
gift nigh to give to the soul than this
love, which Love, by love, hath within her
spread.

255


THE MIRROR OF | [Div. 14


“‘ Ah, what marvel is it if this soul be up-
holden or updrawn thus graciously! Love
maketh her all drunken and suffereth her
not to attend to any but him, by which
strength in love she delighteth her so, that
the soul may none other being hold precious,*
for the great light of love hath covered her,
that suffereth her not to see passing love.
There is she overlooked, for so it is that there_
be two greater estates in this life than this is,
but Love so leadeth that a soul is unseeing,
by the gift of sweetness of the love that.
updraweth her as hastily as she approacheth |
tothesame. Against this strength may none
withstand; this is the soul that Love hath,
by fine love passing herself, updrawn.”


CHAPTER V


OF THE FIFTH STATE, WHICH IS WHEN A SOUL
DEPARTETH FROM HER WILL IN PUTTING
IT IN GOD BY A SPREADING RAVISHING
OF THE MOVING OF DIVINE LIGHT


“ THe fifth is, that a soul behold what God is,
who Is, through whom all thing cometh;
and she is not! For she is not anything that
is. And this beholding giveth her a marvellous
abashing to see that he is all bounty that
hath put free will in her who is naught, but
* MS, “ lay in price.”
256


Ch. 5] SIMPLE SOULS


in all wickedness. Now hath the divine
bounty put free will by pure divine goodness
in her who is but in evils, that is, in all
wickedness enclosed. For he would that
this, who hath no being, had by this gift
of him, being. Then the divine goodness
poureth forth before this ‘‘ will ” a ravishing
outpouring of moving divine light, which is
diffused within the soul, the righteousness
of him who is. And the knowing of this
maketh her to separate the will from the
place where he is not. Then it behoved
her not to be, nor to put [her will] again
where he is not. Whence he comes, there
she ought to be.*

“ Now seeth the will by the diffused}
illumination of divine light. And this light
giveth her this will to put again her will in
God, which she cannot yield without this
light, that it may go forth to him, unless it
depart from her proper will. She seeth
also her wretched nature by inclination of
naught, to which nature she is inclined, and
her willt hath put me in less than naught.
Now seeth the soul this inclination and this
perdition of naught of her nature and of her
own will, and seeth this by illumination,
that will ought to will the divine will without
her willing. And for this was her will

* A very corrupt passage.

+ MS. “ spreading.” £ a.¢., of Nature.

257


THE MIRROR OF | (Div. 14


given. Thus departeth the soul from her
will and the will departeth from this soul,
so she putteth it again and giveth and yieldeth
it [herself] in God where it was first, without
self-love holding back herself, for to fulfil
the perfect divine will that may not be
fulfilled in the soul without this gift, so that
the soul may have no other war or falliaunce.

“This gift maketh in her very perfection, —
and so it hath moved her to the nature of
love that delighteth her with fulfilled peace
and feedeth and filleth her with divine food.
She recketh no more of the war that she was
wont to have, for the will of her is nakedly
laid in the place whence it was first taken,
where it ought by rights to be. It gave her
war as long time as she withheld will with
her, out of its due place.

** Now is this soul not, for she seeth by
abundance of divine knowing her naught,
that maketh her now to put herself at naught.
And she wot all, for she seeth by the deep-
ness of knowing of her naught, which is so
great to her sight, that she findeth neither
beginning, measure, nor end of it; but a deep
darkness without ground or bottom. And
therefore findeth she herself without finding
any ground or end. He findeth not this
that may not to this attain. And the more
that she seeth, in this knowing by truth, that
she may not know her wickedness, of the

258


Ch. 5] SIMPLE SOULS


least point into which she is fallen by
wickedness. And she is naked encircled
of this harbour and of this garrison which
is the darkness of sin, that containeth in him
all perdition. Thus this soul seeth herself
without her sight. This is the deepness of
meekness that there sitteth in her chair and
reigneth without pride. There may not the
power of pride play, since that she seeth
herself, for this unsitting untrue* maketh
her see perfectly herself.

‘* Now is this soul set in low ground; and
this lowness maketh her to see; there it hath
no bottom, so it maketh her low, and this
lowness maketh her to see right clearly the
very sun of his high divine goodness, and
that showeth to her by bounty, that it
draweth her and moveth and oneth by
knitting of bounty, in pure divine goodness,
which is mistress. And this cometh by
the knowing of these two natures that we
have; the one is the divine bounty, and the
other is the wickedness of the spending of
her youth, that is old.f But mercy hath
made peace with justice, firm and stable.
And that hath led this soul into his bounty,
by bounty now she is all and she is none,
for her Beloved hath made her one.


* 7.¢., the abiding in the boundless darkness where
she finds no place to rest.
+ 7.é., ‘an old story,” or, for she is now old.


259


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 14


“ Now is this soul fallen of love into
naught, without which naught she may not
be all. This falling is so perfect, if she’ be
rightly fallen, that the soul may not arise
out of this deepness, nor she ought not to
do it. She ought to dwell within, and there
loseth the soul pride and play, for the spirit
is become bitter,* that suffereth her no more
to be playing nor jolly. For her will is —
departed from her which made her oft
love, in the highness of contemplation, and
in the fourth estate, fierce and dangerous. —
But the fifth hath put her at point con-
cerning this; it showeth to the soul herself.
Now she liveth of knowing of the divine
bounty. This knowing of the divine bounty
maketh her to renounce herself, and then is
the soul of all servitude quit, and of free
being is put in possession. And this hath
rested her of all things by excellent noble-
ness.”’


CHAPTER VI


OF THE SIXTH STATE, WHICH IS WHEN A SOUL-
IS OF ALL THINGS MADE FREE, PURE, AND
CLARIFIED


“THE sixth is that a soul seeth not her naught
by deepness of meekness, nor God, by highful
bounty. But God seeth it in her of his
* 7.e., sobered rather than bitter.
260


Ch. 6] SIMPLE SOULS


divine majesty, who clarifieth her by himself,
so that she seeth that none is but God him-
self, who is that from whence all thing are.
And this that is, is God himself. And this
soul seeth naught but God himself, for
whoso seeth this of himself, he seeth not but
God’s self. And then is a soul in the sixth
state, of all things made free, pure, and
clarified, not glorified; for glorifying is in
the seventh estate that we shall have in
glory, that none can speak of.

‘* But pure, clarified, she seeth not God nor
herself, but God seeth this of him, in her,
for her, without her, and showeth her that
there is none but her. Nor she knoweth
naught but him, nor she loveth but him, nor
she praiseth but him, for there is but he.
That which is, is of his bounty; so loveth she
his goodness which he hath by bounty given
her. This bounty given, it is in God himself.
And God may not from his goodness depart,
that it should not dwellin him. And there-
fore is he the thing which is of his bounty,
And bounty is what God is. So thus she
seeth bounty, through his high bounty,
by divine light, in the sixth estate, of which
beholding the soul is clarified.

“‘ There is none but he that is, and she seeth
this being of his divine majesty by union
of love of bounty, spread and laid in him.
This she seeth in him, of him, who is maker

261 L2


MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS _ [Div. 14


unmade, without touching of anything that
is creaturely.* All is of his own proper
being and this proper self-being is the sixth
being of which we have promised the auditors
to speak in the takings of Love. And Love
hath by himself of his noblesse, the debts
all paid.”


CHAPTER VII
OF THE SEVENTH ESTATE


‘* AND the seventh keepeth he within himself,
for to give us in everlasting glory. If we
_ Wit it not now, we shall wit it when the body
our soul leaveth.”’

* MS. “‘ without nighing ’’; Lat. sine tactu alicu-
ius ‘‘ad creaturam.’ The sense is that the soul


sees by infused immediate knowledge, not by the
knowledge that comes through created things. °


262


Bede See ee ee


DIVISION XV


THE ONLY CHAPTER


HOW THIS BOOK, THAT IS MADE RIGHT HIGH
AND GREAT BY WORDS, SEEMETH RIGHT
LITTLE AND LOW TO THEM THAT BE
FALLEN OF LOVE INTO NAUGHT, AND
BY WHOM IT WAS MADE


es LADIES, nothing ye say,” saith
() this soul that this book doth write.
““Ye that be in being and stand

without default, nothing ye say. No, soothly
ye say nothing, but sit in peace, where Reason
hath no lordship. I excuse me to you and
to all those that lead in naught, that be fallen
of love into this being, for I have made this
book right great and high by words, which
to you seem right little and low. But if ever
I knew you, now excuse me of your courtesy,
for need hath no law. I wot not to whom I
may say mine entent. Now I did it for your
peace and for to show the truth concerning
low cowardice, the same that Reason hath
to yield. But man’s wit nor man’s reason
know nothing of inward love; nor inward
love of divine science. My heart that was

263


MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS | [Div. 15


so high, is cast down so low, that I may
nothing reach; for all that may be said of God,
or written, or in the heart may be thought,
that to which the greatest sayings attain, it
is more gabbings than it is true sayings.

““T have said,” saith this soul that this
book first wrote, “that love hath had it |
made by science of men, and by the will of
unity of mine inwardness, of which I am —
encumbered. In this book it is shown, for
love hath made it by encumbering my spirit, -
by these three which we have spoken of.
And for this I say it is low and right little,
however great the showing of this being
seemed to me at the beginning, and the truth
of them that such be, in the person of one,
where all the others may be understood.”


264


% BALLOON ODLYVODS
ours ccnp econeearor.


DIVISION XVI


THE ONLY CHAPTER


OF THE VERY ADDRESSING OF FINE LOVE. AND
OF THE PRAISING OF THIS SOUL, AND HOW,
BY HAVING NO MORE OF WILL, SHE IS
ABOVE THE LAW, BUT NOT AGAINST THE
LAW


% EMERALD,” saith Truth, “O the
precious gem, very diamond, queen
and empress! Ye give all by pure

fine noblesse, without asking of love his
richesse, but [only] the will of his divine
pleasing. This is right of right, for this is
the very addressing of fine love, who ever
will maintain it.

“OQ ye deep worthy well, in whom the sun
shineth, where the splendour of the sun
continually is found, and the beams thrown
out,” saith Truth, ‘“‘ of divine science, we
wit it by very sapience, that the splendour
maketh you to work alway.”

“Now Truth,” saith this soul, “tell to
none, whatever I say of God, but to him.
This is truth; doubt ye not, lady, in this of
me. Iamnot. And if it please you to wit

265


MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS _ [Div. 16


what I am, I shall tell it you by pure courtesy.
Love kath me so wholly in his keeping that
I have not wit nor will nor reason to do
anything; wit it forsooth, but purely for him.

“© courteous and well taught,” saith
Holy Church that wisely can speak, “ye
be the very star that showeth us the day and
the sun without lack or spot, that taketh
not of uncleanness. And the moon all full,
for never ye shall diminish. And so ye be
the lark that before the king goeth.

““ Ye live all of the grain of wheat, for ye
have no more of will. And they live on the
chaff of rye and of rough barley, that have
maintained* usages of outward wills, which
be of human natures. Such folks be servants
to the law, but these others be above the
law; not against the law, witness of truth;
she is fed and fulfilled, God is in her will.”


* MS. ‘‘ withholden ”—i.e., failed to give up in
sacrifice these usages.


266


ae


DIVISION XVII


CHAPTER I


OF SECRETS THAT THIS SOUL SPEAKETH OF,
WHEREOF THE TRINITY PRAYETH HER TO
LEAVE FOR DEEMING OF OTHERS THAT BE
GOVERNED BY DESIRE, REASON, DREAD,
WILL


if RIGHT sweet divine Love that is in
Trinity,”’ saith this soul, “ such work
there is, that I marvel how they may
endure, whom Reason and Dread govern work
and will, and who can the great nobleness
of naughted being devise.”

“© pure, O heavenly,” saith the Holy
Trinity, “I pray you, dear daughter, that ye
let this be. There is none so great clerk
in the world that can speak to you. Ye have
sat at my table, so I have given you my mess,
and so have ye right well learned, and right
well my mess savoured, and my vines of
fulness, of which ye be the cutting. The
root made you yours without more, nor
never other shall be. Now have ye tasted
honey and our wine savoured,” saith the
Holy Trinity, “none can speak but ye, for

267


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 17


ye may not any other usages in your heart
take, to have in price, but this. I pray you,
my dear daughter, my sister and my friend,
if ye will, that ye say no more the secrets that
ye wit, lest other should deem* where these
taste, since Desire governeth them, Reason,
Dread, and Will. Wit it well, my chosen
daughter, Paradise is given to them.”

“ Paradise,” saith this chosen one, “‘ [not] -
unless you work it! even thus the deer will
run to the death unless you hinder it.t
Nevertheless I will be still, for this that ye
allow it me and I shall say verses of song
by leave of fine love, concerning the high
ascent, and the precious entry, and the worthy
dwelling of mankind, bought and wrought
of the sweet humanity of God’s Son our
Saviour, which the Deity sitteth in, in high
possession in heaven, there above, on the
right side of God the Father, for us to marvel.
Will ye, right this day, by courtesy, dissolve§
me, ye fine Love?”


* i.e., speculate or imagine, as opposed to the
experience of the elect soul.

Tt MS. “ ne werkg ye it, also schalle the deire but
if ye lette him to dethe, werke.”? Lat. sic usque ad
mortem operabitur capreus.

+ Allow =bid me.

§ MS. “ depart.”


268


Ch, 2] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER II


OF CERTAIN THINGS THAT THIS SOUL WOULD
BE DEPARTED FROM, BY THE WHICH SHE
WAS SERVANT, AND OF THE LOVE (?) THAT
SHE IS COME TO; AND HOW THE DIVINE
BEHOLDING HATH BUT ONE ENTENT AND
OF THE PEACE OF THAT FOOD THAT LOVE
GIVETH HER


“* OF what 2” saith Love.

“Of myself,” saith this soul, “and of
mine even-Christian and of all the world,
and of affection of spirit and of virtues,
wherein I have been servant, by the care
and control of reason. And if I shall say
sooth, so beastly I was in the time that I
them served, that I may not with mine heart
declare it. And in the meantime that I
most had them, Love made me hear and speak
of him. And nevertheless, as simple as I
was, Will anon took me Love to love. And
when Love saw me think of him, he refused
me not by [the way of] the virtues, but threw
me out of their little service, and led me to
the divine school and there withheld me
without doing any service.

““ So am I of him fed, fulfilled, and sufficed.
Thinking is worth no more, nor work, nor
eloquence; Love draweth meso high. Think-

26G


MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS | [Div. 17


ing no more is worth; for his divine beholding
it hath but one entent. Love hath made me
by nobleness, seven verses of song to find
that which is of pure Deity, whereof reason
cannot speak.

“A love I have which hath no mother,
proceeding of God the Father and also of
God the Son. His name is the Holy Ghost,
so have I in heart such union in love, that
Love giveth me to love in him, that it maketh
me a joyful life to lead. This is the peace
of the food that Love giveth me to love him.
Nothing will I ask him for too much that °
were of malice, but I ought to trust wholly
in him, and that sweet lover to love.”


270


Lp ie Se See EL


DIVISION XVIII


CHAPTER I


OF WHAT ABUNDANCE OF GRACE OUR BLESSED
LADY HAD IN THE WOMB OF HER MOTHER,
AND OF CERTAIN BEHOLDINGS THAT BE
CONVENABLE FOR THE MARRED, TO COME TO
THE BEING THAT THIS BOOK SPEAKETH OF


% LADY MARY, that art the vessel
that more perfectly wert fulfilled of
divine light, right in the womb of

your mother, than were the twelve apostles

the day of Pentecost, when they gathered the
abundance of the gifts of the Holy Ghost!

O blissful Lady, it was needful to you to be

so; for I hold of God his Son, that if he had

found in you as much vanity as the quantity
of a wrinkle* in a kerchief, of necessity he
had never made of you his mother. Lady,
it may not be that ye had been [his mother].

And this may not be but that ye were it

[indeed]. I behold this Lady at the Cross

in the presence of her Son’s death. Where

the naked Adam did the wrong, the naked

Jesu Christ it had. This, which Jesu Christ

* MS, “ mountenance of a frounce.”
271


THE MIRROR OF (Div. 18


did, set [things] better to rights* than that
which the former set [wrong]. And this
hath this Lady [thereof]. One is she, the
mother of this Saviour.

“* Lady, what would your thought [think]
of them for this >”

“* Lady, what said ye to them for that there
was in them cruelty? Lady, what did ye
to them for works of forfeit+ that they did? —
Lady, if it had been need, ye had for them
that very time given your life rather than
they should not have had forgiveness of God _
of that misdeed. But nay, for Jesu Christ’
made this accordance so abundantly, so
anguishously. Why so abundantly? For-
sooth it is, that as much of his blessed blood
as would have stood upon the point of a
needle, had been sufficient to have bought
an hundred thousand thousand worlds, if
there had been so many worlds. This he
gave for us with such right great abundance,
for he will rob me by this, and separate me
of myself, for to make me live of divine
pleasure. Why so anguishously ? For this,
that I hold, that if all diseases of deaths and
of other torments that have been or shall
be in reasonable creatures from the time of
Adam unto the time of Antichrist, and all
these miseases toforesaid, were in one

* MS. “ laid better the right.”
T 7.é., sin.
272


Ch. 1] - SIMPLE SOULS


creature, truly it were but a point of the
misease that Jesu Christ had in his worthy
precious Body by one of his pains, without
more, for the onbinding* of his tenderness
and cleanness. And then this I beheld, how
the divine nature oned him for us to the nature
of man in the person of God the Son. Ah,
ah, what a thing it is, to think of; who durst
ask this, unless his own bounty had made it;
that Jesu Christ should be poor and despised
and tormented for us? What marvel is it
he might not withhold himself from this
work; for the support of love by which he
loved us constrained him thereto, forasmuch
as he had taken the naturet of man, by which
he might do this. How might he have
done this ? but that the divine nature took
nature of man oneing him thereto in the
person of God the Son. This is thought
right enough for us to be disencumbered
all the day of our life, if we will suffer the
right work in us. I have not suffered it to
do in me this work, for he would have made
me free in this point, if I had heard him as
soon as he had given me this thought of
him: but I would not. Who shall wholly
restore the hideousness of this loss? My
opinion became a foolishness to me, for
besides that I thought to find my works,
naught did I but lose. And then this I
* 7.e.. union. t+ MS. “kind.”


273


THE MIRROR OF » (Div. 18


beheld, how he that is God and Man was
despised on earth in the nature of mankind,
shamefully for me. And the great poverty
that he took for me [I beheld], and the
grievous death that he suffered for me.
In these three points be all that is made
comprised without comprehending.”

*O Truth, Way, and Life, what is this
for us to think of ? Lord, this is a greater
thing to embrace our hearts in the love of
you, by thinking on one of your benefits
that ye have done for us, than were all the ©
world and the heaven and the earth, if they, —
were set on fire for to destroy one body.*
And then I beheld his great purity and
truth.

“Then Truth said to me, that I shall not
see the divine Trinity until my soul be all so
clean without spot of sin, as is the soul of
Jesu Christ. And the soul of Jesu Christ
was glorified in that very time that it was made
of the divine Trinity and oned to deadlyt+
body and to divine nature in the person of
the Son, in the same moment that she was
made, and oned, and knit to these two
natures as perfectly as it is now at this
time. Since that his soul was oned to his
divine nature it might not be that the body
that was mortal, might do sin.

ACL aT SOtwexdites.
} z.e., human, mortal.


274


Ch. 1] SIMPLE SOULS


“* And then I beheld who these should be
that should ascend to heaven. And Truth
said to me this, that none shall ascend but
he only that should reflect* the Son of God
himself. That is to say, that none may
ascend but they only that be God’s sons by
divine graces, of whom he said: This 1s my
brother, my sister and my mother, that doth
the will of God my Father.t

“ And then I beheld the seraphins and
asked of them for what cause were done the
works that charity did of the Incarnation
of the Manhood of Jesu Christ, or of this,
that the divine Trinity made them, and of
all that he shall do without end in creature,
of his bounty.

“And Love told me it was but all solely
for one thing, and that is, that the divine will
of all the Trinity would it. And this is a
sweet beholding and a profitable, to them
that behold it, and to disencumber them of
themselves, to approacht+ this being that we
have spoken of.

““ Now we have seven beholdings that be
for the marred, profitable enough. The
first is of the Apostles, the second is of the
Maudelyn, the third is of John Baptist, the
fourth is of the Virgin Mary, the fifth how

* MS. “alight” ; Lat. elucidavit.
+ Cf. Matt. xii 50; Mark iii 35.
+ MS. “ for to nigh.”

275


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 18


nature divine is oned to the nature of man-
kind in the person of the Son. The sixth
beholding is how the manhood of Christ
Jesu was tormented for us. The seventh
is of the seraphins, how they be in the
divine will.”


CHAPTER II


OF THE BEHOLDINGS THAT THIS SOUL HAD IN
THIS FORESAID LIFE


*“Now I shall tell you the beholdings that I
had in this life, that is aforesaid. I beheld
him in me and me in him, and willed great
wills for him. I allow me of these three
above all thing, howsoever it may be that
these folks be of little peace, who in will
and in desire dwell.

**T said thus in the meantime, that I wist
not how to suffer it, and this beholding
yielded me manner.

“O Lord, I wot not what this compre-
hendeth, your great everlasting might, your
great everlasting divine wisdom, your great
everlasting divine bounty. And this I say
as for me, I know not what ye be, for I know
not your everlasting might, your everlasting
wisdom, your everlasting bounty.

“Nor I wot not what I am, for I wot

276


Ch. 2] SIMPLE SOULS


naught of my passing* feebleness, of my pass-
ing foolishness,t of my passing wickedness.

“Tord, ye be one bounty, by bounty
outpoured and all in you, and I am one
wickedness by wickedness all outpoured
and all in me.

“Lord God, ye be all thing: thus is all
thing made by you, and nothing is made
without you, and I am naught; thus is all
thing made without me.

“Lord, ye be all might, all wisdom and
all goodness, without beginning, without
comprehending, without end, and I am all
feebleness, all foolishness and all wickedness,
without beginning, without comprehending,
without measure.

“Lord, ye be one only God in three
Persons, and I am one only enemy in three
mischances.£

“Lord, ye be Father and Son and Holy
Ghost, and I am feebleness, foolishness
and wickedness.

“Tord, how much comprehend§ I of
your might, of your wisdom and of your
goodness? As much as I comprehend of
my feebleness, of my foolishness, and of
my wickedness.


* t.e., exceeding.

+ MS. “ sotines.”

+ ie., faults. O. Fr. mescheance ; Lat. miseriis.
§ z.e., understand; Fr. comprendre.


277


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 18


‘Lord God, how much comprehend I
of my feebleness, of my foolishness, and of
my wickedness? As much as I compre-
hend of your might, of your wisdom, of
your goodness. And if I might compre-
hend one of these two natures I should
comprehend both. This is the measure,
and for as much as I know naught of my
wickedness as compared to that which it is, |
I know not of your goodness, as compared ~
to that which it is. And yet that little that
I know of my wickedness, it hath given me
the knowing that I have of your goodness. |.

““O Lord God, soothly it is little, so little -
that it may not be said, for it is naught as in
regard of the other part,* and therefore ye
be and none but ye; all your truths grant it
you, in me.”


CHAPTER III


HOW THE BEHOLDING OF THE GOODNESS OF
GOD AND OF HER WRETCHEDNESS SENT
THIS SOUL TO MEDITATION. AND OF THE
PRIVY SPEECH THAT SHE HAD TO GOD
IN HER MEDITATION


“* AND then this I beheld, between the wicked-
ness of me and between the goodness of him,
what thing I might do to appease me to him.
AVM Sit ideally
278


Ch. 3] SIMPLE SOULS


This put me in meditation by reasonings
on one side, in consenting of will, without
receiving [of God’s favours ?].*

“And then I said thus, that if it might be
that I had never been, so that I had never
misdone against his will, if it pleased him,
it would be my pleasaunce.

‘* And then I said to him, that if it might be
that he would give me as great torments as he
is mightful, for to avenge him of my defaults,
if it pleased him, it were my pleasaunce.

“‘ And then after, I said thus to him, that if
it might be so that I were even as he is, and
should be without faillaunce, and with this
I should suffer as much of poverty and of
despites and torments as he hath, of bounty
of wisdom, and of might, so I had never
done against his will, if it were his pleasing,
it were my pleasaunce.

*‘ And then I said to him, that if it might be
that I had of me as much of worthiness as he
hath of himself, so that it might not be taken
from me nor diminished, but if I alone
willed it myself, I should lay all this in him
and go to naught, ere than I might anything
withhold, that came not to me from him;
and though it might be that I might have all
this beforesaid, I might not do it to hold
anything that came not to me from him.

* MS. “ by comprehending of partie in consenting
of will, without receivings.”


279


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 18


“* And then I said this, that if I had of my
proper condition this [which was] aforesaid,
I should love better and rather choose that
it went to naught without recovering, than
that I should have it, unless it came of him.
And if I had as great torments as he is of
might, I should love better these torments,
if they came of him, than I should glory
that came not of him, [even were I] to have
it everlastingly.

“ And then I said to him, rather than I
should henceforward do thing that were
against his pleasing, it were more in my
choice that his manhood should suffer on
the Cross as much as he hath suffered of
torments for me—if it might be. I say this,
for this: rather than that I should do thing
that were his displeasaunce.

‘* And then I told him, that if I wist that all
that he hath made of naught, I and all other
thing be it understood, must go to naught,
except I misdid against his will, it should go
to [naught] of my choice, rather than that I
misdid.

“And then I told him that if I wist that I
should have as much of torment without end
as he hath of goodness unless I misdid
against his will, I should choose rather to go
suffer those pains everlastingly, than that
I should do thing that I wist should dis-
please his will.

280


Ch. 3] SIMPLE SOULS


“ And then I told him, that if it might be
that he could and would give me, by his
will, as much of goodness as he hath of worth
everlastingly, I should not love it but for
him. And if I lost it, I should nor reck
thereof but for him, and if he yielded it me
again after this loss, I should not take it
but for him. And if it might better please
him that I went to naught and had naught
of being than that I should take this gift of
him, I should love more that I went to naught.
And if it might be that I had the same that
he hath in him, as well as he hath of him,
with [the assurance] that it should never
fail if I would, and I wist that it might better
please him that I suffered as much torment
of him as he hath of goodness in him, I
should love it better than for to dwell in that
glory.

“And though I wist that the sweet man-
hood of Christ Jesu and the Virgin and all
the court of heaven might not suffer that I
had the torments everlastingly, but [rather]
that I had the being that I was come from,
and God seeth this in himself (if it might
be this pity of them and this good will),
and thus saith to me: ‘ If thou wilt, I shall
yield thee that which thou art come from,
by my will, for this that my friends of my
court will it, but were it not their will, thou
shouldest not have it, wherefore I yield thee

281


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 18


this gift, if thou wilt, take it!’ It should
fall in my choice rather without end to dwell
in torment than I should take it, since I
had it not of his sole will. So I [would]
refuse it at the prayers of the Humanity,
and of the saints, and of the Virgin Mary.
I might not suffer it unless I had it of the
pure love that he hath to me, for me, of his
pure bounty and of his sole will and love that ~
a Beloved hath to his lover.

**And then I said to him that if I wist it
might more please him that I loved another
more than him ?—Here me faileth wit—thus, ~
it goeth*—this I feel not might nor will to —
grant, but I answered that I should take
counsel with myself.

“And then I said this, that if it might be
that he might love another more than me ?—
Here me faileth wit—I cannot answer, nor
will, nor grant it.

‘““And then this I said to him, that if it
might be that he might will that another loved
me more than he loveth me ?—Here me
faileth also wit—I cannot answer no more
than afore, but alway I said that of all that I
should take counsel, and right so I did. I


* The soul cannot express fully the painful sacri-
fice she perceives; possibly the sentence is left
unfinished, and it is to be understood that now God
pe these things of her, when she says ‘“‘I said to

im.


282


Ch. 3] SIMPLE SOULS


took counsel from himself and told him that
these three things were right hard, more
than the other were before, [namely], that
I should love another more than him, and
he another more than me, and that another
should love me more than he—wit failed
me here, for I might not to none of these
three things grant my will. And always
he assailed me for to have an answer, and so
much I loved myself [together] with him,
that I might not for nothing have discretion
in this, and thus I was in distress. So went
I not lightly away. This wot none, but if
he have assayed this point. And alway
I might have no peace, unless I answered
to this aforesaid.

“ Ah, I still loved myself—this had me—
therefore I might not lightly answer. And
if I had not loved myself, the answer had
been swift and light, and always it behoved
me to answer, if I would not lose myself in
him, for which mine heart suffered so great
distress.”


283


ORO RCOROAZOROAGOR
Kiscceasocentocescors


DIVISION XIX


CHAPTER I


OF THE ANSWER THAT THIS SOUL GAVE OF THE ~
THREE THINGS TO WHICH SHE ANSWERED
NOT AFORE. AND OF THE MARTYRDOM
OF WILL AND LOVE


OW I shall tell you my answer that
N I said to him, concerning himself,

that he would prove me of all points.
Alas! what have I said? I shall speak no
word more; the heart [is] made alone of
him in this battle. What shall I answer in
anguish of death ? That he would thus depart
from his lover, whom he had so well arrayed,
that well I weened it might have endured!
But it might be so, and if it were so, that by
a game of change he might will this and that
he did will it with all his will, [then] I answered
thus, and said to him:

“O Lord, if it might be that this change
might everlastingly endure in fact, as it is
in supposition; I love you, for you and of
you. Therefore I did not want it for your
sake. And if I had the same that ye have,
with the creation that ye have given me, and


284


Ch.1] MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS


might also well do my will, as I do of the
will that ye have given me: and also if I had
this, that I were equal unto you save in this,
that I might change my will for other than
for me, ye should not do this, since ye would
it without any of your goodness; these three
points that be right grievous to grant. And
if I wist without doubt that your will would
it, without diminishing of your divine
goodness, I would grant it without anything
further willing more; my will taketh its
ending in this saying.”

Thus my will is martyred, and my love
martyred; ye have them to martyrdom
brought. Their weenings be fully inclined,
mine heart thought sometime, alway to have
lived of love by desire of good will. Now be
these two things ended in me that made me
out of my childhood go; and there it showed
me the country of freedom.

Then came to me Righteousness, and
asked me what sparing I would have of him
or of thing that torment might do to me.
Then came Mercy, and asked me what help
would I have of him.

I answered anon this, that [as] I was,
I would [have] no more help of him, nor of
anything that might do me good.

And then came Love to me fulfilled with
bounty, that so often times had cast me out
of wit, and in the fire had given me death.

285 M


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 19


‘* Ye have something heard there,” he said,
** T hold all thing that was and is and shall be;
I am of all goodness fulfilled, take of me
what ye will; if ye will have me all, I unwill
it not,” saith my friend, ‘‘ how seemeth it
youofme? Iam Love fulfilled with Bounty.
This that ye will, we will it,”’ saith my friend,
* take your own will !”

I answered anon: “This that I am, is pure
naught. Alas, what would pure naught ?
it has never nothing of will. I will nothing
that is not of the bounty of Love. All
thing that is of him, it is of him verily
fulfilled and thus it is that nothing is, unless
it be of him, and this I say hath me of all
things consumed.”’

Now I began at this trialx of my youth
and of my former spirits, to come again to
this, that will was dead and my works ended
and my love also, that made me jolly. For
the outpouring of the divine love showed me
by divine light, an highful opening approach-
ing to the truth, that showed me suddenly
him and me. Him so high and me so low,
that I might no more from thence rise, nor
help of myself have and that was best.

If ye understand not this, I may not
amend it. This is a work miracleful; this,
then, his lamentations+ may not say.

RENN See ASSIZCe
+ MS. “* waymentings.”’
286


Ch. 2] SIMPLE SOULS


CHAPTER II


HOW THE AFFECTION OF TENDERNESS OF LOVE
THAT THE SOUL FEELETH ‘“‘IN LIFE OF
SPIRIT ’ WHICH SHE WEENETH IT TO BE
IN GOD, IS IN HERSELF, AND OF THE
PROFIT OF NAUGHT WITTING


‘‘ HERE ye have,” saith this soul, ‘some
beholding how I complained for to dis-
encumber myself and for to find the way
that I complained of when I was marred.
This that I was then, is ‘ marring,’ for all
those be marred that have anything of
affection in spirit. And this beholding is
in the life of spirit, by affection of tender-
ness of love that the soul hath to herself,
but she weeneth that it is in God—this love
that she hath—of which she is so attainted.
But in well-understanding it is herself that she
loveth, without her witting. And there they
may be deceived, that love by tenderness that
they have to affection, which suffereth them
not to come to knowing. ‘Thus they lead as
they did in work of youth, and dwell so long
in works till* they have affection of spirit.”
“© God,” saith divine Love, that through
him resteth concerning this, in soul naughted,
“how far is their life from the life of free-
* Perhaps ‘‘ while.”


287


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 19


ness, over which not-willing hath lordship.
And this naught willing soweth in souls
the divine seeds, fulfilled of divine will of
God. This seed may never fail, but few
folks dispose them to receive this seed.

“T have found many of them who be
‘ perished ’ in affection, and of the ‘marred’
in life of spirit, by works of virtues, in desires
of good will. But I have found few of ©
‘ gentil-in-being’’ and fewer of them that
be in ‘ freedom’ without fail, of which this
book speaketh, that have one sole will
that fine love maketh to have; for fine love”
maketh to have one only will and one love.
And therefore, divine will is alway one same
will with Love. And this love is of that
which is wholly and solely fine in the state
of work divine. This soul is no-one by
naughting, and she recketh not in this naught-
ing, though the serpent her devour. Since
God may neither wax nor lessen in his work
[so her joy in it may neither wax nor lessen].

“Tf she took work of herself, she should
be ‘ for’ her; if she be no-one, her working
may not be. And since the bounty of God
may not diminish, dis-ease* may not in her


* Dis-ease —discontent, or here, I think, a feeling
of monotony due to the hiddenness of God’s work in
ber. She would not grow discontented if she dwelt
on his work, but it may arise if she centres on her
own effort or life.

288


Ch. 2] SIMPLE SOULS


grow of his work, unless it wax of her own.
And if it wax of her, she should be, ‘for’ her-
self. If she be nakedly naught, this being*
may not be.”

“This is sooth,” saith this free soul;
“in this point I am, by naughting, myself,
for when I leave and naught myself perfectly,
then his miracles give me very knowing of
his divine gifts. Faith is the cause of this.”


~ 7.e., monotony.


289


DIVISION XX


CHAPTER I
HOW THIS SOUL IS IN HER HIGHEST PERFEC-


TION WHEN HOLY CHURCH TAKETH NO -


ENSAMPLE OF HER. AND WHAT HOLY
CHURCH IS. AND OF THREE THINGS
THAT CAUSETH THIS SOUL THAT SHE
HATH NO DREAD .


“S HIS soul,” saith Love, “is in her
highest. perfection and most nigh
the far night when Holy Church
taketh not of ensample* in her life. She is
then under the work of cleanness, and above
the work of charity. She is so far from the
works of virtue that she may not understand
their language. But the works of virtues
be all within this soul enclosed, that obey her
without any withstanding. And for this
enclosing, Holy Church cannot know her;
the which Holy Church is specially the dread
of God, for the holy dread of God is one of
the gifts of the Holy Ghost. And yet
nevertheless, the dread of God might disturb
the being of freeness.
* ¢.¢., takes no notice of her life.
290


Ch. 1] MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS


“The being of freeness hath no dread
for she hath passed the point of the spear
in putting away the pleasaunce of body, and
in slaying the wills of the spirit. She hath
all her love laid upon her night. She
recketh not of herself, nor that she is naught.
The Sum of all* hath acquit her of her debts
that she owed Jesu Christ. She oweth him
naught however [much] she was against him
in debt. The ‘most’ showeth him that
which of ‘less’ acquitteth her. But they
that would possess the full assurance without
inward [feeling] of unbelief,+ them doth the
great wit of nature deceive. They suffer
themselves to be governed by affection of
life of spirit in sufficing of themselves. And
that robbeth them of the knowledge, so
that they may not the fulness of this deep-
ness understarid, nor the goodness of God
for them, largely trust. And _ therefore,
they dwell in ‘ works.’

** Alas, how they be deceived, who of this
think them to suffice! For all that ever a
creature may do of works of goodness, it
is naught as in regard of his bounty; for the
divine wisdom gave not his highful goodness


* MS. “most.” Cf. earlier part of book. An
obscure passage.

MS. “ would have without any incredence within
the full assize’’; z.e., the sense of insecurity is a last
purgation.

291


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 20


to souls, but for his own goodness’ self.
And only by [this] one understanding of
this great highful everlasting goodness doth
new goodness grow.”


CHAPTER II


OF THE WORTHINESS OF THE BOUNTY OF GOD
AND OF THE UNION THAT MAKETH —
BETWEEN GOD AND THIS SOUL


BOUNTY is more worth than all the work
that any creature may do within an hundred
thousand year or all Holy Church. The
farthest of this is most nigh, for it oneth
from within this being in himself, and it
maketh her alway to be knit to his will
without removing her therefrom, for thing
that may fall to her. All is one to her
without dread and without joy, for she is
no one in this one. And then hath she no
more to do of God than God of her, for
he is and she is not. She hath nothing
withholden in naughting of herself; it is
enough that he is. And she is not; for
she is without being, there where she was,
ere she was not. So hath she of God this
which she hath; and she is this which
God is, by union of love, in that point
where she was, before God had her of his
bounty made.
292


Ch. 2] , SIMPLE SOULS


There she prayeth not,* no more than
she did ere that she was aught. She receiveth
this that she hath, of the bounty of God, of
the will of his love, of this gentle far night.
Thus prayeth she not. That which she most
loved, is now that she most hateth, as it is
the manner. She hath nothing withholden.
And [in] that [she] hath neither more nor
less of love himself, for this hath she no
place, nor recketh of anything that may fall.
She hath neither bottom nor floor, therefore
hath she no place, and if she hath no place,
then hath she not love for herself. This
anyone may say! All work is forbidden
her,t and she is in the simple Being of the
Deity, as it was commanded sometime of
Jesu Christ, the Son of God the Father.

To this end come they who are not
anxious for themselves,§ for love giveth
all thing to this soul, and even acquitteth her
to her even-Christian. ‘‘ Thus it is right,”

* Latin trans. quotes Dionysius: Non orat, not
vocally or consciously. Sed consurgit ignote ad ipsius
unionem que est super omnem substantiam et cogni-
Ssczonem.

+ The Latin translator’s note effectually disposes
of all objections to this sentiment. He says: “If
the soul never did any work she would not have
written this book for our edification; but it is to be


understood, as I have said before, as being for a
short time”’—7.e., the time when the soul is in


prayer. + Cf. John xvii 21 seq.
§ MS. ‘‘ Have not of what to do.”
293 M2


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 20


saith she, “that all things be hallowed to —
me, even as all things be made for me, and
for this I take it, as for mine, without —
challenging. Why should I not do thus ?
Ye, Lord, have loved me and have done and
shall do; with all your power, as Father ye
have loved me and have done and shall
do; with all your wisdom, as Son and
brother, ye have loved me and have done so
and shall do with all your goodness, as friend. -
Then may I well say that ye love none more
than me, for no more than your goodness
may suffer it, [otherwise than] that your high ~
beloved Mother and also the angels, the’ —
saints, men and women, should have glory
of your high everlasting bounty, passing
their deserts, no more may not your high
everlasting goodness suffer that I have the
torments of my deserts, but [rather] that I
receive as much of your mercy continually,
as ye have of might compared to the other
that I should suffer, if it were not for your
bounty. In these words is the gloss of this
song.” ‘


Therefore his eye beholdeth me: that he
loveth none more than me. This is
the substance of my heart.

Therefore his eye beholdeth me, he may
not suffer nor will, but that he be con-
joint within me.

294


Ch. 2] — SIMPLE SOULS


Therefore his eye beholdeth me, that he
loveth none more than me; my necessity
requireth it.

Therefore his eye beholdeth me. I will
nothing that he willeth not. Such
power hath love over me.

Therefore his eye beholdeth me, that he
loveth none more than me. Ah, ah,
fine love of my heart.

Therefore his eye beholdeth me, thou
makest of two wills one will. Such is
the nature of thee.

Therefore his eye beholdeth me, that he
loveth none more than me.


Now—Amen.


Here endeth the book that Love calleth
THE MIRROR OF SIMPLE SOULS.


*Who that this book will understand:
Take that Lord to his Spouse Lovande
That is God in Trinity.


Jesu, mercy and grace.
Jesu, pray for us.


Sigh and sorrow deeply:
Mourn and weep inwardly:
Pray and think devoutly:
Love and long continually.


M. En Dieu
Desormes. N.


x These three verses occur in many mediaeval
MSS. They are printed here from the Bod. MS.


295


THE MIRROR OF [Div. 20


THE TRANSLATOR’S EPILOGUE


O glorious Trinity in whom is all goodness,
hallowed be your holy name, in heaven and
in earth, and fulfilled be your will.

I thank you, blissful Lord God, with ail
my poor heart, for all the gifts of grace that
ye have given and done to me, that am your
poor unworthy creature. And that you
deigned of your excellent Deity, that I,
the most wretched and unfit,* should trans-
late this book. And for that the work is
now ended, thanked and praised be ye of al!
good creatures. Lord, unwitting I am,
unmighty and unable to have done it, but
only by your help and grace. Therefore
to you only, be the worship and the praising
thereof, and of all good works that be done
under the sun.

Beseeching you, Eternal God, if it be
pleasing to you, that those that read this
book mistake no word thereof. But, good
Lord, of your great benignity, give them the
grace of ghostly feeling. Inspire them with
your Holy Ghost that they may fully by the
virtue of love understand it in the same wise
as it is devoutly meant, that it may turn
you, to worship and to them, profit of soul,
by your endless might and bounty.


* MS. ‘* unconvenable.”’


296


Ch. 2] SIMPLE SOULS


O my Lord God, mercy, mercy. I ama
sinner, as ye well know, by which, alas,
unworthy I am to praise you and to laud you.
But all-might, all-wisdom, and all-goodness,
al-glory, all-grace, all-sweetness, all-virtues,
all-victories, all-honours, all-bliss, all-joy
and all-magnificence, Lord, worship, laud,
praise and magnify you everlastingly without
end. :

Jesu Mercy.


Amen. Amen. Amen.


297


_bual ia. fk ae
wort ear Aas Woy


+ i aris.
meetin


Ske, She, He, she, HF ees,


NOTES


NOTE 2, p. 14.


M.N. interprets the mystic in the light of moral
theology, and supplies the ascetical basis of the
author’s more transcendent doctrines. Possibly X
(the author) presupposed this explanation of growth
in the conquest of virtue, but he seems also to have
had in mind the theory, developed further on in the
book, namely, that the soul when liberated by Love
becomes free from the anxious preoccupation con-~-
cerning Virtue and—being, of course, in grace and
habitually pursuing virtue—finds her attention
focussed directly upon the contemplation of God’s
love. In proportion as she grows in union, her
self-consciousness diminishes. As the revelation of
God to the soul progresses, so the soul becomes
more passive, both with regard to effort after virtue
and search for knowledge. These increase steadily
by God’s work in the soul, but there is ever less and
less self-consciousness concerning these things.

The constantly growing factor, the hunger and
thirst after God, supplies the right affective impetus,
which, in the earlier stages, was known—and to some
extent remains always—as a desire for personal
holiness and a knowledge of God.

The affective element outlasts the other personal
elements, but is itself purified in the “far night ”’
of aridity, and is later realised as being but the last
human trappings of self behind which the ‘* Spirit
of God”? resides in that part of the soul completely
inaccessible to self-consciousness.


299


NOTES
Note 2, p. 24.


** For sin must be had in conscience.” ‘This does
not mean that sin is merely a matter of subjective
conscience, and that by directing his intention aright
a man delivers himself from responsibility for fleshly
sin. Rather, assuming freedom from the grosser
sins and progress in the spiritual life, infirmities,
frailties, even venial sins, are not to be overempha-
sised, and in this state no sin is committed without


the deliberate consent of conscience: ‘‘ Sin must be


had in conscience.”

If the conscience is directed wholly towards God,
the soul enjoys a freedom of spirit in which the lawful
demands of nature can now be legitimately satisfied
without fear of impulses to excess, and without need
of the constant check of violent self-denial. But at
no stage of the spiritual life does the soul find itself
able to give up watchfulness nor to abandon all
deliberate mortification. :

**Will a man or nil he-so, in the time after.”
Frailties committed by surprise not by consent of
conscience and repudiated, at the time or after, bythe
will, are not necessarily sins. But such actions,
though indeliberate, can become sinful by a return
of evil desire to which the heart yields itself.


Note I, p. 104.


This qualifying statement together with others
are according to the doctrine of Dionysius Areo-
pagita. They save the treatise from the errors of
Pantheism and of Quietism. The author guards
against the Pantheistic theory that the soul can be
so absorbed into the divine nature as to become
identical with it. ‘‘ Not by nature divine.” ‘* The
treasure fulfilled which is in the Trinity ’? becomes
the property of the soul by the active and constantly


300


ty


NOTES


renewed outgoing of love, the gift of God—1.e., in
action. There is never identification of nature.
Furthermore, the states of indifference and unknow-
ing, which are described, are not quietistic passivity.
The author insists on the interior spiritual activity
inaccessible to the senses, and therefore indescribable,
but issuing in the soul’s possession of the treasure
“* enclosed in the Trinity.”


Note 3, p. 105.


The division of souls into two classes, those
guided by Reason, and those led by Love—.e.,
rationalism v. mysticism—is a very old and a very
modern concept. The author makes a bold per-
sonification here, definitely subordinating the former
family to the latter; “¢ Holy Church the little, or less,
or Holy-Church-under-The Holy Church.”

No heresy is intended, such as the Jansenist theory
of the “‘ elect,” but merely a statement of the probable
relation in which ‘“‘ Rationalising Reason”’ and
“Intuitive Love ” stand to each other. The bold
humour of the passage is intensified and preserved
from unpleasantness by Holy-Church-the-little’s
acceptance of the stricture.

The key to the situation is indicated in the fact
that she “praises them in the glosses of our
scriptures.”” The “ glossing of the scriptures # is
one of the true functions for the “ rationalistic ”


faculties.


Note 2, p. 205.


This passage is important. It explains the
apparent contradiction which the previous para-
graphs offer to the general message of the book, in
the statement that some souls do find the way of


301


NOTES


perfection by the virtues, etc., and that this is asked
of them. Some special asking is implied. Per-
fection is only thwarted when the soul goes unbidden
in this “‘ search of the virtues.”

It is not the soul itself which feels—only the
surface regions are affected—‘‘this is not she.”
Cf. St Francis de Sales’s teaching.

In this and the following chapters we must dis-
tinguish those who are “‘in life of spirit ”’—7.e.,
souls who have passed through the life of the “‘ per-
ished ” and of the “‘ marred ” states—but who have
not attained to the life of the “‘ free souls.”


Note I, p. 241.


>


“© Thoughts of partie.’ A partie is a game in which
a subject is discussed from two or more points
of view. In the courts of love of the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, subjects were thus debated and
poems—vjeu-partis—presented for prize competi-
tions. :

The meaning here seems to be “‘ by thoughts
framed in dialogue,” but below, ‘‘in putting out,”
etc., ““by avoiding all discursive meditation, all
dwelling on particular points of prayer.”


Note I, p. 251.


St Bonaventure’s Itinerarium Mentis describes
seven stages by which the mind ascends to God.
The first three deal with the corporeal nature of the
senses, imagination, the rational soul of man. The
fourth to the seventh show the supernatural inter-
vention of grace by the help of which we see God
revealed in his Being (4), in his goodness (5), and in
the mystery of the Trinity (6). The seventh stage
is the repose of ecstasy.


302


NOTES


It is evident that this system has influenced the
author of the Mirror (see Division XIV, chaps.
6 and 7); it represents the reaction of the pluralistic
mysticism against the theories of the twelfth-century
revival of monistic philosophy and the mystics. The
Franciscan school identifies the Beatific Vision with
Love, and makes Love the method by which it is
apprehended. Freedom in love is the keynote of
Franciscan spirituality as it is of the Mirror.
St Bernard did not hold that the Godhead is revealed
to man by immediate intuition, but is known through
species.

Our author is more influenced by the “‘ Seven
Stages ” of the Ascent to God in St Augustine’s De
Quantitate Animae, than by the treatise of Richard
of St Victor, who describes six stages of contempla-
tion.


303


Wane oS
coe & .
‘ 6 x ae
We #58 eee 1S
‘ > 4 e @ 9
; nied ne
ADS 2% “
‘ > F


PrediabindectecSinbadesesseaBtadady
THE ORCHARD BOOKS


A SERIES
OF
SPIRITUAL CLASSICS
General Editor
DOM ROGER HUDLESTON, 0O.S.B.
Monk of Downside Abbey
| See
2


LONDON


BURNS OATES & WASHBOURNE LTD.
Publishers to the Holy See


Ty yey Tor a ef


wt


a ae


brcteactensSincReadattendSee de,


oe &
40
enteek JO AADTIAIGE


i
i}


soba ikea ; ‘s = s


8.2.0 “MOTeEAIQUH AdDON MOE
wait shicasoGl Yo dno bh


«ee


“


aoanes.. |) =)


s OT] SMAUOKHeAW & ZATAO enAUE
: : 902 loll sd ot erataildat i


_ QPOPAP PAE EAE


THE ORCHARD BOOKS


Volumes now ready, or in the press


1, THE CONFESSIONS OF SAINT AUGUSTINE


7


in the Translation of Sir Tobie Matthew, Kt.(1620).
Revised and emended by Dom Roger Hudleston,
Monk of Downside Abbey, with an Introduction
by the same, [Published in 1923.

“, . .|the version of Sir Tobias Matthew, which has great literary


merit, and ought not to be forgotten. . . .”—Dr. CHARLES
BiGG, D.D. :

“Tt is not too high praise tc say that the style has much of the
resonance and dignity that characterise the work of the Forty-
Seven [translators of the Authorised Version of the Bible],”—
Pax,


2, THE LIVES OF THE BRETHREN OF THE


ORDER OF PREACHERS, in the Translation of
Father Placid Conway, O.P. Revised and edited
by the Very Rev. Bede Jarrett, Provincial of the
English Dominicans, with an Introduction by the
same, [Published in 1924.


This work, which bears much the same relation to the early
history of the Dominican Order that the Little Flowers of St
Francis does to that of the early Franciscans, has. never before
been published in English, the translation of Father P, Conway
being privately printed, and only a small number of copies
circulated.


“ There is something convincing and not without charm in its
robust matter-of-fact simplicity. The book will havea spiritual
value for all connected with or interested in the Dominican
Order.” —Rosary.


“ The book is most valuable for the flood of light that it throws
on St Dominic and his associates and successors, no less than
for the most valuable materials it affords for the social and
religious history of the period. Moreover, it contains much
spiritual unction, and doubtless many who peruse it out of
interest or curiosity will be beneficially affected by the genuinely
ascetical tone of its pages.”—-Catholic Times.


ili


3, LOVE SONGS OF SION. A volume of English
Medizval Devotional Verse, selected and, where
necessary, modernised by Neville Watts, B.A.,
with an Introduction by the same. [Published in 1924.


“While nearly all of the pieces are of remarkable excellence,
all of them without exception are of a distinctive character
which marks them as the product of Catholic England.”—Irish
Monthly.

“A gem of devotion and literary beauty.”—Jrish Catholic,
“The autumm# trade-wind has blown us many cargoes of books,
some of them bulky and costly; but, if we could keep only
five of the 500, one of them would be this very volume, which
slips into the breast pocket—the breast pocket on the side of
the heart.” —Tablet.

“It gives a picture of the spiritual outlook of our Catholic
forefathers in this country which we shall seek in vain in the
history books. .. . It isa reyelation of a people's soul that
oucht to be of spiritual value to the modern Catholic, which is
to say that the volume deserves its place among the Orchard
Books.” —Blackfriars.


4, THE CLOUD OF UNKNOWING; . THE
EPISTLE OF PRIVY COUNSEL; and DENIS
HID DIVINITY. By an anonymous English
Mystic of the fourteenth century, with Notes
on the **Cloud’? by the Venerable Father
Augustine Baker, O.S.B, (1575-1641). The text
edited from the MSS., in a slightly modernised
form, by Dom Justin McCann, of Ampleforth
Abbey, with an Introduction by the same,

[Published in 1924,
Of the three works included in this volume, the ‘‘ Epistle of
Privy Counsel” has only once been printed, and then in a


very unsatisfactory form, while “Denis Hid Divinity” has
never been printed before.


“Of the editing and modernising of the book we can say
shortly that in no point would one wish it to be other than it
is."—Ampleforth Fournal.


“L’edition de Dom MacCann, de tout point excellente. est un
vrai modéle du genre. On y satisfait aux exigences légitimes
de Ja critique, tout en tenant compte de l’usage pratique . .
le commentaire, dfi A un homme d’autorité tel que Dom Baker,
ne contribue pas peu a rehausser encore la valeur et J'intérét du
volume.”— Vie Spirituelle. :


iv


“‘A valuable contribution to our knowledge of fourteenth-
century mysticism. ... A profound treatise on mysticism for
those who have deliberately chosen the contemplative life.
Apart from its use in this direction, this reprint is very valuable
as an historical document, and it will doubtlessly be welcomed
by all students of the age to which the original belongs.”—
Catholic Times,


5. AN INTRODUCTION TO THE DEVOUT
LIFE. By St Francis de Sales, in a new trans-
lation, made expressly for this Series from the
édition définitive of the Saint, by the Rev. Allan
Ross, Cong, Orat., with an Introduction by the
Same. [Published in 1924.


“A scholarly translation, couched in a dignified and beautiful
style worthy in every way of the original.”—Black/riars.


“This new rendering, so artistically brought out, should do
much to realise the wish of the present Pope, ‘ Would that this
book ... were now also read by all.’”—Irish Monthly.


““We shall be surprised if this rendering does not take its place
as the editio princeps of the Vie Dévole in English.” —Theology,


“A thoroughly faithful translation in good modern English.”—
Universe.


6, THE IMITATION OF CHRIST, in the translation
of Richard Whytford, Brigittine of Syon House,
Isleworth. From the original edition printed at
London in 1556, with an Introduction by the Editor
of the Series. [Published in 1925,

“., . in style and feeling the finest rendering into English of
the famous original.” —‘‘ Dict. Nat. Biog.,” s.v. Whitford.


“For those who cannot read the original, this is perhaps the
best English translation, owing much more freely and melo-
diously than Challoner’s.”—Month.


‘Like the previous volumes in this popular series, the little
volume commends itself to the reader both by the evidences of
scholarship in its making and by the attractive guise in which
the work is presented.’'—Tablet,


“Tt has been said of [this translation] that in style and feeling


it is the finest English rendering of the Imitation. The praise
is not too high,”—Ushaw Magazine.


Vv


ny


7, THE NEW TESTAMENT OF JESUS CHRIST,
“as translated faithfully into English out of the
authentical .Latin, in the English College at
Rheims, and printed at Rheims by John Fogny,
1582, [Published in 1925.


An exact reprint of the original text in modern spelling, with
an Introduction by Dom Roger Hudleston, Monk of Down-
side Abbey.


“It is a real, pleasure to welcome a reprint of this relic of our
ancestors of the penal days.’—Pamphlet Guide (Toronto).


“The English language has derived much benefit from it
because the Authorised Version borrowed largely from Martin’s
vocabulary.”—Sonthern Cross.


8. AN EPISTLE OF JESUS CHRIST TO THE
FAITHFUL SOUL. By Dom Lanspergius,
Carthusian, in the translation of Ven. Philip
Howard, Earl of Arundel. Edited, with an
Introduction, by a Monk of St. Hugh’s Charter,
house, Parkminster, [Published in 1926.

“Tt is a beautiful work, written in such words as might well


have been used by. Him who was meek and humble of heart.”
—Universe.


“This interesting and deeply spiritual book .. . contains
many wise and elevating thoughts.”—Jrish Catholic.


9, TREATISE ON PRAYER and MEDITATION.
By St Peter of Alcantara, translated with an
Introduction and Sketch of the Saint’s Life by
Dominic Devas, O.F.M. Together with a
complete English version of PAX ANIMAE, by
John of Bonilla. . : [Published in 1926.

‘An entirely beautiful book, breathing the full self-denial of a
true sanctity.” —Universe. 6


‘A treatise which should be in the hands of every religious,
and indeed of everyone who aspires to a life of prayerful union
with God.” —Franciscan Annals,


“The popularity of this book made St Teresa say of it that it
was in the hands of almost everyone.”—Franciscan Monthly,


vi


10.


Il,


12,


THE MIRROR OF THE BLESSED LIFE OF
JESU CHRIST. By Nicholas Love, Prior of
Mount Grace Charterhouse, Yorkhire (1410-1421),
Edited by a Monk of Parkminster. [Published in 1926.


This series of -deyout meditations on the Life of Our Lord is
a free adaptation of the pseudo-Bonaventure's Meditations on
the Life of Christ, The text has been skilfully but not exces-
sively modernised.


REVELATIONS OF DIVINE LOVE, shewed
to a devout Anchoress, by name Mother Julian of
Norwich. Newly edited from the MSS, with an
Introduction by the Editor of the Series.
[Published in 1927.


THE LITTLE FLOWERS OF ST FRANCIS
OF ASSISI. In the first English translation,
revised, With an Introduction by Dominic
Devas, O.F.M, [Published in 1926.
The translation now issued was first published in 1864, under
the editorship of Cardinal Manning. It was made by the
Marchesa di Salvo, Lady Georgina Fullerton, and the Rev.


Mother of the Poor Clares of Bayswater, and has been care-
fully revised by the Editor of the series.


13, THE SCALE OF PERFECTION. By Walter


Hilton, Augustinian Canon of Thurgarton Priory,
Nottinghamshire (died 1396). Edited with Notes
and an Introduction by Dom E, Noetinger and


Dom E. Bouvet, Monks of Solesmes,
[To be published in 1927.


The text of this edition is based on the earliest printed edition,
published by Wynken de Worde, at London, in 1494, slightly


modernised.


vil


EXTRA VOLUMES


These are similar in character, format, etc., to the rest of the series,
but are issued at a lower price as their content is considerably less
than that of the other volumes.


lex, CERTAIN DEVOUT and GODLY PRAYERS,
made in Latin by Cuthbert Tunstall, Bishop of
Durham, and translated into English by Thomas
Paynell, Clerk. [Published in 1925.

A little volume of great spiritual beauty, by the famous Bishop

and Confessor for the Faith; reprinted from the only edition,
published ‘‘ at London, in Poule’s Churche-yard, at the synge of


the Holye Ghoste, by John Cawood, Printer to the King’s and
Queen's Maiesties, Anno 1558.”


‘© Attractive in appearance and still more attractive in content,
for the prayers are distinguished by depth of feeling and
simplicity of expression,”—Catholic Gazette.


“The prayers breathe a spirit of deep humility and reverence.
Paynell is excellent in his English rendering.” —Southern Cross,
“A charming little book.”—Month,


“No Catholic can open this little book without deep interest,

We hope that these and similar old English devotions
may become even better known and more popular.” —Catholic
Book Notes.


2ex, THE BLIND OBEDIENCE OF AN HUMBLE
PENITENT, THE BEST CURE FOR
SCRUPLES. By Sylvester Jenks, Bishop-Elect
of Callipolis, With an Introduction by the Editor
of the Series, [Published in 1925,


‘A really helpful work ; although over two centuries have
elapsed since it was first written, it is so well edited that,
instead of appearing strange, it is quaint. It maintains interest


at the same time as it gives spiritual instruction.”—Catholic
Truth.


“ Robust sense, a living faith and a fine humour make the little
book pleasant and profitable.’—South-rn Cross.


3ex. THE PRACTICE OF THE PRESENCE OF
GOD, Being the Conversations, Letters and
Spiritual Maxims of Brother Lawrence of the
Resurrection, Discalced Carmelite. Newly
translated by Donald Attwater. [Published in 1926.


This little Catholic classic has hitherto been obtainable in
English in non-Catholic versions only.


Vili


PRINTED INU.S.A.


LJ
=
a
‘a
q
A


GAYLORD


} feta 9 ORS


S51 .


The morror-of si


/

_
d

th,
bag
fs
/-
vr
: f:
mt


wii
