Gaudier-Brzeska (Ezra Pound, 1916)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1916 John Lane edition (https://archive.org/details/gaudierbrzeska0000ezra)
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2024 

https://archive.org/details/gaudierbrzeska0000ezra 

eras Ty See ORCTTT 
‘ WITHDRAWN FROM 

THE LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY OF 
‘WINCHESTER, 

mM 

§ 1) ae 

j ap? ay vis 
ings 5 

ao 

44 

GAUDIER-BRZESKA 

¢7 

\ 

Gaudier-Brzeska working at the Hieratic Head of Ezra Pound. 

GAUDIER-BRZESKA 

A Memoir 

EZRA POUND 

THE MARVELL PRESS 

First published 1916 
This edition 
first published in 1960 
by 
The Marvell Press 
at 253 Hull Road 
Hessle 
East Yorkshire 
All rights reserved 

New material in this edition 
© Ezra Pound, 1960 

Made and printed in Great Britain at the Press of Villiers 
Publications, Ingestre Road, London 

“Gli uomini vivono in pochi e gli altri son pecorelle.’ 

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 

“Des Vinstant qu’il (le prince) aura attiré pres de lui tous les 

savans et les artistes, aussitot ses richesses seront suffisamment 
mises en usage.’ 

The ‘ Tchoung-Young ’ of CONFUCIUS, 

traduit par M. G. PAUTHIER 

| 7 = 

_ : 
i 5 mn f wt abs rong Vr tei pease by a 
et = a ne vé Miw! 

2% : . f : . 7 . 
we ays f oj : es @ : te , ; 
‘4 / 
~ a 
™ 
“ane 
a 
~ 
“~ 
a 
£ 
a 
_ _ 
x | 

We are grateful to Mme. J. Auzas-Pruvost of the Musée des 
Beaux-Arts d’Orléans, Sig. Vanni Scheiwiller, Mr. H. S. Ede, 
Mr. J. Wood Palmer of the Arts Council and the Editor of 
Le Jardin des Arts for the loan of blocks and photographs, 

We also wish to thank Sig. Boris de Rachewiltz for the photo- 
graphs reproduced in Plates XI, XIV, XXIII(A) and 
XXIV(A), which he made specially for this edition. 

7 7 
7 rr 

: “all Hy ofp 
ae sin bee Unie athy ip 
," ingen iwtea ait to Le 
hi | eh Pied Be ina w b teil wr 

wn TlTlee SAE ry ant? 4 
iste se ait “fey ihe tye cae @ 
aoe 

CONTENTS 

GAUDIER-BRZESKA . 
VORTEX 

VorTEX GAUDIER-BRZESKA 

ALLIED ARTISTS’ AssociATION, Ltp. 
An Open LETTER . 

THe Man 

LETTERS TO ME ¢ 
LETTERS TO Mrs. SHAKESPEAR 
LETTERS TO Epwarp WADSWORTH 
FRIENDSHIP WITH BRODZKY 

VoRTICISM 

AFFIRMATIONS : GAUDIER-BRZESKA 

AFFIRMATIONS : ANALYSIS OF THIS DECADE . 

PARTIAL CATALOGUE OF THE SCULPTURE . 
Tue DrAwIncs 

PREFACE TO THE MemoriAL ExursiTion, 1918 
GaupiER: A Postscript, 1934 
PEREGRINATIONS, 1960 . 

cet 

, . épeers4 
of JV és Pure ¢ 

> 
a. J bn pal 
is acarasd oald, op 
=ea A aaer) co 
LeeteeA Gare i 

— co)? eens enced, 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

GAUDIER BRZESKA WORKING AT 

plate 

‘“HIERATIC HEAD OF EZRA POUND’ _ frontispiece 
I 

SEATED NUDE. Stylo Pen Drawing 
Private Collection 

WOLF. Pen and Ink 

Victoria and Albert Museum 

SEATED NUDE. Pen and Ink 
Manchester City Art Gallery 
EQUESTRIAN. Pen and Ink 

H.S, Ede 

CAT. Pencil 

LION. 15” X 8”. Pen and Ink 
ELAND. 93” 1434”. Pen and Ink 
Tate Gallery 

STAG. 83” X 13”. Pen and Indian Ink 
H. S, Ede 

WRESTLERS. 93” & 15”. Pen and Ink. 1913 
H.S, Ede 

EQUESTRIAN. 163” K 20’. Pen and Ink. 1913 | 

Tate Gallery 

RECLINING WOMAN. Pen and Ink 

SOPHIE BRZESKA. 92” & 113. Pen and Ink 

Earl of Sandwich 

LINO-CUT. 1914 

COCK. 8” X 5”. Brush Drawing 

HS. Ede 

PORTRAIT OF EZRA POUND. Pencil 

NUDE. Charcoal 

MAN AND HORSE. 24” X 15” 

SELF PORTRAIT. 203” & 144”. Pastel. 1913 

Southampton Art Gallery 

MADEMOISELLE BRZESKA. 214” X 144”. 

H.S. Ede Pastel. 1913 

HIERATIC HEAD OF EZRA POUND (A). 
Marble. 1914. Shown in its present surroundings; 
the gardens of Brunnenburg 

Ezra Pound Collection, Tirolo 

II 

III 

XIII 

A section of the Memorial Exhibition of Gaudier’s 
sculptures and drawings at Milan in 1957 XIV 
THE DANCER: A Study of Sophie Brzeska. (A) 
H.287. Bronze XV 
Mrs. Violet Schiff 

THE DANCER (B) XVI 
THE SINGER. H.334”. Derby Stone. 1913 XVI 
Tate Gallery 

THE WRESTLER. H.258”. Lead. 1913 XVI 
Leeds City Art Gallery 

TOY and FISH. Cut Brass XVI 
CARITAS. H.173”. Stone XVII 
Musée des Beaux Arts, Orléans 

CAT. Marble XVIII 
Ezra Pound Collection, Tirolo 

FAWN. Bronze XVIII 
Ezra Pound Collection, Tirolo 

DOG. L.14”. Marble XVIII 
Sir F. Dyer Simpson 

TORSO. Marble. 1913 XIX 
Tate Gallery 

TORSO. Marble XIX 

Victoria and Albert Museum 
Gaudier standing behind ‘ BIRD SWALLOWING 
FISH’ XX 
RED STONE DANCER (A). H.17”. 
Mansfield Sandstone. 1913 XXI 
Tate Gallery 
RED STONE DANCER (B) and (C) XXII 
BOY WITH A CONEY (A) and (B). 
Veined Alabaster XXIII 
Ezra Pound Collection, Tirolo 
THE EMBRACERS (A) and (B). 
Marble. 1912 or 1913 XXIV 
Ezra Pound Collection, Rapallo 
STAGS. H.133. Veined Alabaster. 1914 XXV 
Art Institute of Chicago 
BIRDS ERECT (A) and (B). Limestone. 1914 XXVI 
Museum of Modern Art, New York 

THE IMP. H.153”. Veined Alabaster. 1914 XXVII 
Tate Gallery 
SEATED FIGURE. 20” X 8” X 10”, 
Marble. 1914 XXVII 
GAUDIER-BRZESKA XXVIII 
EZRA POUND at Rapallo. 1938 (circa). Vide: 
CAT, EMBRACERS, FAWN and 
WATER-CARRIER XXIX 
Gaudier standing in front of unfinished 
*‘HIERATIC HEAD OF EZRA POUND’ XXIX 
HIERATIC HEAD OF EZRA POUND (B) 
at the Milan Exhibition. 1957 XXIX 
Letter from Gaudier-Brzeska to Ezra Pound, 
28th September, 1914 XXX 
Gaudier-Brzeska in uniform. 1914 or 1915 XXX 

‘re sit iba 

= ~, 

Sh .c<su> Gat ‘ 
‘wits. GA wz aS yl on 
an | Py -aeen | 

_ hotendtine 6 
ert 20 39 
. 1A YW, Ws | : 

e —® tie Peer h? a 

Ss 
vinnie! Gee ; 
i? wh evap at = 
a ad LOS - elle & 
% 
- a 
ee abe 
7 a 

- 

? 

_ : 
_ ‘ _ - ot 
eh yee 

Tl 

I 
GAUDIER-BRZESKA 

In Blast for July, 1915, appears the brief notice :— 
““MORT POUR LA PATRIE. 

“ Henri Gaudier-Brzeska: after months of fighting and two 
promotions for gallantry, Henri Gaudier-Brzeska was killed in 
a charge at Neuville St. Vaast, on June 5th, 1915.” 

It is part of the war waste. Among many good artists, among 
other young men of promise there was this one sculptor already 
great in achievement at the age of twenty-three, incalculably 
great in promise and in the hopes of his friends. 

I have known many artists. I am not writing in a momentary 
fit of grief or of enthusiasm. I am not making phrases. I am 
not adding in any way to statements I had made and printed 
during Gaudier’s lifetime. A great spirit has been among us, 
and a great artist is gone. Neither the man nor the artist had 
shown any traces of failure. Neither do I write in a spirit that 
is not common to those who had known him; to those who had 
known him even slightly. 

Ford Madox Hueffer in The Outlook, for July 31st, has 
written as follows :— 

“IT am not at this moment engaged in appraising Blast as an 
achievement. But even to denizens of the stars it must be evident 
that Blast is an adventure, an exploration; and that to refuse to 
consider where it may possibly get to is to say: ‘ What fine 
fellows those yachtsmen, lounging on the pier, are in comparison 
with the dirty-looking chaps whose ship is visible on the horizon, 
bound for the North-West Passage.’ Indeed, after all the eye- 
openers critics of the type of my friend must have had, it is 
amazing that they ever come within ninety miles of an experi- 
ment, since any experiment must turn inevitably to red-hot coals 
in their poor hands and on their poor heads. It is, however, not 
often that such dire disaster overcomes one of them as has 

17 

attended the unfortunate friend of mine to whom I now refer. 

“ One of the finest men that I ever knew was Gaudier-Brzeska. 
As a sculptor he had carried his experiments far enough to make 
one say that he was a fine fellow; as a student of his art he had 
an erudition and a turn of phrase that I have never known 
equalled. Born in the South of France, Gaudier, at the outbreak 
of the present war, found himself in England, not having done 
his military service. He went to Boulogne to offer himself for 
service; was detained as a technical deserter; escaped, and re- 
turned to London; secured a safe conduct from the French 
Embassy. He went back to France, received a month’s training 
on the Loire, and passed the winter in the trenches. He was 
twice promoted for gallantry on the field, and was killed in a 
charge at Neuville St. Vaast on June 5 last. 

“Put in this cold language this is a record fine enough—I 
wish I had it behind me. And it is this man whom my friend 
the critic selects to pour ridicule upon—pouring, indeed, ridicule 
upon the very record of his death. That is a rather horrible 
achievement. I think of poor Gaudier as I last saw him, at a 
public dinner, standing sideways, with his fine sanguine features, 
his radiant and tolerant smile, his delicate movements of the 
hands, answering objection after objection of stimulated, after- 
dinner objectors to his zsthetic ideas with such a gentleness, with 
such humour, with such good humour. At that date there was 
no thought of war; we were just all separating at the end of the 
London season. And within a year this poor, fine, beautiful spirit 
has gone out through a little hole in the high forehead.” 

The journalistic squabbles to which Mr. Hueffer refers further 
along in the article quoted, do not now much concern us. There 
remains Gaudier Brzeska’s work : some few dozen statues, a pile 
of sketches and drawings, and a few pages about his art. I am 
not particularly anxious to make this book “my book” about 
Gaudier-Brzeska. JI am not over-anxious to enter upon long 
quibbles either about his work or the group-name he chose to 
work under. The fact remains that he chose to call himself a 
“ vorticist,’ as Wyndham Lewis, and myself, and Edward Wads- 
worth and several others have chosen, for good reasons enough. 
The name does not imply any series of subordinations, it means 
simply that we were in agreement concerning certain funda- 

18 

mentals of art. In so far as a knowledge of our agreement is 
likely to lead to a clearer understanding or a swifter comprehen- 
sion of Brzeska’s work, in just so far will the general topic of 
vorticism be dragged into the present work. 

Among his latter wishes was the wish that his work should 
be, in case of his death, made accessible to other artists. (Con- 
cerning the general public he said nothing whatever.) Some 
examples of his work will be placed in the South Kensington 
Museum, others, we hope, in the Musée du Luxembourg, and 
still another group of statues will be kept together in Mr. John 
Quinn’s great modern collection. 

The work must, in any case, be separated, and it is obvious 
that all of it cannot be, in the original, accessible to all students 
of sculpture. Photographs of sculpture are unsatisfactory but 
they are better than nothing. They are perhaps better than 
casts, especially in the case of a sculptor who held so much by 
his material, who never cut in one sort of stone a work more 
fitting another sort, and who cut direct, when he had the marble 
or alabaster, or even the metal. 

In undertaking this book I am doing what little I can to carry 
out his desire for accessibility to students, and I am, moreover, 
writing it very much as I should have written it if he had lived, 
save that I have not him leaning over my shoulder to correct 
me and to find incisive, good-humoured fault with my words. 
(For I should in any case have written some sort of book upon 
vorticism, and in that book he would have filled certain chapters.) 

I have never held with outside criticism, and I have never 
held much with theories, but it is nonsense to say that great 
artists do not theorize or that they do not talk about art. With 
the examples of Dante, and Whistler, and Leonardo before us it 
is nonsense even to say that they do not write about art. 

I shall try to give, first, Gaudier’s own expressions of his 
esthetic belief, and then some account of the man as we knew 
him, with some citations from his more recent letters, and then 
some further discussions of art. 

If this entails a certain formal and almost dreary documenta- 
tion at the very outset, I must ask the reader’s indulgence. I am 
trying to leave as clear a record as possible of Gaudier’s art and 
thought. 

19 

I do not believe that there is any important art criticism, any 
important criticism of any particular art, which does not come 
originally from a master of that art. If a man spend all his life, 
all his intensest life, putting sweet sounds together, he will know 
more about music than a man who is merely pleased by an 
occasional tune en passant. If he spend his life with thoughts of 
form, or with thoughts of words, he will know more of form or 
of words, or of colours or whatever it may be, than will the tyro 
or the dilettante or the incapable observer. 

The observer may know the good he cannot perform, the 
performer may know a good beyond his attainment, but if he 
have that double capacity both for speculation and for action, 
he will have perforce an intimacy and a swift moving appre- 
hension, which the sterile observer has not. It is true that many 
good artists are incapable of talking about their art comprehen- 
sibly, or of talking sensibly, or even of talking at all, but the really 
great artists have seldom been without this faculty for general- 
ization, or without at least a faculty of so speaking as to cast 
shafts of light into the outsider’s comprehension of the degrees 
of their art. 

That Gaudier-Brzeska had an amazing faculty for synthesis 
was well known to his friends and must be at once apparent to 
any one who will study his first written formulation of sculp- 
tural principles, to wit his first “ Vortex,” which I reprint here, 
as it appeared in Blast for June, 1914.* 

GAUDIER-BRZESKA VORTEX 

SCULPTURAL energy is the mountain. 

Sculptural feeling is the appreciation of masses in relation. 

Sculptural ability is the defining of these masses by planes. 

The PALEOLITHIC VORTEX resulted in the decoration 
of the Dordogne caverns. 

Early stone-age man disputed the earth with animals. 

His livelihood depended on the hazards of the hunt—his 
greatest victory the domestication of a few species. 

Out of the minds primordially preoccupied with animals 

* An article by Gaudier-Brzeska appeared in the Egoist about a week 
earlier, but the “ Vortex ” was written first. 

20 

Fonts-de-Gaume gained its procession of horses carved in the 
rock. ‘The driving power was life in the absolute—the plastic 
expression the fruitful sphere. 

The sphere is thrown through space, it is the soul and object 
of the vortex— 

The intensity of existence had revealed to man a truth of 
form—his manhood was strained to the highest potential—his 
energy brutaA—HIS OPULENT MATURITY WAS CON- 
VEX. 

The acute fight subsided at the birth of the three primary 
civilizations. It always retained more intensity East. 

The HAMITE VORTEX of Egypt, the land of plenty— 

Man succeeded in his far reaching speculations—Honour to 
the divinity ! 

Religion pushed him to the use of the VERTICAL which 
inspires awe. His gods were self made, he built them in his 
image, and RETAINED AS MUCH OF THE SPHERE AS 
COULD ROUND THE SHARPNESS OF THE PARAL- 
LELOGRAM. 

He preferred the pyramid to the mastaba. 

The fair Greek felt this influence across the middle sea. 

The fair Greek saw himself only. HE petrified his own 
semblance. 

HIS SCULPTURE WAS DERIVATIVE his feeling for 
form secondary. The absence of direct energy lasted for a 
thousand years. 

The Indians felt the hamitic influence through Greek specta- 
cles. Their extreme temperament inclined towards asceticism, 
admiration of non-desire as a balance against abuse produced a 
kind of sculpture without new form perception—and which is 
the result of the peculiar 

VORTEX OF BLACKNESS AND SILENCE. 

PLASTIC SOUL IS INTENSITY OF LIFE BURSTING 
THE PLANE. 

The Germanic barbarians were verily whirled by the mysteri- 
ous need of acquiring new arable lands. They moved restlessly, 
like strong oxen stampeding. 

21 

The SEMITIC VORTEX was the lust of war. The men of 
Elam, of Assur, of Bebel and the Kheta, the men of Armenia 
and those of Canaan had to slay each other cruelly for the 
possession of fertile valleys. Their gods sent them the vertical 
direction, the earth, the SPHERE. 

They elevated the sphere in a splendid squatness and created 
the HORIZONTAL. 

From Sargon to Amir-nasir-pal men built man-headed bulls 
in horizontal flight-walk. Men flayed their captives alive and 
erected howling lions: THE ELONGATED HORIZONTAL 
SPHERE BUTTRESSED ON FOUR COLUMNS, and their 
kingdoms disappeared. 

Christ flourished and perished in Yudah. 

Christianity gained Africa, and from the seaports of the 
Mediterranean it won the Roman Empire. 

The stampeding Franks came into violent contact with it as 
well as the Greco-Roman tradition. 

They were swamped by the remote reflections of the two vor- 
tices of the West. 

Gothic sculpture was but a faint echo of the HAMITO- 
SEMITIC energies through Roman traditions, and it lasted half 
a thousand years, and it wilfully divagated again into the Greek 
derivation from the land of Amen-Ra. 

VORTEX OF A VORTEX!! 

VORTEX IS THE POINT ONE AND INDIVISIBLE! 

VORTEX IS ENERGY! and it gave forth SOLID EXCRE- 
MENTS in the quattro e cinque cento, LIQUID until the 
seventeenth century, GASES whistle till now. THIS is the his- 
tory of form value in the West until the FALL OF IMPRES- 
SIONISM. 

The black-haired men who wandered through the pass of 
Khotan into the valley of the YELLOW RIVER lived peace- 
fully tilling their lands, and they grew prosperous. 

Their paleolithic feeling was intensified. As gods they had 
themselves in the persons of their human ancestors—and of the 
spirits of the horse and of the land and the grain. 

THE SPHERE SWAYED. 

THE VORTEX WAS ABSOLUTE. 

22 

The Shang and Chow dynasties produced the convex bronze 
vases. 

The features of Tao-t’ie were inscribed inside of the square 
with the rounded corners—the centuple spherical frog presided 
over the inverted truncated cone that is the bronze war drum. 

THE VORTEX WAS INTENSE MATURITY. Maturity 
is fecundity—they grew numerous and it lasted for six thousand 
years. 

The force relapsed and they accumulated wealth, forsook their 
work, and after losing their form-understanding through the 
Han and T’ang dynasties, they founded the Ming and found 
artistic ruin and sterility. 

THE SPHERE LOST SIGNIFICANCE AND THEY AD- 
MIRED THEMSELVES. 

During their great period off-shoots from their race had 
landed on another continent. After many wanderings some 
tribes settled on the highlands of Yukatan and Mexico. 

When the Ming were losing their conception, these neo- 
Mongols had a flourishing state. Through the strain of warfare 
they submitted the Chinese sphere to horizontal treatment much 
as the Semites had done. Their cruel nature and temperament 
supplied them with a stimulant: THE VORTEX OF 
DESTRUCTION. 

Besides these highly developed peoples there lived on the 
world other races inhabiting Africa and the Ocean islands. 

When we first knew them they were very near the paleolithic 
stage. Though they were not so much dependent upon animals 
their expenditure of energy was wide, for they began to till the 
land and practice crafts rationally, and they fell into contempla- 
tion before their sex: the site of their great energy: THEIR 
CONVEX MATURITY. 

They pulled the sphere lengthways and made the cylinder, 
this is the VORTEX OF FECUNDITY, and it has left us the 
masterpieces that are known as love charms. 

The soil was hard, material difficult to win from nature, 
storms frequent, as also fevers and other epidemics. They got 
frightened: This is the VORTEX OF FEAR, its mass is the 
POINTED CONE, its masterpieces the fetishes. 

And WE the moderns: Epstein, Brancusi, Archipenko, Duni- 

23 

kowski, Modigliani, and myself, through the incessant struggle 
in the complex city, have likewise to spend much energy. 

The knowledge of our civilization embraces the world, we 
have mastered the elements. 

We have been influenced by what we liked most, each accord- 
ing to his own individuality, we have crystallized the sphere into 
the cube, we have made a combination of all the possible shaped 
masses—concentrating them to express our abstract thoughts of 
conscious superiority. 

Will and consciousness are our 

VORTEX. 

24 

ae 

GREAT artists have often, as I have said above, possessed a 
faculty for synthesis. They have cast shafts of light from their 
conversation, but we are not always lucky enough to have a 
record of that conversation, or any full synthesis left us. J. M. 
Synge would have been a great genius, but I doubt if he would 
have written his plays, or at least so many plays, if there had 
not been a small, much reviled theatre in Dublin. Gaudier- 
Brzeska’s sculpture would have been just what it was, even if 
there had been no “ vorticist movement,” but the still exasper- 
ated public would never have had this splendid formulation of 
his views, this “whole history of sculpture,” if there had not 
been a periodical edited by Wyndham Lewis, or if the very 
terms “vortex”? and “ vorticism” had not been given him as 
“a peg for his thought.” 

One cannot ask Mr. Synge’s admirers to like Mr. Yeats, one 
does not seek to bring the admirers of Gaudier-Brzeska to the 
feet of either Mr. Lewis or myself, but when I see in the Press 
statements to the effect that Gaudier was not a vorticist, or that 
I am not a vorticist, I am compelled to think that the writers 
of such statements must have read into the term “ vorticism ” 
some meaning which is not warranted by our meanings and our 
definitions. At no time was it intended that either Mr. Lewis, 
or Gaudier or myself or Mr. Wadsworth or Mr. Etchells should 
crawl into each other’s skins or that we should in any way 
surrender our various identities, or that the workings of certain 
fundamental principles of the arts should force any one of us to 
turn his own particular art into a flat imitation of the external 
features of the particular art of any other member of our group. 

For the second number of Blast, Gaudier had planned an 
essay on “ The Need of Organic Forms in Sculpture.” It was 
in almost our last long talk that he outlined his position. He 
had made Mr. Hulme’s “toy,” the best of several purely geo- 
metric abstractions, cut straight into brass. He had further 
experimented with almost the same forms for a couple of cut- 
brass door-knockers. He had done the “ Bird swallowing a fish ” 

25 

which appears in the photo of him (plate XX); he had cut a 
very small brass fish for Mrs. Kibblewhite. His conclusion, after 
these months of thought and experiment, was that combinations 
of abstract or inorganic forms exclusively, were more suitable for 
painting than for sculpture. Firstly, because in painting one can 
have a much greater complexity, a much greater number of 
form units than in sculpture. In sculpture the main composition 
must be simpler. At least the outline from any one point of view 
must be simpler than the gross conglomeration of forms in a 
painting; in, say, one of the more complex designs of Lewis’ 
“Timon.” 

Secondly. The field for combinations of abstract forms is 
nearly unexplored in occidental painting, whereas machinery 
itself has used up so many of the fine combinations of three 
dimensional inorganic forms that there is very little use in ex- 
perimenting with them in sculpture. 

I am afraid that is a very rough and clumsy statement of 
something he would have put much more clearly. 

Needless to say the forms of automobiles and engines, where 
they follow the lines of force, where they are truly expressive of 
various modes of efficiency, can be and often are very beautiful 
in themselves and in their combinations, though the fact of this 
beauty is in itself offensive to the school of sentimental esthetics. 

Good generalization, or good criticism, in the arts, invariably 
follows performance. Gaudier had already demonstrated the 
soundness of his instinct for the combination of organic with 
inorganic forms in such works as the “ Stags” and ‘“‘ The Boy 
with a Coney.” These and certain works have in them what 
Lewis has called “ Brzeska’s peculiar soft bluntness.” No two 
men were ever less likely to imitate each other, or less likely to 
suffer mutual jealousy than these two artists of such very dis- 
tinct, very different genius. No two men were quicker to see 
the good in each other’s work, despite irritations, as we shall 
prove later from Gaudier’s own critique. 

In the meantime the essay on “ The Need of Organic Forms ” 
was left unwritten. Louvain was burned, Rheims was shelled. 
Gaudier went off to Le Havre, drilled, went to the front some 
time in September, wrote several letters which I shall quote 
from later, and wrote another vortex for Blast. As follows :— 

26 

VORTEX GAUDIER-BRZESKA 

(WRITTEN FROM THE TRENCHES.) 

Nore.—The sculptor writes from the French trenches, having been in 
the firing line since early in the war. 

In September he was one of a patrolling party of twelve, seven of his 
companions fell in the fight over a roadway. 

In November he was nominated for sergeancy and has been since slightly 
wounded, but expects to return to the trenches. 

He has been constantly employed in scouting and patrolling and in the 
construction of wire entanglements in close contact with the Boches. 

I HAVE BEEN FIGHTING FOR TWO MONTHS and I 
can now gauge the intensity of life. 

HUMAN MASSES teem and move, are destroyed and crop 
up again. 

HORSES are worn out in three weeks, die by the roadside. 

DOGS wander, are destroyed, and others come along. 

WITH ALL THE DESTRUCTION that works around us 
NOTHING IS CHANGED, EVEN SUPERFICIALLY. 
LIFE IS THE SAME STRENGTH, THE MOVING AGENT 

THAT PERMITS THE SMALL INDIVIDUAL TO 
ASSERT HIMSELF. 

THE BURSTING SHELLS, the volleys, wire entanglements, 
projectors, motors, the chaos of battle DO NOT ALTER IN 
THE LEAST the outlines of the hill we are besieging. A com- 
pany of PARTRIDGES scuttle along before our very trench. 

IT WOULD BE FOLLY TO SEEK ARTISTIC EMO- 
TIONS AMID THESE LITTLE WORKS OF OURS. 

THIS PALTRY MECHANISM, WHICH SERVES AS A 
PURGE TO OVER-NUMEROUS HUMANITY. 

THIS WAR IS A GREAT REMEDY. 

IN THE INDIVIDUAL IT KILLS ARROGANCE, SELF- 
ESTEEM, PRIDE. 

IT TAKES AWAY FROM THE MASSES NUMBERS 
UPON NUMBERS OF UNIMPORTANT UNITS, WHOSE 
ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES BECOME NOXIOUS AS THE 
RECENT TRADES CRISES HAVE SHOWN US. 

MY VIEWS ON SCULPTURE REMAIN ABSOLUTELY 

THE SAME. 

27 

IT IS THE VORTEX OF WILL, OF DECISION, THAT 

BEGINS. 

I SHALL DERIVE MY EMOTIONS SOLELY FROM 
THE ARRANGEMENT OF SURFACES, I shall present my 
emotions by the ARRANGEMENT OF MY SURFACES, 
THE PLANES AND LINES BY WHICH THEY ARE 
DEFINED. 

Just as this hill where the Germans are solidly entrenched, 
gives me a nasty feeling, solely because its gentle slopes are 
broken up by earth-works, which throw long shadows at sunset. 
Just so shall I get feeling, of whatsoever definition, from a statue 
ACCORDING TO ITS SLOPES, varied to infinity. 

I have made an experiment. Two days ago I pinched from 
an enemy a mauser rifle. Its heavy unwieldy shape swamped 
me with a powerful IMAGE of brutality. 

I was in doubt for a long time whether it pleased or 
displeased me. 

I found that I did not like it. 

I broke the butt off and with my knife I carved in it a 
design, through which I tried to express a gentler order of 
feeling, which I preferred. 

BUT I WILL EMPHASIZE that MY DESIGN got its 

effect (just as the gun had) FROM A VERY SIMPLE COM- 

POSITION OF LINES AND PLANES. 
GAUDIER-BRZESKA. 

This essay was written in pencil, and on the corner of the 
sheet is the further message— 

“T have been slightly wounded in the night of Sunday 8th, 
on patrol duty, I have been at rest since and am returning 
service within two or three days.” 

Mr. Hueffer, quoting the foregoing essay in his Outlook 
article introduces it as follows :— 

“T do not think you can want anything gentler or wiser as 
an expression of artistic ideals.” And he says later: “I find that 
a very touching and wise passage of prose. And I will ask the 
reader to observe that it contains the thoughts of an artist who 
had a mystical and beautiful mind and who had been long 
under fire. Is it not interesting and valuable to observe what 

28 

such a mind selects? If Blast had presented us with nothing 
else it would have been justified in its existence.” 

I spoil Mr. Hueffer’s tribute by quoting it in fragments, but 
it interests me because Mr. Hueffer was, as I thought, more 
particularly interested in contemporary painting than in sculp- 
ture, whereas some of us were at first more interested in sculp- 
ture, which seems, in one sense, peculiarly a thing of the twen- 
tieth century. No, acrimonious reader, do not seize that last 
clause by itself; let me explain what I mean. Sculpture, of this 
new sort, Epstein’s, Brzeska’s, is perhaps more moving than 
painting simply because there has been for centuries no sculpture 
that one could take very seriously. There was the early work 
of Rodin, a beginning. But with that partial exception we must 
go back to the polychrome portrait effigies of the early renais- 
sance, or to the medals of that period, before we discover any- 
thing that can move us. It is therefore exciting and interesting 
to find Epstein and Brzeska doing work that will bear compari- 
son with the head of “An officer of rank” (of the XVII to 
XVIII dynasty); with Egyptian stone and with the early Chinese 
bronzes. Not that you would have pleased either of the two 
men by making comparisons in a hurry, or by endeavouring to 
express the precise shade of your pleasure in their work with 
the terminology derived from antiquity. At least Epstein re- 
proved me vigorously for comparing some quality in his “ Birds ” 
to some analogous quality in a great stone scarab, and Brzeska 
resented the label “Chou” in my criticism of a show at the 
Goupil Gallery,* even though I had prefixed the term with 
qualifications. Thus: “it is no use saying that Epstein is 
Egyptian and that Brzeska is Chinese. Nor would I say that 
the younger man is a follower of the elder. They approach life 
in different manners. . . . Of the two animal groups his 
(Brzeska’s) stags are the more interesting if considered as a com- 
position of forms. ‘The Boy with the Coney’ is ‘Chou’ or 
suggests slightly the bronze animals of that period. Brzeska is 
as much concerned with representing certain phases of animal 
life as is Epstein with presenting some austere permanence; some 
relation of life and yet outside it. It is as if some realm of 

* Appearing in the Egoist, March 16th, 1914. 

29 

‘ideas’, of Platonic patterns, were dominated by Hathor.” 

Brzeska takes up my mild allusion with considerable vigour in 
his critique entitled, “The Allied Artists’ Association Ltd.,” 
which appeared in the Egoist three months later. It is a review 
of a show at Holland Park Hall, and was asked for, I think, by 
Richard Aldington during a lull in their (his and Brzeska’s) 
perpetual, acrimonious, and fundamentally amical dispute as to 
whether Greek art and civilization were worthy of serious con- 
sideration. Aldington being all for “ Hellas,” and Brzeska’s 
refrain, “ Those damn Greeks.” 

I give the article entire, for it is a valuable presentation of 
Brzeska’s position with regard to other contemporary artists. I 
have underlined his paragraph about Lewis, firstly, because I 
wish to refer to it later, and secondly because it settles a quibble 
which has been raised in the Press, and clearly marks Brzeska’s 
opinion of certain vorticist paintings. 

ALLIED ARTISTS’ ASSOCIATION LTD., 
HOLLAND PARK HALL 
By Henri GAvuDIER-BRZESKA 

I am in a perilous position. I am on the year’s staff of the 
association, an exhibitor and the personal friend of many artists 
who show their works. In some quarters I am supposed to write 
an official whitewashing account; many readers will accuse me 
of self-adulation and praising of a sect—for all these people I 
have the greatest contempt. 

SCULPTURE 

I specially begin with this virile art. The critics as a whole 
ignore it—place it always last—excusing themselves by the kind 
sentence: “It is not lack of good-will but lack of space which 
prevents me from,” etc., etc. They also prate endlessly about 
sculpture being separated from her mother art: Architecture— 
poor child! If they had not lost their manhood they would find 
that sculpture and architecture are one and the same art. On 
many occasions sculptors have erected buildings to place their 
statues. On many occasions artists like Epstein, Brancusi and 
myself would easily build palaces in harmony with their statuary. 

30 

The architecture that would result would be quite original, new, 
primordial. A professional critic’s mind cannot see beyond vile 
revivals of Greco-Roman and Gothic styles. A professional critic 
when organizing a provincial exhibition catalogues the “ group 
in red alabaster” of one man as the “ group in white marble ” 
of another—it proves their omniscience. 

The sculpture I admire is the work of master craftsmen. 
Every inch of the surface is won at the point of the chisel—every 
stroke of the hammer is a physical and mental effort. No more 
arbitrary translations of a design in any material. They are fully 
aware of the different qualities and possibilities of woods, stones, 
and metals. Epstein, whom I consider the foremost in the small 
number of good sculptors in Europe, lays particular stress on 
this. Brancusi’s greatest pride is his consciousness of being an 
accomplished workman. Unfortunately Epstein, who has been 
a constant exhibitor at the A.A.A. is absent this year. A work 
in marble by Brancusi is catalogued, but up to the present it has 
not arrived, It is a great pity, for I intended to dwell at length 
on the merits of this statue. The number of people who are at 
all furthering their scuptural expression is thus reduced to 
Zadkin and myself. 

ZADKIN 

is contributing two works in wood—another in stone. I prefer 
the wooden head. We have here a composition of masses moving 
in three concentric directions. To be especially admired is the 
contrast of the deeply undercut hair mass to the undulated sur- 
face of the shoulders. This head would be a masterpiece were it 
not a little spoilt by a very sweet expression. The technique is 
beautiful—a quality of surface which is seldom seen in wood. 
The other wood “ composition ” is far less satisfactory—it is also 
sentimental, which spoils the general effect. We get in the stone 
group “ Holy Family ” the same heads again—in two instances 
but in very low relief—half the group is thus tinged with insip- 
idity. A corner of it is well cut and very serene. On the whole 
Zadkin is pulled between a very flowing, individual conception 
of form—which some artists call “lack of form ”—and which 
has the power of emanating great life and a very strong 
liking for pretty melancholy—which bores me. 

31 

GAUDIER-BRZESKA 

I have on show “a boy with a coney ” which has been re- 
ferred to in these columns* as an echo of the bronze animals of 
the Chow dynasty. It is better than they. They had, it is true, 
a maturity brought by continuous rotundities—my statuette has 
more monumental concentration—a result of the use of flat and 
round surfaces. To be appreciated is the relation between the 
mass of the rabbit and the right arm with that of the rest. The 
next is a bird. Unfortunately I now see that had the planes of 
the wings been convex and the forepart thicker the design would 
have gained in buoyancy and stateliness. The design in alabaster 
creates an emotion of distinguished melancholy. The design in 
green marble one of intense reptile life. The door-knocker is an 
instance of an abstract design serving to amplify the value of an 
object as such. No more cupids riding mermaids, garlands, cur- 
tains—stuck anywhere! The technique is unusual; the object is 
not cast but carved direct out of solid brass. The forms gain in 
sharpness and rigidity. 

The rest of the sculpture is an agglomeration of Rodin-Maillol 
mixture and valueless academism—with here and there some one 
trying to be naughty: curled nubilities and discreet slits. 

> 

PAINTING 

Lewis’s most important work had not arrived when I wrote 
this. I propose to write another article dealing with it and Bran- 
cusi’s statue if it comes. Wyndham Lewis has made enormous 
progress in his painting. The two small abstractions ‘‘ Night 
Attack’ and “ Signalling’ are such very complete individual 
expressions that no praise is sufficient to adequately point out 
their qualities. These are designs of wilful, limited shapes con- 
tained in a whole in motion—and this acquired with the simplest 
means—ochres and blacks. Lewis’s abstractions are of a decided 
type and their composition is so successful that I feel right in 

seeing in them the start of a new evolution in painting. 

WADSWORTH 
is well represented by a “short flight’: a composition of cool 
tones marvellously embodied in revolving surfaces and masses. 

* Egoist. 

32 

His bigger picture, No. 113, gives more pleasure on account of 
the warmer pigments used and the construction: growing in a 
corner and balanced at the other by a short mass. 

PHELAN GIBB 
is hung next to Wadsworth, which makes its poor amorphism 
and lack of design appear the more. A really poor kind of 
abstraction half-way between Kandinsky and Picasso of the early 
stages. 

KANDINSKY 
presents an “ improvisation,” a “ picture with yellow colouring,” 
and a third, No, 1559. I have been told that he is a very great 
painter, that his lack of construction is a magnificent quality, 
that he has hit something very new. Alas, I also know all his 
twaddle “ of the spiritual in art.” I agree that these colours— 
set free, so to speak—have an effect of mirth. This is a very 
slight emotion nevertheless. My temperament does not allow of 
formless, vague assertions, “ all what is not like me is evil”; so 
is Kandinsky. 
A. DE Souza Carposo 

comes nearer to my feelings. He has as much colour as Kan- 
dinsky and of a richer kind in his “ musicien de nuit.”” Whereas 
Kandinsky always uses the same palette—at least in his works 
here—Cardoso tones it down to a perfection in his “ jardinier,” 
a jewel of warm blues agitated in a fresh motion. 

Kart HAGEDORN 
offers the worst instance of feelingless abstraction—no emotions; 
no art. 

NEVINSON, 
a futurist painter. It is impressionism using false weapons. The 
emotions are of a superficial character, merging on the vulgar in 
the ‘syncopation”’—union jacks, lace stockings and other 
tommy rot. The coloured relief is at least free from this banality 
—yet there are ciphers and letters—and though the whole is in 

good movement I do not appreciate it. 
People like Miss Dismorr, Miss Saunders and Miss Jones are 
well worth encouraging in their endeavours towards the new 
light. With them stops the revolutionary spirit of the exhibition. 

33 

Before dealing with the rest of the paintings I make a digression 
among applied art. The Rebel art centre has a stand. The 
Omega Shops have the lounge. The Rebel stand is in unity. A 
desire to employ the most vigorous forms of decoration fills it 
with fans, scarves, boxes and a table, which are the finest of 
these objects I have seen. 

The spirit in the lounge is one of subtlety. I admire the black 
and white carpet—the inlaid tables and trays, the pottery. The 
chairs, the cushions and especially a screen with two natural 
swans and the hangings of patched work irritate me—there is 
too much prettiness. 

Happily the Rebel stand shows that the new painting is 
capable of great strength and manliness in decoration. 

Though I am not wholly in sympathy with the other painters, 
I feel it my duty to point out that the rest of the hall is shared 
by two sections—one composed of able, convinced men admiring 
natural forms only—and the other of poor academic imitators 
whose efforts cannot be classified as art even. 

There is a transitional body—men starting from nature and 
getting on the verge of the abstract. 

WOLMARK 
His two negroes handling carpets make a fine composition. 
The not so violent colours as usual, the good workmanship, and 
intensified drawing make of it his best work so far. His smaller 
“negro” of duller tones yet, is also very successful. Wolmark 
argues that his representation helps to receive the emotion pur- 
ported by the design. This is a difficult question—it must be 
candidly said that this form of art can co-exist with absolute 

abstraction and fill one with pleasure. 

Miss Rowtey LEccEtTtT 
in her reclining woman shares apparently the same view. Her 
colours are fresh and transparent, and as the expression, the 

human interest at large is very secondary to the composition I 
like it very much, 

Horace Bropzxy 
sends an able “still life’ and a “ portrait ’—the colours are 
very warm but here I feel the representation to have become the 

34 

primary quality. A fault of which I accuse the painter is of pre- 
ferring harsh contrast. A quality I find is his great frankness. 

Miss HAMMETT 

cares much about representation. It is very interesting to see a 
portrait of Zadkin, the wood-carver. In this work there are great 
technical qualities of paste and drawing—more amplified in the 
other portrait—where carefully chosen blacks and violets create 
a very distinguished effect. I see from the qualities of the 
“women composition” that the affinities of this artist are 
coming nearer to a preference for abstract design. 

Mme. R. Fincu 
has a good portrait. The greens and reds are finely tempered by 
the qualities of the face. I recognize here a greater talent than I 
have ever met in a woman artist. The “ Reginald” unhappily 
does not rank so high as this masterly little head. 
Then come the artists more or less closely bound with the 
Camden Town Group. 

Mme. KARLOWSKA 
has a good picture—a happy composition of figures in a half- 
circle—figures of secondary importance to the composition—and 
a great relief with it, the absence of pink atmosphere. 

BEVAN 
has “ horses ’—also an original composition—crossing the sur- 
face of the picture at an angle with two contrary movements 
balanced by a globular crowd. I believe greater enjoyment 
would be derived from its colours and arrangement had Bevan 
done away with the notion that he saw horses and men. 

GILMAN 
works very solidly. His “‘ Norwegian Scene” has a fine construc- 
tion. The colours are fresh, the effect very natural and spon- 
taneous, the technique accomplished. 

GINNER 
possesses very much the same qualities in his works—his manner 
of working is not so loose—he loses by it in spontaneity; he gains 
in completeness. 
I am very sorry to say that I don’t agree with these two 
painters’ ideas of realism—and grieved to see no hope for them. 

35 

AN OPEN LETTER 

Perwaps for the sake of an almost philological completeness I 
had better include also an open letter to the Egoist. The dispute 
with “ Auceps” need not be taken too solemnly. It was part of 
the discussion about ‘“‘ those damn Greeks.” Auceps was, In 
part, out for a lark. It was perhaps a lark plus a little asperity. 

Gaudier’s letter was preceded by one from myself in which I 
had used the phrase : 

“ Let us confess that we have derived more pleasure from the 
works of Wyndham Lewis than from the works of Poussin and 
Apelles.” 

We had bet that Auceps would reply to this by pointing out 
that works of Apelles no longer survived the wear of time, and 
Auceps gratified us by doing so in the next number of the Egozst, 
with italics. 

Gaudier’s letter was as follows :— 

To the Editor, THE Ecotst.* 

Mapam, 

> 

I wish to answer the impertinent “ Auceps” on the ques- 
tion of new sculpture which he treats with so much contempt. 
The young gentleman seems to have just left a high school and 
coming in contact with life he is unable to fathom the depth of 
artistic earnest—therefore this desperate brandishment of false 
and arrogant scholastics. If he had entered into the spirit of 
“logic Greek philosophy ” he might have found even there that 
only the very ignorant try to refute by means of ridicule and 
irony. No fair-minded person can form an opinion upon the 
value of such a statement as his, which even relies upon a few 
French locutions to get acuteness of derision. This much for this 
aspect of the writer’s personality, which I despise. Let us to the 
Greeks : 

The archaic works discovered at Gnossos are the expressions 
of what is termed a “ barbaric ” people—i.e., a people to whom 
reason is secondary to instinct. The pretty works of the great 

* Eoowst, March 16th, 1914. 

36 

Hellenes are the productions of a civilised—i.e., a people to 
whom instinct is secondary to reason. 

The enormous differences advocated in favour of these sculp- 
tors : Scopas, Praxiteles, Pheidias, Lysippos, Polykleites, Paionios 
and Myron, I suppose, are at the most differences in tendency— 
such as between Praxiteles and Pheidias, the former laying stress 
upon juvenile and morbid gracefulness, the latter upon broad, 
manly firmness of composition—in general, differences in tem- 
perament as existed between Lysippos and Polykleites. Such 
differences can always be observed among men who are agreed 
upon any theory. This can be seen in the bosom of the Royal 
Academy to-day. Let Auceps compare the works of the different 
sculptors of this institution: a Sir George Frampton statue has 
many points of divergence from a Howard Thomas, say. 

What Auceps bitterly calls the “ ithyphallic ” (or some other 
word sounding like it and which I do not understand) sculptors 
of to-day differ from these later Greeks not in tendency but in 
kind, and Auceps brings upon his head the weight of ridicule by 
judging these recent works with, as a standard, the superficial 
qualities of the late Greeks. It would be better if he had the 
courage to say, “I am a dry intellect and I can understand but 
to feel is impossible.” 

The modern sculptor is a man who works with instinct as his 
inspiring force. His work is emotional. The shape of a leg, or 
the curve of an eyebrow, etc., etc., have to him no significance 
whatsoever; light voluptuous modelling is to him insipid—what 
he feels he does so intensely and his work is nothing more nor 
less than the abstraction of this intense feeling, with the result 
that sterile men of Auceps’ kind are frightened at the production. 
That this sculpture has no relation to classic Greek, but that it 
is continuing the tradition of the barbaric peoples of the earth 
(for whom we have sympathy and admiration) I hope to have 

made clear. 
London. H. GaAupiEr-BrZESKA. 

That, I think, completes the reprint of Gaudier’s prose publi- 
cations, as they appeared in Blast for June 20th, 1914, and for 
July, 1915, and in the Egoist for March 16th and June 15th, 

37 

1914, to the Editors of which periodicals I wish to make due 
acknowledgment. 

And these, with the reproductions of his sculpture and draw- 
ings, and with certain excerpts from his letters and one excerpt 
from a sketch-book, must be all that I can give of the man him- 
self. The rest is perforce impressions and opinion, mine and 
those of Mr. Benington’s camera. And Mr. Benington’s camera 
has the better of me, for it gives the subject as if ready to move 
and to speak, whereas I can give but diminished memories of 
past speech and action. 

38 

III 
THe Man 

TuE vivid, incisive manner, the eyes “ almost alarmingly intelli- 
gent.’ People will remember him in various divergent manners, 
but that much at least will be a common recollection. His still- 
ness seemed an action, such was the daemon of energy that 
possessed him, or served him. 

It is because of this activeness, this unremitting need of, or 
urge to physical activity, that the making of his work accessible 
to other artists will be almost useless. You may implant his ideas 
in other artists, you may make him the inspiration of students, 
even of students of talent and habile copyists, but you will not 
find another man so combining the faculties of a sculptor. That 
is to say, by a miracle you might find a man with his sense of 
stone or his sense of form or a man capable of appreciating his 
genuine wisdom, but to combine these with an apparently inex- 
haustible manual activity, No! 

It is one thing to conceive a statue, even to conceive, with 
extreme precision its numberless outlines and planes, it is quite 
another thing to transfer it to “implacable” stone. Without 
these two faculties in conjunction nothing worth calling sculpture 
is produced. 

Thus we remember Gaudier, on the brink of a chair, as if on 
the verge of departure; the verge might last a couple of hours, 
a flow of remarks jabs the air. 

“‘ No, he told me the whole history of Poland, in half an hour, 
with a sketch of the constitution. It was very interesting.” 

That sort of thing was always happening. It was always in- 
teresting : so far as I was concerned it was never the history of 
Poland. It was always something different, it was always inter- 
esting. You always felt that the subject of the conversation was 
exhausted, that there was nothing more to say, that you might 
read numerous and voluminous works and learn nothing more 
of importance. 

It might be exogamy, or the habits of primitive tribes, or the 

39 

training of African warriors, or Chinese ideographs, or the dis- 
gusting “ mollesse”” of metropolitan civilization, or abundant 
chaff, or zsthetics. 

Or you had him arriving, possibly from Putney, with four 
small statues in his various “ pockets” and three more of con- 
siderable weight slung on his back in a workman’s straw basket 

. and half of them lent you for a week or so, so that your 
rooms were, for the time, rich as a palace. 

And, as if his walks, his prowlings, his constant chipping at 
stone were not enough to occupy his hands and feet, he made 
his own tools at a forge. It might take a full day to temper his 
chisels. These chisels were made from old steel spindles sent him 
by Mr. Dray, who had, or perhaps still has, a factory somewhere 
in the indefinite “‘ North.” This also may have been an economy, 
but it was the sort of economy Gaudier liked. He liked to do 
the “ whole thing ” from start to finish; to feel as independent 
as the savage. 

It is possibly from the use of his forge that he took it into his 
head to cut metal rather than cast it. Possibly he wished to 
escape the cost of having things cast, but I think that unlikely. 
He forged his tools, he cut stone until its edge was like metal, as 
for example the charm in green Irish marble. The softness of 
castings displeased him and so he cut the brass direct. The 
charm he wore for some weeks suspended from his neck by a 
string. 

That is the way memory serves us, details return ill assorted, 
pell mell, in confusion. 

40 

IV 

Precinc together Gaudier’s early biography from Miss Brzeska’s 
data, I find that he was born at St. Jean de Braye, Loiret, on 
October 4th, 1891. He was the son of Joseph Gaudier, a joiner. 
Henri respected his father because he was a good workman with 
some pride in his craft and because le pére Gaudier had made a 
fine door or doorway for some place or other in Loiret. 

At fourteen Henri Gaudier won a small scholarship which 
took him to London. Then he was in school at Orleans and won 
another scholarship over a great number of competitors from all 
France. This took him to Bristol College. 

At Bristol he satisfied his professors, refused some sort of an 
offer of patronage, and was finally sent to Germany to study art 
at the expense of the college. 

His note-books begin with very detailed studies of birds in the 
museum (? the Bristol museum). He evidently walked about in 
Somerset. Then, partly on the evidence of the note-books, we 
know that he went to Nuremberg, and later to Munich, tae) 
to other cities en route. 

Later at Paris, partly as the outcome of conversations with a 
Czech poet, whose name Miss Brzeska has forgotten, and whom 
he used to meet at the Café Cujas, Gaudier determined to 
devote himself to sculpture. This brings us to 1910. 

A note-book entitled “ Le Chaos,” begins with the statement, 
“Ce livre appartient 4 Henri Gaudier qui se propose de le 
remplir d’esquisses et de croquis.” The first study is “ Phidias 
going to the Acropolis to carve the figures for the Parthenon, 
monté sur une magnifique bicyclette.” The book is full of pen 
portraits with such titles as “ Friponille de Bourgeois,” “ Sale 
Russe qui peut la vodka,” “‘ Germaniste enragé—grand lecteur 
des Sagas Scandinaves,” ‘“‘Ombre du Christ et de Francois ler 
roy, portrait d’un étudiant en médecine.” 

The only portrait I recognize is that of Mr. Dray but the book 
would probably be of considerable personal interest to people 
who knew Gaudier at that time. It contains also various ‘copies 
of poems, notably Baudelaire’s “ Chats puissants et doux.” 

41 

Another note-book beginning “April 5th, 1911,” contains 
notes on pigment, academic studies of muscles, sketches from 
Goya. 

The book contains what might be considered the germ of his 
first “ Vortex,” at least it shows him already considering the 
dominant characteristics of the different periods of sculpture, 
with an objection to Egypt because “ Mysticisme nuit a la vraie 
sensation d’art. S’est servie de la sculpture comme d’un instru- 
ment pour élever des colosses de granit Témoins de sa philo- 
sophie.” 

The most interesting note in the book is his revolt from 
“ Michael Ange 20 Avril 1911,” as follows : 

“* dessiner dans les plans majeurs les masses principales 

a " Basses <7 s. 5, plans mineurs 

a * 5» plans mineurs ,, masses ,, 
et rendre fermes ces masses mineures par |’étude correcte et vraie 
de tous leurs plans. 

“* Je crois que cette maniére de travailler conduit 4 un détail 
magnifiquement véridique mais toujours contenu dans un 
ensemble imposant, faisant pour ainsi dire cet ensemble méme. 

“La ligne est une chose purement imaginative, elle ne vient 
dans le dessin que pour contenir les plans de la masse, recevant 
la lumiére et créant Pombre, les plans convoient la seule sensa- 
tion artistique et la ligne ne leur sert que de cadre. Lartiste 
recherchant la pureté de la ligne et y ajustant les plans erre, il 
ajuste un tableau 4 un certain cadre et non un cadre A un 
certain tableau, c’est pourquoi je hais Ingres, Flaxman et les 
préraphaélites, et tous les sculpteurs modernes 4 l'exception de 
Dalou, Carpeaux, Rodin, Bourdelle et quelques autres.” 

At this time he calls himself definitely H. Gaudier-Brzeska. 
The funds from Bristol had run out. He supported himself by 
doing commercial correspondence and translations, first with the 
Libraire Collins, where he was badly treated; then with a Ger- 
man firm for Kodak accessories and telescopic gun-sights. Then 
he made designs for a firm of calico printers. He studied in 
museums after his working hours. He had also found time to 
learn short-hand. 

Later he went to his parents on the Loire, resumed his painting, 

42 

came to London and was for three months out of work. This 
in 1911, the last sketch-book with the notes in French may have 
been filled here. He next obtained a clerkship in the city, studied 
in museums in the evenings and on Saturday afternoons and 
spent half the night drawing. Then he broke down. Finally he 
got a little work on advertising designs. He did a large poster for 
“Macbeth,” and several others, which remained, for the most 
part, unsold. 

The first piece of sculpture that he was commissioned to make 
was the statue of Maria Carmi. I am told he was promised 
£100 for this work, from people well able to pay it. “ They 
ended by giving him £5.” 

43 

V 

To give the man as I knew him, there is perhaps no better 
method, or no method wherein I can be more faithful than to 
give the facts of that acquaintance, in their order, as nearly as 
I can remember them. 

In reading over what I have written I find it full of conceit, 
or at least full of pronouns in the first person, and yet what do 
we, any of us, know of our friends and acquaintance save that 
on such and such a day we saw them, and that they did or said 
this, that or the other, to which words and acts we give witness. 

A number of people desire some immediate record of 
Gaudier’s work and there is, I think, no one else ready to take 
the necessary trouble of preparing that record. 

I was with OS. at a picture show in the Albert Hall (“ Inter- 
national,” ‘‘ Allied Artists’, or something). We wandered about 
the upper galleries hunting for new work and trying to find some 
good amid much bad, and a young man came after us, like a 
well-made young wolf or some soft-moving, bright-eyed wild 
thing. I noted him carefully because he reminded me a little of 
my friend Carlos Williams. 

He also took note of us, partly because we paused only before 
new work, and partly because there were few people in the 
gallery, and partly because I was playing the fool and he was 
willing to be amused by the performance. It was a warm, lazy 
day, there was a little serious criticism mixed in with our non- 
sense. On the ground floor we stopped before a figure with 
bunchy muscles done in clay painted green. It was one of a 
group of interesting things. I turned to the catalogue and began 
to take liberties with the appalling assemblage of consonants : 
“ Brzxjk * T began. I tried again, “ Burrzisskzk aed | 
drew back, breathed deeply and took another run at the hurdle, 
sneezed, coughed, rumbled, got as far as “ Burdidis * when 
there was a dart from behind the pedestal and I heard a voice 
speaking with the gentlest fury in the world: “ Cela s’appelle 
tout simplement Jaersh-ka. C’est moi qui les ai sculptés.” 

And he disappeared like a Greek god in a vision. I wrote 

44 

at once inviting him to dinner, having found his address in the 
catalogue. He did not arrive. His sister tells me that she pre- 
vailed with him to intend to come, but that there was a row at 
the last moment and that by the time he had got himself ready 
it was too late. 

The morning after my date I received a letter addressed to 
me as “ Madame,” inviting me to the studio. Then a meeting 
was arranged through a mutual acquaintance. I went to the 
studio. He came to the Cabaret one evening. 

He sold me the marble group and a torse at what would have 
been a ridiculous figure had it not been that he had next to no 
market and that I have next to no income. In fact, it was only 
a bit of unforeseen and unrepeatable luck that enabled me to 
acquire the statues. Though I must say in deference to my own 
common sense that even his sister then thought the group un- 
saleable, and told me later that she believed I only took it out 
of charity, though it is now recognized as one of the most 
personal and intense expressions. 

He had, if I remember rightly, just finished one torse and was 
working on the one now at the “South Kensington.” Then 
came the works in veined alabaster, the “‘ Stags ” and “‘ The Boy 
with a Coney.” He had not been very long at the studio under 
the railroad arch in Putney. 

I was interested and I was determined that he should be. I 
knew that many things would bore or disgust him, particularly my 
rather middle-aged point of view, my intellectual tiredness and 
exhaustion, my general scepticism and quietness, and I therefore 
opened fire with “ Altaforte,” ‘‘ Piere Vidal,” and such poems as 
I had written when about his own age. And I think it was the 
“ Altaforte ” that convinced him that I would do to be sculpted. 
I do not think he took much stock of any of my poems save 
those in that book, and a few of the more violent later short 
satires which have not yet seen the light, though he must have 
opened my “ Ripostes,” for I find three drawings on the blank 
half-pages of his copy, one a study for the bust, and another a 
fine design for “‘ The Tomb at Acr Caar.” “Cathay” he had 
only later, in the trenches. He even tried to persuade me that I 
was not becoming middle-aged, but any man whose youth has 
been worth anything, any man who has lived his life at all in the 

45 

sun, knows that he has seen the best of it when he finds thirty 
approaching; knows that he is entering a quieter realm, a place 
with a different psychology. 

At any rate we had long, gay, electrified arguments over my 
scepticism as to the impracticability of anarchy, over my dis- 
paragements of the benefit of living like African tribesmen, how- 
ever fine their discipline might be for the individual savage. And 
upon such latter topics he poured, as I have said above, a flood 
of detailed information. 

Sic: That in such a tribe they give a man most sumptuous 
wedding presents, but that on the wedding night all the donors 
combine to steal them back, and that if the bridegroom cannot 
defend them he is impoverished, and if he loses too many, he 
may even be sold into slavery along with his wife. 

That on such a part of the African coast the women are 
exceeding skilled in the Ars Amatoria and that the women of the 
hinterland are extremely ignorant, and that therefore the inland 
women are sent down to the coast loaded with ornaments which 
the coast women immediately appropriate; but in return they 
instruct their land-lubbery sisters in all rites of the Cytherean 
goddess, And that the ignorant arrivals are called “ Bahoh ” (or 
something of that sort), but when they are ready to be sent back 
to their tribes they are called “‘ Baheeah.” 

Also he was so accustomed to observe the dominant line in 
objects that after he had spent, what could not have been more 
than a few days studying the subject at the museum, he could 
understand the primitive Chinese ideographs (not the later more 
sophisticated forms), and he was very much disgusted with the 
lexicographers who “ hadn’t sense enough to see that that was 
a horse,” or a cow or a tree or whatever it might be, “ what 
thes.: .sielse could sitsbe Lit Them © astoois 1 

And the talk was always staccato, partly from his nature, 
partly from the foreignness of his accent and the habit of pro- 
nouncing each syllable and of pronouncing his vowels like those 
in the last theory of Latin pronunciation. His spelling was im- 
peccable. 

The savant Gaudier was saved from the usual pedantry of the 
learned. It may have been a grace of youth, or of truculence. 

46 

Gaudier quoting the most learned treatise was indissolubly one 
with Gaudier, having had his hair cut or trimmed vi et armis 
by his sister, proclaiming himself audibly as “ discipulo di Cristo” 
to a bus-full of scandalized Londoners, and carrying a few stone 
chisels in his pocket because he and Brodzky had been ridiculed 
and assaulted in some alley or at some slum crossing, and because 
he intended to go out of his way in order to pass there again. 

At any rate, he was the best fun in the world, whether he was 
inveighing against the softness of modern customs, or telling 
tales of his life. Thus: when he was in Munich he was part of 
a Rembrandt factory. He used to go into the ghetto and draw 
types: the sweep, the vigour, the faces. Then a Swiss used to 
take the drawings up to the pinakoteka and carefully daub them 
a la Rembrandt, studying the mannerisms, all the ways of light- 
ing the hands, etc., etc. And then a German took them and put 
on the tone of time, tea-leaves, etc., and then they were sold to 
a Jew. (O my country! Wherein I have seen galleries of “‘ old 
masters.”’) Thus they made new Rembrandts, not doubtful copies 
or “ originals of which the copies are at the Hermitage.” 

And why he left Paris, as follows :— 

An artist had a mistress, and a sub-chief of police or some 
such person desired her, and either took her or tried to, and the 
artist assaulted the police and got three years, and in that time 
the sub-chief was successful. And when the artist came out he 
accumulated pistols and cartridges and did in more than a score 
of police (I forget the exact figure), and the Quartier Latin rose 
in riot and broke into the gaol on the morning of the execution 
and tore down the scaffold, and still the artist was guillotined 
and many students arrested, including H. Gaudier, who slipped 
under some one’s arm and escaped. 

He accepted himself as “‘a sort of modern Cellini.” He did 
not claim it, but when it was put to him one day, he accepted 
it mildly, quite simply, after mature deliberation. 

He was certainly the best company in the world, and some of 
my best days, the happiest and the most interesting, were spent 
in his uncomfortable mud-floored studio when he was doing my 
bust. 

I had been out of town during the winter of 1913-14 doing 

47 

some work for Mr. Yeats. The bust was begun, I think after my 
return, and after the winter had loosened its grip. 

Normally he could not afford marble, at least, not large pieces. 
As we passed the cemetery which lies by the bus-route to Putney 
he would damn that “ waste of good stone.” 

He had intended doing the bust in plaster, a most detestable 
medium, to which I had naturally objected. I therefore pur- 
chased the stone beforehand, not having any idea of the amount 
of hard work I was letting him in for. There were two solid 
months of sheer cutting, or perhaps that counts spare days for 
reforging the worn-out chisels. 

At any rate, there was I on a shilling wooden chair in a not 
over-heated studio with the railroad trains rushing overhead, and 
there was the half-ton block of marble on its stand, and bobbing 
about it was this head “ out of the renaissance.” 

I have now and again had the lark of escaping the present, 
and this was one of those expeditions. It was not that he was 
like any particular renaissance picture. I have seen men made 
up to the very image of Del Sarto or of some other historic 
person, but here was the veritable spirit of awakening. He was, 
of course, indescribably like some one whom one had met in the 
pages of Castiglione or Valla, or perhaps in a painting forgotten. 

And then sculpture was so unexpected in one’s “ vie littéraire.” 
I had always known musicians and painters, but sculpture and 
the tone of past erudition . . . set me thinking of renaissance life, 
of Leonardo, of the Gonzaga, or Valla’s praise of Nicholas V. 

I knew that if I had lived in the Quattrocento I should have 
had no finer moment, and no better craftsman to fill it. And it 
is not a common thing to know that one is drinking the cream 
of the ages. 

I do not think that there was much incident. It was this 
almost articulate feeling. He made first a number of drawings. 
One day when he was alone in the studio he attempted to shift 
the great block. It slipped, caught his hand under it, and he 
thought his sculpting days were over. He was imprisoned for 
several hours until he managed to attract the attention of some 
one working beyond the partition. 

He slept one day in the studio, and woke up to find himself 
inundated with rain and lying in several inches of water. 

48 

The other member of the company was a kitten. I think it 
had been Spencer Gore’s kitten. Gaudier modelled from it. He 
fed it with bits of meat suspended several feet in the air at the 
tip of a string . . . to teach it to jump. The young cat seemed 
to enjoy it and was visibly devoted to Gaudier. 

He had made one tiny clay model of it on a shelf and trying 
to look at something beneath the shelf. It was the parody of all 
religion, a kneeling posture, a derision of all self-humiliating 
religiosity. It made a fair companion for an angel with enorm- 
ous breasts, in alabaster with its robe painted scarlet and with 
the face of an ignominious Dante. He also parodied himself and 
his sister in wax, which parodies she threw either at him or at 
the stove. 

An infant Hercules in grey stone had been broken in moving 
to this studio. The head rolled about the floor, a round object 
about half the size of a fist, it was one of the kitten’s playthings. 
There was the large bas-relief of the wrestlers, some old work 
in one corner, the small forge, a representational bust, clay, in 
the manner of Rodin which he had, thank Heaven, discarded. 
He could tie knots in Rodin’s tail when he liked, and he had 
got through with it. 

The bust of me was most striking, perhaps, two weeks before 
it was finished. I do not mean to say that it was better, it was 
perhaps a kinesis, whereas it is now a stasts; but before the back 
was cut out, and before the middle lock was cut down, there was 
in the marble a titanic energy, it was like a great stubby cata- 
pult, the two masses bent for a blow. I do not mean that he was 
wrong to go on with it. Great art is perhaps a stasis. ‘The un- 
finished stone caught the eye. Maybe it would have wearied it. 

He himself, I think, preferred a small sketch made later, to 
the actual statue, but in sculpture there is no turning back. 

There is in the final condition of the stone a great calm. 
Various of our artists have thought it one of Brzeska’s best works. 
And I was interested to see how much it impressed Miscio Itow 
who comes to it with Eastern training. 

A kindly journalist “hopes” that it does not look like me. 
It does not. It was not intended to. It is infinitely more 
hieratic. It has infinitely more of strength and dignity than my 
face will ever possess. 

49 

“You understand it will not look like you, it will... not 

.. look . . . like you. It will be the expression of certain 
emotions which I get from your character.” 

Oh well, mon pauvre caractére, the good Gaudier has stiffened 
it up quite a lot, and added so much of wisdom, so much resolu- 
tion. I should have had the firmness of Hotep-hotep, the strength 
of the gods of Egypt. I should have read all things in the future. 
I should have been a law-giver like Numa. And we joked of the 
time when I should sell it to the “ Metropolitan” for $5000, 
and when we should both live at ease for a year . . . some two 
or three decades hence. 

50 

VI 

My memory of the order of events from then on is rather con- 
fused. ‘The bust was exhibited at the Whitechapel show because 
no other exhibit pays cartage on the works shown. He had also 
a faun in relief, another faun and a cat, I think, at Whitechapel 
that year. 

The Holland Park show has been sufficiently mentioned. 
Winter wore into summer. There were Saturday afternoons at 
the Rebel Art Centre, that “social seat,” so wonderfully mis- 
described in “ I] Piccolo della Sera” of Trieste that I think the 
reader will permit the quotation entire. 

I VORTICISTI 
SORPASSANO IN AUDACIA I FUTURISTI. 
VERSI DA UNA A TRECENTO SILLABE! 

I futuristi sono stati oltrepassati, artisticamente ed intellectual- 
mente, da una nuova tendenza manifestatasi fra alcuni buoni 
temponi letterari ed artistici inglesi, che hanno inventata una 
nuova scuola. . quella dei “‘ Vorticisti.” 

Non é la vita un vortice? Si dice di si, e cid ammesso é 
naturale che anche l’arte e la letteratura diventino vortici avvol- 
genti nelle loro spire tutta la produzione intellettuale umana. 

Nessuna legge, nessuna misura, nessuna impronta speciale, é 
necessaria per essere un pittore o scultore vorticista. La pit 
grande, la pit assoluta liberta é accordata ai seguaci della nuova 
teoria. Facciano essi quel che vogliono e come vogliono, purché 
producano qualche cosa che non sia mai apparsa prima dora. 
In fatto di letteratura la liberta é anche pit grande che non in 
fatto di pittura o di scultura, poiché i vorticisti, da buoni inglesi, 
tendono alla soppressione completa della grammatica e della 
sintassi; in poesia non conoscono metro, ai segni ortografici 
sostituiscono delle figurazioni, di modo che le pagina di un libro 
vorticista rassomiglia ad uno di quei “‘ rebus ” nei quali le parole 
si alternano colle figurine che bisogna interpretare. Come tutte 
le stranezze anche la tendenza vorticista trova i suoi entusiasti 

a 

in Inghilterra e questo entusiasmo si traduce in quattrini sonanti. 
Infatti per quanto Il’ idea del vorticismo sia stata resa publica 
a Londra da poche settimane i primi aderenti si sono gia 
costituiti in associazione, hanno trovata una sede sociale che 
stanno adornando di insuperabili decorazioni di stile vorticista, 
si preparano a stampare un giornale per sostenere colla discus— 
sione le loro idee e fra non molto apriranno pure una scuola 
d’arte e di propaganda! II capo riconosciuto della nuova scuol- 
a é il pittore Wyndham Lewis, un londinese di puro sangue, il 
quale ottenne numerosi premi alla scuola d’arte Slade ed ha 
avuto qualche buon successo anche nei circoli ortodossi della 
reale Accademia e dell’ Istituto dei pittori inglesi. Egli ha per 
suo luogotenente il poeta americano Ezra Pound i cui versi 
vanno dal monosillabo alle trecento sillabe. Un altro dei piu 
ferventi vorticisti é il decoratore Lorenzo Atkinson che ha pre- 
parati disegni per le cortine e le tende della sede dell’Associa- 
zione. Disegni nei quali é impossibile ritrovare la pit piccola 
traccia di regolarita di simmetria, di tonalita, di colorito, o di 
ogni altra ordinaria pratica antidiluviana ! 

If the gentle reader does not understand Italian he had better 
let it alone, for no other tongue will give the true flavour. James 
Joyce sent me the clipping, but how all this nonsense ever got to 
Trieste remains a mystery to this day. It was, however, one of 
our jokes for the season. 

A few of us lectured at the “social seat,” the sede sociale. 
Gaudier distinguished himself by interrupting a futurist meeting 
and insisted on having the “cc” in vorticist pronounced soft (sic 
¢), by their speakers. The New Age gave a pleasing and fantas- 
tical account of the affair. 

The appearance of Blast was celebrated in due state at 
*““ Dieudonné,” on July 7th. Or rather the tickets were issued 
for July 7th, and the ceremony performed on July 15th, such 
being the usual proceeding of “ il capo riconosciuto.” 

The feast was a great success, every one talked a great deal. 
It is this dinner to which Mr. Hueffer alludes in his description 
of Gaudier. Gaudier himself spent a good part of the meal in 
speculating upon the relation of planes nude of one of our 
guests, though this was kept to his own particular corner. 

(It forms a pleasing parallel to Tagore’s last function in Eng- 

22 

land, where he employed himself singing the most ribald of 
Calcutta street-songs as the only possible escape from the idiotic 
sanctimoniousness of his theo-floundering followers. I must say, 
if only in parenthesis, that wherever I have met either intelligent 
men or good artists they have been free of pomposity, free of an 
unseemly decorum, free of that gravity which Sterne recalls as 
‘a mysterious carriage of the body to conceal the defects of the 
mind,” free of that cult of the innocuous which so marked the 
elderly and senescent literary circles of England and all the pub- 
lished circles of America before the present war. It is only the 
dull and the cowardly who try to impede the swiftness and 
legerity of the mind.) 

“Tl avait l’4me pure,” our Gaudier, and I think this clarity 
is wholly incompatible with flatness. We may even imagine a 
certain gamin amusement having played about the lips of a still 
earlier artist when he chivvied the usurers out of that historic 
monument in Jerusalem. 

In less than three weeks after the dinner the gigantic stupidity 
of this war was upon us, the accumulated asininity of that race 
which “ N’a jamais pu qu’organiser sa barbarie,” and the vanity 
of an epileptic had tumbled us into the whirlpool. 

Gaudier had evaded his military service in France. He went 
almost at once to the Embassy, where they told him he might 
return without penalty. He left Charing Cross and all the art- 
feuds of young London were at truce for half an hour. Two 
days later he was back again, seated grinning upon my divan. 

He had gone to Boulogne and presented himself to a square- 
set captain with his grey hair en brose, who said— 

“What, insubi ! ! Ten years in Africa !” 

To which Gaudier: ‘‘ But I came back of my own free will, 
to fight.” 

The captain: “It’s a very good thing you did, otherwise 
you’d have got twenty years in Africa. What! Non! la patrie 
n’est pas en danger ! ! "MENE MOI C’T HOMMELA ! ! !” 

After which they put Gaudier into what he called a “ swank 
automobile ” with a lieutenant and four men with (I think he 
said) “‘ fixed bayonettes.” They took him off to a guard-house 
in Calais. He enjoyed the ride, the lieutenant was amiable and 
keen for the last news from London. 

53 

The guard-house was an improvised one. He was put into 
a large room with one minute, high window, was told that there 
was a sentry outside and that he would be shot dead if he 
attempted to escape. 

“That was eight o’clock,” he said, “ at twelve 

I said : ‘‘ You had a happy four hours.” 

He said: ‘I sweat more than I ever did in my life.” 

At twelve he managed to reach the high window and looked 
out: there was no sentry at that side of the house. He did not 
try to see if there was one at the door. Being half the size of 
the expected prisoner he managed to get through the window 
and put back for Boulogne. He arrived there at four a.m., lay 
in the fields until five. Approached the gate-keeper by the Eng- 
lish boat with a different passport from the one he had used the 
preceding evening, swore that he was English and had an Italian 
father, and that he had come over the night before to fetch some 
luggage. He was pleased to convince the gate-keeper, that he, 
the gate-keeper, remembered his, Gaudier’s, having come for the 
luggage. Aboard the English boat he had the pleasure of being 
escorted all the way across the Channel by a French torpedo- 
craft. 

He was back here for about three weeks, undertook to make 
two huge garden vases for Lady Hamilton, got very much bored 
with it, finding the stone much harder than he had expected. 
He did, I think, two other pieces during this time. The bom- 
bardment of Rheims was too much for him, his disgust with the 
boches was too great to let him stay “idle.” He got some better 
guarantee of safe-conduct from his Embassy and went back to 
his death, though his own genius was worth more than dead 
buildings. 

39 

54 

VII 
LETTERS TO ME 

THEN came postcards, one of the fort at Le Havre, “I am drill- 
ing, etc.”; a photo-card of the squad: “I am off to the front,” 
etc. 

The first letter. 

Sept. 24th. 
Mon cHER Ezra, 

Je suis dans un village et j’y monte la garde une heure le 
jour, une heure la nuit, j’écris 4 l’'accompagnement des grosses 
piéces d’artillerie qui envoient aux boches de la confiture, je suis 
sur les lignes depuis 5 ou 6 jours, nous sommes allés tout prés 
des tranchées, nous avons recus quelques obus sans grand mal, 
puis nous avons un detachement au village d’ou j’écris, j’ai été 
choisi comme éclaireur, alors 4 la premiére marche en avant je 
ferai partie des patrouilles, je me porte bien et éspére voir les 
alboches de beacoup plus prés. Mes meilleurs souhaits, 

Henri GAUDIER. 

Il n’y a pas de timbres aux villages, j’éspére que tu n’auras 

rien a payer sur la lettre. 
Lundi, Sept. 28th, 1914. 

Dear Ezra, 

Je reviens d’un enfer d’ou peu échappent, avant hier dans 
la nuit ma compagnie a opéré une attaque contre la route ou 
des prussiens étaient installés, nous y sommes allés a la bayonette, 
puis nous sommes fusillés d’abord 4 50 m. ensuite du bord talus 
de la route a l’autre ou les alboches se tenaient, j’en ai vu deux 
montrer la téte et je les ai envoyé au paradis, mais partis 12 de 
mon escouade nous nous retrouvons aujour d’hui 5 seulement. 
Je t’écris du fond d’une tranchée que nous avons creusée hier 
pour se proteger des obus qui nous arrivent sur la téte reguli¢re- 
ment toutes les cinq minutes, je suis ici depuis une semaine et 
nous couchons en plein air, les nuits sont humides et froides et 
nous en souffrons beaucoup plus que du feu de l’ennemi nous 

55 

avons du repos aujourd’hui et ¢a fait bien plaisir, donne mes 
civilités 4 Mrs. Shakespear, 4 Richard (Aldington) et sa femme 
et bien a vous deux. 

HeEnr1 GAUDIER. 

The next note is in English. October 11th. He is in trenches 
a foot deep in mud, expecting a march forward. He has not 
had “ the opportunity to let a shot go,” etc. 

‘I do not despair of ever reaching Dusseldorf and bringing 
back the finest Cézannes and Henri Rousseaux to be found up 
there. We are not very far from the German frontier as it is.” 

“Tf you send anything, send chocolate, etc.” 

October 24th, 1914. 
I am writing from a trench, I have spent four hours of the 

night on sentry duty before the lines, I have not had the luck of 
sighting an enemy patrol, tho’ at a time I saw several men move, 
at sunrise I made out what it was: barbed wire nets stuck on 
stout posts. For the day we have to stay inside this beastly hole 
without even having the satisfaction of firing a shot. Perhaps 
to-night we shall have greater fun, anyway it is a happy life, 
there are hardships but sometimes we can steal away two or 
three with a sergeant and bring back wine, beer, etc... . 

Sunday. 

A fine sunshine and better mood than yesterday. I have even 
been thinking about writing a short essay on sculpture for the 
Blast Christmas No. Please let them reproduce in it a photo 
of your bust. I shall send the essay as soon as finished, but all 
depends upon the fighting. If we have a few quiet days you'll 
have it soon.” 

November 7th. 
My pEAR Ezra, 

Yes I have survived and will continue to do so, I am 
absolutely sure. We are at rest to-day after a week’s trench life. 
We have had rain, mud, sunshine, bullets, shells, shrapnels, sar- 
dines and fun. I am well weathered and covered . . . have 
more socks . . . etc. than I ever shall wear out within the next 

*“ Vortex ” essay referred to appears on page 19. 

56 

six months. Please keep the sweater, don’t have it dyed, send it 
when the winter has set in really, etc. 

The only things he wants are numbers of the Egoist, cigarettes, 
chocolate, poems. He promises the article before “ next 
Monday.” 

“As I am ordered for a night patrol, it will be the 12th that 
I do. We are only four in the company for this work. We set 
out at sun-down and come back at dawn. This time we must 
go to explore an old bombarded mill within the German line 
where a maxim-gun section is in position. We shall have luck 
I have a good presentiment. 

“T have not received any news since October 5th, etc. 

‘““T am writing this on the back of a book pinched from the 
‘ Boches,’ it is a cheap edition of ‘ Wallenstein,” I am trying in 
vain to interest myself in its complicated nonsense. This is 
why I want some wholesome literature. Be sure that Hueffer 
does not lessen the German aggressions.’’* 

November 9th. 
Dear Ezra, 

I have had the greatest fun this night of all my life. I 
started with two men under my command to reinforce wire 
entanglements at a few yards off the enemy. We were undis- 
turbed for a long time, my fellows went on driving in poles and 
I was busy setting wires lying on my back when the silly moon 
shone out of the mist. The Germans caught sight of me and 
then pumpumpumpumpumpum their bullets cut four barbed 
wires just above my face and I was in a funny way indeed 
caught by the loose wire. I grasped my rifle at last and let them 
have the change, but it was a signal: my men lost their heads, 
one let his rifle fall into his wire coil, threw away the wooden 
mallet and jumped into the trench as a wild rabbit, the other 
in his wake, but this latter did not forget the gun. When they 
came in they said I was dead, and to avenge me my lieutenant 
ordered volley firing, the boches did the same, and I got between 
the two. At great risk, I came back to the trench, where my 
lieutenant was very astonished. When the row ceased and the 

*An allusion to Ford Madox Hueffer’s “ When Blood is their Argument.” 

57 

fog set in again I went back with my two chaps, found every- 
thing back and completed the wire snares. I got your letter and 
replied. I am beginning the essay now. 

Yours ever. 

December Ist. 

(Post-card, of the ruins of Rheims, with a gargoyle of “le 
coq gaulois ” left intact) containing thanks for cigarettes, sweater, 
etc., and the phrase, ‘‘I don’t deserve so much, as the suffering 
isvvery restricted “=~ 7 

“Nothing new, we killed a German a few days ago.” 

“Tt’s amusing to know about the artist volunteers and still 
more about being appointed professor in a Colorado institution. 
Do send them my thanks, and say I'll go and take up the posi- 
tion after the war, etc.” 

The vortex essay finally arrived. 

December 18th. 
The poems depict our situation in a wonderful way.* We do 

not yet eat the young nor old fern shoots, but we cannot be 
over victualled where we stand. I have already told Wadsworth 
where I am at the present moment, and doubtless you see the 
swamps as well as I. Before Rheims we had dug hibernating 
trenches which we had accommodated with all possible care, 
and we only slept once in this seeming comfort to be ousted over 
here. I was spying a German through a shooting cranny and 
loading my rifle when the order came to pack up and get ready 
to start on a night march. We did not know the destination : 
some were sure we went to rest some 20 miles behind the lines, 
others said we were led to the assault of a position, and this 
seemed confirmed when they took away our blankets to lessen 
the weight of the knapsack. Anyway, no one foresaw the awful 
ground we had to defend. We must keep two bridges and natur- 
ally as usual ‘until death.” We cannot come back to villages to 
sleep, and we have to dig holes in the ground which we fill with 
straw and build a roof over, but the soil is so nasty that we find 
water at two feet six inches depth; and even if we stop at a foot, 
which is hardly sufficient to afford cover, we wake up in the 

* This refers to a couple of translations from the Chinese of Rihaku, and 
another by Bunno which I had wrongly ascribed to Kutsugen. 

58 

night through the water filtering up the straw. We have been 
busy these last nights bringing in lots of materials, stoves, grates, 
etc., to make decent abodes, and unhappily they will be done 
just in time for us to go, as we are relieved of the post within 
three weeks. The beastly regiment which was here before us 
remained three months, and as they were all dirty northern miners 
used to all kind of dampness they never did an effort to better 
the place up a bit. When we took the trenches after the march 
it was a sight worthy of Dante, there was at the bottom a foot 
deep of liquid mud in which we had to stand two days and two 
nights, rest we had in small holes nearly as muddy, add to this 
a position making a V point into the enemy who shell us from 
three sides, the close vicinity of 800 putrefying German corpses, 
and you are at the front in the marshes of the Aisne. 

It has been dry these last three days and the 1st Battalion has 
cleansed up the place, I believe. Anyway, we are going back 
to-night, and we shall finish the work. 

I got a sore throat in this damned place and lost my knife 
while falling down to avoid bullets from a stupid German sentry, 
whom I subsequently shot dead, but the stupid ass had no knife 
on him to replace mine, and the bad humour will last another 
week until I receive a new one from my people. 

Anyway the three weeks here will pass away soon. I take 
the opportunity to wish you and your wife a Merry Xmas and 
a prosperous 1915. 

Ever yours, 
H. GaupieEr. 
January 27th, 1915. 

My bDEAR Ezra, 

I was writing you a post-card to Stone Cottage when your 
last turned up. We are at rest again in the same farmhouse for 
six days and we are glad of it. These last 12 days in the trenches 
were hard, it has been raining and every night we had to puddle 
ankle deep; in the daytime we had to empty ditches and dry our 
clothes. I have heard from Hulme when he was at Havre on 
the way to the trenches; it will change him a bit from the com- 
fort he had at Frith Street. I had the luxury of only one patrol, 
we had to wait for a beastly night to do it as the Germans are 

too near us. 

3) 

I started with a sergeant and it was so dark that walking side 
by side we had difficulty to see each other. We went all along 
their barbed wires, paid visits to all their sentry posts, which we 
found empty, and only got one shot fired at us when we got at 
the corner of a burnt farmstead within their line. The bullet 
whizzed past our heads and stuck itself in the ground splashing 
our faces with mud. We had just come from this little emotion 
when we crossed our own wires and came near our sentries. 
There was a youngster on duty and my sudden appearance sur- 
prised him so much that he let me have a bullet at five yards 
which missed the mark. The poor fellow got such a fright that 
he shivered for two days, but of course he had to enjoy a first 
rate licking with the butt end of a rifle from the angry corporal 
on the spot. Since we only had only a sham attack the night 
we were leaving for rest, attack in which my company was not 
engaged. All the time there have been violent artillery duels in 
which nobody got the better. 

(... some data re repayment for a statue, request for reading 
matter, cts + 5s) 

Do send me the series from the New Age so that I may see 
the eulogies. Hulme has told me in detail what Epstein had 
lately been doing, and from the description I should be glad to 
see the works, perhaps I will once. If I return am sure I shall 
not work like Condor.* But I believe I shall develop a style of 
my own which, like the Chinese, will embody both a grotesque 
and a non-grotesque side. Anyway, much will be changed after 
we have come through the blood bath of idealism. Wadsworth 
has told me in a letter that Dunoyer de Segonzay fell in Lor- 
raine; he leaves a complete work. His end may have been a 
great fact. 

X .. . has retired to the still quarter (Hampstead), he is 
near . . . up there, if I remember well, so that it approaches 
to a perfect gentle company. It is better for him, he won’t be 
tormented by doubt. 

*In my letter I had threatened him that in reaction from his present life 
in violence, he would react into Condor, the nineties, delicate shades and 
half, lights, hence this reference. 

+ This is an error, it was another Segonzac. 

60 

My squad behaved so well yesterday that I had the pleasure 
of bringing six of them into quod last night. During a pleasure 
march they left both rifles and sacks in a field and went to a 
pub and never came back in time, a corporal was left in charge 
of the weapons and the major saw it, so that to-day I am left 
with two cooks, a sick man, a red cross fellow and an innocent. 

It is as bloody damp here as it was with you a week ago when 
you wrote, and I again indulged in the luxury of “ mud baths,” 
very good for rheumatisms, arthritis, lumbago and other evils. 
But nowadays I am a trench veteran. I have experienced all 
sorts of weather in these hellish places, so that I can stand a 
night under a heavy rain without sneezing the next day, and 
sleep beautifully a whole day on hard frozen ground without any 
ill result to the “ abdomenalia.” Nevertheless I am writing from 
a barn behind the lines, a good old sheepfold full of straw where 
one is warm, and needless to say I enjoy it and appreciate the 
happy position, especially as I have been able to find good cigars 
and wine in the village. 

Let all the hordes of city clerks and kilted Highlanders come 
to reinforce us and take up the offensive when the weather is 
fine again. I dislike rotting away in a ditch like an old toad. 
Our army is forming behind us, we are being re-equipped with 
better fighting clothes, soft greys instead of bright blues and reds. 
We get American boots and socks, English gloves and scarves. 
We'll do fine work soon. 

The other day at noon during bright sunshine when the 
officers were asleep I went out of the trench with a friend and 
we two attacked the enemy. We came within 60 yards of their 
trench, we had fits of reciprocal politeness via our rifle barrels, 
and came back amid a hail of bullets which did us no harm, as 
usual, but with a helmet and a rifle as prizes which a sentry 
afflicted with bellyache had left in his post of observation which 
we stormed. I have received the New Age where you write 

about me, also the one you have just sent. 
14/3/1915. 

61 

I am at rest for three weeks in a village, that is, I am under- 
going a course of study to be promoted officer when necessary 
during our offensive.* 

I am about to be made a sergeant. . . . The weather is now 
magnificent and I am astonished to have been through such a 
badly wet winter practically in the open air without getting any 
the worse for it. I have been patrolling lately; we had lively 
volleys in the early hours. I threw a bomb also in a very black 
night into the German line: all great fun. It will be a little 
harder when we have to pierce thro’ their three lines of trenches 
soon; but thereafter the pursuit will be quick and decisive, and 
I shall get to Dusseldorf perhaps in a week after having waited 
six long months in the damp. 

As we are here six comrades and we can get wine and other 
suitable liquids, could you send me a couple of pounds during 
the 21 days we have to stay ? 

20/3/1915. 
(Some data about his statues, prices, etc.) There is a big 
marble, a sleeping woman, which you have never seen... 

het a 

For the present I am quiet, still and happy, there’s no more 
trenches for three weeks, but an interesting course some miles 
behind the lines. They are training us to become officers. I 
wrote you a few days ago about it, but I addressed the letter to 
Colemans Hatch . . . ete. 

In the night we can go on top of the hills and see the fireworks 
all along the line from Soissons to Rheims. It is so calm to-day 
and the fellows are writing and reading so quietly that it’s diffi- 
cult to imagine one’s self at war. But I have some presentiment 
it is the great calm preceding violent storms, for which we are 
now well prepared. 

. . . We are so much out of the habit with heated stoves that 
we can’t stay inside the peasants’ cottages. Now we shan’t suffer, 
the frosts and the heavy rains are gone. 

Id be glad to see a few Chinese poems. 

* He had been made corporal some weeks or a month or so before this, 
but there was no word of it in his letters to me; nothing save the change 
in the return address which now read, Henri Gaudier, caporal, 4e section, 
7 cie, 129 infanterie, etc. 

62 

April 7th. 
Many thanks for the poems, I am glad of having the Rihakus. 

There is nothing exciting happening. 

26/3/1915. 
Post-card. fe 

A April 19th. 
Two post-cards, requesting puttees, etc. ‘‘ I am in the best of 

spirits, trenches are a pleasure now, no more mud.” 
“The Germans don’t give us much trouble, I haven’t seen 
any for weeks.” 

May 10th. 
Post-card. 

May 25th. 
(Details)... 

There is nothing very special here. Spring in all its beauty, 
nightingales, lily-of-the-valley in the trenches, and the Germans 
have been routed. They dared attack our entrenchment. We 
killed 1,250, but the horrid side is the stench now. We had a 
handful of prisoners. We are far away from the lines resting. I 
shall write soon to Wadsworth. Tell me of anything that may 
happen in London. 

The following letter is dated 3/5/1915, but my recollection 
is that I received it after the one dated May 25th. The post- 
mark is faint but seems to indicate “6,” i.e. June. It is the 
only letter in which he shows any premonition of death. 

I have further verification that it was sent in June, not May. 

Dear Ezra, 

I have written to Mrs. Shakespear in what a nice place I 
was. It becomes worse and worse. It is the 10th day we are on 
the first line, and the 10th day we are getting shells on the 
cocoanut without truce. Right and left they lead Rosalie to 
the dance, but we have the ungrateful task to keep to the last 
under a hellish fire. 

Perhaps you ignore what is Rosalie? It’s our bayonet, we 
call it so because we draw it red from fat Saxon bellies. We 
shall be going to rest sometime soon, and then when we do come 
back it will be for an attack. It is a gruesome place all strewn 
with dead, and there’s not a day without half a dozen fellows 
in the company crossing the Styx. We are betting on our mutual 

63 

chances. Hope all this nasty nightmare will soon come to an end. 

What are you writing? Is there anything important or even 
interesting going on in the world.? I mean the “ artistic 
London.” I read all the “ poetries” in one of the Egorsts Mrs. 
Shakespear sent along. Away from this and some stories of Guy 
de Maupassant and E. Rod, I have read nothing, a desert in 
the head a very inviting place for a boche bullet or a shell, but 
still it had better not chose this place, and will be received in 
the calf for instance. 

You ask me if I wanted some cash not long ago. No, not 
here, but as you may imagine things are pretty hard and I 
should be thankful if you could send what remains to my 
SIStED 61, 

Have you succeeded with Quinn ? 

(The Germans are restless, machine-gun crackling ahead, so I 
must end this in haste.) 

Yours ever, 
Henri GAUDIER. 

His premonition of a head wound is curious, for this letter was 
written I believe only two days before his death. His sister tells 
me that years ago in Paris, when the war was undreamed of, he 
insisted that he would die in the war. 

The question about the sales to John Quinn were answered 
later in Quinn’s letter. 

“Now here is the distressing thing to me personally. I got 
yours of April 18th on May 10th. It was mostly about Brzeska’s 
work. I intended to write and send you £20 or £30, and say 
‘send this to him and say it can go on account of whatever you 
select for me.’ But a phrase of yours stuck in my mind, that 
when he came back from the trenches he would be hard up. 
Poor brave fellow. There is only the memory now of a brave 
gifted man. What I can do I will do.” 

I quote this because Mr. Quinn is one of the few collectors 
who realize that if a man buys the work of artists who need 
money to go on with, he in some measure shares in the creation. 
He gives the man leisure for work. Whereas the dealers in dead 
men’s work are uncreative, they are merchants and shifters. And 
I am on this account glad that Gaudier’s work will be preserved 

64 

in the South Kensington, possibly the Luxembourg, and certainly 
in the great modern collection of a man who would have been 
his good friend had he lived; and that at least some representa- 
tive number of Gaudier’s statues will be in one place together, 
rather than being scattered among dealers who would merely 
wait for the price to advance. 

65 

VII 

LETTERS TO Mrs. SHAKESPEAR 
January 9th, 1915. 

We left the trenches a few days ago and came to rest some 
15 miles behind the lines and there has been so much washing, 
cleaning and brushing to do that the correspondence suffered 
. . . Our life came very near that of stone or rather hole 
monkeys. We had a stretch of 25 days without sleeping in a 
dry place and without a single chance of washing . . . 

We went four times in three days five strong with a reserve of 
ten behind in case of a perilous enterprise. We drew the Ger- 
mans in a wood every night, they came at first 25 then 40 and 
each time we remained some 30 yards away from them in the 
grass and shot away for three hours. They got so much annoyed 
one evening that they sent us 38 shells; but of course being only 
five we scouted away and let them burst harmlessly. We licked 
a lot of Germans. . . . 

I have lately been promoted corporal sc that I am having a 
much better time of it now, there is no more sentry duty .. . 
nor carrying timber and setting wire entanglements. I supervise 
instead, which is the better part. 

Feb. 4. . . . “ war, which is beginning to try my patience,” 
details as in other letters and respects to “ Max,” who is to be 
“ sculpted ” on Gaudier’s return. 

BEFORE CRAONNE 

; ; : March Ist. 
Your cigare‘tes are delightful in these places, especially wher: 

one cannot d'cam much, shells being a very disturbing agent. I 
have some fellcws in my squad who cannot at all bear them, and 
do they even burst 200 or 300 yards away or simply pass over- 
head, they disappear under ground like as many rabbits and 
with much mre celerity. Notwithstanding the eternal bombard- 

66 

ment I managed to have gay and pleasant visions this morning 
all entangled in the blue smoke.* Indeed I have been living 
happily lately. We had a stay of some eight days in a trench 
only 20 to 50 yards away from the Germans, and I used the 
opportunity to pour upon the Kaiser’s legions all the swear 
words I had learnt in the Vaterland. They hauled up a board 
on their trench with the inscription in French : 
94,000 Russians taken, 
71 cannon, 
1,000 maxims. 

I shot it down and I put up one made out of a bullet-proof steel 
sheet. I had written in German: 

How do you like 

the war bread! 
They shot clear through it and it fell on the back of a sergeant, 
who in his misfortune pulled down the regiment’s chaplain who 
was watching. ‘The sergeant-major ran away, losing all his 
papers and pencils, and all the trench burst out laughing. Then 
we let off a volley over the trench. 

Another day I talked to the Saxons from 7 to 10 in the 
morning, exhorting them to come and constitute themselves 
prisoners; but they wouldn’t. ‘Then under the pretext of ex- 
changing newspapers I went out and met a German in order 
to take him, but as he wanted the same thing we went half way, 
handed each other the news and came back. Later on I showed 
the artillery where their small outpost was, and at 3 o’clock they 
all went up. 

BourGoGNE (MARNE) 
19/3/1915. 
(Details of the officers’ training corps.) 

I don’t believe for once to go back to the trenches for long. 
We shall pursue the boches, it will be hot but rather agreeable, 
same temperament as “ Altaforte,” and we shall have fellows 
able to take command of the section in case the officers are hit. 

. . . Tell Max (the cat who was to be sculpted) that I shall 
do him no harm. We have a wolf-dog as a mascot. He runs 

” 

* As I have indicated elsewhere he was definitely a visionary and “ saw 
both in waking vision and in sleep. 

67 

after hares the whole day; his name is Loulou; he used to come 
out patrolling sometimes but gave too much attention to 
partridges. 

April 11th. 
The war won’t be over for another year. . . . You can tell 
me anything you like about the rumours you talk of, there’s no 
censure on letters. . . . Thank you for the news about the 

“ Singer.” I am getting convinced slowly that it is not much 
use going farther in the research of planes, forms, etc. If I ever 
come back I shall do more “ Mlles. G. .. .” in marble. For 
the present I should like to see some love poems: seven months’ 
campaign gives desires which seem very commonplace in usual 
times, and sensualists have for once my whole sympathy.* 

Please give my compliments to... and... and may it 
be an artist and a warrior that sees the light, as they are the only 
people who can be admired now. 

E ... has sent me the Chinese poems. I like them very 
much. I keep the book in my pocket, indeed I use them to put 
courage in my fellows. I speak now of the “ Bowmen ” and the 
‘“ North Gate” which are so appropriate to our case. 

I shall never be a colonel but I expect to be promoted 
lieutenant very soon, and that will be the end of the carnré; 
sixty men are quite enough for my strength. I have now about 
30 to command and it is much more amusing than being com- 
manded by a grocer or a pawnbroker. My lieutenant is a baron 
of the old stock, a very brave man, intelligent and a fine educa- 
tion, so that I am happy. 

I have seen Siamese cats, they are fine animals to sculpt, I 
quite see you stroking the 28. When I was a boy there was in 
the neighbourhood an old lady who had about 50 cats, we used 
to call her “la mére aux chats,’ and played all sorts of nasty 
tricks to her protégés, but I should not to you. I am going back 
to the trenches in 3 days now. 

Ever yours, 
H. Gavupier. 

*“Mile. G. .. .” is the nickname of a naturalistic torse, plumper and 
not so fine as the one reproduced. He had repeatedly stigmatised it as 
insincere. However, this passage is all that I can find about the “ renun- 
ciation” so vaunted by our enemies. 

t One poem by Bunno, of at least the fourth century B.c., the other by 
Rihaku written in the eighth century A.D. 

68 

May 14th. 
Dear Mrs. SHAKESPEAR, 

Our woods are magnificent. I am just now quartered in 
trenches in the middle of them, they are covered with lily of the 
valley, it grows and flowers on the trench itself. In the night we 
have many nightingales to keep us company. They sing very 
finely and the loud noise of the usual attacks and counter-attacks 
does not disturb them in the least. It is very warm and nice 
out of doors, one does not mind sleeping out on the ground now. 

I have heard W. Rummel already, at your house once, and 
Chopin and Beethoven are my preferred musicians. Needless to 
say that here we can have nothing of the kind, we have the finest 
futurist music Marinetti can dream of, big guns, small guns, 
bomb-throwers’ reports, with a great difference between the Ger- 
man and the French, the different kinds of whistling from the 
shells, their explosion, the echo in the woods of the rifle fires, 
some short, discreet, others long, rolling, etc.; but it is all stupid 
vulgarity, and I prefer the fresh wind in the leaves with a few 
songs from the birds. 

In case I should be wounded I would let you know from the 
hospital some time afterwards. If I was killed of course there 
could be no direct news, but then you could write to my 
captain : 

Captaine B. Menager, 
commandant la 7 eme. Cie. 
129 regt. infanterie, 
but only after a very long silence on my part. 

Really the English fleet can’t be so serious as we imagined : 
these U-boats seem to be allowed to tramp the seas at their own 
will. That the English are not careful enough on sea and land 
is the feeling among us. I knew Sir Hugh Lane. We got the 
news of the Lusitania the very day it happened, and we were in 
the trenches then; we also know day by day what happens on 
the front. I am very far off the English and Indian troops, so 
can never see them. Compliments to Max. 

May 29th. 

Dear Mrs. SHAKESPEAR, 

It was a pleasure to have news: we had our correspond- 
ence very late, 8 to 10 days without letters, and the place where 

69 

I get it is anything but delightful for a stay in the country: the 
foremost trench element near Neuville, St. Vaast! a continual 
bombardment, and endless inferno. I have been buried twice 
in the trench, have had a shell bursting in the middle of a dozen 
hand grenades, which miraculously did not explode, and men 
nastily wounded whom I must give the first aid. We are betting 
on our chances, whose turn it is next.* The boches are restless, 
but we pay them well, they dared attack the day before yester- 
day. It has been a lurid death dance. Imagine a dull dawn, 
two lines of trenches and in between explosion upon explosion 
with clouds of black and yellow smoke, a ceaseless crackling 
noise from the rifles, a few legs and heads flying, and me stand- 
ing up among all this like to Mephisto—commanding: “ Feu 
par salve 4 250 métres—joue—feu! ” then throwing a bomb, 
and again a volley—auntil the Germans had enough of it. We 
give them nice gas to breathe when the wind is for us. I have 
magnificent little bombs, they are as big as an ostrich egg, they 
smell of ripe apples, but when they burst your eyes weep until 
you can’t see, you are suffocated, and if the boche wants to save 
his skin he has to scoot. Then a good little bullet puts an end 
to his misery. This is not war, but a murderer hunt, and we 
have to bring these rascals out of their holes, we do it and kill 
them remorselessly when they do not surrender. 

To-day is magnificent, a fresh wind, clear sun and larks sing- 
ing cheerfully. The shells do not disturb the songsters. In the 
Champagne woods the nightingales took no notice of the fight 
either. They solemnly proclaim man’s foolery and sacrilege of 
nature. I respect their disdain. Many thanks for the explanation 
about the fleet, tell me what comes out of the enquiry if you 
please. 

If my letters are worth your using them I should be glad and 
give my best wishes to the work.} (I become rather interrupted 
because of the enemy. I tell you they'll end by wounding me.) 
. .. All I can give you from here is a buttercup, the only flower 
that grows on the trench (we are in meadows) and not a very 
nice flower, but it is a souvenir from the hard fights at the 

* This also dates the letter to me, which I believe to be of June 3rd; 
Mrs. Shakespear remembers that I received it after she received this one. 
+ A novel in question. 

70 

Neuville. (Again broken off, there’s a machine gun rattling away 
in the village. I must look above the trench to see if they are not 
coming.) 

It has stopped . . . false alarm. 

No signature, but a pencil sketch of “ part of the place from 
my trench.” 

| 

IX 

LETTERS TO EDwARD WADSWORTH 
“ Wadsworth est trés gentil pour moi.” 

November 18th, 1914. 

My pEAR WADSWORTH, 

I have your letter with the woodcuts; it’s a great relief to 
touch civilization in its tender moods now and then. I have been 
unmobilized for a week by a slight wound in the leg received on 
Nov. 8, during the night while strengthening a wire entangle- 
ment. To-day I am in a deserted villa. I slept in a good bed for 
the 2nd time in 2 months and I was quietly reading an 
article upon the primitives of Germany in the Revue des 2 
Mondes when I got the woodcuts of a primitive, shall I say, but 
of another tinge. I knew “ Flushing,” it was hanging on Ezra’s 
wall when I departed, the others are quite new to me. I have 
some preference for ‘“‘ Rotterdam.” I do not know why, as the 
same qualities persist through them all, at the same degree. 
When you send me some more, as I am greedy to see much 
vorticism just now, print them on the thin. The reason is this, 
I have room for them in my knapsack and the less weighty the 
individuals are, the more I shall be able to stuff in, and I must 
have room for what awaits me at Diisseldorf. 

I posted yesterday the unhappy essay I had promised, it is 
much more a letter than anything else, but you may imagine 
how difficult it is to concentrate your mind upon any subject 
when you are obsessed by fighting. Now would be the time to 
read over and over again Ezra’s ‘“‘ Altaforte.”’ 

In the place we are in to-day there is nothing to see. It is all 
false French luxury, damnable imitation Louis XV-XVI. There’s 
one small statue of a seated Christ, Polish work I believe, very 
primitive with a great emotion, it is carved in a log of oak, other- 
wise nothing at all except old Revues des 2 Mondes. Your letter 
came as a godsend anyway. 

I thank you heartily for the packets, but I must scold you too. 

. . Sends, you do, other friends do the same, so that I am abso- 

72 

lutely spoilt as a fighting unit (which will make you laugh), any- 
way the moral is much worse. I am always in good spirits, be 
it in the mud of the trench or in the warmth of the ’biwack. 

I shall come back stronger, I think; it is a good tonic to suffer 
some discomforts after the very soft life we lead in the towns. I 
have no new feats to relate, of course, but I hope to have some- 
thing more to say next week. 

To come back to the parcels, they will be welcome but don’t 
send too many. Give my best regards to your wife. Ever yours, 

H. Gauprer. 

Of course you won’t forget to give news to Ezra, Richard, 

Cournos, all Kensington. 

Note.—The “very soft life of the towns” included “ Cher 
Henri’s ” going to sleep in his studio under the railroad arch and 
awakening to find himself lying in three inches of water, long 
tramps with his sculpture slung on his back, etc., etc. 

The “ Diisseldorf ” joke might almost need a separate chapter. 
He sat where I am now sitting and took notes on what should be 
fetched out of Germany. The Pinakoteka was discussed, but he 
settled on the “ Picasso’s ” at Diisseldorf as the spoila opima, and 
threatened to bring them away in his boots. 

December 16th. 
To Wadsworth, compliments on the birth of a daughter. 

Gaudier is “ 30 miles up northward,” it is “the third circle of 
Dante’s inferno.” 800 Germans dead on the ground, unburied 
and unburiable. ‘‘ Showers of shells daily and it is a wonder 
nobody gets hurt.” 

January 18th. 

Many thanks for the news. . . . I am glad to see you can 
work, and like especially the woodcut you sent. Away here, of 
course, one gets fits of intellectuality now and then, but usually 
it’s a state of soldiery with no greater desires than those of drink, 
good eating and a dry bundle of straw. 

.. . He is on rest after 25 days of trenches, devils of damp- 
ness, etc. He repeats the incident of “ drawing the Germans in 
a wood,” the five of them, and the sound of “ Hoch, hoch, 

73 

vorwarts.” “ We got away as usual and did them a lot of harm, 
too.” 

26/1/15. 
Before Perthes, the “ dam’d river is overflowing.” My chaps 
are cleaning reserve cartridges. . . . Military data, etc. 

Feb, 18th. Letter containing the two drawings done before 
Craonne. 

e< 
1912-14 
THE FRIENDSHIP WITH BRoDzKY* 

I Finp that Horace Brodzky has kept two of Gaudier’s letters; 
one, dated Jan. 6th, 1912, “ please if you could call . . . supper 
together, and conversation.” 

He had seen a wood-cut by Brodzky and wrote to make his 
acquaintance. The second letter, addressed to “ Brodzky del 
Sole,” Nov. 13th, 1914, contains remarks about trench fighting 
which overlap with other letters here printed. He says also, 
“Cap got reversed by a bullet,” and ‘“‘ Thanks for news about 
Currie, I knew nothing.” He goes on to say that suicide is 
foolish, and that in the thick of fighting with so many dead 
about, the suicide was not “ impressive.” 

According to Brodzky, Gaudier had spent the year 1912-13 as 
a clerk of some sort, doing city correspondence, translation, etc. 
He had worked after hours studying “ everything,’ Egyptology, 
China, etc. Also he had made several large posters for adver- 
tising, all of which were refused. 

He had done illustrations for Frank Harris’ “London Society.” 
Some of these drawings are quite good. The caricaturing is 
excellent. There were also various experiments, a few etchings, 
a single dry-point which was scribbled on the back of a scratched 
plate; a pastel portrait of Brodzky, and finally a high-relief of 
two women in plaster (about a foot square). The dry-point is 
dated 1913, the pastel 1912. 

A head of Brodzky shows the effect of a theory that painting 
and drawing are first of all calligraphy. It is a belief Chinese 
in origin, or else deduced from Chinese work by some occidental 
theorist. It shows in the drawing of Brodzky’s moustache, also 
on the delicate drawing of a faun now in his possession. 

Brzeska’s later drawings, so far as I personally know, are done 
almost invariably without any trace of this belief. They were 

* Vide also page 30. 
75 

for a long time done in very thin even line, almost as if they were 
done with a stylographic pen. 

In many of them he had undoubtedly no further intention 
than that of testing a contour for sculpture; certainly this was 
the case in the numerous sketches he made for my bust, and 
must have held true for many of the nudes and animals which 
comprise the bulk of the drawings. 

As for the legend of Gaudier’s life, Brodzky had gathered the 
following impressions and statements :— 

Gaudier’s ancestors had been masons and stone carvers for 
generations and had worked on the cathedral of Chartres. 
Brodzky himself had discovered an almost exact portrait of 
Gaudier, carved on some French cathedral facade. This gave 
piquancy to an, of course, unverifiable fancy. 

Gaudier’s wanderings afoot about Europe had taken place 
between his ninth and fourteenth year. This corresponds vaguely 
with something Gaudier has told me himself. “‘ Gaudier said he 
had worked mending roads in Germany during these tours.” 
Possibly he may have, for a day or two or to provide a stray 
night’s lodging. 

Gaudier took part in the Hervé riots in Paris. Gaudier had 
been through Wales. He had made a particular pilgrimage to a 
certain tree, that blooms on a set day in the year because of the 
warmth of the Gulf-stream. (This might be out of a Japanese 
“Noh ” play, but it isn’t.) 

Frank Harris told Brodzky the following tale of Gaudier’s first 
carving in stone. Gaudier, ztatis suae XVIII or thereabouts, 
met Epstein, who said, mustering the thunders of god and the 
scowlings of Assyrian sculpture into his tone and eyebrows, 
~ UMMHH! Do... you cut. . sdircet.. . (mm stoner 

“Most certainly! ” said Gaudier, who had never yet done 
anything of the sort. 

“'That’s right,” said Epstein; “I will come around to your 
place on Sunday.” 

So Gaudier at once went out, got three small stone blocks, 
and by working more or less night and day had something ready 
by Sunday. 

This may very well have happened. There is a parallel tale 
of Michael Agnolo chiselling an old faun in the Medici’s garden. 

76 

Cosimo said, “ An old faun wouldn’t have all his teeth good as 
new.” 

‘Two teeth were nicked out on the instant. It is perhaps one 
of the readiest marks of genius that it can accept the right idea 
instantly and without cavil, that it does not reject an idea merely 
because it is not its own, or because it runs counter to a personal 
error or thoughtlessness. 

Gaudier acted for a time as art-adviser to Frank Harris and 
did a representative bust of him. He also did several other por- 
trait busts in plaster. These representational busts do not par- 
ticularly interest me, but they do serve to show Gaudier’s 
ability, as, for the matter of that, do some of the comic draw- 
ings, notably where having done some drawings on brown paper 
with blue ink, which renders them unsuitable for reproduction 
because the camera takes blue as white, he copied them in black 
and white with amazing exactness. There is nothing in this, but 
it is the sort of detail which impresses the lay mind and shows it 
the difference between chance rightness and the mastery of a 
medium. 

He was a master draughtsman, and sculpture is consummate 
draughtsmanship, it is an infinite number of contours in one 
work, and on that rests much of its durability of interest. The 
picture we have all at once and we must walk round the statue. 

FRIENDSHIP WITH WOLMARK* 

Alfred Wolmark knew Gaudier before I did. Gaudier was in 
and out of his studio a good deal. Wolmark has done two por- 
traits of him. Mr. Wolmark has been good enough to meet me 
at the Café Royal and communicate his impressions and some 
opinions on Gaudier. 

He said that Gaudier “‘ never came into the house without 
making drawings, of the people there, of models; caricatures, 
anything . . . and no matter what he drew the drawing was 
always a living object.” 

It was on his way to Wolmark’s that Gaudier was set upon 
by roughs, or rather they jeered at him and pulled his cape, so 
he assaulted three of them, was very much mauled, lost a few 

* Vide also page 30. 

77 

teeth, and inflicted, we believe, considerable damage on his 
opponents. He arrived at Wolmark’s silent, almost unrecogniz- 
able, incapable of speech or mastication. 

Wolmark says that Gaudier had no nerves, that he could draw 
anywhere, at any time. He pictures him going off to the Zoo 
for a day and returning with an incredible pile of drawings, 
among them one of a panther (since reproduced in “ Colour ”’). 

Wolmark and I are in agreement as to the degree of Gaudier’s 
promise and genius. But Wolmark considers that Gaudier was at 
his best in “The Singer,” and “ The Seated Woman” (a work 
of about the same period). 

He also thinks that Gaudier would have “ returned to this sort 
of thing; that ” if he had gone on he would have “‘ come back ” 
to this kind of work “ or something like it.” 

This point of view is so opposed to my own that I feel myself 
hardly the person to set it forth. It would be unfair to the idea 
to represent it by my unsympathetic impression. I think it fair 
to state that this opinion exists, I cannot do much more for it. 

If we define style as “ the absolute subjugation of the details 
of a given work to the dominant will; to the central urge or im- 
pulse,” then I admit that in “ The Singer” and statues of that 
phase Gaudier had “style”? in a sense which he hardly had it 
again until he came to the work which I shall later describe as 
‘“squarish and bluntish.”’ But the phase of the “ Singer ” is to 
my mind by no means so interesting or significant as the “ style ” 
in the squarish and bluntish work or in the “ Birds Erect.” 

(I am speaking of the statuary. The stag-drawings and the 
carvings of animals have “style,” and are to me more interesting 
than the “ Singer” or the drawings of human figures.) 

Wolmark considers the later work “ experimental”; and says 
that Gaudier regarded it as a “ phase” not an end. I am not 
sure that there is any great work which is not “ experimental.” 
Some experiments land on “ discovery,” but they are none the 
less “‘ experiments.” 

Personally I do not believe that “ genius’ ever ‘‘ goes back.” 
Any man who has ever made innovations or even reinstated a 
fine but mislaid tradition in any art knows that there are always 
people who want an artist to do and re-do the things he was 
doing the year before last. It would be a great impertinence for 

78 

me to pretend that I was in absolute unanimity with Gaudier. 
It is a great impertinence for any man to think he is in perfect 
agreement with any other. 

It would be a very sickly sign for any man of twenty-two to 
regard his actual work as anything save a way and a leading 
toward some further fullness and rightness. 

I do not believe any important artist knows what he is going 
to do five years hence, and I do not think any one else can know 
for him. I do not think good artists return later in life to do 
what they were doing at twenty. 

It would be most unfair to Mr. Wolmark to interpret his 
phrase too literally, and he allows himself considerable liberty, 
or rather he guards against an academic prediction, by saying, 
“Work like the ‘Singer’ and: ‘Seated Woman’ phase, or 
something like it.” 

It is very hard to limit or give a precise meaning to the words 
“or something like it.” Mr. Wolmark might find similarities 
where I should not. However, Mr. Wolmark’s intuition of 
Gaudier’s future is certainly very different from my own, and I 
wish to present the fact of this divergence as fairly as possible. 
He and certainly quite a number of people whom I cannot 
regard as imbeciles, prefer the work like the “ Singer.” 

I and various people, who seem to me most alive to the signi- 
ficance of Gaudier’s work, are interested in the squarish and 
bluntish period, Gaudier’s latest work, the cut brass and the 
“ Birds Erect.” 

Gaudier himself refers somewhere to “‘the usual Rodin-Maillol 
mixture.”” The Rodin admixture he had purged from his system 
when he quit doing representative busts of Frank Harris and 
Col. Smithers. Maillol I think went next. Epstein reigned for a 
time in his bosom; and then came the work which I can only 
refer to himself, to his own innovations, to his personal com- 
binations of forms. 

The animal drawings and carvings are neutral ground, and in 
them the only possible influence upon him was archaic. Fonts 
de Gaume and Chou bronzes, plus life itself and his genius, 
which was in this case an abnormal sympathy with, an intel- 
ligence for, all moving animal life, its swiftness and softness. 

Respecting Epstein, I remember an amusing outbreak of 

79 

Gaudier’s against Epstein’s sloth: ‘“‘ Work!! Work? I know 
he does not work. His hands are clean! ! ” 

And Epstein, impassively, when he heard it: “ Ugh, so I do 
not work? Well. I hope he works to some advantage.” 

There was another amusing afternoon with Gaudier when he 
held forth at length on the follies of a certain Fabbrucci. 
Fabbrucci is a sculptor of the academic variety who makes clay 
models for gas fixtures and copies Victorian pictures in stone 
with the aid of a drill. He is now doing the “ Princes in the 
Tower” for some one with a large house full of plush furniture. 
Gaudier’s definition of Fabbrucci’s labours was detailed and 
vigorous, the text being, ““ How beautiful is the labour of doing 
a job in the wrong medium.” Some of the cutting on this grand 
idiocy is of course very inconvenient, and as Gaudier said of one 
cavity, “ He will be in that d...d hole for six months.” (The 
“hole” being, I think, the cavity beneath the young prince’s 
chair, or else the space between the two princes’ doublets.) 

It is almost needless to say that sculptors who do this sort of 
work are very prosperous persons in comparison with creative 
artists, discoverers and inventors. 

Fabbrucci’s opinion of Gaudier as quoted by the latter was 
that Gaudier’s sculpture was “ not sculpture but stones.” 

80 

XI 

THERE are always people enough to praise a man during the 
few weeks after his death, and I therefore extract some meagre 
comfort from the fact that I am not among those who waited. 
There were the two articles in the Egoist, before mentioned. In 
September, 1914, I had an article in the Fortnightly Review, 
which was for the most part a closer form of a rather informal 
lecture given at the Rebel Art Centre in Ormond Street the 
preceding spring. 

I reprint that article entire because it shows our grounds for 
agreement, or at least the train of thought which led to the use 
of the term “ vorticist’’ when we wished a designation that 
would be equally applicable to a certain basis for all the arts. 
Obviously you cannot have “cubist” poetry or “ imagist ” 
painting. 

I had put the fundamental tenet of vorticism in a “ Vortex ” 
in the first Blast as follows :— 

Every concept, every emotion presents itself to the vivid con- 
sciousness in some primary form. It belongs to the art of this 
form. If sound, to music; if formed words, to literature; the 
image, to poetry; form, to design; colour in position, to painting; 
form or design in three planes, to sculpture; movement, to the 
dance or to the rhythm of music or verses. 

I defined the vortex as “the point of maximum energy,” and 
said that the vorticist relied on the “ primary pigment,” and on 
that alone. 

These statements seemed to convey very little to people un- 
familiar with our mode of thought, so I tried to make myself 
clear, as follows :— 

VORTICISM 
“Ty is no more ridiculous that a person should receive or convey 
an emotion by means of an arrangement of shapes, or planes, or 
colours, than that they should receive or convey such emotion by 
an arrangement of musical notes.” 

81 

I suppose this proposition is self-evident. Whistler said as 
much, some years ago, and Pater proclaimed that “ All arts 
approach the conditions of music.” 

Whenever I say this I am greeted with a storm of “ Yes, 
but” ... s. “But why isn’t this art futurism ?” ‘“ Why 
isn’t?” “ Why don’t?” and above all: “ What, in Heaven’s 
name, has it got to do with your Imagiste poetry? ” 

Let me explain at leisure, and in nice, orderly, old-fashioned 
prose. 

We are all futurists to the extent of believing with Guillaume 
Appollonaire that ‘“‘On ne peut pas porter partout avec soi le 
cadavre de son pére.” But “futurism,” when it gets into art, 
is, for the most part, a descendant of impressionism. It is a sort 
of accelerated impressionism. 

There is another artistic descent vid Picasso and Kandinsky; 
vid cubism and expressionism. One does not complain of neo- 
impressionism or of accelerated impressionism and “ simul- 
taneity,” but one is not wholly satisfied by them. One has 
perhaps other needs. 

It is very difficult to make generalities about three arts at 
once. I shall be, perhaps, more lucid if I give, briefly, the history 
of the vorticist art with which I am most intimately connected, 
that is to say, vorticist poetry. Vorticism has been announced 
as including such and such painting and sculpture and “ Imag- 
isme ” in verse. I shall explain “ Imagisme,” and then proceed 
to show its inner relation to certain modern paintings and 
sculpture. 

Imagisme, in so far as it has been known at all, has been 
known chiefly as a stylistic movement, as a movement of criticism 
rather than of creation. This is natural, for, despite all possible 
celerity of publication, the public is always, and of necessity, 
some years behind the artists’ actual thought. Nearly anyone 
is ready to accept “ Imagisme ” as a department of poetry, just 
as one accepts “ lyricism” as a department of poetry. 

There is a sort of poetry where music, sheer melody, seems as 
if it were just bursting into speech. 

There is another sort of poetry where painting or sculpture 
seems as if it were “ just coming over into speech.” 

The first sort of poetry has long been called “lyric.” One 

82 

is accustomed to distinguish easily between “lyric ” and “ epic ” 
and “ didactic.” One is capable of finding the “ lyric ” passages 
in a drama or in a long poem not otherwise “lyric.” This 
division is in the grammars and school books, and one has been 
brought up to it. 

The other sort of poetry is as old as the lyric and as honour- 
able, but, until recently, no one had named it. Ibycus and Liu 
Ch’e presented the “ Image.” Dante is a great poet by reason 
of this faculty, and Milton is a wind-bag because of his lack of 
it. The “image” is the furthest possible remove from rhetoric. 
Rhetoric is the art of dressing up some unimportant matter so as 
to fool the audience for the time being. So much for the general 
category. Even Aristotle distinguishes between rhetoric, “ which 
is persuasion,’ and the analytical examination of truth. As a 
“critical > movement, the “‘ Imagisme”’ of 1912 to 714 set out 
“to bring poetry up to the level of prose.” No one is so quixotic 
as to believe that contemporary poetry holds any such position. 
. . . Stendhal formulated the need in his De L’Amour :— 

“La poésie avec ses comparaisons obligées, sa mythologie que 
ne croit pas le poéte, sa dignité de style a la Louis XIV et tout 
attirail de ses ornements appelés poétique, est bien au dessous 
de la prose dés qu’il s’agit de donner une idée claire et précise 
des mouvements de coeur, or dans ce genre on n’émeut que par 
la clarté.”’ 

Flaubert and De Maupassant lifted prose to the rank of a finer 
art, and one has no patience with contemporary poets who 
escape from all the difficulties of the infinitely difficult art of 
good prose by pouring themselves into loose verses. 

The tenets of the Imagiste faith were published in March, 
1913, as follows :— 

I. Direct treatment of the “thing,” whether subjective or 
objective. 

II. To use absolutely no word that does not contribute to the 
presentation. 

III. As regarding rhythm: to compose in sequence of the 
musical phrase, not in sequence of the metronome. 

83 

There followed a series of about forty cautions to beginners, 
which need not concern us here. 

The arts have indeed “some sort of common bond, some 
inter-recognition.” Yet certain emotions or subjects find their 
most appropriate expression in some one particular art. The 
work of art which is most “ worth while ” is the work which 
would need a hundred works of any other kind of art to explain 
it. A fine statue is the core of a hundred poems. A fine poem 
is a score of symphonies. There is music which would need a 
hundred paintings to express it. There is no synonym for the 
Victory of Samothrace or for Mr. Epstein’s flenites. There is no 
painting of Villon’s Fréres Humains. Such works are what we 
call works of the “ first intensity.” 

A given subject or emotion belongs to that artist, or to that 
sort of artist who must know it most intimately and most in- 
tensely before he can render it adequately in his art. A painter 
must know much more about a sunset than a writer, if he is to 
put it on canvas. But when the poet speaks of “ Dawn in russet 
mantle clad,” he presents something which the painter cannot 
present. 

I said in the preface to my Guido Cavalcanti that I believed 
in an absolute rhythm. I believe that every emotion and every 
phase of emotion has some toneless phrase, some rhythm-phrase 
to express It. 

(This belief leads to vers libre and to experiments in quantita- 
tive verse.) 

To hold a like belief in a sort of permanent metaphor is, as I 
understand it, “symbolism” in its profounder sense. It is not 
necessarily a belief in a permanent world, but it is a belief in that 
direction. 

Imagisme is not symbolism. The symbolists dealt in “ asso- 
ciation,” that is, in a sort of allusion, almost of allegory. They 
degraded the symbol to the status of a word. They made it a 
form of metonomy. One can be grossly ‘“‘ symbolic,” for ex- 
ample, by using the term “cross” to mean “trial.’ The 
symbolist’s symbols have a fixed value, like numbers in arithmetic, 
like 1, 2, and 7, The imagiste’s images have a variable signifi- 
cance, like the signs a, b, and x in algebra. 

Moreover, one does not want to be called a symbolist, because 

84 

symbolism has usually been associated with mushy technique. 

On the other hand, Imagisme is not Impressionism, though 
one borrows, or could borrow, much from the impressionist 
method of presentation. But this is only negative definition. If 
I am to give a psychological or philosophical definition ‘“ from 
the inside,” I can only do so autobiographically. The precise 
statement of such a matter must be based on one’s own 
experience, 

In the “search for oneself,’ in the search for “ sincere self- 
expression,” one gropes, one finds some seeming verity. One says 
“T am” this, that, or the other, and with the words scarcely 
uttered one ceases to be that thing. 

I began this search for the real in a book called Personae, cast- 
ing off, as it were, complete masks of the self in each poem. I 
continued in long series of translations, which were but more 
elaborate masks. 

Secondly, I made poems like “ The Return,” which is an 
objective reality and has a complicated sort of significance, like 
Mr. Epstein’s “Sun God,’ or Mr. Brzeska’s ‘“‘ Boy with a 
Coney.” Thirdly, I have written “ Heather,” which represents 
a state of consciousness, or “ implies,” or “ implicates ”’ it. 

A Russian correspondent, after having called it a symbolist 
poem, and having been convinced that it was not symbolism, 
said slowly: ‘“‘I see, you wish to give people new eyes, not to 
make them see some new particular thing.” 

These two latter sorts of poems are impersonal, and that fact 
brings us back to what I said about absolute metaphor. They 
are Imagisme, and in so far as they are Imagisme, they fall in 
with the new pictures and the new sculpture. 

Whistler said somewhere in the Gentle Art: “ The picture is 
interesting not because it is Trotty Veg, but because it is an 
arrangement in colour.” The minute you have admitted that, 
you let in the jungle, you let in nature and truth and abundance 
and cubism and Kandinsky, and the lot of us. Whistler and 
Kandinsky and some cubists were set to getting extraneous matter 
out of their art; they were ousting literary values. The Flau- 
bertians talk a good deal about “ constatation.” ‘‘ The nineties ” 
saw a movement against rhetoric. I think all these things move 
together, though they do not, of course, move in step. 

‘ 

85 

The painters realise that what matters is form and colour. 
Musicians long ago learned that programme music was not the 
ultimate music. Almost anyone can realize that to use a symbol 
with an ascribed or intended meaning is, usually, to produce very 
bad art. We all remember crowns, and crosses, and rainbows, 
and what not in atrociously mumbled colour. 

The image is the poet’s pigment.* The painter should use his 
colour because he sees it or feels it. I don’t much care whether 
he is representative or non-representative. He should depend, 
of course, on the creative, not upon the mimetic or representa- 
tional part in his work. It is the same in writing poems, the 
author must use his image because he sees it or feels it, not 
because he thinks he can use it to back up some creed or some 
system of ethics or economics. 

An image, in our sense, is real because we know it directly. 
If it have an age-old traditional meaning this may serve as proof 
to the professional student of symbology that we have stood in 
the deathless light, or that we have walked in some particular 
arbour of his traditional paradiso, but that is not our affair. It 
is our affair to render the zmage as we have perceived or con- 
ceived it. 

Browning’s “ Sordello” is one of the finest masks ever pre- 
sented. Dante’s “ Paradiso” is the most wonderful image. By 
that I do not mean that it is a perseveringly imagistic perform- 
ance. The permanent part is Imagisme, the rest, the discourses 
with the calendar of saints and the discussions about the nature 
of the moon, are philology. The form of sphere above sphere, 
the varying reaches of light, the minutiz of pearls upon fore- 
heads, all these are parts of the Image. The image is the poet’s 
pigment; with that in mind you can go ahead and apply Kan- 
dinsky, you can transpose his chapter on the language of form 
and colour and apply it to the writing of verse. As I cannot rely 
on your having read Kandinsky’s Ueber das Geistige in der 
Kunst, I must go on with my autobiography. 

Three years ago in Paris I got out of a “ metro ” train at La 
Concorde, and saw suddenly a beautiful face, and then another 
and another, and then a beautiful child’s face, and then another 

* The image has been defined as “ that which presents an intellectual and 
emotional complex in an instant of time.” 

86 

beautiful woman, and I tried all that day to find words for what 
this had meant to me, and I could not find any words that 
seemed to me worthy, or as lovely as that sudden emotion. And 
that evening, as I went home along the Rue Raynouard, I was 
still trying and I found, suddenly, the expression. I do not mean 
that I found words, but there came an equation . . . not in 
speech, but in little splotches of colour. It was just that—a 
‘ pattern,” or hardly a pattern, if by “ pattern ” you mean some- 
thing with a “repeat” in it. But it was a word, the beginning, 
for me, of a language in colour. I do not mean that I was un- 
familiar with the kindergarten stories about colours being like 
tones in music. I think that sort of thing is nonsense. If you try 
to make notes permanently correspond with particular colours, it 
is like tying narrow meanings to symbols. 

That evening, in the Rue Raynouard, I realized quite vividly 
that if I were a painter, or if I had, often, that kind of emotion, 
or even if I had the energy to get paints and brushes and keep 
at it, I might found a new school of painting, of ‘‘ non-represen- 
tative ” painting, a painting that would speak only by arrange- 
ments in colour. 

And so, when I came to read Kandinsky’s chapter on the 
language of form and colour, I found little that was new to me. 
I only felt that some one else understood what I understood, and 
had written it out very clearly. It seems quite natural to me that 
an artist should have just as much pleasure in an arrangement 
of planes or in a pattern of figures, as in painting portraits of fine 
ladies, or in portraying the Mother of God as the symbolists bid 
us. 
When I find people ridiculing the new arts, or making fun of 
the clumsy odd terms that we use in trying to talk of them 
amongst ourselves; when they laugh at our talking about the 
“ ice-block quality ” in Picasso, I think it is only because they do 
not know what thought is like, and that they are familiar only 
with argument and gibe and opinion. That is to say, they can 
only enjoy what they have been brought up to consider enjoy- 
able, or what some essayist has talked about in mellifluous 
phrases. They think only “ the shells of thought,” as De Gour- 
mont calls them; the thoughts that have been already thought 

out by others. 

87 

Any mind that is worth calling a mind must have needs 
beyond the existing categories of language, just as a painter must 
have pigments or shades more numerous than the existing names 
of the colours. 

Perhaps this is enough to explain the words in my 
“Vortex ”* ;— 

“ Every concept, every emotion, presents itself to the vivid 
consciousness in some primary form. It belongs to the art of this 
form.” 

That is to say, my experience in Paris should have gone into 
paint. If instead of colour I had perceived sound or planes in 
relation, I should have expressed it in music or in sculpture. 
Colour was, in that instance, the “ primary pigment ”; I mean 
that it was the first adequate equation that came into conscious- 
ness. The Vorticist uses the “ primary pigment.’ Vorticism is 
art before it has spread itself into flaccidity, into elaboration and 
secondary applications. 

What I have said of one vorticist art can be transposed for 
another vorticist art. But let me go on then with my own branch 
of vorticism, about which I can probably speak with greater 
clarity. All poetic language is the language of exploration. Since 
the beginning of bad writing, writers have used images as orna- 
ments. The point of Imagisme is that it does not use images as 
ornaments. ‘The image is itself the speech. The image is the 
word beyond formulated language. 

I once saw a small child go to an electric light switch and say, 
“Mamma, can I open the light?’ She was using the age-old 
language of exploration, the language of art. It was a sort of 
metaphor, but she was not using it as ornamentation. 

One is tired of ornamentations, they are all a trick, and any 
sharp person can learn them. 

The Japanese have had the sense of exploration. They have 
understood the beauty of this sort of knowing. A Chinaman 
said long ago that if a man can’t say what he has to say in twelve 
lines he had better keep quiet. The Japanese have evolved the 
still shorter form of the hokku. 

“The fallen blossom flies back to its branch: 
A butterfly.” 

* Appearing in the July number of Blast. 

88 

That is the substance of a very well-known hokku. Victor Plarr 
tells me that once, when he was walking over snow with a 
Japanese naval officer, they came to a place where a cat had 
crossed the path, and the officer said, ‘‘ Stop, I am making a 
poem.” Which poem was, roughly, as follows :— 

“The footsteps of the cat upon the snow: 
(are like) plum-blossoms.” 

The words “ are like ” would not occur in the original, but I add 
them for clarity. 

The “one image poem ” is a form of super-position, that is to 
say, it is one idea set on top of another. I found it useful in 
getting out of the impasse in which I had been left by my metro 
emotion. I wrote a thirty-line poem, and destroyed it because it 
was what we call work “ of second intensity.” Six months later 
I made a poem half that length; a year later I made the follow- 
ing hokku-like sentence :— 

“The apparition of these faces in the crowd: 
Petals, on a wet, black bough.” 

I dare say it is meaningless unless one has drifted into a certain 
vein of thought.* In a poem of this sort one is trying to record 
the precise instant when a thing outward and objective trans- 
forms itself, or darts into a thing inward and subjective. 

This particular sort of consciousness has not been identified 
with impressionist art. I think it is worthy of attention. 

The logical end of impressionist art is the cinematograph. The 
state of mind of the impressionist tends to become cinemato- 
graphical. Or, to put it another way, the cinematograph does 
away with the need of a lot of impressionist art. 

There are two opposed ways of thinking of a man: firstly, you 
may think of him as that toward which perception moves, as the 
toy of circumstance, as the plastic substance receiving impres- 
sions; secondly, you may think of him as directing a certain fluid 
force against circumstance, as conceiving instead of merely re- 
flecting and observing. One does not claim that one way is 

* Mr. Flint and Mr. Rodker have made longer poems depending on a 
similar presentation of matter. So also have Richard Aldington, in his 
In Via Sestina, and “H. D.” in her Oread, which latter poems express 
much stronger emotions than that in my lines here given. Mr. Huefler 
gives an interesting account of a similar adventure of his own in his review 

of the Imagiste anthology. 

89 

better than the other, one notes a diversity of the temperament. 
The two camps always exist. In the ’eighties there were sym- 
bolists opposed to impressionists, now you have vorticism, which 
is, roughly speaking, expressionism, neo-cubism, and imagism 
gathered together in one camp and futurism in the other. 
Futurism is descended from impressionism. It is, in so far as it 
is an art movement, a kind of accelerated impressionism. It is 
a spreading, or surface art, as opposed to vorticism, which is 
intensive. 

The vorticist has not this curious tic for destroying past glories. 
I have no doubt that Italy needed Mr. Marinetti, but he did not 
set on the egg that hatched me, and as I am wholly opposed to 
his esthetic principles I see no reason why I, and various men 
who agree with me, should be expected to call ourselves futurists. 
We do not desire to evade comparison with the past. We prefer 
that the comparison be made by some intelligent person whose 
idea of “the tradition ” is not limited by the conventional taste 
of four or five centuries and one continent. 

Vorticism is an intensive art. I mean by this, that one is 
concerned with the relative intensity, or relative significance of 
different sorts of expression. One desires the most intense, for 
certain forms of expression are “more intense” than others. 
They are more dynamic. I do not mean they are more emphatic, 
or that they are yelled louder. I can explain my meaning best 
by mathematics. 

There are four different intensities of mathematical expression 
known to the ordinarily intelligent undergraduate, namely: the 
arithmetical, the algebraic, the geometrical, and that of analytical 
geometry. 

For instance, you can write 

2 PO 4 oC = 5, 

or differently, 32 + 4% = 5? 
That is merely conversation or “ ordinary common sense.” It is 
a simple statement of one fact, and does not implicate any other. 

Secondly, it is true that 
3? + 42 = 5?, 6? + 8? = 107, 92 + 122? = 152, 392 + 522 = 652, 

These are all separate facts, one may wish to mention their 
underlying similarity; it is a bore to speak about each one in 
turn, One expresses their “ algebraic relation” as a2 + b? = ¢?. 

90 

That is the language of philosophy. It MAKES NO 
PICTURE. This kind of statement applies to a lot of facts, but 
it does not grip hold of Heaven. 

Thirdly, when one studies Euclid one finds that the relation 
of a* + b? = c? applies to the ratio between the squares on the 
two sides of a right-angled triangle and the square on the hypo- 
tenuse. One still writes it a* + b? = c?, but one has begun to 
talk about form. Another property or quality of life has crept 
into one’s matter. Until then one had dealt only with numbers. 
But even this statement does not create form. The picture is 
given you in the proposition about the square on the hypotenuse 
of the right-angled triangle being equal to the sum of the 
squares on the two other sides. Statements in plane or descriptive 
geometry are like talk about art. They are a criticism of the 
form. The form is not created by them. 

Fourthly, we come to Descartian or “ analytical geometry.” 
Space is conceived as separated by two or by three axes (depend- 
ing on whether one is treating form in one or more planes). One 
refers points to these axes by a series of co-ordinates. Given the 
idiom, one is able actually to create. 

Thus, we learn that the equation (x — a? + (y-— bP =r 
governs the circle. It is the circle. It is not a particular circle, it 
is any circle and all circles. It is nothing that is not a circle. It 
is the circle free of space and time limits. It is the universal, 
existing in perfection, in freedom from space and time. Mathe- 
matics is dull ditchwater until one reaches analytics. But in 
analytics we come upon a new way of dealing with form. It is 
in this way that art handles life. The difference between art and 
analytical geometry is the difference of subject-matter only. Art 
is more interesting in proportion as life and the human conscious- 
ness are more complex and more interesting than forms and 
numbers. 

This statement does not interfere in the least with “ spon- 
taneity ” and “ intuition,” or with their function in art. I passed 
my last exam. in mathematics on sheer intuition. I saw where 
the line had to go, as clearly as I ever saw an image, or felt 
caelestem intus vigorem. 

The statements of “ analytics” are “lords” over fact. They 
are the thrones and dominations that rule over form and recur- 

¢ 

91 

rence. And in like manner are great works of art lords over fact, 
over race-long recurrent moods, and over to-morrow. 

Great works of art contain this fourth sort of equation. They 
cause form to come into being. By the “image ” I mean such 
an equation; not an equation of mathematics, not something 
about a, b, and c, having something to do with form, but about 
sea, cliffs, night, having something to do with mood. 

The image is not an idea. It is a radiant node or cluster; it 
is what I can, and must perforce, call a VORTEX, from which, 
and through which, and into which, ideas are constantly rushing. 
In decency one can only call it a VORTEX. And from this 
necessity came the name “ vorticism.” Nomina sunt conse- 
quentia rerum, and never was that statement of Aquinas more 
true than in the case of the vorticist movement. 

It is as true for the painting and the sculpture as it is for the 
poetry. Mr. Wadsworth and Mr. Lewis are not using words, 
they are using shape and colour. Mr. Brzeska and Mr. Epstein 
are using “ planes in relation,” they are dealing with a relation 
of planes different from the sort of relation of planes dealt with 
in geometry, hence what is called “ the need of organic forms in 
sculpture.” 

I trust I have made clear what I mean by an “ intensive art.” 
The vorticist movement is not a movement of mystification, 
though I dare say many people “ of good will”? have been con- 
siderably bewildered. 

The organization of forms is a much more energetic and 
creative action than the copying or imitating of light on a 
haystack. 

There is undoubtedly a language of form and colour. It is 
not a symbolical or allegorical language depending on certain 
meanings having been ascribed, in books, to certain signs and 
colours. 

Certain artists working in different media have managed to 
understand each other. They know the good and bad in each 
other’s work, which they could not know unless there were a 
common speech. 

As for the excellence of certain contemporary artists, all I can 
do is to stand up for my own beliefs. I believe that Mr. Wynd- 
ham Lewis is a very great master of design; that he has brought 

92 

into our art new units of design and new manners of organisa- 
tion. I think that his series “ Timon” is a great work. I think 
he is the most articulate expression of my own decade. If you 
ask me what his “Timon” means, I can reply by asking you 
what the old play means. For me his designs are a creation on 
the same motif. That motif is the fury of intelligence baffled and 
shut in by circumjacent stupidity. It is an emotional motif. Mr. 
Lewis’s painting is nearly always emotional. 

Mr. Wadsworth’s work gives me pleasure, sometimes like the 
pleasure I have received from Chinese and Japanese prints and 
painting; for example, I derive such pleasure from Mr. Wads- 
worth’s ‘‘ Khaki.” Sometimes his work gives me a pleasure 
which I can only compare to the pleasure I have in music, in 
music as it was in Mozart’s time. If an outsider wishes swiftly 
to understand this new work, he can do worse than approach it 
in the spirit wherein he approaches music. 

“Lewis is Bach.” No, it is incorrect to say that “ Lewis is 
Bach,” but our feeling is that certain works of Picasso and certain 
works of Lewis have in them something which is to painting 
what certain qualities of Bach are to music. Music was vorticist 
in the Bach-Mozart period, before it went off into romance and 
sentiment and description. A new vorticist music would come 
from a new computation of the mathematics of harmony, not 
from a mimetic representation of dead cats in a fog-horn, alias 
noise-tuners. 

Mr. Epstein is too well known to need presentation in this 
article. Mr. Brzeska’s sculpture is so generally recognized in all 
camps that one does not need to bring in a brief concerning it. 
Mr. Brzeska has defined sculptural feeling as “‘ the appreciation 
of masses in relation,” and sculptural ability as “ the defining of 
these masses by planes.’ There comes a time when one is more 
deeply moved by that form of intelligence which can present 
** masses in relation” than by that combination of patience and 
trickery which can make marble chains with free links and spin 
out bronze until it copies the feathers on a general’s hat. Mr. 
Etchells still remains more or less of a mystery. He is on his 
travels, whence he has sent back a few excellent drawings. It 
cannot be made too clear that the work of the vorticists and the 
“feeling of inner need” existed before the general noise about 

93 

vorticism. We worked separately, we found an underlying agree- 
ment, we decided to stand together. 
Ezra Pounp. 

NOTE. 

I am often asked whether there can be a long imagiste or vorticist poem 
The Japanese, who evolved the hokku, evolved also the Noh plays. In 
the best “ Noh” the whole play may consist of one image. I mean it is 
gathered about one image. Its unity consists in one image, enforced by 
movement and music. I see nothing against a long vorticist poem. 

On the other hand, no artist can possibly get a vortex into every poem 
or picture he does. One would like to do so, but it is beyond one. Certain 
things seem to demand metrical expression, or expression in a rhythm more 
agitated than the rhythms acceptable to prose, and these subjects, though 
they do not contain a vortex, may have some interest, an interest as 
“criticism of life” or of art. It is natural to express these things, and a 
vorticist or imagiste writer may be justified in presenting a certain amount 
of work which is not vorticism or imagisme, just as he might be justified 
in printing a purely didactic prose article. Unfinished sketches and draw- 
ings have a similar interest; they are trials and attempts toward a vortex. 

94 

XII 

In the following January and February I had further oppor- 
tunity for recording some of my thoughts on sculpture. I wrote 
rather bad temperedly in the New Age and was duly abused for 
it. There was one article on Epstein and another on Brzeska in 
a series of articles on the art of our decade. Mention of Brzeska 
is so mixed into the Epstein article that I print the two of them 
almost entire. 

I wrote* that the “nation,” or, rather, the art critics and 
editorial writers of the orthodox press, had been prostrating 
themselves before M. Rodin and offering their pans of praise. 
M. Rodin had made a very generous gift to England. To be 
sure, some of his sculpture seems made rather to please bankers 
with pink satin minds than to stir the lover of fine art; but even 
so, it was not for any loyal Englishman to mention the fact at 
this moment. And, moreover, M. Rodin has been the most 
striking figure in his generation of sculptors, and it is not proper 
to pluck at the beards of old men, especially when they are doing 
fine things. 

The beard which one wishes to pluck is the collective beard of 
the English curators who did not realize Rodin in his best period, 
and who have left this isLand without examples of his best work. 
It is, of course, too late to mend the matter with Rodin; we 
must, as the Times says, look into the future. It would be at 
least sensible to take some count of the present. Whatever may 
be the ultimate opinion concerning their respective genius, there 
can be no doubt whatsoever that the work now being done by 
Jacob Epstein is better than anything which is likely to be 
accomplished by Rodin at the age of one hundred and three. 

Yet I learn from fairly reliable sources that that sink of 
abomination, the ‘‘ Tate Gallery,” has not bought any work of 
Epstein’s (and its funds are, I believe, supposed to be used in 
acquiring representative modern art), but it has rushed further 
into the sloughs of stupidity by refusing, in an indirect manner 

* “ Affirmations,” III., New Age, Jan. 21, 1915. 

0 

perhaps, yet refusing, one of the best of Epstein’s works when 
it was offered as a gift. This is, to put it mildly, robbing the 
public.* 

It may be answered that the public don’t care. And the 
counter reply is that: the public don’t know. Moreover, there 
is no surety that the public of fifty years hence will be plunged 
in a stupidity exactly identical with the present public stupidity. 
And besides all this, it is ridiculous even for the defenders of 
stupidity to pretend that there is not already a considerable part 
of the public who are “ ready for Epstein.” 

The sculptors of England, with the exception of Epstein, are, 
or were until the beginning of the war, we suppose, engaged 
wholly in making gas-fittings and ornaments for electric light 
globes, etc. At least, we have little to prove the contrary. Of 
course, there’s a living in it. And if people still want what 
Dublin calls “ those beautiful productions displayed in the win- 
dows of our city art shops,” one can only commend the sound- 
ness of certain commercial instincts. God forbid that we should 
interfere with any man’s honest attempt to earn his sustenance. 
At the same time, there is a slender but, nevertheless, determined 
cult of the “creative element.” A few, we say regretfully “a 
few,” of us believe in the mobility of thought. We believe that 
human dignity consists very largely in humanity’s ability to 
invent. One is, to put it mildly, weary with sculpture which 
consists of large, identical, allegorical ladies in night-gowns hold- 
ing up symbols of Empire or Commerce or Righteousness, and 
bearing each one a different name, like ‘“ Manchester” or 
“ Pittsburg,” or “ Justitia.’ One can no longer feel that they 
are a full expression of what Kandinsky calls the ‘‘ inner need.” 
They are perhaps “ classic ornament,” and if one did not dis- 
approve of having decorative columns made by the gross, one 
might irreverently suggest that such statues be made by the 
gross, with detachable labels. Unfortunately, one does not believe 
in having even columns made by the gross; one has the tradition 
that columns should be hand-cut and signed. It is only so that 
one can have really fine buildings. One’s loftiest wish is that the 
mimetic sculptors should be set to making columns, and that the 

*I do not accuse Mr. Aitkin, I accuse the parties responsible, whatever 
may be their exquisite anonymity. 

96 

making of fine columns should be held in greater honour than 
the making of silly academy sculpture. The limits of the con- 
vention of columns and capitals might perhaps so press upon the 
mimetic sculptors as to result in something approaching intensity. 

Of course, you will never awaken a general or popular art 
sense so long as you rely solely on the pretty, that is, the “ caress- 
able.” We all of us like the caressable, but we most of us in the 
long run prefer the woman to the statue. That is the romance 
of Galatea. We prefer—if it is a contest in caressabilities—we 
prefer the figure in silk on the stairs to the “ Victory ” aloft on 
her pedestal-prow. We know that the “ Victory ” will be there 
whenever we want her, and that the young lady in silk will pass 
on to the Salon Carré, and thence on toward the unknown and 
unfindable. That is the trouble with the caressable in art. The 
caressable is always a substitute. 

Ideals of the caressable vary. In Persia, the Persia of its 
romances, the crown of beauty, male or female. goes to him or 
her whose buttocks have the largest dimensions. And we all 
remember the Hindoo who justified his desire for fatness with 
the phrase “ same money, more wife.” 

Ideals change, even the ideals of the caressable are known to 
have altered. Note, for example, the change in the ballet and in 
“indecent ”’ illustrations. Twenty years ago, the ideal was one 
with large hips and bosom. To-day the ideal is more “ svelte.” 
The heavier types appear only in very “low” papers. In fact, 
the modern ideal approaches more nearly to the “‘ Greek type,” 
which is, as Pater says, disappointing “to all save the highest 
culture.” The development of Greek sculpture is simple; it 
moves steadily towards the caressable. One may even say that 
people very often set up Greek art as an ideal because they are 
incapable of understanding any other. 

The weakness of the caressable work of art, of the work of art 
which depends upon the caressability of the subject, is, incident- 
ally, that its stimulativeness diminishes as it becomes more fami- 
liar. The work which depends upon an arrangement of forms 
becomes more interesting with familiarity in proportion as its 
forms are well organized. That is to say, the ideal vorticist is not 
the man of delicate incapabilities, who, being unable to get any- 
thing from life, finds himself reduced to taking a substitute in art. 

o7 

Our respect is not for the subject-matter, but for the creative 
power of the artist; for that which he is capable of adding to his 
subject from himself; or, in fact, his capability to dispense with 
external subjects altogether, to create from himself or from ele- 
ments, We hold that life has its own satisfactions, and that 
after a man has lived life up to the hilt, he should still have 
sufficient energy to go on to the satisfactions of art, which are 
different from the satisfactions of life. I will not say loftily : they 
are beyond it. The satisfactions of art differ from the satisfac- 
tions of life as the satisfactions of seeing differ from the satisfac- 
tions of hearing. There is no need to dispense with either. The 
artist who has no “ ideas about art,” like the man who has no 
ideas about life, is a dull dog. 

The result of the attempt to mix the satisfactions of art and 
life is, naturally, muddle. There is downright bad art where the 
satisfactions offered or suggested are solely the satisfactions of 
life; for example, the drawings in salacious “comics” or the 
domesticities of “‘ Pear’s Annual ”—that Mecca of British Acad- 
emicians. There is art, often very fine art, of mixed appeal: for 
example, in Rodin’s “ La Vieille Heaulmiére,” the “‘ beauty ” of 
the work depends in no appreciable degree on the subject, which 
is “hideous.” The “ beauty ” is from Rodin. It is in the com- 
position, as I remember it; in silhouettes. The “ interest ”’ is, 
largely, a life interest or a sentimental interest. It is a pathos for 
lost youth, etc., intensified by a title reminiscent of Villon. With- 
out the title from Villon the bronze loses much of its force. 

If you measure art by its emotional effect scarcely anyone will 
deny that Villon’s poem is more efficient than the statue. It calls 
up an image no less vivid. And it is easier to carry about in 
one’s pocket, or in one’s memory, for that matter. The words 
are, in fact, nearly unforgettable, while it is very hard to con- 
serve more than a blurr or general impression of the bronze 
figure. Of course there is no denying that certain figures, more 
or less caressable, may have an artistic appeal based on “ pure 
form”; on their composition and symmetry and balance, ete. 
Those who appreciate them on these grounds are nearer art than 
those who do not. 

So far as I am concerned, Jacob Epstein was the first person 
who came talking about “form, not the form of anything.” It 

98 

may have been Mr. T. E. Hulme, quoting Epstein. I don’t 
know that it matters much who said it first; he may have been 
a theorist with no more than a sort of scientific gift for discovery. 
He may have been a great sculptor capable of acting out his 
belief. However that may be, the acceptable doctrine of my 
generation is that : 

“ Sculptural feeling is the appreciation of masses in relation. 

“ Sculptural ability is the defining of these masses by planes.” 
—(Gaudier-Brzeska, in Blast.) 

It is in accordance with this belief that one honours Epstein, 
apart entirely from one’s sympathy or unsympathy with any 
particular work. 

“Cynthia prima fuit?”’ what does it matter? Epstein is a 
“slow worker,” perhaps. His mind works with the deliberation 
of the chisel driving through stone, perhaps. The work is con- 
ceived from the beginning, slow stroke by slow stroke, like some 
prehistoric, age-long upheaval in natural things, driven by 
natural forces . . . full of certitude and implacable and un- 
swerving . . . perhaps. And perhaps these are only phrases 
and approximations and rhetoric. They are the sort of phrases 
that arise in the literary mind in the presence of Epstein’s sculp- 
ture. At any rate we do not say “ Here is a man who ought to 
have been writing a comedy of manners.” We feel convinced 
that it is a man fit for his job. 

Let me be quite definite about what I mean by the work of 
Jacob Epstein—the work as I know it consists of : 
“The Strand Statues” (which are very early). 

The Wilde Memorial (which is over-ornate, and which one, on 
the whole, rather dislikes). 

A scrawny bronze head, more or less early renaissance, quite fine, 
and which Mr. Epstein will reprove me for praising. He 
always reproves you for liking the “ work before last.” 

Head of a boy, in bright copper, or some such substance. That 
is to say, the top and back are burnished. 

Head of an infant (quite representational). 
The Sun-God. 

99 

Two sets of pigeons. The heavier and closer is the better. 
The two flenites, the finest work of the lot. 

A bird preening itself (graceful). 

The rock-drill.* 

And in this dozen works there are three or four separate dona- 
tions. One wonders how many great artists have been as tem- 
perate; how many have waited for such a degree of certitude 
before they ventured to encumber the earth with “ yet another 
work of art.” Surely there are two types of mind which the 
mediocre world hates most. There is this mind of the slow gesta- 
tion, whose absoluteness terrifies “the man in the street.” 
Roughly speaking, it is the neglected type of Buonarroti. There 
is the type “ Leonardo,” that follows the lightning for model, 
that strikes now here, now there with bewildering rapidity, and 
with a certitude of its own. The first type is escapable, or at 
least, temporarily evadable. You cannot contradict the man’s 
affirmations, but you can at least leave him alone in his corner. 
You can kill time and avoid looking things in the face. This 
type is, let us say, the less alarming. The second type is, I 
suppose, the most hated; that is to say, the most feared. You 
never know where the man will turn up. You never know what 
he will do next, and, for that matter, when he won’t do some- 
thing or other better than you can, or pierce your belovédest 
delusion. The first type is crowned in due course, the second 
type, never till death. After Leonardo is dead professors can 
codify his results. They can produce a static dogma and return 
in peace to their slumbers. 

I beg you may pardon digressions, but is it or is it not 
ludicrous that “'The Sun-God ” (and two other pieces which I 
have not seen) should be pawned, the whole lot, for some £60? 
And that six of the other works are still on the sculptor’s hands? 
And this is not due to the war. It was so before this war was 
heard of. 

One looks out upon American collectors buying autograph 
MSS. of William Morris, faked Rembrandts and faked Van- 

* This is, of course, not a full catalogue of Epstein’s work, merely the few 
pieces on which I based my criticism. 

100 

dykes. One looks out on a plutocracy and upon the remains of 
an aristocracy who ought to know by this time that keeping up 
the arts means keeping up living artists; that no age can be a 
great age which does not find its own genius. One sees buildings 
of a consummate silliness; buildings which are beautiful before 
they are finished, enchanting when they consist only of founda- 
tions and of a few great scaffoldings and cranes towering into the 
day or into the half-darkness. When they are finished they are a 
mass of curley-cues and “ futile adornments.” Because ? 

Because neither America nor England cares enough to elevate 
great men to control; because there is no office for the propaga- 
tion of form; because there is no power to set Epstein, for 
example, where he should be, to wit, in some place where his 
work would be so prominent that people, and even British archi- 
tects, would be forced to think about form. Of course, some of 
them do think about form; and then, after they have constructed 
a fine shape, go gaga with ornaments. 

I do not mean by this that I would make Epstein an inspector 
of buildings, or that I would set him to supervise architects’ 
plans. The two arts are different, though they both deal with 
three dimensional form. I mean simply that a contemplation of 
Epstein’s work would instil a sense of form in the beholder. That 
is, perhaps, the highest thing one can say of a sculptor. 

All this is very secondary and literary and sociological. There 
could be no such harangue among artists. One sees the work; 
one knows; or, even, one feels. 

Trying to find some praise that shall be exact and technical, 
some few of us, not sculptors, but admirers, would turn to 
Brzeska’s “‘ Vortex,” which will be undoubtedly the first text- 
book of sculpture in many academies before our generation has 
passed from this earth. Accepting his terminology we would 
say: Epstein has worked with the sphere, and with the cylinder. 
He has had “‘ form-understanding ”’; he has not fallen into the 
abyss, into the decadence of all sculpture which is “‘ the admira- 
tion of self.” 

Why should we try to pin labels on “‘ what he has expressed”? 
Is there any profit in saying that his form-organisations express 
facts which were perhaps more violently true for the south-sea 
islander of three thousand years ago than for us, who are 

101 

moderns? That sort of talk is mostly nonsense. It is the artist’s 
job to express what is “ true for himself.” In such measure as 
he does this he is a good artist, and, in such measure as he him- 
self exists, a great one. 

As for “ expressing the age,” surely there are five thousand 
sculptors all busy expressing the inanities, the prettinesses, the 
sillinesses—the Gosses and Tademas, the Mayfairs and Hamp- 
steads of the age. Of course the age is “ not so bad as all that.” 
But the man who tries to express his age, instead of expressing 
himself, is doomed to destruction. 

But this, also, is a side track. I should not spend my lines in 
answering carpings. I should pile my objectives upon Epstein, 
or, better still, I should ask my opponents to argue, not with me, 
but to imagine themselves trying to argue with one of the 
Flenites, or with the energies of his “ Sun-God.” They'd “ teach 
you to” talk about “ expressing your age,” and being the com- 
munal trumpet. 

The test of a man is not the phrases of his critics; the test lies 
in the work, in its “ certitude.”” What answer is to be made to 
the “‘ Flenites ”? With what sophistry will you be able to escape 
their assertion ? 

AFFIRMATIONS * 
GAUDIER-BRZESKA 

Ir may suit some of my friends to go about with their young 
noses pointing skyward, decrying the age and comparing us un- 
favourably to the dead men of Hellas or of Hesperian Italy. And 
the elders of my acquaintance may wander in the half-lights 
complaining that— 

Queens have died young and fair. 

But I, for one, have no intention of decreasing my enjoyment 
of this vale of tears by under-estimating my own generation. The 
uncertainty regarding the number of lives allowed one is too 
great. Neither am I so jealous of other men’s reputations that I 
must wait until they are dead before I will praise them. 

Having written this, I turn to “Il Cortegiano,” “that 

* New Age, February 4th, 1915. 

102 

great book of courtesies” which I have never yet been able to 
read from cover to cover. I find the Italian contemporaries of 
your King Henry VII already wrangling over feminism and 
supermen, over democracies and optimates and groups and 
herds: abstract topics which lead in the end to Polonius, They 
speak of the “ white man’s burden ” and of the rational explan- 
ation of myths, and they talk about “the light of Christian 
truth ” (in that phrase precisely). 

The discourse is perhaps more readable when Cardinal 
Bibiena questions whether or no a perfect gentleman should 
carry a joke to the point of stealing a countryman’s capons. The 
prose is musical and drowsy, so that if you read the Italian side 
of the page you feel no need of Paul Fort. (I am turning aside 
from the very reverent bilingual version of 1727.) The periods 
are perhaps more musical than the strophes of the modern prose 
poems. One reads on aloud until one’s voice is tired, and finds 
one has taken in nothing. Or perhaps you awake at a paragraph 
which says :— 

“Alexander the Great . . . built Alexandria in Egypt . . 
Bucephalia, etc. And he had Thoughts also of reducing Mount 
Athos into the Shape of a Man. To raise on his left Hand a 
most ample City, and in his right to dig a large Bason, in which 
he designed to make a Conflux of all the Rivers, which flow’d 
from the Mountain, and from thence tumble them into the Sea; 
a Project truly noble, and worthy of the Great Alexander.” 

Perhaps, even, you persevere to the final discourse of Bembo 
on the nature of love and beauty, with its slightly stagey remin- 
iscence of the Socratic trance. It is here that he calls beauty the 
sign manifest and insignia of the past victories of the soul. But 
for all their eloquence, for all the cradling cadences of the Italian 
speech, I find nothing to prove that the conversation at Urbino 
was any better than that which I have heard in dingy studios or 
in restaurants about Soho. I feel that Urbino was charming, 
that the scene is worthy of Veronese; and especially I feel 
that no modern ambassador or court functionary could write 
half so fine a book as “Il Cortegiano.” This proves nothing 
more nor less than that good talk and wide interest have aban- 
doned court circles and taken up their abode in the studios, in 
quadriviis et angiportis. 

103 

Et in quadriviis et angiportis we have new topics, new ardours. 
We have lost the idolatry for the Greek which was one of the 
main forces of the Renaissance. We have kept, I believe, a 
respect for what was strong in the Greek, for what was sane in 
the Roman. We have other standards, we have gone on with 
the intentions of Pico, to China and Egypt. 

The man among my friends who is loudest in his sighs for 
Urbino, and for lost beauty in general, has the habit of abusing 
modern art for its “ want of culture.” As a matter of fact, it is 
chiefly the impressionists he is intent on abusing, but like most 
folk of his generation, he “lumps the whole lot together.” He 
says: They had no traditions and no education, and therefore 
they created an art that needed no introductory knowledge. 
This means that he separates the “‘ impressionist ” painters from 
the impressionist writers, but let that pass. Let us say that Manet 
and Monet and Renoir had no education; that the tradition of 
Crivelli’s symbols meant less to them than the rendering of light 
and shadow. I shall not stop admiring their paintings. I shall 
not, for any argument whatsoever, cease to admire the work of 
minds creative and inventive in whatsoever form it may come 
or may have come. Nor, on the other hand, will I ever be 
brought to consider futurism as anything but gross cowardice. 
It may be that Italy was so sick that no other medicine could 
avail, but for any man, not a modern Italian, to shirk com- 
parison with the best work of the past is gross cowardice. The 
Italian may shirk if he likes, but he will remain a parochial 
celebrity even so. 

Urbino was charming for the contemporaries of Count Bal- 
dassar Castiglione. Most of Urbino’s topics, not all, thank 
heaven, have been relegated to the ‘“‘ New Statesman.” The 
Lord Michael Montaigne no longer keeps a conceited, wise note- 
book in private. “ We” keep our journals in public print, and 
when we go wrong or make a side-slip, we know it, we “ hear 
of it,” we receive intimations. I don’t know that it matters. 
I am not even sure that we have lost the dignity of letters 
thereby, though we have lost the quiet security. 

To return to the symboliste friend, I am not going to bother 
arguing the case for deceased impressionists; his phrase was that 
all “ modern art” was the art of the ignorant; of the people who 

104 

despised tradition not because they knew enough to know how 
far tradition might or might not be despicable, but who despised 
it without knowing what it was. I shall let other modern move- 
ments shift for themselves. But to bring such a charge against a 
movement having for one of its integral members Gaudier- 
Brzeska, is arrant nonsense. 

Here is a man as well furnished with catalogued facts as a 
German professor, of the old type, before the war-school; a man 
who knows the cities of Europe, and who knows not merely the 
sculpture out of Reinach’s Apollo but who can talk and think 
in the terms of world-sculpture and who is for ever letting out 
odd packets of knowledge about primitive African tribes or about 
Babylonia and Assyria, substantiated by quotations from the 
bulkiest authors, and who, moreover, carries this pack without 
pedantry and unbeknown to all save a few intimates. 

Take, if you like, four typical vorticists: there is Brzeska, and 
another man digging about in recondite early woodcuts or in 
studies of Chinese painting, and another man mad about Korin, 
and another man whom even The Spectator has referred to as 
“learned.” If these men set out to “ produce horrors,” obviously 
it is not from ignorance or from lack of respect for tradition. 
No. The sum of their so-called revolt is that they refuse to 
recognize parochial borders to the artistic tradition. That they 
think it not enough to be the best painter in Chelsea, S.W., or 
to excel all the past artists of Fulham. “ Speak of perfection, 
my songs, and you will find yourselves exceedingly disliked.” 
Vorticism refuses to discard any part of the tradition merely 
because it is a difficult bogey; because it is difficult perhaps to 
be as good a designer as Diirer, and is consequently more con- 
venient to pretend that “the element of design is not so 
important.” 

There is another shibboleth of the artistic-slop crowd. It is 
the old cry about intellect being inartistic, or about art being 
“above,” saving the word, “ above” intellect. Art comes from 
intellect stirred by will, impulse, emotion, but art is emphatically 
not any of these others deprived of intellect, and out drunk on 
its “lone, saying it is the ‘‘ that which is beyond the intelligence.” 

There are, as often has been said, two sorts of artists: the 
artist who moves through his art, to whom it is truly a 

105 

“medium ” or a means of expression; and, secondly, there is the 
mediumistic artist, the one who can only exist in his art, who is 
passive to impulse, who approaches more or less nearly to the 
“ sensitive,” or to the somnambulistic “ medium.” The faculty of 
this second type is most useful as a part of the complete artist’s 
equipment. And I do not hesitate to call Brzeska “ complete 
artist.” In him there is sculptural ability. That goes without 
saying. And there is “ equipment ” in the sense of wide know- 
ledge of his art and of things outside it, and there is intellect. 
There is the correlating faculty, an ability to “ arrange in order ” 
not only the planes and volumes which are peculiarly of his art, 
but an ability for historical synthesis, an ability for bringing 
order into things apparently remote from the technique of his 
art. 

In my paper on Epstein I referred to Brzeska’s “ Vortex ” in 
Blast. It is not merely a remarkable document from a man 
whom people remember a twelve-month before as speaking Eng- 
lish with difficulty, it is a remarkable arrangement of thought. 
I confess that I read it two or three times with nothing but a 
gaiety and exhilaration arising from the author’s vigour of 
speech. 

“They elevated the sphere in a splendid squatness and created 
the Horizontal. 

“From Sargon to Amir-nasir-pal men built man-headed bulls 
in horizontal flight-walk. Men flayed their captives alive and 
erected howling lions: The Elongated Horizontal Sphere But- 
tressed on Four Columns, and their kingdoms disappeared.” 

I read that passage many times for the sake of its oratorical 
properties without bothering much for the meaning. Then a 
friend who detests vorticism but who “ has to admire Gaudier- 
Brzeska,” said rather reluctantly : ““ He has put the whole history 
of sculpture in three pages.” It is quite true. He has sum- 
marised the whole history of sculpture. I said he had the know- 
ledge of a German professor, but this faculty for synthesis is most 
untedescan. 

The Paleolithic vortex, man intent upon animals. The Hamite 
vortex, Egypt, man in fear of the gods. The derivative Greek. 
The Semitic Vortex, lust of war. Roman and later decadence, 
Western sculpture, each impulse with corresponding effects on 

106 

form. In like manner he analyses the Chinese and Mexican 
and Oceanic forms. The sphere, the vertical, the horizontal, the 
cylinder and the pointed cone; and then the modern movement. 

Naturally this means nothing to anyone who has not thought 
about sculpture; to anyone who has not tried to think why the 
official sculpture is so deadly uninteresting. 

“ Sculptural energy is the mountain.” 

“Sculptural feeling is the appreciation of masses in relation.” 

“Sculptural ability is the defining of these masses by planes.” 

I repeat what I said before; this Vortex Gaudier-Brzeska, 
which is the last three pages of Blast (the first number), will 
become the text-book in all academies of sculpture before our 
generation has passed from the earth. If Blast itself were no 
more than an eccentrically printed volume issued by a half a 
dozen aimless young men, then you could afford to neglect it. 
Blast has not been neglected. Blast has been greatly reviled; that 
is natural. Michael Agnolo fled from Pisa to escape the daggers 
of the artists who feared his competition. Blast has behind it 
some of the best brains in England, a set of artists who know 
quite well what they want. It is therefore significant. The large 
type and the flaring cover are merely bright plumage. They are 
the gay petals which lure. 

We have again arrived at an age when men can consider a 
statue as a statue. The hard stone is not the live coney. Its 
beauty cannot be the same beauty* 

Art is a matter of capitals. I dare say there are still people, 
even in London, who have not arisen to the charm of the 
Egyptian and Assyrian galleries of the British Museum. If our 
detractors are going to talk about art in terms of “ Pears Soap’s 
Annual,” and of the Royal Academy, one dismisses the matter. 
If they are men of goodwill, considering art in the terms of 
the world’s masterwork, then we say simply: What is the charm 
in Assurbanipal’s hunting? What is the charm in Isis with the 
young Horus between her knees and the green stone wings 
drawn tight about them? What is the zsthetic-dynamic basis 
for our enjoyment of these various periods? What are the means 

* This passage was not italicized in the first printing of this article. 

107 

at the artist’s disposal? What quality have the bronzes of 
Shang? ; 

And when they have answered these questions there is no 
longer any quarrel between us. There are questions of taste and 
of preference, but no dispute about art. So that we find the 
“men of traditions ” in agreement or in sympathy. We find the 
men of no traditions, or of provincial traditions, against us. We 
find the unthinking against us. We find the men whose minds 
have petrified at forty, or at fifty, or at twenty, most resolutely 
against us. 

This petrifaction of the mind is one of the most curious pheno- 
mena that I have found in England. I am far from believing 
it to be peculiarly or exclusively English, but I have lived mostly 
in England since I began to take note of it. Before that I 
remember an American lawyer, a man of thirty, who had had 
typhoid and a long nervous illness. He was complaining that 
his mind “no longer took in things.” It had lost its ability to 
open and grasp. He was fighting against this debility. In his 
case it was a matter of strength. With the second type it is, 
perhaps, a matter of will. This second type I have noticed 
mostly in England, but I think it would be the same from 
Portugal to Siberia. This type of mind shuts, at eighteen, or at 
five and twenty, or at thirty or forty. The age of the closure 
varies but the effect is the same. You find a man one week 
young, interested, active, following your thought with his 
thought, parrying and countering, so that the thought you have 
between you is more alive than the thought you may have apart. 
And the next week (it is almost as sudden as that) he is senile. 
He is anchored to a dozen set phrases. He will deny a new 
thought about art. He will deny the potentialities of a new 
scientific discovery, without weighing either. You look sadly 
back over the gulf, as Ut Napishtim looked back at the shades 
of the dead, the live man is no longer with you. And then, like 
as not, some further process sets in. It is the sadisme of the 
intellect, it is blight of Tertullian. The man becomes not only a . 
detester but a persecutor of living and unfolding ideas. He not 
only refuses them, but he wishes to prevent you from having 
them. He has gone from Elysium into the basso inferno. The 
speed of light, the absolute power of the planes in Egyptian 

108 

sculpture have no charm left for such men, And the living move 
on without them. 

So much for opponents. As for Brzeska’s work itself: what 
more can I say of it? That I like it; that I believe in it; that 
I have lived with it; that its ‘‘ definition of masses ” seems to me 
expressive of emotional and intellectual forces; that I have 
bought such fragments as my limited means afford; that a man 
with Brzeska’s skill could easily have a house in Park Lane and 
a seat in the Academy if he chose to make the pretty-pretties 
which the pink-satined bourgeosie desire. (The sequence is easy : 
you make for the market, you become rich; being rich, you are 
irresistible, honours are showered upon you.) 

And it happens, this sculptor, instead of making pretty-pretties, 
chooses to make works of art. There are always two parties in 
“civilization.” There is the party which believes that the 
stability of property is the end and the all. There are those who 
believe that the aim of civilization is to keep alive the creative, 
the intellectually-inventive-creative spirit and ability in man— 
and that a reasonable stability of property may be perhaps one 
of the many means to this end, or that it may not be detrimental, 
or even that it doesn’t much matter. Because of this indiffer- 
ence to the stability of life and property on the part of one 
segment, this entire party is branded anarchic, or incendiary. 
‘“* New art” is thought dangerous, and the dangerous is branded 
as “‘ugly.”” Those who fear the new art also hate it. 

I had, for a long time, a “most hideous” Brzeska statue 
where the morning light came on it as it woke me, and because 
of this shifting light plane after plane, outline after expressive 
outline was given me day after day, emphasised, taken apart from 
the rest. This was a statue which I had chosen when I had but 
glanced at it and not fully taken it in. I cannot impose further 
tests. The beauty was first there in the mass. It was secondly 
there in the detail, which I now know thoroughly, and not 
merely as one knows a thing seen in the hurry of some exhibition. 
_A man having this ability to make beauty which endures months 
of study and which does not decrease as you learn it more inti- 
mately, is what we call a great artist. 

You, gracious reader, may be a charming woman who only 
like pretty men, a statue of a primitive man holding a rabbit 

109 

may not be a matter of interest to you, but that is no reason for 
abusing the artist. Or, on the other hand, ferocious and in- 
tolerant reader, you may be a vigorous male, who likes nothing 
save pretty women, and who despises feminine opinions about 
the arts. In either case you are quite right in saying that you 
dislike the new sculpture, you are being no more than honest. 
But there is no cause for calling it unenjoyable or even ugly, if 
you do you are but stupid, you hate the labour of beginning to 
understand a new form. As for me, I have no objection to “ art 
as an Aphrodisiac,” but there are other possible motifs. 

And the “ new form.” What is it? It is what we have said. 
It is an arrangement of masses in relation. It is not an empty 
copy of empty Roman allegories that are themselves copies of 
copies. It is not a mimicry of external life. It is energy cut into 
stone, making the stone expressive in its fit and particular 
manner. It has regard to the stone. It is not something suitable 
for plaster or bronze, transferred to stone by machines and 
underlings. It regards the nature of the medium, of both the 
tools and the matter. These are its conventions and limits. 

And if the Germans succeed in damaging Gaudier-Brzeska 
they will have done more harm to art than they have by the 
destruction of Rheims Cathedral, for a building once made and 
recorded can, with some care, be remade, but the uncreated 
forms of a man of genius cannot be set forth by another. 

It may not be out of place to quote still another article, 
“ Analysis of the Decade,” not merely because Brzeska is men- 
tioned in it, but because I think any consideration of vorticist 
art is incomplete if it does not make some mention of a sense of 
awakening and of our belief in the present. 

‘* Will and consciousness are our Vortex,” and an integral part 
of that consciousness is the unwavering feeling that we live in 
a time as active and as significant as the Cinquecento. We feel 
this ingress and we are full of the will for its expression. 

110 

AFFIRMATIONS* 
ANALYSIS OF THIS DECADE 

Tue Renaissance is a convenient stalking-horse for all young 
men with ideas. You can prove anything you like by the Renais- 
sance; yet, for all that, there seems to be something in the study 
of the quattrocento which communicates vigour to the student 
of it, especially to such scholars as have considered the whole 
age, the composite life of the age, in contradistinction to those 
who have sentimentalized over its xsthetics. Burckhardt writes 
in German with the verve of the best French heavy prose. 
Villari’s Italian is thoroughly Germanized; he writes always with 
an eye on modern national development for Italy, he has pre- 
sumably an atrocious taste in pictures, he is out of sympathy 
with many of the Renaissance enthusiasms, and yet manages to 
be interesting and most shrewd in his critical estimates, even of 
things he dislikes (e.g., though he speaks with reverence of 
Raphael, he sees quite clearly the inferiority of Renaissance 
painting to the painting which went before, and attributes it to 
the right lack of energy). 

Whatever one’s party, the Renaissance is perhaps the only 
period in history that can be of much use to one—for the 
adducing of pious examples, and for showing “ horrible results.” 
It may be an hallucination, but one seems able to find modern 
civilization in its simple elements in the Renaissance. ‘The 
motive ideas were not then confused and mingled into so many 
fine shades and combinations one with the other. 

Never was the life of arts so obviously and conspicuously 
intermingled with the life of power. Rightly or wrongly, it is 
looked back to as a sort of golden age for the arts and for the 
litterati, and I suppose no student, however imperfect his equip- 
ment, can ever quite rest until he has made his own analysis, or 
written out his own book or essay. I shall not do that here; I 
shall only draw up a brief table of forces : first, those which seem 
to me to have been the effective propaganda of the Renaissance; 

* New Age, February 11th, 1915. 
111 

secondly, those which seem to me the acting ideas of this decade 
—not that they are exclusively of this decade, but it seems that 
they have, in this decade, come in a curious way into focus, and 
have become at least in some degree operative. I shal] identify 
the motive ideas in each case with the men who may, roughly, 
be considered as their incarnations or exponents. 

The Renaissance, as you have all read forty times, was 
“caused ” by the invention of printing and the consequently in- 
creased rapidity in the multiplication of books, by the fall of 
Constantinople (which happened after the Renaissance was 
somewhat well under way, granting that it—the Renaissance— 
had not been more or less under way since the fall of Rome). 
Let us say, however, that various causes worked together and 
caused, or assisted or accelerated, a complex result. The fall of 
Constantinople made necessary new trade routes, drove Colum- 
bus into the West Indies, sent Crisolora to Florence with a 
knowledge of Greek, and Filelfo to Milan with a bad temper. 
And these things synchronized with “ the revival of classicism,” 
and just preceded the shaping up of medizval Europe into more 
or less the modern “ great States.” 

This “‘ revival of classicism,” a very vague phrase, is analysable, 
at the start, into a few very different men, and each one had 
a very definite propaganda. 

Ficino was seized in his youth by Cosimo dei Medici and set 
to work translating a Greek that was in spirit anything but 
“classic.” That is to say, you had, ultimately, a “ Platonic ” 
academy messing up Christian and Pagan mysticism, allegory, 
occultism, demonology, Trismegistus, Psellus, Porphyry, into a 
most eloquent and exciting and exhilarating hotch-potch, which 
“did for” the medizval fear of the dies ire and for human 
abasement generally. Ficino himself writes of Hermes Trisme- 
gistus in a New Testament Latin, and arranges his chronology 
by co-dating Hermes’ great-grandfather with Moses. 

Somewhat later Pico writes his “‘De Dignitate”’ in endless 
periods, among which is one so eloquent that it is being con- 
tinually quoted. 

Pico della Mirandola based his own propaganda on what we 
should call a very simple and obvious proposition. He claimed 
that science and knowledge generally were not, or, at least, 

bh 

should not, or need not be, grounded solely and exclusively on 
the knowledge of the Greeks and Romans. This created horrible 
scandal. People had indeed heard of Arabs and Hebrews, but 
this scoundrelly Pico insisted that there were still other languages 
and unexplored traditions. It was very inconvenient to hear 
that one was not omniscient. It still is. It was equally bad 
when Erasmus wanted scholars to begin using accent-marks over 
Greek letters. I sympathize with the scholars who objected to 
being bothered with “ Tittle-tattles.” 

The finest force of the age, I think, came early—came from 
Lorenzo Valla. He had a great passion for exactness, and he 
valued the Roman vortex. By philology, by the ‘ harmless ” 
study of language, he dissipated the donation of Constantine. 
The revival of Roman Law, while not his private act, was made 
possible or accelerated by him. His dictum that eloquence and 
dialectic were one—i.e., that good sense is the backbone of 
eloquence—is still worth considering. I suppose anyone will now 
admit it in theory. Also, he taught the world once more how to 
write Latin, which was perhaps valuable. Seeing that they were 
drawing much of their thought from Latin sources, a lively 
familiarity with that tongue could not but clarify their im- 
pressions. 

At this time, also, observation came back into vogue, stimu- 
lated, some say, by a reading of classics. The thing that mattered 
was a revival of the sense of realism: the substitution of Homer 
for Virgil; the attitude of Odysseus for that of the snivelling 
/Eneas (who was probably not so bad as Virgil makes out). 

As Valla had come to exactness, it was possible for Machia- 
velli to write with clarity. I do not wish to become entoiled in 
the political phases save in so far as they are inextricably bound 
in with literature. Tyranny, democracy, etc., these things were, 
in the quattrocento and cinquecento, debatable ideas, transient 
facts. None of them could be taken for granted. In Machia- 
velli’s prose we have a realism born perhaps from Valla’s exact- 
ness and the realism of Homer, both coming to Machiavelli 
indirectly. 

And in the midst of these awakenings Italy went to rot, 
destroyed by rhetoric, destroyed by the periodic sentence and 
by the flowing paragraph, as the Roman Empire had been 

iS 

destroyed before her. For when words cease to cling close to 
things, kingdoms fall, empires wane and diminish. Rome went 
because it was no longer the fashion to hit the nail on the head. 
They desired orators. And, curiously enough, in the mid- 
Renaissance, rhetoric and floridity were drawn out of the very 
Greek and Latin revival that had freed the world from mediz- 
valism and Aquinas. 

Quintilian “did for” the direct sentence. And the Greek 
language was made an excuse for more adjectives. I know no 
place where this can be more readily seen than in the Hymns 
to the Gods appended to Divus’ translation of the Odyssey into 
Latin. The attempt to reproduce Greek by Latin produced a 
new dialect that was never spoken and had never before been 
read. The rhetoric got into painting. The habit of having no 
definite conviction save that it was glorious to reflect life in a 
given determined costume or decoration “ did for ” the painters. 

Our thought jumps from the Renaissance to the present 
because it is only recently that men have begun to combat the 
Renaissance. I do not mean that they merely react against it; 
that was done in the hideous and deadening counter-reforma- 
tion; but we have begun deliberately to try to free ourselves 
from the Renaissance shackles, as the Renaissance freed itself 
from the Middle Ages. 

We may regard all the intervening movements as revivals of 
the Renaissance or as continuations of special phases: for in- 
stance, the various forms of “ classicism” getting “colder and 
colder,” or more and more florid. Rousseau was almost born 
out of his due time, and Napoleon is but an exaggerated con- 
dottiero to the very detail of the Roman robe in which he sur- 
mounts the column Vendéme. It would be quite possible to 
sustain the thesis that we are still a continuation of certain 
Renaissance phases, that we still follow one or two dicta of Pico 
or Valla. But we have in so many ways made definite a diverg- 
ence (not a volte-face, because we are scarcely returning to pious 
Catholicism or to limited medizvalism). It is easier, it is clearer, 
to call this age a new focus. By focus I do not in the least 
mean that the forces focussed are in themselves new inventions. 
I mean that they begin to act. I mean, also, that the results 
are decidedly different from the results of Renaissance theory 

114 

and esthetics. It is not long since Springer wrote: “ Durch 
Raffael ist das Madonnenideal Fleisch geworden.” We remove 
ourselves from the state of mind of Herr Springer. 

A certain number of fairly simple and now obvious ideas 
moved the Renaissance; their ramifications and interactions are 
still a force with the people. A certain number of simple and 
obvious ideas running together and interacting, are making a 
new, and to many a most obnoxious, art. I need scarcely say 
that there were many people to whom the art of the quattro- 
cento and the paganism of the Renaissance seemed equally 
damnnable, unimportant, obnoxious. It was ‘“ Rome or 
Geneva.” I shall give these simple ideas of this decade as 
directly as I have given the ideas which seem to me to be the 
motifs of the Renaissance. I shall give the names of men who 
embody them. I shall make some few explanations and no 
apology whatsoever. 

Ford Hueffer, a sense of the mot juste. The belief that poetry 
should be at least as well written as prose, and that “‘ good prose 
is just your conversation.” 

This is out of Flaubert and Turgenev and Stendhal, and 
what you will. It is not invention, but focus. I know quite 
well that Wordsworth talked about ‘“‘ common words,” and that 
Leigh Hunt wrote to Byron advising him against clichés. But 
it did not deter Byron from clichés. The common word is not 
the same thing as mot juste, not by a long way. And it is 
possible to write in a stilted and bookish dialect without using 
clichés. When I say the idea “‘ becomes operative ” here I pre- 
sumably mean that Mr. Hueffer is the first man who has made 
enemies by insisting on these ideas in England. That matter 
can be discussed, and it will aid to the clarity of the discussion 
if we discuss it quite apart from your opinion or my opinion of 
Mr. Hueffer’s work “as a whole ” or in detail. 

Myself, an active sense not merely of comparative literature, 
but of the need for a uniform criticism of excellence based on 
world-poetry, and not of the fashion of any one particular 
decade of English verse, or even on English verse as a whole. 
The qualitative analysis in literature (practised but never formu- 
lated by Gaston Paris, Reinach in his Manual of Classical Philo- 
logy, etc.). The Image. 

115 

Wyndham Lewis, a great faculty of design, synthesis of 
modern art movements, the sense of emotion in abstract design. 
A sense of the import of design not bounded by Continental 
achievement. A sense of dynamics. 

Barzun’s question: Pourquoi doubler Vimage? 

Gaudier-Brzeska. In him the “new” sculptural principle 
becomes articulate. “ The feeling of masses in relation.” (Prac- 
tised by Epstein and countless “ primitives ” outside the Hellenic 
quasi-Renaissance tradition.) General thorough knowledge of 
world-sculpture. Sense of a standard not limited by 1870 or 
1905. 

Edward Wadsworth, sense of the need of “ radicals in design,” 
an attempt towards radicals in design. A feeling for ports and 
machines (most certainly not peculiar to himself, but I think a 
very natural and personal tendency, unstimulated in his case by 
Continental propaganda). 

I consider this one of the age-tendencies, springing up natur- 
ally in many places and coming into the arts quite naturally and 
spontaneously in England, in America, and in Italy. We all 
know the small boy’s delight in machines. It is a natural delight 
in a beauty that had not been pointed out by professional 
esthetes. I remember young men with no care for esthetics 
who certainly would not know what the devil this article was 
about, I remember them examining machinery catalogues, to my 
intense bewilderment, commenting on machines that certainly 
they would never own and that could never by any flight of 
fancy be of the least use to them. This enjoyment of machinery 
is just as natural and just as significant a phase of this age as 
was the Renaissance “enjoyment of nature for its own sake,” 
and not merely as an illustration of dogmatic ideas. The modern 
sense of the value of the “creative, constructive individual ” 
(vide Allan Upward’s constant propaganda, etc., etc.) is just as 
definite a doctrine as the Renaissance attitude ‘‘ De Dignitate,” 
Humanism. As for external stimulus, new discoveries, new lands, 
new languages gradually opened to us; we have great advantage 
over the quattro- or cinque-cento. 

Ernest Fenollosa’s finds in China and Japan, his intimate 
personal knowledge, are no less potent than Crisolora’s manu- 
scripts. China is no less stimulating than Greece, even if Fenol- 

116 

losa had not had insight. And this force of external stimuli is 
certainly not limited by “what we do”; these new masses of 
unexplored arts and facts are pouring into the vortex of London. 
They cannot help bringing about changes as great as the Renais- 
sance changes, even if we set ourselves blindly against it. As it 
is, there is life in the fusion. The complete man must have 
more interest in things which are in seed and dynamic than in 
things which are dead, dying, static. 

The interest and perhaps a good deal of the force of the 
group I mention lie in the fact that they have perfectly definite 
intentions; that they are, if you like, “ arrogant”? enough to 
dare to intend “to wake the dead” (quite as definitely as did 
Cyriac of Ancona), that they dare to put»forward specifications 
for a new art, quite as distinct as that of the Renaissance, and 
that they do not believe it impossible to achieve these results. 

Many parallels will rise in the mind of the reader; I have 
only attempted certain obscure ones. The external forces of the 
Renaissance have been so often presented that one need not 
expatiate upon them. Certain inner causes are much less 
familiar, for which reason it has seemed worth while to under- 
line the “simple directions” of Pico and Crisolora and Valla, 
and the good and evil of Greek. The Renaissance sought a 
realism and attained it. It rose in a search for precision and 
declined through rhetoric and rhetorical thinking, through a 
habit of defining things always “in terms of something else.” 

Whatever force there may be in our own decade and vortex 
is likewise in a search for a certain precision; in a refusal to 
define things in the terms of something else; in the “ primary 
pigment.” The Renaissance sought for a lost reality, a lost 
freedom. We seek for a lost reality and a lost intensity. We 
believe that the Renaissance was in part the result of a pro- 
gramme. We believe in the value of a programme in contra- 
distinction to, but not in contradiction of, the individual im- 
pulse. Without such vagrant impulse there is no art, and the 
impulse is not subject to programme. The use and the limitation 
of force need not bring about mental confusion. An engine is 
not a confusion merely because it uses the force of steam and 
the physical principles of the lever and piston. 

117 

XIII 

Tuere are few things more difficult than to appraise the work 
of a man suddenly dead in his youth; to disentangle “ promise ” 
from achievement; to save him from that sentimentalizing which 
confuses the tragedy of the interruption with the merit of the 
work actually performed; and on the other hand to steer clear 
of unfair comparisons with men dead at the end of long life. 
To blame Raphael that he was not either Leonardo or Buon- 
arroti would be thoroughly stupid. 

Again, all writing about art is apt to be stupid, and one would 
be fairly content to present the public with no more than a 
portfolio of photographs were it not that one is constantly 
greeted with articles on “The New Spirit in Sculpture,” 
“Modern Art,” “ The New Spirit in Art,” etc., and that these 
articles invariably contain reproductions of the same set of stout 
young ladies in the same creased night-shirts, bearing the same 
set of globes, palm-branches, balances, etc., etc., etc., in the same 
silly positions, with the same pure, passionless insipid expressions 
of countenance. They are, it is true, occasionally diversified and 
embellished by other figures carrying hammers, crucibles, etc., 
wearing the same wideish trousers, the same braces, shirts, etc., 
loose at the neck, etc., etc., etc. No sense of form, no sense of 
the properties of the medium, etc., etc. ! ! 

How far it is permissible to stand against the waves of 
circumfluent idiocy I do not know. 

“TI withstood the savages of the Niger with a revolver: 
I withstood the savages of the Thames with a printing press: ” 

says Allen Upward in a very pleasant little poem. I sit here 
taking pleasure in the comfortable curves of “ Jojo’s” fat 
alabaster back and I see very little necessity for writing any- 
thing. I ride from my door to Charing Cross past an indefinite 
number of horrors: the ‘“ Memorial,” the ‘“ War Exhibit ” in 
polychrome, that beastly statue of General X . . ., those figures 
in Piccadilly, that new outrage further down with the stone 
balances all out of balance, and it seems as if posterity might 
be spared these things, it seems as if the present generation 

118 

might be spared any more of these things. It seems that even 
violent propagandist literature might be justified if it could 
defend us from this daily waste and annoyance. 

It seems to me that if one could persuade a few more people, 
the right people, to think a little about sculpture one might 
even give as much pleasure as one would by writing a fine lyric, 
even supposing the two actions excluded each other, which they 
do not. I do not believe that a man’s critical activities interrupt 
his creative activities in the least. As to writing criticism, it is 
not a question of effort. It is merely a question of whether or 
no a man writes down what he thinks. 

Again : there is a vast difference between writing about works 
of art, and trying to determine artistic principles. 

And still again: an artistic principle, even a “ formula” is 
not a circumscription. These ‘‘ dogmas” are not limits, not 
signs saying “ thus far and no further,” but points of departure, 
and lines along which the thought or the work may advance. 

No one can or does “ create to a formula,” by which phrase 
people mean “ building out a work of art in accordance with a 
theory without waiting for the creative impulse.”” No work of 
value is done that way. On the other hand, a man’s antecedent 
reflection, cogitation, etc., is bound to affect his later expression. 

England has always loved the man incapable of thought, the 
praise of Shakespeare which they most love is some absolutely 
inaccurate rubbish about “‘ wood notes wild ” uttered by one of 
the most unpleasant of theorists. They will pardon reams of in- 
sipidity rather than one clear thought. I don’t know that it 
matters, but one may as well register the fact for the comfort 
of future sufferers. Hence the fury which greets any “ new form 
of art,” new forms of art which are valid being always a product 
of thought, a double emphasis on some fundamental principle 
of strength or of a beauty cast aside, or rather buried under the 
slow accretions of stupidity, carelessness, lack of intensity. 

Our battle began with Whistler, the delicate, classical 
“ Master.” I believe the Cerberi of the ‘“ Tate” still consider 
pre-raphaelitism a violent and dangerous innovation, but we will 
leave that old war out of the question. 

Whistler was the only man working in England in the 
“« Eighties ” who would have known what we are at and would 

119 

have backed us against the mob. I do not mean to say there 
would have been absolute agreement, but he would not have 
sided with the mob, he would not have uttered “ bétises.” 

It is to be remembered that the “ Portrait of his Mother,” 
as it is now called, was originally exhibited as “ Arrangement 
in Grey and Black.” 

(Parenthesis: I know that most of his dicta apply more 
immediately to vorticist painting than to Brzeska’s sculpture, 
but they do apply to that sculpture also, and moreover my 
own thought about the two arts is so interwoven that it is very 
hard for me to write about one without amplifying some side- 
thought concerning the other.) 

We return again and again to Pater’s “ All arts approach the 
conditions of music,” and in Whistler’s “‘ Gentle Art ” we find 
sentence after sentence full of matter— 

“Art should be independent of all claptrap, should stand 
alone and appeal to the artistic sense of eye or ear without 
confounding this with emotions entirely foreign to it.” 

“The imitator is a poor kind of creature. If the man who 
paints only the tree, or flower, or other surface he sees before 
him were an artist, the king of artists would be the photo- 
grapher. It is for the artist to do something beyond this in 
portrait painting, to put on canvas something more than the 
face the model wears for that day; to paint the man, in short, 
as well as his features; in arrangement of colours to treat a 
flower as his key, not as his model.” 

I quote that paragraph in toto because it is not absolutely in 
accord with the vorticist aim, but it “ gives to think.” The last 
italicized words are to me the most important. True we have 
brought in new keys, and new, perhaps harsher, arrangements. 

Applying this same principle to arrangement of planes we get 
the new sculpture. I am aware that most people cannot feel 
form “ musically.” That they get no joy, no thrill from an 
arrangement of planes. That they have no sense of form. I 
mean the form of things, as distinct from composition of a 
picture or of a statue. . . . God knows the sense of composition 
is appallingly deficient, especially in contemporary artists. 

The pine-tree in mist upon the far hill looks like a fragment 
of Japanese armour. 

120 

The beauty of this pine-tree in the mist is not caused by its 
resemblance to the plates of the armour. 

The armour, if it be beautiful at all, is not beautiful because 
of its resemblance to the pine in the mist. 

In either case the beauty, in so far as it is beauty of form, is 
the result of “‘ planes in relation.” 

The tree and the armour are beautiful because their diverse 
planes overlie in a certain manner. 

There is the sculptor’s or the painter’s key. The presentation 
of this beauty is primarily his job. And the “ poet”? ‘“ Pour- 
quoi doubler l'image?” asks Barzun in declaiming against this 
“poésie farcie de ‘comme.’” The poet, whatever his “ figure 
of speech,” will not arrive by doubling or confusing an image. 

Still the artist, working in words only, may cast on the reader’s 
mind a more vivid image of either the armour or the pine by 
mentioning them close together or by using some device of simile 
or metaphor, that is a legitimate procedure of his art, for he 
works not with planes or with colours but with the names of 
objects and of properties. It is his business so to use, so to 
arrange, these names as to cast a more definite image than the 
layman can cast; in like manner it is the painter’s or the 
sculptor’s business so to use his planes, his colours, his arrange- 
ments that they shall cast a more vivid, a more precise image 
of beauty upon the mind of his spectator, than the spectator can 
get of himself or from a so different department of art. 

This is the common ground of the arts, this combat of arrange- 
ment or “ harmony.” The musician, the writer, the sculptor, the 
higher mathematician have here their common sanctuary. 

It does not mean that the poet is to describe post-impressionist 
pictures, or that the sculptor is to carve allegorical figures of the 
dramatist’s protagonists. 

In different media, which are at once the simplest and the 
most complex, each artist works out the same and yet a totally 
different set of problems. And he uses the medium for which 
the combination of his talents most fits him. 

His “‘ agreement with fellow artists ” is in many senses a matter 
of no importance. I mean if he has the sense of this common 
ground. 

121 

My brother artist may, and probably does, disagree with me 
violently on all questions of morals, philosophy, religion, politics, 
economics; we are indissolubly united against all non-artists and 
half-artists by our sense of this fundamental community, this 
unending adventure towards “ arrangement,” this search for the 
equations of eternity. A search which may end in results as 
diverse as the portrait of Miss Alexander, at her rather dis- 
agreeable age of thirteen or thereabouts, or a formula like 

(x — a! + om by =P, 

or Brzeska’s last figure of a woman, or Lewis’ “Timon” or 
even a handful of sapphics. And I find this sort of, to me, very 
clear statement is often incomprehensible to people who do 
nothing. I mean people who merely carry on a business, or 
parrot out phrases in “ teaching,” or live respectable lives. How- 
ever, I have never yet found a good artist or a good mathe- 
matician, or in fact a man whose life showed any sort of 
efficiency who could not grasp it at once. 

Our community is no longer divided into “ bohéme ” and 
“bourgeois.” We have our segregation amid the men who 
invent and create, whether it be a discovery of unknown rivers, 
a solution of engineering, a composition in form, or what you 
will. 

These men stand on one side, and the amorphous and petri- 
fied and the copying, stand on the other. 

Perhaps the finest thing said of Whistler is to be found in an 
essay by Symons: “ And in none of these things does he try to 
follow a fine model or try to avoid following a model.” 

It is for the rest an essay which contains some sense and some 
nonsense, the nonsense being chiefly the sort of nonsense against 
which Whistler had expressly inveighed. 

I had intended to quote further from the “ Ten O’Clock,” 
and also from Binyon’s “Flight of the Dragon,” but it is 
perhaps enough to remind the reader that these essays exist, 
and one may by thinking them over, arrive at some degree of 
enlightenment. 

Whistler was the great grammarian of the arts and one should 
not confuse the particular form of his expression, i.e. the pecu- 
larity or the individuality of his expression of himself and his 

122 

temperament, with the principles he uttered, or with the form 
or art whereby some of those principles will become apparent 

when they apply in the expression of some one else’s tempera- 
ment or individuality. 

123 

XIV 

Tuere is another phase of “the revolt” as they call it, which 
is also traceable to Whistler. I mean to say “art for the intel- 
ligent.” 

We are, I think, getting sick of the glorification of energetic 
stupidity. Vienna, Mestrovic, etc., etc. (there are worse forms). 
The art of the stupid, by the stupid, for the stupid is not all- 
sufficient. Whistler was almost the first man, at least the first 
painter of the last century to suggest that intelligent and not 
wholly ignorant and uncultivated men had a right to art. Their 
art is always opposed and always triumphant. Of this art was 
Gaudier-Brzeska, in this sense he was “of the movement.” By 
“the movement ” I mean something wider than the association 
of certain artists a year or so since in Ormond Street. 

After an intolerable generation we find again this awakening, 
not in one spot but in several. Lewis, Brzeska, James Joyce, 
T. S. Eliot all proving independently and sporadically that the 
possession of a certain measure of intellect, education, enlighten- 
ment does not absolutely unfit a man for artistic composition. 

In this awakening I find very great comfort. 

124 

XV 

AGAIN : it is difficult to stop writing. One stands the racket of 
what is called the “ revolt.” Any action of the intelligence is 
of course a “revolt” against the dough-like properties and 
propensities of the race. There would be no need of “ revolt ” 
if things said were also things thought over by hearers. So 
One is destined to reiterations, and turns again to the “Ten 
~ O'Clock.” 

“Nature contains the elements.” It is to be noted that one 
is not forbidden any element, any key because it is geological 
rather than vegetable, or because it belongs to the realm of mag- 
netic currents or to the binding properties of steel girders and 
not to the flopping of grass or the contours of the parochial 
churchyard. 

“The artist is born to pick and choose, and group with 
science, these elements, that the result may be beautiful—as the 
musician gathers his notes and forms his chords.” 

There, again, is a basis. One uses form as a musician uses 
sound. One does not imitate the wood dove, or at least one 
does not confine oneself to the imitation of wood-doves, one 
combines and arranges one’s sound or one’s forms into Bach 
fugues or into arrangements of colour, or into “ planes in 
relation.” 

125 

XVI 

Roucuiy: What have they done for me these vorticist artists? 

They have awakened my sense of form, or they “have given 
me a new sense of form,” or what you will. I remember a time, 
it was in the provinces and therefore not so long ago as it would 
have been in London, when Oriental art was new and strange 
(yes, I know China was heard of in the eighteenth century, but 
she was laid aside and forgotten), a time when Chinese painting 
was ill received, and I still meet people who say all Japanese 
prints look alike. 

I remember when impressionism, i.e. the work of Manet and 
Monet and their followers awakened a sense of colour, or a 
sense of light, and we began to see purple shadows instead of 
black shadows or whatever they had been supposed to be, at 
any rate we were resensitized to colour. I have talked with 
men who “hadn’t got as far as these painters.” 

I have heard Mr. telling how his father’s technique 
was of an earlier school, and that the Impressionist technique 
invalidated it, and his father’s work never caught up. 

“Whistler set people to seeing the beauty of fogs and the 
night on the Thames,” etc. 

These new men have made me see form, have made me more 
conscious of the appearance of the sky where it juts down 
between houses, of the bright pattern of sunlight which the bath 
water throws up on the ceiling, of the great “ V’s” of light that 
dart through the chinks over the curtain rings, all these are new 
chords, new keys of design. 

And my eye is ten times as quick to discriminate between fine 
and mediocre Chinese or Japanese prints or paintings. 

All this is new life, it gives a new aroma, a new keenness 
for keeping awake, The swirls in the film on my morning coffee 
I had watched for some years. They make Whistlerian butter- 
flies, they are in a known key, experimenté. This new awaken- 
ing to form may be a purely personal matter. Certain decorative 
artists may always have had it . . . and yet . . . and yet they 

126 

have done very little to make us aware of it. They may have 
needed it, they may not have been able to make their designs 
and their pictures without it . . . yet they have found very 
few new combinations, They have not communicated it. 

If vorticism has done this for me, I think it can do it for 
others. Others? 

Of course the rest of the world may not want a new sense of 
forms, or a new sense of anything. 

I think it is De Quincey who writes of “the miracle that 
can be wrought if only one man feels a thing more keenly, knows 
it more intimately than any one has known or felt it before.” 
Such a miracle has been performed in our vicinity. 

I dare say various miracles have been so wrought for the few. 
I am constantly surprised at the faintness of men’s talent for 
living, at the number of things they so willingly do without. 
The people who lived without Gaudier’s sculpture . . . perhaps 
that was through ignorance. The people who live without 
Dolmetsch’s instruments . . . that cannot be ignorance . . . 
but still it is all one tendency. 

“T have not repulsed God in his manifestations,” says the old 
Egyptian poet. To-day I see so many who could not say, or 
who could scarcely say it, for these manifestations at their 
intensest are the manifestations of men in the heat of their art, 
of men making instruments, for the best art is perhaps only the 
making of instruments. 

A clavicord or a statue or a poem, wrought out of ages of 
knowledge, out of fine perception and skill, that some other man, 
that a hundred other men, in moments of weariness can wake 
beautiful sound with little effort, that they can be carried out of 
the realm of annoyance into the calm realm of truth, into the 
world unchanging, the world of fine animal life, the world of 
pure form. And John Heydon, long before our present day 
theorists, had written of the joys of pure form . . . inorganic, 
geometrical form, in his “ Holy Guide.” 

All these thoughts gather around one, in one’s thought of this 
new painting and sculpture. . . . And around its detractors, 
what thoughts? 

I think there must be around them very little thought or they 
would not oppose it. 

127 

XVII 
PARTIAL CATALOGUE OF THE SCULPTURE 

Ir is perhaps desirable to give a catalogue raisonné of Gaudier’s 
later work. I cannot be sure of completeness, but there are 
extant the following authentic works. I give the approximate 
time of their creation, though I cannot swear to it. 

1. Marble group, man and woman, Taihitian (?). At least 
one might so regard its ancestry were it not one of 
Gaudier’s most personal expressions. The faces do, I 
think, suggest some Oceanic tradition, the right arm of 
the woman is most delicate in its straightness, and sug- 
gests that of a certain Isis with Horus between her knees 
(green stone, British Museum). (In possession of the 
author.) 

2. Angel, with Dantescan face, huge breasts, done in alab- 
aster, robe painted vivid scarlet. A scandalous satire. 

3. Chanteuse Triste, grey stone, earlier period. Convention 
possibly archaic Greek, woman singing, arms crossed 
behind her. 

4. Boy in alabaster (possession of Omega workshops), fat boy 
with arm held above his head, elbow sharply squared, 
a la Picasso. 

There were also 5 a “head of Christ,” and 6 an “ Infant 
Hercules ” in grey stone, of period of Chanteuse. The Hercules 
was broken in moving to the Putney studio, but its head may 
survive. 

7. Naturalistic torse marble, destined for South Kensington, 
described before. 

8. Another torse, marble, plumper, not so strong. (Possession 
of Mrs. H. H. Shakespear.) 

9. Vase, or Water Carrier. Interesting, a nondescript animal. 
soft marble, supporting a cup made of different stone. 
Reproduced. (John Quinn.) 

10. Bas Relief of a Cat. Reproduced. (John Quinn.) 

128 

. A bas relief of a fattish woman with squarish man creep- 

ing toward her. Unimportant. 

. Very fine bas relief of a woman, on small marble pyx 

presented to Wilfrid Scawen Blunt. 

. Bust of Ezra Pound, sufficiently described in text. 

Works in brown veined alabaster: All important. 

. The Stags, reproduced. 
. Boy with a Coney, reproduced, described by Brzeska in 

his review of the “* Allied Artists.”’ 

. Seated Figure. I think this was his last or almost his last 

work. 

These three show that “soft bluntness”? and are the most 
original, most exclusively his own creation, and owe less to any 
possible “ influence ” from outside himself. 

L7, 

18, 

ai: 

“ Bird swallowing a fish,’ belongs more or less to this 
group and is an expression of the same train of research. 
19, and 20. Cut brass: two door-knockers, and “ toy ” for 
Mr. Hulme. The “toy” being the first experiment and 
the best of the three. 

Paperweight. In alabaster. (In possession of G. Hyde- 
Lees.) Reproductions of the same in brass, cast. 

. A green stone charm. 
. Small faun in brown stone. 
. Earlier. A Faun, crouching, sold at Alpine Club Show 

several years ago. Reproduced. 

Earlier still, some naturalistic busts, more or less 4 la Rodin. 

2, 
26. 

Tiny brass fish, for Mrs. Kibblewhite. 
Model of cat for porcelain. (Omega shops.) 

There was an earlier period when he did figures with bunchy 
muscles. I do not know whether they survive. Also, I think he 
used to buy cheap figures and transform them, at some obscure 

period. 
27. The Dancer, brown stone, varnished. Reproduced; very 
fine. 
28. Imp, late work, grotesque. Reproduced. 
29. Caritas, grey stone, date uncertain, possibly about the 

30. 

time of the stags. Woman giving suck to two children, 
abstract top. 
Boy, in plaster. Omega shops, unimportant. 

129 

S13 

OZ 
oo 

he 

Son 

Chubby figure with bowed head, alabaster, early, unim- 
portant. 

A large bas relief of wrestlers. 

Woman seated, grey stone, same period as Chanteuse, 
reproduced in Egoist, Feb. 16th, 1914. 

Boy in alabaster, high relief against gilt background, early. 
(In possession of Mr. Kohnstam.) 

Birds Erect. This is one of the most important pieces. 
The representative element is very slight. The work is 
the culmination of the study of a set of forms begun in 
Mr. Hulme’s toy, or rather in the drawings which 
preceded that work in cut brass. These forms are in 
some degree related to the series of forms used in the 
“ Bird swallowing a fish,’ but they are distinctly 
different. As a composition of masses I do not think I 
have seen any modern sculpture to match it. 

130 

XVIII 
THE DRAWINGS 

I SHALL not attempt a full catalogue of the drawings, or even a 
moderately full catalogue. 

The development seems to have been as follows: Hetero- 
geneous period before 1912. Pastel, etchings, etc., 1912. 
Drawings done in full influence of the theory that painting, or 
at least drawing, “is caligraphy.” ‘To this period belong the 
drawing of Brodsky’s head. Small drawing of stag in Brodsky’s 
possession. 

The three large pages of stags seem to be from the end of this 
period and one notices the effect of the widening pen-strokes. 

1913 roughly speaking seems to have been the year for the 
drawings, of nudes and animals, in the thin even line, vide the 
wolf, woman (plates II, VII). 

The animal drawings with thicker line seem to have been 
done, for the most part, about the end of 1912, just before the 
nudes in thin line, but I do not wish to be too definite about 
these dates. 

At the end of 1913 came almost the final phase, vide the man 
on horseback (plate VII). In these two drawings we see the 
accumulated skill due to the former diligence. The man on the 
horse has the certitude and the manner which I at least must 
relate in my own mind and for the convenience of reference to 
the animals of the Chou dynasty. 

The stags, and the animals done in their manner, were, I 
should think, done while he was enthused by the drawings in 
the Dordogne caverns and “ Fonts-de-Gaume.” 

Of the later thick line suave drawings I have seen only a 
few. One is a family, man, woman, and infant, the feeling is 
relatable, or at least the general disposition of the subject is not 
unlike Van Gogh and I have therefore chosen to reproduce the 
less familiar and more individual compositions. 

The relations of these later drawings, especially the equestrian, 

131 

the straight fingers, heavy shoulders—to the sculpture of the same 
phase, like the dancer, is easily visible. 

The drawing of the man and women has rapport with a plaster 
figure of the same date, but the drawing is the better piece of 
work. 

The drawing seen in the background of the photograph of 
Gaudier standing by his “ Bird swallowing a fish,” is probably 
an early study for the dancer or else for some other statue that 
was not done. The importance of the “ Bird swallowing a fish ” 
is not to be under-estimated, though the subject is scarcely popu- 
lar in its appeal. 

The squarish female figure in the photograph (plate XX VII) 
is, I think, the last work that Brzeska completed before his 
departure for France. 

Again I feel that I cannot over-emphasize the fact that this 
squarish, bluntish figure was his last work in stone. This and _ 
the “ Boy with a Coney,” and the “ Imp” and the “ Dancer,” 
and “ Bird swallowing a fish,” are all of a unity. They are all 
in a peculiar sense his work, free from influence, the personal 
style which is even by great artists often attained only toward the 
end of a lifetime. 

The embracing figures are a very personal expression. No one 
but Gaudier could have made them, but they are full of reminis- 
cence, Oceanic, Egyptian. In the work of young genius we see 
often the passion of the artist fusing such derived elements into a 
single work. That work is work of promise. The other work, in 
the present case, the bluntish and squarish, is not work of promise 
but work of achievement. 

The seated figures and, emphatically and particularly, the man 
on horseback in the drawing bear the same relation to the 
earlier phases of his drawing. You will not find anyone to 
improve on the earlier drawings of stags, but still the Fonts-de 
Gaume exist for comparison. Gaudier’s work is, I suppose, as 
good as the cave drawings, but they were his “ pace-maker.” 

The later work came from himself, at least it was his final 
decision. 

Speaking meticulously, two pencil drawings done in the 
trenches were his last work, but one cannot compare them with 

132 

work done in the leisure of the studio. The mitrailleuse is quite 
good. 

Anyone wishing to understand certain phases of Gaudier’s 
thought about form should endeavour to see a large number of 
his drawings. A portfolio of them would be of great use to 
students. This statement applies as much to the heavy-lined, 
little notes as to the more comprehensible drawings of animals 
thin in line. 

One finds him developing his abstractions, reducing the imita- 
tive drawing of an horse to the relative masses, or working down 
to the simple design of his alabaster paper-weight from a series 
of red “incomprehensible ” skeletons of the human figure. The 
line drawings here reproduced lose most of their character 
through our necessity to represent the original sheet of paper by 
an illustration one fourth its size. 

A full catalogue of the drawings is, I repeat, out of the question 
at present or in this book. The line drawings are roughly divis- 
ible into : animals (his drawings of the feline and lupine creatures, 
being perhaps the best of this lot, though the birds also are 
excellent), nudes, satiric drawings of people riding in the Row 
and of “ The Social Order.” 

There are a few figures in heavier line in very black ink, very 
important drawings of the “ wrestlers,’ and of “man standing 
by a horse.” There are also studies for sculpture and very 
“modern,” drawings, that is to say drawings composed almost 
wholly of inorganic forms. 

His long meditation on the relative value of organic and in- 
organic forms is witnessed by the great number of studies of 
fishes and birds, in which creatures the division between the two, 
that is between organic and inorganic forms, is less obvious. 

133 

XIX 

Peruaps, with the reader’s indulgence, I may be permitted 
another brief note of emphasis or appendix anent the cut-brass 
work. I have reproduced the “Toy” and the small fish on 
plate XVI. 

These experiments in abstract form interest me. It interests 
me that Mr. Hulme in his boyhood should have pestered the 
village blacksmith week in and week out to forge him a piece 
of metal absolutely square. The boys in my home town used, as 
I said in my paragraph on Wadsworth, to spend hours over cata- 
logues of machinery. These tastes are perfectly natural and form 
a part of esthetics just as much as the velleities of the pink and 
mauve era. The Romans had a passion for squareness. At Sir- 
mione they have chopped off a corner of cliff in one place and 
built out the cliff in another simply to produce a pleasurable 
outline. 

I refer the reader again to John Heydon’s “ Holy Guide ” for 
numerous remarks on pure form and the delights thereof. And 
I might do worse than close with the following citations from so 
conservative a work as Mr. Binyon’s “ Flight of the Dragon.” 
They bear on much of Gaudier’s work, not merely upon the 
cut brass. 

“Every statue, every picture, is a series of ordered relations, 
controlled, as the body is controlled in the dance, by the will to 
express a single idea. 

“In a bad painting the units of form, mass, colour, are robbed 
of their potential energy, isolated, because brought into no organic 
relation. 

“Art is not an adjunct to existence, a reproduction of the 
actual. 

“FOR INDEED IT IS NOT ESSENTIAL THAT THE 
SUBJECT-MATTER SHOULD REPRESENT OR BE LIKE 
ANYTHING IN NATURE; ONLY IT MUST BE ALIVE 
WITH A RHYTHMIC VITALITY OF ITS OWN.” 

He quotes with approbation a Chinese author as follows :—As 
a man’s language is an unerring index to his nature, so the actual 

134 

strokes of his brush in writing or painting betray him and 
announce either the freedom and nobility of his soul or its mean- 
ness and limitation. 

“You may say that the waves of Korin’s famous screen are 
not like real waves: but they move, they have force and volume. 

“It would be vain to deny that certain kinds and tones of 
colour have real correspondence with emotional states of mind. 

“Chemists had not multiplied colours for the painter, but he 
knew how to prepare those he had. 

“Our thoughts about decoration are too much dominated, I 
think, by the conception of pattern as a sort of mosaic, each 
element in the pattern being repeated, a form without life of 
its own, something inert and bounded by itself. We get a 
mechanical succession which aims at rhythm, but does not attain 
rhythmic vitality.” 

EE 

139 

PREFACE TO THE 
MEMORIAL EXHIBITION 1918 * 

His death in action at Neuville St. Vaast is, to my mind, the 
gravest individual loss which the arts have sustained during the 
war. When I say this I am not forgetting that Remy de Gour- 
mont, Henry James, and, lastly, Claude Debussy must all be 
counted among war losses, for in each case their lives were 
indubitably shortened by war-strain; but they, on the other 
hand, had nearly fulfilled their labour, each was still vigorously 
productive, but we could in fair measure guage the quality of 
what they were likely to do. 

Gaudier was at the beginning of his work. The sculpture 
here shown is but a few years’ chiseling. He was killed at the 
age of twenty-four; his work stopped a year before that. The 
technical proficiency in the Stag drawings must be obvious to 
the most hurried observer. The volume and scope of the work 
is, for so young a man, wholly amazing, no less in variety than 
in the speed of development. 

In brief, his sculptural career may be traced as follows: It 
begins with “ representative ” portrait busts in plaster, and with 
work in more or less the manner of Rodin. Whatever one may 
think of Rodin, one must grant that he delivered us from the 
tradition of the Florentine Boy, and the back-parlour sculptural 
school favoured by the Luxembourg. Gaudier was quickly dis- 
contented with the vagueness and washiness of the Rodin deca- 
dence and the work of Rodin’s lesser imitators. We next find 
him in search of a style, interested in Epstein, but much more 
restless and inquisitive. In “The Singer’? we have what may 
seem an influence from archaic Greek, we have the crossed arms 
motif, used, however, very differently from the crossed or x’d 
arms of the splendid Moscophoros. (The anti-Hellenist cannot 
refrain from a slightly malicious chuckle on observing that the 
Greeks really had a great master (before Phidias), and that they 
have carefully forgotton his name. Vide also the consummate 

* The Leicester Galleries, London, May-June, 1918. 

136 

inanities in the Encyclopedia Britannica regarding the Mosco- 
phoros). In the Singer we may observe also an elongation possibly 
ascribable to a temporary admiration of the Gothic. 

In “The Embracers” (plate XXIV) we find a whole pot-pourri 
of forces: Egypt in the delicate flattening of the woman’s right 
arm, Oceanic influence in the rest of it. Note that all great artists 
are imitative in their early work; their power lies in the rapidity 
with which they assimilate, digest, get through with, weld into 
a style of their own, the forces and qualities of their models. 
Obvious as one or two acquired qualities are in “The Em- 
bracers”, it is perhaps the most complete expression of Gaudier’s 
personality that remains to us. It is also intensely original, the 
stylization into the bent prismatic shape of the whole does not, 
I think, occur elsewhere. He has shown the “ sense of stone ” in 
the utilisation of this queer-shaped block as Michelangelo showed 
it in the economy of his “ David” (a block, as you remember, 
which none of his contemporaries could handle, and which was 
regarded as spoiled, and useless). 

Gaudier denied the Chinese influence in “‘ Boy with a Coney ”, 
(plate XXIII), a piece more opulent in its curves than “ The 
Embracers ’’, though perhaps less striking at first sight, because 
of its greater placidity. 

By the time he got to “ The Dancer” (plates XXI, XXII), 
Gaudier had worked definitely free from influence. This work is 
his own throughout. I can but call upon the unfamiliar spectator 
to consider what it means to have worked free of influence, to 
have established a personal style at the age of twenty-two. There 
is no minimising such achievement. 

The personality is asserted in “The Embracers”’, the style 
is established and freed from derivativeness in ‘‘ The Dancer ”. 
This last is almost a thesis of his ideas upon the use of pure form. 
We have the triangle and circle asserted, labled almost, upon the 
face and right breast. Into these so-called “ abstractions ” life 
flows, the circle moves and elongates into the oval, it increases 
and takes volume in the sphere or hemisphere of the breast. The 
triangle moves toward organism it becomes a spherical triangle 
(the central life-form common to both Brzeska and Lewis). These 
two developed motifs work as themes in a fugue. We have the 
whole series of spherical triangles, as in the arm over the head, 

137 

all combining and culminating in the great sweep of the back 
of the shoulders, as fine as any surface in all sculpture. The 
““ abstract ” or mathematical bareness of the triangle and circle 
are fully incarnate, made flesh, full of vitality and of energy. 
The whole form-series ends, passes into stasis with the circular 
base or platform. 

I am not saying that every statue should be a complete thesis 
of principles. I simply point out the amazing fact that Gaudier 
should so clearly have known his own mind, that he should have 
been able to make so definite an assertion of his sculptural norm 
or main urges at the age of but two and twenty. 

The quality of his stone animals, his sense of animal life seems 
too obvious to need note in this preface. 

Because our form sense is so atrophied it is necessary to point 
it out, even to wrangle about it with unbelievers. Again Gaudier’s 
technical power seems too obvious to need explanation, whether 
it be in cutting of brass, or in the little green charm, or in the 
splintery alabaster, or in the accomplished ease of the drawings. 

If the “more modern pieces” puzzle the spectator there are 
various avenues of approach. First, by Gaudier’s own mani- 
festoes. 

“ Sculptural feeling is the appreciation of masses in relation. 

Sculptural ability is the defining of these masses by planes. 

Secondly, by a study of Egyptian, Assyrian, African and 
Chinese, sculpture, and a realisation that Hellenism, neo-Hellen- 
ism, neo-Renaissancism and Albert Memorialism do not contain 
and circumscribe all that it is possible to know on the subject. 
Only those shut in the blind alley which culminates in the 
Victorian period have failed to do justice to Gaudier. My praise 
of him is no longer regarded as an eccentricity. 

He is irreplaceable. The great sculptor must combine two 
qualities (a) the sense of form (of masses in relation); (b) tremend- 
ous physical activeness. The critic may know fine forms when 
he sees them embodied, he may even be able to construct fine 
combinations of form in his imagination. This does not make 
him a sculptor. 

The painter may be able to record or set forth fine form- 
combinations, to “ knock off ” a masterpiece in four hours. 

The sculptor must add to the power of imagining form- 

138 

combination the physical energy required to cut this into the 
unyielding medium. He must have vividness of perception, he 
must have this untiringness, he must, beyond that, be able to 
retain his main idea unwaveringly during the time (weeks or 
months) of the carving. This needs a peculiar equipment. Easily 
diverted, flittering quickness of mind is small use. 

When a man has all these qualities, vividness of insight, poig- 
nancy, retentiveness, plus the energy, he has chance of making 
permanent sculpture. Gaudier had them, even to the superflu- 
ous abundance of forging his own chisels. 

For the rest, circumspice! I can but record the profundity 
of the cry that came from the Belgian poet, Marcel Wyseur, on 
first seeing some work of Gaudier-Brzeska’s: “ I] a eu grand tort 
de mourir, cet homme! II a eu grand tort de mourir”’. 

1918 

139 

GAUDIER: A POSTSCRIPT 1934* 

For eighteen years the death of Henri Gaudier has been un- 
remedied. The work of two or three years remains, but the 
uncreated went with him. 

There is no reason to pardon this either to the central powers 
or to the allies or to ourselves. 

I dare say there was never a man better fitted to serve in 
trench warfare, and his contempt for war is a message. A con- 
tempt for war is by no means a contempt for physical courage. 

‘“T seen so many better guys bumped off!” said Mr. Heming- 
way in the face of a minor author’s obituaries. Than Henri 
Gaudier no better guy was bumped off. 

With a hundred fat rich men working overtime to start another 
war or another six wars for the sake of their personal profit, it 
is very hard for me to write of Gaudier with the lavender tones 
of dispassionate reminiscence. The real trouble with war (modern 
war) is that it gives no one a chance to kill the right people. 

William Hohenzollern was never in personal danger, the Baron 
de Wendel, Zaharoff, the brothers Schneider were never in 
personal danger, nor were the Krupp and Vickers directors. 
Hence the stink of the shambles. They say the ancient Serbian 
custom was to send the old men first into the battle. I could 
nominate nearly a full regiment. 

The art of a period is what the artists make during that period, 
apart from that there are, in Foch’s magnificent phrase “‘ merely 
verbal manifestations.” 

Good sculpture does not occur in a decadence. Literature may 
come out of a decadence, painting may come out of a decadence, 
but in a decadence men do not cut stone. 

A few blocks of stone really carved are very nearly sufficient 
base for a new civilization. The garbage of three empires col- 
lapsed over Gaudier’s marble. And as that swill is cleared off, 
as the map of a new Europe becomes visible Gaudier’s work re- 
emerges, perfectly solid. The last country to be seen collapsing 

* Esquire, New York, August, 1934. 

140 

is his own. The real France of the banks and gun works shows 
in Stawisky. I suppose he, Stawisky, was a great minor crook 
and owed his immunity to his knowledge of the real ghouls and 
wreckers. 

Having said what I knew about Gaudier in my memoir of him 
I should have very slight excuse for restatement unless I could 
now show the same facts in some other light or perspective. 

An. artist’s statement is made in and by his work. His work 
is his biography, and the better the artist the more this applies. 
“There is my autobiography ” said Jean Cocteau one day when 
we were expressing mutual annoyance with the series of impor- 
tunates who return again and again to requesting it. 

The significance of Gaudier’s sculpture is now granted, so far 
as I know, without demur by any person of the slightest compe- 
tence. In 1916 it wasn’t. The work was done from 1912 to 
1914, with perhaps a little preliminary skirmishing in 1911, it 
was done against the whole social system in the sense that it was 
done against poverty and the lack of materials. 

All our work was the work of outlaws, and the significance of 
that fact is now, with the passing of two decades, effulgent.. I 
stated in my memoir that this fact had a meaning. I stated the 
meaning : Namely that the upper strata of society was rotten, I 
don’t mean sexually fantastic, but that the whole mind of the 
exploiting class was trivial, idiotic, and that the best conversation 
was found in quadrivtis et angtportis. 

The white-gleaming intelligence in Gaudier’s studio (half the 
space under a railway arch in Putney with the sides boarded up) 
in comparison with the podgy and bulbous expensiveness of 
Schonbrun, the tawdry, gummy, adhesive costliness of the trap- 
pings of the bourgeois drawing-rooms of the period, had a 
meaning. 

And that meaning is now written into history. You can’t keep 
a good man down, you can’t keep the beau monde under, and 
the beau monde is the “ world” with the most beautiful mind. 

The “revolution in the arts” was quite distinctly revolution. 
The social revolution was coming, that is to say the most intelli- 
gent young ladies of Mayfair were spending their time in Totten- 
ham Court Road to escape from society boredom. The young 
women with lesser mental equipment were seen only in their 

141 

hereditary surroundings. 

The key word of vorticist art was Objectivity in the sense that 
we insisted that the value of a piece of sculpture was dependent 
on its shape. 

It is probably difficult for the contemporary (1934) reader 
to conceive any other position, yet if the last snippet of newspaper 
concerning London speaks the truth, the ineffable Britons have 
recently elected a director of their National Gallery who doesn’t 
yet know this, and whose views on painting are equally stupid. 

Pre-war Europe was guttering down to its end. One tried to 
persuade it to make a “ good end”. One may even have thought 
one was in the act of succeeding. In any case the years immedi- 
ately before the great slaughter were full of exhilaration for those 
in the middle of the action—I suppose one must call it the 
intellectual scene—it was rather like a battle between a weasel 
and a cow with all the fun for the weasel. Whether we supposed 
we could trans-animate the cow and produce a miraculous super- 
antelope or springbok, I doubt. At any rate capitalist society 
refused to make a good end. They hadn’t the theatrical élan 
supposed to have been present in the aristos during the French 
revolution. 

Even in this vicinage I don’t know that we understood 
Gaudier’s “ Vortex.” I mean we, a few of us, saw that it was 
a damn fine piece of writing, tremendously condensed. But if he 
had then heard of Frobenius, he was the only man in London 
who had, and, as nearly as I remember, he had forgotten the 
names of the authors of whatever he had read about art’s 
archaeology. 

But you can’t even now get an English translation of “ Erlebte 
Erdteile,” or even of ‘‘ Paideuma,” and if you could there would 
still be more of Frobenius’ essential knowledge in Gaudier’s four 
pages than would go into any translator’s forty. 

“ Sculptural feeling is the appreciation of masses in relation.” 

“ Sculptural ability is the defining of these masses by planes.” 
And that was 1914. 

We have gradually learned that the best African sculpture is 
conceived as a mass, and that inferior sculpture has been seen as 
silhouettes in succession. 

142 

Epstein was already talking about form. And in twenty years 
I suppose a number of people have gradually got round to 
understanding the apparently simple and apparently platitudin- 
ous statement that a sculptor expresses his meaning by form. 

A sculptor is a bloke that cuts stone (with the kindred arts 
of modelling in clay or wax and having bronze cast into forms). 
Mr. Adrian Stokes has thought a great deal about sculpture, 
about carving, modeling, meaning, but he is not thereby a 
sculptor. 

People will sometimes admit this, but I am not wasting either 
your time or my own, when I try to induce you really to think 
about this distinction. 

For eighteen years after Gaudier’s death no one showed the 
least chance of succeeding him. Epstein had already done his 
most satisfactory work, and Brancusi alone continued the con- 
quest of marble. Brancusi alone continued to use form to express 
a reality with greater precision, with greater knowledge than his 
contemporaries or predecessors had possessed. 

Cubism has not decayed. Concepts do not decay, but inferior 
minds and inferior artists waddle about in dilutions of concepts, 
and exchange weak or faulty imitations. 

Gaudier’s meaning is expressed in his work. There is no use 
in anyone’s thinking they can explain that meaning by mere talk 
about the work. If you can’t get to the actual three dimensional 
objects, the photographs will give you an approximate idea of 
his meaning, as they give you an approximate idea of his work. 
It is even possible that a well meaning spectator with limited 
perceptions could study a statue by photographs, as he might find 
a dictionary useful in studying a foreign language. Stokes’ 
photos, in his ‘‘ Stones of Rimini,” may help a man who has seen 
the original to see more of it. But no one will ever see all of it 
from the photos. Neither will the present reader get the full 
measure of the distance between Brancusi and Gaudier and 
inferior sculptors merely from looking at photos. 

Any more than you can get an idea of Dante by reading some 
bloke’s essay about him. 

John Cournos said at the time (1914): 

“*Gaudier’s Vortex is the whole history of sculpture.’ It is 
also the history of Kulturmorphologie, it is also . . . (and herein 

143 

is the justification of my writing a new article on the subject), 
it is also the proclamation of a new birth out of the guttering 
and subsiding rubbish of 19th century stuffiness. A volitionist 
act stretching into the future. The “fall of impressionism,” the 
“ Untergang ” you can’t call it sunset, but the moon-set or the 
slopset of a period that had included the whole three or four 
preceding centuries, in which expensiveness had usurped the 
place of design. 

It meant a complete revaluation of form as a means of express- 
ing nearly everything else, or shall we say of form as a means 
of expressing the fundamentals of everything, or shall we say of 
form as expressing the specific weights and values total con- 
sciousness ? 

Or would it be better to say simply “form as a means of 
expression ?”’ 

At any rate it was three dimensional assertion of a complete 
revaluation of life in general, of human life in particular, of man 
against necessity, by which I include social and physical necessity 
and there is, of course, in the long run no social necessity. What 
we call social necessity is nothing but the temporary inconveni- 
ence caused us by the heaped up imbecilities of other men, by 
the habits of a dull and lazy agglomerate of our fellows, which 
sodden mass it is up to the artist to alter, to carve into a fitting 
shape, as he hacks off unwanted corners of marble. 

In this field Gaudier did his bit. Magnificently did it, in two 
or three years, getting rid of no end of superfluous nonsense in 
his immediate field, which was perhaps fifty dollars worth of 
marble, and ten dollars worth of paper and ink. (I am here 
making a maximum estimate.) 

There is still enough energy even in what I was able to get 
into my memoir of his (i.e. all his own writing and 40 half-tone 
reproductions) to modernize Russia, to bring communism to date, 
I mean into harmony with the best thought of the occident, and 
to make America fit to live in. By modernizing Russia I mean 
that the trouble with Russia is the trouble with a smoky loco- 
motive. When they get to dividing the cultural heritage, and to 
seeing that this heritage is the actual source of value they will 
have arrived at a state of understanding which will make them 
good neighbours even though Russian. And if we could do like- 

144 

wise we would also be good neighbours for them. 

People talk about “ abstract sculpture ” without realising the 
various degrees of abstraction which can obtain and have 
obtained in great sculpture. We will never have active sculp- 
tural criteria until more critics understand the extent to which 
a good sculptor “abstracts” form, takes form from natural 
objects, and puts it together again in his work. 

Gaudier’s Vortex was so brief that very few people saw its 
profundity. John Cournos saw that it contained the whole 
“history ” of sculpture, but it also contained pretty much the 
whole “ Euclid.” I mean the whole layout of the fundamentals. 
The real sculptor “sees” or is aware of, not only all the sides 
of his work, but of the ‘“‘ through,” that is the diameters that 
can be passed through it from any angle. 

Plates XIII, X XIX, Hieratic Head of E.P. The only large 
block of marble Gaudier ever had at his disposal. The work 
represents two months’ actual cutting, and was preceded by a 
hundred drawings, many of which could be recognized as por- 
traiture, and any one of which might serve as sculptural educa- 
tion. Like Henry James’ prefaces, they indicate what the artist 
has in his head before he starts on the final manifestation. 

145 

PEREGRINATIONS, 1960 

Remy de Gourmont wrote the first French acknowledgement 
of Gaudier’s existence, a brief obit labelled ‘* Macon”, which had 
been Gaudier’s answer on the army form re his profession. 

The British press commented on his death notice in the second 
issue of BLAST by remarking that it was carrying a joke too 
far to print obits of “ these invented mad men.” 

The big bust remained in Violet Hunt’s front garden on 
Camden Hill, its presence recorded in Douglas Goldring’s admir- 
able “ South Lodge’. As no one could afford a pedestal the 
slugs and the lawnmower left their record. Child, Violet’s marvel- 
ous old retainer having been asked for pail and scrubbing-brush 
and then interrogated as to the ubicity of the guest and unknown 
friend for whom the art work was being furbished, reported : 

“* Mr. Peaound iz ine garrden a-scrubbin his MONUMENT.” 
(end quote.) 

Finally there was sufficient cash balance to achieve transfer 
to the Gulf of Tigullio, and for some years the marble stood by 
my lunch table, ground floor of Majerna’s Albergo Rapallo. 
(documentation can be furnished if desired.) 

After Majerna had reported Abyssinia full of animals, and 
rejoiced at having ceased vegetation, and then been ousted from 
proprietorship by one of the dirtiest small wangles that marred 
the second fascist decennio, one risked the structural firmness of 
the restored Palazzo Barratti (then No. 12 via Marsala) stretched 
some large planks over what were presumed to be rafters, and 
the stone eyes gazed seaward. 

After wars and permutations it went to Brunnenburg, and 
thence to the Milan memorial show, to one in Merano, and to 
present home with a wall for the charcoals, and the company of 
Cat, Boy with Coney, a Nina, and other pieces in Brunnenburg. 

The Milan show having been contemporary, to the extent of 
Italians hoping to meet the new sculptor and writing to say so. 
Olivia Rossetti Agresti was, by parallel, asked to sign a copy of 
the Divina Commedia in Chicago, the confusion between her 

146 

uncle Dante Gabriel R. and D. Alighieri not having been cleared 
in the capital of Illinois. 

The remarkable Scheiwiller issued a booklet and, I suppose, 

guided the two excellent Italian catalogues, though those of the 
London and French shows were in larger format. 

Brunnenburg, Tirolo, 1960. 

147 

prey 

LION. Pen and Ink 

VII 

WRESTLERS. 1913. Pen and Ink 

EQUESTRIAN. 1913. Pen and Ink 

ee 

RECLINING WOMAN. Pen and Ink 

— 

YSDAA puvo uag [pooLvy sy 
“aSYOH ANV NVI HON 

[19u9g 
‘dNNOd VUZI AO LIVYLYOd 

2 aioe a 

t : 
Ba 
es ; site 4% 
4 4 loa rd \ } 
Ph Ws Ne fr ; \3 
¥, ay, rs \ 

5] - oo \\ i 
nee wnat 's udu 

XI 

SELF-PORTRAIT. 1913. Pastel 

tel 

as 

P 

2 
oF 

Mile 

RZESKA. 

B 

MADEMOISELLE 

HIERATIC HEAD OF EZRA POUND (A). Marble 1914. 

Shown in its present surroundings; the gardens of Brunnenburg 

XIV 

pue so 

anjdynos s 

‘ 

LG6T Ul ue ye sSurmesp 
Jotpnery jo UOTIIGIUNY [eLIouls fy 9y} jo uOT}IIS VY 

THE DANCER. Bronze (A) 

XVI 

THE DANCER (B) THE SINGER. 1913. 
Derby Stone 

SEE WR S aula Res 91S: TOY and I ISH. 
Lead Cut Brass 

XVII 

Stone 

AS. 

I 

IARY’ 

( 

XVIII 

CAT. Marble FAWN. Bronze 

DOG. Marble 

XIX 

21/q/0W 

SOsSdOWw 

(S161 

19 AD WW 
ynoqe) OSUMOL 

XX 

behind “BIRD SWALLOWING FISH’? 

ing 

stand 

yaudier 

C 

XXI 

RED STONE DANCER. 1913. (A) 
Mansfield Sandstone 

XXII 

RED STONE DANCER () 

XIII 

A 

x 

(q) Lajsvqv] py pauta, 
(V) AANOD V HLIM AO@ 

XXIV 

“S161 

HO GILG}! 

91940 W 
(V) SHAOVUANA AHL 

XXVI 

IUOISIUTT 

XXVIT 

Fl6l 

91 G40 WW 
AYNOM G4LVas 

49JSDQD] V pauia, 1 

‘yI6l dWI HHL 

XXVIII 

GAUDIER-BRZESKA 

XXIX 

(qd) 
GNNOd VUZa JO AVAH DILVUYAIH 

‘dd tO GVaIH 
OLLVUALTH peysruyun jo 
juody ur Bulpueys YATCAVD 

YWALTYAVO-VALVM ‘NMVA ‘SUHOVUGNA 
‘LVO :9PIA “(P2419) BESET 
‘oyjedey 7e punog eizy 

XXX 

0 , 
Tie ah Ce wr \Q\ le L Dew Sara E \e RRA AQAA 
A tu 
ys iy a BA pow thal ja. dua 
Cir Ww awed wow Cains aes ey OPtrg 
bee Mone, “rae Cor rte mute whe Ly) 
L Arbre vy¥VAalie AKL Wows @ aa 
kn bre pode, a meme ately £ 
age 7 - ee Was w)eus eee 
Lege dA‘ absrad ! Jo-wm_— arn 2 
L-ord din aly, ae: Ce Re aX pert 
we Cer alhoclu, 7€ Venn. | Com a 
Vn dine wren Lar tht eb LE Goa 
Cun CU ae hanaday — Wrary bar Tits 
12 deo new brcoucde VEY W0t 
Wkreiow peg Qwi F stra orretiks 
thetrauy din Albuns js bes 
a ae) ee Seq ee he 
ews oe Wire 
, dws in WAN apa = gaat 
wk "Le Sud ohn cd 
eae Ws ZG it ee 
A\AMACWMAL 2 Curtin 

WAL 
Ag Ww 

« CPx: 
Av 

Letter from Gaudier-Brzeska to Ezra Pound. 
28th September, 1914 

GAUDIER-BRZESKA in uniform (bottom row, 
second fr, ft). 1914 or 1915 
RIVE, I 

on a ~~ - 

it
