On the Primitive Characters of the Flint Implements of the Chalk Plateau of Kent (Joseph Prestwich, 1891)
=========================================================================================================
Prestwich's 1891 defense of Harrison's Kent eoliths — the great geologist staking his reputation on pre-glacial man, with the discussion in full. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (sim_royal-anthropological-institute-of-great-britain-ireland_february-10-1891-january-26-1892_21) — Journal of the Anthropological Institute, vol. 21.


On the PRIMITIVE CHARACTERS of the FLINT IMPLEMENTS of the
CHALK PLATEAU of KENT, with reference to the Question of
their Glacial or Pre-Glacial Age. By JosEPH PRESTWICH,
D.C.L., F.R.S., F.G:S., &c., with Notes by Messrs. B. Harri-
SON and De BArRRI CRAWSHAY.


[WITH PLATES XVIII TO XXI.]


Page.
1.— Position and numbers of the Plateau re — en ~ 246
2.—The Geological Question ron ie oe wee 249
3.—Alternative Explanation of their Origin wee = 252
4.—Distinctive Characters of the Valley and Plateau Tmplemen nts. The
Valley Implements. The Plateau Implements _.... we 254
5.—Typical Forms of the Plateau ee oes we ribs w. 257
6.—Explanation of Plates _.... oe an mae eee 262
Notes by Mr. B. Harrison aac ee are re asta ... 263
Notes by Mr. De Barri Crawshay __.... ence a sae o-. 267


1. Position and Numbers of the Plateau Implements.


IT was in 1869 that Dr. John Evans, in company with the
author and a party from High Elms, found on the Chalk Pla-
teau at Currie Farm, near Halstead, a roughly made ovoid
paleolithic flint implement.' The spot was 600 feet above the
sea level, and far from any river valley, though at no great
distance from the head of the dry upper valley of the Cray, and
within one mile of the edge of the chalk escarpment. Although
we made further search over the field on the surface of which it
was discovered, we did not succeed in finding any other speci-

men.?. There was nothing particular about the specimen, which
might pass for a poor example of the ordinary river-v: alley type ;

nor was there anything in its surroundings to give definite clue
to its geological age. A better formed implement was after-
wards obtained in 1883, by Mr. B, Harrison from Park Gate,
Lullingstone, on the plateau west of the Darent Valley, at the
height | of 400 feet, and a similar one was in 1886 found by the
late Miss H. W aring at Cockerhurst, near Shoreham, at 430 feet.
But it was not until Mr. Harrison began his active and persistent


1“ Ancient Stone Implements,” p. 531, and “‘ Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc.,”
vol. xlv, p. 295. It is by mistake that the specimen is stated to have been
found on the second visit. It was on the first.

? Since writing the above my friend the Rev. R. A. Bullen has found, near
the same spot, anotlier very similar specimen, which is figured (No. 6) in Plate
III.


ee


vurnal of the Anthropologual Institut
al ¥


*! bi he Cray re


---- Ay
he


FJ a _Darttor a -
PLATEAU DRIFT a de
O.... S/iTE OF PLATEAU IMPLEMENTS


[oes] VALLEY DRIFTS Dar


a ... SITE OF VALLEY IMPLEMENTS +Swunley
eae a woo OWI
\ ae wee
\ iam ee aie


” p
< a oi \ 10
st" rem. gton \ Aas Me
M ‘ aet CHALK ey .


\ Well oe / Sin
oo. \


“3 rhurst
=e
R25 SHowitts O


Farnborough z° Lullingstone ,


bGreenstvect


/ Upper
Anstin


Plain
3° ns CHALK
Garrie Farm
jrock holt
Otfird
700 a
tl - \
Vorrunts (7 wats \
7 3
i. : “. 21
ov (hevening *F Dunton 2 --- 5
© . Green *% 3° 7
KK _ — LOWE ReeNSAND
| r< . ys ~ y, 3005
i 240 7 g M4. ‘
| nto Shy Ferkead
_/ \ '
1 | | ' : 346 | NSAN f CTP
| Limpstiela ' “+ Westerham -? € GREE 7 \ w} Sevenoaks
500 re , +8 500


f | a


RY 7
viord ; ASN
ied ae ate, ~~ a lees Te ‘“ Map of
urtiord LJ cue os 2 a *Aa hasten tueene cof: Seat i Melee on n Seexet
. eo
‘ swine CHALK ESCARPMENT |
AND |
3200
Swanscombe Jhil PLATEAU
is sr 120
! @ -
Darenth “Rr, RY so Southiicel
+Swaeley CHALK SCALE
aos —— a a : . yao |
(Note :-- Altitiides tn Feet thiis.. 280
=


Snodland - bes
>" adder
82


o a
60
‘ sey ~ 3d Oces Se mae
ESCARPMENT
THE CHALK @= St (Vere .
; a oe — -= FWyotham 200
a= t =
ES Kemsing6 ee
— = 3q0 322 Gee pa. Rates |
| ta ag é m—_ MES . Tg,
bis —— =] e er edad i . ieee
heeano ~ \ = se Malling ~
" ot, + ote ) \ "8 Rerough Green + & ge
, SSeal ~~) , ; i
lohtham . “e .
¢
“~“ oe" LOWER GREENSAND
>|
2


Seven oaks #8 \ :
»$500
+4 escAR me Wealden


D
GREENSAN "= Plartol
er.


THE LOWER


ith. 3: Martins Lane"?


Flint Implements of the Chalk Plateau of Kent. 247


search on the Eastern Plateau in the summer of 1885, that their
numbers and peculiar forms have become known. A total uf
1,452) specimens have now been found. They occur scattered,
at a large number of places, on the surface of the plateau at
heights of from 400 to 800 feet, and extend to the crest of the
escarpment. Nevertheless, these rude implements are at first
not at all easy to find.

These plateau implements have now been traced for a distance
of nearly 20 miles between the Medway and Caterham Valleys,
and with a breadth of from two to four miles. It is on the high
ground only that they occur, and though the heights actually
vary considerably, this arises from the circumstance that the
chalk plateau forms an inclined plane, having its highest pitch
of 700 to 800 feet above the sea level, along the line of the
chalk escarpment, and thence falling by a gr adual incline north-
wards to the height of about 400 feet. (Fi ig. 1.)

The following is a list of the localities at which they have
been found, with the height above the sea level, and the number
of implements obtained at each; but fresh places are being con-
stantly discovered.? In every instance, it is on the high levels of
the places named that the implements are to be sought for.
They are indicated, as far as possible, by dots placed in some
relation to the church of the village, or of the farm-house
named. (See Map, Plate XVIII.)


The Plateau east of the Darent Valley.


With the exception of the places marked with an asterisk
(found by Mr. Crawshay) and f (by the Rev. R. Ashington
Bullen, of Shoreham), all the localities on this plateau were dis-
covered by Mr. B. Harrison.


1 Mr. Harrison has upwards of 1,000 in his collection, and Mr. Crawshay
nearly 400 in his.

2 There is little doubt that further research will show them to have a much
wider range over the Chalk Downs and at other corresponding levels. Within
the last two or three years some thirty to forty worked flints of the plateau
type and colour have been found by Mr. Hilton, of East Dean, at Friston, near
Eastbourne, 350 feet above the sea level. Amongst them are ‘specimens of the
characteristic crescent-shaped scrapers. Mr. Crawshay has also found a few
specimens at Stede Hill, above Lenham, on the Chalk Downs east of the
Medway; and quite recently the Rev. R. A. Bullen has sent me a well-
characterise1 beak-shaped implement from Blean Hill, near Canterbury.
Similar flint implements have also been found by Mr. Worthington Smith on
the hills near Dunstable, at heights of 596 and 760 feet in “ positions away
from existing river valleys.” ” Nature,’ * for June, 1889, p. 151.


248


J. PRESTWICH.—On the Primitive Characters of the


Total


Name of Place. Altitude.

feet.

* Punish Farm 600
Hodsell Street .... 550
Sparksfield 520
Fairseat and Plot Farm 690
Wrotham Hilt .... 760
Plaxdale Green, near Stansted 630
Stanstead 633
Ash 490
South Ash 520
West Yoke Farm 460
Kingsdown 550
Terry’s Lodge .... 770
Peckham Wood Corner 637
Gabriel’s Spring Wood and Speed Gate 450
Horton Wood (west of) 400
Speed Plain and Gate ... 420
The Vigo 690
Birches Wood, St. Clere Hill .... 760
Cotman’s Ash 665
Wick Farm 697
Bower Lane 520
+ Preston Hill (Shoreham) 510


Number


Specimens.


Flint Implements of the Chalk Plateau of Kent. 249


The Plateau west of the Darent Valley.


The places on this plateau are, with a few exceptions * by
Mr. Harrison, the discovery of Mr. De B. Crawshay.


Number
Name of Place. Altitude. of
Specimens.
feet

* Cockerhurst (Shoreham) — oe eee 450 3
* Park Gate (Lullingstone) oe ase cee 430 1
Shacklands Wood (west of) _.... ie om 530 40
Hewitt’s Farm (Chelsfield) _.... rare oo 470 3
Oldmen Wood és on aes oe 430 1

* Polhill Plain’ .... ie on 447 22
Halstead-fields, north of Church = nts 495 36

* Morant’s Court | ao aa wien an 700 10
Colegates ei aie ous ors co 500 1

* Currie Farm ._..... souk ae ie eae 590 3
Norstead Hills .... — aes nae ats 485 54
*+Botley Hillf{ __... ni sis oa 875 5
Betsom Hill (W esterbam) cm ies a 790 23
Titsey Hill — wai ome _ 864 11
Tatsfield Firs _.... paas ms ae 20 3
Ivy Cottage (Tatsfield).... = = te 790 13
Park Wood ens oo “ns wn 780 1
Farthing Street (Downe) — nee we 400 6
Total wee ee _ 236


2. The Geological Question.


Upon the geological question relating to the age of the pla-
teau drift it is not necessary to enlarge, as I have treated it in
detail in two papers recently read before the Geological Society.”
My object now is to enquire whether the character of the imple-
ments is in accordance with the early glacial or pre-glacial age,
to which J would assign them.


I may, however, for the information of those members who
are not acquainted with the geological argument, briefly give
the facts on which the antiquity of the drift, with which the
implements are associated is established, in a diagram which
embodies the essential points. (Fig. 1.)


1 Mr. Bullen has recently discovered another promising locality to the north
of the London Road, not far from the Polhill Arms, and within half-a-mile
from the field on Currie Farm.


2 “ Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc.” for May, 1889, and for May, 1891.


250 J. PRrestwicH.—On the Primitive Characters of the


Fig. 1.—Diagram showing the relative positions of the implement-bearing
Drift on the Chalk Plateaus and of the Valley Drifts of Post-Glacial age.


G LGsS


a.—Red Clay-Drift, 5 to 20 feet thick, containing numerous unrolled chalk
flints, and overlying here and there thin remnants of Lower Eocene and
Pliocene strata. The rude flint implements are scattered over the surface
of this ground.

b.—High-level Valley gravel of fluviatile origin and Post-Glacial age, with
paleolithic flint implement and a few mammalian remains. This lies
about 100 feet above the level of the Thames.

c.—Low-level Valley gravel and loam, with paleolithic implements and
numerous remains of large extinct mammalia. These slope down to the
Thames level.

Ch.—Chalk. G, Upper Greensand and Gault. LGS.— Lower Greensand.


The chalk plateau rises from 400 to 800 feet above the sea-
level, and is bounded north and south by the valleys A’ A,
These valleys have cut off abruptly, on both sides of the plateau,

. the drift a and the Pliocene beds ¢, which originally extended
over the area now occupied by those valleys, as shown by the
dotted lines. Spread over the surface of the red clay (a) is
a scattering of peculiar brown-stained flints, together with
fragments of chert and ragstone,’ derived from the Lower
(;reensand strata, which form a range of hills four to five miles
south of the chalk escarpment, E. But at the time when that
débris was transported on to the chalk plateau, the valley A
was still bridged over by the chalk and overlying strata ¢,
which have since been removed by denudation. The plateau
drift (a) dates therefore from a time subsequent to the
pliocene period, but still when the beds of that age ¢ had a
wider range southward, and anterior to the glacial period, during
which the valleys A’A were excavated. It is therefore of pre-
glacial or early glacial age; and as the flint implements are
closely associated with this plateau drift, and are limited to the
area over which it extends, we are led to infer the pre-glacial
or early glacial age of the men by whom they were fabricated.

The bed of the valleys A’A afterwards formed the channels of
the rivers that deposited the gravel 6, and it is in these high-
level valley gravels, formed during the early stages of the
post-glacial rivers, that the well-known pal:eolithic flint
implements of an advanced type—such as those of the valleys
of the Thames and Somme—are found. As the rivers continued


1 The Southern Drift of the Author (see “Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc.,” vol.
xlvi, p. 155).


Flint Implements of the Chalk Plateau of Kent. 251


to deepen their channels, the gravel beds of this first stage were
cut through and left as terraces at various heights above the
newer valleys B’B, while in the bed of these later valleys were
deposited the gravels and loams ¢ which constitute the low-level
valley drifts of the last stages of the post-glacial rivers, and it
is in these especially that the remains of the great extinct
mammalia (the mammoth, woolly rhinoceros, reindeer, ke.)
abound, associated with flint implements of later Man, though
of types very similar to those of the high-level valley drift.

It will be obvious from the above, that the drift-beds a, with
their associated implements, preceded those marked 8, just as
these latter preceded those of c. This establishes a primd facie
presumption of the greater antiquity of the implements found
on the chalk plateau—a presumption which is materially
strengthened by the circumstance that the workmanship of the
implements is in accordance with the great difference in
geological age between the plateau and the valley drifts.

Nevertheless, though we may be warranted in drawing this
inference from the facts as far as they are known to us, we yet
need, as I have before explained (“ Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc.,” vol.
xlvii, p. 288), further information as to the exact relation of
the implements to the plateau drift. Owing to the absence of
pits and rarity of sections, we have had for the greater part to
depend on specimens found on the surface, or thrown up in
shallow plough furrows or trenches, or on a few roadside
cuttings, and although from the deep staining of the implements,
and their occasional incrustations with iron oxide, we have
reason to believe that they have been imbedded in a deposit
beneath the surface, it is only in a few rare instances that they
have actually been found at any depth. A fine specimen was
found at South Ash in making a hole two feet deep for planting a
tree, but as it was picked up on the thrown-out soil, its exact
position beneath the surface remains of course uncertain. It
was the same with the one obtained in a post-hole at Kingsdown.
For two others we have, however, the personal testimony of Mr.
Harrison. One he took out of a bank of the red-clay-with-flints on
the side of a pond and at the depth of two and a half feet, and
the other from a bed of “deep red clay,” two feet in depth, at
the Vigo."

The condition of the implements and their limitation to the
“red clay” plateau, form, however, a strong argument in favour
of the intimate relation of the one to the other, notwithstanding


1 Mr. Bullen has just had-a trench dug on the top of Preston Hill. It was
nearly five feet deep, through surface soil (one foot); and the red-clay-with-flints
in which, at a depth of three feet ten inches from the surface, he found an un-
worn white flint—apparently the broken point of asmall implement (Oct., 1891).


252 J. Prestwicu.—On the Primitive Characters of the


the absence of definite sections. It is in any case clear from
the occurrence of the implements on the highest summits of the
chalk plateau and escarpment, that whatever may be the causes
which led to their distribution, those causes must have been,
unlike these affecting the valley drifts and implements, in-
dependent of the present topography of the district and of the
system of river drainage as now established.


3. Alternatwe Explanation of their Origin.


Is it possible, however, to account for the presence of these
flint implements in any other way than that of their being con-
temporary or nearly so with the plateau drift? For example,
could these implements, like the neolithic implements which
occur on the same ground, have been dropped on the surface
where they are now found, at some later date? The answer to
this is, that these neolithic implements show only weathering by
exposure on the surface, and are found at all levels, whereas the
plateau implements, besides their wear and colour, present all
the physical characters due to having been imbedded in a special
drift, and are confined to a special area. The two sorts, although
found on the same ground, remain perfectly distinguishable.
(For further observations on this point, see “Quart. Journ.
Geol. Soc.,” vol. xlvii, p. 133.)

Then again, is it not possible that similar rude specimens
occur in the valley drifts, and have been overlooked owing to
the prevalence of the better finished implements to which atten-
tion had been exclusively given. This, if we admit that
rudeness of form alone is not a sufficient reason, is a fair
argument. The ruder valley forms have not, however, been
altogether overlooked. A large number of rude and badly
finished specimens have been collected in the valley drifts, but
they all belong to one set of types (postea, p. 255), and though I
have seen and handled many hundreds of these, I question
whether, with the exception of the derived specimens to be
named presently, there were any like the ruder and most
primitive of the plateau types. The distinction is as well marked
as that between the ruder specimens of Roman pottery and
rude early British pottery.

Boucher de Perthes collected everything in the Somme
district, which showed any traces of workmanship, howsoever
indistinct, or even of similitude, yet I do not remember that in
his great collection there were specimens of the peculiar
character of these plateau implements.’ Nor had Mr. Harrison,


_ 1 Ihave one specimen given me by M. Boucher de Perthes, from near St.
Riquier, five miles north-east of Abbeville, which may belong to this group. It is


Flint Implements of the Chalk Plateau of Kent. 25 3


during his rigorous examination of the Shode Valley, discovered
any specimens in the valley drifts of the Ightham district to
correspond with the group of the plateau implements. At my
request, he has re-examined several of these localities, as well
as the large pit at Aylesford in the Medway Valley, and the
pits at Milton Street (Swanscombe) in the Thames Valley, with
this special object in view. He reports to me that he finds no
contemporary specimens of the plateau type, and very few
derived specimens of that type either at Hightield, Court Lodge,
Bayshaw or elsewhere in the valley drifts near Ightham. At
Aylesford, he found one, and at Milton Street, none.

Mr. Crawshay has one derived specimen from Goodley Stock,
one from Dry Hill,two from Seal,three from Chart Farm and Kiln-
field, and one from Stonepits. His collection from Milton Street
contains less than one per cent. of derived plateau specimens.*

In the large collection from the Limpsfield high-level gravel
formed by Mr. A. Montgomery Bell, there are none of the older
specimens, but Mr. H. Lewis has sent me one of the double-curved
scrapers (the depressed form), characteristic of the plateau group,
which he found in the Limpsfield Common gravel pit ; and Mr.
Bell informs me that he has certainly seen and rejected some of
the older rude specimens, owing to the absence of the bulb ot
percussion which he then considered essential. That a certain
number of derived specimens should be found in the valley
gravels is to be expected, if we bear in mind the extent of
surface lost by the plateau during the excavation of the valleys
which traverse and flank it on all sides, for while the chalk in
these valleys was washed away and lost, the harder and heavier
materials have been left behind amongst the general débris of the
newer drift beds. The derived plateau specimens are easily dis-
tinguished, by their greater wear, distinct colour, and peculiar
= from the implements contemporary with these valley

rifts.

I do not wish to assert that all the plateau implements
are of so distinct a pattern that they can always be distinguished
from the valley implements. Nor would I insist that their
rudeness alone is a proof of their antiquity, for not only are
there rude specimens in the valley drifts, but the plateau
group includes a certain number of better finished valley types.
The difference consists in the fact that the great majority of the
plateau specimens are of this rude make and peculiar types,
said to have been found ata depth of four matres, and evidently comes from the red
clay drift, which there caps, as it does here, the higherchalk hills. It is four inches
Jong by one and a half inches wide, rod-shaped, very roughly chipped all round
and at ends, and has a white patina, to which some of the red clay yet adheres.


1 Mr. Lewis has, however, found a rather larger proportion in the Swans-
combe pits, and one still larger in the gravel at Southfleet.


254 J. PrRestwich.—On the Primitive Characters of the


while well or even moderately well-finished specimens are rare,
and also in that they possess special physical and structural
characters, in accordance with a presumed greater geological
antiquity. The presence of a few forms in common does not
invalidate the general evidence any more than does the
circumstance of the implements in low-level valley drifts
being scarcely distinguishable, except perhaps in the proportion
of some forms, from those of the high-level gravels, notwith-
standing the difference of position and age.


4, Distinctive Characters of the Valley and Plateau
Implements.


But the special question which I wish to bring before
you this evening, is whether, taken as a whole, the plateau
implements exhibit distinct characters and types, such as
would denote them to be the work of a more primitive and
ruder race than those fabricated by palolithic man of the
valley-drift times. The chief features of the valley implements
may briefly be stated as follows :—


The Valley Implements.—With respect to these, it is manifest
that the great majority of the implements have been made
from larger flints, either taken direct from the chalk, or else
found lying on the surface or in the bed of streams. I have
before cited the interesting case at Crayford, described by Mr.
F. C. J. Spurrell? where at the foot of a submerged chalk cliff
on the old Thames bank, he found beneath a depth of 20 to 30
feet of mammiliferous drift beds, the surface of a former strand
strewed over with the flakes and chips of large flints, of which a
layer is still exposed in the adjacent old cliff. The fragments
are as sharp and fresh as those of a recent Norfolk flint-knapper’s
shop, and show as well-marked bulbs of percussion, and though
they are scattered about in disorder, they often admit of being
put together again in a manner to restore the form and substance
of the original blocks. Other old workshops away from the
chalk area, and therefore dependent upon flipts from the surface,
or from the bed of streams, have been found by Mr. Worthington
Smith? at Stoke Newington, and by Mr. Allen Brown® at
Acton.

A few only of the valley implements are made from gravel-
flints, or from the green-coated flints at the base of the Lower
Tertiaries. The size of the implements varies generally from
3 to 6 or 7 inches in length, but some specimens attain a length

? “ Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc.,” vol. xxxvi, p. 544.


* “ Journ. Anthrup. Inst.,” vol. xiii, p. 357.
‘* Paleolithic Man in North-west Middlesex,” pp. 56-60.


Flint Implements of the Chalk Plateau of Kent. 255


of 10 to 12 inches. They are in general but little worn, though
there are exceptions to this rule. The workmanship of the
implements often shows considerable skill, and some of the
smaller lanceolate forms are chipped and finished with a
neatness approaching to the Danish javelins or spear-heads of
the Stone period. At the same time there is a considerable
proportion present of rude and sometimes very rude specimens,
but they all belong to the same types as the more finished
specimens. Many of the implements were no doubt used in the
hand, but a large and probably the greater number must have
been fixed or tied to handles of wood or bone.

Sometimes the colour of the flint of which the implements
are made is in no degree altered, but remains as black and fresh
as originally. At other times, it is stained yellow or ochreous
by the matrix in which it has been embedded, or else owing to
a molecular change of the surface, it has assumed the white
colour and glazed aspect of porcelain. The following are the
principal ferms of the valley implements :—


1. Narrow flakes with sharp untrimmed edges—for cutting.

2. Oval, leaf-shaped, and round flakes, worked on one side
or at the edges—scrapers.

3. Pointed implements with the haft end formed by the
natural surface of the flint—tools or weapons.

. Pointed or lance-head implements, often very large; and
worked entirely out of the flint—same as 3.

. Spatula-shaped implements, generally all worked out of
the flint, or with the natural flint left at one end as a
haft—for same purposes as 3 and 4.

. Flat ovoid implements worked all round.

. Ovoid implements with a slight twist in centre.

. Flints used as hammer stones.


Of these the pointed forms Nos. 3, 4, and 5, largely pre-
dominate, and next are the ovoid forms, Nos. 6 and 7.


The Plateau Implements.—The physical characters which on
the other hand distinguish these implements are :—


1. They are almost all more or less stained, like the
drifted flints with which they are associated, of a
deep warm brown colour, which spreads alike over the
natural and the worked surfaces, although in some
cases it is lighter on the latter.

2. They also, like the drifted flints, generally show a con-
siderable amount of wear, as though they had been a
good deal rolled and knocked about, so that the
worked edges are commonly rounded off and blunted.


256 J. PRESTWICH.—On the Primitive Characters of the


This character combined with the last often renders
the artificial work very obscure.

3. The trimming is also often very slight, and has generally
been made on the edges of rude natural flints taken
from an old flint drift. It is only in a very few
instances that an implement has been entirely wrought
out of a larger flint, whereas, as just mentioned, with
the valley implements such is commonly the case.
The trimming, slight though it may be, is to be
recognised by its being at angles or in places incom-
patible with river-drift agencies, and such as could
not have been produced by natural causes.

4, Besides the implements of definite patterns, there is a
large, probably the larger, number, which though not
the result of chance, show no special design. Amongst
these are the natural flints which have been selected
for use as hammer or trimming stones, the result being
that the flint has become chipped at the ends or round
the sides undesignedly, but still in a manner that could
not have resulted from natural wear. In a similar way,
some are roughened at the end like the large pebbles
or balls used at a later neolithic period, exhibiting
patches of rough abraded surface, the result of repeated
blows.

The observer will soon learn to distinguish between a
natural flint in which angles project in any direction, however
they may otherwise simulate the artificial forms, and those
flints which show an object to be attained, in however simple a
way that object has been carried out.

But although the great majority (at least 95 per cent.) of the
specimens are of rude primitive forms, there are some which
might pass as indifferent valley drift specimens of the ovoid and
pointed types, while a few large implements have been found
almost equalling in workmanship and finish the best of the
valley specimens. Onespecimen(mentionedat p. 251)from South
Ash, in Mr. Harrison’s possession, is most carefully fashioned.
It is 6 inches long by 34 inches in width, and is of the thin
flat spatula-shaped form, and of a bright yellow colour. Two
others are large flat ovoids from the field off Bower Lane,
whilst another, also from Bower Lane, has the top broken off,
and is similar in shape to the Ash specimen, but is weathered
white, as though it had not been entombed in a drift bed.

Two well-made implements of the sharp-pointed St. Acheul
(Amiens) type have also been found—one white, is from Kings-
down, and the other, stained yellow, is from Ash. Neither of
them are at all worn, and both show a slight patina.


Flint Implements of the Chalk Plateau of Kent. 257


It is not easy to account for the presence of these abnormal
specimens. If contemporaneous with the others, we might.
assume that there were then some workmen more skilled than
their neighbours in the fabrication of flint implements. But if
so, how is it that they are not more numerous, and that there
should be so great a difference between those and the other
forms, or that there should be few or no intermediate forms ?
How also are we to account for the great difference in physical
conditions? The rude specimens which preponderate so largely
are of a nearly uniform brown colour, and are usually much
worn; while the few rare finished specimens are sharp, show
no wear, and are of lighter tints.

Again, we may suppose that the plateau heights were at the
later paleolithic periods frequented by man of the valley drifts
for the purpose of the chase or to supply some want, and that
some of their implements were lost when in pursuit of game,
or in felling trees, or grubbing up roots. But these are mere
conjectures, and we must wait in the hope that some new sec-
tions will throw further light upon the geological question, and
show with greater certainty the exact stratigraphical relation of
these different types of implements.

Whilst also the more finished implements have all the ap-
pearance of having remained in situ, the rude implements would
appear to have been carried down, with the southern drift, on to
the plateau, from those Central Wealden uplands which I have
estimated! might, in pre-glacial times before the denudation
of the Weald, have formed a low mountain range 2,000 to
3,000 feet in height If it should prove that the rude imple-
ments have been thus swept down from those uplands with the
drift which evidently has come from that quarter—and we have
found nothing to indicate that they were made on the spot
where they are now found—it is possible that they may have
to be relegated to a still earlier period than I have named.
But that must be a question for the future. For the present I
am concerned only to show that their extreme rudeness as a
whole, points to a very primitive state of art, which is in
accordance with the antiquity indicated by the known geo-
logical evidence.


5. Typical Forms of the Plateau Implements.


Unlike the valley implements, the plateau implements are, as

a rule, made of the fragments of natural drift-flints, that were

found scattered over the surface of the ground, or picked up in

gravel beds and merely roughly trimmed. Sometimes the
1 © Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc.,” vol. xlvi, p. 169.


258 J. PrestwicH.—On the Primitive Characters of the


work is so slight as to be scarcely apparent; at others, it is
sufficient to show a distinct design and object. It indicates the
very infancy of the art, and probably the earliest efforts of
man to fabricate his tools and weapons from other substances
than wood or bone. That there was an object and design is
manifest from the fact that they admit of being grouped
according to certain patterns. These are very simple, but they
answered to the wants of a primitive people.

With few exceptions, theimplements aresmall,from 2 to 5 inches
in length, and mostly such as could have been used in the hand
and in the hand only. There is, with the exceptions before
named, an almost entire absence of the large massive spear-head
forms of the valley drifts, and a large preponderance of forms
adapted for chipping, hammering, and scraping. With these are
some implements that could not have been used in the hand, but
they are few and rude. The difference between the plateau and
the valley implements is as great or greater than between the
latter and the neolithic implements. Though the work on the
plateau implements is often so slight as scarcely to be recog-
nisable,even modern savage work, such as exhibited for example
by the stone implements of the Australian natives, show, when
divested of their mounting, an amount of work no greater or
more distinct, than do these early paleolithic specimens.

Some persons may be disposed to look upon the slight and
rude work which these flints have received as the result only of
the abrasion and knocking about caused by collision during the
transport of the drift. This belief prevailed for a time even
in the case of the comparatively well-fashioned valley imple-
ments. A little practice,and comparison with natural drift flints,
will show the difference, notwithstanding the, at first, unpro-
mising appearance of these early specimens of man’s handicraft.
It is as such, and from their being the earliest such work with
which we are acquainted, that they are of so great interest, for
they give us some slight insight into the occupation and sur-
roundings of the race by whom they. were used. A main object
their owners would seem to have had in view, was the trimming
of flints to supply them with implements adapted to the breaking
of bones for the sake of the marrow, scraping skins, and
round bodies such as bones or sticks, for use as simple tools or
poles. From the scarcity of the large massive implements of
the pointed and adze type, so common in the valley drifts, it
would seem as though offensive and defensive weapons of this
class had not been so much needed, whether from the rarity of
the large mammalia so common later on in the low-level valley
drifts or from the habits and character of those early people. It
would be interesting to institute a careful comparison of these


Flint Implements of the Chalk Plateau of Kent. 259


rude implements with the stone implements of different modern
savages, to ascertain what analogy exists, or whether they do
not point to a different state of things.

In order to form some estimate of the proportional numbers
and character of the type specimens, I have carefully collated the
large collections of Messrs. Harrison and De B. Crawshay, which
they kindly placed at my disposal. This, and a comparison of
them with the implements from the valley drifts in my own and
other collections, lead me to adopt the following grouping of
the main forms typical of the plateau drift. Some of the forms .
pass, however, so insensibly into others, as, for instance, the
crescent-shaped scraper into the beak-shaped implement, or the
double-curve scraper into a pointed implement—that it is difficult
to draw the line between them or to say whether more or fewer
divisions should not be made. Mr. Harrison has adopted a
different grouping, based rather more on their use, which is given
in his notes.

The greater number of the implements, no doubt, are so rude
that probably few of us would agree upon a general classification.
On the other hand some types are peculiar and very distinct,
while a few are common to the later valley drifts, such as the
pointed St. Acheul and the ovoid Abbeville types; but with few
exceptions all the others are of more simple types, and have a
stamp of their own, and most of them seem confined to this
period. They may, for general purposes, be divided into three
groups. The first consisting of those in which the natural flint
has been used with little modification, and in which the original
shape of the stone has determined the ultimate form. In the
second the natural flints were equally used, but some object is
more apparent in adapting them to acommon pattern and special
purpose. In the third, the implement or tool has been worked
more or less entirely out of the flint with a definite object in
view, as is the case with the later paleolithic implements.

The first group includes—

1. Fragments of thin flat pieces of flints or natural flakes,
with the sides chipped and notched and sometimes
brought to a rude point. No definite shape (Figs. 1, 2,
3, 4, Plate XIX).

2. Split flint pebbles from tertiary strata; chipped round
the edges for cutting or scraping (Figs. 5, 6, Plate XIX).

3. Larger flints that fit the hand and could be used with
a little dressing as trimming and hammer-stones.
These show the notches and marks, the result of blows
given by use, and may have served to shape other
flints, or to break bones or other hard substances (Figs.
7, 8, 9, Plate XIX).


= anaataaainlinnnann eta e —


260 J. Prestwicu.—On the Primitive Characters of the


The above constitute a very large proportion of the plateau
implements. The second group is also very numerous, and
includes a greater variety of more definite forms, especially
scrapers of various patterns, such as—

4. Ordinary scrapers, formed out of natural flakes or fiat
pieces of flint trimmed at the edges (Fig. 1, Plate XX).

5. Knob-headed and shoe-shaped scrapers, formed from a
rough flint, flat on one side and retaining the outer
rough surface on the other, and trimmed at one end
(Figs. 2, 3, Plate XX).

6. Massive thick scrapers, flat on one side and trimmed
round one or two edges (Fig. 3, Plate XX).

7. Square-headed or chisel-shaped scrapers.

8. Crescent-shaped scrapers. These are generally small and
adapted to scrape a round body such as a bone or
a stick. This isa very characteristic form (Figs. 4, 5,
Plate XX).

9. Double scrapers. These seem intended for the same
object, but have two scraping edges with an intervening
point. This is another characteristic form (Figs. '7 and
8 are the ordinary forms ; Figs. 6 and 9 (pebble-formed)
are depressed forms; Plate XX).

10. Double scrapers in the form of an hour-glass. These
are generally formed out of a thin flat natural flint,
and are not common.

11. Beak-shaped implements which may possibly have been
used as scrapers or as picks. These also are character-
istic (Figs. 10, 11, Plate XX),

12. Crook-shaped implements, rare (Fig. 12, Plate XX).

The third group includes forms common in the valley drifts
but comparatively rare among the plateau implements, and
comprises—

13. Plain flakes, showing the bulb of percussion, used for
cutting purposes, and so common in the valley drifts,
but rare here (Fig. 1, Plate XX1).

14. Broad flakes, trimmed round the edges (Fig.2, Plate XX1).

15. Ovoid implements of the same pattern as those common
at Abbeville; but the smaller ovoid with a twist in
the centre, so common in the valley gravels and in

the Shode Valley, is wanting (Figs. 4, 5,6, Plate XX1I).

16. Pointed implements of the spear and lance-head pattern
(a St. Acheul type). These are small compared with
those in the valley gravels (Figs. 8, 9, Plate X XI).

17. The same with a slight curve at point (Fig. 7, Plate XX1).


1 These res*mble in shape an instrument termed a “ drawshave,” used in
Kent ior shaving hop-poles,


Flint Implements of the Chalk Plateau of Kent. 261


Besides these there are others of which only single or few
specimens have been found. Amongst them are flints trimmed
round, which may have been used as fling-stones; others are
rod-shaped and short; ohe is crook-shaped (Fig. 12, Plate XX) ;
and a few are drill-shaped (Fig. 12, Plate X XI); another forms
a triangular point (Fig. 3, Plate X XI).


The relative proportion in which those groups occur may be
approximately estimated at—


Slightly worked flints of the 1st group, 40 per cent.
Rude implements 5 ae. ‘i
Implements of later types ,, 3rd _,, 6 sd


It is probable, however, that the 1st group is underestimated,
as so many of the specimens were not considered worth keeping,
and have been thrown away. The greater number of the 2nd
group consist of the various forms of scrapers.

No estimate has been made of the proportions in which the
different types of the later palolithic implements occur in the
valley drifts; but speaking from general knowledge, I should
say that not less than one-half consists of the different forms
of the pointed and ovoid types, and probably one quarter of the
different forms of flakes.

Looking at the very distinctive features of the plateau imple-
ments, such as their rudeness of make, choice of material, depth
of wear and staining, peculiarity of form—taken in conjunction
with the extreme rarity of the valley forms—constitute charac-
ters so essentially different from those which typify the latter
implements, that by those characters alone they might be
attributed to a more primitive race of men; and as this view
accords with the geological evidence which shows that the drift
beds on the chalk plateau, with which the implements are
associated, are older than the valley drifts, I do not see how we
are to avoid the conclusion, that not only was the plateau race
not contemporary with the valley men, but also that the former
belonged to a period considerably anterior to the latter—either
an early glacial or a pre-glacial period.


I have asked Mr. B. Harrison and Mr. De B. Crawshay to
add a few notes respecting the conditions under which they find
the plateau implements, and especially with regard to their
experience in the valley drifts bearing upon the question of
community of forms,


VOL. XXI. U


Explanation of Plates.


6.—LExplanation of Plates.


The numbers in brackets refer to the numbers of the speci-
mens in the collection of Mr. Harrison. C. stands for those in
Mr. Crawshay’s collection, and B. for those of Mr. Bullen.


Plate XIX. First Group.
Fig.


1 (384) South Ash oe “

2 (84) Ash “ee ie .. | Natural flints, very slightly trimmed at the
3 (427) West Yoke es oa edges.

4 (264) 8. Ash Pi

tess — os \ split pebbles, trimmed at the edges.

7 (119) Sparksfield a ia

8 (87) Kingsdown - -- p Hammer and trimming stones.

9 (847) Ash.


Plate XX. Second Group.


14(355) Ash... ee -. Circular scrapers,
2 (218) South Ash - .- Knob-shaped scrapers.
3 (397) South Ash on
4 (72) Birches near St. Clere .. C ee pen
5 (425) South Ash ee ae } a a a baa


6 (B.) Polhill Plain... oe


Shoe-shaped scrapers.


7 (416) Ash ee
8 (93) Ash oe
9 (154) Ash ° es
10 (77) South Ash oe .
ll ree) can am 2 > } Beak-shaped implements.


12 (512) South Ash < .. Crook-shaped implement.


Double scrapers, Nos.7 and 8 the long forms ;
Nos. 6, 9, depressed forms.


Plate XXI. Third Group (10, 11, 12 are out of place).


1 (1206) Ash... Broad flake leaf-shaped.

2 (458) Ash a oe -- Trimmed flake, large.

3 (C.) Ivy Cottage oe .. Pointed triangular flake.

4 (556) Ash ee oe .. Thin ovoid

5 (565) Ash Plain -- Small oo ple s

6 (B.) Currie Farm oa .- Large ovoid

7 (594) Ash Plain oa .. Small pointed, curved at end.
8 (47) Peckham Wood .. -- Small pointed | 7. Joments
9 (537) West Yoke ee -. Large sweet a
10 (1203) South Ash... .- Rude scrapers.
11 (1204) West Yoke .. -» Trimmed triangular flake.
12 (1205) Ash Plain... Drill-shaped tools.


Plate XVIII.


Map of the district showing the extent and range of the
plateau drift, and the position of the places where the implements
have been found. The numbers give the height of the post
above the sea-level,


Journal of the Anthropological Institute TYPES OF THE FPLATEAU Tf
Vol XX.


Lf
s


Pao


oy


2


TEAU IMPLEMENTS: I§8? GROUP Plate 19


Journal of the Anthropologiat Tnstilite TYPES OF THE PLATEAU IM
Vol XI.


W:S:Tomxin Dex.


: 28° GROUP


IMPLEMENTS


TEAU


iMP


TYPES OF THE PLATEAU


4


Vol XXT.


Journal of the Anthropological Institute


W:-S:Tomxin DEL.


ow - t


4


Plate


: 382° GROUP


iMPLEMENTS


EAU


Z


B. Harrison.—On certain Rude Implements. 263


On certain RUDE IMPLEMENTS from the NorTH DOWNS.


By B. Harrison, Esq.


PROFESSOR PRESTWICH having suggested I should make some
remarks on the series of rude implements from the chalk
plateau, I will briefly do so.

For many years I have been a diligent and successful hunter
of palzolithic implements in the Shode Valley around my
home at Ightham, and being familiar with the older forms, I
was much impressed with the Currie Wood specimen when
seen in Dr. Evans’ collection in 1883.

Having made many excursions across the Cray Basin from
Holwood, by Down Cudham and Currie Wood, I was well
acquainted with the locality, and the question was put to
myself, why should not similar specimens be found on the
chalk plateau above Ightham? which to me seemed to present
similar features.

For this purpose I instituted a rigorous search on the capping
of Tertiaries lying just north of Ash Church.

Success, however, did not attend my first efforts, and it was
not until the 19th of November, 1885, that a rich brown
ochreous implement was secured.

This seemed to me the equivalent of the Currie Wood find,
and somewhat like it, and I forwarded it to Dr. Evans, who in a
few days replied with the comforting and encouraging remark :
“The specimen you sent me from Ash much resembles in
character and material the Currie Wood implement.”

I was also encouraged to persevere by Professor Prestwich,
to whom I sent all my successive finds, and advised with me as
to the grounds to search.

This stimulated me to continue the work, but as the locality
is distant about six miles, and my time is much occupied, a
passing glance only could be bestowed for some months.

However, on each occasion on which I visited it, some relic of
palzolithic age was secured, though I must own they were of
so fragmentary and rude a character it needed the trained eye
of a specialist to refigure.

On my submitting these fragments to Dr. Evans previous to
the Ightham paper being given by Professor Prestwich, all
were accepted, and I felt very desirous to thoroughly and
rigorously search the area inch by inch.

Some time elapsed ere this could be done, as one part of the
coveted area was a mass of weeds, and the next patch in corn ;

U2


264 B. Harrison.—On certain Rude Implements


but as soon as available for search, a day was devoted to the
few acres, and about a dozen implements found.

Being much impressed with some rudely worked ochreous
flints thus secured, I was prompted to search diligently on a patch
of deep-stained much worn ochreous gravel lying by South Ash
Farm, with which I had been familiar for many years.

On this spread stones apparently bearing work had been
noticed, and eventually it dawned upon my mind that these
rude and misshapen flints might possibly represent an earlier
layer of paleolithic life—or at least might be rude field tools,
which had hitherto been slighted and overlooked by those
workers who had only sought for more highly finished
specimens.

Feeling confident, I kept on with a determination to prove
this point if possible.

Many and frequent visits were made to obtain specimens, and
so many were acquired that I felt desirous to extend my know-
ledge of the area, and for this purpose traced from near the
escarpment to a field near West Yoke, patches of deep-stained
ochreous flint.

Similar observations were made by tracing along the ridge
from Bower Farm, Eynesford, to Romney Street, and here, too,
I was fortunate, many of the rude flints being found, and
implements of the accepted types, in association with a spread
of deep ochreous flint.

This led to a complete survey of the district, so that the
chalk plateau was rigorously searched and many new localities
added. I may mention those positions on each of which rude
specimens have been found :—Terry’s Lodge, Peckham Wood,
Ash, South Ash (two patches), West Yoke, Sparks Field,
Kingsdown, Cotman’s Ash, Wrotham Hill, The Vigo, Birches,
Wick Farm, and Bower Lane on the east of the Darent.
Morant’s Court Hill, Polhill Plain, the bed of coarse gravel lying
above Eynesford on the west, and more recently on Telegraph
Hill, Swanscombe.

Most of these implements have been found on the surface, with
a few exceptions, which are laid out separately for inspection.

The first was thrown out from a post hole on the Kingsdown
Plain, another from a hole dug two feet deep in which to plant
damson trees at Parsonage Farm, the third from a pond bank
deep down at Ash, and the fourth from a spread of deep red
clay at The Vigo.

The West Yoke and South Ash patches, on which I first
worked with a will, proved remarkably prolific, yielding both
the rude and the accepted types of implements.

One from the former locality is deserving of careful attention.


rom the North Downs. 265


It is of the spear-head type, of a deep red colour, and the angles
of work so much worn it seems to have been derived from some
former resting-place and to have suffered in transport..

The accumulation of so many of these rude examples im-
pressed me.

Though many may possibly be classed as merely field tools
. picked and used for chopping and hammering in the same way
as one sometimes picks up and uses a pebble now-a-days,”
still there are scores of others evidently selected and fashioned
in such a way that I felt justified in separating them into groups.
Feeling confident that they do bear the impress of man, and
possibly represent his first essays in handiwork (certainly in the
Thames Basin), I have classified them as represented in the
accompanying sheet :

Provisionally I have them grouped thus :-—

. Crook point tool, Fig..10, Plate XX.

. Single curve scraper, Fig..1, Plate XIX.

Double curved scraper, Fig. 8, Plate XX.

. Combination tool, Fig. 2, Plate XIX.

. Split pebble group, with work on side, Fig. 5, Plate XIX.
. Semi-circular tool, Fig. 3, Plate XIX.

. Drawshave or hollow scraper, Figs. 4, 5, Plate XX.
Tool with work all round, Fig. 4, Plate XIX.

1. Crook point.—The crook point is common to all patches,
and stones were so selected that but a very little manipulation
served to make an effective tool. No. 1 of this group was found
long since and treasured. From the patina upon it I felt con-
fident it was of palzolithic age, but no others of a like shape
were lighted on for many months..

A specialist to whom it was shown was much impressed with
its peculiar shape, and said it might have been used as a field
tool and cast aside, but the finding of many more convinced me
that a selection as to shape had been made, and it had been used
for some special purpose.

2. Single curve scraper or pointed tool.—These evidently were
common tools, as so many of this form are to be found, some
very small and others of a much larger size, but as a rule
triinmed on one side only.

In some instances these are so worked that a point may have
been the desired end, but the majority seem to me so operated
upon as if for the purpose of a single side-scraper.

3. Double curved scrapers—Many of this form are found and
seem to have been a handy useful tool, possibly used in scraping
round surfaces.

Several indicate long-continued use from the wear, and may
have been prized tools,


oklahoma


266 B. Harrison.—On certain Rude Implements.


4. Combination tools—So named from the fact that some
three tools are combined in one.

The point for a definite use, the hollow scraper or drawshave,
whilst the butt end is so trimmed as to form a broad end
scraper.

The stones so shaped evidently were selected, and by
thinking it out our early stone-workers so operated on the flint
that a very handy tool was secured, or I may say three tools in
one.

5. Split pebble group, with work on one side—Of these many
examples are shown. At first doubt existed, and I felt reluctant
to place them in evidence, but many careful observations and the
finding some on each patch seemed to justify the group being
removed from the suspense account and placed as a distinct
class.

I feel confident from my later observations that split pebbles
had been sought, for and when found, by trimming on one side,
useful tools for cutting or chipping were secured.

6. Semi-circular.—These are not quite so common, but enough
were found to warrant. me in believing that flints of this shape
had been selected, and all being worked in a definite manner,
may have had some special use.

7. Drawshaves or hollow serapers—This group seem to be the
most common of all, found everywhere and abundant in every
patch.

Some much worn by use and possibly highly prized tools ;
others as if only worked up to supply the need of the time and
perhaps cast away and discarded. Still they are so numerous
one cannot but look upon them as ordinary handy tools and
useful for various purposes.

8. Tools with work all round.—These tools bearing work on all
sides are perhaps more convincing to sceptics than many pre-
ceding groups, and it will be seen strikingly resemble each other
in form.

I may add that those more convincing examples were not
immediately found on my instituting a regular search, but the
ordinary rude choppers were first observed many years since,
but the work was so rude and indefinite it was only by carefully
amassing scores of similar examples that one felt justified in
putting in evidence.

These rude choppers are not grouped, as their form presents
such infinite variety, but the work upon the sharper edge is
sufficient to warrant the feeling that a human purpose is visible
in the working.

In completing this work each specimen has been carefully
examined by a hand lens before being sketched in my catalogue,


De B. Crawsuay, Esq.— Notes on the Western Chalk: Plateau, 267


and though hundreds of others bearing some work are in my
possession, care has been taken to include only those that may
be truly deemed to have been worked intentionally and for
a definite purpose.

The total number of these rude examples of man’s handiwork
sketched and catalogued exceeds 600.

If these are accepted as rude beginnings and showing a
human purpose in them, the striving for something better which
in due time followed, then I am content, and I beg to lay
before the Institute the results of many years’ observations and
the harvest of later years’ careful and persistent search.


Notes by De Barri CrawsuHay, Esq.


PROFESSOR PRESTWICH has asked me to write afew notes as to
the work that I have done upon the Western Chalk Plateau
comprised in his paper. There remains but little for me to say,
but at his request I append a few details of the places and their
productions, that you may have an accurate total to date of the
Jarge volume of evidence of the earliest traces of man in
Britain.!


List of Specimens from the Chalk Plateau West to June 1st, 1891
“Crawshay Collection.”


Discovery. | Name of Locality, | O.D. Level. | spicments. | Flakes. | Flats, | T°tal
15/1/91 | Botley Hill.... wel 875 5 stn sie i
28/4/90 | Titsey Hill .... w| 864 11 axe its iL
15/1/91 Tatstield Firs | 820 3 we ec 3
15/1/91 | Park Wood.... a ae 1 ae sn 1
29/10/89 | Ivy Cottage... of 990 13 ols ae 13
1/4/89 Betsoms Hill «| 750-790 21 2 eae 23
1/4/89 Morants Hill conf | 900 1 a as 1
15/3/89 Norstead _.... | 485 51 1 1 53
15/3/89 | Norstead, East ....) 475 ines = 1 1
12/11/88 | Halstead _.... eed 495 19 2 15 36
15/3/90 | Hewetts _.... wel 475 2 1 : 3
25/4/91 Colegates _.... «| 500 1 1
9/7/89 Jerkins Wood | 530 35 2 3 40
15/3/89 Farthing Street ...| 400 5 1 6
27/6/90 Oldwan Wood «| 430 3 ]
169 8 21 | 198


1 I would separate paleolithic implements into two divisions, the usual term,
“paleoliths,” seeming to me insufficient, venturing upon a new word “ paleo-
talith,” to designate the ruder and less uniformly shaped form of implement,
as compared to'the implement which has been flaked as is usual (referred to on


268 Dr B. CrawsuHay, Esq.—WNotes on the Western Chalk Plateau.


Halstead, 12/11/88, is thus the first discovery after Dr. John
Evans’ Currie Wood specimen of 1869, and the “ key-note” to
all my further finds on the west plateau.

I would say from my operations, which have been conducted
entirely on the surface, that the implements lie in the scattered
remains of former gravel beds in and upon the red clay with
flints. In due time I hope to excavate, having been accorded
permission in almost all eases, and we then shall be able to prove
to a certainty the character of the deposits. In two sections
I made at Bower Lane, I found a bed of mottled clay (Reading
Beds), under a thin bed of the red clay with flints.

Another weighty piece of evidence of their extreme antiquity
is, that among all these plateau specimens are none of the
ordinary valley types, at least so far as my experience goes. At
the levels below 400 feet the form becomes far more highly
finished and evidences a great advance in the intellect of the
beings then in occupation. In taking this evidence the reverse
way, I find that on examination of my collection of over 200
specimens of implements and scrapers from the 100 feet level
around Swanscombe, Kent, I have but one, which I produce,
which is a plateau specimen undoubtedly derived. This gives
but half per cent. proportion. Mr. Lewis has found a few also
here.

I have always made specially careful search for all these
ochreous flints in the low level gravels, and have rarely found
one at all, comparatively speaking. From the 117 feet mark
near Southfleet Station, I have two or three apparently derived
ochreous flakes, which I exhibit, and as on the top of Swans-
combe Hill at 300, there is a patch of the ochreous gravel ;
this gives them additional weight. Mr. Lewis also has found
a few here and I call your attention to them. Mr. F. C. J.
Spurrell, of Belvidere, has found an ochreous plateau type imple-
ment at the top of the adjoining hill nearer to Stone.

On reviewing the whole of these later discoveries of man’s
early implements, I think it must be a patent fact to all that


p. 3 of Prof. Prestwich’s paper) overall or a portion of its flatter surfaces in
the specimens of the lower levels, and which are almost absent in the higher
localities above the levels of Ash and Bower Lane (500 and 520’). I personally
have found none, but Mr. Harrison has one for Terrys 770’. I do not suggest
that they are of a separate geological age as is understood by palseo- and neo-liths,
but I only coin and use the word to facilitate argument and research in these most
interesting rude forms that are in many cases only just removed from “ a piece
of stone,” which to the uninitiated eye many acknowledged ones also appear. I
also think that we can trace a difference in these two sections roughly thus:
the palewolith was shaped Jefore using. These ruder forms, | think, were largely
shaped by the use to which the natural stone was subjected, and taking them as
a group they are amply evident of earlier and less intellect than what we used
to find till we worked the highest levels on the chalk plateau.


De B. Crawsnay, Esq.— Notes on the Western Chalk Plateau. 269


these plateau finds are of an order and character that betokens
less intelligence in the working of flint; for even if we take
those that are flaked and worked all over, they are, excepting a
very few, extremely rude, and much like the work of uneducated
workmen in their art.

To complete my remarks, I may say that the additional
evidence of discovering one good specimen of the plateau type, as
well as two or three poorer ones in a search for them that I
made on the beach at Herne Bay, is most interesting and
instructive in the history of these ancient works of man, proving
their descent in decreasing numbers as they arrive at the lowest
levels.

In illustration of Professor Prestwich’s paper, I exhibit a
number of specimens from the various localities.


List of Specimens from Chalk Pateau East to June 1st, 1891.
“ Crawshay Collection.”


Discovery. | Name of Locality. Level. | tmpléments. | Flake, | Flakes, | Total
Stanstead .... ad 630 8 wer se 8
South Ash .... oes 520 2 sats ue 2
Ash (Church) oni 500 1l 1 13 25
West Yoke...  ..| 467 31 t i al
23/6/88 | Punish oe ..| 600 ase ies 1 1
Bower Lane.... wo 520 26 13 40 79
4/12/90 | Gabrielspring Wood | 450 3 vis nee 3
17/2/91 | Speed Plain.... | 421 4 a 6
17/2/91 | Speed Gate .... a 420 11 sin a 11
20/1/88 | Horton Wood a 400 once 2 1 3
17/2/91 | Grove Wood ess 390 1 fied Sis |
13/8/89 | Fawkhan ...... a 360 7 iste —_ cs
104 17 57 | 178


The localities undated were found by Mr. Harrison and
visited afterwards by me. Those found at Norsted on the west,


270


Discussion.


and West Yoke on the east plateau, are.so alike in the specimens
that were they mixed and unnamed they would be indistinguish-
able. Their respective levels are but eighteen feet apart.


List of “derived” Plateau Specimens found in the Valley Drifts.
“ Crawshay Collection.”


‘West Section, South of Escarpment.


-

Date of : 0.D. Vari S | Simpl
wibevery. Name of Locality. Level. Implements. Flakes. Flakes Total.
4/8/88 | Goodley Stock 416 1 = 1

“a Ridlands _.... oll 490 1 sate 1
7/3/89 | Sundridge Mount .... 400 1 _ 1
7/3/89 | Dry Hill vn} 400 | 1 1

3 1] 4
East Section, South of Escarpment.
17/12/90 | Ashford, south of 160 3 | | 3!
S.E.R.
28/1/91 | Greenway Court 380 1 r+ ais
28/1/91 | Hollingbourne 250 2 _— 2
esos Barming Heath 264 1 = 1
Dark Hill ([ghtham) 280 I = 1
Chart Farm and Kiln |
Field | 400-450] 8 | 3
Stonepits 400 1 1
Seal .... 290-320 2 | | 2
East Section, North of the red clay with Flints,
22/2/88 | Southfleet Station .... 117 = | ow {' @Y7 @

‘eas Milton Street a 100 1 1

sil i On the | |
erne Bay .... ~«l) beach 5 | 5
20 | | 5 25


1 Ina 3 deep pit.


Discussion.


Mr. Evans congratulated the author on his being able to record
so large a number of new localities in which palewolithic implements
have been discovered. The geological features of the case appeared
to him very remarkable, and such as to justify a very great antiquity
being assigned to the plateau-beds.


In most instances imple-


ments more or less rude have been found, which are of recognised
With regard to nearly all of the flints that


paleolithic types.


+ Oe eg . . SOCEM PO


Discussion. 271


represented the new types described, he avowed himself to be
among those who attributed the apparent chipping of their edges
to the agency of Nature rather than to that of man. He was at
an absolute loss to see how some of the specimens could in any way
be regarded as artificial, or what purpose they could be supposed
to have served. Primitive man, no doubt, made use of stones with
sharp edges, whether natural or artificial, as cutting tools, but the
peculiarity of many of the new forms was that the edges had been
made blunt. In most gravel deposits of all ages the result of
rolling attrition was to remove the sharp edges of the flints, and
chipping such as that on most of the specimens exhibited might be
seen on flints of any age. The presence of the better-formed im-
plements in the beds rendered it needless to rely on the evidence
of these doubtful forms, and even supposing them to be of human
workmanship, there was no need of assigning them to a more
primitive race than paleolithic man. In all deposits containing
paleolithic implements there were examples of different degrees of
skill and finish, and many fragments resulting from the process of
manufacture as well as abortive productions. Though natural
forms of flint were probably from time to time utilised as tools or
implements by early man, he could not see the necessity of their
being indicative of a specially primitive state of art. As to the
staining of the implements he regarded it as the chemical result of
the beds in which they had lain, and not as characteristic of age.
In some cases the implements in lower and more recent graveis
were deeply stained, while older implements in higher beds in the
immediate neighbourhood remained uncoloured. The size of the
implements, of course, depended on the size of the flints that were
available as raw muterial, but one or two from the plateau were
of large size and chipped out from still larger blocks of flint.
The leaving of a large portion of the original surface of the flint
untouched where its general form lent itself to the manufacture of
an implement was by no means confined to the plateau implements,
but was a common feature among those from the well-known river
gravels. Taking the tray of specimens found at Ash as a typical
example, he could see little in it to differentiate them from the
ordinary forms. While thankfully accepting the discoveries of
Mr. B. Harrison and Mr. De B. Crawshay, and recognising the
importance of the geological theories brought forward by Professor
Prestwich, he could not but recommend extreme caution before
accepting the majority of the specimens exhibited as being of
human manufacture, or regarding what undoubtedly might have
been the work of nature as being indisputably that of man.


General Pitt-Rivers said that for the last ten years he had con-
fined his attention chiefly to the Romano-British period, because
he happened to live in the neighbourhood of a great number of
antiquities of that age. Anthropology had no special periods of its
own, and work could be done very much more thoroughly by anyone
. who lived on the spot. Before that, however, when living in


272 Discussion.


another place, he had discovered drift implements in situ beneath

vel at Acton and Ealing, and also in the gravel of the Valley of
the Nile, so that the subject of Professor Prestwich’s paper was of
interest to him. He had always thought that a time would come
when implements of a ruder type than those of the river drifts
would be discovered. It was hardly reasonable to suppose that
implements of the high finish and form of some of the known
palwolithic ones should be the earliest implements contrived by
man. A single chip or a couple of chips off a rude nodule
of flint would be sufficient to constitute a useful tool for some
purposes, and at the time of the very first commencement of
the arts, probably the ideas of men would go no further. He
was not surprised to see such a number of hollow scrapers
amongst the implements exhibited. One of the first ideas that
would suggest itself to men just emerging out of the condition of
the brutes, would be to take up a natural unformed flint with a sharp
edge and use it for planing or rounding the surface of a stick.
The peculiarity of the fracture of flint is that its edge does not
become rounded in use like a piece of metal or a piece of wood, but
it breaks off in sharp edges, so that a natural flint so used would
become sharper and more efficient by continued use up to a certain
point. The art of making such hollow scrapers would therefore
come naturally to the incipient tool-maker, and he had no doubt
some of the hollow scrapers exhibited might actually have been
formed in this way. Bat the chief interest of the paper appeared
to him to consist in the suggestion made by Mr. Prestwich, that
these primitive tools, now exhibited, most of which, though he
thought not all, were undoubtedly artificial, found as they were
upon the surface of the chalk plateau at a height of 600 to 800 feet
above the sea level, are not, as some of us have been in the habit
of supposing, wasters or ill-formed specimens of the neolithic or of
the river drift period, but characteristic samples of the art of an
earlier period than the river drift, that they were derived from
earlier and perhaps even from tertiary deposits, which originally
overlay the chalk plateau, but had been washed away by denuda-
tion, leaving only these relics behind them. This, however, as
Mr. Prestwich has been the first to admit, has not as yet been proved
by their gisement, and that is certainly the kind of proof we
require in order to determine the point, for there is nothing in
their position upon the surface, at whatever height, to disprove their
being of a comparatively recent period of the stone age, nor is there
anything in the way of associated remains to attest their great
antiquity. Rudely chipped flints, not unlike those exhibited, are
certainly found both in the gravels of the river drift and on the
surface of the neolithic period, and are often neglected and thrown
away. In the flint mines at Cissbury of the neolithic age,
innumerable wasters were found. Probably for every well-formed
implement of neolithic type, as many as sixty or seventy wasters
were found, which were not preserved. But still, there is a
difference between these wasters and the forms now exhibited.


ert he v . ‘ rs — : ee ie opto: fa a
- —_ ee a SO Re 8 0 Ben TET OF NI Ba a io tee ee ee Oe ET ES


Discussion. 273


The Oisshury wasters were all formed out of quarried flints, whilst
these are made out of flints that have been weathered in the
gravels. Many of the Cissbury wasters were evidently half-finished
tools, whilst a much larger proportion of these have evidence of
having been finished tools of a rude type. One thing, however,
appears to be very promising. If the superincumbent deposits
that have now been swept away, have left behind them so many
specimens of man’s handy-work, scattered upon the surface of the
chalk plateau, they must have been pretty thickly distributed in
the deposits themselves. There is everything, therefore, to stimu-
late further close examination of such patches of tertiary and other
strata, as may still remain upon the plateau. He hoped that
Mr. Harrison and Mr. Crawshay, who appeared to be the principal
flint hunters, would continue their researches, that careful sections
would be drawn of the actual sites of any discoveries that may be
made, and that, strengthened as they were by the support given
them by so distinguished a geologist as Mr. Prestwich, they would
not give the matter up until it had been thoroughly worked out.
Mr. Prestwich himself did not accept the antiquity of the imple-
ments of the drift period until he and others had found them
embedded in the gravels of the Valley of the Somme,.in connection
with the bones of extinct animals. We did not accept the
antiquity of the implements scattered about on the surface in the
Nile Valley, until they had been found low down beneath seams of
sedimentary deposits in the delta of the Waddi at Koorneh in
gravel that had become so indurated that the Egyptians had cut
their tombs in it, and the implements were chipped out of the
gravel forming the vertical walls of the tombs. These are the
precedents upon which our existing beliefs have been formed, and
we certainly ought not to be satisfied with less conclusive evidence
for the antiquity of implements of a still earlier date.


Prof. Borp Dawkins felt unable to accept the conclusion
advanced in the paper that the implements were older than those
of the ordinary river drift. True river drift implements had
been found_on the plateau, along with those of the ruder form, and
there was nothing to forbid the inference that the river drift
hunter wandered over the uplands as well as the lowlands, leav-
ing his implements behind at high and low levels alike. The
numerous rude implements found on the plateau, as compared with
their general absence from collections made in other places was
due, in his opinion, to the fact that they had not been collected in
the other places, and that the best implements had alone been pre-
served. Nor is their rudeness an index of theirage. He possessed
a parallel series from the river drift floor of the Cresswell caves,
which ranged from the pot boiler and hammer stone through the
whole rude series up to the ordinary typical hache. He had also
observed the. same amount of rude form with highly finished
implements and pottery in the area frequented by the Red Indians
near Trenton, in the Valley of the Delaware. In both these cases


274 Discussion.


there can be no doubt that the same people used the ruder and
more finished implements. Nor is there any evidence of high
antiquity from the gisement of the implements in question, seeing
that they had been found either on the surface of “ the clay with
flints,” or under circumstances that admitted of their having been
derived from the surface. As the facts stood in the paper it was
not proved that they belong to the age of the clay. He congratu-
lated the Society on having listened to so interesting a paper,
which would not fail to advance the knowledge of the paleolithic
people.


Mr. ALLEN Brown said a large number of the specimens on the
tables present indubitable evidence of human work ; and he fully
concurred with General Pitt-Rivers, who had recognised in some
of the worked fliuts, the rudimentary forms of certain types found
in the valley drifts—with some adverse criticism, as to some of the
specimens, Dr. John Evans had also expressed his opinion, that
others were certainly of human origin.

If some of the specimens showed clear evidence of being shaped
by human agency, and he should place the larger number under
that category—it seemed to him sufficient for the purpose of this
paper. The relative age of these implements, to those found in
the highest level of the present valley drifts, was then the most
important question. It would, of course, be desirable that some
of the implements should be found in situ beneath as well as on the
surface, though it was impossible to connect them with the neo-
lithic stage of human history.

Another theory might be put forward to explain the important
discovery of these rude implements on the chalk plateau at 600
to 800 feet—.e., that they may have been left by the almost pre-
mative men who fabricated them on an older land surface, and
that as the carbonate of lime composing the chalk became dissolved
by springs and disintegrated from sub-aerial agency (the result
being the red clay with flints, and a general lowering of the
surface), they may have become embedded and preserved in the
residue of silica and alumina left by the chalk. The accumulation
of the red clay must have taken place so slowly, that the imple-
ments found in the red clay would still indicate a high antiquity.

On the whole, however, and having regard to the other facts
referred to in Professor Prestwich’s paper, it would appear that
the theory adopted by the author is far more probable, i.e., that
the deposit in which they are found is the remanie of an old drift
deposit formed before the present valleys had been eroded, and by
rivers flowing outward from the formerly much elevated land of
the Weald.

This being so, the date of man’s entrance into this country must be
carried much further into the remote past than has, as yet, generally
been accepted ; and he may have lived as he, the speaker, believed
from other and cogent reasons he did live, before or during the
incoming colder conditions of climate in Great Britain.


Discussion. 275


Having for many years been forming a collection of paleolithic
implements from the Thames Vailey, &c., with the view of estab-
lishing a general classification of these ancient relics, the object
has been to obtain not only the best examples of palwolithic work,
but any flint, however rudely or simply wrought, provided the
evidence of human fabrication was shown in it. He found that a
comparatively small proportion of the specimens discovered in the
highest drift gravels north of the Thames were not only more
coarsely or less skilfully made, but that their surfaces were almost ,
obliterated by abrasion and weathering, and so different from
others as to constitute a distinct class. They were entirely
different in outward conditions—from the sharp, lustrous, well-
formed implements with which they are found associated in the
drift ; they were not only much abraded, but deeply ochreous, and
in many cases the surfaces had been eroded by the action of some
solvent, as in the case of banded flints.

He had brought a selection of these implements, most of them
from the Valley of the Thames, and one from the very high level
drift near Farnham (360 feet, O.D.), and it seemed very remark-
able that their forms and surface character closely resembled those
discovered by Mr. B. Harrison and his co-workers in Kent. Among
them will be found the same types, including the peaked, rudely
pointed and clumsy oval forms. He had always considered such
specimens as these as derived, but from whence? Professor
Prestwich’s theory offered a solution to this question, and it now
seemed to him (J. Allen Brown) as highly probable that they came
originally from an older deposit, perhaps from a plateau, formerly on
the north side of the Thames, corresponding in age to that on the
chalk escarpment in Kent.

The enormous denudation and erosion of the softer tertiaries on
the north which has taken place in quaternary times has, to a
large extent swept away the same kind of evidence which Professor
Prestwich has adduced from the other side of the valley. Looking
to the forms and superficial characters of both series of specimens,
they certainly point to an earlier stage of human development than
has hitherto been shown.

He thought the Institute was much indebted to Mr. B. Harrison
for initiating these investigations in his neighbourhood, and to
Mr. De B. Crawshay and Mr. Bell, &c., for having continued them
so successfully, as well as to Professor Prestwich for the admirable
way in which he had arranged and shown the true significance of
their discoveries.


In reply, Professor Prestwicu said that he had looked forward
to the possibility of there being some substantial objections to his
views which might have escaped him. He had, however, heard
nothing but an amplified repetition of the very same difficulties
whicb had occurred to him, and had been discussed and explained
in the paper. His friend, Dr. Evans, had objected to the work-
manship of some of the specimens. A few days spent on the


276 Discussion.


ground would, he thonght, induce him to change that opinion.
At the same time he would not undertake to say that every one
of the 300 or 400 specimens on the table would pass muster." He
(Prof. Prestwich) by no means intended it to be understood that
the rudeness of form was peculiar to the plateau specimens, or was
by itself, an indication of age. There were rnde and badly made
specimens of all ages. What he contended for was, that besides
there being a much larger proportion of rude and badly made
specimens than in the valley drifts, they were also of peculiar and
special types, and that they were confined to a particular and
distinct area. This had met with no response. That there were
a few forms in common had been pointed out, but this was just
what might have been expected when the tribes who occupied
the ground were of the same descent. Dr. Evans offered no
alternative explanation to account either for the anthropological
or the geological difficulties. With regard to the observations of
Professor Boyd Dawkins, he failed to see the drift of them, except
the expression of a general disbelief. They seemed to him irrele-
vant, and not directed to the real issue. No light was thrown on
the admitted difficulties of the problem, while others not raised by
the paper were the subject of criticism. As to his suggested
explanation of the geological phenomena, it involved physical
impossibilities, which he felt sure the speaker would not have pro-
pounded had he been better acquainted with the ground. The
author would have been glad to have had any well-considered
alternative explanation suggested, but none was forthcoming.
_ The views which had been advanced must, of course, stand or fall
upon the evidence which had been brought forward; but the
author had every confidence that the further investigation which
is needed would confirm his facts and corroborate his opinions.


NOVEMBER 10TH, 1891.


Epwarp B. Tytor, Esq., D.C.L., F.R.S., President, in the Chair.


The Minutes of the last meeting were read and signed.


The following elections were announced :—


Lieut.-Colonel Jos—EpH HarTLey, LL.D., of The Old Downs
Hartley.

A. M. Paterson, Esq., M.D., of University College, Dundee.

S. TsuBol, Esq., of 14, Richmond Terrace, Clapham Road.


' Though slight, so definite is the work that even the labouring men employed
by Mr. Harrison to collect for him in the field, when once tutored in the differ-
ence between the natural and the artificial forms, rarely make a mistake in the
specimens they bring him.
