<OOOwOOOPr060ii


The

Robert  E.  Gross
Collection

A  Memorial  to  the  Founder
of  the


I


V


OBSERVATIONS

ON THE

IMPORTANCE

OF THE

AMERICAN  REVOLUTION,

AND

The  Me  A  n  s  of  making  itaBENEFix  to
the  Wox^  LD.

TO WHICH IS ADDED,

A  Letter  from  M.  Turcot,  late  Comptroller-
General  of  the  Finances  of  France  :

WITH

An  Appendix,  containing  a  Tranflation  of  the
Will  of  M.  Fortune  Ricard,  lately  publifhcd
in  France.


By  RICHARD  PRICE,  D.D.  L.L.D.

And  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society  of  London,  and
of  the  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences  in  New-
England.


L O N D ON:

Printed  for  T.  Cadell,  in  the  Strand.


M.DCC.LXXXV


T  O

The  Free  and  United  States  of
AMERICA,

THE  FOLLOWING  OBSERVATIONS

ARE HUMBLY OFFERED,


A LAST TESTIMONY


O  F


THE  GOOD-WILL


O  F


The Author.


Errata.


fjfs!^^'  ^""  ^'■^"^^<^i"S  in  bufmefs,  w  tranfafting  bu^

.^n'  'P' ^a  ^'""  5th  and  8th,  for  the  numbers  ni  coi
^19,560,  and  143,890,^.3,150,  ,3,956,  and  lif.C'^


[ V ]


CONTENTS.

OF  the  Importance  of  the  Revolution  which
has eftabiifhed the Independence  of  the

United  States of  America.  -  p. i

Of  the  means  of  promoting  human  Improvement

and Happinefs i(i the  United  States. — And

firft,  of  Public  Debts.  -  9

Of  Peace,  and  the  Means  of  perpetuating  it.  14.
Of  Liberty.  -  -  20

Of  Liberty  of  Dlfcufllon.  -  22

Of  Liberty  of  Confcience,  and  Civil  Eftablifh-

ments  of  Religion.  •  -  34

Of  Education.  -  -  ^o

Of  the  Dangers  to  which  the  American  States  are

expofed.  -  -  -  64

Of  Debts  and  Internal  Wars.  -  66

Of  an  unequal  Diftribution  of  Property.  68

Of  Trade,  Banks,  and  Public  Credit.  74

OfOATHS.  -  -  -  81

Of  the  Negro  Trade  and  Slavery.  - 8^

Conclufion. - -  - 84

Letter  from  M.  Turgot. -  - 89

Tranflation  of  M.  Turgot's  Letter.  107

Appendix,  containing  a  Tranflation  of  the  Will

of  M.  Fortune  Ricard. -  129

Tables. - - -  130


[ vii ]


ADVERTISEMENT.

'AVING  reafon  to  hope  I  fioiild  be  ai-
tended  to  in  the  American  States,  and
thinking  I  faw  an  opening  there  fa'vourable
to  the  i?nprovement  and  beji  inter ejls  of  mankind,
I  ha'ue  been  induced  to  convey  thither  the  fen^
timents  and  advice  contained  in  the  following
Obfervations.  They  were,  therefore,  originally
intended  only  for  America.  T^he  danger  of  a
fpiirious  edition  has  now  obliged  me  to  publifi
them  in  tny  own  country »

I  fioidd  be  inexcufable  did  I  not  take  this  op-
port  unify  to  exprefs  my  gratitude  to  a  dijlin^
guijhed  writer  (the  Count  de  Mirabeau)  for
his  trafijlation  of  thefe  Obfervations  into  French,
and  for  the  fupport  and  kind  civility  with
which  it  has  been  accompanied.

Mr,  TurgotV  letter  fanned  a  part  of  this
traui  when  it  was  conveyed  to  America.  I  have
now  given  a  tranjlation  of  it.

I  think


/  think  k  necejfary  to  add  that  I  have  ex^
prejfed  my f elf  infome  refpeSis  toojirojtgly  in  the
conQlu^ion  of  the  following  Obfervations,  By
accounts  from  perfons  the  befl  informed,  I  have
lately^  been  affured  thai  nofuch  diffentions  exifl
among  the  American  States  as  have  been  giiien

I  cut  in  this  country  3  that  the  new  governments
are  in  general  well  fettled,  and  the  people  hap^
fy  under  them  -,  and  that,  in  particular,  a
conviBioJi  is  becoming  univerfal  of  the  necefjity
of  giving  7norc  Jirength  to  that  power  which

forms  and  which  is  to  conduB  and  maintain
their  union.


March, 1785...


OBSER-


OBSERVATIONS, 6cc.


Cy //^^  Importance o/' //^^  Revolution
which has ejiablijhed  the  Independence  of
the  United  States,

AVING,  from  pure  convI<flIon,  taken
a  warm  part  in  favour  of  the  Britifi
colonies  (now  the  United  States  of  Ameri-
ca) during  the  late  war;  and  been  expofed,
in  confequence  of  this,  to  fnuch  abufe  and
Jo?ne  danger;  it  muft  be  fuppofed  that  I
have  been  waiting  for  the  illue  with  an-
xiety 1  am  thankful that  my  anxiety

is  removed  ;  and  that  I  have  been  fpared  to
be  a  witnefs  to  that  very  iffue  of  the  war
which  has  been  all  along  the  objetTt  of  my
wiflies.  With  heart-felt  fatisfacflion,  I  fee
the  revolution  in  favour  of  univerfal  liberty
which  has  taken  place  in  America  \ — a  revo-
lution which  opens  a  new  profpect  in  hu-

B  man


t  2  ]

man  aftairs,  and  begins  a  new  aera  in  the  hif-

tory  of  mankind  ; a  revolution  by  which

Britons  themfelves  Vv'ill  be  the  greateft
1  gainers,  if  wife  enough  to  improve  properly
the  check  that  has  been  given  to  the  defpo-
tifm  of  their  minifters,  and  to  catch  the
flame  of  virtuous  liberty  Vv'hich  has  faved
their  American  brethren.

The  late  war,  in  its  commencement  and
progrej's^  did  great  good  by  diffeminating
jaft  fentimentsof  the  rights  of  mankind,  and
the  nature  of  legitimate  government  j  by  ex-
citing a  fpirit  of  refiflancfe  to  tyranny  which
has  emancipated  one  European  country,
and  is  likely  to  emancipate  others ;  and  by
occafioning  the  efiablidiment  in  America  of
forms  of government more  equitable  and

I  more  liberal  than  any  that  the  world  has
yet  known.  But,  in  its  termination,  the
war  has  done  ftill,  greater  good  by  preferv-
ing  the  new  governments  from  that  de-
ftruftion  in  which  they  mu(t  have  been  in-
volved, had  Britain  conquered  ;  by  provid-
ing, in  a  fequeftered  continent  polTefied  of
many  fingular  advantages,  a  place  of  refuge

\  for  oppreft  men  in  every  region  of  the
world  j and  by  laying  the  foundation  there

of


[ 3 ]

•of  an  empire  which  may  be  the  feat  of  li-
berty, fcience  and  virtue,  and  from  whence
there  is  reafon  to  hope  thefe  facred  bleffings
will  fpread,  till  they  become  univerfal,  and
the  time  arrives  when  kings  and  priefts  Ihall  ,
have  no  more  power  to  opprefs,  and  that
ignominious  (lavery  which  has  hitherto  de-
bafed  the  world  is  exterminated.  I  there-
fore, think  I  fee  the  hand  of  Providence  in
the  late  war  working  for  the  general  good.

Reafon,  as  well  as  tradition  and  revela-
tion, lead  us  to  expert  that  a  more  improv-
ed and  happy  ftate  of  human  affairs  will  take
place  before  the  confummation  of  all  things.
The  world  has  hitherto  been  gradually
improving.  Light  and  knowledge  have  i
been  gaining  ground,  and  human  life  at
prefent  compared  with  what  it  o?ice  was,
is  much  the  fame  that  a  youth  approaching
to  manhood  is  compared  with  an  infant.

Such  are  the  natures  of  things  that  this
progrefs  mud  continue.  During  particular
intervals  it  may  be  interrupted,  but  it  can-
not he  deflroy'd.  Every  prefent  advance
prepares  the  way  for  farther  advances ;  and
?i  fingle  experiment  or  difcovery  may  fome-

B  2  times


[ 4 ]

times  give  rife  to  fo  many  more  as  fuddenly
to  raife  the  fpecies  higher,  and  to  refemble
the  effedis  of  opening  a  new  fenfe,  or  of  the
fall  of  a  fpark  on  a  train  that  fprings  a  n:iine.
For  this  reafon,  mankind  may  at  laft  arrive
at  degrees  of  improvement  which  we  can-
not now  even  fufpect  to  be  poiTible.  A
vdark  age  may  follow  an  enlightened  age;
but,  in  this  cafe,  the  light,  after  being
fmothered  for  a  time,  will  break  out  again
with  a  brighter  luftre.  The  prefent  age  of
increafed  light,  conlidered  as  fiicceeding  the
ages  of  Greece  and  Rome  and  an  interme-
diate period  of  thick  darknefs,  furnifhes  a
proof  of  the  truth  of  this  obfervation.
There  are  certain  kinds  of  improvement
which,  when  once  made,  cannot  be  entire-
ly loft.  During  the  dark  ages,  the  im-
provements made  in  the  ages  that  preceded
them  remained  fo  far  as  to  be  recovered  im-
mediately at  the  refurredion  of  letters,  and
to  produce  afterwards  that  more  rapid  pro-
grcfs  in  improvement  which  has  diftinguiili-
ed  moderr.  times.

There  ;an  fcarcely  be  a  more  pleafmg  and
encouraging  obje(5t  of  refledion  than  this.
An  accidental  obfervation  of  the  effeds
of  gravity  in  a  garden  has  been  the  means

or


[ 5 ]

of  difcovering  the  laws  that  govern  the
folar  fyftem*,  and  of  enabling  us  to  look
down  with  pity  on  the  ignorance  of  the
moft  enlightened  times  among  the  antients.
What  new  dignity  has  been  given  to  man,
and  what  additions  have  been  made  to  his
powers,  by  the  invention  of  optical  glafles,
printing,  gun-powder,  &c.  and  by  the  late
difcoveries  in  navigation,  mathematics,  na-
tural philofophy,  &c.  ?  -f*

*  This  refers  to  an  account  given  of  Sir  Ifaac  New-
ton in  the  Preface  to  Dr.  Pemberton's  View  of  his
Philofophy.

f  Who  could  have  thought,  in  the  firft  ages  of  the
world,  that  mankind  would  acquire  the  power  of  deter- '
mining  the  diftances  and  magnitudes  of  the  fun  and
planets  ? — Who,  even  at  the  beginning  of  this  century,
would  have  thought,  that,  in  a  few  years,  mankind
would  acquire  the  power  of  fubje<Sting  to  their  wills  the
dreadful  force  of  lightening,  and  of  flying  in  aeroftatic
machines? — The  laft  of  thefe  powers,  though  fo  long
undifcovercd,  is  only  an  eafy  application  of  a  power  al-
ways known. — Many  fimilar  difcoveries  may  remain  to
be  made,  which  will  give  new  dircflions  of  the  greateft
confequence  to  human  affairs  ;  and  it  may  not  be  too
extravagant  to  expect  that  (fhould  civil  governments
throw  no  o'ofiacles  in  the  way)  the  progrefs  of  improve-
ment will  not  ceafe  till  it  has  excluded  from  the  earth
moft  of  its  worft  evils,  and  reftored  that  Paradifaical
ftate  which,  according  to  the  Mofaic  Hiftory,  preceded
the  prcfent  ftate.

I  But


[ 6 ]

But  among  the  events  in  modern  times
tending  to  the  elevation  of  mankind,  there
are  none  probably  of  fo  much  confequence
as  the  recent  one  which  occafions  thefe  ob-
fervations.  Perhaps,  I  do  not  go  too  far
when  I  fay  that,  next  to  the  introdu6lion
of  Chriflianity  among  mankind,  the  Ame-
rican revolution  may  prove  the  mod  im-
portant ftep  in  the  progrefiive  courfe  of
human  improvement.  It  is  an  event  which
may  produce  a  general  difFufion  of  the
principles  of  humanity,  and  become  the
means  of  fetting  free  mankind  from  the
fhaekles  of  fuperftition  and  tyranny,  by  lead-
ing them  to  fee  and  knov/  '*  that nothing

*  h  fufidamental  but  impartial  enquiry,  an
'  honeft  mind,  and  virtuous  pradice

*  that  flate  policy  ought  not  to  be  applied
'  to the  fupport of fpeculative opinions

*  and  formularies  of  faith." "  That  the

'  members  of  a  civil  community  are  *  co7t-

*  federates^  not  fubjc^s  3 and their rulers,

*  fervarits,  not majlers, And  that all

*  legitimate  government  confifts  in  the  do-
'  minion of  equal  laws  made  with  com-

y^  mon  confent  3  that  is,  in  the  dominion


Thcfe  are  the  words  of  M'onte$quieu.


<*  of


[ 7 ]

*'  of  men  over  themfehes  y  and  not  in  the
**  dominion  of  communities  over  commu-
**  nities,  or  of  any  men  over  other  men."

Happy  will  the  world  be  when  thefe
truths  fhall  be  every  where  acknowledged
and  pradifed  upon.  Religious  bigotry,
that  cruel  demon,  will  be  then  laid  afleep.
Slavifh  governments  and  flavifli  Hierarchies
will  then  fmk ;  and  the  old  prophecies  be
verified,  **  that  the  laft  univerfal  empire
**  upon  earth  fliall  be  the  empire  of  reafon
**  and  virtue,  under  which  the  gofpel  of
**  peace  (better  underflood)  Jhall  have  free
**  courfe  and  be  glorijicd,  ma?iy  will  run  to
**  and  fro  and  knoivledge  be  increafedy  the
**  wolf  dwell  with  the  lamb  and  the  leopard
•*  with  the  kidy  and  nation  no  more  lift  up
**  a  fword  againji  nation."

It  is  a  convi(ftion  I  cannot  refift,  that  the
independence  of  the  Englijlj  colonies  in
America  is  one  of  the  fleps  ordained  by ,
Providence  to  introduce  thefe  times;  and
I  can  fcarcely  be  deceived  in  this  convic-
tion, if  the  United  States  fliould  efcape
fome  dangers  which  threaten  them,  and
will  take  proper  care  to  throw  themfelves
open  to  future  improvements,  and  to  make
the  moft  of  the  advantages  of  their  prefent

fituation.


[ 8 ]

fituatlon.  Should  this  happen,  it  will  be
true  of  them  as  it  was  of  the  people  of  th^
Jews,  that  in  them  all  the  families  of  the
earth  Jhall  be  bleffed.  It  is  fcarcely  poffible
they  lliould  think  too  highly  of  their  own
confequence.  Perhaps,  there  never  ex-
ifted,  a  people  on  whofe  wifdom  and  virtue
more  depended  ;  or  to  whom  a  ftation  of
more  importance  in  the  plan  of  Providence
has  been  affigned.  They  have  begun  nobly.
They  have  fought  with  fuccefs  for  them-
felves  and  for  the  world  ;  and,  in  the  midft
of  invafion  and  carnage,  eftablifhed  forms
J  of  government  favourable in the highefl

deo-ree  to  the  riehts  of  mankind. But

they  have  much  more  to  do  ;  more  indeed
than  it  is  poffible  .  properly  to  reprefent.
In  this  addrefs,  my  defign  is  only  to  take
notice  of  a  few  great  points  which  feem
particularly  to  require  their  attention,  in
order  to  render  them  permanently  happy  in
ihemfelves  and  ufeful  to  mankind.  On
thefe  points,  I  {hall  deliver  my  fentiments
vvith  freedom,  confcious  I  mean  well  ;  but,
at  the  fame  time,  with  real  diffidence,  con-
fcious of  my  own  liablenefs  to  error.


Of


[ 9 ]


Of  the  Means  of  promoting  human  Improve-^
ment  and  Happinefs  in  the  JJnited  States,
•^^Andfirjiy  ^Public  Debts.

TT  feems  evident,  that  what  firft  requires
the  attention  of  the  United  States  is  the
redemption  of  their  debts,  and  making
compenfation  to  that  army  which  has  car-
ried them  through  the  war.  They  have
an  infant  credit  to  cherifli  and  rear,  whichj
if  this  is  not  done,  muft  peridi,  and  with
it  their  character  and  honour  for  ever.  Nor
is  it  conceivable  they  fliould  meet  with
any  great  difficulties  in  doing  this.  They
have  a  vaft  refource  peculiar  to  theJmfelves>
in  a  continent  of  unlocated  lands  poiTeffing
every  advantage  of  foil  and  climate.  The
fettlement  of  thefe  lands  will  be  rapid,  the
confequence  of  which  muft  be  a  rapid  in-
creafe  of  their  value.  By  difpoiing  of  y
them  to  the  army  and  to  emigrants,  the
greateft  part  of  the  debts  of  the  United
States  may  probably  be  funk  immediately*
But  had  they  no  fuch  refource,  they  are  very
capable  of  bearing  taxes  fufficient  for  the
purpofe of a  gradual redemption. Sup-

C  pofing


I  10  ]
poling  their  debts  to  amount  to  7iine  millmis
llerling,  carrying  intereil  at  c^k  per  cent,  taxes
producing  a  revenue  of  a  million  pei"  ann*
would  pay  the  intereft,  and  at  the  fame  time
leave  a  furplus  of  half  a  million  per  ann,
for  a  fmking  fund,  which  would  difcharge
the  principal  in  thirteen  years.  A  furplus
of  a  quarter  of  a  million  would  do  the
fame  in  2of  years.  After  difcharging  the
principal,  the  appropriated  revenue  being
no  longer  wanted,  might  be  abolifhed,  and
the  States  eaf«d  of  the  burthen  of  it.  But
it  would  be  imprudent  to  abolifli  it  en-
tirely. 100,000/.  per  'ann.  referved,  and
faithfully  laid  out  in  clearing  unlocated
lands  and  other  improvements,  would  in
a  fliort  time  increafe  to  a  treafure  (or  con-
tinental patrimony)  which  would  defray
the  whole  expenditure  of  the  union,  and
keep  the  States  free  from  debts  and  taxes
for ever-'-. Such a rcferve would (fup-

*  The  lands,  forefts,  impofls,  &c.  ho.  v/hich  once
formed  the  patrimo7iy  of  the  crown  in  England,  bore
moft  of  the  expences  of  government.  It  is  well  for
I  this  kingdom  that  the  extravagance  of  the  crown  has
been  the  means  of  alienating  this  patrimony,  for  the
confequence  has  been  making  the  crown  dependent  on
the  people,  l^ut  in  America  fuch  a  patrimony  would
be  continental  property,  capable  of  being  applied  only
to  public  purpofes,  in  the  way  which  the  public  (or
its  delegates)  would  approve.

pofing


[  II  ]

pofing  it  improved  Co  as  to  produce  a
profit  of  5  per  cent.)  increafe  to  a  capital
of  three  millions  in  19  years,  30  millions
in  57  years,  100  millions  in  81  ye^rs,  and
261  millions  in  100  years.  But  fuppofing
it  capable  of  being  improved  fo  as  to
produce  a  profit  of  10  per  cent,  it  would
increafe  to  five  millions  in  19  years,  100
millions  in  49  years,  and  10,000  millions
in  97  years.

It  is  wonderful  that  no  ftate  has  yet
thought  of  taking  this  method  to  make
itfelf  great  and  rich.  The  fmalleft  appro-  1
priation  in  a  finking  fund,  neijer  diverted,
operates  in  cancelling  debts,  jufi:  as  money
increafes  at  compound  interefl  -,  and  is,
therefore,  omnipotent'^ .  But,  if  diverted,
it  lofes  all  its  power.  Britain  affords
a  ftriking  proof  of  this.  Its  finking  fund
(once the hope  of  the kingdom)  has,  by

*  One  penny  put  out  at  our  Saviour's  birth  to  $per
cent,  compound  intcreft  would,  before  this  time,  have
increafcd to  a  greater  fum  than would be  contained  ia  \

TWO HUNDRED MILLIONS  of EARTHS  all folid gold.

But,  if  put  out  X.ofimple  intereft,  it  Would  have  amount-
ed to  no  more  than  feven  fiillings  and  fix-pence.  Ail
governments  which  alienate  funds  deftined  for  reim-
burfements,  chufe  to  improve  money  in  the  lajl  rather
than  the  frji  of  th^fe  ways.

C  2  the


[  12  ]

the  pradlice  of  alienating  it,  been  rendered
impotent  and  ufelefs.  Had  it  been  in-
violably applied  to  the  purpofe  for  which
it  was  intended^,  there  would,  in  the  year
1775,  have  been  a  furplus  in  the  revenue
of  more  than  five  millions  per  ann.  But
inftead  of  this,  we  were  then  encumbered
with  a  debt  of  137  millions,  carrying  an
intereft  of  near  4I  millions,  and  leaving  no
furplus  of  any  confequence.  This  debt
>  has  been  fince  increafed  to  *  280  millions,
carrying  an  intereft  (including  expences  of
management)  of  nine  millions  and  a  half. —
A  monftrous  bubble  j — and  if  no  very  ftrong
meafures  are  foon  taken  to  reduce  it  within
the  limits  of  fafety,  it  muil:  produce  a  dread-
ful convulfion.  Let  the  United  States  take
warning — Their  debts  at  prefent  are  mo-
derate. A  Sinking  fund,  guarded  -f-  againft
mifapplication,  may  foon  extinguifh  them,
and  prove  a  refource  in  all  events  of  the
greateft  importance,

*  See  the  Pojlfcript  to  a  pamphlet,  entitled,  The  State  of
the  Finances  of  the  Kingdom^  at  fignlng  the  Preliminary  Arti'
cles  of  Peace  in  January  1783,  printed  for  Mr.  Cadell.

f  When  not  thus  guarded,  public  funds  become
the  worft  evils,  by  giving  to  the  rulers  of  dates  a
command  of  revenue  for  the  purpofcs  of  coiruption.

I  muft


[ 13 1

I  mud:  not,  however,  forget  that  there  is
ONE  of  their  debts  on  which  no  finking
fund  can  have  any  efft;(5t ;  and  which  it  is

impoffible for them to difchargc  :

A  debt,  greater,  perhaps,  than  has  been
ever  due  from  any  country  ;  and  which
will  be  deeply  felt  by  their  iatefl:  pofterity.
—But  it  is  a  debt  of  gratitude  only —
Of  GRATITUDE  to  that  General,  who  has  »
been  raifed  up  by  Providence  to  make
them  free  and  independent,  and  whofe
name  muft  Ihine  among  the  firft  in  the  fu-
ture annals  of  the  benefadors  of  mankind.

The  meafure  now  propofed  may  preferve
America  for  ever  from  too  great  an  accu-
mulation of  debts ;  and,  confequently,  of
taxes — an  evil  which  is  likely  to  be  the  «
ruin  not  only  of  Britai?!,  but  of  other  Eu-
ropean States. — -But  there  are  meafures  of
yet  greater  confequence,  which  I  wifli  ar-
dently to  recommend  and  inculcate.

For  the  fake  of  mankind,  I  wi{h  to  fee
every  meafure  adopted  that  can  have  a  ten-
dency to  preferve  peace  in  America;  and
to  make  it  an  open  and  fair  ftage  for  difcuf-
fion,  and  the  feat  of  PERFECT  liberty.


Of


[ H ]

Of Peacf,
And  the Means  of  perpetuating it.

/^IVIL  Government  is  an  expedient  for
colleding:  the  wifdom  and  force  of  a
community  or  confederacy,  in  order  to  pre-
ferve  its  peace  and  liberty  againfl every  hoftile
invafion,  whether  from  within  or  from
^without. — In  the  latter  of  thefe  refpedls,
the  United  States  are  happily  fecured  ;  but
they  are  far  from  being  equally  happy  in
ikit.  former  refped:.  Having  now,  in  con-
fequence  of  their  uiccefsful  refiftance  of
the  invafion  of  Britain^  united  to  their
remotenefs  from  Europe,  no  external  enemy
\  to  fear,  they  are  in  danger  of  fighting  with
one  another. — This  is  their  greateji  danger  ;
and  providing  fecurities  againft  it  is  their
hardeft  work.  Should  they  fail  in  this,
America  may  fome  time  or  other  be  turned
into  a  fcene  of  blood  j  and  inftead  of  being
the-  hope  and  refuge  of  the  world,  may
become  a  terror  to  it.

When  a  difpute  arlfes  among  individuals.

in  a  State,  an  appeal  is  made  to  a  court of

3  l^^'-^v  ',


[ '5 ]

law  ;  that  Is,  to  the  wifdom  and  jaflice
of  the  State.  The  court  decides.  The
lodng  party  acquiefces  ;  or,  if  he  does
not,  the  power  of  the  State  forces  him
to  fubmiffion ;  and  thus  the  effects  of
contention  are  fuppreft,  and  peace  is  main-
tained.— In  a  way  ilmilar  to  this,  peace
may  be  maintained  between  any  number
of  confederated  States ;  and  I  can  alrnoH:
imagine,  that  it  is  not  impoffible  but  that  by
fuch  means  z^wzwr/^/ peace  may  be  produced,
and  all  war  excluded  from  the  world. — Why  i
may  we  not  hope  to  fee  this  begun  in
America  ? The  articles  of  confedera-
tion make  confiderable  advances  towards
it.  When  a  difpute  arifes  between  any  of
the  States,  they  order  an  appeal  to  Congrefs,  t
— an  enquiry  by  Congrefs, -—a  hearing, —
and  a  decifion. — But  here  they  ftop. — What
is  molt  of  all  neceffary  is  omitted.  No
provifion  is  made  for  enforcing  the  deci-  •
lions  of  Congrefs ;  and  this  renders  them
inefficient  and  futile.  I  am  by  no  means
qualified  to  point  out  the  befl:  method  of
removing  this  defed:.  Much  muft  be  given
up  for  this  purpofe,  nor  is  it  eafy  to  give
up  too much. Without all doubt the

powers


t  .6  i

i  powers  of  Congrefs  muft  be  enlarged.  In
particular,  a  power  muft  be  given  it  to
collect,  on  certain  emergencies,  the  force
of  the  confederacy,  and  to  employ  it  in
carrying  its  decifions  into  execution.  A
State  ao-ainft  which  a  decifion  is  made,  will
yield  of  courfe  when  it  knows  that  fuch  a
force  exifts,  and  that  it  allows  no  hope
from  refiftance.

By  this  force  I  do  not  mean  a  standing
ARMY.  God  forbid,  that  ftanding  armies
fhould  ever  find  an  eflablifliment  in  Ame-
rica. They are every where the grand

^  fupports  of  arbitrary  power,  and  the  chief
caufes  of  the  depreffion  of  mankind.  No
wife  people  will  trull  their  defence  out  of
their  own  hands,  or  confent  to  hold  their
rights  at  the  mercy  of  armed  Jlaves,  Free
States  ought  to  be  bodies  of  armed  citizens,
well  regulated,  and  well  difciplined,  and
always  ready  to  turn  out,  when  properly
called  upon,  to  execute  the  laws,  to  quell
riots,  and  to  keep  the  peace.  Such,  if  I
am  rightly  informed,  are  the  citizens  of
America. Why  then may  not  Congress

I  be  furnifhed  with  a power  of  calling  out
from the confederated States, quotas of
militia  fufficient to  force  at  once  the  com-
pliance


f »7 ]

f)llance  of  any  State  which  may  lliew  an
inclination  to  break  the  union  by  refifting
its  decifions  ?

I  am  very  fenfible  that  it  will  be  diffi-
cult to  guard  fuch  a  power  againil  abufe  ;
and,  perhapS)  better  means  of  anfwering
this  end  are  difcoverable.  In  human  af-
fairs, however,  the  choice  generally  offered
us  is  *'  of  two  evils  to  take  the  leaft."
We  chufe  the  reftraint  of  civil  govern-
ment, becaufe  a  lefs  evil  than  anarchy;
and,  in  like  manner,  in  the  prefent  in-
ftance,  the  danger  of  the  abufe  of  power,
and  of  its  being  employed  fometimes  to
enforce  wrong  decifions,  mud  be  fubmitted  ♦
to,  becaufe  a  lefs  evil  than  the  mifery  of
inteftine  wars.  Much,  however,  may  be
done  to  leiTen  this  danger.  Such  regula-
tions as  thofe  in  the  ninth  of  the  articles  of
confederation  will,  in  a  great  meafure,  pre-
vent hafty  and  partial  decifions.  The  ro-
tation eftablifhcd  by  the  fifth  article  will
prevent  that  corruption  of  charad:er  which
feldom  fails  to  be  produced  by  the  long
pofiTeflion  of  power  ;  and  the  right  referved
to  every  State  of  recalling  its  Delegates  /
when  difiatisfied  with  them,  will  keep
them  condantly  refponfible  and  cautious.

D  The


[ i8 ]

The  obfervations  now  made  mufl:  be  ex-
tended to  money  tranfadlons.  Congrefs
muft  be  truiled  with  a  power  of  procuring
\  fupplies  for  defraying  the  expences  of  the
confederation  ;  of  contradling  debts,  and
providing  funds  for  difcharging  them:
and  this  power  mull:  not  be  capable  of
being  defeated  by  the  oppofition  of  any
minority  in  the  States.

In  fhort,  the  credit  of  the  United  States,
their  flrength,  their  refpedlablenefs  abroad,
their  liberty  at  home,  and  even  their  ex-
iftence,  depend  on  the  prefervation  of  a
firm  political  union  ; '  and  fuch  an  union
cannot  be  preferved,  without  giving  all
poffible  weight  and  energy  to  the  authority
of  that  delegation  which  conftitutes  the
union.

Would  it  not  be  proper  to  take  perio-
dical furveys  of  the  different  ftates,  their
numbers  of  both  fexes  in  every  ftage  of
life,  their  condition,  occupations,  proper-
ty, &c.  ? Would not  fuch furveys,  in

conjundtion  with  accurate  regifters  of
births,  marriages  and  deaths  at  all  ages,
afford  much  important  inftrudion  by  Ihew-

3  ii^g


[ '9 ]

ing  what  laws  govern  human  mortah'ty,  and
what  fituations,  employments,  and  civil
inftitutions, are moil favourable to the

health and happlnefs of mankind  ?

Would  they  not  keep  conftantly  in  view
the  progrefs  of  population  in  the  dates,  and
the  increafe  or  decline  cf  their  refources  ?
But  more  efpecially,  are  they  not  the  only
means  of  procuring  the  neceffary  informa-
tion for  determining  accurately  and  equita-
bly the  proportions  of  men  and  money  to
be  contributed  by  each  flate  for  fupporting
and  ftfengthening  the  confederation  ?


D  2  Of


[ 20 ]


Of  Lib  jE  R  T  y.

'np  HE  next  point  I  would  In fi ft  on,  as
an  objedt  of  fupreme  importance,  is
the  eftablifhment  of  fuch  a  fyftem  of  per-
fedl  liberty,  religious  as  well  as  civily  ia
America,  as  lliall  render  it  a  country  where
truth  and  reafon  fhall  have  fair  play,  and  the
human  powers  find  full  fcope  for  exerting
themfclves,  and  for  (hewing  how  far  they
can  carry  human  improvement.

The  faculties  of  man  have  hitherto,  in
all  countries,  been  more  or  Icfs  cramped
by  the  interference  of  civil  authority  in
matters  of  fpeculation,  by  tyrannical  laws
againft  herefy  and  fchifm,  and  by  llavifh
hierarchies  and  religious  eftablifhments.
It  is  above  all  things  defirable  that  no  fuch
fetters  on  reafon  fhould  be  admitted  into
America,  I  obferve,  with  inexprelTible
fatlsfadion,  that  at  prefent  they  have  no
exiftence  there.  In  this  refped  the  govern-*
ments  of  the  United  States  arc  liberal  to  a
degree  that  is  unparalleled.  They  have  the
dlftinguifhed honour of being the firft

Aates


[  21  ]

ftates  under  heaven  in  which  forms  of  s:0'  i
vernment  have  been  eflablifhed  favourable
to  urJverJa/ Vihevty.  They  have  been  thus
diftinguidied  in  their  mfancy.  What  then
will  they  be  in  a  more  advanced  ftate  ;
when  time  and  experience,  and  the  concur-
ring afhftancc  of  the  wife  and  virtuous  in
every  part  of  the  earth,  Hiall  have  intro-
duced into  the  new  governments,  correc-
tions and  amendments  which  will  render
them  ftill  more  friendly  to  liberty,  and
more  the  means  of  promoting  human  hap-

pinefs and  dignity  ? »  May we not fee

there  the  dawning  of  brighter  days  on
earth,  and  a  new  creation  rifing.  But  I
muft  check  myfelf.  I  am  in  danger  of  be-
ing carried  too  far  by  the  ardor  of  my
hopes.

The  liberty  I  mean  includes  in  it  liberty
of  condu(ft  in  all  civil  matters-— liberty
of  difcuffion  in  zWfpeculative  matters  —  and
liberty  of  confcience  in  all  religious  mat-
ters.  And  it  is  then  perfeB,  when  un-
der no  reftraint  except  when  ufed  to  injure
any  one  in  his  perfon,  property,  or  good,
name ;  that  is,  except  when  ufed  to  dcilroy
itfelf.

In


[  22  ]

In  liberty  of  difcuffion,  I  include  the
liberty  of  examining  all  public  meafures,
and  the  condud:  of  all  public  men  ^  and  of
writing  and  publifhing  on  all  fpeculative
and  dodrinal  points.


O/LlBERTY of  YX\  SCUSSION.

TT  is  a  common  opinion,  that  there  are
fome  dodtrines  fo  facred,  and  others  of
fo  bad  a  tendency,  that  no  public  difcuffion
of  them  ought  to  be  allowed.  Were  this  a
right  opinion,  all  the  perfecution  that  has
been  ever  pradifed  would  be  juflified.  For,
if  it  is  apart  of  the  duty  of  civil  magiflrates
to  prevent  the  difcuffion  of  fuch  dodrines,
they  muft,  in  doing  this,  ad:  on  their  own
judgments  of  the  nature  and  tendency  of
dodrines ;  and,  confequently,  they  muft
have  a  right  to  prevent  the  difcuffion  of
all  dodrines  which  they  think  to  be  too  fa-
cred tor  difcuffion  or  too  dangerous  in  their
tendency  ;  and  this  right  they  muft  exer-
clfe  in  the  only  way  in  which  civil  power
is  capable  of  exercifing  it, *'  by  infliding

**  penalties


[ 23 ]

•*'  penalties  on  all  who  oppofe  facred  doc-
*'  trines,  or  who  maintain pernicious  opi-

**  nions." In Mahometaii countries,

therefore,  civil  magiftrates  have  a right  to
filence  and  punifh  all  who  oppofe  the  di-
vine miffion  of  Mahomet,  a dodlrine  there
reckoned of  the  mod:  facred  nature. The
like is true  of  the  dodrines  of  tranfubftan-
tiation,  worfliip  of  the  Virgin  Mary, &c.
in  Popijh  countries  ;  and  of  the  dodlrines  of
the  Trinity,  fatisfadtion,  &c.  in  Frotejiant
countries.— — In  Rngland  itfelf,  this  prin-
ciple has  been  adted  upon, and  produced
the  laws  which  fubjedl  to  fevere  penalties
all  who write or fpeak againft the  Su-
preme Divinity of Chrifr, the Book of
Common  Prayer,  and  the  Church  Articles
of  Faith. All  fuch  laws  are  right,  if  the
opinion  I  have  mentioned  is right. But
in  reality, civil power  has  nothing  to  do
with  any  fuch matters  -, and  civil  gover-
nors  go  miferably  out  of  their  proper  pro-  »
vince,  whenever  they  take  upon  them  the
care  of truth,  or  the  fupport  of  any  doc-
trinal points. They are not judges of
truth  ;  and  if  they  pretend  to  decide  about
it,  they  will  decide  wrong. This  all  the
countries  under  heaven  think of the  ap-
plication


[  24  i

plication  of  civil  power  to  dod:rinal  points
in  every  country  but  their  own.  It  is,  in-
deed, fuperilition,  idolatry,  and  nonfenfe^
that  civil  power  at  prefent  fupports  almoft
every  where,  under  the  idea  of  fupporting
facred  truth,  and  oppofing  dangerous  error.
Would  not,  therefore,  its  perfect  neutrality
be  the  greateft  blefling  ?  Would  not  the
interefl;  of  truth  gain  unfpeakably,  were  all
the  rulers  of  States  to  aim  at  nothing  but
keeping  the  peace ;  or  did  they  confider
themfelves  as  bound  to  take  care,  not  of
\.\\Q future,  but  th^ prefent  interefl:  of  men  ; — »
not  of  ihtir  fouls  and  thtix  faitb,  but  of
their  perfons  ^nd  property ;  —  not  of  any  ec^
defiafkal,  hut  fecular  matters  only  ?

All  the  experience  of  paft  time  proves
that  the  confequence  of  allowing  civil
power  to  judge  of  the  nature  and  tendency
of  dodrines,  mufl:  be  making  it  a  hindrance
to  the  progrefs  of  truth,  and  an  enemy  to
the  improvement  of  the  world.

Anaxagoras  was  tried  and  condemned  in
Greece  for  teaching  that  the  fun  and  ftars
were  not  Deities,  but  mafies  of  corruptible
matter.  Accufations  of  a  like  kind  con-
tributed to  the  death  of  Socrates.  The
threats of  bigots  and  the  fear  o^  perfecu-

tion,


I  '^5  ]
lion,  prevented  Copermcus  from  publifh*
ing,  during  His  whole  life- time,  his  difco-
very  of  the  true  fyflem  of  the  world.  Ga-
lileo  was  obliged  to  renounce  the  docflrine
of  the  motion  of  the  earth,  and  fufFcred  a
year's  imprifonment  for  having  aflerted  it«
And  fo  lately  as  the  year  1742,  the  beft
commentary  on  the  firft  produ(ftion  of  hu-
man genius  (Newton's  Principia)  was
not  allowed  to  be  printed  at  Rome,  becaufe
it  afferted  this  do(flrine  ;  and  the  learned
commentators  were  obliged  to  prefix  to
their  work  a  declaration,  that  on  this  point
they  fubmitted  to  the  decifions  of  the  fu-
preme  Pontiffs.  Such /^^^i;^  been,  and  fuch
(while  men  continue  blind  and  ignorant)
will  always  be  the  confequences  of  the  in-  <
terpofition  of  civil  governments  in  matters
of  fpeculation.

When  men  affociate  for  the  purpofe  of
civil  government,  they  do  it,  not  to  defend
truth  or  to  fupport  formularies  of  faith
and  fpeculative  opinions ;  but  to  defend
their  civil  rights,  and  to  prote6l  one  ano-
ther in  the  free  exercife  of  their  mental
and  corporeal  powers.  The  interference,
therefore,  of  civil  authority in fuch cafes

E  is


[ 26 ]

is  dlrectiy  contrary  to  the end of  its in-
ftitution. The  way  in  which it  can  beft
promote the  interefl  and dignity  of  man-
kind, (as far as they can he promoted
by the  difcovery  of  truth) is,  by encou-
raging them to fearch  for truth where-
ever they can  find it  ;  and by proteding
them in doi np- this af^ainfl  the  attacks  of
malevolence  and bigotry. Should  any  at-
tempt be  made  by  contending feds  to  in-
jure one another,  its  power  will come  in
properly  to  crufh  the  attempt,  and  to  main-
tain for  all  feds  equal  liberty,  by  punching
every encroachment upon it. The con-
dud  of  a  civil  magiflrate,  on inch  an  oc-
cafion, (liould be that  of Gallio  the wife
Roman proconful, who, on receiving an
accuiation  ot  the  apolDe Paul, would not
liilen  to  it, but  drove  from  his  prefence  the
accufers  who had  laid  violent  hands  upon
him, after  giving  them  the following  ad-
i  monition  : — If  it id  ere  a  matter  of  wrong
or  TJicked  lewdnefs,  rcafon  would  require  that
I JJjould  bear  with  you. But  if  it  be  a  quef-
tio?i  of  words and  7iames and  the law,  look
you to  it. For I  will  be  no  judge of  fucb
matters. Ads  xviii. 12.  &c. How  much
happier v/ould the world have been,  had
all  magiHrates  aded in  this  manner  ? Let

I  Aine-


[ 27 ]

America  learn  this  important  lelTon,  and
profit  by  the  experience  of  pafl:  times.
A  difTent  from  ejiabliped  opinions  and
dodrines  has  indeed  often  miferably  di-
fturbed  fociety,  and  produced  mifchief  and
bloodflied.  But  it  fhould  be  remembered,
that  this  has  been  owing  to  the  efiabliJJo''
ment  of  the  points  diilented  from,  and  the
ufe  of  civil  power  to  enforce  the  reception
of  them.  Had  civil  government  done
its  duty,  left  all  free,  and  employed  it-
felf  in  procurmg  in  (lead  of  reft  raining  fair
difcuffion,  all  mifchief  would  have  been
avoided,  and  mankind  would  have  been
raifed  higher  than  they  are  in  knowledge
and  improvement.

When  Chriftianity,  that  firft  and  bed  of  all
the  means  of  human  improvement,  was  firft
preached,  it  was  charged  with  turning  the*
world  upfide  down.  The  leaders  of  Jewifli
and  Pagan  eftablifhments  were  alarmed,  and
by  oppoiing  the  propagation  of  it,  converted
a  religion  of  peace  and  love  into  an  occafion
of  violence  and  flaughter  ;  and  thus  verified
our  Lord's  prophecy,  that  he  was  come
not  to  fend  peace,  but  afwordon  earth.  All
this  was the  effed:  of  the mifapplication

E  2  of-


[ 28 ]

of  the  powers of  government. Inflead  of
creating,  they  fliould have been employed
in  preve?itmg  fuch  mifchief,  and  been  aBive
only in  cauling the  Chriftian  caufe to  re-
ceive a  fair  hearing,  and  guarding  the  pro-
pagators of it agalnft infult. — The like
oblervation may be  made  concerning the
iirfl: reformers. — What  we all fee would
have been right  in Pagan and  FopiJIo  go-
vernments with  refpeft  to  Chriftianity  and
the Reformation  ; would it not  be now
right in Chrijiian or Protejiant govern-
ments, were any  attempts made  to pro-
pagate a new religion, or  any dodrines
advanced  oppodte  to  thofe  now  held  facred  ?
Such attempts, if  unfupported by reafon
and  evidence,  would  foon  come  to  nothing.
An  impofture  cannot fland  the  tefl:  of  fair
and  open  examination. On the contrary,
the  caufe  of  truth  will certainly  be  ferved
by  it. Mahometantfm  would  have  funk  as
foon  as  it  rofe, had  no  other  force  than  that
of  evidence  been  employed  to  propagate  it  %
and  it  is  an  unfpeakable  recommendation  of
Chrijlianityt that it made its way till it
became tlie  religion of  the  world in  one
of  its  moft  enlightened  periods,  by  evidence
only,  in  oppofition to the  flrongeft  exer-
tions


I  29  ]

tions  of  civil  power.  There  cannot  be  a
more  ftriking  proof,  that  nothing  but  fair
difcuflion  is  necellary  to  fupprels  error  and
to  propagate  truth.  I  am  grieved,  indeed,
whenever  I  find  any  Chriftians  fliewinsr  a
difpofition  to  call  in  the  aid  of  civil  power
to  defend  their  religion.  Nothing  can  be
more  difgraceful  to  it.  If  it  wants  fuch
aid,  it  cannot  be  of  God.  Its  corruption  1
and  debafement  took  place  from  the  mo-
ment that  civil  power  took  it  under  its
patronage ;  and  this  corruption  and  de-
bafement increafed,  till  at  laft  it  was  con-
verted into  a  fyltem  of  abfurdity  and  fuper-
ilition  more  grofs  and  more  barbarous  than

Paganifm  itfelf. The  religion of  Chriil

difclaims  all  connexion  with  the  civil  efta-
blidiments  of  the  world.  It  has  fufFered
infinitely  by  their  friendfjip,  Inftead  of
filencing  its  opponents,  let  them  be  encou-
raged to  produce  their  flrongell  arguments
againft  it.  The  experience  of  Britain  has
lately  fl:iewn  that  this  will  only  caufe  it
to  be  better  underflood  and  more  firmly
believed.

I  would  extend  thefc  obfervations to  all
points  of  faith,  however  facred they  may

be


[ 3° ]

be  deemed.  Nothing  reafonable  can  fufFer
by  difcuilion.  All  doctrines  really  facred
muft  be  clear  and  incapable  of  being  op-
pofed  with  fuccefs.  If  civil  authority  in-
terpofes,  it  will  be  to  fupport  fome  mif-^
conception  or  abufe  of  them.

That  immoral  tendency  of  dodrines  which
has  been  urged  as  a  reafon  againft  allowing
the  public  difcuffion  of  them,  muft  be
either  avowed  and  direB,  or  only  a  confe-
quence  with  which  they  are  charged.  If
it  is  avowed  and  direSi,  fuch  dodrines
certainly  will  not  fpread.  The  principles
rooted  in  human  nature  will  refift  them;
and  the  advocates  of  them  will  be  foon
difgraced.  If,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  only  a
conjequence  with  which  a  docftrine  is  charged,
it  fhould  be  confidered  how  apt  all  parties
are  to  charge  the  do(flrines  they  oppofe
with  bad  tendencies. It  is well known,

.  that  Cahinijis  and  Armmiansy  'Trinitarians
and  Socinians,  Fatalijls  and  Free-willerSt
are  continually  exclaiming  againft  one  ano-
ther's opinions  as  dangerous  and  licentious.
Even  Chriftianity  itfelf  could  not,  at  its  firft

I  introduction,  efcape  this  accufation.  The
profefTors  of  it  were  confidered  as  Atheijis,
becaufe  they  oppofed  Pagan  idolatry ;  and

their


i  3«  1

their  religion  was  on  this  account  reckoned
a  deftrudtive  and  pernicious  enthufiafm.
If,  therefore,  the  rulers  of  a  State  are  to
prohibit  the  propagation  of  all  do(ftrines  in
which  they  apprehend  immoral  tendencies,
an  opening  will  be  made,  as  I  have  before
obferved,  for  every  fpecies  of  perfecution.
There  will  be  no  doctrine,  however  true  or
important,  the  avowal  of  which  will  not  in
fome  country  or  other  be  fubjecfted  to  civil
penalties.  —  Undoubtedly,  there  are  doc-
trines which  have  fuch  tendencies.  But  \
the  tendencies  of  fpeculative  opinions  have
often  very  little  effed:  on  practice. ^  The
Author  of  nature  has  planted  in  the  human
mind  principles  and  feelings  which  will
operate  in  oppofition  to  any  theories  that
may  feem  to  contradi(ft  them.  Every  fe<ft,
whatever  may  be  its  tenets,  has  (omtfaho  \
for  the  neceflity  of  virtue.  The  philofo-
phers  who  hold  that  matter  and  motion
have  no  exiftence  except  in  our  own  ideas,
are  capable  of  believing  this  only  in  their
clofets.  The  fame  is  true  of  the  philofo-
phers  who  hold  that  nothing  exifts  but
matter  and  motion  j  and  at  the  fame  time
teach, that  man  has no  feif-determining

power  ;


[ 32 ]
power  ; that an unalterable fate  govefn^
all  thing?  -,  and  that no  one  is any thing
that  he  can avoid  being,  or  does  any  thing

ifthat  he  can  avoid doing, Thefe philo-

fophers  when  they  come  out  into  the
world  adt  as  other  men  do.  Common
fenfe  never  fails  to  get  the  better  of  their
theories;  and  I  know  that  many  of  them
are  fome  of  the  bell  as  well  as  the  ablefi:  men
in  the  world,  and  the  warmed  friends  to  the
true  interefts  of  fociety.  Though  their  doc-
trine may feem to  furnifli  an apology for

J  vice,  their  prad:ice  is  an  exhibition  of
virtue  ;  and  a  government  which  would
filence  them  would  greatly  injure  itfelf. — — -

I  Only  overt  ads  of  injuftice,  violence  or  de-
famation, come  properly  under  the  cogni-
zance of  civil  power.  Were  a  perfon  now
to  go  about  London,  teaching  that  "  pro-
•'  perty  is  founded  in  grace,"  1  iliould,
were  1  a  mapiftrate,  let  him  alone  while
he  did  nothing  but  teach,  without  being
under  any  other  apprehenlion  than  that  he
would  foon  find  a  lodging  in  Bedlam, But

*  wxre  he  to  attempt  to  carry  his  dodrine
into  its  confequences  by  adually  Jlealing,
under  the  pretence  of  his  right  as  a  faint
to  the  property  of  his  neighbours,  I  {hould

think


[ .r-! ]
think  it  my  duty to  lay  hold  of  him  as  a
felon,  without  regarding  the  opinion  from
which  he  aded.

I  am  perfuaded,  that  few  or  no  incon-
veniencies  would  arife  from  fuch  a  liberty.
If  magiflrates  will  do  their  duty  as  foon
as  violence  begins,  or  any  overt  adts
which  break  the  peace  are  committed,  no
great  harm  will  arife  from  their  keep-
ing themfclves  neutral  till  then.  Let,  how-
ever, the  contrary  be  fuppofed.  Let  it
be  granted  that  civil  authority  will  in  this
cafe  often  be  too  late  in  its  exertions  \  the
juft  inference  will  be,  not  that  the  liberty
I  plead  for  ought  not  to  be  allowed  ;  but
that  there  will  be  two  evils,  between  which  '
an  option  muft  be  made,  and  the  leaft  of

which muft be  preferred.- One is,  the

evil  juft  mentioned.  ■  The  other  includes
in  it  every  evil  which  can  arife  from  mak-
ing the  rulers  of  States  judges  of  the  ten-
dency of  doctrines,  fubjecfting  freedom  of
enquiry  to  the  controul  of  their  ignorance,
and  perpetuating  darknefs,  intolerance  and
ilavery.  I  need  not  fay  which  of  thefe
evils  is  the  leaft.


F  Of


[ 3+ ]


Of  Liberty  of  Conscience,  and  Civil
Establishments  ^"'Religion.

"N  Liberty  of  Conscience  I  include
much  more  than  Toleration.  Jefus  Chrlft
has  eftablidied  a  perfed  equality  among  his
followers.  His  command  is,  that  they
fhali  afTume  no  jurifdidtion  over  one  ano-
ther, and acknowledge no  mafter befidcs

himfelf. It  is,  therefore,  prefumption in

any  of  them  to  claim  a  right  to  any  fupe-
riority  or  pre-eminence  over  their  brethren.
Such  a  claim is  implied,  v/henever  any  of

them pretend  to  tolerate  the  reft. Not

only  all  Chrifiiaiis,  but  all  men  of  all  reli-
gions ought  to  be  confidered  by  a  State  as
equally  entitled  to  its  protedlion  as  far  as
they  demean  themfelves  honeftly  and  peace-
ably. T'okratlon  caji  take  place  only  where
there  is  a  civil  eftabliiliment  of  a  particu-
lar mode  of  religion  i  that  is,  where  a  pre-
'  dominant  fedl  enjoys  cxclufive  advantages,
and  makes  the  encouragement  of  its  own
mode  of  faith  and  woriliip  a  part  of  the
conftitution  of  the  State ;  but  at  the  fame
I  time


[ 35 ]

time  thinks  fit  to  suffer  the  exerclfe  of
other  modes  of  faith  and  worfliip.  Thanks
be  to  God,  the  new  American  States  are  at
prefent  ftrangers  to  fuch  eftablifliments.
In  this  refped:,  as  well  as  many  others,
they  have  lliewn,  in  framing  their  conftitu-
tions,  a  degree  of  wifdom  and  liberality
which  is  above  all.  pralfe.

Civil  eltablilliments  of  formularies  of
faith  and  worfhip  are  inconfillent  with  the
rights  of  private  judgment — They  ingender
Arife — They  turn  religion  into  a  trade —  '
(They  fhoar  up  error — They  produce  hy-
pocrify  and  prevarication  —  They  lay  an
undue  byafs  on  the  human  mind  in  its
enquiries,  and  obfl:ru(fl  the  progrefs  of
truth. — '-—Genuine  religion  is  a  concern
that  lies  entirely  between  God  and  our
own  fouls.  It  is  incapable  of  receiving  any
aid  from  human  laws.  It  is  contaminated,
as  foon  as  worldly  motives  and  fandions
mix  their  influence  with  it.  Statefmen
iliould'  countenance  it  only  by  exhibiting
in  their  own  example  a  confcientious  re-
gard to  it  in  thole  forms  which  are  mofl
agreeable  to  their  own  judgments,  and  by
encouraging  their  fellow-citizens  in  doing
the  fame. They  cannot  as  public  men  give

F 2  it


[ 36 ]

it  any  other  affiftance.  All  befides  that
has  been  called  a  public  leading  in  religion,
has  done  it  an  edential  injury,  and  pro-
duced feme  of  the  word  confeqUences.

The  Church  Ertablilhment  in  England  \%
one  of  the  mildeft  and  bell  fort. But  even
,  here  what  a  fnare  has  it  been  to  integrity  ?
And what a check to free enquiry  ?
What difpofitions favourable  to  defpotifm
has  it foftered  ? What a turn to  pride
and narrownefs and domination has it
given the  clerical  character  ? What  drug-
gies has it produced in its members to
accommodate their opinions to the  fub-
fcriptions  and  tefts  which  it  impofes  ?  What
a  perverfion  of  learning has  it occafioned
to  defend  obfelete  creeds  and abfurdities  ?
What  a  burthen  is  it  on  the  confciences  of
fome of  its beft  clergy, who, in  confe-
quence  of  being  bound down  to  a fyftem
they  do  not approve,  and having  no fup-
port except  that  which  they derive from
conforming to it, find themfelves under
the hard  neceffity of  either prevaricating

or  Jiarving  f No one doubts but that

the Englifh  clergy  in general  cculd with

\  more  truth  declare that they  do  not,  than

that  they  do  give their  unfeigned  ajjent  to

all


[ 37 ]

nil  and  every  thing  cont'SAntdL  in  the  thirty-
nine  Articles  and  the  Book  of  Common-
Prayer  ;  and  yet,  with  a  folemn  declaration
to  this  purpofe,  are  they  obliged  to  enter
upon  an  office  which  above  all  offices  re-
quires thofe  who  exercife  it  to  be  examples
of  (implicity  and  fincerity.  — Who  can
help  execrating  the  caufe  of  fuch  an  evil  ?

But  what  I  wiih  mod  to  urge  is  the  ten-
dency of  religious  eftablilTiments  to  im-
pede the  improvement  of  the  world.  They
are  boundaries  prefcribed  by  human  folly
to  human  inveftigation  ;  and  inclofures
which  intercept  the  light  and  confine  the
exertions  of  reafon.  Let  any  one  imagine
to  himfelf  what  effects  fimilar  eftablifh-
ments  v/ould  have  in  Philofophy,  Naviga-
tion, Metaphyficks,  Medicine  or  Mathe-
maticks.  Something  like  this  took  place
in  Logick  and  Philofophy;  while  the
IPSE  DIXIT  of  Ariftotle  and  the  nonfenfe
of  the  fchools  maintained  an  authority  like
that  of  the  creeds  of  churchmen  :  And  the
effect  was  a  longer  continuance  of  the
world  in  the  ignorance  and  barbarity  of
the  dark  ages.  But  civil  eftablilhments  of
religion  are  ?7iore  pernicious.  So  apt  are
mankind to  mifreprefent  the  character  of

the


[  38  ]
the  Deity,  and  to  corined:  his  favour  with
particular  modes  of  faith,  that  it  mufl  be
exped:ed,  that  a  religion  fo  fettled  will  be
what  it  has  hitherto  been — a  gloomy  and
cruel  fuperftition  bearing  the  name  of  re-
ligion.

It  has  been  long  a  fubjed:  of  difpute,
which  is  worft  in  its  efteds  on  fociety,
fuch  a  religion  or  fpeculative  Atheifm. For

V  my  own  part,  I  could  almoft  give  the  pre-
ference to  the  latter. Atheism  is  fo  re-
pugnant to  every  principle  cf  common
fenfe,  that  it  is  not  poffible  it  {hould  ever
gain  much  ground,  or  become  very  preva-
lent. On  the  contrary  3  there  is  a  par-
ticular pronenefs  in  the  human  mind
to Superstition, and nothing is more

likely to  become prevalent. Atheism

leaves  us  to  the  full  influence  of  mod
of  our  natural  feelings  and  focial  prin-
ciples ;  and  thefe  are  fo  flrong  in  their
operation,  that  in  general  they  are  a  fuf-
iicient  guard  to  the  order  of  fociety. But

I  Superstition  counteradls  thefe  prin-
ciples, by  holding  forth  men  to  one  another
as  objects  of  divine  hatred  ^  and  by  putting
them  on  harraffing,  filencing,  imprifoning
and  burning  one  anoti  er  in  order  to  do
God  fcrvice. — Atheism  is  a  fancftuary  for

vice


[ 39 ]

vice  bv  taking  away  the  motives  to  virtue
ariiing  from  the  will  of  God  and  the  fear
ofa  future  judgment.  But  Superstition
is  more  a  fan6luary  for  vice,  by  teaching
men  ways  of  pleafing  God  without  moral
virtue,  and  by  leading  them  even  to  com-
pound for  wickednefs  by  ritual  fervices,
by  bodily  penances  and  mortifications,  by
adorning  Ihrines,  going  pilgrimages,  faying
many  prayers,  receiving  abfolution  from  the
pried,  exterminating  heretics,  &c. — Athe-
ism deflroys  the  facrednefs  and  obligation
of  an  oath.  But  has  there  not  been  alfo  a
religion  (fo  called)  which  has  done  this,  by
leading  its  profeffors  to  a  perfuafion  that
there  exifts  a  power  on  earth  which  can  dif-
penfe  with  the  obligation  of  oaths,  that
pious  frauds  are  right,  and  that  faith  is  not
to.be  kept  with  heretics  ?

It  is  indeed  only  a  rational  and  liberal
religion  ;  a  religion  founded  on  juft  no-
tions of  the  Deity  as  a  being  who  regards
equally  every  fmcere  worfliipper,  and  by
whom  all  are  alike  favoured  as  far  as  they
a6t  up  to  the  light  they  enjoy  ;  a  religion
which  confifls  in  the  imitation  of  the  moral
perfedlions  of  an  almighty  but  benevolent
governor of  nature, who directs for the

befl


[  4°  ]
beft  all  events,  in  confidence  in  the  care
of  his  providence,  in  refignation  to  his
will,  and  in  the  faithful  difcharge  of  every
duty  of  piety  and  morality  from  a  regard
to  his  authority  and the apprehenfion  of  a

future  righteous  retribution. It  is  only

THIS  religion  (the  infpiring  principle  of
every  thing  fair  and  w^orthy  and  joyful,
and  which  in  truth  is  nothing  but  the
love  of  God  and  man  and  virtue  warming
the  heart  and  dired:ing  the  condu(ft.) — It  is
only  THIS  kind  of  religion  that  can  blefs
the  world,  or  be  an  advantage  to  fociety. — •
This  is  the  religion  that  every  enlightened
friend  to  mankind  will  be  zealous  to  pro-
mote. But  it  is  a  religion  that  the  powers
of  the  world  know  little  of,  and  which
will  always  be  beft  promoted  by  being
left  free  and  open.

I  cannot help  adding here, that fuch

in particular  is  the  Qhrijiian  religion.

Chriftianity  teaches  us  that  there  is  none
good  but  one,  that  is,^^  God  -,  that  he  vvilleth
all  men  to  be  faved,  and  will  puni(h  nothing
but  wickednefs  ;  that  he  defires  mercy
and  not  facrifice  (benevolence  rather  than
rituals) ;  that  loving  him  with  all  our  hearts,
and  loving  our  neighbour  as  ourfelves,  is
the  whole  of  our  duty;  and  that  in  every

patioa


[ 41 ]

nation  he  that  feareth  him  and  worketh
i'ighteoufners  is  accepted  of  him.  It  refts
its  authority  on  the  power  of  God,  not  of
man  ;  refers  itfelf  entirely  to  the  under-
ftandings  of  men  ;  makes  us  the  fubjeds  of
a  kingdom  that  is  not  of  this  world ;  and
requires  us  to  elevate  our  minds  above  tem-
poral emoluments,  and  to  look  forwards  to
a  (late  beyond  the  grave,  where  a  govern-
ment of  perfedl  virtue  will  be  ereded  under
that  Mefliah  who  has  to/let^  death  for  every
man. — What  have  the  powers  of  the  world
to  do  with  fuch  a  reli^^ion  ? — It  difclaims  all
connexion  with  them  ;  it  made  its  way  at
firft  in  oppofition  to  them ;  and,  as  far  as
it  is  now  upheld  by  them,  it  is  disho-
noured and  vilified.

The  injury  which  civil  eflablifhments  do
to  Chriftianity  may  be  learnt  from  the  fol-
lowing conliderations.

Firll.  The  fpirit  of  religious  eilablifh-
ments  is  oppofite  to  the  fpirit  of  Chrifli-
anity.  It  is  a  fpirit  of  pride  and  tyranny
in  oppofition  to  the  Chriftian  loivly  fpirit  ;
a  contra6ted  and  felfifli  fpirit,  in  oppofi-
tion to  the  ChrifLian  enlarged  and  benevo-
lent fpirit  J  the  fpirit  of  the  world  in  op-
pofition to  the  Chriftian  heavenly  fpirit.

G  Secondly.


[ 42 ]

Secondly.  Religious  eftablifliments  are
founded  on  a  claim  of  authority  in  the
Ghriftian  church  which  overthrows  Chrifl's
authority.  He  has  in  the  fcriptures  given
his  followers  a  code  of  laws,  to  which  he
requires  them  to  adhere  as  their  only  guide.
But  the  language  of  the  framers  of  church
eftablifhments  is — We  have  authority  hi  con-
troverjics  of  faith,  and  power  to  decree  rites
a?id  ceremonies.  We  arc  the  deputies  of
Chrift  upon  earth,  who  have  been  com-
mifiioned  by  him  to  interpret  his  laws,
and  to  rule  his  church.  You  mufi;  there-
fore follow  US.  The  fcriptures  are  infuf-
ficient.  Our  interpretations  you  mud
receive  as  Chrift's  laws  ;  our  creeds  as
his  doctrine  j  our  inventions  as  his  in-
flitutions."
It  is  evident,  as  the  excellent  Hoadly
has  fliewn,  that  thefe  claims  turn  Chrift
(  out  of  the  government  of  his  own  king-
dom, and  place  ufurpers  en  his  throne. —
They  are  therefore  derogatory  to  his  ho-
nour 3  and  a  fubmiffion  to  them  is  a  breach
of  the  allegiance  due  to  him.  They  have
been  almofi:  fatal  to  true  Chriflianity  ;  and
attempts  to  enforce  them  by  civil  penalties,

have


[ 43 ]

have  watered  the Chriftian  world  with  the
blood  of  faints  and  martyrs.

Thirdly.  The  difficulty  of  introducing
alterations  into  church  efliabliiliments  after
they  have  been  once  formed,  is  another
objecflion  to  them.  Hence  it  happens,  that
they  remain  always  the  fame  amidil  all
changes  of  public  manners  and  opinions*  ;
and  that  a  kingdom  even  of  Chriftans  may
go  on  for  ages  in  idolatrous  vv^orQiip,  after
a  general  conviction  may  have  taken  place,
that  there  is  but  one  being  who  is  the
proper  objedt  of  religious  adoration,  and
that  this  one  being  is  that  one  only  living
and  true  God  who  fent  Chrift  into  the  world,
and  who  is  his  no  lefs  than  he  is  our  God
and  father.  W'^hat  a  fad  fcene  of  religious
hypocrify  mud  fuch  a  difcordance  between
public  convidlion  and  the  public  forms  prO'
duce  ?

*  This  is  an  inconvenience  attending  civil  as  well  as  \
ecclcjtafiical  eftablifhments,  which  has  been  with  great
vvifdom  guarded  againft  in  the  new  Anuiican  conltitu-
tions,  by  appointing  that  there  fhall  be  a  revifal  of  them
at  the  end  of  certain  terms.  This  will  leave  them
always  open  to  improvement,  without  any  danger  of
thofe  convulfions  which  have  ufually  attended  the  cor-
reflions  of  abufes  when  they  have  acquired  a  facrednefs
by  time,

G  ^  At


[  44  1
At  this  day,  in  fome  European  countries,
the  abfurdity  and  Havilhnefs  of  their  hie-
rarchies are  feen  and  acknowledged  ;  but
being  incorporated  with  the  flate,  it  is
fcarcely  poffible  to  get  rid  of  them.

What  can  be  more  flriking  than  the  State
of  England  in this refpedl  ? — The fyflem
of  faith  and  worOiip eftabli/hed  in  it  was
formed  above  two  hundred  years  ago,  when
^Europe  was  juft emerging from darknefs
and  barbarity. The  times  have  ever  fine©
been  growing  more  enlightened  ;  but  with-
out any  effed  on  the  eftablifliment. Not  a
ray  of  the  increafing  light  has  penetrated  it.
Not  one imperfe6lion, however  grofs,  has
been  removed. The  fame  articles  of  faith
are  fubfcribed. The fame  ritual  of  devo-
tion is  pradifed, — There  is  reafon  to  fear
J  that  the  abfolution  of  thejick, vv^hich  forms
a  part  of  this  ritual, is  often  reforted  to  as
a  paflport to heaven after  a  wicked life;
and  yet  it  is  continued. — Perhaps  nothing
, more  fiiocking  to  reafon  and  humanity  eve^
made  a  part  of  a  religious  fyftem than the
damning  claufes in the  Athanaf.an  creed  j
and yet the obligation  of the clergy  to
declare affent to this creed, and  to  read
it as a  part  of the public  devotion, re-
mains.

The


[ 45 ]

The  neceflary  confequence  of  fach  a  ftate
of  things  is,  that,

Fourthly, Chriftianity  itfelf  is  difgraced,  y
and  that  all  religion  comes to  be  coniidered
as  a  ftate  trick,  and  a barbarous  mummery.
It is  well known, that in fome  Popidi
countries there are  few  Chriftians  among
the  higher  ranks  of  men, the  religion of
the  State  being  in  thofe  countries  miftaken
for the  religion  of  the  Gofpel. This  in-
deed fliews  a  criminal inattention in  thofe
who fall into fuch a  miflake ; for  thev
ought  to  confider  that  Chriftianity  has  been
grievoufly corrupted, and  that  their ideas
of  it  fhould  be  taken  from  the  New  Tefta-
ment  only. It is,  however,  fo  natural  to
reckon Chridianity  to  be  that  which  it is
held  out  to  be  in all the  eftablifhments  of
it,  that  it  cannot  but  happen  that  fuch  an
error  will take  place  and  produce  fome  of
the  worft confequences. -There  is  pro-
bably a  greater  number  of  rational  Chrift-  i
ians  (that  is,  of  Chriftians upon  enquiry)
in England, than in  all Popifh  countries.
The  reafon  is,  that the  religious  eilablifli-
ment  here  is Popery  reformed;  and  that  a
confiderable body  diflent  from it,  and  are
often inculcating the neceffity  of diftin-

guifhing


[ 46 ]

guiflilng  between  the  Chriftianity  eflabiiili-
ed  by law  and  that  which  is  taught  in  the

Bible. Certain  it  is,  that till this  di-

ftin6tion is made, Chriftianity  can never
recover  its  juft  credit  and  ufefulnefs.


Such  then  are  the  effecfls  of  civil  efla-
blifhments  of  religion.  May  heaven  foon
put  an  end  to  them.  The  world  will
never  be  generally  wife  or  virtuous  or
happy,  till  thefe  enemies  to  its  peace  and
improvement  are  demolished.  Thanks  be
to  God,  they  are  giving  way  before  in-
creafing  light.  Let  them  never  fhew  them-
felves  in  America.  Let  no  fuch  monfler
'  be  known  there  as  human  authority
IN  MATTERS  OF  RELIGION.  Let  every
honefl  and  peaceable  man,  whatever  is
his  faith,  be  proted:ed  there  ;  and  find  an
eifed:ual  defence  againft  the  attacks  of  bi-
gotry and  intolerance. — In  the  united  States
may  Religion  flourifh.  They  cannot  be
very  great  and  happy  if  it  does  not.  But  let
it  be  a  better  religion  than  moll  of  thofe
which  have  been  hitherto  profefied  in  the
world.  Let  it  be  a  religion  which  enforces
moral  obligations ;  not  a  religion  which  re-
laxes and  evades  them, — A  tolerant  and  Ca~

tholtQ


[ 47 ]

thoUc  religion  ;  not  a  rage  for  profelitirm. —
A  religion  of  peace  and  charity  ;  not  a
religion  that  perfecutes,  curfes  and damns.  '

In  a  word,  let  it  be  the  genuine  Gof-

pel  of  peace  lifting  above  the  world,  warm-
ing; the  heart  with  the  love  of  God  and
his  creatures,  and  fuftaining  the  fortitude
of  good  men  by  the  ailured  hope  of  a
future  deliverance  from  death,  and  an  in-
finite reward  in  the  everlajling  kingdom  of
our  Lord  and  Saviour.


From  the  preceding  obfervations  it  may
be  concluded,  that  it  is  impoffible  I  (hould
not  admire  the  following  article  in  the  de-
claration of  rights  which  forms  the  foun-
dation of  the  Majfachufett' s  conftitution. — •
In  this  State  every  denomination  of
Chriftians  demeaning  themfelves  peace-
ably and  as  good  fubjecfts  of  the  com-*
monwealth,  fliall  be  equally  under  the
prote'flion  of  the  law  ;  and  no  fubordi-
nation  of  any  one  fed;  or  denomination
to  another  (hall  ever  be  eftabliflied  by-
law *."

*  The  North  Carolhia  conftitution  alfo  orders  that
there  fliall  be  no  eftablifhment  of  any  one  religious  church
or  denomination  in  that  State  in  preference  to  any  other.

I  This


[ 48 ]

This  is  liberal  beyond  all  example.  —  1
{hould,  however,  have  admired  it  more
had  it  been  more  liberal, and  the  words

ALL MEN OF ALL RELIGIONS been fub-

ftituted for the  v^ords every denomination
of  Chrijlians.

It  appears  farther  from  the  preceding
obfervations,  that  I  cannot  but diflike  the

^  religious  tefts  which  make  a  part  of  feveral

of  the  American conftitutions. -In the

Ma/Jhchufetfs  conflitution  it  is  ordered,  that
all  who  take  feats  in  the  Houfe  of  Re-
prefentatives  or  Senate  fliall  declare  "  their
*'  firm  perfuafion  of  the  truth  of  the
"  Chriftian  relii^ion."  The  fame  is  re^
quired  by  the  Maryland  conftitution,  as  a
condition  of  being  admitted  into  any  places
of  profit  or  truil.  In  Penfyhania  every
member  of  the  Houfe  of  Reprefentatives
is  required  to  declare,  that  he  *'  acknow-
"  ledges' the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and
**  Nev/  Teflament  to  be  given  by  divine
"  infpiration."  In  the  State  of  Delaware,
that  *'  he  believes  in  God  the  Father,  and
**  in  Jefus  Chrid  his  only  Son,  and  in  the
**  Holy  Ghofl,  one  God  blefied  for  ever-
*'  more." All tliis is more  than is rc-

\  quired even in Englaudy where, though

every


[ 49 ]

every  perfon  however  debauched  or  athe-
iftical  is  required  to  receive  the  facrament
as  a  qualification  for  mferior  places,  no
other  religious  teft  is  impofed  on  members  of
parliament  than  a  declaration  againil  Popery.
-^It  is  an  obfervation  no  lefs  jufl  than  com-
mon, that  fuch  tefts  exclude  only  honejl
men. The  ^^/j-honeft  never  fcruple  them.

Monte  s  QjjiEU  probably  was  not  a
Chriflian.  Newton  and  Locke  were  not
Trinitarians  -,  and  therefore  not  Cbrijlians
according  to  the  commonly  received  ideas
of  Chriftianity.  Would  the  United  States,  i
for  this  reafon,  deny  fuch  men,  were  they
living,  all  places  of  trull  and  power  among
them  ?


H  Of


[ 50 ]


Of Education.

CUGH  is  the  ftate  of  things  which  I  wifh
to  take  place  in  the  united  Americafz
States. — In  order  to  introduce  and  perpe-
tuate it,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  give  it
the  greater!:  effed:  on  the  improvement  of
the  world,  nothing  is  more  necelTary  than
the  eftablifhment  of  a  wife  and  liberal  plan
of  Education.  It  is  impoffible  properly
to  reprefent  the  importance  of  this.  So
much  is  left  by  the  author  of  nature  to
depend  on  the  turn  given  to  the  mind  in
early  life,  and  the  impreffions  then  made,
that  I  have  often  thought  there  may  be  a
I  y^n'^/ remaining  to  be  difcovered  in  educa-
tion, which  will  caufe  future  generations
to  grow  up  virtuous  and  happy,  and  acce-
lerate human  improvement  to  a  greater  de-
gree than  can  atprefentbe  imagined.

The  end  of  education  is  to  diredl  the
powers  of  the  mind  in  unfolding  them-
felves ;  and  to  aiTift  them  in  gaining  their
juft  bent  and  force. And,  in  order  to  this,

its


[ 5' ]

its  bufinefs  fliould  be  to  teach  how  to  think,
rather  than  what  to  think ;  or  to  lead  into  the
beft  way  of  fearching  for  truth,  rather  than
to  inn:ru(5l  in  truth  itfelf. — As  for  the  latter,
who  is  qualified  for  it? — There  are  many  in-
deed who  are  eager  to  undertake  this  office.
All  parties  and  feds  think  they  have  difcover-/
ed  truth,  and  are  confident  that  they  alone  are
its  advocates  and  friends.  But  the  very  dif-
ferent and  inconfiflent  accounts  they  give
of  it  demojiftrate  they  are  utter  ftrangers
to  it ;  and  that  it  is  better  to  teach  nothing,
than  to  teach  what  they  hold  out  for  truth.
The  ereater  their  confidence,  the  greater
is  the  reafon  for  diftruftlng  them.  We
generally  fee  the  warmed  zeal,  where  the
objed  of  it  is  the  greateft  nonfenfe.

Such  obfervaticns  have  a  particular  ten-
dency to  fliew  that  education  ought  to  be
an  initiation  into  candour,  rather  than  into;
any  fyftems  of  faith  ;  and  that  it  fhould
form  a  habit  of  cool  and  patient  inveftiga-
tion,  rather  than  an  attachment  to  any
opinions.

But hitherto education has been con-
duced on a contrary  plan. It  has  been
a  contraSiioriy not an enlargement of  the
H  %  in-


[ 52 ]

intelledual  faculties  ;  an  injeBion  of  falfe
principles  hardening  them  in  error,  not
a  cUjcipUne  enlightening  and  improving
them.  Inftead  of  opening  and  (irengthen-
ing  them,  and  teaching  to  think/r^'t'/j'j  it  hath
cramped  and  enflaved  them,  and  qualified
for  thinking  only  in  one  track.  Inflead  of
infiilling  hun^ility,  charity,  and  liberality,
and  thur  preparing  for  an  eafier  difcovery
and  a  readier  admiffion  of  truth  ;  it  has  in-
flated with  conceit,  and  fluffed  the  human
mind  with  wretched  prejudices.

The  more  has  been  learnt  from  fuch  edu-
cation, the  more  it  becomes  necefiary  to
Z(!;z]earn.  The  more  has  been  taught  in
this  way,  of  fo  much  the  more  mud  the
mind  be  emptied  before  true  wifdom  can
enter.— Such  was  education  in  the  time  of
the  firft  teachers  of  chriflianity.  By  fur-
nifhing  with  ikiil  in  the  arts  of  difputation
and  fophiftry,  and  producing  an  attachment
to  eftablifhed  fyflems,  it  turned  the  minds
of  men  from  truth,  and  rendered  them  more
determined  to  refift  evidence  and  more
capable  of  evading  it.  Hence  it  happened,
that this heavenly  inftrudion, when firll

com-.


[ 53 ]

communicated,  was  to  the  Jews  a pimbling
l?lock,  a77d  to  the  Greeks  foolijhizefs ;  and
that,  in  fpite  of  miracles  them/elves,  the
perfons  who  rejed:ed  it  with  mod  difdain,
and  who  oppofed  it  with  moft  violence,  were
thofe  who  had  been  educated  in  colleges,  /
and  were  heft  verfed  in  the  falfe  learning
of  the  times  :  And  had  it  taught  the  true
philofophy  inflead  of  the  true  religion,  the
efFed:  would  have  been  the  fame.  The
doctrine  **  that  the  fun  flood  ftill,  and  that
**  the  earth  moved  round  it,"  would  have
been  reckoned  no  lefs  abfurd  and  incredible,
than  the  doctrine  of  a  crucified  Mejfiah.
And  the  men  v.'ho  would  have  treated  fuch
an  inftrudlion  with  moft  contempt,  would
have  been  the  wife  and  the  prudent  i  that
is,  the  proud  fophifls  and  learned  dodors
of  the  times,  who  had  ftudied  the  Ptole-
maick  fyftem  of  the  world,  and  learnt,  by
cycles  and  epicycles,  to  account  for  all  the
motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies.

In  like  manner,  when  the  improvement
of  Logick  in  Mr.  Locke's  B.j]ay  on  the
Human  XJnderJianding  was  firft  publifhed
in  Britain^  the  perfons  readieft  to  attend
to  it  and  to  receive  it  were  thofe  who  had

never


f 54 ]

iiever  been  trained  in  colleges ;  and  whofe
minds,  therefore,  had  never  been  per-
verted by  an  inftrudion  in  the  jargon  of
the  fchools.  To  the  deep  profeffors  of  the
time,  it  appeared  (like  the  dodlrine  taught
in  his  book  on  the  Reafoijablenefs  of
Chriflianity)  to  be  a  dangerous  novelty
iind  herely ;  and  the  Univerfity  of  Ojc-
\  FORD,  in  particular,  condemned  and  repro-
bated the author. The  like happened

.when Sir Isaac Newton's difcoveries
.were  hrit  publifhed. A  romance (that  is,
the  Philofophy  of  Descartes)  was  then
in  poiTelTion of the p'hilofophical world.
Education  had  rivctted  it  in  the  minds  of
the  learned  ;  and  it  was  twenty-feven  years
before Newton's Pnncipia could gain
fufficient  credit to bring it to a fecond
' edition,.— Such are the prejudices which
iaave  generally  prevailed  againd:  new  lights.
Such the impediments which have been
thrown  in the way  of  improvement by  a
narrow  plan of  education.— Even  now  the
principal objed  of  education (efpecially  in
'  divinity)  is  to  teach eftabliaied fyftems  as
certain  truths,  and to  qualify  for fuccefs-
■fuliy defending  them  againll opponents;

and


[ 55 ]

and  thus  to  arm  the  mind  againfl  convic-
tion, and  render  it  impenetrable  to  farther
light.  Indeed,  were  it  offered  to  my  op-
tion which  I  would  have,  the  plain  fenfe
of  a  common  and  untutored  man,  or  the
deep  erudition  of  the  proud  fcholars  and
profefTors  in  moft  univerfities,  I  lliould
eagerly  prefer  the  former,  from  a  per-
fuafion  that  it  would  leave  me  at  a  lefs
diftance  from  real  Vvifdom.  An  unoccupied
and  limple  mind  is  infinitely  preferable  j
to  a  mind  warped  by  fyfliems  y  and  the
entire  ijDant  of  learning  better  than  a  learn-
ing, fuch  as  mofl  of  that  is  which  hitherto
has  been  fought  and  admired — A  learning
which  puffs  up,  while  in  reality  it  is  no-
thing but  profounder  ignorance  and  more
inveterate  prejudice.

It  may  be  worth  adding  here,  that  a  nar-
row education  (fliould  it  ever  happen  not
to  produce  the  evils  now  mentioned)  will
probably  produce  equal  evils  of  a  contrary
nature.  I  mean,  that  there  will  be  danger,
when  perfons  fo  educated  come  to  fee  the
abfurdity  oi  fome  of  the  opinions  in  which  \
they  have  been  educated,  that  they  will
become  prejudiced  againft  them  all,  ai:d,
confequently, throw them  all  away, and

run


[ 56 ]

lun  wild  into  fcepticifm  and  infidelity.  — »
At  prefent,  in  this  part  of  the  world  this
is  a  very  common  event*

I  am  by  no  means  qualified  to  give  a  jiid
account  of  the  particular  method  in  which
education  ought  to  be  conduded,  fo  as  to
avoid  thefe  evils  :  That  is,  fo  as  to  render
the  mind  free  and  unfettered  ;  quick  in
difcerning  evidence,  and  prepared  to  follow
it  from  whatever  quarter  and  in  whatever
manner  it  may  offer  itfelf.  But  certain  it
is,  that  the  bed  mode  of  education  is  that
which  does  this  moft  effedtually  ;  which
guards  beft  againft  filly  prejudices  i  which
enflames  moft  with  the  love  of  truth ;  which
difpofes  moft  to  ingenuity  and  fairnefs;  and
leaves  the  mind  moft  fenfible  of  its  own
need  of  farther  information.  —  Had  this
been  always  the  aim  of  education,  mankind
would  now  have  been  farther  advanced.  —
It  fuppofes,  however,  an  improved  ftate  of
mankind ;  and  when  once  it  has  taken
place,  it  will  quicken  the  progrefs  of  /;;/-
provement,

I  have  in  thefe  obfervations  exprefied  a
diflike  of  f)'ftems  -,  but  I  have  meant  only

to


[ ^1 ]

to  condemn  that  attachment  to  them  as
ftandards  of  truth  which  has  been  too  pre-
valent. It  may  be  neceffary  in  education
to  make  ufe  of  them  ;  or  of  books  explain-
ing them.  But  they  (liould  be  ufed  only
as  guides  and  helps  to  enquiry.  Inilrudion
in  them  fhould  be  attended  with  a  fair  ex-
hibition of  the  evidence  on  both  fides  of
every  queftion  ;  and  care  (hould  be  taken
to  induce,  as  far  as  poffible,  a  habit  of  be*-
lieving  only  on  an  overbalance  of  evidence  ;
and  of  proportioning  afient  in  every  cafe
to  the  degree  of  that  overbalance,  Vv'ithout
regarding  authority,  antiquity,  Angularity,
novelty,  or  any  of  the  prejudices  which  too

commonly influence  aflent. -Nothing  is

fo  well  fitted  to  produce  this  habit  as  the
iludy  of  mathematics.  In  thefe  fciences  no
one  ever  thinks  of  giving  his  aflent  to  a
propofition  till  he  can  clearly  underftand  it>
and  fee  it  proved  by  a  fair  dedudion  from
propofitions  previoufly  underflood  and  prov-
ed. In  thefe  fciences  the  mind  is  inured
to  clofe  and  patient  attention  ;  fhewn  the
nature  of  juft  reafoning  j  and  taught  to  form
din:in<5l  ideas,  and  to  exped  clear  evidence
in  all  cafes  before  belief.  They  furni£h,
therefore,  the  bed  exercife  for  the  intellec-

I  tual


[ S8 ]
tual powers, and  the  belt  defence  againft
that  credub'ty  and  precipitation  and  confu-
iion  of  ideas  which  are  the  common  fources
of  error.

There  is,  however,  a  danger  even  here  to
be  avoided.  Mathematical  (tudies  may  abforb
the  attention  too  much  j  and  when  they
do,  they  contract  the  mind  by  rendering  it
incapable  of  thinking  at  large -,  by  difqua-
iifying  it  for  judging  of  any  evidence  ex-
cept mathematical  ;  and,  confequently,  dif-
poling  it  to  an  unreafonable  fcepticifm  on
all  fabjeds  which  admit  not  of  fuch  evi-
dence.  There  have  been  many  inftances

of  this  narrownefs  in  mathematicians.

But  to  return  from  this  digreffion,- — I
cannot  help  obferving  on  this  occafion,  with
refped:  to  Christianity  in  particular,  that
education  ought  to  lead  to  a  habit  of  judg^
ing  of  it  as  it  is  in  the  code  itfelf  of
Chriilianity ;  that  the  dodrines  it  reveals
ihould  be  learnt  only  from  a  critical  and
fair  enquiry  into  the  {tn^Q  of  this  code ;
and  that  all  inftrudtion  in  it  flaould  be  a
preparation  for  making  this  enquiry  and
a  communication  of  affiftance  in  examin*
ing  into  the  proofs  of  its  divine  original,
and  in  determining  to  what  degree  of
5  evidence


C 59 ]

evidence  thefe proofs  amount,  after  allow-
ing every difficulty its  jufl  weight. <-

This  has  never  yet  been  the  pv^Ctlce  among
Chriflians.  The  New  Teftament  has  been
reckoned  hitherto  an  infiifficient  ftandard  of  i
Chriftian  Divinity  ;  and,  therefore,  formu-
laries of  human  invention  pretending  to
explain  and  define  it  (but  in  reality  mifre-
prefenting  and  diflionouring  it)  have  been
fubflituted  in  its  room  ;  and  teaching  thcfi
has  been  called  teaching  Chriftianity.  And
it  is  very  remarkable,  that  in  the  Engiij'h
Univerfities  Lecflures  on  the  New  Tefta-  »
ment  are  fcldom  or  ever  read ;  and  that,
through  all  Chriftendom,  it  is  much  lefs  an
objedl  of  attention  than  ihc  JyJIenis  and  creeds
which  have  been  fathered  upon  it.

J  will  only  add  on  this  fubje(5l,  that  it  is
above  all  things  necellary,  while  inflrudion
is  conveyed,  to  convey  with  it  a  fenfe  of
the  imbecility  of  the  human  mind,  and  of
its  great  pronenefs  to  error  ;  and  alfo  ci
difpofition,  even  on  points  which  feem  the
moft  clear,  to  liftcn  to  objcdions,  and  to
confider  nothing  as  involving  in  it  our  hv/oX*
intereft  but  an  honest  heart.

I  2  Nature


[.6o ]

Nature  has  lb  made  us,  that  an  attach-
n  ment  mud  take  place  within  us  to  opinions
once  formed ;  and  it  was  proper  that  we
fhould  be  fo  made,  in  order  to  prevent  that
levity  and  defultorinefs  of  mind  which  muft
have  been  the  confequence  had  we  been
ready  to  give  up  our  opinions  too  eafily  and
haftily.  But  this  natural  tendency,  how-
ever wifely  given  us,  is  apt  to  exceed  its
I  proper  limits,  and  to  render  us  unreafon-
ably  tenacious.  It  ought,  therefore,  like
all  our  other  natural  propenfities,  to  be
carefully  watched  and  guarded  ;  and  edu-
cation riiould  put  us  upon  doing  this.  An
obfervation  before  made  fhould,  in  parti-
/  cular,  be  inculcated,  **  that  all  mankind
**  have  hitherto  been  mod  tenacious  when
**  mod  in  the  v^'rong,  and  reckoned  them-
"  fclves  mod  enlightened  v/hen  mod  in  the
**  dark." This  is,  indeed,  a  very  morti-
fying fadt  ;  but  attention  to  it  is  necelfary
to  cure  that  miferable  pride  and  dogmati-
calnefs  which  are  fome  of  the  word  ene-
mies  to  improvement. —  Who  is  there

that  does  not  remember  the  time  when  he
was  entirely  fatisfied  about  points  which
deeper  reflexion  has  diewn  to  be  above  his
comprehenfion  ? Who,  for  indance,  does

not


t 61 ]

not  remember  a  time  when  he  would  have
wondered  at  the  queftion,  **  why  does
^*  water  run  down  hill  ?"  What  igno-
rant man  is  there  who  is  not  perfuaded
that  he  underftands  this  perfetf^ly  ?  But
every  improved  man  knows  it  to  be  a  quef-
tion he  cannot  anfwer  ;  and  what  diflin-
guiflies  him  in  this  inflance  from  the  lefs
improved  part  of  mankind  is  his  know-
ing this.  The  like  is  true  in  numberlefs
other  inftances.  One  of  the  heft  proofs  of
wifdom  is  a  fenfe  of  our  want  of  wifdom  \
and  he  who  knows  moft  polTefles  moft  of
this  fenfe.

In  thinking  of  myfelfl  derive  fome  en-
couragement from  this  reflexion.  I  now
f<je,  that  I  do  not  underftand  many  points  »
which  once  appeared  to  me  very  clear.
The  more  I  have  inquired,  the  rhore  fen-
lible  I  have  been  growing  of  my  own  dark-
nefs  j  and  a  part  of  the  hiflory  of  my  life
is  that  which  follow^s.

In  early  life  I  was  flruck  with  Bifliop
Butler's  Analogy  of  religion  natural  and
revealed  to  the  conjlitution  and  courfe  of  na-
t^re, I  reckon  it  happy  for  me  that  this

booi?


[ 62 ]

book  was  one  of  the  firfl:  that  fell  Into
my  hands.  It  taught  me  the  proper  mode
of  reafoning  on  moral  and  religious  fub-
jedls,  and  particularly  the  importance  of
oaying  a  due  regard  to  the  imperfe(5tion  of
human  knowledge.  His  Sermons  alfo,  I
then  thought,  and  do  ftill  think,  excellent.^
•  Next  to  his  works,  I  have  always  been  an
admirer  of  the  writings  of  Dr.  Clark.
And  I  cannot  help  adding,  however  flrange
it  may  feem,  that  I  owe  much  to  the  phi-
lofophical  writings  of  Mr.  Hume,  which
I  likewife  ftudied  early  in  life.  Though
an  enemy  to  his  Scepticifm,  I  have  profited,
h'j  it.  By  attacking,  with  great  ability,
every  principle  of  truth  and  reafouj,  he
put  me  upon  examining  the  ground  upon
which  1  flood, and taught  me  not  hallily

to  take  any  thing  for  granted. -The  firf^

fruits  of  my  reading  and  (ludies  were  laid
before  the  public  in  a  Treatife  entitled  A
Review  of  the  principal  ^lejiions  and  T)iji-
culties  in  Morals,  This  publication  has
been  followed  by  many  others  on  various
fubjeds. — And  now,  in  the  evening  of  a
life  devoted  to  enquiry  and  fpent  in  en-
deavours (weak  indeed  and  feeble)  to  ferye

the


t  63  i

the  beft  interefts,  prefent  and  future,  of
mankind,  I  am  waiting  for  the  great
TEACHER,  convinced  that  the  order  of
nature  is  perfect ;  that  infinite  wifdom  and
goodnefs  govern  all  things  ;  and  that
Chriftianity  comes  from  God  :  But  at  the
fame  time  puzzled  by  many  difficulties,
anxious  for  more  light,  and  refting  U'ith
full  and  conflant  aiTurance  only  on  this
ONE  truth  ^—  That  the  pradice  of  virtue
is  the  duty  and  dignity  of  man  ;  and,  in  all
events,  his  v^^ifeft  and  fafeft  courfe.


oj


[ 64 j

Of  the-  Dangers to  lohich  the Americait
States  are  expofed,

T  N  the  preceding  obfervations,  I  hard
aimed  at  pointing  out  the  means  of  pro-
moting the  progrefs  of  improvement  in  the
united  States  of  America,  I  have  infilled,
particularly,  on  the  importance  df  a  juR
fettlement  of  the  federal  union,  and
the  eflabliihment  of  a  well-guarded  and
perfect  liberty  in  fpeculation,  in  govern-
ment, in  education,  and  in  religion.—
The  united  States  are  now  fetting  out,  and
all  depends  on  the  care  and  forefight  with
which  a  plan  is  begun,  which  hereafter
will  require  only  to  be  ftrengthened  and
ripened.  This  is,  therefore,  the  time  for
giving  them  advice  ^  and  mean  advice  (like
the  prefent)  may  fuggefl  fome  ufeful  hints.
► In  this  country,  when  any  improve-
ments are  propofed,  or  any  corredlions
are  attempted  of  abufes  fo  grofs  as  to
make  our  boafts of  liberty  ridiculous  *,  a

clamour

*  The  m:ijority  Oi*^  the British Houfe  of  Com-
l  mons  is  chofen  by  zfew  ihoufarids  of  the  dregs  of  the

people,  who  are  conftantly  paid for  their votes.

Is


[ 6s J

tiamour  immediately  arifes  againjl:  inno-  i
VATioN  i  and  an  alarm  fpreads,  left  the  at-
tempt to  repair  fhould  deftroy, In  Ame-
rica no  fuch  prejudices  can  operate,  libere
abufes  have  not  yet  gained  facrednefs  by
time*  T^here  the  way  is  open  to  focial  dig-
nity and  happinefs  -,  and  reafon  may  utter
her  voice  with  confidence  and  fuccefs.

Is  It  not  ridiculous  to  call  a  country  fo  governed  free  ?
-  See  a  ftriking  account  of  the  State  of  the  Britifh
Parliamentary  Reprefentation,  in  Mr.  Burgh's  Political
Difquifitions,  Vol.  I.  p.  39,  &c.

It  was  propofed  to  the  convention  for  fettling  the  Maf-
fachufetfs  conftitution,  that  one  of  the  two  heufes  which
conftitute  the  general  court  of  that  State  fhould  be  a  repre-
fentation of  perfons,  and  the  other  a  reprefentation  of  pro-
perty J  and  that  the  body  of  the  people  Ihould  appoint
only  the  eleSiors  of  their  reprefentatives. — By  fuch  re-
gulations corruption  in  the  choice  of  reprefentatives
would  be  rendered  lefs  praflicable  ;  and  it  feems  the
beft  method  of  concentering  in  the  Legiflature  as  much
as  polTible  of  the  virtue  and  ability  of  the  State,  and  of
making  its  voice  always  an  exprefllon  of  the  will  and
beft  fenfeofthe  people. — On  this  plan  alfo,  the  number
of  members  conftituting  a  Legiflature  might  be  much
lefTened. — This  is  a  circumftance  of  particular  confe-
quence,  to  which  the  united  States,  in  fome  future  period
of  their  increafe,  v;ill  find  it  neccffary  to  attend.  It  has
been  often  juftly  obferved,  that  a  legiflative  body  very
numerous  is  little  better  than  a  mob.


K  Of


[ 66 ]


CyDEBTs  and  Internal  Wars.

HAVE  obferved  in  the  introdudion  to
this  Addrefs,  that  the  American  States
have  many  dangers  to  fliun.  In  what
follows  I  {hall  give  a  brief  recital  of  fome
of  the  chief  of  thefe  dangers.

The  danger  from  an  endlefs  increafe  of
PUBLIC  DEBTS  has  been  already  fuffici-
ently noticed.

Particular  notice  has'  been  likewife  taken
of  the  danger  from  internal  wars. —
Again  and  again,  I  would  urge  the  necef-
fity  of  purfuing  every  meafure  and  ufing
every  precaution  which  can  guard  againft:
this  danirer. It  will  be  fliockinor  to  fee  in

o  o

the  new  world  a  repetition  of  all  the  evils
which  have  hitherto  laid  wafte  the  old  world
— War  raging  where  peace  and  liberty  were
thought  to  have  taken  their  abodes  —  The
points  of  bayonets  and  the  mouths  of  can-
non fettling  difputes,  inflead  of  the  colledted
wifdom  of  the  confederation  —  and  perhaps
one  refilefs  and  ambitious State  rifing  by

bloody


[ 67 ]

bloody  conqueft  above  the  rell:,  and  becom-
ing 2l  fovereign  State,  claiming  impioufly  (as
Britain  once  did)  **  full  authority  to  make  \
*'  laws  that  fliall  bind  its  Tifler  States  in  all
*'  cafes  whatever,"  and  drawing  to  itfelf
all  advantages  at  their  expence. 1  de-
precate this  calamity.  I  fh udder  when  I
confider  how  poffible  it  is  ;  and  hope  thofe
perfons  are  miftaken  who  think  that  fuch
are  the  jealoufies  which  govern  human
nature,  and  fuch  the  imperfedlions  of  the
beft  human  arrangements,  that  it  is  not
within  the  reach  of  any  wifdom  to  difcover
any  effedual  means  of  preventing  it,  with-
out encroaching  too  much  on  the  liberty
and  independence  of  the  States.  ,  I  have
mentioned  an  enlargement  of  the  powers  ^
of  Congress.  Others  have  propofed  a
confolidation  of  the  powers  of  government
in  one  Parliament  reprefenting  a//  the
States,  and  fuperfeding  the  particular  par-
liaments by  which  they  are  now  feparately
governed.  But  it  is  obvious,  that  this  will
be  attended  with  greater  inconveniencies,
and  encroach  more  on  the  liberty  of  the
States,  than  the  enlargement  I  have  pro-
pofed of  the  powers  of  Congress.  ' ■ If

K  2  fuch


[ 63 1

fuch  a  parliament  is  not  to  faperfede  any  of
the  other  parliaments,  it  will  be  the  fame
with  Congress  as  at  prefent  conflituted.


Of  an  UNEQUAL  Distribution  of
Property.

"T  is  a  trite  obfervation,  that  "  dominion
'*  is  founded  on  property."  Moil  free
States  have  manifefted  their  fenfe  of  the  truth
of  this  obfervation,  by  ftudying  to  find  out
means  of  preventing  too  great  an  inequality
in  the  diftribution  of  property.  What  tu-
mults were  occafioned  at  Rome,  in  its  bed
times,  by  attempts  to  carry  into  execution
the  Agrarian  law  ?  Among  the  people  of
^  IJraeU  by  the  direction  of  heaven,  all  eftates
which  had  been  alienated  during  the  courfe
of  fifty  years,  returned  to  their  original
owners  at  the  end  of  that  term.  One  of
the  circumftances  that  has  been  moft  fa-
vourable to  the  American  States  in  forming
their  new  conflitutions  of  government  has
been  the  ecjuality  which  fubfifts  among
them.

The


[ 69 ]

The  happleil  ftate  of  man  Is  the  middla
(late  between  the  favage  and  the  refined^  or
between  the  wild  and  the  luxurious  iiate*
Such  is  the  ftate  of  fociety  in  Connect
TicuT,  and  fome  others  of  the  American
provinces  ;  where  the  inhabitants  confifl:,  if
I  am  rightly  informed,  of  an  independent
and  hardy  Yeomanry,  all  nearly  on  a
level — trained  to  arms, — inftrucled  in  their
rights — cloathed  in  home-fpun — of  fimple
manners  —  ftraiagers  to  luxury  —  drawing
plenty  from  the  ground — -and  that  plenty,
gathered  eafily  by  the  hand  of  induftry;
and  giving  rife  to  early  marriages,  a  nume-
rous progeny,  length  of  days,  and  a  rapid
increafe — the  rich  and  the  poor,  the  haughty
grandee  and  the  creeping  fycophant,  equally
unknown — -proteded  by  law^s,  which  (be-
ing their  own  will)  cannot  opprefs ;  and
by  an  equal  government,  which  wanting
lucrative  places,  cannot  create  corrupt  can-

vaflings  *  and  ambitious  intrigue. O  di-

ilinguifhed people  ! May you continue

*  In  this  State,  and  alfo  the  State  of  Majfachufetts^
}^ew  Jerfcy^  &c.  any  attempt  to  canvas,  or  even  the  ex-
preflion  of  a  wifh  to  be  chofen,  will  exclude  a  candi-
date from  a  feat  in  the  Houfe  of  Reprefentatives.  The
fame  is  true  of  any  ftain  on  his  moral  character.

long


[ 7° ]

long  thus  happy ;  and  may  the  happinefs
you  enjoy  fpread  over  the  face  of  the  whole
earth  ! — But  I  am  forgetting  myfelf.  There
is  danger  that  a  fbate  of  fociety  fo  happy  will
not  be  of  long  duration  j  that  fmiplicity  and
virtue  will  give  way  to  depravity ;  that  equa-
lity v/ill  in  time  be  loft,  the  curfed  luft  of  do-
mineering ftiew  itfelf,  liberty  languifh,  and
civil  government  gradually  degenerate  into
an  inllrument  in  the  hands  of  the  Jew  to
opprefs  and  plunder  the  ma?2y. — Such  has
hitherto  been  the  progrefs  of  evil  in  human
affairs.  In  order  to  .give  them  a  better
turn,  fome  great  men  {Plato,  Sir  Thomas
More,  Mr.  Wallace,  &c.)  have  propofed
plans,  which,  by  eftablifhing  a  community
of  goods  and  annihilating  property,  would
make  it  impoflible  for  any  one  member  of
a  State  to  think  of  enflaving  the  reft,  or
to  confider  himfelf  as  having  any  intereft
diftindt  from  that  of  his  fellow-citizens.
Such  theories  are  in  fpeculation  pleafmg ;
nor  perhaps  are  they  wholly  impra(5ticable.
Some  approaches  to  them  may  hereafter  be
made  ;  and  fchemes  of  government  may  take
place,  vvhich  fliall  leave  fo  little,  befides
perfonal  merit,  to  be  a  means  of  diftindion,

as


[ 7' ]

as  to  exclude  from  foclety  moil:  of  the  caufes
of  evil.  But  be  this  as  it  will  ;  it  is  out  of
doubt  that  there  is  an  equality  in  fociety
which  is  efTential  to  liberty,  and  which  *
every  State  that  would  continue  virtuous
and  happy  ought  as  far  as  poflible  to  main-
tain. —  It  is  not  in  my  power  to  defcribe
the  beft  method  of  doing  this.  —  I  will
only  obferve,  that  there  are  three  enemies
to  equality  againft  which  America  ought  to
guard.

Firfli  Granting  hereditary  honours  and  ^
titles  of  nobility.  Perfons  thus  diftin-
guifhed,  though  perhaps  meaner  than  the
meaneft  of  their  dependents,  are  apt  to  con-
fider  themfelves  as  belonging  to  a  higher
order  of  beings,  and  ?}2ade  for  power  and
government.  Their  birth  and  rank  necef-
farily  difpofe  them  to  be  hoftile  to  general
liberty ,  and  when  they  are  not  (o^  and
difcover  ajuftzeal  for  the  rights  of  mankind,
it  is  always  a  triumph  of  good  fenfe  and  virtue
over  the  temptations  of  their  fituation.  It  is,
therefore,  with  peculiar  fatisfadion  that  I
have  found  in  the  articles  of  confederation
an  order  that  no  titles  of  nobility  jQiall  be
ever  granted  by  the united States. Let

there


I 7^ ]
there  be  honours  to  encourage  merit  j  but

\let  them  die  with  the  men  who  have  earned
them.  Let  them  not  defcend  to  pofterity
to  fofter  a  fpirit  of  domination,  and  to
produce  a  proud  and  tyrannical  ariflocracy.
— In  a  word,  let  the  united  States  continue
for  ever  what  it  is  now  their  glory  to  be — a
confederation  of  States  profperous  and  happy,

\  without  Lords — without  Bishops* — 'and
without  Kings.

Secondly  ;  The  right  of  primogeniture*
The  tendency  of  this  to  produce  an  im^
proper  inequality  is  very  obvious.  The
difpofition  to  raife  a  name,  by  accumu-
lating property  in  one  branch  of  a  family,
is  a  vanity no  lefs  unjufl  and  cruel,  than

J  *  I  do  not  mean  by  B'ljhops  any  officers  among  Chrif-
tians  merely  fpiritual  ;  but  Lords  fpiritual^  as  diftin-
guilfted  f.om  Lords  te?nporaly  or  Clergymen  raifed  to  pre-
eminence, and  inverted  with  civil  honours  and  authority,
by  a  State  eflablifhment.

I  muft  add,  that  by  what  is  here  faid  I  do  not  mean
to  exprefs  z  general  preference  of  a  republican  conftitution
of  government.  There  is  a  degree  of  political  dege-
neracy which  unfits  for  fuch  a  conftitution. Britain,

I  in  particular,  confifts  too  much  of  the  high  and  the  low,
{oi  ftum  and  dregs)  to  admit  of  it.  Nor  will  it  fuit  Ame"
ricaj  fliould  it  ever  become  cquallv  corrupt.

3  dangerous


i 73 J
dano^erous  to  the  intereft  of  liberty  ;  and  no
XSvifc  State  will  encourage  or  tolerate  it.

Thirdly  J  Foreign  Trade  is  another
of  the  eoemies  againft  which  1  vvifh  to
caution  the  united  States.  But  this  ope-
rates unfavourably  to  a  State  in  fo  many
more  ways  than  by  deftroying  that  equa-
lity which  is  the  bafis  of  liberty,  that  it
will  be  proper  to  take  more  particular  no-
lice  of  it.


of


[ 74 ]


(yTRADE,  Banks,  ^;^^Paper  Credit.

T?OREIGN  trade  has,  In  fome  refpecl?^
the  mofl:  ufeful  tendency. By  creating
an intercourfe hetvveen  diftant kingdoms,
it  extends  benevolence, removes  local  pre-
judices, leads  every  man  to  conlider  him-
felf  more  as a  citizen  of  the  world  than  of
any particular State, and, confequently,
j  checks the exceiTes of that Love  of  out-
Country  * which has been applauded  as

one

*  The  love  of  our  country  is  then  only  a  noble  paf-
fion  when  it  engages  us  to  promote  the  internal  hap-
pinefs  of  our  country,  and  to  defend  its  rights  and  liber-
ties againft  domeftic  and  foreign  invafion,  maintaining
at  the  fame  time  an  equal  regard  to  the  rights  and  liber-
ties of  other  countries.  But  this  has  not  been  its  moft
common  effecSts.  On  the  contrary,  it  has  in  general
been  nothing  but  a  fpirit  of  rivalfhip  between  different
communities,  producing  contention  and  a  thirft  for  con-
cucil:  and  dominion.  — What  is  his  country  to  a  Rujp.an^
a  Turk^  a  Spaniard,  &c.  but  a  fpot  where  he  enjoys  no
right,  and  is  dilpofcd  of  by  owners  as  if  he  was  a  beaft  ?
And  what  is  his  love  to  his  country  but  an  attachment  to
degradation  and  flaverv  ? — What  was  the  love  of  their
country  anx»ng  the  'Jews  but  a  wretched  partiality  for
themlelvcs and a ^  read contempt for  other  nations  ?

Amonij;


[ 75 1

one  of  the  nobleH:,  but  which,  rcalfyy  is  one
of  the  moil: defiriiclrce  principles  in human

nature. Trade  alfo, by  enabling  every

country  to  draw  from  other  countries  con-
veniencies  and  advantages  which  it  cannot
find  within  itielf,  produces  among  nations
a  fenfe  of  mutual  dependence,  and  promotes
the  general  improvement.  —  But  there  is
no  part  of  mankind  to  which  thefc  ufes  of
trade  are  of  lefs  confequence  than  the
American  States.  They  are  fpread  over  a  ^
great  continent,  and  make  a  world  within
themfelves.  The  country  they  inhabit
includes  foils  and  climates  of  all  forts,
producing  not  only  q.v^^'j  neccffaryt  but
every  convenience  of  life.  And  the  vaft
rivers  and  wide -fpread  lakes  which  inter-
fed:  it,  create  fuch  an  inland  communica-
tion between  its  different  parts,  as  is  un-
known in  any  other  region  of  the  earth.
They poiTefs then within themfelves  the

Among  the  Rotnans  alfo  what  was  it,  however  great  in
many  of  its  exertions,  but  a  principle  holding  together
a  band  of  robbers  in  their  attempts  to  crufh  ail  liberty
but  their  own  ? — Chriftianity  has  wifely  omitted  tore-
commend  this  principle.  Had  it  done  this,  it  would
have  countenanced  a  vice  among  mankind. — It  has  done
v/hat  is  infinitely  better  —  It  has  recummciidtd  uni-
versal BENEVOLENCE.

L  2  beft


[ 76 1
bed means of  the  moft profitable trafiic,
and the ampleft fcope for it. Why
fliould they look  much farther  ? What
occafion have they for being anxious

^  about  pufhing  foreign  trade  ;  or  even  about
raifing  a  great  naval  force  ? -= — Britain,  in-r
deed,  confiding  as  it  does  of  iinarmcd  in-
habitants, and  threatened  as  it  is  by  am-
bitious and  powertul  neighbours,  cannot
hope  to  maintain  its  exigence  long  after
becoming  open to  invafion by lofing its

paval  fuperiority. ~-  But  this is  not  the

cafe  with  the  American  States. They  have

'  no  powerful  neighbours  to  dread.  The
vaft  Atlantic  mull:  be  croffed  before  they
can  be  attacked.  They  are  all  a  well-
trained  ^7//// /^  i  and  the  fuccefsful  refinance
which,  in  their  infancy  and  \viLhout  a
naval  force,  they  have  made  to  the  invafioii
of  the  firft  'European  power,  will  probably
difcourage  and  prevent  all  future  invafions.
Thus  fingularly  happy,  why  fhould  they
feek  connexions  with  'Europe^  and  expofe
themfelves  to  the  danger  of  being  involved
in  its  quairels  ?  —  What  have  they  to  do
vvith  its  politics  ?  —  Is  there  any  thing  very
important to them  which they  can  draw

i^rom  thencer— ejvcept Infection  ? In-,

deeds


[  ~7  ]
deed,  I  tremble  when  I  think  of  that  rage  for
trade  which  is  likely  to  prevail  among  them.
It  may  do  thtm  infinite  mifchief.  All  na-
tions are  fpreading  fnarcs  for  them,  and
courting  them  to  a  dangerous  intercoiirfe.
Iheir  bed:  interefl  reouircs  them  to  i?uard
themfelvts  by  all  proper  means  ;  and,  parti-  \
cularly,  by  laying  heavy  duties  on  impor-
tations. But  in  no  cafe  v.ill  any  means
fucceed  unltfs  aided  by  MatvNers.  In  this
inftance,  particularly,  there  is  reafon  to  fear
that  an  increaling  palfion  for  foreign  frip-
pery will  render  all  the  bell  regulations
ineffecftual.  And  fliould  this  happen,  that
fimplicity  of  character,  that  maidinefs  of
Ipirit,  that  diidain  of  tiiifel  in  which  true
dignity  confills,  will  difappear.  Effemi-
nacy, ferviiity  and  venality  will  enter  ;
and  liberty  and  virtue  be  fwallowed  up
jn  the  gulph  of  corruption.  Such  may
be  the  courfe  of  events  in  the  American
States.  Better  hijinitcly  will  it  be  forj
them  to  Gonilfi"  of  bodies  of  plain  and
honed farmers, thati of opulent and

fplendid merchants. Where in thefe

States do the purefl manners prevail  ?

Where do the inhabitants live mod on

an  equality, and niqll  a; their cafe  ? Is

i  it


[ 78 ]

it  not  in  thofe  inland  parts  where  agri-
culture gives  health  and  plenty,  and  trade
is  icarcely  known  ? Where,  on  the  con-
trary, are  the  inhabitants  mod  felfiOi,  lux-
urious, loofe,  and  vicious ;  and  at  the  fame
time  mofl:  unhappy  ?  Is  it  not  along  the
fea  coafts,  and in the great towns, where

trade  flourifl^es  and  merchants  abound  ?

So  ftriking  is  the  effeft  of  thefe  different
iituations  on  the  vigour  and  happinefs  of
human  life,  that  in  the  one  population
would  languifli  did  it  receive  no  aid  from
emigrations  ;  while  in  the  other  it  increafes
to  a  degree  fcarcely  ever  .before  known.

But  to  proceed  to  fome  obfervations  of  a
different  nature — —

The  united  States  have,  I  think,  particu-
lar reafon  to  dread  the  following  effeds  of
foreign  trade.

By  increafing  importation  to  feed  luxury
and  gratify  prodigality,  it  will  carry  out
their  coin,  and  occafion  the  fubftitution  of  a
delufive  paper  currency  ;  the  confcquence
of  which  will  be,  that  idea/  wealth  will
take  place  of  real,  and  their  fecurity  come
to  depend  on  the  flrength  and  duration  of  a

Bubble. 1 am  very  fenfible  that  paper

credit


[ 79 ]

credit  is  one  of  the  greatefl  of  all  coiivc-
niencies ;  but  this  makes  it  likewife  one  of
the  greateft  of  all  temptations.  A  public
Bank,  (while  it  can  circulate  i-ts  bills)  faci-
litates commerce,  and  aflifis  the  exertions
of  a  State  in  proportion  to  its  credit.  But
when  it  is  not  carefully  reftridled  and
watched  ;  when  its  emiffions  exceed  the
coin  it  can  command,  and  are  carried  near
the  utmoft  length  that  the  confidence  of
the  public  will  allow  ;  and  when,  in  con-
fequence  of  this,  its  permanence  comes  to
depend  on  the  permanence  of  public  cre-
dulity—  In  thefe  circumflances,  a  Bank,
though  it  may  for  a  time  (that  is,  while  a
balance  of  trade  too  unfavourable  does
not  occafion  a  run,  and  no  events  arife
which  produce  alarm)  anfwer  all  the  ends
of  a  MINE  from  which  millions  may  be
drawn  in  a  minute  ;  and,  by  filling  a  king-
dom with  cafh,  render  it  capable  of  fuf-
taining  any  debts,  and  give  it  a  kind  of
Omnipotence.  —  In  fuch  circumflances,
I  fay,  notwithilanding  thefe  temporary  ad-
vantages, a  public  Bank  muft  af  lajl  prove
a  great  calamity  ;  and  a  kingdom  fo  fup-
poited, at the very time of  its greatefl

c  excr-


[ So ]
exertions, will be only  driving  more  vio-
lently to  increafe  the  horrof  of  an  approch-
ing  convulfion.

The  united  States  have  already  Verified
fome  of  thefe  obfervations,  and  felt  in  fome
degree  the  confequences  to  which  I  have
alluded.  They  have  been  carried  through
the  war  by  an  emiilion  of  paper  which  had
no  folid fupport,  and which  now  has loft

\  all  value.  It  is  indeed  furprifing  that,-
being  fecured  on  no  fund  and  incapable
of  being  exchanged  for  coin,  it  Ihould
ever  have  obtained  a  currency^  or  anfwered
any  important  purpofe.  •

Unhappily  for  Britain,  it  has  ufed  the
means  of  giving  more  liability  to  its  paper-
credit,  and  been  enabled  by  it  to  fupport
expences  greater  than  any  that  have  been
yet  known,  and to  contract a  debt  v/hich

f  now  aftoniJJjcsy  and  may  hereafter  produce
a  cataftrophe  that  will  terrify  the  world. — '
A  longer  duration  of  the  late  war  would
have  brought  on  this  cataftrophe  immedi-
ately. The  Peace  has  put  it  o^for  the
p-efent.  God  grant,  if  ftill  poffible,  that
meafures  may  be  adopted  which  {]:iall  put
it  o^Jor  ever*

Of


[ 8i ]


Of  Oaths.

A  T  H  S  are  expedients  to  which  all
States  have  had  recourfe  in  order  to
obtain  true  information  and  afcertain  fad:s
by  fecuring  the  veracity  of  witneffes.  But
I  know  not  how  to  rehrh  that  imprecation
which  always  makes  a  part  of  an  oath.
Perhaps,  there  is  no  fuch  neceffity  for  it
as  is  commonly  imagined.  An  Affir-  j
MAT  ION  folemnly  made,  with  laws  in-
fliding  fevcre  penalties  on  fallhood  when
detedicd,  would  probably  anfwer  all  the
ends  of  oaths.— ^I  am,  therefore,  difpofed
to  widi,  that  in  the  united  States  impre-
catory oaths  may  be  abolidied,  and  the
fame  indulgence  in  this  refpe<5t  granted  to
all  which  is  now  granted  to  the  fakers.
But  I  am  afraid  they  will  think  this  too
dangerous  an  experiment  -,  and  what  is  of
mod  confequence  is  to  avoid,

Firft,  Such  a  multiplicity  of  oaths  as  will
render  them  too  familiar.

Andj  Secondly,  A  flight manner  of  ad-

miniftering  them. England,  in  this  re-

M  fped.


t 82 ]

Iped,  feems  to  be  funk  to  the  loweft  pof-
fible  degree  of  degeneracy.  Oaths  among
us  are  required  on  fo  many  occafions,  and
fo  carelefsly  adminiflered,  as  to  have  loft
almoft  all  their  ufe  and  efficacy.  It  has
been  afferted,  that,  including  oaths  of
office,  oaths  at  elections,  cuflom-houfe
oaths,  &c,  &c.  there  are  about  a  million  of
perjuries  committed  in  this  kingdom  annu-

ally, This  is  one  of  the  moft  atrocious

of  our  national  iniquities  ;  and  it  is  a
wonder  if  we  are  not  to  be  vifited  for  it
with  fome  of  the  fevereft  of  God's  judg-
ments.


i'f


83


Of  the  Negro  Trade  jW  Slavery.

''"T^  H  E  Negro  Trade  cannot  be  cen-
fured  in  language  too  fevere.  It  is  a
traffick  which,  as  it  has  been  hitherto  car-
ried on,  is  fliocking  to  humanity,  cruel,
wicked,  and  diabolical.  I  am  happy  to
find  that  the  united  States  are  entering  into  )
nieafures  for  difcountenancing  it,  and  for
abolifhing  the  odious  flavery  which  it  has
introduced.  'Till  they  have  done  this,  it
wall  not  appear  they  deferve  the  liberty
for  vvhich  they  have  been  contending.  For
it  is  felf-evident,  that  if  there  are  any  men
whom  they  have  a  right  to  hold  in  flavery,
there  may  be  ethers,  who  have  had  a right

to  hold  tkem  in  flavery.  * 1  am  fenfible,

however,  that  this  is  a  work  which  they
cannot  accomplifli  at  once.  The  emanci-
pation of  the  Negroes  mufl,  I  fuppofe,  be
left in fome  meafure to be the eifed:  of

*  See  a  remonfirance,  full  gf  energy,  dire£led  to  the
united  States  on  this  Subjeilj  by  a  very  warm  and  able
friend  to  the  rights  of  mankind,  in  a  Tradl,  entitled —
Fragment  of  an  origu:al  Letter  on  the  Slavery  of  the  Negroes  j
written  in  the  year  1776,  but  publifhcd  in  1784,  by
Thomas  Day,  Efq.

M  %  tii^iQ


[ H ]

time  and  of  manners.  But  nothing  can
excufe  the  united  States  if  it  is  not  done
with  as  much  fpeed,  and  at  the  fame  time
with  as  much  effed:,  as  their  particular
circumftances  and  fituation  will  allow.  I
rejoice  that  on  this  occafion  1  can  recom-
mend to them the example of  my  own

»  country. in  Britain,  2i  Negro  becomes  a

freeman the moment he fcts his foot on
Britijh  ground.


Conclusion.

CUCH  is  the  advice  which  I  would  humbly.
(but  earnefily)  offer  to  the  united States

of  America. Such are the means by

which  they  may  become  the  feats  of  li-
berty, fcience,  peace,  and  virtue;  happy
within  themfelves,  and  a  refuge  to  the
world.

Often,  while  employed  in  writing  thefe
papers,  have  I  wiQied  for  a  warning  voice
of  more  pov/er.  The  prefent  moment,
however  aufpicious  to  the  united  States  if
wifely  improved,  is  critical  ;  and,  though
apparently  the  end  of  all  their  dangers,  may

prove


[ 8.- ]

prove  tlie  time  of  their  greateft  danger.
I  have,  indeed,  fince  finiOiing  this  Ad-
drefs,  been  mortified  more  than  I  can  ex-
prefs  by  accounts  which  have  led  me
to  fear  that  1  have  carried  my  ideas  of
them  too  high, and deceived myfelf  with

vifipnary  expectations. And  fliould  this

be  true  — •  Should  the  return  of  peace  and
the  pride  of  independence  lead  them  to
fecurity  and  diffipation  —  Should  they  lofe
thofe  virtuous  and  fimple  manners  by
which  alone  Republics  can  long  fubfifl: —
Should  falfe  refinement,  luxury,  and  irre-
ligion  fpread  among  them  ;  exceffive  jea-
loufy  diftrad;  their  governments  j  and
clafliing interefts, fubje(fi; to no ftrong

controul,  break  the  federal union The

confequence  will  be,  that  the  fairefl  ex-
periment ever  tried  in  human  affairs  will
mifcarry  ;  and  that  a  Revolution  which
had  revived  the  hopes  of  good  men  and
promifed  an  opening  to  better  times,  will
become  a  difcouras^ement  to  all  future  ef-
forts  in  favour  of  liberty,  and  prove  only
an  opening  to  a  new  fcene  of  human  dege-
neracy and  mifery.


A  D  V  E  R.


[ 87 ]


ADVERTISE  ME  NT.

'TpHE  following  letter  was  written  by  the
late  M.  T'ii7-gotj  Comptroller  General
(in  the  years  1774,  1775^  ^"'^  ^71^)  of  the
finances  of  France.  It  contains  obferva-
tions  in  which  the  United  States  are  deeply
concerned ;  and,  for  this  reafon,  I  now
convey  it  to  them,  not  doubting  but  that
the  eminence  of  M.  I'urgofs  name  and
charadier  will  recommend  it  to  their  at-
tention, and  that  it  will  do  honour  to  his
memory  among  all  the  friends  of  public
liberty.


A  Monfw.'.r


[ 88 ]

A  Moiifieur  Price,

A  Londres.

A  Paris,  k  22  Mars,  1778.

lyrR.  FRANKLIN  m'a  remis,  Monfieur,
de  votre  part,  la  nouvelle  edition  de
vos  obfervations  fur  la  liberte  civile,  &c.  Je
vousdois  un  double  remerciment ;  1°  de  votre
ouvrage  dent  je  connois  depuis  longtems
le  prix,  et  que  j'avois  lu  avec  avidite,  malgre
les  occupations  multipliees,  dont  j'etois  af-
fiiilli,  lorfqu'il  a  paru  pour  la  premiere  fois  ;
z"  de  I'honnetete  que  vous  avez  eue  de  re-
trancher  I'imputation  de  maladreiTe  *  que
vous  aviez  melee  au  bien  que  vous  difiez
d'ailleurs  de  moi  dans  vos  obfervations  addi-
tionelles.  J'aurois  pu  la  meriter,  fi  vous
n'avicz  eu  en  vue  d'autre  maladreffe  que
celle  de  n'avoir  pas  feu  demeler  les  reflbrts
d'intrigues  ■  que  faifoient  jouer  contre  moi
des  gens  beaucoup  plus  adroits  en  ce  genre
que  je  ne  ie  fuis,  que  je  ne  le  ferai  jamais,
et  que  je  ne  veux  I'etre.  Mais  il  m'a  paru
que  vous  m'imputiez  la  m^aladrefle  d'avoir
choque  groffierement I'opinion  generale  de

*  See  the  Notes  annexed  to  the  Tranflation  of  this
Lfttcr.

"?  ma


[  %  ]

ma  nation  ;  et  a  cct  egard  je  crols  que  vous
n'avlez  rendu  juflice  ni  a  moi,  ni  a  ma
nation,  ou  U  y  a  beaucoup  plus  de  lumieres
qu'on  ne  le  croit  generalement  chez  vous,  et
ou  peut-etre  11  eft  plus  aile  que  chez  vous
mcme  de  ramener  le  public  a  des  idees  rai-
fonnables.  J'en  juge  par  I'lnfatuatlon  de
votre  nation  fur  cc  projet  abfurde  de  fub-
juguer  TAmerique,  qui  a  dure  jufqu'a  ce
que  I'aventura  de  Burgoyne  alt  commence  a
lui  defliller  les  yeux.  J'en  juge  par  le  fyfleme
dc  monopole  et  d'exclufion  qui  regne  chez
tous  vos  ecrivains  politiques  fur  le  com-
merce, (J'excepte  Mr.  Adam  Smith  et  le
Doyen  Tucker)  fyfteme  qui  eft  le  veritable
principe  de  vctre  feparation  avec  vos  colo-
nies. J'en  juge  par  tous  vos  ecrits  pole-
miques  fur  les  queflions  qui  vous  agitent
depuls  une  vingtaine  d'annees,  et  dans  lef-
quels  avant  que  le  votre  cut  paru,  je  ne  me
rappelle  prefque  pas  d'en  avoir  lu  un,  ou  le
vrai  point  de  la  queilion  ait  ete  faifi.  Je
n'ai  pas  con^u  comment  une  nation  qui  a
cultive  avec  tant  de  fucces  toutes  les
branches  des  fclences  naturelles  a  pu  rcfter
fi  fort  au  defibus  d'elle  meme,  dans  la
fcience  la  plus  intereflantc  de  touteSj  celic
du  bonhcur  public  -,  dans  une  fcience  cu
la  llberte  de  la  prefle,  dont  cllc  fculcjouit,

N  aurolt


[ 90 ]

auroit  dii  lui  donner  fur  toutcs  les autres
nations de i'Europe un avantage prodi-
gleux.  Eil-ce rorguell  national  qui  vous  a
empeches  de  mettre  a  profit  cet avantage  ?
E(t-ce  parce  que  vous  etiez  un  peu  moins
mal  que les autres, que vous  avez  tournc
toutes  vos  fpeculations  a  vous  perfuader  que
vous  etiez  bien  ? Eft-ce  I'efprit  de  parti,  et
I'envie de fe  faire un  appui  des  opinions
populaires qui  a retarde vos progres,  en
portant  vos politiques a traiter de  vaine
metaphylique toutes les fpeculations  qui
tendent  a etablir des principes fixes fur
les  droits  et  les  vrais  ihterets  des  individus
et des nations  ? Comment  fe fait-il  que
vous foyez  prefque le premier  parmi  vos
ecrivains  qui  ayez  donne  des  notions  juftes
de la liberte, et  qui ayez fait fentir  la
faufTete  de  cette  notion  rebattue  par  pref-
que tous  les  ecrivains  les  plus republicains,
que la liberte confifte a n'etre foumis
qu'aux  luix,  com  me  li  un  horn  me  opprime
par  une  loi  injufle  etoit  libre. Cela  ue  feroit
pas  meme vrai quand  on fuppoferoit  que
toutes les  loix  font  I'ouvrage  de  la  nation
afleniblee  ; car  enfin Tindividu a  aufli  des
droits  que  la  nation  ne  peut lui 6ter,  que
par  la  violence  ct  par  un  ufage  illegitime  de
ia  force  ^enerale. Quoique  vous  ayez  ea

egard


[ 91 ]

egard  a  cette  verite,  et  que  vous  vous  en  foyez
cxpliqu'i,  peut-etre  meritoit-clle  que  vous
la  developaffiez  avec  plus  d'ctendue,  vu
le  peu  d'attentlon  qu'y  ont  donnee  menie
Ics  plus  zeles  partifans  de  la  liberie.

Celt  encore  une  chofe  etrange  que  ce  nc
fut  pas  en  Angleterre  une  verite  triviale  de
dire  qu'une  nation  ne  peut  jamais  avoir
droit  de  gouverner  une  autre  nation  j  et
qu'un  pareil  gouvernement  ne  peut  avoir
d'autre  fondement  que  la  force,  qui  eft  aufli
le  fondement  du  brigandage  et  de  la  ty-
rannie  ;  que  la  tyrannie  d'un  peuple  eft  de
toutes  les  tyrannies  connues  la  plus  cruelle
et  la  plus  intolerable,  celle  qui  laiffe  le
moins  de  reftburce  a  I'opprime  ;  car  enfin
un  defpote  eft  arrete  par  fon  propre  interet,
il  a  le  frein  du  remords,  ou  celni  de  I'opi-
nion  publique,  mais  une  multitude  ne  cal-
cule  rien,  n'a  jamais  de  remords,  et  fe  de-
cerne  a  elle  meme  la  gloire  lors  qu'elle
merite  le  plus  de  honte.

Les evenemens font pour la nation

Angloife un terrible commentaire de

votre livre. Depuis quelques mois ils

fe  precipuent avec une rapidite tres  ac-

N  2  celeree.


[ 92 ]

celerec.  Le  denouement  eft  arrive  par  rap-
port a  TAmerique.  La  voila  independante
fans  retour.  Sera-t'elle  libre  et  heureufe  ?
Ce  peuple  nouveau  fitue  ii  avantageufe-
ment  pour  donnerau  monde  Texemple  d'une
conftitution  ou  rhomme  jouilTe  de  tous  fes
droits,  exerce  librcnient  toutes  fes  facultes,
et  ne  loit  gouverne  que  par  la  nature,  la
raifon  et  la  juftice,  faura-t'il  former  une
pareille  conftitution  ?  faura-t'il  rafternnr  fdr
des  fondemens  eternels,  prevenir  toutes  les
caufes  de  divifion  et  de  corruption  qui
peuvent  la  miner  peu-a-peu  et  la  detruire  ?

Je  ne  fuis  point  content  je  Vavoue  des
conftitutions  qui  ont  ete  redigees  jufqu'a-
prefent  par  les  differens  Etats  Americains.
Vous  reprochez  avec  raifon  a  celle  de  la
Penfylvanie  le  ferment  religieux  exige  pour
avoir  entree  dans  le  corps  des  reprefentans.
C'eft  bien  pis  dans  les  autres ;  il  y  en  a  une,
je  crois  que  c'eft  celle  des  Jerfeis  qui  exigc

Je  vois  dans  le  plus  grand  ncmbre  Timi-
tation  fans  objct  des  ufages  de  i'Angleterre.
Au  lieu  de  ramener  toutes  les  autorites  a
une  feule,  celle  de  la  nation,  Ton  etablit  des
corps  differens, un corps  des  reprefentans,

ua


[ 93 ] .

un  confell,  un  gouverneur,  parce  que  I'An-
gleterre  a  une  chambre  des  communes,  une
chambre  haute  et  un  Roi.  On  s'occupe  a
balancer  ces  differens  pouvoirs ;  comme  ii
cet  equilibre  de  forces,  qu'cn  a  pu  croire
neceflaire  pour  balancer  I'enormc  prepon-
derance de  la  Royaute,  pouvoit  etre  de
quelque  ufage  dans  des  Republiques  fondees
fur  I'egalite  de  tous  Ics  citoyens  j  et  comme
fi  tout  ce  qui  etablit  differens  corps  n'etoit
pas  une  fource  de  divinons.  En  voulant.
prevenir  des  dangers  chimeriques,  on  en
fait  naitre  dc  reels  ;  on  veut  n'avoir  rien  a
cramdre  du  clcrge,  on  le  rcunit  fous  la
barriere  d'une  profcription  commune.  En
Texcluant  du  droit  d'eligibilite,  on  en  fait
un  corps,  et  un  corps  etranger  a  I'Etat.
Pourquoi  un  citoyen,  qui  a  le  meme  in-
teret  que  les  autres  a  la  defenfe  commune
de  fa  liberte  et  de  fes  proprietes,  cft-il
exclus  d'y  contribuer  de  fes  lumieres  et  de
fes  vertus,  parce  qu'il  eft:  d'une  profeffion
qui  exige  des  lumieres  et  des  vertus  ?  Le
clerge  n'eft:  dangereux  que  quand  il  exifte
en  corps  dans  I'Etat ;  que  quand  il  croit
avoir  en  corps  des  droits  et  des  interets,
que  quand  on  a  imagine  d'avoir  une  religion
etablie par  la  loi,  comme  fi les  hommes

pouvoient


[ 94 ]

pouvoient  avoir  quelque  droit,  ou  quelque
interet  a  regler  la  confcience  les  uns  dea
autres  ;  com  me  fi  I'individu  pouvoit  facri-
ficr  aux  avantages  de  la  fociete  civile  les
opinions  auxquelles  il  croit  fon  falut  eter-
nel  attache ;  comme  fi  Ton  fe  fauvoit,  ou  fe
damnoit,  en  commun.  La  oil  la  vraye  tole-
rance, c'eft-a-dire  I'incompetence  abtblue
du  souvernement  fur  la  confcience  des  in-
dividus,  eft  etablie,  Tecclefiaftique  au  milieu
de  ralTemblee  nationale  n'eft  qu'un  ci-
toyen,  lorfqu'il  y  eft  admis  ;  il  redevient
cccleiiaftique  lorfqu'on  Ten  exclut,

Je  ne  vols  pas  qu'on  fe  foit  aftez  occiipq
de  reduire  au  plus  petit  nombre  poflible^
les  genres  d'affaires  dont  le  gouvernement
de  chaque  Etat  fera  charge  ;  ni  a  feparer  les.
objets  de  legiilation,  de  ceux  d'adminiftra-
tion  generale  et  de  ceux  d'adminiftration
particuliere  et  locale  j  a  conftituer  des  af-
femblees  locales  fubfiftantes,  qui  rem-
plift^int  prefque  toutes  les  fondions  de
detail  du  gouvernement  difpenfent  les
aflemblces  generales  de  s'en  occuper,  et
otent  aux  membres  de  celles-ci  tout
moyen,  et  peut-etrc  tout  dcfir  d'abufer
d'une  autorite  qui  ne  peut  s'appliquer  qu  a.

des


[ 95 ]

des  jobjets  generaux  et  par  la  mem«
etrangers  aux  petites  paflions  qui  agitent
les  hommes.

Je  ne  vols  pas  qu'on  ait  fait  attention  a
la  grande  dillindlion  la  feule  fondee  fur  la
nature  entre  deux  claffes  d'hommes,  celle
des  proprietaires  de  terres,  et  celle  des  non-
proprietaires  -,  a  leurs  interets  et  par  confe-
quent  a  leurs  droits  differens,  relativenaent
a  la  legillation,  a  radminiftration  de  la  juf-
tice  et  de  la  police,  a  la  contribution  aux
dcpenfes  publiques  et  a  leur  emploi.

Nul  principe  fixe  etabli  fur  I'impot  j  on
fuppofe  que  chaque  province  pent  fe  taxer
a  fa  fantaifie,  etablir  des  taxes  perfonnelles,
des  taxes  fur  les  confommations,  fur  les
importations,  c'eft-a-dire  fe  donner  un
interet  contraire  a  I'interet  des  antrcs
provinces.

On  fuppofe  par  tout  le  droit  de  regler  ie
commerce  -,  on  autorife  meme  les  corps  exe-
cutifs,  ou  les  gouverneurs  a  prohiber  Tex-
portation  de  certaines  denrees  dans  certaines
occurrences  j  tant  on  eft  loin  d'avoir  fcti
que  la  loi  de  la  liberte  entiere  de  tout  com-
merce  eft  un  ccroliaire  du  droit  de  pro-
priete  ;  tant  on  eft  encore  plonge  daiis  le
biouillard  des  iJlufions  Eurooeennes,


nnr


ans


[ 96 ]

Dans  I'union  generale  des  provinces  en-
tre  elles,  je  ne  vols  point  une  coalition,  une
fulion  de  toutes  les  parties,  qui  n'en  fafTe
qu'un  corps  im,  et  homogene.  Ce  n'eft
qu'une  aggregation  de  parties,  toujours  trop
feparies,  et  qui  confervent  toujours  une
tendance  a  fe  divifer,  par  la  diverfite  de
leurs  loix,  de  leurs  mceurs,  de  leurs  opinions ;
par  I'inegalite  de  leurs  forces  adtuelles  j  plus
encore  par  I'inegalite  de  leurs  progres  ulte-
rieurs.  Ce  n'eft  qu'une  copie  de  la  Re-
publique  Hollandoife  j  et  celle-ci  meme
n'avoit  pas  a  craindre' comme  la  Repub-
lique  Americaine  les  accroilTemens  pof-
fibles  de  quelques  unes  de  fes  provinces.
Tout  cet  edifice  eft  appuye  jufqu'a  pre-
fent  fur  la  bafe  fauffe  de  la  tres  ancienne  et
tres  vulgaire  politique  3  fur  le  prejuge  que
les  nations,  les  provinces,  peuvent  avoir  des
interets,  en  corps  de  province  et  de  nation,
autres  que  celui  qu'ont  les  individus  d'etre
libres  et  de  dcfendre  leurs  propritites  contre
les  brigan  et  les  conquerans  :  interct  pre*
tendu  de  faire  plus  de  commerce  que  les
autres,  de  ne  point  acheter  les  marchandifea
de  I'etranger,  de  forcer  I'etranger  a  con-
fommer  leurs  produdions  et  les  ouvrages
de leurs manufactures  : interct pretendu

d'avoir


[  97  ]
d'avoir  un  territoire  plus  vafle,  d'acquerir
telle  ou  telle  province,  telle  ou  telle  iile,  tel
ou  tel  village  :  interet  d'infpirer  la  crainte
aux  autres  nations :  interet  deTemporter  fur
elles  par  la  gloire  des  armes,  par  celle  des
arts  et  des  fciences,

Quelques-uns  de  ces  prejuges  font  fo-
mentes  en  Europe,  parce  que  la  rivalite
ancienne  des  nations  et  Tambition  des
princes  oblige  tous  les  Etats  a  fe  tenir  armes
pour  fe  defendre  contre  leurs  voifins  armes,
et  a  regarder  la  force  militaire  comme  Tobjet
principal  du  gouvernement.  L'Amerique  a
le  bonheur  de  ne  pouvoir  avoir  d'ici  a  bien
longtems  d'ennemi  exterieur  a  craindre,  fi
eile  ne  fe  divife  elle  meme  ;  ainfi  elle  peut
et  doit  apprecier  a  leur  jufte  valeur  ces  pre-
tendus  interets,  ces  fujets  de  difcorde  qui
feuls  font  a  redouter  pour  fa  liberte,  Avec
le  principe  facre  de  la  liberte  du  commerce
regarde  comme  une  fuite  du  droit  de  la
propriete,  tous  les  pretendus  interets  de
commerce  difparoiflent.  Les  pretendus  in-
terets de  pofTeder  plus  ou  moins  de  terri-
toires  s'evanouiffcnt  par  le  principe  que  le
Jerritoire  n'appartient  point  aux  nations,
^ais  aux  individus  proprictaires  des  terres  ^

O  que


[ 98 ]

que  la  queftlon  de  favoir  (i  tel  canton,  tei
village,  doit  appartenir  a  telle  province,  a.
tel  Etat  ne  doit  point  etre  decidee  par  Ic
pretendu  interet  de  cette  province  ou  de  cet
Etat,  mais  par  celui  qu'ont  les  habitans  de
tel  canton  ou  de  tel  village  de  fe  rafTembler
pour  leurs  affaires  dans  le  lieu  ou  il  leur  eft
le  plus  commode  d'aller  -,  que  cet  interet
etant  mefare  par  le  plus  ou  moins  de
chemin  qu'un  homme  pent  faire  loin  de
fon  domicile  pour  trailer  quelques  affaires
plus  importantes  fans  trop  nuire  a  fes  af-
faires journalieres,  devient  une  mefure  na-
turellc  et  pb}/fique  de  I'etendue  des  jurif-
didions  et  des  Etats,  et  etablit  entre  tons
un  equilibre  d'etendue  et  de  forces,  qui
ecarte  tout  danger  d'inegalite,  et  toute  pre-*
tention  a  la  fuperiorite.

L'interet  d'etre  craint  eft  nul  quand  on  nc
demande  rien  a  perfonne,  et  quand  on  eft
dans  une  pofition  oil  Ton  ne  pent  etre^t-
taque  par  des  forces  confiderables  aveg
quelque  efperance  de  fucces.

La  gloire  des  armes  ne  vaut  pas  le  bon-
heur  de  vivre  en  paix.  La  gloire  des  arts,
des  fciences  appartient  a  quiconque  veut  s'en
faifir ;  il  y  a  dans  ce  genre  a  moiffonner  pour

tout


[ 99 ]

tout  le  monde  ;  le  champ  des  dccouvertes
€(i  inepuifable,  et  tous  profitent  des  decou-
vertes  des  tous.

J'imagine  que  les  Americains  n'en  font
pas  encore  a  fentir  toutes  ces  veritesj
comme  il  faut  qu'ils  les  fentent  pour  afTurer
le  bonheur  de  leur  poflerite.  Je  ne  blame
pas  leurs  chefs.  II  a  fallu  pourvoir  au
befoin  du  moment  par  une  union  telle
quelle,  contre  un  ennemi  prcfent  et  redou-
table;  on  n'avoit  pas  le  terns  de  fonger  ^
corriger  les  vices  des  conftitutions  et  de  la
compofition  des  difFerens  etats.  Mais  ils
Solvent  craindre  de  les  eternifer,  et  s'oc-
cuper  des  moyens  de  rcunir  les  opinions  et
les  interets  et  dc  les  ramener  a  des  prin-
cipes  uniformes  dans  toutes  leurs  pro-
vinces.

Ils  ont  a  cet  egard  de  grands  obflacles  a
Vaincre.

En  Canada,  la  conflitution  du  clerge  Re-
main, et  I'exiftence  d'un  corps  de  nobleffe.

Dans  la  Nouvelle  Angleterre,  I'efprit  en-
core fubfiftant  du  Puritanifme  rigide,  et
toujour?,  dit  on,  un  peu  intolerant.

O  2  Dan*


[ 100 ]

Dans  la  Penfylvanie,  un  tres  grand  nom-
bre  de  citoyens  etablifTimt  en  principe  reli-
gieux  que  la  profeflion  des  amies  eft  illicite,
et  fe  refufant  par  confequent  aux  arrange-
mens  neceffalres  pour  que  le  fondement  de  la
force  militaire  de  I'Etat,  foit  la  reunion  de  la
qualite  de  citoyen  avec  celle  d'homme  de
guerre  et  de  miliclen;  ce  qui  oblige  a  fair e
du  metier  de  la  guerre  un  metier  de  mer-
cenaires.

Dans  les  colonies  meridionales,  une  trop
grande  inegalite  de  fortunes,  et  fur  tout  le
grand  nombre  d'efclav^s  noirs  dont  I'efcla-
vage  eft  incompatible  avec  une  bonne  con-
ftitution  politique,  et  qui  meme  en  leur
rendant  la  liberte  embarrafteront  encore
en  formant  deux  nations  dans  le  meme
Etat.

Dans  toutes,  les  prejuges,  I'attachement
aux  formes  ctablies,  I'habitude  de  ccrtaines
taxes,  la  crainte  de  celles  qu'il  faudroit  y
fubftituer,  la  vanite  des  colonies  qui  fe  font
cru  les  plus  puiftantes,  et  un  malheurcux
commencement  d'orgueil  national.  Je  crois
les  Americains  forces  a  s'agrandir,  non  pas
par  la  guerre,  mais par  la  culture. S'ils

laiftbient


[ lOl ]

lalffoient  derriere  eux  les  defcrts immenfes
qui  s'etendent  jufqu'a la mer de  I'Oueft
il  s'y  etabliroit  du  melange  de  leurs  bannis,
et  des  mauvais  fujets  echappes  a  la  fcverite
des  loix',  avec  les fauvages  :  des  peuplades
de  brigands  qui ravageroient I'Amerique*
Gomme les  barbares du nord  ont ravage
I'empire  Remain  -,  de  la un  autre  danger,
la  neceffite  de  fe  tenir  en  armes  fur  la  fron-
tiere  et  d'etre  dans  un  etat  de  guerre  con-,
tinuelle. Les colonies  voifines  de  la  fron-
tiere  feroient  en  confequence  plus  aguerries
que les autres,  et cette inegallte dans la
force  militaire feroit  un  aiguillon terrible
pour  Tambition. Le  reraede  a  cette  inega-
lite  feroit d'entretenir une  force militaire
fubfiftante a  laquelle toutes les  provinces
contribueroient  en  raifon  de  leur  population  ;
et  les Americains  qui  ont  encore  toutes  les
craintes  que  doivent avoir les Anglois  re-
doutent  plus  que  toute  chofe  une  armeeper-
manente. lis  ont  tort. Rien  n'efl:  plus  aife
que  de  lier  la  conditutiond'une  armee  perma-
nente  avec  la  milice, de  fa^on  que  la  milice
en  devienne  meilleure,  et  que  la  liberte  n'en
foit  que  plus  affermis. Mais  il  ell  mal aife
de  caliuer  fur  cela  leurs  allarmes.

I  Voila


t 102 j

Voila  bien  des  difficultes,  et  peut-etre
les  interets  fecrets  des  particuliers  puilTans
fe  joindront-ils  aux  prejuges  de  la  multi-
tude pour  arreter  les  efforts  des  vrais  fages
et  des  vrais  citoyenSi

il  eft  impoffible  de  ne  pas  faire  des  vceux
pour  que  ce  peuple  parvienne  a  toute  la
profperite  dont  il  eft  fuceptible.  II  eft
I'efperance  du  genre  humain.  II  peut  en
devenir  le  modele.  II  doit  prouver  au
monde,  par  le  fait,  que  les  hommes  peuvent
etre  libres  et  tranquilles,  et  peuvent  fe
pafier  des  chaines  de  toute  efpece  que  les
tyrans  et  les  charlatans  de  toute  robe  ont
pretendu  leur  impofer  fous  le  pretexte  du
bien  public.  II  doit  donner  I'cxemple
de  la  liberte  politique,  de  la  liberie
religicufe,  de  la  liberte  du  commerce  et
de  rinduftrie.  L'afyle  qu'il  ouvre  a  tous
les  opprimes  de  toutes  les  nations  doit  con-
foler  la  terre.  La  facilite  d'en  profiler  pour
fe  derober  aux  fuites  d'un  mauvais  gou-
vernement  forcera  les  gouvernemens  d'etre
juftes,  et  de  s'cclairer  -,  le  refte  du  monde
ouvrira  peu-a-peu  les  yeux  fur  le  neant  des
illufions  dont  les  politiques  fe  font  berccs.
Mais  il  faut  pour  cela  que  I'Amerique  s'en
garantifte, et qu'elle ne redevienne pas

commc


[  103  ]
comme  I'ont  tant  repete  vos  ecrlvalns  mw
nlfteriels  une  image  de  notre  Europe,  un
amas  de  puiflances  divifces,  fe  difputant
des  terrltoires  ou  des  profits  de  commerce,
et  cimentantcontlnuellement  refclavage  des
peuples  par  leur  propre  fang.

Tous  les  hommes  eclalre's,  tons  les  amis
de  rhumanite  devroient  en  ce  moment  re-
unir  leurs  lumieres  et  jolndre  leurs  refle-
xions a  celles  des  fages  Americains  Dour
concourir  au  grand  ouvrage  de  leur  legif-
lation.  Cela  feroit  digne  de  vous,  Mon-
iieur  i  je  voudrois  pouvoir  echaufFer  votre
zele  J  et  fi  dans  cette  lettre  je  me  fuis  livre
plus  que  je  ne  I'aurois  du  peut-etre  a  Teifu-
Hon  de  mes  propres  idees,  ce  defir  a  ete
mon  unique  motif,  et  m'excufera  a  ce
que  j'efpere  de  I'ennui  que  je  vous  aurai
caufe.  Je  voudrois  que  le  fang  qui  a  coule,
qui  coulera  encore  dans  cette  querelle
ne  fijt  pas  inutile  au  bonheur  du  genre
Jiumain.

Nos  deux  nations  vont  fe  faire  recipro-
quement  bien  du  mal,  probablement  fans
qu'aucune  d'elles  en  retire  un  profit  reel.
L'accroificment  des  dettes et  des  charges.


[  104  ]
-:{?****•***•**■****•*  £{■  j^  ruine
d'un  grand  nombre  de  citoyens  en  feront
peut-etre  I'unique  refultat.  L'Angleterre
m'en  paroit  plus  pres  encore  que  la  France.
'  Si  au  lieu  de  cette  guerre  vous  aviez  pu
vous  executer  de  bonne  grace  des  le  premier
moment,  s'il  etoit  donne  a  la  politique  de
faire  d'avance  ce  qu'elle  fera  infailliblement
forcee  de  faire  plus  tard,  fi  I'opinion  na-
tionale  avoit  pu  permettre  a  vctre  gou-
vernement  de  prevenir  les  evenemens,  en
fuppofant  qu'il  les  eut  prevus,  s'il  eut
pu  confentir  d'abord  a  Tindependance  de
I'Amerique  fans  faire  la  guerre  a  perfonne,
je  crois  fermement  que  votre  nation  n'au-
roit  rien  perdu  a  ce  changement.  Elle  y
perdra  aujourd'hui  ce  qu'elle  a  depenfe,  ce
qu'elle  depenfera  encore  ;  elle  eprouvera
une  grande  diminution  pour  quelque  terns
dans  fon  commerce,  de  grands  boulever*-
femens  interieurs  fi  elle  eft  forcee  a  la  ban-
queroute  ;  et  quoiqu'il  arrive  une  grande
diminution  dans  I'influence  politique  au
dehors,  mais  ce  dernier  article  eft  d'une
bien  petite  importance  pour  le  bonheur
reel  d'un  peuple,  et  je  ne  fuis  point  du  tout
de  Tavis  de  I'Abbe  Rainal  dans  votre  epi-
griiphe. Je  ne crois  point  que  ceci vous

mene


f ^^5 1

txiene  a  devenir  une nation meprifable,  et
vous  jette  dans  I'efclavage.

Vos  malheurs  feront  peut-ctre  au  con-
traire  I'efFet  d'une  amputation  neceflaire ;
ils  font  peut-etre  le  leul  moyen  de  vous
fauver  de  la  cano-rene  du  luxe  et  de  la
corruption.  Si  dans  vos  agitations  vous
pouviez  corriger  votre  conftitution  en  ren-
dant  les  elecftions  annuelles,  en  repartiffant
le  droit  de  reprefentation  d'une  maniere
plus  egale  et  plus  proportionnee  aux  in-
terets  des  reprefentes,  vous  gagneriez
peut-etre  autant  que  TAmcrique  a  cette
revolution  ;  car  votre  liberte  vous  refteroit,
et  vos  autres  pertcs  fe  rcpareroient  bien
vite  avec  elle  et  par  elle.

Vous  devez  juger,  Monfieur,  par  la  fran-
chife  avec  laquelle  je  m'ouvre  a  vous  fur  ces
points  delicats,  de  Teftirae  que  vous  m'avez
infpiree,  et  de  la  fatisfa<5lion  que  j'eprouve
a  penfer  quil  y  a  quelque  relTcmblance  entre
nos  manieres  de  voir.  '  Je  compte  bien  que
cette  confidence  n'eil:  que  pour  vous.
Je  vous  prie  meme  de  ne  point  me  repondre
en  detail  par  la  polle,  car  votre  reponfe  feroit
infailliblement ouverte dans  nos bureaux

P  de


[ «o6 ]

de  pofte,  ct  Ton  me  trouveroit  beaucoup
trop  ami  de  ]a  liberte  pour  un  miniftre,
meme  pour  un  miniftre  difgracie  !

J'ai riionneur d*etre, Monfieur, avec
tcute  la  confideration  pofTible,

Votre  tres  humble,

ct  tres  obeifTant  ferviteur,

TURCOT,


It  is  not  eafy  to  dojujiice  in  EngliOi  to  many
parts  of  the  preceding  letter.  The  following
T'ranfation  of  it  imll  however  ^  I  hope,  be  found
to  be  nearly  correal ;  and  I  think  niyfelf  greatly
obliged  to  the  Gentleman  who  has  been  fo  good
as  to  favour  me  with  it.


T9


[ 107 3
TRANS L A T ION.

7'q  Dr. Price, London.

Pans,  22d  March,  1778.

S  I  R,

MR.  FRANKLIN  by  your  defire  has
put  into  my  hands  the  lafl  edition  of
your  Obfervatiom  on  Civil  Liberty y  &c.  for
which  I  think  myfelf  doubly  indebted  to
you.  In  the  firft  place,  for  the  work  it-
ielf,  of  which  I  have  long  known  the  value
and  read  with  great  avidity,  notwithftand-
ing  the  multiplicity  of  my  engagements,
when  it  was  firfl  publilhed :  And  in  the
next  place,  for  the  politenefs  you  have
fliewn  in  leaving  out  the  imputation  of
want  of  addrefs,  *  which  you  intermixed
^  P  2  with

*  What  is  here  faid  refers  to  the  following  account
of  M.  Turgors  adminiftration  in  the  fecond  trasSt  on
Civil  Liberty  and  the  War  with  America^  p.  150,  &c.
«  A  new  reign  produced  a  new  minifter  of  finaixe  in
«'•  France^  wh^'ofe  name  will  be  refpeded  by  pnfterity  for
«'  a  fet  of  meafures  as  new  to  the  political  world,  as  any
«  late  difcoveries  in  the  fyftem  of  nature  have  been  to  the
^'  philofophical  world— Doubtful  in  their  oparation, as

^ -^  «"  all


[ loS ]

with  the  handibme  things  you  fald  of  mc
in  your  additional  obfervations.  I  might
have  merited  this  imputation,  if  you
had  in  view  no  other  want  of  addrefs
than  incapacity  to  unravel  the  fprings
of  thofe  intrigues  that  v^^ere  employed
again  ft  me,  by  fome  people  who  are
much  more  expert  in  thefe  matters  than
I  am,  or  ever  floall  be,  or  indeed  ever  de-
lire  to  be  :  But  I  imagined  you  imputed  to
me  a  want  of  addrefs  which  made  my  opi-
nions

"  all  untried  meafures  muft  te,  but  diftinguifhed  by
"  their  tendency  to  Jay  a  folid  foundation  for  endlefs
"  peace,  induftry,  and  a  general  enjoyment  of  the  gifts
"  of  nature,  arts  and  commerce — The  edicts  iflueddur-
"  ing  his  adminiftration  exhibit  indeed  a  phiznomenon  of
*'  the  moft  extraordinary  kind.  An  abfolute  King  ren-
**  dering  a  voluntary  account  to  his  fubjefls,  and  incir
"  ting  his  people  to  think  ;  a  right  which  it  has  been  the
"  bufinefs  of  all  abfolute  princes  and  their  mininfters  to
"  exti!)s:uifli. — In  thefe  edids  the  King  declared  in  the
*'  moft  diftinct  terms  agixinft  a  bankruptcy,  &c.  while
♦  '  the  minifter  applied  himfclf  to  increafe  every  public
"  refource  by  principles  more  liberal  than  France^  or  any
*'  p?ino{  Europe^  ever  had  in  ferious  contemplation. —
*'  It  is  much  to  be  regretted,  that  the  oppofition  he  met
"  with  and  the  intriorues  of  a  court  fhould  have  deprived
*'  the  world  of  thofe  lights,  which  muft  have  refulted  from
"  theexample  of  fuch  an  adminiftration."  In  this  paffage
I  had,  in the  firft  edition,  mentioned improperly  Mv.

Turgofsi


[ 109 ]

nions  grofsly  clafli  with  the  general  opini-
ons of  my  countrymen  ;  and  in  that  relpect
I  thought  you  neither  did  juftice  to  j?7e  nor
to  my  country,  where  there  is  a  degree  of
underflanding  mucli  fuperior  to  what  you
generally  fuppofe  in  England,  and  where  it
is  more  eafy  perhaps,  than  even  with  you,
to  bring  back  the  public  to  hearken  to
reafon.

I  have  been  led  to  judge  thus  by  the  infatu-
ation of  your  people  in  the  abfurd  projedt  of
fubduing  America, till the  affair  of  Bur-

^urgofs  want  of  addrefs  among  the  other  caiifes  of  his
dirmiflion  from  power.  This  occafioned  a  letter  from
him  to  inform  mc  of  the  true  reafons  of  his  difmiflion,
and  begun  that  correfpondence,  of  which  this  letter  is  a
part,  and  which  continued  till  his  death. — It  may  not
be  improper  to  add  here,  that  his  fucceRor  was  Mr.
Necker^  author  of  the  interefling  Treatife  on  the  Admi-
niftration  of  the  Finances  of  France  jufl;  publilhed  ;  and
that  in  the  palTage  juft  quoted,  the  following  no-
tice is  taken  of  this  appointment. — "  After  a  fhort  in-
"  terval,  a  nomination,  in  fome  refpefls 'fl ill  more  ex-
*'  traordinary,  took  place  in  the  Court  of  France.  A
♦*  court,  which  a  few  years  fince  was  diftinguiflied  by  its
^'  bigotry  and  intolerance,  has  raifedapr<7/r/?fl«/,  the  fub-  I
*'  jedl  of  a  fmall  but  virtuous  republic,  to  a  decifivelead
*'  in  the  regulation  of  its  finances.  It  is  to  be  prefumed
*'  that  fo  fingular  a  preference  will  produce  an  equally
♦'  fingular  exertion  of  integrity  and  talents."

o;oync


[ no ]

goyne  began  to  open  their  eyes  ;  and  by
t;-e  lyftem  of  monopoly  and  exclufion  which
has  been  recommended  by  all  your  writers  on
Commerce,  (except  Mr.  Adam  Smith  and
-DeanTucker) ;  afyftem  which  has  been  the
true  fource  of  your  feparation  from  your  Co-
lonies. I  have  alfo  been  led  to  this  opinion  by
all  your  controverlial  writings  upon  thequef-
tions  which  haveoccupied  your  attention  thefe
twenty  years,  and  in  which,  till  your  obferva-
tions  appeared,  I  fcarce  recoiled:  to  have  read
one  th^t  took  up  thefe  queflions  on  theirproper
ground.  Icannotconceivehowa  nation  which
has  cultivated  every  branch  of  natural  know-
ledge with  fuch  fuccefs,  fliould  have  made
fo  little  progrefs  in  the  moil:  interefting
of  all  fciences,  that  of  the  public  good  :  A
Icience,  in  which  the  liberty  of  the  Prefs,
which  ilie  alone  enjoys,  ought  to  have  given
her  a  prodigious  advantage  over  every  other
nation  in  Europe.  Was  it  national  pride
which  prevented  you  from  profiting  by  this
advantage  ?  Or  was  it,  becaufe  you  were
not  altogether  in  fo  bad  a  condition  as  other
.nations,  that  you  have  impofed  upon  your-
felves  in  your  fpeculations  fo  far  as  to  be  per-
fuaded  that  your  arrangements  were  corn-
pleat  ?  Is  it  party  fpirit  and  a  defire  of  being
I  fupporte^


[ in ]

fupported  by  popular  opinion  which  has
retarded  your  progrefs,  by  inducing  your
political  writers  to  treat  as  vain  Metaphyfics  *
all  thofe  fpeculations  which  aim  at  eftablirn-
ing  the  rights  and  true  interefts  of  nations
and  individuals  upon  fixed  principles.  How
comes  it  that  you  are  almoft  the  firll:  of  the
writers  of  your  country,  who  has  given  ajuft
idea  of  liberty,  and  fhewn  the  fallity  of  the
notion  Co  frequently  repeated  by  almoft  all
Republican  Writers,  **  that  liberty  con-
*'  lifts  in  being  fubjed:  only  to  the  laws,"
as  if  a  man  could  be  free  while  oppreilcd
by  an  unjuft  law.  This  would  not  be  true,
even  if  we  could  fuppofe  that  all  the  laws
were  the  work  of  an  afiembly  of  the  whole
nation  ;  for  certainly  every  individual  has
his  rights,  of  which  the  nation  cannot  de-
prive him,  except  by  violence  and  an  un-
lawful ufe  of  the  general  power.  Though
you  have  attended  to  this  truth  and  have  ex-
plained yourfelf  upon  this  head,  perhaps  it
would  have  merited  a  more  minute  expla-
nation, confidering  how  little  attention  is
paid  to  it  even  by  the  moil  zealous  friends
of  liberty.

It  is  likewife  extraordinary  that  it  was  not
thought  a  trivial  matter  in  England  to  afTert

*  See  Mr.  Burke's  Letter  to  the  Sheriffs  of  Briftol.

*' that


r  112  ]

^'  that  one  nation  never  can  have  a  right  to
*'  govern  another  nation" — "  thatagovern-
'*  ment  where  fuch  a  principle  is  admitted
"  can  have  no  foiindation  but  that  of  force,
*'  which  ir  equally  the  foundation  of  robbery
"  and  tyranny" — '*  and  that  the  tyranny  of
*'  a  people  is  the  mofl:  cruel  and  intolerable,
*'  becaufe  it  leaves  the  feweft  refources  to  the
*'  opprefied,"— *A  defpot  is  retrained  by  a
fenfe  of  his  own  intereft.  He  is  checked  by
remorfe  or  by  the  public  opinion.  But  the
multitude  never  calculate.  The  multitude  are
never  checked  by  remorfe,  and  will  even  af-
cribe  to  themfelves  the  higheft  honour  when
they  deferve  only  difgrace.

What  a  dreadful  commentary  on  your
book  are  the  events  which  have  lately  be-
fallen the Englifli nation  ? For fome

months  they  have  been  running  head-
long to  ruin. — The  fate  of  America  is  al-
ready decided — Behold  her  independent  be-
yond recovery. — But  will  She  be  free  and
happy  ? — Can  this  new  people,  fo  advan-
tageoully  placed  for  giving  an  example  to  the
world  of  a  conftitution  under  which  man
may  enjoy  his  rights,  freely  exercife  all
his  faculties,  and  be  governed  only  by  na-
ture, reafon  and  juftice — Can  they  form  fuch
a  Conftitution  ? — Can  they  clhblilli  it  upon

a  never-


[ i'3 ]

a  neverfailing  foundation,  and  guard  agalnfh
every  fource  of  divifion  and  corruption  which
may  gradually  undermine  and  deftroy  it  ?

I  confefs  that  I  am  not  fatisfied  with  the
Conftitutions  which  have  hithertobeenform-
ed  by  the  different  States  of  America.  It  Is
with  reafon  that  you  reproach  the  State  of
Penfylvania  with  exad;ing  a  religious  teft
from  thofewho  become  members  of  the  body
of  Reprefentati\*es.  There  are  much  worfe
tefls  in  the  other  States ;  and  there  is  one  (I
believe  the  Jerfeys)  which  requires  (-f-)  a  de-
claration of  faith  in  the  Divinity  of  Jefus
Chrift. — I  obferve  that  by  moft  of  them  the
cufloms  of  England  are  imitated,  without
any  particular  motive.  Inftead  of  col-
ledting  all  authority  into  one  center,  that
of  the  nation,  they  have  eftabliilied  dif-
ferent bodies  j  a  body  of  reprefentatives,
a  council,  and  a  Governour,  becaufe  there
is  in  England  a  Houfe  of  Com-mons,  a
Houfe  of  Lords,  and  a  King. — They  en-
deavour to  balance  thefe different  pov/ers,

(t)  It  is  the  Conftitution  of  Dclware  that  impofes  the
teft  here  meant.  That  of  the  JerfeySy  with  a  noble  li- 1
berality,  orders  that  there  {hall  never  in  that  Province
be  any  eftablifhmcnt  of  any  one  religious  feft  in  prefer-
ence to  another,  and  that  a)!  Proteftants  of  all  per-
fuafions  fhall  enjoy  equal  rights  and  privileges.

Q^  as


[ 114 ]

as  if  this  equilibrium,  which  in  Enghindniiy
be  a  necelTary  check  to  the  enormous  in-
fluence of  royalty,  could  be  of  any  ufe  in
Republics  founded  upon  the  equality  of  all
the  Citizens  j  and  as  if  eftablilhing  different
orders  of  men,  was  not  a  fource  of  divifions
and  difputes.  In  attempting  to  prevent
imaginary  dangers  they  create  real  ones ;
and  in  their  deilre  to  have  nothing  to  fear
from  the  clergy,  they  unite  them  more
dofely  by  one  common  profcription.  By
excluding  them  from  the  right  of  being
eledled  intopublicoffices  they  become  a  body
diftind:  from  the  State.  Wherefore  fhould  a
Citizen,  who  has  the  fame  interefl:  with  others
in  the  common  defence  of  liberty  and  pro-
perty, be  excluded  from  contributing  to  it
his  virtue  and  knowledge  ?  Is  it  becaufe
he  is  of  a  profeffion  which  requires  know-
ledge and  virtue  ?  The  clergy  are  only
dangerous  when  they  exifl  as  a  diilindl  body
in  the  State  ;  and  think  thcmfelves  poflefied
of  feparate  rights  and  interefts  and  a  religir
on  ertabliflied  by  law,  as  If  fome  men  had
a  right  to  regulate  the  confciences  of  other
men,  or  could  have  an  intereft  in  doing
this  ;  as  if  an  Individual  could  facrifice  to
civil  fociety  opinions  on  which  he  thinks  his

eternal


[ 115 ]

eternal  falvation  depends  ;  as  if,  in  Cnort,
mankind  were  to  be  faved  or  dam72ed  in
communities — Where  true  toleration,  (that  is,
where  the  abfulute  incompetency  of  civil
government  in  matters  of  eonfcience,  is
€ll:abli(hed)i  there  the  clergyman,  when  ad-
aiitted  into  the  national  affembly,  becomes
^  fimpk  citizen:,  but  when  excluded,  he
becomes  an  ecckfuifiic,

I  do  not  think  they  are  fufficiently  careful
to  reduce  the  kind  of  bufinefs  with  which
the  government  of  each  State  is  charged,
within  the  narrbweft  limits  poflible;  nor
to  feparate  the  objeds  of  legiilation  from
thofeof  the  general  adminiftration,  or  from
thofe  of  a  local  and  particular  adminiftra-
tion  j  nor  to  inftitute  local  permanent  af-
femblies,  which  by  difcharging  almofl  all
the  functions  in  the  detail  of  government,
make  it  unneceflary  for  the  general  ailemblies
to  attend  to  thcfe  things,  and  thereby  deprive
the  members  of  the  general  aflemblies  of
every  means,  and  perhaps  every  defire,  of
abufing  a  power  which  can  only  be  applied
to  general  objects,  and  which,  confequent-
\yy  mufl  be  free  from  the  influence  of  the
little  pafiions  by  which  men  ufually  are
agitated^

Q_2  I  do


[ ii6 ]

I  do  not  find  that  they  attend  to  the  great
diftindion  (the  only  one  which  is  founded
in  nature  between  two  claffes  of  men),  be-
tween landholders,  and  thofe  who  are  not
landholders  j  to  their  interefls,  and  of
courfe  to  their  different  rights  refpeding
legiilation,  the  adminiftration  of  juftice  and
police,  their  contributions  to  the  public
expence,  and  employment.

No  fixed  principle  of  taxation  is  efta-
blifhed.  They  fuppofe  that  each  State  may
tax  itfelf  according  to  its  own  fancy,  by
cftablifliing  either  perjonal  taxes,  or  taxes
on  cojzfumption  and  importation  ;  that  is,
that  each  State  may  alTume  to  itfelf  an  in-
tereft  contrary  to  the  interefl  of  the  other
States.

They  alfo  every  where  fuppofe  that  they
have  a  right  to  regulate  commerce.  They
even  delegate  authority  to  executive  bodies,
and  to  Governors,  to  prohibit  the  expor-
tation of  certain  commodities  on  certain
occafions.  So  far  are  they  from  being  fenfi-
ble  that  the  right  to  an  entire  liberty  in
commerce  is  the  confequence  of  the  right
of  property.  So  much  are  they  ftill  in-
volved in  the  mift  of  European  illufions.

In  the  general  union  of  the  States I  do

not  obferve  a  coalition,  a  fufion  of  all  the

f  parts


[ i>7 ]

parts  to  form  one  homogeneous  body.  It
is  only  a  jumble  of  communities  too  dif-
cordant,  and  which  retain  a  conftant  ten-
dency to  reparation,  owing  to  the  diveriity
in  their  laws,  cuftoms  and  opinions ;  to  the
inequality  in  their  prefent  ftrength  ;  but
ftill  more,  to  the  inequality  in  their  ad-
vances to  greater  flrength.  It  is  only  a  copy
of  the  Dutch  republic,  with  this  difference,
that  the  Dutch  republic  had  nothing  to
fear,  as  the  American  republic  has,  from
the  future  poffible  increafe  of  any  one  of
the  Provinces. — All  this  edifice  has  been
hitherto  fupported  upon  the  erroneous
foundation  of  the  moil  ancient  and  vul-
gar policy  ;  upon  the  prejudice  that  Na-
tions and  States,  as  fuch,  may  have  an
intereft  diftindl  from  the  intereft  which  iii-
dividuals  have  to  be  free,  and  to  defend
their  property  againfl  the  attacks  of  rob-
bers and  conquerors  :  An  interefl,  in
carrying  on  a  more  extcnfive  commerce
than  other  States,  in  not  purchafing  foreign
merchandize,  and  compelling  foreigners  to
confume  their  produce  and  manufactures  :
An  intereft  in  poflefiing  more  extenfive  ter-
ritories, and  acquiring  fuch  and  fuch  a
province,  llland  or  village :  An  intereft  in  in-
fpiring  other  nations  with  awe,  and  gaining  a

fuperlority


[ 1.8 ]
fiiperiority  over  them in  the  glory  of  arts^j
iciences,  and  arms.

Some  of  thefe  prejudices  are  fomented  in
Europe,  from  the  ancient  rivalfliip  of  na-
tions and  the  ambition  of  Princes,  which
compel  every  State  to  keep  up  an  armed
force  to  defend  itfelf  againft  the  attack  of
neighbours  in  arms,  and  to  look  upon  a  mi-
litary force  as  the  principal  objed:  of  govern-
ment. A??ierica  is  likely  in  no  long  time
to  enjoy  the  happinefs  of  having  no  external
enemy  to  dread,  provided  £he  is  not  divided
within  herfelf.  She  ought,  therefore,  to
eftimate  properly  thofe  pretended  intercjls
and  caufes  of  difcord  which  alone  are  likely
to  be  formidable  to  her  liberty.  On  that
facred  principle,  *'  liberty  of  commerce
**  coniidered  as  a  natural  right  flowing  from
*'  the  polleffion  of  property,"  all  the  pre-
tended interefts  of  commerce  muft  vanifli. —
The  fuppofed  interefl  in  polTelling  more  or
lefs  territory  difappear  on  this  principle,
*'  that  a  territory  does  not  belong  to  na-
**  tions,  but  to  the  individuals  who  are  pro-
**  prietors  of  the  lands."  The  queflion,
whether  fuch  a  canton  or  fuch  a  village  be-
longs to  fuch  a  Province  or  fuch  a  State,
ought  not  to  be  determined  by  the  intereft
in it  pretended by that  Province  or  that

State  >


[ 119 ]

State  ;  but  by  the  Intereft  the  inhabitants
of  the  canton  or  village  have  in  afiembling
for  tranfading  their  affairs  in  the  place
moft  convenient  for  them.  This  intereft,
nieafured  by  the  greater  or  lefs  diftance
that  a  man  can  go  from  his  home  to  attend
to  important  affairs  w^ithout  injuring  his
private  concerns,  forms  a  natural  boundary
to  thejurifdidion  of  States,  and  eftablilhes
an  equipoife  '^  of  extent  and  ftrength  be-
tween them,  which  muft  remove  every
danger  of  inequality,  and  every  pretence
to  fuperiority.

There  can  be  no  intereft  in  being  feared
when  nothing  can  be  demanded,  and  when
men  are  in  a  iituation  not  to  be  attacked  by
a  confiderable  force  with  any  hope  of  fuc-
cefs.

The  glory  of  arms  is  nothing  to  thofe
who  enjoy  the  happinefs  of  living  in  peace.

The  glory  of  arts  and  fciences  belongs  to
every man  who  can  acquire  it. There  is

*  This  feems  to  be  a  particular  of  much  confequence.
The  great  inequality  now  exifting,  and  which  is  likely
to  increafe,  betv/een  the  different  States,  is  a  very  un-  /
favourable  circumftance  ;  and  the  embaraiTment  and
danger  to  which  it  expofes  the  union  ought  to  be
guarded  againfl  as  far  as  polTible  in  laying  out  future
States.

herp


■  /

[ 120 ]

here  ample  fcope.  The  field  of  difcovcry  is
boundlefs ;  and  all  profit  by  the  difcoveries
of  all.

I  imagine  that  the  Americans  are  not  as
fenfible  of  thefe  truths,  as  they  ought  to
be,  in  order  to  fecure  the  happinefs  of
their  pofterity.  I  do  not  blame  their  leaders.
It  was  neceffary  to  provide  for  the  neceflities
of  the  moment,  by  fuch  an  union  as  they
could  form  againfi:  a  prefent  and  mofl  for-
midable enemy.  They  have  not  leifure  to
confider  how  the  errors  of  the  different  con-
ftitutions  and  States  may  be  corre6ted  5
but  they  ought  to  be  afraid  of  perpetuating
thefe  errors,  and  to  endeavour  by  all  means
to  reconcile  the  opinions  and  interefts  of
the  different  provinces,  and  to  unite  them
by  bringing  them  to  one  uniform  fet  of
principles.

To  accompliih  this  they  have  great  ob-
flacles  to  furmount.

In  Canada,  an  order  of  Roman  Catholic
Clergy,  and  a  body  of  Nobles.

In  New  England,  a  rigid  puritanical  fpirit
which  has  been  always  fomewhat  into^
lerant  *.

*  This  has  been  once  true  of  the  inhabitants  of  New-
England^  but  it  is  not  fo  now* See  p.  47.

In


[ 121 ]

In  Penfylvania,  a  very  great  number  of  In-
habitants laying  it  down  as  a  religious  prin-
ciple, that  the  profefiion  of  arms  is  unlaw-
ful, and  refufing  to  join  in  the  arrangements
necefTary  to  eftablilli  the  military  force  of
the  State,  by  uniting  the  character  of  the
Citizen  with  that  of  the  Soldier  and  Mili-
tiaman, in  confequence  of  which  the  bufi-
nefs  of  war  is  made  to  be  the  buiinefs  of
mercenaries.

In  the  Southern  Colonies,  an  inequality
of  fortune  too  great;  and  what  is  worfe,
a  great  number  of  Blacks,  whofe  flavery
is  incompatible  with  a  good  political  confti-
tution  }  and  who,  if  emancipated,  would
occafion  great  embarraflement  by  forming
two  diftincl:  people  in  one  State.

In  all  of  them,  various  prejudices,  an  at-
tachment to  cftablifhed  forms,  a  habit  of
paying  certain  taxes,  and  a  dread  of  thofe
which  mufl  be  fubflituted  for  them  ;  a
vanity  in  thofe  colonies  Vv^hich  think  them-
felves  moil  powerful  ,  and  a  wretched  be-
ginning of  national  pride.  I  imagine  that
the  Americans  mud  aggrandize  themfelves
not  by  war,  but  by  agriculture.  If  they
negledl  the  immenfe  dcfarts  which  are  at
their  backs,  and  which  extend  all  the  way

R  to


[ 122 ]

to  the  vveflern  fea,  their  exiles  and  fugi-
tives from  the  feverity  of  the  laws,  will
unite  with  the  Savages,  and  fettle  that  part
of  the  country  ;  the  conkquence  of  which
will  be  that  bodies  of  Banditti  will
ravage  America,  as  the  Barbarians  of  the
North  ravaged  the  Roman  Empire,  and
fubjeft  the  States  to  the  neceffity  of  keep-
ing the  frontiers  always  guarded,  and  re-
maining in  a  State  of  continual  war.  The
Colonies  next  to  the  frontier  will  of  courfe
be  better  difciplined  than  the  red:  ;  and
this  inequality  of  military  force  will  prove
a  dreadful  incentive  to  ambition.  The
remedy  for  this  inequality  would  be  to
keep  up  a  {landing  army,  to  which  every
State  (liould  contribute  in  proportion  to
its  population  ;  but  the  Americans,  who
have  the  fears  that  the  Englilh  oug/jt  to
have,  dread  nothing  fo  much  as  a  {land-
ing army.  In  this  they  are  wrong.  There
is  nothing  more  eafy  than  to  combine  a
Handing  army  with  a  militia,  fo  as  to  im-
prove the  militia,  and  gain  additional  fe-
curity  for  liberty.  But  it  is  no  eafy  matter
to  calm  their  apprehenfions  on  that  head.

Ilere are a number  of  difficulties  5  and
perhaps  the private intere{ls of  powerful

individuals


r  T23  ]

individuals  will  unite  with  the  prejudices  of
the  multitude,  to  check  the  efforts  of  true
Philofophers  and  good  Citizens.

It  is  impoflible  not  to  wifli  ardently
that  this  people  may  attain  to  all  the  pro-
fperity  of  which  they  are  capable.  They
are  the  hope  of  the  world.  They  may  be-
come a  model  to  it.  They  ?nay  prove  by  fadt
that  men  can  be  free  and  yet  tranquil  j  and
that  it  is  in  their  power  to  refcue  them-
felves  from  the  chains  in  which  tyrants  and
knaves  of  all  defcriptions  have  prefumed  to
bind  them  under  the  pretence  of  the  public
good.  They  may  exhibit  an  example  of
'political  liberty,  of  religious  liberty,  of  coin^
men'cal liberty »  and  of  induftry.  The  Afylnm
they  open  to  the  opprefTed  of  all  nations
fhould  confole  the  earth.  The  eafe  with
which  the  injured  may  efcape  from  op-
preflive  governments,  will  compel  Princes
to  become  juft  and  cautious  ;  and  the  reft  of
the  world  will  gradually  open  their  eyes  upon
the  empty  illufions  with  which  they  have
been  hitherto  cheated  by  politicians.  But  for
this  purpofe  America  rauft  preferve  herfelf
from  thefe  illufions  j  and  take  care  to  avoid
being  what  your  minifterial  writers  are  fre-

R  2  quently


[  i24  1
quently  faying  She  will  be- — an  image  of  our
\  Europe — a  mafs  of  divided  powers  contend-
ing for  territory  and  commerce,  and  con-
tinually cementing  the  flavery  of  the  people
with  their  own  blood.

All  enlightened  men — All  the  friends  of
humanity  ought  at  this  time  to  unite  their
lights  to  thofe  of  the  American  fages,  and
to  affifl:  them  in  the  great  work  of  legifla-
tion.  This,  fir,  would  be  a  work  worthy
of  you.  I  wi(L  it  was  in  my  power  to  ani-
mate your  zeal  in  this  inftance.  If  I  have  in
this  letter  indulged  too  free  an  effufion
of  my  fentimentSj  this. has  been  my  only
motive  ;  and  it  will,  I  hope,  induce  you  to
pardon  me  for  tiring  you.  1  wifh  indeed
that  the  blood  which  has  been  fpilt,  and
which  will  contiune  for  fome  time  to  be
fpilt  in  this  contefl,  may  not  be  without  its
ufe  to  the  human  race.

Our  two  nations  are  about  doing  much
harm  to  each  other,  and  probably  without
the  profped:  to  either  of  any  real  advantage.
An  increafe  of  debts  and  public  burthens,
(perhaps  a  national  bankruptcy),  and  the
ruin  of  a  great  number  of  individuals,  will
prove  the  refult.  England  feems  to  me  to
be  more  likely  to  fuffer  by  thefe  evils,
and much  nearer  to then), than  France.

--If


[  125  ]
• — If  Inflead  of  going  to  war,  you  had  at  the
commencement  of  your  difputes  endeavoured
to  retreat  with  a  good  grace  ;  if  your  Statef-
men  had  then  confented  to  make  thofe
conceilions,  which  they  will  infallibly  be
obliged  to  make  at  lad  j  if  the  national
opinion  would  have  permitted  your  govern-
ment to  anticipate  events  which  might
have  been  forefeen  ;  if,  in  fl:iort,  you  had
immediately  yielded  to  the  independence  of
America  without  entering  into  any  hoftili-
ties  3  I  am  firmly  perfuaded  your  nation
would  have  left  nothing. — But  you  will  fiow
lofe  what  you  have  already  expended,  and
what  you  are  ftill  to  expend  ;  you  will  ex-
perience a  great  diminution  of  your  com-
merce for  fome  time,  and  great  interior
commotions,  if  driven  to  a  bankruptcy;  and,
at  any  rate,  a  great  diminution  of  weight
in  foreign  politics.  But  this  laft  circum-
flance  I  think  of  little  confequence  to  the
real  happinefs  of  a  people  ;  for  I  cannot
agree  with  the  Abbe  Raynal  in  your  motto*.

I  do

*  This  refers  to  the  following  words  (taken  from  Mr.
Juftamond's  tranflation  of  the  Abbe  Raynal's  Hiftory  of
the  European  Settlements)  in  the  Title-page  to  the
Second  Tra£l  on  Civil  Liberty — *'  Should  the  morals
*'  of  the  Englifh be  perverted  by  luxury — fhould they

♦'  lofe


[ 1^6  ]

I  do  not  believe  all  this  will  make  you  a
contemptible  nation  or  throw  you  into
flavery. — On  the  contrary;  your  misfortunes
may  have  the  effect  of  a  neceffary  amputa-
tion. They  are  perhaps  the  only  means  of
faving  you  from  the  gangrene  of  luxury
and  corruption.  And  if  they  fl^ould  termi-
nate in  the  amendment  of  your  conftitution,
by  reftoring  annual  elections,  and  diftribut-
ing  the  right  of  fufFrages  for  reprefentation  fo
as  to  render  it  more  equal  and  better  propor-
tioned to  the  intercfts  of  the  reprefented,
you  will  perhaps  gain  as  much  as  America
by  this  revolution  ;  for  you  will  preferve
your  liberty,  and  with  your  liberty,  and  by
means  of  it,  all  your  other  lofl'es  will  be
fpeedily  repaired.

By  the  freedom  with  which  I  have  open-
ed myfelf  to  you,  fir,  upon  thefe  delicate
points,  you  will  judge  of  the  efteem  with
which  you  have  inf|3ired  me  ;  and  the  fatis-
fadion  I  feel  in  thinking  there  is  fome  re-

*'  lofe  their  colonies  by  reftraining  them,  Sec.  they  will
*'  be  enflaved.  They  will  become  infignificant  and
"  contemptible  ;  and  Europe  will  not  be  able  to  fliew
**  the  world  one  nation  in  which  fhe  can  pride  herfelf."

7  femblancc


[ 127 ]

femblance  between  our  fentiments  and  views.
I  depend  on  your  *  confining  this  confidence
to  yourfelf.  I  even  beg  that  yoij  will  not
be  particular  in  anfwering  me  by  the  Poll:,
for  your  letter  will  certainly  be  opened  at
our  Poft-Officcs,  aiid  I  (liall  be  found  much
too  great  a  friend  to  liberty  for  a  minifter,
even  though  a  dlfcarded minifter.

I have  the honour to  be  with all  pof-
fible  refpcd't,

Sir,
Your  mofl:  humble,

and  moil  obedient  Servant,

TURCOT,

*  In  compliance  with  Mr.  Ttirgcfs  defirc,  this  let-
ter was  kept  private  during  his  life.  Since  his  death  I
have  thought  the  publication  of  it  a  duty  which  I  owe
to  his  memory,  as  well  as  to  the  United  States  and
the  world.  I  can  add,  with  much  fatisfaiSiion,  that  my
venerable  friend  and  the  excellent  Philofopher  and
Satefman  whofe  name  introduces  this  letter ;  and
filfo,  that  fome  intimate  friends  of  A'Ir.  Turgofs,  who  i
have  been  confultcd  on  this  fubjedt,  concur  with  me  in
this  fentiment.

Note  omitted  in  Page  52.
The  imperfcdion  of  real  knowledge  may  often  produce

unreafonab'e  incredulity. Had  the  befl:  Philofophcrs

been  told  a  few  years  ago,  "  that  there  exifted  fiflies  which  j
**  had  the  co.nmand  of  lighiemvg^  and  which  ufed  it  to
*'  kill  their  prey,"  they  would  have  fcoutcd  the  informa-
tion as  abfurd  and  ridiculous.


APPENDIX,

CONTAINING

A  Translation  from  the  French  of

THE TESTAMENT

O  F

M. FORTUNE RICARD,

Teacher  of  Arithmetic  at  P .

Read  and  publifned at  the  Court of  Bailiwick  of  that
Town, the 19th of  August, 1784.


PRINTED IN M.DCC.LXXXV.


ADVERTISEMENT.

^  i~  H  E  following  Tellament  was  lately
publified  in  France,  and  conveyed  to
me  by  Dr.  Franklin.  //  exemplifies ^  with
an  i?i/irti^ive  pleafantry  and  great  force^  the
account  in  page  lo,  ^c.  of  the  powers  of  Com-
pound Inter efl  or  a  Sinking  Fund,  and  the
ifes  to  which  they  may  be  applied  for  the  benefit
of  nations  and  of  pofierity.  For  this  reafon  I
here  offer  to  the  public  the  following  tranfia-
tion  of  it,  not  doubting  but  I  Jljall  be  excifcd  if
the  turn  of  humour  in  it  renders  it  a  compo-
fition  of  a  nature  not  perfeSlly  fui table  to  the
other  parts  of  this  pamphlet.


S  2


[ 133 ]


T H E


T  E  S  T  A  M E N  T,


-1-t  if  ■  f'  ngragp:™—


riST  the  name  of  Gel  I  Fortune  Ruard,  Teach

^  of  Arithmetic  at  D ,  mvok.ng  the  HoK

Virgin  and  Saint  Fortune  my  patron, do  make
this my laft  Will  as  follows —

r  "  The  Executors,  who  have  caufed  this  Will
"  to  be  printed  in  order  to  fulfil  the  mtentions
-  of  the  late  M.  Fortune  Rlcard,  do  not  thmk  it
«  neceffary  to  publifli  thofc  particular  bcquefts
»' which  concern  only  his  own  family.— Aiter
"  havincr  difpoled  of  his  patrimony  among  them
<'  ;1th  wifdom,  he  proceeds  m  the  following  man-
"  ner."]

It  remains  now  for  me  to  declare  my  in-
tentions with  regard  to  ^^^  prom^^^/!^  50,^
Uvres  *, fubicribed on my behalf dv M.^^1^.

* 22  /. 4/. 6/.


t  134  ]

banker  of  this  town.  This  fum  proceeded  origi-
nally from  a  prefect  which  was  made  me  by  Prof-
fer Ricard^  my  much  honoured  grandfather,  when
I  entered  the  eighth  year  of  my  age.  At  that
age  he  had  taught  me  the  principles  of  writing
and  calculation.  After  havins;  fliewn  me  that  a
capital,  with  its  accumulating  interell  at  five^fr
cent,  would  amount  at  the  end  of  100  years  to
more  than  131  times  the  original  fum*,  and  feeing
that  I  lidened  to  this  lefture  with  the  greateft
attention,  he  took  24  livres  f  out  of  his  pocket,  and
addrelicd  me  with  an  enthufiafm  which  is  fiill  pre-
fent  to  m.ymind — "My  child,  faid  he,  remember
while  thou  liveit,  that  with  ceconomy  and  cal-
culation nothing  is  impoffible  for  man.  Here
are  24  livres  which  I  give  thee.  Take  them  to
a  merchant  in  our  neighbourhood,  who  will
place  them  in  trade  out  of  regard  to  me.
Every  year  thou  Ihalt  add  the  intereft  to  the
principal.  At  thy  death  thou  flialt  employ  the
produce  in  good  works  for  the  repole  of  thy
foul  and  my  own." — I  have  executed  this  order
with  fidelity,  and  in  the  courfe  of  my  life  I  have
planned  many  proje6ls  for  employing  this  money.
Having  reached  the  71ft  year  of  my  age,  it  a-
mounts  to  500  livres  ;  but  as  I  mull  forne  time
or  other  fet  bounds  to  myfelf,  I  now  defire  that
it  may  be  divided  into  five  portions  of  100  livres  -^^
each  •,  to  which  the  interefts  fhall  be  annually  ad-
ded, and  the  accumulated  fums  fhall  be  fucceffive*
ly  applied  to  the  following  ufes.


I,


In  a  hundred  years  the  firfl  fum  of  100  livres
will  amount  to  more  than  13,100  livres  §,(5822/.).

From


*  See  fable i  ft annexed  to this  Will.

f  Nearly  a  guinea.

X  Four  pounds  nine  fhillings.

\  See  table  ift  and  2d.


[ 135 ]

From  this  fum  a  prize  of  4000  livres  fhail  be
given  for  the  beft  theological  difiertation,  to
prove  the  lawfulnefs  of  putting  out  money  to  inte-
reft.  Three  medals,  of  600  livres  each,  fhall  alfo
be  given  for  the  three  diflertations  vvhich  fhall  be
adjudged  the  next  in  merit  to  the  prize-dillcrca-
tion.  The  remainder  of  the  13,100  livres  Ihall
be  expended  in  printing  the  prize  difiertation  and
extrafts  from  the  others.  Copies  of  thefe  Ihall
be  fent,  gratis^  to  all  the  bilhops,  clergy,  and
confeflbrs  of  the  kingdom.  1  Jiad  intended  to
have  fent  them  alfo  into  foreign  countries-,  but  lob-
ferve  that  all  the  univerfitiesof  the  chriflian  world,
excepting  thole  of  France,  have  folemnly  recog-
nized the  lawfulnefs  of  putting  money  to  intereit*;
and  that  it  continues  necclTary  only  in  this  king-
dom to  explain  a  queftion  in  morals  fo  interelt-
ing  to  the  welfare  of  the  State.


'in


2.  After  t'zvo  hundred  yecirs  d^fecond  fum  of  loo
livres,  amounting,  with  its  accuniulated  intereft,  to
more  than  1,700,000  livres  +,  {j^S^^ool.)  fliall
be  emiployed  in  ellablilliing  a  perpetual  fund  for
fourfcore  prizes  of  1000  livres  each,  to  be  diftri-
buted  annually  by  the  different  academies  of  the
kingdom,  as  follows,: — Fifteen  prizes  for  the  moll
diftinguiflied  virtuous  adlions — fifteen  for  works  of
fcienceand  literature — ten  for  folutionsof  queilions
in  arit!imetic  and  calculation — ten  for  fuch  new
procefies  in  agriculture  as  (liall  produce  the  beft
crops — ten  for mafier-pieCes in the  fine  arts  —

and

*  See  the  approbations  of  the  Univerfitlcs  of  Alcala,  Sa-
lamanca, Ingolfladt,  Fribourg  in  Brifgaw,  Mayence,  Co-
logne and  Treves,  printed  at  the  end  of  a  Trcatifc  upon
Vjury  and  Inter  cjf.  Lyon,  Bruv/el- Pont  has,  1776,  in  izvno.
The  firll  five  of  thele  approbations  have  b^-en  dcpoficcd  in
the  archives  of  the  confulfhip  of  the  town  of  Lyons.

f  See  table  2d  and  4th,


[ liS ]

and  ten  to  encourage  races  and  other  exercifes
proper  to  dilplay  the  force  and  agility  of  the
body,  and  to  reftore  amongft  us  a  tafte  for  the
gymnaiium  which  was  in  luch  great  efteem  a-
mong  the  Greeks,  and  which-  formerly  made
fo  many  heroes.

After  three  hundred  years,  from  another  fum
cf  lOO  livres,  increafed  in  that  time  to  more
than  two  hundred  and  twenty  -  fix  millions,
(10,057,000/.)  there  fliall  be  appropriated  196
millions  towards  eftablifhing,  in  the  molt  con-
fiderable  places  in  France,  500  patriotic  banks
for  lending  money  without  interefl;  the  largeft
cf  which  fliall  have  a  fund  of  ten  millions  of  li-
vres, and  the  fmalleft  a  fund  of  100,000  livres.
Thefe  banks  fliall  be  managed  by  a  committee
of  the  moll  upright  citizens  in  each  place,
and  the  money  fliall  be  emplo'yed  in  loans  to
fuccour  the  unfortunate,  or  advanced  towards
promoting  agriculture,  trade,  and  indufl:ry.  The
remaining  thirty  millions  fliall  be  expended
in  founding  twelve  jnufeums  in  the  cities  of  Paris,
Lyons,  Rouen,  Bourdeaux,  Rennes,  Lifle,  Nancy,
Tours,  Dijon,  Thouloufe,  Aix,  and  Grenoble.
Each  of  thefe  mtifeums  fliall  be  placed  at  the  mofl:
agreeable  end  of  the  city.  Five  hundred  thoufand
livres  fliall  be  expended  upon  each  building,  and
in  the  purchafe  of  grounds  which  fliall  belong  to
them,  and  be  laid  out  into  botanical  and  fruit  gar-
dens, and  alio  into  kitchen  gardens  and  extenfive
walks.  To  each  mufeum  fliall  be  annexed  an
income  of  100,000  livres;  and  there  fliall  be
lodged  and  boarded  in  it  forty  literary  men  and
artilts  cf  fuperior  merit,  who,  at  the  time  of
meals  fliall  be  divided  into  four  tables,  that
their  repafts  may  be  chearful  without  being  too
i  noify.


[ 157 ]

hoify.  Each  mufeum  fnall  be  provided  with  C]X
Secretaries,  a  defigncr  and  engraver,  and  four
carriages.  There  fhall  be  alio  a  hall  for  concerts,
a  theatre,  a  chymical  laboratory,  ^  cabinet  of  na-
tural hiftory,  a  hall  for  experimental  philofophy,
and  a  grand  gallery  for  a  common  library.  A
hundred  thou/and  livres  lliall  be  expended  on  a  fe-
parate  library  for  each  of  theie  eftablifliments.
The  fame  fum  fliall  be  employed  in  providing
them  with  feparate  cabinets  of  natural  hiftory  and
with  philofophical  inftruments.  And  10,000  li-
vres Ihall  be  referved  annually  for  keeping  up
and  increafing  thefe  cabinets  and  philofophical
inftruments.*

The  libraries  fhall  always  be  open  to  the  pub-
lic. Twenty  members  of  the  muilnim  fliall  be
engaged  in  giving  public  and  gratuitous  courfes
of  ledlures  upon  the  foreign  languages,  and  upon
all  the  arts  and  fciences.  The  other  twenty  Ihall
be  engaged  in  fuch  other  employments  as  may  be
moft  uieful.  No  one  fhall  be  admitted  a  mem-
ber till  he  has  previoufly  given  proof,  not  of  his
rank,  defcent,  or  nobility,  but  of  his  morals,
and  of  his  never  having  diflionoured  his  pen  by
writing  againit -j-  religion  and  government,  or  by
fatirifing  any  member  of  the  community.  On
being  admitted  he  fhall  make  oath,  "  That  he  v/ill
"  prefer  virtue,  truth,  and  -his  country  to  every
''thing-,  and  the  general  good  of  literature  to
"  his  own  fame."  The  v/orks  of  the  members  of
the  mufeum  fliull  be  printed  at  the  expence  of  the
T  efta-

*  See  table  5th.

t  No  good  men  will  ever  write  againft  religion  and
government.  On  the  contrary  ;  they  will  do  all  they  can
to  render  them  greater  bleffings,  by  fpreadlng  juil  notions
of  them,  and  clearing  them  from  thofe  abufes  and  cor-
ruptions by  which  ufurpers  and  hypocrites  have  made  thcn^
the  means  of  enilaving  and  debafing  mankijid.


[ '38 1

edablifliment,  and  when  thofe  expences  are  relm-
burfed,  the  profits  fliall  belong  to  the  authors.

4.  Ah^r  four  hundred  yeRvs  the  fourth  fiim  of  100
livre.s,amoLinting,  with  intereft,  to  near  30,000  mil-
lions, (1,330,000,000/.)  iTiallbeemployedin  build-
ing 100  towns,  each  containing  150,000  fouls*,  in
the  moft  agreeable  fituations  which  can  be  found
in  France.  The  means  of  peopling  thefe  towns,
of  o;overnino;  and  makino  them  flourifh,  are  ex-
plained  in  a  memorial  annexed  to  this  will  -f .  In
a  fhort  time  there  will  refult  from  hence  an  ad-
dition of  15  millions  of  inhabitants  to  the  king-
dom, and  its  confumption  will  be  doiibled,  for
which  fervice  I  hope  the  ceconomifts  will  think
themfclves  obliged  to  me.

I  am  fenfible  that  all  the  fpecie  in  Europe  is
not  equal  to  thefe  30,000  millions,  and  that  ic
will  be  impoffible  to  make  provifion  in  money  for
fuch  immenfc  fums.  For  this  reafon  I  leave  it  to
the  difcretion  of  my  executors  to  exchange  cafli  at
convenient  leafons  for  landed  and  other  real  polTef-
fiOns.  The  revenue  arifing  from  thofe  poflefTions
fhall  either  be  laid  out  in  cafli,  or  realized  by-
further  purchafes,  fo  that  my  bequefts  may  be
fulfilled  in  their  due  time  without  any  difficulty.

I  am  convinced,  by  the  moft  accurate  calcula-
tions, that  my  arrangements  inftead  of  clogging
will  give  adlivity  to  the  circulation  of  fpecie.
Laying  out  the  money  1  have  ordered  in  the  pur-

ckafe

*  See  table  6th.

f  The  Executors  have  not  yet  determined  whether  they
fhall  publilh  this  Memorial,  which  is  very  copious,  and  con-
tains feme  ideas  that  may  claim  originality.  The  more  im-
mediate concerns  of  their  cxecutorfliip  have  not  yet  afforded
them  time  for  examining  the  whole  of  it.  Befides,  there  can
be  no  neceflity  of  hurrying  the  publication,  inafmuch  a.^
the  towns  of  which  it  treats  are  not  to  be  built  till  the  end
of  four  centuries.


[ 139 1

chafe  of  eftates,  will  foon  increafe  their  value-,  and
when  thefe  accumulating  riches  fhall  have  fo  pro-
duced their  effe<5l  as  that  there  can  no  lonaer  be
found  in  France  a  landholder  who  will  fell  his
eftate,  purchafes  muft  be  fought  for  among  the
neiCThbouringr  nations.

5.  Finally,  with  regard  to  the  lafl:  Aim  of  100
livres,  amounting  nearly,  by  the  accumulation
o^  five  hundred  years,  to  four  millions  of  millions  of
livres,*  it  fhall  be  difpofed  of  as  follows.

Six  thouland  millions  fl-iall  be  appropriated  to-
wards paying  the  national  debt  of  France,  upon
condition  that  the  Kings,  our  good  lords  and
mailers,  fhall  be  entreated  to  order  the  comptrol-
lers general  of  the  finances  to  undergo  in  future
an  examination  in  arithmetic  -[  before  they  enter
upon  their  office.

Twelve  thoufand  millions  fhall  likewife  be  em-
ployed in  paying  the  public  debts  of  England. —
It  may  be  feen  that  I  reckon  that  both  ihofe  na-
tional debts  will  be  doubled  in  this  period  ;  not
that  I  have  any  doubts  of  the  talents  of  certain
minifters  to  increafe  them  much  more,  but
their  operations  in  this  way  are  oppofed  by  an  in-
finity of  circumftances  which  lead  me  to  pre-
fume  that  thofc  debts  cannot  be  more  than  dou-
bled. Befides,  if  they  amount  to  a  few  thoufands
of  millions  more,  I  declare  that  it  is  my  intention
that  they  fhould  be  entirely  paid  ofi',  and  that  a
projed  fo  laudable  fhould  not  remain  unexecuted
T  2  for

*  176  thoufands  of  millions  flerling.— See  tables  2d  and
7th.

f  There  have  been,  it  is  faid,  even  in  England  Lords
of  the  Admiralty  who  could  not  count,  and  Chancellors  of
the  Exchequer  who  could  not  read  figures.


I 140 1

for  a  tiifie  more  or  kfs.  I  beg  that  the  Englifh
would  not  reful'e  this  flight  mark  of  the  rememi-
brance  of  a  man,  who  was  indeed  born  a  French-
man, but  who  fincerely  efteemed  their  nation,  and.
always  was  a  particular  admirer  of  that  magnifi-
cent work  which  Newton,  their  countryman,  has
entitled  Univerfal  Arithmetic.  I  earneftly  defire
that,  as  an  acknowledgment  for  this  legacy,  the
Englifh  nation  will  conient  to  call  the  French
their  neighbours*  and  not  their  natural  enemies  \  that
they  be  afliired  that  nature  never  made  man  an
enemy  to  man ;  and  that  national  hatreds,  com-
mercial prohibitions,  and,  above  all,  ivars  con-
ilantly  produce  a  rnonftrous  error  in  calculations.
But  I  dare  not,  in  this  inftance,  require  any  thing.
We  mult  hope  for  all  we  defire  from  time  -,  and
when  we  have  the  happinefs  of  rendering  a  fer-
vice,  we  muft  not  deflroy  ks  value  by  annexing
conditions  to  it  which  may  encumber  thofe  whorri
wc  wifh  to  ferve.

Thirty  thoufand  millions  fhall  be  formed  into
a  fund  for  producing  an  annual  revenue  of  [5
hundred  millions  to  be  divided  in  times  of  peace
among  all  the  powers  of  Europe.  In  time  of
-war  the  fhare  of  the  aggreflbr  or  aggrefiTors  fhall
be  given  to  thofe  who  have  been  attacked  un-
juftly,  in  order  to  engage  fovereigns,  if  pofllble,
to  reflect  a  little  before  they  commence  unjuft
hoftilities.  This  revenue  fhall  be  diftributed
among  the  different  nations  in  proportion  to  their
population.  Every  ten  years  an  exact  numera-
tion

*  The  parable  ot' the  good  Samaritan  dire£ls  every  man
to  look  upon  every  man  as  his  7te!ghbour,  without  regarding
his  country  or  religion.  M.  Ricard  appears  to  have  attended
to  this  divine  inftrudion.  But  E?!glijhjnen  probably  forget
it,  when,  in  their  public  devotions,  they  pray  that  God
would  abate  the priJi  andaj/uage  the  malice  of  their  enemies.


[ 141 ]

tion  fliall  betaken  with  a  view  to  this  diftribntion,
which  fhall  be  made  by  a  diet  compofcd  of  de-
puties from  all  the  different  nations  ;  but  I  di-
rect that  a  larger  proportion  fliall  be  diftributed
to  thofe  fovcreigns  who  lljall  apply  for  it  and  ap-
pear to  dcfire  it  with  no  other  view  than  to  encou-
rage population  among  their  fubjedts.

1  leave  to  the  wifdom  of  my  executors  the  care
of  extending  the  benefits  of  this  bequeft  to  the
other  parts  of  the  world ;  and  if,  by  this  means,
they  (hould  hope  to  fucceed  in  extinguilhing
throughout  the  world  the  abfurd  and  barb^ous
rage  of  war,  I  willingly  confent  that  they  appro-
priate for  this  purpofe  the  further  fum  of  one
hundred  thoufand  millions.  1  wifh  that  fix  thou-
fand  millions  may  be  offered  to  his  Majefty,  the
King  of  France  ;  namely,  a  thoufand  millions  to
fuperfede  the  necefilty  of  lotteries,  a  fort  of  tax
impofed  upon  wicked  men  which  infallibly  ren-
ders them  a  great  deal  more  wicked  ;  a  thoufand
millions  to  buy  in  all  ufelefs  offices  which  are  at-
tended with  the  fad  inconvenience  of  perfuading
many  perfons  that  it  is  a  fufficient  difcharge  of
their  duty  to  their  country  to  occupy  an  office
without  funfticns,  and  that  an  honour  may  be  de-
rived from  bearing  a  fenfelefs  title  ;  a  thoufand  mil-
lions to  buy  in  offices  which,  on  the  contrary,  are
too  important  toheleftexpofed  to  the  danger  of  ve-
nality •,  a  thoufand  millions  to  purchafe  a  domain  for
his  Majefty  worthy  of  his  crown,  and  fufficient  for
the  expences  of  his  court,  fo  that  the  nation  may
clearly  perceive  tiuu  the  taxes  impofed  upon  them
are  applicable  only  to  the  expenditures  of  the
ftate.  The  remaining  two  thoufand  millions
fhall  form  a  fund,  whofe  annual  produce  ffiall  be
employed  by  his  Majefty  in  penfions  and  gratui-
ties. By  thefe  means,  if  fometimes  thole  favours

Piould
I


[ 142 ]

fhould  be  conferred  upon  intriguing  and  iinde-
ferving  perfons,  the  nation  will  have  no  caiife
to  complain  of  the  improper  life  of  money  drawn
from  taxes  and  the  labours  of  the  hufband-
man.

I  appoint  a  thoufand  millions  towards  adding  a
thoufand  livres  to  the  fettled  income  of  all  the
clergy  in  the  kingdom,  and  600  livres  to  that
of  their  vicars,  upon  condition  that  they  no
longer  demand  fees  for  faying  maffes.  I  had.
alfo  fome  thoughts  of  propofing  to  them  the
fupprelTion  of  fees  for  baptifms,  marriages,  and
burials  -,  but  I  have  confidered  thofe  functi-
ons to  be  of  a  civil  as  well  as  religious  nature  j
and  that  on  this  account  the  clergy  may,  with-
out impropriety,  be  allowed  to  receive  a  pay
which  is,  in  fa6l,  more  moderate  than  would
be  recjuired  by  any  other  public  officers  in
their  places.  Befidcs,  this  pay,  perhaps,  ren-
ders the  fervice  more  exacl,  more  fpeedy  on
their  part,  and  lefs  irkfome  to  the  delicacy  of
fome  of  thofe  who  receive  it.

I  appoint  two  thoufand  millions  towards
forming  an  incomiC  of  ten  livres  a  month  to
all  the  children  Vvhich  fliall  be  born  in  the
kingdom  till  they  are  three  years  of  age ;  and
I  dcfire  this  legacy  to  be  increafed  to  thirty
livres  a  month  to  thoie  children  which  fhall  be
nurfed  by  their  own  mothers.  I  do  not  except
even  the  children  of  the  rich  •,  on  the  contrary,  I
invite  rich  parents  to  accept  this  donation  without
relu6tance,  as  an  honorary  prize  awarded  to  pa-
ternity and  the  cares  of  maternal  love.  They  may,
if  they  pleafe,  apply  it  to  a6ts  of  charity  and  be-
nevolence.

1  appoint  four  thoufand  millions  tov;ards
purchaiing the walle lands  of  the  kingdoiru,

Thefe


r.  '43  ]

Thefe  fliall  be  divided  into  500  thoufand  little
farms  or  tenements  of  four  or  five  acres  each.
on  which  fhall  be  eredled  as  many  commo-
dious cottages.  Thefe  500  thoufand  farms  ihall
be  given  as  freeholds  to  an  equal  number  of
married  peafants^  chofcn  in  each  parifli  by  a
veftry  compofed  often  of  the  moll  aged  inhabitants.
The  poflelibrs  of  thefe  freeholds  fhall  be  obliged
to  make  them  their  only  refidcnce,  to  cultivate
them  with  their  own  hands  and  thofe  of  their  fa-
milies, and  to  report  every  year  the  improvements
of  them  which  they  have  made.  Thei'e  freeholds
fhall  be  hereditary,  but  only  upon  condition  that
they  lliall  neither  be  divided,  nor  any  two  of
them  engroffed  by  one  perfon.  When  a  free-
holder dies  without  leaving  behind  him  either
wife,  children,  brothers,  fillers,  nephews,  or
nieces,  who  have  lived  and  laboured  with  him
for  three  years  prior  to  his  deceafe,  the  freehold
ihall  be  declared  vacant,  and  given  anew  by  the
veftry  of  the  parilh  to  that  peafant  who  fliall  ap-
pear to  deferve  it  beft.

I  defire  that  two  thoufand  millions  be  laid  out
in  purchafing  all  the  manors  of  which  there  fhall
be  fellers,  and  that  the  vafTals  thereon  be  for  ever
afterwards  exempted  from  all  fervitude  and
fealty.

Six  thoufand  millions  fliall  be  employed  in
founding  houfes  of  education  in  all  the  country
parifhes,  agreeable  to  the  plan  of  the  author  of
a  work  entitled.  Patriotic  Vieivs  refpe£fin^  the  Edu^
cation  of  the  People.  If  in  executing  this  plan
of  a  man  of  genius  and  an  excellent  citizen  it
Ihould  appear  to  want  fome  little  amendments  and
alterations,  I  dire6t  that  they  (hall  be  adopted. ^

1  appoint  20,000  millions  towards  creding  in
the  kingdom  40,000  houfes  of  labour,  or  public

work-


[ 144 ]

work-houfes  •,  to  each  of  which  fhall  be  appro-
priated from  10,000  to  50,000  livres  annual  in-
come. Every  man  and  woman  fhall  have  a  right
to  offer  themklves  at  any  time  to  be  maintained
and  employed  in  them.  I  chufe  to  fay  nothing
of  any  other  particulars  in  the  government  and
management  of  thefe  houfes-,  hoping  that  the  ideas
which  begin  to  be  formed  concerning  eftabliih-
ments  of  this  kind  will  be  perfefted  betore  the  pe-
riod fixed  for  thefe  fhall  arrive  •,  and  that  it  will
at  length  be  univerfally  acknowledged,  that
though  it  is  dangerous  and  foolifh  to  give  alms
in  money  to  a  itrong  beggar,  yet  that  iociety  has
no  right  to  deprive  him  of  his  liberty  and  inflidt
punifhments  upon  him,  while  it  does  not  hold
out  to  him  any  other  means  of  fubfiftence,  or  at
leaft  point  out  to  him  a  method  of  difcovering
"what  means  he  is  capable  of  ufing.

I  intreat  the  managers  of  thefe  public  work-
houfes  to  give  the  greatell  encouragement  to  fuch
trades  as  can  be  performed  by  women.  This  fex,
fo  dear  to  all  fenhble  minds,  has  been  negle6led
or  opprefled  by  all  our  inllitutions. — Seductions
of  all  kinds  fee(n  to  confpire  againfl  their  virtue
— NecefTity  precipitates  them  involuntarily  into  an
abyfs  of  infamy  and  miiery. — The  low  price
which  is  let  upon  the  labour  of  women  is  out  of
all  proportion  to  the  inferiority  of  their  bodily
itrength.  Let  the  public  workhoufes  fet  the  ex-
ample of  paying  them  better.

There  are  in  France  many  houfes  of  correc-
tion where  the  mifconduft  of  women  is  fe-
vcrely  punifhed,  but  where  in  reality  it  is  only
fufpended,  mere  confinemerit  having  no  tendency
to  eradicate  vice.  Why  Hiould  there  not  be  one
eftabliniment  where  a  young  woman,  conquered
by  temptation  and  on  the  brmk  of  defpair,  might

prefent


[  145  J
prefent  herfclf,  and  fay — *'  Vice  offers  me  gold ;
"  I  only  aflc  for  labour  and  bread.  In  compaffion
"  to  my  remorfe  afiift  and  ftrengthen  mc.  Open
*'  an  afylum  for  me  where  I  may  weep  without
"  being  feen,  expiate  thofe  faults  which  purfue
*'  and  overwhelm  me,  and  recover  a  fhadow  of
"  peace." — Such  an  inftitution  exifts  no  where —
I  appoint,  therefore,  a  thoufand  millions  towards
eftablilhing  one.

The  fnares  which  are  laid  by  vice  for  women
without  fortunes,  would  make  fewer  viflims  if
more  affiftance  was  given  them.  We  have  an
infinity  of  eftablifhments  for  perfons  in  the  high-
er ranks  of  life  which  do  honour  to  the  generofity
of  our  forefathers.  Why  have  we  none  for  this
purpofe  ^ — I  defire,  therefore,  that  two  thoufand
millions  be  employed  in  eftablifliing  in  the  kijig-
dom  a  hundred  hofpitals,  which  fhall  be  called
Hospitals  of  Angels.  There  fliall  be  admitted
into  each  a  hundred  females  of  the  age  of  fevcn
or  eight  years,  and  of  the  moft  engaging  forms.
They  fliall  receive  the  moft  perfedl  education  in
regard  to  morals,  ufeful  knowledge,  and  agreeable
accompliihments.  At  the  age  of  eighteen  th;fy
may  quit  the  hofpital  in  order  to  be  married  ;  at
which  period  they  fliall  each  be  paid  a  portion  ot
40,000  livres.  1  mention  this  moderate  lum  be-
caufe  it  is  my  wifh  that  they  be  neither  reproached
for  want  of  fortune,  nor  efpoufed  from  inrereft.
An  annual  income  of  2000  livres  fliall  be  given
alfo  to  their  parents.  *  *  *  *  Except  once  in  the  year
at  a  folemn  and  fplendid  procefllon,  they  fliall  rare-
ly appear  in  public,  but  fliall  be  conflantly  em-
ployed in  their  afylum  in  learning  all  that  can  ren-
der them  one  day  excellent  wives  and  mothers.

In  order  to  fit  them,  in  particular,  for  dcme/Jic

(economy^  I  deflre  that  after  they  have  been  taught

the  moft  accurate  ideas  of  expences  of  all  kinds,

U  qucilions


[ h6 ]

qucflions  be  propofed  to  them  from  time  to  time
to  which  they  fhall  be  obliged  to  give  anfwers  by
word  of  mouth,  and  alfo  in  writing  ;  as  for  ex-
ample— "  If  you  had  fnch  or  fuch  an  income,  un-
*'  der  fuch  or  fuch  circumftances,  how  much
**  would  you  appropriate  to  your  table,  your
"  houfe-rent,  your  maintenance,  and  the  educa-
"  tion  of  your  children  ?  How  many  fervants
"  would  you  keep  ?  How  much  would  you  re-
"  ferve  for  ficknefs  and  unforcfeen  expences  ?
"  How  much  would  you  confecrate  to  the  relief
*'  of  the  unfortunate  and  the  public  good  ? — If
"  your  income  depended  either  entirely  or  in  part
"  upon  a  tranfient  advantage  or  a  place  which  was
"  no\.  nJJ'uredio  you,  how  much  would  you  expend
*'  annually?  Whatfum  would  you  referve  for  form-
*'  ing  a  capital?"  &c.  &c.  Prizes  publicly  given  to
the  bed  anfwers  to  queftion's  of  this  kind  would
conftitute,  in  my  opinion,  an  exercife  equally  en-
gaging and  more  uleful  than  the  little  comedies
;ind  novels  with  which  young  perfons  in  the  high-
er flations  are  getlerally  entertained.

The  honours  conferred  upon  great  men  have
always  appeared  to  me  the  moft  effedlual  means  of
producing  great  men.  1  appoint,  therefore,  a
thoufand  millions  towards  ftriking  medals,  and
placing  in  the  halls  of  all  towns,  or  in  any  other
convenient  places,  ftatues  and  buds  in  honour  of
Juch  great  men  as  fhall  hereafter  rife  up.  I
defire  further  that  thtfe  honours  be  not  paid  them
till  ten  years  after  their  deceafe  \  and  that  they  be
decreed  and  proportioned  by  a  tribunal  compofed
of  fuch  upright,  enlightened,  and  worthy  citi-
zens, as  fnall  be  moft  likely  not  to  be  dazzled  by
fali'e  virtues. — It  has  been  once  reckoned,  that
founding  liofpitals  for  the  fick  is  one  of  the  beft
public  Icrvices. For  fome  years  a  convidion  has

been


[  U7  ]
been  gaining  ground,  that  breathing  the  pefti-
lential  air  of  hofpitals  doubles  the  danger  of  di-
ieales ;  and  that  on  this  and  other  accounts  they
probably  dejlroy  more  lives  than  they  fave.  I  de-
fire,  therefore,  that  10,000  millions  be  employed
in  eflablifliing  in  each  parifli  of  the  kingdom
hotifes  of  heaUh^  in  which  fhall  be  maintained  a
phyfician,  a  fufgeon,  and  a  convenient  numbcrr
ot  fillers  of  charity  and  nurfes.  Thefe  houfes
fhall  fupply  the  fick  gratis  in  their  own  houlcs
with  every  afliltance  in  food  and  medicine,  and
none  fhall  be  taken  to  the  houfe  of  health  except-
ing thole  whom  it  fhall  be  impoffible  to  aflift  at
home.

I  have  hitherto  only  directed  the  em.ployment
of  about  two  hundred  thoufand  millions.  There
remain  ftill  ncar/(7«r  millions  of  millions^  the  appro-
priation of  which  1  leave  to  the  difcretion  of  iny
executors.  I  wifh  them  to  purchafe  and  pall
down  all  fuch  houfes  as  incommode  the  public
way  in  all  towns;  to  multiply  fquares,  quays,
fountains,  gardens,  &c.  in  order  to  give  falubrity
to  the  air  of  towns  •,  to  empty  ponds ;  to  clear
heaths  •,  to  deepen  the  beds  of  rivers  fo  as  to  render
them  navigable,  and  to  unite  them  by  means  ot
canals; — in  a  word,  I  wifh  them  to  co-operate  in
every  polFible  method  with  nature,  which  feems
to  have  defigned  France  *  to  be  the  moft  delightful
country  under  heaven.

U  2  I  hope

*  France,  undoubtedly,  pcfTelTes  fome  of  the  beft  Wi7-
/arrt/ advantages,  and  is  a  great  kingdom.  But  it  wants
the  firft  of  all  advantages.  It  wants  a  fice  conltita'ion  of
government.  It  wants  civil  and  religions  liberty.  B-^itain
enjoys  thefe  bleffings  j  and  this,  though  lefs  than  a  fourth  \
of  France  in  extent  and  populrition,  gives  it  a  vait  pre-
eminence. May  thefe  bleHings  be  foon  recovered  by  one  ct
thefe  countries,  and  never  lolt  by  the  other.  — '2  ?v?/.y7tj/tr';
note.


[ M-S ]

I  hope  that  all  good  citizens  will  afTift  my  exe-
cutors in  the  choice  of  fuch  iifeful  eftablifhments
as  (hall  yet  remain  to  be  formed.  I  call  upon
them  to  publiih  the  ideas  with  which  patriotic
zeal  may  infpire  them,  nnce  now  they  are  en-
couraged by  the  confoling  certainty  that  funds
for  executing  them  cannot  be  v;anting.

I  name  for  executors  my  deareft  and  beft  friends

M.  M. [Here the  teftator

names  fix  executors,  who  do  not  think  proper  at
prefcnt  to  reveal  themfclves,  and  then  goes  on  as
follows],

I  beg  of  them  to  meet  as  often  as  the  affairs  of
my  executorfliip  fliall  recjuire.  In  cafe  of  an  equal
divifion  of  opinions,  the  oldeft  fliall  have  the  caft-
ino;  vote.  When  one  of  them  dies,  I  defire  the
furvivors  to  fill  the  vacancy,  as  foon  as  may  be,
with  the  moft  honeft,  zealous,  and  difinterefted
citizen  of  their  acquaintance,  and  to  proceed  in
this  manner  for  ever.  I  hope  that  during  the  firft
years  of  their  executordiip,  when  the  operations
of  the  fund  will  be  eafy,  they  will  tranfadl  in  this
bufinefs  out  of  regard  to  me  and  to  the  public.  I
forefee  that,  in  procefs  of  time,  the  furns  to  be  laid
out  will  become  fo  immenfely  great,  as  to  render
neceffary  voyages  and  other  confiderable  expences,
which  will  be  produdive  of  no  profit.  For  this
reafon  I  have  left  125,000  livres  of  the  fecond
fum  unappropriated',  of  the  third  71 1,000  •,  and
of  the  fourth  thirty-two  millions.  Thele  fums  I
requeft  them  to  accept  as  a  compenfation  for
their  expences  and  trouble.  I  charge  them  al-
ways, as  far  as  they  can,  without  hazarding  the
fecurity  of  the  fund,  to  prefer  thofe  ways  of  lay-
ing out  the  accumulating  fums  which  fliall  be
moft  ferviceable  to  individuals  and  the  public.

If  a  reduflion  in  the  rate  of  intereft,  or  any  un-

forefecn  lofies,  fliould  injure  the  fundjfo  as  to  re-

5  card


[ 149 ]

tard  its  increafe,  the  execution  of  my  defires  need
only  be  poftponed  in  proportion  to  the  interrup-
tion that  fhall  happen.

May  the  fuccefs  of  thefe  eftablifliments  caufe
one  day  a  few  tears  to  be  fhed  on  my  grave.  But
above  all,  may  the  example  of  an  obfcure  indivi-
dual *  kindle  the  emulation  of  patriots,  princes,
and  public  bodies ;  and  engage  them  to  give  at-
tention to  this  new  but  powerful  and  infallible
means  of  ferving  pofterity,  and  contributing  to
the  future  improvement  and  happinefs  of  the
world.

*  During  the  printing  of  this  Will,  the  Gazette  de  Frame
announced  a  legacy  of  the  fame  kind,  which  will  prove  to
oar  readers  that  thofe  ideas  may  fometimes  be  realized.
"  We  read  in  fome  of  our  papers  a  very  fingular  fai^.  Judge
"  Normand,  of  Norwich,  who  died  1724,  made  a  will,  in  \
"  which  he  bequeathed  4000I.  fterling  towards  building  in  60
*'  years,  from  that  time,  a  charity  fchool,  to  the  founding
**  of  which  the  principal,  and  its  accumulating  intereft,
*'  during  this  period,  fhould  be  appropriated.  His  further
"  difpofitions  fix  the  number  of  fcholars  to  120,  regulates
"  their  meals  for  every  day  in  the  week,  each  to  have  for
^'  dinner  on  Sunday  a  pound  of  roafl:  beef,  and  in  the  even-
**  ing  ten  ounces  of  plum-pudding.  He  invells  the  ma-
•'  nageraent  of  this  fchool  in  the  Billiop,  the  Chancellor,
"  the  Dean,  the  four  members  for  the  city  and  county,  and
"  eight  clergymen.  The  period  determined  upon  for  the
"  execution  of  this  Will  expired  in  the  month  of  May,  and
•'  the  accumulated  fum  amounts  to  74,000!.  fterling."

Gaxttte  de  France,  Friday,  Aug,  13,  1784. No.  65.


TABLES.


[ '50 ]


iiiiiimniiitinMiiiiiimnniiaw


TABLES.


No. I.  *

Table  of  the  Produce  of  a  Sujji  of  lOO  Lhres^
with  its  accwmdating  Inter ejl^  during  loo  Tears,
at  5  per  Cent.


Years.

lOO

Int. 5

s.

d.

Years.

4
5
6

Int. 5

J". ^,
^5 3
«5 9

I

105
5

5

0

121
6

1 1  — ■■
I 6

2

110

5

5
10

3

127
6

12 6

7 6

3

H5

15

3

»34


* Rule  yir an eafy  Cowverjion of Li'vres into Pounds
Sterling.

Strike  off  from  the  number  of  livres  the  two  figures  on
the  right  hand,  and  multiply  by  4  the  remaining  figures*
The  produdl  increafed  by  a  tenth  of  itfelf  will  give  nearly
the  number  of  pounds  anfwering  to  the  Humber  of  livres.

Thus.  100,000  livres  are  equal  nearly  to  4000  multiplied
by  4,  and  the  product  (4000)  increafed  by  400.  That  is,
they  are  equal  to  4400/.

In  like  manner,  1,725,768  livres  are  equal  to  17,257
multiplied  by  4,  and  the  produft  (69,028)  increaied  by
6902.  That  is,  they  are  equal  10  75,930/. — Trarjlator'.-
»tQte%


[ 151 ]


Years.

;^. S. d.

Int. 6 14  —

Years

51

&c.

60

61
&c.

70

71

&c.

80
81

&c.

90
91

&c.
99

100

{. s. d.

U45  14  —

Int. 57 5 6

7

140 14  - —
7  - 6

1202 19 6

8

147 14. 6
776

1866 3  —
93 6  —

9

^55 2  —
7  ^5

1959 9  -.

lO

162 17  —

3039 13 9
151 19 6

20

265 4  ^
135  —

3191 ^3 3

21

278 9  —

4951 4 6
247  II  —

30

431 18  —
21 II 9

519S 15 6

31

&c.

453 9 9

8064  18 9
403 4 9

40

703 s 3

35 3 3
738 II 6

8468 3 6

41

12511 5 9
625 II 3

50

1145  14

i3'i3^  »7  —

OBSERVATIONS.

We  found  among  the  papers  of  the  late Af.
Ricard  a  great  number  of  very  curious  tables,  but


[ 152 ]

they  have  not  been  inferted  here  becaufe  they  had.
no  direft  relation  to  the  obiedt  of  his  Will.  He
had  computed  the  produce  of  a  Aim  of  loo  livres,
with  the  accumulated  intereft  of  loo  years,  ac-
cording to  the  different  rates  of  intereft-,  and  the
refults  varied  much  more  than  could  be  believed
from  the  proportion  of  thofe  different  rates.

Intereft  at  4per  cent,  gives 50"]

at  g per  cent. — 1 3 1  I  times  theori-
at 6  per  cent. — 339  1 &^""^  ^'^''^•

?it  loper  cent. — i3,78oJ

From  hence  it  follows,  that  if  the  operations
are  well  managed,  and  the  money  laid  out  to  ad-
vantage, even  by  finking  the  principal,  (as  is
done  in  the  fund  for  the  30  girls  of  Geneva)  and
converting  afterv/ards  the  annual  produce  into
capitals,  the  executors  might  confiderably  accele-
rate the  accomplifhment  of  the  benevolent  dif-
pofitions  of  the  teftator.

By  laying  out  the  money  every  three  months,
as  is  the  cuftom  in  fome  commercial  places,  the
operations  might  alfo  be  accelerated,  although
but  in  a  fmall  degree.

REMARK, by  the  Translator.

Thefe  obfervations  fliew  that  M.  Ricard  was
himfelf  pofTefTcd  in  a  high  degree  of  that  know-
ledge of  arithmetic  which  he  has  required  in  the
comptrollers-general  (p.  139)  as  a  condition  of
the  redemption  of  the  debts  of  France.  In  the  laft
paragraph,  however,  there  is  an  incorrcclnefs  which
Ihews  that  he  had  not  attended  fufficiently  to  07te
circumftance  in  the  improvement  of  money  by
compound  intereft.  This  will  appear  from  the
following  calculations.

One


[ ^53 ]
One  hundred  livres  will  amount,  if  improved
at  5  per  cent,  intereft,

Paid yearly.  Half-yearly.

Livres.  Livres.

Iniooyearsto  131,501  ^ i39'5^o

In  500  years  to  3",932,4oo',ooo,ooo— 5",z96,ioo',ooo,ooo

Paid  quarterly.
In  100  years  to  143.890  livres.

In  500  years  to  6", 1 66, ooo'ooo, 000  livres.

By  direaing,  therefore,  that  the  laft  hundred
livres  fllould  be  improved  at  5  pr  cent,  quarterly
intereft,  M.i?/V^ri  might  have  gained  an  addition-
al fum  equal  to  2",234,ooo',ooo,ooo  livres-,  that  is,
nearly  equal  to  a  hundred  thoufand  millions  fterling,
which  is  a  fum  more  than  fufficient  to  encompafs
the  earth  with  a  belt  of  guineas  all  clofe  and  five
feet  broadi

No.  II.

'Table  of  the  Produce  of  each  Sum  of  100  Livres,  he-
queathed  by  the  "Tefiator,  from  one  hundred  to  five
hundred  Years.

It  has  been  proved  by  the  preceding  table,  that
a  fum  of  100  livres,  with  the  intereft  accumu-
latino-  at  5  pr  cent,  for  100  years,  will  produce
iq,n6//i;.  17/m.  By  multiplying  this  fum  by
itfelf  four  times  fucceffively,  it  will  appear  that
the  following  fums  are  the  produce  of  each  100
livres  at  the  end  of  each  century.

Li'V. JOU.S  den,

i"'°.  Produce  of  100  livres,  with
the  accumulated  intereft  du-

<.  1^,1  36 17  —

ring  100  years -  -  j' j /

2".  Produce  of  100  livres,  with

the  intereft,  during  200  years, - i,725'70» 5

'lO,  Produce of  100 livres in  ^  o  f.

^  :  226,711,509 »2 o

300  years  -  ^  ■^■^ >/ 'j >'

4.O. Produce  of 100  livres in  „ ^ /- , ,

400  years  -  -.  29,782,761.461 13  -

c". Produce of loo livres in  , ,- -


[ ^54 j


No.  IIL

Table  of  the  Difpojition  of  the  frfi Sum,  amount-
ing to  13,136  livres  1 7  fans.

Litres  fous  den.
A  prize  of  -  -  -  4,000  —  —

Three  others  of  600  Hvres  each -  - 1,800

An  edition  of  the  Prize  Difcourfe,  extrads

from  the  three  others,  with  50,000  copies 7,336 17  -r-


Total  13,136  17


No.  IV.


Table of  the  Difpofition  of  the  fecond  Siiniy a-
moiinting  to i^yic^^'] 6% livres  ^fous  bden.

Linjres fous  den..
A  fund  for  80  prizes  of  100  livres  each, 1,600,000  —  —
Referved  towards  defraying  the  expcnccs

of  the  executors,  -  - -  125,768 5 6

Total  1,725,768 5 6

No.  Y.

Table  of  the  Difpofrtion  of  the  third  Sumy  amount-
z>/^  /i?  2  2 1) ,  7  n ,  5  8  9  liv.  1 2  fous  6  den .

Lifres fous  den.

Five  hundred  patriotic  banks  for  lend-
ing money  without  intereft  -  196,000,000  —  —

Building  12  mufeums  at  500,000  liv.
each  -  6,000,000  I

Fund for an annual income of  s 30,000,000  —  • — :
100,000 livres for each mufe-  i
um  -  -  24,000,000''

Refervcd  towards  dcfiaying  the  cxpences

pf  the  executors  -  -  711,589 12 6

Total  226,71 1,589 12  6
r  During  the  three yenrs emplcyed  in building
the  mtrieums,  the  income  of  109,000  livres  is  to  be
3aid  by. towards purchaHng  the  library, the  ca-
binets,


[ '55 J
bjnets,  the  carriages,  the  horfes,  and  ail  the  fiirni.
ture  of  the  mufeuni. Afterwards  it  is  to  be  em-
ployed as  follows.


Table-expence?  for  the  40  members  of  the  mufe- '
um,  the  fix  fecrecarics,  the  defigner,  the  en-
graver, and  all  thedomellics,  coachmen,  cooks,
gardeners,  &c.

Salaries of  the  fecretaries,  defigner,  engraver,
and  wages  of  the  domeiHcs,

Ex'pences  of  the  ftable  and  carriages.

The  library  and  cabinets,

Repairs  of  the  building  and  furniture,

JMnting  and  unforefeen  expences.


50,000


12,000
10,000

IO,OGO

8,oco

10, COO


Total  100,000

No.  VI.

Table  of  the  Difpofition  of  the  ^th  Sumy  amounting
to  29,782,761,461 //ly.  I'ifous,

Towards  building  lop  towns,  containing  each  of
thcin  150,000  fouls.

In  order  that  thefe  towns  may  be  wholefome  and  convenient,
it  will  be  proper  to  confecrate  to  eaoh  of  them  a  very  large
circular  piece  of  ground,  containing  6000  acres  ;  which  be-
ing eftimated  at  the  higheft,  may  be  valued  at  1000  livres
each  acre.  By  judging  from  the  towns  which  now  exifl,
there  will  not  be  required  more  than  from  4,  to  5000  houfes
for  150,000  inhabitants;  but  it  is  not  conducive  to  the
health  of  mankind,  to  be  fo  crowded  together.  I  fuppofe
then  that  each  of  thefe  towns  may  contain  7500  houfes  *,
which,  one  with  the  other,  will  coft  35000  livres  in  build-
ing. Each  town  will  cpft


Six thoufand  acres  of  ground  at 1000

livres  per  acre
7,500  houfes,  at  35,000  livres  each  houfe
Public  buildings,  town  houfes,  bridges,

churches,  &c.  _  _  -


Li'Vres. fous.

6,000,000  —
262,400,000  —

29,000,000  —


Total  297,500,000  —


*  It  would  have  been  much  better  if  M.  Ricard  had  al-
lowed a  houfe  for  every  family,  which  would  have  made  the
number  of  houies  about  30000.

The


t h6 1

Li'vres.  forts.

The  preceding  fum  multiplied  into  ibo,

gives  -  -  -  29,750,000,000  —

P.eferveJ towards defraying the ex-

pences  of  the  executors,  -  32,761,461 13

Total,  29^782,761,461 13

No.  VII.

Table  of  the  Difpofition  of  the  ^th  Sum,  amounting
fo 3,9 1 2,5 1 6, 739,074  liv.  I  sfoiis  3  de7u

The  national  debt  of  France, - 6 thoufand millions.

■  of  England, 12

A  fund  towards  dividing  annually
J 5  hundred  thoufand  livres  a-
mong  the  pacific  powers  of  Eu-
rope, -  -  30

A  fimilar  diftributlon  among  all
the  powers  of  the  world, - 100

Abolition  of  lotteries,  ~  1

Extinftion  of  ufelefs  offices, - • i

Suppreffion  of  venality  in  offices  of
of  importance,  -  1

A  domaine  to  be  offered  to  his  Ma-
jefty,  -  -  -  I

A  fund  to  be  employed  in  annui-
ties and  penfions,  -  2

An  addition  to  the  fettled  ftipends
of  the  clergy,  -  I

Allowance  to  children  under  three
years  of  age, - - - 2

A  foundation  for500,GOofmall_/>-ff-
holds  with  commodious  cottages, 4

Enfranchifement  of  vaffials, - 2

Foundations  for  houfes  of  educati-
on for  the  people,  -  -  6

Houfes  of  induftry,  -  20

Afylums  for  penitentyoung  women, 1

Hofpitals  of  Angels,  -  2

Statues,  bulls,  and  public  honours, I

Houfes  of  health,  -  10

Total  of  appropriated  funis, 203

Remain  unappropriated, 3,709,516,739,074  15 ^

Total,  3,912,516,739,074  15 3

FINIS.


w-


«
