it^P^M


S2a  a  03  £^  ,i£iu  Q3. '52'

OK  TllK

AT

PRINCETON, N.  J.
SAMUEL AONEW^,

OF P  JII  I.  A  n  E  I,  P  H  I  A  , PA.


'/e2.


©^.


PTT/tn/i/cJ^  y^r^^-/^^^.


■  ^  <rt— =-o  e<?*^"?  S<*rr:>-''?  "^P


!]■ 6Ve.Sf^ Division ...l|^.--

^: Shelf r ^ ,.  f

/,  ^  Sec  ion A


I


1


f


^^


X


^^^


^y^


■■■:?r-'.:^''


y


'-^^'i^


FOUR


DISSERTATIONS'


I. On providence.
11.  On prayer.

III.  On  the  Reasons  for  expe6ling  that  virtuous^
Men ihali meet after  Death in a  iState of  %
'Happinels. ■

IV.  On  the  Importance  of-  Christianity,
the  Nature  of  Historical  Evidence,
and  Miracles.


By RICHARD'^RICE, F.R.S


LONDON:

Printed  for  A.  Millar  and  T.  Cadell,  oppofite  to
Catherine- Street,  in  the  Strand.

/
M  DCC  LXVII.  /


Publified  by  the  fame  Author^
Printed  for  A.  Millar  and  T.  Cadell  in  the  Strand^

A  Review  of  the  principal  Queftions-  and  Difficul-
ties in  Morals  ;  particularly,  thofe  relating  to
the  Original  of  our  Ideas  of  Virtue,  its  Nature,  Foun-
dation, Reference  to  the  Deity,  Obligation,  Subjedl-
matter  and  San6lions.  In  One  Volume  06tavo,
Price  65.


[  iii  j


ADVERTISEMENT.

THE Author  hasibeftowed
fo  much  pains  on  Ithe  Firjl
of the following Dijftrtations^
that  he hopes  it will  \^ found
worthy  of  careful  attenticb. His
view  in  the  Second  and  T/)rd  Dif-
feriations is in  a  great ^eafure
PraElical\  and  he  begs  tHs  may
be  remembered,  and  that  futable
allowances may be made  when
they are read. He  wi{hes\ear-
neftly  to  be  able  to  contribut  to-
wards advancing the interei  of
virtue  and  rational  religion  in^he
world  ; and  he  will  think t^t
his  life  has  been  fpent  to  a  vali
A  2


m


^•>'i»«'  "'i^>«"v


[ i^ ]

ble  purpofe,  fhould  he  ever  fuc-
ceed  in  this  in  the  fmalleft  de-
gree-

The  Fourth  DilTertation  is de-
fio-ried  chiefly  in  anfwer  to  an  ob-
ledion againft Chriftianity, on
which  conflderable  ftrefs  has  been
laid. I'  is, perhaps,  too foreign
to  the  main end  of  this work*
There  cannot, however,  be  any-
great  impropriety  in giving  it  a
place-iere.


CO  N-


[  ?:Vr ']

CONTENT S.


ypfi


DISSEllTATION L

On Pro  YiJD  e;^  CE.


Sc6t.  I.  /^.F  the  Argumejtts  for  Providence
from  the  Ferfeclions  of  the  Deity.

P-  3

Seft.  IT.  Of  the  Arguments  for  Providence
from  the  gejieral  Laws  and  Conjlitution  of
the  World.  ?•  23

Sed.  III.  Of  the  Marnier  in  which  Providence
is  admi?iijlered,  p.  60

Sed.  IV.  Of  the  Ob] eBions  againjl  Providence.

p.  89

Sea.  V.  Of  the  Ufes  of  tkeDo5lrine  of  Pro-
vidence^ p. 162

D  I  S  S  E  R.


vi  C  O  ^  T  E  ll  T  S.

DISSERTATION II

On Prayer.  3

Secfl.  L  T'he  Nature y  Reafonablenefs  and  Effi*
cacy  of  Prayer  explained^  and  the  Obje5iiont
to  it  anfwered.  p. 1 97

Sedt.  II.  Of  the  Importance  of  Prayer  as  an

inftnmental  t)uty,  the  Happinefs  of  a  de*
vout  Temper  and  the  particular  Obligation
to  Public  Worjhip.  P-  230

Sedl.  III.  Of  the  Manner  in  'which  Prayer
ought  to  be,  performed.  p.  276

DISSERTATION III.

On  the  Reafons  for  expecting  that  virtuous
Men  fiall  meet  after  Death  in  a  State  of
Happinefs.  P-  3^1

DISSERTATION IV.

Oil  the  Nature  of  Hlftorical  Evidence  and

Miracles.
Sea.  I.  IntroduBory  Obfervations  relating  to

the  Importance  of  Chrijiianity,  its  Eviden-
ces^


CONTENTS.  vii

cesy  and  the  ObjeBions  which  have  been  made
to  it.  P-S^^

Seft.  II. ^he  Nature  and  Grounds of  the

Regard  due  to  Experience^  and  to  the  Evi^

.  ^dence  of  Tefimonyy  fated  and  compared,

p.  384

Se<a.  III.  Of  the  Credibility  of  Miracles,  and
the  Force  of  Tejlimony  when  employed  to
prove  them.  P*  4^3

Conclufon.  P«  4^6


^01 . ii  S


DISSER«


•-■1  a


2ia


DISSERTATION I.


O N


PROVIDENCE.


B


DISSERTATION I.


O N


PROVIDENCE.


SECTION. L

Of  the  arguments  for  Providence  fro?n  the
perfections  of  the  Deity,

IT  cannot  but  be  a  matter  of  anxious
enquiry  with  every  confiderate  per-
fon,  how  far  he  has  reafon  to  think
well  of  that  w^orld  in  which  he  exifts,
and  of  its  laws  and  adminillration.  If
about  this  no  fatisfa^flion  can  he  ob-
tained, there  will  he  an  end  of  ajl  the
chief  comforts  and  hopes  of  reafonable
beings.  The  courfe  of  events  mull:  be
viewed  with  fufpicion,  and  the  world
conten>plated  with  difguft  and  pain.
B  2  T-e


4  0>^ Providence.

The  dodlrine  of  Providence,  therefore,
is  plainly  of  the  hioheft  importance ;
^nd  the  v^riter  of  the  following  Differ-:
tation  can  v^ant  no  apology  for  attempt-
ing to  aiTift  in  explaining  and  defending
it,  though  he  fhould  fall  iliort  of  his
aim,  and  be  able  to  do  no  more  than
^ew  a  good  intention,  and  perhaps  en-
gage a  few  to  join  with  hini  in  care-
fully reviewing  a  fubjedt  that  cannot  top
often  employ  our  thoughts.

What  I  ihall  begin  with  will  be  an  ac-
count of  fome  of  the  principal  argu-
ments that  prove  an  unerring  Provi-
dence.

If  it  can  be  proved  that  the  Deity
^dminiil-er$  all  the  affairs  of  the  world,
and  extends  his  care  to  every  created
being  in  fuch  a  manner  that  nothing
hard  or  oppreffive,  nothing  inconfiftent
with  rectitude  and  v/ifdom  in  the  go-
vernment of  events  ever  comes  to  pafs  y
or,  in  other  words,  if  it  can  be  proved
-^  f^  that


O.^ Providence.  ^

^*  that  all  the  occurrences  in  nature  are
^^  under  perfedly  wife  and  good  direc-
*^  tion  /*  then  the  docftrine  of  Provi-
dence, -in  the  higheft  and  ftritteil:  f^nfc
of  it,  will  be  eflablifhed.

There  are  two  ways  of  proving  this*
One,  from  the  conlideration  of  the  Di-
vine perfedtions.  The  other,  from  what
falls  under  our  notice  of  the  frame  and
conftitution  of  the  world.  Let  us  firft
confider  the  evidence  arifing  from  the
former  of  thefe  heads.

We  have  the  beft  reafons  for  afcrib-
ing  to  the  Deity  all  poffible  excellence ;
or  for  conceiving  of  the  firft  caufe  as  a
being  abfolutely  perfed:.  In  the  idea  of
abfolute  perfedlion  is  implied  infinite
power,  wifdom,  and  goodnefs ;  and  in
thefe,  fuch  a  providence  over  all  things
as  has  been  mentioned.  The  Deity  can-
not be  an  indifferent  fpedator  of  the  fe-
fies  of  events  in  that  world  to  which  he
has  given  being.  His  goodnefs  will  as
B  3  certainly


6  On Providence.

certably.  engage  him  to  dircd  them  a-
greeably  to  the  ends  of  goodnefs,  as  his
wifdomand  power enable  him to do  it
in  the  mofl  effedual  manner. Thus  we
muft  conclude  according  to  all  our  ideas
of  thefe  attributes. Could  we call  that
being  good  who  would  refufe  to  do  any
good  which  he  is  able  to  do  without  the
leajft  labour  or  difficulty  ? — God  is  prefent
every  where. He  fees  all  that  happens  -,
and  it  is  in  his  power,  with  perfeft  eafe,
to  order  all  for  the  beft. Can he then
poiTefs goodnefs,  and  at the  fame  time
not  do  this  ? — I  am, fjppofe,  in afflic-
tion.- The  author  of  mj' exiftence,  who
is almighty  and righteous, knows my
condition,  and  fees,  what  I  feel. Would
he,  if  he. fa w  that  my  afflidlion  is  im-
proper,  or  that- 1  labour  under  any  real
grievance, fuffer it  for one moment  ?
'Tis  utterly  impoflible. — A  God  without
a  Providence  is  undoubtedly  a  contradic-
tion. Nothing  is  plainer  than  that  a  be-
ing of  perfect reafon  will,  in  every  in-
ilaoce,  take  fuch  care  of  the  unlverfe  as

perfecft


On Providence.  j

pcrfed:  reafon  requires.  That  fuprem6
intelligence  and  love  which  are  prefent
to  all  things,  and  from  w^hence  all  things
fprung,  muft  govern  all  occurrences,
and  exclude  from  the  conftitution  of  na-
ture all  real  ill  and  diforder.

Thefe  eonfiderations,  it  fhould  be  ob^
ferved,  prove  what  has  been  called  a
particular  in  oppofition  to  a  general  Pro-*
vidence.  We  cannot  conceive  of  any
reafons  that  can  influence  the  Deity  to
exereife  any  providence  over  the  world,
which  are  not  likewife  reafons  for  ex-
tending it  to  all  that  happens  in  the
worldi  As  far  as  it  is  confined  to  gene-
rals, or  overlooks  any  individual,  or  any
event,  it  is  incomplete,  and  therefore
unfuitable  to  the  idea  of  a  perfeft  Be-
ing.

A great deal  of  very  foolifh  ridicule

has  been  thrown  on  this  fubjedl,  and  {c-'

veral  objedtions  have been  made, which

prove no more than the ignorance of

B  4.  thofe


8  On Providence.

thofe  who  make  them.  It  will  be  pro-
per here  diftindly  to  take  notice  of  fome
of  thefe.

•  One  common  prejudice  againft  this
dodrine  arifes  from  the  apprehenfion
that  it  is  below  the  dignity  of  the
Deity  to  watch  over,  in  the  man-
ner it  implies^  the  meaneft  beings,  and
all  the  minuteft  affairs.  In  anfwer  to
this  it  may  be  obferved,  that  -a  great
number  of  minute  affairs,  if  they  are
each  of  them  ofyi/;?^  confequence  5  make
«p  a  fum  which  is  oi  great  confequence  |.
and  that  there  is  no  way  of  taking
care  ot  this  fum^,.  without  taking  care
of  each  particular.  Whatever  events
indeed  are  ^wholly  frivolous^  it  would  be
•s.bfurd  to  fuppofe  the  Deity  to  concern
himfclf  about.  Such  events  want  no
dlred;ion.  They  are  capable  of  no  di-
:re«5lion.  But,  on  the  contrar}'',  all  e-
¥'2nt3,  not  wholly  frivolous,  are  proper
Qbje(5t3  of  attention;  and  what  would
'fee  really  degrading  to  the  univerfal  pa-
rent is^  not  his  watching  over,  but  neg-
lecting


On  'Providence.  9

lefting  them.  This  objection,  therefore,
under  the  appearance  of  honouring  God,
plainly  difhonours  him.  Nothing  is  ab-
folutely  trifling  wherein  the  happinefs  of
any  individual,  even  the  moft  iniignifi-
cant,  is  at  all  concerned :  nor  is  it  be-
neath a  wife  and  good  Being  to  interpofe
in  any  thing  of  this  kind.  To  fuppofe
the  Deity  above  this,  is  to  fuppofe  him
above  adting  up  to  the  full  extent  of
goodnefs  and  reditude.

The  fame  eternal  benevolence  that  firft
engaged  him  to  produce  beings,  cannot
but  engage  him  likewife  to  exercife  a  par-
ticular providence  over  them;  and  the
very  loweft  beings,  as  well  as  the  high-
eft,  feem  to  have  a  kind  of  right  to  his
fuperintendency^  from  the  very  ad:  of
bringing  them  into  exhlence.  Every  ap-
preheniion  tliat  this  is  too  great  a  con-
defcenfion  in  him,  is  founded  on  the
pooreft  ideas ;  for  furely,  whatever  it
was  not  too  great  a  condefcenfion  in
him  to  create,  it  cannot  be  too  great  a
3  conde-


lO  0/^ P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.

condelcenfion  in  him  to  take  care  of  ^i
It  is  proper  to  add,  that  with  refped  to

God

'Trct^ayoLyzii',  co^i  kolto,  vtAvrct  TfOTTov  dd^vvcnop  (jlH
vrpoyont^sLi  vToBin  ra.  i/t'  olvth  'PreLpety^^iVTet-  Sim.
Comment. Cap.  38.

Some  of  the  obfervations  which  have  been  made
above  may  be  found  alfo  in  Plato's  well-known  lOth
Dialogue  of  Laws.  In  this  dialogue  Plato  teaches
excellently  that  (fince  what  is  felf- moving  is,  by
its  nature,  before  that  which  moves  only  in  confe-
quence  of  being  moved)  mind  muft  he  prior  to  mat-^
tey\  and  the  caufeof  all  its  modifications  and  changes;
and  that,  therefore,  there  is  an  univerfal  min<l  poileft
of  all  perfeclion,  which  produced  and  which  a£luate^

all  things hl  yz  jfov n^y^fjuvtov ovS'^cjtof  a/a^^

Xiy<itv  »  '^c/.<jvv  'JL^^rrw  ^yj^vTav  A-vyjw  iT<i^iay'-tv  'Trd.vrct,
—After  this  he  {hews  that  the  Deity  exercifes  a  parti^
cular  providence  over  the  world,  taking  care  of  fniaU
no  lefs  than  great  things.  Q^  i^iu-tKni  auiKpm  njt
Pui,  ovy^  m^op  »  Ticv  fj.eyiQit  J'i^(f):ov.-Teov^  In  proving
this  he  obferves,  *'  that  a  fuperior  nature  of  fuch
*'  excellence  as'  the  Divine,  which  hears,  fees,  and
"  knows  all  things,  cannot  in  any  inftance  be  fuD-
"  ject  to  negligence  or  lloth  ;  that  the  meaneit  and
*'  the  greatelt  parts  of  the  world  are  all  equally  his
*'  work  or  pofleliion  ;  that  great  things  cannot  be
*'  ri"-htly  taken  care  of  without  taking  care  of
**  fmall  i and  ihat,  in  all  cafes,  the  more  able  and

"  perica

3


0;^ Providence.  ii

God  all  the  diftinCtions  of  high  and  low
in  the  creation  vanilh.  All  beings  are
infinitelyy  that  is,  eqtiallyy  inferior  to
him.

Another  prejudice  by  which,  probab-
ly, the  minds  of  many  are  affetfled  on
this  fubjed:,  arifes  from  the  notion,  that
it  muft  be  fome  trouble  to  the  Deity  to
fuperintend  and  diredl  all  the  immenfe
variety  of  events  in  the  univerfe.  It  is
not  eafy  in  this  inftance  to  avoid  con-
ceiving of  God  as  like  ourfelves,  and  to
remove  all  human  imperfecftions  from
our ideas of  him. We fhould fludy

*'  perfecSl  any  artift  Is  (as  a  phyfician,  an  architect,
*••  or  the  ruler  of  a  ftate)  the  more  his  fkill  and  care
"  appear  in  little  as  well  as  great  things.  Let  us
not  then  (fays  he)  conceive  of  God  as  worfe  than
*'  even  mortal  artifts."  Ot/J'e  ya.^  ctvzv  (Tfxnt^eov  ra?
piyet^ai  octatv  oi  hSoKayoi M^ov^ su K^fSrat //«

791'  yi  BiOV  £t^lCi}<TCOfy.iV  'TTOli BfHTUy S'niJ.lOV^yCOV  tpctVKQTi'

pot  :  01 Trt  '7rfoff)]KovTdL  avToii  '.pyA  OffU  '7ri{  AV  A^ilVOVi

itett  (jiiyctxct  ct-jipyet^ovTcti.  The  chapter  laSimplU
cius  juft  quoted  contains  many  obfervations  fimilar
to  thefc,  and  well  defcrves  to  be  confulted.

this


14  O;? P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E*

this  as  much  as  we  can,  and  take  caf<§
always  to  remember  that  the  whole  of
poffibility  is  alike  eafy  to  mjinite  power
and  knowledge ;  and  that  it  is  a  contra-
diftion  to  imagine  that  they  can  be  ever
encumbered  or  perplexed.

But  the  objection  of  moft  confequence
is  that  taken  from  the  fuppofed  incon-
fiftency  of  a  particular  providence  with
the  liberty  of  reafonable  agents,  and  the
general  laws  of  the  world.  This  objec-
tion may  be  feen  excellently  anfwered  irt
7he  'Religion  of  Nature  delineated,  Sedl.  V.
Svhere  it  is  fhewn,  how  by  fecret  influx
ences  on  the  minds  of  men ;  by  the  in-
troduSion  of  different  charadlers  on  the
ftage  of  the  world  at  proper  times,  and
in  proper  places ;  by  the  miniftry  of  in-^
vifible  beings,  and  a  fuitable  adjuftment
of  phyfical  and  moral  caufes  and  events
to  one  another,  it  may  be  poffible,  con-
fiftently  with  the  laws  of  nature  and
the  liberty  of  mankind,  to  direft  all  oc-
currences in  fuch  a  manner,  that  nothing

on


Qu P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  a*  J  3

on  the  whole  unfit  to.be  allowed,  or  un-
ftiitable  to  any  cafe,  fliall  come  to  pafs.
—  In  fliort :  Concerning  every  event  wq
may  realbn  thus.  Either  it  is  of  impor-i
tance,  or.  it  is  not.  As  far  as  it  is.  not  of  im-
portance, fo  far  it  is  no  object  of  concern
to  any  being.  As  far,  on  the  contrary,
as  it  is  of  importance,  either  in  itfclf,  or
its  circumftances,  or  oa  account  of  its  in-,
fluence  on  other  events^  fo  far,  as:  aK
ready  obferved,  it  is  worthy  of  notice
and  regard,  and  it  would  imply  imper-
fe(ftion  in  the  adminiftration  of  nature
that  the  courfe  of  events  fhould  be  fo  re-
gulated as  to  admit  it, .  fuppofing  it  oa
any  account  not  proper  ta  be  admitted^
— The  opinion  that  fuch  a  particularr'^v^
region  of  events  is  not  poffible,  without
breaking  in  upon  free,  ageacy  and  thet
laws  of  the  univerfe,  fliews,  I  tunik,'
narrow  views.  It  would,  indeed,:  b^
impoffible,,  if  a  man,  for  example,  hap^^^
pens  to  be  under  a  wall  when  it  is  fall--
ing,  to  prevent  his  being  killed,  without
Ijifpending.  the_  law.  of  gravitation.:.  B.ut
*  .  how


14  0;^ P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.

how  eafy  would  it  have  been,. had  his
death  at  this  particular  time,  and  in  this
particular  manner,  been  an  event  proper
to  be  excluded,  or  which  was  not  con-
fiftent  with  exadt  order  and  righteoufnefs
in  the  regulation  of  events;  how  eafy,  I
fay,  in  this  cafe,  would  it  have  been  to
hinder  him  from  coming  too  near  the
dangerous  place,  or  to  occafion  his  com^
ifig  fooner  or  later,  by  infenfibly  influ-
encing the  train  of  ideas  in  his  mind,
and  in  numberlefs  other  methods,  which
afFefl:  not  his  liberty.  And  fmce  this
was  eafy  to  be  done,  and  yet  was  not
done,  we  may  alluredly  conclude  that
it  was  not  right  to  be  done,  and  that  the
event  did  not  happen  without  the  coun-
fel  and  approbation  of  providence.  In
general  3  every  perfon  whenever  any  e-
\zx\\.y  favourable  or  unfavourable,  hap-
pens to  him,  has  the  greateft  reafon  to
own  the  Divine  hand  in  it  j  becaufe,  it
appears,  as  far  as  we  can  judge,  that  had
the  Deity  fo  pleafed,  it  might  have  been
prevented  by  a  fecret  diredion  of  natu-?

ral


0/2 P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.  15

ral  caufes,  and  of  the  thoughts  of  men,
without  offering  any  violence  to  them.
How  plainly  may  we  perceive,  that  if
we  ourfelves  had  a  greater  acquaintance
with  the  powers  of  nature,  and  nearer
accefs  to  the  minds  of  men,  we  could
eafily  over-rule  and  dired:  many  events
not  at  prefent  in  our  power,  agreeably  to
our  own  purpofes,  without  the  leaft  in-
fringement of  the  general  laws  of  the
world,  or  of  the  liberty  of  mankind  ?
But  how  much  eafier  muft  it  be  for
that  being  to  do  this  abfolutely  and  per-
fectly, to  whom  all  the  powers  of  nature
are  fubjed:,  who  fees  through  all  depen-
dencies and  connexions,  and  has  conftant
accefs  to  the  heart  of  every  man,  and
can  turn  it  whitherfoever he  pleafes  *  ?

Where

*  We  are,  I  believe,  more  ignorant  than  is  ge-
perally  imagined  of  the  manner  in  which  ideas  arife
within  us,  and  of  the  caufes  on  which  the  fuccef-
fion  of  them  in  our  minds  depends.  By  this  fuc-
peflion,  the  courfe  of  events  in  the  world  feems  to
be  in  a  great  meafure  determined  ;  and  he  who  had
the  complete  management  of  it  might  give  rife  to

almofl


|6  O;^ P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.

Where  then  can  be  the  difficulty  of  be-
lieving an  invifible  hand,  an  univerfal  and
ever-attentive  providence,  which  guides
all  things  agreeably  to  perfe<5t  redlitude
and  wifdom ;  at  the  fame  time  that  the
general  laws  of  the  world  are  left  unvio-
lated,  and  the  liberty  of  moral  agents
is  preferved  ?

With  refpefl:,  particularly,  to  general
laws,  and  the  inconveniencies  commonly
fuppofed  to  be  infeparable  from  them,  we
may  conceive  that  none  would  be  at  firft
cftabliilied  which  would  produce  any  in-
conveniencies not  rights  all  things  con^
fidered,  to  be  allowed ;  or,  that  fuch
would  be  eftablifhed  whofe  inconve^
niencies  might  even  become  occali-
ons  of  good,  as  the  afflidions  of  hu-^
man  life  have  a  tendency  to  bring  men

almofl:  any  events  he  defirec^,  at  the  fame  time  that
men  went  on  to  think,  and  judge,  and  a(5t  from'
thcmfelves  as  they  do  now.  But  who  can  fay  how
far  it  may  be  actually  influenced  by  the  fu^geftions
of  invifible  beings,  and  particularly  by  the  fccret  a-
gency  of  the  fupreme  Spirit  ?

tQ


G;2 P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.  17

to  fobriety  and  thoiightfulnefs,  and  to
teach  them  feme  of  the  moft  important
virtues.  Or,  fuppofing  the  inconveni-
encies  arifing  from  any  neceffary  gene-
ral laws  to  be  in  themfelves  abfolute
evils,  we  may  conceive  that  there  may
be  direction  in  various  ways,  with  refped:
to  the  inftances  in  which  they  ihall  hap-
pen ;  or  that  remedies  may  be  provided
for  them  in  the  original  conftitution  by
particular  fecondary  laws,  as  the  incon-
veniencies  attending  the  abfence  of  the
fun  are  remedied  by  the  lights  with  which
we  can  furniih  ourfelves  in  the  night,
or  as  the  ill  eifedls  which  would  often
arife  from  gravity  and  other  natural
caufes,  are  prevented  by  the  powers  and
inflincfts  with  which  animals  are  en-
dowed. It  is,  without  doubt,  abfolute-
ly  neceffary  that  natural  caufes  fliould
operate  uniformly  and  fteadily.  Were
they  liable  to  frequent  interruptions,  the
regularity  of  nature  would  be  deftroyed;
there  would  be  no  room  for  the  exercife
of  prudence  and  forefight,  and  an  uni-

C  veri'


ax


1 8  On Providence.

verfal  inadtivity  would  take  place  among
reafonable  beings.  If  then  it  fhould  be
true,  that  fome  evils  are  impoffible  to  be
feparated  by  any  methods  from  the  uni-
form operation  of  any  law  of  nature  ne-
cefTary  to  the  general  good,  fuch  evils
only  render  this  law  fo  much  lefs  good,
while  yet  it  may  be  the  beft  poffible,
and  the  impoffibility  of  preventing  them
without  greater  harm,  becomes  itfelf
a  fuiiicient  vindication  of  Providence
in.  permitting  them,'  and  renders  them
entirely  confiftent  with,  nay  injiances  of^
a  perfect  order  in  the  ©economy  of  the
univerfe.

In  a  word.  It  is  felf-evldent  that  if
there  is  one  event  in  nature,  of  which  all
ii\^  care  is  not  taken  that  is  I'ight  to  be
taken,  the  adminiftration  of  the  world
is  fo  far  defecflive,  and  the  character  of
its  author  imperfedt.  It  will  be  a  con-
tradiction to  fay,  in  anfwer  to  this,  that
there  are  caufes  and  reafons,  which  ren-
der  it \\o\.  pofjible  to take  fuch  care  of

eijcry


O-i Provide  m  c  e.  19

every  tv^nt;  for  the  care  r/V/5/  to  be
taken  can  be  no  other  than  all  the  care
fqfjibk  to  be  taken.  It  follows,  therefore,
that  no  one  who  believes  a  perfcd:  Deity-
can  deny  a  Providence,  or  doubt  whe-
ther it  is  particular.

Leafi:  I  fliould  not  find  a  properer  place^
I  Ill-all  beg  leave  to  add  here,  as  fomc
preiumption  in  favour  of  fuch  a  perfect
order  \\\  nature  as  a  particular  Providence
implies,  that  there  is  in  order  and  right
an  eifential  tendency  to  get  the  afcendant
over  their  contraries.  They  imply  in
their  natures  fuperior  forcey  Jlabilityy
and  permane7icy 'y  Vv^hereas,  confufion  and
wrong  as  fuch  are  neceflarily  weaky
iinjiabky  and  felf-dejiru5iive.  This  a-
lone,  I  think,  rnight  be  fufficient  to
engage  an  attentive  mind  to  believe,
previouflv  to  any  coniideration  of  the
actual  flate  of  the  world,  that  the  for-
mer, rather  than  the  latter,  mufc  be
likely  to  be  prevalent  in  it.  But,  per-
haps, v/e  may  with  reafon  proceed  fur-
C 2  ther


20  0;Z P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.

ther  in  this  way  of  thinking.  The  very
notion  that  there  is  any  circumftance  in
the  courfe  and  adminiftration  of  the
world  as  it  jhould  not  be,  appears  to  me
to  be  felf-evidently  incredible.  It  im-
plies an  impoffibility  like  that  of  deftroy-
ing  fpace  and  duration;  for  it  implies
the  non-exiflence  of  what  cannot  even
in  thought  be  deftroyed  y  of  infinite y  om-
nipotent y  and  enjerlafilng  reafan  and  good-
nefs.  While  we  conceive  thefe  to  re-
main, (and  otherwife  we  cannot  conceive
without  a  contradiction)  we  muft  be-
lieve that  every  thing  repugnant  to  them,
or  not  allowed  by  them,  is  excluded  from
nature  *. — But  let  this  be  as  it  will. It

feems

*  It  would  take  up  too  much  ttmc  as  well  as  lead
to  a  fpeculation  too  abftrufe  for  the  prefent  difcourfe
to  explain  my  full  meaning  here,  or  to  {hew  that
we  have  an  intuitive  perception  of  the  exiftence  of
infinite^  everlajling^  omnipotent  intelligence  and  rc5Jitudsy
which,  like  eternity  and  immcnfity,  we  cannot  de-
ft^oy,  but  remain  after  we  have  fuppofed  them  away,
and  the  ideas  of  which  are  included  in  all  our  rea-
foninfrs,  and  all  our  notions  of  truth  and  morality.

I


On Providence.  21

feenis  to  me,  on  the  whole,  fcarcely  more
certain  that  events  happen  at  all,  than
that  they  do  not  happen  without  the
Providence  of  the  Deity.  As  the  mak-
er and  preferver  of  the  world  he  muft
take  cognizance  of  whatever  happens,
and  have  an  abfolute  dominion  over  it.
Some  determination,  therefore,  of  his
will  there  muft  be  with  refped:  to  every
event.  His  knowing  that  an  event  hap-
pens, and  at  the  fame  time  not  inter-
poling  to  prevent  it,  is  a  confent  that  it
Ihould  happen ;  and  as  this  confent  muft
be  founded  on  fome  reafons,  it  is  the
very  fame  with  exerciiing  a  providence
over  the  event.  This  obfervation  will
have  more  weight  if  we  add,  that  he
forefaw  the  event  before  it  happened,
and  yet  was  not  pleafed  fo  to  difpofe
things  as  to  exclude  it;  or,  that  when
he eftabliflied the prefent fyftem of

I  therefore  only  hint  this  argument,  and  leave  the
reader  to  judge  of  it as  he  pleafes. See  Review  of
the Principal  ^leftions and Difficulties in Morals^
Chap.  V.

C  3  nature.


22  On Providence.

nature,  he  knew  that  it  would  arife  in
confequence  of  his  eflabhfnment,  which

yet  he  did  not think fit to alter.

We  ought  to  poflefs  not  mucii  lefs  than
his  omnifcience  to  be  able  to  comprehend
the  realons  which  have  guided,  in  every
inftance,  the  determinations  of  his  pro-
vidence. It  fliould  be  enough  to  us  to
know  that,  whatever  thefe  reafons  arc,
they  muil  be  worthy  of  infinite  intelli-
gence, or  at  leafl,  of  a  piece  with  that
perfedlion  of  wifdom  and  art  which  we
fee  in  the  whole  of  the  inanimate  crea-
tion. But  thefe  obfervations  I  fhall  have
occafion  to  refume  in  fome  of  the  folio v/-
1X12,  feftions,

D


> T-N


E  C  T.


Ov^ P  R  O  V  1  D  E  N  C  E.  23


SECT. IL

Of  the  arguments  for  Providence  from  the
general  laws  and  conflitiition  cf  the
%vorld^.


TT  has  been  fliewn  in  the  preceding
JL  fecffcion,  that  the  perfedl  charader  of
the  Deity  cannot  be  maintained  without
allowing  an  all- dire fting  and  unerring
Providence,  It  would  have  been  taking
much  too  large  a  compafs  to  enter^  on  this
occaiion,  into  an  account  of  the  evidence
for  the  Divine  perfecflions.  'Tis  fuffi-
cient  if  it  appears  that  the  docftrine  of
Providence  refls  on  the  fame  foundation
with  them,  and  follows  from  them.
There  is,  however,  one  objection  here,
of  which  it  v/ill  be  proper  to  take  fome
notice.  It  may  be  faid  *'  that  our  only
^*  evidence  for  the  Divine  perfedlions  is
C  4  ''  taken


24  On Providence.

*'  taken  from  what we  oblerve  of  their

"  effedls  in  the  frann.e  of  nature,  and  that

*'  therefore  to  infer  from thefe perfec-

'^  tions  any  greater  order  and  wifdom  in

**  the  adminiftration  of  nature  than  we

*'  can adually obferve, is to fappofe

**  greater  perfedtion  in the  Deity than

*'  can  be  proved,  and  the  fame  with  firft

*'  determining  the  properties  of  the  caufe

<*  by  the  efted,  and  then  determining  the

*'  properties  of  the  effedl  by  the  caufe."

In  anfvver  to  this  I  vvould  obferve,  ill,
that  it  is  not  true  that  our  whole  evidence
for  the  Divine  perfedlions  is  taken  from
the  frame  of  nature.  The  difcoveries  of
reafon,  however  they  may  be  preceded
by  obfervation  and  experience,  and  take
their  rife  from  them.,  tranicend  them  in-
finitely ;  and  in  many  inftances  force  us
to  receive  truths  v/hich  they  are  incapa-
ble of  fuggeiling  ''^\  But,

* I am under  a neccflity of referring again
to the  Reviezv of  the  pnn,.ipal  ^lejiions and  Dif-
ficulties in Morals^ Chap, ifl  and loth, where  I
have  endeavoured  to  prove  all  that  is  here  aflerted.
,  The


0/2 P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  B.  25

But,  2dly,  fuppofing  that  our  whole
knowledge  of  the  Deity  muft  be  derived
from  w^hat  we  fee  of  his  works,  it  will  not
follow  that  we  ought  to  afcribe  to  him
only  juft  that  precife  degree  of  the  per-
fedions  we  believe  him  to  poflefs,  which
is  equal  to  what  we  can  comprehend  of
their  effefts  in  the  contrivance  and or-

The  works  of  creation  damnjlrate  that  the  Creator  is
poflefled  of  power  and  intelligence.  That  he  pofTefies
them  in  the  highejl  pojfible  degree^  follows  from  his  na-
ture as  an  uncaujed  being.  Whatever  qualities  fuch
a  being  has,  he  muft  have  necejfarihj^  and,  therefore,
in  their  fource  and  in  infinity.  This  Is  capable  of  the
firidleil:  proof,  and  muft,  1  fancy,  appear  to  every
one  who  has  juft  views  of  this  fubjecl.  l^he  perfeSi
intelligence  of  the  Deity  being  in  this  way  difcovered,
it  will  follow  that  he  is  poftelTed  of  pcrfeSi  benevoknce
and  reSiitude ',  for  thefe  are  included  in  perfe6l  intel-
ligence ;  as,  I  think,  is  fliewn  in  the  treatife  juft  re-
ferred to.  And  thus,  on  the  principles  maintained
in  that  treatife,  the  complete  idea  oi  Deity ^  confift-
ing  of  infinite  poiuer^  intelligence^  and  goodnefs  eflen-
tially  united,  will  be  eftablifhed  :  and  this  being  e-
ftablifhed,  the  doctrine  of  an  unerring  providence
guiding  all  events,  or  of  a  perfect  order  in  naturje,
will  be  likewife  eftablifoed,  as  Is  fliewn  in  the  prc-
(:eding  fedion,

der


26  On Providence.

der  of  the  world.  This  would  impl)%
that  we  ought  never  to  infer  from  any
{lata  more  than  they  immediately  contain,
and  therefore  would  put  an  end  to  all
reafoning. — The  caufe  muft  always  have
in  himfelf,  in  a  greater  degree,  tliofe  per-
fcftions  which  he  communicates.

It  would  be  eafy  to  fhew  that  from
the  works  of  creation  we  have  reafon  to
infer  a  much  higher  degree  of  power,
wifdom,  and  goodnefs  in  the  Creator
than  they  directly  exhibit  ^  and  there^
fore,  it  will  be  right  in  this  cafe,  firft  to
argue  upwards  from  the  efFe(ft,  as  a
foundation  for  proving  the  perfeffions  of
the  caufe,  and  then  back  again  from
the  caufe  thus  difcovered  to  the  effecfl.
Thus,  in  natural  philofophy,  by  reafon-
ing from  particular  fafts  we  gain  the
knowlege  of  the  general  laws  which  ob-
tain in  nature,  and  afterwards  apply
thefe  laws  to  the  explanation  of  other
facets  which  could  not  otlierwife  have  been
accounted  for. For  inflance  5 from  th^

faili


0/2 P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.  27

fiift that gravity is  the power which
keeps  the  moon  in  her  orbit,  is  inferred
the  general  law  of  gravitation,  by  the  help
of  which the  whole order  of  the  folar
fyftem  is  laid  open to us, and all  the
motions of  the  bodies that  compofe  it
explained. How  abfurd  would  it be  to
objed:  in  this  inftance, that  no  conclu-
fion  can  be  drawn  from  any  fadls  which
will  prove  any  greater  degree  of  regula-
rity in  nature  than  thefe  fads  thcmfelves
exhibit, or  which can  be rightly  ufed
to  explain  any  other  fads, about whicl^
we  can  make  no  experiments  ?

It  is  proper  to  add,  3dly,  that  we
adually  fee  that  nature  is  the  efFed  of
fuch  wifdom  as  furpaffes  our  higheft  con-
ceptions. We  know  this  in  numberlef^s
inftancesi  and  the  fame  wifdom  that
takes  place  in  thefc  inftances,  we  are
unavoidably  led  to  apply  to  other  in-
ftances w^here  it  is  not  (cen,  and  to  the
whole  adminiilration  of  events.  It  will,
}  hope,  appear  hereafter  that  this is  an

obfer-


28  0/2 Providence.

obfervatlon  of  particular  weight  on  the
iubjedl  of  Providence.  In  the  mean  time,
it  is  neceffary  that  I  fliould  enter  upon
fome  topics  of  a  different  nature.

The  defign  of  this  fedlion  is  to  give
an  account  of  fuch  arguments  for  Provi-
dence as  may  be  gathered  from  confider-
ing  the  general  lav^s  and  conftitution  of
tlie  world.

In  order  to  be  as  explicit  as  I  can  on
this  head,  I  fhall  beg  leave  to  obferve,
fidiy  that  it  appears  undeniably  that  there
is  a  plan  of  nature  fettled,  which  deter-
mines m  general  the  couije  of  events.  A
particular  order  of  caufes  and  effedls  is
maintained  regularly  and  fteadily.  Laws
have  been  eftablifhed  which  operate  inva-
riably. Many  diiferent  claiTes  of  crea-
tures have  been  brought  into  exiftence,
and  placed  in  circumftances  adapted  to
their  different  natures,  and  all  provided
for  fuitably  to  their  wants  and  exigencies.
The  world, therefore,  has  not  been  left

to


0;Z P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.  29

to  fluftuate  fortuitoufly.  There  is  a  care
taken  of  it,  and  a  diredlion  given  to  its
affairs. — But  this  does  not  come  up  to
what  I  have  here  chiefly  in  view. — It  is
evident  not  only  that  there  is  a  plan  or
conflitution  of  nature  by  which  beings
are  provided  for,  and  a  general  direction
given  to  events ;  but  that  there  is  an
influence  of  the  Deity  conftantly  exerted
to  maintain  this  conflitution. — In  other
words;  it  may  be  proved  *'  that  the
**  Deity  is  always  prefent  and  always
**  adiive  in  all  places ;  and  that  his  e-
**  nergy  is  the ^r/?  mover  in  every  mo-
**  tion,  and  the  true  fource  of  all  the
**  powers  and  laws  v/hich  take place  in

"  the  material  world." To  this  con-

clufion  all  true  philofophy  leads  us ;  and
it  is  a  point  fo  clofely  connected  with
the  main  purpofe  of  this  Differtation,
that  I  fliall  make  it  the  fubje(5t  of  par-
ticular examination.

Much  labour  has  been  employed by
fome  perfons  to  account  for  all  the  pha^-

nomena


30  On V\  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E*'

nomena  of  nature  by  the  powers  of  me-^
chanifni,  or  the  neceflary  laws  of  mat-
ter and  motion*  But  it  feems  indifpu-
tabie  tiiat  this  cannot  be  done.  The
pnjnary  caufts  of  things  muft,  certainly^
be  fome  powers  or  principles  not  me-
chanical. For  let  it  be  granted  that  any
particular  effeft  is  owing  to  the  im.pulfe
of  ether  matter  on  that  in  which  the
effect  is  obferved^  it  may  be  aiked,
what  gives  motion  to  this  other  mat-
ter. If  it  is  anfwered,  the  impulfe  of
fome  third  matter ;  it  may  be  again  afk-
ed>  whence  this  third  matter  derives  its
motion.  ilnd  thus,  w^hatever  number
of  intermediate  fteps  there  may  be,  we
muft  at  laft  come  to  fome  matter  that
cid  not  receive  its  motion  from  the  im-
pulfe of  other  matter ; or to  fome  im-

mechanical caufe. This reafoning

can  no  way  be  evaded,  but  by  either
maintaining  an  endlefs  progreffion  of
motions  communicated  from  matter  to
matter,  without  ^ny  Jirji  J72over -,  or  by
frying, that the firft impelling  matter

moved


On Providence.  31

moved  itfelf.— — The  former  is  an  abfur-
dity  too  great  to  be  embraced  by  any
one  5  and  there  is  reafon  to  hope,  that
the  eilential  inadlivity  of  matter  is  at
prefent  fo  well  underftood,  that  there
can  be  but  few  who  will  care  to  affert  the
latter. — All  our  reafonings  about  bodies
and  the  whole  of  natural  philofophy  are
founded  on  the  three  laws  of  motion,  laid
down  by  Sir  Ifaac  Newton  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  Principia.  Thefe  laws  ex-
prefs  the  plaineft  truths ;  but  they  would
have  neither  evidence  nor  meaning,  were
not  inadlivity  contained  in  our  idea  of
matter.

I  know  it  will  be  faid,  that  matter,
though  naturally  inert,  may  be  made
to  be  otherwife  by  Divine  power.  But
this  is  the  fame  with  faying,  that  matter
may  be  made  not  to  be  matter.  If  in-
activity belongs  to  it  at  all,  it  muft  be-
long to  it  as  matter,  or  folid  extenfion,
and  therefore  muft  be  infeparable  from

it,


32  On Providence.

it  *. The  natures  of  things  are  necef-
farily  what  they are, independently  of
all  power. Matter  is  figured:, moveable^
difcerptibki  inaBroe,  and  capable  of  com-
municating motion  by  impulfe  to  other
liiatter, juft  as  the  four  fides  of  a  fquare
and  its  diagonal  are  incommenfurable  *y  that
is, not  by  W//, but  by  ejjence. Thefe
are' not  accidental,  but  primary  qualities
of  matter. Befides ;  matter  void  of  in-
aftivity,  fuppofmg  it  poflible,  could  pro-
duce no effefls.' 'Tis only in confe-
quence  of  this  property  that  it  is  capa-
ble of  giving  motion  to  other  matter, or
of  anfwering  any  purpofe. Were, there-
fore, the firfl  impelling  matter before-
mentioned  diverted  of  its inertia^  or  en-
dowed with  a principle  of  felf-motion,
it  would  be  utterly  unfitted  for  the  end
afligned  it. What  is now  afierted  will
perhaps  be  evident,  and  the  impofiibility
of  matter without  inertia  appear more
plainly upon confidering particularly

*  See  the  Enquiry  into  the  Nature  of  the  Human  Souly
Se£l.  I.  N^  15,  24,  265  27.

what


On Providence.  33

what  would  happen  on  the  collifion  of
fuch  matter  with  other  matter  of  the
fame, or  of  a  different  kind.

We  know  nothing  of  matter,  and  can
determine  nothing  about  it,  if  it  is  not
true  that  it  muft  yield  to  every  impulfe
upon  it  in  proportion  to  the  force  im-
prefled,  and  that  the  motion  comniiuiicated
by  every  impulfe  is  always  equal  to  that
loft  by  the  impelling  body  and  cannot  be
either  greater  or  lefs ;  or,  in  other  words,
that  it  is  endowed  with  r^Jijlance,  and
abfolutely  and  entirely  paffive'^. But  no-

*  What  I  mean  here  when  exprefled  more  accu-
rately is,  that  a  change  of  J}  ate  is  always  produced  in
the  body  impelling,  equal  to  that  produced  in  the
body  impelled.  In  coinfojltiort  of  motion,  or  when
one  body  ftriktrs  another  body  in  motion  obliquely,
there  is  always  motion  loll  \  bccaufe  fome  of  the
force  of  the  impelling  body  muft  be  fpent  in  merely
altering  the  dlre(£i:ion  of  the  other  ;  though  evert
here,  as  well  as  in  the  rejolutim  of  motion  where,  for
the  fame  reafon,  motion  is  always  gained,  the  general
rule  holds,  that  the  fum  of  the  motions  the  fame
wav,  and  the  diffcri:nce  of  the  motions  cc-ntrarywTi.yay
art:  always  the  fame  before  and  affrr  coIlifion.

D  thing


j4  On Providence.

'thing  like  this  can  be  true  on  the  fuppo-
fition  of  active  or  unrefifting  matter. —
For  let  a  mafs  of  fuch  matter  be  con-
ceived to  ftrike  another  mafs  of  inad:ive
matter  at  reft.  I  alk  w^hat  would  hap-
pen ?  Not  the  moving  of  that  at  reft.  For
the  impelling  body  having  no  refiftance,
or  no  tendency  to  continue  in  any  ftate  of
motion  or  reft,  it  can  have  nothing  like
force,  and  therefore  can.  produce  no  efFeffc.
• — Shall  it  then  pafs  through  or  penetrate
the  body  at  reft, and  go  on  to  move  as

if  nothing  ftood  in its way  ? This

alfo  is  impoffible^  or  we  have  no  idea
at  all  of  matter  as  2tfolid  fubftance,  or  as
fomething  diftinft  from  mere  extenfion.
— 'Tis  certain  then  that  its  motion  muft
be  ftopped,  but  without  communicating
the  leaft  motion  to  the  body  at  reft,  or
having  the  leaft  efFecft  upon  it.  That
is,  an  effed:  vi\\\  be  produced  without  a
caufe  :  For  the  body  at  reft  not  having
received  any  alteration  of  its  ftate,  it
could  not  have  re-aSed  or  been  the  means
of  altering  the ftate  of  the  other.


There
3


0// Pr  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.  35

There  is  no  way  of  avoiding  thefe  con-
tradiftions  but  by  laying,  what  is  too  ri-
diculous to  deferve  any  anfwer ;  that  the
moving  body  had  the  fagacity  to  exert
its  activity  to  flop  itfelf  the  very  inftant
it  came  into  contad:  with  the  other.

But  again ;  let  us  on  the  other  hand,
fuppofe  a  body  of  inactive  matter,  (that
is,  of  fuch  matter  as  we  commonly  rea-
fon  about,  and  is  the  only  fubjedl  of
the  laws  of  mechanifm)  to  move  towards
another  body  of  felf-moving  and  unre-
lifting  matter,  and  to  impel  it  in  the
very  dired:ion  in  which  it  tends  to  move
itfelf.  Now  'tis  certain  that  having  an
innate  tendency  or  endeavour  to  move  in
this  direftlon,  it  cannot  rejift  motion  in
this  direftion,  and  that  therefore  the  firll
body  without  being  rc-a(^ted  upon,  or
having  its  own  ftate  in  any  manner
altered  by  the  impulfe,  would  carry
it  along  with  the  fame  velocity  with
which  itfelf  moves.  Nay,  the  firft
body, though  ever fo  fmall,  would, in

D  2  the


36  0/z Providence.

the  circumftances  fuppofed,  communi-
cate any  motion  though  ever  fo  great  to
any  mafs  or  maffes  of  matter,  without
lofing  any  motion  itfelf,  that  is,  without
meeting  with  any  obJlruBioTty  ov  afting
at  all  on  the  matter  moved.  And  thus
any  effeft  may  be  produced  by  the  moll
inadequate  caufe,  or  rather  by  no  caufe  at
all.

Once  more;  let  a  collifion  be  con-
ceived to  happen  between  two  equal
bodies  both  compofed  of  matter  without
incrtiuy  moving  in  contrary  directions »
As  one  of  them  cannot  be  conceived  to
penetrate  the  other,  the  refult  mud  be,
that  both  fhall  be  flopped,  but  by  no-
thing ;  for  both  wanting  that  property  on
account  of  which  we  fay  of  matter,  that
when  once  in  motion  it  will  perfevere
in  motion,  unlefs  fomething  ftops  it,  or
having  no  power  of  reliflance,  neither  of
them  can  be  any  obftrudion  to  the  mo-
tion of  the  other  *.  But

*  The  refinance  of  matter  is  an  exprefTion  that  muft
be  ufed  in  fpeaking  on  this  fubjedl  for want  of  a

better ;


O// Pr  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.  37

But  the  impofiibility  of  all  adive  qua-
lities  or tendencies in matter may  be

proved

better  ;  but  there  is  fome  danger  of  mifunderftandln^''
it.  The  meaning  of  it  is  not  that  matter  makes
any  oppofition  to  a  change  of  its  ftate,  or  exerts  a
force  to  maintain  itfelf  in  the  ftate  it  is  in,  as  fome
have  very  improperly  exprefled  themfelves.  This
would  imply  that  very  activity  which  I  have  en-
deavoured to  fhew  to  be  inconfiftent  with  its  na-
ture 5  and  were  it  true,  a  part  of  the  force  of  every
impulfe  would  be  fpent  merely  in  overcoming  this
oppofition  without  producing  any  other  eiFe6t ;  and
therefore  the  fum  of  the  motions  the  fame  way  would
be  always  greater  before  than  after  collifion,  which
is  impofTible.  The  largeft  body  will  be  moved  by
,  any  t\iz  Jlighteft  impulfe  of  the  fmalleji  ;  but  then  it
can  be  moved  only  in  proportion  to  the  force  of  the
impulfe  ;  and  this  is  what  is  chiefly  meant  by  the  re-
fijlance  of  matter.  "  For  inftance.  A  body  at  red
will  refijl  another  which  is  moving  towards  it  j  that  is,
it  will  be  an  ohftruclion  to  the  motion  of  this  other.
The  latter  will  be  retarded  by  the  former, and will

iofe  juft  as  much  motion  as  it  communicates. In

other  words.  The  r^t^wr^?  of  matter  is  that  in  its
nature  which  makes  it  require  an  adequate- foreign
caufe  of  every  change  of  ft  ate,  or  from  whence  it
is  wholly  pajfwe^  and  incapable  of  receiving  any  mo-
tion from  impulfe  that  is  not  in  a  certain  fixed  pro-
1^  3  ponioa


38  O/z Providence,

proved  in  a  way  ftill  more  dired:  and  de-

cifive. Let  it  be  fuppofed  that  a  body

now  at  reft  has  an  innate  tendency  to
move.  This  tendency  muft  produce  its
efFeft,  either  by  a  gradual  acceleration  in
the  manner  gravity  afts  j  or  by  inftan^
taneoufly  producing  that  particular  degree
of  motion  which  fatisiies  it,  and  then
ceafing.— -- In  the  former  cafe;  the  ten-
dency to  acceleration  being  the  fame  with

portion  to  the  relative  momentum  of  the  impelling  bo-
dy, and  ftrictly  equal  to  the  change  of  flate  it  fuffers
io  confequence  of  the  impulfe.  In  this  proportion
matter  is  always  moved  w//Z>^/://  difficulty  \  but  beyond
this  there  is  not  only  2i  difficulty  but  an  mpojfibility  of
inoving  it  ;  and  whatever  motion  it  can  be  fuppofed
to  receive  from  any  impulfe  that  is  greater  than  that
which  the  impelling  body  lofes,  it  muft  derive  from
yiothing  at  all.

I  have  fpolcen  above  of  i\\c  force  of  matter  and  of
its  a£ling^  at  the  fame  time  that  I  have  aficrted  it  not
to  be  active.  An  attentive  and  candid  reader  cannot
think  this  an  iriconfiftency.  The  adtivity  denied  to
matter  is  a  power  of  changing  its  own  ftate,  not
that  of  acting  upon  other  matter  by  impulfe.  This
fort  of  a£tivity  or  power  follows  from  and  is  neceiTa-
rily  implied  in  its  perfect  paflivenefs  or  inertia.

a  ten-


O/? Pr  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.  39

a  tendency  to  a  conftant  change  of  ve-
locity, and  this  being  a  permanent  qua-
lity in  the  body,  no  particular  motion  de-
rived from  it  can  have  the  leaft  duration^
but  muft  be  given  and  deftroyed  at  one
and  the  fame  moment,  and  therefore
nothing  could  be  done. — In  other  words;
fuch  a  tendency  is  a  tendency  to  an  infi-
nity of  different  velocities  at  once, and

therefore  is impoffible. Neither  can

motion  be  acquired  in  the  latter  way ;
for  motion  fo  acquired  no  force  could
deftroy,  becaufe  at  the  very  inftant  it  is
dejlroyed  it  muft  be  acquired  in  confe-
quence  of  the  fuppofed  tendency.  No
impulfe,  therefore,  can  without  a  con-
tradi(flion  be  fuppofed  to  have  any  eitedt
upon  the  motion  of  fuch  a  body  r,  and
though  ever  fo  fmall,  it  would  carry
before  it  all  the  bodies  of  the  world  if
in  its  way,  without  being  itfelf  retarded.
And  were  two  fuch  bodies,  moving  in
contrary  diredions,  to  meet,  fince  nei-
ther could  be  ftopped,  they  muft  either
penetrate  one  another,  or  be  annihilated.
D  4  It


40  O^ P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.

It  is  eafy  to  fee  that  the  fame  way  of
arguing  may  be  ufed  to  prove,  that  th^re
can  be  no  innate tendency in matter,

when  in  motion,  to  a  ftate  of  reft.

Matter  naturally  preferves  the  rnotion
once  imprefled  upon  it,  juft  as  it  does
its  figure;  and  were  not ^ this  true,  it
would  not  be  pcfTible  that  any  force
(}"iould  give  it  motion,  for  the  effecft  of
fuch  force  not  being  capable  of  remain-
ing any  time,  it  would  be  loft  as  foon^
as  gained;  that  is,  no  effc(ft  would  be
produced,

Thefe  are  obfervations  which  I  am
perfuaded,  no  perfon  can  duly  attend  tp
without  feeling  the  weight  of  them.
Nothing,  furely,  can  be  ir^ore  repugnant
to  our  ideas  of  niatter  than  fejf-motion  ;
nor  is  there  any  conclufion  wdiich  there
is  much  rpore  reafon  to  rely  upon  than
that  it  is  not  a  fubjed:  capable  of  any
Jpontcneous  powers.^  and  therefore  muft
owe  every  change  that  can  happen  in  i,t
to  fomc J creign  influence.

This


0;/ Pr  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.  41

This  conclufion  will  be  further  con-
firmed if  we  confider  what  naturally
offers  itfelf  in  the  next  place,  and
what  mufl:  not  be  omitted  on  this  ar-
gument, that  felf-moving  matter  muft
have  thought  and  defign.  Whenever
matter  moves  it  muft  move  in  fome
particular  direction,  and  with  fome
precife  degree  of  velocity;  and  there  be-
ing an  infinity  of  thefe  equally  poffible,
it  cannot  move  itfelf  without  feleding
one  of  thefe  out  of  the  reft,  or  deterr-
ming  itfelf  to  one  of  them  exclufively  of
all  the  others,  and  therefore  not  without

defign. But  this  is  not all. It  may

be  plainly  proved  that  matter  cannot  be
the  ultimate  caufe  of  the  phenomena  of  na-
ture, or  the  agent,  which,  by  any  pow-
ers inherent  in  itfelf,  produces  the  ge-
neral laws  of  nature,  wjthout  pcfleffing
the higheft degree of  knowledge and

wifdom. Let  us,  as  a  proper  inftance

to  reafon  upon  here,  take  the  particular
law  of  gravitation.  The  true  account,  I
fay,  ot this  law  cannot be  any innat?

propenfitics


4^  O/Z P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.

propenfities  of  matter  to  motion,  or  Its  u-
niformly  moving  itfelf  according  to  ftated
rules. For in  order to obferve thefe
rules,  every  particle  of  it muft  be  able
to  conform  itfelf  to  all  the  different  fitu-
ations  it  can  be  in, and  therefore  muft
know the precife diftaiicesy magnitudesy
and  number  of  all  the  furrounding  parts  of
matter; thefe  being  the circumftances
which univerfally determine the force
and  direction of  gravity. Thus; if  a
particle  of  matter  on  the  furface  of  the
earth  tends  towards  the  earth  by  its  own
energy, and  without  any  foreign influ-
ence upon  it,  with that  precife degree
of  velocity,  and  in  that  precife  diredlion
which  the  law of  gravitation requires,
it  muft,  in  order  to  this,  know  the  pre-
cife/^wr^'  and  bulk  of  the  earth, and  its
fitiiation  upon  it, fince  the  fmalleft  va-
riation  in any  one of  thefe particulars
will  alter  the  velocity  and  direction  of  its
motion. When  placed  within  the  furface
it  muft  diminifti  its  own  force  at  different
diftances  froin  the center,  in  ihcfmple

direct


On Providence.  43

dire^  ratio  of  thefe  diftances.  When
placed  without  the  furface,  it  muft  di-
minifh  its  own  force  in  the  inverfe,
duplicate  ratio  of  its  diftances  from  the
center.  When  carried  to  the  center  of
gravity  between  the  moon  and  the  earth,
it  muft  determine  itfelf  to  reft.  When
carried  beyond  this,  it  muft  determine
its  motion towards  the  moon, and  not

the  earth. Is  it  poftible that  matter

fhould  vary  its  own  motions  in  a  manner
thus  wonderful;  infomuch  that  all  the
diiferent  parts  of  it  appear  to  aft  in
perfed:  concert  with  one  another  for
producing  the  order  of  nature,  and
bringing  about  the  beft  ends  ?  The
following  argument  will,  I  believe,
fliew  that  there  is  not  lefs  than  the
evidence of demonftration againft the

poffibility  of  this. Nothing  can  know

or  aB  where  it  is  not.  The  prefence
and  adivity  of  every  particle  of  matter
are  confined  to  that  particular  part  of
fpace  it  fills  up.  Were  it  ever  fo  intel-
ligent or  adiive  it  could  k?iow  nothing, it

could


44  On  Pro  V  I  DEV  CE,

could  do  nothing  beyond  this.  How  then
can  it  be  fo  acquainted  with  the  flate
of  bodies  at  the  greateft  diftance  from
it,  and  no  way  connected  with  it,  as  to
be  able  to  ad:  in  concert  with  them,
and  to  move  itfelf  in  exadl  conformity
to  their  fitua(;ion  and  numbers  ?  *

What has been faid of  gravitation
might with equal evidence  be  proved

*  "  It  is  inconceivable  that  inanimate  brute  mat^
'-^  ter  fhould,  without  the  mediation  of  fomething
*'  elfe,  which  is  not  material,  operate  upon  and  af-
*^  fe(Sl  other  matter  without  mutual  conta£l,  as  it
*'  muft  be,  if  gravitation  be  eflential  and  inherent  in
**  it. And  this  is  is  one  reafoq  why  I  defired  you
"  would  not  afcribe  innate  gravity  to  me. That
"  gravity  fhould  be  innate,  inhereyit,  and  cfTential
*'  to  matter,  fo  that  one  body  may  acl  upon  another
"  at  a  diftance  through a  vacuum,  without  the  me-
''  diation  of  any  thing  elfe,  by  and  through  which
*'  their  aftion  and  force  may  be  conveyed  from  one
"  to  another,  is  to  me  fo  great  an  abfurdity  that  I
*'  believe  no  man  who  has  in  philofophical  matters  a
*5  competent  faculty  of  thinking, can  ever  fall  into
*^  it." See  the Third  of  the  Four  Letters  from Sir
Ijaac  NriVton  to  Dr,  Bcntley^  printed  for  Mr,  Dodflcy,

cou-


0/2 Pr  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.  45

concerning  any  more  general  caufe,  of
which  poffibly  gravitation  may  be  only
ah  efFedl;  fuch  as  Sir  liaac  Newton's
JEther^  or  whatever  other  mediums  or
powers  may  exift,  and  be  the  real  primal-
ry  caufes  of  the  phasnomena  of  the  world.
The  elafticity,  for  example,  of  fuch  an
ather  as  Sir  Ifaac  Newton  has  defcribed,
fuppofmg  it  to  exift,  muft  be  derived,
not  from  any  powers  of  felf-motion  in
the  matter  of  this  cether,  but  from  the
conftant  agency  upon  it  of  an  intelligent
and  omniprefent  fpirit  *.

To

*  ''  In  our  enquiries  iRto  nature"  (fays  an  excel-
lent phllofopher)  "  we  are  always  meeting  with
"  powers  that  furpafs  mere  mechanifm,  or  the  ef-
*'  fe<Sls  of  matter  and  motion.  The  laws  of  na-
"  tare  are  conftant  and  regular,  and  for  ought  we
*'  know  all  of  them  may  be  refolved  into  one  ge-
''  neral  and  extenfive  power ;  but  this  power  itfelf
<«  derives  its  properties  and  efficacy  not  from  me-
"  chanifm,  but  in  a  great  meafure  from  the  im-
''  mediate  influences  of  the  flrft  mover,"  M?\
Macklauriris  Account  of  Sir  Ifaac  Newtoris  Dlfcoveries^

Book  IV.  ch.  9.  §.  12. ''  Later philofophers

<*  frame  hypothefes  for  explaining  all  things  mecha-
3  nically  j


46  0;/ PR  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E,

To  afiert  that  matter  can  conform  its
own  motions  in  the  manner  requifite  to
produce  and  maintain  thofe  general  laws
of  nature  on  which  the  world  depends,
is  indeed  but  little  better  than  diredt
atheifm,  or  refolving  ultimately  the
whole  order  and  contrivance  of  the  world
into  matter  and  motion.— Some  good
men,  however,  have  been  ftrangely  de-
ceived on  this  fubjeft,  by  confufed  no^
tions  of  the  Divine  power  to  plant  laws
in  matter,  or  to  endue  it  with  certain
afliive  principles  *  and  tendencies,  in
virtue  of  which  it  (hall  of  itfelf,  and  in-

"  nically;  whereas,  the  main  bufinefs  of  natural
"  philofophy  is  to  argue  from  phaenomena  without
*'  framing  hypothefes,  and  to  deduce  caufes  from
"  efFe6ls  till  we  come  to  the  very  firft  caufe,  which
*'  certainly  is  not  fnechanicalJ'* Newton's  Optich,  ^wy

28. "  Caufs fimpliciflimae nulla  dari  poteft

*'  mechanica  fexplicatio :  fi  daretur  enim,  caufa
'*  nondum  eflet  fimplicIiTuTia."  Mr,  Cotes's  Preface
to  Newton  s  Principia,

*  "  The  great  author  of  all  things  (Mr.  Derham
*'  fays)  has  infpirited  the  materials  of  which  the
''^  world  confifts  with  the  a^ive  quality  called  gravity,*'

JjirO'Theology^  Book  VI.  ch.  3.

dependently


Qn-  5^:  R  o  V  IB  B  H  c  E.,  47

dependently  of  any  immediate  external

influence  upon  it,  execute  the  plan  at  firfl:

laid  by  infinite  wifdom,  and  continue  the

form and order of  the univerfe. But

they  could never have  entertained  any

fuch opinion, had  they attended in a

proper  manner  to  that  inertia  of  matter

before  explained, by  which  it  is  as  in-

capable  of  changing its  ov^n  ftate  with

refped:  to reft and  motion as its  own

figure  J or  had  they confidered that  if

matter,  by  its  own  proper  agency,  produces

the  laws,  and  keeps  up  the  regularity  of

nature,  it  is  a  fubjecfl  naturally  capable

of  thofe  pov/ers whereby it does  this,

and  might  as well  have  at  firft  difpofed

itfelf  into the form and order  of  the

univerfe  *.

It

*  'Tis  worth  obferving  that  the  reafoning  here
ufed  holds  with  equal  force  againft  a  notion  that
has  been  embraced  and  defended  by  fome  great  men,,
but  which  is  totally  unworthy  of  them  ;  I  mean
the  notion  of  a  plajllc  nature^  or  certain  vital  znUfpi'
ritual,  but  unintelligent  and  7iecejfary  agent  which  the
Deity  is  fuppofed  to  have  created  to  carry  on  under
himfelf  his  fcheme,  and  to  produce  the  various  ef-

fe«^


48  0« Providence.

It  has  been  alfo  often  objedted ''  that

"  it is impairing the beauty of the

**  world,

fe£ls  and  phaenomena  of  nature. If  an  unintel-

iigent  agent  can  a6l  with  fuch  uniformity,  and  yet
fo  varioufly,  as  to  produce  the  order  of  the  world,
and  govern  its  motions  ;  if,  for  inftance,  it  can
frame  the  bodies  of  plants  and  animals,  or  fo  dire6l
its  own  adlion  as  to  impel  the  particles  of  matter  to-
wards one  another^  in  fuch  different  directions,  and
with  fuch  different  forces  in  different  fituations^  as
to  be  the  conflant  caufe  of  thofe  laws  and  powers
which  obtain  in  the  corporeal  univerfe,  and  on  which
depend  its  form  and  being ;  if,  I  fay,  this  is  pof-
iible,  there  is  an  end  of  all  our  reafonings  about
caufes  and  effects,  and  of  all  arguments  for  defign
and  intelligence  in  the  author  of  nature,  taken  from

its  regularity  and  beauty. It  avails  nothing  to

fay,  that  this  agent  a6ts  in  fubordination  to  the
Deity,  and  only  in  virtue  of  powers  given  it  by
him.  For  it  is  not  fuppofed  to  be  merely  an  inftru-
nient  in  the  hands  of  the  Deity  which  never  ads  ex-
cept in  ^onfcquence  of  being  firfl  a£led  upon  ;  but
what  it  does  it  is  fuppofed  to  do  properly  by  a
power  inherent  in  itfelf,  without  wanting  any //«-
?ned'iatc  dire6tion  from  the  Deity  ;  and  the  very  rea-
fons  that  have  been  afligned  for  fuppofmg  fuch  an  a-  •
gent,  are,  that  it  is  abfurd  to  think  that  the  Deity
(hould  be  continually  employed  fo  much  in  vain,  as
is  r^cceffary  to  be fuppofed,  if  the  general  laws  of

th»


0;z P  R  o  V  I  D  E  N  c  E.  49

^^  world,  and  reprefenting  it  as  a  pro-
*'  ducfhion  more  imperfe(5l  than  any
*^  work  of  human  art,  to  maintain  that

''  it

the  world  are  derived  from  his  agency  ;  and  that  it
is  difhonouring  him  to  conceive  of  him  as  acling
himfelf  continually  on  matter,  and  immediately-
concerned in framing the bodies of  the meaneft

plants  and infedls. To  as  little  purpofe  is  it

to  fay,  that  omnipotence  can  give  fuch  a  power
tv>  an  unintelligent  agent :  for  what  has  not  wifdom
cannot  adl  wifely,  and  no  power  can  make  that  to  be,
which  catinct  be.  If  the  Deity  can  make  a  caufe
that  a£ls  without  knowledge  or  dcfign  to  produce
regular  efFe6i:s ;  then  it  is  in  the  nature  of  things
poilible  for  fuch  a  caufe  to  ^xoAucq  fuch  efte6ls  ;  then
defign  in  the  caufe  is  not  necefjary  to  the  greateft
conceivable  order  and  regularity  in  the  effect,  nor
can  we  certainly  infer  the  one  from  the  other  :  then,
in  fhort,  any  thing  may  produce  any  thing,  and  no
conclufion  with  refpecl  to  the  caufe  can  be  drawn,

in  any  cafe,  from  what  we  fee  in  the  efi'ecl. ■

The  efFc6ls  of  habits  have  been  very  Improperly  al-
ledged^  as  affording  inftances  of  regular  action
without  knowledge  or  defign.  For,  what  is  done
by  habits,  is,  I  think,  always  done  in  confequence
of  fome  volition  or  dlre6lIon  of  the  mind;  and  our
not  being  confcious  of  it  is  in  reality  no  more  than
not  remembering  it,  the  whole  effect  of  a  habit  oi\
the  executive  powers  confiding  in  their  more  eafy

£  and


50  Ov^ P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.

**  it  cannot  fubfift  of  itfelf, or  that it

*'  requires  the  hand  of  its maker  to  be

**  always at  it  to  continue  its  motions

**  and  order."

The  full  anfwer  to  this  objedion  is,
that  to  every  machine  or  perpetual  move-
ment for  anfwering  any  particular  pur-
pofe, there always belongs fome  Jirjl

and  ready  compliance  with  the  dictates  of  the  mind.
But  not  to  infift  on  this ;  let  it  be  granted  that  re-
gular actions  are  frequently  performed  in  confequence
of  habits  without  thought  or  defign;  this,  if  true,
muft  be  owing  to  certain  powers  and  laws  of  the
animal  oeconomy  which  muft  be  accounted  for  in
the  fame  manner  v/ith  other  powers  and  laws  which
obtain  in  nature,  and  cannot  be  made  an  argument
for  fuch  a  blind  plaftic  force  as  has  been  contend-
ed for, without  begging  the  queftion. See  the

truly  great  and  learned  Dr.  Cudiuorth's  IntelleSfual
Syfiem^  Book  I.  Chap.  3.  where  the  opinion  on  which
I  have  made  thefe  remarks  is  particularly  explained
and  defended.  See  alfo  an  account  of  a  controverfy
which  it  occafioned  between  Mr.  Bayle  and  Le
Clcrc,  in  the  account  of  the  life  and  writings  of
Dr.  Cudworth,  prefixed  to  the  fecond  edition  of  the

Intellectual  Syjlem  by  Dr.  Birch. Dr.  Henry  More

and  Dr.  Grew  have  likewife  maintained  this  opi-
nion.

^  move?'.


Oji Providence,  51

mover,  fome  weight  or  fpring,  or  other
power  which  is  continually  afting  upon
it,  and  from  which  all  its  motions  are
derived  :  Nor,  without  fuch  a  power,
is  it  poffible  to  conceive  of  any  fuch
machine.  The  machine  of  the  univerfe
then,  like  all  befides  analogous  to  it  of
which  we  have  any  idea,  muft  have  a
frjl  mover.  Now,  it  has,  I  think,  been
demonftrated,  that  this  firil  mover  cannot
be  matter  itfelf.  It  follows,  therefore,
that  this  objedion  is  fo  far  from  being
of  any  force,  that  it  leads  us  to  the
very  conclufion  which  it  is  brought  to
overthrow. The  excellence  of  a  ma-
chine by  no  means  depends  on  its  going
properly  of  itfelf,  for  this  is  impofllble;
but  on  the  fkiH  with  which  its  various
parts  are  adjufled  to  one  another,  and
all  its  different  effeds  are  derived  from
the  conjtant  aution  of  fome  power.-  -■■*
What  would,  indeed,  make  a  machine
appear  imperfedt  and  deformed  is,  a^^
ligning  a  feparate  power  to  every  diflin^ft
E  2  part.


^  On F  R  o  y  I  D  E  N  c  t.

part,  Without  allowing  any  place  for
mechanifm.  And,  in  like  manner,  what
would  really  make  the  frame  of  nature
appear  imperfetl  and  deformed  is,  re-
folving  phaenomena  too  foon  to  the  Di-
vine agency,  or  fuppofing  it  the  imme-
diate caufe  of  every  particular  effed:.  But
every  one  mull  fee  that  what  I  have
been  pleading  for  is  not  this,  but  Only,
that  however  far  mechanifm  may  be  car-
ried and  the  chain  of  caufes  extend  in
the  material  univerfe,  to  the  Divine
Pov/er  exerted  continually  in  all  places,
every  law  and  every  effedt  and  motion  in

it  muft  be  at  laji  refolved.-- This  is  a

concluficn  which  the  modern  improve-
ments in  natural  philofophy  have  abun-
dantly confirmed,  and  which  fome  of
the  firft  and  befh  philofophers  have  re-
ceived ;  nor  can  that  philofophy  be  other-
wife  than  little  and  contemptible  which
Jiides  the  Deity  from  our  views,  which
excludes  him  from  the  world,  or  does
not terminate in the acknowledmient

and


O?! Providence.  53

and  adoration  of  him  as  the  maker,  pre-
ierver, and  ruler  of  all things  '^.

The  point  on  which  I  have  been  in-
filling is  of  fo  much  importance  that  no
apology  can  be  neceffary  for  dwelling  fo

long  upon  it. What has been faid

has  a  tendency  to  give  an  attentive  mind
the  deepeft  fenfe  of  the  dependence  of
the  creation  on  the  Deity  j  for  it iliev»^s

*  "  The  philofopher  who  overlooks  the  traces  of
*^  an  all-governing  Deity  in  nature,  contenting  him-
"  felf  with  the  appearances  of  the  material  univerfe
<'  only,  and  the  mechanical  laws  of  motion,  neglects
"  what  is  moft  excellent;  and  prefers  what  is  im-
''  perfect  to  w^hat  is  fupremely  perftx%  finitude  to
*^  infinity,  what  is  narrow  and  weak  to  what  is
"  unlimited  and  almighty,  and  what  is  perifning  to
"  what  endures  for  ever."  Mr.  MacklaunrCs  Account
of  Sir  Jfaac  Newton  s  Difcoveries^  Book IV.  Ch.  q,

Sed.  I. "  Sir  Ifaac  Ncv/ton  thought  it  moft

*'  unaccountable  to  exclude  the  Deity  07ily  out  of  tiic
*'  univerfe.  It  appeared  to  hira  much  more  juft
''  and  reafonable-to  fuppofe  that  the  whole  chain  of
*'  caufcs,  or  the  feveral  feries  of  ihem,  fliould  cen*
"  ter  in  him  as  their  fource  ^  and  the  whole  fyftem
"  appear  depending  on  him  the  only  independent
<•  caufe." Ibid,  Sea.  5.

E  3  i^^.


54  On Providence,

VIS  that  he  is  properly  the  life  of  it,  the
irjinitc  Spirit  by  which  it  is  informed  and
fuftained  ;  that  all  material  caufes  are  no
more  than  inftruments  in  his  hand,  and
that  from  him  their  efficacy  is  derived  ;
and  that,  fo  far  is  he  from  being  an  idle
fpedator  of  what  happens,  thatv/ere  he,
for  one  inftant,  to  fufpend  his  agency,
univerfal  confufion  would  take  place,  and
all  nature  fall  to  pieces.

I  need  not  fay  how  irrefiftible  the  evi-
dence is  which arifes from hence for

the  dodrine  of  Providence. What  it

may  be  of  moil  importance  to  recom-
mend to  notice  in  this  place  is  the  fol-
lowing obfervation. ^It  has  been  prov-
ed that  the  Deity  pervades  and  actuates
the  whole  material  world,  and  that  his
unremitting  energy  is  the  caufe  to  which
every  effed:  in  it  muft  be  traced.  Now,
the  fpiritiial  world  is,  without  doubt,  of
greater  confequence.  Is  his  energy  then
wanting  here  ?  Is  there  not  one  atom  of
tnatter  on  which  he  does  not  ad;  and

is


On Providence.  55

is  there  then  o?2e  living  being  about  which
he  has  no  concern  ?  Does  not  a  Jlone
fall  without  him  5  and  does  then  a  man
fuffer  without  him  ?  Are  fuch  influences
as  may  be  necelTary  to  bring  about  a  juft
regulation  of  events  in  the  moral  world,
lefs  likely  than  thofe  influences  w4iich  we
know  to  be  exerted  continually  to  main-
tain the  order  of  the  inanimate  world?
■The  truth  is,  the  inanimate  world
is  of  ?2o  confequence  abftradted  from  its
fubferviency  to  the  animate  and  rea-
fonable  world.  The  former,  therefore,
muil:  be  preferved  and  governed  entirely
with  a  view  to  the  latter  *.

This  leads  me  to  a  further  argument
on  this  fubjed  which  has,  I  think,  con-
fiderable  weight,  ^nd  feems  greatly  to
flrengthen  the  conclufion  I  would  eftab-

*  I  have  not  mentioned  here  the  conftant  exertion
of  Divine  power  in  maintaining  the  fuccefHon  of
vegetables,  and  in  producing  men,  and  other  be-
ings, becaufe  particular  notice  of  it  will  be  taken
hereafter,

E  4  lifh.


56  0;^ P  R  O  V  I  D  ^  N  C  E.

lifli. This  'argument has been

hinted  already,  but  it  is  neceffary  that  it
fhould  be  here  brought  more  particularly
to  view.  It  offers  itfelf  to  us  upon  con-
lidering  the  wifdom  manifefted  in  the
flrudlure  of  every  objeft  in  the  inani-
mate creation.  How  beautiful  is  the
form  of  every  vegetable,  and  how  cu-
rioufly  arranged  its  parts  ?  What  exqui-
fite  mechanifm,  what  nice  workmanfl:iip
and amazing art appear in every leaf

and  fpire  of  grafs  r Let  us  now  afk

ourfelves;  has  God,  on  obje6ls  in  them-
felves  fo  worthlefs,  poured  forth  fuch  a
profufion  of  wifdom  and  Ikill,  and  is
he  fparing  of  thefe  in  the  concerns  of
reafonable  beings  ?  or  does  he  lefs  regard
order  and  fitnefs  in  the  determination  of
their  flates  ? — It  is  not  poffible  to  imagine

this. Whatever  appearance  the  aftairs

of  men  may  at  prefent  make  to  us,  we
may  be  certain  that  they  are  directed  by
the  fame  wifdom  with  that  which  we
obferve  in  the  reft  of  nature  5  that  is,
ty  a  wiiuom  which  we  know  to  bo  in-
finitely


O;^ P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.  57

finitely  fuperior  to  ours  j  by  a  wifdom
which,  in  the  loweft  objeds,  is  exaft
and  incomprehenfible,  and  which,  there-
fore, muft  be  as  much  more  fo,  in
higher  objefts,  as they are of  greater

value. ' — To this  purpofe  in  a  great

meafure  is  the  reafoning  we  find  in  Matt,
vi.  28,  &c.  Why  take  ye  thought  for  rai^
7nent  ?  Conjider  the  Mies  of  the  field  how
they  grow.  They  toil  not^  neither  do  they
fpin  ;  and  yet,  I  fay  unto  you,  that  even  So--
lomon,  in  all  his  glory ^  was  not  arrayed  like
one  of  thefe\  Wherefore,  if  God  fo  clothe
the  grafs  of  the  field,  which  to-day  is,
and  to-morrow  is  cafi  ijito  the  oven-,
ffjall  he  not  much  more  clothe  you,  O  ye
of  little  faith  ?  Behold  the  fowls  of  the
air,  for  they  fow  not,  neither  do  they
reap,  nor  gather  into  hams ;  yet  your
heavenly  father  feedeth  them.  Are  not  ye
much  better  than  they  ?

There  is  not  indeed  any  thing  which
has  a  much  greater  tendency  to  give  re-
lief to a  mind  earneftly v/ifhing  to  be

fatisfied


58  0/2 Providence.

fatisfied  of  a  wife  iuperintendency  of  all
that  befalls  it,  than  to  contemplate  the
curious  organization  of  any  flower  or
herb  of  the  field,  and  the  attention
beftowed  on  even  its  outward  figure;
and  then  to  confider  whether  it  is
probable,  that  the  Being  who  fo  won-
derfully wrought  fuch  a  fubftance,  can
neglecft  any  intellige?it  creature,  or  be
inattentive  to  any  circumftance  of  his
exiftence;  whether  he  who  has  with
perfeft  exaftnefs  adjufted  the  parts  of
dead  matter  to  one  another  in  the  moft
trifling  planfy  muft  not  be  proportion-
ably  exad:  in 'what  is  of  infinitely  great-
er moment,  the  adjuftment  of  plea-
fure  and  pain  to  a  human  foul.*
Or,  let  fuch  a  perfon  fix  his  thoughts
on  the  flrudiure  of  his  body,  .and  con-
fider, whether  it  is  credible  that  he
who  has  fo  fearfully  made  this,  and
difplayed  fuch  unfpeakable  wifdom  in
adjufting  and  regulating  every  particle
of  matter  that  compofes  it ;  has  not
difplayed  proportionable  wifdom  in  the

ftrucSure


0« P  R  O  V  I  D  E N  C  E,  59

ftrufture  of  his  mind,  or  is  not  pro-
portionably  careful  in  adapting  events
to  its  cafe,  and  in  regulating  what-
ever it  feels.—— To fay  no more.

If  unerring  v^ifdom  fhews  itfelf  in  the
direction  and  government  of  corporeal
nature,  and  all  its  parts  are  ordered
in  number,  weight,  and  meafure,  fo
that  the  more  we  know  of  it,  the  more
we  are  forced  to  admire  it,  if  its  mean-
eft  works  are  finiflied  with  complete
accuracy,  and  the  whole  fyftem  ap-
pears harmonious  and  grand  in  the
higheft  poffible  degree ;  what  harmony,
what  wifdom  and  goodnefs  may  we
well  reckon  upon  in  the  government
of  the  intellectual  world  ?  What  care
and  accuracy  in  difpofmg  the  lots  of
the  individuals  of  it  ?  How  grand  muft
be  its  plan,  and  how  perfecft  its  or-
der ?


SECT.


60  On F  ROY  ID  EN  c^.


SECT. III.

Qfthe  manner  in  which  Provideiice  is
adminijlered.


WHAT  has  been  hitherto  faid
contains  a  brief  view  of  the
principal  arguments  for  the  dodrine  of
a  righteous  and  all-wife  Providence.
My  defign  in  this  feclion  is  to  offer  a
few  obfervations  relating  to  the  mode
of  adminiftring  it.

I  have  frequently  in  the  preceding
fcftions  fpoken  on  the  fuppofition,  that
a  perfcdl  dire6lion  of  events  is  brought
about  by  the  Divine  influence,  immedi-
ately and  conftantly  exerted  every  where
for  that  purpofe.  It  muft  however  be
remembered  that  this  is  a  point  about
which  all  are  not  agreed. Many  wife

and


On Providence.  6i

and  good  men  are  ftrongly  prejudiced  a-
gainft  the  fuppofition,  that  there  have
been  any  interpofitions  of  Divine  Pow-
er fince  the  creation  in  directing  affairs,
as  implying  an  impotence,  unfl^ilful-
ncfs,  and  operofenefs  unworthy  of  in-
finite wifdom.  They,  therefore,  chufe
to  conceive  of  the  laws  and  order  of  the
material  world,  as  having  been  at  firil
adjufted  in  exad:  correfpondence  to  what
fhould  happen  in  the  moral  world,  and
the  whole  fcheme  including  all  events
as  originally  defigned  and  laid  in  the
beft  manner,  and  now  continually  going
on  to  open  and  unfold  itfelf  agreeably  to
the Divine idea, without any  cccafiou

for  any  interpofitions. As  far  as  fuch

maintain  the  fame  perfedt  diredion  of
affairs  in  confequence  of  an  origmal  e-
ftablifhment,  as  is  commonly  fuppofed  to
be  brought  about  by  conJia?2t  influences,
they  maintain  all  that  we  have  reafon  to
be  anxious  about  on  the  prefent  fubjedl.
And  this,  indeed,  I  fhould  imagine,  it
muft  be  impofiible  for  any  one  who  has

jull

5


62  O;/ P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.

juft  notions  of  the  Divine  perfecfllons  to
avoid maintaining, let him think on
this  fubjed:  in  other  refpedls  as  he  pleafes.
For  thus we may argue. — When the
Deity  at  firft  fixed  the  prefent plan  of
nature, and  gave  Beings  their  different
powers  and affedions, he  either  had  a
perfecft forefight  of  the  whole  train of
events  that would arife  in  confequence
of  his  eflablifhment,  or  he had not. —
If  he  had  this fore-knowledge,  the  e-
vents  fore-known  were  either  all  of  them
fuch  as  he  faw  it  would  be  properefl  to
leave  as  fore-known,  or  they  were  noto
If  the afiirmative  is aflerted ; it  is  all  I
plead  for. Every  event  in this  cafe  will
be  juft  fuch  as  perfeA  reftitudeis  pleafed

either  to  ??iake  it,  or  to- fuffer  it  to  be.

But,  on  the  contrary,  if  amongft  the
fore-known  events  there  were  any  which
it  was  on  any  account  right  or  proper  to
exclude ;  on  this  fuppofition,  a  good
theift,  who  rejefts  all  occafional  interpoji-
tions  muft  of  necefhty  fay,  that  the  ori-
ginal plan would  have been  fo  altered

a^


O/^ Providence,  63

as  to  exclude  thefe  events,  and  to  pro-
duce a  complete  coincidence  of  all  that
ihould  happen  with  the  counfels  and
defigns  of  infinite  wifdom  and  goodnefs.
This  cannot  be  avoided  while  the  exi-
ftence  of  infinite  wifdom  and  goodnefs
in  nature  is  believed  -,  and  thus  the  doc-
trine of  Providence  in  its  higheft  fenfe
will  ftill be  afferted.

But  if  an  exad  fore-knowledge  of  all
aftions  and  events,  and  fuch  a  perfed:
original  eftablifhment  in  confequence  of
it,  as  I  have  mentioned,  are  thought  by
any  to  be  impoffible  5  and  if,  for  this
reafon,  no  more  is  fuppofed  than  that
powers  were  given  to  beings,  and  ge-
neral laws  fettled,  and  then  events  fuf-
fered  to  arife  as  they  would  without
any  particular  care  or  fuperintendency
exercifed  over  them;  in  this  cafe,  the
dodtrine  of  Providence  will  be  entirely
rejedled  :  And  if  fuch  fentiments  are  true,
the  univerfe  is  a  chaos  ;  the  character  of
the  parent  of  it  is  imperfecfl;  all  truftin

him.


64  0/2 P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.

him  and  fupplications  to  him  are  ab-
furd,  and  no  part  of  practical  religion  has

any  good  foundation. But  after  what

has  been  before  faid,  I  hope  I  may  be
allowed  to  take  it  for  granted,  that  thefe
fentiments  are  not  true,  and  that  there  Is
indeed  a  perfed:  direction  of  all  events.

• The  point  I  am  now  confidering  is,

in  what  manner  this  is  accomplifhed ;
and  it  has  probably  been  already  feen  in
fome  meafure  why  I  chufe  to  conceive
of  it  as  produced  by  conftant  infiuences>
rather  than fuch  an  original eftablifh-

ment as I have mentioned. It  will

appear  to  fome,  that  an  original  eftab-^
lifhment,  anfwering  this  purpofe,  implies
univerfal  fatalifm,  and  that  in  events
happening  amongft  reafonable  agents,
there  muft  be  infinite  variations  and  un-
certainties not  poffible  to  be  regulated
by  it.  But  be  this  as  it  will ;  it  muft,
I  think,  be  difficult  for  an  attentive  per-
fon  to  perfuade  himfelf,  that  the  other
method  of  adminiftring  Providence  is
not  the  moft  capable  of  bringing about

a


O/Z Pr  O  V  I  D  £  N  C  E.  6^

a  perfedl  regulation  of  events.  And  if
this  fhould  be  true ;  or,  if  any  purpofes
of  vvifdom  and  goodnefs  may  be  anfwered
by  conftant  influences,  which  could  not
at  all,  or  not  fo  well,  have  been  anfwer-
ed in  any  other  way,  we  may  be  fatisfied
that  there  really  are  fitch  influences :  And
to  afTert  the  contrary  from  a  prejudice
againft  them  as  not  regular,  or  not  be-
coming the  Deity,  feems  in  the  higheft
degree  unreafonable.  Can  it  be  irregular
to  produce  the  higheft  regularity,  or
unbecoming  the  Deity  to  govern  the
univerfe  and  its  affairs  in  fuch  a  manner
as  is  moft  agreeable  to  the  ends  for  which
he  created  it  ?  Will  he  facrifice  the  high-
eft,  order  to  theloweft^  or  fufFcr  events
to  arife  at  random  in  the  v/orld,  rather
than  at  any  time  put  forth  his  hand  to
dired  them  ?  Muft  he  have  been  only
lookin£(  en  ever  fince  the  creation ;  and
is  this  what  is  moil  becoming  him  ?

Some, probably, are  led  into  miftakes
on  this  fubjed,  by  thinking  of  the  man-

F  ncr


66  On Providence.

ner  in  which  it  is  moft  becoming  the
Deity  to  a(fl,  too  ftridtly  in  conformity
to  that  in  which  men  are  obliged  to  adl.
They  have  but  little  power,  and  there-
fore are  obliged  to  be  as  frugal  of  it  as
poffible.  But  there  is  nothing  difficult
to  the  Deity,  and  confequentJy  there
can  be  nothing  to  influence  him  to  chufe
one  way  of  a<5ting  rather  than  another,
beiides,  its  being  more  agreeable  to  recti-
tude, and  more  conducive  to  his  end.
And  this  likewife  is,  in  reality,  the  moft
beautiful  way  of  adling.  Beauty  confifts
chiefly  in  the  proper  and  efFedual  adap-
tation of  means  to  ends.  For  this  rea-
fon,  thofe  means  are  the  m^oft  beautiful,
and  thofe  fyftems  the  beft,  which  beft
anfwer  their  end. In  mere  natural  or-
der, abilraded  from  all  ufe,  there  is  no-
thing valuable;  and  the  very  reafon  why
the  Deity  has  chofen  to  eftablifh  a  courfe
of  nature  is,  the  neceffity  of  it  as  a  means
to  produce  happinefs,  and  to  give  his
.rcafonable creatures room  for  a  proper

exertion


0)1 Providenc  e.  67

exertion  of  their  faculties^  and for the
praffice  of  virtue*

Thefe  obfervations  feem  to  me  of  im*
portance on the prefent fubjed:  5 but,
without  having  recourfe  to  them,  it  muft
furely  be  very  evident, that  influences,
confiftent  with  the  free  agency  of  beings
and  uniformly  exerted  to  exclude  every
event  fit  to  be  excluded,  and  to  produce
perfedl  order  in  the  adminiftration  of  the
world, are  fo far  from  unbecoming  the
almighty  and  omniprefent  parent,  that  we
can  conceive  of  nothing  more  worthy  of
him, or  that  can  make  his  charadter  ap-
pear more  amiable. Nor  is  there any
more  reafon  to  be  prejudiced  againft  them,
than  againft  the  influence  which  the  con-
ilitution  of  the  world allows to every
agent  over  events, in  proportion to  his
power  and  knowledge. There  is  no  per-
fon  who does not influence in various
ways  what  paflTes  withfn  the  circle  of  his
friends  and  acquaintance,  and  it  has  never
yet been thought that the liberty
" F  2  of


68  On P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.

oi  maokindj  or  their  fcope  for aftion  is
afFeded  by it. Invifible and fuperior
Beings  may  alfo  be frequently  employed
in  directing  occurrences  among  mankind.
Now,  the  influence  of  Divine  Providence
is  a  fadl  of  the  fame kind  with thefe,
and  feems not to be on any account
more  liable  to  objecflions. Shall  we  ac-
knowledge the influence of  every  agent
on  events,  and  deny  that  of  the  Supreme  ?
Was  it  indeed  fit  that  by  one  original  adt
he  fliould exclude  himfelf  from  all  fur-
ther concern  with  his  works ;  or  can  it
be  poflfible  to  imagine  that  the  Being  who
is  the  fountain  of  all  energy,  and  whofe
nature is perfe(3: adlivity and power,
fhould  be  tlie c;^//  inadive  Being  in  the
univerfe  ?  Is  it  not,  on  the  contrary,  much
more  rational  to  believe,  that  his  influence
over  events  extends  as  much  further  than
that  of  any  other  Being,  and  is  as  much
more  conftant, as  the  relation in  which
he (lands  to Beinj^s  is  nearer, and his


power  and  wifdom  greater  ?


Ill


Oj7 Pr  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.  69

la  (hort;  the  notion  of  an  ^&//!^/6(y  Be-
ing, pejfe^l/y  benevolent  y  obferving  the  afFdirs
of  his  own  offspring,  and  yet  never  exerting
any  influence  to  give  them  that  diredion
which  he  moft  approves,  muil:,  1  iliould
think,  appear  too  inconfiftent  and  ab-
furd  not  to  fliock  every  attentive  and  un-
prejudiced  perfon. — ^ With refpe^:,

however,  to  the  analogy  I  have  juft  men-
tioned between  Divine  Providence  ^d
the  influence  of  created  agents,  'tis  ne-
ceffary  to  obferve,  that  it  ihould  be  con-
fidered  with  fome  caution.  We  (hall
here  be  in  great  danger  of  deceiving  our-
felves,  if  we  judge  of  what  the  Deity
fhould  do,  by  v^hat  we  ought  to  do.
'Tis  our  duty  to  exclude,  as  far  as  we  can,
all  vice  and  fufferings  from  the  world;
and  becaufe  this  is  not  done  by  the  Deity,
v/ho  has  all  hearts  in  his  hands,  and  an
unlimited  power  over  events,  fome  have
queftiontd  whether  he  at  all  direds
events,  or  concerns  Himfelf  about  us.
But  happy  is  it  for  the  world  that  it  i?

F I  110;


yo  0/z Providence.

not  governed  in  the  manner  in  which
human  wifdom  v^ould  govern  it.  From
what  is  incumbent  on  us  in  our  circum-
ftances,  we  cannot  by  any  means  infer
what,  in  this  inftance,  it  is  proper  for
the  Deity  to  do  as  fupreme  governor  *.
We  are  too  -much  unacquainted  with  his
counfels  and  plan  to  be  able  to  determine
this. Undoubted fadt  proves  that  the

#  A  teacher  of  religion  who  had  the  power  by  his
inflrudlions  and  perfuafions  to  engage  men  efFecluaJly
to  virtue  would  be  inexcufable  as  far  a$  he  neglected
this.  But  it  fepms  that  Jefus  Chrift  could  have  (o
fpoken  to  men,  and  i'o  influenced  their  hearts,  as
to  render  his  rniniflry  more  fuccefsful  than  it  was.
He  tells  us,  that  thrre  were  places  where,  if  he  had
done  the  fame  works  that  he  did  in  Judea,  the
inhabitants  would  have  repented  in  fackcioth  and
afhes.  Thefe  places  therefore  muft  have  been  denied
the  rricans  which  it  was  known  w'ould  have  brought
them  to-happinefs. — There  are  degrees  of  advantages
which,  if  .men  refift  or  mifimprove,  the  Deity  does
not  fee  fit  to  grant  them  more,  whatever  he  may
know  would  be  the  confequence.  gut  by  what  rea-
fons  or  rules  particularly  his  providence  ir.  guided  in
this  inftancc  we  cannot  fay.

3  original


0/Z Pr  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.  7t

original  conflitution  was  fo  eftablifhed
by  him  as  to  admit  of  vice  and  fufFer-
ings  in  the  prefent  ftate,  and  that  there-
fore it  cannot  be  a  part  of  his  fcheme  of
Providence  entirely  to  exclude  them.
We  fee  that  there  are  numberlefs  perfons
to  whom  he  does  not  give  all  the  ad-
vantages for  virtue  and  happinefs  which
they  might  enjoy,  and  which,  in  all
probability,  would  be  ^fFeftual.  'Tis
fufficient  to  know  that  he  gives  more
than  enough  to  all,  and  does  every  thing
that  it  is  wifeft  and  beft  for  him  to  do,
in  order  to  bring  about  univerfal  and  in-
finite happinefs. But  this  fubjedl  will

be  more  particularly  confidered  hereafter,
when  I  come  to  examine  the  objedions
againft  Providence,  taken  from  the  evil,
natural and  moral,  in  the  world.

Many  of  thofe  who  think,  that  there
are  no  conftant  influences  of  the  Deity
in  directing  events,  are  ready  to  acknow-
ledge, and  every  one  who  believes  that
Chriflianity  was  proved  by  miracles  and
F  4  came


^2  0/2 P  R  O  y  I  P  E  N  C  E.

came  from  God,  mufh  acknowledge,  that
there  are  particular  emergencies  in  which
lie  does  interpofe  in  the  affairs  of  the
world.  Now,  this  conceffion  is  fuffici-
ent  to  eftablifli  what  I  am  plead-
ing for.  For  let  it  but  be  allowed  that
the  Deity  has  ever  once  interpofed  fmce
the  original  eftabliihment  of  things,  and
there  will  remain  no  tolerable  reafon  foi:
imagining,  that  he  does  not  interpofe  con-^.
tinually,  as  far  as  there  is  any  occafion.

It  will,  I  think,  be  frivolous  to  affert,
that  this  account  of  Providence  rnafces  it
a  continued  feries  of  77iiracles,  If  all  ex-
ertions of  Divine  Power  are  to  be  con-
fidered  as  ?.niraailousy  this  will  indeed  be
trucj nor  w^ill  there  be  the  lead  reafon

why  it  fliould  not  be  admitted. That

influence  of  lupcrior  power  w4iich  is
implied  in  a  miracle  may,  for  ought  we
know,  be  exerted  on  numberlefs  occa-
fion s  5  and  what  diftinguifhes  it  from
common  events  may  be  only  that,  in  the
caft  of  a  miracle,  the  influence  of  fuperior

power


On Providence,  jn

power  is  rendered  obvious  and  fenfible,  by
the  extraordinary  circumftances  attending
a  particular  fad.  Thus;  the  removal  of
a  difeafe  in  the  common  courfe  of  things
no  perfon  can  look  upon  as  miraculous,
whatever  he  may  believe  concerning  the
conftant  agency  of  the  Deity  in  the  crea-
tion. But  if  a  (Jifeafe  is  removed  inftan-
taneouflyat  the  command  of  a  man,  or
in  any  other  manner  which  cannot  be
accounted  for  by  the  ordinary  pov/ers  of  "^
nature ;  in  this  cafe,  the  interpofition  of
fuperior  power  becomes  vi/We,  and  a  pro-
per miracle  happens.

But  v/hat  effedually  removes  every  ob-
jedion  of  this  kind,  and  almofl  decides
the  queflion  1  am  confidering,  is  a  point
which  has  been  already  at  large  infifled
upon ;  namely,  ^^  That  the  caufe  from
''  which  the  general  laws  ^  that  o-overn


■' e


''  thi


*  It  is  to  be  wifhcd,  that  all  who  think  on  the  fub-
jea  of  this  fedion  would  confider,  what  they  mean
by  the  word  Laivs. It  is  very  ambiguous  and  indeter-


minate


74  O;/ P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.

"  the  material  world  are  derived,  is  the
**  immediate  power  of  the  Deity  exerted
"  every  where."  It  has,  I  hope,  been
fliewn  in  the  laft  fed:ion,  that  we  have
clear  and  flrbng  evidence  for  this. — To
what  was  there  faid,  I  will  beg  leave  to
add,  on  the  prefent  occafion,  that  it  is
from  this  caufe  alfo,  in  particular,  muft  be
derived  that  conftant  fucceffion  of  ve-
getables and  animals  which  is  kept  up  in
the  world.  There  is  not  one  fadt  in  na-
ture which  can  be  completely  accounted
for  by  the  mere  pov/ers  of  mechanifm.
Moft  certainly  then  this  facl  cannot  be
thus  accounted  for. 'Tis  utterly  incon-

minate  in  its  fignification,  and  has  been  often  ftrange-
Jy  mifapplied  and  abufed.  The  prefent  queftioji
farniihes  us  with  a  ftrong  proof  of  this.  The  gene-
ral laws  of  nature  fignify  nothing  but  particular
phenomena  which  are  obferved  in  nature,  or  particu-
lar modes  of  the  operation  of  fome  caufe.  When,
therefore,  the  regulation  of  events,  the  continuance
of  the  order  of  the  world,  or  the  formation  of  vegeta-
bles and  animals  is  afcribed  to  Laws  eftabliflied  at  the
creation,  cither  the  word  Laws  has  no  fenfe  at  all,  like
the  word  Nature  when  ufed  in  the  fame  manner,  or  it
muft  fignify  the  regular  and  conftant  agency  of  the
Creator.

celvablcj


O// P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.  75

ceivable,  that  works  of  fuch  ftupendous
art  as  the  bodies  of  vegetables and  ani-
mals, myriads of  which  are  continually-
formed  about  us,  fhould  be  derived  from
laws  planted  at  the  creation  in  dead  mat-
ter, which  have  ever  fince  executed  them-
felves. Thofe who fay this,  fay they
know  not  what. They  make  unmeaning
words  fland  for  caufes,  and  attribute  to
matter  infinitely  more  than  it  is  capable
of. Every new vegetable or animal,
therefore,  I  confider  as a new  produc-
tion of  Divine  Power, ailing conftantly
and regularly  according to an  order  or
fcheme  at  firft  fixed  by  his  wifdom. But
there  is  particular  reafon to  think thus
with  refpedl  to  the confcious and  living
principles of  animals. 'Tis  juft  as  pof-
fible  that  thefe  fhould  arife  into  exiftence,
in  confequence  of  laws  eftablifhed  at  the
creation, without  any  immediate  exertion
of  Divine  Power,  as  it  is  that  they  fliould
arife  into  exiftence  of  themfelves  without
any  caufe  at  all  *. On this  account,

the
*  I  am  fenfible  that  there  is  room  here  for  recurring

to


^6  0>^ P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.

the  prejer^ation  of  all  things  appears  to
be  indeed  but  very-  little  different  from

. a  con^

to  the  notion  of  an  original  fimultaneous  produdioii
of  all  things  ;  and  that  fome  will  not  hefltate  to  af-
iert,  particularly,  concerning  the  living  principles  in
men  and  brutes,  that  they  have  exifted  from  the  firft
formation  of  this  earth,  and  have  ever  fmce  either  lain
dormant  till  united  to  bodies,  or  been  tranfmigrating
from  one  animal  to  another;  I  will  not  lofe  time  ih
pointing  out  the  abfurdity  and  extravagance  of  this
notion.  How  poor  are  the  prejudices  which  lead
perfons  to  fcek  fuch  expedients  for  maintaining  the
inacStivityof  the  Deity  ?  What  is  it  that  renders  it  fo
necefTary  to  confine  the  exertion  of  creative  power  to
the  firft  formation'  of  a,  fyftem^  rather  than  to  con-
iider  it  as  going  on  to  exert  itfelf,  according  to  a  fixed

order,  during  the  continuance  of  a  fyftem  ? Let  this

however  be  allowed.  Still,  fince  fuch  an  original
I'lmalianeous  creation  as  I  have  mentioned  mufl  be
fuppoicd  for  every  particular  fyftem  ;  and  fince,  moft
probably,  ther^  are  new  fyftems  continually  brought
into  being  in  the  boundlefs  univerfe  ;  it  will,  even  in
this  way,  be  neceliary  to  admit  the  conflant  exertion
of  Divine  Power  ;  nor  is  it  pollible  to  avoid  this  con-
clufion,  without  extending  the  notion  now  mentioned
to  the  whole  of  nature,  and  afierting.that  there  never
has  been  more  than  one  2.Qt  of  Divine  Power,  and
that  all  the  fLicceffions  of  Beings  and  worlds  fince
the  commencement  of  created  txiftence,  with  all

theii

3


Oil Providence.  77

a  continual  creat'm  y  for  was  creative
power  to  ceafe  operating,  the  confequence
would  be,  that  no  more  new  beings  would
make  their  appearance  in  the  world,  and
that  this  earth  would  foon  become  a
wild  and  horrid  defart.

The  conclufion  arifing  from  thefe  ob-
fervations  is  very  obvious.  Divine  Pow-
er, we  fee,  did  not  ceafe  operating  at  the
creation.  It  appears,  on  the  contrary,
that  there  is  a  conftant  exertion  of  it
through  all  nature.  Can  there  be  any
reafon  for  denying  that  by  it  Providence
is  adminiftered  ?  Though  employed  con-
tinually in  the  prefervation  of  the  gene-
ral laws  of  the  material  world,  and  the
produftion  of  animate  and  inanimate
Beings,  mufl  it  be  fuppofed  to  have  nor

their  different  laws,  Have  taken  place  of  themfelves,
and  will  for  ever  continue  to  do  fo,  in  virtue  of  that
one  act,  without  requiring  any  immediate  diredion
from  the  Creator,  or  any  interpofition  of  his  power.
If  there  is  any  perfon  who  is  inclined  to  adopt  this
opinion,  I  have  nothing  to  fay  to  him.

thine:


78  0;Z PR  O  VI  DE  N  C  E,

thing t(
agents  ?


thing to do with the  affairs  of  moral


t)


I  cannot  think  of  more  than  one  diiEH-^
culty  that  can  here  offer  itfelf  to  any
perfon's  thoughts.  It  is  poifible,  that
fome  who  admit  thofe  general  influences
of  Divine  Power  by  which  the  world
is  preferved,  may  yet  imagine  that  there
is  an  incredibility  in  that  kind  of  influ-
ence which  the  interpofitions  of  Provi-
dence imply,  becaufe,  being  accommo-
dated to  particular  cafes  and  occafions,
it  muft  be  a  particular  and  occaiional  in-
iiuence  introduced  out  of  courfe,  and  not
reducible  to  any  ftated  and  uniform  mode
of  operation.  It  cannot  perhaps  be  ne-
cefTary  to  take  much  notice  of  this  ob-
jection.  Since general  influences are

only  a  number  of  particular  ones,  the
diflindion  upon  which  it  is  founded  can-
not be  of  much  weight.  And,  fup-
pofing  it  of  weight,  it  muft  be  in  a  great
mealure  invalidated  by  fome  of  the  fadls
I have  mentioned;  for  among  thefe  are

inftances.


On Providencjb.  79

inftances,  not  only  of  general  and  ftated
exertions  of  Divine  Power  in  the  world,
but  of  fuch  as  muft  be  meant  by  par-
ticular and  occafional  Ones. However,

were  it  at  all  neceffary,  it  might  very
well  be  granted,  without  any  prejudice
to  the  prefent  argument,  that  the  Deity
always  afts  by  general  influence,  and  in  a
ftated  courfe.  It  is  eafy  to  conceive,  that
the  agency  by  which  a  particular  provi-
dence is  carried  on,  may  be  an  agency  by
laws  operating,  in  given  circumstances,
invariably  and  regularly ;  for  no  one  can
fay,  what  laws  and  regulations  may  be
eftablifhed  in  the  univerfe,  by  which
events  may  be  fecretly  directed.  Dr.
Butler  *  obferves, that  fo  particular  an

interpofal

*  "  Thus,  that  miraculous  powers  fhould  be  ex-
*'  erted  at  fuch  times,  upon  fuch  occafions,  in  fuch
"  degrees  and  manners,  and  with  regajd  to  fuch
^*  perfons  rathei^than  others;  that  the  affairs  of  the
"  world,  being  permitted  to  go  on  in  their  natural
*'  courfe  fo  far,  fhould,  juft  at  fuch  a  point,  have
*'  a  new  direction  given  them  by  miraculous  inter-
*<  pof.tions;  that  thefe  interpofitions  fhould  be  ex-

*«  aaiy


8q  Oji Providence.

interpofai  of  tlie  Deity  as  that  in  the
Chriftian  revelation,  might  have  been  by
general  law^s.  It  is  at  leaft  certain,  that
there,  is  one  law  to  vs^hich  the  whole  of
divine  influence  in  nature,  of  whatever
kind  it  is,  may  be  reduced.  I  mean  the
{w}pvQmQ\2iV7  oireBitude,  When  viewed
in  their  reference  to  this,  all  the  diverfities
of  operation  by  which  the  adminiftra-
tion  of  the  world  may  be  condudled;,
2gree,  and  appear  to  be  only  different
effed:s  of  one  and  the  fame  principld  -
acling  varioufly,  according  to  the  different
circumflaiices  and  characters  of  moral
agents. -r-^- — If  any  perfoil  fhould  ftili
want  fatisfad:ion  about  the  prefent  pointy'

"  aclly  in  fuch  degrees  and  rcfpedls  only ;  all  this
*'  rniiv  have  been  bv  f;encral  laws  :  Unknown  in-
*'  deed  to  us  :  But  no  more  unknown  'than  the  laws
'*  from  whence  it  is  that  fome  die  as  foon  as  they
*'  are  born,  and;  others  live' to  extreme  old  agef
"•  that  one  man  is  fo  fuperior  to  another  in  under-
"  ftacding;  with  innumerable  moPe  things,  which
"  we  canot  reduce  to  any  laws  or  rules  at  all,  tho'
'*■  it  is  taken  for  granted  they  are  as  much  reduceablc
*'  to  general  ones,  as  gravitation."  Jnalogy^  Fa.nll.
Chap.  4.

let


0;2 Pr  o  V  I  b  £  N  c  E.  Si

let him  recoiled:  an  obfervation which
has  been  made  at  the  beginning  of  this
fedlion. Let him confider that there
IS  no  more  reafon for  being  prejudiced
againft  the  influence  of  mvi/iik  agents^
and  efpecially  the  fupreme>  over  events^
while a courfe  of  nature is  going  on,
than there  is  for  being prejudiced, on
the fame  account^ againft  the  influence
which  vi/^o/e  agents  have  over  the  affairs
of  their  Own fpecies, and thofe  of  the
Beings  belov\^  them. The  latter  we  know
to  be,  not  only  conflftent  with  the  courfe
of  nature,  but  a  part  of  it ;  and  the  other
may  be  equally  fo. This  is  fo  true  that,
agreeably  to  Dr.  Butler's  obfervation,  even
the  interpofition  of  fuperior  power  im-
plied in  a  miracle, however unufual or
extraordinary, may  be  entirely  natural  :
That  is  i  '  the  conftitution  of  the  v/orld
may  be  fuch  as allows  of  it  in  certain
cafes.—.!  know  it  is  common  to  think,
that  miracles  imply  a  fnfpajfion  or  viola^
tion  of  the  laws  of  nature. But  no  opi-
nion can  be  more  groundlefs. Were


u-e
G  to


82  0/2 P  R  O  V  1  t)  E  N  C  £.

to  fee  the  motion  of  water  downwards
ceafe  at  once  at the  word  of  a  man, or
a  river parted  in its  courfe, as Jordan
was, we  {hould  fee  a  miracle. But  we
could  not  fay  that  the  law  of  gravita-
tion was  fufpended  5 for  the  water  might
have  gravitated as ufuaU  and the  true
caufe  of  the  event  be,  the  exertion  of  an
adequate  fuperior  power  to  controul  the
effefts  of  gravitation,  in  which  its  fufpen-
fion  is  no  more  implied,  than  in  a  man's
preventing  a  heavy  body  from  falling,  by
applying  his  hand  to  it. Nor  could  we
in  this  inftance  fay,  that  the  event  was
not  agreeable  to  the  conftitution of  the
univerfe ; for  in  order  to  this  we  (hould
be  able  to  difcover  what  the  conftitution
of  the  univerfe  is,  taking  in  the  vifible  and
inviiible  world, and that  it  excludes  all
interpofitions  oi fuperior  power  in  human

affairs.- -Every  one  will  eafily  fee  how

thefe  obfervations  are  to  be  applied  to
the  purpofe  for  which  they  are  mention-
ed.  Difmiffmg them, therefore,  I

ihall  beg  leave  to  introduce  here  one  fur-
ther


O;^ P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  £.  83

ther  obfervation  which  feems  worth  no-^
tice.

It  ought  to  be  confidcred,  that  events
happen  in  the  world  in  fuch  a  manner,
as  plainly  render  it  not  unlikely,  that  there
may  be  fome  fuperior  influence  concerned
in  directing  them.  We  are  far  from,
having  a  perfed  knowledge  of  all  the
caufes  from  whence  events  arife,  and
therefore  cannot  fay  how  far  the  Divine
hand  may  be  among  thofe  caufes*  The
uncertainty  which  attends  all  human
fchemes  is  continually  obferved  and  felt,
and  has  given  rife  to  the  common  no-
tions of  Fortune^  by  which  many  of  the
antient  philofophers  feem  to  have  meant
the  fame  with  Provide?2ce.  The  bcfl
laid  fchemes  often  fail  of  fuccefs  flrange-
ly,  and  fome  of  the  moft  important
changes  are  often  derived  from  incidents
in  themfelves  entirely  frivolous,  fo  that,
indeed,  it  is  not  poflible  for  us  to  imagine
what  would  follow  from  an  alteration  of
any  one  circumftance  in  the  general  feries

Q  z  of


84  0?2 Providence.

of  events.  What  room  then  Is  there  fof
the  influence  of  invifible  agency  ?  What
a  command  over  events  would  a  fuperlor
Being  have,  by  only  a  fecret  diredlion  of
what  appears  to  us  moft  accidental  and
trifling  ?

Such  are  the  moft  material  obfervations
which  have  occurred  to  me,  on  the  man-
ner in  which  Providence  is  adminiftered.
—The  great  enquiry  on  this  fubjecft
is,  how  far  it  is  reafonable  to  admit  the
conftant  exertion  of  Divine  influence  for
this  purpofe.  In  anfwer  to  this  enquiry,
I  have  endeavoured  to  reprefent  the  folly
of  thofe  prejudices  which  difpofe  men
to  exclude  from  the  world  the  influence
of  the  Deity,  and  to  confider  him  as
being  what  no  other  agent  is;  only  a  mere
fpedlator  of  the  laws  and  order  of  the
world.  But  more  than  this  has  been
done.  It  has,  I  think,  been  demon-
ftrated  that  the  laws  and  order  of  the
world  are  nothing  but  his  uniform  agency;
and  that  the  notion  of  a  felf-fubfifting

world.


0;z Pr  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.  85

world,  or  of  a  fcheme  eilabliftied  at  the
creation  which  has  been  ever  lince  exe-
cuting itfelf  without  depending  on  the
Creator,  Implies  an  abfolute  impoffibility.
There  is,  therefore,  a  neceffity  of
acknowledging  the  conflant  exertion  of
Divine  influence  in  nature.  This  leads
us  almoft  unavoidably  to  conceive  of  Pro-
vidence as  adminiftered  by  it.  And,  in
anfwer  to  a  difficulty  which  might  pof-
fibly  remain  with  fome,  it  has  been  ob-
ferved,  that  it  is  neither  neceffary  to  con-
fider  the  influence  of  Providence  as  an
adventitious  influence  out  of  the  courfe
of  nature,  nor  if  it  was,  could  any  rea-
fon  be  drawn  from  hence  for  rejeding
it.

The  queftion  I  have  been  difcufiing
io,  I  think,  the  only  queftion  on  the
mode  of  the  adminiftration  of  Providence,
about  which  there  can  be  much  dilpute.
It  is  neceflrary  this  fhould  be  obferved,
bepaufe  fpme  probably  wilj  be  inclined

G  3  to


86  0?i Providence.

to  think,  that  there is  another  queftion
of  which  notice  fliould  have  been  taken  ;
namely,  the  queftion  how  far  Providence
is carried  on  by the inftrumentality  of
fubordinate agents. But  it  will eafily
appear,  that  the  difcuffion  of  this  queftion
cannot  lead  us into  any  fentiments  on
the  points  I  have  been  confidering,  diffe--
rent  from  thofe  already  explained. 'Tis
with  me  out  of  doubt,  that  there  is  an^
inftrumentality  of  fubordinate  agents  in
carrying  on the  deligns of  Providence,
and  it may  not  perhaps be  poftible  to
conceive how far  it  reaches  i but  then,
I  confider  thefe  agents  as  ading  in  every
inftance under the fuperintendency of
the Deity, which  reduces  their  inftru-
mentality into  a  perfect  coincidence  with'
that mode of  adminiftring  Providence,

for  which  I  have  pleaded. If  any  one

will  deny  this,  and  aflert  that  there  is
no  other  diredlicn  of  affairs  than  is  pro-
duced by  created  Beings,  uninfluenced
by  the  Deity, and  afting  without  com-

miffion


On Providence.  87

miflion  from  him  ;  in  this  cafe,  there  will
plainly  be  no  other  Providence  than  that
of  thefe  Beings,  and  all  things  will  be
left  to  the  effeds  of  an  original  eftablifli-
ment,  without  any  fubfequent  care  or
government.  Several  remarks  have
been  already  made  on  this  opinion,  and
there  will  be  occafion  to  fay  fomewhat
more  about  it  in  the  next  fedion.  I  am
in  hopes,  however,  that  but  little  need  be
faid  to  convince  moft  confiderate  perfons,
that  the  moral  world  is  not  thus  left
to  itfelf,  or  that  the  feveral  orders  of
reafonable  Beings  in  it  are  not  delivered
up  in  fuch  a  manner  to  their  influence
on  one  another,  as  that  there  is  no  fiipre?7ie
direBion  from  the  Deity.  Were  there
no  fuch  decifive  arguments  to  be  urged
as  fome  that  have  been  propofed,  we
might  well  reckon,  with  confidence,  that
the  Being  v/ho  is  moft  nearly  related
and  moft  intimately  prefent  to  the  world,
is  alfo  the  Being  who  has  the  moft
conftant  and  adlive  concern  with  it.
G  4  But


88  O;? P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.

Put  not  to  repeat  what  has  been  be*
fore  faid,  I  fliali  now  proceed  to  fome
further  pomts,  which  it  will  be  proper
to  confider  on  the  fuh^c^  of  Providence,


SECT.


On  Providence.  8gf


S  E  C  T. IV.

Of  the  0b]e5iions  againjl  Providence,


A  Good  deal  has  been  faid  in  anfwer
to  feveral  of  the  objections  which
have  been  made  againft  the  dodlrine  of
Providence.  But  there  are  fome  impor-
tant ones  of  which  no  notice  has  been  tak-
en, and  my  deiign  in  this  feftion  is  to  offer
a  few  obfervations  upon  them.

It  would  preclude  much  that  has  been
objefted  on  this  fubje<ft  to  remember,  that
the  diredlions  of  Providence  are,  as  it  is
certainly  beft  they  (hould  be,  concealed
and  invifible;  and  that,  therefore,  we
cannot  in  particular  cafes  determine  in
what  manner  its  influence  has  been  ex-
erted, or  what  its  intentions  are.  My
meaning  here  will  be  beft  explained  by

con^


<5<3  On P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  Cl^.

confidering  a  few  inflances. A  fleet,

fuppofe,  has  beat  an  enemy's  fleet  in
confequence  of a fudden turn of the

wind  in  its  favour. Here  would  be

an  event  which,  we  might  afTuredly  be-
lieve, did  not  happen  without  the  con-
cern and  direction  of  the  Deity,  and
which  might  reafonably  be  afcribed  to
him  as  the  firft  caufe  and  fupreme  difpofer
of  all  things.  But  it  would  be  prefump-
tuous  to  fay,  that  it  proved  his  approba-
tion of  the  vigors  and  their  caufe,  or
that  the  fudden  turn of  the wind  was

produced  by  his  immediate  hand. A-

gain  j  an  earthquake,  let  us  fuppofe,
has  laid  in  ruins  a  city  or  a  kingdom.
That  perfon  would,  in  my  opinion,  be
inexcufable,  who  fhould,  in  this  cafe,
terminate  his  views  in  the  natural  caufes
which  produced  the  earthquake.  The
eftablifliing  thefe  caufes  at  firft  in  the
frame  of  nature,  and  condudling  things
fmce  in  fuch  a  manner  as  that  it  fliould
happen  juft  ^when  and  where  it  did,  ought
in  all  reafon  to  be  afcribed  to  the  Divine

good


On Providence.  91

good  pleafure.  And  were  not  this  the
cafe,  or  were  it  true  that  it  never  was
any  objedl  of  Divine  forefight  and  coun-
fe],  but  derived  entirely  from  blind  chance
or  fate,  all  religious  views  of  it  would
be  irrational  and  abfurd.  The  particular
intentions,  however,  of  Providence  in  fuch
a  calamity,  or  the  reafons  by  which  its
difpofals  with  refpedl  to  it  have  been
guided,  we  are  not  capable  of  difcover-
ing ;  and  many  perfons  have  been  much
too  free  in  their  judgments  on  fuch  occa-
fions,  and,  in  confequence  of  this,  have
done  much  towards  bringing  this  dodlrine
into  difcredit. We  may  perceive  in-
deed fome  general  ends  which  are  an-
fwered  by  all  events  of  this  kind,  fuch
as  to  alarm  and  awaken  men,  and  bring
them  to  a  fenfe  of  virtue  and  piety  :  But
we  cannot  go  much  further;  or  fay,  for
example,  that  the  calamity  was  defigned
as  a  judgment  on  the  fufferers,  and  in-
dicated  them  to  be  worfe  than  other
men,

Once


92  O;/ P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.'

Once  more.  A  good  man,  let  us  fup-r
pofe,  with  ferioufnefs  and  fimplicity,
makes  it  the  conftant  fubjeft  of  his  pray-
ers to  the  Deity  that  he  would  fhew  him
what  is  true  and  right,  deliver  his  mind
from  the  influence  of  unreafonable  preju-
diccSy  and  dired  his  thoughts  and  en-
quiries.  Such  a  perfon  may,  I  think,  be
aflured  in  general,  that  his  prayers  are
gracioufly  regarded,  and  that  he  is,  in
fome  way  or  other,  the  better  for  them.
And  he  may  alfo  even  believe  that  his
fentiments,  in  confequence  of  them,  are
nearer  to  truth  than  they  would  other  wife
have  been.  But  wherein,  particularly,
they  are  fo;  or  how  far,  in  confequence
of  his  prayers,  he  has,  on  any  one  point,
been  guarded  from  error,  it  is  not  pof-
fible  for  him  to  know.  As  the  Deity  has
thought  fit  to  make  us  fhort-fighted  and
fallible,  we  muft  be  ignorant  to  what  de-
gree he  may  fuflfer  us  to  miftake.  Our
chief  fecurity  and  comfort  on  this  head
are,  that,  with  honefl  hearts,  we  cannot
pijftake  dangeroufly,  or  fall  into  any  errors
I  that


O;^ P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.  9j

that  ftiall  be  imputed  to  us  as  crimes,  and
leflen  the  Divine  favour  to  us.

What  has  been  now  faid  concernino"
the  influences  of  Divine  Providence  is
very  neceffary  to  be  attended  to,  in  or-
der to  prevent  the  danger  of  fuperftitioa

and  enthufiafm. That  there  is  a  wife

Providence  extending  to  all  events,  we
have,  it  has  been  fhewn,  fufficient  evi-
dence to  prove :  And  that  its  influence
is  not  difcernible  by  us,  or  diftinguiih-
able,  in  its  exertions,  from  the  common
operations  of  natural  caufes,  and  tho.
courfe  of  our  own  thoughts,  is  no  more
any  reafon  for  denying  its  reality,  than
it  is  for  denying  the  reahty  of  our  fouls,
or  of  the  ubiquity  of  the  Divine  effence^
that  they are  not  the  immediate  objeds

of  fenfible  obfervation. In  fome  in-

ftances,  indeed,  the  interpofitions  of  the
Deity  have  been  open  and  fenfible,  but
fuch  interpofitions  are  very  extraordinary ;
and  to  exped:  them  in  any  common  cafes
would  be  madnei^.  The  delufions  of  en-
thufiafm


94  O;^ P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E,

thufiafm  take  their  rife  from  hence,  and
confifl  chiefly  in  afcribing  particular  feel-
ings, without  reafon,  to  fupernatural  fug-
geftion  ;  or  in  imagining  that  the  direc-
tions of  God's  Providence,  and  his  influ-
ence on  the  foul,  are  capable  of  being
particularly  obferved.

'Tis  proper  that  it  fhould  be  further
obferved  here,  with  refped  to  the  doftrine
of  Providence,  that  it  ought  never  to
be  explained  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to
defl:roy  the  value  of  the  agency  of  created
beings.  This  would  be  the  cafe  were
fuch  a  dependence  of  events  on  the  Deity
maintained,  as  would  imply  that  they  are
not  at  all  dependent  on  the  wills  of  in-
ferior Beings.  No  one,  I  hope,  who
has  attended  to  the  account  I  have  giv-*
en  of  Providence,  can  think  tJiat  any
fuch  confequence  arifes  from  it.  I  have
fliewn,  particularly,  how  confiflient  this
dodrine  is  with  the  liberty  of  mankind  ;
and  what  has  been  faid  to  this  purpofe,
together  with  the  obfervations  that  have

been


0;2 P  R  0  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.  9^

been  made  on  the  manner  of  adminifter-
ing  Providence,  is  fufficient  to  remove
any  objedions  that  can  be  taken  from
the  neceffity  of  allowing  Beings,  when
created,  fcope  for  aftion,  and  leaving
events,  in  fome  meafure,  to  be  deter-
mined by  their  choice.  This,  undoubt-
edly, is  neceffary.  Were  there  no  fcope
for  adion  given  Beings,  or  had  they  no
power  over  what  comes  to  pafs,  there
could  be  no  fuch  thing  as  a  mo-
ral government  in  nature,  there  would
be  no  room  for  real  beneficence  and  the
happinefs  connecSted  with  it,  and  the
whole  rational  univerfe  would  be  a  fyftemi
of  confcious  machinery,  void  of  value
and  dignity.  But  then,  furely,  this  does
not  oblige  us  to  maintain  that  the  Deity
cxercifes  no  Providence  over  the  affairs
of  rational  Beings.  The  power  which
they  have  over  events,  with  all  its  re-
ftridtions,  was  given  by  him;  and  all
the  particular  exertions  of  it  are  under
his  diredlion.  If  any  of  them  become
depraved, and bring calamities upon

tliemfelves


96  0;2 Providence.

themfelves  or  others,  we  muft  fay,  that
fo  the  Deity  fufFers  things  to  happen*
Thofe  circumftances  in  the  plan  of  na-
ture and  ftates  of  Beings  which  gave  oc-^
cafion  to,  or  admitted  of,  fuch  evils,
we  muft  afcribe  to  his  will ;  and  all
that  happens  in  confequence  of  them
we  ought  to  confider  as  fuperintended
by  him  in  the  beft  manner.  Nothing
would  be  more  unreafonable  than  to  ima-
gine, that  there  is  any  inconfiftency  be-^
tween  a  limited  and  derived  dependence  of
events  on  created  agents,  and  a  ftipreme
dependence  of  all  events  on  that  firft  caufe
of  whom,  and  through  whom,  are  all  things^
— — My  happinefs,  let  me  fuppofe,  de-
pends entirely,  in  a  particular  inftance,
on  the  determination  of  one  of  my  fellow-
creatures.  It  will  in  this  cafe  be  ftridtly
true,  that  it  is  the  Deity  puts  me  into
his  hands.  If,  contrary  to  reafon  and
the  Divine  law,  he  abufes  his  power^
it  will  be  my  duty  to  acquiefce  chearfully,
from  a  conviftion  of  the  right  which  the
Deity  has  to  make  my  happinefs  depend

on


Oh Providence.  9%

en whatever  conditions  he pleafes,  and
of  the  unerring reafon  by  which all  his
difpenfations  are  guided. Not  to  be  an
abfolute  lufferer  by  exiftence,  if  innocent,
is the chief  unalienable right I have.
Within  this  limit  the  Deity  may,  in  any
degree  he  fees  beft,  and  that  is  confiftent
with  the  rules  of  diftributive  juftice,  make
my  ftate precarious  and dependent. I
can  never  fuffer  beyond  what  is  fit ;  and
I  may,  from  his  goodnefs,  expecfl  all  fuch
remedies for  the  fufferings which  may
be  brought upon me as are, on the  ■
whole, proper to be  provided. Red;i"
tude, under  the  government  of  a beinp*
of  perfed:  reditude,  I  may  be  fure, fliall
take  place  invariably, univerfally  and  for
ever  5 and this  is  all  I  ought to wifh

for.- In  a  word; the Divine  fcheme

is,  plainly,  that  events  fliall,  to  a  certain
degree,  be  what  created  agents  makef
them.  His  will,  in  numberlefs  cafesy
appears  to  be,  that  one  Being  fhall  or  fhall
not  receive  particular  benefits,  or  fufl^er
particular  evils,  as  his  fellow  Beings  fhall
H  pleafe


98  O;/ P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.

pleafe  to  determine.  But  then,  this
happens  no  farther  than  he  knows  to
be  beft,  and  in  no  inftances  but  fuch  as
he  appoints.  Every  determination  of
every  Being  which  w^ould  produce  any
degree  of  wrong  fufFering,  or  any  event
not  confiftent  with  a  perfedl  order  of  ad-
miniftration,  he  will  undoubtedly  either
prevent,  or  over-rule  in  its  confequences.
He  is  prefent  in  all  minds  5  and  that
whole  concatenation  of  events  and
caufes,  in  confequence  of  which  any  a-
gent  finds  himfclf  at  any  time  in  any  cir-
cumftances,  fliould  be  confidered  as  de-
rived from  him,  and  as  having  been,
in  every  part  of  it,  the  objed:  of  his  fu-
perintending  care.  It  would,  as  I  before
obferved,  be  denying  the  dodlrine  of
Providence  entirely,  and  making  the  uni-
verfe  in  a  manner  forlorn  and  fatherlefs,
to  fuppofe,  that  all  that  the  Deity  does
is  to  endow  Beings  with  powers  and  af-
fedlions,  and  then  to  turn  them  out  into
a  wide  theatre,  there  to  fcuffle  as  they
can, and  do  what they  pleafe,  without

taking


On Providence.  99

taking any  care of them, or  prefiding
over  their  affairs. We  cannot  be  more
fure  of  the  moral  perfections  of  the  Deity
than  we  are  that  this  is  faUe* Whatever
evils  there  are  in  the  world,  they  can  be
only fuch as he is pleafcd to admit
into  it. When  he willed  the exiftencc
of  the prefent  univerfe, he  willed  it  as
including  every  event  which  he  forefaw
would arife  in  it. All  abufe of  liberty
and  reafon  he  does  indeed  difapprove  and
forbid,  and  will adequately  puniili. It
is  of  eflential  mahgnity, and  as  far  as  it
enters  tends  to  lay  wafte  his  works. But
it  can  enter  no  further  than  he  fees  fit  to
fuffer  it. He had  the  beft  reafons,  for
eftablifliing  at  firil thofe  ftates  and  con-^
nexions  of  Beings,  from  whence  he  knew
it  would  fpring. He  can  reftrain  and  di-
rect it  as he  pleafes, and  even turn it
into  an  occafion  of  good. If  other  fyftems
in  which  it  does  not  take  place  contain
more  happinefs, and  are  equally  pofiible
and  proper, they  might, when  this was
produced,  have  been  previoufly  exiftent  in
H  2  the


i  oo  On P  R  O  V  I  D  E  1^  C  E  •

the  greateft  variety  any  one  can  imagine^
and  the  addition  of  this  might  have  been
a  further  proper  exertion  of  infinite  good-
nefs.  It  would  be  impofiible  for  the
Deity  ever  to  aft,  if  it  is  a  juft  reafon
againft  the  production  of  any  given
fyftem,  that  there  are  others  poffible  in-
eluding  greater  happinefs.

But  thefe  are  obfervations  which  I  fhall
have  occafion  to  infift  on, and  to  explain
particularly  hereafter,  and  which  lead  me
to  what  I  chiefly  intended  in  this  fedion  ;
namely,  to  confider  the  objections  againft
Providence  taken  from  the  irregularities
and  evils, natural  and  moral,  which  we
fee  in  the  world. Thefe  are  the  greateft
of  all  the  difficulties  that  occur  to  us  in
thinking of this fubjedl. My defign
however  is  not  to  enter into  a  detail  of
all  that  may  be  offered  to  remove  them,
but  only  tofuggeft  a  few  fentiments  with
this  view, which  feem  to  me  of  peculiar
importance, and fome of  which, per-
haps.


On Providence. ioi

haps, have  not  been  enough  inlifled  on
by  others.


The  moll  common  anfwer  to  all  the
difficulties  arifing  from  the  feeming  irre-
gularities and  diforders  in  the  fyflem  of
nature,  is  taken  from  our.  ignorance
and narrow views, compared  with  the

extent  of  the  fcheme  of  Providence.

This  anfwer  is  folid  and  important,  but
it  requires  to  be  ftated  with  fome  care,
in  order  to  appear  in  its  juft  and  full
force.  It  may  be  faid  in  oppofition  to  it,
*^  that  we  can  have  no  more  reafon  to
'^  conclude,  on  account  of  unknown  re-
'^  lations  and  connexions,  that  thtfeem-
'^  ing  diforders  are  not  real/y  fuch,  than
**  we  have,  on  the  other  hand,  to  con-
'*  elude,  on  the  like  account,  that  the
"  feeming  order  is  not  really  fuch  ;  and
^*  that,  therefore,  the  fame  regard  is  due
"  in  all  cafes  to  ii'regular  appearances  -as
*'  to  regular  ;  that  both  fhould  be  allowr-
''  ed  their  v/hole  weight  undiminiihed
**  by  any  confiderations  of  our  ignorance,

H  ^  ''  A\y\


102 On Providence.

^«  and  our  fentiments  be  determined  by  the
**  degree  \n which  we  fee, or  think  we
^^  fee,  the  one  to  prevail  over  the  other."
— But  a  little  attention  will  difcover  this
way  of  arguing,  in  the  prefent  cafe,  to  be
very  fallacious. The  pofition  on  which
it  is  founded^ "  that  unknown  relations
*^  may  as  well  fliew  feeming  order  to  be
*'  diforder  as  the  contrarv,"  is  undoubt-
edly  falfe. Order  and  regularity,  we  are
fure,  wherever they are found, cannot
but  proceed  from defign and wifdom ;
and  it  is  not  poflible  that  any  unknown
relations  fhould deftroy the appearance
of  them. — '—Thus  ; if  we  faw  a  million
of  things,  difpofed  regularly  at  the  angles
of  a  polygon  of  a  million  of  equal  fides,
v/e  fliould  neceflarily  conclude  that  there
Avas  real  order  here, derived  from  knov/-
ledge and  wifdom  ;  nor  could  we  help
reckoning  it  impertinent  to  object,  that,
if  we  knew all  the relations of  thefe
things to  others,  we  might  perceive  the
contrary. But,  on  the  other  hand  ;  fup-
pofin?  any  number  of  obic^rs  to  be  dif-
pofed


On Providence. 103

pofed  apparently  according  to  no  order,
we  could  not  from  hence  conclude  that
this  was  7'ealJy  the  cafe ;  becaufe  it  is  not
impoffible  but  that  their  relations  and
correfpondencies  to  furrounding  objedts,
did  we  perceive  them,  might  fhew  us
that  they  were  difpofed  in  the  moft  beau-
tiful order. In  like  manner,  it  would

be  very  abfurd  to  fay,  that  had  we  larger
views  we  might  difcover,  perhaps,  that
the  eye  was  not  made  for  feeing,  or  that
the  bodies  of  plants  and  animals  are  not
the  effeifts  of  art.  But,  it  is  by  no  means
fo  to  lay  of  any  appointments  of  nature,
or  parts  of  an  animal  body  whichy^-t';;;  ir-
regular or  ufelefs,  that,  had  we  larger
views,  we  might  perceive them to be

otherwife. It is, therefore, evident

that  the  relations  of  objeds,  or  tlieir  con-
nexions with  other  objeds,  may  entirely
alter  what  appears  irregular  in  them,  at
the  fame  time  that  they  cannot  affecl:
v/hat  appears  regular  5  and  that,  confe-
quently,  contrary  to  what  has  been  ob-
jedled,  there  is  the  greateft  regard  due  to

H  4  our


J04 On Providence.

our  ignorance  when  we  contemplate  the
former,  but  none  when  we  contemplate
the  latter.  The  Ont  miijl  be  the  effed
of  wifdom,  and  the  other  may.  Froni
the  appearance  of  deformity,  or  ill  con-
trivance in  an  object,  when  feen  in  one
pofition,  or  confidered  by  itfelf,  there
may  not  arife  the  leaft  prefumption,  that
it  will  have  the  fame  appearance  when
f^tn  in  another  pofition^  or  when  con-
fidered as  a  part  of  an  extenfive  ancj
complicated  fyftem.  How  foplifh  may
the  meafures  taken  by  the  rulers  of  a
flate,  or  the  inftitutions  of  a  civil  polity,
though  in  reality  the  wifeft  pofTible,  feeni
to  a  perfon  not  enough  acquainted  with
the  fituation  of  the  ftat^,  or  with  the
whole  plan  of  the  civil  polity  ?  How
dull  may  a  fmgle  part  of  a  mufical  com-
pofition  appear  when  heard  alone,  which
yet,  when  heard  in  concert  with  the
ether  parts,  may  make  the  moil  delight-
ful harmony  ?  How  auk  ward  may  a
beautiful  and  necelfary  member  of  a  ma-
j;l|ine  appear, when  detaclied from the

reft,


On Providence. 105

y^^y  or  when  viev/ed  by  one  who  fees
not  its  refcre72ce  to  the  end  of  the  ma-
chine ?  How  confufed  does  the  fyftem  of
jhe  world  appear  to  a  fpe.dator  on  the
earth,  or  according  to  the  Ptolemaick
fyfleni;  but  how  regular  and  harmoni-
ous is  it  according  to  the  true  fyftem,  or
as  it  would  appear  to  a  fpedator  in  the
fun  ?  Can  it  be  exci^fable  not  to,  bear  in
mind  fuch  truths,  when  we  contemplate
Divine  Providence  ?  Or  is  it  at  all  judg-
ing according  to  reafon,  not  to  make  the
allowances  they  require  ?  Is  there  any
one  who,  in  examining  any  work  of  hu-
man art,  would  not  impute  to  his  igno-
rance whatever  in  it  appeared  not  con-
fiflent  with  the  fkill  which  the  general
frame  of  it  difcovered  ?  Why  is  not  this
equally  reafonable  with  refpedt  to  the
conftitution  of  nature,  where  we  find  in-
numerable proofs  of  infinite  wifdom,  and
in  the  meaneft  produdions  of  which  is
exhibited  an  incomprehenfible  exadnefs
pf  art  and  workmanfhip  ?

It


io6 On Providence.

It  may  be  worth  adding  here,  that,
being  ourfelves  parts  of  nature,  and  de-
riving from  the  fame  original  with  it  our
very  notions  of  order,  it  feems  very  in-
credible that  we  ihould  be  able  to  corred:
nature,  or  to  conceive  an  order  greater
and  better  than  is  to  be  found  in  it  *.

There  are  two  accounts  to  be  giv-
en of  the  appearance  of  irregularities
in  nature.  It  may  be  occafioned  either
by  the  reality  of  thefe  irregularities;
or  by  our  ignorance,  confined  views,  and
difadvantageous  fituation  for  obferving
nature.  It  may  be  owing  either  to  a
real  want  of  wifdom,  or  to  the  infinity
and  unfathojnablenefs  of  it.  The  firft  of
thefe  accounts  contradids  numberlefs
Fhcenoinena  of  nature;  is  inconfiftent
with  the  perfediion  of  wifdom  apparent
in  the  general  frame  of 'fthe  world,  and
oppofes  our  moft  reafonable  apprehenfions

*  See  Charaaefiftics, Vol.  II.  p.  284.

yi^.ncdv,  liJjyctp av  uttoi  th,  //«pij  avTn  ss"/. Aril!:,  de
Mundo,  Cap.  V.

con-


O;?  Pr  o  V  I  D  E  N  c  E.  107

concerning  the  nature  and  attributes  of
the  lirfl;  caufe.  The  latter  account,  on
the  contrary,  is  in  the  higheft  degree
eafy,  natural,  and  obvious.  'Tis  fug-
gefted  to  us  by  what  we  have  experienced
in  iimilar  inftances,  and  agreeable  to
wh^t,  from  the  reafon  of  the  thing,  we
might  have  forefeen  muft  have  happened
to  fuch  creatures  as  we  are,  in  confidering

fuch  a  fcheme  as  that  of  nature. Can

we  then  doubt  a  moment  to  which  of
thefe  accounts  we  iliall  give  the  prefe-
rence ?  Is  it  reafonable  to  fufFer  our  con-
viction of  a  fa<fl:,  for  which  we  have  good
evidence,  to  be  influenced  by  appearances
that  may  as  well  be  confident  as  inccn-
fiftent  with  it  -,  nay,  by  appearances  that,
on  the  fuppofition  of  its  truth,  we  mufl
beforehand  have  exped:ed  ?  Mufl  it  not
be  ahvays  proper  to  fiifpecl:  our  judo--
ments  in  cafes  where  we  have  often  been
miftaken,  and  where  it  is  certain  we  muft
be  particularly  liable  to  miftake  ?

Let  us  here  fix  our  thoughts  again  '*  on
the  ftrudure  of  the human  body. We

*  See  page  58,

know


ro


8  On P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  CE,


know  it  to  be  an  efFect  of  confummate
ikilL  But  there  are  fome  of  its  parts
the  ufes  and  propriety  of  which  we  do
not  perceive.  Can  we  fuppofe  thefe
parts  to  be  really  ufelefs,  and  the  human
body,  in  fuch  inftances,  to  be  ill  made  ?
Or  can  it  be  poffible  for  any  perfon,  in
this  cafe,  to  infer  any  more  than  the
^*  imperfeftion  of  his  knowledge  ?''
There  is  the  very  fame  reafon  againft
drawing  any  other  concluiion  from  what
is  dark  to  us  in  the  difpenfations  of  Pro-
vidence, and  the  government of  events.

What,  in truth,  would  be  moft  of

all  unaccountable  is,  that  to  Beings  whofe
views  are  confined  within  the  narrowefl
limits  of  time  and  place,  many  parts  of
an  infinite  plan,  contrived  by  infinite  wif-
dom,  fliould  not  appear  unaccountable.
It  ought  to  fatisfy  us,  that  we  fee  and
know  enoMgh  to  convince  us  of  the  per-
fection of  the  Divine  ways  and  works.
To  exped  that  they  fhould  be  fully  un-
derflood  by  us,  or  that  no  difiiculties
(liould  embarrafs  us  in  our  enquiries  into
5  them.


On Providence. 109

them,  would  (hew  the  moft  inexcufable
folly.  It  has  happened,  in  many  inftances,
that  what  for  fome  time  had  been  looked
upon  as  faulty  in  the  conftitution  of  na-
ture, has  been  found  to  be  wife  and  good.
This  ought  to  teach  us  diffidence  with
regard  to  whatever  we  may  ftill  be  unable
to  account  for.  All  the  fancies  of  men,
that  they  could  mend  God's  works,  or
correft  the  order  of  the  world,  have  hi-
therto proved  nothing  but  their  ignorance
and  prefumption.  As  new  light  has
been  ftruck  out,  objedtions  have  vaniflied,
and  the  Divine  works  have  flione  v/ith
greater  brightnefs.  The  further  advances
have  been  made  in  the  knowledge  of  na-
ture, and  the  more  open  it  has  been
laid  to  our  view,  the  more  glorious  It
has  appeared,  and  the  ftronger  proofs
have  been  difcovered  of  the  perfections
of  its  author  :  And  hence,  what  we
ought  in  all  reafon  to  reckon  upon  is,
that  were  we  acquainted  with  the  whole
of  nature,  or  had  faculties  for  entering
into  the  counfels  of  Providence,  and  dif-
covering  the  connexions  and  dependencies

of


no On Providence.

of  all  its  parts,  every  irregulajity would
difappear, and all  that  now  puzzles  us
be found completely right and good.
-The chief difficulties occur  juft
where we  might  expeifl  them ; in  the
ftate of human  affairs, and the ma-
nagement of the 77ioral world. The
fcheme  of  the  natural  world  lies  more  in
one  view  before  us,  and  has  lefs  depen-
dence on paft and future events; but
that  of  the  other,  'tis  reafonable  to  think,
muft  be  as  much  more  deep  laid  as  it  is
of  greater  importance. It  muft  be of
inconceivable  extent  as  to  duration  as  well
as  place y  confift  of  many  related  periods ^
and  proceed  through  a  long  fucceflion  of
ages. If  then  of  the  former  we  are  in-
competent judges,  how much more  fo
muft  we  be  of  the  latter ;  and  with  what
patience and hope  ought we,  under a
fenfe  of  our  blindnefs, to  wait till  time
fhall  unravel the fcheme  and fliew us
more  clearly  the  perfe(ft  order  of  the  Di-
vine government  ?« In  lliort ;  that  per-

fon  is indeed hardly  v/orthy  of  a  place
among  God's  works,  who  obferves  them

fo


On  Providence.  m
£o  carelefsly  as  not  to  know,  that  there  is
a  depth  of  wifdom  and  contrivance  in
them  v^hich  he  cannot  trace,  and  is  not
led  from  hence  to  imphcit  and  hearty  ac-
quiefcence,  believing  were  he  does  not  fee,
and  adoring  where  he  finds  himfelf  inca-
pable of  comprehending.

The  next  obfervation  I  fhall  make  on
the  objeftions  I  have  mentioned  is,  that
in  general,  they  are  founded  too  much
on  the  unreafonable  and  abfurd  expefta-
tion  **  that  the  Deity  fhould  ad,  in  every
^'Jingle  injiance,  to  the  utmoft  extent  of
^*  his  power,  and  communicate  the
*^  greateft  poffible  happinefs/'— Happi-
nefs,  we  know,  is  greatly  prevalent  in
all  we  fee  of  the  world.  Every  diftricft
of  it  abounds  with  effeds  of  the  good-
nefs  of  its  maker.  Our  complaint  then
mufl  be,  not  why  is  not  goodnefs  dif-
played  in  the  conftitution  of  nature,  but
why  is  not  ;^;ord' goodnefs  difplayed.  But
let  it  be  well  confidered,  that  this  is  a
complaint,  the  foundation  of  which  it  is
not  poffible  to remove  : For, had  the

i  happi-


112 On Providence.

happinefs  communicated  been  ever  fo'
g7'eaty  we  might  flill  have  afked,  why
is  it  not  greater?

As  long  as  the  fum  of  the  happinefs
of  any  Being  exceeds  that  of  his  miferies,
God  is  kind  to  him;  nor  does  it  make
the  leaft  difference  to  a  Being,  whether
any  particular  quantity  of  happinefs  with
which  he  is  blefled  is  pure  and  unmixed,
or  only  the  clear  excefs  of  his  enjoy-
ments above  his  fufferings,  or  whether
larger  capacities  of  enjoyment  are  given
him  with  proportionable  dedudlions  of
fufferings,  or  narrower  capacities  without
any  fuch  dedudlons.

As  far,  therefore,  as  the  attribute  of
goodnefs  is  concerned,  no  objedions  can
be  made  againft  any  natural  evils  over-
balanced by  good,  which  may  not  equally
be  made  againft  communicating  a  fmaller
rather  than  a  larger  quantity  of  good,
or  granting  narrower  rather  than  greater

capacities of happinefs. Thus  -, if

the  animals  on  this  globe  (fuppofing  all

along


On Providence. 113

along  happinefs  to  prevail  in  their  exi-
ftence)  fliould  be  exempted  from  the
greater  calamities  that  befall  them,  they
iliould,  for  the  fame  reafon,  be  exempted
from  the  fmaller,  and  enjoy  an  uniform
happinefs,  without  being,  at  any  time,
in  the  leaft  annoyed  or  diflurbed.  This
happinefs  alfo  they  may  exped:  to  be  the
greateft  their  natures  are  capable  of,  and
to  continue  for  ever.  They  ought,
therefore,  to  be  immortal,  fubjed:  to  no
decay,  liable  to  no  accidents,  and  fecure
of  enjoying  every  pleafure  in  the  higheft
poflible  degree.  But  we  cannot  flop
here.  For  the  fame  reafon  that  they
ought  to  be  thus  happy  to  the  utmoft
extent  of  their  capacities,  they  ought  to
have  had  higher  capacities.  But  how
extravagant  is  all  this  ?  At  this  rate,  no
finite  or  imperfedt  Being  muft  ever  be
created.

'Tis  a  very  different  queftion,  how  far
the  wifdom  of  God  appears  in  the  mixed
ftate  appointed  to  Beings : And  fo  like-

I  wife


114  O// P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.

wife  is  the  queftion,  how  far  his  jujiice
can  be  vindicated  in  the  relative  ftates
of mankind, confidered as reafonable

agents  of  different  moral  characters.

The  chief  difficulties  attending  the  latter
enquiry  are  removed  by  fuppoling  a  fu-
ture ftate  ^  and  with  refped:  to  the  for-
mier,  we  know  enough  to  be  fatisiied,
that  all  the  particular  evils  incident  to
Beings  are  under  good  dired:ion,  and
that  it  is  for  the  beft  reafons  that  a  mix-
ed ftate  is  appointed  them.  It  deferves
particular  notice,  that  many  of  the  pains
and  evils  to  which  all  animals  are  liable,,
appear  plainly  to  be  defigned  as  means
to  fecure  their  happinefs  and  to  guard
them  againft  harm,  and  are  therefore,  as
much  almoft  as  any  of  their  natitral  plea-
fures  and  enjoyments,  proofs  both  of  the
w-ifdom  and  goodnefs  of  the  Deity.

I  have  called  the  expei^lation  that  God,..
in  a?iy  Jingle  injiance^  ihould  produce the
greateil poffible  happinefs unreafonable
and  abfurd. This  is  an extremely evi-
dent


On ProvidencC- ir^
dent  truth. But  it  fliould  be  obferved,
that  it  by  no  means  follows  from  hence
that, taking  in the  whole extent and
duration  of  the creation,  a  quantity of
abfolute good has not been produced
which  exceeds  all  that  is  poffible  to  be  con-
ceived. Though  only  a  limited  quantity
of  happinefs  can  exift  in  any  given  num-
ber of  limited  eifeds,  and  though,  there-
fore, all  that  we  can reafonably  exped:
With  regard  to  any  fingle  parts  of  nature
is, to fee that  good is prevalent, or
that  happinefs  is  defigned  and commu-
nicated, and  to  exped:  more  would run
us  into  the  greateft  abfurdities,  yet  the
entire  plan  of  created  exiftence,  reaching,
perhaps, from  eternity  to  eternity, and
extending  through immenfity, may in-
clude in it ifTfinitCy or ififinitely  infinite
happinefe.

But  to  difmifs  this.  It  w^ill  be  worth
while  here,  to  apply  the  prefent  argument
more  particularly  to the flate and  cir-

cumftances of  man ^ Various  have

1  2  been


ii6 On Providence,

been  the  complaints  of  the  evils  under
which  man  groans,  and  the  calamities
to  which  he  is  liable.  But  if  it  mufl
be  granted,  that  he  enjoys,  on  the  whole,
more  pleafure  than  he  fuffers  pain;  that
his  life  and  ftate  are  in  a.  high  degree
eligible,  notwithftanding  the  evils  blend-
ed with  them ;  and  that  the  whole  or-
der of  his  nature,  as  it  came  from  the
hands  of  the  Creator,  is  fuch  as  proves
him  to  have  been  defigned  for  nothing
but  virtue  and  happinefs  :  If,  I  fay,  this
muft  be  granted,  as  furely  it  muft,  it
fhould  go  a  great  way  towards  filencing
all  objections  and  complaints.  For  it  will
follow  that  the  meaning  of  them  mufl
be  in  a  great  meafure  this;  **  Why  was
*'  not  man  made  7nore  happy  and  per-
*'  fed:  ?"  A  queflion  which,  agreeably
to  what  was  before  obferved,  might  have
been  afked,  though  he  had  been  placed
ever  fo  much  higher  in  the  fcale  of  Being.
—Let  then  every  objcdion  of  this  kind
be  for  ever  exploded.  Man,  'tis  true,  is
a  very frail, imperfcft, and  fliort-lived

3  creature ;


0?i Providence. 117

creature  ;  but  ftill  his  exiftence  is  better
to  him  than  non-exiftence.  Such  a  race
is,  at  leaft,  /o772e  addition  to  the  univerfal
happinefs  -,  and,  therefore,  it  was  an
inftance  of  Divine  goodnefs  to  produce  it;
and  inftead  of  murmuring,  it  becomes  us
rather  to  praife  and  adore.

But  it  will,  probably,  be  thought,  that
no  obfervations  of  this  kind  aifed:  the
main  difficulty  that  occurs  to  us  in  con-
lidering  Providence,  which  arifes,  '^  not
*^  from  the  natural  cvih  and  imperfedlions
'*  of  man,  but  from  what  religion  teaches
**  us  concerning  his  circumftances  as  a
**  moral  agent,  placed  in  a  ftate  where  he
*^  is  ftrongly  tempted  to  wickednefs,  and
*^  where  it  muft  have  been  expedled  that
**  a  general  corruption  would  prevail,  all
**  forfeit  innocence,  and  great  numbers  fall
**  into  the  future  punifhment  of  fin, and

"  be  loji  for ever,''- -This is indeed

an  important difficulty ; nor  would  I  at
all  pretend  to  be  able  to  give  any ade-
quate folution  of  it. Some  obfervations,
I 3  how-


1 1 8 On Providence,
Jiowever,  there  are,  fuggefted  by  the  pre-?
fent  argument,  which  feem  to  leffen  it^
weight, and which, therefore, it will
not  be  amifs  to  propofe.

Man  feems  to  be  in  the  loweft  order
of  reafonable  Beings, and  from  what  has
been faid, it  appears  that  there  are  no
objedlions  againft  creating  the  loweft  or-
der, which would not equally  hold  a-
gainft  creating  any  other  order. Now,
^t  h  reafonable  to  think,  that  intelligent
agents,  in  the  firft  period  of  their  ex ift-
ence, or antecedently to all fecurity
from experience and  inflrudlion> mufl
be  more  liable  to  deviate  than  in  any  fub-
fequent  period^ and  it  is certain, that
thofe  in  a  lower  order  muft  be  more  frail
^nd defedible than thpfe in a high-
er. What  wonder  then  is  it  if  of  thofe
in  the  loweji  order, and  who  confequent-
Jy  muft  be  in  the  greateji  danger  of  de-
viation, many lliould adtually deviate,
;ibi]fe their  liberty, and  lofe  the happi-

nefs they  mi2;ht  have  fecured  ? 'Tis

abfurd


On Providence. 119

abfurd  to  afk  why  was  liberty  granted
them,  fince  it  is  eflential  to  intelligence,
and  to  all  rational  and  moral  happinefs.
Liberty  then^  they  mufl  have,  or  not  exill
at  all,  and  the  confequence  of  liberty,
when  expofed  to  temptations  and  trials,
muft  fometimes  be  depravity  and  wicked-
nefs.  And  why  Ibould  not  a  liberty  fo
circumftanced  be  communicated,  as  well
as  a  liberty  more  favourably  circum-
ftanced *  ?  Can  it  be  afferted  that  all
Beings  have  a  right  not  to  be  placed  in
any  disadvantageous  ftates  ?  Or,  fhould
this  be  allowed,  will  it  be  afferted  fur-
ther, that  they  ought  not  even  to  be  ex-
pofed to  the  poffibility  of  being  ever
brought  into  fuch  ftates  ?  As  the  Deity
might  not  have  given  exiftence  at  all,  he

*  It  (hould  be  observed,  that  T  fuppofe  that  all
Beings  might  have  bepn  placed  in  fuch  circumftances
as  that  none  of  them,  though  poficft  of  perfecSt  natu-
ral liberty,  fjiould  ever  be  in  danger  of  any  deviations
or  calamities  :  And  the  defign  of  vi'hat  is  here  faid,
and  of  a  good  deal  that  follows,  is  to  Ihcvv  that  we
have  no  fufficient  reafon  to  expert  this  ;  and  alfo
that,  allowing it  poflible,  it  was  not  heR.

I  4  may


I20 On Providence.

may  furely  give  it  on  any  terms  which
are  confiftent  w^ith  its  being  in  any  de-
gree a  benefit,  or  not  worfe  than  non-
exiilence.^He  cannot,  therefore,  be  under
an  obligation  to  give  it  free  from  dangers

and  inconveniencies.-! -Antecedently  to

the  creation  of  man,  as  many  of  the
moi^e  perfeft  orders  of  creatures  might
have  exifted  as  can  pcffibly  be  imagined,
and  the  creation  of  man  might  make  a
further  addition  to  the  univerfal  happi-
nefs.  Why  then  iliould  he  not  be  creat-
ed ? — -Is  it  not  moft  reafonable  to  expedl
that  Divine  goodnefs  iTiould  difplay  itfelf
in  producing  an  endlefs  variety  of  effedls,
and  in  giving  exiftence  to  every  different
order  of  creatures  '^  capable  of  being
happy  ?

Thefc

*  What  is  here  fuggefled  fhews, that  the  creation
of  a  variety  of  orders  of  creatures  is  not  only  con-

llilent with goodnefs, but  required by  it. But

there  is  another  obfervation  wiiich  ihews  this  in  a
different  manner,  and  which,  though  particular  ufe
will  be  made  of  it  again,  it  will  not  beamifs  jufl  to
mention  on  this  occafion. Had  there  been  no  ine*

qualities


On Providence. 121

Thefe obfervatlons are fufficient to
prove, that  the  perfedions  of  the  Deity

by

qualities  among  Beings,  there  could  have  been  np
room  for  beneficence  ;  no  pofTibility  of  gratifying  the
defire  of  doing  good  ;  no  opportunities  for  exercif-
ing  virtue  in  one  of  its  higheft  inftances,  and  that
principle  in  rational  Beings,  wrhich  affords  a  hap-
pinefs  the  moft  worthy  of  a  rational  nature,  mull
have  lain  for  ever  dormant  and  ufelefs.  Ses  Mr,
Ahernethys  Sermons^  Vol.  II.  Serm.  III.

I  cannot  forbear  adding  in  this  place,  that  it  feems
to  me  very  improper  to  fay,  as  fome  have  done,  that
God  chofe  this  fyftem,  in  which  evil  takes  place,  as
the  beft  of  all  pofTible  fyftems.  'Tis  difficult  to  fay
what  can  be  meant  by  the  befl  of  all  poflible  fyflems.
If  it  fignifies  that  which  includes  t\iz  great  eft  fum  of
happinefs,  it  is  as  inconceivable  as  the  lofigej}  of  all
durations,  or  the  largeji  of  all  numbers.  Thofe  per-
fons  muft  have  low  ideas  of  God's  works  who  can
look  upon  this  earth,  with  its  connexions,  or  even
the  whole  vifible  univerfe  of  fun,  planets,  and  fixed
ftars,  as  at  ^11  confiderable,  when  compared  with  the
reft  of  the  creation.  At  the  time,  therefore,  this
fyftem  was  produced,  there  might  have  been  num-
berlefs  other  fyftems,  containing  brighter  difplays  of
infinite  power  and  goodnefs,  not  only  pojftble  but
actually  ex'iftent.  All  that  we  can  reafonably  expe6l  to
fee  in  what  falls  under  our  notice  of  the  works  and
ways  of  God is,  that  they  are  entirely right  and

good,


^22 On Providence.

by  no  means  required  that  fuch  a  race
^s  ours  fhould  not  exift.  When  con-
iidered  by  itfelf  we  fee  enough,  notwith-
flanding  the  difficulties  .that  we  meet
with,  to  convince  us  that  it  is  the  ef-
feft  of  wifdom  and  goodnefs :  and  when
confidered  in  its  relation  to  the  whole
fyflem  of  Beings,  we  know  not  how
important  purpofes  it  may  ferve.

It  is  particularly  neceffary  on  this  ar-
gument to  bear  in  mind,  that  fufficknt
advantages  are  fuppofed  to  be  granted
to  all,  and  that  nothing  is  expelled
from  any  Being  which  is  not  equitably
proportioned  to  the  light  and  opportuni-
ties he  enjoys. — —If  fome  have  fewer
advantages  than  others,  all  have  more
than  they  can  claim ;  and  from  all  as
much  lefs  will  be  required,  as  they  have
had  lefs given them. If  fome  have a

good,  and  worthy  of  his  perfe£lions.  To  defire
yr.orc,  or  to  expe6t  that  this  fyftem  fhould  be  the
beft,  the  falreft,  and  happieft  poffible,  is  the  fame
as  to  expe£l  that  there  fliould  be  no  Subordination
or  variety  in  the  Divine  vyrorks.

fmaller


On Providence. 123

imaller  chance  for  happinefs  than  others,
all  have  Jome  chance,  and  every  one
might  have  had  none  at  all,  that  is,  might
never  have  exifted*  Happinefs  is  always
a  free  gift  from  God,  and  he  may
make  Beings  liable  to  come  (hort  of
it,  in  any  degree  he  fees  befto  Any  ca-
pacity, any  poJIibtlity  of  happinefs  is  va-
luable for  the  fame  reafon  that  happinefs
Jtfelf  is  fo,  and  ought  to  be  received
with  gratitude.  Nay,  fuch  at  prefent
are  our  circumftances,  that  we  have  in-
deed reafon  for  the  utmoft  gratitude.
We  have  before  us  the  profpedl  of  a
^lejj'ed  immortality  which  we cannot  lofe,

but  through  our  cv/n  fault.* Far  then

be  it  from  us  to  accufe  our  Maker.- -

It  is  in  your  power  to  fecure  infinite
happinefs.  All  the  means  nece/Tary  for
this  are  given  you.  Nothing  but  vo-
luntary and  inexcufable  guilt  can  hurt
you.  Praife  God,  therefore.  Improve
carefully  the  advantages  you  are  blefl
with ;  and  be  not  fo  unreafonable  as  to
f  omplain  becaufe  you  are  not  faved  the

care


124  •  ^^  Providence,
care  and  pains  you  muft  ufe  in  working
out  your  falvation ;  for  this  is  a  complaint
which  nothing  can  fatisfy,  befides  grant-
ing you  every  poffible  advantage,  placing
you  above  all  labour  and  hazard,  and
making  you  abfolutely  indefectible.

The  argument  on  which  I  here  infift
is,  I  think,  fufficient  to  teach  us  a  hum-
ble and  thankful  acquiefcence  in  the
condition  allotted  us.  But  it  would
fcarcely  be  right  to  omit  obferving,  that
there  is  a  great  deal  more  to  be  faid  in
the  prefent  cafe,  and  particularly  in  vindi-
cation of  Providence,  with  refpedt  to  that
ftate  of  labour  and  danger  in  which  we
are  placed.  I  fliall,  therefore,  beg  leave
to  digrefs  fo  far  as  to  introduce  a  few  ob-
iervations  on  this  fubjedl,  not  immedi-
ately connedled  with  the  main  argument
which  I  am  purfuing.

The  fad  that  our  ftate  is  a  ftate  of
labour  and  danger  is  too  obvious  to  be
queftioned. There  is  nothing  in  human

life


On Providence. 125

life  ftable  and  certain.  There  is  nothing
given  us  fo  freely  that  we  are  to  ufe  no
pains  to  obtain  or  preferve  it.  Almofl:
all  the  bleflings  of  our  Being  are  to  be
earned  by  diligence,  if  we  would  poffefs
them.  Such  is  the  Divine  eftablifliment,
that  the  lazy  and  indolent  muft  be  defi-
cient and  unhappy.  But  what  deferves
moft  of  our  notice  is,  that  part  of  the
precarioufnefs  of  our  ftate  which  iscaufed
by  its  dependence  on  our  fellow-beings.
There  is  not,  I  think,  any  fad  in  the
conflitution  of  the  world  which  is  more
remarkable  than  this ;  or  which,  at  firft
fight,  feems  to  contradift  more  our  ideas
of  Divine  goodnefs.  How  common  is
it  for  one  man  to  have  at  his  command
the  fates  of  whole  provinces  and  king-
doms ?  Even  our  receiving  exiilence,  as
well  as  our  condition  afterwards,  is  made
to  depend  on  the  v/ills  of  our  fellow-
beings.  In  the  beginning  of  life  we  are
committed  to  the  care  of  parents  or  guar-
dians, who  can,  almofl:  as  they  pleafe,  de-
termine our  ftate  in  future  life,  or  cut  us

off


126 On Providence,

off  entirely  from  it.  What  is  fimilar  to
this  is  true  of  our  ftate  as  moral  agents
defigned  for  exiftence  hereafter.  As  an
infant  is  put  in  the  way  to  the  happinefs
of  the  prefent  life,  fo  is  a  grown  man  put
in  the  way  to  happinefs  in  another  worlds
and  naturally  capable  of  everlalling  im-
provement in  knowledge  and  perfection.
And  as,  in  our  former  capacity,  it  is
put  into  the  power  of  men  to  caufe  us
to  fail  of  the  happinefs  we  might  have
enjoyed  in  life  -,  fo  likewife,  in  our  latter
capacity,  it  is  put  into  their  power,  by
various  means,  to  deprive  us  of  future
happinefs,  and  to  caufe  us  to  mifcarry
for  ever*

What  has  been  already  faid  is  of  great
ufe  to  filence  the  complaints  which  are
apt  to  rife  within  us  againft  this  part  of
the  conftitution  of  nature,  andean  hardly
be  too  much  inculcated.  We  had  na
right  to  exiftence  or  happinefs  at  all-?
and  therefore  the  Deity  may  make  them
dependent  and precarious in whatever'

manner '


O;^  Pr  o  V  I  D  E  N  c  E. 127

manner  his  counfels  require.  But  we
need  not  reft  the  defence  of  Providence
on  any  argument  of  this  kind.  We  arc
capable,  I  think,  of  perceiving  very  im-*
portant  reafons  for  fuch  a  conftitution>
and  of  difcovering  that  it  difplays  great
wifdom  and  goodnefs.

It  is  abfolutely  neceflary,  as  was  oh-
ferved  page  95,  that  intelhgent  Be-
ings fhould  have  fcope  given  them  for
adlion.  There  is  a  plain  congruity  in
making  their  happinefs  to  arife  from  the
proper  exercife  of  their  powers^  and  ta
be  the  refult  of  their  own  endeavours.
This  is  the  only  happinefs  that  can  fuit
the  natures  of  adlive  and  free  creatures.
Had  they  no  command  over  events;  were
bhfs  forced  upon  them^,  independently  of
their  own  choice  and  endeavours ;  or
were  their  ftates  fo  immutably  fixed  a&
not  to  be  liable  to  be  afFeded  by  one  an-
ther, the  confequence  would  be,  that
they  would  have  nothing  to  do ;  that
their  faculties  would  be  given  them  in

vain ;


128 On Providence.

vain ;  that  virtue  would  be  totally  ex^
eluded  from  the  creation,  and  an  univer-
fal  ftagnation  or  quietifm  take  place  in
it.

But  I  fliall,  on  this  occafion,  defire
particular  attention  to  the  following  ob-
fervations,  which,  I  fancy,  will  ftrength-
en  fome  of  thofe  already  made,  and  ihew
us  plainly  what  unreafonable  expedlations
we  are  apt  to  entertain  from  the  goodnefs
of  God.

Had  the  natural  courfe  of  things  in
the  prefent  ftate  been  fuch,  that  when-
ever any  particular  calamities  or  accidents
happened  to  men,  there  fhould  have  been
no  remedies  for  them  ^  we  could  have  had
no  juft  reafon  for  complaint,  and  God
would  have  been  good.  Nor  could  any
arguments  have  been  taken  from  this  at-
tribute to  prove  that  there  ought  to  have
been  remedies  provided,  which  would
not  equally  have  proved  that  they -ought
to be eafy,  univerfal and  infallible,  or

rather


Oh Providence. 129

rather  that  there  fhould  have  been  no
occafion  for  them,  and  no  fufFerlngs  of
pains  of  any  kind*  But  the  faft  is,  that
there  are  remedies  provided  for  the  mif-
fortunes  and  calamities  of  men,  and  that
thus  greater  goodnefs  is  in  this  inftance
difplayed  in  the  conftitution  of  nature,
than  we  could  on  any  fure  grounds  have
antecedently  expefted.  Men  are  not  left^
as  they  might  have  been,  to  perifh  irre-
trievably by  the  calamities  that  happen  to
them,  but  it  is  put  into  their  power  in
numberlefs  cafes  to  help  one  another,
and  to  prevent  the  fatal  efFedls  that
v/ould  follow  particular  calamities.  A
provifion  is  made  in  the  fpontaneous  a-
gency  and  benevolence  of  our  fellow^-
creatures j  for  a  great  addition  to  the
happinefs  of  iife^  and  diminution  of  its
{iifferings.  And  this  itfelf  becomes  a  ftill
higher  difplay  of  goodnefs  beyond  which
we  cannot  eafily  enlarge  our  ideas.  For
by  eftablifliing  a  plan  wherein  Beings  are
thus  left  to  be  the  voluntary  caufes  of  one

K  another's


1 30 On Providence.

another's  happinefs,  room  is  given  them
for  the  exercife  of  beneficence,  for  gra-
tifying the  noblell  affedtion  in  their  na-
tures, and  enjoying  the  moft  GodUke
bUfs  of  which  they  are  capable.  Had
nature  been  framed  agreeably  to  what
relight  have  appeared,  to  our  narrow
views,  beft  and  moft  produdive  of  hap-
pinefs, there  would  probably  have  been
no  fuch  liablenefs  to  calamitous  events,
or  dependence  of  Beings  on. one  another,
as  we  obferve  in  it;  and,  confequently,
the  higheft  kind  of  happinefs  would  have
been  wanting  in  it,  and  the  very  end
we  meant  to  fecure  would  have  been  de-
feated.

What  has  been  here  faid  of  the  con-
ftitution  of  things  in  the  prefent  world,
may,  I  fuppofe,  be  applicable  in  a  great
meafure  to  the  whole  plan  of  Providence
and  fyftem  of  being.  The  welfare  of  a
fpeciesy  like  that  of  indlvidiuils  among  men,
may  be  made  dependent  on  a  higher
fpecies, and whole orders  of  reafonable

creatures


On Providence. 1.3 i

creatures  may  be  fo  cireumftanced,  as  to
be  liable  to  be  brought  into  very  cala-
mitous ftates,  from  v/hich  it  may  not  be
poffible  for  them  to  be  faved,  according
to  the  general  laws  of  the  v^orld,  except
by  the  kind  affiftance  and  labours  of  Be-
ings fuperior  to  them.  And  from  w^hat
I  have  obferved,  we  fee  reafon  to  believe
that  fuch  a  general  oeconomy  of  nature,
though  the  refult  in  feme  inftances  may
prove  abortion  and  ruin,  v/as  neceffary
to  produce  the  greateft  virtue, and  the

greateft  good  on  the  whole. -It  is  an

enquiry  of  fome  importance  here  how  far
the  dependence  of  Beings  on  one  another
may  extend;  or  within  what  limits  it
can  be  ccnfiftent  with  reditude,  that
they  fliould  be  liable  to  faffcr  m  con-
fequence  of  one  another*s  agency.  I  have
already  hinted  fome  obfervations  on  this
head  in  the  preceding  fedtion.  We  may
be  affiired,  in  general,  that  the  connex-
ions of  Beings  are  under  the  heft  regu-
lations, and  their  powers  v/ifely  limited  :
And  we  may  alfo  know,  in  particular,  that
K  2  their


132  On  Providence.
their  dependence  on  one  another  cannot
extend  fo  far  as  that  there  Ihall  ever
happen  a  failure  of  adequate  retribution^
or  that  any  Beings  fhall  be  hable  to  be
deprived  of  any  of  their  unalienable  rights,
or  to  fuffer  any  thing  which  it  would  be
wrong  or  hard  that,  as  the  creatures  of
the  Deity,  they  fhould  fuffer.  The  pow-
ers, therefore,  of  Beings  over  one  another
cannot  extend  further  than  to  the  gifts
of  bounty y  or  fuch  bleffings  as  the  Deity
is  not  obliged  to  grant.  Of  this  Idnd  are
exiftence,  its  perpetuity,  and  almoft  all
its  privileges,  capacities,  and  advantages :
And  therefore,  it  may  be  eafily  conceiv-
ed what  degradations  and  loffes  may  be
fometimes  brought  upon  Beings  under
the  Divine  government,  in  confequence
of  their  mutual  agency,  confiftently  with
the  moft  perfect  juflice,  and  even  (if
fome  of  the  preceding  obfervations  are
right)  as  the  effed  of  a  conftitutioii
formed  in  the  beft manner  to produce

happinefs. But  the  queftion, how  far

the  dependence  of  Beings  on  one  another
3  may


On Providence.  133

may  extend,  wouid  carry  me  beyond  my
prefent  purpofe  were  I  to  attempt  a  pro-
per difcuffion  of  it,  nor  is  there  any
occafion  for  now  entering  into  it  fur-
ther.

It  is  right,  I  have  fald,  that  the
happinefs  of  intelUgent  Beings  fhould
be  made  to  be  the  fruit  of  what  they
do  and  deferve.  The  noblefl:  enjoy-
ments, or  all  which  pre-fuppofe  moral
merit,  can  have  no  other  fource^  and
virtue  (fince  its  nature  will  not  ad-
mit of  its  being  either  created  with  Be-
ings, or  taught  them)  muft  always  be
an  acquijition,  Thefe  confiderations,
when  applied  to  the  fubjed  into  which
I  am  enquiring,  have  a  conliderable  ten-
dency to  render  it  lefs  puzzling.  It  is
fcarcely  conceivable  that  an  agent,  in
w^orking  out  his  own  happinefs  and  ac-
quiring virtue  by  attention  and  care,
iliould  not  be  in  circumflances  of  fome
hazard  ;  and  if  this  is  true,  the  enquiry
concerning  the  origin  of  evil  muft  be,
TiOt,  why  any  Beings  have  been  placed  in
K  3  a


134 O;^ Providence.

a  ftate  of  trial  and  hazard,  but  why
they  have  been  placed  in  a  ftate  of  trial
and  hazard,  attended  with  fuch  and  fuch
circumftances  of  particular  difadvantage
and  diftrefs.

Upon  the  whole.  We  may,  I  think,
perceive  that  it  was  neceffary  that  there
ihould  be  a  real  contingency  of  events  in
the  creation,  and  fuch  a  fubordination  of
Beings  to  one  another  and  precm^ioufnefs
of  their  ftates,  as  could  not  but  fubjedl
them  in  many  inflances,  and  efpecially
in  the  infancy  of  their  exiftence,  to  the
danger  of  moral  defedtion  and  a  failure
of  happmefs.  There  could  not  other-
w^ife,  it  has  appeared,  have  been  room  for
a  proper  exertion  of  the  powers  of  Be-f
ino-s,  or  for  that  ffioral  excellence  by  which
they  mod:  nearly  rcfemble  the  fountain  of
all  perfedion,  The  right eji  and  alfo  the
greatejl  happinefs  could  not  have  been  at-
tained in  any  other  way.  This  appears
to  mc  with  ftrong  evidence,  and  the  rea-
fons that have been afiigned feem to

prove  it. -But  it  is  time  to  return tq

what


On Providence. 135

what I intended here  chiefly  to infift
upon.

I  was  confidering  the  obje(5lion  againft
Providence  arifing  from  the  difadvantage-
ous  ftate  we  are  in  for  virtue,  and  par-
ticularly, from  what  mufl  have  been  the
forefeen  confequence  of  it ;  that  future
Jinallok  of  a  great  part  of  mankind  which
religion  teaches  us  to  expect.  I  have
faid  a  great  part  of  mankind.  How
great  a  part  can  be  known  only  to  that
Being  who  fees  through  all  futurity,  and
who  fearches  all  hearts. — When  I  con-
fider  the  general  careleffnefs  which  feems
to  prevail  with  refped:  to  religious  vir-
tue ;  the  inexcufable  defects  of  many
v/ho  are  ranked  among  the  better  fort
of  men ;  the  fcope  of  the  cliriflian  doc-
trine, and  feveral  intimations  of  fcrip-
ture ;  I  am  indeed  forced  to  entertain
melancholy  reflections.  Every  benevolent
mind  will,  however,  endeavour  to  think
on  this  fubjeft  as  favourably  as  poflible.
There  is  enough  in  the  face,  as  it
K  4  mufl


^36 On Providen^ce.

muft  appear  to  the  largeft  charity,  to
render  it  in  the  higheft  degree  alarming,
and  to  awaken  in  us  the  deepeft  concern
for  ourfelves  and  our  fellow-men.  Mil-
lions of  reafonable  Beings,  naturally  imr
mortal  and  capable  of  infinite  improve-
ment,  bereaved  of  all  their  hopes,  cut
off  fronn  every  bleffing  of  exiftence,  caft
away  for  ever  from  God  and  blifs,  and
funk  in irreco.verable  dejiruciian  I — What

pan  be  imagined  mofe  Ihocking  ?— r

But  though  fuch  a  fad:  cannot  but  greatly
affed  an  attentive  rnind,  it  furniflies  with
no  juft  reafons  for  cenfuring  Providence.
God,  notwithftanding,  appears  to  he
good,  infinitely  good.  No  cpnclufion  to
the  contrary  could  be  drawn^  were  there
ever  fo  great  a  difproportion  between
the  number  of  thofe  who  fliall  be  faved,
and  thofe  who  will  be  lofl.  One  may
even  venture  to  affert,  that  it  would
have  been  w^orth  while  to  have  create4
this  world  fof  the  fake  of  only  orie  perfon
t9^  be  faved  out  of  it,  and  fitted  in  it  for

^v^rlajiijig  happinefs. But  thanks  be  to

Divim


On Providence. 1-^7


o,


Divine  love,  the  virtuous  and  happy  part
pf  our  fpecies,  when  they  fhall  hereafter
he  Jfeparated  from  the  reft  of  mankind,
vs^ill  appear  to  he  a  great  multitude^  which
no  one  can  number ^  gathered  out  of  all  na^
tions,  and  kindred,  and  people,  and  tongues^.
Nay,  we  cannot  tell  how  much  greater
a  proportion  they  will,  on  the  whole,
bear  to  the  reft  of  mankind,  than  the
ftate  of  things  hitherto  in  this  world  has
given  us  reafon  to  hope.  For  it  is  not
impoffible  but  that,  before  the  end  of
the  prefent  ftate,  a  general  reformation
may  take  place,  and  knowledge,  peace,
and  virtue  prevail  much  more  than  they
have  ever  yet  done  f , This  many  have

thought

^  Rev.  vii.  9.

t  It  is  the  opinion  of  fome  that  the  world  has
from  the  firft  been  gradually  improving,  and  that
it  will  go  on  to  improve  'till  fuperftitlon  and  wicked-
nefs  fhall  be  in  a  great  meafure  exterminated.  The
advances  and  difcoveries  made  within  the  three  lafl
centuries  are,  indeed,  wonderful,  and  may  well  lead
us  to  expe6l  an  approaching  general  amendment  in
human  affairs. The  light which has been  lately

ftruck


138 On Providence.

thought  a  reafonable  objedt  of  ex-
pectation, and  it  feems  to  be  very
plainly  foretold  in  the  fcriptures.

flruck  out  will  probably  increafe  ;  and  the  more  it  in-
creafes,  the  further  will  free  enquiry  and  generous
fentiments  fpread  ;  the  harder  will  it  be  for  eftablifh-
ed  corruptions  to  maintain  their  ground  ;  and  the
more  the  way  v/ill  be  prepared  for  the  downfall  of  all
flavifh  hierarchies  and  governments,  and  for  the  in-
trodu£l:ion  of  thofe  times,  when  truth  and  liberty
fhall  triumph  over  all  oppofition,  when  nation  fhall
no  more  lift  iip  a  fword  againft  nation,  every  falfe  re-
ligion be  deftroyed,  and  the"  kingdoms of  this  world

hecome  the  k'tngdojns  of  the  Lord  and  of  his  Chr'iji. 1

cannot  think  it  neceffary  that  the  world  fhould  con-
tinue for  ever  divided,  as  it  is. now,  into  a  multitude
of  independent  ftates  whofe  jarring  interefts  are  al-
ways producing  war  and  devaluation.  A  fcheme  of
government  may  be  imagined  that  fhall,  by  annihi-
lating property  and  reducing  mankind  to  their  natu-
ral equality,  remove  moft  of  the  caufes  of  contention
and  wickednefs.  An  account  of  fuch  a  fcheme  has
been  given  by  an  ingenious  writer  in  a  book  intitled,

Profpe^s  of  Nature^  Mankind^  and  Providence.

It  is  there  obferved,  that  if  a  government  of  this  kind
fhould  be  once  efcablifhed  on  any  fpot,  the  advan-
tages of  it  would  be  fo  vifible,  and  it  would  flrengthen
and  extend  itfelf  fo  fafl,  that  in  time  it  would  be  very
likely  to  become  qniverfal.

But


On  Providenc  e,. i  39

But  be  this as it  will ; while  all  may^
a  great  number,  we cannot  doubt, will
efcape the  fatal  effeds  of  vice, and  be
brought through the dangers of  this
world  to  endlefs  blifs, It  may  be  en-
quired  here,  why  the  circumftances  of
the world have not been fo ordered,
as  that  this  number  fhould be greater;
and fomc of the principal obje(ftions
againft  Providence  are  reducible  to  this
enquiry :  But  it  is one  of  that  fort  of
enquiries  which  has  been  before  fhewn
to be unreafonable. It is an enquiry
which  might  have been  made, though
this  number  had  been  greater,  or  though
it  had  been  fo  great  as  to include every
individual of mankind. For, on this
laft  fuppofition, the fame  general  prin-
ciple would  have  led  an  objecflor  to  afk ;
«  Why  are  not  more  of  mankind  brought
^*  on the ftage, fince more may  ?"
[  *' Why  is  the earth fo thinly  flocked
^^  with  them, fmce it  might  have  been
^*  always full  ?" Or, though alv/ays
^'  full,  Why  was  it  not  made  larger,  or

^^  created


140  On  Providence.
«'  created  fooner  ?"— — In  fliort;  had
this  earth  been  fo  httle.as  to  be  capa-
ble of  holding  only  a  number  of  men,
equal  to  thofe  who  will  be  formed
in  it,  as  it  is  now,  for  future  happi-
nefs,  and  had  all  thefe  been  fo  advan-
tageoufly  circumftanced  as  that  not  one
of  them  fliould  mifcarry  :  Had  this,  I
fay,  been  the  cafe,  it  could  fcarcely  have
been  thought  that  there  was  room  for
complaint,  or  the  leaft  reafon  for  que-
ilioning  the  goodnefs  of  the  Deity.  But
to  the  views  of  benevolence  there  can  be
no  difference  between  fuch  an  earth  and
the  prefent,  the  quantity  of  happinefs
refulting  from  both  being,  by  fuppofition,
the  fame.  This  is  true  of  two  fuch
ftates,  abflrafting  from  all  connexions.
What  they  may  be  when  viewed  in  the
relations  they  may  have  to  other  ilates,
or  when  confidered  as  parts  of  a  fyftem,
it  is  not  pofFible  for  us  to  difcover.  There
may  in  this  cafe  be  a  preference  due  to
the  latter  5  or  it  may  be  the  unavoidable
refult  of  a  general  plan  of  government

produftive


On Providence. 141

produdive,  on  the  whole,  of  the  greatefl
abfolute  good  ^. See  page  128 — 132.

There

*  I  am  fenfible  that  many  perfons  will  think;  that
I  ought  here  to  have  taken  notice  of  the  good  which
may  arife  out  of  the  evil  of  the  world,  and  the  im-
portant ends  which  the  abortive  part  of  mankind  may
be  made  to  ferve  under  the  Divine  government.  It
has  been  faid  particularly  to  this  purpofe,  that  the  fu-
ture puniftiment  of  wicked  men  will  be  the  means  of
difplaying  to  the  creation,  in  a  manner  not  otherwife
pofTible,  the  dreadful  nature  of  vice  and  the  perfe6l
holinefs  of  the  Deity  ;  that  it  is  owing  to  them  that
the  prefent  ftate  is  a  proper  fchool  of  virtue  to  that
part  of  mankind  who  will  efcape  Xht  fecond  deaths  and
that,  for  this  reafon,  they  anfwer  an  end  like  that  of
dung  in  a  garden  which,  though  itfelf  loathfome,
helps  the  growth  of  fome  choice  plants,  which  in
proper  time  are  to  be  removed  to  a  more  confpicuous
fpot,  where  they  will  fhew  themfelves  in  their fi-

nifhed form  and  beauty. Such  is  the  docStrine

which  fome  of  the  beft  writers  have  taught ;  and  they
have  added,  that  this  do<3:rine  ought  not  to  have  any
influence  on  our  notions  of  the  evil  of  vice,  becaufe,
whatever  good  may  eventually  arife  from  it  in  con-
fequence  of  the  difpofals  of  infinite  wifdom,  its  ef-
fential  malignity  is  the  fame  ;  it  is  always  fatal  to  the
individuals  who  pradlife  it*;  and  it  ftill  continues  true,
not  only  that  its  tendency  is  to  ruin  the  creation,  but
that  this  would  be  its  a^ual  effeci  were  it  under no

reftraint.


142 On Providence.

There  is  one  obfervation  more  of  a
particular  nature  on  the  prefent  fubjedt,
which  is  fo  important  that  it  would  be
inexcufable  to  omit  it.  What  I  have
in  view  is  the  conformity  obferved  by
Dr.  Butler,  betv/een  that  lofs  of  human
creatures  which  I  have  been  confidering,

reftraint. — I  leave  every  one  to  determine  for  hlmfelf
how  far  thefe  obfervationsare  juft. For  my  own  part,
I  am  afraid  of  talking  much  in  this  way;  and,  per-
haps,  it  will  in fome meafure  appear  from  what  is
above  faid, that  there  is  no  great  occafion  for  it  in
order to  vindicate  Providence  in  the  permiflion  of
evil. It  is  right  to  think  of  vice  as  always  an  enemy
to  the  world,  and of  the  havock  it makes  among
mankind  as  a  real  and  great  calamity. The  founder
of  our  religion  certainly  thought  thus, otherwife  he
would  not  have  ftooped  fo  low  and  fufFered  fo  much,
to  prevent  the  efFecis  of  vice  and  to fave  mankind.
This  appears  likewife  from  the  laws  and  threatenings
of  the  Deity,  and  from  all  that  we  fee  of  the  order
of  ^ his  government. The  wicked  may  with no  lefs
truth be confidered as the weeds and briars that
choak  the  plants,  than  as  the  manure  that  helps  their
growtlu If  the  temptations and  di'nculties  of  hu-
man life  are  the  means  fometimes  of  improving  vir-
tue, by  affording It  exercife, they  are  alfo  generally
the  very  caufcs  which  overwhelm  anJ  ruin  it.

and


On Prtovidence.  143

and the  courfe  of  nature  in other  in-
ftances. — Vid.  Analogy^  Part  I.  Chap.  5.
Alinoil  all  kinds  of  vegetables  and  trees
have  a  vaft  profufion of  feeds  prepared
for  them,  far  the  greateft  part  of  which
is  loft  y and,  in  fome  inftances, not  one
of  them  in  many  myriads  grow  up to
any  thing. The  like  is  very  obfervable
in  th^  animal  world ; and were  one  to
enter  minutely  into  this  part  of  natural
hiftory, it  would  be  furpriiing  to  obferve
what  a  fuperfluity  of  eggs  is  provided  for
fome  infects,  what  an  inconceivable  mul-
titude of  creatures are loft  in embryo,
or  born  only  to  be  deftroyed ; and  what
great  numbers of  even  thofe that  pro-
ceed fome  way  towards a  ftate  of  ma-
turity perifti  before  they  arrive  at  it.

Should  it  be  faid  here  that,  as  this
world  is  conftituted,  a  great  wafte  of
this  fort  could  not  but  happen,  which
rendered  it  neceffary  that  a  confiderable
overplus  fliould  be  provided  ^  and  that
the  greatnefs  of  the  numbers  loft  cannot

be


144 0/2 Providence.

be  regarded  by  a  Being  in  whofe  eye  no-
thing is  great,  to  whom  the  produftion
of  any  one  number  of  any  objedls  is  as
cafy  as  the  produdion  of  any  other  5  and
who,  therefore^  can  with  no  more  rea-
fon  be  cenfured  for  any  fueh  lofs,  than
for  the  non-exiflence  of  the  Beings
he  has  not  created  :  Should  this,  I  fay>
be^*K)bje(fled,  it  would  be  obvious  to  an-
fwer,  that  what  is  in  fome  degree  equi-
valent to  it,  may,  with  equal  reafon,-
be  applied  to  the  particular  cafe  under'
confideration.

In  thinking  of  the  analogy  of  nature
in  this  inftance,  we  fhould  by  no  means
forget  the  untimely  deaths  that  happen
among  our  own  fpecies.  Many  perifli  in
the  womb ;  and  the  greater  part  of  thofe
that  fee  the  light,  and  are  put  in  the
way  to  the  enjoyments  and  happinefs  of
grown  men  in  the  prefent  life,  fall  fhort
of  them,  and  are  nipped  in  their  bloom ^
Such  fads  as  thefe  have  a  tendency  ta
make the deepeft  impreffion on  every

con-


On Providence. 145

confiderate  perfon.  They  fhew  us  that
what  we  are  taught  to  believe  with  re-*
ipedl  to  the  future  lot  of  mankind  is  en-
tirely agreeable  to  all  that  we  fee  of  the
world  *. Nor  have  we  any  reafon for

fufpefting

*  I  fuppofe  it  will  be  eafily  feen  on  what  opi-
nion of  the  future  punifhment  I  have  all  al#>ng
argued  ;  and  if,  on  this  opinion,  the  ways  of  God
can  be  vindicated,  there  is  no  other  which  any
reafonable  perfon  is  likely  to  embrace,  on  which  they
may  not  be  vindicated. The  difficulties  to  be  re-
moved are  evidently  much  lefs  on  the  fuppofition  of
the  tiliimate  rejloratlon  of  all  mankind  ;  but  this  opi-
nion is  by  no  means  reconcileable  to  the  language  of
fcripture ;  and  there  is  reafon  to  believe,  that  the
confequences  of  vice  will  be  found  far  more  ter-
rible.

In  order  to  give  a  diftin(£ler  view  of  that  part  of
natural hiftory  which I have  mentioned  above, I

will recite the following facts. Monfieur

Dodarty  in  a  piece  communicated  to  the  Royal  Aca-
demy of  Sciences,  computes  that  an  elm'"fvery  year,
at  a  medium,  produces  330,000  feeds,  and,  therefore,
fuppofmg  it  to  live  a  hundred  years,  33  millions  dur-
ring  its  whole  age. — Fern  is  vaftly  more  fruitful  in

feeds. Hart's tongue, as Dr. Grczv calculates,

produces  in  a  year  a million  of  feeds. "  There is


146 On Providence.

fufpeding  that  this  part  of  its  conftitu-
tion  is  faulty,  as, I hope, the  preced-
ing

«'  an  infinite  diverfity  between  the  places  that  pro-
*'  duce  and  nourifh  different  plants. There  are  fome
*'  that  2tre  not  produced but  upon other  particular
*'  plants, of  which  the  trunk,  or  the  bark,  or  the
"  roots have  alone  the  juice  that  is  agreeable to
"  them. What  Monfieur  Tournefort  has  heard  from
*'  Mcliieurs  Mcry  and  Lemery  is  yet  more  furprifing.
**  There  are  akindofmulhroomswhich  grow  upon  the
"  bands  and  plaifters  applied  to  the  wounds  and  fores
«'  of  the  Tick  men  in  the  hofpital  called  L'Hotel-Dieu.
*'  After  this  nobody  will wonder  that  horfe dung
"  prepared,  as  Monfieur  Tournefort  mentions,  fhould
*'  be  a  kind  of  foil  or  bed, capable  of  bringing  forth
"  the  ordinary  mufhrooms. It  follows  from  hence,
"  that  the  feeds  of  mufhrooms  muft  be fcattercd in
*'  a  pretty  large  quantity,  in an  infinite  number  of
"  places  where  they  never  appear,  and  indeed  over
*'  all  the  earth;  and  by  confequence,  likewife,  the  in-
"  vifible  feeds  of  a  great  number  of  other  plants.
'•  It  muft  be  owned  that  the  imagination  is fliocked
"  at firft, wnth the  confideration of  fuch  a  prodi-
"  gious  multitude  of  different  feeds  fown  everywhere
"  indifferently;  and  in  an  infinity  of  places,  in  vain
"  too. And  yet,  when  one  comes  to  weigh  the  mat-
"  tcr,  one  muft  allow  it. From  whence  come  other-
''  wife  the marfhy  plants that  are  found  in lands
**  turned  to fens, and  which never  appeared  there

"  before  i


On Providence. 147

ing  obiervations  will  prove*  It  is  obvious
that  the  main objedions  to  it lead us

equally

*'  before  ?  From  whence  come  thofe  new  plants  that
*'  other  accidents  fccm  to  have  produced  fometlmes
*'  in  certain  places  j  for  inftance,  the  black  poppies
"  that  grow  in  the  burnt  grounds  of  Languedoc,  in
*'  Provence,  and  in  the  ifles  of  the  Archipelago,
*'  and  which  are  feen  no  more  the  following  ^rears  ?
*'  From  whence  that  great  quantity  oi  Eryfinum  lati-
**  folium  majus  glahrum  which  appeared  after  the  fire  of
'*  London  upon  more  than  200  acres  of  ground  where

*'  that  happened  ? Thefe  kinds  of  fads,  and  many

*'  others  which  one  might  alledge,  equally  incontefti-
*'  ble,  prove,  at  the  fame  time,  both  the  great  multi-
*'  tude  of  feeds  fcattered  every  where,  and  the  want  of

*'  certain  circumftances to  make  them  appear.

*'  If  to  this  fpeculation  on  the  invifible  feeds  of  plants,
*'  we  join  that  of  the  invifible  eggs  of  infecSts,  which
*'  is  exactly  parallel,  the  earth  will  be  found  full  of
*'  an  inconceivable  number  of  vegetables  and  animals
*'  already  perfe(Sl:ly  formed  and  defigned  in  miniature,
*'  and  which  only  (lay  for  certain  favourable  accidents
"  to  appear  in  full  length."  See  the  lives  cf  the  Frerjch^
Italian,  and  German  Philofophersy  late  members  of  the
Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris,  together  zvith  ab-
Jiracts  offome  of  the  cboiceji  pieces  communicated  by  ther-i

to  that  illujirious  fodety. By  Mr.  Chajuherlayne. A

fpider  lays,  as  naturalifts  tell  us, five  or  fix  hundred

eggs. As  the notion  of  fpontaneous generation

L  2  is


148 On Providence.

equally  to  objeft,  in  all  cafes,  to  the  cre-
ation of  a  fmaller  rather  than  a  greater

number

is  now  unlverfally  exploded,  how  fhall  we  account
for  the  infecls  that  never  fail  to  be  bred  in  particular
places,  or  for  the  animalcules  that  are  found  in
certain  infufions,  after  expofing  them  uncovered  to
the  air,  except  by  fuppofing  that  the  eggs  of  thefe
animals  are  continually  wafted  about  every  where  In
the  air  ?  What  an  infinity  then  of  thefe  eggs  muft  be

loft  for  want  of  falling  into  favourable  fituations  ?

Some  have  maintained  that  the  bodies  of  all  living
creatures  are  produced  from  the  animalcules  in  femine
mafcuUno^  which  when  they  happen  to  find  a  proper
titdus^  are  there  changed,  and  for  fome  time  nou-
rifhed  and  enlarged,  till  at  lafl  the  creature  in  its
complete  form  is  ripened  for  birth  ;  juft  as  all  trees
and  plants  proceed  from  a  feed,  which  is  nothing
but  the  tree  or  plant  itfelf  in  miniature,  and  which,
upon  being  thrown  into  a  proper  foil,  is  there,  not
formed,  but  unfolded,  nourifhed  and  increafed,  till
it  becomes  a  full  grown  plant  or  tree.  \i  this  opi-
nion is  true,  it  affords  a  moft  remarkable  inftance  to
the  prefent  purpofe,  there  being  no  reafon  to  think,
confidering  the  inconceivable  number  of  the  animal-
cules mentioned,  that  one  out  of  many  millions  of
them  ever  find  the  proper  nidus^  or  acStually  give  rife
to  the  animals  intended  to be produced  from  them.

Erractly  parallel  to  this,  is  the  account  given  by

natur;ilifts  of  the  conftru^tion  and  ufe  of  the  flower

which


On Providence. 149

number  of  Beings. There is nothing
like  injujiice,  or  even  iinkindnefs, implied

in

which  precedes  the  fruit,  in  plants,  and  trees,  and
of  the  manner  in  which  the  farina^  or  fine  duft  of
flowers  fecundifies  the  germen  or  feed  placed  at  the
bottom  of  the  flower.  Mr.  Samuel  Moreland  in
Philofophical  Tranfaclions,  N°.  287,  (after  giving
an  account  of  a  well  known  part  of  natural  philo-
fophy,  namely,  that  there  is  in  every  feed  a  feminal
plant  lodged  between  the  two  lobes  which  confti-
tute  the  bulk  of  the  feed,  and  are  defigned  for  the
firft  nourifliment  of  the  plant)  mentions  it  as  his
opinion,  that  the  feeds  which  come  up  in  their  proper
involucra^  are  at  firft  like  unimpregnated  ova  of  ani-
mals 5  that  the  farina  is  a  congeries  of  feminal
plants,  one  of  which  mufl  be  conveyed  into  every
ovum  before  it  can  become  prolific  ;  that  the  ptjlil  is
a  tube  defigned  to  convey  thefe  feminal  plants  into
their  nefl:s  in  the  ova  ;  and  that  there  is  fo  vaft  a  pro-
vifion  made  bccaufe  of  the  odds  there  are,  whether
one  out  of  a  great  number  fhall  ever  find  its  way

through  fo  narrow  a  conveyance. This  theory  has

been  received  by  Mr.  Geoffrey  and  many  others.
It  fecms  now  pretty  well  confirmed,  and  has  bid  the
foundation  of  the  Linnaan  fyflem  of  botany.  How
remarkably  does  it  fhew  us  the  analogy  that  runs
through  nature  ?  How  furprifing  to  confider  what  ar>
expence  of  farina  there  is  to  produce  one  feed,  and
L  3  what


I  :;o On Providence.

in  it  to  any  Being. It  is  confiftent  with
an  infinite  overbalance  of  good; and,  for

thefe

what  an  expence  of  feeds  to  produce  one  plant  ? — Is  it
impoffible  that  what  is  fimilar  to  this  fhould  take  place
in  the  formation  of  reafonable  Beings  in  this  world
for  happinefs  hereafter  ? — "  That  the  prefent  world
*'  (fays  Dr.  Butler  in  the  paflage  above  referred  to)
<'  does  not  actually  become  a  flate  of  moral  difcipline
f '  to  many,  even  the  generality,  cannot  be  urged  as
*'  a  proof  that  it  was  not  intended  for  moral  difcip-
<'  line,  by  any  who  at  all  obferve  the  analogy  of
<^  nature.  For,  of  the  numerous  feeds  of  vegetables
^'  and  bodies  of  animals  which  are  adapted  and  put
^'  in  the  way  to  improve  to  fuch  a  point  or  ftate  of
^'  natural  maturity  and  peife£l:ion,  we  do  not  fee
<«  perhaps  one  in  a  million  adually  to  improve  to  it,
*'  Far  the  greateft  part  of  them  decay  before  they  are
''  improved  to  it ;  and  appear  to  be  abfolutely  de-

^'  ftroyed. 1  cannot  forbear  adding,  that  the  ap-

''  pearance  of  fuch  an  amazing  wafle  in  nature,
"  with  refpedl  to  thefe  feeds  and  bodies,  by  foreign
<*  caufes,  is  to  us  as  unaccountable  as  what  is  much
**  more  terrible,  the  prefent  and  future  ruin  of  fo
'«  many  moral  agents,  by  themfelves,  /'.  e.  by  vice."
There  is  a  further  circumflance  in  the  conftitution
of  nature  applicable  to  the  prefent  purpofe,  which
feems  to  be  worthy  of  notice,  and  which  I  will  men-
tion as  briefly  as  pofiible. — One  of  the  moft  remark-
able


On Provi.dence. 151

thefe  reafons, the mere  circumftance  of
its unaccountableneis as occafioning a

ivajle

able and  diftinguifiiing  properties  of  human  nature
is,  its  capacity  of  improvement. What  the  lower  crea-
tures were  at  firft,  they  are  now,  and  probably  ever
will  be. But  this  is  by  no  means  the  cafe  with  men.
Previoully  to  all  advantages  from  experience  and  in-
ftruaion,  they  are  nearly  the  favages  defcribed  by
Mr. Roujfeau, {See  his  Treatife  on  the  Origin  of  the
Inequality  among  Mankind)  or  creatures  running  naked
and  wild  in  the  woods, without  refleaion,  without
fociety,  and  without  language. Compare  them in
this  ftate  with  what  they  are  capable  of  becoming  by
a  due  application  of  their  powers,  by  the  invention  of
'arts  and  fciences,  and  the  eftablifhment  of  the  beft
fchemes  of  civil  policy;  and  a  difFerence  will  appear
not inferior to that  between  men  and the  loweft
fpecies  of  brutes,  or  between  the  wifeft  perfon  on

earth and a  child  juft  born.- This  natural  im-

proveablenefs  of  the human  race  has  never  taken  its

^  complete  effea. The greateft part,  of  men  have,

from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  been  in a ftate

of  darknefs  and  barbarifm. Many  ages  paft  before

the  difcovery  of  any of  thofe  arts,  from  whence  are

derived  the  chief  conveniences  of  life  :  And though

now, in confequence of  the acquifitions of  fome

thoufands  of  years,  human  life  in  a  few  nationsap-

pears  in  a  ftate  of  confiderable  order  and  dignity,  yet

ftill  it  is  farther  than  canbewellimagincd,  from  having

L  4  attained


i^fz  On V  R  t)  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.

ivajie  of  being  (which  is  the  moft  that  is
puzzling  in  it)  cannot  be  of  any  great
confequence.  The  feeming  wajle  may,
for  ought  we  know,  anfwer  important
ends,  and  appear  at  laft  to  be  the  greateft
frugality.  How  hard  is  it  that  we  fliould
be  willing  to  truft  the  wifdom  of  nature
no  further  than  it  keeps  within  fight  ?
How  inconceivable  is  it  that,  in  this  or
any  other  inftance,  a  creature  of  yefter-
day  and  a  reptile  of  the  duft  fhould
be able to  fee further, or to contrive

attained  any  where  to  a  ftate  fo  improved  and  happy
as  we  fee  it  to  be  capable  of. ^^This  lofs  of  the  ef-
fect of  human  improveablenefs  will  appear  equally
remarkable,  if  we  confider  the  individuals  of  mankind.

— Thoufands  of  Boyles,  CJarks  and Newtons

have  probably  been  loft  to  the  world,  and  lived  and
died  in  ignorance  and  meannefs,  merely  for  want  of
being  placed  in  favourable  fituations, and enjoying

proper  advantages. Such  has  been  the  cafe  with

mankind,  confideredas  defigned  only  for  exiftence  in
this  world.  But  they  are  capable  of  exifting  in  a
Jiighcr  ftate.  They  are  capable  of  an  endl-js  future
progrefs  in  knowledge  and  happinefs. — Can  any  one
fay,  that  the  effe(£l:  alfo  of  their  improveablenefs  in
this  refpcft  may  not  fail  in  numbcrlcfs  inftances  ?

better;^


On Provi-dence. ^^3

better,  than  that  original  intelligence  irora

whence all things fprung  ? 1 feel

particular  fatisfadlion  whenever  I  make
fuch  reflexions,  and  therefore  I  hope  I
fliall  be  excufed  if  I  am  too  often  recur-
ring to  them.

^I  have  now  propofed  the  thoughts
which  have  appeared  to  me  of  moil:
confequence,  towards  reconciling  oor
minds  to  our  ftate,  confidered  as  a  mixed
and  imperfed:  ftate ;  a  ftate  of  labour,
temptation,  and  danger ;  and  a  ftate  in
which  many  are  likely  to  fail  of  future
happinefs,  and  to  be  loft  for  ever.  Some
of  the  obfervations  which  have  been  made
on  the  head  laft  mentioned,  have  gone
on  the  fuppofition,  that  the  virtuous  part
of  mankind  are  not  only  to  be  equitably
diftinguiihed  from  others  in  proportion  to
the  difterence  of  their  charaders,  but
to  be  rewarded  hereafter  with  an  emilefs
life  in  a  ftate  of  ever  increafing  happi-
jiefs.  As  we  have  reafon  to  think  this
to  be  the  faft,  it  makes  no  great  diffe-
c  rence


154 ^^^ Providence,
rence  with  refpecft  to  the  argument  on
which  I  have  infilled, how^  it  comes to
be  fad: ; whether, for  inftance,  it  is  to
be  confidered  as  derived  from  the  origi-
nal  canjiitution  of  the  Deity, or  as  the
effedl  of  an extraordinary  difpenfation  of
mercy. In  juftice, however, to what
the  Chriftian  Revelation has  taught  us,
I  cannot  difmifs  this  fubjed:  without  ob-
ferving,  that the  latter  is  in  reality  the
truth. The  Scriptures are  exprefs and
clear  in  reprefenting  Chrift  as  the  author
of  eternal  lijcy  pr  our  rejlorer  to  immor-
tality. The account  there  given  feems
to  be, that we  were  indeed  at  firft  in-
tended for  immortality, but  that  in  con-
fequence  of  certain events  at the  com-
inencement  of  the prefent  ftate, we  loft
it,  and  were  brought  into  fuch  circum-
ftances of diftrefs as  gave  occafion to
the  interpofition  of  the  Meffiah,  by  whofe
benevolent  agency  our race  has  been  fo
far  delivered,  that  all  the  truly  penitent
Ihall  efcape  the  fecond  death,  and  be  made

happy  for  ever. As  one  who  believes

I  Chri-


071 ProvideInce. 155

Chriftianity,  I  am  obliged  to  think  this
a  true  account ;  and  there  are  feveral
reafons  which  determine  me  to  think  it
an  account  entirely  credible.  Death  has
in  it  all  the  appearance  of  being  an  evil
for  which  fuch  creatures  as  we  are  might
not  be  originally  intended.  The  beft  of  us
have  expofed  themfelves  to  the  confe-
quences  of  guilt  in  many  inftances.  I
cannot  conceive,  why  it  fliould  be  thought
unlikely,  t\i2itfiich  Beings  fhould  be  in  a
ftate  which  (though  perfectly  right  con-
fidered  in  its  reference  to  the  Divine  ad--
miniftration)  may  yet  be  a  degraded  or
fallen  ftate,  and  fuch  as  might  have  need-
ed fuch a  Saviour  as  Jefus  Chrift. .

I  fhould  be  carried  far  beyond  the  pur-
pofe  of  this  Differtation  were  I  to  fay
much  more  here.  I  will  therefore  ad-
vance no  further  than  to  offer  a  few  hints,
in  order  to  fhew  what  force  fome  of  the
arguments  already  propofed  have  to  vin-
dicate Divine  Providence,  even  on  the
fuppofition  that  our  real  ftate  is  that  now
mentioned.

It


156 071 Providence.

It  has  been  proved,  I  think,  that  there
is  no  reafon  to  look  upon  our  prefent  ftate
as,  in  any  refpefl:,  inconfiftent  with  the
perfedions  of  the  Deity  "*.  Moft  cer-
tainly then,  it  is  a  ftate  into  which  he
might  have  made  us  liable  to  be  brought
in  confequence  of  any  connexions  proper
to  be  eftablifhed  in  the  univerfe.  We
fee  among  the  individuals  of  mankind
that,  in  confequence  of  their  dependence
on  one  another,  they  are  often  deprived
of  benefits  which  feemed  to  be  intended
for  them  by  the  conftitution  of  the  Deity,
and  brought  into  ftates  which,  tho'  they
give  no  reafon  for  complaining  of  Pro-
vidence, are  yet  juftly  deemed  calamitous.

*  If  any  one  fliould  fufpe£t  an  inconfiftency  in  fay-
ing that  our  flatc  i$  calamitous,  and  yet  a  ftate  that
difplays  God's  goodnefs,  and  in  which  we  might  have
been  originally  placed,  let  him  put  the  cafe  of  a  per-
fon  fallen  from  honour,  eafe,  and  wealth,  to  the
cares,  and  toil,  and  indigence  of  low  life ;  would  it
TiOt  be  true,  that  the  condition  of  fuch  a  perfon  was
calamitous  ?  But  might  he  not,  as  many  actually
are,  have  been  horn  in  it,  and  yet  have  abundant  rea-
fon to  be  thankful  for  exiftencc  ?

How


On Providence. 157

How credible is it that there may
alfo  be events  or  connexions  in  nature
by which, confidently with perfedt
wifdom and goodnefs, the like may
happen fometimes to a  /pedes  ? The
enjoyment of  whatever is a  favour  in
exiftence, may be  made precarious in
any  degree the  creator  pleafes, or  fuf-
pended  on  any  conditions  that  he  fees  to
be  moft  conducive  to  the  ends  of  his  go-
vernment. The bleffings which the
Chriftian  fcheme fuppofes  mankind  had
loft,  they  never  had  any  right to. The
Divine  perfedlions certainly do  not  re-
quire, that  fuch  virtue  as  ours  fliould  be
rewarded with the Chri/ian  fahation.
Had  our  Maker  intended  us  only  for  a
temporary  exijience, we flipuld  have  had
>no  reafon  for  any  other fentiments  than
grateful  ones, provided  we  enjoyed any
degree of  happinefs,  and received uni-
verfally  an  adequate  retribution. But  he
has been infinitely more kind to us.
That very  conftitution of his govern-
ment


158 On Providenck.

ment  which  made  us  liable  to  be  brought
into  that  calamitous  ftate  which  Chri*'
ftianity  fuppofes,  made  provifion  alfo  for
the  pofTibility  of  our  deliverance  and  re-
ftoration  to  the  views  of  a  happy  eter-
nity ;  and  thus  difplays  the  higheft  wif-
dom  and  goodnefs  we  can  imagine,  a-
greeably  to  the  obfervations  in  page  130

—  133-

But  it  is  high  time  to  ftop.  I  feel
myfelf  in  danger  of  going  far  beyond  my
depth.  The  ways  and  adminiftration
of  the  Deity  muft  be  unfathomable  to  us.
Were  they  otherwife,  they  could  not  be
infinitely  wife  and  good.  The  origin  of
evil  has  been  the  grand  fubjed;  ot  en-
quiry among  thoughtful  men  in  all
ages,  and  various  have  been  the  fenti-
ments  about  it.  What  has  been  now
faid  on  this  point  is  offered  with  a  deep
fenfe  of  imperfediion  and  blindnefs.
Though  it  fcems  to  remove  fome  diffi-
culties, it  does  not,  I  am  fenfible,  re-
move all. What  has  been  laft infifted

on


0;Z F  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E .  1  59

on  fliould  be  particularly  attended  to.
If,  according  to  the  fcriptures  and  ancient
tradition,  our  ftate  is  indeed  a  fallen
ftate,  the  dired:  folution  of  the  queftion
concerning  the  origin  of  evil  would  be
a  recital  of  the  manner  in  which  we
were  brought  into  it,  or  a  diftind  ac-
count of  thofe  caufes  and  events  under
the  Divine  government  from  which  it  is
derived.  But  fuch  an  account,  fuppof-
ing  it  given  us,  we  may  not  perhaps  be
capable of  underftanding  *. We muft

*  The  account  of  the  Fall  in  Gene/is  is  far  from
being  fuch  an  account  as  I  here  mean.  It  is,  per-
haps, in  fome  meafure  veiled^  or  at  leaft  partial^  and
defigned  only  to  inform  us  that,  whereas  we  were  at
firft  placed  higher  in  the  fcale  of  being,  we  were
reduced  lower  and  funk  into  our  prefent  mortal  flats
in  confequence  of  fome  connexions  we  had  with  fu-
perior  orders  of  creatures,  or  of  the  agency  of  an
evil  Being  reprefented  by  the  Serpent  -,  a  deliverer  be-
ing at  the  fame  time  promifed,  who  fhould  dejitoy  tlse
works  of  the  devil, — See  the  laft  eiTliy  in  a  book  intitled,
CritOy  where  a  good  deal  tliat  deftrves  attention,  is
faid  by  the  ingenious  and  learned  author,  on  the  power
of  fuperior  Beings  and  the  connexions  we  may  have
had  with  them  5  and  alfoj  on  another  fubjecl  touched
in  page  141.

there-


i6o On Providence.

therefore  be  much  in  the  dark  -,  and
while  we  are  fo,  while  we  fee  nothing
but  juft  the  prefent  moment,  and  know
fo  little  of  the  hiftory  of  the  univerfe,
and  its  connexions  and  laws,  it  cannot
but  be  unreafonable  to  pretend  to  be
able  to  form  an  adequate  judgment  of
our  ftate,  or  completely  to  account  for
every  circumftance  in  it.  Every  one
who  looks  about  him  muft  lament  the
degeneracy  of  mankind ;  and  every  one
who  believes  the  doctrines  of  rehgion
muft  tremble  for  the  danger  he  is  in,
and  the  multitudes  who  are  likely  to  be
loft.  Inftead  of  allowing  ourfelves  to
be  very  anxious  about  difcovering  the
particular  caufes  that  brought  us  into
thefe  circumftances,  our  chief  enquiry
fhould  be,  whether,  amidft  all  our
darknefs,  we  do  not  fee  enough  to  alTure
us  that  God  is  perfedly  righteous  in
all  his  ways ;  and  about  this  I  can
entertain no doubts, for the reafons I

have endeavoured  to  explain. But,

above all things, it  is our bufinefs to

take


On PROVIt)ENCE.  l6t

take  care  of  ourfelves,  to  keep  clear  of
the  corruption  that  is  in  the  v)orld  through
liift^,  to  ftrive  to  fave  our  own  fouls
amidft  the  dreadfiil  wreck,  and  at  the
fame  time  to  do  all  we  can  to  fave
fome  with  ourfelves.  This  is  the  great
ufe  which  we  fliould  make  of  what  We
have  reafon  to  believe  concerning  cur
itate ;  and  I  wifh  I  knew  how  to  im-
prefs  on  the  mind  of  the  perfon  who
reads  this  a  due  fenfe  of  its  importance.
Without  doubt  every  other  objedl  of
concern,  compared  with  it,  is  entirely-
trivial  and  infignificant.

*  ^  Pet.  i.  4.


^M  SECT.


1 62 On Providence.


S  E  C  T. V.

Of  the  Vfes  of  the  DoBrine  of  Providence*

IN  the  preceding  fedllons  I  have  con-
fidered  moft  of  the  queftlons  relat-
ing to  the  dodlrine  of  Providence,  which
feemed  to  me  of  great  importance.  I
have  endeavoured  to  give  a  juft  view  of
the  nature  and  proofs  of  it,  but  have
not  aimed  at  difcuffing  every  queftion
that  has  been  ftarted  about  it,  or  in-
fiftlng  on  every  argument  that  might
have  been  urged.  In  ftating,  particu-
larly, the  evidence  for  Providence,  I
have  avoided  entering  into  fome  reafon-
ings  which  have  a  great  effetS  on  my
own  mind,  becaufe  likely  to  be  con-
fidered  as  too  abflradted  and  metaphyfi-
cal,  and  becaufe  alfo  a  full  explanation
of them  could not be properly given

in


On PROVIDENtEi  163

jn this diiTcrtation  *. What  has been
faid, however, will, I hope, be fuf-

ficient

*  0{  this  fort  are  the  following  obfervations,  which
I  will  juft  mention  here,  becaufe  it  is  poflible  that,
without  any  particular  explanation,  they  may  appear

to  a  few  as  important  as  they  do  to  myfelf. Since

all  limitation  muftbe  an  effect  of  fome  limiting  caufe,
it  can  have  no  place  In  an  unorlginated  nature. Un-
briginated  pov/er,  wifdom,  and  goodnefs, therefore,
muft  be  mfinite. Wherever  infinite  power  is,  there
muft  be  infinite  knowledge^  it  being  contradidory  to
fuppofe  that  the  power  of  any  intelligent  Being  can
extend  further  than  his  ideas. And,  fmce  the  obliga-
tions of  moral rectitude  are  founded  in  eternal  truth
and  reafon,  where  there is  infinite  knotvkdge^ there
muft  be  infinite  ^5(7i«£/}. There  is,  therefore,  a  ne-
cefTary  connexion  betv/een  infinite power,  wifdom,
and  goodnefs. They  are  eflentially  one,  and  cannot
refide  in  different  natures. The fovereignty  of  the
univerfe, therefore, muft be perfectly wife and
righteous  j  and  all  the  order  and  beauty  in  the  crea-
tion are  to  be  traced  up  to  one  eternal  and  immutable
principle, of  order  and  beauty,  and  of  all  that  is  ve-
nerable and  excellent. It  deferves particular  no-
tice,  that the  necefTary  connexion  which  our  own
ideas  teach us,  in  the  manner  juft  mentioned j be-
tween  infinite power,  wifdom and goodnefs, and
which  certainly  is  the  moft  agreeable  and  important
of  all  truths,  is  exhibited  to  us  in  all  that  we  fee  of
M  a  the


I  &4  C>;/  Providence.
licient  to  convince  fuch  as  vv^ill  impaf'*'
tially  attend  to  it,  and  nothing  now  re-
mains but  that  I  reprefent  the  proper
improvement  of  this  fubje6t,  and  con-
fider  the  influence  which  it  ought  to
have  on  our  tempers  and  lives.

Here,  ifl:.  It  fliould  be  recollefted
that  the  argument  on  which  I, have  prin-
cipally infifled  in  the  laft  feclion,  fur-
nifhcs  us  with  a  flrong  reafon  for  con-
tentment. As  this  reafon  for  content-^
ment  cannot  be  too  much  inculcated,
I  fhall  not  fcruple  to  recall  fome  of  the
obfervations  before  made,  in  order  to
give  a  more  diflindl  and  full  account  of
it.

The  fadl  I  (hall  go  upon  is,  that  hap-
pinefs  is  prevalent  in  human  life.  This,
I  know, has  been  denied  by  fome, but

the  world ;  there  being  no  inftance  in  which  the
foiver  that  matle  the  univerfe  has  dilplaycd  dcfign,
which  docs  not  appear  to  be  wife  and  kind  defign.
Compare  the  note  in  page  24.

cer-"


On Providence. 165

certainly  without  any  reafon.  There  is,
in  reality,  no  comparifon  between  the
blejjings  and  the  calamiucs  of  life,  or  be-
tween the  number  of  hours  in  which  we
enjoy  fome  kind  of  pleafure,  and  thofe
in  which  we  fuffer  pain.  What  in  fome
meafure  deceives  us  in  this  matter  is,  our
confidering  every  ftate  in  which  we  are
not  exempted  from  all  tineajinefs ^  as  a
ftate  of  abfolute  mifery ;  whereas  we
may  be  happy,  that  is,  the  whole  pleafure
of  exifting  may  not  be  deftroyed,  un-
der confiderable  degrees  of  uneafinefs. — ^
We  are,  on  the  contrary,  apt  to  coniider
no  ftate  as  happy  which  is  not  attended
with  fome  fenfatioris  of  pofitive  joy;  and
this  is  true  as  this  word  h^  been  generally
ufed,  but  is  far  from  being  fo  if  w^e  ap-
ply it,  as  I  now  do,  to  any  ftate  or  cir-
cumftances  in  which  to  he  is  better  than

not  to  be. Life,  though deftitute of

any  particular  gratifications,  is  naturally

agreeable. Seldom does it happen at

the end  of  a  djiy  that  we  have  no  reafon

M  3  to


I


j66 On Providence.

to  thank  God  for  it,  or  that  we  can  fay
Avith  truth,  upon  reviewing  it,  that  it
has  been  a  miferable  day  to  us.  A  ftate
of  fome  degree  of  enjoyment,  or  of
exemption  from  all  fuch  diftrelTes  as  take
away,  while  they  laft,  all  comfort,  being
our  ufual  ftate,  it  is  what  we  look  for
and  reckon  upon ;  and  therefore,  what-
ever happens  to  put  us  out  of  this  ftate,
or  to  render  exiftence  a  real  burden,
is  the  more  obferved  and  makes  the
deeper  impreffion.  And  from  hence  it
comes  to  pafs,  that  one  fit  of  ficknefs  or
difafter  engages  the  attention,  and  fur-
nifties  with  matter  for  converfation  for
months  or  years,  while  all  the  health
and  pleafures  ^ith  which  common  life
abounds,  are  overlooked  and  difte-
garded.

Suppofing  it  then  evident  that  the
portion  of  good  allotted  to  men  exceeds
the  portion  of  evil,  let  us  next  enquire
what  reafon  they  can  have  for  difcon-
tent.  Happy,  in  foii^e  degree,  they  feci
I  them-


On  Providence. 167

themfelves.  If  then  they  are  dilTatisfied,
it  muft  be  becaufe  they  are  not  more
happy.  But  this  is  perverfenefs  and  pre-
fumption :  For  if  this  be  a  juft  reafon
for  diffatisfadlion,  it  is,  in  the  nature
of  things, impoffible they  fhould  ever

be  fatisfied. A  perfon, fuppofe, in  a

low  ftation  and  narrow  circumftances,
finds  upon  comparing  his  enjoyments
and  fufFerings,  the  former  to  be  greateft,
and  his  exiftence,  all  things  confidered,
to  be  preferable  to  non-exiftence.  Why
then  is  he  not  contented  ? — '^  Becaufe  he
*'  is  not  ftationed  higher  in  the  world/*
— -Suppofe  this  granted  him.— —Will
not  the  fame  ground  of  difcontent  ftill
remain  ?  And  would  it  not  remain  tho*
he  was  even raifed  to  the  ftation  of  an

angel  *  ? It  is  plain, therefore, that

nothing

*  No  perfon  of  any  reflexion  can  Imagine  that  this
argument  implies,  that  we  ought  not  to  ufe  proper
means  to  improve  our  circumftances,  or  increafe  our
happinefs.  The  moft  vigorous  ufe  of  fuch  means  is
confiftent  with  the  higheft  degree  of  fubmlirion  to  the
Divine  will,  nay,  is  required  by  it.  Whatever  hap-
M  4  pincfs


J  68  On P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.

nothing  can  be  more  abfurd  than  difeon^
tent.  It  goes  upon  a  principle  which
would  level  the  whole  univerfe,  and  fow
uneaiinefs  among  all  the  inferior  orders
of  Beings.  The  true  language  of  it  is ;
*^  I  will  be  at  the  top  of  th?  creation,
^'  I  will  accept  of  no  happinefs  fhort
*'  of  the  greatefl  that  can  be  communi-
^*  cated." -What  can  equal  the  ar-
rogance of  fuch  a  difpcfitlon  of  mind  ?
How  entirely  does  it  unfit  for  exiftence
under  God's  government,  where  there
muil:  be  fubordinations  and  diftindlions
of  all  forts  and  degrees  ?  How  bafe  is  it
to  complain  of  that  Being  who  has  given
us  all  wx  enjoy,  merely  becaufe  he  ha$
not  given  us  7nore,  when,  without  wrong,
he  might  have  given  us  nothhig?  It
becomes  not  :thofe  who  are  obliged  for
every degree  *of  good to  pure favour,

plncfs  lies  within  the  reach  of  the  powers  given  us
and  we  can  innocently  obtain,  ought  to  be  con-
fidcred  as  a  part  of  the  happinefs  intended  us  by  Pro-
vidence ;  and  it  would  be,  not  acquiefcing  in  its  dif-
pofals  but  thwarting  them,  to  deprive  ourfelves  of
jt  by  iti^ciiyity  and  negligence,

t9


On  Providence.  169
to  prefcribe  how  much  they  fliall  have ;
or  for  tliofe  who  might  never  have  ex-
ifted,  to  determine  how  perfect  and  hap-
py they  fhall  be.- We  need  not  doubt

but  that  it  is  for  the beft  reafons,  that
our  flate is fuch as we find it. Our
duty  is to accept humbly  that portion
of  bhfs  which  falls  to  our  /hare, to  ac-
quiefce chearfully in our different  fta-
tions, and  to efteem  ^s^^xy  little  which
may  be  granted  us  a  kindnefs that  calls
for  gratitude. Thus  fliall  we  make  the
moft  of  what  we enjoy, aft  fuitably  to
the relation of creatures, recomm.end
ourfelves  to  our  all-wife Governor, and
take  the  certain method  to  fecure  fui>
ther  favour.

It  will  not  be  improper  to  obfcrve
here,  that  though  I  have  argued  on  the
fuppofition  that  happinefs  is  prevalent  in
human  life,  yet  v/e  fliould,  in  reality,
have  no  good  reafon  for  complaint,  tho'
the  contrary  were  true,  provided  it  v/as
the  effed:  of  our  own  ill  condud. From

this


ijo On  Providence.

this  fource,  undoubtedly,  proceed  our
worft  evils.  Human  life,  as  it  is  the
gift  of  God,  or  as  we  might  make  it
by  behaving  fliitably  to  his  intentions
and  ftudying  to  maintain  tranquility,  is
an  unfpeakably  greater  bleffing  than  we
commonly  find  it.'  This  obfervation
places  the  abfurdity  of  difcontent  in  a
light  that  cannot  but  imprefs  every  in-
genuous mind.  Is  it  not  fhameful  to
murmur,  on  account  of  evils  which  we
voluntarily  bring  upon  ourfelves,  con-
trary to  plain  admonitions  and  warnings  ?
Does  it  not  infinitely  more  become  guilty
Beings,  who  are  fo  much  the  creators  of
their  own  fufferings,  to  accufe  and  re-
proach themjelves,  than  to  exclaim  againft
Providence  ?

I  cannot  quit  thefe  reflexions  without
adding,  that  the  fame  argument  with
that  now  ufed  to  fliew  the  folly  of
difcontent  in  general,  may  be  employed
to  (hew  the  folly,  in  particular,  of  the
inclination  which  many  perfons  difcover

to


On Providence, 171

to  complain,  becaufe  greater  light  and
evidence  on  feveral  fpeculative  points
have  not  been  granted  them.  Every
man  has  light  enough  to  a6t  upon,  and
to  diredl  him  in  his  mofl  important  con-
cerns. This  is  all  we  can  have  any  right
to  expedl ;  and  to  indulge  difcontent  be-
caufe v^e  have  not  fo  much  as  wq  wifla
for,  or  as  is  neceflary  to  fatisfy  curiofity,
w^ould  be  tacitly  to  aflert  that  we  have  a

right  to  be omnifcient. It  is  indeed

our  duty  to  ftrive  to  obtain  all  the  light
poffible ;  but  at  the  fame  time  we  ihould
remember,  that  it  is  no  fmall  part  of
virtue  to  acquiefce  in  that  degree  of  light
allotted  us  by  Providence,  or  which  we
are  able  to  acquire  in  the  faithful  ufe  of
pur  faculties.— But  to  difmifs  this  fubjeft.

I  would  further  obferve  with  refpeft  to
the  proper  improvement  of  the  dodrine
of  Providence,  that  it  ought  to  be  always
attended  to  and  recognized  by  us.  The
care  of  the  Deity,  we  have  feen,  extends

to


/

172 Oh Providence.

to  all  events.  Nothing  happens  with-,
out  either  his  appointment  or  permiffion.
It  muft  be  our  duty  to  remember  this,
and  to  maintain  a  deep  fenfe  of  it  in  our
hearts.  Nothing  can  be  more  reafonable
than  that  we  fliould  look  up  continually
to  the  Sovereign  Arbiter  of  nature,,  ex-
peft  fuccefs  in  our  undertakings  from
him,  and  acknowledge  \am  in  all  our
ways.  There  is  within  us  an  unhappy
pronenefs  to  fink  into  an  infenfibility
with  refpecfl  to  him  ,  and  it  is  remark-
able that  the  chief  caufe  of  this  is  the
peculiar  degree  of  our  dependence  upon
him,  and  his  being  fo  much  one  with
our  fouls  that  we  overlook  him.  There
is  nothing  fo  near  us,  and  therefore,  there
is  nothing  that  we  are  fo  apt  to  dif-
regard.  He  is  in  every  breath  we  draw
and  in  every  thought  we  think,  and  for
this  very  reafon  he  engages  not  our  at-
tention y  and,  becaufe  every  thing,  he  be-
comes nothing  to  us. Thus,  in  par-
ticular, his  power  is  as  much  difplayed
m  thofc  events  which  are  moft  com-
mon.


On Providence. 173

mon,  as  in  thofe  which  are  moft  extra-
ordinary. But  in  the  former  we  feldom
take  notice  of  it,  whereas  in  the  latter
it  alarms  and  terrifies  us.  \Ver6  the  bo-
dies on  the  furface  of  the  earth  to  afcend
into  the  air,  or  were  the  planets  to  fly
out  of  their  orbits,  our  thoughts  would
be  immediately  drawn  to  God's  hand ;
but  it  afteds  us  not  in  cafes  where  there
is  much  more  reafon  to  acknowledge  it,
in  the  tendency  of  bodies  downwards,
and  the  regular  motions  of  the  heavenly
bodies.  What  comes  to  pafs  out  of  the
ufual  courfe  we  are  never  backward  to
afcribe  to  him ;  but  what  is  done  con-
ftantly  and  regularly,  we  are  ready  to
confider  as  coming  to  pafs  of  itfelf,  and
requiring  no  caufe.  We  fliould  endea-
vour to  guard  our  minds  againft  this
weaknefs,  and  fludy  to  acquire  a  habit
of  carrying  up  our  views  to  God  on  all
occalions.  We  may  be  fure  of  being
right  in  doing  this.  The  courfe  of  nature
is  nothing  but  his  power,  exerting  itfelf
every  where  according  to fixt  rules,  m

order


174  O/^  Providence,
order  to  anfwer  the  beft  ends.  The
frame  of  the  world  muft  be  in  every
refped  what  he  has  been  pleafed  to  or-
dain. By  him  it  fubiifts,  and  in  him  we
livCf  and  move,  and  have  our  beings  *.  See
Seft.  II.  page  41 — 54.

One  cannot think, without  concern
and  furprife,  of  the  inexcufable  degree  in
which  fome  perfons  are  guihy  of  that  dif-
regard  to  Providence,  on  which  I  am  now
remarking. They  terminate  their  views
in  the  objeds  of  fenfe,  and  forget  all  fu-
perlor  and  invifible power. They  con-
fider  the  Deity  as  either  withdrawn  from
the  world  to  enjoy repofe  in  the  extra-
mundane  fpaces;  or,  if  neceflarily  prefent
to  it,  as  an  idle  and  vaing-lorious  Being,
who is  above  concerning himfelf  with
any  thing  in  it. They  look  no  higher
for  the  fource  of  any evils they fufFer^
or  bleffings  they  enjoy, than  change ^ or
fortune^ ox  fate ^ and  they are  generally
very well  fatisfied  if  they  can  point  out
the  immediate  caufe  of  an  effed  without

*  Acts  xvii.  28,

€n-


0;7  Providence. 17^

enquiring  any  further. This has  been
too  true  of  even  fome  who have been
diftinguiflied  by  the  name  of  Philofophers.  \
But  it  is  impoffible  that  they  fhould  have
anyjufk  title to  that  charadler. It  has
appeared, I beheve, that  fuch  a  w^ay  of
thinking  is  no  lefs  repugnant  to  true  phi- ,
lofophy, than  it  is  miferably  gloomy  and
difcouraging*. 'Tis  worth  remember-

*  "  A  little  philofophy  inclineth  mens  mind  to
«*  atheifm  ;  but  depth  in  philofophy  bringeth  mens
*<  minds  about  to  religion,'*  Lord  Bacon* s  EJfay  on
"  Atheifm »

"  In  the  entrance  of  philofophy,  when  the  fecond
*'  caufes  moft  obvious  to  the  fenfes  offer  themfelves
*'  to  the  mind,  we  are  apt  to  cleave  to  them,  and
*«  dwell  too  much  upon  them,  fo  as  to  forget  what
**  is  fuperior  in  nature.  But  when  we  pafs  further^
•'  and  behold  the  dependency,  continuation,  and
"  confederacy  of  caufes,  and  the  works  of  Provi-
«'  dence,  then,  according  to  the  allegory  of  the
"  poets,  we  ^afily  believe  that  the  higheft  link  of  na^
*«  ture's  chain  muft  needs  be  tied  to  the  foot  of
"  Jupiter's  chair  j  or  perceive  that  philofophy,  like
*'  Jacobus  vifion,  difcovcrs  to  us  a  ladder  whofe  top
"  reaches  up  to  the  footftool  of  the  throne  of  God/*
Mr.  Maclaurins  Account  of  Sir  Ifaac  Newton's  Philofo^
phical  Difcoveriesy  Book  I.  Chap.  3.


1^6 On Providence.

ing,  particularly,  that  the  difpofition  i6
be  fatisfied  with  difcovermg  the  im"
mediate  caufes  of  efFedls  in  natural  philo-
fophy,  without  carrying  our  views  higher,
argues  exadly  the  fame  folly  with  that
of  a  perfon,  v/ho  fliould  imagine  that  he
had  fufficiently  accounted  for  the  motion
of  a  particular  wheel  in  a  machine,  by
flbewing  that  it  was  turned  by  the  wheel
next  to  it,  without  extending  .  his  views
to  the  fkill  of  the  artift,  and  to  the
fpring,  on  whofe  cpnftant  aftion  all  the
motions  of  the  machine  depended  ^  or
rather  it  argues  the  fame  folly  with  that
of  the  Indian  mentioned  by  Mr.  hockey
who  fatisfieij  himfelf  with  thinking  that
the  world  was  fupported  by  an  elephant,

and the elephant by  a  tortoife. It

fliOuld,  however,  be  obferved  here  that
there  is  an  extreme  on  the  other  fide,
which  ought  carefully  to  be  avoided.
I  mean,  the  extreme  into  which  thofe
perfons  run  who  have  rccourfe  immc^
diately  to  Divine  power,  in  order  to  ac-
count for  every  event,  and who  are  apt

to


On Providence. 177

to  look  with  horror  on  all  attempts  to
aflign  the  natural  caufes  of  events.  The
former  extreme  is  atheifm.  This  is  fu^
ferjiition 'y  and  both  argue  great  fliort-
fightednefs  and  ignorance.  But  the  laft
is  perhaps  the  moft  excufable.  We  can-
not fay  how  far  the  dependence  of
lower  caufes  on  more  general  ones
reaches,  or  how  complicated  the  me-
chanifm  of  nature  may  be;  but  we  know
that  the  Maker's  agency  is  the  primary
caufe  which  eftabliflied  all  others,  and
to  which  all  others  owe  their  force  ;  and
this  proves,  that  there  is  a  juft  fenfe  in
which  we  may  afcribe  to  him  every
effect  in  the  material  world,  and  con-
fider  all  that  happens  as  the  refult  of  his
will.

Thirdly.  From  the  account  that  has
been  given  of  Providence  we  may  learn
the  reafonablenefs  of  prayer.  Were  it
true  that  the  Deity  does  not  attend  to
our  affairs,  or  that  the  feries  of  events
goes  on  in  one  immutable  dired:ion  in-
N  dependently


ijS On Providence.

dependently  of  him,  no  help  could  be
expected  from  him ;  nor  could  we  be
at  all  the  better  for  any  application  of
our  minds  to  him,  and  therefore  prayer
would  be  an  abfurdity.  But  it  has  been
fhcwn  that  the  contrary  is  true.  If  I
have  argued  right,  the  feries  of  events
is  juft  what  he  fees  fit  to  appoint  or  al-
low. He  is  intimately  prefent  with  us
every  moment,  obferving  all  our  thoughts,
and  difpofing  all  the  circumftances  of  our
exiflence.  The  whole  world  is  in  his
hand,  and  by  an  imperceptible  diredlion
of  the  operations  of  natural  caufes  and
of  the  thoughts  of  mankind,  he  can
over-rule  whatever  comes  to  pafs^  and
grant  proper  anfwers  to  prayer. — —The
objedion  then  againfl  prayer,  taken  from
the  fuppofed  unalterablenefs  of  the  courfe
of  things,  and  the  impoffibility  of  de-
riving any  benefit  from  it,  confiftcntly
with  the  fettled  order-  of  the  world,  is
groundlefs. — If  there  is  an  all -dire  ding
Providence,  nothing  can  be  more  fit  than
to  endeavour  to  engage  it  in  our  favour.
I  If


On P  R  o  V  I  b  E  isi  c  E. 179

If  we  owe  our  whole  happinefs  to  God,
and  the  entire  fate  of  our  Beings  is  de-
termined by  his  will,  it  muft  be  inex-
cufable  not  to  acknowledge  and  worfhip
him.  If  he  governs  all  created  exiftence,
and  nothing  can  come  to  pafs  contrary  to
his  counfels,  it  is  reafonable  to  feek  his
protection,  to  fly  to  him  in  danger^
to  beg  his  aid  in  accomplifliing  our
good  defigns,  to  implore  his  bleffing  on
our  enjoyments,  and  to  recommend  to
his  care  thofe  who  are  dear  to  us.  Nor
can  any  perfon,  who  has  his  mind  duly
impreffed  with  a  fenfe  of  the  abfolute
dependence  of  all  things  on  the  Deity,
omit thefe ad:s without offering great

violence  to  himfelf. The  belief  of  an

omniprefent  Deity  prompts  the  human
heart,  with  a  force  almofl  irrefiftible,  to
direft  its  defires  to  him.  This  tendency
difcovers  itfelf  in  all  mankind  j  and  as
far  as  it  operates,  it  implies  a  neceffity
of  confid^ring  prayer  as  likely  to  be  of
avail  to  procure  blefiings  iot  us.  It  may
be  well  prefumed  that  this  fentiment  of
N  2  nature


1 8o On Providence.

nature  muft  be  right;  and  that  the  Deity
does  indeed,  either  by  himfelf  or  fome
intermediate  agency,  follow  prayer  with
fuch  bleffings  as  it  may  be  a  juft  reafon
for  communicating.  Experience  and
obfervation  prove  nothing  to  the  contrary.
For,  fuppoling  the  conftltution  of  the
world  to  be  fuch  as  e/labliflies  an
availablenefs  in  prayer,  it  muft  be  im-
poiiible  to  diftinguifli  the  bleffings  which
have  this  fource  from  others.  It  is
enough  that  we  have  reafon  to  conclude
that  God  is  a  friend  to  the  pious  and
v^orthy,  and  that  we  fee  in  general  their
flate to be happier than  that of the

irreligious  and  vicious. The  opinion

that  the  Deity  has  limited  himfelf  to  a
fettkd  courfe  of  afting,  or  to  general
laws  from  which  he  never  deviates,  has
very  little  to  do  with  this  point.  For  let
it  be  allowed  to  be  true ;  Is  it  likewife
true  of  ail  thofe  fubordinate  Beings,  who
may  be  the  minifters  of  his  Providence?
May  it  not  be  itfelf  a  law  of  his  govern-
ment, or  one  part  of  his  fettled  courfe

of


On Providence. iSi

of  afting,  to  make  a  proper  difference
between  thofe  who  Acknowledge  his  fu-
preme  dominion  by  prayhig  to  him,  and

thofe  who  do  not? But  v/hat  is  it

informs  us  that  the  Deity  never  adls  but
by  general  laws  ?  The  reafon  I  have  men-
tioned more  than  once  *  for  the  eftablifli-
ment  of  general  laws  is  far  from  being
any  juft  foundation  for  this  opinion.
Particular  influences  accommodated  to
particular  occafions,  though  fuppofed  not
reducible  to  any  general  laws,  may  yet
be  agreeable  to  them,  and  entirely  con-
fiflent  with  their  inviolablenefs ;  as  13
fliewn  in  the  firfl  and  third  feftions.

It  is  neceffary  to  add,  that  were  there
in  truth,  on  account  of  the  unalterable-
nefs  of  the  courfe  of  nature  and  the
impropriety  of  adventitious  influences,
no  benefit  to  be  derived  from  fupplica-
tions  to  the  Deity,  an  inconfiflency  would
be  eftablifhed  in  the  conftitution  of  the
world; for  by  the  frame  of  our  minds

*  See  page  17.

N  3  it


J 82 On Providence.

it  would  diBate  prayer  to  us,  at  the  fame
time  that  by  fixing  its  unav.ailablenefs  it
had  rendered  it  vain  and  impertinent.
But  this  fubjed:  will  come  to  be  more
amply  difcuffed  in  the  next  DifTertation.

In  the  next  place.  God's  Providence
is  the  proper  objeft  of  abfolute  confix
dence.  We  ought  to  truft  in  it  with
firmnefs,  and  to  throw  upon  it  all  our
cares.  The  belief  of  it  fhould  render  us
ferene  in  all  feafons,  and  fupport  and  en-
courage us  in  the  worft  extremities.  It
is  impoffible  that  any  event  in  which
our  intereft  is  concerned  fliould  be  neg-
leded.  We  are  under  the  protection  of
infinite  power  ;  and  the  charge  of  fove-
reign  goodnefs.  No  perplexing  fears,
therefore,  or  defponding  folicitude  fliould

^t  any time  enter  into  our  breafts.

One  truth,  however,  Jet  us  carefully  at-
tend to.  Let  us  ren:>ember  that  our  truft
in  God's  Providence  ought  to  be  regu-
lated by  a  regard  to  the  fpotlefs  purity
of  his  characfter, and accompanied air

wayq


On Providence. 183

ways  With  the  pradtice  of  virtue,  and
our  own  utmoft  prudence  and  diligence.
Without  this  our  expectations  from  Pro-
vidence are  vain,  and  our  truft  in  it  will
be  prefumption-  What  it  is  chiefly  em--
ployed  in  is  the  adjuftment  of  events  to
the  different  charardlers  of  moral  agents.
God  is  a  righteous  Being,  and  he  can  fa-
vour none  but  the  righteous.  If  we  are
not  of  this  number  we  have  nothing  to
expeft  from  him.  His  government,
which  fliould  be  the  joy  of  the  whole
creation,  ought  to  be  a  terror  to  us ;
and  it  will  be  a  necefTary  inftance  of  its
perfe(ft  redlitude  to  confign  us  over  to
punifliment.  It  would  be  difhonourable
to  him  to  exercife  goodnefs  towards  thofe
who  abufe  his  goodnefs,  and  are  nufances
in  his  works.  It  is  not  fit  that  rational
agents  fliould  be  made  happy  v/ithout
their  own  a^flive  concurrence,  and  virtu-
ous induftry.  But  thefe  fuppofed,  there
is  nothing  that  fliould  difturb  us,  nor
i^  it  poffible  that  we  fliould  expedl  too
much  from  the  bounty  of  our  Maker.
N  4  After


184 On Providence.

After  difcharging  our  duty  and  making
the  beft  ufe  we  can  of  the  powers  given
us,  we  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  trull
our  concerns  with  the  Deity,  to  commit
to  him  our  whole  exiflence,  and  wait
quietly  for  the  iflue  of  prefent  events,
which  will  prove  glorious  beyond  con-
ception to  every  true  friend  of  righteouf-
nefs.

In  connexion  with  this  it  muft  be
obferved  that  the  dodlrine  of  Provi-
dence is a fource of  the higheft  joy.

Were events  under  no  good  di-

recftion ;  did  blind  neccfTity  or  fickle
chance  govern  the  world,  our  condition
would  indeed  be  deplorable.  We  could
look  at  nothing  with  any  complacency.
All  nature  would  lofe  its  beauty,  and
appear  dark  and  defolate.  But  this  is
by  no  means  our  flate.  The  order  of
nature  is  wife  and  good  beyond  all  that
we  can  allc  or  think.  Almighty  power,
it  has  been  fhewn,  united  to  perfcifl  wif-
dom  and  benevolence,  is  at  the  head  of
1  the


On Providence. 185

the  univerfe  aftuating  all  its  parts,  and
prefiding  over  all  its  events.  What  feems
itioft  formidable,  therefore,  may  fit  eafy
on  our  minds,  and  infinitely  more  may
be  expefted  to  take  place  in  nature  than
the  moil  benevolent  heart  can  imagine.—
How  delightful  are  thefe  truths  ?  With
what  exultation  and  triumph  fiiould  they
fill  us  ?-^ Do  you  fufFer  under  any  ca-
lamity ?-— Remember  that  the  eye  of
the  Deity  is  upon  you,  and  that  you  can
fufFer  nothing  but  in  confequence  of  the
difpofals  and  counfels  of  his  ever-attentive
and  unerring  Providence.  Accept  then
your  fufferings  with  a  zeal  becoming  his
faithful  fubjed:.  Submit  to  them  with
loyal  and  hearty  affection,  and  never
indulge  a  repining  thought.  Wherein
can  your  dignity  confiil:  except  in  having
one  will  with  God  ?  Can  you  be  difpleaf-
ed  with  what  is  right  ?  Would  you  have
the  world  governed  wrong  ?— No  degree
of  improper  pain,  no  fufferings  inconfiftent
with  a  perfeft  order  of  adininiflration
can  ever  find  admiflion  into  the  world.

Our


i86 On Providence.

Our  affairs, >  and  thofe  of  our  friends
and  of  all  our  fellow-creatures,  are,  in
every  particular,  under  the  management
of  everlafting  and  omnipotent  reafon  and

love. Is not this what every heart

muft  wifh  for  ?  Is  there  any  thing  that
we  can  poffibly  defire  beyond  it  ?  What
fatisfaciion  fhould  we  feel  in  exiftence,  ,to
find  ourfelves  in  a  fcene  fo  glorious, in

circumftances  fo  happy  ? Did  the  uni-

verfal  order  require  us  to  facrifice  to  it
every  advantage  of  exigence,  or  were
the  fubordinations  eflablifhcd  in  the  crea-
tion for  producing  the  greateft  good  fuch
as  obliged  us  to  give  up  all  our  happi-
nefs ;  though,  in  thele  circumftances,
fuch  a  fealty  of  heart  to  the  government
of  the  univerfe  as  would  caufe  us  to  re--
joice^  is  not  perhaps  attainable  ;  3^et,  if  du-
ly prevalent,  it  would  certainly  produce
perfedl  acqiiiefcence.  But  this  is  a  fuppo-
lition  that  we  have  no  reafon  for  making.
No  fuch  trial  is  put  upon  us.  Our  cir-
cumftances are  infinitely  happier.  The
univerfal  order  has already brought us

much


On Providence. 187

much  happinefs ;  and  we  are  affured  that,
if  we  avoid  vice  and  difcharge  our  duty,
our  happinefs  fhall  not  ceafe  at  death,
but  be  renewed  in  brighter  regions,  and
there  go  on  increafing  and  improving
tp  all  eternity. — Oh!  ravifhing  hope. —
Glory  for  ever  be  to  that  inconceivable
grace  which  thu5  bleffes  us  *.

Once  more.  I  cannot  help  obferv-
ing  that  the  account  which  the  fcrip-
tures  give  of  the  dodlrine  of  Providence
leads  us  to  believe  their  heavenly  ori-
ginal. It  is  not  poflible  to  confider^
without  admiration,  the  elevated  defcrip-
tions  which  they  give  of  God  as  prefiding
pver  the  world,  producing  all  the  revo-
lutions in  it,  and  working  all  things  after

*  The  wages  of  fin  h  death.  But  the  gft  of  God
is  eternal  Ufe^  through  J  ejus  Chrijl  our  Lord.  Rom.
vl.  23.  Bleffed  he  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord
Jffus  Chri/i,  who,  according  to  his  abundant  jnercy,  has
begotten  us  again  to  a  lively  hope^  by  the  refurreSiion  of
Jefus  Chrijl  from  the  dead^  to  an  inheritance  incorruptible^
undcfiled^  and  that  fadeth  not  away^  rejerved  In  heaven  for
Vf^  I  Pet.  i.  3,  4.

the


j8S On Providence.

the  counfel  of  his  own  will  *.  The  whole
hiftory  they  contain  is  one  uniform  dis-
play of  the  Divine  fuperintendency  of
our  affairs, — It  is  an  obfervation  no  lefs  juft
than  common  that  there  is  this  remark-
able difference  between  the  facred  hiftory
and  all  others ;  that  whereas  other  hiflo-
ries  feldom  go  higher  than  the  paffions  of
men  and  the  powers  of  nature  for  the
fources  of  the  events  they  relate,  this
always  carries  our  thoughts  up  to  the
jirjl  caufe,  and  direds  our  views  to  God
as  the  guide  and  governour  of  whatever
happens.  Thus ;  of  the  fwordy  or  a  fa--
miney  or  a  pejl Hence y  it  fays  that  Godfent
it  \  y  of  every  calamity  in  a  cityy  that  he
does  it ;  of  the  wind  and  the  lightnifig^
that  they,  go  forth  at  his  word;  of  the
raiuy  that  he  gives  it  y  of  the  falling  of
a  fparrow  to  the  groundy  that  it  happens
7iot  without  him ;  of  what  feems  moft
cafual,  that he  direfts  it, and of  the

*  Eph,  i. II.

•t  If. xlv.  7. Amos  Hi.  6. Pfal.  cxlviii. — -

Ffov.  xvi.  33. Matih.  x.  29,  30.— Rom.  xi.  36.

hairs


On Providence. c  1[B9

hairs  of  our  heady  that  they  are  all  niim-
^^;r^/.— Such  reprefentations  of  Divine
Providence,  fo  agreeable  to  our  beft  no*-
tions,  and  exceeding  all  that  can  be  found
in  other  writings,  afford  an  internal  evi-
dence of  confiderable  importance  in  fa-
vour of  the  fcriptures.

But  further. As  the  dodlrinc  of  Pro-
vidence, fuppofed  previoufly  eftablifhed,
furnifhes  us  with an  argument  for  the
fcriptures,  fo  thefe  in  their  turn  furnifh
us  with  an  argument  for  Providence.-—
We  fee  here  that  we have connexions
w^ith  an  inviiible  world of  fpirits,  that
there  have  been  interpofitions  of  fuperior
power  in  our  affairs, and that heaven
does  intereft  itfelf  about  us particularly
and  wonderfully. — But  what  I  have  now
chiefly  in  view  is,  the  argument  for  Pro-
vidence arifing  from the  completion  of
the  fcripture  prophefies. There are  in
the  Old  and  New  Teftament,  many  pre-
diftions  of  events  very  diflant  from  the
times  when  they  were  delivered, which

are


190 On Providence.

are  reprefented  as  fure  to  be  verified  by
Divine  Providence.  The  accomplifli-
ment  of  fuch  predictions,  when  it  hap-
pens, proves  that  the  predicted  events
were  indeed  fubjedt  to  the  fuperinten-
dency  of  Providence,  and  obhges  us  to
conclude  the  fame  concerning  all  events.
When  we  find,  for  inftance,  that  the
prefent  ftate  of  the  Jews  and  the  cor-
ruption of  chriftianity  by  popery  were
foretold,  and  the  principal  circumftances
attending  them  defcribed,  fome  thoufands
of  years  ago,  we  cannot  doubt  but  thefe
events  have  been  all  along  objects  of  the
attention  of  the  Deity,  and  happen  only
in  confequence  of  his  unfearchable  coun-

fels.. It  is  worthy  of  fpecial notice,

that  the  reprefentation  made  in  thefe
prophecies  of  tht/potlefs  *  holinefs  of  the
Deity  as  his  moft  diftinguifliing  attribute,
and  the  chief  Ipring  of  his  adions  in
^uiding  events,  proves  further  that  the
adminiftration  of  the  world  is  holy  and
rig-htcous. In  fliort. The  Bible  gives

*  Rev iv.  8. — XV.  4.

US


O// P  R  O  V  I  D  E  N  C  E.  191

US  a  hiftory  of  all  the  great  fads  in  which
this  earth  is  concerned  from  its  creation
to  its  diiTolution.  A  confiderable  part  of
this  hiftory  muft  be  prophetical,  and  what
we  have  feen  verified  of  this  part  de-
monftrates  that  the  writings  containing  it
come  from  the  author  and  ruler  of  na-
ture. It  likewife  proves  that  the  world
is  under  a  moral  government,  and  that
Divine  Providence  watches  over  it  thro'
every  period  of  its  duration.  And,  per-
haps, the  prophecies  which  ftill  remain
to  be  accompliflied  may  fome  time  or  o-
ther  afford  a  demonflration  of  thefe
truths  that  will  put  to  flight  all  infidelity^
and  convince  and  furprife  the  whole  world.

It  ought  not  to  be  forgotten  on  this
occalion  that  there  is  one  event,  im-
portant above  all  others,  which  the  fa-
cred  writings  foretel,  and  to  which,  they
acquaint  us,  every  prefent  difpenfation
of  Providence  refers.  I  mean  the  last
JUDGMENT;  when,  we  are  told,  every
one  Jl:ii!l  receive  according  to  bis ivoris,

anj


%gz On  Providence.

gnd  the  Divine  moral,  government  with
refpe<^  to  the  human  race  fliall  be  con-
fummated  ;  when  the  earth  ivith  all  her
njuorksjldall  he  bumf  up\  the  Son  of  man
appear  in  poiver  and  great  glory y  and  all
that  are  in  their  graves  jhall  hear  his  voice ^
andfiall  come  forth y  they  that  have  done
good  to  the  refurreBion  of  Ife^  and  they  that
have  done  evil  to  the  refurredfion  of  dajn-
nation.  What  we  have  i^^w  verified  of
the  fcripture  prophecies  ajjiires  us  that
iiich  a  time  is  coming ;  and  happy  are
thole  who  are  always  thinking  of  it,  and
preparing  for  it.

To  conclude  the  whole.'  ---Let  us
labour  earneftly  to  bring  our  minds  into
that  temper  which  the  dodrine  of  Pro-
vidence requires.  Let  us  follow  impli-
citly wherever  it  leads  us,  and  make  an
abfolute  furrender  of  our  wills  to  God's
will,  fupprefling  all  foUicitude  about
every  thing  but  ading  faithfully  the  part
he  has  affigned  us,  maintaining  inviolably
our  allegiance to  his  government, and

never


On PROVlt>ENCE.  193

never  wiftiing  to  enjoy  any  advantage
\vhich  he  is  pleafed  to  deny,  or  to  be
exempted  from  any  troubles  which  he
can  permit  to  come  upon  us.- — Thus  fhall
we  be  eafed  of  all  unneceffary  cares,
enjoy  that  peace  of  God  which  pajjeth  all
imderjlandingy  and  attain  to  the  higheft
dignity  and  blifs  of  which  rational  Beings

are capable. Oh  ! joyful refledion  !

God  reigns  and  all  is  well.  Eternal
wifdorh  and  benevolence  are  prefent  every
where,  and  govern  all  things.  Welcome
then  every  event.  Welcome  difappoint-
ment,  ficknefs  or  death.  Let  tempefts
roar.  Let  thunder  tear  the  heavens,
or  earthquakes  overturn  cities  and  king-
doms. In  all  we  may  hear  the  voice  of
the  prefiding  Divinity  ail\iring  us  that  we
need  not  fear.  Within  the  embraces  of
his  arms  we  muft  be  always  fafe.
'Rejoice  in  the  Lord  all  the  earth.  Say  a?no?ig
the  heathen  that  the  Lord  reigneth.  Let
the  heavens  rejoice^  and  let  the  earth  be  glad.
iM  the  fea  roar,  and  the  floods  clap  their
O  hands.


194 O// Providence.

hands  '*. Fraife  him  all  ye  his  angeh.

Praife  him  fun  and  moon,  Praife  hi?n  ye
Jlars  of  light,  Pratfe  him  ye  dragons  and
all  deeps.  Fire  and  haiU  fnow  and  vapour^
mountains  ajid  fields^  beafls  and  all  cattle^
creeping  things  and  flying  fowls,  kings  of
the  earth  and  all  people  y  Praife  the  name
of  the  Lord,  for  his  name  alone  is  excellent.

-. Let  the  whole  creation  join  in  raifing

one  fong  of  praife  to  him. Praife  tha

Lord, O  my  foul,

*  Pfa!.  xcv:»cxlviii»  ciii.


A jl


D  I  S  S  E  R-


DISSERTATION IL


O N


PRAYER


02


^'  Mt.  V


VJ


DISSERTATION IL


O N


PRAYER


S  E  C  T  I  O  N L

^he  Nature^  Reafonabtenefs,  and  Efficacy  of
Prayer  explained^  and  the  Objections  to
it  anfwered.  '


H


AVING  in  the  foregoing  differ-
tation  endeavoured  to  explain  and
defend  the  doftrine  of  Providence,  I  fhall
now  proceed  to  treat  of  the  duty  of
Prayer.  There  is  no  religious  diity  a-
gainft  which  more  objections  have  beeri
made.  It  will,  therefore,  be  necefiary
to  be^in  this  diflertation  with  ftatino^
particularly  its  nature  and  reafonable-
nefs.  After  vdiich,  I  /hall  give  an
O 3  account


198  On Prayer.

account  of  the  manner  in  which  it  ought
to  be  performed,  in  order  to  render  it
acceptable  and  fuccefsful.  Thefe  are
the  two  heads  under  which  I  fhall
throw  what  I  intend  to  fay  on  the  fub-
jeft  now  before  me.

By  Prayer,  I  mean  a  ferious  and  folemn
addrefs  of  our  minds  to  the  Deity,  as
the  fountain  of  being  and  happinefs,  and
the  parent  and  governor  of  the  world.
It  has  been  divided  into  feveral  diftind:
parts  according  to  the  feveral  afts  of  our
minds  when  engaged  in  it.  The  chief
of  thefe  parts  are  the  four  following.
Acknowledgment  of  our  dependence,  and
of  the  Divine  perfeftions  and  fovereignty.
Thankfulnefs  for  the  mercies  we  have
received.  A  penitential  confeffion  of
what  we  have  done  amifs ;  and  offering
up  our  defires  of  favour  and  happinefs
for  oiirfelves  and  others.

Nothing is plainer than that the
firft  of  thefe is reafonable. Abfolute

per-


On P  R  A  Y  E  il>  1:99.

jperfedion  of  nature  and  charadler,  and
complete  excellence,  muft  be  the  pro^
pereft  objedls  of  acknowledgment  and
efteem.  Worflilp  and  adoration  muft.
be  due  to  the  Being  who  made  us,  and
who  poffefles  infinite  power,  wifdom,.  and
goodnefs.  He  who  is  fupreme  over  all
beings  ought  to  receive  the  homage  of  all.

The obligation to  the  next  p^rt of
prayer,  or  thankfgiving  for  the  mercies
we  enjoy,  is  as  evident  as  the  obligation
to gratitude in general. There is  no
clearer principle of reafon, than that
thankfulnefs  i&  due  for  benefits  received;
and  if  that  perfon.  adls  wropg,  who  is  not
grateful  to  human  benefacflors, or  who
does  not  ftudy  in  a  proper  manner  to
teftify  his  gratitude,  it  is  not  pofiible  that
he  can  be  innocent  who  is  void  of  grati-
tude to  the  Deity ;  or  who  neglefts  to  offer
up  thankful  acknowledgments  to  the  Be-
ing to  whom  he  owes  all  he  />, all  he
^as,  and  all  h^  hopes  f()r\

0  A  The


200


On P  R A Y E


The  propriety  alfo  of  the  third  part
of  prayer,  or  of  a  penitential  confeilion

of  our  guilt, is  very  obvious. As  far,

therefore,  as  thefe  conftitute  Prayer  there
feems  no  room  for  queftioning  its  reafon-
ablenefs  :  And  it  iliould  be  remembered
that  in  reality  they  are  very  important
parts  of  Prayer.

It  w^ill,  however,  be  obje6ted  pro-
bably by  fome,  that  all  that  feems  ne-
celTary  in  thefe  inftances  is  a  fenfe  of  the
Divine  goodnefs,  and  of  our  dependent
and  guilty  ftate^  and  that  where  this
fenfe  and  the  proper  reverent,  grateful,
and  penitent  difpofitions  are  found,  there
can  be  no  occafion  for  what  is  meant  by
Prayer.

I  anfwer ;  that  it  is  plainly  proper  not
only  that  we  fhould  pollefs  thefe  difpofi-
tionsy  but  that  they  fliould  be  drawa
forth  into  cxerctfey  and  expreJJ'ed' hy  par^
ticular  a£ts  before  the  Deity.  Good  dif-
pofitions,  when  not attended  with the

adts


0)1 P  R A  Y  E  R,  201

ads  which  are  the  proper  expreffions  of
them,  muft  be  defed:ive.  Gratitude
and  repentance  lead  us  in  all  cafes  to
grateful  and  penitential  acknowledg-
ments. When  in  their  due  ftrength,
they  always  produce  thefe ;  and  it  is
plainly  fit  they  fhould. — It  is  incumbent
upon  us  to  teftify  our  regards  to  the
Deity  in  the  beft  manner  we  can ;  but
it  would  be  abfurd  in  any  perfon  to  pre-
tend he  does  this,  who  refts  in  con-
templation, and  avoids  all  diredl  praife
and  worfhip*

The  laft  part  of  Prayer  I  mentioned
was,  offering  up  our  defires '  of  favour
and  happinefs  for  ourfelves  and  others.
This  is  what  is  mofl:  properly  ftiled
Prayer  y  and  it  is  what  has  been  mofl:
objeded  to,  and  what  therefore  fhali
be  now  particularly  examined.  The  dif-
ficulties which  have  been  raifed  about
it,  would,  I  believe,  have  been  little
regarded  had  more  attention  been  given
to  the  native  and  uncorrupted  did:ates  of

the


202  On P  R  A  V  E  R.

the  human  mind  on  this  fubjeft.  What
is  evident  if  it  be  not  fo,  that  what  we
want  from  God  it  is  fit  we  fhould
humbly  implore  from  him  ?  What  com-
mon and  unperverted  underftanding  can
doubt,  whether  there  is  a  propriety  in
alking  for  the  bleffings  and  benefits  which
we  muft  owe  to  his  bounty  ?  Is  it  pof-
fible  that,  if  we  negleft  this,  it  fhould
be  equally  fit  that  we  fhould  be  made
happy  by  him  ?  Who  can  help  feeing
that  devout  fupplicants  are  more  proper
objects  of  favour  than  thofe  who  never
pray,  though  it  fliould  be  fuppofed  pof-
fible  that,  in  other  refpeds,  their  qua-
lifications  may be alike  ? In fhort  i

the  ad:  of  addrefling  our  defires  to  God
for  the  benefits  which  are  necefTary  to  our
happinefs,  implies  in  it  that  itXii.Q  of  our
dependence  upon  him,  and  that  acknow^
ledgment  of  his  dominion  which  render
it  felf-evidently  proper.  The  fitnefs  of
it  is  i.nmediately  perceived  by  the  lowefl
as  well  as  the  highefl  underflanding ;
and  the  force  of  nature  and  reafon  wiU

extort


On P  R  A  Y  E  R.  203

extort  It  from  every  mind  that  poffeffes  a
juil  fenfe  of  piety.

But  let  us  attend  to  the  objections  that
have  been  urged.

In  the  firft  place;  it  has  been  faid,
««  that  there  can  be  no  reafon  for  Prayer,
"  becaufe  God,  being  omnifdenf^  needs
**  not  to  be  informed  of  our  wants ;
*«  and  being  unchangeable y  none  of  our
**  fupplications  can  be  the  means  of
"  making  any  alteration  in  him,  or  of
"  obtaining  from  him  any  benefits."


;iiip  .♦.,»ii#


Before  I  confider  this  and  the  other
objedlions  commonly  infifted  on  againft
Prayer,  I  mufl  beg  leave  to  recommend
to  particular  notice,  that  I  affert  that
there  is  an  immediate  propriety  or  fitnefs
in  fupplicating  the  Deity  for  the  blef-
fings  w^e  want.  For  the  truth  of  this
I  appeal  to  every  man's  confcience.
No  words can  make  it  plainer  than  it

tnuft  appear  by  its  own  light. Now

the


204  On Prayer.

the  defign  of  all  juft  objedions  againft
Prayer  ought  to  be,  to  fhew  that  there
is  indeed  no  fuch  immediate  propriety  in
the  adt  of  fupplication ;  nor  can  any
objeftions  which  have  not  this  tendency,
or  which  fuppofe  that  there  is  no  fuch
propriety, be  of  the  leaft  confequencCi

Keeping  this  then  in  remembrance,
let  us  confider  the  objedlion  juft  men-
tioned.  The  firft  part of  it,  or  the

affertion,  that  God,  being  omnifcient,
needs  not  to  be  informed  of  our  wants,
is  entirely  impertinent.  For  no  one  ever
faid  that  the  defign  of  Prayer  was  to  in-
form the  Deity  of  what  he  did  not  know.
The  plain  defign  of  it  is,  to  obtain  for
ourfelves  the  bleflings  we  pray  for.  This
is  what  every  one  niuft  mean  whenever
he  prays.  'Tis  implied  in  the  very  idea
of  the  adlion,  that  we  think  it  has  a
tendency  to  procure  for  us  what  we  fup-
plicate.  This  tendency  is  founded  on  the
propriety  which  I  have  faid  there  is  in  afk-
ing  for  the  benefits  we  want.  Hence  afk-
4  ing


0/2 P  R  A Y  E  R.  205

ing  becomes  a  means  of  having,  and  is  uni-

verfally  fo  confidered. In  other  words;

afking,  in  a  proper  manner,  for  bleffings
from  Gpd  has  a  tendency  to  procure
them  for  us,  becaufe  it  is  doing  what  is
fit  to  be  done  \  and  what,  therefore,  God
cannot  but  exped  and  require  us  to  do
as  a  condition  of  our  having  them.

Let  us  now  confider  what regard is
due  to  what  is  faid  in  oppofition  to  this

in  the  latter  part  of  the  objedion.

*«  God,  'tis  faid,  is  unchangeable ;  and,
^*  therefore,  no  prayers  can  be  the  means
f' of  making  any  alteration  in  him,  or
<*  of  caufing  him  to  bellow  any  bleffings,
**  which  he would not have  beftowed

f*  without  them." 1 anfwer^ 'tis

true,  indeed,  that  our  prayers  can  make
no  alteration  in  the  Deity ;  that  is,  in
his  nature y  charaBery  or  difpojitions ,  But
they  may  make  an  alteration  in  the  ex-*
ternaL  effedis  of  his  agency,  or  in  his
manner  of  treating  us.  Nay,  they  mujl
make  fuch an  alteration  if  they  at  all

alter


2o6  Ofl P  R  A  Y  E  K.

elter  our  qualifications  ^  or  if  offering
them  up  is  the  performance  of  a  duty,
or  doing  what  is  proper  to  be  done. —
The  diftinftion  between  the  perfedions
of  God  confidered  as  piinciples  or  difpo-
fitions  in  his  nature,  and  the  exercife  of
them  in  a  courfe  of  outward  adlions,  tho*
an  obvious  and  ufeful  diftindtion,  many
feem  entirely  to  forget.  An  affertion  may
be  very  juft  when  undcrftood  of  the  lat-
ter of  thefe,  which  would  be  very  wrong

when  underftood  of  the former.

Thus,  in  the  prefent  cafe,  though  it
would  be  improper  to  fay,  that  God  may
be  rendered  more  propitious  or  favour-
able in  dijpofition  to  his  creatures  by  any
thing  they  can  do ;  yet,  furely,  he  may
be  rendered  more  propitious  or  favour-
able in  aS  to  them.  That  is ;  their
ailtions  may  be  the  means  of  many  effedls
of  his  favour  to  them.  They  may  avert
the  confequences  of  his  difpleafurc,  and
procure  bleflings  for  them  which  they
would  other  wife  never  have  had.

'Tis


On  Prayer.  207

, 'Tis worth  adding, that  as we may
thus  by  our  aftions  obtain  bleffings  for
our/elves  from  the  Deity,  confiftently  with
his  immutabihty ; fo, Hkewife, may  we
for  others. Or, what  fome  Beings  do
for their  fellow-beings, their benevo-
lence, labours,  and  virtue  may  influence,
though not  properly  the  Divine  perfec-
tions, yet the  exercife  of  them. They
may fupply reafons  to  infinite wifdom
for  favouring  others, and  obtain  eflfefts
of  Divine  goodnefs  for  them  which  they
might  elfe  have  wanted. — — But  to  re-
turn. If  it be really proper that  wc
ihould  humbly apply to God for the
mercies  we  need  from  him, it  muft  be
alfo  proper  that  a  regard  fhould be  paid
tofuch  applications,  and  that  there  fliould
be a  different  treatment  of  thofe  who
make  them  and  thofe  who  do  not ; and
it  muft  be  exceeding  frivolous  to  objed,
that this would imply changeablenefs
in  the  Deity. God's  unchangeablenefs,
when  confidered  in  relation  to  the  exer-
tion of  his  attributes  in  the  government

of


2oS  On Prayer.

of  the  world,  conlifts,  certainly,  not  in
always  ading  in  the  fame  manner  how-
ever cafes  and  circumflances  alter;  but
in  always  doing  what  is  right,  ^nd  va-
rying his  condudl  according  to  the  various
aftions,  charadiers,  and  difpofitions  of
Beings.  If  then  prayer  makes  an  altera-
tion in  the  cafe  of  the  fupplicant,  as  be-
ing the  difcharge  of  an  indifpenlible  du-
ty ;  what  w^culd,  in  truth,  infer  change-
ablenefs  in  him,  would  be,  not  his  re-
garding and  anfwering  it,  but  his  not
doing  this. ,

Hence,  'tis  eafy  to  fee  that  the  notice
which  God  may  be  pleafed  to  take  of
our  prayers  by  granting  us  blefiings  in
anfwer  to  them,  is  not  to  be  coniidered
as  an  yielding  to  importunity y  but  ^s  one
injlance  of  his  ading  agreeably  to  reafon,
or  his  fuiting  his  dealings  with  us  to  our
conduft.  Nor  does  it  imply  that  he  is
backward  to  do  us  good,  and,  therefore,
wants  to  be  follicited  to  it.  This  is  no
more  implied  in  the  cafe  of  Prayer,  than

in


On Pray  e  R;  209

in  that  of  repentance,  or  any  other  in-
flance  of  good  condiidt,  wb.en  confidered
as  obtaining  for  us  bleffings  and  favour.
God  is  always  ready  to  do  us  all  poiiible
good ;  but  there  are  certain  conditions
on  the  performance  of  which  the  effedls
of  his  goodnefs  to  us  are  fufpended.
There  is  fomething  to  be  done  by  us
before  we  can  be  proper  objeds  of  his
favour  ^  or  before  it  can  be  fit  for  him
and  confiilent  with  the  meafures  of  his
government  to  grant  us  particular  bene-
fits. We  have  a  part  to  aft,  and  duties
to  difcharge,  which,  if  negledred,  can-
not but  deprive  us  of  his  protection,  and
leave  us  dellitute  and  unhappy.

But I have, perhaps, beftov/ed too

much  time  on  this  objedtion. Let  us

then  proceed  to  another  on  which  great
ftrefs  has  been  laid.  **  Before  we  pray
*'  we  are  either  worthy  to  receive  v/hat
"  we  pray  for,  or  we  are  not.  If  we
'*  are  worthy,  'tis  needlefs  to  pray  becaufe
**  we  fhall  have  v/hat  is  proper  to  be
P  *'  given


210  On P  RAVER.

*'  given  us,  whether  we  pray  for  it  or
*^  not.  If  we  are  imworthyy  no  prayers
*'  can  be  of  any  avail."

The  weaknefs  of  this  objedtion  will
be  obvious  to  any  one  who  will  apply
it  to  a  parallel  cafe,  and  fuppofe  it  urged
againil:  repentance,  or  any  other  duty,
when  confidered  as  a  means  of  procuring
bleffings  for  us.  *'  Before  w^e  repent  (it
"  might  be  faid)  it  is  either  fit  we
**  fl:iould  receive  bleffings  from  the  Deity,
**  or  it  is  not.  If  it  is  fit,  we  fliall  re-
*'  ceive  them,  whether  we  repent  or  not;
*^  for  God  v^ants  nothing  to  engage  him
*'  tO  do  what  is  fit.  If  it  is  not  fit,
*^  our  repentance  can  be  of  no  avail."-—
-pEvery  one  will  acknowledge  the  in-
tolerable abfurdi ty  of  fuch  a  way  of  ar-
guing againil  repentance,  and  fee  that
the  full  anfwer  to  it  is,  that  before  re-
pentance it  may  be  unfit  that  we  ihould
be  favoured by the Deity,  but that  it  ]

may  become  fit  upo?i  repentance. In

like  manner,  the  full  anfwer  to  th-e  pre*.

fent


On P  R A -i'  E  R .  2  11

feiit  objection  againft  Prayer  is, that  be-
/ore  Prayer  we may be unworthy, and
that  Prayer  may  be the  very  thing that
makes  us  worthy. Before  v/e  pray  it  may
be  unfit  to  beftow  particular  bleflings  up-
on us, and  it  may  be  therefore  fit to  be-
ftow  them becaufe we pray for them.
That  this  is  true  is  undeniable, if  there
is  an immediate  reditude in  afeing for
bleffings  from  the  Deity; for  hence, as
was before obferved, it becomes  itfelf
one  cojtdition  of  having, one  circumftance
in  our  characters  that  contributes  to  ren-
der us  proper objeds  of  favour,  or one
part  of  condu(fl  which  cannot  be  negleft-
ed without negleding what  is  reldbn-
able,  without  negletling  virtue  and  duty,
and  fo  far  difqualifying  ourfelves  for  re-
ceiving bleffings Suppofe  two per^

fons,  in  other  refpeds  of  like  qualifica-
tions, one  of  v/hom  makes  cOnfcience  of
frequently  and  feriouily  addreffing  his
wilhes  to  the  Deity  for  mercy  and  hap-
pinefs.  The  other  entirely  omits  this,
and  never  puts  up  any  fuppiications  to
him*  Is  it  likely  that  both  thefe  perfons
P 2  ^ will


212  0;2 P  R A Y  £  R.

will  be  treated  alike  ?  Does  not  the  one
do  right y  and  the  other  do  wrong  ?  Does
not  the  one  a<ft  as  becomes  a  dependent
Being,  and  the  other  as  if  he  was  inde-
pendent ?  May  not  the  prayers  of  the
one,  as  being  in  themfelves  reafonabk
ad:s  and  proper  acknowledgments  of  de-
pendence and  indigence,  be  eflicacious
towards  procuring for  him  fome  effefts

of  particular  favour  ? On  the  whole ;

hov/  evident  is  it  that  this  objection,  like
the  former,  does  not  prove  but  fuppofe
that  Prayer  is  not  reafonable  ?

It  has  been  further  objected,  that  me-
ditation alone  may  anfwer  all  the  purpofes
of  Prayer,  by  fixing  in  our  minds  all
thofe  good  fentiments  which  are  exprefTed
by  it ;  and  that  therefore  it  cannot  be  a
neceffary  duty.

As  a  reply  to  this it  might  be  faid,

that  meditation  alone  cannot  fo  well  and

fo  effedually  anfwer  this  end. But  the

moll:  proper  reply is, that it  goes on

I  the


On Prayer.  213

the  falfe  fuppofition  that  Prayer  is  reafon-
able  only  on  account  of  the  good  effects
produced  by  it  in  our  minds.  There
is  belides,  I  have  faid,  an  immeduite  pro-
priety in  it.  It  is  in  it/elf  a  duty,  hke
gratitude  or  veracity,  independently  of  its
confequences.  It  is  not  only  an  exprej-
Jion  or  declaration  of  good  fe)itiinents,
but  the  immediate  exerci/e  of  them  in  di-
red:  and  explicit  ad:s.

But  ftill  it  may  be  pleaded,  *^  that  the
*^  difpofitions  orfentiments  from  which
"  Prayer  fhould  proceed  are,  in  ftrid:-
**  nefs,  all  that  can  be  neceilary ;  and
**  that  'tis  very  unlikely  that,  while
*^  deeply  fenfible  of  our  need  of  mercy
*'  from  God  and  our  dependence  upon
*^  him,  and  pofleirmg  the  mofl  fervent
*'  defires  of  his  favour  and  the  moft
<*  humble  and  pious  difpofitions,  we
**  fhould  fuffer  merely  on  account  of
**  our  omitting  all  formal  fupplications,
**  which,  when  confidered  as  direded
^*  to  a  Being  who  perfectly  knows  our
P 3  ''  defires.


214 •  0;J P  R  A Y E R,

*'  defircs, and who wants nothing to

*«  enp-ase him to  fulfil  them as  far  as

''  is  proper,  look  more like ceremoni-

"  ous  impertinences than ads of  real

**  duty."

What  is  fug£;eR-ed  in  the  latter  part
of  this  objedlion  has  been  confidered
before.  One  can  really  fcarce  think  it
T'Ciiiblc  for  an  unprejudiced  underftand-
ii'.g  ferioufly  to  determine,  that  addreffing
our  defires  of  good  to  an  omniprefent
Peity,  or  fupplicating  him  for  benefits,
is  an impcrtincnccy and not  a  reafonablq

and  proper  aB. With refpeci: to  the.

former  part  of  the  objecftion,  'tis  enough
to  fay,  that  defires  and  fentiments  are  far
from  bchig  clone  fufficient  in  any  cafe»
'Tis  the  acts  in  which  they  fliew  them-
felves  that  give  them  their  worth  and
acceptablcnefs.  No  pious  defires  and
fentinients  can  be  what  they  ought  to
be,  \yhich  do  not  carry  us  to  the  adts
that  are  exprefTive  of  them,  and  ifTue
ia  devotion,  Befidesthe  defires  and  fen--.
^  timents^


On Prayer.  215

tlments,  the  ad:s  themfelves,  as  was
before  obferved,  are  proper.  Indeed,  it
is  not  conceivable  that  thefe  can  be  fe*
parated.  He  who  has  the  feehngs  that
become  a  creature  and  a  fmner  will  not
flop  at  inadtive  defires  and  reflexions.
A  convidion  of  indigence  and  dependence
which  has  no  effed:  in  turning  the  foul
towards  heaven,  and  engaging  it  to  diredt
its  defires  to  him  who  alone  can  fulfil
them,  is  as  real  a  contradiftion  as  a  gra-
titude or  benevolence  which  produces  no

ads  of  gratitude and benevolence. .

He  that  is  poffefled  with  proper  affec-
tions to  the  Deity  will  feel  the  reafcn-
ablenefs  of  Prayer :  He  will  be  neceffa-
rily  difpofed  to  it,  and  incapable  of  re-
frainins:  from  it  without  dolns:  violence
to  hinifelf.  A  perfon  who,  with  due
attention  and  a  right  temper,  confiders
God  as  his  maker  and  preferver,  the
parent  of  the  univerfe,  the  difpofer  of
all  blefTmgs,  and  the  fource  of  all  hap-
pinefs,  cannot  fail  to  dired  his  heart  to
P  4  him


2l6  0/7 P  R A  Y  E  R.

him  in  humble  aPxd  fervent  fupplications.
The  love  of  God  in  the  foul  and  prayer
arc  fo  infeparably  conneded  that  they
are  almoft  the  fame.  No  one  who  has
a  juft  perception  of  the  dependence  of
all  things  upon  God,  and  is  pierced
with  a  fenfe  of  the  amiablenefs  and  ex-
cellence of  his  nature,  can  help  falling
down  before  him  in  prayer  and  adoration.
No  one  who  knows  what  he  has  done
to  offend  him,  who  fees  himfelf  loft
without  his  protedion,  and  is  duly  con-
fcious  of  his  innumerable  wants,  can
avoid  flying  to  him  for  fuccour  and  mer-
cy. One  proof  of  this  arifes  from  the
fadl,  that  there  are  few  who,  in  times
of  danger  or  any  particular  emergencies
and  difliculties,  do  not  neceffarily  look
up  to  God  for  help.  'Tis  the  voice  of
nature  at  thefe  times  that  God  is  to  be
prayed  to ;  and  indeed,  in  general,  at  all
times,  it  appears  to  be  the  irrefiftible
fcnfe  of  mankind  that  Prayer  is  reafonable.
There  is as much a tendency in  our

natures


0/2 P  R A Y E R.  217

natures  to  devotion  as  to  food  or  focietv.
Our  native  bent  lies  evidently  this  way,
which  never  fails  to  difcover  itfelf  in  the
moft  irreligious  people,  when  calamities
or  death  threaten  them.

To  the  perform  then  who  alledges,  that
ferious  arid  frequent  meditation  joined
with  pious  affeftions  and  defires,  is  all
that  can  be  our  duty,  and  that  every
thing  beyond  is  mere  ceremony  and  folly;
it  will  be  proper  to  reply  by  aJkino--
**  Do  you  indeed  pradife  fuch  medita-
**  tion  ?  Do  you  poflefs  thefe  pious  af-
'^  fecftions  and  defires,  and  ftudy  to
**  cherifh  them  by  all  proper  means  ?
^*  Do  you  often  fet  yourfelf  to  think  of
"  the  Deity,  to  contemplate  his  perfec-
^^  tions,  to  recoiled:  his  mercies,  and
**  to  endeavour  to  affedt  your  mind  with
*'  a  fenfe  of  your  abfolute  dependence
**  upon  him  ?  Can  you  truly  fay  that
"  you  live  and  aft  under  the  power  of
^*  religious  principles  and  fentiments  ?" —

I


21  8  0/2 P  R  A  Y  E  R.

I  may  venture  to  pronounce  that  you
cannot  anfwer  in  the  affirmative.  'Tis,
therefore,  impertinent  to  make  fuch  an
objedion;  nor  are  you  properly  qualified
to  underltand  the  full  force  of  the  an-
fwer to  it  ^.

Should

"^  "  Gratitude,  love,  and  edeem  are  aife^lions
*'  which  decline  concealment  v/hen  they  are  lively.
*'  We  are  naturally  prone  to  exprefs  them,  even
*'  though  they  give  no  new  happinefs  to  their  obje£t."
See  the  chapter  on  the  ivorJI/ip  due  to  the  Deity  in  Dr\
HuUhinfoiis  Syjh-m  of  Moral  Philofcphy^  Vol.  I. Page

217.

— *'  The  human  mind  feels  a  powerful  impulfe
*'  urging  it  forward  to  beg  God  to  beftow  what  it
*'  wiflies  for  with  vehemence:  And  this  very  argu-
^'  ment  which  is  urged  againft  the  lifting  up  holy
<'  defires  to  God  (viz.  that  he  is  infmite  in  goodnefs,
<'  and  willing  to  gratify  them)  is  a  principal  motive
*'  ipr  offering  them  up  \  and  makes  it  impoflible  for
*'  a  well-difpofed  mind  to  abftain  from  it."  Dr^
Lcechmmis  Sermon  on  Prayer.

The  impulfe  mentioned  here  and  above,  urging  us
to  addrefs  our  defires  of  happinefs  to  God,  being
plainly  natural,  is  to  be  confidered  as  a  direction  to
pray  from  the  author  of  nature.  The  impoffibility
q{  avoiding  it,  where  there  are  juft  affciSlions  to  the
Deity, is  founded  not  only  on  this  natural  impulfe,

but


0;^ P  R A  Y  E R.  219

Should  it  be  again  ajfked,  whether  a
Being  would  be  lefs  favoured  by  the
Deity  on  account  of  his  omitting  Prayer,
fuppofing  this  omiffion  to  proceed  from
nothing  but  a  perfuafion  of  its  impro-
priety :  It  would  be  proper  to  give  the
fame  anfwer,  as  might  be  given  to  the
fame  queftion,  fuppofed  to  be  aiked  con-
cerning the  omiffion  of  any  other  moral
duty  from  the  fame  convidtion.

Once  more.  It  may  be  faid,  that
'*  the  courfe  of  things  is  unalterable;
"  and  that,  therefore,  no  anfwers  to
^'  Prayer  can  be  expe'ded,  without  fup^
*'  pofmg  God  to  work  miracles  for  us,
"  or  to  break  in  upon  the  general  laws
''  and  fettled  order  of  the  world." ^

but  alfoon  a  fitnefs  which  In  this  cafe  is  palpable  to
every  perfon,  To  repeat  defires  in  our  minds,  being
at  the  fame  time  fenfible  that  the  fupremc  difpofer  of
our  lot  ftands  by  us  and  obferves  them,  without  ever
(lireding  them  to  him,  or  looking  to  him  for  the
accomplifhment  of  them;  this  implies  a  neglea
of  the  giver  of  all  good,  fo  repugnant  to  the  fenti-
ments  of  the  human  heart  and  fo  criminal^  as  to  be
abfolutely  incompatible  whh  right  difpofitions.

This


220  On Prayer.

This  objeftion has been diftindly an-
fwered  in  the  Differtation  on  Prdvidence,
to  which therefore I muft refer  *. I
fhall only obferve here, that  under  a
perfect  government there  cannot  be  any
fuch general laws, as are inconfiftent
with  every  perfon's  being  treated  agree-
ably  to  what  he  is  and  does; and that,
confequently,  fince  the  difcharge  or  neg-
lect of  the  duty  of  Prayer  is one  impor-
tant circumftance  that  goes  towards  de-
termining  the charad:ers  and  deferts  of
Beings,  there  can  be  no  fuch  laws  in  na-
ture as  render  it  necefiary,  that  reafon-
{ible  Beings  fliould  be  treated  in  the  fame
manner  whether  they  pray  or  not. This,
indeed, is itfelf  the  principal law and
the immutable order  of  the  Divine  ad-
miniflration, ^*  that  all  Beings  fliall,  on
**  the  whole,  receive  according:  to  their
"  works :"  And  it  is  of  but  little  weight
in  oppofition  to  this, that  we  cannot  fee
diftindly in what  manner the laws  of

*  Page 177,  &c.

the


On P  R  A  Y  E  R.  221

the  world  operate  towards  bringing  it
about  as  the  great  end  of  God's  govern-
ment, and  the  laft  iflue  of  all  prefent
events.

Hitherto,  I  have  confined  myfelf  to
the  confideration  of  Prayer  for  otirjehcs.
It  may  be  thought  that  fomething  fur-
ther ought  to  be  faid  in  defence  of  pray-
ing for  others. **  For  what  influence,

*'  it. may  be  faid,  can  our  prayers  have
"  on  the  ftate  of  others  ?  What  benefit
**  can  they  receive  from  our  intercef-
**  fions  ?  Is  it  to  be  conceived  that  God,
*^  like  weak  men,  may  be  perfuaded
«'  by  the  importunity  of  one  perfon  to
*'  beftow  on  another  any  bleffings  which
'*  he  would  not  elfe  have  beftov/ed,
^^  and  for  the  reception  of  w^hich  no
"  importunity  can  render  him  more
^'  qualified  ?"

The  proper  anfwer  to  this  will  appear
if  we  confider,  that  it  is  by  no  means

neceffary


222  O;^ P  R  A  Y  E R*

nec^flaiy  to  fuppofe  that  the  treatment
M'hich  Beings  Ihall  receive  depends,  in
all  cafes,  folely  on  what  they  are  in
themfelves.  This,  without  doubt,  is
what  the  univerfal  Governor  ch'ejly  re-
gards ;  but  it  is  not  a//.  And  tho'  there
are  fome  benefits  of  fuch  a  nature,  that
no  means  can  obtain  them  for  Beings
w4io  have  not  certain  quahfications,  there
are  other  benefits  which  one  Being  may
obtain  for  another,  or  for  which  he  may
be  indebted  entirely  to  the  kind  offices
of  his  fellow- creatures*  An  advantage
may  become  proper  to  be  granted  to  an-^
other,  in  coniequence  of  fome  circum-*
fiances  he  mav  be  in,  or  fome  relations
in  which  he  may  lland  to  others,  which,
abftraded  from  fuch  cireumftances  and
relations,  would  not  have  been  proper  **
Nothing  is  more  intelligible  than  this,
or  happens  more  frequently  in  the  com-
mon courfe  of  affairs  and  events.  The
whole  fcheme  of  nature  feems  indeed  to  be
contrived  on  purpofe in  fuch a  manner,

*  See  before,  page  207,


On Prayer.  223

as  that  Beings  might  have  it  in  their  pow-
er,  in numberlefs ways, to blefs one
another. No  attentive perfon  can  con-
fider  without  furprize  how  precarious  the
ftate  of  men  in  particular  is  left,  and  how
dependent  their  moft  important  intereils
are  made  on  their  condud:  to  one  another*
One end of this conftitution appears
plainly  to  be, to  give  us  room  and  fcope
for the exercife of  beneficence. And,
'in general,  it is  obvious  that had the
ftate  and  happinefs  of  Beings  been  made
otherwife  than  precarious  and  dependent
in  the  manner  we  find them, all  poffi-
bility of  this virtue,  and confequently
the  fublimeft  part  of  rational  and  mora!
happinefs, would have been excluded
from the  creation  '^^

But  not  to  infift  on  this.  'Tis  (ui^^
ficient  for  my  purpofe,  that  the  general
fad  is  certain ;  that  Beings  may,  in  va-
rious ways,  be  the  procuring  caufes  of

*  See  the  Diflertaticn  on  Providence,  page  laS,

good


224  On Prayer*

good  to  one  another.  So  true  is  this,.
that  almoft  all  our  happinefs  is  conveyed
to  us,  not  immediately  from  God's  hands,
but  by  the  inftrumentality  of  our  fel-
low-beings, or  through  them  as  the
channels  of  his  beneficence,  in  fuch  a
{txii^y  that  had  it  not  been  for  their
benevolence  and  voluntary  agency,  we
Ihould  have  for  ever  wanted  the  blef-
lings  we enjoy.

Let  us  now  apply thefe  obfervations

to  the  cafe  of  Prayer  for  others.

Why  may  not  this  be  one  thing  that
may  alter  a  cafe,  and  be  a  reafon
with  the  Divine  Being  for  fhewing
favour  ?  Why,  by  praying  for  one  an-
other, may  Ave  not,  as  in  many  other-
ways,  be  ufeful  to  one  another  ?  Why
may  not  the  univerfal  Father,  in  con-
fideration  of  the  humble  and  benevolent
interceffions  of  fome  of  his  children
for  others,  be  pleafed  often,  in  the  courfe
of  his  Providence,  to  direct  events  for
the  advantage  of  the  perfons  interceded

for


On Prayer.  225

fDr  in  a  manner  that  would  not  other-
wife  have  been  done  ? -No  truly  bene-
volent and  pious  man  can  help  lifting
up  his  heart  to  the  Deity  in  behalf  of
his  fellow-creatures.  No  one  whofe
breaft  is  properly  warmed  with  kind
wKhes  to  his  brethren  about  him,
and  who  feels  within  himfelf  earnefl
deiires  to  do  them  all  pofiible  good,
can  avoid  offering  up  his  kind  wiflies
and  defires  to  the  common  Bene-
fador  and  Ruler,  who  knows  v/hat
is  beft  for  every  Being,  and  who  can
make  thofe  we  love  infinitely  happy.
In  reality;  fupplications  to  the  Deity
for  our  friends  and  kindred,  and  all
in  whofe  welfare  >/e  are  concerned,  are
no  lefs  natural  than  fupplications  for
otirfelves.  And  are  they  not  alfo  rea-
foriablc  ?  What  is  there  in  them  that  is
not  worthy  the  mofl  exalted  benevolence  ?
May  it  not  be  fit  that  a  wife  and  good
Being  lliould  pay  a  regard  to  them  ?
And  may  not  the  regarding  and  anfwer-


226  0/? P  R  A  Y  E  R.

ing  them,  and,  in  general,  granting  blef-
fings  to  ibme,  on  account  of  the  virtue
of  others,  be  a  proper  method  of  en-
couraging and  honouring  virtue,  and
of  rewarding  the  benevolence  of  Be-
ines  to  one  another  ? Perhaps,  in-
deed, it  may  not  be  eafy  to  conceive  how
much  regard  is  paid,  in  the  difpofals  of
Providence,  to  the  benevolent  defires  and
virtue  of  fome  Beings  in  the  treatment
of.  others.  Perhaps,  there  may  not  be
a  better  way  of  encouraging  righteoufnefs
in  the  creation,  than  by  making  it  as  much
as  poffible  the  caufc  of  happinefs  not
only  to  the  agent  himfelf,  but  to  all  con-t
necled  vv^ith  him.  There  is  no  virtuous
Being  who  would  not,  in  many  circum-
ftances,  chufe  to  be  rewarded  with  a
grant  of  bleflings  to  his  fellow-beings
rather  than to  himfelf.

Thefe  obfervations  feem  to  me  fuffi-
cient  to  defend  Prayer  for  others,  and
to  fliew  that  it  may  have  an  eftedl  on
their condition. Were  it true  indeed

that


On ?  R  A  Y  E  k.  227

that  it  could  have  no  fuch  effed:,  as  hav-
ing of  itfelf  no  influence  on  the  charac-
ters or  perfonal  quahfications  of  thofe
prayed  for,  it  v^ould be  more. difficult  to

defend  it. The immediate  viev/  of

every  one  in  praying  for  another,  as  well
as  for  himfelf,  is  to  obtain  v/hat  he  prays
for ;  and  did  any  one  apprehend  that  the
ad:  of  fupplicating  the  Deity  for  others
has  no  tendency  to  be  of  any  advantage
to  them,  I  cannot  fee  what  could  ever
lead  him  to  it.  No  one,  I  fuppofe,  will
affert  that  what  we  mean  by  addreffing
our  defires  to  the  Deity  for  otkej's  is  feme
benefit  to  oiirfehes.  It  muft,  therefore,  be
wrong  to  reft  the  whole  defence  of  Prayer
on  its  tendency  to  promote  our  moral  and
religious  improvement.  This,  without
doubt,  is  in  the  higheft  degree  true  of  it ;
but  it  is  its  cffeB^  not  its  immediate  and
direct  end.

Several  queflions, not eafj/ to  be  an-

fwered,  may be  afl.ed'  about  the extent

of  the efficacy  of  Prayer. But  this is

Q_2  jiot


228  On Prayer.

not  a  point  into  which  it  is  necefiary  for
me  to  enter.  All  I  plead  for  is,  that  it
is  not  abfiird  to  fuppofe  it  om  thing
which  the  Deity  is  pleafed  to  regard  in
the  communication  of  good  to  his  crea-
tures. How  far  it  becomes  a(ftually  a
ground  cf  favour,  or  what  anfwers  to
it  arc  granted  in  particular  inflances,  we
are  not  capable  of  determining.  There
is  here,  undoubtedly,  room  for  much
folly  and  fuperftition.  Care  fhould  be
taken  that  neither  cur  prayers  for  our-
felves  or  others  be  too  particular,  and
that  we  indulge  no  ether  expediation  in
confequence  of  them  than  that,  if  the
fruits  of  genuine  benevolence  and  piety,
th.ey  ihall  be  accepted  and  heard  as  far
as  is  confiftent  w^ith  the  order  of  the
world  and  the  purpofes  of  infinite
wifdom*

It  would  be  very  unreafonable  to  urge
■on  this  occafion  an  objection  already  con-
sidered ;  that  God  is  infinitely  good,  and
wants  nothinr^ to  en^a^-e him to  i:^rant

any


On P  R A  Y E R.  229

any  bleffings  to  thofe  who  are  not  impro-
per objects  of  them.  Nothing  is  plainer
than  that  this  may,  with  ^qual  force,  be
urged  againfl  any  other  duty  of  natural
religion.  The  v/hole  queflion  is,  whe-
ther Prayer  may  not  itfelf  be  a  circum-
ftance  creating  propriety  and  altering  a
cafe.  For  my  part,  I  fee  no  fufScient
reafon  for  denying  the  poffibility  of  in-
terceiTions  or  interpofitions  which  may
make  an  infinite  difference  in  the  cafes
of  particular  Beings,  and  gain  the  highefl
bleffings  for  them.— But  it  is  time  to  fi-
nifh  this  part  of  the  defence  of  Prayer.


CLs  SEC  T.


230  On Prayer


S  E  C  T. 11.

Of  the  hnportance of  Prayer  as  an  in--
flnimental  Duty, the Happinefs of  a
devout Temper^ and the particular
Obligation  to  public  Worflnp,

THERE  remain  fome  further  ar-
guments, for  Prayer  of  great  weight
which  muft  not  be  overlooked.  I  have
hitherto  defended  it  without  any  regard
to  its  effedls  on  our  tempers  and  lives ;
but  it  is  neceifary  that  thefe  fliould  be
particularly  reprefented,  in  order  more
fully  to  recommend  and  juftify  it. — No-
thing, certainly,  can  tend  more  to  pro-
mote a  right  condudl  and  temper  and
to  eflablifh  within  us  all  good  difpofitions,
•than  this  duty  properly  difcharged.  He
that  makes  confcience  of  frequent  'and
ferious  Prayer  muft  live  under  an  habitual
fenfe  of  the  prefence,  authority,  and  pro-
I  videncQ


On Prayer.  231

videncc  of  God,  and  of  his  dependence
upon  him  and  obligations  to  him.  He
muft  be  continually  reminding  himfelf
of  the  moft  important  truths,  and  ex-
citing himfelf  to  the  utmofl  care  of  his
life.  He  muft  be  always  exerciling  re-
pentance for  his  tranfgreffions  and  bene-
volence to  his  fellow-creatures.  It  is
fcarcely  poffible  for  fuch  a  man  to  be
otherwife  than  truly  virtuous.  The  in-
dulgence of  known  guilt,  and  a  regu-
lar courfe  of  unafFe<fled  devotion  are  fo
incompatible,  that  it  is  not  conceivable
that  they  can  be  united  in one  and the

fame man. 1  acknowledge  that  there

are  many  pretendedly  devout  people  who
are  as  f^lfe,  fpiteful,  peevifh  and  co-
vetous, and  in  every  refped:  as  una-
miable  as  any  perfons  in  the  world  :
And  the  fcandal  given  by  fuch  has,  I
believe,  contributed  more  than  any  thing
towards  bringing  devotion  into  difcredit.
But  what  is  the  Devotion  of  fuch  ?
-A  mere  lip  fervice ;  not  the  work
of  the  foul.  The  femblance  of  devotion  ;
0^4  not


232  On Prayer.

not  the  reality.  An  abufe  of  the  AU
mighty  3 not  genuine  woiiliip  and  piety.

Where  the true  fpirit  of  devotion

prevails,  it  cannot  fail  to  render  a  man
more  amiable,  and  to  promote  the  pu-
rification of  his  mind.  It  will  itifie  in
the  birth  all  wrong  tendencies;  fubdue
the  temper  to  kindnefs  and  charity ;
conquer  every  rebellious  inclination,  and
form the heart and life to univerfai

goodnefs.- Can  a  man  fet  himfelf  often

to  realize  to  himfelf  the  infpediou  of
the  Deity  and  to  adore  his  perfections,
while  he  feels  himfelf  an  enemy  to  his
laws  and  government  ?  Can  he  with  a
contrite  heart  confefs  his  fms,  and  not
refolve  tb  forfake  them  ?  Caq  he  fo  mock
his  tremendous  Creator  as  to  feek  favour
from  him  while  he  goes  on  to  affront
him ;  or  to  beg  that  love  and  forgive-
nefs  to  himfelf  which  he  is  not  willing  to
pra(flife  to  others  ?  Can  he  pray  for  thofe
who  difpitefully  ufe  *  hi7n  and  perfecute  him,
and  at  the fame time  indulge rancour

*  Matt.  V.  44.

in


On P  R A  V E R.  23

in  his  heart  ?  In  fliort ;  can  he  employ
himfelf  in  turning  his  attention  fre«
quently  to  eternal  righteoufnefs  and  good-
nefs,  without  participating  of  fome<legTees
of  thefe  excellencies ;  or  preferve  a  con-
ftant  intercourfe  between  his  mind  and
the  firft  and  beft  of  all  Beings,  without
growing  like  to  him,  and  being  confirm-
ed in  pious  gratitude  and  refignation  ? —
''Tis  one  of  the  jufteft  obfervations,  that
what  we  don't  think  of  is  the  fame  to
us  as  if  it  did  not  exiit.  There  is  little
or  no  difference  between  what  is  not
confidered  and  what  is  not  believed.  It  is
the  rcjlexion  on  what  is  believed  that  ren-
ders it  ufeful  to  us,  and  gives  it  its
whole  pov/er  to  influence  us.  The
pradlice,  therefore,  of  ftated  Prayer
muft  be  of  unfpeakable  ufe,  as  it  is
perpetually  fixing  our  reflexions  on  thofc
truths  which  are  the  fprings  and  fup-
ports  of  goodnefs.  There  Is  nothing  does
this  fo  well.  There  is  nothing  engages
the  attention  fo  clofely  to  the  moft  im-
portant truths,  and  confequently  nothing

that


234  O;^ Prayer.

that  has  fo  much  power  to  excite  good
afFedions,  and  to  keep  alive  and  confirm
good  refolutions.  I  will  venture  to  add,
that  for  this  reafon  it  muft  be  the  beft
means  of  preparing  our  minds  for  Di-
vine influences,  and  of  drawing  into  them
thofe  irradiations  of  Divine  grace  which
upright  and  pure  minds  have  reafon  to
exped:.  When  in  the  midil  of  the  hurry
of  life  and  full  of  its  cares,  our  minds
are  not  properly  fufceptible  of  good  im-
preffions.  But  when  we  retire  from
the  world,  and  employ  ourfelves  in  the
duties  of  devotion,  all  fenfible  objedls
lofe  their  power;  the  tumults  of  paf-
fion  fubiide ;  the  voice  of  the  Deity
within  us  is  capable  of  being  heard,
and  our  breafts  are  thrown  open  to
heavenly  communications.

We  may  then  lay  it  down  as  certain,
that  Prayer  is  in  the  greateft  degree  fub-
fervient  to  virtue,  and  productive  of  the
higheft advantages. 'Tis in this that

the


0« P  R  A  Y  E  R.  235

the  converfion  of  the  foul  to  religious
goodnefs  generally  firft  flieWcS  itfelf.
'Tis  the  beft  friend  of  every  virtue,  a
faithful  monitor  in  all  feafons,  a  pow-
erful quickener  in  every  laudable  under-
taking, and  one  of  the  chief  fprings  of
that  wifdom  which  is  from  above,  and
that  peace  which  the  world  cannot
give.

But  it  mufl:  be  here  attended  to,  that
though  Prayer  is  inftrumental  to  virtue
in  the  manner  now  reprefented,  it  is  by
no  means  merely  an  injlriimental  duty.
This  muft  be  acknowledged  if  what
has  been  before  faid  is  juft.  It  appears
to  me  unqueftionable  that  it  is  a  prime
and  original  duty  of  natural  religion,
which  derives  its  obligation,  not  folely
from  its  effeds,  but  is  of  intrinfick  ob-
ligation and reftitude. 1 muft add,

that  it  is  the  higheft  poffible  recommen-
dation of  Prayer, that  it  is  not  only  //-
y?^ virtue,  but  the  beji  means  oi  virtue;
not  only  itfelf  a  duty,  but  of  the  greateft

ufe


236  On Prayer.

ufe  to  maintain  and  increafe  a  regard  to

all  other  duties.

What  has  been  laft  infifted  on  natu-
rally leads  to  an  obfervation  proper  to  be
juft  mentioned,  and  which  will  fet  the
reafonablenefs  of  Prayer  in  a  light  fome-
what  different  from  that  in  which  we
have  hitherto  viewed  it.— Suppofe  that
it  had  no  immediate  propriety  in  it,  yet
if  it  is  fo  important  a  means  of  virtue,
and  fo  ufeful  towards  impreffing  on  the
mind  pious  fentiments ;  if  without  it  we
fhould  neceflarily  grow  more  remifs  and
earelefs,  lefs  mindful  of  the  Deity  and
lefs  affe(3:ed  with  his  perfedions  j  this
alone  affords  to  the  Deity  the  highefb
reafon  for  commanding  it,  and  making
the  regular  difcharge  of  it  a  ftanding
law  of  his  government,  and  a  ftanding
condition  of  his  favour. — ^ — And  as  in
the  reprefentation  before  given  of  Pray-
er, it  implied  no  reflexion  on  the  good-
nefs  of  God,  to  maintain  that  he  expeds
us  to  do  what  we  ought  to  do ;  that is,

addrefs


On Prayer,  237

addrefs  him  and  ajk  for  bleffings  before
we  have  them  :  So  here,  there  is  plainly
much  lefs  reafon  for  fuch  an  objeftion  5
our  ideas  of  Divine  goodnefs  being  not
diminiflied  but  magnified  by  fuppofing,
that  he  makes  folemn  adls  which  are
conducive  to  our  higheft  perfection  ne-
ceffary  to  our  being  favoured  by  him.

Before  I  proceed  further,  I  cannot  help
flopping  to  take  notice  on  this  occafion
particularly  of  the  inter cejjiojiary  part  of
Prayer,  as  a  moft  obvious  inflance  of
the  tendency  of  Prayer  to  improve  us.-—
No  one  can  avoid  feeing  how  happy  an
effed:  this  muft  have  in  fweetening  our
tempers,  in  reconciling  us  to  ail  about
us,  and  cauiing  every  unfriendly  paffion
to  die  away  vs^ithin  us.  V/e  cannot  offer
up  prayers  to  God  for  our  fellow-men,
without  fetting  them  before  our  minds
in  fome  of  the  moft  engaging  lights  poffi-
ble ;  as  partaking  of  the  fame  natures
with  ourfelves,  liable  to  the  fame  wants
and  fufFerings,  and  in  the  fame  he'plefs

circumflances ;


238  ^On Prayer.

circumflances ;  as  children  of  the  fame
father,  fubjedls'  of  the  fame  all-wife
government,  and  heirs  of  the  fame  hopes.
He  who  prays  for  others,  with  under-
ftanding  and  fmcerity,  muft  fee  himfelf
on  the  fame  level  with  them  -,  he  muft
be  ready  to  do  them  all  the  good  in  his
power;  he  muft  be  pleafed  with  what-
ever happinefs  they  enjoy ;  he  can  do
nothing  to  leiTen  their  credit  or  comfort;
and  fervent  defires  will  naturally  rife
within  him,  while  thus  engaged,  that
his  own  breaft  may  be  the  feat  of  all
thofe  good  difpofitions  and  virtues  v/hich
he  prays  that  they  may  be  bleft  with,
Refentment  and  envy  can  never  be  in-
dulged by  one  who,  whenever  he  finds
himfelf  tempted  to  them,  has  recourfe
to  this  duty,  and  fets  himfelf  to  recom-
mend to  the  Divine  favour  the  perfons
who  excite  within  him  thefe  paflions.
No  defire  of  retaliation  or  revenge,  no-
thing of  unpeaceablenefs,  ill-nature,  or
haughtinefs  can  eafily  lliew  itfelf  in  a
heart kept under this guard and dif-

cipline.


On  Prayer.  239
cipline.  How  is  it  poffible  to  ufe  him  ill
for  whom  we  are  conftant  advocates  with
God  ?  How  excellent  a  parent  or  friend
is  he  likely  to  make,  who  always  remem-
bers before  God  the  concerns  and  inte-
refts  of  his  children  and  friends,  in  the
fame  manner  that  he  remembers  his
own  ?  Is  there  a  more  rational  way  of  ex-
preffing  benevolence  than  this  -,  or  a  more
effedlual  way  of  promoting  and  enlarg-
ing it  ? Nothing  is  more  deiirable  or

more  delightful  than  to  feel  ourfelves
continually  under  the  power  of  kind
affeiftions  to  all  about  us.  Would  v/e
be  thus  happy  ?  Would  we  have  our
hearts  in  a  conftant  ftate  of  love  and
good- will  ?  Would  we  have  every  tender
fentiment  ftrong  and  adive  in  our  breafts  ?
-Let  us  be  conftant  and  diligent  in
this  part  of  devotion,  and  pray  continu-
ally for  others,  as we  do  for  ourfelves.

I might  in this manner  go throuo-h
all the different parts of  Prayer, and
point  put  particularly  the  happy  influ-
ence


240  On Prayer.

ence  which  they  are  fitted  to  have  oil
our  tempers  and  condud.  But  this
would  be,  in  a  great  meafure,  a  need-
lefs  work;  it  being  hardly  pofiible  to
doubt  on  this  point*

From  the  whole  of  what  has  been
faid  we  may  now  colledl  the  following
reafons  for  Prayer,  which  deferve  cur
careful  attention.

I  ft.  It  is  in  itfelf  necefiarily  right*
We  cannot  omit  it  without  violating  the
plaineft  reafon ;  without  contradicfting
the  higheft  relations  in  which  we  ftand  j
and,  in  effedt,  fetting  ourfelves  up  as
felf-fufficient  and  independent.  Nothing
can  be  criminal  if  it  be  not  fo  to  for-
get Him  from  whom  alone  comes  every
good  gift ;  to  negledl  Him  who  is  the
blifs  of  all  nature.  Shocking,  certainly^
is  the  guilt  of  every  irreligious  perfon.
He  ftiould  blufli  to  lay  any  claim  to  true
wortii  of  charader.

sdlyi


On Prayer.  241

gdly.  Prayer  is  ncceflary  to  promote
a  good  temper  in  us,  and  to  train  us  \xp
in  righteoufnefs.  Without  it  all  our
Virtues  will  wither,  our  good  defires
and  refoliltions  will  languilli,  and  reli-
gious truth  lofe  its  power  over  our
minds.  Prayer  rightly  performed  im-
plies the  lively  exercife  of  love.^  grati-
tude, humility^  repentance,  hope,  re-
lignation,  and  almoft  all  the  worthy
principles  that  can  aftuate  the  heart*
When  this  is  negledled  they  lie  dormant,

and  muft  tend  to  decay. As  a  heart

overflowing  with  love  to  God  and  mari
will  unavoidably  give  itfelf  vent  in  Pray-^
cr^  fo  Prayer  has  a  tendency  to  carry
this  blefled  temper  to  its  higheft  pitch  ^
nor  is  it  eafily  to  be  conceived  how
friendly  an  influence  thefe  have  on  one
another,  or  how  clofely  they  are  con-*
nested.— — ^Nothing  can  be  more  fublimd
than  a  fpirit  of  unafi:ed:ed  and  zealous
devotion.  A  heart  infpired  with  this
mufl;  be  holy  and  pure,  prepared  for
every  good  work,  and  filled  with  every
jRjk  Divine


242  On Prayer.

Divine  grace.  This  facred  fire,  where-
ever  it  enters,  will  confume  the  drofe
of  the  mind  and  refine  all  its  powers.
Serious  and  attentive  Prayer  brings  us
to  a  nearer  view  of  the  Divine  perfect
tions,  and  draws  light  and  glory  from
them  into  our  hearts.  By  this  we  ele-
vate ourfelves  above  fenfible  objects,
unite  our  fouls  to  the  firft  good,  furren-
der  our  wills  to  God's  will,  and  main-
tain in  ourfelves  a  conftant  and  chearful
acquiefcence  in  that  order  of  events  which

his  wifdom  has appointed. In  fliort.

Prayer  is  the  main  duty  of  religious  vir-
tue; the  neareft  approach  to  God  we
are  now  capable  of;  the  immediate  ex-
ercife  of  our  nobleft  afFedions  on  their
higheft  objed:,  and  the  fupport  and  life
of  all  true  piety.

^dly,  'Tis  incumbent  upon  us  to  pray
as  we  hope  for  the  favour  of  God.  This
is  one  qualification  for  his  favour;  07ie
important  means  of  obtaining  blefllngs
from him* Thofe who  omit  it  mufl

be


On P  R  A  Y  E  1^.  243

be  under  his  dilpleafure ;  but  thofe  who
acknowledge  him  in  all  their  ways,  and
live  under  a  fenfe  of  his  rightful  do-
minion expreffed  by  all  fuitable  a(flionSi
muft  be  approved  by  him^  and  the  ob-
jeds  of  his  peculiar  care.  'Tis  impof-
fible  that  he  fhould  not  make  a  difference
between  them  and  the  impious  men
who  addrefs  no  acknowledgments  to
him.

To  thefe  arguments  for  Pray^  taken
from  what  has  been  faid  to  fhew  the  rea-
fonablenefs  of  it,  I  will  add  that  the  Chri-
ftian  revelation  enjoins  it.  This,  I  know,
will  weigh  but  little  with  moft  of  thofe
who  objed:  to  this  duty.  But  it  muft  havei
great  weight  with every  attentive  chri-

ftian. Our holy  religion exhorts us

to  pray  without  ceajing ;  to  pray  alirays
with  all  manner  of  prayer,  and  fupplica-
tion  in  the  Jpirit ;  to  continue  in  prayer ,  and
watch  unto  the  fame  with  thankfgiving  \  to
lift  up  every  where  holy  hands  without
wrath  or  firife^  and  to  make  fupplicatiom
R  a  and


244  0;2 P  R  A  Y  E  R*

and hiterceJfiGns  for  all  men,  ftnce  this  is
good  and acceptable  in the  fight  of  God.
This  duty is  particularly recommended
to  us  by  the  example  of  Chrifl  himfelf,
the  founder of  our  faith and hopes  *.
The accounts  we  have  of  the time  he
fpent  in  devotion, and  of  his  regularly
performing all the offices  of  it, prove
that  this muft  be  an  important  part  of
righteoufnefs, and that  there  is no  vir-
tue fo perfedl or dignity of  charafter
fo great as to fuperfede the reafons
on  which  the  obligation  to  it  is  founded.
Such  imperfedl  and  finful  creatures  as  we
are have certainly  peculiar reafons for
it,  and  therefore  muft  be  in  the  higheft

degree  inexcufablc  if  they  negled:  it.

But  further ,  Chrift  has  encouraged  us
to  this  part  of  duty  by  promifing  par-
ticular favour  to  thofe  who  diligently
pradtife it. That  efficacy of  Prayer  to

*  Matt.  xiv.  23.  iVhen  he  had  fe?it  the  mtdt'itiuh
{ii'jay^  he  went  up  into  a  ?nountain  apart  to  pray.  Luke
vi.  12.  He  went  cut  into  ci?nQnntain  to  pray ^  and  continued
all  7iight  in  prayer  to  God,

obtain


On P  R  A V  E  R.  24^

obtain bleffings for us which I have
endeavoured  to  prove  and  explain, is  by^
him  clearly  aflerted. Thus  Matt.  vii.  7/
Ajk  a7id  ye  flail  have. Seek  and  ye  flail'
find. Knock  and  it  floall  be  opened  to  you.
For  every  one  that  aflethy  receiveth. He
that  feekethy  findeth. And  to hiin that
knockethy  it  floail  be  opened. Matt.  vi.  6.
But thou ivhen thou  praycjl, enter into
thy  clofety  rnd  pray  to  thy  Father  in  fe-
cret ;  and  thy  Father  who  feeth  in  fecret
flail  reward  thee  openly,-^-- — To  the  fame
purpofe he has taught us in the pa-
rable  of  the  widow and unjuit  judge.
Luke  xviii.

But  let  It  be  remembered,  that  though
Chriftianity  thus  commands  Prayer,  it  v^,
by  no  means  merely  a  chrillian  duty.  •
Tis  an  effential  part  of  all  religion.  All-
nations  of  men  acknov/ledge  the  obh-
gation  to  it,  and  the  pra«^tice  of  it  has
been  as  univerfil  as  the  belief  of  a
Deity.

R  3  Li


1246  On Prayer,

In the  laft place. I would recom-«
mend this  duty  from the  confideration
of  the  pleafures  that attend  the  due  dif-
charge of  it. Prayer, as  has  been  be-
fore obferved, is the exercife of  our
higheft  affeftions  on  their  higheft  obje(ft,
and  the intercourfe  of  our minds  with
uncreated and fovereign goodnefs. It
muft, therefore, be the foundation of
the  higheft  pleafure.— -It  is  alfo  in  Prayer
that  the  happinefs  arifing  from  the  prac-
tice of  virtue, and  the  hope  and  triumph
it  infpires are  chiefly  felt. At  no  other
time are we  fa open to  the caufes of
virtuous  pleafure, or  fo difpofed to  the
moft  joyous  and  exalting  reflexions. It
is  in the power  of  every one  who  will
make  the experiment to  fatisfy  himfelf
about  this. What  delight  does a  virtu-
ous man  often  feel  when  he  puts  himfelf
folemnly  into  the  prefence  of  his  Maker,
and  confiders  him  as  one  with  his  foul  and
as  obferving  every  motion within  them;
when  he implores all fuitable  bleilings
from him with a liyely faith in his

L'eadinef§


On P  R  A  Y  E  R.  247

readinefs  to  give  him  more  than  he  can
afk  or  think ;  when  he  adores  his  in-
conceivable excellencies,  and  magnifies
and  bleffes  that  love  which  gave  being
to  the  world;  when  he  commits  his
whole  exiftence  to  him  with  boundlels
hope,  and  gives  full  fcope  to  every
pious  and  grateful  affecflion  ?  What  rap-
ture and  ravifhment  attend  fuch  exer-
cifes,  and  how  high  do  they  lift  our
fouls  *  ? ^— Words  are  indeed  want-
ing here ;  nor  is  it  pofiible  properly
to  defcribe  the pleafure there  is in all

*  "  In  thefe  the  foul  is  enlightened,  enlarged,
*«  raifed,  ravilhed.  In  thefe  it  foars  up  to  heaven,
"  and  looks  down  upon  earth.  In  thefe  it  pofTefTes
''  liability  and  fecurity,  peace  and  reft  in  the  midft
"  of  a  frail  unftable  nature,  and  a  reftlefs  ^nd  tu-
"  multuous  world.  In  thefe  all  the  pafTions  of  the
*'  foul  are  exercifed  with  a  moft  tender  fenfible  de-,
"  light,  forrov/,  fear,  or  reverence.  Hate  and  in-
"  dignation  do  here  exprefs  themfelvcs  to  the  height,
"  not  only  without  any  diforder  or  torture,  but  alfo
"  with  ffreat  contentment  and  fatisfa6lion  of  ourna-

o

''  ture.  Love,  hope,  joy  reign  here  without  either
"  check  or  fatiety."  Dr.  Lucas  s  Enquiry  after  Hap-
finefs. Vol.  I. page  117.

R 4  th^


243  On Prayer.

the  ads  of  devotion ;  in  addreffing  our
deiires,  with  a  pure  heart,  to  our  al-
mighty parent  \  in  praifing  him  for  his
innumerable  benefits ;  in  befeeching  him
to  caufe  us  to  grow  in  every  amiable  dif-
pofition;  in  interceding  with  him  for
thcfe  we  love;  in  feeling  benevolence,
gratitude,  and  hope  kindling  v/ithin  us
before  his  eye ;  in  fpreading  our  wants
and  perplexities  before  him,  and  feek-
ing  direftion  and  help  from  him;  iri
throwing  our  cares  and  burdens  upon
him,  and  referring  ourfelves  to  his  dif-
pofal,  fo  as  not  to  retain  any  ii)ifi:  of
any  thing  which  he  is  pleafed  to  forbid
or  deny.  Even  the  tears  of  penitential
forrow  and  contrition,  or  of  fympathy
and  benevolence,  into  which  a  devout
perfon  may  fometimes  be  melted,  have
a  fv/eetnefs  in  them  not  to  be  expreffed,
and are more to be defired than the

greateft  joys  of  the irreligious. Am

I,  Reader,  nov^'  talking  to  you  a  language
you  do  not  underftand  ?  Have  you  never
felt  .any of the  pleafures I am now

fpeaking

.5


On P  R  A  Y  E  R.  249

ipeaking  of?  Do  you  not  know  what  it
is  to  look  up  to  God  in  private  and  to
pour  out  your  foul  before  him  ? — Un-
happy then  are  you,  and  a  ftr^nger  yet
to  what  you  ought  to  be  beft  acquainted
with.

In  order  to  obtain  a  juft  fenfe  of  the
pleafures  conceded  with  devotion,  it
(hould  be  remembered  v/ith  how  much
mors  force  our  affe^ftions  ought  to  ex-
ert themfelves  before  the  Deity  than
in  any  other  circumftances,  and  what
greater  influence  his  prefence  ought  to
have  over  us  than  the  prefence  of  in-
ferior Beings.  It  is  certain  that  we
have  more  to  do  with  him  than  with  all
nature,  that  he  may  be  infinitely  more
our  happinefs  than  any  of  thofe  objedls
Vvhich  he  has  adapted  to  our  faculties,
and  that  the  neareft  and  moft  important
of  all  relations  is  that  between  a  creature
and  the  Creator,  The  approach,  there-
fore, of,  an  upright  mind,  poiTefl:  of  juft
yiews  and  proper  feelings, to  the  Deity,

to


25a  On Prayer.

to  its  guardian  and  life  and  greateil:  friend,
cannot  but  be  productive  of  the  higheft

effeds. But  it  will  not  be amifs,  on

tiiis  occalion,  particularly  to  compare  the
pleafures  of  devotion  with  thofe  arifing
from  contemplating  the  works  of  the
Deity.  In  ftudying  the  laws  and  order
of  the  univerfe  we  converfe  only  with
effeds,  but  in  devotion  our  minds  are
turned  immediately  to  ^  the  caufe,  and
contemplate,  not  tht  fiadows  or  Jig?is  of
wifdom,  power,  and  goodnefs,  but  thefe
qualities  themfelves  as  they  exift  in  the
neceffary  nature  of  the  Deity.  How
mtuch  higher  objecfts  of  contemplation
and  admiration  muft  uncreated  excellence
and  abfolute  perfection  be,  than  any
traces  of  thefe  or  emanations  from  them  ?
'Tis  in  God  alone,  in  the  fupreme  in-
telligence which  fills  all  things  and  from
whence  all  order  and  good  fprung,  that
we  can  find  complete  fulnefs  of  all  that
is  lovely  and  beatifying,  and  where
every  power  within  us  can  have  rooin
for  its  utmoil  exertion.

It


On Prayer.  251

It  cannot  be  doubted  but  that  the  plea-
fures  I  am  now  fpeaking  of  will  con-
flitute  a  principal  part  of  our  happinefs
in  every  future  period  of  our  exiilence.
We  can  indeed  enjoy  them  but  very  im-
perfecflly  here.  Many  low  cares  and  de-
fires  are  continually  forcing  themfelves
into  our  minds,  and  diftradting  their  at-
tention, and  rendering  it  impoffible  for
us  to  difengage  them  enough  from  fenfi-
ble  objedls,  and  to  acquaint  ourfelves
with  God  in  the  manner  we  defire.
But  hereafter  we  may  hope  to  get  nearer
accefs  to  him,  and  obtain  clearer  views
of  his  glory  and  majefty.  All  that  now
retards  the  flight  of  our  fouls  to  him
and  checks  their  happinefs  in  him  will
be  removed.  Every  cloud  that  now
hides  him  from  our  fight  will  vanifh,
and  we  fliall  be  able  to  feel  his  pre-
fence  with  us  in  a  manner  we  cannot
now  conceive.  How  high  then  will  the
pleafures  of  devotion  rife  ?  With  what
ardor  and  tranfport  fhall  we  be  able  to
worfhip  and to  praife  him, to  caft  our

foul§


2^2  On Prayer.

fouls before  him, and to delight our-
felves in  him  ?— But  let  it  be  remem-
bered,  that this  is a happinefs which
will  never  be  enjoyed  by  any  who  forget
God  now. If  we  allow  ourfelves  in  guilt
and  irreligion, or  cultivate  no acquain-
tance  with  the Deity in this life, we
cannot  be  fit  for  feeing  him  and  dwel-
ling with  him  in  another  life. A  courfc
of  prefent  devotion, as it will give us
fome  foretafles  of  the  happinefs  of  hea-
ven,  is alfo  neceffary  to  inure  us  to  it
and  prepare  us  for  it.

I  cannot  omit  obferving  further,  under
this  head,  that  devotion  is  not  only,  in
the  immediate  exercife  of  it,  thus  a  fource
of  happinefs,  but  alfo  conftitutes  a  ge-
neral temper  conducive  in  the  higheft
degree  to  happinefs.  The  fpirit  of  Pray-
er is  the  fpirit  of  hope,  humility,  gra-
titude and  refignation ;  and  muft,  there-
fore, as  far  as  we  are  pofTelTed  of  it,
be  produdtive  of  an  inward  fatisfaclion
and  tranquility  which  are  preferable  to

all


On Prayer.  25^

all  fenfible  delights. A  mind  thus  turned
has  many  fources  of  pleafure  peculiar  to
itfelf. 'Tis  elevated  above  the  tumults
of this world, and can preferve felf-
enjoyment  in  all  circumftances,  and  take
up  its  reft  in God  in  the  midft  of  out-
ward troubles  and  calamities.- 'A  truly
devout  temper  is  indeed  the  very  tem-
per of  blifs. It  cherifhes  and  ftrengthens
all the tender and agreeable affec-
tions, and  checks  all the  turbulent  and
painful  ones. It  difpofes us  to receive
pleafure  from  every  objed:  about  us,  gives
new  luftre to  the face  of  nature, ren-
ders every  agreeable  fcene  and  occurrence
more agreeable,  heightens  the  relifh  of
every common bleffing, and improves
and  refines all our enjoyments. How
bleft  is  that  man  whofe  defires  are  con-
tinually direded to heaven  ; who  is  al-
ways exercifing gratitude  to the  Deity
and truft  in  him ; whofe  heart  is  kept
clofe  with  him, and  whofe  thoughts  are
full  of  him ; who  taftes  his  beneficence
in whatever gives him pleafure ; who

terminates


254  ^^^ Prayer,

terminates  all  his  views  in  him,  and  has
learnt  to  carry  his  attention  from  every
degree  of  beauty  and  good  in  created
Beings,  to  the  inexhauftible  fountain  of
all  beauty  and  good  ?  What  peace  and
ferenity  muft  fill  a  mind  affured  that  its
affairs  are  under  the  bejl  diredion ;  con-
fcious  of  its  intereft  in  almighty  love ;
and  vv^hofe  regard  is  habitually  fixt  on
that  unfearchable  wifdom  which  conducts
all  events  ?

I  will  add,  that  devotion  greatly  im*
proves  the  pleafure  attending  all  enqui*
ries  into  nature,  and  advances  in  the
knowledge  of  it.  The  difference  be-^
tween  the  pleafure  received  by  a  devout
and  an  indevout  mind  in  obferving  the
univerfe,  is  like  that  between  the  plea-
fure received  from  the  fame  caufe  by  a
man  and  a  brute.  'Tis  the  confidera-
tlon  of  the  univerfe  as  God's  work,
and  the  obfervation  of  his  power,  wif-
dom, and  goodnefs  difplayed  in  it  that
cloath it with its chief  beauties, and

render


On  Prayer,  255

render  it  in  the  higheft  degree  a  delight-
ful fpedtacle. There  is  no  greater  in-
centive to devotion than an attentive
confideration  of  the  glorious  order  of  na-
ture ; nor  is  there  any  tendency  v^ithin
us  more  natural  than  that  arifing  from
hence  to  religious  adoration. And  there
is  an  inexpreffible  pitifulnefs  in  the  cha-
rafter  of  a  man  who  ftifles  this  tendency;
who  confines  his  views  to  fecond  caufes,
and  forgets  the  Jirji ; who  fees  not  the
Deity  in  his works ; who devotes his
time  to  philofophical  refearches, but  fa-
tisfies himfelf with mere fpeculation,
who can furvey the world, enjoy its
pleafures and reflecft  on its wonderful
ftrufture, without  lifting  up his heart
to  the  author  of  it,  without  being  warm-
ed into  praife,  or  feeling  any  pious  and
devout  emotions.— — Admiration  is one
of  the  moll pleafing afFedtions of  our
natures ; and  this  cannot  but be  excited
in  the  moft  infenfible  mind,  upon  obferv-
ing the works of the creation. But
then  only  is  our  admiration  what  it  ought

to


256  On Prayer.

to  be,  and  the  pieafure  attending  it  com^
plete,  when  it  is  exalted  into  devotion-,
""Tis  devotion  that  confecrates  knowledge
and  renders  it  fubfervient  to  its  proper
end;  that  gives  unbounded  fcope  to  our
moft  raifed  afFeftions,  and  employs  ouf
faculties  on  an  objecffe  every  way  ade-
quate to  them.

Thus  w^e  fee what  reafons there  are
for  Prayer,  and what  motives we  have

to  pradlife  it* The  natures of  things

render  it  our  indifpenfible  duty.  Our
improvement  in  true  virtue,  and  even  its
very  being  within  us,  depend  upon  it*
The  uncorrupted  dictates  of  our  own
minds,  and  the  general  fenfe  and  voice
of  mankind  proclaim  the  iitnefs  of  it,
and  call  us  to  it.  The  favour  of  God
to  us;  our  intereft  in  the  protection
and  bleffing  of  his  all-difpofmg  Provi-
dence, and  the  fupply  of  our  various
wants  are  in  a  great  meafure  conneded
with  it.  The  Chrillian  revelation  en-*
joins  it ;  and  it is, moreover, a  means

of


On Prayer.  257

of  maintaining  communion  between  hea-
ven and  our  minds,  a  fource  of  pleafure
of  the  higheft  kind,  and  a  neceffary
preparation  for  eternal  happinefs. — If  then
we  value  all  that  is  moft  important,  or  if
the  plaineft  and  ftrongeft  confiderations
of  reafon,  duty  and  intereft  can  influence
us,  w^e  fhall  not  live  in  the  omiffion  of
Prayer.

What  I  have  hitherto  faid  is  applicable
chiefly  to  private  Prayer.  I  fhall  now
beg  leave  to  add  a  few  obfervations  par-
ticularly ovi  family  and  publick  Prayer.

If  the  former  is  right,  there  can  be
no  doubt  but  that  the  latter  is  fo  like-
wife.  There  are  few  or  no  objedions  to
the  one,  which  may  not  be  equally  made
$0  the  other.  We  are  to  confider  our-
felves  not  only  as  private  perfons,  but
as  members  of  families  and  of  fociety,
and  in  thefe  capacities  ought  to  offer  up
praifes  and  fupplications  to  God.

S  With


2j8  On P  R  A  Y  E  R.

With  relped  to  Jamily  Prayer,  I  can-
not help  ailcing  with  ferioufnefs  and
coacern  -,  where  the  religion  of  that  fa-
mily can  be  that  never  meets  for  religious
v/orfhip  ?  With  what  reafon  can  fuch  a
family  expect  the  bleiling  of  heaven  up-
on it  ?  Is  it  not  fit  that  thofe  who  live
together  in  the  fame  houfe,  and  are  con-
neded  to  one  another  by  the  clofefl  ties ;
who  in  common  depend  entirely  upon
God,  need  continually  his  care,  and  are
always  receiving  mercies  from  him  ;  is  it
not  fit,  I  fay,  that  thefe  fliould  alfo  join
together  in  owning  their  common  depen-
dence and  obligations,  in  feeking  that  pro-
tection they  need,  and  in  paying  ho-
mage to  their  great  preferver  and  guar-
dian ?  Can  they  imagine  that  they  will
on  the  whole  do  equally  well,  whether
they  make  confcience  of  this  or  difre-
gard  it  P  Is  it  of  no  importance  that  thofe
who  have  children  or  fervants  under  their
pare  fliQVild  endeavour  to  teach  them  the
fear  of  God, and  do  what  they  can to

inftil


On P  R  A  Y  E  R,  259

inftil  good  principles  into  them,  to  keep
them  mindful  of  their  duty,  and  preferve
them from the  greateft  of  all  dangers;
the  danger  of  lofmg  eternal happinefs,
and being  undone  for  ever  by  guilt  and
irreligion  ? Is it  incumbent on them
to  provide for their bodies  y and  ought
they to  take  no  care  of  their  fouls, of
their  reafonable  and  immortal  part  ? But
how  little  care  of  this  kind  can  be  taken,
and  under  what  great  difadvantages  mufl
children  and  fervants  lie, if  thofe who
have  the  diredion  of  them  feldom  or  ne-
ver call  them  together  to  worfhip  God  ?
Surely that religion mufl be very
carelefs  which  extends  not  to  our  fami-
lies,  and fufFers us to forget God in
them. And  we  ought  to  remember  that
a  caf^elefs  religion  is  likely  to  prove  an  i?i-
fufficient  religion.— -In  a  word. If  the  chief
interefts  of  a  family  are  to  be  confulted,
or  the  lirfl  of  all  the  relations  in  which
we  fland  to  be regarded, family  Prayer
is  reafonable  and  proper; nor  can  any
S  2  perfon


i6o  On Prayer.

perfon  deny  this  with  any  colour  of  rea-
fon,  who  acknowledges  the  obligation  to
pray  at  all.  If  then  it  is  reafonable  and
proper,  how  can  the  flated  omiffion  of
it  be reconciled  to  a  character  of  found

virtue  ? ^^  Conftant  family  worfhip

*^  (fays  the  excellent  Archbiihop  Tillotfon)
**  is  fo  neceflary  to  keep  alive  a  fenfe  of
**  God  and  religion  in  the  minds  of  men,
"  that  I  fee  not  how  any  family  that
<*  negledls  it  can  in  reafon  be  efteemed  a
<^  family  of  Chriftians,  or  indeed  to
**  have  any  religion  at  all/*

I  know  of  no  tolerable  plea  that  can
be  found  for  the  omiffion  of  this  duty.
There  is  no  mafter  of  a  family  who
(liould  not  be  afhamed  to  fay  that  he
cannot  find  time  (fuppofe  one  quarter
of  an  hour  in  every  day)  for  one  of  the
moft  important  and  reafonable  of  all
works.  And  there  have  been  fo  many
good  forms  of  prayer  for  the  ufe  of  fa-
milies: puhlifh^d,  that  no  one  can  plead
.  .  want


On P  R  A  Y  E  K.  2tH

want  of  abilities  who  is  at  all  able to
read.

Let  us next turn our thoughts to
public  worfliip.

It  IS  very  evident  that  in  confequence
of  the  principle  of  fympathy  in  the  hu-
man heart,  every  aft  or  fervicc  in  which
We  engage  in  company  with  one  another
is  likely  to  be  performed  with  more  de-
light, and  to  be  produftive  of  greater
effefts.  Our  affeftions  operate  in  fociety
with  particular  force.  We  are  naturally
warmed  by  the  prefence  of  one  another,
and  infenfibly  catch  one  another's  feel-
ings. This,  1  think,  fuggefts  a  reafon
of  great  weight  for  the  public  exercifes
of  religion ;  for  it  proves  that  they  have
a  particular  tendency  to  imprefs  the
"tninds  of  men,  and  to  do  them  good. —

But  not  to  infift  on  this. Tis  furely

a  moft obvious  principle of  natural  re-
ligion, that  God ought to be  publicly
^^  S  3  worfhip-


262  On Prayer.

worfhipped.  Nothing  can  be  more  be-
coming creatures  linked  together  in  fo-
ciety,  and  fo  united  to  one  another  by
nature,  intereft  and  public  afFeClions  as
men  are,  and  who  have  fo  many  common
wants  and  cares,  than,  at  ftated  times,
to  agree,  with  one  heart  and  voice,  in  ad-
drefiing  their  defires  to  their  common  pa-^
rent.  Is  it  poffible  that  there  fliould  be
any  impartial  perfon  who  can  avoid  fee-
ing and  feeling  a  congruity  and  becom-
ingnefs  in  this  ?  Is  there  a  more  agree-
able or  noble  fight,  than  that  of  a  mul-
titude of  reafonable  Beings  engaged  in  of-
fering up  their  joint  homage  and  thankf-
givings  to  the  fupreme  ruler and  bene-

fador  ? The  heathens  appear  to  have

been  univerfally  fenfible  of  the  obligation
to  public  worfhip,  and  they  had  public
forms  of  devotion  on  which  they  con-
fcientioufly  attended.  It  is  therefore
furprifing  that  any  who  are  not  atheifts
fhould  be  able,  with  any  peace  or  fa^-
tisfaction,  to  dlow  themfelves  in  the  neg-

lea


\


On Prayer.  26?


Jeft  of  it.  Such  do  really  in  effed:  with*
draw  themfelves  from  the  government  of
God,  rejed  his  authority  over  them,  de-
ny his  Providence,  and  declare  they  have
no  dependence  upon  him,  or  obligations

to him. But, befides  ; let  it  be  con-

fidered  what  v/ould  be  the  confequence
if  all  were  to  follow  the  example  of
fuch,  and  what  would  then  be  tiie  ftate
of  mankind.  Are  not  the.  public  and
ftated  forms  of  religion  the  evident
means  of  keeping  up  order  in  the
world,  and  of  preferving  in  the  minds
of  men  fome  fenfe  of  morality  and  du-
ty ?  Were  thefe  aboliflied,  how  many
of  the  moft  powerful  reftraints  from  vice
would  be  taken  away  ?  Plow  foon  fliould
we  fink  into  the  favagenefs  and  barbarifm
of  Indians  and  Hottentots  ?  What  mul-
titudes would  be  loft  in  ignorance  and
guilt  who  now,  under  the  influence  of
the  public  fervices  of  religion,  are  train-
ed up  in  piety  and  goodnefs  for  future
happinefs*?  Was  there  then  nothing  to
''  •  engage

J  '*  And  were  it  not  for  that  izwi^  of  virtue  which
S  4  «  is


264  On P  K A  V  E  R".

engage  perfons  to  an  attendance  on  public
worfhip,  belldes  the  influence  their  ex-
ample may  have,  this  alone  fliould  be
fufficient.  And  this  ihews  us  alfo  how
poor  an  excufe  it  is  which  fome  make
when  they  fay,  that  they  know  alrea-
dy all  they  are  likely  to  hear  from  the
pulpit ;  and  that  they  can  improve  their
time  at  home  as  well as  at  a  place of

*^  is  principally  preferved,  fo  far  as  it  is  preferved,
**  by  national  forms  and  habits  of  religion,  men
*'  would  foon  lofe  it  all,  run  wild,  prey  upon  one
*'  another,  and  do  what  elfe  the  word  of  favages  do."
See  JUr,  JVoUaJtans  Religion  af  Nature  delineated^
Sea.  V.

^"^  'Tis  plainly  our  duty  to  promote  virtue  and  hap-
*^  pinefs  among  others.  Our  worfhipping  in  fociety,
**  our  recounting  thankfully  God's  benefits,  our  ex-
*'  plaining  his  nature  and  perfeftions,  our  exprefling
''  our  admiration,  efteem,  gratitude  and  love,  pre-
"  fents  to  the  minds  of  others,  the  proper  motives
♦*  of  like  afFeftions  ;  and  by  a  contagion,  obferv-
*'  able  in  all  our  paflions,  naturally  tends  to  raife
*'  them  in  others.  Piety  thus  diffufed  in  a  fociety
**  is  the  ftfongeft  reftraint  from  evil,  and  adds  new
♦'  force  to  every  focial  dlfpofition,  to  every  engage-
**  ment  to  good  offices."  Dr,  Hutchefon's  SyJIem  of
Moral Philofophy^  Vol,  I.  page  217.

public


On P  R  A  V  F.  '^^  26^

public  worfiiip. For  fuppofing  this  true
of the perfons who talk thus, they
ought to  remember  that  it  is not  true
of  the bulk  of  mankind, who  plainly
need  the  aid  of  pubUc  inftruftions  and
admonitions. By abfenting themfelves,
therefore, they  contribute towards de-
feating the  effecft  of  what  is  calculated
to promote the general good. They
ought, befides, to  confider  that  the  end
of  attending  on  the  public  fervices  of  re-
ligion is  n6t  merely to  receive  inftruc-
tion ; but to worfhip God, to  join  as
members of  fociety in honouring and
glorifying our common Lord by ce-
lebrating his  praifes together, and  pub-
lickly acknowledging and fupplicating
him. This is  what  cannot be  done  at
home. And  there  is  no  excufe  or  apolo-
gy poffible  which  can  make  the  ftated  and
voluntary  omiffion  of  it  otherwife  than
criminal  and  fhameful. I  cannot  indeed
refled,  without  fome  indignation,  on  the
conduft  of  thofe  who  allow  themfelves

in


266  On Prayer,

in  this  guilt,  who  difcover  fo  little  re-
verence for  the  Deity  and  regard  to  de-
ce?icy  as  to  chufe  to  be  fauntering,  feaft-
ing,  or  fleeping,  while'  their  fellow-
creatures  are  engaged  in  attending  to
truths  of  infinite  importance,  and  in
offering  up  their  acknowledgments
to  the  giver  of  all  good.  How
aftonifhing  is  it  that  this  fhould  be  fo
common  as  it  is  ;  that  in  a  land  of  light
and  knowledge,  in  this  Chriftlan  and
proteftant  nation,  the  public  worihip  of
God  fhould  be  more  flighted,'  and  the
places  defigned  for  it  more  deferted  tuan
perhaps  ever  was  known  among  civilized
pagans  ?  Nothing  can  have  a  much
worfe  afped:  on  the  welfare  of  the  na-
tion, or  threaten  it  with  greater  evils.
When  a  people  become  generally  irre-
ligious and  impious,  they  become  ungo-
vernable, untradable,  ready  for  every
evil  work,  and  ripe  for  mifery  and  de-
ftrudtion.  Religion,  to  fay  the  leaft  of
it, is a moft ufeful engine of flate,

and


On Prayer.  267

and  one  of  the  beft  fupports  of  public
order.  If  we  confider  it  only  in  this
light,  it  is  the  proper  objed;  of  public
encouragement  *  -,  and  the  perfon  who
does  not  iludy  to  countenance  it  in  his
condud:,  is  fo  far  a  pernicious  member
of  fociety.

Before I  proceed  to  what  further  lies
before  me  in  this  difcourfe,  it  comes  in

*  By  the  public  encouragement  that  fhould  be
given  to  religion,  I  do  not  mean  the  magiftrate's
interpofing  his  authority  to  require  compliance  with
any  particular  form  of  it,  or  to  raife  any  one  relio-i-
ous  party  above  others.  This  vt^ould  be  going  out
of  his  province,  and  has  hitherto  been  nothing  but
an  encroachment  on  liberty,  the  fhoaring  up  of  er-
ror, the  dejRjrudion  of  peace  and  harmony,  and  a
violation  of  fome  of  the  moft  important  rights  of
mankind.  The  way  in  which  it  is  earneftly  to
be  wifhed  that  all  in  public  ftations  would  encou-
rage religion  is  by  their  example-,  by  employing  their
influence  to  promote  a  confcientious  regard  to  it  in
thofe  forms  of  it  which  every  one  approves  moft;
by  leading  the  way  in  an  attendance  on  its  public  fer-
viccs,  and  at  the  fame  time  protecting  alike  all  who
are  fincere  in  the  profefTion  of  it.

my


268  On Prayer.

my  way  to  take  particular  notice  of  two
extremes  into  which  men  are  apt  to
fall;  both  common,  and  both  fatal. — —
The  firft,  and  that  which  it  is  moft  to
my  prefent  purpofe  to  mention,  is  the
extreme  into  which  thofe  perfons  fall
who  pay  no  regard  to  piety  or  any  of
its  duties,  but  profefs  great  zeal  for
juflice  and  gratitude  and  all  focial  du-
ties. As  far  as  fuch  pradlife  focial  du-
ties, and  are  truly  faithful  and  bene-
volent, they  cannot  be  too  much  ho-
nouied.  But  while  they  continue  re-
gardlefs  of  the  Deity,  and  void  of  de-
votion, there  is  furely  an  effential  defe<5l
in  their  characters.  They  want  the
living  root  5  they  want  the  bejft  f  jpport,
and  a  capital  part  of  real  goodnefs.  The
Deity  ought  to  be  the  objecft  of  the  firft
regard  of  a  virtuous  man.  Love  to  him
muft  be  his  prevailing  affedion ;  and
he  cannot  but  be  anxious  about  making
the  proper  acknowledgments  of  him  in
every  capacity  and  relation  of  life.  The
exercifes  of  devotion, I  have  fliewn,  are

fome


On Prayer.  269

fome  of  the  noblefl  employments  of  our
minds  5  mod  worthy  of  our  rational
powers  ',  r.  moll  perfeftive  of  our  tempers
and  charafters,  and  productive  of  the
greateft  delight. Can  then  a  good  man

negledt  thefe  ? A  good  man without

religion. A  benevolent  heart  without

love  to  the  firil  benevolence. A  grate-
ful mind  without  gratitude  to  its  great-
eft  benefadtor. A  righteous  life  with-
out prayer  ;  without  any  ad:s  expretling
fuitable  difpofitions  to  the  head  and  pa-
rent of  the  creation. What  palpable

contradicflions  are  thefe  ?

The  other  extreme  I  meant,  and  the
worft  by  far  of  the  two,  is  that  into
which  thofe  fall  who  are  zealous  for  de-
votion, and  exa(5l  in  all  pofitive  and  re-
ligious duties,  but  at  the  fame  time  neg-
le<fl  focial  duties ;  make  religion  a  cloak
for  wickednefsi  indulge  cenforioufncfs
and  uncharitablenefs  ;  and  will  lye,  trick,
cheat,  calumniate,  undermine  and  pre-
varicate. Thefe are indeed deteftable.

Thejr


270  On P  R  A  V  E  rJ

They  know  nothing  of  true  devotion.
They are, on many  accounts, fome oi

the vileft  of  mankind. -It  (hould  be

our  earneft  ftudy  to  difcharge  our  whole
duty,  and  to  acquire  an  univerfaily  right
temper  and  charadler.  Nothing  fhort
of  this  can  denominate  us  truly  virtuous.
No  zeal  for  any  one  fpecies  of  virtue  or
pundluahty  in  fome  parts  of  duty,  while
others  are  negleded,  can  avail  to  our
acceptance.

I  have  fuch  an  opinion  of  the  im-
portance of  this  that  I  cannot  help  en-
deavouring here  to  engage  attention  to
it  by  dwelling  a  little  longer  upon  it,
with  a  particular  view  to  the  two  forts

of  charadiers  I  have  mentioned. ^It  is

univerfaily  acknowledged  that  a  virtuous
man  is  one  who  ads  in  conformity  to
his  duty.  We  can  have  no  other  idea
of  a  virtuous  as  diftinguilhed  from  a
vicious  man.  But  let  us  confider
what  mull  be  meant  when  this  is
faid. Can the meaning  be  that  a  man

is


0?i  Prayer.  271

is  virtuous  if  he  difcharges  a  part  of
h^s  duty  only,  or  if  he  conforms  to  it
in  more  inftances  than  he  tranfgrefles  it  ?
If  this  Is  true,  then,  fuppofing  our  whole
duty  to  be  contained  under  any  number
of  heads,  as  for  inftance,  under  tem-
perance, gratitude,  juftice,  benevolence,
and  piety ;  it  will  follow  that  a  man
who  pradlifes  three  of  thefe  will  be  a
virtuous  man,  though  he  neglefts  the
other  two.  If  he  is  temperate,  juft,  and
pious,  he  is  a  virtuous  man,  though
he  wants  gratitude  and  benevolence.  Or
if  he  is  grateful,  juft  and  benevolent,
he  is  a  virtuous  man  though  he  wants
piety  and  temperance.  On  the  contrary;
he  only  will  be  a  vicious  man  who  pof-
fefTes  only  two  of  thefe  and  wants  the
reft. Is  it  poffible  that  any  perfon can

maintain f  ).ch an abfurdity  ? When

St.  Paul  affures  us,  that  neither  forni-*
cat  or  Si  nor  covcious  men,  nor  drunkards  ^
nor  revilersj  nor  extortioners  fhall  inhe-
rit the  kingdom  of  God;  did  he  mean
that  2^  fornicator,  or  a  covetous  'man,  or
.2  a


272  On Prayer.

a  drunkard,  or  an  extortioner  ihall  inherit
the  kingdom  of  God,  provided  he  h^s
but  that  one  vice,  and  fulfils  his  duty  in
other  inftances  ?  When  eternal  happinefs
is  promifed  in  the  New  Teftament  to  all
that  repent ;  does  it  mean  by  repentance,
not  the  forfaking  of  a//  fins,  but  all
except  that  one  which  we  love  moft  ?—
If  fuch  doftrine  is  right;  with  what
fort  of  charafters  will  heaven  be  filled  ?

Who  is  there  that  will  not  be  faved  ?

But  let  no  one  thus  deceive  himfelf.  If
there  is  any  regard  due  to  feme  of  the
plaineft  didlates  of  reafon  and  fcripture,
it  is  paft  doubt  that  no  kind  of  partial
goodnefs  can  be  true  goodnefs,  and  that
he  only  is  virtuous  who  endeavours
faithfully  to  do  his  whole  duty.  The
fame  truth  will  appear  very  evidently
if  we  confider  true  goodnefs  as  confid-
ing, not  in  having  (what  no  Being  can
want)  a  regard  to  redlitude,  but  in  h^^
ing  governed  by  it :  For,  certainly,  it  can-
not govern  where  there  is  any  one  pafiion
that  over-powers  it,  or  where  there  is
2  any


On Prayer.  273

a?2y  blown  guilt  indulged,  or  any  known
obligation  neglected  in  the  flated  courfe
of  life.  Virtue,  we  fhould  remember,
is  one  undivided  thing.  It  is  the  fame
in  all  the  different  parts  of  it;  and  an
habitual  difregard  to  it,  in  any  one  in-
ftance,  is  difregarding  the  whole,  and  be-
trays moil:  manifcfdy  a  heart  falfe  to  its
intereft, and  void  of  a  juft  affedion  for

it. But not to  fay  more  "©n this

fubjea  *.

I  am  fenfible  that  I  have  been  in  dan-
ger of  incurring  the  derifion  of  fome  per-
fons,  by  talking  as  I  have  done  of  family
religion,  of  the  pleafures  of  devotion,  and

of  happinefs  in  the  Deity. But this

gives  me  no  great  concern.  What  I
have  been  infilling  upon  is,  in  my  opi-
nion, of  unfpeakable  importance,  Thofe
who  have  entertained  contrary  opinions
are  welcome  to  rejecft  it. I  can  only  wifh

*  It is  conlidered  at  large  in  The  Reviav  of  the
principal  ^ejiions  in  Morals,  Chap,  IX.


It


274 0;; Prayer.
it  was  poffible for  me  to  convince  them
of  a  miftake  which,  I think,  moft  un-
happy and  dangerous. Others, by

what  has  been  laid  of  devotion,  private
and  public,  as  indilpenfably  obhgatory
in  itfelf,  and  the  fupport  and  hfe  of  vir-
tue, may  be  led  to  reflect  very  ferloufly
on  the  ftate  of  his  fellow-men.  An
ardent  and  at  the  fame  time  a  rational
and  unaffeded  devotion  is  one  of  the
chief  excellencies  and  glories  we  can  pof-
{cfs.  Nothing  can  make  us  appear  morq
venerable,  or  beflow  greater  dignity  on
our  charad:ers.  But  where  fliall  we  find
much  of  it  ?  What  numbers  either  pour
contempt  on  devotion  by  principle,  or
negledl  it  through  a  criminal  indolence,
or  difgrace  it  miferably  by  the  tricks  of
fuperftition  and  the  madnefs  of  enthu-
fiafm  ?  How  unaccuftomed  to  the  beft
and  moft  neceffary  exercifes ;  how  im-
merfed  in  {tnk ;  how  full  of  low  cares ;
how  inattentive  to  th;;  Divine  nature,
and  deftitute  of  heavenly  affedions, are

a  great  part of  mankind  ? When,

indeedi.


0?i Pray  e  r.  275

indeed,  I  confider  that  piety  and  fimpll-
city  and  purity  and prevailing  regard  to
every  known  obligation,  which  are  necef-
fary  to  conftitute  genuine  goodnefs  -, and
when  I  compare  thefe  with  the  carelef-
nefs and defefts  of  numberlefs perfons
about  me,  and even  of  feveral  who  on
many  accounts  are  refpea:able  and  wor-
thy, I cannot help feeling a painful
concern  and  grief.— Would  to  God  we
were  all  more  diligent,  and  more  follici-
tous about acquiring  true worth, and
leaving  nothing  undone  that  reafon  and
piety  require.


T  2  SECT.


2/6  On Prayer


SECT. III.

Of  the  Manner  in which Pi^ayer ought
to be  performed.

I  HAVE  now  finifhed  the  firft  part
of  my  defign  in  this  Diflertation.
What  I  had  further  in  view  was  to
reprefent  the  manner  in  which  Prayer
ought  to  be  performed,  in  order  to
render  it  an  acceptable  and  profitable
fervice.

The  firfb  obfervation  I  {hall  make
on  this  fubjedl  is,  that  Prayer  ought
to  be  performed  with  a  mind  pro-
perly prepared  for  it,  and  with  fixed
and  compofcd  thoughts.  'Tis  an  impor-
tant and  folemn  work,  and  no  pains  can
be  too  great  to  perform  it  in  a  becoming
manner.  Before  we  engage  in  it,  'tis
proper  to  take  time  for  ferious  recol-
'  '  ^^  Icftion,


0)1 P  R  A Y  E R.  277

leftion,  for  confidering  what  we  are
going  to  do,  and  endeavouring  to  bring
our  minds  to  a  right  temper,  and  to  im-
prefs  them  With  fuitable  deiires  and  fen-
timents.  'Tis  not  likely  to  be  attended
with  great  advantages  when  this  is  neg-
lected, or  v/hen  performed  with  minds
full  cf  worldly  cares,  ruffled  by  paffion,

or  diffipated  by  pleafure. But  if  it  is

thus  proper  to  prepare  ourfelves  for  Pray-
er, it  muft  be  much  more  fo  to  avoid
all  levity  and  abfcnce  of  mind  when  ac-
tually engaged  in  it.  For  otherwife
we  ill  all  not  pray  at  all,  but  tnock  the
Deity  with  unmeaning  founds.  What
can  be  more  indecent,  or  exprefs  greater
difrefped:  to  the  Moft  High,  than  to
draw  nigh  to  him  with  our  lipSy  while
our  hearts  are  far  from  him  ;  to  pretend
to  addrefs  ourfelves  to  him,  and  at  the
fame  time  to  fuffer  our  thoughts  to  wan-
der to  the  ends  of  the  earth  ?  Can  we
think he  will hold them  guiltlefs who

thus trife  with  him  r If  we  worftip

him  at  all,  it  ought  to  be  with  a  guard
T  3  upon


2


8  O/Z P  R  A Y  E R,


upon  our  attention,  with  an  awe  of  him
upon  our  minds,  and  an  inward  and
fincere  devotion.  No  bodily  fervices  or
external  pageantry  and  fliew  can  pleafe
bim.  He  is  an  omniprefent  and  perfe(ft
mind  who  looks  to  our  minds,  and
regards nothing but the ads of our

minds. 'Tis true, the  beft men  are

liable  to  wanderings  and diftradtions of
mind in  religious exercifes. But  fome
there  are who are utterly inexcufable
this  way ;  who  indulge  themfelves  in  in-
attention, and  fatisfy  themfelves  with  the
carelefs  repetition  of  a  fet  of  words  and
the  mevtform  of  worfhip. There  is  too
much  reafon  to  believe, with  refpeft  to
public Prayer  in particular,  that  many
attend  it  without  any  view  at  all  to  de-
votion or  improvement,  only  becaufe  it
is  the  cuftom,  or  for  fome  lefs innocent
reafon  i and that others,  who perhaps
are  never abfent  from it, feldom  rea/Iy
pray,  but  pafs  away  the  whole  folemnity
of worfhip in a  heedlefs and trifling
rnanner,  with their  thoughts  employed

on


On Prayer.  279

on  bufiiiefs,  or  intent  on  pleafure  and
folly..  How  can  per  ions,  who  have  any
fenfe  of  the  obligation  and  importance  of
Prayer,  know  themfelves  to  be  thus  guil-
ty, without  fevercly  reproaching  them-,
felves  ?  Were  it  not  for  the  influence
which  the  examples  of  fuch  might  have,
they  Vv^ould  be  aimed  as  innocent  if  they
were  openly  irren^ious,  and  never  ap-
peared at  any  place  of  Divine  worihip.

2dly,  We  ought  to  pray  with  fer-
vency of  affection  and  defire.  Thi3  muft
be  of  particular  importance.  It  cannot
be  imagined,  that  any  prayers  will  be
accepted,  which  are  not  emanations  from
a  heart  charged  with  good  defires.  The
jufteft  and  heft  definition  that  can  be
given  of  devotion  is,  **  that  it  is  the  af-
*'  fedions  correiponding  to  the  Divine
**  nature  and  charader,  expreffing  them-
**  felves  by  their  proper  adls."  As  far,
therefore,  as  thefe  affedlions  are  either
wanting  or  languid,  devotion  lofes  (I
may  fay) its  foul, and degenerates  into

T  4  a


28o  On Prayer.

a  worthlefs formality. The proper

difpofitions  for  Prayer  are  gratitude  and
love  to  God  'y  efteem  and  veneration  for
him;  joy  and  confidence  in  his  good-
nefs  ',  a  fenfe  of  our  dependence  upon
him  as  the  abfolute  difpofer  of  our  lot ;
forrow  for  the  diforders  of  our  hearts;
humility  and  felf-abafement  ;  hatred  of
all  fin  ;  love  to  virtue  as  our  chief  good  ;
and  unfeigned  benevolence  to  our  fellow-
creatures.  For  the  fame  reafon  that  we
fliould  poflefs  thefe  difpofitions  at  all
when  we  pray,  they  fhould  be  warm  and
adtive  within  us.  It  is  not  poffible  that
we  fhould  then  be  too  much  concerned
about  reviving  in  ourfelves  the  beft  fen-
timents,  and  raifing  to  the  utmoft  every
pious  aff^edion.  Our  affedtions  cannot
be  too  intenfe  when  the  Deity  is  the
objedt  of  them.  It  is  not  poflible  for
any  Being  to  honour  and  love  him
enough.- — We  ought  never  to  think  of
him  without  reverence.  With  what  re-
verence then  fhould  we  pray  to  him  ? —
Our hearts indeed here require our

ftrifteft


On P  R A Y E R.  281

ftridlefl  care;  and  after  all  our  labour
we  fhall  find  them  much  too  cold.
Every  virtuous  man  laments  the  weaknefs
of  his  good  afFe6lions,  and  the  infenfibi-
lity  into  v^hich  he  is  apt  to  fink  with
refped:  to  the  mofl:  interefl:ing  concerns.
We  are  furrounded  with  alluring  fcenes
and  objeds,  which  fiirongly  folicit  our
attention  and  engage  our  paflions,  and
which,  if  we  are  not  watchful,  will
purfue  us  to  the  clofet  and  the  church,
and  there  caufe  our  minds  to  fi:art  afide,
and  damp  and  check  them  in  their  af-
cent  to  the  Deity.  In  thefe  circum-
ftances  it  is  encouraging  to  refle(5l,  that
God  remembers  we  are  dujly  and  will  ac-
cept us,  notwithftanding  any  infirmities
which  we  endeavour  faithfully  to  corredt
and  remove.

That  fervor  in  Prayer  which  I  am
now  recommending,  is  fo  far  from  being
inconfiftent  with  the  mofl  free  and  per-
fect exercife  of  our  rational  powers,  that
it  is  its  neceflary  effeft. The  jufter  views

we


282  Oji Prayer,

we  have  of  our  ftate,  and  the  more
plainly  and  truly  we  perceive  the  de-
pendence of  all  things  upon  God,  our
own  ignorance  and  defed:s,  the  impor-
tance of  virtue  and  the  evil  of  vice;
the  more  our  hearts  muft  be  imprefled ;
the  higher  our  affeftlons  muft  rife  3  and
the more  earneitly  v/e  fliall pant  after

wifdom,  diredion  and  virtue. There

is,  however,  a  fervor  in  reHgious  ex-
ercifes  which  is  entirely  mechanical,  and
the  effecl  of  nothing  but  pride  and  pre-
fumption.  Againft  the  influence  of  this
we  iliould  take  care  to  guard.  All  in-
ward perfuafions  and  tranfports  of  which
we  can  give  no  good  account ;  all  fal-
lies  of  blind  zeal  and  aiFedtion  we  fhould
fupprefs  in  ourfelves  as  delufive  and
dangerous.  Reafon  ought  always  to  be
the  governing  faculty,  and  the  affedions
muft  not  lead  but  follow.  It  will  there-
fore, be  extremely  wrong  in  any  perfon,
to  judge  of  his  religious  character,  by
the  heat  and  the  extafies  he  may  feel
in  devotion,  without  examining  into  the

fources


On Prayer.  283

fources  of  them. Tho*  it  be  in  ge-
neral true,  that  where  the  pure  love  of
God  and  a  fpirit  of  genuine  piety  pre-
vail, there  will  be  an  unfpeakable  ardor
and  delight  in  the  exercifes  of  devotion;
and  though  one  reafon  why  many  reli-
gious men  do  not  feel  more  of  this
ardor  and  delight,  is  the  imperfedion  of
their  characters ;  yet  it  fhould  be  re-
membered, that  the  only  fafe  and  in-
fallible way  of  judging  of  ourfelves  is  by
our  adions  *.  Every  tree  muft  be  known
by  its  fruits.  The  nature  and  degree  of
inward principles muft be determined

*  It  fhould  be  attended  to,  that  the  fervency  in
Prayer  which  I  have  in  view,  is  an  engagement
and  ardor  of  mind,  confifting  in  the  exercife  of  ftrong

and  lively  fentiments  of  virtue  and  piety. There

are  many  good  men  of  cold  natural  tempers,  who  may
feldom  be  much  moved  with  any  thing  in  the  com-
mon courfe  of  worldly  affairs,  and  who  therefore,
in  religion^  may  feel  little  of  that  pallionate  zeal
ar)d  heat  which  others,  of  warm  tempers  but  poiTibly
far  lefs  refpe£lable  chara6lers,  may  feel  continuaily.
The  rule,  therefore,  given  above  IhouM  not  be
forgotten.

by


284  ^^ Prayer.

by their effedls. He  is the  bed man
who  is  moft  remarkable  for  good  works.
He  loves God  moft  who  is  moft  like  to
him  y who maintains in  all he thinks
and  does  the  moft  ftridl  regard  to  truth
and  right, and is the moft  ufeful and
kind to  his  fellow-creatures. The  true
raptures  in  religion  are  thofe  which  flow
from a  confcience void  of  offence to-
wards God and man, from a mind
thoroughly  reconciled to  eternal  righte-
oufnefs, and  a  lile fhining with every
Divine grace  and  virtue. The  true  fpi-
rit  of  devotion  prevails  moft,  where  there
is  the  moft  exemplarinefs  of  converfation
and behaviour , the moft regular dif-
charge  of  all  moral  and  religious  duties ;
the  moft  abfolute  refignation  in  all  events
to  the  Divine  will ; and  the  greateft  de-
grees of meeknefs, patience, candour,
charity, and  felf-government.

3dly,  We  ought  to  be  conftant  in
Prayer  ;  or  in  the  language  of  fcripture
to  pray  always with  all  manner  of  prayer

and


On Prayer.  285

and  fupplication in  the  fp'irit. So many
and  fo  great  are  the  adv.Mitages  of  Pray-
er, and  of  fuch  uie  is  it  toward^  guard-
ing us againft  temptations  and  promot*%
ing  our  conformity  to the Divine  laws,
that  it  ought  to make  one  of  the  flated
employments of  our  lives. So  apt are
we  to  lofe  our fenfe  of the mofl: im-
portant truths,  to  link  into a  forgetful-
nefs  of  our  chief  intereft, and  to  grow
indolent  and  carelefs  amidft  the  avoca-
tions  of  bufinefs and  pleafure,  that  we
ought  to be often having recourfe to
it, reviving by  it  good impreffions on
our minds, and putting ourfelves into
the  proper pofture for receiving  grace
and.  help from heaven. When this
duty  is negledted our beft defence is
loft, our progrefs in virtue fiackens,
and  we  mull  be in  great  danger  of  be-
ing  carried  away  with the  evil of  the

v^orld.-. 'As  you  value  then  all  that  is

of  confequence to a moral agent, you

ought  to  be  frequent  in  Prayer. If  you

have any  ambition  to  grow  in  goodnefs,

a  vou


286  On P  R  A  Y  E  R.

you  will  without  doubt  be  diligent  in
uling  this  beft  means  of  it.  If  you  have
a  juft  fenfe  of  thofe  mercies  with  which
every  moment  of  your  exiftence  is  filled,
you  will  be  continually  fending  up  your
thankfgrvings  for  them.  If  you  know
what  fatisfadtion  there  is  in  true  devotion,
or  have  had  any  experience  of  its  pow-
er to  make  you  more  happy  and  God-
like, it  will  not  be  in  your  power  to
avoid  employing  yourfelf  often  in  it.

There  are no  particular  rules to  be
given  on  this  head. Every  one  is  here
at  liberty  within  certain  limits,  and  mufl:
regulate  himfelf  as  he finds  moft  fuit-
able  to  his  temper  and  circumftances. I
fhall  only  fay,  that  at  leaft  we  ought  to
apply  to  the purpofes  of  devotion  fome
portion  of  time  in every  day. I  fhould
think that no  religious  perfon  can  well
content  himfelf  with  lefs  than  this. — Sup-
pofe,  for  inftartce, that  we made  it  our
pradice  to  devote  the  greateft  part  of  an
hour  every morning  or  evening  to  the
2  duties


On Prayer,  287

duties  of  ferious  recollediion,  felf-exami-
nation,  and  private  Prayer ;  befides  more
time  on  Sundays,  and  at  other  extraor-
dinary feafons. Would there  be  any

thing  unreafonable  in  this  ?  Would  we
not  find  ourfelves  abundantly  recompenf-
ed  for  it,  by  the  vigour  and  alacrity  with
which  it  would  infpire  us  in  the  ways
of  righteoufnefs,  the  heavenly  turn  it
would  give  to  our  minds,  and  the  con-
ftant  watchful nefs  and  attention  to  our
charad:ers  which  it  would  produce  ?
Would  we  ever  have  reafon  to  refleft,
that  we  had  thus  taken  too  much  pains
to  cultivate  worthy  affecftions,  and  to
prepare  for  a  better  ftate  ?  Would  we
repent  of  fuch  a  courfe  when  we  came
to  die  ?  Would  not  this  and  more  than
this  be  aftually  our  practice,  v/ere  we
fenfible  enough  of  the  infinite  impor-
tance of  religious  virtue,  or  as  much
in  earned  about  it  as  the  children  of
this  world  arc  about  pleafure,  gain  and
honour  ?

The


^88  On P  R  A  Y  E  R.

,  The  great  advantages  arifing  from  fuch
a  method  of  devotion  as  that  now  pro-
pofed,.  have  been  attefted  to,  from  their
ov^n  experience  "*,  by  fome  of  the  wifeft

*  'Tis  related  of  Dr.  Boerhaave  (in  his  life  by  Dr.
Brown)  that  he  ufed  to  devote  the  firfthour  in  every
day  to  meditation  and  prayer  ;  which,  he  ufed  to  fay,
prepared  and  ftrengthened  him  for  the  following  em-
ployments of  the  day. — We  are  told  of  the  excellent
Mr.  Jbc-niethyy  that  it  appears  from  his  diary,  that  be-
Udes  the  daily  exercifes  of  the  clofet,  he  frequently  Ihut
himfelf  up  the  whole  day  for  the  fecret  fervices  of  de-
votion. The  reafons  he -gives  for  fpending  fo  much

time  in  this  way  are  in  his  own  v/ords  thefe. .

*'  I  apply  my felf  to  thefe  exercifes,  ift,  Becaufe  they
*'  are  a  noble  employment  of  the  mind,  moft  worthy
**  of  its rational powers,  tending  to their higheft

"  perfed^ion,  and  affording  moft  folid  joy. 2dly,

*  In  folemn  tranladtions  with  God  I  may  hope  for
"  fuch  a  co.nfirmatioii  in  virtuous  „fentiments  and
''  Jifpofitions,.  and  fuch  advantages  over  worldly
*■'  luffs  as  rriay  be  of*  great ufe  to me  in  future  life  j

*'  and this hope  is  juflined by  experience.

<•'  3dly,  I  would  lay  ftricler  obligations  on  myfelf
*'  tg  greater  watchful oets  .and  caption  againft  the
'•  fiTJn^S'cf  eiror ;inJ pcji;^lexity ..  and guilt,  imp

''  wnich  1 have bcen^  formerly^  nriijj^jj," See the

A  count  of  Mr,"  Mernethys  Life  pvejixed  to  the  third
l(olu%*e  of  hh 'Sermons]  j-rage  i8.

•'/^'-  /r -w:* '"'■-■  and


On P  R  A  Y  E  tl»  Cl2>()

and  beft  men  ;  and  there  are  many  now
in  the  world,  who  would  not  exchange
it,  for  the  moft  profperous  courfe  of  ir-
religion  that  can  be  imagined.- — It  Is
neceffary  to  obferve  here,  that  at  the  fame
time  that  we  devote  fome  part  of  every
day  to  religious  duties,  there  fhould  al-
ways run  thro*  the  reft  of  the  day  pre-^
vailing  piety  and  goodnefs,  and  a  fpirit
of  love  and  humility.  In  othef  Words  i
when  not  aftually  engaged  in  Pray-
er, we  fliould  keep  ourfelves  as  much
as  poffible  in  a  difpolition  for  it,  and
fpeak  and  a<5l  on  every  occafion  in  fuch
a  manner,  as  to  fhew  to  all  about  us
that  we  are  often  engaged  in  the  beft
exercifes.  Happy  beyond  expreffion  are
thofe  who  thus  walk  with  God  i  who
ftudy  always  to  live  in  the  fame  Ipirit
that  they  pray.

I  muft  add,  that  there  art  many  mci-
dental  occafions  in  life,  in  which  Prayef
is  peculiarly  proper.  Such  are  all  occa-*
fions  in  which  we  have  any  weighty
affairs  under  coniideration>  or  are  about
U  engaging


290  On Prayer,

engaging  in  any  important  undertakings.
Nature  and reafon  then  ftrongly  prompt
us  to  feek  the bleffing of  heaven upon
our  undertakings, and  to  implore  direc-
tion  and  wifdom  from  that  Being  who
governs  all  events. Plato, in a  palTage
which  has  been  often  quoted  ^",  fays,  that
among  the  Greeks,  no one  of  any dif-
cretion  would  ever  undertake any thing
without  firft  invoking  the  Deity. — Times'
of  trouble  and  affli-flion  are  likewife  pe-
culiarly proper  for  Prayer. There  is  no
relief  at fuch  times  like to that  ariling
from  pouring  out  cur  forrows  before  our
Maker, meditating  upon them  as  what
he  fees  and  yet  permits, and  profeffing
before  him  our  hearty  acceptance  of  them
as  his  will. — When  we  have  in  any  in-
flance  been  drawn  into  guilt,  it  become^
VIS particularly  to  confcfs  it  in  his  pre-
fence;  and  to form,  under  his  eye, fo-
lemn  refolutions  to  endeavour  ia  future

time to be more careful. Again ;

\vhen  we  have  received  any  extraordina-
ry mercies  or deliverances,  it becomes

*  /«  Timao  Jul  iHiilo^


On P  R  A  Y  E R.  ^91

US  particularly  to  acknowledge  them. — -
When  we  are  tempted  to  any  crime,
we  ought  alfo  to  fly  to  Prayer  as  our
very  beft  fecurity.  There  are  few  temp-
tations which-  would  not  lofe  their  force,
if,  when  they  come  in  our  way,  we
would  take  tiriio  to  fet  ourfelves  ferioufly
to  this  duty.  A  prayer  then  offered  up
with  attention  would  place  us  under  the
guardiandiip  of  heaven,  and  bring  our
minds  in  fuch  a  manner  under  the  im-
preffions  of  the  motives  to  virtue,  that
it  would  be  fcarcely  pofiible  for  us  to
deviate  from  it  '^.

4thly,  In  order  to  render  our  prayers
fuccefsful,  'tis  abfolutely  neceffary  that
they  jfhould  be  accompanied  with  a
holy  life,  and  the  diligent  ufe  of  our
>own  endeavours  to  acquire  what  we  pray
for. The  efficacy  of  Prayer  arifes from

*  See  Mr.  Amorys  Sermon  on  the  Advantage  of  Pray  ^

er  \ and  alio  his  Diabgiu;  on  Devotion. 1  would  fur-

tl>er  beg  leave  here  to  rccommcn.l  to  every  head  of  a
family  Mr.  Pkkard's  three  difcourfcs  on  the  Religious
GjVir7immt  of  a  Fcwiih.

.{.  •  U 2  its


292  07t Prayer.

its  being  the  means  and  fruit  of  virtue,
as  well  as from  its  being  an  immediate
aft  of  virtue,  or  a  due  acknowledgment  of
>our  dependence,  and  the  performance  of
what  is  in  itfelf  fit to be performed,
Xf  therefore  we feparate fropi it vir-
tuous refolution and right praftice  we
deflroy its  value, and make it much
worfe than what fome think it muft
alv^ays be, ** a^  infignificant  form or
:**;!tr ceremony." A  wicked  mans  prayers
are  an  abomination to  the  Lord, If  we
regard  iniquity  in  our  hearts,  it  is  certain
he  will  not  hear  us. As a  righteous  life
without Prayer  implies  a  contradiction.
Prayer  being  one  eflential  part  of  right
pradice  '^" :  So  Prayer  without  a  righte-
ous life is ,  impiety and profanenefs.
What an infult, for inftance, on the
Deity would it  be  to  alk  of  him  the
pardon  of  thofe  offences  which  we  de-

*  Imo  vero  auda<Ster  affirmare  pofTum  eum  qui
fine  finceris  ad  dcum  precationibus.  virtutem  fedatur,
nunquam  illarn  poflTe  affequi,  fed  evanidam  duntaxat
aliquain  illius  umbram  et  inane  imitarfientum.  Dr,
Moris  Enchirid,  Ethicurri,

fign


Oji Prayer.  293

fign  to  repeat ;  to  thank  him  for  thofe
benefits  which  we  employ  in  rebelHon
againft  him;  or  to  implore  his  blefling  on
any  of  our  unlawful  undertakings  ?  What
a  mockery  of  him  would  it  be  to  feek
wifdom  and  happinefs  from  him,  and  at
the  fame  time  to  negledl  the  appointed
means  for  obtaining  them ;  to  pray  not
to  be  led  into  temptation,  and  at  the
fame  time  to  put  ourfelves  into  the
way  of  it;  or  to  bring  with  us  Into
His  prefence  any  fecret  vice  or  favourite
paflion  to  which  we  are  determined  his

authority  fliall  not  extend  ? If  then

we  would  have  our  prayers  fuccefsful
we  muft  refolve  to  abandon  all  iniquity :
They  muft  be  affifted  by  good  works,
and  render  us  through  our  whole  condu<i
^  more  amiable  and  worthy,

^i  I  have  before  more  than  once  touched
upon  what  I  am  now  obferving ;  but  it
is  of  fo  much  importance  that  it  cannot
be  too  often  repeated,  or  too  much  in-
culcated. J  muft  therefore  be  excufed
U  3  fbr


294  ^^^ Prayer.

for  infilling  here  ftill  further  upon  it.
—There  are,  certainly,  no  perfons
whodeferve  more  of  our  deteftation,  than
thofe  who  reft  in  the  external  fervices
of  religion,  without  endeavouring  to  ac-
pompany  them  with  fuitable  adtions  ia
common  life.  'Tis  melapcholy  to  find
in  all  'religious  focietjes  fo  many  of  thefe
hypocrites ;  men  who  (liew  no  concern
about  going  further  than  the  form  of
godlinefsy  and  yet  look  upon  themfelvep
as  the  only  favourites  of  heaven.  They
are  conftant  in  Prayer  :  But  it  does  not
mend  their  tempers  or  fubdue  their  paf-
iions.  They  will  not  break  the  fabbath
or  omit  a  facrament :  But  they .  wuU
pradice  cunning  and  deceit,  and  fpeak
evil  of  th^ir  neighbours.  At  church  they
are  all  ferioufnefs  and  fandity.  In  their
families  they  are  tyrants,  and  in  their
fliops,  cheats.  Like  the  Pharifees  of  old
they  tithe  ?nint,  anife  and  cummin  3  but  they
neglecf  the  ^weightier  matters  of  the  law,
judgment^ mercy and  fidelity  ■^. Theif

*  Matt,  xxiii.  23.

laith


On Prayer.  295

faith is  uncharitablenefs, and  their  zeal

pride and rancour. Oh  ! wretched

men !  How  can  you  avoid  knowing
that  you  are  fubftituting  the  means  for
the  end,  and  that  the  moft  profligate
linners will enter into the kingdom

of heaven befare you  ?^ Offences

of  this  kind  will  come.  But  woe  be
to  thofe  by  whom  they  come.  At  the
univerfal  reckoning  they  will  ■  plead  :
^*  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  propbefied  in
**  thy  name,  and  eat  and  drank  at  thy  ta^
''  ble?  Have  we  not  offered  up  many
"  a  prayer,  kept  many  a  fail,  and  been
"  zealous  for  thy  caufe  ?"  But  we  are
affured  that  the  anfwer  they  fhall  re-
ceive will  be  :  T never  knew  you.  Depart
from me  ye  that  work  iniquity  •^-.

It  has  before  been  fl:icwn  at  large,  that
Prayer  has  the  greatefl  tendency  to  make
us  in  every  rcfpedt  better.  In  propor-
tion to  the  degree  of  this  t^xi&^WQy,  muft
be  the  peculiar  guilt  of  thofe  in  whom
it  does  not  take  effedl. Su^^h  are  wicked

*  Alatt.  vii.  22. — Luke  xili.  25,  26,  27.

•  U 4  in


296  On Pray  e  r-,

in  oppofition  to  ilronger  motives  and
obligations  than  others ;  and  therefore
fliew  greater  depravity  of  character.
They  do  unfpeakable  harms  and  that
fpurious  piety  in  which  they  truft  is  in-
deed vvorfe  than atheifm, Are  you  a

reHgious  man  ?  Tremble  at  the  thoughts
of  fuch  guilt.  Remember,  that  your  prin^
cipal  v/ork  is  to  be  done  after  you  have
been  prefent  at  religious  exercifes.  Shcvy^
to  all  about  you  that  religion  is  lovely
and  happy,  the  infpirer  of  hope  and
joy, and the parent of  all excellent

qualities  and  noble  acftions. You  make

confcience,  I  will  fuppofe,  of  Jlatedly
retiring  for  ferious  recolledion  and
prayer.  Nothing  can  be  more  reafon-f
able  5  nothing  more  important.  But
how  do  you  a6l  in  the  intermediate
times  ?  Do  you  leave  your  retirements
with  fweeter  difpofitions  and  firmer  pur-
pofes  to  be  and  do  all  that  is  gene-
rous and  worthy?  Are  you  afterwards
more  humble  and  meek,  more  candid
jind  fmcere,  more watchful over  your

life.


^ ...  ^..
On Prayer.  297

life,  and  fuller  of  love  and  kindnefs  to
mankind  ?-^ — This,  without  doubt,  ought
to  be  the  effed  of  your  devotions  \  and
if  they  have  not  this  efFedl;  or  if,  on
the  contrary,  they  only  render  you  more
proud  and  difagreeable  and  lefs  ufeful
as  a  member  of  fociety,  from  a  notion
that  they  v^''ill  be  accepted  as  compen-
fations  for  deficiencies  in  moral  duties-
as  far  as  this  is  true,  your  prayers  are  a
curfe  to  you,  and  your  religion  is  nd4
thing  but  an  execrable  and  deftruftiVe
fuperftition.— I  muft  not  omit  to  ob-i
ferve,  ^

5thly,  That  v^e  ought  to  pray  and
give  thanks  in  the  name  of  Chrift.  Thai
are  v^e  direfted  in  the  New  Teftament!
John  xvi.  23.  Verily  I  fay  unto  yoii\
whatfoever  ye  JImH  ajk  the  Father  in  iiiy
name^  he  Jhall  give  it  you.  Ephelt
V.  20.  Giving  thanks  always  for  ah
things  to  God  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jefiis
Chriji.  Col.  iii.  17.  Whatfoever  ye  do  t?i
'word  or  in  deedy  do  all  in  the  name  of  the
Lord  Jfus. The meaning  of  this  is;

that


agS  On P  R  A  Y  E  R,

that  we  ought,  in  our  reHgious  fervices
and  all  our  actions, to  maintain  a  regard
tO'  the relations  in which Chrift  ftands
to us,  and  to  confider  ourfelves as his
followers. — —Nothing  can  be  more  rea-
fonable than this. The relations in
which we  ftand to Chrift are of  the
greateft  iraportance. A  regard  to  them,
and  a  compliance  with  the  duties  refult-
ing from them are  a  neceffary  part  of
goodnefs,  and  an  indifpenfible  condition
of  favour  to  all,  as  far  as  they  have  been
made  known. If  Chrift  is  indeed  what
the fcriptures fay, the way, the truth
and  the  life  ;  the  propitiation  for  our  fins ;
our Deliverer  from  death,  and the  Sa-
viour and  Judge of  the  world, it  is  fit
that  he  fliould  be  recognized  in  thefe  cha-
rafters,  and  that our  prayers  fhould  be
pfFered up  under  a  fenfe  of them. It
cannot  be  excufable to  treat with neg-
left that  name to which we  owe  our
profpeft  of  a bleffcd immortality, and
pit  which every  knee  is  commanded  to  bow
of  things  in heaven and  things  in earth

3  aiid


Qn Prayer.  299

and  things  tinder  the  eart/j^  to  the  glory  of
God  the  Father  '*.  The  inconceivable
benefits  which  we  receive  by  Chrift's
miniftry,  and  the  high  ftation  to  whicl^
he  is  exalted  for  the  good  of  mankind,
afford  us  the  nobleft  foundation  for  joy
and  hope,  and  the  warmeft  admiration
of  Divine  goodnefs.  It  would  be  wrong
to  forget  thefe  at  any  time  ;  but  it  muft
be  particularly  fo  to  forget  them  when
engaged  in  the  duties  of  devotion.

It  may  not  be  improper  here  to  make
a  few  obfervations  on  the  /natter  and
compojition  of  Prayer,  as  the  due  regu-
lation of  thefe  has  a  confiderable  ten-r
dency  to  render  it  a  more  profitable  fer-

vice. With refped:  to the  matter  of

Prayer ;  what  requires  moft  to  be  re-
membered is,  that  we  ought  never,  ex-
cept with  great  caution,  to  pray  for  any
particular  worldly  advantages.  The  rea-
fon  is  obvious.  We  cannot  fay  what
advantages  of  this kind  are  fit  for  us,

*  Phil. ii.  10, n,

or


30O  072 Prayer.

or  moft  conducive  to  our  true  intereft.
Thofe  comforts,  fuccefles  and  gratifica-
tions v/hich  we  may  be  ready  mofl
eagerly  to  defire,  may  be  entirely  im-
proper to  be  granted  us ;  or,  if  granted
us,  might  perhaps  prove  pernicious  to
us.  And,  on  the  contrary,  thofe  fuf-
ferings  which  we  may  be  moft  apt  to
fhrink  from  and  to  deprecate,  may  in
reality  be  ufeful  to  us, and prove,  on

the whole,  the  greateft  benefits, —

Virtue  alone  is  what  we  certainly  know
to  be  good  for  us.  This  either  implies
in  it,  or  will  draw  after  it,  all  that  is
important  to  a  reafonable  Being.  It  is
the  true  riches,  the  noblefl  treafure,  the
higheft  honour,  and  God's  beft  and
choiceft  gift.  If  we  have  this,  it  fig-
nifies  nothing  what  we  ^^anf.  If  we
want  this,  it  fignifies  nothing  what  we
have.  To  the  acquifition  of  this,  there-
fore, and  our  improvement  in  it, ought

all  cur  prayers  to  be  direfted. 1  hope

it  will  not  be.faid  that  this  being  placed
in  our  own  power,  we  have  no  reafpa

for


0« P  R  A  Y  E  R.  301

for  any  applications  to  God  for  it,  but
ought  to  feek  it  entirely  from  ourfelves.
Such  a  fentiment  cannot  eafily  be  enter-
tained by  any  who  have  a  due  fcnCe
of  their  own  frailties,  or  due  appre-
henfions  of  the  Deity,  as  the  author  of
all  good  and  the  ruler  of  all  events,  of
'whoniy  and  through  whoifz^  and  to  whom
are  all  things. Is  any  man  truly  vir-
tuous ?  And  has  he  no  reafon  to  praife
God  on  this  account  ?  May  he  venture
to  declare  that  he  owes  it  not  in  any
way  to  God  ?  Was  it  not  in  confequence
of  the  Divine  will  and  diredlion,  that  he
was  brought  into  thofe  circumftances,
and  had  thofe  views  of  things  laid  be-
fore his  mind,  which  have  produced  this
happy  effeft  ?  Is  there  no  reafon  to  think
'that  there  have  been  many  good  men
m  the  world  who,  had  their  circum-
ftances been  in  the  leafl  different  from
what  they  were,  had  one  incident  in
their  lives  never  happened,  or  had  any
fmaller  (hare  of  advantages  been  granted
them,  would  have  continued  in  the  num-
ber


302  On P  R A  Y  E  R.

ber  of  the  carelefs and  irreligious,  and

been  loft  for  ever  ^  ?

With

*  "  'Tis  God  who  has  made  the  mind  of  man  ca-
"  pable  of"  perceiving  motives,  and  of  being  wrought
*'  upon  by  them.  'Tis  God  who,  in  the  courfe  of
"  his  Providence,  has  prcfcnted  fuch  a  train  of
*'  motives  to  any  one's  mind,  as  has  engaged  him
'^  to  pradice  all  the  virtues  of  a  holy  life.  To
*'  God,  therefore,  the  praife  of  it  is  to  be  given.''
Dt\  Leechmari's  excellent  Sefmo?2  on  Prayer,  page  Ii2.

Nothing  can  be  more  ilrong  than  what  m.any
heathen  writers  have  faid  on  this  fubjecl.  Msyar
c  ay^V^  Osicy  ro  ipycVy  UTTfp  (icta-iXzia^j  virzp  s\su-
^ioij,^. T»  Gsb?  (juiJ-vriO-o ', ^y.zivc'j iTriKoKa  jSo^Oov

TrXsovTSf.  Ucic^  yao  /jr=i(^iov  ^HfJi'^v  n  o  iy.  (fav-
raaioiv  i^updv  y.ai  €xxps?:xoov  ra  Xoyy.  Arriani
Epia.  Lib.  II.  Chap.  i8.  "  Great  is  the  confli6li
*'  divine  the  enterprize  ;  for  a  kingdom,  for  liberty,
"  for  tranquility.  Remember  God.  Call  upon  him
"  for  aid,  as  mariners  do  on  Caftor  and  Pollux  in  a
*'  dorm  :  For  what  greater  florm  is  there  than  that
"  aiifmg  from  violent  pallions  clalhing  with  reafon?"
— — Ek  rrs  c/^iayotaj  sx^aXs  /^'jTrnv,  (p'c^ov,  sTriOu-
/utiav,  &c.  Taura.  c'**  yx  £S"iv  cXXco;  v/.€cl\u-j  u
(j.n  Trpos"  /Jtcvov  Tov  0£ov  aTTcCXsTTcvra,  sy.sfvw  /jtcvco
Trpc&xsTrcvOoTa,  Trpor  SKSiva  7:pccra.yixaL(ji  xa^cocrf-
w/jisyov. "  Grief,  fear,  defirc,  5cc.  cannot  be  othcr-

«'  wife


Oh P  R  A  Y  E  R.  303

With refpecl to the compofition of
Prayer  we may  obferve, that  it  ought

to

*'  wife conquered  than  by  looking  to God  a^one^'
*'  and  relying  upon  him."  lb.  Lib.  II.  Chap.  i6.— — »
Again  ',  Lib.  IV.  Chap.  4. Haft  thou  overcome  thy
luft  or  thy  anger? Ilotja) /xsi^oay  aiTia Gucraj n
yxarsia,  i\  V7ra^')^ta, Taura sx,  an  uvtb  ymra%
Viai  OLiro  rm  ©sojv. "  How  much  greater  reafon  for
*'  a  facrifice  is  this  than  a  confulfhip  or  procuratorfhip  I
*'  For  this  proceeds  from  thyfelf  and  from  God.". — ^
Excellent  alfo  to  the  prefent  purpofe  are  the  words
of  Hierocles  in  his  Commentary  on  Pythagoras^  Golden
Verfes,  verfe  48. Outs  ya.^  [J.0V0V  7rpoGu/jt£i<3'ar  c^s;
ra jiaXa, w?  e(p  iavroi^ ovra. :iarop^:))a-aty y,ai
^cdpis- ra  ©s^  c-uvipynct^  -, are -vJ/fXyjr  ty^c  s'J;:^^??
Sec, "  We ought  neither  to  purfue  virtue,  as  if  it
^*  was  in  our  own  power  to  acquire  it,  without  the
^'  help of  God  ', nor to content ourfelves with
«*  mere prayer,  without  ufmg  our  own  endeavours
'«  to acquire vihat we pray for. This will be
^'  either to  make  our  virtue  impious,  or  our  prayers
^^vunfuccefi^ful. But  impiety  deftroys  the  eflence  of
*'  virtue  J and ina6lion, the efficacy  of  prayer." — -
Plato  (in  Meno)  after  he  had  endeavoured  to  prove
that  men  have  not  virtue (perhaps  he  means  chiefly
political  or  public virtue) either  from  nature  or  in^
ftru6lion,  concludes  that it mud  be  a  Divine  com-
munication i  and  obferves,  that  for  this  reafon  virtuous

men


304  On P  R  A  V  E  k.

to  be  plain>  ferious  and  iimple.  No-*
thing can be more contemptible  than

an

men  have  been  juftly  called  dmne.  Ex  /xsv  rcivui;
TOUTS?  T»  XoytciMiy  0)  /jcsvcov,  Gskx  fjiotpa.  Yifjiiv  f  ai-
virai  Trapayiyvoixivri  »  cipsrji  cr?  'irctpuyiyvirau — -

. To  the  fame  purpofe  fpeaks Seneca. Bonus  vir

fine  Deo  iumo  eji.  An  poteft  aliquis  fupra  fortunam,
nifi  ab  illo  adjuftus,  exfurgere  ?  Ille  dat  confilia
magnifica  et  ereda.  In  unoquoquc  virorum  bono-
rum  (quis  Deus  incertum  eft)  habitat  Deus.  Epift,
41.  ''  No  perfon  is  virtuous  without  God.  How
*'  can  any  one  rife  above  fortune^  unlels  a/lifted  by
*'  him.  'Tis  he  gives  great  and  noble  defigns."——*
ha  dico^  Luciliy  facer  intra  nos  fpiritus  bahliat^  bonorum
makrumque  nojiror'um  ohfervator  et  cujlos.  Hie  prout  a
nobii  iraSlatm  efly  ita  nos  ipfe  tra6fat.  Ibid.  *'  There
*'  dwells  within  us  a  holy  fpirit  who  obferves  and
**  watches  our  good  and bad  deeds,  and  who  treats

*^  us  as  he  is  himfelf  treated  by  us." Multos

et  noftra  civiias  et  Gracia  tulit  fmgulares  viros  ;  quorum
Keminem,  nifi  juvante  DcOy  talem  fu'tffe  credendum  ejf,
*'  Both  our  city  and  Greece,  fays  Cicero,  have  pro-
'<  duced  many  extraordinary  men  ;  none  of  whom,
"  we ought to believe, could be what they

"  were without God's help." Nemo  vir  mag-

nus  fine  aliquo  Divino  cfflatu  unquam  fuit. De Nat*

Deorum,  L.  II.  66. The  fubjcdl  of  Maximus

Tyrius's  2d  Diilertation  is  this  qucilion  s "  whether

"  a  good


O^ P  R  A  Y  E  R.  305

an  affefted difplay  of  eloquence  in this
duty,  quaint  phrafes,  fludied antithefes,

vain

**  a  good  man  is  fuch  in  virtue  of  a  Divine  communi-
**  cation  or  not."  He  maintains  the  affirmative,  and
obferves  that  God  ought  to  be  much  more  acknow-
ledged the  giver  of  Virtue  than  of  arts  and  fciences,
or  any  temporal  bleflings ;  this  being  the  beft  and
greateft  good,  and  therefore  what  he  muft  be  moft
ready  to  communicate.  Men,  he  fays,  on  account
of  the  infirmities  of  their  natures,  need  the  influence
of  an  aflifting  and  co-operating  Deity  to  lead  them  to
virtue.  Asovrat  cuvayoivi^a  Gm  y.ai  au}Xi\if\oDo^
Tr)f  poxrif  x^f  ;;^si  pa/coy  far.  The  life  of  Socrates,
he  fays  DifT.  3c.  was  full  of  prayer.  Hv  0  Bjo?
^oxpars?  ^£5-0?  €u;;^y}?.  But  the  things  he  prayed
for  were  not  riches  and  power,  but  a  virtuous
mind,  a  quiet  life,  unblemifhed  manners,  and  a
death  full  of  hope,  which  are  glorious  gifts,  and
fuch  as  the  gods  beftow.  Aprnv  ^^x^^  ^^^  ^o"y*
^»av  Bi» -aai  Xoi\v  afJuiXTrlov %ai  iUiXyriv  ^avarov

ra  ^a\j[j.a<^a J^aipa^  ra  Gso:?  cl^ora «  As for

"  the  gods,  who  has  told  thee  that  they  cannot  help
♦*  us  in  thofe  things  which  they  have  put  in  our
•«  own  power  ?  Whether  it  be  fo  or  not  thou  {halt
"  foon  perceive^ if  thou  wilt but try  and pray."

Marc,  JntonL  L.  IX.  S.  40. "  It  is  the  duty  of

"  all  who  are  endowed  with  reafon  to  afk  all  good
«  things  of  the  gods  -, particularly  the knowledge

X  4« of


3o6  On Prayer.

vain  tautologies,  a  redundancy  of  lan-
guage, or impertinent excurfions into

matters

*'  of  themfelves,  for  there  is  nothing  greater  that
"  man  can  receive  or  God  beftow.'*  TicivrcL  fxsv
^ii  rayaha.  rois  vouv  f^ovra?  arrsfOai  Trctpa  ro)!/*
6€0Dy  •  iJLaKi<^a  Jli  th?  Trsp:  aurcuv  S7rrs-y)/xy]j  &C,
Pluta.  de  Ifide  et  Ofiride  initio.

Some  of  thefe  paflages,  at  the  fame  time  that  they
fhew  us  what  the  beft  antient  philofophers  thought
of  our  dependence  on  the  Deity  for  the  acquifition  of
virtue,  prove  lilcewife  that  they  thought  very  highly
of  the  reafonablenefs  and  importance  of  prayer.  But
I  fhall  beg  leave  to  take  occafion  here  to  produce  a
few  more  pafTages  in  order  to  prove  this.

*'  To  worftiip  the  gods  and  to  pray  to  them,
^'  fays  PlatOy  is  above  all  things  fit,  decent,  beautiful
*'  and  conducive  to  a  happy  life."  PIc2t.  de  Leg.  L.  IV.

In  the  12th  book  of  laws  (Sub  fine)  he  obfsrves,

*'  that  it  Is  above  all  things  proper,  that  none  but  fuch
"  as  underftand  and  venerate  and  practice  religion
*'  (hould  be  chofen  magiftrates,  or  be  held  in  efteem

*'  on  account  of  their  virtue." In  another  of

his  Dialogues  he  obferves  to  the  fame  purpofe,  that
it  {hould  not  be  thought,  that  there  is  any  part  of  hu-
man virtue  of  greater  weight,  than  religion  or  piety

towards  the  Deity.  Ep'in,  Sub  fine. C'laro  (in  Offic,

Lib.  I.  Cap.  ult.)  places  in  the  firft  rank  of  duties
thoic  wc  owe  to  God  ;  And  he  obferves.  that  to  de-

ilroy


O;^ P  R  A  Y  E  R.  307

matters of  controverfy  and  fpeculation,
as  if  our  defign  was  to  fhew  the  Deity-
how

llroy  piety  and  religion  is  to  introduce  confufion  into
human  life,  and  to  fubvert  all  fecial  duties. De  Nat,

L.  I.  n.  2. "Marcus  Antoninus  afierts  that  the  foul

of  man  was  made  for  godlinefs  no  lefs  than  for
juftice,  and  that  the  former  is  the  proper  ground  and
fpring  of  the  latter.  De  rebus  Suis,  Lib.  XI.  S.  i8,
The  chief  article  of  the  unwritten  law  men-
tioned by  Socrates  (in  Xenoph.  Mem.  L.  IV.  C.  IV.
S.  19,)  is,  that  the  gods  ought  to  be  v/orfhipped»
This,  he  fays,  is  acknowledged  every  where ;  and
received  by  all  men  as  the  firft  command.  Flapet
Tracrtv  civGpooTroir  'ir^o^rov  vo/at^grar,  ra^  ©gyr  CtCsrv.
— '——Piety,  fays  Hierocles^  is  the  chief  and  the  pa-
rent of  all  the  virtues,  and  the  contempt  of  piety  the
caufe  of  all  vice.  In  Carm.  Pythag.  Verf.  i.  17. —
If  you  fearch  the  world,  fays  Plutarch^  you  may  find
cities  without  walls,  without  letters,  without  kings,
without  money ;  but  no  one  ever  faw  a  city  without
a Deity, without  a temple, or without  prayers.

Plut.  adverfus  Coloiem. He  concludes  his  trea-

tife  on  fuperftition  with  obferving,  ''  that  thofe  v,'ho,
*'  forfaking  that  piety  which  lies  in  the  middle,  run
*^  into  irreligi on  to  avoid  fuperfition^  adl  like  a  perfcn
*' who  to  avoid  a  wild  beaft,  or  a  fire,  {hould  run

*' among  pits  and precipices." But  there  would

be  no  end  of  quoting  pafTages  of  this  kind.

X  2  Nothing


308  On Prayer.

how  finely  we  can  talk, or  how  much

we  know. 1  have  now  in view  piib^

lie  Prayer  only.  In  private  Prayer  'tis
not  to  be  fuppofed  that  any  one  can  fall
into  thefe  abfurdities  and  indecencies.
Here  a  truly  devout  heart  will  often  find
itfelf  above  the  ufe of  words. And  in

Nothing  Is  more  certain  than  that  religion  has
been  held  in  the  higheft  veneration  among  all  civiliz-
ed nations,  and  particularly  among  the  wife  Greeks
and  Romans.  "  Our  city,  (fays  Valerius  Maximns^
**  of  Rome.  Lib.  I.  Cap.  i.)  has  always  held  every
<*  thing  to  be  of  inferior  value  to  religion." — It  is  im-
poflTible  to  think  of  this  without  being  furprifed  at  that
difregard  to  religion  which  prevails  at  prefent  in  this
kin'^dom.  Has  it  indeed  been  difcovered  that  the  vvif-
dom  of  all  ages  has  been  deceived  in  this  inflance,  and
that  piety  is  no  part  of  a  good  charajSler  ?  One  v/ould
think  that  this  muft  be  the  cafe  ;  for  it  is  not  ealy,  on
any  other  fuppofuion,  to  account  for  that  tranquility
and  fatisfa^lion  with  which,  not  merely  the  vulgar  and
illiterate,  but  many  fenfible  and  in  other  refpei51:s  vir-
tuous men,  fecm  to  live  in  ihe  ncgle6l  of  religious  du-
ties. 'Tis  plain,  however,  th:it  the  epithet  hcathemjh
has  been  very  in^properly  applied  to  uich  perfons,  for
it  appears  that  FIfeathens  thought  and  prad^ifed  very
differently. -^Cl ^fft Ir^ Pno/lO';>.

general


On Prayer.  309

general  It  will,  perhaps,  be  right  in  pri-
vate Prayer  to  fuffer  ourfelves  to  be
guided  by  our  feelings  and  afifeftions,
and  the  prefent  ftate  of  our  circum-
ftances,  without  tying  ourfelves  down
to any  particular  forms.

I  might  go  on  to  give  an  account
of  the  means  of  acquiring  a  true  fpirit
of  devotion,  and  of  improving  in  it ;
and  alfo  to  point  out  the  hindrances  ol
it. — The  principal  helps  to  devotion  are,
the  uninterrupted  praftice  of  it  with  fin-
cerity;  clofe  and  frequent  meditation
on  our  own  wants,  and  on  the  Divine
nature  and  attributes  5  the  diligent  dif-
charge  of  every  othej^  duty  of  life  ;  an
ardent  love  of  virtue  and  zeal  to  grow
in  it ;  and  a  heart  lifted  above  fenfible
objefts,  and  warmed  with  benevolent
wifiies  and  worthy  fentiments, — ^The
chief  enemies  to  devotion  are,  vanity
and  diffipation  of  mind ;  the  love  of
pleafure  j  the  deceitfulnefs  of  riches  ;
gloomy  notions  of  the  Deity ;  inatten-
X  3  tioa


3IO  On Prayer,

tion to religious truths ; carelel'snels
in cultivating good affections  ; and
the indulgence of known guilt. A
heart filled with the cares of life,
and ftrongly attached to  v/orldly  plea-
fures, profits and honours, cannot a^
fcend  to heaven,  or rife to  clear  views
and a  calm  contemplation  of Spiritual
and Divine objeds. The fire of  luft,
of  am.bitio;?, or refentment will foon
put  out  that  of  devotion. A  foul  con-r
fcious  of  demerit  and  deformity,  burden-
ed with  a  fenfe  of  guilt,  and  unable  to
refolve upon a prefent and thorough
amendment  muft  be  averfe  to  the  Deity,

and  to  all religious  duties. 'Tis  our

duty  to  labour  more  and  more  to  remove
thefe  hindrances  of  our  religious  im-
provement, to  make  ufe  of  every  me-
thod In  our  power  to  cherifh  a  devout
temper,  and  to  throw  off  all  low  cares,
all  irregular  defires  and  perplexing  paf-.
fions,  that  our  fouls  may  turn  themfelves
with  greater  eafe  and  alacrity  to  the  au-
thor of  their  exigence  and  th^ir  only
2  l^ap-*


On Prayer.  311

happinefs. But  after  all  that  vvc  can

do,  innumerable  imperfedtions  muft  cleave
to  our  beft  exercifes  in  the  prefent  ftate.
How  reviving  is  the  profped  of  a  better
ftate,  where  we  fhall  lofe  all  our  prefent
infirmities,  and  nothing  damp  the  exta-
fies  of  our  fpirits;  where  'wefiallfee  God
face  to  face y  ferve  him  without  wearinefs,
and  be  happy  in him  for  ever  ?

To fum up and conclude the

whole. Wretched is the  man who

lives  as  without  God  in  the  world.
Let  all  who  would  be  happy  remem-
ber what  danger  they  muft  be  in,
not  only  from  crimes  they  co^nmit,  but
from  any  known  duties  which  they
ncgleB,  Let  them  confider  that  according
to  the  reprefentation  in  Matth,  xxvth,
many  will  hereafter  be  condemned,  not
for  being  aBively  vicwus,  but  for  being
unprofitable  *y  not  for  isjafthig  their  talents,
but  for  not  improving  them  \  not  fur  any
harm  they  have  done,  but  for  good  they
have  not  done.  Of  all  the  omiffions
X  A,  which


312  0;z Prayer.

which  we  can  be  guilty  of,  one  of  the
rnoll:  unwarrantable  and  fatal  is  the
omiffion  of  devotion.  To  want  piety  is
to  want  the  fureft  foundation  of  all  excel-
lent qualities,  and  to  break  that  which
our  Lord  calls,  th.t  Jirji  and  great  com-
mandment of  the  law  *.  No  worfe  blind-?
nefs or calamity can happen to a

rational creature.- What fliould we

think  of  a  oerfon  who  fhould  never  ad-
4refs  himfelf,  in  a  way  of  acknow-
ledgment and  refpefl-,  to  another  perfon
upon  whom  he  was  dependent,  and  to
whom  he  owed  all  his  happinefs  ?
Would  not  fuch  a  one  fliew  a  temr-
per  void  of  all  gratitude  and  ingenuity  ?
— — What  an  injury  is  it  to  our  minds
to  refufe  opening  them  to  heavenly  light
and  grace;  to  (hut  out  of  them  the
nobleft fentiments  ^  and  to remain re-

*  Matt.  xxii.  37.  Thou  JJ)aU  love  ih  Lord  th^  God
With  all  thy  hearty  and  ivlth  all  thy  foul.  This  is  ibe
Jirji  and  great  commandment.  And  the  fee  on  d  is  like  unto
it ;  thou  Jh(dt  love  thy  neighbour  as  ihyfelf.  On  ihefe
two  commaudmenis  hang  all  the  laiv  and  the  prophets,

gardlefs


0/1 P  R  A  Y  E  R*  31^

gardlefs  of  the  infinite  Deity,  though
always  foliciting  our  attention  and  work-
ing within  and  without  u$;  though  fur-
rounded  with  his  glory,  dependent  every
moment  on  his  power,  and  maintained

by  his  goodnefs  ? Can  he-  be  qualified

for  the  worihip  of  fuperior  Beings  in  the'
manfions  of  the  blefl^ed,  who  never  v/or-
fhips  here  below?  Can  he  poffefs  true
goodnefs  who  forgets  the  fountain  of  all
good,  and  omits  a  fundamental  part  and
important  means  of  goodnefs  ?- — ^Even
the  beft  men,  with  all  the  aid  which  they
derive  from  religious  duties,  find  it  diffi-
cult to  keep  their  minds  in  tolerable  or-
der, and  to  maintain  themfelves  in  tran-
quility and  purity  ?  What  then  muft  be
the  condition  of  thofe  who  pay  no  reo-ard
to  thefe  duties?  In  what  confufion  muft
their  minds  lie  ?  Into  what  a  defart  muft
their  charaders run  ? How  unprepared

muft  they  be  for  ficknefs  and  death  ?

We  are  often  feeing  that  thofe  who  have
negledled  Prayer  in  life,  fly  to  it  with
eagernefs  in  death. They  then  fend,  for

minifters
2


314  0/7 P  R  A  Y  E R.

minifters  to  pray  with  them,  and  expect,
perhaps,  that  encouragement  and  com-
fort fhould  be  given  them.  But  what
comfort  can  be  given  them  ?  He  that
now  paffes  his  days  without  Prayer,  in
vain  will  he  fly  to  it  when  he  comes
to  die.  The  happinefs  of  another  world
is  promifed  to  a  holy  life^ not  to  a  fc-

nitent  death. Let us then,  while in

health,  apply  ourfelves  to  the  moft  necef-
fary  duties,  and  endeavour  always  to  be:
fo  devout  and  diligent as  we  fhall  foon

wifh  we  had  been. In a  little  time

this  world  vnll  be  no  more  to  us ;  the
curtain  will  drop  between  us  and  all  mor-
tal fcenes ;  the  folemn  events  which  we
are  often  hearing  of,  and  w^hich  we  are
apt  to  fee  at  a  great  diftance,  w^ill  over-
take and  amaze  us  j  religion  and  eternity
will  appear  to  us  in  their  juft  impor-
tance, and  nothing  will  prove  of  any
advantage  to  us  except  the  good  we  now
do,  and  the  habits  of  virtue  and  piety
which  we  pofTefs.  Let  us  take  care  to
bear  this  in  mind  amidft  all  our  engage-
ments


072 Prayer.  315

ments  and purfuits. Let  us ftrive  to
acquire that  fpirit  of  true piety  which
will affimilate us to the Deity, and
ellablifh  our  fouls  in  peace  and  refigna-
tion  and  a  fuperiority  to  defiling  paffions^
Let  us  do  all  in  our  power,  by  our  ex-
ample and  influence, to  revive  the  credit
of  religion,  and  to  remove  the  prejudices
which  prevail  againft  it.  Thefe  prejudices,
as  far  as  they  proceed  from  the  dreadful
effefts  of  the  corruptions  of  religion,  are
indeed  in  the  highefl  degree unreafon-
able :  for  no  one  can  be  ignorant,  that  what
is  mofl  ufeful  arid  valuable  becomes  in  all
cafes  the  moft  pernicious  when  corrupted.
But  the inexcufablenefs  of  thefe  preju-
dices affords  no reafon  for  being more
remifs  in  endeavouring to  remove  them,.
Did religion  appear,  in  the  tempers  and
lives of  all  who  profefs  it, to be  that
joyful  and divine  thing  which  it  really
is,  every objedion to  it  would vanifh,
and  it  would  foon  force  univerfal  reve-
rence and  admiration. But  I  feel  my-

felf  in  danger  of  being  too  tedious.

In


3l6  O// PtI  A  Y  E  R.

In  the  latter  part  of  this  differtation  I
have  endeavoured  to  fhew  in  vv^hat  man-
ner we  ought  to  pray. I have  infifted
particularly on our obligation to  pray
with  minds  duly  prepared  ; with  ferven-
cy, frequency  and perfeverance ; with
univerfal virtue in our lives ; in the
faithful  ufe  of  the  means  for acquiring
what  we  pray  for,  and  as  the  followers
of  Jefus  Chrift, who  through  him  look
for  a  refurre<5tion  from  death  to  the  en-
joyment of  endlefs life and happinefs,
• — Kow delightful and  improving mufl
fuch  devotion  be  ?  How  mighty  its  pow^
er  to refine  and  exalt our fouls  ?  How
unutterable the fweetnefs  of  a  life  thus
fpent  ?  How noble  an acl of  mind is
a  prayer  thus  offered up  with  fimplicity
and humility, with collected  thoughts,
pure  hearts,  affured  hope, warm affec-
tions, and in  the lively  exercife of  all
worthy  fentiments  ? Does  any  man lack
wjfdomy or any thing good for him  ?
Let him in this manner  ajk it  of  Gody
ivho  ^ivcth to all  men liberally ^  and  it

jJmll


0?l P  R A Y E R.  317

Jhall  be  ghen  him  *.  Nothing  can  hap-
pen amifs  to  fuch  a  perfon.  He  has
an  almighty  friend  to  confide  in,  who
hears  liim  at  all  times,  is  engaged  in
his  defence,  and  will  diftinguifh  him
eternally  and  infinitely  from  the  irreli-
gious and  profane.

*  James  i 5.


D  I  S  S  E  R.


DISSERTATION IIL


O N


The  Reafons  for  expeding  that
virtuous  Men  fhall  meet  after
Death  in  a  State  of  Happinefs.


r


DISSERTATION IIL

O  N

T^he  Reafons  for  exptEiing  that  wtuoiLs
Men  Jloall  meet  after  Death  in  a  State  of
Happinefs,

NO  perfon  who  ever  makes  any  fen-*
ous  reflexions,  can  avoid  v^ifhing
carneftly  to  be  fatisfied.  Whether  there  i$
^  future  flate  ?  And  if  there  is.  What
expeftations  he  ought  to  entertain  w^itli
refpeft  to  it, and  by  what means his

happinefs in  It miift be fecured  ? »-

There  are  many  arguments  which  lead
us  to  conclude,  in  anfwer  to  the  firfl  of
thefe  queftions,  that  we  are  indeed  defigri-
ed  for  another  ftate.  And  there  are  alfo
many  which  at  the  fame  time  prove,
that  the  practice  of  virtue  muft  be  our
beft  fecurity  in  all  events,  and  the  moil
Y  likely


322  The  Jiin^ion  of  vtrtiioiis  Men
likely  method  to  fecure  happinefs  through
every  poflible  future  period  of  our  dura-
tion. True  goodnefs  is  the  image  of
the  Deity  in  our  fouls;  and  it  is  not
conceiveable  that  it  fhould  not  recommend
us  to  his  particular  regard,  or  that  thofe
who  praftife  it  fliould  not  be  always  fafeft
and  happieft.  On  the  fuppolition  of  a
fviture  world,  nothing  offers  itfelf  more
unavoidably  to  our  thoughts  than  the  no-
tion, that  it  will  be  a  ftate  in  which  pre-
fent  inequalities  will  be  fet  right,  and  a
fuitable diftindion  made  between good

and bad men. It muft  however  be

owned,  that  this  fubjedl,  as  it  appears
to  the  eye  of  unafifted  reafon,  is  involv-
ed in  much  darknefs.  That  in  the  fu-
ture ftate  all  men  (hall  receive  an  ade-
quate retribution^  we  may  in  general
knoWy  but,  had  we  nothing  to  guide
us  befides  natural  light,  we  could  not  go
much  further  on  any  fure  grounds,  or
give  a  fatisfadtory  reply  to  feveral  very
interefting  enquiries.

The


in  the  Heavenly  State.'  323
The  connderation,  particularly,  of  oar-
felves  as  giiihy  creatures,  would  raife
doubts  in  our  minds;  and  thefe  doubts
would  not  be  leffened  but  increafed  by
•reflefling,  that  under  the  divine  govern-
ment^ happinefs  is  connedied  with  virtue,
and  punifhment  with  vice.  The  fa(ft,
that  virtue  will  be  rewarded,  does  not
by  any  means  determine  what  fuch  virtue
as  ours  may  expe(fl:.  The  virtuous  among
mankind  are  to  be  confidered  as  penitent
Jinners,  and  what  peculiar  treatment  the
cafes  of  fuch  may  require,  or  how  far  re-
pentance might  avail  to  break  th^  con-
nexion eftabhfhed  by  the  divine  laws
between fm and'mifefy^ would not,  I

think,  be  clear  to  us. Here  then  the

aid  of  the  chriftian  revelation  comes  in
moft  feafonably,  and  gives  us  the  moft
agreeable  information.  It  furniflies  u^
tvith  a  certain  proof  from  fadt  of  a  fu-
ture ilate,  and  ihews  to  our  fenfes  the
path  of  life  m  the  refurredlion  and  afcen-
fion  of  Jefus  Chrift.  It  afiires  us,  that
repentance  will  be  available  to  our  com-
V  2  plete


324  ^^^  Jundiion  of  ^virtuous  Men
plete  falvation,  and  that  all  virtuous  men
fliall  be  rewarded  with  a  bleffed  and  glo-
rious Immortality.  At  the  fame
time,  it  teaches  us  to  confider  this  as  the
efFedt,  not  of  the  ordinary  laws  of  the
divine  government,  but  of  a  particular
interpofition  in  our  favour,  and  a  love  to
man  in  Jefiis  Chrift  which  pajjh  knov)-
ledge.

But  it  is  not  my  prefent  purpofe  to  in-
fift  on  thefe  things.  The  reality  of  a
future  ftate,  as  it  is  difcoverable  by  rea-
fon  and  as  it  has  been  confirmed  and
explained  by  the  chriftian  revelation,
muft  be  now  taken  for  granted.  The
defign  of  this  difcourfe  is  only  to  offer  a
few  thoughts  on  one  particular  queftion
relating  to  it,  which,  though  not  of  the
highcjl,  is  yet  ol  fome  confequence.  I
mean  the  queftion,  *'  How  far  we  have
<«  reafon  to  expeft,  that  we  Hiall  bereaf-
"  ter  be  reftored  to  an  acquaintance  with
**  one  another,  or  again  fee  and  know
**  one  another."

There


in  the  Heavenly  State.  325
There  are  probably  but  few  who  have
felt  what  it  is  to  be  deprived  by  death  of
perfons  they  loved,  whofe  thoughts  have
not  been  a  good  deal  employed  on  this
point.  What,  on  fuch  occafions,  we
muft  delire  chiejiy  to  know  is,  that  our
friends  are  happy ;  but  it  is  unavoidable
to  inquire  further  concerning  them  with
fome  anxiety,  whether  we  are  likely  e-
ver  to  fee  them  again.  It  would  be  dif-
mal  to  think  of  a  departed  friend  or  rela-
tive, that  "  He  is  gone  from  us  for  ever,
*^  that  he  exifts  no  more  to  us."  But
virtuous  men  have  no  reafon  for  ^ny  fuch
apprehenfions :  And  one  of  the  unfpeak-
able  comforts  attending  the  belief  of  a
future  ftate,  arifes  from  the  hope  it  gives
of  having  our  friendfhips  perpetuated,
and  being  re-united  in  happier  regions
to  thofe  whom  we  have  loved  and  ho-
noured here. 1  am  well  fatisfied  that

this  is  a  very  rational  hope ;  and  in  or-
der to  fliew  that  it  is  fo,  I  fliall  beg  leave
to  offer  the  following  obfervations,

Y3  Let


326 The  JunBhn  of  'virtuous  Men

Let  it  be  confidered  firft,  what  efFecfb
our  future  recoUedtion  of  thofe  who  are
nov/  dear  to  us,  is  likely  to  have  uppi^
us.T — ^We  have  great  reafon  to  believe,
that  all  the  fcenes  of  this  life  will,  in
the  future  life,  be  prefented  to  our  me-?
mories,  and  that  we  fhall  then  recover
the  greateft  part,  if  not  the  whole  of
*our  prefent  confcioufnefs.  The  fcrip-
tures teach us  this in a very ftriking

manner. '^ It is not therefore to be

doubted,  but  that  we  fhall  hereafter
have  a  diftinft  remembrance  of  our  vir-
tuous friends  and  kindred;  and  this  re-
membrance, one  w^ould  think,  muft  be
attended  with  fome  revival  of  particular
regard,  and  have  a  |;endency  to  draw  us
to  one  another,  as  far  as  it  will  be  poffiblc

Or  proper.' -It  will,  I  know, be  ob-

jefted  to  this,  that  our  attachments  tq
relations  and  friends  are  derived  from
inftinfts  which  have  been  planted  in  us
to  carry  on  the  purpofes  of  the  prefent
{late,  and  which  muft  ceafe  intirely  here-
after. This  'is, undoubtedly, in fome

degree


in  the  Heavenly  State. '^ij
deo-ree  true. Every  inftindive determi-
nation,  which refpefts  only  the  exigen-
cies of  the  prefent  life, will ceafe  with
it. But  does  it  follow  from  hence,  that
we  are  likely  hereafter  to  be  left  as  indif-
ferent  to thofe who  are now our re-
lations and  friends, as  if  we  had  never
known them?  This would be a very
wrong  conclufion. The  natures  of  things
render  it  fcarcely  conceive  able,  that  the
recolledlion of thofe valuable perfons
with  whom v/e now have  connections,
(of  valuable  parents, for example, who
had  the  care  of  us  in  our  firft  years,  and
have  brought  us  up to  virtue  and  hap-
pinefs,)  fhould not,  in  every  future  pe-
riod of  our  duration, endear  their  me-
mory to  us, and  give  us  a  particular  pre-
ference of  them,  and inclination  to  feek
their  fociety. Many  of  the  diftindions,
which  we  make in  our  regards  between
fome  and  others,  are  derived  from  reafon
and  neceffity ;  and  this  feems  to  be  the
cafe  in  the  prefent  inftance.-- — fWe  are,
perhaps, apt  fometimes  to  carry  our  no-
Y  4  tions


52S l^he  yunSion  of  virtuous  Men
tions  too far  of  the  difference  between
what  we  now  are,  and  what  wc  raall  be.
in  thene;xt  ftage  of  our  being. Ii,  would
be  abfurd  to  fuppofe,  that  we  ihall  here^ /^
after  want  all  particular  defires  and  pro-
penfities. Benevolence, curiofity,  .  felf-r
love,  the  defire  of  honour,  and  mcfr of
our  more  noble  and  generous  aff^iilions,  .
will  not  decreafe  but  grow as the  per-
fection of  our  intelleftual  nature  giT^wSvi.
And.  even  ourprefent  facial  inJiinBs may  .
ledve effedts  on  our  tempers which  n^ay
produce  an  everlafting  union  of  fouls,  and
lay  the  foundation  of  fentiments and  de^-
iires  which flaall  never  be  loft,

Buttheie  obfervations,  lamfenfible,  are
not  direffly  to  the  prefent  purpofir  Whet
affords  the  plaineft  evidence  on  this  fubr,
je(fl,  is  the  following  confideratioh.'-—- ^
There  is  great  reafon  to  believe '  tliat  '
virtuous  men,  as  beings  of  the  fame  fpe-
cies  who  have  begun  exiftence  in  the
fame  circumftances,  and  been  trained  up
to virtue  in the  fame  ftate  of  trial  and

difcipline^j


in  the  Heavenly  State.  32^^

difcipline, will  be  hereafter  placed  in  the
fame  common  manfions  of  felicity. It  is
groundlefs and unnatural to imagine, "
that  after  paffing  through  this  Yii^y they '
will  be  removed  to  different  worlds,  or"
fcattered  into  different  regions  of  the  uni-
verfe. The  language of  the  fcriptures
feems  plainly  and  exprefly  to  determine  the
contrary. They  acquaint  us,  that  man-
kind are  to  be  raifed  from  the  dead  toge-
ther y  and  to  be  judged  together  -,  and  that
the  righteous, after  the  general  refurrec-
tion  and  judgment,  are  to  be  taken  to-
gether to  the  fame  heavenly  ftate,  there  •
to  live  and reign  with Chrift, and to
fhare  in  his  dignity  and  happinefs. When,
in  the  epiftle  to  the  Hebrews,  (chap,  xii.-  -.
?2,  23,  24.)  we  ate  faid,;  in  confequencerit
of  the  clear  difcoveries  made  by  the  gof- -vf^
pel  of  a  future  ftate,  to  be,  as  it were^T
already  come  to  the  city  of  the  living  God,
fa  an  innumerable  company  of  Angels,  to  the^i'y
general  ajfembly  and  church  ofthefirjl-bom^  L
and  to  the  fpirit^  of  pijl  men  made  pcrfe5l :

1%


330  The  JunBion  of  virtuous  Men
it  is  plainly  implied,  that  we  are  to  join
the  general  aflembly  of  juft  men  and
of  angels  in  the  realms  of  light,  and
to  be  fixed  in  the  fame  manfions  with
them.

The  ftate  of  future  reward  is  frequent-
ly, in  the  New  Teftament,  defcribed  un-
der the  notion  of  a  city, that  is,  a  com-
munity or fociety. It is likewife very
often called a  kingdom , the  kingdom  of
God,  and the  everlajling  kingdom of  our
Lord and  Saviour fefus Chrifl. The
great end of  Chrift's  coming into  the
world  w^as to  lay  the  foundation  of  this
kingdom,  by  faving  men  from  the  effedts
of  guilt, delivering them from death,
and  uniting  the virtuous part  of them
under  one  perfedt  and  everlajfting  govern-
ment in  the heavens. 'Tis faid  of  the
true  difciples  of  Chrift,  that  *  becaufe  he
lives y  they  Jhall  live  alfoy  that  they  fliall
hereafter  appear  with him  in  glory  ^  that
he  is  now  entered  for  them  into  hearven  as
their  for  erun7icr ; that  he  is  there  prepar-


ing


John.


in  the  Heavenly  State. 331

ing  a  place  for  them^  and  that  he  will
foon  come  again  to  take  them  to  hlmfelfy
that  where  he  is,  there  they  may  be  alfoy
beholding  his  glory.  This  account  is  ut-
terly inconfiftent  with  the  fuppofition,
that  thofe  who  fhall  partake  of  the  fu-
ture reward  of  virtue  are  to  be  difperfed
into  different  parts  of  the  univerfe,  and
fcarcely  leaves  us  any  room  to  doubt  on
the  prefent  queftion.  For,  is  it  poffible,
that  we  fhould  be  happy  hereafter  in  the
fame  feats  of  joy,  under  the  fame  per-
fe<a  government,  and  as  members  of  the
fame  heavenly  fociety,  and  yet  remain
ftrangers  to  one  another  ?  Shall  we  be
together  with  Chrift,  and  yet  not  with
one  another?  Or  fhall  we  lofe  one  ano-
ther in  that  multitude  which  cannot  be  num-
bered ^%  of  thofe  who  have  been  refcued
by  him  from  deftrud:ion,  and  who  wull
follow  him  to  his  everlafting  kingdom?
Being  in  the  fame  happy  ftate  with  our
prefent  virtuous  friends  and  relatives.
Will  they  not  be  acceffible  to  us  ?  And
ff  acceffible,  Shall we not  fly  to  them,

and
* Rev. vli. Q.


332 T^he  JunBion  of  virtuous  Men

and  mingle  hearts  and  fouls  again  ? — I  am
very  fenfible,  that  a  great  deal  of  what
the  fcriptures  fay  of  the  future  ftate  is
accommodated  to  our  prefent  imperfedl
ideas,  and  muft  not  be  underftood  too
literally.  But  if,  in  the  prefent  in-
ftance,  it  means  any  thing,  it  muft
mean  as  much  as  implies  what  I  am
pleading  for.

In  order  to  give  fome  further  evidence
on  this  point,  it  will  not  be  amifs  to  de-
fire,  that  the  following  palTages  of  fcrip-
ture  may  be  attended  to. — The  TheiTalo-
nians,  a  little  before  St.  Paul  wrote  his
firft  epiftle  to  them,  had,  it  feems,  loft
fome  of  their  friends  by  death.  In  thefe
circumftances,  he  exhorts  them  not  to
forrow  like  others  who  had  no  hopey  be-
caufe  they  might  conclude  certainly,
from  the  death  and  refurredion  of  Jefus,
that  thofe  who  had  Jlept  in  him,  God
ivould  hereafter  bring  with  him.  He  tells
them  hy  the  word  of  the  Lord,  or,  as  from
immediate revelation,  that  a  period  was

coming


in  the  Heavenly  State.  333

coming  when  Chrift  would  defcend
from  heaven  with  ajhouty  with  the  voice
of  the  arch' angel y  and  with  the  trwnp  of
God;  and  when  the  friends  they  had  loft
fhould  be  raifed  from  the  dead,  and,  toge-
ther with  themfelves,  fiould  be  caught  up
to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  airy  and  to  live
for ever  with  hi?n. 1  Theff.  iv. 13, 14,

&c. But  what  I  have  in  view  is  more

diftindlly  aflerted  in  the  2d  chapter  of
this  epiftle,  verfe  19th.  For  what  is  our
hopey  our  joy,  our  crown  of  rejoicing?  Are
not  even  ye  in  the  prefence  of  our  Lord  fe-"

fas at his coming? *Tis moft

plainly  implied  in  thefe  words,  that  the
apoftle  expefted  to  fee  and  know  again
his  Theffalonian  converts  at  Chrift's  fe-
cond  coming.  The  fame  remark  may
be  made  on  his  words  in  2  Cor.  iv,  14.
knowingy  that  he  which  raifed  up  the
Lord  Jefusy  Jhall  raife  us  up  alfo  by  Jefusy
and prefent  us  with  you.  And  alfo  in  2  Cor.
i.  14.  As  you  have  acknowledged  us  in  party
that  we  are  your  rejoicingy  even  fo  ye  alfo
are  curs  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jfus,

Having


334 The  yun^iion  of  liirtiious  Men

Having  made  thefe  obfervations  to
flxew,  that  we  may  with  reaibn  enter*
tain  the  exped:ation  of  joining  one  ano^
ther  hereafter  5  I  fhall  now  beg  leave  to
give  myfelf  free  fcope  in  imagining  and
reprefenting  the  happinefs  with  v/hich  it

will  be  attended. It  is fcarcely  pof-

fible  for  any  perfon  not  to  look  upon
this,  as  one  moft  agreeable  circumilance
in  the  future  ftate  of  felicity.  It  has  a
tendency  to  render  the  contemplation  of
another  w^orld  much  more  delightful.
The  hope  of  it  rifes  up  unavoidably  in
our  minds,  and  has  generally,  if  not  al-»
ways  *",  accompanied  the  belief  of  a  fu-*
ture  exiflence.  Nor  does  there  appear
the  leajft  reafon  why  we  fliould  helitate
here  a  moment,  or  refufe  falling  in  rea-
dily with  the  natural  and  common  appre-

*  0  pnedarum  diem^  turn  ad  illud  dlvinum  animo-
rurn  concilium  catumque  proficifcar ;  cumque  ex  hac  iurha
£t  colhrJto7ie  d'ljcedam  !  Proficifcar  euhn  mn  ad  cos  folurh
vlros  de  qu'ihus  ante  dixi,  fid  ct'iam  ad  catonem  ineum^  quo
nemo  v'lr  rncUor  nsitus  f/i^  mmo  pietate  praftantUr^  &Cw
Cicer.  de  Sene(Slute,

henfions


in  the  Heavenly  State. 33^

henlions  of  mankind.  Without  dwelling
therefore  any  longer  on  the  evidence  for
this  point,  let  us  recolledl  fome  of  the
particular  circumftances  which  will  con-
tribute towards  rendering  the  future  junc-
tion of  virtuous  men  joyful.

One  of  thefe  circumftances  will  be  the
remembrance  of  their  prefent  connexi-
ons with  one  another.  For  me7z  to  meet
men  ki  the  heavenly  fociety;  for  beings
to  join  one  another  hereafter,  who  have
begun  their  exiftence  on  the  fame  planet,
felt  the  fame  fears,  and  undergone  the
fame  difcipline,  muft  be  the  caufe  of  plea-
fure.  What  then  will  it  be  {or  friends
to  meet  friendsy  and  kindred  to  meet  kin-
dred? What  will  it  be,  after  obtaining
a  complete  conqueft  over  death,  to  be
reftored  to  thofe  who  are  now  dear  to  us
as  our  own  fouls,  and  to  whofe  example
and  inftruftions  we  are,  perhaps,  indebt-
ed for  the  higheft  bleffings  ?  With  what
delight  will  the  pious  parent  meet  his
children,  the  hufband  the  wife,  and  the
5  mafter


336 T^he  JunSimz  of  vir tutus  Men

mafter  his  family?  How  will  many  good
men,  now  of  oppofite  fentiments,  re-*
joice  to  fee  one  another  in  blifs,  and  to
find  thofe  errors  correfted  and  thofe
filly  prejudices  removed,  which  here
keep  them  at  a  diftance  from  one  ano^
ther?  How  will  the  faithful  clergyman
rejoice  with  thofe  of  his  flock  who  have
profited  by  his  labours,  and  whom  he  has
been  the  means  of  reclaiming  from  vice,
or  improving  in  goodnefs  ?  What  congra-*
tulations  and  mutual  welcomings,  may
we  fuppofe,  will  then  take  place  be-
tween all  virtuous  friends  ?  How  agree-
able will  it  be  to  review  together  the
converfations  which  they  have  with  one
another  in  this-flate  of  darknefs,  and  to
recolledt  and  compare  the  fcenes  they  now
pafs  through,  the  doubts  that  now  perplex
them,  the  different  parts  they  now  ad:,  and
the;  different  temptations  and  trials  with
which  they  fl:ruggle?  Are  fuch  views
and  reflexions  all  vifionary?  Surely  they
are  not.  If  there  is  indeed  to  be  that
future  junftion  of  the  worthy  among
^  5  mankind.


'  '^^\r'fBeHeave?2ly  State, 337-.

mankind,  which  I  have  pleaded  for,
they  are  fufficiently  warranted,  and  mull
offer  themfelves  to  every  confiderate
mind.

Another  circumftance  which  will  con-''
tribute  to  the  joy  we  fliall  have  in  meet-
ing one  another  hereafter,  will  be  our
reflexion  on  the  common  danger  we  fhali
have  efcaped.  We  are  told  in  the  plain-
eft  terms  by  the  mouth  of  divine
wifdom,  that  all  who  do  wickedly
iliail  be  doomed  to  that  everlafling fire  *■

which

"^^Matth.  XXV.  41.  ThenJJ)allhe  fay  to  them  on  the
left  'handy  depart  from  me  ye  cur  fed  into  everlafling  fire  ^
prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.  It  has  been  obfer-
ved  as  remarkable,  in  the  paflage  from  whence  thefc
words  are  taken,  that,  whereas  the  kingdo?n  into.
wHTch  the  righteous  are  to  be  advanced,  is  faid  to
have  been  prepared  for  them  from  before  the  founda-
tion of  the  world  ;  the  everlafling  fire^  on  the  con-
trary, into  which  the  wicked  are  to  be  configned,  is
faid  to  have  been  prepared, not  for  them, but  for  the

devil  and  his  angels, -This  fecms  to  intimate to  us,

that  the  devil  and  his  an^iels  were  the  firft  tranf^ref-
fors,  who  have  been  the  means  of  involvins;  mankind
in  guilt  and  diRrefs,

Z  i


33^ 0?i  the  Junction  ofvktuous  Men

which  was  prepared  for  the  devil  and  hh
angeh ;  and  that  braad  is  the  way,  and  wide

I  cannot  forbear  adding,  with  refpedl  to  the  repre-
fentation  which  the  fcriptures  often  make  of  the  fu-
ture ftate  of  punifliment,  zs  zn  unquenchable  and  ever -
lajVing  fire  into  which  the  wicked  are  to  be  caft;  that

probably  the  rcafons  of  it  may be, 1/?,  The

propriety  of  an  inextinguifliable  fire,  which  confumes
whatever  is  thrown  into  it,  to  reprefent,  in  a  manner
flriking  to  the  imagination,  the  future  everlafting
rcje6^ion  and  extermination  of  all  that  work  iniquity.

idly^  Learned  men  have  obferved,  that  there  is

in  this  reprcfentation  an  allufion  to  the  continual
fires  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom  near  Jerufalem,  where^
in  idolatrous  times,  innumerable  children  had  been
burnt  alive  to  Moloch  5  and  where,  in  the  times  of  our
Saviour,  there  was  a  fire  always  burning  to  confume
the  fihh  of  the  city  and  the  carcafcs  of  animals.  Thiij
valley  was  confidered  by  the  jews,  for  this  reafon,  ai»
a  place  (o  unclean  and  horrible,  that  it  was  natural
to  make  ufc  of  it  as  an  emblem  of  the  ftate  of  future
punilhment.  It  is  well  known,  that  the  original
words  rendered  by  the  tranflators  of  the  New  Tefta-
ment,  Hell-fire,  are  the  fire  of  Gehenna^  or  the  fire  of
the  valley  of  Hinnom,  It  was,  therefore,  from  this
Valley-,  that  the  regions  of  punilhment  came  to  be  called
by  the  ancient  Jews  Gehenna^  the  fign  or  emblem  being
n^.c-nic  to  ftand  for  that  which  it  was  fuppofed  to  re-
fcmblc.

the


in  the  Heavenly  State.  ^^g

the  gate  that  ieadetb  to' dejlruclion,  and  that
many  there  be  who  go  in  thereat.  Every
pcrfon,  therefore,  who  fliall  hereafter  at^
tain  to  happinefs,  will  be  one  efcaped
from  great  danger.  And  can  it  be  ima-
gined, that  the  remembrance  of  this  will
have  no  tendency  to  enhance  the  fatisfac-
tion  attendirtg  the  future  jundion  of  good
men  ?  Will  it  not  be  agreeable  to  fee
that,  amidft  the  difmal  wreck,  our  friends
have  been  prefer ved ;  and  that  they  arc
fafe  landed,  after  being  toiled  on  the  fea
of  this  world,  and  running  numberlefs
rifks  of  being  caft  away  ?  Will  it  not
give  us  the  higheft  pleafure  to  meet  a-
mong  the  blefled,  thofe  perfons  for  whom,
perhaps,  we  have  often  lighed  and  trem-
bled; or  to  find,  that  inftead  of  being
numbred  among  the  loft  and  miferable,
our  earneft  wilhes  for  them  have  been
anfwered,  that  they  have  acquitted  them-
felves  well  in  life,  and  chofen  that  good
fart  which  will  never  be  taken  from  them?

Z  a  ThirJly,


340 On  the  JiinBion  ofmrttious  Men

Thirdlyy  It  may  be  proper,  on  this  oc-
cafion,  to  think  of  the  place  where  we
fhall  hereafter  join  our  virtuous  friends.
We  fliall  meet  them  in  the  realms  of  light;

m  that  city  *  which  hath  foundations  y  whofe
builder  and  maker  is  God-,  in  the  e^oerlajling
kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  fefus
Chrijl.  We  fhall  fee  them  again  in
thofe  new  heavens  and  that  new  J  earth
wherein  dwelleth  right eoifnefs^  into  which
nothing  that  deflethy  or  that  loveth  or  mak-
eth  a  licy  fhall  be  admitted  -f- ;  where  all  tears
will  be  wiped  away  from  our  eyes,  and  pain
and  death  and  forrow  J}:all  be  known  no
more  || ;  where  nature  will  ihew  us  its
moft  glorious  face,  and  order,  peace  and
love  reign  in  full  perfeftion  for  ever.

But  one  of  the  particulars  that  moft  re-
quires our  notice  here  is,  that  our  friends
will  then  have  loft  their  prefent  weak-
neflefs. They  will  not  then  be  fuch  frail


-*


Heb. xi. 10. t  2  Pet.  iii. 13.
t  Rev.  xxi.  27.  II  Rev.  xxi.  4.

and


in  the  Heavenly  State.  341

and  helplefs  beings  as  we  now  fee  them.
They  will  not  be  liable  to  be  iiifnared  by
temptations, or  ruffled  by unreafonable
paflions. They  will  not  be  hafly  in  their
judgments, capricious  in their  tempers,
or narrow in their opinions. Every
wrong  byafs  will  be  taken  from  their  wills,
and  the  imperfeftions,  which  now  render
them lefs amiable, will be removed.
Our  hearts  fh all  never  more  ache  for  their
troubles,  or  feel  anguifh  on  their  account.
They will be  paft  all  ftorms,  cured  of
all  follies, and  eafed  of  all  pains. They  .
will appear in finifhed dignity and
honour, after  the  education  and difcip-
line  of  this  world,  and  be  endowed  with
every  excellence  which  we  can  wiili  them
to  have.  —  What  pleafure  will  it  give  to
meet  them  in  thefe  circumflances  ?  How
dehghtful  will  be our intercourfe with
them  when  they,  together  with  ourfelves,
fliall  be  thus  changed  and  improved  ?

Once more. In the future world,

there v/Ill be no fuch painful fepa-

Z  3  rations


342 On  the  ju7tBio7i  of  virtuous  Men

rations  from  our  friends  as  we now  flifv

fer. It  can  fcarcdy be  faid  that  wc

have  in  this  life,  more  than  juft  time  e-'
nough  to  begin  friendships,  and  to  feel
the  pangs  of  forrow  that  attend  the  diffo-
Jution  of  them.  But,  in  the  heavenly
irate,  we  fhall  feel  no  forrows  of  this
kind.  Our  friends  will  be  immortal.  Our
happinefs  in  them  will  be  liable  to  no  a-
batements  from  the  fad  apprehenfion  of
being  foon  parted  from  thenn,  and  feeing
them  fmk  under  decay  and  ficknefs.  We
iliall  never  be  witneffes  to  any  fuch  fliock-
ing  fcenes  as  their  expiring  agonies.  The
cruel  hand  of  death  will  not  be  able  there
to  reach  them,  and  to  tear  them  from  our
embraces  *, They  will  flourifh  in  eternal

health

*  "  Who  would  naf,  (T^ys  §ocrates  in  his  apo-
"  Jogy)  part  with  a  gr-eat  deal  to  purchafe  a  meeting
^'  with  Orpheus^  Hefiod^  Homer ^  &c.?  If  it  be  true
^'  that  this  is  to  be  the  confequence  of  death,  I  would

'*  even  be  glad to  die  often. What  pleafure  will

^^  it  give  to  live  with  Palatncclcs  and  others, who  fuf?
f*^  fjarcd urijuflly, ^Jid  lo fpirpare my fate with

*'  $hcirs?


. 171  the  Heavenly  State.  343

health  and  vigour,  and  be  with  us  for
ever  witJp  the  Lord.-r — Such  are  the  cir-?
c^umftances  that,  we  may  imagine,  will
contribute  to  the  joy  attending  the  future
jundlion  of  virtuous  men  in  the  heavenly
ftafe.  I  cannot  help  adding  tlie  follow-
ing reflexions  .-

Firjl,  What  I  have  been  faying  has  a
tendency  to  increafe  our  fatisfac^Hon  in  o'ur
friends.  The  profpedl,  in  general,  of  a
future  Hate,  muft  have  a  moft  friendly  in-
fluence on  our  prefent  enjoyments.
What,  indeed,  is  human  life  without
fuch  a  profped?  What  darknefs  refts
upon  it,  when  we  confider  it  as  no  more
than  a  paffing  fliadow,  which  appearcth
for  a  little  while  (ind  then  vanifieth  away  ;
or, as  a  iliort  period of  tumultuous  buf~

'"  theirs  ?  What  an  inconceivable  happinefs  will  it
*'  be  to  converfe,  in  another  world,  v/ith  ^ifiphus^
*'  Ulyjftsy  &c.  efpecially,  as  thofe  who  inhabit  that
'f  wyrkl  fhali  die  no  more  ?- Kai rr^^n  '^o-j  Xonro^^

tSlV' Sccr.  ApoL  fipud  Plata-

z  4  ^1=


344 ^^'  ^^^  JunBion  of  virtuous  Men

tie  and  uncertain  happinefs  diminillied
J^y  many  vexations,  with  an  infinite
blank  before  and  behind  it?  Such  a  view
of  life  deprives  its  plcafures  of  their  relifh.
It  is  enough  to  chill  all  our  thoughts,
and  to  break  every  fpring  of  noble  acSion

within  us. -But  if,  in  reality,  this  life  is

only  an  introduBion  to  a  better  life,  or
the  feeble  infancy  of  an  exiftence  that
fliall  never  t'^A,  it  appears  with  un-
ipeakable  dignity ;  it  has  an  infinitely  ini-^
portant  end  and  meaning ;  all  its  enjoy-
ments receive  an  additional  relifh,  and
the  face  of  nature  will  fliine  with  greater

beauty  and  luftre. In particular, the

confideration  of  the  circumflance  relat-
ing to  our  future  exiftence  on  which  I
have  been  infifting,  will  communicate
new  joy  to  all  our  prefent  friendflnps.
<■ — The  refletffcion  on  our  friends  as  heirs
with  us  of  the  fame  blefled  immortality,
as  perfons  whom  we  fhall  meet  in  the
regions  of  heavenly  blifs  and  live  with
for  ever,  muft  chear  our  minds  in  all  our

inter^.


in  the  Heavenly  State. 345

intercourfe  with  them,  and  caiife  us  to
look  upon  them  with  the  higheft  affedi-v
on  and  dehght.  But,  to  conlider  them
as  only  beings  of  a  day,  who  are  to  pcrifh
in  death  we  know  not  how  foon ;  How
uncomfortable  is  this?  What  a  damp
muft  it  throw  over  our  friendfhips  ?  How
dijfficult  mull  it  be  for  perfons,  who  have
any  tender  feelings,  to  think,  without
diftrefs,  of  agreeable  connexions  which
they  fee  will  end  in  a  fpeedy  and  final
reparation  -,  or,  of  valuable  friends,  all
whofe  valuable  qualities  are,  in  a  little
while,  to  be  wholly  extinguifhed,  and
whom  they  are  juft  going  to  lofe  for  e-
ver  ?  The  more  agreeable  the  connexions
are,  the  more  diftrefs  muft  fuch  appre-
henfions  create;  and  the  more  valuable
our  friends,  the  greater  reafon  will  there

be  for  pain. But,  fuppofe  what  has

been  afferted  in  this  difcourfe;  fuppofe,
that  our  prefent  connexions  are  to  be  re-
newed hereafter,  that  we  are  again  to
fee  thofe  valuable  perfons  who  are  gone
before us from hence, or, that  the

friendr


34^ On  the  JunBmi  of  virtuous  Men

iriendfliips  which  now  take  place  betweeiT^
worthy  in^en,  are  only  the  beginnings  q£
an  union  of  mind«,  that  will  be  continue
ed  and  perfeifted  in  the  heavens :  Sup-
pofe  this,  I  fay,  and  all  will  be  triumph.
We  fliall  have  abundant  encouragement
to  cultivate  friendfliip.  The  view  of
death  will  have  a  tendency  to  increafe,
rather  than  damp  the  pleafares  attending
it.  The  addition  of  a  good  friend  or  re-
lative will  be  the  addition  of  one,  who
will  fhare  with  us  in  the  joys  of  immor-
tality, who  will  enter  with  us  into  the
city  of  the  living  God,  and  be  our  ever-
lafting  companion  in  glory.

'Tis  natural  to  remark  further  on  this
occafion,  how  important  it  is  that  we  cul^
tivate  only  virtuous  friendships.  Cicero
has  obfcrved,  with  the  higheft  reafon,
that  all  fricndihip  ought  to  be  founded
in  virtue.  There  is  certainly  nothing-
elfe  that  can  rpake  it  fafe,  lailing  and
happy.  It  is  its  cement,  life^  joy  and
^Towa. Th^re  is  no other  permanent

founda-


in  the  Heavenly  State.  347

foundation  of  love,  or  bond  of  union  be-
tween reafonable  beings.—- But  there
is  nothing  much  better  fitted  to  fliew  the
importance  of  virtue  in  friendfhip,  than
the  fubjed:  now  under  our  confideration.
How  fhocking  muft  it  be  to  beheve,
that  our  deareft  intimate  is  one  whom
we  cannot  expe<fl  to  fee  hereafter  in  bHfs,
one  who  wants  the  love  of  the  Deity,  and
who  is  haftening  faft  to  everlafting  puniih-
ment?  How  can  any  perfon  think  of
having  in  his  bofom  an  enemy  to  the
order  of  the  world,  and  a  child  of  perdi-
tion and  ruin  ?  With  what  pain  muft  an
attentive  perfon  look  upon  fuch  a  friend,
and  what  concern  muft  he  feel  for  him  ?
On  this  account,  were  irreligious  friends
to  allow  themfelves  time  enouorh  for  re-
flexion,  they  \^>ould  neceffarily  be  the
caufes  of  the  f?;reateft  trouble  to  one  ano-
ther. Did  they  duly  attend  to  their  own
circumftances,  the  danger  they  are  in,
ihe  precarioufnefs  of  life,  and  the  near*
nefs  of  the  time  when  they  fhall  be  fepa-
fated never again to  meet,  except  in

that


348 On  the  JunBion  of  virtuous  Men

that  world  where  joy  is  never  known,
and  hope  never  comes ;  did  they,  I  fay,
properly  attend  to  thefe  things,  they
would  furely  be  incapable  of  bearing  one
another;  their  love  would  be  turned  into
anguifli,  and  their  friendfhip  into  horror.
Let  us  then  avoid,  as  much  as  we  well
can,  becoming  intimately  connedled
with  any,  except  the  virtuous  and  wor-
thy. Let  us  refolve  to  cultivate  friend-
fliip  only  with  thofe  whom  we  may  hope
to  be  happy  withy^r  ever.

In  the  next  place.  It  is  a  very  obvious  ob-
fervation  on  the  prefent  fubjeft,  ihat  it  af-
fords the  beft  confolation  in  a  time  of  grief

for  the  death  of  friends. It  is,  I  think,

very  credible  that  death  is  an  event,  for
which,  fuch  creatures  as  we  are,  might
not  at  firft  be  defigned.  It  looks  like
a  break  in  our  exiftence,  attended  with
fuch  circumftances,  as  may  well  incline
us  to  believe,  that  it  is  a  calamity  in
which  we  have  been  involved,  rather
llian  a  method  of  tranjition  from  one  ftate

of
S


in  the  Heavenly  State,  349

of  exiftence  to  another,  originally  ap-
pointed by  our  creator  and  common  un-
der his  government.  This,  the  fcrip-
tures  declare  plainly  to  be  the  real  fad: :
But  then,  it  fhould  be  remembered,  that
the  fame  fcriptures  inform  us  further,
that  we  have  a  great  deliverer,  who  came
into  the  world,  that  we  might  have  *  life  -,
and  who,  by  death  has  dejiroyed  death  and
him  who  had  the  power  of  deaths  and  obtain^
edfor  us  everlajiing  redemption.

The  dark  and  dreary  grave,  therefore,
has  now  nothing  in  it  that  fliould  make  it
appear  terrible.  To  virtuous  men,  it  is  no
more  than  a  bed  of  reft  till  the  morning  of
a  joyful  refurredtion.  We  have,  as  chrif-
tians,  fomething  better  to  fupport  us  under
the  anguifh  produced  by  the  death  of
friends,  than  the  cold  alternative  of  the  an-
tient  philofophers,  that  either  they  are
happy,  or  returned  to  the  fi ate  they  were
in  before  they  were  born.  We  may  exult
in  the  expe«ftation of  finding them  again,

**  John  X.  10. Heb,  ii. 14. ix. 12.

and


350 On  thejuri^ion  of  virtuous  Men

and  renewing  our  friencKhip  with  them  in  a
better  country.  The  word  that  death  can
do,  is  to  caufe  a  lliort  interruption  in  our
intercourfe  with  tliem  ;  or  to  remove  them
from  our  fight  for  a  moment :  We  fliall
foon  follow  them,  be  raifed  up  with  thetn
to  a  new  life,  and  take  pofleffion  with
them  of  an  inheritance  iticorruptible^  ujtde^
filed,  and  that  fadeth  not  away  *.  Such
are  the  hopes  which  the  bleffed  gofpel  gives;
and  well  may  they  elevate  our  minds  above
thefe  fcenes  of  mortality,  dry  up  our  tears
in  every  feafon  of  forrow,  and  infpire  us  al-
ways with  joy  iinfpeakablc  and  full  of  -f-  glory  ^
The  whole  eiFe<fl  which  the  inroads
made  by  death  among  our  friends,  fhould
have  upon  us,  is  to  render  us  more  diligent
in  religious  virtue,  and  to  quicken  us  to
greater  zeal  in  endeavouring  to  fecure  a
meeting  with  them  and  with  all  worthy
men  hereafter.  It  fhould  belong  only  to
thofe,  whole  regards  are  confined  to  this
world  and  who  have  no  hope,  to  be  in-
confolable  on  fuch  occafions,

* I Peter  i.  3,  4.  t I  Peter  i.  8.

Once


in  the  Hea'uenly  State.  351;

Once  more:  I  would  obferve,  that  the
expectation  which  virtuous  friends  have  of
being  completely  happy  together  hereafter^
furnifhes  them  with  a  very  important  direc-^
tion  for  regulating  their  prefent  behaviour
to  one  another.  They  fhould  maintain  in
their  whole  deportment,  that  purity  and
dignity  which  become  fo  higli  an  expecta-
tion.  They  fhould  endeavour,  by  their  ex-
amples and  admonitions,  to  excite  in  one
another  an  earneft  ardor  to  excel  in  every
worthy  quality,  and  watch  continually  over
one  another,  leaft,  through  the  indulgence
of  any  failures,  they  fliould  lofe  future
blifs,  and  come  to  be  eternally  feparated
from  one  another.  Their  views  ought  to
be  direded  always  to  the  heavenly  ftate,
and  their  whole  concern  fliould  be  fo  to
live  and  converfe  together,  as  to  fecure  a
joyful  meeting  there.

The  pleafures  of  fociety  and  friendfliip

are  fome  of  the  greateft  we  are  capable  of.

It  is  not  credible,  that  there  is  any  created

intelligence  that  enjoys  a  happinefs  which

5  is


352 On  the  JunBion  of  virtuous  Men

is  independent  of  all  focial  correfpondencies
and  connexions.  A  ftate  wholly  folitary
niuft  want  many  of  the  principal  fources  of
blifs.  It  appears  dark  and  defolate,  and
cannot  admit  oi  the  exertion  of  fome  of  the
nobkft  powers  of  reafonable  beings.  Friend-
fliip  therefore,  in  all  probability,  is  ever-
lafting  and  univerfal  in  the  rational  creation,
and  will  make  a  part  of  our  happinefs  in  e-
very  future  period  of  our  exiftence.  The  coo-
fideration  of  this  has  a  tendency  to  raife  our
ideas  of  its  value,  and  fhould  engage  us  to
be  anxious  about  fo  ading  in  this  relation
now,  and  fo  Improving  its  bleffings,  as  that
we  may  go  from  hence  properly  qualified
for  the  more  noble  and  exalted  friend-
fliips  of  another  world. — How  noble  and
exalted  thefe  will  be,  it  cannot  enter
into  our  hearts  to  conceive.  It  is  impoffible
to  look  forwards  to  them  with  lively  faith
and  attention,  without  feeling  an  alacrity
and  elevation  of  mind,  not  to  be  produced
by  any  other  caufe.  Let  us  before  we  difmif^
this  fubjed,  fix  our  thoughts  here  a  moment,

and


4u  4.,.. ;venJy  State.  ^rj

and  recoiled  fome  of  the  obfervations  which
have  been  made*

It  gives  us,  in  the  prefent  life,  a  pleafure  of
the  higheft  kind,  to  converfe  w^kh  wife  and
worthy  men  amidft  all  our  prefent  imper-
fedlions,  and  notwithftanding  the  certain
profpeft  of  being  in  a  little  while  parted  by
death.  What  then  will  it  be  to  join  the  ge-
neral ailembly  of  the  great  and  good  in  the
heavens  j  to  be  reftored  there  to  thofe  who
are  now  the  defire  of  our  eye  and  the  joy
of  our  hearts  5  to  converfe  with  them  when
freed  from  every  weaknefs  and  adorned
with  every  amiable  quality,  and  to  make  a
part  of  the  glorious  company  of  Chrift's
faithful  foUow^ers  at  his  fecond  coming  ?
What  will  it  be,  not  only  to  have  our  pre-^
fent  friendfhips  thus  perpetuated,  but  to
commence  new  ones  with  fuperior  beings ;
to  live  and  reign  with  the  Saviour  of  finful
mortals,  and  to  be  for  ever  improving,  with
all  the  virtuous  part  of  the  creation,  under
the  eye  and  care  of  the  Almighty  ?

A  a '  Wc


354 0^^  ^^^  JunBioji  of  virtuous  Men

We  are  now  frail,  feeble,  ignorant  and
helplefs.  We  think,  we  fpeak,  and  aft  like
children ;  but,  in  a  little  time,  we  ihall  be
advanced  to  a  more  perfedl  ftate,  and  re-
ceive our  complete  confummation  in  foul
and  body  in  everlafting  glory.  Soon  the
darknefs  of  this  world  will  vanifli,  every
weight  will  be  removed  from  our  afpiring
minds,  our  higheft  faculties  gain  full  fcope
for  exertion,  and  unclouded  endlefs  day
dawn  upon  us.  We  Ifhall  be  brought  to
the  heavenly  fenifalem^  to  an  innumerable
company  of  angels^  to  the  fpirifs  of  juji  meit
made  perfeBy  to  Jefus  the  mediator  of  the
new  covenant -i  and  to  God  the  judge  of  all.
———We  have  latent  powers  which  it
may  be  the  bufinefs  of  eternity  to  evolve.
We  are  capable  of  an  infinite  variety  of  a-
jgreeable  perceptions  and  fenfations,  which
are  now  as  incomprelienfible  to  us,  as  the
enjoyments  of  a  grown  man  are  to  an  infant
in  the  womb.  Our  prefent  exiftence  is
but  the  .firft  ftep  of  an  afcent  in  dignity  and
blifs,  which  will  never  come  to  an  end.— -
How  amazing  and  extatick  this  profped  t
I  What


ifi  the  Heavenly  State.  ^55

\Vhat  fliall  we  fome  time  or  other  be  ?- ^

But  let  us  take  care  to  remember  the  truth,
which,  in  this  difcourfe,  I  have all along
'kept  in  fight. Lejt  us  not  forget,  that  none
but  perfons  of  righteous  Jives  and  charac-
ters hav6  reafon  to  rejoice  in thefe  views.
—The workers of iniquity  vAll  not  rife
h\.\\.ft7iL They will be  driven from the
fociety  of  virtuous  beings. They  will  lofe
infinite  happinefs,  and  be  caft away  for  e-
ver. They are  nuifances  in  the  creation,
and  unfit  to  be  prefcrved  ^  or,  according  to
our  Lord's reprefentation,  the  tares  amojig
the  'wheat  ^  and  when  the  time  of  harveji /Joall
come,  he  will  fay  to  his  reapers,  gather  to-
gether, firfl  the  tares,  and  bind  them  in  bun-
dies,  and  burn  them-,  but  gather  the  wheat
into  my  barn  *.-.— Would  you  then make
fure  of  the happinefs  I  have  -been  repre-
fenting  ? Would you, when  every  earth-
ly connexion is broken, obtain admiffi-
on into  a better world, and an union
with  thofe  you  love  in  the  habitations  of
the  juft?  Would  you be  able,  hereafter,

*  Matth.  xiil. 30*

Aa  2  to


t)


356 On  the  Jiin6iio?i  of  "virtuom  Men

to  join  your  voice  to  the  voices  of  mil-
lions, v^ho,  after  the  long  filence  of  the
grave,  will  break  forth  into  St.  Paul's
fong  of  triumph,  0  grave  where  is  thy
fvi6fory?  O  death  where  is  thy  Jiing?  Blef^
fed  be  God  who  giveth  lis  the  victory  through
Jeftis  Chrifi  ?  Would  you  rife  to  a  place  on
ChrijVs  throne  ^  -,  or,  fee  the  time  when  yoa
fhall  look  down  upon  arch-angels  ?— — .
Then  avoid  vice.  Practife  true  religion.
Strive  to  get  above  defiling  paffions,  and
to  grow  in  every  excellent  difpofition  ?
.On  this,  all  depends.  This  is  the
only  preparation  for  blifs,  and  the  only
way  to  favour  under  the  divine  go-
vernment. All  anxiety,  except  about
this,  every  human  being  will  foon  know
to  be  folly  unfpeakablc. Remem-
ber, that  if  there  is  fuch  a  ftate  of  fu-
ture exiftence  as  has  been  defcribed,  there
is  nothing  worth  a  lingle  thought,  com-
pared with  making  provifion  for  it ;  and
that,  confcious  of  your  own  dignity,  it
|)ecomes  you  to  look  continually  above  e-

*  Rev.  iii.  2.1,

very


i?i the Heavenly  State.  357

very  thing  mortal,  and  to  fpurn  with'dif-
dain  at  thofe  pleafures,  profits  and  ho-
nours, on  which  the  children  of  this  world
fet  their  hearts. — Blejj'edare  they  who  keep
the  commandments  of  God,  that  they  may
have  a  right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  may  enter

in  through  the  gates  into  the  city  *. He

that  over  Cometh  fiall  inherit  all  things.  But
the  fearful  and  unbelieving,  and  the  abomi-
nable, and  murtherers,  and  whoremongers,
and  forcer  ers,  and  idolatrous,  and  all  liars,
flmll  have  their  part  in  the  lake  that  burneth
with  fire  and  brimjione -,  which  is  the  fecond
death.


*  Rev.  xxil.  14. xxi.  7,  8.


D  I  S  S  E  R-


DISSERTATION IV.

O N

The  Importance  of  Chriftianity,
The  Nature  of  Hiftorical  Evidence,

AND

MIRACLES,


A  a  4


DISSERTATION IV.

O  N

The  Importance  of  Chriftianity,
the  Nature  of  Hiftorical  Evi-
dence, and  Miracles.


SECTION T,

Introdudiory  Obfervations,  relatmg  to  the
Importance  ofChrlftianityy  its  I^videncesy
and  the  QhjeBions  which  have  been  made
to  it.

IT  is  not  poflible,  that  any  informa-
tion fhould  be  fo  important,  as  that
which  we  have  in  the  facred  writings.
The  difcoveries  lately  made  in  the  fyftem
of  the  material  world  are  juftly  thought
of  with  admiration.  They  bellow,  in-
■'  deed


362 On  Hijiorical  Evidence ^

deed,  new  luftre  and  dignity  on  human
nature.  But  they  are  of  no  confequence
and  deferve  no  regard,  compared  with
the  difcoveries  contained  in  the  Bible,
fuppofmg  it  in  titled  to  our  faith.  We
are  here  made  acquainted  with  feveral
fads  in  the  fcheme  of  the  moral  world,  and
the  hifcory  of  providence,  which  are  not
only  wondcrfidy  but  inter ejlingm  the  high-^
eft  degree.

There  is  nothing  In  all  nature,  about
which  we  have  fo  much  reafon  to  wifh  for
information,  as  deathy  the  relentlefs  de-
ftroyer  which  reduces  to  the  duft  every
human  being,  and  which,  in  all  ages,
has  held  the  world  in  bondage,  and  given
birth  to  numberlefs  woes  and  forrows.
Concerning  this,  the  fcriptures  reveal  to
us  many  particulars  of  the  utmoft  impor-
tance, which  we  could  not  otherwife
have  known.  They  acquaint  us,  that  it
was  not  an  original  part  of  the  divine
fcheme,  but  a  calamity  in  which  our  race
has  been  involved,  in  confequence  of  cer-
tain


and  Miracles.  365

tain  connexions  which  took  place  under
the  divine  government.  They  inform  us
of  the  caufes  which  introduced  it,  and  of
a  ftupendous  difpenfation  of  providence
which  it  has  occafioned.  They  difcover
to  us  that  great  MeJJiah^  by  whom  God
made  this  world,  and  who  came  down
from  heaven  to  deliver  it  from  diftrefs ;
who  is  now  the  Lord  of  men  and  angels,
^nd  who,  hereafter,  will  appear  in  glo-
ry to  abolifh  death,  to  judge  mankind  in
righteoufnefs,  to  execute  juftice  on  the
wicked,  and  to  eftablifh  an  everhfiing
kingdom,  in  which  all  the  virtuous  and
worthy  ihall  meet,  and  be  completely
and  unchangeably  happy.

I  make  thefe  obfervations  in  order  to
ihew  how  much  it  concerns  us  to  ftudy
the  facred  records,  and  to  inquire  into  the
evidences  of  their  divine  original.  It  is
not  eafy  to  conceive  of  a  higher  obligar*
tion,  that  fuch  creatures  as  we  are  can
be  under.  There  is  fcarcely  a  principle
in  oqr  natures  which  does  not  induce  us


364 ^^^ Hijlorical  Evidence,

to  tliis  powerfully.  In  particular;  as  the
fcriptures  inform  us  of  the  chief  revolu^
tions  through  which  this  world  has  paft,
and  will  pafs,  the  principle  of  curiofity
leads  us  to  it.  As  they  profefs  to  teach
us  God's  will,  and  to  give  an  account  of
a  revelation  from  heaven,  all  the  princi-
ples oi  piety  lead  us  to  it.  But,  more  e-
ipecially,  we  are  led  to  it  by  the  whole
force  of  the  principle  of  felf-love :  For,  if
the  Bible  is  true,  it, fettles  the  terms  of
falvation,  and  contains  the  words  of  eternal
Ufe-y  and,  confequently,  the  folly  of  care -
Icfly  rejedling  it  will  be  infinitely  worfe,
than  the  folly  would  be  of  carelefly
throwing  afide  a  deed,  which,  if  validly
proved  our  title  to  a  large  eftate.

I  think,  with  great  pleafure,  that  the
fubjeft  to  which  I  refer  has  lately  en-
gaged much  attention,  and  undergone  a
icridl  fcrutiny.  It  is  to  be  wiflied,  that
the  attention  to  it  may  continue,  and
that  all  the  learned  and  inquifitive  would
unite  their  efforts  towards giving it  the

moil


and  Miracles,  365

moft  thorough  difcuflion,  allowing  every
objeiftion  its  full  weight  and  a  fair  hear-
ing, and  never  concealing  any  thing  that
may  have  a  tendency  to  throw  light
on  a  controveriy  of  fuch  moment.
— —  The  oppofition  hitherto  made  to
chriftianity,  has,  I  think,  done  it  the
greateft  fervice.  It  has  been  the  means
of  caufing  it  to  be  better  under-
ftood,  of  fhewing,  in  a  clearer  light,  on
what  foundation  of  evidence  it  /lands,
Wd  of  removing  from  it  many  incum-
brances and  adulterations,  which,  for
many  ages,  had  miferably  difguifed  and
debafed  it.  We  may  reafonably  hope  for
Inore  and  more  of  thefe  good  efFed:s,  the
more  unbelievers  go  on  to  exert  their
ftrength  *.  Let  no  one  then  put  him-
felf  to  the  leaft  pain  on  account  of  any
of  their  writings.  Much  lefs,  let  any
one  think  of  calling  in  the  aid of  civil

*  This  is  well  reprefented  in  the  feconJ-x»f  Dr.  Ge-
rard's DiiTertations  on  Subjali  relating  to  the  Genuii  and
Evidinui  of  Chnjlianitj.

X  po\^'er


•366 On  Hijlorical  'Evidence^

power  to  anfwer  them  *,  Detefted
•be  the  men  who  have  ever  done  thi^.
X»et  rather  unbelievers  be  encouraged  to
produce  their  ftrongeft  objeiftions.  If
chriftianity  is  of  God,  we  may  be  fure
that  it  will  bear  any  trial,  and  in  the  end
prevail. — The  civil  magiftrate  ought  not
to  interpofe  in  the  defence  of  truth,  till
it  has appeared  that  he  is a  competent

*  We  have  lately  feen  a  cruel  inftance  of  this  In  the
profecution,  pillorying  and  confinement  to  Bridewell^
of  a  poor  [iuny  infidel,  worn  out  with  age,  who
was utterly incapable of doing any caufe the

leaft  good  or  harm. It  is  a  bad  excufe  to  fay,  that

k  was  not  infidelity y  but  indecency  and  fiurrility  that  were
punifhed  in  this  inftance.  For,  this  is  to  punifh  for
the  circumftances  in  a  publication,  which  render  it  fo
much  the  lefs  likely  to 'produce  any  efFedl.  Befides^
who  fhall  have  the  power  of  determining  whether  a
book  againfl:  an  eftabliftied  opinion  is  writ  decently^  irv
order  to  give  a  right  of  punifhing  ?  There  are  no
hands  in  which  fuch  a  power  can  be  lodged,  without
the  utmofl  danger  to  what,  as  reafonable  beings,  we
ought  moft  to  value.  A  zealot  in  a  popijh  country,
cannot  well  wifh  for  any  greater  power.  God  grant
it  may  never  be  again  allowed  to  any  zealots  in  our
own.

judge


and  Miracles.  367

judge  of  truth.  This,  certainly,  he  is
not.  On  the  contrary  -,  univerfal  experi-
ence has,  hitherto,  proved  him  one  of  its
worfl  enemies.  Nothing  can  be  more
difgraceful  to  the  chriftian  religion  than
to  fuppofe,  that  it  needs  Juc/j  alliftance.
Were  this  true,  it  would,  by  no  means,
be  worth  defending.

Among  the  objeftions  which  have  been
mad^  to  chriftianity,  there  are  fome  that
contain  real  difficulties ;  and  w^hich  a
candid  defender  of  chriftianity,  inftead  of
pretending  intirely  to  remove,  fliould  al*
low  to  v/eigh  as  far  as  they  can  go  againft
the  evidence.  The  proof  of  chriftianity
does  not  coniift  of  a  clear  fum  of  argu-
ments, without  any  thing  to  be  oppoled
to  them.  Butitisthe  overbalance  of  e  vi  -
dence  that  remains  after  every  reafonable
dedudion  is  made  on  account  of  difficult
ties.  This^'is'  the  cafe  with  refpeft  to
almofl:  every  point  that  can  employ  our
thoughts;  and  thofc  who  believe,  that
there is any q[ueilion which they can

clear


368 On  Htjlorical  Evidence,

clear  of  every  difficulty,  may  be  fure,
that  they  are  either  very  unfair  or  very
fuperficial  in  their  inquiries. — But,  at  the,
fame  time  that  I  acknowledge  this,  I
mud  fay,  with  refpedl  to  chriftianity,
that  molt  of  the  objeftions  to  it  have  re-
ceived a  full  anfwer,  and  are  indeed  the
effedls  of  either  want  of  candour,  or  of
wrong  notions  derived  from  ignorance
and  carelefs  examination.— I  will  beg
leave  juft  to  mention  a  few  inftances  of
this.

It  has  been  faid,  that  if  chriftianity
came  from  God,  it  would  have  been
taught  the  world  with  fuch  clearnefs  and
precifion,  as  not  to  leave  room  for  doubts
and  difputes.'— I  cannot  think  that  any
candid  perfon,  who  has  read  the  defences
of  chriftianity,  would  mention  this.  Has
the  author  of  nature  giv^n  us  reafon  in
this  manner,  or  even  the  information  we
derive  from  our  fenfes  ?  Is  it  poffible,
while  we  continue  fuch  creatures  as  we
are, tliat  any  inftru(5tion Ihould be fo

clear


and  Miracleii  2 69

clear  as  to  preclude  difputes?  Suppofing
the  deity  to  grant  us  fupernatural  light,  are
we  judges  what  degree  of  it  he  ought  to
give,  or  in  what  particular  manner  it
ought  to  be  communicated  ?

Again :  The  animofities,  perfecutions
and  bloodfhed  which  the  chriftian
religion  has  occafioned,  have  been  urg-
ed as  objections  to  it, — '■- — This,  like-
wife,  certainly  ftiould  not  be  mentioned,
till  it  can  be  fhewn,  that  there  is  one  be-
nefit or  bleffing  enjoyed  by  mankind,
which  has  not  been  the  occafion  of  evils.
How  eafy  would  it  be  to  reckon  up  many
dreadful  calamities,  which  owe  their
exiftence  to  knowledge,  to  liberty,  to
natural  religion,  and  to  civil  govern-
ment? How  obvious  is  it,  that  what  is
in  its  nature  moft  ufeful  and  excellent,
will,  for  this  very  reafon,  become  moll
hurtful  and  pernicious  when  mifapplied
or  abufed?  Chriftianity  forbids  every
evil  work.  Its  fpirit  is  the  fpirit  of  for-
bearance, meeknefs  and  benevolence.
B  b  Were


370  On  Hiflorical  "Evidence ^

Were  it  to  prevail  in  its  genuine  purity,
and  to  be  univerfally  pradlifed,  peace
and  joy  would  reign  every  where.  Un-
charitablenefs,  prieft-craft,  contention
and  perfecution,  are  evils  which  have
taken  place  among  its  profeflbrs,  in  di-
redt  oppoiition  to  its  fcope  and  defign.
Is  it  not  then  hard  that  it  fhould  be
made  refponfible  for  thefe  ?  Has  it  not  a
right  to  be  judged  of  by  its  genius  and
tendencies,  rather  than  by  any  mifchief
which  blindnefs  and  bigotry  and  the
love  of  domination  have  done  in  the  chrif-

tian  church  ? For  my  own  part,  when

I  contemplate  the  horrid  fcenes  which
ccclefiaftical  hiftory  prefents  to  our  view,
inflead  of  feeling  difgufl  with  chrifliani^
ty,  I  am  ftruck  with  the  divine  forejQght
difcovered  by  its  founder,  when  he  faid,
/  am  not  come  to  fend  peace  on  earthy  but  a
Jword'y  and  led  to  a  firmer  faith,  arifing
from  a  reflexion  on  the  warning  given
in  the  fcriptures,  that  an  apoftacy  would
come,  and  a  favage  power  appear  which,
fhould  defile  God's  fanduary,  tread  un-
der


md  Miracles.  371

der  foot  truth  and  liberty,  and  make  it-
felf  drunk  with  the  blood  of  faints  and
martyrs*

Further  :  The  offence  which  has  been
given  to  unbelievers,  by  the  pofitive  in-
ftitutions  of  chriftianity,  affords  another
inflance  of  plain  unreafonablenefs  and  dif-
ingenuity.  There  is  not  a  more  ftriking
recommendation  of  chriftianity  than  its
Jimplicityy  or,  its  freeing  religion,  fo
much  as  it  does,  from  the  incumbrance
of  rites  and  ceremonies.  Other  religions
are  loaded  with  thefe,  and  have  a  ten-
dency to  hurt  the  intereft  of  morality,  by
turning  the  attention  of  men  from  it,
and  leading  them  to  feek  the  favour
cf  God  more  by  an  exa(5lnefs  ixi  out-
ward forms,  than  by  a  virtuous  temper
arid  pradice.  Chriilianity  condemns,  in
the  ftrongeil:  language,  this  dangerous
fbperftition,  afiuring  us,  that  thofe  who
fall  into  it  fhall  receive  the  greater  dam'"
nation  ;  tliat  God  dejires  mercy  and  7iot  fa-
cripce-y  and,  that  true  religion  confifts,
not  in  anv  ritual  fervices,  but  in  ri^htc-
B  b  2  oufnefi


372 On liijiorical  Evidence y

oufnefs  and  ftacey  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoji.
To  cenfure  it,  therefore,  notwithftand-
ing  this,  merely  becaufe  it  enjoins  two
fuch  eafy  and  fimple  rites  as  baptifm  and
the  Lord/s  fupper^  is  doing  it  manifeft
injuftice,  and  fhewing  a  difpofition  wil-
fully to  overlook  one  of  its  moft  peculiar
and  diftinguifhing  excellencies.

But,  there  is  no  objection  about
which  more  h-as  been  faid,  than  that
taken  from  the  want  of  univerfality  in  the

chriftian  revelation. This  alfo, in  my

opinion,  is  an  objedtion  which  there  is
great  reafon  to  expedl,  that  unbelievers
fhould  drop.  Such  effedual  anfwers  have
been  given  to  it,  that,  indeed,  it  is  fome  trial
of  patience  to  fenfible  chriilians,  to  hear  it
ftill  fo  much  infifted  on,  and  fo  often  re-
peated. Thofe  who  are  influenced  by  it
go  upon  a  notion,  that  they  could  not
entertain,  were  they  not  too  partial  and
carelefs  in  their  inquiries.  They  fuppofe,
that  if  the  chriftian  revelation  is  true,
there  muft  have  been  a  neccjjlty  of  it,  in

order


and  Miracles,  373

order  to  fupply  mankind  with  fufficient
means  for  fecuring  God's  favour,  and  at-
taining to  future  happinefs.  But  fucha
notion  is  intirely  groundlefs.  Afting  up
faithfully  to  the  light  we  enjoy,  is  the
only  condition  of  our  happinefs.  Glory
honour  and  peace  JJjall  be  upon  every  one  that
worketh  goody  be  he  Jew  or  Ge7itile  *.
God  is  no  refpeBer  of  perfons,  (St.  Peter
tells  us^  but  in  every  nation ^  he  that  fear ^
€th  hira,  and  worketh  right eoufnefsy  is  ac-
cepted of  him, There  are  two  points

©f  view  in  which  chriftianity  may  be
confidered.  It  may  be  confidered  either  as
an  inJiruBion  communicated  to  mankind ;
or,  as  an  extraordinary  difpenfation  of
providence  the  end  of  which  is  the
redemption  of  mankind.  If  we  confider
it  in  the  former  of  thefe  lights,  it  was  a
favour  or  bleffing  which,  however,  deli-
rable,  could  not  be  claimed,  and  m.ight
not  have  been  given  to  any  part  of  man-
kind. Were  there  reafon  for  concluding,
that  it  cannot  be  of  divine  original,  m.ere-
*  Rom,  ii. 10. Ads  x.  34,  35.

B  1:.  3  ly


-xiAp On Hiftorical  Evidence ^

ly  becaufe  the  benefits  of  it  are  not  exten-
ded equally  to  all,  we  fhould  be  obliged
to  conclude  the  fame  of  almoft  every  ad-
vantage we  enjoy,  and  the  whole  courfe  of
nature. — If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  confider
chriftianity  in  the  latter  of  thefe  lights,
its  end  might  have  been  anfwered,  by
Chrift's  paffing  through  human  life  in  the
manner  he  did,  though  no  hiftory  of  him
had  been  writ,  or  knowledge  of  him  pre-?

ferved  in  the  world. -In  other  words.

There  were  two  purpofes  of  Chrift's
coming.  He  came  to  teach  and  to  reform
the  world;  but,  this  being  an  tnd  that
might  have  been  accomplifhed  by  mucli
lower  means,  we  ought  to  remember,
that  he  came  principally  tofave  the  world.
That  is;  I]e  defcended  from  heaven  riiid
appeared  in  our  natures,  partly,  indeed,  to
be  the  founder  of  a  vifible  church  enjoy-
ing particular  light  and  advantages,  and
which,  after  going  through  feveral  revo-
lutions, fliould,  at  laft,  triumph  over  e-
very  faifc  religion  and  take  in  all  nationsiji
but, primarily, to  be the deliverer  of  a

diftreft


and  Miracles^  37^

diftreft  race,  to  acquire  the  power  of  for-
giving fin  and  of  raifing  us  from  the
dead,  to  reinftate  vij-tuous  men,  where-
cver  or  whenever  they  have  Hved,  in  the
profped:  of  a  glorious  immortaHty;  and
thus  to  perform  a  fervice  under  the  di-
vine government  of  infinite  importance,
and  to  which,  probably,  no  agent  of  in-
ferior dignity  was^  equal. Chriftiani-

ty,  therefore,  is  fo  far  from  implying  an
obligation  on  the  Deity  to  make  the
knowledge  of  it  univerfal,  that,  on  the
contrary,  in  the  benefit  of  what  is  moft
eflential  to  it,  all  virtuous  men,  whether
they  have  ever  heard  of  it  or  not,  will  be
alike  fharers.

Another  very  confiderable  caufe  of  of-
fence to  the  oppofers  of  chriftianity  is,  the.
account  given  in  the  gofpel  hiftory  of  the

Demoniacs. It  ftiould,  I  think, go  a

great  way  here  towards  fatisfying  a  fair
inquirer,  that  the  writers  of  the  gofpel
hiftory  fpeak  of  the  cafes  of  the  Demo-
niacs in  no  other  way  than  was  ufual  at
B  b  4  the


37-6 On J$jlorical  Evidefice^

the  time  they  wrote,  and  in  which  we
find  them  fpoken  of  by  other  contempo-
rary bi^orians.  They  talk  the  language
of  their  age  and  country,  and  in  confor-?
jnity  to  prevailing  opinions.  Nor  is  it
of  any  confequ&nce  to  the  credit  of
their  hiftory,  whether  thele  opinions  were
right  or  wrong,  or  even  what  they  them-
felves  thought.  To  expect,  that  they
fhould  be  better  informed  than  others  a-
bout  the  caufes  of  diftempers  ^  or,  that
fuch  inflruftion  fhould  be  communicated
to  them  as  would  have  led  them,  in  the-
prefent  cafe,  to  form  a  new  language
and  to  fpeak  with  perfed:  accuracy,  feems
as  unrcafonablc  as  it  would  be  to  enter?
tain  the  fame  expeftation  with  refpe(fl:
to  the  motion  of  the  fun,  or  the  fecon-
dary  qualities  of  bodies.  The  one  has  as
little  to  do  with  the  main  end  of  their  of-
fice as  the  other.  Such  inflru«£lioA,  had
it  been  given  them,  wotild  have  thrown
needlefs  difficulties  in  the  way  of  the
propagation  of  chriilianity ;  and,  it  muft
have  klTcncd  its  evidence  to fubfequent


ages.


and  Miracles.  2,77

ages,  by  making  the  apoftles  appear,  not
in  the  charafter  of  plain  and  unlettered
men,  but  of  able  philofophers,  and  thus
raiiing  a  fufpicion,  that  it  prevailed  in
the  world  more  by  the  wifdom  of  men,
than  by  the  power  of  God  and  the  de-
monjlration  of  the  Spirit.  Our  Saviour,  no
doubt,  might  have  taught  the  truth  on
this  fubjeft,  and  red:ified  the  common
^pprehenfions  as  far  as  they  were  errone^
ous.  But,  it  is  impoffible  to  fhew,  that
there  was  fufficient  reafon  for  exped:ing
this,  or  that  it  came  properly  within  the
purpofe  of  his  miffion.  It  would,  per-
haps, have  only  given  him  the  appear-
ance of  being  a  friend  to  the  do&rine  of
the  Sadducees,  and  embarraffed  the  minds
of  his  followers,  without  doing  any  great
good.

The  prejudices  I  have  now  in  view,  are
derived  chiefly,  from  the  frricl  notions
which  have  prevailed  of  the  univerfal
and  infallible  infpiration  of  the  writers
of  the  New  Teftament. And there  is

not.


378  On  Hijlorical  Evidence^

not,  perhaps,  any  thing  which  the  friends
of  chriftianity  have  more  reafon  to  com-
plain of,  than  that  unbelievers  (hould  fuf-
fer  themfelves, carelefly and  ignorantly,
to  be  influenced  by  thefe  notions. — The
gofpel is not a fpeculative  fcience, or
an abftrufe and complicated theory.
Whatever  jargon  may  have  been  fathered
upon it in fyflems and creeds, it  is
in  itfelf  plain and  fimple. It  is  a  fet  of
fads  exhibiting  and demonftrating  this
one  truth;  eternal  life, the  gift
OF  God,  through  Jesus  Christ  our
LORD. The  New  Teftament  contains
a  narrative  of  thefe  fadls. The bufinefs
of  the  apoftles  was  to atteft  and  publifh'
them  to  the  world ;  and  no  enquiries,  re-
lating to  their  qualifications  and  authori-
ty, are  of  great  importance  in  any  other
view,  than as  w////^^^'^  to  thefe  fadls. I-
think,  indeed,  that  they  have  an  autho-
rity as  teachers y  as  well  as  witneffes:  But-
what  they  infift  themfetves  mod  upon,  is
their  office  as  witnefles,  and  the  regard  they
claim  is  founded  principally  on  their  hav-
ing

5


and  Miracles.  379

ing  heard,  and  feen*,  and  handled  the  word
of  life.  It  does  not  appear,  that  in  all  mat-
ters of  reafoning  and  fpeculation,  the  firft
chriftians  entertained  the  fame  fentiments
of  their  authority,  that  many  do  now.
Be  this,  however,  as  it  will  y  the  on-
ly queftion,  certainly,  that  affedls  the
truth  of  chriftianity  is,  "  Whether  they
*«  were  honeft  men,  who  did  not  mean
<*  to  deceive,  and  who  were  competently
*'  informed with refped  to the fads

«*  they  atteft." 1 wiili the attention

of  unbelievers  could  be  held  to  this,  fet-
tino-  afide  whatever  is  commonly  believ-
ed,  or,  that  there  may  be  reafon  to  be-
lieve, on  the  fubjed:  of  wjpiration.  If
this  appears,  (as,  I  think,  it  does  abun-
dantly) chriftianity  is  proved ;  nor  need
any  perfon  be  anxious about  more  in  it

than  ne.ceflarily  follows  from  hence.

But,  it  is  time  to  come  to  the  main  de-
fign  of  this  differtation.

-^fif.John  i. T,  2.

One


280 On  Hiftorical  EiVidencey

One  of  the  abjedtions  that  *  deferves
moft  to  be  attended  to,  is  that  taken,
from  the  nature  of  the  principal  fadls  re-
corded in  the  fcriptures.  Thefe  are  mi^
raculouSy  and,  as  fuch,  (it  has  been  faid)
*^  have  a  particular  incredibility  in  them,
*^  which  does  not  belong  to  common  e-
**  vents.  When  we  look  into  the  Bible,
**  we  find  ourfelves  tranfported,  as  it
'*  were,  into  a  rvQ\N  world,  where  the
**  courfe  of  nature  is  altered,  and  every
*^  thing  is  different  from  what  we  have
*^  been  ufed  to  obferve.  Could  we,  in
**  any  other  cafe,  receive  a  book  filled  with
*'  vifions  and  prodigies,  and  containing
*'  fo  much  of  the  marvellous'^  Ought  not
**  fuch  a  book  to  ftartle  our  minds  ?  Or
*'  can  there  be any  evidence  fufEcient  to

''  eftabhfli  Its  authority  ? Some  have

gone  fo  far  in  this  v/ay  of  obje6ling,  as
to  affert  in  general,  that  all  relations  of
fadls  which  contradidl  experience,  or
imply  a  deviation  from  the  ufual  courfe
of  nature,  are  their  own  confutation,  and
fhould  be  at  once  rejected  as  incapable  of

proof,

5


and  Miracles.  381

proof,  and  impoffible  to  be  true.— —One
cannot  be  better  employed  than  rn  inquir-
ing how  far  fuch  fentiments  are  right,
and  what  regard  is  really  due  to  tejiimony,
when  its  reports  do  not  agree  with  expe-
rience.  I  fhall  endeavour  to  ftate  thia
matter  as  accurately  a^  poffible,  by  en-
tering into  a  critical  examination  of  the
grounds  of  belief  m  this  cafe,  and  of  the
nature  and  force  of  hiftorical  evidence.

In  anfwer  to  the  queftlons  juft  propofed
it  might  be  faid,  that,  fuppoiing  the  ftate
and  connexions  of  this  world  to  be  fuch
as the Bible reprefents, the  hiftory  it
contains  could not  but  be a  hiftory  of
extraordinary events; that  it  has  many
internal marks of  truth and authority
which  no  other  book  has ;  and  that,  par-
ticularly, we are witneffes to the ac-
complifliment  of  predictions  delivered  in
it  thoufands  of  years  ago, and  therefore,
do  ourfelves  fee  fad:s  as  wonderful  as  any
of  thofe  it  relates,  and  are  fure,  that  the
writers  of  it  were  fupernaturally  inftruc-

ted.


382 On  Wftorical  Evidence^

ted,  and  might  alfo,  very  probably,  work

rniracles.-^ What  has  been  laft  intima-^

ted  is  of  the  greateft  importance.  Chrifti-
ans  infift,  and  they  think  they  have  pro-
ved, that  there  are  very  remarkable  ap-
pearances of  the  completion  of  feveral
fcripture  prophecies.  The  patrons  of  in-
fidelity ought  to  fhew,  if  they  can,  that
there  are  not  indeed  any  fuch  appearances
which  deferve  regard.  Nothing  can  be
more  incumbent  upon  them  than  this  :
For,  as  far  as  there  feems  reafon  to  be-
lieve, that,  in  any  inftance,  a  fcripture
prophecy  is  fulfilled,  an  unprejudiced
perfon  muft  be  imprefTed.  It  affords,
not  only  a  demonftration  of  the  credibili-^
ty  of  miracles,  but,  in  fome  degree,  an
adlual  exhibition  of  them.

But,  it  is  not  my  prefent  defign  to
dwell  on  any  arguments  of  this  kind.
In  what  follows,  I  ihall  confine  myfelf
to  the  examination  of  the  principles  on
which  the  objection  I  have  mentioned  is
founded. When  thefe  are  proved  to  be

fallacious.


end  Miracles.  383

fallacious,  the  way  will  be  open  to  an
eaficr  admiffion  of  the  dire^  evidences  of
chriftianity, and  they  will  operate  with

greater  force, It  is  well  known,  that

this  objedion  has  lately  been  urged  in  all
its  ftrength  by  Mr.  Hume^  a  writer
whofe  genius  and  abilities  are  fo  diitin-
guifhed,  as  to  be  above  any  of  my  com-
mendations. Several  excellent  anfwers
have  been  publiflied  *  ^  and  it  is  not
without  fome  pain,  after  what  has  been
fo  well  and  fo  efFed:ully  faid  by  others,
that  I  determine  to  take  up  this  fubjedt.
I  imagine,  however,  that  it  admits  of
further  difcuffion,  and  that  there  remain
flill  fome  obfervations  to  be  made,  which
have  not  been  enough  attended  to.-
Before  I  proceed,  it  will  be  proper  to
give  a  more  diftind;  and  full  account  of  the
objed:ion  to  be  confidered.

*  By  Dr.  Adaim  in  his  EJfay  on  Miracles^  In  anfwer  to
Mr,  Hume's  EJfay  ;  and  by  the  author  of  the  Criterion^

or,  Miracles  examined,  he. Some  time  after  this

diflertation  had  been  compofed.  Dr.  Campbell^  princi-
pal  of  the  Marijhal  college  at  Aberdeen^  publi(hed  ano-
ther anfwer,  which  is  written  with  great  judgment
and  candour.

SECT.


384 On  Hijlorical  Evidence ^


S  E  C  T. II.

T!he  Nature  and  Grounds  of  the  Regard  due
to  Experience  and  to  the  Evidence  of
T^efwnony^  Jiated  and  compared.

*' TIT  X  p  E  R  I  E  N  c  E., we  have  been

-ft / told, is the ground of  the

*'  credit  we  give  to  human  tejlimony.
**  We  have  found,  in  pall  Inftances,
**  that  men  have  informed  us  right,
*'  and  therefore,  are  difpofed  to  believe
*^  thern  in  future  inftances.  But  this  ex-
*'  perience  is  by  no  means  conftant ;  for
**  we  often  find  that  men  prevaricate  and

**  deceive.- On  the  other  hand  :  What

"  affures  us  of  thofe  laws  of  nature,  in  the
*'  violation  of  which  the  notion  of  a  mi-
**  raclc  confifts,  is,  in  like  manner,  ex-
"  perience.  But,  this  is  an  experience
**  that  has  never  been  interrupted.  We
"  have  never  been  deceived  in  our  expec-

**  tations.


and  Miracles.  385

*^  tations,  that  the  dead  will  not  come
"  to  Hfe,  or  that  the  command  of  a  man
"  will  not  immediately  cure  a  difeafe.
"  There  arifes,  therefore,  from  hence,
*^  a  proof  againft  accounts  of  miracles
"  which  is  the  ftrongeft  of  the  kind  pof-
*'  fible,  and  to  believe  fuch  accounts  on
"  the  authority  of  human  teflimony,  is
"  to  prefer  a  weaker  proof  to  a  ftronger,
*^  to  leave  a  guide  that  never  has  deceived
"  us,  in  order  to  follow  one  that  has  often
"  deceived  us ;  or  to  receive,  upon  the
**  credit  of  an  experience  that  is  weak  and
"  variable^  what  is  contray  to  invariable
"  experience."

In  other  words:  ^'  A  miracle  is  an  e-
"  vent,  from  the  nature  of  it,  inconfif-
"  tent  with  all  the  experience  we  ever
"  had,  and  in  the  higheft  degree  incredi-*
*'  ble  and  extraordinary.  In  the  falfe-
**  hood  of  teflimony,  on  the  contrary,
**  there  is  no  fuch  inconfiftency,  nor  any
**  fuch  incredibility,  fcarcely  any  thing
^  being  more  common.  No  regard,
C  c  **  therefore.


3S6 On  Hifiorkal  Evidence^

«^  therefore, can  be due to  the  latter^
<«  when  it  is  appHed  as  a  proof  of  the  for-

«  rner.^ According  to  this  reafoning,

•<  we  are  always  to  compare  the  impro-
**  babiHty  of  a  fadt,  with  the  improbabi-
**  lity  of  the  falfehood  of  the  teftimony
**  which  aflerts  it,  and  to  determine  our
"  affent  to  that  fide  on  which  the  leaft
**  improbability  Hes.  Or,  in  the  cafe  of
**  miracles,  \ve  are  to  confider  which  is
**  mofl  likely,  that  fach  events  fhould
**  happen,  or  that  men  fhould  either  de-
**  ceive  or  be  deceived.  And,  as  there
*'  is  nothing  mofe  unlikely  than  the  for-
*'  mer,  or  much  more  common  than  the
*^  latter,  particularly  where  religion  is
**  concerned  >  it  will  be  right  to  form  a
<*  general  refolution^  never  to  lend  any  atten'
**  tion  to  accounts  of  miracles y  with  'whate-
**  "jer fpecious pretexts  they  may  be  covered'^*

*  See  the  EJpiy,  on  Miracles^  in  Mr,  Hume's  phil§^
fo[hical  ejjays  concerning  human  underjlanding^  pag,  205.
2d.  edition, in  the  Note.

c  •*  It:


md  AJi racks,  387

**  It  is,  fays  Mr  Hume^j  a  ?naxim  worthy
**  of  our  attentmj,  that  no  tefi'monj  is  Jliffi-
**  cient  to  ejlablijh  a  jniracle, unlefs  the  tejli"
y  mony  he  of  fuch  a  kind,  that  its  falfehood
"  would  be more  miraculous  than  the  fadt
<*  which  it  e7idcavours  to  eftablifi. And  e^
*'  ven  in  that  cafe,  there  is  a  mutual  dejlruc-^
*^  tion  of  arguments^ and  the  fuperior  only
**  gives  us  an  afjiirance  fuitable  to  that  degree
"  rffo^^^^  'ii/'A/VA  remains  after  deducing  the
**  inferior. When  any  one  tells  me  that  he
^^  faw  a  dead  man  rejiored  to  life,  I  immedi^
**  ately confider  with  my f elf, whether  it  be
**  more  probable  that  the  perfon  jhould  either
"  deceive  or  be  deceived, or  that  the  faB  he
**  relates  fjould  really  have  happened,  I  weigh
*'  the  one  miracle  dgainjl  the  other, and  ac-^
*^  cording  to  the  fuperior ity  which  I  dif cover ^
**  /  pronounce  my  decifion,  and  always  reject
"  the  greater  miracle, Ifthejalfehood  of  his
**  tefimony  would  be  fnore  miraculous than
"  the  event  which  he  relates^  tben^ and  ftot
"  ////  then, can  he  pretend  to  command  jny
C  c  2  "  belief


388  On  WJlorical  Evidence^

**  belief  or  opinion  *." For  fuch  rea*

fons  as  thefe,  Mr.  Hume  afferts,  "  T^haf
"  the  evidence  of  tejtimony^  when  applied  to
"  a  miracle,  carries  falfehood  upon  the  very
*^  face  of  it,  and  is  more  properly  a  fubje5l
"  of  derifion  than  of  argument  -f*  >  and  that
**  whoever  believes  the  truth  of  the  chrifti-
*'  an  rehgion,  is  confcious  of  a  continued  mi--
*•  rack  in  his  own  perfon,  which  fubverts  all
**  the  principles  of  his  underjlanding,  and
*•  gives  him  a  determination  to  believe  what
**  is  tnojl  contrary  to  cujlom  and  experience  \y

This  is  the  objeflion  in  its  complete  force.
It  has,  we  fee,  a  plaulible  appearance,
and  is  urged  with  uncommon  confidence.
But,  it  is  founded  on  indifputable  fallacies,

*  lb.  p.  182 p.  206. /  defire any  one  to lay

his  hand  on  his  hearty  dnd  after  ferious  confideration
declare,  whether  he  thinks,  that  the  falfehood  of  fuch
a  hook,  (ilie  Pentateuch)  fuf ported  by  fuch  teftimony^
would  he  more  extraordinary  and  miraculous  than  all  the
miracles  it  relates  \  which  is,  however^  neceffary  to  make
it  he  received,  according  to  the  meafures  of  prohahility  <?-
liVe  ejlabliftjed.

t  Page  195. X  Page  207.

and


<ind  Miracles.  389

^nd  is  indeed  nothing  but  a  poor  though  fpe-
cious  fophifm.  I  cannot  hefitate  in  making
this  aflertion  ;  and,  I  think,  it  muft  ap-
pear to  be  true,  to  any  one  who  will  beftovv
attention  on  the  following  obfervations.

The  principles  on  which  this  objedlioa
is  built  are  chiefly,  "  That  the  credit  we
"  give  to  teftimony,  is  derived  folety  from
f*  experience ;"  "  That  a  miracle  is  a  fadl
^^  contrary  to  experience;'*  *' That  the
**  previous  incredibility  of  a  fa(3:  is  a  proof
"  againft  it,  diminifhing  in  proportion  to  the
"  degree  of  it,  the  proof  from  teftimony  for
"it;*'  and  "That  no  teftimony  {hould
"  ever  gain  credit  to  an  event,  unlefs  it  is
**  more  extraordinary  that  it  fhould  be  falfe,
*'  than  that  thcj  event  fhould  have happen-

<c  ed."-- Every  one  of  thefe  aiTertions

will,  upon  examination,  be  found  to  be  ei-r
ther  plainly  falfe,  or  to  need  fuch  explana-
tion to  render  them  true,  as  will  render
them  of  no  ufe  to  the  purpofe  which  they
^re  intended  to  ferve,

C  c  3  Iiv


J90 On  Hijiorical  E*vidence^

'-^tn  order  to  prove  this,  let  us  confider  the
nature  and  the  foundation  of  that  affurance
which  experience  gives  us  of  the  laws  of
jiature.  This  affurance  is  nothing  but  the
convi'dion  we  have,  that  future  events  will
be  agreeable  to  what  we  have  hitherto
found  to  be  the  courfe  of  nature,  or  the  ex-
peBation  arifing  in  us,  upcn  having  obferved
that  an  event  has  happened  in  former  expe-
riments, that  it  will  happen  again  \n  future
experiments.  This  expcdlation  has  been
reprcfented  as  one  of  the  greateft  myfteries,
and  the  refult  of  an  ingenious  and  elaborate
difquilition  about  it  is,  that  it  cannot  be
founded  on  any  reafon,  and  confifts  only  in
an  affociation  of  ideas  derived  from  habit,
or  a  difpofition  in  our  imaginations  to  paf^
from  the  idea  of  one  objec-l;  to  the  idea  of
another  which  we  have  found  to  be  its  ufual
attendant  ^.  But  furely,  never  before  were
tuch  pains  taken  to produce  darknefs  and

perplexity  on a point  fo  plain. If  I  wa^

to  draw  a  flip  of  papei* out  of  a wheel,

* See  M: HumfV  philofophical  elTays, cftiy  4th

V/here


and  Miracles.  39!

where  I  knew  there  were  more  white  than
black  papers,  I  (hould  intuitively  fee,  that
there  was  a  probability  of  drawing  a  white
paper,  and  therefore  (liould  expeB  this;  and
he  who  fhould  make  a  myftery  of  fuch  an
cxpeftation,  or  apprehend  any  difficulty  in
accounting  for  it,  wouW  deferve  more  to  be
laughed  at  than  argued  with.— ^In  like
manner ;  if,  out  of  a  wheel,  the  particu-
lar contents  of  which  I  am  ignorant  of,  I
fhould  draw  a  white  paper  a  hundred  times
together,  I  fliould  lee  that  it  was  probable,
that  it  had  in  it  more  white  papers  than
black,  and  therefore,  (hould  expedl  to  draw
a  white  paper  the  next  trial.  There  is  no
more  difficulty  in  this  cafe  than  in  the  for-
mer; and,  it  is  equally  abfurd  in  both  cafes
to  afcribe  the  expeSlation^ not  to  k?i720w!edge^

but  to  injTtnci. The  cafe  of  our  aflurance

of  the  laws  of  nature,  as  far  as  we  are  ig-
norant of  the  caufes  that  operate  in  nature,
is  exadly  the  fame  with  this.  An  experi^
ment  which  has  often  fucceeded,  we  ex-
pe6l  to  fucceed  again,  becaufe  we  per-
mV0  intuitively,  that  fuch  a  conftancy  of
C  c  4  event


39?  On Wfiorical  Evidence ^

event  muil  proceed  from  fomething  in  the
conilitution  of  natural  caufes,  difpofing
them  to  produce  it;  nor  will  it  be  poffible
to  deny  this,  till  it  can  be  proved,  that  it  is
not  a  firft  principle  of  reafon,  that  of  every
thing  that  comes  to  pafs  there  mufl:  be  fome
account  or  caufe ;  or,  that  a  conftant  rc-cur-*
rency  of  the  fame  event  is  not  a  facl  which
requires  any  caufe. — In  a  word ;  We  trufl;
experience,  and  expedl  that  the  future  ihould
refemble  the  paft  in  the  courfe  of  nature,  foi:
the  very  fame  reafon  that,  fuppofing  our--
felves  otherwife  in  the  dark,  we  fhould
conclude,  that  a  dye  which  has  turned  an  ace
ofteneft  in  fajl  trials  is  rnqftly  marked  with
aces,  and  confequently  fhould  expect,  that;
it  will  go  on  to  turn  the  fame  number  ofr

teneft  in  fyture  trials. The  ground  of

the  expedation  produced  by  experience
being  this,  it  is  obvious,  that  it  will  always
be  weaker  or  ftronger,  in  proportion  to  the
greater  or  lefs  conftancy  and  uniformity  of
(Dur  experience.  Thus,  from  the  happen-
ing of  an  event  in  every  trial  a  million  of
times,  we  fliould  conclude  more  confident-


and  Miracles,  393

ly,  that  it  will  happen  again  the  next  trial,
than  if  it  had  happened  lefs  frequently,  or
if  in  fome  of  thefe  inflances  it  had  failed.
The  plain  reafon  is,  that  in  the  former  cafe
it  would  appear,  that  the  caufes  produce-
ing  the  event  are  probably  of  a  more  fixed
nature,  and  lefs  liable  to  be  counteracted  by

oppofite caufes. It  muft, however, be

remembered,  that  the  greateft  uniformity
and  frequency  of  experience  will  not  af-
ford a  proper  proof,  that  an  event  will  hap-
pen in  a  future  trial,  or  even  render  it  fo
much  as  probable,  that  it  will  always  hap-
pen in  all  future  trials. — — In  order  to
explain  this,  let  us  fuppofe  a  folid  which,
for  ought  we  know,  may  be  conftituted  in
any  one  of  an  infinity  of  different  ways,
and  that  we  can  judge  of  it  only  from  ex-
periments made  in  throwing  it.  The  oft-
ner  we  fuppofe  ourfelves  to  have  it^w  it  turn
the  fame  face,  the  more  we  fhould  rec-
kon upon  its  turning  the  fame  face  when
thrown  next.  But  though  we  knew,
that  it  had  turned  the  fame  face  in  every
trial  a  million  of  times, there  would be

no


394 ^^^  Hijhrical  Evide?ice,

no  certaintyy  that  it  would  turn  this  face
again  in  any  particular  future  trial,  nor
even  the  leaft  probability ^  that  it  would
never  turn  any  other  face.  What  would
appear  would  be  only,  that  it  was  likely^
that  it  had  about  a  million  and  a  half
more  of  thefe  fides  than  of  all  others  * ;

or,

*  If  any  one  wants  a  further  explication  of  what  is
here  faid,  let  him  confidcr,  that  as  there  is  only  a
high  prohabilityy  not  a  certainty^  that  the  fuppofed  fo-
lid,  after  turning  the  fame  fide  a  million  of  times
without  once  failing,  would  turn  again  this  fide  in  the
next  trial,  the  prpbability  muft  be  lefs,  that  it  would
turn  this  fide  in  two  future  trials,  and  ftili  lefs,  that  it
would  do  it  m  three  future  trials;  and  thus,  the  probabi-
lity will  dccreafe  continually  as  the  number  of  the  fup-
pofed trials  is  increafed,  till,  at  laft,  it  will  become  an
equal  chance,  and  from  thence  pafs  into  an  improbabi-
lity  .^ — This  may  be  a  little  differently  reprefented

thus.  Let  a  folid  be  fuppofed  that  has  1,600,000
fides  of  the  fame  fort,  to  one  of  any  other  fort.  There
is  a  probability,  that  in  a  million  of  trials,  fuch  a  fo-
lid would  turn  conftantly  the  fame  fide.  Such  a  fup-
pofition,  therefore,  would  completely  account  for
this  event,  fuppofing  it  to  happen  ;  and  nothing  further
couldy  with  reafon^  he  concluded  from  it.  But,  there  is
^n  injjfii/y  of  other  fuppofitions  that  will  alfo  account
^"  *  for


and  Miracles.  39^

iOr,  that  Its  nature  was  fuch  as  difpofed
it  to  turn  this  fide  oftener,  in  this  pro-
portion, than  any  other;  not  that  It  had
no  other  fides,  or  that  it  would  never
turn  any  others.  In  reality,  there  would
be  the  greateft  probability  agalnft  this.-—
Thefe  obfervations  are  applicable,  in  the
exaftcft  manner,  to  what  paffes  in  the
courfe  of  nature,  as  far  as  experience  is
pur  guide.  Upon  obferving,  that  any
natural  event  has  happened  often  or  inva-
riably, we  have  only  reafon  to  expeft  that
it  v/ill  happen  again,  with  an  afiurance
proportioned  to  the  frequency  bf  our  ob-
servations. But,  we  have  no  abfolute
proof  that  it  will  happen  again  in  any
particular  future  trial  y  nor  the  leaft  rea-r
fon  to  believe that  it  will always hap-

for  it,  of  which  the  particular  fuppcfitlon  that  it
has  no  fides  of  any  other  fort,  and  that,  therefore,  it
will  never  turn  any  other,  is  only  ojie.  Againft  the
truth,  therefore,  of  this  particular  fuppofition,  there
piuft  be,  in  the  clrcumilances  of  ignorance  above  fup-
nofed,  the  greateft  probability.


>en.


-^06 On Hljlorical  Evidence y

pen  *. For  ought  we  know, there  may
be  occafions  on  which  it  will  fail,  and

fecret

*  In  an  eflay  publifhed  in  vol.  53d  of  the  Philofo-
fhical  Trarjfa^iom,  what  is  faid  here  and  in  the  laft
note,  is  proved  by  mathematical  demonftration,  and
a  method  fhewn  of  determining  the  exacSl  probability
of  all  conclufions  founded  on  indu6tion.— — This
is  plainly  a  curious  and  important  problem,  and  it
has  fo  near  a  relation  to  the  fubjeiSl:  of  this  diflertation,
that  it  will  be  proper  juft  to  mention  the  refuUs  of  the
folution  of  it  in  a  few  particular  cafes.

Suppofe,  i/?,  all  we  know  of  an  event  to  be,  that
it  has  happened  ten  times  without  failing,  and  that
it  is  inquired,  what  reafon  we  Ihall  have  for  thinking
ourfelves  right,  if  wc  judge,  that  the  probability  of  its
happening  in  a  Angle  trial,  lies  fomewhere  between
jixteen  to  one  and  two  to  one. — The  anfwer  is,  that
the  chance  for  being  right,  would  be  .5013,  or  very
nearly  an  equal  chance. Take  next,  the  particu-
lar cafe  mentioned  above,  and  fuppofe,  that  a  folid
or  dpj  of  whofe  number  of  fides  and  conftitution
we  know  nothing,  except  from  experiments  made
in  throwing  it, has  turned  conftantly  the  fame  face  in

a  million of  trials. In thefe circumftances, it

would  be  improbable^  that  it  had  lefs  than  1,400,000
more  of  thefe  fides  or  faces  than  of  all  others  j  and  it
would  be  alfo  improbable,  that  it  had  above  1,600,000
more.  The  chance  for  the  Lttcr  is  .4647,  and  for
5  «hc


and  Miracles.  397

fccret  caufes  in  the  frame  of  things
which  Jometimes  may  counteradt  thofe  by
which  it  is  produced.  *

But

the  former  .4895.  There  would,  therefore,  be  no
reafon  for  thinking,  that  it  would  never  turn  any  o-
ther  fide. On  the  contrary, it  would  be  likely  that

this would happen  in  1,600,000 trials. In  like

manner,  with  refpecSt  to  any  event  in  nature,  fuppofe
the  flowing  of  the  tide,  if  it  has  flowed  at  the  end  of  a
certain  interval  a  million  of  times,  there  would  be  the
probability  exprefl^ed  by  .5105,  that  the  odds  for  its
flowing  again  at  the  ufual  period  was  greater  than
1,400,000  to  I,  and  the  probability  exprefled  by  .5352,
that  the  odds  was  Icfs  than  1,600,000  to  one.

Such  are  the  conclufions  which  uniform  experience
warrants.^— —What  follows  is  ?ifpecimen  of  the  ex-
pectations,  which  it  is  reafonable  to  entertain  in  the

cafe of  interrupted  or  variable experience. If  we

know  no  more  of  an  event  than  that  it  has  happened
ten  times  in  eleven  trials,  and  failed  once,  and  we
fhould  conclude  from  hence,  that  the  probability  of  its
happening  in  a  fingle  trial  lies  between  the  odds  of
nine  to  one  and  eleven  to  one,  there  would  be  twelve
to  one  againji  being  right. — if  it  has  happened  a  hun-
dred times,  and  failed  ten  times,  there  would  alfo  be
an  odds  of  near  three  to  one  again/}  being  right  in  fuch

a  conclufion. If  it  has  happened  a  thoufand  times

and


398 On Hijiorkal  Evidence y

But  to  fay  no  more  at  prefent  of  tliis^
Let  us,  in  the  next  place,  confider  what
is  the  ground  of  the  regard  we  pay  to
human tejlimony, We  may, I thinks

and  failed  a  hundred,  there  would  be  an  odds/iT  being
right  of  a  little  more  than  two  to  one.  And,  fuppofing
the  fame  ratio  preferved  of  the  number  of  happenings
to  the  number  of  failures,  and  the  fame  guefs  made^
this  odds  will  go  on  increafmg  for  ever, as  the  num-^

ber  of  trials  is  increafed. He  who would fee  this-

explained  and  proved  at  large  may  confult  the  effay
in  the  Philofophical  Tranfadtions,  to  which  I  have
referred  ;  and  alfo  the  fupplement  to  it  in  the  54th  vo-
lume.  The  fpecimen  now given  is  enough  tcji

fhew  how  very  innaccurately  we  are  apt  to  fpeak  and
judge  on  this fubje£t, previoufly  to  calculation. See
Mr  Hume's  EfTay  on  miracles,  p.  175,  176,  ^c,  and
Dr.  Campbell's  Eflay,  Se£l.  2d. p.  35. — It  alfo  de-
monftrates, that  the  order  of  events  in  nature is  de-
rived from  permanent  caufes  eflablifhed  by  an  intelli-
gent being in  the  conftitution of nature,  'and not
from  any  of  the  powers  of  chance. And  it  further
proves, that  fo  far  is  it  from  being  true,  that  the  un-
derftanding  is  not  the  faculty  which  teaches  us  to  rely
on  experience,  that it  is capable  of  determining,  in
all  cafes,  what  conclufions  ought  to  be  drawn  from  it,
and  \\\\7!itpr£cife  degree  of  eoflfidcnce  fhould  be  placed
ill  it.

fee


and Miracles.  399

fee  plainly,  that  it  is  not  experience  on-
ly j  meaning,  all  along,  that  kind  of
experience  to  which  we  owe  our  expedta-
tion  of  natural  events,  the  caufes  of
"which  are  unknown  to  us.  Were  this
the  cafe,  the  regard  we  ought  to  pay  to
teftimony,  would  be  in  proportion  to  the
number  of  inftances,  in  which  we  have
found,  that  it  has  given  us  right  informa-
tion, compared  with  thofe  in  which  it
has  deceived  us  5  and  it  might  be  calcu-
lated in  the  fame  manner  with  the  re-
gard due  to  any  conclufions  derived  from
induftion.  But  this  is  by  no  means  the
truth.  One  adlion,  or  one  converfation
with  a  man,  may  convince  us  of  his  in-
tegrity and  induce  us  to  believe  his  tefti-
mony, though  we  had  never,  in  a  finglc
inftance,  experienced  his  veracity.  His
manner  of  telling  his  ftory,  its  being
corroborated  by  other  teftimony,  and  va-
rious particulars  in  the  nature  and  cir-
cumftances  of  it,  may  fatisfy  us  that  it
muft  be  true. We  feel  in  ourfelves,  that

a


400  On  Hijlorical  E-vidence^

a  regard  to  truth  is  one  principle  in  hu-
man nature ;  and  we  know,  that  there
muft  be  fuch  a  principle  in  every  reafona-
ble  being,  and  that  there  is  a  necelTary  re-
pugnancy between  the  perception  of  moral
diftindions  and  deliberate  falfehood.  To
this,  chiefly,  is  owing  the  credit  we  give
to  human  teftimony.  And  from  hence,
in  particular,  muft  be  derived  our  belief
of  veracity  in  the  Diety.  It  might  be
fhewn  here  in  many  ways,  that  there
is  a  great  difference  between  the  convic-
tion produced  by  teftimony,  and  the  coh-
viftion  produced  by  experience.  But  I
will  content  myfelf  with  taking  notice,
how  much  higher  the  one  is  capable  of
being  raifed  than  the  other.  When  it
appears,  that  a  man  is  not  deceived,  and
does  not  defign  to  deceive,  we  are  fo
far  fure  of  the  truth  of  the  fafts  re-
lated. But  when  any  events,  in  the
courfe  of  nature,  have  often  happened,
we  are  fure  properly,  of  nothing  but  the
paft  faft. Nor,  I  think,  is  there  in  ge-^

neral;,


and  Miracles.  401

neral, antecedently  to their  happening,
any  comparifon  between  the  alTurance  we
have that  they will happen, and that
which  we  have  of  many  fads  the  know-
ledge of  which  we  derive  from  teftimo-
ny. For  example  i we are  not  fo  cer-
tain that  the  tide  will  go  on  to  ebb  and
flow,  and the  fun  to  rife  and  fet  in  the
manner  they  have  hitherto  done,  a  year
longer,,  as  we  are  that there  has been
fiich  a  man  as  Alexander y or  fuch  an  em-
pire as  the  Roman  *•

-  *  It  might  have  been  added  here,  as  another  ob-
fervatlon  of  confiderable  importance,  that  the  great-
eft  part  of  what  is  commonly  called  experience  is
merely  the  report  of  teftimony.  "  Our  own  expe-
**  rience  reaches  around,  and  goes  back  but  a  little
"  way  ;  but  the  experience  of  others,  on  which  we
«'  chiefly  depend,  is  derived  to  us  wholly  from  tefti-
«<  mony." Dr.  Adams's  EJfay  on  MiracleSy  page  5th.

In  proportion,  therefore,  as we  weaken  the

evidence  of  teftimony,  we  weaken  alfo  that  of  expe-
rience; and  in  comparing  them  we  ought  in  reafon
to  oppofe  to  the  former,  only  what  remains  of  the  lat-
ter after  that  part  of  it  which  is  derived  from  the  for-
mer, that  is,  after  much  the  greateft  part  of  it  is  de-

du(^ed»  _

D  d  From


40^  On  Uijlorlcal  Evidence^

From  thefe  obfervations  It  follows,
that  to  ufe  tejlimony  to  prove  a  mi-
racle implies  no  abfurdity.  *Tis  not
ufing  2i  feebler  experience  to  overthrow  a-
notherof  thefame  kind,  which  is Jlronger:
But,  ufing  an  argument  to  eftablifli  an
event,  vi^hich  yields  a  direcft  and  pofitive
proof  and  is  capable  of  producing  the
ftrongeft  convid:ion,  to  overthrow  ano-
ther founded  on  different  principles,
and  which,  at  bed,  can  prove  no  more
than  that,  previoufly  to  the  event,  there
would  have  appeared  to  us  a  prefump-
tion  againfl:  its  happening.

What  I  now  mean  will  be  greatly
confirmed  by  obferving,  that  a  miracle
cannot,  vl^ith  ftridl  propriety,  be  ftyled
an  event  contrary  to  experience.  This  is
one  of  .the  aflertions  which  I  have  men-
tioned among  the  fallacies,  on  which  Mr.
Huf27es  argument  is  founded.  A  mira-
cle is  more  properly  an  event  different
from  experience  than  contrary  to  it.
Were  I  to  fee  a  temped  calmed  inftan-

taneoufly


and  Miracles.  403

tmcoufly  by  th^^- ward  of  a  marp,  -  dL  my
paft  experience  would  remain  the  fame  5
and  were  I  to  affirm  that  I  faw  what  wasi
contrary  to  ity  I-ioulid-  bnly  hie.art, that  I
faw  what  I  never  before  had  a-riy  experi-*..
ence  of. In  like  manner ; was  I  to  be  af-
^ired  by eye witneffes  that, 'bii  a  parti-
cular occalion,  fome  event,  different  frorrl
the  lifual  coUrfe  of  things^,  'had  happened,
teftimony,  in  this  cafe^^'would  afford  di*
reft  and  peremptory  evidence  for^  the  fa(a;
But  what  infotmatiOn  wbUld 'experience
give  ?*— i— It would  only  tell  me what
happened  on  other  occalions, and  in  o^
ther  inilances. Its  evidence, therefore,
would  be  entirely  hegative^i It  Would
afford  no  proper  proof  that  the- event  did
not  happen  ; for  it  can  be  no  part  of  any
'one's  experience,  that  the  courfe  of  na-
ture will  continue  always  the  fame. •

There  cannot  then  be  any  tolerable  pro-
priety in  aiferting  (as  Mr  Hume  -f  does)

*  See  Dr,  Adams's  EJfay^Yzp  9th  and  23d.
t  EJp^  <m  Aliraclesy Page  179.

D  d  2  that.


404 On  Ilijlorical  Evidence^

that,  in  every  cafe  of  a  miracle  fupported
by  teftimony,  there  is  a  contefl  of  twQ
oppofite  experiences,  the  ftrongeft  of
which  ought  always  to  determine  our
judgments.

But  thi«  leads  me  to  take  notice of
the  fundamental  error  in  this  argument :
An  error  which, I  fancy,  every  perfon
xnuft  be  fenfible  of  when  it  is  mentioned,
and  for  the  fake  of  pointing  out  which
chiefly  this differtation is  written.
The  error  I  mean  is  contained  in  the  af-
fertion,  that  "  if, previoully to an e-
**  vent, there  was  a  greater  probability
/*  againji  its  happening,  than  there  l^for
•*  the  truth  of  the  teftimony  endeavour-
"  ing  to  eftablifh  it,  the  former  deftroys
/*  the latter,  and renders the  event  un-
"  likely  to  have  happened in  proportion
"  to  its fuperiority." That this is a
fundamental  point  in  Mr  Humes objec-
tion muft be apparent to thofe  who
have  confidered  it. By  the  conteft  be-
tween two  oppofite  experiences  in  mira-
culous


and  Miracles .  405

culous  fafts  fupported  by  teftimony.  the
greateft  of  which  always  deftroys  the  other
as  far  as  its  force  goes; he  cannot  confi-
ftently  mean  any  thing  but  this. One  of
the  oppofite experiences muft  be  that
which  acquaints  us  with  the  courfe  of
nature, and by which, as before ex-
plained, it  is  rendered  probable, in  pro-
,  portion  to  the number  of  inftances  in
which an  event  has  happened,  that  it
will  happen  in  future  trials. The  other
muft  be  that  from  whence  the  credit  we
give  to  teftimony  is  derived,  which,  ac-
cording to  Mr  Hume,  being  our  obferva-
tion  of  the  ufual  conformity  of  fadis  to
the  reports  of  witneffes,  makes  it  proba-
ble that  any  event  reported by witneffes
has  happened,  in  proportion  to  what  we
,  have experienced of this  conformity.
Now,  as  in  the  cafe  of  miraculous  fads
thefe probabilities  oppofe  one another,
and  the  greateft,  according  to  Mr  Hume,
muft  be-  the  firft,  becaufe  the  experience
. which  produces  it  is  conftant  and  inva-
- riable  >  it  follows,  that  there  muft  be  al-

D  d  3  ways


4o6 0/;  HiJloricaJ  Evidence^

ways  a  great  overbalance  of  evidence  a-
gainft  their  reality.  He  feems  to  lay  it
down  as  a  general  maxim,  that  if  it  is^more
improbable  that  any  facjl  fhoqld  have  reaU
ly  happened,  than  that  m^n  fhould  either
deceive  or  be  deceived, it  fhould  be  re-^

jefted  by  us. But, it  muft be need^

lefs  to  take  any  pains  to  ihew,  that  the
turning  point  in  Mr  Hume's  argument
is  that  which  I  have  mentioned;  or,  in
other  words,  the  principle,  that  no  tefti-^
rnony  fliould  engage  our  belief,  except
the  improbability  in  the  falfehood  of  it
is  greater  than  that  in  the  event  which
it  attefls  *,

*  Let  it  be  well  remembered,  that  the  improbabi-
lity of  event  here  mentioned,  can  mean  nothing  but
the  improbability  which  we  fhould  have  feen  there  was
of"  its  happening  independently  of  any  evidence  for  it,
or,  previoufly  to  the  evidence  of  tef^imony  inforrn-
ing  us  that  it  has  happened.  To  fuppofe  that  any
pther  improbability  is  meant,  would  be  to  make  this
objection  to  the  laft  degree  abfurd  ;  the  whole  difpufte
being  about  the  improbability  that  remains  after  the
evidence  of  teftimony  given  fpr  the  event,

fa


.,<^Y  a^td  Miracles.  407

In  order  to  make  it  appear  that  this  is
an  error,  what  I  defire  may  be  confider-
ed  is,  the  degree  of  improbability  which
there  is  againft  almofl  all  the  moft  com-
mon fafts,  independently  of  the  evidence
of  teflimony  for  them.  In  many  cafes
of  particular  hiftories  which  are  immedi-
ately believed  upon  the  flighteft  teftimony,
there  would  have  appeared  to  us,  previ-
Qufly  to  this  teftimony,  an  improbability
of  almoft  infinity  to  one  againft  their  rea-
lity, as  any  one  muft  perceive,  who  will
think  how  fare  he  is  of  the  falfehood  of
all  fads  that  have  no  evidence  to  fupport
them,  or  which  he  has  only  imagined  to
himfelf.  It  is  then  very  common  for
the  flighteft  teftimony  to  overcome  an  al-
moft infinite  improbability.

To  make  this  more  evident :  Let  us
fuppofe,  that  teftimony  informed  us  right-
ly ten  times  to  one  in  which  it  deceived
us ;  and  that  there  was  nothing  to  diredt
our  judgments  concerning  the  regard  due
to  witnefles,  befides  the  degree  of  confor-^
D  d  4  mity


40  3 On Hiftorical  Evidence,

mity  which  we  have  experienced  in  paft
events  tx>  their  reports.  In  this  cafe,  there
would  be  the  probability  often  to  one  for
the  reality  of  every  fadt  fupported  by  tef-
timony.  Suppofe  then  that  it  informs
me  of  the  fuccefs  of  a  perfon  in  an  affair,
againft  the  fuccefs  of  which  there  was
the  probability  of  a  hundred  to  one,  or
of  any  other  event  previoufly  improbable
in  this  proportion.  I  afk,  What,  on
this  fuppofition,  would  be,  on  the  whole,
the  probability  that  the  event  really  hap-
pened? Would  the  right  way  of  com-
puting be,  to  compare  the  probability  of
the  truth  of  the  teftimony  with  the  pro-
bability that  the  event  would  not  hap-
pen, and  to  rejed:  the  event  with  a  con-
fidence proportioned  to  the  fuperiority  of
the  latter  above  the  former  ?  This  Mr.
Hume  diredts  ;  but  certainly  contrary  to
all  reafon.< The  truth  is,  that  the  tef-
timony would  give  the  probability  of  ten
to  one  to  the  event,  unabated  by  the  fup-
pofed  probability  againft  it.  And  one
rcafon  of  this  is, that  the  very  experience

which


and  Miracles.  40^

which  teaches  us  to  give  credit  to  tefti-
mony,  is  an  experience  by  which  we
have  found,  that  it  has  informed  us  right-^
ly  concerning  fadls,  in  which  there
would  have  appeared  to  us,  previoufly,
a  great  improbability.

But  to  be  yet  more  explicit ;  Let  us
fuppofe  the  event  reported  by  teftimony
to  be,  that  a  particular  fide  of  a  die  was
thrown  twice  in  two  trials,  and  that  the
teftimony  is  of  fuch  a  nature  that  it  has
as  often  informed  us  wrong  as  right.  In
this  cafe,  there  would  plainly  be  an  e-
qual  chance  for  the  reality  of  the  event,
though,  previoufly,  there  was  the  pro-
bability of  thirty-five  to  one  againft  it :
And  every  one  would  fee,  that  it  would
be  abfurd  to  fay,  that  there  being  fo  con-
iiderable  a  probability  againft  the  event,
and  no  probability  at  all  for  the  truth  of
the  teftimony ;  or,  that  having  had  much
more  frequent  experience  that  two  trials
Jiave  not  turned  up  the  fame  face  of  a
die, than  of  the  conformity  of  fads  to

the
?


41  o, On  Hijlorical  Evidence^

the fuppofed teftimony, therefore, no

regard  is  due  to  the  teftimony.. An  e-

vidence  that  is  often  conneded  with  truth,
though  not  ojtner  than  with  falfehood,  is
real  evidence,  and  deferves  regard.  To
rejed  fuch  evidence  would  be  to  fall  of-
ten into  error,  whatever  improbabilities
may  attend  the  events  to  which  it  is  ap-
plied ;  and  to  affert  the  contrary,  would
be  to  affert  a  manifefl  contradicSion.

But  let  us  take  a  higher  cafe  of  thi$
kind.  The  improbability  of  drawing  a  .
lottery  in  any  particular  affigned  manner,
independently  of  the  evidence  of  teftimo-
ny, or  of  our  own  fenfes,  acquainting  us
that  it  has  been  drawn  in  that  manner,
is  fuch  as  exceeds  all  conception  *, And

yet

"*■  Thi3  Improbability  is  as  the  number  of  difFerent
ways  which  there  are  of  drawing  the  lottery  ;  or,  as
the  number  of  permutations  which  a  number  of
things,  equal  to  that  of  the  tickets  in  the  lottery,  ad-
mits of.  In  a  lottery,  therefore,  of  50,000  tickets,
this  improbability  is  exprciTed  by  the  proportion  of
i.X2x3X4X5x6&c.  continued  to  50jOOO.  to  one.  Or,  it

is


and  Miracles.  411

yet  the  teftimony  of  a  news-paper,  or  of
any  common  man,  is  fufficient  to  put  us
out  of  doubt  about  it.  Suppofe  here  a
perfon  was  to  rejedl  the  evidence  offered
him  on  the  pretence,  that  the  improbabi-
lity of  the  falfehood  of  it  is  almoft:  infi-
nitely lefs  than  that  of  the  event  *; or,

fuppofe,

is  the  fame  with  that  of  drawing  fuch  a  lottery  exa(5lly
in  the  order  of  the  numbers,  firft  i,  then  2,  and  fo  on
to  the  laft.  Moft  perfons  will  fcarcely  be  able  to  per-
fuade  themfelves,  that  this  is  not  an  abfolute  impof-
fibilityj  and  yet  in  truth,  it  is  equally  poffible,  and
was  beforehand  equally  probable  with  that  very  way
in  which,  after  drawing  the  lottery,  we  believe  it  has
been  drawn :  And  what  is  fimilar  to  this  is  true
of  almoft  every  thing  that  can  be  offered  to  our  affent,
independently  of  any  evidence  for  it ;  and  particularly,
of  numberlefs  fa6ls  which  are  the  obje<£ls  of  teftimony,
and  which  are  continually  believed,  without  the  leaft
iiefitation,  upon  its  authority.

*  Dr.  Campbell  feems  not  to  have  attended  to
the  fallacy  in  this  method  of  reafoning.  If  he  had,
he  would  perhaps  have  expreffed  himfelf  differently  in
fome  parts  of  the  tirft  and  fixth  fedlions  of  the  firft  part
of  his  very  judicious  differtation  before  mentioned. —
In  the  cafe  he  fuppofes,  of  the  Jpfs  of  a  paffage  boat

which
A


412 0?i  Hijiorical  Evidence,

fuppofe,  that  univerfally  a  perfon  wa$
to  rejedt  all  accounts  which  he  reads  or
hears  of  fa6ts  which  are  more  uncom-
mon, than  it  is  that  he  ihould  read  or
hear  what  is  falfe :  What  would  be
thought  of  fuch  a  perfon  ?  How  foon
would  he  be  made  to  fee  and  acknow-
ledge his  own  folly  ?

iB^hich  had  croffed  a  river  two  ihoufand  times  fafely  ;
it  is  plain,  that  an  evidence  of  much  lefs  weight  than
the  probability,  that  an  experiment  which  had  fuc-
ceeded  two  thoufand  times  will  fucceed  the  next  time,
would  be  fufficient  to  convince  us  of  the  reality  of  the
event.  Any  report  that  has  been  oftner  fouiid  to  be
true  than  falfe  Would  engage  belief,  though  the  con-
vi(Slion  we  fhould  have  had,  fuppofing  no  fuch  report,
that  the  event  did  not  happen,  would  have  been  much
ftronger  than  any  that  the  report  itfelf  is  capable  of
producing.  I  have  above  afligned  the  reafon  of  this ;
and  indeed  the  fophifm  I  have  endeavoured  to  point
out  feems  to  me  fo  glaring,  that  did  not  fo  fagacious
»  writer  as  Mr.  Hume  and  fome  others  appear  to
have  been  deceived  by  it,  I  fhould  have  thought  it
very  unnecefTary  to  fay  much  about  it.


SECT.


mid  Miracles^  413


' SECT, in.

Of  the  Credibility  of  Miracles,  and  the  Force
of  Tejlimony  when  employed  to  prove  tbem^

TH  E  application  of  what  has  been
faid,  in  the  laft  fedlion,  to  the  parti-
cular cafe  of  miracles,  is  fb  obvious,  that
it  need  not  be  much  infifted  on.  It  has
plainly  appeared  how  little  the  credit
of  teftimony  is,<  in  general,  affedted  by
the  previous  improbability  of  events,  and
howjuftly  it  has  been  obferved  to  be
wrong  to  make  this  improbability  a
proof  agcunjl  a  fad;,  deflroying,  in  propor-
tion to  its  force,  the  proof  from  teftimo-
ny yi?r  it.

I  mull  add  what  deferves  particular
notice,  that  it  alfo  (hews  us,  that  Mr.
IJume%  argument  would  prove  nothing,

even


414 0;2  Hijlorical  Ei)idencei

even  though  the  principle  before  oppofed
were  granted,  namely,  that  we  derive
our  regard  to  teftimony  from  experience,
in  the  fame  manner  with  our  aiTurance  of
the  laws  or  courfe  of  nature.

'Tis  here  natural  to  afk,  "  Is  there
*'  not  then  a  regard  due  to  the  im-
**  pjobability  of  events,  in  confidering  the
**  evidence  of  teftimony  for  them  ?  "  "  Is
**  there  not  good  reafon  for  believing
'*  fafts  more  or  lefs  eafily,  as  they  appear
**  to  us  more  or  lefs  conformable  to  ex-
"  perience  ? ''  I  anfwer ;  that,  though
this  muft  undoubtedly  be  in  general  ac-
knowledged, it  is  by  no  means  true  in
the  fenfe  and  degree  in  which  it  has  been
fometimes  infifted  on.  There  areinftan^
ces  in  which,  when  the  improbability  of
an  event  goos  beyond  a  certain  pitch,  we
necelTarily  hefitate  in  receiving  the  evi-
dence of  teftimony,  at  the  fame  time
that,  in  other  inftances,  we  fliould  give
eafy  credit  to  the  fame  teftimony,  with-
out


and  Miracles.  ""^  41  r

out  being  afFedled  'by equal  or  greater

^  improbabilities.  It  is  not,  perhaps,  fuf-
ficiently  underftood  by  what  reafons  and
principles  our  affent  is  governed  in  thefe
cafes.  I  fhould  be  carried  much  too  far,
were  I  to  attempt  a  difcuflion  of  this  fub-
jed;  nor  is  it  in  the  leaft  neceiSary  to  my
prefeht  purpofe.  It  is  enough  that  it  has
been  proved,  that  the  influence  of  the  im-
probabilities of  events  on  hiftorical  evi-
dence is  not  fuch  as  Mr.  Hume  afTerts,  or
fuch  as  aiFords  any  folid  argument  againft
miracles. — We  have  feen,  that  teftimony  is
continually  overcoming  much  greater  im-

'  probabilities  than  thofe  of  its  own  falfe-
hood, and  that  it  is  even  its  nature  to  do

^d  ^hc  objedion,  therefore,  founded
on  the  fuppofed  abfurdity  of  trufting  a
feebkr experience in oppofition to a

'ftronger>  or,  of  believing  teftimony  when
it  reports  fadls  which  are  more  extraor-
dinary than  falfehood  and  deception,  is  fa-
lacious.  If,  in  common  cafes,  teftimo-
ny overcomes  fuch  improbabilities  as  have
•'^•^  been


41 6 On  Hlporkal  Evidence ^

been  reprefented,  there  can  be  nothing
unreafonable  in  fuppofing,  that  it  may
overcome  thofe  attending  the  moft  un-
common cafes*

But  the  particular  improbability  attend-
ing miracles  has  been  a  good  deal  mag-
nified, and  my  principal  bufinefs  in  what
remains  will  be  to  prove  this,  in  order  to
ihevv  w^ith  what  propriety  and  efFed:  tef-
timony  may  be  employed  to  gain  credit
to  a  miracle.— —With  this  view  I  (hall
propofe  the  following  obfervations.

There  are  many  events,  not  miraculous^
which  yet  have  a  previous  incredibility
in  them  fimilar  to  that  of  miracles,  and
by  no  means  inferior  to  it.  The  events
I  mean,  are  all  fuch  phenomena  in  na-
ture as  arc  quite  new  and  ftrange  to  us.
No  one  can  doubt  whether  thefe  are  ca-
pable of  full  proof  by  teftimony, 1

could,,  for  inflance,  engage  by  my  own
fingle  teftimony  to  convince  any  reafon-
Able  perfon,  that  I  have  known  one  of

the


the  human  fpecies,  neither  deformed  noj:.-
an  ideot,  and  only  thirty  inches  high,  who
arrived  at  his  moft  mature  ftate  at  feyen
years  of  age,  and  weighed  then  eighteen
pounds ;  but  from  that  time  gradually  de-
clined, and  died  at  feventeen  weigh-
ing only  twelve  pounds,  and  with  almoft

every  mark  of  old  age  upon  him.

Now,  according  to  Mr.  Hume's  argu-
ment, no  teftimony  can  prove  fuch  a  fad  j
for  it  might  be  faid,  that  nothing  being
piore  common  than  the  falfehood  of  tefti-
mony,  nor  more  uncojmnon  than  fuch  ^
fad,  it  mud;  be  contrary  to  all  reafon  to
believe  it  on  the  evidence  of  teftimony.

It  deferves  particular  notice  here,  that
in  judging  from  experience  concerning  the
probability  of  events,  we  ftould  always  take
rare  to  fatisfy  ourfelves,  that  there  is  no-
thing wanting  to  render  the  cafes,  from
whv^h  we 'c.ieue,perfedly  alike.  Our  know-
ledge that  ra^  :vent  has  alwa'  :  generally
happened  in  certain  cip  ' .:es, gives

no  reafon  for  believing. ,x...:.  jhe  fame  e-
vent  will  happen,  wben  thcfe  cireumftan-
E  e  ces


41 8  On  Hijlorical  Evidence,

ces  are  alte;-ed :  And,  in  truth,  we  are
fo  ignorant  of  the  conftitution  of  the
world  and  of  the  fprings'of  events,  that
it  is  feldom  poflible  for  us  to  know  what
different  pkcenomena  may  take  place,  on
any  the  leaft  change  in  the  fituation  of
nature,  or  the  circumftances  of  objefts.
It  was  inattention  to  this  that  occafioned
the  niiftake  of  that  king  of  Siam,  men-
tioned by  Mr.  Lock,  who  rejected,  as
utterly  incredible,  the  account  which  was
given  him  of  the  effeds  of  cold  upon
water  in  Europe.  His  unbelief  was  plains
ly  the  effedl  of  ignorance.  And  this  in-
deed is  almoft  as  often  the  cafe  with  un-
belief, as  with  its  contrary.  Give  to  a
common  man  an  account  of  the  moft  re-
markable experiments  in  natural  philofo-
phy  :  Tell  him  that  you  C2Ln  freeze  him  to
death  by  blowing  warm  air  upon  him  before
a  gooAJire-y  or  that  you  often  divert  yourfelf
with  bottling  up  lightning  and  difcharg-
ing  it  through  the  bodies  of  your  acquain-
tance ;  and  he  will  perhaps  look  upon  you
as  crazy,  or,  at  leaft,  he  will  think  himfelf

fure


and Miracles.  419

fure  that  you  mean  to  deceive  him.  Could
we  fuppofe  him  pofleft  of  Mv,  Hume's  genius
and  eloquence,  he  might  fay,  **  That  what
"  you  acquaint  him  with  is  contrary  to
*'  uniform  experience,  that  he  cannot  be-
**  lieve  you  without  quitting  a  guide  that
*^  has  never  deceived  him,  to  foilow  one
**  which  is  continually  deceiving  him ;
'*  and  that,  therefore,  fuch  fads,  when
**  reported  by  teftimony,  are  more  pro-
**  perly  fubjeds  of  derijlon  than  argirmentJ*
But,  how  obvious  would  be  the
weaknefs  of  his  reafoning  ? — A  perfon  in
fuch  circumftances,  who  thought  juftly,
would  confider  how  complicated  and  ex-
tenfive  the  frame  of  nature  is,  and  how
little  a  way  his  obfervations  have  reached.
This  would  fhew  him  that  he  can  be  no
competent  judge  of  the  powers  of  nature,
and  lead  him  to  expefl  to  find  in  it  things
ftrange  and  wonderful,  and  confequently
to  enquire  what  regard  is  due  to  the  tef-
timony which  informs  him  of  fuch  fads,
rather  than  haftily  to  rejed  them.^— One
E  e  2  cannot


420 On liijhrical Evidence ^

cannot  help  being  greatly  difgufted  with
the  inclination  which  fhews  itfelf  in  many
perfons,  to  treat  with  contempt  what-
ever they  hear,  be  it  ever  fo  well  attefted,
if  it  happens  that  they  are  not  able  to  ac-
count for  it,  or  that  it  does  not  coincide
with  their  experience^  juft  as  if  they  knew
all  that  can  take  place  in  nature,  or,  as  if
their  experience  was  the  ftandard  of  truth
tind  the  mcafure  of  poffibilityi  This
is  really  no  lefs  filly,  than  it  is  vain  and
prefumptuous.  It  is  barring  their  minds
againft  improvement,  and  giving  them^
■felves  up  to  the  influence  of  a  principle
Avhich  has  a  tendency  to  render  them
unfit  for  fociety.  If  we  would  be  truly
wife,  we  ought,  at  the  fame  time  that  we
are  upon  our  guard  againft  deception,  to
avoid  carefully  an  arrogant  fcepticifm,
preferving  opennefs  with  refpeft  to  ^?iy
evidence  that  can  be  offered  to  us  on  every
fubjedl,  from  a  fenfe  of  our  own  ignorance

and narrow views. But to come

more  diredly  to  the  fubjedl  under  con-
lideration.

There


end  Miracles,  421

There  is,  I  have  faid,  no  greater  in-
credibiUty  in  a  miracle,  than  in  fuch
-facts  as  thofe  I  have  mentioned.  It  has
been  aire  idy  (hewn,  p  393,  &c.  that  the
moft  uniform  experience  aftbrds  no  reafon
for  concluding,  that  the  courfc  of  nature
will  never  be  interrupted,*  or  that  any  na-
tural event  which  has  hitherto  happened,
will  always  happen.  It  has  appeared,  on
the  contrary,  that  there  muft  be  always
reafon  againjl  this  conclufion.  There
may,  I  have  faid,  be  fecret  caufes  which
will  fometimes  countera(fl  thofe  by  which
the  courfe  of  nature  is  carried  on.  We
are  under  no  more  neceffity  of  thinking
that  it  muft  be  the  fame  in  all  ages  than  in
2\\  climates.  During  the  continuance  of  a
world,  there  may  be  periods  and  emer-
gencies in  which  its  affairs  may  take  a
new  turn, and  very  extraordinary  events

happen. In particular, there are,

for  ought  we  know,  fuperior  beings  who

may fometimes  interpofe  in our  affairs,

and  over-rule  the  ufual  operations  of  na-

E  e 3  tural


422  On  Hijlorical  Evidence y

tural  caufes  ^.  We  are  fo  far  from  hav-
ing any  reafon  to  deny  this,  that  if  any
end  worthy  of  fuch  an  interpolition  ap-
pears, nothing is more  credible. ^

There  was,  undoubtedly,  a  time  when
thi^  earth  was  reduced  into  its  prefent
habitable  ftate  *  and  form.  This  muft
have  been  a  time  of  miracles,  or  of  the
exertion  of  fupernatural  power.  Why
muft  this  power  have  then  fo  entirely
withdrawn  itfelf,  as  never  to  appear  af-
terwards ?  The  vanifhing  of  old  ftars,
and  the  appearance  of  new  ones,  is  pro-
bably owing  to  the  deftrudiion  of  old
worlds,  and  the  creation  of  new  worlds.
It  is  reafonable  to  believe  that  events  of
this  kind  are  continually  happening  in
the  immenfe  univerfe  ;  and  it  is  certain,
that  they  muft be  brought  about  under

*  Sure  it  is,  that  Mr  Hume  at  lead,  cannot  dif-
pute  the  credibility  of  this,  who  has  faid  of  the  mon-
ftrous  fyftem  of  pagan  mythology,  that  it  feems  more
than  probable  that,  fomewhere  or  other  in  the  univerfe,
it  is  r'-^ally  carried  into  execution.  Natural  Ht/^ory  of
Riliglojty  SQ^i.  nth.

the


and  Miracles,  423

the  direaion  of  Ibme  fuperlor  power.
There  is,  therefore,  the  conflant  exertion
of  fuch  power  in  the  univerfe.  Why
mull  it  be  thought  that,  in  the  lapfe  of  fix
thoufmd  years,  there  have  been  no  occa*
fions  on  which  it  has  been  exerted  on
our  globe  ?

What  I  am  now  faying is  true  on  the
fuppofition  that  a  miracle,  according  to
the  common  opinion,  implies  a  violation
ov  fufpenfion  of  the  laws  of  nature. But,
in  reality, this  is  by  no  means  neceiiari-
ly  included  in  the  idea  of  a  miracle. A
fenfible  and  extraordinary  effedl  produced
hyfuperior  power ^  no  more  implies  that  a
law  of  nature  is violated^  than  any  com-
mon effect produced by human  power.
This  has  been  explained  in  the  difTertation
on  Providence,  p.  81,82.  and  it  has  a  con-
fiderable  tendency  to  render  the  admiffion
of  a  miracle  more  eafy.

Thefe obfervations demonflrate, that

there  is  nothing  of  the  improbability in

E  e  4  miracles


424 On Ilijhrkal  Evidence y

miracles  which  fomc  have  imagined.  I
may  even  venture  to  fay,  that  they  have  in
them  a  much  lefs  degree  of  improbabihty,
than  there  w^as,  antecedently  to  obferva-
lions  and  experiments,  in  fuch  phcenomena
as  comets y  or  fuch  powers  as  thofe  of  mag-^
netifm  and  ele6lricity.  My  reafon  for  this
affertion  is,  that  it  is  far  more  Hkely  that
the  courfe  of  nature  fhould  fome  time  or
other  fail,  than  that  any  particular  povyers
or  efFedls  {hould  exifl  in  nature,  which
we  could  before-hand  guefs,

A  due  attention  to  thefe  arguments
will  neceflarily  difpofe  a  candid  enquirer
to  give  a  patient  hearing  to  any  teftimo-
ny  which  affures  him,  that  there  adlually
have  been  miracles.  It  appears  that  to
decline  this,  under  the  pretence  that  no-
thing different  from  the  common  courfe
of  things  can  be  proved  by  teftimony,  is  the
moft  inexcufable  folly  and prcfumption.

The  miracles  of  the  New  Teflament,

in  particular, have  many circumftances
attending  them  which  recommend  them

Arongly


and  Miracles.  425

ftrongly  to  our  good  opinion,  and  which
lay  us  under  indiipenfable  obligations  to
give  the  evidence  for  them  a  fair  and  pa-
tient examination. Such is the ftate

of  mankind,  that  there  is  nothing  more
credible,  than  that  our  affairs  have  not
always  beeii  fuffered  to  go  on  entirely  of
themfelves.  A  revelation  to  inftrud:  and
reform  a  fmful  and  degenerate  world  is
fo  far  from  implying  any  abfurdity,  that
it  is  an  effed  of  divine  goodnefs  which
might  very  reafonably  be  hoped  for.
There  appears  to  have  been  great  need  of
it ;  and  it  feems  to  be  certain,  that  there
muft  have  been  a  revelation  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  world.  If  we  rejedl  the  mi-
racles mentioneed  in  the  New  Tcftament,
it  will  not  be  poflible  to  give  any  tolera-
ble accoiint  of  the  eftabliiliment  of  fuch
a  religion  as  the  chriftian  among  man-
kind, by  a  few  perfons  of  no  education
or  learning,  in  oppofition  to  all  the  pre-
judices and  powers  of  the  world.  The
excellence  of  the  end  for  which  they  were

^vrought;  the  myriads  of  mankind  which

they

I


426 On  Hiflor'ual  E'Vidence^

they  brought  over  to  piety  and  goodnefs,
and  the  amazing  turn  they  gave  to  the
ftate  of  religion  by  deftroying,  in  a  few
years,  a  fyftem  of  idolatry  which  had  been
the  work  of  a2:es,  and  eftablifliino:  on  its
ruins  the  knowledge  and  wor(hip  of
the  one  true  God;  thefe,  and  various
other  undeniable  fadls  which  might  be
enumerated,  give  them  a  I'igh  credibility.
We  fee  here  an  occafion  worthy  of  the
ufe  of  fuch  means,  and  a  probability  that,
if  ever  fmce  the  creation  there  has  been
any  interpofition  of  fuperior  power,  this
was  the  time.

CONCLUSION.

Enough  has  been  now  faid  in  anfwer  to  the
objeftion  which  has  been  the  chief  fubjecft
of  this  diflertation  *. The  neceffary  con-

clufion

*  Some  of  the  principal  obfervations  which  I  have
made,  may  be  found  in  the  chapter  of  Bifbop  Butler's
Analogy  on  i\\Gfuppofed  prcfumption  againji  a  Revelation
confjdered  ai  miraculous.  Had  I  remembered  this,  it
IS  probable  I  (hould  not  have  thought  of  drawing  up

this


and Miracles.  4^7

clufion  from  it  is,  that  the  main  bufinefs
of  thofe  who  oppofe chriilianity  fliould

be

this  differtation.  The  greateft  prirt  of  the  pafTage  I
refer  to  I  (hall  here  give,  in  order  to  fave  the  reader
the  trouble  of  turning  to  it,  and  alfo  to  enable  him  to
judge  how  far  what  I  have  writ,  fhould  it  anfwer
no  other  end,  may  be  of  ufe  to  illuftrate  and  ftrengthen
what  this  excellent  author  has  faid.

«  Firft  of  all,  there  is  a  very  ftrong  prefumption  a-
<«  gainft  common  fpeculative  truths, and againft the
«  moft ordinary fa^s before  the proof  of  them,
'<  which  yet  is  overcome  by  almoft  any  proof. There
«  is  a  prefumption  of  millions  to  one  againft  the  fiory
<«  of  CxHir,  or  any  other  man. For, fuppofe  a  num-
«  ber  of  common  fa^s fo  and  fo  circumftanced, of
<<  which  one  had  no  kind  of  proof,  fhould  happen  to
"  come  into  one's  thoughts,  every  one  would,  without
««  any  poflible  doubt,  conclude  them  to  be  falfe. And
*«  the  like  may  be  faid  of  a  fingle  common  facl.  And
«  from  hence  it  appears,  that  the  queftion  of  impor-
ts tance,  as  to  the  matter  before  us,  is  concerning  the
«  degree  of  the  peculiar  prefumption fuppofed  againft
«  miracles ;  not  whether  there  be  any  prefumption
«  at  all  againft  them.  For,  if  there  be  the  prefumption
*'  of  millions  to  one  againft  the moft  common  fads;
"  what  can  a  fmall  prefumption,  additional  to  this,  a-
<«  mount  to,  though  it  be  peculiar?  It  cannot  be  efti-
cif^  mated, and  is as  nothing. The  only material

*'  queftion


"^28 On Hijlorical 'Evidence ^

be,  to  invalidate  the  dirc5i  evidence  for  it.
Every attempt  of  this  kind  would  de*-

ferye

**  queftion  is,  whether  there  be  any  fuch  prcfumption
**  againft  miracles,  as  to  render  them  in  any  fort  incre^
"  dible.  Secondly^  If  we  leave  out  the  confideration  of
"  religion,  we  are  in  fuch  total  darknefs  upon  what
^'  caufes,  occafions,  reafons  or  circumflances  the
"  prefcnt  courfe  of  nature  depends  5  that  there  does  not
''  appear  any  improbability  for  or  againft  fuppofing,
*'  that  five  or  fix  thoufand  years  may  have  given  fcope
"  for  caufes,  occafions,  reafons  or  circumftances,
*' from  whence  miraculous  interpofitions  may  have
«'  arifen.  And  from  this,  joined  with  the  foregoing
"  obfervation,  it  will  follow,  that  there  muft  be  a
"prcfumption,  beyond  all  comparifon  greater,,  a-
*'  gainft  t\\Q  particular  common  facls  juft:  now  inftan-
,*'  ced  in,  than  againft  miracles  in  general^  before  any
^"  evidence  of  either.  But,  thirdlyy  take  in  the  confi-
**  deration  of  religion,  or  the  moral  fyftem  of  the
**  vvorld,  and  then  we  fee  diftinc^:  particular  reafons
"  for  miracles;  to  afford  mankind  inftru^lion,  addi-
.f<  tioJial  to  that  of  nature,  and  tp atteft  the  truth  of

"  it. Lajlly^  Miracles  muft  not  be  compared to

''  common  natural  events,  but  to  the  extraordinary
*'  phenomena  of  nature.  And  then  the  comparifon
'<  will  be  between  the  prefumption  againft  miracles,
•'  and  the  prefumption  againft  fuch  uncommon  ap-
'•  pearances,  fuppofe, as  comets, and,  againft  there

"  being


and  Miracles,  429

ferve  the  mofl: ferious  regard;  and, it  is
vain  to  think  of  overthrowing  chriftianity  ill
any  other  way. As  far  as  there  is  reafon  to
believe,  that  the  apoflles  wxre  neither  de-
ceived nor intended to deceive, we  are
under  a  neceflity  of  receiving  the  fads  they
witnefled though miraculous. Let  then
unbelievers  prove, if  it be  poffible,  that
there  is  no  fufficient  reafon  to  believe  this.
Let  them  fliew,  that  Chrift  and  his  apoftles
were  either  enthiiftajis  or  hnpojiors,  and  ac-
count for  their  conduit  and  writings  on  one
of  thofe  fuppofitlons,  taking  along  with  them
the  confideration,  how  nvild  and  frantick

"  being  any  fuch  powers  in  nature  as  magnetifm  and
^«  ekaricity,  {o  contrary  to he  properties  of  other

«  bodies,  not  endued  with  thefe  powers. Upon

«'  all  this,  I  conclude,  that  there  is  certainly  no  fuch
'«  prefumption  againft  miracles  as  to  render  them  in
<«  any  wife  incredible.  That,  on  the  contrary,  our
^«  being  able  to  difcern  reafons  for  them  gives  a  pofi-
«  tive  credibility  to  the  hiftory  of  them,  in  cafes  where
«  thofe  reafons  hold  :  And  that  it  is  by  no  means  cer-
"  tain,  that  there  is  any  peculiar  prefumption  at  all,
*«  from  analogy,  againft  miracles,  as  diftinguifhed
"  from  other  extraordinary  phsenomena.'*  Analogy  of
^Rd\gm^  6cc.  p.  243,  5:c,

they


4j.-3b On WJlorkal  'Evidencey

they  muft  have  been  if  the  former,  and
how  profane  and  abandoned  if  the  latter.
But  let  them  not  pretend  that  they  are  able
to  prove  a  priori^  that  no  accounts  of  mira-
cles ca7i  be  true ;  or  fatisfy  themfelves  with
faying  lazily,  that  deceit  and  falfehood  are
very  common,  and  miracles  very  extraordina-
ry 5  and  that,  therefore,  the  whole  quefti-
on  is  decided,  and  there  can  be  no  occafion
for  any  further  examination.  A  perfon
who  fliould  reafon  in  this  manner,  in  other
inftances,  would  be  quite  ridiculous.  Tefti*
mony  is  an  evidence  which  admits  of  an  in-
finite variety  of  degrees,  and  which,  fome-
times,  is  fcarcely  fliort  of  demonflration.
Though  it  often  deceives,  yet  there  are  fome
kinds  of  it  that  have  never  decei  ed,  and  that
cannot  deceive.  It  is  one  of  the  principal
fources  of  all  our  information  and  know-
ledge. To  argue,  therefore,  againft  chriC«
tianity  from  the  general  topick  of  the  com-
monnefs  of  falfe  teftimony,  is  trifling  and
unjuft,  unlcfs  it  can  be  (hewn,  that  it  has
been  common  ioxfiich  teftimony  as  that  of

the


and  Miracles.  431

the  apoftles  to  be  falfe  *.  Hiftorical  evi-
dence being  of  all  degrees,  what  is  true  of

other

*  It  may  be  worth  while  to  obferve  here,  that  the  ob-
jection I  have  been  confidering  is  apph'cable  to  fa6ls
for  which  we  have  the  evidence  of  fenfe^  as  well  as
thoCe  which  depend  on  the  evidence  of  teft-imony.  Were
we  to  be  eye  witnefTes  to  any  thing  quite  new  to  us»
and  out  of  the  ufual  courfe  of  nature,  it  might  be  faid,
that  what  we  perceive  being  contradictory  to  uniform
experience,  but  deceptions  of  our  fenfes  common  ;
therefore,  it  muft  be  wrong  to  beheve  the  reality  of  it ;
becaufe,  this  would  be  trufting  a  feebler  experience
in  oppofition  to  a  ftronger,  or,  receiving  a  faCl  upon
an  evidence,  the  falfehood  of  which  would  be  lefs
uncommon  than  the  faClitfelf.  He,  therefore,  that
will  guide  himfelf  by  the  principles  which  are  the
foundation  of  this  objection,  and  balance  oppofite  ex-
periences in  the  manner  it  requires,  muft  have  been
an  unbeliever,  though  he  hady^^w  the  miracles  related

in  the  New  Teftament. Though  our  fenfes  have

often  deceived  us,  we  cannot  help  relying,  in  general,
without  diffidence  on  their  information.  There  are
innumerable  circumftances  and  inftances  in  which  ihey
have  never  deceived  us  :  And,  tharefore,  when  in  a-
ny  particular  inftance  they  convey  to  us  any  informa-
tion, it  is  trifling  to  objeC^,  that  they  have  informed
us  wrong  in  fome  other  inftances,  except  thofe  other
inftances  were  of  a  fimilar  nature. And  even  fuppo-

2


432 On  Hlflorkal  Evidence y

o^/6(^r  hifloncal  evidence  is  nothing  to  thih
If  the  facfls  are  extraordinary,  there  may  be
peculiar  circumftances  attending  them  tak-
ing off  all  improbability  from  them  on  this
account ;  and  it  may  be  even  lefs  wonderful
that  they  fliould  be  true,  than  that  the  tefti-
mony  reporting  them  fhould  be  falfe.  It  has
been  fliewn  indeed,  that,  in  order  to  our
reception  of  the  chriftian  miracles,  it  is  by
no  means  neceffary  to  prove  this.  A  great
deal,  however,  has  been  faid  to  prove  it
with  much  ftrength  of  reafon,  by  the  de-
fenders of  Chriftianity  *. Why  ihould  not

fome

fing  this  fimilarity,  the  objection  will  be  of  little
weight,  unlefs  the  number  of  fuch  ihftances  in
which  they  have  deceived  us,  is  nearly  equal  to  or
greater  than  thofe  in  which  they  have  not  deceived
iis.< — It  appears  from  what  is  faid  above,  that  thcfeob-
fervations  are  applicable,  with  like  propriety  and  force,
to  the  information  we  receive  from  teftimonv.

* See  Dr.  Adams's  EfTay  on  Miracles, When

Mr.  Hunic,  in  a  pafiage  before  quoted,  p.  387.  lays  it
down  as  a  maxima  ''  That  no  teflimony  is  fufficient  to
*'  cftablidi  a  miracle,  unlefs  the  falfehood  of  it  is  more
"  miraculous  than  the  fadt  it  endeavours  to  eftablifti ;"
tis  meaning,  I  fliould  think,  muft  be  that  as,  accor-
ding


end  Miracles.  433

fome  notice  be  taken  of  the  arguments  they
offer?  Why  Ihould  not thofe who  rejea

chriftlanity

<Jing  to  him, no  teftimony  is  fufficient  to  prove  an  or-
dinary  fa£t,  unlcfs  its  falfhood  is  improbable  In  a  high-
er degree  than  the  fa6t  is  improbable,  in  the  cafe  of  a
miraculous  fa6l  the  falfnood  of  the  teftimony  muft  be
miraculous  in  a  higher  degree  than  tiie  fad  is  mira^uloui :
that  is,  it  muft  be  certain^  that  there  is  no  other  ac-
count to  be  given  of  the  falfhood  of  the  teftimony,
befides  a  miraculous  deception  of  the  fenfes  and  fub-
verfion  of  the  faculties  of  the  perfons  who  give  it.  We
fhould  not,  therefore,  be  able  to  convince  Mr.  Hu7ne
of  the  truth  of  chriftianity,  though  we  could  prove  to
a  demonjiration^  that  the  apoftles  did  not  intend  to  de-
ceive, and  were not  themfelves  deceived  except  mi-
racles were  employed  to  deceive  them. It muft  be
further  proved  to  him,  that  a  miraculous  deception  of
their  fenfes  and fubverfion  of  their  faculties  would
be  greater  miracles  than  the  fa^s  they  atteft. At  this
rate,  agreeably  to  what  was  obferved  in  the  laft  note,
it  is  plain,  that  had  we  ourfelvesy^^  the  miracles  of
Chrift  and  his  apoftles,  we miift  nave  been  entirely
doubtful  about  them, unlefs  we  were  perfuadea  that  a
deception  of  our  fenfes  required  a  greater  e?(ert.on  of
fupernatural power,  than  the  reaUty  of  what  we  faw.—
Surely, no  one  can  think  that  fuch  an  argument  de-
ferves  ferious  regard. The  obvious  conclufion  from  it
is,  that  we  have  no  reafon  for  believing  the  exiftence  of

F  f  any


434 ^^ Hijhrical  Evidence^

chriflianity  tell  us,  in  particular,  how  they
account  for  the  rapid  progress  it  made  in  the

world ;

any  external  obje6ls,  or  the  reality  of  any  thing  we  hear,
fee  or  feel  in  any  other  fenfe,  than  as  an  idea  or  mode  of
perception  in  our  minds.  This,  however,  cannot  ftartle
Mr.  Hume ;  for,  it  is  the  very  conclufion  he  has  led
us  to  draw,  and  to  which  his  fyftem  of  philofophy
neccfTiirily  carries  us.  '-'

I  hope  I  fhall  be  excufed  if  I  give  room  here  to  art
obfervation which  is  a  little foreign to  the  prefent

purpofe. It  has  been  objected,  that  fuppofing  the

reality  of  the  miraculous  facls  of  chriflianity,  there  is
no  connexion  between  them  and  the  truth  of  its  doc-
trines. This,  in  my  opinion,  is  to  trifle  inex-
cufably  ;  nor  can  it  be  worth  any  chriftian's
while  to  fay  a  word  in  anfwer  to  it,  till  one  per-
fon  is  found  who  can  honeftly  declare,  that  he  believes
the  miracles  of  Chrift,  but  denies  his  divine  miiiion  ;
that,  in  particular,  he  is  convinced  that  he  raifed  fe-
veral  perfons  from  the  dead,  and  at  laft  rofe  himfelf
from  the  dead  and  afcended  to  heaven,  and  afterwards
poured  forth  on  the  apoillcs  and  iirft  chriftians  thofe
gifts  of  thefpirit  mentioned  in  the  New  Teftament^
but,  at  the  fame  time,  doubts  v/hether  he  faid  true
Vvhen  he  declared,  that  he  was  the  rcfurreSfion  and  the
life ;  that  all  poiver  was  given  htm  in  heaven  and  earth  ;
and  that  the  hour  would  come ^  when- all  that  are  in  their
^ravei  Jkould  hear  his  voice  and  come  forthy  they  that  have

done


ani  Miracles.  ^2S

World ;  for  the  manner  in  which  St.  Paul
mentions  the  miraculous  gifts  in  his  epiftles  >
and  for  the  fortitude  with  which  the  apof-
tles,  in  giving  their  teftimony,  facrificed
every  worldly  intereft  and  at  laft  laid  down
their  lives  ?  Why,  inftead  of  making  any
attempts  of  this  kind,  do  they,  in  general,
infifl:  on  topicks  which  atfedt  not  the  dire^
evidence,  or  found  their  objedions  on  the
adulterations  of  chriftiahity  by  human  in-
ventions and  civil  eftablifhments,  without
taking  pains  to  difcover  what  it  is  as  it
lies  in  the  New  Teftament  ?

If  the  chriftian  religion  is  true  we  have  clear
information  on  points  the  mofl  intereding^
A  vicious  man  has  every  thing  to  fear,  and
a  virtuous  man  every  thing  to  hope.  The
queftion,  therefore,  whether  it  is  of  divine
original,  is,  as  I  obferved  at  the  beginning
of  this  differtation,  of  unfpeakable  impor-
tance. 'Tis  inexcufable  to  treat  it  with  in-

done  good  to  the  refurreSlion  of  Ufe^  and  ihey  that  hare  dene
f*i)il  to  the  rejurrtclion  of  damnation,  John  xi.  25.  •  *
V* 28,  29.

F  f  2  difference  ;


436  On  Hijlorical  Evidence^

difference;  or,  with  conceited  half-thinkr
ers,  to  fuffer  ourfelves  to  be  led  into  infir
delity  by  a  few  fpecious  difficulties,  without
critically  examining  the  original  code  itfelii
and  confidering  carefully  the  joint  force  of
all  the  evidences  internal^  external  and./>r^r
fumptive  taken  together.  If,  after  fuch  an
examination,  any  perfon  {hould  judge,  that
the  whole  amount  of  the  evidence  is  inade-
quate to  the  proof  of  the  fads  on  which
chriflianity  is  founded,  he  ought  next  to  con-
fider  how  far  it  goes  towards  proving  them.
That  it  goes  fome  way  towards  this  is  abfo*
lutely  certain.  The  furtheft  that  any  enquir-
er can  go  in  his  rejection  of  chriflianity  is,
to  think  that  the  objedions  out-weigh  the
evidence ;  but  he  cannot  poffibly  think  that
there  is  no  evidence.  I  fhould  imagine  in-
deed, that  he  cannot  poffibly  avoid  feeing,
that  there  is  very  confiderable  and  ftriking
evidence,  though  he  may  judge  it  infiiffici-
ent.  It  is  not  conceivable,  that  any  one  can
read  the  New  Teftament,  and  obferve  with
what  a  force  and  purity,  before  unknown,
it  teaches  morality  and  natural  religion;  the
,  ♦;!,..  fiiblimc


and  Mir^cleim  ^yj

fublime  and  Angular  charadterit  has  dpawft,

without  the  leaft  appearance  of  art  Or  effort,

in  the  hiftory  it  gives  of  the  life,  difcourfes

and  miracles  of  Jefus  Chrift  j  and  the  fpirit

of  piety,  goodnefs,  love  and  heavenly  mind'-

cdnefs  which  breathes  through  all  its  parts :

It  is  not,  I  fay,  conceivable,  that  any  pefJ-

fon,  after  fuch  a  perufal  of  the  New  Tefta-

ment,  can  be  able  eaiily  to  perfuade  him-

felf,  that  the  writers  of  it  were  fuch  mra-

cles  of  madnefs  or  profligacy  as  they  muft

have  been,  if  the  fads  to  which  they  bor^

teftimony  were  falfe,  and  the  religion  they

taught  an  impofition  on  mankind. But

not  to  dwell  on  this.  For  the  reafon  which
has  been  affigned  it  is  certain,  that  no  infi-
dels, who  are  inquifitive  and  candid,  can
go  beyond  a  ftate  of  doubt.  They  muft  ac-
knowledge that,  at  leafl,  there  is  evidence
enough  to  give  a  chance  for  the  truth  of
chriflianity;  and  they  ought  toconfider  feri-
oufly  to  what  this  chance  amounts,  and  what
obligations,  in  refped  of  pradtice,  their
own  flate  of  doubt  lays  tliem  under.  Would
they  do  this, they  could  never  make  chrif-

tianity
2


'4jS On  HiJIdrical  Evidence^

Tlianity  a-  fabjeft  of  ridicule  or  contempt.
-Though  not  convinced  of  its  truth,  they  would
live  linderthe  apprehenfion  that  it  may  pof-
fibly  pi'ov'e  true.  ■  Thofe  who  do  not  ad  thus
xannotreafonably  complain  of  the  threatnings
denounced  in  the  fcriptures  againft  iilfidelity.
-Thefe'' threatnings 'certainly  (hould  not  be
applied^  nor  were  they  ever  intended  to  be
-applied  to  any  honeft  enquirers,  be  their
doubts  vvhat^  they^wilL  There  is  nothing
fundamental^  but  a  fincere  defire  to  know
and  do  the  will  of  God,  Speculative  errors
can  be  no  further  criminal  than  they  {hew,
that  this  does  not  prevail  in  the  charader,  or
proceed  from  criminal  difpofitions,  and  are
made  fanduaries  for  vice.  That  this  is  one
of  the  fources-  of  modern  as  well  as  antient
infidelity,  appears  too  plainly.  The  purity
and  piety  required/by  chriftianity,  though
the  moft  irrefiftible  recommendation  of  it  to
a  good  mind,  muft  create  flrong  prejudices
againft  it  among  the  licentious  and  diflb-
lute,  and  all  whofe  hearts  arc  not  governed
by  the  love  of  God  and  virtue..  *JIe  that
belkveth  not h condemned  already^  becaufe

ht
5


r^^'


aJid Miracles.  429

he  hath  not  believed  in  the  name  of  the  only
begotten  Son  of  God.  And  this  is  the  con-
demnation, the  reafon  of  the  condemnation,
that  light  is  come  into  the  world,  and  men
love  darknefs  rather  than  light,  becaufe  their
deeds  are  evil.  For  every  one  who  doth  evil
hateth  the  light,  neither  cometh  to  the  light
leaft  his  deeds  fioould  be  reproved  "^ .

*  John  iii. iS, 19.

THE END.


ADVERTISEMENT.

AFTER  thefe  DifTertations  were  printed  ofF  I
happened  to  look  into  an  Eilay,  entitled,  ^-
marh  on  the  Laws  of  Motion  a?id  the  Inertia  of  Matter^
by  Dr.  Stewart,  ProfeJJor  of  Natural  Phihjophy  at  Edin-
burgh, publifhcd in  the  nrft  volume  of  the  Edinburgh

Phyfical  Ellays. The conformity  which 1 have

found  between  the  obfcrvations  contained  in  that  ex-
cellent paper,  and  lome  of  thofe  made  in  the  iecond
fcdion  of  the  Diflcrtation  on  Providence,  has  agreeably
furprized  me  ;  but  at  the  fame  time  it  has  given  mc
fome  pain  becaufe  difcovered  fo  late.  I  cannot  help,
therefore,  taking  notice  of  it  in  this  manner,  left  I
fhould  appear  to  be  guilty  in  any  inflance  of  writing
after  others  without  makin^^  proper  acknowlcd;;-
ments.


^mim


-tM


:i*  .<
