The New Geology
George McCready Price
The New Geology: A Textbook for Colleges, Normal Schools, and Training Schools; and for the General Reader. Mountain View, CA: Pacific Press, 1923.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/newgeology0000geor).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

DAP TPS I
THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY


KANSAS CITY, KANSAS


in 2025


THE NEW GEOLOGY


Cs‘) PS CE ‘SHIAM ) `Sn092%194O9 uo BUNSƏL uBlyuos,y ECEAT] Apəuuəy JO J10] UuUl4ou əul woaz ‘euByuoyy *“urgyunojx JID E “DIT


(Te
NEW GEOLOGY.


A TEXTBOOK FOR COLLEGES,

NORMAL SCHOOLS, AND TRAIN-

ING SCHOOLS; AND FOR THE
GENERAL READER


by
GEORGE McCREADY PRICE


Professor of Geology, Uni College, College

View, Nebraska; Author 9f “The Fundamentals

of Geology,” “A Textp6ok of General Science,”
“Q.#. D.,” etc.


rA


SECOND
Pa
EDITION
— r I —


PACIFIC PRESS PUBLISHING ASSOCIATION


MOUNTAIN VIEW, CALIFORNIA


|


LIBRARY
CENTRAL BAPTIST SEMINARY


Copyright, 1923, by
Pacific Press Publishing Association


PRINTED
IN U:S:A:


ao.
PIYE


PREFACE


In various ones of the natural sciences, it has often hap-
pened that the theories of one generation have become the dog-
matic doctrines of the next. Fortunately, in such sciences as
physics, chemistry, and bacteriology, theories are usually short-
lived, unless they rest on a solid basis of facts. Fortunately
also, the prime postulates at the basis of most of the natural
sciences are merely those basic truths of experience and com-
mon sense which are capable of being checked up by reality
almost at an instant’s notice.

In geology, however, we have long labored under the handi-
cap of having several wide-sweeping assumptions lying at the
very threshold of our investigations; and these assumptions
have shown a phenomenal tenacity of life, because they were of
such a nature that they could not readily be checked up by
either experience or experiment. Such were the theory of the
molten interior of the earth, the theory of uniformity, and
the theory of a succession of life in a definite order all over the
globe. For many decades, these assumptions and their many
corollaries have not only pervaded all the literature of the
science, but have also strictly limited observers in what they
ought to find in their investigations, just as truly as the scho-
lastics of the Middle Ages felt limited always by what the
church had defined as truth. Of late years, it is true, the first
two of these three primary assumptions, long venerated as
dogmas, have been partly shaken off; for the theory of the mol-
ten interior of the earth has fallen into disrepute, and instead
of a dead level of uniformity, recent geological theory has been
verging more and more toward a sort of cyclical catastrophism,
periods of uniformity being considered as having alternated
with other periods of greatly accelerated geological action. But
the strictly definite order of successive groups of plants and
animals has imperceptibly passed out of the position of an as-
sumption, and is to-day treated as the most firmly established
dogma of the whole science. And few of the modern students
of geology have ever given sufficient attention either to the his-
tory of this idea or to its logical foundation to realize that this
historical outline of the alleged successive forms of life is still
only an assumption, and has already become an incredible as-
sumption, in view of certain facts which have come to light in


recent years.


16/19 6


(5)


6 PREFACE


When a man trained in any other mental discipline takes up
a modern geological report of some particular locality, or dips
into a discussion of the age of a particular set of beds, he is
at once amazed at the easy confidence with which the geologist
asserts a knowledge of the geography of the long-vanished age
which is under consideration, with just as definite a knowledge
of the migrations of the various types of animals, and the exact
time (relatively) in the chronology when certain types of life
appeared or disappeared. And he begins to ask in his own
mind, “How much of this story is actual fact, and how much is
merely imagination or hypothesis?” If he perseveres and at-
tains to a more extensive acquaintance with the science as it is
taught and written about to-day, he is not likely to have his
query answered, but on the contrary, is almost sure to arrive
at the conviction, sooner or later, that geology is a very profound
subject, and the underlying principles and methods are deep
secrets known only to the initiated; all dabblers must be content
to take without question the dicta of experts in these matters.

The name of the present volume is not meant as a challenge;
but it is meant as the designation of a method which the author
believes is here employed for the first time in a geological text-
book. Whether the author has always succeeded or not, the
effort has at least been made to keep facts and theories clear
and distinct; and where alternative hypotheses are possible and
permissible, these alternatives are openly stated, and the reader
is advised to take his choice. True, the author has often felt
free to state a line of argument in favor of that hypothesis
which he considers the more reasonable. But it is supposed
that even the beginner in the science will acquire a better ap-
petite for more of the subject, and will be more mentally alert
to discriminate between the true and the false in the way of
theories, if he is not always spoon-fed with those theories which
in the minds of most teachers of the science have already crys-
tallized into infallible dogmas. In the first part, and, indeed, in
all the body of the work, the great problems of the science have
been held steadily before the student as problems to be solved,
not as questions already settled by all the experts in the science.
Only in the concluding section, when all the leading facts are
already before him, has the student been asked to decide be-
tween the conflicting hypothetical solutions. If such a method
should appear like a new thing under the sun, so far as geologi-
cal textbooks are concerned, this very fact might suggest to the
thoughtful .person the urgent need of such an attempt at re-
forming the method of teaching this subject. And the author


PREFACE 7


is satisfied that, whether or not the present work is successful
as an effort thus to reform the teaching of this science, such a
reform must inevitably come sooner or later.

Why should any apology be needed „here for bringing in the
hypothesis of a great world catastrophe to account for some
(an indefinite amount) of the geological changes? Its rival, the
theory of uniformity, has so long been in vogue that we are all
inclined to forget that it also is only a theory; and that if this
ancient alternative, a great world catastrophe, will more satis-
factorily explain some of the phenomena, a true scientific induc-
tion ought not to have any settled prejudice against it which
would continue everlastingly to rule it out of court. In the
opinion of the present writer, the latter method has prevailed
about long enough; and this volume has been prepared in the
belief that if these two rival theories are impartially examined
in contrast in the light of all that modern science has revealed
to us, the decision must inevitably be in favor of that hypothe-
sis which has been furnished to science ready-made by the
oldest documents of the human race, to say nothing of the con-
current traditions of every people on earth.

Since the publication of the writer’s “The Fundamentals of
Geology” (first edition, 1906), there has been a growing de-
mand for a textbook based on the principles there stated. The
presentation of such a treatise, however, involving the actual
reconstruction of the whole science, has been no easy task. The
present volume is only a tentative effort along this line; and
the author would esteem it a great favor if the critics who may
read it, and the teachers who may use it, would report to him
any mistakes of fact or any faulty methods of description which
they may observe in it, so that these may be corrected in sub-
sequent editions. The first edition of any pioneer work of this
kind, which endeavors to reconstruct the whole body of so
highly developed a science as geology in many of its aspects
now is, can not fail to be in many respects a crude affair; but
the readers of the book can materially assist the author in mak-
ing subsequent editions more in keeping with his high aims
to build only on that solid ground of nature which makes for aye.

The notable works of Suess and Howorth have largely fur-
nished the inspiration for the present volume, these works being,
so far as they go, founded on true inductive principles. The
present writer must ever consider these two men as his mas-
ters; but in addition, many other prominent authors and teachers
of the science have contributed varying amounts of help. Yet
the author hesitates to mention their names here, for fear such


8 PREFACE


a mention might be misunderstood as an effort to make these
fellow workers partially responsible for the views here set forth.
For these views he wishes to take the entire responsibility,— a
responsibility, however, which many intelligent people in other
lines of intellectual work will not consider altogether a disgrace.
At least, the volume has not been hastily thrown together; for
it has occupied much of the time of the author for over ten
years. And if the teachers and students who may use it ac-
quire therefrom a greater interest in the great book of nature,
and develop a greater ability to discriminate between facts and
theories regarding the earth and its history, this book will have
served the purpose of
THE AUTHOR.
College View, Nebraska, March, 1923.


CONTENTS


CHAPTER PAGE
UU PP p. P In eee | Ce t A, Cas Ta oat 45-26


Problems. Former Methods of Interpretation. Time. Characters of
the Stratified Rocks. Modern Methods of Interpretation. Divisions
of the Subject.


PART I—PHYSIOGRAPHIC GEOLOGY


I. THE GENERAL FEATURES OF THE EARTH , . . cts) eae


Introductory Remarks. The Earth as a Planet. The Nebular Hy-
pothesis. Objections. Form, Size, Density, Rigidity. Underground
Heat. Proportion of Land and Water. The Ocean Bottom. Moun-
tains. Interior Basins. Mediterraneans.


II. THE ORGANIC FEATURES OF THE EARTH. . . aan) Se 6


Geological Importance of Plants and Animals. Geographical Distri-
bution. Environmental Factors. Habitats. The Biological Regions.
Aquatic Species. Problems in Distribution. Variation.


PART II — STRUCTURAL GEOLOGY


III. MINERALS AND RocKs. ... . x y “SPOR 168-80


Meaning of the Terms. Elements and Simple Combinations. The
Chief Rock-Making Minerals. Organically Formed Materials. Kinds
of Rocks. Calcareous Rocks. Fragmental Rocks Not Calcareous.
Crystalline Rocks.


IV. Rock MASSES .. -+ ~ s 2 ee Ol-9S


General Remarks. Stratified and Unstratified. Structure and Char-
acteristics. Formations. Positions and Conditions of Strata. Other
Definitions. Original Positions of Strata. Fractured and Displaced
Strata. Positions of Fractured and Displaced Strata. Order of Ar-
rangement of Strata.


PART II — DYNAMICAL GEOLOGY


Y. CHEMICAL WORE .. . ee esa tA 34 7 00282


General Remarks. Weathering. Oxygen. Iron Compounds. Carbon
Dioxide. Kaolin. Laterite. Other Rocks. Iron Ores. Arid Condi-
tions. The Stassfurt Deposits. Iron Bacteria. Concretions. Precipi-
tation of Calcium Carbonate. Odlites. Dolomites.


VI. THE ATMOSPHERE AS A GEOLOGICAL AGENT. . . . . . 118-122
Results of Weathering. The Planetary Winds. Dust Storms. Desert
Conditions Peculiar to Our Age. Dunes. Loess.

VII. RUNNING WATER ... > 123-151


The Rainfall. The Run-Off. Erosion in Arid Regions. Mountains of
Erosion. Erosive Power of Moving Water. The Assorting Power of
Water. Aggrading and Degrading Streams. “Young” and “Old”
Valleys. Gorges. Niagara. Constructive Work. Terraces. Deltas.
Ground Water. Estuaries. The Abrading Action of Sediments.


VIII. ICE AS A GEOLOGICAL AGENT . 152-164


River Ice. Lake Ice. Above the Snow Line. Glaciers. The Move-
ment of Glaciers. The So-Called “Glacial” Phenomena. ObiadHone.


(9)


10 CONTENTS


CHAPTER PAGE


IX. THE OCEAN AND ITS WoRK ç" = s. « LG65—L86


Destructive Work of the Waves. Their Action on Weather Coasts.
The Tides. Translation Waves. Ocean Currents. The Continental
Shelf. Deposits. Marine Deposits (Table of Classification). Shore-
Line Deposits. Shallow-Water Deposits. Hypotheses. Organic De-
posits on the Continental Shelf. The Muds. Abysmal Deposits. The
Oozes. Conclusions.


X. Lire: Its GEOLOGICAL EFFECTS Pe Oe a ey pe ge eT)


General Remarks. Moors. Peat. Summary. Iron Ores. Calcium
and Magnesium Carbonates. Coral Reefs. Chalk. Other Limestones.
Siliceous Deposits. Phosphates. Ancient Limestones. Stratified
Limestones. Other Examples. The Interpretation. Summary.


XI. VOLCANOES . . : d meh 205228


General Remarks. The Two Types. Size. Engulfment Craters. Ex-
plosions. Magmas. Vapors. Vesicular Structure. Duration. Other
Phenomena. Location. Causes. Hot Springs. Former Activity.
Dating.


XII: Heat: Irs Errects AND Its CAUSES 5 2 =) 2). 2. = 224-2387


Quantity of Erupted Materials. Definitions. Metamorphism. Causes
of Underground Heat—History. Sources of Heat. Changes in
Atmospheric Pressure. Effects of Tidal Strain. Chemical Action.
Radioactivity. The Friction Attending Mountain Making. Combus-
tion in Coal Mines — General Remarks. The Extent of the Coal Beds.
The Summit Hill Fire. Other Examples of Burning Coal Beds. Con-
ditions Favorable for Producing a Voleano. The Expansive Power of
Water. Old Volcanoes Which Had Been Formed in This Way. Vol-
canoes Confined to Stratified Rocks. Two Types of Igneous Rocks.


XIII. EARTHQUAKES AND DIASTROPHISM. . .. . .. . 238-254


General Remarks. The San Francisco Earthquake. Other Examples.
Ancient Earthquakes. Diastrophism — Secular Changes of Level.
Difficulties of the Subject. Past Changes Sudden, Not Gradual. Suess
on Secular Changes.


XIV. MOUNTAINS AND MOUNTAIN MAKING . a . O a «. 255-269


Definitions. Classification. Mountains Which Have Been Caused by
Earthquake Movements. Assigning Dates. Speculations. Probable
Causes of Folding. Probably Unconsolidated Strata.


XV. MINERAL VEINS AND ORE DEPOSITS. . . See 02276


Definitions. Occurrence. Bedded Ores and Pla igi i
Secondary Enrichment. age Na Ae BROS


PART IV —STRATIGRAPHICAL GEOLOGY


AVI. CLASSIFICATION © P T ere
Introduction. The Time Problem. Principles of Classification —
Merely a Taxonomic Series. Criteria. Groups, Systems, Formations
Methods. Difficulties. What the Terms Mean. The Groups. Mlogical
Methods. Tables of Classification. Distribution.


XVII. FOSSILS AND THEIR USES IN GEOLOGY. . er O05


Historical Sketch. Index Fossils. How Index Fosi A -
ditions Favoring Fossilization. Definition. Caleite mes
Other Structures. The Siberian “Mummies.” Other Conditions i


CONTENTS 11


`
CHAPTER PAGE
XVIII. A GENERAL VIEW OF THE PLANT AND ANIMAL KINGDOMS 306-327


Living Organisms. Variation. Species. Distinctions Between Ani-
mals and Plants. The Animal Kingdom — Vertebrates and Inverte-
brates. Mammals. Birds. Reptiles. Amphibians. Fishes— Teleosts.
Selachians, Gars, and Dipnoans. Invertebrates— Arthropods. Worms.
Mollusks. Brachiopods. Echinoderms. Ccelenterates. Sponges.
Protozoans. The Plant Kingdom — Algæ, etc. Pteridophytes. Sper-
matophytes.


Deen. DHE Pee-CAMBRIAN ROCKS > . 6 ss soa s. oa 328-336
The Basement Complex. The Archæan System. The Algonkian Sys-
tem. General Remarks.

XX. THE PALEOZOIC GROUP — THE CAMBRIAN SYSTEM 2 U < 331-948


Subdivisions and Classification. Methods of Correlation. Divisions of
the Cambrian. Distribution — In America. Foreign. Cambrian Life.
Peculiar Facts.


MEP O 25. ee aAa 849-353
Systematic Position and History. General Structure. Habitat.
Geologic Distribution. Anatomy. Molting. Relationships.

XXII. Fossa SHELLS . . š . . . 854-364


Importance. Brachiopods, or Lamp Shells — Types of Brachiopods.
Structure. Condition of the Fossils. Occurrence. The Mollusca, or
True Shellfish — Structure of a Mollusk. The Shell. Classification.
Pelecypods. Structure. Habits. Occurrence. The Gastropoda.
Structure. Occurrence. Cephalopoda. Form and Structure. The
Ammonites. The Belemnites.


XXIII. THe ORDOVICIAN System . ...... . . . 865-380
Subdivisions. Character of the Rocks. Life — General Remarks.
Kinds of Fossils. Economic Products.

XXIV. Fossm RADIATES. . © -a + 3881-391


Bilateral and Radial Symmetry. Coelenterata. Echinodermata.
Classification. Coral Polyps and Their Kin — General Remarks. The
Graptolites. The Anthozoa. Cup Corals. Colonial Corals. Habitat.
Echinodermata — Structure. Subdivisions. The Starfishes. The
Echinids. The Crinoids. The Blastoids. Difficulties.


A. He SILURIAN SYSTEM .9 , Jia ses & « = « | 892-402
Extent and Subdivisions. Lithic Characters. Distribution. Life.
Salt and Gypsum Beds. “Extinct Species.”

MOOV POS HASHES 5 <4 6 se 7 + + 2 +, “e a o 405408
Definition. Structure. Subdivisions. Elasmobranchs. Ostracoderms.
Lungfishes. Armored Fishes. Ganoids. Teleosts.

Revie. DHE DEVONIAN SYSTEM . s ..- s s « «© « « »« 409-419
History. Subdivisions. Distribution. Life— Plants. Invertebrates.
Fishes.

XX VIE. THe CARBONIFEROUS SYSTEM ...... . « 420-441


Historical. Mississippian — Distribution. Pennsylvanian — Distri-
bution. The Coal Measures. Other Characters. Foreign. Life —
Plants. Deep-Sea Animals with the Coals. “Fossil Hickory Nuts.”


12 CONTENTS


PAGE


CHAPTER
Crinoids. Sea Urchins. Arthropods. Brachiopods. Mollusks. Ver-
tebrates.

XXIX. THE PERMIAN SYSTEM. . . 2 se, « 442-453


Historical. Distribution. Foreign. “Tillites.” Life— Plants. In-
vertebrates. Vertebrates.


XXX. COAL: ITS OCCURRENCE AND ORIGIN . . . . < 454-470


General Remarks. Mineral Matter. Color of the Associated Strata.
Classes of Coals. How Formed. Difficulties. The Underclay. The
Sedimentation Theory. The Opinion of Suess. The Probable Method
of the Formation of the Coal Beds. Meaning of the Conglomerates.
The Exquisite Preservation of the Plants. Pyrites. Marine Remains
Mixed with the Coals. The Kinds of Plants Composing the Coals.
No Similar Modern Deposits Anywhere. Conclusion. Climate.


XXXI. THE Mesozoic Group — THE TRIASSIC SYSTEM . . . 471-483


Historical. Subdivisions. General Characters. Distribution. For-
eign. Life — Plants. Invertebrates. Vertebrates.


XXXII. THE JURASSIC SYSTEM arse . aa e 4534498


History. Subdivisions. Distribution. Foreign. Life — Abundance.
Plants. Invertebrates. Vertebrates. Unscientific Methods.


XXXIII THE CRETACEOUS SYSTEM .... . a A00 BIS


History. Subdivisions. Distribution. Foreign. Life — Plants. In-
vertebrates. Vertebrates.


XXXIV. EOSS REPTILES aa se we ee O—baG


Diversity. Marine Reptiles. Flying Reptiles. Dinosaurs. Size of
Brain. Other Characters. Size. Food. Skeleton. Where Found.
Their Extinction. Hunting Fossils. Recovering Fossil Vertebrates.


XXXV. THE CENOZOIC GROUP — THE TERTIARY SYSTEM . . . 537-563


Classification. Historical. The Artificiality of These Subdivisions.
Difficulties. Consolidation. Paleocene Series — Distribution. Eocene
Series — Distribution. Floras and Faunas. The Oligocene Series —
Distribution. The Miocene *Series — Distribution. Fossils. The
Pliocene Series — Distribution. Fossils.. Methods.


XXXVI. THE QUATERNARY SYSTEM — THE PLEISTOCENE SERIES 564-586


Classification. Occurrence. Bowlders. Other Drift Materials. Ad-

ditional Facts. Sir H. H. Howorth. Other Considerations. Raised

Beaches. Terraces. Fossil Elephants. Foreign Pleistocene. Life of

the Pleistocene. Ambiguity. Barbados Earths. La Brea Formation.

1 So Breccias. Siberian “Mummies.” The Sudden Change. Relic
akes.


PART V — THEORETICAL GEOLOGY
XXXVII. A BRIEF HISTORY oF GEOLOGY. . . See e eS


Importance of the Subject. Among the Greeks and Romans. The
Post-Reformation Period. Lehmann and Fiichsel. Count Buffon.
The “Heroic Age.” Werner and His Theories. The Modern Onion-
Coat Theory. William Smith. The Mistake in Smith’s Methods.
Cuvier and His Work. The Reverse of the Baconian Method. Sub-
sequent History. The Rise of Uniformitarianism. The Evolution
Doctrine. The Lesson from It All. The Demonstration of Creation
The Unique Position of Geology. s=


CONTENTS 18


CHAPTER PAGE
XXXVIII. Do THE FOSSILS OCCUR IN A CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER? 610-642


The Alleged “Invariable Order” of the Fossils. How Shall We Begin?
Why Not Contemporary? Biological Onion Coats. Reductio ad Ab-
surdum. What Do the Formations Represent? General Facts —
Relations to the Archean. Conformity. “Deceptive Conformity,’
Examples. “Thrust Faults.” In Alberta and Montana. Other Ex-
amples. Scientific Methods. In Every Possible Relative Order.
“Extinct Species.” Difficulties. Summary.


XXXIX. THE CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH THE FOSSILS OCCUR 643- 660


Uniformity Only a Theory. Acknowledging a Flood. Methods of
Investigation. Modern Conditions. Contrasts. Wonderfully Pre-
served. Remarkable Conditions. Change of Climate. Degeneracy.
Changes of Land and Water. Mountain Making. What Do These
Things Mean?


XL. SCIENTIFIC METHODS . . oe os = O61=—678
Facts and Theories. The Hare of noe sss, Werner’ s Methods.
Biological Onion Coats. Warnings of Spencer and Huxley. Absurd
Methods. Not the Only Interpretation. An Illustration. The Three
Interpretations. The Application. Other Considerations. Energy
Versus Time. No Historical Order of the Fossils. Unity of the Fos-
siliferous Deposits. A True Induction.


XLI. THE HYPOTHESIS OF A WORLD CATASTROPHE . . . . . 679-692


The Two Hypotheses. A Reconsideration Necessary. A World Ca-
tastrophe. An Ideal World. The World as a Whole. The Antedi-
luvian Climate. Tidal Phenomena. Astronomical Aspects. Other
Considerations. The Bible Record. Corollaries. A Candid Exami-
nation Demanded. Natural Consequences. The New Catastrophism.


XLII. THE ORIGIN AND ANTIQUITY OF MAN. . . eee 093706


Man Created. Antiquity. Pithecanthropus Brus: The Heidelberg
Jaw. The Piltdown Skull. The Neanderthal Skull. Other Specimens.
“How the Anti viy of Man Is Estimated.” Unscientific Methods.
The Verdict of th uture.


El Capitan, Yosemite Valley.


INTRODUCTION


Problems. Geology is that branch of natural science which
seeks to solve the great problems relating to the earth,— its
structure, the present behavior of its various parts, and its
physical and biological history.

No study of the plants and animals now living on the earth
can be of much educational value unless this study of the
modern forms is supplemented with a similar study of the plants


Fic. 2. Bluff of Wasatch (Tertiary) rocks about one mile west of Hamilton, Wyoming. Gas-

tropods and pelecypods (sea shells) are abundant in the shelf near the middle and at the top.

This locality is now about a mile above sea level, and a dry desert. What has made the change?
(Lee, U. 8. G. 8.)


and animals of the past. And no knowledge of the present dis-
tribution of land and water, and of the present-day action of
air, water, and temperature, can be complete without a knowl-
edge of the conditions regarding these matters that have pre-
vailed in the past. Geology includes all these subjects; for
though it is chiefly concerned with the physical changes that
have taken place in the earth, the records of which have been
stamped in the rocks during the very processes of these changes,
these fragmentary leaves from nature’s diary are extremely
intricate documents, and can be successfully read and put to-
gether into an intelligible and truthful narrative only by the
help of those tombstone inscriptions, found almost everywhere,
in which the buried dead, in writing their own epitaphs, have


(15)


16 INTRODUCTION


also unconsciously recorded the sad story of the world in which
they lived, which was destroyed and changed into the world
as we now find it (Fig. 2).

Geology thus deals with the earth's structure, its present
changes, and its past changes, or its history. The study of ge-
ology involves as complete a knowledge as possible of most of
the other sciences; for it builds on the perfected knowledge of
the many physical and biological sciences which have been de-
veloped in modern times. It is essentially a science of problems
regarding the past; and a correct solution of these problems
demands not only as complete a knowledge as possible of all
the potentialities of all the constituents of the earth, but de-
mands also a peculiarly judicial attitude of mind, one that will
not form snap judgments on scanty and insufficient data, and
that will nevertheless not hesitate to assign causes competent to
explain all the phenomena with which we have to deal.


Until quite recently, geologists have often thought they had disposed of
a problem when they had merely pushed it back so far into the shadow of
the remote past that its conditions could no longer be clearly seen. But
this prodigal demand on time is just as unscientific as the prodigal use of
many causes when one would be sufficient. A truly scientific induction re-
garding the earth’s history will seek to decide, not how the changes of the
past may have occurred, but how only they could have occurred. Moreover,
geology is in no sense concerned with the origin of things — either with
the origin of the earth, or with the origin of the plants and animals upon it.
In other words, geology is not a cosmogony, though it has often been treated
as a cosmogony by some who did not understand the true limits of scientific
research. It deals with what appear to be the ruins of a world, certainly
not with its origin; yet a sound philosophy may take up the investigation
where geology leaves off, and by building on the results obtained by geology,
pay be able to tell us something very important regarding the origin of
things.


Former Methods of Interpretation. Beneath the soil and
water on the surface of the earth, we find everywhere a sub-
structure of hardened rocks. In many places, as seen in
the rocky cliffs bordering many valleys, in the ledges about the
tops of mountains, and in the cliffs along the seashore, these
hard rocky ribs of earth’s framework are found protruding
through the shallow soil, and revealing the layers, or strata, of
which they are composed, or sometimes showing a crystalline
structure without distinct layers.

The rocks beneath the soil generally lie in beds. These beds
may be a few inches or many feet thick; but no matter how
great their thickness, they are usually spread out over one an-
other in successive layers. In the early days of the science, it
was supposed that each particular kind of rock, such as lime-


INTRODUCTION 17


stone, sandstone, or shale, was always to be found in the same
position relative to the others; and hence it was said that they
all originally encircled the whole globe like the coats of an
onion. When this was found to be contrary to fact, the remains
of plants and animals embedded in the rocks, and known as
fossils, were fixed upon as furnishing the true index of the age
of the rocks and of their history, as compared with other rocks
elsewhere. Thus for several decades, or for over a hundred
years, the rocks have been named and classified according to
the fossils which they happen to contain. According to this
view, similar fossils, wherever found over the world, are re-
garded as of approximately the same age, and dissimilar fossils
are regarded as of different ages, the various typical kinds of
fossils, which it is supposed successively occupied the earth,
having been worked out in very elaborate details from scattered
localities all over the earth. The arrangement of these various
typical fossils into what is regarded as a true historical order,
has been the chief occupation of geologists for a century; but
this arrangement has always been a purely artificial arrange-
ment, although it was founded on the alleged fact that wher-
ever they occur, they occur in this same relative order. Thus
we have a sort of biological onion-coat theory, based on the
assumption that each great assemblage of life found in any
particular set of beds represents a group which at some re-
mote time occupied the world exclusively and universally, this
group in its turn giving place to other forms of a different type.
Of late years, however, this “‘life-succession theory,” as it is
called, has been found to be untrue, and impossible as an inter-
pretation of the facts of the rocks; but it is still believed by
most geologists, and is still taught in most of the textbooks. It
has always been merely a theory or an assumption, as a means
of interpreting the facts of the rocks; though it is often treated
as if it were the only possible interpretation of these facts.
All the stratified beds, or those containing fossils, are of
quite limited extent, varying from a few square yards or a few
acres to a few hundred square miles in area. Sometimes these
beds, when followed out on the sides, are found to end abruptly;
sometimes they split up into several distinct beds and dovetail
into other beds; and sometimes they change into beds of very
different texture, or into beds containing distinctly different
kinds of fossils. Thus the biological onion-coat theory is just
as physically absurd as was the mineralogical onion-coat theory.
Moreover, the various kinds of fossils, which were so long
thought to be found only in the same relative order all over the


18 INTRODUCTION


globe wherever they occur, are now known to occur in practi-
cally every conceivable order, or at least in many orders directly
contradicting the alleged standard order, just as the various
kinds of sandstone, limestone, and shale may occur in any rela-
tive order whatever.

When it was supposed that the different kinds of sedimen-
tary material were spread around the globe universally as pre-
cipitates from a universal ocean, and that they always preserve
the same order relative to one another, just as real onion coats
do, it was reasonably supposed that they must represent a true
historical succession, just as the successive rings on a pine or a
maple show a real succession. Thus, only one kind of rock, it
is said, was formed at any one period in the world’s history;
and after this had ceased to be formed, another and totally dif-
ferent kind began to be produced. Hence it was axiomatic and
inevitable that these various kinds of rocks must represent a
true succession in time; for, of course, unless disturbed since
their formation, the rocks now found at the bottom of a given
series must be the oldest, and those above must be younger; for
when first formed, they must all have been spread out flat, as
sediments or precipitates are now deposited.

But when, with further knowledge, it was realized that the
various kinds of rock were never universal, never of more than
very local occurrence, or provenience, as it is technically called,
and when it was discovered that the various rocks did not al-
ways occur in the alleged invariable order, then the mineralogi-
cal onion-coat theory had to be given up. In an exactly similar
way, when it was realized that the various fossiliferous beds
could never even originally have been universal, never more
than of local occurrence, and when it was discovered that in
numerous and important instances, the fossiliferous beds oc-
cur in many orders of sequence very different from the alleged
invariable order, then the biological onion-coat theory also had
to be given up. The history of the refutation of the one theory
is the counterpart of the history of the refutation of the other.

But it took a good many years to shake off the mineralogical
onion-coat theory entirely; and it seems to be taking fully as
long a time to get rid of the biological onion-coat theory. The
former persisted well along into the first third of the nineteenth
century; and the latter is still cherished by many people, al-
though its refutation has now been before the scientific world
for nearly twenty years, or almost from the beginning of the
twentieth century.


INTRODUCTION 19


If none of the fossiliferous beds are universal, but all are of
merely local extent, how absurd it is to think of proving from
them that only a certain limited few of those animals and plants
which they contain were alive at a certain period in the world's
history, and that after these became extinct, another set of
living forms succeeded and in turn became universal! We may
assume this evolutionary succession of life, if we wish, as a
working hypothesis, and see if we can arrange the fossils to fit
it; but we should always remember that it is merely a theory,
and should also remember clearly that we can never prove it
as a real scientific fact, even after we have arranged all the
fossiliferous deposits of the world to fit it; for this arrange-
ment of the fossils must ever be_a purely artificial scheme, with
never anything more than a constructive existence. We could
arrange all the books in a library according to their titles, from
A, B, and C, down to X, Y, and Z; but it would be a purely
artificial scheme, and to say that this arrangement proved that
the books arranged under A, B, and C must have been written
and published long before those arranged under X, Y, and Z,
would be absurd.

Time. It is a very ancient obsession in geology, that these
various deposits of rock must represent successive long ages.
Obviously there is in any given locality a plain record of a
succession in time, since these beds could not all have been
deposited at once. The difficulty has always been in trying to
find some method strictly scientific and logical whereby these lo-
cal events could be extended and expanded into events of world
significance, and thus to formulate a reliable world history from
the records of the rocks in a few limited localities.

On the one hand, the scientific experience of nearly two cen-
turies seems to prove that there is no possible way to differen-
tiate these deposits from one another in respect to actual age, so
as to assign some of them to one age and some to another age
long subsequent to the first. For there is always this difficulty
from the point of view of real science, of getting back of the
conditions known to experience, with a world fully stocked with
plants and animals, and with very diverse kinds existing together,
as in our present world, the only world of which we have direct
knowledge. Indeed, it is necessary to assume a supernatural
knowledge of the past, in order to be sure that when certain types
of fossils, such as the trilobites or the dinosaurs, were living in
certain localities, certain other types, such as belemnites, or am-
monites, or elephants, were not yet in existence in some distant
locality or localities.


20 INTRODUCTION


On the other hand, we can never ignore the alternative hy-
pothesis, that these various deposits represent merely the ruins
of a world well stocked with plants and animals, which, by a
series of rapid catastrophic changes of no very great duration,
was transformed into the world as we have had it since historic
times.

Thickness of the Strata. Another point growing out of these
former misunderstandings needs to be explained; namely, the
total thickness of the fossiliferous strata. When it was first as-
sumed that the different fossils represent successive ages, it was
soon discovered that in no particular locality could even a ma-
jority of the successive strata be found all together one above
another. The total thickness of stratified rocks found piled up
in any one locality is never more than a few thousand feet. And
any such local succession of beds never contains more than a very
few of the total number of the typical fossil types; usually not
more than parts of two or three “systems,” as they are called, are
found together in any particular locality. Hence, in following
out the popular theories, it became necessary to bring very many
widely scattered deposits together, and to imagine the beds of one
locality superimposed upon or piled up on top of those from other
localities, in order to complete the whole series of beds alleged to
have been made in the successive ages. And by thus piling them
one on top of another from various separated localities, it has been
said that the total thickness of the stratified deposits amounts
to about 30 miles. But this is not a scientific method of pro-
cedure. The total thickness of the stratified deposits in any par-
ticular locality is all that any true scientific method can reckon
when speaking of the total thickness of the water-formed rocks;
and this is never more than a few thousand feet.

Probably two or two and one half miles may be taken as a safe maxi-
mum; while in the majority of places it is probably less than one mile, and
in thousands of places all over the earth it is only a few hundred feet, or


even less. Thus we may say of the total thickness of the strata, as Mark
Twain said of the report of his death, that it has been greatly exaggerated.


Characters of the Stratified Rocks. In penetrating into the
earth, we always find that the stratified beds rest upon others,
such as granite or schist, which are not stratified, but crystalline
in texture. These crystalline rocks are also interesting and im-
portant geologically, and often contain valuable minerals or ores.
But they are obviously not connected with the stratified rocks in
their origin, and probably represent a previous period of the
world’s history, before the stratified rocks were formed. As to
the character of the rocks constituting the great mass of the earth


INTRODUCTION 21


deep down beneath the limits of scientifie observation, we can
only conjecture. The surface parts of the crystalline rocks may
furnish us some materials for comparison, and rock masses which
have come up from unknown depths through volcanic vents and
fissures may be supposed to furnish us with samples of material
from lower depths than we have access to in any other way.
Still, as volcanic action is now supposed to be comparatively shal-
low, we really have no means whatever of knowing what the
great mass of the earth is like.

The various rock masses teach us many things by their struc-
ture and arrangement. Most of them give evidence that they.
were made of mud, sand, or gravel, much like our modern mud,
sand, and gravel. But there are two marked differences between
the ancient and the modern deposits. Our modern rock-forming
materials, derived largely from decomposed rocks, and carried
down by rivers, to be arranged in beds on the bottom of some lake
or ocean, are always more or less of a heterogeneous mixture,
though sand, or gravel, or mud may so predominate as to furnish
a convenient name for the whole. In contrast with this, the
ancient limestones, slates, or sandstones often stretch out in great
sheets, miles on miles in area, without containing anywhere a
corresponding mixture of particles. Hence these ancient deposits
could not have been formed exactly as the corresponding sedi- —
mentary beds are now being formed, though we know that they
must have been spread out by water, in most cases by the waters
of the ocean.

The so-called drift beds, with some rocks classified as Tertiary, and a
few other surface rocks, often show a considerable mixture of particles, and


are thus much more like the modern deposits, and in marked contrast with
the great majority of the geological formations.


But the second point of contrast between the ancient and the
modern deposits is with reference to the fossils which they con-
tain; and in this respect, the contrast is even more marked. In
our modern deposits, the remains of plants and animals are
scanty in numbers and very poorly preserved. But the ancient
rocks are often full of the remains of once living organisms, like
trenches after a battle, many of these remains being in an aston-
ishingly perfect state of preservation (Fig. 3). Hence, by their
fossil contents, even more than by their lithological structure, the
ancient strata seem to proclaim that they were generally formed
in some way different from the methods of rock formation pre-
vailing in our modern world. But only as we correctly interpret
the record can we hope to frame a true induction regarding the
way in which these ancient deposits were made.


CSD S n ər)


“UMOYS ||ƏA 1B spied Əy} IV “SuwoAM U13459 M “uomwugurroj (Areata) TOA PULIN ur Atend e woaz ‘snynguap snishwmojdiq `g ‘Diy


(22)


INTRODUCTION 23


In many places, the rocks, after having been piled up to a
depth of many hundreds or thousands of feet, have been broken
open by great cracks or fissures; and in some instances, these fis-
sures have been filled with melted rock material which has come
up from some heated region in the depths below. Some instances
of this sort have been observed to occur in modern times; and
they are always accompanied by more or less violent earthquake
movements. And if we assign a similar cause as the explanation
of the much larger fissures and ejections of heated rock materials
which have occurred in the past, the records of which are plainly
visible in the rocks here and there, we must suppose that the earth
went through some frightful convulsions after most or all of the
fossiliferous strata were laid down. For in some instances, these
fissures involve all of the strata in the locality where they occur,
and the ejected materials have been poured out on top of the
ground. In other instances, these fissures involve only a certain
lower depth of the strata, and the ejected materials have been
laid out with other sedimentary materials now lying above them.
In this instance, we may suppose that this fissuring of the lower
beds and the ejection of molten materials may have occurred be-
neath the ocean waters, while the sedimentary beds were in course
of deposition; or that this ejection of liquid material took place
while the rocks were above the waters, and that afterwards the
whole set of strata were submerged and other beds deposited upon
the ejected layers; or that these liquid materials forced their way
up through some of the beds, and then extended themselves as
wedges between these beds and those lying above them. In each
particular instance, we must decide on the exact method of for-
mation of these rocks as best we can, according to the evidence in
that particular instance.

Many sets of beds have evidently been so disturbed by earth
movements of some character that they are no longer horizontal,
as at first laid down, but more or less tilted and inclined, as if the
two sides of the beds had been pushed together by some enormous
lateral pressure, or as if the supporting foundation had given
way under some parts while remaining in place in other parts
(Figs. 159, 160). This tilting and contorting of the strata is
much more noticeable in mountain regions than elsewhere, þe-
cause the outcrops of the beds are there much more exposed; but
it is quite probable that the beds even in a seemingly level coun-
try would be found thus similarly tilted and faulted, if we could
examine their structure under the mantle of surface beds or soil
(Fig. 156). The real causes of these disturbances in the strata
after they were laid down, are not well understood. But it seems


24 ° INTRODUCTION


certain that no such causes are now operating anywhere on earth;
for while earthquakes are common enough, and faults and breaks
in the strata are occurring every now and then, nothing at all
similar to this flexing of the strata has ever been observed since
the beginnings of scientific observation.

Lastly, many beds which were originally laid down in a soft
state, by water, as incoherent sand or mud, have since become
hardened and even crystalline over vast areas, an originally strati-
fied rock mass having thus entirely lost its visible stratification,
being now changed into a mass of granite or slate. This change
of texture has been brought about by pressure and heat, the fric-
tion attending the flexing or disturbing of the strata having of-
ten generated sufficient heat to crystallize the entire mass of
a mountain.

The changes enumerated are some of the chief forms of re-
corded events in the history of the earth which geology is called
upon to read and interpret; and it is evident, from even this
cursory glance at them, that these records are extremely intri-
cate, easily misunderstood and misinterpreted, and that they can
be correctly read and interpreted only after the most painstak-
ing study and an impartial estimate of all the evidence available.

Modern Methods of Interpretation. But the chief scientific
source of information concerning the history of the globe, is the
remarkable array of facts which may be gathered from a careful
study of the shells, corals, leaves, bones, or other remains of
plants and animals, which are often found embedded in the rocks,
all such remains or relics being known as fossils (Latin, fossilis,
something dug up). For, just as a coroner, by a careful study
of all the circumstances in which a dead body is found, can
often arrive at a correct idea of the way in which the man died,
and of at least the circumstances in which he lived immediately
before death, so geologists, by careful study of the fossils, may
not only tell something of how they came to be buried in the rocks
where we find them, but may even reconstruct, with a degree of
accuracy and completeness, the conditions of climate and the other
factors of the environment in which they lived, and thus may ar-
rive at a more or less distinct picture of what that ancient world
was like before these great changes took place.

As a careful study of the human body in health under normal
conditions is indispensable to a coroner in dealing with a body in
death under perhaps very abnormal conditions, so a knowledge of
the present everyday changes in earth, air, and water is a pre-
ancient rocks. But just as a coroner may, by unmistakable evi-


INTRODUCTION 25


dence, be compelled to believe, in spite of himself, that something
out of the ordinary has happened and that a murder or a suicide
has been committed, so may the geologist be compelled, by cogent
evidence, to believe that the ancient deposits in the earth were
not laid down in the quiet, regular manner in which beds of clay,
sand, and gravel are now being formed, but that something of
a wholly abnormal nature must have taken place in the past. To
perform a truly scientific or inductive investigation of the rocks,
based on the evidence presented, we must not come to this in-
vestigation with the bias or prejudice that only the normal or
present-day rate of change has always prevailed in the past, as
Lyell and most succeeding geologists have done. We must hold
an open mind on this point, until all the pertinent evidence has
been examined; for one of the most important of the problems
confronting us is to decide whether or not the tools of nature
have always worked at the same rate and in the same manner as
at present.


Divisions of the Subject. From the foregoing outline, we
may see that the objects of the science of geology are many and
varied. They may be conveniently grouped under five leading
divisions, as follows:


1. To consider the earth as a planet, and in its general surface features.

2. To study the composition and character of the various rocks, and
their arrangement in rock masses.

3. To ascertain the present behavior of the forces of nature, and their
potential possibilities; to see how rocks are now being made, how fossils
are now being formed, and to determine, by comparing the ancient forma-
tions with the modern ones, what sort of elemental action must have pro-
duced the ancient deposits.

4. To note where the various kinds of fossils are found, and in what
condition; to compare them with their living representatives; to classify
these ancient forms of plants and animals in some systematic order like
that adopted for the living forms; and to formulate whatever lessons these
ancient remains may have to teach us.

5. To study the history of geological interpretation; to group together
some of the great outstanding facts of the science, for the purpose of fram-
ing a true induction from them all; and to study the bearings of the facts
of the rocks upon the problem of the origin of the earth and of its inhabitants.


Hence we may study the science of geology under the, five
principal branches:

I. PHYSIOGRAPHIC GEOLOGY,— treating of the general
aspects of the earth’s features.

Il. STRUCTURAL GEOLOGY,— treating of the rocks of the
globe, their constituents and characteristics, and their arrange-
ment in masses.


26 INTRODUCTION


HI. DYNAMICAL GEOLOGY,— treating of how rocks are
now being made or modified, and by comparison with the an-
ciently formed rocks, showing how the latter must probably have
been produced.


IV. STRATIGRAPHICAL GEOLOGY,— treating of the fos-
siliferous strata, their classification and location; the comparison
of their fossils with the living forms; and some of the more ob-
vious lessons to be learned from such a comparison.


V. THEORETICAL GEOLOGY,— treating of the true scien-
tific methods of studying the ancient strata; and seeking to for-
mulate a safe and accurate conclusion regarding the past of our
earth, based on all the evidence at our disposal.


Part I— Physiographiec Geology


CHAPTER I


The General Features of the Earth


Introduction. What do we know about the history of the
earth? Or what do we know about the origin and antiquity of
man and animals and plants now living on the earth? The an-
swers to these questions are inextricably bound up with our knowl-
edge and our interpretation of the various earth processes now
going on,— the action of the air, the water, and the internal
forces of the earth. What are these earth forces doing in modern
times? Have they always acted as we now observe them acting?

In attempting to solve any problem, we must first have the
facts in the case,— all the facts we can get which bear on the
subject we are considering. In the present instance, we need
first to get a broad general view of the earth as a whole, and as
related to the other members of the solar system. We shall then
need to examine briefly the earth’s surface features.

These two classes of facts may be included under the general
head of “‘Physiographic Geology.”

The Earth asa Planet. The earth is one of a group of planets
all of which revolve around a huge central sun. This group of
planets revolve in what is very nearly a common plane of revolu-
tion, and each planet revolves not in a perfect circle, but in an
ellipse, with the sun in one of the foci; though in the case of the
earth, the variation from a perfect circle amounts to only about
1.5 per cent of the diameter of the orbit. The earth rotates on its
polar axis once in 24 hours, while revolving around the sun in
about 36514, days, its polar axis maintaining a constant inclina-
tion to the plane of its orbit of about 2314°, this arrangement be-
ing the cause of the varying seasons in the earth’s Northern and
Southern hemispheres.


Outside our solar system are great numbers of other bodies, many of
which we can see on a clear night, and which we call the stars. Most of
them are suns similar to our own; but they are so very far away that if each
of them has a family of planets around it, these planets could not possibly
be visible even with the most powerful telescopes. A brief statement of the
results obtained by reducing the universe to a scale, will make this point
clear. |i

If we let one millimeter represent 10,000 miles, our sun will be about
the size of a baseball, and the earth, with its mere 8,000 miles of diameter,
will be represented by a small dot 8/10 millimeter in diameter, some 9.3
meters away from the baseball, or about the distance across an ordinary


(27)


28 THE NEW GEOLOGY


schoolroom. Mercury and Venus would be represented by smaller dots
intermediate in distance between the earth and the sun; but the major
planets are farther off, Jupiter being about the size of the end of a chalk
crayon and some 160 feet away, while Neptune would be much smaller than
this and situated nearly a fifth of a mile away. But on this same scale,
Alpha Centauri, the nearest of the fixed stars, would be less than a foot in
diameter and about 1,800 miles away. On this scale, only 19 of the fixed
stars known to us could be placed on the earth at all. More than half of


Fic. 4. Spiral Nebula in Ursa Major, known as Messier 101. (From a photograph taken at
Mount Wilson Solar Observatory.)


them would have to be set farther away than our moon. This helps us to
realize that our solar system is very much alone by itself, and also that our
little speck of a world is quite insignificant in point of size.


The Nebular Hypothesis. But, insignificant as it may appear,
this earth is the subject of our present study; and we do not have
a sufficient amount of exact knowledge regarding the other bodies
of the universe to help us very much in our study of the earth.

Much useless speculation has been indulged in, regarding the
origin of our solar system, these speculations being professedly
based on the large number of points in which all the members of
this system resemble one another in their rotations and revolu-
tions. Kant, in 1755, and Laplace, in 1796, proposed what has
since been known as the nebular hypothesis, to account for the
origin of the present solar system.


A vast nebulous mass with a very high temperature was assumed to have
existed, and to have extended out far beyond the present orbit of Neptune,
the outermost of the planets. It was assumed that this vast nebulous mass


THE GENERAL FEATURES OF THE EARTH 29


revolved about a gradually condensing nucleus or sun, and that under this
revolution it gradually assumed a disklike form. It was supposed that,
in process of time, various successive equatorial zones or rings were formed
in this rotating mass, these rings finally condensing into the various planets,
the sun being the condensed central nucleus, and still retaining much of its
original heat, though the planets have lost most of theirs. On this hypothe-
sis, our earth must have passed from the gaseous to a liquid state, and
finally into a solid.


Objections. But fundamental objections to this hypothesis
have been brought forward from time to time, until now we may
safely say that it has no longer any standing among men of sci-
ence, though it still survives in some belated textbooks, and is still
quite popular among people who have a slight acquaintance with
scientific facts. Two fundamental objections to this hypothesis
may be stated as follows:

1. If the total mass of the solar system once revolved as a
unit and condensed, it would gain in its angular velocity of rota-
tion toward the center, and finally its equatorial belt would reach
a critical point of speed where the outward centrifugal force
would balance the inward gravitational force. From this point of
time, this whirling material could not any longer converge to-
ward the center, but would be left rotating at about this definite
distance from the center. The remainder would continue to con-
dense and accelerate, till it also was left behind. This much
would seem to be in accord with the facts as we see them. But
contrary to the working out of this proposition, the giant planet
Jupiter seems to have acquired most of the bulk of the planetary
matter of the system, and also most of the speed of rotation; for
it exceeds the collective mass of all the other planets in the pro-
portion of 5 to 2, and although so huge in size, it rotates on its
axis in about 9 hours and 55 minutes. All the planets between
it and the sun are almost negligible in point of size when com-
pared with it.

2. According to this hypothesis, the sun ought to be rotating
very swiftly, and ought to be much flattened in form, or highly
oblate. On the contrary, it rotates quite slowly, or once in about
25 days, and this slow speed allows it to be almost spherical in
form. According to the laws of celestial mechanics, this condi-
tion of the sun proves that it could never have revolved with more
energy than at present; hence the original nebula, if it included
the planets, could never have revolved as a unit. Therefore the
material. composing the planets must always have been separate
from the sun; and on this basis, it is impossible to suppose that
the solar system originated in the way suggested.


3


30 THE NEW GEOLOGY


In addition to these two fundamental objections, the force of
which can only be appreciated by those with a wide knowledge of .
celestial physics and of the molecular behavior of gases, other ob-
jections to this hypothesis may be stated as follows:

3. No ring-shaped solar nebule have yet been discovered, nor
anything resembling such a form. (Charles Schuchert, “Text-
book of Geology,” p. 511.)

4. If the planets had originated from a system of rings, ac-
cording to the theory, they ought now to be found rotating in a
direction opposite that of the parent body; but instead, they ro-
tate in the same direction as the sun.

5. The satellites should revolve about their planets in the same
direction in which the planets rotate on their axes. On the con-
trary, the ninth satellite of Saturn, the eighth of Jupiter, and the
one of Neptune are retrograde, or revolve in the opposite direction.
The satellites of Uranus revolve in orbits which are practically
at right angles to the orbit of the planet; and Phobos, the inner
satellite of Mars, whirls around its planet three times while the
latter rotates once, but according to the theory, its velocity should
be less than that of the surface of the planet.

6. The masses of the various planets, and the densities of the
rings from which they are said to have originated, are entirely
different from what we should expect from the theory.

Accordingly, Professor Hale, director of the Mount Wilson
Observatory, says, “It can hardly be denied that Laplace’s idea
of the development of the solar system must be reconstructed
or abandoned.”


Within the past two or three decades, another hypothesis, called the
planetesimal hypothesis, has been attracting the attention of those who
persist in thinking that human ingenuity can hit on the method of origin
of the solar system. This hypothesis is founded on almost precisely opposite
principles from the one already considered, in that it starts with an aggre-
gated mass of matter, and would explain the planets as having originated
by a disruptive expansion, instead of by a condensive attraction. But it need
not further concern us here, as no human guessing could possibly hit on the
method of origin of our world and its companion planets. As easily might
an infant correctly guess how a locomotive or a steamship is built.


It will be more profitable to consider some things that we really
know about the earth as it now is.


Form, Size, Density, Rigidity. The earth is spherical in
form, but slightly flattened at the poles, its polar diameter being
about 26.8 miles less than the equatorial, which is about 4,926
miles. Its circumference is 24,899 miles. Its mean density as
a whole has been computed by various methods to be about 5.6,-or


THE GENERAL FEATURES OF THE EARTH 31


twice that of the more common minerals, such as calcite (2.72)
and quartz (2.65), and about two thirds that of pure iron. The
average density of the outer shell of the earth is about 2.7; and
thus the interior must be quite different in composition from
the outer part. We really know nothing more than this regard-
ing the character of the interior; but there are reasons for
thinking that there is no distinct outer crust, but that the density
increases gradually with the depth.

As a whole, the earth is calculated to be about 1.5 times as
rigid as hard steel, in order to resist the deforming influences of
the tidal pull of the moon and the sun. The fact that the earth
retains its shape in spite of these attractive forces exerted upon
it, is the best kind of proof that its interior is not in that liquid
state which was long taught for a-fact by all writers on geology.
As a whole, the earth is also fully as elastic as steel.

The atmosphere may be considered a part of the earth, thus
adding one or more hundred miles to its total diameter. From
evidence given by meteorites, the atmosphere is supposed to ex-
tend in an attenuated form some 200 miles above the earth’s sur-
face. Owing to its ready compressibility, the lower layers of
the atmosphere are very much denser than the upper, with the re-
sult that one half of the total mass of the air is found within the
lower 4 miles above the sea level. And if the aérial ocean could
be made of uniform density throughout and similar to that part
now at the sea level, its total height would then be less than
5 miles.

Underground Heat. The phenomena of volcanoes, with other
phenomena which will be more fully discussed in a later chapter,
convince us that at least certain parts of the earth are very hot.
Many observations have also been made in deep mines and bor-
ings, from which we learn that there seems to be a more or less
steady increase of heat with increase of depth, at least to a certain
depth. The average rate of increase has been stated at 1° F. for
every 60 feet of depth; but the rate is so unequal in the various
localities observed, and even so irregular for the different depths
in the same locality, that the figures usually given along this line
are of little significance, and probably quite misleading. Local
developments of heat due to chemical processes, such as the oxi-
dation of ores containing sulphur, are constantly encountered
here and there, and very inconveniently high temperatures have
been encountered in certain deep mines and in some of the tunnels
through the Alps.

But the present writer has averaged the 500 odd observations
recorded by Prestwich in his discussion of this subject, these ob-


32 THE NEW GEOLOGY


servations being all the reliable temperatures taken in mines,
artesian wells, ete., which this author could find recorded (“Con-
troverted Questions,” pp. 249-264); and it turns out that the
average of all these recorded temperatures is only 69.23° F.,
which is not higher than the average surface temperature
must have been when most of the fossiliferous strata were de-
posited, for they contain the remains of corals and palms in the


Fic. 5. Mme. Curie, the discoverer of radium,


latitude of England and Canada, and even warm temperate con-
ditions throughout the arctic regions. Hence it would seem that
we might well claim a respite from this overworked argument
based on the increase of heat with increase of depth, until we
have gone down a good deal deeper than any observations yet
recorded.

These facts, with others that might be mentioned, have led
many of our leading geologists to say that below the superficial
zone the temperature seems to be practically stationary, and that


THE GENERAL FEATURES OF THE EARTH 33


when we descend below the reach of all local superficial influences
there is probably no further increase of temperature with in-
crease of depth. As one celebrated author has expressed it, we
may “consider it as more likely that the increase of temperature
is at a constantly diminishing rate, so that the interior tempera-
tures do not exceed those with which we are acquainted on the
surface.” (Grabau.)


Since the discovery of radioactivity, this property of matter has been
appealed to as a probable source of underground heat. Certain elements, as
thorium and uranium, are constantly disintegrating or breaking down into
other elements, such as helium, radium, and lead, the process being ac-
companied by the liberation of relatively enormous quantities of heat. Most
rocks, especially the igneous ones, contain more or less of these radioactive
substances; and it is possible that radieactivity may be an important factor
in the development of whatever internal heat the earth now possesses. Some
geologists have even thought that this factor might be sufficient to account
for volcanic action. “There is wide diversity of opinion on the subject and, at
present, this view has not advanced beyond the speculative stage.” (Pirsson.)


Proportion of Land and Water. The total area of the surface
of the globe has been calculated to be 196,940,000 square miles.
About 69.6 per cent of this, or 137,000,000 square miles, is cov-
ered by water; and about 30.4 per cent, or 59,870,000 square
miles, is dry land. There is a northern or land hemisphere com-
prising about 41,000,000 square miles, with less than half this
amount of dry land in the southern or water hemisphere. The
center of this northern or land hemisphere is in the region near
the western part of the British Channel.

The oceans occupy various sunken areas or depressions, vary-
ing in depth from 500 to nearly 31,000 feet, the waters in these
depressions being all connected. The average depth of the ocean
is about 13,000 feet,.while the average height of the land is only
about 2,300 feet. Hence the ocean is about 5.6 times as deep as
the land is high; and as the ocean surface is about 2.8 times that
of the land, there is about 15.6 times as much water below the sea
level as there is land above it. From this it follows that, if all
the present dry land should sink beneath the ocean, the water
would be raised only about 650 feet, or little more than ten times
the height to which the tide sometimes rises in the Bay of Fundy.
Furthermore, if all the present inequalities of the globe were
smoothed out, so that all the solid part would be of a uniform
level, it would be completely covered by the waters to a uniform
depth of about 9,000 feet, or 1.56 miles. “If a ball three feet in
diameter were dipped into water, and withdrawn, the film of wet-
ness adhering to it like a skin of varnish would represent the
ocean.” (Pirsson.)


34 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Compared with its size, the globe is almost smooth, and its
relief, as shown by the mountains and the oceanic depressions,
is extremely small. If a circle representing the earth be drawn
on a blackboard on the scale of an inch to a hundred miles, the
circle would be 79 inches in diameter. On such a circle, the
height of Mount Everest would be a slight irregularity .055 of an
inch in height, while the extreme depth of the ocean would be rep-
resented by a depression .06 in. in depth. Evidently it would
not require much of a disturbance of the earth to spill the water
of the ocean pretty well over the land.


The Ocean Bottom. Around the edge of all the continents,
the water continues comparatively shallow for some 50 or 150
miles from shore, forming what is called the continental shelf or
border. At the outer edge of this shelf, the water is only about
100 fathoms, or 600 feet, deep; and the river sediments brought
down from the lands, and the materials washed away from the
coast by the waves and the currents, do not get out beyond this
100-fathom line. At this point, the waters deepen quite rapidly,
and here the true oceanic area begins. The gravitational attrac-
tion of the lands also draws up the waters somewhat, so that the
surface of the ocean is slightly distorted from a true level, this
phenomenon being much more noticeable in such places as the
west coast of South America, where the lands are very high close
to the shore, than along a low-lying coast, as the Atlantic border
of the Southern States. l

Along the middle of the Atlantic, extending in a zigzag di-
rection from north to south, is a wide ridge or plateau conform-
ing in a general way to the trend of the American coast. Over
this oceanic plateau, the water is from 6,000 to 12,000 feet deep,
while on either side there are large areas from 15,000 to 20,000
feet below the surface. The greatest depth of the Atlantic and
the largest area of deep water are located in the western part of
this ocean. Elevated plateaus of a similar character are found
in the other oceans. They seem like so many sunken continents ;
but whether or not these plateaus were once above the waters,
we have no means of knowing.

If the ocean were removed from its basin, we would see no
steep ridges like those of ordinary mountain scenery. A few
mountain ranges having the present islands of the ocean for their.
summits would appear here and there; but the water has acted
as a great leveler, and has smoothed out the entire ocean bottom,
so that the changes of level are very much less abrupt than those
on the surface of the lands.


THE GENERAL FEATURES OF THE EARTH 35


As the bottom of the oceans may be regarded as somewhat
dome-shaped, so the continents may be regarded as almost the
reverse of this, many of them being somewhat basin-shaped, with
rims composed of mountain chains, and with large interior basins,
some of which have no exterior drainage. Curiously enough, the
highest border of one or two of the continents faces the larger
ocean, and sometimes very high points in such a bordering moun-
tain region are only a comparatively short distance from a cor-
respondingly deep part of the ocean, as off the coast of Japan, and
the west coast of South America opposite Chile and Ecuador.

Mountains. With respect to their origin, three classes of
mountains are recognized: those of volcanic or igneous origin,
those formed by the erosion of the materials once surrounding
them, and those formed largely by movements of the earth’s crust.

Volcanic mountains will be considered in a later chapter.
When studying erosion, we shall have opportunity to speak of
the way in which enormous blocks of a portion of country ele-
vated high above the general surface have been sculptured out
and left standing, often in a very picturesque style, while the
strata surrounding them have been carried away by the agencies
of erosion. The Catskill Mountains, of New York, are of this
character, as are also most of the peaks in the Glacier National
Park, and others of the front ranges of the Rockies, with very
many elsewhere. The enormous masses left standing around
the margin of the Grand Cañon of the Colorado, which are suf-
ficiently elevated above the bottom of the cañon to make high
mountains, and which would be regarded as mountains if they
could be removed and set down somewhere on an open plain, are
also typical mountains of erosion (See Fig. 79).

But many of the loftiest mountains are composed largely of
granite or similar rocks which do not show any signs of strati-
fication, and if originally composed of stratified beds, they have
been so changed or metamorphosed that all signs of stratification
have been obliterated. Sometimes a few stratified beds are found
among them here and there; but all such strata are usually seen
to have been much disturbed at some time in the past, and so it
has been easy for geologists to imagine that these mountains have
been formed by the puckering up of the strata into folds by some
enormous lateral pressure. That the strata have been tilted in
thousands of instances, or occasionally crumpled into something
resembling a real fold in a small way, is a truism needing no
proof. But that such tilting or folding of the beds has in any
material way contributed to the height of the rock masses in-
volved, is merely a theory, and a highly questionable theory at


36 THE NEW GEOLOGY


best. Certainly the enormous folds many miles high which have
fancies, and are usually founded on the supposed necessity of
explaining how the strata happen now to be found in a relative
order of superposition contrary to the theories long held with re-
gard to the order in which the fossiliferous rocks ought to be
found. And it is at least entirely possible that even the loftiest
and most crystalline mountain masses may be understood as also
merely mountains of erosion, the record having been complicated
by more local disturbances than are seen in those mountains
where all of the strata remaining are still in a horizontal position.


OCEAN
LEVEL.


Fic. 6. The inequalities of the earth’s surface exaggerated ten times.


By reference to the accompanying diagram (Fig. 6), it will be seen that
the height of the mountains is in all instances quite insignificant when com-
pared with the size of the earth. In only one or two very small areas do we
find points five miles above the sea level, while not very many spots of the
ocean are much more than this below sea level. With the earth’s diameter
approximately 8,000 miles, it is evident that even these few peaks of the
mountains and the few deeps in the ocean are not more than about one
sixteen-hundredth of the diameter. In other words, on a globe sixteen inches
through, the greatest differences of elevation and depression from the mean
or average surface would be represented as one hundredth of an inch, and
this in only a very few places.


As to what it was that primarily elevated parts of what we
now call the continents, or depressed other parts that we call the
ocean basins, we have little or no means of knowing. At best,
the real cause of such an elevation or depression of parts of the
crust is a matter of speculation, not of knowledge. But granting
the existence of portions elevated into what are now America,
Europe, or Asia, and granting that the areas where we now find
the mountain ranges were slightly more elevated than the rest,


THE GENERAL FEATURES OF THE EARTH 37


the sculpturing out of the mountain peaks, and even the basin-
like general form of the surface of most of these continents, would
seem to follow inevitably from the general laws of denudation,
as the result of the action of the waters falling upon these lands.

The sedimentary materials now found in the great basinlike
interiors of the continents, like the great central valley of North
America, both north and south of the 49th parallel between
Canada and the United States, are probably largely the waste
materials which erosion has carried away from the mountain
areas on either side. Similarly the interior basins of the other
continents are to be explained.

Furthermore, it will be noticed from this diagram how ex-
tremely slight the height of the great mountain ranges is, com-
pared with the part of the earth’s surface which is not thus ele-
vated, or even as compared with the horizontal distance through
the base of a great mountain range. Any mountain range is a
great many times as wide as it is high; but as the whole land
mass or block in this vicinity has been elevated above the sur-
rounding areas, the rivers and streams have cleaned out valleys
through this mass, thus by erosion or denudation creating the
abruptness and ruggedness often so characteristic of mountain-
ous districts. Since we know that even in quite level regions the
strata deep down beneath the surface are often found to be
‘thrown into wavelike undulations, it seems reasonable to suppose
that if such areas also should be elevated and denuded, they would
exhibit just such conditions as we find in the so-called folded
mountain areas.

We must dismiss once for all the idea that these undulations
of the strata are in any way connected with a supposed contrac-
tion of the earth’s crust; for in many instances, a set of beds has
been crumpled or folded while the strata both above and below
are still wholly unaffected and still in a horizontal position. This
disturbance of certain beds, which, as already remarked, is ex-
tremely slight as compared with the extent of the surface of the
strata affected, may in some instances have been caused by the
differences in the expansion and contraction of the different beds
under changes of temperature, or in some instances by the set-
tling away of part of the foundation under some enormous mass
of newly deposited strata before it had time to solidify, or in other
instances by the cumulative effects of earthquake waves or earth
movements acting upon soft or unconsolidated strata. Such
earthquake waves are known to have been very common in the
past experience of the earth; and when such waves travel through
sedimentary beds still unconsolidated resting upon other rocks


Fig. 7. Cliffs and peak of Algonkian limestone, 14% miles northwest of Mount Cleveland, Mon-
tana, Glacier National Park. The portion of the cliff in view is about 1,200 feet high; the
base below the view extends nearly vertically as far again. Goat trails extend across the face


of ther cliff.) (Wallis, US Gs so)


(38) `


Li


THE GENERAL FEATURES OF THE EARTH 39


of a different kind, such as granite, they would encounter masses
of the latter with a very different modulus of elasticity rising as
obstructions in their course. “The effect of this would be to heap
up the strata in folds against the obstacle, somewhat as when
waves break on the shore.” (E. H. L. Schwartz, in a paper be-
fore the British Association at Victoria Falls, 1905; Nature,
November 23, 1905, p. 91.)


Speaking in the most general
way, it may be said that the
earth’s general surface features
seem most intelligible when
regarded as a modification of
a former ideal arrangement of
land and water, so distributed as
to produce an equable climate all
over the earth. Such a (hypo-
thetical) ideal arrangement of
land and water would seem to
require several channels of rather
deep ocean water running north
and south, perhaps northeasterly
and southwesterly, so as to pro-
vide for several warm tropical
currents to flow into the arctic
regions. The deeper parts of the
Atlantic Ocean on each side of the
central plateau, may represent
the remnants of such ancient
channels; and the central valley
of North America, stretching
from the Gulf of Mexico to the
Arctic Ocean, may represent the


: M Fic. 8. Schematice representation of the direc-
filled-in ruins of another. But tion of the ocean currents in an ideal ocean.


it should be understood that all (After Kriimmel.)

this is only a supposition. There

are many evidences on which to base such a hypothetical explanation; but
they are not sufficient to raise this suggestion above the rank of a hypothesis.


Interior Basins. One of the outstanding features of the
earth’s surface, as we now have it, is the existence of large de-
pressions here and there with only interior drainage. In some
cases, these interior basins, as they are called, have small lakes
in their lowest levels; and in all cases, these basins show abun-
dant evidence that at some period in the past more or less re-
mote they were largely or wholly filled by bodies of water. Great
Salt Lake is but the dwindling remnant of a much larger lake
that once occupied this region; and the existence of this an-
cient lake is so well attested by physical evidence on the hills
around that it has received a definite name, being known to ge-


40


Fic. 9.
tained.


THE NEW GEOLOGY


. rot tee eeeen. oe
N usa


Map of the Great Basin, showing the large lakes which it once con-
The various drainage basins are shown by dotted lines, the prehistoric


lakes by shaded areas. (U. S. G. S.)


Red Rock Pass, Southeastern Idaho, the former outlet of Lake
Note the marshy condition of the land. (Fairbanks. )


Fig. 10.
Bonneville.


THE GENERAL FEATURES OF THE EARTH 41


ographers as Lake Bonneville. This lake once had an area two
thirds as large as Lake Superior, including parts of three States.
It must have been over a thousand feet deep, though Great Salt
Lake is now only about forty feet deep (Fig. 9).


Desert of


Kara Kum


Fic. 11. Map of the Caspian Sea and vicinity. (After Grabau.)


Lake Lahontan is the name given to another body of water,
which once existed to the west of Lake Bonneville; and these two
great lakes occupied but a part of what is known as the Great
Basin, an immense area, including practically all of Nevada, with


42 THE NEW GEOLOGY


r
Monntuing SE AA
Spring XE


—_—


.
a s. g
SR Signal Min 2
.—- NE à aea L


Fic. 12. Map showing mouth of the Colorado River, with the Salton Sink
and Pattie Basin. (After Sykes, from McDougal, American Geographical
Society Bulletin.)
portions of Utah, Idaho, Oregon, and California. Parts of this
great area, such as Death Valley, are many feet below sea level;
and it is quite probable that much of this area was once occupied
by standing water (Fig. 9).

The Caspian Sea is properly a lake in an interior basin, the
waters flowing into it from many sides, but the Caspian Sea it-
self having no outlet. It has an area about twice that of all the
Great Lakes. of North America. Its surface is about eighty-six
feet below ocean level; and its waters are nearly fresh, because of
the large volume of the Volga and other rivers flowing into it.


THE GENERAL FEATURES OF THE EARTH 45


But in reality the Caspian Sea occupies the deepest part of a
widespread depression, which includes also the Sea of Aral, and
which on this account is often called the Aralo-Caspian basin.
This huge interior basin is known to have been in former times
more or less full of water, this enormous body of water being
now called the Eurasian Mediterranean, or the Sarmatian Ocean,
though its exact limits are not well known.

All over the surface of the globe are to be found similar de-
pressions, or interior basins, with interior drainage, and with no


Fic. 13. Lake Sorkul, in the Great Pamir desert. This is a small interior basin,
or without any outlet. (After Reclus.)


exterior drainage or no outlet to the ocean. Indeed, it has been
estimated that about one fourth or one fifth of the entire surface
of the earth is occupied by these interior basins. And, if we as-
sume that there was once a universal Deluge (the reality of which
seems to be an inevitable induction from the general facts of
geology, as will appear later), it would follow that all these areas
were probably at one time full of standing water, and that the
water remained in these areas for many years or many centuries,
gradually diminishing in extent by evaporation; but so long as
it remained, this water could not fail to exert a very profound
influence on the climate of the surrounding lands, and even in-
directly on the rest of the globe.


44 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Mediterraneans. Another of the general features of the
globe as a whole, is the existence of more profound depressions
which are now occupied by parts of the ocean, but with partial
barriers between them and the main body of the ocean. The
Mediterranean Sea is a typical example; and on this account, the
other similar areas are called mediterraneans. The Gulf of
Mexico, the Japan, China, and Sulu seas, with some others, are
of this character. They are connected with the main ocean at
the surface; but their connecting channels
are shallow, so that the cold waters of the
bottom of the ocean can not flow into them.
The Mediterranean is nearly as deep as the
ocean proper, but its bottom is much
warmer than the depths of the ocean (Fig.
14) ; and the same is true more or less of
the other bodies of water similarly situated.
It seems reasonable to conclude that the
comparatively warm waters of these pro-
tected depressions may represent what all
m oc the waters of the ocean once were like in
ia is nearie as deep 22 point of temperature, when the arctic
the Atlantic, but the Strait regions were enjoying a sort of perpetual


of Gibraltar is not deep


enough to allow the cold summer. At present, the oceans at the two


water from the Arctic to ç
flow into the Mediterranean. poles act as refrigerating plants, because
This imdicates that the a
whole body of the ocean they pour a constant supply of chilled, icy
arene Se water along the bottom of the oceans, these
icy waters rolling down even to the areas
of the tropics. But on account of the shallow channel at the
opening of the Mediterranean, at the Strait of Gibraltar, this
icy water can not find access to the bottom of this basin, and so
its bottom waters have remained comparatively warm, being now


about 55° F.


an Mediterranean Sea
STRAIT OF .
GIBRA


Atlantic Oce


_


CHAPTER II


The Organic Features of the Earth


Geologic Importance of Plants and Animals. In point of
mere quantity, it may seem that the plants and animals consti-
tute a negligible part of the earth, so far as its general features
are concerned. But when we consider such a structure as the
Great Barrier Reef of Australia, over a thousand miles long, built
up by tiny coral polyps, or the enormous organically formed
limestones which constitute a large part of the total mass of many


Fic. 15. Parts of palm leaves, from Cape Lisburne, Alaska. These are, of course,
tropical or semitropical in habitat. (U. S. G. S.)


of the great mountain ranges of the world, or even think of the


prodigious quantities of coal and oil found buried in various lo-
ealities practically all over the globe and undoubtedly derived
from plant or animal remains, we see that the organic part of the
earth’s surface is by no means insignificant. *

Geology is a science of problems, the chief problem being to
find out what we can about the changes through which the world
passed in the long ago. And in the study of such a problem, the
traces which we find of plants and animals are of the greatest as-
sistance. Mud or sand found in one locality is very much like mud
or sand found anywhere else. But shale (which is consolidated
mud) containing palm leaves though found in the latitude of
Northern Alaska (Fig. 15), or containing grapevines or sequoias
though found in Greenland, will have a very interesting story to
tell us about what these localities have experienced in the way of
climatic change. Or sandstones found in New York or Wyoming

(45)

4


46 THE NEW GEOLOGY


which contain the bones of elephants, will have a story to tell
quite different from that of a similar sandstone beneath some city
like Chicago or St. Louis which is found to contain the remains `
of creatures that live only in the deep waters of the ocean.

~ In a subsequent chapter, we shall study the special charac-
teristics of the various kinds of plants and animals. In this chap-
ter, we are to consider briefly the general aspects of the organic
part of the world, and how the various types are now found dis-
tributed over its surface.


Environmental Factors. Plants and animals are affected by
their environment, the principal factors of the environment, so
far as the distribution of land forms is concerned, being tem-
perature and moisture. Not that these factors of the environ-
ment directly produce changes in the living forms; but these
living forms have the capacity to respond to the conditions in
which they find themselves, and (within certain limits) have the
power to adapt themselves to their ehvironment. The changes
thus induced are often very remarkable. Yet it is a fact of very
far-reaching consequences, that all such changes in the individual
induced by the environment are not transmitted to the next
generation; but the members of the succeeding generation, being
affected by the same environment, respond in turn, as did their
ancestors, and similarly adapt themselves.


Within recent years, extensive experiments have been carried on with
insects and other forms of life, whereby striking changes in such matters
as the color of the wings of butterflies have been produced by subjecting the
larve to definite changes of temperature or moisture. In this way, varie-
ties now classed as distinct geographical races and listed under separate
specific or even separate generic names, have been reproduced time and
again in the laboratory. In addition to this line of experiments, we have the
somewhat related results obtained by breeding and hybridization, in accord
with what is known as Mendel’s laws. In this way also, many new forms of
both plants and animals have been produced, so different from their ancestral
forms that, if found wild in a state of nature, they would undoubtedly be
honored with distinct specific or even sometimes with distinct generic names
by any collector. From all of which we learn to have less confidence in the
sharp distinctions often made between related species when found in widely
separated localities; and the alleged specific differences between the widely
scattered kinds of elephants, or tapirs, or camels, or crocodiles, or pigs, or
what not, lose much of their significance and fancied importance.


In the tropical regions, where heat and moisture are abundant
and continuous throughout the year, both animal and vegetable
life flourish in profusion. Great stretches of evergreen forests,
so dense as to be utterly impenetrable by man, are to be found
in almost all parts of the tropics. Not only are the trees close to-
gether, so close as to shut out the light and to render the parts


THE ORGANIC FEATURES OF THE EARTH 47


near the ground almost as dark as night, but trees and vines and
hanging plants are all matted together in an inextricable laby-
` rinth of profuse growth. Animal life also abounds. Mammals,
birds, reptiles, mollusks, and insects exist in abundance and in
_ most astonishing variety.

When we pass from such regions toward the poles, we notice
that the forests become more and more open, and the under-
growth less dense; while the animal life also decreases in num-
ber and in variety. As we reach latitudes where there is a
marked difference between summer and winter, the broad-leaved


Fic. 16. Trees at the timber line, on Long’s Peak trail, Rocky Mountain National Park,
Colorado. The trees are all inclined toward the east, or away from the prevailing winds.
(Lee, U. S. G. S.)


evergreens give way to deciduous trees and shrubs, while the few
remaining evergreens have only needle-shaped leaves, like the
pines and the firs, or platelike leaves, as the cedars and the cy-
presses. The forms and habits of the animals are found also to
be adapted to the change in climate; some migrate with the
seasons, some hibernate during the cold weather, while others ac-
quire a thicker covering of hair, fur, or feathers on the approach
of winter, or even new coats of a very different color.

In extremely high latitudes, all trees and tall shrubs disap-
pear, leaving only such low-growing plants as can mature their
seeds during the short summer, and can lie covered by the snow
during the long winter. Mosses, lichens, and strangely dwarfed
and stunted shrubs, looking almost like caricatures of those found


48 THE NEW GEOLOGY


farther south, are the only forms of plant life; while the land
animals are reduced to such as can migrate back and forth with
the seasons, or such as are otherwise adapted to withstand the
severe winters of the arctic.

A very similar series of gradations is to be seen in ascending
any lofty mountain range in the tropics. Since it becomes con-
stantly colder the higher we ascend, the mean temperature de-
creasing about 1° F. for every 330 feet of elevation, the rank
vegetation and abundant animal life at the foot of the mountain
are soon replaced by plants and animals which strongly resemble
those found on the lowlands in the cooler latitudes. Finally, also,
an altitude is reached where there are no more trees, this being
called the timber line; next the snow line is attained, or the point
where the snow persists all the year round; and above this, all life
ceases (Fig. 16).

The influence of moisture is less marked than is that of tem-
perature, for there seems to be no part of the earth so dry as to
be entirely devoid of life. Nevertheless, the changes in plants
and animals are very noticeable as we pass from the dense forests
of the Amazon or the Congo to the deserts of Sahara or of
Arabia (Fig. 17). These deserts have about the same mean
temperature as the tropical forests; hence their striking differ-
ences must be wholly due to the differences in moisture.

The dense tropical forests mark the regions where both mois-
ture and heat are abundant, and continuous throughout the year.
In regions which are hot but which have only a moderate rainfall,
and especially where the rainfall is unequally distributed over the


Fic. 17. Mohave Desert, near Cajon Pass, California. The view shows a camp outfit and
the characteristic desert vegetation. (Campbell, U. S. G. S.)


THE ORGANIC FEATURES OF THE EARTH 49


year, with plenty of rain in one season, but with a long dry season
during the rest of the year, forests are absent, giving place to
open meadows of grass and other grasslike vegetation. Such
regions go under the various names of llanos, pampas, prairies,
and steppes; and with their peculiar type of vegetation, there


Fic. 18. A tree fern, Voleano Road, Hawaii. (Mendenhall, U. 8. G. 8.)


is also a markedly special type of animal life in these places. In
other regions, where the rainfall is still less, vegetation becomes
even more scanty, resulting in what is called a desert, with its
strikingly peculiar plants and animals.

Im studying the distribution of plants and animals solely from
these points of view, one is quite liable to get the impression that
environment is everything, or the sole determining factor, in this
distribution. But such is by no means the case; for we frequently
find very dissimilar kinds of life — that is, dissimilar floras and
faunas — in the same sort of climate and food supply. The equa-
torial parts of South America and those of Central Africa have the
same sort of climate; but their floras and faunas are very


50 THE NEW GEOLOGY


different. Australia and South Africa have very similar cli-
mates; but their floras and faunas are about as different as
can be imagined. Again, many of the invertebrate animals of
Florida and Georgia are much more like those of the northern
parts of America and Eurasia than they are like those of the


Fic. 19. Ginkgo trees, Lafayette Park, D. C. (Lee, U. S. G. S.)


near-by Bahama Islands and Cuba, although the latter have a
very similar climate. Many other such comparisons and con-
trasts could be made from all over the globe.


From these facts, it is evident that something else besides environment
must have been concerned in the present distribution of living forms. This
something else must be of the nature of original differences in the stock from
which the present living forms have been derived. Evolutionists seek to
connect these original differences with the kinds of fossils found in the same
or in neighboring localities, or else imagine migrations from some distant
center of distribution. On the basis of a world catastrophe, these present
differences in the floras and faunas of places with similar climates must be
explained as due chiefly to the original differences in the plants and ani-


THE ORGANIC FEATURES OF THE EARTH 51


mals with which these localities were stocked after the world-desolating
Deluge. From either point of view, the problem is much the same.


Habitats. However, it is a fact of prime importance, in any
study of either the present or the past of our globe, that certain
types of life, or certain assemblages of plants and animals, are


Duck Mole


Fic. 20. Characteristic animals of Australia. (After Heinman.)


now found only in certain definite parts of the world. In other
words, plants and animals have habitats, large or small; and
species which may be related to one another by descent, or which
are in some way related to other forms of life by interdependent
conditions of life, are found associated or near together. From
the study of the fossils found in the rocks, as will be seen in sub-


Jungle-Bear Tiger Tapir '
Gawal Muntjac Chevrotain
Orang-utan Silver Pheasant Peacock Pheasant


Fic. 21. Characteristic animals of the Oiiental region. (After Heinman.)


52 THE NEW GEOLOGY


sequent chapters, we learn that in the ancient world in which
these creatures lived, the habitats of the various floras and
faunas were apparently even more sharply defined, more strictly
confined to certain regions, than at present. And these buried
groups of plants and animals, preserved in the rocks in what must
often be very nearly their original habitats, are now available for


Aa rd- vark Pangolin Ostrich
Giraffe Gnu Zebra
Lion Hippopotamus Gorilla


Fic. 22. Characteristic animals of Africa. (After Heinman.)


our study, and are what are called the various geological forma-
tions. Accordingly, the study of the present geographical dis-
tribution of plants and animals is of intense interest not merely
for the present understanding of the world, but also for its bear-
ings on the problem of what the world was like in the olden time.


Of the Pteridophyta, or higher vascular cryptogams, the ferns, the
equiseta, and the lycopods are found in all latitudes from the equator to the
polar regions; but giant forms, such as the tree ferns, similar to the large
ferns found as fossils in the coral beds, are now confined to the warmer parts
of the world, and do not flourish beyond the parallel of 35° (Fig. 18)
The modern palms have about the same limit of range, though their Ese
show that they formerly spread also over all the temperate regions. The
conifers are found in all zones. The yews are warm temperate species;

?


THE ORGANIC FEATURES OF THE EARTH 53


while the cycads, found so abundantly in the Coal Measures, are now con-
fined to the tropical or semitropical regions. The ginkgoes, or maidenhair
trees, which also occur abundantly in the Mesozoic rocks, are now found as a
single cultivated species in China and Japan, from which they have been im-
ported to this country and are now widely grown for ornamental purposes
(Fig. 19).


The Biological Regions. The world has been marked off into
biological regions, six in number, which contain more or less
distinct assemblages of plants and animals, though, for the
purposes of our present study, the animals only will be here
considered.

1. The Australian Region. This includes Australia, New
Zealand, New Guinea, and Celebes. The fauna of Australia is
very peculiar. There are absolutely no native placental mam-
mals, save rats, mice, and a few bats, with a wild dog; and
all these have probably accompanied man. But instead, it has a
great variety of marsupial mammals, such as wombats, phalan-
gers, and kangaroos, comprising an‘incredible number of species
with a great variety of habits. There is also a still lower variety
of mammals, the monotremes, including the water mole, or duck-


Sloth Armadillo Anteater
Rhea Curassow Condor
Prehensile-tailed Monkey Llama Jaguar


Fic. 23. Characteristic animals of South America. (After Heinman.)


54 THE NEW GEOLOGY


bill, which lay eggs, though they are true mammals, and suckle
their young after they are hatched.

This region has few reptiles, but numerous amphibians. Its
birds are numerous; and many, such as the bird of paradise,
lyre birds, parrots, and cassowaries, are in various ways re-
markable. a

New Zealand contains the remains of several ostrichlike birds
(such as the dinornis), which seem to have become extinct within


Bighorn Prong-horned Antelope Gopher
Prairie Dog Opossum Buzzard


Fic. 24. Characteristic animals of North America. (After Heinman.)


modern times, though this point is uncertain. It has also a
very interesting reptile, the hatteria, or sphenodon, which has
been called a “living fossil,” for it represents an otherwise extinct
tribe, the fossil remains of which are found in the Mesozoic rocks,
though not in any so-called “later” formations.


2. The Oriental Region. This includes India, Farther India,
the Philippines, Sumatra, Java, Borneo, and the included small
islands. r

This region lies in the tropics; and only very narrow waters
— the so-called “Wallace’s line,” between Borneo and Celebes —
separate this region from the Australian region, which adjoins
it on the south and the southeast. However, in spite of their close
contiguity, these two regions are wonderfully different in their
types of life.

The Oriental region has no marsupials, but it contains ele-
phants, rhinoceroses, buffaloes, lions, tigers, and other large


THE ORGANIC FEATURES OF THE EARTH 55


members of the cat family, many deer, a species of tapir, bears,
the gibbon, and the orang-utan, the two last named being re-
stricted to this region. The birds are very abundant, as are also
the reptiles and the amphibians.


3. The Ethiopian Region. This includes that part of Africa
south of the Atlas Mountains, with Madagascar and the Mas-
carene Islands.

This region contains the hippopotamus, rhinoceros, elephant,
giraffe, lion, hyena, zebra, gorilla and other anthropoid apes,
and the lemurs; but strangely enough, no camels, or bears, or
deer, or oxen, or species of Sus (pig). It contains the ostrich,
which is the largest living bird in the world.

Madagascar had formerly the epiornis and the dodo, large
birds somewhat like the ostrich, or the dinornis of New Zealand,
but like the latter, extinct. It also contains about all the surviv-
ing lemurs (35 species), the fossils of which are found in the
Eocene rocks of Europe and America, and apparently only in
these regions.

4. The South American or Neotropical Region. Besides
South America, this includes also the West Indies, Central
America, and Mexico.

This region contains monkeys with prehensile tails, tapirs
(the only other species of tapir being confined to the Malay Pen-
insula), several of the camel family, with numerous edentates,
as the sloths, armadillos, and anteaters.

All the humming birds of the world, listed under some 400
species and 100 genera, are found in the New World, ranging
from Patagonia to Alaska, with their headquarters in the Neo-
tropical region. In this region are also numerous reptiles and
amphibians; and among fishes, the very interesting Lepidosiren,
one of the few surviving lungfishes, related to the Dipnoi of
Africa and Australia.

This region contains a very great variety of land snails.

5. The Nearctic Region. This includes the United States
and Canada. It surpasses all other parts of the world in its fresh-
water mollusks. Among the vertebrate fishes, it has many
ganoids, such as the gar pike and the sturgeons. Many large
mammals are peculiar to this region; and the alligator, which
occurs here, is represented by only one other species, which, curi-
ously enough, is found in the Yangtze River of China. However,
the cayman of South America, and also the crocodile of the Old
World, may be generically related to the alligator, and all may
have had a common origin.


56 THE NEW GEOLOGY


6. The Palxarctic or Eurasian Region. This comprises all
that part of Africa lying north of the Atlas Mountains, with all
Europe, and all Asia north of India.

This is by far the largest region of all, and contains a very
wide diversity of types, though when compared with its great
geographical extent, it is not so prolific of animal life as are the


Chamois Wild Boar


Hedgehog Camel Desman
Fic. 25. Characteristic animals of Euro-Asia. (After Heinman.)


great tropical regions. But the study of its fauna in detail is too
complicated a subject to be even sketched with profit in the very
limited space which we have here.


Aquatic Species. Distribution in the ocean seems to be more
a matter of vertical measurement than of horizontal. Depth is
the chief factor, with other modifications, such as temperature,
which are connected with depth.

Formerly it was taught that below 300 fathoms (1,800 feet)
little or no life is to be found. But it is now known that there is
no azoic or lifeless zone in the ocean; an abundant fauna, repre-
sented by many groups of animals, “extends down to the greatest
depths of from four to five thousand fathoms — nearly six statute
miles from the surface.” (Herdman.) As the bottom of the
ocean is of about the same temperature the world over, ranging
from about 37° F. down to about 35° or 34°, which is the point
of maximum density for sea water, there is practically ice-cold
water over all the bottom of the ocean; and as all the oceans com-
municate with one another by deep water, abyssal species that are
accustomed to this pressure and this temperature can migrate
over the whole world.


THE ORGANIC FEATURES OF THE EARTH 57


The lower boundary of the littoral zone, or the belt around all
the lands, extending out to the edge of the continental shelf, is
about at the depth of 600 feet, or 100 fathoms. This is about the
lowest limit to which light can penetrate, and hence the lowest
limit at which plant life can exist. Therefore certain species of
animals which exist upon this plant life, often microscopic, are
necessarily limited to the waters above this depth. In turn, other
species of carnivorous habits will also be limited to this region,
as here only can they find their food. Large seaweeds are not
found below 200 feet, as they require considerable light. The
fucoids, or brown and olive seaweeds, which are related to the
fossil seaweeds, are found on most of the shores in all latitudes.

The reef-forming corals are not plentiful below a depth of
150 feet, though some of them extend down as low as 240 feet;
and they occur only in the warm waters of the southern seas, re-
quiring a temperature between 68° and 78° F. Along with the
corals go numerous species of fishes, mollusks, starfishes, and
many other forms. Most of the mollusks, crustaceans, and many
of the brachiopods inhabit these shallow waters on the continen-
tal shelf, some of them being confined to the upper beaches where
the waters are less than 100 feet deep.

Absolute darkness probably prevails below 600 feet. The
ocean currents as a rule do not extend the motion of their waters
much below 1,000 feet, though in a few instances where they are
confined to narrow channels, they extend to slightly greater
depths. It has long been supposed that the great middle parts
of the ocean, between the bottom waters and the upper 1,000 feet
or so, are quite devoid of life; but recent investigations seem to
indicate that life abounds throughout even these regions.

Diatoms are microscopic plants secreting silica. They are
pelagic species; that is, they live in the open ocean, near the sur-
face. But their minute siliceous secretions fall continually to the
bottom, and cover vast areas of the South Atlantic with a soft
mud or diatom ooze.

The Foraminifera are minute, almost microscopic, rhizopods,
or animals related to the common ameba, but secreting calcare-
ous shells. These also abound in the open surface waters of the
ocean, and their delicate chambered shells fall like a continuous
shower of snowflakes over vast areas of the ocean bottom, form-
ing the globigerina ooze (Globigerina being a genus of the Fo-
raminifera) of the North Atlantic and other oceans. They com-
prise numerous genera and species, some of which are identical
with the fossils that make up the chalk rocks of the Cretaceous
system, found in Kansas, England, and elsewhere.


THE NEW GEOLOGY


Jı
o0


The Radiolaria are other microscopic rhizopods, which secrete
silica instead of limestone; and their skeletons, after falling to
the bottom, make the radiolarian ooze of the Central Pacific and
Indian oceans.

Both calcareous and siliceous sponges occur in various parts
of the oceans, and fheir spicules or skeletons are found in all
the oozes.


Until the time of the Challenger expedition (1872-1876), it was not
known that any such deposits as these oozes are now being made at the
bottom of the oceans; and so the species of animals found in the ancient
chalk and other similar rocks were all said to be “extinct.” We now know
that in many instances, these fossil forms are identical with the kinds found
in the deep-sea oozes. But though the animal remains are identical in the an-
cient and the modern deposits, the ancient beds are often as truly stratified
as an ordinary sandstone or a shale, while, where the modern oozes lie, there
is absolutely no movement of the waters at all, and thus a true strati-
fied formation at the bottom of our modern oceans is impossible. Then, too,
the ancient chalk beds “always contain fossils indicative of shallow water, as
well as skeletons of birds, pterosaurs (flying reptiles), ete.” (Pirsson.)
Evidently these ancient deposits represent quite abnormal conditions of the
waters, whereby the contents of the ocean depths and the forms of the shore
and of the lands were mixed together.


Echinoderms, including the starfishes, the sea urchins, and
the crinoids, are found at various depths and temperatures, some
of the crinoids living in the icy waters a mile or more down.
Many of these modern kinds are identical with the ancient fossil
species, though the fossil
kinds were formerly thought
to be absolutely extinct.

Some of the mollusks, as
the oysters and the ptero-
pods, are littoral or shallow-
water species; while others,
like the gastropods, are also
plentiful in the deep seas.
The pearly nautilus, an al-
most extinct type of cephalo-
pod, is found only in the
rather deep but warm waters
between the Malay region
and the Philippine and Fiji


Fic. 26. Horseshoe crabs: A, Limulus as l k

walchi. Jurassic: Solenhofen. Ventral and e i 2

dorsal views; one fourth natural size. B, yera inds of g usta-
Limulus poluphemus, the larval stage (trilo- ceans, as the large crabs,


bite stage) of the modern species; one half


natural size. (After Steinmann.) seem to be found almost from


THE ORGANIC FEATURES OF THE EARTH 59


pole to pole. They are chiefly littoral or shore species. The
limulus, or king crab (Fig. 26), is found along the whole eastern
coast of North America, and also in the waters of the East Indies,
the two similar groups being thus widely separated. These king
crabs are more or less closely related to the trilobites and the
eurypterids, fossil
Crustacea, which
are very common in
the Paleozoic rocks
of all the continents.

Of the verte-
brate fishes, we can
refer to only a few
kinds that are es-
pecially interesting
on account of their
connection with =
some of the fossil ¥/
types. The existing
ganoids, such as the
sturgeon and the Fic. 27. The woolly opossum (Didelphis lanigera).
pike, seem to be con-
fined to fresh water; but this may not have been true of their
fossil representatives. The Lepidosiren. of South America, the
Polypterus of the rivers of Central Africa, and the Ceratodus of
Australia, with the bullhead (or cestraciont) sharks of the seas
between Japan and Australia, are among the most interesting of
the fishes, as they are each the sole survivors of their respective
tribes — though their fossil representatives are found in great
abundance in the rocks of many parts of the globe —and until
quite recently they were all thought to be extinct.

Problems in Distribution. There are numerous disagreements
between the present occurrence of certain living species and
their occurrence as fossils in the rocks. We have already al-
luded to the case of the lemurs, the living animals being now found
only in the vicinity of the island of Madagascar, while their fos-
sils have hitherto been discovered only in Europe and North
America. But this is quite an insignificant fact as compared
with the occurrence of some of the larger animals. For instance,
large numbers of horses, identical with our domestic horse (Equus
caballus), only larger, are found as fossils all over North America
and South America from Alaska to Patagonia. But there was not
a single horse in any part of the New World when the whites
first came here, the wild horses with which we are acquainted in


60 THE NEW GEOLOGY


American history having been introduced by the Spaniards.
Their rapid multiplication when again placed here proves that
the environment was eminently suited to their needs. How did
so many uncounted thousands of them become extinct?

But the horse is not alone in this sudden disappearance. Ele-
phants, rhinoceroses, camels, megatheriums, and glyptodonts, the
three first mentioned being identical with the kinds now living
in the Old World, also lived here in North America alongside
these fossil horses. The huge dinosaurs may also have been con-
temporary. How did such an assemblage of animals all become
extinct together? The diluvialist has an easy explanation, in
saying that none of these happened to get back to this part of the
world after the great disaster; but how can we account for these
facts with even moderate probability on the basis of uniformity
and evolutionary geology?

Again, if all the marsupials are descended from a common
stock, and if we place their origin in Australia, where practically
all the surviving ones are found, how shall we account for the
opossums in North and South America (Fig. 27)? Or how did
the tapirs become so widely scattered, some of them being in
South America, and all the rest in the Malay Peninsula? Why
should the camels be confined to the eastern parts of the Old
World, and their close relatives, the llamas and the vicuñas, be
found only in South America?

The dipnoans, or lungfishes, are confined to the streams of
Central Africa, the Amazon Valley, and two small rivers in
Queensland, Australia. Another kind of fishes, the osteoglossids,
which are very interesting from the scientific point of view, are
also confined to these same widely scattered localities, with the
addition of the Malay Archipelago. (Giinther.)

The molluscan fauna of the West Indies is almost identical
with that found fossil in the Eocene rocks of the Paris basin.
The collective fauna of Australia is very closely like the collective
fauna of the Lower Eocene beds of North America.

Such things are remarkable, to say the least; and they could
be extended and continued almost indefinitely. They show at a
glance that there are many facts about the present geographical
distribution of animals which are most easily accounted for on the
basis of a former world catastrophe. And with the new light
which we have received regarding the subject of “species,” partly
through experiments with changes in environment during the
embryonic stage, and partly through crossing under the methods
taught us by Mendel, we now know that the old specific and ge-
neric distinctions were marked off on altogether too narrow lines.


61


THE ORGANIC FEATURES OF THE EARTH


ble;


i


tural way than used to be thought poss


It is perfectly evident that both animals and plants have varied


much more in a na


, it further


From this


and hence two or more comparatively different forms may very
_ follows that the problem of accounting for the modern diversity


well be supposed to be of a common descent.


('qəysəsuerr wor ‘9 pue g i aayjuNy wor V)


“2 ul se ‘a[qistaut K&[əl)ə[duroəo aie sales


ay} “uəuroəds usədj e UJ sj? JUSWIZIA Aq pəumpno urs ay} JO S¥eIe Mq ‘salvos quəsərdəqr you Op g JO əowujans ay} uo SSurytvw


pədeys-ə3uəzo out, “Aunsereg ‘pxoppind uassopiday 'O : eque


SUIJIPUUD SNLILAOJOtdA ‘q `'puwe[suəənb


SHHSIGDNNT NYAGOW '87 Slt


‘149}8L40f SNPOJPDAIIOINT ‘V


62 THE NEW GEOLOGY


of animals (and plants) as the survivors from a universal Deluge
has been greatly simplified; for the more variation we admit as
possible, the easier it is to account for the present fauna (and
flora), since fewer original forms would be required to begin the
present stock.


Variation. A half century ago it was supposed that plants
and animals tend constantly to vary in all directions and to a
practically unlimited extent. We now know that this is not the
case. Thanks to the keen investigations stimulated by Mendel’s
discoveries, we now know quite definitely how plants and animals
vary, the extent of their variations, and can even predict with
accuracy the results of combinations as developed in heredity in
succeeding generations.

It has been found that variations are of two kinds: first, what
are termed fluctuations, slight differences induced by the environ-
ment or in other ways, these fluctuations being non-heritable, or
not capable of being transmitted to the next generation ; the other
kind of variations are termed modifications, and are the segre-
gates which are brought to light under Mendelian crossing. These
modifications are very definitely transmitted in heredity, with all
the precision of chemical law. But we also know now that these
modifications are all within the bounds of the true species; for
they are not only definitely produced by known combinations, but
they can also be resolved into their originals by back-crossing.
So none of these new types are really outside the bounds of the
true species.

From all these considerations, we find that biology is now in
the strange situation of not really knowing how new types of
plants and animals, new “species” in the proper sense of the word,
can arise de novo. Doubtless our old ideas of the limits of a
“species” will have to be enlarged so as to include perhaps all the
forms now listed under a genus, perhaps all the members of a
family. Doubtless, too, many of the listed “species” will turn out
to be merely Mendelian segregates which have appeared naturally
in a wild state. In this respect, the views of the “lumpers” are
more or less justified, for they have been inclined to group many
so-called “species” together under a common name, calling these
different forms only well-marked varieties. But as the net re-
sults of over half a century of study of these problems, we have
a man like Bateson proclaiming that we really do not know any-
thing at all about the “origin of species.” And this is certainly
true, if we mean “species” in the broadest and most correct sense
of the term.


Part H — Structural Geology


CHAPTER III


Minerals and Rocks


Hitherto we have not acquired many facts with which to
solve our big problems. But the records of the earth’s past are
all written (in so far as they are written at all) in the rocks of
the crust; and all the problems of geology must be solved by
reading these records. Hence we must learn to understand the
language in which these records have been written. Very often
in the past, this writing has been misunderstood and misinter-
preted, as is seen by the many-conflicting announcements which
have been based on the reading of these records. Even now
there is no very complete agreement as to how they should be
read and interpreted.

But to learn the language in which the earth’s history has
been written, we must first study the rocks, which may be called
the alphabet of this history. Then we shall need to see how
these rocks are now being made and arranged in masses, and
how we find those rocks which were made in the older days.

In this chapter, we shall study the subject of the rocks, their
composition and kinds.


A. Elements and Simple Combinations

The number of terrestrial elements or uncombined substances
is a little over 80. Some of these, as oxygen, nitrogen, and
hydrogen, are gases at ordinary temperatures; but in their
varied combinations, they contribute very largely to the making
up of the rocks of which the earth is composed.

Oxygen is the most abundant of the elements, and constitutes
50 per cent by weight of the whole earth’s structure, so far as
we can tell. H is chiefly important because of its intense
chemical activity, combining with practically all the other
elements. Life and decay, as well as true combustion, are each
dependent upon the oxygen of the atmosphere.

Combined with the various metallic elements, as potassium,
sodium, calcium, iron, and aluminium, it forms essentially stable
oxides, which are the principal constituents of the materials
making up the rocks.

Carbon. All living substances, plant or animal, contain car-
bon. Charcoal is very nearly pure carbon, while the diamond
and graphite are variant forms, or paramorphs. The best

(63)


64 THE NEW GEOLOGY


mineral coal is about 80 to 95 per cent pure carbon. Uniting
with oxygen (in the form of CO.) in the animal body, carbon
is given out by respiration and becomes the source of growth
for the plant. It enters largely into the make-up of rocks,
through its combination with lime, forming calcium carbonate
(CaCO), the material of ordinary limestone.

Silicon. Combined with oxygen, silicon becomes silica or
quartz (SiO.), which is the most abundant and durable of com-
mon minerals. With the various oxides, it forms silicates. Of
these oxides, alumina (Al,O;) is the most important, being next
to silica in abundance, very hard, and almost infusible.

Sulphur. This element is a common volcanic product, and
combined with the different metals, forms ores of considerable
importance. In company with oxygen, it unites with various
metals to form sulphates.

Phosphorus. With oxygen, this also forms acids, one of
which combines with calcium to form calcium phosphate, the
chief inorganic constituent of bones and guano. The mineral
apatite, largely used for making fertilizers, is a calcium phos-
phate. Phosphorus unites also with ‘iron, lead, copper, etc.

Nitrogen. Nitrogen is an essential constituent of all animal
tissues, and of many plants. It comprises 79 per cent of the
atmosphere, and combines with oxygen and hydrogen to make
nitric acid (HNO;), which forms nitrates.


B. The Chief Rock-Making Minerals


Only brief, elementary descriptions of the chief minerals can
be attempted here. Certain important physical properties must
first be mentioned, by means of which these minerals can often
be recognized without chemical or other tests. These physical
properties are crystal form, cleavage, color, hardness, and streak.

As a rule, each mineral has a characteristic form of crystal,
which is usually invariable. Any natural formation of a mineral
with flat surfaces and sharp edges is called a crystal. These
crystals generally have geometric shapes; and their formation
is supposed to be due to the manner in which the molecules have
arranged themselves.

Cleavage is shown by minerals when they have a tendency
to split or break more readily in certain directions than in
others, yielding smooth, flat surfaces. Thus mica has very
definite cleavage in one direction, splitting into thin elastic
sheets. Some minerals, such as quartz, show no tendency to
cleavage whatever.


MINERALS AND ROCKS 65


The color of a mineral is usually very noticeable; but in most
instances, it is not a reliable means of identification. The color
of the powdered form of a mineral may be quite different from
that of the portion which has not been broken up into a powder.
This powdered form of a mineral is called its streak; and many
minerals are identified by the streak when the color may be
quite misleading. Hematite, or red iron ore, is red only in its
streak, its ordinary color being gray or almost black. The
streak of a mineral may always be obtained by scratching it
with a substance which is harder than it and which will produce
some powder by its scratching.

The hardness of minerals is a very useful means of identi-
fying them. A scale of hardness has been worked out, ranging
from certain soft substances like tale, which may be scratched
readily with the finger nail, to the diamond, which is the hardest
of all known substances. The following table gives a list of the
scale of hardnesses:


T Pale: 6. Orthoclase.

2. Gypsum. 7. Quartz.

3. Calcite. 8. Topaz.

4. Fluorite. 9. Sapphire.

5. Apatite. 10. Diamond.
1. Silica


Quartz. As already remarked, quartz is the most abundant
mineral. It is a silicon oxide, its formula being SiO». Hard-
ness, 7, not being scratched with a knife. Specific gravity, 2.65.
Infusible, and insoluble in ordinary acids. When heated with
soda or potash, it fuses to common glass. It has no cleavage, and
in luster and transparency often resembles glass; it may,
however, be dull and opaque, and of various colors, as yellow,
red, brown, etc. Its crystals often make beautiful hexagonal
prisms, terminated at one or both ends by hexagonal pyramids.
Most of the stones and sand grains of the fields and beaches are
composed of quartz. They are the remains left behind after
the other accompanying minerals have been worn down or decom-
posed and carried away. Hence sandstones and conglomerates
consist largely of quartz.

It may be distinguished by its hardness, infusibility, non-
action under acids, and especially by its absence of cleavage.

Opal. This is identical with quartz in composition, though
containing some water. It is uncrystallized, less hard and
heavy, and dissolves more readily in heated alkaline waters.


66 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Geyserite is the material deposited by the hot waters of
geysers, and is similar to quartz in composition, as are also the
siliceous secretions of sponges, the shells of radiolarians, and the
minute microscopic plants called diatoms. Flint and chert are
amorphous, dark-colored forms of silica, usually opaque.


2. Alumina


Sapphire, or Corundum. This is aluminum oxide, its formula
being Al 03.

When the crystals are blue and transparent, they are called
sapphire; when red, Oriental ruby. They are the hardest of
gems next to the diamond, and the coarser material, when
ground, makes emery.


3. Silicates of Aluminum and Other Basic Elements


The Feldspars. These are next to quartz in abundance.
Hardness, 6.5 to 7, or almost equal to that of quartz; a piece
of feldspar will scratch glass. Specific gravity, 2.4 to 2.6. The
color is usually white or flesh red, sometimes brownish or green-
ish. Feldspar is readily distinguished from quartz by its perfect
cleavage in two directions, with flat, lustrous surfaces, the angle
of cleavage being nearly or quite a right angle. It is more or
less fusible before the blowpipe.

Orthoclase is a potash feldspar; albite, a soda feldspar; and
labradorite, a lime-soda feldspar. Andesite is a species some-
what like the last named.

The Micas. These are cleavable into thin, elastic leaves, and
are thus often used for the doors of stoves and lanterns. The
formula varies slightly with the species; but in addition to the
silica, alumina, and potash or soda of the feldspars, the micas
generally contain magnesia and iron.

They may be colorless, brown, green, or black. Mica may
occur as small scales disseminated through granite or other
rocks; or sometimes as great plates several feet across. Musco-
vite or hydromica and biotite are the chief varieties.

Quartz, feldspar, and mica are the constituents of granite,
the grains of each being readily distinguished from the others.

Other aluminum silicates, which are often disseminated
through crystalline schists or slates, are: andalusite, tourmaline,
garnet, and topaz.


4. Silicates of Magnesium and Iron or Calcium, with Little or No
Alumina and No Water


Hornblende, or Amphibole. This is about as hard as feld-
spar, usually black or greenish black. Specific gravity, 2.8 to


MINERALS AND ROCKS 67


3.2. It is brittle, and often occurs in prisms with a cleavage
angle of 124° 30. It sometimes occurs in slender green crystals
or fibers; and when these fibers are long and fine like flax, it is
called asbestos.

Pyroxene. This is similar to hornblende in composition and
in most of its characteristics; but the crystals form angles of
87°, and are often eight-sided. Hence it is a paramorph of
hornblende. It is a constituent of trap and many other igne-
ous rocks.


5. Silicates of Magnesium, etc., with Water


Tale. Very soft; hardness, 1. Crystallizes in flexible leaves
like mica, but they are not elastic. Usually pale green in color.
Soapstone, or steatite, is a massive variety of talc, and feels
soapy or greasy.

Serpentine. Soft; hardness, 3. Greenish in color. Massive
or crystalline.

Chlorite. Resembles green or black mica in appearance, but
is not elastic; it contains 14 per cent water, and no potash.


6. Silicates of Alumina Containing Water


Kaolinite. Pure white clay; derived from the decomposition
of feldspar, water taking the place of the potash, and the sub-
stance becoming soft and amorphous. It is used in making fine
pottery and porcelain.

Glauconite, or Green Earth. The material of the New Jersey
marl, or greensand, of the Cretaceous and other formations. A
very similar material, known as “green mud,” is to be found on
the modern ocean bottom in various places. The glauconite is
formed inside the remains of the minute foraminifers, sea ur-
chins, and sponges, “in a manner not yet understood.” (‘Ency-
clopedia Britannica.’’)

7. Carbonates

Calcite. This is the material of common limestones and
marbles. Its composition is CaCO,. Hardness, 3; easily
scratched. Specific gravity, 2.7. Effervesces actively under
hydrochloric acid, giving off CO. It can not be readily distin-
guished from other minerals by either its color or its crystals;
but when heated, it turns white and amorphous, and the residue,
when dampened, turns red litmus paper blue. It contains no
water.

Aragonite. A paramorph of calcite, present in most uncrys-
talline limestones, and formed from the shells that compose these


68 THE NEW GEOLOGY


rocks. The part of the inside of many sea shells which is called
mother-of-pearl is composed of aragonite.


Dolomite. This is a calcium-magnesium carbonate, and often
resembles calcite so closely that it can only be distinguished by
chemical tests. It effervesces but feebly under cold hydrochloric
acid, but actively when placed in the liquid and heated. Much
of the limestone of the world is dolomite, or magnesian lime-
stone, as it is sometimes called.


Siderite. An iron carbonate, FeCO,. A very valuable iron
ore. It crystallizes and cleaves much like dolomite, but is much
heavier, its specific gravity being 3.7 to 3.9. It is white or gray
in color, changing to brown on exposure, becoming limonite.
Like dolomite, it effervesces in hot dilute hydrochloric acid. It
is often called clay ironstone.


8. Sulphates


Gypsum. This is a hydrous calcium sulphate. It is very
soft; hardness, 1; does not grate under the teeth. Color from
white to black, the pure white form being called alabaster. It
is often crystalline, with pearly luster. The latter form cleaves
in broad plates like mica, which are nevertheless softer than
those of mica, and are not elastic. When heated slightly in a
test tube, it gives off its water of crystallization and becomes a
powder. This powder is plaster of Paris. Gypsum is not af-
fected by hydrochloric acid.

A calcium sulphate containing no water is called anhydrite.

Barite, or heavy spar, is barium sulphate.


9. Phosphates


Apatite. The crystals resemble beryl in being six-sided
prisms, as well as in color; but apatite is much softer. It is a
calcium phosphate, and is much used in making fertilizers.


10. Sulphides


Pyrite. Brasslike in color. Hardness, 7; will strike fire with
steel. Its crystals are often in cubes. Formula, FeS. Often
called “fool’s gold.” When heated, it crackles, and breaks up
into small pieces, giving off sulphur. These small pieces, with
much more heat, become black and magnetic, showing that they
contain iron. Pyrite is, however, not good for producing iron,
but is used for making sulphuric acid.


Arsenopyrite. It is silver white and brittle, but much harder


than the silver ores. It contains arsenic as well as sulphur
and iron.


MINERALS AND ROCKS 69


Chalcopyrite. Copper pyrites. Gold yellow, but very unlike
gold in being brittle.

Galena. Color light steel gray. Brittle. It is lead sulphide
(PbS), and the most common lead ore.


Sphalerite (Blende). This is zine sulphide (ZnS), and the
most common ore of zinc.


11. Oxides


Hematite. A steel gray ore of iron, its streak or powder
being red. In the powdered form, as red ocher, it is often used
for making red paint. Formula, Fe03.

Magnetite. Called magnetic iron ore and loadstone, because
attractable by the magnet and eften itself magnetic. It some-
times looks like hematite, but its powder is black. Formula,
Fe,O;.

Limonite. Color dark brown to yellow. When heated in a
test tube, it gives off water, and the residue is then like hematite
in composition. Continued heat makes this residue black and
magnetic; that is, converts it into magnetite. The streak or
powder of limonite is yellow, and a yellow earthy variety is the
common paint, yellow ocher. When it does not contain sulphur
as an impurity, it is a valuable iron ore, and easily worked.
Like all the iron ores, it is heavy. Formula, Fe,0;+112H.0O.


Manganite. A hydrous oxide of manganese.


Water. Water must not be omitted in any account of the
constituents of rocks. Its formula is H.,O; but because of its
solvent properties, it is seldom or never found pure.


C. Organically Formed Materials


Besides the materials of mineral origin already mentioned,
much material for rock making has been contributed by animals
and plants. When animals die, their harder parts, as bones,
shells, or corals, are left behind, and vast beds of rocks have been
formed in this way. Plants are the source of the coal beds.

Beds often occur which contain materials of purely organic
origin mixed with sand, clay, gravel, and the like, or materials
of mineral origin. Sometimes only a few organic relics remain
to be distinguished. Any such organic relics preserved in a
rock are called fossils, and the bed containing them is spoken
of as fossiliferous.

There are but four chief organic products that contribute
to the formation of rocks.


70 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Caleareous. This is the material composing the limestones.
It may be formed from the shells of mollusks, corals, crinoids,
foraminifers, or rhizopods. Vast beds have no doubt been made
in this way, and others are still being made; but it is a strange
blunder to suppose that all limestones must be of organic origin,
for all the lime now in the world must have existed in some form
before the animals, as the latter can not be supposed to have
created it. These corals, mollusks, etc., do not create their own
building material, they simply work over what they find.


Siliceous. Silica is secreted by two classes of animals, the
sponges and the radiolarians. The minute plants called diatoms,


Fic. 29. Phosphate mine, near the mouth of Swan Creek, Tennessee. (Hayes, U. S. G. S.)


with some algoid species of plants, also form siliceous products.
The beautiful “glass sponges” are composed of silica.


Phosphatic. The bones, teeth, and shells of land animals are
chiefly phosphates, as is also guano, composed principally of the
excrements of birds or bats, and used extensively as fertilizer.
Fossil excrements found in the rocks are called coprolites. The
phosphatic tests of gastropods (Cyclora) are found in the Ordo-
vician limestones of Tennessee; and when this limestone decom-
poses into a residual red clay, these phosphate tests or shells are
left behind, thus forming the phosphate beds of these regions,
which are now mined, and by chemical treatment, are converted
into very valuable fertilizers (Fig. 29).


MINERALS AND ROCKS cal


Carbonaceous. Plants are the main source of carbonaceous
material, though animals have contributed largely toward the
formation of many of the oil deposits and some of the cannel
coals. However, as already remarked about the limestones, the
plants must not be looked upon as having created the carbon of
these deposits; they have simply worked it over.

Ordinary wood contains about 50 per cent carbon, with
oxygen 44 per cent, and hydrogen 6 per cent. Peat is plant
material partly changed toward coal, though there is abundant
evidence that coal was not formed from ancient peat bogs, but
from well-preserved plant material buried suddenly. Brown
coal has lost still more of its hydrogen and oxygen than peat;
bituminous coal, still more; and anthracite, most of all. The
last named is nearly pure carbon.

Mineral oil and mineral gas contain only carbon and hydro-
gen. Both were probably formed by distillation from the
coal beds, and other organic deposits.


D. Kinds of Rocks


Rocks may be divided into two general divisions, (1) frag-
mental or clastic, and (2) crystalline. But it will be convenient
to insert here a few definitions as preliminary to the study of
this subject.

The fragmental rocks are the sands, gravels, earths, and
clays, usually found from the wearing away of more solid rocks,
and thus called detritus.

Fragmental deposits are built up in successive beds or layers,
and hence are called stratified (Latin, stratum, a layer). For
the most part, also, they are sediments deposited by water, and
are thence called sedimentary beds.


Crystalline Rocks. When either vapors, solutions, or fused
substances change into the solid state, they generally crystallize;
and noncrystalline solids may become crystalline without actual
fusion, if subjected to long-continued moderate heat.

Crystalline rocks are often igneous or eruptive rocks; that is,
they have crystallized from a state of fusion, having been forced
up from beneath the surface, as the lavas, some granites, etc.
Others have become crystalline by heat without fusion, as mas-
sive limestone becomes crystalline limestone or marble, and
granitic sandstone becomes granite or gneiss. Such rocks are
called metamorphic rocks, and they have often been produced
on a large scale by the heat generated in mountain making.


12 THE NEW GEOLOGY


DESCRIPTIONS OF ROCKS


It will be convenient to subdivide the rocks into the follow-
ing three divisions:


I. Limestones, or calcareous rocks
II. Fřagmental rocks not calcareous
III. Crystalline rocks


I. Calcareous Rocks
1. Limestones Not Crystalline


Massive Limestone. Compact and uncrystalline. Color
whitish, gray, or nearly black. Consists essentially of calcite or
calcium carbonate, but often contains clay or sand as impurities.

Many limestones are of organic origin. The dark color, when
present, is usually caused by carbonaceous matter from the de-
composition of plants and animals. When burned, limestone
loses its carbon dioxide and becomes white; it is then quicklime
or lime (CaQ).

When a bed is made up chiefly of pebbles of limestone com-
pacted together, it is called a limestone conglomerate.

Dolomite, or Magnesian Limestone. In color and texture, it
resembles ordinary limestone. Many limestones are a mixture
of calcite and dolomite; and sometimes the contained fossils are
magnesian while the rock itself is common limestone.

Hydraulic Limestone. This is a limestone containing 20 to
30 per cent of clay, which when burned becomes a quicklime
mixed with clay, which makes a very firm cement that will
“set” under water. i

Oolite. Ordinary or magnesian limestone consisting of small
concretionary spherules, which look like petrified eggs or roe of
fish, whence the name.

Chalk. This has the same composition as ordinary limestone.


Marl. A clay containing much limestone, often as shells or
shell fragments. Such names as shell limestone or coral lime-
stone explain themselves.


Travertine. A massive limestone, perhaps formed by depo-


sition from calcareous waters. The outer walls of the Colos-
seum and of St. Peter’s at Rome are constructed of it.


2. Crystalline Limestone


Stalagmite and Stalactite. These are deposits from water
percolating through the roofs of limestone caverns, the latter
name being given to the cones or iciclelike bodies that hang


MINERALS AND ROCKS 73


from the ceiling, and the former applied to the formation on the
floor under the dripping.


Marble. This is a crystalline or granular limestone. It is
usually a metamorphic rock.
Dolomite. The crystalline variety of dolomite can not be dis-


tinguished from marble except by chemical tests. Unless quite
pure, it is not very durable.


_


H. Fragmental Rocks Not Caleareous


Conglomerate. This is merely a gravel bed, composed of
pebbles or rock fragments, consolidated into a firm mass. If the


Fic. 30. Contemporaneous erosion, seen in the channel of the Niagara Gorge.

(U. S. G. S.) This is very evidently an example of subaqueous erosion, that
! is, made while the first beds were still beneath the waters.
pebbles are rounded, it is called pudding stone; if angular,
breccia. These distinctions often tell us something concerning
the history of the fragments composing the bed.

Grit. A hard, gritty rock, sometimes used for millstones,
composed of coarse quartz sand and small pebbles, the sand
grains often having sharp edges, as if they had never been
washed much by moving water. It frequently accompanies the
coal beds.

Sandstone. A consolidated sand bed. The descriptive names
used to distinguish varieties are generally self-explaining.

Shale. This is simply consolidated mud or clay, and, like
the latter, has various colors and textures.


74 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Argillite. Called also clay slate. It is a slaty rock somewhat
like shale, but, unlike the latter, it breaks into thin, even slates
or slabs. Much of it is of metamorphic origin, and often it
graduates into hard, thick-layered sandstones, which used to be
called graywacke.

Tuff. Made up of comminuted volcanic sand or lavas more
or less changed.

Clay. Soft and plastic, largely aluminous in composition,
and of different colors. It usually contains particles of quartz


$ an a ag
SSS an tg de Tos
wap ttt


Fic. 31. Granite intrusions parallel to mica gneiss. Flow ganding in the granite.
(Keith, U. S. G. S3


and feldspar, and traces of some iron oxide, besides the kaolin,
or pure clay. On being heated, clay hardens, and the iron in
it turns red, thus forming red brick. Clays that contain no iron
are used to make white pottery; and those containing no feld-
spar can be used to make fire brick, but the potash of feldspar
makes ordinary brick fusible.


Alluvium, Silt, Loess. The first two are the earthy deposits
made respectively by moving fresh waters, and by the waters of
bays or harbors. Loess is a singular deposit, coarse or fine,
often following the course of valleys, like alluvium, but without


MINERALS AND ROCKS 75


division into thin layers. It seems to be chiefly or wholly an
ancient deposit; while alluvium and silt are modern deposits.
Loess may have been deposited in a rapid, continuous manner,
through deep overlying water. The adobe soil of the western
United States is very similar to the loess.


Tripolite. Called also infusorial earth, and composed of the
siliceous shells of diatoms. It resembles clay or chalk in texture,
but will scratch glass when rubbed on it.


HI. Crystalline Rocks


1. Siliceous Rocks


Quartzite. A siliceous sandstone, sometimes made to include
conglomerate. Other rocks coming under this head are: siliceous
slate, chert, jasper rock, buhrstone, and geyserite.


2. Rocks Having Alkali-Bearing Minerals as Chief Constituents
A. THE POTASH FELDSPAR AND MICA SERIES


Granite. A mechanical mixture of quartz, feldspar, and
mica, with no appearance of layers. Its quartz has no cleavage.
There are numerous varieties, named from the color of the feld-
spar or other peculiarities. It is often metamorphic and eruptive
in origin, but may be primitive.

Gneiss. Like granite in materials, but having the mica and
other ingredients more or less in layers. There are many va-
rieties. It is often metamorphic in origin.


Mica Schist. The mica predominates, but usually there is
much quartz and some feldspar. There are many varieties, and
it is usually considered metamorphic.

Hydromica Schist. Thin and schistose, made chiefly of hy-
drous mica, or sometimes containing also quartz. a

Slate, Argillite. These rocks form a transition between the
hydromica schists and the shales, and are the result of but slight
metamorphism. They are finely grained rocks, that to the naked
eye do not appear crystalline. As will be shown subsequently,
the planes of slaty cleavage are independent of the planes of
stratification, and are due to pressure.

“Perfectly gradual transitions may be traced from granite
to gneiss, from gneiss to mica schist, from mica schist to hydro-
mica schist, from hydromica schist to slate, and from slate to
shale.” — Dana.


Ottawa County, Quebec.


ip,


Portland Townsh
(Wilson, U. S. G. S.)


Banded gneiss,


2.


Fig. 3


MINERALS AND ROCKS 77


Felsite. This is compact orthoclase, mixed with some quartz.

Porcelanite. Baked clay. It is like flint in fracture, and
gray or red in color. Formed by the baking of clay beds when
they consist largely of feldspar. This often has occurred in the
vicinity of a trap dike, or over large areas by the burning of
coal beds underneath, as in North Dakota and Montana.

Trachyte. Consists mainly of orthoclase. It has a rough
surface of fracture; differs from felsite in containing some
glass, and in having a rougher surface. Ash gray or brownish
in color, and eruptive in origin.

Lava. Under this name are included a number of varieties
that have flowed in streams from a volcano, especially those
that are scoriaceous or contain~cavities. Obsidian, scoria, and
pumice are some of the names in this group.


B. PoTASH FELDSPAR AND HORNBLENDE OR PYROXENE SERIES

Syenite. This is a granitelike eruptive or metamorphic rock,
having black hornblende instead of mica. When containing
quartz, it is called quartz syenite. The name syenite comes from
Syene in Egypt, where red granite graduating into quartz syen-
ite was obtained by the Egyptians for making their obelisks and
much of their architectural work.

The term augite is given to varieties containing pyroxene
instead of hornblende.


C. Sopa-LIME FELDSPAR Rocks


These are basic rocks, eruptive or metamorphic in origin,
varying much in the kind of feldspar present, in texture, and
in composition, even in the same eruptive mass. Many of the
dark-colored varieties are included under the term trap rock.
Little more than the names of the numerous varieties can be


given here.

Diorite. Includes greenstone and the red porphyry of Egypt.
Labradorite, andesite, gabbro, and dolerite, or trap, are some of
the more important varieties.

3. Rocks Without Feldspar

These include garnet rock, epidosite, tourmalite, pyroxenite,
hornblendite, and amphibolite.

4. Hydrous Magnesian and Aluminous Rocks

These include the chlorite and talcose schists, steatite, or
soapstone, serpentine, and ophicalcite, or verd antique.


6


Fig. 33. Columnar structure, obsidian columns, Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming.
(Iddings, U. S. G. S.)


(78)


MINERALS AND ROCKS 79


Oxygen, Carbon, Silicon, Sulphur, Phosphorus,
I. Elements
Nitrogen, Chlorine, Bromine, Fluorine, Boron.


r
1. Silica | Quru Opal
2. Alumina { Sapphire, or Corundum
|
| 3. Silicates of Aluminum ( The-Feldspars, the Micas,
I and other Basic Ele-~ Andalusite, Tourmaline,
ments | Garnet, Topaz
4. Silicates of Magnesium Chrysolite,
and Iron or Calcium,
with little or no Alu- a rues
| mina and no water Pyroxene
| 5. Silicates of Magnesium, na ’
3 erpentine,
etc., with water Chlorite
CON- II. Rock- T !
STITU- Forming S oiae or Alumnina Kaolinite, Glauconite,
saad Minerals containing water Zeolite
sad | Calcite, Dolomite,
7. Carbonates
| siderite, Aragonite
| | Gypsum,
| 8. Sulphates < apine,
| L Barite
| | 9. Phosphates | Apatite
|
| f Pyrite, Pyrrhotite,
| 10. Sulphides Arsenopyrite, Galena,
| Chalcopyrite, Sphalerite
Pp mate, Magnetite,
11. Oxides k Manganite,
! ater
X
š leareous
UI. Or- 2 ie
ganically ee.
- Formed 3. Phosphatic
Materials 4. Carbonaceous


THE NEW GEOLOGY


80


(aenbyuy p4ə9A) Əpəreərydo
‘sutjuedieg ‘(əuozsdeog) 34178294S
‘ISTIS ASOV, “Ystyog OPOTI J


əlt[oqrudurv “əlyrpuə[quaoH “əYtuəxoiÁd


‘op[eUuLInoy, ‘eytsoptdy ‘yooy 3əua


deay, ‘orqqes
iR AA nope | redsp[ə g out ee
porq contquesieyy J PANE A REN ha ASS


SeLlIeg əuəxodÁd
10 əpuəjquIoy pue

qedspjog yseqog
VALT ‘ajyAyoviy, 'əltue[əoo4oq y

puspa SS worurozp£H DE AFR aL ae
\styog VIW 'sstəous “Qəqrueze) J pia isrioq


ayLsny ‘ssrouy Ste)


‘aytuaAG zj1ent “əyruə£g J


ajidashery ‘auoysayng ‘yooy aəds


qaəuO ‘IEIS SNOS “əlrzyren0O J


syooy snoururn[ V
pue uvisouse nW
snoipAy `F


qxedspp T
yNoyyIM S3901 `£


Ú
eX) J
5
°.


sluəninsuoo JəoruO
L SB S[eIəurINW
; Surreəq-rIe3[y
q Əurureluoo s3201 `Z


W)
Cp)


snodig `T


eypodi4y, “ssəorr “rS ‘wnan y
7 ‘ARID LMI ‘oy[sry PYS
“9uolspueS ‘PINY “eiəuro[8šuoo


a}IWO[Od ‘e[q1ef, I0 “Əuolsəurr al
-nuedy ‘ayjoeleyg pue aywsererg |


OUIJAOARL YT,
“əuolysəurri [EIo pue (us
‘IEW ALEYO PPO “ouolsəurr -
aynearpAP “əlturo[oq 10 “uojsəurr] |
uvIsouSe “uojsəurr AISSEW J


əuoysəurrr əur[[e3sÁ4oO `Z


əut[#)s£A4O9 JOU səuonsəutrr] `I


+


r SYooy əurle4sA:O TU |


snoəzeəo[eo Jou
if Ssyooy [ejueudel q 'II


|
Í SyooYyY SNOIIVIJLQ
I0 “səuoljsəuur] ` j


J r


CHAPTER IV


rocks consist, we may now pass to the study of the great rock
masses which make up what we call the earth’s crust; for we may
still use this latter term concerning that part of the earth’s struc-
ture which we can examine, though most people have long since
discarded the old idea of a molten interior which gave rise to this
expression.


Many such terms, which have arisen under false theories, are yet so ex-
pressive or have become so much a part of scientific language, that it is more
convenient to continue them than to invent new ones; just as astronomy and
chemistry still use many names surviving from the old superstitions of as-
trology and alchemy.


Many of the rock masses of our globe are stratified in struc-
ture, others are unstratified, while everywhere there are other
masses which may cut across the stratified rocks in the form
of veins or dikes. The last mentioned will be more properly de-
unstratified rocks proper. Hence our study here will be confined
to the stratified rocks.


1. Structure and Characteristics


Stratified rocks are those which are spread out in beds or
strata, the Latin word stratum meaning that which has been
spread out. These beds are often of considerable extent, perhaps
many square miles in area and many feet in thickness. The term
stratum is used in geology to designate a bed or several beds that
are made, of approximately the same kind of rock material
EArouehont. Thus, if limestone, sandstone, and shale lie one on
top of another, each is a separate stratum, though they may in-
dividually be composed of several beds, and each bed may be made
up of various lagers.

Formations. On the other hand, if several independent strata
are found containing a similar assemblage of life-forms or fossils,
it has become the custom among geologists to class them together
into what is termed a formation; because the old system of classi-
fying the rocks according to their mineral or lithologic character
was found to be unsatisfactory, and a new system of classification
was proposed in the early part of the nineteenth century, this
system being based on the kinds of fossils found in the rocks.


(81)


82 THE NEW GEOLOGY


This latter system has now been in vogue for nearly a century;
and though, through recent discoveries, we have come to discard
the time-values so long associated with these different types of
life, this classification of the rocks according to the fossils they
contain has many things to recommend it, and should be retained.

The term formation thus becomes synonymous with stratified
rock mass; and though we now know that no one type of fossil
can be proved to be older than another, the term formation is
a convenient one to usé in the sense in which it has so long
been employed, namely, meaning any group of stratified rocks,
large or small, whose parts are related to one another in respect
to the types of fossils they contain. Thus these parts may or may
not be of the same mineral or mechanical make-up; even strata
from widely separated localities may be grouped or classed to-
gether in one formation to make it complete. For example, the
latter use of the term would be illustrated by the Tertiary for-
mation, or by the Eocene formation, the latter being a subdivi-
sion of the former.

The term formation is often used in widely different senses by various
authors. Thus it is sometimes used, though less frequently and less exactly,


for a group of rocks of similar lithologice structure, as a siliceous formation,
or a calcareous formation.


Positions and Conditions of Strata. The study of the order
and characteristics of the strata, or beds, of a region, is termed a
stratigraphical investigation, and this adjective is also applied
to the relation that one deposit bears to another in a stratified
series. It used to be taught (by the Neptunists, as Werner and his
associates were called) that the earth is covered by a regular
series of coats like those of an onion, which maintain the same
relative position toward each other in all countries, each encir-
cling the whole globe. But we now know that nothing much more
absurd or contrary to fact could well be imagined. For a stratum
which is 1,000 feet thick in one locality may in the course of a
few miles become only 10 feet in thickness, or may run out alto-
gether; or it may change from sandstone to limestone or shale;
or if the first part of it contains Devonian fossils, it may change
to a bed containing Silurian or Carboniferous ones.

Often a bed of coral limestone, for instance, thins out at short
intervals, being in mere isolated pieces 100 feet or 1,000 feet or
so in length, called lenticular masses, sandstone or shale occupy-
ing the space between. This condition may have been produced
in any one of various ways, sometimes by parts of the original
bed of limestone having been eroded or washed away by some cur-
rent of the water before the succeeding beds were deposited above


ROCK MASSES z 83


it. In the larger and less exact sense of the word, all stratified
beds are more or less lenticular, since they always thin out sooner
or later, or are replaced by other kinds.

It is also a general rule, with some exceptions, that the beds
composed of coarse materials are small in area; while those com-
posed of fine materials are sometimes of enormous extent, and
cover areas of many square miles. That is, conglomerates and
coarse sandstones usually die out within a few miles or even
less, and are replaced by other materials; while beds of shale and
limestone have often been observed to cover hundreds of square
miles.

The source of supply from which a mass of sand or gravel was obtained
may also be traced in a general way by the principle that the beds are always
thickest and coarsest near the sourc€ of supply of the material. By exami-


nation of any extensive set of beds in the light of this principle, the direc-
tion of the currents depositing the materials can usually be made out.


A seam is a thin layer differing in composition from the layers
between which it lies. Thick seams become beds. Thus we have
seams of coal, and beds of coal. A seam is said to be intercalated,
or interstratified, between the layers above it and those below.


It has often been supposed that the marine basins in which certain de-
posits were originally formed can now be made out from a study of the
materials which we find in the rocks. It has thus come about that we are
often confidently informed that certain beds were deposited in a delta, or
along the seashore, or in an inland lake, as the case may be; and on the
accuracy of these findings, we are treated to a very confident description
of the character of the ancient geography represented at the time these de-
posits were made. But too many uncertainties enter into such a problem;
and these descriptions of paleogeography are in reality the veriest guess-
work, and are in no sense worthy of being called scientific.


or layers of rock need to be explained.

These layers may be (1) massive (that is, very thick without
perceptible division into subordinate layers), (2) laminated, or
(3) shaly. Laminated sandstone is used for paving in some
places, and is termed flags.

(4) Straticulate structure, or banded structure, is a term ap-
plied to a bed made up of very thin, even layers, whether sepa-
rable or not.

(5) Slaty structure much resembles shale, and a hardened
shale is sometimes termed a slate. But the layers of shale are
parallel to the planes of deposition, and the appearance is due to
the pressure from the weight of the material above. On the
other hand, slate has much more even layers, with smoother sur-
faces, and usually these divisions are transverse to the bedding.


84 THE NEW GEOLOGY


This peculiar feature is termed slaty cleavage, and is supposed
to have been produced by strong lateral pressure of some sort, or
in some way not well understood (Fig. 225).

(6) Cross-bedded structure, or current bedding, is a term
given to a condition where the beds are obliquely laminated,


Fic. 34. Uneonformities by heavy cross-bedding, in stratified sands, east of Lock
York. (Gilbert, U. S. G. S.) ` A pa


generally alternating with horizontally bedded layers. Cross-
bedding is usually observed in strata composed of coarser
materials, such as conglomerates and sandstones. It is sometimes

‘formed in modern deposits by a retreating tide rushing out from
a confined estuary, or by some other strong movement of a cur-
rent over a broad sandy bottom.

The term flow and plunge structure has been applied to an
extreme type of cross-bedding; but the parts are more wavelike
in appearance, and much larger, each part being sometimes 5 or
6 feet thick and many yards long. This structure is seldom if


ROCK MASSES 85


ever produced in modern deposits. It could only be produced by
very rapidly flowing waters, with an enormous supply of sand
or fine gravel of uniform character as the material for composing
it. The whole mass of one of these sand waves, often containing
many cubic yards of material, “was produced by one fling of the
waters.” (Dana.)

(7) Mud cracks indicate that the lower bed was exposed to
the sun or drying winds for some time, perhaps only for an hour


Fic. 35. Numerous concretions formed in Chico sandstone (U. Cretaceous), Coalinga district,
California. Some have been broken open and show crystals inside. (Arnold, U. S. G. S.)


or more, before the next layer was spread out upon it. Mud
cracks are very common in rocks of modern origin; but they are
rare in the real fossiliferous rocks of the ancient world. Each
reported instance needs careful consideration on its own merits.

(8) Ripple marks are sometimes found in the ancient rocks;
but they do not necessarily indicate a sand flat, or, indeed, even
very shallow water, since ripples will be formed as far down in
the waters as the oscillation extends, which may be a hundred
yards or more. ! f |

(9) Raindrop impressions or footprints of animals are rare,
but are very interesting, and are easily interpreted.


86 THE NEW GEOLOGY


(10) Scratches or groovings, which were evidently made by
a branch or a root dragging across the soft surface of a bed be-
fore it had hardened, may be distinguished from the scratches
(striw) which have evidently been made on the hard, solidified
rock by strong abrasion caused
by movements in large masses
above them, such as large rocks
moved violently by currents, or a
piece of rock in the foot of a
moving iceberg, or other similar
Fic. 86. Outerop, dip, and strike. d—p action. The latter marks ete
shows the direction of ‘the dip, while s...t often falsely attributed to gla-
tip. The rocks here constitute an outoren, Ciera. A Very n sr s l
however, to note in connection
with this subject is that these latter, the strie proper, are invari-
ably to be found on primitive or non-fossiliferous rocks, so far as
our present information extends.


(11) Concretions are spheres or disks of rock, resulting from
the tendency of matter to concrete or solidify around a center.
The smaller kinds, found in some limestones, are called odlites;
but others are a foot or more in diameter. When they are hol-
low and the cavity is lined with crystals, they are called geodes
(Fig. 35).


2. Original Positions of Strata


We know, by common observation, that strata spread out by
water are horizontal or approximately so. Perhaps no large part
of the bottom of our seas or oceans is
absolutely horizontal; but a grade of
one foot for every 600 or 700 feet can
not be detected by the eye, and we are
accustomed to speak of such surfaces
as horizontal. And of course the
sand beds formed by our rivers, or
the beds of detritus formed at the
mouths of rivers or on the seashore
by tidal currents, are often percep-
tibly sloping, because they take the
slope of the bottom on which they lie.
But even in these cases, the top layers © D
are laid down parallel to the surface Fic. 37. Diagram to illustrate and
of the underlying beds. We shall not explain the components of faulting.


The fault-surface is shaded. Most
-anticipate the question of how the remie faut: are more nearly ver-


i tical than here indicated. From A
ancient beds were produced, further t° F is the strike of the outerop.


(After Pirsson.)


ROCK MASSES 87


than to say that these same general principles must have prevailed
in the past.
3. Fractured and Displaced Strata


Many of the strata of the world, however, have lost the hori-
zontal position they originally had, and are now more or less in-


Fic. 38. Anticlinal fold in sandstones and shales, 3 miles west of Hancock, Washington
County, Maryland. The rocks are Upper Silurian. (Walcott, U. S. G. S.)


clined, sometimes being even up on edge, so as to make their
surfaces vertical. In some cases, they are bent like wrinkles in a
piece of cloth whose edges have been pushed toward each other,
these flexures being a few yards in extent, or it may be many
thousands of yards (Fig. 38).

Sometimes we have examples of the superposition of bent and folded
beds upon others which have not been disturbed in any way. These beds may
even be found folded over upon themselves like a crushed letter S, so that a
continuous layer of loose sand between two horizontal layers of gravel or
loam might be pierced three times by one vertical boring. Such things are


88 THE NEW GEOLOGY


difficult to explain. But the wholly undisturbed strata between which they
lie show that the cause which folded them was not from beneath, but was
superficial in its action; in other words, it could not have been due to the
contraction of the earth’s crust, as was formerly supposed. The instances
referred to above are usually only a few yards in extent; but as there is
every stage of gradation between these small, thin beds folded in this way,
and the largest disturbances of mountain ranges, there is every reason to


Fic. 39. Contorted laminze in marine clay overlying drift, East Deering, Mai £
the middle beds are contorted or folded, while the strata both above and i slow se any
unaffected. What is the explanation? (Katz, U. 8. G. S.)


believe that both large and small were formed in much the same way. Of
course, in this we are not admitting the reality of the so-called “overthrust
folds,” which are discussed elsewhere.

Sometimes the beds have been fractured, and one part has
risen or fallen, so that the part of the bed on one side of a frac-
ture is a few inches or several hundred yards above or below
that on the opposite side.

Positions of Fractured and Displaced Strata. The terms used
in describing the positions of fractured and displaced strata must
be explained:


1. An outcrop is a projecting ledge of rock with the strata in
sight at the surface of the ground (Fig. 36).


ROCK MASSES 89


2. The dip is the angle which these beds make with the hori-
zontal surface, and is measured in degrees; while the direction
of this dip is also noted — as 40° to the north, or 25° to the east.

The dip is measured by an instrument called a clinometer,

= consisting of a square block of wood or other substance, with a
plummet suspended from the upper corner, and swinging over a
graduated arc on which are marked degrees and parts of degrees.
It usually has a compass attached or combined with it.


Fic. 40. Buckling in sandstone strata on account of expansion from being heated by
the sun. (Smith, U. S. G. S.)


3. The strike is the horizontal direction at right angles to
the dip. It is to be taken by the compass, and is measured in de-
grees, minutes, and seconds.

4. A fault is found where the strata have been fractured or
separated, and the beds on one side pushed up or pushed down,
so that there is a displacement of a few inches or many feet.

The lower side is the downthrow, the higher is the upthrow.
Most fractures or faults are to be found near mountains; and all
of our experience indicates that these movements are produced
suddenly, and are accompanied by earthquakes. The real ulti-
mate cause of this slipping of the strata is unknown.

5. Folds or flexures. These have already been referred to.
literature are probably based on mistakes, due to a supposed
necessity of maintaining some geological theory, such as that re-
garding the succession of life. Each particular case reported as


90 THE NEW GEOLOGY


a fold should be critically reéxamined, when very many of them
will be found to furnish the best possible evidence refuting this
succession-of-life theory.

6. Flexures are either anticlines or synclines, the upward
bend in the strata, more or less like a huge arch, being the former,
while the downward bend,
shaped somewhat like an enor-
mous basin, is the latter.
When the strata are observed
to slope only in one direction,
such a structure is called a
monocline.

7. The terms geosyncline
and geanticline were invented
by Dana and applied by him to
the supposed tilts in the great
mass of the whole strata of a
Fic. 41. Diagram to illustrate unconformity. wide region, and may be illus-
The line A—B represents the dividing line trated by the basin of the Great


between two sets of sedimentary rocks, the


lower set having been disturbed before the Lakes, if we suppose that the
upper beds were laid down. (From “The New


International Encyclopædia,” by permission.) strata underlying these lakes
are to some degree in con-
formity with the bottoms of these basins.


The great continental slope of the country from the base of the Rocky
Mountains toward the east might be imagined to represent a part of such
a great geosyncline. In most modern cases, such as those we have men-
tioned above, it is doubtful if these conditions represent any real change
in the original position of the strata. As used in current geology, these
terms are quite fanciful in meaning, and are always coupled with unproved
theories about the rise and fall of wide- extended basins of deposition, and
are thus of only hypothetical value.


8. The effects of denudation on displaced strata. The parts
of a fold that once projected above the surrounding strata may
since have been washed away, because the strata in the vicinity of
an anticline fold are generally so broken and fractured as to be
very easily eroded. Hence, what was originally the ridge of a
large anticlinal fold may since have been almost wholly washed
away, and may now be represented by a deep valley which is
occupied by the course of a stream.

It is commonly assumed by writers of the present day that
denudation and erosion of the strata can only take place after
the strata have been elevated into dry land. But there is abun-
dance of evidence to show that enormous amounts of erosion: or
washing away of the strata took place beneath the waters, and
while the strata were soft and freshly laid. This principle of


Fic. 4la. Striated limestone laid bare by wave action, at Pillar Point, on the east shore of
Lake Ontario. Bluff composed of till. An irregular g < 3 swise of the others
“are supposed to have been caused by the stranding of an iceberg.” (G. K. Gilbert.)
(Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


A fault cliff, or escarpment, in the House Range, Utah. Looking northward. Which
side has moved relative to the other? (Gilbert, U. S. G


92 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 43. A nearly vertical fault in porphyry. Which way (relatively) have these parts
moved? The slight bending of these beds is termed the drag. (Graton, U. S. G. S.)


erosion beneath the waters, or swhaqueous erosion, as it is termed,
is a very important one in attempting to interpret the way in
which former geological action must have taken place (Fig. 30).

9. Conformity and unconformity. When strata are found
parallel to one another in bedding, as originally laid down one
upon another, they are said to be conformable, or there is con-
formity in the bedding. But if the first bed was plainly tilted or
disturbed in some way, or had a part of its surface washed away,
before the next bed was laid down upon it, the two sets of strata


ROCK MASSES 98


will not now be parallel to one another. In this case, they are said
to be unconformable to each other, or there is an unconformity be-
tween them (Fig. 41).

By some authorities, uncomformities are divided into two
classes:


(1) Where there is a distinct diference in the dip of the two
sets of strata, the upper beds having been deposited across the
upturned and truncated edges of the lower. As has been already
remarked, it is usually assumed by modern writers on this sub-
ject that such a condition of affairs is proof of an immense
lapse of time between the formation of these two sets of beds.
That is, it is assumed that the first set of beds, after having been
formed in an ordinary way, were upturned and elevated so as to
form a land surface. It is further assumed that a long period of
time elapsed during which the erosion of these upturned beds
went on until the whole mass was more or. less completely worn
down to a peneplain, or down to base level. After such an amount
of erosion, it is assumed, the whole set of beds was again sub-
merged beneath the waters, and then received a new load of
sediment, now represented by the upper beds which lie across the
upturned edges of the lower ones.


i i i t the
Fic. 44. A plain eroded by the sea, showing outcropping edges of the strata at
ending of a syncline, with curving strike and inward dip. Near North Berwick,
Scotland. (Geological Survey of Scotland.)


94 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 45. Blue banded crinoidal limestone, showing close folding and cleavage. Florence,
Vermont. (Keith, U. S. G. S.)


But all of this is mere theory. The upturning and erosion of
the first set of beds may have gone on beneath the waters and
without these beds’ ever having been lifted above the surface of
the ocean. Indeed, it would be entirely possible for the first set
of beds to be made, then to be tilted up and eroded by another set
of currents, and afterwards the upper set of beds might have
been laid down upon the eroded lower beds, and the whole thing
might have taken place beneath the waters and within a com-
paratively brief space of time — that is, within the space of a
few days at the most, if we are at liberty to suppose a violent and
catastrophic action of the waters prolonged over weeks or months
of time. Thus an unconformity of this character, often called an
angular unconformity, instead of proving an immense lapse of
time, may only prove a strong earthquake action followed by ero-
sion and the deposit of other beds by a different set of currents;
and all of the changes here indicated might very possibly have
taken place within a few days at most (Fig. 384).


ROCK MASSES 95


(2) Another kind of unconformity, sometimes called a dis-
conformity, is that wherein the two formations are strictly par-
allel in their bedding, but the lower strata have been evidently
eroded before the upper strata were laid upon them. This too
could very easily take place beneath the waters, simply by a
change in the direction of the currents.

There are many cases in the rocks where we find two sets of
strata in quite evident conformity upon one another, but where
there is a very great difference between the fossils of the two sets.
In other words, the fossils of the lower set of beds may be placed
in one system, while the fossils of the upper set may belong to an
entirely different system ; and according to the popular theory, one
or more whole geological “ages” must have passed after the first
set of beds was laid down and before the upper beds were de-
posited upon them. Yet the appearance of conformity may be


Fic. 46. An overturned anticline, Panther Gap, Virginia. The seale can be estimated by the

size of the men in the lower left-hand corner. The same conditions which caused the fold —-

say the settling down of soft strata from lack of lateral support — might easily be continued
J so as lo produce this overturning of the fold. (Darton, ri t S.)


Fic. 47. Anticlinal fold in sandstones and shales, 3 miles west of Hancock, Washington County,
Maryland. The rocks are Upper Silurian. (Walcott, U. S. G. S.)


illustrating ‘deceptive


Limestone cliff at Newsom, Tennessee,
At the top are black shales of the Mississippi (L. Carbon-


conformity.”

iferous), resting conformably on six feet of Middle Devonian, the latter
in turn resting in similar conformity upon Middle Silurian.

(From Charles Schuchert.)


Fig. 48.


(96)


ROCK MASSES oy


Fic. 49. An angular unconformity, near Meeteetse, Wyoming. Basal Wasatch con-
glomerate (Eocene) resting on the upturned edges of Laramie sandstone (Upper
Cretaceous). (Fisher, U. S. G. S.)


quite perfect; and indeed, in many instances, the limestone of one
may be succeeded by an exactly similar limestone in the other, or
a shale may be succeeded by a shale, the two sets of strata being
thus structurally and lithologically alike. Such a condition of
affairs is a great puzzle to those who hold the popular theories;
and they have invented a term to represent it. Such a condition
is termed a “deceptive conformity,” or a “non-evident discon-
formity.” As we shall see later, these examples of “deceptive
conformity” become very strong evidence against the popular
theories of the succession of life, or the geological ages. They
will be considered again in the proper place.


4. Order of Arrangement of Strata


It has long been taught that the formations are to be found
only in a certain definite order; and it has been thought that by
reading this order aright, we can get at the true order of sequence
in which the various kinds of life were introduced on the earth.
It was thus supposed that geology could furnish us with some-
thing almost like a moving picture of creation in the process of its
development. Of course, it was quite inevitable that such a
scheme of successive ages would grow into the biological theory
of evolution; for the scientific mind must naturally demand some
causal connection between the successive forms of life. But we
now know, as will be made plain later, that this alleged definite
order of the formations is a great mistake, and that there has
been no such succession of life in historical order upon the globe.
This subject will be considered under the head of “Theoretical


Geology.”


‘aPUBIS DY} Jo uonunojxə ñunwasnrr ‘eruAoOsIVD ‘AALA ƏltutəsoX ‘soyory [eAoyY pue əuG Jey '09 DIA


Part HI — Dynamical Geology


CHAPTER V


Chemical Work


General Remarks. It has already been stated that dynami-
cal geology treats of two general problems:

(1) How rocks are now being made or modified;

(2) How the ancient deposits must have been produced.

The second of these problems can only be touched upon in this
section; because we really need a more general knowledge of the
whole subject of geology before Ave can solve such a problem
properly.

We have already compared the work of the geologist with that of a
coroner, and have suggested that only one acquainted with the normal action
of the human body could accurately decide whether the person on whose body
he was holding an inquest had died of natural causes, or from some extra-
ordinary cause, as poison or shooting. In the same way, only one versed in
the normal action of the forces of nature can form a correct estimate of the
forces that anciently laid down the fossil-bearing strata. As we shall see
hereafter, all the earlier investigators of geology, and even those who
framed the theories under which the science is now working, were quite
ignorant of many of the most important facts relating to the formation of
the rocks and the burial of the fossils. And they were also profoundly
ignorant of most of the living species of plants and animals whose repre-
sentatives are found as fossils in the rocks. Hence it need not seem sur-
prising if there is now an urgent need of revising some of the fundamental
theories which have long prevailed regarding the forces that produced the
geological work of the past.


But as a study of the fossils is of even more importance than
a study of the formation of the rocks themselves, we can not
frame any general conclusion concerning geological causes, until
we have considered the fossils also, which we will do under the
head of “Stratigraphical Geology.”

Hence in this section, “Dynamical Geology,” we shall treat
chiefly of the present action of the forces engaged in rock making
and rock modification, with merely such incidental comparisons
between the ancient and the modern deposits as may be necessary
to enable us to appreciate the problem in its entirety.

Weathering. The various chemical processes which act upon
the rocks may be divided into two classes: those which tend to
break up solid rocks into fragments, and those which tend to con-
solidate fragmental rocks into masses. The former work is called
disintegration; but as chemical agencies are not alone engaged


(99)


100 THE NEW GEOLOGY


in this work of breaking up the rocks, but are assisted by such
physical processes as changes of temperature, and the action of
the rains and the winds, we can not wholly ignore these processes
in the present study. br
All these agencies of rock disintegration and decomposition
are included under the term weathering; and in this work of


Fic. 51. Frank, British Columbia. An enormous mass of rock, estimated at 40,000,000 cubic

yards, broke away from the mountain near its top, and slid down upon the town of Frank,

obliterating part of it, and burying houses, people, and coal mines forever out of sight. The
rocks in the foreground are some of the fragments.


weathering, chemical and physical or mechanical changes go on
side by side.

The mechanical changes are chiefly confined to the surface of
the rocks, and are brought about by such agencies as changes of
temperature, which result in the surface layers of a rock expand-
ing or contracting more rapidly than the deeper layers. From
this, large fragments may be broken off, or concentric layers may
be made to scale off, especially in such rocks as granite; which
results in the rounded form so characteristic of exposed granite
rock masses (Fig. 50). In the northern regions, frost also has a
very important influence in breaking up exposed rocks.

Chemical changes are constantly going on, both upon the sur-
face of the earth, and deep within the earth as well. In fact,
the depths of the earth constitute an immense chemical labora-
tory, within which all manner of chemical transformations are
continually occurring. But the*decomposing and disintegrating


CHEMICAL WORK 101


chemical changes are confined principally to the superficial parts
of the earth, down to the plane of the average level of the ground
water, this superficial layer of the earth being called the belt of
weathering.


Oxygen. Singularly enough, most of the chemical changes
which take place in the rocks are performed by that omnipresent
and well-nigh illimitable agent, the atmospheric gas, oxygen.
Not indeed always, perhaps not even generally, as a gas and as
a part of the atmosphere, but as present in solution in the rain
and in every drop of water that touches any particle of rock, does
this ceaselessly acting element do its work. Of course, this dis-
solved oxygen is not the only agent of chemical change. Carbon
dioxide is an important factor; as is also water itself, in uniting
chemically with various rocks, thuS producing hydration, as it is
termed. The reverse of oxidation is reduction, which means the
process of extracting oxygen from a substance. Similarly the
process of extracting water which is chemically united with
a rock is called dehydration. In addition to these processes,
there are two others: the making of kaolin, or clay; and the mak-
ing of laterite, a kind of soil found in the tropics.

All of these processes are embraced under the study of the
chemical changes taking place in the earth. Some of these
changes are very complex processes, and can be studied here in


y


>N
SS. TURTLE MT


SA fissures


‘old bed of Old Man River


lake


3 and sandstones


Fic. 52. Profile of Mount Turtle, Frank, British Columbia, Canada, showing the

amount of material which siid away from the top of the mountain in 1903. This

amount is estimated at 40,000,000 cubic yards. In this diagram, the dip of the strata,

particularly of the coal beds, is greatly exaggerated, as is usual in such diagrams,

And, of course, the “fault” merely marks the contact line between the overlying

Paleozoic limestones and the underlying Cretaceous. (After Brock ; and W. B.
Scott, “Introduction to Geology,” permission of Maemillan Co.)


102 THE NEW GEOLOGY


outline only. But as the work of oxygen is the most common
and the most important, it will be considered first.

About 21 per cent by volume of the atmosphere is oxygen.
It forms about three fourths by weight of the animal world, four
fifths of the vegetable, and half of the mineral; and taking the
world as a whole, the weight of the oxygen exceeds that of all
the other elements together.


Iron Compounds. Almost all the rocks contain iron in some
form; this iron in one of its combined forms giving a red color
to the rocks, in another giving a yellow color, and in still other in-
stances giving many brilliant hues. In fact, the coloring of the
rocks is mostly due to the presence in them of various iron com-
pounds; and the changes which these iron compounds undergo
are the cause of many mechanical changes in the structure of the
rocks themselves.

Ferrous oxide (FeO), or protoxide of iron, is the form in
which it is present in many rocks. But in this form, it is ready
to take on more oxygen; and in so doing, it passes into ferric
oxide (Fe,Os), with a considerable increase- of volume. Such
minerals as pyroxene, hornblende, or black mica, which contain
iron in the form first mentioned, often disintegrate and break
up by taking on more oxygen. Hence rocks like trap, which con-
tain these minerals, are quite easy to decompose; for when one of
the substances composing them decays, the other substances must
break up into small fragments. This red oxide of iron, which
we have already studied as hematite, which is thus formed by
the disintegration of the rocks already mentioned, may go on to
absorb water and thus turn into the brownish or yellowish ocher,
which is the mineral called limonite, with a further increase of
volume of 64 per cent. Limonite and hematite are often as-
sociated together; and these red and yellow colors are frequently
found in the joints and cracks of rocks that are partly break-
ing up.

Iron is very often combined with sulphur in various propor-
tions, one of the more common forms being ordinary iron sul-
phide, like pyrite or marcasite (FeS,.), which readily take on
oxygen and change over into the state of yellow ocher, or limo-
nite. The sulphur which is thus set free also takes on oxy-
gen, and forms sulphuric acid, which in turn unites with such
substances as lime, potash, soda, alumina, or magnesia, thus mak-
ing sulphates.

Iron sulphide, in the form of pyrite or marcasite, often as
small particles, is found in almost all the rocks of the world.
And all rocks which contain these substances, or contain iron sul-


CHEMICAL WORK 105


phide in any form, are readily decomposed. This iron sulphide

“is the most universal of rock destroyers.” (Dana.) Stones
which contain iron sulphide in any form are worthless for build-
ing purposes. Even granite or sandstone that contains this
mineral in even minute quantities, readily decays by oxidation,
and thus the other particles of the rock are released, and the solid
rock becomes merely a mass of broken particles of quartz, mica,
and feldspar. This feldspar itself soon decays, and changes over


sy es =,


Fic. 53. Foot of bad land bluff, North Dakota. Fed of limonite (bog iron ore),
in which were fcund numerous cones of Sequoia. Tertiary. (Lloyd, U. S. G. S.)


into kaolin, which is ordinary clay; and thus we have only sand
and clay mingled together. This formation of clay is accom-
panied by a decrease of 54.44 per cent in volume.

Whenever siderite (iron carbonate) is expos2d to the ele-
ments, it soon changes color by the oxidation of its iron, the sur-
face becoming brown or yellowish, because the iron has changed
to limonite. Pure crystalline limestone, when it contains’ noth-
ing but calcite (CaCO,), or even when it is pure dolomite
(CaMgC,.0,,), will long resist the elements of disintegration, as
is seen in Milan cathedral and other Old World structures which
have survived for many hundreds of years. But even one per
cent of iron in a limestone of this character will soon cover the


104 THE NEW GEOLOGY


surface with red or yellow rusty streaks, and it does not take long
for such a rock to go to pieces. If manganese instead of iron is
found in the limestone, the stains are black instead of red; but
the limestone goes to pieces just the same.


Carbon Dioxide.~ Another very common agent of chemical
change is carbon dioxide. We have learned that this gas is
present in the atmosphere in the proportion of about 3.5 parts
in every 10,000. Being very soluble, it is found in all rain water,
and is also present in soil water because of the decomposition of
animal or vegetable particles in the soil. The sea also contains
some carbon dioxide in solution, since the sea is made up of the
water that has flowed into it from the lands. Thus we may say
that practically all of the waters on the globe contain carbon
dioxide in solution, but more carbon dioxide is obtained from de-
caying organic matter than from the air.

But any waters containing carbon dioxide are also more ca-
pable of dissolving other rocks than pure water would be. The
rocks which it especially attacks are those containing lime, mag-
nesia, soda, or potash, or iron in the ferrous oxide state. In other
words, any of these alkali materials are liable to be carried off
by water containing carbon dioxide in solution. Feldspar, which
is one of the constituents of granite, and which occurs in very
many of the crystalline rocks, is thus caused to disintegrate by
losing its lime, soda, or potash; and the substance which is left
behind is what is known as kaolin, or pure white clay. Granite,
when exposed to the weather, is thus eaten into and decomposed
by the turning of its feldspar into clay, this decomposition ex-
tending into the granite as much as 50 or 100 feet in warm tem-
perate climates like those of the Southern States or of South
America.

All the rocks which are exposed to our examination are al-
ways divided into blocks large or small by systems of cracks or
breaks, which are known as joints (Fig. 54). These joints be-
come the means by which water containing oxygen in solution, or
carbon dioxide in solution, may get at the internal structure of
these rocks; and thus the action of decomposition may penetrate
deeply into a rock, far more deeply than would be evident from
a superficial examination. Even rocks which seem to be com-
pact are nevertheless more or less filled with minute pores. In- ~
deed, it is a common test for a building stone, to weigh a cubic
inch of it, for instance, then soak the piece in water for a day or
so, and weigh it again. The amount of water which it has ab-
sorbed will be the measure of the porosity of the rock, and thus


CHEMICAL WORK 105


Fic. 54. Vertical joints in nearly horizontal Cambrian quartzite. One mile west of Poplar,
North Carolina. (Keith, U. S. G. S.)


also the measure of its liability to disintegrate under atmospheric
action.


Kaolin. Hydration is the process by which water enters into
chemical union with various mineral substances; and as a whole,
it is one of the most important processes of change taking place
among the rocks. Not only the surface waters, but also the
deeply circulating underground waters, are concerned in this
change; and as hydration is always accompanied by an increase
in the volume of the substances which take on the water, large
physical effects are also accomplished in this way. One of the
chief examples of hydration is the changing of the feldspars to
kaolin, or clay; but this must be considered as a process by itself.


106 THE NEW GEOLOGY


The feldspars readily cleave into blocks large or small; and
water entering these fissures, which may be very fine and almost
imperceptible, often carries with it carbon dioxide in solution.
The CO, in solution effects the change of the feldspar into kaolin,
or clay, according to the following equation:


Orthoclase Water Carbon Kaolin Quartz Potassium
Feldspar Dioxide or Clay or Silica Carbonate


OKAISI,0, + 2H,0 + CO; == H,Al,Si,0, + 4810, SK n


This process is known as kaolinization; and by it, a decrease of
54.44 per cent in volume is brought about, by the removal of the
potassium carbonate, which is very soluble, and by the removal
of the silica or quartz as well. Ordinary clay usually contains
some quartz flour, iron oxides, and other substances, besides the
kaolin, or pure white clay. This change of feldspar into clay is
one of the most important chemical changes taking place under
the processes of weathering, the kaolin thus produced being
chemically a hydrous silicate of alumina.


Laterite. But in the moist, warm conditions of the tropics,
the feldspars are not generally changed into clay, but into hy-
drous oxides of alumina, one of the chief of these being
hydrargillite (Al,0O,°3H.O). A mixture of such oxides of alumina
is termed bauxite. If the decaying rock is basic, such as basalt,
a considerable amount of iron oxide is set free, which then gives
a deep red or brown color to the mass, and often forms iron
nodules or concretions. The mass of disintegrated rock thus pro-
duced is known as laterite. This is one of the most widespread
products of rock decay throughout the tropics; and in Brazil, it
has been known to penetrate to a depth of 300 feet below the sur-
face, the solid rock having disintegrated and decomposed to that
depth. The silica accompanying this change is usually carried
off and accumulates as separate masses of quartz, in the form of
agate or chalcedony.

Opposite the mouths of the Amazon and other tropical rivers,
the floor of the ocean is covered by a red mud which has been
derived from the laterite found on the lands drained by these
rivers. Many of the bright red rocks among the older geological
deposits were doubtless formed in much the same fashion, so far
as their color is concerned, as practically all of these rocks give
proofs of having been formed under tropical or semitropical con-
ditions. Red rocks are also being formed at the present time
under the arid conditions of the deserts; but as we have no desert
fossils throughout the whole range of the fossiliferous rocks, and
as other conditions forbid the idea of deserts when these rocks


CHEMICAL WORK 107


Fic. 54a. Buttress, illustrating vertical jointing, on the north wall of Fall Creek,
Ithaca, New York. (Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


were formed, it is more reasonable to suppose that these red
rocks- were formed under some such conditions as are now pro-
ducing the laterite of the tropics. It has been estimated that lat-
erite covers 49 per cent of the surface of Africa, 16 per cent of
Asia, and 43 per cent of South America.

Other Rocks. Rocks which are largely composed of grains of
quartz, or sandstone, may have their cementing materials com-


108 THE NEW GEOLOGY ;


posed largely of limestone. Thus such sandstones are quite easy
to decay; whereas sandstones with silica as the cementing sub-
stance are almost proof against the action of the weather. All
limestones are easily eroded by water containing carbon dioxide,
the limestone being converted into calcium bicarbonate, which is


Fic. 55. Vertical jointing in Portage rocks (U. Devonian), East of Lake Cayuga,
New York. (Kindle, U.S. G. S.)


readily soluble. This calcium bicarbonate, which is thus carried
off in solution by the water, may be deposited in some other lo-
cality by precipitation from this solution, thus forming some new
bed of limestone in another and distant locality.

In regions of scanty rainfall, like those of the Rocky Moun-
tains, we often see the rocks and mountains displaying brilliant
colors of yellow, orange, or even vermilion, these brilliant colors


5 CHEMICAL WORK 109


being due to the presence of the oxides of iron which have been
brought to the surface of the rock and there deposited in the
form of ferric oxide. If the rainfall were more plentiful, the
water would carry away these iron oxides as fast as they were
formed, and thus these brilliant colors could not be produced.

Iron Ores. Large, thick beds of limonite, practically pure and
sometimes 100 feet thick, are thought to have been produced in
the places where we find them, by decomposition of other beds
which once existed in these localities, such beds being origi-
nally composed of limestone containing iron carbonate (siderite).
When such rocks are decomposed and the other substances are
carried away by the percolating waters, the iron oxide which is
left behind changes over into siderite or limonite, forming the im-
mense beds which are often now tke source of valuable iron ores.

It is supposed that when waters containing iron in solution
come in contact with a large amount of decaying organic ma-
terials, these latter substances seize upon all the available oxygen
in the solution; and thus the iron is deposited, not as an oxide,
but as a carbonate.

In accord with this idea, it is a well-recognized fact that
siderite, which is an iron carbonate, is commonly found in con-
nection with formations which also contain coal or other organic
materials.

But if there is not much decaying vegetation, the carbonate
may be changed over into the oxide, and be deposited in the form
of limonite, or yellow iron ore, which is often found in loose, por-
ous masses near the margin of swamps or ponds, but is often
absent near the middle. In some of the Swedish lakes, this bog
ore has been known to form very rapidly, layers several inches
in thickness having formed in twenty-six years. (Grabau.)

This change of iron carbonate into an iron oxide is largely accomplished
by the so-called “iron bacteria,” which are minute organisms present in
many waters. In most instances, it is impossible to determine whether a
certain iron deposit found in the rocks was formed by purely chemical pre-
cipitation, or by the agency of these bacteria; but it is known that bacteria
are the active agents in many of these formations.


Large deposits of clay have been formed by the decomposition
of quartzites or granites, the clays accumulating in basins or
valleys by the action of streams which have brought them from
the higher ground where they were made.

Arid Conditions. In arid regions, where lakes have been
gradually drying up for centuries, the water becomes concen-
trated with certain minerals, and these concentrated solutions
throw down precipitates of the substances which they hold, these


8


110 THE NEW GEOLOGY f


substances being precipitated in a very definite order. Gypsum
(calcium sulphate) is one of the first substances to be thus de-
posited; and large, thick beds of this material are thrown down
by waters which contain it in solution, whenever these waters are
concentrated by evaporation. After most of the gypsum has
been deposited, othër salts may be thrown down, common salt
being one of the last substances to be dropped from such a
solution.

As immense beds of both gypsum and salt are found in various parts
of the world, these beds sometimes being many hundreds of feet in thick-
ness, it has been commonly supposed that such deposits were originally
formed by the evaporation of great inland lakes. That small deposits of
these substances are now being formed where lakes are drying up, is un-
doubtedly true; but that all the beds of these substances which we find in the
earth were formed in the long ago by a similar evaporation of huge lakes in
arid climates, is merely an assumption. There is no proof whatever that
they were formed in this way. It is quite possible that these beds may
represent original formations of these materials which have since been
covered by sedimentary rocks. Each particular instance, of course, would
have to be decided on its own merits, according to the evidence available.


The Stassfurt Deposits. In the Stassfurt deposits of North
Germany is a series of limestones and dolomite, followed by strata
of anhydrite and gypsum some 300 feet in thickness, followed by
salt beds over 1,000 feet thick. These latter are subdivided or
interbedded by about 3,000 thin layers of anhydrite averaging
about 7 millimeters in thickness, which have been called “annual
rings.’ The alternating beds of salt average about 8.5 milli-
meters in thickness. Above these salt deposits are the salts of
other minerals which have given these beds their great commer-
cial value, these latter strata being from 200 to 300 feet in total
thickness. Above these again is a second series of salt clays with
various other kinds of salts containing the remains of marine
animals, with some red clay beds forming the topmost deposit
of all. Throughout the series, fossils are rare except in the basal
limestones and in the salt clays near the middle of the whole
series, though a few plant remains occur here and there through
the other beds.

It has been thought that these beds were produced in a portion
of the sea which had been cut off from the main body of the ocean
and had gradually dried up during a long period of time. There
seems a degree of plausibility about this theory; though the esti-
mate of over 3,000 years, based on the number of so-called
“annual rings,” depends for its accuracy wholly upon the assump-
tion that the changes represented by the alternations of the de-
posits were of yearly recurrence. If these changes took place


° CHEMICAL WORK 111


more frequently than once each year, the estimated length of time
involved would be reduced in just that proportion.

This theory of the gradual building up of these deposits in a
drying or arid climate of a cut-off arm of the sea, would also
imply that these beds were not subsequently disturbed by the
other geological changes. As a matter of fact, we do not really
know how these deposits were formed. It is possible that they
may have been produced by chemical precipitation from the
waters of the ocean in some wholly different manner. The mat-
ter is too uncertain for us to base any very far-reaching conclu-
sions upon our views of the way in which these deposits were
formed.

Iron Bacteria. Within recent years, it has been proved that
_ minute vegetable organisms livingin water, which are known as

iron bacteria, are the intermediary agents for the change of iron
carbonate into ferric hydroxide, or limonite. These organisms
secrete the iron from the solution and change it in their cells
from the ferrous to the ferric condition, thus rendering the iron
insoluble. As such changes are now going on in swamps and
other bodies of rather shallow water, it is often assumed that all
of the ancient deposits of similar iron ores were made in this way.
This, too, is an unwarranted assumption. The chemical changes
spoken of do go on in many instances without the presence of
these bacteria; and these deposits which we find in the ancient
rocks may, like the gypsum and salt, merely be the remains
of primitive formations. In other words, while certain types of
chemical processes are now known to produce these deposits of
iron or gypsum or salt in a small way under modern conditions,
yet it is not an assured fact that all of such substances which
we find in the earth must have been produced in these ways. The
iron, the calcium, and the sodium and chlorine must originally
have been in existence in some form or other; and it is a wholly
unwarranted assumption to suppose that all of these substances
originally existed in solution in the sea water, and that they were
gradually derived from the sea water a little at a time and then
finally converted into the rocks as we find them now. This sounds
too much like a modern revival of the old onion-coat theory.

Concretions. Waters which contain limestone in solution are
often the means of consolidating masses of sand or gravel, or
even of clay, because this limestone is very easily precipitated by
partly evaporating the water in which it is contained. Often such
precipitations of calcium carbonate take place around small
grains of sand or other particles of matter, thus forming what are
known as concretions (Fig. 35). Deposits of limonite may also


112 THE NEW GEOLOGY


occur in beds of sand or gravel, thus consolidating them. But
when silica is held in solution by the waters percolating through
these beds of sand and gravel, the silica may also be precipitated
and may form a cementing material by which the grains of sand
are strongly held together. Such a cementation by means of silica
makes the hardest and most enduring type of sandstone.

Precipitation of Calcium Carbonate. Recent studies have
shown that the ocean water in general is saturated with calcium
carbonate in solution, except at great depths and probably at the
surface in the polar regions. As the larger part of the ocean is
now intensely cold, any decided increase in the temperature of a
portion of it, or any material amount of evaporation which might
affect a portion of it, would cause a precipitation of the calcium
carbonate held in solution. It is known that such precipitation
does go on in parts of the ocean, as in the lagoons of the coral
islands, though it is not precisely known how fast or how wide-
spread such chemical. deposits are now being made.

Oodlites. Certain bacteria, called the denitrifying bacteria,
which live in the warmer waters of the ocean, bring about the
change of the nitrates held in solution, producing ammonia, which
ultimately forms ammonium carbonate. The latter, by reaction
with calcium sulphate in the sea water, produces a precipitation
of calcium carbonate, which usually accumulates in spherical
or elongated grains, forming the deposit known as odlite. De-
posits of this kind are forming at the present time off the coast
of Florida and near the adjacent islands.

Dolomites. Several kinds of algx living in the ocean form
precipitates of calcium carbonate in their tissues and as crusts
on the outside. They generally go under the name of nullipores;
and while they occur in the northern waters, they are most com-
mon in the tropical seas, where they comprise very important
agents in the building up of coral reefs. Many reefs are more
than half composed of limestones built by these organisms. Many
or perhaps most of these lime-secreting alge also separate out of
the sea water a considerable amount of magnesium carbonate
and form a precipitate of it in the same way that they form
the calcium carbonate. In this way, limestones rich in magnesium
carbonate are formed, and may become true dolomite in compo-
sition, the purity of the dolomite being assisted by the leaching
or dissolving out of much of the associated calcium carbonate at
some subsequent period, the proportional amount of magnesium
carbonate being thus increased. It is possible that this will ex-
plain the formation of many of the ancient dolomites whose for-
mation has been so long a puzzle to geologists.


CHAPTER VI


'The Atmosphere as a Geological Agent


Results of Weathering. In the previous chapter, under the
subject of chemical action, we have already considered some of
the work done by the atmosphere. This work of the atmosphere
in its chemical capacity in breaking up the solid rocks, with other
agencies also which act together for the same results, is known
as weathering. But there are other kinds of work done by the
atmosphere which are of considerable geological importance, and
these must now be considered.


The various kinds of rocks offer very different degrees of resistance to
the action of the various agents of weathering. Differences in rainfall, in
temperature, and in the direction and violence of the winds, result in many
differences in the changes accomplished in the various localities. A protec-
tive coat of vegetation also offers a very material obstacle in the way of the
action of the atmosphere.


When these various agents begin to work upon a level land
surface, the first effect in denudation, or removing material from
a part of the exposed surface, is to produce an increasing irregu-
larity in the surface (Fig. 56). A land surface which is varied
by hill and valley is said to possess relief; and when the various
agencies of erosion have planed off all these irregularities, leaving
only a flat or gently sloping surface which is but slightly above
the level of the sea, such a land is said to have been reduced to
the base level of erosion, or to be base-leveled. We should note
in passing that such a condition of base-leveling is an entirely
ideal or imaginary condition of things, since, except on the most
minute scale, such an action of base-leveling has never in a single
instance been observed as an actual fact. It is commonly assumed
that such action of base-leveling has repeatedly occurred in past
ages under the combined agencies of erosion; but there is no
direct proof to this effect. The smoothing out of a wide area of
unconsolidated materials by the action of a body of water stand-
ing above it, has often been seen. But we have no experience of
seeing even a small area which has actually been leveled off by
the ordinary agencies of subaérial denudation and erosion. In
other words, subaqueous leveling is a well-demonstrated process;
but subaérial base-leveling is quite hypothetical, and wholly un-
demonstrated objectively.

The general result of weathering is to accumulate masses of
broken fragments about the base of the bare rock surfaces which


(113)


114 THE NEW GEOLOGY


are exposed to the agencies of weathering. Such accumulations
of fragmental material are termed talus, and they are seen in
almost every locality where bare rocks are exposed to view. But
as the rain and the winds, which are the mechanical agents of
the atmosphere for removing fragmental material, are constantly
engaged in carrying’away these deposits of talus, the amount of


Fig. 56. Erosion following the removal of forest cover; Great Smoky
Mountains, Tennessee. (U.S. Bureau of Forestry.)


this talus, called also residual waste, which we find in any par-
ticular locality, represents the balance between the work of
weathering and the work of erosion and denudation.


Planetary Winds. The atmosphere as a whole exhibits cer-
tain well-marked forms of movement which are termed the plan-
etary circulation, those members of this circulation which are
near the surface of the earth being known as the planetary winds.
Speaking broadly, the air in the vicinity of the heat equator tends
to rise, causing calm, cloudy weather, with much precipitation.
This produces a belt of calms all around the globe, which by the


THE ATMOSPHERE AS A GEOLOGICAL AGENT 115


sailors is termed the doldrums. Flowing in toward this tropi-
cal belt of calms from either side are the northeast and the south-
east trade winds, these winds blowing with great steadiness.

North and south of the trade-wind belts are two other belts of
comparative calm, known as the horse latitudes. In these regions,
the high upper air is slowly settling, producing almost uniformly
fine weather. North and south of these again (in each hemi-
sphere) are the regions of the prevailing westerly winds, these
regions of the westerlies being abott what we usually call the
north temperate zone and the south temperate zone respectively,
these regions, however, extending even into the more extremely
cold regions of the north and the south.

These planetary winds exert a profound influence on the
ocean waters, producing or at least promoting the flow of the
waters in those definite directions which we call the ocean cur-
rents. Both the planetary winds and the ocean currents form
great circles moving according to Ferrel’s law, clockwise in the
Northern Hemisphere and anti-clockwise in the Southern Hemi-
sphere. And in those localities where the winds are quite uni-
formly from one direction, very pronounced effects are to be seen
in the drifting of the sand dunes and in the forms of atmospheric
erosion exhibited by the rocks, as well as in the shape and loca-
tion of the shore forms worn away by the ocean waves and
currents.


Dust Storms. Wherever the winds are strong and the loose
material on the surface of the ground is not held down by mois-
ture or vegetation, the wind always carries vast clouds of dust
and sand, whenever it moves at a rapid rate. Everyone who has
traveled through the arid parts of the southwestern United
States has had some experience with dust storms, as they are
usually called. Such dust storms are of quite frequent occurrence ;
and in such places as the deserts of Southern California and Ari-
zona, they often produce some very astonishing results. Tons
of material have sometimes been piled up on the railway tracks
or about lone railway depots, almost like drifts of snow, attaining
a height of ten or twenty feet in a single storm. The sand blown
by the wind acts like a natural sand blast, and near San Ber-
nardino, in Southern California, has been known to cut the tele-
graph poles to such an extent that unless protected by piles of
rock about their bases, they are soon entirely cut off. On ocean
beaches also, the sand is carried by the wind to a considerable
‘extent; but here the effects are much less pronounced than on the


wide expanses of desert regions.


116 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Dust storms have been known to carry material to very great
distances. One such storm in China is reported to have extended
over more than 450 miles at one time, and the materials gathered
up were transported an immense distance. In February, 1895,
an extensive fall of dust was observed in Missouri which must
have come from Nebraska and Western Kansas, because all of the
intervening country was at that time covered with snow and ice.
It has been proved that a single storm carried more than a million
tons of dust from the arid southwest plains region and scattered
it over the region around the Great Lakes.

On April 2, 1892, there fell on the deck of a ship 95 miles
southwest of Nagasaki, Japan, a cloud of yellow dust which must
have come from the interior of China, at least one thousand miles
distant. Dust storms have also transported materials from Aus-
tralia to New Zealand, a distance of some 1,500 miles. Dust from
the Sahara desert has been observed to fall in Northern Germany
and England, representing a distance of over 2,000 miles. Vol-
canic dust which has been blown up into the high regions of the
atmosphere has also been carried to great distances. On good
authority, it is declared that the dust formed by the great erup-
tion of Krakatoa, in the East Indies, in 1883, was carried up to
such a height in the atmosphere that it was caught by the high
air currents and carried completely around the globe before it
settled. This dust is said to have made the entire circuit of the
globe in 15 days.

Desert Conditions Peculiar to Our Age. It has long been be-
lieved that practically all of the stratified deposits formed in the
olden time and now existing as the stratified rocks of all the con-
tinents, were produced by water, and largely by ocean water.
But of late years there has been a marked tendency on the part
of geologists to explain many of these deposits as having been
due to the action of the winds. It has been pointed out that the
winds produce deposits that are well assorted; that is, where the
fine and the coarse materials are not mixed together in a hetero-
geneous mass, but the materials of one size are all together. De-
posits formed by the atmosphere are also much inclined to be
cross-bedded — a term which has already been explained. They
are also quite markedly void of fossiliferous remains. Accord-
ingly, when cross-bedded structures of well-assorted materials
which contain no fossils are encountered here and there in the
ancient rocks, the tendency now is to explain these deposits as
having been formed by wind action in the olden time.

But it seems to the present writer that such a conclusion is not:
well justified. It may be quite difficult to distinguish beds formed


THE ATMOSPHERE AS A GEOLOGICAL AGENT 117


by wind from those formed by water under some circumstances ;
but the very fact that we have not up to the present time found in
the rocks any fossils similar to our modern desert life, is good
evidence to my mind that in thè stratified deposits with which


Fic. 57. Shore sand dunes and artificial breaks, Beaufort Harbor, North Carolina.
(Holmes, U. S. G. S.)


geology deals we do not have any considerable amounts of strata
made by the wind, if indeed we have any at all except those sur-
face deposits on all the continents which have been formed in
comparatively recent times, or since the other geological deposits


Fic. 58. Diagram to illustrate the migration of a sand dune
during 60 years. On the east shore of the Baltic Sea, near
the village of Kunzen. (From Berendt.)


were laid down. “No fossil remains of desert plants have yet
been recovered.” (D. T. Macdougal.) In fact, it seems to me
that desert conditions such as we know at the present time are
peculiar to our present age, and that in ancient times, not only
was the climate more mild and equable, as we shall see from


118 THE NEW GEOLOGY 3


evidence a little later, but desert conditions like those of the
present time were as wholly unknown as were the frozen regions
of our present arctic climate.

Dunes. Sand dunes are heaps of sand, much like drifts of
snow, which are found along all the coasts except the steep, rocky
ones, these dunes being formed by the winds, and burying trees,
houses, and fertile lands as they gradually travel inland. They
abound on the shore of the Bay of Biscay, in France, extending
along the coast for some 200 miles, and covering a strip from


Fic. 59. Banding in loess, at railroad cut east of Wynne, Arkansas.
(Fuller, U. S. G. S.)


3 to 6 miles wide. Some of these dunes, or sand drifts, are over
100 feet high, the highest of strictly coastal dunes, though the
dunes of the Great Lakes in America, and of the deserts in all
parts of the world, are sometimes much larger than even these.
Dunes abound also along the coast of Belgium and the Nether-
lands, the Danish coast of the North Sea, and the south coast of
the Baltic; and in almost all these instances, the sea seems to be
very rapidly encroaching on the land, eating away at the coast,
and gradually working farther and farther inland.


Desert dunes are plentiful in the mountain plateau region
between the Rockies and the Sierra Nevada Mountains, in the
Colorado and the Mohave deserts of Southern California, and
even in Nebraska and other States just east of the Rockies.
Large areas in European Russia are covered with dunes, as are


THE ATMOSPHERE AS A GEOLOGICAL AGENT 119


also immense areas in the arid parts of Asia, Northern and
Southern Africa, and Australia. One third of the entire surface
of Arabia is said to be covered with these rolling and constantly
changing hills of sand.


Fic. 60. Loess deposits, North China. (After Willis.)


Loess. Large areas on all the continents are also covered
with a peculiar deposit called loess, which is generally thought
to have been formed by the winds largely or almost wholly;
though this point is much disputed.

The typical loess is composed of very minute angular (not
rounded) grains of silica which form a loamy silt containing
much caleareous matter. It is finer than sand, but coarser than
ordinary clay, though it resembles the latter much in texture. It


120 THE NEW GEOLOGY


is of remarkably uniform mechanical make-up, and is usually de-
void of any visible stratification. It seems almost to be jointed,
like many solid rocks; for it breaks off in large upright slabs, thus
leaving abrupt cliffs which are a very striking feature of the
landscape where they_occur (Fig. 59).

was also found over large parts of the Mississippi Valley, over


Fic. 61. View across Death Valley, California. There is every evidence that this basin, like
others elsewhere, was once full of water. (Gale, U. S. G. S.)


much of Southeastern Europe, and especially in China. In the
latter country, the loess beds occasionally have a thickness of
over a thousand feet; and they are thought to have been formed
from the materials brought by the winds from the great desert
of Gobi, in Central Mongolia. These loess deposits abound along
the Yellow River and its branches, the high vertical bluffs formed
by the loess being characteristic of this region. ‘Millions of
Chinese live on the valley floors of dissected basins of this kind,
for the loess is extremely fertile where well watered. Great
numbers of people inhabit cavelike dwellings excavated in loess
bluffs; in a thickly populated district not a house may be seen.
The yellowish color of the loess prevails everywhere. It gives


THE ATMOSPHERE AS A GEOLOGICAL AGENT 121


color and name to the great river of the region, and to the sea
into which the river flows.” (Davis.)
The fossils of the loess are scanty, and consist chiefly of land
snails, such as Helix, Pupa, and Succinea, with shells of ponds or
- lakes, such as Planorbis and Paludina. Bones of land vertebrates
also occur, with roots and stems of grasses and other plants, the
latter more or less mineralized.
Such fossils make it difficult- to believe that this loess is a
typically desert formation. And the fact that the regions where
we find it are not in any sense deserts at the present time is an-


Fic. 62. Old shore line or terrace of Lake Bonneville, 3 miles north of Tooele, Utah.
(Walcott, U. S. G. S.)


other argument of like nature; for there is no well-authenticated
instance of any region which has once been a desert ever becom-
ing anything else through a natural increase of the rainfall,
though there are plenty of instances of the reverse, that is, of
fruitful regions having become progressively so dry as to turn
into typical deserts.

On the hypothesis of a great universal Deluge, we must sup-
pose that great areas which are now largely desert were im-
mediately after the Deluge full of water; for such areas are
almost all of them basin-shaped. On this hypothesis, the lands to
the east of such water-filled basins, at least in the region of the
prevailing westerly winds, must for centuries have had a much
greater rainfall than at present. But we must remember that all
of the lands had been (on this hypothesis) wholly stripped of


122 THE NEW GEOLOGY


their vegetation, and must have remained thus denuded for a long
period subsequent to the emergence of the continents.

Now it is a remarkable fact that the regions of the loess are
found chiefly to the east of such basinlike depressions, now
deserts, and in the path of the prevailing westerly winds; and it
is reasonable to suppose that where we now find the loess, the
winds for many centuries were far more uncontrolled in drifting
clastic material than they are to-day in the same regions, for
these regions are now covered with more or less of a full mantle
of vegetation. But at the same time, the climate was not that
of a desert, but probably well watered; and this peculiar combina-
tion of conditions may have been the cause of the production of
this admittedly peculiar material, which has occasioned much dis-
cussion and dispute as to its origin.

However, the loess is conspicuously absent from those regions
toward which the winds of the Sahara blow; and accordingly we
must suppose that the materials of the loess are not found over
the wide expanse of the Sahara and Arabia.


CHAPTER VII


Running Water


The Rainfall. Under the term rainfall is included all the
water that is precipitated to the earth in any form whatever,
whether as rain, or snow, or even common dew. Along the At-
lantic seaboard of North America, the rainfall averages about 40
inches a year. In the plains region, it is 20 inches or less; while
in the Great Basin between the Rockies and the Sierra Nevada
Mountains, it is usually less than 10 inches. Regions where the


Fic. 63. Labyrinth Cafion of the Green River, Wyoming. On the dividing ridge at Bowknot
Bend, looking up the river on the left, and down on the right. It is 6 miles from the one
point to the other, following around the course of the river. (Beaman, U. 8. G. 8.)


rainfall is 10 inches or so a year, are termed desert; and even
where the precipitation is not more than 20 inches, the climate is
termed arid or semiarid.

In the northwest corner of the United States, the rainfall is often 100
inches a year; while in some parts of the tropics, this amount is much ex-
ceeded. In Java, the mean or average rainfall is given as 110 inches; in
Sumatra, as 130 inches; in the mountains of Burma, as 160 inches; while in


the hills of Assam, at the head of the Bay of Bengal, at the altitude of nearly
a mile, the rainfall reaches the almost incredible average of between 400


and 500 inches a year.


The Run-Off. The amount of the rainfall which is carried
away from the surface of the land is termed the run-off; the


(123)


CS "D'S `n “uolteq)


*səuolspuwes pII JIL SAJOI Əsəu.L


“


AE ~ g P


*OpLeIoJ09 ‘Spog ey} JO uəpre5 oy} 0} ABMa}ED


2


sige ai ml ea qan EF


“79 “DI


(124)


RUNNING WATER 125


remainder either evaporates or soaks into the ground and be-
comes ground water. The latter will be considered in the proper
place. Here we are concerned to study what this run-off does in
the way of geological work as it travels toward the sea. Murray
has calculated that the total annual rainfall on the lands of the
globe amounts to about 29,000 cubic miles, and of this about
6,500 cubic miles, or about one fifth, composes the run-off. As
this run-off is working its way toward the ocean, it picks up and
carries along with it an immense amount of earthy matter, partly
by dissolving it and carrying it in solution, partly by carrying it
in suspension, and also by the mere mechanical process of rolling
particles along the bottom of its channel. Some of this load it
drops at various places along the way, forming extensive river
or lake deposits, which have characteristics of their own by which
they may be identified with considerable certainty. But part of
the load carried by the run-off ultimately finds its way to the
ocean, where the mechanical part of it is dropped on the con-
tinental shelf near the mouth of the river. Even the portion of
the load held in solution may be partly precipitated under certain
circumstances, if the river happens to flow into a lake in an arid
region, or even if it flows into some portions of the sea; but in
general, this matter held in solution merely adds to that great
accumulation of every mundane substance which we find in the
waters of the ocean in some form of solution.

The effects of rain water in eroding a hill or other surface
which is not well consolidated, are familiar to most of us. We
are also familiar with the fact that a mantle of vegetation, es-
pecially a thick forest growth, almost entirely prevents erosion
by the rains (Fig. 66). In forested lands, the rainfall is retained
and allowed to pass off so slowly that floods are unlikely to oc-
cur in the spring of the year; while in regions of little forest
cover, especially if the hillsides are steep, very destructive floods
are liable to occur, as in the upper waters of the Ohio. The re-
moval of the forests from a region has often resulted in the rapid
erosion and loss of much of the soil of these lands, illustrating
one of the great wastes of modern civilization.

Erosion in Arid Regions. In regions of dry climates, the ef-
fects of erosion are easily seen and are extremely characteristic.
There is probably no region with absolutely no rainfall, and in
those parts where the precipitation is very slight, it usually oc-
curs fitfully in the form of violent downpours, or “cloud-bursts,”
as they are commonly called. Such cloud-bursts are generally of
very limited horizontal extent, perhaps less than twenty or thirty
miles in areal or horizontal diameter; but they have been known


9


CS :5 `S N “uosytəowp)


“BuUIULOA M ‘UO Ba
M WB AVA UseIH AvauU IMO UL APOY od
: “ LL,


“G9 “DIA


(126)


RUNNING WATER 127


to result in a maximum precipitation of over ten inches of rain in
twenty-four hours. The erosion resulting from such downpours
is much greater in arid regions than elsewhere, because the per-
centage of run-off is increased, and because the soil in such
regions is already filled with air instead of with water, which
prevents the entrance of more water when a surface film of the
soil has once become wet. As vegetation is almost entirely lack-
ing in such regions, this lack also helps the erosive powers of the


Fic. 66. Illustrating the very important part played by the roots of trees in hold-
ing the soil in place. San Juan Mountains, Colorado. (Fairbanks. ) °


water. Throughout the western part of the United States, these
picturesquely eroded hillsides are very frequently seen. In some
parts, they form’ what are called bad lands, because of the diffi-
culty experienced in crossing the gullies made by the erosion of
the streams. @


Im the desert regions of all parts of the world, we find rock deposits
formed under the action of the streams produced by the violent downpours
of these regions. These deposiis strongly resemble in their coarseness and
in the angular character of their contents the traditional kind of deposits
formed by glaciers. No less an authority than Grabau declares that “often
the structure is suggestive of morainal accumulation.” This author de-
angular blocks abound in the sandy ground mass with a total absence of
sorting, the result of the indiscriminate piling together of the material by
the tremendous flood rains of the desert. The evidence of violent impaet is


128 THE NEW GEOLOGY


further shown by the abundance of concussion marks and the total absence of
the woody vegetation which is ground to fragments and washed away by the
floods.” (“Principles of Stratigraphy,” page 542.)


Mountains of Erosion. In numerous parts of the plains coun-
try just east of the Rocky Mountains are many erosion remnants
or beehive-shaped mounds which are the remains left after the
surrounding materials have all
been carried away by the ero-
| sive action of the winds or the
WECHANICSVILLE SOME waters, or by both combined.

“esa The famous Garden of the
Gods, near Pikes Peak, Colo-
rado, shows many very won-
derful monuments of hard
rocks which have been left
standing in striking forms
(Fig. 64). The various
buttes, found in many places
over all this region east of the
Rockies, are composed of hori-
zontal strata which have been
left in a rounded, sugar-loaf
— mao | form standing alone on the


J
\
\
7
/


Scale» of Mile . .
— 181 ° plains. Some of these isolated
a masses have broad and com-
THAM .
ees paratively flat tops, and are


termed mesas, from a Span-
Fic. 67. Map of a ‘‘cloud-burst,’’ near Tabor- 1 i

ton, New York, on August 10, 1920. The fig- ish word meaning table. Such
ures indicate the amount of the precipitation mesas are generally capped


fie thi Ge pits by a layer of hard roek, which
Report Review) has protected the softer un-

derlying strata. It is an im-

pressive sight to see such a mesa or a butte rising for many feet
above.a great plain with its strata in a horizontal position, and to
realize that all of the country, perhaps as far as the eye can reach,
must at one time have been filled up with rock material at least
as high as the top of this solitary monument, and that all this
surrounding material has since vanished and been carried away
by the waters. A fact which often makes such a phenomenon
more impressive is that, in very many instances, for water to flow
around such a lone monument at the present time would require


that the whole country for a thousand miles must be submerged
under the waves.


RUNNING WATER 129


However, no long ages of time are necessarily indicated by even this
prodigious amount of erosion. We have only to suppose that the waters of
a retreating ocean once flowed over these regions, while the strata of the
rocks were still more or less freshly laid and still quite unconsolidated, to
understand how all this vast amount of erosion might well have taken place
in a very brief space of time, the present diurnal action of the elements
merely finishing what was chiefly accomplished under quite different cir-
cumstances.


Speaking broadly, of course, we may say that practically all
the mountains, except those of volcanic origin, are mountains


Fic. 68. “Toadstool Park,” 3 miles northwest of Adelia, Sioux County, Nebraska. Bad Lands.

Evidently the eroded bottom of an old Jake. Note the marked difference between the erosion

forms in this lake bottom and those of the surrounding hills. The hills represent the “Bad
Lands.” (Darton, U. 8. G. 8.)


of erosion; that is, they owe their present form largely to the
eroding effects of the elements, many of them being composed
of strata still comparatively horizontal, which may have ex-
tended out on all sides to a quite indefinable distance. How-
ever, in the great majority of such instances, it would be quite
impossible to prove that the mere continuance of the amount of
erosion now going on could have produced this present visible
result, even if we prolong this present action of the elements
to any reasonable length of time in the past. On the contrary,
almost all the mountains, in their valleys and in their general
features, are more easily explained as having been at least
partly sculptured out by masses of water which once stood or


`pue[st uu vuo ssa
[qnop se. f T
p SBM ssew siy, ‘you HuphƏoor SAORA S9, s ‘N ‘uopeq)
: TeyUNOW, u4oH Big Jo


Ədol[s }SVƏ ‘(dIssBain p-uzrurto d)


spəq per 1leyeusnyo


`69 “DIA


30)


(a


RUNNING WATER 131


flowed around them, these waters in many instances evidently
having done much of their work upon the strata while the latter.
were still comparatively soft and unconsolidated. And while
this subject is easily capable of endless discussion, and perhaps
incapable of definite settlement when considered by itself alone,
yet, as must be confessed, the catastrophic interpretation of
these problems has many strong arguments in its favor, and
when considered in connection with the other geological argu-
ments, seems quite unanswerable.

Erosive Power of Moving Water. Clear water, whether of


the streams or of the sea, has practically no power of eroding
"á


Fic. 70. Bell Butte, near Beil Ranch, New Mexico. (Lee, U. S. G. S.)


the surface of the compact rocks over which it flows. This is
manifest by the many streams flowing in mountain districts
at a rapid rate which pass over stones completely covered with
plant growth. On many seacoasts also, the rocks are covered
with a coat of seaweeds, even though the tide and the waves
pass rapidly over these rocks many times a day. These coats of
vegetable matter could not possibly exist if the waters were
eroding the bottoms or the banks where they are situated.

On the other hand, when a river is carrying mud or sand
or gravel in its course, it uses these materials as tools with
which to dig out a deeper channel for itself. Such a river, when
dragging along rock materials over the bottom of its channel,
has been compared to a “sinuous, flexible, and endless file, ever
moving forward in one direction, and by means of the moving


`
CS ‘D'S N ‘At0Se15) 'əpım 3əəJ gg “dol 4 Avmasneo : 1997] 8)Z 'syuəuunque
uəəaqəq YP + Joos 868 ‘WYSIOH `(Ərssurnp) əuolspuus wujud BT Jo pəsoquuo,) ‘yez ‘AJuN0D uenp ueg `ujnos Əy} WOAJ paMaIA PFPH Aoqureq “TL DIA


(132)


RUNNING WATER 133


sand or gravel rasping away the country rocks beneath and be-
side it, thus cutting an ever-deepening trench.” (Pirsson.)
When standing on the banks of some mountain stream in flood
season, one can often feel the ground vibrate, as the large rocks
carried along in the bed of the stream are pounded against
one another in the bottom of the torrent, such friction result-


Fic. 72. Cañon of the Snake River, below Shoshone Falls, Idaho. The wall rocks are volcanic.
(Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


ing in a very great and rapid decrease in the size of these rock
fragments as they work their way down the river.

Flowing waters, whether in the form of streams or in the
form of waves and currents along the shore, take advantage of
the joints with which all rocks are intersected, to loosen and
move the blocks of rock formed by these joints. This process
of picking out joint-blocks or other pieces of rock, is known as
plucking, or it is spoken of as the quarrying power of a stream
or current. Such plucking or quarrying is also performed by
glaciers.

When a stream is not overloaded with material which is
being transported, an increase in the rapidity of the current
will enable the stream to erode still more rapidly. In fact, the


154 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fig, 73. Glen Canon of the Colorado River. (Hillers U. S. G. S.)


erosive power of a current varies as the square of the velocity,
when the size of the rock fragments is equal and when they are
present in the same proportion. Thus if the velocity of the cur-
rent is doubled, the erosive power (from this cause alone) will
be four times as great; or if the velocity is three times as great,
the erosive power will be increased nine times.

However, another factor enters into this problem, greatly
complicating it. This other factor is that the transporting or
moving power of a current varies as the sixth power of its


RUNNING WATER 135


velocity. This can be illustrated by the following diagram,
which has been’ taken from Pirsson.


If we start with a current which has just sufficient power to move a
cube a, and if this current is doubled in velocity, it can then strike one end
of such a cube with a force four times as great as before, according to the


Fic. 74. Artesian well, San Luis Valley, Colorado. (Siebenthal, U. S. G. S.)


rule already given. This would be obvious from the fact also that, with this
increase in velocity, twice as much water would strike the face of such a
cube, and each particle of water would have twice the velocity. Such a
current moving now with a power four times as great as before, would be
able to move four such cubes, a’ af a’ a‘, placed one behind the other in a
row. But clearly if sixteen

rows of such blocks were piled

up together, we should have a

cube which would be sixty-

four times as great as the

ETA small cube with which we
f started; and it is equally clear
that this increased current

striking on the face of this

large cube A would move it

Fie. 75. Diagram to illustrate the fact that, if the just as the first current moved
' velocity of a stream is doubled, its transporting power the small cube a. And this


% : = Pi . . .
is thereby made Catmas ee (After Pirsson larger cube is just sixty-four


156 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 76. Two containers, illustrating the settling of clay in salt and in fresh
water, after 24 hours. The jar containing the salt water is clear, while that
containing the fresh water is still turbid. (After W. B. Scott.)


times as great as the small cube; while sixty-four is the sixth power of two.
Thus we see that the transporting power of a current increases as the sixth
power of its velocity. Expressed as a formula, it would be T = V°, where
T = the transporting ability, and V = the velocity. If the velocity of the
current be trebled, then its transporting ability will be 729 times as great
as before, since 729 equals the sixth power of three. And if the velocity is
increased 10 times, its transporting power becomes 1,000,000 times as great.
And we must remember that this increase in transporting power also affects
the erosion power of the waters, so that our formula for estimating the
erosive power of water will now be that it varies somewhere between the
square and the sixth power of the velocity.


It has been found by observation that when a current is
running a fifth of a mile an hour, it will carry fine clay. When


RUNNING WATER 137


it flows half a mile an hour, it will transport sand. A current
of a mile an hour will roll along gravel of medium size, while
one flowing two miles an hour will sweep along pebbles of the
size of an egg over a comparatively smooth surface. But a
current of fifteen miles an hour would move blocks of similar
form weighing 56 tons or more; and a current of twenty miles
an hour would move blocks weighing 320 tons. A current of
water moving with the velocity of the wind in a storm would be
capable of almost digging out the very mountains themselves by
the roots.


The Assorting Power of Water. The power of a current of
water to assort the materials which it is carryirig, and to lay
down coarse materials of about one size in one locality, while
it carries finer materials farther on and lays them down in an-
other place, with still finer sediment carried still farther and
laid down in an entirely different place,— this ability of mov-
ing water to assort its materials is the explanation of the fact
that we so often find a bed of sand consisting of grains of about
one size in one place, and a bed of fine clay or mud in a
distant place.

It has been found that river waters, such as those of
the Mississippi, may carry muddy sediment in suspension for
months or years, there being little practical difference between


Fic. 77. An overloaded, or aggrading, stream. Matanuska River, Alaska.
(Mendenhall, U. S. G. S.)


158 THE NEW GEOLOGY


such finely suspended material and the material carried as a
true solution. But if such waters holding clay in suspension
are mixed with salt water and agitated as by the waves, the clay
quickly coagulates or forms into minute lumps, and is rapidly
precipitated to the bottom, thus leaving the water clear within
a very few hours (Fig. 76). This is the explanation of why
the muddy waters of such large rivers as the Mississippi and
the Amazon never are observed very far out in the ocean, for


Fic. 78. View of the newly cut gorge of New River, and wrecked buildings, Mexicala, Mexico.
1906 — after the Colorado River had broken through and had been flowing in this channel for
a few months. (Mendenhall, U. S. G. S.)


all their suspended load of sediment is quickly dropped on
reaching the sea, and is not carried out beyond the edge of the
continental shelf.


It has been estimated that the Mississippi annually carries about 340,-
000,000 tons in suspension in its waters, and more than a third as much
more in the form of true solutions. All of these materials have been
gathered up by the waters of the river in flowing over the land. On this
basis, estimates have been made of the length of time which such transpor-
tation would require in order to lower the level of the Mississippi Valley to
the extent of a foot or one hundred feet, and how long it would take for the
river to lower the whole country to the sea level. Such calculations may be
curious and interesting, but they do not get us very far. Indeed, we can not
be sure that such calculations, if projected back into the past, would even give
us a glimmer of an idea of how long it has taken to lower the valley of
such a river to its present level. Too many factors in our calculus must
necessarily be neglected because wholly unknown. If, when the river began
its work, the surface of the land was all bare of vegetation, if the materials
on which the streams worked were all soft and freshly laid, or if the pre-


RUNNING WATER 139


cipitation at that time was much greater than it is at present, the erosive
power of the rivers and surface streams would be so much greater than at
present as to be wholly beyond our power to estimate.


Aggrading and Degrading Streams. When a river or stream
is so overloaded with sedimentary materials that it can not well
carry them all along, it must deposit some of these materials
whenever for any reason the current is obstructed and its


Fic. 79. The Grand Cañon of the Colorado, from the river bed. (Hillers, U. S. G. S.)


velocity is decreased. A river is said to be graded, or at grade,
when its load and its transporting power are equal. It is an
aggrading stream when it has more of a load than it can carry
(Fig. 77). Or it is a degrading stream when it is running rapidly
and could carry more of a load of sediment than it has. A river
may often be aggrading or building up the lower part of its
channel while it is still degrading its upper course. Thus the
Missouri in its upper waters is still eroding its channel; but in
the lower part of its course, it is much overloaded and is aggrad-
ing its bed.

“Young” and “Old” Valleys. It is usually assumed that a
river has started its work of erosion on a level country, gradu-
ally sawing down a channel for itself through the sedimentary
beds. Under normal conditions, the sides of such a channel
will be worn away simultaneously with the deepening of the
channel; and thus the profile which a valley displays may be


140 THE NEW GEOLOGY


regarded as depending upon the relative balance between these
two agencies, the sawlike cutting of the river and the broaden-
ing of its valley at the top. In the common language of physi-
cal geography, a valley with steeply sloping sides is regarded
as “young,” or “immature”; while a valley with gently rounded
or sloping sides is spoken of as “old,” or “mature.” Such a use of
terms is, however, very misleading, for it takes no account
of the differences in the kinds of rock which a river may en-
counter in various parts of its course; for in one place, it may
show an open valley with well-rounded sides, while in another


Fic. 80. Looking down the canon of the Little Colorado River, from above Grand Falls,
Arizona. (Mendenhall, U. S. G. S.)


place, it may pass through a narrow defile with steep, rocky
walls, though the stream may have been flowing through both
these places exactly the same length of time. In fact, we should
remember always in this connection, as a highly respected
authority has stated it, that in the use of these terms, young
and mature, “absolute age is not at all referred to; they are
merely expressions to denote relative stages of development
of topographic form in a river valley during its history.”
(Pirsson.)


Gorges. It used to be thought that such gorges as that of
the Arkansas, the Grand Cafion of the Colorado, or that of the
Snake River, and the valley of the Virgin River, are examples
of what ordinary river erosion will accomplish after long


RUNNING WATER 141


ages of operation. Such calculations always assume, also, that
these rivers had begun their work of sawing out their channels
after all of the rocks had been consolidated as they are at
present. But it is now quite generally agreed, or at least it is
understood by many, that some of the most striking examples
of this sort are merely instances of rivers which have cleaned
out a gorge or fissure already existing in the strata. The
amount of time required to effect the present condition of
affairs in these instances would also be very materially reduced,
if we suppose it possible that these rivers may have begun their


Fic. 81. Bird’s-eye view of the Victoria Falls, Zambesi River, South Africa.
Surely the erosive power of running water never formed such a zigzag
channel as this. (After John Murray.)


work upon a mass of strata which were still soft and freshly
deposited. It should also be remembered that such rivers as
the Colorado are now carrying a very large load of sediment,
and that they thus have plenty of tools with which to scour out
the bottoms of their channels. The word Colorado means red,
and is quite descriptive of the appearance of the water of this
mighty stream; and there is no doubt that such a river is quite
capable of digging out a channel for itself, though there is no
reason at all for supposing that the present stream, rapid and
loaded as it is, was the sole cause for the erosion of that im-
mense chasm across the plains of Arizona which has been quite
irreverently called the “greatest ditch on earth.”


10


142 THE NEW GEOLOGY


There are many examples on record, however, of gorges hundreds of feet
deep which have been cut through solid rock with only two or three hundred
years of work. Lyell mentions the case of the Simeto, in Sicily, which was
dammed up by a lava eruption in 1603. In a little over two centuries, it had
excavated a channel from 50 to several hundred feet in depth, and in some
places from 40 to 50 feet in width, although the rock through which it was


m
l


i


in
i


montory <s
orth


J
z


-X
a


AUA


Fic. 82. Plan of the Falls of the Zambesi, Central Africa.


deep bed of decomposed rock in Georgia, which started at first as a mere
mud crack a yard deep, but which in 20 years was 300 yards long, from 20
of twice the length in Brazil, which had been made in 40 years. Like ex-
amples might be cited from all parts of the world.


In the year 1905, the Colorado River broke into the Salton
Sink, in Southeastern California; and in an incredibly short
time, it had cut a huge, deep trench through the soft alluvial
soil (Fig. 78). This is a good illustration of what flowing water
will do when acting upon unconsolidated materials. The action


RUNNING WATER 143


of flowing water when carrying stones or bowlders may be
illustrated by what happened in the Sill Tunnel, in Austria.
The bottom of this tunnel or water channel was provided with
a pavement or flooring of granite slabs more than a yard thick.
Through this tunnel a strong current carrying great quantities
of débris was passed at a high velocity; but so rapid was the
abrasion of the granite slabs that it was found necessary to
renew them after only a single year. (Scott.)

As already remarked, it seems incredible that such gorges as
those of the Zambesi, in South Africa, the Via Mala, on the
Rhine, or the Ausable Chasm, in the Adirondacks, were due
primarily to ordinary erosion. Rather must we suppose that


Fic. 83. Bird's-eye view of the Niagara Gorge. W., Whirlpool; Q., Queenston; Q. H.,
Queenston Heights; O. Ch., old channel. (From Gilbert.)


they represent chasms or fissures in the rocks through which
the waters found their way and which they have since cleaned
out so as to make passable channels for themselves.


Niagara. The falls of the Niagara are another classic ex-
ample of a peculiar set of circumstances. Originally this river
tumbled over an escarpment some 300 feet high, near Lake
Ontario. Here the plateau is capped by a layer of hard lime-
stone known as the Niagara limestone, beneath which are found
a set of soft, easily eroded shales. The waters of the fall gradu-
ally undermined the limestone by eroding the soft underlying

„shales, thus leaving the harder limestone projecting as a ledge;
and when this work of undermining had proceeded sufficiently


144 THE NEW GEOLOGY


far, a large piece of the limestone would tumble down and be
carried away. In this way, the falls have been gradually mov-
ing upstream, leaving a deep gorge behind them, until they are
now some seven miles above their original position. And be-
cause there is a slight dip in the limestone upstream, the


Fig. 84. North wall of Yakima River, showing old river terraces at various levels. As
explained in the text, the higher terraces are of course the oldest. These terraces would be
classed as Pleistocene or Recent. (Russell, U. S. G. S.)


original height of 800 feet has been lowered to the. present
height of about 165 feet, leaving out of account the grade in
the river between the two places.


The rate at which the recession of Niagara Falls is now taking place
has been often discussed, but it does not seem that the present rate can be
accurately determined. Its present rate has been estimated at from 2 feet
a year to more than twice this amount. But the falls are now nearly a mile
wide, which is nearly four times as wide as they were farther down the
gorge; and the present amount of water is probably much less than this
stream formerly carried. Many geologists make 5 feet a year a probable
average. At this rate, the length of time involved in cutting this gorge
7 miles long would be about 7,000 years. But even this amount of time would
require very material reduction, if any of the factors involved were much
more powerful long ago than they are now. And there is plenty of evidence
in favor of the supposition that the erosion may have been much more
effective long ago than it is at present.


RUNNING WATER 145


Constructive Work. The constructive work of rivers is also
an important part of the work which they perform. When a
river carrying sediment comes to a part of its course where it
spreads out much more widely than before, it always tends to
drop a considerable amount of the material which it has been
carrying, because its current has been slowed up. Most rivers
have wide-spreading plains in the lower parts of their courses,
which they overflow in flood season, such plains being known as
flood plains. Over these flood plains, such a river constantly
deposits a layer of sediment, fine or coarse, during its season
of flood, this material being known as alluvium. The Nile is
a good example of a river acting in this way, aŠ is also the
Mississippi, though the action of the latter river has been
interfered with by artificial banks, or levees, which have been
built to restrain its flood waters. As the material thus de-
posited by a river on its flood plain is coarser and more plenti-
ful near the bank of the river from which the overflow has
spread out sidewise, the part of the flood plain near the river is
gradually built up higher than the portion of the plain farther
away; and thus it happens that such a river is gradually banked
in with low ridges along its course, these low ridges being
called natural levees. Beyond these ridges, the land is generally
low and swampy.


Terraces. Sometimes a river, after forming an extensive
flood plain, cuts down its channel to such an extent that the re-


Fic. 85. Terraces on the Columbia River, looking down the old outlet of Lake Chelan,
Washington. (Willis, U. S. G. S.)


146 THE NEW GEOLOGY


mains of this flood plain are left high on either side as shelves
or terraces. Important changes in the amount of materials
carried by a river at different times in its history will also assist
in accomplishing the same result. Often there are visible ter-
races at several different levels along the same stream (Fig.
84). The beds in these terraces consist of gravel, sand, or clay,
generally with quite distinct stratification. In all cases where
there are several terraces in a valley, one above another, the


K Port Said


=


° Ci 40 39 O i tot
A


SCALE OF LES í


`~ oea
2 SS =: Lake
er IS Tsmsah
Qe ara N
9 oe S E A ees Saa
SS DE £: : < o Mẹ NY pekes Zephon
< Ç Vx Migdol `N
R Bees 3 ett
: ET s P=. A Pihohir i
LOWER EGYPT | Se
= Ph 21 og
4 ey, JABEL ATTAKA S Susi N.
ys u t D) ie |


Fic. 86. Map of the delta of the Nile, showing the probable route followed by the Israelites

on leaving Egypt. If the Red Sea were some 30 feet higher than at present, its water would

extend up to Etham, on the north side of Lake Timsah. It is supposed that the Israelites

crossed at either Serapeum or Chaloof, which would at that time be covered by some 5 to 10

feet of water, which a “strong east wind” (Ex. 14:21) might easily blow down the Gulf of
Suez. (From George Frederick Wright.)


higher ones are older than the others, as already remarked, and
represent the level at which the first sedimentary deposits were
spread out. Afterwards, when the river had scooped out a
much lower bed for itself, it formed a flood plain at this lower
level; and perhaps after many more centuries of work, when
its channel was again much lower, it may have made another
flood plain, which would be not only lower but also much nar-
rower. Thus a series of terraces on the sides of a valley record
an interesting history of events which have taken place since
the present drainage conditions became established. Yet, be-
cause of the great uncertainty regarding the many factors in-


RUNNING WATER 147


volved, the absolute length of time between the formation of any
two terraces is quite beyond conjecture.


Deltas. At the mouth of a river, the prolongation of the
river-plain is carried out into the lake or sea into which the
river empties. Often this prolongation of the river-plain is
shaped more or less like a triangle, with its apex upstream,
and its base forming the shore of the sea or lake. It is named
from its resemblance to the Greek letter delta. Usually such
a river discharges its waters by many channels, which are there-
fore called distributaries, each of these carrying but a fraction
of the total water brought down by the river in its main channel
farther upstream. Rivers which form deltas are constantly
engaged in building the edge farther out into the still water
into which they empty; though some rivers, like the Nile, are
doing so only at a very slow rate.


Not all rivers form deltas. Usually only those entering lakes or pro-
tected seas, where the tides are weak, or at least where the tidal currents
sidewise along the shore are not very strong, form deltas. Such a river
as the great Hwangho of China probably brings down so much sediment that
it would form a delta in spite of any tide or current. The Thames, how-
ever, has no delta, nor do any of the rivers on the Atlantic coast of Canada
and the United States.


Any swift-flowing stream which carries a heavy load of
sediment may form something resembling a delta as it emerges
from a ravine and enters a broad plain. Such a dry-land delta
is called an alluvial cone or fan; and some of them are of
enormous extent. Plenty of smaller examples of such cones or
fans are to be seen along the base of the hills in all arid regions,
where heavy loads of material have been washed out of the
narrow tributary valleys by sudden and heavy rainfalls. In ex-
amining such fans or alluvial cones, it is quite impossible to tell,
in some cases, whether the major part of such a deposit may not
have been formed as an actual delta, when an extensive body of
water stood over the level land where we now find it. In
many instances, such was probably the method of formation.

The actual depth or thickness of the deposits formed by
modern deltas varies greatiy, but is generally not very great.
“The mud of the Nile delta is not over 10 or 15 meters thick.”
(Grabau.) Some of the deltas in Europe seem to be thicker
than this, and that of the Ganges is about 20 meters. “The
actual delta deposits of the Mississippi range from 9.5 to 16
meters near New Orleans, increasing to 30 meters at the head
of the passes, beyond which the thickness rapidly increases.


148 THE NEW GEOLOGY


They rest throughout on a stiff blue clay of earlier age.”
(Grabau.)

In order to agree with its theoretical structure, a delta
should consist of what are termed bottom-set, fore-set, and top-
set beds. Im many-of the anciently formed deltas which have
since been opened up for exami-
nation by the draining of the
bodies of water in which they
were formed, these various beds
are well displayed. But in most
modern deltas, such distinctions
between the variously formed
beds are difficult or impossible to
trace. It is also found by bor-
ings that the strata of modern
deltas are generally of extremely
small area, the borings revealing
scarcely any two sections the
same even in closely situated
boreholes. Evidently, therefore,
the beds of such a delta comprise
only a series of lenticular masses
of. very limited extent laterally.
In the delta region near Venice,
Italy, “only two sandy layers,
carrying water, have proved in
any way constant; all other
layers quickly wedge out later-
ally.” (Grabau.) Often a large
Fic. 86a. Map of the delta of the Colorado amount of finely divided vege-
River, showing former distributary cbans table matter is found in layers


nels, canals, and the Salton Sea.


perial Valley, here shown, is now one of here and there in some deltas:
,


the garden spots of California. Its soil is


a det eea sis a Gamal Cates Eon PS 5 R
nf cha Gol aqo: posits are in no way similar to

the ancient beds now forming

our coal deposits, being finely comminuted and scattered through
the sediments, they are sufficient to resemble somewhat the black


shales so often found in ancient formations.


Ground Water. Much of the water which falls on the
earth’s surface, whether on hill or in valley, sinks through the
ground by means of the pores of the rocks or through other open-
ings, and thus becomes subterranean or ground water. These
waters sink down readily through the sandstones, but are stopped
by a layer of clay or other compact stratum which is impervious


RUNNING WATER 149


to water. Down below the sea level also, these underground
waters usually accumulate and lie still, often being quite salty,
perhaps indicating that at one time the sea water had access to
these regions, or that these rocks were originally deposited in
sea water, or perhaps they may have become salty through
contact with beds of rock salt.

Ordinary surface waters easily erode limestone, because they
contain carbon dioxide in solution. Following along joints and
cracks in the rocks, they soon hollow out large cavities for
themselves; and by this means, a complete system of under-
ground drainage may become established. Large caverns of
this character are found in all limestone regions,’also in some
other kinds of rock, these caverns sometimes containing large
streams of flowing water.

The level at which the ground water stands, called the water
table, depends partly upon the amount of precipitation upon
the surface, and also upon the shape of the surface, being
higher on the high level plateaus, and sloping away toward the
valleys almost as does the surface of the ground. Yet the sur-
face features alone do not reveal the depth at which the water
level will be found.

“In a large number of very deep mining shafts in various
parts of the world, and in both humid and arid regions, water
is found only in the upper levels, within 2,500 feet or less of the
surface, while below the mines are dry, even dusty.” — Scott,
“Introduction,” p. 125. +

Estuaries. Many rivers enter the ocean by a large opening
which is termed an estuary. The mouth of the St. Lawrence is
a large estuary; but many smaller ones abound along the At-
lantie coast, such as those of the Hudson, Delaware, and Chesa-
peake. On account of the large size of these river mouths, the
river water is unable to fill them entirely to the exclusion of
the ocean water; hence with a mingling of river water and
ocean water, the water in these estuaries is brackish, and is
not favorable for many kinds of water animals. Many animals
live in the salt water, and many also in the fresh water; but
not many can stand to have the water brackish.

The deposits made in estuaries are much like those made in
the sea, except that finer muds occur in the estuary at any given
depth of the water. Sands and gravels occur on exposed situa-
tions, though the rivers do not bring down any coarse materials
so nearly into the sea. All kinds of stratified deposits in
estuaries are likely to show a confusion of stratification, due
to the conflicting currents and eddies in which they were laid


150 THE NEW GEOLOGY


down. But there is really no well-marked difference between
the deposits in an estuary and those formed elsewhere along
the coast.

As might be expected, no great variety of either marine or
fresh-water fossils can accumulate in estuarine deposits. Ani-
mals from either the salt or the fresh water may be killed by
getting into the brackish water of the estuary; but as a rule,
such animals are never buried in these situations. Vertebrate


Fa. 87. When water gets in a hurry, it can carry masses and perform work wholly
incommensurable with its effects under normal circumstances. The effects of a flood,
August, 1901. (U.S. G. S.)


fish are more likely to be killed in this way than are any other
forms of life; and such fish will always float to the surface in
a short time, and before very long will be devoured by other
forms of life. Practically none of them will ever be buried in
the muds and sands of the estuary, or, indeed, be buried any-
where else. The custom of many writers on geology of classing
as estuarine deposits any set of beds which happen to contain a
mixture of both marine life and forms from the lands or from
fresh water, is much to be deplored, for it is merely an évasion
of the evidence which such deposits present.


Abrading Action of Sediments. Water that carries no sedi-
ment has no wearing or abrading effect when flowing over a


RUNNING WATER 151


smooth surface. But when thrown in masses against any flat
surface, as in plunging waves or torrents, it may be the cause
of very marked results. Immense blocks of stone, weighing
perhaps many tons, may thus be moved slightly at each impact
of the water, and in the course of time transported over con-
siderable distances along a level or slightly sloping surface.

Whén loose material, such as sand or gravel, is carried by
moving water, this material is made to act like the emery of an
emery wheel, but with only slight pressure. At the same time,
the material thus transported is itself worn away by the pieces
of sand, gravel, or stones being rubbed against each other, thus
rounding them. However, it seems that after these particles
reach a certain grade of fineness, they are no longer worn away
by mutual impact.


CHAPTER VIII


Ice as a Geological Agent


More than half of the lands are covered with snow and ice
for several months each year, and large areas are permanently
covered. Hence these materials are at the present time of much
geological importance; and we can not undertake to solve all the `
problems regarding the geological work of the past, unless we
understand what ice is now doing, and learn to read the records
which it leaves behind.


River Ice. River ice becomes important when it picks up
stones from the shore and from the bottoms of streams and
carries them off as the ice breaks up in the spring, to deposit
them perhaps a long distance away. It is even more important
from the manner in which it accumulates in the channel of
flowing water and dams it up, producing lakes of greater or less
extent. All the streams in the colder latitudes are thus affected
every spring; and when this moving mass of river ice can dam
up such a mighty river as the St. Lawrence, endangering cities
like Montreal, as occurs almost every year, we can understand
that river ice is an agent of no small importance. It would
be of even vastly more importance if, on the hypothesis of a
land surface just emerged from the ocean, the larger part of
a continent were devoid of a protecting mantle of vegetation,
and especially with no forest cover. A nearly level country, such
as we have in Minnesota, could not fail to be fairly pock-
marked with irregularities on the surface, thus producing in-
numerable lakes, if the conditions which we have spoken of
were fulfilled.


Lake Ice. Lake ice has also another action which needs to
be considered. When a pond or a lake is frozen over, the ice
completely fits the surface of the water. With still further
freezing, the ice undergoes contraction, resulting in huge cracks
or fissures in the ice, the size of these fissures — that is, their
width as well as their length — depending upon the size of the
body of water which is frozen over; in large lakes, they may
be several feet wide. But as the water rises and fills these
cracks, it also is frozen solid, completely restoring the sur-
face cover of the water, so that the ice again completely coin-
cides with the extent of the water surface, this ice being now
perhaps many degrees below the freezing point.


(152)


ICE AS A GEOLOGICAL AGENT š 153


But when the temperature again rises, and the ice nears the
melting point, the whole surface of the lake must expand.
And the actual amount of this expansion will be proportional
to the size of the body of water affected. In a large lake, it
may result in pushing the edge of the ice violently against the
bank or the shore of the river or lake, forming what are called
ice ramparts, which are heterogeneous masses of earth and
stones indistinguishable from masses of rocks piled up from
other causes, except in so far as the proximity of a large river
or lake may give the key to their origin.

Above the Snow Line. On the high lands of all the con-
tinents, there are regions where the ice and snow never melt,
but where masses of
frozen water keep accu-
mulating from year to
year, forming permanent
ice fields or snow fields.
In warm latitudes, this
can occur only on the tops
of the highest mountains;
in more northern lati-
tudes, these permanent ac-
cumulations of snow and
ice are much lower; while
in the arctic regions, per-
K 772 eet ag en ice and snow are

about at sea level. In
any particular locality, the point of elevation at which snow re-
mains over the summer without melting is called the snow line.

In the tropics, the snow line is between 15,000 feet and
18,000 feet high; in the Alps, it is about 9,000 feet; and in
Norway, about 5,000 feet. Much depends upon the amount of
annual precipitation; the snow line is very much lower in
-regions of heavy precipitation than in regions where the total
rainfall is light and where there is much evaporation, it being
nearly half a mile higher on the dry western side of the Andes
than on the moister eastern side. Montana, with its dry climate,
has a much higher snow line than Switzerland, which is in about
the same latitude.

The weight of the accumulating mass of snow above the
snow line in suitable places, presses the flakes together until
the mass assumes a very distinctly granular structure, much
like the snow which remains for a long time in the spring as


154 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 89. View showing the terminus of the Mer de Glace Glacier, Chamonix Valley,

Switzerland ; also showing the terminal and lateral moraines about the lower end

of the glacier, evidently formed long ago, when the glacier was much larger than
at present. (Holmes, U. S. G. S.)


the relics of large drifts, as we see it over all the north tem-
perate lands. This granular ice is termed névé — the French
word used by the mountaineers of Switzerland.


Glaciers. The mass of granular ice accumulates to a great
thickness in the valleys and amphitheaters among the peaks;
and at some outlet on the lower side, we can detect a movement
downward, much as if the ice were a thick, viscous, semiliquid
mass, this point where movement downward begins being the
beginning of a glacier. A glacier may be likened to a river of


ICE AS A GEOLOGICAL AGENT 155


ice; it derives its energy of movement entirely from its gravi-
tation. As a geological agent, it works by falling; and it works
as long as it falls, but no longer; and the amount of work it
can do depends upon this falling movement, which is caused
wholly by gravity.

At the lower end of the glacier, where the ice foot is being
pushed out into a comparatively warm region much below the
snow line, there necessarily come a time and place where the
ice must melt faster than it can advance; and this means the end
of the glacier. It has been compared to a rod of ice thrust
into a furnace; the distance such a rod could be thrust in
before being melted would depend upon its size the rate at
which it was pushed in, and the heat of the furnace. Accord-
ingly, in warm tropical regions, we should not expect glaciers to
extend much below the snow line; and they do not. But in
northern countries, they often extend far below the limits of the
snow line; and in the far north and south, we find them push-
ing down to the very ocean itself, where the foot breaks off
in huge pieces and forms icebergs, the latter being sometimes
miles in length.

In the Alps, some of the larger glaciers extend 5,000 feet
below the snow line. In the southernspart of New Zealand, they
extend down to levels where subtropical forests, including tree
ferns, grow side by side with the foot of the ice mass; while


Fic. 90. View in Glacier National Park, Montana. General view of Grinnell Glacier, Gem
Glacier, and the Garden Wall, from the slope north of Grinnell Lake. (Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


156 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Rock :
26-i9- iq eT
s P “=


Fic. 91. A large hot rock which was washed by a flood five miles from the crater of Mount
Lassen, California. (Photograph by Loomis.)


they even descend to the sea level in the southern part of Chile,
at about latitude 47° S.


The granular structure of glacier ice is not always apparent where the
ice has been subjected to much*pressure. But even here the structure may
be clearly detected by subjecting a thin section of it to examination under
polarized light. At the lower end of the glacier, also, this granular form
reveals itself; for under the differential melting which the particles there
undergo, the mass breaks up into pieces of what resembles sand or gravel.
It has also been proved that the movement of the ice, as the glacier gradually
flows down grade, is due to the shearing or slipping of each of these little
crystals past or over others; so that the movement is not exactly like that
of a true viscous fluid, such as cold molasses, to which it used to be often
compared. Yet, like a true viscous fluid, its mass movement is wholly due to
gravity.

The truth seems to be that the particles can move upon one another
only as the pressure causes them to melt slightly at their points of contact,
this melting being promoted by pressure, which counteracts the expansion
all ice undergoes when it forms. At any given temperature near the melting
point, the ice can be made to melt by a sufficient amount of pressure; but
when this pressure is relieved, the ice instantly freezes again, since its
actual temperature is below the freezing point still. Indeed, the tempera-
ture at any particular depth of the glacier seems to correspond with the .
melting point of the ice for the pressure at that depth. From this, it follows
that the depth of the glacier can not increase indefinitely, about 1,600 feet
being apparently the maximum. With greater thickness than this, the bot-
tom parts would melt because of the pressure of the load.


There are some 2,000 glaciers, large and small, in the Alps,
most of them being less than a mile long. Several are from three
to five miles in length, while the largest, the Aletsch Glacier, is


ICE AS A GEOLOGICAL AGENT 157


ten miles long and about two miles wide. Glaciers occur also
in Northern California, Oregon, and Washington, with many
in Alaska, the Seward Glacier, near Mount St. Elias, being
some fifty miles long and three miles wide at its narrowest part.
This glacier unites at its foot with several others, forming the
huge nearly stagnant ice field known as the Malaspina Glacier,
which covers a total area of some 1,500 square miles.


The Movement of Glaciers. Greenland and the antarctic
continent are covered with what are called ice caps, these being
deep accumulations of glacier ice which move slowly outward
from some high central point toward the seacoast, where great
blocks of the ice break off in the form of icebergs, which are
thus always formed of fresh-water ice.

In the Alps, the movement of the glaciers is from 300 feet
to 1,000 feet a year, or from one to three feet a day. The
Muir Glacier, in Alaska, is said to move 2,500 feet a year; while
some in Greenland move much faster than even this, because of
the immense mass behind, which is pushed out through narrow
valleys into the sea.

The ice of a glacier does not move as fast along its margin
as it does in the center of its mass. The top also moves faster
than the lower layers. So there is a decided difference in the
rate of the different parts. In these respects, also, it acts some-
what like a river; it is a case of a genuine flowage, much like
that of a viscous fluid. From a molecular study, there is also a
shearing movement of the minute parts upon one another, by
little starts and stops, as might be expected of an elastico-rigid
body, as we know ice is.


Fic. 92. North end of drumlin, one mile south of Newark, New York, looking south.
(Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


11


158 THE NEW GEOLOGY


The surface of every glacier is traversed by great cracks,
called crevasses, which run more or less transverse to the course
of the glacier. They are caused by the irregularities over
which the ice is moving, which produce strains and tensions
which the ice can not resist. At the side and at the lower end
of the glacier, we always find a mass of clay, pebbles, and
even huge bowlders which have been brought down by the
glacier, these piles of miscellaneous material being termed


Fig. 93. Section through a drumlin, Koshkonong quadrangle, Wisconsin. (Alden, U. S. G. S.)


moraines, the one at the foot being a terminal moraine, and
those at the sides being lateral moraines. One or more rows
of débris may be seen riding on the top of the glacier, these
rows being termed medial moraines. In addition, there is some-
times a mass of material which is carried along by the glacier
over the bottom of its channel. This is called a ground moraine.
The terminal moraine may be piled up 25, 50, or even 100 feet
high, and may constitute indeed a very imposing mass of
material, which, of course, will have no stratification in it.
Much of this material has been brought down by the ice mass,
embedded within it, and thus has not been subjected to much
wearing or grinding. Other fragments, however, have been


ICE AS A GEOLOGICAL AGENT 159


used as tools, being embedded in the foot of the glacier itself ;
and these are often striated or scratched, or even rounded and
polished, through contact with the rocks of the channel through
which the mass has been moving. These rocks over which the
glacier has moved are seen to be more or less smoothed and
scratched, a neat channel having usually been made by the
ice river for itself. As the result of this wearing of the rocks,


Fic. 94. Esker, Westford Township, Dodge County, Wisconsin. (Alden, U. S. G. S.)


the water which issues from underneath the lower end of the
glacier is always of a peculiar milky appearance, due to the rock
flour with which it is loaded.

Most of the modern glaciers seem to be gradually getting smaller, the
lower ends not pushing down so far as formerly. In some instances, this has
been questioned; but it seems that so far as we can determine, the glaciers
were much larger a few hundred years ago than they are at present. At any
rate, at some time in the long past, glaciers of much greater magnitude than
any now existing were at work in the Alps, in Scandinavia, in the Rockies,
and practically everywhere over the world where there are glaciers at
present.


The So-Called “Glacial” Phenomena. Some of the phe-
nomena which continental glaciers are invoked to explain, and


160 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 95. Section of an esker, showing oblique bedding, manifestly formed by flowing water.
914 miles north of Menominee, Michigan. (Russell, U. S. G. S.)


which they do not always explain very satisfactorily, should
be mentioned.


1. Drumlins. These are oval-shaped or elliptical mounds of
heterogeneous materials, though often stratified, which are found
scattered over wide areas of the so-called “glaciated” parts of
America and Europe. They look like hillocks which have been
nearly worn away by erosion; and if they were situated in
the plains region of America, where erosion has been relatively
feeble, they might be mistaken for buttes. They usually have
their axes pointing in the direction of the larger drainage of
the country where they are found.


2. Kames. These are short ridges or hillocks of distinctly
stratified gravel and sand, which were evidently made by water,
in some manner not well understood. They often seem’ to be
crosswise of the general drainage.


3. E'skers. Long winding ridges of gravel, often strongly
resembling an old abandoned road or railway embankment,
sometimes 20 or even 100 feet wide, are found running for


ICE AS A GEOLOGICAL AGENT 161


long distances, sometimes for many miles, as in Scandinavia.
They are very common in Maine.


4. Crag-and-Tail Phenomena. A very common thing is to
find an outcrop of hard crystalline rock facing in a direction
which is upward, so far as the general drainage of the country
is concerned, with a wide stretch of till spread out behind it,
strongly resembling what is found in many streams. The diffi-
culty in these cases, however, is that, in order to have water
flowing where we find these phenomena, the whole country
would almost have to be flooded; for in many cases, they are
found near the crest of the country, where no running water
has existed, apparently, since the present topography of the
country was established.


5. Potholes, or Kettles. Great holes, sometimes 100 feet
deep, perhaps filled with water, are often found here and there
over these areas.


6. Perched Bowlders. Great pieces of rock are often found
in such peculiar situations that one wonders how they could
have been placed there by either water or ice. It may almost
be said that these huge blocks of rock are very frequently found
on points higher than the general trend of the surrounding
country. Traveled bowlders are a very common phenomenon
over all the region which we are discussing. Many of them
are as large as a small house; and some of them, both in this
country and in Europe, have become so individually famous as


Fic. 96. An esker which is transverse to the trend of the neighboring drumlins, one half
mile north of Spalding, Menominee County, Michigan. Looking east. (Russell, U. S. G. S.)


162 THE NEW GEOLOGY


to have received distinctive names, like those of a mountain or
a river or a lake.

These are a few of the phenomena which glaciers are called
upon to explain; but the ordinary things for which this theory
was invented are the great stretehes of transported materials,
different from the country rock beneath, and hence not residual
materials, which are found spread out over many wide stretches
of the areas here spoken of. Glaciers are supposed to explain


Fic. 97. Perched bowlder of granite porphyry, on a ledge of Cambrian sandstone, ‘‘Driftless
Area,” Wisconsin. (Alden, U. S. G. S.)


all the scratches (stri and groovings and flutings) in the rock
surfaces; and particularly the rounded, hummocky rocks (roches
moutonnées) found within the areas of many of these “glaci-
ated” districts.


Objections. Some objections which have been urged against
the theory of a continental glaciation, such as has been postu-
lated by the evolutionary geologists, are as follows:

1. The impossibility of ice masses’ being thick enough to
cover the high points where the “glacial” marks are found.
These marks are found on the very tops of the highest moun-
tains in New England and New York. In the Green Mountains,
they are found at a height of 4,400 feet; and in the White


ICE AS A GEOLOGICAL AGENT 163


Mountains, 5,500 feet high. Yet the physicists declare that ice
can not be piled up higher than 1,600 feet without the bottom
layers’ starting in to melt because of the pressure of the in-
cumbent mass. The thickest ice known on earth to-day, which
is in the antarctic region, is not thicker than this maximum;
and according to the laws of physics, the ice could never get
thicker than this amount.

2. The same principle appears in another form, when we try
to imagine ice flowing out from two or three centers over the


Fic. 98. “Glacial’’(?) stri#, on Permian rocks, Riverton, Vaal River, South
Africa. (R. B. Young.) Evidently something besides continental glaciers must
have produced these striz.


larger part of North America; for in order to have the ice
pushed even a fraction of the distances which this theory re-
quires, an amount of pressure would have to be exerted behind
the mass (presumably by gravity) which would far exceed the
amount represented by a vertical column of 1,600 feet. Hence
it is hard to see how the ice could have traveled across the coun-
try in the way it is said to have gone,— down to the Missouri
and the Ohio, with centers over Labrador and Keewatin.

3. The so-called glaciated areas are peculiarly distributed.
Alaska is not affected; neither is Siberia, nor much of Russia.
Also there are even “driftless” areas within the limits of the


164 THE NEW GEOLOGY


supposed glaciers, one of the largest and best-known being in
Wisconsin.

4. The many evidences of semitropical conditions over much
of these regions, as presented by the fossil plants and animals
which are found in these so-called “glacial” deposits.

5. The marine fossils often found interstratified with the
“glacial” beds.

That glaciers are very efficient agents of erosion and of
transportation on a small scale, can not be doubted. That they
can scratch up their channels, transport immense blocks of
rock for miles, and pile up a heterogeneous mass of débris at
their lower ends, are all matters of observation. But that in the
long ago immense ice caps covered the greater portion of the
northeastern part of North America and the northwestern part
of Europe, is mere matter of speculation. This is not the place
to give the beginning student a long controversial discussion of
this much-mooted question; but the few facts just given will
serve to show that the extreme doctrines regarding former
glacier action are not- beyond criticism.

These subjects will be further discussed in a subsequent
chapter, where the consideration of these theoretical questions
more naturally belongs.


CHAPTER IX


The Ocean and Its Work


Destructive Work of the Waves. The ocean is by far the
most important agent of geological work, and “rocks of marine
origin form the larger part of the present land surfaces.”
(W. B. Scott.) The work now being done by the ocean may be
considered under the two
general heads: the de-
structive work, performed
chiefly by the waves of the
shore; and the construc-
tive work, or the laying
down of deposits in the
ocean, which takes place
mostly far from the shore.

The ocean waters ac-
complish their destructive
work principally by means
of the waves which are
propelled by the winds
x i blowing over their sur-
Fic. 99. Wave erosion in nearly horizontal strata, face, and by the tidal cur-
Duncansbay Head, Orkney Islands, Scotland. (From rents which are generated
oat Par ecrane Aa -aroak A by the attractive force of

the moon and sun. The
ocean currents, though very important in modifying the climates
of various localities, are usually so shallow in their extent, they
are so far from shore, and flow generally on the surface of such
deep water, that they have little or no mechanical effect upon
the materials at the bottom. Possibly the Gulf Stream may
keep its narrow channel cleaned out as it passes through the
Florida Straits, but this is a very unusual thing for an ocean
current to do.

As the result of friction and of unequal pressures on the
surface of the water by the wind, the upper waters of the
ocean are readily put in motion in a series of oscillations up
and down. Normally this action of the waves is merely an
up-and-down motion or oscillation, and does not carry the
surface water forward, though the friction of the wind does `
propel the mere surface layers to a slight extent. However,


(165)


166 THE NEW GEOLOGY


when a wave nears the beach and strikes shallow water, it
changes its character; for as the rising and falling masses of
water encounter the bottom, part of their mass is forced by
the hydrostatic pressure of the wave to rush forward as a
breaker, the top of the wave also occasionally curling over and
adding to the momentum
of the forward-rushing
mass, which thus be-
comes a powerful force
in the way of geological
work. These breakers
are a constant factor,
working away day and
night, “without haste,
without rest,” along all
the coasts of the world.
Under the propulsion of
violent winds, these
wind-waves may have all
the force of a thousand
battering-rams, accom-
plishing results that are
almost incredible.


°
ae
O


°? °
v


>


°
°


Soo Ye


* co %


2


` Q


q
06
b


b?
ro


Some lighthouses in ex-
posed situations are kept al-
most continuously covered
with sprays, even from


FiG. 99a. Map of a part of the west coast of Norway, ground swells when there is


which is a characteristic “weather coast.” Here the no wind, these sprays being
currents and winds are prevailingly on-shore, with the =
result that the sedimentary materials have been almost thrown perhaps to the height


entirely carried away, leaving bare the old, hard erys- of 100 feet, which would rep-
talline, or Archzean rocks. Such a coast has often : n
been termed a “submerged” coast ; but there is no real resent a pressure causing it


evidence of its gradual submergence. of nearly 3 tons to the square

foot. Since a cubic foot of

water weighs about 64 pounds, the mere hydrostatic pressure of a wave

20 feet high would be 1,280 pounds, or over half a ton, to the square

foot; the rest of its force coming from its momentum. According to ob-

servations made on the coast of Scotland, the average wave pressure there

for the summer months was 611 pounds to the square foot, while for the

six winter months the average was 2,086 pounds. Even these figures are

greatly exceeded in violent storms, when the force of the breakers is often
many tons to the square foot.


Stavanger Jo)


Dana records some remarkable driftings of beach materials
along the Atlantic coast. “A vessel, the Sylph, was wrecked
in 1814-1815 on the south coast of Long Island, and the ma-


THE OCEAN AND ITS WORK 167


terials from the wreck drifted westward beyond Fire Island;
and 7 years afterward her rudder [a heavy thing that could
not float] was found 20 miles west of where she was lost. In
another case, coal from the cargo of a vessel wrecked ‘on the
south side of Nantucket was carried eastward and then north-
ward, and the keeper of
the lighthouse of the >
north cape, called Grand
Point, supplied himself
from it with fuel for the
winter; and brick from
another vessel pursued
the same course. Again,
an anchor with 10 fath-
oms of chain attached,
from a brig of 200 tons
wrecked on Cape Cod
near Truro, was drifted
a mile and a half to the
north in three weeks... .
Such transportation is
beyond the power of any
currents; it is the work
of the dashing, lifting,
and propelling waves.”
The power of the
waves to lift and trans-
bare socks Of Cer ` —— a =
Es u pu sea es Moe t
trated by what happened barrier beaches and inclosed sounds. Here the prevail-
Ser s a i oe ee uui ace ot shore, tennieing in the
harbor of Wick, on the “emerging coast,” but a sheltered coast, a “lee coast.”
northeast coast of Scot-
land. “This breakwater consisted, above the foundation, of
three large blocks, weighing 80 to 100 tons each, across which
a huge concrete monolith, weighing over 800 tons, was cast in
place and firmly anchored to the blocks by iron chains. The
total mass weighed 1,350 tons; and yet during the great storm
of December, 1872, it was lifted by the waves and hurled into
the inner harbor, a distance of 10 to 15 meters, the monolith
and three foundation stones remaining anchored together and
being moved as a single mass.” (Grabau, “Textbook of Ge-
ology,” Part 1, p. 428.)


168 THE NEW GEOLOGY


There seems to be some uncertainty as to the depth at which the waves
may affect the material lying on the bottom. The size of the waves has much
to do with this depth, and from this it follows that the depth of this wave
influence is much greater in the open ocean and in large seas like the
Mediterranean than in smaller seas or inclosed lakes. “Probably 600 feet
represents the limit at Which fine sand is disturbed off the Atlantic coast,
but at from 60 to 100 feet sand, gravel, and even pebbles are moved.”
(Pirsson, “Textbook of Geology,” p. 97.)


Fic. 100. The island of Helgoland, North Sea. In the year 800 A. D.,
this island had an area of 120 square miles. At present, it is only one
third of a square mile in area.


Their Action on Weather Coasts. The results accomplished
by the waves on the coast will depend largely upon the character
of the coast itself. If the coast is high and rocky, and com-
posed of hard crystalline rocks with few and _ inconspicuous
joints, the results of wave erosion will be insignificant compared
with their work on a coast where the shore is composed of
nearly horizontal stratified beds that are only slightly con-
solidated. In the latter instance, the sea often keeps eating
steadily into the mainland with a most alarming persistence
and regularity, and towns that once were many miles from the
shore have been abandoned and finally engulfed by the in-
satiable waters (Fig. 99). The sea accomplishes such a result
by picking up the materials of the cliffs which it has unmn-
dermined, and hurling these materials as projectiles against the
base of the cliffs which still remain. In storms, huge masses


THE OCEAN AND ITS WORK 169


weighing many tons may thus be flung against the base of the
cliffs, still further undermining them; and when the tops of
these tumble down, they are in turn converted into the weapons of
the storm and thrown against the parts of the shore which are
still standing.

On the coast of Yorkshire, in England, the sea is advancing
at the steady rate of about 7 feet a year. The island of
Helgoland (Fig. 100), off the mouth of the Elbe, in the North
Sea, is at present only about a mile long and a third of a mile.
wide; but in 800 A. D., it had an area of 120 square miles, be-
ing reduced in 1300 to 45 square miles, and in 1649 to 4 square
miles. It would doubtless have entirely disappedred long ere
this, if its shores had not been artificially protected by elaborate
stone structures. Most of the shores surrounding the North
Sea seem to be in process of destruction by the encroaching
waters.

On sandy coasts, the waters often work with much less ef-
fectiveness, sometimes even accumulating materials instead of
carrying them away. In cases where the sea is advancing, the
surf can cut back the shore only at a constantly decreasing rate;
because as the waves cut away at the shore, they leave the


Fic. 101. Diagrammatic view of the island of Helgoland (direction S. W.

by N. E.), showing the wide erosion platform on the S. W. side, where

the dip is toward the island. The rock is Bunter sandstein (Triassic).
(After Walther.)


materials thus made in the form of a shelf covered with shallow
water, and such shallow water greatly diminishes the force of
the waves by friction, so that the waves work with constantly
diminishing force. “Just how far such a coast may be cut
back is not definitely known, but it probably does not exceed
a few miles at most.” (Scott.) The only way in which the
ocean could be capable of planing down a continent to the sea
level, would be by the land’s conveniently subsiding as fast as
the waves were inconvenienced by the waste products of their
erosive work. As to whether or not the coasts in any localities
are now undergoing progressive subsidence, we shall see later.
But if such a subsidence should occur at about the same rate as


170 THE NEW GEOLOGY


the sea was advancing, it is evident that the entire surface of
the land thus affected would progressively go through all the
experiences of a beach, with no materials that had not thus gone
through the great mill of the grinding and pulverizing waves.

On the other hand, coasts which are composed of hard crys-
talline rocks with little jointing, seem to be almost proof against
the most violent attacks of the ocean. The extreme eastern
coast of the United States, with that of New Brunswick and


Fig. 102. Sea cliff on the south shore of Helgoland, showing how the stratified

rocks have been worn away by the ceaselessly acting waves. The rocks are Per-

mian. They appear to be horizontal, from this point of view, but in reality they
dip slightly to the north. _ (After Walther, Haase, and Grabau.)


Nova Scotia around the Bay of Fundy, would seem to be about
as violently assaulted by both wind and tidal currents as any
part of the world; yet the rocks along the shore in most parts
of this area are not perceptibly being worn away at all.
Usually the waters near the shore are clear and free from rock
fragments, and the complete harmlessness of the waves is often
seen by the fact that the rocks are covered with seaweeds down
below the level of low tide, which could not be the case if these
rocks were undergoing erosion. Yet the tide rushes along these
shores four times each day, often at the rate of ten miles an
hour, or the rate of a rapidly flowing river.


The Tides. Twice each day, a bodily movement of the
whole mass of the ocean takes place, due to the attraction of
the moon and the sun. As this movement is dependent upon


THE OCEAN AND ITS WORK 171


the earth’s eastward rotation, it moves westward at the same
rate as the earth’s rotation, or 1,000 miles an hour at the equa-
tor. The height of the actual movement in mid-ocean is quite
insignificant, being calculated at less than an inch. (Goi Dar
win.) But shelving shores and bays increase greatly the magni-
tude of the movement, and proportionately its efficiency as a
geological agent; for under these circumstances, it becomes a
translation wave, with almost incredible power as a transport-


Fic. 103. A curving beach. Conception Bay, Newfoundland. If a coast were to subside
gradually for a long period of time, every part of it would have to pass through the
stage of a beach line before it became an ocean bottom. (Walcott, U. 8. G. S.)


ing and denuding agent, its transporting ability increasing as
the sixth power of its velocity, just as in the case of running
water, a subject which has already been discussed.


However, it should be noted here that while ordinary waves due to the
action of the winds are extremely superficial in their action, being limited to
a few feet in depth of the surface water, the tidal wave theoretically extends
to the very lowest depths, and is a bodily movement of the ocean to its very
bottom. Yet, in the open ocean, and, indeed, on all but shelving coasts and
in peculiarly shaped channels, it has little or no eroding effects. That it has
little or no effects on the bottom of the ocean is proved by the fact that the
softest oozes lie on the bottom of the ocean absolutely unaffected by it.

The reason for this latter fact seems to be that in the open ocean, the
tidal action is merely an up-and-down movement, and this of only very slight
extent; but on soundings, and especially where converging coasts tend to
bring a wide stretch of waters to a focus, the tidal wave, as already re-
marked, becomes a translation wave, which is a bodily movement forward of
the water. The outflowing current, or the ebb, from bays and estuaries has
some noticeable effect in scouring out confined channels, producing some of


172 THE NEW GEOLOGY


the so-called “drowned” estuaries; but in general, it is the incoming tidal
wave, and not the current, which does the work accomplished by tidal waters.

Translation Waves. Scott Russell was the first to analyze
the normal action of rapidly flowing water, and the first to dis-
criminate between the mere undulatory movement of ordinary
waves and the bodily movement of a wave forward from one
position to another. The latter he called a primary wave of
translation. It differs entirely from other waves in its origin,
its behavior, and the laws governing its action. “By its transit
the particles of the fluid are actually raised from their places,
transferred forwards in the direction of the motion of the wave,
and permanently deposited at rest in a new position at a con-
siderable distance from their original position. There is no
retrogression, no oscillation; the motion is all in the same di-
rection, and the extent of the transference is equal throughout
the whole length.” (Howorth.)

This principle of a movement of the water forward in the
form of translation waves is a very important one; for very
probably much of the ancient geological work, as recorded in
the fossiliferous strata of the long ago, was accomplished in
some such manner.

Ocean Currents. The surface of the ocean is in constant
though mostly slow motion. In the tropics, its general move-
ment, called drifts or currents, is westward, probably due in
large measure to the friction of the trade winds. At least the
ocean currents follow the trade winds as to direction, as a
general thing. When a current reaches the edge of a continent
at the west side of an ocean, it is deflected poleward,— north-
ward in the Northern Hemisphere, and southward in the South-
ern. This is in accord with Ferrel’s law, which we have already
studied in connection with the winds. When a poleward current
reaches a latitude of about 35° or 40°, the flow diverges more
and more from the continent, and circles around to the eastern
border of the ocean, unless some land happens to intervene and
deflect it from its course. In such a case, it may keep to the
northward, like the Gulf Stream, which continues on past Great
Britain and even past Iceland into the polar seas, with profound
climatic effects.

Currents are always made in the waters of the ocean, and
even in large lakes, by any long-continued winds in one direc-
tion. The trade winds of the tropics thus become the primary
propelling power of the ocean currents. The rotation of the
earth eastward is responsible for the direction which they
take on leaving the equatorial regions; because when any body is


THE OCEAN AND ITS WORK 173


moving from the equator toward the pole, its rate of eastward
rotation is constantly decreasing. “Flowing waters in the North-
ern Hemisphere, whether of rivers or of the ocean, and what-
ever their source, are thrown toward the right side as they
advance, and in the Southern Hemisphere toward the left side.”
(Dana.) This is a formal statement of Ferreľs law.

In illustration of this law, we have the Labrador or polar
Atlantic current lagging behind the rotation of the part of
the earth to which it is flowing, thus keeping to the right, or the


Fic. 104. Diagram of the ocean currents.


west. When it meets the Gulf Stream, it seems to go beneath
the latter, or to lose itself in some way not well understood. At
any rate, the Gulf Stream has already acquired more eastward
rotary motion than the part of the earth toward which it is
flowing, and accordingly keeps to the right, or the east; and
because its waters are warm, they stay on the surface. The
result is that the British Isles feel the influence of the warm
waters which bathe their coasts, and have a mean annual tem-
perature equal to lands many degrees farther south.

And if one tropical current or drift flowing into the arctic
regions can thus profoundly moderate the climate of much of
Northwestern Europe, what might we not expect if several other
similar currents were also permitted to flow unobstructedly into


12


174 THE NEW GEOLOGY


the northern seas? When we know that a mild and springlike
climate once prevailed over all the arctic regions, it is hard to
refrain from imagining the lands and waters arranged in long,
somewhat narrow strips, running northeast and southwest (in
the Northern Hemisphere), in such a way as to steer the warm
currents into the polar regions. It would seem that such an
arrangement might so modify the polar climate as to abolish
winter around the pole, and make it a region of perpetual
spring. All this is only a theory; but some such arrangement
there must have been, probably something which also pro-
foundly affected the atmospheric currents; for it is certain that
in former times, a climate of perpetual spring prevailed over
the entire globe.

As already remarked, the ocean currents are quite super-
ficial in their action, affecting the waters only a few hundred
feet down. When a current is confined, as the Gulf Stream is
confined between Florida and the islands of the West Indies,
the current descends to the depth of nearly 2,000 feet. But in
general, and in the open ocean, its depth is but slight, not °
affecting the life on even the banks which lie in its course. In
the Florida Straits, the current attains a maximum rate of 5.25
miles an hour; but off the coast of Newfoundland, it is only
from one to two miles an hour. The Gulf Stream is the strong-
est and most important of all the ocean currents.


The Continental Shelf. It should be remembered that the
actual shore line is not what is regarded as the true margin
of the ocean. This margin is always regarded by geologists as
really beginning at the 100-fathom line, as it is called, or the
edge of the continental shelf. East of New York the continental
shelf extends out about 100 miles with a grade of only 6 feet
to the mile, a grade so slight that if the sea were to retire and
the bottom were to be laid bare, it would take an experienced
eye to detect any slope in the land at all. When the depth of
100 fathoms, or 600 feet, is reached, the bottom begins to drop
away very rapidly to the deep oceanic abyss; and as we have
already seen, the deepest portions of the oceans exist as rather -
wide strips along the margins of the continents.


It is often said that the oceans have encroached upon the lands to the
extent of the width of this margin of shallow water over the continental
shelf, as if the oceans had overflowed the lands to this extent. But it would
be just as reasonable, and would be much more scientific — because furnish-
ing a probable explanation of this phenomenon — to regard this continental
shelf as composed of materials washed by the sea down from the surface of
the lands, the 100-fathom line representing the distance to which these land
materials are usually washed by the waters. Thus the edge of the con-


THE OCEAN AND ITS WORK ' 175


tinental shelf might be considered as the edge of the dump; and, indeed, this
seems to be about the best way of looking at the matter. Of course, the
edge of this great continental dump is not always exactly 600 feet below the
water line. In the Gulf of Guinea, it begins at a depth of only 40 fathoms,
or 240 feet; while off the coast of Ireland, it begins only at a depth of about
200 fathoms. Again, off the Atlantic border of the Southern States, there
seems to be no well-marked boundary line between the shallow water and
the deep abyss. But in general, such a margin of shallow water, sometimes
narrow and sometimes much wider, surrounds all the lands; and the outer
edge of this margin, at an average depth of about 600 feet, may be regarded
as the true limits of the continents and the beginning of the ocean proper.


Deposits. A considerable variety of deposits is found at
the bottom of the ocean; and it will be convenient to arrange a
classification of these deposits, including also those which are
found on the continental shelf. This classification is based on
the work of the Challenger expedition (1872-1876), which
marked the beginning of our real knowledge of the conditions
at the bottom of the ocean. Before this time, statements about
the ocean depths had been mere opinions, based on guesswork.


MARINE DEPOSITS


Í posits, between high | Muds, ete.
1. Littoral De- and low tides


Shoreline De- [ Was: Gravels, )
posits, extending


out to the 100- 3  Shallow-water De- ) Sands, Gravels,
fathom line | posits, between low | Muds, Calcareous :
Raar and the 100- Bedi. ote __ I. Terrigenous
fathom line š P Deposits, derived
from the land, ex-
2 Slope Deposits, (Coral atu sa oe a
laid down on the Voleanie Mud
outer slope of the J Green Mud and Sand
continental shelf, Blue Mud
beyond the 100- Red Mud
fathom line


Caleareous Deposits J


II. Pelagic De-

L posits, formed only
in deep water far
from land


f aspotntferal Ooze )

3. Abysmal De- J Pteropod Ooze

posits, laid down on Diatom Ooze

the true ocean floor Radiolarian Ooze
p Geeanie Red Clay


The term littoral is sometimes restricted to characterize the
shore line proper, between high and low tide; but here it seems
best to extend it so as to include all the area covered by the
water out to the edge of the continental shelf. But by sub-
division of the littoral deposits, we have the shore-line deposits,
formed between high and low water, and extending, in heavy
storms, even above ordinary high water; and the shallow-water
deposits, formed over the surface of the continental shelf out
to the margin, or to the 100-fathom line.


176 THE NEW GEOLOGY


The shore-line deposits thus constitute a very narrow ring
around all the lands, estimated at only about 62,000 square
miles for the whole world. The width of this ring at any par-
ticular place will depend on the slope of the bottom, and the
amount of tidal rise and fall. On steep rocky shores, shore-
line deposits may be wholly absent; while on wide mud flats
at the heads of bays or near the margins of deltas, they may be
of quite wide extent. Sand or gravel predominates on most
beaches, and here distinct signs of stratification are not com-
mon; but on mud flats or marshes, where the surface is
alternately exposed to sun and wind, and again covered by the
rising tide, minutely laminated bedding is the rule, the beds
being often characterized by ripple marks, rain prints, tracks
of animals, and sun cracks, the latter often developing in the
course of a few hours, or between tides, in hot, dry climates,
like that of the Red Sea coast. Ripple marks, also, are not
confined to the shore line, but have been observed in the open
Atlantic and off the coast of Florida at a depth of over 600
feet. But the finding of any such marks on the surfaces of the
ancient rocks is good evidence that the rock was formed in no
very great depth of water. Unless we imagine the lands to be
sinking, the shore-line deposits can never become thick or of
much geological importance.

Shallow-water deposits begin at the margin of low tide and
extend out to the edge of the continental shelf. The area here
covered is about 10,000,000 square miles for the entire globe,
or about 7 per cent of the ocean bottom; and those parts of the
ocean covering this area are sometimes known as the epicon-
tinental or epiric seas (Greek, epi, upon or above). Accord-.
ingly, the deposits here formed are of very great geological
importance, especially since it is now understood that in the
abysses of the ocean, no true stratified deposits are now be-
ing made.

On parts of the coast where no large rivers enter the sea for
long distances, the materials on the shelf are all derived from
the wear of the shore, and the assortment of these materials -
into coarse and fine deposits is carried on more extensively
than in places where large rivers bring down their loads of
silt. This sorting of materials is so complete in some localities
that a belt of gravel may extend out to a distance of 10 miles
from the shore, with another belt of sand beyond this, and mud
still farther out, each of these belts extending along the shore
for perhaps a hundred miles or more. Of course, there is no
sharp line of demarcation between these belts; they grade into


THE OCEAN AND ITS WORK ive


one another imperceptibly. But beds of sand have been ob-
served to extend out 100 or 150 miles from shore in some places,
and for many hundreds of miles along the line parallel to the
shore. The material of such a sandy bottom is nearly pure
quartz sand ; for these particles of quartz are the most enduring
of all the substances derived from the disintegration of the
rocks of the lands.

As the waves have little disturbing effect upon the bottom
below a depth of 100 feet, it is chiefly along the more shallow
parts of the epicontinental seas that effective transportation of
materials takes place. Where shore currents are, strong, the
structure known as cross-bedding, or current bedding, is oc-
.casionally made. This structure is produced by the water push-
ing large quantities of sand or gravel forward over the top of a
bank and dropping them down on the sheltered side in steeply
inclined layers. The layers of a cross-bedded deposit are at
a considerable angle, and the strata thus characterized may
be found occurring between two horizontal bedding planes.
Cross-bedding is more frequently observed in the older rocks
which are composed of coarse sand or gravel. It is not con-
fined to the littoral deposits of the ocean, but may occur in lakes
and rivers, and, in fact, is far more frequently found in the de-
posits made by swiftly moving currents in streams and rivers.
The s«flow-and-plunge style of bedding is an extreme type of
cross-bedded structure, where the supply of sand or gravel is
abundant and the current is very strong. In such an instance,
the layers are wave-shaped, a yard or more long and six inches
or a foot thick, each of these wavelike masses having been “pro-
duced by one fling of the waters.” (Dana.) The size of these
masses of sand or gravel is often much greater than the figures
given above; and in one instance observed in the stratified
Pleistocene deposits near New Haven, Connecticut, the thick-
ness is six to eight feet. Such structures are never formed
along any of our modern coasts, as the supply of material would
- not be sufficient to produce them; but they might be produced
by swiftly rushing rivers in a flood, if enough loose materials
were at hand.

In holes or depressions on the continental shelf, mud and
clay will accumulate; for here the waters are less disturbed
and therefore can drop finer materials. Such mudholes are
found along the New- Jersey coast near the entrance to New
York harbor. Such mud deposits will of course wedge out
laterally or dovetail into the sandy deposits around them.


178 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Hypotheses. It is obvious that no great thickness of shallow-
water or littoral deposits can take place unless we suppose the
sea bottom to be sinking; for without such a subsidence of the
land, the shallow waters on the continental shelf would soon
be filled up, and thus the coast line would be built farther out
into the ocean. But as the vast majority of the ancient deposits
seem to have been formed by some disturbance or exchange of
the sea and land, either by the land’s subsiding or by the sea’s
rising and transgressing over the land, it will be of interest to
consider just what would take place under such circumstances.

“Tf the subsidence be very slow, deposition may shoal the water and
thus extend the coarse materials seaward; if it be rapid, deepening the
water, fine sediment will be thrown down upon coarse; while if the rate of
deposition and subsidence be nearly equal, the coarser material will form
long, narrow bands, running parallel with the coast. Thus in the same
vertical line may be accumulated many different kinds of sediment, corre-
sponding to the different depths of water at the same spot. When traced
laterally, beds of any given kind of material will eventually give way to
those of another kind, either by gradual transition, or by thinning to an edge
and dovetailing with the thin edges of the other beds.”— Scott.


However, the attempt to read the ancient deposits in the
light of such facts has ‘not usually been very successful, since
it is not easy to distinguish sands laid down by the sea from
those laid down by lakes or large rivers, and since, in many
respects, the deposits formed long ago seem to have taken place
under conditions quite different from any with which we are
acquainted in modern times. Especially is it difficult to in-
terpret the manner in which any given ancient deposit was
formed, unless we have some embedded forms of life or fossils
to help us in our interpretation.

Organic Deposits on the Continental Shelf. Organic de-
posits are not very common on the continental shelf, though
occasionally they are developed on a somewhat extensive scale.
It will be proper to consider the characteristics of these organi-
cally formed deposits in some detail.

All animal life, whether on the land or in the sea, is, in the
last analysis, dependent upon plants of some sort, the plants be-
ing the only ones that can appropriate the raw inorganic ma-
terials of the lands or the waters. Accordingly, the minute
forms of floating vegetation, microscopic in size, furnish one of
the chief supplies of food. Upon these microscopic plants
(algee) great numbers of small vegetable-feeding animals exist,
such as worms, herbivorous gastropods, and other kinds of
shellfish, many more living upon the larger kinds of algee which
also abound in many parts of the waters. Upon these small


THE OCEAN AND ITS WORK 179


animals, other carnivorous creatures subsist; so that these shal-
low waters are the home of a great variety of animal life, in-
cluding the most of ‘the commercial food-fishes.

The warm waters of the tropics contain a great variety of
life; but, contrary to the general impression, it is in the cooler
waters of the temperate and even of the arctic regions that the
greatest amount of animal and plant life is found. One reason
for this is that the warm waters can not hold nearly so much
dissolved oxygen in solution as can the cooler waters, and
oxygen is essential for both plant and animal life in the water
as well as on the land. Another reason seems to be that certain
bacteria swarm in the warm waters, but are absent or scarce in
the cooler seas; and these bacteria interfere with other forms
of life in two ways,— first by using up most of the nitrogen
compounds which are necessary for the existence of other forms
of life, and secondly by liberating free nitrogen from these
compounds on which they subsist, this liberated nitrogen in-
terfering with the solution of a sufficient. amount of oxygen to
provide for any profuse life in other forms. But in the cooler
waters, these denitrifying bacteria are absent, more oxygen can
be held in solution by the waters, and hence “we find their
shores and bottoms thickly populated with an abundance of
organisms, both animal and vegetable.” (Pirsson.)

Shellfish, or mollusks, of various kinds supply a large amount
of the calcareous materials for the formation of shallow-water
limestones. These animals secrete CaCO, directly from the
sea water, and their shells often accumulate in large banks; and
when such banks lie below the limit of violent wave agitation,
these shells may be unbroken, and may lie embedded in much
finer material, which may be composed of other substances be-
sides calcium carbonate. More often, however, the shells are
broken up into fine fragments by the waves, thus forming shell-
sand or even mud; and in this state, chemical action soon con-
verts the mass into a solid limestone. Crustaceans and fishes
which feed upon these mollusks materially assist in breaking
up the shells and forming the calcareous sand and mud in which
many unbroken shells may become embedded.

The Echinodermata are a group of marine animals which
includes the starfishes, sea urchins, crinoids (sea lilies), and
sand dollars. Their skeletons are composed largely of calcium
carbonate, and are thus capable of forming considerable beds of
limestone. “At the present day, however, they seldom build
up any extensive masses unassisted, but in former ages of the
world’s history they did so on a great scale.” (Scott.) The


180 THE NEW GEOLOGY


most important (geologically) of this group are the crinoids,
which have been considered rather rare in our modern seas, and
which, when they do occur, are found chiefly in the deeper
waters. But very extensive limestones of the ancient rocks are
composed almost entirely of their broken stems and calyxes.

But by far the most important limestone makers of our
modern seas are the corals. They comprise a great variety of
forms, sizes, and habits of growth, though it is only the social
or colonial types, or reef-building corals, that are conspicuous as
rock makers. The solitary corals, which are found in our mod-
ern oceans down to very deep waters, are not of geological
importance to-day, though their fossils are often found in the
older geological deposits which compose our present lands. The
reef builders are confined to clear, warm water which never
gets colder than 68° F., and which has the full amount of
salinity. They do not flourish below a depth of 150 feet, and
most of them are confined to depths of less than 120 feet. Thus
they are never found near the mouths of large rivers, for such
rivers bring down fresh water more or less laden with sediment.
They seem to thrive best in the face of the steady ocean
currents; for such waters not only bring them plenty of food
(and as the creatures are themselves stationary, they have to
depend upon what the waters bring them), but also prevent
the accumulation of calcareous silt and débris which would
otherwise smother the polyps.

“Saville-Kent, indeed, insists that reef building is influenced by tem-
perature much more than by the species of corals, for he finds that the same
species which build the reefs in tropical waters are not reef-building in extra-
tropical regions. He further holds that it is only in the shallower water
where precipitation of lime is caused by evaporation that coral conglomerates
and limestones occur. Corals as such are, however, by no means restricted
to the tropics. Astrangea dama grows on the southern shore of Massachu-
setts at Woods Hole, and Lophohelia prolifera and Dendrophyllia ramea
form dense beds at a depth of from 100 to 200 fathoms [600 to 1,200 feet]


off the coasts of Norway, Scotland, and Portugal.”— Grabau, “Principles of
Stratigraphy,” pp. 391, 392; “The Great Barrier Reef of Australia,” p. 98.


Many varieties of other animals hang around the coral reefs,
feeding upon the coral polyps, and breaking up the sharp points
of their skeletons or boring into the coral mass. Certain
calcium-secreting seaweeds, called nullipores, contribute very
materially to the slowly accumulating submarine mountain
which in many instances seems to rise directly out of the pro-
found depths of the deeper ocean, though the living corals them-
selves are confined to the extremely shallow levels of the sur-
face waters.


THE OCEAN AND ITS WORK 181


Some of the problems connected with the formation of coral
reefs and coral islands will be more properly considered in the
next chapter.

The Muds. Beyond the 100-fathom line, on the outer slope
of the continental shelf, are the so-called muds, of various colors
and varying composition, these muds being a mixture of min-
erals derived from the lands, in a state of very fine mechanical
division, but differing from true clay in that they are not chemi-
cally decomposed.

1. Blue Mud. Very minutely divided grains of quartz, with
some clay, and from 7 to 25 per cent of calcium carbonate,
mostly comprise this deposit; but minute quantities of other
minerals derived from the land are also present. The remains
of diatoms, radiolarians, and the spicules of sponges contribute
organically formed particles of silica; while the shells of
Foraminifera which live in the surface waters fall upon the con-
tinental slope and help to furnish the calcareous materials found
in this bluemud. The blue color of this mud is due to the presence
of the organic matter which prevents the oxidation of the sulphide
of iron which it contains. In places, this blue color is replaced by
a greenish tint, caused by minute grains of glauconite, a silicate of
magnesia, iron, and potash. More or less glauconite is almost
always present in these blue-mud deposits, sometimes predomi-
nating and forming a green mud.

These blue muds are estimated to cover 14,000,000 square
miles of the ocean bottom, the total area of the slope deposits
being only about 18,000,000 square miles. Thus these blue
muds are by far the most extensive deposits in the deep seas
which are derived in any measure from the lands. They often
extend from the edge of the continental shelf far out beyond
the 6,000-foot line.

2. Red Mud. This is found chiefly in the Yellow Sea to the
east of China, and on the Atlantic coast of Brazil. The red
color is due to Fe,O; which is contained in the laterite brought
down by the neighboring rivers. The shells of Foraminifera are
present in this red mud; but those of radiolarians are rare.

9. Greensand. This is not sand in the ordinary sense of
the term, but its granular appearance is due to chemically
formed grains of glauconite, with about an equal amount of
calcium carbonate. These glauconite sands often occur within
the 100-fathom line, and usually in shallower water than the
true muds. They are interesting geologically from the fact that
they resemble in composition certain beds associated with the
ancient chalk deposits, such as those of Southern England and


(`paguəq puw BIIN Ja}Jy) “'Əzoo uiíolurIp JO SEIIB ‘SIUN UIYOLQ IPJUOZILOY + BIÐ pet JO SBIIE ‘HUsNL 1DJUOZLLOY
Í SpNul [B10 PUB əzoo BULIASIGO[S Jo svare ‘Huns 1D944əa $ SJISOdƏP snouəBrrIəl Jo seaie ‘pajzjoq `səzoo QULI JO uonnqLr-stI( “GOT `LJ


SS


sqowW anv


SUZOO OINVAJO
ao


=== —


III
| SESE |
————
S|
SS
wz
=
==
=a
==
[a | 1
===
== hin
=
cain
==
=|
EHH
—
=
ae RE


|
E


2
i


=
—
7


|l
R:
rs


Rou,


as


S SEa


AR
EEA

5 cantik:

S

PRSS BS Sey


=


ven


€
DARN


AW


(182)


THE OCEAN AND ITS WORK . 183


Kansas. These modern glauconite deposits cover about 1,000,-
000 square miles.

Abysmal Deposits. Aside from the scanty voleanic deposits
found alike on the bottom of the deep seas and on all other parts
of the ocean floor, the abysmal accumulations are not directly
derived from the land, but consist of substances secreted by
marine organisms which fall to the bottom and lie there in a
far advanced state of decomposition. These abysmal deposits
occur only far from land, beyond the 6,000-foot line; and they


Fic. 106. Globigerina ooze. > 20. (After Murray and Renard.)


accumulate very slowly, since the bones of animals long extinct
lie exposed on the ocean floor and not yet covered by the organic
accumulations.

1. Foraminiferal Ooze. The Foraminifera are minute ani-
mals allied to the common amceba, which nevertheless secrete
beautifully formed shells of calcium carbonate (CaCO,). They
live in uncounted myriads in the open surface waters of the
ocean, principally in the warmer waters, though they often
follow these warm currents into the northern regions. Murray
and Renard have calculated that throughout the ocean in gen-
eral, every square mile of the surface water, extending to the
depth of 600 feet, or the limit to which light penetrates, con-
tains on an average at least sixteen tons of floating carbonate
of lime, in the form of the shells of minute pelagic organisms.
When these organisms die, their delicate spiral shells drop in
clouds to the bottom of the ocean. Although these shells fall
to the bottom of most of the ocean waters, the silt from the
lands predominates in those regions which are near the shore;
and it is only when the foraminiferal shells are present in suffi-
cient quantity to amount to about 30 per cent or more, that the


184 THE NEW GEOLOGY


bottom ooze is called foraminiferal. Other organisms which
also secrete calcium carbonate add their quota to these deposits ;
and in some places in the medium depths of the ocean, the ooze
may consist of 90 per cent calcium carbonate. In such instances,
it is nearly white, Jike chalk; and, indeed, the ancient chalk
deposits were formed almost entirely of such materials, though,
from the frequent alternation of
as f) these chalk beds (in the older

rocks) with beds containing plants
and other remains from the lands,
these ancient chalk beds are
thought to have been formed in
some way near the shore — a very
inadequate explanation.

As a kind of the Foraminifera
belonging to the genus Globigerina -
constitute the majority of the pres-
Fig. 107. Modern shell-hearing ptero- ent animals forming this ooze;
poda € Styliole vitrea. about two these beds have often been called
= Me pei s the globigerina ooze (Fig. 106).
Sautk) Cafer Murray and Renan.) These deposits cover a very wide

extent of the total oceanic area,
amounting to some 49,520,000 square miles. They are especially
characteristic of the Atlantic bottom, though they are present in
all except the polar oceans. They range in depths from about
2 400 feet down to nearly 18,000 feet, though they become rarer
below 15,000 feet, because the percentage of carbon dioxide in-
creases in these depths, and this carbonic acid in solution dis-
solves the shells.

2. Pteropod Ooze. The pteropods are small mollusks with
thin, delicate shells, and they live in the surface waters of the
warmer oceans. In the shallow waters, their shells are out-
numbered by other materials; but in some parts of the At-
lantic, in depths of less than 12,000 feet, there are so many of
these pteropod shells among the foraminiferal ooze that these
deposits have received the name of the pteropod ooze (Fig.
108). These pteropod shells abound in some of the older rocks
known as the Ordovician limestones, which are found in various
parts of America and Europe, as well as elsewhere.

3. Radiolarian Ooze. The Radiolaria are minute animals
which, instead of secreting calcium carbonate, form tests of
silicon dioxide (SiO,). Their shells are small, delicate, and of
a very beautiful structure; and these animals live both at the
surface and at the bottom of the ocean. But all of the radio-


a


THE OCEAN AND ITS WORK 185


larian oozes are deep-sea formations, and are found to-day at
depths between 10,000 and 20,000 feet.

However, it is a very interesting fact in this connection that
the radiolarian deposits found in the older rocks, often called
radiolarite, quite common in the Jurassic rocks of the Alps, are
very closely associated with limestone breccias or gray muds,
in such a way as to show that fairly strong currents must have
been instrumental in producing them. Certainly it would take
a very profound disturbance of the ocean, reaching to its very
bottom waters, to produce any such deposit in our modern
world. It is probable that the cherty limestones of the Onon-


Fic. 108. Pteropod ooze, magnified 10 times. (After Murray
and Renard.)


daga beds of Western New York, as well as the so-called Cor-
niferous limestones of these same parts, were also formed by
radiolarian deposits which became intimately mixed with de-
posits of calcium carbonate and were subsequently hardened
into limestone.

The shells of radiolarians occur in most of the modern
marine deposits; but only when they comprise 20 per cent or more
of a deposit is it called a radiolarian ooze. Such conditions occur
only in the more profound depths of the Pacific and Indian oceans,
between 2,300 and 5,000 fathoms below the surface. The ooze
covers about 2,290,000 square miles.

4. Diatom Ooze. The frustules of diatoms, which are micro-
scopic plants secreting silica, occur in both fresh waters and
salt; but it is only in the Antarctic Ocean, and in a small area
in the North Pacific, that the marine diatoms accumulate in
quantities of importance. This ooze is found in depths between
600 and 2,000 fathoms, and it covers an area of over 11,000,000


186 THE NEW GEOLOGY


square miles (Fig. 105). Such a marine diatom ooze resembles
the similar deposit found in fresh water, but may be dis-
tinguished from the latter by having foraminiferal shells and
radiolarian tests mixed with it.

5. Red Clay. AH the deepest parts of the ocean bottom are
covered by a deposit called the red clay. It is composed of the
decayed residue of materials derived from volcanic dust, though
its exact origin is not well understood. It covers some 51,500,-
000 square miles, four fifths of this area being in the P'aditre:


CATEI


iit


eer
oe
aed
>


Fig. 109. Many species of diatoms washed out of Antarctice diatom ooze.
xX 3 (From Kriimmel’s Oceanographie.)


Conclusions. From all this study, it has become evident that
these modern deposits on the bottom of the oceans do not help
us much in explaining how the ancient sandstones, slates, and
limestones were actually formed. Certainly these ancient beds,
with their distinctly stratified layers, often alternating with coal
seams or coarse conglomerates, were not formed at the bottom
of the ocean. It used to be taught that if the bottom of the
ocean could be lifted up and exposed to erosion, we should see
the counterpart of the rocks which now compose our mountains
and hills. True, the fossils found in these ancient beds are
often similar to or identical with marine forms now living at
great depths in the ocean; but the texture of the two kinds of
deposits is entirely different, and we do not know of any modern
processes by which such an alternation of marine and land
forms is now being made.


CHAPTER X
Life: Its Geological Effects


In this chapter, we shall consider those organic accumula-
tions which are forming under modern conditions and which
are of geological importance. These accumulations are pro-
duced by a wide variety of living creatures, plants and animals;
yet one universal condition seems to be essential for them all,
namely, a complete covering of water fresh or salt, to exclude
the agencies of oxidation. A complete covering of Water is not
so essential for the preservation of the calcareous and siliceous
deposits as it is for the carbonaceous ones; but the former are
produced only under water, and so they also partake of the
same conditions which have contributed to preserve the car-
bonaceous accumulations.

Moors. The last-named deposits are found in connection
with the lands, and are produced in localities which are scien-
tifically termed moors; these being, however, classified under
three divisions: marshes, swamps, and bogs. .

1. Marshes. The marsh is a low moor near the sea. It is
covered by a vegetation consisting chiefly of sedges and eelgrasses
of the pond lily family, if the flat is permanently covered by
the water. If the marsh is only partly covered by the water,
the eelgrass will be replaced by other types of marsh grass.
The slow accumulation of the decaying tissues of these plants
contributes to the making of a sort of salt-water peat, which,
however, is meager in amount, and quite completely mixed with
earthy matter; for the only way in which such marshes are now
being buried is by the high tides’ spreading silt over them, or by
very scanty deposits of wind-blown sand. Such salt marshes
are common in various places along the coasts of most of the
continents.

In the tropics, salt-grass marshes are replaced by mangrove
marshes. Mangroves are trees from 5 to 60 feet in height
which can grow in salt or brackish water, and which send out
numerous long aérial roots from the lower parts of the stems,
or even from the branches, like the banyan tree. Even seeds
still attached will send out roots which extend down to the
mud and thus take root. In this way, dense thickets of these
plants spread over marine marshes in the tropics which are
sufficiently shallow and protected from the waves. Like the
eypresses of Florida and other Southern States, the mangroves


(187)


188 THE NEW GEOLOGY


have air roots, which are erect or kneed branches of the real
roots, and which project above the mud, and are provided with
minute openings through which air passes down to the sub-
merged part of the roots, thus providing oxygen for the plants.
It is not well understood how much carbonaceous material may
be now accumulating in these tropical marshes; but at the most,
it is not of any great thickness. f

In all peat beds to which salt water has access, hydrogen
sulphide (H S) is generated in large quantities. Apparently
this is on account of the presence of certain bacteria which act
on the sulphates contained in sea water, these bacteria thriving
in the presence of decaying vegetable matter. By chemical re-
action, this hydrogen sulphide unites with whatever iron com-
pounds are present in available form, and produces iron pyrite.
The latter substance is commonly found in salt-marsh deposits.
This and other sulphides are also present in many of the
ancient coals, proving that sea water had access to these vege-
table masses before they were buried; for hydrogen sulphide
does not occur in fresh-water vegetable deposits.

2. Fresh-Water Swamps. In lakes, water lilies and other
plants will sometimes begin to grow where the water is nearly
25 feet deep; but the most important peat-forming plants do
not grow in lake water that is more than about two feet deep.
The chief ones concerned in producing the peat are the cat-
tails, rushes, sedges, and bulrushes, with Hypnum and Sphag-
num mosses near the surface of the water in some of the swamps
of Continental Europe and some few other parts of the world.
When a swamp has become partly filled up with the accumula-
tions of these materials, alders, cedars, tamaracks, and a few
other hydrophytes may grow in it, the decay of their trunks
and roots adding very materially to the accumulating mass. If
such a swamp is situated near the mouth of a large river, it may
become unusually flooded in some freshet time, and a deep layer
of silt may be spread out over it, thus burying the peat. In
this way, an alternation of strata would be formed. But such
a process could not be often repeated under any modern condi-
tions, unless we suppose that the swamp area is subject to
gradual or periodic subsidence; and we do not know of any such
examples in our modern world.


The Okefenokee Swamp of Southern Georgia contains a peat bed some
10 feet thick; while the Dismal Swamp of Virginia and North Carolina has
a deposit some 15 feet thick. These swamps give no indications of being in
process of further submergence and burial under silt or sand; and their
bottoms rest directly on beds of the older geological formations (Tertiary).


LIFE: ITS GEOLOGICAL EFFECTS 189


3. Bogs. These are moors situated in the upland districts
of Great Britain and Northern Europe, as well as of Canada,
the northern United States, and Northern Asia. Sedges, pond-
weeds, bulrushes, and the peat mosses, especially Sphagnum, are
the common bog plants, with heather in some localities.

In Northern Germany, the upland moors usually consist of
an older, much decayed Sphagnum peat, with another layer of
Sphagnum above it, the two being separated by a dividing layer
of more terrestrial-growing plants, these three layers being sur-
mounted by a more modern layer of heaths, lichens, ete. “Ow-
ing to the fact that the old Roman roads were built upon the
dividing layer of terrestrial peat, it becomes possible’ to measure
the rate of growth of the upper peat layer, which must have
accumulated during the past two thousand years.” -(Grabau.)
- This alternation of different kinds of vegetable material is, how-
ever, not due to anything like a submergence or burial of the
deposit, but rather to the fact that the Sphagnum tends to dry
up the water through capillarity and evaporation, which causes
its own death; and only after other plants and more water have
returned, can the Sphagnum again obtain a foothold, to be again
replaced by the modern growth of heaths and lichens.

Peat. The conversion of fresh vegetable matter into peat
is a process quite similar to the formation of charcoal, only not
so complete. The oxidation which would become complete in the
free air is smothered; but some of the hydrogen is removed as
H,O, some of the carbon as COs, and some of both as CH,, or
marsh gas. What remains is much richer in carbon and leaner
in hydrogen than were the original substances; but the total
amount has been much decreased, and in this semi-decomposed
condition is known as peat. In color, when dried, it varies from
a pale yellow or light brown to a dark brown; and when wet, it
is almost black. It always shows its vegetable composition, in the
fibers running through the mass; but there are no well-preserved


plant remains in it.


The arrest of the decay in these peat swamps and bogs seems to be
due to the fact that the bacteria, which are chiefly concerned in the decaying
processes, generate waste products which, if not removed, tend to stop
further bacterial growth, just as alcoholic fermentation tends to kill the
bacteria which produce it, since these waste products are antiseptic in their
nature. This would also explain why the bones of men and prehistoric ani-
mals have been found in peat bogs in a good state of preservation, though
buried for hundreds or thousands of years.


The arctic plains, or tundras, also have extensive peat de-
posits, which, however, rest upon a substratum of frozen soil


13


Fic. 110. A fossil cyead fern (Dictyopteris sub-brongniartii), from the Coal Measures of
France. (Hardin, U. S. G. S.)


(190)


LIPE: ITS GEOLOGICAL EFFECTS 191


or ice which remains frozen all the year round. In many places,
these tundra deposits contain the remains of prehistoric animals
which do not now live in these regions, showing that these de-
posits have continued from remote times. Along the Yukon,
such beds are seen from 8 to 10 feet thick, “and nearly always
frozen solid.” (Russell.) On the island of Anticosti, in the
Gulf of St. Lawrence, are peat beds from 100 to 1,000 acres in
extent, with a thickness of ten feet or more, which rest “directly
upon the eroded limestone surface of early Paleozoic age.”


Fic. 111. Village on a coral island, San Blas Coast, Panama. (Smithsonian Report, 1909.)


(Grabau.) The lower parts of these beds often contain tests
of sea urchins, with fragments of lobsters, crabs, gastropods,
and other marine animals.


Summary. From this survey of the modern peat-forming
deposits, we do not obtain much help in understanding how the
ancient coal beds were formed. Not only do we have no modern
analogies, in the way of large masses of vegetable matter now
being buried by gravels, sands, or muds; but the exquisite pres-
ervation of many of the ancient remains (Fig. 110), the way
in which the beds of land plants alternate with beds containing
crinoids, corals, and other deep-sea forms, as well as the charac-
ter of the plants themselves in many of the beds, which often
consist of trees and plants which do not grow near swamps or
bogs,— all these facts stow conclusively that we have in these
ancient coal beds a problem of no little difficulty, if we feel


192 THE NEW GEOLOGY


obliged to explain them on the basis of the modern action of
the processes of nature.


Iron Ores. All the rocks and soils contain iron in varying
proportions. In the presence of decaying organic matter, such
as is found in peat bogs and marshes, the insoluble ferric form
of the oxide is converted into ferrous oxide, which is soluble,
and is carried away by the water. Under certain conditions,
however, this dissolved iron may be acted upon by certain bac-
teria, known as iron bacteria, which may reverse this process,
and indirectly may produce extensive beds of limonite, or bog
iron ore, as it is often called; or they may even give rise to
similarly extensive beds of ferrous carbonate (siderite, FeCO3).
Such beds of iron ore extend from Vermont and New York
southward to Alabama, and may have been formed in somewhat
this way by bacterial action and concentration of the insoluble
ores produced thereby, this process having been going on for
the long periods of time since the ancient vegetable beds were
laid down.


Calcium and Magnesium Carbonates. It used to be thought
that the chemical precipitation of lime and magnesia as lime-
stones and dolomites is not now going on. But it is now known
that both limestones and dolomites are being formed as chemi-
cal precipitates to some extent, and as organic deposits pro-
duced by bacteria and alge to a very considerable extent.
Certainly the quantities of limestone which are now being
formed through the action of animal and plant life are very
considerable; and the consideration of how these modern de-
posits are being formed will help us in our study of those de-
posits of these materials which we find in the ancient rocks.
Our modern limestones are chiefly being formed by the coral
reef builders of the ocean; and we must now give consideration
to them.


Coral Reefs. Coral reefs are complex in their formation,
and coral polyps may sometimes play only a minor part in this
work. Nullipores, or calcareous algæ, are almost always con-
tributory; and in some instances, they seem to be even the prin-
cipal agents in the accumulation of the limestone. But mille-
pores also are abundant; while among the fossil coral beds,
sponges and bryozoa are often the most important calcareous
organisms.

According to the time-honored classification, there are three
types of coral reefs, the fringing reef, the barrier reef, and the
atoll. But in the factors influencing their geographical distri-


LIFE: ITS GEOLOGICAL EFFECTS 193


bution, as well as in their growth and internal structure, all
coral reefs are very much alike. And although all the older
coral deposits, as revealed to us in the fossiliferous rocks, are
invariably associated with other deposits from the lands, and
often interstratified with them, the lone atolls of the mid-Pacific
do not in structure or in the factors controlling their existence
and growth differ essen-
tially from those fringing
voleanic and other islands.
And there is no sharp line
of division between these
three classes, but they
grade off into one another
in each direction.


The typical fringing
reef, or shore reef, is lo-
cated along the shore of
some island or larger body
of land, and a distinct
channel exists between it
and the land. The side to-
ward this channel is usually
lower than the outer side,
and does not have so many
living forms upon it; for
here the water is sometimes
freshened by water from
Re dency of ke supposed changeratier long the land, and is always
period of time, from a fringing reef (1) to a par- more laden with sediment,
T T 7 A 208 Dasa, pene discredited. while the tidal currents in-
eee the Mow soy Pacrckpeds” terfere with the growth of

the polyps. But on the
seaward side, which is always oriented so as to face the pre-
vailing winds and currents, the reef is often abrupt or at least
quite steep, though it descends usually into comparatively shal-
low water.

Fringing reefs are found along the coasts of Florida, and
around nearly all the islands of the West Indies. They are
found along both shores of the Red Sea, and along the coasts
of Mozambique and Madagascar, as well as around many of
the islands of the Indian Ocean. In the Pacific, they occur on
the shores of such well-known islands as the New Hebrides, the
Hawaiian, Solomon, Friendly, and Samoan, with many others.


194 THE NEW GEOLOGY


A barrier reef is much like a fringing reef, except that it is
farther from the shore, and accordingly has a deeper channel
between it and the land, with deeper water also on its seaward
side. According to the theory of Murray and A. Agassiz, a
barrier reef is simply a fringing reef that has progressed sea-
ward by the natural growth of the front of the seaward side,
growing outward upon the talus of coral detritus in front, and
by the enlargement of the landward channel through the solu-
tion and the disintegration of the dead rock on that side.
Others (Darwin and Dana) explain the barrier reef by the
theory of the gradual subsidence of the bottom and the simul-
taneous upward growth of the corals on the outer face of the
reef. These two theories are also invoked to explain the atolls;
and there is still much controversy as to which explanation is
correct, or whether either is.


The Great Barrier Reef of Australia extends along the northeast coast,
with some interruptions, for 1,250 miles; and in places, its outward wall
is 90 miles from the coast and drops away into water 1,800 feet deep. It is
“a great submarine wall or terrace, fronting the whole northeast coast of
Australia, resting at each end in shallow water, but rising from very great
depths about the center. Its upper surface forms a plateau, covered by
10 to 30 fathoms of water, but studded all over with steep-sided, blocklike
masses which rise up to low-water level.” (Jukes-Browne.)

The Fiji Islands, the Society Islands, and New Caledonia have barrier
reefs. The one around the latter island is 400 miles long and about 10
miles from the shore.


Atolls are ring-shaped reefs, sometimes broken at one or
more places by channels which lead into the interior lakelike
space of water, which is called the lagoon. The water in the
lagoon is shallow; but on the outside, it is sometimes a mile
deep, always far deeper than the depth in which corals can be-
gin their work. The openings in the wall of the atoll are gen-
erally on the leeward side, and thus the water of the lagoon is
protected. Within the lagoon are numerous kinds of creatures,
including fishes and especially sharks.


Atolls are scattered all across the Pacific and the Indian
Ocean. There are no atolls in the Atlantic, though the Ber-
mudas have fringing reefs, which represent the most northerly
range of the corals of the reef-building kinds. However, it has
been contended that some of the same species which build reefs
in the tropics exist elsewhere but do not build reefs in more
northerly or southerly regions; and from this, it would seem
that reef building is more controlled by temperature and other
conditions than by the mere species of corals. It seems that


LIFE: ITS GEOLOGICAL EFFECTS 195


coral conglomerates and limestones can be consolidated by the
precipitation of the lime only in shallow and warm water where
evaporation is extensive. But true corals are found off the
coasts of Norway and Scotland, and at depths of 1,000 feet,
where they form dense beds. One species grows at Woods
Hole, on the south shore of Massachusetts.


It may be that, if the ocean was warmer down to a much greater depth,
as seems to have been the case, in ancient times, the reef-building corals
could lay the foundation of their atolls and other reefs at much greater
depths than that in which they can work at present. It is of course possible
that many of the atolls may have started from the slightly submerged tops
of voleanoes, or again it is possible that a subsidence of the battom has taken
place. But it seems to the present writer that in a much warmer water
down deep in the ocean, which we know there must have been when the
luxuriant Miocene flora was growing in the arctic regions, these coral
- reefs now found rising from such deep waters may have started on slightly
elevated parts of the bottom, but much below the point at which these corals
now live.


Some years ago borings were made in one of the typical
atolls (Funafuti, in the Ellice Island group), and they showed
that the coral rock extended down more than 1,000 feet. But
more recently borings have been made in another Pacific atoll,
` and also in Bermuda, which show “only a relatively thin cap-
ping of it on the volcanic rock, which forms the main masses
rising from the ocean depths.” (Pirsson.) There have also
been found, in various places in the tropical waters, shallow
water platforms which are about the proper depth for corals to
begin upon, but which have no such corals as yet; hence other
platforms of similar character may have served for the be-
ginning of some of the barrier reefs and atolls. (Vaughan.)
It has also been shown that the water of the lagoons, so far
from dissolving the rock and thus enlarging the lagoons, is
really precipitating calcium carbonate and thus tending to fill
them up. Taken all together, it does not seem that any gradual
subsidence of the ocean bottom is needed to account for the
formation of these coral reefs, or even that any unreasonably
long time is required for their formation.


“The theoretical possibility of the progressive change of a fringing reef
into a barrier and later into an atoll, according to the Darwin-Dana hy-
pothesis, may not be denied; but no instance of such a transformation has yet
been discovered.”— T. W. Vaughan, “Smithsonian Report,” 1917, p. 238.

However, it conveys a wholly wrong impression to speak as if the coral
reef were built up by the industry of the polyps. These furnish some of the
materials, while perhaps an equal amount is supplied by the coral-like sea-
weeds called nullipores; but the actual work of converting the remains of
these and of many other kinds of organisms into compact limestone rock is


196 THE NEW GEOLOGY


performed partly by the waves, in grinding up into lime-sand and lime-mud
these organic remains, and partly by the chemical action of cementing or
“setting” the mass together.


After a storm, the water around a coral reef is milky for
great distances, because of the fine limerock flour held in sus-
pension. Such suspended calcareous material has been observed
at a distance of 8 or 12 miles from the reef. From 1.5 to 2
inches of coral mud was in one instance deposited between two
tides, after a prolonged storm. (Agassiz.) Some of this rock
material is dissolved and afterwards precipitated as CaCO»,
thus cementing the whole into a firm rock, which is so hard that
Darwin found he could break off a piece only with a chisel. In
all the older portions of the reef, all signs of stratification or of
its organic structure are lost, much of the mass even becoming |
crystalline, like the older fossiliferous limestones. Even under `
the microscope, no trace of organic structure can be seen, so
completely has the substance been changed.

In some instances, even in modern reefs, the limestone is con-
verted more or less completely into dolomite, CaMg(COs)>.
Rocks which are not entirely changed into pure dolomite, but
which contain a considerable amount of magnesia, are often
called dolomite or dolomite-limestone. It is now known that
some of the algæ contributing to the formation of the lime-
stone also secrete a considerable amount of magnesium car-
bonate. Vast thicknesses of dolomitic limestone are found in
the Alps and elsewhere; and
in some instances, we find
limestones and dolomites in-
terstratified, which are still
harder to explain. These
are probably due to differ-
ences in the materials de-
posited, the limestone com-
ing from one locality and the
dolomite from another. This
would imply that there were
originally magnesian de-
posits available for such
work of sedimentation.

Chalk. Two quite dif-
Fig. 113. Microscopie view of white chalk, ferent kinds of chalky lime-


showing the Foraminifera, ete. A, chalk


from Sussex, England; B, chalk from Fara-
fra, Libyan desert. Both X 60. a, Textularia stones are found among the
globulosa; b, Rotalia (Discorbina) marginata. older rocks, though both are
C, dried residue of milky chalk water with :

coccoliths. X 700. (After Grabau and Zittel.) sometimes classed under the


LIFE: ITS GEOLOGICAL EFFECTS 197


Fic. 114. Quarry in Annona chalk, Whitecliffs, Arkansas. (Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


head of chalk deposits.


One of these contains a large percentage


of foraminiferal shells, with microscopic calcareous algæ and


other fragments.


Its organic content is quite similar to the


foraminiferal or globigerina ooze now found on the floor of the
Atlantic; though some authorities make a ‘distinction between
the species of the two deposits, and argue that the kinds of life
found in the chalk do not necessarily indicate deep, abysmal


`


deposits. It is not strange that a distinction can be made out


between the species in the ancient as distinguished from the
modern globigerina ooze; but it may be questioned whether, after
all, such specific distinctions mean very much. On the other
hand, it is truly remarkable to find deposits like that of the
chalk, which probably was produced at the bottom of the deep


Fig. 115. A fragment of nummulitic
limestone, from the Pyrenees Moun-
tains. The shells appear in section


and are of natural size.


(After Haas.)


ocean, systematically interbedded
with deposits containing fossils
from the lands, indicating that these
two kinds of organisms, so differ-
ent in their origin, had somehow
become mixed up together.

The other chalklike deposit is
that formed from the shells of num-
mulites, Foraminifera which are not
so minute as those of the chalk, be-
ing nearly an inch in size. These


198 THE NEW GEOLOGY


do not live in the surface waters of the ocean, but live entirely
on the bottom of the deeper waters; but their remains are now
found composing vast masses of mountains stretching from
Central Europe almost to India, the stones of the pyramids and
of the Sphinx in Egypt being composed of such nummulitic
limestone.


Other Limestones. The Bryozoa are regarded as of a some-
what higher grade of organization than the coral polyps, but
they form structures of calcium carbonate which can not always
be readily distinguished from those produced by corals, except
by a trained observer. The living Bryozoa form delicate leaf-
like structures of limestone material, or are found incrusting


Fic. 116. A Devonian ostracoderm, Cephalaspis lyeliii.


rocks, or seaweeds, or other substances on the sea floor. The
ancient Bryozoa, however, seem to have built branching masses
which often in accumulation produce large limestones. Along
the coasts of the Crimea are seen cliffs which contain reeflike
mounds built by these ancient Bryozoa; but oftener their re-
mains are found spread out as wide sheets.

The shells of the Brachiopoda and of the Mollusca contrib-
-uted very largely to the formation of limestones as we find
them in the ancient rocks; though there are only a few localities
where extensive modern accumulations of limestone are being
produced by any of these creatures, these being chiefly formed
by oysters and other bivalves. Some quite extensive beds of
limestone were built up by some ancient kinds of Ammonites,
related to the modern Nautilus. Other related types, which,
however, have straight shells instead of coiled ones, also were
an important source of the limestone material of many rocks
(Orthoceras limestones).


Siliceous Deposits. Chief among the siliceous deposits of
organic origin may be mentioned the radiolarian oozes. These
are typical deep-sea deposits, being found only in the deeper
parts of the ocean, near to or associated with the red clay of the
very deepest parts. The island of Barbados, however, has a


LIPE: ITS GEOLOGICAL EFFECTS 199


colored clay largely composed of radiolarians similar to those
now found in the deep waters of the Pacific. An intensely blood-
red rock composed of a radiolarian mud constitutes certain por-
tions of the Austrian Alps, the organisms being similar to those


Fig. 117. “The Dolomites,” in the Tirol of the Austrian Alps. These rocks are composed largely
of the remains of minute lime-secreting marine plants or alge. (After Ratzel and Grabau.)


found from 2 to 4 miles down in the Pacific, these rocks being
now about as high above the water as they formerly were be-
low it.

Similar deposits of siliceous radiolarians occur in the Lower
Carboniferous beds of the Rhine, as well as in various parts of
Great Britain and elsewhere. They often alternate with lime-
stone breccias or argillaceous marls, indicating a profound dis-
turbance of the ocean bottom. Nowhere on earth to-day do we
find anything like an approach to such a strange combination
of conditions as is thus indicated.

Microscopic plants called diatoms also contribute very ma-
terially to the production of siliceous deposits. The structure
which a diatom forms is called a frustule, and it consists of two


200 THE NEW GEOLOGY


parts which fit together like the two parts of a pill box. In
some fresh-water ponds and lakes, these frustules accumulate
to a considerable depth, forming a chalklike deposit, which,
however, is not composed of calcium carbonate, but of silica,
and which will serve as a polishing powder for metals. When
pure, such a deposit is called tripolite; and when impure, dia-
tomaceous earth.

These siliceous deposits in fresh water are of very limited
extent, and quite unimportant geologically; but diatoms live
in the ocean also, and their deposits are spread out over
an area of some 10,000,000 square miles in the South Pacific
and Antarctic oceans, forming the so-called diatom oozes. An
area of some 40,000 square miles in the North Pacific is also
covered with diatom deposits. They occur at an average depth
of 9,000 feet, or a mile and a half. Radiolarian remains and the
siliceous spicules of sponges are usually found mingled among
them. a

Diatoms are quite frequently found among the ancient rocks,
forming considerable areas in some instances. It has been
thought that the slow accumulation of diatoms on the bottom of
some ancient shallow sea was the chief source of the organic
materials forming the oil and gas found in California and else-
where. This is of course only a supposition; for although dia-
tomaceous rocks are associated with these hydrocarbons, as at
Lompoc (Fig. 118), California, and in other places, yet here we


Fig. 118. Quarries near Lompoc, California. Some of the strata here are f i
m , Cal s ull of fossil
The beds are eomposed of silieeous diatoms, which, falling in great quantities upon the E
of fish, evidently buried them alive.


LIFE: ITS GEOLOGICAL EFFECTS 201


Fic. 119. An exposure of diatomaceous earth, along the main line of the S. P.
Railroad, about 2 miles west of Reno, Nevada. (Gale, U. 8. G. 8.)


find whole square miles of these rocks crammed full of fishes,
and it is more reasonable to suppose that these fishes contrib-
uted the organic materials now forming the oil and gas found
in these rocks. It is quite unreasonable to pass over these fish
remains, which are here in ample quantity and which were cer-
tainly all buried suddenly and buried alive, and speak of the
slow accumulation of diatoms on the bottom of a stagnant sea
where there were neither creatures to eat them nor enough
decay to dissipate their putrescible parts.


202 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Phosphates. The minute pelagic gastropods called the Ptero-
poda, which are sometimes known as sea butterflies, have also
contributed materially to the formation of important rocks.
Their shells are phosphatic; and although the animals them-
selves live in the surface waters of the ocean, their shells have
in the past accumulated on the bottom, and have become buried
as other remains have been, particularly in the Devonian and
other rocks. The Middle Ordovician rocks of Tennessee also
contain great quantities of these pteropod shells; and when the
limestone in which they occur is decomposed into a residual
red clay, these pteropod shells remain behind undecomposed,
forming the chief part of the residue, which thus becomes a
concentrated phosphate of lime, and of great value as a fertilizer.
Certain kinds of brachiopods also secrete phosphatic shells, and
thus have contributed to the production of phosphatic deposits.


Ancient Limestones. Thus we see that there are vast
quantities of rocks which have unquestionably been formed by
the accumulation of organic materials; and these materials are
also of considerable variety. But serious mistakes are liable to
grow out of the assumption that all limestones, or all car-
boniferous beds (such as graphite), have been formed by or-
ganic means. This certainly does not follow; for much of such
materials may have been original or primitive. Inductive ge-
ology is not a cosmogony; and no legitimate natural science will
undertake to tell how the original materials of the world came
into existence.

But the possibility that much of the nonfossiliferous lime-
stone may have been original, or primitive, is constantly ignored
in geological discussions. Like the greedy, land-hungry nations,
which have parceled out among themselves the unoccupied por-
tions of Africa and Asia, each including within its “sphere of
influence” all the unoccupied territory adjacent to its actual hold-
ings, so geologists have long been accustomed to include in their
formation-groups all the rocks in sight which are not plainly
and positively of different fossiliferous character. It thus
comes to pass that large areas and great thicknesses of rocks
which contain no fossils have been pressed into the ranks of
the Silurian, Carboniferous, or Cretaceous, as the case may be,
merely because no other formation has yet included them within
its sphere of influence, and the other popular hypothesis about
the originally igneous condition of the globe forbids the idea of
any stratified rocks remaining outside the ranks. But such
things only breed confusion; and if we wish to arrive, by any


LIFE: ITS GEOLOGICAL EFFECTS 203


system of clear thinking, at a true conception of the past con-
dition of our globe, we must keep the fossiliferous as distinct as
possible from the nonfossiliferous or Archean, even though the
task may be difficult and may involve the possibility of much of
the latter being stratified. Hence, if we refrain from assuming
how our world originated, and refuse to say that a certain
limestone is of fossiliferous origin, until we have positive evi-
dence to this effect, the task of explaining the origin of some
of these rocks is greatly reduced.

There are doubtless limestones which we can point to as
having been formed by growth in situ during long periods of
time, and which have since been elevated into dty land with
little change in position or structure. Such is the case with
many of the nummulitic limestones so widely spread through
Europe and Asia, and such is probably the case also with many
of the Niagara and Onondaga limestones of various parts of
America. For instance, in some parts of Wisconsin, the Ni-
agara limestone is thought to have quite distinctly the features
of an old coral reef. Some large coral masses “stand erect in
the rock, precisely as they grew;” while all around are ‘‘accumu-
lations of coral fragments, becoming finer and finer on reced-
ing from the reef, and thus the rock graduates into ordinary
limestone.” (Dana, “Manual,” p. 541.)

Similar old coral reefs, or other rocks of natural and slow
formation, are found in all quarters of the globe, even in the
arctic regions. But though these rocks may be called Ordovi-
cian, Carboniferous, or Tertiary, as the case may be, we are
not therefore obliged to suppose that any other and older fos-
siliferous rocks lie below their general mass; though, of course,
an alternation of strata, or an interfingering of the limestone
material with sandstone or shale, may be of common occurrence.
Hence, although we may continue to class as Eocene the great
nummulitic mountain peaks of the Alps, the Apennines, the
Carpathians, and the southern Himalayas, we have no reason
to doubt that they often rest on the Archean; and accordingly
they may be just as really “old”? as the Cambrian limestones of
New York or British Columbia. As we shall see in a subse-
quent chapter, the common method of classifying the rocks off
in chronological order because of the fossils which they happen
to contain, has no scientific value.

Stratified Limestones. But there are other beds which very
manifestly were not produced by growth in situ as we find them,
or by slow accumulation on the spot in any modern way. These
beds also are composed of the remains of corals or crinoids, of


204 THE NEW GEOLOGY


mollusks or brachiopods, of nummulites or other Foraminifera,
as the case may be. But they are spread out over much wider
areas than any calcareous deposits now forming around our
modern coral reefs; they are often composed of kinds of animals
which in our modèrn conditions never are disturbed by the
slightest movement of wave or ocean current, because of living
down in the silent depths of the ocean; yet we find them con-
stantly interbedded with deposits so utterly incongruous, so
completely foreign to them, as to prove some totally different
action of the waters from anything which we have observed to
take place within historic times and under scientific observation.

Take for example the following section from the “Lower
Barren Coal Measures” of Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania,
as given by Dana. The total thickness is 654 feet.


Limestone 6’, shale 10’ (underneath 3’ fire clay and Pittsburg


coala te Stacie Sars k ot ue eee Seer eee eee 16’
Coal. bed uma. wists suse siete a a E cone a tne ot aaa aura oot ater tical ss it
Shale 10, lamestone.3', shale 25°) acme os n a s 38’


Goal icra P P Ae, arora Benga dA cilia. 1%’
Shale 35’, Connellsville sandstone 60’ (not persistent), limestone 5’ > :
Coal bed s Sas w s k slay Ci u Qa w E ele W N y < wi ot qh s ae sas n


Barton. coal, bed Paces a wo. s Wiwa a aan e a hte Rea cect caer een eG 1
Shale 100’, crinoidal hkmestone 4’, shale S0 mEn T a 134’
Coal bed + u Secs t aw. Cp aa a eee 2a
Goals bedh resale naa wayma A k Sos sns m n eee 1-2'


Shale 380-50’, with Mahoning sandstone (divided sometimes into
Upper, Middle, and Lower), with thin layers of shale and
limestone, and sometimes a thin coal bed, in all 195%’ in
Ligonier Valley, varying to 75’ and less elsewhere .... 75’-19514’


Disregarding the other limestone beds given in this section,
we may consider briefly the 4-foot crinoidal limestone between
the two thick beds of shale, with coal beds both above and below.
How did it get there? Almost all our modern crinoids live in
the clear depths of the ocean, from 600 feet to over a mile
down. At such depths, there are no land sediments now being
deposited in our modern seas, or as Dana says, “no means of
producing a stratified or bedded structure.” It seems ŝelf-
evident that nothing but a wholly abnormal occurrence, a dis-
turbance of the oceans to their very bottom, is sufficient to
explain these conditions.

Yet, in another view of the matter, these things are not
abnormal; for they are practically universal over the earth.
Similar proofs of abnormal conditions of deposit are found, not


LIFE: ITS GEOLOGICAL EFFECTS 205


only throughout the Carboniferous rocks, but in very many
others. Nearly a thousand species of crinoids have been de-
strangely enough, just because these essentially abnormal con-
ditions are universal, they seem to lose their value as evidence,
in the minds of some people, and are looked upon as quite the
normal thing.

Professor Suess, in speaking of the limestone formations
throughout most of the Alps and Central Europe, says that he
had never seen anything in these localities “which could be
called a true coral reef.” The limestones, he says, “have rather
the appearance of thick beds than of true reefs,” the corals ly-
ing heaped together, with shells, in tuffs or marls, that is, “al-
ways in clastic sediments.” (“Face of the Earth,” Vol. 2, pp.
Sai, aoe.)

The same may be said of practically all the limestones of
other parts of the world, though occasionally there are localities
where the central mass of an old coral reef apparently has re-
mained more or less intact, the fragmental products formed
from its destruction having been spread around it for miles on
every side.

The Interpretation. It would seem that the most satisfac-
tory explanation of these conditions is to be sought in supposing
a disturbance of the oceans to their very depths, perhaps by an
abnormal tidal action, as will be alluded to later. Indeed, this
seems the only way to account for all the conditions as we
find them.

Without expanding further on this subject, we may say
that all these organically formed materials teach the same les-
son; namely, that though the materials for these deposits must
have been accumulated through long centuries of quiet in the
calm, deep waters, yet their present position and bedded arrange-
ment indicate that most of them must have been spread out
by some great and abnormal action of the waters wholly dif-
ferent from anything which has been known to take place within
the historic period. !

It would thus appear that we have two quite markedly dif-
ferent kinds of deposits now composing our limestones.

The first are what we may term normal deposits, formed by
long centuries of growth in situ, with perhaps only slight dis-
turbance afterwards. These rocks are mostly crystalline, and
show little or no trace of their original structure. A large part
of the original mass, however, may have vanished, providing the
materials of the second class of deposits. Since being thus ac-


14


206 THE NEW GEOLOGY


cumulated, these ancient coral reefs have been raised high above
the sea level by some means, and may now form mountains or
table-lands; or they may be now deep down in the earth, over
which other and wholly different rocks have been deposited.

The second kindof limestones are such as could not possibly
have been formed by this normal method of growth on the spot,
or could not have been spread out by the ordinary action of the


-.


Se ESP
AGC erp:


z


Fic. 120. Brecciated limestone, or limestone conglomerate, from the Calcif. i
zone, one mile south of Highgate Falls, Vermont. (Walcott, U. S. G. al


waves around the original coral reef. They must have been
washed into their present positions by some very abnormal ac-
tion of the ocean waters. They are as distinctly sedimentary
rocks as sandstones or conglomerates, though they may be com-
posed of materials which first accumulated in the eternal quiet
of the ocean depths, where ordinary stratified deposits are now
never formed.

Doubtless it may not always be easy to draw a sharp line
of distinction between these two classes of rocks; but until we
nee m distinction, until we make a persevering attempt thus
to classify them, we shall make no real progress i i
the records of the past. SAN AE


LIFE: ITS GEOLOGICAL EFFECTS 207


At any rate, there is no ambiguity as to the meaning of the
numerous limestones known as “‘conglomeratic limestones,” or
limestone breccias. These rocks consist of “an earthy calca-
reous matrix, in which flat, pebblelike bits of limestone are ir-
regularly embedded. The pieces are commonly rounded, but
sometimes sharply broken; they are fragments of thin limestone
sheets, which were broken up, washed, and rearranged during
the formation of the stratum in which they occur.” (Bailey
Willis, “Research in China,” Vol. 2, pp. 41, 42.)

But since such beds are usually unbrokenly conformable to
the beds on which they lie, and since the composition of the
matrix and of the contained pebbles is identical, with the fossils
in each also identical, the interpretation is very plain. Evi-
dently the original bed composing the calcareous materials had
begun to harden more or less on the outside or in some of its
layers, when it was disturbed and the partially consolidated
lime rock was broken,-washed, and redeposited after the man-
ner of a conglomerate. But unfortunately, “we do not know the
physico-chemical or organic conditions under which limestones
consolidate” (Jd.), and therefore are unable to read more than
this outline of the record, so tantalizingly beyond our present
knowledge.

Summary. We may sum up the kinds of material furnished
by plants and animals somewhat as follows. Plants, including
marine plants, furnish:

(a) Caleareous materials in minute quantity only, through
some calcareous alge.

(b) Siliceous material through diatoms.

(c) Carbonaceous materials in immense quantities, which,
under certain conditions, may contribute largely to rock for-
mation.

Animals furnish:

(a) Caleareous materials in large quantities, through rhizo-
pods, corals, hydrozoans, echinoderms, mollusks, brachiopods, and
very sparingly through some of the fishes and other vertebrates.

(b) Siliceous materials sparingly through radiolarians and
sponges.

(c) Carbonaceous materials very sparingly in modern times,
but in considerable quantities in former times, as in the case
of some of the coals and in many of the oil and gas deposits.

(d) Phosphatic materials very sparingly in modern times,
and not in any extensive way even in ancient times, chiefly
through pteropods and brachiopods.


Fira. 121. Mount Shasta, California, an extinet volcano.


CHAPTER XI


Voleanoes


General Remarks. Volcanoes are mountains which during
a period of activity throw out heated rock materials and gases
from some region underground. Some of them are low and flat,
but most of them rise more or less steeply in a conical mass.
They have a pit or basin-shaped depression at the top, known as
the crater, which is the part whence the eruption proceeds.

Fifty years ago it was confidently thought that the problem
of the causes of volcanoes was completely solved. It was so
easy to say that they are simply blowholes connected with the
earth’s molten interior! But the theories then prevalent were
based on what was then known of the European volcanoes.
Since that time, some of the other great volcanic regions of the
world have been studied; and especially has our knowledge of
volcanic action been materially modified by a scientific study of
such eruptions as have taken place in the Hawaiian Islands,
Japan, Martinique, and from Krakatoa, near Java. The re-
sults of these studies have compelled a very material modifica-


(208)


VOLCANOES 209


tion of the older views; and it now seems that many phenomena
supposed to be characteristic of all volcanoes, because observed
in those of Southern Europe, are not found in all voleanoes
in other parts of the globe.

The Two Types. It is now known that most if not all vol-
canoes have built up their own masses entirely by means of an
accumulation of the materials which they have thrown out, such
as lava, cinders, and ashes. Some volcanoes emit very little
steam or other gases, and their cones are built up almost en-
tirely of lava which they pour out quietly without explosive
violence. These are said to be of the effusive type; and the
voleanoes of Hawaii and Samoa are examples of this type.
Their cones are broad and not at all steep. Others, such as
Chimborazo and Cotopaxi, blow out immense quantities of steam
and other gases with incredible violence, and build steep cones
of cinders and scoriæ; and these are called explosive vol-
canoes. Krakatoa blew its volcanic dust from 20 to 25 miles
high. In still other volcanoes, there is an alternation in the
kinds of ejected materials during successive centuries, or even
during the same eruption; so that it is not easy to make a
definite classification of all volcanoes on this basis. But in a
general way, these two types of volcanoes are. recognized.

Size. Although the largest mountain on earth is insig-
nificant as compared with the size of the earth, yet some vol-
canoes are in and of themselves quite impressive in their
proportions.


f of Santorin, Ægean Sea, during the volcanic

eruption of February, 1866. Looking west. The entrance at b is 1,068 feet deep,

while the peaksshown at d is Mount St. Elias, and is 1,887 feet high. It is nonvol-
canic, being composed of granular limestone and clay slate. (From Lyell.)


210 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 123. Monte Nuovo, a new volcano which was formed in the Bay of
Baiz, September 29, 1538. (After Lyell.)


Cotopaxi, in Ecuador, is 19,600 feet high, and has a crater
half a mile in diameter and over a quarter of a mile deep. It
is still active; but others still higher and only recently extinct
are not far away. Aconcagua is 23,000 feet high, Tupungato
21,500, and Chimborazo 20,500. These are some of the highest
voleanoes in the world; but as they stand upon a region of coun-
try which itself is about two miles above the sea level, their
apparent height is not more impressive than many others.
Some of those just named have no visible craters, and have not
been active for some time.

The Hawaiian volcanoes seem to be low and flat, for they
cover immense areas; but in reality, they are about 14,000 feet
above the sea level, while instead of rising from an elevated
plateau, their bases really rest on the ocean bottom some 14,000
or even 18,000 feet below sea level. Thus their tops are about
30,000 feet above their bases; while as for size, one of them,
Mauna Loa, has a crater 3.69 miles long and 1.75 miles wide; and
Kilauea, on its eastern flank and only about 20 miles away,
has a crater even larger, it being about 8 miles in circumfer-
ence. The latter is the largest active crater in the world, while
Mauna Loa as.a whole is the largest volcano in the world, be-
ing 75 miles by 50 miles at its base, and 13,675 feet above the
sea level (Fig. 124). Indeed, the whole island of Hawaii, which
has an area of 4,210 square miles, has been wholly built up by
volcanic action, the two mountains mentioned, with a few others,
occupying the entire island.


VOLCANOES 211


Kilauea is easily accessible, and on this account, is often
visited by tourists as well as by scientists. Its crater is a won-
derful sight. “Enclosed by a circular wall from 200 to 700
feet in height is a black and slightly undulating plain having an
area of 4.14 sq. m., and within this plain is a pit, Halemaumau,
of varying area (about 2,000 ft. in diameter in 1905), now full
of boiling lava, now empty to a depth of perhaps 1,000 feet.
When most active, Halemaumau affords a grand spectacle, es-
pecially at night: across the crust run glowing cracks, the crust
is then broken into cakes, the cakes plunge beneath, lakes of


|


Kealakek a


5 Zt alf-way
House


Keauhou


HAWAII


FROM THE


GOVERNMENT MAP


SCALE or MILES


‘Saad —19-
20° 135" = Eat


FiG. 124


212 THE NEW GEOLOGY


liquid lava are formed, over whose surface play fire-fountains
10 to 50 feet in height, the surface again solidifies and the
process is repeated.” (“Encyclopædia Britannica,” Vol. 13, p.
83; edition 11.)

Engulfment Craters. Many of the craters of the Hawaiian
Islands are of what is called the “engulfment type’; that is,
they are pit-craters which are enlarged on one or more sides
by the breaking off and falling in of their walls, as already


Fig. 125. Lava cascades, Kilauea, Hawaii. Such very liquid lavas may sometimes flow at a
rate of nearly 10 miles an hour down a slope; and when they cool, they harden into a surface
with curved, wrinkled, and twisted, or ropy forms, called by the Hawaiians, pahoehoe.
(Mendenhall, U. S. G. S.)


Not only so, but the volcanic action on these islands seems to
have marched steadily from west to east, only the most easterly
portion being now active. Thus it would not be impossible to
regard the whole chain of these islands as belonging to a more
or less connected set of underground phenomena which have
been steadily progressing in an easterly direction, the voleanoes
to the west having long been extinct.

The eruptions of the mountains just spoken of are always
of the quiet or effusive type, and where a portion of the rim
does not tumble into the lava and become engulfed, the lava
often breaks out through the flanks of the mountain, and some-
times the lava flows occur below the sea level. It is difficult


VOLCANOES 213


to regard the seat of such phenomena as situated at any great
depth below the surface of the earth.


Explosions. Many volcanoes have appeared quiescent for
long periods, during which there may have been a gradual
accumulation of gaseous pressure inside. Eventually this pres-
sure becomes too great, and an eruption begins with an explo-
sion of more or less violence; great quantities of gases, together
with dust and blocks of rock, are ejected; and after such an
outburst, the pressure inside seems to become relieved, and a


Fic. 126. Map of the Strait of Sunda, East Indies, showing the location of the
voleano Krakatoa, the lines being the supposed “rift lines” which center at this
point. (From Ratzel.)


quieter outflow of liquid lava succeeds. The most tremendous
voleanic explosion of modern times occurred at Krakatoa, a vol-
canic island in the Strait of Sunda, in August, 1883 (Fig. 126).


“After premonitory outrushes of gas for some time, the great ex-
plosion occurred, which blew away over a cubic mile of material from the
voleano into the air in the form of dust and ashes. This vast dark cloud is
stated to have risen 17 miles into the atmosphere, completely hiding the sun
by its denseness over a vast area. The noise of the terrific detonation was
heard for more than 150 miles, while the disturbance in the atmosphere was
registered by barometers over the whole world. Huge waves, up to 100
feet above high tide, were generated in the sea and rushed along the low-
lying coasts of Java and Sumatra, sweeping far inland and destroying
towns, villages, and the lives of nearly 40,000 people; they were perceptible
3,000-4,000 miles away.”— Pirsson. l

“Great sea-waves (tsunamis) were generated, one of which was esti-
mated to have risen 100 feet, and these destroyed 1,295 towns and villages
along the shores, killing 36,380 people. By their force a large ship was


214 THE NEW GEOLOGY


carried inland for a mile and a half and left stranded 30 feet above sea
level. Great blocks of stone, weighing from 30 to 50 tons, were also carried
inland for two or three miles. All together this was the most stupendous
manifestation of volcanic activity known in modern times.”— Grabau, “Text-
book,” Vol. 1, p. 188.


~


In May, 1902, two volcanoes in the West Indies, Pelée on the
Island of Martinique, and Soufriere on St. Vincent, blew up,
with the very striking peculiarity that the hot gases filled with
incandescent particles of rock which they ejected were the
most active agents of destruction. These heavy, fiery clouds
seemed to act almost like liquids, rolling down the sides of


Fig. 127. The volcanic 'spine'" of Mount Pelée, Martinique, West Indies.

The top of this spine was at this time about 1,200 feet above the old crater

rim. It was soon destroyed by the various elements of disintegration.

(Photograph by E. O. Hovey, March 25, 1908. Courtesy of American Mu-
seum of Natural History, New York City.)


VOLCANOES 215


Fic. 128. Layer of basalt about 40 feet thick, resting upon undisturbed lake beds, Canon Creek
Cañon, one mile from Snake River, Idaho. (Russell, U. S. G. S.)
the mountains into the sea, the town of St. Pierre on Martinique
being destroyed, with its 30,000 inhabitants. The eruptions of
these two mountains did not occur exactly simultaneously, but
nearly so. Pelée continued to have explosions of almost equal
violence at intervals of only a few weeks for about a year and
a half. No lava streams appeared; but the crater became
plugged up with a mass of stiff viscous material, which was
gradually pushed up as a spine or obelisk at an average rate of
41 feet a day for some 18 days. The cone in which this spine
arose was itself extended upward nearly a quarter of a mile
in vertical height, the top of the spine sticking up 1,100 feet
above the top of the mountain (Fig. 127). Eventually this
spine disintegrated and entirely disappeared. Several ancient
examples of somewhat similar volcanic spines are known from


various parts of the world.


216 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Magmas. The liquid or semiliquid materials which are
found in voleanoes or which are poured out by them are called
magmas. When these magmas are deeply situated under the
earth, and before they are ejected, they seem to contain great
quantities of gases> especially water vapor, which they ap-
parently hold under this heavy pressure underground in an oc-
cluded state or in a state of molten solution. As these masses
of molten rock rise nearer to the surface, the pressure is re-
lieved, and the gases tend to escape. This would account for
some of the minor phenomena connected with volcanic erup-
tions; but it seems more than likely that a large influx of water
upon a mass of hot magma may be largely responsible for the
eruptions of a more violent type.

In composition, volcanic magmas are classified into two
types, with all grades intermediate between the two. In one
of these, silica and the alkali metal oxides (NaO and K,O)
predominate; and on cooling and solidifying, they form what
are called felsites or acidic lavas. The other type contains more
lime, with iron and magnesia compounds; and such magmas, on
solidifying, form basalts or basic lavas. The felsites are usually
light-colored, from the presence of the quartz; while the basalts
are dark or even black, on account of the iron compounds.

The felsites are hard to melt, remaining thick and only semi-
fluid up to a temperature of over 2,000° C., probably because
of the large amount of silica which they contain, the silica con-
tent running sometimes as high as 75 per cent. Such thick,
almost infusible magmas give rise to volcanoes of the explosive
type, as the occluded gases have much difficulty in escaping and
can do so only with explosive violence. Mount Pelée and other
explosive volcanoes exhibit lavas of the felsite type, while Coto-
paxi and Krakatao and others have lavas of a kind called
andesite, intermediate between felsite and basalt. The basaltic
magmas are much more easily melted, as they contain only
about 50 per cent of silica, and they melt at a temperature as
low as 1,300° C. Hence the internal gases can escape from them
more readily, without the need of explosive violence. Such are
the lavas of the Hawaiian Islands. There are some seeming
exceptions to these rules in volcanoes found elsewhere; but such
seems to be the best explanation of the differences between the
two leading types of volcanoes.

Vapors. The quantities of vapor given off by an active
volcano are vast almost beyond comprehension, steam equivalent
to 460,000,000 gallons of water having been observed to issue
from one of the subsidiary cones of Etna within 100 days, or


VOLCANOES 217


4,600,000 gallons of water a day. Even the lavas after being
ejected continue to emit gases for weeks or months while they
are cooling. Hydrochloric acid and hydrofluoric acid have been
observed largely in the vents and from the hottest lavas, while
free hydrogen is common; and the explosions constantly oc-
curring in the vent are probably due to the combustion of this
gas as it comes in contact with the oxygen of the air. Hydrogen
sulphide (H.S) and sulphur dioxide (SO.) are given off by
many volcanoes, but they have not been observed from all.
Many other gases are likewise given off, the last to be emitted
being carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide, which „are always
symptoms of the old age of a volcano, when its activity is about
ended and it is partly cooling off. The latter two gases are
doubtless derived from the carbonaceous materials, together with
the limestone, which have been affected by the underground heat.

Vesicular Structure. The fragmental materials thrown into
the air during an explosion are of all degrees of fineness, from
dust so minute that it will float for days or months in the up-
per air, to large rock masses weighing several hundred pounds.
All the rock products thrown out by volcanoes, including even
the liquid lavas, have a spongy, vesicular appearance, due to the
presence of gases within them, which tend to expand when the
external pressure is relieved. Volcanic rock may almost always
be distinguished by this spongy, or vesicular structure, even
when in general appearance it may resemble some other kind
of rock.

Duration. The length of time during which volcanoes have
been active is in some instances quite remarkable. Stromboli,
called the “lighthouse of the Mediterranean,” has been in almost
constant activity for over 2,000 years, and seems to have changed
but little in its appearance during that time. For long periods,
it seems to be in such a state of balance between its own
internal pressure and the external pressure of the atmosphere,
“that barometric changes have a marked effect upon its activity,
and the Mediterranean sailors make use of it as a weather
signal.” (Scott.) Etna has had much the same general char-
acter and appearance for 2,500 years. Vesuvius, at several
times in its history, has been dormant for so long that its sides
have been covered with vegetation and with human dwellings,
only to blow up again with great violence, destroying many lives.

But entirely new volcanoes have occasionally appeared within
modern times. One of the most noted of these occurred in
1831, in the Mediterranean, between Sicily and the coast of
Africa. A cinder cone was thrown up from the sea, discharg-


218 THE NEW GEOLOGY


ing much gas and scoriæ or fragments, the cone finally attain-
ing a height of over 200 feet above the sea, and a circumference
of 3 miles. The water at this point was about 800 feet deep,
so that measured from the sea bottom, this mountain attained
a height of 1,000 feet. But when the eruption ceased, the waves
soon demolished it, leaving only a shoal to mark its site.
(Geikie.) Even this shoal seems now to have disappeared.
Several other submarine volcanoes have appeared from time to


Fic. 129. Mount Lassen, the only active voleano in the United States. (Photograph by Loomis. )


time, in the Azores, also near Alaska, and one even off the west
coast of Ireland, in 1783. In September, 1759, a new volcano
burst forth in Jorullo, in Mexico, in the midst of a cultivated
plain. It is now nearly a mile high. A similar one appeared in
Salvador, in 1770, and is now some 6,000 feet high. Mount’
Lassen, in Northern California, is the only active voleano within
the limits of the United States proper. It began to erupt in
1914, after an indefinite period of quiescence (Fig. 129).

Other Phenomena. Heavy downpours of rain, accompanied by marked
electrical and magnetic disturbances, often accompany voleanic eruptions.
They were especially noted in connection with the eruption of Mount Pelée
in 1902. The electrical discharges are partly accounted for by the fact that


the vapors have been observed to carry a positive charge, and the cinders
a negative.


a ok a,
rer.


It may have been


This is regarded as a laccolithic
G. S.)


monument, the former covering being supposed to have been eroded away.
(Darton, U. S.


“The Devils Tower,” Crook County, Wyoming.
the neck or plug of an old volcano.


FiG. 130.


(219)


220 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Extinct voleanoes are found in all parts of the world, great
numbers of badly eroded volcanic necks or plugs, often with
radiating dikes, like the spokes of a cart wheel, showing where
they once were. The Rocky Mountains contain many such
wrecks of former volcanoes; but almost every corner of the
globe, including many regions where no volcanic activity has
been seen within historic times, shows signs of former action.
Many such relics of old volcanoes are to be seen in the New
England States and in Eastern Canada, in the British Isles, in
France and Germany, and, indeed, in many regions where the
thought of voleanic activity seems almost as strange as that of
snow in the tropics.


Location. The location of volcanoes is thought by some to
be an important point in considering the causes of their phe-
nomena. If the great mountain ranges have been formed by
the crumpling up and folding of a thin crust of strata resting
on a molten mass beneath, we should most naturally look for
volcanoes along these lines of folding; for on the old view, vol-
canoes were supposed to connect directly with this molten in-
terior. But this is exactly where we do not find them, but
rather on the flanks of the main chains, as in the Andes, or on
the low grounds near their bases, or even far away from any
mountain range. Neither is there any great line of earth fissure
connecting neighboring volcanoes, as some have supposed; for
as the result of investigations on this point carried on in Italy,
it seems that no such traces along a line of earth fissure con-
necting the various volcanoes can be made out. (A. Geikie,
Nature, May 30, 1901, pp. 103-106.)

Another interesting fact in this connection is the remarkable
way in which volcanic outbreaks have occurred near the Grand
Cañon of the Colorado. This cañon is an opening about a mile
deep through all the stratified deposits down to the granite. Yet
numerous volcanoes have broken out upon the very rim of this
cañon, instead of breaking out at its bottom; and the lavas of
these outbreaks have overflowed the rim and descended into
the canon, largely covering parts of its sides, thus proving
that they were formed after the cafion itself had been made.
In connection with such facts as this, it is impossible to think
that these volcanic vents are connected with any very deep-
seated part of the earth’s interior.


“The old idea that the earth has a hot, liquid interior, and that the
downward pressure of the contracting cold and solid lithosphere forces this
liquid out, and thus gives rise to volcanoes, has been completely disproved
by a number of considerations, and is no longer held. The independent


VOLCANOES 221


eruptions of adjacent volcanoes in the same group, and the fact that the
lava column in Mauna Loa stands 10,000 feet higher than that in Kilauea,
only 20 miles away, are disproofs of this view.”— Pirsson.


Two volcanoes not far apart may simultaneously throw out
lavas of very different composition. Two in the Lipari Islands
may be given as examples, for the lava of Stromboli is basic or


Fic. 131. Mammoth Hot Springs, Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming.
(Jackson, U. 8. G. 8.)


basaltic, while that of Vulcano is highly acidic or felsitic. Many
similar examples might be cited. If these lavas were coming
from a common source, the great hypothetical molten interior,
it would be much like getting salt water and fresh from sepa-
rate faucets on the same pipe.

Causes. As the result of very much discussion of the sub-
ject during recent years, it seems certain that, whatever may
be the initial cause of the heat itself, the reservoirs supplying
the magmas exist as pockets in comparatively shallow portions


15


222 THE NEW GEOLOGY


of the crust only a mile or two down, as Dutton has shown.’
The direct cause of an eruption seems to be, in some cases, the `
obstruction of the usual outlet for the vapors which are con-
stantly being produced, and in other instances, the sudden influx
of a large quantity òf water upon the fiery mass of superheated
rocks. In either of these instances, there would be necessarily a
violent bursting forth of the imprisoned vapors whenever they
finally attained enough pres-
sure to lift the overlying
rocks.
As for the ultimate source
` of the heat itself, this will be
more properly left over for
another chapter.


Hot Springs. Long after
UY a volcano has ceased to ex-
plode or to throw out molten
lava, vapors and gases con-
tinue to issue from its flanks,
or from various fissures in the
surrounding country, perhaps


iy
— —< many miles away. Even the


Fic. 132. Diagram to illustrate the conditions beds of lava themselves may


necessary for geyser action. The temperature


of the water increases with the depth; and continue to exhale steam and


whenever the steam pressure in the lower levels
is great enough to lift the overlying mass of other gases for Many years
Datar tisnal inevelops dia by permiaion) aite0 a tbey i paya DO hs
posited. These may give rise
to fumaroles, when steam and other vapors, such as HCl and
HS, are given off; while if sulphurous vapors are prominent,
these vents may be called solfataras. It seems that the hot-
test fumaroles give out acidic gases, while the cooler ones are
more inclined to produce carbon dioxide. Any of these sub-
stances may become dissolved in streams of underground water,
producing various kinds of mineral springs; or, if the water
continues to hold its heat until it finds its way to the surface,
it will issue as a hot spring or even as a geyser.
Such hot springs are common in different parts of the world,
as in the Yellowstone Park, near Mount Shasta, and near St.
Helena, California, also in Iceland and New Zealand, which


pela,


1 Major Dutton tells us that there is a growing mass of strong and highly concordant
evidence to the effect that the seat of the reservoir of a voleano “is very shallow and seldom
more than three miles deep. Very rarely is there any indication of its being more than
two and one half miles deep, and it is certain that in many cases the depth is less than one
mile. The indications are that most of the volcanic eruptions originate at depths between one
mile and two and one half miles.”—“Journal of Geology,” May-June, 1906.


VOLCANOES 223


are all scenes of former volcanic activity. All the active or
recently active volcanoes have many such fumaroles and hot
springs in their vicinity.

Former Activity. Considering the world as a whole, there
are probably three or four times as many extinct volcanoes as
active ones. This would seem to indicate that there was prob-
ably a period of intense volcanic activity in the long ago, soon
after the earth took its present form of land and water dis-
tribution. Volcanic activity is undoubtedly dying out in point
of geographical extent, though possibly increasing in violence
in some particular localities. j

Dating. The dating of volcanoes and of past volcanic up-
heavals is subject to all the infirmities of the artificial geological
chronology now prevailing, being based on the alleged age of
the accompanying strata either below or above, or both. Such
alleged dating of the beginnings of volcanoes, or of ancient
outflows of lavas, has no scientific value.


CHAPTER XII


Heat: Its Effects and Its Causes


Quantity of Erupted Materials. It is important for us to
have some adequate idea of the vast quantity of material brought
up from underground and deposited by the various kinds of
volcanic activity. For instance, there are some 107 volcanoes in
Iceland, “with thousands of craters great and small.” (Tho-
roddsen.) Yet in one single
outflow, there issued from
the craters of Laki, at
Skapta, in 1783, materials
which now cover an area of
218 square miles, and which
would make a cube 7.5
miles on each side, or a
total of over 400 cubic miles
of rock. The largest un-
broken lava field in Ice-

eet land covers an area of 1,700

153 | square miles, and has been

Fie 18a: Map of the region around the Columbia estimated to be sufficient to
and Snake BV as s esos lava fields. form a cube 13.4 miles ona
side. One single stream of

lava is 60 miles long. With all this vast quantity of material
brought up and spread out over the top of the ground, it is no
wonder that “there are gigantic fissures, running for several
miles, caused by subsidences of the underlying sections.” (Tho-
roddsen.) The fragmental materials blown out by the great ex-
plosion of Krakatoa, in 1883, were estimated at 4.3 cubic miles.

Still more gigantic are the outflows of lava which in pre-
historic times have covered great areas near the Columbia and
Snake rivers; in the extreme
northwest of the United
States. It seems uncertain
whether these outflows oc-
curred from mere open fis-
sures, or from a large number
of craters which are now con-
cealed and the products of Fic. 134. Section of a laccolith. The black


area indicates the igneous rock. (From “The


which have become blended to- New hicmi pea S 2 ae
permission. )
(224)


HEAT: ITS EFFECTS AND ITS CAUSES 225


gether to form great continuous sheets. The view at present
held by those who have made the most careful study of the con-
ditions is that a large number of low, broad craters were the
real origin of these lava sheets, the lava being of an extremely
liquid character, spreading out in streams some of which were
50 miles long and many miles wide. All together, these vol-
canic outflows in this part of the United States are estimated to
cover from 150,000 to 200,000 square miles of area, and to be
in places 3,000 feet deep. In the Deccan, Western India, are


Fic. 135. Intrusive sheets of igneous rock, Cottonwood Cañon, New Mexico.
(Lee, U. S. G. S.)


similar sheets of trap which have been explained as due to great
fissures, but which on further examination will probably be
found to be due to numerous low, broad volcanic vents, such as
are now assigned as the cause of those sheets on the Columbia
and Snake rivers. Large areas in the north of the British
Isles, in Scandinavia, and in many other parts of the world are
also covered with volcanic outflows which took place long before
the beginnings of scientific observation, and yet since the strati-
fied rocks were formed, for these volcanic sheets now lie on top
of the stratified beds.

Definitions. In other instances, however, sheets of melted
rock have been spread out over stratified beds while the. latter
were still under water, and other strata were subsequently laid
down upon the lava., In still other cases, the lava seems to have
intruded itself between the layers of sedimentary rock after
both the upper and the lower beds had been formed. Such


226 THE NEW GEOLOGY


lavas are called intrusives; and they are thought to be of com-
mon occurrence. When a quantity of lava fills a fissure and
solidifies, it is called a dike (Fig. 136); and as might be sup-
posed, such a dike will be found cutting across the bedding, if
the country rock around it is stratified. Lyell observed a fissure
12 miles long near Etna which was filled with liquid lava not yet
solidified. Necks are solid plugs
of lava filling old voleanic vents.
Various other names are applied
to the many peculiar forms in
which consolidated lava is found.
A great mass of granite or other
so-called Plutonic or igneous
rock, perhaps many miles or
even hundreds of miles in extent,
which, as in the cores of most
mountains, seems to become
wider the deeper it is traced
down into the earth, is termed a
batholith. The great central
part of such mountains as the
Rockies and the Sierra Nevadas
is spoken of as batholitic; but
such a name ought not to carry
any implication of the theory
that these masses came up from
below or that they are in any
way connected with the fabled
liquid interior of the earth. A
Fro. 186.. Lamprophyre (mica-trap) dike, Small batholith is termed a stock
15 feet thick, about 6 miles east of Big Or boss. Granite, diorite, and
the country rock, (Pepperberg, U.S G.S) gabbro are the frequent constit-

uents of bosses and batholiths,
and the texture of the rock usually becomes progressively coarser
as we proceed from the edge toward the center of the mass, the
interior having cooled more slowly than the outside, this slower
cooling having resulted in a coarser grain, just as it does when
sugar cools, or when salt crystallizes from solution; for the
slower these processes proceed, the coarser is the resulting grain
of the material.

Metamorphism. The term metamorphism is applied to any
profound change of structure or character which a rock under-
goes, except disintegration. Generally metamorphism results in
the rock’s becoming harder and more crystalline, and often in


HEAT: ITS EFFECTS AND ITS CAUSES 227


its showing an entirely different set of minerals within it, these
minerals being produced by the chemical changes and combina-
tions which accompanied the metamorphism. Any degree of
change may be produced, from the mere solidification of loose
sediments to the most profound transformation, and there are
all grades between the two extremes. Sedimentary or stratified
beds are not the only rocks which may become metamorphosed ;
igneous rocks are also frequently changed by metamorphism,
and when the process is at all complete, it is quite impossible
to tell the original character of the rock. This is only natural;
because a clay shale, a volcanic tuff, or a basalt may contain the
same chemical elements in much the same proportions, and
similar conditions of heat, moisture, and pressure may convert
any of them into the same kind of metamorphic rock.

A lava flow on the surface or in a fissure near the surface
will ordinarily effect some metamorphism of the rocks with
which it comes in contact. Bitu-
minous coal may lose its volatile
constituents and become like
coke; clay may become baked to
the appearance of red brick or
rough earthenware; or limestone
may lose much or all of its car-
bon dioxide and be changed into
«quicklime. But such changes
are not very marked, and are the
result chiefiy of what may be
termed dry heat, without the
added assistance of the other
factors of change which often ac-
company igneous intrusions that
take place deep underground.
The latter usually are already at
a much higher temperature than
the surface lavas, they retain
their heat much longer, and
the hot vapors and gases which
they contain in far greater abun- Fic. 137. Diabase dikes in Red Beds (Tri-
denec havera more profound efa amio. on Alsmillo Creek, New. Mexico.
fect upon the rocks around them.

Magmas which contain large amounts of vapors or gases (called
mineralizers) are much more effective in bringing about a
metamorphism of the surrounding rocks than those magmas
which do not contain them. Hence acidic magmas are more


228 THE NEW GEOLOGY


efficient than basie magmas. If the invaded rock contains
considerable quantities of lime or alumina, it is much more
likely to become changed in character than if it is composed
largely of silica.

We usually find a gradual change in the surrounding rock;
that portion nearest to the invading magma is most altered,
while that which is farther away is less changed. The part of
the invaded rock in immediate contact with the igneous magma
may be so transformed that even the microscope will scarcely
distinguish the sedimentary material from the intruding magma.
Farther away, conglomerates or sandstones may become quartz-
ites, clay may change into slate or mica schist, limestone may
become marble, bituminous coal may be changed into anthracite
or graphite, and limonite may become magnetite. The inter-
stices between the particles of the invaded rock may become
filled with iron oxides, quartz, feldspar, mica, or other minerals,
thus cementing the original grains together with a firm matrix.

All such phenomena come under the head of contact meta-
morphism, or local metamorphism; but the results of such work
may often transform large areas of sedimentary rocks, because
of the widely branching streams of igneous intrusions, and be-
cause the superheated mineralizing waters seem to dissolve
many very diverse kinds of rock and to carry these solutions
considerable distances, only to deposit them again in some other
form scarcely recognizable as having the same origin as the-
original deposit.

The term regional or dynamic metamorphism is applied to a
still more widespread transformation of the rocks, often affect-
ing hundreds or thousands of square miles. Usually such rocks
are wholly crystalline and have lost all traces of whatever
stratification or fossils they may have possessed originally.

Many metamorphic rocks show a tendency to break or split
in some directions more easily than in others. Such a tendency
is termed cleavage; and to distinguish this kind of cleavage
from that shown by minerals, it is commonly called slaty cleav-
age. Roofing slate is a good example of a rock exhibiting such
a tendency to split or cleave along definite surfaces. This struc-
ture is not at all like the stratification planes formed by sedi-
mentation, and often develops in rocks approximately at right
angles to the stratification planes which were originally present.
It may have been developed by the stresses of lateral compres-
sion; but geologists are not agreed as to its exact cause.

Schistosity or foliation is seen in certain metamorphosed
rocks with a banded appearance, where the component minerals


HEAT: ITS EFFECTS AND ITS CAUSES 229


form nearly parallel surfaces, along which they more readily
divide or split.


Causes of Underground Heat


History. The ultimate source or sources of the heat mani-
fested in all parts of the earth, has been the occasion of much
discussion. In the earlier days of the science of geology, it was
considered a sufficient explanation to say that the earth was
originally a fiery, liquid mass, and that the interior is still in
this condition, not having yet cooled off. On this basis, vol-
canoes were simply the vents or blowholes from this liquid
interior; the mountains were the puckers forced up by lateral
compression caused by the contraction of the surface or cooled
part, as the rest gradually lost more and more of its heat; and
metamorphic rock was easily explained as merely rock which
had come into more or less intimate contact with heated rocks
from this molten interior.

But presently physicists and astronomers pointed out that
the earth behaves as an extremely rigid body in resisting the
deformative tendencies exerted by the sun and the moon; for
if the earth were not more rigid than the best steel, it would
show tides in its surface. The fact that it shows tides in its
superficial watery envelope, but not in its rocks, is the best of
proof that its interior can not be in the liquid or semiliquid con-
dition indicated by this theory. Next it was pointed out that
a column of lava could not find its way up through a cool crust
of even moderate thickness without losing so much of its origi-
nal heat as to solidify before reaching the surface. And if this
would be the case with even the largest of volcanic craters, what
about the dikes of melted rock, which in many cases are only a
few feet in thickness? Furthermore, it was pointed out that,
if the mountain ranges were due to the contraction of a crust
even 25 or 50 miles thick, these mountains would be of much
greater breadth, if not of greater height; “for if a solid plate of
any kind be broken and the fractured edges be turned up by
reciprocal pressure in presence of a resisting body beneath, the
width of the protruding mass will bear a definite relation to
the thickness of the plate.” (Prestwich.)

We have already seen that this old idea that the earth has a
hot, liquid interior, the contracting of the crust over this molten
interior being the cause of the lava outflow and of all the other
related phenomena, “has been completely disproved by a num-
ber of considerations, and is no longer held.” (Pirsson.) We
may therefore discard all such theories based on the nebular


230 THE NEW GEOLOGY


hypothesis, and see if we can not establish present, common-
place causes competent to act as sources of heat in producing
rock metamorphism and volcanic phenomena. The numerous
speculations which have prevailed regarding the present condi-
tion of the earth’s interior, all based on some form of the
theory that the earth ‘is a cooling globe, have no scientific value,
and are a hindrance to scientific progress. It is much to be
hoped that the time is not far distant when this assumption
of a cooling globe will become an anachronism in any treatise
on geology.
Sources of Heat


Five Sources. We may distinguish two very slight but
nevertheless universal sources of change in the rock, capable of
producing induration, perhaps metamorphism; and four more
positive sources of heat of various degrees. We give them here
in what may be considered the reverse order of their impor-
tance as means of rock change, though this is almost the direct
order of their universality:

Changes in atmospheric pressure.

The effects of tidal action.

Chemical action.

Radioactivity.

The mechanical movements attending mountain making.
The burning of coal and oil beds, with accompanying
chemical action.


Of these, only the third, fourth, and fifth are now EENE
recognized in geological literature. The last (6) is sometimes
alluded to, though in a very fragmentary way; while the first
two have only a few scattering references here and there.


Changes in Atmospheric Pressure. In a paper read before
the British Association at Glasgow, F. M. Denison reported that
the depression of the earth's crust due to an area of high baro-
metric pressure can be detected by a seismograph at great dis-
tances from the center of the depression, and that the approach
of a barometric depression is indicated by the seismograph long
before the barometer shows any sign of it. (Nature, October
10, 1901, p. 587.)

The effects of varying degrees of atmospheric pressure are
incidentally referred to by G. K. Gilbert in his presidential ad-
dress before the American Association (Science, January 22,
1909, p. 131) ; and it would appear that this cause, so universal
and ceaseless in its action, must, in thousands of years, result
in considerable changes in the texture of rocks.


he Mae te ie


HEAT: ITS EFFECTS AND ITS CAUSES - 231


Effects of Tidal Strain. The Tidal Committee of the British
Association, August, 1871, while confirming the previous an-
nouncement of Professor William Thomson (Lord Kelvin) about
the earth’s being “more rigid than steel,” admit that the super-
ficial parts must yield in at least some degree to the tide-
generating influences of the sun and moon. Theoretically we
know this must be so; and it is difficult to see how a variation of
stress of this kind can thus be repeated twice every twenty-four
hours for long ages upon all rocks of our globe, without pro-
ducing enormous effects in the way of structural change or
metamorphism.


Chemical Action. The oxidation of ores containing sulphur,
such as pyrite and marcasite, is too well recognized as the
source of heat in many mines, and as a source of the heat of
many hot springs, to need any further mention here. As Dana
has remarked, these facts throw a cloud of doubt over the
real value of observations made regarding the increase of heat
with descent downward in the earth; and this chemical action
“has always to be considered in such investigations.” (‘‘Manual,”
p. 257.) Years ago, Sir Humphry Davy, and later, Gay-
Lussac, French chemist and physicist, made chemical reaction
in the earth’s interior the foundation of their theories of vol-
canic action; and these chemical explanations of volcanic heat
were for a while quite popular. Even Sir Charles Lyell at one
time seemed to think them sufficient to account for the phenomena.


Radioactivity. Since the discovery of the radioactive proper-
ties of matter, these properties have been appealed to as a
source of heat. That a part of the earth’s interior heat may
be due to this cause seems reasonable; while some enthusiastic
students of the subject have thought that this might serve as an
explanation for all these phenomena. Investigation seems to
show that radium, with its heat-generating influences, is prob-
ably confined to a comparatively shallow zone on the outside
of the earth, extending downward only a few miles. IL
is also known that the radioactive substances are widely scat-
tered through the rocks, and especially through the igneous
ones. But as to the significance of radioactivity in general,
“there is wide diversity of opinion on the subject, and, at
present, this view has not advanced beyond the speculative
stage.” (Pirsson, “Textbook of Geology,” 1920, p. 223.)


The Friction Attending Mountain Making. The enormous
effects which the mechanical movements attending mountain
making are capable of producing, no matter what we may con-


232 THE NEW GEOLOGY


sider the ultimate cause of these latter processes, have long been
recognized and need not long detain us. These effects may be
illustrated on a small scale by what takes place in mines when
the pressure crushes the pillars and forces the strata out of
position in what the miners call creeps. Prestwich records one
case where, when the pressure began to crush the pillars, the
heat which was developed was so great that the observer “feared
it would set fire to the coal.” (“Controverted Questions,” p.


Fic. 188. Hillside creep of surface strata. The railroad is badly out of line. On a tributary
of the Yukon, at Coal Creek, Alaska. (Atwood, U. S. G. S.)


192.) In some mountain regions — for instance, Aspen, Colo-
rado — there sometimes appears to be a general slipping of a
whole mountain side in the vicinity of old faults; and in the
course of a few years, surveys are found to be several feet out
of line. (Mines and Minerals, March, 1902, p. 342.) It seems
to be generally admitted that in the crushing of a rigid material,
such as rock, almost the entire mechanical work is transformed
into heat; and hence if “the disturbance affecting the massive
strata of a great mountain range were abrupt, an intense degree
of heat might be developed” (““Controverted Questions,” pp. 235,
236); Mallet contending that ‘7,200 cubic miles of crushed


HEAT: ITS EFFECTS AND ITS CAUSES 233


rock would cause heat enough to make all the voleanic moun-
tains on the globe” (Dana).


While all mountain making may not have been of this abrupt and
violent character, numerous ones of the great breaks and faults in the rocks
are conclusive proof that tremendous convulsions of a violent character have
many times taken place in the long ago; and it is always well to remember
the possibilities in this respect. Many of the enormous outflows of trap and
basalt which have occurred in the remote past suggest this as their cause by
their proximity to greatly disturbed regions, and are in many cases easily
separable, by their compact structure, from the true lavas of volcanoes.


Combustion of Coal in Mines


General Remarks. But we have another and very potent
cause of underground heat in the oxidation of vast carbonifer-
ous deposits, such as coal and oil. This was commonly taught
a hundred years ago as the source of volcanic heat; but the
empirical investigation of this subject has been neglected for
nearly a century. On this account, it may be proper to enter
into the subject at considerable length, though we have space
for only a few of the facts now available as illustrative of
this subject.

As is well known, fires frequently take place in coal mines,
and these, with the resulting explosions of coal dust and gas,
often cause terrible destruction of lives and property. But
it is not so generally known that these fires frequently get
beyond the control of the mine owners, and burn for long
series of years. In Nova Scotia there are several instances
of such fires’ having been burning for twenty or thirty years;
and at the last accounts available, some were still burning
there. In the anthracite region of Pennsylvania also, we have
some instructive examples of how persistently coal seams will
burn when once ignited.

Various mines in Pennsylvania have taken fire and have
burned for considerable periods of time. Notable among these
is the Summit Hill mine, which at the present writing (1923)
has been burning for over sixty years, in spite of the utmost
efforts of the owners and the expenditure of over three millions
of dollars to put out the fire. The area involved is about a mile
long and 1,500 feet wide, and the coal seam in which the fire is
‘situated is some 50 feet thick and consists of solid anthracite,
with several hundred feet of rock above it.

Observations at this place, as well as many taken elsewhere,
prove that the combustion of the coal is not at all dependent
upon the oxygen of the air, but that the requisite oxygen is ex-
tracted from the oxides in the adjacent rocks, by a chemical


234 THE NEW GEOLOGY


process. This being the case, such fires might burn to any
depth whatever; and, of course, at a much greater depth than
that of the Summit Hill mine, much more of the heat generated
would be conserved, and this would contribute to the production
of phenomena still more resembling a true volcano. But even
here it does not require much imagination to transform this
quarter mile of incandescent rock into a baby volcano.
Amount of ‘Coal. The coal beds of this part of Pennsylvania
seem to average about 75 feet in thickness of actual coal, mak-


Fic. 189. Diagram of the Grand Mesa, Colorado, showing how lava beds have
originated from burning coal beds.


ing a total of about 150,000 tons to the acre, or about 96,000,000
tons to the square mile. The anthracite areas are usually
divided into four fields:

1. The Northern coal field, in one great basin 55 miles long
and from 2 to 6 miles wide.

2. The Eastern Middle field, containing about 33 square
miles.

3. The Western Middle field, some 37 miles long, with a
maximum width of about 5 miles, and containing over 90
square miles.

4. The great Southern field, some 70 miles long, and cover-
ing an area of 180 square miles.

The total production from this region up to 1893 was about
902,000,000 tons, with about 17,245,000,000 tons still in the
ground. It would thus seem that we have here enough latent
energy to keep a dozen volcanoes steaming away for a long time,
especially if it were supplemented by a fair proportion of lime-
stone and an occasional supply of underground water; for there
would be about 1,500,000,000 tons for each of them to work upon.

Other Examples. The lignite coals bordering the Mackenzie
River have been burning continuously ever since first seen by
Sir Alexander Mackenzie in 1789. On the Little Missouri River
is a region 200 miles long by 30 miles wide which was burned
out in prehistoric times, some of the overlying rocks having


HEAT: ITS EFFECTS AND ITS CAUSES 235


been baked to a “half-fused cellular or scoriaceous and pumice-
like character, looking like the products of a voleano.” (Dana,
“Manual,” pp. 266, 267.) But in these cases, the burning beds
were far too shallowly situated and were much too thin them-
selves to produce the phenomena of a volcano.

In the vicinity of New Castle, Colorado, are other burning
coal beds, which have evidently been burning for hundreds or
perhaps thousands of years, with much more resemblance to the
characteristics of a real volcano. These beds form a large
synclinal basin some 50 miles from the northeast outcrop to the


` 4


AA


\ EU Creek
Fic. 140. Diagram of coal beds at New Castle, Colorado.


southwest outcrop, the high mesas between these outcrops be-
ing largely covered with sheets of basaltic lava which has un-
doubtedly come up through vents or fissures from the burning
beds below. Several small volcanoes near by have doubtless
been produced in much the same way, the Dotsero Volcano and
the one near Basalt, on the Colorado Midland Railway, be-
ing examples.

Mr. P. C. Coryell, of New Castle, Colorado, in a letter to the
present writer, says:


“I have particularly observed that no lava has come out of any of the
profound faults which doubtless extend to tremendous depths under the
Triassic measures [in this locality]; but that the origin of the lava is in-
variably the least disturbed portions of the sedimentary beds, but usually
within a mile or two of some great fault or crack.

‘ “It may be reasonable to suggest that owing to the pyritiferous condi-
tion (locally) of the Triassic sandstone, and the close proximity of large


236 THE NEW GEOLOGY


bodies of gypsum, a chemical action between the iron, sulphur, and gypsum
was set up in the process of faulting, which developed what we call a
volcano.”

This gentleman goes on to say: “All true volcanoes are undoubtedly lo-
cated in stratified rocks, and may not be confined to any given formation.
In refutation of the theory that volcanoes are the chimneys connected with
the fluid center of the @arth, I will mention that, at this point in Colorado,
nearly every system except the Triassic is represented on a tremendous
scale. . . . Yet most of the lava flows have broken out on top of the Tertiary
formation, being the most extreme point possible from the granite. The
voleanic districts in tropical countries are only doing to-day what this district
has gone through from one to five thousand years ago; and doubtless their
volcanoes have no more connection with the central portion of the earth than
our extinct craters had.”


Conditions Essential for a Voleano. In the light of the pre-
ceding facts, we may give several essential conditions which
seem to be primarily responsible for the production of many,
perhaps all, of the true volcanoes of the world:

1. A large quantity of carboniferous material, such as coal
or oil. Some of the best-known examples of such masses of
carboniferous material are those in Pennsylvania, South Wales,
Vancouver, B. C., or the Latrobe Valley, Australia, the latter
place having coal seams with an aggregate thickness of 780
feet, and one single bed over 260 feet thick.

2. These deposits must be buried very deeply in the ground,
from 1,000 feet to 10,000 feet or more.

3. Limestone, gypsum, iron ores, or other oxygen-bearing
rocks must be associated with the carboniferous beds, and be
present in very considerable quantities.

4. A large influx of water upon the fiery mass of molten
rock is essential to the production of at least an explosive vol-
cano. Steam is one of the chief substances ejected in eruptions.
When water is converted into steam, it tends to expand to about
1,700 times its former volume, which is over five times the ex-
pansive force of gunpowder and nearly twice that of guncotton.
But even this tremendous expansive force is increased with a
further rise of temperature above the boiling point; so that at
962° F. the pressure is about 1,000 atmospheres, or sufficient to
lift a weight of nearly eleven miles of overlying rock. Thus a
few hundred tons of water, in contact with a molten mass of
rock, would cause sufficient pressure to shake the earth over
vast areas and blow out almost any quantity of rock or melted
ore from the chimney of this underground furnace.

Classification. As for a classification of the various forms
of igneous eruptions, some authorities make no distinction be-
tween the older (really so) and the more modern eruptions.


HEAT: ITS EFFECTS AND ITS CAUSES 237


Others — and the weight of evidence is on their side — make a
fairly clear distinction between the massive sheets of igneous
rocks which seem to have flowed out quietly from fissures or
multiple vents, and those produced in modern times by true
voleanoes, effusive or explosive. The former appear to have
taken place often beneath the waters, or at least upon wet sedi-
mentary beds, and were probably caused by the intense heat
attendant upon the prodigious shattering and dislocation of the
Archean rocks which are in evidence over almost every part of
the globe, the mechanical movements which generated this heat
being in some way connected with the causes producing the
movements of the oceans which in turn produced the stratified
deposits themselves.

True volcanoes, on the other hand, seem to be more modern
in origin. In many instances, their heat may have been partly
started by the other sources of heat just mentioned, and also
by the intense heat developed by the mountain making after the
laying down of the sedimentary strata, this mountain making
having been by no means a slow, gradual process. But true
volcanoes are confined exclusively to the stratified or sedimen-
tary rocks, and seem to be dependent for their heat mainly upon
the subterranean oxidation of carboniferous matter and the
chemical changes accompanying this oxidation; their explosive
action being due to the expansive forces of the vapors thus
generated, largely to the expansive forces of superheated
steam. They have no more to do with the fabled molten in-
terior of the earth than have the smokestacks of locomotives.


16


Fic. 141. Lower end of Reelfoot Lake, Tennessee, showing in the distance several trunks of
trees killed by the submergence of this area, which occurred at the New Madrid earthquake,
1811. (Fuller, U. S. G. S


CHAPTER XIII
Earthquakes and Diastrophism


General Remarks. The modern scientific knowledge of earth-
quakes may be considered as having been initiated by Robert
Mallet, who issued a notable work on the Neapolitan earthquake
of 1857. The Charleston (1886), Assam (1897), San Francisco
(1906), and Messina (1908) earthquakes have added to our
knowledge, until “there is perhaps no field of geological inquiry
in which greater progress has been made, especially in recent
years.” (Pirsson.)

An earthquake may be defined as an undulatory or trembling
motion in the rocks of the “solid” earth, this motion having been
communicated to the visible part of the earth by some shock.
The question is, What causes the shock?

Violent volcanic outbursts, such as those at Krakatoa and
other centers, which we have already spoken of, have been
accompanied by light earthquakes of quite limited extent. The


(238)


EARTHQUAKES AND DIASTROPHISM 239


sudden falling in of the roof of a subterranean cavity has in
some instances produced distinct shakines of the surface. In
December, 1811, and January, 1812, a series of earthquakes
accompanied an extensive depression of the surface some 75
miles long and 30 miles wide, near New Madrid, Missouri. Per-
haps on account of the lack of accurate scientific observation at
the time, it is now difficult to determine whether the earth-
quakes were the cause of the subsidence of the surface, or
whether this subsidence was itself the chief cause of the trem-
bling of the ground. At any rate, the large region spoken of
above seems to have dropped bodily several feet, enormous
fissures appeared in the ground, and great lakes were formed,
one of which, Reelfoot Lake (Fig. 141), east of the Mississippi,


Fic. 142. Plicated beds on unfolded ones. Mineral Ridge, Nevada. (U. 8. G. 8.)
(After W. B. Scott, “Introduction to Geology,” permission of Macmillan Co.)


is 20 miles long and 7 miles wide, “and so deep that boats sail
over the submerged tops of tall trees.” (“Encyclopædia Britan-
nica,” Vol. 18, p. 613.) In another part of the area affected, a
ridge “twenty miles in diameter was bulged up athwart the
channel of the Mississippi.” (Norton.)


The San Francisco Earthquake. Such things give us some
idea of causes which may occasionally contribute to earthquake
action; but neither of the two causes just mentioned is the lead-
ing cause of earthquake phenomena. “It has now been rather


240 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 143. Buckling in the railway track, Howard Street, San Francisco, California, caused by
the ground on the right of the foreground settling and moving forward. San Francisco earth-
quake, 1906. (Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


definitely settled that the main cause of earthquakes, especially
the heavier ones, is the jar given the earth’s shell by the sudden
forming of a fracture in its outer portion, or, perhaps, a sud-
den slipping, or displacement, along the walls of an already ex-
istent fracture.” (Pirsson.) It is thought that the outer part
of the earth’s surface is cut up into blocks, large and small, and
that such fractures or division lines die out below at a depth of
some 12 miles or less. Within this zone of fracture or displace-
ment, great faults are known to extend across various parts of
the lands, some of them being many hundreds of miles long.


EARTHQUAKES AND DIASTROPHISM 241


For instance, the great break concerned in the San Francisco
~ earthquake of April 18, 1906, has been followed, with a few
interruptions, for about 600 miles, and is called the San Andreas
Rift (Fig. 144). At many times previously, it seems, dis-
placements along this line had already taken place, the one con-
nected with the San Francisco earthquake being of the nature
of a horizontal displacement of the two earth blocks on the op-
posite sides of this fault or rift, the eastern side moving south-
ward, and the western side moving twice as far northward, the
maximum horizontal displacement being 21 feet, with an aver-
age of about 10 feet. Fences and roads running across this
fault were afterwards found to be just so much out of line (Fig.
145). The movement of the earth, and thus also the violence of
the shock, diminished in proportion to the distance east or west
from this fault line. Toward the north, there was a slight
vertical displacement of from one to three feet.

From the study of this and other earthquakes, it seems evi-
dent that the real shock is caused by the sudden giving way of
the rock which has been under a tensional strain, this strain
perhaps having been gradually accumulating for a long time.
Milne has pointed out the probable connection between earth-
quake frequency and the wandering of the pole of the earth
from its mean position (Fig. 146). According to this author,
earthquakes have been most noticeable at times when the dis-
placement of the pole has
been larger than usual,
or when there has been
a sharp change in the di-
rection of this movement.
This would point to an ae horn;
astronomical cause as the tl e Ne moss
ultimate one; and it Y N ay
would lead us to ask
whether what we are
now experiencing may


1 50 +o) UNES uug
not be but the gradual ee We
adjustment of the earth ae NOR odipog +


to similar causes of far- | jh eR ‘OD a
greater intensity which z Yi 9

may have operated in the
past. In the present
state of our knowledge
relative to the matter, it Fic. 144. Map showing the position and extent of the


fault-line, A—A, movement along which produced the


may be impossible to earthquake of April 18, 1906.


242 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 145. Fence offset 8% feet, by the main fault of the San Francisco earthquake, one half
mile northeast of Woodside, California. (Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


settle this point definitely; but there are many facts which point
in this direction.

It is important to remember that the displacements accom-
panying earthquakes are not caused by the shaking of the
ground, but the shaking of the ground is caused by the displace-
ment in the earth. In many instances, the amount of this dis-
placement has been much greater than was noted in the case of
the San Francisco earthquake. In the Mino-Owari earthquake,
in October, 1891, in Japan, a fault was traced for a distance of
nearly 50 miles which in some places showed a scarp with a
vertical throw of 20 feet, while the amount of displacement
underground is supposed to have been in places much greater.
But in the rocks in all parts of the world, ancient displace-
ments have been detected which often have throws of vertical
range measuring from ten to a hundred times this amount. And
if these also were suddenly brought about, as all analogy seems
to indicate, there must at some time in the past have been earth-
quakes of indescribable violence.


EARTHQUAKES AND DIASTROPHISM 243


Other Examples. The Messina earthquake of 1908 had its
center near the Strait of Messina, between Italy and Sicily,
practically wiping out the towns of Messina and Reggio, with a
loss of life of possibly 200,000. This being so near the ocean,
it was accompanied by marked tidal phenomena, giving us some
idea of what an earthquake is capable of in the way of a dis-
turbance of the waters. “At first the sea retired, and then a
great wave rolled in, followed by others generally of decreasing
amplitude, though at Catania the second was said to have been
greater than the first. At Messina the height of the great wave
was 2.7 meters, whilst at Ali and Giardini it reached 8.4
meters, and at San Alessio as much as 11.7 meters.” (Rudler.)
At Malta, nearly 200 miles distant, the wave was nearly 3 feet
high. Such waves are not at all like ordinary wind-caused
waves, but are translation waves, and sweep across the ocean
at a rate varying as the square root of the depth of the water,
the rate being 38.7 miles an hour in water 100 feet deep, and
122.3 miles an hour in water 1,000 feet deep. “An earthquake
at Concepcion, Chile, set in motion a wave that traversed the
ocean to the Society and Navigator [Samoan] Islands, 3,000
and 4,000 miles distant, and to the Hawaiian Islands, 6,000
miles; and on Hawaii it swept up the coast, temporarily delug-


+0130 +020 +010 0700 -070 -0°20 -030


+030
cg 0730 40°20 40/0 0700 -070 - -0.20 -0730.


Fic. 146. Diagram to illustrate the “wandering of the pole,” or
what is more commonly called the “variation in terrestrial lati-
tude.” (After Milne.) Milne held that when this variation of
latitude was greatest, earthquakes were more frequent, thus con-
necting this wandering of the pole with earthquake phenomena.


244 THE NEW GEOLOGY


ing the village of Hilo” (Dana.) Another earthquake on the
coast of Peru, in 1868, sent out waves which were felt in New
Zealand and Australia, in the Hawaiian Islands, and on the
coast of Oregon, in the United States.


Ancient Earthquakes. Hence, if the displacements so plenti-
fully recorded in the older rocks were similarly sudden, and of
a magnitude proportionate to.
the hundreds or even thou-
sands of feet of these displace-
ments, we can well agree with
a venerable geologist of the
old school that the “sea-
borders, continental seas, and
land-borders the world over
might be mostly stripped of
life by earthquake waves.”
For such “deluging waves
sent careering over the land
from any seas in the range of
the vibrations . . . would
have been destructive over all
the coasts of a hemisphere.”
(Dana;~“Manual.” pp. 375,
878.)

That many at least of the
great breaks recorded in the
rocks were accompanied by
tremendous convulsions of
the earth, is attested by many


Fic. 147. Ruins of the temple of Jupiter
Serapis, on the Bay of Naples, Italy, as they of our foremost geologists.


epo te bc an The following from Suess is


representative of many statements which might be given from
others also:


“The earthquakes of the present day are certainly but faint reminis-
cences of those telluric movements to which the structure of almost every
mountain range bears witness. Numerous examples of great mountain
chains suggest by their structure the possibility, and in certain cases even
the probability, of the occasionai intervention in the course of great geologic
processes of episodal disturbances, of such indescribable and overpowering
violence, that the imagination refuses to follow the understanding and to
complete the picture of which the outlines are furnished by observations of
fact. Such catastrophes have not occurred since the existence of man, at
least not since the time of written records.” —“Face of the Earth,” Vol. itp
aya Df alsin


EARTHQUAKES AND DIASTROPHISM 245


Earthquakes are recorded and their effeets made available
for study by delicate instruments called seismographs, which
work on the principle of a heavy pendulum suspended with a pen-
cil or finger attached, this pendulum, by its inertia, remaining at
rest while the earth beneath it is vibrating under a shock. The
pencil records the path taken by a stationary object.


Diastrophism


Secular Changes of Level. When we pass from this study
of surface changes which have been observed in the modern


Xa “NAPLES
OAS


Fic. 148. Map of the region around Vesuvius, showing Pompeji (Pompeii) and
Puzzuoli, also several submarine voleanoes. (After Walther, Ratzel, and Grabau.)


world, to interpret the changes which are recorded as having
taken place in the long ago, we are met with many difficulties,
not the least of which are the theories which have hitherto ob-
structed the true interpretation of these events. That changes
of land and water have taken place in the past, is evident to
everyone who has traveled, with his eyes wide open, for a hun-
dred miles in almost any direction. The well-preserved re-
mains of sea creatures are embalmed in the rocks underneath
dozens of our cities, and other sea fossils are to be seen high
up on almost every mountain range on earth.


246 THE NEW GEOLOGY


“There rolls the deep where grew the tree.
O earth, what changes hast thou seen!
There where the long street roars, hath been
The stillness of the central sea.”


But how shall we interpret these great changes? Are there
any present-day evidences that the incipient stages of such ex-
changes of land and water are now going on? For many years,
books on geology have taught that such incipient changes of
land and water are even now going on, and the records of the


Fic. 149. Ancient sea-caves, formed by wave action, in a former sea-cliff at the back
of an elevated beach, showing an elevated strand-line. Coast of Fifeshire, Scotland.
(Geological Survey of Scotland.)


past have continuously been interpreted in the light of this sup-
posed fact. In this chapter, it will be well to content ourselves
with examining the evidence supposed to point in this direction,
allowing the real interpretation of the records of the past to
stand over until a later chapter, when we hope to have more
data with which to judge concerning this problem, which is
really the crucial problem of the whole science of geology. We
are in reality only at the threshold of this problem as yet; for
we have not yet examined any of these ancient records. We
must here consider the preliminary conditions of this problem.

Difficulties of the Subject. When we seek to consider the
relative position of the land and the water, we need some fixed
point of reference. Naturally we think of the sea level, or mean
tide level, as a fixed point from which to start. In case of any


CS ‘D'S `n ‘uozeq)


“UIBABI-BAS B 9DUO SBM SIY} Á[qeEqo:d4


*BUOZILY


‘gouByed MOA ILIU ,


‘SYIVJSÁLH,, 24} 38


‘QUOJSPUBS ut YOY ‘OQTI


47)


248 THE NEW GEOLOGY


mere local fluctuating of the land near the sea, this would be
the natural datum level from which to measure the change.

But we presently discover that the surface of the ocean does
not present a true geometric surface, but a surface considerably
warped by various conditions. Certainly the mean tidal level
is not the same distance from the center of the earth at all
points of the ocean. The surface of the ocean in the tropics
is about 13.5 miles farther from the earth’s center than is the
surface of the ocean at the poles. Not only so, but in many
parts of the world, as we know, the waters are pulled up onto
the lands by the gravitational pull of the land masses. In
localities like the Bay of Naples, it has also been demonstrated
that when Vesuvius has its crater full of lava, the water stands
measurably higher on the shore than it does when the shell of
this volcano is empty. This reservoir of lava may fill up
gradually, and thus the waters may gradually rise along the
shore; but the mountain empties itself suddenly, and thus the
waters might go down very suddenly. The measurements so
painstakingly performed along the shores of the Baltic and the
North Sea have been shown to be worthless as accurate scien-
tific records, for it is now known that these waters fluctuate
considerably between wet seasons and dry; and at one end of
the Baltic, during a storm in that direction, the winds will pile
the waters up many feet above the normal level, and will main-
tain this difference for many days.

These are some of the difficulties encountered in entering
upon our subject. That there are changes plainly recorded
along many parts of the coast, is very evident. In numerous
localities along the shore, barnacles and corals and other sea
animals are found many feet above the present ocean level in
these respective localities. The classic example of the temple
of Jupiter Serapis, built by the Romans on the shore of the Bay
of Naples (Fig. 147), is evidence of this sort. Three marble
columns of this temple are still standing, their bases at present
in the water. For the first 11 feet above their bases, they are
intact; but from this point to 19 feet up, they are pitted full
of holes bored by the rock-boring shelled animals, Lithodomi,
the remains of these animals being still in the holes. Evidently
these columns must have been beneath the waters for some time,
and quite as manifestly the lower parts of the columns must
have been quickly protected from the action of these creatures
by mud or volcanic ashes. It has been argued that the rise and
fall of the land on which this temple rests (or the rise and fall
of the water, which would be the same thing) must have been


EARTHQUAKES AND DIASTROPHISM 249


Fic. 151. The main fault between Point Reyes Station and Olema, California, looking south-
east. The ground at the right of the fault has moved toward the observer; and that at the
left, away from the observer. San Francisco earthquake. (Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


slow and gradual enough to allow these three columns to remain
standing. But it is evident that it may have been so sudden as
to throw down all of the temple but these three remaining
columns. In the absence of authentic records of this place, how
are we to interpret the record which we find here engraved for
us in these stone columns?

Another evidence of change of relative level is presented
by the raised beaches, consisting of wave-built and wave-cut
terraces, often showing caves formed by the waves (Fig. 149),
which are found in many places around the shores of the con-
tinents. These ancient marks of the strand-line are eloquent
testimony to the fact that changes of either the land or the ocean


250 THE NEW GEOLOGY


have taken place. But again it is well to ask, Do these phe-
nomena indicate a slow, gradual change in the localities referred
to, or is it a sudden change which they testify to? Surely if
it had been a slow and gradual change, the gradation from the
old beach to the modern one would have been a gradual one,
and all the area intervening between the upper beach and the


x


71 Bi GEG, ELEY
Long Island Sound, Wy 7 Yy lg Y
| A ae š ie
Long Island, AS `
and the
Atlantic Border


with


Depths along Bathymetric 4f WY: Yj š í Af GEE Z. : S,

lines in fathoms; Cotidal 474 y Z P Z PA ii

linesin Long Island Bound; $4 f;

the under-water Channei Z 2;

jot Hudson River, trom’ S f
Coast Survey Charts. 4


igen,


AF oF


p ; Z
F te
Z Z. 30 Èa A


nd

ç y P.

REG E
7 7200


Fic. 152. Map showing the submerged channel opposite the mouth of the Hudson River. The
figures indicate depths in fathoms. (After Dana.)


lower (present) one would have successively gone through the
stage of forming a beach for a considerable time, and hence
there would not be the sharp contrast between these two definite
marks and the intervening area which has no such marine hand-
writing upon it. Surely it is some sudden change which we
see indicated here, not a gradual one.

The same thing may be said of the submerged forests and
submerged peat bogs found along many coasts, as well as the
submerged wave terraces found on some of the coral islands.
These point to quick, sudden changes of level, not to any slow,


EARTHQUAKES AND DIASTROPHISM 251


gradual change. The warped position of the old shore lines
around the Great Lakes tells the same story. These old shore
lines are not now all on the same level, as would be the case if
the waters had merely gone down in the usual manner through
the drying away of the water of the lake, or through the outlet
of the lake having been lowered, thus partly draining it; but
the shore line at one end or on one side is at a decidedly dif-
ferent level from that at the opposite portion. But here again,
it seems to me, the facts can be very easily understood as due
to sudden changes of level, such as we know often accompany
earthquakes.

As for the so-called “drowned valleys’ opposite the mouths
of such rivers as the Hudson, I think that possibly they also
could be understood as having been caused by a sudden sub-
mergence of the land. But I question whether these so-called
“drowned valleys” are really submerged channels. The pro-
longed estuaries here spoken of may be caused by the scouring
action of the cold salt water of the ebb tide, which in the winter
is chilled while up in the river channel, and which at the re-
treat, or ebb, would on this account keep on the bottom of the
warmer surface water of the ocean, and thus form a real sub-
marine river flowing out across the continental shelf, thus
scouring out a distinct channel for itself.


The upper Rhone flowing into Lake Geneva, and the upper Rhine flowing
into Lake Constance, have both excavated distinct stream channels in the
beds of these lakes. Both of these rivers are fed by glacial streams, and
their waters are very cold; and when this icy water, carrying great loads
of sediment, is emptied into the warmer and lighter water of the lake, it
naturally keeps to the bottom. Thus these rivers maintain their courses
for considerable distances from the shore and cut trenches across the bot-
toms of these lakes. And it is self-evident that the*cold ebb tides running
out of such rivers as the Hudson in the wintertime, might easily account
for the so-called “drowned vaileys” found opposite their estuaries.


Past Changes Sudden, Not Gradual. Thus in all the various
ways in which we can examine this problem of the present-day
changes of level along the coasts, we are met with evidence of
distinct change, it is true, but the changes indicated seem to be
best understood as having been sudden, and not gradual. We
do know that earthquakes are attended in many instances
by sudden and extensive changes in the lands thus affected,
some of these changes being in the nature of vertical displace-
ments. And the marks along the coasts may have been due to
changes of this character. Certainly there is no positive and
unambiguous evidence of slow, gradual changes now in progress.


252 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 153. Eduard Suess (1831-1914), celebrated Austrian geologist;

author of Das Antlitz der Erde (“The Face of the Earth,” Oxford

University Press, 1904-1908). Professor Suess during his life was one
of the very foremost of modern geologists.


Suess on Secular Changes. And all this is in accord with
that monumental work, “The Face of the Earth” (Oxford, 4
volumes, 1904-1908), by Eduard Suess (Fig. 153). The essence
of this great work is that we do not find now in progress
around our coasts any indications of such exchanges of land and
water as we find recorded in all the ancient geological forma-
tions. Professor Suess’ exact words along this line may be
appropriate in this connection. He testifies to the present signs
of permanence along the coast:


“Phenomena confront us which testify to the stability of the existing
state, which has endured since the remotest period of human tradition, or
since a period even earlier still: in hundreds of localities, the sea has graven
its mark deep in the rocks at the level of the tide.”— Vol. 2, p. 554.


After an exhaustive examination of all the recorded observa-
tions in Northern Europe and arctic America, he declares:


EARTHQUAKES AND DIASTROPHISM 253


“Even in these seas, displacements susceptible of measure-
ment have not occurred within the historic period.”— Id., p. 497.

In reviewing all the available evidence, he makes the fol-
lowing statement:


“We find ourselves confronted with so many circumstances which may
exert an influence on sea level, by so much uncertainty in the existing data,
and by so many sources of error, that finally little remains of many years’
labor, but a conviction that many doctrines which in spite of unprejudiced
_authorities have become accepted dogmas, are erroneous.”’— Id., p. 24.


And also the following:


“Thus, as our knowledge becomes more exact, the less are we able to
entertain those theories which are generally offered in explanation of the
repeated inundation and emergence of the continents.”— Id., p. 295.


It is only just to point out that Professor Suess has a theory
of his own, which is that the bottom of the main part of the
ocean itself has probably been
oscillating up and down, thus af-
fecting the lands of all the con-
tinents simultaneously. His
reasons for this are not objec-
tive, physical reasons, but are
based on the prevailing theories
of the successive kinds of life
alleged to have lived in the suc-
cessive geological “ages” ; for he
argues that only by a universally
acting cause, like the rise and
fall of the ocean all over the
world, would it be possible “to
employ the same terminology to
distinguish the sedimentary for-
mations in all parts of the
world.” This matter will be con-
sidered in the proper place, and
must not detain us here. But
it should be remembered that,
even if this substitute theory of
Suess’ should prove inadequate
and based wholly upon wrong
assumptions, the completeness of
his destructive criticism of the


e : Fic. 154. Earthquake crack filled with
current theories about the rise sand, Charleston, Missouri; formed at the


i he N Madrid th ke, 1811.
and falleof our modern coasts “™e ct “Rr Maarid earthquake


17


254 THE NEW GEOLOGY


is not thereby affected in the least. This destructive criticism
is complete and final; and it should now be regarded as settled
that no modern changes of the sea and land have been proved
which will help us in solving the problem of how the ancient
changes took place.

The subject of mountain making will be considered in the next
chapter. In connection with this subject, we shall see that moun-
tain making in general may be understood as chiefly due to the
elevation of the whole region involved and the subsequent erosion
of the strata in places, leaving mountains of denudation or ero-
sion. At any rate, whatever we may consider as the cause of
mountain making, the formation of the mountains is generally
regarded as belonging to quite another series of phenomena than
the causes which produced the exchange of land and water
areas, or the great aqueous transgressions recorded in the
stratified rocks.


CHAPTER XIV


Mountains and Mountain Making


Definitions. Mountains may be defined as masses of strata
or of ancient crystalline rocks elevated considerably above the
general level of the country. Thus we can not draw any definite
line between mountains and hills; for even the highest peaks
of the Appalachians or of the Ozarks would seem like hills if
placed alongside the giants of the Andes or the Himalayas.
On the contrary, the enormous pinnacles surrounding the’Grand
Canon of the Colorado would, if removed and set down bodily
on the Atlantic coast, become the most notable elevations of
land east of the Mississippi; yet, where they are, they present
merely slight contrasts with the surrounding country, aside
from the gorge itself. It seems to be the general impression
that mountains are chiefly the results of a wrinkling or pucker-
ing of the rocks composing the crust of the earth. But it would
be just as accurate to represent them as the results of erosion
acting upon portions of the crust which have been slightly
elevated above the common level. Certain it is, however, that
the making of the mountains belongs to the past, instead of to
the present, except in so far as erosion may even now be carv-
ing out the bases of them, thus rendering their outlines more
distinct.

A series of peaks more or Jess in line is spoken of as a range; though
several distinct series may be included in this term. A series of ranges,
more or less independent of each other in appearance, but composed of the
same kinds of rocks (geologically), or else having the same kinds of strata
on their flanks, are spoken of as a mountain system, and are regarded as a
geological unit. A combination of mountain systems, such as we see in the
Andes, or in the general collection of mountains on the west of North


America running from Panama to Alaska, being nearly a thousand miles
wide in the latitude of Colorado or Wyoming, is called a cordillera.


Classification. Mountains are usually classified according
to their origin as igneous mountains, mountains of erosion, and
mountains formed by movements of the crust of the earth.
As we shall see later, this is not an altogether satisfactory
method of classification; but it will serve our purpose for
the present. ` l

Mountains of igneous origin may be again subdivided into
two classes, of which the first are the true volcanoes, such as
Vesuvius, Shasta, Cotopaxi, and the mountains of Hawaii, with


(255)


CSD °g `n HOM) °
Əun AJS ay} Jo APEJUOZOY aq} ƏJON “AaT[BA suUaMO Jo Əpts UL9}sva JJ WOJ “BlULOJI[eD ‘AjuNOD OAUT ‘SZULI VPBADN BAIOIG Əu) JO AƏIA “SGT DIA


MOUNTAINS AND MOUNTAIN MAKING 257


ae


many others of the highest peaks in the world. The Hawaiian
voleanoes can be regarded as 30,000 feet high, if we reckon
them from the bottom of the neighboring ocean, from which
they arise. The giant peaks of the Andes would lose about half
their height, if reckoned in the same manner; for they arise
from elevated regions or plateaus which are from 12,000 to
14,000 feet high already, only about 10,000 or 12,000 feet of
actual mountain height appearing above these plateaus.

The second subdivision of the mountains of igneous origin
are spoken of as mountains of intrusion, being regarded as


Fic. 156. Looking across the upturned edges of tilted strata, near Blue Creek Cafion, Okla-
homa. This suggests that comparatively level country, or even the prairies, may have tilted
strata underneath the surface. (Gould, U. 8. G. 8.)


having been formed by the intrusion of igneous materials þe-
tween or among masses of stratified rocks, the whole having
since been subjected to considerable erosion, leaving the hard
igneous interiors exposed, since these parts are more resistant
to the wearing effects of erosion and denudation. The Henry
Mountains of Utah and the West Elk Mountains of Colorado
are regarded as having been made in this way. But where the
core of a mountain range consists of granite or of other crystal-
line rocks, often it is impossible to say whether these moun-
tains may not more properly be considered as primitive. And
this is the case with some of the most massive mountain ranges
in the world. Pikes Peak, Colorado, may be regarded as of this


258 THE NEW GEOLOGY


class, with numerous ranges among the Rockies, the Alps,
the Caucasus, and many others.

But very many of our more familiar mountains are merely
the peaks left by the dissection and erosion of an uplifted area
of country. All the Catskill Mountains of New York are of this
class, also many of the buttes in the plains region of the West,
most of the mountains in the Glacier National Park, with such
conspicuous peaks as Chief Mountain and Mount Cleveland, and
also Crowsnest Mountain, and Mount Rundle and Cascade Moun-
tain, near Banff, in Alberta. Indeed, all these front ranges of
the Rockies from the middle of Montana up to Mount Robson
and beyond, in Alberta, ought properly to be considered
as merely mountains of erosion. True, they show evidences
of slight disturbance here and there; for no large area of
this size is ever quite free from minor disturbances. But
they have all the appearance of being merely the dissected rem-
nants of a great mass of nearly horizontal strata once elevated
into a high plateau. Doubtless many other mountain ranges in
the Alps and elsewhere, which have been called “folded” or
“faulted” mountains, and for the explanation of which many
wonderful theories have been invented, should be regarded as
only examples of erosion acting on nearly horizontal beds.
which, because they do not happen to occur in the accepted
order of sequence looked for by geologists, are supposed not
to be now in the positions in which: they were first deposited,
and hence some complex folding or faulting of the strata is
alleged to have occurred since their deposition.


Mountains Caused by Earth Movements. Mountains caused
by movements of the earth’s crust are usually subdivided into
three classes: block mountains, folded mountains, and moun-
these heads, and frame our conclusions in reference to them
after having examined their characteristics.

The term block mountains is given to those peaks of nearly
horizontal strata which have high fault-scarps more or less dis-
sected on one side, with long, gentle slopes on the other, the
beds all dipping in the direction of the gentler slope. Some-
times it appears that two or more parallel sets of these block
mountains run across the country, the slopes of these various
ranges being all more or less in the same general direction.
The north and south small ranges in the Great Basin, between
the Wasatch Mountains and the Sierra Nevada, are regarded
as of this type, as are also the mountains of Southern Oregon
and Northern California and Nevada. But no sharp line of dis-


(`S `5 `S N) AMLA I[#tzədtu] ay} Jo roog ayy


“op81o[oO ƏY} JO UOULO PULIN ay} Woz se |[ƏA. se
*SI9Y}O Əy} ut [ƏAƏ[ euTeS əy} Ye punoj-sr saqynq asa


‘SUOISeI ƏSƏ} WOIJ pəpozə s[eLrəl=eUr au,


pug Opezo[oD Əy} JO w@)[Əp ey} əsoduuoə 0} djay mou pue umop patted uəəq aaRy


‘TB Wey} JO sdo} əy} saoqge [eas] IUO sem pus ayy


4} FO əuo u; WN}eI}s YOR Yel quəumuomN [Isuone N deomnjunynW ‘syorejeg FINYL ayy,


A[}UaPIAG
“LET “DIA


(259)


260 THE NEW GEOLOGY


tinction can be made between these so-called block mountains
and what are called folded mountains, nor yet between either
of these classes and ordinary mountains of erosion, such as we
ages of the strata composing these mountains enters into the
distinctions made Between them.

The Jura Mountains, between France and Switzerland, are
usually pointed out as typical examples of mountains composed of
a series of wavelike folds. They consist of a number of parallel
ranges trending northeast and southwest, each range appear-
ing to be bowed up like an arch, and the valleys being like the
troughs of these wavelike folds. Much of the material once
composing the peaks of the arches has been eroded away and
now partly fills the intervening troughs. But the whole range
_is composed of strata once laid down horizontally in the sea, for

an abundance of sea fossils are contained within them, though
now they are many thousands of feet above sea level.

But by far the greater number of mountain ranges are so
highly complex in their structure that they are usually classed
together as complex mountains. Such are the Alps, the Hima-


7,
“Wik


ESS :
WAALS NAN AN SSS SSR


SS Fç
NA SSS SS


h,
;


Š. SASS WY A yy t SS
N š PRON WTA ARS SO SSSSE SNS
` ` SEES ` A > RS WSS SS =
Q NSSSSSE ZT EAA GN NSY EM BET ARS w SES
NUNS Ee ee sri INep NNR SS hill- tr is > ASS SS SSS SS
NN Ng Se z, SHINGO NSSS PE E ` `; 2 s>
` < > _ > J" NSN EN 3 DATARO
P A SDE EN Sb aS

TSF EE


Fig. 158. Section (imaginary) near Livingston, Montana, where Madison (Mis-

sissippian) limestone is repeated three times, with strata of different age inter-

vening. These huge folds are imagined to have taken place here, in order to

explain this serial repetition of the same kind of beds. We must remember that

all the drawing below the horizontal line is absolutely imaginary, as are also the
folds pictured above. (U. S. G. S.)


layas, and many of the individual ranges of the Rockies. As
already remarked, there is no sharp line of distinction to be
drawn between the mountains of this type and mountains like
the Juras, which are obviously made up of wavelike folds. And
these complex mountains present so many diverse types of struc-
ture that it is difficult to do more than point out a few char-
acteristics common to very many of them. Their majestic
peaks constitute the most elevated portions of the earth, and


MOUNTAINS AND MOUNTAIN MAKING 261


Bok k a Qa R. |


Fic. 159.


The limestone has “'flowed,” while the dike has been “fractured” by the subsequent
changes. Near Rockland, Maine. (Bastin, U. S. G. S.)


Fractured basie dike in crystalline limestone, 15 feet wide in places.


these peaks are merely the most resistant portions of much
larger masses which once existed, these peaks being left stand-
ing while all the rest has vanished. These lofty ranges are
generally so much changed in structure by processes of meta-
morphism that it is impossible to say what was their original


262 THE NEW GEOLOGY


structure; though there is great probability that many of them
represent primitive or original mountain structures which have
remained during all the vicissitudes through which the earth
has passed.

Assigning Dates. The method employed in assigning a geological date
for the uplifting of a mountain range is simple enough, but it is based en-
tirely on the prevailing theories concerning the dates to be assigned to the
various kinds of fossils. As will appear in a later chapter, the stratified
rocks are all classified according to the fossils which they happen to con-
tain, these different groups of fossils being regarded as strictly chronologi-
cal, so that the relative dates of the strata can be assigned to them wholly
cn the basis of the fossils they contain, and wholly irrespective of whether
they are made of limestone, sandstone, shale, or any other kind of lithic
structure. Of course, this is a purely theoretical arrangement, and as we
shall see presently, is not only highly artificial, but is utterly false and er-
roneous. Hence it may be supposed that the dating of the elevation of the
mountain chains would be a very uncertain business, and might result in
making the structure of a mountain range very unnecessarily complicated;
which is indeed the case.


But the method employed is to date the mountain subse-
quent to the “newest” strata composing any part of the range
which has participated in the elevation, and earlier than the
“oldest” strata resting unconformably against the flanks of
the range — if any such can be found. As might be imagined,
the dating of the mountain ranges of the world has kept a
large number of men busy for a couple of generations, and
whole libraries of books have been written upon the results of
their herculean labors. The general outcome of it all has been.
that the mountain ranges over most all the globe are astonish-
ingly “young,” since they contain strata which can not be as-
signed to the older ages of geological history; and hence the
amazing conclusion is reached that the making of these moun-
tains — that is, the making of almost all the great mountain
ranges of the globe — must have taken place more or less
contemporaneously, and at the close or near the close of the long
stretch of what is called the geological ages. This is a most
surprising and a most interesting conclusion; but the further
consideration of this fact must be left over for another chapter.

Speculations. In following out the theory of the dating of
the fossils, and thus the dating of the strata in which they
occur, it is no wonder that the perplexed geologists were often
put to their wit’s end, in an endeavor to account for the strange
and unlooked-for positions in which these strata were found in
such mountains as the Alps. These mountains were complex
enough to begin with; but an arbitrary theory as to the relative
order of the strata made matters a thousandfold worse; and so


MOUNTAINS AND MOUNTAIN MAKING 263


for over half a century, following the lead of Dr. Albert Heim
and other Continental geologists, the textbooks have always pro-
vided us with elaborate diagrams which pictured these moun-
tains in cross section, with huge folds many miles high in the
air to show where the strata once were. We have also been
treated to fairy stories about the strata now composing the
Alps having originally been spread out over a width of from
400 to 750 miles, which by lateral pressure has been reduced
to about 100 miles, the extra amount, of from 300 to 650 miles,
having been absorbed in gigantic folds and thrust faults.

To confirm the theory, the mechanics of the thing had to be
illustrated. And so pressure boxes were brought into yse, by
which layers of clay or cement or wax or what not were sub-
jected to strong lateral pressure, to see how these layers would
act under compression; and of course, the structures developing
in these pressure boxes had to be looked for in the various
mountain ranges, and if not found there, were imagined as
possible, and again drawn out as diagrams for wondering
schoolboys to study and admire.

Such is a part of the pseudo-science of geology and physical
geography with which the civilized world has been afflicted for
nearly two generations. And if, under such guidance, we have
not made much progress in working out a knowledge of how
the mountains were actually formed, the results are not greatly
to be wondered at. However, a few stray facts have come to
light during the process; and we shall do what we can to make
an application of them, trusting to further developments and
future discoveries to make the subject still clearer.


Probable Causes of Folding. When rocks of great thickness
are cut through by any means, either by erosion or by the act
of man, as in tunnels, mines, or open cuts, the weight upon the
lower strata whose supporting sides have thus been removed
often proves too much for these lower layers to stand. The
result is, these lower beds begin to “creep,” as it is termed in
mines, or to flow almost like a semiliquid mass, as was ob-
served in the Panama Canal. The bed of the Chicago drainage
canal, composed of limestone, buckled up into a low anticline
when the overlying load of rocks had been removed. Innumer-
able examples of very similar phenomena could be given from
the long history of mining and tunneling operations, illustrating
the general principle that strata which become overloaded and
which are not sufficiently supported on the sides, will become
contorted and will even flow out laterally, allowing the upper
strata to settle down.


CS ‘D'S AN ‘097/BM) ‘ary əuop aAeY Áəul se “uəyoaq BABY JOU p[noA pue “pəp[og
10 pa[dwuni9 avy pom SYIOI JY} *B}BI{S ƏY} JO uongprosuoə əuq ətogəq pəzanəəoo peu SIY} JI “a2UeTIND00 uzrəpour JO A[JUepIAe sr Surdəə4q9 SYL “EIULA
-[Asuueg ‘AyunopD dejsvoury ‘viquinjop jo ujaou aru Jey əuO ‘“Suidas1o 10 yem zuəqunəuədns Aq umop uUayorg əseyq YSIYM səƏLeys “O9T DIA


(264)


MOUNTAINS AND MOUNTAIN MAKING 265


We have only to apply this principle in a large way, in order
to explain practically all the mountain structures of the world,
provided we are willing to forget the traditional theories re-
garding the relative ages of the various strata, and are willing
to assume that these strata were mostly laid down during one
rather long process, but a process which did not permit much of
the first deposits to consolidate before the others were piled on top
of them. And since uniformitarian geologists have been so
free at imagining things, it may be allowable to attempt to
picture how these matters would work out, on the supposition
of a great world catastrophe, such as seems to be the logical
induction from the sum total of the facts about the fossilifer-
ous deposits.

If now we have successive layers of limestone, sandstone,
shale, etc., piled up from one to three miles deep, but all more
or less unconsolidated, because only recently laid down, and
if all this mass is elevated into a high plateau, with the forces of
erosion beginning to act upon it, we would very soon have the
mass cut up into blocks, with wide valleys running in different
directions across it. With the supporting sides thus removed,
the beds at the bottom of the high cliffs could not well support
the load upon them, but would necessarily give way and flow
outward, allowing the upper strata near the edge of the eroded
section to lop down or settle, presenting the appearance of a
part of a syncline. Ifa similar condition prevailed on the
opposite side of the eroded section, we might have a perfect
semblance of a syncline from both sides.

As is well known, however, oftener the crests of anticlines
have been eroded away, many streams and rivers now flowing
where once high ridges and anticlines existed. To the present
writer, this seems good evidence that such erosion must have
been started while yet the water stood over the entire mass.
Such may not always have been the case; but this is the easiest
way to explain the phenomena. Rivers don’t begin to run along
the crest of a ridge, even if this crest is badly broken up by the
rupture of the strata; and the long stories of the history of such
rivers with which we have been entertained for many years,
are not altogether convincing. On the other hand, it is easy to
understand how we might now find a river channel running
along what was once the ridge of an anticline, if we suppose
that the first washing away of these broken rocks along the
ridge was performed while the waters of the sea were retreat-
ing from the general surface of the emerging land area, thus


CS ‘DSN UPUH) ‘URA uqouture] 24} U, `əurəuáks peus e N sMoo[ ym Bursneo ‘BIUBAJASUUƏJ “uolə[Z8] ‘AdayjoD poomA[oy 18 UL-ƏALI V `I9I DIA


MOUNTAINS AND MOUNTAIN MAKING 267


forming the outline of a channel which would subsequently be
occupied by a river.


Probably Unconsolidated Strata. That in every mountain
range we have structures which in their appearance would sesm
to indicate that the strata were still soft and unconsolidate1
when they were folded and otherwise disturbed, is a well-known
fact. "The following is from De la Beche, the first director-
general of the Geological Survey of Great Britain:


“The question of how such a volume of matter as that composing the
contorted calcareous Alps was sufficiently softened, if previously indurated,
or kept soft, if never consolidated as rocks usually are, before acted upon by
the contorting cause, appears to be one of no ordinary difficulty; and this
difficulty not only attends this case, but also an abundance of others. As
we might expect, shales and clays are frequently contorted in a disturbed
district, while associated limestones and sandstones are merely fractured.
The harder strata have snapped, and the softer have bent. There is nothing
in such phenomena which is not readily understood. When, however, we
find hard siliceous and other sandstones, compact limestones, and even
brittle substances, twisted and bent into every imaginable shape, and re-
quiring a very soft yet tenacious condition of matter, the subject is anything
but easy.”—“Geological Researches,” p. 132.


In this connection, this author declares that in many instances,
the chief evidences of contortion seem to be in the strata on the
flanks of the mountain chains, with appearances to indicate that
there was at some time a strong “pressure from the central
parts outwards, causing the lateral contortions we observe.”
(Id. p. 128.) Such could easily follow if the supporting flanks
of a deep mass were partly removed, and the main part should
settle down in place, perhaps under earthquake action, thus
pushing outward the strata lying against it, as we have de-

But two other conditions need to be considered as having
existed at this same time. First, not all of the underlying
strata were equally competent to support the loads placed upon
them, even without any erosion. For in places, many layers
of fresh vegetable matter were laid down, or vegetable deposits,
which if not fresh in one sense of the word, were at least not
compressed or consolidated; also it would take at least ten times
the thickness of pressed plants which we now find in various
places composing our coal seams, to produce the materials of
these seams. And these beds of plant remains would neces-
sarily settle, and would thus allow the neighboring strata to be-
come more or less disturbed as a consequence.

Lastly, we have the disturbances of which earthquakes are
the symptoms, acting upon these masses of piled-up strata


268 THE NEW GEOLOGY


which were as yet only partly settled into place and only partly
consolidated. We know, from our study of seismic phenomena,
that these shakings of the earth always show their effects very
much more strongly on unconsolidated strata than on the older
consolidated rocks. For this reason, an earthquake would af-
fect these newly formed beds a hundred times more strongly


Fic. 162. Anticline in Ordovician rocks, above Levis railway station, Province of Quebec,

Canada. How natural to suppose that some of the strata on the side of this cliff settled down

before they were fully consolidated, crowding outward some of the strata at the foot, thus

forming this neat little anticline! Obviously no great thickness of strata can be involved in
this fold, for otherwise the fold would be much thicker. (Walcott, U. S. G. S.)


than it would affect rocks which were already well hardened.
And we know, from the evidences so abundant in the fossilifer-
ous rocks, that earthquakes (or at least changes of level, which
would mean tremendous earthquakes if they were at all sud-
denly accomplished) were very common while and soon after
the sedimentary strata were being laid down. Violent seismic
disturbances occurring beneath deep thicknesses of sedimentary
strata which were still unconsolidated, and which here and
there reposed on bottom layers of unequal competence or carry-
ing capacity, could not fail to produce anticlines and synclines
in the upper parts of these strata, fully equal in magnitude to


MOUNTAINS AND MOUNTAIN MAKING 269


anything which we actually find among our mountains, if we do
not have the problem made unnecessarily large and complicated
by unfounded theories about the precise order in which the
respective fossils lived and were buried.

And this view of the matter would help us to understand
the otherwise singular fact that practically all the faults
which we can actually see and demonstrate in an objective
way, occur in regions where the strata are still horizontal, or
when occurring among folded strata, are as a rule subsequent
to the folding. (W. B. Scott, “Introduction to Geology,” p.
365.) Any faulting which might occur before the strata were
consolidated would not be recorded, because not visible through
these soft beds, folding even resulting in many instances fnstead
of faulting. And although we must suppose that many pro-
found faults and disturbances took place during and closely
subsequent to the deposition of the strata by the great world ca-
tastrophe which we have postulated, yet, as we now observe
them, real faults occur (or are visibly recorded) almost entirely
in regions where folding is absent.

In addition to all this, we know that great masses of soft
semiliquid rock have in very many instances been squeezed out
on top of the overlying strata; and it would necessarily follow
that some areas underground must be supposed to settle to fill
up the space thus evacuated. This would account for other
examples of settling and tilting of the strata. And we must re-
member that where a great mass of half-hardened strata a mile
or so deep was tilted up on one side, so as to cause even a slight
movement downward along the line of the unsupported portion,
necessarily the beds at the lower side would be very much dis-
turbed, probably even made to stand on end for a short distance.

Thus it would seem that we have now reached a rational
explanation of practically all the outstanding phenomena ob-
served in our great mountain ranges, if we will admit that
some of them may have been in existence before the sedimen-
tary strata were deposited.


18


CHAPTER XV
Mineral Veins and Ore Deposits


Definitions. Any natural substance having a definite chemi-
cal composition throughout its mass, is a mineral. Thus the
rocks are composed of minerals, often of various mineral pieces
mixed together, as granite is composed of quartz, feldspar, and
hornblende (often mica). But minerals often occur in veins,
which are breaks or fissures filled with minerals.

The term ore is sometimes used to include anything useful
which is mined from the earth. But speaking precisely, ores
should include only such substances from the earth as will
yield metals, thus excluding coal, salt, and building stones. The
more important ores are those which yield such metals as
gold, silver, copper, lead, and iron. Gold usually occurs free,
or as the native metal. Silver and copper also occur thus some-
times, but oftener they are found combined with other sub-
stances. Lead and iron occur only in combination. Some of
the most important ores are combinations of two or more of
these metallic compounds. Sulphides of each of these metals
except gold are of frequent occurrence; but oxides of copper and
iron are also common, and so are the carbonates of copper, lead,
and iron.

The ores and minerals can be divided into two great
groups,— those containing oxygen, and those which do not con-
tain oxygen. They are often termed the oxide and the non-
oxide groups. We have already learned that throughout the
crust of the earth, in the zone of weathering, which extends
down to the level of ground water, or the water table, the rocks
are acted upon by the usual agencies of weathering; and here
oxidation is of very common occurrence. Below this, other
kinds of chemical changes go on; but “experience in mining
teaches that in the upper zone the ore minerals are most likely
to occur as carbonates, sulphates, and hydrated oxides; below
this, they occur chiefly as sulphides, and in the case of iron as
non-hydrated oxides, while metallic silver and copper may be
also produced by the oxidation and alteration.” (Pirsson.)

Occurrence. Ores may occur in the form of small particles
scattered through a large mass of rock. If this mineral or ore
is gold or silver, even such scattered fragments may be of
sufficient importance to pay for mining it; but it is obvious that
iron or lead in this scattered form would be valueless. Fortu-


(270)


MINERAL VEINS AND ORE DEPOSITS 271


nately, deposits of lead and copper and the less valuable ores
have in many cases been enriched by accumulation or concen-
tration, so that such an ore deposit may now be much richer
than when it was first formed. The iron ores often occur in
beds or large lenticular masses between sedimentary strata;
but the other ores more frequently are found filling fissures or
seams in the rock, such ore deposits being known as veins.
These ore deposits in veins, however, do not usually fill the
entire cavity. More fre-
quently the actual volume of
the metal is only a very small
part of the total mass filling
the vein, the rest of the ma-
terial being known as gangue,
which may be quartz, calcite,
siderite, or almost any other
sort of rock. One of the most
Fic. 163. Replacement ore deposit. The in- Common substances associated
closed light areas show the ore. The suspended with such mineral deposits is


blocks of still unaltered limestone in the ore 4 4 i
body show that the eavity could not have been sulphide of iron, or pyrite


(From “The Gece aspas elitare (FeS). This substance is

i ai valueless, and if present in
some ores, is a great nuisance, as the sulphur in it is difficult to
get rid of in the process of smelting or reducing the ore.

The veins in which minerals occur are often found to run
across the country for many miles, and to penetrate into the
earth to depths which are beyond the reach of mining. Such
great earth fissures were evidently first caused by the disloca-
tions associated with earthquakes, and their walls are often
quite straight and regular, with a more or less constant width,
and a definite direction of both strike and dip. (Spurr.) The
material filling such a fissure is usually quite distinct in appear-
ance and in character from the wall of country rock on either
side; but there sometimes occurs inside the primary vein an-
other vein, which has evidently been formed after the first de-
posit. Most of such deposits filling veins are thought to have
been made by precipitation from an aqueous solution containing
the materials of the vein, more frequently a hot solution.

In other instances, the circulating waters have apparently
picked up by solution the materials of a part of the rock, such
as the calcite or the phosphate composing a fossil shell, and
have substituted for this material which they have carried off
some entirely different substance, such as iron sulphide or
quartz. In such a case, we find an exact reproduction of the


272 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 164. Sandstone dike in Protoceras beds (Oligocene), south of White River,
South Dakota. (Barnett, U. S. G. S.)


shell or other object, looking exactly like the original, but now
composed of an entirely different material. In a similar way,
the crystals of an ore or mineral deposit may be entirely re-
placed by other materials which now assume the form of the
original crystals. Such phenomena are termed veins of replace-
ment. They occur very commonly in limestones, because the
latter are readily soluble; but they occur in many other kinds
of rock.


MINERAL VEINS AND ORE DEPOSITS 273


Mineral veins are found chiefly in the oldest or Archean
rocks, and in sedimentary rocks which have been much frac-
tured or disturbed; but they are usually absent from regions
of undisturbed strata. Thus mineral veins are generally asso-
ciated with rocks which have been metamorphosed or which are
near to igneous intrusions. Occasionally there are found fis-
sures or veins which have been filled with sand or other sedi-
ment. Such are called sandstone dikes (Fig. 164), though they
are not true dikes, the latter being always composed of igneous
rocks. Such sediment-filled veins have evidently been formed
during some earthquake or volcanic disturbance, when sediment
has been washed into these open fissures from above, or in some
instances, injected into these fissures by pressure from below.


Bedded Ores and Placers. As already mentioned, iron often
occurs in beds which are interstratified with other rocks (Fig.
166) ; but manganese ore and a few other ores are also occa-
sionally found occurring in this way. Such bedded ores of iron
are usually found among rocks which have become highly meta-
morphic, and are especially common in association with the
crystalline schists. Stratified beds of river gravels which con-
tain grains or nuggets of such heavy metals as gold and plati-
num, are termed placers; and they have been formed by the


Fig. 165. View of the Tertiary gold gravel deposits, eee Gold Run and Duteh
Flat, California. (Gale, U. S. S.)


274 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 166. Face of limonite in a mine cut, Cass County, Texas.
(Burchard, U. S. G. S.)


settling and concentration of these metallic particles, which
have been transported by currents of water, and which, because
of their great specific gravity, have settled into pockets or de-
pressions when the sand or gravel was deposited.


Origin of Veins. The exact process by which metalliferous
veins have been produced is not clearly understood, or at least
there is not a perfect agreement among geologists as to how
they have been produced.. Doubtless many variations in the


MINERAL VEINS AND ORE DEPOSITS 275


process have occurred. But in general, it seems evident that
the contents of these veins have been precipitated from solution
in thermal waters and vapors, by a process similar to what is
now going on in connection with many hot springs. Such
thermal waters must have a channel along which they flow; and
as only very minute quantities of the metals are contained in
these waters, large quantities of such waters must pass through
a rock fissure in order to make any considerable accumulation
of the ore. But the rate at which such formation of deposits
may take place is quite obscure. Evidently in the long ago, while
the rocks were more heated than they are now, because of the
metamorphic processes which had only recently taken place,
the rate may have been much more rapid than now in such
localities; for in most instances, this formation of ore deposits
is now completed and no longer in progress, though a few
scattered examples of deposit from hot springs are still observed.
Many speculations have been indulged in, regarding the manner
in which various particular mineral veins have been formed; but
while more or less plausible or interesting as speculations, they
do not have the certainty of definite scientific knowledge.


Secondary Enrichment. A process known as the secondary
enrichment of veins seems to be of very common occurrence.
Many different kinds of veins may be enriched in this way; but
the process may be illustrated by the way in which it occurs in
the case of gold and iron.

The part of any mineral vein above the
level of the ground water is usually much
affected by the processes of weathering.
Below the level of the ground water, or
the water table, gold is often found within
crystals of pyrite, or iron sulphide. But
above the water table, the pyrite has dis-
appeared, leaving the free gold scattered
as minute threads and grains among a
mass of partly shattered quartz, the latter
stained rusty red or brown from the iron
oxides remaining after the pyrite has been
leached out.

Pyrite, under the action of air and water, 5... Jet. Goneretion of clay
is slowly weathered and changed into fer- ironstone split in two, show-
rous sulphate, which is soluble, and which fossil fern (Neuropteris).
in turn is changed by oxidation into limo- Putar O E apne,
nite, and sulphuric acid is set free. This from *rérimen in Columbia


276 THE NEW GEOLOGY


limonite often aceumulates or becomes concentrated in the form
of sheets or beds, and is called gossan or iron hat by the miners
of England.

As there are already many sulphides below the level of
ground water, and as the sulphides above this level have become
oxidized, the latter_are carried downward in soluble form and
then turned again to other sulphides just below the level of the
ground water, forming secondary sulphides, which are often
much richer than the portions still deeper in the earth, since
they represent a more concentrated stage of deposit.

Some of the ores of lead and zinc, often found occurring in
the joints or bedding planes of limestones, may have been
formed in this way.

Doubtless a great variety of methods have been employed by
nature in producing the numerous ore deposits; for the depths
of the earth are an immense chemical laboratory, and these
processes of chemical change are still going on underground.
And it is not at all surprising that we can not always be sure
of the exact method by which certain changes have taken place.


Fic. 168. Crowsnest Mountain, from near Coleman, Alberta. The jointed, precipitous part of
the mountain is composed of Paleozoic limestone, resting on Cretaceous sandstones. This
mountain has an elevation of 9,125 feet, or about 4,800 feet above the valley. It is situated
some twenty miles west of the front range of the Rockies at this point. According to the popu-
lar theory, all this region of Paleozoic strata was pushed bodily over on top of the Cretaceous.


Part IV —Stratigraphical Geology


CHAPTER XVI


Classification


Introduction. As science has been called classified knowl-
edge, the classification of the results attained in geology consti-
tutes an important part of the subject. As this science has
been extensively studied for more than a century and a half,
different systems of classification may well be supposed to have
been in vogue during this time. There has been a constant en-
deavor to arrange the rock deposits of the world in some sort
of chronological order for the world as a whole —a real cos-
mogony. At first, such a chronological arrangement was based
chiefly on the minerals or the lithological character of the rocks.
But about a hundred years ago a system was devised of ar-
ranging the stratified beds of the earth in an alleged chronologi-
cal order based primarily on the types of fossils found in the
rocks. A more minute study of the history of this part of the
science will be given in a later chapter; and a discussion will


(277)


278 THE NEW GEOLOGY


also be given of the value of this chronological or historical ar-
rangement. In this chapter, we must be mainly concerned with
the common methods employed in classifying the rocks, content-
ing ourselves with a mere outline statement of some of the
principles which should govern us in making such a classification.

As we have so often pointed out, geology deals with the
earth's past, and is thus historical in character, and it is prin-
cipally concerned with the problem of how and when the vari-
ous geological formations took place. Moreover, the geological


Fig. 169: Glacier National Park. Summit Mountain from the southwest, showing the con-
tact line on the slope, Algonkian resting on Cretaceous, apparently in conformity.
(Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


work recorded in the rocks evidently took time, and was not all
done instantaneously. The question in this connection is, How
much time? and, How long ago?

The Time Problem. Dealing with this latter point first, we
can only say that remains of numerous living species of animals,
including probably man, are now known to have been involved
in every great class of geological change. The commonly ac-
cepted theory of evolutionary geology would have us believe
that only certain types of life existed in the earlier ages of the
world, and that afterwards these disappeared, and other en-
tirely different types made their appearance, flourished for -a
time, to be in turn succeeded by still different groups. But as
the author has pointed out elsewhere (“The Fundamentals of
Geology,” passim), all this is merely a theory, and is now


Fic. 170. Cliffs of Mount Gould, Glacier National Park, Montana. Algonkian. These rocks
rest on Cretaceous. (Willis, U. S. G. S.)


(279)


280 THE NEW GEOLOGY


definitely disproved by a large number of recently discovered
facts. It follows that we do not have as yet any method truly
scientific by which the many various fossils contained in the rocks
can be arranged in a true historical order. Accordingly, we are
compelled, in the present state of our knowledge, to regard all the
species of plants and animals now found as fossils as having
probably lived contemporaneously in an older state of our world.
And while it would be absurd to say that all the great geological
changes recorded in the fossiliferous rocks occurred at once, yet
it is impossible to say that any of these fossils lived before
other kinds of plants and animals, or before man himself was
living on the earth. This much is scientifically certain; and it
is about all that we are scientifically certain of in the com-
plicated condition of this very large subject. Perhaps before
we get through with the study of these fossiliferous deposits,
we may have arrived at more definite knowledge on various other
points; but it will not do for us to be dogmatic about these
matters here at the outset.

As to how much time was occupied in the geological changes,
we can speak only in the most general terms. In any un-
disturbed vertical section, the lower strata were certainly laid
down before those on top; and this gives us a local time scale.
But such a local chronology is of no value, unless we can cor-
relate the events occurring in this locality with other events
which are recorded in other parts of the world. At present, we
do not have any basis for such correlation which will bear the
rigid inspection of exact science. But from a study of the
rocks in a large way, it appears that most of the mountain mak-
ing occurred after the greater part of the strata were deposited.
The erosion of the valleys, and the deposits made by the rivers in
the form of their high terraces, came next in order; and such
erosion and the formation of other river deposits is still going
on in a greatly modified way. Furthermore, it seems quite evi-
dent that the so-called “glacial” deposits (or more properly, the
drift) were spread out after probably all of the true fossilifer-
ous strata were formed, and even (it may be) after much of the
mountain making had been done. Much the same statements
may be made regarding the old shore lines which encircle all
the continents. This much in the way of a chronology or his-
tory of the events recorded in the rocks is about all that we can
state with certainty just at present.


On the hypothesis of a universal Deluge, we would merely have a SEE:
and awful event, so far as its beginnings are concerned. According to the
Bible account, the Flood prevailed over the whole earth a little more than a


CLASSIFICATION 281


year, with much additional time before a complete readjustment was effected.
Doubtless the full recovery from it occupied much more time than the event
itself. On this hypothesis, we might well suppose that the completion of the
mountain making, and the spreading out of the drift over Western Europe
and Northeastern America, may have occurred years or even centuries:
after the other geological work was done, and after practically the present
land and ocean boundaries had been established.


Fic. 171. Surface of fossiliferous limestone slab, one twenty-fifth natural size. Upper
Ordovician. (Photograph by Bassler.)


But whether we accept this hypothesis of a universal Deluge
or not, the chronology of events as outlined in the next to the
last paragraph preceding is definite and scientific enough, so
far as it goes. Thus on the basis of any truly scientific study
of the rocks, there are but two great ages known to inductive
geology, and these two ages we may well term the geological
proper and the recent. However, the time limits of each of
these are entirely unknown from any mere geological investiga-
tion. No system yet devised of reading absolute time from the
rocks has the slightest scientific value. The length of time
which was occupied in quietly accumulating the vast mass of


282 THE NEW GEOLOGY


organic and inorganic materials which were subsequently taken
up by the waters and rearranged as we now find them, is wholly
beyond scientific conjecture. And if we deal with this subject
by the methods of natural science alone, the length of time since
these great earth changes occurred can be only very roughly
approximated. N


STRATIGRAPHICAL GEOLOGY treats of the kinds and distribution
of the fossil-bearing strata; the kinds of fossils found in them; and a classi-
fication of these rocks into appropriate groups based on the fossils which
they contain. It also includes the larger lessons to be learned from the con-
ditions and circumstances in which we find both the strata and their fossil
contents. This part of the general subject of geology used to be called
“historical geology,” which was a decidedly objectionable term, because the
historical distinctions which were thus dealt with were based on a purely
artificial arrangement of the rocks, and these historical distinctions we have
now found to be wholly unscientific and fanciful.


Principles of Classification


Merely a Taxonomic Series. Although all the present sys-
tems used in classifying the plants and animals of our world,
living and extinct, are more or less fanciful and unnatural, be-
cause of the dominating theoretical prejudices under which
these classifications have been arranged, yet, in most cases, the
deviations from a more natural system are not of sufficient
importance to occasion any serious objection to their use in such
a work as this. The geological series also represents merely a
taxonomic series of the life of the ancient world; and like any
modern taxonomy or classification, it is a purely conventional
arrangement for educational convenience, and has been based
on the prevailing ideas of the structural relations between the
different groups of the fossils. The dominant idea, of course,
in the minds of those who arranged the geological series, was
the evolution theory regarding the development of life, and this
theory is embalmed in thé arrangement which was thus made.
Repeatedly, during all the history of the science, the recognized
order in which the fossils owght to be placed, has been subject
to readjustment; and such readjustments are still of frequent
occurrence, aS a means of bringing the geological order of the
fossils into more apparent agreement with what is recognized
as the true organic development. Yet, in spite of all this, it will
be possible for us to handle this present arrangement and
take it at its face value, so far as a mere classification of the
fossils is concerned. But we must constantly endeavor to for-
get the time-values which have so long been associated with this
arrangement. Hence, though we shall continue to use the ac-


CLASSIFICATION 283


Fic. 172. A shark’s tooth, natural size, from North Carolina.


cepted geological classification of the stratified rocks, we must
at the outset repudiate most emphatically any idea of a time-
value attaching to the various geological names. In many ways,
the current system of geological classification seems absurd for
those who realize the fanciful— we might almost say, the
farcical— character of the reasons behind such an arrange-
ment; but it has been thought best for the present to continue
the popular classification, because of its almost universal ac-
ceptance and its familiarity in the minds of most intelligent
people of the present day.


284 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Criteria. The following are some of the leading principles
which must constantly be borne in mind while studying the fos-
siliferous deposits:

1. The larger divisions of the rocks are named from the
dominant types of life which they contain. These larger divi-
sions are termed groups. Thus we have the Mesozoic group,
which is often called the group of reptiles (formerly the “Age of
Reptiles”), because the dominant type is reptilian: The follow-
ing words from standard authorities will make this point clear:

“The primary divisions of the geological time-scale are, as
we have seen, based on the changes in life, with the result that
fossils alone determine whether a formation belongs to one or
the other of these great divisions.”— Grabau, “Principles of
Stratigraphy,” p. 1108.

But the systems, or the subdivisions of the groups, are like-
wise based just as wholly on the types of life which they con-
tain, as will appear from the following:

“These systems, although actually arbitrary groupings of the
stratified rocks of particular regions, have come into common
use as the primary divisions of the rocks whenever chronologi-
cal sequence is considered. In describing any newly discovered
fossiliferous strata in any part of the earth, the first step to be
taken, in giving them a scientific definition, is to assign them to
one or other of these systems upon evidence of the fossils found
in them. The character of the rocks themselves, their composi-
tion, or their mineral contents have nothing to do with settling
the question as to the particular system to which the new rocks
belong. The fossils alone are the means of correlation.”—
H. S. Williams, “Geological Biology,” pp. 37, 88.

2. The stratified rocks comprise an indefinite number of
shales, limestones, sandstones, and conglomerates; but these
mineral or lithological characters are of little or no assistance
in identifying, classifying, or naming the fossiliferous rocks,
as almost any kind of life is likely to be found in any of these
types of rocks indifferently. That is, mineral and lithological
characters, though of great value in any limited locality in
tracing out continuous strata, are of little value in identifying
or classifying rocks in any large way, and are quite generally
ignored; though in some instances, it has been found that par-
ticular types of life accompany certain textures of deposits.

Where some peculiar type of rock is spread out over a large
region, it may be often identified in disconnected localities by
its structural characters, entirely without the aid of fossils.
Thus the remarkably interesting Paleozoic limestones of North-


CLASSIFICATION 285


ern Montana and Southern Alberta are readily recognized, even
at great distances, by their characteristic jointed structure, often
comprising the rectangular, cathedral-like tops of such mountains
as Chief and Crowsnest. Thus in this subordinate sense, litho-
logical characters are useful in identifying and classifying rocks.

But it must also be remembered that “the same bed often
changes its character from a sandstone to a shale, or from a shale
to a limestone or a conglomerate, or again to a sandstone”
(Dana), within a few miles, or even within a few hundred


Fic. 173. Uneonsolidated Pennsylvanian clay and sandstone resting on St. Louis limestone
(Mississippian), southwest of Colchester, Illinois. (Hinds, U. S. G. S.)


feet. And it is also true that when distinctly different types of
fossils are found in different parts of what seem like the same
set of connected strata, some way will always be discovered or
invented to account for this apparent connection; for fossilifer-
ous evidence is always considered paramount to all other evi-
dence whatever.

3. The condition of a rock as to its degree of solidification or
crystallization is no guarantee as to the kinds of fossils which
it may contain. Any type of life, even what used to be called
the very “youngest,” is likely to be found in crystalline or
metamorphic rock, as old in appearance as any on the globe.
The Cambrian beds near Petrograd, in Russia, and in Wiscon-
sin, are as young in appearance as some recent river deposits,
consisting, as they do, of clays that are scarcely indurated, and
sands still incoherent (Figs. 173 and 174). Conversely, many


19


286 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 174. Cretaceous sand and gravel (unconsolidated), looking east from Sixteenth Street,
Washington, D. C., just above Florida Avenue. (Butts, U. S. G. S.)


beds containing “young” fossils, and therefore classed high up
in the geological series, are contained in rocks as old-looking as
any on the globe. The Eocene schists of the Alps, and the
Eocene marbles of the Himalayas, are as highly metamorphosed
and crystalline as even the oldest of the Paleozoic rocks; and
the same may be said of many of the “young” Tertiary rocks of
the Coast Range of California. The Nagelfluh of Salzburg,
Austria, is a highly consolidated conglomerate, although it is
classed as Pleistocene; and a similarly solidified deposit of
Pleistocene is to be seen near the railway station at Lewiston,
on the Niagara River.

4. “A stratum of one era may rest upon any stratum in the
whole of the series below it.” (Dana.) Not only so, but it
may even rest conformably upon it, giving every physical evi-
dence that the one followed the other in quick succession. Thus
the Cretaceous may rest in apparent conformity on the De-
vonian, the whole of the Jurassic, Triassic, Permian, and Car-
boniferous being wanting, as occurs around Lake Athabaska
for some 150 miles. At Ust-Waga, on the Dwina, in Northern
Russia, the Pleistocene shell beds rest in “absolutely conform-
able superposition on the horizontal Permian sediments” (Suess),
while many similar examples could be given elsewhere (Fig.
422). In such cases, there is nothing even in the way of erosion
to give a hint of the alleged long ages of time intervening be-


CLASSIFICATION 287


tween the successive beds. Judged by these localities, these
alleged ages never existed.

5. But the exact reverse of these conditions may also occur.
That is, Cambrian or Silurian or Devonian beds may be found
not only above Triassic, Cretaceous, or Tertiary, but they may be
found in this position with just as much apparent conformability,
giving every physical evidence, over vast areas, of having been de-
posited in the order in which we find them. Chief Mountain,
Montana, and Crowsnest Mountain, Alberta (Fig. 168), are
examples of Paleozoic limestones and quartzites resting in ap-
parent conformability upon Cretaceous shales. Indeed, the
whole of the Glacier National Park is composed of Paleozoic
rocks resting in a perfectly normal way on the Cretaceous; for
on all sides of this large area, the Cretaceous beds run under
the Paleozoic mountains almost horizontally, though of course
it would be unreasonable to expect- to find true conformability
throughout this area. Many similar examples from other parts
of the world will be given in a later chapter.

6. Where we can not prove, by physical evidence, that the
strata have been disturbed, the obvious order of superposition,
as shown by a vertical section or by outcrops of inclined strata,
ought to be regarded as the true historical order for the locality.
No theories concerning a supposed “normal order” of the fossils


“A coin-conglomerate containing


Fic. 176.
silver coins of the reign of Edward I, found


Fic. 175. A fossil skeleton of man from a
shell-rock of Guadeloupe, West Indies. “It is


the remains of an Indian killed in battle two
centuries since; and the rock is of the same
kind with that which is now forming and
consolidating on the shores.” (J. D. Dana.)


at a depth of ten feet below the bed of the

river Dove in England.” (J.D. Dana.) Both

of these examples illustrate how rapidly rock
tends to harden under certain conditions.


288 THE NEW GEOLOGY


should be allowed to warp our conclusion as to the historical
order of events in any particular locality, as read from the local
order of superposition. Physical and natural evidence should
always have the right of way over theoretical evidence of every
kind, and especially over fossil evidence. Fossil evidence (theo-
retical) ought to be regarded as utterly worthless when con-
fronted with a physical fact.

But as physical or stratigraphical evidence is the only kind
of evidence competent to testify in reference to the relative
ages of two contiguous strata, even this evidence is of only local
value, pertinent only so far as the beds themselves extend. We
no longer believe in the onion-coat theory, since we know that


Fic. 177. Skeleton of Mastodon giganteus.


all sedimentary beds are of limited extent; and hence the order
of the beds in one locality can never be allowed to dictate the
relative order of the beds in another locality with which they are
not in stratigraphical relationship. And onion coats of fossilifer-
ous strata are as absurd and unscientific as onion coats of a lithic
or a mineralogical character. j

7. But when we decide that one bed is older than another,
on stratigraphical evidence, it is obvious that we can not say
how much older it is. Even an angular unconformity between
the two may mean only a sudden earthquake and the erosion
of the tilted (unconsolidated) strata by submarine currents; and
all this may have taken place deep beneath the waters, within a
short space of time. Or if these upturned and eroded strata
were elevated above the waters, the time interval represented
may be only the interval between two successive tides, if the


CLASSIFICATION 289


lower strata happened to be soft and unconsolidated when the
disturbance took place. To explain every angular unconformity,
or any angular unconformity, as due to slow elevation above the
sea and then to ordinary subaérial erosion and base-leveling, is
pure assumption, and has no finality or certainty about it as a
scientific fact.

A very marked break in the fossils between two consecutive
beds is always interpreted as implying a very great lapse of
time. But if we do not deny the possibility of biological zones
and districts in the olden time, but admit that diverse faunas
and floras may have existed contemporaneously in separated
localities, just as they do to-day, a marked break in the fossils
of two successive beds may mean only a change in the currents,
or the mere difference between the ebb-and the flow of the tide,
bringing into a vertical relationship of position distinct faunas
or floras which had been living in a geographical relationship
more or less distance apart.

Hence, although an angular unconformity or a marked break
in the fossils between two contiguous layers of the strata shows
a distinct time interval, yet this interval may not have been
long. We may assume that it was a long interval; but this
would be a pure assumption, with no warrant in the way of
strictly scientific evidence.

8. More common sense and less theory needs to be used in
stating the total thickness of the strata found in any particular
locality. It is often the case that strata are added together to
make an absurd total, with no more justification than there
would be in adding together the total thickness of the scales on
a fish from the tail to the head, because they are found to over-
lap, or in adding all the shingles on the roof of a house. The
report of a total thickness of the strata in any particular locality
which greatly exceeds what can be physically demonstrated in
some vertical section, ought always to be regarded with sus-
picion. Such an excessive thickness is usually built up out of
theory; and geologists need to be especially mindful of the rule
of inductive evidence that the inference from one theory must
never be treated as the substantive foundation for another
theory; or as it is commonly stated, we must never base an in-
ference on an inference. If this rule were always followed, there
would be much less ink and paper wasted at the government
printing office and at other printing establishments.

Groups, Systems, Formations. As has been already stated,
the larger divisions of the strata, or the groups, as classified
in the geological series, such as the Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and Ceno-


290 THE NEW GEOLOGY


zoic, are based wholly on organic factors, and are merely ideal
divisions entirely independent of stratigraphical considerations.

The next set of divisions, or the systems, such as the Cam-
brian, Ordovician, Silurian, Devonian, etc., were originally
based chiefly on field evidence, or stratigraphical evidence. But
with the progress -of the science, and with the assembling of
vast numbers of formations gathered from widely separated
localities to make each of these systems complete, these systems
have in turn become merely ideal or imaginary groups, based
wholly on organic or evolutionary considerations. The inferior
subdivisions, called variously stages, zones, horizons, or simply
formations, which have chiefly local geographical names, still
retain much more of their original stratigraphical features; and
it is often extremely difficult or impossible to assign them to a
definite place in one of the higher divisions, since they may
contain typical groups of fossils found in two or more. This
difficulty arises from the arbitrary character of the larger di-
visions, which are based not on stratigraphy, but on theoretical
relations between the types of life, stratigraphy and these taxo-
nomic relations being wholly incommensurable; just as it would
be, in fact, to try to measure music by the square yard, or
beauty by the gallon. These difficulties arising from an attempt
to classify the stratigraphical formations according to an arti-
ficial scheme of life, are continually multiplying with a more
careful and detailed study of the rocks in new localities, such
as Australia, China, and Africa; but even these subordinate di-
visions are fast assuming a purely abstract or constructive
character, as various scattered formations are assembled and
grouped together under some common name.

There can be no serious objection to the following rule put
forward by the United States Geological Survey to determine
the method of defining and identifying the formation as the
stratigraphical unit:
=) “As uniform conditions of deposition were local as well as temporary,
it is to be assumed that each formation is limited in horizontal extent. The
formation should be recognized and should be called by the same name as


far as it can be traced and identified by means of its lithologic character, its
stratigraphical association, and its contained fossils.”


But we must ever bear in mind that when such a formation
has thus been worked out in some definite locality in the field
the correlation of this formation with other similar formations
on the other side of the globe (it may be), or its assignment to
a definite place in the long series of successive life-forms, is not
the work of the field, but of the laboratory or the library, and


CLASSIFICATION 291


is based wholly on theoretical considerations regarding an imagi-
nary succession of life. Thus this correlation with other distant
formations, and its assignment to a place in the hypothetical
ladder of life, are both purely arbitrary and artificial acts, and
their results have only a constructive existence, with only such
values as are possessed by the theories on which they are based.


Methods. As worked out in the field, the methods employed
are logical and scientific enough for the local conditions only,
or until a correlation is made with distant localities, or until
speculative theories regarding the time relationships of organ-
isms are dragged into the work. Dana has thus stated the
method:


“In the study of a new region it is necessary at the outset to make arbi-
trary subdivisions of its formations, such as may seem most convenient and
natural, and give them local names. These names have at first only a note-
book value. When the relations of the beds to those recognized in other
regions have been ascertained through fossils, the facts begin to take their
place in the general geological history of the country; and should the corre-
lation be complete, the local names may give way to those generally accepted
elsewhere.” —“Manual,” p. 405.


Difficulties. But in multitudes of cases, it has been found
difficult or impossible to correlate exactly these newly studied,
beds with the classifications recognized elsewhere. In such in-
stances, the local names are retained and are used as new local
centers of crystallization about which other neighboring strata
may be assembled, as in the case of the Laramie of the Rocky
Mountain region, which are partly Cretaceous and partly Ter-
tiary, or the Rhetic formation on the Rhine River, in Europe,
which can not with certainty be assigned to either the Triassic or
the Jurassic, or the Morrison beds of the eastern front of the
Rockies, which are partly Jurassic and partly Cretaceous. Liter-
ally hundreds of similar examples might be given.

Such a failure on the part of a formation to fit into its pre-
arranged pigeonhole, is often dodged or disguised by another
method which is not so candid or so justifiable. Also this
method is employed when species are found in kinds of rock
where they are not at all expected, and where, according to the
prevailing theories, it is quite incredible that they should be
found. In such a predicament, the not very honorable expedient
is resorted to of inventing a new name, specific or even generic,
for these inconveniently found fossils, to disguise or gloss over
the strange similarity between them and the others which have
already been assigned to wholly different formations. As re-
marked by Heilprin:


292 THE NEW GEOLOGY


“It is practically certain that numerous forms of life, ex-
hibiting no distinctive characters of their own, are constituted
into distinct species for no other reason than that they occur
in formations widely separated from those holding their nearest
kin.”—“Geographical and Geological Distribution of Animals,”
pp. 183, 184.


the 22,000 mollusks, the quarter of a million arthropods, with the uncounted echinoderms,
brachiopods, and celenterates, and weed out those that are mere duplicates but listed as
distinct species or genera because of our ignorance or our disregard of the possibilities of
Mendelian variations in these groups, or because their fossil representatives are found in
“widely separated” formations, and the traditional theories forbid that they be identical,
although they may look exactly alike? It seems a hopeless task; but the tendency of the best
zodlogical work is strongly in this direction. These reformed methods, however, have not yet
been adopted among the paleontologists.


What the Terms Mean. In the following enumeration, we
have adhered to the current nomenclature as nearly as possible,
even at the expense of retaining some names which are de-
cidedly objectionable because of their etymological meaning, and
which may ultimately have to be discarded when a true induc-
tive geology has become more firmly established.

However, we all understand that by Cambrian, Devonian,
Triassic, and the other names of systems, we mean only those
rocks which contain certain kinds of fossils. And as most of
the names of the systems and the divisions are geographical in
origin, they are, in themselves, neutral as to theory, and will
probably endure the test of time. In this respect, they conform
to the standard set by Huxley in his essay on “Homotaxis,”
where he demands names expressing merely “similarity of
serial relation, and excluding the notion of time altogether.”
The names of the great groups, “Paleozoic,” “Mesozoic,” and
“Cenozoic,” as well as the name “Tertiary,” are decidedly ob-
jectionable as embalming the fancies of an outgrown hypoth-
esis, and will some day have to give place to others, that
express no theory as to age or origin. But they have been re-
tained here, as Dana says of “Tertiary,” “simply because of
the convenience of continuing an accepted name.” Chemistry
and astronomy still carry many names surviving from the old
fooleries of alchemy and astrology; and perhaps geology can
hardly expect to fare much better.


The Groups. In most places, we do not have to go very far
down into the earth before we come upon rocks which contain
no fossils and which we have every reason to believe never
contained any. Whether we assume the evolution theory, or
assume the creation hypothesis, and its corollary, a world Deluge,
we must always come, sooner or later in our descent into the


CLASSIFICATION 293


earth, upon these primary or original rocks, which we may
suppose to have existed before the fossiliferous beds began to
be laid down. They have gone under many names, and of late
they have been subdivided elaborately into alleged successive
ages. They are usually highly crystalline or metamorphic, but
there is no antecedent reason why we must always expect to
find them in this condition. These lowest and really oldest
rocks we shall agree to call the Primary or Primitive group.

There is always a marked unconformity between the Archean
rocks and the strata lying upon them.

The next great group of rocks contains a great variety of
the lower forms of life, such as mollusks, crinoids, corals, trilo-
bites, also numerous low types of fishes, and the preserved re-
mains of a luxuriant vegetation of a low or “primitive” charac-
ter, as found in our greatest coal beds. These rocks also contain
some amphibians and reptiles of inferior tribes. This group of
rocks is called the Paleozoic group. Or, to turn the statement
around the other way, so as to accord with the actual methods
employed, it would be more exact and scientific to say that any
rocks found to contain such types of life as we have just spoken
of, are always classed with the Paleozoic group, no matter
whether they look old or young, and no matter what their
stratigraphical relationship with any other group or set of strata.


On the hypothesis of a world Deluge, it would not be necessary to assume
that all the beds of this group were rearranged by the waters of that tur-
moil. Many of them may be regarded as still in their original positions.


The next great group of the fossiliferous rocks is quite dis-
tinct from those already mentioned as to the contained types of
life, there being few species common to the two groups. The
dominant type of life in these is the reptilian, so much so that
these rocks were formerly assigned to an “Age of Reptiles.”
But this group is now better known as the Mesozoic group
(mesozoic—middle life). Or, to make additional remarks simi-
lar to those already made regarding the preceding group,
any strata which contain the typical fossils of this group would
on that account be assigned to this group, no matter what their
mineral or lithologic texture, and no matter what their strati-
graphical relation to any of the other rocks.

Last of all, we have a great group of rocks consisting of a
great variety of textures and a still greater variety of fossils.
These rocks contain few of the great reptiles, and few of the
types of life assigned to the other groups. Instead, they contain
the remains of land quadrupeds or mammals in great numbers


294 THE NEW GEOLOGY


and in amazing variety, with the higher orders of plants and
the more “modern” types of invertebrate life. Some scanty and
ambiguous remains of man are assigned to the “uppermost” or
“latest” part of this group. These rocks comprise the Cenozoic
group. That is, any rocks which contain the bones of the great
land quadrupeds or. the shells of certain of the “higher” inver-
tebrates, would because of these very facts be assigned to the
Cenozoic group. And this definite and positive assignment
would be made in spite of any appearance of great antiquity
which they might show, or in spite of even direct and positive
proof of Mesozoic or Paleozoic rocks stratigraphically above
them. If lithologic texture and stratigraphic position agree
with the fossil evidence, all right and good; they are then re-
garded as “assisting” in the classification of the rocks. But if
lithologic texture and stratigraphic position disagree with the
fossil evidence, so much the worse for the texture of the rock
and its apparent position. Such is the universal method of
reasoning employed in this classification.


Illogical Methods. A card catalogue or index is a very useful thing
in a library. But it would strike us as highly absurd if some antiquary
should come along and solemnly assure us that this card catalogue showed
the real history of the order in which the books listed had been published.
Suppose he should affirm that all the books listed under A and B had been
issued first, while those under X, Y, and Z had been issued last. Would we
not think that this antiquary ought probably to be put into some institution
for his own protection, if not for the protection of the public?


But the geological classification as currently taught, based
on the grade of fossils contained in the various rocks, is just as
purely artificial as the card catalogue of a library, and has no
more time-value to its subdivisions. It is merely a convenient
working classification, that is all, something to help us to name
and handle the numerous fossiliferous deposits in different parts
of the world. It has been made a fetish, and evolutionary
theories about the development of the various types of life have
been allowed to take possession of it. But they do not own it
and we who have had our eyes opened regarding the folly of
trying to tabulate all the rock deposits in a historical order accord-
ing to the grade of fossils they contain, can still make good use
of this classification, even though we have discarded the tradi-
tional time-values so long associated with these systems.

On an average, probably the Cenozoic rocks are oftener un-
consolidated than are those classed as Mesozoic or Paleozoic.

Since the Primary group of rocks contains no fossils, it can
not be subdivided in quite the same way as are the other groups.


CLASSIFICATION 295


It has its own system of subdivision, which will be mentioned
later. But each of the other groups is subdivided into systems,
and these again into series, and still again into other subdi-
visions known by various names, sometimes called zones or
horizons, or simply formations.

The following tables will represent these divisions and sub-
divisions conveniently for the eye of the student.


CLASSIFICATION
Group System | Series Dominant
Type of Life
Quaternary or Recent
Post-Tertiary or Terrace
Pleistocene Drift (Glacial) Man
Cenozoic | Pliocene a
E | Miocene Mammals
Tertiary Oligocene
| Eocene
| Paleocene
Cretaceous | Upper or Cretaceous Proper
| Lower or Comanchean
| Upper (Malm) Reptiles
Mesozoic Jurassic | Middle (Dogger) Conifers
f Lower (Lias) and
Upper (Keuper) Palms
Triassic | Middle (Muschelkalk)
| Lower (Bunter Sandstein)
Permian Upper j Amphibians
Lower and
Carbonif Pennsylvanian Coal Plants
BIDET ous Mississippian
Upper Fishes
Devonian Middle and
Lower Insects
Paleozoic Upper — Monroan
Silurian Middle — Salina
Lower — Niagara
Upper — Cincinnatian
Ordovician Middle — Champlainian Invertebrates
Lower — Canadian
Saratogan
Cambrian Acadian


Waucobian
Primary or Algonkian Few Fossils
Primitive Archean or None


The geological series, or any subdivision of it, is always
read from the bottom upward, in accord with the supposition
that the first part of the series is farther down in the earth
than are the other parts of the series. This is not necessarily
or always the case; but one may as well get accustomed to this
order as to the reverse.


296 THE NEW GEOLOGY


The student should not be misled by the appearances given
in such tables as these, of the strata piled one above another in
a regular order of superposition. No fact in the whole science
of geology is more necessary to be borne in mind than that the
rocks do NOT thus occur in a single case anywhere on earth.
Parts of two or three consecutive systems may occasionally be
found in a locality together in this relative order; but parts of
two or three of the systems are about as much as are ever
found together. Moreover, there is a great law regarding the
order and positions of the strata, which will be shown in detail
in a subsequent chapter, and will be illustrated in many ways
with numerous examples, this law being known as the Law of
Conformable Stratigraphic Sequence. This law says that —

Any kind of fossiliferous rock, “young” or “old,” may be found
conformably on any other kind of fossiliferous rock, “older”
or “younger.”

If the student will bear this great law in mind, he is not
likely to be misled by any representation of these various types
of rocks in a regular suceessive series.

Geologic maps are often published which show the distribu-
tion of the different fossiliferous rocks. As will appear in a later
chapter, any one of these great systems or series of rocks may
be found resting upon the Archzean; also any one of them may be
found at the top of the ground, and may constitute practically
all of the surface rocks of any particular locality, with or with-
out other fossiliferous rocks below. A geological map is made
to represent the kinds of fossiliferous rocks appearing on the
surface in various localities, usually disregarding the soil and
loose materials on the top of the ground.

Distribution. Thus whenever we speak of the distribution
of a certain kind of rocks, we mean that these rocks are at
the surface throughout a certain region, disregarding the loose
soil on top, and even disregarding what are known as “drift”
materials, whenever such occur. But according to geological
custom, a formation is often said to be distributed over a wide
region, when its existence over much of this region is only
inferred from the dip and other characters of the beds which
outcrop here and there, and which are supposed to be continu-
ous deep beneath other surface deposits. In some instances,
this principle is legitimate enough; but it must always be used
with caution, as it always involves the risk of mistakes; and it
is sometimes used in a way that does not carry any conviction
as to its correctness, to affirm the continuous extension of deep-
lying strata between two or more widely separated exposures.


CHAPTER XVII


Fossils and Their Uses in Geology


Historical Sketch. Many centuries ago it was observed that
fossils resembling the shells found in the sea are to be found
far inland, often high up on some mountain side. Among the
ancient Greeks, some of the wise ones attempted to explain
these fossils as the result of a natural plastic force inherent in
the earth itself. About the fifteenth century, when the mind of
man was awaking from the slumber of ages, there was much
controversy about the origin of fossils. The most common ex-
planation at that time was that the fossils are mere mineral
concretions, mere freaks of nature— lusus nature, as they
were often called. Others asserted that they had been formed
in the soil under the magic influence of the stars. Still others
declared that they must represent plants and animals which
were once alive on the earth, and that had been buried at the
time of the Deluge, which was regarded at that time as a real
event which had overtaken the world and which had destroyed
most of the plants and animals then living upon it.


This last view was finally formulated into an argument of more or less
scientific character, and was called the “diluvial theory.” This opinion re-
garding the fossils was held by many scientists of national reputatim down
until the early part of the nineteenth century.


Throughout all the Mediterranean countries, there are de-
posits which contain fossils in such vast numbers as could not
fail to arrest the attention of all inquiring minds. Among the
Greeks and the Romans, there were many who explained these
fossil deposits as having been due to the various vicissitudes
through which the earth had passed; and based on this view,
the theory grew up that there had been many successive cata-
clysms and re-creations of plant and animal life. This latter
view maintained its position in the world alongside the diluvial
theory until about the beginning of the nineteenth century. At
about that time, the explanation was adopted that these suc-
cessive cataclysms and re-creations were not as sharply marked
off as had been formerly supposed, but that on the contrary, the
types of one age had blended more or less naturally with those
before and after. About the middle of the nineteenth century,
this theory was gradually and imperceptibly transformed into
the modern theory of evolutionary geology, which is the pre-
vailing view at the present time.

(297)


298 THE NEW GEOLOGY


A more detailed study of the rise and progress of the science
will be given in a later chapter.

Index Fossils. On a certain occasion, J. W. Powell, director
of the United States Geological Survey, was before a Congres-
sional committee, and explained the value of paleontology by
saying that it is “the geologist’s clock.” More recently we have
had two large volumes issued by Grabau and Shimer, two
prominent paleontologists, the title of these volumes being
“North American Index Fossils.” Charles Schuchert has a chap-
ter in his “Textbook of Geology,” entitled, “‘Fossils, the Ge-
ologist’s Time Markers.” In various other
ways, the position which the fossils oc-
cupy in the study of geology has been
stated by various writers. Occasionally
some dabbler in the science of geology will
be found to declare that the rocks of the
globe are not arranged solely and entirely
according to their fossil contents, but that
stratigraphic position and lithologic text-
ure are also used, with some other consid-
erations, like base-leveling, disconforma-
ties, and diastrophism, in order to help out
the testimony of the fossils concerning the
Fr. 18. toe S ` exact age of any definite rock deposit. Bin

: such a claim is very misleading. It is like
many half truths, which are so often worse than direct false-
hoods. It is true that any or all of these considerations are oc-
casionally employed when the fossils are scanty or when their
evidence is found to be ambiguous. But no experienced geolo-
gist would for a moment admit even the direct contradictory evi-
dence of any or all of these other considerations combined, when
confronted with the direct and unequivocal testimony of the
fossils. How, then, is it wrong to say that the evidence of the
fossils is taken as the one and sole testimony concerning the age
of a rock deposit?

How Index Fossils Are Used. We may illustrate the way in
which the fossils are used to determine the age of a rock de-
posit. Hundreds of other examples might be given; but these
are typical of the rest.


In 1902, the first fossils were brought from the Antarctic Continent.
They were only about a dozen all told; but among them were some fossil
ammonites belonging to genera which had already been found in other parts
of the world and had been classified as Cretaceous. It was further known
that these particular ammonites were good index fossils for certain par-


FOSSILS AND THEIR USES IN GEOLOGY 299


ticular subdivisions of the Cretaceous, and that these fossils occur in no
other formations, either above or below. Accordingly, on the basis of these
few fossils, the geological “age” of these rocks in the Antarctic Continent is
settled once and for all.

Another example: The rocks of the oil region at Tampico, Mexico, have
been hard to classify, as they have yielded few determinable fossils. How-
ever, the government printing office, at Washington, D. C., recently issued
a paper by Dr. T. W. Stanton describing a new rudistid mollusk belonging
to the family Radiolitide, which is regarded as strictly confined to the


Fic. 179. Sandstone block containing a large fossil palm leaf, from Coryell Coal Mines, New
Castle, Colorado. (Gale, U. S. G. 8.)


Cretaceous system (Fig. 180). On the basis of this single fossil shell, Dr.
Stanton declares that this fortunate discovery “establishes the Cretaceous
age of the San Felipe formation in its typical exposures west of Tampico.”


In the preceding chapter, we have seen that the great groups
of the strata are based entirely on theoretical considerations re-
garding the order in which the fossils have occurred. The same
is true also of the systems, which are the subdivisions of next
rank. The subordinate divisions, as we have seen, with local
geographic names, such as the John Day beds, the Laramie, the
Niagara, or the Dakota formation, are based largely on field
experience; but the place in the geological time-scale to which
they are to be assigned is wholly a matter of fossil evidence.


300 THE NEW GEOLOGY


If a new set of beds were to be found in Russia, or at Cape
Horn, or in Alaska, or in China, and these beds contained
trilobites, every geologist on earth would assign these beds to
some part of the Paleozoic group, the exact position in this
group depending entirely upon the kind of trilobites. Similarly,
if beds containing belemnites were found in any of these lo-
calities, the rocks would be classed, without any hesitation, as
Mesozoic, the position in the Mesozoic group to which they
would be assigned depending, as before, upon the grade or char-


Fig. 180. An “index fossil” Sawvagesia degolgeri, Stanton, recently dis-
covered in the Tampico region, Mexico. Dr. T. W. Stanton says of it, that
it “establishes the Cretaceous age of the San Felipe formation in its
typical exposures west of Tampico.” (“A New Cretaceous Rudistid,”’
“Proceedings of the United States National Museum,” Vol. 59, p. 453.)


acter of these fossils. So much, then, for the general view of
the position occupied by the fossils as the index or ticket of the
exact “age” of a rock deposit.

The consideration of this method, and a discussion of its-
scientific value, and the logical principles involved, must be
left over for another chapter.


Conditions Favoring Fossilization. Plants or animals which
are buried wholly under water, as in the deeper waters of the
seas, are much more likely to be preserved from complete de-
composition than those buried in the soil of the land, because
far less oxygen comes in contact with those under the former
condition. Both in ancient times and under modern conditions,
marine organisms stand a much better chance of being pre-
served. Indeed, over the lands, there are only insignificant de-


FOSSILS AND THEIR USES IN GEOLOGY 301


posits here and there which preserve any remains of plants or
animals long enough for them to become true fossils.

The following words from Dana state the matter very
clearly:


“Over the land, the chance of burial is very small. Plants and all animal
matter pass off in gases, when exposed in the atmosphere or in dry earth;
and bones and shells become slowly removed in solution, when buried in
sands through which waters may percolate. Vertebrate animals, as fishes,


{
VPI — Om Sa


/


i
Í Yr J


Fic. 181. Delta of the Mississippi.


reptiles, ete., which fall to pieces when the animal portion is removed, re-
quire speedy burial after death, to escape destruction from this source as
well as from animals that would prey upon them.”—“Manual,” p. 141.


David Starr Jordan declares that “the chances for the pres-
ervation of any individual fish are a hundred thousand to one
against it.”

Insects are rarely found as fossils, while birds are exceed-
ingly rare.

The lowest forms of life are now contributing most toward
rock formation, as the corals, crinoids, rhizopods, brachiopods,
and mollusks. Since they form hard parts which are largely
composed of rock material, the accumulation of these parts
contributes very largely to the formation of rocks when the


20


302 THE NEW GEOLOGY


creatures are dead. On the other hand, the higher forms of life
are contributing practically nothing to the mass of rocks in our
modern world, a few stray specimens which are buried here and
there under very exceptional circumstances being all that are
now preserved as fossils.

Usually when any relic of life is buried under such condi-
tions as to insure its preservation as a fossil, there takes place
a more or less marked change in its substance. The exact form
and appearance of the original may be preserved, even while
there may be an entire replacement of the original component
elements by other very different elements. Such changes are
of course chemical processes; and they may result in the re-
placement of wood or bone by carbonate of lime, by silica, or
even by iron oxide, or by pyrite, which is iron sulphide. If
we consider wood as a typical example, the mineral matter
seems first to fill the cells of the wood, and then it proceeds to
replace each particle of the wood, molecule by molecule, as the
wood slowly decomposes and passes away; the result being that
finally the original material is all gone, and a mass of mineral
matter looking wonderfully like the wood is left behind. In
common language, the wood has been “turned into stone.”
As we have seen, this is not wholly an accurate expression, but
it is very often used. Sometimes it happens that a fossil log
may be carbonized at one ehd and silicified at the other.

Definition. A fossil may be the well-preserved remains of
an ancient animal or plant, or it may be merely the natural im-
pressions made by such an animal or plant upon the surround-
ing rocks. Even the tracks of birds or reptiles are spoken of as
fossil footprints, and the holes bored by worms and found
preserved in the older rocks are always spoken of as fossils.
The dead bodies of animals are very quickly decomposed and
reduced to gases, except such hard parts as may be able for a
greater length of time to resist the processes of decay. Plants,
likewise, are quickly subject to decay, although various kinds
of wood may be preserved, under favorable conditions, for many
years or even for centuries. Some of the smaller plants, such
as the microscopic single-celled diatoms, have part of their
structure composed of silica; and these, with some microscopic
animals known as radiolarians, and some of the sponges, often
leave behind them these siliceous parts, which are capable of be-
ing preserved for many centuries or quite indefinitely. In some
of the sponges, the silica occurs in a colloidal form, like opal,
which is quite easily destroyed. The diatoms and radiolarians
which have been preserved best have the silica in an insoluble


FOSSILS AND THEIR USES IN GEOLOGY 303


form; and the exact structure of these siliceous spicules can
easily be recognized to-day under the microscope, after such
long periods of time since they were first deposited.


Calcite and Aragonite. Many types of invertebrate animals,
with some few plants, chiefly seaweeds, secrete calcium car-
bonate as part of their structure. This calcium carbonate is
obtained from the waters in which these creatures live. Such
a secretion of calcium carbonate may take either of two forms,
the one known as aragonite, the other as calcite. Occasionally
an organic structure is found consisting entirely of one or the
other of these forms; but more frequently both of these forms
of calcium carbonate are found in the same individual. For ex-
ample, among many shellfish, the inner mother-of-pearl] layers
are composed of aragonite, while the outer porcelaneous layers
are of calcite. In the oysters, however, the calcite usually
predominates.

The value of these two kinds of calcium carbonate appears
readily upon examination of many fossils; for structures which
have been formed of calcite are quite likely to be preserved in-
tact, but those structures composed of aragonite are likely
to be dissolved and carried away, or replaced by entirely
different minerals which have been brought by the perco-
lating waters. “Im the Paleozoic rocks it is almost the rule
for the aragonite structures to be gone, this being especially
true among the Mollusca, but in the Mesozoic and Cenozoic the
mother-of-pearl layers are much more commonly preserved.
Just why this is so is not yet determined.” (Schuchert.) The
skeletons of vertebrates, which are composed chiefly of calcium
phosphate, are sometimes found in an excellent state of preser-
vation, as in many peat bogs, or in the asphalt tar pits of La
Brea, and other places; but more frequently they are found in
a poorly preserved condition.


Other Structures. The skeletons of such animals as insects
and crustaceans are composed largely of a nitrogenous sub-
stance of quite complicated structure which is known as chitin.
Most nitrogenous substances are easy to decay, but this material
seems to resist the chemical agents of destruction remarkably
well. The external skeletons of insects, trilobites, and crusta-
ceans may consist largely of chitin, though lime salts are also
occasionally present. The skeletons of such animals have in
countless instances been remarkably well preserved, the struc-
ture retaining its perfect form for a sufficient length of time to
impress its exact mold upon the surrounding rock materials.


304 THE NEW GEOLOGY


The soft parts of animals decay so rapidly that only under
exceptional circumstances are they preserved. Yet it is a very
common thing to find the entire form of fishes preserved in the
calcareous or siliceous sediments in which they were entombed.
In such instances, the most minute forms of the creatures are
preserved with all the perfection of an intaglio. Such fossil
fishes have been found by millions in various parts of the world.
Occasionally the muscles and tissues of larger vertebrates which
apparently lived on the land, have also been excellently pre-
served. There is no doubt that in the case of the many fishes


a sha TS


: 2
1A,


aeti


Fic. 182. Restoration of Mastodon americanus (X 1/48), by Marsh; tooth of same (X 1/4).


referred to, these creatures. were literally buried alive by some


sudden influx of smothering sediments which dropped suddenly
down upon them from the waters above.


The Siberian “Mummies.” The most remarkable cases,
however, of the preservation of the soft tissues of.animals, have
occurred in the tundras of Northern Siberia, the frozen ground
in these regions remaining in a solid state for century after
century. The remains of elephants, rhinoceroses, oxen, and
other animals have been found here in an almost perfect state of
preservation. Of these animals, the ancient elephant known as
the mammoth, Elephas primigenius, is by far the most common,
the tusks of the creature in many places protruding from the
surface of the half-frozen soil in such numbers that a regular
trade in this fossil ivory has been carried on for centuries, some
of this ivory finding its way eastward through China, and some


FOSSILS AND THEIR USES IN GEOLOGY 305


of it westward to Petrograd; and as one author expresses it,
fossil ivory has a market quotation of current price just the
same as wheat or potatoes. The best-preserved specimens have
been found along the banks of such northward-flowing rivers as
the Lena, where the current, by undermining a portion of the
banks, may occasionally expose a carcass which has been lying
in cold storage underground for uncounted centuries. When
thus exposed and when the surrounding ice and soil have melted
away, the flesh has been greedily devoured by dogs and wolves.
Less perfectly preserved specimens have been found also in the
frozen soil of Northwestern Alaska.


Other Conditions. The best and most perfectly preserved
fossils are found in strata of marine origin which are evenly
bedded and which are composed more or less of limestone or
magnesian limestone. They are rare in conglomerates, or even
in sandstones or in red shales. ‘In nearly all of the red beds
other than red limestones it is the exception to find fossil re-
mains, because the plants and animals have been oxidized and
- dissipated during the process of subaérial sedimentation. It is
therefore the green, blue, gray, black, and subsequently oxidized
yellow beds that are apt to hold fossils.” (Schuchert.)

It has been estimated that the stratified rocks in general
are composed of about 5 per cent limestones, about 15 per cent
of sandstones, while shales make up fully 80 per cent. The
limestones are usually quite rich in fossils, while the sandstones
and shales contain them in varying proportions. The fossils
which are found in conglomerates and sandstones are not
usually well preserved, and much difficulty has been experienced
in gathering together such gigantic specimens of reptiles and
other vertebrates as are exhibited in many of our museums,
some of these specimens having been found in sandstones so
hard that blasting has been resorted to in order to release
the fossils.


CHAPTER XVIII


A General View of the Plant and
Animal Kingdoms


Living Organisms. Living organisms differ essentially from
inorganic or mineral substances.

1. All living beings are composed of cells which contain `
protoplasm.

2. They grow, not by mere accretion or crystallization, but
by imbibing food which they change and use for their self-
development.

3. They have the power of reproducing themselves. And
new living things can come only from preéxisting similar things;
that is, no combinations of mere physical and chemical forces
can originate life from the not-living.

The great outstanding fact in this connection is that some- .
thing quite different from mere physical and chemical forces
is in operation in the living organism. There is evident a
power of development, a purposeful growth and adaptation,
such as can not be explained by the mere laws of the physi-
cal world.

4. Another characteristic just as distinctive of living organ-
isms is what we may term vital elasticity, or the ability on
the part of the organism to change as an adaptive response to
its environment. It is not the environment which produces the
change in the organism; the changes are produced by the organ-
ism itself to meet the changed conditions in which it is situated.

Variation. The investigations of biologists during the last
half century or so have given us an increasing appreciation of
the amazing extent to which this property of adaptation is
possessed by every living form. And the higher and more com-
plex the organization, the greater is its capacity for adaptive
response toward its environment. Linnæus founded his term
species in an attempt to designate precisely “as many forms as
were created in the beginning.” This naturally led to the idea
of the “fixity” of species. Of course, it is true that no amount
of selective breeding would ever grow horns on a horse or
hoofs on a cat. But we now have facts in abundance at our
command which Linnzeus did not have, by which we know that
species have varied greatly under domestication; and there is
every reason to believe that in prehistoric times, even greater


(306)


THE PLANT AND ANIMAL KINGDOMS 307


variations may have been produced by nature, though these varia-
tions have apparently now become so “fixed” and so distinct by
the erection of a barrier of cross-sterility between them that
they are now classed as separate “species,” or in some cases
even as separate genera.

The endeavor to find a scientific explanation of how these
variations originate in a natural way, has been one of the prin-
cipal studies of the last century. Lamarck and Darwin thought
that new species were produced by slow, long-continued varia-
tions in a gradual way, chiefly by external causes, such as the
influence of the environment in its broadest sense, together with
what may be termed the impersonal factor, “natural selection.”
Modern scientists, following the lead of Mendel, whose results
have been ably supplemented by De Vries, William Bateson,
T. H. Morgan, etc., think that new types may have come into
existence suddenly, though they are now agreed that we do not
know the exact process by which “species” really have originated.

But these recent investigations help us to understand some-
what the very remarkable fact that away back in the earliest
days of Egypt, the various races of man, such as Negro, Cau-
casian, Mongolian, etc., are represented precisely as they appear
to us to-day, showing that at that very early period, these strik-
ing racial differences were already completely established. Evo-
lutionists have been accustomed to argue, from this fact, that
before this first dawn of history, there must have been long un-
numbered ages during which these differences were gradually
accumulating; while the creationist sees in this situation only
a confirmation of the record regarding the compulsory disper-
sion of the races soon after the Deluge.

On either view, if we are to study the various races of men
as we study mammals, or birds, or fishes, there is no doubt that
we should divide the human race up into many “species,” per-
haps even into several genera. As is well known, even such an
accomplished naturalist as Louis Agassiz did this very thing,
arguing strongly for the multiple origin of mankind. Among
the lower animals, there seems to be a sexual aversion or antip-
athy that tends to keep these “species” distinct, in cases where
geographical barriers do not intervene, even in those instances
where, by artificial means, they may be induced to interbreed
and produce perfectly fertile progeny. And there is little doubt
that if human beings were as true to normal instincts as are
most of the lower animals, the lines of demarcation between the
various races of mankind would be as clearly marked as þe-
tween many “species” in nature.


308 THE NEW GEOLOGY


As for the ultimate causes by which these variations have
originated, we know practically nothing. Professor William
Bateson, in his notable address before the Toronto meeting of
the American Association, December 28, 1921, said: “It is im-
possible for scientists longer to agree with Darwin's theory of
the origin of species. No explanation whatever, after forty
years, no evidence, has been discovered to verify his genesis of
species. . . . We no longer feel as we used to do, that the proc-
ess of variation, now contemporaneously occurring, is the þe-
ginning of a work which needs merely the element of time for its
completion; for even time can not complete that which has not


yet begun.”


From the point of view of a direct creation, we may say that in the
origin of these variant forms of animals and plants, as well as in the origin
of the various races of mankind, we are witnessing merely another mani-
festation of the Power behind nature, which undertook to reproduce from
the wrecks of plant and animal life left by the Deluge a new world of life
only a little less wonderful and beautiful than that which the Creator in the
beginning pronounced “very good.”


Species. To discuss the probable limits of species in a work
of this size and character is clearly impossible. It is a very
commendable tendency on the part of modern scientists, that a
strong reaction has set in against the mania which prevailed
during the nineteenth century, for multiplying new specific
names. This reaction is especially noticeable in works dealing
with the.-mammals, where a knowledge of the fact that numer-
ous “species” are perfectly cross fertile has often led modern
systematists to group perhaps ten or twenty of them together
under one name. Among the lower forms of life, and especially
among those very forms that are of the most importance in
geology, such as mollusks, brachiopods, crinoids, corals, etc., we
are still pitifully ignorant of their life-history from the ovum to
maturity, many of them living miles down in the ocean, or un-
der other conditions which render it quite impossible to conduct
control experiments. Thus among these lower forms of life,
there may still be many modern kinds which are merely the
modified descendants of kinds found as fossils in the rocks,
though slightly different in one or more important character-
istics. However, on the whole, it would seem to be wise for the
present to follow the current classification of species and genera,
but with this mental reservation, that most of the “species” un-
der any given genus, whether plant or animal, are probably
artificial distinctions, the various modern forms having prob-
ably all descended from one stock. In some instances, perhaps


THE PLANT AND ANIMAL KINGDOMS 309


even the different genera of a family may be thus of a com-
mon origin.

But in all this, it is very important to bear in mind that this
is by no means to concede the doctrine of evolution. The real
creationist can afford to be liberal in respect to species, for he
- knows that a correct view of geology forever puts the evolution
theory out of possible consideration. We may thus account for


VO
vb `<


Fic. 183. Rock split by the growth of a tree, Sierra Nevada, California,
(Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


many “species” and even for some “genera,” but such an ex-
planation of the origin of variations does not touch the problem
of accounting for the originals out of which these are derived.
It merely helps the believer in the Bible, by showing him how
all the modern world could easily have grown out of the ruins
of the world surviving from the great world catastrophe; but
back of all this, of course, there must have been a direct or
literal creation of the originals from which the modern forms
and the fossils were alike descended.


Distinctions Between Animals and Plants. The system of
life as a whole is divided into two kingdoms, the animal and the


310 THE NEW GEOLOGY


NË V


|
WRD
W


Fic. 184. The great anteater (Myrmecophaga jubata). (From Sclater, List of
Animals in Zodlogical Society’s Gardens, 1883, p. 190.)


vegetable, which are mutually dependent upon each other. The
following are some of their characteristics:


1. All animals, save the very lowest, have a mouth, and
receive food into it or into a stomach. Even most of the lower
forms of life extemporize a mouth and a stomach for the ap-
prehension of food, so that even in these cases, the food is di-
gested in an interior cavity. On the other hand, plants take
their nourishment entirely by absorption.


2. Plants absorb carbon dioxide, keeping the carbon and set-
‘ting free the oxygen; animals inhale oxygen, which in their
bodies unites with carbon, forming carbon dioxide, which is
then thrown out by the animals and ultimately furnishes food
for the plants.


3. Plants take inorganic matter as food. But animals can
not thus feed upon the inorganic; this must be prepared for
them by the plants as intermediaries.

This is the one invariable test to distinguish plants from
animals among those lowly forms where all other tests fail. It
is interesting to note how the Bible millenniums ago recognized
the plant as the necessary instrument in preparing food for
the animal. (Psalm 104:14.) Food for animals can be brought


THE PLANT AND ANIMAL KINGDOMS 311


forth “out of the earth,” or from the inorganic, only by passing
through the intermediate stage of plant life.

4. No plant possesses self-consciousness, nor does it possess
consciousness of other external existences. Contrastedly, all
animals seem to be conscious of an external world, even the
lowest forms showing this consciousness by avoiding obstacles.


Some biologists have thought that they could distinguish a difference
in chemical composition between the protoplasm of plants and that of ani-
mals. Others emphatically declare that no such difference exists. But
quite evidently the more nearly alike are the cells or protoplasmic units of
these widely different forms, the more clear does it become that only some
directing Power behind all the cells of these multiform kinds of life guides
each in its own particular method of development, and on a plane distinctly
above that of dead, inorganic matter. Certain it is that life in all its forms
is a manifestation of divine Power that can never be interpreted in terms of
physics and chemistry. Š


The Animal Kingdom


All animals may be divided into two groups: I. Vertebrates;
II. Invertebrates.

The first of these possess a backbone, or vertebral column,
and along the dorsal side of this column, a bone-sheathed cavity
which holds the spinal cord or the great central nerve. A cross
section of a vertebrate's body shows two cavities: the dorsal,
containing the cerebrospinal nervous system; and the ventral,
containing the digestive, circulatory, and respiratory systems.


Fic. 185. Skeleton of Megatherium, from the specimen in the Museum of the Royal College of
Surgeons. X 1/25. (After Flower and Lydekker.)


312 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 186. Eggs of feathered giants, Epiornis, ostrich, moa. compared with a hen’s egg.


The invertebrates have these two cavities reversed; that is, the
chief nervous cord is below, or ventral in position, instead of
above. All vertebrates have a liver, and usually have a well-
developed nervous system.

The vertebrates include mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians,
fishes.

The more important characteristics of these five classes of
vertebrates must now be given.


1. Mammals


Mammals nourish their young by milk; breathe air by means
of lungs; and have a heart of four cavities. There are three
subdivisions:

a. The viviparous, or placentals, which bring forth their young alive;
as man, all the ordinary quadrupeds, and also bats, whales, and seals.

b. The semioviparous, the young of which are quite immature at birth,
and are transferred to a maternal pouch, where they are suckled until


maturity; as the kangaroos of Australia, and the little opossum of America.
These are also called marsupials.


c. The oviparous, or monotremes, which lay true eggs, ftom which the
young are hatched, as the duckbill and the echidna of Australia.


2. Birds


These are oviparous, or reproduce themselves by true eggs;
breathe air by lungs; have a heart of four cavities; are warm-
blogded; are covered with feathers; and usually have wings for


THE PLANT AND ANIMAL KINGDOMS 313


flying. Existing birds do not have teeth; but some fossil birds
from the Mesozoic rocks had a full set of teeth; some of them
had long vertebrated tails.


3. Reptiles


Generally oviparous; breathing by lungs; having a heart of
four or three cavities ; covered with scales or naked. They include
snakes, turtles, tortoises, lizards, crocodiles, and alligators.
Most of the living reptiles are not very large; but many of
those found as fossils were among the very largest of land ani-
mals, being more of the order of whales, so far as size is
concerned.

4. Amphibians


Mainly oviparous; when young breathing by gills, after-
wards by both gills and lungs or by lungs alone. The heart
has three cavities. Toads and frogs lose their tails as well as
their gills when mature. Some ancient kinds of amphibians,
found as fossils in the Permian and other formations, had scales
like reptiles, with strong teeth; while all the kinds surviving
into our modern world are naked and chiefly toothless.


5. Fishes


Being of much more importance in geology than any other
vertebrates, fishes will demand a more careful consideration.

They are mostly oviparous; have a heart usually of two cavi-
ties; breathe by gills; and have the skin naked, or covered with
scales, or with bony plates.


Fic. 187. Diplomystus, an ancient member of the shad family. From the fish bed at Green


River, Wyoming. (From a specimen in the United States National Museum.) š


314 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Without attempting any formal classification of this class,
we may note the following subdivisions:

Teleosts. Nearly all the existing fishes, except sharks, rays,
and a few others of low order, are grouped under this name.
As is implied in the name, they have a true bony skeleton. The
gills are free, and the body is usually covered with scales. Out
of a total of about 13,000 species of fishes that have been de-

Selachians, Gars, and Dipnoans. The selachians include thé
sharks and the dogfishes. The rays are closely related forms.
They have a cartilaginous skeleton; have generally several gill


Fic. 188. Port Jackson shark (Heterodontus philippi). A, lateral view; B, mouth and nostrils.
From a specimen in the Cambridge University Museum, after T. W. Bridge.)


openings with no gill cover; no air bladder; and usually not
proper scales, but a rough skin called shagreen. The common
sharks have the mouth underneath and separate from the nos-
trils, with sharp-edged teeth. But the bullhead sharks — one
genus (Heterodontus = Cestracion, Fig. 188) with four species
constituting all that are now alive, while many are found fos-
sil — have a bony pavement in the mouth in addition to a row of
teeth. Many ancient sharks, like some modern ones, had large
spines connected with the fins, which, with some teeth and
pieces of shagreen, are almost all the remains of these fishes
which are found as fossils. Some of the best-known modern
sharks are viviparous.

Under the term ganoids, Agassiz included forms that have
since been separated into various groups, only some three orders
being still alive, including the Polypterus, the sturgeon, and the
gar pike (Lepidosteus). But the fossil forms are very numer-
ous in the Paleozoic and Mesozoic rocks. Modern forms have a
more or less ossified skeleton, while many of the ancient types
had a cartilaginous one. The skin is covered with thick bony
scales, or even bony plates which somewhat resemble the cover-


THE PLANT AND ANIMAL KINGDOMS 315


ing on a turtle or the armor of a battleship. While probably
modern forms can not be proved to be identical with any par-
ticular kinds found in the Devonian rocks, the popular chrono-
logical arrangement of these fishes shows the folly of the popu-
lar theories, since this arrangement makes these surviving
forms appear to skip many whole geological ages, or from the
period where they occur down until the modern.

The dipnoans, or lungfishes, have both gills and lungs, and
can live by breathing air. The Ceratodus of Australia has
skipped from the Mesozoic to the modern, while the Protop-
terus of Africa and the Lepidosiren of South America do not
appear to have been found at all in the fossil forms. Great
numbers of fossil dipnoans are found in the Devonian, Car-
boniferous, Triassic, and Jurassic rocks.

A still further group of fishes, called the Cyclostomas, is
usually made by the zodlogists, to include the hogfishes and the
lampreys. They are not geologically important.


Invertebrates


The distinction between vertebrates and invertebrates does
not suit some modern zodlogists very well, as various forms
have been discovered which seem to be both or neither. The
tunicates, or ascidians, also called sea squirts, are commonly
placed with the invertebrates. In the mature state, they are
fastened to the bottom of the ocean like a plant and have lost
all their organs of locomotion, and to an outside view, they look
like a bag with two holes, through one of which the water
enters, and passes out through the other. In the larval stage,
however, the animal swims around in a sort of tadpole fashion,
having many points of resemblance to the young amphibians.
Hence these curious creatures have been said to be “degenerate
vertebrates”; for in modern biology, it has become the fashion
to measure everything according to its embryonic development.
Tunicates are not found as fossils.

The lancelet, or Amphioxus, is another form which is usually
classed as a vertebrate. It looks a good deal like a worm; but
unlike the latter, it has gill slits, a notochord above the intestine,
and a spinal cord dorsal to the notochord. It is not found fossil.

The classification of invertebrates is a difficult and unsatis-
factory task, no two authors agreeing in all details. In the
following outline, we have in a measure followed the results of
modern classification as seen in such works as the “Cambridge
Natural History” (10 volumes) ; but wherein we have deviated
from it in the order of the groups, in names, or otherwise, we


316 THE NEW GEOLOGY


have done so largely in favor of the methods still retained in
most geological textbooks, for the latter are conservative in the


matter of adopting new names for the orders and classes.


I. Arthropods
a. Terrestrial species
5 > 1. Insects; 2. Myriapods; 3. Arachnids
Articulates | b. Aquatic species
| 4. Limuloids; 5. Crustaceans
U II. Worms
III. Mollusks
` kuk
eel i IV. Brachiopods
V. Echinoderms
í Hydrozoans
Radiates Vic l Actinozoans (Polyps)
VII. Sponges
VIII. Protozoans j Rhizopods
l Radiolarians


I. Arthropods


The terrestrial species of the Arthropoda have spiracles
(breathing holes), a vascular system for the circulation of
oxygen inside the body, but with no antennæ, or but a single
pair. They include the insects, myriapods, and the arachnids.

The aquatic species have gills with which to absorb oxygen
from the water, or sometimes this function is carried on through
the general surfaces of the body. The aquatic species include
the limuloids and the crustaceans. Some 200,000 modern species
been found fossil.

(1) Insects


These have a distinct head, thorax, and abdomen. Some of
the various groups are: hymenopters (ants, bees, wasps);
lepidopters (butterflies, moths); coleopters (beetles); dipters
(flies) ; neuropters (dragon flies, May flies).


(2) Myriapods


These have a regularly articulate body, wormlike in form,
with numerous pairs of legs ; as the centipedes and the millepedes.
They are very rare as fossils.


(3) Arachnids


These have a body in two parts, and include the spiders and
the scorpions. They are not very common as fossils.


THE PLANT AND ANIMAL KINGDOMS 317


(4) Limuloids
The only species of this group found living in America is
the horseshoe crab, or king crab (Limulus polyphemus), found
on the Atlantic coast. These creatures differ considerably from
the crustaceans, being somewhat like the arachnids; but they
are chiefly interesting as being the scanty remains of almost
identical forms found in large numbers in the Paleozoic rocks.
Some of the ancient limuloids, known as eurypterids, were sev-
eral feet in length.
(5) Crustaceans
These are subdivided into (1) decapods, as crabs, lobsters,
and shrimps, having ten feet or five pairs of appendages; (2)


Fic. 189. The crayfish. Adult male. a, rostrum; b, cephalothoracic shield ;
e, gill; d, anal segment; I-VI, abdominal segments; 1, eye stalk; 2, 3,
feelers ; 9, outermost jaw-foot (maxilliped) ; 10, chelate foot; 11-14, walking
feet; 17, swimming feet (pleopoda); 20, caudal fin. (After Huxley.)


tetradecapods, having fourteen feet, as the sow bugs and sand
fleas; with many extinct species, the most important of which
are the trilobites; (3) cirripeds, or barnacles.

As already remarked, by far the most important of these
groups, from the point of view of geology, are the trilobites.
As shown by Beecher and Matthew, they had not only slender
legs, used perhaps as organs for swimming, but delicate an-
tenn, like some of the modern sow bugs and sand fleas, to
which they were related in structure. But they were usually
much larger than any of the latter, many of them being several
inches in length. They have been divided and subdivided into
a tiresome number of genera and species, each separate kind
being used as the infallible ticket of a distinct “age” or “era”
of the earth’s early history, in the fanciful scheme of the evolu-
tionary geologists.


21


318 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Il. Worms


Several kinds of worms (Vermes) are found as fossils, but
they are not of much geological importance. In the evolution-
ary scheme, they are used as the precursors of the crustaceans
and the other arthropods.


HI. Mollusks


There are about 45,000 species of living mollusks already
bodies without joints or appendages of any kind. They in-
clude the oysters, clams, snails, limpets, pearly nautilus, and the
cuttlefishes. The modern slugs belong here; but as they have
no shells, they are not found as fossils. The chief subdivi-
sions are:

1. Cephalopods. These are free-swimming species, having
four or five or more pairs of arms arranged about the mouth,
as the nautili and the ammonites (Fig. 191), which have an
external chambered shell, and the devilfishes, cuttlefishes, and
squids, which have no external shell. One species of squid
found in the seas off Newfoundland has a body 15 feet long,
and arms 35 feet. The pearly nautilus’is the sole survivor of
very numerous forms found in the Paleozoic rocks.

2. Gastropods. These include the chitons, snails, and slugs.
Some small free-swimming forms called pteropods are still
found in great numbers in the open waters of the ocean, and
much larger kinds are found as fossils, their remains giving
rise to the phosphate beds of the Southern States and elsewhere.


3. Pelecypods. These include the clams, oysters, and other
true bivalves. The two valves cover the right and left sides of
the body, and are held together by one, two, rarely more, ad-
ductor muscles, which leave the impressions of their attach-
ments on the interior surfaces of the valves near the hinge.
The prominence on a valve near the hinge is called the wmbo
(plural, wnbones or wmbos), or beak.


Some species of pelecypods burrow in the mud at the bottom of the
water, and these forms usually gape widely when the animal dies, this
opening of the shell being brought about by the strong elastic ligament
which unites the two valves. When any of these species are found as fossils
with the valves applied and hollow — that is, without any mud or sand
having been washed into the shell cavity — we have proof that the animals
must have been buried alive, or at least buried before decomposition of the


soft parts took place. Mollusks are very common as fossils, some 21,000


THE PLANT AND ANIMAL KINGDOMS 319


IV. Brachiopods


These were formerly called molluscoids, since they have a
bivalve shell like the pelecypods. But the valves, instead of be-
ing lateral, are dorsal and ventral; that is, they cover the top
and the bottom of the creature. The two valves are unequal in

size, but each is symmetrical in
form. They do not tend to
spread open when the animal
dies. Through a hole in the
upper valves near the beak, there
passes a pedicel, or stalk, form-
ing a part of the body of the ani-
mal, by which it fastens itself to
the bottom of the ocean or to
some fixed object. When the ani-
mal dies and this stalk decays,
there is left a hole in the shell
which will admit mud or sand if
the shell is exposed to currents
of moving water. Accordingly,
when brachiopods are found as
fossils with the valves applied
and the interior hollow, it would
seem to indicate that they must
have been buried before decom-
position took place. The fossil
forms probably lived in the
deeper parts of the ocean, where
there is naturally no action of
‘marine currents and no forma-
tion of true stratified deposits.


Fic. 190. A Lower Cambrian trilobite, for- Certain living species, as for ex-
merly called Olenellus vermontanus, butnow ample Terebratula vitrea, seem to be
called Mesonacis vermontana Wale. found over practically all parts of
the ocean, and at almost all depths,
specimens having been dredged from over 1,400 fathoms. Terebratula
Wyvillei has been recorded from 1,035 to 2,900 fathoms, and Discinisca at-
lantica from 690 to 2,425 fathoms, while Atretia gnomon has been found at
from 650 to 1,750 fathoms. Even those forms which are often found in
shallow water generally extend their range also down to depths much below
100 fathoms.


_ There are only about 160 species of living brachiopods, and
they are usually very localized; that is, they live in but few
localities in widely scattered parts of the ocean. But when they


320 THE NEW GEOLOGY


are found, they are commonly in large numbers. As fossils,
they are among the most important of all the kinds found in
the rocks; at least, in the Paleozoic rocks, they appear to out-
number all the other fossils put together, constituting some
7,000 species. However, only about 20 species have been found
in the Cenozoic rocks of North America.

Little was known of the anatomy of the brachiopods until
about the middle of the nineteenth century, and almost nothing
was understood of their embryology until 1861. Even now very


Fic. 191. Modern cephalopods. A, the pearly nautilus; B, the squid (Loligo vulgaris), with
a body 6 to 12 inches long; z, the funnel through which the ink and water are thrown out;
p, the “pen.” The giant squid is many times larger than this.


little is known of their embryonic development or of the habits
of the larval forms. The ova seem to develop in brood pouches
of the mother, and after hatching into a free larval form, the
young creature swims around and looks for a location. ‘When
this is found, it settles down, attaches itself, and never after leaves
this spot. “The extreme minuteness of the larva and the short
time it spends in this motile condition, probably accounts for
the fact that brachiopods are extremely localized.” (“Cam-
bridge Natural History,” Vol. 3, p. 481.)

Among the kinds of brachiopods that have continued with
little change to the present day, are Lingula from the Cambrian,
Discina and Crania from the Cambro-Silurian, with Terebratula
from the Devonian. Rhynchonella also is found in Cambrian
and Silurian rocks.


V. Echinoderms


These include the sea slugs, sea urchins, starfishes, and
crinoids, or stone lilies. All but the last of these lend them-
selves so well to experimental work that they have become
favorite specimens for use in the laboratory; yet, in spite of
this, they are not well known as to their embryonic growth or
proper classification. Perhaps the chief reason for this is that
they show so much individual variation that it is almost impos-


` THE PLANT AND ANIMAL KINGDOMS 321


sible to classify them. They also show very great capacity for
hybridism; and consequently we may conclude that they may
possibly have sprung from very few original forms. There
` are about 2,500 living and 2,600 fossil species.

Crinoids are very important as fossils, and their remains
have furnished materials for many of our largest deposits of
limestone. Over 500 species of crinoids are still living, and are
usually found at great depths. Because of this latter fact, their
life-history is not well known, and the limits of their possible
variations are absolutely unknown.


VI. Celenterates


These include the jellyfishes, and the coral polyps, the re-
mains of some of which are very common as fossils. They be-
gin life as ciliated free-swimming larve; but in a few hours or
days, they attach themselves to some rock or shell ‘at the bottom
and start the process of budding, thus forming colonies in the
case of those that are colonial in habit. In this class, as in so
many others, much confusion has been brought into the study


Fic. 192. Internal character of brachiopods. A, ventral valve of a strophomenid

(Rafinesquina expansa). B, dorsal valve of a spire bearer (Nucleospira), showing

the skeleton that supports the arms. C, both valves with the dorsal shell broken to

show the spiralia (Spirifer striatus). Ad, adductor scars; C, cardinal area, which

also makes the hinge of the valves, and to which are attached the teeth(T) ; De,

open delthyrium where the pedicel emerged; Di, diductor muscle scars; Va, vascular
markings. (After Schuchert and Davidson.)


of the subject by the pernicious custom of assigning new names
for the forms found as fossils, even different generic or family
names, merely to avoid the awkward acknowledgment that the
fossils of the so-called “oldest” strata still have living repre-
sentatives in our modern ocean. This custom is the outgrowth
of the early days of natural science, when the fossil kinds alone
were known; because, strange as it may seem, in almost all the
great divisions of the animal kingdom, the knowledge of the fos-
sil forms long preceded that of the living. But it is much to be
deplored that these artificial and confusing distinctions are still


322 THE NEW GEOLOGY š:


perpetuated. As an example from this group, we have the
Syringopora, which is so common in the Carboniferous and
other limestones. It resembles some of the reef builders of the
East Indies so closely that it can be separated only with diffi-
culty, while our complete ignorance of the possibilities of varia-
tion among these forms makes all our
conclusions regarding distinctions be-
tween them of very little value. Some
3,000 living species of Ccelenterates
are named, with about 1,780 fossil
species.
VII. Sponges


“No group among the inverte-

brates,” says Zittel, “resisted scientific
treatment so long as the fossil
sponges.” In fact, it was not until the
time of the Challenger expedition, or
about 1876, that the various fossil
genera found in the English chalk
were proved to be identical with the
living sponges. The living species
number only about 600, while some 800
are found as fossils. Those that form
siliceous or calcareous fibers or spicules
are of geological importance.


VIII. Protozoans
Fic. 198. A typical polyzoan These creatures illustrate the prin-


eas tally pena”, ciple that the most insignificant beings
pharynx; b, cardia; c, gizzard; d, can often accomplish the very greatest


stomach; e, pylorus; f, intestine;


g, anus; h, muscles. 2, the same results. The protozoans are all minute


animal when completely retracted: 5 °

i ky opercular retractor muscles. or almost microscopic creatures; yet,

; Iitarearllesttstates through their profuse abundance, they
have produced enormous quantities of

rock. Some 4,400 living species are named, with less than

half as many fossil ones.

Two groups only, the Foraminifera and the Radiolaria, are
of any geological importance; and hence these are all that call
for mention here.

“A very remarkable point which has led to great confusion
in the study of the Foraminifera, is the fact that the shell on
which we base our characters of classification, may vary very
much even within the same individual.” (“Cambridge Natural


THE PLANT AND ANIMAL KINGDOMS 323


History,” Vol. 1, p. 66.) Many of their shells so closely re-
cephalopods or cuttlefish by d’Orbigny.

The nummulites are now classed with the Foraminifera, but
are somewhat larger than the Globigerine. Their remains
make up the enormous
masses of nummulitic lime-
stones which are so abun-
dant in the Alps, the Hima-
layas, and other mountain
ranges of the Old World,
the pyramids of Egypt be-
ing largely built of num-
mulitic limestones.

Radiolarians. These
also are minute creatures,
and secrete siliceous shells
symmetrically radiate or
circular. The radiolarian
ooze occupies some 4,000,-
000 square miles of the bot-
| tom of the Pacific Ocean,
Fic. 194. Amoeba. Bezinníng at the up.er from two to four miles deep.


left-hand figure, the successive drawings show F; ñ #
the progress of a division of an amæba through Fossil radiolarians seem to


Oo 5 a = -be found in almost all the

various formations; but we

can not depend very much upon the distinctions which are often

made between the species. As Hartog remarks, “Possibly many

of the species may be mere states of growth, for it is impossible to

study the life-histories of this group.” (“Cambridge Natural
History,” Vol. 1, p. 87.)

Diatoms are the siliceous shells
formed by minute plants. They live
near the surface in both salt water
and fresh, and their spicules or shells
fall to the bottom and form thick
chalklike deposits, which are often
made use of as polishing powders.


The Plant Kingdom


The remains of plants are of vast


geological importance. They not only Fic. 195. Chalk from Kansas, X 46.
r e eologica u
have produced some of the most ex- a E Sa)


324 THE NEW GEOLOGY


tensive coal deposits, but also
have left their abundant traces
in rock strata in the arctic h
regions and in other places, AE


where they tell us a very clear fi ZAN
and unambiguous story of the = AF A
climate and other conditions (pe : ` PEGS, $
amid which they lived. How- LAN 4
ever, it will not be necessary to Yes s i
give a detailed account of all ai f VO WS k
those kinds of plants which are | PPS hh
found as fossils. A few of the A, Ax ay fl
more outstanding plant forms Z NS U YO Q
which occur as fossils will suffice < He. i
at this time. A more detailed ac- HA ty
count of some of the plants pro- f i
ducing the Carboniferous coals Ai "
will be found in the chapter deal- i Py
ing with the formation of these s
deposits. j i 5 É.
Algæ, fungi, and lichens con- j ; ‘ # fT
stitute three groups of what are j 4 h Z b


termed thallus plants, because d N


they form a simple structure, SEF fa
À ==


Q
\\
D
Q


E 2


called a thallus, which is not defi- =


Fic. 196. A modern horsetail, or scour-

ing rush (Equisetum arvense), which
° grows in wet places in almost all parts
of the world.


nitely separated into
root, stem, and leaf,
though possessing
parts which resemble
these organs of the
higher plants.

Some of the algæ
have formed and are
even now forming
‘vast deposits of lime,
being associated in
this work with the
corals of the tropical
seas. They are known
collectively as nulli-


FiG. 197. A modern ground pine, or lycopod (Lycopodium °
annotinum). The stem arises from a creeping rootstock. pores. The diatoms


THE PLANT AND ANIMAL KINGDOMS 325


are minute alge which secrete silica. The green, brown, and red
algæ comprise most of the common forms known collectively as
seaweeds. They are not of any great geological importance,
though some of them have been recognized in the fossil form.
The fungi and the lichens are not of much geological importance.

The mosses and the liverworts are included under the term
bryophytes. One of the mosses (Sphagnum) grows practically
from the water, and in places helps to form large peat deposits.


1


Fic. 198. Permo-Carboniferous plants. 1, Lepidodendron obovatum; 2, Sigilluria oculata; 3,
Stigmaria ficoides; 4, Sphenopteris gravenhorstii; 5, Calamites canneformis; 6, Trigono-
carpum tricuspidatum. 4 and 7 are regarded as Permian. (After Dana.)


Traces of fossil mosses have been detected; but the mosses are
not of geological importance.

The pteridophytes are a very important group of plants, and
include the equiseta, the lycopods, and the ferns proper.

The modern equiseta, or horsetails (Equisetum, Fig. 196),
are small spore-bearing plants growing in wet places in many
widely scattered parts of the world. The ancient types include
the giant calamites, which were veritable trees, sometimes
nearly 200 feet high.


326 THE NEW GEOLOGY


The lycopods are familiar to us as the club mosses (Fig.
197), their prostrate rootstocks and graceful leafy stems being
often used in the East and the North for Christmas decorations.
The ancient kinds were often 100 feet high, and comprise the
very important Lepidodendrons and the Sigillaria, which will


Fic. 199. Cycas revoluta, in New York Botanical Garden. Cycads closely resemble certain kinds
of palms in appearance; but the cycads are gymnosperms, resembling the conifers in the
structure of the wood and in the simple structure of their flowers; thus they are extremely
different from the palms. (From “The New International Encyclopædia,” by permission.)


of the formation of coal.


True ferns (Fig. 198), which reproduce by spores, are found
as fossils in some of the Paleozoic rocks; but along with them
are other fernlike plants which are termed cycad ferns (Cyca-
dofilices), and which were not only treelike in point of size,
but which also produced parts which were equivalent to true
seeds. The modern sago palm belongs to this group, while the
maidenhair tree, or Ginkgo (Fig. 19), is a closely related form.
The latter has broad, fanlike, undivided leaves, and while abun-
dant in many of the Mesozoic rocks, is still living, and widely


THE PLANT AND ANIMAL KINGDOMS 327


grown for ornamental purposes,
having been imported from
China and Japan.

Spermatophytes. Among the
true conifers, the sequoias are
very common as fossils, and are
represented by the two modern
California species, Sequoia gi-
gantea (Fig. 200) and Sequoia
sempervirens, the latter being
more familiarly known as the
redwood. Their fossils occur in
Greenland, Dakota, Switzerland,
and many other interesting
places. The pines, spruces, firs,
and larches comprise some of
our most important trees, most
of the modern kinds having been
found as fossils.

The angiosperms compris?
the true flowering plants, and in-
clude our fruit trees, as well as
such familiar objects as our de-
ciduous forest trees, such as the
oaks, elms, birches, beeches,


Fic. 200. Sequoia gigantea, among firs,
Giant Forest, Kaweah Basin, California.
(Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


maples, walnuts, with hundreds of others, most of which have
been found preserved as fossils in the rocks of the long ago.


CHAPTER XIX


The Pre-Cambrian Rocks


The Basement Complex. It seems to be the fate of specula-
tive geology that it begins its work in the dark; for the begin-
ning of the geological series is by all odds the most complicated
of the whole. Usually we can not see very distinctly in the
dark; and a similar handicap awaits the student of geology who
undertakes to trace out a defi-
nite starting point from which
to begin a geological history.

Of course, geologists did
not begin at the beginning; for
in the early days of the science,
the workers started with the
rocks nearest at hand and those
most easily examined, which in
England, where much of the
first work was done, happened
to be chiefly the Jurassic and
Cretaceous rocks. After these
had been examined and classi-
fied, the early workers began to
go back farther and farther
into the mass of complex rocks
found underlying these strati-
fied beds in England, Wales,
and Scotland. The tacit as- Rater:
sumption that what they found "= jas n aa oe
in these localities were of uni-
versal extent, applicable to the entire world, was carried with
them as Sedgwick and Murchison gradually extended their studies
down into the earth; and on this basis, the systems now known
as Cambrian and Silurian were gradually worked out and
brought into something like their modern form.

However, the lowest of these beds seemed to rest everywhere
on a world-wide unconformity; while below this was a vast
series of gneisses and other crystalline rocks which were then
known as the Primary rocks.

In America, William Logan (1798-1875), the first director
of the Geological Survey of Canada (Fig. 201), was one of the
pioneers in studying and classifying these most ancient of the


(328)


THE PRE-CAMBRIAN ROCKS 329


rocks appearing at the surface of the earth, which are still often
referred to as the “basement complex,” the two words telling
the whole story of their characters. Practically all of Canada
north of the Great Lakes and east of Lake Winnipeg and the
Mackenzie River, is composed of these primitive rocks, vari-
ously called Archzxan, Primitive, or Pre-Cambrian. By some,
these Pre-Cambrian are subdivided into two great divisions, the
Archzan proper and the Algonkian, each of these being again
subdivided several or many times. The names of these subdi-
visions would not mean anything to the beginner, and are
therefore omitted here. But it may be worth while to consider
briefly some of the characteristics of these Pre-Cambrian rocks
in a few typical localities, and to see where they are most
typically exhibited.

As these rocks contain practically no fossils, their subdivi-
sion has been effected entirely on stratigraphic and lithologic
considerations. Even stratigraphy, as ordinarily understood, in
the sense of a clearly defined system of bedding, is almost
wholly absent; for all these rocks are crystalline and meta-
morphosed beyond any hope of visible stratigraphic structure.
Hence lithologic structure alone is almost the sole guide, except
as we can trace (locally) a rude order of superposition between
intrusives and the rocks which they have invaded, or between
successive sheets of instrusives themselves. Nonconformities
(representing crustal movements) and cycles of erosion have
also been much depended upon in working out the subdivisions
of the great “basement complex’; and the subdividing and
naming still goes on.

The Archean System. The Archzxan (also known as the
outsidé of North America being found in Norway, Sweden,
Finland, China, and Australia. The vast central plateau of
Africa is composed mostly of Archzean rocks, as are also the
larger part of the peninsula of India, and much of the great
mountain ranges of the Himalayas, the Altai, and the Andes,
and to a lesser extent, long, narrow belts in the Alps, the
Pyrenees, and the Balkans.

In North America, there is first what is called the Canadian
“shield,” comprising all of Labrador, and all of Northern
Quebec and Ontario north of the Great Lakes, and a large strip
running north to the Arctic Ocean and east of the Mackenzie
River, with the exception of a considerable area around the
south shores of Hudson Bay. The name “shield” was given to
this area, with similar areas on some of the other continents,


330 THE NEW GEOLOGY


ARCHEOZOIC AND
PROTEROZOIC ROCKS
AT THE SURFACE


After B. Willis


Fic. 202. Map showing the exposures (in black) of the undifferentiated Archean or
Primitive rocks (here termed ‘“‘Archeozoic and Proterozoic”).
because of their fancied resemblance in outline to an immense
depressed shield. They are conceived to be the very oldest of
the lands, and are thought by evolutionary geologists to have
remained more or less continuously above the sea level, while
the rest of the areas now comprising the continents have been
down under the ocean waters and up again a dozen times since


THE PRE-CAMBRIAN ROCKS 331


then. They are always spoken of as the nuclear areas of their
respective continents, about which the subsequently formed
lands have formed; yet they are not thought of as having
furnished the sediments for the formation of the other parts of
the continents, as these “shields” are spoken of as remaining
continuously low in relation to the sea level.
. In addition to this large Canadian area of Archean rocks,
much smaller areas of Archean rocks are found in the Adiron-
dacks of New York, and in the highlands of New Jersey and
Southeastern New York. Many scattering areas of granite in
the Rocky Mountains are referred to the Archean, though
many such areas of granite and other crystalline rocks here and
elsewhere are classed as Cenozoic or Mesozoic “intrusions.”
In the lower parts of the Grand Cafion of the Colorado are
masses of schists and other rocks which are assigned to the
Archzan system.


Great quantities of graphite are found in various ones of the Archean
areas, chiefiy among the quartzite schists. Sir William Dawson used to say
that there is more graphite disseminated through the Archzan rocks north
of Lake Ontario and east of Lake Huron, than there is of carbonaceous mat-
ter in the entire coal beds of such areas as England and Pennsylvania.
Graphite comprises from 3 to 10 per cent of the Archzan rocks of the
Adirondacks, and near the northwestern part of Lake George are “alternat-
ing layers of graphitic schists from 3 to 13 feet thick, and the appearance
is that of a fossil coal bed.” (Schuchert.) As all of their original structure
is obliterated from these beds, it is quite impossible to tell what may have
been the materials from which these graphites were formed.


Immense quantities of iron ores and limestones are found
among these ancient rocks; but it is quite useless to speculate
about their supposed origin through primitive forms of life,
merely because limestones are now being formed by various
kinds of plants and animals, and even iron ores are being pro-
duced by the iron bacteria. It is quite essential to suppose that
there were at one time large quantities of these substances on
the earth which were original or primitive in the proper sense
of these words; and it is to be expected that whenever such sub-
stances are found among the Archean rocks, they will prove to
be among crystalline and metamorphic surroundings.


“Tt is estimated that the Archzan rocks form somewhat more than one
fifth of the land surface of the earth, and there is reason to believe that
they are actually universal, and that a boring made at any point, if suf-
ficiently deep, would encounter them. They are found at the bottom of
many deep cafions, and borings frequently penetrate them at points where
there are no surface indications of their presence. If these rocks are really
distributed over the entire globe, they are the only formation of which this.
is true.”— Scott.


332 THE NEW GEOLOGY


In many different parts of the world, these Archean rocks
are found to be divisible into two quite distinct series, the one
of schistose rocks composed of highly metamorphosed sedimen-
tary rocks with some so-called volcanic outflows, and the other
composed principally of a gneissoid granite, which seems to be
intrusive and therefore later than the former series. From
this, some geologists hold that over these large areas in practi-
cally all parts of the world, the original lands were “ingulfed
and destroyed by a universally ascending magma” (Scott), a
conclusion which would accord well with the hypothesis of a
great world catastrophe; for this event, if it ever took place,
must have resulted in such contortions and displacements of
the deeper and more solid parts of the earth’s exterior or crust,
as would of necessity heat to fusion many parts of these rocks,
and thus probably squeeze much of this fused material out upon
the surface. The fact that such phenomena have been actually
observed in many widely scattered parts of the world among
these most ancient rocks, is quite the expected thing, on the
basis of a universal world catastrophe.

The Algonkian System. The other great division of the
Pre-Cambrian rocks has been called the Algonkian, a name
which was proposed by the United States Geological Survey to
apply to the extensive series of metamorphic and sedimentary
rocks lying above the Archean “basement complex” and below
the overlying fossiliferous rocks classed as Paleozoic. The
name “is but little used outside of this country and is not uni-
versally employed even here, but it is beginning to make its way
in Europe.” (Scott.) As usual, these Algonkian rocks have
been subdivided many times, the subdivisions being based
chiefly on unconformities and on changes in lithologic texture,
for fossils are almost entirely absent. However, in the Algon-
kian rocks observable deep down in the sides of the Colorado
Grand Canon, and also in the Belt series of Central Montana,
are a few scanty fossils which are found in the less altered parts
of these rocks. These fossils include the tracks of small worms,
a few characteristic brachiopods, and occasional fragments of
large crustaceans which have been classed as eurypterids.

The Belt series of Central and Western Montana is a very
extensive mass of rocks, said to be 12,000 feet thick, consisting
mainly of quartzites, limestones, sandstones, and hard sandy
shales. They are named from the Belt Mountains, near the
middle of the State; but this name is also applied to similar
Algonkian rocks found extensively throughout much of the
western part of Montana, and also in Alberta. Most of the


THE PRE-CAMBRIAN ROCKS 338


magnificent mountains of the Glacier National Park are.com-
posed of Algonkian rocks, though underneath them run the
practically horizontal Cretaceous beds, the latter dipping gently
under them toward the west from the front of the range, and
similar Cretaceous dipping under them from behind, in the
North Fork of Flathead River. We shall have more to say
later of this striking example of rocks in the “wrong” order.

In the Lake Superior region is another extensive exposure
of Algonkian rocks. These comprise highly metamorphosed
limestones, quartzites, mica schists, with occasional beds of sand-


Fic. 203. General view of Summit Mountain and neighboring peaks, from Summit Station,
Glacier National Park. The upper strata are Algonkian. The underlying Cretaceous extends
part way up the side of the mountain. A closer view is given in Fig. 204. (Stanton, U.S. G. S.)


stones and conglomerates which have not been so indurated and
transformed. Sheets of lava and of volcanic tuff also occur.
The great copper mines of Lake Superior, consisting of native
or free copper, are in amygdaloids and conglomerates distributed
over an area 70 miles long by 3 to 6 miles wide. Similar de-
posits of native copper, “perhaps on a larger scale” (Schu-
chert), occur east of Great Bear Lake and near the Coppermine
River, in the northwestern part of the Canadian “shield.” The
Marquette iron mines of Michigan, and the Mesaba mines of
Minnesota, are in Algonkian rocks, as are also the rich nickel
and copper mines of Sudbury, Northern Ontario.

Other extensive areas of Algonkian rocks occur in the
Wasatch and Uinta Mountains, in the Black Hills, in isolated
areas in Missouri, in Texas, and in the southern Appalachians.

Similar rocks classed as Algonkian occur in Scotland and
other parts of the British Isles, in Sweden, in Finland, and in
many other countries.

Coarse broken fragmental rocks, which have been called “tillites” and
have been alleged to be of “glacial” origin, have been found among some


22


334 THE NEW GEOLOGY


of the Algonkian rocks here and there. But other agencies besides glaciers
can distribute deposits composed of coarse angular fragments, which show
little or no evidence of stratification; for when water really gets in a hurry,
it can pile miscellaneous materials up in a very surprising manner. There
are too many evidences of a perpetually mild or warm climate in all these
early days of the world, to permit us to think of glaciers as the cause of
these few, scanty, and ambiguous deposits called “tillites” by some geologists.
And a few striz or scratches on the rocks of Norway or Scotland or Ontario
are not sufficient evidence to warrant us in talking about continental glaciers,


Fic. 204, On the slope of Summit Mountain, Glacier National Park, looking southwest. This
shows the line of contact between the Altyn limestone (Algonkian), which lies conformably
upon the Cretaceous. This contact is just as normal in appearance as any stratigraphic
-contact could be. By every law of common sense and true science, we must say that these
rocks were laid down successively in the order in which we find them. (Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


in the face of the extensive organically formed limestones in northern lati-
tudes belonging to the Algonkian series, which give proof of at least a
mild climate.


General Remarks. If we consider the Pre-Cambrian. rocks
as a whole, we may regard them as the remains of old basement
rocks, which were not entirely obliterated by the erosion and
other changes of all the subsequent years. Accordingly we
might expect to find occasional traces of life among them, as in
reality we do. But on the basis of the ordinary theories, it is
extremely difficult to understand how these extensive areas
could have persisted in their original horizontal position above
the oceans, through all the long millions of years during which
the other parts of the continents were down and up a dozen or
more times, without receiving thick accumulations of sediments.


THE PRE-CAMBRIAN ROCKS 335


Even if these areas had remained above the waters all this time,
it is hard to understand why we should not expect to find some
traces of the great dinosaurs and other land animals which oc-
cur so profusely in other parts of the world. It is acknowledged
that these widespread Pre-Cambrian areas, comprising 2,000,-
000 square miles in the Canadian “shield” alone, have experi-
enced “no pronounced warping or folding” since their original
elevation above the ocean and their leveling to the present pene-
plain, which is in most places ‘‘a close approximation to this
ancient land surface.” (Schuchert.) Yet, over this vast area,
there are practically no traces of the sediments or the fossils
of any of the “subsequent” “ages.”


The following words show how one of the most illustrious of living
geologists meets this difficulty:

“Tt is of common occurrence on the Canadian shield to find the Archzo-
zoic [Pre-Cambrian] formations overlain by the almost recent Pleistocene
glacial deposits, and even these may be absent. It appears as if in such
places no rocks had been deposited, either by the sea or by the forces of the
land, since Archzozoic time; and yet geologists know [I wonder how they
know! G. McC. P.] that the shield has been variously covered by sheets of
sediments formed at sundry times in the Proterozoic, Paleozoic, and, to a
more limited extent, in the Mesozoic.”— Schuchert, “Textbook of Geology,”
p. 569; edition of 1915. j


We are on surer ground, and no such distorting cloud of
theories will obscure our vision of the real facts, if we speak
of the actual characters and the methods of occurrence of these
Pre-Cambrian rocks. I quote again from another prominent
teacher of the science in one of the large Eastern universities,
these remarks referring to the Archæan rocks proper:

“In all the continents they form the foundation upon which
the oldest fossiliferous sediments were laid down, and, in brief,
they are the oldest, the thickest, the most widely distributed,
and the most important of all the accessible constituents of the
earth’s crust. Their uniform character, wherever found, the
extreme plication and metamorphism which they have under-
gone, and their world-wide distribution, are all extremely
remarkable features, such as recur in rocks of no other age.” —
Scott, “Introduction to Geology,” p. 544.

As a whole, these basement rocks, called Primitive, or
Archæan, are very generally crystalline, and are composed of
such rocks as granite, syenite, gneiss, various kinds of schists,
and crystalline limestones. In some places, however, they con-
sist of hardened conglomerates, gritty sandstones, and slates.
There is no necessity to suppose that they should always be


336 THE NEW GEOLOGY


erystalline, or, indeed, that they must always be indurated. It
is quite probable that large amounts of strata already included
among some of the other and later formations may in reality be
Primitive; for in all these formations are many rocks which
contain no fossils, which probably never contained any fossils,
and which are so situated that it is quite impossible to prove the
existence of any fossiliferous rocks stratigraphically below them.


It is a very singular fact that these Primitive rocks should be found
so extensively uncovered in the northern portions of so many lands. We
have already spoken of their wide exposure in the northern parts of North
America and Europe. But it is almost equally true of South America, and
of Northeastern Asia; and a large part of the interior of Africa is also
composed of the Archzan rocks from which all the subsequent formations
have been stripped away. Just why this should be so, is not very clear; nor
is it clear just what meaning should be attached to this singular fact.


CHAPTER XX


The Paleozoic Group The


Cambrian System


The Paleozoic group is usually divided into six systems,
as follows:


Systems Types of Life


Permian


Amphibians and Lycopods
Carboniferous


|


Devonian J
Paleozoic Group — Fishes
Silurian
Ordovician _ , : 4
ú z Higher Invertebrates
Cambrian


As stated in a previous chapter, such lists of geological
systems are always to be read from the bottom upward, cor-
responding to the position which they are supposed to occupy
in the earth. |

Methods of Correlation. Beginning with the Cambrian sys-
tem, we find the strata far less disturbed than is the case with
the older, primitive rocks; and we also find an abundance of
fossils. This enables us to correlate even the subdivisions of
these various systems from all parts of the world. The Cam-
brian, for instance, is divided into a Lower, a Middle, and
an Upper series; but many of the same genera of many types of
Cambrian life are of cosmopolitan range. The older, Pre-
Cambrian, or Primitive rocks could not thus be correlated in de-
tail all over the world, because they contain practically no
fossils; and they can be identified chiefly and most surely by
their relationship to the overlying fossiliferous beds. For,
throughout the entire world, wherever they have been seen and
examined, there is always a marked unconformity between the
: Pre-Cambrian, or Primitive rocks, and whatever fossiliferous
beds happen to lie above them. It is only occasionally that such
overlying beds can be classed as Cambrian. Very frequently
these overlying beds may contain fossils which necessitate call-
ing them Devonian, Cretaceous, or Tertiary, as the case may
be. But in case these rocks lying above the “basement complex,”


(337)


338 THE NEW GEOLOGY


or the Algonkian, contain certain fossils peculiar to the Cam-
brian system, these beds are then called Cambrian, no matter
what other characters they may exhibit in the way of texture
or lithologic composition. The characteristic fossils of the Cam-
brian which make such identification possible, will be mentioned
presently. >


Large amounts of space, often equaling a half of the total, of the cur-
rent geological textbooks and treatises, are devoted to picturesque accounts
of alleged “uplifts,” “depressions,” “revolutions,” and “disturbances,” of
the ancient land surfaces, with descriptions of the migrations of the ancient
floras and faunas, the authors of such
books being apparently sublimely uncon-
scious of the utter incongruity of such
fantastic speculations in any work profess-
ing to deal with scientific facts. At any
rate, the present author can not have the
heart to undertake any such fairylike ex-
cursions into the unknown and unknow-
able, but must content himself with prosaic
statements regarding the present occur-
rence or distribution of the various ancient
rocks, their characters, and their fossil
contents, with such scanty inferences re-
garding ancient conditions as may seem
inevitable in view of the facts as we now
know them.


Fue. 208 tei he? Revs Adam tedewick Divisions of the Cambrian. All
Coss At Ceonhtidee Uaivesine of the rocks classed:as. “older” than

the Coal Measures were for many
years left undivided, and grouped together under the general name
of graywacke, or transition rocks, and had not been explored by
geologists. However, about the year 1831, Sedgwick and Murchi-
son began the study of these transition rocks, with the result that
they were soon subdivided. The name given to the “oldest”
of these divisions by Sedgwick was Cambrian, from the old
Latin name for Wales. Although much heated discussion was
indulged in between these two men regarding the matter of sub-
dividing these rocks, this name has persisted down to our time
and has become firmly established as applying to the lowest di-
vision of the true fossiliferous series. However, this division
is now subdivided as follows:


3. Upper Cambrian, Saratogan series, Dikellocephalus fauna.
2. Middle Cambrian, Acadian series, Paradoxides fauna.
1. Lower Cambrian, Waucobian series, Olenellus fauna.


THE PALEOZOIC GROUP — CAMBRIAN SYSTEM 339


Distribution


In America. In a general way, as already remarked, the
Cambrian rocks may be found near the Archean areas; that
is, they prevail near the northern boundary of the United
States, especially the eastern part. They are not exposed at the
surface over large areas, being often buried deeply under other
sediments. They occur in disconnected outcrops from the Adi-
rondacks to Newfoundland, and in many other spots southward
from the St. Lawrence to Ala-
bama. They occur in somewhat
large areas in Wisconsin and
Missouri, while small outcrops
of them are found in Texas and
in various parts of the Rocky
Mountain region. Cambrian
strata outcrop in the Grand
Cañon of the Colorado, but their
extent in this locality and in the
numerous others just mentioned
is largely a matter of conjecture.


Evolutionary geologists always
take it for granted that if the over-
lying Mesozoic and Cenozoic strata
could be removed from the rest of
these countries, and the other strata
of the “later” Paleozoic could also be
removed, we should probably find the
Cambrian beds spread out over prac-


š : Fic. 206. Roderick Impey Murchison (1792-
tically all of the continents, next to 1871), pioneer geologist, and the one who


the Pre-Cambrian. But this supposi- named the Silurian, Devonian, and Permian


tion is wholly imaginary, and is quite systems,


out of harmony with what we know

of the extremely limited areas of all the other formations that we can ac-
tually get at and examine. It is merely a relic of the old onion-coat theory
of Werner, and is unworthy of a place in a modern textbook of geology.


Moreover, it should be noted that there are several instances
where Cambrian rocks do not occur thus next to the primary or
primitive rocks. In many localities in the eastern ranges of
the Rockies north of the middle of Montana, great areas of
Paleozoic rocks are found comprising the mass of the mountains,
but resting upon Cretaceous beds which underlie them in a
more or less horizontal position. Some of these upper rocks
are called Algonkian, as mentioned in the preceding chapter;
but some of them are also classed as Cambrian, while others
are classed as Permo-Carboniferous. Doubtless some day, under


340 THE NEW GEOLOGY


a more rational system of classifying the rocks, most or all of
these upper beds will be classed together under some common
name; for they have many physical and lithologic characters in


Fic. 207. Map of known Cambrian outcrops in the United States and Canada.
(After W. B. Scott, “Introduction to Geology,” permission of Macmillan Co.)


Fic. 208. Erosion remnant, composed of Cambrian sandstone, “Driftless Area,” Wisconsin.
(Alden, U. S. G. 8.)


common, and they all seem to rest equally upon the great basal
shales of the Cretaceous system which run underneath them
from all sides like the soil under a building.

Foreign. Im Europe are many extensive exposures of Cam-
brian rocks. The largest exposures and the thickest beds occur


THE PALEOZOIC GROUP — CAMBRIAN SYSTEM 341


‘1G. 209. Deadwood sandstone (U. Cambrian) resting on erystalline schists (Archean), in
Gol Brook Cafion, 4 miles southwest of Wind Cave, South Dakota. (Darton, U. S. G. S.)


in Wales and Spain. In the former country, they are alleged to
attain a thickness of some 20,000 feet, and comprise conglom-
erates, sandstones, shales, and slates. There are considerable
areas of Cambrian rocks in Sweden and in the part of Russia
around the Baltic province and near Petrograd. But here they
are only about 400 feet in thickness, while the beds still remain
in their original horizontal position, and consist of blue clays


342 THE NEW GEOLOGY


which are scarcely hardened, and sands containing a few Cam-
brian fossils, the sands being still loose and incoherent. These
are regarded as very striking peculiarities in beds which are
considered so very, very old; and it is one of the astonishments
of geology as currently taught, how these very ancient beds can
have come down to`us in this quiet way, with the strata still
horizontal and showing so little the hardening processes of time.
They look as young as the very youngest of the fossiliferous
rocks elsewhere.

Other areas of Cambrian beds are found in France, Ger-
many, Bohemia, Spain, and other parts of Europe. Large areas
in Eastern and Northern Asia are occupied by Cambrian rocks.


Fic. 210. Mount Stephen, British Columbia. The upper part of the mountain

is formed of Middle Cambrian limestones, interbedded with which is a bed of

shale that has become famous for the fossils found in it. This bed is shown at
wx; and the fossils are most wonderfully preserved. (After Walcott.)


They also occur in Northern India, in the south of Australia,
and in Tasmania. But strangely enough, no Cambrian rocks
whatever have been discovered anywhere in Africa, or in South
America, except in one or two small localities in Northern
Argentina.

One of the best-known rocks of the Cambrian system in
North America is the so-called Potsdam sandstone, which in
many localities is used for building material. These sandstone
beds sometimes contain ripple marks, mud cracks, and oc-
casionally even tracks of animals, and are usually quite regular
in their bedding. Such evidences of shallow-water formation
occur here and there throughout many of the fossiliferous groups;
but they are often overemphasized by geologists. The great
magnesian limestone of Missouri and some other parts of the
Mississippi Valley is composed in part of Cambrian rocks, as
are also the celebrated ‘‘Pictured Rocks” in the sandstone near


“UBLIqUIBD APPIN


*erqumroO ysyug


uəudə1s uno Jo apis
PIs 94} uo BulZUNY [Issog q4o9[eAA “SIT pue 4qoo[e AA
<: sezeqo “1d


‘TTS “Ola


(343)


344 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Carp River, Northern Michigan. Some of the rocks near here
have been already referred to as producing great quantities of
copper ore; but they are classed as belonging to an “older” series.

Cambrian Life. The fossils of the Cambrian rocks are all
marine. A few seaweeds are found, and the calcareous accumu-
lations of some of these may have contributed greatly to the
making of some of the limestones. But no land plants are
known from these beds. The animals are invertebrates, and
include sponges, corals, pelecypods (lamellibranchs), gastropods,
pteropods, cephalopods, with numerous trilobites and other
crustaceans. The most characteristic types of life are the
brachiopods and the trilobites.

Foraminifera “very like those of the modern seas” (Scott)
are of common occurrence, and siliceous sponges are also found.
These forms may or may not indicate deep water.

Of the Coelenterata, a remarkable extinct group known as
graptolites are found in the Cambrian rocks, but do not occur
in any except the lower divisions of the Paleozoic group. Or,
to state the matter another way, any rocks containing grapto-
lites are always classed as belonging to the lower parts of the
Paleozoic. These graptolites were somewhat similar to our Hy-
drozoa, or jellyfishes; but they seem to have had horny internal
skeletons, which have been left in great numbers as curious-
looking marks like the branches of trees or various fantastic
objects embedded in these ancient rocks. Some of these grapto-
lites have been found in practically all parts of the world; that


Fic. 212. Panorama looking along the east side of Labarge Mountain, Uinta Cou -
ming, showing Cambrian lying on top of Cretaceous (coal-bearing). The rounded ha w the
middle distance are also Cretaceous. All the beds have steep westerly dips. (Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


THE PALEOZOIC GROUP — CAMBRIAN SYSTEM 345


EO >.


ç


PRE S, >
Fic. 213. Lower Cambrian quartzites, with thin beds alternating with thick. The thick beds
show vertical cleavage or jointing, while the thin beds do not. Inyo County, California.
(Walcott, U. S. G. S.)


is, a special variety (Dictyonema) is of almost world-wide dis-
tribution. And of course this is considered a very fortunate
circumstance by geologists, as it makes this species a splendid
“index fossil,” enabling them to correlate the rocks in which it
occurs, whether in Spain or Australia or Northern Canada.
What is really proved by this correlation?

The corals which are found in the Cambrian are of the order
known as cup corals, and probably lived, as do many of the
modern corals, as single individuals and in comparatively deep
water. They seem to have been sufficiently abundant in some
parts of the Western States to form distinct reefs, but their
habits of life are not known. Many of our modern cup corals
live in the deepest parts of the ocean.

Of the Arthropoda, by far the most abundant are the mem-
bers of the great group of Trilobita, which are entirely con-
fined to the Cambrian and the other systems of the Paleozoic.
They occur in the Cambrian rocks in a great variety of forms
and sizes; but they are of so much importance that they will be
discussed at greater length in the succeeding chapter.


346 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 214. CAMBRIAN FOSSILS


GRAPTOLITES: 1, Phyllograptus typus; 2, 3, Graptolithus logani. BRACHIOPODS: 4, Lin-
gula prima; 12, Lingulepis antiqua. PELECYPOD: 6, Fordilla troyensis. GASTROPODS:
7, Stenotheca rugosa; 8, Platyceras primzvum; 13, Holopea sweeti. PTEROPOD: 9, Hyolithes
americanus; 10, operculum of same. TRILOBITE: 11, Paradoxides harlani (X 1/6).
(After Dana.)


Various kinds of brachiopods are among the most abundant
of the Cambrian fossils. They belong to two great groups: the
Inarticulata, with shells of two valves which are not connected
together by a hinge, these shells being mostly horny; and second,
the Articulata, which have calcareous shells joined by a very
beautiful and elaborately constructed hinge. The latter order
becomes much more important in some of the beds which will
be subsequently considered, in which they “are found in incal-
culable numbers.” (Scott.) But these brachiopods also will be
considered more at length in a subsequent chapter.

The principal divisions of the great group of Mollusca are
also represented in the Cambrian rocks. The pelecypods (bi-
valves) are usually small and not numerous. The gastropods
occur rather infrequently, while other forms referred to the
pteropods, and still others which are referred to the cephalopods,
have also been recognized in the Cambrian rocks. All of these
sequent chapter.

Peculiar Facts. Some of the peculiarities connected with the
occurrence of these types of life in the Cambrian rocks should
be noted in this chapter. Only a few of these striking peculi-
arities can be noted here.


THE PALEOZOIC GROUP — CAMBRIAN SYSTEM 347


Many of the sandstones abound in a small shell about the
size of a finger nail, related to the modern gastropod, Patella.
Another gastropod, Platyceras primævum, has a spiral top like a
broad horn (Fig. 215), and, “according to some authors, is not ge-
nerically distinct from the modern genus Capulus.” ( Dana.) It
seems to skip all the formations from the Triassic to the modern.

Evolutionists are justly surprised at the
sudden appearance, in the lowest Cambrian
rocks, of so many different species of quite
highly organized animals, with only the most


scanty evidence of any other lower and more Poir
embryonic forms of life having preceded them. a a ay


And this is notwithstanding the fact that

these various fossil beds occur in such detached localities
that their arrangement into a series is a purely arbitrary and
artificial arrangement; so that geologists have had their pick
of all the suitable rocks in the world with which to begin their
series. The striking way, however, in which a large variety of
types of life spring suddenly into existence, in spite of the best
attempts at arranging them so as to make it seem a more
gradual process, is thus commented on by that pioneer of Ameri-
can geology, Professor James D. Dana:


“The Lower Cambrian species have not the simplicity of structure that
would naturally be looked for in the earliest Paleozoic life. They are
perfect of their kind and highly specialized structures. No steps from
simple kinds leading up to them have been discovered; no line from proto-


Fic. 216. A group of Paleozoic Linguals. a, Lingula eva (Black River) ; b, L.
rectilateralis (Trenton-Lorraine) ; c, L. modesta (Trenton-Lorraine) ; d, L.
coburgensis (Trenton) ; e, L. ligea (Hamilton-Portage) ; f, L. elderi, interior
of dorsal valve, showing muscular and vascular markings. (After Whitfield.)
d, Divaricator muscular scars; ad, adjustor muscular scars; pa, posterior ad-
ductor sears ; a, a, anterior adductor scars ; z, x, track of advance of the muscular
sears ; s, great pallial sinuses; ps, posterior course of the latter; o, inner ramifi-
cations of the sinuses. (After Whitfield.)


848 THE NEW GEOLOGY


zoans up to corals, eehinoderms, or worms, or from either of these groups up
to brachiopods, mollusks, trilobites, or other crustaceans. This appearance
of abruptness in the introduction of Cambrian life is one of the striking
facts made known by geology.”—“Manual,” p. 487.


Two genera of brachiopods, Lingula (Fig. 216) and Crania

(Fig. 217), have come down to us unchanged from these Cam-
brian rocks. They are regarded as wonders in the way of per-
sistence. Discina and Rhynchonella (Fig.
250, 9), two other brachiopod genera, are ; “aE TES t
also répresented in the modern waters;
but they occur also in the Mesozoic. It is
not quite clear, from the published litera-
ture on the subject, whether or not these
creatures are found in all of the so-called
“subsequent” formations. A few examples
of them may be found here and there, but
it is certain that they skipped nearly all of
these great groups of rocks which have
been supposed to represent the many mil-
lions of intervening years.

Another example of skipping one of
the minor subdivisions of the Cambrian
rocks is alluded to by Dana, when he says,
“The absence of lamellibranchs in the
Middle Cambrian, although present in both


Fic. 217. a, 6, G i
the Lower and Upper, means the absence (a, Cs) tells attache Ha


A A S -
of fossils from the rocks, not of species  3o,g7homena Upper Or


from the faunas.” (“Manual??*p.488:)) sos ee


(After Hall and Clarke.)


But-it may be asked, Why then are the
types of life that are represented in the Middle Cambrian rocks
regarded as representing all the types of life which existed dur-
ing that period in any part of the world?

The lesson to be drawn from these and similarly related
facts will be considered in a subsequent chapter.


CHAPTER XXI


The Trilobites


Systematic Position and History. The Trilobita constitute
a subclass of the Crustacea, which are a class under the phylum
Arthropoda, the latter containing all the articulated and seg-
mented animals, such as the crustaceans, insects, scorpions, and
all from Paleozoic rocks. They have been so minutely subdivided
that they constitute some of the most important “horizon
markers” or “index fossils” for distinguishing the formations.

“Trilobites were the first fossils to arrest the attention of
naturalists” (Schuchert), Edward Llwyd, the curator of the
specimen in 1698. Linnzus, the Swedish naturalist, first recog-
nized their relationship with such animals as shrimps, crabs,
and lobsters. The name trilobite was proposed by Walch, in
1771, and soon came into general use. But for nearly another
century, very little was known about the anatomy of these
creatures, until their legs were discerned by Billings and Wal-
cott, and finally the antennze and other features.

General Structure. The name trilobite means, having three
lobes, and refers to the three longitudinal lobes seen on the dorsal
or upper side of most of these animals. Their bodies were seg-
mented, the segments being grouped into three divisions, and
united on the upper side into a shell or carapace, which is the part
usually found as a fossil. The shell on the under side was very
thin; and this, with the delicate legs and antenne, is seldom
found preserved except in black shales more or less impregnated
with sulphur. The carapace also was quite thin, and was made of
chitin, a substance like the exoskeleton of insects, and more
like hair or horn than like bone. It is a nitrogenous substance,
somewhat impregnated with lime salts. But it resists chemical
change much better than bone, or than the shells of such ani-
mals as oysters, clams, and brachiopods; and on this account,
the remains of trilobites are very often well preserved.

Habitat. Trilobites lived only in the seas and oceans, prob-
ably in rather shallow waters, though of this latter fact we are
not absolutely certain. They were probably carnivorous, or
scavengers, feeding on the minute forms of life of the bottoms
of the seas and oceans. They are found in almost all kinds of
marine sediments, though chiefly in limestones and shales, that

(349)

23


350 THE NEW GEOLOGY


is, in the finer sediments. Some of the trilobites may have been
good swimmers; but their structure and their habits of life ren-
dered them very helpless in the presence of any disturbance of
their habitats which would fill the waters with falling particles
of mud or sand. When any such unusual sedimentation oc-
curred, they seem to have perished in millions; and quite evi-
dently most of the complete specimens which we find were
buried alive. They are found in practically all parts of the


Fig. 218. Outlines of a complete trilobite (Triarthrus becki). A, dorsal or upper

side of carapace, showing the three lobes, the antennz, axis (4), glabella (1), and

free cheeks (2), and eyes (3). B, ventral or under side, showing limbs, and the
upper lip or hypostoma (1) which covers the mouth. (After Beecher.)


world, the strata in which they are found being always classed
as Paleozoic. They evidently did not live in the waters where
vertebrate fishes were common, as the two types are seldom
found together.


Geologic Distribution. The following table serves to show
the relative proportions of species and genera in the various
Paleozoic systems, and it should be remembered that rocks are
assigned to the one or the other of these systems largely ac-
cording to the number of trilobites which they happen to con-
tain, together with the variations in the forms and characters


THE TRILOBITES 351


of these trilobites themselves, the more elaborately constructed
types being assigned to the Silurian and Devonian, and the
more generalized or “primitive” types to the Cambrian or
Ordovician.


System Genera Species
Devonian | °? 105
Silurian | 30 485
Ordovician 80 950
Cambrian 55 300


In size, the trilobites range from minute forms less than half
an inch long up to giants 27.5 inches in length; but the average
size was about 1.5 inches. Specimens of 3 inches or 4 inches
are common, and some even of 6 inches are far from rare; while
the very large ones were quite unusual, and the very largest
ones are based on restorations made up by piecing together
parts of separate individuals, and even fragments from (pos-
sibly) scattered localities.

The modern sow bugs or pill bugs which are found in cellars
and in damp places, can roll themselves up into balls, with the
carapace alone exposed. It is supposed that most of the trilo-
bites could do the same. This would be but a partial protec-
tion at best, and did not serve to deliver them from that which
seems to have been the real cause of their extermination,
namely, being buried alive under rapidly accumulating sediments.

Anatomy. The carapace of the trilobite is divided into (1)
the cephalon, or head portion; (2) the thorax, made up of a series
of segments; and (3) the pygidium, or tailpiece, also called the
abdomen.

In the middle of the cephalon is the glabella; and on either
side of the latter are the free cheeks, each of which bears a
compound eye. In some varieties, each free cheek is separated
from the glabella by a faint raised line, called the facial suture;
and this division often causes the parts to separate after death,
resulting in imperfect fossils. Some kinds of trilobites are called
blind, because no eyes have been discovered. In most instances,
the compound eye is covered by a single cornea, through which
the individual lenses underneath may or may not be visible to
us. In a few varieties, each lens had its own cornea. “The
number of lenses in a compound eye may vary from fourteen to
the astonishing number of fifteen thousand. Imagine an ani-
mal with thirty thousand eyes.” (Schuchert.)

The number of segments in the thorax is constant in the
adults of each species, but varies in the young specimens, and


352 THE NEW GEOLOGY


also varies with the different genera. Two is the least, and
twenty-nine the greatest number known, the largest number
of segments in the thorax usually going along with a small
pygidium, or tailpiece.

The pygidium consists of from two to twenty-eight segments
cemented together, though the demarcations between them are
not always discernable.

On the ventral side was a mouth, covered by an upper lip,
called the hypostoma, the latter being fastened like a flap to the
margin of the glabella above. A pair of antennex, or touch
organs, are to be seen occasionally at the sides of the hy-
postoma; though these antennz were not discovered until trilo-
bites had been studied for many years. Many pairs of legs are
occasionally seen; and it is thought that such appendages were
always present, even where no trace of them can be discerned.
Many of these new parts have been discovered only by study-
ing extremely thin sections under the microscope.


Molting. It is considered that trilobites periodically shed
their chitinous shell, just as crabs and lobsters now do, this
shedding of the shell, or molting, as it is called, occurring
more frequently during the early growth of the animal, but oc-
casionally during the entire life. The growth or development
of these creatures has been traced out by much patient observa-
tion, and is almost as well known as if the living creatures were
available for study.


Relationship. Much speculation has been indulged in as to
the relationship between the trilobites and the other crustaceans.
Except for mere matters of anatomical comparison, such specu-
lations are valueless and quite unscientific; for there is no way
of proving that any of our modern forms are in any way
genetically related to these creatures. - Speculation also as to the
historical order in which the different forms of trilobites them-
selves appeared and disappeared, is useless, and always involves
a reasoning in a circle; for certain varieties are called the
“oldest” because of having what are called generalized or
“primitive” characteristics; and then the more specialized kinds,
which are called “younger,” are said to have been derived from
the “older” kinds, because they are more specialized!

Locally, of course, certain beds containing one type of trilo-
bite can be shown to lie stratigraphically above another, and
thus can be shown to have been buried in this locality after the
other; but the theory that all over the earth, the one kind lived
and died before the other, is absolutely incapable of proof, and


THE TRILOBITES 353


quite unscientific. Such a condition of the ancient world can
not even be thought out and imagined, without assuming the
entire onion-coat theory in its biological form. And then when
some people take these assumed successive kinds of trilobites —
which is a purely artificial arrangement, and in no sense his-
torical — and from the results try to prove how one kind was
evolved into some other kind, we must recognize such juggling
of the evidence as mere child’s play. Yet, for over half a cen-
tury, this paleontological whirligig has been the leading di-
version of people otherwise intelligent and scientific in their
habits of thought.


CHAPTER XXII


Fossil Shells


Importance. Im sheer point of numbers, fossil shells con-
stitute by far the greater number of fossils found and collected.
As here presented, both of the two great groups of shelled ani-
mals, the Mollusca and the Brachiopoda, will be included in our
study; and of these classes, about 45,000 species of the true
Mollusca are known to be now living, while more than half as
many are found as fossils. In the case of the brachiopods, only
about 160 species are now living, while the fossil species num-
ber at least 7,000, or forty times as many. Indeed, the brachio-
pods constitute the most important single group of fossils, when
considered as mere “horizon markers” or “index fossils.”


Fic. 219.

heimia flavescens; 2, loop of Terebratula vitrea; 3, Terebratulina caputser-

pentis; 4, Spirifer striatus; 5, the same, showing interior of dorsal valve;

6, Athyris concentrica; 7, Atrypa reticularis; 8, the same, showing interior
of dorsal valve. (After Dana.)


Doubtless it is because of their helplessness in avoiding burial
alive in the presence of an unusual condition of sedimentation,
that such great numbers of brachiopods are found as fossils
in the rocks, a fact which we found to explain the great num-
bers of fossil trilobites.


Brachiopods or Lamp Shells
Types of Brachiopods. Brachiopods are found as fossils in
the Paleozoic and Mesozoic rocks throughout the world. Some
few specimens are occasionally found in the rocks classed as
Cenozoic, or the Tertiary rocks; but only about 20 kinds have
been found in the Cenozoic rocks of North America, and not


(354)


FOSSIL SHELLS 355


many elsewhere. The living genera Crania and Lingula are re-
garded by evolutionary geologists as the longest-lived of all the
shellfish, for the living ones can not be distinguished from
the fossils found in what are called the “oldest” formations of
the Paleozoic, the Cambrian. The genera Discina and Rhyncho-
nella are alive to-day, and are found as fossils in the Ordovician
and other systems. The Terebratulide are a family with 68
living species, and are found as fossils chiefly in the Mesozoic.

Brachiopods are first found mentioned in zodlogical literature in a work
published in Rome in 1606; but not until the time of Cuvier was any detailed
study of their internal anatomy published, the great French naturalist hav-
ing published an account of them in 1797. Their embryology and early


growth were not understood until about 1860, and even yet these features
are not at all well known.


Structure. The body of a brachiopod is inclosed in a bivalve
shell, the two valves constituting a ventral and a dorsal cover-
ing, or a top and a bottom, rather than the two sides, as in the
mussel, the clam, and the oyster. The latter are true mollusks;
and in their internal structure as well as in their shells, the
mollusks and the brachiopods are very different.

The word brachiopod comes from a word meaning arm-
footed, and originated because of a wrong interpretation of the
brachia, or arms, for these are not used by the animal as feet,
as was supposed in the year 1806, when the word was coined.
The two arms are looped and rolled into a spiral, and have two
chief functions: first, to propel currents of water through the
shell from which the minute food, mostly alge, can be extracted
and passed over to the mouth; second, to serve for purposes of
respiration, that is, for absorbing oxygen from the water.

In the ventral valve, near the hinge, is found a hole through
which, when alive, a fleshy stem called the peduncle or pedicel
grows; this peduncle or pedicel being in most cases anchored to
some fixed object, like the bottom of the sea. Thus the adult
animals are permanently located for the rest of their lives. But
in the developing stage, soon after being hatched, the young
creatures swim around freely for a few hours or a few days,
until they find a suitable location, when they settle down and
fasten themselves permanently to some rock or to the bottom of
the sea. The extremely small size of these larvee, together with:
the very short time which they spend in this active state, would
help to explain why the brachiopods are not very widely dis-
tributed, but are quite localized. However, when found at all,
they are often in astonishing numbers, the rocks in some locali-
ties being almost covered with: them.


356 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Brachiopod shells are divided into two groups, the Articulata
and the Inarticulata, these divisions being based on the way in
which the two valves are articulated or fastened together at the
hinge. When the ventral valve has one or more teeth which
work in corresponding dental sockets or hinge-lines in the dor-
sal valve, the specimen is classed as one of the Articulata; when
these are not present, it is placed in the other subclass. The
shells of the Articulata are usually composed of calcium car-
bonate; that is, they are calcareous. The shells of the others
are phosphatic, being composed of calcium phosphate. By the
aid of a pocket lens, minute holes or canals may sometimes be
seen passing through the shell, which is then said to be punc-
tate; if these are absent, the shell is impunctate.

The shells grow or are secreted by a part of the animal
called the mantle, which consists of two thin membranes, one
fitting to the inside of one valve, and one fitting that of the
other. These parts of the mantle are like a second or inside
shell, only they are soft, like skins; and besides the work of se-
creting the outer shell, they act to assist the brachia, or “arms,”
in the work of respiration carried on by the latter.

Condition of the Fossils. On the inside of an empty valve
are seen various scars or markings, showing the places where
‘the adductor and diductor muscles were attached. The former
served to close the valve, or to bring the two sides together;
the latter muscles were for the purpose of opening the valves.
Unlike the shells of many true Mollusca, the shells of the
brachiopods do not gape or open after the animal dies. But
when the soft parts of the creature decay after death, the hole
in the beak or hinge region is left open; and then sand or mud
can be washed into the empty shell through this open hole. In
very many cases, however, perhaps in the majority of cases, the
fossil brachiopods are found with the valves applied or closed,
and the interior hollow, or only filled with minute crystals of
calcite, indicating that these shells had been buried while the
animals were still alive, or at least before the shells had been
exposed to any particular washing or movement of the waters.
And when there are found, in various parts of the world, ex-
tensive strata containing uncounted thousands of individual
‘specimens of brachiopods, practically all of them in this condi-
tion, it is hard to understand that these beds were formed under
any normal conditions, such as prevail at the present time; be-
cause it is a very simple and plain fact that no such rock de-
posits are now being produced anywhere on earth, so far
as we are aware.


FOSSIL SHELLS 357


Occurrence. During the cruise of the Challenger, brachio-
pods were dredged or brought up at only 38 or 39 out of the total
of 361 stations where dredging work was carried on, showing
that these animals are extremely localized, or restricted in
their geographical distribution, though plentiful where they do
occur. They do not seem to be eaten extensively by other ani-
mals, nor are they troubled much by internal parasites; their
restriction in space and their comparative scarcity in the modern
seas, as compared with their abundance in ancient waters, be-
ing due, probably, as already pointed: out, to the conditions that
attend the early growth of the young animals. As all the adults
are fast anchored to the bottom or to some large object, they
are absolutely helpless in the presence of any great disturbance
of the waters which might bring along an unusual supply of
mud or sand and so bury them where they are.

Among the modern living genera, Lingula and Glottidia are
found between tide marks or in the shallow waters down to 17
fathoms. Others are found in much deeper waters, at depths
ranging from 4,000 feet to nearly 14,000 feet. (Davidson.)
Crania is usually found at moderate depths down to about 5,000
feet. One species of Terebratula was dredged from a depth of
2,900 fathoms, or 17,400 feet, in the North Pacific. But most
brachiopods live in shallower water, abounding down to a
depth of 3,000 feet or 3,600 feet, though about half of the living
species live below the hundred-fathom line, or below 600 feet.
Thus the majority of the living brachiopods live below the edge
of the continental shelf, where no,sedimentation or deposit of
mud or sand is now going on, and where no true stratified beds
are now being made.

However, the total area of the ocean hitherto explored by
dredging, forms such a very small fraction of the total, that it
is quite premature to speak of the geographical distribution of
such creatures as the Brachiopoda, or to dogmatize about what
kinds are “extinct”; for the progress of scientific discovery is
constantly bringing to light, from almost all the groups of the
invertebrates, genera which seem identical with fossil genera
which have long been declared to be “extinct.”


The Mollusca or True Shellfish


Structure of a Mollusk. The Mollusca are soft-bodied ani-
mals, with bilateral symmetry, and are represented by the clam,
oyster, snail, and pearly nautilus. Most of them have external
shells, while some have instead an internal shell or skeleton, and
some, like the slugs, have no shell at all, or only a rudimentary


358 THE NEW GEOLOGY


one. Thus a great variety of forms are included under this class.
The class name means soft; and this is a characteristic common
to all, though, as we have seen, there are many other animals
to which this description would equally apply.

One noticeable feature of most mollusks is the foot, so-
called, a flat portion under the creature by means of which it
creeps or crawls along. There is commonly a thin, membranous
mantle, by means of which a shell is secreted. Within the
mantle cavity are the gills, organs which, by their movements,
keep currents of water passing through this cavity, and which
extract oxygen from the water as it passes along. In the land
snails and slugs, the gills are absent, and respiration is carried
on by means of the mantle cavity, which acts as a lung, this
cavity being filled with air. The snails and slugs, with most
other mollusks except the true bivalves, have a sharp, flexible
ribbon, or tongue, called a radula, which is made of chitin, and
which is armed with minute, sharp teeth, much like a saw, by
means of which the animal cuts up its food.

The Mollusca live in a great diversity of habitats. Almost every part
of the land, and all the shallower parts of the oceans and the fresh waters,


contain them; and in numbers of species, they are surpassed only by the
insects, which probably outnumber them 2 to 1.


The Shell. The shell of a mollusk consists usually of three
layers. The outer one is very thin, brownish in color, and
composed of horny matter. This layer is always absent in the
fossil. The thick, main layer of the shell is caleareous, or com-
posed of some form of calcium, and is called the porcelaneous
layer. This is the part most often preserved in the fossil state.
The innermost layer is often quite thick, and is composed of
mother-of-pearl, which is a form a calcium carbonate known as
aragonite and readily soluble in water containing certain
chemicals in solution. On this account, this layer is not often
well preserved in the deeper rocks, or in the more porous ones.

Classification. Only three classes of mollusks are of geo-
logical importance, and these are the only ones which we need


to study here. They are the Pelecypoda, the Gastropoda, and
the Cephalopoda.


Pelecypoda (or Lamellibranchia)


Structure. The name Pelecypoda is derived from words
meaning hatchet-foot, because the foot is shaped like a wedge
or a hatchet. A former name applying to this class is Lamelli-
branchia, derived from words meaning lamellate or leaflike gills.
When looked at from above, one of these animals seems to be


FOSSIL SHELLS 359


compressed from the sides, the soft parts being covered with a
right and a left valve, each symmetrical with reference to the
other. Thus these animals are often called bivalves, in distinc-
tion from the univalves, such as the snails and other Gastropoda.

The pelecypods include such common types as clams, oysters,
mussels, cockles, and scallops. Some of them live in the fresh
waters of the lands; but most of them are marine, and live
along the shores of the shallower water, where they find plenty
=: food, consisting of microscopic alge and other low forms
of life.

The gills not only act as breathing organs, taking oxygen
from the waters, but they serve also to strain out the food from
the water which passes through the mantle cavity in a continual
current, passing in through one opening near the posterior end
and out through another similar opening near by, these two
tubes being called the siphons. Many of these animals live
more or less deeply buried in the mud or sand; and in such a
case, the siphons are large and long, sufficiently so to reach to
the top of the mud or sand.

The right and left valves are joined on the dorsal side by
a hinge, which allows the valves to open and shut. There is
always an elastic ligament, either on the outside or on the inside
of this hinge, which acts like a spring to keep the valves open
when the animals are reposing or feeding. On the inside of the
shell, attached to each valve, are one or more pairs of adductor
muscles, by means of which the animal can keep the valves
closed against an enemy for a limited time. But when these
muscles become tired, or when to the animal all seems safe and
well, the muscles relax, and then the elastic ligament springs
the valves apart more or less widely. The hatchet-shaped foot
then protrudes through this opening between the valves; and
by means of this fleshy foot, some varieties can plow their way
through the mud or sand to the distance of a foot or two.

Habits. Some forms, like the oyster, do not burrow at all,
but are permanently attached to some object on the bottom.
Other forms, like Solen, Lutraria, and Mya, make quite deep
burrows; and in these cases, the valves always gape or spread
open quite widely after the animal dies, and even in life these
valves have to spread considerably in order to allow the large,
fleshy foot to protrude between them. The shells of these burrow-
ing species are always elongated in form.

Occurrence. Pelecypods are not common in the Cambrian,
though they are found in the Ordovician rocks; but they are
found best preserved in the Pennsylvanian or Upper Carbon-


360 THE NEW GEOLOGY


iferous. To reverse this statement, rocks where pelecypods are
abundant and well preserved could not well be called Cambrian ;
but if the other associated fossils permitted the idea, these rocks
would be classed as Pennsylvanian or Upper Carboniferous.
Pelecypods, however, are not often used as index fossils in the
Paleozoic rocks. Im the Mesozoic, on the other hand, they are `
more common (or where more common, the rocks are called
Mesozoic, which is the same thing), and are often used as index
fossils to differentiate between the systems, Triassic, Jurassic,
Comanchean, or Cretaceous. They are plentiful wherever these
rocks are found throughout the world. Indeed, Lyell based his
division of the Tertiary rocks on the percentage of what he con-
sidered to be living or extinct species of Mollusca found in these
various rocks, assigning those with a small percentage of “liv-
ing” species to the earlier divisions, and contrastedly assigning
those with a large percentage of “living” species to the later
divisions of this system. As we shall see later, this percentage
system is quite unreliable and wholly unscientific as a method of
distinguishing the relative ages of the formations.


The Gastropoda


Structure. The name Gastropoda means stomach-footed,
and was given because of the fact that these animals crawl
around on the fleshy part called the foot, which is, of course, on
the ventral (stomach) side of the body. This name is almost
grotesque in its whimsical meaning; but it has been so firmly
established, and for so long a time, that any attempt to displace
it with something more expressive would be useless — even if
such a name could be invented.

The Gastropoda include the snails, conchs, drills, periwinkles,
and limpets, together with the naked and semi-naked slugs of
the ocean and of the land. As a class, these animals are quite
slow and stupid in their movements, and are most common in
the shallow salt waters, though some are also found in the fresh
waters. On land, a great variety of forms belonging to this
class are found in all parts of the world. The latter are the
pulmonate or air-breathing snails and slugs, which are often
great pests in gardens and greenhouses, their keen radulz, or
sawlike tongues, making rapid destruction of many choice and
valuable plants in a very short time. Forms not widely dif-
ferent from these are found in the ocean, where their radulæ
are used to pierce the shells of other shellfish, from which their
name of “drills” has been derived. This drilling of oyster and
clam shells is materially assisted by a weak solution of sulphuric


FOSSIL SHELLS 361


acid secreted by the attacking drill. When a hole is effected,
the contents of the victim are sucked up by the drill.

The shell of a gastropod is usually shaped like a spiral
which turns toward the right hand, or in a dextral direction.
Some few kinds are known which turn in the opposite direction.
From having only the one shell, they are called univalves. Most
kinds, however, have a small plate, called an operculum, which
is attached to the foot, and by means of which the animal can
close the opening to its shell after its body has been drawn in-
side. This operculum is sometimes made of chitin and some-
times of calcium carbonate. It in no way corresponds to the
second valve of other mollusks.

Occurrence. Small, hood-shaped gastropods are found in
the Cambrian beds. They are common in most of the other
systems, many of the fossil forms being so similar to the living
ones that it is extremely difficult to tell them apart. When we
remember that there are some 20,000 living species named and
changed environment, it would seem impossible to tell how
many of the modern living species may truly be the counterparts
of those found as fossils; for in comparing the fossil kinds with
the living ones, no allowance is ever made for the greatly
changed environments between the ancient and the modern con-
ditions. It would really seem to be quite unsafe and unscientific
to base wide general conclusions on the results obtained by such
superficial comparisons, when one of the most important factors
pertaining to these conditions has been completely neglected
or ignored.

The Pteropoda, or sea butterflies (also called winged snails),
compose a group of small gastropods with thin phosphatic
shells, which are found living in the upper parts of the pelagic
or open ocean waters. Fossil gastropods are sometimes found in
great numbers in certain localities, their remains having given
rise to the extensive phosphatic rocks found in Tennessee and
elsewhere. The name given to the kinds forming these latter
deposits is Cyclora, their shells having been left behind after
the rest of the limestone in which they were originally em-
bedded has been removed by weathering. These phosphate
rocks are very valuable as fertilizers.


Cephalopoda
Form and Structure. The highest group of the Mollusca are


the cephalopods, a name which indicates that the parts corre-
sponding to the foot in other mollusks here acts like a real head.


362 THE NEW GEOLOGY


The Cephalopoda include the octopus, the cuttlefish, the squid, and
the nautilus, together with the great group of fossil forms
known as the ammonites. The ammonites (with also the living
nautilus) had shells with distinct chambers, the animal living
only in the outer apartment, or the vestibule. The squids, the
octopus, and the cuttlefish do not have any external shell, though
they have a body almost exactly like the first group, and they have
also an internal shell or internal skeleton, which is often found
as a fossil. Another group, the belemnites, are found as fossils
only in the Mesozoic rocks, and are entirely extinct, so far as we
know. They had thick internal skeletons shaped like a cigar;


Fic. 220. The pearly nautilus.


and they are very common in the rocks of the Mesozoic group.
Here it will be sufficient to speak briefly of the three divisions,
the nautiloids, the ammonites, and the belemnites.

The pearly nautilus (Fig. 220) is an inhabitant of the open
waters of the East, ranging from the Philippines and the Malay
region to the Fiji Islands. They are gregarious animals, and
live in the warm waters at a depth of from 300 to 600 feet,
though occasionally found as deep as 1,000 feet. Their empty
shells often drift on the surface of the water to almost all the
shores bordering their marine habitats. Some four living
species are known, and the shell of these living species is not
very unlike multitudes of fossil forms found in the Paleozoic
and Mesozoic rocks. Many of the Paleozoic forms had straight


FOSSIL SHELLS 363


chambered shells instead of coiled ones, some of these straight
shells being 15 feet long.


The Ammonites. The beautiful coiled chambered shells of
the ammonites are among the most characteristic fossils of the
Mesozoic rocks. In size, in shape, and in elaborate ornamenta-
tion, they almost tax the ingenuity of the naturalist to attempt
have been listed and classified. The shells
range in size from 3 inches up to 7 feet in diam-
eter; and if one of these large specimens were
uncoiled, it would be about 25 or 30 feet in
length. These large, elaborately constructed
shells are always assigned to the Mesozoic, usu-
ally to the “late” Mesozoic. Full and elaborate
lists of types for examples to be used as index
fossils have been prepared; and from these lists,
it is easy for the expert to assign any particular
bed or set of beds to the proper “horizon.”

The name ammonite dates back nearly two
hundred years, and is in allusion to the ram’s


horns which were considered to be characteris- Po. 2a kina a
. - . s epr
tic of Ammon, an Egyptian deity. “Alexander  offcinatis), viewed


from the upper side.


the Great is represented on the coins of Ly- Much reduced. The


simachus deified, with the horn of Ammon and a
diadem.” (Edwards.) In India, these fossils
are used in certain religious services, and also
constitute regular articles of trade.

The ammonites had a more ornamented


suckers can be seen
on the inside of the
long arms, as well as
on the smaller ones.
(After Woodward.)


shell than the


pearly nautilus, and often had a distinct keel along the center
of the outer whorls. The ammonites probably closed the open-
ing to their shell with an operculum, while the modern nautilus
does not have any such door to his home. In trying to picture
them, we must think of something like a squid or an octopus,
with its posterior end and the larger part of its body tucked
away inside one of these coiled shells, the arms and all the
anterior part being free on the outside. It may be that the
entire body could be withdrawn into the shell. In spite of their
large, somewhat heavy shells, it is quite probable that the am-
monites were good swimmers.


The form and arrangement of the septa dividing the various compart-
ments have been made the basis of an elaborate classification; for as these
septa always become more and more complex in pattern with the age of the
individual animal, as can be seen by the progressive complexity outward in
any individual specimen, therefore (so the evolutionists reason) the more


364 THE NEW GEOLOGY


simple specimens must be older than the more complicated ones; and so in
this simple fact, we have (so they say) the key to determine the relative
age of any given variety. Thus the beds containing any fossil ammonites
can easily be arranged in an alleged “chronological” order, based quite largely
on this gradual development in the complexity of the septa of these fossil
animals. As Professor Schuchert says, it is this structure which “makes
these fossils so valuable in deciphering the chronology of Mesozoic time.”
(“Textbook of Geology,” p. 865; edition of 1915.) The puerility of such a
method of reasoning seems never to have suggested itself to the minds of
geologists since Alpheus Hyatt (1838-1902) first taught it to them.


The Belemnites. The fos-
sils known as belemnites
(Fig. 222) are the internal
parts of a kind of cephalo-
pod similar to the modern
squids or cuttlefishes. In a
few instances, the outlines of
the soft parts of these crea-
tures have been made out;
and from these, we see that
the animal had ten arms or
tentacles, eight short and
two long, as in the modern
squid. They had large, well-
developed eyes, and had two
internal gill plumes, from

which circumstance the name
Fic, 222, Fossil cuttlefish (ostemnites): 1 A Dibranchiata has been as-
Lias, England. 2. A belemnite (Belemnoteuthis signed to them. As in the


antiqua) from the Oxford Clay, England, partly


restored: b, arms; oc, eyes; m, mouth; d, ink Case of the modern forms, the
bag; Ph, phragniocone; R, guard. 3. Restoration z


of a belemnite's shell: Po, prodéstracum; Ph, belemnites had an internal
phesemosone y guard. (Emor “ihe Nev in) 7ga¢@containing® 9
sepia, long the foundation

for so-called India inks. This sepia is brownish black, and mixes
readily with the sea water; and in times of danger, the creature
squirts some of this fluid into the water in front of it, and under
the cover of this original “smoke screen,” can make its escape.
The part of these animals usually found is the guard, a
pencil-shaped, calcareous piece from their internal structure,
together with the cuttle bone, and also the pen, which was made
of chitin. The guards were sometimes 2 feet long and 4 inches
thick; while the cuttle bones were some 2 feet long, indicating
a length of body for the animal of perhaps 8 feet. The giant
squids of our present seas are sometimes 18 feet long, their two
longest arms attaining a span of over 30 feet when extended.


Rpg: | J
= eae ee > P
/:


VT


zz
Maas
k. <


CHAPTER XXIII


The Ordovician System


Subdivisions. In Europe, these beds are named Lower
Silurian, though the name Ordovician, derived from the name
of an ancient tribe of people who lived in Wales in the time
of the Romans, is gradually becoming accepted. Fully 5,000
Ordovician rocks, a fact which gives us some idea of the great
profusion of life here displayed. The following is the classifi-
cation of the subdivisions of these rocks, as given by Grabau:


| 9. Queenston shale
8. Oswego sandstone
Upper Ordovician | 7. Lorraine (Pulaski) shales and sand-
or Cincinnatian 4 stones
(including Trenton) 6. Frankfort shales
E 5. Utica shales
| 4. Trenton limestone


Middle Ordovician J 3. Black River limestones
or Champlainian L 2. Lowville-Chazy limestones


p r
Lower Ordovician J 1. Beekmantown formations
or Canadian


In many localities, the Ordovician rocks rest conformably,
or without any marked physical break, upon the Cambrian.
Occasionally also, as in the case of the Ozarkian beds of South-
ern Missouri, we find sets of rocks which can not be definitely
assigned to either the one or the other, being apparently partly
the one and partly the other, so far as the contained fossils go.
This, however, is only what must be expected, from the very
nature of the way in which these geological systems of rocks
are made up.

Characters of the Rocks. Limestones greatly predominate
in the Ordovician rocks, and dolomites are even more common
than ordinary limestones. Sandy and shaly beds occur among
the Lower and the Upper series; but the rocks of the Middle
series and of parts of the others were evidently deposited in
seas where limestones were being made by all kinds of organ-


(365)
24


364 THE NEW GEOLOGY


simple specimens must be older than the more complicated ones; and so in
this simple fact, we have (so they say) the key to determine the relative
age of any given variety. Thus the beds containing any fossil ammonites
can easily be arranged in an alleged “chronological” order, based quite largely
on this gradual development in the complexity of the septa of these fossil
animals. As Professor Schuchert says, it is this structure which “makes
these fossils so valuable in deciphering the chronology of Mesozoic time.”
(“Textbook of Geology,” p. 865; edition of 1915.) The puerility of such a
method of reasoning seems never to have suggested itself to the minds of
geologists sinee Alpheus Hyatt (1838-1902) first taught it to them.


The Belemnites. The fos-
sils known as belemnites
(Fig. 222) are the internal
parts of a kind of cephalo-
pod similar to the modern
squids or cuttlefishes. In a
few instances, the outlines of
the soft parts of these crea-
tures have been made out;
and from these, we see that
the animal had ten arms or
tentacles, eight short and
two long, as in the modern
squid. They had large, well-
developed eyes, and had two
internal gill plumes, from

which circumstance the name
Fig. 292,” Posell cuirieteh (bolonte A Dibranchagta "hada s
Lias, England. 2. A belemnite (Belemnoteuthis signed to them. As in the


antiqua) from the Oxford Clay, England, partly


restored: b, arms; oc, eyes; m, mouth; d, ink case of the modern forms, the
bag; Ph, phragniocone; R, guard. 3. Restoration 2


of a belemnite's shell: Po, proöstracum; Ph, belemnites had an internal
nbrermocondi i aunt tnn ihe New ho PP Pp tes
sepia, long the foundation

for so-called India inks. This sepia is brownish black, and mixes
readily with the sea water; and in times of danger, the creature
squirts some of this fluid into the water in front of it, and under
the cover of this original “smoke screen,” can make its escape.
The part of these animals usually found is the guard, a
pencil-shaped, calcareous piece from their internal structure,
together with the cuttle bone, and also the pen, which was made
of chitin. The guards were sometimes 2 feet long and 4 inches
thick; while the cuttle bones were some 2 feet long, indicating
a length of body for the animal of perhaps 8 feet. The giant
squids of our present seas are sometimes 18 feet long, their two
longest arms attaining a span of over 30 feet when extended.


THE ORDOVICIAN SYSTEM 367


Fic. 224. View in quarry of Beekmantown dolomite (L. Ordovician), Williamsburg,
Pennsylvania. (Butts, U. 8. G. S.)


composed of well-rounded grains of quite uniform size in any
particular locality.

The Upper Ordovician consists more largely of e and
sandstones, with some slates and even some conglomerates, the
Medina sandstone and the Oneida conglomerate being assigned
to this series. These names, as will be recognized, are from the
State of New York, where the type formations were first rec-
ognized. But when the type formations were thus fixed upon
and named from their occurrence in particular localities, then,
as exploration was extended, the same names would be given to
similar rocks found elsewhere, whether or not any actual strati-
graphical continuity could be established between the two locali-
ties. If fossils happened to be scarce, such identification might
have to be made largely on lithologic texture, checked up by
the associated beds both above and below.

In Europe, the Ordovician rocks occur in two quite separated
areas, the northern one extending, with interruptions, from
Ireland to the interior of Russia, the southern one occurring in
disconnected patches over much of the southern countries of


368 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 225. Ledge of outcropping Ordovician slate, north of West Castleton, Vermont.
Syncline showing relations of cleavage and bedding. (Dale, U. S. G. S.)


Europe, including some areas in the middle of the continent.
Shales and limestones characterize these rocks in Scandinavia,
where they are nearly horizontal and undisturbed; while in
Russia, where they cover wide areas, they resemble the Cam-
brian beds of the same regions, in being so little affected by
the disturbing and indurating processes of time, that they are
often still very recent-looking sediments. “The sands and clays
are as soft and incoherent as the similar rocks of Tertiary age
are in the South of England.” (Howe.) lLimestones are scarce
in the Ordovician of Northern Europe, in very striking contrast
with those found in America.

Ordovician rocks occur over wide areas in Northern and
Eastern Asia, and are found in a narrow strip along the north-
ern coast of Africa; but they are absent from the greater part
of Southwestern Asia, and from practically all of Africa except
the region north of the Sahara. They occur in various parts of
Australasia, and in the extreme southern part of South America,
though absent from the central and northern portions of the
latter continent.


THE ORDOVICIAN SYSTEM 369


The vast beds of Ordovician limestone and dolomite which
are found in the valley of the Mackenzie River and in Alaska,
prove that when they were made, a warm ocean extended into
the arctic regions. “The same Middle Ordovician reef corals
that are found in Tennessee and New York occur also in Baffin
Island, the Mackenzie River valley, and in Alaska, though they
are less abundant in the far north. We may therefore assume
that the temperature of the lands and the seas in the Northern
Hemisphere was nearly everywhere the same, and that it was
warm temperate throughout.” (Schuchert.)

Life

General Remarks. The life displayed in the Ordovician
rocks is much more varied and luxuriant than the life of the
Cambrian, and it is also, in general, of a higher grade. Or
rather, we should say that because certain rocks show fossils
with these characteristics, therefore they are classed as Ordo-
vician. “All the great types of marine invertebrates, and most


of their important subdivisions” (Scott), are exhibited in these
rocks. The graptolites, the Cystoidea, the straight-shelled


Fic. 226. Galena dolomite, in the valley of Apple River, near Millville, Illinois. The lowest
beds exposed contain Receptaculites, a kind of sponge regarded as characteristic of the
Ordovician. (Shaw, U. S. G. S.)


370 THE NEW GEOLOGY


cephalopods, and the trilobites are more abundant and more
highly developed in the Ordovician strata than in any others.

It is the first grand display of the ocean life which we meet
with in the fossiliferous series ; but at the most, it is only a partial
display of the total marine life which may have existed con-
temporaneously, the fossils of which geologists may have assigned
to the Jurassic, the Cretaceous, or the Tertiary system. What
glimmer of a scientific reason is there for saying that these
Ordovician forms of life occupied the oceans exclusively, and


Fic. 227. View of Williams Canon, Manitou, Colorado. The cañon walls are composed of
Manitou limestone (L. Ordovician), with Sawateh sandstone (U. Cambrian) at base. The
upper strata, above the cave entrance, are Carboniferous. (Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


that examples of the higher forms of life, such as the teleost
fishes, or the ammonites and the nummulites, or even the mam-
mals and other land animals, were not then in existence any-
where on earth? Any attempt to justify such an assertion must
(1) assume the biological onion-coat theory, or (2) dogmati-
cally deny the possibility of distinct zodlogical zones and dis-
tricts in these early ages. In short, any such argument based
on our ignorance or our denial of what may have existed else-
where, is like the argument of a blind man based on what-he
can’t see: it is not very scientific.


Kinds of Fossils. But we must record the actual kinds of
fossils classed as Ordovician.


THE ORDOVICIAN SYSTEM 371


The plants are chiefly coralline alge and other seaweeds; for
although a few land plants have been reported from these rocks,
and although the profusion of land plants in the other systems
closely following this one makes the evolutionists think that the
beginnings of such plant forms ought to be found in the Ordo-
vician rocks, yet geologists have not generally credited the
actual reports of such discoveries.

The remains of Foraminifera and Radiolaria have been


Fic. 228. Caleiferous (M. Ordovician) beds resting on crystalline schists (Archean), west of
Downing Station, New York. (Darton, U. 8. G. 8.)


found in only a few localities, though in much abundance when
they do occur.

Sponges with skeletons of calcium carbonate or of silica are
common, though horny sponges, similar to the common bath
sponge, occur here and there, but necessarily are not well
preserved.

Graptolites occur in great profusion and in a great variety
of forms. “So abundant are the graptolites that in many parts
of the system they are almost the only fossils, and are employed
to divide the substages into zones. Graptolite zones, with the
same or closely similar species, and in the same order of suc-
cession, are found in Great Britain, the St. Lawrence and
Champlain valleys, and in Australia.” (Scott.)

Among the corals, there are many solitary cup corals, with
many reef-building varieties, though, like the other corals classed


372 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 229. Trenton limestone (U. Ordovician), near Lexington, Kentucky, one stratum, marked
with the cross, containing heads of corals. (Photograph by Bassler.)


in the Paleozoic group, they show a marked bilateral symmetry,
and have the septa arranged in multiples of four (Tetracoralla),
instead of in multiples of six (Hezacoralla), as in the living
species of corals.

Of the Echinodermata, cystoids are common, and so are the
lowing chapter. Starfishes, brittle stars, and sea urchins occur,
but are not very common:

Of the Arthropoda, the trilobites are more numerous and
more highly developed in the Ordovician rocks than in any
others; hence they are spoken of as “culminating” in this
“period.” Each subdivision of these rocks is labeled and ticketed
with some particular variety of trilobite. The general characters
of this class have been given in the preceding chapter. An-
other group of crustaceans, the Hurypterida, is also repre-
sented; and even an insect is reported from the Ordovician
rocks of Scandinavia.


Fic. 230. Fault and dike on East Canada Creek, New York. Upper Ordovician limestones
and shales have been faulted against Middle Ordovician sandstone, with conspicuous drag on
the downthrow side of the fault. (Darton, U. S. G. S.)


(37


374 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 231. Natural Bridge, Virginia.
The names of George Washington and many other notable persons are carved on
the sides of the rocks, which are Ordovician limestone. (After D. W. Johnson.)


Probably a remnant of a former cave roof.


The Brachiopoda are second only to the trilobites as the
characteristic animals of these rocks. They have been already

The Mollusca occur in great numbers, and all the leading
divisions of this great phylum are represented. The cephalo-
pods were all nautiloids, with chambered shells, like the living


Fic. 232. ORDOVICIAN SPONGES, CORALS, ETC.


1, Zittelella typicalis, Ulrich and Everett, X %, Trenton. 2, Strobilospongia
tuberosa, Beecher, X %, Trenton. 3, Cyathophycus reticulatus, Wale., X %,
Utica. 4, Receptaculites fungosus, Hall, X %, Trenton. 5, Petraia profunda,
Conrad, X %, Trenton. 5a, The same, top view. 5b, The same, vertical section.
6, Columnaria stellata, Hall, X %, Trenton. 7, Romingeria trentonensis, Weller,
X %, Trenton. 8, Malocystites emmonsi, Hudson, X 2, Chazy. 9, Pleurocystites
filitextus, Bill., X 1, Trenton. 10, Lepidodiscus cincinnatiensis, Hall, X %, Rich-
mond. 11, Glyptocrinus dyeri, Meek, X %, Richmond. 12, Blastoidocrinus car-
charizdens, Bill., X %, Chazy. 12a, The same, basal view. 12b, The same, side
view. 13, Palgzasterina stellata, Bill., X %, Trenton. (After W. B. Scott, “In-
troduction to Geology,” permission of Macmillan Co.)
(375)


376


THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 233. ORDOVICIAN TRILOBITES


1, la, Triarthrus becki, Green, X 3/2, Utica. Restoration by Beecher of dorsal
and ventral sides. 2, Bumastus trentonensis, Emmons, X %4, Trenton. 2a, The
same, from the side, rolled up. 3, Acidaspis crosotus, Locke, X 4, Richmond.
4, Trinucleus concentricus, Eaton, X 1, Trenton. 5. Bronteus lunatus, Bill ols
Trenton. 6, Ceraurus pleurexanthmus, Green, X 1, Trenton. 7, Isotelus maximus,
Locke, X 1, Trenton. 8, Calymmene callicephala, Green, X 1, Richmond. 8a, The
same, rolled up, from the side. (After W. B. Scott, “Introduction to Geology,”
permission of Macmillan Co.)


THE ORDOVICIAN SYSTEM 377


pearly nautilus. The huge straight shells of some of these
ereatures are very common, and some of these shells are 10
feet long. One genus of this group, Emdoceras, is found in no
other rocks except the Ordovician. It is thus a very excellent
“index fossil.”

Economic Products

Many marine sediments contain so much organic material
disseminated through them that when it becomes transformed,
by loss of oxygen, into the various hydrocarbons (oils), it may
become concentrated into limited areas underground, and stored
in reservoirs or pools. Black shales often contain oil as high
as 20 per cent of their mass; and in that case, they will burn
almost like coal. Even when the oil content of a shale is not
more than 5 per cent, it would be commercially worth extract-
ing, if the cost of such extraction were not too great. But
nature has often performed this extraction of the oils on a gi-
gantic scale, the percolating waters having carried the oil with
them and accumulated it under heavy pressure in porous sand-
stones or conglomerates, where the oil may be found in a vast
sheet lying on the top of the water, with some impervious layer
of rock situated above it, like a shale or a clay bed, which keeps
the oil (and its associated gases) from rising to a higher level
and perhaps escaping into the air.

These hydrocarbons are thought to have resulted chiefly
through bacterial agency, from the decomposition of animal
material originally disseminated through some of the rocks.
Optical examination of these mineral oils proves them to be of
animal origin, since they have the same optical properties as
animal oils.

“Oil and gas are usually found in the flattened tops of de-
pressed geologic arches and down the slopes of anticlines where
the dip of the strata is arrested so as to form shelves or terraces
(the ‘terrace structure’ of oil experts), but there is always above
the productive zones an impervious and usually a thick shale
cover. Broadly stated, the thicker the shale formation, the more
impervious the cover, and the deeper the storage bed, the richer
the gas or oil field.” — Schuchert.

In some instances, marine invertebrates, or even microscopic
organisms, may have contributed largely to produce the organic
materials from which these oil deposits have been derived.
More often, however, it seems to have been fish, or even mam-
malian remains. At Lompoc, California, and in many similar
formations, the petroleum in the rocks very evidently came
from the millions of fish there entombed; while at Hollywood,


378 THE NEW GEOLOGY


near Los Angeles, it is equally evident that the immense quan-
tities of mammalian remains in the strata are perhaps the chief
source of the organic materials forming the oils. In the latter


Fic. 234. ORDOVICIAN MOLLUSCA
1, Byssonychia radiata, Hall, X 1⁄4, left valve, Trenton.
triata, Hall, X %, left valve. 3, Opisthoptera fissicosta, Meek, X %, right valve,
Richmond. 4, Pterinea demissa, Conrad, X %, left valve, Trenton. 5, Cyrtodonta
huronensis, Bill, X 44, right valve, Lowville. 6, Cymatonota attenuata, Ulrich,
X 1⁄4, right valve, Richmond. T, Cyclonema humerosum, Ulrich, X %, Lorraine.
8, Eotomaria supracingulata, Bill., X 1⁄2. 9, Trochonema umbilicatum, Hall, X %,


2, Ambonychia planis-


Trenton. 10, Hormotoma gracilis, Hall, X %, Trenton. 11, Cyrtolites ornatus,
Conrad, X 1⁄4, Lorraine. 12, Protowarthia cancellata, Hall, X %, Black River.
13, Maclurea logani, Salter, X 12, Trenton. 14, Ophileta compacta, Salter, X 1%,
Beekmantown. 15, Conularia trentonensis, Hall, X %, Trenton. 16, Orthoceras
multicameratum, Hall, X 1⁄4, Lowville. 17, Cyrtoceras juvenalis, Bill., X %, Tren-
ton. 18, Eurystomites occidentalis, Hall, X 14. 19, Schrederoceras eatoni, Whit-
field, X %. (After W. B. Scott, “Introduction to Geology,” permission of
Macmillan Co.)


THE ORDOVICIAN SYSTEM 379


Papa ==


A


So
—


+


Be


SJ


NA


`
pa serra ANY


Fic. 235. The old and the new.


place, the mammals were evidently piled together in the strata
like driftwood, the ordinary processes of decay having been
arrested in a few spots, called the La Brea tar pits. But it is
quite clear that these beds were once just as completely packed
with mammalian remains over acres or even over many square
miles, as we find in the case of the beds at these tar pits.
In many other localities, we do not, it is true, find the peculiar
combination of circumstances which we find here, with great
numbers of bones preserved, as it were, in their own fat; but
there is little doubt that in many other localities, mammalian
remains have contributed largely to the production of the
hydrocarbons.

Throughout Ohio and Indiana, the oil and gas are found
stored in the upper 20 to 30 feet of the porous Trenton dolomite
(Middle Ordovician), from 1,000 to 2,000 feet below the surface.
The dark Utica shales form the impervious cover in this in-
stance; and below the gas and oil, there is always “highly saline


water.”


Gas wells were first put down at Findlay, Ohio, in 1862; but oil had
been struck in drilled wells several years before this in Pennsylvania (1859).
The oils which have been brought to the surface in the United States since
that time have been estimated at 2,500,000,000 dollars. Though at first dis-
covered in definite horizons of rock, and thought to be confined to these geo-
logical formations, yet, like the coal deposits of the world, the oil has since
been found in practically every one of the other “later” formations.


380 THE NEW GEOLOGY


s
A


*


Las 3
es


pi


Fic. 236. Polished slab of dark red Tennessee marble, with sections of cephalopod shells.
(Dale, U. S. G. S.)


The Ordovician marbles of Vermont, and the beautiful red
limestones or marbles of Tennessee, are much used for building
and decorative purposes. Portland cement is also extensively
made from Ordovician and other limestones. Lead and zine
ores are mined in Iowa, Wisconsin, and Illinois, from Middle
Ordovician dolomites, a Trenton limestone-dolomite known as
the Galena formation. Large quantities of calcium phosphate,
useful as a fertilizer, are obtained from the limestones of Cen-
tral Tennessee, formed from minute gastropod shells, as already


CHAPTER XXIV


Fossil Radiates


Bilateral and Radial Symmetry. Most of the animals with
which we are familiar are constructed on a plan of what is
termed bilateral symmetry; that is, they are so constructed that
a line may be drawn through them in such a way as to divide
the body into two equal and symmetrical parts, each structure
in one part having its duplicate in a similar structure in the
other part.

However, there are many animals which do not have any
bilateral symmetry, but which seem to be constructed on a plan
of more or less radial symmetry instead. In the early days
of natural science, a group of animals was named Radiata; but
the naturalists of recent years have discarded this term, be-
really originated from a common source —so much has the
prevailing doctrine of evolution dominated every department
of modern scientific work. For the study of the embryology of
the seemingly radiate animals reveals the surprising fact that
many of them start out in their early days with a decidedly
bilateral symmetry, and only later do they change over into
animals of radiate symmetry. Yet, in spite of all these protests
of the modern evolutionists, this combining of many different
kinds of animals into a group which might be called radiate
animals, is a very convenient one, and very well answers our
purpose in this present chapter.

These animals may be divided into two quite distinct divi-
sions, the Celenterata and the Echinodermata. The former di-
vision includes the jellyfishes, the sea anemones, and the corals;
while the latter includes the starfishes, the sea urchins, and the
erinoids. Practically all of both divisions live only in salt water.

The name Celenterata means that these animals have but
one internal or body cavity, which serves both as a celom (or
body cavity) and as an enteron (or digestive cavity). In con-
trast with these, all the higher animals have a body cavity, and
also, inside this body cavity, another cavity, which serves for
digestion, and which is called the alimentary canal. However,
while most of the ccelenterates are simple in their organic struc-
ture, many of them are extremely elaborate in their appearance.
“In their variety they seem nearly to exhaust the possibilities
of radial symmetry, and many are very flowerlike. They have,

(381)

25


382 THE NEW GEOLOGY


therefore, also been called zoöphytes (plant-animals), and their
budded colonies afford interesting illustrations of coöperation
and division of labor.” (Schuchert.)

The Echinodermata, while having in the mature stage a
radial symmetry just as pronounced as the ones already men-
tioned, have also a.true body cavity in addition to the digestive
tract; and on this account, modern scientists refuse to place
them with the Coelenterata under the old term Radiata. But in
the larval stage, the echinoderms have a true bilateral sym-


/# +$
Feet vay
CKK
SN


Fic. 237. Some representative fossil corals. I, Favosites polymorpha, Devonian; a, corallites,

enlarged, two being broken open and showing the tabulæ. II, a modern branching coral; p,

an active polyp. III, fossil cup coral, Cyathophyllum cæspitosum, Devonian. IV, a living

massive coral, called a star coral. V, a fossil coral, Halysites catenularia, Silurian. VI, a

fossil coral, Cyathophyllum hexagonum, Devonian. (From “The New International Encyclo-
pædia,” by permission.)


metry; and on this account also, they are placed in another
phylum by themselves. As a rule, they do not have as pro-
nounced a calcareous skeleton as some of the ccelenterates,
especially as the corals; and for this reason, they do not as
largely contribute toward rock making.


This astonishing change from a marked bilateral symmetry in the
larval stage to a radial symmetry in the adult form, “constitutes one of the
most remarkable life-histories known in the animal kingdom.” (“Cambridge
Natural History,” Vol. 1, p. 429.)


FOSSIL RADIATES 383


Classification. These two groups of radiate animals may be
briefly set forth in the following table:

Phylum Celenterata. Chiefly marine. Free or attached.
Some live singly as independent individuals, others only as
members of a colony. They have skeletons composed of cal-
cium carbonate or of horn.

Class Hydrozoa (Hydroids). The modern kinds are very
simple in construction, and are quite unimportant geologically.
But the graptolites, which were ancient hydrozoans with horny
skeletons, are found in many of the Paleozoic rocks.

Class Anthozoa. These are coral polyps.

Sea Anemones. These live as individuals, not in colonies,
and do not secrete any hard skeleton.

Stony Corals. These secrete a hard external skeleton com-
posed of calcium carbonate. They are subdivided into the
Tabulata, the Tetracoralla, and the Hexacoralla, the last named
being similar to most of the living corals.

Phylum Echinodermata. Chiefly having an external skeleton
of calcium carbonate composed of several pieces.

Class Stelleroidea. The starfishes. Free individuals.

Class Echinoidea. Sea urchins. Free individuals.

Class Crinoidea. Feather stars or sea lilies. Mostly
attached.

Class Blastoidea. Pentremites, or “fossil hickory nuts.”


Coral Polyps and Their Kin


General Characters. The members of this phylum are usu-
ally provided with an apparatus for stinging other animals.
This stinging is done by means of a sharp, needlelike arrange-
ment which is shot forth from a cell which is itself embedded
in the tissues of the animal. A given surface may have a great
number of these stinging cells. This sting is set off by a very
delicate sensory arrangement around its base, and it carries a
poisonous fluid. The great numbers of these stinging cells pos-
sessed by the animal thus serve as a defense, or as a means of
paralyzing other minute animals which may then be used as food.

These animals are little more than an animated sac, the
closed end of which is attached to some object, as a reef or
the bottom of the sea, while the free end is open and contains the
mouth. Some of them are minute, others are one or more
inches in size.

The medusz, or jellyfishes, belong to this group, and are
of very much the same construction as the sea anemones and
the coral polyps; but as they do not have any hard parts, they


384 THE NEW GEOLOGY


are seldom found as fossils. Impressions referred to medusz
have been found in the Cambrian, Liassic, and Cretaceous beds.


The Graptolites. The graptolites (from a Greek word
meaning to write, in allusion to the fossil traces which look
somewhat like pen markings) were hydroid animals arranged in
a line or a series, with occasional thin tubular buds composed
of horny matter. They were arranged singly in a series, or in
sets of two or four. Numbers of such colonies were fastened
to a central piece which resembled a saucer upside down, the
colonies resembling the rays of a star, and the whole thing be-
ing able to float around in the water. Others of the graptolites
were attached to the sea bottom or to a piece of seaweed, and
in structure they resembled a sprig of a plant. These colonies
were mostly fan-shaped or funnel-shaped. Graptolites are gen-
erally black when found as fossils, and frequently occur in
black shales. The graptolites are almost entirely restricted to
the Ordovician and Silurian rocks, and are regarded as excellent
“index fossils.”


The Anthozoa. The term Anthozoa is made to include the
sea anemones and the corals. The animals themselves are called
polyps. They are of rather complicated internal structure, and
usually secrete a hard part or skeleton called the corallum, com-
posed of calcium carbonate, this being secreted by a portion of
the outside of the creature, and being attached to some fixed ob-
ject, either to another similar corallum or to a rock. As the
soft part of the polyp has a radiate internal structure, or one
divided off by radial partitions, and as the hard corallum takes
on the exact form of the internal structure, we have an exact
pattern of the polyp preserved in the rock. It is these lime-
stone skeletons fastened together as colonies which we find as
fossils. As the sea anemones have no skeleton, they are not
preserved as fossils. Some corals secrete a black skeleton ‘of
horny material, and are accordingly called “black coral.” Sea
anemones are sometimes over six inches across; but the coral
polyps are commonly not more than a quarter of an inch in size,
though the groups of skeletons when combined into a colony
may sometimes be 10 or 15 feet across.


Cup Corals. The stony cuplike coralla of single polyps, and
known as cup corals, are very common in all of the Paleozoic
rocks. They did not form colonies, because they did not multi-
ply by budding, but by sexual reproduction. These cup corals
are usually rudely cone-shaped, and internally have many parti-
tions, or septa, arranged radially from the center to the outer


FOSSIL RADIATES 385


wall. One kind of cup coral, called the Archæocyathidæ, formed
cups less than three inches in length, and are restricted to the
Lower Cambrian.

Colonial Corals. The Tabulata were colonial corals, the in-
dividual corals being small crosswise; but as they built long
tubelike structures which were partitioned off transversely by
many tabule (meaning bottoms), they were quite important as
coral makers. There are no radial septa. The tabulate corals
are found principally in the Silurian and Devonian systems.


Fic. 238. Paleozoic cup corals (Tetracoralla). A, common Devonian

form (Heliophyllum halli), with ornate septa. B, Silurian form (Zaph-

rentis umbonata), with deep cup, many septa, and a fossula. C, Devo-

nian species (Amplexus yandelli) sectioned to show tabule. (After
Schuchert and Rominger.)


Halysites, a chain coral, abounds in the Silurian and the
Ordovician; while Favosites, a honeycomb coral, is very abun-
dant in the Silurian and the Devonian. Immense limestone rocks
of wide extent are largely formed of their remains.

The corals with septa in four groups, or the Tetracoralla,
are other forms found in the Silurian and the Devonian, and
less commonly in the “later” systems of the Paleozoic. They
are supposed to be found in none of the “subsequent” forma-
tions, and are classed as “extinct.” However, it is not always
easy to distinguish those with four sets of septa from those
with six, the latter being the living corals, and found as fossils
extensively in the Mesozoic and the Tertiary.

The Hexacoralla, or corals with six sets of septa, are the
modern reef builders of the tropical waters, and various genera
of them are found as fossils in the Mesozoic and Tertiary rocks.


386 THE NEW GEOLOGY


The six primary septa are more easily distinguished in the
young polyps, but are preserved as more or less distinguishable
in maturity. The staghorn corals and the brain corals belong
to this division.

Habitat. As the ancient corals were probably similar to the
modern kinds in habits and requirements, it will be interesting
to study briefly the ways in which the modern species live.
Modern Hexacoralla are found in the very deep waters, even
down as far as 11,000 feet, where the waters are icy cold; but
they are mostly confined to the warm waters within 240 feet of
the surface. It is chiefly the solitary corals which are found in
the deep waters; the reef makers live almost exclusively near the
surface, where there is plenty of sunlight and a warm or
tepid water. Indeed, the greater number of species are found
in water less than 150 feet deep. In this zone, the water is of
a temperature between 68° and 78° F., though they will stand
to have the water some ten degrees warmer than this, but not
colder. Between 600 and 2,400 feet is another zone of single
corals, or of delicate branching colonies; and here the water
ranges between 40° and 50° F. Most of the fossil corals that
are similar to living forms are like the warmth-loving reef
builders, and must have lived in warm waters in the olden
time, though their remains are often found in the far north
and even in the arctic regions. But when the arctic regions
were warm, the deep waters of the ocean were probably much
warmer than at present; and in that case, the reef-building corals
may have lived at greater depths than they do at present.


Echinodermata (Spiny-Skinned Animals)


Structure. These animals have a radiate structure with
the parts generally arranged in fives, a characteristic best seen
in the starfishes. In other members of this group, this pentam-
eral arrangement is always present, but is sometimes obscured
by other peculiarities. Usually there is also a set of spines com-
posed of calcium carbonate embedded in the dermis; or there is
a strong set of plates inclosing the softer parts of the animal.

Two or more rows of soft, tubelike processes called tube
feet extend along the radii, or arms. These tube feet constitute
the chief locomotive organs of the animal, and terminate in suck-
ing disks. The tube feet are connected with a very elaborate
system of internal tubes, which are not found in any others of
the animal kingdom, this internal tube system forming what is
called the water-vascular system. A circular canal around the
centrally situated mouth unites all these internal tubes; and the


FOSSIL RADIATES 387


sea water has access to this canal and to the tube feet through
a large porous plate on the dorsal side, the amount of water in
the tube feet being under the control of the animal.

Subdivisions. The Echinodermata are divisible into two
main groups based on the habits of the animals. The starfishes
and the echinids are free; while the crinoids and the blastids
are sedentary or attached, with long stalks like those of a
flower, by means of which they are anchored to the bottom or to
some fixed object. In the free forms, the mouth is on the
ventral or under side of the body, thus facing downward to the
ground over which the animal crawls in search of its food. The
stalked forms, however, have all this reversed, the mouth and
the ventral surface being upturned, like a flower, the stalk be-
ing fastened to the under or dorsal side. The free or active
forms feed on mollusks and other large animals; while the
stalked forms feed on the minute or microscopic life that comes
to them in the passing waters. Most of the stalked kinds live
at considerable depths in the ocean. Many of the echinoderms,
particularly the starfishes, have extraordinary powers of re-
generation, or of growing new parts that have been lost or“
broken off. Any part of a starfish which retains a portion of
the central disk may eventually grow into an entire animal.

The Starfishes. Starfishes are found in the Ordovician, but
are not common in the Paleozoic rocks. A few entire ones are
found in some of the Mesozoic strata; but as a rule, entire
specimens are rare, and they are not considered of much im-
portance for identifying different formations. Doubtless their
broken skeletons contributed somewhat to the formation of the
materials of which the limestones were made.

The Echinids. A group called echinids is named to include
the sea urchins, the heart urchins, and the sand dollars. They
are very spiny creatures, in some of them the spines being mov-
able on ball-and-socket joints. The heart urchins are not as
regular in construction as the real sea urchins, but are more
elongate, sometimes being distinctly heart- shaped, whence the
name. The sand dollars also are irregular in form.

The echinids are very rare in the Paleozoic rocks, but are
common in the Mesozoic, and are much depended upon as “hori-
zon markers,” particularly in Europe, “where the Mesozoic
strata are at times crowded with them.” (Schuchert.) In Ala-
bama, Texas, and Mexico, the Comanchean beds often contain
them. The irregular kinds are regarded as good index fossils
of the Jurassic and the Comanchean. Some 5,000 fossil species
are known, while only a tenth as many are living.


——


NES
San


CRINOIDS


Fic, 239.


(388)


FOSSIL RADIATES 389


The Crinoids. The crinoids are by far the most important
of the fixed or sedentary echinoderms. The name means that
they look like lilies; and they are often called stone lilies, or
sometimes feather stars. While many of them are fixed to the
bottom by a long stalk, some of them are free, while all are
free in their younger stages of growth. They live in groups,
or are gregarious in habit.

They consist of a calyx, the arms, and the stalk. The arms
and the calyx are also included under the general word crown,
which thus means all except the stalk. The latter is made up
of many disklike perforated pieces placed in a column one
above another, and composed of calcium carbonate. The stalks
may be from 6 inches up to 18 inches; though one Jurassic
species had a stalk 50 feet long, with a crown a yard in width
as well as in length.

From the modern seas, 576 species of crinoids have been
families. Only 76 species of these are stalked, the rest be-
longing to the unstalked or comatulid type. (A. H. Clark.)

As fossils, the crinoids are scarcely second to the corals in
forming immense limestone deposits. A form called box cri-
noids, with a calyx that was large and boxlike, were very com-
mon. Many of the Mississippian limestones are formed of their
remains. Crinoids are found in all the Paleozoic rocks. Kinds
distinct from those of the Paleozoic occur in the Mesozoic, the
latter being similar to the kinds alive to-day. Good whole
crowns are never very common, for the reason that the pieces
composing the skeleton were loosely embedded in the skin, and
readily went to pieces when the animal died. But their broken
stalks and crowns have accumulated into vast limestones many
feet thick and extending for tens or even hundreds of miles.

There is “a bewildering variety” among the fossil crinoids,
and “there is no agreement among experts as to how they should
be classified.” (MacBride.)


1. An encrinite (Encrinus), fossil in the Triassic. 2. Larva of a feather star. (See 10 and
7.) 3. Batocrinus pyriformis, fossil in the Subearboniferous of Iowa. 4. Pisocrinus fla-
gellifer, fossil in the Silurian of Gottland ; a, posterior view of a perfect calyx; b, calyx seen
from one side. 5. Type of calyx with a coriaceous skin in which calcareous plates are em-
bedded. 6. A free-swimming crinoid (Saccocoma pectinata), fossil in the Upper Jurassic
lithographic slates of Bavaria. 7. Diagram of arrangement of principal pieces in the calyx
of a crinoid: b, basals; ib, infrabasals; r, radials; ed, centrodorsal (compare 2, where the
letters are the same, plus o, orals). 8. Woodocrinus macrodactylus from the Carboniferous of
Yorkshire, England. 9. Apiocrinus: B, longitudinal section through the uppermost stem joints
of Apiocrinus parkinsoni (Odiitic), showing empty spaces between them; A, restoration of
the base of another species (Apiocrinus roissyanus, U. Jurassic). 10. A feather star (Antedon
rosacea), now living on European coasts; 2 is the larva of this, showing developing plates
(see 7) of the calyx. 11. An existing deep-sea “stone lily” (Metacrinus interruptus). (From
“The New International Encyclopædia,” by permission.)


THE NEW GEOLOGY


390


(After Kirk.)


Fossil erinoid (Pentacrinus) found in Jurassie rocks.


Fig. 240.


.


ies of the last few years have shown that the 1


“The discover
crinoids, far from being rare or


divi


iving


are abundant both as in-


, they occur, some-


The requirements necessary for the mainte-


’


e


duals and as species, and that in all'localities where the somewhat
exacting conditions under which they can exist are met


times in enormous numbers.


few in numbers


FOSSIL RADIATES 391


nance of crinoidal life are unfortunately of such a nature that, though quite
generally distributed in the deeper waters of the oceans, they become rare or
very local in the littoral, which, together with the great difficulty of preserv-
ing them in anything approaching satisfactory form, has served to keep
them enshrouded in mystery while animals of other types engaged the atten-
tion of investigators.”— Austin H. Clark, “Sea Lilies and Feather Stars,”
Smithsonian Institution, Miscellaneous Collection, Vol. 72, No. 7, p. 2.


The stalked genera are confined to considerable depths in
the ocean, “and can only be obtained by deep dredging.” (Mac-
Bride.) Hence it seems reasonable to conclude that the ancient
kinds also lived in the deeper waters generally or exclusively.
The fact that crinoidal limestones so frequently occur alternat-
ing with shales or sandstones, or even alternating directly with
the coal beds themselves, has been taken as evidence that the
ancient crinoids may have lived in shallow water. But it would
be much more legitimate to argue that these conditions are
proof that very abnormal circumstances prevailed when these
rocks were laid down.


The Blastoids. The blastoids, or pentremites, are fossils
resembling nuts in form, and are very common in the Mississip-
pian beds of the Southern States, where they are called “fossil
hickory nuts.” They are used as “guide fossils” for the strata
wherein they occur. They resemble the crinoids except that
they were compact and had no arms. The calyx is usually made
up of 13 plates. They seem to be wholly extinct.


Difficulties. The following remarks, while referring pri-
marily to the Asteroidea, are of value as throwing light on the
classification of many other groups of animals as well:


“Whilst there is considerable agreement amongst authorities as to the
number of families, or minor divisions of unequivocal relationship, to be
found in the class Asteroidea, there has been great uncertainty both as to
the number and limits of the orders into which the class should be divided,
and also as to the limits of the various species.

“The difficulty about the species is by no means confined to the group
Echinodermata; in all cases where the attempt is made to determine species
by an examination of a few specimens of unknown age there is bound to
be uncertainty; the more so, as it becomes increasingly evident that there
is no sharp line to be drawn between local varieties and species. . . .

“The disputes, however, as to the number of orders included in the As-
teroidea proceed from a different cause. The attempt to construct detailed
phylogenies [pedigrees of evolutionary descent] involves the assumption
that one set of structures, which we take as the mark of the class, has re-
mained constant, whilst others which are regarded as adaptive, may have
developed twice or thrice. As the two sets of structures are of about equal
importance, it will be seen to what an enormous extent the personal equa-
tion enters in the determination of these questions.”—‘‘Cambridge Natural
History,” Vol. 1, pp. 459, 460.


CHAPTER XXV


The Silurian System


Extent and Subdivisions. If we take the world over, the
Silurian system is-not as widespread or as important as is the
Ordovician system. In extensive areas where the latter is well
developed, the Silurian is either wholly absent or is but scantily
represented, though there are some additional localities where
we find Silurian rocks far from any similar outcrop of the
Ordovician beds. The name Silurian was given by Murchison,
as the result of his study of the rocks in Southwestern Britain,
being based on the name Silures, that of an ancient tribe who
used to inhabit Wales.

The following classification includes some of the chief forma-
tions grouped under the Silurian system:


Manlius limestone

Upper Silurian Rondout water lime

or Monroan Cobleskill and Akron limestones
Camillus shale (in part)


Middle Silurian Camillus shale and gypsum (in part)
or Salina — Syracuse salt series


Upper Niagara (including Guelph dolomite, and
Lockport dolomite and limestone)

Middle Niagara (including Rochester shale, and
Clinton limestones and shales)

Lower Niagara or Medina (including Oneida con-
glomerate, Medina sandstones and shales, and
Whirlpool sandstone)


Lower Silurian
or Niagara


In Europe, the Silurian is made to include the Ludlow (also
called the Clunian on the Continent) and the Wenlock.

Lithic Characters. The Clinton shales, which change into
limestones as they extend westward, run from New York State
to Indiana, perhaps also through Illinois to Missouri. These
beds extend southward to Alabama; while the same beds (doubt-
less with extensive interruptions between) have been observed
in Nova Scotia and Wisconsin. Extensive stratified beds of red
iron ore (hematite) occur in the Clinton formation in the two
localities last mentioned, and also in the State of New York.

The limestones of the Niagara series (Lockport-Guelph)
are among the most extensive limestones in America. They

(392)


THE SILURIAN SYSTEM 393


y
2
í Q


Ç


| r
it


— =
A


Fic. 241. Map showing Silurian outcrops in North America, which are in black.
Silurian strata are not known over the white areas. (After W. B. Scott.)


extend (with interruptions) from the Great Lake district to
Wisconsin, across Illinois, and thence to Iowa, Missouri, and
Western Tennessee, a distance of nearly 1,000 miles. Similar |
rocks occur in the Maritime Provinces of Eastern Canada, also
in Manitoba and south of Hudson Bay, and on many of the
islands in the arctic regions. The limestones of the Niagara
contain many corals and crinoids, indicating that these beds
were formed in clear water, some of them probably in compara-


394 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 242. Anticline in Medina sandstone (L. Silurian), aya the shore of Lake Ontario, near
Eighteen-mile Point, New York. (Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


THE SILURIAN SYSTEM 395


Fic. 243. Louisville limestone (L. Silurian), in a bluff of the Ohio River, about one mile
northeast of Louisville, Kentucky. (Butts, U. S. G. S.)


tively deep water. At Niagara Falls, the Silurian limestone is
much harder than the underlying shales; and as the latter are
gradually worn away by the spray of the falls, the overlying
limestone breaks off, causing the falls slowly to move upstream,
as has already been explained.


Fic. 244. Niagara Falls


396 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Distribution. This Silurian limestone underlies the city of
Chicago, and much of it is quite saturated with oil. It is here
called “Athens marble” or “Joliet” building stone. Corals are
very plentiful and conspicuous in the limestones of Wisconsin,
with many crinoids also; while similarly abundant corals are ob-
served at Louisville, Kentucky, though these are classed as
Lower Silurian.


ihe w Ç as
i fj I
DSa


7
nF


Fic. 245. Sectional diagram through the Horseshoe Falls, Niagara,

showing the sequence of the formations and the depth of the water

below the falls. Height of falls, 158 feet; depth of water, 150-200 feet.
(After G. K. Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


On Anticosti Island, in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, is found
what is regarded as one of the most complete sets of the Silurian
beds in North America.

In Europe, there is the same twofold division in the Silurian
rocks which we found in the Ordovician of that continent. They
occur in Ireland, Wales, Northern England, and in Scotland.
They occur also in Scandinavia and in Russia, one of the typical
examples of these rocks being found on the island of Gott-
land, off the coast of Sweden. Silurian coral rocks are plenti-
ful in Siberia, and they contain the same kinds of corals as are
found in the arctic regions of North America, probably imply-
ing that these rocks extend, in many places, under the Arctic
Ocean. A chain coral (Halysites) and a honeycomb coral
(Favosites) occur in these rocks on both sides of the Arctic


THE SILURIAN SYSTEM 397


Fic. 246. Cañon of the Genesee River, below Lower Falls, Rochester, New York. The white
band and all below it belong to the Medina formation ; the strata above are Clinton. All Lower
Silurian. (Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


Ocean, occurring in one instance at Polaris Bay, 81° north
latitude.

Silurian rocks have also been detected in China, North
Africa, and some localities in South America and Australia.
Some of the rocks of the Table Mountain sandstones of South
Africa are thought to be Silurian. “In all these areas, as also in
North America, the fossils resemble those of the Northern
European division, rather than those of the Southern.” (Scott.)

With such an abundance of Silurian corals in many parts of
the arctic regions, it is impossible to avoid the conclusion that
the climate represented by these remains must have been very
uniform over the entire earth, with no indication of distinct


climatic zones, as we have at present.


26


398 THE NEW GEOLOGY


w aa sss
Fic. 247. Remnant of a giant ripple mark, in Medina sandstone (L. Silurian), New York
Central Railway, Niagara Gorge, New York. This is nearly 20 miles west of the locality


shown in Fig. 248. Probably these phenomena prevailed in the Medina sandstone over all
this region. (Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


Life
Very many of the Silurian rocks are packed full of fossils;


but as a rule, they do not show any great variety of types, ex-
cept a profusion of marine invertebrates, chiefly corals, crinoids,


Fic. 248. Giant ripple marks in Medina sandstone (L. Silurian), Lockport, New York. These


are manifestly quite abnormal, They could have been caused at the bottom of very deep
water — perhaps a mile or more deep —if a gigantic tidal wave was moving through the
ocean. It is difficult to see how else they could have been made. (Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


THE SILURIAN SYSTEM 399


bryozoans, brachiopods, and trilobites. Nautiloids are fairly
common in America, nearly one hundred species having been
from this small area 1,150 species. This represents the great-
est number of nautiloids found anywhere in the rocks. The
present pearly nautilus is but the lonely survivor of great tribes


j
Ka

“<
k
x


y.
: ~-
. ¿p>


Fic. 249. Ripple marks on sandstone, Berea, Ohio. These are normal, that is, formed in
shallow water. Compare these with those in Figs. 247, 248. (Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


of similar creatures which used to flourish in the ancient seas.
If we judge by the habitat of this modern nautilus, the ancient
representatives of the family probably lived at considerable
depths. The shales containing graptolites and the sponge-
bearing cherts found in many of the Silurian formations, may
also represent rather deep waters. Some fifty-two species of
dendroid graptolites occur at Hamilton, Ontario.

About 400 kinds of crinoids are known from the Silurian
rocks of America. They must have thronged the waters in
certain localities, for we have many thick limestones composed
largely of their broken skeletons. The modern crinoids do not
live together in colonies in such a way as to contribute to the
making of limestones, and most of the modern kinds live in
rather deep waters, some of them two or more miles down. We


400 THE NEW GEOLOGY


14
°
37


gnaanae
a 1%


a


SAX
le Xe)
x
rx
oJ


3

El

3 aa

LA E]

880353030039722
3wgəqaannnaaa aan
mapanas
AADIIIIS2.
SGS e


=


Meaeseelter
Stef
PEN


EN


Fic. 250. SILURIAN FOSSILS


CORALS: 1, Zaphrentis bilateralis; 2, Favosites niagarensis; 3, Halysites caten-

ulatus. CRINOID: 4, Caryocrinus ornatus. MOLLUSKS: 5, Pentamerus ob-

longus; 6, Orthis biloba (X 2); T, Leptæna transversalis; 8, Strophomena; 9,

Rhynchonella cuneata, United States and Great Britain; 10, Avicula emacerata;

11, Cyclonema cancellata; 12, Platyceras angulatum. ARTICULATES: 13, Homa-
lonotus delphinocephalus. (After Dana.)


can not always be sure of the environment in which these
ancient animals lived.

Many forms of bryozoans occur in these beds, a typical group
of them being seen near the railway track in the gorge of the
Niagara River.

the Silurian rocks of America. They resemble in a general way `
the similar species of the Ordovician.

About 150 American species of trilobites have been de-
huge spines on their heads and tails.

Eurypterids, or “sea scorpions,” are quite common in the
Silurian rocks. The largest of them was found in New York,
and has been reported to be 9 feet in length. They seem to have


THE SILURIAN SYSTEM 401


lived in water not far from the shore, and are not often asso-
ciated with any other fossils.

Corals are plentiful in the limestones of the Middle and the
Upper Silurian. Splendid examples of these ancient corals are
to be seen in Iowa, Wisconsin, the Manitoulin Islands, and at
Louisville, Kentucky. They belong to the groups of tabulate
corals and those of four sets of septa, or the Tetracoralla, as de-
are often found associated with the corals, as is the case in the
reefs of the present day. _

So far as the Lower Silurian rocks are concerned, it seems
that each area had more or less of its own peculiar assemblage
of life. But the fossils found in the Upper Silurian beds are
much more cosmopolitan. At least 30 species seem to be the
same in Northern Europe and in America.

Some few fishes occur in the rocks of the Upper Silurian,
but the description of the fishes will be postponed until the next
chapter. Fishes are so plentiful in the rocks of the next, the
Devonian system, that the old geologists used to speak of them
as representing an “Age of Fishes.”

Geologists have been somewhat puzzled at finding many ex-
amples of scorpions in the Silurian rocks. They were very


Fic. 251. Three stages in the growth of Pteroceras rugosum, Sowb., East Indies,

showing the development of the “fingers.” (After A. H. Cooke, in Cambridge

Natural History.”) If these were found fossil, how natural it would be to place
them not merely in separate species, but in distinct genera!


402 THE NEW GEOLOGY


much like living scorpions, though the largest one yet known
was only about 2.5 inches long. As scorpions are strictly carniv-
orous land animals, and as no insects, spiders, or even land
snails have yet been found in any of the Silurian rocks, or in
any of the preceding systems, the question naturally arises,
What did these Silurian scorpions live on? This interesting
question has not yet received a satisfactory answer, from the
point of view of evolutionary geologists.

Salt and Gypsum Beds. Rock salt and gypsum are asso-
ciated with the Silurian (Salina formation) in various parts of
New York, Ohio, and Ontario. Similar beds, even much thicker,
occur near Berlin, in Germany, and at Stassfurt, in Southern
Saxony. These latter beds are over 3,000 feet in thickness;
but they are classed as belonging to the Permian system. Much
speculation has been indulged in regarding the way in which
these beds may have been formed in arid climates, by the slow
evaporation of confined lakes. As these beds contain absolutely
no fossils, we can not even be sure that they are really of fos-
siliferous age. They may represent primitive or original forma-
tions. At least, all the speculations in reference to their
formation are of little value.

“Extinct” Species. It is difficult to refrain from saying that
we do not know how many of the genera and species repre-
sented in these Silurian rocks may be alive to-day. We have
already mentioned the absurd and unfair custom of giving new
names — that is, names different from those of modern similar
genera and species — to all the fossils found in these so-called
“old” rocks. Only some seven or eight genera of rhizopods,
brachiopods, and mollusks are mentioned in geological literature
as having living representatives; but doubtless by a little im-
partial comparison, large numbers of other forms might easily
be shown to be identical with their modern relatives.


The following remarks of Heilprin are worth repeating here:

“It is by no means improbable that many of the older genera, now recog-
nized as distinct by reason of our imperfect knowledge concerning their true
relationships, have in reality representatives living in the modern seas... .

“However divergent may be the views of authors on the matter of rela-
tionship, it is practically certain that numerous forms of life, exhibiting no
distinctive characters of their own, are constituted into distinct species for
no other reason than that they occur in formations widely separated from
those holding their nearest kin.” —“Geographical and Geological Distribution
of Animals,” pp. 207, 208, 103, 104.


CHAPTER XXVI


Fossil Fishes


Definition. The word fish is derived from the Latin piscis;
and among the Romans, the latter was applied to any animal
that lives entirely in the water. We have a reminder of this
use of the word in such terms as shellfish, starfish, and jelly-
jish, these terms referring to animals which are wholly different
from real fishes in every way.

Structure. Among naturalists, the class Pisces includes only
the true fishes, all of which have a backbone and other struc-
tures always associated with the backbone. Fishes do not have
a movable neck, but they do have a distinct or movable lower
jaw, which works on a hinge joint. As their blood remains
of about the same temperature as that of the water in which
they live, they are-called cold-blooded, in this respect resem-
bling the amphibians and reptiles which do not live in the water.

All fishes have gills, with which to absorb oxygen from the
water; and they have fins, with which to propel themselves
through the water. Most fishes have an air bladder, which
serves the purpose of a float or a hydrostatic organ. By en-
largement or contraction of this air bladder, the size of the
animal is increased or diminished; and thus it can rise or
sink in the water, just as the same thing can be accomplished
in a Cartesian diver, or in a submarine. Some fishes use the
air bladder to assist the gills in respiration, absorbing oxygen
from its surface. Other fishes, the Dipnoi, or lungfishes, have
true lungs in addition to their gills, and can live indefinitely out
of the water, breathing air like a land animal.

The general outline of a tapering form is much the same
in all fishes, though there are some kinds which depart widely
even from this general shape. The skin of most fishes is pro-
tected by overlapping scales or by bony plates called scutes, or
even by an elaborate set of spines; though in some forms, the
skin is soft and unprotected by covering. The fins are variously
arranged, and are used for steadying or steering the body; but
the chief organ for propelling the fish forward is the tail, which
is flexible, strong, and a very efficient organ for locomotion,
acting much like a sculling oar at the rear of a boat, but many
times more effectually.

Subdivisions. There are three general types of tails in
fishes; and as the classification of fishes is made to depend con-


(403)


404 THE NEW GEOLOGY


siderably upon these distinctions, it will be worth while to note
these three types.


1. The Diphycercal or Symmetrical Tail. In this, the vertebral column
continues in a straight line to the extremity, with the joints, or vertebra,
constantly diminishing in size, and at the extremity is surrounded by a sym-
metrical tail fin. Thistype is found commonly among Devonian fishes, and is
seen in the early stages of many modern living fishes.

2. The Heterocercal or Unequally Lobed Tail. In this type, the end of
the spinal column turns upward toward the dorsal side at the very end,
terminating in a series of diminishing joints in an upper lobe only, the
corresponding lower lobe being wanting.

3. The Homocercal or Two-Lobed Tail. This type is also usually sym-
metrical, with both lobes equal in size; and this is the more common type
to-day among living fishes. In it, the spinal column ends quite abruptly,
and the tail fins develop in such a way that the upper and lower rays are
the longest, forming two more or less distinct lobes above and below.


In this chapter dealing with the subject of fossil fishes, it
will be necessary to include some forms which by some authori-
ties are not included in the class Pisces, but are separated off
into one or more classes by themselves. Such are the lampreys,
sharks, and rays or skates. Our classification of the fishes, ac-
cordingly, will be as follows:


Class Pisces, or true fishes.
Subclass Elasmobranchii, or cartilaginous fishes.

Order Acanthodii, or spinous sharks.

Order Selachii, or true sharks and rays.
Subclass Ostracodermi, or bony-skinned fishes.
Subclass Dipnoi, or true lungfishes.

Subclass Arthrodira, or armored fishes.
Subclass Ganoidei, or enamel-scaled fishes.
Subclass Teleostei, or bony fishes.


Elasmobranchs. The Elasmobranchii, or cartilaginous fishes,
include the true sharks, ancient and modern, the sea cats
(Chimerx), and the skates and rays. The word Elasmobranch
means having platelike gills; and most of these fishes are marine.

In most of them, the mouth is situated on the under side
of the head. The tail is usually heterocercal; and the internal
skeleton is cartilaginous, or does not harden into bone. The
skin is covered with small pieces of material like the teeth in
composition, with hard, shining enamel on the outside or tip,
and with a core made of dentine, and a base sunk in the dermis
and made of phosphate of lime. This kind of scale is the
placoid; and when these scales are quite small and set closely to-
gether, they constitute the shagreen (meaning rough mosaic)


FOSSIL FISHES 405


which is so often the only part of these fishes which remains
as a fossil.

On each side of the body, back of the head, are five gill slits,
which in the living sharks and their kin are either entirely un-
covered, or covered merely with a flap of skin, never covered
with a true bony operculum, as in the true fishes. The median
fins, or those on the dorsal and ventral parts, usually have long,
sharp spines composed of horn or bone; and these also are often
found as fossils, together with the shagreen.

Unlike most other fishes, the elasmobranchs have a skull
without joints or sutures, but composed of one entire cartilagi-
nous piece. They have no swimming bladder; and a large part of
the intestine is provided with a fold or spiral membrane on the
inside, which thus increases its absorbing surface. This feature
is often noticeable in the fossil forms that are well preserved,
and is seen also in the existing ganoids and lungfishes.

Fin spines of elasmobranchs occur in the Silurian rocks of
both America and Europe; 39 species are named from the
American Devonian, 288 from the Mississippian, 55 from the
Pennsylvanian, and 10 from the Permian. As already pointed
out, such an arrangement as this is a purely artificial one, cer-
tain species being regarded as characteristic of the one or the
other of these formations, and whenever found, they are used
more or less as “index fossils,” to determine the “age” of the
given beds. Most of these sharks from the Paleozoic rocks had
pavementlike teeth, belonging to the two general types, the
cochliodonts and the cestracionts; examples of the latter form
being seen in the living Port Jackson shark (Cestracion philippi)
of Australia. These pavementlike teeth are adapted to crushing
crustaceans and shellfish, on which the living Port Jackson
shark subsists, and because of which it has received the name of
“oyster crusher.”

Sharks like those more common to-day are found in the
Mesozoic rocks, and are seen in a great variety of forms.
Sharp-cutting teeth like those of modern sharks are found in the
Miocene beds of South Carolina; and some of them are nearly
6 inches long, evidently belonging to an animal 60 feet long.
The great blue shark of our present oceans sometimes attains
a length of 40 feet. As all fishes and reptiles grow in size as
long as they live, the size of any given species is more or less
an index of the age of the specimen. (See Fig. 172.)

Ostracoderms. The Ostracodermi, or armored fishes with
bony skins, as the word really means, are an extinct group, and
found as fossils only in the Ordovician, Silurian, and Devonian


406 THE NEW GEOLOGY


rocks. They are thought to have been adapted to feeding on the
bottom of the sea, and are regarded as of sluggish habits. The
head was broad and depressed; and both it and the whole pos-
terior part of the body were covered with heavy scaled or
placoid plates, which in some species became fused into thick
plates of bone. The posterior part was often unprotected,
though in some species it also was covered with plates or scales.
Some species had large paddles or swimming limbs (not true
fins) on the sides; and these were covered with the usual plates
or scales. None of these fishes had any internal skeleton what-
ever; and on this account, naturalists have had great difficulty
in classifying them. As fossils, they are very widely distributed.

Lungfishes. The Dipnoi (Greek, double breathing), or lung-
fishes, which have survived to our day are divided into three
genera, and are found in South America, Central and Western
Africa, and Australia. They are sluggish animals; and in times
of drought, they inclose themselves in a case or rude cocoon of
mud, and survive without food for months, breathing air
through an opening in the mud. The skeleton is mostly carti-
laginous, though somewhat ossified; and the tail is either
diphycercal, as in modern dipnoans, or heterocercal, as in most
of the fossil types.

About 15 species of dipnoans occur in the Devonian of both
America and Europe. They are also found in the Carbonifer-
ous, Triassic, and Jurassic, but it seems that they are not found
in any of the “later” fossiliferous strata. When the modern
forms were discovered, about fifty years ago, they were looked
upon almost as if brought back from the dead; and it was con-
sidered very wonderful how they could have “persisted” into
our modern world. Why they have skipped all the strata from
the Mesozoic down to the modern, is a problem for evolutionary
geology to solve.

Armored Fishes. The Arthrodira (Greek, jointed neck) are
named from a rare feature in the neck region whereby the head
could move up or down, by the armor of the head sliding over
that of the body, an arrangement similar to that of the ostra-
coderms. They were heavily armored fishes, found in enormous
numbers in the Devonian and other Paleozoic rocks; and they
were the largest and most formidable fishes found in these
rocks. Instead of true teeth, they had plates for crunching or
shears for cutting; and if they were as savage as their appear-
ance would indicate, they must have been very cruel monsters.
One form, Dinichthys (Greek, terrible fish), was over 20 feet
long, and is common in the Devonian rocks. Another species,


FOSSIL FISHES 407


Titanichthys clarki, was even larger, with a head over four feet
wide, and with a lower jaw a yard long.

Hugh Miller, a Scotch geologist of a half century ago, has
Pterichthes which are found in the rocks in various parts of
Scotland. It is not so much the size that he dwells upon, for
many of the specimens in these rocks are not large; but he
emphasizes the way in which the figures of the fish are con-
torted and twisted around as if the fish had been in convulsions
and had been buried alive by the sediments in which it is now
inclosed. He says that the innumerable existences over an area
more than one hundred miles in length must all have been “an-
nihilated at once,” and he expresses great wonder as to how
such a thing was brought about. But it is a still more remark-
able fact that wherever these fishes are found throughout the
world, they occur in practically this same condition. Much the
same thing is true of the other kinds of fishes found in the other
geological formations. In other words, the evidences of violent
and sudden death are to be seen in connection with almost all the
remains of fossil fishes, wherever they are found.

By some, the Arthrodira are classed with the Dipnoi, or lung-
fishes. More than 40 species are named from North America.

Ganoids. The Ganoidei (Greek, bright appearance), or
enamel-sealed fishes, are familiar from the living gar pikes and
sturgeons of the fresh waters of North America. The glossy
appearance of these fishes is due to the bright enamel, like the
outer covering of the teeth of mammals, which covers the scales.
The scales of the ganoids have but two layers, the enamel
layer and the bony one; they lack the dentine layer, which is
found in the scales of the cartilaginous fishes. Some of the
ganoids, however, have true elastic cycloid scales, as in the
bony fishes, or teleosts, to be mentioned presently. They have
diphycercal or heterocercal tails, and have a spiral valve in
the intestine.

The ganoids are divided into two orders, the divisions being
based on the types of fins. These two orders are: (1) the
Crossopterygii, or those with fringe fins or lobed fins; and (2)
the Stylopterygti, or those with the pillarlike fins. There are
but two living genera of the first order, and both of these
genera inhabit the fresh waters of Africa. One of them, the
Polypterus, or bichir, of the Nile and other waters of Central
Africa, is a well-known food fish of that region. The air bladder
of these fishes has some of the functions of a lung; but these
fishes can not live out of the water more than a few hours.


408 THE NEW GEOLOGY


The pillar-finned ganoids are the type prevailing to-day in our
northern lakes and rivers, as, for instance, in the Great Lakes
of North America.

The crossopterygians are the most common fishes found in
the Lower Devonian rocks. They are divided into a great many
genera. The stylopterygians are more common in the Mesozoic
rocks, and especially in the Jurassic.

Teleosts. The Teleostei (Greek, true bone), or bony fishes,
include most of the fishes caught for sport or for commercial
purposes; and they are found in all our modern rivers, lakes,
and oceans. As a rule, they are covered with thin, elastic,
cycloid scales. In such forms as the eels, the skin is naked and
slimy. The tail is usually homocercal. The internal skeleton
of all these fishes is completely ossified, and the vertebrze are
hollow at both ends.

Fossils of this class are fairly common in the Cretaceous
and Tertiary rocks. Herrings, mullets, catfishes, cod, and sal-
mon are found in the Cretaceous. Naturally enough, the rocks
in which any such fishes are found could not be classed as
Paleozoic, or even as “early” Mesozoic.

At Lompoc, California, is a deposit of diatoms covering some
four square miles in area, and originally much larger, because
this is simply the remnant left after a considerable amount of
erosion. In the beds of this deposit of diatoms are found im-
mense numbers of Xyne, a kind of herring, which have been
buried here by the diatom ooze falling upon and around them
and thus burying them alive. Other well-known localities where
fossil fishes have been found in great numbers are, Glarus,
Monte Bolca, and many other places in Europe, together with
the Onondaga black limestones of Ohio and Michigan, and the
Green River shales of Arizona, with many others.


CHAPTER XXVII


The Devonian System


History. For over a hundred years, the strata which in
England occur between the Coal Measures and the old transition
rocks were popularly known as the Old Red Sandstone, which,
like another somewhat similar bed above the Coal Measures, and
known as the New Red Sandstone, is widely distributed through
the British Isles. Hugh Miller (Fig. 252), a stonemason of
Cromarty, Scotland, was one of the first to give a scientific de-
scription of these beds. Soon afterwards (1837) Sedgwick and
England, which were supposed, from the evidence of their fos-
sils, to belong between the Silurian and the Coal Measures.
A little later Murchison traveled through Russia, and there he
found beds which seemed to bridge over the sharp contrast be-
tween the Old Red Sandstone of Scotland and Northern Eng-
land, and the Devonian of Devon and Cornwall in the south of
England. In this way, all these three groups were united into
one system, since known as the Devonian system. Quite full
sections of the Devonian beds are also found in Belgium and in
the valley of the Rhine; but for America, the exposures in the
New York region are taken as the standard, more than one
half of the State of New York being covered with Devo-
nian rocks.

Subdivisions. The following are the chief subdivisions of
the Devonian rocks in America:


Chautauquan Series Chemung-Catskill formations
Upper f Portage formations
Devonian Senecan Series Naples, Ithaca, and Oneonta beds
i Genesee-Tully formations

Middle Erian Series Hamilton formation
i anar A Tia Mls Marcellus-Onondaga formations

e | Schoharie-Esopus formations
Lower Oriskanian Series Oriskany-Port Ewen formations
Devonian Helderbergian Series Helderberg formations


Distribution. The Helderberg limestones extend, with vari-
ous interruptions, from Southwestern Virginia, along the line of
the Appalachians to Albany, New York. These rocks are ex-
tensively developed in Northern Maine, Southern New Bruns-
wick, and in parts of Nova Scotia. In the Gaspé Peninsula,


(409)


410 THE NEW GEOLOGY


at the mouth of the St. Lawrence River, are found 1,500 feet of
limestones representing the Helderbergian and Oriskanian series.
Fossils of these rocks have been found in the arctic regions, at
80° north latitude.

The Oriskanian series are chiefly sandstones. They are
thickest in Western Maryland, and thin away both to the north
and to the south from that center. In the Mississippi Valley,
the Oriskany is found in about the same region as the lime-
stones of the preceding series, but it ex-
tends into Northern Georgia and Ala-
bama. Limestones of this series also
occur in the Maritime Provinces of
Canada, where they are said to be 5,000
feet thick. Many of the fossils of these
latter rocks are identical with the De-
vonian beds of Belgium and the Rhine
Valley in Europe.

The Onondaga limestone extends,
with some interruptions, from the Hud-
son River across New York into Michi-
gan, and circling around, it runs through
Indiana, Illinois, and Kentucky. Ex-
Frey 202 nose yu the tensive developments of these rocks are
of “The Old Red Sandstone.” found near the mouth of the Mackenzie

River, in the arctic regions; with inter-
ruptions, these rocks extend down across the Dakotas, Ne-
braska, and Kansas, into Iowa, Minnesota, and other parts of
the upper Mississippi Valley. These limestones are largely of
coral formation; and at such places as the falls of the Ohio, above
Louisville, Kentucky, specimens of the corals are most beauti-
fully preserved. Such localities are often spoken of as repre-
senting an old coral reef. But doubtless, while the materials
came from such a coral reef, they have been rearranged and
spread out by subsequent movements of the waters. Professor
Eduard Suess, in describing the coral beds of Central Europe,
uses the following language; and probably these words will be
just as applicable to these coral deposits here in America:


“Notwithstanding the abundance and variety of the corals, sometimes
forming really large isolated growths, I have never seen anything in these
localities which could be called a true coral reef. The corals lie heaped to-
gether, with shells, in tuffs, or marls, that is, always in clastic sediments. ...
These also, so far as I have been able to observe them, have rather the ap-
pearance of thick beds than of true reefs.” —“The Face of the Earth,”
Vol. 2;.pp. $21, $22.


THE DEVONIAN SYSTEM 411


w >
—
SS — um > — w w sa m LE WE F.
_


Fic. 253. Map of the Devonian outcrops in North America, which are shown in
black. White areas, unknown. (After W. B. Scott, “Introduction to Geology,”
permission of Macmillan Co.)


The Upper Devonian beds have much the same distribution
as those already mentioned. The Genesee shales are black and
quite carboniferous. They extend from Lake Erie to Central
Pennsylvania. The Portage series is associated with it; and in
Western New York, they have between them a limestone which
contains the famous assemblage of animals called the “Naples
fauna.” Fossils similar to these have been found from Mani-


412 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 254. Helderberg limestone (L. Devonian), in a railway cut, three fourths mile north of
Daw, Virginia. (Hinds, U. S. G. S.)


toba through the northwest of America into Siberia, and from
there through Russia into Westphalia, Germany.
The Chemung comprises a mass of sandstones and con-


Fic. 255. Oriskany sandstone (L. Devonian), in a cut of the Pennsvivania Railw.
Huntingdon, Pennsylvania. (Butts, U. S. G. S.) et


THE DEVONIAN SYSTEM 415


Fic. 256. Middle Chemung (U. Devonian) rocks, at Hawns Bridge, Pennsylvania. Shale,
with thin, hard sandstone layers. Looking northeast. (Butts, U. S. G. S.)


glomerates, of maximum thickness in Pennsylvania, but thin-
ning out toward the west.

Devonian rocks do not seem to occur in the Great Plains
region; and in Colorado also, they seem to be absent, the Car-
boniferous strata resting upon Cambrian and Ordovician. How-
ever, in the plateau region are many outcrops of Devonian
beds, as in the Grand Cañon region, in the Wasatch Mountains,
and in Nevada.

Many facts connected with these ancient rocks seem to favor
the hypothesis of an alternating tidal action, with its regular
ebb and flow, as a possible explanation of the peculiar way in
which limestones and sandstones alternate with one another.


“Comparing the rocks of the Ordovician, Silurian, and Devonian, as
these are developed in the Appalachian and adjoining regions, a certain
rhythmic or periodic recurrence of events may be discovered among them.
Each system is characterized by a great and very widespread limestone
formation, the Trenton, Lockport-Guelph, and Onondaga, respectively, and
in each the limestone is succeeded by shales or other clastic rocks, the Utica,
Salina, and Portage, due to an increase of terrigenous material, and each
was closed by a more or less widespread emergence of the sea bottom.


27


414 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Each began with a subsidence which gradually extended to a maximum at
the time when the great limestone was formed. The parallelisms are not
exact, but they are certainly suggestive.”— Scott.


As already remarked, Devonian rocks are extensively shown
in Southwest England, in Belgium, and in Germany; and they
are very widespread in Russia, both in European Russia and


Fic. 257. Cliff of Devonian rocks on the shore of Lake Erie, south of Buffalo.
This view is typical of the rock exposures on the lake shore from Buffalo to
Cleveland. (After Grabau.)


in Siberia. Devonian limestones composed of coral rocks are
found extensively in the Alps, also in Spain and in Portugal.

Devonian areas have been reported from China, the Altai
Mountains, from Asia Minor, and from Northern Africa. In
South America also, occur wider areas of Devonian strata than
those of any other Paleozoic system.

According to the evidence already given, the climate must
have been mild and uniform over all the earth when these ex-
tensive limestone beds were formed in the arctic regions.


Life


Plants. A great abundance of plant life is found in the
Devonian beds in many parts of the world. All the higher


THE DEVONIAN SYSTEM 415


Fic. 258. Cliff of Devonian limestone, on the Yukon. (Blackwelder, U. S. G. S.)


cryptogams are found, but chiefly ferns, lycopods (club mosses),
and Equisetacee (horsetails). Many examples of Cycadofilices
are also found in these Devonian beds. But as these plants are
largely concerned in the formation of the coral beds of the sub-
sequent Carboniferous system, a further description of them
will be postponed until another chapter.

Invertebrates. Graptolites are not found in any great abun-


Fic. 259. Upper Devonian strata from the type section, Cornwall, South-
west England. These beds are alternating shales and limestones. (After
Lake and Rastall. )


416 THE NEW GEOLOGY


dance in the Devonian rocks, but corals are even more plentiful
in these than in the systems already spoken of.

Of the Echinodermata, the cystoids and the blastoids are not
very plentiful, but the crinoids and starfishes are found in great
variety and in immense numbers. The remains of crinoids
contributed largely to the making of immense limestone de-
posits of the Devonian system.

The trilobites are less plentiful in the Devonian than in
the preceding systems. One of these, Terataspis, is one of the
largest and most elaborately ornamented of all the trilobites.


Fic. 260. The famous Lorelei Rock, on the Rhine, formed of inclined
Devonian sandstones and shales.


Most of the Devonian trilobites exhibit more or less oramenta-
tion on the margin of the head, while they usually have a de-
velopment of spines on both tail and head.

The eurypterids, another family of crustaceans, are found
in great abundance in the Devonian rocks. Some of them were
gigantic creatures, being six feet long. Insects are occasionally
found, though they are not common.

Brachiopods are the most abundant fossils found in the De-
vonian, in respect both to species and to numbers. Of these,
some of the most characteristic genera are Spirifer, Hypothyris,
Athyris, Gypidula, Vitulina, and those belonging to the large
family of Terebratulide, many genera of which are still living
in our modern seas.

Of the Mollusca, the ammonoid division of the cephalopods
are found occasionally in Devonian beds. These are distin-
guished from the nautiloids by the complex sutures, or lines,
made by the junction of the septa, or internal partitions, with


THE DEVONIAN SYSTEM 417


>


Fic. 261. SILURO-DEVONIAN FOSSILS
BRACHIOPODS: 1, 2, Pentamerus galeatus; 3, 4, Rhynchonel:a ventricosa; 5,


Spirifer macropleurus. PTEROPOD: 6, Tentaculites gyracanthus; 7, the same,
enlarged. OSTRACOID: 8, Leperditia alta. ARTHROPOD: 9, Eurypterus
remipes, a small specimen. 1-5 are species from the Devonian; 6-9, from the
Silurian. (After Dana.)
the outer wall of the shell. Some of these ammonoids had
straight shells, like that of Orthoceras already mentioned from
the Ordovician and Silurian strata.
Fishes. Among the most interesting fossils found in the
Devonian beds are the fishes. So numerous are they and so


splendidly preserved that these beds used to be assigned to an


Fic. 262. Devonian corals. 1, Zaphrentis rafinesquii; 2, 3, Cyathophyllum rugosum ;
4, Syringopora maclurii; 5, Aulopora cornuta; 6, Favosites goldfussi: all of the
Onondaga limestone, Middle Devonian. (After Dana.)


418 THE NEW GEOLOGY


os ‘Poe ip tg $ xi
A W,
Z, $


Fic. 263. Natural casts of Atrypa, Spinosa, Spirifer, Rhynchonella ; Pelecypods; and Tanta-
culites. Hamilton fauna (M. Devonian). (Hardin, U. S. G


alleged “Age of Fishes.” A description of this great group has
already been given in the preceding chapter. Here a descrip-
tion of some of the fossil fishes characteristic of the Devonian
beds will be sufficient.

The ostracoderms are often called fishes; but as they had
neither true jaws nor paired fins, and as they had no internal
skeleton whatever, the mere fact that they had the outward ap-
pearance of fishes, and also had their body covered with heavy
plates of bony material, would not-make them fishes in the true
sense of the word. But we must place them here among the
fishes, for we do not know what else to do with them. One of
the most remarkable of these near-fishes is the Pterichthys,
found in great numbers in the Old Red Sandstone of Scotland,

Of the true fishes, there are selachians, or sharks, with Dip-
noi, or lungfishes, and the terrible Dinichthys and Titanichthys,
the latter being some 25 feet long and having a head 4 feet
wide.

The following is Hugh Miller’s description of the fishes of
the Old Red as found in Scotland, and we should remember that
the condition in which the Devonian fishes are found in various
other parts of the world is not particularly different:


THE DEVONIAN SYSTEM 419


“The river bullhead, when attacked by an enemy, or immediately as it
feels the hook in its jaws, erects its two spines at nearly right angles with
the plates of the head, as if to render itself as difficult of being swallowed as
possible. The attitude is one of danger and alarm; and it is a curious fact,
to which I shall have occasion afterwards to advert, that in this attitude
nine tenths of the Pterichthes of the Lower Old Red Sandstone are to be
found. . . . It presents us, too, with a wonderful record of violent death
falling at once, not on a few individuals, but on whole tribes. . . .

“At this period of our history, some terrible catastrophe involved in sud-
-den destruction the fish of an area at least a hundred miles from boundary
te boundary, perhaps much more. The same platform at Orkney as at
Cromarty is strewed thick with remains, which exhibit unequivocally the
marks of violent death. The figures are contorted, contracted, curved, the
tail in many instances is bent round to the head; the spines stick out; the fins


are spread to tke full, as in fish that die in convulsions. . . . The
record is one of destruction at once widely spread and total, so far as it
extended. . . . By what quiet but potent agency of destruction were the


innumerable existences of an area perhaps ten thousand square miles in ex-
tent annihilated at once, and yet the medium in which they lived left un-
disturbed in its operations?


“Conjecture lacks footing in grappling with the enigma, and expatiates
in uncertainty over all the known phenomena of death.”—“Old Red Sand-
stone,” pp. 48, 221, 222.


But it is not only evident that all these innumerable exist-
ences were annihilated at once, it is also equally evident that
they were all buried alive, or at least buried before decomposi-
tion had ensued. They were obviously entombed by the sedi-
ments in which we find them buried.

The problem of how this happened must be left over until
we have the data before us regarding the various other phe-
nomena of geology; for we wish to frame an intelligent induc-
tion regarding these phenomena in general, and do not wish to
prejudice the case by deciding on one or two particular phe-
nomena beforehand. We must deal with the world as a whole,
and not with a few isolated patches of strata here and there.


Z


WR


he


Fic. 264. Pterichthys testudinarius, restored. Old Red Sandstone. (After W. B.
Scott, “Introduction to Geology,” permission of Macmillan Co.)


CHAPTER XXVIII


The Carboniferous System


Historical. For`over a hundred years, the miners and others
connected with mining operations in England have been fa-
miliar with what they have called the Coal Measures. In many:
places, these Coal Measures were underlain by a coarse, gritty
sandstone, known as the Millstone Grit, from the uses to which
it was frequently put. Below both of these, or directly below
the Coal Measures when the Millstone Grit happened to be ab-
sent, was usually a series of sandy and shaly beds containing
either marine fossils or plant remains, sometimes both. These
latter were called the Culm; or occasionally when this also was
absent, theré would be a limestone series, which was accordingly
called the Carboniferous Limestone. This latter was also even
more frequently called the Mountain Limestone, because in the
west of Britain and in Ireland it formed the tops of many hills
and ridges.

The name Carboniferous was first proposed by Conybeare,
in 1822; and from this date onward, these beds below the Coal
Measures came to be known as the Lower Carboniferous series,
a name which still attaches to them in many countries of Eu-
rope. In America, these beds or their equivalents were early
called the Sub-Carboniferous; but later the name Mississippian
began to be applied to them, the name having been suggested
by Winchell in 1870, because these beds were found well de-
veloped in the upper part of the Mississippi Valley. Similarly
the name Pennsylvanian was proposed by H. S. Williams in
1891 for the Carboniferous proper, or the Coal Measures; and
these names have gained their way so much in America that
they are now established as the equivalents of Lower and Upper
Carboniferous, as the latter are still used in Europe. On the Con-
tinent of Europe, the name Dinantian (from Dinant, on the
Meuse, Belgium) is usually applied to the Lower Carboniferous,
while the name Carbonic is used for the real Coal Measures.

These names may be conveniently placed side by side in a
table to show their equivalent usage:


America England Continental Europe
Pennsylvanian Upper Carboniferous Carbonic
Mississippian Lower Carboniferous Dinantian or Culm


(420)


THE CARBONIFEROUS SYSTEM 421


|


Fic. 265. Map of the outcrops of the Lower Carboniferous (Mississippian) strata,
indicated in black. (After W. B. Scott. “Introduction to Geology,” permission of
Macmillan Co.)


Mississippian

Distribution. The New York rocks which have so long
served as the standard of comparison and correlation of the
strata, no longer furnish a standard scale for the rocks of the
Carboniferous system; for the rocks of New York have nearly
all been included under the other systems which we have al-
ready examined, and very few of the “later” systems are found
there. The standard scales for these subdivisions of the Car-


422 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 266. Exposure showing Fountain formation (Pennsylvanian) resting on the granite,
west of Lyons, Colorado. (Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


boniferous are found in Pennsylvania and in the Mississippi
Valley. Carboniferous rocks are also found over much of the
western part of America; but they are wholly marine deposits,
and contain no coal. The following table will show the subdi-
visions of the Mississippian rocks:


Mississippi Valley


Ohio


Upper Mississippian or
Chester Series


(Stratigraphical break)
Maxwell limestone


Eastern Pennsylvania


Mauch Chunk red shales and
sandstones, with Greenbriar
limestone in some localities


Middle Mississippian or
Meramec Series


(Stratigraphical break)


Lower Mississippian or
Osage-Kinderhook Series


Lower Mississippian or
Waverly Series


Pocono sandstone


In the Southern States, the lowest beds of the Mississippian


are regarded as including the black Chattanooga shales, a re-
markable and widespread series which are regarded as in
some sense the equivalent of the lowest Mississippian farther


CS ‘S$ N ‘uopeq) “3ymsəx sry} əəonporxd 07 (Al[e}yeuOoI}IOdoId) Suljjjeas gB Jo uəonur AeA Əəzrnbə:r JOU P[NOM y ‘ssəuyory}
10 uydəp Ul ərour dO AU @ JIL ərxəu S}IsOdep PIYIJLIJS oy} JI `uorssərxduroəo [V197V] € ULY} 194I ‘yzeəurəpun suomnspunoj əy} JO Buinjəs e Ə SHOOT
Ae SIU, `əurrmuáKs Əy} ur SUIMOY JAWY St ƏƏ V 'ZULWOLM ‘SUIEJUNOW u4oH Big J0 opis Jseq `əuouvsəurt[ SNOABFIUOgIeD ut JUUS “197% “DIA


424 THE NEW GEOLOGY


north. The Chattanooga black shales are so intimately inter-
fingered with the various other beds to the north, both the Up-
per Devonian and the Lower Mississippian, that there is much
dispute as to their exact relationships.

In the Great Plains and the Rocky Mountain regions, the -
other preceding systems of the Paleozoic group have been either
entirely absent, or at the most but scantily represented. In con-
trast with this, the Carboniferous rocks are widely represented in
these regions, and some of these rocks are found in places on the
Pacific coast as far north as Alaska. As the other members of
the Paleozoic are absent over these areas, or only a few of them
are present, and that scantily, the Carboniferous throughout
these parts is found to rest upon the Pre-Cambrian, or upon any
other members of the Paleozoic which happen to be present,
“sometimes in apparent conformity.” (Scott.) Over the West
and the Central States, limestones are the prevailing beds. -

In the Rocky Mountain region, the limestones are known as
the Madison limestone, the limestones (with some shales) in
Southern Alberta which go under the name of the Lower Banff
series being regarded as belonging to the same set of beds.

In the central interior, crinoidal limestones are chiefly found,
nearly 400 species of crinoids having been found near Burling-
ton, Iowa, alone. Brachiopods, such as Productus and Spirifer,
are found in abundance along with the crinoids, with cup corals
and bryozoans. The flat crushing teeth of cestraciont and coch-
liodont sharks, and also their sharp fin spines, are found also
in these beds. “That reef-building corals were not present in
this warm and clear sea is strange, since reefs were made at
this time in Europe.” (Schuchert.) If we could only dismiss this
idea of a time-value as attaching to these beds, this difficulty,
with many others, would vanish.

In New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, the Mississippian beds
are represented by conglomerates, sandstones, shales, and great
quantities of gypsum, with some dolomites. In Alaska, on the
Arctic shore, are thick beds of coal, which are mined at Cape
Lisburne. Some of the coal beds at this latter place are re-
garded as belonging to the Jurassic system.

Soft red sandy shales are found in Pennsylvania (Mauch
Chunk, Pottsville), and are regarded as the equivalent of these
marine deposits in the interior and the north.

Land vertebrates and fresh-water fishes are practically
absent from the Mississippian rocks. In one of the subdivisions
“is a dwarf fauna of more than seventy species which reap-
pears at least four times, but is always connected with the same


(`S D `S `r ‘uoyed) `'əoəuwlstp ə[pptur ay} ul dey %AO9[V ‘speq LEMPA pey,, Jepun Buiddip (snozəgtuoq
“489° I) Əuozspugs dəə[suə], smoyg “YOU Zuo 'BururoKAA ‘eaoopy JO ymos sə[tur + ‘IIA Lld YHON oy} JO uous 94} JO pue YON “ggg ‘DIT


(425)


426 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 269. Dinantian (Mississippian) limestones on the banks of the Meuse
at Dinant, Belgium ; the locality from which the name is derived. (After Haug.)


physical environment, shallow-water odlite deposits.” (Schu-
chert.) This group of fossils is known as the Spergen fauna,
being best shown at Spergen, Indiana. Associated with these
other fossils is a single species of Foraminifera, and numerous
blastids (Pentremites), which in places are so numerous that
these beds have sometimes been called the Pentremital limestone.

In the Mauch Chunk beds of Pennsylvania are slabs marked
with the tracks of amphibians and with rain imprints and
ripple marks.

Pennsylvanian


Distribution. The Pennsylvanian rocks contain the great
coal beds of America, England, Continental Europe, and China.


Fic. 270. Spirifer striatus, a Dinantian (Mis-
sissippian) brachiopod, with shell partly
broken open to show the internal spiral arm- Fie. 271.
supports. natural size. Dinantian (Mississippian).

(Kayser. )


Productus giganteus, one fourth


427


|


ts


j


auras
“i
H


|
‘iA


pasy


Fic. 272. Map showing the outcrops of Upper Carboniferous (Pennsylvanian)
strata, indicated in black. The dotted area indicates the Permian of Kansas and
Texas. (After W. B. Scott, “Introduction to Geology,” permission of Macmillan Co.)


These coal beds are perhaps the most extensive coal deposits
found anywhere, though many other geological systems, notably
the Cretaceous, also have extensive coal deposits.

The Pennsylvanian series, consisting of marine deposits
which alternate with coal or its associated beds, are found from
Pennsylvania (with many interruptions) to Nebraska, Kansas,
Oklahoma, and Texas. In the western part of this area, the
coal beds are often associated with true marine fossils, and


428 THE NEW GEOLOGY


frequently interbedded with calcareous shales and limestones.
In the eastern part, the strata are coarser and much thicker,
and consist of sandy shales and gritty sandstones, the marine
calcareous beds being few or wanting. Here, too, the coal
accumulations are the thickest, consisting of some of the richest
and best coal beds. in the world.

The lower beds of the Pennsylvanian series (Pottsville) show
evidence of strong currents in their “repeated and pronounced
torrential cross-bedding.” (Grabau.) These coarse, cross-


Fic. 278. View along the strike of an outcrop of Mississippian limestone (U. Carboniferous),
looking down the south fork of Sulphur Cañon, Idaho. The strata are dipping to the right.
(Mansfield, U. S. G. S.)


bedded sandstones and conglomerates do not usually contain
marine fossils, or, indeed, fossils of any kind, though there are
occasional exceptions to this rule. Fossils are never well pre- `
served in coarse sandstones or conglomerates.

The Coal Measures. The coal beds themselves are found in
what seem like “a series of disconnected basinlike areas” (Gra-
bau), though the interruption of these beds may have been
due, in some cases, to subsequent erosion. In many instances,
however, the beds were doubtless deposited in quite distinct
basins. Throughout the area of the Coal Measures, there are
great differences in the nature and in the thickness of the coal.
beds. “Im one portion may occur a coal seam of great thickness,


THE CARBONIFEROUS SYSTEM 429


divided into two or more layers by exceedingly thin ‘partings’ of
shale. As we trace the coal seam in the proper direction,
the partings gradually grow thicker, until, perhaps, they be-
come strata, that intervene between very distinct and widely
separated coal seams, each of which is continuous with the
corresponding portion of the thick seam.” (Scott.) It is hard
to reconcile these facts with the swamp-bog theory of the origin
of the coal.

The strata associated with the coal are mostly shales, sand-


Fic. 274. Enchanted Mesa, near Acoma, New Mexico. Composed of Zuni sandstone _(Penn-
sylvanian), with a thin cap of Dakota(?) sandstone (L. Cretaceous). The top of this mesa
is over 400 feet above the plain. (Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


stones, and, in some places, limestones, the workable coal beds
comprising only about 2 per cent of the entire Coal Measures.
Many of the shales and other beds in between the coals proper
are highly impregnated with carbonaceous matter, and are of-
ten black in color. Lumps or bowlders of coal-like masses are
often found in the sandstones and other coarse materials in-
terbedded with the coals, showing that the fossilization of the
carbonaceous material was very quickly accomplished, or that
isolated masses of vegetation were buried in addition to the
regular deposits now forming the coal beds. Pure coal beds are,
in reality, very rare, as compared with the total amount of car-
bonaceous materials which are mixed up with sands and muds
‘(of course, in a hardened form).


28


450 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 275. Uneconsolidated sand and gravel of the Rio Grande formation (Carboniferous),
near Rincon, New Mexico. (Lee, U. S. G. S.)


Underlying a coal bed directly is often a bed of grayish or
bluish shale, called by miners the “‘seatstone,’ or “underclay,”
which is formed by the chemical action of the various acids
produced by the decomposition going on in the beds above, which
have reacted on the sediments present in the underlying beds,
removing the alkali materials from the feldspar, and converting
it into a fire clay. When such an underclay is absent, as in Ili-
nois, Nebraska, and elsewhere, the rock below is usually a
sandstone or a shale. The layers capping the coal, especially
if shaly, are often filled with fossil leaves and stems. In some
cases, trunks of old trees rise and extend from the coal bed
up through many feet of the overlying beds. In the Killing-
worth colliery, near Newcastle, England, one such fossil tree, with
roots resting in a shale, was found to extend through ten distinct
overlying strata. In Dulkeith, Scotland, the stem of a tree nearly
two feet in diameter was found rising from the floor of the coal,
passing through the coal bed itself, and entering the roof. Lyell
mentions one tree, over 60 feet long, with a diameter at the base
of five feet, which stood at an angle of about 40 degrees, and in:


THE CARBONIFEROUS SYSTEM 431


tersected over ten distinct beds of the sandstone, these beds be-
ing “divided into laminz so thin, that from six to fourteen of
them might be reckoned in the thickness of an inch.” This lat-
ter fact, which is of common occurrence, is a good indication
that these coal deposits did not require the long ages of swamp-
bog accumulation which are commonly assigned for their
production.

It is supposed that the original bed of vegetable matter must
have been 12 or 14 times as thick as the bed of coal is, hence
we get some idea of the quantity of plant remains which it must
have taken to produce the coal beds. The beds vary in thick-
ness from a fraction of an inch to 30 or 40 feet, though eight
or ten feet is a common thickness. Some parts of the famous
Mammoth Vein, in the anthracite region of Pennsylvania, are
50 feet thick. It would be a conservative estimate to say that


U SS S25


nett i — Sasssssi

|| =i a SS

x: SASS S: x
¿Z (Ay g

Z AAEN


ZZ


2


ZW


Fic. 276. Map showing the outcrops of the Carboniferous rocks of North America, which hav


not been subdivided into Mississippian and Pennsylvanian, (After Bailey Willis, U. S. G. S.)


432 THE NEW GEOLOGY


this giant seam must-represent a thickness of over 500 feet of
pressed vegetable matter.

Other Characters. The method of formation of the coal
beds will be discussed in a subsequent chapter; but here it
should be noted that in some of the coal areas, there is found
a remarkable alternation of coal beds with other kinds of rock.
In the Joggins section, at the head of the Bay of Fundy, in
Nova Scotia, there are some 76 of these successive beds; while
in England and on the Continent of Europe, this number is
much exceeded. But it is the usual thing to find the very same
kinds of plants in-the lower seams as in the upper ones; and the
same kinds of shells and other animal fossils often occur in
the upper shales and sandstones as in those associated with the
lower beds. All of which is hard to reconcile with the immense
lapse of time commonly associated with the production of these
beds. This fact will be spoken of more particularly later.

Some coals contain much pyrite, or iron sulphide, which is
an indication that sea water had access to the plant remains,
hydrogen sulphide being generated by bacterial action only
when sea water has been mixed with the decomposing vegetation.
(Grabau, “Principles of Stratigraphy,” pp. 493, 494.) Some of
this sulphide is present in almost all coal, and is the chief source
of the strong sulphur fumes given off from burning coal.

Beds of iron ore, often in the form of impure siderite (clay
ironstone), are very common in the coal districts. They have
been formed by the organic acids generated from the vegetable
deposits, which have taken out the iron originally disseminated
through the neighboring rocks, and have concentrated it in the
form of iron carbonate. When mixed with more or less clay,
it is called clay ironstone; and when it is found mixed with coal
or carbonaceous matter, it is called blackband ore, which is a
very valuable ore occurring in Ohio and Pennsylvania. The
formation of these iron ores will be treated of more at length
in the succeeding chapter.

Foreign


In England and Western Europe, the succession of strata in
the Carboniferous is similar to that in the eastern part of North
America; but in Russia, the Carboniferous is mostly marine,
as in the western part of North America. The Mountain Lime-
stone underlies the Coal Measures in Ireland, Western England,
Belgium, and parts of Germany. In Scotland, these limestones
are replaced by sandstones and impure coals. East of the Rhine,
the similarly placed beds are mostly sandstones and shales, and
are called Culm.


THE CARBONIFEROUS SYSTEM 433


The Culm of Northern Europe and Asia is generally char-
acterized by the presence of shales, sandstones, and conglomer-
ates, the shales often holding plant remains. ‘A remarkable
occurrence in this series is seen in beds rich in Radiolaria,
which are suggestive of a deep-water origin for the formations,
whereas the character and mode of occurrence of the other
fossils, especially the plants, indicate shallow water.” (Grabau,
“Textbook,” Part 2, p. 461.) The Radiolaria, it will be re-
membered, are now found only in the deeper waters of the Pa-
cific and the Indian Ocean; and it certainly does look strange
to see these specifically deep-sea forms mixed up in this way


with land plants, or even with shales, sandstones, and con-
glomerates.


Ww
wm i,


mnia


va


an


rea


j
£
z
š
Q


=
š
=
S


Fic. 277. CARBONIFEROUS FOSSILS


1, Zeacrinus elegans; 2, Actinocrimus proboscidialis; 3, Pentremites pyriformis;

4, Lithostrotion canadense; 5, Archimedes reversa; 6, Chonetes mesoloba; T,

Productus rogersi; 8, Spirifer cameratus; 9, Athyris subtilita; 10, Pleurotomaria
tabulata; 11, Pupa vetusta. (After Dana.)


434 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Carbonie fern, Mariopteris Carbonie fern, Pecopteris

pottsvillea. Lower Pottsville. vestita. Coal measures,

(After D. White.) Pennsylvania. (After Les-
quereux. )


Common Carbonic fern, Neuropteris pocahontas.
Alethopteris pennsylvanica. Lower Pottsville. (After D.
(After Lesquereux.) White.)


Fig. 278. FOSSIL FERNS


The Culm type of Lower Carboniferous runs as far north
as Spitzbergen; but in the south of Europe are limestones, with


fossils much like those of England and Western Europe.


contain the well-known index fossil, the brachiopod, Produc-


tus giganteus.


“These beds can be traced south to Sarajevo in the Balkans, through
Asia Minor, Persia, and the Kirghiz Steppe, through Central Asia north to
the Tian Shan Mountains, through North China, and so on into the western
part of the Cordilleran trough of North America, where the same Productus


giganteus is found.”— Grabau, “Textbook,” Part 2, pp. 461, 462.


THE CARBONIFEROUS SYSTEM 435


“In Russia the order of succession is reversed, the productive coal beds
being below and the great bulk of the limestone above, but there is some
productive coal interstratified in the marine limestones of the Donjetz basin
in the south.”— Scott.


The limestones thus found capping the Coal Measures in
Russia and throughout great areas of Southern and Eastern
Asia are largely composed of the shells of Foraminifera, the
genus Fusulina predominating. These shells are identical with
those largely composing the Carboniferous limestones of the
western part of America, and extending as far east as the
Mississippi River. Throughout. Southern Europe, limestones
and Culm are succeeded by the foraminiferal limestone and
other clastic sediments, but without coal beds. The limestones
of the Upper Carboniferous are found in Greenland, Spitz-
bergen, Bear Island, Nova Zembla, and other places in the
arctic regions. Similar limestones, showing these same Forami-
nifera, are found in Japan, Borneo, and Sumatra; while in
China, they are also accompanied by very extensive coal beds,
the coal deposits of this country being among the richest of
the world.

Carboniferous beds with plants like those of the Coal Meas-
ures of Europe are found near the east coast of Africa, in the
Zambesi district; while limestones classed as Carboniferous
occur in Egypt and Morocco, in the north of this continent.
In South America, the Carboniferous beds are not so well de-
veloped as we have found the Devonian to be; but sandstones
classed as Carboniferous are found in Argentina, containing
plants similar to those of Africa and Australia. Carboniferous
limestones also occur in various parts of South America.

Life

Plants. The plants of the Carboniferous system are much
the same as those of the Devonian, though accumulations of
vegetable matter are not found in the Devonian. Perhaps it
would be more correct to say that if large beds of vegetable
matter are found anywhere, they must be always classed as
Carboniferous, and not as Devonian, though the plants are much
the same in each. The limestones, shales, and sandstones of the
Carboniferous “are so similar to the rocks of the Devonian and
Silurian that they can not be distinguished except by the fos-
sils.” (Dana.) The fossil plants include over 1,000 species, and
comprise ferns, lycopods, including Lepidodendron and Sigil-
laria, with Equisetales (horsetails), especially the genus Cala-


436 THE NEW GEOLOGY


mites, the stems of which are among the most common fossils
of the coal beds.

The Cycadofilices resembled the tree ferns of the tropics, and
their remains are found in great abundance, probably also con-
tributing much material for the formation of the coals. A group


ene


wl


by iit v
AN ipate
ha)
jp


Fig. 279. Fusulina (X 9), polished slab of limestone showing
shell in section. Carbonic.


an


=


Fig, 279a. Schwagerina verbecki, Carbonic. A, diagrammatic view;
B, plan of structure; a, natural size.


of gymnosperms called Cordaitex also occur, and they are sup-
posed to be related to the existing orders of gymnosperms, the
cycads, conifers, and gingkos. The exact facts regarding the
kinds of plants found in the Coal Measures are not yet well
understood.


THE CARBONIFEROUS SYSTEM 437


chapter dealing with the formation of the coal beds. Here we
may call attention to the wide distribution and the uniform
character of this assemblage of plants, which are included un-
der the Carboniferous flora. “We find the same or nearly allied


Fic. 280. Neuropteria clarksoni, Lx. High anthracite, Olyphant, Pennsylvania.
(Hardin, U. S. G. S.)


species of plants spread over North America, Europe (even in the
polar lands, like Spitzbergen and Nova Zembla), Siberia, China,
the Sinai peninsula, Brazil, Australia, and Tasmania.” (Scott.)


Deep-Sea Animals with the Coals. It is at least remarkable
that the one-celled Foraminifera should be so widely associated
with the coal beds, as these creatures are now almost exclusively
found in the open ocean, their remains composing vast areas of
the oozes at the bottom of the deeper parts of the Atlantic, the
Pacific, and the Indian Ocean. Many living genera are repre-
sented among the widespread foraminiferal limestones of the
Carboniferous, though the most numerous are F'usulina, a very


438 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 281. Fossil fern, Pseudopecopteris maci’enta, Lepidocystis (Polysporia) salisburyi, La.
Pottsville (L. Carboniferous). The first specimen is from Arkansas, the other from Alabama.
(Hardin, U. S. G. S.)


large kind, looking much like a grain of rice or of wheat. (Fig.
279.) It is said to be extinct. Another more globular genus,
Schwagerina (Fig. 279a), is also present in these rocks which
are so widely distributed over the larger part of the Old World
and the western part of North America.


“Fossil Hickory Nuts.” The blastoids constitute a group of
extinct Echinodermata which are regarded as very character-
istic of the Carboniferous limestones. They are used much as
“index fossils,” as it is considered that they became extinct with
these Carboniferous rocks. In appearance, they resembled the
closed bud of a flower, which is indeed called the “calyx” of
the animal, for it also had a stem, like a crinoid. Their struc-
ture and habits are not at all understood, as they are entirely
extinct, though they seem to have been related in structure to
the crinoids and the sea urchins.

Crinoids. But the crinoids are by far the most numerous
echinoderms of the Carboniferous rocks, more than 600 species
limestones. Several localities, as Burlington, Iowa, and Craw-


THE CARBONIFEROUS SYSTEM 439


fordsville, Indiana, have become famous for the abundance and
splendid preservation of their fossil crinoids.
“The crinoid remains occur in such multitudes that in many places the


limestones are principally composed of them; in such places they must have
covered the sea bottom like miniature forests.”— Scott.


Sea Urchins. The Echinoids, or sea urchins, are common in
these rocks; but they are all said to belong to genera which are
extinct. However, when we understand the great variations ex-
hibited by these animals, we are naturally inclined to question
the accuracy of such a statement. Some of them were large;
and at least one kind closely resembles the modern genus Cidaris.

Arthropods. Of the Arthropoda, the trilobites are rare; the
eurypterids are common, though not so large as those found in
the Devonian; while horseshoe crabs are also represented. Some
of these animals are even found mixed up with the coal beds
themselves. Centipedes, scorpions, and spiders are also found,
with both neuropters and orthopters among the insects.


%


Fic. 282. Permo-Carboniferous plants. 1, Lepidodendron obovatum; 2, Sigillaria oculata; 3,
Stigmaria ficoides; 4, Sphenopteris gravenhorstii; 5, Calamites cannæformis; 6, Trigono-
carpum tricuspidatum. 4 and 7 are regarded as Permian, (After Dena.


440 THE NEW GEOLOGY


“Many of the Carboniferous insects are remarkable for their great
size, some of them measuring 30 inches across the extended wings, and more
remarkable is the fact that several insects of this period had three pairs of
wings, corresponding to the number of legs.”— Scott.


Brachiopods. Brachiopods are not so numerous or so varied
as in some of thexrocks already studied. But the genera Spi-
rifer and Rhynchonella are well represented, and also Dielasma,
quite similar to the genus Terebratula, which figures so largely
in the Mesozoic rocks. But most important and most character-
istic of the Carboniferous brachiopods is the great genus Pro-
ductus, represented by many species, one of them, P. giganteus,


S inches,


Fic. 283. Hurypterus mansfieldi, Hall. Specimen from just below Darlington cannel coal,
near Cannelton, Pennsylvania. (U. S. G. S.)


being the largest brachiopod known. The larger valve of these
forms is very convex, and often spinous; while the smaller valve
is flat or even concave.


Mollusks. Of the Mollusca, the true bivalves are abundant,
as are also the gastropods, the same genera being found in the
Carboniferous as in the preceding Devonian and Silurian beds.
Of these, Pleurotomaria was long thought to be extinct; but
within modern times, five species have been discovered in the
very deep waters of the West Indies and near Japan. Orthoc-
eras, one of the nautiloid cephalopods, is also seen; but many
other nautiloids are found in these rocks, their shells being orna-
mented with prominent ridges or tubercules.

Vertebrates. Sharks are quite common, even more so than
in the Devonian; but the Dipnoi and the crossopterygians are
not nearly so numerous. But the true ganoids (called variously
stylopterygians and actinopterygians) are represented by sev-


THE CARBONIFEROUS SYSTEM 441


eral genera, such as Eurylepis, Palæoniscus, Eurynotus, Chei-
rodus, and Platysomus, which are in appearance very much like
modern fishes. They are said to be extinct.


Amphibians belonging to the extinct order Stegocephalia,
shaped much like our modern salamanders, though some seven
or eight feet long, are very common in the Carboniferous beds.
Some, however, are much more elongated in form. Their skull
was well covered with a roof of sculptured bones, the backbone
was not ossified, the limbs were small and weak, the tail short
and broad; and in many forms, the anterior portion was pro-
tected by an armor of bony scutes. A very large number of
these Carboniferous amphibians are known. They were adapted
for living amid the peculiar vegetation represented in the
coal beds.


CHAPTER XXIX


The Permian System


Historical. The German miners used to have a series of red
sandstones and limestones which they termed the Zechstein.
Another associated series of magnesian limestones contained a
black copper-bearing shale in their lower horizons, a series of
great economic importance because of its copper ore. At a later
date the Zechstein was found to contain the now famous Stass-
furt salt beds. Afterwards these two groups were combined
in one, to which was given the name Dyas, because of its two-
fold character. The same beds (that is, their equivalents) were
represented in England by the Magnesium Limestone of Dur-


rops of the Permian rocks in North ica.
fter Bailey Willis, U. B. Gi SM memes


Fic. 284. Map showing the oute
(A


(442)


THE PERMIAN SYSTEM 443


R ` ~
ar ye


E:


Fic. 285. Regional distribution of Pennsylvanian (U. Carboniferous) floras. White rings,
Westphalian plants; black rings, Stephanian plants. (David White, U. S. G. S.)


ham, which, in the west of the island, was regarded as the lower
part of what was called the New Red Sandstone. But as the
result of Murchison’s explorations in Russia, where this pioneer
geologist found very similar strata in the province of Perm,
near the Ural Mountains, the name Permian soon became rec-
ognized as applying to all these formations.


In the early days of geology in America, when little of the continent
had been examined except the part near the Atlantic, it was thought that
the Permian rocks were so scanty as hardly to warrant a separate system
to include them; and so the custom was adopted of including them along
with the Coal Measures, in a Permo-Carboniferous system. More recently,
however, large areas of Permian rocks have been found in Kansas, Idaho,
Wyoming, and Utah; and now the Permian system has won a recognized
place in American geology.


Distribution. Soft red shales and sandstones, classed as
Permian, are found extensively in Prince Edward Island, Nova
Scotia, and New Brunswick, lying apparently above the Coal
Measures. In Maryland, West Virginia, Ohio, and Pennsylvania,
similar beds consisting of sandstones and shales, with a few
seams of coal and some limestones, used to be called the Upper
Barren Measures; but they are now classed as Permian be-
cause of the character of the plants which they contain. No
Permian rocks have been found south of West Virginia; but


444 THE NEW GEOLOGY


regions of the West, as already mentioned.

When the Permian rocks of the West, in Kansas, Nebraska,
and Texas, became known, it was declared by geologists that
only the lower part of the Permian is represented by the beds
in the Maritime Provinces and in the Atlantic States; the rest of
the system finds better expression in these wide areas west of the
Mississippi.

In Kansas, the beds consist of fine red clays, with some
sandstone, conglomerate, and some impure limestone, in the
north of the State, but with purer marine limestones in the.
southern part. Extensive salt beds are found interbedded with
gypsum, but without sufficient fossils to make the identification
of these beds quite certain. Sandy shales, also associated with
gypsum, are traced through many parts of Northern Arizona
and Southern Utah, Western Colorado, and Central Wyoming,
where they are locally called the Red Beds. “The Red Beds are
not all Permian, however, and the rarity of fossils in them
makes it often impossible to decide whether a given area of
these beds should be referred to the Permian, to the subsequent
Triassic, or to Doth. a (Scott.)

In the mountainous part of Western Texas, extensive Per-
mian marine beds are found which contain fossils much like


Fic. 286. Regional distribution of Permian floras. White rings, Lower Permian; triangles,
Middle Permian ; crosses, Upper Permian; solid rings, Gondwana flora.
(David White, U. S. G. S.)


THE PERMIAN SYSTEM . 445


ies,
oN


Fic. 287. Chugwater shales (Permian-Jurassic), capped by travertine cemented gravels.
On the south bank of Shoshone River Canon, at Hot Springs, above Cody, Wyoming.
(Condit, U. S. G. S.)


those of the Mediterranean and of India. These Permian beds
of Texas extend (with interruptions) across southwesterly
through Mexico; and similar beds occur on the Copper River
in Alaska, with traces of them in the Klamath Mountains of
Northern California.

Foreign. In England and Central Germany, the sandstones,
shales, and marls of the Permian are predominantly red, which
has suggested to some that these beds were deposited in an arid
climate, the gypsum and the rock salt, with extensive layers of
potassium and magnesium salts, encouraging this explanation.
On the other hand, the associated coal beds, which are found in
this system not only in Central Germany, but also in France
and Bohemia, on either side of these gypsum and salt beds, are
good testimony against this hypothesis. Grabau is of the opin-
ion that these red beds were light yellow or ochery in color
when first deposited, but that they underwent a process of de-
hydration after being buried, just as yellow clay is very easily
changed into a red brick by heating, the driving off of the water
of crystallization contained in the yellow iron oxide changing
the color to that of the red iron oxide, or hematite. (‘‘Text-
book,” Part 2, p. 509.)

These Permian beds are very widely scattered throughout
Central Europe, from Commentry, in Central France, to Silesia.


29


446 > THE NEW GEOLOGY


a ae


Fic. 288. Cliff of red beds of Chugwater formation (Permian-Jurassic), on No-Wood Creek,
Big Horn Mountains, Wyoming. (Darton, U. S. G. S.)


They compose the older red strata of the Vosges Mountains,
“and in the dry moat of the ancient Heidelberg Castle on the
Rhine they can be seen to lie directly upon the granite.” (Gra-
bau.) (Fig. 291.) Throughout Europe, many volcanic beds
are classed with these Permian ones, these volcanics being scat-
tered through Great Britain, France, and Germany, and also in
some parts of the Alps; but this only means that these voleanic
beds lie directly upon these Permian strata.

In Russia, the Permian beds extend along the Baltic coast
and in a long strip along the west of the Ural Mountains to the
Arctic Sea, and into Nova Zembla and Spitzbergen. Some of
these beds greatly resemble the Permian of Kansas, and the fos-
sils of associated beds in Russia and the arctic are like those of
South Africa and other parts of the Southern Hemisphere, as
will be given in more detail presently.

Permian rocks extend, of course with wide interruptions,
from the Mediterranean eastward through Armenia, Persia,


THE PERMIAN SYSTEM 447


Fic. 289. Permian sandstone, 700 feet thick, Cañon de Chelly, Arizona. (From Men-
denhall and Gregory, U. S. G. S.)


Tibet, China, and the island of Timor. In Northern India, the
Permian compose a part of the remarkable Gondwana series,
the rest being Triassic and Jurassic.


Fic. 290. Upper Bryozoan limestone, Park City formation (Permian), Popo Agie River,
Wyoming. (Condit, U. S. G. S.)


448 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 291. Heidelberg Castle, Germany.


“Tillites.” A coarse angular conglomerate with a so-called
bowlder clay is found in these beds of extensive spread in
Northern and Central India, while smoothed and striated pave-
ment rocks have also encouraged the idea that these formations
are of true glacial origin. But the associated floras and faunas
do not give any encouragement to this idea; while it is always
well to remember that it does not require huge glaciers to pro-
duce the phenomena which we have mentioned. As Scott re-
marks, “It is certainly very remarkable to find glacial deposits
formed on such a scale within the tropics, and evidently at no
great height above the sea level.” An additional absurdity is
introduced into the situation by the recent discovery that the
movement of these hypothetical glaciers “seems to have been
from the south northward, or away from the equatorial region
of to-day.” (Grabau, “Textbook,” Part 2, p. 521.)

An exactly similar situation has been discovered in South
Africa, in what is known as the Karoo series. “Tillites” rest-
ing upon striated and polished older rocks are extensively spread `
out through Cape Colony, Transvaal, Rhodesia, and north to
Nyasaland. In parts of these areas, the underlying smoothed
and striated pavement is in “a state of wonderful freshness”
(Scott), as if these deposits had been made in recent times.


THE PERMIAN SYSTEM 449


This district is partly within the tropics; but here, as in India,
the movement of these materials, with the scratches on the
rocks, is away from the equator toward the colder region. Is
it reasonable to think that huge glaciers once spread poleward
in each direction from the tropics as a center?

The characteristic plants in the beds above the “tillites” are
Glossopteris and Gangamopteris, accompanied by Neuropteris
and Sigillaria, and also by reptiles and amphibians, practically
the same kinds of plants and animals being found in scattered
localities over nearly half of the globe, though mostly south of
the equator. Coal beds with similar fossils are found in New
South Wales and in other parts of Australasia, where the so-
called glacial beds are interstratified with marine strata, some
of the “tillites” themselves containing typical marine fossils.
(Seott.) Permian beds containing the typical Glossopteris
flora, as it is called, occur also in Argentina and Brazil.


s Life

Plants. We have already seen the twofold character of the
Permian in many parts of the world, this system being called
the Dyas in Central Europe because of this dual character.
This duality is especially marked in respect to the floras of these


beds, the Lower Permian flora resembling the Carboniferous
and the other Paleozoic formations, while the Upper Permain


_ Fig. 292. Section of the Dwyka bowlder clay at Prieska, northwestern part of
Cape Colony, Africa. (After Hatch and Corstorphine, “Geology of
South Africa.”)


450 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 293. So-called “tillite,” or glacier-formed deposits, in Permian strata, State of Sao Paulo,

Brazil. On the Mogyara Railway, between the stations Coronel Correa and Baldeacao. As

this is within the tropics, it is difficult to believe that this area was once covered with a vast

ice sheet. Would it not be more reasonable to seek some other explanation of these beds?

(From Bulletin of the Geological Society of America, Vol. 30, 1918, pl. 10. Dr. G. Florence,
photograph.)


flora is much more like that of the Mesozoic; “so that if the
line dividing these two great eras [groups] were drawn in ac-
cordance with the vegetation, it would pass through the Per-
mian.” ~(Scott.)

However, the giant lycopods, Lepidodendron and Sigillaria,
are not at all common in éven the Lower Permian beds, though
calamites and ferns are quite plentiful, tree ferns being even
more common than in most of the Carboniferous. The Upper
Permian flora is composed chiefly of ferns, cycads, conifers, and
gingkos. The broad-leaved ferns, Glossopteris and Ganga-
mopteris, with some associated ferns, conifers, and calamites,
help to compose the almost cosmopolitan Glossopteris flora,
though the extension of this flora into Northern Russia is
associated with the Triassic rocks. This group of plants is also
called the Gondwana flora, “Gondwana” being an imaginary
continent in the Southern Hemisphere which by some geologists


is thought to have united India, South Africa, Australia, and
South America.


THE PERMIAN SYSTEM 451


Invertebrates. Of the fossil animals, foraminifers are very
widely scattered through the Permian rocks, and some corals
belonging to the living Hexacoralla are found. But the crinoids
are rare, and trilobites and eurypterids are found only as strag-
glers. Insects are very plentiful in some of these strata, some
of them being very large.

Brachiopods are numerous, though few of them are distinc-
tive of the Permian beds. But many characteristic molluscan
bivalves appear, while the cephalopods are especially varied and
abundant. Not only do we find many new species of the genus
Nautilus, but many new ammonoids with very complicated
sutures are particularly characteristic of these beds, some of the
same species of ammonoids having been identified in the rocks
of such widely scattered localities as Texas, Russia, Sicily, and
India. Similar ammonoids-are very common in the subsequent
Mesozoic group.

Vertebrates. Many of the fishes are like those already
spoken of from the preceding systems. But of the Dipnoi, the
genus Ceratodus, similar to the living lungfish of Australia,
occurs in the Permian beds. The teeth and fin spines of sharks
are common.

Amphibians are very numerous and varied. Some were
slender and snakelike, others were much like salamanders, while
still others were shaped almost like alligators, with large, pe-


Fic. 294. Glossopteris browniana, Brngn. From Newcastle, Australia.


452 THE NEW GEOLOGY


culiar heads. They ranged in size from a few inches up to
eight feet. The Stegocephalia, called also labyrinthodonts be-
cause of their complicated tooth pattern, are especially charac-
teristic of these deposits.

Many distinct kinds of true reptiles also are found, some of
them in large numbers. They occur in a great variety of forms


Fig. 295. A flowering fern (cycad fern) of the Upper Carbonie of England.
(Lyginopteris [Lyginodendron] oldhami.) A, reconstruction of the plant about
one eighth natural size, showing stem, aérial roots, sterile and fertile fronds; B,
section of stem: m, marrow; p, primary wood bundles; s, secondary wood; pd,
periderm, marking outer border of central cylinder ; ir, inner bark; ar, outer bark,
with radial bands of sclerenchyma; 61-b5, leaf bundles; bl of oldest leaf, X 8/5;
C, cross section of stem of frond: p, primary wood strands of V-shaped form, sur-
rounded by a ring of bast (b) ; ar, outer bark, X 25. (After Steinmann.)


in the Karoo formation, South Africa, some of them being most
bizarre in appearance, with a great row of high spines along
the backbone, or with other strange characteristics. One group
of these, the theriodonts, had a set of complete teeth, differen-
tiated, as in the mammals, into incisors, canines, and multi-
cuspid molars. Evolutionists naturally think this is a very good
start from which to derive the teeth equipment of the mammals.

But this sudden appearance of a great variety of true rep-
tiles in these Permian beds is a cause of some astonishment to
those who explain all organic forms in terms of progressive
evolution. The following is a typical remark along this line:


THE PERMIAN SYSTEM 453


“There is no reason to suppose that such a variegated rep-
tilian fauna can have come into existence suddenly, and their
ancestors will doubtless be discovered in the Carboniferous
[would these beds be called Carboniferous, if many such reptiles
were to be found in them? G. McC. P.]; but while no true
reptiles are certainly known from the latter, in the Permian
they are the most conspicuous elements of vertebrate life.”
— Scott, “Introduction to Geology,” p. 652.

But how simple the whole matter becomes when we understand
that in all these geological distinctions and classifications,
we are merely dealing with zodlogical taxonomy, or the zodlogi-
cal classifications of the ancient life of the world, and that these
classifications are just as truly artificial as any modern taxo-
nomic classification! These geological classifications have ab-
solutely no more time-value than have the modern ones.


CHAPTER XXX
Coal: Its Occurrence and Origin


General Remarks. “Although many thousands of men,”
says Professor Suess, “work day and night in our Coal Measures,
and although many acute observers are led by their profession
to make the study of these deposits the business of their life,
yet the mode of formation of the coal beds is still far from
being satisfactorily explained.” (“Face of the Earth,” Vol. 2,
p. 244.)

These words seem like a quite unpromising introduction to
our subject; yet we shall do the best we can to present a ra-
tional and satisfactory explanation of the origin of the coal de-
posits. But first we must note the occurrence of coal and some
of its characteristics.

Almost all the geological systems of rocks contain coal beds
of some description; but the most important beds occur in the
Carboniferous, the Cretaceous, and the Tertiary. Of these, the
Carboniferous is the most important, and has been estimated
to include seven tenths of the total coal beds of the world. In
North America, the Carboniferous coals are east of the 100th
meridian, the Tertiary are mostly west of the 120th meridian,
with the Cretaceous beds in between. In Europe, the coal in
the British Isles is chiefly Carboniferous, as are also some of the
coal beds on the Continent; but the immensely thick brown
coal beds of Germany, from 75 to 150 feet thick, are classed as
Tertiary. Beds of brown coal even much thicker than this are
known in Australia. China has very extensive coal beds; but
they are mostly Carboniferous.

As will appear later, the distinction between these different
geological systems is based on the kinds of fossils associated
with the beds, and it is a common impression that only in the
Carboniferous strata do we find good coal. But this is a mis-
take. Splendid anthracite, as good as any in Pennsylvania or
Wales, occurs in the Cretaceous formations of British Columbia
and Alberta, or even in the Tertiary beds there and elsewhere.
But in a general way, it may be stated that the Carboniferous
coals are more likely to be anthracite or bituminous, while those
of the Cretaceous and Tertiary are more likely to be less carbon-
ized, or even to be little more than pressed wood, as is the case
with so many of the lignites. The latter usually occur at the
surface of the ground, or close beneath the surface; while the


(454)


COAL: ITS OCCURRENCE AND ORIGIN 455


Carboniferous beds are sometimes many thousands of feet
down. This makes an immense difference in the amount of
pressure which these formations have been subjected to; and
this difference in pressure, together with differences in the heat
and other metamorphic agencies to which they were subjected,
will partly account for the differences in the coals as we find


KNOWN COAL
FIELDS
DOUBTFUL

COAL FIELDS


E COAL UNDER
DEEP COVER


Fic. 296. Map showing general distribution of coal fields in the United States. (U.S. G.S.)


them. Yet it may be that the original differences in the plant
materials entering into the beds may be largely responsible for
the distinctions which we now observe.

Mineral Matter. In every coal region, there are always
many very thin seams which are worthless as a source of coal,
and also many seams of shale which are so impregnated with
carbonaceous matter that they can be made to burn, though
with a large amount of residue as ash. Good coals show only
from 5 to 1 per cent of ash, but the percentage often runs
higher. This ash is due to earthy or rock materials which are
mixed up with the coal, having been included in the deposit
when it was first made. Probably all the original plant remains,
when first buried, contained much mineral matter; but in many
of the larger or thicker seams, most of this mineral matter has
been dissolved and leached out by the acids generated in the
fermenting and decomposing mass, as will be explained later.
The wonder is that so much of the coal is so nearly free from
mineral matter.


456 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Color of the Associated Strata. Red or yellow rocks are
usually absent in the coal regions, because of the acids generated
by the organic deposits, which dissolve the iron oxides which
cause these bright colors. A similar explanation is made of the
so-called “underclay” which is often found at- the base of a coal
bed. This is a fire clay; that is, it has lost the basic or alkaline
materials which would act as fluxes and cause it to melt easily,
so that now it is almost infusible, and can be used as the lining
for blast furnaces, and in other places where intense heat must
be resisted. It is often gray or almost pure white for several
inches or even for several feet below the coal, and has been
produced by the carbonic acid and other acids which formed
in the decomposing mass of plant remains, these acids dissolv-
ing and carrying away, first the alkali material in the feldspar,
and next the iron compounds, until the blanching is often com-
plete throughout a thick bed. The great quantities of carbonic
acid generated in these plant deposits will also serve to account
for the very frequent occurrence of siderite, or iron carbonate,
in association with the coal beds. Beds of iron carbonate
several feet thick often alternate with the coal beds, being re-
peated many times in a vertical section. These beds of iron
ore are also frequently found resting upon a pure fire clay, just
as the coal does.


It is often stated that this ‘“‘underclay” contains the remains of the roots
of the plants (trees) which grew in the beds above, and that in many in-
stances, the stumps of these trees are still found in situ, as they grew. It
is curious how this assertion has been repeated over and over again in all the
textbooks, being copied from one to another for more than half a century.
However, the fact is that, while stumps are often found in the coal beds, it
is only by the help of the imagination that anything like true roots can be
detected as attached to them. As for the frequent assertion that the small
rootlets can be still made out in the underclay, being derived from the plants
which grew above, it is wholly imaginary. Of course, even if the vegetable
matter were washed into the position of these beds and buried, the trees
would in many instances carry their stumps and roots with them, and if
the stem were broken off a few feet above the roots, the stump would in most
cases sit upright, as is so frequently seen in snags in the rivers which have
been floated down by floods or freshets; and many roots are always attached
to the stumps in such instances. It may be confidently affirmed that there is
no well-authenticated case where the presence of such old stumps in the coal
beds can be proved to have been due unquestionably to growth on the spot.
The wish is father to the thought in such reports. -


Classes of Coals. There are four leading types of coal =
brown coal, lignite, bituminous, and anthracite.

Brown coal is little more than a compacted mass of plant
remains, and is usually more or less of a homogeneous character


COAL: ITS OCCURRENCE AND ORIGIN 457


throughout. It may vary in color from a light yellow to a deep
brown; but ordinarily not much can be determined regarding
the kind of plant materials entering into its formation. Only
in rare instances can anything like a positive identification of
a particular type of plant be made; but if we suppose that the
materials in the coal itself were similar to the plant remains.
preserved often with such exquisite perfection in the shales
above the coal, we shall have no trouble in fixing upon the kinds
of plants entering into the composition of these coals.


Fic. 297. General view of a lignite mine (Tertiary) about 12 miles south of Cologne, Germany.
The lignite bed is from 25 to 30 feet thick, and is cov vered with 12 to 18 feet of sand and gravel.
This is what is called the “open system” of mining. (Holmes, U. S. G. S.)


The brown coals burn with a sooty flame, a strong odor,
and but little heat. They generally run from 55 per cent to
75 per cent of carbon. In density, they range from 0.5 to 1.5.
Many of the Tertiary formations contain brown coal, the beds
often being of an astonishing thickness; and these beds often oc-
cur near the surface.

Lignite is the name given to coal which has been made
chiefly out of trees, such as conifers, and which has been only
partially converted into coal. Often the texture of the wood
can be distinctly made out. Lignites are common throughout
the Mesozoic and the Tertiary formations. A regular grada-


458 THE NEW GEOLOGY


tion can be traced from the little altered lignites to the true
bituminous coals and the anthracites. It even occurs that a
seam will be a lignite in one locality, and if followed up only
a few hundred feet, will turn into a true coal, and perhaps even
into a true anthracite, the change being due to some local source
of heat, such as a-dike.*

The ordinary soft coal is termed bitwminous. It is black in
color, of a bright luster, and quite brittle. Usually it runs from
75 to 90 per cent in carbon, and contains a greater or less
amount of sulphur. In density, it ranges from 1.2 to 1.35. It
burns with a clear flame; though there is a great diversity among
the different varieties with respect. to their behavior in the fire.

Under the microscope, the organic structure can occasion-
ally be seen; and the kinds of plants contributing to its forma-
tion can almost always be recognized from the well-preserved
leaves in the shales capping the coal bed.

Anthracite is the purest hard coal, and contains over 90 per
cent carbon. It has a vitreous or submetallic luster, and breaks
with a conchoidal fracture. Its density is from 1.35 to 1.7. It
is difficult to ignite; but when once raised to a sufficient tem-
perature, it burns with an intense, steady heat, without smoke
or odor. Many anthracites are found in regions where the
rocks have been disturbed; so they are commonly spoken of as
metamorphosed bituminous coals. It is usually more difficult
to make out the kinds of plants in the beds above the anthra-
cites, as all traces of leaves have generally disappeared in the
metamorphism which has accompanied the transformation of
the coal. However, occasionally perfect leaves or other parts
of plants have been discovered, so that we know with reason-
able accuracy the kinds of plants contributing to these formations.


The Peat-Bog Theory. We must now consider briefly the
problem of how the coal beds were probably formed; that is, how
the plant remains were accumulated which were subsequently
converted into the coal.

For nearly a century, we have been pointed to the peat bogs
of the cool temperate regions as the nearest approach to the
present formation of a coal deposit. We have already con-
sidered the growth and character of these peat bogs. They are


t “Wood will also under certain circumstances pass into the state of lignite very rapidly,
as may be sometimes seen in the timbers of old colliery workings. Count Solms-Laubach
states that in one mine timbers 150 years old were found to be converted into lignites of
black color, and lustrous conchoidal fracture, while in another ease as little as six years was


necessary to produce similar changes.” — E. A. Newell Arber, “The Natural Histo is
pp. 65, 66; Cambridge University Press. nee


COAL: ITS OCCURRENCE AND ORIGIN 459


confined to cool climates; no such deposits exist in the tropics.
Hence, as all the coal deposits found in our fossiliferous forma-
tions were certainly produced under tropical or semitropical
conditions, the mangrove swamps of the tropics, or the Ever-
glades of Florida, are often mentioned as better modern anal-
ogies. But in all cases, it is something in the nature of a
swamp or a marsh or a bog which is used as a parallel. Of


Fic. 298. Tertiary coal at Van Houten, New Mexico. The rock directly above the coal is a
conglomerate. (Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


course, if formed by gradual accumulation on the spot where we
find them, a cover of water would be necessary to keep the ma-
terials from oxidizing too rapidly. The stumps and roots said
to be present in the underclay are always referred to as evi-
dence of growth in situ. These arguments have hitherto seemed
conclusive; and we are told that we have here an ancient soil,
which, after having accumulated its load of peatlike material,
gradually settled down beneath the waters, and had another
layer of earth or sand spread out over it to form the soil for a
new growth of vegetation. The land then rises—or the sea


460 THE NEW GEOLOGY


retires, which is the same thing — until this layer of clay or
sand is just about the proper distance above the surface again.
Thus the same course is repeated age after age, up and down,
up and down, there being frequently 75 or 100 successive seams
of coal piled one above another, each with its “underclay,” and
each “underclay” having what are alleged to be the roots of the
plants in the beds above.

Difficulties. That the “pulsating crust” could thus rise and
fall ad libitum, was regarded as being eminently reasonable
during the first half of the nineteenth century, for then every-
one thought our earth to be fluid inside. However, since the dem-
onstration of the earth’s remarkable rigidity, this traditional
explanation of the rise and fall of the crust has taken on a much
more doubtful cast; but even some who, like Dana, were com-
pelled to accept the earth’s essential rigidity, still clung to the
old idea of the land’s rising and falling, or as they expressed it,
“oscillating” at the sea level, in some way not exactly explained.

But when we consider that over wide areas, all these succes-
sive coal beds are approximately parallel to one another through
the whole series of from 50 to 100 successive beds, and that thus
all these countless elevations and subsidences must never have
disturbed the exact horizontal position of these beds through-
out hundreds or even thousands of square miles, but must al-
ways have carried them up and down with the same care with
which a waiter carries a full plate of soup, another idea sug-
gests itself: How much better it would be if we only supposed
the land to be stationary and the sea to be rising and falling,
transgressing over the lands and retreating from off them!
Of late years, this explanation has been steadily advanced by
many eminent scientists; and it would have gained decidedly
more acceptance if its defenders could only have shown how
these transgressions of the ocean could take place in a few
localities without affecting all the coasts of all the continents —
which is far more than is required.

An objection which lies against either theory is that all
these areas affected must repeatedly have gone through all the
experiences of a seabeach; for “with each foot of submergence,
the seabeach would be set a little farther inland, so that the
whole would successively pass through the conditions of a
seashore.” (Dana.) Of this condition there is no evidence
whatever throughout these deposits; yet it is difficult to under-
stand how the marks of such a seashore experience could be
obliterated, even if such an experience did not destroy entirely
the accumulated peatlike deposits.


COAL: ITS OCCURRENCE AND ORIGIN 461


Here is Professor Dana’s naive statement of the exactness
required in adjusting the superior and the inferior limits of the
land or of the water, as the case may be:


“For the making of extensive Coal Measures a nice balancing of the
land surface between submergence and emergence was a requisite. With a
very little too much emergence, even if only a few hundred feet, there would
have been no marshes in North America; for the land would have been
drained. And with a little too much submergence, limestones or barren
sediments of sand or gravel would have covered the region. North America
was admirably arranged and poised for the grand result.”—“Manual,” pp.
710, 711.


It is needless to comment on such a statement.

The next thing that claims our attention is a problem con-
nected with the wonderful similarity in the kinds of plants
throughout the set of beds in any given locality. At the South
Joggins, Nova Scotia, there are 76 successive seams of coal; in
the British coal field, England, there are 87 coal beds; in South
Wales, over a hundred, 70 of which are worked; in the Liége
basin of the Continent, 85; and in Westphalia, 117 successive
seams of coal.

No wonder Huxley estimated the length of the Carbonifer-
ous period (on the basis of uniformity) at about six million
years. Some have made it many times this. But how is it that
through all this vast lapse of time, a series of ages so prolonged
that our historic period is but the tick of a clock compared with
it — how is it that during all this time, the particular plants
growing in these localities remained constantly the same, not only
unchanged in general aspect, but practically unchanged even in
genera and species? Whenever in our modern world a region
of spruce or pine forests is completely burned over and de-
stroyed, the next growth is almost certain to be some entirely
different kind of vegetation, such as maple or birch. In Den-
mark, three or four such successive forests have occupied given
localities within quite modern times, while in New Brunswick
and Nova Scotia, as Dawson has shown, a complete change of
this character has occurred over and over again within a single
generation. But strange to say, during all these uncounted mil-
lions of years(?) of the “Coal period,” while the country was
being “desolated again and again, either universally or partially,
by the returning waters, and over the large submerged areas kept
desolate for many centuries or series of centuries again and
again” (Dana, “Manual,” p. 666), the vegetation continued ever
the same, the very same plants being found in the upper beds
as in the lower, and practically identical the whole world


30


462 THE NEW GEOLOGY


around, wherever the Carboniferous rocks have been discovered,
whether in North America, Europe, Asia, South Africa, or
South America. Surely this is a very strange inconsistency
which this theory compels us to believe in.

The Underclay. We must next consider the character and
conditions of a modern peat deposit. Here we have a bed per-
haps 30 or 40 feet thick, made largely of moss which can grow
in water alone without earth, or grow on the decaying bodies
of its ancestors. Trees of any size do not act thus; for though
arbor vite, speckled alder, ete., may thrive in wet, swamplike
conditions, yet they require to get their roots into real soil even
though submerged. So they could not possibly thrive on de-
posits of purely organic materials of the thickness here spoken
of, or where their roots could not reach the soil below. And
so far as we are aware, this is the case with all trees, and the
huge coal plants ought not to have been any exception to this
rule. But suppose we admit that those ancient ferns and club
mosses, even though trees in character and size, could have lived
and thrived in peatlike accumulations of any thickness, and that
they did not need to have their roots in real soil. But even the
thickest seams of coal, say 30, 40, or 50 feet in thickness, have
their “‘stigmaria” or rootlets in the lower part, just as do the
thin beds. We must also remember that for each foot of coal,
we require several feet in thickness of organic material; the
usual estimate seems to be that about 10 or 12 feet of peatlike
deposits would be required to produce one foot of good coal.
Thus we would have 300 or 400 or 500 feet of peat as quite a
common thickness for the larger sort of these ancient deposits.

Now we shall hardly be prepared to claim that the roots of
even the giant plants of the “Coal period” could thus reach
down through these 300 or 500 feet of deposits to the soil below.
The alternative is that the roots of the first plants must have
remained intact and unaffected by decay all the centuries that
these 300 or 500 feet of deposits were being built up. Either
way, the case seems absurd.

But it frequently happens that a fossil tree is found extending
up through two or more of these successive beds of coal, together
with the intervening beds of shale or sandstone. Evidently in
the current theory. _

Another difficulty is that if the first plants lived and thrived
in the soil before there were any peatlike accumulations, the
same plants could hardly be expected to grow well in the top
layers when there was nothing but peat,—no soil whatever


COAL: ITS OCCURRENCE AND ORIGIN 463


within reach. Frequently, also, these bands of shale or sand,
the so-called “underclays,” separating two successive seams of
coal, are only one, two, or three inches in thickness, an utterly
insufficient amount for a soil in which trees are supposed
to grow.

Thus it seems that in every way in which we can get at this
theory from the a priori point of view, the evidence breaks
down completely.

The Sedimentation Theory. However, it should be noted
here that not all geologists teach this peat-swamp theory, with
its incredibly delicate oscillations of level. The French geolo-
gists, with others on the Continent, hold strongly to another
explanation, called the theory of sedimentation, which claims
that the plant material of ordinary coal does not represent
growth in situ, but that it drifted to its present position in
much the same way as ordinary sedimentary rocks.

Without going into a detailed consideration of this theory or
of the arguments by which it is supported, it is quite evident
that, to those who hold it, the alleged presence of rootlets in
the “underclay” must be of very little weight. And this French
theory, if we may so term it, evidently explains the surprisingly
regular “alternation of conglomerate sandstone, shale, and coal
seagis observed in most coal basins” (Zittel) far better than the
other theory. Still it fails to explain the almost universal pres-
ence of exquisitely preserved leaves and other parts of plants in
the accompanying shales; and it is perfectly helpless in the
presence of crinoids and corals and radiolarians alternating
regularly with the coal seams, or what is still worse, in the pres-
ence of limestones and coals, which are sometimes even mingled
together.

That the coal beds themselves are usually as thoroughly
stratified or bedded in their structure as are the conglomerates
and the sandstones, is proved by their frequent lamination, and
even their alternations in shades of color. (Dana, “Manual,”
p. 709.) As for the “underclay” itself, it admits of only one
rational explanation in the case of either theory, and so proves
nothing for either side. Even if the coal plants were de-
posited by a wholly abnormal kind of sedimentation, with great
quantities of the plants perfectly fresh and green, as may have
been the case, the acids generated in the decomposing mass, car-
ried along by the water percolating from above, would dissolve
or carry to the bottom of the bed practically all the earthy
matter which would necessarily at first be scattered through
the mass of vegetable matter. This is why coal is so purely


464 THE NEW GEOLOGY


carboniferous, and also why we generally find perfect plant
specimens only in the upper part of the seam, or in the shales
above the seam.


Professor E. A. N. Arber, of Cambridge University, has given us
some very enlightening remarks about the “underclays.” He says that
“nothing could be more unlike a soil, in the usual sense of the term, than
an underclay.” (“Natural History of Coal,” p. 95.) He further points out:

“Not only are fire clays commonly found without any coal seams above
them, but they may occur as the roof above the seam, or in the seam it-
self. . . . Sometimes coals occur without any underclay, and rest directly
on sandstones, limestones, conglomerates, or even on igneous rocks.”— P. 98.

“Another difficulty in connection with underclays is that their thickness
commonly bears no relation to the extent of the seam above. Often thick
coals overlie thin underclays, and vice versa.”


Regarding the many instances of upright stems, this author
argues that —


“These stems in some instances are certainly not in situ. Examples
have been found which are upside down, and in some districts the prone
stems far exceed those still upright. No doubt the majority, if not all of
these trunks, have been drifted.”— P. 114.


The Opinion of Suess. It is a decided relief to take up a
work like that of Eduard Suess, and see how this most accom-
plished scientist makes quite impossible and absurd the «old
theory of the oscillation of the land. One of his arguments
against the common theory of the formation of the coal, is
that there are many instances where coal beds do not rest upon
anything like an “underclay,” but directly on shale or limestone.
Another is that in very many cases, “thick beds of coal split
up into a number of smaller seams, which become separated
further and further from one another by the thickening out of
intercalated wedges of sterile rock” (‘‘Face of the Earth,” Vol.
2, pp. 244-246), a thing that would be clearly impossible on
the basis of the current theory. Thus in Staffordshire, Eng-
land, the main coal bed, 25 feet thick, splits toward the north
into 8 seams, in such a manner that the sum of the seams and
the intervening beds amounts to 390 feet.

But this work of Professor Suess also has its disappoint-
ments; for while the author sees the errors of the old theory
he has little better to offer in the way of explanation, and he
gives the following summary of the situation, which will bear
repetition here:

“Although many thousands of men work day and night in
our Coal Measures, and although many acute observers are
led by their profession to make the study of these deposits the


COAL: ITS OCCURRENCE AND ORIGIN 465


Lignite with seams Ó
of Firecley, Pebbles SS
——
& Gypsum.


Lignite with seams
of Sand, Clay
& Pebbles


Sond eoft white
Sandstone |” 7


<—-— ZÜ Level ——


Fic. 299. Parallel vertical or columnar sections
as shown on the face of Pulpit Rock, near Colo-
rado Springs, through identical strata, and only
20 feet apart. These sections show how rapidly
the strata change when followed only a short
distance. Notice how the thin partings between
the coal seams in one section become wide strata
in the other. (After Grabau and Crosby.)


business of their life, yet
the mode of formation of
the coal beds is still far
from being satisfactorily
explained.”— P. 244.


The Probable Method of
the Formation of the Coal
Beds. If we care to go into
the question of probabili-
ties, and can picture to our-
selves a wide stretch of
country clothed for long
periods with a most luxuri-
ant vegetation, and if we
may suppose that the re-
markable atmospheric con-
ditions of the ancient world
may have absolutely pre-
cluded any parching
drought, thus rendering it
quite improbable that the
accumulated deposits of
centuries should ever be
burned up by forest fires,
we shall have the probable
source of the materials. If
now, in the great world
catastrophe which seems to
be indicated, these accumu-
lations of many centuries
were all washed away, dead
and green together, and
swept pell-mell into lakes
or valleys, somewhat like


the great natural “raft” on the Red River, only on a far more
enormous scale, the stumps of the trees would still carry many
of their roots with them, and would frequently float in the
natural or upright position. In this case, too, we would ulti-
mately have the formation of an “underclay” at the bottom of
the bed from the action of the acids generated in the oxidizing
mass; and this “underclay” would naturally contain many roots
or something resembling them. Thus these two conditions are


accounted for.


466 THE NEW GEOLOGY


. Coarse conglomerates or gritty sandstones very generally underlie
the coal beds or are sometimes intercalated with them, as the Millstone
Grit of England and the Pottsville conglomerate of Pennsylvania. These
conglomerates and grits point to large volumes of water in sudden and
violent action.


Marine Remains Mixed Up with the Coal. But let us con-
sider another proof of how these coal beds were formed; namely,
the remarkable way in which various kinds of marine life are
mixed up with the coal. We have already spoken of the deep-
sea crinoids and the clear-water ocean corals, both of which
often alternate with the coal beds; and we have drawn the con-
clusion that these conditions indicate an abnormal tidal action.
We need not repeat the evidence here.

The proofs of vast numbers of fishes having been entombed
in the deposits forming the cannel coals, are of the same im-
port. Indeed, as Dana says:

“The great number of fossil fishes in some very carbona-
ceous or bituminous shales, has led to the suggestion that fish
oil may have been the sole source of the oil or gas yielded by
the shales. It is not improbable that it was a prominent source,
since the same process which will convert vegetable tissues into
coal or mineral oil, will produce a like result from animal
oils.”—“Manual,” pp. 655, 656.


We have already spoken of the small chance which verte-
brate fishes have of being fossilized under our modern condi-
tions. Dana himself says that they “require speedy burial after
death, to escape destruction.” And it should be remembered
that the stagnant, poisonous waters of our modern swamps or
bogs do not thus teem with fishes.

Quite evidently these enormous deposits, thus packed full
of fish remains, must have been formed in some wholly ab-
normal manner. Nothing at all resembling such things has ever
been formed within the historic period. But we must remember
that these fossil conditions are absolutely world-wide in extent,
and are scattered through almost all the various formations.


Pyrites. Another interesting side light upon the question of how the
coal beds were formed, is supplied by the frequent presence of various com-
pounds of sulphur. Thin layers of pyrite are very common, the percentage
in the anthracites being a little over one per cent, while in the coals of Ohio
and Indiana and Illinois the average is over two per cent. The coals from
Nova Scotia and the anthracites of Pennsylvania seem to have very little
sulphur, and they contain very scanty traces of marine fossils. But all the
other coals are interbedded with strata which contain relics of marine
faunas; and it is now known that the presence of sulphur is due to the action
of sulphur-making bacteria which exist only in connection with sea water.


COAL: ITS OCCURRENCE AND ORIGIN 467


Hydrogen sulphide is found in great abundance in modern peat beds to
which sea water has access, and is seldom found in peat which forms under
fresh water. Thus the presence of sulphur in these coal beds is “an indica-
tion that the sea water had access to these beds while the vegetable matter
was still recent.” (“Acadian Geology,” p. 164.) Even common salt, in the
form of brine, is sometimes present in the coal.


Two other features characterize the coal beds as a whole,—
the lignites and the brown coals, as well as the true coals of the
Coal Measures,— and these features should decide the question
of how the coal beds were produced. These two lines of facts
are (1) the well-preserved character of the plant remains; and
(2) the kinds of plants composing them.


Condition of the Plant Remains. With regard to the won-
derful perfection with which the plants are found preserved in
the accompanying beds, Sir Archibald Geikie says:


“Not much is usually to be made out from the coal itself, for the vegeta-
tion has been so squeezed and altered that the leaves and branches of the
plants can no longer be recognized. . . . But though the larger plants
have not usually been preserved well in the coal itself, they may sometimes
be found in great profusion and beauty in the beds of rock above or below
the coal. . . . Now and then, the plants may be seen lying across each other,
in wonderful profusion, upon the bottom of the bed of rock that overlies
the coal seam and forms the roof of the mine. Though all squeezed flat like
dried leaves in a book, they still retain their original graceful forms.”—
“Primer,” pp. 68, 69; 1893.


Most geologists who have written upon this subject have
bewailed the poverty of our language to convey any adequate
idea of the marvelous perfection of the forms laid out to view
by the thousands through the opening up of such beds of shale
or fine sandstone.

Evidently such things could not have lain for centuries rot-
ting in a swamp or peat bog. But this splendid preservation
of the plant remains is a universal characteristic of all the coal-
bearing rocks, not alone those of the Carboniferous system,
but also those of the Jurassic, Cretaceous, or Tertiary, or even
the lignites of the Pleistocene. They are all much alike in these
respects; they all contain wood or leaves, flowers and fruits, in
a marvelous state of preservation, “with all the perfection they
have in an herbarium.” (Dana.) On this point, certainly, we
must conclude that these ancient accumulations of plant remains
were not formed as our modern peat bogs or swamps are- now
being made.


Kinds of Plants. But the kinds of plants contributing to the
formation of the coal beds, have also a very important bearing


468 THE NEW GEOLOGY


on the problem of how these beds were formed. The plants of
the Coal Measures proper are always spoken of as ferns, cycads,
equiseta, lycopods, etc.; and our ignorance of how they actually
grew has made it seem reasonable to suppose that they may
have grown on wide, damp plains, with plenty of moisture
above and below. . But it must be remembered that “the ablest
botanists,” as Dr. Page observes, are “yet unable to assign them
a place among existing genera.” (“Textbook,” p. 134.)
However, these Carboniferous coals constitute only a portion
of the total coals of the world, all the subsequent systems con-


i


Fic. 300. Cycads growing in a cemetery, New Orleans, Louisiana. (Lee, U. S. G. S.)


taining vast coal deposits. And if we ask ourselves what kinds
of plants produced these coals of the Cretaceous, Tertiary, and
other formations, we have to reply that they are chiefly plants
and trees which do not grow in swamps or bogs, and: ean not,
by any stretch of the imagination, be supposed to have contrib-
uted to the formation of any peatlike accumulations in the
long ago. For example, we have in the Upper Creataceous such
kinds as sassafras, laurel, tulip tree, magnolia, Aralia, cinna-
mon, sequoia (like the “big trees” of California), poplar, wil-
low, maple, birch, chestnut, alder, beech, elm, with the leaves
of some palms, and hundreds of others. In the Tertiary of
England and the Continent, we have such trees and shrubs as
fig, cinnamon, various palms, varieties of Proteacex (like those
of India and Australia), cypress, sequoia, magnolia, oak, rose,


COAL: ITS OCCURRENCE AND ORIGIN 469


plum, almond, myrtle, acacia, with many other genera now
found only in America. The Miocene strata of Greenland have
yielded great numbers of the same genera. It would thus seem
that in whatever way we examine this problem of how these
ancient plant deposits were formed, we are confronted with evi-
dences of some very abnormal action of the elements, essentially
different from any conditions now prevailing.

Climate. David White has given us a very careful study of
the climatic conditions indicated by the coal deposits. He first
tells us that “‘well-developed coal has been found in the strata
of every period since the Silurian” (“Origin of Coal,” p. 1);
and then proceeds to say that —

“During the times of deposition of most of the principal
coal groups the climate has been characterized by —

“(1) General mildness of temperature, approaching in most
cases tropical or subtropical;

“ (2) Conspicuous equability or approximation to uniformity
of climatic conditions; . .

“(3) A generally high humidity ; A =

“(4) An amazingly wide geographical distribution of these
genial and equable climates, which occurred seemingly in almost
uniform development simultaneously in the high and in the low
latitudes of both the Northern and the Southern Hemisphere.”
— P. 68.

Next he gives his reasons for these conclusions, though we
can give here only a brief outline of the facts which he pre-
sents. But these conclusions are based on the following criteria:

“1. The relative abundance or luxuriance and large size of
terrestrial vegetation — that is, rankness of growth — indicat-
ing favorable conditions of temperature, humidity, ete.

“92. Character, condition, and amount of land-plant material

. indicates humidity.

“9. Great radial distribution, seemingly over the greater
part of the earth, and especially over wide ranges of latitude, of
identical species and genera in characteristic association, in-
dicating the extension of approximately uniform climatic con-
ditions in these regions.

“A. Presence of types known to be adapted to or confined to
the warm temperatures or moist climatic conditions ee the
_ present day.

“5. Structures of the plants themselves. Features Restos
rapidity of growth; that is, abundant rainfall, mild or warm
temperatures, ete.— conditions favorable to rapid growth:


470 THE NEW GEOLOGY


“ (a) Very large size of the cells, many with thin walls, and
large intercellular spaces, indicating rapid growth and abundant
moisture, noticeable in the woods found in and with most coal.

“ (b) Large size of fronds and leaves.

“(c) Frequency of laciniate or much-dissected, drooping
fronds and pendant branches or twigs.

= (a3 Smoothness of bark, which is often thick, pointing to-
ward warm humid swamps.

“(e) Absence of growth rings in the woods of the older coal
formations, showing climatic conditions favorable to practically
uninterrupted growth, and the absence of long dry seasons or
winter frost.”

F. H. Knowlton, in commenting on these facts; agrees fully
with White in the above conclusions, and declares that there
was “a non-zonal arrangement” of climate prior to the Pleisto-
cene. (Bulletin of Geological Society of America, Vol. 30, p.
541.) He further declares that the temperature of the oceans
was everywhere the same and without “widespread effect on the
distribution of life” (P. 548.) And he summarizes this mat-
ter of climate in the following words:

“Relative uniformity, mildness, and comparative equability
of climate, accompanied by high humidity, have prevailed over
the greater part of the earth, extending to, or into, polar circles,
during the greater part of geologic time, since, at least, the
Middle Paleozoic. This is the regular, the ordinary, the normal
condition.” — P. 501.

Knowlton further confirms the conclusions of White, and
says the argument of the latter “applies with equal force to all
horizons,” and even goes so far as to affirm that even the red
beds, so often pointed out as proofs of arid or desert condi-
tions, “may have been formed under conditions of warm, moist
climates.” (P. 506.)


CHAPTER XXXI


The Mesozoic Group The


Triassic System


Historical. Some of the rocks of the Mesozoic group were
among the earliest stratified rocks with which geologists became
acquainted, chiefly because in Central Europe they were long
ago worked for their minerals and ores. In these localities, the
strata now called Mesozoic rest directly upon the old crystalline
rocks, which were called primitive or Primary. Hence the rocks
above the latter were called Secondary, a name which lingered
with them for a very long time, the term Mesozoic having been
adopted only within recent years. In other localities also, these
Mesozoic formations rest directly upon the Pre-Cambrian or
primitive rocks, as in the Plains States of Western America, and
in Sonora, Mexico; so that in a certain sense, it might be said
that in these strata we are starting again from the bottom, as
we did at the beginning of the Paleozoic.

In England, where these rocks were first studied scien-
tifically, these Mesozoic (Secondary) beds were separated into
three distinct sets or systems, the New Red Sandstone, the
Odlites, and the Chalk. These have since been called the Tri-
assic, the Jurassic, and the Cretaceous, respectively. And this
usage has been extended wherever geological exploration has
extended.

The New Red Sandstone of England proved to be the
equivalent of rocks with a threefold serial division in Germany,
which were designated as the Bunter Sandstein, the Muschel-
kalk, and the Keuper, this characteristic threefold division
giving rise to the name Trias, and later to the more modern
Triassic. Still later a sixfold division was adopted on the Con-
tinent of Europe; but here it will be sufficient for us to speak
of merely a Lower, a Middle, and an Upper Triassic. In
America, for a long time, there was not a clear distinction
made between the Triassic and the Jurassic, many deposits
being designated by the combined name, the Jura-Trias. But
more recently a distinction has been made between these systems.

Subdivisions. Thus the Mesozoic group is made up of the
three systems:

3. Cretaceous; named from the chalk (Latin, creta, chalk)
beds which are common in the regions where this system was
first examined.

(471)


472 THE NEW GEOLOGY


2. Jurassic; named from the Jura Mountains, between
France and Switzerland.

1. Triassie; so named from the threefold division of these
rocks in Germany, where first studied. The name thus early


= =
=. S,


Tay 4 Ñ Ç
= EWA >, Ee \ VE
POS TIER e

Ar] N Ñ

) AS {iLL VS


D


Sore G


iy AT aa oo a


>
"i
is


L


as


108° 102" 96" ° 8° 78° ne


Fic. 801. Map showing the distribution of Triassic rocks in North America,
including some undivided Triassic and Jurassic rocks.


adopted has persisted, in spite of the fact that in other coun-
tries, this threefold character does not often occur.

General Characters of the Mesozoic. The earlier works on
geology very strongly emphasized the fact that a complete
change in the types of life is noticed in passing from the
Paleozoic to the Mesozoic group, a change so complete, it was
said, that none of the species of the former group are found in
the latter, and few of the genera or tribes. This came about
from the artificial way in which these groups were constituted,


THE MESOZOIC GROUP — TRIASSIC SYSTEM 473


the distinction being wholly a biological one, based on the prin-
ciples of systematic classification. On the other hand, in actual
field work, it has frequently been found that there is no such
sharp line of distinction between the two groups. Not only do
Mesozoic strata frequently occur conformably on strata of the
Paleozoic (and not always the Permian, or Upper Paleozoic),
but strata are often found extending over wide areas, as over
the larger part of China and Eastern Asia, where no strati-
graphical break can be discovered between the two groups. Of
course, in a general way, the types of plants and animals in
the two groups are very different, for the very simple reason
that one group has been built up from certain kinds of fossils,
and the other from wholly different kinds of fossils. As rep-
tilian types are the most abundant and the most characteristic
fossils of the Mesozoic strata, this group used to be spoken of
as indicating an “Age of Reptiles.”

The Triassic — Kind of Rocks. In America, the Triassic
rocks are chiefly conglomerates and granitic sandstones, with
some impure limestones here and there. The sandstones are
usually red or brownish red. Fresh undecomposed grains of
feldspar are often found along with the quartz, making what is
called arkose; and much of the sandstone thus composed has
the exact constituents to produce granite again under the meta-
morphic action of heat and pressure. The condition of these
grains of feldspar and quartz is often such as to indicate that
they had not been much exposed to the action of the air and
the waters.

Besides the coarse conglomerates, which in many instances
contain stones three or four feet across, the beds frequently
have a marked cross-bedded structure, with other evidences
of strong currents.

Distribution. Rocks classed as Upper Triassic are found in
isolated localities along the Atlantic border from Cape Breton
Island to South Carolina. They are generally red in color, and
consist of shales and sandstones, with occasional conglomerates.
They show mud cracks, rain imprints, the tracks of reptiles,
and are often strongly cross-bedded, showing that they are prob-
ably not of marine origin. In New Jersey and the Connecticut
Valley, and also to the south, are black shales in which are the
remains of ganoid fish “wonderfully well preserved.” (Gra-
bau.) In Virginia and North Carolina are workable seams of
coal, some of the plants associated with these beds being like
the beds classed as Rhetic (Upper Triassic) in Europe. The


474 THE NEW GEOLOGY


small crustacean, Estheria, quite characteristic of this forma-
tion, occurs in great numbers in the black shales associated with
these coal beds.

Extensive igneous rocks, largely basaltic, are associated with
the Triassic formations near the head of the Bay of Fundy;
while the great diabase near Holyoke, in the Connecticut Valley,
nearly 3 miles wide and 400 feet thick, is assigned to this
system, according to the usual custom of geologists, because as-
sociated with Triassic beds. Similar igneous intrusions oc-


Fic. 802. Base of the Palisades of the Hudson, Weehawken, New Jersey.
This shows the very irregular contact of the diabase sill with the under-
lying shales. (U. S. G. S.)


cur farther south, the famous Palisades on the Hudson being
also classed as Triassic. Dana very pertinently remarks that
these igneous masses “are so associated with the sandstone for-
mation that there must have been some connection between the
water-made and the fire-made rocks.” In some of these igneous
outflows in Nova Scotia and New Jersey, “the lava flows seem
to have covered bodies of shallow, standing water, or over-
spread a flood-plain deposit still saturated with water. In such
cases, the base of the lava sheet was rendered porous by the re-
sulting steam, while sand and mud are not infrequently car-
ried up into the lava. sheet for some distance by the violent
activities of the expanding steam.” (Grabau.) (Fig. 302.)


THE MESOZOIC GROUP — TRIASSIC SYSTEM 475


Some of the rarer minerals are often found in the pockets re-
sulting from such igneous action.

But far more extensive areas of Triassic rocks occur in
Arizona, New Mexico, Utah, and Colorado, the front ranges of
the Rockies being also largely assigned to this system. The
famous “Petrified Forest,” so-called, of Arizona, is classed as
Triassic. Here we have giant trees, most of them being arau-
carians, like the Norfolk Island pines, so extensively used for
decoration purposes, and grown outdoors in California, which


Fic. 303. General view of the “Petrified Forest,” Arizona. Lithodendron Creek, Apache and
Navajo counties. (Gregory, U. 8. G. 8.)


are now natives of the Southern Hemisphere. Some of these
tree trunks are over 100 feet long and 6 feet in diameter. They
are all prostrate, and are broken into sections, the wood having
been replaced by silica in the form called chalcedony, with many
beautiful bands of brilliant colors, brown, yellow, and red, due
to the iron oxides present.

On Vancouver and Queen Charlotte Islands, and elsewhere
in the southern part of British Columbia, Triassic beds are
found. Basalts near Mount St. Elias are assigned to this sys-
tem, which seems to be of wide extent in Alaska, and on several
of the islands in the Arctic Ocean, as well as on each side of
Greenland. The plants found in these regions show a warm or
temperate climate.


476 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 304. Log-bearing beds, “Petrified Forest,” Arizona. The petrified logs, being much more
resistant to weathering, have been left behind after the matrix of the beds has been carried
away. (Darton, U. 8. G. S.)


Triassic beds are known in Inyo County, and also west of `
Lake Tahoe, California, and in the West Humboldt range of
Nevada. Fossils very similar to the Triassic beds of Spitz-
bergen, Tibet, the Himalayas, and Southern Siberia, have been
found in these California strata.

In Sonora, Mexico, in Central America, and again in the
high Andes of Peru, are strata identified as Triassic.

The red color, which first gave these formations the name of
New Red Sandstone, is a very common characteristic of the
Triassic all over the world. But we have already learned of
the vast laterite deposits in the tropics and even in subtropical
localities, as in the southern Appalachian Mountains, where
the old crystalline rocks of almost every kind are decomposed
into a red clay which extends to depths of 100 feet or more.


CS 5 `S `n tuoyreq)


*wuozury ,.3səroq Pegiitjed,, .


‘SI9qSIS UML əur,,


"G08 “DIA


(477)


31


478 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 306. Map showing approximate distribution of Triassic and rs us floras. Rings,
riassie ; dots, Jurassic. (After Knowlton, U. S. S.)


This laterite is a porous clay, colored red with iron oxide; and
it is formed by the minute grains of quartz becoming covered
over with a reddish film. The red laterites of the warm
~ climates “may be derived from very many different kinds of
parent rock, igneous rocks, crystalline schists, limestones, and
dolomites.” (Scott.) This helps us to understand how the
Triassic rocks are so often alike in appearance, this appearance
being simply due to similar chemical conditions in the rocks,
either before or after deposition, for a change from yellow
iron oxide to red can even take place by chemical dehydration
underground, after the sediments have been deposited. (Gra-
bau.) And thus it is not at all necessary for us to imagine that
. these Triassic rocks were formed in an arid climate. The luxu-
riant vegetation represented by the coal beds and by such for-
mations as the “Petrified Forest” of Arizona, are good evidence
that the climate in which these floras grew was anything but
arid. No true desert plants have ever been found in any of the
fossiliferous rocks. (Macdougal.)

Foreign. In Germany, as we have seen, the Triassic beds
are well shown; and they also cover much of the central plains
of England, Northengtern Ireland, and small localities on the
east coast of Scotland. In France, they are seen in the eastern
and southern parts of the country, and also around the border
of the central plateau region. They occur in Eastern and


THE MESOZOIC GROUP — TRIASSIC SYSTEM 479


Southern Spain, and are well developed in Italy directly to the
south of the Alps, and also in the northern Apennines, and in
Southern Austria. The famous white Carrara marble of the
Apuan Alps, Italy, is a metamorphic Triassic limestone.

In many isolated parts of Asia, Triassic rocks have been ob-
served, these disconnected spots running across the continent
to the eastern border. The Salt Range of Northwestern India
near the Himalayas has already been mentioned as being in
part Permian; but it is Triassic in its upper portion, as are also
the Gondwana series with their Glossopteris flora. In Japan
also, and on the eastern coast of Siberia, as also in the arctic
islands of Spitzbergen and Bear Island, Triassic beds with
characteristic fossils of both plants and animals have been found.

The Karoo beds of South Africa, which are partly Permian
in their basal conglomerates, are Triassic in their upper forma-
tions. Coal beds of Triassic facies are found in Queensland and
New South Wales, Australia, and the Triassic are also found
extensively in many of the islands of the Indian and the Pacific
Ocean, as Sumatra, Borneo, and many others.

Life

Plants. Triassic coal beds, composed of the characteristic
plants of this system, are found in such widely scattered regions
as Virginia, Alaska, Germany, Sweden, South Africa, and Aus-
tralia. They consist chiefly of ferns, horsetails, cycads, and
many kinds of conifers.

A magnificent fern, Macroteniopteris, with broad banana-
like leaves, is found in great numbers in Virginia. In other


Fic. 307. Upper Triassic (Rhetic) plants. a, Otozamites macombit; b,
Podozamites crassifolia; e, Txniopteris elegans; d, Alethopteris whitneyi.
a, b, cycads; c, d, ferns. (After Newberry.)


480 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fig. 308. TRIASSIC INVERTEBRATE FOSSILS


1, la, Tropites subbullatus, Hauer, side and end views, X %, U. Tr. Paige Veh
Meekoceras gracilitatis, White, side and front views, L. Tr. 8, 3a, Gymnotoceras
blakei, Gabb, X 1⁄2, side and front views, M. Tr. 3b, The same, a suture line,. X 1.
4, Sagenites herbichi, Mojs., X %, U. Tr. 4a, The same, a suture line, X 1. 5, 5a,
Joannites nevadanus, Hyatt and Smith, X %, side and front views, M. Tr. 5b,
The same, a suture line, X 1. 6, 6a, Analcites meeki, Mojs., X 1%, side and back
views, M. Tr. 7, Ta, Terebratula semisimplex, White, X 1, dorsal and side views,
L. Tr. 8, Pseudomonotis subcirculuris, Gabb, X %, M. Tr. 9, Daonella lommeli,
Wissmann, X %2, U. Tr. (After W. B. Scott, ‘“‘Introduetion to Geology,” permis-
sion of Macmillan Co.)


THE MESOZOIC GROUP — TRIASSIC SYSTEM 481


localities, true horsetails belonging to the living genus Equi-
setum are more abundant. They were immense plants, with
stems 4 inches in thickness. Their stems and rhizomes are
very abundant, and doubtless they helped to form the enormous
vegetable accumulations which were buried and afterwards
turned into coal. - The cycads belong, in many instances, to the
modern or living genera, and they are in such great num-
bers that these and other Mesozoic formations used to be spoken
of as belonging to an “Age of Cycads.” Ginkgoes are common;
but even of greater importance are the splendid araucarian
pines, like the Norfolk Island pine now so common in South
America, Australia, and Polynesia. The cypresslike Voltzia,
which also is common in these coal formations, is of the dry-
land variety and not of the swamp-loving kind. The gingkoes
and the araucarians also have their habitats in dry, well-drained
regions, and not in anything like swamps or bogs. Hence it
would seem that the old swamp-bog theory for the origin of the
coal beds would not apply to these Triassic coal beds.

Invertebrates. Corals belonging to the living group Hexa-
coralla are the common reef builders represented in the lime-
stones of the Triassic. Coralline seaweeds, or calcareous alge,
contributed very materially to the formation of these ancient
limestone deposits. Sea urchins are not common, while the
crinoids belong chiefly to the genus Encrinus.

The little crustacean Estheria is very common in some of
the Triassic beds; but otherwise crustaceans are not very nu-
merous. Insects occur, beetles being found in addition to the two
orders of insects already mentioned from the preceding systems.

Brachiopods are far less plentiful than in the preceding
formations. A few specimens of Productus, Athyris, and Cyr-
tina are occasionally found; but the more common kinds are
those with short, curved hinges, such as Terebratula and Rhyn-
chonella, which are still existing genera.

Of the Mollusca, the true bivalves, or Pelecypoda, are much
more varied and more numerous than in the other formations
which we have been considering under the Paleozoic group,
Pectens, Carditas, and other modern-looking genera being here
represented. Gastropoda are sparingly represented; but the
Cephalopoda, especially the ammonoids, are profuse in their
abundance and in great variety. The ammonoid cephalopods
are minutely subdivided in order to serve as “index fossils,” the
distinctions being based largely on the suture lines showing on
the sides of the shell. The related dibranchiate cephalopods


482 THE NEW GEOLOGY


known as belemmites are also found in these rocks, though they
are more common in some of the succeeding Mesozoic formations.

Barrande asserts, however, that the Triassic Nautilide show
less affinity to the modern species than do those of the Paleo-
zoic; in other words, the existing species of this group are more
closely like the so-called “oldest” forms than the forms of these


Fic. 309. Catopterus redfieldi, from the black shale in the Triassic sand-
stone of the Connecticut Valley and New Jersey. (After Newberry.)
Ischypterus micropterus, from the black shale in the Triassic sandstone of
the Connecticut Valley. (After Newberry.)


Mesozoic or “Middle Age” formations. (Heilprin, “Geographical
and Geological Distribution,” p. 188.)


Vertebrates. Among the Vertebrata, fishes are not very
common, though shark teeth are found, and the dipnoan Cerato-
dus, or lungfish, is quite characteristic of the Triassic. Ganoids
like the existing gar pikes are fairly common, with occa-
sional curious-looking types, like the Diplurus, which belongs
to the crossopterygians.

Amphibians, especially those belonging to the Stegocephalia,
are exceedingly common and greatly diversified, some of them
being very large. They have been found in North America, in
South Africa, and in Europe, “the Bunter sandstone of Ger-
many being a treasure house of such remains.” (Scott.) Sev-


THE MESOZOIC GROUP — TRIASSIC SYSTEM 483


eral of the formations containing their fossils are called bone-
beds. But it is a very expressive commentary on the artificial
method of arranging the fossils in alleged chronological order,
that the whole group of Amphibia seem to skip from the Tri-
assic to the Oligocene of the Tertiary (Gadow, “Cambridge
Natural History,” Vol. 8, p. 83), though a stray salamander or
two occur in the Cretaceous.

The reptiles are very common and show a great variety of
forms, though their remains are more common and better pre-
served in the European Triassic than in the American. But
essentially the same genera occur in the two regions. All the
great orders of the Reptilia are represented in the Triassic,
though the ichthyosaurs and the plesiosawrs which are here
found are not the gigantic kinds found in the subsequent sys-
tems of the Mesozoic. The Dinosaurs also are not so common
or so monstrous in size as those found in the Jurassic and the
Cretaceous, though some footprints of them have been found
which are from 14 to 18 inches long. A subsequent chapter will
deal more at length with the fossil Reptilia.

However, the chelonians (tortoises and turtles) are very
common and are found in many diversified forms. Some had
cutting jaws, like modern turtles, but others had a pair of large
tusks in the upper jaw. One genus of this group, Dicynodon,
has been found in Scotland, Russia, India, and South Africa.
Others of these fossil Chelonia, as they are usually called, the
Therodontia, were much like mammals in their dentition, and
have left a great profusion of remains in the Karoo beds of
South Africa, and also in India.


CHAPTER XXXII


`


The Jurassic System


History. The formations included in this system are some
of the most wideSpread and important in Europe, though they
are of inferior importance in America, except in the Rocky
Mountain region. Early in the nineteenth century, William
Smith worked out the leading subdivisions of this system from
the Lias and the Odlites in England. Later the study of the
Swiss Jura gave many additional facts regarding these rocks,
and the name Jurassic was used as including all these scattered
formations. The Swabian Alps of Germany present a very
full set of these rocks, and a profusion of fossils in a wonderful
state of preservation are found in France; so that “to-day the
Jurassic is perhaps better known than any other similar system
of formations.” (Grabau.)


Subdivisions. The following are the divisions of the system
as recognized in England, only a fraction of which have been
worked out in this country so as to make a perfect correlation,
though the general divisions, Lower, Middle, and Upper, are
everywhere recognized:


Upper Jurassic or a Purbeck
Malm Portland
Kimmeridge Clay
Middle Jurassic or Coral Rag
Dogger Oxford Clay
Kellaway Rock
Lower Jurassic or I Great Oölite `


Lias Inferior Oölite


Distribution. Outside of a few doubtful localities, as in New
Jersey, no rocks of the Jurassic are found on the Atlantic
border of the United States or Canada. But in Cuba, in Texas,
and in the States of Puebla and Vera Cruz, Mexico, they occur,
the beds in Mexico being black and yellow clay slates.

On the Pacific coast, the Lias, or Lower Jurassic, is found in
various parts of California, in Oregon, and especially in Alaska
and some of the arctic islands. In the northern part of Cali-
fornia, all three divisions of the system seem to be represented ;
while the gold-bearing veins of the Mariposa formation of the
Sierra Nevada range, penetrating highly metamorphosed slates,

(484)


THE JURASSIC SYSTEM 485


are regarded as Upper Jurassic. Extensive limestones and
slates of the same classification are found in the Humboldt
Range of Nevada.

A remarkable series of beds is found on the Arctic shore of
Alaska, near Cape Lisburne, consisting of shales, sandstones,
and a few conglomerates, with some 40 or 50 seams of a good


3 >x P
' e. t x=, =
A qata S


Sy MDE


Fic. 310. Map showing the distribution of Jurassic rocks in North America.


grade of coal, the seams aggregating a total thickness of 137
feet. Ten of the beds are over 4 feet thick each, and one is
30 feet. The plants are the usual Jurassic flora of more
southerly localities, and include the fronds of large fruiting
ferns, and the leaves of the Ginkgo (Fig. 311), similar to the
living Japanese variety, Ginkgo biloba, widely cultivated in
the United States for its handsome fan-shaped leaves. Even
palm leaves have been found in these now arctic rocks.


486 ` THE NEW GEOLOGY


In Montana, Idaho, Wyoming,
Utah, and Colorado are compara-
tively thin beds of clays, marls,
impure limestones and sand-
stones, the. fossils being almost
universally oysters, with a few
ammonoids and squids. They are
classed as Middle Jurassic, and
contain a few ichthyosaurs and
plesiosaurs.

Farther south, in the Grand
Fic. 311. Leaf of the Ginkgo, or maiden- Cafion region, cross-bedded white
hair tree, very abundant in the strata sandstones often outcrop above


from Oregon and Eastern Siberia, as well


as at Cape Lisburne, Alaska. It is iden- the red underlying Triassic.
tical with the living Japanese tree, Ginkgo . .
biloba, widely cultivated in the United These white Jurassic beds are
States for its ae es leaves. locally called the White Cliff, be-
ing equivalent to what is termed
the La Plata farther north and elsewhere. Fossiliferous shales
and limestones, with occasional gypsum beds, occur in the high
plateau region of Utah; but red beds classed as Jurassic, and as-


sociated with dark calcareous shales and shaly limestones, are


Fic. 312. East side of East Fork, Sandcoulee, Montana, showing Jurassic sandstone lying
directly upon Madison limestone (L. Carboniferous). Here the Middle and Upper Carbonif-
erous, the Permian, and the Triassic are wanting; yet these two sets of strata are essentially
parallel with each other, and seem to have followed one another in quick succession.
(Fisher, U. S. G. S.)


THE JURASSIC SYSTEM 487


Fic. 313. Looking across West Creek, about 3 miles east of Dolores River, Colorado. The

light-colored band at the top of the cliffs is the La Plata (Jurassic) sandstone. Beneath occur

the Dolores (Triassic) and the Cutler (Permian) formations. The valley of the Dolores River
is seen on the extreme right. (Cross, U. S. G. S.)


found on both sides of the Front Range of the Rocky Mountains,
and similar beds occur as far east as the Black Hills and the Big
Horn Mountains. The most characteristic fossils of these beds
aré certain varieties of belemnites, several pelecypods, Trigonia
of many species, some crinoids with five-sided stems, and a few
ichthyosaurs. (Grabau.)

These typically marine beds are followed by a remarkable
series called the Morrison, which has occasioned much contro-
versy among geologists: as to whether they are properly
Jurassic or Cretaceous. These beds contain such a profuse assort-
ment of dinosaurs and mammals, with land plants and fresh-
water invertebrates, that it has been very difficult to assign all
the beds to either the one system or the other. The Morrison
beds “extend down the eastern front of the Rocky Mountains
from Wyoming to Texas and New Mexico, with disconnected
areas, perhaps outliers, in the Black Hills and Western Colo-
rado.” (Scott.) The name Morrison is from a place of the
same name near Denver, where these beds were first examined
and specimens of dinosaur bones collected in 1877. Subse-
quently even more important discoveries of dinosaurs were


488 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 314. An outlier, called “Casa Colorado,” composed of La Plata (Jurassic) sandstone.
Dry Creek, Utah. Looking north. (Cross, U. S. G. S.)


made at Como Bluff, near Medicine Bow, Wyoming, with the re-
sult that now almost every large museum in this country has
some specimens from these dinosaur bone yards.

Foreign. As already intimated, the Jurassic system is very
well shown in various parts of Europe. Fossils similar to those
of the Black Hills of South Dakota are found in England,
through Russia and Siberia, to Spitzbergen and Nova Zembla.


Fie. 315. Bluff on the east side of Oil Creek, 8 miles north of Cañon City, Colorado, showing
Morrison, Comanche, and Dakota formations. (Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


THE JURASSIC SYSTEM 489


Fic. 316. The rock of Gibraltar. It is composed of Jurassic limestone, greatly eroded.


Jurassic beds are known from the Himalayas; and in India, the
upper part of the Gondwana series is classed as Jurassic, as is
also the upper part of the Karoo beds of South Africa. Coal
beds of the Jurassic are found in the interior of Australia, while
marine beds occur in New Zealand; but in South America, they
seem to be confined to a narrow strip along the western coast.
Here, however, we find some of the identical fossils that are
characteristic of the Jurassic in Europe; “even the minuter divi-
sions, the substages and zones of the European Jura, are appli-
cable to the classification of the South American beds.” (Scott.)
Life

Abundance. So many of the Jurassic strata show a profu-
sion of fossils, often in a marvelous state of preservation, that
in Europe alone. Although only about one twenty-fifth as many
great difference is not wholly or perhaps mainly due to any
such actual difference between the beds in these two parts of
the world, but is more largely due to the long and careful study
which has been given to these rocks in the Old World.

Plants. As a whole, the Jurassic flora is much like that of
the Triassic, consisting principally of ferns, horsetails, cycads,
conifers, and ginkgoes. Forty species of cycads have been found
in a single horizon of the English Upper Jura, while araucarian


490


THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 317. JURASSIC INVERTEBRATE FOSSILS


1, Pentacrinus asteriscus, M. and H., section of stem, X 2, U. J. 2, Cidaris coro-
nata, Goldf., X %, Kimmeridgean, Europe. 3, Antinomia catulli, Pictet, X 14,
Tithon., Alps. 4, Eumicrotis curta, Hall, X 8/2, U. J. 5, Tancredia corbuliformis,
Whitf., X 1, U. J. 6, Gervillia montanensis, Meek, X %, U.J. 7, Volsella subim-
bricata, Meek, X 4%, U. J. 8, Trigonia americana, Meek, X 1%, U. J. 9, Phola-
domya kingi, Meek, X 4%, U. J. 10, Camptonectes bellistriata, Meek, X 1⁄4, U. J.
11, Pleuromya inconstans, Aguilera and Costello, X %, U. J. 12, Myacites sub-
compressus, Meek, X %, U. J. 13, Gryphea arcuata, Lam., X 2/5, Lias, France.
14, Ostrea marshi, Sowerby, X 3/8, Bajocian, Germany. 15, Lyosoma powelli,
White, X %, U. J. 16, Pleurotomaria conoidea, Deshayes, X 1%, France. 17,
Nerinea dilatata, d’Orb, X %, France. 18, Peltoceras cf. athleta, Phillips, X 14,
Callovian, Europe. 19, Lytoceras fimbriatum, Sowerby, X 1⁄4, Lias, England. 20,
Crioceras bifurcatum, Quenstedt, X 1⁄4, Bathonian, Germany. (After W. B. Scott,
“Introduction to Geology,’’ permission of Macmillan Co.)


THE JURASSIC SYSTEM 491


Pentacrinus fasciculosus, showing calyx with arm
,


Fig. 318. Jurassic erinoids.
and part of stem. c, e, lateral and summit view of stem points. (After d'Orbigny.)
The stem has been shortened.


Apiocrinus roissyanus, showing entire individual.
(After d’Orbigny.)


pines also occur in England and throughout Europe. Of the
conifers, such modern families as arbor vitæ, cypress, yew, and
pine are also found in these rocks. The ginkgoes, or maidenhair
trees, are also present in almost all localities where these rocks


are well represented.


492 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Invertebrates. Foraminifera occur in great numbers and in
much variety, “many of them belonging to genera which still
abound in the modern seas.” (Scott.) Portions of the Austrian
Alps consist of red flints and jaspery slates composed almost
entirely of the tests of Radiolaria, quite like the modern kinds
which now compose the deep-sea radiolarian oozes from two to
four miles down in the ocean. In these Alps, the strata con-
taining these radiolarians rest on variegated ammonite lime-
stones or breccias, and are capped by other gray calcareous
shales. (Grabau, “Principles of Stratigraphy,” p. 459.) Radio-
larian tests occur in many of the other Jurassic rocks found
elsewhere.

While sponges have not been found in any great numbers
in the preceding systems, they are very plentiful in some of the
Jurassic beds, and their most minute structure can often be seen
in detail under the microscope. “Im some localities these
sponges are heaped up in such masses that they fill the strata,


Fi. 319. Jurassic mollusks. 1, Gryphea incurva; 2, Exogyra virgula; 8, Ostrea
marshi; 4, Trigonia clavellata; 5, Diceras arietinum. (After Dana.)


THE JURASSIC SYSTEM 493


Fic. 320. North end of Cedar Butte, near Wade, North Dakota. Lance formation (? U. Cre-
taceous). (Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


while other localities of the same horizon are entirely free from
them.” (Scott.)

Anthozoan corals, belonging to the living Hexacoralla, are
common in the limestones of England and Central Europe.

The crinoids are again found in great profusion, though
there are few of them in the preceding Triassic. In number of
species and genera, the crinoids of the Jurassic do not equal
those of the Carboniferous; but in point of size, as well as in
the abundance of individuals, the Jurassic is superior to all
other formations. Especially characteristic are the giant mem-
bers of the genus Pentacrinus, similar to those which still live
in the waters off the West Indies and in the Pacific Ocean. Some
of the fossil members of this group had stems 50 feet long, with
a crown a yard in length and in width. Sea urchins, starfishes,
and brittle stars like the modern ones also occur.

Of the Arthropoda, many crustaceans are occasionally found
in particular localities, such as the clastic lithographic limestones
of Solenhofen, in Bavaria; but as a rule, they are not very
numerous. However, decapods, similar to our crabs and lob-
sters, are found. Limulus, the horseshoe crab, occurs as a fos-
sil in many places in Europe; but the living ones are now con-
fined to the eastern coast of the United States and the Molucca
Islands.

Many varieties of insects are found in these rocks; but the
higher orders, as the Lepidoptera, are not certainly known in


these strata.
32


THE NEW GEOLOGY


Brachiopods occur, but they are
not characteristic; and they are
chiefly represented by genera which
are still alive in our modern seas.

Bivalves like the oysters, such as
Gryphxa, Exogyra, and the great
order Ostrea, often form great
banks and strata almost alone. The
genus Trigonia is considered to be
quite distinctive of the Jurassic
beds; but living representatives of
the genus have been discovered in
the seas near Australia. Gastro-
pods like the living Purpurine and
the Pleurotomaria are also found in
the Jurassic, but are not regarded
as “index fossils” of these rocks.


Fig. 321. Quarry in the slates of the
Upper Lias (Jurassic), at Holzmaden,


Württemberg, Germany. In 1911, more
than 25 such quarries were in opera-
tion in this vicinity. About 100 speci-
mens of saurians are obtained each
year from these quarries, about ten
per cent of which are sufficiently per-
fect to warrant preservation. (After
Grabau, and Bernard Hauff, Holz-
maden-Teck, Germany.)


But the Cephalopoda reach their
“culmination” in these Jurassic for-
mations, ‘filling whole strata with
their heaped up shells.” (Scott.)
Both the nautiloid and the ammo-


noid group are represented by a pro-
fusion of species and of individuals. But even more characteris-
tic of these strata are the belemnites, which more nearly resemble
the modern squid or cuttlefish. They had a straight, conical,
chambered shell, which was
partly external to the animal,
its sharp end being covered
with a sort of cap of dense cal-
cite, called the guard, or ros-
trum. Great numbers of the
latter have been preserved as
fossils, and have been called the
“thunderbolts of Thor,” from
which the name belemnite is de-
rived, coming from the Greek
word for dart. The various
kinds of ammonites and belem-
nites are regarded as splendid
“index fossils” by means of
which to distinguish the differ-
ent subdivisions of the Jurassic.


Fic. 322.
oölite,
structure of the grains,


Microscopic section of Jurassic
showing the zonal or concentric
Enlarged 24 di-


ameters. (After Rosenbusch.)


THE. JURASSIC SYSTEM 495


Fic. 323. Odlitie limestone silicified. (Photograph by B. Hubbard.)


Vertebrates. Of the fishes, sharks and rays are found in
practically their modern forms. Chimeroids, like the bizarre
types which live in our modern deep seas, are often found; but
the dipnoans are represented only by the living genus Cerato-
dus. Ganoids much like our modern sturgeons and gar pikes
are found, some of them being very large. “Some of the Ju-
rassic fishes approximate the teleosts so closely that it seems
arbitrary to call them ganoids.” (Scott.)

“No Amphibia are certainly known from the Jurassic.”
(Scott.) Comment is unnecessary.

But the reptiles, by their great numbers, their astonishing
variety of forms, and their monstrous size, quite make up for
the absence of the Amphibia. Rhynchocephalia, lizards, and
turtles are common; but the ichthyosaurs, or fish-lizards, are
especially plentiful. ‘Certain localities in the Lias of England
and Germany have yielded an incredible number of skeletons,
and some of the specimens have preserved the impressions of
the outline of the body and limbs, showing recognizably the na-
ture of the skin.” (Scott.) Some of these water reptiles were
25 feet or more in length, and must have looked almost exactly
like the modern dolphins and porpoises, though this resem-
blance would have been wholly superficial, the latter being
neither fishes nor reptiles, but true warm-blooded mammals.
The evolutionists call it a remarkable case of “parallel develop-
ment,” when such very different creatures resemble one an-


496 THE NEW GEOLOGY


ERR a ASSP ai


hy


iy a3 \ TESE Er
at wot a “J 0 “1 4 i iluum u yur
E = sac


Fic. 324. Skeletons of Brontosaurus (above) and Diplodocus (below) in the American Mu-
seum of Natural History, New York City. The parts preserved in these specimens are shaded.
Seales, 10 feet — 1 inch. (After W. D. Matthew.)


other outwardly in this way; but there are almost innumerable
cases of such “parallel development” all through the plant and
animal kingdoms.

The Plesiosauria were another group of marine, carnivorous
reptiles, with small heads, but with long necks and tails, and
with enormous paddles or flippers, two on each side. They
were some 20 feet long; but very much larger “sea serpents”
occur in the Cretaceous.

Crocodiles closely resembling the living gavial of India are
very plentiful.

Gigantic dinosaurs, like Brontosaurus and Diplodocus, 60 feet
or more in length, have been found in the Morrison beds of the
western United States. They were the most enormous creatures
which ever walked on dry land, almost rivaling the whales in
size. They will be considered more at length in a subsequent
chapter.

Flying reptiles, or Pterosawria, are also found, with a curi-
ous kind of bird (Archzeopteryx), the skeletons of two of which
have been preserved in the limestones of Solenhofen. This
creature had a full set of teeth, and a long vertebrated tail; and
of course the evolutionists point to these characters as visible
relics of its reptilian ancestry.

A very few small, insignificant mammals have been found
in Jurassic beds from here and there all over the world; and


THE JURASSIC SYSTEM 497


they are looked upon with great interest by those who believe in
the development theory, and who believe that these Jurassic
beds are actually older than the Cretaceous and Tertiary for-
mations, where the majority of the mammals are found.
Unscientific Methods. According to the curious methods of
reasoning hitherto in vogue in paleontology, if any large, well-


x li i p i raphic limestone series
Fic. 325. Archxopteryx lithographica, from the lithograp
of the Solenhofen region, Bavaria. Specimen in Berlin Museum. Reduced.


498 THE NEW GEOLOGY


organized mammals should happen to be found in any given set
of beds, this very fact would prove that these beds could not
possibly be Jurassic.

This method of reasoning is correct enough, if we recognize
these geological classifications as merely taxonomic classifica-
tions; but it is hard to understand how men with any mental
training can take the results of such a constructive arrange-
ment of the fossils as the historic outline on which to construct
evolutionary trees of descent. The history of human thought
presents nothing more remarkable or more pathetic than the
prevalence, for over half a century, of such methods of tracing
out alleged evolutionary pedigrees, and doing all this in the
name of natural science and under the egis of its protec-
tive name.


CHAPTER XXXIII


'The Cretaceous System


History. The Cretaceous (Latin, creta, chalk) rocks get
their name from the soft limestone called chalk found in the
south of England and the north of France. But as with all the
other systems, these Cretaceous rocks in other localities are not


Fic. 826. Map of the Cretaceous areas of North America. Black areas indicate

known exposures. (After W. B. Scott, “Introduction to Geology, permission

Macmillan Co.) It will be noted that Cretaceous rocks cover much wider areas
= than do those of any other formation.


(499)


500 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 327. Cretaceous sandstone on Red Beds (Permian), south of Zuni, New Mexico.
(Darton, U. S. G. S.)


` by any means entirely, or even largely, composed of chalk, but
consist of hard limestones, sandstones, shales, and conglomer-
ates. Quite frequently they compris2 soft beds of sand, clay, or
shells “so imperfectly consolidated that they may be turned up
with a pick.” (Dana.) In England, sands colored green from
glauconite were early examined by William Smith and his con-
temporaries, and these were called the Greensands; later even
this name began to be applied to beds with similar fossils which
might be composed of very different materials from the original
glauconitic sands. In fact, all such names are used in geology
as mere names, and not as descriptions of the lithologic struc-
ture of the beds. Of late, the more convenient custom has been
adopted of giving to the formations geographical names derived
from the localities where the formations were first observed or
typically developed.

Subdivisions. But the standard for the details of this sys-
tem has been worked out in France and Switzerland, rather
than in England. In Europe, two great subdivisions are rec-
ognized, the Upper Cretaceous and the Lower Cretaceous. In
America, the lower of these divisions is usually called the
Comanchean, a name derived from that of the Comanche In-
dians, who used to live in the regions of Texas and Mexico
where these rocks were found to be well represented. Thus in
America we have (in ascending order) the Comanchean and the
Cretaceous proper, the latter being subdivided into an Upper


THE CRETACEOUS SYSTEM 501


and a Lower. This confusion of names gives rise to consider-
able inconvenience; but at present, it seems to be without
remedy. The name Neocomian is used in England as equivalent
to their Lower Cretaceous, and nearly synonymous with the
American Comanchean.

In America, the subdivisions most widely recognized are
as follows:
| wan. Cretaceous or Laramie


Cretaceous Middle Cretaceous or Montana | a
— | Niobrara
| Lower Cretaceous or Colorado Benton
Dakota
[ Upper Comanchean or Washita
Comanchean Middle Comanchean or Fredericksburg


[ Lower Comanchean or Trinity

Distribution. In marked contrast with the scanty occur-
rence of the Triassic and especially of the Jurassic rocks in
North America, the Cretaceous strata cover enormous areas of
this continent.

A very complete set of the Comanchean series has been
worked out in the States of Vera Cruz and Puebla, Mexico,


Fic. 328. Contorted beds of the Potomae (L. Cretaceous or Comanchean of the Atlantic)
formation, resting on crystalline schists (Archean), Belt Line R. R., Baltimore, Maryland.
(Darton, U. 8. G. 8.)


502 THE NEW GEOLOGY


where the series seems to begin with a great thickness of un-
fossiliferous slates which rest upon Jurassic or other rocks.
These are often intercalated with marine limestones, and are
followed by fossiliferous marls and limestones, the latter con-
stituting the main limestone series of México. Similar beds
have been detected in Colombia and Venezuela; while to the
north, similar limestones are seen in the southern half of Texas,


Fic. 329. Erosion remnants of Dakota sandstone (L. Cretaceous), in Monument Park, north-
west of Colorado Springs, Colorado. (Darton, U. S. G. S.)


and extending through the western mountains of this State
to Bisbee, Arizona. The twisted pelecypod, Requienia, is one of
the index fossils of these formations (Trinity).

A characteristic basal sandstone underlies not only these
rocks of the Trinity division, but also “the whole Comanchean
series in the southern United States.” (Grabau.) It is sup-
posed to be continuous to the north with the so-called basal
Dakota sandstones. The limestones overlying these beds at
Austin, Texas, and on the Rio Grande, are marked by the pres-
ence of the odd-shaped rudistid pelecypods, Monopleura, Radio-
lites, and other similar forms, these fossils being duplicated in
the Lower Cretaceous beds of Southern Europe. Northward
these beds are represented by sandstones in Southern Kansas,


THE CRETACEOUS SYSTEM 503


Fic. 330. Hogback, 2 miles southwest of Cañon City, Colorado. Composed of Dakota beds
(L. Cretaceous), with Morrison strata to the left (U. Jurassic), and Niobrara (L. Cretaceous)
to the extreme right. (Darton, U. 8. G. 8.)


Fic. 331. Cliffs of Niobrara limestone (L. Cretaceous), on the Missouri River, above Running
Water, South Dakota. Taken from the ferry landing, on the Nebraska side of the river.
(Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


504 THE NEW GEOLOGY


which contain plant remains, and which are overlaid by beds
containing Gryphea, Ezogura, Ostrea, and other kinds of oysters.

The Washita shales and limestones cover large areas of
Kansas and Oklahoma; while far to the north, the Kootenai
coal beds of Southeastern British Columbia and Alberta are
considered to be equivalents. These immense coal deposits in
the Kootenai area proper and around Crowsnest Pass are esti-
mated to cover an area of 3,000 square miles, and contain
nearly 8,000,000,000 tons of coal, 400,000,000 tons of which can
be classed as real anthracite. Similar coal beds of more limited
thickness are found near Great Falls, in the central part of


Fic. 332. Mesa capped by Niobrara limestone (L. Cretaceous), Arkansas Valley, Eastern
Colorado. (Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


- Montana; and very thick seams have also been observed in the
North Fork of the Flathead, to the west of the Glacier National
Park. Both on the east and on the west of these mountains of
the Glacier National Park, the flat-lying Cretaceous shales un-
derlie the massive Algonkian limestones and quartzites com-
posing the greater part of ‘the front ranges of the Rockies, such
outliers as Chief Mountain, just to the south of the international
boundary line, and Crowsnest Mountain, lying in apparent per-
fect conformability on the Cretaceous beds, though they are
themselves composed of Paleozoic rocks. In fact, as Cretaceous
beds seem to underlie the mountains of the Glacier National
Park on all sides, the park might be spoken of as a huge Paleozoic
island floating on a Cretaceous sea. The obvious contradiction
to the traditional order of the rocks needs no comment.


THE CRETACEOUS SYSTEM 505


The Cretaceous of the Pacific coast is subdivided as follows:


Cretaceous or Chico series
Thin-bedded and massive sandstones and conglomerates
Comanchean or Shasta series
Horsetown beds
Thin-bedded sandstones and shales
Knoxville beds
Shales, calcareous layers, with sandstones below


While these names are derived from the occurrence of the
Cretaceous in California, similar formations have been de-


Fic. 333. Cliff of Washita limestone (L. Cretaceous), on Devil’s River, at the mouth of Rough
Cañon, Texas. The beds contain ammonites, echinoids, ete., at base, and Caprinide at top.
(Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


ince, these beds contain not only extensive coal beds, but also
beds of iron ore. Northward in Alaska, they also contain coal.
The fossils of the Chico and the Horsetown beds are similar to
those of the equivalent beds in India, while the Knoxville fos-
sils are more like fossils found in the far north of America.

Beds of the Comanchean series are extensively spread out
over the Great Plains regions of America from Montana south
into New Mexico, if we assume that the Morrison series are
chiefly to be classed with the Cretaceous system. But beds of
the Cretaceous proper (Upper Cretaceous of Europe), called the
Dakota formation, are found in many places to the east and also
to the west of the Front Range of the Rockies. In the Uinta


506 THE NEW GEOLOGY


: ‘tam š
Fic. 334. Erosion forms in Dakota sandstone (Cretaceous), 5 miles east of Kenton, Oklahoma.
Note the cross-bedding in the strata. (Gould, U. S. G. S.)


and Wasatch Mountains, the Dakota strata rest in “apparent
conformity” upon the Jurassic, though the whole of the Coman-
chean is there wanting. (Scott.)

The extensive chalk deposits of Kansas are placed in the
Niobrara formation, as are also the beds regarded as equivalent
in South Dakota. Harder limestones and even sandstones are
associated with these beds.

Coal beds in Alberta are listed as belonging to the Montana
formation; but the most extensive coal deposits of these Creta-
ceous rocks are classed as belonging to the Laramie, though
some geologists consider that some of the beds of this formation
should be classed as belonging, not to the Cretaceous, but to the
first part of the Tertiary.

It should be remembered that these strata of the Rocky
' Mountains and Great Plains are spread out over a very wide
territory, that great areas of this region are difficult of access
and have not been extensively studied, and moreover they are
largely detached from one another, so that stratigraphical cor-
relation is usually impossible, and therefore dependence is
placed almost wholly upon the fossils. The latter are plentiful


THE CRETACEOUS SYSTEM 507


enough in many localities; but the lack of careful examination
has led to hasty generalizations about the extent of many of
these individual formations, and it may be that some of the
formations which are now supposed to be of almost continental
extent will ultimately prove to be repeatedly interrupted by
other kinds of deposits.

On the Atlantic coast, the Potomac (Comanchean) forma-
tion is found in isolated patches from Martha’s Vineyard, Long
Island, through New Jersey southward to Georgia. Here these
beds are traced westward (with interruptions) through Ten-
nessee and Arkansas. In Maryland, where these rocks are
best developed, are some dark carbonaceous shales carry-
ing beds of lignite, in which have been discovered some seven
skeletons of dinosaurs, a fact which has been the means of
correlating these beds with the Morrison beds of the Great
Plains. Along much of the Atlantic border are also beds of the
Upper Cretaceous, the materials of which “are unconsolidated,
and consist in the lower half of gravels, sands, and clays with
lignite, while the upper portion is made up of clays and sands
becoming more and more glauconitic and finally going over
mainly into greensands.” (Schuchert.) “Cretaceous formations
that are practically unconsolidated are met with from Tennessee
through Eastern Mississippi into Alabama and Georgia. Nearly


Fic. 335. A cliff of Benton limestone (Cretaceous), near Thatcher, Colorado. The pelecypod,
Inoceramus labiatus, oceurs here in great abundance. Note the alternation in the beds.
(Gilbert, U. S. G. 8.)


508 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fig. 336. Little Missouri River, with Fox Hills sandstone (U. Cretaceous) showing in the
cut bank, capped by Lance formation (7? U. Cretaceous). (Hares, U. S. G. S.)


everywhere they overlap Paleozoic strata, and in Georgia they
rest on the more ancient crystallines.” (Schuchert.)

Another widely scattered area of Cretaceous rocks is found
in the West Indies, where the strata consist often of basal
arkose sandstones which are unfossiliferous, or coal-bearing


Fic. 337. Eutaw formation (U. Cretaceous), with about 2 feet of superficial material on top;
in a railway cut, near Leidy, Mississippi. (Shaw, U. 8. G. S.) k


THE CRETACEOUS SYSTEM 509


Fic. 338. Hills of Cretaceous strata, west of Bisbee, Arizona. (Ransome, U. S. G. S.)


beds followed by shales and limestones with marine fossils. We
have found this order a very common one; and it is instructive
that in some instances at least, as at Havana, Cuba, and in
Jamaica, the bottom of the series rests directly upon the old
-erystallines or the Archean. (Grabau.) On Porto Rico, some
of the beds abound in Foraminifera, though thick-shelled Ru-
distes and other shallow-water pelecypods are associated with
them, as are also sandstones and other clastic rocks.

Foreign. In England, the Wealden formation has been cor-
related with the Morrison of America, because it also contains
the remains of large dinosaurs in great numbers. This forma-
tion is extensively developed in the south of England, and con-
sists of sands and clays in which are the remains of plants
and the shells of such species as Unio, Paludina, and others
found in fresh water. Beds regarded as equivalent occur in
Northeastern Spain, in Germany, and in Poland, coal occurring
in the latter countries.

The more distinctively marine deposits of the Upper Cre-
taceous are widely spread over Europe and the northern part
of Africa. But they are almost wholly absent from the eastern
part of Asia. Indeed, as one veteran geologist has remarked,
“A geologist taught only by observation in China, outside of
Tibet, would know nothing of the Cretaceous. No strata are
known which may be correlated with the strata that represent
the period in America and Europe.” (Bailey Willis.) They are
known, however, in India, Australia, and South Africa.


33


510 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 339. White Cretaceous clays and sands, near Sea Cliff, Long Island,
New York. Worked for the sand. (Fuller, U. S. G. S.)


But these marine deposits often contain coarse sands or even
conglomerates, much of the Carpathian Mountains being of this
character (Flysch formation). Near Dresden, these beds rest
directly upon the old crystalline rocks, and contain well-preserved
brachiopods, oyster shells, and sponges.


The Chalk. The chalk itself, which has given its name to
the system, is splendidly shown in the white cliffs facing the
Dover channel on both the English and the French coast
(Fig. 341). It consists ‘of fine calcareous particles which the
microscope shows to be composed chiefly of the minute shells of
Foraminifera, similar to those now composing the foraminiferal
oozes at the bottom of the Atlantic. Calcareous plates called
coccoliths, probably due to unicellular alge, are found among


THE CRETACEOUS SYSTEM 511


En


FiG. 340. The hills in the distance are composed of the lignite-bearing member of the Lance
formation (? U. Cretaceous). Little Missouri River. Erosion of alluvium in the foreground.
(Hares, U. 8. G. S.)


the chalk; and the siliceous spicules of sponges, “and probably
to some extent radiolarian shells as well” (Grabau), are also
scattered through the chalk. The percolating waters have dis-
solved some of these siliceous particles, and have redeposited


i n TTE
ie T K! H Ltstuary o Y of Thames


iat


a =A =


Boulogneg§ A


Geach ty llead


ENGLISH CHANNEL


1. Tertiary. 5. Weald clay.

2. [J Chalk and upper greensand. 6. CS) Hastings sabda.
8. mm Gault, 7. Purbeck beda,
4 E Lower Greensand. 8. Oblite.


Fic. 341. Geological map of Southeastern England and part of France, ex-
hibiting the denudation of the Weald. (After Lyell.)


512 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 342. The Sphinx, cut from a ledge of nummulitie limestone (Cretaceous), surrounded

and formerly partly buried by desert sands derived largely from the destruction of a sandstone

in other parts of the Libyan desert. The Great Pyramid in the background is covered by slabs

of nummulitic limestone, the fossils which project by weathering being called “Pharaoh's
beans,” by the Arabs.


them at certain levels through the chalk in the form of bands of
flint nodules. The shells of various pelecypods, the tests of sea
urchins, and other fossils, are found at different horizons
throughout the mass, which is quite distinctly stratified, and
often has sands and shales or marls as the lateral extensions
of the beds.

Ever since the first deep-sea explorations and the discovery
of the modern foraminiferal oozes at the bottom of the oceans,
it has been supposed that the chalk must have been of deep-
water origin. Of late, however, some have argued that the
organisms associated with the ancient chalk, as well as the fact
that the chalk turns into clay or sand beds when traced suffi-
ciently far laterally, indicate that it must have had a shallow-
water origin. That it has passed through a shallow-water
stage, goes without any argument; for it now has no water at
all above it. But that it really originated in the deep ocean,
there can be no doubt. The only question is whether it got
from the bottom of the deep ocean to its present position above
water by some gradual, ordinary process, or by some extra-


THE CRETACEOUS SYSTEM ; 513


ordinary one. On this
point, probably one per-
son's opinion might never
convince another, since we
have absolutely nothing to
point to in the way of any
similar occurrence which
has gone on within scien-
tific observation.


Life
Plants. The plants of
the Lower Cretaceous (Co-


manchean) are much the
same as those of the Tri-


assic and Jurassic, and in-.


clude ferns, horsetails,
cycads, and numerous
kinds of conifers. But the


Fic. 343. Nubian sandstone (Cretaceous), near

the Second Cataract of the Nile, Sudan. This is

the rock from the disintegration of which the sands
of the Libyan desert are largely derived.


flora of the Upper Cretaceous is very different, and includes
a wide variety of dicotyledons of a very “modern” appear-
ance. In many widely separated parts of the world, such


Fic. 344. Cretaceous plants.


1, Leguminosites marcouanus; 2, Sassafras
eretaceum; 3, Liriodendron meekii; 4, Salix meekii. (After Dana.)


514


THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 345. TYPES OF PLANTS OF THE AMERICAN CRETACEOUS


a-f, Characteristic Middle Cretaceous plants, Dakota group: a, sweet gum (Liquid-

ambar integrifolium) ; b, laural tree (Laurus nebrascensis) ; c, oak (Quercus primor-

dialis) ; d, willow (Salix protexfolia) ; e, beech (Fagus polyclada) ; f, Protophyllum

quadratum; g-i, characteristic Upper Cretaceous plants (Laramie): g, sarsaparilla

(Aralia digitata) ; h, arrowwood (Viburnum newberrianum) ; i, alder (Alnus grewi-
opsis). All reduced. (From Le Conte.)


THE CRETACEOUS SYSTEM


==:


⁄


Mt)
f


Wy


SS
š


Fic. 346. CRETACEOUS INVERTEBRATE FOSSILS


1, Frondicularia major, Bornemann, X 3, U. Cret., N. J. 2, Haplophragmium
concavum, Bagg, X 12, U. C. 3, Curdiaster cintus, Morton, X %, U. C. 4, Tere-
bratella plicata, Say, X 1, U. C. 5, Terebratula harlani, Whitf., X %, U. C. 6,
Inoceramus vanuxemi, M. and H., X 1⁄4, Ft. Pierre. 7, Aucella pioche, Gabb, X 1,
Knoxville. 8, Idonearca nebrascensis, Owen, X %, Fox Hills. 9, Exogyra costata,
Say, X %, U. C. 10, Veniella conradi, Morton, X %, U. C. 11, Ostrea larva,
Lam., X %, U. C. 12, Pyropsis bairdi, M. and H., X %, Fox Hills. 13, Anchura
americana, X 1, Evans and Shumard, Fox Hills. 14, Baculites compressus, Say,
X %2, fragment of adult with suture lines, Ft. Pierre. 15, The same, a very
young shell, X 5, showing apical coil. 16, Scaphites nodosus, Owen, X %, Ft.
Pierre. 17, Heteroceras stevensoni, Whitf., X 2/5, Ft. Pierre. 18, Belemnitella
americana, Morton, X 1⁄2, U. C. (After W. B. Scott, “Introduction to Geology,”
permission of Macmillan Co.)


515


516 THE NEW GEOLOGY


as Greenland, Alaska, the Mississippi Valley, and Argentina,
we find the same or very similar plants, including even palms
and figs. (Schuchert.) But many others of our common trees
are represented, such as beech, oak, maple, magnolia, tulip tree,
sassafras, elm, willow, and eucalyptus. And we have already
seen that coal beds (composed largely of such plant materials)
are found in the Upper Cretaceous beds on a very extensive
scale, both in America (Laramie, formation) and in Europe.
And very obviously any theory regarding the origin of the
coal beds must, to be adequate, take account of the kinds of
trees in these Upper Cretaceous beds, as well as merely those
in the Carboniferous.


Fic. 347. A mosasaur (Platecarpus corypheus) from the Upper Cretaceous of Kansas.
About 1/36 natural size. (After Williston.)


Invertebrates. The lower forms of the invertebrates are not
sufficiently different from those which we have already de-
many kinds are distinctive, and will require further notice.

Oysters (Fig. 319) belonging to the genera Ostrea, Gry-
phea, and Exogyra, are plentiful, many beds being packed with
their remains; but the genus Inoceramus also is a good guide
fossil. Even more characteristic are the remarkable shells
called collectively Rudistes, which have one long horn-shaped
valve, and have merely a cover for this to serve as the other
valve. These strange pelecypods are divided into many genera;
but they are regarded as confined exclusively to the Cretaceous,
and are accordingly treated as horizon markers or “index fossils.”

Fresh-water or brackish-water shells are quite common, and
include many modern forms, such as the river mussel Unio, and
the snails Planorbis and Viviparus. Other modern-looking
shells, such as Cyprea, Voluta, Fusus, and Murex, are also com-
mon, and are much like the kinds found in the Tertiary beds.

But the cephalopods are most remarkable in their variety
and in their astonishing forms. Many of.the Ammonites have
highly ornamented shells, with spines and nodes and flutings,
some tightly coiled, some almost uncoiled, and some twisted into
fantastic shapes. They are minutely subdivided, and are re-
garded as horizon markers.


THE CRETACEOUS SYSTEM 517


Vertebrates. The fishes include many modern families and
even many modern genera, such as the cod, salmon, herrings,
mullets, and catfishes, with many that are now extinct, such as
the Portheus, found in large numbers in the chalk beds of
Kansas, which was sometimes 15 feet long, and had large reptile-
like teeth.

The reptiles are much the same as we have already de-
are confined to the Cretaceous. A giant plesiosaur, called


Fic. 348. Cross-bedding in Dakota sands (U. Cretaceous), south of Bennet, Nebraska,
(Darton, U. S. G. 8.)


Elasmosaurus, found in the Kansas chalk, was nearly 50 feet
long, 22 feet of which was neck. The great mosasaurs (Fig.
347), with their comparatively slender bodies, must have been
veritable sea serpents, one skeleton found in the Cretaceous of
New Zealand being computed as being originally 100 feet long.
From the frequent reports by competent observers of large ser-
pentlike creatures which have been seen in the Gulf of Mexico
and elsewhere, it is entirely possible that some of these crea-
tures may have survived to our time.

chapter. Most of the noted specimens seen in the various


518 THE NEW GEOLOGY


museums of this country have come from the Morrison, Laramie,
and Denver formations; while the European specimens have
come chiefly from the Wealden of England, Belgium, and other
parts of the Continent.

Two remarkable birds, Hesperornis and Ichthyornis, have
been found in the~Kansas chalk (Niobrara formation), which
are somewhat like the famous Archzxopteryx of Solenhofen, in
that they had a good set of teeth. Hesperornis was about 6
feet high, with rudimentary wings; but the Ichthyornis was a
smaller bird, with strong wings, and somewhat like a gull.


CHAPTER XXXIV


Fossil Reptiles


Diversity. The characteristic animals of the Mesozoic for-
mations are the reptiles; while the most interesting and the most
remarkable of the reptiles are the dinosaurs. The latter consti-
tute but one division of the Reptilia; but in point of diversity, the
reptiles constitute almost a whole world of their own. In point of
size, the reptiles found as fossils in the rocks range from the size


pie


Amphibious Dinosaur BRONTOSAURUS


Armored D nosaur Horned Dinosaur


STEGOSAURUS TRICE RATOPS


Duck billed Dinosaur
TRACHODON


Fic. 349. Outline restorations of dinosaurs. Scale about nineteen feet to the inch.
(From Matthew.)


of a small dog to monsters over 80 feet in length. Their habits of
life were equally varied; for they embraced some which ate vege-
tables only, some which ate other animals only, and some which
apparently ate anything at hand, either animal or vegetable. In
still another view of the matter, we see an equal diversity; for
some of them flew in the air, some swam in the ocean, others
strutted around on the land on their hind feet alone, while still
others walked on all fours. But whether in the air, in the
water, or on the land, they are not only the chief forms of life
in the rocks where they are found, but some of them far sur-
passed in size and strength any land animals now alive, and


(519)


THE NEW GEOLOGY


520


-8104594 “g-2)


(`uorssrturrəd Aq ,‘erpædopsouy [BUONLUIIJU] MAN ƏL, WOI) (yyUsIUY pue uaoqsO 19478 ‘suor
*(eIsdoye1e9 Jepio) sdolgeaəəLud, `F : (gpodoujrutaO aepa.qns) sninesorpeH ` : (@podoyzAO 1əp10) snin¥soZa}g `g : (gpodo:əur,


1Əp10) snanesolw:əO :Z ! (epodoaneg 1Əp10) snoopo[diGq Jo uoljə[ə1AS '[ 'ƏAH Pexoo] slgurtue ssoy} JO əuros YUIY} 84877U9S JUYM Jo suone1o1so14
SUNVSONIG `098 “SI


FOSSIL REPTILES 521


have been rivaled, either in ancient or in modern times, only
by the whales.

Marine Reptiles. The ichthyosaurs, or fish-reptiles, were
nearly 30 feet in length, and in outward appearance must have
been much like a dolphin or a porpoise. They had a long, sharp
snout, jaws armed with sharp teeth set in a continuous groove
and not in separate sockets, a short fishlike neck, large, powerful
flippers, and a very fishlike tail. The eye was large, and was
protected by numerous bony plates, which are often preserved
in the fossil state. These creatures were undoubtedly carniv-
orous and lived in the ocean;
and certain beds of the Lower
Jurassic (Lias) of England
and Germany are literally
packed with their skeletons,
some of the specimens even
showing the outlines of the
body and of the limbs, and even
the nature of the skin, which
was smooth, with neither bony
scutes nor horny plates. In
Wiirttemberg, Germany, there
were in 1911 some 25 stone Fic. 351. Pterodactyl of the genus Rham-
quarries in operation for the TrereaticnalEneyelorsedia” by permission.)
marketing of the slates there
obtained; but in the course of this work, on an average about
100 specimens of fossil reptiles are found each year, of which
about one in ten is sufficiently perfect to warrant preparation by
experts. Lyme Regis, in Southern England, is another locality
famous for similar remains of ichthyosaurs. The beds in which
these fossils occur are usually strongly bituminous, or impreg-
nated with oil; and many huge ammonite shells are found along
with them, some of these shells being five or even six feet in diam-
eter. The oil in these beds is best accounted for by the sup-
position that all these creatures were entombed alive, or at
least before the flesh had decomposed.

The plesiosaurs are another group of marine reptiles which
make a marked contrast to the former group in appearance.
They had a long, slender neck, with huge paddles nearly as long
as the body, and a tail of proportionate length which tapered to
a point. Some of these creatures were 20 or more feet long,
while one genus, Pliosaurus, had paddles 6 feet in length. An-
other, named Elasmosaurus, found in the Cretaceous rocks of
Kansas, was nearly 50 feet long, “of which 22 feet was neck.”


522 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 352. Allosaurus skeleton mounted. (American Museum of Natural History,
New York City.)


(Schuchert.) A related tribe, having scales and movable lower
jaws, as in snakes, were even more snakelike in appearance,
and constituted veritable “sea serpents.” They have been
named mosasaurs, and are found in great numbers in the
Kansas Chalk, and also in the south of England and the Nether-
lands. One of the largest specimens, found in New Zealand,
seems to have been about 100 feet long (Gadow) ; but only im-
perfect fragments have been found.


Flying Reptiles. The flying reptiles are called pterosaurs,
though one genus of the group, Pterodactylus, is better known
than the others. The pterosaurs had real wings, quite like those
of a bat; and as they could doubtless fly with the greatest ease,
they would serve to justify the tradition of flying dragons. The
head was large, with a capacious brain cavity, and was set at
right angles to the neck, as in birds. Some of these flying
reptiles had a full set of teeth, and are thought to have been carniv-
orous. Some may have been frugivorous. The joints of what
would correspond to the little finger of the hand were greatly
enlarged and enormously lengthened out, until in total length
this “finger” was longer than the body and the legs together.
To this “finger,” a membrane, or patagium, was attached, which


FOSSIL REPTILES 523


extended from this long framework of a finger down to the
flanks of the body and the hind limb, thus forming a true wing,
very much like that of a bat, but quite unlike that of a bird.
Some specimens of these animals found in the limestones of
Solenhofen, Germany, show distinctly the impressions of these
wing membranes, the animals evidently having been buried be-
fore decomposition took place. The bones were like those of
birds in being hollow, or pneumatic; and there was a true keel
or breastbone, as in birds, for the attachment of the strong
muscles used in flying —a structure which is found also in both
birds and bats. Some of these pterosaurs were small, with a
spread of wing of only two or three feet; while others had a
head a yard long, and a stretch of wing of over 20 feet.

Plenty of true crocodiles, lizards, and turtles are found as
fossils, with some few snakes. One of the marine turtles found
in the Cretaceous strata was nearly 11 feet long, and 12 feet
across the front flippers. But without dwelling on the details of
these, we may pass on to notice in more detail the character-
istics of the dinosaurs, some of which were the mightiest mon-
sters that ever marched across dry land.


Dinosaurs. The dinosaurs are usually divided into two main
groups, the herbivorous and the carnivorous, these groups being
based on the best we can decide regarding the diet of these


Fic. 353. Mounted skeleton of Brontosaurus in the American Museum, New York.


524 THE NEW GEOLOGY


4,
|
| 2
|a:
||
|


Fic. 354. Mounting the skeleton of a Brontosaurus. (American Museum of Natural History,
a New York City.)


animals from their teeth, their feet, and a few other structures.
One race of herbivorous dinosaurs had a turtlelike beak in


the front of the mouth, and a wonderful battery of several rows
of teeth farther back on the Jaws.


FOSSIL REPTILES 525


Another group are called the bird-footed dinosaurs. Some
of these were small, only about 5 feet in length, while others
were at least 40 feet long. One of the striking features of this
and other groups, especially of the carnivorous dinosaurs, was
the very short, almost useless fore limbs, which in some of the

. species were even shorter in proportion than the fore limbs of the
kangaroo. Like the kangaroos, these animals had long and
strong hind legs, and a powerful tail, the latter acting like a
rudder or a third leg. If they were as correspondingly quick
in their movements as some of the modern lizards, they must have
been speed breakers.

A description of one of these bird-footed dinosaurs will
serve as more or less applicable to the group:

“A fortunate discovery made in Niobrara County, Wyoming, in 1908,
brought to light a specimen of Trachodon which, because of the marvelous
preservation, permits an almost perfect mental reconstruction of the animal.
The dinosaur had apparently died where it could be gradually desiccated
under the heat of a tropical sun until the skin and much of the flesh and
tendons had shrunken down upon the bones. In places the skin is thrown
into the finest wrinklings, showing it to have been as thin as that of a
python; but in contrast to that of the snake, it bore not scales but tubercles,
some rather large, others excessively fine, but showing a distinctive arrange-
ment. There is, however, over the entire body no trace of defensive armor.
The curious webbed character of the hand, and the presence, in other speci-
mens, of a powerful compressed tail, point to an animal with the swimming
powers of an alligator, but still retaining the ability to travel rapidly on
land. Hence Trachodon was able to avoid the onslaught of the omnipresent


carnivore, not alone by its speed ashore, but by taking to the water when
hard pressed.”— Lull.


These trachodonts had a huge ducklike bill, and are accord-
ingly called the beaked dinosaurs. They have been found quite
plentifully in Montana and the Dakotas, as well as in Wyoming;
also in New Jersey, Mississippi, and Alabama. Not all the
specimens have been so excellently preserved, though some seven
specimens have been found which are practically “mummies.”

The Stegosauria were armored dinosaurs, covered with a
coat of mail like that of the modern crocodiles, the hide of which
will turn a rifle bullet. Some of the stegosaurs, however, had
a much more complete armor than any crocodile or alligator,
and resembled nothing so much as a living castle or battle
“tank”; and it must have been almost impossible for an enemy
to capture or subdue them. Lull calls them “animated citadels.”
Stegosaurus had a double row of large plates up and down its
back, the ones over the pelvic region being 2 feet high, 214 feet
long, and 4 inches thick at the base, thinning out at the edges.
On its tail were 4 or more huge spines, these spines being 2


34


526 THE NEW GEOLOGY


feet long and 5 or 6 inches thick at the base, making the tail
a veritable mace or battle club.


Size of Brain. These creatures had a ridiculously small
brain, estimated at only 2.5 ounces, while the body was equal
in weight to that of an elephant, and the latter has a brain at
least 20 times as great. However, Stegosaurus had in addition,
in the sacral portion of the spinal column, a very large cavity,
some twenty times the size of the real brain. This second
“brain” doubtless controlled all of the instinctive and reflex
actions of the animal; and if its diminutive brain in the skull
indicates that the animal must have been excessively stupid, its
sacral “brain” must have been sufficient to keep its body func-
tioning in good shape, and it had such an elaborate set of
defensive armor that it probably was not much annoyed by at-.
tacking enemies.

Many of these ancient reptiles had less than half a pound of
real brain for each ton of body weight, and they weighed from
10 to 38 tons or even more. Man has about 2 pounds of brain
to every 100 pounds of body weight, or 80 times as much pro-
portionately.

In this connection, one can hardly refrain from quoting
what a certain wag has written about the brains of these
strange creatures:


“Behold the mighty dinosaur,
Famous in prehistoric lore,
Not only for his weight and strength,
But for his intellectual length.
You will perceive by these remains
The creature had two sets of brains —
One in his head (the usual place),
The other at his spinal base.
Thus he could reason a priori
As well as a posteriori.
No problem bothered him a bit;
He made both head and tail of it.
So wise was he, so wise and solemn,
Each thought filled just a spinal column.
If one brain found the pressure strong,
It passed a few ideas along;
If something slipped his forward mind,
"Twas rescued by the one behind;
And if in error he was caught,
He had a saving afterthought.
As he thought twice before he spoke,
He had no judgments to revoke;
For he could think, without congestion,
Upon both sides of every question.”


(AOA MON ‘AI0JSIH [LINJEN Jo urnəsn]q[ uweoəorzsəuryv)


`sTms]əoxə SNANDSOJUOLG


"SSG “SIA


(527)


528 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Other Characters. Another group of plant-feeding dino-
saurs possessed a huge head armed with horns, two, or three,
or even five in number, set on various parts of the face and
head, the bases of which were correspondingly strengthened
with a solid bony structure to carry these massive projections.
Some of these creatures had in addition a strong bony crest
projecting backward from the back of the head over the neck
and shoulders, like a massive flange or bony shield, which must
have been of material protection to its owner when charging
an enemy. Many of the specimens recovered as fossils show a
great assortment of wounds which had been received by these
animals during their lives; for horns and jaws have been broken
and healed, skulls have been found pieced and grown together,
and in all these ways we have an indication of the kind of life
which these old battle-scarred veterans lived. And as the
creatures continued to grow as long as they lived, their mon-
strous size is a pretty good index of their age, which was doubt-
less measured by centuries.


“Unlike man and the higher vertebrates, reptiles and fishes do not have
a maximum size which is soon reached and rarely exceeded, but continue to
grow throughout life, so that the size of a turtle, a crocodile, or a dinosaur
tells something of the duration of its life. If tortoises may attain an age
of several hundred years, why should not a dinosaur grow to be much older?”
— Schuchert.


Fic. 356. The largest known dinosaur. Sketch reconstruction of Brachio-
saurus, from specimens in the Field Museum in Chicago, and the Natural
History Museum in Berlin. (After W. D. Matthew.)


FOSSIL REPTILES 529


Fic. 357. View of the “Marsh quarry” for vertebrate fossils, in the Morrison formation, Gar-
den Park, 9 miles north of Cañon City, Colorado. This shows the irregular character of the
sandstone underlying the dinosaur bed. (Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


Size. Several specimens have been found in the Cretaceous
beds of the West, of the massive Tyrannosaurus, or “tyrant
saurian,” as it has been named. This animal was some 47
feet long, and must have had a body as large as the very larg-
est of the elephants. At it walked chiefly on its hind legs and
its powerful tail, it was probably from 18 to 20 feet high,
whereas the largest of living elephants are only about 12 feet
high. Tyrannosaurus had immense sharp claws on its hind feet,
even those on its small front feet being 6 to 8 inches in length,
and curved like those of a bird of prey. The head of one speci-
men in the American Museum of Natural History, New York
City, is 4 feet 3 inches long, 3 feet 4 inches deep, and 2 feet 9
inches wide, the massive jaws being set with teeth from 3 to
6 inches long and an inch wide. As this animal was un-
doubtedly carnivorous, it certainly was a tyrant monster. Sci-
entists have thought that it must have been slow and sluggish
in its movements; but of this we can not be certain.

But mightiest of all the monsters that ever walked the earth
were the huge Sauropoda, or reptile-footed beasts, such as Dip-


530 THE NEW GEOLOGY


lodocus, and Brontosaurus, examples of which are to be.seen in
several of our chief museums.

Dr. W. D. Matthew tells us that many of the visitors of the
Natural History Museum, on entering the Dinosaur Hall, re-
mark in a casual way, “They make these out of plaster of
Paris, don’t they?” This incredulity on the part of these people
reminds Dr. Matthew of the old farmer’s indignant retort on
seeing a giraffe for the first time —“There ain't no sich ani-


Fic. 858. Triceratops horn in situ, showing below Dr. T. W. Stanton, of the United States
Geological Survey. Oregon Basin Quadrangle, Wyoming. (Hewitt, U. S. G. S.)


mal.” Were it not for the incontestable proofs of the very
bones themselves, one could scarcely believe that such outlandish-
looking monsters ever lived on earth.

The skeleton of Brontosaurus (thunder-lizard) in the
American Museum of New York is 66 feet 8 inches long, and
the live animal must have weighed about 38 tons. It had a
very long, tapering neck and tail, “as though an elephant were
deprived of its normal terminals and provided with those of an
enormous snake.” (Lull.) The specimen of Diplodocus in the
Carnegie Museum in Pittsburgh is 87 feet long, though a little
slenderer than Brontosaurus.


FOSSIL REPTILES 581


Food. As there must have been large numbers of these ani-
mals, it is difficult to imagine what they could have found to
live on. The teeth of Brontosaurus are spoon-shaped, and con-
fined to the front part of the jaws, so that it is hard to see what
good they could have been in chewing. It has been conjectured
that the creature lived on the abundant plant life of marshes
and river bottoms, and that it swallowed its food with little or
no mastication. The finding of smoothly polished stones within
the ribs of some specimens has suggested that the animal may
have had a gizzard, which may have acted as a digestive mill
to grind up the food it had swallowed in haste; for the amount
it required daily has been estimated at about half a ton of
plants. It is supposed to have been amphibious, somewhat like
the crocodile or the hippopotamus.


Skeleton. “The skeleton of one of these creatures is a marvel of
mechanical design; the bones of the vertebral column are of the lightest
possible construction consistent with strength, the bony material being
laid down only where stresses arise, and reduced to a minimum at other
points. The assembled skeleton reminds one forcibly of a cantilever bridge
borne on two massive piers — the limbs — between which the trunk repre-
sents the shorter channel span, and the long neck and tail the spans leading
to the shores. Over the hips is a ridged anchorage formed by the coalescence
of several vertebre, for not only was this the point of origin of the tendons
and sinews supporting the 30 feet of tail, but on occasion the whole forward
part of the body, fore limbs, and neck could be raised clear of the ground
after the manner of a bascule bridge. In the refinement of its architecture
the vertebral column is essentially Gothic, with arch, pillar, and buttress,
and the freedom of design characteristic of the great fabrics of medieval
time.” — Lull.


A closely related saurian, named Brachiosaurus, has been
found in German East Africa. It was apparently about 80 feet
long, while its neck alone is given as 36 feet, and each of its
cervical vertebre was from 3 to 4 feet long. Its tail was rela-
tively short; its fore legs were longer than the hind ones, and
the upper bone (humerus) of the front leg measured 6.5 feet.
This animal was probably larger than the Brontosaurus.


Where Found. Skeletons of fossil reptiles have been found
in great numbers in numerous localities among the foothills of the
Rocky Mountains, from Wyoming to New Mexico and Texas, with
outlying patches of similar beds in the Black Hills and in Western
Colorado. Many of these scattered beds, called collectively the
Morrison formation, have been variously classed as Jurassic
or Cretaceous; and the dispute about their exact “age” is still
going on. Others are classed as “Upper Cretaceous”; but it is
sufficient to know that these fossils are in many cases found in


532 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 359. Irregular bedding in sands and carbonaceous shales of “Ceratops beds” (Creta-
ceous), where bones of dinosaurs are found, on the east bank of the Little Missouri, Marmarth,
North Dakota. Lignite beds below. (Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


the surface strata, and that these strata are often not more
consolidated than the very similarly situated and very similar-
appearing Tertiary beds of other localities.


“In the arid Western regions these formations girdle the Rockies and
outlying mountain chains for two thousand miles from north to south, and
are extensively exposed in great escarpments, river canons, and ‘bad-land’
areas, bare of soil and vegetation and affording an immense stretch of ex-
posed rock for the explorer.”— Matthew.


The flora found associated with these fossil animals is much
like that of the warmer parts of our modern world, though con-
fessedly the combinations of trees and plants are different from
the present assemblage in any one locality. Besides many com-
mon temperate-climate trees, this flora includes palms, like
the palmetto of Florida, the ginkgo of China and Eastern
Asia, the fig, and the Sequoia, like the big redwoods of Cali-
fornia. But the plants are very markedly modern in aspect;
and there is not the slightest warrant for saying that the as-
sociated reptilian remains collectively are a day older than the
Tertiary beds of the Western States and of Europe. Nothing
but pure, unfounded hypothesis and theoretical speculation


FOSSIL REPTILES 533


stands in the way of our saying that these reptiles were con-
temporary with the almost equally gigantic mammals whose
skeletons are found in other parts of these Rocky Mountain
regions, as well as in various parts of the Old World.

Their Extinction. This being so, the problem of how these
animals became extinct assumes a very important place in the
general geological problem of how these ancient animals were
destroyed and buried where we now find their remains. And
the problem is not at all narrowed down to Europe and America.
As we have seen, one of the largest of these brutes has been
found in German East Africa; other dinosaurs have also been
found in Madagascar, in India, and in Patagonia, South America;
and we must remember that the geological study of the vast
regions in the tropics has only fairly begun. But if these
gigantic reptiles can not be separated, in the problem of their
extinction, from the huge prehistoric mammals, such as the
megatherium, the titanotheres, the mastodon, and the other an-
cient elephants, we have indeed a large problem on our hands
urgently needing an explanation.

“One of the most inexplicable of events,’ says Professor
Lull, referring to the dinosaurs, “is the dramatic extinction of
this mighty race.” But if to this problem we have added also
the extinction of the great numbers of elephants, rhinoceroses,
camels, mastodons, megatheriums, and what not, over all of
North America (to say nothing of the other continents), we
shall have to make allowance for such phenomena when at-
tempting to frame a true and adequate induction regarding the
way in which the geological changes of the past really took


Fic. 360. Laramie beds (U. Cretaceous) on the west side of the Missouri River, 6 miles north
of Cannon Ball, North Dakota. Dinosaur bones occur in the lower part. (Stanton, U.S. G. S.)


534 THE NEW GEOLOGY


place. “The cutting off of this giant dinosaur dynasty was
nearly if not quite simultaneous the world over,” says Dr. H. F.
Osborn. But what if all these other animals are also to be
included in this event? Can any system of uniformitarianism
be framed which will bear such a strain as the attempt to ac-
count for all this at once?


Hunting Fossils. We must present a few quotations to il-
lustrate how the bones of these animals occur in the great
regions of the West, as well as to show how explorers have
had to work to secure specimens of these animals for our
great museums.

of the famous “Bone-Cabin quarry,” not far from the Medicine
Bow River, in Central Wyoming:


“In the spring of 1898, as I approached the hillock on which the ruin
stands, I observed, among the beautiful flowers, the blooming cacti, and the
dwarf bushes of the desert, what were apparently numbers of dark brown
bowlders. On closer examination, it proved that there is really not a single
rock, hardly even a pebble, on this hillock; all these apparent bowlders are
ponderous fossils which have slowly accumulated or washed out on the sur-
face from a great dinosaur bed beneath. A Mexican sheep herder had
collected some of these petrified bones for the foundations of his cabin, the
first ever built of such strange materials. The excavation of a promising
outcrop was almost immediately rewarded by finding a thigh bone nearly
six feet in length which sloped downward into the earth, running into the
lower leg and finally into the foot, with all the respective parts lying in the
natural position as in life. This proved to be the previously unknown hind
limb of the great dinosaur, Diplodocus.”— “Century Magazine,” 1904, Vol.
68, pp. 680-694.


Some ten miles south of this locality, across the Laramie
plains, is the Como Bluffs quarry, believed to be in the same
set of beds, which are thought to have once been continuous
over all the intervening region. These dinosaur beds are some
274 feet in total thickness; but remains of marine saurians
are found in beds supposed to be both above and below these,
ichthyosaurs in the beds below, and mosasaurs in the beds al-
leged to be above them.


At the Como Bluffs, says Professor Osborn, “single animals lie from
twenty to one hundred feet apart; one rarely finds a whole skeleton, such
as that of Marsh’s Brontosaurus excelsus, the finest specimen ever senured
here, which is now one of the treasures of the Yale museum. More fre-
quently a half or a third of a skeleton lies together. |

“In the Bone-Cabin quarry, on the other hand, we came across a veritable
Noah’s-ark deposit, a perfect museum of all the animals of the period. Here
are the largest of the giant dinosaurs closely mingled with the remains of
smaller but powerful carnivorous dinosaurs which preyed upon them, also


FOSSIL REPTILES 535


those of the slow and heavy-moving armored dinosaurs of the period, as
well as of the lightest and most birdlike of the dinosaurs. Finely rounded,
complete limbs from eight to ten feet in length are found, especially those of
the carnivorous dinosaurs, perfect even to the sharply pointed and recurved
tips of their toes. Other limbs and bones are so crushed and distorted by
pressure that it is not worth while removing them. Sixteen series of vertebre
were found strung together; among these were eight long strings of tail
bones. The occurrence of these tails is less surprising when we come to
study the important and varied functions of the tail in these animals, and
the consequent connection of the tail bones by means of stout tendons and
ligaments which held them together for a long period after death. Skulls
are fragile and rare in the quarry, because in every one of these big skeletons
there were no fewer than ninety distinct bones which exceeded the head in
size, the excess in most cases being enormous.’’— Ib., id.


In the year 1878, soon after the first discovery of these
dinosaur bone beds, the following was written by one who was
intimately connected with their first exploration:

The failure of the earlier explorers to find these marvelous
bone beds, we are told, “is all the more remarkable from the
fact that in several of the localities I have observed acres liter-
ally strewn with fragments of bones, many of them extremely
characteristic and so large as to have taxed the strength of a
strong man to lift them. Three of the localities known to me
are in the immediate vicinity, if not upon the actual town sites,
of thriving villages, and for years numerous fragments have
been collected by (or for) tourists and exhibited as fossil wood.
The quantities hitherto obtained, though apparently so vast,
are wholly unimportant in comparison with those awaiting the
researches of geologists throughout the Rocky Mountain region.
I doubt not that many hundreds of tons will eventually be
exhumed.” (Williston.) Later this author says that his pre-
diction of many hundreds of tons being unearthed in these re-
gions, has been well fulfilled; though “how many tons of these
fossils have since been dug up from these deposits in the Rocky
Mountains is beyond computation.” They are found in all the
leading museums throughout the world.


Recovering Fossil Vertebrates. The following is a good de-
scription of how the work of actually getting these bones out of
the rock is accomplished:


“The heavy ledges above are removed with pick and shovel, often with the
help of dynamite and a team and scraper. As he gets nearer to the stratum
in which the bones lie, the work must be more and more careful. A false blow
with pick or chisel might destroy irreparably some important bony structure.
Bit by bit he traces out the position and lay of the bones, working now mostly
with awl and whisk broom, uncovering the more massive portions, blocking
out the delicate bones in the rock, soaking the exposed surfaces repeatedly


536 THE NEW GEOLOGY


with thin ‘gum’ (mucilage) or shellac, channeling around and between the
bones until they stand out on little pedestals above the quarry floor. Then,
after the gum or shellac has dried thoroughly and hardened the soft parts,
and the surfaces of bone exposed are further protected by pasting on a layer
of tissue paper, it is ready for the ‘plaster jacket.’ This consists of strips of
burlap dipped in plaster of Paris and pasted over the surface of each block
until top and sides, all but the pedestal on which it rests, are completely
cased in, the strips being pressed and kneaded close to the surface of the
block as they are laid on. When this jacket sets and dries the block is rigid
and stiff enough to lift and turn over; the remains of the pedestal are
trimmed off and the under surface is plastered like the rest. With large
blocks it is often necessary to paste into the jacket, on upper or both sides,
boards, scantling or sticks of wood to secure additional rigidity. For should
the block ‘rack,’ or become shattered inside, even though no fragments were
lost, the specimen would be more or less completely ruined.

“The next stage will be packing in boxes with straw, hay, or other
materials, hauling to the railway, and shipment to New York.”’— Matthew,
“Dinosaurs,” pp. 118, 119.


CHAPTER XXXV


The Cenozoic Group— The
Tertiary System


Classification. In the Cenozoic, we have the last of the great
geological divisions. By those who believe in the geological ages,
it is called the Age of Mammals and of Modern Floras. The fol-
lowing are the subdivisions as given by Schuchert and others:


| Quaternary D sata Pleistocene
| Late Tertiary Pliocene
CENOZOIC | I (Neogene) Miocene
Tertiary
Early Tertiary Oligocene
(Paleogene) Eocene
Paleocene


Historical. In the early days of geology, the entire series of
rocks was divided into Primary, Secondary, Tertiary, and
Quaternary. Thus these last two names are a survival of an
old system of classification, and are continued to-day in geologi-
cal nomenclature merely as a matter of convenience, though
they have entirely lost their etymological significance. In the days
of Werner, what we now call the Tertiary was termed the
Alluvium, and was supposed to represent the work done by the
great Deluge of Noah. About 1810, however, Cuvier and others
began to study carefully the strata underlying Paris, made up
of sands, clays, marls, limestone, gypsum, etc., lying quite hori-
zontally and mostly unconsolidated. A little later the strata
under and around London and in Hampshire, in the south of
England, were studied, and were thought to be the exact
equivalents of those in the so-called Paris basin, those in Eng-
land being termed the London basin and the Hampshire basin
respectively. These English beds were regarded as the equiva-
lents of those in France, because in each case, these beds rested
as being very abundant on the flanks of the Apennines, in Italy;
and a little later others were found in the south of France which
were supposed to be intermediate between those of the Paris
basin and those of Italy. In 1833, Sir Charles Lyell worked out


(537)


538 THE NEW GEOLOGY


a table showing the percentage of “living” and “extinct” Mol-
lusca in these different beds; and on this basis, he arranged
them in chronological order as follows, reading upward:


Pliocene Sub-Apennines 35 to 50% living species
Miocene “South of France 17% living species
Eocene London and Paris 31% living species


With further study, these percentages were found to be somewhat in-
exact; but the method has been adapted to the progress of discovery, and in
its revised form is still largely used as the basis for classifying these Ter-
tiary and Post-Tertiary or Pleistocene deposits. The following is the present
system of classification, as given by Schuchert:


Quaternary Pleistocene from 90 to 100% of living Mollusca


Pliocene from 50 to 90% of living Mollusca
Neogene Š ie
Miocene from 20 to 40% of living Mollusca


Tertiary


Eocene from 1to 5% of living Mollusca


Oligocene from 10 to 15% of living Mollusca
Paleogene
Paleocene practically no living Mollusca


The Artificiality of These Subdivisions. As will be very
readily understood, these subdivisions of the Tertiary system
(and also of the Quaternary) are the most arbitrary and arti-
ficial of all the geological classifications. The beds are more
frequently in isolated patches here and there, giving less op-
portunity for stratigraphical comparisons, and this fact has
given more opportunity for the full exercise of this percentage
system of classification. Of course, to-day it is not the Mollusca
alone which are thus considered in deciding whether a certain
set of beds should be classed as Eocene, Miocene, or Pliocene;
all the other types of life are also taken into consideration. For
instance, it is assumed that all the mammals of the Tertiary -
are extinct species. In actual practice, this means that when-
ever fossil mammals are found which are plainly like living
species, they must be excluded from the Tertiary, and called
Post-Tertiary or Pleistocene; or, as another alternative, a new
generic name can be invented for them, and then they can be
left in the Tertiary and regarded as “extinct species.” On the
other hand, if in a new set of beds the fossils do not show
any close approximation to modern living forms — if, for ex-
ample, they should happen to contain bones of large reptiles —
the beds would then have to be assigned to the Mesozoic. If,
however, they contained mammals, but of a very strange or
“primitive” type, the beds might be classed as Paleocene or
Eocene, certainly not as Pliocene or Pleistocene.


THE CENOZOIC GROUP — TERTIARY SYSTEM 539


— rs


|
[ote
| YON


erates
SA
Sree
PS
SOK
SS


Z ARS


Wee


RUS


WERN
X N

m

3

°

°

®

® ~~

2 at

= o, - °°, a Si cx


* > = > = ç a
= 3


=
Fic. 361. Map showing the outcrops of the “earlier” Tertiary roc
Oligocene) in North America. (After Bailey Willis, U. S. G. S.)


Under these circumstances, the various divisions of the
Cenozoic group could hardly fail to show a graded approxima-
tion to the modern living types of life. But to claim that the
results of such an artificial arrangement prove anything re-
garding the way in which the various lines of animals have
evolved, such as the horse, the elephant, the camel, or the hog,
is to show a lack of mental clearness.

Difficulties. In actual field work, it is often impossible to
say to which of these subdivisions a certain set of strata should
be assigned. This difficulty is evaded or postponed by the very
sensible custom of giving to these beds a local geographical
name, and awaiting the pronouncement of expert paleontologists
for the exact classification. This is a very convenient method


540 THE NEW GEOLOGY


in itself; but it also serves to illustrate the purely artificial
character of this whole system of classification.

Usually it has not been very difficult to find a way of placing
a new set of beds wholly in the Tertiary, or wholly in the
Mesozoic; and thus it has long been the custom to speak of the
marked break in the fossils in passing from the Cretaceous,
the last division of the Mesozoic, to the first of the Tertiary. But
in many areas, as in the Great Plains region east of the Rockies,
formations have been found where the animals, both vertebrates
and invertebrates, should be classed. as Cretaceous, while the
plants are those of the Tertiary (Fort Union formation).

Consolidation. Many beds of the Tertiary formations are
composed of unconsolidated materials. This was the case in
England and France, where these strata were first examined;
and it was long assumed to be the case with the Tertiary forma-
tions everywhere. But with the progress of exploration, many
instances have been found where beds which must be classed
as Tertiary are just as fully consolidated and metamorphosed
as any of the so-called “older” formations. Eocene schists in
the Alps and Eocene marbles in the Himalayas are examples
of this sort; while in many places on the Pacific coast, even the
middle or “later” Tertiaries “‘are folded or otherwise altered so
that they are as much consolidated as are the formations of the
Paleozoic.” (Schuchert.) As we shall see in a later chapter,
this is also true even of some of the strata classed as Pleistocene
or Post-Tertiary.

Paleocene Series

Distribution. In America, so few localities are known where
rocks are found which can be classed as Paleocene, that this
name is not in common use in this country, the Eocene being
made to include all the first formations of the Tertiary. In
Europe, this term has been used for some time, and it is re-
ceiving wider recognition of late in this country as well.

To the east of the Rockies are large areas (the Denver and
the Livingstone beds) which by some are classed with the Paleo-
cene, because of the fossil plants which they contain. But as
they contain also remains of dinosaurs, most geologists place
them with the Cretaceous. The Fort Union beds, however,
which are extensively shown in Wyoming, Montana, North
Dakota, and Canada, are quite generally classed as the lowest of
the real Tertiary beds. They consist chiefly of clays and sand-
stones, and contain the remains of some fresh-water shells; but
the fact that they contain also the bones of some mammals is
considered sufficient, in the minds of most geologists, to war-


Fic. 362.


35


THE CENOZOIC GROUP — TERTIARY SYSTEM 541


Map of Southwestern Wyoming and Northern Utah, showing partial areas of the
Wasatch, Wind River, Bridger, and Uinta formations. Extensive areas of the Wasatch are
purposely omitted. (After H. F. Osborn and F. B. Loomis.)


542 THE NEW GEOLOGY


rant classing them with the Tertiary formations. Beds with
very similar plants have been found in Greenland and Alaska.

In New Jersey (Shark River beds) are some marls and
glauconite sands which rest upon Cretaceous strata. The Med-
way beds on the Gulf Coast, consisting also of glauconite sands,
clays, and limestones, and also the Wilcox (Lignitic formation)
beds, are classed as belonging to the lowest Tertiary.

On the western border between New Mexico and Colorado
are two related series of beds (Puerco and Torrejon) contain-
ing bones of mammals, which unitedly are regarded as equiva-
lent to the Fort Union beds. In Patagonia, beds have been
found which contain the remains of mammals of the same grade
as some of these beds from New Mexico and Colorado (Puerco) ;
and these are regarded as also belonging to the “earliest” Ter-
tiary, or the Paleocene. In Europe, extensive areas in the south
of England, Belgium, and the north of France have furnished
mammalian remains so remarkably like the Torrejon as to make
them equivalent. Similar beds have been found in Denmark, in
Central Russia, in the Pyrenees, and in Egypt.

Fossils are not very abundant in these rocks, all of the most
distinctive types of both the Cretaceous and the Middle Tertiary
being absent. Low or “primitive” types of mammals are the
most characteristic types; or perhaps it would be more correct
to say that those beds which do not show any distinctive Middle
Tertiary mammals or invertebrates, but which instead show
only certain “generalized” or “primitive” types of mammals, are
classed as Paleocene.

_Eocene Series


Distribution. Along the lower Atlantic and Gulf borders
are many beds classed as Eocene. In New Jersey, Maryland,
Virginia, and the Carolinas, they consist of unconsolidated sands
and clays, with some greensand (glauconitic) ; and in general,
it may be said that they here compose the surface beds and dip
gently toward the ocean. On the Gulf border, and extending
around the Mississippi embayment as far’as Texas, are larger
beds, some of which are quite hard limestones, sandstones, and
shales, with extensive deposits of brown coal, or lignite. Some
of these deposits (Jackson formation) contain the massive ver-
tebre of the extinct whale, Zeuglodon, in such vast numbers
that in Alabama they were long “used for making walls, or
were burned to rid the fields of them” (Dana), these vertebræ
being a foot and a half long and a foot in diameter.

Whales and other large sea animals sometimes become
stranded in modern times, on the sand of the shore; but here


THE CENOZOIC GROUP — TERTIARY SYSTEM 543


we are not dealing with one or two individuals, but with great
numbers. The catastrophic nature of the event evidenced is
well stated by the Nestor of American geology:


“Vertebre were so abundant on the first discovery in some places that
many of these Eocene whales must have been stranded together, in a com-
mon catastrophe, on the northern borders of the Mexican Gulf,— possibly
through a series of earthquake waves of great violence; or, by an elevation
along the sea limit that made a confined basin of the border region, which
the hot sun rendered destructive alike to zeuglodons and their game; or,


Fic. 363. Projecting ledges of Eocene limestone resting on Cretaceous shale, at White
Bluff, Rio Grande, Texas. The strata are conformable. The Eocene strata are well
consolidated. (Stephenson, U. S. G. S.)


by an unusual retreat of the tide, which left them dry and floundering for
many hours under a tropical sun.”— Dana, “Manual,” p. 908; edition of 1894.


On the Pacific coast, the Coast Range shows Eocene rocks
along its eastern flank (Tejon). The plateau region west of the
Rocky Mountains shows an astonishing number of Eocene beds,
some of which have become famous all the world over for the
bones of mammals which have been unearthed from them. Of
these Eocene deposits, the Wasatch formation is found from
New Mexico, over wide areas in Eastern Utah and Western
Colorado, to the Uinta Mountains, and by a narrow band ex-
tending northward and expanding so as to cover Southwestern
Wyoming. Much of the Big Horn Mountains is composed of
Wasatch beds. By some, these Wasatch beds are classed as


544 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 364. Fort Union conglomerate (L. Eocene), 5 miles south of Meeker, Colo-
rado. Here also the Eocene beds are as well consolidated as any of the so-called
“older” formations. (Stanton, U. S. G. S.) ©


Paleocene, because of the low grade of the mammals which
they contain.

The Wind River and the Green River beds, and also the
Bridger beds of the same areas, are names applied to other wide
areas in this plateau region. The first of these series contains
a large number of mammals; the second, numerous plants, in-
sects, and fishes; while the third contains the remains of fishes,
crocodiles, and shells, mixed up largely with volcanic ash. These
Kocene deposits of the plateau region comprise sands and clays,
with occasional conglomerates; they are only partly consoli-


THE CENOZOIC GROUP — TERTIARY SYSTEM 545


dated; and in this semiarid region, they usually weather out
into the fantastic erosion forms known as the bad lands. Tapirs,
giant pigs, titanotheres and uintatheres, which are quite extinct
mammals, and also rhinoceroses, comprise a few of the many
very extraordinary fossil mammals which have been brought to
light from these great beds, which seem to have been literally
Eocene graveyards.

In the Old World, the Eocene comprises wide areas of the
most important mountain regions stretching across Europe and
Asia. The characteristic rocks through this area are the num-
mulitic limestones, made up of the shells of nummulites, which
were Foraminifera of the size of one’s finger nail. Such lime-
stones stretch through Southern France, the Pyrenees, Spain,
much of the Alps, and eastward to Asia Minor. They occur
extensively in the Apennines and the Carpathians; also in Egypt,
and the pyramids and the Sphinx were made of this nummulitic
limestone, the shells sticking out by differential erosion on the
sides of the latter, and being known as ‘“Pharoah’s beans” by
the Arabs. These nummulitic limestones extend over vast
areas of Persia, Afghanistan, the Himalayas, and also in Japan,
the Philippines, Borneo, and Java.


Fic. 365. Upper Jackson sands (U. Eocene), Siwel, Mississippi. (Crider, U. S. G. S.)


546 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 366. Castle Rock, 30 miles northeast of Bellefourche, South Dakota. From the south-
east. Tertiary sandstone resting on Laramie (U. Cretaceous). (Darton, U. S. G. S.)


Floras and Faunas. The flora of the Eocene beds has a very
modern appearance; but it shows warm-climate or even tropical
varieties in what are now comparatively severe climates.
Through Idaho, Wyoming, Montana, and Canada are found such
plants as oaks, willows, beeches, myrtles, poplars, elms, laurels,
magnolias, maples, walnuts, pines, spruces, but also bananas


Fic. 367. Eocene conglomerate cliffs, near Echo, Utah. (Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


THE CENOZOIC GROUP — TERTIARY SYSTEM 547


Fic. 368. Coal bed near the base of the bad lands near the mouth of Salt Creek, Wyoming.
Fort Union formation (L. Eocene). The sandstone parting in the coal thickens rapidly
toward the east, and becomes a thick bed of sandstone. (Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


and palms, with very many others. Many of these have also
been found in the Eocene beds of Alaska and Greenland.

In Europe, the Eocene beds show an even more tropical as-
pect. Here sequoias, ginkgoes, with aloes, pines, and screw
pines, occur along with the more temperate-climate forms al-
ready mentioned.

Of the animals, the genus of foraminifers known as Num-
mulites has already been mentioned. A related genus, Orbito-
lites, occurs in the Eocene rocks of the Gulf border in America.
Corals like our modern corals are plentiful, while all the various
kinds of shellfish are well represented. The fishes and the
reptiles are essentially like the modern living ones. Some large
flightless birds are also found. But it is the mammals to which
especial attention must be given.

The great variety of mammalian forms found in the Eocene
rocks has furnished the opportunity to mark off these rocks in
successive stages, each stage characterized by its own peculiar
type of mammalian life. But after these typical fossil mam-
mals have thus been used as index fossils to determine the
order in which the scattered formations should be arranged,
it is very strange reasoning to take the results of this artificial


548 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 369. “Ship Rock,” near Reva Gap, South Dakota. A peculiar erosional form composed

of White River strata (Oligocene). (Hares, U. S. G. S.) ,
arrangement as evidence regarding the precise order in which
such forms as the horse, the camel, and the elephant have
evolved. Why should our museums still be disgraced with such
unscientific methods of “proving” a pet theory?

A great many curious forms, called “horses,” or “pigs,” or
“elephants,” by courtesy, because somebody can detect some
resemblance to these modern forms in these strange creatures,
are found among these Eocene rocks. But they are of interest
mainly to those who think that by "the circular reasoning al-
luded to above, they can trace back the pedigree of these modern
mammals to their primitive originals. Of more interest from
the point of view of real science are such bizarre forms as
Fobasileus (Fig. 440), a creature with `a body about as large
as that of an elephant, with huge postlike legs, a low, flat skull
with six horns upon it,—two on its nose, one over each eye,
and one over each ear. It had two tusks or canine teeth pro-
jecting from the upper jaw; and from its diminutive brain, it
was probably a creature of slow, dull movement that may have
passed an inoffensive life browsing off the shrubs and trees
where it lived. There is nothing like it alive to-day.


The Oligocene Series


Distribution. On the Atlantic coast, the Oligocene is very
scantily represented; but on the Gulf border are thick beds con-
taining a profusion of invertebrate life. Many of these rocks


THE CENOZOIC GROUP — TERTIARY SYSTEM 549


are also found in the West Indies and in Central America. On
the Pacifie coast, they are extensively shown in Alaska, where
they contain thick beds of lignite, also down the coast of British
Columbia, and in Oregon. The famous John Day beds, which
cover much of the eastern part of the latter State, and also a
small patch in Central Montana, are classed as Oligocene. Im-
mense lava outflows in the Columbia and Snake River region
are referred to this series.

But as before, with the Eocene, the great interior region is
where these rocks are best shown. The Uinta is sometimes
classed as Eocene, but more usually as Oligocene; it gets its
name from the mountains on the border of the Great Basin.
The White River formation covers a wide area over several
States of this region. These beds also have been very fruitful
hunting grounds for the museum collectors.

Large lignite or brown coal beds in Belgium and Germany are
classed with this series. Similar lignite beds are found in Russia
and France, in Switzerland, and in Bavaria. The gypsum beds
near Paris are classed here. Also the peculiar formation known


.


Fic. 370. “Protoceras sandstone” (U. Oligocene) area, Big Bad Lands, South Dakota.
Characteristic erosion forms. (Darton, U. 8. G. 8.)


550 THE NEW GEOLOGY


as the Flysch, a coarse deposit of angular fragments, is classed
as part Eocene and part Oligocene. It is found in the Alps, the
Apennines, the Carpathians, the Caucasus, Asia Minor, and in
many parts of Southern Asia.

In most parts of the tropics, the Oligocene has not been
separated from the series before and after it.

The Uinta beds have given us the great uintatheres, rhinoc-
eroses, tapirs, and camels, with large and numerous crocodiles.
The White River beds contain a very different fauna, which in-


Fig. 371. Moropus, a remarkable ungulate nearly as big as a
horse, with claws instead of hoofs. Oligocene and Miocene of
North America. According to the fashionable method of reason-
ing, this animal was “undoubtedly” descended from the birds.


cludes many Carnivora, such as dogs, saber-tooth cats, and also
the Mesohippus, an animal about as large as a sheep, and the
monstrous Titanotherium, and many allied animals.

The peculiar group of hoglike ruminants called oreodonts
were very abundant, with many small rodents, like squirrels,
mice, rabbits, and beavers.


The Miocene Series


Distribution. Traces of Miocene beds are seen in New
Jersey and Maryland, and from there southward. To the north
of this area, they consist of unconsolidated clays and sands;
but at Richmond, Virginia, they show also diatom ooze; while
in Georgia and Florida, they contain compact limestones.

On the Pacific coast, the Miocene beds attain a great thick-
ness and a wide extent, though chiefly in a long belt parallel with


THE CENOZOIC GROUP — TERTIARY SYSTEM 551


the coast. Here the Monterey formation, comprising much of the
Coast Range and the Santa Cruz Mountains south of San Fran-
cisco, is highly metamorphosed, and in appearance is remark-
ably like the greatly contorted Paleozoic rocks. At Lompoc, in
Santa Barbara County, is an interesting set of beds composed


SE 3


k:
j
N
|.
j
j


S. "+, ERS, ey R


| a ERA GON pet" sapan masc


FiG. 372. Map showing the outerops of the “later” Tertiary rocks (Miocene and
Pliocene) in North America. (After Bailey Willis, U. 8. G. S.)


almost entirely of diatoms and Foraminifera, but packed full of
fossil herrings which have evidently been buried suddenly by
this diatomaceous mass pouring down upon them before they
could get away. Some four square miles of these beds have
been left; the rest (nobody knows how much more in area)
have been eroded away. The organic remains from these
diatoms, fish, and other sources, are supposed to have been the


552 THE NEW GEOLOGY


origin of the vast petroleum deposits found in the Coalinga
district and elsewhere in the Tertiary beds of this State.

Wide areas in the interior of the continent which are of
slight thickness, and which seem to have been formed from the
erosion of the older beds of the present land surface, have been
referred to the Miocene; but some of them are clearly not older
than the Recent. The wide basaltic outflows on the Columbia
and Snake have been called Miocene; but they may belong to
the Recent period. The Florissant beds of Colorado, famous for
their fossil insects and fossil plants, are called Miocene. More
these beds, which are largely the result of the dust from explo-
sive volcanoes.

In Europe, no Miocene occur in England or in many parts of
Northern Europe. In France, Spain, and Portugal, however,
they occur; while very extensive Miocene areas are found in
Italy, Sicily, and much of the northern part of Asia Minor.
They are found in North Africa, in Northwestern India, in
Burma, Japan, and Java. Patagonia, in South America, has
large Miocene areas; and certain Tertiary beds of Australia and
New Zealand have been classed as Miocene, because they con-
tain fossils much like those in Patagonia.


Fig. 373. Restoration of giant pigs, Elotherium (Entelodonts), which were
common in the Middle Oligocene of Europe and America. They had stilted
legs and elongated skulls, and the entire body was of larger proportions than
in the pigs of to-day. (Courtesy of American Museum of Natural History.)


THE CENOZOIC GROUP — TERTIARY SYSTEM 553


Fic. 374. Skeleton of a horse, in Vaquero (L. Miocene) sandstone, Santa Barbara Cañon,
California. This skeleton was situated in a vertical wall. (English, U. S. G. S.)


Fossils. Oaks, elms, beeches, maples, poplars, walnuts,
hickories, magnolias, and sycamores are a few of the common
trees found in the Miocene of Oregon and Yellowstone Park.
Conifers also are abundant in these and equivalent beds, and
these conifers include the Sequoia, or California redwood. All
these trees have likewise been found in the Miocene of the
arctic regions. In Oregon is also found the breadfruit, with
palms in British Columbia. In Europe, the flora is even more
tropical in aspect, resembling the modern flora of India.

The marine invertebrates are much like the present ones
found in the warm waters of the south. Birds are always
scarce as fossils, and verv few have been found in the American
Miocene; but in Europe, the birds of this series resemble the
ones now found in Africa, including parrots, flamingos, ibises,
and secretary birds, with many others that resemble the present
birds of Europe.

The mammals of the American Miocene include wolves,
panthers, saber-tooth tigers, camels, and many rhinoceroses.


554 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 375. Distorted Miocene shales, in a street car cut, in the northern part of Los Angeles,
California. (Arnold, U. S. G. S.)


Fic. 376. Fin Rock and Cape Blanco, Oregon. Cape Blance is composed of Miocene rocks.
The rocks composing the ridge between the spectator and the cape, are Cretaceous,
(Diller, U. S. G. S.)


THE CENOZOIC GROUP — TERTIARY SYSTEM 555


Fic. 377. Lafayette sands (Pliocene) resting upon purple Potomac clays (L. Cretaceous).

In addition to the puzzle of the great stratigraphical gap between these two formations, the

question naturally arises, Why should these Cretaceous beds be still so entirely unconsolidated ?
(Fuller, U. 8. G. S.)


One species of camel-like animal, Alticamelus, was much like the
giraffe in proportions. The horselike animals of the Loup Fork
beds, Protohippus and Hipparion, are small but very interesting
animals, often pointed to as among the ancestors of the modern
horse. They had three toes on each foot. Peccaries, or wild
pigs, are very common in the same beds. The European Mio-
cene strata include much the same animals, also the peculiar
elephantlike Dinotherium, with a flattened head, and two large
tusks in the lower jaws which curved backward like massive
hocks. Animals resembling the mastodon are found in both
Europe and America.

The Miocene mammals of most of the other continents have
not been well worked out. But in the Santa Cruz beds of Pata-
gonia have been found a very interesting array of strange mam-
mals. They include carnivorous marsupials, like the modern
ones of Australia, with others resembling the phalangers of the
same region, and also the American opossum. Rodents similar


556 THE NEW GEOLOGY


to the South American porcupines are common, with armadillos,
glyptodonts, and ground sloths; but the other animals com-
monly found in the North American beds are absent.


The Pliocene Series


Distribution. `A few isolated patches of Pliocene beds have
been recognized in Florida, Georgia, the Carolinas, and Virginia.


Fic. 378. Erosion gullies in Lafayette formation (Pliocene), about 2 miles northwest of
Oxford, Mississippi. The beds consist of thin, reddish, irregular sandy strata, with whitish
clayey sand. (Shaw, U. S. G. S.)


One small set of sands on the island of Martha’s Vineyard are
classed as Pliocene. Parts of Eastern Mexico, with much larger
portions of Yucatan and Central America, are referred to
the Pliocene.

On the Pacific coast, the Pliocene strata extend in a narrow
strip (with many interruptions). through Washington, Oregon,
and California. The Coast Range is partly Pliocene; while
thick beds of sandstones and volcanic materials south of San
Francisco (Merced formation) are also referred to the Pliocene;
though some contend that the upper strata of these beds should
be called Post-Tertiary, or Quaternary.

Small areas in various parts of the interior of the continent
formation is found in the northwest part of Kansas, Northern


THE CENOZOIC GROUP — TERTIARY SYSTEM 557


Nebraska, and Eastern Oregon. Similar areas occur in Oregon
and in Northwestern Texas, mammals like those of South
America having been found at the latter place. “No doubt
much of the surface deposit of the Great Basin and other
regions is Pliocene, but lack of fossils prevents their determina-
tion.” (Scott.) Very many of the great volcanic outflows (fis-
sure eruptions) of Northern California, Nevada, Southern
Idaho, and Eastern Oregon and Washington, have been referred


Fic. 379. Tertiary bluff, 3 miles east of Jines, Texas. (Gould, U. S. G. S.)


to the Pliocene and Miocene, as they lie upon beds classed as
Lower or Middle Tertiary. But it is more than likely that most
of these should be classed as Recent, or even later than the
Pleistocene, as most of the outflows of this character occurred
after most or all of the sedimentary beds were laid down.

In Europe, the Pliocene beds are shown in Belgium and
Northern France; though larger areas occur in Spain, and
Algeria, and very much of Italy and Sicily, and also of Greece,
are classed as Pliocene. The Pikermi beds near Athens, with
the island of Samos, are famous for their mammalian fossils.
Beds of lignite occur in different parts of Germany, in some of
which the plants “are nearly one half conifers, but also include
many American trees, such as walnuts and hickories.” (Scott.)

Extensive beds on the south side of the Himalayas (the Si-
walik Hills formations) have become noted for their remarkable
fossils; while very similar fossils have been found in Borneo


36


THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 380. AMERICAN TERTIARY FOSSILS


1, Ostrea virginiana, X 1⁄2, Miocene. 2, Pecten madisonicus, X %, Miocene. 3, Car-

dita perantiqua, Eocene. Whitfield. 4, Volutolithes sayana, X 34, Eocene. 5, Oliva

carolinensis, X %4, Miocene. 6, Helix dalli, Miocene. White. 7, Planorbis con-

voluta,? Fort Union. Meek. 8, Aturia vanuxemi, X 1⁄4, Eocene. 9, Glyptostrobus

ungert, X 4, Eocene. Lesquereux. 10, Salix sp., X %4, Miocene. (1-5, and 8,

after Whitfield.) (After W. B. Scott, “Introduction te Geology,” permission of
Macmillan Co.) Š


THE CENOZOIC GROUP — TERTIARY SYSTEM 559


and Java. Pliocene strata have also been recognized in Argen-
tina and Patagonia, South America.


Fossils. Very few plants or trees have been found in the
Pliocene beds of North America. In Europe, however, occur
many trees which are now growing only in America or Asia,


Fic. 381. Fossil leaf of the sweet gum tree, liquidambar, from a quarry in the Green River
(Tertiary) formation, Western Wyoming. There are only two living or modern species, one
from Asia Minor, the other from tropical America. (Lee, U. 8. G. S.)


such as tulip trees, magnolias, walnuts, hickories, sequoias,
and many others.

The marine invertebrates are practically those still living in
the localities near where the fossils occur; but it should be re-
membered that only a very small fraction of the great numbers
of genera and species found as fossils in the Mesozoic and
Lower Tertiaries, and which are still alive in our modern oceans
and on our modern lands, have been found as fossils also in the
Pliocene. In other words, these multitudes of modern genera
surviving from the so-called “older” rocks are (by this artificial
arrangement) made to skip the Pliocene “Age,” leaving no
trace of their existence. Many of them seem to skip all of the
Tertiary and the Pleistocene. All of which shows the absurdity


560 THE NEW GEOLOGY


of saying that these Pliocene beds represent the life-forms of
an “age” or “period” in the world’s history.

from the Miocene, with species much more like the modern ones
(for this is why they are classed as Pliocene). Mastodons,
horses, camels, rhBinoceroses, pigs, huge ground sloths, and
armadillos, are some of the representative mammals found in
the Miocene beds of North America. In Europe occurs also the
Dinotherium, with the hippopotamus, the giraffe, and many
others. In the Pikermi formation of Greece and the Siwalik
of India occur the remarkable Samotherium, Sivatherium, Bra-
matherium, and other related forms, which were huge creatures
like the giraffe, with four horns on their heads.


In voleanic tuffs which have been called Pliocene, on the island of Java,
were discovered pieces of a skull, a femur, and some teeth which have been
named Pithecanthropus erectus. These fossils have been much discussed,
and have been called the oldest human remains known. Good authorities,
however, have said that they are the bones of a large gibbon (Hylobates).
It has also been denied that the strata in which these fossils occurred are
really Pliocene. The truth seems to be that these materials are of that
problematical character which leaves the decision regarding them largely
a matter of personal preference; while the decision as to whether these
beds should be called Pliocene or Pleistocene or Recent, is also very much a
matter of personal opinion.

On the basis of the current theories regarding the successive geological
ages, it is difficult to understand why we ought not to find abundant Tertiary
remains over most of Northern and Eastern America, or over the other con-
tinents where no such remains are to be found at all. According to the
current theory, these regions were mostly dry land during the Tertiary
“era,” and were densely populated with mammals, birds, and the various
inferior orders of invertebrates. Why should we not expect to find abundant
traces of their remains over these wide areas, instead of in the few scattered
patches where we really do find them? Surely the few scanty traces of this
profuse Tertiary life which we actually do find along the Atlantic coast
and the Gulf border, as well as in a few isolated spots through the interior,
are quite insignificant in allaying our curiosity, and do not help very much
to remove the charge of absurdity which might be brought against this
theory on this ground alone.


Methods. The great Cuvier was the first to make a scientific
study of the fossil Tertiary mammals of the Paris basin. These
bones had long been known, but were thought to be those of
modern animals. Through careful study and comparison with
the living forms, Cuvier was enabled to reconstruct the long dis-
jected skeletons, bringing bone to bone as they were in life;
and from observing the mutual dependence which subsists be-
tween the different parts of every skeleton, he was often enabled
to determine the shape and character of the missing parts. His


THE CENOZOIC GROUP — TERTIARY SYSTEM 561


Fic. 382. Palm leaf found in the roof of the coal mine at Cokedale, Colorado. Tertiary. The
leaf is 36 inches wide. (Lee, U. S. G. S.)


happy hits at reconstructing an entire animal from only a few
bones of a wholly unknown creature, revealed an almost pro-
phetic insight into the nature of the parts which would some day
be found, when more complete skeletons would be discovered;
and these fortunate guesses have been repeated to wondering
-students ever since, with the accounts of the subsequent finding
of just such animals as Cuvier had predicted. But his curious
mistakes along this line are not so generally remembered; while
his fantastic speculations regarding the alleged “order of crea-
tion,” as revealed in the strata, have acted like a pathologic
taint in the whole subsequent history of the natural sciences.
A great man, a wonderful man, under whom most astonishing
progress was made in understanding the fossil animals and even


THE NEW GEOLOGY


562


“AUD HIOA MON ‘AIOJSIH [EINEN JO WNƏSNW uuətrrəurv JY} Jo suomsor[qnd ay} urozg poonpordar sı yy “jUBIOUZI
a4} ATWO ƏAI99Ə3D 0} poUDIsap ‘o9[quz [VYE AjeInd E SI SIYL “umucuje3əur əuq PUB “ə3m ujool-zəqes JY} PULI JY} “sorəoou
-lyt ey} pus ‘osje YZOUTUTEU I4} YIM ‘speUTUB 4aəulo SIY} [[B SB əuumn Əurgs AIBA JY} JE (II ULI ƏM SB IBJ SE) worrəurv ur PUYXƏ
əureəoəq PUB “srəujo Əy} YIIM Buole ‘sso ona} B se punoj osje st ‘snndg_ ‘estoy uxəpour əy} UAW “A[SNoeueIOduIe}U0D SUUN
AEI OTOM ,səsrou,, P2[[BI-OS əsəu1) [PE JEY} VƏPI ay} PIQIOF 0} PILF [ENJ Jo AsAa}eVYM SBuruqou yM ‘SUOT}eULIOF pə:911e9s K[ƏDIA
WOI dn əpeur ‘UsuUIesUBITE [BIOYIZAB AJINA V st sty} —‘ainjeU ur sny} punoj jou aie “əuqoue əuo uodn pesoduaedns se pəluəs
-DIdƏI JII SUOYLWIOFJ IY} FEY} SI ‘SITY, SB WRIZBIP B uəns ñuruiurgxə uəuQA purur ur IEA 0} s19%J JUBIOdUII ay} Jo IUO “Ege “DIY


assen J,


== = 5 : =: š d
= eae amen | "in


IP s(əyuow Jo əçou) IJ! YPL pue
WO YOY UO SIO] IIA UNM SuOsaoUy er|oqwdATY


snoarejaa)


(snddiyo3)
pipas yo wide HBip ah ye yds wntsayjoreaky foo]


Rs snddyosojosg EEE ee — —


punoa$ ay) Suiyono
$90) apig
saoj IL "bp qs e wunde
tpunos$ əy} urnos
$90) əpiç


S90] IUL


punau$ ay; $urtpnos 10u punos$ ay) Junpno; 10u
#20) əp'ç $20) əpiç
$20] 2244] $90] y


FO BP PLC Rs SUBIR Gy PUP az
P munds yo sudo


| woypuyy |  pogaog | peg ulasuoy jo ədÁ] P pue saeig papiun wasay ut suoyewog
`ISHOH AHL dO NOLLYIOA+T AHL


THE CENOZOIC GROUP — TERTIARY SYSTEM 563


the living ones; yet the baleful effect of the theories initiated
under the dominating spell of his influence has not yet been out-
grown by either geology or zoélogy. t

As already remarked, it has always been the intention of
geologists not to include among the Tertiary species the fossils
of any fishes, reptiles, birds, or mammals which can be shown to
be identical with the corresponding living species. Hence new
specific and often new generic names are given to the fossil
species found in any of the Tertiary beds, though it is almost
certain that in this way many gross mistakes have been made
which tend to cover up the real facts in the case, and which
create mountains of labor for those who wish to work out a
sound science of the fossil forms.

Many thousands of new species and genera have also been
created from the finding of only a few imperfect parts, in some
cases only a few teeth or a single bone. And no allowance
seems ever to be made for the infiuence of a very marked change
in environment in bringing about an adaptive response in both
animals and plants without effecting any real changes worthy of
specific distinction. It is to be hoped that some day a truly
scientific and unprejudiced comparison of all the Tertiary fossils,
to say nothing of those of the Mesozoic and of the Paleozoic,
with the forms now living, will be undertaken by somebody, so
that we may really know the truth about this problem of “ex-
tinct species.” At the present, however, this whole subject is
a mass of utter confusion which no one has had the courage
to attack.


CHAPTER XXXVI


The Quaternary System — The


` Pleistocene Series


Classification. Most geologists consider the Quaternary sys-
tem as including but one series of deposits, called by various
names: Pleistocene, Glacial, and Post-Tertiary. The last term is
an awkward one, and emphasizes a false distinction between these
beds and the Tertiary beds, a distinction which nowhere exists at
all, except over the northeastern part of America and the north-
western part of Europe. The term “Glacial” is open to the
second of the objections just presented against “Post-Tertiary,”
and it has also this additional objection, that it embodies in
itself, in explanation of these deposits, a theory which some
geologists do not believe, but stoutly deny. The term “Drift”
was also used by the early geologists; but this term was dis-
carded by the glacialists for the same reason that some are now
repudiating the term “‘Glacial’’— because it has too much theory
in it. The term “Diluvium” was similarly used by the geologists
of the first part of the nineteenth century, and similarly dis-
carded by those of the last part of the same century. Geologists
like. the present writer, who deny any time-value as attaching
to the fossils per se, might reasonably object to the terms
Quaternary and Pleistocene, as embalming the ideas of a dis-
carded hypothesis. Yet we must have some name by which to
designate these strata; and when all things are considered,
probably the terms at the head of this chapter will be the least
objectionable. They have also the merit of being almost uni-
versally used by modern geologists, though the term “Gla-
cial” is almost as widely used as an equivalent term.

Attention should also be called to the need of grouping
these formations with the Cenozoic group, thereby expressing
their proper classification as being included with the Tertiary
beds among the deposits of true geological age, and marking off
all of these deposits from the “Recent,” or the “Modern,” from
which they are in all parts of the world clearly and sharply
divided. This puts the great hiatus or dividing line between the
true geological and the Recent where it properly belongs. And
it is well to note that this method of classifying these forma-
tions is followed by all the older geologists, including Dana, as
well as many of the modern ones, such as Scott and Schuchert;


(564)


QUATERNARY SYSTEM — PLEISTOCENE SERIES 565


Fic. 384. Cliffs showing the contact line between the Pliocene and the Pleistocene beds, Pacific
Beach, 10 miles north of San Diego, California. The Pleistocene beds on top are quite remark-
ably consolidated. This contact shows an angular unconformity. (Arnold, U. S. G. S.)


though other methods of classifying them are also given in some
textbooks.

Following our usual custom, we shall first state the occur-
rence and the character of the deposits included in the Pleisto-
cene, then give a statement of the kinds of life represented,
and afterwards discuss the theories attached to the explanation
of these phenomena.

Occurrence. Throughout Canada and the northeastern
United States are very many scattered localities (assumed to
have been once continuous and since removed in places by ero-
sion) where occur what are called bowlder clay or “till,” an
unstratified (generally) mixture of clay, angular fragments,
pebbles, and bowlders, some of the last-named being very large.
Some of these bowlders are now seen as “perched rocks” sitting
on the tops of hills or other high spots of ground; and in some
instances, they are as big as a haystack or a small house. Of-
ten these bowlders can be identified as having been derived from
a particular locality where such material forms the country
rock, this locality being sometimes many miles to the north;
and such bowlders are then called traveled bowlders. These
bowlders, large and small, are frequently found to be marked


566 THE NEW GEOLOGY


with scratches or strig, and are often polished or smoothed.
Likewise some of the rock surfaces over which these materials
(bowlder clay, etc.) lie are marked with striz, while others are
smooth and fresh-looking, or unmarked by weathering. Deep
parallel flutings or grooves are sometimes found, which make
the rock look almost like the finish on an enormous picture
frame, these grooves having been made evidently by a hard sub-
stance which has been dragged over the rock surface with tre-
mendous violence. To all this list of phenomena must be added


Fic. 385. Pleistocene conglomeritic valley fill, Pala, San Diego County, California. Why is
this not called a ‘‘glacial moraine’? (Ellis, U. S. G. S.)


many peculiar forms of deposited materials, such as kames,
eskers, drumlins, and so-called moraines, which have been de-

Bowlders. The traveled bowlders which are so character-
istic of these Pleistocene deposits, are of all dimensions from
those of a small pebble to those of a good-sized house. Many
on Cape Cod are 20 feet in diameter. One at Bradford, Massa-
chusetts, is about 30 feet each way, and is supposed to weigh
2,000 tons. Some are even larger than this: the “Churchill
Rock,” at Nottingham, New Hampshire, is 62 feet long, and 40
feet wide and high, and must weigh about 6,000 tons. The
famous ‘“Pierre-a-bot,” on the Jura Mountains, is also 62 feet
- long, but is 48 feet broad. Many other examples have become
sufficiently famous to have received individual names. Cer-
tainly nothing but the most stupendous of forces could have


QUATERNARY SYSTEM — PLEISTOCENE SERIES 567


been adequate to the transportation of such masses imto their
present positions.

That they have actually been transported to the localities
where we now find them seems self-evident when we examine
their surroundings; for they are like strangers, being composed
of kinds of rock quite different from any ledge of rock near by,
the ledges from which they
were apparently derived being
usually a few miles or even a
hundred miles or more away, and
in a more or less northerly di-
rection. This is as true of the
small bowlders as of the large
ones ; the land to the south seems
to be now covered with stones
from the lands lying to the north.
And all this evidently took place
after all or almost all of the
other geological changes; be-
cause these Pleistocene deposits
are the surface rocks over the
areas mentioned, being spread
out indiscriminately over all the
other formations.


Other Drift Materials. As
already remarked, much of this
drift material is apparently quite
unstratified, the ingredients be-
ing mingled pell-mell. Some, , b
however, is plainly stratified ; Fic. 386. Traveled bowlder of coarse schist,
and this stratified portion is "=n fame (Bastin USGS)
scattered over all the areas here
involved. Moreover, it is often so embedded in the other as to
indicate that the latter also was deposited by water, but: water
in extremely violent action.

The whole of this transported material is called the Drift
(very often called the “Glacial” deposits), while the unstratified
portion is called the tiil. Among the latter, there is in many
cases a peculiar mixture of clayey earth and angular stones,
with numerous traveled bowlders. This is called the bowlder
clay, though the term is sometimes used as synonymous with
till. The actual clay of this deposit is often found to have thin,
even layers within it.


568 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Additional Facts. All these phenomena are commonly in-
terpreted as having been due to the action of great glaciers
of almost continental extent which formerly covered the areas
here spoken of. But before we decide whether or not this in-
terpretation is correct, other facts in connection with these
which we have already mentioned, must also be enumerated.

1. In very many localities, more than one layer of til is
found, the two layers being separated by materials plainly
water-borne, among which are the remains of plants and ani-
mals which live only in mild or semitropical climates — such
Pliocene and other beds of the Upper Tertiaries. Sometimes
these inter-tillite (called “interglacial’) beds are distinctly ma-
rine, containing animal remains found only in the deposits
formed by the ocean, including oysters and other sea shells and
even Foraminifera.

2. Most, probably all, of the striz occur only on the surfaces |
of the older or nonfossiliferous crystalline rocks (Archean).

3. The typical traveled bowlders are also invariably com-
posed of the older crystallines, though fragments large or small
of such formations as fossiliferous limestone may occur in the
inter-tillite beds.

4. The limits covered (with many interruptions) by these
Pleistocene deposits are of considerable importance in framing
a true induction regarding the cause which spread them out.
The areas involved extend down in a general way to the Ohio
River in the eastern part of the Mississippi Valley, and to a


Fic. 387. Tower Rock, an erosion remnant of Potsdam sandstone (U. Cambri
“Driftless Area,” Wisconsin. (Alden, U. 8. eee an), in the


QUATERNARY SYSTEM — PLEISTOCENE SERIES 569


L ~


Fic. 388. Pleistocene bluff, right bank of the Cape Fear River estuary, about 2 miles above

Southport, North Carolina. Blue Clay layer, with shell casts and much lignite, at base

( ? Cretaceous). (Fuller, U. S. G. S.)

little south of the Missouri River in the western part. Within
this area is a large “driftless’” area in the central part of
Wisconsin (Fig. 387). But there are no such deposits in Alaska,
and none west of the Rocky Mountains. In Europe, the areas
affected extend down to the central parts of the Continent and
to the Thames and Bristol Channel in the south part of Eng-
land. They extend over the northwest part of Russia; but there
are none in Siberia, or east of the Ural Mountains.

Such are the leading facts relating to the phenomena with
which we here have to deal. It is quite unnecessary to say that
these facts have proved the most perplexing, the most obsti-
nately inscrutable, of any with which geologists have had to
deal. Tons of books and pamphlets and scientific articles have
been written about these phenomena during the past two or
three generations, and the end is not yet in sight. But it would
be quite beyond the scope of a chapter like this one to enter at
length into the discussion of the perplexities of this subject.
Here it must suffice to state briefly some of the conclusions
which seem to be warranted by the facts as we now know them.


570 THE NEW GEOLOGY


H. H. Howorth. The arguments against the glacial theory
have been ably presented by Sir Henry H. Howorth, first in a
long series of articles in the Geological Magazine, of London,
and afterwards gathered into volumes, one entitled “The Mam-
moth and the Flood,” two entitled “The Glacial Nightmare and
the Flood,” and two more entitled “Ice or Water.” In these
volumes, the author seems to make out a strong case, first,
against the possibility of glaciers’ ever being able to do the
kind of work which we see in these Pleistocene beds; second,
in favor of an abnormal sweep of waters as being the undoubted
cause behind these phenomena. So far as I am aware, these
elaborate and scholarly works of Howorth have never been an-
swered, and have never been met in any adequate or detailed
way; and until some such answer is forthcoming, we may con-
sider his main thesis unanswerable, and needing no supple-
mentary arguments here.

That in the Alps and other mountains, glaciers once existed
of much greater extent than at present, is a fact easily sus-
ceptible of proof. But that a great sheet or great sheets of ice
once spread over the “drift” areas in America and Europe, that
this ice was competent to travel over hundreds or thousands of
miles of level ground, and that it could dig out lake basins,
erode river channels, and spread out the well-stratified materials
constantly found associated with these other phenomena, seems
utterly incapable of proof, and wholly incredible.

As for the elaborate distinctions made between the different
deposits, with many “interglacial periods,” etc., Howorth says
he is a—

“complete disbeliever in any such separation, except as a mere local phenom-
enon. Whichever way we view the facts, they seem to point to these beds
as representing different phases of one movement representing one period
of no long duration; and the differences in the beds seem to mark, not the
operation of different and widely separated forces, but the manifold handi-
work of water which at one and the same time can and does lay down
shingle beds in one place, sand banks in another, and mud in a third, ac-
cording to the force and character of its currents. This view is not my own
only, it is shared to a large extent by some of the most distinguished ex-
plorers of the glacial beds. They have pointed out that the same shells oc-
cur at all supposed horizons in them, that pockets of the same kind of sands
and gravels are found embedded in the midst of the clays like plums in a
pudding, and traversing and overlapping lines of junction and of bedding
and that the beds themselves are ranged in no certain order of sequence,


but most irregularly, so that no kind of suggested arrangement suits any
two localities.”—“Nightmare,” pp. 843, 844. l


Regarding the idea of huge continental ice sheets, this author
declares:


QUATERNARY SYSTEM — PLEISTOCENE SERIES 571


“T not only disbelieve in, but I utterly deny the possibility of ice having
moved over hundreds of miles of level country, such as we see in Poland and
Russia, and the prairies of North America, and distributed the drift as we
find it there. I further deny its capacity to mount long slopes, or to traverse
uneven ground except when under the impulse of gravity. I similarly deny to
it the excavating and denuding power which has been attributed to it by those
who claim it as the excavator of lakes and valleys; and I altogether ques-
tion the legitimacy of arguments based upon a supposed physical capacity
which can not be tested by experiment, and which is entirely based upon
hypothesis.”— Id., Preface, pp. xiv, xv. `


Other Considerations. That the vast area of Northeastern
America known as the great Canadian “shield” should have
been above the ocean for the uncounted ages since Archean
time (according to the popular theory), without having its rocks
weathered, and immense accumulations upon it due to this
weathering — in other words, without showing everywhere deep
residual materials, probably containing many relics of Mesozoic
and Cenozoic life — is wholly unreasonable. But over this vast
area, there is practically nothing in the way of such results
from the disintegration of the bed rock. Instead, these basal
rocks are covered with transported materials, and these trans-
ported materials often contain the remains of plants and ani-
mals so wholly strange and foreign to the present climate and
general environment as to make an abrupt break between the
two eras, the geological and the modern, instead of that gradual
transition which it has been the business of uniformity to
establish.

This, it seems to me, is the great subconscious reason for the
popularity of the glacial theory: It furnishes a sort of mental
buffer, an intellectual shock-absorber, enabling the uniformi-
tarian to pass from that old world of so many wonders in plants
and in animals, as well as in its climate, over to the modern
world, with as little sense of catastrophe as possible. A few
hundred thousand years of a recurrent glacial climate, or per-
haps a million or two, make it easier to deny or ignore the real
abruptness of the change from that ancient world to the modern
one. And in this legerdemain, time is supposed to be the equiva-
lent of power, and equal to the task of effecting any sort of trans-
formation whatever.

Raised Beaches. There are other phenomena scattered over
the whole globe which manifestly belong to this transition
period between the true geological era and the modern. To this
class belong the raised beaches around practically all the con-
tinents. In the high latitudes of the arctic, these old sea
beaches or strands are often at considerable elevations, while


572 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 389. The so-called “parallel roads” (terraces) of Glen Roy, Scotland.
(After W. Lamond Howie.)


as a rule they are nearer to the present sea level in more
southerly latitudes. San Pedro Hill, however, offers a good ex-
ample of these phenomena. It stands at the southwest corner
of the wide Los Angeles plain of Southern California, and is
1,000 feet high; and it has eleven distinct wave-cut terraces on
its southern side, or the side facing the ocean, these being
clearly old strand lines, and formed during the period when the
lands and the oceans were taking on their present relationships.


Terraces. And the high terraces which are found along the
valleys of almost all headwaters and mountain streams, tell


z e T E A oe
Fic. 390. Skeleton of mammoth (Elephas primigeniug). (After d'Orbigny.)


QUATERNARY SYSTEM — PLEISTOCENE SERIES 573


substantially the same story. Many of these are in such posi-
tions that to bring flowing water up to the levels where we
find them, would render necessary the submergence of almost
whole continents. And of course it would be more convenient
to suppose that vast glaciers
had dammed back the waters,
so as to render the formation
of such terraces possible. But,
unfortunately for this glacial
theory, such high terraces are
not at all confined to northern
lands, but are found as well
throughout tropical and semi-
tropical regions. In fact, they
constitute a world-wide series
of phenomena which manifestly
record the period when the
waters were making their final
retreat from off the gradually
emerging lands.

This is admittedly only a
theory; but it is a theory
which accords admirably with
the known facts,—a series of
facts which are not confined
to one or two localities, but
which are almost universal over


Fic. 391. Elephant tusk found during
the globe. mining operations on the ground of the
: 2 Tolstoi Mining Company, at Boob Creek,

Fossil Elephants. The fos- pali (Harrington; U. 6, G6.)


sil mammals of the Pleistocene

include a great variety of species, and a profusion of indi-
vidual specimens, while their enormous size is a prominent
characteristic.

One of the most typical species is the mammoth, Elephas
primigenius. Its remains are found in great numbers over
nearly all North America, Europe, and Northern Asia. It is
identical with the modern Asiatic elephant (Elephas indicus),
there being only minor and quite insignificant differences be-
tween them, chiefly in the pattern of the molar teeth, the transi-
tion from the one to the other being “almost imperceptible.”
(Flower and Lydekker, “Mammals, Living and Extinct,” pp.
429, 424.) Specimens of the mammoth have been found which
indicate an animal fourteen feet high, or three feet taller than


37


574 THE NEW GEOLOGY


the great African elephant, Jumbo. (Grabau, “Textbook,” Part
2 p. 860.) Other varieties of elephant have received specific
names; but there are only unimportant differences which sepa-
rate them from the mammoth and the modern species.

But an even larger species of elephant found as a fossil, was
the Mastodon americanus. This animal was some 25 feet in


Fic. 392. Skeleton of the American mastodon (Mastodon americanus)
(X 1/60).


length, including about 7 feet for the tusks. Remains of the
mastodon are abundant over most of the northern United States,
also in the southern part of the Mississippi Valley, and in Eu-
rope. That is, these fossils, with those of the mammoth and
other typical Pleistocene mammals, are found far outside of
the Drift area proper. The specimens of the mastodon, like
those of the mammoth, are often entire, with indications of
undigested food. Many individual specimens are also sometimes
found in the same locality, as if they had all been buried together.


Fic. 393. Teeth of mastodon and elephant.


QUATERNARY SYSTEM — PLEISTOCENE SERIES 575


Remains of the tapir, camel, rhinoceros, saber-toothed tiger
(Smilodon), gigantic ground sloth (Megatherium), and horse,
with many other remarkable animals, have been found in vari-
ous parts of North America.


Foreign. In countries where there is nothing corresponding
to the “Drift” proper, it is difficult or impossible to separate the
Pleistocene deposits from the Tertiary, and also difficult to sepa-
rate them from the really
modern deposits. But we
shall follow the classifica-
tion as usually given, with
this proviso,—that in
some localities, the mod-
ern deposits are prob-
ably inextricably mixed
with the Pleistocene.

South America has
afforded some amazing
specimens of animal life;
but most of its bizarre
forms, once thought to
have been peculiar to
that continent, have
since been found also in
the lower parts of North
America, including even Fic. 394. Mylodon robustus. (After d'Orbigny.)
parts of the United States.

One of the earliest to be discovered of these strange fossil
animals from South America, was the Megatherium, a slothlike
animal larger than the rhinoceros, a skeleton in the British
Museum being 18 feet long. “Its massy limbs were more like
columns for support than like organs of motion. The femur
was three times as thick as an elephant’s; the clumsy tibia and
fibula were soldered together; the huge tail was like another
hind leg, making a tripod to support the heavy carcass when the
animal raised itself against a tree and slowly wielded its great
arms; and the hands terminating the arms were about a yard
long, and ended in long claws.” (Dana.) It seems quite impos-
sible to determine whether or not this huge beast was in any
way related to the present sloth of South America, except in a
general morphological resemblance.

Another edentate from South America, though since found
in Mexico and even in the United States, was the Glyptodon, an


576 THE NEW GEOLOGY


animal that is always compared with the little modern arma-
dillo. The Glyptodon looked much like a giant turtle, being
some 9 feet long. However, it was not a reptile at all, but a
true mammal.

“Why such a form as the Glyptodon should have failed to
keep his ground is,” as Parker remarks, “a great mystery;
nature seems to have built him for eternity.”

In Europe and Asia, we find several of the species mentioned
already from North America, with many additional ones, in-
cluding the hippopotamus, remains of the latter being found in
such northern parts as England.

The broken bones of many of the larger mammals are fre-
quently found jumbled together in the limestone fissures (often
called “caves”) of France, Belgium, and England, into which
they apparently have been washed by the same agency that
spread out the “drift” over these northern regions. In a few
instances, such bone breccias have been discovered in true caves;
and in these, human remains also have been occasionally found.
But hitherto it has proved impossible to settle definitely whether
the latter represent men who lived contemporary with the
mammoth and the hippopotamus in Northwestern Europe, or
whether they represent other men, later immigrants into these
territories, whose remains were in one way or another, by de-
liberate interment or by accident, mixed with these antediluvian
animals. To the present writer, it seems more probable that no
genuine antediluvian human remains have yet been discovered
in these cave deposits, or in any other formations from West-
ern Europe.

Australia also has given us some huge creatures, some of the
fossil wombats being as large as an ox; while the Diprotodon,
an animal “closely allied to the living, grass-eating kangaroos”
(Nicholson), was as big as a hippopotamus, and possibly some-
what similar in habits.


Fic. 395. Glyptodon clavipes (> 1/30).


QUATERNARY SYSTEM — PLEISTOCENE SERIES 577


Many of the fossil mammals of Australia were marsupials, as
are almost all the larger animals found in that region to-day.


The Life of the Pleistocene


Ambiguity. Within the strict limits of the area embraced
by the “Drift,” or the so-called “Glacial” deposits, remains of
marine invertebrates are not very abundant, occurring only in
the few inter-tillite beds of strictly marine origin. These -
marine invertebrates are much like those of the present day,
though they often show an incongruous mixture of arctic and,
tropical forms in the same beds. Much the same ambiguity at-
tends the plants found in the lignite beds, which are also occasion-
ally found intercalated between the beds of till or other Pleisto-
cene deposits.

On the other hand, as has already been stated, outside the
strict limits of the so-called “Glacial” deposits, as in Siberia,
Africa, South America, or even in the Southern States of
America, no clear line of distinction has been attempted between
the Pliocene beds and those of the Pleistocene. Three or four
typical deposits from widely separated localities will serve to
show the character of these beds, and also to indicate that they
do not help very much in the way of smoothing out the transi-
tion between the ancient world and the modern one.

Barbados Earths. We will first go to the West Indies. The
island of Barbados has a colored clay (Barbados earth) which
contains an abundance of Radiolaria, similar to the radiolarian
deposits now forming at the bottom of the deeper parts of the
ocean, mainly, however, in the Pacific and the Indian Ocean.
On the island are also limestones composed of tests like those
comprising the globigerina ooze at the bottom of the Atlantic.

That this represents an elevation of the bottom of the deep
water within quite recent time, can hardly be doubted. But
that anything like a gradual movement of this nature is now
taking place, is entirely without proof. If we associate this
elevation with the other geological changes, we can have an ex-
planation of it whenever we arrive at a satisfactory explanation
of the others. It is evidently of the same order; and it is mani-
festly an event of no great antiquity. This fact would seem to
imply that the other geological changes of similar character may
not be of any great antiquity.

La Brea Formation. About nine miles to the west of Los
Angeles, Southern California, are some tar pools (La Brea for-
mation), caused by the petroleum of the Hollywood district
adjoining seeping up through fissures and preserving almost as


`OSIXƏ]N JO APIO OY} 01 VYSBIGeN uo] pawAu1nos
rddıssıssı ey} JO Ysəa. pəñuwr uəoodə əuəooqstə[d 94} ur yuwsudə[ə [errədurr əuL  'puno:r3ə:oy oy} ut Yong 3rq ay} YIM 10 ‘wry əpısəq ayers ay} ujrA
wig e1edui0g ‘sejesuy soy ul IV pue ‘PIUA “Kt0SIH JO wnəsny Əul 3B uoryqryxə uo YUBYdele penadur əy} JO uoys 94} JO AƏIA V “968 DIA


(578)


QUATERNARY SYSTEM — PLEISTOCENE SERIES 579


originally deposited a vast assortment of mammal skeletons.
Some modern animals have tumbled into these pits and have be-
come preserved also; but that the deposit is primarily due to the
oil's having seeped up and preserved a deposit previously there,
is proved by the fact that out-
side the limits of the effects of
the tar, the soil is very calca-
reous, as if originally crammed
full of bones likewise, but
these bones subsequently de-
cayed, because the tar did not
reach them. Another fact
proving that the majority of
these animals did not come
along and tumble into this Fuck 397;


š Saber-tooth tiger (Machairodus)
tar, is that the bones of all, ex- from the La Brea (Pleistocene) formation


of Los Angeles, California.


cept a few modern specimens,

are broken, mashed, contorted, and mixed in a most heterogene-
ous mass, such as could never have resulted from the chance
trapping and burial of a few stragglers.

Moreover, the animals found here are such as have never
lived in this vicinity since the great earth-changes took place.
They comprise such animals as the great ground sloth, the
saber-tooth tiger, both mammoths and mastodons, a camel, and
species of horse and bovines which were extinct when the whites
came here. Even a peacock, which is now restricted to the
Asiatic tropics, occurs here, with a few other birds, some of
which may have been caught in the tar, as they are such as
sometimes visit this part of the world. But when the whites
came to this region, there were scarcely any animals here, ex-
cept a few half-starved coyotes and rattlesnakes wandering
about among the manzanita and sagebrush.

Obviously we have here a museum made by nature, preserv-
ing the remains of a prehistoric fauna which was buried in
great quantities, and preserved in an almost perfect state, so
far as the materials of the bones themselves are concerned;
though, as previously stated, the bones are in most cases broken
and thoroughly mixed together. In Pit No. 3 were found the
skulls of no less than 268 saber-tooth tigers; while in Pit No.
9 were seventeen elephants (Hlephas imperator), besides several
mastodons, “and a great quantity of bones of the. ancient ox,
giant sloth, horse, lion, saber-tooth, wolf, and cave bear” (F. S.
Daggett), with thousands of bones of smaller animals.


580 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Palermo Breccias. We will next go to the island of Sicily,
in the Mediterranean. Here we have a most interesting mass
of bones, mostly of the hippopotamus, with a few elephants
and other animals, in the bone breccias near Palermo. Twenty
tons of these bones were shipped from one pocket or cave-
deposit within the first six months after their commercial value
was discovered, “and they were so fresh that they were sent to
Marseilles to furnish animal charcoal for use in the sugar
factories.” (Prestwich.) That some extraordinary occurrence
caused this astonishing mass of bones, is proved by the fact that
“the bones are those of animals of all ages down to the fetus.”
(Prestwich.) And that something more than a mere earth-
quake wave, or some other sudden rise of the water, was the
cause of this phenomenon, is proved by the known habits of
this animal; for it is as much at home in the water as a duck
or a beaver. And it manifestly has not lived in this locality
within historic times — indeed, could not live there in the
present state of climate there prevailing, even though the
climate be mild and salubrious.


Siberian “Mummies.” We will next go to Northern Siberia,
near the mouth of the Lena River, which is very near to the


eh


y 52 hee teil Ë Š > =


Fic. 398. Section of the great bar of the old “Lake Iroquois” shore line, near Hami
: c Sirens : ; ilton, On-
tario. “Lake Iroquois” is the name given to the much larger lake which once existed Gace the
spot where Lake Ontario is now. (Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


QUATERNARY SYSTEM — PLEISTOCENE SERIES 581


Fic. 399. Old shore line of Lake Bonneville, on a promontory of the Wasatch Range, Utah.
(Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


coldest spot on the face of the earth; for the cold pole is not by
any means at the north geographical pole, but here in North-
eastern Siberia. Here mammoths, rhinoceroses, and other ani-
mals, seem to fill the frozen soil in certain localities like the
bodies of soldiers in a burial trench after a battle. Since the
tenth century at least, perhaps for a much longer period, a regu-
lar market in the fossil ivory of the mammoth tusks has been
carried on both eastward to China and westward to Europe,
and “fossil ivory has its price current as well as wheat.”
(Flower and Lydekker.) Not all the specimens are preserved
with the flesh upon them; for in many places, the soil thaws
out more or less during the short summer. But occasionally
one of these ancient animals comes to light with the flesh in
such a state of preservation that the dogs and wolves are greedy
to eat the meat, and a party of scientists even had a meal off
this ancient meat which has been kept in cold storage so many
millenniums.

Bones and tusks of these animals, which are identical with
the modern Indian elephant, though larger, are found over
practically all of Northern Europe and Northeastern America.
And it is at least allowable to think that the same cause (what-
ever it was) which extinguished so many thousands of them in
arctic Siberia may have been the cause of their extermination


582 THE NEW GEOLOGY


over these other regions also; only in Europe and America, the
frost has not kept the flesh in such a state of preservation as
it has in Siberia.

Much has been said about the coat of hair and wool which
this animal possessed. All land mammals, except in cases of de-
generation, are provided with a good coat of hair. Doubtless
this ancient elephant had use for his coat, which his modern
relative in India has not; for he was evidently adapted to the
cooler plateaus or mountain sides. But that any amount of
fur could make his life safe in a tundra winter may well be
doubted. However, it is not so much a case of what amount of
cold he could stand, as of what he could get to eat. For over
`a thousand square miles of such country as that in which their
fossil mummies are now found, there is scarcely enough vegeta-
tion to keep half a dozen of these animals alive for a month,
even during the short summer; while they seem to have been
entombed by the thousands or the millions. It is clear that at
the time these animals lived here, the climate must have been
very different from what it is now.


The Sudden Change. And it is equally evident that the
change of climate must have been sudden, and as permanent as
it was sudden. As that veteran geologist, James D. Dana, ex-


Fic. 400. Terraces and shore lines of former Lake Bonneville, near Wellsville,

Utah. Notice the strong contrast between the topography of the hills above the

old shore line and that of the part below, indicating a great difference of age and
conditions of erosion. (After Gilbert.)


QUATERNARY SYSTEM — PLEISTOCENE SERIES 583


presses it, the cold “became suddenly extreme, as of a single
winter’s night, and knew no relenting afterwards.” How this
sudden change of climate could take place in this part of the
earth without affecting the whole earth to a very large and
striking degree, is incomprehensible. Here, then, is one fact that
we can depend upon, a radical and extreme change of climate


Fic. 401. Old shore line or beach of Lake Bonneville, on the north face of Traverse Range,
Utah. (Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


within the limits of time embraced by animals now alive in our
modern world. And this sudden and wide-affecting change of
climate is a part of the world-changes with which we have to
deal in these Pleistocene deposits.

Relic Lakes. Another line of facts of much importance in
this connection, is that regarding what are called relic seas and
lakes; that is, bodies of water now wholly unconnected with the
ocean, which contain evidence of having been connected with
the ocean in some way, at some time in the not very remote
past. Such a relic lake or sea is the Caspian, the waters of
which are chemically very like the ocean, so far as their
dissolved salts are concerned. And its fauna bears distinct
evidence of a former but recent mingling of the ocean with its
waters; for it includes salmon, herring, and other ocean fish,


584 THE NEW GEOLOGY


with even porpoises and seals. Lake Baikal, in Siberia, also has
herring, salmon, marine sponges, and seals. Lake Onondaga,
once a part of Lake Ontario, contains marine squids; while
around Lake Champlain are elevated beaches containing very
numerous marine shells, with the bones of seals and whales.
Still more interesting are some of the inland waters of the
tropics, such as Lake Tanganyika, in Central Africa. Here are
found jellyfish, marine gastropods, with other marine organ-
isms; but doubt has been thrown upon these facts as indicating


— pp HE OS i aa
te


Fic. 402. Gravel-capped terraces in the foreground, and escarpment with coal outcrops in
the background. East of Helper, Utah, Castlegate quadrangle. (Clark, U. S. G. S.)


any connection with the ocean, because, forsooth, these relics
of marine life resemble more closely Jurassic forms than any
more modern ones!


“A Zoodlogically Impoverished World.” “Tt is clear, there-
fore, that we are now in an altogether exceptional period of the
earth’s history. We live in a zodlogically impoverished world,
from which all the hugest, the fiercest, and strangest forms
have recently disappeared; and it is, no doubt, a much better
world for us now they are gone. Yet it is surely a marvelous
fact, and one that has hardly been sufficiently dwelt upon, this
sudden dying out of so many large Mammalia, not in one place
only but over half the land surface of the globe. We can not
but believe that there must have been some physical cause for
this great change; and it must have been a cause capable of act-


QUATERNARY SYSTEM — PLEISTOCENE SERIES 585


ing almost simultaneously over large portions of the earth's
surface, and one which, so far as the Tertiary period at least
is concerned, was of an exceptional character.” — A. R. Wallace,
“Geographical Distribution of Animals,” pp. 149-151.

This author thinks that he has such a physical cause in the
traditional “Glacial Age.” But it is easy to see that this
“Glacial Age” did not come on suddenly, as the evidence re-


FT ta


ae


Shee ;
ip ez pi


Fic. 403. Light-colored Pleistocene sands, in the upper part of the picture, resting upon
laminated sands and clays of the lignitie division of the Cretaceous. Cape Fear River, 3%
miles below Elizabethtown, North Carolina. (Fuller, U. S. G. S.)


quires; nor would such a theory explain the sudden and mys-
terious disappearance of many of the animals which he here
speaks of from South America, Central America and Mexico, and
Southern Europe. And how much stronger, how irresistible,
is the evidence, when we remember that such forms as the
dinosaurs and the ammonites, the semitropical floras of the
Cretaceous and Carboniferous coal beds, with the trilobites and
all their associated companions, can not be separated in time
from this common catastrophe, which thus becomes literally
and absolutely world-wide in extent!


586 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Other Phenomena. Im parts of the south of England, on
the Channel Islands, and elsewhere in Europe, the raised
beaches are overlaid by what is locally called a “rubble drift”
or “head,” a peculiar angular breccia formed of local fragments.
This in turn is overlaid by the loess deposits; while in some
other instances, -the loess forms the matrix of the “rubble” or
“head.” Accordingly, this rubble drift must have been formed
after the raised beaches, and it evidently marks a re-submer-
gence of these parts, or a re-transgression of the ocean, which
amounts to the same thing. The loess is subsequent; and if
formed by water, it must have been deposited during the brief
interval of this last submergence. If formed principally by the
winds sweeping over the bare and unprotected land surfaces, its
formation would then date from the years or centuries im-
mediately following this last submergence. But on either con-
sideration, we have here a true (though merely local) chronology:
the raised beaches, the rubble drift, followed by the loess, and
the recent. As for the absolute length of time represented by
any one of these phenomena or all together, conjectures are of
no scientific value.


Part V — Theoretical Geology


CHAPTER XXXVII


A Brief History of Geology


Importance of the Subject. No one can judge fully of the
weakness of the present geological theories, or forecast the
future development of the science, who does not have clear and
somewhat full ideas regarding the history of the science with
which we are dealing. In fact, the historical method is a
splendid way of studying any question, whether of science,
morals, religion, or politics. Most of the other natural sciences,
as physics, astronomy, chemistry, and medicine, have each
passed through about the same stages of historical development.
Beginning as mere speculations, each passed through a period
where speculative or a priori methods struggled with the rising
scientific or inductive methods. Finally these other sciences
have now reached the place where scientific methods alone are
recognized by the educated world, and speculative fancies are
debarred from exercising their baleful influence over the main
conceptions of these sciences. At any rate, in all the sciences
except geology, facts and theories are kept separate and distinct
in all textbooks to be used by students in academies and colleges,
so that the student can judge of the value of the theories for
himself. In this way, the student has a chance for his intellectual
life, his intellectual freedom. But in geology, facts and theories
are still inextricably commingled; and in the ordinary college text-
book of the science, the most absurd and fantastic speculations are
still taught to the students with all the solemnity and pompous
importance which might be allowable in speaking of the facts
of chemistry or physics.

Thus the history of geology conforms to the same general
law of progress seen in the other sciences; only geology has de-
veloped much more slowly than some of the other sciences, and
has not yet escaped from the period of a priori methods and
metaphysical speculation.

Among the Greeks and Romans. The abundant fossils found
in almost all the Mediterranean countries could not fail to
attract the attention of the ancients; but the vain speculations
of the Greeks, who made these fossils the occasion for many
wild fancies as to how the world was made, have no scientific
value. The Romans were somewhat more practical, and Strabo,


(587)


588 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Seneca, and the two Plinys wrote on geological subjects with
some gleams of common sense. But on the breaking up of the
Roman Empire, the world again relapsed into semibarbarism ;
and for many centuries, a barren system of false education and
false methods of thinking blighted the healthy development of
the human mind>

The Post-Reformation Period. But with the revival of
learning and the Reformation, men awoke as from the hypnotic
sleep of ages, and began to inquire for new worlds to explore
and new realms of knowledge to study out. The great book of
nature also resumed the place in education which it had held
among the Hebrews in remote antiquity; and plants, animals,
astic students, so that in a very short time, a fairly representa-
tive literature on all these subjects sprang into existence.

But another strange perversity now seized men’s minds; for
while the Greeks and the Romans had realized that the fossils
were the remains of real plants and animals, the learned men
of this period would not admit any such thing.


“With the dawn of the fifteenth century began that long series of dis-
putes about fossils which lasted more than three centuries. The questions
under discussion were, whether fossil organisms had taken origin from a
vis plastica, or from living seeds carried in vapors from the sea, or from
any living force in the earth itself; whether they might be regarded as
mere illusory sports of nature, or as mineral forms, or if they really were
the remains of animals and plants that had once lived and had been brought
by the Flood or some other catastrophe into their present position.”— Zittel,
“History of Geology and Paleontology,” pp. 13, 14.


However, several people of this time had correct ideas about
the fossils. Among them were the famous artist, Leonardo da
Vinci, George Bauer (Agricola), Bernard Palissy the inventor,
with Steno, and Robert Hooke (1633-1703) of England; who
believed the fossils to be the remains of former living things.
Robert Hooke was the first to suggest that they might be the
means of revealing something of the past condition of the earth;
and from the occurrence of huge turtles and ammonites at Port-
land Isle, he concluded that the “climate of England had once
been much warmer.” (Zittel.)

The world was now rapidly awaking to the full meaning of
these relics of the ancient world; and had not the speculative
scholasticism of the Middle Ages still cast its baleful shadow
over the science of this time, the secret of the rocky records
might even then have been solved. As it was, most investiga-
tors felt impressed that the fossils were really relics of the


A BRIEF HISTORY OF GEOLOGY 589


ancient world that was destroyed by the Flood. Yet, as they
were profoundly ignorant of any true inductive way of building
up a science, they usually made a sorry mess of trying by the
subjective method to show how the world was made and how
it was destroyed; that is, trying to hit on a postulate from
which they could deduce all the facts discovered or discover-
able regarding the earth and the rocks. Perhaps in no instance
has the puerility of the scholastic method of treating a scientific
problem been more manifest than in this and other instances
in the history of geology.

Burnet and Whiston are the most notorious of the “diluvial-
ists,” as the geologists of that age are called. Their wild fancies
deserve to be called travesties alike on the Bible and on true
science; and the word “diluvial’” has been a term to mock at
ever since. John Woodward (1665-1722) was much more ra-
tional, and should have credit for helping to prove that the
fossils really represent past floras and faunas. He taught that
they must have been buried by a universal Flood, the Deluge of
the Scriptures; but his books embodied all the scientific knowl-
edge then known, and he restrained his fancy, and endeavored
to keep within the bounds of true science.

Happy would it have been for the subsequent history of all
the sciences, if the students of the rocks had all been willing
patiently to investigate the records, and hold their fancies
sternly in leash until they had gathered sufficient facts upon
which to found a true induction or generalization. Unfor-
tunately, there lived during this same period other writers on
geology who were engaged in spinning fantastic theories about
the origin and the history of our world, or as Zittel puts it,
“accepted the risks of error, and set about explaining the past
and present from the subjective standpoint.” And happy would
it now be for the world if modern geologists could be said to
have entirely outgrown these methods.

Lehmann and Fiichsel. J. G. Lehmann was a German miner
who in 1761 was appointed professor of chemistry and director
of the Imperial Museum at St. Petersburg, by the czarina
Catherine, of Russia, and was one of the real founders of the
science of geology. He divided the rocks of the earth into three
great divisions, the Primitive, the Secondary (containing the
fossils), and the Alluvial or superficial deposits, which last he
held to be due to local floods and the Deluge of Noah. His work
was chiefly confined to those rocks of Thuringia since classed


as Permian.


38


590 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Dr. Fiichsel (1722-1773) studied in great detail those rocks.
of the same district now known as Triassic. He was the first
to use the word “stratum,” and also the term “formation.” The
latter he used in pretty much the same sense in which it is used
to-day, as including all the rocks which had been made at a
certain epoch in the history of the earth. He distinguished
nine of these “formations” from the oldest to the Middle Tri-
assic. His work gave to the word “formation” a time-value;
and as this idea was afterwards taken up by Werner and his
pupils, it had a very profound influence over the subsequent
history of the science in Germany and the rest of the world.
We see in this teaching the germ of those chronological onion
coats which have since been so notorious; though Werner made
this term “formation” to be based strictly on lithic or mineral
composition.

Both Lehmann or Fiichsel, and particularly the former, were
following true empirical or scientific methods. Their work was
especially of value to later students of the rocks in being ex-
haustive descriptions of particular localities,— descriptions that
have seldom been equaled since. However, in so far as they in-
dulged in speculations about time, and laid off the strata in
groups or “formations” representing successive ages, they were
tacitly making these small localities,— mere spots on the globe,—
the standard by which to judge all the rest of the world, thus
leaving safe inductive methods far behind. This monstrous as-
sumption that, because the rocks occur in a certain order in a
particular locality, therefore they must be found occurring in
this same order all over the globe, has ever been the stumbling-
block of geological science; for it involves the palpable absurdity
that different kinds of sediment could not be forming con-
temporaneously in localities distant from one another, or that
distinctly different kinds of life did not coéxist in separated
localities in the long ago. In other words, this idea, from its
very first inception, implied that each of these “formations”
encircled the globe like an onion coat. Thus far, the rocks were
being set off in “ages” chiefly on the grounds of their mechani-
cal and mineral make-up. Werner continued the idea, but
founded it strictly on lithologic characters. To make the fossils
the real test of a “formation” was an invention of a much
later date. `

Count Buffon. The French naturalist Buffon (1707-1788)
seems to have been the real father of the evolutionary develop-
ment of life as read from the rocks, or the geological succession
of life, much as we now understand it. He is said to have


A BRIEF HISTORY OF GEOLOGY 591


remarked about the previous writers on geology that they must
feel much like the ancient Roman augurs, who could not meet
in private without laughing in one another's faces at the fool-
eries which they perpetrated on the confiding public. He un-
hesitatingly combated the idea of a universal Deluge, and with
the little smattering of geological facts at his command, under-
took to construct a detailed history of “the beginning, the past,
and the future of our planet.” (Zittel.) His reputation ob-
tained in other lines of scientific knowledge served to invest
with a quasi scientific character this tissue of unscientific specu-
lations, and to fasten on the world for another hundred years
the habit of dealing with geology as the scholastics of the
Middle Ages dealt with all their “sciences,” from the subjective
point of view. y

From this time down, it would seem that practically all
writers on geology have never had a doubt that somehow there
has been a succession and progression in the types of life which
have existed on the globe, and that it is the principal business
of geology to work out and illustrate this wonderful fact of
organic development. All subsequent theories of evolution seem
to be but variations and amplifications of this remarkable idea
which Buffon extracted from the scanty data available a hun-
dred and seventy years ago. Even the seven “days” of crea-
tion, taught by Thomas Chalmers, Hugh Miller, and other
religious geologists of the early nineteenth century, who tried
to quiet the scruples of the church by their “day-period theory”
of creation, seem to have come bodily from Buffon’s seven
“epochs”; and it has taken many a long year to show the un-
scientific character of this cosmological speculation, as we now
know this notion to be.

The “Heroic Age.” From 1790 to 1820 followed what Zittel
calls the “Heroic Age” of geology. It was characterized by a
determination to discard speculation, and by an honest en-
deavor to build up a true science of actual fact and truth.
Many keen-eyed, scholarly men of this period, men who had
command of all the geological facts then obtainable, held to a
catastrophic interpretation of geology. Others held very di-
vergent views; but while the study of minerals was regarded as
a true science, geology (or geognosy, as it was then called) was
not considered as of sufficient importance or dignity to warrant
the classing of it with the other natural sciences. Geologists
were regarded as mere collectors of curiosities, or as persons
who liked to indulge in fanciful dreams about how the world
was made. Even Comte, when he issued his classification of the


592 THE NEW GEOLOGY


sciences in 1820, denied a place to geology altogether, saying
that it was not a distinct science at all, but only a field for
the application of the various sciences. In fact, the nineteenth
century was well advanced before geology had secured a well-
recognized place among the other natural sciences. The estab-
lishment of geologital surveys by the British government and
by other governments, marks the beginning of the rise of ge-
ology as a well-recognized science.


Werner and His Theories. But we must go back to the days
of A. G. Werner (1749-1817), who long held the position of
professor of mineralogy at Freiberg, Germany. He was the
great original “Neptunist”; for he taught that all the rocks of
the earth’s crust had originated as mechanical or chemical
precipitates from aqueous solutions which in the beginning had
enveloped the whole globe. Volcanic products, he claimed,
represented rock material originally formed in this way, but.
subsequently melted and ejected. Thus he taught that all vol-
canic rocks are later than the sedimentary, and that volcanoes
are caused by the burning of coal deposits beneath the ground.

He was a clever and enthusiastic teacher, and undoubtedly’.
knew as much about mineralogy as any other man of his time.
For several decades, his influence over both mineralogy and
geology was practically unbounded. “From all parts of Europe
students came, and when they returned to their own countries
they spread the teachings of geognosy and mineralogy as Werner
had taught it to them.” (Zittel.)

Following the theories of Fiichsel and of a certain Swedish
scientist named Bergman, Werner distinguished five “suites” or
series of rocks, each characteristic of an age or epoch in the
earth’s history; and he taught that each of these “suites” en-
veloped the globe, one outside another, like the coats of an onion,
each one originally being universal around the globe.

In all this speculation, he was, of course, wandering far
from true inductive methods. Quite likely he never heard of
Bacon’s Novum Organum or of Newton’s Principia. And in
view of the rank absurdities which he taught, and of the sur-
prising vogue which these absurdities attained throughout the
civilized world, the remarks of Sir Archibald Geikie seem none
too severe:


“But never in the history of science did a stranger hallucination ari
than that of Werner and his school, when they supposed themselves to dis.
card theory and build on a foundation of accurately ascertained fact
Never was a system devised in which theory was more rampant; theory ese

5 ,


unsupported by observation, and, as we now know, utterly erroneous Eom


A BRIEF HISTORY OF GEOLOGY 593


beginning to end of Werner’s method and its applications, assumptions
were made for which there was no ground, and these assumptions were
treated as demonstrable facts. The very point to be proved was taken for
granted; and the geognosts, who boasted of their avoidance of speculation,


Fic. 404. A. G. Werner (1749-1817), the originator or
promulgator of the “onion-coat” theory.


were in reality among the most hopelessly speculative of all the generations
that had tried to solve the problem of the theory of the earth.”—“Founders
of Geology,” p. 112.


The dogmatic confidence of those who for so many years
controlled the teaching of geology and mineralogy in all the
countries of Europe, is well illustrated by the following remark
of the same author:

“The Wernerians were as certain of the origin and sequence
of the rocks as if they had been present at the formation of
the earth’s crust.”


594 THE NEW GEOLOGY


From a study of the paleogeographic maps found in so many modern
textbooks, as well as from the detailed descriptions which go along with
them, we must conclude that the modern writers are not very far behind the
followers of Werner in their dogmatic certainty about the origin and se-
quence of the strata.


In speaking of Werner’s five successive “suites” or onion
coats in which he enveloped his embryo world, Zittel says:

“Unfortunately, Werner’s
field observations were limited to
a small district, the Erz Moun-
tains and the neighboring parts
of Saxony and Bohemia. And
his chronological scheme of for-
mations was founded upon the
mode of occurrence of the rocks
within these narrow confines.”
~—“History,” p. 39.


The Modern Onion-Coat
Theory. Yet it is precisely such
a charge as this that we must
bring against the modern phase
of the doctrine of successive ge-
ological ages based on the suc-
cession-of-life idea. - Werner,
from observations “limited to a
small district,” constructed his
scheme of exact chronological


s Fic. 405. Alexander von Humboldt (1769-
sequence based upon the mineral isch, CHO Sus a seat sn cag A


much to promote an interest in scientific


or mechanical character of his observation. Unfortunately, in geology
“suites.” And hundreds of en- he followed blindly the theories of A. G.


Werner, of ‘‘onion-coat’”’ fame.


thusiastic disciples in England

and Scotland, France and Germany, long declared that where-
ever they went, they found the rocks in the exact order taught by
the great prophet of Freiberg. Even so great a scientist as Hum-
boldt, in his trips through Central and South America, always
reported finding rocks in the order of Werner’s chronologi-
cal arrangement.

But we now know that in other parts of the world, the rocks
do not occur as Werner decreed. Even in the parts examined
by his followers, it has developed that they made many and
grievous blunders of observation, due to the hypnotic suggestion
of their supposedly infallible theory. Besides, we know that in
our modern world, one kind of mineral or rock may be forming


A BRIEF HISTORY OF GEOLOGY 595


in one locality, while a totally different kind of deposit may
be forming some miles away at the very same time; and we
have no scientific ground for assuming that there ever was a
time since life appeared on the globe, when this principle would
not hold good. Such cosmological speculations do not promote
inductive science. But in the very same fashion, the idea of a
time-value was, as we shall see, transferred from the mechanical
and mineral character of the rocks to their fossil contents; and
again, from observations limited, like Werner’s, to a few spots
of England and France, William Smith and Cuvier conceived
the idea that the fossils always occurred in a certain definite
order; that only certain fossils had lived at a certain time; that,
for example, while trilobites were living or being buried in one
locality, other types, such as dinosaurs, or nummulites, or mam-
mals, were not living or being buried in another locality, though
in any system of clear thinking, this latter notion is just as ir-
rational, just as unscientific, as that of Werner.

In short, this new system of identifying the rocks by their
fossils still retained the essential absurdity of the onion-coat
theory, namely, the universality of one kind of deposit. It
merely restated this theory in terms of the fossils, instead of in
terms of mineralogy and mechanical texture. It involved all
the arbitrary assumptions, all the incredible fictions about un-
natural past conditions, which characterized the theory of
Werner which it professed to displace. And modern geology
has never got completely rid of the characteristic absurdity of
this whole system of cosmology; namely, the universality, in the
long ago, of one limited assemblage of life-forms. Hence, even
Herbert Spencer, seeing this, declares that “though the onion-
coat hypothesis is dead, its spirit is traceable under a tran-
scendental form even in the conclusions of its antagonists.”
(“Illustrations of Universal Progress,” p. 343.)

The two cases are exactly parallel; only it has taken over a
century to convince us that the fossils do not follow the pre-
arranged order of Smith and Cuvier any better than the rocks
and minerals follow the scheme of Werner. If most modern
geologists still think that the fossils in general agree with the
standard order, we must remember how many sharp-eyed ob-
servers said the very same thing for decades about Werner’s
scheme. But both systems exhibit the same reckless disregard
of the basic principles that must control all scientific research
to make it of permanent value, and both have now been found to
be equally at variance with modern discoveries.


596 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 406. William Smith (1769-1839), often called “Strata” Smith, also
the father of English geology.


William Smith. It was William Smith, an ignorant English
land surveyor, who first suggested the idea of fixing the relative
ages of strata by their fossil contents. He wrote no books, and
it is a little difficult to tell just what he did teach; but his theory
seems to have been only a crude rule-of-thumb by which the
various outcropping rocks in distant localities throughout Eng-
land could be identified by their fossils, and thus be proved to
be continuous underground between these scattered outcrops.
His ideas were handed around privately among some clergymen
and other enthusiastic fossil collectors in England, and soon be-
came quite popular. Ultimately he and his disciples came to the
conclusion that one and the same succession of strata extended
across England from the south coast to the east, these rocks be-


A BRIEF HISTORY OF GEOLOGY 597


ing now classed as subdivisions of the Jurassic and Cretaceous
systems; that certain fossils always “reappear in the same bed
in the different localities; and that each fossil species belongs
to a definite horizon of rocks.” (Zittel, “History,” p. 110.)


The Mistake in Smith’s Methods. The fault with Smith’s
theory is the fault common to all crude guesses based on wholly
insufficient data; for even granting the accuracy of his observa-
tions for the rocks which he had seen, it is evident that his
theory has all the infirmities of Werner’s scheme, of which
Whewell says that “he promulgated, as respecting the world, a
scheme collected from a province, and even too hastily gathered
from that narrow field.” (“History of the Inductive Sciences,”
VoL 2,.p. 52k)

Not only so, but each of these theories has the additional
flaw of being but another attempt at a cosmogony. Hasty gen-
eralizations and crude guesses are bad enough at any time and
in any department of knowledge. But the history of human
thought shows that in no other department have otherwise
sensible men shown such puerile folly as when they have tried
made. One of the reasons for this result is that the construction
of a scheme of world-building is the very quintessence of sub-
jective speculation; and the development and after history of
these theories of Werner and Smith serve clearly to illustrate
what a deadly taint this subjective method imparts to all the
subsequent studies with which it is even remotely connected.


Cuvier and His Work. Baron Cuvier (1769-1832) is the
next to be mentioned in this historical sketch, as this otherwise
great scientist must be considered in an especial sense the
father of the modern system of cosmological geology, and thus,
we might almost say, the father of modern biological evolution;
for however limited in their outlook the provincial minds of
Werner and Smith may have been in their general view of the
subject, and in their comprehension of the connection between
their scheme of successive kinds of rock and the general doc-
trine of a complete world history, Cuvier was certainly not thus
mentally limited. In his broader intellect, these successive ages
of Werner (he seems never to have heard of his obscure con-
temporary, William Smith) suggested the possibility of con-
structing a similar scheme of the history of creation covering
the various kinds of plants and animals. “How glorious,” he
wrote in his “Preliminary Discourse,” “it would be if we could
arrange the organized product of the universe in their chrono-


598 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 407. Georges Cuvier (1769-1832), founder of the old doctrine of


“catastrophism,’’ which was rather a doctrine of creation on the


installment plan.


logical order, as we can already do with the more important
mineral substances.”

Accordingly, he undertook to arrange the fossil plants and
animals in successive ages, just as Werner had done with the
minerals; and under the influence of his great name, the edu-
cated world granted this theory a cheerful acceptance which
Smith’s similar idea might never have attained alone. By the
end of the second decade of the nineteenth century, this idea of
successive ages of various types of life had largely displaced the
former system of Werner. But not until well on toward the
middle of the nineteenth century were the results of such a
fantastic scheme regarded very seriously by the students in


A BRIEF HISTORY OF GEOLOGY 599


other lines of science. Charles Lyell adopted this system and
incorporated it into his scheme of uniformity; and when his
works became popular, they carried with them into universal
acceptance this system of tabulating the rocks off in successive
ages according to the fossils which they may happen to contain.


The Reverse of the Baconian Method. It will not be neces-
sary to give in detail the peculiar manner in which the geologi-
cal outline of successive ages was gradually pieced together into
a complete whole from the strata found in England, Germany,
Russia, and the State of New York.

We should note here that this whole chain of life as repre-
sented by the fossils was practically completed according to the
methods of Cuvier, before any serious attempt was made to
study the rocks on top of the ground, the last to be deposited
and the most closely connected with our modern world. It was
a mere phantom world with which these early geologists felt
that they were dealing, a sort of fairy world of the long ago,
with no connection whatever with the world in which we now
live. For nearly half a century, geologists denied that the fossil
world had anything to do with the world of plants and animals
which we now see about us; and only long after the geological
history of the many successive ages had been mapped out in
this stereotyped form, was any effort made to find out how this
strange record of the past joins on to the modern world.

But this was completely reversing the true Baconian method,
for it left over to the last the most important data of all, those
facts which held the key to all the rest, namely, the rocks con-
taining human remains and those of other living species of
plants and animals; with the result that we have for more than
half a century been laboring under a “glacial nightmare,” and
these deposits on the very top of the ground “still remain in
many respects the despair of geology.” (Howorth.) Cuvier,
indeed, denied till the last that there was any organic connection
between the fossil world and the modern one, declaring that
absolutely all the fossils are extinct species.


Subsequent History. Contemporaneously with this work of
Smith and Cuvier, Lamarck (1744-1829) was formulating a
biological theory of how species become transformed into other
new species through the direct influence of their environment,
and through the transmission to their offspring of the changed
habits and structures acquired by the use and disuse of particu-
lar organs,— a theory which was ridiculed by his contempora-
ries, and which received consideration only when supplemented


600


es

Fic. 408. J. B. de Lamarck (1744-1829).
The founder of the theory of the progres-
sive and imperceptible transformation of
one species into another by a natural
process of evolution. He thought this
change was brought about chiefly by the
transmission in heredity of the effects of
use and disuse. We now know that this
latter is a pseudo-scientifie notion, not
supported by fact.


THE NEW GEOLOGY


by that of natural selection a
half century later under the
teaching of Darwin.

The Rise of Uniformitarian-
ism. The great outstanding
figure in geology during the
middle nineteenth century was
Sir Charles Lyell (1797-1875).
As we have already intimated,
he adopted the system of Smith
and Cuvier of -identifying the
rocks by their fossil contents.
This he supplemented with his
own characteristic theory of uni-
formity, by which he undertook
to explain all the changes re-
corded in the rocks in terms of
the present-day action of the
elements. Such a scheme could
logically end only in a system of
organic evolution; for as Huxley
has remarked, not only was


Lyell the chief agent in smoothing the road for Darwin, so far as


he, Huxley, was concerned, but
“consistent uniformitarianism
postulates evolution as much
in the organic as in the inor-
ganic world.” (‘‘Life and Let-
ters,” Vol Ieep. loss)

The Evolution Doctrine.
We have not here the space to
parts contributed to this gen-
eral idea of organic develop-
ment by such men as Agassiz,
Darwin, Wallace, Weismann,
and many others. With the
general outline before them of
the successive types of plants
and animals occurring in what
was regarded as a true his-
torical order, there is not
much wonder that the scien-
tists of the latter part of the


Fic. 409.


Sir Charles Lyell (1797-1875).


A BRIEF HISTORY OF GEOLOGY 601


Fic. 410. Charles Darwin (1809-1882).


nineteenth century believed that Darwin’s theory had cleared
away the last difficulty, and that they had a complete scientific
account of how the various modern species of organisms had
developed from cruder and less organized originals. As the re-
sult of this combination of geology and biology, the world for
several decades thought that the great problem of the origin of
life and of living things had been completely solved by science.

However, in the further attempt to verify all the details of
this extraordinary theory of how the organic world has evolved,
doubt has been thrown upon one after another of those great
leading doctrines on which the evolution theory has been built
up. The process of natural selection was seen to be incapable
of originating anything. The doctrine of the transmission of


602 THE NEW GEOLOGY


acquired characters had to be discarded through the failure to
find a single example of such transmission which would stand
scientific investigation. Finally, the investigations inspired by
Mendel’s discoveries have put a serious question into the very
basis of the theory regarding the supposed unlimited tendency to
vary on the part of plants and animals. As the consequence of
all these biological investigations, such men as Dr. William
Bateson are now declaring
openly that we really do not
know anything about the way
in which new species of organ-
isms can originate by either ar-
tificial or natural processes. It
thus appears that all the biologi-
cal phases of the theory have
been about worked out; and that
nothing is left but the original
skeleton on which the theory
was hung, that is, the geological
outline of alleged successive
forms of life, according to the
scheme of Smith and Cuvier.
The final chapter in the his-
ee e. - tory of the refutation of the
s s ç evolution doctrine was entered
upon about the beginning of

P. a S s TEE the present century, when it was

discovered that the successive
geological ages were not scientifically established, but were at
best merely an assumption; while many geological facts have
come to light which show that the assumption of these succes-
sive biological ages must be a serious blunder after all. Not
only so, but the doctrine of uniformity as taught by Lyell has
also fallen into disrepute; for we now know that there seems to
be no modern action going on around our coasts to confirm
Lyell’s theory that such a rise and fall of the lands is now tak-
ing place. Hence we have absolutely nothing now occurring by
which to interpret the great exchanges of land and water that
are recorded in the fossiliferous strata.

Thus with biology acknowledging that it has come up to the
end of its blind alley, and with its supposed geological out-
line already discredited and proved to be without scientific
foundation, the scientific situation is to-day very different from


A BRIEF HISTORY OF GEOLOGY 603


Fic. 412. Louis Agassiz (1807-1873).


He might well be called the
father of natural science in America.


that which prevailed a half century ago. Evidently it is only
a question of time until the world will see the complete collapse
of that doctrine which loomed so large in the eyes of scien-
tists during the latter part of the nineteenth and the early part
of the twentieth century. For nearly a century, science has
been trying to explain the origin of things. It has had a free
hand, and has done its best. But it has failed to give us a
plausible explanation of the origin of things which will stand
scientific scrutiny.

The Lesson from It All. What then may we give as the
chief lesson to be learned from the record of this hundred-
year search for a scientific explanation of the origin of man and


604 THE NEW GEOLOGY


of the organic world in terms of the processes now going on?
One of the most obvious lessons is that natural science properly
has nothing to do with such speculations as to the origin of
things. The working out of the details of how -creation was
brought about is wholly beyond the sphere of natural science;
and in theorizing along these lines, the speculative spirit al-
ways comes in to vitiate the accuracy of our conclusions and de-
bauch the true spirit of scientific research.

A hundred years ago every writer on geology was confident
that he knew all about the general process of how the world
was made. Wholly immune to doubt, and unconscious of the


Fic. 413. James D. Dana (1813-1895).


A BRIEF HISTORY OF GEOLOGY 605


Fic. 414. August Weismann (1834-1914). His great and lasting contri-
bution to science was in showing that acquired characters are not
transmitted to offspring.


futility of such a course, such men as Cuvier and Lamarck,
Lyell and Agassiz, thought they had discovered what they had
only invented, and easily mistook their subjective inventions
for real objective discoveries. And while it has taken nearly
a century of active scientific investigation in all the departments
of natural science to prove that the ideas of these men were
wrong and were wholly unscientific, yet the results have been
well worth all that they have cost.


39


606 THE NEW GEOLOGY


We now see that natural science can not legitimately have
anything to do with attempting to explain the process of crea-
tion — at least, it is useless to attempt to explain the origin of
things in terms of the natural processes now going on in our
modern world. The net results of all modern scientific investi-
gation seem to be-that the plants and animals now alive could
never have originated by any such method of gradual develop-
ment as has been pictured to us in the name of natural science.
Certain it is that modern biology, and geology also, for that
matter, have simply developed a complete negative demonstra-
tion against the easy assumptions of the earlier scientists that
plants and animals probably originated by a gradual progres-
sion from the lower to the higher types by processes similar to
those which are now going on.

A hundred years ago — nay, fifty years ago — this assump-
tion of being able to explain creation in terms of present every-
day processes, did not seem so untrue, so unscientific, as it now
appears; for we did not then have the details of the scientific
evidence, both biological and geological, with which to refute
such an idea. But in this third decade of the twentieth century,
in the light of the marvelous progress which science has been
making, this profound mystery regarding the origin of things,
this great lesson concerning our creation and our destiny, is
brought home to us by all that we know in every department of
natural science; and with weary, reluctant sadness does human
science confess that about the origin of life, or about the origin
of the whole world of organic forms, as well as about the origin
of the very globe itself, she knows absolutely nothing.

The Demonstration of Creation. It is necessary to make
this latter point clear; for it is the very acme of the results of
modern science, the outcome of all our modern investigations.
Science is based upon what we really know about the natural
world. But when all our studies serve only to impress upon
us more deeply the conviction that we do not know anything
and can never hope to know anything in a scientific way of how
the world was made, or of how the various types of life came
into existence, the conclusion is inevitable that creation must
have been something different, essentially and radically different,
from anything now going on in our world.

The central idea of the evolution doctrine: is uniformity;
that is, it teaches that what is now going on is identical with
or similar to what has always been going on; that the present
is the correct measure of all the past; and that the present
operations of nature are as much a part of creation as anything


A BRIEF HISTORY OF GEOLOGY 607


Fic. 415. Karl Von Zittel (1839-1904), late professor of geology and
paleontology in the University of Munich. One of the foremost of
ogists


paleontolog


that ever took place at any time in the long ago. But the net
results of modern science are against all this. They assure us
unmistakably that there must have been a real, direct crea-
tion at the beginning, essentially different from any of the
processes by which the present order of things is now sustained
and perpetuated. The record of creation as given in the open-
ing words of our Bible is now being vindicated by modern
science in a way as surprising as it is conclusive; for this vin-
dication is being brought about by those very means which men
have supposed would discredit this doctrine of creation forever.
“In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.”

In that one word, created, we have crossed the boundary of
strict inductive science, and have entered the domain of phi-
losophy and theology. But if now the customs of modern scien-


608 THE NEW GEOLOGY


tific inquiry ask us to bid adieu to that guide, demonstrable
science, which has conducted us thus far, and which has pointed
us to the portals of the temple, we can not ignore the fact that
our guide declares emphatically that she has examined and
proved worthless and dangerous every other path save that
which leads in the direction of the temple of the great Creator.
She may not be allowed to accompany us across the deep, dark
abyss which separates the field of knowledge from the temple
of faith; but she can at least assure us of the real existence of
that other and better land which lies behind the portals to
which she is now pointing us. Reluctantly she declares that she
can not go with us; but she points onward and upward.

Yet, as we bid good-by to our guide, we must not for a
moment think that we are treading on ground any less firm
than that upon which we have walked before. Can we be sure
of nothing beyond what we can see, and feel, and measure, and
the conclusions which we can build by syllogisms from these
things? Rather must we acknowledge that there are axiomatic
truths of philosophy and religion that we can not escape from
or ignore. Creation is- one of these axiomatic truths; and
though natural science must not be expected to do more than
point the inquirer to this inner sanctuary of truth, yet she has
in this reconstructive system of geology given us a demonstra-
tion which the world can never again ignore, of the fact that
the plants and animals on our globe were not produced by any
combination of the processes now going on around us. The
other possible alternative interpretations have been tried and
found wanting. The Bible record of a universal Deluge is so
wonderfully confirmed by these contemporary documents in
stone, that inexorable logic compels us to go back of all this and
face the great problem of creation itself. And although natural
science can not be expected to tell us the details of how creation
really was accomplished, yet in demonstrating that things could
not have originated by means of the processes now going on,
she has effectually demonstrated the truth of creation in the
only possible way. And this demonstration comes to us in this
third decade of the twentieth century as the most sublime and
august thought which can occupy the human mind. The many
mistakes and blunders which have marked the constant progress
of natural science as she has toiled along the path leading in
this direction, can now well be ignored and forgotten, since we
have at last arrived at that position where, with bowed head
and hushed heart, we feel that we are being ushered into the
very presence of our Creator.


A BRIEF HISTORY OF GEOLOGY 609


The Unique Position of Geology. Alone among the sciences,
geology conducts us back into the past and reads for us the his-
tory of our earth. The record of this history was long mis-
read, and was supposed to indicate that creation has slowly
taken place during the lapse of uncounted ages.. Admonished
by past mistakes, and holding to the stern logic of demonstrable
science, while bringing into the field of vision all the data made
available by modern discovery, geology is now beginning to read
from these epitaphs in stone the sad story of how that ancient
world, “being overflowed with water, perished.”

For our age, skeptical above all others regarding the wonder-
working power of God, these unanswerable proofs from the
contemporary documents of nature, recording the death and
burial of that beautiful world, have been reserved as final and un-
answerable arguments. But not alone as an appeal to our fear
and dread. Rather do they come to us with the sweet assur-
ance that some day the bright, happy conditions of Edenic
life will be restored to our sin-blasted planet, and God’s re-
deemed people will shine forth in the restored image of divine
beauty. “And there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor
crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former
things are passed away.” —


CHAPTER XXXVIII


Do the Fossils Occur in a


Chronological Order?


The Alleged “Invariable” Order of the Fossils. We must
now group together some of the more important facts which
have been discovered in recent years regarding the order in
which the fossils are said to occur. That is, we must consider
whether or not they occur in a real world-historical or chrono-
logical order. For nearly a hundred years, it has been assumed
and confidently asserted by writers on geology that the fossils
always occur in a very definite order of sequence, this order
being a true historical order, thus showing the real order in
which life has occurred on the globe.

It has been asserted that the fossils always occur in the same
relative order in one country as in another, and that this order
shows the real history of the way in which life in all of its
diversified forms has developed. It is stated that the order shown
by the fossils in one country is never contradicted in another
country; and as the lower ones were evidently. laid down first,
we have here a true historical sequence, which, by being enlarged
and considered from the world as a whole, shows the history of
life on the globe.

This is all there really is behind the sage remark often given
by a teacher or writer on geology to the young student: “It has
been discovered that certain fossils occur only in the oldest
strata,” etc. But when was this discovered? And how was it
known (independently) that the rocks in which such and such
fossils were found are really the oldest? When or where was it
discovered that the rocks always occur in an invariable order of
sequence? We have already considered the history of the sci-
ence in a brief way: does this history show when these won-
derful discoveries were made?

It would seem that every natural science worthy of the name
ought to be susceptible of the closest dissection and scrutiny
logically; and we ought to be able to-day to start from the raw
material facts and build the foundations of the science without
any regard whatever to its history. In physics, or chemistry,
or astronomy, it would never do to say to the beginner that the
basic facts and principles of the science were worked out long
ago by the founders of the science, but that these foundation
principles are too abstruse and recondite to be explained to be-


(610)


DO FOSSILS OCCUR IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER? 611


ginners. In all these other sciences, we try to start the young
student off with a full set of facts, instead of with some one’s
ipse dixit. Why not do the same in geology?

How Shall We Begin? The fathers of our science always
present us with the geological “time-table” ready-made. If we
are to start from the raw facts, instead of beginning with the


Fic. 416. Dakota and Morrison strata (L. Cretaceous and U. Jurassic), resting on the granite
(Archean), 4 miles southwest of Cañon City, Colorado. Looking northeast. (Darton, U. S. G. S.)


ipse dixit of some expert, our first question will be, How shall
we begin such a chronological series? That is, How shall we
fix on certain rocks containing fossils, or fix on certain fossil
types, which are undeniably older than all others hitherto dis-
covered? If we decide that certain ‘‘Pre-Cambrian” beds in
the Rockies or elsewhere are the oldest fossiliferous rocks
hitherto discovered, how are we to explain to an average in-
telligent beginner in the science, say a college freshman, our
reasons for calling these the oldest? Can we give substantial
reasons for calling these the oldest? Or must he take it on
our say-so?


612 THE NEW GEOLOGY


We have already learned that each stratified formation is of
only limited horizontal extent, and that, instead of encircling
the globe like universal onion coats, each formation occurs only
as mere scattered patches here and there. For instance, the
Triassic and the Jurassic rocks are absent over most of North
America; while over the larger part of Asia there are no
Cretaceous strata. The Tertiary beds also are absent from
most of Asia. In very many localities, also, these Triassic,
Jurassic, Cretaceous, or Tertiary rest directly on the Archean
or old crystalline rocks. Over the larger part of Northeastern
America, the Pleistocene, or “Drift,” reposes directly on the
Archean. Large areas of South America, and practically all of
the great interior of Africa, have no fossiliferous rocks at all,—
nothing but the Archzean or Primitive. How then shall we fix
on certain typical fossils which are really older than all others?
In other words, since we do not have fossiliferous onion coats
to work with, but merely isolated patches of strata, how are we
to find the real bottom of the fossiliferous series? And where
we do find these bottom beds, how are we to know that they are
the bottom beds?


Why Not Contemporary? In most localities, we have not
more than two or three of the fossiliferous systems represented
(and always only partially represented) above the Archzan.
At any rate, we do not have to go down very far in any locality
to come to the Azoic or Archean rocks, which clearly antedate
all life. The earlier geologists, Sedgwick, Murchison, and
others, evidently assumed that those were the oldest fossils in
any particular locality which are found thus at the bottom of
the fossiliferous series, or next to the Archean. This was
natural enough, so long as they held to the biological form of
the onion-coat theory inherited from Werner. But now that
we have outgrown this crude idea, and realize that any kind of
fossiliferous bed whatever may occur next to the Archzean, one
kind occurring thus say in Florida, another in California, an-
other in Southern England, and so on, are we not face to face
with the possibility that samples of all these various types of
life may have lived contemporaneously in scattered localities
all over the world? In other words, how are we to prove that
there were not distinct floral and faunal districts and regions
back at the earliest period of which we have scientific knowledge?


Biological Onion Coats. Or, let us not attempt to start with
an absolute beginning, but let us begin, we may say, with the
Cambrian.: Either these Cambrian deposits were once universal,


DO FOSSILS OCCUR IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER? 613


or they were not. If we affirm that they were once universal,
even so far as the ocean was concerned, how are we to prove
this affirmation? Certainly they are far from being universal
In appearance. In fact, so far as we can actually see and esti-
mate them in any physical way, these Cambrian beds constitute
one of the smallest and least widespread of all the fossiliferous
systems. It is easy to assume that, if we were to strip off all
the other fossiliferous strata, a broad set of these Cambrian
beds would probably be found spread out over much wider
areas of the Archean than appears from the surface indica-
tions. But so far as we know, samples of every single one of
the other formations might also be found thus in patches rest-
ing on the Archxan, and in such a relationship to these Cam-
brian beds that no trace of overlap could prove them to be
younger and not merely contemporaneous. At any rate, ap-
pealing to what we can’t see and can’t prove is much like the
argument of a blind man based on what he can’t see,— it is
not very scientific.

On the other hand, if we admit that we can not prove that
these Cambrian deposits were once universal, we must either
keep on affirming what we admit we can not prove, or we
must admit that while these Cambrian trilobites and brachiopods
were living in certain localities, such as Newfoundland, or the
high Sierras of California, or Norway, Jurassic ammonites and
bélemnites were probably also living in other localities, such as
Texas or Alaska, and Cretaceous dinosaurs and Tertiary mam-
mals were also living in scattered localities over various parts
of the world. In other words, we should have to admit that it
is mere bald dogmatism, without any scientific facts whatever
to support it, to assert that these widely diverse types of life
might not all have lived contemporaneously. Certainly there is
no scientific way of proving that they did not.

Reductio ad Absurdum. All geologists assume that the life
groups represented in the systems — the Cambrian, Ordovician,
Silurian, etc.— were successively universal around the world; or
at least, it is assumed that they occupied the world exclusively,
as no other distinctly different kinds of life were then in exist-
ence. For otherwise the strata of these systems would not be
of any time-value; they would not represent all that was really
going on in the world during their respective periods. But
these systems are always capable of much subdivision,— first
into Lower, Middle, and Upper, and then more minutely. Hence,
by the same line of reasoning, each of these subdivisions must


614 THE NEW GEOLOGY


likewise have been universal. By this process of subdividing,
we finally reach the formational unit, which we must also as-
sume to have been universal, or to represent a universal condi-
tion; for otherwise this set of beds which we term a formation
would not be of any time-value in the general geological series.
But this is palpably absurd; these formations are not universal,
and clearly never were universal. They are always extremely
limited in horizontal extent, that is, are localized; for we can see
their localization and their limits with our eyes.

Hence, as our reasoning has led us into an obvious ab-
surdity, there must be something wrong either with our method
of reasoning, or with our assumed major premise. But the
method is as clear and connected as any demonstration in
Euclid; therefore the major premise with which we started
must be false. In other words, the life groups represented in
such systems as the Cambrian, Ordovician, Silurian, and on to
the Tertiary, can not represent universal conditions.

What Do the Formations Represent? But the question then
very naturally arises, What do they represent? The answer to
this is just as obvious: They simply represent a taxonomic or
classification series of the life of the ancient world, just as living
samples might be made up from here and there all over our
modern earth to represent the life of the world to-day, these
samples being each a representative local fauna or flora from
some particular locality here or there over the modern world.
For it is simply these buried local faunas and floras with which
we are dealing when we speak of the various geological forma-
tions; and we have been piecing these scattered formations into
systems and into groups of strata, under the impression that
they represent various time-values, when they can not represent
anything of the kind. The whole geological series is just as
purely constructive, just as wholly artificial, as would be a cor-
responding series of the living plants and animals of our modern
world, which might be made up by carefully gathering and ar-
ranging many thousands of local faunas and floras from scat-
tered localities all over the earth. There would be no essential
difference between the two series, save that the geological one
represents dead (and often extinct) forms, while the modern one
would represent living ones. The one would essentially parallel
the other, and would also just as clearly represent a “history
of creation” as would the other. ;

To revert to an analogy already used, if we consider the
catalogue index of a library, we could doubtless prove our A’s
and B’s and C’s to be each universal, just as truly as we do


DO FOSSILS OCCUR IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER? 615


our geological systems, in the sense that some books under each
letter would turn out to have been issued in New York, Boston,
Atlanta, Chicago, San Francisco, London, Paris, Berlin, Cape-
town, Sidney, etc. And then our ingenious antiquary might de-
vise a brilliant theory about the history of the development of
printing all over the world, based on this catalogue index, just


Fic. 417. Tertiary beds resting directly upon metamorphic Archzan, in Red Cañon, east of
Mecca, California. (Mendenhall, U. S. G. S.)


as our evolutionary geologists have given us a moving picture
of the evolution of life, based on their geological series. And
the scheme of this ingenious antiquary would have just as much
real historical and scientific value as has the current popular
one furnished us by the evolutionary geologists.


GENERAL FACTS


Relations to the Archean. But perhaps we should descend
from the clouds of these a priori speculations, and formulate a
few facts about the fossils which we can actually demonstrate.


616 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 418. Natural arch, showing consolidated Eocene conglomerate, on the coast, 4 miles north
of Santa Monica, California. (Arnold, U. S. G. S.)


Some of these facts have already been illustrated with so many
examples that we need not repeat these examples here. Others
will need to be illustrated with specific instances.


I. There is always a marked nonconformity, usually an
angular nonconformity, between the Primitive or true Archean
and the fossiliferous strata overlying them.


II. Any kind of fossiliferous rock, Tertiary, Cretaceous,
Jurassic, Triassic, etc., may rest (nonconformably) upon the
Archean directly, without any so-called “younger” strata in
between; and these strata thus resting on the Archean may
themselves be crystalline or .wholly metamorphic in texture.

For example, through Tennessee, Eastern Mississippi, and
into Alabama, the Cretaceous rest on the Paleozoic, “and in
Georgia they rest on the more ancient crystallines” (Schuchert) ;
that is, they rest on the Primary or Archean. Over the Rocky
Mountain region, the Triassic beds lie directly upon the Archean;
and the same condition extends down through much of Mexico
and Central America. Also in other parts of the region west of
the Rocky Mountains, the Carboniferous frequently occur di-
rectly on the Archean. In Cuba and Jamaica, the Cretaceous
are in this position; while in California, the Tejon (Eocene) lie


DO FOSSILS OCCUR IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER? 617


Fic. 419. Natural bridge, in consolidated Miocene shales, half a mile north of the mouth of
Meder Creek, Santa Cruz County, California. (Arnold, U. S. G. S.)


directly upon the old granites and gneisses, and are as highly
metamorphosed as any of the Paleozoic. In Saxony and Bo-
hemia, the Mesozoic rest upon the Archean or Primitive; and


Fic. 420. Consolidated Pleistocene gravel, at Lewiston, New York. (Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


618 THE NEW GEOLOGY


it was on this account that these Mesozoic strata were formerly
styled the “Secondary rocks.”

These examples help us to understand that Tertiary or
Cretaceous strata are about as likely to be found at the bottom
or next to the Primitive as are Cambrian, Ordovician, or Silu-
rian; and that these so-called “young” rocks may by every
physical appearance as well as by their position, resemble the
so-called “oldest” fossiliferous rocks. Geologists always speak
of these instances as examples of “overlap,” and assume that
if these upper strata were followed out far enough laterally,


Fic. 421. Maximus Chapel, in the catacombs of Salzburg, Austria. These

rooms were hewn out of the highly consolidated Pleistocene gravels (Nagel-

fluh). They date from the third century. In its physical characters, this

rock is apparently more ancient than some of the Cambrian and Ordovician
beds in Northern Russia. (After Grabau.)


other so-called “older” strata would be found intervening
between them and the Archean. But this is only theory; for in
many instances, no such intervening strata can be proved to
exist, the upper strata giving out before they can be traced
sufficiently far in any direction to prove a superposition on other
fossiliferous rocks. From this, it follows like a mathematical
demonstration, that when Cambrian, Ordovician, or Silurian
strata are found resting on the old crystalline or Archean rocks,
they can not be proved to be intrinsically and necessarily older
than those Tertiary, Cretaceous, Jurassic, or Triassic strata
found in an exactly similar situation elsewhere. And hence no
one of these systems can be proved to be really older than
any other.


DO FOSSILS OCCUR IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER? 619


III. Conversely, any kind of fossiliferous strata may over
wide areas constitute the surface rocks, and may consist of loose,
nonconsolidated materials, in position and texture thus resem-
bling the “late” Tertiaries or the Pleistocene.

The soft muds and clays and unconsolidated sands compos-
ing the Cambrian strata around the Baltic and in Wisconsin,
have been mentioned in a previous chapter dealing with these
formations. The wide sweep of the Ordovician over much of
Russia, consisting of similarly soft, unconsolidated materials,
has also been spoken of when we were dealing with these strata.
The soft Cretaceous beds of the southeastern Atlantic seaboard
examples might be given from Eastern Asia and other parts
of the world.

On the other hand, even the most recent of the rocks (ac-
cording to the commonly accepted theory), such as the late
Tertiary rocks, or even the Pleistocene, may be as completely
consolidated as any of the strata classified as very “old.”
Plenty of examples have already been given in the previous
pages; while a few illustrations of this fact are shown in the
accompanying illustrations.


Conformity. Having in these three propositions treated of
every possible relationship between the fossiliferous strata and
the Archzean, we must next turn our attention to the relations
between the fossiliferous beds themselves, and see if there are
any clear distinctions as to relative age in the manner in which
they lie upon one another. We have two principles here to
guide us, that of superposition, and that of conformity. As we
have already explained these terms elsewhere, we need not take
the time to amplify the subject here. Unless physical evidence
of overturning is present, the order of superposition shows the
true historical order for the locality; and where there is no
manifest erosion or disturbance of the lower beds before the
upper ones were laid upon them, it is quite natural to suppose
that no great length of time could have elapsed between the
deposition of the two sets of strata. In other words, conformity
means substantially continuity of deposition.

We shall deal with this subject of conformity first. And we
may state a great general principle regarding the relations be-
tween the various strata as follows:

IV. Strata of any of the fossiliferous systems may be found
reposing in apparently perfect conformity upon the strata of
any “older” fossiliferous system.


620 THE NEW GEOLOGY


‘Deceptive Conformity.” The conditions covered by this
statement have been termed “disconformity”’ by many geologists.
Professor W. B. Scott calls such a case a “deceptive conformity,”
with very obvious expressiveness. For when a formation
classed as “young” occurs in obvious conformity upon one called
much “older,” the beds supposed to be properly intervening be-
ing absent, and not even represented by erosion or by any dis-


Fic. 422. ‘‘Deceptive conformity” of Cretaceous shales on Devonian limestones (at
dotted line near the water), 4 miles below Fort McMurray, Athabaska River, Alberta,
Canada. (F. J. Aleock, Geological Survey of Canada.)


turbance of the lower beds, it surely is a case to deceive all
except those who are well fortified with a preconceived theory
as to the true “historical” order.

1. An example was reported many years ago by Murchi-
son, from Northern Russia, at Ust-Waga, on the Dwina, where
Pleistocene or “late” Tertiary beds occur in ‘absolutely con-
formable superposition on the horizontal Permian sediments.”
(Suess, “Face of the Earth,” Vol. 2, p. 543.)

This is perhaps an extreme case; but there are many where
only one or two systems, sometimes only a part of one, are ab-
sent. However, in even such a case, the time interval, as esti-
mated by evolutionary geologists, is to be reckoned in thousands
of years, perhaps in millions.

2. There is a large area near Lake Athabaska, Canada,
where Devonian limestone is conformably covered by Cretaceous
beds. The “remarkable persistence” of this “deceptive” con-
formity, according to an officer of the Canadian Geological


DO FOSSILS OCCUR IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER? 621


Survey, extends in one direction for fully 150 miles; and yet,
over this wide area, according to this geologist, “the vast in-
terval of time which separated the two formations is, so far as
observed, unrepresented either by deposition or erosion.” (“An-
nual Report,” New Series, Vol. 5, Part D, p. 52.) Indeed, this
same succession of strata, Cretaceous upon Devonian, extends


Fic. 423. View in Shanks quarry, on Bear Grass Creek, near Louisville, Kentucky. Looking

southeast. Here Middle Devonian strata rest in “deceptive conformity” upon Middle Silurian,

the contact line being in the upper heavy layer, just above the white streaks, which are light-
colored chert in the Silurian part of the layer. (Butts, U. S. G. S.)


nearly to Lake Manitoba, some 500 miles away; though it would
be quite unreasonable to expect even the most honest conformity
to cover any such distance.

But very evidently, if we can only discard the life-succession
theory, the Cretaceous beds were here laid down quickly after
the Devonian; and hence the long millions of years supposed to
have intervened between these two systems of rocks can have
had no real existence. All theories about diastrophism and base-
leveling which have been used to explain such facts as these, are
merely efforts to dodge the force of very plain and unequivo-
cal evidence.


40


622 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 424. Close view in Shanks quarry, showing the “deceptive conformity” between the
Middle Devonian above, and the Middle Silurian below,— marked by the hammer head. Look-
ing east. (Butts, U.S. G. S.)


3. Another example is near Banff, Alberta, where Lower
Cretaceous overlies Lower Carboniferous “without any per-
ceptible break, and the separation of one from the other is
rendered more difficult by the fact that the upper beds of the
Carboniferous are lithologically almost precisely like those of
the Cretaceous” (above them). And the illustrious director of
the Geological Survey of Canada, from whom I have been quot-
ing, A. R. C. Selwyn, gives us the further enlightening state-
ment that “were it not for fossil evidence one would naturally
suppose that a single formation was being dealt with.” (“An-
nual Report,” New Series, Vol. 2, Part A, p. 8.)

These words are surely very full of meaning, and especially
when it is remembered that they do not come from some youth-
ful novice, but from one of the most distinguished geologists
of modern times.


4. In the Bear Grass quarries (“Shanks” quarry) at Louis-
ville, Kentucky, a Middle Devonian coral limestone lies directly
upon another similar coral limestone classed as Middle Silurian.
Yet “the absolute conformability of the beds can be traced for


DO FOSSILS OCCUR IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER? 623


nearly a mile,” and “the parting between these two zones is like
that between any two limestone beds; but this insignificant line
represents a stratigraphic hiatus the equivalent to the last third
of Silurian and the first third of Devonian time.” (Charles Schu-
chert, “Textbook,” pp. 587, 588.)

5. A similar disconformity of Middle Devonian resting upon
Middle Silurian is seen at Newsom, Tennessee. These Middle De-
vonian are about 6 feet thick, and in their turn are overlain, again
conformably, by Lower Carboniferous shales (Mississippian).

6. One might almost think that the Middle Devonian had
the habit of following the Silurian in quick succession; for we
find this sequence again at Buffalo, New York, though in this
case the lower beds are classed as Upper Silurian (Manlius).
Still another disconformity occurs a few feet below in this same
set of beds; so that this example, like the preceding one from
Tennessee, is a double disconformity.

7. In Eastern Tennessee, the Chattanooga black shales,
Lower Carboniferous, rest conformably upon the Rockwood gray
clays, Lower Silurian, with the whole of the Devonian and more
than half of the Silurian absent. Another complication also is
added in this instance; for the two formations seem to have


Fic. 425. A double example of “deceptive conformity,” near Buffalo, New York.
The Middle Devonian (Onondaga) limestone rests conformably on the Silurian
(Manlius), the latter in turn resting conformably on the Bertie (Silurian), two
formations, the Rondout and the Cobleskill, being absent. (From Charles Schuchert. )


624 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Fic. 426. A case of “deceptive eonformity.” Jeffersonville limestone (M. Devonian) is seen
resting conformably upon Louisville limestone (L. Silurian). The hammer head, just below
the hat, marks the line of contact. Halysites catenulatus, characteristic of the lower Silurian,
is found at the level of the hammer head, with abundant corals, Favosites and Cyathophylloids,
in immediate contact with them above, and characteristic of the Middle Devonian.
(Butts, U. S. G. S.)


been mixed up at the point of contact, each one being inter-
calated with the other in such a way that it is difficult to tell
just where the line is to be drawn between them.


8. Throughout four provinces in Northeastern China, Upper
Carboniferous beds, chiefly shales, repose directly upon Lower
Ordovician limestones, the rest of the Ordovician, all of the
Silurian, the Devonian, and the Lower Carboniferous being
wanting. According to the closest scrutiny, “the Ordovician and
the Carboniferous strata are strictly conformable” (Bailey
Willis) over all this region where observations could be made.
Indeed, Richthofen, who first examined these rocks, reported
them all as belonging to one formation, a Carboniferous lime-
stone.

Space forbids any further listing of specific examples. Sir
Archibald Geikie, in summing up the facts along this line, says
of these conditions of disconformity, or “deceptive conformity,”
that they are “not merely local, but persistent over wide


DO FOSSILS OCCUR IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER? 625


areas. . . . They occur abundantly among the European Paleo-
zoic and Secondary rocks,” and are “traceable over wide re-
gions.” (‘“Textbook,” p. 842.)

Dr. E. O. Ulrich, in speaking of examples of these condi-
tions here in America, says:

“A break corresponding to several geological periods may
be no more clearly marked than the relatively brief interruption
of sedimentation between two small formations, or between
diastrophically distinguished members of a single formation. ...
It makes little difference whether the compared sequences are
lithologically similar or dissimilar; the large hiatuses are, as a
rule, no more clearly defined than the smaller breaks.” —“Bulletin
of the Geological Society of America,” Vol. 22, p. 459.

As for the number and frequency of these examples of “de-
ceptive conformity” or “disconformity,” one of the most ex-
perienced geologists in America has told the present writer that
he himself has seen and examined probably a thousand instances
of this character, some of them covering areas as large as
several States.

We can well believe Sir Archibald Geikie when he declares
that “it is not so easy to give a satisfactory account” of these
things. Professor Eduard Suess, in speaking of the “numerous
examples” of this sort, declares that they “may well be cause
for astonishment.” However, the astonishment which I feel


Fic. 427. Panorama showing Chief Mountain and neighboring peaks. All the foreground
and the bases of these mountains are Cretaceous. The tops of the mountains are composed of
Algonkian limestone. (Willis, U. S. G. 8.)


626 THE NEW GEOLOGY


is due to the amazing power of a preconceived theory to blind
the eyes and stultify the reasoning powers of the shrewdest ob-
servers, when confronted with a series of facts for which their
theory has made no provision. Of late years, some ingenious
wits think they have worked out a plausible explanation of these
facts by a delicate combination of diastrophism and base-
leveling, each of precisely the right amount. But a plain


Fie. 428. Chief Mountain, Montana, looking north from Kennedy Creek. This mountain is

situated some 3 miles south of the international boundary line. Its top is composed of Algon-

kian limestone and quartzite, which rest on Cretaceous shales, with every physical appearance
of natural conformity. (Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


common-sense view of the matter, which would make such elabo-
rate theories unnecessary, would be to say that these conformi-
ties are like all others of their kind, an obvious proof that these
strata followed one another in quick succession, with no great
time interval in between; because the alleged time distinctions
between these two contiguous strata are all a mistake, and no
such distinctions in age need to be taken into account at all.
This solves the whole difficulty, and we then take these con-
formities just as we do any others at their face value. A
wrong theory has made a mountainous difficulty, when in reality
there is none whatever.


DO FOSSILS OCCUR IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER? 627


Thrust Faults. But if devoted followers of the current
theory have found “cause for astonishment” in these examples
of “deceptive conformity,” what will they say if we should
find an apparent conformity of this kind upside down, that is,
with the “older” above and the “younger” below, but with just
as much apparent agreement in dip between the two,— in short,
the two apparently in actual conformity, only in the wrong
order? In such a case, either the rocks are wrong, or the theory


Fic. 429. Another view of Chief Mountain.


is wrong. Will our theorists be brave enough to hold to their
theory and give the direct lie to the rocks? If the former ex-
amples of conformity were deceptive, what name shall be ap-
plied to examples where the conformity is so obviously the
reverse of all that the theory has taught us for a hundred years?

But there are plenty of examples of this sort also. They are
listed among the curiosities of the science of geology, and are
called “thrust faults,” or simply “thrusts”; and the theoretical
explanation of how the rocks happen to be in this wrong posi-
tion has been called “one of the triumphs of modern geological
research.” (Pirsson.) Perhaps; but it may be that the reader
of these pages will conclude, after a study of the facts, that
this theory of “thrusts” is rather a pitiful example of the


Fic. 430.
slope of the mountain. This is all Algonkian ; the Cretaceous appears only much
lower down on the mountain. (Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


THE NEW GEOLOGY


tae KUNO
en we a sO
7


> y ET E F E.
Se eae


Southwest face of Chief Mountain, Montana, viewed from the upper


DO FOSSILS OCCUR IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER? 629


Fic. 431. Algonkian limestone resting on Cretaceous shale, with every appearance of natural
conformity. On the slope of Summit Mountain, Glacier National Park. (Stanton, U.S. G. S.)


hypnotizing power of a false theory in the presence of the very
plainest facts.

Alberta and Montana. A good example to start with is the
region in the Rocky Mountains running from the Sun River,
just west of the middle of Montana, up to the Yellowhead Pass,
in Alberta, Canada. The district is over 500 miles long, north
and south, and of quite indefinable width, though at the inter-
national boundary line it is some 30 or 40 miles wide, running
back at least to the valley of the North Fork of the Flat-
head River. South of the boundary line, it includes all of the
Glacier National Park. North of the line, it takes in five parallel
ranges of mountains running north and south, with four inter-
vening valleys. It takes in all the wild, picturesque scenery
around Banff and Lake Louise, and also that around Crowsnest
Pass, and includes such picturesque lone peaks or outliers as
Crowsnest Mountain, Chief Mountain, and Gould’s Dome, the
latter being 10,125 feet high.

Over all this vast area, which must measure nearly 20,000
square miles, the mountains present much uniformity, and con-
sist of jointed limestones, argillites, and quartzites, classed as
Algonkian (Pre-Cambrian) in all the southern part of the area,
and called Carboniferous farther north. But the valleys are all
Cretaceous, wherever the rivers have dug out their channels deep
enough; for Cretaceous strata run under the mountains in a


630 THE NEW GEOLOGY


nearly horizontal] position from the front, or from the east; and
to the west of this area (as in the valley of the Flathead), the
Cretaceous run under again as before. Of course, it is quite un-
reasonable to expect any conformable contact throughout all this


Fic. 432. Pinnacle (erosion remnant) of Altyn limestone (Algonkian), resting on
coal-bearing Cretaceous shale and sandstone, on the divide running southwest
from Chief Mountain, Montana. (Stanton, U. S. G. S.)


immense area. Yet, where good exposures can be obtained, as
at the base of Crowsnest Mountain and Chief Mountain, and
at many points along the front of the Glacier National Park,
also to the north, the apparent conformability is perfect. The
picturesque peaks just mentioned, as well as the entire Glacier


DO FOSSILS OCCUR IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER? 631


Cretaceous sea; for the Cretaceous runs under these mountains
from every side, just as the soil runs under a building.

There are minor disturbances, as could not but be expected
in an area of these dimensions. Yet, the undisturbed character
of most of these mountains is quite remarkable. Merely a gentle
dip here and there is observed in the clearly defined strata com-


Fic. 433. Chief Mountain and its satellites. The pinnacles in the middle of the view are
erosion remnants of Algonkian limestone resting on Cretaceous sandstone, the latter contain-
ing coal seams. All the upper part of the mountain proper is also composed of Algonkian
rocks. The sloping part is Cretaceous. Glacier National Park, Montana. (Willis, U. S. G. S.)


posing the tops of peak after peak extending across the sky line,
the whole area looking like undisturbed horizontal strata worn
away into mountains of erosion. Were it not for the order in
which the popular theory says that these strata ought to occur,
no one would ever drearn of anything else than that over all
this area, the Cretaceous strata were laid down first, and these
Paleozoic and Algonkian beds were laid down quite quickly and
rapidly afterwards.

R. G. McConnell, of the Canadian Survey, speaking of the
very natural appearance of the upper and the lower strata near


632 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Kananaskis Station, on the Canadian Pacific Railway, says that
the line between them “acts exactly like the line of contact of
two nearly horizontal formations,” while in a natural section
made by the Ghost River a few miles away, the two sets of beds
“appear to succeed one another conformably.” (“Report” for
1886, Part D, p. 83.)

Other Examples. Other examples of strata in this reverse
order are to be found almost everywhere. One of them is in the
State of New York, and runs up across Vermont into Quebec.
Another in the southern Appalachian chain is a well-known


Fic. 484. Hart Mountain, from 3 miles east of Cody, Wyoming. The cap of this mountain

is composed of Madison limestone (L. Cretaceous), and rests in apparent conformity on Eocene

beds. This cap is manifestly an erosion remnant which was once continuous with the cap of

Chalk Mountain, some 15 miles to the southwest. Doubtless a sheet of these strata once ex-

tended over all this region. The theory of a gigantic “thrust” is merely an attempt to save
the old theory of the “invariable” order of the fossils. (Hewitt. U. S. G. S.)


instance; it involves parts of Georgia, Alabama, and Eastern
Tennessee. Here Cambrian or Lower Silurian lie in apparent
conformity upon Carboniferous; and the line of contact has
been made out as extending 375 miles in length. The so-called
“Bannock overthrust” is some 270 miles long, covering parts of
Utah and Idaho to the northeast of Great Salt Lake. Many
other examples might be given from various parts of North
America.

In the Highlands of Scotland are other examples famous in
the history of the science, because Sir Archibald Geikie, one of
naturally conformable. Afterwards, when others had visited
the localities and had found “younger” fossils in the lower beds,
the whole description of the country had to be revised in accord
with the traditional theory; but Geikie, who was then the di-
rector of the Geological Survey of Great Britain, excused his
former “mistake” by saying:


DO FOSSILS OCCUR IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER? 633


“Had these sections been planned for the purpose of deception, they
could not have been more skillfully devised, . . . and no one coming first
to this ground would suspect that what appears to be a normal stratigraphi-
cal sequence is not really so.”—“Nature,” Nov. 18, 1884, pp. 29-35.


Examples of the strata in the “wrong” order were first re-
ported from the Alps nearly half a century ago. Since that
time, whole armfuls of learned treatises in German, in French,
and in English have been written to explain the wonderful con-
ditions there found. The diagrams that have been drawn to
account for the strange order of the strata are worthy to rank


Fic. 435. Erosion remnant of Bighorn limestone (Ordovician) overlying Tertiary beds, East

Peak, McCulloch Peaks, Bighorn Basin, Wyoming. (Hewitt, U. S. G. S.) This is a part of

the so-called “Hart Mountain overthrust,” where Carboniferous limestones comprise the tops
of several peaks, with much younger (Eocene) strata underneath.


with the similar ones by the Ptolemaic astronomers picturing
the cycles and epicycles required to explain the peculiar þe-
havior of the heavenly bodies in accordance with the geocentric
theory of the universe then prevailing. The geological theories
to explain the findings in the Alps have gone through many
vicissitudes, and have been repeatedly revised. At the present
time, the theory generally received is that the rocks now com-
posing the Lepontine Alps were lifted up several thousands of
feet and pushed bodily northward some 60 miles into the Hel-
vetiac region, where erosion has since carved them up into the
mountains as we now find them. Several other “thrusts” of
“a mighty mountain without roots, a stranger in a foreign
geologic environment.”

In Scandinavia, a district some 1,120 miles long by 80 miles
wide is alleged to have been pushed horizontally eastward “at


632 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Kananaskis Station, on the Canadian Pacific Railway, says that
the line between them “acts exactly like the line of contact of
two nearly horizontal formations,” while in a natural section
made by the Ghost River a few miles away, the two sets of beds
“appear to succeed one another conformably.” (“Report” for
1886, Part D, p. `93.)

Other Examples. Other examples of strata in this reverse
order are to be found almost everywhere. One of them is in the
State of New York, and runs up across Vermont into Quebec.
Another in the southern Appalachian chain is a well-known


Fic. 434. Hart Mountain, from 3 miles east of Cody, Wyoming. The cap of this mountain

is composed of Madison limestone (L. Cretaceous), and rests in apparent conformity on Eocene

beds. This cap is manifestly an erosion remnant which was once continuous with the cap of

Chalk Mountain, some 15 miles to the southwest. Doubtless a sheet of these strata once ex-

tended over all this region. The theory of a gigantic “thrust” is merely an attempt to save
the old theory of the “invariable” order of the fossils. (Hewitt. U. S. G. S.)


instance; it involves parts of Georgia, Alabama, and Eastern
Tennessee. Here Cambrian or Lower Silurian lie in apparent
conformity upon Carboniferous; and the line of contact has
been made out as extending 375 miles in length. The so-called
“Bannock overthrust” is some 270 miles long, covering parts of
Utah and Idaho to the northeast of Great Salt Lake. Many
other examples might be given from various parts of North
America.

In the Highlands of Scotland are other examples famous in
the history of the science, because Sir Archibald Geikie, one of
naturally conformable. Afterwards, when others had visited
the localities and had found “younger” fossils in the lower beds,
the whole description of the country had to be revised in accord
with the traditional theory; but Geikie, who was then the di-
rector of the Geological Survey of Great Britain, excused his
former “mistake” by saying:


‘punog aq 0} qy/6mo Beas BY} MOY Jo
A1094} 14014, D UB 0} Pd}}IWIUIOD JOU JIL OYM ə[doəd BurAo[-u)n:a1 WOT, UOIZUS}}e snorrəs Jo AYJIOMUN JV ‘aAOqe UALS sulBIZeBIp
OM} 94} UL pərpoquə suorzeməəds dI}sejUBF əul JO YO “MSTA oumnuətəs A[UO əul TILU J} JO mət ə[qIsuəs Auo Ə} SI SYL
“mey} puy eM YSIYM ur IƏPIO Ə} UL UMOP PIB, A[[BNJOe JIƏM *@qwe:Js SOY} JEY} ABS P[NOM 9M *“KIroəul [BUOI}IPBA} ƏY} JosIOF p[noo
əm JI 'ƏIƏYMƏS[Ə B}BI}]S JO uortssəəoəons 1IƏUYJO AUB SB [LINJBU SB SOOL uortrssəoons JY} PUY ME st Jey} :4əpio DUOIM ƏY} UI AII ae
S[ISSOJ ƏQL “ByVI}ZS Əy} JO Bulutn}1eao [wat Aue Jo ƏJIƏY əouəpiAə [BdisAyd OU SI III} BY} əouəptAə INDÍ Dwiid SI uonsggə:diəlur
jo exueyo SI4L ‘Aem əuo paysnd [e syo01 ƏY} YPM ,,q[ngy ISNIYJ, B pəl[eə Mou st ‘Aa[eA JUIIg I4} PIBMO} səpts uloq uroay ur
Peploy Byers ISSEL PUB DISSBINE ƏY} YPM ,‘PIOF əl[qnop,, B peal[so ÁA[təurroj SEM FBM FLY} UVES SI Yt ‘SUIBIDBIP OM} Əsəul WOT


‘daLYUdaYALNI ATISNOIUVA SV ‘CGNVTYUAZLIMS ‘SNUVID LV SNOILIGNOO NMOG-HdISdN AHL “Ler “Ol


(uwiuaəd) OUBINILIA — A ƏSrssuin f — f (SIVIL 1940) uəsá[q — ?
(Ytuao[opru104) ISSEL — 7 SnoəI8gJƏ10 — O (SIUIL ƏIDDIW) ƏSSEJOW — W

WIH EOGI “sənS ZEST PULIMIA EFFI u HNLEF-JSNIYL aəudw[5,, `q
(we H 449q1V “4d 41fV)


wH puu IBA 061 OF 0O¿L8I PIOA ətlqnoq WUW, ÜV


t. — `
Ny


qwuao aK oe [eyuseg Yoo suayos}ANW apinA_, 4əuəpury


[Byueyy 4əp4o A Wuop4uS 90781007 uəltəuizytds l əəsuə[u M . raed
ymog YON


(635)


636 THE NEW GEOLOGY


cated device which would save the theory of the traditional
order of the fossils, for there was no physical evidence of any
such incredible overturning.

Later, however, similar reversed conditions were found in
regions like the southern Appalachians and in the Rockies, where
the strata looked practically horizontal, with little or no signs of
any disturbance. Then the theory was modified so as to provide
for a sharp break or rupture of nearly horizontal strata, and
the pushing up of the one set of strata over on top of the other,
after which erosion is supposed to have removed all but the lower
layers of the thrust block, leaving them now lying in a natural-
looking position upon the strata which are really “younger.”
Thus the former explanation of an “overthrust fold” has gener-
ally been replaced by that of a flat-lying “thrust” or “thrust
fault,” in the language of the current theories. But all such
incredible movements of the strata are necessitated by the
simple fact that the fossiliferous strata happen to be found in
the wrong order, and as Dr. Albert Heim once expressed it in a
letter to the present writer, “the most incredible mechanical
explanation is more probable than that the evolution of organic
nature should have been inverted in one country as compared
with another.”

But I confess that I do not understand such a style of argu-
ment. It seems to me that this method of reasoning belongs
to the Middle Ages, not to the twentieth century. Surely the
order in which the rocks (fossils) were laid down all over the
earth must always at best be only a theory. We may have
found them occurring in a certain relative order for a thousand
times; but are we to deny the positive evidences of our senses, if
we should at last happen to find them occurring in some other
than the accustomed order? My training in natural science has
never taught me that a theory should have the right of way
over facts in any such fashion as this. What progress would
the world have made in physics, or chemistry, or bacteriology, if
we had not thrown bushels of theories out of the window, when-
ever these theories were plainly and unequivocally contradicted
by real facts? In another communication to the writer, the
distinguished scientist of Switzerland just quoted says: that
the strata are thus in a reversed position over immense
areas “is a fact which can be clearly seen,— only we know not
yet how to explain it in a mechanical way.” I prefer to take the
most obvious explanation at hand, namely, that the rocks were
actually laid down as we find them; and if any theories do not
agree with these facts, so much the worse for the theories. I


DO FOSSILS OCCUR IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER? 637


do not believe that it is safe, in any of the natural sciences, to
reverse this method, and let theories dominate our views about
the facts.

Nor can I agree with the eminent Scottish geologist already
quoted, who seems to insinuate that these conditions of the
strata have possibly been planned by nature for the purpose of
deceiving us, perhaps to test our ingenuity in explaining them.
I think we shall be treating nature with more respect if we take
her messages at their face value, instead of assuming that they
are written in code, and that we must decipher them as best we
may in accord with a key which we possess. We can be better
employed than in trying to decode the plain statements of nature


VOSGES BLACK FOREST


6

sl

“ `

- ae à

š ris pee = 3
¥ a4 -R nares, 2


Fic. 438- Diagram across the Rhine valley, showing the Mesozoic rocks on each
side, with Tertiary and Pleistocene rocks in the valley. It should be remembered
that the vertical proportion is enormously exaggerated, and that there is no abso-
lute proof of the faults at the sides of the valley which appear-in this diagram,
and which have been placed here as a theory to help explain why these rocks are
in the wrong order. This is called a “rift valley,” or “graben,” by the theory.
1, granite; 2-7, Mesozoic rocks; 8, 9, Tertiary and Pleistocene.
(After Lake and Rastall.)


in accord with any such key, no matter if this key has been
rendered honorable by a century of use and by the confidence of
the most illustrious names in our country’s history.


In Every Possible Relative Order. If now we attempt to put
together the facts which we have learned in this chapter, we
shall find that we have had examples of the strata occurring
in practically every order of serial relationship.

We first had numerous examples of strata at the top of the
geological series occurring conformably on any of the strata
“farther down in the list, the iritervening being wanting. Now
we have this condition reversed, and have any of the strata at
the bottom of the list occurring conformably on top of any
others farther up in the series. If we put these two classes of
facts together, we shall have the great law of conformable
stratigraphic sequence, which may be stated as follows, and
which is by all odds the most important law ever formulated
with reference to the order in which the strata occur:


41


638 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Any kind of fossiliferous beds whatever, “young” or “old,”
may be found occurring conformably on any other fossiliferous
beds, “older” or “younger.”

Of course, we have not in this chapter presented anything
like examples of every possible combination of the strata, such
as this law speaks of; that would be a large matter. It may
be that scientific discovery has not yet found examples of every
possible combination; that itself would be a very large matter.
But scientific discovery has been made of quite sufficient ex-
amples, and we have even in this chapter presented sufficient
examples, to justify this broad general statement, or scientific
law. And it is perfectly obvious that no puerile statement about
the invariable order of sequence in which the rocks always oc-
cur, can stand for a moment in the face of this law of conform-
able sequence. This law forever puts an end to all evolutionary
speculations about the order in which the various plants and
animals have developed, in the minds of those who are correctly
informed regarding these facts. This law alone is quite suffi-
cient to relegate the whole theory of organic evolution to the
lumber room of science, there to become the amusement of the
future students of the history of cosmological speculations.

“Extinct Species.” The subject of “extinct species” must
be briefly referred to ere this chapter is closed. It is an intri-
cate subject for the beginning student, and only the outline can
be considered here.

By many, the facts connected with this subject are supposed
to furnish a line of evidence in favor of the geological series as
a true historical order, and to furnish this evidence quite in-
dependent of anything hitherto considered in this chapter. The
claim is made that all the species of the so-called “older” rocks,
such as the Cambrian, Ordovician, Silurian, etc., are extinct,
many of even the genera being unrepresented by any living
forms; but that as we gradually approach the “youngest” rocks,
as the Cretaceous and the Tertiaries, the fossils of modern liv-
ing species appear more and more commonly, until in the Pleisto-
cene all the invertebrates and some even of the higher forms
are identical with those now living. And it is argued from this `
that those formations all of whose species are extinct must
necessarily be vastly older than those others which contain many
species now alive.

But the following facts must be considered in connection
with the claims of this line of argument:

1. This argument is based on the assumption of uniformity
in its most extreme form, for it denies the possibility that the


DO FOSSILS OCCUR IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER? 639


modern living species and genera may be merely the lucky
survivors of tremendous earth changes in which their contem-
poraries perished ; and this possibility must be candidly faced in
any investigation of these questions which pretends to be an
impartial scientific investigation. To assume uniformity is to
prejudice the case from the start; and this is not a scientific
method of procedure. If there has been anything like a world
catastrophe, this assumption of uniformity would forever ignore
and disguise this fact, and would continually rule out of court
any and all evidence pointing in that direction; which is a wholly
unscientific attitude of mind.

2. There are several reasons why, if there really was a
world catastrophe, very many of the lower forms of life would
probably be exterminated, especially such bottom feeders as
trilobites and brachiopods and others of like habits. And as the
Paleozoic and even the Mesozoic group are composed largely
of these lower forms of life, the results as we have them, and to
which appeal is made as evidence, are only just what we should
naturally expect on the supposition of such a world catastrophe.
In other words, this supposed evidence is capable of another
easy explanation which is directly opposed to the conclusion
based upon it.

3. This idea of extinct species belonging properly in the
“older” rocks, and of a gradual approximation to the living
floras and faunas, has constantly been kept in mind by the ex-
perts who have been intrusted with the work of deciding the
exact “age” of all newly discovered strata. Even formations
long known have in many instances been changed from one
system to another on the testimony of these experts, the pro-
portion of living and extinct species in these formations, and
the degree of their approximation to the living floras and faunas,
having been the chief factors in making these changes. That
is, the fossiliferous rocks from all over the earth have been
classified largely with this very principle in view; and hence
it is not at all strange that the classification as now complete
should conform quite generally to this idea of extinct species
largely predominating in the so-called “older” rocks. In short,
the witness has been coached to testify as desired, and hence
is not competent to testify. It is difficult to understand how the
results of such a purely artificial arrangement of the strata
should ever have been suggested as evidence that the geological
series presents a gradual approximation to the present order
of things among the plants and animals.


640 THE NEW GEOLOGY


4. There is abundant and unmistakable evidence of a great
world catastrophe of some sort, involving a sudden and very
extreme change of climate over the Northern Hemisphere at
least, with very extensive changes in the distribution of the
ocean and the dry land, since man and thousands of living
species came into existence, even according to the present ac-
cepted system of classifying the strata. But may not this great
world change have been the cause of the extinction of multitudes
of the species which we are so often told must imply the lapse
of long ages of time? Is there any way to make a scientific
distinction between those extinct species which may have been
exposed to such a world convulsion, and to decide that only a
certain limited few were made extinct by this event, and then
to arrange the others off on the percentage system, as if no
such event had ever happened? If a dozen burglaries have been
committed in a certain vicinity, and a certain notorious criminal
has been convicted of having done one of these “jobs,” how is
he going to avoid the strong suspicion of having done most
of the others?

5. Repeated references have been made in the previous chap-
ters to genera and families which seem to skip one or more of
the systems, and also many genera and families long supposed
to be extinct, and found as fossils only in the Paleozoic and the
Mesozoic rocks, but discovered in modern times in numerous
unsuspected places over the world. There is the further cer-
tainty that many other kinds alleged to be extinct are not really
separable from others alive to-day, though it is impossible to
determine how many such examples may be found among the
lower forms of life. At the present time, this subject is in too
confused a condition to determine the real facts in the case.

Summary. We may summarize the five points just enu-
merated, by saying that any alleged chronological distinctions
between different formations, based on this idea of extinct
species, have no scientific value whatever. Hence the value of
the geological series as a true historical order, gains no sup-
port whatever from this principle of extinct species, just as
we have already seen that it is without a vestige of support
from the order in which the fossils occur in the strata.

The geological series of the various successive formations
is a purely artificial contrivance, convenient enough if made to
keep its proper place as a mere artificial arrangement, but
without any scientific support as representing a real historical
order, when examined either from the history of the science
or from the facts of the rocks as we now know them.


(UOISTIM 493V) .Sulddrys,, Jo sə[durexə Augu 04} IMJON “Se}BAqe}1ea jJƏru9Ə ay} JO uonnqtrnsrp [BoIZojoas oy} Burmoys HEO “GEP DIA


H H : W
poyas ORV yon Fš GS
puossouda

! I í — oy] mika T

3 H H RTRT te
u : . NOSO DW Y

5772757 DY : } DwpnvdzZ

EEH Eltiru CEA ! "w. ....... EET k. bop


=*F 1.


=e (OYI | —i


E org ns oW


UT Uvpus
g


v? kes: ae
ANN SIWWAVA


mowa oudw


wijuepeulag VILLNOTO WON


VILA USAID AT
H EE VSOYPOL
. 22k o> olu
xzuq2oyo
vhuopd
“oot x A


vaIpownaygy VIN013H3


vapi ayrryduy


` py Pd
|


VIAAYSO} oD
5 Moso


sy 43307]
Sa NY} ylvWwvnbs
oydsouiouoy e
CNS T N | — a
| »»p>ydosoyoulyy| YVI TYHd 39
HP rvsoyukyy|_ OH IN AHM
whi! eal? | (EATS ED
agra |) STN (G


aminy
y aspa
Bpodosnng VIXAVSONIG


vpodosay |
DTyoMSOpgsg
murnsophig| sss


YV
DVIYIS0


ee


(641)


642 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Im conclusion, it should be stated that the ancient world,
whose ruins we now find as fossils, was doubtless a well-
balanced unit, and is to be regarded as merely an older state of
our present world. All the important orders of plants and
animals living in our modern world have now been found in
the fossil state; and the classification of their fossils does not
represent a serial or chronological order any more than does a
similar classification of the modern plants and animals. The
one series is merely the complement of the other. The geologi-
cal series of plants and animals represents merely taxonomic
relationships; it is the systematic or classification series of an
older state of our world,—of the antediluvian world, if we
accept the language of the new catastrophism.


CHAPTER XXXIX


The Circumstances Under Which


the Fossils Occur


Uniformity Only a Theory. For nearly a century, or ever
since the publication of Lyell’s “Principles of Geology” (1830-
1833), geologists have assumed that all the rock deposits of the
past were made much as rocks are being made to-day, by common-
place causes. This is called the doctrine of uniformity, or uni-
formitarianism; and this doctrine has so long and so completely
dominated scientific investigation that in effect it has become
an iron dogma which rules out of consideration all evidence
not agreeable to its teachings. The argument seems to be, that
anything contrary to uniformity is impossible; hence no amount
of evidence can ever prove anything contrary to uniformity.

But we must always keep in mind that this idea of uni-
formity is only a theory; and like all other theories, it must
constantly be measured up alongside the facts. And the op-
posite idea, namely, that a great world catastrophe may have
happened to our world in the long ago, should always be kept
in mind also as the alternative. The latter has as good a right
to a hearing as has the former; and it is also just as scientific
a hypothesis as the other. And a true study of the facts of
geology, if this science is good for anything at all, ought to be
able to settle the matter very positively in favor of the one or
the other of these rival theories.

For these two theories are in direct antagonism; the one is
the direct denial of the other. We are done with the old
burlesque of a long succession of catastrophes, in serial order, as
taught by Cuvier and his followers. If we are to consider the
theory of a world catastrophe at all, we must take it as it comes
to us from the oldest and most venerable history of the human
race, in which it appears as a veritable overturning of all the
quiet and regular action of the elements, earth, and air, and
water; and such an event can never be made to fit into any
scheme of uniformity. The hypothesis of a flood or a deluge
is that of a great world catastrophe, absolutely universal in its
sweep, wholly abnormal, and essentially different from any event
which has taken place under scientific observation, and of in-
calculable violence and power; and if there ever was such an
event, this theory of uniformity can not be true. The two


(643)


644 THE NEW GEOLOGY


ideas are antagonistic and mutually exclusive. Each theory is
on trial; and the evidence from the rocks must decide the one or
the other to be the probable explanation of how the major part
of the geological changes took place.

Acknowledging a Flood. It is true that some of the best-
known of moderm geologists, such men as Howorth, Wright,
Prestwich, Suess, and Sir William Dawson, have admitted or
have undertaken to prove that there must have been some sort
of catastrophe, like a partial flood, since man appeared upon
the earth. But all these men, save perhaps the two first men-
tioned, seem to labor under the strange inconsistency of sup-
posing that such an event could occur without leaving abundant
and indelible proofs of its work in the rock deposits which it
would leave behind and in the species which it would extermi-
nate. For when we consider the delicate and complicated
mechanism of our world in respect to its climate and the dis-
tribution of the land and the water, we must own that any pro-
found disturbance of this delicate equilibrium would easily send
the waters of the ocean careering over the land, burying and
exterminating myriads of living creatures both in the ocean
and on the land, churning them all up together, until no one
could estimate the quantity of stratigraphical work accom-
plished or the numbers and the kinds of species which would
be exterminated, before equilibrium could be restored.

Methods of Investigation. From all this, we conclude that,
by following true principles of scientific investigation, we ought
to be able to decide very positively whether or not any such
event has ever happened to our world. A true induction, if it
is good for anything at all, ought to be able to find out for certain
whether or not the present regular and mild action of the ele-
ments has always prevailed in the past; so that there would
be no need of assuming uniformity beforehand and then reading
all the records of the past in the light of this assumption.

But the theory of uniformity was first taught when the
scientific world knew nothing of the life at the bottom of the
ocean, and when the most absurd notions were commonly taught
about the mechanical and chemical conditions prevailing there.
The whole geological series was blocked off, and much of the
details arranged, before any of the leading scientists would
acknowledge that man or any of the living species of plants and
animals had anything whatever to do with these geological
changes, or that actual representatives of our modern living
forms were found as fossils in any of these ancient rocks. The
fossil world was considered as entirely separate and distinct


CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH FOSSILS OCCUR 645


from the modern one; the two worlds were regarded as separate,
having nothing at all to do with each other. People still treat this
doctrine of uniformity, not as a mere hypothesis to be tested ac-
cording to the evidence, but as a Procrustean law to which every
newly discovered fact must be made to conform either by lopping
off or by stretching.

But it is absurdly unscientific to assume uniformity and thus
to decide beforehand just how the various geological deposits
took place, and then throw out of consideration any and all
evidence which does not seem to agree with this Procrustean
law. If a coroner, called upon to hold an inquest, were to con-
tent himself, after the manner of these uniformitarian geolo-
gists, with glittering generalities and average statistics about
how people are all the time dying of old age, fever, and other
causes, coupled with assurances regarding the quiet, regular
habits of all his fellow citizens, we could not admire the scien-
tific methods which he employed, if there was clear and ample
evidence that the poor fellow under consideration had been shot.
Just so with this doctrine of uniformitarianism; it is not ap-
proaching the subject in a judicial manner. It is not following
the method of true scientific research, but the medieval method
of scholastic dogmatism. The geological formations are not re-
garded as presenting materials for solving the problem of the
past of the earth, but as materials for illustrating a precon-
ceived theory of the present order of things prolonged and pro-
jected indefinitely into the past. Hence it is not much to be
wondered at that under the tyranny of such a doctrine, the
science of geology has made little or no advance in its theoretical
aspects and in its methods during the past three quarters of a
century, though during this period all the other sciences have
been making astonishing progress.

But we must reserve the further consideration of this part
of the subject until the next chapter, and give here some of the
facts which have been discovered regarding the condition in
which the fossils are found, that will furnish us with data for
estimating how they were buried. Because, although our sci-
ence has made little or no progress for nearly a century in its
general theory and methods of reasoning, it has indeed ac-
cumulated a vast amount of data, which ought to be sufficient
for a complete reconstruction of the science of geology; just
as the patient and exact observations of the Ptolemaic as-
tronomers, accumulated during many centuries, furnished Kep-
ler and Newton with the means of reconstructing the science
of astronomy. The reform and reconstruction of geology is the


646 THE NEW GEOLOGY


next great advance to be made in modern natural science; and
the present author will consider his mission accomplished, if
this volume contributes even slightly toward such a result.

Modern Conditions. Several of the preceding chapters
(chapters 5-13) have been devoted to an examination of the
way in which modern rock deposits are now being made by our
rivers and oceans. Our rivers carry a great variety of ma-
terials, and while they sort these materials slightly, they do not
form any wide or extensive deposits of one kind of materials
alone; these materials are all more or less commingled, and do
not present that clear distinction between gravel and sand and
clay which we find so markedly in evidence in most of the Paleo-
zoic and Mesozoic strata. And the fossils buried by modern
streams and rivers are meager and fragmentary in the extreme.

Along the coasts of our oceans, it is true, great stretches of
gravel or sand or mud are being separately made, and the
various materials are kept more or less distinct. But the fossils
now being buried in these deposits are also quite fragmentary,
and are limited to the kinds of life inhabiting the littoral zone.
We have learned that in the pelagic waters, the ocean currents
are confined to the surface waters, and have “no sensible
mechanical effects, either in the way of transportation or abra-
sion.” (Dana.) And because of the precipitating effects of
salt water, none of the sediments from the land get beyond the
classic 100-fathom line, which marks the edge of the continental
shelf, and in most cases is not very far from shore. Over all
of the true ocean floor, there is no gravel, no sand, no true clay
derived from the land surfaces, and no true stratified deposits
of any kind are now being formed there; for the waters are so
eternally calm as not to disturb the softest ooze. These various
oozes, indeed, cover the entire ocean floor; but nothing could in-
terbed these with sand and gravel and land fossils, as we con-
stantly find them interbedded in the ancient rocks, except a
tremendous disturbance of the ocean to its very bottom, such as
has never occurred since the dawn of scientific observation.

Sir Archibald Geikie thus draws the contrast between the
present deposits on the ocean bottom, and the deposits which we
find composing the fossiliferous strata:


“Thanks to the great work done by the Challenger and other national
expeditions, we have learned what are the leading characters of the ac-
cumulations now forming on the deeper parts of the ocean floor. So far
as we know, they have no analogues among the formations of the earth’s
crust. They differ, indeed, . . . entirely from any formation which ge-
ologists have considered to be of deep-water origin.” —“Textbook,” p. 929;
edition of 1908.


CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH FOSSILS OCCUR 649%


Driven from the ocean proper, geologists have made heroic
attempts to explain all the formations composing our lands in
terms of the shallow-water deposits of the continental shelf,
including the estuaries and deltas of large rivers. But it is
interesting to watch the methods of reasoning employed. As
we have already seen in the previous chapters, we have in the
fossiliferous strata repeated examples of the life represented
in the deep-sea oozes interbedded with sediments from the land.
And so when confronted with radiolarian or diatomaceous or
globigerina remains in clean, thick beds interstratified with
sands or clays which perhaps contain land plants or land ani-
mals, geologists have tried to picture how the plankton of the
oceans must be thrown down along with the sediments forming
at the mouths of large rivers. Of course, they can not show
how any noticeable quantity of this plankton is here deposited,
and thus can not show any similarity worthy of the name be-
tween modern estuarine and delta deposits and the anciently
formed beds; but they have done the best they could to apply
the theory of uniformity, and profess to be satisfied with the
results. But the contrast must ever remain clear and distinct
between the ancient deposits and the modern ones, not only in
the fossils themselves, but in the texture of the beds. For all
modern deposits made by rivers and streams, even when these
empty into the ocean or other large body of water, are made up
of mixed particles, constituting a more or less heterogeneous
mixture of materials; in contrast with which we have prodigious
deposits in every part of the world, belonging to the Paleozoic and
the Mesozoic formations, which are astonishingly uniform in
texture throughout hundreds of feet in thickness and often ex-
tending over hundreds or even thousands of square miles in area.

Contrasts. Let us now briefly review the facts regarding
the condition in which the fossils themselves are found.

1. First we may consider the relative abundance of fossils
in the ancient deposits, as compared with the modern.

We have already seen that the modern fossiliferous deposits
are scanty, and the specimens themselves very imperfectly pre-
served. The arctic explorers have remarked with amazement
on the scarcity of modern organic remains in the arctic, where
such a profusion of animal life now exists; declaring that it is
far easier to find the remains of some Mesozoic or Tertiary
monster in the rocks than it is to find the carcass of a modern
animal. . Then, too, dredgings about the mouths of such rivers
as the Thames and the Hudson have shown the entire absence of
such remains of land animals as we might expect to find there,


648 THE NEW GEOLOGY


in view of the numbers of domestic animals which live along the
banks of these rivers, and which must occasionally be carried
downstream. Vertebrate fish also are very rarely found in
modern deposits, for they require “speedy burial after death”
(Dana) to escape destruction from decomposition, as well as
from animals which would eat them up.

It has been claimed that a violent mixing of cold waters
with warm ocean currents, such as takes place occasionally in
heavy storms, will kill great quantities of fish; and that great
numbers are also killed by being driven from salt water into
fresh, or vice versa. These phenomena do occur; but in all such
cases, the fish rise to the surface and float away to the shore, or
to the open ocean, to be devoured bit by bit by all sorts of other
animals. It is doubtful if a single specimen out of such great
shoals as are sometimes thus destroyed, ever is buried in sedi-
ments in such shape as to make possible its identification after
a year has elapsed. -

In very notable contrast with these modern conditions are
the fossil fishes found in many of the ancient deposits; for here
we find them entombed in whole shoals, constituting beds many
feet in thickness and sometimes extending miles in area, the fish
often so close together as to touch one another, and all so as-
tonishingly preserved that we can make out the full outline and
often many of the delicate tissues. Where, for instance, in our
modern world, do we have anything going on similar to the
record that is preserved for us in the great fish beds at Lompoc,
California, at Fossil, Arizona, or in the Onondaga limestones of
Ohio and Michigan? Or where is there anything to-day form-
ing like the shales of Monte Bolca, the black slates of Glarus, `
the calcareous marls of Œningen on Lake Constance, the
Jurassic shales of Solenhofen, or the copper slate of the Mans-
field district,— to mention a few more localities from Europe?
The list might be continued indefinitely from almost all parts
of the world.

In many other instances, where the remains of fish are not
thus packed in on top of one another, the shales are so saturated
with organic oil that they will burn almost like coal. In many
of the Devonian rocks, the remains of fish “are often found in
masses, as if they had been suddenly entombed in living shoals
by the sediment which now contains them.” (David Page.)
Describing the rocks of this system in Scotland, where they
cover a large part of the country, Hugh Miller remarks with
amazement that “conjecture lacks footing in grappling with the
enigma” as to how the “innumerable existences of an area per-


CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH FOSSILS OCCUR 649


haps ten thousand square miles in extent” could be “annihilated
at once,” as they evidently were, for they seem to have been
buried alive, though the water was evidently deep and compara-
tively undisturbed.

We have not the space to speak of the abundant remains of
amphibians and reptiles, which have been found in myriads
in many localities, packed together as if in natural graveyards.
Many kinds of the larger mammals occur in similar abundance
in various parts of the globe. For instance, the remains of the
mammoth are found in such profusion in different parts of
Northern Siberia that the soil “is said to consist only of sand
and ice with such quantities of mammoth bones as almost to
comprise its chief substance.” (Lydekker.) In some of the
warmer parts of the same country, and also in Alaska, the black
carbonaceous soil, when freshly opened, has the rank, strong
smell characteristic of a disturbed grave. We have already
spoken of the prodigious quantities of hippopotamus bones
found in Sicily, twenty tons having been shipped from one spot
within six weeks, the bones being in such excellent preserva-
tion that they were used to furnish animal charcoal for the
sugar factories. Mention also has been made, in a previous chap-
ter, of the great masses of bones at La Brea, California, and in
numerous localities in the Rocky Mountain region, very different
from anything being made to-day, for, as Dana says, they “have
been found to be literally Tertiary burial grounds.”

Wonderfully Preserved. 2. But the marvelous preservation
of these fossils is equally strong evidence that they must have
perished suddenly by some tremendous catastrophe, in some
wholly un-modern way.

The fishes in all the localities specified aboye, and of the
Devonian rocks in general, are often exquisitely preserved.
Some of them even show traces of color upon their skin, which
is evidence “that they were entombed before decomposition of
their soft parts took place.” (Buckland.)

Hugh Miller’s picturesque description of the condition in
which, as he says, nine tenths of the fishes of the Old Red
Sandstone are found, is already a classic in scientific literature,
but will bear repetition in this connection:

“At this period in our history, some terrible catastrophe involved in
sudden destruction the fish of an area at least a hundred miles from bound-
ary to boundary, perhaps more. The same platform at-Orkney as at Crom-
arty is strewed thick with remains, which exhibit, unequivocally, the marks
of violent death. The figures are contorted, contracted, curved, the tail in
many instances is bent round to the head; the spines stick out; the fins are
spread to the full, as in fish that die in convulsions.”


650 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Of course, there are modern instances of large numbers of
fish being killed at the estuaries of some rivers, and at such
places as the Gulf of Kara Bugas, in the Caspian Sea; but
nothing on any such scale as this. And besides — for here is
the crucial difference between the ancient and the modern
instances — these-modern fish, after being killed, are not buried
in sediments, and hence no such modern examples will help us
the slightest in solving the problem of how the ancient deposits
were produced.

Remarkable Conditions. 3. But the fossil invertebrates are
often found in telltale conditions of another sort, which, how-
ever, are just as conclusive evidence of abnormal conditions’ hav-
ing prevailed when they were entombed.

Let us begin with the corals. These, we have learned, re-
quire a definite depth of water, rather shallow, but it must be
clear and pure, perfectly free from any sand or other land sedi-
ments. Storms often break up the coral rock and spread out the
coral mud for many miles around the reef; but such coral mud
or coral sand is spread out above other layers of the same sort.
In contrast with this, we often find in the ancient deposits thin
beds of coral fragments repeatedly interbedded with sand and
clay or even with sediments containing plant remains. Such
interbedding of coral fragments is of too ordinary occurrence
to require specific mention; yet I do not see that we have any
modern analogies which quite explain these instances. At any
rate, among the fossiliferous strata, they are of very common
occurrence, so common as not to elicit any special remark on the
part of writers on geology.

We do not have any crinoidal limestones forming at the
present time, though many species of crinoids are found in
various parts of the deep waters. A few live on the continental
shelf, but the majority live a mile or more down in the dark,
cold, silent waters. We really do not know just what were the
conditions under which the ancient crinoids lived, though it is
quite likely that they all lived in much deeper water than our
modern corals. It is absolutely certain that the water must
have been as pure as for the corals; because the crinoids must
have been very susceptible to anything like strong currents,
and must have been very liable to be damaged by sediments
of any kind.

Yet the Lower Carboniferous limestone of both Europe
and America (called Mountain. Limestone in England), so fa-
mous for its corals and its crinoids, is constantly found inter-
bedded with shales or sandstones, or even directly between the


CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH FOSSILS OCCUR 651


coal seams themselves, as at Springfield, Illinois, and in the
Lower Coal Measures of Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
Very similar conditions, of crinoidal remains alternating re-
peatedly with shales or sandstones, are found throughout the
world, wherever these rocks occur. Still I can not think that
we are here dealing with any normal conditions of sedimentation.

We might speak of the vast numbers of mollusks and
brachiopods; for we not only find evidence, in many instances,
of their having been buried alive over vast areas, but we also
constantly find species that live only in the deep, quiet waters,
mingled with other species from the shore, or even with plants
from the land, and always buried in sands or muds such as
are never in our modern times associated with such deep-sea
species as we find in these rocks.

Possibly one reason why geologists have come to view such
things with complacency, under the idea that they are not at all
unusual, is the fact that these conditions are indeed the usual
thing in all the so-called “older” rocks. For throughout all the
Paleozoic and the Mesozoic formations of practically the whole
world, these same conditions prevail; so that, though they are
certainly abnormal from the point of view of modern conditions,
yet their very universality throughout the fossiliferous rocks
has had the strange effect of making scientists perfectly ac-
customed to them, and by some strange freak of logic, has
tricked them into calling these things the real normal conditions.

We can not do better, in closing this part of our subject,
than to give the words of De la Beche, the first director of the
British Geological Survey, who wrote his “Geological Re-
searches” before the uniformitarianism of Lyell had cast its
hypnotic spell over scientific research. De la Beche is very
positive in teaching the general doctrine that most of the fossils
were buried suddenly and in an abnormal manner. His words
are, “A very large proportion of them must have been entombed
uninjured, and many alive, or if not alive, at least before de-
composition ensued.” (P. 265.) And it should be particularly
noted that this illustrious author is speaking, not of merely
some particular instances here and there, but of the fossiliferous
deposits in general. And these words are just as true to-day
as when written, almost 90 years ago.

Surely every judicial mind that is not hampered by uniformi-
tarian prejudices must conclude that we have, in every part of
the world and in every sort of fossiliferous formation, vast
numbers of fossils which, in the light of the conditions which
now prevail, become eloquent protests against Lyellism, and


652 THE NEW GEOLOGY


constitute collectively prima facie evidence that our globe
must at some time in the long ago have witnessed some sort of
cosmic convulsion.

And there are two or three additional facts which give
much more certainty to this general conclusion.


Change of Climate. 4. The next point which we ought to
consider is that of climate. There is good evidence from the
rocks, that there has been a sudden and permanent change in
the climate of a large part of the earth. We may briefly review
this subject of climate as revealed by geology.

Sir Henry H. Howorth, who wrote three very elaborate
works against the glacial theory, gives us some remarks about
the relative value of the various kinds of evidence bearing
upon this subject of climate. He says that the flora and fauna
are virtually the only thermometer with which we can test the
climate of any past period. “Other evidence,” he says, “is al-
ways sophisticated by the fact that we may be attributing to
climate what is due to other causes; bowlders can be rolled by
the sea as well as by subglacial streams, and conglomerates tan
be formed by other agencies than ice. But the biological evi-
dence is unmistakable; cold-blooded reptiles can not live in icy
water; semitropical plants, or plants whose habitat is in the
temperate zone, can not ripen their seeds and sow themselves
under arctic conditions.” (“The Glacial Nightmare,” p. 427.)

And yet, when we examine the whole geological series from
the Cambrian to the Pleistocene, we shall find, as A. R. Wallace
well remarks, only “one uniform climatic aspect of the fossils.”
There is but one climate known to the ancient fossil world, as
revealed by the plants and animals entombed in the rocks; and
that climate was a mantle of springlike loveliness which seems
to have prevailed continuously over the whole globe. Just how
the world could have thus been warmed all over may be a matter
of conjecture; that it was so warmed effectively and continuously
is a matter of fact.

It would be quite useless to go through the whole fossilifer-
ous series in order, for there is not a single system which does
not have coral limestones or other evidence of a mild climate
away up north, most of the systems having such rocks in the
lands which skirt the very pole itself. The limestones and coal
beds of the Carboniferous are the nearest known rocks to the
north pole. They crop out all around the polar basin; and
from the dip of the beds, they must underlie the polar sea
itself. But it is needless to go through the systems one after


CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH FOSSILS OCCUR 653


another, for they “uniformly testify that a warm climate has in
‘former times prevailed over the whole globe.” (A. R. Wallace.)

According to the popular doctrine of successive ages, it be-
comes a very interesting and a very important question to
decide as to how far back in “geological time” man made his
first appearance on earth. For a time, it was stoutly main-
tained, by many geologists and archeologists, that human re-
mains had been found in deposits of the Miocene of France,
even if the notorious “find” on the island of Java should not
turn out to be human or should prove to be “younger” than the
Miocene. Of course, there is no real scientific foundation for
these chronological distinctions between the various divisions
of the Tertiary and the Quaternary, even if we could admit
(which the present author does not) some distinction between
such great divisions as the Paleozoic, the Mesozoic, and the
Tertiary (Cenozoic). But certainly the distinctions made be-
tween the subdivisions of the Tertiary deposits, or between the
latest of them, the Pliocene, and the Pleistocene, are founded
entirely on a theory which has no justification, even when they
are not founded on the mere caprice and personal “tact” of the
experts who pronounce upon them. But the evolutionary arche-
ologists and anthropologists demanded a good long recessive
vista as a background for “primitive” man; and for a time, they
insisted on giving a Middle Tertiary date for the beginning of
human history. More lately, however, the “Glacial Age” has
been lengthened out sufficiently to suit them, and most of them
are now content to bring down the dates of “paleolithic man”
within the Pleistocene.

But whether or not we accept these theories about human
remains’ having been found in Tertiary (Miocene) strata, it
becomes an interesting point to consider what sort of climate
prevailed over the world during the time that the Miocene de-
posits were laid down. But the Miocene rocks are among the
most abundant and the best known of any of the strata found
in the arctic regions. In Greenland, Iceland, and Spitzbergen,
they give us beeches, oaks, planes, poplars, walnuts, limes,
magnolias, holly, logwood, hawthorn, ivy, grapevines, “and
many evergreens, besides numerous conifers, among which was
the Sequoia, allied to the gigantic Wellingtonia [Sequoia] of Cali-
fornia.” (James Geikie.)

I suppose that the evolutionary geologists will be shocked
if we mix the magnificent Pleistocene fauna with this flora
of the Miocene, although it seems perfectly evident that the
plants and the animals are the necessary complements of


42


654 THE NEW GEOLOGY


each other. But unless we outrage common sense and all human
experience by placing these plants just mentioned in one age
and their evidently complementary animals in an entirely dif-
ferent one, we shall have to declare that at this same time there
roamed over England and all Western Europe, over North
America and Siberia, those giants of the prime, the mastodon,
the mammoth (which can not be specifically distinguished from
the modern Indian elephant, Elephas indicus), the great lion, the
Cape hyena, the rhinoceros, and the hippopotamus, while mon-
keys and parrots chattered in the palms and the acacias, and
giant turtles and crocodiles bathed in the tepid waters.

But suddenly an awful change took place. The exact details
of how it occurred may still be somewhat uncertain; but that it
was astonishingly sudden, and that it must have been a change
affecting the entire world, seems as certain as man’s own ex-
istence. As a well-known geologist remarks, this genial climate
in which these animals lived ‘‘was abruptly terminated. For
carcasses of the Siberian elephants were frozen so suddenly
and so completely at the change, that the flesh has remained
untainted.” (Dana.) And this author emphasized the word
“abruptly,” as I have done.

In concluding this topic of climate, we need only summarize
by saying that the fossils, both of plants and of animals, uni-
formly and with absolute consistency, testify that a surprisingly
mild and uniform climate prevailed over the entire globe while
these plants and animals were living. If we disregard the
fanciful speculations based on the striated rocks, the traveled
bowlders, and other related phenomena, which at the very
most are ambiguous in their testimony, and if we listen to the
unequivocal testimony of tropical plants and animals found
away to the north and even within the arctic regions, we must
declare that geology knows only one climate until this sudden
change came; and this astonishing climate seems to have been
practically uniform over the entire globe. This sudden and
world-wide change of climate is somehow intimately connected
with the geological exchange of land and water and the forma-
tion of we know not how much of the geological deposits, and
serves to mark, in the words of Howorth, the “great dividing
line” between that old world, with its perpetual summer, and
our present world, with its terrific extremes of heat and cold.

This radical and world-wide change of climate, therefore,
demands ample consideration when we seek to frame a true
and scientific induction as to how the geological changes took
place. That it was no secular or gradual affair, but that the


CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH FOSSILS OCCUR 655


climate “became suddenly extreme, as of a single winter’s
night” (Dana, “Manual,” p. 1007), the Siberian elephant “mum-
mies” are unanswerable arguments, and arguments whose true
meaning can not be misunderstood. That this change occurred
within the human epoch is conceded by every scientist.


Degeneracy. 5. Very closely associated with this matter of
a change of climate, though probably also dependent partly
upon other causes, is the great principle that, regarded as a
whole, the fossils of both plants and animals are usually larger
and more thrifty-looking than their corresponding modern rep-


Fic. 440. A huge Eocene mammal (Tinoceras ingens), which is probably
identical with the genera named Dinoceras and Uintatherium. It is also
called Eobasileus, and a few other names. (After Beddard.)


resentatives. There are a few exceptions; the modern squids
seem to be larger than any hitherto found fossil; there are no
large fossil anthropoid apes; we have several types of trees
growing in California and in Australia which are decidedly
larger than any similar kinds (Sequoia and Eucalyptus) found
in the fossil state, or indeed than any other fossil trees what-
ever. There may be a few other exceptions to the rule just
stated. But whether we take the insects, the crustaceans, the
brachiopods, the mollusks, the amphibians, the reptiles, or the
mammals, or even if we consider any single order or family or
genus which has living representatives, the exceptions to this
general rule, if there are any, are so few and so unimportant as
to be quite negligible.

Even when the fossil species are proved to be identical with
the living ones, as has now, after long wrangling, been re-


656 THE NEW GEOLOGY


luctantly conceded in the cases of the mammoth, Hippopotamus
major, and the “cave”? forms of the lion, bear, and other charac-
teristic Pleistocene mammals, the strikingly larger dimensions
of the fossil forms are recognized by almost every schoolboy
who has visited any of our larger museums. To quote the words
of John Allen Howe, of the British Museum: “Elephas antiquus,
for instance, attained a more excessive bulk than any other
proboscidian either before or since, the woolly rhinoceros, the
great hippopotamus, the cave bear, cave lion, and giant deer
were all larger than their living representatives.” (‘“Encyclo-
pedia Britannica,” Art. “Pleistocene.’’)

But the point which needs to be noted in this connection is
not the mere difference in size between the fossils and the
moderns. The fact which is of especial significance for our
purpose, as helping us to understand the true nature of the
geological changes, is that this peculiarity of large size is
characteristic of all the fossils, taken as a whole; and that when
we cross over into our modern world, the change in the charac-
ters of the fossils is just as sudden and just as noticeable as is
the change in climate. Practically all our modern animals and
plants, whether terrestrial or marine, are degenerate dwarfs.
Variation there is and has been; in many instances, by careful
breeding and cultivation, man has been able largely to over-
come this almost universal tendency toward degeneration. But
with one voice do the rocks testify that the general trend of
variation has been downward and not upward. We may even
state as a great biological law, a law incomparably more im-
portant and more securely established in actual fact than many
generalizations put forward in the past by such men as Haeckel,
Agassiz, and others, that degeneration has marked the history
of every form of life of which we have knowledge for a time suf-
ficiently long to judge concerning the matter. And it is of the ut-
most geological importance to note that this very abrupt change
in the size and character of the fossils coincides exactly with the
great dividing line between the ancient and the modern world.


Changes of Land and Water. 6. It is scarcely necessary to
formulate as a separate fact the general principle that great
transgressions of the ocean have been the cause of the forma-
tion of immense rock deposits in every part of the world. in
which the remains of thousands of living species of plants and
animals (perhaps of man himself) were entombed. And they
are the splendidly developed forms of that old world of ideal
climate which we find thus buried by flowing water, in many


CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH FOSSILS OCCUR 657


cases evidently ocean water, where now the land is high and
dry. The total of the geological facts is merely a cumulative
argument proving this most conclusively.


“O earth, what changes hast thou seen!
There, where the long street roars, hath been
The stillness of the central sea.”


But the meaning of this great general fact will be entirely
lost to us, if we do not continually remember that, while these
changes took place a long time ago, it is with unmistakable
fossils of forms living in our modern world that we are here
dealing; and if we do not also remember the great principle
already emphasized in the previous pages, that it is only an
artificial and a highly theoretical distinction that can be made
between the times of deposit of the various water-formed rocks
found all over the globe. Of course, these rocks were not all
laid down at once. In any particular locality, the lower strata
were obviously laid down before the upper, it may have been a
considerable length of time before. But the methods hitherto
in vogue for reading the length of time involved, have been
proved to be wholly unscientific and unreliable. Whether we
shall ever be able to solve this part of our riddle, is a question
for the future; it certainly has not been solved, except in the
most grotesque way, hitherto. But the great general fact is
that we have a whole fossil world on our hands, buried by mov-
ing water; and this is the one prime and essential fact with
which we have to deal in interpreting the long-past history
of our globe.

Mountain Making. 7. The last great phenomenon with
which we shall deal in this series is that of mountain making.
It is the strata formed by moving water, which contain the re-
mains of these thousands of living plants and animals, that
now constitute many of our greatest mountain ranges in all
parts of the world. This, then, is another most important event
which has taken place since man and these myriad plants and ani-
mals appeared on earth; and this event likewise needs ample and
careful consideration, when an attempt is made to frame any gen-
eral induction as to how the great geological changes were
caused and when they occurred.

We have seen how evolutionary geologists date the making
of the various mountain ranges. Evidently a mountain could
not be formed until after the strata composing it were laid
down by the water. For example, if Eocene strata are found
anywhere on the top or on the flanks of a mountain range, the


u. m


658 THE NEW GEOLOGY


making of this mountain must be postponed until after the
Eocene “period,” much as the evolutionists would like to have
this mountain making out of the way as early as possible on the
geological program. Unfortunately, however, almost all the
mountains contain strata so very astonishingly “young” that
practically all of the mountain making of the world must be
postponed until almost the very close of the entire program, and
then all take place practically at once! This is a very awkward
situation, to be sure; but it can not well be helped. I can not
find any very recent textbook of geology which has practically
anything to say on this matter; it is a most embarrassing subject.

All of the Pacific coast ranges of North America, with most
of the whole American Cordillera, from Cape Horn to Alaska,
contain “late” Tertiary strata; and hence their lifting from the
sea level has to be put off until the close of the Miocene, or in
some localities, till the close of the Pliocene,— unless huge fresh-
water lakes can be imagined to have formed these beds. The
Andes, with at least half of South America, are also of very late
date, as are also the Pyrenees, the Apennines, the Carpathians,
and, indeed, the larger part of Southern Europe, with large un-
defined parts of Africa and Australia.

As for Asia, the most recent investigators of the geology
of that continent declare that the mountain ranges throughout
much of Asia “challenge credulity by the evidence of their ex-
treme youth” (Bailey Willis, “Research in China,” Vol. 2,
p. 24), declaring the opinion that “the principal continental
upwarp of Central Asia” must have occurred even after all of
the Tertiary “period.” “Tt appears to fall chiefly within the `
Quaternary.” (P. 99.) Other geologists had already admitted
the “late” Tertiary date of the Himalayas; but in view of the
recent evidence of the extreme youth of the rest of the moun-
tains of Asia, Willis suggests that possibly these, the greatest
mountains of the globe, may date from the Pleistocene. (P. 96.)

Thus over all parts of the globe which have been scientifi-
cally examined, the uplifting of the mountains has been practi-
cally one event, even though the evolutionists have every need
to have this mountain making take place gradually, on the in-
stallment plan. Evidently this work of mountain making
throughout the earth may not have occurred until all of the real
fossiliferous strata were deposited, and then may have been all
crowded into a very short period of time. Certain it is that
the whole of this work must have taken place since man and the
other thousands of living species were on the earth; for these
mountains contain their fossils by the myriads, these fossils


CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH FOSSILS OCCUR 659


LEGEND,
mapped “EAA
z ‘wamayped Loc)
Lf teerdanra of timate owais — =


Qoatertrary L.


Approximate dati — a


Fic. 441. The Great Basin of Western North America. (U.S. G. 8.)


having been buried by flowing water, in most cases demon-
strably ocean water. No wonder Dana says that this late date
of the mountains is “one of the most marvelous in geological
history.” (‘“Manual,” p. 392.) And he adds, “It has been


660 THE NEW GEOLOGY


thought incredible that the orographic climax should have come
so near the end of geological time; . . . yet the fact is beyond
question.” (E. 1020.)

All of this agrees perfectly with the hypothesis which we
have been considering. On this basis, the mountain making
of the entire world (except in the case of some few mountains
composed of Archzean rocks) was practically one event, begun
only after the deposition of most or possibly all of the fossil-
iferous strata, and completed rapidly, long before the beginning
of scientific observations. Certainly nothing like the birth or
even the gradual growth of a mountain range has been observed
since the beginnings of human records.

What Do These Things Mean? We have enumerated seven
large outstanding facts regarding the fossiliferous rocks. What
do these things mean? They are all consistent with one an-
other, and together they constitute a cumulative argument of
some sort; and any truly rational and scientific induction
regarding the causes of the geological changes must take them
all into consideration, and must agree with each one singly, and
must also agree with them all collectively. I do not know of any
other way of establishing a really scientific induction regarding
the great outstanding problem of geology. All conclusions on
this general problem of the causes and the manner of the
geological changes, which do not take these great facts into
consideration, are mere snap judgments, blind guesses, or
puerile speculations, and can have no scientific value. On the
other hand, even the most faulty and inadequate conclusion
which attempts to embrace all of these facts, must have some
scientific value, although it may require even more data than
we now possess to work out a detailed picture of what is called
for in this general conclusion.

Many of these seven facts are really new discoveries within
recent years, and were wholly unknown to the pioneers of the
science. Others have been known in a sort of way for many
years, but were misunderstood or obscured by the prevailing
theories. But we now have all these facts before us; and on a
correct understanding and interpretation of these facts rests the
future of the science of geology, so far as the latter ceases to be
a cosmological speculation, and becomes inductive in its methods

But the further consideration of these matters must be left
over for another chapter. j


CHAPTER XL


Scientific Methods


Facts and Theories. Science consists of two essentially dis-
tinct parts, facts and conclusions. Not that we can always suc-
ceed in keeping them distinct; but we attain to clearness of
mind and approach scientific certainty, just in proportion as we
approximate to this segregation of facts from conclusions. For
the two are essentially distinct in their natures. Facts are
the raw materials with which science works. They are the
bricks; but bricks alone, without organization, will never make
a house. The cement between the bricks may be spoken of as
corresponding to conclusions or theories; while the method of
arranging the bricks together so as to constitute a structure,
makes the whole thing into an organized mass — otherwise,
into a science. No amount of mere facts alone can make a
science; the facts must be brought into right relationship to
one another. That is, the facts must be explained by some con-
clusion, this explanation being technically a theory, an induc-
tion, or a generalization from the facts under consideration.

Thus conclusions formed from any two or more facts so as
to “explain” them, or so as to put them in right relation to each
other and to still other facts, become theories; and there can
be no organization of facts, or in other words, no science, with-
out many theories.

The Danger of Hypotheses. But theories are of no value
unless they are to be used; and any theoretical “explanation”
of certain facts, when used to help explain other facts, becomes
a hypothesis. That is, a theory put to work is a hypothesis.
And hypotheses are always dangerous things. We put our in-
tellectual freedom at stake whenever we adopt a hypothesis.
We can make absolutely no progress in any line of science with-
out using them; yet they are more dangerous to use than
dynamite. And the more we use a hypothesis, and the more
plausible it appears because of the ease with which it seems
to help us explain other facts, the more surely do we become its
slaves, and the more hopeless becomes our intellectual slavery,
if this hypothesis happens to be really wrong; for a cherished
hypothesis blinds the eyes of the observer to new facts, just
as a gift has been said to blind the eyes of a judge in court. We
never persevere in making experiments to test out a hypothesis
in which we really believe; and often we will not listen to the


(661)


662 THE NEW GEOLOGY


testimony of others who claim to have tested it, if their results
do not tally with what our pet hypothesis has taught us.

Werner’s Method. A good geological example of how this
principle works out, is that of Werner and his disciples. The
great Neptunist had acquired a degree of skill in identifying
the various minerals with which he had to deal, and he taught
his pupils that the schists, limestones, sandstones, etc., always
occurred in a definite sequence. And as these pupils trained
under his hypothesis went from Werner’s narrow little district
of Germany over the rest of the world, through Western and
Southern Europe, or through North America, or Mexico, or Cen-
tral America, they always seemed to find the rocks occurring very
much as their master had taught them to expect. Even the
scholarly and keen-eyed Von Humboldt, in his epoch-making
trip through Central and South America, thought that the rocks
which he saw confirmed Werner’s chronological arrangement,
and he wrote his voluminous books accordingly.

But examples of strata plainly contradicting Werner’s theory
or hypothesis finally accumulated in such enormous numbers
as to put a stop to this solemn scientific farce, by convincing
some who were not slaves to this hypothesis, that Werner’s onion
coats must be a mistake. Yet such was the implicit trust re-
posed in this accepted hypothesis, that real intellectual courage
was required to break away from it —a real intellectual revolt.
But finally some brave souls gathered the courage to declare
that this expert mineralogist, who nevertheless had never in
his life been outside of his little district around the Erz Moun-
tains in Saxony and Bohemia, had after all not been gifted
with any supernatural knowledge of just how the rocks would
always be found to occur on the other side of the globe. And
they said that this venerable onion-coat hypothesis should not
any longer domineer over geological thinking, when there were
actual facts which plainly contradicted it. For facts should
always have the right of way over theories and hypotheses, no
matter how long the latter had been accepted, and no matter
how many facts they had hitherto helped to explain.

Biological Onion Coats. But a succession of certain groups
of life was substituted for Werner’s mineral onion-coat theory
this new theory being based now on biology instead of on
mineralogy, but being now a biological onion-coat theory, in-
stead of a mineralogical one. And if I can understand the
matter correctly, we are now about in the Von Humboldt stage
of this biological theory. We already have a large accumulation
of facts contradicting it; but through reverence for illustrious


SCIENTIFIC METHODS 663


names, or through intellectual slavery to hypothesis, geologists
have merely stared in open-eyed wonder at the accumulating
examples of what they call “deceptive conformity,” and have
invented huge overturned folds or “thrust faults,’ involving


Fic. 442. Herbert Spencer (1820-1903), one of the first teachers of
the theory of evolution.


thousands of square miles of area, rather than doubt the per-
fect sufficiency of their theory.

This hypothesis of a succession of plants and animals has
been with us for a long time; but historically and logically it
has no foundation whatever, except that William Smith and
Cuvier and others in the early part of the nineteenth century
found the fossils occurring in a certain order of relative se-
quence in England and France, and concluded that this was


664 THE NEW GEOLOGY


a better method of identifying the rocks than Werner’s methods,
which were then falling into disrepute.

However, Herbert Spencer tells us that the “original nomen-
clature of periods and formations” brought over from Werner,
long kept alive the original idea of complete envelopes encircling
the whole globe like the coats of an onion; so that now, instead
of Werner’s successive ages of limestone making and sandstone
making, and successive suites of these rocks, we have, says
Spencer, successive ages of various types of life, with successive
systems or “groups of formations which everywhere succeed
each other in a given order, and are severally everywhere of
the same age. Though it may not be asserted that these suc-
cessive systems are universal, yet it seems to be tacitly assumed
that they are so. . . . Though probably no competent geologist
would contend that the European classification of strata is
applicable to the globe as a whole, yet most, if not all geologists,
write as though it were so.” (‘Illustrations of Universal Prog-
ress,” pp. 329-380; edition of 1890.)

And he adds this pointed question: “Must we not say that
though the onion-coat hypothesis is dead, its spirit is traceable,
under a transcendental form, even in the conclusions of its
antagonists?” j

But what progress can we point to in the theoretical aspects
of our science, when we find that these words are just as true
to-day as when first written, nearly three quarters of a cen-
tury ago?

Warnings. Of course, no geologist of to-day would care to
be caught openly defending the onion-coat theory even in what
Spencer calls its “transcendental form.” But the only way in
which to put in an honest disclaimer is to say with Huxley,
“All that geology can prove is local order of succession.” (“Dis-
courses Biological and Geological,” pp. 279-288.) And we should
not only repeat these words, but we should let them become a
part of our being; because, as this clear thinker pointed out,
“the moment the geologist has to deal with large areas,” there
is incalculable mischief in projecting this local order of suc-
cession into distant localities, and saying (as all geologists con-
tinue to say) that these widely separated strata are or are not
of the same age; for of this “there is not a shadow of proof,”
as Huxley very candidly admits.

Such language sounds very strange to us to-day, as do also
the following truthful words from the same author:

“In the present state of our knowledge and of our methods
[sic], one verdict —‘Not proven and not provable’— must be


SCIENTIFIC METHODS 665


recorded against all grand hypotheses of the paleontologist re-
specting the general succession of life on the globe.”

These words have been assented to and praised in a general
way, but they have never had the slightest effect in changing


Fic. 443. Thomas Henry Huxley (1825-1895), ardent advocate of the
theory of organic evolution.


the methods or the theories of geologists; for geologists would
never go to such absurd lengths to explain away the plainest
evidence of our eyesight and our common sense, as they do in
the invention of so many instances of ‘deceptive conformity”
and “thrust faults,” if they felt that there were any of their
colleagues who had any suspicion about the European classifica-
tion’s being “applicable to the globe as a whole,” or who had


666 THE NEW GEOLOGY


any latent prejudices about their science’s being unable to prove
any more than “local order of succession.” And finally we
should never have had so much discussion within recent years
about positive and negative “eustatic movements,” if many
geologists had not like Professor Suess been astonished in find-
ing that even the more minute subdivisions of the scale invented
in Europe had been found to “extend over the whole globe.”

I have already pointed out that the reason why this strati-
graphic scale can be applied to the world at large, is that it is
merely a taxonomic scale, purely arbitrary and artificial, but
applicable everywhere, because a taxonomic series is applicable
everywhere. But certainly the mere stratigraphic sequence found
in Europe is not applicable to the world as a whole, or we should
never have had to invent the terms “deceptive conformity” and
“thrust faults.”

Absurd Methods. But is there anything more pathetic than
the absurd methods constantly employed to interpret all our new
discoveries in terms of the biological onion-coat theory of
William Smith and Cuvier?

Notice the method of reasoning employed. We first take the
order found in a few corners of Western Europe as the gauge,
the standard, for all the rest of the world. Then when we find
great masses of mountains extending over nearly a whole State
which are at variance with our rule, even though the rocks ap-
pear to be in a normal order, and though the line between the
upper beds and the lower ones “acts exactly like the line of con-
tact between two nearly horizontal formations,’ and in a clear
section cut out by a river the two “appear to succeed one
another conformably’” (McConnell), yet we are in such utter
slavery to our hypothesis that we are prepared courageously to
deny every objective evidence of our eyesight and all the physi-
cal facts, in order not to throw discredit upon our time-honored
hypothesis. Solely because of our intellectual bondage to a
theory invented to explain the local fortuitous order observed in
a little corner of Europe, we are here bidden to deny the plain
evidence of our senses, because these rocks do not happen to be
in the order predicted by our theory. And this is being done,
not in the name of scholastic word-twisting in the tenth century,
but in the name of Baconian science in the third decade of the
twentieth century. And if there is any more pathetic example
of slavery to a hypothesis, I have failed to find it through the
whole history of inductive science.

There is only one possible argument in favor of this geologi-
cal series’ actually representing a true historical order, and that


SCIENTIFIC METHODS 667


is the mere rule-of-thumb argument that we usually find the
fossils occurring in this order of relative sequence, and we as-
sume that this order can never be reversed. There is no other
possible argument from stratigraphy alone. But utterly oblivi-
ous of the purely artificial way in which geologists have had
to piece together these various standard formations from many
scattered localities all over the globe in order to make the
geological series complete, the experts in the science continue
to have such faith in this “normal” sequence, that, in such an ex-
ample as that in Montana and Alberta, they tell us with a
sober face that a country nearly 20,000 square miles in area
was elevated perhaps some 20,000 or 30,000 feet and pushed
bodily over on top of the soft Cretaceous shales for 30 miles or
so; then they tell us that the upper 18,000 or 25,000 feet con-
veniently disappeared by erosion, leaving only the lower beds
of this great thrust mass. But these now lie in such a remark-
able semblance of natural conformity as to excite the amaze-
ment of the most experienced observers. Surely a case of
being hypnotized by a cherished hypothesis into blind and un-
questioning obedience to its necessities!

How much of the earth’s crust would we have to find in this
upside-down order, before it would be permissible for us to
question this “standard” or “normal” order of the fossils, which
was started in England and France and Germany, and which
we have pieced together and completed by a purely artificial
method from every part of the globe? It would really seem
that any amount of the earth’s surface might be found in this
condition, without seriously disturbing the sublime confidence
which modern geologists still repose in a hypothesis which has
been so long employed.

But I fancy that some people will think it perfectly axio-
matie and requiring no proof, that the lower and more gen-
eralized forms of life must have come into existence long before
the higher or more specialized. Though seldom formally ex-
pressed, this idea seems to be heard as an undertone through
all discussions of these subjects. But is such a postulate suf-
ficiently axiomatic, so self-evident a truth, as to be a sure
foundation stone not only for geology but for all biological
science? Why must we always treat stratigraphic geology as
a cosmogony? Obviously this attitude begs the whole question
in dispute between evolution and creation, and thus removes
these purely stratigraphical questions completely from the court
of objective fact, and allows them to be decided by intuition
and mere subjective impressions. What is the use of pretending


668 THE NEW GEOLOGY


that we are investigating a problem of natural science, ¿f we
already know beforehand that the lower and more generalized
forms of animals and plants came into existence first, and the
higher and more specialized came only long afterwards, and that
specimens of all these successive types have been pigeonholed in
the rocks in order to help us to illustrate this wonderful truth?


Not the Only Interpretation. Let us come back to earth, and
try to confine ourselves to questions of objective fact and to
scientific methods, leaving questions of metaphysics and intui-
tion to others. Human beings have always had plenty of axio-
matic notions, plenty of a priori postulates; and the history of
natural science is one long record of an unending struggle with
just such ideas, and with a weak tendency to inject these
methods constantly into scientific investigations. This evolu-
tionary doctrine is indeed allowable as a hypothesis, a mere
working hypothesis,— though I fancy that it has been consider-
ably overworked during the last half century. But we must ever
bear in mind that this intuition about the order in which life
has occurred on the globe is not the sole and only possible in-
terpretation of the phenomena with which we are dealing. There
is at least one other view of the matter; and the evolutionist
has no right to boast that his is the only possible view,
until this other alternative has at least had a candid considera-
tion. And I feel sure that we shall be doing a distinct benefit for
scientific thinking, if we can frame a rational explanation of
these phenomena in Western Montana and Southern Alberta,
and not have to entangle our explanation with any cosmological
speculations whatever.


An Illustration. Let us get at the matter by a very simple
illustration.

Let us suppose that William Smith and Georges Chrétien
Cuvier had been born on the western prairies of North America.
Yes; and let us include along with them Adam Sedgwick and
Roderick Murchison. As they grew up to manhood, they became
familiar with the country around them, examining the rocks as
well as the living plants and animals. And let us suppose also
that these young men have become familiar with the forms of
the living plants and animals in the deep seas as well as on the
lands in other parts of the globe, so that they can come to the
study of the rocks here near their homes without being ham-
pered by those preconceived prejudices about “extinct Species”
and catastrophism which we know warped their investigations
in actual life.


SCIENTIFIC METHODS 669


In due course of time, these young gentlemen become ac-
quainted with this great “faulted” area in Alberta and Montana.
They find Algonkian, Cambrian, and in some instances other
Paleozoic rocks extending in what evidently was a great con-
tinuous sheet (now reduced to disconnected patches in many
places) spread out over some 20,000 square miles, and consti-
tuting the great dominant and characteristic topographic fea-
tures of Northwestern Montana and Southern Alberta. But
everywhere the underlying beds are Cretaceous; yet these four
young investigators, who come to these studies without any
theoretical prejudices, have had no warning that the rocks are
not in a perfectly “normal” order. "

We will suppose that these four younzg friends are of a philo-
sophic turn of mind, wishing to get at the real heart of things,
but more cautious than we know some of them to have been
in real life. But they are determined to know what these things
mean, how these strata got here, and what these rocks have to
teach us regarding the history of the world and the origin
of things.

The Three Interpretations. With these geological phe-
nomena before them as a basis of thinking and reasoning, it is
quite evident that these young gentlemen might have their
choice of three possible interpretations. On some minor points,
there are other possible variations of these typical explanations;
for it is confessedly a complex and intricate subject. But the
three explanations here presented are the three which have been
adopted at various times, as shown by the history of the science.

I. They might say: These strata represent successive ages
that formerly prevailed over the globe; and they show that the
earth has experienced great vicissitudes. We might think, as
some do, that we see here no sign of a beginning, no prospect
of an end. But it is more probable that we have here a record
of successive creations and catastrophes, one set having been
destroyed by some great catastrophe before the next set of ani-
mals and plants appeared. And if we should examine the rocks
of all the rest of the globe, we should have an exact chart of
these successive creations and catastrophes, coming down to our
own modern conditions.

II. Or they might say: These strata represent successive
ages, and each set of rocks containing a particular group of ani-
-mals and plants was undoubtedly spread universally around the
globe in the first place, or when formed, though now extensively
interrupted by erosion or hidden from view by other strata.
But these successive ages can be accurately determined by the


43


670 THE NEW GEOLOGY


fossils contained in these rocks, and can thus be identified
wherever found. And the order here observed is to be taken as
the actual order in which these successive assemblages of life
prevailed over the earth. However, there is no reason to sup-
pose that anything like a catastrophe marked the change from
one set of conditions to the next. Here the change may seem
abrupt; but elsewhere we should find evidences of a gradual
transition from the one set of conditions to the next, for all the
changes of the past must have been brought about by gradual,
everyday causes, such as are now going on.


III. Or they might say: These strata are mere local phe-
nomena, and could never have been continuous around the earth
like onion coats. Elsewhere we should probably find the various
groups of fossils in very different relative orders; for these beds
are of merely limited horizontal extent. They are mere local
faunas and floras, buried at some time or times; though we do
not have here sufficient data to determine either the when or the
how. Any general theory regarding the causes of these changes
can be determined only after the most painstaking and exhaus-
tive study of the rocks of the entire globe. A local catastrophe
of some sort may seem to be indicated here by these local con-
ditions; and if similar conditions should be found to occur over
the entire earth, we might have to believe that a great world
catastrophe has occurred. But in the strata here alone, we do
not have sufficient data to form a safe and intelligent opinion.
Sherlock Holmes might diagnose a disease by a mere glance at
his patient’s boots; but even this glance might furnish the great
detective with more pertinent data than we have here in this
limited locality for framing a general theory of the geological
causes and processes applicable to the whole world.


The Application. But it is evident that the second of these
theories is just as unscientific and absurd as the first, possibly
more so. Even the evolutionists own that it would be manifest
folly to take the relative order of the fossils in Alberta and
Montana as the standard for the rest of the world. Yet such
an action is scientifically and philosophically no more absurd
than the methods now in vogue. A standard order compiled
from these localities might not survive as a measuring rod for the
rest of the world quite as long as one from England or France
or Germany, for we should probably very soon recognize its
palpable disagreement with the order of the rocks found else-
where; but theoretically it ought to make just as good a stand-
ard order as the one under which we are now working. Also,


SCIENTIFIC METHODS 671


this area is about as large as that from which the present
standard order of the rocks was first worked out by Smith
and Cuvier, Sedgwick and Murchison.

Accordingly, we may conclude that the third of the explana-
tions suggested above is the only one left available for us in mod-
ern times who wish to build safely on a sure basis of fact.

Historically, then, we have abandoned the first of these
theories, and are in the second stage of the development of a
true geological theory. We have not exactly entered the third
stage, but it lies just ahead. It is the geological theory of
to-morrow, and of the reformed science of geology. We aban-
doned the first long ago, and we profess very loudly that we
have left behind all the dogmatic assumptions of the second; for
all geologists are very much ashamed of the onion-coat theory.
But the reproach of this theory, in what Spencer so fittingly
calls its “transcendental form,” will still cling to our science,
like a poisoned Nessus’ shirt, just so long as we persist in set-
ting up the fortuitous order of the rocks in England and France
and New York State as the norm, the fixed standard, by which
to measure the rocks elsewhere, and so long as we insult our
eyesight and our common sense, in the presence of such ‘‘ex-
ceptions” to our standard order as we find in Alberta and Mon-
tana, by positing incredible contortions and convulsions of
nature in order to make these reluctant phenomena conform to
our Procrustean rule.

How long is it going to take us to be graduated out of the
second and into the third and final stage of geological theory?
Why may we not admit forthwith that these conditions in the
Rockies are just as rational a measure to which to compel the
strata elsewhere to conform, as anything in Western Europe?
If they are not, why not? Why should we not discard methods
and assumptions so manifestly unscientific, and start out on a
new chapter in the history of this science, where facts will al-
ways have the right of way over theories, and where we can
even be content to hold our restive imaginations severely in
leash until we have a reasonable amount of data on which to
build a safe general induction? To appropriate the words of
Sir Henry Howorth, I do not know of anything to hinder such
a consummation most devoutly to be wished, save “the almost
pathetic devotion of a large school of thinkers to the religion
founded by Hutton, whose high priest was Lyell, and which in
essence is based on a priori arguments like those which domi-
nated medieval scholasticism and made it so barren.” (“Gla-
cial Nightmare,” Preface, pp. 21, 22.)


672 THE NEW GEOLOGY


Other Considerations. Some geologists have sought to evade
the charge that the popular geological chronology is based en-
tirely upon the hypothetical succession of life; and they have
appealed to several other methods which they say are able to
supplement this succession of life, or even to establish the
geological chronology on an independent basis apart from this
succession of the fossil forms. A brief consideration of these
other methods of correlating the strata and arranging them in
an alleged “historical order” must now be given.

1. The order of superposition. Of course, the lower of a
pair of undisturbed beds must be the older. But how much
older? If the two beds are conformable and of much the same
lithological texture, the plain inference is that the two beds
must have followed one another in quick succession. An in-
terval there must have been, or we should have had one bed,
not two. This interval may be measured in minutes or hours,
but plainly not in ages or years, probably not even in months or
days. If the lower is of a very different lithological composition,
the interval may have been longer; but how much longer?
Might it not have been only a few hours, or a few days at
the most?

If there is an angular unconformity between the two beds,
evolutionary geology says that the lower beds must have been
elevated above the sea level and eroded down to a sort of base
level, then lowered into the sea — or a transgressing ocean came
upon it, which is the same thing. But all this elevation, ero-
sion, base-leveling, and resubmergence is quite gratuitous and
unnecessary. It is not needed to explain an angular uncon-
formity. Could not these strata have been eroded beneath the
sea, if a local warping of the sea bottom had elevated one part
considerably higher than the rest, and a strong tidal wave
were generated by some similar disturbance elsewhere caused by
some newly made prominence on the sea bottom? Surely there
is no occasion to invoke an elevation above the sea and an ordi-
nary base-leveling in order to explain an angular unconformity.
Hence this angular unconformity does not at all imply (neces-
sarily) a long lapse of time. If the beds were still unconsolidated,
and a warping of the sea bottom had suddenly occurred, the upper
part might be planed off by a new current of the water, and sub-
sequently a new layer of sediment might be deposited upon it,
all within the space of a few hours. Thus such an angular un-


conformity might represent merely the lapse of time between
two successive tides.


SCIENTIFIC METHODS 673


2. Unconformities. Unconformities themselves are alleged
to be important means of correlating distant strata. They are
often spoken of as widespread, of continental or almost of world-
wide extent; and they are then declared to be sufficient grounds
for dividing the strata off into distinct groups, these uncon-
formities thus marking the dividing line between distinctly dif-
ferent groups of fossils.

In reality, however, unconformities are quite as local as are
the beds themselves. And such local unconformities can be cor-
related with other similar unconformities elsewhere only on the
fossil evidence from the beds above or below. How then can an
alleged “widespread” unconformity be used to supplement the
historical succession of life? Can one lift one’s self by the top
of one’s boots? Can a bobtail dog catch his tail by chasing it?


Diastrophism is often spoken of as a means of correlation; but it has no
real existence apart from that constructive existence furnished by a com-
bination of the ideas just considered, namely, stratigraphy, unconformity,
and the alleged paleontological succession. Hence it will be useless to dis-
cuss diastrophism here as a separate subject.


3. Paleontological breaks. A radical change in the fossils
in passing from one bed to another higher up, is always taken
by evolutionary geology to prove a long lapse of time. And such
a break is often spoken of as if it must prove a long lapse of
time quite apart from any theory about the precise order in
which the fossils are alleged to have succeeded one another.
But this is by no means the case. Such a break in the fossil
succession may only mean a current from a different direction
bringing in some contemporary forms of life from a few hun-
dred yards away, or at the most merely a few miles away.
Even the most radical change in the flora or fauna may mean
nothing more than this. Were there not zodlogical provinces and
districts, or even narrower divisions, in the olden time? How
are we going to limit the possibilities of variation in the contem-
porary life in geological times, except by assuming a super-
natural knowledge of the past which is quite out of harmony
with inductive science?

In reality, a change from Cambrian trilobites to Jurassic
or Cretaceous ammonites may mean nothing more than this;
that is, a change in the currents, bringing more or less distant
but strictly contemporary faunas above one another in succes-
sive beds. There is nothing but assumption to forbid such an
idea. A strictly scientific induction can not say that a long
lapse of time must be represented by such a change,— from |


674 THE NEW GEOLOGY


trilobites to ammonites, or from Devonian ostracoderm fishes to
Tertiary teleosts, or from Ordovician graptolites to Jurassic
belemnites, or from Cretaceous dinosaurs to Pliocene mammals.

Thus even the most radical of fossil breaks can not prove
any great lapse of time, nor can it assist in correlating distant
deposits; for it depends for its supposed value wholly on the
succession of life in a definite order, which we have insisted is
only an assumption, nothing more.

4. Paleogeography. It has even been supposed that we can
tell in which direction the land was situated relative to any
particular shale or sandstone or conglomerate; and that from
an elaborate study and comparison of the beds in various ad-
jacent localities, we can reconstruct the ancient geography of
land and water and ocean currents at certain periods in geologi-
cal history. In this way, we are treated to a moving picture
of the pulsating crust rising and falling here and there, vast
transgressions of the ocean occurring from time to time and
blotting out whole continents of life, and again the land emerg-
ing and being peopled by migrations from distant parts of the
earth. All this is given us in the name of sober science, as if
we really have a warrant in substantial fact for such a series
of successive events. But it is sad to have to say that such
graphic pictures of the past are pure evolutionary assumptions,
without a shred of actual fact to warrant them, and must be
dismissed from works dealing with sober science.

From all this, it follows that there is no truly scientific way
to reconstruct even a local chronology of the events recorded
by the strata in a particular locality, except in the most general
way. And whenever we attempt to compare the events of one
locality with those of distant localities, or whenever we go be-
yond the bounds of what we can actually demonstrate by a real
stratigraphical superposition of beds, we can do so only by a
series of pure assumptions which are wholly unworthy of a
place in a scientific textbook.

Energy Versus Time. We must next consider the old con-
troversy of energy versus time. It is commonly assumed that
we may explain the general geological problem either way,—
by appealing either to an enormous amount of energy, or to an
enormous length of time. It is assumed that energy and time
are in a measure equivalent, when it comes to their usefulness
in explaining geological processes. A powerful cause acting
through a short period of time is assumed to be equivalent to
much weaker forces acting through a proportionately long
period. But it is usually declared, in this connection, that the


SCIENTIFIC METHODS 675


appeal to unlimited time is intrinsically more reasonable and
more scientifie than an appeal to forces greater in magnitude
than those forces of which we have had contemporary experience.

But is this really correct? Is this appeal to time more scien-
tific than the appeal to force?

On this point of energy versus time, and the rightful place
which each may hold in scientific methods of reasoning, I can
not do better than to quote at length from an author whose
writings seem to contrast so vividly with those of many who
have written upon geological subjects.


“In my view,” says Howorth, “the only true philosophical method to adopt
in geology, when we have a problem to explain, is to search for a competent
cause in all the highways and byways of nature’s arsenal. If we find any
cause still operating which is competent to do the work, we shall of course
accept that cause as the only one justified by the evidence. If we find a
cause which is capable of producing similar effects but only on a smaller
scale, we may reasonably and rightly inquire further whether the smaller
cause could bear the strain of much larger demands upon it, when operat-
ing over a much longer period, and could then produce the enhanced effects.
If we are satisfied that it could, we must not take it for granted that this
factor of additional time is necessarily available. That is as much a ques-
tion of evidence as any other problem.

“If we eventually satisfy ourselves that we can not legitimately ap-
peal to enhanced time, or that the intensity of the force as measured by our
experience is incapable of doing the work, we ought to have no hesitation
whatever in appealing to a much greater force, similar in kind maybe, but
greater in intensity or greater in rapidity of operation. That is surely
the true inductive method. The only proviso which is a necessary element
in such an appeal, is that the force we call to our aid shall be clearly and
distinctly one consistent with a most rigid adherence to the laws of physics,
and whose competence would be confirmed by the mathematician and the
mechanic. All other appeals I deem to be transcendental, metaphysical, and
outside the limits of true science, by whatsoever great men they are made;
and I especially protest against the notion that geology can dispense with
the methods and the results of mathematics, mechanics, and physics in
framing its hypotheses.

“This, the true inductive method, I hold has been completely ignored by
cover the bony skeleton of the earth with their soft mantle.

“Long ago, when I was a mere boy, I was corresponding with Darwin
on a subject which had always interested me, namely, how to account for the
carcasses of mammoths and other beasts being preserved whole, in the frozen
ground of Siberia; for the vast hecatombs of buried skeletons and bones
of his contemporaries in different parts of the world; and for the great
gap in the evidence and the hiatus which exists between the remains of
these animals, including primitive man, and the remains of the succeeding
races of men with their domesticated animals.

“Darwin, like many others who have looked the problem face to face,
confessed to me that it remained to him the one stupendous mystery in the
latter geological history of the world, for which no rational explanation
had been forthcoming. .. .


676 THE NEW GEOLOGY


“I hold that an appeal to limitless time is in itself as preposterous and ir-
rational as an appeal to limitless force is deemed to be, by certain
thinkers. . . . No amount of time will enable a set of human teeth to punch
holes in a steel plate. Hence when we are face to face with some gigantic
problem, greatly differing in degree from any similar problem at present
in solution, we must_not hesitate to give increased potency to our cause, In
order that our induction may be sound. And for this we have surely ample
justification (as I have often urged before) in some of the unmistakable
monuments of nature. If we look at the placid face of the moon, where the
keenest observation has failed to notice the slightest change going on at
present, we find it torn and rent in a way quite unmatched by anything
on the earth, and attesting a period in its history quite unlike anything at
present known. If we look to our own geological record, where are we to
find anything fashioned in human memory the least like the great beds of
granite and gneiss, or even the tabular masses of basalt and trachyte which
occur in so many latitudes, for instance in India, South America, and in
Auvergne, or the quite as wonderful deposits of the chalk or the slate
rocks? Can we answer our boys who ask us how these beds were formed,
by pointing to any process in actual operation now, which would explain
them? If we turn from these instances to those more distinctly dynamical,
who is prepared to say that the riven and twisted and upheaved masses of
the Himalayas and the Andes, the huge faults like that of Durham, the vast
cliffs and chasms of the Alps where the Tertiary beds are thrown up on end,
etc., etc., are comparable in extent and degree in any way with phenomena
of which man has had direct cognizance, or which are within the capacity of
any forces of which he has had direct knowledge?

“It is not only in regard to the extent of the work done that we must
frequently in geology put aside any human tape measure and foot rule and
appeal to a far more significant exercise of dynamical forces than can be
measured by our daily experience, namely, that marked by the enhanced
rapidity and actual violence demanded by the changes involved. This is
true, I maintain, not merely of degree but also of rapidity or suddenness.
No appeal to gradual changes will explain the vast ruins on the face of the
moon, the similar ruins that cover Iceland or Auvergne, or the burnt land
of Asia Minor and Lower India; the signs of violent dislocation we see in
the great African rift and in the other great rifts elsewhere, and the torn
and tossed masses of crystalline rocks on the Alps.”—“Jce or Water,”
Preface, pp. 8, 9.


No Historical Order of the Fossils. But the appeal to un-
limited time is always accompanied by the artificial arrange-
ment of the numerous floras and faunas found in the rocks in an
alleged historical or chronological order; and it is only in this
connection that the idea of practically unlimited time has been
built up. There would be no serious question about the length
of time involved in any single geological event; it is only when
the countless geological events all over the world are arranged
in this artificial series in an alleged historical order, based on
the fossils in the rocks, that the appeal to time has any great
significance.

In a previous chapter, we have seen that this alleged histori-
cal order of the fossils is clearly a scientific blunder; for there


SCIENTIFIC METHODS 677


are many unequivocal evidences to prove that this supposedly
historical order must be a mistake. There is no possible way
to prove that the Cretaceous dinosaurs were not contemporary
with the late Tertiary mammals; no evidence whatever that the
trilobites were not living in one part of the ocean at the very
same time that the ammonites and the nummulites were living
in other parts of the ocean; and no proof whatever that all
these marine forms were not contemporary alike with the dino-
saurs and the mammals. In short, the only scientific way to
look at this matter is to say that we have in the fossils merely
an older state of our world; and the man who wishes to arrange
the various burials of these animals off in some sort of chrono-
logical order will have to invent some other scheme than any
hitherto considered, for all such schemes of an alleged historical
order which have been hitherto proposed are now seen to be
wholly unscientific.

Unity of the Fossiliferous Deposits. But there are other
considerations which serve to show that the fossil world is
really a unit, and that it is marked off or separated from our
modern world in many remarkable ways. The following facts
have been brought out in this connection:

1. The wholly abnormal character of many of the fossilifer-
ous deposits.

2. The evidence of a sudden, complete, and world-wide
change of climate.

3. The marked degeneration in passing from the fossil world
to the modern one.

4. The fact that the upheaval of practically all the mountain
ranges must have taken place since the burial of the fossils;
that is, since thousands of living species of plants and animals,
including man himself, came upon the earth. As a corollary
from this last fact, we have the conclusion that the living plants
and animals, and man himself, for that matter, must have wit-
nessed or must have participated in most of the great geological
changes — perhaps all.

All these facts tend still further to emphasize the unity or
solidarity of that ancient world. They also tend to show how
the geological changes are all connected, the fossil plants and
animals being indissolubly bound together in a common fate,
and how the fossil world is sharply and distinctly separated
from our modern world by a very striking series of geological
changes which true science can never ignore.

A True Induction. A true spirit of scientific induction must
unhesitatingly face these great geological changes, and must


678 THE NEW GEOLOGY


deal with this matter first, or before any theories can be framed
regarding the early days of the earth's history. These changes in
which man and the living species of plants and animals were in-
volved must be first explained. Can we hope to explain these
changes on the basis of any ordinary or everyday action of the
elements? To ask this question is to answer it, if we have any
sufficient idea of the changes here spoken of. Any comprehen-
sive view of the radical and world-wide changes registered in
the rocks must force upon us the conviction that our old world
has witnessed something of the nature of an awful aqueous
convulsion. And while it would be rash to say that all the
geological changes recorded in the rocks were due to this event,
yet we can make no‘scientific progress in attempting to un-
ravel the events of the previous ages until we have settled the
matter as to just what deposits were due to this event, and
which ones probably took place in some previous age of the
world’s history. Certainly it may be difficult to draw the line
between these two kinds of deposits; but until we have made an
attempt to do this, and have succeeded in the separation of these
two classes of events, we can have no right to speak of the
events which may be supposed to have occurred before this
world convulsion took place.

Here we must leave the matter for the present. We do not
yet have a sufficiently accurate knowledge of all the facts to say
just how this great geological disaster was accomplished. We can
see some of the details, but not all of them. Yet the general fact
of a great world convulsion through which our globe has passed,
a convulsion which has registered itself in the rocks of every
mountain side as well as in the strata buried deep beneath many
of our most populous cities, is as certain as any other histori-
cal event — as certain as the fall of Babylon or the destruction
of Carthage. And all of the sciences, such as physical geog-
raphy, botany, zodlogy, and anthropology, to say nothing of
geology itself, must take this great fact into account in any
problem which has to do with the interpretation of present con-
ditions and how they came about.


CHAPTER XLI


The Hypothesis of a World Catastrophe


The Two Hypotheses. Necessarily any solution which we
may make of the causes of the geological phenomena must be
of the nature of a hypothesis. We can only do the best we can
to frame an induction which will satisfy the major part of the
demands of the phenomena. We have no direct and first-hand
scientific witnesses. We have plenty of evidence of one kind
and another; but it is all circumstantial evidence, and we must
frame the best hypothesis we can to satisfy this evidence.

True science has never had any quarrel with uniformity, as
a mere hypothesis. Nor can any man object to trying it out, to
see if it will work. It is the most natural thing in the world,
the most scientific procedure conceivable, to try to explain the
geological changes of the past by the known processes now go-
ing on. But we have been trying this hypothesis for over three
quarters of a century; and unless the record of the previous
chapters of this book are a travesty on the real science of ge-
ology, this hypothesis has proved utterly inadequate, and must
be abandoned.

Moreover, what has been said, in the previous pages, in the
way of reflections against the doctrine of uniformity, has been
said not against this doctrine standing alone and on its own
merits, but against it in an unholy alliance with the other hy-
pothesis of a succession of life. The latter was an absurd
enough notion to begin with; but when these two ideas became
united in their unholy and unscientific alliance, they became
dogmas, not hypotheses; and for nearly a century, this pair
have arrogantly domineered over the whole scientific world, as
if, forsooth, they had become laws, and were the only explana-
tions of the geological phenomena entitled to a hearing. But
this dogmatic and domineering monopoly of the situation is now
past, and another hypothesis is entitled to a candid and full
hearing. All who have any judicial capacity for judging scien-
tific evidehce in an unprejudiced way are going to have a chance
to estimate the relative values of these two opposed hypotheses.

As these two hypotheses are mutually contradictory, only
one can possibly be true. The other must be absolutely and
wholly false. Either the present is a fair measure of all
the past, and there has been a long succession of ages under
conditions much like the present; or there has been, at some


(679)


680 THE NEW GEOLOGY


time in the past, a world change quite different from the present
order of things — so different as to make unreliable any at-
tempt to tabulate off in an accurate historical succession the
events preceding this world catastrophe. If the former of these
propositions is true, the latter is false; if the latter is true, the
former is false. Evolutionary geology affirms the former as
a working hypothesis, which, by long usage, has now become an
iron dogma. The new catastrophism affirms the latter as the
best explanation of the facts in sight, and asks for a recon-
sideration of the whole case with this hypothesis as a possible
explanation. Whatever may have been the form which this
issue has assumed in the past, the issue in this third decade of
the twentieth century is between a dogma, called uniformity,
coupled with an assumption of a supernatural knowledge of the
past, called the succession of life, on the one side; and the
hypothesis of a world catastrophe having overtaken a splendid
world fully stocked with plants and animals. And all that this
latter proposition pleads for is a full and candid hearing.


A Reconsideration Necessary. From the point of view of
strict logic and scientific method, this plea for a consideration
of the second alternative is reasonable; and to continue to rule
that alternative out of court as unworthy of a hearing is out
of harmony with the professions of a science that claims to be
actuated only by a fearless search for truth, regardless of con-
sequences. To seek to evade the issue by claiming that this
hypothesis has already been considered a century ago and
found wanting, is palpably untrue. This hypothesis has never
in the history of science had a sober and careful consideration,
with a sufficient amount of evidence available to furnish the
grounds for a safe and final decision of the case. But now we
do have a body of evidence on hand which is sufficient to enable
us to frame a reasonably safe scientific conclusion; this hypothe-
sis now asks for a consideration of this evidence.

Necessarily, however, this whole matter, in the last analysis,
is a question of probability, not of mathematical certainty.
There are some minds, like that of David Hume, which can say
of a world catastrophe, as he said of miracles, that such a
thing is impossible, and that therefore no amount of evidence
can ever prove a world catastrophe. I do not expect these
people to be convinced by the wonderful array of evidence which
we now possess all pointing to some sort of world catastrophe as
the most reasonable explanation of the facts of the stratified
rocks. But for those whose minds are not dominated by the uni-


HYPOTHESIS OF A WORLD CATASTROPHE 681


formitarian dogma, I believe that the evidence we now have
will be sufficient to prove that a once beautiful world, well stocked
with an amazing variety of plants and animals, was at some time
in the long ago overtaken by a sudden and horrible world con-
vulsion, the results of which we now have spread out over all
the continents, in the form of the major part of the stratified
deposits, and the study of which has now become the chief busi-
ness of the science of geology.

A World Catastrophe. Very fortunately, we do not have to
invent a hypothesis of a world catastrophe, for such a hypothe-
sis is furnished us ready-made by the very oldest and most
venerable records of the human race, to say nothing of the con-
current and harmonious tradition of every great branch of the
human family. But this hypothesis is not a simple and puerile
affair, as it has often been pictured. On the contrary, it is
a highly complex idea, capable of being understood and judged
of scientifically only by minds trained to weigh evidence, and
by minds also willing to take into consideration a multitude of
consequences or corollaries which go along with it, and with-
out which the central idea itself can not be said to exist. Unless
we are willing to examine it in detail, with all these corollaries
accompanying it, we can not make any progress in the direction
toward which the cumulative evidences of the previous chapters
seem to point, but must remain under the same old rule of dog-
matic assertion regarding the “impossibility” of such an event,
and the demonstration of the evolution theory furnished by
such circular reasoning as the biogenetic “law” of Haeckel,
which first assumed the succession of life through geological
time, and then demonstrated organic evolution by showing how
the embryonic development of the modern individual corre-
sponds to this assumed historical development of the race.

What, then, are some of these corollaries which can not be
separated from the hypothesis of a world catastrophe? We shall
give them in serial order, and afterwards examine them in de-
tail, to see how they fit the evidence which is furnished us by
the records of the rocks.

An Ideal World. ‘The first corollary of this hypothesis is
that regarding the character of the world with which we have
to deal; for it is not the kind of world which we see now, but
an ideally perfect world, of which the present one is but the
partly salvaged ruins. In the first place, it was a world with
an ideally perfect climate. And this means (so far as we can
see) a peculiar distribution of land and water which would con-
tribute to the making of such an ideal climate; for with all our


682 THE NEW GEOLOGY


discussion of climate during the past fifty years, we do not
seem to have hit upon any cause competent to produce an ideal
climate except some particular distribution of land and water
which would furnish several warm currents continually flowing
into the polar regions, warming them by hot water, as it were.
Along with this ideal state of climate may have existed a peculiar
salubrity of the atmosphere which would secure a regularity of
moisture to all parts of the lands, thus promoting a most luxu-
riant vegetation, each locality having its own special flora, and
thus also, of consequence, its own particular fauna, adapted to
the plant life of the locality.

The World as a Whole. Our second corollary is that this
hypothesis of a world catastrophe deals with the world as a
whole, that is, it deals with the world in its planetary aspects;
and therefore this catastrophe must have been of an astronomi-
cal character, and must have an astronomical cause. In other
words, to spoil this ideal world, and do it suddenly, would re-
quire an astronomical cause, something that would disturb this
delicate equilibrium existing between water and land, thus de-
stroying the ideal climate, and incidentally destroying the plants
and animals existing upon it.

But the only astronomical cause which we can readily
imagine as competent to bring about such results, would be
something of the nature of a jar or a shock from the outside,
which would produce an abnormal tidal action, resulting in
great tidal waves sweeping twice daily around the earth from
east to west, this wave traveling 1,000 miles an hour at the
equator.

All this is but the larger setting of our picture. To descend
into more minute particulars requires more uncertain inferences,
though many such suggest themselves. However, without de-
scending into more minute particulars, let us see if in these
broad aspects we have anything at all corresponding to the de-
mands of the geological problem.

The Antediluvian Climate. For those acquainted with the
geological facts, there is no need of presenting evidence in favor
of the earth’s having once enjoyed an ideal climate from pole to
pole. The corals and the coal plants of the arctic regions are
objective evidence which tell a complete story that can not be
misunderstood. What combination of circumstances it was
which produced these conditions of an equable world-enveloping
climate, may be matter for study; but that such a condition ex-
isted can no more be doubted than can the existence of Nineveh
and Carthage. As it is difficult to explain this equable arctic


HYPOTHESIS OF A WORLD CATASTROPHE 683


climate without postulating an ideal distribution and arrange-
ment of land and water in order to bring about such a state of
climate, just so the violent and sudden disturbance of this dis-
tribution of land and water could not fail to spoil this ideal
climate, and probably change it suddenly and completely.
Tidal Phenomena. An abnormal tidal action would seem to
be exactly what is indicated by so many evidences of an alter-
nation of deposits. For instance, in the English Jurassic, there


SSe “ = 3 = . = E


Fie. 444. “Alternations of strata of limestone and limy shale, showing rhythm in conditions
of deposition.” (G. K. Gilbert.) South wall of Provo Cañon, Wasatch Range, Utah. Similar
rhythmic alternations are common all over the world. (Gilbert, U. S. G. S.)


is a repetition of the series, clay, sand, and limestone, one above
another; and this series is repeated no less than five times be-
tween the Lias and the Portland division of the Jurassic. Al-
most as regularly recurrent, and on a far larger scale of
repetition, are the great coal beds, where as many as 75 or 100
repetitions of the series are frequently observed. Throughout
the geological series, this is one of the most common of phe-
nomena; and it falls very appropriately within the scope of
our hypothetical explanation, when we remember that every
tidal action means four movements of the waters each day, two
flows and two ebbs. And it should be remembered that any
abnormal action of the tides, while it might arise suddenly,
could not subside in a similarly sudden manner, but would
necessarily be prolonged through weeks or perhaps months, with
all the inevitable consequences of the ocean’s repeatedly trans-


684 THE NEW GEOLOGY


gressing over the lands, and just as repeatedly regressing from
off them, and all the while performing an untold amount of
geological work.


Astronomical Aspects. Let us now glance for a moment at
some of the astronomical aspects of this problem.

As is well known, the earth is not a perfect sphere, but a
spheroid, with an equatorial diameter longer by 27 miles than its
polar diameter. That is, the earth has a huge solid ring around
its equator. Because it is thus weighted and balanced, its axis
of rotation could not possibly be otherwise than about the


+0130 +0°20 +0210 0°00 -0°10 “0°20 -030


3o leih 7 = ~—1*0°30
+030 +020 4070 0100 -070 - -020 -0739.
Fic. 445. Graph showing the migration of the north pole


from 1892 to 1894. (After Milne.) The figures indicate
the number of large earthquakes in each period.


shortest diameter, as it is now. Some have speculated that the
earth was once a perfect sphere, the present difference between
its polar and equatorial diameters having been brought about in
connection with the other geological changes, though this seems
quite improbable.

On the other hand, we know that the earth’s axis of rotation
is not perpendicular to the plane of its orbit, but is inclined
2314° from the perpendicular, and that the earth rolls around
the sun constantly maintaining this strange inclined position.
The astronomical reason for the establishment of this position is
not well understood, though since it is thus established, we can
not easily conceive of any cause which could change this as-


HYPOTHESIS OF A WORLD CATASTROPHE 685


tronomical habit. To bring about any such change would re-
quire an external force, and a force of large magnitude. But if
we may suppose such a change possible — that is, if the earth’s
axis had been formerly perpendicular to the plane of its orbit,
and some external force had changed the earth to its present
inclined position and changed it suddenly — there would be
forces let loose on the earth’s surface sufficient to do an incon-
ceivable amount of geological work. In the first place, the earth,
like a huge top, would “begin to wabble, and it would continue
to wabble as a top does when going to sleep,” until it had adjusted
itself to its new position of rotation. (Houghton.) In the
meantime, the surface of the earth would be shattered and dis-
located beyond all description; and twice each day, the oceans
would sweep a mighty tidal wave around the world, attaining a
maximum, every 150 days, of about six miles in height at the
equator. (Twisden.) Such translation waves, traveling at the
rate of 1,000 miles an hour at the equator, and proportionately
in the other latitudes, would certainly leave no dry land anywhere
on earth, and would seem to give us a wonderfully competent
cause for the production of the geological changes. And it is
at least a remarkable coincidence that a period of 150 days is
twice mentioned in the Bible account of the Deluge. (Genesis
7:24; 8:3.)

I do not affirm that this was actually the method by which
the geological changes were brought about; but one can not fail
to be impressed with the remarkable similarity between these
astronomical calculations and the results which we find recorded
in the rocks, as well as the similarity of both to the account
which we have, in the Hebrew Scriptures, of the event there
spoken of as the Flood.

In an earlier chapter of the present volume, we saw that
there is plenty of water on the globe to cover the whole of it;
that, in fact, if all the lands were submerged beneath the sea,
and the solid parts all smoothed out to a uniform level, the
ocean would stand at a depth of a mile and a half all over the
globe. Hence the old quibble about there not being enough
water on the earth to cover all the lands, is seen to be without
any scientific foundation. There is enough water, and plenty
to spare.

Other Considerations. But the same physical phenomena
would follow, if the earth were to receive a jar or shock in ap-
preciable strength from an outside source, such as could come
from a large mass of matter falling upon one hemisphere of the
earth. This would follow, partly as the mere result of the shock,


44


686 THE NEW GEOLOGY


and also partly as the effect of an out-of-balance condition of
the rotating body. Under such a jar, the earth would also
begin to wabble, and a vast tidal wave, twice every twenty-four
hours, would sweep around the earth, the amount of the earth’s
wabble and the size of the resulting tidal wave being propor-
tionate to the amount of jar or shock which the earth had re-
ceived. The period of maximum intensity for these tidal waves,
given above as 150 days, would be the same for any amount of
shock, small or large, provided the earth has a certain rigidity.
This period has been calculated with other results; but the
authority to whom I have referred above, has given it as 150
days. (Professor J. F. Twisden; Quarterly Journal of the Ge-
ological Society, Vol. 34, p. 41.)

Now it is a very remarkable fact that the earth does have a
slight wabble at present. This is called the wandering of: the
pole, or the variation of terrestrial latitude (Fig. 445), by
astronomers; and although it is not large at the present time,
this present variation may be only the remnant of vastly greater
variations which the earth may once have had. We can not
prove this at present, but it is a very probable hypothesis.

Furthermore, we know that our modern earthquakes are
largely the result of the slipping of rocks into a new position
in such a way as to relieve a former tension, all such movements
of the crust being of the nature of a recovery from an existing
tension, or from an accumulating tension in the strata. And
Milne has suggested that earthquakes occur more frequently
and more violently whenever the value of terrestrial latitude is
changing most rapidly, and possibly whenever the latitudes have
reached their maximum and minimum values. In other words,
this suggests a connection between earthquakes and this wan-
dering of the pole; and it is entirely possible that this wandering
of the pole, due to the wabble of the earth, may in the past have
resulted in enormous geological changes.

But we must now turn to other aspects of our problem.

The Bible Record. I do not feel that any apology is needed
on my part for comparing what we have already learned along
these lines with the record of the Flood as given in the Bible.
Personally I confess that my study of the scientific aspects of
this subject has tended very strongly to increase my confidence
in the Bible record; but I do not think that any intelligent per-
son can doubt that the unanimous tradition of every great
branch of the human family must represent a real and awful
event which happened to the race in its early days. Hence, as
this Hebrew record gives the most reasonable and intelligent


HYPOTHESIS OF A WORLD CATASTROPHE 687


form of this narrative, it is on this account, if for no other
reason, entitled to some consideration in this connection. I
may myself believe that we have in this Bible narrative some-
thing of much greater importance than a mere racial tradition;
yet I would never think of offering this narrative here in this
connection as tending in any way to prove this general fact of
a universal Deluge, for if anyone has attentively read the pre-
ceding pages of this book and still doubts this great general
fact, neither any further words of mine nor the original record
in the Bible itself would tend to convince him. But I am my-
self convinced of this great general fact on purely scientific
grounds, and as I believe that the Bible and the book of nature
have both the same Author, it would seem reasonable that that
explanation is most probable which most clearly and absolutely
equates these two accounts of this great event; for as already
stated, the great general fact of a world catastrophe of some
sort is to my mind now as firmly established as a real historical
event as the reign of Hammurabi or the wars of Attila.

In considering what the Bible says on this subject, there is
no need of dwelling on the words there used to express the ab-
solute universality of the Flood; for these words are repeated
over and over again. But it may be worth while to point out
how, in the very prediction of the event, the declared purpose
was to destroy the earth itself, as well as its inhabitants; that
is, so to destroy the face of the earth as to make it thereafter
a new world entirely. The record is, “I will destroy them [the
people] with the earth.” Also in the reference to this event in
the second epistle of Peter, it is said, “The world that then was,
being overflowed with water, perished.” Evidently, if we are
to take these words at their face value, the design was to make
such radical changes in the whole aspect of the earth as would
take away the abundant supply of food for both man and beast
which had existed from the beginning, and to spoil that de-
lightful climate which had hitherto made life in the open air
a continuous joy. And no one who studies the record of the
antediluvian climate which we have in the rocks, and com-
pares that climate with the present extremes of terrific heat
and death-dealing cold, can doubt that this purpose was fully
accomplished.

As for the length of time occupied in the various events of
the Deluge, the Bible makes very plain that it was far from
- being merely one huge inundation which swept over the lands
and drowned the creatures living upon their surface. A few
days would have sufficed to drown all the land animals; and


688 THE NEW GEOLOGY


even all the people must have perished with but a short inunda-
tion. But the Bible record is that the Deluge really lasted
more than a year. It took six weeks for the waters to attain
their maximum, evidently by terrific cloud-bursts and by
enormous ebbs and flows of the tides, the latter rising a little
higher each day over the ever-narrowing lands, driving the men
and the animals before it, until, after over a month of this
agony long drawn out, those who still survived looked out from
their pinnacles of mountain tops over a shoreless ocean. Then
half a year or so elapsed before the waters had abated suffi-
ciently to allow the ark to ground on the high land where it
finally came to rest.

- Corollaries. During all this time, an inestimable amount of
geological change must have been taking place, as the waters of
the transgressing oceans flowed around in unaccustomed chan-
nels and currents, doubtless swept by storms such as the world
has never since witnessed. Then another half year was oc-
cupied in the process of the land’s rising here and there, or
(which is the same thing) by the ocean’s gradually subsiding
into its present basin. As we are told that the Flood began
about the beginning of our northern winter, this retreat of the
ocean from the lands must also have taken place at about the
commencement of another northern winter. And what a winter
that must have been!

For we must remember that the whole body of the ocean
water originally must have been warm, about as warm as the
surface waters of the tropics are at present. It would begin to
cool very rapidly in the northern latitudes; but so long as any
material amount of this original warmth remained in the ocean
water, the warm parts would float as a layer on top. And as this
warm layer came in contact with the icy cold air, the inevitable
result would be to cause dense fogs and almost continuous pre-
cipitation. How long a time would be required for the waters of
the ocean to cool off, it would be impossible to say. The bottom
waters of the Mediterranean and of other similarly land-locked
basins are still much warmer than the depths of the ocean —
even yet, as it seems, retaining some of their original warmth,
because they are so situated as to be protected from the cold
currents flowing along the bottom of the oceans from the refrig-
erating plants at either pole. But until the great body of the
ocean had appreciably cooled down to somewhat near its present
temperature, there must have been very much more precipita-
tion in all the northern lands than we now see. This may have
taken years or even centuries.


HYPOTHESIS OF A WORLD CATASTROPHE 689


Another great fact must not be overlooked in this connection.
As has been pointed out in a previous chapter, a considerable
portion of the earth’s surface is basin-shaped, with interior
drainage; that is, the water drains into hollows surrounded by
hills or mountains, and this water never runs out toward the
sea, but stands or evaporates where it is. The amount of the
earth’s surface thus occupied by these interior basins has been
variously estimated at from a fifth to a fourth of the entire land
surface of the globe. But the point of interest for us is that after
the Flood, all these basins must have been full of water to the
very brim. Doubtless many large basins which now have out-
side drainage, like the basin of the Great Lakes of North
America, contained much more water than at present, the water
in them standing at a higher level then, until the outflow had
cut down a channel for itself more like that which we now see.
But for years, perhaps for centuries, as these great interior
basins remained more or less full of water, and as the perpetual
banks of clouds prohibited the sun from warming the northern
lands, immense quantities of snow and ice must have accumu-
lated on all the high mountain ranges, perhaps even on some of
the higher table-lands of the more extreme latitudes. In this,
we have an easy explanation of all those evidences of extended
glacial action which we see in all our mountain regions; while
in the thick ice which must have formed over such waters as the
Great Lakes at their former high levels, and also in the shore
ice which must have formed around all the epicontinental waters
as they first retreated slowly from off North America and
Europe, we probably have the true explanation of at least many
of those evidences of supposed glacial action with which we-
have been regaled for the past half century or so.

A Candid Examination Demanded. It is nothing short of
a burlesque on the Bible account of the Deluge to represent it as
a small, very temporary affair, which could not have performed
or have left behind any extended geological work. If we are
going to consider the Bible record at all, let us give it a fair
and candid hearing. This record is not ambiguous, nor difficult
to understand. From it we would gather a picture of a complete
change in both the climate and the surface features of the
world. Doubtless the rivers and the oceans did some geologi-
cal work in that orderly, quiet world before the Flood. In our
modern world, too, a considerable amount of geological work of
one kind and another is being done. But all of both these series
of geological operations, though prolonged over thousands of
years as they have been, sink into insignificance when com-


690 THE NEW GEOLOGY


pared with those vast changes which took place during and
immediately subsequent to the world catastrophe which the
Seripture calls the Flood.

Natural Consequences. We can also now understand why
the marine invertebrates are, as a general rule, found in the
lower strata of the earth, and why the larger animals, and
especially the land mammals and such great reptiles as the
dinosaurs, are usually found in comparatively superficial de-
posits. We can also understand why some of the Paleozoic and
even some of the Mesozoic rocks are spread out in such wide
sheets, often a hundred or even several hundred miles in extent,
and why the Tertiaries, or the superficial deposits, are usually
so fragmentary and in such interrupted patches here and there.
Evidently most of the former rocks were formed near the begin-
ning of the diluvial changes; while the latter were more generally
formed near the close, or as the waters were retreating from off
the lands — some of them possibly years or centuries afterwards.
In this sense, there are obvious chronological differences be-
tween the older fossiliferous rocks and the younger ones; but
these distinctions do not at all correspond to the present popu-
lar distinctions based on the fossils.

It is equally evident that the convulsions which the crust of
the earth went through during this prolonged disturbance,
would account for much of the contortion and twisting that the
older rocks plainly exhibit. The friction attending some of
these movements must have generated a prodigious amount of
heat within the Archean rocks; this heat would be communi-
cated to the overlying wet strata, metamorphosing them, in
some instances actually melting the rocks, both old and new;
then further movements of the crust would often squeeze this
semiliquid material out upon the surface of the earth, or per-
haps on the rocks at the bottom of the sea, again to receive a
deposit of sediment from the embroiled waters.

Some of the heat thus generated, also the heat produced by
later chemical action, would occasionally be communicated to
some of the vast carboniferous beds buried deep beneath other
sediments; or these carboniferous beds would themselves take
fire, and thus many genuine volcanoes would be started here and
there all over the earth within a short period after the Deluge
had subsided. In all this, we would have a good explanation
of why volcanic action was much more abundant and possibly
more violent in the long ago than at the present time.

It would be almost inevitable that enormous thicknesses of
strata would be piled up over very unequally stable foundations.


HYPOTHESIS OF A WORLD CATASTROPHE 691


And where the basement rocks were not competent to support
a mile or so in thickness of extra load, these strata would neces-
sarily settle down, while other large areas might remain nearly
horizontal. Accordingly, where certain portions, perhaps a
square mile or more in area, settled down because of a yielding
foundation, the upper strata near the edges of this area would
become tilted; and if the settling was extensive and the over-
lying strata was a mile or so in thickness, this tilting of
the strata might result in a very marked contortion of the
disturbed portions, or even in a distinct rupturing of the surface
rocks. Synclines and anticlines would thus be produced all over
the earth. If now a strong current of water, either marine or
continental, were brought to bear upon these rocks, an im-
mense amount of erosion would of necessity take place in a very
short time.

Again, if a very great depth of strata had been piled up in
a certain area, and a deeply cut channel of erosion had taken
away a portion of the deposit to the depth of a mile or so be-
fore the mass had completely consolidated, as might easily oc-
cur, there would necessarily be a settling of the pile of rocks
left standing; for nothing but firmly consolidated rocks at the
bottom could possibly support a weight of a mile or more of
superincumbent rocks. That is, when the lateral supports of
the pile were removed, the pile of strata would settle or collapse.

When we understand that these things were taking place in
many parts of the earth at the same time, there is little doubt
that we have here an explanation of a great many things which
we observe in almost every mountain region; for the rocks every-
where present the clearest evidence that most of the folding
and tilting of the rocks occurred while the beds composing them
were still soft. This physical evidence has been doubted; be-
cause evolutionary geologists have taught that the various rocks
composing any considerable pile of strata were deposited slowly
and through many long ages, and it has been thought incredible
that the lower rocks could have remained soft and unconsoli-
dated until after the uppermost beds had been deposited. But
in view of the conditions which we have here presented, it is
evident that we are now at liberty to believe the obvious indi-
cations that these strata were still in a plastic condition when
their deformation took place.

The New Catastrophism. It would thus appear that we have
now reached a rational explanation of all the great outstanding
geological phenomena. Still, to find objections to this explana-
tion, and to point out how in one point or another it supposes


690 THE NEW GEOLOGY


pared with those vast changes which took place during and
immediately subsequent to the world catastrophe which the
Seripture calls the Flood.

Natural Consequences. We can also now understand why
the marine invertebrates are, as a general rule, found in the
lower strata of the earth, and why the larger animals, and
especially the land mammals and such great reptiles as the
dinosaurs, are usually found in comparatively superficial de-
posits. We can also understand why some of the Paleozoic and
even some of the Mesozoic rocks are spread out in such wide
sheets, often a hundred or even several hundred miles in extent,
and why the Tertiaries, or the superficial deposits, are usually
so fragmentary and in such interrupted patches here and there.
Evidently most of the former rocks were formed near the begin-
ning of the diluvial changes; while the latter were more generally
formed near the close, or as the waters were retreating from off
the lands — some of them possibly years or centuries afterwards.
In this sense, there are obvious chronological differences be-
tween the older fossiliferous rocks and the younger ones; but
these distinctions do not at all correspond to the present popu-
lar distinctions based on the fossils.

It is equally evident that the convulsions which the crust of
the earth went through during this prolonged disturbance,
would account for much of the contortion and twisting that the
older rocks plainly exhibit. The friction attending some of
these movements must have generated a prodigious amount of
heat within the Archean rocks; this heat would be communi-
cated to the overlying wet strata, metamorphosing them, in
some instances actually melting the rocks, both old and new;
then further movements of the crust would often squeeze this
semiliquid material out upon the surface of the earth, or per-
haps on the rocks at the bottom of the sea, again to receive a
deposit of sediment from the embroiled waters.

Some of the heat thus generated, also the heat produced by
later chemical action, would occasionally be communicated to
some of the vast carboniferous beds buried deep beneath other
sediments; or these carboniferous beds would themselves take
fire, and thus many genuine volcanoes would be started here and
there all over the earth within a short period after the Deluge
had subsided. In all this, we would have a good explanation
of why volcanic action was much more abundant and possibly
more violent in the long ago than at the present time.

It would be almost inevitable that enormous thicknesses of
strata would be piled up over very unequally stable foundations.


CHAPTER XLII


The Origin and Antiquity of Man


Man Created. It was Sir William Dawson, president of
McGill University, who once said: “I know nothing about the
origin of man, except what I am told in the Scripture,— that
God created him. I do not know anything more than that, and
I do not know of anybody who does.”

Sir William Dawson was a scientist, a geologist; and what
he said in these remarks was said by him as a scientist, and was
meant as the essence of his contribution to the discussion, then
acute, regarding the origin of man. To-day the center of the
discussion has shifted considerably. It is now not so much the
origin of man, as the antiquity of man, which is under discus-
sion. Nobody knows anything more about the real origin of
man than was known in Dawson’s day; so this part of the prob-
lem suggested by the title of this chapter might very well be
left just there. Plenty of speculations are being published in
ponderous, scholarly-looking books; but of real scientific infor-
mation regarding this matter, we are exactly where this great
scientist declared he was — we know only that God must have
created man. :

Antiquity. But the second part of this subject will demand
a more extended statement; for a great deal of scientific infor-
mation on this point is commonly supposed to have been accu-
mulated within recent years. Two large books, “The Antiquity
of Man,” by Professor Arthur Keith, and “Men of the Old
Stone Age,” by Dr. Henry Fairfield Osborn, may be taken as
typical of a large amount of literature which has been issued
within recent years, professing to prove a far greater antiquity
for the human race than used to be thought possible. And the
general implication seems to be that, by pushing the history of
mankind back far enough into the shadow, we can dispose of
the problem of origin; for on the strength of this seeming great
antiquity, but without any adequate proofs, we are treated to
numerous positive assertions that man doubtless originated
from some anjmal stock by some process of natural develop-
ment or evolution.

Various archzological human remains are depended upon
by these authors to prove the great antiquity of man, and to
imply an animal ancestry. Among these fossil remains of man,
four specimens are the most famous: the Java skull, the Heidel-


(693)


THE NEW GEOLOGY


(American


The fragments on the sloping


One might just as well schematize or arrange in


a series illustrates the evolution of the American house.


“reconstructed.”
Museum of Natural History, New York City.)


which these skulls have been
Boston, and claim that such


A seriai but artificial arrangement of some skulls of apes and men, designed to teach the ape origin of man.
he houses of New York or


round show the real original specimens from


serial order samples of t


Fic. 446.
foreg


berg jaw, the Pilt-
down skull, and the
Neanderthal skull;
and these are re-
garded as the oldest
human remains yet
discovered. Accord-
ingly, it will be in or-
der for us to consider
what we know about
these ancient human
remāins, and what
light they throw on
this problem of the
origin and antiquity
of man.


Pithecanthropus
Erectus


In the year 1891,
Dr. Eugene Dubois, a
Dutch army officer,
found the upper part
of a- skull and a
molar tooth on the
left bank of a stream
near Trinil, in Cen-
tral Java. The next
year, a left femur, or
thigh bone, was
found about 45 or 50
feet away; also a
second molar tooth.
Still later another
tooth was found. The
locality was one
where numerous fos-
sil bones of animals
had been found pre-
viously, and where
others have been
found subsequently;
and the deposit
from which they
were unearthed has


THE ORIGIN AND ANTIQUITY OF MAN 695


been classed variously as Pliocene or as Pleistocene. We have al-
ready learned something of the high scientific accuracy(?) of
these distinctions. Only the cap of the skull was found; and to
“reconstruct” the entire skull from such a fragment in a way
which makes the results reliable, is admittedly very difficult. But


Scale 1:4800 ` TRIN/L


0 25 mile


Outline Map of the Excavations (Fits I and I:
Trinil, Java. (After M.L Selenka,/9//)
|= Monument
.» Places where remains of Pithecanthropus
erectus were found by Dubois, /89/- 1/892.
A-B, Line of Geologic Section.


Fic. 447. Map of locality where the remains of Pithecanthropus erectus were
discovered. (American Museum of Natural History, New York City.)


this skull is of a very low order, the capacity having been esti-
mated as probably about 28 ounces. The average human brain
has a capacity of about 49 ounces, and no normal brain is less
than 30 ounces. The Java skull has been variously pronounced
as that of an idiot, that of a sub-man or an ape-man, or that of a
large Hylobates, or gibbon.

When these remains were first brought to Europe, they
were shown before the third International Congress of Zodlo-
gists in Leiden, in September, 1895. Dr. Rudolf Virchow,
for thirty years president of the Anthropological Society of
Berlin, and by all odds the most prominent archeologist and


696 THE NEW GEOLOGY


pathologist of his time, was president of this congress at Leiden;
and at the close of the remarks of Dr. Dubois, he criticized the
latter’s report by saying there was no certainty that all these
bones were really parts of the same individual. He further de-
clared that it could not be known positively whether they were
the remains of a man or an ape. Later, after he had had an
opportunity of examining the remains more closely, he expressed
his decided opinion that the skull was that of a large gibbon.
The teeth, he said, were more apelike than human; while the
thigh bone, though much like that of a man, would also pass for
that of a gibbon, as the latter is the only one of the apes which


Fiver Solo

Pithecanthropus $o m

High water mark of River Solo r oe
l


80 M
75M
70M


ee 3-4 e
AE E T E te 65M above
1000 feet Sea levei


Geologic Section along the Line A-B of Map, Trinil. Java.
Recent 7 Fiver wash, blue-black clay

6 Light colored sandstone like tuff

5 Gray tuff with balls of clay, freshwater shells
Pleistocene {4 White streaked sandstone resembling tufa

3 Blue-black clay with plant remains

2 Bone bearing stratum

I Lahar conglomerate


Fic. 448. Geologie section across the Solo River at the point where the

skulleap of Pithecanthropus was discovered. Note that the river, at high

water, overflows this point. This same layer has yielded many bones of

mammals, some apparently belonging to modern species, though this bed is
usually classed as Pliocene-Pleistocene. (After Osborn.)


habitually walks in an upright position, and there is a very
marked resemblance between its femur and that of man.

This opinion that these bones really represent a gibbon, is
concurred in by some of the very foremost scientists. For ex-
ample, Richard Hertwig says, “The opinion that is most prob-
ably correct is that the fragments belonged to an anthropo-
morphic ape of extraordinary size and an abnormal cranial
capacity, and with a relatively large brain.”

Only the large size seems to stand in the way of anyone’s `
regarding it as the remains of an ape. Macnamara, after care-
ful study of the specimen, declared that Pithecanthropus was a
true ape of rather extraordinary size. He says, “The cranium
of an average adult male chimpanzee and the Java cranium
are so closely related that I believe them to belong to the same
family of animals, that is, to the true apes.” This opinion is also


THE ORIGIN AND ANTIQUITY OF MAN 697


indorsed by many German authorities, including Klaatsch and
Branca, the latter being professor of geology and paleontology in
the University of Berlin. And as we are accustomed to find
among the true geological deposits specimens of animals which
are larger than the corresponding modern specimens, I do not see
why any mere question of size should hinder us from classing
these remains as those of a prehistoric gibbon.

In an article in a recent number of the North American
Review (April, 1922), Dr. W. H. Ballou bluntly throws doubt
upon the bona fides of the discoverer of these Java remains,
because of the fact that Dr. Dubois sealed up these remains
some thirty years ago, and has since never allowed any scientists
to examine them. Furthermore, Dr. Dubois has recently an-
nounced that thirty years ago, or at the same time at which he
discovered Pithecanthropus, he also secured other skeletons, of
other prehistoric men and women, with skulls much larger than
those of any known race. This long-delayed announcement does
not tend to quiet the natural suspicions aroused at the fact that
the discoverer will not even yet allow other scientists to examine
his specimens.

This specimen from Java is always spoken of as by all odds
the oldest relic of humanity yet discovered. But the geological
age of the bed in which it was found, is far from being satis-
factorily established; and this skull may not be of true geologi-
cal age after all. Moreover, it seems quite probable that these
remains do not represent a human being, but rather a large
ape. Hence we can not think that this particular “find” helps us
very much in regard to the problem of man’s antiquity.


The Heidelberg Jaw


In 1907, there was found in a sand pit at Mauer, near
Heidelberg, Germany, a human mandible, or lower jaw, con-
taining some teeth. The stratum in which it was discovered
was about 78 feet below the surface, some 24 distinct layers
having been counted in the entire deposit above it. These strata
have been identified geologically as corresponding to the so-
called “forest bed” of Norfolk, England, classed as “pre-Glacial.”’

The front teeth, including the incisors, canines, and pre-
molars of this jaw, are pronounced by Professor Keith to be of
the same shape as those of the specimen found at Spy, which
will be referred to later. That is, these teeth are of practically
normal pattern, and are not of extraordinary size. But the
jaw itself is so massive, at least its ascending ramus is so large,
that this characteristic seems to place this jaw almost in a


698 THE NEW GEOLOGY


class by itself. At least, this is the argument. The crowns of
four of the teeth had been broken off by accident; the rest of the
teeth were intact. No distinct chin is recognizable in the jaw.
Subsequently what are called “eoliths,’ or fragments of sharp
stones said to have been manufactured by human beings, though
of little regularity of form, were discovered in the same sand
bed, some distance away.

This jaw evidently does not shed much light on our prob-
lem. This specimen is doubtless quite old — but just how old,
or even relatively how old as compared with any other human
or animal fossils, nobody can say with any degree of certainty.


A Arevzsrein


Railway
River Elsen
Maver
Mauer Sana Pir
Heidelberg Jam,
dle
ale
Z
a.
(4 P: bucket


—
KEEEESS


o
= ni EN Sea Leres
F] 1000 2000 3000 4000 merers
Mo Upper Muschelkalk a Recent, mari. loam, sand } Recent
Middle Triassic Nm Middle a doi Redeposired /oess of rhe slopes
Mu Lower " dlo Younger loess Pleis
ș [Sa Upper Bunrsanasrera die - loam p
L
SUNG? OCTET Sm Middle dlia Older "woe
dun Maver gana (Neckar, gravel alia sand)


Geologic Section of Mauer Sand Pit (Homo heidelbergensis)


Fic. 449. Geologie section where the Heidelberg jaw was found. (American
Museum of Natural History, New York City.)


Everything about the whole matter. is of that delightful uncer-
tainty which makes it an admirable subject for discussion. It is
largely a matter of personal opinion.


The Piltdown Skull


The larger part of a skull, with part of a jawbone, was
found in 1913 at Piltdown, Sussex, England, in a bed of gravel
on a high plateau or ancient river terrace. These have been
named “EKoanthropus,” and have by some been declared to be
the oldest human remains hitherto found in Europe. Many
authorities, however, place this relic after the Heidelberg
specimen.

This Piltdown skull has been restored or reconstructed by
several scientists, and it is rated by some as having a capacity
of about 48 ounces, or slightly below the average male skull of
to-day, being almost exactly that of the average female brain,
which is given as 44 ounces. The brain case is very thick, and


THE ORIGIN AND ANTIQUITY OF MAN 699


the fore part of the face is regarded as prognathous, or snouty;
but the forehead is as steep as in modern man, and not re-
ceding, though somewhat narrow. This jaw also, like the
Heidelberg one, has no chin; and its ramus, or neck, is
very thick.

Professor Keith criticizes the restoration of this skull pro-
posed by Dr. Smith Woodward, saying that when the latter
came to “replace the missing points of the jaws, the incisor
and canine teeth, he followed simian rather than human lines.”
(“Antiquity of Man,” p. 324.) However, at last, Keith declares,
“An approach to symmetry and a correct adjustment of parts
came only after many experimental reconstructions.” (P. 364.)

Considering the fact that these fragments were not all found
together or at one time, some of them having been found in
the autumn and the rest in the spring of the next year, the
various fragments being scattered over an area of several yards,
the difficulty of being sure of the real form and size of this
skull will be appreciated.

As for the geological age of these remains, Keith calls them
Pliocene, while Smith Woodward thinks them Pleistocene.
Keith thinks the skull is that of a woman.


The Neanderthal Skull


In 1857, portions of a skeleton, including the cap of the skull,
were found in the Neanderthal Cave, near Elberfeld, Germany,
by Dr. Fuhlrott, who at first doubted whether they were the re-
mains of a human being. As so many years have elapsed since
this specimen was found, there has accumulated a voluminous
literature dealing with it; and almost every expert from that day
to this has had his say with reference to whether or not this
piece of a skull takes us perceptibly nearer to our supposed ape
ancestors.

Huxley declared that it was the most apelike of any skull
discovered up to that time; for the three specimens which we
have been studying about have all been discovered since Huxley’s
time. Huxley compared this Neanderthal skull with those of
the flat-headed natives of Australia, and with those of other
examples of what are usually called “primitive” man; but he
added, “I may say that the fossil remains of man hitherto dis-
covered do not seem to me to take us appreciably nearer to that
low pithecoid [apelike] form, by the modification of which he
has probably become what he is.”

Huxley thought that these bones from Neanderthal were of
great antiquity; but there were circumstances connected with


700 THE NEW GEOLOGY


this case which made the matter quite uncertain. No human
implements were found in this cave, nor any bones of extinct
animals. These bones had not been unearthed by any respon-
sible scientist, but by some workmen; and it appeared that these
workmen had been careless in collecting them, and had pre-
served only the larger ones. From all that could be learned of
the circumstances attending their finding, it was entirely un-
certain whether the bones had been buried in this cave by
friends in prehistoric times, or whether they had been washed
into this place from the surface of the ground outside. As for
the geological “age” represented, one man’s guess is as good
as another’s.

Regarding the type of skull here being dealf with, Virchow
unhesitatingly pronounced it a pathologic specimen; and we
must remember that Virchow was the founder of the science of
pathology. He further declared that he had often seen upon
the streets men with just such shaped skulls as that of the
Neanderthal man. Others, however, have strongly emphasized
the prominent ridges above the eyes, and the very long, almost
flat form of the head.

Keith says, “Although the brain of Neanderthal man equals
or exceeds that of the modern type of man in point of size, yet
in its general conformation it resembles the brain casts taken
from anthropoid skulls.” And he further adds: “We feel assured
that certain features of the face [but the bones of the face are
absolutely lacking and unknown to us] would have at once
struck us as totally different from the corresponding features in
all varieties of modern man. To find eyebrow ridges like those
of Neanderthal man, great continuous horizontal bars of bone,
overshadowing the orbits —a supra-orbital torus — we have
again to refer to the anthropoid skull.” (P. 140.)

Keith is one of those who claim that this skull should be
regarded as that of a distinct race or species of man. From the
scanty fragments found at Neanderthal, it would not seem
reasonable to erect this specimen into a racial type; and this
might indeed not have been done, but for the subsequent discov-
ery of some more complete remains at Spy, near Namur, Bel-
gium, in 1886. Two nearly complete skeletons, a man and a
woman, were found in a grotto at a depth of about 16 feet. The
skull of No. 1 of these was broken into abcut forty pieces, and
the other also was badly broken. The jaw of No. 1 is well
preserved, except in the region of the coronoids and condyles,
where it joins the skull. But the lack of the latter makes only


THE ORIGIN AND ANTIQUITY OF MAN 701


conjectural any position in which we may place it to show its
original position. Only one entire femur and the upper half of
another belonging to the other specimen were recovered.
Virchow said that the characteristics shown in these skulls
were still to be seen in some exceptional Friesian skulls of to-day.
But others subsequently have pointed out the similarity between
these specimens from Spy and the one from Neanderthal; and
they have made them the foundation for a new and distinct
race or species of man,— Homo neanderthalensis, or Homo
primigenius, as this species is variously named. Associated
with the skeletons at Spy were found bones of the rhinoceros


Fic. 450. Skull of the “old man” of Cro Magnon. (American Museum of
Natural History, New York City.)


(R. tichorhinus), the mammoth (Elephas primigenius), and the
great bear (Ursus speleus). A geological study of the locality
where these remains were found shows that the present valley
of the Orneau, the stream flowing near by, was already almost
completely formed when the materials were deposited in the
cave in which these skeletons were found; and from the posi-
tion of the bones when found, it was evident that the bodies
had been buried by friends.

Other Specimens. We have now examined all the most
famous examples of human remains found anywhere in the
world, the crucial ones from which evolutionists have sought to
prove the great antiquity of the human race. The three skele-
tons found at Cro Magnon, Dordogne, France, are almost equally
famous; but they are so well developed and in every way such
splendid specimens of mankind that anthropologists do not


45


702 THE NEW GEOLOGY


think they can really be very old — that is, in the geological
sense. The skulls here are of the dolichocephalic or long-headed
type, and are thus classed as distinctly paleolithic by many
authorities; but the large size of the brain cavity, as well as the
magnificent development of the bodies, has made other scientists
insist that these men can not be as old as the smaller and more
“primitive” looking ones. They are now usually classed as
“Upper Paleolithic.”

The old man of Cro Magnon
was over six feet tall, with a
skull which one authority says
was equal to that of Bismarck,
the skeleton giving “evidence
of immense muscular develop-
ment.” (Dawson.) He had
evidently attained a great age;
for, though every tooth was
sound, they had been worn down
almost to the very sockets.
Keith declares that this race
“was the finest the world has
ever seen”; while Macnamara
says, on the basis of these re-
mains, that the tradition about
“a race of giants in far distant
times was no myth.” Several of
Fic. 451. Lateral restoration of the head “= Cro Magnon ee s six
of the “old man” of Cro Magnon. (Ameri- feet four inches high.

ee Cae Ae But according to the rules

formulated by evolutionary ar-

cheologists for estimating the antiquity of man, which will be

given presently, these men of the Cro Magnon caves are not

regarded as of very high antiquity. They were far too well de-

veloped, and had far too large a brain. This is the method
of reasoning.

It would not serve our purpose to take.up the many other
examples of human remains found in various parts of Europe,
or to speak of the wonderful art work found on the cave walls
of Southern France. But it would never do to pass over the
remarkable set of rules by which the antiquity of any human
remains are judged, by those who have to deal with these mat-
ters in a professional way. The rules here given were at one


THE ORIGIN AND ANTIQUITY OF MAN 708


Fic. 452. Some of the most famous skulls. Im the upper right-hand corner is shown the
printed card stating “How the Antiquity of Man is Estimated,” a full reproduction of which
is given in the text. (American Museum of Natural History, New York City.)


704 THE NEW GEOLOGY


` time: placed conspicuously in one of the show cases containing
models of these most famous human skulls, in the anthropologi-
cal section of the American Museum of Natural History, New
York City, of which institution Henry Fairfield Osborn is
the president.


How the Antiquity of Man Is Estimated


“The dating of human skeletal remains is at best only a
rough approximation. The probable error of our estimate
would undoubtedly be expressed in thousands of years. Never-
theless we have several guides in determining the probable
position in time of a given find.

“The first and best indication is afforded by geological
records. Geologists know that the sands, gravel, loam, and loess
of certain localities were deposited by glaciers, rivers, or winds
during certain geological periods. Another valuable guide is the
association of human remains with the skeletal remains of
animals- now extinct. Paleontologists have a fairly clear idea
as to the time at which these animals became extinct. A third
indicator is the kind of articles of human manufacture found
with the skeletons. Archzologists have a general idea of the
gradual development of human industries in Europe up through
the exclusive use of rough stone implements, to the more finely
finished products of polished stone, bone, copper, bronze, and
iron. Finally the nature of the skeletal remains themselves
affords an indication of their probable place in man’s evolution.

“The attitude of modern science is decidedly critical, and not
until a given specimen has been subjected to the above four
tests is it finally assigned to a definite place in man’s history.
Many finds, which have failed to satisfy the demands of science
on one or more of the four points of geological position, asso-
ciated animal remains, associated implements of human manu-
facture, and morphological form, have been temporarily placed
to one side to await the possibility of future discoveries throw-
ing some light on their true position.”


Unscientific Methods. This statement is as charmingly
candid as it is authoritative; for evidently, according to these
rules, the whole doctrine of the evolution of man from low,
Savage, or semi-brute beginnings is quietly assumed to begin
with, and every evidence not in full accord with this prejudice
is “temporarily placed to one side” and not allowed a hearing

1The writer copied them in the summer of 1920; but on a subsequent trip to New


York in the spring of 1922, the card containing these rules had been removed. The card
is shown in the accompanying illustration, in the upper right-hand corner of the show case.


THE ORIGIN AND ANTIQUITY OF MAN 705


in rating any remains which have to do with the antiquity and
early history of mankind. In the light of these facts, it is not
too much to say that, with our present discoveries, and under
the rules now in vogue for evaluating these discoveries, it is
quite impossible to arrive at any clear and accurate picture of
the early days of man in Western Europe.

Personally, I do not know of a single example of a human
relic found anywhere on earth which we can confidently say
antedates the great catastrophe of the Deluge; though, if any
such specimens should be found, J do not see how they could get
into scientific literature, if they had to run the gauntlet of such
rules as those just quoted.

But rules or no rules, I do not think anyone can say that
any very ancient human remains have been discovered in the
New World. As Duckworth says, “Time after time the attempts
to demonstrate the early origin of man in the American con-
tinent have resulted in failure, which in some cases has been
regrettably ignominious.” (“Prehistoric Man,” p. 55.) And it
seems to me that in even those cases where human remains
have been found in Europe in association with the bones of such
distinctly fossil animals as the mammoth, rhinoceros, hippopota-
mus, and great bear, these human remains are mingled with
these fossils only as they are also mingled with the rocks and
bowlders which also accompany them. In other words, these
fossil animal bones may be as much bowlders as the rocks; and
the human remains may be altogether quite subsequent to the
former, as we know they were subsequent in origin to the latter.

My reasons for making such a statement are as follows: It
is evident that for a long time, perhaps for many centuries, the
bones of these antediluvian animals must have been thickly
scattered over and through all the soil and the entire surface
deposits of great areas of the northern lands. The very fact
that we find such numbers of them now, after these thousands
of years, is an indication of what immense quantities must
once have been found almost everywhere. Under these circum-
stances, it would be almost impossible for any human remains
to be entombed, either by accident or by deliberate burial, with-
out our now running the risk of finding fossils of these ancient
animals in association with these human remains; but only in
association with them as bowlders, like the rocks and stones.
At least, I can not feel sure that in any of the cases hitherto
reported, the presence of mammoth bones, or those of the
rhinoceros or great bear, etc., really proves the antediluvian age
of these human remains.


706 THE NEW GEOLOGY


The Verdict of the Future. It seems to me that the dis-
covery of genuine antediluvian human remains is still in the
future. At any rate, satisfactory evidence of any such discovery
has not yet found its way into orthodox scientific literature.
Doubtless there are such human remains somewhere in the
earth, and they may some day be unearthed; but I do not know
of any examples to which we can now point with confidence
as undoubtedly of the same age as that of the mammoth and
the hippopotamus and the rhinoceros in England.

Here we must leave the matter for the present. Some day
we may be able to learn more about that physically splendid
race of antediluvian man. I say physically splendid; because,
as the great mammals of that day were all such that their
modern representatives of the same species “are dwarfs in
comparison” (Dana), we have the most reliable of scientific
reasons for expecting the same characteristic to hold true of
the men of that same time, who were undoubtedly the contem-
poraries of these great land animals.

The reasons why we have not yet found any such human
remains which we can confidently rate as antediluvian, are, I
confess, theological rather than scientific. We are told that the
Creator undertook deliberately to destroy that ungodly race;
and we can only suppose that He accomplished this work in a
complete and satisfactory manner, and that He buried their
remains so completely that we have not yet found any of them.

But it may not be inappropriate to conclude these studies
with the remark with which we opened this chapter, words from
one of the greatest and most reverent of the students of the rocks:

“T do not know anything about the origin of man, except
what I am told in the Scripture,— that God created him. I do
not know anything more than that, and I do not know of any-
body who does.”’


INDEX


INDEX


CONCAGUA, 210
Adobe, 75
Agassiz, Louis, 307, 603
“Age of Cycads,” 481
of Fishes,” 401 '
of Reptiles,” 293, 473
Alabaster, 68
Albite, 66
Aletsch Glacier, 156
Algæ, 112, 178, 324
calcareous, 192, 481
Algonkian, fossils found in, 332
limestone, 38
on Cretaceous, 1, 278, 279, 333,
834, 625-628, 630, 631
system, 332-336
Alligator, 55
Allosaurus skeleton mounted, 522
Alluvium, 74, 145
rock, see Cenozoic group.
Alternations of strata of limestone
and limy shale, 683
Alumina, 64, 66
Ammonites, 362, 363
Cretaceous, 516
Ammonoids, Permian, 451
Triassic, 481
Ameeba, 327
Amphibians, 54, 55, 313
Carboniferous, 441
Permian, 451
Triassic, 482
Amphibole, see Hornblende
Amphibolite, 77
Amphioxus, see Lancelet.
Ancient sea-caves, 246
Andalusite, 66
Andes, 257
Andesite, 66, 77, 216
Angiosperms, 327
Anhydrite, 68
Animal kingdom, 306, 311
life, its geological effect, 187
Animals and plants, distinctions be-
tween, 309
Animals, characteristic, of Africa, 52
of Australia, 51
of Euro-Asia, 56
of North America, 54
of Oriental region, 51
of South America, 53
footprints of, 85
geologic importance of, 45
material furnished by, 207
variation of, 62
Anteater, 55, 310
Anthozoa, 384
Anticline, 90, 95,.96


in erea sandstone (L. Silurian),


in Ordovician rocks, 268
Anticosti Island, 396
Apatite, 64, 68
Apes, anthropoid, 55
Arachnids, 316
Aragonite, 67, 303
Aralo-Caspian basin, 43
Arch in sandstone, “Haystacks,”

Arizona, 247
Archean system, 293, 329-332
Archezocyathide, 385
Archæopteryx lithographica, 496, 497
Archeozoic, see Archean
Areas, glaciated, 163
Argillite, 74, 75
Arid conditions, 109, 123

regions, erosion in, 125
Arkose, 473
Armadillo, 55
Armored fishes, 406
Arsenopyrite, 68
Artesian well, 135
Arthrodira, 406
Arthropoda, 316

Cambrian, 345

Carboniferous, 439

Jurassic, 493

Ordovician, 372
Asbestos, 67
Ascidians, see Tunicates.
Asteroidea, 391
Astronomical aspects, 684
Aaaa as a geological agent,


part of the earth, 31
pressure, changes in, 230
Atoll, 192-194
Augite, 77
Azoic or lifeless zone, 56


ACTERIA, denitrifying, 112, 179

iron; 111, 192

“Bad lands,” 127, 129

Ballou, W. H., 697

Barbados earths, 577

Barite, 68

Barium sulphate, 68

Barnacles, see Cirripeds.

Basalts, 215, 216

“Basement complex,” 329

Base of Palisades of Hudson, 474

Bateson, Professor William, 62, 308,
602


Batholith, 226
Bauxite, 106


(709)


710


Beach, a curving, 171
Beaches, raised, 571
Bear, 55
Bedding, current, 84, 177
flow-and-plunge style of, 177
Belemnites, 362, 364
Jurassic, 487, 494
Triassic, 482
Bell Butte, 131
Bible record, 686
Bighorn Basin, Wyoming, 633, 634
Big Horn Mountains, Wyoming, 423
Biotite, 66
Bird of Paradise, 54
Birds, 55, 312
Bird’s-eye view of the Gulf of San-
torin, 209
of the Niagara Gorge, 143
of Victoria Falls, 141
Birds of the Cretaceous, 518
of the Miocene, 553
Bivalves, in Jurassic, 494
_Blackband ore, 432
Blastoids, 391
Carboniferous, 438
Blue mud, 181
Bluff on Oil Creek, showing Jurassic
formations, 488
Bog iron ore, 192
Bogs, 189
Bowlder clay, 565
Bowlders, perched, 161, 162
traveled, 566, 567
Brachiopods, 319, 321, 354
Cambrian, 344, 346, 348
Carboniferous, 424, 426, 440
Devonian, 416
Jurassic, 494
Ordovician, 374
Permian, 451
Silurian, 400
Triassic, 481
Brachiosaurus, 531
Breccia, 73, 206, 580
Brontosaurus, skeleton of, 496, 523,
524, 527
Bryophytes, 325
Bryozoa, 192, 198
in Silurian rock, 400
Buckling in railway track, Howard
Street, San Francisco, 240
Buffalo, 54
Buffon, Count, 590
Buhrstone, 75


Buttes, 128
Buttes, The Three Patriarchs, Mu-
kuntuweap National Monu-


ment, Utah, 259


INDEX


ALAMITES, 325
Calcite, 67, 303
Calcium and magnesium carbonates,
192


Calcium carbonate, 64, 112, 303
Calcium phosphate, 64
Cambrian fossils, 346
life, 344
outcrops in United States and
Canada, map of, 340
quartzite, 105, 345
rocks, 162, 206, 340-345, 568
distribution of, 339, 340
on Archean, 341, 344
system, 337-348
Camels, 55, 60
Canon Creek Canon, 215
Cañon of the Genesee River, Roch-
ester, New York, 397
of the Little Colorado River, 140
of the North Platte River, 425
of Snake River, Idaho, 133
Cape Lisburne, Alaska, palm leaves
from, 45
Carbon, 63
Carbon dioxide, 101, 104
Carbonates, 67, 192
Carbonic, see Carboniferous.
Carboniferous amphibians, 441
arthropods, 439
blastoids, 438
brachiopods, 424, 426, 440
coal beds in, 454
erinoids, 424, 438
echinoids, 439
floras, map showing regional dis-
tribution of, 443
fossils, 438, 434, 438
mollusks, 440
rock, outcrops of, in North Amer-
ica, map showing, 421, 427,
431
rocks, 96, 422-430
system, 420-441
distribution of, 421-435
plant life in, 435
vertebrates, 440
Caspian Sea, 42, 583
map of, 41
Cassowaries, 54
Castle Rock, South Dakota, 546
Catopterus vredfieldi, in Triassic
_sandstone, 482
Cave-in at Hollywood colliery, Hazle-
ton, Pennsylvania, 266
Cayman, 55
Cedar Butte, North Dakota, 493
Cement, Portland, 380
Cenozoic group, 289, 294, 537


INDEX


Vy aoe eek 58, ‘gh 320, 361, 362
retaceous, 5

Jurassic, toa

Permian, 451

Triassic, 481
Ceratodus, see Lungfish.
Chaleopyrite, 69
Chalk, 72, 196, 197, 323, 510
Challenger expedition, 58, 175, 322,

357, 646
Charcoal, 63
Chart showing geological distribu-
tion of chief vertebrates, 641

Chattanooga shales, 422
Chelonians of the Triassic, 483
Chemung rocks, 412, 413
Chert, 66, 75
Chief Mountain, 2, 625-628, 630, 631
Chimeroids, 495
Chimborazo, 210
Chitin, 303, 349
Chlorite, 67, 77
Chugwater formation, 130, 445, 446
Cirripeds, 317
Classification of fossiliferous rocks,


of invertebrates, 316
Clay, 74
and sandstone on limestone, 285
ironstone, 68, 275, 432
Cleavage, 64, 84, 228
Cliff, a fault, 91
of Benton limestone (Cretaceous),
507


of Devonian limestone, Yukon, 415
of Devonian rocks, Lake Erie, 414
of Niobrara (L. Cretaceous) lime-
stone, 503
of red beds of Chugwater forma-
tion, 446
of Washita limestone (L. Creta-
ceous), 505
showing contact line between Plio-
cene and Pleistocene beds, 565
showing Jurassic sandstone, 487
Climate, antediluvian, 682
change of, 582, 652
conditions indicated by coal de-
posits, 469
Clinton shales, 392
“Cloud-burst,” map of, 128
“Cloud-bursts,” 125
Clunian system, see Silurian.
Coal, 64, 71, 454
anthracite, 458
beds, amount of, 234
burning, 233-235
Carboniferous, 454
climatie conditions indicated by,
469


Al


condition of plant remains in,
467
Cretaceous, 454, 504
diagram of, New Castle, Colo-
rado, 235 .
Eocene, 547
in United States, map showing
distribution of, 455
kinds of plants in, 467
marine life in, 466
probable method of formation
of, 465
Tertiary, 454, 459
ney of how probably formed,
combustion in mines, 233
Measures, 42
Ceelenterates, 321, 381
“Coin-conglomerate,” a, 287
Colorado River, map of delta of, 148
Mexicala, Mexico, 138
Columbia River, terraces on the, 145
Columns, obsidian, 78
Comanchean series, 505
Compounds, iron, 102
Conception Bay, Newfoundland, 171
Concretions, 86, 111 `
Cone, an alluvial, 147
Conformity, 92, 619
deceptive, 96, 97
Conglomerate, Basal Wasatch, 97
Conifers, 52, 327
Consolidated Pleistocene gravel, 617
Continental glaciation, objections to
theory of, 162
pontine) shelf or border, 34, 174,
17


Contorted beds of Cretaceous, 501
Coprolites, 70
Coral polyps and their kin, 383
reefs, 192
Corals, 57, 180
anthozoan, in Jurassic, 493
colonial, 385
cup, 384
Devonian, 415, 417
Eocene, 547
fossil, 382
habitat of, 386
Silurian, 401
tabulate, 385
Triassic, 481
Cordillera, 255
Corundum, 66
Cosmogony, geology not a, 16, 202
Cotopaxi, 210, 255
Crab, horseshoe, in Jurassic, 493
Crabs, 58, 59, 317
Cracks, mud, 85
Crag-and-tail phenomena, 161


712


Crania, Cambrian, 348
Craters, engulfment, 212
Crayfish, 317
Creep, 232
Creeping which has broken down
shales, 264 `
Cretaceous areas of North America,
map of, 499
coal beds in, 454
formations, dinosaur beds in, 532,
533


invertebrate fossils, 515, 516

on Permian, 500

plants, 513, 514

rocks, 85, 493, 500-513, 517, 611,


620, 632
system, 471, 499-518
Crevasses, 158
Crinoids, 58, 180, 321, 388-390
Carboniferous, 424, 438
Jurassic, 491, 493
Permian, 451
Triassic, 481
Crocodile, 55, 496
Cro. Magnon, old man of, 702
Cross-bedding, 84, 177, 517
Crowsnest Mountain, Alberta, 277
Crustaceans, 58, 317, 481, 493
Cryptogams, 52
Crystal, 64
Culm, 420, 432
Cup corals, 384
Curie, Mme., 32
Current bedding, 177
Currents, ocean, 172
Cuttlefish, 362, 364
Cuvier, 537, 560, 595, 597, 598
Cycadofilices, in Carboniferous, 436
Cycads, 53, 326, 452, 468
Cyclora, 361
Cyclostomas, 315


AKOTA and Morrison
503, 611

sandstone, 502
Dana, James D., 604
Darkness in ocean depths, 57
Darwin, Charles, 307, 308, 601
Dawson, Sir William, 693
St sandstone, South Dakota,


strata,


Death Valley, California, 120
Decapods, 317, 498
“Deceptive conformity,” 620, 624
Deep-sea animals with the coals, 437
Deer, 55
Dehydration, 101
De la Beche, 651
Delta of the Colorado, 148

of the Mississippi, 301

of the Nile, 146


INDEX


Deltas, 147
Deposits, ancient and modern, 19-21
made partly by stranded ice, 153
ocean, 175, 176, 183
siliceous, 198
Tertiary gold gravel, 273
Desert, 49, 123
conditions peculiar to our age, 116
“Devil’s Tower,” The, Crook County,
Wyoming, 219
Devonian brachiopods, 416
corals, 417
Echinodermata, 416
eurypterids, 416
fauna, 418
fishes, 417
graptolites, 415
invertebrates, 415
Mollusca, 416
on Silurian, 621-624
ostracoderm, a, 198
outcrops in North America, map
of, 411
rocks, 108, 412-416
system, 409-419
distribution of, 409-414
life in, 414
Diabase dikes, 227
Diagram across the Rhine valley,
showing Mesozoic, Tertiary,
and Pleistocene rocks, 637
of coal beds at New Castle, Colo-
rado, 235
`of Mount Turtle, Frank, British
Columbia, 101
of ocean currents, 173
of the Grand Mesa, Colorado, 234
of “up-side-down” conditions at
Glarus, Switzerland, 635
to illustrate conditions necessary
for geyser action, 222
to ape evolution of the horse,
to illustrate faulting, 86
to illustrate inequalities of earth’s
surface, 36
to illustrate migration of a sand
dune, 117
to illustrate unconformity, 90
to Eee velocity of a stream,


to illustrate “wandering of the
pole,” 243, 684
Diagrammatic view of
Helgoland, 169
Diamond, 63
Diastrophism, 238, 245 °
Diatom ooz; 57, 185, 186, 199, 200,
Diatomaceous earth, 200, 201
Diatoms, siliceous, in quarries, 200


island of


INDEX


Dike, fractured basic, in crystalline
limestone, 2
sandstone, in Protoceras beds, 272
see Lava.
Dikes, diabase, 227
“Diluvial theory,” 297
Dinantian (Mississippian)
stones, 426
see Carboniferous.
Dinichthys, 418
Dinornis, 54
Dinosaurs, 60, 517, 519, 520, 523, 528
armored, 525
beds of, 532-534
extinction of, 533
food of, 531
Jurassic, 496
size of, 529
size of brain of, 526
Diorite, 77
Dip, 86, 89, 93
Diplodocus, skeleton of, 496
Diplomystus, 22, 313
Diplurus, 482
Dipnoans, 55, 314, 315, 451, 495
Disconformity, 95
Dismal Swamp, 188
Distorted Miocene shales, 554
Distributaries, 147
Dodo, 55
Doldrums, 115
Dolerite, 77
Dolomite, 68, 72, 73, 112, 196
Beekmantown, 367
“Dolomites, The,” 199
Downthrow, 89
Drift beds, 21
Drift material, 567
“Driftless Area,” Wisconsin, 568
“Drowned valleys,” 251
Drumlin, 157, 158, 160
Dubois, Dr. Eugene, 694
Duckbill, 53
Dunes, sand, 117, 118
Dwyka bowlder clay at Prieska,
Africa, 449


EFEARIB as a planet, 27
diatomaceous, 200, 201
form, size, density, rigidity of, 30
general features of, 27
ae of the surface of, 33-


lime-


ia engl mountains caused by,


organic features of, 45

55 of land and water, 33

underground heat of, 31
See crack filled with sand,


Messina, 243


713


Mino-Owari, 242
owe Missouri, 238, 239,


San Francisco, 239, 249
Earthquakes, 238
ancient, 244
Echinoderms, 58, 179, 320, 381, 382,
386, 3


Carboniferous, 438, 439
Devonian, 416
Ordovician, 372
Edentates, 55
Eggs of feathered giants, 312
Elasmobranchs, 404
Elasmosaurus, see Plesiosaur.
Elephant, 54, 55, 60
fossil of the Pleistocene, 573
skeleton of imperial, 578
tusk found in Alaska, 573
Elephas primigenius, 304, 572, 573
Emery, 66
Endoceras, Ordovician
sil,” 377
Energy versus time, 674
Environmental factors, 46
Eocene, fauna of the, 546
flora of the, 546
formations, 544-547, 616
mammal, skeleton of, 655
mammals, 547
nummulites characteristic of, 545
series, 542
Epicontinental seas, 176
Epidosite, 77
Epiornis, 55
Epiric seas, 176
Equiseta, 52, 325
Erosion, contemporaneous, 73
following removal of forest cover,
114


“index fos-


forms in Dakota sandstone, Okla-
homa, 506 a:
gullies in Lafayette formation


(Pliocene), 556
in arid regions, 125
mountains of, 128, 129, 255, 258
remnant, Algonkian, 630
Cambrian sandstone, 340
Dakota sandstone (L. Creta-
ceous), 502
Ordovician on Tertiary, 633
Erosive power of moving water, 131
Esker, 159-161
Estuary, 149
Ethiopian region, 55
Etna volcano, 217, 226
Eurypterids, 59, 317
Devonian, 416
Permian, 451
Silurian, 400


714


Eurypterus mansfieldi, 440
Eutaw formation (U. Cretaceous),


8
Evolution doctrine, the, 600
of the horse, 562
Exfoliation of granite, illustration
of, 98
“Extinct species,” 638


ACTS and theories concerning
scientific methods, 661
Falls of the Zambesi, 141, 142
Fault, 89
and dike, 373
a nearly vertical, 92
Faulting, diagram to illustrate, 86
Fauna, molluscan, 60
of the Devonian, 418
of the Eocene, 546
Feldspars, the, 66, 75, 77, 104, 106
Felsites, 77, 216
Fence offset, San Francisco earth-
quake, 242
Fern, a flowering, 452
a fossil, 190, 434, 438
Ferns, 52, 326
Ferrel’s law, 173
Fin Rock and Cape Blanco, Oregon,
554


Fire clay, 456
Fishes, 313
armored, 406
Cretaceous, 517
Devonian, 417
Eocene, 547
Jurassic, 495
Silurian, 401
Triassic, 482
vertebrate, 55, 59
Flags, 83
Flint, 66
Flood, acknowledging a, 644
illustration of the effects of a, 150
methods of investigation of a, 644
Flora, Carboniferous, map showing
distribution of, 443
Eocene, 546
Gondwana, 450
Jurassic, 489
Permian, 450
map showing distribution of,
444
Triassic and Jurassic. map show-
ing distribution of, 478
1 style of bedding,
TT


Fold, anticlinal, in sandstone and
shales, 87, 96
anticline, in Ordovician shales, 268
Folding and cleavage, 94
probable causes of, 263


INDEX


Folds or flexures, 89
Foraminifera, 57, 322
Carboniferous, 437
Eocene, 547
Jurassic, 492
Permian, 451
Foraminiferal ooze, 183
Formation of coal beds, probable
method of, 465
theory of, 458
Formations in Alberta and Montana,


Fossil corals, 382
crinoids, 390
cuttlefish, 364
definition of, 302
ferns, 190, 434, 438
fishes, 403
hunting, 534
ivory, 304, 581
mammoths, 573
palm leaf, in sandstone block, 299
radiates, 381, 383
radiolarians, 323
reptiles, 519, 531
shells, 354
skeleton of man, 287
“Fossil Hickory Nuts,” 438
Fossiliferous deposits, unity of the,
677
Fossilization, conditions favoring,
300
Fossils, 17, 24, 69
and their use in geology, 297
Cambrian, 346
Carboniferous, 433, 434, 438
chronological order of, 610
circumstances under which they
occur, 643
conditions in which found, 647
Cretaceous invertebrate, 515, 516
Devonian, 417
historical order of, 676
index, 298, 300
Jurassic invertebrate, 490
Miocene, 553
Ordovician, 370
Pliocene, 559
preservation of, 649
Silurian, 398-401
Tertiary, 558, 559
tree, 327
Triassic invertebrate, 480, 481
vertebrate, conditions in which


found, 650
how recovered, 535
Fountain formation (Pennsylva-


nian) on granite, 422
Fractured basic dike in crystalline
limestone, 261


INDEX


Frank, British Columbia, 100
Fresh-water swamps, 188
Frustule, 199

Fucoids, 57

Fumaroles, 222

Fungi, 324

Puente 435-437


ABBRO, 7
Galena,
dolomite, 369
Gangue, 271
Ganoids, 55, 59, 314, 407
Carboniferous, 440
Jurassic, 495
Triassic, 482
Garden of the Gods, gateway to, 124
Garnet, 66, 77
Gar pike, 55, 314
Gas, 71
wells, 379
Gastropods, 58, 318, 360
Cambrian, 346
Jurassic, 494
Triassic, 481
Geanticline, 90
Gem Glacier, 155
Genesee shales, 411
Geodes, 86
Geologic section across
River, 696
section where Heidelberg jaw was
found, 698
Geological Tasso the atmosphere as
a, 11
map of Southwestern England and
part of France, 511
terms, meaning of, 292
Geology, a brief history of, 587
ç the Greeks and Romans,
87
definition of, 15
divisions of, 25, 26
dynamical, 99
former methods of interpretation
of, 16
inductive, two f ages of, 281
physiographic, 2
in post-Reformation period, 588
stratigraphical, 277, 282
structural, 63
theoretical, 587 :
unique position of, among the sci-
ences, 609
Geosyncline, 90
Geyser, 222
action, diagram to illustrate, 222
Geyserite, 66, 75
Gibbon, 55
Gibraltar, the rock of,
Ginkgo trees, 50, 53, 308, 481, 485,
486, 489, 491, 532, 547


the Solo


715


Giraffe, 55

“Glacial Age,” 585

“Glacial phenomena,” 159

Glacial series, see Quaternary sys-


tem.
“Glacial striæ,” 163
Glacier, 154


Glacier National Park, Montana,


Glaciers, movement of, 157

Glauconite, or green earth, 67

Glarus, Switzerland, diagram of
“up-side-down” conditions at,
635

Glen Cañon of the Colorado River,


134
Globigerina ooze, 57, 183, 184
Glossopteris browniana, 451
Glyptodon clavipes, 576
Glyptodonts, 60
Gneiss, 71, 75, 76
Gondwana flora, 450
series, 489
Gorges, 140
Goriila, 55
Grand nen of the Colorado, 139,
2


Granite, 66, 71, 75
Exfoliation of, 98
gneissoid, 332
intrusions, parallel to mica gneiss,
74
Graph showing migration of the
north pole, 243, 684
Graphite, 63, 331
Graptolites, 384
Cambrian, 344, 346
Devonian, 415
Ordovician, 371
Graywacke, 74, 338
Great Barrier Reef of Australia, 45,
194
Great Basin, 41, 659
map of, 40
Great Pyramid, cut from cliff of
Cretaceous limestone, 512
Green mud, 181
Greensand, 181
Grinnell Glacier, 155
Grit, 73
Groovings, 86
Guano, 64, 70
Gulf of Santorin, 209
Gypsum, 68, 110
beds, Silurian, 402


HABITATS of plants and animals,
51

Half Dome and Royal Arches, Yo-
semite Valley, 98

Hamilton fauna, Devonian, 418


716


Hardness of minerals, scale of, 65
Hart Mountain, Wyoming, 632
Hatteria, 54
Hawaii, map of, 211
Hawaiian volcanoes, 210, 257
Heat, causes of underground, 229
chemical action of, 231
effect and causes of, 224
sources of, 230
Heidelberg Castle, Germany, 448
jaw, 697
Helderberg limestone, 412
Helgoland, ie aa of, 168-170
Hematite, 69,
“Heroic Age,” 501
Hertwig, Richard, 696
Hills of Cretaceous strata, west of
Bisbee, Arizona, 509
Hillside creep ae surface strata, 232
Hippopotamus, 5
Hogback, near Cañon City, Colorado,


Pe. 66

Hornblendite, 77

Hooke, Robert, 588

Horse, domestic, 59

diagram presenting evolution of

the, 562

Horsetail, a modern, 324

House Range, Utah, 9

Howorth, H. H., 570, 652

Humboldt, Alexander von, 594

Humming birds, 55

Huxley, Thomas Henry, 665

Hydration, 101

Hydromica schist, 75

Hyena, 55

Hypnum, 188


[cE as a geological agent, 152
deposits made partly by, illustra-
tion of,
lake, 152
ramparts, 153
river, 152
Icebergs, 155, 157
Ichthyosaurs, 521
Jurassic, 495
Impressions, raindrop, 85
Index fossils, 298, 300, 349, 481, 494,
516, 547
how used, 298
Inkfish, living European, 363
Insects, 316
Jurassic, 493
Permian, 451
Triassic, 481
“Interglacial” beds, see Inter-tillite.
Interior basins, 39
Inter-tillite beds, 568


INDEX


Intrusion, mountains of, 257
Intrusive sheets of igneous rock, 225
Invertebrates, 315, 650
classification of, 316
Cretaceous, 515, 516
Devonian, 415
Jurassic, 490-492
Miocene, 553
Permian, 451
Pliocene, 559
Silurian, 398
Triassic, 481
Iron bacteria, 111
carbonate, 103
compounds, 102
ores, 109, 192
pyrite, 188
sulphide, 102
Ischypterus micropterus, in Triassic
sandstone, 482
Ivory, fossil, 304, 581
OINTING, vertical, illustrations
of, 105, 107, 108
Jupiter Serapis, ruins of the temple
of, 244, 248
Jura Mountains, 260
Jurassic arthropods, 493
belemnites, 487, 494
cephalopods, 494
crinoids, 491, 493
flora, 489
floras, map showing distribution
of, 478
formation in go 494
“index fossils” of,
invertebrate fossils, “790-492
limestone, 489
mammals, 496
mollusks, 492
odlite, microscopic section of, 494
reptiles, 495
rocks in North America,
showing, 485
sandstone, 132
“Casa Colorado,” 488
on Carboniferous, 486
with Triassic and Permian for-
mations, 487
system, 472, 484-498
distribution of, 484, 488
life of, 489
vertebrates, 495


JAMES, 160
Kangaroos, 53
Kaolinite, 67, 105
Kaolinization, 106
Karoo beds of South Africa, 448,
452, 479, 489


map


INDEX


Keith, Professor Arthur, 693, 702
Kilauea volcano, 210-212
Knowlton, F. H., 470

Krakatoa Island, 213, 224


ABARGE MOUNTAIN, Uinta
County, Wyoming, 344
Labradorite, 66, 77
La Brea formation, 577
Labyrinth Cañon, of the Green
River, Wyoming, 123
Laccolith, section of, 224
Laccolithic monument, 219
Lafayette sands (Pliocene) on Cre-
taceous, 555
Lake Bonneville, 41, 121
old shore line of, 581-583 '
“Lake Iriquois” shore line, section


91,
Lake Lahontan, 41
Lamarck, J. B. de, 307, 599, 600
Lamellibranchia, see Pelecypods.
Laminz, contorted, 88 m
Lamprophyre (mica-trap) dike, 226
Lancelet, 315
Land and water, changes of, 656
Laterite, 106
Lava, 77, 226
acidic and basic, 216 L
cascades, Kilauea, Hawaii, 212
fields, region of Columbia and
Snake rivers, 224
intrusive, 226 ,
obsidian, pumice, and scoria, qis
Law of conformable stratigraphic
sequence, 296, 637 š
Layer of basalt, Cañon Creek Cañon,
Idaho, 215 :
Layers of rock, laminated, massive,
and shaly, 83 3
Leaf fossil of the gingko (Ginkgo)
tree, 48
Lehmann and Füchsel, 589
Lemurs, 55, 59
Lepidodendrons, 326
Lepidosiren, 55, 59, 315
Lichens, 324 2
Life, degeneracy of plant and ani-
mal,
its geological effects, 187 |
Lignite coal mine, general view of,
457


Lime, 72

Limestone, 72
ancient, 202
blue banded crinoidal, 94
brecciated, 206
conglomerate, 206 | °
erystalline, hydraulie, magnesian,

massive, 72

dolomitic, 196


46


TLL


nummulitic, 197, 203

slab, fossiliferous, 281

stratified, 203

striated, laid bare by wave action,


Limonite, 68, 69, 102, 103, 109, 192
in mine cut, face of, 274

Limuloids, 317

Limulus, or king crab, 59, 317

Linguals, Paleozoic, 347, 348

Lion, 54, 55

Lithic “gm. Silurian system,


9
Little Missouri River, Cretaceous
formations by, 508
lance formation (Cretaceous), 511
Littoral zone, 57
Llama, 53, 60
Llanos, 49
Loadstone, 69
Location of volcanoes, 220
Loess, 74
banding in, 118
deposits, North China, 119
fossils of, 121
Logan, Sir William, 328
Log-bearing beds, “Petrified Forest,”
Arizona; 476
Long’s Peak trail, 47
Lorelei Rock, 416
Louisville limestone, 395
Lower Banff series, 424
Cambrian quartzites, Inyo County,
California, 345
Silurian, see Ordovician.
Ludlow system, see Silurian.
Lungfishes, 55, 61, 315, 406, 418
characteristic of the Triassic, 482
Lycopods, 52, 326
Lyell, Sir Charles, 537, 600
Lyre birds, 54


MACNAMARA, 696, 702
Madison limestone, 424, 634

Magmas, 216, 227
Magnesian limestone, 68, 72
Magnetic iron ore, 69
Magnetite, 69
Malaspina Glacier, 157
Mammals, 312

Eocene, 547, 655

Jurassic, 496

marsupial, 53

Miocene, 553

Pliocene, 560
Mammoth, 304

skeleton of, 572
Mammoth Hot Springs, 221
Man, antiquity of, 693, 704

first appearance of, 653
Manganite, 69


718


Mangrove marshes, 187
Manitou limestone, 370
Man, origin and antiquity of, 693
Map of a “cloud burst,” 128
of area of San Francisco earth-
quake, 241
of Caspian Sea and vicinity, 41
of delta of the Colorado River, 148
of delta of the Mississippi River,
301
of delta of the Nile River, 146
of Great Basin, 40
of Hawaii, 211
of locality where Pithecanthropus
erectus was discovered, 695
of North Carolina coast, 167
of part of west coast of Norway,
166
of southwestern Wyoming and
Northern Utah, 541
of Strait of Sunda, East Indies,
213
showing distribution of Carbonif-
erous floras, 443
of Jurassic rocks in North
America, 485
of oceanic dozes, 182
of Ordovician rocks in North
America, 366
of Permian floras, 444
of Triassic and Jurassic floras,
478
of Triassic rocks in North
America, 472
showing exposures of Archean or
Primitive rocks in North
America, 330
of Cretaceous rocks of North
America, 499
showing general distribution of
coal beds in the United States,
455
showing lava fields in region of
Columbia and Snake rivers,
224
showing outcrops of Cambrian
rocks in the United States
and Canada, 340
of Carboniferous rocks of North
America, 431
of Devonian rocks of North
America, 411
of “earlier” Tertiary rocks in
North America, 539
of “later” Tertiary rocks in
North America, 551
of Lower Carboniferous rocks in
North America, 421
of Permian rocks in North
America, 442


INDEX


of Silurian rocks in North
America, 393
of Upper Carboniferous rocks in
North America, 427
showing position and extent of
fault-line, San Francisco
earthquake, 241
showing submerged channel, Hud-
son River, 250
Marble, 73, 380
Marcasite, 102
Marine deposits, 175
remains mixed up with coal, 466
Marks, ripple, 85
Marl, 67; 12
Marshes, 187
Marsupials, 53, 54, 60, 312
Masses, lenticular, 82
Mastodon americanus, 574
skeleton of, 304
Mastodon giganteus, skeleton of, 288
Matanuska River, 137
Materials, organically formed, 69
Matterhorn, 633
Matthew, Dr. W. D., 530
Mauna Loa voleano, 210
Maximus Chapel, Pleistocene
gravels, Austria, 618
Mediterraneans, 44
Megatherium, skeleton of, 311
Megatheriums, 60, 575
Mendel, 60
Mendel’s laws, 46
Mer de Glace Glacier, Chamonix Val-
ley, Switzerland, 154
Mesa, 128
capped by Niobrara limestone (L.
Cretaceous), 504
near Acoma, New Mexico, 429
Mesozoic group, 293, 471, 472
rocks, fossils found in, 354
Messina earthquake, 243
Metamorphism, 226, 228
Methods, scientific, 661
Micas, the, 66, 75
peer section of Jurassic odlite,


view of white chalk, 196
Millepores, 192
Miller, Hugh, 409, 410
Millstone Grit, 420
Mine, eet general view of a lignite,


Mineral, color of, not reliable means
of identification, 65
hardness of, useful means of iden-
tification, 65
matter in coal, 455
Ridge, Nevada, 239


INDEX


streak of, means of identification,
65


Minerals and rocks, 63
ee, and simple combinations
o ,
the chief rock-making, 64
Mino-Owari earthquake, 242
Miocene formations, 553, 554, 617
‘series, distribution of, 550
Mississippi River, delta of, 301
pasar carried in suspension in,
13


solutions carried in, 138
Mississippian (Carboniferous), dis-
tribution of, 421
limestone, 428
Mississippian, see Carboniferous.
Modern methods of interpretation, 24
Moisture an environmental factor, 46
Mollusca, 55, 58, 179, 318, 357
Carboniferous, 440
Devonian, 416
Jurassic, 492
Ordovician, 374, 378
Triassic, 481
Molluscoids, see Brachiopoda.
Mollusk, structure of, 357
Monkey, 55
Monocline, 90
Monotremes, 53
Monte Nuovo, 210
Moors, the, 187
Moraines, 158 4
Moropus, Oligocene and Miocene of
North America, 550
Morrison series, 487
Comanche and Dakota formations,
488
Mosasaurs, 516, 522
Mount Gould, Glacier National Park,
9


27
Lassen, 218
large rock washed from crater
of, 156 :
Pelée, Martinique, West Indies,
21
Shasta, 208, 255 )
Stephen, British Columbia, 342


fossil hunting on, 343 f
Turtle, Frank, British Columbia,
101


Mountain Limestone, 420
making, 255, 657
friction attending, 231
range, assigning dates for, 262
system, 255
Mountains, block, 258
caused by earth movements, 258
classification of, 255
complex, 260
folded, 258, 260


719


of erosion, 128, 255, 258
of intrusion, 257
three classes of, with respect to
origin, 35
Mud, blue and red, 181
Muir Glacier, 157
“Mummies,” Siberian, 304
Murchison, Roderick Impey, 339, 409
Muscovite, 66
Mylodon robustus, 575
Myriapods, 316


“NAPLES fauna,” 411
Natural arch showing consoli-
vi Eocene conglomerate,
Natural bridge in consolidated Mio-
cene shales, 617
Natural Bridge, Virginia, 374
Nautilus, pearly, 58, 320, 362
Neanderthal skull, 699
Nebular hypothesis, 28
objections to, 29, 30
Necks, see Lava.
Neuropteris clarksoni, 437
Névé, 154
New Madrid earthquake, 239, 253
New Red Sandstone, 471
Niagara Falls, 143, 395
Gorge, bird's-eye view of, 143
series, limestones of, 393
Nile, map of delta of, 146
Nitrates, 64
Nitrogen, 64
North Carolina coast, map of, 167
Norway, map of part of west coast
of, 166
Nubian sandstone (Cretaceous), 513
Nullipores, 112, 180, 192, 324
Nummulites, 197, 323, 545
Nummulitic limestone, 512, 545


OCEAN, the, and its work, 165
bottom, 34
currents, 172
diagram of, 173
deposits, 175
depth of, 33, 34
ozoic or lifeless zone in, 56
Ocher, red, 69
yellow, 69
Octopus, 362
On, 71
in Ordovician system, 377
wells, 379
Okefenokee Swamp, 188
Old man of Cro Magnon, 702
Old Red Sandstone, 409
Old shore line and beach of Lake
Bonneville, 581-583
Oligocene formation, 272, 548, 549


720


series, distribution of, 548
Onion coats, biological, 662
Onion-coat theory, 17

modern, 594
Onondaga limestone, 410
Odlites, 72, 86, 112, 471, 494
Oölitic limestone swicified, 495
Ooze, diatom, 57, 185, 186

foraminiferal, 188

globigerina, 57, 183

pteropod, 184, 185

radiolarian, 58, 184, 323
Oozes, oceanic, distribution of, 182


pal, 65

Ophicalcite, 77

Opossum, woolly, 59, 60

Orang-utan, 55

Ordovician Arthropoda, 372
brachiopods, 374
Echinodermata, 372
economic products, 377
fossils, 370
graptolites, 371


limestones and shales faulted
against M. Ordovician sand-
stone, 373


marbles, 380
Mollusca, 374, 378
overlying Tertiary, 633
plants, 371
rocks, 268, 281, 368-374
classification of, 365
distribution of, in North
America, map of, 366
life in, 369
sponges, 375
system, 365-380
trilobites, 376
Ore, 270
blackband, 432
deposit, 270
occurrence of, 270
Ores, bedded, 273
iron, 192
Organic deposits on the continental
shelf, 178
Oriental region, 54
ruby, 66
Oriskanian series, 410
Oriskany sandstone, 412
Orthoclase, 66, 77
Coben re Henry Fairfield, 534,
Osteoglossids, 60
Ostracoderm, 198, 405, 418
Ostrich, 55
Outcrop, dip, and strike, 86, 88, 89
“Outlier,” “Casa Colorado,” of La
Plata sandstone, 488
n. 4 Aa 22 of dinosaurs,


INDEX


Oxen, 55

Oxide, ferric, 102
ferrous, 102, 192

Oxides, 63, 69, 102

Oxygen, 63, 101

Oysters, 58, 318, 516


ALASARCTIC or Eurasian re-
gion, 56
Paleocene series, 540
distribution of, 540
Paleogeography, 674
Paleontological breaks, 673
Paleontology, 298
Paleozoic group, 293, 337
linguals, 347, 348
on cretaceous, 277
rocks, fossils found in, 354
Palermo breccias, 580
Palisades of the Hudson, base of, 474
Palm in Tertiary formations, 561
sago, 326
Pampas, 49
“Parallel roads” (terraces) of Glen
Roy, Scotland, 572
Parrots, 54
Pearly nautilus, 58, 320, 362
Peat, 71, 189
Peat-bog theory, 458
Pelagic species, 57
Pelecypods, 318, 359
Cambrian, 346
Cretaceous, 516
Pelée voleano, 214, 216
Pennsylvanian, composed of Zuni
sandstone, 429 š
rocks, distribution of, 426
see Carboniferous.
Perched bowlders, 161, 162
Permian ammonoids, amphibians,
brachiopods, and cephalopods,


flora, 450
map showing regional distribu-
tion of, 444
invertebrates, 451
outcrop of rocks in North America,
map showing, 442
reptiles, 452
rocks, 163, 170, 447, 450
_System, 442-453
distribution of, 443, 445
vertebrates, 451
Permian-Jurassic 130,
445, 446
Toae ee plants, 325,


formation,


“Petrified Forest,” Arizona, 475-477
Phalangers, 53

Phosphate mine, 70

Phosphates, 68, 202


INDEX


horus, 64
Pie seig 55
Pies, restoration of giant, 552
Pike, 55, 59, 314
Piltdown skull, 698
Pithecanthropus erectus, 560, 694
Placers, see Ores, bedded.
Plain, eroded y the sea, 93
Plains, flood, 145
Plan of the Falls of the Zambesi, 142
Planetesimal hypothesis, 30
Plant kingdom, 323
general view of, 306
life, Cretaceous, 513, 514
geological effect of, 187
Jurassic, 489
Ordovician, 371


Plants and animals, distinction be-
tween,
geologic importance of, 45
material furnished by, 207
Permo-Carboniferous, 325, 439
thallus, 324
variation of, 62
Plaster of Paris, 68
Platyceras primævum, 347
Pleistocene bowlders, traveled, char-
acteristic of, 566
deposits, occurrence of, 565, 575
fossil mammoths, 573
life of, 577
on Cretaceous, 569, 585
on Pliocene, 565
e rocks, 144, 566, 617, 618
series, 564-586
Plesiosaur, 517, 521
Plicated ae Mineral Ridge, Ne-
vada, 2
Pliocene eed, 556
on Cretaceous, 555
series, distribution of, 556
Polyps, coral, 192
Polypterus, 59, 314
Porcelanite, 77
Porphyry, red, 77
Port Jackson shark, 314
Portage series, 411
Portland cement, 380
Post-Tertiary series, see Quaternary
system.
Potash, 77
Potholes, or kettles, 161
Potsdam sandstone, 342
Powell, Major John Wesley, 298
Prairies, 49
Pre-Cambrian rocks, 328
Primary rocks, see Cenozoic group.
Primitive rocks, 329
Productus giganteus, 426


721


Proterozoic rocks, map of, 330
“Protoceras sandstone” (U Oligo-
cene), South Dakota, 549

Protopterus, 815

Protozoans, 322

Pterichthes, 407, 418, 419

Pteridophyta, 52, 325

Pterodactyle, 521, 522

Pteropod ooze, 184, 185

Pteropods, 58, 202, 318, 361
modern shell-bearing, 184

Pterosaurs, 522

Pudding stone, 73

Pumice, 77

Pyrite, 68, 102

Pyroxene, 67

Pyroxenite, 77


UARRIES in Württemberg, Ger-
many, fossils in, 521
near Lompoc, California, 200
Quarry, Holzmaden, Württemberg,
Germany, 494
Quartz, 64, 65
syenite, 77
Quartzite, 75
horizontal Cambrian, 105
Quaternary, see Cenozoic group.
system, 564-586
Quicklime, 72


ADIATES, fossil, 381
Radioactivity, 33, 231
Radiolaria, 58, 322, 323, 492
Radiolarian ooze, 184, 198, 323
Rainbow Bridge, San Juan County,
Utah, 132
Rainfall, the, 123
Red Beds, 444
clay, 186
mud, 181
Rock Pass, 40
Reduction, 101
Redwood, 327
Reef, barrier, 192-194
fringing, 192, 193
Reefs, coral, 192
Reelfoot Lake, Tennessee, 238
Region, Australian, 53
Ethiopian, 55
Nearctic, 55
Oriental, 54
Palearctic or Eurasian, 56
South American or Neotropical, 55
Regions, biological, 53
Reptiles, 54, 55, 313
Cretaceous, 517
Eocene, 547
flying, 496
fossil, 519


722,


Jurassic, 495, 496

marine, 521

Permian, 452

Triassic, 483
Restoration of giant pigs, 552
Restorations of dinosaurs, 519, 520
Rhinoceroses, 54, 55, 60
Rhizopods, 57
Ripple marks in Medina sandstone,

398


on sandstone, Berea, Ohio, 399
Rivers, constructive work of, 145
Rock, amphibolite, epidosite, garnet,

hornblendite, pyroxenite, and
tourmalite, 77

igneous, intrusive sheets of, 225

jasper, 75

large hot, washed from crater of

Mount Lassen, 156

masses, 81

stratified, 81

split by growth of a tree, 309
Rocks, Algonkian, 329, 332

aluminous, 77

Archean, 329

calcareous, 70, 72

carbonaceous, 71

characters of the stratified, 20

conglomerate, 73

constituents of, table showing, 79

crystalline, 71, 75

definition of “different terms de-

scriptive of, 83

descriptions of, 72

detritus, 71

feldspar, soda-lime, 77

folding, probable causes of, 263

fossiliferous, classification of, 295

fragmental, 71

not calcareous, 73
hydrous magnesian and aluminous,


kinds of, table showing, 80
magnesium, 77
massive, 83
metamorphic, 71
phosphatic, 70
Pre-Cambrian, 328
primitive, 329
pudding stone, 73
schistose, 332
siliceous, 70, 75
stratified, 71, 81, 305
systems of, 284
transition, 338
Triassic, kinds of, 473
without feldspar, 77

Ruins of temple of Jupiter Serapis,

244, 248
Run-off, the, 123


INDEX


GABER-TOOTH tiger, 579
Salt beds in Permian, 444
common, 110
in Silurian, 402
San Andreas Rift, 241
San Francisco earthquake, 239, 242,
249
Sand and gravel, Cretaceous, 286
Sandstone, 73
arch in, Arizona, 247
block containing a large fossil, 299
dike in Protoceras beds, 272
laminated, 83
ripple marks on, 399
Sapphire, 66
Schematic representation of direc-
tion of ocean currents, 39
Schist, hydromica, 75
mica, 75
Schists, chlorite, 77
taleose, 77
Schwagerina verbecki, Carbonic, 436,
438
Scoria, 77
Scorpions, in Silurian system, 401
Scouring rush, see Horsetail.
Sea butterflies, 202
cliff on the south shore of Helgo-
land, 170
urchins, 58
Carboniferous, 439
Jurassic, 493
Triassic, 481
Sea-caves, ancient, 246
Seas, epicontinental or epiric, 176
Seaweeds, 57 `
Secondary rock, see Cenozoic group.
Section of great bar of old “Lake
Primigi shore line, Ontario,
of the Dwyka bowlder clay, 449
Sectional diagram through Horse-
shoe Falls, Niagara, 396
Sedgwick, the Rev. Adam, 338, 409
Sedimentation theory, 463
Sediments, abrading actions of, 150
Seismograph, 245
Selachians, 314
Sequoia gigantea, 327
sempervirens, 327
Serpentine, 67, 77
Seward Glacier, 157
Shad tamily, diplomystus, a member
of,
Shale, 73
Shales broken down by creeping, 264
Shallow-water deposits, 176
Shark, Port Jackson, 314
Sharks, 59, 314, 405
Carboniferous, 424, 440
Devonian, 418


INDEX


Jurassic, 495
Shark's tooth, 283
Shellfish, 179
true, see Mollusca.
Shells, fossil, 354
“Ship Rock” (Oligocene), South Da-
kota, 548
Shore-line deposits, 176
Siberian “mummies,” 304, 580
Siderite, 68, 103, 109, 192
Sierra Nevada range, 256
Sigillaria, 326
Silica, 64, 65, 70
Silicates, 64, 66, 67
Silicon, 64
Silt, 74
Silurian fossils, 398-401
outcrops of, in North America,
map of, 393
rocks, 87, 394, 395, 397, 398
“extinct” species in, 402
fossil life in, 398
remnant of ripple mark in, 398
salt and gypsum in, 402
system, 392-402
classification of, 392
distribution of, 396
Siluro-Devonian fossils, 417
Skeleton of allosaurus, mounted, 522
of American mastodon, 574
of Brontosaurus and Diplodocus,
496
of Brontosaurus,
524, 527
of Eocene mammal, 655
of horse (L. Miocene), 553
of imperial elephant, Los Angeles,
578


mounted, 523,


of mammoth, 572
of Mastodon giganteus, 288
of Megatherium, 311
Skull of the “old man” of Cro Mag-
non, 701, 702
Skulls, artificial arrangement of, to
teach origin of man, 694
in American Museum of Natural
History, New York City, 703
Slab of dark red Tennessee marble,
380
Slate, 83
argillite and siliceous, 75
Sloths, 55
Smith, William, 595
Snails, 55
Snake River, cafion of, 133
Snow line, 48, 153
Soapstone, 67, 77
Solfataras, 222
Soufriere, 214


723
South American or Neotropical re-
gions, 55
Species, 308


aquatic, 56
azoic or lifeless, 56
pelagic, 57
problem in distribution of, 59
Spencer, Herbert, 663
Spermatophytes, 327
Sphagnum, 188, 189, 325
Sphalerite, 69
Sphenodon, 54
Sphinx, the, 512
Spiral Nebula, 28
Spirifer striatus, 426
Sponges, 58, 192, 322
in Jurassic beds, 492
Ordovician, 371, 375
Spy, skeletons found at, 700
Squid, 320, 362
Stalactite, 72
Stalagmite, 72
Stanton, Dr. T. W., 299
Starfishes, 58, 387
Jurassic, 493
Stassfurt deposits, 110
Steatite, 67, 77
Stegosauria, 525
Steppes, 49
Storms, dust, 115
Strait or eta East Indies, map of,


Strata, alternations of, Utah, 683
nacoo, effects of denudation on,


examples of reverse order of, 632
fractured and displaced, 87,,88
order of arrangement of, 97
original positions of, 86
positions and conditions of, 82
thickness of, 20
tilted, Blue Creek Cañon, Okla-
homa, 257
unconsolidated, 267
Stratified limestone, 203
Stream, a degrading, 139
an aggrading, 137, 139
Striæ, 86
“glacial,” 163
Strike, 89
curving, 93
Stromboli volcano, 217, 221
Structure, banded, slaty, and stratic-
ulate, 83
columnar, 78
hae tp and flow-and-plunge,


724


Sturgeon, 55, 59, 314
Suess, Eduard, 252, 464
Sulphates, 64, 68
Sulphides, 68
Sulphur, 64
Summit Hill mine, 233
Mountain, 333, 334
Superposition, 672
Sus (pig), 55
Swamps, fresh-water, 188
Syenite, 77
Syncline, 90
appearance of, 266
in Carboniferous limestone, 423
strata at the ending of a, 93
Syringopora, 322


TABLE, scale of hardness of min-
erals, 65

Tale, 67

Talus, 114

Tapir, 55, 60

“Teapot Rock,” near Green River
Station, Wyoming, 126

Teeth of mastodon and elephant, 574

Teleosts, 314, 408

Temperature, an environmental fac-


tor, 46
Terraces, 145, 572
and shore line of former Lake
Bonneville, 582
Columbia River, 145
Glen Roy, Scotland, 572
gravel-capped, Utah, 584
Lake Bonneville, 121
Yakima River, 144
Tertiary, coal beds in, 454
coal, New Mexico, 459
“earlier” rocks in North America,
map showing outcrops of, 539
Eocene of the, see Eocene.
formations, consolidation of, 540
fossils, 558, 559, 561
general view of a coal mine in, 457
“later” rocks in North America,
map showing outcrops of, 551
Miocene of the, see Miocene.
Oligocene of the, see Oligocene.
Paleocene of the, see Paleocene.
Pliocene of the, see Pliocene.
rocks, 15, 103, 273, 459, 557
on Archean, 615
on Cretaceous, 546
see Cenozoic group.
system, 537-563
Tetradecapods, 317
Theoretical geology, 587
Theriodonts, 452


INDEX


“Three Patriarchs,” the, Mukuntu-
weap National Monument,
Utah, 259

“Thrust faults,” 627

Tidal phenomena, 243, 683

Tidal strain, effects of, 231

Tides, the, 170

Tiger, 54

saber-tooth, 579
“Till,” see Bowlder clay.
“Tillite,’ in Permian strata, Brazil,
450

“Tillites,” 448

Timber line, 48

Titanichthys, 418

“Toadstool Park,” near Adelia, Ne-

braska, 129
Tooth of Mastodon americanus, res-
toration of, 304
shark’s, 283

Topaz, 66

Tourmaline, 66

Tourmalite, 77

Tower Rock (U. Cambrian), 568

Trachodonts, 525

Trachyte, 77

Translation waves, 172, 243

Trap, see Rock, soda-lime, feldspar.

Travertine, 72

Tree fern, Hawaii, 49

Trees, roots of, holding soil in place,

127
Trenta nene, U. Ordovician,


Triassic ammonoids, 481
amphibians, 482
belemnites, 482
brachiopods, 481
chelonians, 483
corals, 481
floras, map showing distribution
n of, 478
invertebrate fossils, 480, 481
Mollusca, 481
Pee Forest” classed as, 475-


plant life in, 479
reptiles, 483
rocks, 169, 227, 474-476
kinds of, 473
mep shoving in North America,


sandstone, fossil fish in, 482
system, 471-483
distribution of, 473, 478
vertebrates, 482
Triceratops horn, 530 .


INDEX


Trigonia, distinctive of Jurassic, 494
Trilobites, 59, 317, 319, 349-353
Cambrian, 319, 344, 346
Devonian, 416
Ordovician, 376
Permian, 451
Silurian, 400
Tripolite, 75, 200
Tufa, 74
Tundras, 189
Tunicates, 315
Tupungato, 210
“Twin Sisters,” “Petrified Forest,”
Arizona, 477


NCONFORMITY, 84, 90, 92-94,
97, 673
angular, 94, 97
diagram to illustrate, 90
Unconsolidated sand and gravel
(Carboniferous), 430
“Underclay,” 456, 462
Uniformitarianism, 600, 643
Upper Bryozoan limestone
mian), 447
Upper Jackson sands (U. Eocene),
Siwel, Mississippi, 545
Upthrow, 89


(Per-


ALLEYS, “young” and “old,” 139
Vapors of volcanoes, 216
Veins, mineral, 270, 273
origin of, 274
secondary enrichment of, 275
Verd antique, 77
Vertebrates, Carboniferous, 440
chart showing geological distri-
bution of, 641
classes of, 312
Cretaceous, 517
fossils, recovering, 535
Jurassic, 495
Permian, 451
Triassic, 482
Vesuvius volcano, 217, 255
Victoria Falls, Zambesi River, South
Africa, 141
Vicuñas, 60


View in Glacier National Park,
Montana, 155
in quarry of Beekmantown dolo-
mite, 367


in Shanks quarry, M. Devonian on
M. Silurian, 621, 622

of a lignite mine (Tertiary), Ger-
many, 457

of Mississippian limestone, 428


725


of the “Marsh quarry” for verte-
brate fossils, 529
of the Sierra Nevada range, 256
of the Tertiary gold gravel de-
posits, 273
of Williams Cañon, Manitou, Colo-
rado, 370
showing the terminus of the Mer
de Glace Glacier, 154
Virchow, 700
Voleanic “spine” of Mount Pelée, 214
Volcano, causes of, 221
conditions essential for a, 236
vapors of, 216
vesicular structure of a, 217
Volcanoes, 208
classification of, 236
dating of, 223
duration of activity of, 217
effusive, 209
explosive, 209, 213
former activity of, 223
Hawaiian, 209-212, 257
in Iceland, 224
location of, 220
size of, 209
Von Humboldt, Alexander, 594
Vulcano, 221


ALCOTT, Dr. Charles D., fossil
hunting on Mount Stephen,
343


Wallace, Alfred Russel, 602, 652

“Wandering of the pole,” 241, 686
diagram to illustrate, 243, 684

To rocks (Tertiary), bluff of,


Water, assorting power of, 137
brackish, 149
ground, 125, 148
mole, 53
moving, erosive power of, 131
running, 123
son of clay in salt and fresh,


surface, 149
table, 149
velocity of a stream of, diagram to
illustrate, 135
Aar, aS a: of, on weather coast,


destructive work of, 165
erosion of, 165
translation, 171, 172, 243, 685
Weathering, 99
results of, 113
Weismann, August, 605


726


Wenlock system, see Silurian.


Werner, A. G., 592
White, David, 469
Winds, planetary, 114
Wombats, 53

Wood, 71

Woodward, John, 589
World catastrophe, 679
Worms, 318


$


INDEX


YAKIMA River, showing old ter-
races, 144
Yews, 52


EBRA, 55
Zine sulphide, 69
Zittel, Karl Von, 607
Zone, azoic or lifeless, 56
littoral, 57


oe oe (2 V Sp awa ee
k: W 1 k Aya


S ; \


- oe OF > aa y n "
DERE E Sis `


ioe
i
pr EIR


a)


NOV 4


GAYLORD


DATE DUE
