The  evidence  for  a
future  period  of  improvement
in  the  state  of  mankind.


f

EVIDENCE


THE


FOR A FtTTURE

PERIOD OF  IMPROVEMENT

IN THE STATE OF MANKIND/

Wl  T  H THE

MEANS  ANDDUTYOF  PROMOTING  IT,

RRPRBSENTED IN A

DISCOURSE,

DELIVERED ON

Wednesday  the  25th  of  April,  1787,

AT THE

MEETING-HOUSE  IN  THE  OLD  JEWRY,  LONDON,

TO THE SUPPORTERS OP A

NEW  ACADEMICAL  INSTITUTION

AMONG

PROTESTANT DISSENTERS.


By  R  I  C  H  A  R  D P  R  I  C  E,  D.  D.  F.  R.  S


LONDON;

PRINTED BY H. COLDNEY,
FOR T. CADBLL, IN THE STRAND; AND J. JOHNSON,


ST,  Paul's  church-yard.


M  DCC  LXXXTXI.


\\C>


\\K


\^^J.


h  {  -  ^'


Jufl  fubliJJoed  by  the  fame  Author,

And printed for Mr. C  a  d  e  l  l.

Sermons  on  the  Chriftlan  Doftrine  as  held
by  the  different  Denominations  of  Chrif-
tians ;

TO WHICH ARE APDED

Bermons  on  the  Security  and  Happinefs  of
a  Virtuous  Courfc,  the  Goodnefs  of  Gop,
and  the  Refurreflion  of  Lazarus.


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2008  with  funding  from

IVIicrosoft  Corporation


http://www.archive.org/details/ev-idenceforfuturOOpricuoft


SERMON, &c


Matthew vi.  lo.

Thy  kingdom  come. Thy  will  be  done
ON  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven.

THESE  words,  being  a  part  of  th©
Lord's  prayer,  mull  be  perfe6tly  fami-
liar to  you.  It  is  evident  that  by  the  king-
dom mentioned  in  them  is  meailt,  not  that
abfolute  dominion  of  the  Deity  by  which  he
does  whatever  he  pleafes  in  the  Annies  of
Heaven  and  among  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth ;  but  that  moral  kingdom  which  con-
lifts  in  the  voluntary  obedience  of  reafonablc
beings  to  his  laws,  and,  particularly,  that
kingdom  of  the  Mefliah  which  our  Saviour
came  to  eftablifh.

B  The


[  2  ]

The  fame  kingdom  is  undoubtedly  here
meant,  with  that  which  we  are  told  in  the
Gofpel  Hiftory  the  apoftles  went  about
preaching  every  where  and  declaring  to  be
at  hand  s  which  the  Jews  at  the  time  this
prayer  was  framed  were  impatiently  expec-
ting ;  and  which  in  their  religious  fervices
they  were  continually  praying  for  in  the
words,  May  his  kingdom  reign.  May  the
MeJJiah  come^  and  deliver  his  people,-

This  kingdom  is  defcribed,  in  the  Pro-
phecy of  Daniel,  under  the  chara6ler  of  a
kingdom  which  the  God  of  heaven  was  to
fet  up  in  the  time  of  the  fourth  temporal
kingdom  upon  earth  (or  the  Roman  em-
pire), and  which  was  to  be  given  to  the  Son
of  Many  and  to  increafe  gradually  ////  it  broke
in  pieces  all  other  kingdoms^  and  filled  the
whole  earth.  In  the  prophecy  of  the  feventy
weeks  the  very  time  of  the  commencement
of  this  kingdom  is  fixed;  and  it  appears
evidently  that  the  phrafes,  kingdom  of  God^
and  kingdom  of  heaven  ^  \vhich  the  Jews  ufed
to  fignify  the  reign  of  their  Meffiah,  ^nd
by  which  it  is  expreffed  in  the  New  Tefta-
ment,  were  derived  from  thefe  prophetical
reprefentations  in  Danieh

This


[ 3 ]

This  petition,  therefore,  in  our  Lord*s
prayer,  referred  primarily  to  the  introduc-
tion of  the  Chriftian  religion  among  man-
kind. His  difciples  were  directed  by  it,  and
by  the  petition  that  follows  it  {thy  will  be
done  on  earth  as  it  is  i?i  heaven),  to  pray,
that  the  advent  of  his  kingdom  might  be
fpeedy,  that  the  Gofpel  might  be  foon  eftab-
liflied  in  the  world,  that  the  virtue  which  it
was  fitted  to  infpire  might  take  place  every
where,  and  mortal  men  be  taught  to  regard
God's  will  with  a  fubmiffion  refembling  that
of  the  heavenly  fpirits.  We  cannot  exprefs
before  the  Deity  any  defires  that  are  more
reafonable  and  important.  The  eftablifh-
ment  of  Chrift's  kingdom  includes  in  it  the
enjoyment  of  the  higheft  bleflings  that  can
be  communicated  to  the  world.  It  is  a
kingdom  of  light,  and  peace,  and  virtue.
It  is  the  beginning  and  foundation  of  an
eveiialling  kingdom  in  the  heavens.  The
fubjefls  of  it  are  fellow-citizens  with  angels,
and  heirs  of  a  glorious  immortality.  With
the  utmoft  ardour  then  might  the  apoftles
and  firft  difciples  pray  for  the  coming  of
this  kingdom  j  and  nothing  can  now  be  a
jufter  objedl  of  the  prayers  of  Chriftians.
B  2  For


[ 3 ]

For  I  cannot  be  of  the  opinion  of  thofe  of
our  diffenting  brethren  who  fcruple  ufing
this  prayer,  from  an  apprehenfion  that  the
words  [thy  kingdom  come)  cannot  be  ufed  with
propriety  now  the  kingdom  of  Chrift  /i
come  and  the  grace  of  the  Gofpel  made
known  to  men.  The  truth  is,  that  there  is
a  kingdom  of  Chrift  ftill  to  come.  You
fhould  recollect  that  there  are  two  comings
of  Chrift's  kingdom  mentioned  in  the  Scrip-
tures, one  partial  and  the  other  univerfal  \
and  that  though  the  former  is  paft,  yet  we
may  with  the  utmoft  reafon  pray  for  the  lat^
ter,  and  for  that  better  ftate  of  things  upon
earth  which  our  Lord  exprefles,  by  doing  the
will  of  God  on  earth  as  it  is  dene  in  heaven, —
Hitherto,  the  kingdom  of  the  Meffiah  has
been  in  its  infancy.  The  moft  glorious
period  of  it  is  yet  future  — His  religion  i§
now  confined  to  a  few  nations.  It  will
hereafter  extend  itfelf  over  all  nations. — It
is  now  dishonoured  by  much  contention,
fuperftition,  and  wickednefs.  Hereafter,  it
is  to  be  cleared  of  thefe  evils,  and  to  tri-
umph over  all  falfe  religions. — Hitherto,  it
has  caufed  the  will  of  God  to  be  done  but
very  imperfeftly. Hereafter,  it  will  caufe

the


[ 5 ]

the  will  of  God  to  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is
done  in  heaven. — The  light  it  has  hitherto
produced  has  been  like  the  dawn  of  the
morning.  It  will  hereafter  produce  a  bright
day  over  the  whole  earth. — In  other  words,
and  to  ufe  our  Lord's  comparifon  in  the
parable  of  the  grain  of  muftard  feed  5  the
kingdom  of  heaven  has  hitherto  refembled
a  fmall  feed  germinating  under  ground.  A
period  is  coming  in  which  it  will  throw  off
all  that  encumbers  it,  and  grow  up  to  a  tree
large  enough  for  the  birds  of  the  air  to  lodge
among  its  branches.

That  fuch  a  ftate  of  chriftianity  lies  before
us  between  this  and  the  end  of  time ;  or,
that  there  is  a  progreffive  improvement  in
human  affairs  which  will  terminate  in
greater  degrees  of  light  and  virtue  and  hap-
pinefs  than  have  been  yet  known,  appears
to  me  highly  probable  ;  and  my  prefent
bufinefs  will  be  to  reprefent  to  you  the  na-
ture, the  grounds,  and  the  ufes  of  this  ex-
pectation.— in  doing  this  1  fhall  firft  ftate
the  evidence  which  makes  it  probable  ;  after
which  I  fliall  be  naturally  led  to  take  notice
of  the  means  by  which  it  is  to  be  accom-
plifhed,  and  the  encouragement  it  gives  us  in

our


[ 6 ]

Gur  exertions  to  promote  the  improvement  of
the  world ;  and,  particularly,  in  that  under-
taking which  occafions  the  prefent  fervice.

The  evidence  on  which  the  expeftation  I
have  mentioned  refts,  is  taken,  partly,  from
tradition  and  fcripture ;  and,  partly,  from
reafon  and  the  neceflary  tendencies  of  things,
confirmed  by  what  we  know  of  the  paji  and
fee  of  the  prefent  ftate  of  the  world.

There  has  been  a  tradition  which  has  led
Jews  and  Pagans  (as  well  as  Chriftians)  to
expe6l  that  the  laft  ages  of  the  world  will  be
ages  of  improvement  and  happinefs.  This
tradition  is  fo  ancient,  and  has  been  fo  ge-
neral, that  there  is,  I  think,  fome  regard
due  to  it.  But  it  is  of  little  confequence
compared  with  the  declarations  of  fcripture
on  this  fubjed.  Thefe  are  clear  and  deci-
five.  I  have  juft  mentioned  a  parable  of
our  Lord's  which  direds  our  views  to  a  fu-
ture enlargement  of  his  kingdom.  To  the
fame  purpofe  is  his  comparifon  of  his  king-
dom to  a  particle  of  leaven,  which  worked
gradually  and  infenfibly  in  a  large  quantity
of  meal,  till  the  whole  was  leavened.  St.
Paul  fpeaks  in  very  plain  language  of  a  time

when


[ 7 ]

when  the  fullnefs  of  the  Gentiles  Jh all  come  iuy
and  all  Ifracl  be  faved. Rom.  ii.  25. Ifalah
prophefies that, in the latter  days, the
mountain  of  the  Lord's  houfe  fhall  be  eftab-
lifhed  on  the  top  of  the  mountains,  and  all
nations  flock  into  it ;  and  the  Lord  Jhall  judge  ,
among  the  nations^ and  they  Jloall  heat  their
[words  into  plow-Jhares,  and  their  fpears  into
priming-hooks. Nation  Jl:all  not  lift  up  afword
againfi  nation^  neither  fhall  they  learn  war  any
more. Jfaiah  ii. 2,  3,  4. The  fame  pro-
phet, in  the  eleventh  and  fixth  chapters,
foretells  that  under  the  reign  of  the  Mefliah,
the  Lord  would  create  new  heavens  and  a  new
earth, The  people  of  the  Jews  Jhoiild  be  all
righteous^ and  inhabit  their  la?id  for  ever.
The  wolf  fiould dwell  with  the  lamby and
the  leopard  lie  down  with  the  kidy and  the
lion  eat  fir  aw  with  the  ox^  and  the  earth  be
filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  as  the
waters  cover  the  fea, — Daniel,  in  a  paflage
already  quoted,  tells  us,  that  the  kingdom
of  the  Mefliah  was  to  break  in  pieces  all  other
kingdoms y  and  to  encreafe  till  it Jilled  the  whole
earth. — In  the  feventh  chapter  he  gives  a
particular  account  of  a  tyrannical  power
which  was  to  appear  after  the  fall  of  the  Ro-
man


f 8 ]

man  empire,  and  which,  after  conthiuing  a
limited  time,  was  to  be  deftroyed,  and  to
be  fucceeded  by  an  univerfal  kingdom  which
fhould  never  be  deftroyed.  This  kingdom,
according  to  Daniel's  reprefentation,  is  to
be  the  fifth  and  laft  univerfal  monarchy  on
earth  5  and  he  defcribcs  it  under  the  cha-
rafter  of  the  reign  of  t\\t  faints  ;  that  is,  of
an  empire  of  reafon  and  liberty  and  virtue
which  is  to  follow  defpotifm,  ignorance,
and  wickednefs.  I  beheld,  fays  he  (verfe  11.)
////  the  beafi  (that  is,  the  tyrannical  power
juft  mentioned)  was  deftroyed  and  given  to
the  burning  fiame.  And  then  came  the  Son
of  Man  in  the  clouds  of  heaven ;  and  there
was  given  him  dominion  and  glory,  that  all
men  and  languages  Jlmdd  ferve  him ;  and  the
kingdom^  and  dominion^  and  the  greatnefs
of  the  ki?igdom  under  the  whole  heaven,  was
delivered  to  the  people  of  the  faints  of  the
Moji  High*  In  the  laft  chapter  of  this  pro-
phecy we  have  the  remarkable  declaration,
that  at  the  time  of  the  end  (till  which  time
Daniel  reprefents  himfelf  as  ordered  to  feal
his  words)  many  fhould  run  to  and  fro,  and
knowledge  Jhould  be  increafed.

St.  Paul


(93

St*  t^aul  in  his  fecond  Epiftle  to  the  Thef*
falonians  affures  us  that  the  day  of  judg-
ment would  not  Come  till  an  Apostacv
had  taken  place  in  the  Chriftian  church,
and  a  man  of  fin  had  appeared  in  it  whoJJ:ould
exalt  himfelf  above  all  that  is  called  Gody  and
whofe  comi?2g  Jhould  be  after  the  ^working  of
Satan  ivith  figns  and  lying  wonders ^  but  whom
the  Lord  would  confutrie  with  the  breath  of  his
7nouth  and  the  brightJiefs  of  his  coming.  St.  John
tells  uSj that  the  holy  city  (by  which  un-
doubtedly is  meant  the  Chriftian  church)
fiiould  be  trodden  Under  foot  1260  years  *
at  the  end  of  which  term  he  reprefents  the
kingdoms  of  this world  as  becoming  the
kingdoms  of  the  Lord  and  of  his  Ghrift*
Rev.  xi.  2,  15.  The  beaji  and  the  falfe  prophet,
he  fays,  .will  be  taken  and  caft  into  a  lake  of
fire  (that  is,  all  antichriftian  corruption  and
opptelTion  will  be  abolifhed),  aridChrifl  floalt
reign  a  thoufand  years ^  and  the  fdijits  fialt
reign  with  him. That  is  ;  truth  and  righte*
oufnefs  fhall  for  a  long  period  become  pre*
Jalenj:,  and  mankind  univerfally  receive  ar^d
acknowledge  Chrifl  as  their  Head  and  Law-
giver.— I  will  only  add  our  Lord's  predi(tt|c^ri
in  Luke  xxi.  24.  The  Jews  fjall  he  led  cap-*
C  ti%e


E Id ]

tive  to  all  nations,  and  Jerufalem  Jhall  he
trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles  till  the  times  of
the  Gentiles  are  fulfilled.  Thefe  words  are
very  ftrlking.  They  intimate  to  us  a  dif-
perfion  of  the  Jews  for  a  certain  period ;
the  prefervation  of  them  through  that  peri-
od ;  and  fome  great  revolution  in  the  flate  of
the  Gentiles  at  the  end  of  it.  It  is  evident
that  thefe  prediftions  in  the  Old  and  New
Teftaments  have  the  fame  events  in  view,
nor  is  it  poflible  with  any  appearance  of
reafon  to  apply  them  to  any  events  which
have  already  happened.  Certainly,  the  ftone
mentioned  by  Daniel  which  was  cut  out  of
the  mountain  without  hands  (that  is,  without
the  aid  of  human  power)  has  not  yet  filled
the  whole  earth.  That  man  of  fm  who  was
tp.ufurp  the  prerogatives  of  the  Deity,  and
to  deceive  the  world  with  lying  miracles,
has  not  yet  been  deftroyed  by  the  brightnefs
of  our  Lord's  fecond  coming.  The  know-
ledge of  the  Lord  has  not  yet  covered  the
earth  as  the  waters  fiU  the  channels  of  the
fea.  The  univerfal  empire  of  reafon  and
virtue  has  not  yet  been  eftablifhed ;  nc^
have  all  people  and  nations  been  yet  brought
to  ferve  the  Son  of  Man. War  has  not  yet

been


^»


[  II  ]

been  excluded  from  the  world,  nor  has  li-
berty taken  place  of  tyranny,  knowledge  of
ignorance,  and  fanclity  of  vice  and  corrup-
tion. To  fuch  a  happy  termination  of  hu-
man affairs  in  this  world,  next  to  the  hap-
pinefs  of  the  heavenly  ftate,  the  Scriptures
point  our  views  ;  and  it  is  an  argument  in
their  favpur,  that  they  do  give  us  an  ex-
peSlation  fo  animating,  amidft  the  variety  of
gloomy  profpefts  with  which  this  world,
in  its  prefent  ftate,  is  often  prefenting  us  j
for  it  is  an  expeftation  no  lefs  credible  and
probable  in  itfelf  than  it  is  encouraging. —
This  is  what  I  fliall  now  proceed  to  fliew
you.

Almoft  every  object  in  nature  grows  up
gradually,  from  a  weak  and  low,  to  a  ma-
ture and  improved  ftate  of  being.  The
condition  of  mankind,  in  particular,  has
been  hitherto  improving.  At  firft  they  were
rude  and  ignorant.  In  time  feveral  of  the
arts  were  difcovered.  Civilization  and  agri-
culture began,  and  governments  were  efta-
bliftied.  By  degrees  the  arts  were  improved.
New  ones  were  difcovered,  and  better  forms
of  government  were  eftabllftied  5  and  in  the
^2,  ^■  '  '  ^t^L


[ 12 ]

pr^fent  ^era  of  the  world,  it  is  evident,  that  the
life  of  man  appears  with  greater  dignity  than
everi  and  that  in  confequence  of  a  vaft  varie^
ty  of  fucceffive  improvements  and  additions
produced  by  them  in  the  fources  of  human
enjoyment,  there  is  the  fame  difference  be-
tween the  ftate  of  our  fpecies  now  and  its
ftate  at  fifft,  as  there  is  between  a  youth
approaching  to  manhood  and  a  child  jufl:
born.

It  deferves  particular  confideration  here,
that  it  is  the  nature  of  improvement  to  in-
creafe  itfelf.  Every  advance  in  it  lifts  man-
kind higher,  and  makes  them  more  capable
of  farther  advances ;  nor  are  there,  in  this
cafe,  any  limits  beyond  which  knowledge
and  improvement  cannot  be  carried.  And
for  this  reafon,  difcoveries  may,  for  aught
we  know,  be  made  in  future  time,  which,
like  the  difcoveries  of  the  mechanical  arts  and
the  mathematical  fciences  in  paft  time,  may
exalt  the  powers  of  men  and  improve  their
ftate  to  a  degree,  which  will  make  future
generations  as  much  fuperior  to  the  prefent
as  the  prefent  are  to  the  paJft.  Let  us  here
look  back  again.

At


in]

At  the  firfl:  eftablifliment  of  civil  fociety
man  was  an  animal,  naked  in  body  and
mind  ;  running  about  in  the  woods,  or
tending  cattle,  dellitute  of  arts  and  laws
and  ideas.  From  this  low  condition  he  has
rifen  to  be  the  animal  we  now  fee  him  -,  to
command  the  powers  of  nature;  to  ferti-
lize the  earth ;  to  traverfe  the  ocean ;  and
to  meafure  the  diftances  and  magnitudes  of
the  fun  and  planets.  His  progrefs  to  this
ftate  has  been  irregular  and  various.  Ages
of  improvement  have  been  followed  by  ages
of  barbarifm  ;  and  the  feveral  climates  of  the
earth  have  felt  the  viciffitudes  of  knowledge
and  ignorance  juft  as  they  have,  of  light
and  darknefs.  Yet  what  has  been  loft  in
one  place,  or  at  one  time  has  been  gained  in
another ;  and  an  age  of  darknefs  and  bar-
barifm has  been  fucceeded  by  ages  of  im-
provement more  rapid  than  any  that  pre-
ceded them.  There  was  a  time  when  no
man  was  what  whole  countries  are  now.
And  there  may  come  a  time  when  every
country  will  be  what  many  are  nowj  and
v/htnfome  will  be  advanced  to  a  ftate  much
higher.

Nothing


[ H ]

Nothing  can  direft  us  better  in  judging
of  the  manner  in  which  future  improve-
ments are  likely  to  proceed,  than  refle6ling
on  the  courfe  of  human  improvement  as
it  has  hitherto  taken  place.  I  cannot  illuf-
trate  what  I  now  mean  better  than  by  in-
ftancing  in  natural  philofophy.

The  higheft  ftate  of  philofophical  and
aftronomical  knowledge  was,  at  the  begin^
ning  of  this  century,  that  which  it  had  at^
tained  by  the  difcoveries  of  Sir  Isaac  New-
ton. But  it  had  been  the  work  of  many
ages  to  prepare  mankind  for  thefe,  and  to
bring  the  world  to  a  capacity  of  underftand-
ing  and  receiving  them.  To  a  few  wife
men  above  two  thoufand  years  ago  there
appeared  fome  glimmerings  of  this  philofo-
phy, but  they  were  difregarded  and  fooii
loft.  A  barbarous  philofophy,  called  the
Pe7'ipatetic,  prevailed  after  this  for  a  long
period.  The  inventor  of  it  (like  the  Pope
in  the  Chriftian  church)  was  fet  up  as  an
laniverfal  mafter,  and  the  moft  wretched
jargon  was  received  implicitly  for  true  fci-
ence.  It  is  fcarcely  poflible  to  defcribe  the
ftate  of  darknefs  with  refpedt  to  the  know-
Sedge  of  nature,  in  which  the  world  was  in-

voIye4


[ '5 ]

volved  during  this  whole  time.  About  two
centuries  ago  a  glimmering  of  light  again
appeared,  and  a  more  rational  philofophy
began  to  gain  ground.  The  light  gradually
increafed.  One  great  genius  rofe  after  an-
other, and  one  difcovery  produced  further
difcoveries.  A  Bacon  was  followed  by  a
Boyle,  and  a  Boyle  by  a  Newton.  Each
of  thefe  prepared  the  way  for  his  fuccelTor  j
and  the  lajiy  (the  pride  and  glory  of  this
country,  and  a  name  with  which  no  names
of  kings  and  princes  deferve  to  be  thought
of)  the  laft,  I  fay,  has  ftruck  out  a  glorious
light.  He  extended  on  every  fide  the  boun-
daries of  fcience ;  fubjeded  light  itfelf  to
diffeftion  ;  and  with  a  fagacity  never  before
known  among  mortals,  unfolded  the  law^s
which  govern  the  folar  fyflem.  Such,  how-
ever, were  the  prejudices  in  favour  of
former  fyftems  of  philofophy,  that  even  his
philofophy,  though  founded  on  experiment
and  demonftration,  was  not  immediately
received.  For  many  years  it  encountered
much  oppofition:  But  at  laft  it  made  its
way.  Foreign  nations  came  over  to  it;  and
it  is  now  the  philofophy  of  the  world.  A
ftate  of  philofgphy  fo  improved  could  not

take


t «6 ]

take  place  foon  among  mankind.  It  was
neceffarily  referVed  for  an  advanced  age  of
the  world.  What  is  now  known  of  the
relation  of  this  earth  to  the  fun,  and  of  the
order  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  is  fo  contrary
to  vulgar  prejudices,  and  feems  to  be  fo  con-
tradifted  by  the  teftimpny  of  our  fenfes,  that
had  it  been  propofed,  even  to  the  philofo-
phers  of  Greece  ami  Romey  they  would  prob-
ably have  fcouted  it  as  much  as  they  did
Chriftianity.  Falfe  fyftems  of  philofophy
have  occafioned  a  more  thorough  examina-
tion of  philofophical  fubjc6ls  ;  and  theii'
deteftion  has  given  greater  weight  and  fta-
bility  to  the  true  philofophy;  for  truth  al-
ways fhines  brighter  and  flands  firmer  af-
ter growing  out  of  the  ruins  of  error  ;  and
an  error  once  prevalent,  and  aftei*wards
detected,  is  never  likely  to  recover  itlelf.

Thefe  obfervations  are  applicable  with
fl:ri(ft  propriety  to  the  natural  courfe  of  im-
provement in  religious  knowledge ;  and,
particularly,  the  knowledge  of  genuine
Chriftianity  and  its  fpread  among  mankind*
Till  the  time  of  our  Saviour,  the  world  had
been  too  much  in  its  infancy  to  be  capable
of  admitting more of  tht  knowledge  of

Chriftianity


t  17  ]

Chiiftianity  than could be  communicat-
ed  by  obfcure  hints, and  a  fucccffion  of
dark  preparatory  difpenfations. And  even
in  the  ages  immediately  following  the  time
of  our  Saviour,  it  was  by  no  means  ripe
for  that  univerfal  prevalency  of  Chriftiauity
which  we  expeft  hereafter. The  prejudices
of  mankind  were  then  of  fuch  a  nature,  and
the  do6\rines  of  the  gofpel  fo  much  out  of
the  road  of  their  ideas,  that  had  it  prevail-
ed every  where,  it  muft  have  prevailed  in  a
very  imperfeft  form ;  and  an  adulteration  of
it  by  the  falfe  learning  and  philofophy  of
the  times  was  unavoidable. For  theferea-
fons  it  might  be  neceffary,  that  at  firft  there
fhould  be  only  a  partial  propagation  of  it,
and that  its more general el^abliihment
(hould  be  deferred  till  the  world  was  more
improved, and  therefore  more  capable  of
properly underftanding it; till fufEcient
time  had  been  allowed  for  a  full  difcuffion
of  its  doftrlnes  ;  till  the  completion  of  pro-
phecy became  an  argument  for  it  fo  ftrik-^
ing,  as  to  be  irrefiftible;  till  the  fyftem  of
nature,  and  the  plans  of  Providence  (hould
be  laid  more  open  to  our  views,  and  there
fhould  be a  poffibility of  cllablifhing  it
D  amon^


[ i8 ]

aftiong  mankind,  in  fuch  purity,'  and  witJP
fach  evidence,  as  fhould  kaveilo  danger  6£^
farther  adulterations  of  it.
'-*  ft -appears,  therefore,  that  the  fame  pre-
pSation  of  ages  which  is  required  to  bring
about  advances  in  philofophical  knowledge,*
i^  required  alfo  in  religious  knowledge.  We
^re  apt  to  be  hafty  and  impatient. We
lliould  learn  to  wait  till  feeds  have  had  time
ta^grow  and  to  produce  crops.  The  govern-
inentof  the  Deity  proceeds  gradually  and
flowly. As  he  does  not  bring  the  indivt-
duals  of  the  human  race  on  the  ftage  of  ma-
ture life,  before  they  have  been  duly  pre-
pared for  it,  by  pafling  through  the  inftruc-
tion  and  difcipline  of  infancy  and  childhood,
fo  neither  does  he  bring  the  fpecies  to  that
finifhed  ftate  of  dignity  and  happinefs  for
which  it  is  intended,  without  a  fimilar  in-
troduftion  and  education.
^^Keligious  improvement  muft  be  expe6led
to'  keep pace with other improvements.

There  is  a  connexion  between  all  the  differ-

J'

tent  branches  of  knowledge  which  render

this  neceflary. It  would  be  ftrange,  indeed,

If  men  were  not  likely  to  underftand  reli-

Ijon  heft, when  they  underftood  beft  all


i .f9 i

Other  fubjedls ;  or  if  an  increafe.  of  :^<jj^/^^
knowledge  only  left. us  more  in  the  dark.i^i
theology.  This  is  what  thofe  .of  qur  hr^
thren  who  will  admit  of  no  new  light^.i^
religion  would  have  us  believe.  But:  nq-
thing  can  be  more  unixafonable.  'Ih(5,age
of  polite  literature  in  antient  Gr^^c^  ..an^ci
Rome  was  likewife  the  age  when  general
knowledge  prevailed  moft;  and  the  period
of  the  revival  of  letters  in.thefe  laft  ages  was
alfo  the  period  of  the  reformation  from  v
popery  5  and  in  like  manner  it  muftbr  ex-
pected, notwithftanding  all  the  obftacles
which  the  friends  of  old  eftablifliments  €«-
deavour  to  throw  in  the  way,  that  the  pre-
fent  period  of  more  knowledge  than  ever
yet  exifted  in  the  world  will  produce  aj^f-
ther  reformation.  -j-

It  is  obfervable  that  the  Scriptures  place
the  downfal  of  Antichrift  before  the  com-
mencement of  the  univerfal  kingdom  of  the
Meffiah.  This  cnuft  be  the, order  in  which
thefe  events  will  happen.  It  would  be  ab-
furd  to  imagine  that  Chriftianity,  in  its  cor-
rupt ftate,  will  ever  become  the  univerfal  re-
ligion. Previoufly  to  this  it  muft  lofe  that
(iQuneflion  with  civil  power  which  has  de-
'•^^^  D  2  bafed


[ 20 ]

"baftd  it,  and  which  now  in  almoft  every
Chriftian  country  turns  it  into  a  fcheme  of
worldly  emolument  and  policy,  and  fu im-
ports error  and  fuperftition  under  the  name
of  it.  The  abfurdities  fathered  upon  it
muft  be  exploded  ;  and  it  muft  be  difplayed
to  the  world  in  its  native  and  original  ex-
cellence. Then  only  will  it  be  fit  to  tri-
umph over  falfe  religions,  and  to  reform
and  blefs  all  nations,

*— ^'^The  obfervations  now  made  may  be  of
life  in  aflifting  you  to  form  juft  ideas  of  the
progreffive  courfe  of  human  improvement.
Such  has  it  hitherto  been ;  and  fucb  the
natures  of  things  affure  us  it  muft  continue

"  to  be.  Like  a  river  into  which,  as  it  flows,
new  currents  are  continually  difcharging
themfelves,  it  muft  increafe  till  it  becomes
a  wide-fpreading  ftream,  fertilizing  and  en-
riching all  countries,  and  covering  the  earth
as  the  waters  cover  thefea,

I  will  here  point  out  to  you  briefly  a  few
circumftances,  in  the  prefent  ftate  of  the
world,  which  indicates  a  farther  progrefs ;
^nd  are  particularly  encouraging,

Firft.


[ 21 ]

Firft.  In  phllofophical  knowledge,  great
advances  have  been  lately  made.  New  Jfields
of  philofophy  have  been  opened  fince  the
time  of  Sir  Issac  Newton. Our  ideas  of
the  extent  and  grandeur of  the  univerfc
have  been  carried  much  farther  than  he  car-
ried them,  and  fafts  in  the  fyftem  of  na-
ture difcovered,  which  could  they  have  been
intimated  to  him,  would  have  been pro-
nounced by  him  impoflible. Standing  on
his  ihoulcfers  and  affifted  by  his  difcoveries
we  fee  farther  than  he  did. How  daring
then  would  be  the  man  who  fhould.fay,
that  our  fucceffors  will  not  fee  farther  than
we  do  ?

This  increafe  of  natural  knowledge  muft
be  accompanied  with  more  enlarged  views
and  liberal  fentiments  in  religion  5  and  wc
find  that  this  has  been  its  efFedt.  There  is,
indeed,  no  circumftance  in  the  prefent  ftatc
of  the  world  which  promifes  more  than
the  liberality  in  religion  *  which  is  now  pre-
vailing.

*  This  liberality  is  attended  with  one  eflFcS,  which
every  good  man  muft  fee  with  concern  5  I  mean,  an
indifference  to  all  religion,  and  a  difpofition  to  fcepticifm :
^ut  this  may  be  an  evil  of  ihort  duration,  and  it  will,

probab-


I 32 1

trailing. God  be  thanked, the burning

times  are  gone;  and  a  conviftion  of  the

reafonablenefs of univerfal toleration is

fpreading  faft. Jufter  notions  alfo  of  the

origin and end of  civil government are

making  way;  and  an  experiment  is  now

making  by  our  brethren  on  the  other  fide

of  the  Atlantic  of  the  laft  confequence,  and

-to  which  every  friend  of  the  human  raqe

*muift  with  fuccefs.  There  a  total  reparation

2of:  religion  from  civil  policy  has  taken  place,

2<(rhich  will  probably  read  a  leffon  to  the

tv'^rld  that  will  do  it  infinite  fervice. AUi-

ii^ril- w4^^iiicji;*  i^ii  ii*T^  dK^w^^i^i  , ances

^jM»bably,  iathc^nd  prove  advantageous  rather  than
^.hurtful  to  the  intereft  of  true  religion.  It  is  lefs  an  evil
'  than  that  wretched  ignorance  which  has  turned  religion
*^toa  compromife  with  the  Deity  for  ungoverned  paifions,
«^rtd  that  frantic  zeal  for  modes  pf  faith  which  has  led  men
35te1iate  and  deftroy  one  another. Infidelity  is  occafioned

bj^  .miftaking  for  Chriftianity  that  which  is  held  out  as

*luch  in  the  civil  eftablifhments  of  it.  And  this  is  an  eiFedt

"which  wHl  ceafe  when  the  caufe  ceafes. I  will  add,  that

."J^fcoppofition  to  Chriftianity  muft  (as  I  have  obferved

above)  be  ferviceable  to  it,  by  producing  a  ftri6ler  en-

•*;fl«iry  into  its  nature  and  evidence. I  believe  ihis^  be-

ngcauie  I  believe  it  to  be  of  God. He  who  thinks  other  -

^wife  muft,  if  he  is  confiftent,  believe  that  it  will  not  bear

enquiry,  and  confe(j.uently,  that  it  is.  not  of  God,  an4
^ifught  to  be  oppofed.  ,  ^


r  23  ]

arices  between  church  and  ftate  and  flaviflt
hierarchies  are  lofing  credit,  long  experience
halving  taught  their  mifchief.  The  nature
of  religious  liberty  is  better  underftood  than
evef.  -In  the  laft  century,  thofe  who  cried
out  the  loudeft  for  it  meant  only  liberty  for
themfelves  becaufe  the  advocates  of  truth.
But  there  is  now  a  convidion  prevailing
that  all  encroachments  on  the  rights  of  con-
fcience  are  pernicious  and  impious;  that
the  proper  office  of  the  civil  magiftrate  is  to
maintain  peace  5  not  to  fupport  truth,— To
defend  the  properties  of  men,  not  to  take
care  of  \h€iv fouls. — And  to  protect  equally  all
honeft  citizens  of  all  perfuafions,  not  to  fet
up  one  religious  kOi  above  another.

Sentiments  fo  reafonable  muft  continue
to  fpread.  They  promife  an  open  and  free
ftage  for  difcuflion,  and  general  harmony
among  the  profcflbrs  of  Chriftianity.  O  hap^
py  time !  when  bigotry  fhall  no  more  perfe-
cute  the  fincere  enquirer,  and  every  one
Ihall  tolerate  as  he  would  wifli  to  be  himfelf
tolerated — When  mankind  fhall  love  one
another  as  brethren  amidfl:  their  religious
differences,  and  human  authority  in  religi-
on be  exploded — When  civil  governors  fhall

know


[ Hi

know  their  duty  and  employ  their  power
for  its  proper  purpofe — When  the  facred
bleffing  of  liberty  fhall  meet  with  n6  tcf
ftraint  except  when  ufed  to  injure  itfelf  j
and  all  fliall  be  allowed  without  the  feaf  of
lofmg  any  rights,  to  profefs  and  praftifc
that  mode  of  faith  and  worftiip  which  they
Ihall  think  molt  acceptable  to  their  Maker.
Then  will  come  to  pafs  the  prophecy  of
Ifaiah,  (before  recited  to  you)  *The  wolf  will
d^ell  "with  the  lamb  -,  the  leopard  lie  down  with
the  kid  \  and  the  lion  eat  Jiraw  with  the  ex.
The  fucking  child  Jhall  play  on  the  hole  of  the
afp ;  and  they  fhall  not  hurt  or  dejiroy  in  all
the  earth.

I  might  now,  would  the  time  allow,  pro-
ceed to  recite  many  other  important  circum-
ftances  in  the  ftate  of  the  world,  which  are
preparations  for  that  revolution  in  favour  of
human  happinefs,  which  is  the  objed  of  this
difcourfe.  Such  as  the  alileviation  of  the  hor-
rors of  war  occafioned  by  the  fpread  of  the
principles  of  humanity  j  and  the  encourage*
ment  arifing  from  hence,  (and  alfo  from  the
growing  convidion  of  the  folly  as  well  as
the  iniquity  of  wars)  to  expeft  a  time  when  '

nation


t 25 ]

nation  fliall  no  more  lift  up  a  fword  againft
nation. — The  foftencd  fpirit  of  popery ;  and
the  vifible  decline  of  the  papal  power. — •
The  extinction  of  the  order  of  Jefuits,  and
the  demolition  of  convents  and  monafteries.
—The  fhutting  of  the  doors  of  the  infernal
inquifition,  and  the  ceafing  of  afts  of  failh.
*«*-The extended intercourfe  between  the
different  parts  of  the  world  3  and  the  facility
of  the  diffufion  of  knowledge  created,  firfl:  by
the  invention  of  the  art  of  printing,  but  now
carried  farther  than  ever  by  the  increafe  of
commerce,  and  the  improvements  in  the  art
of  navigation. — The  eftabliOiment,  at  this
moment going  forward, of  an  equal  re-
prefentation  of  the  different  provinces  of
France  ;  and  the  tendencies  to  it  in  fome
of  the  other countries of  Europe. — All
thefe  circumftances  (and  many  more  might
be  mentioned)  render  the  prefent  ftate  of
the  world  unfpeakably  different  from  what
it  was. They  fliew  us  man  a  milder  animal
than  he  was  and  the  world  outgrowing  its
evils,  fuperflition  giving  way,  antichrift  fal-
ling, and  the  Millennium  haflening.

Having  ftated  to  you  the  evidence  for

the  doctrine  which  is  the  fubjefl:  of  this  dif-

E  courfe,


icourfe,  1  fhall  how  proceed  to  what  I  next
propofed  when  I  entered  upon  it. I  mean,
to  take  notice  of  the  means  by  which  that
happy  termination  of  affairs  on  this  globe
which I  have  been  rep refen ting  is  to  be
"brought  about. The  obfervations  I  have
made  plainly  point  out  to  us  thefe  means  ;
and,,  therefore,  I  have, in  fome  meafure,
ailticlpated  myfelf  dn  this  fubjeft. There
iare",  however,  fome  of  thefe  means  which
1  muft  not  omit  to  recal  to  your  remem-
brance, and  to  which  it  Is  neceffary  that,  on
the  prefent  occafion,  I  fhould  more  particu-
larly dired  your  attention.
'  In  general  yit  is  obvious  that  this  end  is
ib  be  brought  about  by  the  operations  of
Providence  concurring  with  thofe  tenden-
xies  to  improvement,  which  I  have  obferved
to  be  infeparable  from  the  nature  of  man.
<3ften Providence  works for  this  end by
l^ringing  good  out  of  evil,  and  making  ufe
of  human  paffions  to  ^accomplifh  purpofes
contrary  to  thofe  at  which  they  aimed. Ft
would  be  eafy  to  mention  many  inftances
of  this. The  end  of  perfecutors  is  to  pre-
vent the  fpread  of  heterodox  opinions ;  but,
inftead'  of  anfwering  this  end,  it  generally
gives  fuch  opinions  a  wider  fpread. The
.'•^  I '•.-»••  .  progrefs


f 27 ]

progrefs  of  Chriftianity  has  been  affifted  in
this  way  ;  for  it  is  a  very  juft  obfervation,
that  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  has  been  the
feed  of  the  church.  The  political  views  of
princes  have  often,  and  are  now  remarka-
bly operating  in  the  fame  way.  The  paf-
fions  of  King  Henry  the  8th,  were  the  means
of  introducing  that  period  of  light  and  re-
formation in  this  country  to  which  we  owe
our  prefent  liberty  and  happinefs.  The  writ-
ings of  unbelievers  have  done  fervice  to  the
Chriftian  religion,  by  caufing  a  ftrider  en-
quiry into  its  evidence,  and  clearing  it  of  the
rubbifh  which  has  been  thrown  upon  it,and
the  falfe  do6trines  which  have  been  ming-
led with  it.  And  I  am  greatly  miftaken,  if
the  obftinacy  with  which  abufes  fo  grofs  as
to  be  palpable  to  all  the  world  are  retained,
in  the  prefent  age,  and  even  in  this  country,
will  not  in  the  end  prove  a  great  public  be-
nefit by  caufing  a  more  quick  and  complete
overthrow  of  them,and  of  the  eftabhftiments
that  fupport  them,  and  thus  giving  a  better
opportunity  for  the  introdudion  of  efta-
blifhments,  favourable  to  truth  and  liberty
^nd  virtue.

Such  are  the  fecret  and  indire6t  means  by
which  providence  often  carries  on  its  ends.

But,


[ a8 ]  '

But,  in  the  prefent  cafe,  the  mofl:  common
means  which  it  employs  are  the  inveftiga-
tions  and  adtive  exertions  of  enlightened  and
honeft  men.  Thefe  are  aimed  direftly  at
the  melioration  of  the  world,  and  without
them  It  would  foon  degenerate.  It  is  the
blefling  of  God  on  the  difquifitions  of  rea-
fon  and  the  labours  of  virtue,  united  to  the
invifible  directions  of  his  Providence,  that
muft  bring  on  the  period  1  have  in  view.  In-
adivity  and  fleep  are  fatal  to  improvement.
It  is  only  (as  the  prophet  Dariiel  fpeaks)  by
running  to  andfrOy  that  is,  by  diligent  enqui-
ry, by  free  difcuflion  and  the  collifion  of
different  fentiments,  that  knowledge  can  be
increafed,  truth  ftruck  out,  and  the  digni-
ty of  our  fpecies  promoted.  Every  one  of
us  ought  to  co-operate  with  his  neighbours
in  this  great  work,  and  to  contribute  all  he
can  to  inftrud  and  reform  his  fellow-crea-
tures. His  power  may  be  little  j  but  this
is  no  reafon  againft  exerting  it  as  far  as  it
will  go.  The  lefs  his  power  is,  the  more
an;xious  he  ftiould  be  to  employ  that  little,
and  not  to  fuffer  any  part  of  it  to  be  loft.
There  are  none  who  have  not  fome  de-
gree of  powei;.  The  rich  may  help  by
"  '  their


[ 29 ]

their  fortunes.  The  great  by  their  in--
fluence.  The  poor  by  their  labour:  And
the  learned  by  their  inftruftion  and  coun-
fel.  And  were  all  to  contribute  all  they  can
in  thefe  different  ways  much  would  be  done ;
and  the  world  would  make  fwift  advances
to  a  better  ftate.

The  obfervations  I  have  made  (hew  that
our  exertions  for  this  purpofe  ought  more
efpecially  to  be  directed  to  the  following
points.  '

Firft,  An  improvement  in  the  ftate  of
civil  government.  The  difpofitions  and  man-
ners of  men  depend  more  than  we  can  well
(:onceive  on  the  nature  of  the  government  to
which  they  are  fubjeft.  There  is  nothing
fo  debafing  as  defpotic  government.  They
convert  the  governed  into  beajlsy  and  the
men  who  govern  into  demons.  Free  govern-
ments, on  the  contrary,  exalt  the  human
character.  They  give  a  feeling  of  dignity
and  confequence  to  the  governed,  and  to  the
governors  a  feeling  of  refponfibility^  which
has  a  tendency  to  keep  them  within  the
bounds  of  their  duty,  and  to  teach  them,
that  they  are  more  properly  the  fervants  of
the  public  than  its  governor s.-^Mwch.  ftudy

has


' [ 30 ]

has  been  employed,  and  much  pains  taken,
to,  find  out  the  beft  forms  of  government ;
nor  is  there  any  fubjedt  on  which  the  human
underftanding  can  employ  itfelf  much  more
ufefuUy.  Many  improvements  remain  to  be
made  ;  and  it  fhould  be  the  bulinefs  of  wife
and  good  men  to  inveftigate  them,  and  to
throw  as  much  light  as  poflible  on  a  fubject
fo  interefting  to  human  happinefs  *.  I
cannot  help  taking  this  opportunity  to  re^
move  a  very  groundlefs  fufpicion  with  re-
fpe6l  to  myfelf,  by  adding,  that  fo  far  am
I  from  preferring  a  government  purely  re-
publican, that  1  look  upon  our  own  confti-
tution  of  government,  as  better  adapted
than  any  other  to  this  country,  and,  in

'  Theory,


.;


^  Much  afllftance  in  this  enquiry  may  be  derived  from
the  Defence  of  the  American  conftitutions  of  government ^
lately  publifhed  by  his  Excellency  Mr,  Adams,  where
an  account  is  given  of  moft  of  the  governments  that  have
hitherto  exifled,  in  order  to  prove  the  neceflity  of  pro-
viding checks  and  balances  in  a  conftitution  of  govern-
ment, by  lodging,  as  is  done  in  our  own  conftitution,
the  power  of  legiflaiion  in  more  than  one  aflembly,  and
feparating  from  one  another  the  legiflative,  executive,
amd  judicial  powers.


[ 31 ]

Theory,  excellent  *.  I  have  faid  in  theory
for,  in  confequence  of  the  increafe  of  cor-
ruption and  the  miferable  inadequatenefs
of  our  reprefentation,  it  is  chiefly  the
THEORY  and  FORM  of  our  conftitution  that
we  poflefs;  and  this  I  reckon  our  firfl  an<l
worfl:  and  greatefl  grievance.  We  have
been  the  mofl  diflinguifhed  people  under
heaven.  Lately  our  glory  has  been  eclipfed.
But  could  we,  in  this  inftance,  turn  the
form  into  the  reality  (the  padow  into  the
fubjlance)  we  might  recover  our  former  rank ;
and,  with  the  aid  oifirong  meafures  for  re-
ducing our  debts,  rife,  perhaps,  to  greater
glory  than  ever.

But,  I  mufl:  haften  to  what  I  meant  next
to  mention  as  an  object  necefTary  to  be  at-
tended to  by  the  enlightened  part  of  man-
kind,

*  What  I  here  fay  of  myfelf  I  believe  to  be  true  of
,  the  whole  body  oi Britijh  Subje6ls  among  Prt)teftan't  Di'f-
fenters.  I  know  not  one  individual  among  them  wIto
would  not  tremble  at  the  thought  of  changing  into  ^
Democracy  our  mixed  form  of  government,  or  who  h^  ^
any  other  wifti  with  refpe6t  to  it,  than  to  reftore  it  to
purity  and  vigour,  by  removing  the  defedls  in  our  re-
prefentation, and  eflablifhing  that  independence  of  the
three  flates  on  one  another,  in  which  its  eflence  confifts.


[ 32 ]

kind. In  order  to  improve  the  world. 1

mean,  gaining  an  open  field  for  difcuffion,

by  excluding  from  it  the  interpofition  of

civil  power,  except  to  keep  the  peace ;  by

feparating  religion  from  civil  policy ;  and

emancipating the human  mind  from  the

chains  of church-authority, and  church-

cftablifhments. Till  this  can  be  efFeftedj

the  worft:  impediments  to  improvement  will

remain  *. The  period  to  which  I  have  been

carrying
*

*  Some  notion  of  thefe  impediments  may  be  derived
from  the  following  fads.  Anaxagorai  was  tried  and  con*
demned  in  Greece  under  a  Fagan  eftaWiftiment  for  teach-
ing that  the  fun  and  ftars  were  not  deities,  but  mafles  of
corruptible  matter.  Accufation  of  a  like  kind  con-
tributed to  the  death  of  Socrates.  The  threats  of  big-
gots,  and  the  fear  of  becoming  the  fport  of  prefump*.
tuous  and  ignorant  men,  prevented  Copernicus  from  pub-
liihing,  for  more  than  30  years,  the  papers  containing  his
difcovery  of  the  true  fyftem  of  the  world  j  and  after  at
laft  giving  permiffion  to  his  friends  to  publifli  them,  he
lived  only  to  fee  a  copy  of  his  book  (in  1543)  a  few  hours
before  his  death.  Galileo  was  obliged  to  renounce  the
do6lrine  of  the  motion  of  the  earth,  and  fufFered  a  year's
imprifonment  for  having  afferted^  it.  And  fo  lately  as
the  year  1742,  the  bed  commentary  on  the  firft  produc-
tion of  human  genius  (Newton's  Principia)  was  not
allowed  to  be  printed  at  Rome,  becaufe  it  aflerted  this
dodtrines  and  the  learned  commentators  were  obliged

to


t 33 ]

carrying  your  views  muft,  as  I  have  before
obferved  lo  you,  be  preceded  by  the  downfal
of  all  flavifli  and  antichriftian  hierarchies.
Thefe  let  at  prefent^  and  they  will  let  till  they
are  taken  away^  2  ThefT.  ii.  They  are,  by
certain  prophecy,  deftined  to  deftru6lion.
The  liberahty  of  the  times  has  already
loofened  their  foundations.  The  obftinacy
of  their  adherents  is  increafing  their  danger;
and  the  wife  and  virtuous  of  all  defcriptions
(hould  make  themfelves  wilhng  inftruments
in  the  hands  of  Providence  to  haften  their
removal ;  not  by  any  methods  of  violence;
but  by  the  diffufion  of  knowledge,  and  the
quiet  influence  of  reafon  and  conviftion.

Thirdly ;  Another  great  object  which  the

friends  of  reformation  ought  to  attend  to,

F  is

to  prefix  to  their  work  (afterwards  printed  at  Geneva)
a  declaration,  that  on  this  point  they  fubmitted  to  the
decifions  of  the  church.  The  a£t  of  the  firft  of  Eliz,
ch.  1.  (which  fubftituted  our  prefent  ecclefiaftical  efta-
blifhment  for  the  popiih  one  which  preceded  it)  was
pafled,  Judge  Blackftone  fays,  with  the  diflent  of  all  thff
Bifhops,  (Gibf.  Codex  268.)  and  therefore  the  ftyle  of
Lords  Spiritual  is  omitted  throughout  the  whole.  Black-
ftone's  Comment.  Book  I.  Chap.  ii.  Note.


[ 34 ]

is an IMPROVEMENT IN THE STJV.TE OF
EDUCATION.

The  importance  of  Education  has  been
fo  well  reprefented  to  you  by  my  excellent
friend  and  brother,  Dr.  Kippis,  in  the  dif-
courfe  he  delivered  to  you  in  this  place  lafl:
year,  that  it  is  needlefs  for  me  to  dwell  much
upon  it.  Nothing,  certainly,  can  be  of
more  importance.  Seminaries  of  learning
are  the  fprings  of  fociety  which,  as  they  flow
foul  or  pure,  difFufe  through  fucceflive  gene-
rations depravity  and  mifery,  or  on  the  con-
trary virtue  and  happinefs.  On  the  bent
given  to  our  minds  as  they  open  and  ex-
pand, depends  their  fubfequent  fate;  and
on  the  general  management  of  education
depend  the  honour  and  dignity  of  our
ipecies.  This  is  a  fubjeft  with  which  we
are  far  from  being  fufficiently  acquainted.
I  often  think  there  may  remain  a  fecret
in  it  to  be  difcovered  which  will  contribute
more  than  any  thing  to  the  amendment  of
mankind  ;  and  he  who  fhould  advance  one
ftep  towards  making  this  difcovery  would
deferve  better  of  the  world,  than  all  the
learned  fcholars  and  profeffors  v»^ho  have
hitherto  exifled.

The


[ 35 1

The  courfe  of  improvement,  when  it  has
once  begun,  is  (like  the  motion  of  a  de-.
fcending  body)  an  accelerated  courfe.  One
improvement  produces  other  improvements,
and  thefe  others ;  and  for  this  reafon  there
may  be  improvements,  apparently  little,
which  may  lead  to  fo  many  more  as  to  be,
in  their  confequences,  like  the  opening  of
new  fenfes  among  mankind.  There  is  great
encouragement  in  this  confideration.  It
fliews  us,  that  the  greateft  good  may  arife
from  the  flighteil:  degree  of  real  improve-
ment, which  we  can  produce  by  our  ex-
ertions ;  and  it  fliould,  therefore,  quicken
our  zeal  in  all  fuch  exertions. — This  obfer-
vation  is,  perhaps,  more  applicable  to  the
fubjeft  of  education  than  any  other.  Im-
provement, in  this  cafe,  muft  be  in  the
higheft  degree  ufeful.  It  has  a  particular
tendency  to  perpetuate  itfelf;  and  may,
however  inconfiderable  at  firft,  increafe  fo
far  as  to  bring  about  an  univerfal  reforma-
tion.— A  fet  of  gentlemen,  let  us  fuppofe,
well-informed  and  of  liberal  fentiments,  fee
and  lament  the  defects  and  abufes  in  the
common  modes  of  education.  Thev  refolve
to  try  the  efFed  of  a  new  plan.  They  unite
F  2  their


[ 36 ]

their  influence  and  their  contributions  for
this  purpofe.  They  found  a  college,  fmall
perhaps  in  its  origin  and  narrow  in  its  ex-
tent, but  wife  in  its  regulations.  The  care
with  which  it  is  fuper-intended,  and  the
excellence  of  its  difciphne,  make  it  an  afylum^
in  which  young  men  are  faved  from  the
contagion  to  which  they  are  expofed  in  other
feminaries  ;  and  from  which  they  go  out
well-inftructed  and  well-principled,  to  be  a
comfort  to  their  parents,  an  honour  to  their
teachers,  and  bleffings  to  Society.  This
foon  engages  general  attention,  and  draws
to  it  greater  encouragement ;  in  confequence
of  which  it  extends  its  beneficial  influence
through  a  wider  circle.  The  example  kin-
dles zeal  in  others,  and  gives  rife  to  inftitu-
tions  formed  on  plans  ftill  more  extenfive
and  improved.  One  generation  thus  im-
proved communicates  improvement  to  the
next,  and  that  to  the  next,  till  at  lafl:  a  pro-
grefs  in  improvement  may  take  place  rapid
and  irrefifliible,  which  may  iflue  in  the  hap-
piefl:  flate  of  things  that  can  exift  on  this
earth. — It  cannot  be  amifs  for  the  gentle-
men to  whom  I  am  addreffing  myfelf  to
fancy  themfelves  in  the  fituation  now  de-

fcribed*


[ 37 ]

fcribed.  Should  it  lead  them  to  entertain  a
delufive  expeftation,  it  is  a  pleafing  one,
and  they  will  have  their  reward.  1  he  fuc-
cefs  to  which  it  carries  their  views  is  at  leaft
the  tendency  and  the  poflible  eJfFefl  of  their
exertions.  They  have,  hitherto,  been  en-
couraged beyond  their  expeftations ;  and
they  have  reafon  to  look  forward  to  greater
encouragement.  Let  it  appear,  that  they
are  lilcely  to  improve  the  ftate  of  education,
and  to  fow  the  feeds  of  catholicifm,  virtue
and  rational  piety  in  the  kingdom;  and
there  cannot  be  a  doubt  but  they  will  re-
ceive all  the  fupport  they  can  wifti  for.
And  who  knows  what  a  glorious  fervice
they  may  in  the  end  perform  ?  1  feel,  indeed,
more  and  more  of  a  hope  that  they  are  lay-
ing the  foundation  of  an  inftitution  which
will  gather  ftrength  for  a  long  period,  and
caufe  multitudes  in  future  times  to  rife  up
and  called  them  blefled.

One  of  the  beft  efFefts  which  I  exped:
from  it,  is  an  extenfion  of  that  catholicifm
which  1  have  juft  mentioned,  and  of  a  fpirit
of  candour  and  benevolence.  The  common
efFeft  of  education  has  hitherto  been  the
reverfe  of  this.  It  has  taught  a  gloomy  and

four.


[ 38 ]

four,  inftead  of  a  manly  and  benevolent  re-
ligion i  a  religion  confifting  in  a  blind  at-
tachment to  rites  and  forms  and  myfteries,
and  not  in  an  impartial  enquiry  after  truth,
in  the  love  of  God  and  his  creatures,  and
the  pradice  of  all  that  is  worthy,  from  a
regard  to  the  moral  government  of  the  Deity
and  a  future  judgment.  This  has  produced
fome  of  the  worft  confequences ;  and,  par-
ticularly, that  Odium  I'heologicum  (that  ran-
cour of  ecclefiaftics)  which,  becaufe  furpaff-
ing  in  virulence  all  other  rancour,  has  been
long  proverbial.  There  is,  as  I. have  be-
fore obferved,  lefs  of  this  than  there  ufed  to
be  in.  the  world.  But  too  much  of  it  re-
mains ',  nor  will  it  be  ever  totally  abolifhed,
till  a  conviftion  becomes  univerfal  of  the
following  truth.  *'  That  nothing  is  very
"  important  except  anhoneft  mind;  nothing
"  fundamental  except  righteous  praftife,
*'  and  a  fmcere  defire  to  know  and  do  the
"  will  of  God."  I  wifh  earneftly  I  could
be,  in  any  degree,  the  means  of  propagating
this  conviaion.  There  is  nothing  by  which
any  one  can  better  ferve  the  effential  inter-
efts  of  fociety.  The  inftitution  which  oc-
cafions  the  prefent  fervice  will,  I  hope,  do

much


[ 39 ]

much  good  in  this  way.  It  is  intended  for
the  purpofe  of  providing  that  denomination
of  Proteftant  Diffenters  to  which  we  belong,
with  a  fucceflion  of  able  and  ufeful  minif-
ters.  And  this  is  of  no  lefs  importance  than
the  exiftence  of  our  diflent  from  the  efta-
blifhed  church;  a  diflent  which,  in  my
opinion,  is  derived  from  the  beft  reafons,
— from  a  diflike  of  the  creed  *  as  well  as

the

»  It  fliould  be  attended  to,  that  I  here  fpeak  of  the
Prejbyterian  Az\^on\\nzX\on  of  difTcnters  only.  7'he  whole
body  of  Proteftant  diffenters  confids  of  a  great  variety  of
different  fe<Sls  who  have  hardly  one  co?nmon  principle  of
diflent.  The  majority  of  ihis  very  mixed  and  numer-
ous body  are,  without  doubt,  Calvinijis  and  Trimtayi-
am  ;  and  therefore  cannot  diflike  the  creed oiiht  church  ;
and,  at  the  beginning  of  this  century,  the  faiTiC  was
true  of  even  the  PreJhyUrian  diflenters.  ^  great  re-
volution has  taken  place  in  the  opinion  of  this  lafl:
clafs  of  diflenters :  but  it  originated  in  the  church  it-
felf  with  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  Clarke,  Hoadley,
Whiston,  Sykes,  &c.  and  if  from  thefe  diflenters
the  faith  of  the  eftabliftied  church  is  in  any  danger,  it.
muft  be  more  in  danger  from  many  of  its  own  members,

I  will  take  this  opportuity  to  add,  that  there  is  a  dif-
ference of  opinion  among  diflenters  on  the  fubje£t  of
civil  eftablifliments  of  religion  ;  fome  approving  them
in  general,  and  only  difliking  that  particular  form  of  re-
ligion which  happens  to  be  eftablifhed  in  this  country  ;

while


[ 40 ]

the  ceremonies  of  the  church — from  a  re-
gard to  Chrift  as  the  only  lawgiver  in  his
kingdom,  and  the  rejeftion  of  all  human
authority  in  religion — and,  above  all,  from
a  convi(5lion  that  the  only  proper  objeft  of
our  religious  worfhip  is,  that  one  undivided
and  felf-exiftent  Being  and  caule  of  all  cau-
fes,  v/ho  fent  Chrill  into  the  world,  and
who  is  his  God  and  Father,  no  lefs  than  he  is
€ur  God  and  father.  Thefe  are  reafons  which
give  the  caufe  we  wifh  to  fupport,  a  digni-
ty not  to  be  expreffed  j  and  render  the  pre-
fervation  of  it  our  duty  by  all  the  means
that  are  confiftent  with  the  refpeft  we  owe
to  our  brethren  of  different  fentiments  j  and
particularly  by  the  eftablifhment  of  an  in-
ftitution,  like  the  prefent,  for  educating  mi-
nifters.

But  the  education  of  minifters  is  far  from
being  the  only  end  of  this  inllitution.  It
is,  (as  the  public  has  been  informed  in
our  printed  reports)  farther  intended for

the

while  others  objed  to  all  fuch  eflablifliments,  and  think,
as  I  do,  that  they  encroach  on  the  rights  of  confciencc,
obftru6t  the  progrefs  of  truth,  engender  ftrife  land
animcfity,  and  turn  religion  into  a  trade.  The  former
fort  of  diflenters  muft  wifh  to  fee  their  own  religion  fub-

ilituted.


f 41 ]
the  education  of  youth  in  general  at  that
period  of  approach to mature life when
they  are  moft  liable  to  feduftion,  and  moft
in  danger  of  taking  a  wrong  turn.

In  carrying  on  this  undertaking,  the  firft
aim  of  its  conduftors  will  be  undoubtedly
to  attach  young  minds  as  much  as  poflible
to  virtue,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  commu-
nicate to  them  fuch  inlT:ru6lion  as  fliall  be
beft  fitted  to  aflift  them  in  judging  for  them-
felves,  and  to  engage  them  to  unite  libera-
lity and  humility,  to  piety,  zeal,  and  learn-
ing.

The  beft  education  is  that  which  does
this  moft  effe6tually  ;  which  imprefles  the
heart  moft  with  the  love  of  virtue,  and  com-
municates the  moft  expanded  and  ardent
benevolence  j  which  gives  the  deepeft  con-
fcioufnefs  of  the  fallibility  of  the  human  un-
derftanding,andpreferves  from  that  viledog-
matifm  fo  prevalent  in  the  world ;  which
makes  men  diffident  and  modeft,  attentive
G  to

ftituted  for  that  which  is  eftabliflied;  but  the  latter
dread  fuch  a  fubftitution,  and  can  have  no  other  wifh
thsn  to  fee  all  unjuft  preferences  on  account  of  modes
of  faith  and  worlhip  abolifiicd,  and  all  honeft  and  peace-
able citizens  equally  protected  and  encouraged.


E 42 }

to  evidence,  capable  of  proportioning  their
affent  to  the  degree  of  it,  quick  in  difcerning
it,  and  determined  to  follow  it  >  which,  in
fhort,  inftead  of  producing  acute  cafuifts,
conceited  pedants,  or  furious  polemics,  pro-
duces fair  enquirers  endowed  with  that  hea-
venly wifdom  defcribed  by  St.  James,  which
i^  fi^fi  pure^  then  peaceable^  gentle^  eafy  to
be  entreated^  full  of  mercy  and  good  fruitSy
without  partiality  and  without  hypocrify.  An
education  fo  conduced  is  the  only  means  of
gaining  free  fcope  for  the  progrefs  of  truth ;
of  exterminating  the  pitiful  prejudices  we
indulge  againft  one  another  ;  and  of  efta-
blifhing  peace  on  earth  and  goodwill  among(l
men.

Think  here  of  the  effeds  of  education  as
commonly  managed.  Its  bufinefs  is  to  teach
a  learning  which  puffs  up,  and  which  muft
be  unlearnt  before  reafon  can  acquire  its
juft  influence.  Inftead  of  opening,  it  con-
trails. Inftead  of  enlightening  it  darkens ;
and,  by  giving  a  notion  of  facrednefs  in  dif-
putable  do6trines  and  fluffing  the  mind  with
prejudices,  incapacitates  for  the  reception  of
real  wifdom,  and  makes  men  think  it  their
duty  to  filence,  to  imprifon,  and  perhaps  to

kiU


[ 4S ]

kill  one  another  in  order  to  do  God  fervicc.
Such  was  the  efFedt  of  education  in  our  Sa-
viour's time  among  Jews  and  Pagans.  It
made  felf- righteous  Pharifees,  oftcntatious
difputants,  proud  fophifts,  and  cruel  per-
fecutors,  zealous  for  the  abfurdities  of  fu-
perftition  and  idolatry,  and  furniflied  with
fkill  to  defend  them  and  to  refift  conviftion.
And  the  confequence  was  that,  not  fufpedt-
ing  the  neceflity  of  knowing  themfelves  fools
before  they  could  be  wife,  they  rejefted  with
difdain  the  inftrudion  of  the  Gofpel,-and
that  the  pooreft  and  plaineft  men  who  had
never  been  taught  in  their  fchools,  or  been
perverted  by  the  falfe  learning  of  the  times,
entered  into  the  kingdom  of  God  before
them.  It  is  on  this  circumftance  that  our
Lord's  thankfgiving  in  Matth.  xi.  25.  is
grounded.  I  thank  thee^  O father  y  Lord  of  hea-
ven and  earthy  becaiife  thou  haji  hid  thefe  things
from  the  wife  and  prudent  ^  and  revealed  them
unto  babes^  Let  the  condudlors  of  this  in-
ftitution  take  care  to  avoid  this  error.  Let
it  be  their  ftudy  to  form  men  who  fliall,  in
Chrift's  fenfe,  be  babes  rather  than  wife  and
prudent ;  that  is,  who  fhall  poflefs  the  mo-
^efty,  lowlinefs,  and  teachable  fimplicity  of
G  2  children^


[ 44 ]

children,  rather  than  the  pride  and  dog-
maticalnefs  of  men  who,  having  been  edu-
cated in  colleges,  think  themfelves  wife  andl
learned  -,  but  whofe  learning  produces  a
w'orfe  entanglement  of  the  underftanding
than  common  men  are  fubjedl  to,  and  i^
nothing  but  deeper  ignorance  and  more  in-
veterate prejudice.  This  is  the  great  ad-
vantage by  which  I  wifli  this  inftitution  to
be  diftinguiflied ;  and  it  is  an  advantage
which  it  muft  poflefs,  if  your  prefent  views
are  carrie4  into  execution.  It  is  to  be  form-
ed on  an  open  and  liberal  plan.  Our  two
vmiverfities  are  fortreffes  ere6led  for  the  fe-
curity  and  prefervation  of  the  church  of
England,  and  defended  for  that  purpofe  by
lefts  and  fubfcriptions,.  Moil  of  the  femi-
naries  alfo  among  ourfelves  are  intended  for
conveying  inftrudion  in  the  particular  fyf-
tems  of  the  fe6ts  that  fupporj:  them,  and  for
making  baptifts,  independents,  Calvinifts,
and  GrtJoQdox  believers.  The  founders  of
ihh,.  inftitqtion,  while  they  negleft  no  pro-
per means  pf  making  good  fchclars  and  en-:
lightened  philofophers,  wilj,  I  doubt  not,
be  ^nxious  above  all  things  about  making


r  45  ]

good  nyeii, upright  citizens,  ^nd  ho.nefi-^n^
^andid  believers.

This  is  a  defign  that  all  mqfl:  apprqve
Vvhp  do  not  think,  that  the  truth  having  beerj
happily  found  out  and  eftabliflied  in  this
Jkingdom  two  hundred  years  ago,  nothing  re-
inains  to  be  done  but  to  fupport  it,  and  tQ
adopt  meafures  for  maintaining  tjie  belief  of
it,  and  for  cheating  an  inviolable  attachment
to  it.  Thus,  did  Jevi^s  and  Pagans  think  ia
pur  Saviour's  time  3  and,  therefore,  rejefl:e4
the  Divine  light  of  Chriflianity.  Thus  dp
Mahometans  and  Papifts^  npw  think  of  thieir
national  eftablifhments ;  and,  therefore,
f:pntinue  in  darknefs  and  fuperftition.  Is  it
credible  that  like  confequences  fhould  no}:
arife  from  like  fentiments  in  this  country?
Is  it  not  as  proper  in  us,  as  it  v^ould  be  ia
them,  to  fjufpe^  our  public  creeds  and  forms?
Can  it  be  imagined,  that  w^e  have  reached
a  degree  of  perfedion  v^hich  renders  farther
enquiry  needlefs  ?  I  am  indeed  much  miC-
taken  if  fome  very  great  errors  do  not  ftill
make  a  part  of  our  national  faith.  This  is,
at  leaft,  poflible;  and  t\{is  pe/Jibility  is  a  fuf-
ficient  reafon  for  maintaining  anopennefs  to
fpnvidion  with  refpeft  to  it. Should  fuch

errors


[ 46 ]

errors  exift,  and  the  reformed  churches
themfelves  want  reformation,  inftitutions
for  liberalizing  education  muft  do  infinite
good  by  being  the  means  of  detefting  them.
iBut  fliould  they  not  exift,  fl  ill  the  beft  con-
fequences  muft  follow.  It  will  appear  that
our  national  code  of  faith  and  worfhip  can
ftand  the  teft  of  examination.  It  will  gain
credit,  and  find  a  more  honourable  fup-
port  than  that  authority  of  faUible  men  and
that  interference  of  fecular  power  in  reli-
gion, which  have  hitherto,  almoft  every
where,  fupported  nothing  but  impofture,
fuperftition  and  idolatry.

It  may  be  objected,  that  the  liberality  in
education  which  I  have  recommended,  will
have  a  tendency  to  fet  men  loofe  from  all
principle^.  The  obfervation  I  have  juft
made  proves  this  to  be  an  unreafonable  ap-
prehenfion.  The  beft  way,  certainly,  of
attaching  men  to  true  principles  is  to  enable
them  to  examine  impartially  ^//principles.
Every  truth  that  is  neceffary  to  be  believed
and  reMy  facredy  muft  be  attended  with  the
cleareft  evidence.  Free  enquiry  can  be  hof-
tile  to  nothing  but  abfurdity  and  bigotry*
It  is  only  falfhood  and  delafion  which  fly

frQm


[ 47 ]

from  difcuffion,  and  chufe  to  fkulk  in  the'
dark.

But  I  am  in  danger  of  wandering  be-
yond the  proper  purpofe  of  this  difcourfe.
Let  me  now  recall  briefly  to  your  attention
fome  of  the  reafons  which  fliould  quicken
your  zeal  in  the  great  work  you  have  un-
dertaken.

I  have  already  taken  notice  of  its  great
importance.  Forming  youthful  and  tender
minds  to  virtue,  and  pointing  their  ambi-
tion to  that  moral  excellence  and  refem-
blance  of  the  Deity,  which  alone  conftitute
true  honour  and  dignity — direding  their
faculties  as  they  open,  and  checking  in
them  the  rifings  of  criminal  paflions — af-
fifting  them  in  the  acquifition  of  valuable
knowledge,  and  teaching  them  habits  of
patience,  modefty,  candour,  and  felf-go-
vernment — guarding  them  againft  the  in-
fluence of  the  foolifh  prejudices  which
blind  mankind,  and  preparing  them  by
judicious  difcipline  and  infl:ru6tion  for  an
eafy  admiflion  of  the  light  of  truth ;  and
thus  contributing  to  the  progreflive  im-
provement of  the  world,  the  enlargement

of


(  4  ]

df  Ciirift's  kingdom,  and  the  arrival  of  ea
period  when  the  will  of  God  will  be  done
on  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven.  This,  bre-
thren, this  is  a  work  of  the  nobleft  and
higheft  nature.  Angels  can  hardly  be  more
ufefully  or  honourably  employed.

But  confider  next,  the  need  there  is  of
your  exertions  in  this  inftance.  It  is  a
narrow  and  ill-nlanaged  education  that
keeps  up  difcord  and  malevolence,  and  that
produces  moft  of  the  evils  of  life.  It  is
this  that  is  continually  fending  out  into  the
World  coxcombs,  pedants,  bigots,  defpots^
and  libertines,  to  debafe  the  dignity  of  man^
to  embroil  fociety,  and  to  perpetuate  igno-
rance, vice  and  flavery.  The  fmalleft  de-
gree of  fuccefs  in  an  attempt  to  corre6l
thefe  evils,  by  an  improvement  in  the  ftate
of  education,  would  be  an  ample  reward
for  the  greatefl:  trouble  and  expence  that
could  attend  it.  The  inattervtion  to  this
fubjeft  which  has  prevailed,  is  no  lefs  afto-
niftiing  than  melancholy.  When  the  refo-
Jution  *  was  taken  to  eftabliih  this  inftitu-

tion,

•  Soon  after  this  refolution  was  taken,  a  body  of  very
ijefpeclaBle  Dilientcrs  at  Manchciler,  inftcad  of  joining

us,


t 49 1

tion,  there  was  but  one  feminary  for  educa-
tion, after  paffing  through  the  common
grammar  fchools,  to  which  we,  as  Diflenters
of  the  denomination  commonly,  (though
improperly)  called  Prejbyterian,  could  lookj
and  even  this  feminary  was  by  the  founder
of  it  intended  to  form  Independents  and  Cal^
mnijls.  The  moderation  and  wifdom  of  its
truflees  and  tutors  have  indeed  given  it  a
liberal  turn,  and  made  it  very  ufeful.  It  is
not,  however,  of  fufficient  extent  to  anfwer
all  our  views.  Being  fituated  in  the  coun-
try, it  wants  many  advantages  which  can
be  found  only  near  the  centre  of  the  king-
dom.-^— But  I  will  not  enter  on  a  repeti-
tion of  what  you  have  fo  well  obferved  on
this  fubjeft  in  your  reports  and  circular
letters.

Let  me,  therefore,  defire  you,  in  the  next

place, to  confider the obligation under

which  your  conftant  ufe  of  the  words  of

H  my

us,  refolved  on  an  attempt  to  eftablifh  a  fimilar  i.iftitu-
tion in  ihat  town. At  firft  it  was feared, that, by
dividing  our  ftrength,  this  would  weaken  it  too  much  >
but  the  contrary feems now  to  appear, and  there  if^
reafon  to  hope  that  both  inftitutions  will  profper.


[ so ]

my  text  lays  you,  and  the  encouragement  it
gives  you. — To  pray  for  a  benefit,  without
ufmg  our  endeavours  to  procure  it,  is  a
mockery  of  the  Deity  and  an  abufe  of
prayer.  We  are  commanded  to  pray  for
our  daily  bread ;  but  he  that  fhould  do
this,  while  he  takes  no  pains  to  get  his
daily  bread,  would  be  inexcufeable.  We  are,
therefore,  bound  by  our  ufe  of  that  part  of
the  Lord*s  Prayer  which  I  have  taken  for
my  text,  to  employ  all  the  means  in  our
power  to  caufe  the  kingdom  of  God  to
come,  and  his  will  to  be  done  on  earth  as  it
is  done  in  heaven.  And  one  of  the  beft  of  all
the  means  we  can  employ  is,  I  have  (hewn,
the  eftablifhment  of  fuch  a  feminary  as  we
have  now  in  view.

Our  ufe  of  this  part  of  the  Lord's  Prayer
is  farther  an  encouragement  to  us  in  em-
ploying thefe  means.  A  command  to  pray
for  a  blefling,  implies  that  we  fhall  ob-
tain it,  if  we  ufe  the  means.  In  the  prefent
inftance  particularly,  it  allures  us,  that  an  ex-
tenfion  of  Chrift's  kingdom  and  an  amend-
ment of  the  ftate  of  the  world,  are  bleffings
which  lie  in  fome  degree  within  our  reach,

and


[ 5' ]

and  that  our  exertions  for  this  purpofe  fhall
be  favoured  and  fucceeded.

The  encouragement  derived  from  hence
is  greatly  increafed  by  the  doftrine  on  which
I  have  been  infifting.  A  more  profperous
ftate  of  things  is  to  take  place  on  this  earth.
The  ftone  which  was  cut  out  of  the  moun-
tain, without  human  force,  is  hereafter  to
fill  the  whole  earth,  and  the  kingdom  of
the  Mefliah  to  become  univerfal.  Reafon
and  Scripture  lead  to  this  expeftation  J.  Re-
member then  in  your  endeavours  to  enlight-
en

J  **  Let  us,"  fays  the  Marquis  of  Condorcet  ex-
cellently, '*  be  cautious  not  to  defpair  of  the  human
**  race.  Let  us  dare  to  forefee,  in  the  ages  that  will
**  fucceed  us,  a  knowledge  and  a  happinefs  of  which
*'  we  can  only  form  a  vague  and  undetermined  idea.-»«-
**  Let  us  count  on  the  perfe^ibility  with  which  nature
'*  has  endowed  us ;  on  the  ftrength  of  the  human
*'  genius,  from  which  long  experience  gives  us  a  right
<*  to  expe<Si  prodigies  ;  and  let  us  confole  ourfelves  for
*'  not  being  the  living  witneiTes  of  that  happy  period,
•'  by  the  pleafure  of  predicting  and  anticipating  it,  and
*'  perhaps  by  the  more  fweet  fatisfadlion  of  having  by  a
**  few  moments  accelerated  its  arrival."  Sec  page  365
of  the  Tranflation  of  the  Marquis  of  Condorcet*s
Account  of  the  Life  of  M.  Turgot,  late  Comptroller-
Qeneral  of  the  Finances  of  France,  printed  for  Mf»
Tohnfon  in  St.  Paul's  Churph-yard,


[ 52 ]

en  and  reform  mankind,  that  you  are  co-
operating with  providence ;  that  the  hapd
of  God  has  marked  out  your  path  ;  and
that  his  favour  will  guide  and  proted  you.
I  have  been  fhewing  you  hovv  much  the
ftate  of  the  world  encourages  you.  A  fpirit
of  enquiry  is  gone  forth.  A  difdain  of  the
reftraints  impofed  by  tyrants  on  human
reafon  prevails.  A  tide  is  fet  in.  A  fa^
vourable  gale  has  fprung  up.  Let  us  feize
the  aufpicious  moment,  obey  the  call  of
Providence,  and  join  our  helping  hands  to
thofe  of  the  friends  of  fcience  and  virtue. —
Think  not,  however,  that  you  have  no
difficulties  to  encounter.  It  will  not  be;
ftrange  if  an  alarm  fhould  be  taken  about
the  danger  of  the  church.  There  is  a  jea-
loufy  natural  to  church  eftablifhments  (efpe-
cially  when  undermined  by  time  and  the
fpread  of  knowledge)  which  may  produce
fuch  an  alarm.  In  this  cafe  it  would  be  a  moft
tmreafonable  alarm,  for  if  our  religious  efta-
blifhment  can  bear  difcuffion,  and  ftands  on
good  ground  as  its  friends  muft  believe,,
what  harm  can  be  done  to  it  by  an  inftitu-
tion,  the  defign  of  which  is,  not  to  inculcate
the  peculiarities  of  any  fe6l,  but  to  com-^

municate


f 53 ]

municate  fuch  general  infl:ru<5lion,andto  pro-
mote fuch  a  fpirit  of  enquiry  and  candour,  as
fliall  form  worthy  citizens  for  the  ftate,  and
ufeful  minifters  for  the  church? — Thisjhow-
ever,  is  aconfideration  that  will  not  prevent
oppofition.  The  enemies  of  reformation
may  be  alarmed.  Ignorance  and  intolerance
may  clamour.  But  their  oppofition  cannot
be  fuccefsful.  The  liberal  temper  of  the
times  muft  overpower  them.  Bigotry  and
fuperftition  muft  vanifli  before  increafing
light.  We  fee  the  clouds  fcattering.  W^
live  in  happier  times  than  our  fore- fathers.
The  fhades  of  night  are  departing.  The
day  dawns ;  and  the  Sun  of  righteoufnefs
will  foon  rife  with  healing  in  his  wings.
Let  us  keep  our  attention  fixed  on  this  re-
viving profpeft.  Animated  by  it,  let  us
perfevere  in  our  exertions,  knowing  that,
as  far  as  we  are  on  the  fide  of  liberty  and
virtue,  we  are  on  that  fide  which  muft  at
laft  prevail.

Let  us,  however,  at  the  fame  time  take
care  not  to  forget  a  caution  which  I  have
before  given,  and  cannot  too  often  repeat.
"While  we  proceed  in  our  exertions  with
perfeverancq  and  zeal,  let  them  be  accom?

panied


[ 54 3

panied  with  peaceablenefs,  and  difpofitions
perfeftly  charitable. — Some  of  our  fellow-
chriftians  are  eagerly  maintaining  a  pre-
eminence in  the  Chriftian  church,  which
Chrift  has  prohibited  ;  and  ftruggling  to
preferve  the  power  they  claim  as  interpre-
ters of  Chrift's  laws,  and  kings  in  his  king-
dom *.  They  either  do  not  fee  the  great
change  that  is  going  forward  ;  or,  if  they
do  fee  it,  they  have  not  the  wifdom  to  fuit
their  conduct  to  it,  and  to  prepare  for  its
effects.— Others  of  our  brethren  continue  to
hold  as  facred  fome  of  the  do6lrines  of  the
dark  ages.  The  mift,  which  opening  day  is
difperfing,  ftiil  lurks  round  them.  Ima-
gining

'  •  Never  was  a  more  important  fervicc  done  to  the
caufe  of  religious  liberty,  than  by  the  excellent  Bifliop
Jioadley^  in  the  controverfy  occafioned  by  a  fermon  in
which  he  confuted  thefe  claims.  For  this  fermon,  (and
alfo  his  oppofition  to  a  teft  law  which  ftigmatizes  a
JaTge  body  of  the  king's  bcft  fubje<3:s,  and  profanes  4
chriftian  ordinance)  he  was  threatened  with  the  ven-
geance of  both  houfes  of  convocation  ;  but  the  power
of  government  (in  this  cafe  wifely  applied  to  the  r£-
ftraint  of  clerical  refentment)  interpofed  and  faved  him;
The  ilTue  is  well  known.  He  was  promoted,  and  the
CONVOCATION  ruincd  j  fo;*  fince  that  time  it  has  neve^
been  allowed"  to  fit  to  exercife  its  foinier  powers


t 55 ]

gining  the  acceptance  of  the  Deity  to  be
confined  within  the  circle  of  their  own  faith,
they  cannot  view  mankind  with  the  fame
fatisfadion  that  we  do.  They  have  not  yet
felt  the  chearing  power  of  a  religion  which
makes  nothing  eiTential  but  an  honeft  heart  j
and  they  look,  perhaps,  with  pain  on  your
attempts  to  ferve  the  caufe  of  truth  and
piety.  But  though,  in  this  refped  lefs  happy
than  ourfelves  and  as  we  think  not  fo  well
informed,  they  may  be  truly  worthy  ;  and
wre  fhould  learn  not  to  condemn  them,
whatever  fentiments,  with  refpedl  to  us,  a
miftaken  Judgment  may  lead  them  tp  en-
tertain.

My  own  experience  has  induced  me  to
fpeak  thus  to  you.  I  have  been  an  objeft
of  cenfure  for  actions  v/hich  I  confider  as
fome  of  the  beft  in  my  life.  But  being  con-
fcious  that  I  have  meant  well,  and  believ-
ing  that  I  have  not  laboured  quite  in
vain,  the  cenfure  I  have  met  with  has
made  noimpreffion  upon  me.  I  look  back
with  complacency;  and  I  look  forward
with  joy,  in  hope  of  a  time  when  thofe
good  men  who  now  diflike  me  on  account
of  the  difference  of  our  rehgious  opinions

and


[ 5^ 1

and  views,  will  be  as  ready  to  embraee  m^
as  I  am  to  embrace  them.  V " ,  ■

.  Excufe  this  digreffion.  I  am  growing  toQ;
tedious,  and  I  have  gone  beyond  my  ftrength.
i  will  therefore,  conclude  with  direding  you
to  carry  your  thoughts  to  another  world.
The  period  on  which  I  have  been  difcourf-
ing  will  pafs  while  we  are  filent  in  the  grave.
But  through  the  grace  of  God  in  the  great
Redeemer,  we  fhall  be  raifed  up  from  death
and  enter  on  a  new  world.  There  a  bright-
er fcene  than  this  world  can  exhibit  to  us
in  its  beft  ftate,  will  open  upon  us.  There,
a  government  of  confummate  order  will  be
eftablifhed ;  and  all  the  faithful  and  worthy
of  all  religions  will  be  gathered  into  it.
There  peace  and  love  will  reign  in  full  per*
feftion ;  and  thofe  who,  by  fuch  exertions
as  yours,  are  the  means  of  enlarging  the
kingdom  of  Ghrift,  and  caufing  the  will  of
God  to  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  done  in
heaven,  will  be  exalted  to  ahappinefs  great-
er than  can  be  now  conceived,  and  which
will  never  come  to  an  end. — To  this  hap-
pinefs,  may  God  of  his  infinite  mercy
bring  us,  through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord
and  Saviour.

FINIS.


NOTE  omitted  at  the  words,  Connexion  with  civil
power y  in  page  19.

*  It  is  neceflary,  in  order  to  prevent  miftakes,  I  fhould
here  obferve,  that  by  the  civil  ejiahlijhment  of  religion
which,  in  this  and  feme  other  parts  of  this  difcourfe,  I
have  had  in  view,  I  mean  an  exclufive  fupport,  attended
with  exclufive  advantages  and  emoluments,  granted  by
civil  power  to  the  profeflbrs  of  one  particular  mode  of  faith
and  worfhip  at  the  expence  of  all  the  members  of  the
flate,  whether  they  do  or  do  not  -approve  that  mode  of
faith  and  worfhip;  and  that,  confequently,  an  equal
fupport  of  religion  in  general,  by  requiring  a  contribu-
rion  for  that  purpofe,  payable  by  every  citizen,  but  with
liberty  to  apply  it  to  the  fupport  of  that  worfhip  he  likes
befl,  as  now  pradtifed  in  New  England  ;  is  not  fuch
an  eflablifhment  of  religion  as  I  have  intended  to  con-
demn. I  mufl  add,  however,  that,  in  ri^y  opinion,  this
is  the  farthefl  a  legiflature  ought  to  go  in  its  interference
with  religion.  And,  as  all  that  is  mofl  important  in  re-
ligion is  common  to  all  religions  (that  is,  the  belief  of  a
moral  governor  of  the  world  and  a  future  retribution)
this  feems  to  be  the  only  method  a  legiflature  can  take
to  encourage  what  \s  falutary  in  religion  without  injuf-
tice  and  oppreffion.  If  civil  governors  go  farther,  uni-
verfal  experience  proves  that,  not  being  judges  of  reli-
gious truth,  they  will  fupport  falfliood,  obftrud  the  im-
provement of  the  world,  and  hurt  the  beft  interefls  of
fociety.


i  3P1.  c


(wdaoW-  bdS I'V^


rjfj-.  pi


RE P O R T, &c.


London,  July  u,  1786.

AT  a  numerous  and  refped^able  Meeting  of  the
Subfcribers  to  a  f^ew  Academical  Institu-
tion among  Protestant  Dissenters,  for  the  edu-
cation of  their  Minifters  and  Youth,  Thomas  Roger?,
Efq.  was  called  to  the  Chair  j  and  the  Refolutions  of
the  laft  General  Meeting  of  March  loth  having  been
read  and  unanimoufly  confirmed,  the  following  Report
from  the  Committee  was  read  :  viz.

Gentlemen,
Your  Committee  have  taken  the  libert}'  of  now
convening  you,  in  order  to  inform  you  of  the  progrefs
they  have  made  in  the  important  bufinefs  with  which
you  entrufted  them.  They  cannot  refledi:  on  the  libe-
rality and  zeal,  with  which  the  New  Academicai,
Institution  has  been  encouraged,  without  peculiar
fatisfadion  :  And  they  have  full  confidence,  that  the
Report,  which  they  are  now  able  to  make,  of  the  fuc-'
cefs  of  their  application  in  its  favour,  will  give  you
equal  pleafure.  Your  Committee  confider  this  fuccefs
as  a  public  teftimony  to  the  importance  of  that  plan  of
education,  which  you  concur  in  promoting;  and  as  a
happy  omen  of  its  eftablifhment  on  a  durable  founda-
tion, and  of  the  extenfive  benefits  that  are  likely  to  re*
fult  from  ir.

As  nothing  deferves  the  attention  of  the  Public  In

general,  and  of  Proteftant  DilTenters  in  particular,  more

than  the  principles  and  character  of  their  Youth  ; i£

A  feems


[ 2 ]

fcems  ftrange  that  no  fuch  Inftitution  as  t!iat  now  prc-
pofed,.  uniting  education  with  domeftic  government,
and  extending  the  advantages  of  both,  to  lay-ftudervts  as
well  as  to  candidates  for  the  Miniftry,  fhould  have  been
hitherto  eftablifhed  in  the  neighbourhood  of  London  ;
and  that  the  liberality  and  public  fpirit  of  the  Dif-
fenters,  fo  diftinguiftied  on  a  variety  of  other  occa-
fions,  {hould  never  have  been  direded  to  this  great
object.  The  want  of  fuch  a  provifion  for  the  edu-
cation of  our  laity  in  particular  has  often  been  the
fubje£t  of  complaint  ;  and  it  is,  indeed,  an  evil  which
there  has  been  great  reafon  to  lament.  A  fpirit  of  free
inquiry  is  now  generally  diffufed  ;  and  wherever  it  pre-
vails, it  revolts  againft  thofe  reftridlions  and  (hackles,
which  embarrafs  the  integrity  and  obftrudt  the  improve-
ment of  youthful  minds.  In  the  prefent  advanced  ftate
of  fcience  and  of  religious  liberty,  there  are  many  un-
conne6ted  with  us  as  Diflenters,  who,  we  are  perfuaded,
will  rejoice  in  the  eftablifliment  and  fuccefs  of  that  li-
beral fyftem  of  education  and  of  domeftic  difcipline,
which  is  the  objedl  of  our  Inftitution  :  And  fome  of
them  have  already  afforded  us  confiderable  fupport.
You  will  permit  us  to  add,  Gentlemen,  that  there  is
ample  encouragement  to  proceed,  with  fteady  and  ac-
tive exertion,  in  accompliftiing,  to  its  utnioft  extent,
the  defign  which  you  are  countenancing  by  your  pre-
fence  and  by  your  contributions.

In  purfuance  of  the  inftrud:ions  of  a  General  Meet*
ing,  held  in  this  place  on  the  loth  of  March,  your
Committee  opened  a  fubfcription  in  London,  and  cir-
culated propofals  for  it  through  different  parts  of  the
kingdom  :  And  they  have  now  the  pleafure  to  report
to  you,  that  the  amount  of  the  donations,  the  principal
part  of  which  has  been  already  received  and  invefted  in
the  funds,  is  seven  thousand  pounds,  fifteen  (hil-
lings ;  and  that  of  the  Annual  Subfcriptions  six  hun-
dred and  SIXTY- FIVE  pounds,  fourteen  (hillings  and
fixpence.

You  will  obferve.  Gentlemen,  in  examining  the  lift
now  delivered  to  you,  that  it  contains  the  names  of
many  refpecStable  perfons  in  various  parts  of  the  country,
who concur in tcftifying their approbation  of our

Defign,


r  3  ]

Defign^  and  in  liberally  promoting  the  execution  of  it.
We  are  not  unapprized,  that,  notwithftanding  our  ut-
moft  affidiiity,  there  are  many  more,  both  in  Town
and  Country;,  to  whom  we  have  not  been^able  to  com-
municate our  propofals;  and  who  will,  without  doubt,
come  forward,  and  unite  their  exertions  to  ours  in  the
accomplifhment  of  a  plan. that  is  intended  for  general
utility.  We  can  hardly  fupppfe,  that  any,  who  are
not  influenced  either  by  miftaken  views  or  an  improper
fpirit,  can  be  adtiye  in  their  oppoiilion  to  it.  No  con-
fiderate  and  candid  perfon,  we  prefume,  can  openly
avow  himfelf  hoftile  to  a  Defign,  that  has  no  other
objc<Sl  but  the  benefit  of  our  youth,  of  our  churches,
and  of  the  community  in  general.

We  are  afTured,  Gentlemen,  from  i^e  difpofition  to
ferve  the  Inftitution  which  you  have  already  difcovcr-
ed,  that  you  will  avail  yourfelves  of  every  opportunity
that  may  occur  for  increafing  the  number  of  its  Friends.
It  is  needlefs  to  ftate  to  you,  that  though  the  afliftance
^yhich  has  been  received  is  liberal  and  encouraging,  it
re<5ui,res  a  large  increafe,  in  or^er  to  render  it  fully  ade-
quate to  the  great  expence,  that  muft  unavoidably  at-
tend the  firft  eilabjiftiment  of  an  Inlfitution  which  (hall
l?e  worthy  of  the  gencrofity  of  its  friends,  fefpe<5^able
in  its  conne61;ion  with  that  body  of  DifTenters  who  are
engaged  in  founding  and  fupporting  it,  extenfive  in  its
benefits,  and  permanent  in  its  duration.  We  hope,
therefore,  that  thofe  wiih  whom  you  are  to  entruft  the  fu-
ture conduct  and  final  accomplifhmentof  the  plan  which
has  been  adopted,  will  endeavour  to  procure  farther
aids  for  its  fupport,  by  recommending  it  to  fuch  of  the
liberal-minded  among  their  acquaintance  as  may  not  yet
be  fufficiently  informed  concerning  it.

Your  Committee  have  not  been  inattentive  to  a  vari-
ety of  other  circuniftances,  that  are  efleatially  connec-
ted with  the  eftablifhmcnt  and  future  profperity  of  tfie
Inftitution.  They  have  been  indefatigable  in  their  en-
deavours to  procure  a  houfe,  in  a  fituation  agreeable  to
jhe  views  of  the  J^enefadlors  and  Subfcribers,  and  fit
•for  accommodating  a  fufficient  number  of  Students.
But  notwithftanding  the  moft  diligent  fearch  and  in-
iquiry,  they have  not  hitherto  been  able  to  find any-


t 4 3 •

houfe  that  is  at  all  adapted  to  the  purpofe.  It  is,  there-
fore, their  opinion,  that  it  will  be  thought  neceflary  to
build  a  commodious  Academical  Houfe  :  And  that  this
is  the  moft  pra6licable,  and,  all  circumftanccs  confi-
dered,  the  moft  eligible,  and,  probably,  the  moft  fru-
gal meafure.  They  alfo  apprehend,  that  the  parts  ad-
jacent to  Hackney  or  Clapton  would,  for  a  variety  of
reafons  which  it  is  unnecefTary  to  enumerate,  be  con-
venient in  refpeil  of  fituation  :  And  they  have  reafoii
to  believe,  that  a  proper  fpot  of  ground  may  be  obtain-
ed in  that  neighbourhood.  In  the  mean  while  your
Committee  are  of  opinion,  that  fuitable  apartments
fhould  be  procured  for  one  year,  for  the  purpofe  of
giving  lectures  to  fuch  divinity-ftudents  as  the  General
Committee  may  think  proper  to  encourage,  until  the
Inftitution  be  fixed  in  a  houfe  capable  of  admitting  a
refident  Tutor  and  the  Students  in  general,  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  feffion  1787.

Your  Committee  farther  inform  you,  that  they  have
applied  by  a  particular  letter  to  each  of  the  Truftees
and  Subf.  ^iber^  of  the  late  Warrington  Academy,  and
alio  by  a  mea.orial  addrcfled  to  them  at  their  General
Meeting  on  the  29' h  of  Juoe  :  And  they  have  the  fatif-
fa<^ion  to  add,  that  the  Truftees  and  Subfcribers  have
been  fo  obliging  as  to  aflign  to  the  New  Academical
Inftitution  their  Fhilofophicjl  Apparatus,  ^nd  a  moiety
of  the  furplus  of  their  rernaini'ng  funds,  under  certain
reftritStions.

Application  has  likewife  been  made  to  the  Truftees
of  the  late  Academy  at  Exeter  for  the  ufe  of  their  libra-
ry, which  your  Committee  have  reafon  to  believe  will
be  attended  with  fuccefs.

The  23d  Refolution  of  the  loth  of  March,  which
cxpreftes  that  "  a  permanent  fund  is  of  great  importance
**  to  the  prosperity  and  continued  fubfiftence  of  this
<'  inftitution,"  appeared  to  your  Ccmmittee  of  fuch
moment  as  to  deferve  their  particular  attention.  You,
Gentlemen,  we  are  perfuaded,  will  excufe  cur  antici-
pating a  bufinefs,  which  is  referred  by  that  Refolution
to  the  General  Committee  ;  and  allow  us  to  fubmit  to
your  approbation  feme  regulations  with  refpec^  to  fuch
a  fund,  which  we  are  of  opinion  it  may  be  proper  to
*  , •  .  adopt*


f s ]

adopt.  We  are  happy  to  think,  that  the  liberality  of
the  friends  of  the  Inftitution  empowers  us  to  make  an
immediate  appropriation  of  part  of  our  capital  to  this
fund  ;  and  that  we  (hall  be  able  to  referve  fuch  a  pro-
portion of  future  benefa<Stions  for  this  purpofe,  as  to
render  this  not  only  a  permanent,  but  an  increafing
ifund.

Your  Committee  now  beg  leave  to  recommend  the
choice  of  a  General  Committee,  agreeably  to  your  Re-
folutions  of  the  loth  of  Marxh,  who,  we  doubt  not,
will  devote  much  of  their  time  and  attention  to  the
completion  of  the  great  obje6l  which  we  have  in  view.
"Wifdom,  unanimity,  and  zeal,  are  neceffary  to  perfedi
your  Defign:  And  we  truft  that  every  exertion  will  be
made,  by  thofe  to  whom  you  commit  the  eftablifhment
of  your  Inftitution,  for  enfuring  its  credit  and  profpe-
rity ;  and  that,  confcious  of  the  integrity  of  their
views,  and  encouraged  by  the  magnitude  and  impor-
tance of  the  objedt,  as  well  a-s  by  the  concurrence  of
thofe  whofe  approbation  is  of  the  greateft  value,  they
will  perfevere  in  fo  good  a  caufe.  The  hope  of  its^
anfwering  the  important  and  ufeful  ends,  which  you
propofe,  and  of  its  conducing  to  the  extenfive  and  laft-
ing  benefit  of  Protellant  Diflentcrs  and  of  the  commu-
nity in  general,  muft  animate  every  friend  of  religion
and  liberty,  of  his  country  and  of  mankind.

The  Report  of  the  Committee  having  been  read,  the
Chairman  made  the  following  Report,  viz.

Gentlemen,

1  beg  leave  to  inform  you,  that  in  purfuance  of  the
14th  Refolution  of  the  loth  of  March,  application  has
been  made  to  the  Gentlemen  therein  named,  requeuing
their  affiftance  for  carrjing  on  the  purpofes  of  the  Infti-
tutfon,  as  Tutors.  I  have  now  the  pleafure  to  ac-
quaint you,  that  Dr.  Price  will  aflifl  in  giving  le6lures
pii  fele£t  parts  of  Morals,  Mathematics,  Agronomy,
and  Natural  Philofophy  :  Dr.  Kippis  has  confented  to
ledture  on  the  Bejles  Lettrcs,  including  Univerfal
Grammar,  Rhetoric,  Chronology,  and  Hiftory;  Dr«
Rees  has  undertaken  Divinity,  Hebrew,  Jewifh  Anti-

* ■ ■-■■■'■  quities.


I 6 ]

quiti*s,  Ecclefiaftical  Hiftory,  ?nd  lecSiures  on  other
lubjedls  preparatory  to  the  Miniftry  :  And  Mr.  Wor-
thington  has  undertaken  Logic  and  Claffical  Literature.
Dr.  Recs  and  Mr.  Worthingtcn  have  alfo  engaged  to
inftru(5l  the  Students  in  the  elementary  parts  of  Mathe-
matics and  Natural  Philofophy  in  the  enfuing  year,
until  the  arrangement  of  Tutors  for  the  New  Inftitu-
tion  can  be  completed,  and  the  vvhole  plan  carried  into
fall  exeicution  by  the  ere6Hon  of  a  proper  building.

I  am  directed  farther  to  inform  you,  Gentlemen,
that  the  Committee  recommend  particular  attention  to
the  inftruclion  of  the  Students  in  Experimental  Philo-
fophy, Chemiftry,  and  a  proper  mode  of  elocution.

After  thefe  reports  the  following  Refolutions  were
propofed  and  unanimoufly  agreed  to,  viz.

J.  Whereas  by  the  2d  Refolution  of  the  loth  of
March  it  was  refolved,  that  fome  farther  regula-
tions be  adopted  as  to  thofe  who  ftiall  become  An-
nual Subfcribers  after  the  24th  of  June,  it  is  novir
refolved,  in  order  to  accommodate  fuch  perfons  as
have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  fubfcribing  to
the  New  Academical  Inftitution,  that  the  payment
of  two,  three,  four,  or  five  guineas,  or  upwards,
before  the  25th  of  December  next,  as  an  Annual
Subfcription,  (hall  conftitute  an  Annual  Governor :
But  that,  after  the  25th  of  December,  the  firft
payment  of  five  guineas  or  upwards,  the  fecond
payment  of  four  guineas,  the  third  payment  of
three  guineas,  and  the  fourth  payment  of  two
guineas,  each  as  an  Annual  Subfcription,  Ihall  be
neceflary  to  conftitute  Annual  Governors,
IL  That  one-thiid  of  the  prefent  and  future  dona-
tions, benefactions,  and  bequefts  to  the  New  Aca-
demical Liftitution  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Lon-
don, the  fame  not  being  Annual  Subfcriptions,
ihall  go  to  create  a  permanent  fund;  the  capital
whereof  (hall  be  preferved  for  ever  inviolable  and
unalienable  in  the  hands  of  Truftees.
III.  That  on  the  ift  of  January  in  each  year,  the
'  Treafurer  fliall  makp  up  an  account  of  all  fucU
donations,  benefactions,  and bequefts,  not  being

Annual


[ 7 ]

Annual  Subfcriptions,  as  fhall  have  been  received
in  the  preceding  year,  and  deliver  the  fame  to  the
Qeneral  Committee  at  their  next  enfaing  Meeting;
'  that  one-third  of  the  amount  thereof  may  be  paf-
fed  or  placed  by  the  General  Committee  to  the
account  of  fuch  fund.

IV.  That  the  Annual  income  arifmg  from  the  per-
manent fund  fhall  alone  be  paid  from  time  to  tinrie,
as  it  arifes,  towards  the  fupport  of  the  faid  Infti-
tution,  in  fuch  manner  as  the  General  Committee
fhall  diredl;  or,  if  the  faid  Inftitution  (hall  at  any-
time hereafter  be  dilTolved,  or  be  difcontinued  for
the  fpace  of  three  years,  to  the  founding  or  to  the
fupport  of  any  other  Academical  Inllitution,  or  of
any  Inftitution  preparatory  to  fuch  among  the
Proteftant  Diffenters,  for  the  liberal  education  of
youth  in  any  part  of  England  or  Wales  ;  or  in
giving  exhibitions  to  Students  for  theMiniftry;
or  in  fupporting  one  or  more  Tutors  at  any  fuch
Inflitution  or  Inftitutions  within  the  fame  limits  ;
as  the  General  Committee  (hall  dired:.

V.  That  in  cafe  of  the  difiblution  or  fufpenfion  for
three  years  of  the  faid  Inftitution,  and  after  the
difcharge  of  its  debts,  all  other  property  belonging
to  the  faid  Inftitution,  which  (hall  then  be  fubjecS
to  the  difpofal  of  the  General  Committee,  (hall  be
held  in  truft  by  the  Truftecs  to  be  chofen  in  pur-
fuance  of  the  7th  Refolution  of  the  General  Meet-
ing of  the  loth  of  March  laft,  jointly  with  the
Truftees  of  the  permanent  fund;  and  that  fuch
other  property  Ihall  thenceforth  be  applied  to  the
fame  objects  and  by  the  fame  authority  as  the  in-
come of  the  permanent  fund.

VI.  That  the  General  Committee  eftablifti  the  per-
manent fund,  as  foon  as  poffible,  agreeably  to  the
preceding  Refolutions  ;  and  that  they  prepare  a
proper  declaration  or  deed  of  Truft  for  this  pur-
pofe.  That  four  Gentlemen,  who  are  Governors
for  life,  be  appointed  .Truftees  of  the  faid  fund,
and  that  they  be  authorized  to  "mveft  the  monies
belonging  to  it  in  land,  ftocks,  buildings,  or
mortgages,  and  to  vary  and tranfpofe'the  fecuri-

tief.


t  8  ]


VII


tle§,  under  the  diredlion  of  the  General  Committee^
as  circumrtances  may  require.  That  all  vacancies
in  this  Truft  fhall  be  filled  lip,  by  the  General
Meeting.  And  that  the  following  Gentlemen  be
the  firft  Truftees,  viz.  Vlr.  Jofeph  Travers,  Mr.
John  Towgood,  Mr.  William  Lfdaiie^  and  Mr.
Thomas  Rogers,  jun.
That  in  purfuance  of  the  4th  Refolution  df  the
loth  of  March,  the  following  Gentlemen  be  the
viz.


General  Committee,

JLevy  Ames,  Efq.
Nath.  Barnardillon,  Efq.
Dr.  Bayly

Henry  Beaufoy,  Efq.  M.  P.
Benjamin  Boddington,  Efq.
Richard  Bright,  Efq.
George  Brooksbank,  Efq.
R.  Hall  Clarke,  Efq.
Richard  Cooke,  Efq.
Michael  Dodfon,  Efq.
Sir  James  Efdaile,  Alderman
John  Finch,  Efq.
EdsVard  Grubb,  Efq.
William  Hawker,  Efq.
Chrift.  Heinekin,  Efq.
Sir  H-Hoghton^  Bart;  M.P.
T.  Brand  Hollis,  Efq.
B.  B.  Hopkins,  Efq. M.  P.
Rev.  T.  Jervis,
George  JefFery,  Efq.
Edward  Jeffries^ Efq.
Adam  Jeiiicoe,  Efq.
John  Ingram,  Efq.
Francis  Kemble,  Efq;
Andrew  Kippis,  D.  D.
Thomas  Lees,  Efq.
Rev.  T.  Lindfey,
Rev.  J.  Lindfay,
Philip  Mallet,  Efq.
George  Makby,  Bfq*


Rev.  T.  Morgan,
W.  New  many  Efq.  &  Aid,
Robert  Newton,  Efq.
Richard  Price,  D.  D.
Abraham  Rees,  D.  D.
Thomas  Rickards,  Efq.
Thomas  Rogers,  Efq,
William  RuiTel,  Efq.
John  Savery,  Efq.
William  Scullard,  Efq.
Samuel  Shore,  Efq.
Samuel  Shore,  jun,  Efq.
Rev.  J.  Simpfon,
Philip  Slater,  Efq.
William  Smith,  Efq.  M.  P.
Ifaac  Solly,  Efq.
Thomas  Streatfield,  Efq.
William  Tayleur,  Efq.
R.  G.  Temple,  Efq.
Matthew  Towgood,  Efq,
Jofeph  Turton,  Efq.
Mr  John  Wanfey,
George  Webfter,  Efq.
James  Weft,  Efq.
Ifaac  Wilkinfon,  Efq.
Rev.  Ed.  Williams,  Notting,
T.  Carill  Worfley,  Efq.
Rev.  H.  Worthington,  juH.
John  Yerbury,  Efq.


VIII.  That


[ 9 ]

VlII.  That  the  following  Gentlemen  be  Corref-
pondent  Members  of  this  Society  :  viz.  the  Rcvi

Meflrs.

R.  Alderfoiij  Norwich  P.  Jillard^  near  Taunton

Edward  Armftrong,  Bath  W.  Johnftone,  Brighthelmft.

ll.  Barbauld, Warwick-court  George  Morgan,  Yarmouth

Malachi  Blake,  Taunton  James  I*ickbo urn,  Hackney

Samuel  Blythe,  Birmingham  — Pope,  Stand,  near  Manch.

John  Coates,  ditto  J.Prieftley,  LL.  D.  Birmingh.

J.  Difney,  D.  D.  Brumpton  R.  Scolefield,  ditto

Peter  Emans,  Coventry  —  Walker,  Enfidd

W.  Enfield,  LL.  D.Norwich  G.  Walker,  Nottingham

—  Eftlin,  Briftol  W.  Walters,  Wimbledon

Hugh  Farmer,  Walthamftow  William  Wood,  Leeds

J.  Fuller*  Cheftiam,  Bucks  H.  Worthington,  Leiceftcf

S.  Griffiths,  Wolverhampton  T.  Wren,  D.D.  Portfmouth

R.  Harris,  Colchellcr  John  Yates,  Liverpool.
W.  Hawkes,  Birmingham

IX.  That  in  purfuance  of  the  7th  Refolution  of  the
loth  of  March,  the  following  four  Gentlemen  bfe
Truftees,  viz.  Nathaniel  Barnardifton,  Ef<j.  Wil*
liam  Smith,  Efq.  M*  P.  Samuel  Shore,  jun.  Efq;
and  Mr.  John  Wanfey.

X.  That  in  purfuance  of  the  8th  Refolution  the  fol-
lowing three  Gentlemen  be  the  Committee  of
Treafury,  viz:  Thomas  Rogers,  Efq.  MattheW
Towgood,  Efq.  and  Michael  Dodfon,  Efq.

XI.  That  in  purfuance  of  the  9th  Refolution  the  fol-
lowing three  Gentlemen,  being  Governors,  but
not  of  the  General  Committee,  be  Auditors  of  the
Accounts  of  this  Society,  viz.  Mr.  Ifaac  Thompfon^
Mr.  William  Stone,  and  Mr.  Sturch.

XII.  That  the  Thanks  of  this  Meeting  be  given
to  the  Truftees  and  Subfcribers  of  the  late  War-
rington Academy  for  granting  their  Philofophical
Apparatus  and  a  moiety  of  the  furplus  of  their  re-
maining funds  to  the  New  Academical  Inftitution  :
And  that  the  Chairman  be  defired  to  tranfmit  the
fame  to  Thomas  Butterworth  Bayley,  Efq.  the
Chairman  of  the  late  Meeting,  held  at  Warrington
on  the  29th  of  June.

B  XIII.  That


[ lo ]

^III.  That  the  thanks  of  this  Meeting  be  given  to  the

late  Committee  for  their  fervices.
XIV.  That  the  thanks  of  this  Meeting  be  given  to

the  Chairman.

(Signed)
THOMAS  ROGERS,  Chairman.


N.  B  The  Trudys  of  the  Library  belonging  to  the
late  Exeter  AcademyWiet  on  the  2cft  inftant  to  confider
of  the  application  referred  to  in  the  above  Report.

Prefent, the  Rev.  Mic.  Towgood,
Rev.  John  Hogg,
^ Rev.  Abraham  Tozer,
Rev.  J.  P.  Bartlett,
Rev.  James  Manning.
Who  unanimouily  agreed  to  grant  the  ufe  of  their  Li-
brary to  t!ie  New  Academical  Inftitution ;  at  the  fame
time  prefenting  their  compliments  to  the  Gentlemen  of
the  Committee,  and  affuring  them  that  they  wifh  them
every  degree  of fuccefs in the prefent undertaking,
that  they  are  happy  to  have  it  in  their  power  to  oblige;
them,  and that  they  (hall  always  hold  themfelves  un-
der continued  obligations  to  do  all  they  can  to  forward
fo  laudable  a  Defign.

The  following  is  a  copy  of  a  Vote  of  rhanks  pafTed  at
the  half-yearly  AlTembly  of  Proteftant  DifTenting  Mi*
nifters,  held  at  Exeter  on  the  loth  of  May  laft,  tranf-
mitted  by  the  Moderator  of  that  AlTembly  to  Thomas.
Rogers.  £fq.

Refolved,

That  the  thanks  of  this  Afiembly  be  returned  to  the
Gentlemen  of  the  Committee  of  the  New  Acade-
mical Inilitution  for  their  attention  to  the  itate  of

the


the  DifTenting  Intereft,  and  their  vigorous  exer-
tions to  fupport  it.  That  the  Moderator  be  de-
fired  to  communicate  the  thanks  of  the  Aflembly
to  the  Committee,  and  at  the  fame  time  exprcfs
our  approbation  of  the  general  plan  of  the  New
Inftitution,  and  our  wifhes  for  its  fucccfs.

(Signed)

JAMES  MANNING,  Moderator.


R E P O R t, &c.


\T SI O -i >1 ^


REPORT, &c.


London,  January  17,  1787.

AT  a  numerous  and  refpe6lable  Meeting  of  the  Go-
vernors and  Subfcribers  to  the  New  Academi-
cal Institution  among  Proteftant  Diflenters,  for  the
education  of  their  [Vlinifters  and  Youth,  Thomas  Ro-
gers, Efq.  was  called  to  the  Chair;  and  the  follow-
ing Report  from  the  Committee  was  read  :  viz.

Gentlemen,

Agreeably  to  the  third  Refolution  of  the  loth  of
March,  1786,  that  a  General  Annual  Meeting  be  held
on  the  third  Wednefday  of  January  in  each  year,  to  elect
Officers,  receive  Reports,  and  tranfa(5t  other  bufinefs
rcfpeding  the  New  Academical  Inftitution,  your  Com-
mittee have  now  called  you  together.

Senfible  of  the  great  importance  and  utility  of  the  de-
fign,  which  you  have  authorized  them  to  carry  into  exe-
cution, your  Committee  have  been  anxious  to  difchargc
their  truft  with  fidelity  and  zeal,  and  have  been  unre-
mitting in  their  endeavours  to  accelerate  the  completion
of  an  Inftitution,  which  proraifes  the  moft  beneficial  ef-
fe6ls  with  regard  to  the  rifmg  generation,  and  the  gene-
ral interefts  of  truth,  piety,  virtue,  and  religious  li-
berty.

The  neceflity  of  hiring  fuitable  apartments  for  the
purpofe  of  giving  LecSfures  to  fuch  Divinity  Students  as
the  Committee  might  think  proper  to  encourage,  until
the  Inffitution  be  fixed  in  a  houfe  capable  of  admitting
Lay-ftudents  as  well  as  others,  has  been  fuperfcded  by  the
A  kindnefe


f a ]

kindnefs  of  the  Truftees  of  Dr.  Daniel  Willlanis*s  Li-
brary, who  have  unanimoufly  confented  to  grant  us
the  ufe  of  a  room  in  that  library  during  the  prefent
year.

Accordingly  the  Academical  bufinefs  commenced,  in
the  beginning  of  October,  with  five  Divinity  Students,
befides  one  who  is  upon  his  own  foundation.  To  thofe
encouraged  by  your  exhibitions,  another,  well  recom-
mended, hath  this  month  been  added.  The  Tutors
have  regularly  carried  on  a  courfe  of  Lectures  to  the  Stu-
dents fix  days  in  the  week.  They  are  alfo  inftrudled,
one  day  in  the  week,  in  the  principles  and  practice  of
elocution  ;  a  fubje£l  of  much  confequence  to  thofe,  who
are  intended  to  be  public  fpeakers.

Juftice  to  the  young  men  under  your  patronage,  re-
quires our  informing  you,  that  their  abilities  and  appli-
cation, as  well  as  their  religious  and  moral  condu<St,
give  us  reafon  to  expedt,  that  by  their  future  ufefulnefs
they  will  do  honour  to  your  generous  encouragement
and  fupport.

With  regard  to  the  grand  object  of  providing  an  Acade-
mical Houfe,  or  College,  your  Committee  have  beftowed
upon  it  the  moft  affiduous  attention.  They  have  examined
every  place  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Metropolis  which
might,  in  their  opinion,  be  likely  to  anfwer  your  views*
They  entered  into  feveral  negociations  for  the  purchafe
of  houfes  or  for  procuring  a  proper  fpot  of  ground,  and
they  obtained  from  Mr.  Blackburn,  an  able  Surveyor
and  Architedt,  and  a  zealous  friend  to  the  prefent  under-
taking, the  plan  of  a  commodious  building.

After  a  variety  of  endeavours,  and  much  enquiry  and
deliberation,  they  have  been  induced  to  give  a  decided
preference  to  the  houfe  and  land  in  the  parilh  of  Hack-
ney, which  they  have  purchafed  for  the  ufe  of  the  Infti-
tution,  and  which  they  haVe  reafon  to  believe,  will  be
found  adequate  to  your  wiihes.

The  houfe  is  a  large  and  noble  building,  and  in  the
moft  fubftantial  repair.  The  land  belonging  to  it,  and
in  which  it  (lands,  is  computed  to  confift  of  about  eigh-
teen acres,  enclofed  within  a  brick  wall.  The  walks,  gar-
den ground,  offices,  and  other  conveniences,  corrcfpond
in  every  refpe^t  to  the  houfe  itfelf. The  fituation  is  in  a

' healthful


U  1

healthful  and  gravelly  foil,  well  watered,  and  afFording
agreeable  and  extenfive  profpe6ts.  The  principal  apart-
ments of  the  houfe  are  admirably  accommodated  for  a
library,  lecture  rooms,  and  the  public  meetings  of  the
friends^  of  the  Inftitution.  It  is  alfo,  in  its  prefent
flate,  capable  of  admitting  a  number  of  pupils  :  but
as  other  buildings  will  be  requifite  for  accommodating
fuch  a  number  of  Students  as  there  is  reafon  to  expert
will  be  offered,  it  is  neceflary  to  eredl  an  additional
wing,  which  it  is  propofed  to  execute  as  fpeedily  as  pof-
fible.  The  purchafe  of  this  valuable  freehold,  with  the
fixtures,  timber,  and  other  articles  upon  it,  has  been
five  thoufand  fix  hundred  pounds;  a  fum  which  enters
deeply  into  the  funds  of  the  Society.  But  large  as  this
fum  is,  when  it  is  confidered,  that  an  entire  new  build-
ing, with  the  land  neceflary  for  it,  properly  enclofed  and
laid  out  for  the  domeftic  and  other  ufes  of  the  Inftitution,
would  have  been  much  more  expenfive  ;  that  there  was
an  extreme  difficulty  in  procuring  a  fuitable  fpot  of
ground  ;  and  that  it  would  have  required  two  or  three
years  before  the  edifice  could  have  been  fitted  for  ufe  :—
When  it  is  farther  confidered  that  this  purchafe  is  in  the
moft  defirable  fituation  which  could  have  been  feleifted  ;
that  it  has  a  refpe6iable  and  collegiate  appearance;  that
it  is  adapted  to  the  convenient  attendance  of  tutors,  go-
vernors, and  vifitors  ;  that  it  is  well  cakulated  for  the
prefervation  of  difcipline ;  that  it  is  near  to  fuch  different
places  of  worfhip,  as  may  be  agreeable  to  the  inclinations
and  choice  of  the  Students,  or  of  their  Parents  and  Guar  •
dians  ;  and  that  it  has  in  it  every  capability  of  improve-
ment, to  whatever  degree  of  extent  and  dignity  the  In-
ftitution may  hereafter  arrive ;  your  Committee  have  a
full  confidence  that  their  conduct  will  receive  your  una^
nimous  approbation  ;  and  that  your  zeal  and  that  of  the.
other  friends  to  this  great  objeft  will  be  exerted  to  give
it  the  moft  effecStual  and  liberal  fupport.

Your  Committee,  having  been  happy  in  attaining  fo
important  a  point,  have  the  fatisfa£tion  of  informing  you,
that  they  have  fucceeded  in  another  matter,  of  no  little
confequence.  They  have  engaged  for  Affiftant  refident
Tutor,  the  Rev,  John  Kiddle,  of  Tiverton,  Devon  •»
{liire|  an  elderly  gentleman  of  acknowl^^^g^^  abilities


f 4 ]

a»d  excellent  cha<^<fter,  and  of  an  amiable  temper,  \frl*«
Has  Iwig  been  employed  in  the  bufinefs  of  education,  and
who  is  not  only  weii  aequainted  with  the  Greek  and  La^
tin  languages,  but  alfo  with  the  modern  tongues.  This
gentleman,  by  being  always  upon  the  fppt,  befides  at-
tending to  the  order  of  the  family,  will  be  able  to  give
cfFe£iual  aid  to  your  other  Claffical  Tutor,  in  bringing
the  Younger  Students  forward  in  that  fpecies  of  litera-
ture ;  an  object  which  your  Committee  have  very  mucb
at  heart.  Mrs.  Kiddle,  the  wife  of  Mr.  Kiddle,  who
is  excellently  fitted  for  the  purpofe  by  her  prudence  and
experience,  ias  well  as  by  her  a6live  and  cheerful  difpo-
fition,  is  chofen  houfe- keeper,  under  the  dire<5lion  of
the  Committee,  who  take  upon  themfelves  the  care  of
the  commons.  Your  Committee  have  the  farther  hope  oS
engaging,  as  foon  as  proper  accommodations  can  be  pro-
vided. Dr.  Rees  to  be  Superintending  Refident  Tutor*  [
tJy  thefe  arrangements,  and  others  to  be  farther
adopted  (in  the  future  appointment  of  a  Mathematical
and.Philofophical  Tutor),  in  procuring  all  the  neceflary
means  of  important  and  ufeful  inftru<Stion,  and  in  form*
mg  a  proper  fyflem  of  internal  regulation  and  difcipline,
your  Committee  hope  to  eftablifh,  upon  the  foundation
already  laid,  fuch  an  Inftitution,  as  will  not  only  fur*
mfti  a  recuifite  fupply  of  Minifters,  but  qualify  young
gentlemen  for  filling  the  various  ftations  and  oiEces  of
civil  life  with  dignity  aind  ufefulnefs.  This,  they  ap-
prehend, to  be  anobje6tof  fingular  importance;  and  no,
meaifui;*©  that  can  contribute  to  the  attainment  of  it,  fhal^
be  difregarded.  ::)

•  Th«y!  have  the  ajdditional  pleafure  of  acquainting  yo«ijj
tfeat  MIrs.  Harris,  of  Honiton,  Devonfliire,  widow  ofth^
late  Rev.  and  learned  Dr.  William  Harris,  the  author  of
f&veral  hiftorical  woj-ks,  bath  made  a  prefent  to  the  Nevs?-
Aca^erriiicai  Infthution  of  her  huftjand's  Library,  con-;
taining  many  curious  publications.  This  generous  do-,
rwtioo^  and  rbe  ufe  of  the  Exeter  Library  already  ob-
tai^ned^  your  Committee  regard  as  pleafrng  aufpices  that
ffettire  initances  will  occur  of  fimilar  generofity  5-- a
large  and  well  furniftied  library  being  highly  conducive
to  tiie  honour  and  utility  of  the  la^itutLon.

Agrqeabl^


[ 5 ]

Agreeably  to  former  Refolutions  of  the  general  body
of  the  Subfcribers,  your  Committee  have  proceeded  in
eftabiifhing  a  permanent  fund,  and  prepared  a  proper
deed  of  truft  for  this  purpofe.  Arid  they  now  report  to
you  that  the  fum  of  £.  2,332,  5^.  being  the  third  part
of  the  amount  of  the  benefadions  received  in  the  lad
year,  hath  been  palled  or  placed  to  the  account  of  the
laid  fund  in  purfuance  of  the  3d  Refolution  of  the  21ft
of  July  laft.  They  beg  leave  to  add,  that  the  prefent
amount  of  benefatStions,  fubfcriptions,  and  dividends  on
ftock,  the  greateft  part  of  which  has  been  received,  is

£'  8,547,  gs.

Thus  far  yoyr  Committee  have  been  enabled  to  pro-r
ceed  ;  and  they  are  happy  in  having  fo  agreeable  a  prof-
pc(5t  before  them.  They  are  fenfible  that  much  yet  rcr
maifis  to  be  done  ;  that  many  regulations  are  to  be  efta-
blifhed,  and  various  meafures  to  be  purfued,  prcvioufly
to  the  opening  of  the  College  at  Michaelmas  next.  To
thefe  things  they  will  zealoufly  and  diligently  apply  j
and,  when  prepared,  will  take  the  liberty  of  convening^
you  again,  and  laying  before  you  an  account  of  their
proceedings.

While  your  Committee  exprefs  their  moft  grateful
fenfe  of  the  generous  fupport  with  which  the  defign  hatli
already  been  favoured,  they  beg  leave  to  add,  that  farther
aid  is  requifite  to  carry  it  on  to  perfection  ;  and  this  aid
they  have  the  full  confidence  of  receiving  from  the  na-
ture, importance,  and  extent  of  the  Inftitution,  and  tlie
munificent  fpirit  of  its  friends  and  patrons.  Several  re-
fpe<5table  perfons  have  added  their  names,  fince  the  lalt
lift  of  ben-efa^lors  and  fubfcribers  was  printed: — And
there  ca-n  be  no  doubt  but  that  others  will  come  for-
ward on  this  great  occafion  ; — the  greateft  dccafion-
which  hath  ever  called  forth  the  attention  and  the  ar-
dour of  the  liberal-minded  among  the  Proteftant  Dif-
fenters  ;  and  one  of  the  greateft  oecafions  that  has  eve^r
been  prefented  to  the  friends,  in  general,  of  truth  and
pi«ty,  of  an  enlarged  and  virtuous  education,  and  of
^iyil  and  religious  liberty.

The


t 6 3

The  Report  having  been  read,  the  following  Refolu-
tions  were  nfoved  and  Unanimously  agreed  to,  viz.

I.  That  the  Thanks  of  this  Meeting  be  given  to  the
Committee  for  the  nieafures  they  have  taken,  as
now  reported  ;  and  particularly  for  the  purchafe,
fo  judicioufly  made,  at  Hackney,  for  the  ufe  of  the
Inftitution,  vi^hich  we  highly  approve  of  for  the
iituation  of  our  intended  College,  and  which  ap-
pears in  other  refpecSls  fo  well  to  correfpond  with
the  magnitude  and  importance  of  the  objedts  which
we  have  in  view.

JI.  That  the  Committee  be  inftru£^ed  to  make  fuch
immediate  addition  to  the  houfe  lately  purchafed  at
Hackney  as  they  fhall  judge  to  be  neceflary  for  the
proper  opening  of  the  College  in  September  next,
and  to  take  fuch  other  meafures  as  (hall  appear  to
them  to  be  requifite  for  carrying  their  whole  plan
into  execution.

III.  That  the  Thanks  of  this  Meeting  be  given  to  the
Truftees  of  the  Exeter  Library  for  their  grant-
ing the  ufe  of  it  to  this  Inilitution.

IV.  That  the  Thanks  of  this  Meeting  be  given  to
Mrs.  Harris,  widow  of  the  late  Rev,  Dr.  William
Harris,  for  her  very  valuable  prjefent  of  his  Li-
brary.

V.  A  doubt  having  arifcn  as  to  the  meaning  of  the

Refolution  under  which  the  General  Committee
was  appointed  in  July  laft,  Refolved  that  the
prefent  Committee  be  continued  tijl  the  tbir4  We^-
nefday  in  January  next.  t i.  .

VL  That  the  Thanks  of  this  Meeting  be  given  to
|he  Chairman.

(Signed)

THOMAS  ROGERS,  Chairman.

N.  B.  Subfcriptions  for  this  Inftitution  will  be  re*
ceived  by  the  Chairman,  or  any  other  Qentlemaii  qf  th^
Committee,


f 7 ]

London,  March  21  ^  lySji

Sir,  ^

The  Committee  for  eftablifhing  the  New  Acade-
mical Institution  have  now  the  pleafure  of  tranf-
mitting  to  you  a  farther  Report  of  their  proceedings,  to-
gether with  the  Refolutions  of  the  General  Meeting  of
Subfcribers  held  on  the  17th  of  January.  The  infor-
mation contained  in  this  Report  would  have  been  com-
municated fooner,  if  the  Committee  had  not  been  defi-
rous  of  giving  you,  at  the  fame  time,  an  account  of  the
meafures  that  have  been  adopted  in  purfuance  of  thefe
Refolutions.  By  the  Report  you  will  find,  that  the
houfe  lately  purchafed  is  excellently  adapted  in  a  va-
riety of  refpeds  to  the  purpofes  of  the  InfHtution.  Be-
iides  the  rooms,  which  will  be  appropriated  to  the  li-
brary, lectures,  and  public  exerciies,  as  well  as  to  do-
meftic  ufe,  it  contains  feveral  other  very  commodious
apartments,  which  will  be  allotted  for  the  reception  of
Students.  1  hefe  are  fpacious  and  airy ;  and  being  fit
lor  immediate  refidence,  the  Committee  will  have  it  in
their  power  to  accommodate,  at  the  opening  of  the  (&[^
fion  in  September  next,  a  confiderable  number  of  Young
Gentlemen  intended  for  civil  and  commercial  life,  be-
fides  thofe  defigned  for  the  Miniftry  ;  of  which  they
take  this  early  opportunity  to  inform  their  friends.
Their  terms  of  admi/Tion  will  fooh  be  announced  to  the
public.

But  as  there  is  reafon  to  expert  a  much  greater  num-
ber of  Students  than  the  houfe  in  its  prefent  ftate  will
admit,  the  Committee,  in  confequence  of  the  Refolu^-
tions  of  the  laft  General  Meeting,  have  given  orders  for
the  addition  of  a  new  wing,  confiding  of  feveral
ranges  of  lodging-rooms  and  ftudies,  \Vhich  will  be  ex-
ecuted with  all  convenient  difpatch.  The  plan  is  already
formed  by  Mr.  Blackburn,  and  a  Sub-committee  is  ap-
pointed for  fuperintending  the  execution  of  it,  under
his  diredion,  and  agreeably  to  an  eflimate  which  he  has
delivered.  We  have  the  pleafure  to  add,  that  the  pro-
pofed  building  has  been  much  approved  not  only  by  the
General  Committee,  but  by  many  other  friends  of  the

Inflitutiony


C 8 J

tnftltuliori,  to  whom  the  defign  has  been  communicated.
The  wing  now  undertaken  is,  indeed,  only  part  of  a
plan,  which  we  hope  to  fee  executed,  in  its  utmoft  ex-
tent, at  fome  future  period,  by  the  generous  patronage
of  the  public.  We  have  ordered  the  plan  and  elevation
of  the  building  to  be  engraved^  copies  of  which  will  be
fent  to  the  Subfcribers  as  foon  as  they  are  finifhed,  that
the  moft  diftant  friends  of  the  Inftitution  may  be  able  to
form  a  judgment  of  our  whole  defign,  and  be  induced
to  unite  with  us  in  their  wifhes  and  exertions  for  its
completion.

With  that  general  concurrence  which  we  may  rea-
fonably  expecSl,  we  have  no  doubt  of  accomplifhing  the
great  object  in  view  ;  and  of  efiablifhing  an  Inftitution,
the utility  of  which  will  be  exienfive  and  permanent.

Whtlft  the  Committee  have  been  anxious  to  provide
Suitable  accommodations  for  the  Young  Gentlemen,
who  may  offer,  they  have  been  no  lefs  afliduous  in  their
endeavours  to  lay  the  foundation  of  fuch  government
and  difcipline  as  may  be  efFed^ual  for  preferving  their
virtue  and  reputation.  They  have  the  pleafure  cf  in*
forming  you,  that  with  this  view,  they  have  prevailed
on  Dr.  Rees  to  accept  the  office  of  Refident  Tutor,  and
to  take  the  dtrcdion  and  government  of  the  Inftitution,
A  houfe  contiguous  to  the  main  building  is  now  prepar-
ing for  his  accommodation,  and  will  be  ready  at  the
opening  of  the  feffion.

The  Committee  are  alfo  digefting  a  fyftem  of  inter-
nal regulations,  derived  as  far  as  they  are  able  to  coUe^l:
them  from  the  wifdom  and  experience  of  thofe,  who
have  been  connedcd  with  fimilar  Inftitutions.

They  are  determined  moreover,  to  provide,  at  all
times,  fuitable  means  of  inftrud^ion  in  the  various
branches  of  Literature  and  Science.

Upon  the  whole  they  indulge  the  hope,  that  the  fitu-
ation  of  the  New  Inftitution,  and  the  advantages  that
accompany  it  with  regard  to  health,  morals,  and  men-
tal improvement,  will  render  it  adequate  in  importance
and  ufe  to  the  juft  expectations  of  its  liberal  founders,
and  recommend  it  to  the  patronage  of  the  ffiends  of
truth  and  virtue,  of  their  country,  and  of  mankind.

'  The


I 9 1

The  Committee  beg  leave  to  add,  that  the  completbn
of  the  plan  which  they  have  adopted  will  require  farther
affiftance  5  nor  have  they  any  fear  that  their  defign  will
fail  for  want  of  encouragement  and  fupport.  They  arc
folicitous  to  avoid  both  the  extremes  of  parfimony  and
profufion  ;  and  to  approve  themfelves  to  the  friends  of
the  Inftitution  by  fuch  exertions  at  its  firft  eftabliihr
ment  as  may  be  likely  to  contribute  to  its  credit  and
fuccefs.

It  is  the  higheft  ambition  of  the  Committee  to  be
faithful  to  their  truft  ;  and  to  apply  the  donations  ancj
fubfcriptions,  committed  to  their  difpofal,  in  fuch  a
manner  to  the  fupport  of  this  InlHtution,  as  (hall  appear
to  their  deliberate  judgment  the  moft  efFedual  for  the
advancement  and  profperity  of  the  caufe  of  Truth  and
Liberty,  and  for  the  reputation  and  advantage  of  the
rifing  generation.  Thefe  are  the  great  obje£ls  to  which
their  own  views,  in  concurrence  with  thofe  of  the  other
friends  of  the  Inftitution,  are  diredled  ;  and  to  the  at-
tainment of  thefe  objects  they  devote  a  very  confider-
able  portion  of  their  time  and  labour.  Happy,  there^
fore,  in  the  confcioufnefs  of  their  own  integrity  and
zeal,  and  encouraged  by  the  appprobation  of  thofe  who
arc  beft  acquainted  with  the  meafures  they  are  purfuing,
they  confide  in  your  continued  affiftance.

We  are,  Sir,  with  great  rcfpe£l.

Your  moft  huipble  Servants,

Signed,  by  order  of  the  CprnmitteCj

1_.  THOMAS  ROGERS,  Chairman,


?ri  '?r.fi


!Mi ^»f>l


■t;.i


3  }o  iH3infti«.J


«fik9cfr»f  j^r^


NEW  ACADEMICAL  INSTITUTION.


THE  Committee  for  eftablifljing  the  New  Aca-
demical Institution  among  Proteftant  Dif*
fejiters,  for  the  education  of  Minifters  and  Youth,
have  now  the  pleafure  to  inform  the  public,  that  the
ipacious  and  eligible  houfe,  which  they  have  purchafed
in  the  parifh  of  Hackney,  will  be  opened  for  the  re-
ception of  Students,  on  the  29th  day  of  Septcmbfcr  next.
The  Situation  of  this  houfe  is  recommended  by  a  va
riety  of  local  conveniences  and  advantages  j  and  the
Committee  will  afliduoufly  avail  thcmfclves  of  every
circumftance  that  may  be  conducive  to  the  health,  moral
conduct,  and  literary  improvement  of  the  young  Gentle-
men, who  fliall  be  entrufted  to  their  care.  They  beg
leave  to  add,  that  it  is  a  fundamental  principle  of  this
Inftitution,  that  it  will  be  open  to  perfons  of  all  Deno-
minations, who  will  be  encouraged  in  forming  their
religious  fentiments  without  reftri^ion  or  impofitiom

The  courfe  of  education  will  be  comprehenfive  and
liberal,  and  adapted  to  youth  in  general,  whether  they
are  intended  for  civil  or  commercial  life,  or  for  any  of
the  learned  profcffions.  This  courfe  will  include  the
X^atin,  Greek,  and  Hebrew  Languages,  Greek  and  Ro-
man Antiquities,  Ancient  and  Modern  Geography,
Ujiiverial  Grammar,  Rhetoric  and  Compofition,  Chro-

nology,


[^  ]

nology,  Hiflory,  Civil  and  Ecclefiaftical,  the  PnncU
pies  of  Law  and  Government,  the  feveral  Branches  of
Mathematics,  Aftronomy,  Natural  and  Experimental
Philofophy  and  Chemiftry,  Logic,  Metaphyfics  and
Ethics,  the  Evidences  of  Religion,  Natural  and  Re-
vealed, Theology,  Jewifh  Antiquities, -and  Critical
Le£lures  on  the  Scriptures.

The  Gentlemen  who  have  engaged  to  condu<ft  this
plan  of  education,  are,  the

Reve  Richard  Price,  D.  D.  F.  R.  S.

Rev.  Andrew  Kippis,  D.  D.  F.  R.  S.  and  S.  A,

Rev.  Abraham  Rees,  D.  D.  F.  R.  S.

Rev.  Hugh  Worthington.

Rev.  George  Cadogan  Morgan.  .

Rev.  John  JCiDDtE.

The  Students  will  be  inftru(Sled  in  the  pra£l:ice  of
Elocution,  by  a  perfon  appointed  for  that  purpofe.

The  ufual  courfe  for  young  Gentlemen  not  intended
for  the  miniftry,  will  be  compleated  in  three  years;
and  with  refpe<Sl  to  thofe  who  fhall  continue  longer  in
college,  a  proper  plan  of  education  will  be  purfued.

The  commons  will  be  provided  by  the  Committee  j
and  the  Students  will  be  under  the  more  immediate  di-
re£lion  and  government  of  Dr.  Rees,  who  will  refidc
in  a  houfe  contiguous  to  the  main  building,  and  of  Mr,
Kiddle,  who  will  live  in  the  college  with  the  ftudents.

The  terms  for  each  feflion,  commencing  on  the  third
Monday  in  September,  and  clofmg  on  the  iirft  day  of
July,  are  fixty  guineas,  which  will  include  apartments,
board, and  education. Students  on  the  foundation

will


[ 3 ]

will  be  provided  for  in  thefe  refpe(5ls  without  expence  :
And  the  Committee  will  encourage  young  perfons  in-
tended for  the  miniftry,  whofe  friends  are  willing  to
defray  the  charges  of  their  board  and  education,  by  a
conllderable  abatement  in  the  above  terms.

It  is  fcarcely  neceflary  to  obferve,  that  the  fituation
of  this  Inftitution  affords  opportunity  of  obtaining  the
beft  means  of  in{lru(5tion  in  French  and  other  Modern
Languages,  Drawing,  &c.  at  a  feparate  expence.

No  Divinity-ftudents  will  be  admitted  under  the  age
of  fixteen  years ;  nor  any  Lay-ftudents  under  the  age
of  fifteen  years,  nor  above  the  age  of  eighteen  years  :
and  it  is  expected,  that  all  ftudents  be  well  recom-
mended both  as  to  condud  and  qualifications.

Applications  for  the  admifllon  of  ftudents  may  be
made  to

Thomas  Rogers,  Efq;  Cornhill,
Matthew  Towgood,  Efq;  Clement*s-lane,
Michael Dodfon, Efqj Bofwell-court,
Carey- ftreet,  • ^

Dr.  Price,  Hackney,
Dr.  Kippis,  Crown -ftreet^  Weftminfter,
Dr.  Rccs,  Old  Jewry,
Rev.  H.  Worthington,  Iflington.

London,  April  24,  1787.

N.  B.  Subfcriptions  for  this  Inltitution  will  be  re-
ceived by  the  Treafurcrs,  or  any  other  Gentleman  of  the
Ccmmittec.


'  Trcafurcrs.


[  >  ]

nology,  Hiflory,  Civil  and  Ecclefiaftical,  the  Princi^
pies  of  Law  and  Government,  the  feveral  Branches  of
Mathematics,  Aftronomy,  Natural  and  Experimental
Philofophy  and  Chemiftry,  Logic,  Metaphyfics  and
Ethics,  the  Evidences  of  Religion,  Natural  and  Re-
vealed, Theology,  Jewifh  Antiquities,- and  Critical
Le£lures  on  the  Scriptures.

The  Gentlemen  wht)  have  engaged  to  conduct  this
plan  of  education,  are,  the

Rev,  Richard  Price,  D.  D.  F.  R.  S.

Rev.  Andrew  Kippis,  D.  D.  F.  R.  S.  and  S.  A.

Rev.  Abraham  Rees,  D.  D.  F.  R.  S.

Rev.  Hugh  Worthington.

Rev.  George  Cadogan  Morgan.  .

Rev.  John  Kiddj-e.

The  Students  will  be  inftru<Sled  in  the  pra£lice  of
Elocution,  by  a  perfon  appointed  for  that  purpofe.

The  ufual  courfe  for  young  Gentlemen  not  intended
for  the  miniftry,  will  be  compleated  in  three  years;
and  with  refpe£l  to  thofe  who  fhall  continue  longer  in
college,  a  proper  plan  of  education  will  be  purfued.

The  commons  will  be  provided  by  the  Committee  •
and  the  Students  will  be  under  the  more  immediate  di-
re£lion  and  government  of  Dr.  Rees,  who  will  refidc
in  a  houfe  contiguous  to  the  main  building,  and  of  Mr,
Kiddle,  who  will  live  in  the  college  with  the  ftudents.

The  terms  for  each  feffion,  commencing  on  the  third
Monday  in  September,  and  clofing  on  the  iirfl:  day  of
July,  are  fixty  guineas,  which  will  include  apartments,
board, and  education. Students  on  the  foundation

will


[ 3 ]

will  be  provided  for  in  thefe  refpecSls  without  expence  :
And  the  Committee  will  encourage  young  perfons  in-
tended for  the  miniftry,  whofe  friends  are  willing  to
defray  the  charges  of  their  board  and  education,  by  a
conllderable  abatement  in  the  above  terms.

It  is  fcarcely  neceflary  to  obferve,  that  the  fituation
of  this  Inftitution  affords  opportunity  of  obtaining  the
beft  means  of  inftruftion  in  French  and  other  Modern
Languages,  Drawing,  &c.  at  a  feparate  expence.

No  Divinity-ftudents  will  be  admitted  under  the  age
of  fixteen  years ;  nor  any  Lay-ftudents  under  the  age
of  fifteen  years,  nor  above  the  age  of  eighteen  years  :
and  it  is  expected,  that  all  ftudenfs  be  well  recom-
mended both  as  to  condu<5l  and  qualifications.

Applications  for  the  admiflion  of  ftudenis  may  be
made  to

Thomas  Rogers,  Efq;  Cornhill,  ]

Matthew  Towgood,  Efq;  Clement*s-lane,\  ^
Michael Dodfon, Efqj Bofwell-court,j
Carey- ftreet,  )

Dr.  Price,  Hackney,
Dr.  Kippis,  Crown -ftreet,  Weftminfter,
Dr.  Rces,  Old  Jewry,
Rev.  H.  Worthington,  Iflington.

London,  Jpril  24,  1787.

N.  B.  Subfcriptions  for  this  Inltitution  will  be  re-
ceived by  the  Treafurcrs,  or  any  other  Gentleman  of  the
Ccmmittec,


f

4-^

University  of  Toronto

3: a;

H 0

Library

0

•H

DO  NOT /f

REMOVE /

for  a  future

mankind .

THE 1
CARD 11
FROM ^

-

Richard
evidence
state  of

THIS \
POCKET \

Price,
The

in  the

1

Acme  Library  Card  Pocket

r  ,

LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  limited

K^
