Robert  E.  Gross
CoUeftion

A  Memorial  to  the  Founder
of  the


Business  Administration  Library
Los  Angeles


0


ly


^%^^^j^  ^-X"*^.* »r-*-  '^


:*■*•


V


OBSERVATIONS

O N

REVERSIONARY PAYMENTS;

O N

Schemes  for  providing  Annuities
for  Widows,  and  for  Perfons  in  Old  Age  ;

O N

The  Method  of  Calculating  the  Values
of  Assurances  on  Lives  ;

AND ON

The national DEBT.

To  which  are  added,

FOUR ESSAYS

On  different  Subjects in  the  Do6trine  of  Life
Annuities  and  Political  Arithmetick.

ALSO,

AN APPENDIX,

Containing  a  complete  Set  of  Tables;  particularly.
Four  New  Tables,  fnewing  the  Probabilities  of  Life  in
London,  Norwich,  and  Northampton;  and  the
Values  of  joint  Lives.

By RICHARD PRICE, D.D. F.  R.  S.

L 0 N D O N:

Printed  for  T.  C  A  D  E  l  l,  in  the  Strand,

M.DCC.LXXI.


cr


ill


CONTENTS.


/.


NTRODUCTION. - - Page  vli


CHAP. I..

^lejiions  relating  to  Schemes  for  granting  Re^

'verJiGiiary  Annuities y  and  the  Values  of  Af-

furances  on  Lives. - - - p.  i

CHAP. II.

Sect.  I.  Of  the  London  Annuity,  and
Laudable  Societies  for  the  Beneft  of  Widows.

p.  64

Sect.  II.  Of  the  Ajj'ociation  among  the  Lon-
don Clergy  and  the  Minifters  in  Scotland,
for  providing  Annuities  for  their  Widows,

p.  84

Sect.  III.  Of  the  beji  Schemes  for  providing
Annuities  for  Widows, - - P*  97

Sect.  IV.  Of  Schemes  for  providing  Life-
Annuities^  which  are  not  to  commence  till
particular  Ages  ;  andy  particularly y  cf  the
Societies  lately  ejlablijhed  in  London  for  the
Scfiejit  of  Old  Age.  -  -  -  p.  108
A  2  Sect,


iv  CONTENTS.

Sect.  V. Of  the  Amicable  Corporation  yi?r

a  perpetual  A ffurance -Office  .•  and  the  Society

for  Equitable  AfTurances  on  Lives  and  Sur-

vivorffiips. - - - - p.  122

CHAP. IIL

Of  Puhlic Credit, and  the National Debt,

ESSAY I.

Ohfervations  on  the  Expeciations  of  Lives ;  the.
Increafe  of  Mankind ;  the  Nimiber  of  Inha-
bit ajits  in  London  j  and  the  Influence  of  great
fl'oivns  on  Health  and  Population.  In  a  Let-
ter to  Benjarnin  Franklin,  Efq-y  L  L.T>,  and
F.  R' S.  p.  167.  To  which  is  added,  a
Pojicripty  containing  Obfervations  on  Edin-
burgh, Paris, and  Berlin. - p.  209

ESSAY IL

On  Mr,  De  Moivre'j  Rides  for  calculating  tke
Values  of]omx.  Lives. - - p.  222

ESSAY IIL

On  the  Method  of  calculating  the  Values  of
P^cverfions  dependifig  on  Survroorfloips.  p.  22 8

ESSAY IV.

On  the  proper  Method  of  conftrudling  Tables  for
determining  the  Rate  of  human  Mortality^

the


CONTENTS.  V

the  Number  of  Inhabitants y  ^and  the  Values
of  Lives  in  any  Town  or  DiJiriB,from  Bills
of  Mortality  in  winch  are  given  the  Numbers
dying  annually  at  all  Ages, - - p.  235

APPENDIX.

Containing  Algebraical  Bemonjlrations  -,  Tables  i
and  Rules  for co?nputi?jg the Increafe of
Money  bearing  Compound  Liter  eft, ^'  '2.JJ


A3  IN-


Puhlijljcd  by  the  fame  Author ,

I.  A  Review  of  the  principal  Q,ueftions  and
£\.  Difficulties  in  Morals.  Particularly,
thole  relating  to  the  Original  of  our  Ideas  of  Vir-
tue, its  Nature,  Foundation,  Reference  to  the
Deity,  Obligation,  Subject-matter,  and  Sanctions,
The  Second  Edition  corrected.

11. Four  Dissertations. 1.  On  Provi-
dence.  -II.  On  Ph AVER.- III.  On  the  Rea-

fons  for  expefting  that  virtuous  Men  fliall  meet

after  Death  in  a  State  of  Happincfs. IV.  On

the  Importance  of  Chrifcianity,  the  Nature  of  Hi-
{lorical  Evidence,  and  Miracles.  The  Second
Edition,  with  Additions.

Printed  for  T.  Cad  ell,  in  the  Strand..


INTRODUCTION


EFORE  the  Reader  enters  upon  this
Work,  it  will  not  be  improper  to  give
him  the  following  information  cbricerniiig  it»

A  few  years  ago,  many  gentlemen..;  ot  the
firfl  eminence  in  the  law,  formed  themfelvcs
into  a  Society,  for  providing  annuities  for  the
tvidows  of  all  fuch  perfons  in  judicial  ofHces,
barrifters,  civilians,  and  folHcitors,  as  fhould
chufe  to  become  members.  A  plan  was  agreed
tipon  and  printed ;  but,  fome  doubts  happen-
ing to  arife  with  refped:  to  it,  the  diredors
refolved  to  afl<.  the  opinion  arid  advice  of  three
gentlemen,  well  known  for  their  fkill  in  cal-
culation. This  occafioned  a  further  reference
■^o  me  5  and  the  iiHie  was,  that  the  plan  be-
ing found  to  be  infufficient,  the  whole  defign:
Was  laid  alide.

About  the  fame  time,  feverat  othef  focie-

ties  were  formed  with  the  fame  views  ;  but

^ll  on  plans  alike  improper  and  infufncient.

A  4  Findin-g


vili INTRODUCTION.

Finding,  therefore,  that  the  public  wanted
information  on  this  fubjecfl,  I  was  led  to  un-
dertake this  work  ;  imagining,  that  it  might
be  foon  finiilied,  and  that  all  I  could  fay
might  be  brought  into  a  very  narrow  com-
pafs.  But  in  this  I  have  been  much  miflaken.
A  defign,  which  I  at  iirfl  thought  v/ould
give  little  trouble,  has  carried  me  far  into  a
very  wide  field  of  enquiry ;  and  engaged  me
in  many  calculations  that  have  taken  up  much
time  and  labour,  I  (hall,  however,  be  fuffi-
ciently  rewarded  for  my  b.bour,  flaould  it
prove  the  means  of  preventing  any  part  of
that  diftrefs,  which  is  likely  to  be  hereafter
produced  by  the  focieties  now  fubfifting  for

the  benefit  of  widows. 1  have  proved  the

inadequatenefs  of  their  plans,  by  undeniable
i?.cls  and  mathematical  demonftration  {a). —
1  have,  further,  given  an  account  of  fome  of
the  bed  plans,  that  are  confident  with  a  fuf-
ficient  probability  of  permanency  and  fuc-
ccia. Should,  therelore,  any  of  tbeie  fo-

(a)  In  the  note  p.  68,  I  take  notice  of  the  five  guineas
J7r/e  required,  by  ioir.c  ot  thcle  (bcieties  at  admilfion  ;  and
mention  lome  reafons  for  not  making  any  particulai  al-
lov^aiice  for  if.  Uur  I  have  fmce  learot,  that  it  is  indeed
no  more,  than  the  iirft  of  the  yearly  payments,  which
I  have  always  fuppofed  to  bef;in  immediately.  No  al-
lowance, therefore,  was  neceflary  to  be  made  for  it.

4  cicties


INTRODUCTION. ix

cieties  determine  to  reform  themTelves;  or
fhould  any  inlHtutions  of  the  fame  kind  be
hereafter  eftablifhed,  they  will  here  find  di-
rcdion  and  affiflance  ^/;).

la

{o]  I  have  lately  learnt,  that  Mr.  Caciell,  the  p':b;i-r.-r
of  this  work,  and  alio  Mr.  Beckety  Bookfeller  in  the
Strand,  are  commiflioned  to  deliver  in  London^  printed
accounts  of  the  fcheme  of  a  fociety,  efiabliihed  five
years  ago  at  Amjierdnm,  for  granting  annuities  on  furvi-

vorfliip. 1  cannot  faiisfy  my  own  mind  vvithout  intro^

ducing  here,  though  an  improper  place,  the  folloviring
remarks  on  this  fcheme.

From  the  folution  of  Qiieftions  I  and  IV.  in  the  Firft
Chapter  of  rhe  following  Work,  ic  may  be  gathered,  that,
(reckoning  intcreft  at  ■^l- per  cent,  and  the  probiibilitiesof
life  as  they  are  in  I'ables  III.  IV.  and  V.  in  the  y^-
pendix)  the  value  of  ?n  annuity  of  i/.  for  life,  to  be  en-
joyed by  a  perfon  aged  20,  provided  he  furvives  another
perfon  aged  60,  is  b'/.  lbs.  bd.  in  one  prcfent  payment;
and  185.  6d.  in  annual  payments,  during  the  two  joint
lives :  the  firft  payment  to  be  made  immediately.  A  Jingle
payment^  therefore,  of  j^O  Jlorins^  entitles  to  an  annuity
ot  i^Jlorlm  ;  and  an  atinual  payment  of  no  florins,  to  an
annuity  of  i  ig  florins ;  and  both  together,  to  an  annuity
of  i7^fiorins.  if  the  annual  payments  are  to  be  made,  not
during  xhz  joint  lives,  but  during  the  whole  continuance
of  the  o\dt[k  flugle  life,  they  will,  together  with  the  fingle
payment,  entitle  to  an  annuity  of  \^^  florins.  Butthis  fo-
ciety promifes,  for  thefe  payments,  an  annuity  of  lOO
florins,  if  the  oldefi:  life  fails  in  the  fi.ft  year  after  admif-
fion  j  100  fliOrins,  if  it  fails  in  the  2d  year  ;  "jpo  ftorins,  if
it  fails  in  the  third  ;  ^00  florins,  if  it  fails  in  the  4th  ;  and
^00  flori'is,  if  it  fails  in  ihc  flfth  year,  or  at  any  time  af-
terwards. It  is,  therefore,  evident  that  the  fcheme  of
this  fociety  is,  in  this  inflance,  grofsly  defedfive.  There
are  other  inltances  in  which  it  is  even  more  defedlive  j
and  the  ivhek  of  it,  like  the  fchemcs  of  moft  of  the  Lon-

din


X INTRODUCTION.

In  Queflion  VI.  Chap.  I.  a  general  me-
thod is  defcribed  of  finding  the  values,  in
Jingle  and  annual  payments,  of  all  life-annui-
ties which  are  to  begin  after  a  given  term
of  years  -,  and,  in  the  4th  Section  of  the  2d
Chapter,  the  plans  of  the  focieties  for  grant-
ing fuch  annuities  are  particularly  confidered,

and  proved  to  be  extremely  deficient.- ^'

Indeed,  the  general  difpofition  which  has
lately  fhewn  itfelf  to  encourage  thefe  focieties,
is  a  matter  of  the  moft  ferious  concern  j  and
ought,  I  think,  to  be  taken  under  the  no-
tice of  the  Legifi.ature.  The  leadiiig  perfons
among  the  prefent  members,  will  be  tli^jirji

don  focieties,  appears  to  have  been  contrived  by  perfons
who  had  no  principles  to  go  upon.  And  yet  it  has  been
much  encouraged.  Many  have  entered  themfelves  into
it  from  different  parts  of  Europe  ;  and  the  printed  plan
acquaints  us,  that  it  is  now  in  poffeiTion  of  an  annual  in-
come of  100.000  florins.  What  difappointment  then  muft

it  in  time  producer it  is  provided  by  its  rules,  that  the

terms  of  admiffion  Ihall  become  lefs  andlefs  advantageous,
the  longer  it  has  fubfifled  ;  juft  as  if  the  value  of  the  an-
nuities it  promifes  depended,  not  on  the  probabilities  of
life,  and  the  improvement  to  be  made  of  money,  but  on

the  ae;e  of  the  fociety. 1  have  taken  notice  of  a  fimilar

abfuidity  in  the  rules  of  our  own  focieties.  But  it  is  eafy
to  fee  v/hat  is  meant  by  it.

Mr,  Cadell  can  procure  from  his  correfpondents  in
Holland^  any  information  for  thofe  who  may  want  to
know  more  of  this  fociety.  But  indeed  I  fiiould  be  ferry
to  find  it  much  enquired  after  in  LoNii'ON.

annul-


INTRODUCTION. xi

annuitants  ;  and  they^  are  fure  of  being
gainers  :  and  the  more  infufficient  the  fcheme
is,  on  which  a  fociety  is  formed,  the  greater
will  be  the  gains  of  the  firft  annuitants.
The  fame  principle,  therefore,  that  has  pro-
duced and  kept  up  other  buhbJesy  has  a  ten-
dency to  preferve  and  promote  thefe;  and,
for  this  reafon,  it  is  to  be  feared,  that,  in  the
prefent  cafe,  no  arguments  will  be  attended
with  any  effe6t  (c).  The  coniideration,  that
**  the  gain  made  by  fome  in  thefe  focieties,
**  will  be  fo  much  plunder  taken  from
**  otliers,"  ought  immediately  to  engage  all
to  withdraw  from  them,  who  have  any  regard
to  juftice  and  humanity;  but  experience
proves,  that  this  argument,  when  oppofed  to

(^)  This  apprehenfion  has  been  verified  by  fa£l. — At
the  beginning;  of  laft  winter  a  letter  was  published  to  the
Provident  Society^  containing  a  clear  proof  of  the  infuf-
ficiency  of  the  plans  of  all  thefe  focieties.  It  was  at  leaft
to  be  expected,  that  fuch  a  publication  (vould  prevent  the
rife  of  new  focieties,  formed  on  7mre  inadequate  plans.
But  this  was  fo  far  from  being  the  efrect,  that,  foon  af-
terwards, a  fociety  fprung  up  which  calls  itfelf  the  Ra-
tional Annuity  Society-',  and  which,  though  it  does  not  take
half  the  values  of  the  annuities  it  promifes,  has  had  the
fhamelefihefs  to  ojjiire  the  public,  that  it  is  formed  on  a
plan  inconte/lctbJy  durahlc.  The  Conj'didatcd^  the  Public  An-
nuitant^ and  the  JVef^mirJicr  Union  Societies,  are  yet  worfe
jnllitutions,  which  have  been  fince  formed;  and  there
may,  for  ought  1  know,  be  many  more  :  for,  indeed,  all
LoNDOw  fecnis  to  b;  now  ent'^rinji  into  aflociations  of
this  kind.

^  private


xii INTRODUCTION.

private  interefl:,  is  apt  to  be  too  feeble  in  its
influence.

It  cannot  be  faid  with  precilion,  how  long
thefe  focieties  may  continue  their  payments
to  annuitants,  after  beginning  them.  A  con-
tinued increafe,  and  a  great  proportion  of
young  members,  may  fupport  them  for  a
longer  time  than  I  can  forefee.  But  the
longer  they  are  fupported  by  fuch  means,  the
more  mifchief  they  mufl  occafion. — So,  a
tradefman,  who  fells  cheaper  than  he  buys,
may  be  kept  up  many  years  by  increafing
bufinefs  and  credit;  but  he  will  be  all  the
while  accumulatifig  diftrcfs  i  and  the  longer
he  goes  on,  the  more  extenfive  ruin  he  will
produce  at  laft.

In  the  latter  end  of  the  firO:  chapter,  I
have  ilated  very  particularly,  the  method  of
computing  the  values  of  ajfurances  on  lives
and  furvivorfhips,  in  all  cafes  where  no  more
than  two  lives  are  concerned  :  and,  in  the
3d  EiTay,  I  have  pointed  out  a  confiderable
error,  into  which  there  is  danger  of  falling  in
computing  fome  of  thefe  values.  The  fo-
cieties and  offices  for  tranfadling  bulinefs  in
this  way,  are  very  ufeful ;  and  it  is  necelTary
that  they  (hould  go  upon  the  befl  principles,

and


INTRODUCTION. xlU

and  poflefs  all  the  information  that  can  be
given  them.

But  there  is  no  part  of  this  work  in  which
the  public  is  fo  much  concerned,  as  the  -^d
Chapter.  It  will  be  there  proved,  that  had
the  fums  raifed  for  public  fervices  lince  the
Revolution,  been  much  greater  than  they
have  been,  the  increafe  of  the  public  debts
to  their  prefent  flate  might  have  been  pre-
vented in  the  eafiefl  manner,  and  at  a  triflin^>-
expence.  A  method,  likewife,  of  reducinp-
within  due  bounds  thefe  debts,  heavy  as  they

now  are,  will  be  propofed. All  competent

judges  will,  I  believe,  fee,  that  this  method,
being  founded  on  the  moil  perfed:  improve-
ment that  can  be  made  of  money,  is  the  mod:
expeditious  and  effectual  that  the  natures  of
things  admit  of.  N^r,  in  my  opinion,  if  the
nation  is  not  yet  too  near  the  limit  of  its  re-
fources,  can  there  be  any  |;-5Ci:/ reafon  againft

carrying it into execution. It is well

known,  to  vyhat  prodigious  fums,  money,
improved  for  fome  time  at  compound  inter  eft  ^
will  increafe  [a). A  flate,  if  there  is  no  mif-

{a\  A  penny,  put  out  to  5  per  cent,  coumpnund  intereft
^l  our  Saviour's  birth,  would,  by  this  time,  have  i;icrcarctl
to  more  money  than  would  be  contained  in  150  millions
of  globes,  each  t.qual  to  the  earth  in  magnitude,  and  all
iplid  geld.

application


XIV INTRODUCTION.

application  of  money,  muft  neceffarily  make
this  improvement  of  any  favings,  which  can  be
applied  to  the  payment  of  its  debts.  It  need
never,  therefore,  be  under  any  difficulties ;
for,  with  the  fmallejl  favings,  it  may,  in  as
little  time  as  its  interefl:  can  require,  pay  off
the  largejl  debts.- — -Several  of  the  obferva-
tions  I  have  made  on  this  fubjedt,  have  not,
perhaps,  been  duly  confidered.  Could  they
engage  the  attention  of  the  managers  of  our
public  affairs,  they  might,  I  think,  be  of
ibme  fervice.  Bat  this,  I  am  fenfible,  I  can-
not exped.  I  have,  however,  in  fome  de-
gree, fatisfied  rny  ov^n  mind ;  and  I  (hall
always  refle<5t  v;ith  pleafure,  that,  in  this  part
of  the  follovv^ing  treatife,  I  have  endeavoured
to  convey  to  the  public,  an  information
which  is  of  particular  importance  to  it.

In  ihtjirjl  Ellay  I  have  made  many  obfer-
fervations  on  the  expectations  of  lives,  the
pernicious  influence  of  great  towns  on  health,
and  manners,  and  population ;  the  increafe  of
mankind ;  and  other  fubjedts  in  the  dodrine

of  Annuities  and  Political  Arithmetick.-

In  the  Lafl  Effay  I  have  flated  carefully  the
proper  method  of  forming  tables  of  the  pro-
babilities of  human  life,  from  given  obferva-

tions :


INTRODUCTION. xv

tions :  And,  in  the  Appendix,  befides  feveral
new  Tables,  I  have  thought  it  necefTary  to
give  Mr.  Shnpfons  Tables  of  the  values  and
expectations  of  London  lives  ^  and  all  the
other  Tables  which  can  be  wanted  in  the

perufal  of  this  work.' 1  have  alfo,  in  the

Appendbcy  given  the  Demonftrations  of  the
Anfwers  to  the  9^eJlions  in  Chap.  I.  Thefe
Demonftrations  I  have  chofen  to  keep  out  of
fight  in  the  body  of  the  work,  in  order  to
avoid  difcouraging  fuch  readers  as  may  be
unacquainted  with  mathematics.

Upon  the  whole.  A  great  part  of  this
work  is,  I  believe,  new  ;  and  I  am  in  hopes
alfo,  that  it  will  be  found  to  contain  fome
improvements  in  thofe  branches  of  philofo-
phical  enquiry,  which  are  the  fubjeds  of  it.


CHAP.


The  Reader  is  defired  to  corre6l  the  follow-^
ing  Error.

In  page  148,  line  11.  tnjlead  of  11,  read  9  years  pur-
chafe  ;  and  in  the  ne,xi  line,  in/lead  of  b-l,  read  i^l  year?;
purchafe.


CHAP. I.

ihieflions  relaiijtg  to  Sche^nes  for  grant-
ing Reverfionary  An72uities^  a7td  the
. Values  of  AJftirances  on  Lives.

Q^  E  S  T  I  O  N i.

it*i'>^^<"^  Set  of  married  men  enter  into  a
X  <c  A  i  *'  focicty  for  fecuring  annuities  to
§  ^  *'  their  widows. What  fuin of

£!}'53^i^<(^  "  money,  in  a  lingle  prefent  pay-
"  ment,  ought  every  member  to
**  contribute,  in  order  to  entitle  his  widovV"
*'  to  an  annuity  of  30/.  per  annum  for  her  iife^
**  efiimating  interell  at  4  per  cent  V*

A  isr  s  w  E  R .

it  Is  evident,  that  the  value  of  fuch  an  ex-
pectation is  different,  according  to  the  diffe-
rent ages  of  the  purchafers,  and  the  propor-
tion of  the  age  of  the  wife  to  that  of  the
hufband.  Let  us  then  fuppofe,  that  every
perfon  in  fuch  a  fociety  is  of  the  fame  age
with  his  wife,  and  that  one  with  another  all
the  members  when  they  enter  may  be  reck-
B  oned


2  ^lejiions  concerning

oned  40  years  of  age,  as  many  entering  above
this  age  as  below  it.  It  has  been  demonlbat-
ed  by  Mr.  Tie  Moivre  and  Mr,  Simp/on,  that
**  the  value  of  an  annuity  on  the  joint  con-
*'  t'lJiuance  of  any  two  lives,  fubtrad:ed  from
'  **  the  value  of  an  annuity  on  the  life  in  ex-
**  peculation,"  gives  the  true  prefent  value  of
an  annuity  on  what  may  happen  to  remain  of
the  latter  of  the  two  lives  after  the  other.

In  the  prefent  cafe,  the  value  of  an  annuity
to  be  enjoyed  during  the  joiJit  continuance  of
two  lives,  each  [a)  40,  {b)  is  9.826,  accord-
ing

\a)  See  Table  VII.  Appendix.

(b)  The  values  o^ joint  lives  and  reverfions,  as  deduced
from  the  Brejlaw  obfervations,  are  not  given  in  any  part
of  this  work  from  Mr.  De  Moivre  %  rules  in  his  treatife  on
annuities  on  lives.  For  thefe  rules  are  approximations,
which  give  refults  fo  far  from  the  truth,  as  to  be,  not
only  ufelefs,  but  dangerous.  In  the  fecond  efTay  in  the  Ap-
pendix, a  particular  account  of  this  will  be  given,  and
alfo  of  the  method  in  which  thefe  values  have  been  cal-
culated.

Mr.  De  Moivre  has  calculated  the  values  oifmgle  lives,
on  the  fuppofition  of  an  equal  decrement  of  life  thro'  all  its
ftages  till  the  age  of  86,  which  he  confidered  as  the  ut-
mod  probable  extent  of  life.  Thus  ;  let  there  be  56  per-
fons  ^Jive  at  30  years  of  age.  It  is  fuppofed  that  one  will
die  every  year  till,  in  56  years,  they  will  be  all  dead.
The  fame  will  happen  to  46  at  40,  in  46  years.  To  36
at  50,  in  36  years,  and  fo  on  for  all  other  ages.  The
number  of  years  which  a  given  life  wants  of  86,  he  calls
the  complement  of  that  life.  Fifty-fix,  therefore,  is  the  com-
^)lene72t  of  50  ;  46  of  40,  and  36  of  50.

This  hypoiheas  eafcs  very  much  the  labour  of  calcula-
ting the  values  of  lives ;  and  it  is  fo  conformable  to  Dr.
Hollef^  table  of  obfervations,  that  there  is  little  or  no  rea-

fon


Rcverjionary  Annuities,  &c.  \

irig  to  the  probabilities  of  life  in  the  table  of
oblervations  formed  by  Dr.  Hailey,  irom  the
bills  of  mortality  oi  hrejlaw  in  Stlejia,  The
value  of  a  fingle  life  40  years  of  age,  as  given
by  Mr.  De  MoivrCy  agreeably  to  tiie  fame  ta-
ble, is  13.20  (^) ;  and  the  former  fubtraded
from  the  latter,  leaves  3.37,  or  the  true  num-
ber of  years  purchafe,  which  ought  to  be
paid  for  any  given  annuity,  to  be  enjoyed  by  a

fon  for  diftinguifhing  between  the  values  of  lives  as  de-
duced from  this  Table,  and  the  fame  values  deduced  from
the  hypothefis.

In  order  to  avoid  putting  the  reader  to  trouble,  T  have
given  this  table  at  the  end  of  this  vv^oric.  And  I  have  alfo
given  two  other  tables  which  I  have  formed  from  the  bills
of  mortality  at  Northamptcn  and  Norwich.  Thefe  laft  ta-
bles anfwer  more  nearly  to  Mr,  De  Moivri^  hypothefis
than  even  Dr.  Halleys  table;  and  the  difference  between
the  values  oi fingle  and  joint  lives  by  the  hypothefis.^  and  the
fame  values  computed  ftri£tly  from  the  tables,  is  gene-
rally lefs  in  thefe  tables  than  in  Dr.  HalleySy  as  will  be
(hewn  in  the  laft  Eflay.  When,  therefore,  in  the  courfe
of  this  work  the  values  o'i f ingle  zn6  joint  lives  are  men-
tioned, as  given  agreeably  to  Dr.  Halli-ys  table,  it  mufl  be
Underftood,  that  they  are  taken  from  Tables  VI.  and  VII.
in  the  Appendix,  and  given  in  ftrict  agreement  only  to  the
hypothefis -y  and  that  for  this  reafon,  they  are  in  reality  ftill
more  conformable  to  the  Northampton  and  Norwich  tables.

The  inhabitants  of  London,  as  is  well  known,  not  liv-
ing fo  long  as  the  reft  of  mankind,  the  values  offngie  and
joint  lives  there,  are  confiderably  lefs  than  in  ::ny  other
place  where  obfervations  have  been  kept.  Whenever,
therefore,  I  have  had  London  lives  in  view,  I  have  given
particular  notice  of  it,  and  taken  their  values  from  Mr.
Simpfony  who  has  calculated  them  with  much  accuracy
from  the  London  tables  of  obfervation.  See  Tables  X.
and  XI.

(a)  See  Table  VI.  Appendix.

B  2  perfon


4  ^ejlions  concerning

perfoti  40  years  of  age,  provided  he  furvlves
another  perfon  of  the  fame  age,  intereft  being
reckoned  at  4  per  cent,  per  annum.  The  an-
nuity, therefore,  propofed  in  this  queftion  be-
ing 30/.  the  prefent  value  of  it  is  30  multi-
pUed  by  3.37,  or  101/.  2s.

By  calculating  from  Mr.  Simpfoiis  tables  [a),
formed  from  the  bills  of  mortality  of  London,
this  value  comes  out  102/.

The  difference  in  the  value  of  the  reverfion
will  be  inconfiderable,  whether  the  common
age  is  taken  a  few  years  more  or  lefs  than  40.
Thus  married  men  of  30  ought  not,  accord-
ing to  Dr.  Halleys  table,  to  give  two  fifths
of  a  year's  purchafe  more,  for  any  given  re-
verfionary  annuity  for  their  wives,  than  mar-
ried men  of  50,  provided  they  are  of  the  fame
ages  with  their  wiv^s  -,  and  one  quarter  more,
according  to  Mr.  SimpfoJis  table.  If  the
wives  are  younger  (as  is  generally  the  cafe)
there  will  indeed  be  a  confiderable  difference;
for  the  value  now  determined  would  be  120/.
according  to  the  Brejlaw  obfervations,  fup-
pofing  the  two  lives  to  be  40  and  33,  or
that  wives  are  one  with  another  feven  years
younger  than  their  hufbands  j  and  118/.  \os,
according  to  the  London  obfervations.

(a)  See  Table  X.  and  XI.  Appendix.

QuES-


C(


Reverjionary  Annuities,  &c.  5

Qjj  E  s  T  I  0  N II.

"  Suppofing  fuch  a  fociety  as  that  defcrib-
ed  in  the  preceding  queftion,  to  be  limit-
**  ted  to  a  certain  number  of  members,  and
**  conflantly  kept  up  to  that  number,  by  the
**  admifiion  of  new  members  as  old  ones  arc
**  loll,  in  confequence  of  their  own  deaths,
**  and  the  deaths  of  their  wives :  What  is  the
**  number  of  annuitants  which,  in  fome  time
**  after  its  eflabhfhment,  will  come  to  be
*^  conftantly  upon  it  ?"  ^

Answer.

Since  every  marriage  produces  either  a
widow  or  widower  -,  and  fince  all  marriages
taken  together  would  produce  as  many  wid-
ows as  widowers,  were  every  man  and  his
wife  of  the  fame  age,  and  the  chance  equal
which  (liali  die  firll: ;  it  is  evident,  that  the
nimiber  of  widows  that  have  ever  exifted  in
the  world  would,  in  this  cafe,  be  equal  to
half  t\\&  number  of  marriages.  And  what
would  take  place  in  the  world  muft  alfo,  or^
the  fame  fuppofitions,  take  place  in  this  fo-
ciety. ——In  other  words ;  every  other  per-
fon  in  fuch  a  fociety  leaving  a  widow,  there
muft  arife  from  it  a  number  of  widows  equal
to  half  its  own  number.  —  But  this  does  not
determine  what  number,  all  living  at  one  and
'^he  fam^  time,  the  fociety  may  expcdl  will
B  \  come


6  ^.ejlions  concerning

come  to  be  conftantly  upon  it.  For  if  every
widow  lived  no  more  than  a  year,  the  fociety
would  never  have  more  annuitants  upon  it
than  came  on  in  a  year.  And  on  the  cour
trary,  if  none  ever  died,  the  number  of  an-
nuitants would  go  on  increafing  for  ever. — :
*Tis,  therefore,  neceffary,  in  order  to  anfwer
the  prefent  enquiry,  to  determine  how  Jong
the  duration  oi fiirvivorJlDtp  between  perfons
of  equal  ages  will  be,  compared  with  the  du-
ration of  marriage.  And  the  truth  is,  that,
fuppofing  the  probabilities  of  life  to  decreafc
uniformly  [a),  the  former  is  equal  to  the
latter;  and  confequently,  that  the  number
oifurvivors,  or  (which  is  the  fame,  fuppo-
fmg  no  fecond  marriages)  of  widows  and  wid-
owers alive  together,  which  will  arife  from
any  given  fet  of  fuch  marriages  conftantly
kept  up,  will  be  equal  to  the  whole  num-
ber of  ii^arriages ;  or  half  of  them  (the  num-
ber of  widows in  particular)  equal  to  half,

(a)  7'hat  is,  fLiopofing  that  out  of  any  given  number
alive  at  any  age  the  fame  number  will  die  every  year  'till
all  are  dead.  See  the  preceding  note.  That  on  this  hy-
pothefis,  the  duration  of  furvivorfhip  is  equal  to  the  du-
ration of  marriage,  when  the  ages  are  equal ;  or,  in  other
words,  that  the  expe^ation  of  two  joint  lives,  the  ages
being  equal,  is  the  fame  with  the  expe£iation  of  furvivor-
ibip,  may  be  learnt  from  the  i8th  and  20th  problems  of
Mr.  De  Afoivre's  treatife  on  annuities ;  and  a  demonftra-
tion  of  it,  together  with  a  particular  explanation  of  this
lubje£^,  may  be  found  at  the  beginning  of  the  firft  Eflay
to  which  I  muft  beg  the  reader  to  turn,  if  he  is  at  any
lofs  about  the  full  meaning  of  what  is  here  faid,

the


Reverjionary  Annuities ^  6cc.  y

the  number  of  marriages. — Now,  it  appears
that  the  decreafe  in  the  probabiUties  of  hfe,
is  in  fadl  nearly  uniform.  According  to  the
BreJlaWy  the  Northatnpton  and  Norwich  ta-
bles of  obfervation,  almoft  the  fame  num-
bers die  every  year  from  20  years  of  age  to
yj  {a).  After  this,  indeed,  fewer  die,  and
the  rate  of  decreafe  in  the  probabilities  of
life  is  retarded.  But  this  deviation  from  the
hypothelis  is  inconfiderable ;  and  its  effed:,
in  the  prefent  cafe,  is  to  render  the  duration
of  furvivorfliip  longer  than  it  would  other-
wife  be.  According  to  the  London  table  of
obfervations,  the  numbers  dying  every  year
begin  to  grow  lefs  at  50  years  of  age  j  and
from  hence  to  extreme  old  age,  there  is  a
conftant  retardation  in  the  decreafe  of  the
probabilities  of  life  [b).  Upon  the  whole,
therefore,  it  appears  in  anfwer  to  the  pre-
fent queftion,  that  "  according  to  the  three
**  former  tables  of  obfervations,  and  fuppo-
**  fing  no  widows  to  marry,  the  number
**  enquired  after  is  fotnewhat  greater  than
**  half  the  number  of  the  fociety ;  but,  ac-
"  cording  to  the  hondon  table,  a  good  deal
**  greater.''

It  muft  be  carefully  remembered,  that  thi*
has  been  determined  on  the  fuppofition,  that

(a)  See  Tables  III.  IV.  and  V.  Appendix.

[h)  The  reafon  of  this  difference  between  iheXomicu
and  other  tables,  will  be  given  at  the  end  of  the  fourth
Effay.

B  4  hufbands


8^  ^teJiio?js  concerning

hufbands  and  their  wives  are  of  equal  ages,
and  that  in  this  cafe  it  becomes  an  equal
chance  which  fliall  die  lirft.  In  reality  neir
ther  of  thefe  fuppofitions  is  juil:.  Hufbands
in  general  are  older  than  their  wives  j  and  in
equal  ages  the  mortality  of  males  has  been
found  to  be  greater  than  the  mortality  of  fe-
males. For  both  thefe  reafons,  it  is  much
more  than  an  equal  chance  that  the  hufband
will  die  before  his  wife,  or  that  the  wojnan
fhall  be  the  furvivor  of  a  marriage,  and  not
the  man.  This  will  increafe  conliderably
the  duration  of  furvivorfhip  on  the  part  of
the  woman,  and  confequently  the  number
enquired  after  in  this  queflion.  The  mar-
riage of  widows  will  alfo  diminifh  this  num-
ber, and  the  operation  of  thefe  caufes  will
be  different  in  different  fituations.  But  it  is
by  no  means  to  be  expeded  (in  the  fituation
of  the  focieties  I  have  in  view)  that  the  di-
minution from  the  latter  caufe  will  be  con-
fiderable  enough,  to  overbalance  the  opera-
tion of  all  the  other  caufes  which  have  been
mentioned,  and  reduce  the  number  under
confideration  fo  low,  as  half  the  number  of
marriages  {a).

Scholium.

In  London  it  appears,  that  there  is  a  re-
tardation of  the  decreafe  in  the  probabilities

(a)  It  will  be  obferved  hereafter,  that  this  obfervaiion
^as  been  found  to  be  true  m  fa(5lc

^  pf


l^eijerJiQnary  Annuities^  Sec,  g

pf  life,  which  renders  the  duration  of  furvl-
vorfhip  between  two  lives  of  equal  ages,  con-
fiderably  longer  than  their  joint  continuance.
It  fcems  worth  obferving,  that  this  is  the
reafon  why,  though  the  probabilities  of  life,
and  therefore  the  values  of  fingle  and  joint
lives,  are  lefs  in  London  than  in  other  places,
yet  the  values  of  reverfions  depending  on  fur-
vivorfhips,  are  in  fonie  cafes  greater  there.
It  is  proper  to  add,  that  this  likewife  is  the
reafon  why,  in  calculating  the  values  of  joint
lives  and  reverfions,  the  prefent  value  of  an
annuity  payable  yearly  to  the  furvivor  of  two
equal  lives,  may  come  out  equal  to,  or  even
greater  than,  the  prefent  value  of  a  like  an-
nuity for  the  joint  lives.  As  an  annuity,  du-
ring fuch  furvivoriliip,  will  probably  not  be-
come payable  for  fome  years,  and  therefore
the  money  given  for  it  will  have  time  to  ac-
cumulate, it  is  manifeft,  that  the  value  of  it
could  never  be  equal  to  the  value  of  an  an-
nuity on  the  joint  lives,  the  payment  of
which  begins  immediately,  were  not  the  ob-
fervation  now  made  true.

QjJ  E  S  T  1  O  N III.

"  Such  a  fociety  as  that  defcribed  in  the
*'  preceding  queftions  being  fuppofed,  in
."  what  time  will  the  number  of  anriuitants
f*  upon  it  come  to  a  viaxhriumV

Ans-


iO  ^ ^lefJons  concerning

Answer.

In  order  to  be  more  clear  in  anfwering  this
queftion,  I  will  firft  fuppofe  the  fociety  to
comprehend  in  it  from  its  firft  eftablifhrnent,
all  the,  married  perfons  of  all  ages  in  any  town
or  country,  where  the  number  of  people  con-
tinue conftantly  the  fame.  In  this  cafe,  the
whole  colledive  body  of  members  will  be  at
their  greateft  age,  at  the  time  of  the  eftabliOi-
ment  of  the  fociety  -,  and  the  number  of
members,  together  with  the  number  of  wi-
dows left  every  year,  will,  taking  one  year
with  another,  admit  of  no  increafe  or  dimi-
nution. The  number  of  widows  in  life  to-
gether,  derived  from  any  given  number  com-
ing on  a  fociety  every  year,  will  increafe  con-
tinually, till  as  many  die  off  as  are  added  e-
very  year;  that  is,  till  they  come  to  die  off
as  faft  as  poffible.  But  they  cannot  die  off
as  faft  as  poffible,  till  the  whole  colledive
body  of  widows  are  at  their  greateft  age  j  or,
till  there  is  among  them  the  greateft  number
pofTible  of  the  oldeft  widows ;  and,  therefore,
not  till  there  has  been  time  for  an  accefhon
to  the  oldeft  widows,  from  the  youngeft  part
of  the  widows  that  come  on  annually.

Let  us,  for  the  fake  of  greater  precifion,
divide  the  whole  medium  of  widows  that
come  on  every  year,  into  different  claffes  ac-
cording to  their  different  ages,  and  fuppofe
fome  to  be  left  at  56  years  of  age,  fome  at  46,

fome


ReverJio7tary  An^tultieSy  &c.  'n.

fome  at  36,  and  fome  at  26.  The  widows,
conftantly  in  life  together,  derived  from  the
iirfl  clafs,  will  come  to  their  greateft  age,
and  to  a  maximum^  in  30  years,  fuppoling
with  Mr.  De  Moivrc,  86  to  be  the  utmoft
extent  of  life.  The  fame  will  happen  to  the
fecond  clafs  in  40  years,  and  to  the  third  in
50  years  (^).  But  the  whole  body,  compof-
cd  of  thefe  clafTes,  will  not  come  to  a  maxi-
mum, till  the  fame  happens  to  the  fourth  or
youngefl  clafs ;  that  is,  not  till  the  end  of  60
years.  After  this,  the  affairs  of  the  fociety
will  become  Jiationary,  and  the  number  of
annuitants  upon  it  of  all  ages  will  keep  al-
ways nearly  the  fame.

Such  is  the  anfwer  to  this  queftion,  fup-
poling a  fociety  to  begin  with  its  complete
number  of  members,  confifling  of  married
perfons  of  all  ages,  in  the  fame  proportions  to
one  another,  with  the  proportions  in  which

they  exift  in  the  world. If  it  begins  with

its  complete  number  of  members,  but  at  the"
fame  time  admits  none  above  a  particular
age :  If,  for  inftance,  it  begins  with  200
members  all  under  50,  and  afterwards  limits
itfelf  to  this  number,  and  keeps  it  up  by  ad-
mitting every  year,  at  all  ages  between  26
and  50,  new  members  as  old  ones  drop  off;

(a)  In  theJppendix,  note  (a),  a  rule  is  given,  by  which
the  numbers  alive  at  the  end  of  any  particular  number  of
y.ears  may  be  very  eafily  determined.

in


12  ^ejlions  concerning

m  this  cafe,  the  period  neceffary  to  bring  on
the  maximum  of  annuitants  will  be  juft  dou-
bled. For,  in  the  firft  place,  the  v/hole  col-
le(5tive  body  of  members  will  be  60  years  in
getting  to  their  greatefl  age,  as  may  eafily
appear  from  what  has  been  juft  faid.  The
annual  medium  of  widows,  therefore,  that
will  come  on  the  fociety  will  increale  con-
tinually for  60  years,  it  being  evident,  that
the  older  any  fet  of  married  men  are,  taken
one  with  another,  the  fafter  thev  will  leave
widows.  And  after  this  annual  medium  is
increafed  to  a  maximimi,  60  years  more  will
be  neceflary  to  bring  to  a  ?naximiim  the  num-
ber in  life  together,  derived  from  fuch  2ijixed

annual  medium  conftantly  coming  on. -If

fuch  a  fociety  is  any  number  of  years  in  gain-
ing its  maximmn  of  members,  the  time  ne-
cellary  to  bring  on  the  maximum  of  annuitants
will  be  ftill  further  prolonged,  and  will  be
equal  to  twice  60  years  with  that  number  of
years  added. — Moft  of  the  focieties  for  grant-
ing annuities  to  widows  are  of  this  kind  ;
and,  therefore,  fuppofmg  them  to  gain  their
complete  number  of  members  in  ten  years,
and  for  ever  afterwards  to  preferve  it,  the
number  of  annuitants  upon  them  will  go  on
increafing  for  130  years. — It  is  proper,  how-
ever, to  be  remembered,  that  the  increafe
will  be  quicker  at  firft,  and  afterwards  flower;
and  that,  within  20  or  30  years  of  the  end

5  of


Reverjionary  Annuities ,  6cc.  £3

of  this  term.  It  will  be  fo  flow  as  fcarcely  to
be  fenfible,  though  ftill  real.

All  who  will  befl-ow  due  attention  on  this
fubjed:  muft  fee  thefe  decifions  to be  juft ; '
and  a  demonftration  of  them  might  be  given,
in  a  form  more  flridUy  mathematical, were
it  neceflary.

Qjj  E  s  T  I  o  N IV.

*'  Suppofe  the  members  of  fuch  a  fociety
"  as  that  defcribed  in  the  preceding. quefli-
**  ons,to  chufe  making  annual  pay  tnents  during
*'  the  continuance  of  marriagCy  in  lieu  of  the
**  fum  which  the  reverfionary  annuity  for
**  their  widows  is  worth  In  prefent  money  :
**  What  ought  thefe  annual  payments  to  be,
\*  cftimating  intereH:  at  /^  per  centV

Answer.

This  will  be  eaiily  determined,  by  finding
what  annual  payments,  during  two  joint  lives
of  given  ages,  are  equivalent  to  the  value  of
the  reverfionary  annuity  \n  prefent  inoney, —
Suppofe,  as  in  Qaefi:Ion  I.  the  two  joint  lives
to  be  each  40,  and  the  reverfionary  annuity
30/.  per  annum.  An  annual  payment  during
the  continuance  of  two  fuch  lives  is  worth,
according  to  Dr.  Halleys  table  of  obfervati-
ons,  9.82  {a)  years  purchafe. The  annual

. {a)  See  Table  VII.

payment


14  ^ejlions  concerning

payment  then  ought  to  be  fuch  as  being  mul-»
tiplied  by  9.82,  will  produce  (c)  /.  loi.i,  the
prefent  value  of  the  annuity  in  one  payment
by  Queftion  I.  Divide  then  /.  joi.i  by
9.82,  and  the  quotient ,  or  /.  10.3  will  be
the  anfwer.— This  is  very  nearly  the  an-
nual payment  of  all  the  members  at  an  ave-
rage, fuppoling  equal  numbers  to  offer  them-
felves  for  admifiion  of  every  age  between  30
and  50.  As  much  as  fome  give  lefs,  others
ought  to  give  more,  according  to  their  ex-
cefs  of  age.  Thus,  the  annual  payment  of
a  married  perfon,  30  years  of  age,  ought  to
be  /.  9.39  ; and  of  a  perfon  50  years  of  age

/.  11.33- If  the  values  of  joint  lives  and

the  reverfionary  annuity  are  taken  agreeably
to  the  London  table  of  obfervations,  thefe  an-
nual payments  will  be,  for  30  years  of  age  [b\
I.  10.9, — for  40,  /.  12.5, — for  50,  /.  14.5.

If

{a)  Particular  notice  fhould  be  taken  of  the  method
of  notation  here  ufed,  becaufe  it  will  be  carried  through

the  whole  of  this  work. The  figures on  the right

hand  of  the  full-point,  fignify  the  decimal  parts  of  i /.
Thusi  /.  loi.i,  is  /.  lOi and  the  loth  of  1  /.  or  /,  10  i

and  IS. ^•9>39»  's  /.g,  and  39  hundredths  of  i/.  or

l.c^:  li,:  jod. /.  11.33,  ^^  l-iiy  and  33  hundredths

of  i/.  or  /.  1 1  :  6  J.  :  7  d. In  general  ;  it  fhould  be

remembered,  that  2  fhillings  allowed  for  every  unit  in
the  firft  place  of  decimals,  and  two-pence  half-penny  for
every  unit  in  the  fecond  place  of  decimals,  will  give,
nearly  enough,  the  value  of  the  decimal  part  of  every
fuch  expreffion.

(b)  The  value  of  two  joint  lives  of  3c,  taken  from  Ta-
ble XI.  is  9.6.  This  fubtravSted  from  the  value  of  the
life  in  expectation,  or  from  13.  i,  by  Table  X.  gives  3.5,

the


Reverjionary  AnnuitJes,  Sec,  15

If  either  the  rate  of  intereil  is  fuppofed
lower,  or  wives  are  fuppofed  younger  than
their  hufbands,  the  annual  payments  will  be
increafed.  But  there  is  no  occafion  for  point-
ing out  particularly  the  difference.  It  may
be  ealily  found  in  any  cafes  by  the  directions
now  given.  There  is,  however,  one  obfer-
vation  which  ought  to  be  here  carefully  at-
tended to. — This  method  of  calculation  fup-
pofes,  that  the  firft  annual  payment  is  not
to  be  made  'till  the  end  of  a  year.  If  it  is  to
be  made  immediately,  the  value  of  the  joint
lives  will  be  increafed  one  year's  purchafe;
and,  therefore,  in  order  to  find  in  this  cafe
the  annual  payments  required,  the  value  in
prefent  money  found  by  Quefl:.  I.  muft  be
divided  by  the  value  of  the  joint  lives  in-
creafed by  unity,  and,  in  this  way,  the  pre-
ceding values  at  /\.  per  cent,  according  to  the
Brejlaw  obfervations,  will  be  found  to  be
7.8.62 — /•9'35 — 7. 10.07.— According  ^^  ^^^
London  obfervations,  /.  10, — /.  1 1.2, — L\2.j,

the  number  of  years  purchafe  which  an  annuity  for  a  life
of  30  years  of  age,  after  another  life  of  the  fame  age,  is
worth.  This  remainder,  multiplied  by  30,  gives  105/.
the  value  in  a  fingle  payment,  fuppofing  the  rcverfionary
annuity  to  be  30/.  And  105/.  divided  by  9.6,  gives
/.  10.9,  the  value  of  the  fame  annuity  in  annual  payments,
during  the  joint  continuance  of  the  two  lives,  according
to  the  London  obfervations. — By  fimilar  operations  all  thff
other  values  above  given  have  been  found.

QUES-


l6  ^ejliem  concerning

QjJ  E  S  T  I  O  N V.

*'  A  foclety  may  chufe  to  make  abate-
**  ments  in  thefe  annual  payments,  and  to  re-
**  quire  the  remainder  of  the  value  of  the
**  reverfionary  annuity  to  be  given,  in  fines
*'  or  premiums  at  the  time  of  admiffion  -,  it
**  may,  for  inftance,  chufe  to  fix  the  annual
'*  payments  of  all  the  members  to  5  guineas.
**  What,  in  this  cafe,  would  be  the  premium
**  due  at  admiffion,  the  annuity  being  fup-
"  pofed  30/.  per  annitm,  and  interefi:  being
"  at  4  per  cent  F  "

Answer.

From  the  whole  prefent  value  of  the  an-
nuity in  one  payment,  fubtra(ft  the  value  of
5  guineas  per  annum^  during  the  joint  lives  i
and  the  remainder  will  be  the  anfwer.

Suppofing  the  joint  lives  both  40,  the
whole  prefent  value  of  the  annuity  in  one
payment  is,  according  to  the  Brejlaw  obfer-
vations,  /.  loi.i,  by  Queft.  I. — The  value  of
5  guineas  per  annutiiy  or  oi  I.  ^.1^  per  anmun^
during  two  fuch  joint  lives,  is  5.25,  multi-
plied by  the  value  of  the  joint  lives ;  that  is,
5.25,  multiplied  by  9.82,  or  /.51.55;  and
this  fubtraded  from  /.  loi.i,  gives  l.\c).^y
the  anfwer  required  for  two  lives  at  the  age
of  40. — The  anfwer  found  in  the  fame  way
for  two  lives  whofe  common  age  is  30,  is
/.46.5, — and  for  two  lives  at  50,  50/.

Accord-


Reve'rfiondry  Anrimties,  Sec.  ij

According  to  the  Londojz  obfervationSjthefe
values  are,  for  two  lives  at  30,  /.54.6. — At
40, /.59.4.-— x\t  50, 7.63.  3.

If  the  lirft  of  the  annual  payments  is  to  be
made  immediately,  the  true  arifwer  will,  in
every  inflance,  be  the  values  found  in  the
manner  now  diredled,  diminiihed  by  the  an-
nual payment  s  or,  in  the  prefent  cafe,  ^
guineas  lefs  than  the  values  fpecified.

The  values,  in  premiumi  and  annual  pay-
me?itSi  ot  any  other  reverfionary  annuity,  will
be  as  much  greater  or  lefs  than  thefe,  as  the
annuity  itfelf  is  greater  or  lefs.

Qjj  E  s  T  I  o  N VI„

*'  A  perfon  3  9  years  of  age  wants  to  buy
**  an  annuity,  for  what  may  happen  to  re-
'^  main  of  his  life  after  _^o  years  of  age.
**  What  is  the  value  of  fuch  an  annuity  in
**  ready  moneyj>  and  alfo  in  annual  payments,
*'  till  he  attains  to  the  faid  age ;  that  is,  in
*'  annual  payments  for  1 5  years,  fubjed:  in
**  the  mean  time  to  failure,  ihould  his  life
**faiir'

Answer.

The  prefent  value  of  fuch  an  annuity  Is
the  prefent  value  of  a  lite  at  50,  in  money  to
be  received  15  years  hence,  and  the  payment
of  which  depends  on  the  contingency  ol  the
continuance  of  the  given  lite  i  5  years.  That
isj  it  is  equal  to  the  value  of  a  life  at  50,
C  multi-


J  8  ^lejllons  cmcer'ning

multiplied  by  the  prelent  value  of  i  /.  to  be
received  at  the  end  of  15  years,  and  alfo  by
the  probability  that  the  given  life  will  con-
tinue fo  long. — A  life  at  50,  according  to
Mr.  Dc  Molvres,  valuation  of  lives,  and  reck-
oning interefl  at  ^  per  cent,  is  worth  1 1,  34
year's  purchafe.  The  prefent  value  of  i  /.
to  be  received  at  the  end  of  1 5  years,  is,  by
Table  I,  0.5553.  And  the  probability  that
a  life  at  35,  will  continue  15  years,  is,  ac-
cording to  the  Brejlaw  obfervations  -144  (^).
And  thefe  three  values,  multiplied  by  one
another,  give  /.  4.44,  or  the  number  of  years
purchafe  that  ought  to  be  given  for  the  an-
nuity.— The  annuity  then  being  fuppofed
^o/.  its  value  in  prefent  money  is  222/.

[a)  The  probability  that  a  given  life  fhall  continue
dfty  number  of  years,  or  attain  to  a  given  age^  is  (as
is  well  known)  the  fraction,  whofe  numerator  is  the
number  of  the  living  in  any  table  of  obfervations  oppofitc
to  the  given  age,  and  denominator,  the  number  oppofite  to
the  prefent  age  of  the  given  life. — Thus,  in  the  prefent
inftance ;  346  is  the  number  in  Dr.  Halleys  table  oppo-
fite to  50,  and  490  the  number  oppofite  to  35. — |^^,  (or
the  odds  of  17  to  7)  is,  therefore,  the  probability  that  a
perfon  whofe  age  is  35  (hall  attain  to  50,  or  live  15  years.
in  the  fame  manner  it  will  appear,  that,  according  to  the
fame  table,  the  probability  that  a  perfon  at  this  age  {hall
live  25  years,  is  -^^J ;  or  nearly  an  even  chance.

At  Nortl)ampton  and  Noriuieh  a  perfon  at  the  fame  age,
has  an  even  chance  of  living  26  years;  but  in  London,
fcarcely  20  years.  See  Tables  III,  IV,  V^  and  VIIL
Appendix.  I  will  add,  though  foreign  to  my  prefent
purpofe,  that  a  perfon  at  the  fame  age  has  in  thefe  towns
a  better  chance  of  living  one  year,  than  in  London^  in  th«
proportion  of  3  to  2.

In


Reverjionary  Annuities ^  &:c.  19.

In  order  to  find  this  value  in  atinual pay-
tncntSy  while  the  given  life  is  attaining  to  50,
it  is  neceflary  to  find  the  value  of  an  annuity
for  15  years,  fubje6l  to  failure  on  the  ex-
tindlion  of  the  given  hfe.  And  the  value  of
fuch  an  annuity  is,  evidently,  the  laft  value
fubtraded  from  the  value  of  the  given  life ;
or,  in  the  prefent  inftance,  /.  4.44,  fubtra<5led
from  /.  13.97.  (See  Table  VI,  Appendix)  that
is,  /.  9.53, — -222/.  then,  being  the  prefent  va-
lue of  an  annuity  of  50/.  for  the  remainder
of  a  life  now  35,  after  attaining  to  50;  and
9.53  being  the  number  of  years  purchafe,
which  ought  to  be  given  for  an  annual  pay-
iiient  to  lall:  15  years,  if  a  life  now  35  lafts
folong,  it  follows,  that  the  value  of  the  fame
annuity  in  annual  payments  till  this  life
attains  to  50,  is  222/.  divided  by  9.53  ; or

^•23.3.

This  calculation  fuppofes,  that  the  fu-fl  of
the  annual  payments  is  not  to  be  made  till
the  end  of  a  year.  If  the  firi^  payment  is
made  immediately,  the  value  will  be,  the
Jingle  pay ?nent  divided  by  the  value  of  the  life
for  the  given  term  increafed  by  unity;  that  '\i,
in  the  prefent  cafe,  222/.  divided  by  10.53  '
or  /.  21.080

If  the  value  of  the  annuity  is  required  in
a  fingle  payment^  over  and  above  any  given
annual  payment  -,  dedu6l  the  value  of  the  an-
nual payment  from  the  whole  value  in  a  fin-
gle prefent  pavmentj  and  the  remainder  will
C  2  be


20  ^lejiions  concerning

be  the  anfvver. — Thus ;  let  5  guineas,  in  the
prefent  inflance,  be  the  given  annual  pay-
riient  for  the  afligned  term;  and  let  the  en-
quiry be,  how  much  more  in  prefent  money
the  fuppofcd  annuity  is  worth.  By  what  has
been  juil:  faid,  9.53,  multiplied  by  5  guineas,
that  is,  50/.  is  the  value  of  the  annual  pay-
ment; and  this  fum  deduced  from  222/.
leaves  172/.  the  anfwer.

If  the  annual  payment  begins  immediately,
its  value  is  10.53,  niultiplied  by  5  guineas,
and  the  anfwer  comes  out  /.  166.75.

In  this  way  may  be  found  the  value,  in
fmgle  and  annual  payments,  of  any  other  an-
nuity, payable  to  an  afligned  life,  after  a  given
term  of  years,  taking  any  valuation  of  lives
or  interell:  of  money.  But  care  muft  be  ta-
ken to  remember,  that  it  is  the  title  to  the
annuity  that  will  commence  at  the  end  of
the  given  term^  and  that  the  firfl  payment
is  not  to  be  made  'till  a  year  afterwards ;
that  is,  in  the  cafe  here  fpecihed,  not  'till
the  end  of  16  years.

Scholium.

The  value  of  the  remainder  of  two  joint
lives,  after  a  given  term  of  years,  is  likewife
the  value  of  r  /.  due  at  the  end  of  the  given
term,  multiplied  by  the  value  of  two  joint
lives,  each  older  by  the  given  term  than  the
given  lives  j  and  this  produd:,  multiplied  by
the  probability,  that  the  given  joint  lives  fl:iall

not


"Reverfionary  Annuities^  6cc.  21

not  fail  in  the  given  term;  or  (which  is  the
fame)  by  the  producft  of  the  two  probabiH-
ties,  that  the  fingle  hves  (hall  each  continue
the  given  term.  And  the  value  of  an  an-
Huity,  on  any  given  joint  lives  for  a  term  of
years  beginning  now,  is  this  lafl  value,  fub-
traifted  from  the  whole  prefent  value  of  the
jointlives.  Thus;  the  value  of  two  joint  lives,
one  40  years  of  age,  and  the  other  50,  (fee
Table  VII.)  is  8.9  i;  which,  multiplied  by
0.6755,  ^^  value  of  i/.  due  10  years  hence,
and  by  44r,  (the  probability  that  a  life  at  30
fhall  continue  10  years)  and  alfo  by  Iff-,  (the
probability  that  a  life  at  40  fliall  continue  10
years)  gives  3.92,  the  prefent  value  of  the
remainder  of  two  joint  lives,  aged  30  and  40,
after  10  years;  and  this  value,  lubtracfted
from  10.43  (^^^^  value  in  Table  VII.  of  two
joint  lives,  aged  30  and  40)  leaves  6.51,  their
value  for  10  years.

As  the  value  of  the  longefl  of  two  lives  is
always  the  value  of  ih^  joint  lives,  fubtraded
from  the  fum  of  the  values  of  the  two  Jingle
lives;  their  value  alfo  for  any  given  term,  is
the  value  of  lh.c  joint  lives  for  the  given  term,
fubtrad:ed  from  the  fum  of  the  values  of  the
Jingle  lives  for  the  given  term.

The  truth  of  thefe  rules  may  eafily  appedr
without  particular  proof.  I  have,  however,
pointed  out  the  method  of  demonflrating
them  in  a  note  [a)  at  the  end  of  this  work.

(a)  See  note  (B)  in  the  Appendix.

C  3/  By


22  ^lejlions  concerning

By  {imilar  operations,  may  be  found  the
values  of  3  or  morcjowt  lives,  or  the  longeft
of  thre  or  more  lives,  for  a  given  term  of
years,  or  of  what  fliall  remain  of  them  after
a  given  term  of  years,

Qu  E  s  T  I  o  N VIL

**  The  prefent  value  is  required  of  an  an-
'^'  nuity  to  be  enjoyed  by  one  life,  for  what
^*  may  happen  to  remain  of  it  beyond  ano-
''  ther  life,  after  a' given  term;  that  is,  pro-
**  vided  ht&  lives  continue,  from  the  pre-
*5  fent  time,  to  the  end  of  a  given  term  of


years


Answer.


Find  the  value  of  the  annuity  for  two  lives
greater,  by  the  given  term  of  years,  than  the
given  lives.  Difcount  this  value  for  the  gi-
ven term ;  and  then,  multiply  by  the  proba-
bility, that  the  two  given  lives  fhall  l^ot^
continue  the  given  term;  and  the  produ(5t
will  be  the  anfwer.

Example.

Let  the  two  lives  be  each  30.  The  term
feven  years. The  annuity,  10/. Intereft,  4

percent. rThe  given lives,  increafed  by

7  years,  become  each  37. The  value  of  two
joint  lives  each  37,  is  (by  Table  VII)  10.25.

The


'  Reverjionary  Annuities ,  tec,  23

The  value  of  a  fing'e  life  at  37,  is  (by  Ta--
bleVI)  13.67.  The  former,  fubtradted  from
the  latter,  is  3.42,  or  the  value  of  an  annuity
for  the  life  of  a  perfon  37  years  of  age,  after
another  of  the  fame  age,  by  QucH:.  I.^^3.  43
difcounted  for  7  years,  (that  is,  multiplied  by
0.76,  the  value  of  i  /.  due  at  the  end  of  {tvtvi
years,  by  Table  I.)  is  2.6. — The  probability
that  a  {ingle  life  at  30  fliall  continue  7  years,
is  (by  the  hypothefis  explained  page  2.)
X5-  (^). The  probability,  therefore,  that  two

fuch

[a)  In  tiiis-eafe,  it  is  on  fome  accounts  beft,  as  well
as  eafieft,  to  take  the  probabilities  of  life  from  the  hypo-
thefi; ,  rather  than  immediately  from  the  Tables. — Fitty-
fix  perfons  being  fuppofcd  a'ive  at  30,  one  will  die  every
year,  according  to  the  hypothefis.  At  the  end  of  feven
years  then,  the  number  of  the  living  will  be  49,  and  ^,  or
the  odds  of  7  to  i,  is,  by  note  p.  18.  the  probability,  that
a  life,  aged  30,  will  continue  7  years  ;  and  this  fraction,
multiplied  by  itfelf,  is  the  probability,  that  two  lives  of
this  age,  (hall  both  continue  7  years.  In  general,  it  muft
be  remembered,  that  the  probability,  that  any  two  or
more  events  fliall  all  happen,  is  the  product  arifing  from
multiplying  by  one  another,  the  probabilities  of  all  the
events  taken  feparately.  The  probability,  therefore,  that
any  number  of  perfons  will  all  live  any  given  time,  is
rightly  found  by  multiplying  into  one  another  the  proba-
bilities that  each  of  them  will  live  that  time. — It  may
further  jbe  of  ufe  to  fome,  that  I  (hould  obferve  here,  that
the  difrerence  between  unity  and  the  fra£tion  exprefling
the  probability,  that  an  event  will  happen,  gives  the
probability  that  it  will  tiot  happen.  Thus  ;  the  probabj-
iity,  that  a  perfon  40  years  of  age  will  live  1 1  years,
is  by  the  BreJJatv  Table  -|-^.  The  probability,  there-
fore, that  he  will  not  live  11  years,  iS'^^-|>  ^"btradted
C  4  from


24  ^lejtions  concerning

fuch  lives  (liall  both  continue  7  years,  is
jT7r,  or,  in  decimals  0.765.  And  2.6  mul-
tiplied by  0.765,  is  1.989,  the  number  of
years  purchale  which  ought  to  be  given  for
an  annuity,  to  be  enjoyed  by  a  life  now  30
years  of  age,  after  a  life  of  the  fame  age,  pro-
vided both  continue  7  years.  The  annuity
then  being  10/.  its  prefent  value  is  /.  19.89.

By  fimilar  operations,  it  may  be  found,
that  fuppofing  the  term  one  year,  and  the
ages  and  the  rate  of  interefl  the  fame,  ths
prefent  value  of  the  fame  reverfionary  an-
nuity is  /.  32.4;  and  that  if  the  term  is  15
years,  the  value  is  /,  9.7,

For  two  lives  each  40,  thefe  values  arc
/.  30.33.-— /.  17.44. — /.  7-3.  the  term  being
1,  7,  or  15  years.

For  two  lives  each  ^jo,  the  fame  values
for  the  fame  tcrn:i5,  are  /.  28.2, — /.  13.86,—
7.4.34  (^).

Thefe  Vci.lues,  according  to  the  London  ob-
fervations  and  Mr.  Sf/nffons  Tables  of  the
values  of  iingle  and  joint  lives,  are,

from  unity  or  ~  °. — In  like  manner:  The  probability  that
two  perfons  aged  30,  fliall  ioth  live  7  vears,  being  0.765,
the  probability  that  they  will  not  both  live  fo  long,  or
that  cfie  or  other  ui  them  will  die  in  7  years,  is  0.765  fub-
lra<Sled  from  unity,  or  .235.

If  any  reader  is  unwilling  to  take  thefe  aflertions  for
granted,  he  fhould  confult  the  beginning  of  Mr.  De
Aloivre's,  or  Mr.  Si/npfons  Treatifes  on  the  Doctrine  of
Chances,  where  he  will  find  them  demonftrated.

(<?)  See  Nots  (C)  Appendix.


IR^everfionary  jinnuitte^,  &c.  25

For  z  lives  at  30 — /.32.05— r/.  18.62— /.7.66„
at40— /.30.7  —A  15.6  — /.5.45.
at5o— /.29.36— /.i2.33-r-/.3.24,

Q^  E  s  T  I  o  N yilL

*'  Let  the  fcheme  of  a  foclety  for  granting
*'  annuities  to  widows,  be,  that,  if  a  member
^'  lives  a  year  after  admiflion,  his  widow  (hall
^*  be  entitled  to  a  life  annuity  of  20/.  If
*' /even  years,  to  10/.  more,  or  30/.  in  the
f'  whole.  \^ fifteen  years ;  to  another  addi-
^«  tional  10/.  or  40/.  in  the  whole.  What
^*  ought  to  be  the  annual  payments  of  the
^*  members  for  the  ages  of  ^^^o^  40,  and  50,
^*  fuppofing  them  of  the  fame  ages  with  their
^*  wives,  and  allowing  compound  intereft  at
**  4  per  cent  ?  "

Answer.

According  to  the  hypothefis^  explained  p.
2j  and,  therefore, ;  very  nearly,  according  to
the  Tables  of  obfervation  for  Brejlaw,  Nor-*
wichy  and  Northampton^

/.  8.44 — /,'8.69 — l.  9.05.

According  to  the  London  obfervations^
/.  9.41 — /.  10.17 — /.  10.92.

Thefc


i^6  ^.efiions  concerning

Thefe  values  are  eafily  deduced  from  ths
values  in  the  !aft  queftion.  For  example,
The  value  of  lo/.  per  annum  for  u.e  to  40
after  40,  provided  the  joint  lives  do  not  fail
in  one  year,  is,  according  to  the  hypothe/is,
I.  30.33.  The  value  of  20/.  per  annum^  in  the
fame  circumflances,  is,  tiierefore,  /.  60.66. -—
In  like  manner,  the  value  of  10/.  2Ji\.t\' Jeven
years,  is  /.  17.44.  And  of  10/.  after  15  years
L']»1* — Thefe  values  together  make  /.85.4,  or
the  value  of  the  exped:ation,  defcribed  in  this
queftion,  in  2.  Jingle  pre] ent  payment  \  which,
divided  by  9.82,  (the  value  by  Table  VII.  of
two  joint  lives  at  40)  gives  /.  8.69,  the  value
of  the  fame  expedlation  in  annual  payment s^
during  the  joint  lives. — In  the  fame  manner
may  be  found  the  anfwer  in  all  cafes  to  any
queftions  of  this  kind.

Thefe  calculations  fuppofe,  that  the  an-
nual payments  do  not  begin  till  the  end  of
a  year.  If  they  are  to  begin  immediately ^  the
true  annual  payments  will  be,  as  was  before
obferved,  ihtfmgle  payments,  divided  by  the
value  of  the  joint  lives  increafed  by  unity  ^
and  in  the  prefent  cafe  they  will  be,  by  the
hypothejisy

^'  7-7 S—^'  7-9— ^-  ^-o?-

By  the  London  obfcrvations,

/.  8.52 — /.  9.06 — /.9.51.

By


Reverfw7iary  Annuities,  6cc.  2j

6y  the  method  of  calculation  now  ex-
plained, may  be  eafily  found  in  all  cafes,
fuppofing  the  annual  payments  preyioufly
fettled,  what  the  reverfionary  annuities  are
correfponding  to  them  in  value. — Thus,  the
annuities  being  the  fame  with  thole  menti-
oned in  this  queftion,  the  mea?i  annual  pay-
ments for  all  ages  between  30  and  50,  are
nearly  8/.  according  to  tlie  higheji  probabi-
lities of  life;  9/.  according  to  the  lowe/li  and
8  guineas  the  mediim  {a)  ;  interefl  being  at
4  per  cent,  and  the  tirfl  payment  to  be  made
immediately.

If  the  mean  annual  payments,  beginning
immediately,  are  fixed  to  five  guineas,  the
correfponding  life  annuities  will  be  nearly
(by  the  bypothejis)  12/.  if  the  contributor
lives  a  year,  and  24/.  it  he  lives  feven  years ;
or  (by  th^  London  obfervations)  12/.  if  he  lives
a  year,  and  20/.  if  he  lives  i^vtn  years  [b).

It

(«)  The  value  of  this  expstftation,  fuppofing  married
men  40  years  of  age,  and  their  wives  30,  is,  in  zjhigle
payment,  113/.  In  annual  payments  beginning  immedi-
ately /. 9.88,  by  the  hypotbefis.  And  107/. — and  /.  10.93,
by  the  London  obfervations.

[b)  If  the  annuities  in  expectation  are  14/.  provided  a
member  lives  a  year,  and  20/.  provided  he  lives  feven
years,  the  proper  mean  fingU  payments  for  all  :)ges,  taken
one  with  another,  under  50  or  52,  is  50  guineas  nearly,
according  to  all  the  Tables  of  obfervation,  fuppofing
equality  of  age  between  men  and  their  wives.  And  the
addition  which  ought  to  be  made,  on  account  of  e.xcefs
of  age  on  the  man's  fide  is,  taking  the  neareft  and  the

cafieft


2^  §upJlions  concernhtg

It  is  obfervable,  that  the  difference  in  the
X'alues  of  the  annuities,  arifing  from  diffe-
rence of  ages,  and  the  difference  in  the  pro-
babilities of  life,  is  lefs  in  this  queftion  than
in  qiieftion  4th  \  and  that,  confequently,  the
plan  propofed  in  it,  is  the  fafeft,  as  well  as  the
moil  equitable  and  encouraging,  that  a  fociety
can  adopt.

It  is  neceffary  to  remark  here  further,  that
yearly  payments  which  begin  immediately,
are  more  advantageous  than  half-yearly  pay-
ments which  begin  immediately.  Mr.
Simpfon  (in  his  Treatife  on  'The  DoBrtne  of
Annuities  and  Reverfons,  pag.  j?)y  and  alfo
i?2  his  SeleB  Exercfesj  p.  283)  has  fliewn,
that,  in  the  cafe  of  life  annuities,  half-yearly
payments,  which  begin  at  the  end  of  half  a
year,  are  ^  of  a  year's  purchafe  better  than
yearly  payments,  which  begin  at  the  end  of
a  year.  And  it  is  manifefl:,  that  half-yearly
payments,  which  begin  immediately,  are  no

eafiefl:  round  fums,  about  a  guinea  and  4  l^or  every  year
as  far  as  17  years;  or,  in  the  annual  payments,  (fup-
pofcd  5  guineas)  •'-  a  guinea />^r  annum  for  five  years  ex-
cels, and  4  a  guinea  more  for  every  four  years  excefs  be-
yond five  years,  till  the  excefs  comes  to  be  17  years.
And,  I  believe,  that  60  guineas  \w  f.ngk  payments^  and  fix
guineas  in  flH«z^(?/ ^^^rj'w^w/i  beginning  immediately,  may
very  well  be  flated  as  the  lowejl  common  payments  proper
to  be  required,  fuppofing  all  married  men  under  52,  ta-
ken into  a  fociety,  without  enquiring  into  the  difference
of  age  bctv/ccn  them  atid  their  wives,  the  annuities  be-
ing all  along  fuppofcd  to  be  ///>  annuities,  and  intereft
reckoned  at  \-per  cent,

c  more


Keverjionary  Annuiticsy  Sec.  '2;.^

more  than  half  a  year's  purchafe  better  than
thofe  which  begin  at  the  end  of  half  a  year.
But  yearly  payments,  which  begin  immedi-
ately, are  a  ivhokycars  purchafe  better  than
the  fame  payments  to  begin  at  the  end  of  a
year.  The  difference  of  value,  therefore,
between  yearly  and  half-yearly  payments,
fuppofmg  both  to  begin  immediately,  is  a
quarter  of  a  year's  purchafe  in  favour  of  the


q

former.


QjJ  E  8  T  I  O  N IX.


*'  The  value  is  required  of  an  annuity  to
*'  be  enjoyed  for  what  may  happen  to  re-
*'  main  of  one  life  after  another,  provided
**  the  life  in  cxpecftation  continues  a  given
'*  time?"

Answer.

Find  by  Qiieflion  VI.  the  prefcnt  value  of
the  annuity  tor  the  remainder  of  the  life  in
expectation,  after  the  given  time,  and  multi-
ply this  value  by  the  probability,  that  the
other  life  fliall  fail  within  that  time.  Find
alfo,  by  Queftion  VII.  the  value  of  the  revcr-
fion,  provided  both  lives  continue  the  given
time.  Add  thefe  values  to  one  another,  and
thQ  fiun  will  be  the  anfwer  in  a  fingle  pre-
fent  payment. /

Exam-


^^-  ^ejiions  concerning

Example.

An  annuity  of  lo/.  for  the  life  of  a  perfofi
how  30,  is  to  commence  at  the  end  of  1  \
years  {a\  if  another  perfon  now  40,  fhould
be  then  dead ;  or,  if  this  lliould  not  happen^
at  the  end  of  any  year  beyond  1 1  years  in
which  the  former  fliall  happen  to  furvive  the
latter.  What  is  the  prefent  value  of  fuch  an
annuity,  reckoning  intereft  at  4  per  cent,  and
taking  the  probabilities  of  life  as  they  are  in
Dr.  Halley^  Table  ?

The  value  of  10/.  fer  annum,  for  the  re-
iiiainder  of  the  life  of  a  perfon  now  30,  after
1 1  years,  found  by  Queft.  VI;  is  /.  69.43. — ^
The  probability  that  a  perfon  40  years  of  age
fhall  live  1 1  years,  is,  by  Dr.  Halley\  Table^
^\\.  The  probability,  therefore,  that  he
will  die  in  1 1  years,  is  \\\  fubtraded  from
unity  (^), or  ^^t;  which  multiplied  by  7.69.43,'
gives  /.  17.16. — The  value  of  the  reverfion,
provided  both  live  1 1  years,  found  by  Queft,
VII.  is  17/. And  this  value  added  to  the

{a)  That  is,  the  title  to  the  anhuity  is  to  commence
at  the  end  of  ii  years,  and  the  firft  payment  to  be  made
a  year  afterwards,  in  cafe  the  life  in  expectation  fhould
continue  fo  long,  and  the  other  fail.  But  if  both  liveS
fhould  continue  the  given  term,  the  firft  payment  is  al-
ways to  be  made  at  the  end  of  the  year,  in  which  the
former  life  fhall  happen  to  furvive  the  latter. See  Queft,

VI.

{b)  See  the  Note,  p.  23,

former.


keverjionary  Annuities ^  Sec,  jt

former,  makes  /.  34. 16,  the  value  required
in  2,  Jingle  prefent  payment 'i  which  payment
divided  by  /.  1 1 .43,  (the  value  by  Table  VJL
of  two  joint  lives,  aged  30  and  40,  with
unity  added)  gives  3/j  [a)  or  the  value  re-
quired in  annual  payments  during  the  joint
lives,  the  firfl  payment  to  be  made  immedi-
ately.  If,  every  thing  elfe  being  the  fame^

the  affigned  term'  is  15  years,  the  value  re-
quired will  be  29/.  in  2,  fmgle  payjnent,  and
/.  2.55  in  annual  payments.

O^u  E  s  T  I  o  N X.

**  What  money  in  hand,  and  alfo  in  an-
**  nual  payments  during  life,  ought  a  perfon
**  of  an  affigned  age  to  give  for  a  fum  of  mo-*-
**  ney,  payable  at  his  death  to  his  heirs  [b)  ? —
**  In  other  words,  what  money  in  hand,  and
"  in  annual  payments  during  life,  ought  a
**  perfon  of  a  given  age  to  pay  for  an  affu-
**  ranee  of  any  given  fum  on  his  life  ?"

Answer.

Subtra(ft  the  value  of  the life from the
perpetuity. Multiply  the  remainder  by  the

[a)  See  the  demonftration  of  this  rule  in  Note  (D)
Appendix.

{b)  This  queftion  is  the  fame  with  Problem  i6th,  in.
Mr.  De  Moivre's  Treatife  on  Annuities,  and  Problem;
26th,  in  Mr.  Simpfon's  Seletl  Exercifes  ;  but  the  anfwera
there  given  are  right  only  when  applied  to  reverfionary
elates,  and  therefore  mull  be  materially  wrong,  when
applied  to  reverfionary  Jurm,  as  will  appear  from  the  Scho-
lium to  this  Queftion,  and  from  note  (E)  in  the  Appendix.

product


2  2  '^eftmis  concernmg

prodadt  of  the  given  fum  into  the  interefl  of
lOo/.  for  a  year:  and  this  laft  product,  di-
vided by  I  go/,  increafed  by  its  interefl  for  a
year,  will  give  the  anfwer  in  z. Jingle  prefent
payment.  i\nd  this  payment,  divided  by  the
Value  of  the  life,  will  give  the  anfwer  in  an^
nual  payments,  during  the  continuance  of
the  lite.

Example.  Let  the  life  be  30.  The  furn
loo/.  The  rate  of  interefl:  /^per  ce?2t.  And
the  valuation  of  lives,  that  in  Table  VI.  The
perpetuity,  therefore  [a)y  is  .?^.  The  inte-
refl; of  100/.  for  a  year,  is  4/.  100  i.  increaf-
ed by  its  interefl:  for  a  year  is  104/.  And
the  value  of  the  life  14.68. — -The  valiK-^of  the
life,  fubtraded  from  the  perpetuity,  gives
10.32,  which,  multiplied  by  the  produd:  of
100/.  into  4,  or  by  400,  gives  4128.  And
this,  divided  by  104,  gives/.  ^9.7,  the  va-
lue of  100/.  payable  at  the  death  of  a  perfon
aged  30,  in  a  fingle  prefent  payment.— And
this  payment,  divided  by  14,68,  is  /.  2.7,  the
fame  value  in  annual  payments  during  the
continuance  of  the  life.

Thefe  values  found  in  the  fame  way,  agree-
ably to  the  valuation  of  lives  for  Lo/ido?!,  in
Table  X,  are  /.  45.76,  and  /.  3.49. — If  the  life
is  36,  and  interefl:  /^per  cent,  thefe  values  are
43A and  /.  3.1,  by  Table  VI, and  L/a^g.t,

[a)  That  is;  the  value  of  the  fee  ftmple  of  an  eftate
found  by  dividing  100/.  by  the  rate  of  interefl:.

and


Reve7'Jio?jary  Annul  ties,  &c.  ^^

and  /.  4.1,  by  Table  X. — If  interefl  is  reck-
oned at  3  per  cent,  the  fame  values  are»  by
Table  VI,  for  30  years  of  age,  /. 48.14. —
2.86.  —  For  36  years  of  age,  /.  51.43,  and
/.3.28.

It  appears  here,  that  difference  of  interefl
makes  no  confiderable  difference  in  the  anf-
wers  to  queffions  of  this  kind,  except  when
the  values  are  required  in  a  lingle  payment.

If  the  firft  of  the  annu-il  payments  is  to  be
made  immediately,  the  fmgle  payment  is  to
be  divided  by  the  value  of  the  life,  with  uni-
ty added  to  it,  agreeably  to  w'hat  has  beeii
already  obferved ;  and  the  annual  payments
in  this  cafe  (interefl  fuppofed  at  ^  per  cent.)
will  be  by  Table  VI,  for  a  life  at  30,  /.  2.53—
At  36,  /.  2.9.

If  the  payments  are  half  yearly  payments
beginning  immediately,  the  fingle  payment
mufl  be  divided  by  the  value  of  the  life  in-
creafed  by  I,  or  .y^,  (fee  Quefl.  VIII.)  And
the  half  yearly  payments,  ior  the  age  of  36,
will  be  half  2.9,  or  1.45.  And  half  1.45,
or  .725,  is  likewife  nearly  the  proper  quar-
terly payments.

Again ;  if  an  annual  payment,  beginning
immediately,  of  7.2.9,  o'^E^^  (reckoning  in-
terefl at  /\.  per  cent.)  to  purchafe  100/.  pay-
able at  the  failure  of  a  life  now  36  ;  5/.  by
the  rule  of  proportion,  ought  to  purchafe
172/.  And  in  like  manner,  it  mav  be  found,
that  the  fame  annual  contribution,  in  half^

D  yearly


34  ^ejtlom  concerning

yearly  or  quarterly  payments,  beginning  im-
mediately, ought  to  purchafe  170/. —  Thefe
Turns,  according  to  the  London  obfervations,
are  132/.  and  130/.  nearly.

The  reafon  of  mentioning  thefe  particu-
lars will  be  ittw  in  the  next  chapter.

Scholium.

If  the  reverfion  is  not  Tifuniy  but  an  an-
nuity for  ever,  or  an  efiate  mfeejimpk,  to  be
entered  upon  after  a  given  life,  its  prefent
value,  in  a  Jingle  payment,  will  be  **  the  value
**  of  the  life  fubtraded  from  the  perpetuity,
**  and  the  ^^remainder  multiplied  by  the  an-
**  nuity,  or  the  annual  rent  of  the  eftate." — •
And  the  value,  in  annual  payments,  will  be,  as
before,  the  fingle  payment  divided  by  the
value  of  the  life.  —  Univerfally.  It  ought  to
be  remembered,  that  a  reverfionary  ejiate,
after  any  given  life  or  lives,  is  worth  as  much
more  than  a  correfponding  reverfionary yzif;;/^
as  100/.  increafed  by  its  intereft  for  a  year,
is  greater  than  lOo/. — Thus,  the  prefent  va-
lues, in  fingle  and  annual  payments,  of  4/.
per  annum  for  ever,  and  of  100/.  in  money
after  any  afligned  life,  are  to  one  another,
(intereft  being  at  \  per  cent.)  as  104  to  100,
or  1.04  to  I. — The  reafon  of  this  difference
is,  that  the  calculations  fuppofe,  that  the  re-
verfion aryyz^/?;,  and  the  firfl:  yearly  rent  of
the  ejlate^  or  firfl  payment  of  the  annuity,.

are


Reverjionaty  An?mitiesy  Sec.  ^5

are  to  be  received  at  the  fame  time,  after  the
extindtioii  of  the  lives  in  poffefTion.  It  is
eafy  to  fee^  that  this  is  a  circumftance  which
muft  make  the  latter  of  moil  value.  But  to
prevent  any  doubts  about  it,  I  ihall  explain
it  more  particularly  in  a  note  in  the  Appen-
dix {a).

QjJ  E  s  T  I  o  N XL

"  A  perfon  of  a  given  age,  having  an  year-
**  ly  income  which  will  fail  with  his  life,
**  wants  to  make  provifion  for  another  per-
*'  fon  of  a  given  age,  in  cafe  the  latter  fhould
"  happen  to  furvive.  What  ought  the  for-
**  mer  to  give  in  a  fingle  payment,  and  alfo
"  in  annual  payments  during  their  joint  lives,
**  for  a  given  fum,  payable  at  his  death  to
«*  the  latter?"

It  is  manifell,  that  the  value  of  the  given
fum  in  this  cafe,  mufl:  be  lefs  than  in  the  cafe
Hated  in  the  lad  Queftion  ;  becaufe,  here  the
payment  of  it  is  fui'pended  on  the  contingen-
cy, that  one  life  fiiall  furvive  another,  where-
as in  the  other  cafe,  it  is  certainly  to  be  paid
at  the  failure  of  a  given  life.

Answer.

Find,  by  the  folution  of  problem  3  2d,
p.  297,  Mr.  Simpfo7i\  Sele(5t  Exercifes,  the

{a)  Vid.  Appendix  note  (E).

D  2  value


2  6  ^ejlions  concerning

value  of  an  eftate,  correfponding  to  the  givefi
fum,  and  depending  on  the  given  furvivor-
lliip.  Divide  this  value  by  i  /.  increafed  by
its  intereft  for  a  year,  and  the  quotient  will
be  the  value  of  the  given  fum  in  a  fmgle  pre-
fent  payment.  And  the  fmglc  payment,  di-
vided by  the  value  of  the  given  joint  iives-,
will  be  the  anfwer  in  annual  payments  during
the  joint  lives.

The  folution  I  have  referred  to  is  as  fol-
lows.

**  Find  the  value  of  an  annuity  on  two  e-
*'  qual  joint  lives,  whereof  the  common  age
"  is  equal  to  the  age  of  the  older  of  the  two
**  propofed  lives  ;  which  value,  fubtradt  from
*'  the  perpetuity,  and  take  half  the  rcmain-
**  der.  Then  fay,  as  the  cxpcclation  oi  thie
*'  duration  of  the  younger  ot  the  two  lives  rs
"  to  that  of  the  elder,  fo  is  the  faid  half  re-
"  mainder  to  a  4th  proportional,  which  will
**  be  the  number  of  years  purchafe  to  be  gi-
'*  ven  for  the  eflate  when  the  life  in  expec-
*'  tation  is  the  oldefl:  of  the  two.  But  if  this
^^  life  is  the  youngeft,  then  add  the  number
"  of  years  purchafe  juft  found  to  the  value
*'  of  the  joint  lives,  and  let  the  fum  be  fub-
**  trac'led  from  the' perpetuity,  and  you  will
**  alfo  have  the  anfwer  in  this  cafe  (^/)".

Let

((?) Mr.  Slmpfon  has  given  the  following  examples  of

this  folution,  adapted to  London  lives. Example  I.

"  Suppofe  the  age  of  the  expciiant  to  be  40  ;  of  the  pof-
**  fcilbr  30. The  rate  of  interefl:4p^r  cmt,  and  the

"  given


'Reverftonary  Annuities^  Szc.  37

Let  the  life  in  expecftation  be  30 ;  and  the
other  life  40  :  The  fum,  100/.  Intereft,  4
J>er  cent.  The  valuation  of  lives,  that  in  Ta-
ble VI.

The  expcBatioji  of  the  firft  life,  is  28 ;  of
the  fecond  life  23,  by  Mr.  De  Moivres  hy-
potbejis. The  value  of  the  joint  lives  is  10.43,

"  given  legacy  5000/.  or  200/.  -per  annum.  Then  the
■"  value  of  two  equal  joint  lives  of  40,  being  8.1,  by
*'  Table  XI,  and  the  perpetuity  25,  the  remainder  o-r
**  difference  will  be  here  16,9;  whereof  the  half  is  8.45.
*'  Therefore,  it  will  be  as  23.6  to  19.6,  fo  8.45  to  7.02
^'  years  purchafe,  or  /.  1404,  the  required  value."

Example  II.  "  Let  the  age  of  the  expe^ant  be  30,  of
*'  the  poffejjor  40,  and  the  relt  as  in  the  preceding  exam-
*'  pie.  Here  the  value  of  the  joint  lives  30  and  40,  will
*'  be  8.8;  which  added  to  7.02,  (found  above)  the  funi
"  will  be  15.82;  whence  the  anfwer,  in  this  cafe,  is
*'  9.18  years  purchafe,  or  1836."

1  have  Ihewn,  that  the  values  of  reverfionary  ejlates,
and  reverfionary _/«/;«,  are  not  the  fame  as  is  here  fup-
pofed. — The  rule  gives  the  true  value  when  applied  to
-the  former;  but,  when  applied  to  the  latter,  the  values
^iven  by  it  muft  be  divided  by  \l.  increaCed  by  its  inte-
reft for  a  year,  as  above  diredled. — The  fame  obfcrvatiou
is  to  be  applied  to  Mr.  S'nnpfons  next  Problem,  or  the

In  thefe  Examples,  23.6  and  19.6,  are  the  expectations,
in  Table  IX,  of  30  and  40,  according  to  the  London  Ta-
bles of  Obfervation  ;  and  the  method  of  finding  them  for
any  age,  and  from  any  Tables  of  obfervation,  is  ex-
=plained  at  the  beginning  of  the  firft  EiTay.

In  Mr.  Dc  Ahivrcs  hypothrf:s^  the  expedation  of  a  life,
is  always  half  the  complement.  See  note  p.  2. — Some-
times the  compknie7it  of  a  life  is  mentioned  without  any
jview  to  Mr.  De  Moivris  hypothefis,  and  it  then  means
.double  the  expetlation  of  the  life  whatever  that  may  be
according  to  any  Table  of  obfervations.

D  3  by


^8  ^cfilons  concernhig

hy  Table  VII. The  value  of  two  joint  lives,
both  40,  is  9.82,  by  the  fame  Table. The
eftate  correfponding  to ipo/. is  /\.l,  per  an7i.
and  the  prelent  value  of  fuch  an  eftate  to  be
entered  upon  by  a  perfon  30  years  of  age,  pro-
vided he  furvives  a  perlon  40  years  of  age  is,
by  the  rule  jufl  quoted,  7.33.32. And  this
value,  divided  by  i  /.  increafed  by  its  intereft
for  a  year,  or  by  1.04,  is  /.  32.03.  the  value
in  2^  Jingle  prefent  payment  of  the  fum  of  100/.
dependent  on  the given  furvivorfnip. And
this fingle  payment, divided by 10.43,  is
/.  3,07,  the  required  value  in  annual  payment  s,
during  the  joint  lives,  if  the  firll:  payment  is
not  to  be  made  till  the  end  of  a  year. But  if
the  firft  payment  is  to  be  made  immediately,
the  required  value  in  annual  payments  will  be
/.  32.03,  divided  by  i  1.43,  or  /.  2.8. — Thefe
values,  according  to  the  London  obiervations,
or  Mr.  Simpfon^  Tables  founded  upon  them,
are  /.  35.30,  in  2,  Jingle  payment^  and  7.3.6,  in
Mnniial payments y  beginning  immediately.

Mr.  Simpjon,  in  the  Problems  following
that  here  quoted,  has  given  folutions  of  moft
other  Qaellions,  concerning  the  values  of  re-
verfions  depending  on  furvivorfliips,  where
the  whole  duration  of  two  or  three  lives  is
concerned.  And  I  am  acquainted  with  no,
other  folutions  of  thefe  Queftions,  which  are
applicable  to  all  Tables  of  obfervations,  and
which  at  the  fame  time  (proper  regard  being
I  paid


Reverjionafj  Annuities^  &c.  39

paid  to  the  correcftion  explained  in  the  laft
Queftion)  may  be  confidered  as  fufficiently
corred  {a),

Q^  E  s  T  I  o  N XII.

**  Suppofe  an  inftitation  for  the  relief  of

*'  widows  to  extend  its  afliftance  likewife
*'  to  the  families  of  married  men,  provided
"  they  leave  no  widows.  Suppofe,  for  in-
**  fiance,  that  in  this  cafe  children  are  to  be
•*  entitled  to  100/.  What  is  fuch  an  expec-
"  tation  worth,  in  prefent  payment,  accord-
"  ing  to  Dr.  Halkys  Table,  intereft  being  at
^'  /^per  centf"

Answer.

If  40  is  the  mean  age  at  which  members
are  admitted  on  fuch  an  inftitution,  and  32
the  mean  age  of  their  wives,  the  anfwer
(fuppofing  no  fubfequent  marriages)  is,  by
the  33d  Problem  in  Mr.  Simp/on  s  Selecfl  Ex-
erciles,  p.  298,  and  the  corredion  already
explained,  /.  13.80  {b).

But

[a)  See  the  third  Eflay.

[b)  This  Problem  and  its  folution  are  given  by  Mr.
Simpfon  in  the  following  words.  *'  A  and  his  heirs  are
*'  entitled  to  an  eftate  of  a  given  value,  upon  the  deceafe
"  of  B,  provided  B  furvives  A  j  to  find  the  value  of
**  their  expeftation  in /);-^K/ money." — Solution.  "Find
*'  the  value  of  an  annuity  on  the  longeft  of  two  equal

D  4  "  lives.


40  ^.ejlions  concerning

But  there  is  a  reducftion  neceffliry,  on  ac-
count of  the  chance  there  is,  that  a  widower
may  marry  again.  Suppofe,  therefore,  one
half  of  all  widowers  to  marry  a  fecond  and
third  time,  and  tliat  two  fifths  of  fuch  wid-
owers furvive  thefe  fubfequent  marriages.  In
this  cafe,  4-  added  to  ^  of  4,  or  tV  of  all  who
become  widowers,  will  die  without  leaving
widows,  and  therefore  A  of/.  13.8,  or  7.9.66,
will  be  the  anfwer.  If  only  ox\t  fourth  of
all  who  become  widowers  marry  again,  and
two  fifths  of  thefe  furvive,  the  anfwer  v^ill
be  /.  1 1.73.

"  lives,  whereof  the  common  age  is  that  of  the  older  of
"  the  lives  A  and  B;  which  value  fubtracSt  from  the
^'  perpetuity,  and  take  half  the  remainder;  then  it  will
*'  be  as  the  expectation  of  duration  of  the  younger  of
*'  the  lives  .A  and  B,  is  to  that  of  the  older,  fo  is  the
f'  faid  half  remainder  to  the  number  of  years  purchafe
f  required,  when  the  life  B /i  the  older  of  the  two.  But
"  if  B  l>e  the  younger ;  then  to  the  number  thus  found,
"  add  the  value  of  an  annuity  on  the  longeft  of  the  lives
"  A  and  B,  and  fubtra6t  the  fum  from  the  perpetuity,  for
?'  the  anfwer  irj  this  cafe."

If  the  eftate  is  4/.  per  annum.,  the  age  of  B  40,  and  of
A  32,  intercft  ^  per  cent,  the  anfwer  by  this  rule  comes
out  /.  14.35,  which  divided  (as  in  the  preceding  queftion)
by  J04,  gives  /.  13.80,  the  value,  as  above,  of  too/,  in
money. If  B  is  30  and  A  40,  the  fame  value  is  20/.

N.  B.  The  value  of  the  longeft  of  two  lives  is  always
the  difference  between  the  value  of  i\\e  joint  lives,  and  the
fum  of  the  values  of  the  two  given  y?K^/^  lives.  Thus;
the  value  of  a  life  at  40,  is,  by  Table  VI,  13.2.  The
J'ufn  of  the  Vclues  of  two  fuch  lives,  is  26.4.  The  value
'of  tvv'o  joint  lives,  whofe  common  age  is  40,  is,  by  Ta-
ble VI],  g.82  ;  and  tlie  dift'erence  is  16.58,  or  the  value
of  the  Iof;^e/i  of  two  lives  at  40.

This


Keverfionary  Annuities^  Sec.  41

This  calculation  fuppofes  all  marriages  to
leave  children  who  furvive  their  parents.  If
this  is  conlidered  as  uncertain,  the  values  now
determined  mufh  be  diminiflied  in  the  pro-
portion of  this  uncertainty. — Thus;  if  one
•marriage  in  (even  fails  of  leaving  children  (a)
that  furvive  their  parents ;  thefe  values  will
be  reduced  a  feventh  part,  or  to  /.  8.28,  if
halj\  and  /.  10.05,  if  a  quarter  of  all  widow-
ers marry.

In  this  way  may  any  other  queftions  of  the
fame  kind  be  anlwered  on  any  fuppoiitions
that  may  be  thought  moft  reafonable,

QjJ  E  s  T  I  o  N XIII.

**  Let  an  efl:ablifl:iment  be  fuppofed  which
'*  takes  in  at  once  all  the  marriages  in  a
*'  country,  or  all  marriages  among  perfons
**  of  a  particular  profeffion  within  a  given
''  diftrid,  and  fubjeds  them  for  perpetuity
**  to  a  certain  equal  and  common  tax,  or  an-
"  nual  payments,  in  order  to  provide  life  an-
**  nuities  for  fuch  widows  as  fhall  refult  from
**  thefe  marriages.  What  ought  the  tax  to
**  be,  fuppofing  the  annuity  20/.  and  calcu-
**  lating  at  ^pcr  cent,  from  Mr.  Ds  Moivre's
**  valuation  of  lives ;  or,  which  is  nearly  the
•'  fame,  from  the  probabilities  of  life  in  Dr.
**  Halleys  Table  of  obfervations  ?"

[a)  This  for  many  years  has  been  nearly  the  facl  a-
mong  the  minifters  und  profefibrs  in  Scotland,

Answer,


42  ^ejlions  concerning


Answer.

Since  at  the  commencement  of  fuch  an
eftablifliment,  all  the  oldeft,  as  welt  as  the
voungeft  marriages,  are  to  be  entitled  equally
to  the  propofed  benefit,  a  much  greater  num-
ber of  annuitants  will  come  immediately  up-
on it,  than  would  come  upon  any  fimilar
eftablilliment,  which  limited  itfelf  in  the
admiffion  of  members  to  perfons  not  exceed-
ing a  given  age.  This  will  check  that  ac-
cumulation of  money,  which  fl:iould  take
place  at  firfl:,  in  order  to  produce  an  income
equal  to  the  dilburfements  at  the  time  when
the  number  of  annuitants  comes  to  a  maxi"
7nuniy  and,  therefore,  will  be  a  particular  bur-
den upon  the  eilabliniment  in  its  Infancy.  For
this,  fome  compenfation  muft  be  provided  \
and  the  equitable  method  of  providing  it,  is,
by  levyingj^^z/L^j-  at  the  beginnmg  of  the  efla-
blifliment,  on  every  member  exceeding  a  g.i-
ven  age,  proportioned  to  the  number  of  years
which  he  has  lived  beyond  that  age.  But  in
theprefent  queftion,  It  Is  fuppofed,  that  fuch
fines  cannot  be  convenient! v  levied,  or  that
every  paym.ent  mud  be  equal  and  common,
whatever  difoarity  there  may  be  In  the  value
of  the  expedations  of  different  members.
The  fines,  therefore,  mull:  be  reduced  to  one
common  one,  anfwering  as  nearly  as  poiTible
to  the  difadvantage  I have  mentioned,  and

payable


Reverfionary  Annuities^  5cc.  43

payable  by  every  member  at  the  time  when
the  eftablilLment  begins.  After  this,  the
eftabhfhment  will  be  the  fame  with  one  that
takes  upon  it  all  at  the  time  they  marry;
and  the. tax  or  annual  payment  of  every  mem-
ber adequate  to  its  fupport,  will  be  the  annu-
al payment  during  marriage,  due  from  perfons
who  marry  at  the  mean  age  at  which,  upon
an  average,  all  marriages  may  be  confidered
as  commencing. — There  are  then  two  points
to  be  here  determined.  Tho,  fines  necellary  to
be  paid  at  firfl,  according  to  the  account  I  have
jufl  given  ;  and  the  conjiant  annual  payment^
neceilary  to  be  made  by  every  member,  as
an  equivalent  for  the  expedation  provided
by  the  eftablifhment. — T\\q fines  to  be  paid
at  firft  are,  for  every  particular  member,  the
fame  with  the  difference  betv/een  the  value
of  the  expedation  to  him  at  his  prefent  age,
and  what  would  have  been  its  value  to  him
had  the  fcheme  beo-un  at  the  time  he  marri-

o

ed  ?  Or,  they  are,  for  the  whole  body  of
members,  the  difference  between  the  value
of  the  common  expedation,  to  perfons  at  the
mean  age  of  all  married  perfons  t:.ken  toge-
ther as  they  exill  in  the  world,  and  to  per-
fons at  that  ape,  which  is  to  be  deemed  their
mean  age  when  they  marry.

Thus;  let  33  for  the  man,  and  25  for  the
woman,  be  the  mean  ages  of  all  that  marry
annually.  Let  alfo  48  be  the  mean  age  of
all  the  married  men  in  the  world,  and  40  of

married


44  ^cjiions  concerning

married  women  {^a).  —  Now,  he  that  will
calculate  for  thefe  ages,  in  the  manner  di-
i^eded  in  Quefl.  IV.  will  find,  that  the  value
in  ammal payments  during  marriage,  and  be-
ginning immediately,  of  the  expediation  of
an  annuity  of  20/.  per  amiwn^  by  a  perfon
25  years  of  age,  after  a  life  whofe  age  is  33,
is  /.  6.64. — And  that  /.  8.04,  is  the  value  of
the  fame  expedation,  the  ages  being  4S
and  40.

The  former,  therefore,  is  the  payment  for
perpetuity  from  every  member  of  the  efta-
blilhment  J  and  the  value  of  the  difference  be-
tween it  and  the  latter,  or  of  /.  i.^per  ann.
payable  during  two  joint  lives,  whofe  ages
are  40  and  48,  that  is,  /.  14.2,  is  the  fine  n^-
ceilary  to  be  levied  on  every  married  mem-
ber at  the  beginning  of  the  eilabliihment  [b).

It  would  be  eafy  to  extend  the  benefit  of
fuch  an  eflabliihment,  fo  far  as  to  provide
jog/,  for  the  children  of  members,  provided

{a)  I  mift  beg  leave  to  refer  to  note  (F)  in  the  Ap-
pendix, for  an  explanation  of  what  1  mean  by  the  mean
ages  of  married  men  and  women,  and  alfo  for  a  confir-
mation of  the  anfwer  I  have  given  to  this  queftion.

[h)  An  annuity  for  ever,  the  firfl:  payment  of  which
is  to  be  made  immediately,  is  worth  26  years  purchafe,
intereft  being  at  \per  cent.  L  \6f.l  therefore,  is  equiva-
lent in  value  to  c.55/.  or  \is.  per  annum^  for  ever.  Add
'this  to  /.  6.64,  and  it  v.'ill  appear,  that  l.'j.i'^per  anniim^
lieginniiig  immediately,  is  the  anfwer  to  this  queftio,),
I'uppolint/ the  value  of  the yW  to  be  provided  for  in  the
perpetual  annua!  payments.

they


Reverjionary  Annuities y  Sec.  45

they  leave  no  widows ;  and  the  neceflary  ad-
dition on  this  account  to  the  perpetual  an-
nual payments,  can  fcarcely,  in  the  circurn-  .
ftances  this  queflion  fuppofes,  be  much  more
than  about  15^.  payable  during  life,  and  ex-
cluding from  all  benefit  fuch  as  happen  to
be  widowers  at  the  commencement  of  the
eftablifhment,  and  do  not  afterwards  marry.

If,  in  fuch  an  eftablifhment,  all  perfons
of  a  particular  denomination,  whether  mar-
ried men,  widowers,  or  batchelors,  are  fub-
jed:ed  alike  to  the  taxes  and  fines ;  they
ought  to  be  as  much  k/s,  as  the  whole  num-
ber of  perfons  fubjedted  to  them,  is  greater
than  the  number  of  marriages  conflar.tlv
exifting.

In  carrying  thefe  fchemes  into  execution,
there  cannot  be  a  more  eafy,  or  equitable
way  of  raifing  the  neceffary  fines,  than  by
providing,  that  none  fhall  be  entitled  to  any
expectation  for  a  few  of  the^firll  years.  Thus ;.
an  eftablifhment,  entitling  widows  to  20/.
per  annum  for  life,  and  conhfting  of  667
married  members,  and  344  unmarried,  al-
ways kept  up  at  an  average,  ought  to  begin
with  a  capital  of  /.  14.2  multiplied  by  667,
or  9471/.  beiides  one  pryment  in  hand  of
the  conftant  annual  payments.  That  is,  (the
proper  annual  payment  of  every  member  be-
ing in  this  cafe  toVt,  multiplied  by  /.6.64V
or  /.4.38)  it  ought  to  begi;i  with  a  capital

of


46  Slueflions  concerning

of  13,899/.  over  and  above  the  payment  of
/.4.38,  at  the  end oi  every  year  for  ever  af-
terwards [a). — The  exclufion  of  all  the  lirft
members  from  any  benefit,  unlefs  they  fur-
vive  the  firfl:  two  years,  or  live  to  make  three
payments,  would  raife  this  capital  nearly.
And  fuch  an  exclufion  for  three  or  four  ycsirs,
would  be  an  advantage  lb  confiderable,  that
it  would  probably  give  fecurity  and  ftability
to  the  fcheme  for  all  fubfcquent  time<

In  thefe  obfervations,  I  have  had  in  vieWj
feveral  fchemes  of  the  kind  defcribed  in  ity
which  are  now  adually  eftablifhed  in  this
kingdom ;  but  more  particularly,  one  begun
among  the  London  and  Middlcfex  clergy,  and
another  which  is  eftablifhed  by  ad:  of  par-
liament, among  the  clergy  in  Scotland,  of
both  which,  I  (hall  have  occafion  in  the  next
chapter  to  take  further  notice.

I  have  chofen  to  calculate  here  only  from
Dr.  Halleys  Table,  or  Mr.  De  Molvres  hy-
pothefts  grounded  upon  it,  becaule  the  London
Table  is,  by  no  means,  adapted  to  the  cafes
in  view.

The  difference  of  eight  years  betvv'een  the
ages  of  men  and  their  wives,  as  here  taken>
is  probably too  little ;  and  for  this  reafon^-

{a)  Or,  fiippofing  the  value  or947i  /.  (the  fine)  provid-
ed for  in  the  annual  payments,  it  ought  to  receive  every
year,  at  the  beginniyig  of  the  ytar,  a  contribution  from
each  member  of /.  4-74.

and


ReverfwJtary  AnnuiUeSt  &c.  47

and  alfo  on  account  of  the  greater  mortality
of  males,  the  values  I  have  given  fliould  be
confidered  as  the  lowefl:  that  any  fcheme
ought  to  provide.

It  fhould  be  further  remembered,  that
when  the  mean  ages,  at  which  marriages
commence,  are  fuppofed  to  be  33  and  25,
all  fecond  and  third  marriages  are  included;
and  that  it  is  to  be  expeded,  that  almoft  all
thefe  marriages  will  begin  after  thefe  ages ;
and  likewife,  that  a  confiderable  proportion
of  the  firft  marriages  will  begin  a  much  lon-
ger time  after  tlicle  mean  ages,  than  any  of
the  other  firft  marriages  will  begin  before
them. — Probably,  therefore,  thefe  mean  ages
fliould  not  be  taken  younger.  One  or  two
years,  however,  more  or  lefs,  in  every  fup-
pofition  I  have  made,  will  make  no  diffe-
rence of  any  confequence.

Qjj  E  s  T  I  o  N XiV.

**  A  perfon  of  a  given  age  has  an  eftate  de-
'*  pending  on  the  continuance  of  his  life  for
**  a  given  term.  What  ought  he  to  give  for
**  having  it  ajjiired  to  him  for  that  term  ?"

Answer.

From  the  value  of  an  annuity  certain  for
the  given  term,  found  by  Table  II,  fuh-
tra(^  the  value  of  the  life  for  the  given  term,

found


48  ^cjlions  concerning

found  by  Queft.  VI.  and  referve  the  remain-
der.— Multiply  the  value  of  i  /.  due  at  the
end  of  the  given  term,  (found  by  Table  I.)
by  )^^  perpetuity y  and  alio  by  \.\\q  probability,
that  the  given  life  fhall  fail  in  the  given  term.
The  producl  added  to  the  referred  remainder,
and  xh&Jhn  multiplied  by  the  given  annuity,
will  be  the  required  value  of  the  alTurance
in  one  prefent  payment  [a).

Example.

An  eftate  or  annuity  of  10 L  for  ever,  will
be  loft  to  the  heirs  of  a  perfon  now  -^4,
fhould  his  life  fail  in  1 1  years.  What  ought
he  to  give  for  the  ajjurance  of  it  for  this
term  ? — That  is;  v/hat  is  the  prefent  value
of  fuch  an  annuity  to  be  entered  upon  at  the
failure  of  fuch  a  life,  fl:iould  that  happen  in
1 1  years  ?

The  value  of  the  life  of  a  perfon  whofe
■iig^  is  34  for  1 1  years,  is,  by  Quell:.  VI.
(reckoning  Interefl:  at  4  per  cent,  and  calcu-
lating from  Dr.  Halley's  Table  of  obferva-
tions)  7.76  ',  which,  fubtraded  from  8.760,
(the  value  of  an  annuity  certain  for  1 1  years)
leaves  i  /.  the  remainder  to  be  referved.

The  value  of  i  /.  to  be  received  at  the  end
of  1 1  years,  is,  0.6496,  by  Table  I.  The  pro-
bability that  the  life  of  a  perfon,  aged  34,

(a)  See  the  demonftration  in  note  (G)  Appendix.

fhall


Rc'uerfio?iary  Annuities ^  Sec.  49

lliall  fiiil  in  1 1  years*  is,  by  Dr.  Hal/ey'sTd.-
ble,  4tv;  and  tiie  perpetuity  is  25.  Thefe
numbers,  multiplied  by  one  another,  and  i
added  to  the  product,  make  4.34,  which,
multiplied  by  10,  (the  given  annuity)  gives
/.  43.4,  the  required  value  in  a  fingle  prel'ent
payment.

7.43.4,  divided  by  1.04,  gives  /. 41.7,  the
true  value,  by  Scholium  to  Queft.  X.  of  the
aiTurance  of  an  equivalent  fum,  or  of  250/.  for
1 1  years  on  the  given  life.

Again.  41.7,  divided  by  8.76,  (the  value
of  the  given  life  for  the  given  time  with  unity
added  to  it)  gives  4.76,  the  fame  value  in  an-
nual payments  beginning  immediately,  for
1 1  years  (a),  fubjedt  to  failure  fhould  the
life  faiL

Scholium.

In  a  fimilar  way  may  the  price  of  afTuran-
ces  on  any  two  joint  lives,  or  the  lo?igeJl  of
two  lives  for  any  given  terms,  be  calculated ;
the  rule  being  as  follows :

**  From  the  value  of  an  annuity  certain
**  for  the  given  term,  fubtrad:  the  value  of
**  the  joint  lives,  or  the  longefl:  of  the  two
*' lives  for  the  o"/'L'(?;z /^r;;^,  lound  by  Scho-
"  Hum  to  Queft.  VI.  and  referve  the  remain-
**  der. — Multiply  the  value  of  i  /.  to  be  re-

(fl)  The  laft  payment  to  be  made  at  the  end  of  the
nth  year  J  or  12  payments  in  all.^

E  , ♦'  ceived


5<>  StueJIions  concerning

^^  ceived  at  the  end  of  the  given  term  by  the
**  perpetuity,  and  alfo  by  the  probabihty
•'  that  the  joint  lives,  or  the  hngeji  of  the  two
*'  liveSi  fhall  fail  within  the  given  term.  This
*'  product  added  to  the  referved  remainder,
*'  and  the fum  multipHed  by  the  annuity  to  be
**  allured,  will  be  the  value  of  the  aflurancc
*'  in  a  fingle  prefent  payment."

Example.

**  What  is  the  value  of  lo/.  per  annum,  to
**  be  entered  upon,  fliould  either  of  two
'*  perfons,  one  40  and  the  other  30  years  of
*'  age,  die  in  ten  years,  reckoning  intereft
**  at  /^  per  cent,  and  calculating  from  Dr.
«'  Halleys  Table."

The  value  of  two  joint  lives  at  thefe  ages,
for  10  years,  (found  by  Scholium  toQueft.  VI.)
is,  6.51  i  which,  fubtracfted  from  8.1 1 1,  (the
value  of  an  annuity  certain  for  10  years,  at
/^per  cent.)  leaves  1.60,  the  remainder  to  be
referved.

The  value  of  i  /.  to  be  received  at  the  end
of  10  years,  is,  .6755,  by  Table  I.

The  probabihty,  that  the  lives  of  one  or
other  of  two  perfons,  aged  30  and  40,  ihall
fail  in 10  years,  is,  44f, by  Table  III  i^a).

{a)  The  probability  taken  from  the  Table,  that  a  per-
fon  aged  30,  (hall  live  10  years,  is,  ^-^r-  That  a  perfon,
aged  40,  Ihall  live  10  years,  is,  ij-^.  That  they  fhall
both  live  10  years,  is,  \±^%^  multiplied  by  .\\\.^  or  4*4'
That  they  fhall  not  both  live  10  years,  or  that  one  or  other
of  them  (hall  die  in  this  time,  is,  A*4,  fubtraded  from
unity,  or,  i^-J. See  note  p.  23.

And


Reverjionary  AnmdtieSj  Sec.  51

And  the  perpetuity  25.  Thefe  numbers,
multiplied  by  one  another,  and  1.60  added
to  the  produdt,  make  7.48,  which,  multiplied
by  10,  (the  given  annuity)  gives  7.74.8,  the
anfvver  in  a  lingle  prefent, payment.

/.  74.S,  divided  by  1.04,  gives  /.  71.92,  the
value  of  the  aiTurance  of  an  eqiihmJent  Jmi ;
or  of  250/ — 7.7 1. 92,  divided  by  7.51,  (the
value  of  the  two  joint  lives  for  10  years  with
unity  added)  gives  9.57,  the  value  of  the
fame  fum  in  annual  payments  beginning  im-
mediately, for  10  years,  fubject  to  failure
Ihould  the  joint  lives  fail.

Example II.

**  What  is  the  value  of  i  oLper  amium^  to  be
*'  entered  upon,  fliould  two  perfons  one  30,
**  and  the  other  40,  both  die ;  that  is,  iliould
*'  the  longeji  of  the  two  lives  fail  in  10  years,
*'  reckoning  intereft  at  4  per  cent,  and  cal-
*'  culating  from  Dr.  Halleys  Table?"

The  value  of  the  longeji  of  the  two  lives
for  10  years,  (that  is,  the  value  of  the  joint
lives  for  10  years,  fubtra(5ted  from  the  fum
of  the  {a)  values  of  the  lingle  lives  for  10
years)  is,  7.9  ij  which,  fubtraded  from  8.1 1 1,
the  value  of  an  annuity  certain  for  10  years,
leaves  .20  the  remainder  to  be  referved.—
The  value  of  i  /.  to  be  received  at  the  end

{a)  See  Scholium  to  Queft.  VI,

E  2  of


52  ^efilons  concerning

of  10  years,  is,  '6y^^.  The  probability  that
the  Hves  of  two  perfons,  aged  -^o  and  40,
lliall  fail  in  10  years,  is,  by  Table  III,  tVt,
multiplied  by  -m,  or  T-|-5-44-r ;  and  the  per-
petuity 25.  Thefe  numbers,  multiplied  by
one  another,  and  .20  added  to  the  product,
make  .740,  which,  multiplied  by  10,  (the
given  annuity)  gives  7.4,  the  anfwer  in  a  fin-
gle  payment.

7.4,  divided  by  1.04,  gives  i  i,  the  va-
lue of  the  affurance  of  250/.

Remark I.

The  values  of  fingle  lives  for  given  terms,
when  thefe  terms  are  lefs  than  10  years,
muft,  in  anfwering  thefe  Queftions,  and  alfo
in  anfwering  the  following  Queftions,  be
found  true  to  at  leaft  2-  or  3  places  of  deci-
mals. But  they  cannot  be  found  to  this  ex-
aftnefs  by  any  Tables  that  are  extant ;  and,
therefore,  thev  muft  be  calculated  in  the  fol-
lowing  manner :

**  Multiply  the  probability,  taken  out  of
**  the  Table  of  obfervations,  that  the  life
*'  fhall  exift  i,  2,  3,  &c.  years,  by  the  value
**  of  i/.  due  at  the  end  of  i,  2,  3,  &c.  years ;
**  and  the  funi  of  the  products  will  be  the
**  value  of  the  life  for  i,  2,  3,  &c.  years."

For  Example.  The  probability,  that  a
perfon  whofe  age  is  34,  fliall  live  a  year,  is,

by


'Reverjionary  Annuities^  &c.  53

by  Dr.  Hallefs  Table,  -IIt.  The  probabili-
ty, at  the  fame  age,  of  living  2  years,  is,  ^-Ai
3  years,  tw- — ^14  multiplied  by  .9615,  (the
value,  by  Table  I,  of  i  /.  due  at  the  end  of  a
year,  interefl  being  at  ^  per  ce?jt.)  is,  .942;
or  the  value  of  the  life  for  o?2e  year.  —  *|4»
multiplied  by  .9245,  (the  value  of  i  /.  due  at
the  end  of  2  years)  is,  .891.  And  this  added
to  the  former  produ6l,  gives  1.833;  or  the
value  of  the  life  for  2  years. — 4It,  multiplied
by  .8890,  (the  value  of  i/.  due  at  the  end  of
3  years)  is,  .841;  and  this  produdt,  added
to  1.833,  makes  2.674,  or  the  value  of  the
given  life  for  3  years.

When  the  term  exceeds  10  years,  the  rule
in  Queft.  VI.  will  give  thefe  values  with  fuf-
£cient  exadtnefs  -,  and  it  would  do  the  fame
in  all  cafes,  were  the  values  of  lives  given
true  to  3  or  4  places  of  decimals,  and  in
flrid  agreement  to  the  Tables  of  obfervation
ufed.

The  remark  now  made  is  to  be  extended
to  the  values  o^  joint  lives  for  given  terms.
For  thefe  values,  like  thofe  oi  Jingle  lives,
cannot  be  found  in  folving  thefe  Queftions
with  fufficient  accuracy,  when  the  terms  are
fmall,  by  any  method,  except  the  tedious
one,  of  multiplying  the  probability  that  the
2  lives  fliall  both  continue  i,  2,  3,  &c.  years,
by  the  value  of  i/.  due  at  the  end  of  i,  2,
3,  &c.  years,  and  taking  the  fum  of  the  pro-
duds  in  the  manner  jult  defcribed.

E  3  Remark


54  ^lejllons  concerning

Remark II.

If  the  annuity  is  to  he  entered  upon,  In
cafe  of  the  failure  within  a  given  time  of
any  life  or  lives,  at  the  end  of  that  time',  and
not  at  the  end  of  the  year  in  which  the  failure
may  happen ;  its  prefent  value  will  be  the  pro-
dud:  ariling  from  the  continual  multiplication
by  one  another  of  the  perpetuity  increafed
by  unity  ^  the  value  of  i  /.  due  at  the  end  of
the  given  time;  the  annuity;  and  the  proba-
bility that  the  life,  or  lives,  fliall  fail  within
the  given  time.  And  care  (hould  be  taken
not  to  confound  thefe  two  forts  of  Quefliong
with  one  another. — Thus ;  the  value  in  one
payment  of  lo/.  per  ami.  to  be  entered  upon
eleven  years  hence,  in  cafe  a  perfon  aged  34
fhould  not  live  fo  long,  is  26,  (the  perpetuity
increafed  by  unity,  interefl  being  at  ^per  cent.)
multiplied  by  .6496,  and  by  10/.  and  alfo
by  4?i;  or  34.8.  —  This  value,  divided  by
1. 04,  is,  3V5>  ^^^^  value  of  an  equivalent
fum,  or  of  250/.  to  be  obtained  on  the  fame
conditions.

The  value  of  the  afjurance  of  any  annuity
on  the  whole  continuance  of  any  lingle  life
is,  by  Queft.  X.  the  excefs  of  the  perpetuity
above  the  value  of  the  life,  multiplied  by  the
annuity.  And  in  like  manner;  the  value  of
the  ajj'urance  of  any  annuity  on  the  whole
contmuance  of  any  two  joint  lives,  or  the
longeji  of  two  lives,  is  the  excefs  of  the  per^

petiiit^


Reverjionary  Annuities,  Sec.  55

petuity  above  the  value  of  the  joint  lives,  or
of  the  longeft  of  two  lives,  multiplied  by  t'he
annuity.  This  is  very  obvious;  but  no  ge-
neral method  has  been  yet  explained  of  find-
ing the  values  q{  a[]urances  on  lives  and  fur-
vivorfhips  for  terms  of  years  lefs  than  the
whole  continuance  of  the  lives.  For  this  rea-
fon,  I  have  been  here  more  explicit  than  I
fhould  otherwife  have  been  ;  and,  as  fuch  af-
furances  are  now  much  pradtifed,  and  may
be  very  ufeful  if  their  values  are  rightly  de-
termined, I  have  thought  proper  to  add  the
two  following  Queftions,  which,  when  join-
ed to  Queftion  XI.  and  Mr.  Sitnpfons  33d
Problem  given  in  the  note  p.  39,  will,  I  be-
lieve, exhaufi:  this  fubjedt  as  far  as  two  lives
can  be  concerned.

Qjj  E  s  T  1  o  N XV.

**  B,  expectant,  will  lofe  a  given  fum,
**  (hould  he  furvive  A,  within  a  given  time.
**  What  ought  he  to  pay  for  the  ajjiirance  of
**  it  ? — In  other  words  :  "  What  ought  he  to
*^  pay  for  a  given  fum  to  be  received  at  the
"  death  of  A,  fliould  he  happen  to  furvive
^*  him  within  a  given  time  ?"

Answer.

Divide  thtfwn  of  the  decrements  of  life

In  the  Table  of  obfervations  from  the  age

of  A,  for  the  given  time,  by  the  given  time;

and, by  the  quotient, divide  the  number  of

E  4  the


56  ^ejiions  concerning

the  living  In  the  Table  at  the  age  of  A  ;  and
again,  by  thhfecond  quotient  (a)^  divide  the
given  fum  referving  the  third  quotient.

Find  the  value  of  an  annuity  on  the  life
of  B,  for  the  given  time.  To  this  value  add
the  quotient,  that  will  arife  from  dividing  the
value  of  an  annuity  certain,  for  the  given
time,  by  twice  the  complement  of  the  life  of
Bj  and  xhQfu?n,  multiplied  by  the  referved
quotient^  will  be  the  required  value  in  a  fingle
prel'ent  [b)  payment.

Example.

Let  the  Table  of  obfervations  be  Mr.  Simp-
Jon  $  for  London,  or  Table  VIII.  Let  the  rate
of  interefl  be  3  per  cent.  A,  feven  years  of
age.  B,  30.  The  given  time  14  years.
The  given  lum  100/. — The  fum  of  the  de-
crements,  in  Table  VIII.  for  14  years  from  the
age  of  feven,  is  73,  which,  divided  by  14,
gives  5.2.  The  number  of  the  living  at  fe-
ven is  430,  which,  divided  by  5.2,  an^
100/.  divided  by  the  quotient,  gives  /.  1.21,
the  quotient  to  be  referved.

(a)  When  the  age  of  A  is  under  60,  and  the  term  fo
large  as  to  exceed  the  difi'erence  betv/een  it  and  70,  it
will  be  beft,  when  the  London  Table  is  ufed,  to  divide
the  given  fum,  not  by  the  fecond  quotient  here  menti-
oned, but  by  the  complement  of  the  life  of  A,  taken  oqt
of  Table  IX.

{h)  See  the  demonftration  of  this  rule,  and  alfo  of  the
jule  that  will  be  given  for  folving  the  next  Queftion,  in
the  Appendix,  note  (H),

The


Keverjionary  Anmiittes,  Sec,  57

The  value  of  an  annuity  for  14  years  on
the  life  of  B,  is,  by  Quell.  VI.  9.5.-— The
value  of  an  annuity  certain  for  14  years,  is,
by  Table  II.  11.296,  which,  divided  by
94.4,  (twice  the  complement  of  the  life  of  B,
by  Table  IX)  (^),  gives  .  1 2,  which,  added  to
9.5,  gives  9.62  ;  and  this  again  multiplied
by  1.2 1,  the  referved  quotient,  gives  11.64,
t\\Q  prefent  value  in  one  payment  of  100/.  pay-
able at  the  death  of  A  aged  37,  to  B  aged
30,  (hould  A  die  and  leave  B  the  furvivor
within  14  years.

The  prefent  value  for  14  years  of  two  joint
lives,  one  7  and  the  other  30  years  of  age,
may  be  found,  by  the  help  of  Table  XI,  and
the  rule  in  the  Scholium  to  Queft.  VI.  to  be
nearly  9  years  purchafe  s  and,  /.  11.64  ^^~
vided  by  this  value  with  unity  added,  or  by
10,  gives  1. 1 64,  the  foregoing  value  in  ^7;/-
nual payments  during  the  joint  lives  for  14
years,  the Jirji  payment  to  be  made  imme-
diately, and  the  la/l  payment  at  the  end  of
14  years,  fhould  the  joint  lives  not  fail.

Scholium.

It  deferves  particularly  to  be  remembered,
that  in  this  method  likewife  may  be  calcu-
lated, what  fums  ought  to  be  paid  on  any
furvivonliip,  within  a  given  time,  of  one  life

(fl)  This  Table  gives  the  expeSiations  only,  but  it  fiiould
be  remembered,  that  twice  the  expeSfation  is  always  the
^ompUment  of  a  lif»;. See  note,  p.  37.

beyond


58  ^lejfions  concerning

beyond  unother,  in  confideration  of  any  gi-
ven fum  now  advanced. — The  following  Ex-
ample of  this  is  a  cafe  which  has  offered  it-
felf  in  pradice.

**  A  perfon,  aged  30,  has  in  expe(ftation
**  an  eftate  which  is  to  come  to  him,  pro-
**  vided  he  furvives  a  tji'mor,  aged  7,  before
**  he  is  out  of  his  minority  ;  that  is,  pro-.
**  vided  he  fliould  be  himTelf  living  at  the
•*  time  of  the  minor's  death,  ihould  that  hap-
**  pen  before  he  is  21. — In  thefe  circum-
«*  ftances,  he  wants  to  borrow  looo/.  on  his
**  expeSiation.  What  reverfion  out  of  the
**  eltate  depending  on  fuch  a  furvivorfliip,  is
'*  a  proper  equivalent  for  this  fum  now  ad-
^*  vanced,  interelt  being  reckoned  at  3  per
**  cejit,  and  the  probabilities  of  life  being
^*  fuppofed  the  fame  with  thofe  in  Mr.  Simp-
**/on^  Table  oi  London  obfervations  ?"

Answer.

It  appears  from  what  has  been  jufl:  deter-
mined, that  for  /.  1 1.64  now  advanced,  the
proper  equivalent  in  fuch  circumftances,  is,
100/.  to  be  paid,  in  cafe  the  furvivorfliip
ihould  take  place  s  or,  by  the  correSiion  in
page  34,  as  much  of  the  eftate  as  100/,
will  buy  at  3  per  cent,  fuppofing  the  iiril  rent
to  be  received  immediately;  (that  is,  fup-
pofing the  eltate  worth  34.33  years  purchafe.)
or  /.  2.9 1 2  per  annum.  —  By  the  rule  of  pro-
portion, therefore, for looo/. the  proper

equi-


Reverjionary  AmiuitieSt  &c,  59

equivalent  will  be  8591  /.  in  money,  or  250 A
fer  annum  out  of  the  cltate.

Qjj  E  s  T  I  o  N XVI,

"  100/.  will  be  loft  to  B's  heirs,  fhould  he
^*  happen  to  die  after  A,  within  a  given  time^
*'  What  is  the  price  of  the  ajj'urance  of  it  ?— ;
^*  That  is  :  What  is  the  prefent  value  of
^*  100/.  payable  at  the  death  of  B,  provided
^'  his  death  ihould  happen  after  A's  death,
^^  within  a  given  time  f  "

Answer,

Divide  the  fum  of  the  decrements  of  life
in  the  Table  of  obfervations  from  tlie  age  of
B,  for  the  given  time,  by  the  given  time;
and  by  the  quotient  divide  the  number  of  the
living  at  the  age  of  B;  and  again,  by  this
Jecond  quotient  [a)y  divide  the  given  fum,  re-
ferving  the  third  quotient.

Find  the  value  of  an  annuity  on  the  life  A
for  a  number  of  years,  lefs  by  one  year  than
the  given  time,  which  fubtrad:  from  the  var
|ue  of  an  annuity  certain  for  the  fame  num-
ber of  years.  Multiply  the  reinainder  by  the
referved  quotient:,  and  divide  the  produSi  by
the  amount  of  1  /.  for  one  year,  and  let  this
be  2ifecond  referved  quotient.

{a)  Or  rather,  if  the  London  Table  is  ufed,  by  the  com-
plement of<the  life  of  B,  when  his  age  is  under  60,  and
;ije  term  exceeds  the  diffcrcncs  betwesa  it  and  70.

Again.


6o  ^ejlions  concerning

Again.  Multiply  into  one  another  tht  Jirji
refervcd  quotient,  and  the  value  of  an  an-
nuity certain  for  the  given  time;  and  divide
the  produd:  by  twice  the  compk7nent  of  A's
life.  This  lajl  quotient,  added  to  thtfecond
referved  quotient,  will  be  the  anfwer  in  a  pre*
fent  lingle  payment.

Example.

Let  the  age  of  B  be  40.  Of  A  30.  The
fum  100/.  Rate  of  intereft  \per  cent.  The
given  time  20  years.  The  Table  of  obfer-
vations,  Mr.  SimpfaiSy  or  Table  VIII. — The
fum  of  the  decrements  of  life,  in  this  Table,
from  the  age  of  40  for  20  years,  is  1 27,  which,
divided  by  20,  (the given  time)  gives  6.38. —
The  number  of  the  living  at  40  is  229,  which,
divided  by  6.38,  gives  35.8;  and  100/.  (the
given  fum)  divided  by  35.8,  gives  2.79,  the
Jirft  quotient  to  be  referved.

The  value  of  an  annuity  for  19  years  on
a  life  at  30  years  of  age,  is  10.3;  which,
fubtradled  from  13.134,  (the  value  of  an  an-
nuity certain  for  19  years,  by  Table  II)  and
the  remainder  multiplied  by  2.79,  gives  7.89.
This  product  divided  by  1.04,  (the  amount
of  I  /.  in  one  year)  gives  7.60 ,  the  Jecond
referved  quotient.

2.79  multiplied  by  13.59,  (the  value  of  an
annuity  certain  for  20  years)  gives  37.9165
and  this  product  divided  by  94.4,  (twice  the

com-


Reverjionary  Ajznuities,  &c.  6i

complement  of  A's  life  by  Table  IX.)  gives
.401,  which,  added  to  7.60,  gives  8/.  the
Anfwer  y  or,  the  value  of  100/.  payable  at  the
death  of  B,  on  the  contingency  of  his  furviv-
ifig  A  aged  30,  and  both  dying  in  20  years.

It  is  plain,  that  this  is  likewife  the  fum
that  ought  to  be  lent  to  B  now,  on  the  ex-
peftation  of  100/.  at  his  death,  provided  it
fliould  happen  after  A's  death  in  20  years.

This  rule  gives  the  jufl:  folution  in  all  cafes,
except  when  B,  the  expedtant,  is  \\\q  youngejl
of  the  two  lives,  and  at  the  fame  time  the
term  of  years  greater  than  the  complement
of  A's  life.  In  this  particular  cafe  the  fol-
lowing rule  muft  be  ufed.

Find,  by  the  preceding  rule,  the  value  of
the  alTurance  of  the  given  fum  for  a  term  of
years,  equal  to  the  complement  of  A's  life,
and  let  this  value  be  referved.  Multiply  by
one  another  the  gwtn  fw7i  i  the  value  of  iL
to  be  received  at  the  end  of  a  number  of
years  equal  to  the  complement  of  A's  life;
and  the  value  of  an  animity  certain  for  as
many  years  as  the  given  term  exceeds  this
complement.  And  the  produB^  divided  by
the  complement  of  B's  life,  and  the  quotient
added  to  the  value  referved,  will  be  the  true
value  fought.

Example.

Let  the  age  of  B  be  30;  of  A  40. The

term  47  years ;  and  every  thing  elfe  as  in

2  the


6^  ^ejlions  tonctrniitg

the  laft  Example.  The  complement  of  A's
life,  is,  by  Table  IX.  39.2.  The  value  of
100/.  to  be  received  at  the  death  of  B,  if  he
furvives  A  within  39  years,  may  be  found
by  the  preceding  rule  to  be  /.  16.15;  the  va-
lue to  be  referved.  —  The  value  of  i/.  to  be
received  at  the  end  of  39  years  is,  by  Table
II,  .2166.  The  value  of  an  annuity  certain
for  8  yearSj  (thu  -.xcei's  oi  the  given  term
above  the  complement  of  the  life  of  B  by
Table  IX.)  is,  6.733.

And  thefe  two  values  multiplied  by  one
another,  and  by  100/.  give  145.835  which^
divided  by  47.2,  (the  complement  of  the  life
ofB)  and  16.15,  added  to  the  quotient,  make
A  19.23,  the  value  fought.

Remark.

As  after  finding  the  prefent  value  of  an
cftate,  or  annuity,  it  is  neceffary  to  divide
that  value  by  the  amount  of  1  /.  in  one  year,
in  order  to  find  the  prefent  value  of  2,fum
equivalent  to  the  amiidty ;  fo,  after  finding  the
value  of  a  fum,  it  is  neceffary  to  multiply  that
value  by  the  faid  amount,  in  order  to  find
from  it  the  value  of  an  equivalent  annuity.

In  the  firit  Example,  therefore,  the  valiie
of  an  eflate  of  4/.  per  annum,  would  be  7.8.32,
In  the  fecond  Example,  20/.  And  this  is<
as  it  ought  to  be,  the  value  for  the  whole
duration  of  the  lives,  agreeably  to  the  Pro-
blem in  the  note  pngc  37.

2  In


Re^'oerfionary  Atuiuities,  6cc.  63

In  folving  this  Queftion,  care  alfo  mufl  be
taken  not  to  forget  the  fijl  Remark  under
the  foregoing  Queftion.

In  the  fame  way  with  that  in  which  the
rules  in  the  three  laft  Queftions  have  been
difcovered,  it  is  poffible  to  find  rules  for  cal-
culating the  values  of  ajfurances,  for  given
termSi  on  lives  and  furvivorihips,  where  three
or  more  lives  are  concerned.  But  this  is  of
lefs  importance ;  and  I  chufe  to  leave  to
others  the  further  profecution  of  this  fubje^ft.


CHAP,


[ 64 ]

CHAP. II.

Containing  an  Applicatio7t  of  the  ^uef-^
tions  in  the  foregoing  Chapter  to  the
Schemes  of  the  Societies  in  Great
Britain,  for  making  Affiirances  07t
Lives  a7id  Survivor fJoips^  a?id  for
graJtting  An7iuities  to  Widows^  and
to  Perfons  in  old  Age,

SECT. L

Of  the  London  Annuity,  and  the  Laudable

Societies  for  the  Beiicfit  of  Widows.

THE  fcheme  mentioned  in  Queft.  VIII.
is  nearly  that  of  the  hondon  Annuity
Society.  The  Laudable  Society  is  alfo  formed
on  a  fimilar  plan.  In  both,  the  annual  con^
tribution  of  every  member  is  five  guineas,
payable  half-yearly ;  and  for  this  a  title  is
given  to  an  annuity  of  20/.  to  every  widow
during  widowhood,  if  the  hufband,  after  ad-
miiHon,  lives  one  year  according  to  thejirfi
fcheme ',  or  three  years  according  to  the  {a)

(a)  In  this  fociety  a  member  who  lives  but  one  year,
is  entitled  to  no  more  than  an  annuity  of  10/.  for  his
tvrdow  ;  if  he  lives  two  years,  15/.  If  he  lives  three  years,
20/.  four  years,  25/.  feven  years,  30/.  ten  years,  35/,
thirteen  years,  40/.

Jecond'i


Of  the  London  Annuity,  ^c. 6^

fccond'y  of  30/.  if  thehuiband  livesy^^v«  years,
according  to  both  fchcmesj  and  40/.  accord-
ing to  ihtf.rjl  fcheme,  if  he  lives  15  years,
or  13  years,  according  to  the  fecond. —
In  both  fchemes  alfo,  there  Is  no  other  pre-
mium or  fine  required,  than  five  guineas  ex-
traordinary, at  admiflion,  from  every  mem-
ber whofe  age  does  not  exceed  45.  The
Laudable  Society  admits  none  above  45,  and
the  London  Annidty  Society  obliges  every  per-
fon  between  45  and  55  to  pay,  at  admilfion,
five  guineas  extraordinary,  for  every  year  that
he  is  turned  of  45.

Thefe  are  the  main  particulars  in  thefe
fchemes;  and,  therefore,  both  of  them,  were
the  annuities  to  be  enjoyed  for  life,  would
receive  (fuppofing  the  members  all  under
46  at  admilTion,  and  of  the  fame  ages  vfith
their  wives,  and  money  at  ^  per  cent.)  but
little  more  than  three  fifths  of  the  true  value
of  the  annuities ;  or  about  one  half,  fuppo-
fing wives,  one  with  another,  10  years  young-
er than  their  bulb  and  s  3  as  appears  from
Queftion  Vill.

It  appears  further  in  that  Queflion,,  that,
fuppoli ng  the  annuities  to  be  life  annuities,
and  men  and  their  wives  of  equal  ages,  the
expetftation  to  which  an  annual  payment  of
five  guineas  beginning  immediately,  entitles,
is  nearly  14/.  if  the  contributor  lives  a  year,
and  20/.  ii  he  lives  icwtn  years  (<^),  taking

[a)  The  fame  annual  payment  will,  on  the  fame  fup-
pofitions,  entitle  to  14/.  if  a  member  lives  a  year,  and  i8/.
jf  he  lives  three  years.

F  thf:.


66  Of  the  London  Annuity

the  medium  between the London  and tlje
other  Tables  of  Oblervation.

It  is  Hkely,  that  many  perfons  will  be  very
unwilHng  to  beHeve,  that  thefe  Ichemes  are
fo  deficient  as  they  have  been  now  reprelent-
ed.  I  will,  therefore,  endeavour  to  prove
this  in  a  way  which,  tho'  lefs  ftridt,  is  fuffi-
ciently  decilive,  and  may  be  more  Hkely  to
be  intelligible  to  perfons  unikilled  in  mathe-
matical calculation. — ^I  ihall  here  confine  my-
felf  to  the  fcheme  of  the  London  Annuity  So-
ciety. The  differences  between  it  and  the
fcheme  of  the  Laudable  Society  are  inconfi-
derable,  and  what  ihall  be  faid  of  the  one  will
be  fully  applicable  to  the  other.

According  to  this  fcheme,  as  it  has  beeft
jud  defcribcd,  all  that  live  15  years  in  the.
fociety  will  be  entitled  to  annuities  of  40/,
■per  ajinuni  for  their  widows.  Suppofe  the
whole  fociety,  at  admiffion,  to  be  men  of  40
years  of  age,  taken  one  with  another.  A
perfon  of  this  age  has  an  even  chance  of  liv-
ing 23  years ;  and  he  has  an  even  chance  of
continuing  with  a  wife  of  the  fame  age,  (that
is,  of  continuing  in  the  fociety)  13  years,
and  ~  [a). Not  much  lefs, therefore,  than

half

•  (a)  This  is  the  exacl  truth  according  to  Mr.  De  Mol-
vre's  Hypothefis,  and  the  Norzvicb  Table.  •  But  accord-
ing to  Dr.  Halley's  and  the  Northcmipion  Table,  a  man
40  years  of  age  has  an  even  chance  of  living  no  more
t'fian  22  year?,  and  of  joint  conup-,ua'j;ce  wiih  a  wife  of  the

fame


and  Laudable  Societies ^  &c.  67

half  the  members  will  continue  in  the  focie-
ty  15  years;  and,  confequentiy,  not  much  lefs
than  half  the  widows  that  will  come  upon
the  fociety  will  be  annuitants  of  40/.  per  an-
num. Thefe  widows,  however,  being  older
than  the  refl  when  they  commence  annui-
tants, will  continue  on  the  fociety  a  fiiorter
time  -J  and,  therefore,  the  number  conftantly
in  life  together,  to  which  they  will  in  a
courfe  of  years  incrcafe,  will  be  proportion-
ably  fmaller.  Putting  every  thing  as  favour-
ably as  poi'iihle,  let  us  fuppofe,  that  out  of
20  annuitants  conftantly  on  the  fociety,  ^i?^
will  be  annuitants  of  ^ol.  fix  of  30/.  and
nine  of  20/.  To  20  annuitants  then  the  fo-
ciety will  pay  ^6qL  per  amiwn,  or  the  20th
part  of  this  lum,  that  is  28/.  to  e'-oery  annui-
tant at  an  average.  But  fuch  an  annuity  for
a  life  at  40,  after  another  equal  life,  provided
both  furvive  one  year,  is  worth  (by  Queft.  VII.
p.  24.)  in  a  lingle  prefent  payment,  85/.
nearly,  according  to  the  Lo?idon,  and  all  tlie
Tables  of  Obfervations,  intereft  being  all  along
fuppofed  at  4  per  cent.

It  cannot  appear  improbable  to  any  one,
that  this  fhould  be  the  true  value  of  fuch  a
reverfion. It  is  not  credible,  that there  is

fame  ajvf*,  13  3-e?.rs. — Forty  mud-  be  more  th?n  the  mean
age  of  the  members  cf  the'focicty  at  admiffion,  and  ca
this  account  the  number  of  annuitants  of  4c/.  muil  he
proportionably  g-eater.  The  mean  age,  therefore,  has
been  t^skcn  very  moderately.

F  2  any


68  Of  the  London  Annuity

any  {ituation  in  which'  the  decrements  of  h'fc
are  fuch  as  can  make  it  a  tenth  part  more  or
lefs.  —  85/.  in  prefent  payment  is  the  fame
with  3/.  8 J.  per  annum  for  ever. — But  is  an
annual  payment  of  five  guineas,  which  muft
ceale  as  foon  as  either  of  two  lives  each  40,
fails,  equal  in  value  to  fuch  a  perpetuity  }
Every  one  mull  fee,  that  there  is  a  great  dif-
ference.—  A  fet  of  marriages  between  per-
fons  all  40,  will,  according  to  the  probabi-
lities of  life  in  Dr.  Halleys  Table,  laft,  one
with  another,  15  years  \a) -,  and  an  annual
payment  beginning  immediately,  during  the
joint  continuance  of  two  perfons  of  this  age,
is  worth  10  years  purchale  (/>).  The  com-
parison then,  in  the  prefent  cafe,  is  between
3/.  ^s.  per  annum  for  ever,  and  five  guineas
per  annwnfor  i  ^  years ;  or  between  an  an-
nuity of  3/.  Ss.  worth  25  years  purchafe,
and  an  annuity  of  five  guineas  worth  only  10
years  purchafe.

But  to  throw  this  fubjccft  into  another  light.

(^)  See  the  beginning  of  Efiay  I.

[b)  The  value  of  fuch  an  annual'  pavmcnt,  by  Table
XI,  or  the  London  Obfervations,  is  9.  i ;  and  10,8,  by  Mr.
Dc  Moivre's  Hypothefis. — I  have  not  taken  into  this  ac-
count the  five  guineas  yf«^  paid  at  admiflion,  bccaufe  it  is
obvioufly  of  too  little  confequence  to  make  any  confide-
rable  diffeience.  The  allov/ances  I  have  made  in  favour
of  thefe  fchemes  are  more  than  equivalent  to  it.  In  par-
ticnlar;  it  fhould  be  remembererl,  that  the  payments  re-
quired by  thcfe  fchemes,  are  Ijalf-yearly  paymenls  begin-
ning immediately;  and  that  thtfe,  by  Q^icflr.  Vill.  are
lefs  advantageous  than  the  payments  I  all  alotig  fuppofc
them  to  require,  or,  '•'■  vuirly  payments  b/gimiing  imme-
"  diately."

J.  Left


and  Laudable  Societiesj  Sec.  69

Let  the  number  to  which  the  fociety  is
kept  up  be  luppofed  to  be  200.  It  has  been
dcmonftrated  in  Qneft.  II,  that  at  leaft  half
this  number  of  widows  will  in  time  come  to
be  conf^antly  on  the  fociety ;  and  it  has  alfo
been  juil  now  (liewn,  that  the  medium  of  an-
nuities, payable  to  them,  will  be  at  leaft  28/.
After  a  courfe  of  years,  then,  the  fociety  will
have  a  conftant  expence  to  bear  of  2800/.  per
annum. — But  what  will  be  its  income  ? — In
order  to  determine  this,  we  muft  confider,
that  there  are  two  fources  from  whence  its
income  will  be  derived.  Firft,  the  annual
payments  of  the  members.  And,  fecondly,
the  money  accumulated,  or  the  capital  raifcd
during  the  time  the  number  of  annuitants  is
coming  to  a  maximum.  — The  firft  of  thefe
fources  affords  1000  guineas,  or  1050/.  per
annum.  This  wants  1750/.  of  the  annual
expence  juft  mentioned;  and,  therefore,  in
order  to  have  the  income  of  the  fociety  equ^l
to  the  burden  upon  it,  when  the  annuitants
come  to  a  )naximu?n,  there  muft  be  a  fund
raifed  in  the  mean  time  equal  to  43,750/.
or  to  an  eftate  in  perpetuity  of  1750/.  per
annum. — But  1050/.  per  annum  beginning
immediately,  and  forborn  24  years,  and  im-
proved, without  lofs  or  delay,  all  that  time
at  4  per  cent,  compound  intereft,  will  but
juft  raife  fuch  a  capital  i^a).  There  is,  there-
fore,

(rtj  Every  Queftion  of  this  kind may  be  cafily  folvcd

in  the  following  manner. In  Table  I, find  the  value

F  3  of


^o  Of  the  London  Annuity

fore,  the  fuUeft  proof,  that  the  khernc  I  arn
confiderin'^  is  extremely  delicient.  The
truth  is,  that  fcarcely  a  third  of  fuch  a  capi-
tal could  be  raifed,  as  will  uppear  from  the
following  obfervations.

Out  of  200  perfons,  all  40  years  of  age,
viore  than  five,  according  to  the  Lendon  Ta-
ble of  Obfervations,  and  not  fo  many  by  Dr.
Hallefs  Table,  may  be  expected  to  die  in  a
year.  Suppofe  then  five  to  be  the  real  num-
ber of  members  that  will  die  the  firfi;  year
of  the  iociety.  In  fubiequent  years  the  col-
ledive  body  of  members  will  be  continually
growing  older;  and,  therefore,  the  propor-
tion of  them  that  will  die  every  year,  will
be  continually  increafing,  till  it  gets  to  a
maximum.  I  will,  however,  fuppofe,  that
during  the  firft  20  years  no  more than  the

of  I /.  payable  at  the  end  of  any  number  of  years;  and
any  given  annuity  divided  by  that  value,  will  be  the  an-
nuity to  which  the  given  annuity  v/ill  in  that  number
of  years  increafe.  — Thus ;  the  piefent  value  of  1/.  pay-
able at  the  end  of  25  years,  is  .3751,  reckoning  intereft
•&1  ^  per  cent,  and  ic^cl.  per  annwn  divided  by  .3751,
gives  2,800/.  per  anuian^  the  increafed  annuity  arifing
irom  1050/.  per  ann.  In  the  fame  manner  ;  it  may  be
found,  that  the  fiime  annuity,  forborn  1 1  years,  will  in-
creafe to  1610/.  per  annum.  This  fuppofes  the  firfl  pay-
ment of  the  annuity  to  be  made  a  year  hence.  If  the
£ril  payment  is  to  be  made  immediately,  which  is  the
prefcnt  cafe,  the  annuity  v/ill  incre.n'e  to  the  fame  fums
in  one  year  icfs  time. — But  a  more  paiticular  account  of
this  wi  1  be  given  in  the  rules  annexed  to  the  Tables  at
the  end  of  this  work.

number


^nd  Laudable  Societies,  &c. yi

number  juft  fpecificd  will  die  every  year;  and
that,  conicquently,  no  more  than //bf  loidows
will  come  every  year  on  the.  fociety.  The
ages  of  all  thefe  widows,  when  they  com-
mence widowhood,  will,  it  is  evident,  be
between  40  and  60.  One  with  another  then,
they  maybe  conlidered  as  having  commenced
widowhood  at  50  years  of  age.  Now,  live
widows  left  every  year  at  this  age,  will,  in
10  years,  increafe  to  43  conflantly  in  life
together,  according  to  the  expectations  of
life  in  Tables  III,  IV,  and  V  5  and,  in  20
years,  to  70  [a).  Suppofe  the  true  number
alive  together  at  the  end  of  20  years  to  be
only  62.  the  greater  part  of  thefe  will  be
annuitants  of  30/.  and  40/.  per  arm.  and  the
reft  20L  Were  the  former  only  equal  to  the
latter,  the  medium  of  annuities  payable  to
them  would  exceed  25/.  Suppofe  then  this
medium  to  be  no  more  than  26/.  and  it  will

[a]  Every  calculation  of  this  kind  is  cafily  made  by
the  rule  in  note  (A)  in  the  Appendix.  —  I  have  put  the
number  living  together  at  the  end  of  20  years  at  62,  not
only  that  the  reader  may  be  better  fatisfied  that  I  have
kept  low  enough,  but  alio  to  make  an  allovv-ance  for  fuch
widows  as  will  be  left  by  thofe  members  who  die  within
a  year  after  admiHion,  and  who,  therefore,  according  to
thefe  fchemes,  will  be  entitled  to  no  annuities.  This
allowance  is  too  large :  For,  after  the  firft  year  of  the
fcheme,  it  will  not  happen  above  once  in  4  or  5  years,
that  the  death  of  a  member  will  be  fo  circumftanced,
fuppofmg  the  probability  that  a  man  at  40  will  live  a
year,  to  be,  as  ?A\  but  the  London  Tables  make  it,  50
to  1.

V A.  folio V/


72  Of  the  London  Annuity

foliOvv,  that,  at  the  end  of  20  years,  the  {o^
ciety  will  have  an  anniKil  rent  to  pay  of  26/.
multiplied  by  62  or  1612/.  and,  if  then  able
to  bear  fach  an  expence,  it  muft,  in  the  in-
termediate time,  have  acquired  an  incrcafe  of
inconie  equal  to  the  difference  between  1050/,
and  \612l. per  ann.  That  is  j  it  mud,  with
its  favings,  have  accumulated  a  ftock  equal  to
c^i)il.  per  ami.  and  worth  14,050/.  But,  as
during  this  time,  there  will  be  a  number  of
annuitants  conftantly  increafing,  to  whom
yearly  payments  mull:  be  made,  the  favings  of
the  fociety  cannot  certainly  be  one  half  of
what  they  would  have  been  had  it  been  all
the  time  free  from  all  burdens.  Suppofe  then
the  ftock  produced  by  thefe  favings,  to  be
equal  to  the  flock  that  would  arife  from  an
income  of  10 ^oi.  per  arm.  beginning  imme-
diately, and  improved  perfectly  at  4  per  cent,
compound  intereft,  for  half  the  time  1  have
mentioned,  or  for  10  years,  without  being
fubje^l  to  any  checks  or  deductions.  Such  ar^
income  thus  improved,  would,  in  10  years,
produce  an  additional  income  of  560/.  per
(inmwi,  or  a  capital  of  14,000/,— According
to  thefe  obfervations,  therefore,  the  annuaj
income  of  the  fociety  at  the  end  of  30  years,
and  before  a  third  part  of  the  higheft  annui-
tants could  come  upon  it,  would  begin  to
fall  riiort  of  its  expences.  About  that  time
then  it  Vv'culd  neceffarily  run  aground  ;  and
\on^  before  the  number  of  annuitants  could

rife


a?id  Laudable  Societies j  &c.  73

rife  to  a  100,  it  would  fpcnd  Its  whole  ftock,
and  iind  itlelf  under  a  neceflity  of  either
doubling  the  annual  payments  of  its  mem-
bers, or  of  reducing  the  annuities  one  half.

All  I  have  now  faid  is  meant  on  the  fup-
poiition,  that  the  fociety  begins  with  200
members  at  40  years  of  age,  and  is  afterwards
limited  to  that  number,  by  admitting  no  more
new  members  than  will  juH:  fupply  the  vacan-
cies cccalioncd  by  the  lols  of  old  members.
If  it  is  allowed  to  increafe,  it  may  continue  a
longer  time.  And,  for  this  reafon,  a  fociety
that  wants  half  the  income  neceilary  to  ren-
der it  permanent,  may  very  well  fubfift,  and
even  profper  for  30  or  40  years. — Thus,  the
Laudable  Society^  was  it  to  keep  to  its  prefent
number  of  members,  might  poflibly  feel  no
deficiencies  for  20  or  30  years  to  come  ;  but
if  it  fliould  continue  to  increafe  at  the  rate  of
70  or  80  every  year,  it  would,  at  the  end  of
that  time,  pollcfs  a  balance  fo  m.uch  in  its  fa-
vour, as  might  enable  it  to  fupport  itfelf  for  20
or  30  years  more  [a). But  bankruptcy  would

cgme

{a)  What  has  been  before  deinonflrated  In  Queft.  III.
ihould  be  here  recolledlec!,  that  the  number  of  annuitants
on  fuch  a  fociety  as  this,  mull  go  on  to  increafe  for  more
than  ICO  years,  after  acquIrinL;  its  greatefl  number  of
members.

The  Laudable  Society,  I  am  informed,  took  its  rife
from  a  calculation  contained  in  a  pamphlet  entitled.  The
Pojfibility  and  Probability  of  a  ScHEME  intended  for  the  Be-
neft  cf  Widows  being  able  to  fupport  itfelf.  The  fchem^  here
iefgrr«d  to,  is  the  farne  with  that  which  this  Society  has

ftnce


74  Of  '^'^^  London  Annuity

come at  laft, and with the  more  terrible
weight  the  longer  it  had  been  deferred.

The  rule  in  the  London  Annuity  Society,
which  obliges  every  perfon  between  the  ages
of  45  and  55,  to  pay  at  admifTion  ^  guineas
extraordinary,  for  every  year  that  he  exceeds
45,  is  an  advantage  to  it,  but  it  is  a  very
inadequate,  and  aifo  a  very  unequitable  ad-
vanta^'-e.  For  at  the  fame  time,  that  it  ob-
liges  a  perfon  ^^  years  of  age,  to  give  more
than  the  value  of  his  expectation,  it  takes
above  two  fifths  lefs  than  the  value  from  a
perfon  who  is  45  years  of  age.

Should  any  perfons  remain  (IIH  doubtful
about  what  1  have  faid,  I  would  beg  them
to  attend  to  one  further  argument.

It  mud  be  reckoned  upon  that  every  other
member  of  thefe  focieties,  fuppoftng  them  to
confiti  of  perfons  all  of  the  fame  ages  with
their  wives,  will  leave  widows  to  v.^hom  one
with  another,  (as  already  Ihewn)  at  leaft  28/.

fince  fo'lowcu  ;  and  I  ^m  afraid  I  fiiall  not  be  credited,
V.'hen  I  fay,  that  the  calculation  to  prove  its  capacity  of
fiippoiting  itfeU,  is  founded  on  the  iuppofition,  that  a
hundred  married  men  whofe  common  age  is  36,  will
leave  but  one  widow  every  year,  tho'  at  the  fame  time  it
is  fuppofcd  that  two  of  them  will  die  every  year.

This  miftake  has  made  the  whole  calculation  one  half
wrong. — Nothing  can  be  plainer  than  that,  if  the  death
of  a  married  man  does  not  leave  a  widow  at  the  end  of
the  year,  the  rcafon  muft  be,  tl\at  both  himielf  and  his
wife  h.ave  happened  to  die  in  the  year,  But  it  is  always
very  improbable  thii  fiiuuld  happen.

1  .  .pr


and  Laudable  SGcicties,  &c.  7^

per  a?itu  miift  be  allowed,  for  as  many  years  as
there  have  been  payments  from  each  mem-
ber. For  every  10  guineas  then  received
they  mull  Tome  time  or  other  hereafter  pay
28/.  But  let  it  be  well  confidered  what  can
enable  them  to  do  this.  Did  money  bear
no  intercll:,  for  any  given  fum  now  received,
they  could  not  afford  at  any  time  hereafter
to  pay  more  than  an  equal  i\xm.  That  is;
(fince  the  duration  o\  furvivorJJjip  is  in  the
prefent  cafe,  by  Queft.  J  I,  equal  to  the  du-
ration of  marriage)  the  proper  confideration
for  any  given  reverfionary  annuity,  to  be  al-
lowed to  ^<//the  furvivors  of  a  fet  of  marriages,
Vv'ould  be,  fuppofmg  no  interefl  of  money,
an  equal  annuity  payable  by  each  marriage
during  its  exiftcnce;  and  juft  balj  ihc  rever-
fionary annuity,  if  it  is  to  be  allowed  only  to
half  the  furyivors,  or  to  widows  exclufive  of
widowers.  The  annual  payment  then  oifive
guineas,  during  marriage,  can  entitle  widows
to  no  more  than  an  annuity  of  ten  guineas,
fuppofmg  money  to  bear  no  intereif.  But  if
it  does  bear  interefl,  the  fame  payment  will
entitle  them  to  more,  in  proportion  to  the
degree  in  which  it  is  capable  of  being  im-
proved, during  the  time  between  that  iji
which  the  annual  payments  begin,  and  the
commencement  of  widowhood.  Now,  it  is
eafy  to  fee,  that  unlefs  money  bears  very  high
intereft,  this  improvement  cannot  be  likely
in  any  circumflances  to  produce  a  capital,  the

interefl


76  Of  the  London  Annuity

intercil  of  which  fliall  be  equal  to  the  annual
payment  itfelf.  Any  given  annual  payment
perfec^Hy  improved  at  4  per  cent,  compound
interefl,  requires  17  years  to  double  itfelf,
iuppohng  the  firft  payment  made  immediate-
ly j  or,  near  18  years  (^),  if  the  firft  payment
is  not  made  till  the  end  of  a  year.  But  no
marriages  are  likely  to  laft  fo  long  as  this,
except  thofe  among  perfons  who  are  very
young.  A  marriage  between  two  perfons,
both 40,  will  not  probably  laft  longer  than

13  years,  according  to  the  probabilities  of
life  in  Dr.  Halkys  Table.  A  marriage  be-
tween two  perfons,  both  50,  will  not  pro-
bably, by  the  fame  Table,  laR  longer  than
eleven  years  j  nor  a  marritige  between  two
perlons,  both  30,  longer  than  16  years.
Sugh  marriages,  it  is  true,  may  poffibly  lafl
30  or  40  years.  But  this  circumftance  is
more  than  balanced  by  the  fa6t,  that  no  lefs
poiTibly  they  may  not  lad  one  year.  The  an-
nual payments,  then,  being  incapable  of  fuch
an  improvement  as  iliall  produce  an  additi-
onal income  equal  to  themfelves ;  it  is  obvi-
ous, that  no  fociety  ought  to  go  fo  far  as  to
allow  to  widows  annuities  twice  as  great  as
thofe  which  might  be  allowed,  fuppoiing  no

(o^ At  -ipn'  cevt. the period of  doubling  money  by
compound  inteicit,  is  nearly  23  years. At  5  per  cenU

14  years.

ifiterefl


and  Laudable  SjcietieSf  &C4  77

intereft  of  money  {a)  ;  To  far,  for  inAance,
as  to  allow,  iiiflead  of  10  guineas,  20  gui-
neas for  an  annual  payment  of  five  guineas.
In  the  circumflances  of  moft  of  thefe  focie-
ties  three  fifths  addition  may  be  the  full  al-
lowance. That  is ;  fuppofing  the  annual
payment  of  each  member  to  be  five  guineas,
time  may  be  expeded  for  gaining  from  hence
a  capital  of  75  guineas,  or  that  fliall  produce
three  guineas  per  annum  intereft  ;  and  the
proper  reverfionary  annuity  will  be  16  gui-
neas i  or  fix  guineas  more  than  the  proper
reverfionary  annuity,  did  money  admit  of  no
improvement.

The  preceding  obfervations  have  gone  011
the  fuppofition,  that  the  reverfionary  annui-
ties are  to  h^  for  life.  What  difijrence  in
favour  of  thefe  focieties  arifes  from  the  cir-
cumftance,  that  the  annuities  are  to  be  paid
ovX'j  for  widowhood^  cannot  be  exactly  deter-
mined. Some  judgment,  however,  may  be
formed  of  it  from  what  has  been  faid  at  the
conclufion  of  Queft.  II. Were  even  one  half

(a)  The  money  accumulated  will  not  be  exatflly  the
fame  with  that  to  which  the  annual  payment  would  in-
creal'e,  if  improved  at  compound  interell  for  a  number  of
years,  equal  to  that  which  the  joint  lives  have  an  equal
chance  o^  tx\^\v\z-  Miicli  lefs  will  the  incrcafc  be  ths
fame  with  that  which  would  arife.from  the  annual  pay-
ment foiborn,  and  improved  for  a  number  of  years  equal
to  the  expeflatiOHS  of  the  joint  lives.  It  v^iU  be  lefs  thaa
either  of  thefe,  for  a  re«fon  explained  in  note  (L)  Ap-
pendix.

of


78  Of  the  London  Annuity

of  the  widows  to  marry,  ftill  the  fchemes  I
have  been  coniidering  would  probably  be  in-
liifficient.  But  in  the  circumftances  of  thefe
ibcieties  it  cannot  be  expedted,  that  above
one  in  10,  or  perhaps  one  in  20,  will  marry.
The  perfons  moll:  likely  to  enter  into  them,
are  fuch  as  have  not  tlie  profpect  or  abi-
lity of  making  competent  provifions  for  their
widows  in  other  wavs.  The  widows  left,
therefore,  will  in  general  be  unprovided  for,
and  being  alfo  left  v/ith  families  of  chil-
dren, it  is  quite  unreafonable  to  exped,  that
any  confiderable  proportion  fliould  marry.
This  is  true  of  fuch  as  may  happen  to  be  left
young ;  but  when  a  fociety  has  fubfiiled  fome
time,  the  greater  part  will  not  be  young  when
left,  and  thefe,  at  the  fame  time  that  no  ad-
vantage can  be  expedled  from  their  marrying,
will  be  in  general  the  /6/_g-/6^  annuitants,  and,
therefore,  the  heaviejl  burdens.  —  Moreover,
the  profpeet  of  the  lofs  of  their  annuities  will
have  a  particular  tendency  to  check  marriage
am.ono;  them. — For  all  thefe  reafons  it  feems
to  me  likely,  that  the  benefit,  which  thefe
focieties  will  derive  from  marriage  among
their  annuitants, will  not  be  very  confiderable;
or  at  leafl  not  fo  confiderable  as  to  be  equal
to  the  advantages  I  have  allowed  them,  by
calculating  on  the  fuppolitions,  that  the  mo-
ney they  receive  will  be  always  improved  per-
JeSllyy  without  lofs  or  delay y  at  the  rate  of  4  per
cent,  compound  inter ejly  that  the  probabilities

of


and  Laudable  Societies^  &c.  79

of  life  among  males  and  females  are  the  fame,
and  all  hufbands  likewife  of  the  fiime  ages
with  their  wives,  and  that  confequently  the
maximum  of  widows  on  fuch  focieties  can  a-
mount  to  no  more  than  half  the  number  of
marriages  [a),  —  With  refpe(ft  to  the  lafl:  of
thefe  fuppofitions,  it  deferves  to  be  particu-
larly obferved,  that  by  an  enquiry  made  fome
years  ago  in  Scotlandy  it  was  found,  that  the
widows  of  7nin'iflers  and  prqfeJJ'ors  there,  [b)
notwithftanding  the  diminution  occafioned  by
their  marrying,  did  exceed  half  the  number
of  marriages.  And  certainly  it  would  be  un-
reafonable  in  thefe  focieties  not  to  reckon
that  the  fame  will  happen  among  them. —
Indeed  it  feems  certain  that,  notwithli:andin<y

[a]  Care  fhould  be  taken  in  thefe  focieties,  not  to  judge
of  the  proportion  of  widows  that  will  marry,  from  the
proportion  that  may  happen  to  marry  during  th^ir  firf!:
years.  For  moil  of  the  widows  that  will  be  left  at  iwH.
will  be  young;  whereas  the  greater  part  will  not  be  young
when  they  commence  widowhood,  after  a  fociety  has
rubfiftcd  30  or  40  years ;  and,  therefore,  tho'  one  in  3  or
4  fhould  marry  at  firft,  it  will  not  be  realbnabie  to  ex-
pe£t,  that  half  fo  many  fhould  marry  after  the  affairs  of
the  fociety  become  ftationary.

[b)  364  widows,  all  living  at  one  time,  were  counted;
and  the  number  of  married  minifters  and  prcfefibrs  for
many  years  paft  has  been,  at  an  average,  667. — Twenty
widows  likewife  are  left  one  year  with  another;  and,  for
10  years,  ending  in  the  year  1767,  but  nine  of  thefe  had
married. — Of  the  annuitants  likewife  (about  160  in  num-
ber) on  the  fund  tftablillied  among  the  Diffenters  in
London^  for  relieving  tiie  v/idowj  of  indigent  minift'jrs,  it
is  found  that  fev/  ever  marry.  See  the  latter  end  of  the
4th  Eifay;  and  nitc  [k)  in  the  Appendix.

the


So  Of  ike  London  Annuity

the  hazards  that  attend  child-bearing,  the
probability,  that  the  woman  fliall  furvive  in
marriage,  and  not  the  man, is  much  greater  [a]
than  ib  commonly  imagined.  It  vvih  be  £hewn
in  the  laft  Eilay,  that  it  is  not  lets  than  the
odds  of  1^  to  2  >  and  had  I  calculated  agree-
ably to  this  fa6t,  the  values  of  annuities  for
widov/s,  would  have  been  given  near  a  quar-
ter greater  than  they  have  been  given  on  the
fuppofitlcn,  that  the  chance  of  furvivorfhip
is  equal  between  men  and  their  wives. —  It
muft  be  added,  that  I  have  made  no  account
of  any  expences  attending  the  execution  and
management  of  the  fchemes  of  thefe  focieties*
Some  fuch  expences  there  muft  be,  and  fome
advantages  fliould  be  always  provided  in  or-
der to  compcnfate  them.


There  are  in  this  kingdom  feveral  inftitu-
tions  for  the  benefit  of  widows,  befides  the
two  on  which  I  have  now  remarked;  and  in
p^eneral,  as  far  as  1  have  had  any  information
concerning  them,  they  are  founded  on  plans

(<?)  Parths  as  obfei  ved  in  page  8,  on  account  of  the
greater  mortality  of  males,  but  chiefly  on  account  of  the
cxcefs  of  age  on  the  man's  fide. — According  to  the  print-
ed articles  of  agreement,  the  Laudable  Society  pays  no  re-
gard to  this  excels  of  age  ;  and  the  allowance  required
on  this  account  by  the  London  Annuity  Society  is  fo  tri-
fling that  it  defervcs  no  notice.

In  March  1770,  thirty-two  hufbands  had  died  in  the
Londahh  Society.^  and  27  wives.  They  feem,  therefore,
to  be  already  beginning  to  experience,  that  the  chances
of  turvlvorfnip  iii  m;:rriage  arc  in  favour, of  the  wife.

equally


dnd  Laudable  Societies,  Sec  8i

equally  inadequate.  The  motives  which  in-
fluence the  contrivers  of  thele  inftitutions  are,
without  doubt,  laudable;  but  they  ought,  I
think,  to  have  informed  themfelves  better.
This  appears  fufficiently  from  what  has  been
faidj  but  I  will  juft  mention  one  further
proof  of  it.

The  London  Annuity  Society  promifes  that,
if  in  21  years  j  and  the  Laudable  Society  that,
if  in  25  years,  it  fhall  appear  that  there  has
been  all  along  an  annual  furplus  in  favour  of
the  focieties,  it  ihall  be  employed  in  either
raifino:  the  annuities,  or  in  fmkin?  the  annual
payments.  Now,  they  may  be  afTured,  that,
if  at  the  end  of  thefe  periods,  they  ihould  not
be  polTefled  of  a  confiderable  furplus,  the  true
reafon  will  be,  their  having  granted  much
higher  annuities  than  the  annual  contribu-
tions are  able  permanently  to  fupport :  For
it  has  been  demonftrated,  that  the  number
of  annuitants,  and  confequently  the  amount
ai  the  annual  expences,  will  go  increaling  for
a  long  courfe  of  years  beyond  thefe  periods.
The  efFed,  therefore,  of  carrying  into  exe-
cution this  regulation  will  be,  precipitating
that  bankruptcy  which  would  have  come  too
foon  had  there  been  no  fuch  regulation.

It  has  been  faid  in  defence  of  thefe  Socie-
ties, that  the  deficiencies  in  their  plans  cannot
be  of  much  confequence,  becaufe  their  rules
oblige  them  to  preferve  a  conftant  equality
between  their  income  and  expences,  by  re-
ducing the  annuities  as  there  fliali  be  occafion.

G  And


82  Of  the  London  Annuity

And  from  hence  it  is  inferred,  that  they  can
never  be  in  any  danger  of  a  bankruptcy. — Iti
anfvver  to  this,  it  has  appeared,  that  the  time
when  they  will  begin  to  feel  deficiencies  is  fo
diiiant,  that  it  will  be  too  late  to  remedy  paft
errors,  without  finking  the  annuities  fo  much,
as  to  render  them  inconfiderable  and  trifling.
All  that  is  given  too  much  to  prefent  an-
nuitants is  fo  much  taken  away  horn  f tit ure
annuitants.  And  if  a  fcheme  is  very  defici-
ent, the  firft  annuitants  may,  for  30  or  40
years,  receive  fo  much  more  than  they  ought
to  receive,  as  to  leave  little  or  nothing  for  any
who  come  after  them.  Deficient  fchemes,
therefore,  are  attended  with  particular  in-
juftice;  and  this  injuftice  will  be  the  fame,
if,  inftead  o'i rediicmg  the  annuities,  the  annual
payments  fl-jould  be  increafed;  for  all  the  dif-
ference this  can  make  will  be,  to  caufe  the
injuilice  to  fall  ovi  future  contributors,  inflead
Qi future  annuitants.

But  what  requires  mofi:  to  be  confidered
here  is,  that,  after  either  the  annuities  have
been  for  fome  time  in  a  ftate  of  reduction,
or  the  contributions  in  a  ilate  of  increafe,  it
v/ill  be  feen  that  thefe  Societies  have  gone
upon  wrong  plans,  and,  therefore,  they  will
be  deferted  and  avoided  ;  the  confequence  of
which  udll  prove  rtili  greater  deficiencies  in
their  annual  income,  and  a  more  rapid  de-
fertion  and  decline,  'till  a  total  diflolution
and  bankruptcy  take  place. — This  will  be  the
5  death


and  Laudable  Societiesy  &c.  S?

death  of  Pxiofl:  of  the  prefent  focietles  for  pro-
viding for  widows,  if  they  continue  to  be  en-
couraged, and  do  not  foon  alter  their  plans  :
And  at  that  period  the  nun^h^r  of  anniikants
will  be  greater  than  ever ,  whofe  annuities,
having  no  other  fupport  than  the  poor  re-
mains of  a  ftock  ahvays  infufficient,  will  be
foon  left,  without  the  poilibility  of  relief,  to
lament  that  ignorance  and  credulity  which
gave  rife  to  thefe  focieties,  and  which  had
fo  long  fupported  them.

In  the  Loiidon  Annuity  Society,  there  is  an
encouri!gement  to  batchehrs  and  widowei's  to
join  them,  ariling  from  the  additional  an-
nuities to  which  they  will  be  immediately
entitled,  when  they  marry,  in  confequence
of  having  made  their  payments  a  greater
number  of  years ;  and  it  is  imagined,  that
particular  advantages  will  be  derived  from
fuch  members.  But  even  thefe  will  in  ge-
neral  pay  much  lefs  than  the  value  of  their
expectations. — A  perfon  who  begins  an  an-
nual contribution  of  five  guineas  at  the  age
of  24  will,  fhould  he  live  1 1  years,  and  mar-
ry a  woman  of  the  fame  age  at  the  end  of
that  time,  entitle  her  immediately  to  35/.
per  ann.  during  furvivorfliip,  and  to  j\.\l.  per
annum  fhould  he  live  four  years  after  marry-
ing, (interefl  being  at  ii^per  cent.)  (^).  In  this

par-

(-7)  The  value  of  five  guineas /)£r  anniim\^'i^  payment

made  immediately)  for  11  years,  iubjecl  to  failure  fliould

•■i,  life  now  24  fail  \  and,  after  ii  years,  for  the jointlives

G  2 '  of


84  Of  the  Ajfociation  among

particular  cafe,  therefore,  a  perfon  will  pay
nearly  the  true  value  of  his  expedation.  But
all  at  all  ages  who  marry ;  and  mojl  of  thofe
who  die^  in  lefs  time  than  1 1  years  after  ad-
miiTion,  will  pay  lefs  than  the  value  of  their
expedtations.

SECT. IL

Of  the  Afociatlon  among  the  London  Clergy ^
and  the  Minifiers  in  ^coi\?indy  J cr  providing
Annuities  for  their  Widows,-

N  April,  1765,  the  clergy  within  the  bills
of  mortality,  and  the  county  oi Middlefex,
at  a  general  meeting  in  Sion-College,  agreed  to
form  themfelves  into  a  fociety  for  the  fup-
port  of  their  widows  and  orphans.  Many  in
this  refpedtable  body  may  be  capable  of  do-
ing, in  a  better  manner,  what  I  have  attempt-
ed in  this  Treatife ;  and  they  are,  perhaps,
already  fenfible  of  the  deficiencies  in  the  plan
which  they  have  eftablillied.  I  fliall  not,
however,  I  hope,  do  wrong,  in  taking  the
liberty  to  recite  briefly  this  plan,  in  order  to
introduce  a  few  obfervations  upon  it.

of  two  perfoJis  both  35,  is,  by  the  Table  of  London  Ob-
fervatioiis,  1. 69.3. — By  Dr.  Halleys  Table  /.  76.44. — The-
prefcnt  value  of  35/.  per  anninn  for  life  to  the  widow  of  a
perfon  now  24,  (iiould  he  live  11  years,  and  marry  a  wo-
man of  the  fame  age  with  himfelf  at  the  end  of  that  time ;
and  alfo  of  6/.  more,  or  41  /.  per  anmmi  in  all,  fhoiild  he
live  after  marriage  four  years  ;  is,  by  the  Table  of  London
Obfervations,  ^69.36, — By  Dr.  Halley%  Table,  /.  76.03.
2  Accord-


the  London  Clergy t  &c.  85

According  to  the  printed articles,  every
clergyman  poffeiTed  of  any  benefice,  lediire-
fhlp,  or  licenfed  curacy,  within  the  bills  of
mortality,  and  the  county  of  Middle/ex,  who
fubfcribes  annually  one  guinea,  or  two  gui-
neas, or  more,  fhall  entitle  his  widow  to  an
annuity ;  or,  if  he  leaves  no  widow,  he  fhall
entitle  any  fuch  children  as  he  (liall  leave,  to
the  fame  annuity  for  iQvtn  years  as  his  wi-
dow would  have  had. And,  in  cafe  a  widow
poflefled  of  an  annuity, fliould  either  die  or
marry  before  the  lapfe  of  10  years,  from  the
commencement  of  her  annuity,  fuch  children
of  her  former  hulband,  as  fliall  be  then  alive,
are  to  be  entitled  to  as  many  of  the  ten  years
payments  of  the  annuities as  ihe  fhall  not
have  received. — The  annultv  is  fixed  to  no
particular  fum,  but  inftead  of  this,  it  is  or-
dered, that  a  fourth  part  of  the  annual  fub-
fcriptions  and  intereft fliall be  divided  the
firft  three  years  after  the  eftablifliment  of  the
fociety  ; half  only  the  next  four  years  -,  and
3-4ths  the  next  i;  years;  provided,  however,
that  in  no  one  of  thefe  1 2  years  the  dividend
fliall  exceed  20/.  to  the  widows  and  orphans
of  the  clergy  fubfcribing  two  guineas  or  more;
and  10/. to  the  widows  and  orphans  of  the
Ibbfcribers  of  one  guinea. And,  after  the  ex-
piration of  12  years,  the  whole  amount  of  the
fubfcriptions,  and  of  the  Intereft  of  the  capi-
tal Itock,  is  to  be  divided  proportlonably  for
ever. — It  is  further  provided,  that  every  cler-
gyman, who  iliail  be  married,  or  have  chll-
G  3  dren.


86  Of  the  AJj'ociatlon  among

dren,  at  the  time  of  his  fubfcription,  fliall  paj^
a  fine  of  two  guineas  towards  a  capital  flock,
if  a  fubfcriber  of  two  guineas  or  more,  and  40
years  of  age  or  upwards. If  50  years  of  age
or  upwards,  he  fhall  pay  a  fine  of  three  gui-
neas ;  if  60  or  upwards,  five  guineas. But,  if
not  married  art  the  time  of  his  fubfcribing,  and
fhall  afterwards  marry,  he  fliall  pay  a  fine  ac-
cording to  the  age  he  fliall  be  of  at  the  time
of  his  marrying. The  obligation  laid  upon
all,  whether  married  or  unmarried,  to  become
fubfcribers,is,  an  incapacity  of  being  admitted
members  without  the  confent  of  a  general
court,  unlefs,  within  two  years  after  becom-
ing pofTeiTed  of  any  ecckfiadical  employment,
they  fubfcribe.

Every  one  who  has  attended  to  the  obfer-
vations  in  this  and  the  preceding  chapter,
muft  know  what  judgment  to  form  of  thefe
regulations.

Let  us  fuppofe,  that  all  the  clergy  in  Lon-
don  and  Middle/ex  came  into  this  afibciation
from  the  firft;  and  that  one  with  another
they  are  fubfcribers  of  tv^o  guineas  annually;
and  that  there  are  among  them  as  many  un-
married perfons  as  married.

In  this  cafe,  it  may  be  learnt  from  Queft.
XIII,  that  the  annuity  to  which  widows
fhouid  be  entitled,  (fuppofing  no  allowance
to  the  children  of  any  that  die)  ought  not  to
exceed  10  or  11  guineas  at  moft,  and  that,
befides  the  annual  fubfcriptions,  there  ought

to


the  London  Clergy)  &c.  87

to  have  been  a  fine  paid  at  the  commencement
of  the  fcheme,  by  every  married  perfon,  of  fix
guineas  at  leaft,  or,  by  the  whole  number  of
fubfcribers,  three  guineas.  If  the  number  of
married  members  is  double  the  unmarried,
the  annuity  ought  not  to  exceed  eight  gui-
neas ;  and  the  fine  from  every  member
{ht)uld  be  about  four  guineas. — The  order,
that  only  a  fourth  part  of  the  annual  fub-
fcriptions  and  intereft  fliall  be  divided  the
firft  three  years,  half  the  next  four  yedrs,
and  three  quarters  the  next  five,  is  vs^ith-
out  reafon  j  becaufe  the  number  of  clai-
mants, for  the  firit  12  years  of  the  fcheme,
will  be  fo  i&w,'  that  it  will  not  be  polTibie,
during  that  time,  that  there  fliould  be  occa-
fion  for  dividing  any  proportions  fo  large  of
the  annual  fubfcriptions  and  interefl,  unlefs
they  are  indeed  beyond  all  bounds  too  little/
— After  1 2  years,  the  number  of  annuitants
will  go  on  increafing  for  near  50  years,  as
appears  from  Queft.  III.  The  confequencc,
therefore,  of  dividing,  after  this  time,  the
whole  amount  of  the  annual  fubfcriptions  and
intereft,  will  be  a  conitant  yearly  diminution
in  the  dividends  for  near  50.  years ;  and  mak-
ing the  payments  to  the  firil  claimants  mucli
more  confiderable  than  they  ought  to  be,  at
the  expence  of  all  fubfequent  claimants. — For
thefe  reafons ;  it  appears  to  me  out  of  all
doubt,  that  this  fcheme  is  by  no  m.eans  iikeiy
to  anfvver  the  good  ends  propofed  by  it ;  and
thatj  therefore,  it  will  be  beft  to  Ir.y  it  afide.
G  4  At


85  Of  the  Eftablifliment  among

At  the  time  it  was  fettled  it  was,  I  find,  fur-»
ther  agreed,  that  the  annual  fubfcriptions  o£
the  laityy  together  with  the  intereft  of  their
benefactions,  unlefs  otherwife  directed  by  the
donors  -,  and  the  annual  fubfcriptions  of  fuch
of  the  clergy  as  Ihall  fo  dired,  fhall  make  a
charitable  J  imd  to  be  applied  to  the  relief  of
the  diftreffed  widows  or  children  of  all  the
clergy  within  the  limits  I  have  mentioned,
whether  fubfcribers  or  not,  provided  that  ia
no  one  year  of  the  iirft  twelve  more  than  20/.
be  given  out  of  the  fund  to  any  one  family. — ?
This  is  an  excellent  delign  j  and  if  the  mo-
ney arifing  from  all  the  fubfcriptions  is  thrown
into  this  fund,  an  important  means  of  relief
may  be  provided,  for  fuch  of  the  more  indi-
gent widows  and  families  as  will  accept  the
help  of  charity.

There  is  one  more  affociation  of  particular
confequence,  which  it  is  neceiTary  I  Ihould
take  notice  of.  I  mean,  the  ajjhciation  among
the  minifters  and  profefTors  in  Scotlafid^  for
making  provifions  for  their  widows  and
orphans.  The  lafl-mentioned  alTociation,
and  alfo  feveral  others  of  the  fame  kind  {a)
in  this  kingdom,  have  been  formed  on  the

[a)  There  is  one  among  the  DifTenting  Minifters  in

the  counties  oi  Chejier  and  Lancajhire^  and  another  among
the  Diflenting  Minifters  in  Cumberland^  Northunihcrland,
}VeJimor eland ^  and  Durham. — Even  the  London  Annuity
Society,  tho'  its  plan  is  totally  different,  pioiedes  to  forni
itfelf  on  the  principles  of  the  Scotch  eftabliOiment,  and  to
deri'/e  encouragement  from  ic.

model


the  Mlnijlers  in  Scotland,  6cc. 89

model  of  this  eftablifliment ;  and  the  fuc-'
cefs  with  which  it  has  been  hitherto  attend-
ed, has  been  the  principal  caufe  to  which
they  owe  their  rife.  —  I  am  afraid  of  being
too  tedious,  and  therefore  I  will  not  attempt
to  recite  all  the  particulars  contained  in  the
plan  of  this  eflabliiliment.  It  may  be  fuf-
ficient  to  obferve,  that  for  "  an  annual
^^  payment,  which  begun  immediately,  of
**  five  guineas  from  loii  contributors,  667
^'  of  whom  are  married  perfons ;  befides  a
**  tax  on  weddings  producing  about  142/.
**  per  afimwi',  it  entitles  every  widow  to  an
"  annuity  of  20/.  during  widowhood;  and  al-
*'  fo,  every  family  of  children  that  fiiall  be
*'  left  by  fuch  members  as  die  v/ithout  leav-
**  ing  widows,  to  200/."  Now,  by  particu-
lar enquiry  at  the  commencement  of  the
fcheme,  it  had  been  found,  that  there  was
reafon  to  believe  that,  for  many  years  back,
20  widows  had  been  left  annually  by  the
whole  body  of  minifiers  and  profefTors  -,  and
that,  alfo,  fix  had  died  annually  and  left  chil-
dren without  widows  \  and  thefe  facSts  have
been  fince  confirmed  by  the  experience  of  25
years. — Subfi:ra(5l,  therefore,  from  5,450/.
(the  whole  annual  income)  1,200/.  payable
every  year  to  fix  families  of  children ;  and
4,250/.  per  arm.  (the  firfl:  payment  of  which
was made (^) immediately) or/.4.2  per

annum

(a)  Thetruth  is,  that  a  double  payment  wa,s  madeatths
l^eginning  of  the  fecond  year. This  is  of  lefs  value  than

two


go Of  the  Eflabllrtiment  among

annum  from  each  member,  will  remain  as  the
ftanding  provilion  for  bearing  the  burden  of
the  annuitants, — This  provifion,  according
to  the  calculation  in  Queft.  XIII,  and  note  (F)
Appendix,  ought  to  be  at  leaft  4,745/.  ^^r
anmim^  from  each  member;  from  whence  it
feems  to  follow,  that  this  eftablilliment  has
not  a  fufiicient  income  to  afford  it  a  perma-
nent fupport.-- 'But  I  do  not  by  any  means
defis.n  to  alTert  this.  The  difference  between
the  real  and  calculated  incomes,  as  it  has
been  now  Hated,  is  not  confiderable  enough
to  give  fufficient  reafon  for  fuch  an  affertion.
This  eftablifliment  may  have  fome  advan-
tages that  I  know  nothing  of,  and  that  are
not  mentioned  in  the  printed  accounts ;  or,
in  confequence  of  the  increafe  of  luxury,  and
the  higher  price  of  all  the  means  of  fublift-
ence,  marriage  may  decline  among  the  mini-
fters;  or,  poffibly,  the  probabilities  of  life
among  them,  tho'  much  higher  'till  towards
50,  than  is  common  among  mankind  in
towns,  may  yet  afterwards  decreafe  much
fafter.  The  income,  therefore,  of  this  efta-
blifhment,  properly  improved,  may  continue
to  be  adequate  to  all  its  expences  and  bur-
dens.— One  obfervation,  however,  ought  to
be  carefully  attended  to.  The  fuccefs  it  has
hitherto  met  with,  is  no  good  reafon  for  en-
two  payments,  one  of  v/hich  is  made  Immediately,  and
the  other  a  year  hence  ;  but,  the  difference  not  being
confiderable,  1  have  reckoned  them  the  fame.

tertaining


the  Minijicrs  in  Scotland,  &c.  pt

tertaining  this  expe(ftation,  with  any  degree
of  conlidence.  It  appears  from  Queft.  Ill,
that  the  number  of  annuitants,  on  fuch  an
.eflablidiment,  muft  go  on  increafing  for  60
years,  from  the  time  of  its  commencement;
land  it  is  obvious,  that  the  continuance  of  a
fiiccefs  which  has  not  lafted  half  xKis  period,
cannot  be  abfolutely  depended  on.  I  know,
indeed,  that,  according  to  the  calculations
v/hich  were  made  when  this  eflabliiliment
begun  {a)y  the  number  of  widows  upon  it
will  not  increafe  fenfibly  after  the  year  1780,
or  for  more  than  10  years  to  come;  and,
were  this  true,  all  diffidence  about  it  would,
perhaps,  be  unreafonable.  But  thefe  calcu-
lations cannot,  in  this  inftance,  be  right;  for
they  imply,  that  none  are  left  widows  under
52  years  of  age.  'Tis  certain,  on  the  con-
trary, that  many  are  left  widows  under  32;
and  that,  confequently,  the  whole  body  in
life  together  mud  go  on  to  increafe  for  25
years,  beyond  the  period  alTigned  in  thefe  cal-
culations;  or  till  the  year  1805  [b).  It  is  ne-

ceiTary

[a)  See  Table  III,  in  a  book  printed  at  Edinburgh  in
1748,  entitled,  Calculations,  with  the  Principles  and
Data  on  which  they  are  inftituted,  relative  to  a  late  acl
of  parliament,  entitled.  An  aSt  for  ra'ifing  aiul  ejiallijhing
a  fund  for  a  pro'Sificn  for  the  ividows  and  children  of  the  mi-
tiijiers  of  the  churchy  and  of  the  heads.,  principals  and  majiers
of  the  univerfities  (j/"Scotland  ;  fiiewing  the  rile  and  pro-
grefs  of  the  fund.

{h)  This  is  faid  on  the  fuppofition,  that  all  the  mini-
fters  and  profefTors  acceded  to  the  fchcnie  from  tlie  firfr.


92 Of  the  Eftablifhment  among

cefTary  I  fhould  add,  that  the  whole  num-
ber alive,  when  the  increale  flops,  will,  mod
probably,  be  greater  than  the  number  provid-
ed for  in  thele  calculations.  They  are  made
on  the  fuppofition,  that  52  is  the  mean  age
at  which  women  commence  widows.  If
this  fuppofition  is  right,  it  is  impoflible  that,
according  to  the  probabilities  of  life  in  Dr.
Halleys  Table,  the  number  of  widows  living
together  at  one  time,  derived  from  20  left
annually,  fliould  increafe  to  more  than  323,
if  none  marry;  .or  about  300,  if  one  marries
every  year  [a)  :  Nor  does  it  appear  likely,  that

this

135  did  not  accede  ;  but  all  their  fucceflbrs  have  been
obliged  to  accede.  This  circumftance  muft  add  30  or
35  years  to  the  period  of  increafe  which  T  have  men-
tioned ;  that  is,  as  many  years  as  are  necefiary  to  caufe
all  the  non-contributors  to  die  off. See  Qtieft.  111.

[a)  The  expe£iation  of  a  perfon  at  the  age  of  52  is,
v/hen  taken  exactly  from  Dr.  i/a/^y's  Table,  16.16;
and  this  number  multiplied  by  20,  gives  the  maximum^
to  which  20  widows  left  annually,  at  52,  will  increafe
in  34  years,  fuppofing  86  the  utmoft  limit  of  life.  Vid,
Effay  I. — In  the  calculation  to  which  I  have  referred,
there  is  no  account  taken  of  thofe  that  die  \n  the  year  in
which  they  are  left  widows ;  and,  for  this  reafon,  they  are
made  to  increafe  to  a  greater  number  than  is  confiftent
with  the  fuppofition,  that  52  is  their  mean  age  when  they
commence  widowhood.- — It  fhould  be  remembered  here,
that  fuppofing  this  mean  age,  as  explained  in  note  (F)
Appendix,  rightly  taken,  the  maximum  of  widows  will  be
rightly  found  in  the  manner  juft  fpecified.  But  the  period,
in  which  they  would  attain  to  that  maximum^  would  be  as
many  years  greater  than  the  difference  between  the  mean
age  and  the  utmofl 'limit  of  life,  as  the  mean  age  is  greater

than


th2  Mimjlers  hi  Scotland,  &c.  91

this  eftabllfliment  will  be  able  to  bear  the
expence  of  above  30  or  40  more  than  the

lafl-

than  the  Icafl  age  at  which  widowhood  ever  commences.
The  calculation,  therefore,  which  I  have  in  view  muft
be  very  wrong.  It  fuppofes  not  only,  that  all  the  v/i-
dows  left  at  all  ages,  will  increafe  to  a  tiiaximum  in  the
fame  time  with  thofe  left  at  the  mean  age;  but  that  all
left  in  the  courfe  of  every  year  will  certainly  live  to  the
beginning  of  the  next  year.  It  fuppofes,  likewife,  that
no  widows  will  marry  ;  and  thofe  concerned  will  under-
hand mc  when  I  add,  that  it  fuppofes  further,  that  ac-
ceders,  tho'  moftly  young  minifters  unmarried,  will  leave
widows  as  faft  as  the  noncontributors  whom  they  fucceed.
In  confequence  of  thefe  omiflions  it  has  all  along  given
the  numbers  in  life  much  higher  than  they  ought  to  have
been  given  ;  but  yet  the  event  has  been,  that  thefe  num-
bers have  in  fa6l  correfponded  nearly  to  the  calculation  :
From  whence  it  follows,  that  the  widows  in  life  have
hitherto  increafed  at  a  much  greater  rate  than  they  could
have  done,  according  to  Dr.  Haliey^s  Table,  had  their
mean  age,  when  left,  been  52.  Either,  then,  their  mean
age  has  been  confiderably  lefs  than  52 ;  or,  their  pro-
babilities of  life  muft  be  confiderably  greater  than  thofe
in  Dr. //<3//^j;'s  Table ;  and,  it  ought,  therefore,  to  be
expe£led,  that  they  will  at  laft  increafe  to  higher  num-
bers than  thofe  alTigned  in  this  calculation.

I  cannot  help  here  mentioning  one  more  reafon  for
entertaining  this  expedlation. — Were  the  decrements  of
life  uniform,  and  the  chances  of  furvivorfhip  between  men
and  their  wives  equal,  the  number  of  widows  and  widow-
ers in  the  world,  if  none  married,  would  alfo  be  equal  ;
and  both  together  equal  to  the  whole  number  of  mar-
riages. See  Queft.  II,  and  note  (F)  Appendix.

If  the  chances  for  the  furvivorfhip  of  the  wife  are  great-
eft,  the  number  of  widows  in  the  world  will  be  alfo
greatcft,  and  the  whole  number  of  widows  and  widowers
greater  than  the  whole  number  of  marriages.  In  the
prefent  cafe  experience  proves,  that  the  chances  of  fur-
vivorfhip in  marriage  are  as  5  to  3  at  leaft,  in  favour  of

the


94  Of  the  Eflablifhment  among

laft-mentioned  niim'oe*'. But  it  was  founds
by  enquiry,  that  the  number  of  widows  liv-

ijiJ^

the  wife  ;  or  that  there  are  20  widows  left  to  12  widow-
ers. (See  note  (F)  Appendix,  and  the  end  of  the  laftEllayj.
The  number  of  widows  and  widowers  then  would  cer-
tainly, if  none  married,  exceed  667,  the  whole  number  of
marriages.  Suppofe,  however,  that  they  would  be  only
equal  ;  which  is  the  fame  with  fuppofing,  that  zvicbtvs
would  not  increafe  to  more  in  life  together,  in  proportion
to  the  number  left,  than  widowers ,  or  that  one  with  ano-
ther they  are  of  equal  ages.  667  then  being  the  number
of  marriages,  this  will  likewife  be  the  number  of  widows
and  widowers,  4.16  of  whom  mufl:  be  widows  and  250
widowers  ;  that  is,  3  to  3.  Now  as  zvidozvs  arc  certainly,
one  with  another^  younger  than  widowers;  and  likewife,
very  probably,  more  long-lived  at  equal  ages  j  and  as
alfo,  in  the  prefent  cafe,  but  one  marries  of  the  Hventy  left
annually ;  it  follows,  with  demonftrative  evidence,  that
if  the  annuitants  on  this  eftablilhnient  fhould  not  increafe
to  400,  the  reafon  muft  be,  that  the  decreafe  in  the  pro-
babilities of  life,  inftead  of  continuing  always  uniform,  is
flow  in  the  firft  ftages  of  mature  life,  and  accelerated  af-
terwards, to  a  degree  of  which  there  is  no  example  in  any
Tables.  And  this,  poffibly,  may  be  indeed  the  cafe  ;  for
it  is  uncertain  whether,  in  this  particular  fituation,  life
may  not  wafte  according  to  a  law  not  yet  obferved.  This
uncertainty  it  is  in  the  power  of  the  conduciors  of  this
fchcme  to  remove,  by  keeping  an  account  of  the  ages  at
which  all  the  minifters  and  profeflbrs  enter  upon  their
offices  and  die ;  and  alfo  of  the  ages  of  their  wives  when
they  marry  and  die.  From  fuch  an  account  kept  for  a
courfe  of  years.  Tables  of  Obfervation,  adapted  to  the
befl  fort  of  lives  of  both  fexes,  might  be  formed,  which
would  contribute  much  to  the  improvement  of  this  part
of  knowledge.

I  have  faid  nothing  above  of  the  advantage  which  this
eilabliflunent  derives  from  the  njarriases  amono;  widows.
This  advantage,  it  has  appeared,  were  it  enjoyed  without
abatement,  would  not  be  confiderable  ;  but  it  is  in  (ome
mcafure  given  up  by  the  order  whicji  makes  a  part  of  this

efta-


the  Minifters  in  Scotland,  &c.  9^

ing  in  1748,  was  at  k aft  364;  (^)  and  it  may*
he  learnt  from  notes  (A  and  F)  in  the  Appen-
dix, that,  according  to  Dr.  Kalky^  Table,  2vO
widows  left  annually,  muft  in  time  increafe
to  near  400,  tho'  one  of  the  yoiingeft  marri-
ed every  year.  And  it  may  be  farther  learnt
from  note  (A)  Appendix,  that  the  widows  on
this  ertablifiiment  have  not  hitherto  increaf-
ed  more  ilowly,  than  is  confident  with  their
adually  increaiing  to  400  :  Nor,  indeed,  (as
the  probabilities  of  life  in  this  cafe  are  higher
than  thofe  given  by  Dr.  Halleys  Table)
fhould  I  much  doubt  of  their  increafing  to
mo?'e  than  this  number,  were  it  not  that  364
has  been  given  as  the  number  found  upon
enquiry.  With  refped;  to  this,  however,  it
ought  to  be  mentioned,  that  another  account
had  been  taken  which  made  the  number  of
widows  only  321.  As,  therefore,  a  more  care-
ful enquiry  difcovered  43  new  widows ;  per-
haps, an  enquiry  yet  more  careful  would
have  made  yet  further  difcoveries.  In  ta-
king fuch  accounts,  none  can  well  be  added  ;

eftablifhrnent,  that  fuch  children  of  an  annuitant  as  arc
under  i6,  fliall  be  entitled,  if  flie  marries,  to  as  much  as
(hall  happen  to  be  then  unpaid  of  ten  years  purchafe  of
her  annuity.  The  fame  provifion  is  made  for  the  chil-
dren of  annuitants  that  die.  There  are  olhcr  burdens  on
this  eft.Tblifhment,  and  it  has  alfo  ndvaniages  of  vvhicli  I
have  taken  no  notice;  but,  as  far  as  1  am  acquainted
with  them,  they  are  of  no  particular  confequence,  and
they  alfo  nearly  balance  one  another.

[a)  See  Calculations,  v/ith  their  Principles  and  Data,
&c.  introduction.

but


^6  Of  the  Eftablifhinent,  ^c.

but  In  the  llriden:  fearch  it  can  hardly  btf
poffible  to  avoid  omitting  fome.

The  refult  of  the  laft  enquiry,  in  particu-
lar, is  laid  to  have  been^  not  that  it  was
found  that  there  were  no  more  than  364  wi-
dows, but  that  they  did  exceed  this  number.
{a)  However,  let  364  be  the  true  number
living  in  1748.  Before  that  time^  there  had
probably  been  more  marriages  among  them,
than  there  have  been  fmce ;  and  this  may
have  rendered  their  number  iefs  than  it
would  otherwife  have  been,  and  Iefs  than  it
will  be  hereafter  :  For  it  feems  to  me,  that
this  eftablifliment,  at  the  fame  time  that  it
encourages  marriage  among  the  minifters,  has
a  tendency  to  check  it  among  their  widows,
by  making  the  confequence  of  marrying  to
be  the  lofs  of  their  annuities.

I  hope  the  venerable  minifters  and  profef-
fors  concerned  in  thefe  remarks,  and  at  pre-
fent  fo  eminent  in  all  the  departments  of
fcience,  will  excufe  what  has  been  now  faid.
It  may,  perhaps,  be  of  fervice,  if  not  to  them,
yet  at  leaft  to  fome  in  this  part  of  the  unit-
ed kingdoms,  by  fliewing  them,  that  this
eftablilhment  has  been  copied  in  it  much
too  rafhly ;  and  that,  however  fuccefsful  it
may  in  the  end  prove,  it  is  yet  too  foon  to
make  it  a  model  and  an  authority  for  fimilar
eflablifliments.

{a)  See  Calculations  with  their  Principles,  &c.  p.  44.

SECT.


tjf  the  heft  Schemes  for  ^  &c.  97

SECT. III.

Of  the  hejl  Schemes  for  providing  Annuities  for
Widows,

INflitutlons  for  providing  widows  with  aii-
.  nulties  would,  without  doubt,  be  ex-
tremely ufeful,  could  fuch  be  contrived  as
would  be  durable^  and  at  the  fame  time  eafy
and  encouraging.  The  natures  of  things  do
not  admit  of  this  In  the  degree  that  is  com-
monly imagined.  The  calculations  and  rules,
ifi  the  preceding  chapter,  will  enable  any  one
to  determine  in  all  cafes  to  what  reveriion-
ary  annuities  any  given  payments  entitle,  ac-
cording to  any  given  valuation  of  lives  or
rate  of  intereft.  From  Queft.  VII  and  VIII,-
in  particular,  it  may  be  inferred  that  (intereft
being  at  4  per  cent,  and  the  probabilities  of
life  as  in  Mr.  De  Moivre's  Flypothefis,  or  the
Breflaw^  Norwicht  and  Northampton  Tables)
for  an  annual  payment  beginning  immedi-
ately o{  four  guineas  during  marriage;  and
alfo  for  a  guinea  and  half  in  hand,  on  ac-
count of  each  year  that  the  age  of  the  huf-
band  exceeds  the  age  of  the  wife,  every  mar-
ried man,  under  40,  might  be  entitled  to  aii
annuityj  during  life,  for  his  widow  of  5/.  if
he  lives  a  year,  10/.  if  he  lives  three  years,
and  20/.  if  he  Ywc^feven  years.  Money  can
fcarcely  now  in  this  kingdom  be  improved
H  at


9^  hf  the  heji  Schemes  for

at  fo  high  a  rate  as  4  per  cent.  But,  per-
haps, it  might  be  realbiiably  expected,  that
an  advantage,  fufficient  to  compenfate  this
difad\^antage,  would  be  derived,  from  chang-
ing the  annuities  I  have  mentioned  into  an-
nuities during  widowhood.  One  may,  at
leaft,  venture  to  pronounce,  that  nothing
much  worie  could  befall  a  fociety  that  went
on  this  plan,  than  the  neceffity  of  fome  time
or  other  adding  half  a  guinea  to  the  annual
payments.

If  fuch  a  fociety  chufesj  that  thofe  who
Ihall  happen  to  continue  members  the  long-
eft  time>  {hall  be  intitled  to  flill  greater  an-
nuities, fix  c;uineas,  additional  to  all  the  o-
ther  payments  at  admilhon,  would  be  the
full  payment  for  an  annuity  of  25/.  and
12  guineas  for  an  annuity  ot  30/.  if  a  mem-
ber ihould  live  1 1;  years.

All  batchelors  and  widowers  might  be  en-^
couraged  to  join  fuch  a  fociety,  by  admitting
them  on  the  following  terms. — Four  guineas
to  be  paid  on  admiflion,  and  three  guineas
every  year  afterwards,  during  celibacy  j  and*
on  marriage,  the  fame  payments  with  thofc
made  by  perfons  admitted  after  marriage;
in  coijfideration  of  which,  i/.  per  annum,  for
every  iingle  payment  before  marriage,  might
be  added  to  the  annuities,  to  which  fuch
members  would  have  been  otherwife  enti-
tled.

For


providing  Annuities  for  Widows. 99

For  example.  If  they  have  been  members
four  years,  or  made  five  payments  before
marriage,  inftead  of  being  entitled  to  life-an-
nuities for  their  widows  of  only  5/.  10/.
20/.  25/.  and  30/.  on  the  conditions  I  have
fpecified,  they  might  be  entitled  to  annuities
of  10/.  I  ;/.  25/.  30/.  and  35/.  Or,  if  they
have  been  members  nine  years,  and  made  10
payments,  they  might,  inftead  of  the  fame
annuities,  be  entitled  to  annuities  of  15/.
20/.  30/.  35/.  and  40 A — In  this  cafe,  the
contributions  of  fuch  members  as  fliould  hap-
pen to  defert,  or  die  in  celibacy,  would  be  lb
much  profit  to  the  fociety,  tending  to  give  it
more  ftrength  and  fecurlty.

This  is  one  of  the  beft  fchemes  that  I  ani
able  to  think  of,  or  would  chufe  to  recom-
mend. There  are,  however,  others  no  lefjj
fafe  and  encouraging  which  fome  may  pre-
fer, and  which  therefore,  I  will  juft  prO"
pofe*

Let  the  probabilities  of  life  be  the  famef
with  thofe  in  the  Tables  juft  mentioned.
Let  money  be  fuppofed  to  be  improved  at  no
higher  interefl;  than  3  per  cent.  Let  the  re-
verfionary  annuities  promlfcd  to  widows  be
10/.  for  lifey  if  a  member  lives  five  years
after  ad mlfTion,  and  15/,  more,  or  25/.  in  alj^
if  he  lives  1 1  years.  The  proper  payments
for  fuch  an  expedation,  from  married  men
not  exceeding  50  years  of  age,  will,  in  the
H  2  neafelif


JQ6  Of  the  befi  Schemes  fof

neareft  and  mod  convenient  round  fums.  Be
four  guineas  in  annual  payments  beginning
immediately,  and  two  guineas  in  hand  for
every  year  that  his  age  exceeds  his  wife's,  not
admitting  any  greater  excefs  than  15  years  :
Or,  if  the  whole  value  is  given  in  one  prefent
payment,  40/.  added  to  a  guinea,  for  every  year
that  his  age  falls  fhort  of  50,  befides  the  pay-
ment juft  mentioned  on  account  of  difparity
of  age. — ^For  example.  Four  guineas  in  an-
nual payments,  belides  10  or  20  guineas  in?
hand,  according  as  the  age  of  the  hufband
exceeds  the  wife's  5  or  10  years.  Or,  if  the
whole  value  of  the  expedation  is  given  in  one
payment,  10  guineas  added  to  40/.  (that  is
50/.  10 J.)  from  a  man  whofe  age  is  40;  and,
in  like  manner,  20  guineas  added  to  40/,
(that  is  61  /.)  from  a  man  whofe  age  is  30  ;
befides  the  payment  juil  mentioned  on  ac-
count of  difparity  of  age.

If  money  is  improved  at  4  per  cent,  or,  on-
account  of  any  advantages  attending  a  fcheme,
may  be  ju^ftly  eonfidered  as  fo  improved,  the
full  payments  for  the  expedation  I  have
mentioned  will  be  about  one  eighth,  or  half
a  guinea,  lefs  in  the  afinual  payments  during
marriage  y  and  a  quarter  lefs  in  all  the  other
payments.  That  is  :  A  married  man,^^  or
tinder  50,  would,  befides  three  guineas  and
halfin  annual  payments  during  marriage,  be
bound  to  add  a  guinea  and  half  for  every
year  he  is  older  than  his  wife ;  Or,  if  he
I  chufes


prcrolding  Annuities  for  Widows, loi

chufes  to  give  the  value  of  his  expectation  in
one  payment ;  befides  the  common  contribu-
tion of  30/,  and  a  guinea  and  half  for  every
year  his  age  exceeds  his  v/ife's;  he  w^ould  be
bound  to  pay  three  quarters  of  a  guinea,  for
■every  year  he  is  lefs  than  50  years  of  age ;
that  is,  53/.  1 2  J".  6^.  in  all,  fuppofing  him
40  years  of  age,  and  10  years  older  than  his
wife. — All  thefe  payments  doubled  would
entitle  to  double  annuities.

There  is  one  particular  advantage  which
focieties  formed  on  a  plan  of  this  kind  would
enjoy  [a]  —  Perfons  who  know  themfelves
fubjed;  to  diforders,  which  are  likely  to  ren-
der them  fliort-lived,  will  have  no  great  temp-
tations to  endeavour  to  gain  admiffion  into
fuch  focieties ;  and,  if  admitted,  the  danger
from  them  will  be  lefs  than  on  any  other
plan.  Were  it  not  for  this  danger,  one
might  recommend  the  following  plan,  as  one
of  the  moft  inviting.

In  the  plans  hitherto  mentioned  it  is  im-
plied, that,  if  either  a  member  or  his  wife
dies  within  any  of  the  periods  fpecified,  the
additional  annuities,  that  would  otherwife
have  become  due,  will  be  loft.  But  it  would
be  much  more  agreeable  to  a  purchafer,  that
they  (liould  be  made  certain  to  his  wife,  pro-
vided fhe  lives  to  the  end  of  thefe  periods,

{a)  See  another  advantage  mentioned  under  Qiiefl,
VIII,  p.  2fc'.

H  \  tho"


102  Of  the  left  Schemes  for

tho'  in  the  mean  time  his  own  life  fhoiil4
fail.  The  value  of  fuch  annuities  may  be
computed  by  the  rule  in  Queft.  IX.

Suppofe,  for  in  fiance,  the  fcheme  to  be
"  that  a  wife  (liall  be  entitled  certainly  to  a
^'  life-annuity  of  20/.  the  firfl  payment  of
*'  which  (liali  be  made  at  the.  end  of  i  2  years,
*^  provided  flie  (liould  be  then  alive,  and  her
*'  huiband  dead;  or  at  the  end  of  any  year
^*  beyond  this  term  in  which  Oie  may  hap-
*•  pen  to  be  left  a  \yidow."  Suppofe  it  alfo
ilipulated,  **  that  flie  Oiall  be  entitled  to
?'  10/.  more,  or  ':^o/.  in  all,  on  the  fame
*'  terms,  provided  fhe  fliould  live  16  years.'*
— The  value  of  fuch  an  expe<ftation  (interell:
being  at  3  per  cent,  and  the  probabilities  of
life  as  in  Mr.  De  Mohre's  Hypothefis)  will
be,  in  i\\Q  mofl  convenient  round  fums,  fup-
pofmg  none  admitted  above  50  years  of  age,
feven  guineas  in  annual  payments  to  be  con-
tinued during  marriage,  and  to  begin  imme-
diately'3  belides  four  guineas  in  prefent  mo-
ney for  every  year,  as  far  as  1 5  years,  that  the
huiband's  age  exceeds  the  wife's,  if  he  is
between  40  and  ^o,  and  three  guineas  on  the
fame  account  if  he  is  under  40  :  Or,  if  the
wliole  value  of  the  expedation  is  given  in
one  prefent  paynient,  70/.  added  to  a  guinea
and  half,  for  every  year  that  the  huiband's
age  fiiils  fliort  of  50,  befides  the  payment  juft
inentioned  on  account  of  difparity  of  age,

J  If


frGvidi?ig  Annuities  for  Widows, 103

If  the  annuities  are  made  to  be  annuities
during  widowhoods  and  not  during  lije^  and
the  advantage  arifing  from  hence,  is  fuppof-
pd  equivalent  to  the  difference  between  the
improvement  of  money  at  ^per  ce?it.  and  its
real  improvement ;  the  value  of  the  expecfta-
tion  jult  mentioned,  (that  is,  its  value  at  4
per  cent.)  will  be  fix  guineas  in  annual  pay-
ments; befides  three  guineas  in  prefent  mo-
ney, for  every  year  that  the  huiband's  age
exceeds  the  wife's,  if  he  is  between  40  and
50  j  and  2  guineas,  if  he  is  under  40  :  Or,  if
the  whple  value  of  the  cxped:ation  is  given  in
one  prefent  payment,  56/.  added  to  1/.  5^.  for
every  year  that  his  age  falls  fliort  of  ^o,  be-
lides  the  payment  laft  mentioned  on  account
pf  inequality  of  age. (^a)

{a)  Suppofing  16  years  the  only  term,  tlie  annuity
20/.  and  intercft  at  4.  per  cent,  the  proper  payments  wiil
be  nearly,  in  the  cafe  of  equal  ages  zx\A  fingle  payments,
46/. — 40/. — 29/.  as  the  age  of  the  man  is  30,  40,  or  50.
Or,  in  (7«;/«.7/ payments,  /,3.8o. — /.3.66. — /.3-i3' — Sup-
pofing the  woman's  age  lo  years  lefs  than  the  man's,  the
fame  values  v/ili  be,  in  finglc  payments,  l.^'i.()2.  —  /.56.56.
— /.53.66. — In  ^;7«Kj/ payments  /.4.63. — /•5. — /.5.41. —
It  appears,  therefore,  that  a  fociety,  fuppofmg  money  im-
proved at  the  rate  of  4  per  cent,  might  entitle  all  married
men  Ind'ijcrminately^  who  are  under  50  years  of  age,  to  fuch
2n  expectation  as  this  for  their  wives,  for  either  60/.  ;n
c/.Y  payment,  or  five  guineas  in  «««;/,7/ payments.  —  But
equity  requires,  that  ditferent  payments  (hould  be  made,
according  to  the  different  comparative  ages  of  men  and
their  wives  ;  and  Tables  might  be  formed  for  fhewing,  at
one  view,  what  theie  different  payments  aught  to  be  in  all
cafes.  If  fuch  Tables  are  wanting,  recourie  muft  be  had
JO  fome  fuch  eafy  rules  as  thofe  I  have  ftated  above.

H  4  . He


104  Of  the  beji  Schemes  for

He  that  will  give  himfelf  the  trouble  to
calculate,  agreeably  to  the  directions  in  the
Queftions  to  which  I  have  referred,  will  find
that,  taking  all  particular  cafes  together,
the  rules  now  given  come  as  near  the  truth
as  there  is  reafon  to  dsfire  in  an  affair  of  this
nature,  the  defers  in  fome  cafes  being  nearly
compenfated  by  the  exccfes  in  others.

I  have  calculated  here,  as  well  as  in  moft
other  places,  from  Mr.  T>e  Moivres  Hypo^
thejis,  becaufe  its  conformity  to  the  three
Tables  which  I  have  fo  often  mentioned,
convinces  me,  that  it  gives  a  proper  medium
between  the  different  values  of  tow?i  and
country  lives.  In  the  country  the  probabili-
ties of  life  are  much  higherj  but  in  hondon^
and  probably  in  all  great  towns  and  fome
fmaller  ones,  they  are  much  lower.

It  is  proper  to  add,  that,  according  to  the
values  of  lives  and  furvivorfliips  deduced  both
from  the  Lojidon  and  Dr.  Halley^  Table,  and
taking  intereft  as  low  as  3  per  cent,  all  wo-
men whofe  hufbands  are  under  50  years  of  age,
might  be  entitled  to  an  annuity  of  24/.  dur-
ing Ufe  (the  firfl  payment  to  be  made  at  the
end  of  the  year  in  which  they  fliall  be  left
widows)  for  the  fum  of  100/.  fuppofing  3/,
additional  given  on  account  of  every  year
that  they  are  younger  than  their  hufbands. — ?
At  4  per  cent,  an  annuity  of  30/.  might  be
granted  on  the  fame  terms.


providing  Annuities  for  Widows* loj

In  the  year  1690,  the  company  of  Mercers
in  London,  adopted fuch  a  fcheme  as  that
laft  mentioned. For  100/.  in  one prefent pay-
ment, they  entitled  every  fubfcriber  to  a  life'
annuity  for  his  widow  of  30/.;  and  this,  at
that  time,  (when  money  bore  6  per  cent,  in-
tercft)  was  confiderably  lefs  than  the  value  of
the  money advanced, fuppofing men and
their  wives  of  equal  ages. As  the  intereft
of  money  funk,  they  funk  alfo  the  annuity,
firft  to  25/.  and  then  to  20/.  and  15/. But,  at
laft,  after  carrying  on  the  fcheme  for  above
50  years,  finding  the  burden  of  the  annui-
tants too  heavy, and  likely  to  go  on  increa-?
fing,  they  were  obliged  to  drop  the  fcheme
and  to  flop  payment. In  a  little  time,  how-
ever, by  a  parliamentary  aid  of  3000/.  perann.
which  they  are  now  enjoying,  they  were  re-
ftored  to  a  capacity  of  making  good  all  their
engagements,  and  of  paying  their  arrears. — »
Their  failure,  is,  indeed,  much  to  be  lamented ;
for,  in  confequence  of  it,  the  public  has  lofl
the  benefit  of  an  inftitution,  that  for  many
years  promifed  the  happieft  effeds,  by  en-
couraging marriage,  and  affording  relief  to
indigence. The  rapid  fall  of  the  interefl  of
money;  their  admitting  purchafers  at  too  ad-
vanced ages  j  and,  particularly,  their  paying  no
regard  to  the  difference  of  age  between  huf-
bands  and  their  wives,  mufl:  have  contribut-
'ed  much  to  hurt  them. Some  of  the  prin-
cipal caufes,  therefore,  which  have  rendered

then^


Io6  Of  the  hejl  Schemes  for

them  unfuccefsfiil,  may  be  now  avoidecli
and  for  this  reafon  1  fhould  be  glad  to  lee
fome  fimilar  Icheme,  providing,  as  this  did,
Annuities  for  life^  and  not  for  widowhood,  un-
dertaken. If  well  planned  it  would,  I  think,
be  a  proper  objedl:  of  parliamentary  encou^


ragement.


It  muft,  however,  be  remembered,  that
the  iflue  of  the  beft  fchemes  of  this  kind
mufi:  be  in  fome  degree  uncertain.  For  want
of  proper  obfervations,  it  is  not  poffible  to
determine  what  allowances  ought  to  be  made,
on  account  of  the  higher  probabilities  of  life
among  females  than  males.  No  prudence
can  prevent  all  lofTes  in  the  improvement  of
money;  nor  can  any  care  guard  againfl  the
inconveniencies  to  fuch  fchemes,  which
mufi  arile  from  thofe  perfons  being  mofl
ready  to  fly  to  them  who,  by  reafon  of  con-r
cealed  diforders,  feel  themfelves  moft  likely
to  want  the  benefit  of  them.

The  focieties,  therefore,  on  which  I  have
remarked  in  the  firft  Sedlion  of  this  chapter,
would  have  reafon  to  take  warning  from  what
has  happened  to  tlie  Mercer  s  Company,  were
the  fchemes  on  which  they  are  formed  per-
fediy  unexceptionable.  But  I  have  demon-
ftrated  that  thefe  fchemes  are  very  defedive;
and  that  the  longer  they  are  carried  en,  the
more  mifchief  they  mull  produce.  'Tis  vain
(as  appears  from  (^efl.  III.)  to  form  fuch
eftablifhments  with  the  expedljition  of  fee-


ing


providing  Annuites  for  Widows, 1 07

ing  their  fate  determined  foon  by  experience.
If  not  more  extravagant  than  any  ignorance
can  well  make  them,  they  will  go  on  prof-
peroufly  for  20  or  30  years;  and,  if  at  all  tol-
erable, they  may  llipport  themfelves  for  50
or  60  years ;  and  at  laft  end  in  diftrefs  and
ruin.  No  experiments,  therefore,  of  this  fort
fhould  be  tried  haftily.  An  unfuccefsful  ex-
periment mud  be  produ(5tIve  of  very  perni-
cious efleds.  All  inadequate  fchemes  lay
the  foundation  ol  prefent  relief  on  Jutmr  cala-
mity, and  afford  alfiilance  to  ^Jew  by  difap-
polnting  and  opprefiing  multitudes.

As  the  perfons  v^^ho  conduct  thefe  fchemes
can  mean  nothing  but  the  advantage  of  the
public,  they  ought  to  liflen  to  thefe  obferva-
tions.  At  prefent  their  plans  are  capable  of
being  reformed ;  but  they  cannot  continue
fo  always ;  for  the  greater  number  of  exor-
bitant paym.ents  they  now  make  to  annui-
tants, the  more  they  confume  the  property
of  future  annuitants,  and  the  lefs  pradi-
cable  a  retreat  is  rendered  to  a  rational  and
equitable  and  permanent  plan  {a).  They
fliould,  thcreiore,  immediately  [b)  either  reduce

{a)  See  p.  82,  83. Sea.  I.

[b)  Thus;  was  the  Zcw^aftfw  Annuity  Society  to  make
their  loweft  annuity  lo/.  the  next  20/.  and  the  higheft
30/.  they  would  probably  be  fafe.  But,  after  procseding
on  their  preltnt  plan  fome  years  longer,  fuch  a  redudion
■would  by  no  means  be  luflicient.

their


JoS  Of  Schemes  for  providing

their  fchemes,  or  change  them  into  one  of
thofe  which  I  have  propofed.  But,  I  am  afraid,
this  IS  not  to  be  expeded.  The  negled  with
which  they  have  received  fome  remonftrances
that  have  been  already  made  to  them  gives
reafon  to  fear,  that  what  has  been  noWfaid
Will  be  in  vain;  and  that  thofe  who  are  to
come  after  them,  muft  be  left  to  rue  the  con.
Sequences  of  their  miftakes.


SECT. IV.

Of  Schemes  for  providing  Annuities  for  Old

Age.

A  General  difpofition  has  lately  /hewn  it-
lelf,  to  encourage  fchemes  for  granting-
annuities  to  perfons  in  the  latter  flages  of  life^
and  this  has  occafioned  the  6th  Queftion  in
t\\Q  former  Chapter;  and,  as  a  further  and
more  particular  diredion  in  cafes  of  this  kind,
J  have  thought  it  necelTary  here  to  give  the
i:oJIowin<?  Table.


Q


Valuo


AnniiiUes  for  Old  Age,


109


VaJoMof  i/./fr
artr..  for  life,  af-
ter 50,  to  per-
fons  whofe  ages
are

10

15

20

25

40


Values  in  me  1

Intereft

prefent  payment,  1
intereA 4 /i«r

3  per  cint.

cent.

1-235

1.583
2.028

2.015
2.444
2.989

2.594

3-369
4.446

3-644
4.508

5,667

5-953

7.232

Values  in  aitnti-

Intereft

al payments,  till
50,  to  begin  at
the  end  of  a  year,
intereft  4  pr  ct.

3  per  cenTt

.0789
.106

•113

.146

.146

•193

.203
.297
.466

.259
.366

'559

.822

.950

Values  of  the
fame  annuity  af-
ter 60,  to  ages

35
40

45
50


1.667
2.234
3-043
4-255


2.290
2.923
3.81 1
5.061


•135
.203

-327
.600


Values  of the

fame annuity,

after  5  5,to  ages

30

2. 114

2.937

.167

.21 1

35

2.722

3-632

.241

.297

40

3-732

4.708

•394

.464

45

5.088

6.1 15

•703

.803

,i6S

'245
.384

.679


The  numbers  In  the  2d  and  3d  columns
of  this  Table,  multiplied  by  any  annuity,
will  give  the  value  of  that  annuity  in  ajmgk

pay.


110  Of  Schemes  for  providing

payment,  to  be  enjoyed  for  life,  by  the  ages
correfponding  to  thofe  numbers  in  the  firfl
column,  after  the  age  mentioned  at  the  head
of  that  column. — And  in  the  fame  manner;
the  numbers  in  the  4th  and  5th  columns  will
give  the  values  in  annual  payments. — Thus.
The  value  of  44/.  per  annum^  to  be  enjoyed
for  life,  after  50,  by  a  perfon  now  40,  (inter-
eft  at  A^  per  cent.)  is  5.95,  multiplied  by  44,
or/.  261.9,  in  2.  fngle  payment;  and  .822,'
multiplied  by  44,  or  /.  36.16,  in  annual  pay-
ments till  50,  the  firft  payment  to  be  made
at  the  end  of  a  year.

In  order  to  find  the  fame  values,  partly  in
annual  pay?nents,  and  partly  in  any  given  en-
trance or  adtnifjion-inojiey %  fay;  "  As  the  va-
*'  lue  of  the  groeti  annuity  in  ^fngie  payment,
*'  (found  in  the  way  juft  mentioned)  is  to  the
**  given  entrance-money  ',  fo  is  its  value  in  an-
**  nual  payments,  to  a  fourth  proportional ;
*'  which,  fubtra(fled  from  the  value  in  annual
"  payments,  the  refnainder  will  be  the  annual
"  payment  due,  over  and  above  the  given  en*
**  trance-money."

E  X  A  M  P  L  E.i

Suppofe  a  perfon  now  40,  to  be  willing  to
pay  200/.  entrance-money,  befides  fuch  an
annual  payment  for  10  years  as  iliall,  toge-
ther with  his  entrance-money,  be  fufficient


Afmukies  for  Old  Age,  1 1 1

to  entitle  him  to  a  life  annuity  of  44/.  after
^o.  What  ought  the  annual  payment  to  be?

Answer.

Z/.8.55.  —  For,  /.  261.9,  is  to  200/.  as
/.  36. 1 6,  to  /.  27.6 1  3  which,  fubtraded  from
/.  36.16,  the  remainder  is  /.  8*55.

This  Table  has  been  calculated  from  the
.probabilities  and  values  of  lives  in  Tables  III.
and  VI.  The  probabilities  of  life  among
the  inhabitants  oi  London^  are  (as  I  have  of-
ten had  occafion  to  obferve)  much  lower
than  among  the  generality  of  mankind ;  and
the  values  in  the  preceding  Table,  had  they
been  given  agreeably  to  the  LoTidon  Obferva-
tions,  would  have  been  lefs.  But,  certainly,
an  office  or  fociety,  that  means  to  be  a  per-
manent advantage  to  the  public,  ought  al-
ways to  take  higher  rather  than  lower  va-
lues, for  the  fake  of  rendering  itfelf  more
fecure,  and  gaining  (ovnQ profits  to  balance  lojjes
and  expences.

There  have  lately  been  eflablifl:ied,  111
London,  feveral  focieties  for  granting  fuch
annuities  as  thofe  now  mentioned  i  and  he
that  will  compare  their  true  values,  as  they
may  be  learnt  from  the  preceding  Table,
with  the  terms  of  admiffion  into  thefe  focie-
ties, as  given  in  their  ^x'miQ^  Abfra^s  and

Tables,


1 1 2  Of  Schemes  for  providing

Tables t  muft  be  furprifed  and  fliocked.  They
are  all  impofitions  on  the  pubHc,  proceeding
from  ignorance,  and  encouraged  by  creduUty
and  folly.

It  has  been  {hewn  ; that  the  proper  pay-
ment, (allowing  compound  intereft  at  4^  per
cent.)  for  an  annuity  of  44/.  to  be  enjoyed  by
a  perfon  now  40,  for  what  may  happen  to
remain  of  his  life  after  50,  is  200/.  in  admif-
fion-money-y  befides  7.8.5 5,  or  8/.  i  ^  -^m  i^^  ^"*
nual  payments  till  he  attains  to  50, the  firft
of  thefe  payments  to  be  made  at  the  end  of
a  year.  —  The  conditions  of  obtaining  this
annuity,  according  to  the  Tables  of  the  Lau^
dahle  Society  of  Annuitants  for  the  benefit  of  age  y
are  76/.  17J.  in  admiffion-money,  and  6/.  14^.
in  annual  payments, — According  to  the  Ta-
bles of  the  fociety  of  Lo?idon  Annuitants  for
the  benefit  of  age,  the  conditions  of  obtaining
the  fame  annuity  are  30/.  in  admifjion-mojieyy
and  10/.  in  annual pay?nents.-—T\'\Q  Equitable
Society  of  Annuitants  requires  for  the  fame
annuity  38/.  ioj-.  m  admijjion- money ^  and  13/.
in  annual  payments. The  true  value  is,  over
and  above  the  admifiion- money  juft  mentioned,
an  annual  payment  of  30/.  \']s.  (interelt  reck-
oned at  4  per  cent.)  or  an  annual  payment  of
36/. 1 5  J.  intereft  reckoned  at  3  per  cent. — •■
The  London  Union  Society  for  the  comfortable
fupport  of  aged  members  promifes  an  annuity
of  no  lefs  than  50  guineas  for  life,  after  50,

to


Annuities  for  Old  Jge,  113

to  a  perfon  now  40  for  40/.  \os.  in  admif-
fion-money,  and  7/.  in  annual  payments.

The  Amicable  Society  of  AnniiitiVits  for  the
benefit  of  age  y  promifes  an  annuity  of  26/. />£"/'
annuWy  for  life,  to  a  perfon  now  40,  after  at-
taining to  50j  for  28/.  165.  in  admifwn-rno-
neyy  and  6/.  in  annual  payments.  —  Tiie  true
value  of  this  annuity  is  28/.  i6j-.  in  admif
fion-money,  and  17/.  8/.  in  annual  payments.,
(interefl  fuppofed  -aX.  a^  per  cent.) -,  or  the  fame
fum  in  adfnijjion- money y  and  20/.  185.  in  <^/Z-
nualpayme7tts,  intereft  fuppofed  at  3  per  cent.

The  Provident  Society  for  the  ben  ft  of  age
promifes  an  annuity  of  25/.  to  a  perfon  now
40,  after  attaining  to  50,  for  34  guineas  in
admiffion-money,  and  eight  guineas  in  annu-
al payments.  The  true  value  is,  34  guineas
in  admifion- money,  and  15/.  \2s.  in  annual
payments,  interefl:  at  4  per  cent.  -,  or,  the
lame  fum  in  admijjion- money ,  and  j  9/.  in  aniiual
payments,  interefl:  being  at  ^  per  cent  [a).

But  I  will  not  tire  the  reader,  by  going,  in
this  manner,  thro'  the  fchemes  of  all  thele  io-
cieties.  The  contrivers  of  them,  it  is  certain,
can  know  nothing  of  the  principles  on  which
the  rule  in  Quefl:.  VI,  and  the  demonftration
of  it  in  the  Appendix  is  founded  ;  and,  there-
fore, if  unwilling  to  be  guided  by  the  autho-

(a)  The  acccunt  here  given  of  the  terms  on  v/hich  i
perfon  whofe  age  is  40,  is  admitted  into  thefe  focieties,  I
have  taken  from  their  printed  Tables  as  they  flood  at  the
end  of  the  year  1770. — In  the  younger  agej  the  defici-
encies are  gre:ucr.

I  rity


1 1 4  Of  Schemes  for  providing

rity  of  mathematicians,  it  may  not  be  poflr*
ble  to  convince  them  of  their  miftakes.  I
will,  however,  offer  to  them  the  following
demonflration,  which  will  be  underftood,
without  difficulty,  by  every  one  who  knows
how  to  compute  (^)  the  increafe  of  money  at
compound  intereft.

The  value  of  a  life  at  50,  (intereil  being  at
4  per  ce}2t.)  is  ii4  years  purchafe  by  Table
VI.  For  an  -annuity,  therefore,  of  44/.  per
anniun  for  life,  to  be  enjoyed  by  a  perfon  at
this  age,  498/.  ought  to  be  given.  T^wo  in
three  of  a  number  of  perfons  at  the  age  of  32
will,  (by  Tables  III,  IV,  and  V,)  live  to  50;
and  therefore,  in  order  to  be  able  to  pay  an
annuity  to  them  of  44/.  for  life,  after  50,  the
money  now  advanced  by  every  three^,  ought
to  be  fuch  as  Vv'ill,  in  confequence  of  being
laid  up  to  be  improved,  increafe  in  18  years
to  double  498/.  or  to  996/. —  From  the  pre-
ceding Table  it  may  be  learnt,  that  the  mo-
ney which  ought  to  be  advanced  by  every
fingle  perfon  is  165/.  or  by  three  perfons
495/.  and  this,  in  18  years,  will  double  it-
felf,  or  increafe  to  ju(l  the  fum  that  will
then  be  the  value  of  the  annuities  to  be  paid.
— But  the  money  required  in  this  cafe  by  the
Laudable  Society,  is  14/.  11^.  9^.  from  each
member  at  admiffion,  befides  an  amiiial  pay-
ment of  4/.  The  admiffion-money,  there-
fore, of  two  members, being  29/. '^s,  6d.

{a)  The  eafieft  method  of  doing  this,  is  taught  in  the
rules  annexed  to  the  Tables  iii  the  Appendix.

may


Annuities  fir  Old  Agd  i  j  ^

may  be  increafed  to  twice  this  fum,  or  to
58/.  ys.  An  annual  payment  of  4/.  for  iS
years  will,  ifperfeiflly  improved  at  \  per  cent.
compound  interefi:,  increafe  to  102/3  iind  two
fuch  annual  payments  will  increafe  to  204/.

The  whole  pay,  therefore,  of  two  mem-
bers will  produce  at  the  end  of  18  years
262/.  yj. -^A  third  part,  1  have  faid,  will
die  without  attaining  to  50,  and  thefe  will
live  one  with  another  10  years.  An  annuity
of  4/.,  tor  this  time,  will  produce  a  capital  of
48/.  and  this  capital  improved  for  eight
years  more  will  increafe  to  66/.  The  whole
profit,  therefore,  from  the  member  who  will
die  is,  his  admiffion-money  doubled  and  ad-
ded to  66/.  or  95/.  3J-.  bd*  And  this  fum
added  to  262/.  7J.  makes  357/.  loj-.  td.
the  whole  money  with  which  the  fociety  can
be  provided,  at  the  end  of  1 8  years,  to  bear
the  expence  of /wolife-annities,  worth  toge-
ther 996/.

By  a  fimilar  computation  it  may  be  found,
that  the  improvement  of  money  at  only  ^
per  cent.  v^'iiXJink  i\\Q  former  fum  to  329/.  at
the  fame  time  that  the  value  of  the  annuities
will  be  raifed  to  1 100/.

The  deficiencies  in  the  fchemes  of  all  the
other  focieties,  except  the  Provident  Society,
are  no  lefs  confiderable  (^/).  — What  eonfu-

lion

[a)  Some  of  thefe  focieties  tell  us,  that  the  payments

on  admiffion  fliall  increafe,  as the  number  of  nVembers

increafes  i  and  they  have  praitifed  on  this  rule  juft  as  if

I  ?.  ihQ


1 1 6  Of  Schemes  for  providing

fion then  mufl  they  produce  Tome  time  or
other  ?  How  barbarous  is  it  thus  to  draw  mo-
ney

the  value  of  an  annuity  was  nothing  determinate  in  itfelf,
but  depended  on  the  number  of  perfons  who  have  been
purchafeis.  But  the  true  defign  may  perhaps  be,  to
quicken  the  public  in  their  applications.

Should  any  of  thefe  focieties,  fenfible  of  their  miftakes,
refolvc  to  reform  themfeivcs,  they  ought  toconfider,  that
this  cannot  he  done  by  only  obliging //v/ar^  members  to
pay  the  juft  values  of  the  annuities  promifed  them.  All
the  prefcnt  members  mufl:  likewife,  befides  raifing  their
payments,  make  compenfation  for  what  they  have  hi-
therto paid  too  little  ;  and  this  compenfation  is  to  be  cal-
culated in  the  following  manner.  —  "Find  the  whole
*'  amount  to  the  prefent  time  of  the  payments  which  have
'•'  been  made.  Subtradl  this  from  the  whole  amount  of
"  the  payments  which  Jhould  have  been  made;  and  the
*'  remainder  will  be  the  compenfation  required."

Example.  In  the  Laudable  Society  of  Armziitants,  the
condition  of  a  titld  to  44/.  per  annum  for  life,  after  50,  to
a  perfon  at  the  age  of  40,  was,  4  years  ago,  34/.  lyj.
in  admiffion-money,  befides  an  annual  payment  of  6/.
141.  'till  he  attained  to  50. — The  admilHon- money  will,
(reckoning  compound  intereft  zf^perceiit.)  amount  in  four
years  to  39/.  45.  and  the  annual  payment  to  28/.  The
whole  aniount,  therefore,  of  the  payments  of  a  member
admitted  4  years  ago,  is  67/.  4^. — But  the  value  of  the
annuity  was  37/,  45.  in  annual  payments,  befides  34/.
I'js.  in  admilTion-money  ;  and  thefe  payments,  during
the  4  years,  would  have  amounted  to  195/.  The  diffe-
rence, therefore,  betv/een  thefe  two  amounts,  or  127/.
16 i.  is  the  cojifpefifation  vi^hich  fuch  member  ought  to  pay  ;
and  if  he  continues  a  member  without  paying  it,  (be-
fides raifing  his  annual  contribution  to  37/.  45.)  he  mufl:
either  lofe  his  annuity,  or  owe  it  to  injultice.

I  have  taken  intereft  here  at  '^pcr  cent,  becaufe  I  think
thefe  focieties  cannot  reafonably  depend  on  always  im-
proving the  money  they  receive  at  a  higher  rate.

Since  I  Writ  the  above,  I  have  found,  that  the  admif-
fioii-moncy  required  by this  fucicty  has  lately  received

another


Annuities  for  Old  Age,  1 1 7

neyfrom  the  public  by  promifes  of  advantages
that  cannot  be  obtained  ?  Have  we  not  al-
ready fuffered  too  much  by  hubbies -y  and,  if
nothing  elfe  can  check  the  frenzy  that  en-
courages them,  ought  not  the  legiflature  to
interpofe  its  authority  ?

I  do  not,  however,  mean  to  condemn  all
inftitutions  of  this  kind.  They  may  be  very
ufeful,  if  the  full  values  are  taken,  and  pro-
per  care  is  ufed  in  the  improvement  of  money.
Intereft,  in  thefe  cafes,  ought  not  to  be  reck-
oned higher  than  3  per  cent,  and,  fuppoiing
money  improved  at  this  rate,  a  perfon,  for  a
fingle  payment  of  50/.  before  he  is  40,
might  be  entitled  to  a  life-annuity  of  10  gui-
neas after  ^^-y  or,  if  he  chufes  it,  to  a  life-an-
nuity of  17/.  after  60.  But  if  he  pays  the  fame
fum  before  he  is  34,  he  might  be  entitled  to
a  life  annuity  of  14/.  after  55,  or  22/.  after
60.  25/.  might  purchafe  for  him  half  \\it{c
annuities;  and  100/.  double.

A  fociety  or  office  that  would  go  on  this
plan, might do great  fervice. Perions in

another  advance.  At  the  age  of  40,  in  particular,  it  is
advanced  to  ic8/.  7^. — when  they  have  further  either  ad-
vanced the  admiffion-money  to  douhlc  this  fum,  or  tripled
the  annual  payments,  they  will  be  nlmiJi  right  v/ith  refpe6t
to  this  particular  age,  provided  the  cofnpe}ifalion-77:oncy,]^^^
mentioned,  has  been  paid.

I'hefe  focieties,  tho'  their  plans  are  fo  infufficient,  may,
after  beginning  their  payments  to  annuitants,  continue
them  15,  or,  perhaps,  20  years  j  but  it  will  be  by  rob-
bing all  the  younger  members.

I  3  the


1 1 8  Of  Schemes  foj-  providing

the  lower  flations  of  life  might  be  brought
to  a  habit  of  induftry,  in  the  beginning  of
life,  by  driving  to  get  25/.  or  50/.  before-
hand in  order  to  purchafe  fuch  annuities,  and
thus  to  make  provifions  for  themfelvesin  the
more  advanced  parts  of  life,  when  they  will
be  incapable  of  labour.

There  are  now  eftabliflied  \n  Hollcmd  (omt
inilitutions  of  this  kind. — Any  poor  perfons
there,  I  am  informed,  who  can,  betore  they
attain  to  a  particular  age,  lay  up  50/.  may
make  ufe  of  it  in  buying  for  themfelves  a
right  to  be  admitted,  when  50,  or  at  any
time  afterwards,  to  houfes  prepared  on  pur-
pofe,  for  providmg  them  with  all  the  con-
veniencies  of  lodoinp  and  board.  This  is  an
excellent  infiiitution  ;  and  I  wiili  there  was
fome  imitation  of  it  in  this  kingdom.

Confiderable  profits  would,  in  this,  cafe  be
received,  from  the  payments  o^  fome  who
would  chufe  to  delay  going  into  fuch  houfes  ;
and  of  others  who  would  grow  rich  enough
to  be  above  them.

It  is  proper  to  obferve  here,  that  inftitutir
ons  of  this  kind  would  furnidi  one  of  the
fafef  W'^ys  of  providing  for  widows. — A  mar-
ried man  might,  by  paying  100/.  before  his
wife  attained  to  40,  entitle  her,  after  ^^,  or
60,  to  a  life  annuity  of  21/.  or  34/.  Or,  by
paying  the  fame  fum  before  (he  attained  to,
3|,  he  might  entitle  her;,  after  the  fame  ages^

■  to.


Annuities  for  Old  Age,  1 1 9

to  a  life  annuity  of  28/.  or  44/.  (^)  ;  and  in
this  cafe  he  would  have  a  chance  of  (haring
himfelf  in  the  beneiit  of  the  annuity.

I  have  called  this  ihtjafeji  way  of  provid-
ing for  widows,  becaufe  attended  with  none
of  the  dangers  arifing  from  difproportion  of
age  between  men  and  their  wives,  and  from
the  admilTion  of  perfons  labouring  under  con-
cealed diflempers.

I  cannot  conclude  this  Sedion,  without
mentioning  the  following  plan  of  a  provilion
for  Old  Age.

Let  1 3  guineas  be  given  as  entrance-money ;
and  let  befides  i /.  2/.  3/.  4/.  &c.  be  given
at  the  beginning  of  the  ifl,  2d,  3d,  4th,  &c.
years,  as  the  payments  for  thefe  years  refpec-
tively  ,•  and  let  the  lail:  payment  be  16/.  at
the  beginning  of  the  i6th  year.  All  thefe
payments  put  together  will,  according  to  the
probabilities  of  life  in  the  3d,  4th  and  5th
Tables,  (intereft  being  at4^6T  cent.)  entitle  a
perfon,  whofe  age  was  40  when  he  begun
them,  to  an  annuity,  after  1 5  years,  begin-
ning with  15/.  and  increaling  at  the  rate  of
i/.  every  year,  'till,  at  the  end  of  15  years
more,  or  (^)  v/hen  he  has  attained  to  70,  it

[a)  The  fame  payment  before  30,  would  entitle  to  an
annuity  of  22/.  after  50.

[b)  According  to  the  probabilities  of  life  in  the  London
Table,  this  annuity  (hould  be  greater. — A  Theorcin  for
finding  what  the  annuity  ought  to  be  in  thefe  cafes,  is
given  in  the  Appendix,  Note  (1).

I  4  becomes


I20 Of  Schemes  for  providing^  &c.

becomes  a  ftanding  annuity  of  30/. for  the
remainder  of  his  life.

If  the  addition  of  three  guineas  is  made  to
the  entrance-money,  iox  every  year  that  any  life
betvveen  30  and  40  falls  iliort  of  40,  the  va-
lue will  be  obtained  nearly,  of  the  fame  an-
nuity to  be  enjoyed  by  that  life,  after  the
iame  number  of  years,  and  increafing  in  the
lame  manner,  'till,  in  30  years,  it  becomes
ftationary  and  double .-—'X\\\^  plan  is  particu-
larly inviting,  as  it  makes  the  Icirgeji  payments
become  due,  when  the  near  approach  of  the
annuity  renders -the  encouragement  to  them
grcatcji  ;  and  as,  likev/ife,  the  annuity  is  to
increafe  continually  with  age,  till  it  comes  to
be  highell  [a],  when  life  is  moil  in  the  de-
cline;^

{flj  The  lower  part  of  mankind  are  objccls  of  parti-
cular compaiTion,  when  rendered  Incapable,  hy  accident,
ficknels,  or  age,  of  earning  their  fubliftence.  This  has
given  rile  to  many  very  uieful  focitties  among  them,  for
granting  relief  to  one  another,  out  of  little  funds  fupplicd
by  weekly  contributions.  A  fociety  of  this  kind,  formed
on  the  following  plan,  would  probably  thrive,  and  might,
on  fome  accounts,  be  even  more  ufeful  than  the  inftitu-
tions  in  Holland^  mentioned  in  p.  118.

Let  the  fociety,  at  its  firfl:  eftablifliment,  confift  of  lOO
perfons,  all  between  30  and  40 ;  and  whofe  mean  age
may  therefore  be  reckoned  36;  and  let  it  be  fuppofed  to
be  always  kept  up  to  this  number,  by  the  admiffion  of
new  members,  between  the  ages  of  30  and  40,  as  old
members  die  off.  Let  the  contribution  of  each  member
be  four-pence  ^rr  week,  making,  from  the  whole  body,
an  annual  contribution  of  85/.  17^. — Let  it  be  further
luppofcd,  that  feven  of  them  will  fall  every  year  into  dif-
ordcrs,  that  fhall  incapacitate  them  for  ievcn  weeks.-r—


Of  the  Amicahk  Corporation^  Sec. 1 2 1

cline,  and  when  therefore  it  will  be  moft
ufeful. — -It  is  further  a  recommendation  of
this  plan,  that  lefs  depends  in  it  on  the  im-
frovement  of  money  than  in  moft  other
plans.  —  But  I  mull  leave  thefe  hints  to  be
purfued  by  others.

SECT. V.

Of  the  Amicable  Society  for  a  perpetual  Affu-^
ranee  Ojice  :  And  the  Society  J  or  equitable
Afjiirances  on  Lives  and  Survivorfiips,

THE  loth  Problem  has  been  given,  with
a  particular  view  to  the  corporation  of
the Amicable  Society,  for a  perpetual  Aflu-

30/.  I2X.  of  the  annnal  contribution  will  be  juft  fuffici-
ent,  to  enable  the  fociety  to  grant  to  each  of  thefe  \zs,
per  week,  during  their  illnelfes.  And  the  remaining  55/.
per  annum,  laid  up  and  carefully  improved,  at  3^  per  cent,
will  incrcafe  to  a  capital  that  fhall  be  fufficient,  accord-
ing to  the  chances  of  life  in  Tables  III,  IV,  and  V,  to
enable  the  fociety  to  pay  to  every  member,  after  attaining
to  67  years  of  age,  or  upon  entering  his  68th  year,  an
annuity,  beginning  with  5/.  and  increafing  at  the  rate
of  I  /.  every  year  for  fcven  years,  'till,  at  the  age  of  75,
it  came  to  be  a  Handing  annuity  of  12/.  for  the  remain-
der of  life.

Were  fuch  a  fociety  to  make  its  contribution  j^iv?;-
pencc per  v/cek,  an  allowance  of  155.  might  be  made,  on
the  fame  fuppofitions,  to  every  member  during  ficknefs  ;
bsfidcs  the  payment  of  an  annuity  beginning  with  5/.
when  a  member  entered  his  64th  year,  and  increafing  for
15  years,  'till,  at  79,  it  became  fixed  for  the  remainder  of
life  at  20/.

\i  the  probabilities  of  life  are  lower  among  the  labour-
ing poor,  than  among  the  generality  of  mankind,  this
plan  will  be  fo  much  the  more  fure  of  fucceeding.

ranee-


122  Of  the  Amicable  Coj^poration

rance-ofiice  on  fingle  lives,  kept  In  Serjeant' s-
Inn.  This  fociety  was  eftabliflied  in  1706,
and  is  the  only  one  I  am  acquainted  with,
which  has  flood  any  confiderable  trial  from
time  and  experience.  The  annual  payment
of  each  member  ufed  to  be  6/.  \s.  payable
quarterly  ^  but  it  has  been  lately  reduced  to  5/.
The  whole  annual  income,  hence  arifing,  is
equally  divided  among  the  nominees^  or  heirs
of  fuch  members  as  die  every  year;  and  this
renders  the  dividends  among  the  nominees  in
different  years,  more  or  lefs,  according  to  the
number  of  members  who  have  happened  to
die  in  thofe  years.  But  the  fociety  now  en-
gages, that  the  dividends  fliall  not  be  lejs  than
150/.  to  each  claimant,  tho'  they  may  be
more.  —  None  are  admitted  whole  ages  are
greater  than  45,  or  lefs  than  12  ;  nor  is  there
any  difference  of  contribution  allowed  on  ac-
count of  difference  of  age.

This  fociety  has,  I  doubt  not,  been  very
ufeful  to  the  public;  and  its  plan  is  fuch,
that  it  cannot  well  fail  to  continue  to  be  fo.
It  might,  however,  certainly  have  been  much
more  ufeful,  had  it  gone  from  the  firfl:  on  a
different  plan.  It  is  obvious,  that  regulating
the  dividends  among  the  nominees  by  the
number  of  members  who  die  every  year,  is
not  equitable  ;  becaufe  it  makes  the  benefit
Vv'hich  a  member  is  to  receive  to  depend,
not  on  the  value  of  his  contribution,  bu£
on  a  contingency  y  that  is,  the  number  of
members  that  iball  happen  to  die  the  fame

yeav


for  affiiring  Lives.  123

year  with  him.  This  regulation  muft  allb
have  been  diiadvantageous  to  the  focietyj  as
will  appear  from  the  following  account  of
the  natural  progrefs  of  the  affairs  of  fuch  a
fociety,  when  eftablillied  on  a  right  plan.

Suppofe  a  thoufand  perfons,  whofe  com-
mon age  is  36,  to  form  themfelves  into  a  fo-
ciety for  the  purpofe  of  aJJ'uring  a  particular
fum  at  their  deaths,  to  fuch  perfons  as  they
iliall  name,  in  confideration  of  a  particular
annual-contribution  to  be  continued  during
their  lives.  Suppofe  the  annual  contribution
to  be  5/.  and  the  firft  payment  [a)  to  be
made  immediately.  Suppofe,  likewife,  the
original  number  of  the  fociety  to  be  con-
flantly  kept  up  by  the  admiffion  of  new
meniibers,  at  36  years  of  age,  in  the  room  of
fuch  as  die.  —  In  Queft.  X.  p.  33,  it  appears,
that  an  annual  payment,  beginning  immedi-
ately, of  5/.  during  a  life  at  the  age  of  36,{hould
entitle,  at  the  failure  of  fuch  a  life,  to  172/.
reckoning  intered  at  4  per  cent,  and  taking
Mr.  De  Moivre?,  valuation  of  lives. — A  /'/60//-
7^;^^  perfons,  all  36  years  of  age,  will  die  off
at  the  rate  of  20  every  year.  The  difburfe-
ments,  therefore,  of  fuch  a  fociety  will  be,
the  firft  year,  20  times  172/.  or  3,440/.  and
its  income  will  be  5000/.  It  will,  there-
fore, at  the  end  of  the  year,  have  a  furplus

{a)  Such  payments,  it  has  been  fliewn,  Queft.  VIII.
p.  28,  are  better  than  any  half  yezx\y  or  quarterly  payments,
^nd  at  the  fame  time  they  lave  fome  trouble.

of


1 24  Of  the  Amicable  Corpoi'atiQU

of  1560/.  to  put  to  intereft. — In  confe-
quence  of  the  yearly  acceffions  to  fupply  va-
cancies, the  number  dying  annually  will  be
always  increafnig  after  the  firft  year.  In  50
years  it  will  attain  to  a  maximum ;  and  then,
the  affairs  of  the  fociety  will  become  Jiatio-
nary,  and  the  number  dying  annually  will  be
40,  and  its  annual  expence  will  be  6,880/.
exceeding  the  annual  contribution  1,880/.
But,  in  the  mean  time,  by  improving  its  fur-
plus  moneys,  it  will  have  raifed  a  capital
equal  to  this  excefs,  and,  confequently,  its  af-
fairs will  be  fixed  on  a  firm  bafis  for  all  fub-
fequent  times.

Suppofe  now,  that  fuch  a  fociety,  at  its
eftablilhment,  fliould  refolve  to  divide  its
whole  yearly  income  among  the  nominees  of
deceafed  members.  The  effed  of  this  would
be,  that  no  capital  could  be  raifed;  that  the
dividends  payable  to  nominees  would  diminifh
continually,  till,  at  the  time  that  the  great-
eft  number  of  members  came  to  die  annuaUy^
or  at  the  end  of  50  years,  they  would  be  re-
duced to  half;  and  all  claimants,  after  this
period,  receive  too  little,  becaufe  the  firft  clai-
mants had  received  too  much  {a).

At

[a)  The  reverfe  of  this  will  take  place,  if  fuch  a  fo-
ciety begins  with  admitting  all  at  all  ages,  and  afterwards
changes  its  plan,  and  limiti  the  age  of  admiirion.  In  this
cafe,  the  number  o{  yearly  deaths  will  he  great ejl  at  firft,
and  the  dividends  ftnallcji.  In  confequence  of  altering  its
plan,  \.hc  yearly  deaths  will  leffen  gradually,  and  the  divi-
dends rife;  but  in  time  both  would  return  a^ain  to  their
original  ftate.
' ■  '  The,


for  ajjuring  Lives*  125

At  the  time  of  the  inflitution  of  the  Ami-
cable  Corporation^  the  intereil:  of  money  was
at  6  per  cent,  and,  as  they  admit  all  between
12  and  45,  the  mean  age  of  admiffion  can-
not probably  be  fo  great  as  36.  It  appears,
therefore,  that  had  they  avoided  the  error
now  mentioned,  and  gone  from  the  firft  on
the  plan  I  have  defcribed  -,  they  might  have
all  along  paid  to  each  72ominee  172/.  befides
railing  a  capital  much  greater,  in  proportion
to  the  number  of  members,  than  that  I  have
ipecified;  by  the  help  of  the  excefs  of  their
annual  payments  above  5/.  and  fome  other
advantages  which  they  have  enjoyed  [a).
Indeed,  I  cannot  doubt  but  that,  with  thefe
advantages,  they  might,  before  this  time,
have  found  themfelves  able  to  pay  at  leaft
200/.  to  each  nominee , and  at  the  fame  time


The  following  fails  incline  me  to  fufpecl,  that  this
remark  may  be  applicable  to  the  Amicable  Corporation,

Firft.  In  their  original  charter,  as  it  is  given  in  their
printed  abftraiSls,  there  is  no  limitation  of  age  menti-
oned ;  but  31  years  afcerwards,  I  find  a  bye-law  made
againft  admitting  any  perfon  who  fliould  be  above  the
age  of  45,  or  under  12. — iJecondly.  In  their  printed
advertifements  in  1770,  it  is  faid,  that  in  59  years  they
had  paid,  among  3643  claimants,  378,184/.  from
whence  it  follows,  that  tho'  the  average  of  their  divi-
dends, for  the  laft  17  years,  has  been  154/.  the  fame  ave-
rage, for  59  years,  is  only  104/.

(a)  A  furplus  from  a  thoufand  members  of  only  Jive
/hillings  per  annum,  duly  improved,  at  ^percent,  would,
in  41  years,  produce  a  capital  of  25,000/.

reftrided


126  Of  the  Amicable  Corporation

reftridled  themfelves,  as  they  now  do,  to'  an
annual  payment  of  5/.  {a).

I  have  already  mentioned  one  inftance  in
Vv'hich  the  plan  of  this  fociety  is  not  equita-
ble. Another  inftance  of  this  is,  their  re-
quiring the  fame  payments  from  all  per-
fons  under  45,  without  regarding  the  diffe-
rences of  their  ages ;  whereas,  the  annual
payments  of  a  perfon  admitted  at  45,  Ought
to  be  double  the  annual  payment  of  a  perfon"
admitted  at  12.

Further.  The  plan  of  this  fociety  is  fo
narrow,  as  to  confine  its  ufefulnefs  too  much.
It  can  be  of  no  fervice  to  any  perfon  whofe
age  exceeds  45.  It  is,  like  wife,  far  from  be-
ing properly  adapted  to  the  circumftances  of
perfons,  who  want  to  make  alTurances  on  theii"
lives,  for  only  fhort  terms  of  years.  —  Thus ;
the  true  value  of  the  affurance  of  150/.  for
10  years,  on  the  life  of  a  perfon  whofe  age
is  30,  is,  by  Queft.  XIV,  (intereft  being  at  3  per
cent.)  it.  13^.  in  annual  payments  for  ro
yeats,  to  begin  at  the  end  of  the  firfc  year ;
and  fubjed  to  failure  when  the  life  fails.  But
fuch  an  affurance  could  not  be  made,  in  this
fociety,  without  an  annual  payment  of  5/. —
Neither is the plan  of  this fociety at  all

((j)  It  (liould  be  remembereJ,  that  all  this  is  faid  or»
tlie  fuppofition,  that  proper  care  has  been  taken  to  Iccep
out  unhealthy  perfons;  and  that  the  probabilities  of  life
among  the  meir.bers  of  this  fociety,  are  the  fame  with?
thofe  in  the  3d.  4th,  and  5t:h  Tables,  in  the  Jppendix.

4  adapted


for  ajjurhig  Lives.  127

adapted  to  the  circumftances  of  perfons,  who
want  to  make  aflurances  on  particular  lur-
vivorfliips.  —  For  example.  A  perfon  pof-
iefled  of  an  eftate,  or  falary,  which  muft  be
loft  with  his  life,  has  a  perfon  dependent
Upon  him,  for  whom  he  delires  to  iecure  a
fum  of  money,  payable  at  his  death.  But,
he  deiires  this  only  as  a  provilion  againft  the
danger  of  his  dying^r/?,  and  leaving  a  wife,
or  a  parent,  without  fupport.  In  thefe  cir-
cumftances,  he  enters  himfelf  into  this  fo-
ciety ;  and  by  an  annual  payment  of  5/.  en-
titles his  nominee  to  150/.  in  a  few  years,
perhaps,  his  nominee  happens  to  die ;  and,
having  then  loft  the  benefit  he  had  in  view,
he  determines  to  forfeit  his  former  payments,
and  to  withdraw  from  the  foclety.  In  this
way,  probably,  this  fociety  muft  have  gain-
ed fome  advantages.  But  the  right  method
would  have  been,  to  have  taken  from  fuch  a
perfon  the  true  value  of  the  fum  aflured,
**  on  the  fuppofttion  of  non-payment,  pro-
**  vided  he  fhould  furvive."  \w  this  way  he
would  have  chofen  to  contract  Vv''ith  the  fo-
ciety ;  and  had  he  done  this,  he  would  have
paid  for  the  ajjurance,  (fuppofmg  intereft  at
3  per  cent,  his  age  30,  the  age  of  his  no-
minee 30,  and  the  probabilities  of  life  as  in
the  3d,  4th,  and  5th  Tables)  3/.  %s.  (a)  in
annual  payments,  to  begin  immediately,  and

to

{a)  The  value  of  150/.  payable  at  the  death  of  a  per-
ibfi,  aged  30,  provided  he  lurviveii  another  perfon  of  the

fame


128  Of  the  AJfiirances  for

to  be  continued  during  the  joint  continuance
of  his  own  life,  and  the  Hfe  of  his  7iominee,

All  thefe  obje6lions  are  removed  by  the
plan  of  the  fociety  kept  in  Nicholas-Lane^
Lcmbard-Street,  which  has  juftly  filled  itfelf
the  Society  for  Equitable  Ajjurajices  on  Lives
and  Stirvivorjhips,  This  Society,  if  due  care
is  taken,  may  prove  a  very  great  public  be-
nefit. It  v^as  founded,  in  confequence  of
propofals  which  had  been  made,  and  lec-
tures, recommending  fuchadefigUjwhich  had
been  read  by  Mr.  Dodfon^  the  author  ot  the
Mathcfnatical  Repojitory,  It  aflures  any  fums^
or  reverfionary  annuities,  on  any  liveSj  for
any  number  of  years,  as  well  as  for  the  whole
continuance  of  the  lives,  at  rates  fettled  by
particular  calculation,  and  in  any  manner
that  may  be  beft  adapted  to  the  views  of  the
perfons  affured.  That  is  j  either  by  making
the  afiured  fums  payable  certainly  at  the  fai-
lure ot  any  given  lives  -,  or  on  co?iditio7t  of  fur-
vivorfhip  ;  and  alfo,  either  by  taking  the
price  of  the  affurance  in  one  prefent  payment ;
or  in  annual  payments,  during  any lingle or

fame  age,  is,  by  Queft.  XI.  Chap.  I.  7.45.65;  and  this
value  divided  by  13-43,  (the  value  increafed  by  unity,
of  two  joint  lives  both  30)  gives  /.  3.4,  or  3/.  gj. —
The  value  of  the  fame  reverlion,  according  to  the  pro-
babilities of  life  in  London^  is,  A  49,19,  in  <j«t  payment  ;■
and  4.16,  in  amwal  payments,  during  the  joint  lives,  the
firft  payment  to  be  made  immediately.

join^


^qtiitdhk  Affuranccs  on  Lives, iig

joint  lives,  or  any  terms  lefs  than  the  whole
continuance  of  the  lives. — In  fhort  ^  the  plan
of  this  fociety  is  fo  extenlive,  and  fo  impor-
tant, that  I  cannot  fatisfy  my  own  mind,
without  offering  to  the  gentlemen  concerned
in  the  direction  of  it,  the  following  obfer-^
vations,  hoping  they  will  not  think,  them
impertinent  or  improper.

Firft.  They  fliould  confider  what  diftrefs
would  arife  from  the  failure  of  fuch  a  fcheme
in  any  future  time ;  and  v/hat  dangers  there
are,  which  ought  to  be  carefully  guarded
againft  in  order  to  fecure  fuccefs.  I  have  al-
ready more  than  once  obferved,  that  thofe
perfons  will  be  moft  for  flying  to  thefe  efta-
bliiliments,  who  have  feeble  confcitutions,
or  are  fubje(5t  to  diftempers,  which  they  know
render  their  lives  particularly  precarious  i
and  it  is  to  be  feared,  that  no  caution  will  be
fufficient  to  prevent  all  danger  from  hence.

Again.  In  matters  of  chance,  it  is  impof^
iibie  to  fay,  that  an  unfavourable  run  of
events  will  not  come,  which  may  hurt  the
beft  contrived  fcheme.  The  calculations  on-
ly determine  probabilities;  and,  agreeably  to
thefe,  it  may  be  depended  on,  that  events
will  happen  on  the  whole.  But  at  particu-
lar periods,  and  in  particular  inflances,  great,
deviations  will  often  happen ;  and  thefe  de-
viations, at  the  commencement  of  a  fcheme,
muft  prove  either  very  favourable,  or  very
unfavourable.

K  But


^3*^  ^f  ^^^ Society  fiy

But  further.  The  calculations  fuppofe,
that  all  the  monies  received  are  put  out  im-
mediately to  accumulate  at  compound  inte-
reft.  They  make  no  allowance  for  lofTes,  or
for  any  of  the  expences  attending  manage-
ment. On  thefe  accounts,  the  payments  to
a  fociety  of  this  kind,  ought  to  be  fomewhat
more  than  the  calculations  will  warrant.  The
interefl  of  money  ought  to  be  reckoned  low;
and  fuch  Tables  of  Obfervations  ufed  as  give
the  higheft  values.  Mr.  Dodfon^  I  find,  has
paid  due  attention  to  all  this,  by  reckoning
interefl,  in  his  calculations  for  this  fociety,
at  3  per  cent,  and  taking  the  lowed  of  all  the
known  probabilities  of  life,  or  thofe  deduced
from  the  London  bills  of  mortality  [a).  There
is,  befides,  a  liberty  provided  of  making  a
call  on  all  the  members,  in  cafe  of  any  par*
ticular  emergency.  It  is,  therefore,  highly
probable,  that  this  fociety  is  fecure.  The
laft  expedient,  however,  would  be  a  very  dif-
agreeable  one,  fliould  there  be  ever  any  oc-

[a]  It  ought,  however,  to  be  remembered  here,  that  in.
felling  life-annuities  to  commence  either  immediately.
Or  after  given  terms  ;  and  alfo  in  fome  other  cafes,  the
values  come  out  kfs  in  confequence  of /(jzc^rr  probabilities
of  life.  Would  it,  m  fuch  inlhmces,  be  taking  an  unfair
advantage,  to  eftimate  the  values  by  the  3d,  4th,  or  5th
Table  in  the  Appendix,  rather  than  the  Z(57?<'/(5«  Table  ?—
Thus ;  was  the  fociety  to  fell  20/.  per  annum,  for  life,  to
a  perfon  nov/  30,  after  attaining  to  50,  the  value,  ac-
cording to  Dr.  Halley\  Table,  would,  reckoning  interefl
zx  iper  cent,  be  90/.  in  a  fingle  payment ;  but,  accord-
ing to  the  £o«fl'c« 'liable,  the  value  would  be  only  70/.

cafion


Equitable  Ajfurances  on  Lives, 131

Cafion  for  having  recourfe  to  it ;  and,  in  order
to  guard  ftill  more  effedually  againft  danger,
it  would  not,  I  think,  be  amils  to  charge  a
profit  of  3  or  d^per  cent,  on  all  the  payments.
—Should  the  confequence  of  this  prove,  that
in  fome  future  period  the  fociety  fhall  find
itfelf  pofTefTed  of  too  large  a  capital,  the
harm  will  be  trifling,  and  future  members
will  reap  the  advantage.  But  this  leads  me
to  repeat  an  obfervation  of  particular  confe-
quence.

As  this  fociety  is  guided  in  every  inftance,
by  ftri(ft  calculation,  it  is  not  to  be  exped:ed
that  it  can  meet  with  any  difficulties  for
many  years  j  becaufe,  not  till  the  end  of
many  years  after  it  has  acquired  its  maximum
of  members,  will  the  maximum  of  yearly  clai-
mants and  annuitants  come  upon  it  ?  Should
it,  therefore,  thro'  inattention  to  this  remark,
and  the  encouragement  arifing  from  the  pof-
feffion  of  a  large  furplus,  be  led  to  check  or
flop  the  increafe  of  its  flock  by  enlarging  its
dividends  too  foon,  the  confequences  might
prove  pernicious.

Again  ;  I  would  obferve,  that  it  is  of  great
importance  to  the  fafety  of  fuch  a  fociety,

that  its  affairs  fhould  be  under  the  infoediion

i.

of  able  mathematicians.  Melancholy  expe-
rience fhews,  that  none  but  mathematicians
are  qualified  for  forming  and  conducing
fchemes  of  this  kind.  — In  (bort;  dangerous
miftakes  may  fometimes  be  committed  if  the
K  2  affairs


132  Of  the  Society  for

affairs  of  fuch  a  fociety  are  not  managed  care-
fully and  prudently.  One  inilance  of  this  I
cannot  avoid  mentioning.

A  perfon,  who  delires  to  affure  a  particu-
lar fum,  to  be  paid  at  the  failure  of  his  life,
on  condition  of  the  furvivorfhip  of  another
life,  may  chufe  to  pay  the  value  in  annual
contributions  during  the  continuance  of  his
own  lingle  life,  rather  than  during  the  con-
tinuance of  the  joint  lives,  becaufe  the  an-
nual contributions,  in  this  cafe,  ought  to  be
much  lefs.  But  a  fociety  that  would  prac-
tife  fuch  a  method  of  afj'uraiice  would  hurt
itfelf;  for,  as  foon  as  the  life,  on  whofe  fur-
vivorfhip the  aifurance  depends,  is  extindl,
the  perfon  affiired,  if  then  living,  would  have
no  longer  any  benefit  in  view ,  and,  there-
fore, would  make  his  payments  with  reluc-
tance, and,  in  time,  perhaps,  entirely  with-
draw them;  the  confequence  of  which  would
be,  that  the  fociety  would  fuffer  a  lofs  by
being  deprived  of  the  juft  value  of  the  ex-
pedation  it  had  granted.  The  plan  of  a  fo-
ciety ought  always  to  be  fuch,  as  that  the
lolTes  arifing  from  difcontinuance  of  payment,
Ihould  fall  on  the  purchafer,  and  never  on
the  fociety.

I  mud  not  forget  to  add,  that  it  is  necef-
fary,  that  fuch  a  fociety  fhould  be  furnifhed
with  as  complete  a  fet  of  Tables  as  poffible.
This  will  render  the  bufinefs  of  the  fociety
much  more  eafy,  and  alfo  much  more  capa-
ble of  being  condu(5ted  by  perfoxTS  unfkilled

in


Equitable  Ajurances  on  Lives. 133

in  mathematics.  It  will  alfo  contribute  much
to  lis  fafefy.  For  in  all  cafes  to  which  Ta-
bles can  be  extended,  there  would  be  no  oc-
cafion  for  employing  any  calculators ;  and,
confequently,  a  danger  would  be  prevented
to  which,  tho'  it  is  not  now,  it  may  hereaf-
ter be  expofed  ;  I  mean,  the  danger  of  hap-
pening to  truft  unfkilful,  or  carelefs  calcula-
tors.— Mr.  Dodfon,  I  find,  has  furnifhed  this
fociety  with  fome  important  Tables ;  and  his
fkill  was  fuch,  that  there  is  no  reafon  to
doubt,  but  they  may  be  depended  on.  They
have  alfo  others  which,  I  believe,  are  fafe
and  accurate.  But  there  are  fome  ftill  want-
ing which  fhould  be  fupplied  ;  and  all  fliould
be  fubjeded  to  the  examination  of  the  beil
judges,  and  afterwards  publiflied^  together
with  a  minute  account  of  the  principles  af-
fumed,  and  the  method  taken  in  compofing
them.  Such  a  publication  would  be  a  valu-
able addition  to  this  part  of  fcience  ;  and  it
would  alfo  be  the  means  of  increafing  and
eftablifliing  the  credit  of  the  fociety.

In  Queftions  4th,  6th,  icth,  iith,  14th,
15th,  and  1 6th,  I  have,  with  a  particular  view
to  this  fociety,  given  rules,  by  which  may
be  formed  every  Table  it  can  want,  for  {hew-
ing the  values  of  affurances  on  the  whole  du-
ration, or  any  terms,  of  any  one  or  two  lives,
in  all  poffible  cafes ;  and  nothing  but  care
and  attention  can  be  neceflary  to  enable  any
good  arithmetician  to  calculate  from  them.
K  3  Perhaps,


134  Of  the  Society  for,  &c.

Perhaps,  this  may  be  as  much  bufmefs  as  any
one  foclety  {hould  undertake.  Rules,  how^
ever,  for  finding  the  values  of  aJJ'urancesy  in
moft  cafes,  where  the  whole  duration  of  any
three  lives  is  concerned,  may  be  found  in  Mr.
Stmpfons,  Select  Exercifes,  from  pag.  299  to
p.  307  'y  and  it  is  not  poffible  they  ihould
follow  a  better  guide.


CHAP,


[ ^35 ]

CHAP. III.

CyPuBLic  Credit,  and  the  National
Debt.

THE  National  Debt  is  a  fubjedl  in  which
the  public  is  deeply  interefted.  Some
obfervations  have  occurred  to  me  upon  it,
which  I  think  important ;  and  for  this  rea-
fon,  though  foreign  to  my  chief  purpofe  in
this  work,  I  cannot  help  here  begging  leave
to  offer  them  to  the  reader's  attention.

The  practice  of  ralfing  the  neceffary  fup-
plies  for  every  public  fervice,  by  borrowing
money  on  intereft,  to  be  continued  'till  the
principal  is  difcharged,  muft  be  in  the  high-
efl  degree  detrimental  to  a  kingdom,  unlefs
a  plan  is  fettled,  for  putting  its  debts  into  a
regular  and  certain  courfe  of  payment.  When
this  is  not  done,  a  kingdom,  by  fuch  a  prac-
tice, obliges  itfelf  to  return  for  every  fum  it
borrows  infinitely  greater  fumsj  and,  for  the
fake  of  a  prefent  advantage,  fubjeds  itfelf  to
a  burden  which  muft  be  always  growing
heavier  and  heavier,  'till  it  becomes  infup-
portable.

This  feems  to  be  now  the  very  ftate  of

this  nation. At  the  Revolution,  an  asra

K  4  in


1^6  Of  Public  Credit,

in  other  refpeds  truly  glorious,  the  pradlice
I  have  mentioned  begun.  Ever  fince,  the
public  debt  has  been  increafing  fall,  and
every  new  war  has  added  much  more  to  it,
than  was  taken  from  it,  during  the  preced-*
ing  period  of  peace.  In  the  year  1700,  it
was  16  millions.  In  1715}  it  was  ^^  mil-
lions. A  peace,  which  continued  'till  1740,
funk  it  to  47  millions ;  but  the  fucceeding
war  increafed  it  to  78  millions ;  and  the
jiext  peace  funk  it  no  lower  than  72  mil^
lions.  In  the  laji  war  it  rofe  to  148  mil-
lions ',  and,  at  a  few  millions  lefs  than  this
fum  it  now  Hands,  and  probably  will  {land,
'till  another  v/ar  raifes  it  perhaps  to  200  mil-
lions.— One  cannot  refleft  on  this  without
terror.-— No  refources  can  be  fufficient  to  fup-
port  a  kingdom  long  in  fuch  a  courfe.  'Tis
obvious,  that  the  confequence  of  accumulat-
ing debts  fo  rapidly  j  and  of  mortgaging  pof-
terity,  and  funding  for  eternity,  in  order  to
pay  the  intereft  of  them ;  muft  in  the  end
prove  deftrudive.  Rather  than  go  on  in  this
way,  it  is  abfolutely  neceifary,  that  no  mo-
ney fhould  be  borrowed,  except  on  annuities,
which  are  to  terminate  within  a  given  pe-
riod. Were  this  pradiifed,  there  would  be
a  LIMIT  beyond  which  the  national  debts
pould  not  increafe  -,  and  time  would  do  that
fiecejj'arily  for  the  public,  which,  if  trufted  to
the  oeconomy  of  the  condu6^ors  of  its  affairs,
jii.ight  poffibly  never  be  done.

3  This,


and  the  National  Debt.  137

This,  therefore,  is  one  of  the  propofals  to
which,  on  this  occafion,  I  wifh  I  could  en-
gage attention.  —  I  am  fenfible,  indeed,  that
the  frefent  burdens  of  the  ilate  would,  in  this
cafe,  be  increafed,  in  confequence  of  the
greater  prefent  intereft,  that  would  be  necef-
fary  to  be  given  for  money.  But  I  do  not
confider  this  as  an  objection  of  any  weight.
For  let  the  annuity  be  an  annuity  for  a  100
years.  Such  an  annuity  is,  to  the  prefent
views  of  men,  nearly  the  fame  with  an  annui-
ty for  ever  j  and  it  is  alfo  nearly  the  fame  in.
calculation,  its  value  at  4  per  cent,  being
244  years  purchafe,  and  therefore  only  half  a
year's  purchafe  lefs  than  the  value  of  a  per-
petidty.  Suppofing,  therefore,  the  public  able
to  borrow  money  at  4  per  cent,  on  annuities
for  ever,  it  ought  not  to  give  above  is.  jd.
per  cent,  more  for  money  borrowed  on  annui-
ties for  100  years :  But  Ihould  it  be  obliged  to
give  a  quarter,  or  even  an  half  per  cent,  more  {a),
the  additional  burdens  derived  from  hence,

{a)  Thefe  annuities  might  be  kept  r8  years  without
being  much  diminifhed  in  value;  for,  fuppofing  intereft
at  \  per  cent,  an  annuity  for  82  years,  is  within  a  49th
part,  or  2/.  in  98/.  worth  as  much  as  an  annuity  for  a
JOO  years.

Perhaps,  in  this  way  of  raifing  money,  it  might  be  beft
to  offer  a  higher  intereft  at  firft,  which  fliould  fall  to  a
lower,  at  the  end  of  given  intervals.  Thus,  tho'  4I  for
100  years  is  equal  in  value  to  ^  per  cent,  for  17  years,  and
after  that  ^percent,  for  83  years,  yet  the  latter  might
jippear  more  inviting.

would


138  Of  Public  Credit,

■would  not  be  fuch  as  could  be  very  fenfibly
felt  'y  and  the  advantages,  arifing  from  the
necefTary  annihilation  of  the  pubHc  debts  by
time,  would  abundantly  overbalance  them.

Thefe  advantages  would  be,  indeed,  un-
fpeakably  great.  By  fuch  a  method  of  raifing
money,  the  expence  of  one  war  would,  in
time,  come  to  be  always  difcharged,  before
a  new  war  commenced;  and  it  would  be  im-
poflible,  that  a  ftate  fliould  ever  have  upon
it,  at  any  one  time,  the  expence  of  many
wars;  or  any  larger  debts  than  could  be  con-
tracted, within  the  limited  period  of  the  an-
nuities :  and,  confequently,  it  would  enjoy
the  invaluable  privilege  of  being  rendered,
in  fome  degree,  independent  of  the  manage-
tnent  of  its  finances  by  ignorant  or  unfaithful
fervants.

I  muft  add,  that  it  is  by  no  means  necef-
fary,  that  the  limited  period  of  the  annuities
fhould  be  fo  long  as  I  have  mentioned,  or
100  years  :  And  that,  at  any  time  before  the
expiration  of  this  period,  the  public  might
employ  any  furplus  monies,  in  extinguKhing
part  of  the  annuities,  by  purchafing  them  for
itfelf  at  the  market  price  i  and  thus  it  might
aid  the  operations  of  time,  and  keep  its  debts
within  any  bounds,  that  its  interell  rendered
necefTary. — Our  government  has,  I  know,  in
fome  inftances  adopted  the  plan  now  propof-
ed ;  but  it  is  to  be  wiflied  that,  inftead  of

retrading


and  the  National  Debt.  139

retrading  [a)  it,  as  was  once  done,  it  had
been  carried  much  further.

I  am,  however,  far  from  intending  to  re-
commend this  plan  as  the  beft  a  ftate  can.
purfue.  There  is  another  method  of  gaining
the  fame  end,  which  is,  on  many  accounts,
preferable  to  it.  I  mean,  "  by  providing  an
♦'  annual  faving,  to  be  applied  invariably,
**  together  with  the  interefl  of  all  the  fums
*'  redeemed  by  it,  to  the  purpofe  of  difcharg-
**  ing  the  public  debts  :  Or,  in  other  words,
**  by  the  eflablilhment  of  a  permanent  sink-

**  ING FUND."

It  is  well  known,  that  this  plan  has  been
alfo  adopted  by  our  government;  but,  tho'
capable  of  producing  the  greateji  efFedls  in
the  eqfieji  and  fureji  manner,  it  has  never  been
carried  into  execution.  It  will  abundant-
ly appear  from  what  follows  that  this  obfer-
vation  is  jufl,

Suppofe  the  annual  faving  to  be  100,000/.
This  fum,  applied  now  to  difcharge  an  equal
debt,  bearing  intereft  at  \per  cent,  will  tranf-
fer  to  the  public,  from  its  creditors,  an  an-
nuity of  4,000/.  At  the  end  of  a  year,
then,  there  would  be  a  faving  of  104,000/.
which  would  transfer  to  the  public  another
annuity  of  4, 160/.  and  make  the  faving,  at

{a)  In  the  year  1720,  the  nation  was  put  to  the  ex-
pence  of  three  millions,  in  order  to  reduce  feveral  long
and  fhort  annuities  then  fubfifting,  to  redeemable  perpe-
\uitieit

the


140  Of  Public  Credit^

the  end  of  two  years,  to  be  108,160/.—
Thus,  the  original  fund  would  go  on  increaf-
ing,  at  the  fame  rate  with  money  improved
at  4  per  cent,  compound  intereft.  —  At  the
end  of  three  years  it  would  be  1 12,486/.  At
the  end  of  18  years,  202,587/.  Of  36  years,
410,393/.  and  of  95  years  (^),  4,151,138/. —
At  the  end  of  93  years,  then,  the  nation  might
be  eafed  of  above  4  milHons  per  annum  in
taxes;  and  above  100  millions  of  its  debts
would  be  difcharged,  gradually  and  infenfibly,
at  no  greater  expence  than  100,000/.  per  an-
num-, and,  without  interfering  with  any  of
the  refources  of  government;  or  making  any
other  difference,  than  q2sx{\x\^  funds  to  be  en-
gaged for  a  courfe  of  time  to  the  public^  that
would  have  been  otherwife  neceifarily  engag-
ed to  its  creditors,  and  which,  therefore,  muft
have  been  entirely  ufelefs  to  it.

It  is  an  obfervation  that  deferves  particular
attention  here,  that,  on  this  plan,  it  is  of  lit-
tle importance  what  intereft  a  ftate  is  obliged
to  give  for  money  :  For  the  higher  the  in-
tereft, the  fooner  will  fuch  a  fund  pay  oft"
the  principal.  Thus;  a  100  millions  borrow-
ed at  8  per  cent,  and  bearing  an  annual  in-
tereft of  eight  millions,  v/ould  be  paid  off" by
a  fund,  producing  annually  100,000/.  in  56
years;  that  is,  in  -^9  years  lefs  time,  than  if
the  fame  money  had  been  borrowed  at  d^per
cent.

(a)  See  the  Qiieftions  annexed  to  the  Tables  in  ih«
Appendix.

It


ajid  the  National  Debt,  141

It  follov/s  from  hence,  that  redudlons  of
intereft  would,  on  this  plan,  be  no  great  ad-
vantage to  a  flate.  They  would,  indeed,
lighten  its  prefent  burdens  5  but  this  advan-
tage would  be  balanced,  by  the  addition  that
would  be  made  to  its  future  burdens,  in  con-
fequence  of  the  longer  time,  during  which
it  would  be  neceffary  to  bear  them. — I  mean
this  on  the  fuppofition,  that  the  favings  pro-
duced by  redudions  of  intereft,  are  imme-
diately applied  to  the  relief  of  the  ftate,  by
annihilating  taxes  equivalent  to  them.  But
if  this  is  not  the  cafe ;  and  if,  likewife,  there
is  either  no  plan  eftablifhed  for  putting  the
public  debts  into  a  certain  courfe  of  payment,
or  it  is  not  faithfully  carried  into  execution  ;
in  thefe  circumftanccs,  reductions  of  intereft
may  prove  hurtful.  For,  firft.  They  would
only  furniih  v^^ith  more  money  for  fupplying
the  deficiencies  arifing  from  bad  manage-
ment. And,  fecondly.  As,  in  fuch  circum-
ftances,  they  would  only  retard,  and  not  pre^
vent  the  increafe  of  the  burdens  occafioned
by  the  public  debts,  a  period  would  come
when  the  affairs  of  the  flate  would  get  to  a
cri/is',  and,  at  fuch  a  period,  its  danger  would
be  increafed,  in  proportion  to  the  redudlions
of  intereft  that  had  been  made.

In  order  to  underftand  this ;  let  us  fuppofe,
that  a  debt,  bearing  an  annual  intereft  of  five
millions,  is  the  whole  debt,  which  a  ftate
can  bear  without  being  £0  much  oppreft  as

to


j^2  Of  Fiibllc  Credit^

to  be  near  finking. Let  it,  however,  be  fup-"
pofed  to  have  flill  fome  laft  refources  left,
which  may  enable  it  to  bear,  for  23  years  to
come,  this  load,  together  with  every  addi-
tional load,  which,  during  this  time,  may  be
neceffary  to  be  thrown  upon  it. — Let  it  fur-
ther be  fuppofed,  that  at  this  time,  the  ftate,
urged  by  the  fear  of  an  approaching  bank-
ruptcy, refolves  upon  entering  into  fome  ef-
fectual meafures  for  preferving  itfelf.  —  Cer-
tain it  is,  that  in  this  cafe,  no  meafureyS  ef-
fedlual  can  be  purfued,  as  the  eftablifhment
of  2l  finking  fund t  and  fuch  a  faithful  applica-
tion of  it  as  I  have  explained. Let  this  then
be  the  meafure  entered  upon  ; and  let  the
ftate  be  fuppofed  capable  of  providing  a  fund,
producing  a  million  annually.  If  all  the  debts
bear  intereft  at 6  per  cent, this  fund  would
pay  off  three  fifths  of  them,  within  the  time
I  have  mentioned;  or,  in  23  years;  and  the
ilate  might  be  faved. But  if,  in  confequence
of  redudtions,  they  bear  intereft  at  no  more
than  -^per  cent,  the  fame  fund  would  not  give
the  fame  relief,  in  lefs  than  double  that  time;
and, therefore, a  bankruptcy might prove
unavoidable  [ci).

{a)  In  fome  other  kingdoms  a  fpunge  might  be  ap-
plied in  luch  circumftances,  or  the  funds  reduced  one
half  by  an  a£t  of  defpotifm,  without  occafioning  any  con-
vulfions  \  but  this  is  not  pofTible  in  this  free  country  ;
and,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  never  will  be  pofiible.


and  the  National  Debt,  i^j

I  wifh  I  could  think,  that  there  Is  nothing
in  this  reprefentation,  that  can  be  applied  to
the  prefent  ftate  of  this  nation.  The  intereft
of  the  public  debts  has  been  reduced,  at  dif-
ferent periods,  from  6  to  5,  and  from  5  to  4^
and  3  per  cent.',  but  flill  they  have  grown
with  rapidity;  and  we  now  fee  ourfelves  over-*
loaded,  and  in  no  way  of  gaining  relief.  Had
there  been  no  redudionsof  intereft,  we  {hould,
indeed,  have  been  in  the  fame  condition
foonerj  but,  we  might  have  been  relieved
alfo  fooner,  and  with  lefs  difficulty  and  dan-

What  I  have  now  faid  implies,  that  a  ftatff
always  difcharges  its  debts,  whatever  intereft
they  bear,  by  paying  the  original  fum  bor-
rowed. It  may,  perhaps,  be  imagined,  that
when  a  loan  is  under /i^r,  it  may  be  dlfcharg-
cd  at  a  lefs  cxpence.  But  this  is  by  no  means
fo  pratlicable  as  it  may  feem;  for  it  fhould
be  confidered,  that  a  public  loan,  now  under
favy  would  not  long  keep  fo,  after  being  put
into  acourfe  of  payment :  And,  for  this  rea-
fon,  as  a  ftate  can  never  be  obliged,  in  re-
deeming its  debts,  to  pay  t}iore  than  the  ori-
ginal fum  borrowed,  fo  neither  ought  it  to
cxpedl,  in  general,  to  be  able  to  redeem  them
by  paying  lefs.  I  have  faid,  in  general-,  for
I  am  fenlible,  that  at  the  beginning  of  the
operations  of  a  fund,  when  its  produce  is
fjivall  j  and  alfo,  in  a  time  of  war,  a  flate
might  derive  great  advantages  from  the  low

price


i44  ^f  P^i^^^<^  Credit,

price  of  its  debts.  And  I  am  fenfible  alfo^
that  confiderable  advantages  might  be  de-
rived from  lotteries  [ci),  in  paying  the  public
debts  :  But  lotteries  do  great  mifchief  in  a
flate,  by  foftering  the  deftrudive  fpirit  of
gaming.  It  is  wretched  policy  to  make  them
familiar,  by  recurring  to  them  in  the  ordinary
courfe  of  government.  There  are  great  oc-
cafions  on  which  they  may  be  necelTary,  and
for  fuch  occalions  they  {hould  be  referved.

But  to  return  to  the  fubjed  I  have  princi-
pally in  view.

The  advantages  of  putting  the  public  debts
into  fuch  a  courie  of  payment,  as  I  have
defcribed,  are  fcarcely  to  be  imagined.  It
would  give  a  vigour  to  public  credit,  which
would  enable  a  ftate  always  to  borrow  money
eafily,  and  on  the  bed:  terms.  And  the  en-
couragement to  lenders  might  be  always  im-
proved, without  any  inconvenience,  by  mak-
ing every  loan  irredeemable,  during  the  firft
20  or  30  years ;  for,  there  could  feldom  be
any  occalion,  for  beginning  to  difcharge  any
one  loan  fooner.

It  might  be  eafily  iliewn,  that  the  faithful
application,  from  the  beginning  of  the  year

{d)  Thus;  800,000/.  of  the  'i^pcr  cenU.  at  87  ;  of
3,000,000,  at  70,  might  be  redeemed  with  half  a  million
pf  money,  confiiling  of  50,000  lottery  tickets  at  10/.  each,
real  value  ;  but  capable  of  being  fold  at  14/.,  as  was
done  in  feme  of  the  laft  lotteries.

1700,


and  the  National  Dek,  14^

1700,.'  of  only  200,000/.  annually,  would
long  before  this  time,  notwithftanding  the
redudions  of  interefl,  and  every  wafce  that
has  been  made  of  the  public  money,  have
caufed  above  half  the  public  funds  to  revert
to  the  public,  and  paid  off  above  80  millions
of  its  debts.  The  nation  might  therefore,
fome  years  ago,  have  been  eafed  of  the  great-
eft  part  of  the  taxes  Vv^ith  v/hich  it  is  load-
ed. The  moft  important  relief  might  have
been  given  to  its  trade  and  manufactures;
and  it  might  now  have  been  in  much  better
circumftances,  than  at  the  beginning  of  the
laft  war ;  its  credit  firm  5  refpeded  by  fo-
reign nations;  dreaded  by  its  enemies;  and
ready  to  punifh  any  infult  that  could  be  of-
fered to  it.  The  near  view,  likewife,  of  fuch
a  period,  during  the  courfe  of  the  laft  war,
would  have  given  higher  fpirits  to  the  na-
tion, and  encouraged  it  to  bear  the  expence
occafioned  by  the  war  with  more  chearful-
nefs,  and  to  continue  it  with  vir^our  for  two
or  three  years  longer;  the  confcqucnce  of
which  would,  probably,  have  been,  gaining
a  full  indemnification  from  our  enemies,  and
weakening  them  to  fuch  a  degree,  as  would
have  given  us  efi^e<ftual  fecurity  againft  them
for  many  years  to  come.  —  A  new  account
might  alfo  now  have  been  begun  ;  and  an-
other fund,  not  much  more  confiderable,  ap-
plied in  the  fame  way,would,  in  60  or  70  years
more,  have paid,  not  only  all that would

L  have


146  Of  Public  Credit,

have  been  now  unpaid,  but  alfo,  probablyj,
a  great  proportion  of  fuch  further  debts  as
muft  be  contradled  within  this  time  [a).  And
thus,  without  any  expence  that  could  be  (Qn--
libly  felt,  its  debts,  as  foon  as  they  began  to
grow  heavy,  might  have  been  conftantly  re-
duced to  a  half]  or  a  third ,  and  not  only  all
danger^  but  all  confiderable  inconvenience  from
them  prevented.

All  I  have  now  faid,  fuppofes  2.  Jingle  fund
with  a  general  appropriation  to  the  payment
of  the  public  debts.  The  faitie  ends  might
be  anfwered  by  particular  funds,  with  fmall
furpluffes,  appropriated  to  particular  debts.
In  the  wars  of  King  William  and  Queen  Anne,
6  per  cent,  intereft  was  given  for  all  loans.
It  would  have  been  eafy  to  have  annexed  to
each  loan  a  fund  producing  a  furplus  of  i  /.
per  cent,  after  paying  the  intereft  ;  and  fuch  a
furplus  would  have  been  fufficient  to  annihi-
late the  principal  of  every  loan  in  33  years.
Had  this  plan  been  followed,  the  difengage-
ment  of  the  public  funds,  and  the  relief  at-
tending it,  would  have  begun  50  years  ago;
and  the  debts  contraded, during  the  reigniJ

{a)  One  of  the  propereft  objeiSts  of  taxation  in  a  ftate
is  celibacy.  I  doubt  not,  tut  that  hy  a  fund  fupplied  only
from  hence,  the  end  1  have  in  view  might  have  been
cafily  accomplifhed  ;  and,  confequently,  the  very  means
of  paying  off  the  debts  of  the  nation,  rendered  at  the
fame  time  the  means  of  increafmg  its  chief  ftrengrh,  by
promoting  population  in  it.

of


and  the  National  Debt,  147

bf  Ring  William  and  Queen  AnnCy  would  have
been  all  cancelled  near  20  years  ago,  without
any  of  that  trouble,  tumult  and  diftrefs,  which
have  been  occafioned  by  reductions  of  intereft,
and  by  the  various  fchemes  which  have  been
tried  for  lelTening  the  debts  (^z). — A  fund,
yielding  i  /.  per  cent,  furplus,  annexed  to  a
loan  at  5  per  cent.,  would  difcharge  the  prin-
cipal in  37  years  {b).  At  j^  per  cent.)  in  41
years. At  3  per  cent.,  in  47  years.

Thefe  obfervations  relate  only  to  what
might  have  been  the  ftate  of  the  nation  with
relpedl  to  its  debts,  had  a  right  plan  been
purfued  from  the  firft.  But  it  Vv'ill  be  aiked.
What  can  be  done  with  them  as  they  are? —
I  wifh  I  was  able  to  give  a  more  fatisfadtory
anfwer  to  this  enquiry.  Every  one  muft  fee
Gur  profped:  to  be  difcouraging,  and  our  ftate
hazardous. Some  have  thought,  that  a  good

[a)  The  fums  to  be  laid  out  would,  in  this  cafe,  be  fo
fmall  at  firft,  that  it  would  be  proper  to  employ  them  in
purchafing  part  of  the  loan  to  be  annihilated  at  the  prices
m  the  public  market;  and  this,  as  far  as  it  can  be  car-
ried, is  the  moll  eafy  and  quiet  and  filent  way  pofTiblc
of  extinguifliing  the  public  debts.

[b)  \  have  all  along  fuppofed  the  produce  of  the  pub-
lic funds  to  come  in  yearly.  The  truth  is,  that  it  comes
in /'^//^-yearly ;  but  this  gives  no  advantage  in  the  pay-
ment of  the  public  debts  worth  taking  into  account,  i  /.
per  annum^  together  with  its  growing  intereft,  at  4  fer
cent.  ti^i^r\  yearly  out  of  loo/.  will  reduce  it  to  nothing
in  41  years;  if  taken  balf-yQ?i:\y ,  it  will  annihilate  th«
fame  capital  only  four  months  and  12  days  fooner.  See
the  queftions  annexed  to  the  Tables  in  the  appendix.

L  2  method


148  Of  Public  Credit y

method  might  be  found  out  of  difchargmg
the  national  debt,  by  life  annuities.  The  fol-
lowing obfervations  will  l]iew  how  vain  an
imagination  this  is.

Let  us  fuppofe,  that  33,3-^3,000/.  is  to
be  paid  off,  by  offering  to  the  public  cre-
ditors life-annuities,  in  lieu  of  their  3  per
cents.  A  life  at  60,  fuppofing  intereft  at  3.I
per  cent.,  and  the  probabihties  of  life  as  in
the  BreJIaw,  Norwich,  and  Northampton  Ta-
bles of  Obfervation,  is  worth  1 1  years  pur-
chafe.  A  life  at  30  is  worth  61  years  pur-
chafe.  Certainly,  therefore,  no  fcheme  of
this  kind  would  be  fufficiently  inviting,  which
did  not  offer  8  per  cent,  at  an  average,  to  all
fubfcribers.  Let  us,  however,  fuppofe,  that
no  more  than  7I  is  given;  and  that  there  are
3:^333  fubfcribers,  at  1000/.  ftock  each,  for
which  a  life-annuity  is  to  be  granted  of  7^;/.
or,  for  the  whole  flock  fubfcribcd,  two  mil-
lions and  a  half.  A  million  and  a  half  ex-
traordinary, therefore,  muft  be  provided  to-
wards paying  thcfc  annuities.

Let  us  further  fuppofe,  that  the  fubfcri-
bers are  perfons  between  the  ages  of  30  and
■60;  and  that  the  numbers  of  them,  at  all
the  intermediate  ages,  are  in  the  fame  pro-
portions to  one  another,  with  the  proportions
of  the  living  at  thefe  ages,  as  they  exift  in
the  world,  or,  as  they  are  given  in  T^ahks  of
0/frrvdtion.  Let  us  again  ilippofe,  that  as
thefe  annuitnnts  die  o!F,  ti\ey  arc  immediately
3  replaced


and  the  National  Debt.  I/J9

replaced  by  others,  who  arc  continually  of-
fering tlicmfclves  at  the  fame  ages,  and  in
the  fame  proportional  numbers  at  thefe  ages,
with  thoi'e  of  the  original  fubfcribers  at  the
time  they  fubfcribed ;  in  confcqucnce  of
which,  the  whole  number  of  annuitants  will
be  kept  always  the  fame.  In  thefe  circum-
ftances,  it  will  be  30  years,  at  lead,  before  a
number  will  die  off,  [a)  equal  to  the  whole
number;  that  is,  before  33  millions  of  debts
will  be  annihilated.  But  had  tlie  extraordinary
million  and  half  provided  for  paying  thefe
annuities,  been  employed  during  this  time,  in
paying  off  fo  much  of  the  debt  at  par  every
year,  extinguifhing  at  the  fame  time  every  year
an  equivalent  tax,  45  milHons  would  have
been  paid.  But  had  the  favings,  alfo,  inftead
of  being  funk  as  they  arofe,  been  employed
in  the  fame  manner,  71  millions  would  have
been  paid.

The  nation,  therefore,  mufl,  without  doubt,
lofe  greatly  by  all  fchemes  of  tliis  kind;
and  yet  they  have  been  often  much  talked
of;  and,  indeed,  I  ffiall  not  wonder,  fhould
I  hereafter  fee  an  attempt  made  to  pay  off
the  national  debt  in  this  way.

I  mufl:  beg  leave  to  detain  the  reader  here
fome  time  longer.  A  more  particular  ex-
planation of  this  fubje(51:, will  lead  to  fome

{a)  A  (Icmonflration  of  this  will  be  given  in  the  Ap-
pendix, note  (K).

L -;  obfcr-


T^o  Q/*  PMc  Credit,

obfervations  on  the  beft  methods  of  raifing
money  which,  I  think,  deferve  to  be  carer
fully  confidered.

When  any  fum  is  faid  to  be  the  value  of  a
life-annuity,  the  meaning  is,  that,  in  confe-
quence  of  being  improved  at  intereft,  and
allowing  for  the  chances  of  mortality,  it  will
bear  the  whole  expence  of  the  annuity.  If,
therefore,  inftead  of  being  laid  up  for  im-
provement, it  is  either  immediately  applied
to  particular  ufes,  or  has  been  long  fmce  fpent;
there  will  be  a  lofs,  equal  to  the  fum  which
would  have  been  added  to  the  purchafe-mo-
ney,  had  it  h^tn  improve d.-^Hihis  is  the  rea-
fon  of  the  lofs  which,  I  have  fliewn,  the  pub-
lic would  fufFer  by  offering  life -annuities,  in
lieu  o^ Jlock,  in  order  to  extinguifli  its  debts.
And  for  the  fame  reafon,  it  muft  always  lofe
confiderably  by  raifing  money  on  life-annui-
ties.

Suppofe  a  million  raifed  hy  annuities  on  a
fet  oi  lives,  all  at  30  years  of  age.  Perlons
at  this  age  have,  (according  to  Tables  III,
IV,  and  V,)  an  expccfation  of  28  years.  That
is;  the  duration  of  their  lives,  taking  them
one  with  another,  will  be  28  years  j  (fee  the
beginning  of  the  firfl  Effay)  and  they  will  he
entitled,  fuppoUng  intereft  at  /\.  per  cent,  to
y  L  per  an?ium,  for  every  100/.  advanced.  For
a  million  then,  the  public  would  make  28  pay-
ments of  70,000/. — -Let  us  fuppofe  next,  that

'  a  fun4


and  the  National  Debt.  151

a  fund  producing  this  fum  annually,  inftead
of  being  engaged  to  pay  thefe  life-annuities,
is  engaged  for  28  years,  to  pay  the  principal
and  intereft  of  a  million,  borrowed  on  f'edeetn-
able  ^^x^^X.mtx^^y'iX  \per  cent .  There  will, at  the
end  of  the  firftyear,  be  a  furplus  of  30, 000/.—
In  confequence  of  applying  this  to  the  ex-
tin(ftion  of  the  principal,  it  will  be  reduced  to
970,000/.  on  which,  at  the  end  of  the  fe-
■cond  year,  the  intereft  due  will  be  38,800/.
There  will,  therefore,  be  a  faving  of  1200/.
Inftead  of  employing  this  faving  in  further
linking  t\i&  principal,  which  would  caufe  the
fund  to  accumulate  in  the  fame  manner  with
money  at  compound  intereft,  let  it  be  taken
and  employed  in  any  other  way:  And  let  the
fame  be  done  with  all  the  fubfequent  favings,
referving  only  30,000/.  annually,  for  thepur-
pofe  of  finking  the  principal.  At  the  end  of  the
fecond  year,  the  principal  will  be  940,000/. ;
and  the  faving  of  intereft  upon  it,  at  the  end  of
the  third  year,  2400/  At  the  end  of  the  28th
year,  the  principal  will  be  reduced  to  1 60,000/.
The  faving  of  intereft  that  year  will  be,  1 200/.
multiplied  by  27,  or  32,400;  and  the  fum  of
all  the  favings  will  be  453, 600/, — Dedudtfrom
hence  i6o,oooA  remaining  then  undifcliarg-
ed  of  the  principal;  and  293,600/.  will  be
the  lofs  the  public  would  fuftain,  in  the  cir-
cumftances  I  have  fuppofed,  by  raifmg  mo-
ney on  life-annuities.  But  if  we  fuppofe
the  favings,  as  they  arife,  as  well  as  the  con^
L  4  ftant


152  Of  Public  Credit,

ftant  fum  of  30,000/.  to  be  applied  to  the
difcharge  of  the  principal,  inftead  of  being
fpent  on  current  fervices  -,  the  v/hole  million
will  be  annihilated  in  21  years  and  half;  and
the  lofs  to  the  public  by  life-annuities,  will
be  6^  years  purchafe  of  the  annuities ;  or
455,000/. — By  fimilar  dedudions  it  may  be
eafily  found,  that  the  lofs,  in  younger  lives,  is
greater;  in  (^/^^/fcT  lives  lefs  5  but  never  incon-
fiderable,  except  in  the  oldeji  lives.

It  appears,  therefore,  that,  in  confcquence
of  fuch  a  way  of  railing  money,  the  public
muft  always  pay  much  more  in  intereft  than
there  is  any  occafion  for;  and  ivajle  a  fum
nearly  equal  to  half  the  principal  borrowed  {a).

This,

{a)  It  is  obvious,  that  the  obfervations  here  made,
may  be  applied  to  the  common  methods  of  raifing  money,
on  life-annuities,  for  building  churches,  paving  ftreets,
making  navigations,  &c.  &c.  And,  in  general,  to  all  cafes
v/here  the  money  received,  is  not  laid  up  to  be  improved.
-—For,  to  view  this  fubjeiSl  in  another  light,  let  us  fup-
pofe  10,000/.  borrowed  for  any  public  v/oric,  on  perpe-
tuities, at  4  ^rr  cent.  And,  if  that  will  afford  more  en-
couragement, let  them  be  made  irredeemable  for  any
nnmber  of  years  lefs  than  fevcnteen.  Let  us  further  fup-
pofe,  fuch  rates,  or  tolls,  cftablifhed  for  the  payment  of
the  intereft  and  principal,  as  fhall  produce  double  the  in-
tereft of  the  fum  borrowed  ;  or  8oo/.  fer  annwn^  inftead
cf  400/.  per  amuvn.  Let  the  furplus^  as  it  comes  in  kalf-
ycnrly^  be  laid  up  to  accumulate  in  the  public  funds.  \\\
J  7  years  and  half,  reckoning  intereft  at  4 /><??'  cent,  a  ca-
pital will  be  raifed,  equal  to  the  whole  fum  borrowed  ;
and,  therefore,  at  the  end  of  that  time,  the  whole  debt
may  be  difcharged,  and  the  whole  tranfa6lion  finiihed. —
But  if  the  fame  fum  had  been  borrowed  on  annuities,  fo;-

hi


and  the  National  Debt.  153

This,  however,  tho'  fo  wafleful,  Is  a  more
frugal  way  of  procuring  money  than  by  bor-
rowing on  perpetuities,  without  putting  them
into  a  courfe  of  redemption  ;  for  in  this  cafe,
(if  a  fpunge  is  not  appHed)  the  lofs  mufl  be
infinite.

I  mufl  add,  that  thefe  obfervations  are  par-
ticularly applicable  to  all  the  ways  of  raifing
money  by  the  fale  of  reverfions. — The  pub-
lic, for  inftance,  might  procure  a  million,  by
offering  for  it  a  fund,  that  will  be  difengag-
ed  at  the  end  of  1 8  years ;  and  then  produce
80,000/.  per  annum  for  ever.  This,  fuppo-
fmg  interefl  at  /^percent.,  would  be  the  very
fame  with  offering  tivo  millions,  18  years
hence,  for  one  million  now  :  And  a  private
man,  or  an  office  for  the  fale  of  reverlions,
might  gain  by  fuch  a  tranfaftion ;  becaufe,
the  money  advanced,  in  co'nfequence  of  being
improved,  might,  in  18  years,  be  more  than

the  lives  of  a  fet  of  perfons  50  years  of  age,  at  8  fer  cent.
which  is  I  /-.  per  cent,  lefs  than  the  true  value  of  fuch  an-
nuities :  Had  this,  I  fay,  been  done,  half  the  annui-
tants would  have  been  alive  at  the  end  of  the  term  I  have
mentioned;  (fee  Tables  III,  IV,  and  V,)  and  the  whole
tranfa6lion,  together  with  the  expences  and  trouble  at-
tending the  management  of  it,  could  not  have  been  finally
clofed  'till  the  extinction  of  all  the  lives ;  that  is,  not  in
lefs  time,  moft  probably,  than  35,  or,  perhaps,  40  years.
■ — It  is  a  neceflary  obfervation  here,  that,  if  public  credit
maintains  its  ground,  much  will  not  depend,  in  the  plan
now  propofed,  on  the  rife  and  fall  of  Stocks.  If  a  ivar
finks  them,  the  money  laid  out,  while  the  v/ar  lafls,  will
accumulate  fafter.  If  a  peace  raifesthem,  the  money  that
had  been  pre-vioufly  laid  out  will  be  proportionably  in-
<;rcafcd.

doubled.


154  0/  Public  Credit f

doubled.  But,  as  the  pubUc  always  borrows
for  immediate  fervices,  and  never  lays  up
money.,  it  would  necefTarily  lofe  a  fum  equal
to  the  whole  fum  borrowed  :  And  the  fame
money  might  have  been  borrowed  on  a  fund,
producing  50,000/.  per  annum',  which  would
not  only  pay  the  intereft,  but  difcharge  the
whole  principal  in  41  years  {a).

By  railing  money  on  life-annuities,  the
frefent  me??ibers  of  a  ftate  take  a  heavier  load
on  themfeives,  in  order  to  exempt  pojlerity  -,
and  there  would  be  a  laudable  generofity  in
this,  were  it  not  for  tht  folly  of  it ;  the  fame
exemption  being  equally  pradlicable  at  half
the  expence. — On  the  other  hand.  By  bor-
rowing on  reverfionary  grants,  the  prefent
members  of  a  flate  exempt  themfeives  entire-
ly^ by  throwing  the  load  doubled  on  pofterity ;
and  there  is  a  cruelty  and  injuftice  in  this
that  nothing  can  excufe.

fi  is  well  known,  that  both  thefe  methods
of  railing  money  have  been  pradtifed  among
us.  This,  however,  is,  by  no  means,  the
worftthat  has  been  done.  It  has  been  common
to  borrov/  money  to  pay  the  intereft  of  mo^
ney  borrowed,  and  thus  to  give  compound  in-
tcrcjl  for  money ;  and  our  parliaments  have,
fometimes,  exprefsly  provided,  that  this  fliall
be  done  for  a  fucceflion  of  years.

(a)  The  fmallnefs  of  the  fums,  which  I  have  here  and
clfe where  fometimes  fuppofed  to  be  employed  in  dif-
charging  the  public  debts,  can  create  no  difficulties,  be-
caufe  there  is  no  fum  which  may  not  be  applied  to  this
yfe  by  rurchafmg  flock.

But


and  the  National  Debt,  j^^

But  to  return  to  the  main  point  I  had  in
yiew.

The  enquiry  which  has  occafioned  this
digreflion,  mufl  be  highly  interefting  to  every
perfon  who  wifhes  well  to  his  country. — All
fchemes  for  difcharging  the  public  debts,  by
life-annuities,  have  been  fhewn  to  be  abfurd
and  extravagant. — In  general ;  it  may  be  obr-
ferved,  that  it  is  far  from  probable,  that  any
money  which  the  nation  can  fpare,  if  ap-
plied fo  as  to  bear  only  Ji??ipk  intereft,  can
be  capable  of  reducing  its  debts  within  due
bounds;  or  of  doing  us,  in  ourprefent  circum-
ftances,  any  effentjal  fervice.  A  fund,  pro-
ducing a  furplus  of  even  two  millions  annu-
ally, would,  when  thus  applied,  pay  no  more
than  40  millions  in  20  years;  and,  in  that
time,  a  war  might  probably  come,  which
would  interrupt  the  application  of  it;  and
increafe  our  debts  much  more  than  fuch  a
fund  had  leffened  them.

Certain  it  is,  therefore,  that  if  our  affairs
are  to  be  retrieved,  it  mufl  be  by  2ifund  in-
creafing  itfelf  in  the  manner  I  have  explain-
ed. The  fmallefl  fund  of  this  kind  is,  in-
deed, omnipotent,  if  it  is  allowed  time  to  ope-
rate. But  we  are,  I  fear,  got  fo  near  to  the
limits  of  the  refources  of  the  nation,  that  it
cannot  be  allowed  much  time :  And,  in  or-
^er  to  make  amends  for  this,  it  is  neceffary
|hat  it  flioul4  be  larger — Let  us  then  fuppofe,
3  that


156  Of  Public  Credit,

that  the  nation  Is  ftill  ftrong  enough  to  ena-
ble it  to  provide  a  fund,  that  (hall  yield  a
million  and  halfanmiallyy  for  20  years  to  come :
And  alfo,  that,  together  with  all  its  prefent
burdens,  it  is  capable  of  bearing  every  addi-
tional burden  that  20  years  more  can  bring
upon  it.  If  this  is  not  true,  we  have,  I  think,
nothing  to  do  but  to  wait  the  iffue,  and
tremble.

A  fund,  producing  annually  a  million  and
a  half,  would  increafe  to  three  millions  per
Gnn,  in  20  years  (<2.)  At  the  end  of  this  term,
the  nation  might  be  eafed  of  the  moft  op-
preffive  taxes,  to  the  amount  of  a  million  and
a  half;  and  the  confequence  would  prove,
that,  if  there  fliould  have  been  a  war,  either
the  whole,  or  much  the  greateft  part  of  the
addition  occaiioned  by  it  to  the  public  bur-
dens, would  be  taken  off,  and  the  nation
reinftated  nearly  in  its  prefent  circumllances.
But,  if  there  fhould  have  been  no  war,  the
national  debt  and  the  taxes  charged  with  it,
would  be  reduced  a  third  below  the  fums  at
which  they  now  flandj  and  the  nation  would
be  fo  much  relieved  as  to  be  prepared  for  a
war. — The  remaining  million  and  half  would,

(a)  It  (hould  be  remembered,  that  in  the  year  1779*
1/.  per  cent,  on  the  confolidated  4  per  cents^  will  be  anni-
hilated, and  that  I  fuppofe  thefavings  derived  from  hence
to  be  taken  at  that  time  as  a  part  of  the  fund. — Methods
might  be  eafily  contrived  for  gettin2;  this  faving  imme-
diately, which  would  be  fome  advantage.


and  the  National  Debt.  1^7

in  23  years,  increafe  again  to  three  millions
per  aiiniim ;  and  then,  fo  much  more  of  the
public  taxes  would  be  fet  free;  50  millions
more,  or  93  millions  in  all,  of  the  public
debts  would  be  difcharged,  and  the  difficul-
ties of  the  nation  would  be,  in  a  great  mea-
fure,  conquered. — During  this  whole  courfe
of  time,  there  may  poffibly  be  but  one  war^
and  fliould  that  happen,  the  appropriation  at
the  end  of  it,  of  about  400,000/.  per  annunif
might  be  enough  to  anfwer  all  purpofes.

In  thefe  obfervations,  I  fuppofe  the  3  per
cents  to  be  paid  off  ^.tpar  -,  and  no  advantage
taken  at  any  time  of  their  low  price. By
taking  this  advantage,  and  with  the  help  of
a  little  management,  a  fund,  producing  an-
nually a  million  and  half,  might  be  made  to
increafe  to  another  million  and  half,  in  lefs
time  than  I  have  affigned. Should  there  be
a  war  in  a  few  years,  the  3  per  cents,  would
probably  fall  below  j^  ;  and  then the  pro-
prietors of  them  muft  be  glad  to  part  with
them  at  this  price;  thejconfequence  of  which,
fuppofing  the  war  to  laft  eight  years,  would
be,  that  the  fund  would  double  itfelf,  and
the  nation  be  relieved  in  the  manner  I  have
mentioned, in 18,  inflead  of  20  years.—
The  advantage  will  be  the  fame,  fuppofing
the  government  at  fuch  a  time  to  go  on  in
paying  off  the  3  per  cents  2Xpar.  For  the  effecft
of  this  would  be,  that  money  might  be  bor-
rowed for  the  public  fervice  on  proportion-
ably


158  Of  Public  Credit,

ably  better  terms. Suppofe, for  inftaricCjj
that  four  millions  muft  be  borrowed  for  the
fervice  of  the  year ;  and  let  the  produce  of
the  fund  be  then  increafed  to  two  millions;
and  the  interefl:  of  money  in  th^Jlocks,  above
4  per  cent. In  thefe  circumflances,  it  would
be  the  interefl  of  the  lenders  of  money,  to
take  3^-  per  cent,  for  the  fums  they  advanced,
in  conlideration  of  having  their 3  per  cents
paid  off  at  par,  to  the  amount  of  half  thefe
fums.— War,  therefore,  would  accelerate  the
redemption  of  the  public  debts ;  and  it  would
do  this  the  more,  the  longer  it  lafted,  and
the  higher  it  raifed  the  intereft  of  money.
Or  if,  in  confequence  of  paying always  at
par,  this could  not  happen ;  an  equivalent
effecft  would  be  produced  in the  way  jufl;
mentioned. The flocks would  be  always
kept  up  by  the  operations  of  the  fund  ;  and,
in  proportion  to  the  fums  yielded  by  it,  the
public  would  be  able  to  borrow  money  more
advantageoufly,  and Icfs  would  be  added  to
its  burdens. — This  feems  to  me  an  obferva-
tion  of  particular  confequence. It  demon-
itrates,  that the invariable  application, in
ivar  as  well as  peace,  of  the  oroduce  of  the
fund I  am fuppofing, to the payment  of
the  national  debts,  rather  than  to  any  cur-
rent fervices,  would.  Independently  of  its  ef-^
fe«5t  in  {a)  redeeming  theic  debts,  be  attend-
ed

{a)  So  true  is  this,  that  a  war,  were  we  now  engagect
ir  it; would  only  render  the  ptefent  time  lb  much  tine


and  the  Natio?ial  Debt,  i^(^

cd  with  great  advantages  to  the  public.  But
this  is  a  fubjecft  on  which  I  fhall  have  occa-
lion  to  fay  more  prefently.

fiiore  proper  for  entering  into  meafures  for  paying  the
public  debts.  And  the  following  obfervations  will  put  this
out  of  doubt.

As  it  is  now  become  the  pra£lice  to  have  recourfe  to  lot-
teries \n  peace,  we  may  be  fure,  that  no  year  will  pafs  with-
out them  in  war.  I  would,  therefore,  propofe,  that,  inftead
of  making  ufe  of  them  in  raifing  the  annual  fupplies  in
war,  they  fliould  be  then  applied  as  an  aid  in  difcharging
the  public  debts. — Suppofe  the  war  to  laft  lo  years,  and
the  3  per  cents  at  70.  Suppofe  alfo,  each  lottery  to  confift
of  750,000/.  in  tickets,  which,  when  difpofed  of  to  fub-
fcribers,  will  bring  in  1,050,000/.  On  thefe  fuppofitions,
the  whole  lofs  to  the  public,  from  applying  the  lotteries
to  the  payment  of  the  public  debts,  rather  than  to  the  cur-
rent fupplies,  will  be  1,050,000/.  annually,  or  10  millions
and  .\  in  all. — The  gain  will  be  as  follows.  750,000/.  of
the  produce  of  the  finking  fund,  formed  into  tickets,  will
be  the  fame  with  1,050,000/.  j  and  this  fum  will  pay
ofFa  million  and  a  half  of  the  "^per  ce?its,  every  year,  or  15
millions  in  all ;  and  the  growing  favings  arifmg  from
thefe  payments  will,  at  the  end  of  10  years,  have  paid,
at  lealt,  two  millions  more.  The  nation,  therefore,  hav-
ing paid  ofF  17  millions  of  its  debts,  and  added  to  them
only  10  millions  and  ',  will  gain  fix  millions  and  ■^.  But
this  will  be  the  fmalleft  part  of  its  gains.  All  the  produce
of  the  finking  fund,  over  and  above  750,000/.  might  be
charged  with  the  payment  of  the  interertoffuch  new  debts
as  would  be  neceflary  to  be  contracted  during  the  war;
and,  at  the  end  of  it,  the  nation,  with  the  help  of  200,000/.
to  be  difengaged  in  1779,  by  the  redudion  of  the  ^per
cents,  would  find  itl'elt  pofTefl'ed  of  a  fund,  producing
1,450,000/.  annually  ;  which,  faithfully  employed,  might
probably  be  fufficient  to  extricate  it  from  all  its  difficul-
ties.—Befides  this ;  iuch  a  fchcme  would  not  only  pre-
ferve,  but  raife  and  ejiablijl)  the  credit  of  the  public  :  And
he  only  can  be  duly  fenfible  of  the  importance  of  this,
who  will  confider,  what  danger  there  would  be  in  ano-
ther


l6o  Of  Public  Credit,

'X\it  finking  fund,  in  its  prefent  flate,  and,
after  fupplying  the  deficiencies  of  the  peace
cftablilhment,  yields,  I  fuppofe,  a  confidera-
ble  part  of  the  milHon  and  a  hah^I  have  men-
tioned. An  annual  lottery  might  eafily  raife
200,000/.  more.  But  this  is  a  meafure  which
I  cannot  wifh  to  fee  carried  into  execution,
unlefs  abfolutely  necefTary.  Were  the  ma-
nagers of  our  affairs  fufiiciently  in  earneft  in
this  bufinefs,  I  cannot  doubt  but  that  fuch
favings  might  be  made  in  the  colledlion  and
expenditure  of  the  national  revenue,  as  would
caufe  the  finking  fund  to  yield,  for  18  or  20
years  to  come,  the  "whole  of  this  fum,  vv^ith-
out  impofmg  any  new  burdens  on  the  pub-
lic. But,  were  there,  indeed,  no  way  of
providing  any  part  of  it,  but  by  creating  new
funds,  or  impofing  new  taxes;  it  ought  to  be
done,  becauie  it  7mfl  be  done,  or  the  nation
be  ruined.


The  evils  and  dangers,  attending  an  exov"
hitant  public  debt  in  this  country,  are  fo  great,
that  they  cannot  be  exaggerated. — Without
repeating,  what  has  been  fo  often  faid,  of  its
increafing  the  dependence  on  the  crown,  by
jobs  and  places  without  number;  occafioning

ther  war,  fliould  it  coiitinue  long,  of  either  cverwhehnlng
public  credit;  or  ot  being  terrified,  by  the  apprehenfion  of
fuch  a  calamity,  into  an  ignoniinious  and  fatal  peace:
The  cftablilhment,  therefore,  of  fome  fuch  plan  as  that
now  propofed,  would,  at  the  beginning  of  a  war,  be  the
moft  important  of  all  works,

execrable


and  the  National  Debt,  i6i

execrable  pradiccs  of  the  Alley ;  rendering  us
tributary  to  foreigners;  and  railing  the  price
of  provifions  and  labour;  and,  confequently,
checking  population,  and  loading  our  trade
and  manufadtures ;  I  will  only  take  notice  of
the  two  follow! no;  evils  which  attend  it.

In  the  firil  place.  It  mud  check  the  ex-
ertions of  the  fpirit  of  liberty  in  the  kingdom.
The  tendency  of  every  government  is  to  de-
fpotifm  ',  and  in  this  it  mufi  end,  if  the  peo-
ple are  not  conftantly  jealous  and  watchful.
Oppofition,  therefore,  and  refiftance  are  often
neceffary.  But  they  may  throw  things  Into
confufion,  and  occafion  the  ruin  of  the  public
funds.  The  apprehenfion  of  this  mud  in-
fluence all  who  have  their  intereft  conneded
with  the  prefervation  of  the  funds,  and  in-
cline them  always  to  acquiefcence  and  fer-
vility.

But  further.  It  expofes  us  to  particular
danger  hom  foreign  as  well  as  dcmeji'ic  ene-
mies, by  making  us  fearful  of  war,  and  in-
capable of  engaging  in  it,  hov/ever  neeefTary,
without  the  hazard  of  bringing  on  terrible
convulfions  by  overwhelming  public  credit.

All  thefe  are  evils  which  mud  is^creafe
with  every  increafe  of  the  national  debt;  and
there  is  a  point  at  which,  when  they  arrive,'
the  ccnfequences mud  be  fatal  i^ci).  —  I  am

{a)  "  Either  the  nation  (Mr.  Himie  fays,  EfTdys
Vol.  II.  p.  145,)  muft  deftroy  public  credit ;  or  puhlic
"  credit  will  deflroy  the  nr^tron." — A  dreadful  ahenia-
tjve  !  furcly.

M  new'


i62  Of  Public  Credit,

now  writing  under  a  convidion,  that  I  am
doing  the  little  in  my  power  to  preferve  m.j
country  from  this  danger.  I  have  fhewn,  that
an  annual  fupplyof  a  million  and  a  half  for  i8,
or  at  moil  20  years,  may  be  made  the  means
of  reftoring  and  faving  us.  This,  therefore,
is  our  remedy ;  aud  it  ought  to  be  applied
immediately,  lead  it  fhould  not  be  applied
time  enough.

But  to  proceed  to  fome  further  obferva-
tions.

What  has  been  faid,  has  all  along  fup-
pofed  a  facred 2.nd  ininolahle  application  of  the
fund  I  have  defcribed,  and  of  all  its  earnings,
to  the  piirpofe  of  finking  the  national  debt.
The  whole  etfedl:  of  it  depends  on  its  being
allowed  to  operate,  without  interrup-
tion, a  proper  time.  But  it  may  be  alTced,
how  this  can  be  fecured  ?  Or,  by  what  me-
thod an  objetfi:,  that  mull:  be  continually
growing  more  and  more  tempting,  can  be
defended  againft  invalion  and  rapine?  —  I
might  here  mention  the  fuperintendency  and
care  of  the  reprefentatives  of  the  kingdom,
the  faithful  guardians  of  the  flate,  to  whom
miniflers  are  refponlible  for  the  ufe  they
make  o\  tlie  public  money.  But  experience
has  lliewii,  that  we  cannot  rely  on  this  fe-
curity. — The  ditiiculty,  therefore,  now  men-
tioned, is  the  very  greatefl  difficulty  the  na-
tion


and  the  Natmial  Debt,  1 63

tion  has  to  ftruggle  with  in  the  payment  of
its  debts.

The  finking  fund  was  eftabhfhed  in  the
year  17 16,  or  foon  after  the  acceffion  of  the
prefent  family,  at  a  time  when  the  public
debts,  tho'  not  much  more  than  a  third  of
what  they  are  now,  were  thought  to  be  fo
confiderable  as  to  be  alarmmg  and  danger-
ous. It  was  intended  as  a  sacred  depo-
sit never  to  be  touched;  the  law  which
eftabHdied  it  declaring,  that  it  was  to  be  ap-
plied to  the  payment  of  the  principal  and  in-
tereft  of  fuch  national  debts  and  incumbran-
ces, as  had  been  incurred  before  the  25th  of
December  1716;  and  to  ?io  other  uje,  intent  or
purpoj'e  whact'ver.  —  The  faith  of  parlimnent^
therefore,  as  we  ll  as  the  fecurity  of  the  king-
dom, feetned  to  require,  that  it  fhould  be
prefervc^d  careiuUy  and  rigoroufly  from  alie-
nation. But,  notwithflanding  this,  it  has
been  generally  alienated  -,  and  the  produce  of
it  employed,  in  helping  to  defray  fuch  current
expences  as  the  exigencies  of  the  flate  ren-
dered necv  llary.

In  order  to  juftify  this,  it  has  been  ufual
to  plead,  that  when  money  is  wanted,  it
makes  no  difference,  whether  it  is  taken  from
hence,  or  procured  by  making  a  new  loan.
There  cannot  be  a  worfe  fophifm  than
this.  The  difference  between  thefe  two
methods  of  procuring  money  is  no  lefs  than
infinite. — For,  let  us  fuppofe,  a  million  want-
ed for  any  public  lervice.  If  it  is  borrowed  at
M  2  4  fsr


r^4  Q/*  P^i^^^^(^  Credit,

/j^per  cent,  the  public  will  lofe  by  the  payment
of  intereft  40,000/.  the  firft  year,  and  the
fame  the  fecond  year,  and  the  fame  for  ever
afterwards.  But  if  it  is  taken  out  of  the
Jinking  fund,  the  public  will  lofe  40,000/.
they/r// year;  4160/.  theyt^i^W year;  80,000/.
the  1 8th  year;  a  million  the  85th  year:  For
thefe  are  the  fums  that  would,  at  thefe  times,
have  otherwife  neceffarily  reverted  to  the
public.  It  lofes,  therefore,  the  advantage  of
paying  in  85  years,  with  money  of  which
otherwife  no  ufe  could  have  been  vn^^d^,  twen-
ty-Jive millions  of  debt. — In  other  words;  by
employing  the  sinking  fund,  in  bearing
current  expences,  rather  than  borrowing  new
money  ;  the  ftate,  in  order  to  avoid  giving
Jimple  intereji  for  money,  is  made  to  alienate
money,  that  miijl  have  otherwife  been  im-
proved at  compound  intereji ',  and  that,  in  time,
would  have  neceffarily  Increafed  \.oa?2y  ium[d). —
Had  a  faithful  ufe  been  made  from  the  firft,
of  only  one  third  of  the  produce  of  this
fund,  near  three  Jour  ths  of  our  prefent  debts
might  nov/  have  been  difcharged ;  and,  in  a
few  years  more,  the  whole  of  them  might  have
been  difcharged  [b). — Can  it  be  pofTible  then

(«)  The  principal  obfervations  in  this  Chnpter,  I  have
given  juft  as  they  occurred  to  my  thoughts, without  knovv-
)ng  that  anv  of  them  had  been  made  by  other  writers.
Some  propoHiis  of  afimiiar  nature,  but  very  differently  re-
prefented,  I  have  fmce  found  in  Mr.  PoJIleihivayt's  Dictio-
nary, under  the  articles  Public  Credit,  Debts,  Fundi,  Sec.

(A)  See  a  particular  explanation  and  proof  of  this  iji
the  Qj^ieftions  following  the  Tables  in  the  Jppendlx.

to


and  the  National  Debt,  165

to  think,  without  regret  and  indignation,  of
that  mifapplication  of  this  fund,  which,  with
the  confent  of  parliaments  always  complying,
our  minlfters  have  praclifed  ? — I  find  it  dif-
ficult here  to  fpeak  with  calmnefs.  —  But  I
muft  reftrain  myfelf.  Calculation,  and  not
cenfure,  is  my  bufinefs  In  this  vv'ork. — I  muft
believe,  that  the  grievance  i  have  mentioned,
has  proceeded  more  from  inattention  and
miflake,  than  from  any  defign  to  injure  the
public.


M  3  ESSAY


[ i67 ]


ESSAY I.


*


Conta'inhig  Obfervations  on  the  Ex-
pedations  of  Lives ;  the  Increafe  of
Ma?ikmdj  the  Number  of  Inhabit
tants  in  London  ;  a7td  the  Influ-
e7ice  of  great  Towns ^  on  Health  and
Population.

In  a  Letter to  Benjamin  Franklin,
Ef(i'y  LL.  D.  and  F.  R.  S.

D  EAR  Sir,

Beg  leave  to  fubmit  to  your  perufal  the
following  obfervations.  If  you  think  them
of  any  importance,  I  fliall  be  obliged  to  you
for  communicating  them  to  the  Royal  So-
ciety. You  will  find,  that  the  chief  fubjedt
of  them  is  the  prefent  ftatc  of  the  city  of
London^  with  refped:  to  healthful nefs  and
number  of  inhabitants,  as  far  as  it  can  be
colleded  from  the  bills  of  mortality.  This
is  a  fubjed:  that  has  been  confidered  by
others  j  but  the  proper  method  of  calculating

*  This  EfTay  was  read  to  the  Royal  Society,
April  27th,  1769,  and  has  been  publifhcd  in  the  Philo-
fophical  Tranfaclions,  Vol.  59.  It  is  here  republiflicd
with  fcveral  additions;  particularly,  the  Pnfifcript.

M  4  from


naar


168 Of  the  Expediation  of  Lives ,

from  the  bills  has  not,  I  think,  been  fuffici-
ently  explained.

No  competent  judgment  can  be  formed  of
the  following  observations,  without  a  clear
notion  of  what  the  writers  on  LiJ'e-Ammities
and  Reverfions  have  called  the  ExpeBation  of
Lfe,  Perhaps  this  is  not  in  common  pro-
perly underftood;  and  Mr.  De  Mohre\  man-
ner of  expreinng  himfelf  about  it  is  very  lia-
ble to  be  millaken.

The  mofl  obvious  fenfe  of  the  expeBation
of  a  given  life  is,  **  That  particular  number
**  of  years  which  a  life  of  a  given  age  has  an
**  equal  chance  of  enjoying."  This  is  pro-
perly, the  time  that  a  perfon  may  reafonably
expeB  to  live  -,  for  the  chances  againfi  his  liv-
ing longer  are  greater  than  thofe/or  it ;  and,
therefore,  he  cannot  entertain  an  expeBation
of  living  longer,  conlidently  with  probability.
This  period  does  not  coincide  with  what  the
writers  on  Annuities  call  the  expeBationof  Ife,
except  on  the  fuppofition  of  an  uniform  de-
creafe  in  the  probabilities  of  life,  as  Mr.
Simpfo?i  has  oblerved  in  his  SeleB  Exercfes,
p.  273.— It  is  necelTary  to  add,  that,  even  on
this  fuppofition,  it  does  not  coincide  with
what  is  called  the  expeBation  of  life,  in  any
cafe  of  joint  lives.  Thus,  two  lives  of  40
have  an  even  chance,  according  to  Mr.  De
Mohres  hypothefis  [a),  of  continuing  to-
gether only  13^  years. But  the cxpeciation

[a)  See  the  Notes  in  pa^;.  2,  and  23.


the  State  o/'London,  Populatiofiy  Sec, 1 69

of  two  equal  joint  lives  being  (according  to
the  fame  hypothecs)  always  a  third  of  the
commoji  complement  \  it  is  in  this  cafe  1 5  j  years.
It  is  neceffary,  therefore,  to  obferve,  that
there  is  another  fenfe  of  this  phrafe,  which
ought  to  be  carefully  diftinguifhed  from  that
now  mentioned.  It  may  fignify,  **  The
**  mean  continuance  of  any  ^vitvi  Jingle,  joint,
**  ov  furviving  lives,  according  to  any  given
**  Table  of  obfervations  :"  that  is,  the  num-
ber of  years  which,  taking  them  one  with
another,  they  adually  enjoy,  and  may  be
confidered  as  fure  of  enjoying;  thofe  who  live
or  furvive  beyond  that  period,  enjoying  as
much  more  time  in  proportion  to  their  num-
ber, as  thofe  who  fall  0:ort  of  it  enjoy  lefs^
Thus;  Suppofing  46  perfons  alive,  all  40
years  of  age;  and  that,  according  to  Mr.  t)e
Moivres  hypothejis,  one  will  die  every  year
*till  they  are  all  dead  in  46  years;  half  46,  or
23,  will  be  their  expectation  of  life :  That  is;
The  number  of  years  enjoyed  by  them  all,
will  be  juil  the  fame  as  if  every  one  of  them
had  lived  23  years,  and  then  died;  fo  that,
fuppoiing  no  intereft  of  money,  there  would
be  no  difference  in  value  between  annuities
payable  for  life  to  every  Ungle  perfon  in  fuch
a  fet,  and  equal  annuities  payable  to  another
equal  fet  of  perfons  of  the  fame  common  age,
fuppofed  to  be  all  furc  of  living  jud  23  years
and  no  more.

In


170 Of  the  "Expeclatmi  of  Lives-,

In  like  manner;,  the  third oi  46  years,  or
1 5  years  and  4  months  (^),  is  the  expeclation
of  two  joint  lives  both  40  \  and  this  is  alfo
the  expeuiation  of  the  furvivor.  That  is ;
fuppofing  a  fet  of  marriages  between  perfons
all  40,  they  will,  one  with  another,  laft  juft
this  time;  and  the  furvivors  will  laft  the  fame
time.  And  annuities  payable  during  the  con-
tinuance of  fuch  marriages  would,  fuppofing
no  intereft  of  money,  be  of  exactly  the  fame
value  with  annuities  to  begin  at  the  extinc-
tion of  fuch  marriages,  and  to  be  paid,  during
life,  to  the  furvivors.  In  adding  together
the  years  which  any  great  number  of  fuch
marriages,  and  their  furvivorfhips  have  lafted,
the  fums  would  be  found  to  be  equal.

One  is  naturally  led  to  underftand  the
expeBation  of  life  in  the  firft  of  the  fenfes
now  explained,  when,  by  Mr.  Smpfon  and
Mr.  De  Mororc,  it  is  called,  the  number  of
years  which,  upon  an  equality  of  chance,  a  per-
fon  may  expeci  to  enjoy ;  or,  the  time  which  a
pcrfon  of  a  given  age  may  jujlly  expcB  to  continue
in  being',  and,  in  the  lafi:  fenfe,  when  it  is
called,  the  fare  of  Ife  due  to  a  perfn.  But,
as  in  reality  it  is  always  ufed  in  the  lad
of  thefe  fenfes,  the  former  language  fhould
not  be  appplied  to  it:  And  it  is  in  this  lall:
lenfe,  that  it  coincides  with  th^  funis  of  the
prefent  probabilities,  that  any  given  fmgle
■or  joint  lives  lliall  attain  to  the  end  of  the

[a]  Sec  Note  (L)  Appejidi.v.

3 '  '  "  ift.


the  State  ^London,  Population,  &c. 17  j

J  ft,  2d,  3d,  &c.  momejits,  from  this  time  to
the  end  of  their  poffible  exiftence ;  or,  (in
the  cafe  of  furviorfliips)  with  the  fum  of  the
probabiHties,  that  there  fliall  be  afurvivorat
the  end  of  the  ill,  2d,  3d,  &c.  moments,
from  the  prefent  time  to  the  end  of  the
poffible  exiftence  of  furvivorfliip.  This  coin-
cidence every  one  converfant  in  thefe  fubjedts
muft  fee,  upon  reflecting,  that  both  thefe
fenfes  give  the  true  prefent  value  of  a  life-
annuity,  fecured  by  land,  vi^ithout  intereil  of
money  {a).

This  period  in  joint  lives,  I  have  obferv-
ed  is  never  the  fame  with  the  period  which
they  have  an  equal  chance  of  enjoying  ;  and
in  fingle  lives,  I  have  obferved,  they  are  the
fame  only  on  the  fuppofition  of  an  uniform
decreafe  in  the  probabilities  of  hfe.  If  this
dccreafe,  inftead  of  being  always  uniform,  is
accelerated  in  the  laft  ftages  of  life ;  the  for-
mer period,  in  fmgle  lives,  will  be  lefs  than
the  latter  ^  if  retarded^  it  will  be  greater.

It  is  neceflary  to  add,  that  the  number
expreffing  the  former  period,  multiplied  by
the  number  of  fingle  or  joint  lives  whofe  ex-
pedation  it  is,  added  annually  to  a  fociety  or
town,  gives  the  whole  number  living  toge-
ther, to  which  fuch  an  annual  addition
would  in  time  grow.  Thus;  lince  19,  or
the  third of  57,  is the expeBation  of  two

{a)  See  Note  (L)  in  the  Appendix.

joint


172 Of  the  ExpeBatiojz  of  Lives',

joint  lives  whofe  common  age  is  29,  or  com-
mon coviplement  ^j  -,  twenty  marriages  every
year  between  perfons  of  this  age  would,  in
K^j  years,  grow  to  20  times  19,  or  380  mar-
riages always  exifting  together.  The  num-
ber o^ ftirvivors  alfo  ariling  from  thefe  mar-
riages, and  always  living  together,  would,  in
twice  ^j  years,  increafe  to  the  fame  number.
And,  fince  the  expeBation  of  a  fingle  life  is
always  half  its  complejnent  -,  in  ^'j  years  like-
wife,  20  lingle  perfons  aged  29,  added  annu-
ally to  a  town,  would  increafe  to  20  times
28.5  or  570  ;  and,  when  arrived  at  this  num-
ber, the  deaths  every  year  will  juft  equal  the
acceflions,  and  no  further  increafe  be  poffi-
ble.

It  appears  from  hence,  that  the  particu-
lar proportion  that  becomes  extindt  every
year,  out  of  the  whole  number  conftantly
exifting  together  of  fingle  or  joint  lives,
muft,  wherever  this  number  undergoes  no
variation,  be  exadlly  the  fame  with  the  ex~
peBation  of  thofe  lives,  at  the  time  when
their  exigence  commenced.  Thus;  was  it
found  that  a  19th  part  of  all  the  marriages
among  any  body  of  men,  whofe  numbers  do
not  vary,  are  diffolved  every  year  by  the
deaths  of  either  the  hufband  or  wife,  it
would  appear  that  19  was,  at  the  time  they
were  contracted,  the  expeBation  of  thele
marriages.  In  like  manner;  was  it  found
in  a  fociety,  limited  to  a  fixed  number  of

members^


the  State  c/'  London ,  Popniatw?:,  &c . 175

members,  that  a  28th  part  dies  annually  out
of  the  whole  number  of  members,  it  would
appear  that  28  was  their  common  expeda-
tion  of  life  at  the  time  they  entered.  So
likewife ;  were  it  found  in  any  town  or  di-
flridl,  where  the  number  of  births  and  burials
are  equal,  that  a  20th  or  30th  part  of  the
inhabitants  die  annually,  it  would  appear,
that  20  or  30  was  the  expeBation  of  a  child
raft  born  in  that  town  or  diftridt.  Thefe  ex~
peclations,  therefore,  for  all  Jingle  lives,  are
eafily  found  by  a  T^ahle  ofOhfervations,  fliew-
ing  the  number  that  die  annually  at  all  ages,
out  of  a  given  number  alive  at  thofe  ages  j  and
the  general  rule  for  this  purpofe,  is  **  to  divide
**  the  fum  of  all  the  living  in  the  Table,  at
**  the  age  whofe  expectation  is  required,  and
**  at  all  greater  ages,  by  the  fum  of  all  that
*'  die  annually  at  that  age,  and  above  it  j  or,
**  which  is  the  fame,  by  the  number  in  the
*'  Table  of  the  living  at  that  age  y  and  half
**  unity  fubtraded  from  the  quotient  will  be
"  the  required  expeBation  [a)"  Thus,  in  Dr.
Halley\  Table,  the  fum  of  all  the  living  at
20  and  upwards  is,  20,724.  The  number
living-  at  that  age  is  598  ;  and  the  former
number  divided  by  the  latter,  and  half  unity

(^)  This  rule,  and  alfo  rules  for  finding  in  all  cafes
the  expeilations  of  joint  lives  and  furvivorfliips,  may  be
deduced  with  great  eafe,  by  having  recourfe  to  the  doc-
trine of  fluxions.  In  this  method,  Mr.  De  Mo'ivre  fays,
he  difcovered  them.  See  Appendix,  Note  (L),  where  an
account  will  be  give.a  of  thefe  deductions,  omitted  by
Mr.  De  Mo'ivre.

A  fub-


1 74 Q/^  ^'^^  Expediation  of  Lives ;

(a)  fubtraded  from  the  quotient,  gives  34.1^
for  the  expectation  of  20.  The  expecSlation
of  the  fame  hfe  by  Mr.  Si?npfons  Table,
formed  from  the  bills  of  mortality  of  Lon-
don, is  28.9  [b).

Thefe

[a)  If  we  conceive  the  recruit  necefiary  to  fupply  the
vjajle  of  every  year  to  be  made  always  at  the  end  of  the
year,  the  dividend  ought  to  be  the  inediimi  between  the
numbers  living  at  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the  year.
That  is,  it  ought  to  be  taken  Icfs  than  the  funi  of  the  liv-
ino-  in  the  Table  at  and  above  the  given  age,  by  Jjulfihe
number  that  die  in  the  year;  the  eiFeft  of  which  di;ni?JU'
iion  will  be  the  fame  with  \.\\t  fubWaSiion  here  directed. —
The  reafon  of  this  fubtracStion  will  be  further  explained,
in  the  beginning  of  the  laft  Efiay.

[b)  It  appears  in  p.  169  and  170,  that  the  expe£iations  of
finale  and  '-joint  lives  are  the  fame  with  the  values  o{ annuities
on  thefe  lives,  fuppofing  no  intereft  or  improvement  of
money.  —  In  confidering  this  fubje6l,  it  will,  probably,
occur  tofome,  that,  allowing  intereft  for  money,  the  values
of  lives  muft  be  the  fame  with  the  values  of  annuities
certain  for  a  number  of  years  equal  to  the  expeSiatiom  Cii
the  lives.  But  care  muft  be  taken  not  to  fall  into  this
miftake.  The  latter  values  are  always  greater  than  the
former:  And  the  reafon  is,  that,  tho'  a  nuniber  of fvigle
or  joirit  lives  of  given  ages  v/ill,  among  them,  enjoy  z  gi-
ven number  of  years,  yet  forr.eofthem  will  enjoy  a  much
vreoter^  and  fome  a  much  Ufs  number  of  years.  Thus  ;
100  marriages  among  perfons,  all  29,  would,  as  I  have
faid,  one  with  another,  exift  19  years;  and  an  office
bound  to  pay  annuities  to  fuch  marriages  during  their
continuance,  might  reckon  upon  making  19  payments
for  each  marriage.  But  then,  many  of  thefe  payments
would  not  be  made  'till  the  end  of  30,  and  fome  not  'till
the  end  of  40  years.  And  it  is  apparent,  that  on  account
of  the  o;reatfr  value  of  quick  than  late  payments,  when
nionev  bean  intereft,  19  payments  fo  made  cannot  be
woah  as  much,  as  the  fame  number  of  payments  made

rejularlv


the  State  of  London,  Fopiilation,  Sec. i  j^

Thefe  obfervations  bring  me  to  the  prin-
cipal point  which  I  have  had  all  along  in
view.  They  fuggefh  to  us  an  eafy  method
of  finding  the  number  of  inhabitants  in  a
place,  from  a  Table  of  Obfervatioiis,  or  the
bills  of  mortality  for  that  place,  fuppofing  the
yearly  births  and  burials  equal.  **  Find  by
*'  the  Table,  in  the  way  juil  defcribed,  the
''  expe5latio?2  oi ^n  infant  jufi:  born,  and  this,
**  multiplied  by  the  number  of  yearly  births,
*'  will  be  the  number  of  inhabitants."  At
Brejlaw,  according  to  Dr.  Halleys  Table,
though  half  die  under  16,  and  therefore  an
infant  juft  born  has  an  equal  chance  oi  liv-
ing only  1 6  years ;  yet  his  expeBation,  found
by  the  rule  I  have  given,  is  near  28  years ;
and  this,  multiplied  by  1238  the  number
born  annually,  gives  34,664,  the  number  of
inhabitants. In  like  manner,  it  appears  from

regularly  at  the  end  of  every  year,  'till  in  19  years  they
are  all  made.

This  obfervation  might  be  employed,  to  dcmonftrate
further,  the  error  of  thofe  who  have  maintained,  that  the
value  of  a  given  life  is  the  fame,  with  the  value  of  an  annu-
ity certain,  for  as  many  years  as  the  life  has  an  equal  chance
of  exiftina;.  Were  this  true,  an  annuity  on  a  life,  fuppofed
to  be  expofed  to  fuch  danger  in  a  particular  year,  as  to
create  an  equal  chance,  whether  it  will  not  fail  that  year,
would,  at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  be  worth  nothing.,
though  fuppofed  to  be  fure  of  continuing  for  ever,  if  it
efcaped  that  danger.-- But  there  can  be  no  occafion  for  tak-
ing notice  of  an  opinion,  which  has  been  embraced  only
by  perfons  ignorant  of  mathematics,  and  plainly  unac-
quainted with  the  genuine  principles  of  calculation  on
this  fubjecir. — See  a  Pamphlet  o-n  Life- Annuities  by /i^-
man  Lce^  Efq;  of  the  Inner  TcmpU.

Mr.


iy6 Of  foe  Explication  of  Lives*,

Mr.  Simpfons  Table,  that,  though  an  infant
juft  born  in  hondon  has  not  an  equal  chance
of  living  3  years,  his  expeBatio?i  is  20  years ;
and  this  number,  multiplied  by  the  yearly
births,  would  give  the  number  of  inhabitants
in  Londo?2,  wQi'Q  the  births  and  burials  equal. —
The  medium  of  the  yearly  births,  for  10
years,  from  17 1^9  to  1768,  was  15,710.  This
number  multiplied  by  20,  is  314,2005  which
is  the  number  of  inhabitants  that  there  v/ould
be  in  LQndo?2j  according  to  the  bills,  were
the  yearly  burials  no  more  than  equal  to  the
births  :  that  is,  v/ere  it  to  fupport  itfelf  in  its
number  of  inhabitants,  without  any  fupply
from  the  country.  But  for  the  period  I  have
mentioned,  the  burials  were,  at  an  average,
22,956,  and  exceeded  the  chriftenings  7,246.
This  is,  therefore,  at  prefent,  the  yearly  ad-
dition of  people  to  London  from  other  parts
of  the  kingdom,  by  whom  it  is  kept  up.
Suppofe  them  to  be  all,  one  with  another^
perfons  who  have,  when  they  remove  to  Z/o;z-
do7if  an  expeclation  of  life  equal  to  30  years.
That  is  \  fuppofe  them  to  be  all  of  the  age
of  18  or  20,  a  fuppofition  certainly  far  be-
yond'the  truth.  From  hence  will  arife,  ac-
cording to  what  has  been  before  obfcrved,  an
addition  of  ^^o  multiplied  by  7.246;  that  is,
217,380  inhabitajits.  This  number,  added
to  the  former,  makes  53IJ580;  and  this,  I
think,  at  moft,  would  be  the  number  of  in-
b.abitants  in  London  were  the  bills  perfed.

But


ihe  State  ^London,  Vopiilatio7i,  &c. 177

But  it  is  certain,  that  they  give  the  number
of  births  and  burials  too  Httle.  There  are
many  burying-places  that  are  never  brought
into  the  bills.  Many  alfo  emigrate  to  the
navy  and  army  and  country ;  and  thefe  ought
to  be  added  to  the  number  of  deaths.  What
the  deficiencies  arifmg  from  hence  are,  can-
not be  determined.  Suppofe  them  equiva-
lent to  6000  every  year  in  the  births,  and
6000  in  the  burials.  This  would  make  an
addition  of  20  times  6000,  or  1 20,000,  to  the
laft  number ;  and  the  whole  number  of  in-
habitants would  be  651,580.  If  the  burials
are  deficient  only  two-thirds  of  this  number,
or  4000  J  and  the  births,  the  whole  of  it;
20  multiplied  by  6000,  mufl:  be  added  to
314,290,  on  account  of  the  defeds  in  the
births  :  And,  fmce  the  excefs  of  the  burials
above  the  births  will  then  be  only  5,246;
30  multiplied  by  5,246  or  157,380,  will  be
the  number  to  be  added  on  this  account;
and  the  fum,  or  number  of  inhabitants,  will
be  59  1 ,580. — But  if,  on  the  contrary,  the  bu-
rials are  deficient  6ooOj  and  the  births  only
4000;  80,000  mull  be  added  to  314,290,
on  account  of  the  deficiencies  in  the  births  ;
and  30  multiplied  by  9,246,  or  277,380,  on
account  oF  the  excefs  of  trie  burials  above  the
births ;  and  the  v/hole  number  of  inhabitants
will  be  671,580.

Every fuppofition in thefe calculations

is  too  high. Emigrants  from  London  are,  in

N  par^


27S On  the  'Expedldtion  of  Lives-,

particular,  allowed  the  fame  expeciation  of
continuance  in  London  with  thoie  who  are
born  in  it,  or  who  come  to  it  in  the  firmed
part  of  life,  and  never  afterwards  leave  it;
whereas  it  is  not  credible  that  the  former
expeSlation  fliould  be  fo  much  as  half  the  lat-
ter. But  I  have  a  further  reafon  for  think-
ing that  this  calculation  gives  too  high  num-
bers, which  has  with  me  irrefidible  weight.
It  has  been  feen,  that  the  number  of  inha-
bitants comes  out  lefs  on  the  fuppofition,
that  the  defeats  in  the  chriftenings  are  greater
than  thofe  in  the  burials.  Now  it  feems  evi-
dent that  this  is  really  the  cafe ;  and,  as  it  is
a  fad:  not  attended  to,  I  will  here  endeavour
to  explain  diflincflly  the  reafon  which  proves
it.

The  proportion  of  the  number  of  births  in
London^  to  the  number  who  live  to  be  10
years  of  age,  is,  by  the  bills,  16  to  q.  Any
one  may  hnd  this  to  be  true,  by  fubtradting
the  annual  mcdiiun  of  thofe  who  have  died
under  10,  for  fome  years  paft,  from  the  an-
nual medimn  of  births  for  the  fame  number

of  years. Now,  tho',  without  doubt,  Lon~

don  is  very  fatal  to  children,  yet  it  feems  in-
credible that  it  (hould  be  fo  fatal  as  this  im-
plies. The  bills,  therefore,  probably,  give  the
number  of  thofe  who  die  under  10  too  great
in  proportion  to  the  number  of  births;  and
there  can  be  no  other  caufe  of  this,  than  a
greater  deficiency  in  the  births  than  in  the
q  burials^


^'


the  State  c/' London,  Population y  &cc, 1 79

Min'als.  Were  the  deficiencies  in  both  equal;
that  is,  were  the  btiriahy  in  proportion  to
their  number,  jufl  as  deficient  as  the  births
are  in  proportion  to  their  number,  the  pro-
portion of  thofe  who  reach  10  years  of  age
to  the  number  born,  would  be  right  in  the
hills,  let  the  deficiencies  themfelves  be  ever
fo  confiderable.  On  the  contrary;  were  the
deficiencies  in  the  burials  greater  than  in  the
births,  this  proportion  would  be  given  too
great;  and  it  is  only  when  the  former  are
leaft,  that  this  proportion  can  be  given  too

little. Thus ;  let  the  number  of  annual

burials  be  23,000;  of  births  15,700;  and
the  number  dying  annually  under  10,
J 0,800.  Then  4,900  will  reach  10,  of
15,700  born  annually;  that  is,  5  out  of  16.
-—Were  there  no  deficiencies  in  the  burials,
and  were  it  fad:  that  only  half  the  number
born  die  under  10 ;  it  would  follow,  that
there  was  an  annual  deficiency  equal  to  4,900
fubtraded  from  10,800,  or  '5,900,  in  the
births. — Were  the  births  a  third  part  too  lit-
tle, and  the  burials  alfo  a  third  part  too  little,
the  true  number  of  births,  burials,  and  o'i  chil^
dr  en  dying  under  10,  would  be  20,9-^3 — 30,666,
and  14,400;  and,  therefore,  the  number  that
would  live  to  10  years  of  age,  would  be  6,5:^3
out  of  20,933,  or  5  of  16  as  before. — Were
the  birthi  a  third  part,  and  the  burials  fo  much
as  two-fifths  wrong,  the  number  of  births,
burials,  and  children  dying  under  10  would
N  2  be


i8o On  the  Expedfation  of  Lives ;

be  20,933  —  32,200  —  and  15,120.  And,-
therefore,  the  number  that  would  live  to  i  o
would  be  £;,8i3  out  of  20,933,  or  five  out
of  18.  —  Were  the  births  a  3d  part  wrong;,
and  the  burials  but  a  6th,  the  foregoing  num-
bers would  be  20,933  —  26,833  —  i2,6oo>
and,  therefore,  the  number  that  would  live
to  10  would  be  8,333  out  of  20,933,  or  5
out  of  12.56  :  And  this  proportion  feems
as  low  as  is  confident  with  probability.  It
is  fomew^hat  lefs  than  the  proportion  in
Mr.  Simpfons  Table  of  London  Obfervatio?ts  ;
and  much  lefs  than  the  proportion  in  the
Table  of  Obfervations  for  Brejlaw.  The  de-
ficiencies, therefore,  in  the  births  muft  be
greater  than  thofe  in  the  burials  [a);  and  the
leaft  number  I  have  given,  or  591,580  is
neareft  to  the  true  number  of  inhabitants.
However,,  (bould  any  one,  after  all,  think  that
it  is  not  improbable  that  only  5  of  16  fliould
live  in  London  to  be  10  years  of  age;  or  that
above  t'lvo-thirds  die  under  this  aire  :  the  con-
fequence  will  dill  be,  that  the  foregoing  cal-

[a)  One  obvious  reafon  of  this  fa£t  is,  that  none  of  the
h'lrths  among  Jeivs^  j^akers,  Papljis^  and  the  three  deno-
mlnaiioni  of  Dijfentcrs  are  included  in  the  bills,  whereas
?nany  of  their  burials  are.  It  is  further  to  be  attended  to,
that  the  abortive  and  ftill-born,  amounting  to  about  600
annually,  are  included  in  the  burials,  but  never  in  the
births.  If  we  add  thefe  to  the  chriftenings,  preferving
the  burials  the  fame,  the  proportion  of  the  born,  accord-
ing to  the  bills,  who  have  reached  ten  for  the  laft  fixteen
years,  will  be  very  nearly  one  third  inftead  of  five  fix -
t,  enths,

culatlon


the  State  o/" London,  Population t  Sec, iSi

dilation  has  been  carried  too  high.  For  it  will
from  hence  follow,  that  the  expediatlon  of  a
child  juft  born  in  London  cannot  be  fo  much
as  I  have  taken  it.  This  expediation  is  20,  on
the  fuppofition  that  half  die  under  3  years  of
age,  and  that  5  of  16  live  to  be  29  years  of
age,  agreeably  to  Mr.  Simpfo?is  Table.  But
if  it  is  indeed  true,  that  half^  die  under  2
years  of  age,  and  5  of  16  under  10,  agree-
ably to  the  bills,  this  expe6lation  cannot  be  fo
much  as  17  [a) ;  and  all  the  numbers  before
given  will  be  confiderably  reduced.

Upon  the  whole  :  I  am  forced  to  con-
clude from  thefe  obfervations,  that  the  fe-
cond  number  I  have  given,  or  651,580,
though  fliort  of  the  number  of  inhabitants
commonly  fuppofed  in  London,  is,  very  pro-
bably, much  greater,  but  cannot  be  lejs,
than  the  true  number.  Indeed,  it  is  in  ge-
neral evident,  that  in  cafes  of  this  kind  num-
bers are  very  much  over-rated.  The  inge-
nious Dr,  Brakenridge,  14  years  ago,  when
the  bills  were  lower  than  they  are  now,
from  the  number  of  houfes,  and  allowing
fix  to  a  houfe,  made  the  num.ber  of  inhabi-
tants 751,800.  But  his  method  of  deter-
jnining  the  {b)  number  of  houfes  is  too  pre-
carious;

[a)  This  may  be  deduced  from  the  obfervations  in  the
laft  EfTay;  and  it  will  be  there  proved,  that,  in  reality,
this  expectation  does  not  exceed  18.

{b) Vid.  Phil.  Tranfaaions, Vol.  XLVIIT, p.  788.

Jii  a  paper  fubfequent to  this,  Dr.  Brakenridge  tells  us,

N 3  that


182 On  the  Expc Station  of  Lives  5

carious ,  and,  belides,  iix  to  a  houfe  is  too
large  an  allowance. — ?vlany  families  now
have  two  houfes  to  live  in. — The  ma<rill:rates
of  Norwichy  in  1752,  took  an  exad  account
of  both  the  number  of  houfes  and  indivi-
duals  in that city, [a) The number of

houfes

that  in  a  late  furvey  it  appeared,  that  in  all  M'uldlcfex^
London^  Wejlm'injier^  and  Southwark^  there  were  87,614
houfes,  of  which  19,324  were  cottages,  and  4810  empty.
And  he  acknowledges,  that  this,  if  right,  proves  London
to  be  much  lefs  populous  than  he  had  made  it.  See
Phil.  Tranf.  Vol.  50,  p.  471.  He  does  not  mention  how
this  furvey  was  taken ;  but  moft  probably  it  muft  have
been  incorrect. — Mr.  Maitland  gives  two  accounts  of  the
number  of  houfes  within  the  bills.  One  carefully  taken
from  the  books  of  all  the  parifhes  and  precin(5ls  belong-
ing to  London ;  and  another  taken  from  a  particular  fur-
vey in  1737,  made  by  himfclf  with  incredible  pains.  The
firfl:  account  makes  the  number  of  houfes  85,805.  The
fecond  account  makes  it  95,968.  And  the  reafon  of  the
difference  he  obferves,  is,  that  many  landlords  of  fmall
places,  paying  all  taxes,  they  are  in  the  parifli  books
reckoned  as  fo  many  fuigle  houfes,  tho'  each  of  them
contain  feveral  houfes.  See  Mr.  Maitland'^  Hiftory  of
London^  2d  Book  at  the  end. — Thii-,  periiaps,  may  be  alfo
the  reafon  of  the  deficiencies  which,  I  fuppofe,  there  muft
be  in  the  furvey,  mentioned  by  Dr.  Brakenr'idge.  —  \t  will
be  obferved  prefently,  that  the  number  of  inhabitants  in
London  m  1737,  was  eonfidcrably  greater  th.m  it  is  now.

(rt)  Vid.  Gentleman's  Magazine  for  1752,  and  Dr.
Shorf  s  Comparative  Hjjlory  of  the  Increafe  of  Mankind^  P*  38.
In  page  58  of  this  laft  Vv'ork  the  author  fays,  that,  in  or-
der to  be  fully  fatisfied  about  the  number  of  perfons  to
be  allowed  to  a  family,  he  procured  the  true  number  of
famihes  and  individuals  in  14  market  towns,  fome  of
them  confiilerable  for  trade  and  populoufnefs  ;  and  that
in  them  were  20,371 families, and  97,611 individuals,

ox


the  State  o/'London,  PopuIatlo?t,  See. 183

houfes  was  y,i29*  ^"^  of  individuals  36,169,
which  gives  nearly  5 to  a  houfe. Ano-


the


or  but  little  more  than  4-|  to  a  family.  He  adds,  that,  ia
order  to  find  the  difference  in  this  refpedl  between  towns
of  trade  and  country  parifhes,  he  procured,  from  divers
parts  of  the  kingdom,  the  exa<Sl  number  of  families  and
individuals^  in  65  country  parifhes.  The  number  of  fa-
milies wa.s  17,208;  individuals  76,284;  or  not  quite  4!
to  a  family. — in  the  place  I  have  juft  referred  to,  in  the
Gentleman's  Magazine,  there  is  an  account  of  the  num-
ber of /;'oz^j- and  i«/;^^zVflK/5  in  Oxford^  exclufive  of  the
colleges  ;  and  in  IP'olverbatnpton^Coventry  zn^ Birmingham^
for  1750.  The  number  of  pcrfons  to  a  houfe  was,  by
this  account,  4i  in  the  two  former  towns,  and  54  in  the
two  latter. — Dr.Davenant,  from  M.r. King's  Obfervations,
gives  4^,  as  the  number  of  perfons  to  z  family  for  the
whole  kingdom.  See  Jn  Efjay  on  the  probable  method  of
making  a  people  gainers  by  the  balance  of  trade.  From  an
account  with  which  a  friend  at  Shrewjbury  has  favoured
me,  it  appears,  that  in  that  town,  in  1750,  the  number
of  inhabitants  to  a  houfe  was  4^. — Very  exaiSl  accounts,
of  which  I  {hall  take  further  notice,  prove,  that  in  the
parifli  of  Holy-Crofs,  one  of  the  fuburbs  of  Shrew/bury^
and  at  'Northampton^  the  fame  proportion  is  4 1  to  a
houfe  in  the  former;  and  4!  in  the  latter. — It  feems,
therefore,  that  five  perfons  to  a  houfe  is  an  allowance
large  enough  for  London^  and  too  large  for  England  in
general.  FVom  whence  it  will  follow,  that  Dr.  Braken-
ridge  has  likewife  over-rated  the  number  of  people  in
England.  In  a  letter  to  George  Lewis  Scott,  tfq;  publifh-
cd  in  1756,  in  the  Phil.  Tranf.  Vol.  49,  p.  877  ;  he  fays,
that  he  had  been  certainly  informed,  that  the  number  of
houfes  rated  to  the  window-tax  was  690,000.  The
number  of  cottages  not  rated,  he  adds,  was  not  accu-
rately known  ;  but  from  the  accounts  given  in,  it  appear-
ed, that  they  could  not  exceed  200,000  ;  and  from  thefe
data,  in  confequence  of  allowing  fix  to  a  houfe,  he  makes
the  number  of  people  in  England  to  be  5,340,000.  Per-
haps the  number  of  houfes  in  this  account  is  too  little.
N  4  Suppofe


1  §4 On  the  ExpeBatiojt  of  Lives ;

ther  method  which  Dr.  Brakcnndge  took  to
determine  the  number  of  inhabitants  in  Lon-
don  was  from  the  annual  number  of  burials,
adding  2000  to  the  bills  for  omiffions,  and
fuppofmg  a  30th  part  to  die  every  year.  \w
order  to  prove  this  to  be  a  moderate  fuppo-
fition  he  obferves  that,  according  to  Dr.
Halleys  Obfcrvations,  a  34th  part  die  every
year  at  Brejlaw.  But  this  obfervation  was
made  too  inadvertently.  The  number  of
annual  burials  there,  according  to  Dr.  Hal-
Iljs  account,  was  iij^,  and  the  number  of
inhabitants,  as  deduced  by  him  from  his
Table,  was  34,000 ;  and  therefore  a  29th
part  died  every  year.  Befides ;  any  one
may  find,  that  in  reality  the  Table  is  con-
firudcd  on  the  fuppofition,  that  the  wholp
number  born,  or  123B,  die  every  year;  from
whence  it  will  follow  that  a  28th  part  died
every  year, [a)  Dr.  Bi'akenridge,  therefore,

^  had

Suppofc  It  a  million  ;  and  let  five  be  allowec!  to  a  houfe  ;
and  the  number  of  people  in  England  will  be  five  milli-
ons :  Which,  fince  five  to  a  houfe  is  too  large  an  allow-
ance, ought  to  be  confidcred  as,  probably,  more  than  the
true  number.  —  The  number  of  people  in  Scotland  and
Ireland,  Dr.  Brakenridge  eftimatcs  at  three  rnilliqns.  See
Phil.  Tranf.  Vol.  5c,  p.  473.

{a)  C31C  {hould  he  taken,  in  confidering  Dr.  Halley's
Table,  not  to  take  the  firft  number  in  it,  or  looo,  for  (o
many  juft  born.  1238,  he  tells  us,  was  the  annual  me-
dium of  births,  and  1000  is  the  number  he  fuppofes  all
jiving  at  one  vear  and  under.  It  was  inattention  to  thjs
tnat  hd  Dr.  Brakenrids:e  to  his  miftake.

I?


the  State  o/'London,  Fopiihtion^  kc. i8^

liad  he  attended  to  this,  would  have  ftated
a  24th  part  as  the  proportion  that  dies  in
London  every  year,  and  this  would  have  taken
off  I  CO, coo  from  the  number  he  has  given.
But  even  this  muft  be  lefs  than  the  jufl  pro-
portion. For  let  three-fourths  of  all  who
either  die  in  London  or  migrate  from  it,  be
fuch  as  have  been  born  in  London;  and  let
the  reft  be  perfons  who  have  removed  to
London  from  the  country,  or  from  foreign
nations.  The  expeSlation  of  the  former,  it
has  been  lliewn,  cannot  exceed  20  years;  and
30  years  have  been  allowed  to  the  latter.
One  with  another,  then,  they  will  have  an
expeBation  oi  22t  years.  That  is;  one  of
224.  will  die  every  year, [a)  And,  confe-

quently,

Ijt  will  be  fhewn  in  the  4th  EfTay,  that  the  number  of
the  living,  under  20,  is  given  too  high  in  this  Table  ;
and  from  hence  it  will  follow,  that  more  than  a  28th
part  of  the  inhabitants  die  at  Brejlaw  annually.

(a)  The  whole  number  of  inhabitants  in  ^i?w/?  in  1743,
was  147,476,  and  the  annual  medium  of  burials  for  three
years,  from  1 741  to  1743,  was  6338.  A  23d  part,  there-
fore, died  every  year.  See  a  Treatife  in  German^  on  the
different  de2;rees  of  human  mortality  in  different  fitua-
tif>ns,  by  SufmiUh,  firft  counfellor  of  his  P.uJJian  Majefty's
Confiftory,  and  member  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  fciences
at  Berlin^  p.  15.

In  1761,  the  whole  number  of  inhabitants  in  the  fame
town,  was  157,452.  The  annual  medium  of  births,  for
three  years,  from  1759  to  1761,  was  5167  ;  and  of  bu-
rials 7153-  One  in  22,  therefore,  died  annually.  See
Dr.  Shorfs  Comparative  Hijiory  of  the  Increaje  and  Decreafc
f)f  Mankind  in  England  and  favercil  Countries  abraad,  p.|59,

60.


I S  6 On  the  Expe5iatlo?i  of  Lives ;

quently, fuppofing  the  annual  recruit  from
the country to be 7000, the number  of

bh'ths


60. — In  1752,  the  accurate  and  diligent  Mr.  Struyk^  took
particular  pains  to  determine  the  number  of  inhabitants
in  Amjlerdain^  and  the  refult  of  his  enquiry  was,  that
very  probably  it  did  not  amount  to  200,000.  The  an-
nual medium  of  burials  for  fix  years,  from  1747  to  1752,
was  8247.  One  in  24,  therefore,  died  annually.  See
Suftnilch  ibid. — At  Anijlerdam^  there  is  a  great  number  of
Jews,  and  their  burials  are  not  included  in  the  bills.
There  muft,  I  fuppofe,  be  other  deficiencies,  and  an  al-
lowance for  thefe  would,  I  doubt  not,  incrcafe  the  pro-
portion of  inhabitants,  who  die  annually,  to  one  in  21
or  22. — At  Dublin^  in  the  year  1695,  the  number  of  in-
habitants was  found,  by  an  exa£l  furvey,  to  be  40,508,
(fee  Philof.  Tranfadions,  N°  261).  I  find  no  account
of  the  annual  burials  juil  at  that  time;  but  from  1661
to  1681,  the  medium  had  been  1613;  and  from  1715  to
1728  it  was  2123.  There  can,  therefore,  be  no  mate-
rial error  in  fuppofing  that,  in  1695,  it  ^^^  1800;  and  this
makes  i  in  22  to  die  annually. — In  1745  the  number  of
familici  in  the  fame  city  appeared,  by  an  exaiSl  account
Jaid  before  the  Lord  Mayor,  to  be  9,214.  It  is  highly
probable  this  number  of  families  did  not  confift  of  fo
many  as  45,000  individuals.  Suppofe  them,  however,
50,000;  and,  as  at  this  time  the  medium  of  annual  burials
appears  to  have  been  2,360,  i  in  21  died  annually:  fee  Dr.
Short's  Co?nparative  Hojhry^  p.  15,  and  New  Obfcrvations,
p.  228. — Thefe  facls  prove  that  I  have  been  very  mode-
rate in  making  only  i  in  224-,  including  emigrants,  to
die  in  London  annually. — In  1631  the  number  of  people
in  the  city  and  liberties  oi  London  was  taken,  by  order  of
the  Privy  Council,  and  found  to  be  130,178. — This  ac-
count was  taken  five  years  after  a  plague  that  had  fwept
oft'  near  a  qu;!rter  of  the  inhabitants  ;  and  when,  there-
fore, the  town  being  full  of  recruits  in  the  vigour  of  life,
the  medium  of  annual  burials  muft  have  been  lower  than
ufual,  and  the  births  higher.  Could,  therefore,  the  me-
dium


the  State  of  London,  Population^  &c. 187

■births  3  times  7000  or  21,000,  and  the  bu-
rials and  migrations  28,000  (which  are  all
high  fuppoiitions),  the  number  of  inhabi-
tants  will  be,  224  multiphed  by  28,000,  or
630,000.

I  will  juft  mention  here  one  other  in-
ftance  of  exaggeration  on  the  prefent  fub-
je(ft.

dium  of  annual  burials  at  that  time,  within  the  walls,
and  in  the  16  parifhes  without  the  walls,  be  fettled,  ex-
clufive  of  thofe  who  died  in  fuch  parts  of  the  16  pariflies
without  the  walls,  as  are  not  in  the  liberties,  the  propor-
tion dying  annually  obtained  from  hence  might  be  de-
pended on,  as  lefs  than  the  common  and  juft  proportion.
But  this  medium  cannot  be  difcovered  with  any  accuracy.
Grai4nt  eftimates  that  two-thirds  of  thefe  16  pariflies  are
within  the  liberties  i  and,  if  this  is  right,  the  medium  of
annual  burials  in  the  city  and  liberties  in  1631,  was  5,500,
and  I  in  23^  died  annually;  or,  making  a  Imall  allow-
ance for  deficiencies  in  the  bills,  i  in  22.  —  Mr.  Mait-
land,  in  his  Hiftory  of  London,  Vol,  II.  p.  744,  by  a  la-
borious, but  too  unfatisfacSlory,  inveftigation,  reduces  this
proportion  to  i  in  24^;  and  on  the  fuppofitions,  that
this  is  the  true  proportion  dying  annually,  at  all  times,  in.
London,  and  that  the  deficiencies  in  the  burials  (includ-
ing the  burials  in  Marybone  and  Pancrafs  pariflies)  amount
to  3,038  annually  ;  he  determines,  that  the  number  of  in-
habitants within  the  bills  was  725,903,  in  the  year  1737.

The  number  of  burials  not  brought  to  account  in  the
bills  is,  probably,  now  much  greater  than  either  Dr.
Brakenridge  or  Mr.  Maitland  fuppofe  it.  I  have  reck-
oned it  fo  high  as  6cco,  in  order  to  include  emigrants,
and  alfo  to  be  more  fure  of  not  falling  below  the  truth.

It  will  appear  in  the  laft  Efl'ay,  with  an  evidence  little
fliorc  of  demonftration,  that,  at  leafl:,  i  in  20-|^  die  an-
nually in  London,  and  that,  confequently,  the  number  of
inhabitants,  if  the  omilfions  in  the  burials  are  6000,
cannot  exceed  601,750.

Mr.


iS8 On  the  ExpeSiation  of  Lives ',

Mr.  Corbyn  Morris,  in  his  ufeful  Ohferva^
tions  on  the  pq/i  growth  and  prefentjtate  of  the
city  of  London,  publiihed  in 175  i,  luppofes
that  no  more  than  a  60th  part  of  the  inhabi-
tants of  Z/O/zJi?;?,  who  are  above  20,  die  every
year,  and  from  hence  he  concludes  that  the
number  of  inhabitants  was  near  a  milhon. In
this  fuppofition  there  was  an  error  of  at  leail
one  half. According  to  Dr.  Haileys  Table,
it  has  been  fliewn,  that  a  34th  part  of  all  at
20  and  upwards, die  every year  at  Brejlaw,
In  London, a 29th part, according to  Mr.
Bimpfon^  Table,  and  alfo  according  to all
other  Tables  of  London  Obfervations. And
in  Scotland  it  has  been  found  for  many  years,
that,  of  974  minifters  and  profellbrs  whofe
ages  are  27  and  upwards,  a  33d  part  have
died  every  year.  Had,  therefore,  Mr.  Morris
Hated  a  30th  part  of  all  above  20  as  dying
annually  in  London,  he  would  have  gone  be-
yond the  truth, and  his  conclufion would
have  been  400,000  lels  than  it  is.

Dr.  Brakenridge  obferved,  that  the  num-
ber of  inhabitants,  at  the  time  he  calculat-
ed, was  127,000  lefs  than  it  had  been.  The
bills  have  lately  advanced  a  little,  but  flill
they  are  much  below  what  they  were  from
J717  to  1743.  The  medium  of  the  annual
births,  for  20  years,  from  171 6  to  1736^  was
18,000,  and  o^  burials  26,529;  and,  by  cal-
culating from  hence  on  all  the  fame  fuppo-
fitions  with  thofe  which made  651,580  to

be


.  the  State  ^London,  Population^  &c. 189

be  the  prefent  number  of  inhabitants  in  Loti-
don,  it  will  be  found  that  the  number  then
was  735,840,  or  84,260  greater  than  the
number  at  prefent.  London,  therefore,  for
the  laft  30  years,  has  been  decreafmg;  and
though  now  it  is  increafmg  again,  yet  there
is  reafon  to  thuik  that  the  additions  lately
made  to  the  number  of  buildings  round  it,
are  owing,  chiefly  to  the  increafe  of  luxury,
and  the  inhabitants  requiring  more  room  to
live  upon  [a).

It  fhould  be  remembered,  that  the  num-
ber of  inhabitants  in  hondon  is  now  fo  much
lefs  as  I  have  made  it,  than  it  was  40  years

{a)  The  medium  of  annual  burials  in  the  97  parifhes
within  the  walls  was,

From 1655  to 1664, 3264

From  1680  to  1690, 3^39

From  1730  to  1740, 2316

From  1758  to  1768, 1620

This  account  proves,  that  though,  fnice  1655,  London
has  doubled  its  inhabitants,  yet,  tv'ith'in  the  tvalh^  they
have  decreafed  ;  and  fo  rapidly  for  the  laft  30  years  as  to
be  now  reduced  to  one  half. — The  like  may  be  obferved
of  the  17  pariflies  immediately  without  the  walls.  Since
1730,  thefe  parifhes  have  been  decreafmg  fo  faft,  that
the  annual bttrials  in  them  have  funk  from  8,672  to  5,432,
and  are  now  lovi'er  than  they  were  before  the  year  1660,
In  JVcJlminJler^  on  the  contrary,  and  the  23  out-parifhes
in  Middlesex  and  Surrey^  the  annual  bur lah  have  fmce  1660,

advanced  from  about  4000  to  16,000. Thefe  fa6ts

prove,  that  the  inhabitants  o^  London  are  now  much  lefs
crowded  together  than  they  were.  It  appears,  in  parti-
cular, that  zvithin  the  walls  the  inhabitants  take  as  much
room  to  live  upon  as  double  their  number  did  formerly.
— The  very  fame  conclufions  mav  be  drawn  from  an  exa-
mination of  the  chr!jkni7i^s^

ago.


190 On  the  FiXpeUtatlon  of  lLwes%

ago,  on  the  fuppodtion,  that  the  proportion
of  the  omiffions  in  the  births  to  thofe  in  the
burials,  was  the  fame  then  that  it  is  now.
But  it  appears  that  this  is  not  the  fadt. — From
1728,  (the  year  when  the  ages  of  the  dead
were  firft  given  in  the  bills^  to  1742,  near  five-
fixths  of  thofe  who  were  born  died  under  10,
according  to  the  bills.  From  1742  to  1752
three  quarters:  And  ever  lince  1752,  this
proportion  has  flood  nearly  as  it  is  now,  or
at  fomewhat  more  than  two-thirds.  The
omiffions  in  the  births,  therefore,  compared
with  thofe  in  the  burials,  \NQrQ  greater  former-
ly ',  and  this  muft  render  the  difference  be-
tween the  number  of  inhabitants  how  and
formerly  lefs  confiderable  than  it  may  feem
to  be  irom  the  face  of  the  bills.  One  rea-
fon,  why  the  proportion  of  the  amounts  of
the  births  and  burials  in  the  bills,  comes  now
nearer  than  it  did,  to  the  true  proportion,
may,  perhaps,  be,  that  the  number  of  Diffen-
ters  is  leffcned.  The  Foundling  Hofpital
alfo  may  have  contributed  a  little  to  this
event,  by  leirening  the  number  given  in  the
bills  as  having  died  under  10,  without  tak-
ing off  any  from  the  births;  for  all  that
die  in  thib  hofpital  are  buried  at  Pancrafs
church,  which  is  not  within  the  bills.  See
the  preface  to  a  coUecfticn  of  the  yearly  bills
of  mortality  from  1657 to 1758  inciufive,

I  will


the  State  of  London,  Population^  &c. 1 9 1

I  will  add,  that  it  is  probable  that  London
is  now  become  lefs  fatal  to  children  than  it
was;  and  that  this  is  a  further  circumftance
which  muft  reduce  the  difference  I  have
mentioned;  and  which  is  likewife  neceffary
to  be  joined  to  the  greater  deficiencies  in  the
births,  in  order  to  account  for  the  very  fmall
proportion  of  children  who  furvived  10  years
of  age,  during  the  two  firfl:  of  the  periods  I
have  fpecified. — Since  1752,  London  has  been
thrown  more  open.  The  cuflom  of  keep-
ing country-houfes,  and  of  fending  children
to  be  nurfed  in  the  country,  has  prevailed
more.  But,  particularly,  the  deflruvflive  ufe
fpirituous  liquors  among  the  poor  has  been
checked.

I  have  flicwn  that  in  London,  even  in  its
prefent  ftate,  and  according  to  the  moft  mo-
derate computation,  half  the  number  born
die  under  three  years  of  age.  But  it  appears
from  Graunt's  (a)  accurate  account  of  the
births,  weddings,  and  burials  in  three  coun-
try pariilies  for  90  years;  and  alfo,  from  Dr.
Short's  colledlionof  obfervations  in  his  Com^
parative  Hi/lory,  and  his  treatife  entitled.
New  Ohfervations  on  Town  and  Country  Bills

[a)  See  Natural  and  Political  Ohfervations  on  the  Bills  of
Mortality,  by  Capt.  John  Graunt,  f .  R.  S.— See  alfo  Mr.
Derhani's  Phifico-Theology,  p.  174,  where  it  appears,  that
in  the  parifh  of  Jynho  in  Northamptonjhire^  tho'  the  births
had  been,  for  118  years,  to  the  marriages  as  6  to  I  j  yet
the  burials  had  been  to  the  marriages  only  as  3|.  to  i.

of


192 On  the  ExpeBation  of  Lives-,

of  Mortality,  that  in  country  villages  and
pariilies,  the  major  part  live  to  mature  age,
and  even  to  marry.

In  the  parifli  of  Holy-Crofs  [a],  in  Salop,
it  appears  from  a  curious  regifler,  which  has
been  kept  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Gcrfucb,  the  vi^
car,  that  of  655  who  have  died  there  at  all
ages  for  the  laft  20  years,  321,  or  near  one
half,  have  lived  to  30  years  of  age  :  And,  by
forming  a  Table  ot  Obfervations  from  this

(a)  This  parifli  contains  in  it  a  villnge  which  is  a  parfc
of  the  fuburbs  of  Shreivjlmry.  It  confifts  of  140O  acres
of  arable  and  pafture  land  ;  befides  300  acres  taken  up
by  houfes  and  gardens.  Jtis  fix  miles  in  circumference;
half  of  which  lies  along  the  banks  of  the  river  Severn. — ^
I  mention  thefe  particulars  to  fliew,  that  it  may  be  reck-
oned a  country  pariih  ;  tho',  perhaps,  not  perfectly  fo,  ort
account  of  its  nearnefs  to  Shrewfoury, — The  chriftenings
in  it  exceed  the  burials  a  little;  and  the  number  of  in-
habitants (mofily  labouring  people)  has,  for  the  laft  20
years,  kept  nearly  to  JC50,  without  any  confiderable  in-
creafe. — The  regifter  of  this  parifli,  from  1750  to  1760,
has  been  publifhcd  in  the  52d  volume  of  the  Philofoplncal
"TranjaLlions^  Part  I.  Art.  25.  And  a  continuation  of  it
from  1760  to  J770,  has  been  lately  communicated  and
read  to  the  Royal  Society.  It  is  to  be  wiihed,  that  more
fuch  accounts,  fpecifying,  as  this  does,  the  males  and'
females  dying  at  all  ages,  v/ere  kept  in  different  fituations
in  the  country.  This  is  the  only  one  that  I  have  ever
heard  of.  It  is  kept  with  particular  care  and  accuracy
by  Mr.  Gorfnch  ;  and  furnifhes  very  ufeful  data  for  deter-
niming  the  difference  in  value  between  town  and  coun-
try lives. — It  defcrvcs  to  be  mentioned  particularly,  that
ivo  foreigners  or Jiravgers^  who  happen  to  die  in  this  parifh,
(T  who  may  be  brought  into  it  to  be  buried,  are  entered
into  the  regifter :  Nor  are  any  of  the  fixed  inhabitants
omitted,  tho'  earned  out  to  be  buried.

3  regifbr,


the  State  ofLondon,  Pvpidationi  &c. 193

regifter,  in  the  manner  which  will  be  de-
Icribed  in  the  lail  EiTay,  I  find  that  a  child
juH:  born  in  this  pariHi  has  an  expedation  of
3-:^  years;  and  that  in  general,  under  the  age
nt  ^o,  the  expeclatiofis  of  lives  here  exceed
thole  in  London,  in  the  proportion  of  about
4  to  3. — So  great  is  the  difference, eipecially
to  children,  between  livinsr  in  rrcat  towns
and  in  the  country. — Hut  nothing  can  place
thi^  obfervation  in  a  more  ftriking  light,  than
the  account  given  by  Dr.  'Thomas  lieberden,
and  publilhed  in  the  Philofophical  Tranf-
adions  (vol.  LVII.  p.  461),  of  the  increafe
and  niortality  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  if -and  of
Madeira,  \x\  this  ifland,  it  feems,  the  wed-
dings have  been  to  the  births,  for  8  years,
from  1759  to  1766,  as  10  to  46.8  j  and  to
the  burials,  as  10  to27.v  Double  thefe
proportions,  therefore,  or  the  proportion  of
20  to  46.8,  and  of  20  to  27.  c,  are  the  pro-
portions of  the  number  marrying  annually,
to  the  number  born  and  the  iiumber  dying,
L.et  I  marriage  in  10  be  a  2d  or  3d  mar-
riage on  the  lide  of  either  the  man  or  the
woman;  and  10  marriages  \\\\\  imply  19
individuals  who  have  grown  up  to  maturity,
snd  lived  to  marry  once  or  oftener  ;  and  the
proportion  of  the  number  marrying  aniiually
the  firli  time,  to  the  number  dying  annually,
will  be  19  to  27.5,  or  near  3  to  4.  It  may
Jeem  to  follow  from  hence,  that  in  this  iiland
nrar  iliree-iourths of  thoi'e who die have

O  been


1 9-4 Of  the  Expccfiithn  of  Lives  j

been  mcirried  ;  and,  confequcntly,  that  not
many  more  than  a  quarter  of  the  inhabi-
tants die  in  childhood  and  ceUbacy ;  and
this  would  be  a  jull:  conelufion  were
there  no  increafe,  or  had  the  births  and  bu-
rials been  equal.  But  it  mud  be  remem-
bered, that  the  general  eftecft  oi  an  increafe
while  it  is  going  on  in  a  country,  is  to  ren-
der the  proportio-n  of  perfons  marrying  an-
nually, to  the  annual  deaths,  greater^  and  to
.the  annual  births  lefs^  than  the  true  propor-
tion marrying,  out  of  any  given  number
born.  This  proportion  generally  lies  be-
tween the  other  two  proportions,  but  always
jieared  to  the  firil  [ii] ; and,  in  the  prefent

cafe,

((?)  In  a  country  where  there  is  no  increafe  or  de-
creafe  of  the  inhabitants, , and  where  alfo  life,  ia  its  firft
periods,  is  fo  ftable,  and  marriage  fo  much  encouraged,
ns  that  half  of  all  who  arc  horn  live  to  be  married,  the,?;;-
7/?/<7/ births  and  burials  muil  be  equal,  and  alio  quadruple
the  number  of  weddings,  after  allowing  for  2d  and  -^d
marriages.  Suppofe  in  thcfe  circumlianccs  (every  thing
clfe  remaining  the  fame)  t\^Q  probabUhics  of  life,  during  its
firft  ftages,  to  be  improved.  In  this  cafe,  more  than  half
the  born  will  live  to  be  married,  and  an  increal'e  will  take
pi. ice.  The  births  will  exceed  the  burials,  and  bo-th  fall
below  qiuulruple  the  weddings  j  or,  which  is  the  fame,
below  double  the  number  annually  married. — Suppofe
next  i^iht  probabilities  of  life  and  the  encouragement  to  mar-
riage remaining  the  fame)  the  proHficknefs  orily  of  the
marriages  to  be  improved.  In  this  cafe  it  is  plain,  that
an  increafe  alfo  will  take  [■)lacc  ;  but  i\\'^  tmnualh\r\.\\s  and
burials,  inflead  of  being  lefs,  will  now  both  rife  above
quadjuplc  ilie  weddings  i  and  therefore  the  proportion  of
the  borii  to  that  part  of  the  born  who  marry  (being  by
hippbiUioa  Uvo  to  one)  will  be  lefs  than  the  proporuon

of


the  State  of  London,  Population,  &c. 19^

cefe,  it  is  fufficiently  evident  that  it  cannot
be  much  leis  than  two-thirds.

In


of  either  the  annual  births  or  the  annual  burials,  to  the
number  marrying  <7«««(7//^-. — Suppole  again  {\.\\<z  encourage-
ment to  marriage  remaining  the  fame)  that  t\\t  probahilities
of  life  and  l\\e  prolif.chncfs  of  marriages  are  both  improved*
In  this  cafe,  a  more  rapid  increafe  will  taice  place,  or  a
greater  cxcefs  of  the  births  above  the  burials  ;  but  at  the
fame  time  they  will  keep  nearer  to  quadruple  the  wed-
dings, than  if  the  latter  caufe  only  had  operated,  and
produced  the  fame  incresjfe.-^l  {hould  be  too  minute  and
tedious,  were  I  to  explain  thefe  obfervations  at  large.  ]t:
follows  from  them,  that,  in  every  country  or  fituation
where,  for  a  courfe  of  years,  the  burials  have  been  either
equal  to  or  lefs  than  the  births,  and  both  under  quadruple
the  marriages  ;  and  alfo  that,  wherever  the  burials  are
Lfs  than  quadruple  the  annual  marriages,  and  at  the  fame
time  the  births  greater,  there  the  major  p:^-rt  of  all  that
are  born  live  to  marry.  In  the  inftance  which  I  have
confidered  above,  and  which  occafions  this  note,  the  an-
nual births  arc  fo  much  greater  than  quadruple  the  marri-
ages, and  at  the  fame  time  the  annual  burials  fo  much
lfs,  that  the  proportion  that  live  to  marry  of  thofe  who
ire  born,  can  fcarcely  be  much  lefs  than  I  have  faid  j  or
two-thirds.

I  have  fhewn  how  the  allowance  is  to  be  made  for  2d
and  3d  marriages ;  but  it  is  not  fo  confulerable  as  to  be
of  any  particular  confequence;  and,  befides,  it  is,  in
part,  compenfated  by  the  natural  children  which  are  in-
cluded in  the  births,  and  which  raife  the  proportion  of
the  biiths  to  the  weddings  higher  than  it  ought  to  be,
and  therefore  bring  it  nearer  to  the  true  proportion  of  the
number  born  annually,  to  ihofe  who  marry  annually,  af«
ter  dedufling  thofe  who  marry  a  2d  or  3d  time.

in  drawing  conclufions  from  the  proportion  o^ annual

birrhs and  burials, in  different  fituations,  fome  writer?

on  the  increafe  of  mankind,  have  not  given  due  attention.

to  the  difference  in  thefe  proporciens,  arifing  from  the

O  2  different


196 Of  the  ExpcBation  of  Lives ;

In  LondoHy  then,  half  die  under  three
years  of  age;  and  in  Madeira  about  two-
thirds  of  all  who  are  born  live  to  be  married.
Agreeable  to  this,  it  appears  alfo  from  the
account  I  have  referred  to,  that  the  expedla-
tion  of  a  child  juft  born  in  Madeira  is  about
39  years ;  or  double  the  expedation  of  a
child  juil  born  in  London.  For  the  number
of  inhabitants  was  found,  by  a  furvey  made
in  the  beginning  of  the  year  1767,  to  be
64,614.  The  annual  medium  of  burials
bad  been,  for  eight  years,  1293;  o{  births
2201.  The  number  of  inhabitants,  divided
by  the  annual  medium  of  burials^  gives
49.89;  or  i\\t  expe&ation  nearly  of  a  child
jufl  born,  fuppofing  the  births  had  been
1293,  and  confiantly  equal  to  the  bnrialsy
the  number  of  inhabitants  remaining  the
fame.  And  the  fame  number,  divided  by
the  annual  medium  of  birthsy  gives  29.35;
or  the  expectation  of  a  child  juft  born,  fup-
pofing the  burials  2201,  the  number  of  births

different  circumftances  of  Increafe  or  decreafe  among  a
people.  One  inftance  of  this  I  have  now  mentioned  ;
and  one  further  inftance  of  it  is  necefTary  to  be  mentioned.
'I'he  proportion  of  annual  births  to  weddings  has  been
confidered  as  giving  the  true  number  of  children  derived
from  each  marriage,  taking  all  marriages  one  with  ano-
ther. But  this  is  true  only  when,  for  many  years,  the
births  and  burials  have  kept  nearly  equal.  Where
there  is  an  excefs  of  the  births  occafioning  an  increafe,
the  proportion  oi  onnual  births  to  weddings  muft  be  lefs
than  the  proportion  of  children  derived  from  each  mar-
riage ;  and  the  contrary  rauft  take  place  where  there  is  a
decreafe.

and


the  State  ^/London,  Population t  &c. 1 97

and  of  inhabitants  remaining  the  fame.  And
the  true  expeBation  of  life  mud  be  fome-
where  near  the mean between  49.^9 and

Again  :  A  50th  part  of  the  inhabitants  of
Madeira,  it  appears,  die  annually.  In  Lon-
dofi,  I  have  (hewn,  that  above  twice  this
proportion  dies  annually.  In  fmaller  towns
a  fmaller  proportion  dies;  and  the  births  alfo
come  nearer  to  the  burials.  In  general;  there
feems  reafon  to  thing  that  in  towns  (allow-
ing /or  particular  advantages  of  (ituation,
trade,  police,  cleanlinefs,  and  openncfs,
which  fome  towns  may  have,)  the  excefs  of
the  burials  above  the  births,  and  the  annual
deaths  are  more  or  lefs  as  the  towns  are
greater  or  fmaller.  In  Londo?2  itfelf,  about
160  years  ago,  when  it  was  fcarcely  a  fourth
of  its  prefent  bulk,  the  births  were  much
nearer  to  the  burials,  than  they  are  now.
But  in  country  parifhes  and  villages  the  births
almoll  always  exceed  the  burials;  and  I  be-
lieve it  feldom  happens  that  fo  many  as  a
30th,  or  more  than  a  40th  part  of  the  in-
habitants, die annually {a). In the four

provinces

[a]  In  the  year  I7;^3,  a  furvcy  was  taken  of  the  in-
habitants of  the  parifli  of  Stcke-Damerel  in  DcvonJJnre^
and  the  number  of  men,  women,  and  children  was  found
to  be  3361.  —  The  chrijhnhigi  for  the  year  were  122 —
the  xveddings  28 — burials  62. — No  more,  therefore,  than
the  54th  part  of  the  inl'.abitants  died  in  the  year, — In  part
of  this  year  an  epidemical  fever  prevailed  in  the  parifh.
See  Mart}  h'k  Ahrukment  of  the  Phihf.  Tranfaftkns,  vol.
O  3  IX,


ig%  Of  the  BxpcBntion  of  Lives t,

provinces  of  New-Ejigiand  there  is  a  vcvf
rapid  increaie  of  the  inhabitants ;  but,  not-
vvithftanding  this,  at  Bofton,  the  capital,  the
inhabitants  would  decreafe  were  there  no
fupply  from  the  country  :  for,  if  the  account
I  have  {ctn  is  juft,  from  1731  to  1762,  the
burials  all  along  exceeded  the  births  [a).
So  remarkably  do  towns,  in  confequence  of
their unfavourablenefs to health, and the

IX.  p.  32^ — According  to  G'r(7?m^'s  account  of  a  parifh
in  Hampjhlre^  not  reckoned,  he  fays,  remarkably  health-
ful, a  50th  part  of  the  inhabitants  had  died  annually  for
90  years.  Natural  and  political  Obfcrvatlom^  &c.  Chap,
xii.

In  icg8  country  parifhes,  mentioned  by  Sufmikh^  the
annual  aver.ige  of  deaths,  tor  fix  years,  ending  in  1749,
was  5255.  The  number  of  inhabitants  was  225,357.
One,  therefore,  in  43  died  annually.  —  in  ic6  other
pari  flies,  mentioned  by  him,  this  proportion  was  i  in  50.
• — In  the  Dukedom  of  JVuricmherg^  the  inhabitants,  he
fays,  are  numbered  every  year;  and  from  the  average  of
five  yeais,  ending  in  1754,  it  appeared  that,  taking  the
f^iwns  and  country  together,  i  in  32  died  annually. —
In  another  province,  which  he  mentions,  confifting  of
635,990  inhabitants,  i  in  33  died  annually.  From  thefe
fads  he  concludes,  that,  taking  a  whole  country  \n  grofs,
including  ail  cities  and  villages,  manjcind  enjoy  among
them  ab-ut  32  or  33  years  each  of  exiftcnce.  And  this,
very  probably,  may  not  be  far  from  the  truth  in  the  pre-
fent  {tate  of  moit  of  the  kingdoms  oi  Europe.  And  it  will
follow,  that  a  child  born  in  a  country  parifli  or  village,
has,  at  Icali",  an  expedfation  of  36  or  37  years  ;  fuppofing
the  proportion  of  country  to  town  inhabitants  to  be  as  3[-
to  1  5  which,  I  tiiink,  this  ingenious  writer's  obfervationa
prove  to  be  nearly  the  cafe  in  Pomerania,  Brandenburgh^
and  fome  other  kingdoms.

[a)  See  a  particular  account  of  the  births  and  burials
in  this  town  from  1731  to  1752  ia  the  Gentleman  i  Ma-
gazi-iifioi:  1/53'  P-  4' 3-

}  luxury


the  S'tate  ^London,  Popn!atkny  Sec. icjg

luxury which generally prevails in them,
check  the  increale  of  countries.

Healthfulnefs  and  Prolificknefs  are,  pro-
bably, caufes  of  increale  feldoni  feparated.
In  conformity  to  this  obfervation,  it  appears
from  comparing  the  births  and  weddings,
in  countries  and  towns  where  regiftcrs  of
them  have  l>£en  kept,  that  in  the  former,
marriages,  one  with  another,  fcldom  produce
lefs  than  four  children  each  j  generally  be-
tween four  and  five,  and  fomctimes  above
five.  But  in  towns  feldom  above  four  ;  ge-
nerally between  three  and  four;  and  fome-
times  under  three  (a).

I  have  fometimes  heard  the  great  num-
ber of  old  people  in  London  mentioned,
to  prove  its  favourablenefs  to  health  and
long  life.  But  no  obfervation  can  be  more
erroneous.  There  ought,  in  reality,  to  be
more  old  people  in  London^  in  proportion  to
the  number  of  inhabitants,  than  in  any
fmailer  towns ;  becaufe  at  lead  one  quarter
of  its  inhabitants  are  perfons  who  come  in-

{a)  Any  one  mny  fee  what  evidence  there  is  for  thi'^,
by  confiilting  Dr.  S/jcrfs  two  books  alreiidy  qiioLed,  and
the  Abyidment  of  the  Philofiphical  Trunjaftkns^  vol.  Vll.
partiv.  p.  46,  and  Gr(7.v/7/'s  account  already  quoted,  of  the
births,  weddings  and  burials  in  three  country  paiilhes  (or
90  years;  compared  with  fnnilar  accounts  in  towns.  In
confidcring  thefe  accounts,  it  fl^ould  not  be  forgotten
that  allowances  mull  be  made  for  the  different  circum-
ftances  of  uicri-afe  or  decrcafe  in  a  place,  agreeably  to
theobfervaiion  at  ihe  end  f)f  tl^e  note  in  pai2;e  104.

O  4  ' '  to


^,o.o of  ibe  ExpeBation  of  Lives ,

to  it,  from  tb.c  country,  in  the  mod:  robuft
part  oi  life,  and  with  a  much  greater  proba-
bility of  attaining  to  old  age,  than  if  they  had
come  into  it  in  the  vveaknefs  of  infancy.
But,  notvvithltanding  this  advantnge,  there
are  much  fewer  perfons  who  attain  to  great
ages  in  Loudon,  than  in  moft  other  places
where  obfervations  have  been  made.  —  At
Vienna;  of  22,704  who  died  in  the  four
years  1717,  1718,  1724,  1725  (^),  109
reached  90  year?i  that  is,  48  in  10,000.
But  in  London^  for  30  years  before  1769  only
35  of  the  fame  number  have  reached  this
age. — At  Brefuiw  it  appears,  by  Dr.  Halleys
Tabic,  that  41  of  i238  born,  or  a  30th  part
live  to  be  Ho  years  of  age. — In  the  pnriHi  of
jili-JaintSy  in  Northampton^  an  account  has
been  kept  ever  fmce  1 733  of  the  ages  at
which  the  inhabitants  die;  and  I  find  that
a  22d  part  die  there  turned  of  H'o.  At  Nor-^
njDich  iX\V,^  account  his  been  kept;  anditap-*
pears,  that  for  the  laft  30  years,  a  27th  part  of
the  inhabitants  have  died,  turned  of  the  fairjs
age. — According  to  Mr. /itr//c'/^(5^w's  Table  of
Obfervations,  published  at  the  end  of  the  laft
edition  of  xMr.  De  Moivre%  Treatife  on  the
Doctrine  of  Chances,  a  1  A^tb  part  of  all  that  are
born  live  to  80. — And  in  the  parifh  of  Holy-
Crofs,  already  mentioned  p.  183  and  p.  192,

[a)  ViJ,  Abridgment  of  the  Philorophic:^!  Tranfac-
tions,  vol.  V'li.  part  iv.  p.  46. —  It  appears  allb  that  more
than  ihree-hfihs  of  all  who  died  in  thtTe  years  at  Fienna
were  boys  and  {Tii  lii,  by  whom,  I  fuppofe,  arc  meant  per-


I'jns  under  16.


the


(be  State  c/^London ,  PoptilatwH,  Szc. 201

tlie  e/eventh  part  of  the  inhabitants  live  to
80  (a). — Bat  in  Lom-fo?!,  for  30  years,  ending
nt  the  year  1768,  only  25  of  every  1000,
who  have  died,  or  a  40tli  part,  have  lived
to  this  age  ;  which  may  be  eafily  difcovered,
by  dividing  the  fum  of  all  who  have  died
during  tliefe  years  at  all  aii^es,  by  the  fum  of
GJl  wlio  have  died  above  80.

Among  the  peculiar  evils  to  which  great
towns  are  fubjed,  1  might  further  mention
the  Plague.  Before  the  year  1666,  this
dreadful  calamitv  laid  Loncion  almoft  walte
once  in  every  i  ^  or  20  years  ;  and  there  is
no  reafon  to  think.,  that  it  was  not  generally
bred  within  itfelf.  A  moft  happy  alteration
has  taken  place  ;  which,  perhaps,  in  part
is  Dv/ing  to  the  greater  advantages  of  clean-
linefs  and  opennefs,  which  London  has  en-
joyed fmce  it  was  rebuilt;  and  which  lately
have  been  very  wifely  improved.

The  fads  I  have  now  taken  notice  of  are
fo  important  that,  1  think,  they  defervc  more
attention than has been  hitherto  beitowed

(^)  This,  however,  v/ill  appear  itfelf  inconfuierable,
whe/j  compared  with  the  following  account:  "  In  ij6i
*'  the  burii.]s  in  the  diilrict  of  Ckr'ijTianna^  in  Norway.,
*'  amounted  to  6,929^,  and  the  chriucnings  to  11,024.
*'  Among;  thofe  who  died,  394,  or  i  in  18,  had  lived  to
*'  the  a;^e  of  90  ;  63  to  the  age  of  100,  and  {^wcn  to  the
*'  age  ot^"  lOi.  —  In  the  diocefe  of  Bergen.,  the  perfons
*'  who  dhd  amounted  only  to  2,580,  ot  whom  18  lived
**  to  the  acre  of  ico  ;  o:;c  woman  to  the  ace  of  lOJ.,  and
*'  another  woman  to  the  age  of  108/'

ice  the  Ar.uual  Rigijur  for  1761,  p.  191.

upon


20  2 Of  the  Expecfutton  of  Lhes  ;

upon  them.  Every  one  knovv-s  that  tne
itreneth  of  a  ftate  confifts  in  the  number  of
people.  The  encouragement  of  population,
therefore,  ought  to  be  one  of  ths  iirfh  ob-
jedls  of  pohcy  in  every  ftate  ;  and  fome  of
the  word  enemies  of  population  are  the  lux-
ury, the  licentioufnefs,  and  debility  produced
and  propagated  by  great  towns.

I  have  obferved  that  Lovidon  is  now  [a)
increafing.  But  it  appears  tliat,  in  truth,
this  is  an  event  more  to  be  dreaded  than  de-
iired.  The  more  London  increafes,  the  more
the  reft  of  the  kingdom  mud  be  deferted  ;
the  fewer  hands  muft  be  left  for  agriculture  j
and,  confequently,  the  lefs  mufl  be  the  plen-
ty and  the  higher  the  price  ot  all  the  means
of  fubfiftence. — Moderate  towns,  being  feats
of  refinement,  eiDulation,  and  art<,  may  be
public  advantages.  But  g7-cat  towns,  long
before  they  grow  to  half  the  bulk  of  London^
become  checks  on  population  of  too  hurtful
a  nature,  nurferies  of  debauchery  and  volup--
tuoufnefs;  and,  in  many  refpedts,  greater
evils  than  can  be  compenfated  by  any  advan-
tages (/;).

Dr.

(a)  This  increafe  is  greater  than  the  bills  f!ievv,  on
account  of  the  oiriifTiOn  in  them  of  the  two  parifhes  v/hicll
have  been  mod  increafed  by  new  buildings ;  I  mean  Mary-,-
hme  ami  Pancrafs  parifnes.  The  former  of  thefe  parifhes
is,  I  fuppofe,  now  one  of  the  largeft  in  London.

(/>)  The  r.'xcs.n  :iv.nu:.\  births^  zveddinzs^  and  burials  ia
the  following  towns,  for  ibme  of  the  bit  years,  have  been
nearly,

At


the  State  o/London,  Fopiihtioriy  6cc. 203

Dr.  Heberden  obferves  that,  in  Madeira,
the  inhabitants  double  their  ov/n  number  in
84  years.  But  this  (as  you.  Sir,  well  know)
is  a  very  flow  increafe,  compared  with  that
which  takes  place  among  cur  colonies  ia
America.  In  the  back  lettlements,  where
the  inhabitants  apply  themfelves  entirely  to
agriculture,  and  luxury  is  not  known,  they
double  their  own  number  in  i  5  years ;  and  all
thro'  the  northern  colonies,  in  25  years  [^a).
This  is  an  inflance  of  increafe  fo  rapid,  as  to
have  fcarcely  any  parallel.  The  births  in
thefe  countries  mud  exceed  the  burials
much  more  than  in  Madeira y  and  a  greater
proportion  of  the  born  muft  reach  maturi-
ty.— -In  1738,  the  number  of  inhabitants  in
New  Jt'i'Jty  was  taken  by  order  of  the  go-
vernment, and  found  to  be  47,369.  Seven
years  afterwards,  the  number  of  inhabitants
ivas  again  taken;  and  found  to  be  increafed,-
by  procreation  only,  above  14,000;  and  very-
pear  one  half  oi  the  inhabitants  were  found

Births. Weddings.  Burials,

At  Paris, — 19,100  — 4,400 —  19,400

Vienna, — 5,600  — —  6,8co

Amllcrdam,  —  4,600  — 2,400 —  8, coo

Copenhagen,  --  2,700  — bb6 —  3;3<^o
Berlin,  for  5


^rlin,  for  5  1
years, end-  > 7,
ingat  1751  )


years, end- ^ 3,634 —  936 — 4,092

ingat  1751  )

[a)  See  a  difcourfe  on  Chrijlian  Union,  bv  Dr.  Styles,
Bc/iotu  1761,  p.  103.  lOQ,  &c.  —  See  alfo  77?^  Inter r^  of
Great  Britain  confukred  zviti?  regard  to  her  Colonies^  together
wit}}  Ohfervotions  eouLerning  the  increoje  of  mankind^  peopling
ofcountriiij  is't.  p.  35.  2d  edit.  Ljiuicn,  ijbi.

to


2  04 Of  the  Expe^atwn  of'Lkesj

to  be  under  {a)  i6  years  of  age.  In  22  years,
therefore,  they  nuift  have  doubled  their  own
number,  and  the  births  muft  have  exceeded
the  burials  2000  annually.  As  the  increafe
here  is  much  quicker  than  in  Madeira^  we
may  be  fure  that  a  fmaller  proportion  of  the
inhabitants  mull  die  annually.  Let  us,
however,  fuppofe  it  the  fame,  or  a  50th  part.
This  will  make  the  annual  burials  to  have
been,  during  thefe  feven  years,  looo;  and
the  annual  births  3000;  or  an  18th  part  of
the  inhabitants. — Similar  obfervations  may  be
made  on  the  much  quicker  increafe  in  Rhode
Ijlandy  as  related  in  the  prefiice  to  the  Collec-
tion of  the  London  Bills  of  Mortality  \  and  alfo
in  the  valuable  pamphlet,  lait  quoted,  on  the
Inter  eft  of  Great  Britain  'with  regard  to  her
Colonies,  p.  36.  —  What  a  prodigious  differ-
ence mull  there  be,  between  the  vigour  and
the  happinefs  of  human  life  in  fuch  lituati-
ons,  and  in  fuch  a  place  as  London?  —  The
original  number  ol  perfons  who,  in  1643,
had  fettled  in  New-England,  was  21,200.
Ever  lince,  it  is  reckoned,  that  more  have
left  them  than  have  gone  to  them(^).  In
the  year  1760,  they  were  increafed  to  half  a
million. They have, therefore, all  along

[a)  According  to  Dr.  Hallcfs  Table,  the  number  of
the  living  under  16,  is  but  a  third  of  all  the  living  at  aU

ages.

{b)  See  Dr.  Siyleis  pamphlet  juft  quoted,  p.  iro.  Sec.

doubled


the  State  o/'London,  Population,  Sec. 205

doubled  their  own  number  in  25  years.  And
if  they  continue  to  increafe  at  the  fame  rate,
they  will,  70  years  hence,  in  New-England
alone,  be  four  millions ;  and  in  all  North
America,  above  twice  the  number  of  inhabit-
ants in  Great-Britain  [a). — But  I  am  wan-
dering

[a)  The  rate  of  increafe,  fuppofing  the  procreative
powers  the  fame,  depends  on  two  caufes  ;  The  "  encou-
**  ragenient  to  marriage ;"  and  the  *'  expeSiation  of  a  child
juft  born."  When  one  of  thefe  is  given,  the  increafe  wiU
be  always  in  proportion  to  the  other.  That  is ;  As  much
greater  or  lefs  as  the  ratio  is  of  the  numbers  who  reach
maturity,  and  of  thofe  who  marry,  to  the  number  born,
fo  much  quicker  or  Jlovjer  will  be  the  increafe.  —  Let  us
fuppofe  the  operation  of  thefccaufcs  fuch,as  to  produce  an
annual  excels  of  the  births  above  the  burials  yt<\wdX  to  a  36ih
part  of  the  whole  number  of  inhabitants,  it  may  fecm
«o  follow  from  hence,  that  the  inhabitants  would  double
their  own  number  in  36  years;  and  thus  fome  have  cal-
culated. But  the  truth  is,  that  they  would  double  their
own  number  in  n^uch  lefs  time.  Every  addition  to  ths
number  of  inhabitants  from  the  births,  produces  a  pro-
portionably  greater  number  of  births,  and  a  greater  ex-
cefs  of  thefe  above  the  burials ;  and  if  we  fuppofe  the
excefs  to  increafe  annually  at  the  fame  rate  with  the  in-
habitants, or  fo  as  to  preferve  the  ratio  of  it  to  the  num-
ber of  inhabitants  always  the  fame,  and  call  this  Viitlo

--,  the  period  of  doubling  will  be,  the  quotient  prodyced

by  dividing  the  logarithm  of  2,  by  the  difference  between
the  logarithms  of  r  -}-  i  and  r  \  as  might  be  eafily  demon-
flrated.  In  the  prefent  cafe,  r  being  36,  and  ;  -f-  i  be-
ing 37,  the  period  of  doubling  comes  cut  25  years.  If
r  is  taken  equal  to  22,  the  period  of  doubling  will  be  15
years.  —  But  it  is  certain  that  this  ratio  may,  in  many
lituations,  be  greater  than  ^\;  and,  inftead  of  remaining
the  fame,  or  becoming  lefs,  it  may  increafe^  the  confe-
quence  of  which  will  be,  that  the  period  of  doubling  will
he  fliortcr  than  this  rule  give?  it. — According  to  Dr.
Hallefi  1  able,  the  number  of  perfons  betv/een  20  and

4?,


2o6 Of  fhe  ExpeElatlon  of  Lhes;

dering  frotii  my  purpoie  In  this  letter. Tlie
point  1  had  chietly  in  view  was,  the  pre  lent

Hate


4.2  years  of  age  is  a  third  part  of  the  whole  number  living
at  all  ages.  The  prolific  part,  therefore,  of  a  country
may  very  well  be  a  4th  of  the  whole  number  of  inhabi-
tants ;  and  fuppofing  four  of  thefe,  or  every  other  mar-
riage between  perfons  all  under  42,  to  produce  one  birih
every  year,  the  annual  number  of  births  will  be  a  i6th
part  of  the  v^'hole  number  of  people.  And,  therefore^
fuppofing  the  burials  to  be  a  48th  part,  the  annual  excefs
of  the  births  above  the  burials  will  be  a  24th  part,  and  the
period  of  doubling  17  years. — The  number  of  inhabi-
tants in  Neiv-Enghmd  was,  as  I  have  faid  from  Dr.  Styles's
pamphlet,  half  a  million  in  1760.  If  they  have  gone  oii
increafing  at  the  fame  rate  ever  fmce,  they  muft  be  now
640,000  5  and  it  feems  to  appear  that  in  facSl  they  are  now
more  than  this  number.  For,  fince  writing  the  above
obfervations,  I  have  feen  a  particular  account,  grounded
chiefly  on  furveys  lately  taken  with  a  view  to  taxation
and  for  other  purpofes,  of  the  number  of  males,  between
J  6  and  60,  in  the  four  provinces.  According  to  this  ac-
count, the  number  of  fuch  males  is  218,000,  The
whole  number  of  people,  therefore,  between  16  and  60,
muft  be  nearly  4365000.  In  order  to  be  more  fure  of  a-
voiding  exccfs,  1  will  call  them  only  400,000.  In  Dr.
Ualley's  Table  the  proportion  of  all  the  living  under  16
and  above  60,  to  the  reft  of  the  living,  is  13.33  ^^  ^°  5
and  this  will  make  the  number  of  people  now  living  in
the  four  provinces  of  New-Engiand  to  be  666,000.  But
on  account  of  the  rapid  increafe,  this  proportion  muft  be
ronliderably  greater  m  hhiv- England^  than  that  given  by
Dr.  Hallcys  Table.  In  Neiu-Jerfey,  I  have  faid  the  num-
ber of  people  under  16,  was  found  to  be  almoft  equal  to
the  number  above  16.  Suppofe,  however,  that  in  Neiv-
England^  where  the  increafe  is  flower,  the  proportion  i
have  mentioned  is  only  16  to  20  j  and  then  the  whole
number  of  people  will  be  720,000.

I  eannot  conclude  this  note  vv'iihout  adding  a  remark  to
remove  «u  objecStion  which  may  occur  to  fome  in  reading

l>r.


the  State  ^^London,  Population ^  6cc. 207

ftate  of  London  as  to  healthfulnefs,  number
ot  inhabitants, and  its influence  on  popula-
tion. The obfervations  I have  made  may,
perhaps,  help  to  Ihew,  how  the  moft  is  to  be
made  of  the  lights  afforded by  the  London
bills ;  and  ferve  as  a  fpecimcn  of  the  proper
method  of  calculating  from  them. It  is  in-
deed extremely  to  be  vviOied,  that  they  were
lefs  imperfed:  than  they  are, and  extended
further. More  pariflies  round  London  might
be  taken  into  them ;  and, by  an  eafy  im-
provement in  the  parifli  regifters  now  kept,
they  might  be  extended  through  all  the  pa-
ri/hes  and  towns  in  the  kingdom. The  ad-
vantages arifing from  hence  would  be  very
confiderable. It  would  give  the  precife  law
according  to  which  human  life  waftes  in  its
different  ftages ;  and  thus  fupply  the  neceffary
data  for  computing accurately  the  values  of
all  life- annuities  and reverfions. It would,
likewife,  (hew  the  different  degrees  of  health-

Dr.  Heberdcns  account  of  Madeira,  to  which  I  have  re-
ferred. In  that  account  5945  is  given  as  the  number  of
children  under  feven  in  the  ifland,  at  the  beginning  of  the
year  1767.  The  medium  of  annual  births,  for  eight
years,  had  been  2201 ;  of  burials  1293.  1'^  ^^'^  years,
therefore,  13,206  muft  have  been  born*,  and  if,  at  the
end  of  fix  years,  no  more  th.m  5945  of  thefe  were  alive,
1210  muft  have  died  every  year.  That  is;  almoft  all
the  burials  in  the  ifland,  for  fix  years,  muft  have  been
buiialb  of  children  under  {tt\c\\  years  of  age.  This  is
plainly  incredible;  and,  tlierefore,  it  feems  certain,  that
the  number  of  children  under  feven  yeisrs  of  age  muft,
through  fome  miftake,  be  given,  in  that  account,  3-300
or  4000  too  little.

fulnels


••oS Of  the  Expecfdiio?i  of  Lives  ;

lulncfs  of  different  lituations,  mark  the  pro-
grefs  of  population  from  year  to  year,  keep
always  in  view  the  number  of  people  in  the
kingdom,  and,  in  many  other  refped^s,  fur-
Dilh  indruLtion  of  the  ^reatelt  imoortance  to
tfie  flate.  Mr.  De  Moivrc,  at  the  end  of  his
book  on  the  dodirine  of  chances,  has  rccom-
iDended  a  general  regulation  of  this  kind  ;
and  obferved,  particularly,  that  at  leail  it  is
to  be  widied,  that  an  account  was  taken,  at
proper  intervals,  of  all  the  living  in  the  king-
dom, with  their  ages  and  occupations ;
which  would,  in  feme  degree,  anfwer  mod
of  the  purpofes  1  have  mentioned.  —  But,
dear  Sir,  i  am  feniiblc  it  is  high  time  to
finifli  thefe  remarks.  I  liave  been  carried  in
thei«n  far  beyond  the  litnits  I  at  firfl  intend-
ed. I  ahvays  think  with  pleafure  and  gratis
tude  of  your  friendfhip.  The  world  owes
to  you  many  important  difcoveries ;  and  your
n.une  muft  live  as  long  as  there  is  any  know-
ledge of  philofophy  among  mankind.  That
your  happinefs  in  this,  and  every  other  re-
fpedl,  may  continually  increafe,  is  the  finccre
Willi  of,  Si  r.

Your  much  obliged,

and  very  humble  fervant,

NcwinG;tnn-Grccn,  -r»  t-,

Aprils,  1709.  Richard  riuci:.


POST-


the  State  g/'London,  PopuIailoUy  &C. io^


A


POSTSCRIPT.

T  Edmhurgb,  bills  of  mortality,  of  the
f^me  kind  with  thofe  in  London^  have
been  kept  for  many  years.  I  have,  fince
the  foregoing  letter  was  written,  examined
thefe  bills,  and  formed  a  Table  of  Obferva-
tions  from  them,  as  I  found  them  for  a  period
of  20  years,  beginning  in  17393  and  ending  in
17^8. — As  this  is  a  tov/n  of  moderate  bulk,
and  feems  to  have  a  particular  advantage  of
lituation  ;  1  expedted  to  find  the  probabili-
ties of  life  in  it,  nearly  the  fame  with  thofe
at  BreJlaWy  Northampton  and  Norvjich  j  but  I
have  been  furprized  to  obferve,  that  this  is
not  the  cafe.  During  the  period  I  have  men-
tioned, only  one  in  42  of  all  who  died  at
Edinburgh,  reached  80  years  of  age  j  which  is
a  fmaller  proportion  than  attains  to  the  fame
age  m  London.  See  p.  201. — In  general  ^  it
appears,  that  the  probabilities  of  life  in  this
town  are  much  the  fame,  thro'  all  the  ilages
of  life,  with  thofe  in  London,  the"  chief  diffe-
rence being,  that  after  30,  they  are  rather
lower  at  Edinburgh. — It  is  not  didicult  to  ac-
count for  this.  It  affords,  1  think,  a  ftrik-
ing  proof  of  the  pernicious  cffcdts  arifing
from  uncleanlinefs,  and  croudin^!;  t09;ether
on  one  fpot  too  many  inhabitants.  At
Edinburgh,  Mr.  Maitland  fays,  "  the  build-
**  ings,  elfewhere  called  houjh^  are  denomi-
P  '  "  nated


2 1  o On  the  ExpeSfation  ef  Lives ;

**  nated  lands  \  and  the  apart?nents,  in  other
"  places  mxn^AJiories^  here  called  houfesy  are
**  fo  many  freeholds  inhabited  by  different
"families;  whereby  the  houfes  are  fo  ex-
*'  ceffively  crouded  with  people,  that  the
"  inhabitants  of  this  city  may  be  juftly  pre-
*^  fumed  to  be  more  numerous  than  thole  of
**  fome  towns  oi  triple  its  dimenfions."  See
Maitlanis  Hijlory  of  Edinburgh,  p.  140.

In  the  year  1748,  the  whole  number  of
apartments  or  families  in  the  city  and  liberties
of  Edinburgh,  was  9064.  This  Mr.  Mait-
land  mentions  as  the  refult  of  particular  exa-
mination, and  undoubtedly  right,  lb,  p.  2  17,
218. — In  1743,  an  accurate  account  was
taken,  by  the  defire  of  this  writer,  of  the
number  oi families  and  inhabitants  in  the  pa-
n^hoi^t.Ciithhert.  lb.  p.  171.  The  number
oi families  was  2370,  and  o^  inhabitants  at  all
ages,  9731.  The  proportion,  therefore,  of
inhabitants  to  Jamilies,  v/as  4t'o-  to  i  ;  and,
fuppofing  this  the  true  proportion  for  the
whole  town,  the  number  of  inhabitants  will
be  4^-0  multiplied  by  9064,  or  37,162. —
The  yearly  medium  of  deaths  in  the  town
and  liberties  for  eight  years,  from  1741  to
1748,  was  1783.  lb.  p.  220  and  222.  And,
confequently,  one  in  20*  died  annually.

Mr.  Maitland, tho'  poirefTed of  the  data
from  which  thefe  conclufions  neceffarily  fol-
low, lias made  the  number  of  inhabitants
-50,120,  in  confequence of  a  difpofition to
3  exag-


the  State  0/ London,  Fopulatmiy  5cc. 211

exaggerate  in  thefe  matters,  and  of  afiumlng,
without  any  reafon,  a  28th  part  of  the  inha-
bitants as  dying  annually.

\\\  page  220,  he  expreffvis  much  furprize
at  finding,  that  the  number  of  males  in  this
town  was  lefs  than  the  number  of  females,
in  the  proportion  of  3  to  4.  Bul  this  is  by
no  means  peculiar  to  Edinburgh.

All  I  have  been  faying  mull  be  underllood
of  the  flate  of  Edinburgh,  before  the  year
2758.  The  bills,  for  the  lafl  12  years,  have
been  fo  irregular,  and  fo  different  from  the
fame  bills  tor  the  preceding  years,  and  from
all  other  bills,  that  I  cannot  give  tl^em  any
credit.  Either  fome  particular  incorredneis
has  crept  into  the  method  of  keeping  them;
or  there  has  been  fome  change  in  the  ftate
of  the  town  which  renders  them  of  no  ufe.
Probably  the  former  is  the  truth.

From  the  note  in  p.  203,  It  appears,  that
the  chriftenings  and  burials  at  Paris,  come
very  near  to  equality.  This  once  led  me  to
fufped:,  that  there  muft  be  fome  particular
lingularity  in  the  ftate  of  Paris,  v/hich  ren-
dered it  much  lefs  prejudicial  to  health  and
population  than  great  towns  commonly  are.
But  better  information  has  lately  obliged  me
to  entertain  very  different  fentiments. — The
difference  between  the  births  and  burials  at
Paris,  is  much  greater  than  the  bills  (iievv.
P  2  "  Children


212  On  the  ExpeBation  of  Lives ;

*'  Children  here  are  baptized  the  inflant
**  they  are  born ;  and,  in  a  day  or  two  af-
"  terwards,  it  is  the  cuftom  to  fend  them  to
**  the  adjiicent  viiliges  to  be  nurfed.  A
*'  great  number  therefore,  of  the  infants  born
**  at  Paris,  die  in  the  country,  and  thefe
"  appear  only  in  the  regifter  of  chriften-
**  ings."  See  a  book  entitled  the  Police
of  France,  page  127.  And  Buffon%  Natural
Hiftory,  Tom.  II.  at  the  end.  —  '*  All  the
"  children  alfo  received  into  the  FGundling-
*'  Hofpital,  sre  immediately  fent  to  be  nurf-
*'  ed  in  the  country,  at  a  diftance  from  Paris,
'«  where  they  remain  5  or  6  years  j  at  the  end
**  of  which  time  they  are  brought  again  to
**  Paris,  the  boys  to  be  placed  in  the  fuburbs
**  of  St.  Antoine,  and  the  girls  at  SalpetrierCy
"  to  be  further  maintained  till  they  arrive  at
"  the  age  of  twelve  years."  Police  of  France,
p.  81.  —  The  following  pafTage  in  the  fame
writer,  containing  a  further  account  of  this
Hofpital,  is  important;  and,  therefore,  tho*
long,  I  cannot  help  tranfcribing  it  —  **  Let
*'  us  fuppofe,  that  out  of  4000  children  an-
*'  nually  carried  into  the  country,  two  thirds
"  rnay  die,  during  the  five  years  they  are  de-
*'  iliined  to  remain  at  nurfe ;  fo  that  only
**  133-^  would  conftantly  be  the  annual
"  number  fent  b.ick  to  Paris-,  who,  being
*'  kept  at  the  tw^o  Hofpitals  St.  Antoine  and
*'  *SVz^6'/r/('r£'juf]:  mentioned,  'till  they  are  12,
*'  and  fucceeded  by  ^  like  number  each  year,

"  the


the  State  o/' London,  Population,  &c. 2 1 3

**  tlie  total  number  compofcd  of  all  brouglu
"  in the  ruccefTive years, would  make  the
"  condant  reding-  flock  to  amount  to  9331.
"  But  of  thefe  we  will fuppofe  a  5th  part
**  to die every year. Yet even then the
•*  conflant  reftins;  ftock  of  children  ought  to
**  be  7465. How  greatly  then  mud:  we  be
**  furprized  to  find,  by  the  authentic  account
**  taken  from  their  own books, only 640
**  boys  in  the  college  of  St.  Antoiney  and  not
*'  more tham  600  girls at the  Salpetriere  ;
"  fo  that  the  refting  ftock  of  returned  found-
'*  lings  appears to be no more  than  1240,
*'  which  being  deducted  from  7465,willmake
*'  the difference in the deficiencies 6225.
"  What  then  becomes  of  thefe  ?  —  Are  they
"  reclaimed  by  their  parents  ? — Or  do  they
*'  periih for want  of  care?  —  In  anfwer  to
"  which queftions  it  was  explained  to  me;
**  that  as  many  of  the  lower  clafs  of  people
"  were  induced  to  marry,  in  order  to  be  ex-
**  cufed  from  ferving  in  the  militia  ;  fo  when
**  thefe  have  children,  which they  are  una-
**  ble  to  maintain,  they  ufually  fend  them  to
*'  this  hofpital ; which,  therefore, mud be
**  looked  upon,  as  not  only  a  charity  for  the
**  care  of  expofed  and  deferted  children  whofe
**  parents  are  unknov^n,  but  alfo  as  a  public
*'  nurfcry  for  the  fuftcnance  of  the  children
*'  of  poor  people,  who,  tho'  regiftered  at  tiie
**  office,  are  often  reclaimed  from  their  coun-
"  try  nurfes  by  their  parents. This  accounts,
P  3  ' *'  in


214 0?i  the  ExpeBation  of  Lives  ;

"  in  foine  meafure,  for  the  fmall  flock  of
**  children  brought  back  to  the  hofpital  at
"  Pan's. — The  further  difference  is  fufpefted
"  to  be  owing  to  the  infufficient  nourishment
**  they  receive  i  as  this  particular  charity,  as
*'  well  as  the  General  Hofpital,  adopts  that
"  prcpofterous  method  of  taking  in  an  un-
"  limited  number,  while  there  is  only  a  li-
"  mited  income  for  their  fubfiftence."  16.
page  83.

Thele  h&s  prove,  that,  at  the  fame  time
that  the  reriftcr  of  chrijlenings  at  Faris  muft
be  iul],  the  regifter  of  burials  muft  be  very
deficient.  Let  tlie  deficiencies  be  reckoned
at  4600  ;  and,  confequently,  the  annual
burials  at  24,000.  The  annual  average  of
weddings,  given  in  p.  203,  is  4300;  and,
therefore,  the  number  of  perlbns  who  marry
annually  mufl  be  8600.  The  difference  be-
tween the  chriflenings  and  burials  is  5000;
which,  therefore,  is  the  number  of  annual
recruits  from  the  country.  Thefe,  in  gene-
ral, mull:  be  perfons  in  mature  life.  Suppofe
3600  of  them  to  marry  after  fettling  at  Paris.
Then,  8600  lefTened  by  3600  or  5000,  will
be  the  number  of  perfons  born  at  Paris  who
marry  annually;  and  14,100,  or  near  three-
fourths  of  all  who  are  born  at  Paris ^  will  be
the  number  dying  annually  in  childhood  and
celibacy.

The  fuppofitions  on  which  I  have  made
this  computation  feem  moderate; but  if  any

one


the  State  o/' London,  Population,  &c. 215

one  thinks  otherwife,  he  may  make  the  fame
calculation  011  any  other  fuppofitions.

The  births  at  Paris  arc  above  four  times
the  weddings ;  and  it  may  feem,  therefore,
that  here,  as  well  as  in  the  mod  healthy
country  lituations,  every  wedding  produces
above  four  children.  I  have  obferved  no-
thing like  this  in  any  other  great  town.
Many  children  born  in  the  country  are,  I
fuppofe  [a),  brought  to  the  Foundling-Hof-
pital,  and  there  chrlftened.  This  Hofpital
may  likewife  occafion  a  more  than  common
number  of  illegitimate  births.  And,  befides,
fome  who  leave  the  country  to  fettle  at  Paris,
may  come  thither  already  married.  Thefe
are  circumflances  that  will  fwell  the  regifter
of  births,  without  having  any  effect  on  the
weddings.  I  do  not,  however,  know  that
any  of  them  take  place  at  Paris ;  and,  per-
haps, it  muft  be  granted,  that  it  is  diftin-
guifhed  in  this  refped;  from  moft  other  towns.
Nor  can  I  wonder  at  this,  if  it  be  indeed
true,  not  only,  that  all  married  men  in  France
are  excufed  ferving  in  the  militia  from  whence
draughts  are  made  for  the  army,  but  alfo,
that  "Sijifth  of  all  the  children  born  at  Paris
are  fent  to  \\\^Foundling-Hofpital  {b). Thefe

are

[a]  "  If  the  parents  of  a  child  brought  to  this  Hofpital
''  are  known,  the  regifter  of  its  baptifm  muft  be  pro-
"  duced.  If  the  parents  are  unknown,  the  child  muft
**  be  baptifed  after  being  received."  Police  of  France,
pag.  82.

[b)  See  Poh'ce  of  France,  &c.  p.  83.  —  This  writer
adds,  that  a  third  of  all  that  die  at  Paris  die  in  Hofpitnls.

P  4  "In


2 1 6 On  the  ExpeSlation  of  Lives ;

are  encouragements  to  marriage  that  no  other
city  enjoys.  It  has  been  fecn  thatthe  Found-
ling-Hojpital,  tho'  attended  with  this  efFeift,
is,  probably,  in  the  higheft  degree  pernici-
cus;  but  it  is  to  be  vvillied,  that  fome  poHcy
oi  the  fame  kind  wtTih  that  firft  mentioned,
was  piirfiied  in  this  kingdom. — hi  the  end  of
the  2d  vol.  of  Monfieur  De  Buffhns  Natural
Hijiory^  there  are  Tables  formed  from  the
Obfervations  of  M.  Du  Pre  de  S.  Mour,  of
the  French  Academyy  containing  an  account  of
the  ages  as:  v/hich  13,1 89  perfons  died  in  three
pariiiies  Aiparis],  and  alio,  of  the  ages  at  which
10,805  perfons  died  in  1 2  country  pariflies  and
villages  near  Paris. — According  to  thefe  Ta-
bles, many  ??tore  die  in  the  beginning  of  life,
and  much  /'kyjr  in  the  latter  part  of  life,  in
the  country  than  in  Paris.  But  the  circum-
ll:anccs  of  Paris,  and  the  country  round  it,
are  fuch,  that  no  argument  can be  drawn

*'  In  \n(t  Hotel  Dien  (a  great  Kofpital  fiturted  in  the
l^'  micJJIe  of  the  city)  we  may,  he  fays,  beliold  a  hoiri4
*'  icene  of  nufery  j  for,  the  becis  being  too  few  for  the
"  numbers  admitted,  it  is  common  to  fee  4,  or  6,  or
*'  even  8  in  a  bed  together,  lying  4  at  one  end,  and  4
<"•  at  the  other,  ill  of  various  diflempers  in  feveral  de-
i^'  grccs  ;  feme  bad,  others  worfe ;  fome  dying,  others
*'  dead. — Above  ^  fifth  o^  all  admitted  to  this  flolpital
*'  die;  the  annual  numbers  admitted  being  21,823.  -^^^
f  medium  of  deaths  for  three  years  from  1751  to  1753,
*'  4&50. — The  medium  of  deaths  for  the  lame  years  in
''  ^//7  the  Kofpitals  was  6/8i."  lb.  p.  85.  —  In  our  tv/o
great  city  Hofpitals,  St.  TLsivms^s  and  St.  Bartholonieius^
about  600  die  annually  ^  or  one  in  13  of  all  admitted  as
jn  pati^'irvS,

3  from


the  State  of  London ,  Fopulation^  &c . 217

from  hence  in  favour  o{  Paris.  Many  of  the
children  dying  in  the  country,  are  children
fent  thither  from  Pans  to  be  nurfed;  and,
on  the  other  hand,  many,  perhaps  mqfty  of
thole  who  die  in  old  age  at  Paris ^  are  per-
fons  who  have  removed  thither  from  the
country,  fome  to  Plofpitals,  and  fonie  to
places  and  fettlemeiits.  It  is  evident,  there-
iore,  that  thefe  Tables  give  a  reprelentation
of  the  probabilities  of  life  at  Paris,  which,
when  compared  with  thofe  in  the  adjacent
country  [a),  is  jull,  the  reverfe  of  the  truth.
Were  the  children  born  at  Paris,  who  die
in  the  country,  to  be  transferred  to  the  town
fegifter;  and,  on  the  contrary,  the  adults
born  in  the  country,  who  die  at  Paris,  to
be  transferred  to  the  country  regifter,  there
is  no  reafon  to  doubt,  but  that  the  proba-
bilities of.  life  at  Paris,  would  be  found  as
low,  in  comoarifon  with  thofe  in  ihe  coun-
try,  as  the  probabilities  of  life  in  London
are;  or,  perhaps,  much  lower.  —  This  ob-
fervation  is  applicable,  in  fome  degree,  to
mOil  other  great  towns ;  and,  in  general,
on  account  of  the  migrations  from  the  coun-
try to  towns,  navies  and  armies,  we  may  be
fatisfied,  that  we  err  on the  iide  of  defeB,

[a)  It  is  for  this  reafon  that  thefe  Tables,  when  com-
bined, exhibit  juftly  the  mean  probabilities  of  life  for  town
and  country  taken  together  ;  and  that  the  Table  of  the
dccrcncnis  of  life  deduced  from  them  by  M.  Buffon  and
M.  Du  Pre,  agrees  nearly  with  Dr.  Hallcy-i  Table.

whenever


2i8 On  the  Expedlation  of  Lives 'j

whenever  v/e  judge  of  the  probabilities  of
life  in  the  country y  from  the  numbers  dy-
ing in  the  feveral  ll:ages  of  life  -y  and,  on  the
fide  of  excefsy  whenever,  in  the  fame  way,  we
judge  of  the  probabilities  of  life  in  towns.
And  this,  it  is  obvious,  has  a  tendency  to
confirm  all  that  has  been  faid  in  the  preced-
ing Eflay,  concerning  the  pernicious  effed;s
of  great  towns  on  human  life.

There  are  feveral  ordonances  and  arrets  of
council  which  fix  the  boundaries  of  Paris,
and  prohibit  all  new  buildings  beyond  thofe
boundaries. — The  reafons  of  this  regulation,
as  fet  forth  in  one  of  thefe  arrets,  are  re-
markable I  and  it  will  not  be  improper  to
recite  them. — **  By  the  exceilive  aggrandiz-
"  ing  of  the  city,  it  is  faid,  the  air  would  be
**  rendered  unwholefome,  and  the  cleaning
**  the  flreets  more  difficult." — "  Augment-
*'  ing  the  number  of  inhabitants  would  aug-
**  ment  the  price  of  provifions,  labour  and
*'  manufadures." — **  Tiiat  ground  would  be
**  covered  with  buildings,  which  ought  to  be
"  cultivated  in  raifing  the  necellary  fublift-
**  ence  for  the  inhabitants  j  and  thereby  ha-
**  zard  a  fcarcity."  —  *'  The  people  in  the
*'  neighbouring  towns  and  villages  would  be
*'  tempted  to  come  and  fix  their  refidence  in
*'  tlie  capital,  and  defert  the  country."  —
*'  And  laflly;  the  difficulty  of  governing  fo
**  great  a  number  of  people  would  occafion
*'  a  diforder  in  the  Police,  and  give  an  oppor-

*'  tunity


the  St0te  of  "LonAony  Population,  &c. 219

*'  tiinitv  to  rofTues  to  commit  robberies  and

J  ■J

**  murders  {n)."

No  one  can  think  overgrown  cities  greater
evils  than  I  do.  But,  yet,  I  can  by  no  means
approve  of  tliis  policy.  The  efFecft  of  it  mufl
be,  crouding  together  too  many  people  with-
in the  prefcribed  boundaries,  and  rendering
a  town  more  the  feat  of  uncleanlinefs,  infec-
tion and  difeafe. — The  number  of  houfes  in
P^j- is  reckoned  to  be  28,000  [b),  or  30,000;
but  the  number  of  inhabitants,  fuppofing  a
20th  part  to  die  annually,  cannot  be  much
lefs  than  480,000,  or  16  times  the  number
of  houfes.

It  is  happy  for  London,  that  there  have
been  no  laws  to  reftrain  its  increafe.  In  con-
fequence  of  being  allowed  to  extend  itfelf  on
all  lides  into  the  country,  the  inhabitants
now  take  near  twice  the  room  to  live  upon
that  they  did;  and  it  is  become  lefs  the  means
of  fliortening  human  life.  See  p.  189,  191,
and  201.

In  page  203,  I  have  given  the  annual  me-
dium  of  births,  weddings  and  burials  at  Ber-
lin, from  1747  to  175 1. —  In  1747,  an  ac-
count was  taken  with  the  utmoft  care,  by
the  order  of  the  King  of  Prussia,  of  the
number  of  inhabitants  in  this  town  ;  and,  it
was  found  to  be  107,224.  —  In  order  to  be
more  certain,  2.Jkond  account  was  taken  the

{a)  Vid.  Police  of  France,  p.  130.
[b]  Ibid. — There  are  other  accounts  which  makes  this
number  above  50,000,

fame


220 On  the  ExpeSiation  of  Lives -,

fame  year;  and  the  number  found  the  fame
within  200. — In  1749,  the  inhabitants  were
increafed  to  1 10,933.  Their  number,  there-
fore, compared  with  the  annual  burials,  was
as  27  to  I. — This  is  a  higher  proportion  than
could  be  expeded  in  a  town  lb  confiderable ;
and  alfo  fo  much  crouded,  as  to  have,  at  an
average,  16  inhabitants  in  every  houfe. But
there  is  a  plain reafon to  be  given  for  this
fad:.  —  Berlin, for  many  years, had  been
increaling  very  faft,  by  a  conflux  of  people
from  the  furrounding  country  and  provinces.
About  the  year  1700,  the  medium  of  annual
burials  was  no  more  than  1000. In  50  years,
tb.erefore,  it  quadrupled  itfelf.— In  a  city  in-
jcreafing  with  fuch  rapidit3^  the  ratio  of  in-
habitants to  the  annual  deaths,  mu(l  be  great-
ly below  the  juft  (landard. — Were  there  now,
fuch  acceffions  to  London  of  deferters  from
the  country,  in  the  beginning  of  mature  life,
as  would  caufe  the  number  of  inhabitants  to
increafe  at  the  rate  of  10,000  every  year, it
would  in  60  years  be  doubled  ;  and  the  pro-
portion of  inhabitants  to deaths  would  rife
gradually,  'till  it  came  to  be  about  one  third
greater. Berlin,  we  have  feen,  has,  in  fad,
increafed  at  fmre  than  double  this  rate ; and,
therefore,  the  proportion  of  inhabitants  dy-
ing annually  in  it  is  in  reality  very  low.

The  ingenious  Sufmilch,  to  whofe  curious
book,  already  quoted,  I  owe  my  information
concerning  Berlin, makes the  proportion

of


the  State  of  London,  Population^  &c. >  2  2 1

of  people  who  die  annually  in  great  towns,
to  be  from  ^  +  to  -rV ;  in  moderate  towns,  from
-V  to  tV  j  and,  in  the  country  from  Vo-  to  -5^.
— The  obfervations  and  fads  in  this  EiTay,
joined  to  thofe  which  will  be  found  in  the
4th  EfTay,  prove,  I  think,  that  thefe  propor-
tions may  be  more  truly  ftated  as  follows.—-
Great  towns,  from  aV  to  Vt  or  Vt-  Moderate
tovv'ns,  from  Vt  to  aV.  The  country,  from
tV  or  ^,  to  -s^  or  -sV. — This,  however,  muH:
be  underflood  with  exceptions.  There  may
be  moderate  towns  fo  ill  fituated,  or  whofe
inhabitants  may  be  fo  crouded  together,  as
to  render  the  proportion  of  deaths  in  them
greater  than  in  the  largeft  towns :  And,  of
this,  Edinburgh,  if  it  is  not  now,  was  20
years  ago,  an  example. — There  may  be  alfo
great  tov/ns  in  which,  from  a  fudden  increafe,
this  proportion  may  be  lefs  than  in  fmall
towns :  And  of  this,  I  have  juft  given  an
example  in  Berlin.


ESSAY


[ 222 ]


ESSAY II.

On  Mr.  De  Mo IV re's  Rules  for  cal-
culaWtg  the  Values  of  Joint  Lives,

THE  calculation  of  the  values  o^  Ji?Tgle
2Lnd  joint  lives,  from  given  Tables  of
Obfervation,  being  tedious  and  troublefome;
Mr.  De  Moivre  has  had  recourfe  to  two  Hy-
pothefesy  which  give  eafy  rules  for  this  pur-
pofe ;  and  which,  he  thought,  correfponded
with  fufficient  exadnefs  to  Obfervations. —
The  firft  of  thefe  Hypothefes  is,  that  the  pro-
babilities of  life  decreafe,  as  we  advance  from
childhood  to  old  age,  in  an  arithmetical  pro-
grej/ion-,  or  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  the  diffe-
rence is  always  the  fame,  between  the  num-
ber of  perfons  living  at  the  beginning  of  any
one  year,  and  the  number  living  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  next  following  year.  —  The
other  Hypothejis  is,  that  the  probabilities  of
life  decreafe  in  a  geometrical  progreffion  j  or
in  fuch  a  manner,  that  the  proportion  is  al-
ways the  fame,  between  the  number  of  per-
fons living  at  the  beginning  of  any  one  year,
and  the  number  living  at  the  beginning  of
the  next  following  year.  —  All  the  Tables
of  Obfervation  Hiew,  that  the  real  law,  ac-
cording to  which  human  life  waftes.  comes

much


Of  the  Method  of  calculating^  Sec. 223

much  nearer  to  the  former  llypothefiSy  than
the  latter. — In  Tables  III,  IV,  and  V,  in  the
Appendix t  it  is  fo  near  the  former  HypotheJiSt
that  the  ditference  is  fcarcely  worth  regard-
ing. According  to  this  Hypothejis^  therefore,
(accommodated  to  the  Brejlaw  Table,  in  the
manner  mentioned  in  the  note,  page  2.  )
Mr.  De  Moivre  calculated  the  values  oi Jingle
lives;  and  the  rules  founded  upon  it  for  this
purpofe  are  fo  eafy,  that  an  operation  which
would  otherwife  take  up  much  time,  may
be  performed  almoft  immediately.

By  proceeding  on  the  fame  principles,  the
values  o^ joint  lives  might  have  been  calcu-
lated ;  but  the  rules  for  this  purpofe  derived
from  thefe  principles,  are  far  from  being
equally  eafy  in  pradife.  Here,  therefore,
Mr.  De  Moivre  quitted  hhfrji  Hypothefis  ;
and  finding,  that  the y?^<9;?<^  Hypothefis  af-
forded, in  the  cafe  of  joint  lives,  rules  that
were  as  eafy,  as  the  rules  given  by  the  other
Hypothefis  were  in  the  cafe  o^  fmgle  lives,
he  chofe  to  adopt  this  Mypcthefis ;  believing
at  the  fame  time,  that  the  values  of  joint  lives,
obtained  by  rules  derived  from  it,  would
not  deviate  much  from  rhe  truth.  But  in
this  he  was  greatly  mifl:ak.en.  The  values
of  two  joint  lives  obtained  by  thefe  rules  are
fo  wrong,  that  in  finding  the  prefent  value,
in  2i  Jingle  payment,  of  one  life  after  another,
they  generally  give  refults  which  are  near  ^
of  the  true  value  too  great;  and  about  tivo-

fifths


224 Of  the  Method  of  calculating

fifths  too  great,  when  the  value  is  fought  in
annual  payments  during  the  joint  lives. — *
Thefe  are  errors  To  confiderable,  that  I  think
it  is  of  particidar  importance  that  the  public
fhould  be  informed  of  them,  in  order  to  pre-
vent the  inconveniencies  and  perplexities
they  may  occafion.

Mr.  Simpfofi  (in  the  Appendix  to  his  Trea-
tife  on  the  DoBrine  of  Annuities  and  Rever^

fions)  has  obferved,  that  ?vlr.  De  Moivres  rules
for  finding  the  values  of  joint  lives  are  wrong.
But  I  don't  knov/,  that  it  has  been  ever  at-
tended to,  that  they  ^ivcfo  wrong  as  I  have
found  them.  Mr.  Si?npJon%  remarks  point
out  chiefly  the  errors  in  thefe  rules,  when  the
values  of  three  or  more  joint  lives  are  calcu-
lated by  them ;  but,  'till  1  was  forced  to  a
particular  examination  of  this  fubjefl  by
fome  difficulties  into  which  I  found  myfelf
brought  by  following  Mr.  De  Moivre  too
implicitly,  I  did  not  at  ail  fufpe6:,  that  any
fuch  errors  as  I  have  mentioned,  could  arife
from  thefe  rules,  when  the  values  of  only  two
]o\nt  lives  are  calculated  by  them.  Mr.  De
Moivre,  in  coni'equence  of  other  remarks  con-
tained in  Mr.  Simpfon?,  Appendix,  altered  in
the  4th  edition  of  his  Treatife  fome  of  his
rules.  It  is  furprizing  he  did  not  fee  reafon
at  the  fame  time  to  alter  thefe.

That  there  may  be  no  doubt  about  the
truth  of  thefe  obfervations,  I  will  juH:  men-
tion a  few  examples  of  the  difference  between

the


the  Fakes  of  Joint  Lhes.  225

the  values  of  a  given reverfionary  annuity,
according  to  the  rules  to  which  1 have  ob-
jeded,  and  the  true  values,  according  to  the
cxa6t  method of  deducing them  from  Mr*.
De  Mohresfuji  Hypot be/is.

Let  the  propofed  annuity  be  30/.,  to  be
enjoyed  for  what  fliall  happen  to  remain  of
the  life  of  a  perfon  now  40  years  of  age,  af-
ter the  life  of  another  perfon  of  the  fame  age*
The  value  of  the  joint  lives  (intereft  being
at  ji^  per  cent.)  is,  by  problem  2d  of  Mr.  De
Moivre's  Treatife  on  Life-annuities,  8.964;
which  fubtracted  from  13.196,  (the  value
by  Table  VI,  of  a  fingle  life  at  40)  gives
4. 23  ;  v/hich  remainder,  multiplied  by  30,
gives  /.  126.9,  or  the  value  of  the  reverfion  in
a  fingle  prefent  payment.  And  126.9,  di-
vided by  the  foregoing  value  of  the  joint
lives,  is  A  14.  16  ;  or,  the  value  of  the  rever-
lion  in  annual  payments  during  the  joint
lives.— But  the  true  values  are  /.  loz.i  in  a
Jingle  payment,  by  Queft.  L  chap.  L;  and
/.  10.3,  in  aimual  payments,  by  Queft.  IV.—--
The  former  values,  therefore,  are  near  a
qiiarter  of  the  true  value  too  great  in  ih^Jin-
gle  payment  j  and  near  fivo-fjths  too  great
in  the  ^/;;? ?/<:?/ payments.

The  true  value  of  the  fame  annuity  for  a
life  at  66,  after  another  life  of  the  fame  age,
is,  (reckoning  interefl:  as  before,  at  ^per  cent.)
68/.  in  ayZ/z^^  payment ;  and  13-5,  in  an-
?iual  payments.-— But  tliefe  values,  according


2  26 Of  the  Method  of  cakiilating

to  the  Problem  jud  quoted,  are  91/.,  and  21/.
one  of  which  is  near  a  thirdy  and  the  other
above  ha ftho,  true  value  too  great.

In  unequal  lives  tlicfe  errors  may  be  no  lefs
conliderable. — Thusj  if  the  value  of  the  pro-
pofed  annuity  be  required  for  a  life  at  jo^
after  a  life  at  30  years  of  age  ^  it  will,  by
the  fame  Problem,  be  Lib.^^  in  2.  f ingle  pay-
ment;  and  /.  5.1,  in  annual  payments  during
the  joint  lives.  But  the  /r//f  values  are  17/.
and  /. 3.05.

Where  3  or  more  lives  are  concerned  the
errors  will  be  flill  greater.

The  true  values  of  the  joint  lives,  men-
tioned in  thefe  Examples,  have  been  calcu-
lated by  a  rule  in  pag.  16,  of  Mr.  Simpfons
Treatife  on  the  Dodrine  of  Annuities  and
Reverfons,  and  explained  in  note  (M)  Ap-
pendix.— To  fave,  however,  a  great  deal  of
trouble  hereafter,  I  have  thought  proper  to
calculate  Table  VII,  which  gives  the  exad:
values,  according  to  Mr.  De  Moivre^  fojl
Hypothefis,  of  two  joint  lives,  for  every  five
years  of  human  life  from,  10  to  70.

This  Hypotbejis,  I  have  obferved,  does  not
differ  much  from  the  Tables  of  Obfervation
in  the  Appendix^  for  Bre/laiv,  Northampton  and
Norwich.  Between  the  ages  of  '^o  and  40,
it  gives  the  values  oifingle  lives  almoft  the
lame  with  the  Brejlaw  Table.  Under  30,  it
gives  them  fomewhat  hfs ;  and  above  40,
lumewhat  greater.  But  it  ought  to  be  re-
membered.


the  Vdlucs  of  'Joint  Lives.  227

membcred,  that  wherever  it  docs  tills,  it
sives,  at  the  lame  a<?cs,  the  values  of  the
joint  lives  alio  too  little  or  too  great;  and  that,
conlequently,  the  refults  from  it,  in  calcula-
ting the  values  oiReverfionSy  and  of  the  longefi
of  given  lives,  conie  fo  much  nearer  to  exact-
nels.

The  rules  to  which  I  have  objeded  are  the
only  ones  given  by  Mr.  T):  Moivre,  in  all  the
editions  of  his  Treatife  on  Life-Annuities.
But  it  feems,  this  great  mathematician  be-
came at  lall:  fenfibie,  that  they  were  too  in-
correct ;  and,  therefore,  at  the  end  of  the  lall
edition  of  his  Treatife  on  the  DoBrhie  of
Chances y  pag.  320,  (a  work  which  gets  into
comparatively  few  hands)  he  has  given  other
rules  which  come  nearer  the  truth.  But
even  thefe  rules  produce  errors  fo  great  in
many  caf^s,  (particularly  when  combined
with  the  errors  of  the  Hypothefis)  that  it
will  be  beft  never  to  ufe  them.


<i^2  ESSAY


[ 22^ 3


ESSAY IIL


Of the Method of  calculating the
Values  of  Reverfons  depe?jdi72g  o?i
'  Survivotfjips.


ALL  Qaeftlons  relating  to  the  values  of
lives  and  revcrfions,  are  at  pi'efent  of  par-
ticular importance  in  this  kingdom.  Much
bufinefs  is  continually  ti'anfad:ed  in  this  way;
and  any  confiderable  errors  in  the  methods
of  folving  fuch  queftions,  nuifl:  in  time  pro-
duce very  bad  confequences. — The  defign  of
the  following  obfervations  is  to  point  out  a
particular  error,  into  which  there  is  danger
of  falling,  in  finding  the  values  of  fuch  re-
vcrfions as  depend  on  furvivorfliips.  In  do-
ing this,  I  fhall,  in  order  to  be  as  plain  as
poffible,  take  the  following  cafe.  **  A,  aged
**  40,  expe(5ls  to  come  to  the  poirellion  of
"  an  eilate,  ihould  he  furvive  B,  aged  like-
"  wife  40.  In  thefe  circumftances  he  ofters,
"  in  order  to  raife  a  prefent  fum,  to  give  fe-
*'  curity  for  40/.  per  anmuiiy  out  of  the  edate
'*  at  his  death,  provided  he  (liuukl  get  into

"  polief-


Of  the  Values  of  Reverfions^  6cc. 229

^■*  pofledion  ; that  is,  provided  he  rtiould  fur-
**  vive  B. What  is  the  Turn  that  ought  now
**  to  be  advanced  to  him,  in  conlideration  of
*'  luch  fecurity,  reckoning  compound  intereft
**  at  4  pi'r  centV*

Mr.  T)e  Mohre'%  directions  in  his  Trea-
tife  on  Annuities,  Problems  17th  and  20th,
lead  us  to  feek  the  required  fum  in  this  cafe,
by  the  following  procefs.

Find  firft,  the  prefent  fum  A  iliould  re-
ceive, for  the  reverfion  of  40/.  per  anmun  for
ever  after  his  dsath  ;  fuppofing  it  not  depen-
dent on  his  furviving  B.  The  prefent  value  of
fuch  a  reverfion  is  *'  the  (.7)  value  of  the  lite
'*  fubtradted  from  the  pei'petuity,  and  the  re-
**  mainder  multiplied  by  the  annual  rent." —
The  value  of  the  life  is,  by  Table  VI,  13.196.
This  fubtraded  from  25,  the  perpetuity ^  leaves
I  1.80;  which,  multiplied  by  40,  gives  7.472 ;
the  value  of  the  fuppofed  eflate,  after  the  life
of  A.  But,  as  Mr.  T>e  Moivre  obferves,  the
lender  having  a  chance  to  lofe  his  money,  a
compenfation  ought  to  be  made  to  him  for
the  rifk  he  runs,  which  is  founded  on  the
poifibility,  that  a  man  of  40  years  of  age  may
not  furvive  another  perfon  of  the  fame  age.
This  chance  is  an  equal  chance ;  and,  there-
fore, half  the  preceding  fum,  or  236/.  is  the
money  which  fliould  be  advanced  now  on
the  expectation  mentioned.

[a) By  Scholhnr.y p.  34, and Problem  26th,  p.  293,
cf  Mr.  Simpfon's  Selccl  Kxercifcs.

Q..3  TiiU


230  Oj  the  Values  cf  Reverjions

This  iolation  carries  a  plaullble  appear-
ance ;  and  moft  perfons  will,  probably,  be
ready  to  pronounce  it  right;  nor  will  this
be  at  all  wonderful,  as  lb  great  a  mafter  of
thefe  fubje*fls  as  Mr.  De  Moivre  appears  to
have  been  mifled  by  it.  —  Nothing  more  is
necelTary  to  prove  it  to  be  fallacious,  than
proceeding  in  the  fame  way  to  folve  the  fol-
lowing limilar  Queftion.

*'  A,  aged  40,  offers  to  give  fecurity  for
**  40/.  per  anmimy  to  be  entered  upon  at  his
*'  death,  provided  it  fhould  happen  before  ths
**  death  of  B,  aged  likewife  40.  V/uat  fum
**  fhould  now  be  advanced  to  him  for  fuch  a
**  reverlion,  interefl  being  reckoned  at  ^fer
'*  ce7it  V

In  folving  this  Problem,  agreeably  to  the
method  juft  defcribed,  we  are  to  find  the  va-
lue of  j^oL  per  annum,  to  be  entered  upon
certainly  at  the  death  of  A  ;  and  then  to  mul-
tiply this  value  by  the  chance  that  A  fliail
not  furvive  B,  or  by  4- ;  and  in  this  way  the
anfwer  comes  out  the  fame  with  that  already


given,


Now  it  may  be  eafily  feen,  that  this  muft
be  wrong.  The  value  of  a  reverfion,  to  be
received  when  a  perfon  of  a  given  age  dies,
cannot  be  the  fame,  whether  the  condition
of  obtaining  it  is,  that  he  fliall  die  before^  or
that  he  (hall  die  after  another  perfon.  That
is,  whether  it  is  provided,  that  a  purchafer,  if
he  fucceeds,  Ihall  get  into  pofTelTionySi?;?^;-  or
1  later.


depending  on  Zurmivorjlnps.  2  3 1

later.  The  reverfion  in  the  latter  cafe  muH:,
without  doubt,  be  of  lefs  value  than  in  the
former.

The  firfl  Queftion  here  propofed,  refolves
itfelf  into  the  following  general  Q^ieftion.

**  What  is  the  prefent  value  of  a  given  re-
"  vcrfionary  eftate,  to  be  entered  upon  after
"  the  failure  of  two  lives,  provided  one  in
'^  particidar  of  them  fliould  be  the  longeji
''lifer-

Now,  the  prefent  value  of  an  eftate  to  be
enjoyed  for  ever,  after  the  failure  of  the  long-
eji  of  two  lives,  is  *'  the  value  of  the  longeJl
**  of  the  two  lives,  fubtraifled  from  the  per-
*^  petuity 'y  and  the  remainder  multiplied  by
'*  the  annual  rent  of  the  eftate." — The  value
of  the  /ongeft of  two  lives  is,  (as  is  well-known)
the  value  of  the  two  Joint  lives, fubtrad:ed  from
tht/wn  of  the  [a)  values  of  the  two  Jingle
lives.  In  the  prefent  cafe,  therefore,  it  is
9.82,  (the  value  of  two  joint  lives  at  the  age
of  40  by  Table  VII,)  fubtraded  from  twice
1  3. 196  ;  (the  value  of  2i  Jingle  life  at  the  fame
age  by  Table  VI,)  that  is,  16.57  year's  pur-
chafe.  And  this  fubtraded  from  25,  (the
perpetuity)  gives  8.43  ;  which,  multiplied  by
40,  gives  /•337.2,  the  value  of  the  given  eftate
were  it  certainly  to  be  enjoyed,  after  the  ex-

[oi)  See  Mr.  De  Motvre  on Annuities, Problem  IV;
or  Mr.  Simpfon's  Doiirine  of  Annuitiei  and Rever/ions,Pioh.

0^4  tindtion


o  ^  '7


,32  Of  the  Values  of  Reverfioiis

tinflion  of  the  longed:  of  two  lives  both  40;
that  is,  whether  one  or  other  of  them  failed
laft.  But  that  A's  life  in  particular  fhould
jRiil  lad,  rather  than  B's,  is  an  even  chance.
The  true  value  of  the  reverfion,  therefore,
is  half  the  lail  value,  or  /.  16H.6.

In  like  manner.  The  fecond  Queftion  is  the
fame  with  the  Queftion,  *'  What  is  the  pre-
**  fent  value  of  40/.  per  ann.  for  ever,  to  be  en-
"  tered  upon  after  the  extinction  oi'  iv^o  jomt
**  lives  both  40;  that  is,  whenever  either  of
*'  them  (iiall  fail ;  provided  the  firft  that  fails
**  fhould  happen  to  be  A's  life  in  particular  r"
—  Arid  the  anfwer  is  found  Uy  fubtratling  the
prefent  value  of  the  two  joint  lives  from  the
perpetuity,  and  multiplying  the  remainder  by
',  or  by  the  chance  that  A  in  particular
iliall  die  firft  :  And  this  will  give  the  re-
quired value,  /.  303.4  [a).

In  (liort.  It  appears  in  both  thefe  cafes,
that,  according  to  the  firft  method  of  folu-
tion,  we  are  to  fubtrad;  from  the  perpetuity
the  value  of  one  of  the  fingle  lives  ;  when,  in
xX^z  former  cafe,  the  value  of  the  hngeji  of  the
two  lives  J  and,  in  the  latter  c^^Q^  the  value
of  x\\<z\x  joint  continuance,  ought,  in  reality,  to
be  fubtraded.  I  need  not  fay  what  prodigi-
ous errors  may  often  arife  from  hence;  aiid
how  unfit  fuch  a  method  of  folution  is  fer
practice,

{a)  1  have,  thvo'  fcarcelv  necefiary,  given  a  demonftr?-

::on,  of  laeTe  Solutijiis  in  t!ic  Appendix,  note  (N).

Mr.


depend! fig  on  Survi'vorjhips.  233

Mr.  Simpfon^  in  p.  322,  of  his  Sele<ft  Ex-
ercifcvS,  ipeaks  on  this  fubjedt  in  the  follow-
ing manner.  —  **  I  have  been  very  particular
**  on  thefe  kinds  of  Problems;  and  the  more
*'  fo,  as  there  has  been  no  method  before  pub-
**  li(hed,  that  I  know  of,  by  which  they  can
**  be  rightly  determined.  "Tis  true,  the  man-
**  ner  of  proceeding,  by  firft  finding  the  pro-
**  bability  of  furvivoriliip,  (which  method  is
**  ufed  in  my  former  work,  and  which  a  cele-
*'  brated  author  has  largely  infiftcd  on  in  three
*'  fucceliive  editions)  may  be  applied  to  good
"  advantage,  when  the  given  ages  are  nearly
**  equal ;  but  then  it  is  certain,  that  this  is
*'  not  a  genuine  way  of  going  to  work,  and
**  that  the  conclufions  hence  derived  are  at
**  bed  but  near  approximations."

This  excellent  mathematician  has  here  ex-
prefled  himfelf  much  too  favourably  of  the
method  of  folution  on  which  I  have  remark-
ed. —  In  both  the  cafes  I  have  fpecificd  the
ages  are  equal;  and  yet,  in  one  of  them  the
error  is  a  good  deal  above  a  third  of  the  true
value,  and  in  the  other,  2<Jifth:  And,  it  is
obvious,  that  in  cafes  where  three  equal  lives
are  taken,  the  errors  will  be  much  greater.
— Mr.  Si?7ipfo?is  Obfervations  in  this  pafTage
are  true  only,  when  applied  to  a  different  me-
thod ufcd  by  himfelf,  in  the  28th  and  fol-
lowing Problems  of  his  Treatife  on  the  Dec-
trim  of  Annuities  and  Revtfjions.  This  me-
thod is  exa^  when  the  lives  are  equal ,  hut,

it


2  34 Of  the  Values  of  Rcverfionsy  6lc.

it  gives  reiults  which  are too  far  from  the I
truth,  when  there  is  any  coniiderable  inequa-
lity between  the  lives..

It  is  with  reluc^lance  I  have  made  fome  of
thefe  remarks.  Mr.  De  Mohre  has  made
very  important  improvements  in  this  branch
of  fcience;  and  the  higheil  refpedl  is  due  to
his  name  and  authority.  This,  however,
only  renders  thefe  remarks  more  iieceiTary.

In  the  firfl:  Chapter  (Quellions  loth,  i  ith,
I2th,  i4.th,&c.)  I  have  given  a  minute  ac-
count of  the  method  of  finding,  in  all  cafes,
the  values  of  the  reverlions  which  have  been
the  fubjedt  of  this  Elfay.


Ohfer-


f  235  ]


Obje7'vat'i07is  on  the  p7'oper  Method  of
conftruBing  tables  jcr  deter 77it7ting
the  Rate  of  /ju77tan  Mortality ^  the
Number  of  I7ihabita7its^  a7id  the
Values  of  Lives  JTt  a7ty  T'oizm  or
Diff7'i&y  fro77t  Bills  of  Mortality  171
"which  are  give7t^  the  Nu7nbers  dyi7tg
a?2nually  at  all  Ages.


N  every  place  that  jufl:  Aipports  itfelf  in
the  number  of  its  inhabitants,  without  any
recruits  from  other  places;  or  where,  for  a
courfe  of  years,  there  has  been  no  increafe
or  clecreafe,  the  number  of  perfons  dying
every  year  at  any  particular  age,  and  above
it,  muft  be  caual  to  the  number  of  thelivins;
at  that  age.— The  number,  for  example,  dy-
ing every  year,  at  all  ages,  from  the  beginning
to  the  utmoft  extremity  of  life,  muft,  in  fuch
a  fituation,  be  jufl  equal  to  the  whole  num-
ber born  every  year.  And  for  the  fame  rea-
fon,  the  number  dying  every  ye^Tr  at  C/^f  year
of  age  and  upwards ;  at  two  years  of  age  and
upwards ;  at  three  and  upwards,  and  fo  on  ;
muft:  be  equal  to  the  numbers  that  attain  to
thofe  ages  every  year  3  or,  which  is  the  fame,

to


2j6  Of  the  Method  of  forming

to  the  numbers  of  the  living  at  thofe  ag«.
It  is  obvious,  that  iinlefs  this  happens,  the
number  of  inhabitants  cannot  remain  the
fame.  If  the  former  number  is  greater  than
the  latter,  the  inhabitants  vcw^^  decreafs  y  if
lefs,  they  mull  mcreafc,  — From  this  obfer-
vation  it  tollows,  that  in  a  town  or  country,
where  there  is  no  increale  or  decreafe,  bills
of  mortality  which  give  the  ages  at  w^hich
all  die,  will  fliew  the  exadl  number  of  inha-
bitants; and  alfo  the  exa6t  lav/,  according  to
which  human  life  waftes  in  that  town  or
country.

In  order  to  find  the  number  of  inhabitants;
the  mean  numbers  dying  annually,  at  every
particular  age  and  upwards,  muft  be  taken
as  given  by  the  bills,  and  placed  under  one
another  in  the  order  of  the  lecond  column  of
the  1 2th  Table  in  the  Appendix.  Thefe
numbers  will,  it  has  appeared,  be  the  numbers
of  the  living  at  i,  2,  3,  &c.  years  of  age;  and,
confequently,  the  fum,  diminiihed  by  half
tiie  number  born  annually  (<^),  will  be  the

whole

(rt)  This  fubtraclion  is  necelTary  for  the  following  rea-
fon. — In  a  Table  formed  in  the  manner  here  direiled,  it
is  fuppored,  that  the  numbers  in  the  fecond  column  are
all  Irving  together  at  the  beginning  of  every  year.  Thus;
the  number  in  the  fecond  column  oppofite  to  0  in  the
pjl  column,  the  Table  fuppofes  to  be  all  juft  born  to-
gether, on  the  firft  day  of  the  year.  The  number,  like-
wife,  opjjofite  10  I,  it  fuppofes  to  attain  to  one  year  of

a^9


Tdl>/t's  of  Ohftr-vaUons,  &c.  2\j

whole  number  of  Inhabitants. — In  fucli  a  fe-
ritrs  of  numbers,  the  excefs  of  each  number
above  that  whicli  immediately  follows  it,  will
be  the  number  dying  every  year,  out  of  the
particular  number  alive  at  the  beginning  of
the  year;  and  thefe  cxceffes  fct  down  regu-
larly as  in  the  third  column  of  the  Table  to
which  I  have  referred,  will  (hew  the  diffe-
rent rates  at  which  human  life  wafi:es  thro*
all  its  different  periods,  and  the  different  pro-
babilities of  life  at  all  particular  ages.

It  muft  be  remembered,  that  Vv^hat  has
been  now  faid  goes  on  the  fuppofition,  that
the  place  whofe  bills  of  mortality  are  given,
fupports  itfelf,  by  procreation  only,  in  the
number  of  its  inhabitants.  In  towns  this  verv
feldom  happens,  on  account  of  the  luxury  and
debauchery  which  generally  prevail  in  them.
They  are,  therefore,  commonly  kept  up  by
a  conflant  acceffion  of  flrangers  or  fettlersy

age  juft  at  the  fame  time  that  the  former  number  is  born.
And  the  like  is  true  of  every  number  in  the  fccond  co-
lumn.— During  the  courfe  of  the  year,  as  many  will  die  at
all  ages  as  were  born  at  the  beginning  of  the  year;  and,
confequently,  there  will  be  an  excefs  of  the  number  alive
at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  above  the  number  alive  at
the  end  of  the  year,  equal  to  the  whole  number  of  the
annual  births ;  and  the  true  number  conftantly  alive  to-
gether, is  the  arithmetical  mean  between  theie  two  num-
bers;  or,  agreeably  to  the  rule  I  have  given,  thcfum  cf
the  numbers  in  the  fecond  column  of  the  Table,  lefrenei
by  half  iht  number  of  annual  births.  See  Eir:ty  1,  pa^e
174.

who


238  Of  the  Method  of  jormlng

who  remove  to  them  from  country  parlflies
and  viUases.  lii  thefe  circua;iflanccs,  in  or-
der  to  find  the  true  number  of  inhabitants,
and  probabihties  of  life,  from  bills  of  morta-
lity containing  an  account  of  the  ages  at
which  all  die ;  it  is  neceiTary,  that  the  pro-
portion of  the  annual  births  to  the  annual
lettlers  lliould  he  known;  and  alio  the  period
of  life  at  which  the  latter  remove.  —  Both
thefe  particulars  may  be  difcovered  in  the
following  method.

If  for  a  courfe  of  years  there  has  been  no
fenfible  increale  or  decreafe  in  a  place,  the
number  of  annual  fettlers  will  be  equal  to
the  excefs  of  the  annual  burials  above  the
annual  births.  If  there  is  an  increafey  it  will
be  greater  than  this  excefs.  it  there  is  a  de-
er eafe^  it  will  be  hfs.

The  period  of  life  at  which  thefe  fettlers
remove,  will  appear  in  the  bills  by  an  in-
creafe  in  the  number  of  deaths  at  that  pe-
riod and  beyond  it.  Thus;  in  "Cri.^^  London
bills,  the  nuir.ber  of  deaths,  between  20  and
30,  is  generally  above  double;  and  between
30  and  40,  near  triple  the  number  of  deaths
between  io  and  20  :  And  the  true  account
oi  this  is,  that  Irom  the  age  of  18  or  20,  to
35  or  40,  thiCre  is  an  afflux  of  people  every
year  to  London  from  the  country,  which  oc-
cafions  a  great  increafe  in  the  number  of  in-
habitants at  thefe  ages;  and,  confequently,
raifes  the  deaths ioi ail  ages  above  20,  con-

fiderably


ll'ahks  of  Ohfcrvaiionsy  6cc.  239

fiderably  above  their  due  proportion,  when,
compared  with  the  number  of  deaths  before
20.  —  This  is  oblervable  in  all  the  bills  of
mortality  for  towns with  which  I am ac-
quainted, not excepting even the  Brejlaw
bills. Dr.  Hallcy  takes  notice, that thefe
bills  save  the  number  of  deaths,  between  10
and  20,  too  fmall. This  he  confidered  as  an
irregularity  in  them,  owing  to  chance  ;  and,
therefore,  in  forming  his  Table  of  Obferva-
tions,  he  took  the  liberty  fo  far  to  corretft  it,
as  to  render  the  proportion  of  thofe  who  die
to  the  living  in  this  divifion of  life,  nearly
the  fame  with  the  proportion  which,  he  fays,
he  had  been  injorincd  [a)  die  annually  of  the
young  lads in Chrijl-Church  Hofpitai. But
the  truth  is,  that  this  irregularity  in  the  bills
was  derived  from  the  caufe  I  have  jufl  aflign-
ed. — During  the five  years for  which the
Brejla-w  bills are  given  by Dr.  Hallcy,  the
births  did,  indeed,  a  little  exceed  the  burials;
but,  it  appears,  that  this  was  the  effed: of
fome  peculiar  caufes  that  happened  to  ope-
rate luft  at  that  time;  for, during  a com-
plete century  from  1633  to  ijl^,  the  annual
medium  oi  births  was  1089  (^),  and  of  bu-

[a)  See  Lowthorp's  Abridgment  of  the  Philofophicni
Tranfaclions,  vol.  III.  p.  670. — Dr.  HaU:y's  information
in  this  inftance  was  not  right,  as  will  appear  prefently  ;
and,  therefore,  he  has  by  no  means  fufnciently  correclcJ
the  irregularity  I  have  mentioned.

[b)  See  Dr.  .9/,-;'7's  Comparative  I-Iincrv,  p.  63.

rials


240 Of  the  Method  of  forming

rials  1256  {a)>  This  town,  therefore,  mud
have  been  all  along  kept  up  by  a  number  of
yearly  recruits  from  other  places,  equal  to
about  zfevcnth  part  of  the  yearly  births.

What  has  been  now  obferved,  concerning
the  period  of  life  at  which  people  remove
from  the  country  to  fettle  in  towns,  would
appear  fufficiently  probable,  were  there  no
fuch  evidence  for  it  as  I  have  mentioned  ;
for  it  might  be  well  reckoned,  that  thefe
people  in  general,  mud  be  lingle  perfons  in
the  beginning  of  mature  life,  who,  not  hav-
ing yet  obtained  fettlements  in  the  places
where  they  were  born,  migrate  to  towns  in
que  ft  of  employments.

Having  premifed  thefe  Obfervatlons,  I  diall
next  endeavour  to  explain  di(lin<ft ly,  the  effect
which  thefe  acceflions  to  towns  mufl:  have,
on  Tables  of  Obfervation  formed  from  their
bills  of  mortality.  This  is  a  fubje(fi:  proper
to  be  infilled  on,  becaufe  miftakes  have  been,
committed  about  it ;  and  becaufe  alfo,  the
difcuffion  of  it  is  neceflary  tofliew,  how  near
to  truth  the  values  of  lives  come  as  deduced
from  fuch  Tables.

The  following  general  rule  may  be  given
on  this  fubjed.

[a)  It  appears  from  the  account  in  the  Phikfophicctl
Tran/a.^ffons^^Ahudgmemy  vol.  ViI,No.  380,  p.  46, &c.}
that  from  17  17  to  1725,  the  annual  medium  of  births  an
Brejlavo  was  1252,  of  burials  1  507  ;  and  alfo,  that  much
the  greaicft  part  of  Lhc_  births died  under 10  years  of

If


Tables  of  Ohfervations,  &c.  241

If  a  place  has,  for  a  courfe  of  years,  been
inaintained  in  a  (late  nearly  ftatlonary,  as  to
number  of  inhabitants,  by  recruits  coming  in
every  year,  to  prevent  the  decreafe  thatwould
arife  from  the  excefs  of  the  burials  above  the
births ;  a  Table  formed  on  the  principle,
*'  that  the  number  dying  annually,  after  every
**  particular  age,  is  equal  to  the  number  liv-
**  ing  at  that  age,"  will  give  the  number  of
inhabitants,  and  the  probabilities  of  life,  too
greats  for  all  ages  preceding  that  at  which  the
recruits  ccafe ;  and  after  this,  it  will  give
them  right. — If  the  acceffions  are  fo  great  as
to  caufe  an  increafe  in  the  place,  fuch  a  Ta-
ble will  give  the  number  of  inhabitants,  and
the  probabilities  of  life,  too  little,  after  the  age
at  which  the  accelTions  ceafe  {a) ;  and  too
great,  if  there  is  a  decreafe.  Before  that  age
it  will  in  both  cafes  give  them  too  great ;  but
mod  conlidcrably  io  in  the  former  cafe,  or
when  there  is  an  increafe.

[a)  Agreeably  to  thefe  Obfervations ;  if  a  place  in-
creafes,  not  in  confequence  of  acceflions  from  other
places,  but  of  a  conftant  excefs  of  the  births  above  the
deaths  ;  a  Table,  conili  uflcd  on  the  principle  I  have
mentioned,  will  give  the  probabilities  of  life  too  lovv
through  the  luhole  extent  of  life  ;  bccaufe,  in  fuch  cir-
cumfijnces,  jthe  number  of  deaths  in  xhc  firj}  ilages  of
life  muft  be  too  great,  in  comparifon  of  tlie  number
of  deaths  in  the  latter  ilages  j  and  inore  or  Icio  {o.,  as  the
increafe  is  more  or  lefs  rapiJ.  —  The  contrary,  in  all  re-
fpecls,  takes  place  where  there  is  a  decreafe,  ariling  from
the  excels  of  the  deaths  above  the  births.

R  For


542  C^f  the  Method  of  forming

For  example.  Let  us  fuppofe,  that  244
of  thofe  born  in  a  town,  attain  annually  to
20  years  of  age;  and  that  250  more,  all  like-
wife  20  years  of  age,  come  into  it  annually
from  other  places ;  in  confequence  of  which,
it  has,  for  a  courfe  of  years,  been  juft  main-
tained in  the  number  of  its  inhabitants,  with-
out any  fenfible  increafe  or  decreafe.  In  thefe
circumfiances,  the  num.ber  of  the  living  in
the  town  of  the  age  of  20,  will  be  always
244  ?7atives  and  7.^0  fcttlers,  or  494  in  all  ^
and,  fince  thefe  are  fuppofed  all  to  die  in  the
town,  and  no  more  recruits  are  fuppofed  to
come  in  -,  494  will  be  likewife  the  number
dying  annually  at  20  and  upvv^ards.  —  In  the
fame  manner;  it  will  appear  on  thefe  fup-
pofitions,  that  the  number  of  the  living,  at
every  age,  flibfequent  to  20,  will  be  equal  to
the  number  dying  annually  at  that  age  and
above  it;  and,  confeqnently,  that  the  num-
ber of  inhabitants  and  the  decrements  of  life,
for  every  fuch  age,  will  be  given  exactly  by
the  Table  I  have  fuppofed.  But  for  all  ages
bfore  20,  they  will  be  given  much  too  great.
For  let  280  of  all  born  in  the  town,  reach
10.  In  this  cafe,  280  will  be  the  true  num-
ber of  the  livins;  in  the  town  at  the  ao;e  of
ID;  and  the  recruits  not  coming  in  'till  20,
the  number  given  by  the  bills,  as  dying  be-
tvv^een  10  and  20,  will  be  the  true  number
dyino;  annually  of  the  livinoj  in  this  divifion
of  life.  Let  this  number  be  36 ;  and  it  will
3  follow.


tables  of  OhfcrvatlonSy  &c.  243

follow,  that  the  Table  ought  to  make  the
numbers  of  the  livins;  at  the  a<{es  between  10
and  20,  a  feries  of  decreafing  means  between
280  and  (280  diminiflied  by  36,  or)  244.
But  in  forming  the  Table  on  the  principle  I
have  mentioned,  250  (the  number  above  20
dying  annually  in  the  town  who  were  not
born  in  it)  will  be  added  to  each  number  in
this  feries  \  and,  therefore,  the  Table  will
give  the  numbers  of  the  living,  and  the  pro-
babilities of  life  in  this  divifion  of  life,  almofl
twice  as  great  as  they  really  are. — This  ob-
fervation,  it  is  maniieil:,  may  be  applied  to
all  the  ages  under  20.

It  is  neceilary  to  add,  that  fuch  a  Table
will  give  the  number  of  inhabitants,  and  the
probabilities  of  life,  equally  wrong  before  20,
whether  the  recruits  all  come  in  at  20,  agree-
ably to  the  fuppofition  juffc  made,  or  only
begin  then  to  come  in.  In  this  laft  cafe,  the
Table  will  give  the  number  of  inhabitants,
and  probabilities  of  life,  too  great  throughout
the  whole  extent  of  life,  if  the  recruits  come
in  at  all  ages  above  20.  But  if  they  <z<:i\\iQ  2lX.
any  p.irticular  age,  it  will  give  them  right
only  from  that  age;  and  before,  it  will  err  all
along  on  the  fide  of  excefs ;  but  Icfs  confi-
derably  between  20  and  that  age,  than  be-
fore 20. For  example. If, of  X^^q  250

I  have  fuppofed  to  come  in  at  20, only  1  50
then  come  in,  and  the  reft  at  30; the  num-
bers oi  the  living  will  be  given  loo  too  high,
R  2  at


244  Q/'  ^'^^^  Method  of  forming

at  every  age  between  20  and  30  ;  but,  as  jufl
ihewn, they  will be  given 250  too  high  at
every  age  before  20. —  In  general,  therefore,
the  number  of  the living  at  any  particular
age,  muft  be  given  by the  fuppofed  Table,
as  many  too  great  as  there  are  annual  fettlers
after  that  age  -,  and,  if  thefe  fettlers  come  in
at  all  ages  indifcriminately,  during  any  cer-
tain interval  of  life  ;  the  number  of  inhabi-
tants  and  the probabilities  of  life  will  be
continually  growing  lefs  and  lefs  wrong,  the
nearer  any  age  is  to  the  end  of  that  interval.
- — Thefe  obfervations  prove,  that  Tables  of
Obfervation  formed  in  the  common  way,from
bills  of  mortality  for  places,  where  there  is
an  excefs  of  the  burials  above  the  births,
muft  be  erroneous,  for  a  great  part  of  the  du-
ration of  life,  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of
that  excefs. They  ihew  likewife,  at  what
parts  of  life  the  errors  in  fuch  Tables  are  mod
conliderable,  and  how  they  may  be  in  a  great
meafure  correded.

All  this  I  fliall  beg  leave  to  exemplify  and
illuftrate  a  little  further,  in  the  particular  cafe

of  London,

The  number  of  deaths,  betwe<^n  the  ages
of  10  and  20,  is  always  fo  fmall  in  the  Lon^
don  bills,  that  it  feems  certain  few  recruits
come  io  London  under  20  j  or  at  ieaft,  not  fo
many  as  before  this  age  are  fent  out  for  edu-
cation to  fchools  and  univerlities.  After  20,
great  numbers  come  in  'till 30,  and  fome,

perhaps.


Tables  of  Ohfcrvationsy  See.  245

perhaps,  'till  40  or  50.  —  But,  at  every  age
after  50,  it  is  probable,  that  more  retire  froai
Loftdon  than  come  to  it. — The  hondon  Tables
of  Oblervation,  therefore,  being  formed  on
the  principle  I  have  mentioned,  cannot  give
the  probabilities  of  life  right  'till  40.  Be-
tween 30  and  40  they  rnuft  be  a  little  too
high  J  but  more  fo  between  20  and  30 ;  and
molf  of  all  'io  before  20. — It  follows  alio,  that
thel'e  Tables  mud  give  the  number  of  inha^
bitants  in  London  much  too  great.

Table  Xll,  in  the  Appendix,  is  aTable  form-
ed in  the  manner  I  have  explained,  from  the
London  bills  for  10  years,  from  1759  to  1768;
and  adapted  to  a  1000  born  as  a  radix.  The
fum  of  the  numbers  in  the  fecond  column,
diminidiedbyhalf  the  number  born,  1525,757.
According  to  this  Table  then,  for  every  1000
deaths  in  London^  there  are  25+-  as  many  in-
hibitants ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  expectation
of  a  child  juft:  born  is  2;i;  and  the  inhabi-
tants are  to  the  annual  burials,  as  25^  to  i.
— But  it  has  appeared,  that  the  numbers  in
the  fecond  column  being  given  on  the  fup-
pofition,  that  all  who  die  in  London  were  born
there,  muft  be  too  great;  and  v/e  have  from
hence  a  demonstration,  that  the  probabi-
lities of  life  are  given  in  the  common  Tables
^{London  Obfervations,  too  high,  for,  at  leaft,
the  firft  30  years  of  life ;  and  alfo,  that  the
number  of  inhabitants  in  London  muft  be  Icfs^
than  25^^,  multiplied  by  the  annual  burials.
!PrrThe  common  Tables,  therefore,  oi London
R  3  Ubfer-


246  Of  the  Method  of  forming

Obfervations,  undoubtedly  want  to  be  cor-
reded  [a)  ;  and  the  way  of  doing  this,  and
in  general,  the  right  method  of  forming  ge-
nuine Tables  of  Obfervation  for  towns,  may
be  learnt  from  the  folio v/ing  rule.

'*  From  the  fum  of  all  that  die  annually,
**  after  any  given  age,  fubtradt  the  number
'*  of  annual  fettlers  after  that  age  j  and  the
**  remainder  will  be  the  number  of  the  liv-
**  ing  at  the  given  age."

This  rule  can  want  no  exphcation  or  proof,
after  what  has  been  ah-eady  faid.

If,  therefore,  the  number  of  annual  fettlers
in  a  town  at  every  age  could  be  afcertained;
a  perfedc  Table  of  Obfervations  might  be
formed  for  that  town,  from  bills  of  mortality,
containing  an  account  of  the  ages  at  which
all  die  in  it.  But  no  more  can  be  learnt  in
this  inftance,  from  any  bills,  than  the  whole
number  of  annual  fettlers,  and  the  general
divifion  of  life  in  which  they  enter.  This,
however,  may  be  fufficient  to  enable  us  to
form  Tables  that  lliall  be  tolerably  exact.—
For  inflance.  Suppofe  the  annual  deaths  in
a  town  which  has  not  increafed  or  decreafed,

(i/)  The  ingenious  and  accurate  Mr.  ShnpfGU  faw  that
it  was  necefiary  10  correal  the  London  Tables,  and  he  has
done  it  with  great  judgment;  but,  I  think,  too  imper-
fectly, and  without  going  upon  any  fixt  principles,  or
fliewing  particularly,  how  Tables  of  Obfervation  ought
to  be  formed,  and  how  far  in  different  circumftances,  and
tt  differeiit  a^es,  they  are  to  ^e  depended  on.


to


t


Tables  of  Ohfcrvations,  &c.  247

to  have  been  for  many  years,  In  the  propor-
tion of  4  to  3,  to  the  annual  births. It  will
hence  follow,  that  -I-  of  the  perfons  who  die
in  fuch  a  town  ^{'cfeukrs,  or  emigrants  from
other  places j  and  not  natives:  And  the  fud-
den  increafe  in  the  deaths  after  20,  will  alfo
fliew,  agreeably  to  what  was  before  obferved,
that  they  enter  after  this  age. In  forming,
therefore,  a  Table  for  fuch  a  town, a  quar-
ter of  all  that  die  at  all  arres  throup;hont  the
whole  extent  of  life,  mull  be  deduced  from
the  fum  of  all  that  die  after  every  given  age
before  20;  and  the  remainder  will  be  the
true  number  living  at  that  given  age. And
if,  at  20,  and  every  age above  it,  this  de-
dudlion is omitted,  or the number  of  the
living  at  every  fuch age  is  taken the  fame
with  the  fum  of  all  that  die  after  it,  the  re-
fult  will  be  (fuppofmg  mojl  of  the  fettlers  to
come  in  before  30,  and  all  before  40)  a  Ta-
ble exadt  'till  20  ;  too  hii^h  between 20  and
30  -y  but  nearly  right  for  fome  years  before
40 ;  and  after  40  exad:  again. — Such  a  Table,
it  is  evident,  will  be  the  fame  with  the  Ta-
ble laft  defcrlbed  at  all. ages  aboVe  20;  and
different  from  it  only  under  20. — It  is  evi-
dent alfo  that,  on  account  of  its  giving  the
probabilities  of  life  too  great  for  fome  years
after  20,  the  number  of  inhabitants  deduced
from  it  may  be  depended  on as  fomewhat
greater  than  the  truth;  and  m.ore  orlefsfo,as
the  annual  recruits  enter  iu  general  later  or
fooner  after  20.

R  4  Let


24^  Of  the  Method  of  forming

Let  us  now  confider,  what  the  refiilt  of
thefe  remarks  will  be,  when  applied  particu-?
larly.  to  the  hondon  bills.

It  muft  be  here  firO:  obferved,  that,  at  leaft,
one  quarter  of  all  that  die  in  London  •^xtfettlers
from  the  country,  and  not  natives, — The  me-
dium of  annual  burials  for  lo  years,  from
1759  to  1768, was  22,956;  of  births  15,710.
The  excefs  is  7246;  or  near  a  third  of  the
burials. — The  fame  excefs,  during  10  years,
before  1750,  was  10,500;  or,  near /6^^ the
burials.  London  was  then  decreafing.  For  the
lail  1 2  or  1 5  years  it  has  been  increafmg.  This
excefs,  therefore,  agreeably  to  the  foregoing
obfervations,  was  then  greater  than  the  num-
ber of  annual  fettlers;  and  it  is  now  lefs.  I
have  chofen,  however,  to  fuppofe  the  num-
ber of  annual  fettlers  to  be  now,  no  more  than
a  quarter  of  the  annual  burials,  in  order  to  al-
low for  more  omiflions  in  the  births  than  the
burials  j  and  alfo,  in  order  to  be  more  fure
of  obcaining  refults  that  fliall  not  exceed  the
truth.

Of  every  thoufand  then  who  die  in  Lon-
don, only  750  are  natives,  and  250  ^xt  fet-
tlers, who  come  to  it  after  18  or  20  years  of
age  :  And,  confequently,  in  order  to  obtain
from  the  hills  a  more  correal  Table  than  the
1 2th  in  the  Appendix,  250  mud  be  fub-
traded  from  every  one  of  the  numbers  in  the
fecond  column  'till  20;  and  the  numbers  in
the  third  column  muft  be  kept  the  fame,  the
bills  always  giving  thefe  right.— After  20,
-i  the


'Tfihles  of  Olife'rvatlons,  &c.  249

the  Table  is  to  be  continued  unaltered  ;  and
the  refult  will  be,  a  Table  which  will  give
the  numbers  of  the  living  at  all  ages  in  Lon-
don much  nearer  the  truth,  but  11:111  fome-
what  too  high.  —  Such  is  the  13th  Table  in
the  Appendix. — The  Turn  of  all  the  numbers
in  the  fecond  column  of  this  Table,  dimi-
niflied  by  500,  is  20,750.  For  every  1000
deaths,  therefore,  in  London^  there  are,  ac-
cording to  this  Table,  20,750  living  perfons
in  it;  or  for  every  fingle  death,  2o|:  inhabi-
tants. It  was  before  lliewn,  that  the  num-
ber of  inhabitants  in  London  could  not  be  io
great  as  25  times  i  the  deaths.  It  now  ap-
pears, (fince  the  numbers  in  the  fecond  co-
lumn of  this  Table  are  too  high)  that  the
number  of  inhabitants  in  Lojidon  cannot  be
fo  great  as  even  20  times  i  the  deaths.  And
this  is  a  conclufion  which,  I  believe,  every
one  who  will  beflow  due  attention  on  what
has  been  faid,  will  find  himfelf  forced  to  re-
ceive. It  will  not  be  amifs,  however,  to
confirm  it  by  the  following  fa(fl,  the  know-
ledge of  which  I  owe  to  the  particular  en-
quiry, and  kind  information  of  Mr.  Harris^
the  ingenious  mafter  of  the  Royal  Mathema-
tical School  in  Chrift-Church  Hofpital.  —
The  average  of  lads  in  this  fchool  has,  for  30
years  part,  been  831.  They  are  admitted  at
all  ages  between  leven  and  eleven  ;  and  few
flay  beyond  16.  They  are,  therefore,  in  ge-
neral lads  between  the  ages  of  eight  and  16.
They  have better  accommodations  than  it

can


250  Of  the  Method  of  forming

can  be  fuppofed  children  commonly  have ;
and  about  300  of  them  have  the  particular
advantage  of  being  educated  in  the  country.
In  fuch  circumflances  it  may  be  well  reck-
oned, that  the  proportion  of  children  dying
annually,  muft  be  lefs  than  the  general  pro-
portion of  children  dying  annually  at  the  fame
ages  in  London.  —  The  fad:  is,  that,  for  the
laft  30  years,  i  \t  have  died  annually;  or  one-

in  70T.

According  to  Table  XIII,  one  in  73  dies
between  10  and  20,  and  one  in  70  between
eight  and  16.  That  Table,  therefore,  pro-
bably gives  the  decrements  of  life  in  hondon,
at  thefe  ages,  too  little,  and  the  numbers  of
the  living  too  great :  And,  if  this  is  true  of
thefe  ages,  it  mud  be  true  of  all  other  ages
under  20  \  and  it  follows  demonilrably,  in
conformity  to  what  was  before  (liewn,  that
more  people  fettle  in  London  after  20,  than
the  ~  I  have  fuppofed  -,  and  that  from  20  to
at  lead  30  or  35,  the  numbers  of  the  living
are  given  too  great,  in  proportion  to  the  de-
crements of  life.

In  this  Table  the  numbers  in  the  fecond
column  are  doubled  at  20,  agreeably  to  what
really  happens  in  London-^  and  the  fum  ot
the  numbers  in  this  column  diminiflied  by
half  the  whole  number  of  deaths,  gives  the
expetlation  of  life,  not  of  a  child  juft  born,
as  in  other  Tables,  but  of  all  the  inhabitants
of  London  at  the  time  they  enter  it,  whether
that  be  at  birth,  or  at  20  years  of  age. The

ex-peihj->


^ahles  of  OhfcrvatlonSibiQ.  251

expeBatwis,  therefore,  and  tht  values  o^ Lo?i-
don  lives  under  20,  cannot  be  calculated  from
this  Table.  But  it  may  be  very  eafily  fitted
for  this  purpofe,  by  finding  the  number  of
births  which,  according  to  the  given  decre-
ments of  lite,  will  leave  494  alive  at  20;
and  then  adapting  the  intermediate  numbers
in  fuch  a  manner  to  this  radix,  as  to  preferve
all  along  the  number  of  the  living,  in  the
fame  proportion  to  the  numbers  of  the  dead.
This  is  done  in  the  14th  Table  in  the  Ap-
pendix; and  this  Table  may,  I  fancy,  be  re-
commended as  better  adapted  to  the  prefent
ftate  of  London  than  any  other  Table.  The
values  of  lives,  however,  deduced  from  it,
are  in  general  nearly  the  fame  with  thofe  de-
duced by  Ml'.. SimpJoj2,  from  the  London  bills
as  they  flood  40  years  ago.  The  main  dif-
ference is,  that  after  52,  and  in  old  age,  this
Table  gives  them  fomewhat  lower  than  Mr.
Simp/on^  Table.

It  has  fuiiiciently  appeared,  what  judgment
we  are  to  form  of  the  values  of  lives  thus
deduced.  During  the  greateft  part  of  the
interval  of  life,  in  which  the  annual  recruits
that  keep  up  London  come  to  it,  thefe  values
err  on  the  fide  of  excefs ;  and  after  that  in-
terval, they  err,  perhaps,  a  little  on  the  fide
of  defeB  [a),  on  account  of  retirements  from
London  in  the  lafi;  fiiages  of  life.

The

{a)  I  have  not  taken  into  account  the  effect  of  migra-
i\OT\$^rom  towns^  on  T;ib!es  formed  in  the  manner  I  have

explained  \


2^1  Of  the  Method  of  forming

The  number  of  inhabitants  in  London  may
alfo  be  learnt  from  what  has been  offered,

more

explained  ;  becaufe,  towns  in  general  being  kept  up  by
recruits  from  the  country,  the  migrations y;-5;.v  thein  are
of  little  confequence,  compared  with  the  migrations  to
them. — Thus;  in  London,  it  appears,  from  the  much
greater  number  of  deaths  between  40  and  50,  than  in
any  other  equal  interval  of  life  after  10,  that  more  peo-
ple come  to  it  than  leave  it,  at  every  age  between  20  and
50.  After  50,  it  is  probable,  that  the  contrary  happens.
But,  it  fhould  be  confidered,  that  emigrants  from  Lon-
don after  50,  are  chiefly  pcrfons  who,  having  got  for-
tunes in  bufinefs,  chufe  to  leave  off,  and  to  fpcnd  the
latter  part  of  their  lives  in  country  retirements.  But
how  few  are  thefe  compared  with  the  multitudes  who,
tho'  poffeffed  of  good  fortunes,  never  retire  ;  and  with
the  bulk  of  the  inhabitants  in  lower  (lations,  who  never
can  he  able,  without  the  greateft  inconveniencics,  to  quit
the  fettlements  by  which  they  are  fupported  .•*  It  is,  how-
ever, likely,  that  retirements  from  London  arc  now
niore  numerous  than  they  ever  were  ;  and  that  they  have
fame  effeit  on  the  bills  of  mortality,  and  onTahlcs  forme4
from  them;  by  caufing  thefe  Tables  to  give  the  number
of  the  living  too  little,  in  comparifon  with  the  decrements
of  life,  at  every  age,  from  that  at  which  the  migrations
to  and  from  London  become  equal,  to  the  age  at  which
the  latter  ceafe. — To  explain  this ;  let  us  fuppofe,  that
none  fettle  in  London  after  50 ;  but  that,  between  35
and  50,  as  many  come  to  it  as  retire  from  it  at  all  ages
after  35;  and  that  thefe  retirements  ceafe  at  70.  In  this
cafe,  the  Tables  will  give  the  proportion  of  the  living
to  the  decrements  of  life  too  high  '////  35.  At  35,  this
proportion  v/ill  be  given  right.  Jfter  35,  it  will  begin
to  be  given  too  low;  and  this  error  will  increafe  'till  50 }
from  which  age  it  will  decreafe  gradually  'till  it  vanilhes
at  70:  And  atter  70,  the  Tables  will  be  exadtly  right
again. — This  is  the  exa6t  flate  of  the  effe£l  of  retire-
ments from  London,  on  the  London  Table  of  Obfervations.
^jut  this  eftedi  appears,  indeed,  to  be  inconfiderable  ;  for,

afte^


Tables  of  OhfcrvationSi  See,  253

more  nearly  than  by  any  method  which  has
been  hitherto  taken.  It  cannot,  it  has  been
(hewn,  exceed  20  times  -^  the  number  of  an-
nual deaths.  Could,  therefore,  the  annual
deaths  be  afcertained,  we  fliould  know  the
number  of  inhabitants  within  pretty  narrow
limits.  But  the  omiflions  in  the  bills  are
fuch,  that  it  is  not  poffible  to  afcertain,  with
cxadtnefs,  the  annual  deaths.  Dr.  Braken^
ridge  fuppofed  thefe  omiflions  to  amount  to
2000  annually.  The  refult  of  a  very  minute
enquiry  by  Mr.  Maitland  is,  that  in  the  year
1729,  they  amounted  to  3038.  But  they
arc  probably  now  much  more  conliderable,
than  either  of  thefe  writers  have  reckoned
them  {a).  Let  them  be  6000  -,  and  the  num-
ber of  inhabitants  will  be  601,750  at  mofl.

All  the  preceding  Obfervations  are,  it  is
plain,  applicable  to  bills  of  mortality  for
towns  in  general  -,  and  point  out  the  way  of
deducing  from  them  genuine  Tables  of  Ob-
after  50,  the  values  of  lives  by  the  London  Table,  are
continually  approaching  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  fame
values  by  other  Tables  ;  which  could  not  happen  were
retirements  attended  with  any  great  effect. — It  is  proper
to  add,  that  in  fumming  up,  as  above-explained,  the
numbers  of  the  living,  in  order  to  find  the  number  of
inhabitants  in  Lomkn,  the  circumftance  that  thefe  num-
bers may  be  too  fmall  for  fome  years  after  40  or  50,  in
confequence  of  retirements,  is,  undoubtedly,  much  more
than  balanced  by  their  being  given  too  high  between  20
and  40.

(a)  Vid.  Preface  to  a  Colledlion  of  the  Bills  of  Mor-
tality from  1657  to  17585  p.  4,  &:c.

ferv.itions.


254  Of  the  Method  of  forming

lervations,  which  fliall  give  the  true  proba-
bilities and  Vcilues  or  lives,  and  the  true  num-
ber of  inhabitants,  in  the  town  whofe  bills
are  s^iven. — I  fliall  be^:  leave  to  confirm  and
illuitrate  this,  in  the  particular  cafe  of  the
town  of  Northampton.

In  this  town,  containing  four  pari{hes,
namely.  All- Saint Sy  St.  Sepulchre's,  St.  Giles ^
and  St.  Peter  s,  an  account  has  been  kept  ever
fince  the  year  1741,  of  the  number  of  males
and  females  that  have  been  chriflened  and
buried  (Diffenters  included)  in  the  whole
town.  And  in  the  parifli  oi  All- Saints,  con-
taining the  greateft  part  of  the  town,  an  ac-
count has  been  kept  ever  fince  1735,  of  the
ages  at  w^hich  all  have  died  there.

In  1746,  an  account  was  taken  of  the  num-
ber of  hoifcSi  and  of  inhabitants  in  the  town.
The  number  of  i6(9?^j- was  found  to  be  1083;
and  the  number  of  inhahita-nts  5136. — In  the
pari  flies  oi  All- Saints  and  St.  Giles,  the  num-
ber o^  j/iale  ^nd  female  heads  of  families,  ^r-
lants,  lodgers,  and  children,  were  particularly
diflinguifhed.— The  heads  of  families  wert,yoj
malcs:;  and  846  females.  —  Children,  males
624;  females  759.  —  Servants,  males  203;
females  280. — Lodgers,  males  137;  females
287. — In  St.  Peter  s,  males  99  ;  females  129.
— In  St.  Sepulchre  s, adults  638  ;  children  427.
In  this  panfh  the  fexes  were  not  diftinguifli-
ed.

The


Tables  of  Ohfervations,  &c,  255

The  Chrifiejiings  and  Burials  in  the  ivhole
to'-^n  for  28  years,  from  1741  to  1770,  have
been  as  follows.

Chriftened  <  p  ^ o\?,?,  \  4^49  —  Annual  medium  155

ri .  J f  Males  2860  ? „  ^ A  1 J-

Buried >  p.^^^ ^g^g  J  5747  —  Annual  medium  191

In  the  parifh  oi  All- Saints,  from  1735  to
1770,  or  36  years,

Chriftened  \  p^ ^ ?  3242  — Annual  medium 90

^ . , 5  Males  1856? ^  A  1 J-

curieJ I  Fern i8?<is3  ^^ — Annual  medium  102^

Of  thefe died,
Under  2  years  of  age — 1206


Between

2

and

5

—

276

Between

5

and

10

"^SS

Between

10

and

20

—

"^SS

Between

20

and

30

297

Between

30

and

40

—

257

Between

40

and

50

297

Between

50

and

60

-—

300

Between

60

and

70

—

293

Between

70

and

80

285

Between

80

and

90

—

^ss

Between

90

and

100

—

14

Total

3690

/

ATa-

2^6  Of  the  Method  of  forming

A  Table  formed  from  thefe  data  in  the
manner  of  Table  XII ;  or,  on  the  fuppofition,
that  all  who  die  in  Northampton  were  born
there,  would  give  the  exped:ation  of  a  child
jufl  born  28.83  years  j  or,  the  proportion  of
the  inhabitants  to  the  annual  deaths,  as  28.83
to  I.  It  has  been  Ihewn,  that  this  propor-
tion, in  a  place  where  the  burials  exceed  the
births,  mud  hQ  greater  than  the  true  propor-
tion of  the  number  of  inhabitants  to  the  an-
nual deaths  :  And  this  appears  to  be  the  real
cafe.  For  the  bills  rtiew,  that,  from  1741
to  1750,  or  for  10  years,  about  the  time
when  the  number  of  inhabitants  was  5136,
the  annual  medium  of  burials  was  197.5;
which,  multiplied  by  28.83,  gives  56933  or
a  9th  part  more  than  the  true  number.

A  Table  formed  in  the  manner  of  Table
XIII,  would  give  the  proportion  of  inhabi-
tants to  the  annual  deaths,  as  26.41  to  i  ;
and  this  makes  the  inhabitants  5216;  or
very  near  the  true  number.

The  IVth  Table,  in  the  Appendix,  is  form-
ed in  the  fame  manner  with  Table  XIV,  for
London:  And  this  is  the  genuine  Table  of
Obfervations  for  Northampton,  from  which
may  be  calculated  the  true  probabilities  and
values  of  lives,  at  all  ages,  in  that  town.

At  Norwich,  bills  of  mortality,  of  the
fame  kind  with  thofe  in  London  and  North-
ampton, have  been  kept  for  many  years. I

have


Talks  df  Ohfervationsi  ^c. 257

have  been  favoured  with  a  copy  of  thefe  bills
for  30  years,  from  1740  to  1769.  The  an-
nual medium  of  chrijienings,  during  this  pe-
riod, has  been  1057  {a),  of  burials  1206.
And  from  hence,  together  with  the  account
of  the  numbers  dying  in  the  feveral  decads
of  life,  after  ic,  I  have  formed  Table  V,
which  fliews  the  true  probabilities  of  life  in
this  town.

The  following  particulars  feem  to  defervd
notice  here.

Firft.  Had  thefe  Tables  been  formed
from  the  Northampton  and  Norwich
bills,  for  no  longer  time  than  any  10  years
taken  together,  of  the  periods  1  have  men-
tioned; they  would  have  given  the  probabi-
lities and  values  of  lives  nearly  the  fame.
Thefe  Tables,  therefore,  are  founded  on  a
fufficient  number  of  Obfervations ;  and  it
appears,  that  there  is  an  invariable  law  which

(a)  In  this  regifler  all  that  die  before  baptifm,  and
alfo  all  that  are  born  and  die  among  ^uahrs,  ynvSy  &:c.
are  omitted.  There  are  alfo  fome  other  omiflio'ns;  and
the  true  annual  medium  of  births  and  burials  mull  ht
greater  than  they  are  given  in  the  bills.  But  this  will
have  no  efFcdl:  on  a  Tabic  of  Obfervations,  fuppofing
the  proportions  of  the  births  to  the  burials,  and  of  the
numbers  dying  in  the  different  (tages  of  life,  given  right.
— It  is  proper  I  fliould  mention  further  here,  that  theftj
bills  give  only  the  whole  number  of  children  dying  un-
der IC,  without  fpecifying  the  numbers  d\ing  under  two
years  of  age,  between  2  and  5,  and  between  5  and  10,
as  in  other  bills.  I  have,  therefore,  in  forming  the  Ta-
ble for  Norwich,  fuppofed  the  proportions  of  rhefc  num-
bers the  fame  that  they  are  at  North ampton.

S  governs


258  Of  the  Method  of  forming

governs  the  wafte  of  human  life  in  thefe
towns. — The.  fame  remark  might  be  made
concerning  London  {a).  See  p.  251.

Secondly.  An  account  was  taken  at
Shrewsbury,  in  17^0,  of  the  whole  num-
ber of  inhabitants^  diftinguifliing,  particular-
ly, the  number  at  the  age  of  21  and  up-
wards,-—  The  former  number  was  8141;
and  the  latter,  5187. — According  to  a  Ta-
ble formed  for  Northampton,  in  the  fame
manner  with  Table  XIII,  for  London,  the
whole  number  of  the  living  is  to  the  num-
ber of  the  living  at  21  and  upwards,  as  26,41  i
to  16,586  ;  that  is,  as  8  141  to  51 13. — -Ac-
cording to  a  like  Table  for  Norwich,  thefe
numbers  are  to  one  another, as 24,500  to

(«)  Some  have  entertained  a  very  v/rong  nption  of  the
imperfections  in  the  Lontdon  bills.  They  do,  indeed,
give  the  tvhole  number  of  births  and  deaths  much  too  lit-
tle ;  but  the  conclufions  with  rcfpedt  to  the  probabilities
of  life  in  London,  and  the  proportion  of  inhabitants
dying  annually,  depend  only  (agreeably  to  the  obferva-
tion  in  the  laft  note)  on  the  ■proportions  of  the  numbers
dying  in  the  feveral  divihons  of  life  ;  and  thefe  are  given
right  in  the  London  bills. —  For  firft.  There  feems  no-
thing in  this  cafe,  that  can  be  likely  to  caufe  the  defici-
encies in  the  bills  to  fall  in  one  divilion  of  life  more  than
in  another :  But  vi^hat  decides  this  point  is,  that  thefe
proportions,  as  given  by  the  bills  {or  any  ten,  or  even  any
five  years,  come  out  nearly  the  fame  with  one  another;
and  always  very  different  from  the  proportions  given  by
other  bills. — There  are  no  other  variations,  than  fuch  as
muft  arife  from  the  fiuttuations  of  London,  as  to  increafe
and  decre?fe;  and  alfo  from  fome  improvements  in  its
ftate,  which  have  lately  taken  place.  SccEliayl.  p.  190,
191,  201.

15,680;


Tables  of  Obfervationsy  Sec.  259

i«:,68o;  that  is,  as  8 141  105210.  —  Thcfd
Tables,  therefore,  give  the  proportion  of  the
w/joie  number  of  inhabitants,  to  the  number
of  the  living  at  21  and  upwards,  almoft  ex-
adly  the  fame  with  the  true  proportion,  as
it  is  at  Shrewsbury  (a) :  And  this  affords  a
kind  of  demonllration  ot  the  reditude  of  the
principles  on  which  thefe  Tables  have  been
formed.

In  the  parilli  ofHoLY-CRoss  nearSHREws-
BURY,  an  account  was  taken,  in  1760  and
1770,  of  the  i:;ho?e  number  of  inhabitants;
diftinguin)ing,  bot/j  times,  the  number  at  the
age  of  70  and  upwards ;  and  the  /afi  time,
the  number  at  10  and  upwards  :  And,  1  find,
that  a  Table  formed  from  the  Regijier  of  this
parifh,  mentioned  p.  192,  gives,  likewife,  thefe
numbers  as  nearly  the  fame  as  could  poflibly
be  expedcd.

But  further.— The  number  of  inhabitants,
not  reckoning  children,  in  the  parilhes  o^ St*

(«)  The  annual  medium  of  births  at  Shrewsbury,
for  7  years,  from  1762  to  1768,  was  301 ;  of  burials,
329.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  one  in  24^  of  the  inha-
bitants die  annually.  But  it  Ihould  be  rer.lembered,  that
in  1766,  the  fmall-pox  and  meafles  increafed  very  much
the  mortality  in  this  town  j  and  I  find  alfo,  that,  fince
1750,  a  nurfery  iox  foundlings  from  London,  was  eftab-.
lilhed  here;  and  that  in  1768  this  nurfery  contained
660  children  and  fcrvants.  It  fcems,  therefore,  prubable,
that  the  ixut  mediuiit  of  burials  about  the  year  175O,  mult
have  been  lefs  than  329  ;  and  that  the  proportion  of
inhabitants  dying  annually,  may  not  be  much  (greater
than  it  is  at  Northampton  ;  or  i  in  26,41.

S  2  Giles


26  o Of  the  Method  of  forming

Giles  and  All-Faints,  Northampton,  was, ..J
in  1746,  2460  ;  and  the 'Z£'/6o/t' number  of  in-  «

habitants in  thefe two parifies  was  3843.  i

See  p.  254. — In  the  account  1  have  received,
the  particular  age  at  which  the  Hmit  of  child-
hood was  fixed  in  taking  this  furvey,  is  not
mentioned  ;  but  there  is  fufficient  reafon  to
believe,  that  it  was  2  1  :  And,  taking  this  for
granted,  the  number  of  inhabitants,  not  chil-
dren, will  come  out,  (by  fuch  a  Table  for
Northampton,  as  Table  XIII  for  Lon-
don) 2414;  or,  nearly  the  fame  with  the
iwimhtv  really  found  in  thefe  pariflies. — Had
this  number  been  computed,  from  a  Table
forn^edforNoRTHAMPTON,in  the  manner  of
Table  XII,  Appendix,  it  would  have  come  out
only  2  176.  This  remark  is  applicable  to  the
Table  for  Brefauj,  formed  by  Dr.  Halley,
compared  with  the  fame  Table,  corrected  for
all  the  ages  under  20  (^),  by  the  rule,  p.  246.

[a)  I  have  given  Dr.  Halleys  Table  in  the  Appendix
juft  as  he  framed  it.  A  correction  of  it  might  be  made
from  the  proportion  of  births  to  buridls,  mentioned  p.  239.
And  it  would  then  appear,  that  a  25th  part  of  the  inha-
bitants at  Brrjlaiu  die  annually  ;  and  that  half  the  num-
ber born  die  there  under  fix,  as  well  as  at  Norwich.  This
Table,  as  we  now  have  it,  makes  half  live  to  16;  but
the  account  mentioned  in  the  note,  p"ge  240,  (hews  this
not  to  be  the  truth.  It  liicewife  makes  the  number  of
inhabitants  at  Shrew^sbury,  above  the  age  of  21,  to  be
4730  J  and  in  the  parishes  of  All  Saints  and  St.  Giles  in
'  Northampton,  2230.  It  gives,  therefore,  thefe  num-
bers wrong ;  whereas,  as  oblerved  above,  a  correiled  Ta-
ble would  give  them  true.

The


Tables  of  Obfervations,  &c.  261

The  necefilty,  therefore,  of  this  correftion  is
verified  by  fads  -,  and  it  appears,  abundantly,
that  the  Tables  I  have  given  for  North-
ampton and  Norwich  may  be  depended
on.

But,  thirdly.  In  comparing  thefe  two  Ta-
bles, it  may  be  obferved,  tfiat  there  is  a  dif-
ference between  them  in  favour  of  Noi^rn-
AM^T on,  fewer  dying  there  in  childhood,
and  i?2ore  in  old  age.  The  fame  would  be
found  to  be  true,  were  the  Northampton
Table  to  be  compared  with  a  corrcded  Bres-
LAW  Table.  It  appears,  therefore,  agree-
ably to  what  might  have  been  expeifled,  that
Northampton,  being  a  fmall  town  com-
pared with  Breslaw  and  Norwich,  is  lefs
unfavourable  to  health  and  longevity.  The
difference,  however,  i^  not  confiderable.  Af-
ter the  age  of  20,  there  is  a  firiking  confor-
mity between  all  the  three  Tables,  Vvhich
gives  them  great  weight  and  authority.

Further.  It  ought  to  be  particularly  no-
ted, that  thefe  Tables  prove,  the  decrements
of  life  in  moderate  towns,  to  be  nearly  equal
thro'  moft  of  its  ftages.  At  Northamp-
ton it  appears  that,  of  a  given  number  of
perfons  alive  at  20,  the  lame  number  die
every  year  'till  78,  without  any  interruption
worth  notice,  except  between  the  ages  of
30  and  40. — A  Hke  uniform  decreafc  in  the
probabilities  of  life  appear  in  the  Breslaw


262  of  the  Method  of  forming

and  Norwich  Tables;  but  not  fo  remark-
ably. It  was  this  clrcumftance  in  the  Bres-
LAW  Table,  that  led  Mr.  De  Moivre  to  the
HypothefiSj  defcribed  in  p.  2,  and  fo  often
mentioned  in  this  work.— The  values  of  lives,
I  have  faid,  deduced  from  this  Hypothejis,
agree  fo  nearly  with  the  fame  values  deduced
immediately  from  theTablcs,  that  it  is  fcarce-
]y  worth  while  to  diftinguifh  them.  But  that
every  one  may  be  able  to  judge  of  this  for
himfelF,  I  have  calculated  {a)  the  following
Table.


Value  of  a  life
at  the  age

By  Brcjlaiv
Table.

By  Norivkb
Table.

By  Northamp-
ton Table.

By  Mr.  De  Mot
'vre's  Hypotbtfii.

12

17.617

17.48

17.20

16.69

RecKon-

16.49

16.41

15-93

15.89

iDg in-  IjO
tereft  at  \
4  per 40

12.90

14.85
13.10

14.68

i3-'9

-- 50

10.87

II. 13

11.25

1^-34

60

8.58

8.54

9.02

9.01

70

5-59

5-99

6.26

6.06

75

4.21

4.86

479

4.29

It  may  be  obferved  in  this  Table,  that  the
values,  by  the  Iijpothefsy  come  nearer  to  the
true  values  by  the  Northampton  and
Norwich  Tables,  than  by  the  Breslaw
Table  ;  and  alfo,  that,  before  the  age  of  60,
they  are  all  much  higher  than  the  values  for

(fl)  Every  calculation  of  this  kind  may  be  made  with-
out much  bbour,  by  a  rule  explained  in  note  (O)  Ap'
pendlx,

the


Tables  of  Obfervationsy  &c. 263

the  {\m^  ages  in  London  by  Table  X; the
inhabitants  oi London y  (as  Mr.  De  Mohre  ob-
ferves)  being  **  for  caufes  {ci)  too  well  known,
"  more  fliort-lived  than  the  reft  of  mankind."
— The  HypotbefiSy  therefore,  is  by  no  means
applicable  to  London  lives. It  is  proper  to
add,  that  neither  can  it  be  applied  to  the  va-
luation of  Country  lives. — It  appears,  from
the  regifter  of  the  parifli  of  Ho/y-Crofs  [b)y
that  the  expeBations  of  lives  there are  much
greater  than  the  expe6lations  by  the  Hypotbejis,
— 'The  expcSiation  there  of  a  life  [c]
At  20  is  38 V>^Hypoth.ii \nLorJ.2%.c^
27 33.9  29.5  25.1

30 32  28  23.6

40 25.7  23  19.6

50 20  18  16

60 14.5  13  12.4.

70 10  8  8.8

From

{a)  Do6lrine  of  Chances,  p.  347.

{}))  Sec  Eflay  I.  p.  191.  —  I  have  not  given  the  Tabic?
of  Obfervations  from  whence  thefe  condufions  are  de-
duced, becaufe  it  is  poilible,  feme  may  think  20  years  not
a  period  long  enough,  toafrord  data  in  this  cafe  of  I'ulnci-
ent  authority.  I  have  in  p.  257,  mentioned  a  fa£l  which
feems  to  prove  the  contrary.  It  is,  however,  certain,
that  the  fame  regifter  continued  10  or  20  years  longer,
will  afford  data  more  to  be  depended  on.

(^)  The  expe£tation  of  a  child  juft  born  in  this  parifh,
is  33.  At  Northampton,  25I.  At  Norwich,  23I.
In  London,  18. — In  this  parifh,  i  in  11  dies  at  80,  and
upwards.  In  NoRTHAiMPTON  ;  1  in  22.  InKoRWiCH;
1  in  27. In  London  ;  i  in  40. See  Eflay  I.  p.  200.

S  4  1  will


264.  Of  the  Method  of  forming

From  this  comparifon  it  appears,  that  th?
Ilypothefis ,  from  20  to  60,  gives  nearly  the

medium


I  will  aJd,  that  the  probabilities  of  life  here,  appear  to
be  much  the  fame,  with  the  probabilities  of  life  among
the  minifters  and  profefTors  inScoTLAND. — This  is  a  fa6t
of  fomc  confequencc  ;  and,  therefore,  1  fhall  beg  leave
^o  give  a  brief  account  of  it.

The  mean  age  at  which  the  minifters  and  profeflbrs
enter  into  benefices  and  profelTorfhips  in  Scotland,  is  reck-
oned to  be  27.  Their  number  is  974.  The  eftablifh-
ment  among  them  for  providing  for  their  widows,  begun
on  the  25th  oi  A'larcb  1744J  from  which  time  to  Novem-
ber 22,  1768,  721  have  died:  That  is,  29.23  annually;
or  I  in  33-5-.  The  expcilation,  therefore,  of  a  life  among
them,  at  the  age  of  27,  is  33^;  which  is  neaily  the  fame
with  the  expectation^  as  given  above,  of  a  life  of  the  fame
age  in  the  parifh  of  Holy-Crofs;  and  y^  years  more,  thati
the  expe^ation  of  the  fame  age  by  Tables  III,  IV  and  V.
—  Now,  the  expcSlation  at  a  given  age,  being  compofed
of  all  the  probabilities  of  life  from  that  age  to  the  extre-
mity of  life;  there  arifes  from  hence  reafon  for  conclud-
ing, that  the  probabilities  of  life  among  the  minifters  in
Scotlmul,  cannot  differ  much  in  any  part  of  life,  from
thofe  in  this  parifh.-^ But  there  is  another  fatl  that  con-
firms this  obfervation.

The  annual  average  of  weddings  among  the  minifters
2nd  profeflbrs  in  Sco  rLAND,  for  the  laft  24  years,  has
been  at  moft  32.  The  average  of  married  perfons  among
them,  for  17  years  ending  in  1767,  had  been  667.  This
number,  divided  by  32..  gives  20.84,  ^^e  expectation  of  mar-
riage among  them  ;  which  is  1~  years  more  than  the  ex-
fetation  of  marriage  would  be,  by  Dr.  Halley's  Table,  on
the  fuppofition,  that  all  ift,  2d  and  3d  marriages  may  be
juftly  confidercd  as  commencing,  one  v^ith  another,  fo
early  as  the  age  of  30. — The  expc£iation  of  two  equal
joint  lives  is  to  the  expeSiation  of  zfi7igle  life  of  the  fame  age,
3S  2  to  3,  by  note  (L)  Appendix,  it  follows,  therefore,  thac
among  the  minifters  in  Scotland^  the  expe^ation  of  zfingU

life


Tables  of  Ohfcrvationsy  &c.  265

medium  between  the  expeBations  of  London
and  Country  lives ;  and  for  tiiis  reafon  it  is
excellently  adapted  to  general  ufe. — After  60,
the  cxpeBatlons  and  values  oflives  in  London
approach  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  expectations
and  values  of  lives  in  Northampton,  Norwich
and  Bre/la-zu ;  'till,  at  70,  they  come  to  be
almofl  the  fame.  This  is  a  circumftance
which,  I  believe,  has  not  been  attended  to;
And  it  is  the  more  furprizing,  as  there  is  no
caufe  known,  which  can  produce  any  error
in  the  values  of  lives  after  60,  deduced  from
the  London  Taole,  except  migrations  from
London  ;  and  the  effe6t  of  thefe  mull  be  to
diminiPd  thefe  values.

The  following  obfcrvatlons  will,  perhaps,
account  for  this.

It  has  been  proved,  that  at  leaft  half  ih^
inhabitants  of  London,  turned  of  20  years
of  age,  are  emigrants  to  London  from  the
country.  So  great  a  change  as  that,  from
the  count?')'  air  and  modes  of  life,  tp  the  air
and  modes  of  life  in  Londcn,  muft  be  parti-
life  at  30  cannot  be  lefs  than  31.26.  Moft  probably  it
is  more;  on  account  of  the  later  commencefnent  of  mar-
riage in  the  fituation  of  the  Scotch  miniftcrs.  —  \  reckon
alfo,  that  27  muft  be  lefs  th<>n  the  mean  a'^^e  at  which
they  enter  their  benefices  and  profefioidiips ;  meaning
by  it,  not  the  age  on  each  fide  of  which  equal  numbers
enter  j  but  the  age  at  which,  the  exccfs  of  the  interval
of  time  taken  to  enter  on  one  fide,  is  juft  fuch  as  to  com-
penfatc  the  greater  numbers  who  enter  on  the  other  fide.
See  the  conclufion  of  note  (F)  Appendix.

cularly


266  Of  the  Method  of  forming

cularly  hurtful  to  thefe  perfons;  and,  there-
fore, (except  infants)  it  is  in  them,  probably,
that  the  pernicious  influence  o^ London  on  its
inhabitants  chiefly  appears.  They  come  in
at  every  age  'till  near  50  ;  and  this  is  the  rea-
ibn  why  the  deaths  continually  increafe  in
London  'till  that  age  ;  but,  after  that  age,  the
inhabitants  confiding  chiefly  of  perfons,  who
(like  men  ifed  to  drink)  have  h^^n  feafoned  to
London^  or  with  v/hom  it  does  not  happen
particularly  to  difagree;  the  number  of  deaths
becomes  lefs,  and  the  values  of  lives  begin  to
approach  nearer  to  the  common  flandard  in
other  towns.

There  is  one  more  facft  which  I  {hall  here
take  notice  of  j  and  which  deferves  more  at-
tention than  has  been  hitherto  befl:owed  upon
it.  I  mean ;  "  the  difference  between  the
**  probabilities  of  life  among  males  and  fe-
"  males,  in  favour  of  the  latter."

From  the  account  in  p.  254,  it  appears,  that
at  Northampton,  tho'  nioxQ ?nales  are  born
l\\?iX\  females,  and  nearly  the  fame  number
die;  yet  the  number  of  livingy^Z/'M/cj- is  greater
than  the  number  of  males,  in  the  proportion
of  2301  to  1770,  or  39  to  30.  This  cannot
be  accounted  for,  without  fuppoling,  that
males  are  more  fhort-lived  thany^;72^/^j. — One
obvious  rcafon  of  this  fadl  is,  that  males  are
more  fubje(5l  to  untimely  deaths  by  accidents
of  various  kinds ;  and  alfo,  in  general,  more
addided  to  the  excelTes  and  irregularities
c  which


Tables  of  Obfcrvatlcns,  &c.  267

which  (liorten  life.  But  this  is  by  no  means
the  07ily  reafon.  For  it  ihould  be  obferved,
that  at  Northampton  the  number  of/t'-
male  children  was,  in  1746,  greater  than  the
number  of  male  children,  in  the  proportion  of
759  to  624. — The  greater  mortahty  of  males,
therefore,  takes  place  among  children. — But
this,  together  with  the  greater  mortality  in
general  of  males  at  all  ages,  will  more  parti-
cularly appear  from  the  following  recital  of
fads.

In  the  pariOi  o^ Holy-C?'ofsy  Salop,  the  Inge-
nious Vicar,  Mr.  Gorfuch,  in  1760,  and  again
in  1770,  took  the  number  of  male  and  fe-
male inhabitants  turned  of  70.  In  1760,  the
number  of  females  turned  of  this  age,  was
35;  of  males,  8.  In  1770,  thefe  numbers
were,  females,  35;  males,  26.  And  for  the
Jaft  10  years  11,  cut  of  365  have  died  be-
tween the  ages  of  "^^^  and  102;  and  they
were  all  females.

At  Berlin,  it  appeared,  from  the  accu-
rate account  which  was  taken  of  the  inhabi-
tants in  1747,  and  which  lias  been  mentioned
in  p.  219,  that  the  number  oi jejnale  citizens
exceeded  the  number  oi  male  citizens,  in  the
proportion  of  459  to  391  :  And  yet,  out  of
this  fmaller  number  of  males,  more  had  died,
for  20  years  preceding  1751,  in  the  propor-
tion of  19  to  17  (^).

{a)  Vid.  SiifiiiUch,  p.  8,  and  p.  32,  &c.  where  a  mi-
nute account  is  given  of  the  number  of  males  and  females
at  Berlin  in  1747;  and  alfo,  of  the  numbers  of  each
fex  that  had  died  from  1722  to  1750.

At


263  Of  the  Method  of  forming

At  EdIxNBUrgh,  in  1743,  the  number  of
females  was  to  the  number  oi males y  as  4  to  3  j
(See  Eflay  1.  p.  2 1 1 )  but  the  ferhales  that  died
finnually,  from  1749  to  1758,  were  to  the
males,  in  no  higher  proportion  than  34-  to  3.
Before  1749,  the  bills  give  the  totals  of  bu-
rials, without  diftinguifliing  them  into  the
totals  of  males  and  females  dying  every  year.

Mr.  Kefeboom,  in  his  Effay  on  the  num-
bers of  people  in  Holland,  informs  us,
that  from  the  Tables  of  allignable  Annuities
for  lives  in  Holland,  which  had  been  kept
there  for  125  years,  wherein  the  ages  of  the
perfons  dying  are  truly  entered;  it  appears,
that  females  have,  in  all  accidents  of  age,
lived  about  3  or  4  years  longer  than  the  fame
number  of  males.  See  Pbilofophical  Tran-
faSlions  abridged.  Vol.  IX,  p.  326.

In  Volume  the  7th  of  the  Pbilofophical
^ranfaBions  abridged.  Part  IV,  p.  46,  &c.
there  is  an  account  of  the  numbers  of  male
and  female  ftill-born  children  and  chryfoms,
and  of  boys  and  girls  under  10,  of  married
men  and  married  women,  and  of  widows
and  widowers,  who  died  for  a  courfe  of  years
at  Viennay  BrefaWy  Drefden,  LeipfiCy  Ratifbon,
and  fome  other  towns  in  Germany.

He  that  will  take  the  pains  to  examint?
thefe  accounts  will  find  that,  though  in  thefe
towns  the  proportion  of  males  and  females
bqrn  is no  higher  than 19  to  18,  yet the

pro^


Tables  of  Obfervations^  &c.  269

proportion  of  boys  and  girls  (^)  that  die  i§
8  to  7 ;  and  that,  in  particular,  \\\tJiili-born
and  chryfom  males,  are  to  the  ftill-born  and
chryfomyt';;W<?j-,  as  3  to  2.

In  thefe  accounts  it  appears  alfo,  that  of
7270  7narried  perfons  who  had  died  in  thefe
towns  {U),  43'?6  were  married  men,  and  but
2934.  married 'Z£j(5;;;^«j  that  is,  t/jree  mzTntdmeft
died  to  two  married  women. — The  fcheme  for
making  provifion  for  the  widows  and  orphans
of  the  minifters  in  Scotland,  has  obliged
them  to  keep  an  account  of  tlie  number  of
weddings  among  them,  and  the  number  of
widows  left  annually ;  and  it  appears,  from
the  reports  of  the  trujlees  for  carrying  this
fcheme  into  execution,  that  the  annual  me-
dium of  weddings  [c),  is  (as  obferved  in  the
note,  p.  264)  at  mofi:  32. And  the  annual

[a]  In  the  accounts  from  Brejlaw  it  is  particularly
mentioned,  that  by  boys  and  girh  are  meant  children  to
10  years  of  age,  of  whom,  for  8  years  fron^  17^7  ^o  ^725,
y^z/^n  males  died  x.o  fix  females,  exclufivcly  of  ihcjilll-born
and  chryfoms.

{b)  In  Brejlaw  alone,  for  the  eight  years  mentioned  in
the  laft  note,  1891  married  men  died,  to  Iig6  married
women  ;  that  is  5  to  3, — in  Drefden  alone,  for  five
years,  thefe  numbers  were  1080  and  849.

[c)  The  annual  medium  of  weddings,  among  the  mi-
nifters admitted  to  benefices,  has  been,  for  24.  years  from
the  commencement  of  the  fcheme,  27.  Befides  thefe  I
find  there  have  been  4  weddings  annually  among  them,
before  admiffion  to  benefices.  The  whole  annual  medium,
therefore,  is  no  more  than  31.  But  1  have  fuppofed  ic
32,  in  order  to  go  upon  more  Xure  grounds.

medium


270 Of  the  Method  of  forming

medium  of  widows,  who  have  come  upon  the
fcheme  for  24  years,  is  20.  Of  32  marriages
then  contracted  annually,  20  become  extincft
by  the  deaths  of /^E/y^^^Wj;  and  but  12  by  the
deaths  oi  wives.  That  isj  among  the  mini-
flers  and  pro^efTors  in  Scotland,  20  mar-
ried men  die  to  1 2  married  women ;  or  5  to  3.
It  appears,  therefore,  that  there  is  the  chance
of  3  to  2,  and  in  fome  circumftances  even  a
greater  chance,  that  the  ivoman  fhall  be  the
furvivor  of  a  marriage,  and  not  the  j]2a?i.  In
order  to  account  for  this  by  the  difference  of
age  between  men  and  their  wives,  this  dif-
ference ought  to  be  at  leaft  12  years  [a).
That  is  J  fuppoling  the  mean  age  at  which
women  marry  to  be  23,  the  mean  age  at
which  men  marry  ought  to  be  35.  But  this
feems  to  exceed  the  bounds  of  credibility;
and,  therefore,  very  probably,  the  greater
mortality  of  males  muft  operate  in  this  cafe.

It  is  further  obfervable  in  the  accounts  from
Germanyy  to  which  I  have  referred,  that  the
number  of  widows  dying  annually,  is  four
times  the  number  of  widowers  {b) ;  and,  as

widows

(a)  The  chance  of  furvlvorfhip  between  two  perfons
aged  21  and  34,  is  nearly  3  lo  2  in  favour  of  the  former.
1  here  is  the  fame  chance  of  furvivorlhip  between  25
and  37;  and  20  and  39.  This  may  be  learnt  from  Pro-
blem XVI,  in  Mr.  De  Mohr/s  Treatife  on  Llfe-Jnnui-
ties.

(b)  In  DrefJe?j  alone,  the  number  oi  widoivs  who  died,
in  four  years,  was  584.  The  number  of  widowers^  149-
That  is  i  4  to  i.  —  It  appears  from  note  (^}  in  the  laft


Rubles  of  Ohfervaiions,  &c.  271

widows  are  certainly,  one  with  another,  feve-
ral  years  younger  than  widowers ;  it  may  be
concluded  from  hence,  that  the  number  of
the  former  in  life  together  could  not  be  lefs
than  five  times  the  latter. — This  fad:  is  like-
wife  confirmed,  by  the  obfervations  which
have  been  made  among  the  miniflers  in  jScot^
land.  At  the  commencement  of  the  fcheme
which  I  have  fo  often  had  occafion  to  men-
tion, an  account  was  taken  of  the  number  of
the  widows  of  miniflers  in  the  whole  coun-
try. 364  were  counted ;  and,  probably,  the
true  number  was  greater.  See  p.  95  and  96.
On  the  contrary ;  the  number  of  widowers
among  the  miniflers  has,  one  year  with  an-
other, been  fcarcely  90  -,  that  is,  not  fo  much
as  a  quarter  of  the  number  oi  widows,  —  It
may  be  eafily  feen,  and  it  would  not  be  dif-
ficult to  denionftrate,  that  neither  the  greater
number  of  perfons  left  widows,  nor  any  pro-
bable fuppofition  concerning  the  greater  fre-
quency of  marriages  among  widowers,  can
completely  account  for  this,  without  admit-
ting the  greater-  mortality  of  males.  —  This,
therefore,  appears,  on  the  whole  to  be  a  fadt

page,  that  the  chance  of  furvlvorfhip  in  this  city  in  fa-
vour of  the  vjife^  is  Icfs  than  among  the  miniiters  ia
Scotland. — Does  not  this  fail  afford  a  reafon,  additional
to  that  mentioned  above,  and  in  p.  92,  93,  94,  he.  and
notes  (A)  and  TFj,  for  believing^  or  at  [c<\\k  fufpeuting  that
the  number  ot  Vindows  on  the  Scotch  cflablifhment,  if
marriage  does  not  decline  among  the  minirierb,  v/ill  not
at  lad  be  found  to  be  fo  little  as  400  ?

well


272  Of  the  Method  of  forming

well  cflablidied  :  And  it  follows  from  it,  that
in  order  to  calculate  the  values  of  Lfe- An-
nuities and  Reverfoiis  with  exadtnefs,  there
ought  to  be  diftindt  Tables  of  the  probabili-
ties of  life  for  males  -^v^^  females.  But  there
are  no  fuch  Tables  extant ;  nor,  indeed,  has
it  been  fufpeded,  that  there  is  fo  much  oc-
cafion  for  them  as  the  fads  I  have  mention-
ed feem  to  (hew.  All  that  is  neceifary  to
obtain  the  proper  data  for  forming  fuch  Ta-
bles is,  that  the  fexes  as  well  as  the  ages  of
the  dead  (hould  be  fpecified  in  the  bills ;  and
this  is  an  improvement  of  bills  [a)  of  mor-
tality which  would  give  little  trouble,  and
which,  therefore,  I  hope,  will  be  fome  time
or  other  made.

It  has  been  obferved,  that  the  author  of
nature  has  provided,  that  more  viales  {hould-
be  born  than  females,  on  account  of  the  par-
ticular wafte  of  males,  occafioned  by  wars  and
other  caufes.  Perhaps  it  might  have  been
added,  that  this  provifion  had  alfo  in  view,
that  particular  weaknefs  or  delicacy  in  the
conftitution  of  males,  which  makes  them
more  fubjed  to  mortality  -,  and  which, con-

{a)  T'his  improvement  would  be  rendered  more  com-
plete, by  diftiiiguifhing  the  waks  that  die,  under  the  de-
nominations ot  married  7ncn,  widowers,  and  batchelors  ;
and  the  females,  under  the  denominations  of  7;Zv'7r;7V(:/ Wij-
men,  widows,  and  virgifis. — The  ufe  I  have  made  oFfome
accounts  of  this  kind  which  have  been  kept  in  Germany,
{hews  that  this  would  be  of  confiderable  lervice.

fequently.


T^ables  of  Ohfer'-oatlonSi  Scci^ 273

fequently,  renders  it  necefTary,  that  more  of
them  fhould  be  produced,  in  order  to  pre-
ferve  in  the  world  a  due  proportion  between
the  two  fexes.

In  the  courfe  of  this  Eftay^  it  has  often
appeared,  that  I  have  been  particularly  in-
debted to  an  information  which  I  have  re-
ceived from  Northampton.  —  I  {hould  be
inexcufable,  did  I  not  mention,  that  I  owe
this  information  to  Mr.  Lawton,  an  ingeni-
ous gentleman  in  that  town,  who  has  pre-
ferved  the  bills  of  mortality  there  with  much
care,  and  been  very  obliging  in  communica-
ting them  to  me. — It  is  much  to  be  defired,
that  like  accounts  were  kept  in  every  town
and  parifli.  It  would  be  extremely  agree-
able to  learn  from  them  the  different  rates
of  human  mortality  in  different  places,  and
the  number  of  people  and  progrefs  of  popu-
lation in  the  kingdom.  The  trouble  of  keep-
ing them  would  be  trifling  j  but  the  inflruc-
tion  derived  from  them  (^),  would  be  very
important. — I  have  already  propofed  one  im-
provement of  fuch  accounts.  I  will  add,  that
they  would  be  flill  more  uleful,  did  they  give
the  ages  of  the  dead  after  10,  within  periods
ofjivt'y  inftead  of  fen  years.  —  During  every
period,  fo  fliort  as  Jive  years,  the  decrements
of  life  may,  in  conltrudiing  Tables,  be  fafely

(rt)  See  EfTay  I.  p.  207,  2c8.

T  taken


274 Q/'  ^^^  Method  of  forming

taken  to  be  uniform.  But  this  cannot  be  e-
qually  depended  on,  in  periods  fo  long  as  ten
years.

There  is  yet  another  improvement  of  thefe
accounts,  which  I  will  take  this  opportunity
to  mention.  They  fhould  contain  not  only
a  lift  of  the  diftempers  of  which  all  die,  like
that  in  the  London  bills;  but  they  (liould  fpeci-
fy  particularly  the  numbers  dying  of  thefe  dif-
tempers,  in  the  feveral  divilions  of  life.  Ac-
curate registers  of  mortality  kept  in  this  man-
ner, in  all  parts  of  the  kingdom  j  and  com-
pared with  records  of  the  feafons,  and  of  the
weather,  and  with  the  particular  circum-
ftances  which  difcriminate  different  iituations,
might  contribute,  more  than  can  be  eafily
imagined,  to  the  increafe  of />^jy^r<j/ know-
ledge. —  But  to  proceed  no  farther  in  thefe
Obfervations ;  I  (hall  now  beg  leave  to  fhut
up  this  v/hole  work  with  the  following  ge-
neral reflexion.

I  have  reprefented  particularly,  the  great
difference  between  the  probabilities  of  hu-
man life  in  towns  and  in  country  pariOies ;
and  from  the  fadts  I  have  recited,  and  the
obfervations  I  have  made,  it  appears,  that
the  further  we  go  from  the  artificial  and  ir-
regular modes  of  living  in  great  towns,  the
fewer  of  mankind  die  in  the  frjl  flages  of
life,  and  the  more  in its  kf  lUges. The

lower


Tables  of  Obfervations,  &c.  275

lower  animals  (except  fuch  {a)  as  have  been
taken  under  human  management)  feem  in
general  to  enjoy  the  full  period  of  exiftence
allotted  them,  and  to  die  chiefly  of  old  age  :
And  were  any  obfervations  to  be  made  among
favjgcsy  perhaps  the  lame  would  be  found  to
be  true  ot  them. — -Death  is  an  evil  to  which
the  order  of  providence  has  fubjeded  every
inhabitant  of  this  earth ;  but  to  man  it  has
been  rendered  unfpeakably  more  art  evil  than
it  was  defigned  to  be.  The  greateft  part  of
that  bhck  catalogue  of  difeafes  which  ravage
human  life,  is  the  off-fpring  of  the  tender-
nefs,  the  luxury,  and  the  corruptions  intro-
duced by  the  vices  and  falfe  refinements  of
civil  fociety  (^). That  delicacy  which  is  in^

jured

[a)  Calves  are  the  only  animals  taken  under  our  pe-
culiar care  immediately  afier  birth  ;  and,  in  confequcnce
of  then  adminiltring  to  them  the  fame  fort  of  phyiic  that
is  given  to  infants^  and  treating  them  in  other  rei'peds  in
the  fame  manner,  it  is  probable,  that  more  of  them  die
foon  after  being  born,  than  of  ull  the  other  fpecies  of
animals,  which  we  fee  in  the  fame  circumftances.  See
the  Comparative  Vieiv  cf  the  State  and  Faculties  of  Man  ivifh
thofe  cf  the  JniTr.al  IFcrld^  p.  23.  —  It  is,  indeed,  melan-
choly to  think  of  the  havock  made  among  the  humarl
fpecies  by  the  unnatural  cujhms  as  well  as  the  vices^  which
prevail  in  polifbed  focieties.  I  have  no  doubt,  but  that
the  cuftom,  in  particular,  of  committing  infants,  as  foon
as  born,  to  the  care  oi fojler -mothers^  deftroys  more  lives
than  the  fword,  famine  and  peftilence  put  together.

(h')  The  ingenious  and  excellent  writer  quoted  in  the
laft  note,  obferves,  that  the  whole  clafs  of  dileafes  which
arife  from  catching  cold,  are  found  only  among  the  ci-
vilized part  of  mankind,  p.  51.  —  And,  concerning  that
T  a  lofs


276 Of  the  Method  of  forming  T'ahles,  8cc.

jured  by  every  breath  of  air,  and  that  rot-
tennefs  of  conftitution  which  is  the  effedt  of
intemperance  and  debauchery,  were  never  in-
tended by  the  author  of  nature;  and  it  is
impoflible,  that  they  fhould  not  lay  the  foun-
dation of  numberlefs  fufferings,  and  termi-
nate in  premature  and  miferable  deaths. —
Let  us  then  value  more  the  fimplicity  and
innocence  of  a  life  agreeable  to  nature  ;  and
learn  to  confider  nothing  as  favagenefs  but
malevolence,  ignorance  and  wickednefs.
The  order  of  nature  is  wife  and  kind.  In
a  conformity  to  it  confifts  health  and  long
life  'y  grace,  honour,  virtue  and  joy.  But
nature  turned  out  of  its  way  will  always  pu-
nifh.  'The  wicked  JJd all  not  live  out  half  their
days.  Criminal  exceffes  embitter  and  cut
fhort  our  prefent  exijlence ,  and  the  highefl:
authority  has  taught  us  to  expecft,  that  they
will  not  only  kill  the  body,  but  xh^fouly  and
deprive  of  an  everlasting  existence.

lofs  of  all  our  higher  powers  which  often  attends  the  de-
cline of  life,  and  which  is  fo  humiliating  to  human  pride  ;
he  ohfcrvcs,  that  it  exhibits  a  fcene  fingular  in  nature,
and  that  there  is  the  greateft  reafon  to  believe,  that  it
proceeds  from  adventitious  caufes,  and  would  not  take
place  among  us  if  we  led  natural  lives,  p.  62.


A  P  P  E  N-


APPENDIX.


Note  (A). See  Queftlon  III.  Page  ii.

T ET  E  be  any  given  expedation  of  life;  and

•■"^  — ^  Xpx  will  be  the  number  of  perfons

alive  at  the  end  of  x  years,  arifing  from  p  perfons
left  annually  as  widows,  (or  added  annually  to  a
town  or  fociety)  at  the  age  whofe  expectation  is  E.
The  maximum^  therefore,  is  always  ^E — .  In  Mr.
D<?  Moivre's  Hypothefis^  E  is  always  -^  the  difference
between  the  given  age  and  86.  See  the  note  page  2,
and  the  latter  end  of  the  note  in  page  t^'].  See
likewife  the  beginning  of  the  Firft  EfTay,  and  note
(L)  in  this  Appendix,  where  the  invelligation  of
this  rule  will  be  given.

It  will  not  be  amifs  to  o-lve  the  followino-  ex-
ample  ot  the  application  ot  this  rule.

At  the  time  of  the  commencement  of  the
fcheme,  among  the  minifters  and  profefTors  in
Scotland,  for  making  provifion  for  their  widows,
it  was  neceffary,  that  a  calculation  fhould  be  made
of  the  number  of  widows  that  would  be  upon  the
fcheme  at  the  end  of  every  year,  till  they  came  to
a  maximum^  on  the  fuppofition  that,  (agreeably  to
what  particular  enquiry  had  lliewn  to  have  hap-
pened for  many  preceding  years,)  20  new  widows
would  be  left  every  year.  In  order  to  make  this
calculation,  let  4  of  the  20  widows  be  fuppofed  to
T  3  be


e;^  [APPENDIX.

be  under  32  years  of  age  when  left-,  and  let  2S
be  Rippofed  their  mean  age.  Let  the  fime  num-
ber be  left  between  32  and  39,  and  let  35  be  their
mean  age-,  between  39  and  47,  and  43  their  mean
age-,  between  47  and  sy-,  and  52  their  mean  age;
between  57  and  the  extremity  of  life,  and  6^  their
mean  age.  The  number  in  life  together,  to  which,
in  ID  years,  4  widows  left  annually  at  the  age  of
28 will grow,  is, by the rule, (E being 29)

7 —  X  40,  or  36.55 The  number  alive  at

the  end  of  20  years,  will  be  - — — —  X  80,  or  66.2,
^  1 16

At  the  end  of  20  years,  the  number  alive  will  be
89  i  of  40  years,  104.82;  of  58  years  1 16'
Thefe  numbers,  found  in  the  fame  way,  for  the  2d
clafs,  (E  being  25.5),  at  the  end  of  10,  20,  30, 40,
and  5 1  years,  will  be  36. 7 — 64.31 — 84.7 — 97-25—

102 for  the  3d  clais,  (E  being  21.5)  at  the  end

of  10,  20,  30,  40,  and  43  years,  35.34 — 61.4 — '

78.13 — 05.6 — 86 For  the  4th  clafs,  (E  being

17)  at  the  end  of  10,20,  30,  and  34  years,  34.11

■ — 56.47  —  67 — 68 For  the  5th  clafs,  (E  being

31.5)  at  the  end  of  10,  20,  and  23  years,  31.3—

45.2 — 46 The  whole  number,  therefore,  con-

lilling  of  all  the  claiTes,  will  come  to  a  maximum
nearly  in  58  years  -,  and  the  totals  in  life,  at  the  end
of  JO,  20,  30,  40,  50,  and  58  years,  will  be
173-37— 293.58— 364.83— 401.67— 41 8.

Thefe  determinations  fuppofe  none  to  marry.
In  10  years,  from  1757  to  1767,  I  have  been  in-
formed, that  but  9  widov;s  married.  Let  us  then
fuppofe,  that  one  widow  of  the  firft  clafs  marries
every  year  j  and  let  all  that  marry,  be  fuppofed
to  continue,  one  with  another,  5  years  in  widow-
]io,od  before  they  marry.  On  thefe  fuppofitions,
-5  the


APPENDIX,  279

the  foregoing  totals  will,  at  the  end  of  the  fame
periods  of  years,  be  169.23  —  282  —  347-5  —
380.47—394.

Thcfe  calculations  are  made  from  Mr.  De
Moivre^s  Hypothefis.  Had  they  been  made  ex-
adly  from  Dr.  Halicy*s  table,  or  any  other  of  the
Tables  I  have  given  at  the  end  of  this  work,  ex-
cept the  London  one,  the  refults  would  have  been
very  nearly  the  fame. — It  appears,  that  the  pro-
babilities of  life,  among  thefe  widows,  are  greater
than  thofe  given  by  thefe  tables.  See  the  Lad
Effay,  pages  263,  264  266,  270,  (kc.  The
effedt  of  this  muft  be,  to  raife  the  maximum  with-
out fenfibly  increafing  the  numbers  in  life  for  the
firll  20  or  25  years:  and  its  effecl  may  be,  to  raife
the  maximum^  and  at  the  fame  time  even  to  diminilh
thefe  numbers.

Twenty-five  years  have  now  elapfcd  fmce  the
commencement  of  this  fcheme ;  and  the  number
of  widows  living  every  year  have,  in  faA,  corref-
ponded  to  the  lalf  numbers  I  have  given,  as  nearly
as  could  poflibly  be  expedcd  in  an  aifair  of  this
nature.


T  4  Note


28o  APPENDIX.


Note  (B). Queflion  VI.  Page  21.

LET  r  fignify  the  fum  of  i/.  and  its  interefl,
for  one  year.  The  value  of  a  life,  whofc
complement  is  »,  being  (by  Mr.  Dz  Moivre  on
Annuities, 4th edition, page 14. and p. 100.)

1 — -  A ^  H tj  &c.  the  preient  va-

lue  of  the  remainder  of  it  after  two  years  muft  be

— ^  -^ §^c.  which  IS  equal  to  -  X X


=^  4-  =^  -t  =^,  &C.
7z — 2r K — 2r* « — 2r^


Now  -  is  the  prefent  value  of  il.  due  at  the


}? — 2


end  of  tv/o  years. is  the  probability  that  a

life,  whofe  complement  is  »,  fhall  continue  two

?z — 3 ;* — 4 ;? — 5
years,  and -f  i:^ -f- — ,  &c.  is  the  va-

K—  2r 7; — 2r^ « — 2r^

lue  of  a  life  two  years  older  than  the  life  whofe
complement  is  n.  And,  therefore,  (fince  any  num-
ber of  years  lefs  than  n  may  be  fubftituted  for  two
years)  the  firfl:  rule  given  in  this  queftion  is  right.

The  fame  procefs,  applied  to  joint  lives,  will
demonftrate  what  is  faid  in  the  Scholium.


Note


L


APPENDIX.  281

Note  (C). See  Queftion  VII.  Page  22.

ET  the  complements  of  any  two  affi^ned
-,  lives  be  n  and  m.  The  prelent  value  ot  the
fidt  poffible  payment  of  an  annuity  to  be  enjoyed
by  the  life  whole  complement  is  //,  provided  ^./£r
lives  continue  7  years,  and  the  life  whofe  comple-
ment  is  .,  furvives  the  other  .//..  that  term  is  the
probability,  that  the  lite  ^^^  .^^^^.^P^^^"^,  ^^^.^
continue  8  years,  and  the  other  life  7  years  and

then  fail  in  the  8  th  year,  multiplied  by  ^,  or  by

1/  difcounted  for  8  years.— The  probability  that
the  life  of  the  tx^t^ant  fhall  continue  8  years  is

""— , The  probability  that  the  olher  life  lliall  con-

n
tinue  7  years  is  ^  . The  probability  that  it  llaall
continue 7 years!  and  fail  in  the  8th  year, is
ffl— 7 __  "'—^  —  I , The  probability,  there-

fore that  the  life  of  the  expe^ant  fhall  continue  8
years,  and  the  other  life  7  and  fail  in  the  8th  year,  is

!i:5  X  -;  and  the  prefent  value  of  the  firft  pofli-
ble  payment  of  the  annuity  fuppofed,  h -^  X -


X  -.


See rhe  Bo^rine of  Annuities by Mr to#?/,

^ 6—1';,  or  his  Sele^  Exercifes,  p.  315.  &:c- •

in  like  manner,  the  prefent  value  ot  the  2d  pay-
p^ent,  at  the  end  of  the  9th  year,  may  be  found


sSa  APPENDIX.


n — n m — 7 m — 9  n — Q 2

to  be  — -  X X  I -,  or  — f  X  -.

and  the  prefent  value  of  all  the  polTible  payments,

I  A — b 1  n — Q 2  « — 10  3 „

r^  nr  m^ nr'-  m^ nr^  m

,./-.. 1 I ^^ — 7 '" — 7
But  this  leries  is  equal  to  —  X  X  X

.  ■ *  • . '  . .  ' '  . .

« — 8  T  n — 9  2  n — 10

3  « — 8  I  n — 9  2

,  &c. Now==r  X 1-  =~~  X  ,

m — -7  n — yr ^ 7 n — yr~ ^ 7

&:c.  is  the  value  of  an  annuity  for  a  life  feven

years  older vthan  the  expeftant,  after  another  life

ieven  years  olcier  than  the  life  whofe  complement

w — 7 m — 7

IS  m, X is  the  probability  that  both

n  m  '■

the  afTigned  lives  fhall  continue  7  years. And  -

is  the  value  of  i/.  due  at  the  end  of  7  years.  The
rule,  therefore,  given  for  folving  this  queftion,  is
right.

This  demonilration,  as  well  as  that  in  the  laft:
note,  is,  for  the  fake  of  more  eafe  and  clearnefs,
applied  to  the  hypothefis  of  an  equal  decrement
of  life.  It  does  not,  however,  depend  upon  it,
but  may  be  applied  to  any  table  of  obfervations.


Note


APPENDIX,  283


Note  (D). Quenion  IX. Page  29.

LET  the  complement  of  any  two  affigned  lives
be  n  and  m,  and  the  given  term  be  feven
years,  as  in  note  (C).  The  probability  that^  the
former  life  (fuppofed  to  be  the  life  in  expcclation)
fhall  laft  8  years,  is,  by  Mr.  De  Moivre's  Hypo-

thefis, -^ — i  and  the  probability that  the  latter

life  fnall  fail  in  8  years,  is  -  •,  and  the  firft  pay-
ment of  the  annuity  mentioned  in  this  queftion,
depends  on  the  happening  of  both  thefe  events,

the  probability  of  which  is X  -  .

The  prefent  value,  therefore,  of  the  firft  pofiible

payment  of  the  annuity  is  — ^  X  — . In  like

manner ;  the  prefent  value  of  the  [econd  poffible
payment  is  ^^^  x  -  •,  and  of  all  the  payments.


n — 8 8 n — Q q , n — lO lO ©  t»

—T-  X --, ~  X  -  +  —7^  X  — , &c. But

n—S 8 K — 8 I n—S 7  ,  «— 9 ,

— r  X  -  ==  — r  X -  -f  — r  X -;  and  — ^  X

-  :=  — ^  X  — V  — ~  X  - . The  forefroing  fe-

ries,  therefore,  is  equal  to  the  two  feries's  - X

n — 8 1 , n — Q 2 , 71 — 10 3 o  J

' X  -  4-  — r  X  -  +  — 7-  X  - ,  &c. and

Jir  771  717-^ 771  nr^  m


284  APPENDIX.

I n — 8 7 , 7i— 9 7 , «— 10 7 ^

-7  X  X  -  +  — r  X  -  4-  — r-  X  - ,  &c.  or

I « — 7 w — 7 n — 8  I  n — Q

to  -  X X X  =-  X h  =^  X

r  n  m  j^ — ^^ ;„ — ^ ^ — ^^z

2  7z — 10  3 «  ,17 « — 7

+  =^  X  -i-,  &C. +  p7  X  £  X  — ^  X

7« — 7 n — 7r^ »2 — 7  ' '-^  "

7? — 8  n — 9  n — 10  1  •  1 .

+ + — ,  &c.  which  is  the  very

n — 7r « — 7r* ;z — jr^

rule  given  for  folving  this  quellion,  as  will  appear
from  notes  (B)  and  (C).


Note


APPENDIX.  285


Note  (E). See  the  Scholium  to  Queft.  X.

ACCORDING  to  the  calculations,  the  time
in  which  the  firft  yearly  payment  of  a  rever-
fionary  annuity  becomes  due,  is  the  end  of  the  year
in  which  the  event  happens  that  entitles  to  it,  how-
ever little  or  much  of  the  year  may  then  happen  to
be  unelapfed.  And  this,  likewife,  is  the  time
when  a  reverfionary  fum  becomes  due.  Thofe  who
know  how  the  calculations  of  the  values  of  rever-
fions  are  inftituted,  mud  know  this.  But  an  an-
nuity, the  firft  payment  of  which  is  to  be  made  at
the  fame  time  with  another  payment  of  a  fum  in
hand,  fufficient  to  buy  an  equal  annuity,  is  worth
one  year's  purchafe  more  than  the  ilim.  For
inftance.  Reckoning  intereft  at  4  per  cent,  and  r
being  i/.  increafed  by  its  intereft  for  a  year,  or  1.04,

-  +  —  +  -^ ,  &c.  1:1  25/.  is  the  prefent  value  of

an  eftate  of  1/.  per  annum  for  ever. That  is,  it  is
the  value  of  it,  fuppofing  the  firft  rent  of  it  is  to

be  paid  a  year  hence,- If  the  firft  rent  is  to  be

received  immediately,  or  at  the  fame  time  with
another  payment  of  25/.  it  is  worth  one  year's
purchafe  more,  or  equivalent  to  26/. — —I  have
not  found,  that  any  of  the  writers  on  annuities  and
reverfions,  have  attended  to  this  obfervation.  It
fuggefts  a  correction  necefl^ary  to  be  applied  to  the
common  folutions  of  feveral  important  problems :
particularly  to  the  2  i  ft  and  22d  in  Mr. Smpfon'^s  "Trea'
tife  on  Annuities^  and  the  26th,  27th,  3 2d,  33d,  and
40th  problems  in  his  Sele^  Exercifes ;  and  to  all  other
problems  of  the  fame  kind  in  other  writers.  There
5  can


2§6  APPENDIX.

can  be  no  great  occafion  for  being  more  explicit.
Ic  will  not,  however,  be  amifs  to  add  the  following

demonftration  :  ^ is  the  prefent  probability

that  a  life,  whofe  complement  is  n,  will  fail  in  any

one  afTiofnable  year  of  its  duration. S  X -{ r


-f.  — ,  &c.  («),  or  the  prefent  value  of  il.  per  an-


S
num  for  n  years,  multiplied  by-  ,  is  the  prefent

value  of  the  fum  or  legacy  denoted  by  S,  payable
at  the  failure  of  the  given  life.  Therefore,  {n  be-
ing 56  ;  the  life  30-,  intercft  4  per  cent.  m:i.04;
the  fum  25/.)  the  value  of  the  expedtation,  by
Mr.  De  Moivre's  hypothefis,  is  9.919.

Further.  The  value  of  il.  to  be  received  at  the
end  of  a  year,  provided  the  life  whofe  complement
is  n  fails,  is  the  probability  of  the  failure  of  the
life  multiplied  by i/.  difcountcd  for  a  year,  or

X  -. In  like  manner  J  the  value  of  lA


il  r


to  be  received  at  the  end  of  2  years,  if  the  fame

life  fails  in  2  years,  is  i X  -r* And,  there-

fore,  the  value  of  all  the  -pojjihle  payments  of  an
eftate  or  annuity  of  1/.  for  ever,  to  be  entered

upon  after  the  p-iven  life,  is  i ■  X  -  +  i  —

cj  n  r


-2 I  n — 2  I o , s  I

I


APPENDIX.  287


T 9  I  I  I 5  n — I «— 2 ,

,  &c.  that  is,  the  value  of  the  life  fubtraded


from  the  perpetuity  -,  or,  in  this  example,  14/.  684,
(the  value  of  a  life  at  30)  fubtrafted  from  25  ;  that
is,  10/.  316.  But  10.316  is  to  9.919,  in  the  fame
ratio  with  104  to  100,  or  26  to  25,  agreeably  to
the  rule  in  the  Scholium,


Note


2S8  APPENDIX.


Note  (F.) Quefllon  XIII.  Page  44.

WFIEN  I  here  call  48  the  mean  age  of  all  mar-
ried men,  and  40  the  mean  age  of  married
women,  I  do  not  intend  to  fuppofe,  that  there  are  as
many  married  perfons  who  exceed  thele  ages,  as
there  are  w  ho  fall  (hort  of  them.  It  is  likely  that  the
latter  are  moft  numerous ;  and  it  is  neceffary  that
this  fhould  be  the  cafe,  to  render  the  fuppofition  I

make  juft If  all  marriages  commenced  at  33  for

the  man,  and  25  for  the  woman,  one  half  of  them
would  be  diflblved  by  the  time  the  men  were  50,
and  the  women  42  •,  for  (by  the  Hypothejis,  and
alfo  nearly  by  the  Brejlaw^  Norwich^  and  'Northamp-
ton tables)  there  is  an  equal  chance  for  the  joint
continuance  of  two  lives,  whole  ages  are  25  and
33,  fcventeen  years.  Forty-two  and  fifty  then
would  be  properly  the  mean  ages  at  which  widow-
hood would  commence  •,  meaning  by  thefe,  "  the
*'  ages  on  each  fide  of  which  equal  numbers  are

*'  left  v^idows  and  widowers." But,  tho'  in  this

cafe  half  the  marriages  of  every  year  would  be  dif-
folved  in  17  years,  they  would  not  be  all  diflblved
in  twice  that  time.  So  far  would  this  be  from
happening,  that  about  a  7th  part  would  continue
beyond  twice  17  years-,  nor  would  it  be  certain,
that  they  would  be  all  diflblved  till  near  the  ex-
tremity of  the  poflible  extent  of  life.  Tho*,  there-
fore, an  equal  number  of  marriages  would  be  dif-
jolved,  or  an  equal  number  of  widows  and  wi-
dowers left  kfore  50  and  42,  and  afierzvards,  yet
the  aores  of  the  latter  would,  one  with  another,
much  more  exceed  50  and  42,  than  the  ages  of

the


APPENDIX.  289

the  former  (that  is,  of  the  widows  and  widowers  left
before  50  and  42)  would  fall  fhort  of  them.  And  the
number  of  marriages  alfo  in  the  world,  am.ong  per-
fons  of  greater  ages  than  thefe,  v/ould  be  much
fewer  than  among  perfons  of  lefier  ages— — In  other
words :  the  period,  at  which  the  m.arriages  that
have  been  contrafted  are  half  diflulved,  is  not  the
period  at  which  the  number  of  marriages  conftantly
cxifting  is  equally  divided,  but  this  period  falls
feme  years  fooner ;  and  the  period  I  have  in  view,
falls  in  that  part  of  the  interval  between  thefe  two
periods,  Vv'hcre  the  greater  ages  of  the  marriages
on  one  fide,  are  iuft  enough  to  compenfate  (in  fuch
a  calculation  as  that  I  have  given)  their  deficien-
cies in  number,  compared  with  the  number  of
marriages  on  the  other  tide.

In  Ihort.  Suppofe  35  marriages  every  year,
between  perfons  33  and  25.  In  12  years  there
would  be  half  as  many  in  the  world,  as  could
poffibly  arife  from  fuch  a  number  of  yearly  wed-
dings. In  17  years,  half  every  fet  would  be  ex-
imtt.  The  expe5!ation  of  every  marriage  would  be
19  years,  by  prob,  21  of  Mr.  De  Moivre^s  Treatife
en  Ammities^  or  by  the  note  p.  299  :  that  is,
taking  them  all  together,  they  would  exill  juft  as
long  as  an  equal  number  oifingk  perfons,  fuppofed
to  be  fure  of  living  juft  19  years,  and  no  more;
or,  as  long  as  an  equal  number  of  lingle  perfons,
all  48  years  of  age,  fuppofed  to  be  fubjedt  to  the
common  laws  of  mortality.  One  with  another,
then,  they  will  be  all  extinft  in  19  years:  the
marriages  which  continue  beyond  this  term,  tho'
fewer  in  number,  enjoying  among  them  juft  as
niuch  more  duration,  as  thofe  that  fall  fliort  of  it
enjoy  lefs.  Widows,  then,  at  a  medium,  will  com-
mence widowhood  at  44  (that  is,  25  increafcd  by  19)

U  year^


290  APPENDIX.

years  of  age,  and  ividowers  at  52.  The  values,  therer
fore,  of  the  lives  of  the  former,  when  they  commence
widowhood,  will,  one  with  another,  be  the  fame  with
the  value  of  a  life  at  44;  or,  (reckoning  intereft  at
4  per  cent.)  12.5  years  purchafe,  in  prefent  pay-
ment, (the  annuity  to  begin  at  the  end  of  a  year);
and  their  expectations  of  life  will  be  21  years,  or  half
the  difference  between  44  and  86.  The  value  of
the  lives  of  the  latter  will  be  10.92,  and  their  £x^_
pe^aiion  17  years — The  whole  number  of  marriages
conftantly  exifting,  which  would  refult  from
35  fuppofed  to  commence  annually,  would  be
it)X355  or  665  -,  and  53  years  (the  difference  be-
tween 33  and  86)  would  be  the  time  in  which  they

would  increafe  to  this  number- The  chance  of

furvivorfhip  would  be  6g  to  p,2->  ^y  prob.  i8th,
Mr.  Be  Moivre  on  Annuities  ;  that  is,  in  p,^  years,
0^^  relicts  of  thefe  marriages  would  be  left  every
year,  and  the  number  of  widows  would  be  to  the
number  Oi  widowers ^  as  69  to  53  •,  or  19.S  widows
would  be  left  annually,  and  15.2  widowers.  The
tiiaximum  of  widows  in  life  together,  if  none  mar-
ried, would  be  21 X  19.8,  or  416-,  and  they
would  increafe  to  this  number  in  114  years  (or  61
years  after  the  number  of  marriages  had  attained

to'  a  rnaxiriiura) -The  rnaxiinum  of  widozvers  would

be  15.2X17,  or  258;  and  they  would  increafe
to  this  nudiber  in  106  years.

An  eafy  method  may  be  hence  deduced  of  folv-
ing  the  queifion  v/hich  occafions  this  note  If
the  number  of  the  members  of  the  cftablifhrnent
I  have  fuppofed,  is  66^,  and  the  mean  ages  at
which  marriage  m.ay  be  deemed  to  commence  are
25  and  -^^^  19.8  widows  will  (ithasjuft  appeared)
be  left  every  year-,  and  the  values  of  their  lives,
when they  commence  widowhood,  will  be,  one

4  "y^^^!?^


APPENDIX.  291

■with  another,  i24r  years  piirchafe.  An  annuity  of
20/.  will,  thereiorc,  be  worth,  to  each  widow,  250/.
and  19.8  fuch  annuities  muft  be  worth  4950/.
•which,  confequently,  is  the  annual  income  necel-
fary  for  the  Tupport  of  the  eftablifhment,  the  firfl:
payment  to  be  received  immediately  :  or  /.  7.44
Ironi  each  of  the  66§  members ;  which  anfwers
nearly  to  the  determination  in  page  44.

In  the  Lad  Eflay,  p.  296,  it  has  been  flicwn,  that
obfervations  determine  the  chance  of  furvivorihip
in  favour  of  the  wife  in  marriage,  to  be  really  lb  great
as  3  to  2  i  and  in  fome  circumitances  greater.  I  have
alio  there  obferved,  that  in  order  to  account  for  this,
from  the  difference  of  age  between  men  and  their
wives,  this  difference  mule  be  at  leaft  12  years,  and
the  mean  ages  of  ail  who  marry  annually,  muft  be
fuppofed  to  be  about  23  and  35.  In  this  cafe,  19,
as  before,  will  nearly  be  the  expe<^cUion  of  all  mar-
riaD;es.  The  mean  age  at  which  widows  and  wi-
dowers  will  commence  fuch  will  be  42  and  54.  The
number  of  annual  marriages  ncceflary  to  keep  up
66^  marriages  conftantly  exilling,  will  be  ^^,
The  number  of  widows  left  annually,  by  fuch  a
number  of  marriages,  will  be  2  i  •,  and  the  values
of  their  lives,  at  the  time  they  commence  widow-
hood, will  be  12.85  years  purchafe  by  Table  VI:  and
therefore,  the  whole  annual  income  neceiiary  for  the
fupport  of  the  fuppofed  cilablifhment,  will  be  5397/.
or  anjinnual  paym.ent,  beginning  immediately,  of
/.  8.1 1  from  each  member — The  number  of  widows
Qn  fuch  an  eftabliflimeni;  v/ill,  in  6^  years,  grow,  if
none  marry,  to  462  ;  and  the  number  of  widowers

to  224. It  may  be  depended  on,  that  all  this

would  happen  as  far  as  Dr.  Halky\  table,  or  the
tables  for  Norwich  and  Northampton^  exhibit  the
Uue  ftate  of  human  mortality.


-92  APPENDIX.

Arnon<^  the  iTiinifters  and  profeflbrs  in Scot-
land, the  number  of  married  men  being  667,  or
jieaiiy  that  here  mentioned,  the  number  of  annual
weddings  has,  for  manyyears,  been  at  an  average  32,
and  tlie  number  of  widows  left  annually  20-,  and,
therefore,  the  chance  of  furvivorfnip  in  favour  of
the  wife, as  20  to  12,  or  5  to  3. See  Elfay  IV.
p.  269. This  is  not  more  different,  from  the  refults
I  have  given,  than  might hive been expected;
and  the  chief  reafon  of  the  difference  is,  that  the
esp£oI<xlwns  oi  fuigle  and  joi'it  lives  among  the  mi-
riillers  and  their  wives  in  Scotland, are  greater
than  thofe  given  by  Dr.  HcUey^?,,  and  the  oiher  ta-
bles of  obfcrvacion '1  hele  tables  give  the  ex-
pectations of  lives  as  they  are  among  the  bulk  of
mankind  in moderate  tov/ns. The expeftations
of  lives  among  the berter fore  of  men, living
mofdy  in  country  villages  and  parillies,  are  much
greater. The  fad  is,  that  among  the  minifters  in
ScGthmd^  the  expedation  of  a  fingle  life  at  the  age
of  27, is  three  years  and  an  half  greater;  and,
confequently, of  joint lives, above two years
greater,  than  the  fame  expedlations  by  Dr,  Halley\
'rable.  Ibid, page  264.

I cannot  help  juR'  mentioning  another  remark

here. It  may  be  obferved,  that  fuppofing  no

kcond  marriages,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  that  the
odds  for  the  woman's  furviving  in  marriage  is  3  to
2,  the  number  of  imdoisos  in  the  world  would  be
double  the  number  of  iridcissers.  But  it  has  been
found,  in  fadt,  that  the  number  of  widows  is  five
times  the  number  of  vvidowers.  How  this  is  to  be
accounted  for,  I  have  iliewn  in  the  Eflay  juft  re-*
fcrred  to,  page  270,  271.


Kote


APPENDIX.  293


Note  (G). QuePcion  XIV. Page  48.

LET  r  be  i/.  increafcd  by  its  intercfl:  for  one
year;  /the  given  time  or  number  of  years
tor  which  the  affurance  is  to  be  made  ;  rt,  b^  c^Scc,
the  probabilities  taken  out  of  a  table  of  obferva-
tions,  that  the  perlbn  whofe  age  is  given  fiiall  live
I,  2,  3,  &c.  years  ; and  P  the  probability  that  he

fhall  live  /  years. Then  ~  -f  — ; — \ — ,  &:c«

(t — i)  4- •  4 ■  A &c. —  -  4-  — f-


&c.  (/)—-  +  -  +  _,  &c. ,(/  -  1)  +  -  -f
X  -  +  —  +  -  ,  &c. vi'iil  be  the  exadl  value


r
I— P


of  an  annuity  to  be  entered  upon  at  the  failure  of
the  given  life,  provided  it  happens  in  /  years.
And  the  rule  is  nothing  but  this  value  exprefied
in  words.  In  a  fimilar  manner  may  be  demon-
ftrared  the  other  rule  for  findins;  the  values  of
aflurances,  tor  a  given  time,  on  two  joint  liveSj  or
the  long-ell  of  two  lives.


IT  cj  Kote


294  APPENDIX.


Note  (H). Queftion  XV.  page  ^6,

ET  r  fignify  as  before-,  S  the  given  fum  to
be  afllired  ;  /  the  given  time;  N  and  n  the
number  of  the  living  in  the  table  of  obfervations,
at  the  age  of  A  and  B  refpedtively  •,  A,  B,  C,  &c.
and  a,  h^  c^  &c.  the  number  of  the  living  in  the
table,  at  the  end  of  i,  2,  3,  &c.  years  from  the  ages
of  A  and  B ;  D,  D,  D,  D,  &c.  and  d^  d,  d,  d,  &c.

I II ni  I n III

the  decrements  of  life  in  the  table,  at  the  end  of
I,  2,  3,  &:c.  years  from  the  fame  ages.  Then,  by
reafoning  in  the  fame  manner  with  Mr.  Simp/on,  in
p.  3 1 6,  &c,  Sek^  Exercifes,  it  will  appear  that  S  X


+

ax  a
I

Cx

d

" ,  &c.

co-

s

-  X

71

f  s

X .

Dd

iNnr

-h

&c.
S

•  3

(0-

Dd

I T

.+

Dd

II  II

2Nw

Ad

Nr

+

hd

+

C'i

hd

Dd

_J1.,  &c.  (/)  -i X \-2-L,  &c. (/). This

Nr^  2N nr nr'^

is  the  exact  anfv/er  to  Queflion  XV.  and  the  rule
is  as  near  an  aproximation  to  it  as  there  is  reafon  to
defire.

In  the  fame  manner,  retaining  all  the  fame  fym-
bols,  it  may  be  found,  that  the  anfwer  to  Qiieition
XVI.  is


SX


iy,l  Dd  D-^Uxd D-i-iv-j-ux^


+  ^^-^  +


iHur Nw-  N/jr^  Nw


■ Dd  Dd  Dd

(/),  &c. +  S  X  -^-i-  + "': +  -iiiiii- ,  &c.

2iN«r*  2Hnri  2Nw*


APPENDIX.


195


(/— i)  =  —  X  _L  + I iL  ^-


Nr  Nr-  Nr^


S D^/ Di D^

&c.  r/— 0+^  X  —  4-J4-  +  iif,  &c.  (-/;.

D D+D D+D+D

But  ^  4-  .^„  4- • / "  ,  &c.  (/— i)  is  the

fame  with  the  excefs  of  the  value  of  an  annuity
certain  for  a  number  of  years  lefs  by  one  year  than
the  given  term,  above  the  value  of  an  annuity  on
the  life  of  A,  for  the  fame  number  of  years ;  from
whence  the  reafon  of  the  rule  for  folving  this
queftion,  may  be  eafily  difcovered.


U  4  .iioiii


296  A  P  t^  E  N  D  I  X.


Note  (I). Page  119,  Sec.

LET  /  be  any  given  term  of  years;  p  the  va-
lue of  i/.  due  at  the  end  of  the  given  term  ;
A  the  value  of  an  annuity  certain  for  the  fame
term  -,  ;z  the  complement  of  a  given  life  -,  G  the  va^
lue  for  the  given  term,  of  two  joint  lives,  both
equal  to  the  given  life-,  (to  be  found  by  Queft.VI.)
P  the  perpetuity  -,  r,  i/.  increafed  by  its  interelt  for
one  year.

Then  A  — G  X  «-+/X/'XP — AxPxr  will  be
the  prefent  value  of  i/.  2/.  3/.  &c.  (/)  payable  at
the  end  of  i,  2,  3,  &c.  (/)  years;  but  fubjed  to
failure  when  the  given  life  fails.

If  fuch  a  courfe  of  payment  is  to  begin  im-
mediately, and  to  be  made  at  the  beginning  of
every  year,  till  t-\-i  payments  are  made  in  /  years  ;
add  to  the  preceding  value,  the  value  increafed  by
unity  of  an  annuity  on  the  given  life  for  /  years,
found  by  Qiieflion  VI.  and  the  fiim  will  be  the  va-
lue fought.  And  this  value,  divided  by  the  pre-
fent value  of  what  may  happen  to  remain  of  the
given  life  after  t  years,  found  by  Quellion  VI.  will
give  the  Jlanding  annuity  to  which  fuch  a  feries  of
increafing  annual  payments,  beginning  immedi-
ately, will  entitle,  for  the  remainder  of  the  given
life  after  t  years.

With  the  ailiiLance  of  this  theorem,  all  that  is
faid  in  page  119,  &c.  may  be  inveftigated.  It
would  be  too  tedious  to  enter  into  a  more  minute
account.


Note


APPENDIX.  297


Note  (K). Page  149.

LET  ^  fignify  the  difference  between  the  compli-
ments of  the  youngefl  and  the  oldeft  life  in
the  body  of  Annuitants,  here  defcribed,  at  the
•time  they  enter ;  let  S  fignify  the  fum  of  thefe
tomfkments ; n  any  given nun^.ber  of  years  not

C  J

greater  than  -  — •,  and  .v  the  ratio  of  the  whole
°  22

number  of  Annuitants  to . Then

2

A'x^  will  be  the  number  that  will  die  the  ift  year ;
.vx^-{-  -n- the  number  that  will  die  the  2d  yearj


.vx^-f-^  4-|i,  3d  year;


■vX^-r  J  +  ^.  +  s^ »  4tn  year  j


d  ,^ id .

and  X  X  nd-\-  ?/ — n  X  "^  -f-  ''^  —  2  +  n — 2  r  X  -r;  +  « — 3


+  «  — 3^'X  -■  +  ^  — 4  +  «  — 4I*  X  -^,&c.  («)


will  be  the  whole  number  dying  in  n  years.  When

n  is  greater  than ,  this  feries  is  greater  than

t3  22  °

the  whole  number  dying  in  n  years ;  but  in  all
other  cafes  it  gives  this  number  exadlly,  fuppofing
the  probabilities  of  life  to  decreafe  uniformly.'

I  In


298  APPENDIX.

In  the  prefent  inftance,  the  youngeft  life  being  30,
and  the  oldeft  60^  the  two  complements  are  §6  and

26.  S  — 82.  ^  —  30.— =  1230.  And  therefore  a: ~

-  '^  1Z27.1.  Take  »  =  30  years,  and  the  fore-
going feries  will  be  27.1  X  900  +  318.2  +  7-2424-

.164Z: 33.214,  which  is  a  little  greater  than  the
whole  number  dying  in  30  years,  but  at  the  fame
time  lefs  thaa  the  whole  number  of  Annuitants.


Note


APPENDIX.  399


Note  (L). See  EiTay  I. Page  169, 170,
172.

THE  fum  of  the  probabilities  that  any  given
lives  will  attain  to  the  end  of  the  ift,  2d,
3d,  Sic.  years  from  the  prefent  time  to  the  utmolt
extremity  of  life  (for  inftance,  ^4-  +  ^t  +  ^i,  &c.
to  -:fV  —  224-  for  lives  of  40,  by  the  hypothefis)  may
be  called  their  expe^aiion^  or  the  number  of  pay-
ments due  to  them,  zs, yearly  annuitants.  The  fum
of  the  probabilities  that  they  will  attain  to  the  end
of  the  ift,  2d,  3d,  &c.  half  years  (or,  in  the  parti-
cular cafe  fpecified,  -|4  +  ||  -i-  4|  +  I?.,  &c.  zi
V  ^^/^  years,  or  12^ years)  is  their  expedlation  as
half  yearly  annuitants.  And  the  fums  jufl:  men-
tioned of  the  probabilities  of  their  attaining  to  the
end  of  the  ift,  2d,  3d,  &c.  moments  (equal  in  the
fame  particular  cafe  to  23  years)  is  properly  their
expectation  of  life^  or  their  expectation  as  annuitants
fecured  by  land.

Mr.  De  Moivre  has  omitted  the  demonftCations
of  the  rules  he  has  given  for  finding  the  expeCla-
tio7is  of  lives,  and  only  intimated,  in  general,  that
he  difcovered  them  by  a  calculation  deduced  from
the  method  of  fluxions.  See  his  Treatife  on  Anmd-
ties.^  page  6(>.  It  will,  perhaps,  be  agreeable  to
fome  to  fee  how  eafily  they  are  deduced  in  this
method,  upon  the  hypothefis  of  an  equal  decre-
ment of  life.

Let  X  ftand  far  a  moment  of  time,  and  n  the

complement  of  any  affigned  life. Then , ,


n — 3;r


,  &c.  v/ili  be  the  prefent  probabilities  of  its


n

con-


3G0  APPENDIX.

continuing  to  the  end  of  the  ift,  id,  3d,  &c.  mo-*
ments ;  and  -—  the  probability  of  its  continuing

to  the  end  of  .v  time. — -  X  -v  will  therefore  be

71

the  fluxion  of  the  fum  of  the  probabilities,  or  of  :in
area reprefenting  this fum, whofe ordinates  are

J  and  axis  a\— The  fluent  of  this  exprefiion,  or


W X


n


X ,  is  the  fum  itfelf  for  the  time  x  ; and  this.

when  ;c'=:;?,  becomes  In,  and  gives  the  expe5lation  of
the  afligned  life,  or  the  fum  of  all  the  probabilities
juft  mentioned  for  its  whole poffible  duration.— — In


like  manner:  fince  — p-  is  the  probability  that


71 A'


two  equal  joint  lives  will  continue  x  time,  — r^  ><;  v
will  be  the  fiHxion  of  the  fum  of  the  probabilities.


n


The  fluent  is ;;  — ' — \-  ■ — ,  vv'hich,  when  n  —  x,  is  -,

or  the  expedation  of  two  equal  joint  lives.

Agam :  fince  ■— —  X  —  is  the  probability  that  there
will  be  a  furvivor  of  two  equal  joint  lives  at
the end of x time, -^ — - X ^ x  i will be

fl  71

the fluxion of the fum of the probabilities  ;

2Lnd.\h.t  fluent,  or 7-7  is  (when  xznn)  -^n,  or

the  expeSlation  of  furvivorfhip  between  two  equAl
lives  i  which,  therefore^  appears  to  be  equal  to  the


APPENDIX.  301

expeBaticn  of  their  joint  continnance. The  expefta-
tion  of  two  unequal  joint  lives,  found  in  the  fame

way,  is  -  —  7-, m  beinp;  the  compknient  of  the

oldefl  life,  and  n  the  complement  of  the  youngefV.

The  whole  expe<5bation  of  furvivorfhip  is h


r— .  The  expectation  of  furvivordiip,  on  the  part
of  the  oldefl  is  —  -, and  the  expedlation,  on  the

part  of  the  youngeH:,  is ~  '^"fT' ^^  ^^  ^^^^  ^°

apply  this  inveftigation  to  any  number  of  joint
lives,  and  to  all  cales  of  furvivorfhip.

It  may  be  obferved,  concerning  the  firfl  of  thp
fluents  here  given,  that  it  exprelfes  not  only  the
expeflation  of  a  given  life  for  the  time  «■,  and
therefore  its  whole  expeflation  when  .v=«,  but
likewife,  the  number  of  perfons  alive,  to  which  one
perfon  added  annually  to  a  fociety,  at  a  given  age,

will  increafe  in  x  time. Thus : Suppofe  one

annuitant,  v/hofe  age  is  28,  (and  whole  complement
of  life,  therefore,  is  58,  or  expe^alion  of  life  2g)
to  come  upon  a  fociety  every  year  •,  the  number  of
annuitants  alive,  deduced  from  hence,  vi'ill,  in  x

,  X'  A  X  20 — ,r^  J ,

years,  be  :i^ ,  or x^v;  and,  there-

^  4^29'  4  +  29

fore,  the  number  of  annuitants  alive,  deduced  in
the  fame  time  from  p  annuitants  left  annually  at

the  fame  age,  will  be  -^^^ — ^  xp^' In  like

°  4x29-^

manner,  the  2d  fluent,  or  — - f-  a\  gives  the

number


3oa  APPENDIX.

number  of  marriages  in  being  together,  that  will,
in  X  years,  grow  out  of  one  yearly  marriage,  be-
tween perfons  of  equal  ages,  v/hofe  complement  of
life  is  n.  If  they  are  of  unequal  ages,  and  the  com-
plement of  the  oldeft  life  is  m,  and  of  the  youngeft

»,  this  number  will  be |-x And

'  rimn  171!  It

if  the  number  of  years  is  required,  in  which  any
given  number  of  yearly  marriages,  betv;een  men
and  women  at  given  ages,  will  increafe  fo  far  as
to  be  in  any  given  proportion  to  the  greatell  num-
ber that  can  poiTibly  grow  out  of  fuch  marriages,
tihis  expreiTion  muft  be  made  equal  to  the  ex'pe^la-
4ton  of  the  joint  lives,  or  of  each  marriage,  multi-
plied by  the  fradion  expreffing  the  gi-ven  propor-
tion •,  and  the  root  of  the  equation  will  be  the  an-
fwcr.  Thus  :  it  may  be  found,  that  one  marriage
every  year,  between  perfons  o^'i  and  25  years  of
agCj  v/ould  in  10  years  increafe  to  8.35  •,  in  15
years,  to  11.38  -,  and  in  c^^  years,  to  19,  or  their
greateft  poffible  number  :  and,  confequently,  that
35  fuch  yearly  marriages  would,  in  10  years,  in^
creafe  to  292  -,  in  15  years,  to  398  •,  and  in  53  years,
to  665.— —And  if  it  is  enquired  in  what  number
of  years  35  fuch  yearly  marriages  v;Duld  increafe
to  half  the  number  in  being  together,  pofiible  to
be  derived  from  them,  the  value  of  .v,  in  the  cubic

A"^  n-\-mxx^ , m m ^  n.

equation -j-  ^si'  — r~  X  a?  mult

•*  3«OT  2nm  2 d;z

be  found ;  which,  in  the  prefent  inftance,  is  nearly
12.

I  have,  in  fome  parts  of  this  work,  had  occafion
to  m.ake  fuch  deduftions  as  thefe.  See  note  (A>,
p.  277  i  and  note  (F),  p.  288  ;  and  Quefuons  III,
and  XIII.


APPENDIX.  -.O'


Note  (M). EiTay  II.  Page  226.

ET  r  fignify  i/,  increafed  by  its  intercH  for
one  year.

V  the  PERPETUITY.

■n  the  difference  between  the  age  of  the  youngefl
life,  nnd  86;  or  lis  complement .

m  the  complement  of  the  oldeft  life.

P  the  value  (in  Table  II.)  of  an  annuity  certain
for  m  years.

And  the  exad  value  of  any  two  given  joint  lives,
according  to  the  hypothefis  of  an  equal  decrement

V+r  ~ ?

of  life,  v;ill  be  V — x^ — ^ — 21;  —  ix  —


-\-  2v. Example :

Let  the  ages  be  27  and  38  ;  and  the  rate  of  in-
tereit  ^per  cent.  Then  n  —  59.  m  —  48.  V;;:^  25.
P  — 21.195.  n  —  m  —  2v  —  1  =  — 40.  n  —  m  —

- P

2v  —  I  X  -  ^'-21;  =  50 — 17.660  =  32.340.  And

V X  n — m  —  2V  —  I  X  ~  -{■2Vzz2k — j-t

X  32.340=  10.748,  the  value  of  two  joint  lives
\yhofe  ages  are  27  and  ^^.


Note


-04  APPENDIX.


Note  (N). ElTay  III. Page  232.


IT  is  plain,  that  the  purchafer  of  A's  right,  as
ftated  in  the  firil  of  the  queftioris,  to  which  this
note  refers,  cannot  get  into  pofTefnon,  till  the  year
when  A  and  B  fhall  be  both  dead  ;  nor  then,  un-
lefs  A  happens  to  die  lajl.  Nov/,  fuppofing  the
common  complement  of  life  n  -,  the  probability
that  A  and  B  iliall  be  hlb  dead  at  the  end  of  the

frjl  year,  and  A  die  laft,  is  i —  x  i


n  )i


X  -  = ; h  —.---. -In hlce

manner,  the  probability  that  they  fhall  be  hoih
dead  at  the  end  of  the  2d,  3d,  &c.  years,  and  A

{. . -I n-. — 2 n-—i n — 2I ' i n—T.
lurvive,  IS \-


2  in  in  171' 2  in


-^r-^  -i 4:-,  &c. The  prefent  value,  therefore,

in  in-  ^ ■^

of  the  ift,  2d,  3d,  &c.  rents  of  the  reverfionary

„ . I  n — r n — i , aT^'- i  n — 2

eitate  is V ,

2/"  mr  inr  2?/r 11- irir-


n — 2 , n — 21' I  n — -;> 7z— r? n — -iV- -

— r  ^ —,  -T T -r  — ~r  ,  &C.

ini"  i>rr- ir^  Tnr^  iny  iwr^

Suppofing  r  to  fignify  1/.  increafed  by  its  intereft
for  a  year  •,  and  the  eitate  to  be  i/.  ■per  annum.  And
thefum  of  thefe  terms  continued  in  infinitum^  is  the

value  required. But \ — ■,  -1 : ,  &c,  is  half

-'  IT ir- lr^

the


^o^


^  —  2 , « — 2
2»r* 2«r-


APPENDIX.

the  perpetuity. And \- _ — —  +

2«T^ 2/.'r-> 2«r^ 2H^r^
is  half  tht  value  of  the  joifit  lives,  fubtracled  from
half  ihc  fum  of  the  values  of  the  two  Jifi^le  lives ;'
that  is,  /?\'7//  the  value  of  the  ioiigefl:  of  the  two.
lives.

A  fimilar  demon (Iration  may  be.  applied  to  the,
ether  qucilion.


Note


^,o6  APPENDIX.


Note  (O). E%  IV. Page  262.

LET  r  be  i/.  increafed  by  its  intereft  for  one
year.

Let  S  reprefent  any  given  interval  of  time,  or
number  of  years,  during  which  the  decrements  of
lite  in  a  table  of  obfervacions  continue  equal.

a  the  number  of  the  living  in  the  table  at  the
beginning  of  the  firfl:  year  of  that  interval.

b  the  number  of  the  living  in  the  table  at  the
beginning  of  the  year  immediately  following  the
lame  interval.

P  the  value  of  an  annuity  certain  for  S  years.

p  the  valucjin  Table  I.  of  i/.  due  at  the  end  of
S  yars.

Q^the  value,  in  Table  Vl.  of  an  annuity  for  the
life  of  a  perlbn  vvhofe  age  wants  S  years  of  86.

N  the  value,  in  ftri6b  agreement  with  the  given
table  of  obfervarions,  of  an  annuity  on  the  life  of
a  pcrfon  whofe  ao;e  is  S  years  grreater  than  the  age
at  which  the  interval  of  equal  decrements  begins.
Then

Q_"l-  -  X  P- — -Q^vvill  be  the  value,  according

to  the  table  of  cbfervations,  of  an  annuity  for  S
years,  on  a  life  of  the  fame  age  with  that  at  which
the  interval  of  equal  decrements  begins. And

h  '  —

Q_+  -  X  P  —  Q^+  /'N  will  be  the  value  of  at!

annuity  on  the  v/hole  duration  of  that  life.

When  S  reprefents  one  year,  Q^vaniflies,  and  the

lafi:  exprefllon  becomes  —  x  1  +  K ;  which  is  the

ar


3  rule


APPENDIX*  307

rule  for  finding,  from  the  value  given  of  any  life,
the  value  of  a  life  one  year  younger.

Thefe  Tlieorems  fave  much  labour  In  calculat-
ing the  values  of  life-annuities  from  tables  of  ob-
fervations.

The  firft  of  them,  with  its  Inveftigation,  may
be  found  in  page  341,  3d  edition,  of  Mr.  D:
Moivrc\  Treat! fe  on  the  Doclrine  cf  Chances.  But  i&
is  neceflary  to  obferve,  that  the  direction  Mr,  Be
Moivre  has  given  for  finding  the  value  of  Q  is
wrong.  In  confequence  of  calculating  agreeably  to
this  diredion,  he  gives  the  value  of  a  lite  at  the  age
of  42,  by  Dt.  HclUy'^  table,  greater  than  the  value
of  the  fame  life  by  his  own  hypothefis  ;  whereas,  it
is  evident,  that  the  probabilities  of  living  after  42,
being  all  along  lefs  in  Dr.  Halleyh  tabic,  tlian  in  the
hypothefis,  the  z^ahio  of  the  life  muft  be  aho  lefs.

The  mathematical  reader  may  cafily  fatisfy  him-
felf,  that  the  value  of  Q^ought  to  be  taken  from
Table  VI.  as  I  have  diredtcd.

An  eafy  and  accurate  method  of  finding  the
values  of  fingles  lives,  agreeably  to  any  given  table
of  obfervations,  is  given  by  Mr.  Dodfon  in  his
Mathematical  Repcfitory^  vol.  II.  page  161.

There  is  alio  in  Mr.  Simpfoji's  Sek5i  Extrcifes^
page  27^,  a  very  eafy  rule  for  approximating  to
the  values  cf  fingle  lives,  according  to  Dr.  HalUy^^
table.  But  this  rule  mud  not  be  depended  on  j
for  I  have  found  it  4-  a  year's  purchafe,  and  fome-
times  three-quarters  of  a  year's  purchafe  wrong.

To  prevent  the  danger  of  miftaking  the  Theo-
rem I  have  given,  1  have  thought  proper  to
fubjoin  the  following  exam.ple.

Let  the  table  oFoblervations  be  iht  Brrjla-'jj  Ta-
ble, or  Table  III.  The  value  of  a  life  at  78,  by  this
X  2  Table,


3o8  APPENDIX.

Table,  is ^^+^  +  P7^>  &c.  to  the  end  cf

life.  The  number  of  terms  in  this  feries  being
Imall,  it  may  be  eafily  found  to  be  3.514,  fuppof-

ing  intereft  at  j^per  cent,  and  -  ,  —  ,  -j,  &c.  be-
ing the  values,  in  Table  I.  of  i/.  at  the  end  of
I,  2,  3,  &c.  years. ^ From  78  to  74  the  decre-
ments of  life  Gontinue  equal ;  and  therefore  8=4.
a  n:  98.  b  —  58,  P  —  3.6298,  by  Table  II  •,  pzz
.8548,  by Table  li Qji:  1.406,  by  Table  VI ;

N  zz  3.514.  P  —  Q^+Z'N  =  5.227  -^  and  Qj-|


^^  —  Q^-i-^N  =  4,500,  or  the  value  of  a  life  at

74-

From  74  to  70  there  is  another  interval  of  equ^l

decrements ; and, by  a  like eafy  operation,  ths

taiue  of  a  iix^e  at  70  will  be  found  to  be  5-595.


T  A  E  L  £


APPENDIX.


3^9


TABLE I.

The  prefent  Value  of  i/.  to  be  received  at  the  end
of  any  number  of  years,  not  exceeding  loo;
difcounting  at  the  rates  of  3,  3^,  4,  4^,  5  and
6  per  cent,  compound  interelt.


1

3  per  Ct.

3!  per  Ct.

4  per  Ct.

4ipcrCt

5  per  Ct.

6  per  Ct.
.943396

,970874

,966184

,961538

,956938

952381

2

,942596

.935511

,924556

■ .91573c

,907029

,^^89996

3

,915142

,90,1943

,888996

,876297

,863838

,839619

4

,888487

,871442

,854804

,838561

,822702

,792094

s

.862609

.841973

,821927

,802451

.783526

,747258

6

,837484

,813501

'790315

,767896

,746215

,704961

7

,813092

.7^^599'

,759918

,734828

.710681

,665057

8

,789409

.759412

,730690

,703185

.676839

,627412

9

,766417

•73373J

.7025^7

,672904

,644609

,59189s

10
1 1

,744094

,7o^9'9

,675564

,■643928

,613913

'55^395
.526788

,722421

,684946

,649581

,616199

,584679

12

,701380

,661783

,624597

,589664

.556837

,496969

'3

,680951

,639404

,600^74

,564272

,530321

,468839

H

,661118

,617782

.577475

.559973

,505068

,442501

'5

,641862

,596891

.555265

,516720

,481017

,4:7265

lb

,623167

,576706

,533908^

.494469

,45^1 12

.393646

'7

,605016

,557204

-513373

'473 '76

.436297

•371364

ly

<5«7^^95

.53^36'

,493628'

,452800

,415521

■353344

'9

,570280

,520156

,474642

.433302

'^95734

•330513

zo
21

,553676:

,502566

,456387

414643

.376889

,311805

.537549

.485571

,438834

,396787

.358942

.294155

22

,521893

.469151

,421955

.379701

341850

■277505

23

,506692

,453286

,405726

.363350

•32557'

,261797

2+

'491934

.457957

,390121

.3477P3

,310068

,246979

^5

) 47 7 606

,423147

•375i'7

.33273^

.295303

232999

26

,463695

,408838

,360689

,318402

.281241

219810

27

,450-189

,395012

.3468^7

,30469:

.26784!!

207368

28

.437077

,381654

■333477

,291571

255004

195630

29

,424346

.368748

,320651

.=790'5

242946

'%57

30

,41 19S7

.356278

,308319

,267000

231377

174110

,390987

,344230

296460

255502

220359

164255

32

.3883^7  ,332590!

28505S  ,244500!

209866

'54957

X3


^10  APPENDIX.

TABLE I. Continued,


3  ptr  Ct.


:>  ■»
34
35

i^>
37
5^

39
40

41

42

43
44

45
46

47
48
49


377026
,366045

,345032

.334983
,^25226

.315754
»3o6557


3iperCt.l  4perCt.  U^perCt


,321343
,310476

.299977
,289853
,280032
,270562
,261413
,252572


,297628
,288959

'^'■'-543
,272372
,264439

.-56737
,249259
,241999

J'234950
I50  ,228107


,274094
,263552

.2534' 5
,243669

,234297

,225285

,216621

,208289


,233971
,223896
,214254
,205028
,196199
,18775c
,179665
171929


5  per  Ct.  I  6  per  Ct.  I


51

52

53
54
5  5
56

57
5S

59

60


,244031

.235779
,227800!

,220102'

,212659

,205468

,198520

,191806

,185320

.179053


,200278

.192575
,185168
,178046
,171198
,164614
,158283
,152195
,146341
,140713


,221463

.215C13

,208750

,202670!

,196767

,191036

,185472

,180070

,174825

.169733


64


,1 047^9
,159990
.15533c

,! 50806
051-146413
661,142149

67  1,138009

;  68 1,133989

I  ••9  j,i  iCoS6
I  -o  j,i  2629T


,17299^
,167148

,161496

.156035

.150758

,14566c

140734

135975

131377
126934


.155301
,130057
,125093
,120282
,115656
,1 1 1207
,106930
,102817
,098963
,095060


,164525
,157440
,1 50663

.144173
,137964

.132023

,126338

,120898

,115692

,1 10710


,199873

.190355
,181290

,172657
,164436
,156605
,149148
,  1 42046


,105942
,ioi3i;o
,097014

,092837


,0!:


^■•39


122642
118495

,114487
,  1 1 06 1 6
,106875
.103261
,099760
,096395
.093136
.019986


,085013
,081353
,077849

.074497
,071289


,135282
,128840
,122704
,116864
,111297
,105997
,100949
,096142
,ogi 564
,087204


,146186
,137912
,130105
,122741

.115793  '
,109239
,103056
,097222


,091404
,087889
,084508
,081258
,078133
,075128
,072238
.069460
,066788
,064219


,083051
,079096
,075330

.071743
,068326
,065073
,061974
,059023
,056212
,053536


,091719
,086527
,081630
,077009
,072650
,068538
,064658
,060998!

.057546
,054288]

,051215

,048316
,045582
,043001
,040567
,038271
,036105
,034061

.032133
,030310


,068219
,065281
,062470
,059780
,057206
,054742
,052385
,050129
,047971
,045905


,050986
,048558
,046246
,044044
,041946

.039949
,038047
,036235

.034509
,032866


,028598
,026989
,025453
,02401:
,027653
,021 37c
,020161
,019020
,017943
,  016927


APPENDIX.
TABLE I. Continued.


3n


71

3  per  Ct.

3^  per  Ct.

4  per  Ct.

n\  per  Ct.

5  par  Ct.

6  per  Ct.

,i?26i9

,086943

.061749

,043928

,031301

,015969

72

.119047

,084005

.059374

,042037

,029811

.015065

73

,115580

,081 162

,057091

,040226

,028391

,014212

74

,112214

,078418

,054895

,038491

,027039

,oi34Cii

75

.108945

,075766

,052784

,036836

,025752

,012649

76

,105772

,073204

,050754

,035250

,024525

.01193^

77

,102691

,070728

,048801

.033732

,023357

,01 1258

78

,099700

,068336

,046924

,032280

,022245

,010620

79

,096796

,066026

,045120

,030890

,021 186

,010019

80
81

.093977

,063793

,943384

,0:9559

,020177

,009452

,091240

,061636

.041716

,028287

,019216

,008917

82

,088582

,059551

,0401 1 1

,027068

,018301

,008412

83

,086002

•057538

,038569

,025903

,017430

,007936

84

,083497

,055592

,037085

,024787

,016600

.007487

85

,081065

,053712

,035659

,023720

,015809

,007063

86

.078704

,051896

,0342^7

,022699

,015056

,006663

87

,076412

,050141

,032968

,021721

,014339

,006286

88

,074186

.04^445

,031700

,020786

,013657

,005930

89

,072027

,046807

,030481

,019891

,013006

,005595

90
91

,069928

,045224

,029309

,019034

,012387

,005278
,004979

,067891

,043695

,028182

,018215

,011797

92

,065914

,042217

,027098

,017430

,011235

,004697

93

,063994

,040789

,026055

,016680

,010700

,004432

'  94

,062130

,039410

,025053

,015961

,010191

,004181

95

,060320

,038077

,024090

,015274

.009705

.003944

96

,058563

,036790

,023163

,0146:6

,009243

,003721

97

,05685s

,035546

,022272

,013987

, 008003

,0035 10

98

,055202

.034344

,021416

.013385

,008384

.003312

99

.053594

,033182

,020592

,012808

,0079^  5

.CO3124

ICO

,052053

,032060

,019800

,oi2v;s7

.oo-6od

,O070s'7

X4


TABLE


3U


APPENDIX.


TABLE II.

The  prefent  Value  of  an  Annuity  of  One  Poundj
for  any  Number  of  Years  not  exceeding  100,
at  the  feveral  Rates  of  3,  3|-,  4,  5,  and  6/.
per  Cent»


Ye.

I

I3  perCt.

3|perCc.

4  per  Ct.

5  per  Ct.

6  per  Ct.

.970S

.9662

.9615

'95^3

•9433

2

^•9133

1.8997

1.8860

1.8594

^'^333

3

2.8286

2.8016

2.7750

2.7232

2.6730

4

Z'1^1^

3-^73^

3.6298

3-5^59

3-4651

5
6

A-5797

4-5151

4.4518

4.3294

4.2123

5-4971

5.3286

5' 242  I

5-0756

4-9173'

7

6.2302

6.1 145

t).0020

5-7'-63

5-5823

8

7.0196

6:8740

6.7S2y

6.4632

6.2097

9

7.7861

7.6077

7-4-353

7.1078

6.8016

10
1 1

S.5302

8.3166

8.1108

7.7212

y.^6oQ

9.2526

9.0015

8.7604

8.3064

7.8868

12

9.9540

g.6633

9.3850

8.8632

8.3838

13

10.6349

10.3027

9-9^5^

9-3935

8.8526

14

11.2960

;io.92o5

10.5631

9.8986

9.2949

15
16

11.^379

11.5174

11.1183
11.6522

10.3796

9.7122

12.561 1

12.0941

10.8377

10.1058

17

1^.1661

12.6513

12.1656

11.2740

10.4772

.i8

^3-7535

13.1897

12.6592

11.6895

10.8276

19

14.5238

13.7098

13-1339

12.0853

11.1581

20
21

14.8774

14.2124

^3-5903

12.4622
12.S211

1 1.4699

15-4150

14.6980

14.0291

1 1.7640

22

i5-93^'9

15.1671

14.4A11

13.1D30

12.0415

•231

16.4436

15.6204

14.8568

13.4885

12.3033

24

1^-9355

16.0584

15.2469

13.7986

12.5503

25

1*7.4131

16.4815

15.6220

14.0939

12.7833

APPENDIX.
TABLE ir. Continued.


Tf«!


-'Ye:
26

3  per  Ct.

3^;  per  k„c.

4pcr  Cc.

5  per  CC.

0  per  U;.

17.876S

16.8904

15.9827

^'^■375^

13.0031

•'27

^8.3270

17.2854

16.3295

146430

13.2105

28

18.7641

17.6670

16.6630

14.8981

13.4061

29

19.1884

18.0358

16.9837

15.1410

^3-59^7

30
31

19.6004

20.0004

18.3920

17.2920

15-3724

13.7648

1 8. 7363

17.5884

15.5928

13.9290

3-2

20.3887

19.06S9

^7-'^735

15.8026

14.0S40

33

20.7657

19.3902

18.1476

16.0025

14.2302

34

2  I .  I  3 1  8

19.7007

18.41  II

16.1929

14.3681

35
36

21.4872

20.0G07

18.6646

16.3741

14.4982

21.8322

20.2905

18.9082

16.5468

14.6209

37

22.1672'

20.5705

19.1425

16.71 12

H-7367

38

22.4924

20.841 1

19.3678

16.8678

14.8460

39

22.8082

21.1025

19.5844

17.0170

14.9490

40
41

23.1147

21-3551
21.5991

19.7927

17.1590

15.0462

23.4124

19.9930

17.2943

15.1380

42

23.7013

21.8349

20.1856

17.4232

15-2245

43

23.9819

22.0627

20.3707

^7-5fj9

15.3061

44

24.2542

22.2828

20.548S

17.6627

^5-3'^3'^

45
46

24.5187

24-7754

22.4955

20.7200

17.7740

^5-455!^

22.7009

20.8846

17.8800

15-5243

47

25.0247

22.8994

21.0429

17.9810

15.5S90

4H

25.2667

23.0912

21.1951

18.0771

J  5.6500

49

25.5016

23.2766

21.3414

18.1687

^5-7^75

50
5i)

25.7297

23-4556

21.4821

18.2559

15.7618

25.9512

23.6286

21.6174

18.33S9

15.8130

52

26.1662

23-'795^

21.7475

i8.^.i8o

15.8613

53

26.3749

23-9^^^73

21.8726

18.4.9^4

15.9069

54

26.5776

24-1133

2 1.9929

1S.5651

15-9499

55

26.^744

24.2641

22.IGi^6

18.6334115.990,:!

APPENDIX.

TABLE If. Continued.


yi;.


56


51
58


3  P


er  Ct.


26.9654


OQ


27-i5^y
27.3310

c,(^ 27.5058
60  '2.'].6']^S


61  27.(5403

62  28.0003

67, 28.1556

64  28.3064
6^ 28.4528


66

67
68


72

73
74
75


76

77
78

79
80


81

82

84


28.5950

28.7330

28.8670

28.9971

29.1234


29.2460

29.3650

29.4806

29.5928

29.7018


3ipfrLt.


4  per  Ct.


24.4097

24.5504
24.6864
24.8178
24.9447


25.0674
25.1859
25.3004
25.41  10
25.5178


29.8076
29.9102
30.0099
30.1067
30.2007


30.2920
30.3805
30.4665
30.5500
85  30.6311


25.6211
25.7209
25.8173

25.9104
26.0004

26.0873
26.1713
26.2525


22.2198
22.3267
22.4295
22.5284
22.6234


22.7148
22.S027
22.8872
22.9085
23.0466


23.1218
23.1940
23-2635
23.3302


23.4562
23-5^56
23-5727


26.3309123.6276
26.4067  23.6804


26.4799  23.7311
26.5506  23.7799
26.6190  23.826S
26.6S5O  23.872c
26.7488  23.9153

26.8104  23.9571
26.8700  23.9972
26.9275  24.0357
26.983il24.072i:
27.0368  24.1085


•;  per  Ct.


18.6985

18.7605

18.8757
18.9292

13.9802
19.0288
19.0750
19.1191
19.1610

19.2010
19.2390

Lg,Q.jS3
19.3098

19.3426

^9-3739
19.4037

19.4321

19.4592

19.4849

19.5094
19.5328

^9-5550
i^.5y6i
19.5964.

19.6156

^9-^339
19.6514

19.6680

19.68:^8

b  per  (Jt.

6.0288
6.0649
6.0989
6.I3U
6.1614


6.1900
6.2170
6.2424
6.2664
6.2891


6.3104

6.^S^6
6.3496
6.3676
6.3845


6.4005

6.4155
6.4297

6.4431

6.4558

6.4677
6.4790
6.4896
6.4996
6.5091


6.518Q

6.5264

6-53^3
6.541b

6.5489


APPENDIX.
TABLE IL Continued.


^^S


Ve.

86

87

88
89
80

91
92

93
94
95

96

97
98

99
100

3  per  Cc.

3ipcrCt.

Vf-"'"  ^•

5  per  Ct.

6  per  Ci.

30.7098
30.7862
30.8604
30.9324
31.CO24

31.0703
31.1362
31.2002
31.2623
31.3226

27.0887
27.1388
27.1873
27.2341
27.2793

27-3230
27.3652
27.4060
27-4454
27-4835

24.1428

24-1757
24.2074

24.2379

24.2672

19.6988
19.7132
19.7268
19.7398
19.7522

16.5556
16.5618
16.567S

16.5734
16.5786

24.2954
24.3225
24.3486
24-3736

24-3977

19.7640
19.7752
19.7859
19.7961
19.8058

16.5836
16.5883
16.5928
16.5969
16.6009

31.3812

31.4380

31-4932
31.5468

3I-59S9

27-5203

27-555S
27.5902
27.6234
27-6554

24.4209
24.4431
24.4646
24.4852
24.5050

19.815I
19.8239
19.8323
19.8403
19.8479

16.6046
16.6081
16.6114
16.6145
16.6175

3i6 appendix;

TABLE III.

Shewing  the  Probabilities  of  the  Duration  of
Life,  as  deduced  by  Dr. Hallcy  from  Obferva-r
tions  on  the  Bills  of  Mortality  of  Breslaw.


Perfons

Deer,  i

-

I'erfons

Deer.

Perfons

Deer.

Ages
I

Jiving.
1000

of  Life.
145  1

Ages.
31

livine.
523

of  L'fi.

Ages

living.

of  Lif<^
10

8

61

232

2

855

57

32

515

8

62

222

10

3

798

38

33

507

8

63

212

10

4

760

28

34

499

9

64

202

10

5

732

22

35

490

9

65

192

10

,6

710

18

36

481

9

66

182

10

7

692

12

37

472

9

6y

172

10

8

680

10

38

463

9

6S

162

ID

9

670

9

39

454

9

69

152

10

lO

661

8

40

445

9

70

142

II

II

653

7

41

436

9

71

13^

u

12

646

6

42

427

10

72

120

II

i3

640

6

43

417

10

73

109

II

14

634

6

44

407

10

74

98

ro

15

628

6

45

397

10

75

88

10

i6

622

6

46

3^7

10

76

78

10

17

616

6

47

377

10

77

68

10

i8

610

6

48

3^7

10

78

58

9

19

604

6

49

357

1 1

79

49

8

20

598

6

50

346

II

80

41

7

21

592

6

51

335

1 1

81

34

6

22

586

7

52

324

1 1

82

28

5

23

579

6

53

313

''

83

23

4

24

573

6

54

302

10

84

19

4

25

.5^7

7

55

292

10

85

15

4

26

560

7

5'o

282

10

86

1 1

3

27

553

7

57

272

10

87

8

3

28

546

/

5S

262

10

88

5

2

29

539

8

59

252

10

89

3

2

30

53^

8

60

242

— _ —

10

90

I

I

APPENDIX,  317

TABLE IV.

Shewins  the  Probabilities  of  Life  at  Nortii-
See  page  255,  256.


aMpton.


Ferlens

Deer.

Pcrlbns

Deer,  f , .

Ferlons

Deer.

Ages.

living.

of  Life.
300

Ages.
31

living.

of  Life.

/\ges

1 living.

of  Life.

0

1149

428

7

62

187

8

I

849

127

32

421

7

63

179

• 8

2

722

50

33

414

7

64

171

8

3

672

26

34

407

7

65

163

8

4

646

21

35

400

7

66

^55

^

5

625

16

36

393

7

67

147

6

609

13

37

386

7

68

139

8 ,

7

59^

10

38

379

7

%

^3'

8

8

586

9

39

372

7

70

123

8

9

577

7

40

3%

8

71

115

8

10

570

6

41

357

8

72

107

8

II

564

6

42

34-9

8

73

99

8

12

558

5

43

341

8

74

91

8 ;•

^3

553

5

44

333

8

75

83

8

14

548

5

45

3^5

8

76

75

8

15

543

5

46

3^7

8

77

67

7

16

538

5

47

3^9

8

78

60

7

17

533

5

48

301

8

79

53

7

18

528

6

49

293

9

80

46

7

19

522

7

50

284

9

81

39

7

20

515

8

5i

275

8

82

32

6

21

507

8

52

267

8

83

26

5

22

499

8

53

259

8

84

21

4

23

491

8

54

251

8

85

17

4

24

483

8

55

243

8

86

13

3

25

475

8

56

235

8

^7

10

2

26

467

8

57

227

8

88

8

2

27

459

8

58

219

8

89

6

2

28

451

8

59

211

8

00

4

2

29

443

8

60

203

8

i?'

2

i

30

435

7

61

J  95

8

I92

I

I

^iS


A  p  p  E  N  D  I  ii:.

TABLE V.


Shewing  the  Probabiliiies  of  Life  at  NoRwiCH-i
See  page  256,  257.


177

Perl'ons

Deer.

Ages
32

Perfohs

Deer.

Ages
63

i'erfons

j  Deer.

Ages
0

living.

of  Lite.

living.

of  Lite.

living.

^74

[of  Lifi,

1185

320

392

6

9

I

865

160

33

386

6

64

165

9

2

705

60

34

380

6

65

156

9

3

^45

32

35

374

6

66

H7

9

4

613

23

36

368

6

67

^38

9

5

590

20

37

362

6

6S

129

9

6

570

16

38

35^

6

69

120

9

7

554

13

39

350

7

70

II I

Q

8

541

II

40

3^3

6

,7^

102

8

9

53^

9

41

337

6

72

94

8

10

521

7

42

33^

6

'73

S6

8

II

5H

6

43

325

7

74

78

8

12

508

6

44

318

7

'75

70

8

13

5C2

5

45

3if

7

J76

62

7

14

497

5

46

304

7

77

55

7

i^

492

5

47

297

7

78

48

6

16

487

5

48

290

7

79

42

5

17

482

5

49

28?

7

So

37

5

18

477

5

50

276

7

^^

32

4

19

472

5

51

269

7

82

28

4

20

467

6

52

262

7

83

24

4

21

461

6

53

255

8

84

20

3-

22

4 1-  r

6

54

247

8

S5

17

J

23

449

6

55

239

8

86

14

3

24

443

6

56

23  f

8

87

II

rf

25

43;

6

57

223

8

88

9

2

26

43  i

7

ss

215

8

89

7

2

27

424

7

59

207

8  i

90

5

2

28

417

7

60

199

8  '

91

3

2

29

410

6

6l

191

8  i

02

I

1

^0

/[.04

6

62

^^3

9

93

I

I

^^  f

39^'

6  1

1

1

APPENDIX.
TABLE VI. {a).


\9


Shewing  the  prefent  Values  of  an  Annuity  of  i/.
on  a  fingle  life,  according  to  Mr.  De  Mohreh
hypothefis  ;  and,  therefore,  nearly,  according  to
the  probabilities  of  life  at  Breslaw,  Norv/ich,
and  Northampton. See  p.  2,  and  p.  262.


Age.

8

9

10

II
12

«3
H
15
16

>7
18

'9

20

21
22

23
24

^5
26

27
28
29

30

31
32

33

3  per  Ct.

3iperCt.

4  per  Ct.

16,791
16,882
16.882

4-1  per  Ct.

5  per  Ct.

14.544
14,607

14.607

'4.544
14,480
14,412
14,342
14,271
14.197
14,123
14,047
13,970
13,891

13,810

'3.727
13,642

'3.555
13,466

13.375
13,282

13,186

13,088

12,988

12,855
12,780
12,673

6  per  Ct.

12,790
12,839
12,859

19,736
19,868
19,868

18,160
18,269
18,269

'5-595

15,672
15,672

19,736
19,604

19.469
19-331
19.192
19,050
18,905

18,759
18,610

18,458

18,160
18,049

17.937
17,823
17,707
17.588
17.467
17,344
17,220

17.093

16,791
16,698
16,604
16,508
16,410
16.311
16,209
16,105

'5.999
15.891

15.595
15.517

15.437

'5.356

'5'273
15,189
15,102
15,015

'4-923
14,831

12,790
12,741
12,691
12,639
12,586
12,532
12,476
12,419
12,361
12,301

12,239,

12,177

12,112

12,045

11,978

11,908

11,837

11.763

11,683
ii,6io

18.305
18,148
17,990
17.827
17,664

'7.497
17.327

17.154
16,979

16,800

16,963
16,830
16,696

'6,559
16,419
16,277
16,133
15.9JJ5

15.^35
15,682

15,781
15,669

'5.554
'5-437
15,318

15. '97

'5.073
14,946
14,816
14.684

14,549
14,411
14.270

'4.737
14,641

14.543
14,442
14,340

14*235
14,128
14,018
'3.905
13.79'

13,673
'3.553

'3.43^'

16,620
16,436
16,248

15,526

'5.367

15.204

11,530
11,449
11.365

the  V

This  Ts
alues  of

ible  is  the
iingle  li\

:  fnme  w
es, publ

th  Mr.  D
lihed in  .

1  Moi'vre
lis  Tread

J  Table  of
/e  on  Life

Anmdtiei,  and  carried  aS  far  as  the  age  of  79  to  three  place's  'of
decimals  by  Mr.  Dodjon  in  his  Mcithc^natical  Rsp'nlton,  vol.  ii,
p.  169.


gzo


APPENDIX.
TABLE VI. Continued.


Age
34

j  3  P"  Cc.

3f  perCt.

4  per  Ct.

4-1  per  Ct.

5perCt.

6  per  Ct-

16,057

15,039

14,126

13^304

12,562

11,278

3S

15.^^

14.871

13.979

13.175

12,449

1  1,189

56

15,666

14,699

13.829

13,044

12.353

1  1,098

57

15.465

14,524

13,676

12,909

12,214

11,003

3«

15,260

H'345

i3.5'9

12,771

12,091

10,907

39

J5.053

14,163

13.359

12,630

1  1,966

10,807

40
41

.  I4'842

13,978

13,196

12.-485

11,837

10,704

14,626

i3>789

13,028

12,337

11,705

10,599

42

14.407

'3.596

12,858

12,18^

11,570

10,49c

:  43

14-185

•3'399

12,683

12,029

11,431

10,378

44

'3'958

13,199

12,504

11,870

11,288

10,263

45

13.728

12.993

12,322

I  1,707

I  1,142

10,144

46

13.493

i2,7«4

12,135

I  1.540

10,992

10,021

47

13.254

12,571

11,944

11,368

10,837

9.895

4d

13,012

12354

11,748

1  1,192

10,679

9,765

49

12,764

1 2, 1 3 1

11,548

1  1,012

10,515

9,630

50


5'

12,51 1

1 1,904

11.344

10,827

50,348

9,492

12,255

11,673

11,135

10,638

10,176

9.3.49

3-

11,994

J  1.437

10,921

10,443

9.999

9,201

53

1.1,729

11,195

10,702

10,243

9.S17

9,049

54

11.457

10,950

10,478

10,039

9,630

8,891

55

11,183

10,698

10,248

9,829

9.437

8,729

5^

10,902

10,443

10,014

9,614

9.239

8,561

57

10,616

1 0, 1 8 1

9.775'

9.393

9.036

8.387

5«

10325

9.913

9.527

9,166

8,826

8,208

S9

10,029

9,640

9.275

8,953

8,6x1

8,023

bo
61

9.727

9,361

9.017

8,694

8,389

7.831

9.4'9

9,076

8.753

8.449

8,161

7.63:3

62

9,107

8,786

8,482

8,197

7.926

7.428

.^^

- b',787

8,488

8,205

7.938

7.684

7,216

64

8,462

8.185

7,921

7.672

7.435.

6.997

^5

8,132

7.875

7,631

7.399

7.179

6,770

66

7-794

7.558

7.333

7.119

6,915

6.535

67

7,450

7.234

7.027

6.831

6,643

fy,z<^-

68

7.099

6.902

6,714

6,534

6,362

6,040

6q

6,743

6,565

6,394

6,2^0

6,073

5.779

7c

6.rS

6,2  IQ

6.065

5.918!

5-775

5,508

A  P  I^  E  N  D  I  X.
TABLE VI. Continued.


32t


Age.

3perCt.

ji  per  Ct.

4  per  Ct.

4i  P"  Ct

S  per  Ct.

6  per  Ct.

7'

6,008

5,865

5,728

5.596

5,468

5,228

72

5.631

5.505

5.383

5.265

5.^2

4,937

73

5,246

5.m6

5,029

4.926

4,826

4,636

74

4.8H

4.759

4,666

4.576

4,489

4.324

7S

4.453

4.373

4,293

4,217

4. '43

4,000

76

4,046

3.978

3,912

3.847

3.734

3.664

77

3.632

3.J75

3,520

3.467

3,415

3.3'5

78

3,207

3.'63

3,111

3076

3.03  +

2,953

79

2.776

2,741

2,707

2,673

2,641

2.578

«o

2.334

2,309
1,867

2,284

2,259
1,832

2,235
1,816

2,188

81

1,886

1,850

1.783

82

1.429

1,411

1,406

1.394

1,384

1,362

«3

0,961

0.955

0,950

0.943

0,937

0.925

84

0,484

0,483

0,481

0.479

0,476

0,472

«5

o.coo

0,000

0,000

0,000

OjOOO

0,000

TABLE


322


APPENDIX.
TABLE Vir.


I


Shewing  the  Value  of  an  Annuity  on  the  joint  con-
tinuance of  two  lives,  according  to  Mr.  De
Moi-vre's  Hypoihefis  ;  and,  therefore,  nearly  ac-
cording to  the  probabilities  of  life  at  Breslaw,
Norwich,  and  Northampton.  See  ElTay  11^
and  p.  2,  3,  226,  262.


•  u  .

U

to  ,

■*^

^o  .

•5«
° c

0  .g

JO

>  ^

>  t

^g.

10

15.206

13-342

11.855

^5

14.878

13-093

ii.66i

20

14-503

12.808

11.430

25

14.074

12.480

11. 182

10

30

13-585

I2.I02

10.884

■

^5

13.025

i  1.665

10.537

40

12.381

II. 156

10.128

45

11.644

10.564

9.646

50

10.796

9.871

9.074

■

55

9.822

9.059

8.391

60

8.704

8.105

7-57^

65

7-417

6.980

6.5^5


70

5-936

5-652

5-391

15

14-574

12. i^6o

11.478

20

14.225

12.593

11.266

25

13. 822

12.281

11.022

30

13-359

II. 921

10.736

35

12.824

II. 501

10.402

15

40

12.207

II.0I3

10.008

45

11.496

10.440

9-541

50

10.675

9-7^7

8.985

55

9.727

^■975

8.318

bo

8.632

8.041

7-515

65

7-377

6-934

6.544

70

5-932

5.623

5-364

A

P  P  E  N  D  I  X. ;

TAB

L  E Vir. Cor

itinued.

u

u

ro ,

■*  .

<o  .

-5«

-c

«5

to 0

"  s

o ^

°-s

JO

?e  U

"1  ^

fijD O

0  ~

(M 4>

%  ^

< >-•

<
20

>  ^

> ^

1 1.067

13-904

12.341

25

13-531

12.051

10.840

50

13.098

11.71 I

10.565

35

12.594

11.314

10.278

40

12.C08

10.847

9.870

20

45

11-325

10.297

.  9.420

50

10.536

9.648

8.880

55

9.617

S.Syg

8-233

60

8.549

y.g6y

7-44«

65

7.308

6.S82

6-495

70

5.868

5-590

5-333  .

25

13.192

11.786

10.621

30

12.794

11.468

10.367

35

12.333

11.095

10.067

40

11.776

10.655

9.708

25

45

II. 130

10.131

9.278

50

10.374

9-509

8.761

55

9.488

S.yb6

8.134

60

8.452

7.8S0

7'37i

65

7.241

6.826

6.440

70
30

5.826

5-551

5.294

12.434

11.182

J0.133

35

12.010

10.838

9.S54

40

11.502

10.428

9-514

45

10.898

9-93^

9.1 12

30

50

10.183

9'345

8.620

55

9-33S

8.634

8.018

60

S.33S

7779

7.280

65

y.ibi

6.748

^-373

70

5-777

5.505

5.254..

323


Y  2


324


APPENDIX.


TABLE Vir. Continued.


u

CO .

Tj-  .

«^  .

o  c

§0

«  g

II

eo  5

35

«  0

{> ex.

►SS.

11.632

10.530

9.600

40

II. 175

10.157

9.291

35

45

10.622

9.702

8.913

50

9-955

9.149

8.450

55

9.156

8.476

7.879

60

8.202

7.658

7.172

65

7.066

6.662

6.294

70
40

5.718

5-450

5.203

10.777

9.826

9.014

45

10.283

9.418

8.671

40

50

9.677

8. 911

8.244

55

8.936

8.283

7.710

60

8.038

7.510

7.039

65

6.951

6.556

6.198


70

45

5.646

5-383

5.141

9.863

9.063

8.370

50

9-331

8.619

7-987

45

55

8.662

8.044

7.500

60

7-831

7-332

6.S75

65

6.807

6.425

6.080

70

50

5-55<^

5-300

5.063

8.892

8.235

7.660

55

8.312

7-738

7.230

50

60

7.56S

7.091

6.664

65

6.623

6.258

5.926

70

55

5.442

5-'93

4.964

7.8^9

7-33^

6.873

55

60

7.220

6.781

6.386

^•5

6.379

6.036

5.724

1 70

5.291

5-053

4.833

APPENDIX.  32^

TABLE VII. Continued.


•5<ti

'Si

H
60

65

70

u

^«

<
60

65

70

65
70

70

n g
SO

so

Value  at  5
per  Cent.

^'737
6.043

5.081

6-351

5-73"^
4.858

6.001

4-653

5-547
4-773

5-^77
4-57^

5.031
4-385

4.270

4.104

3-952

T  A-


336


APPENDIX.


TABLE VIII.

Shewing  the  Probability  of  the  Duration  of  Life  in
London,  deduced  by  Mr.  Simpfo'4  from  obfer-
vations  on  the  bills  of  mortality  in  London  for
I o  years,  from  1728  to  1737.


1

PerfiMis

Deer.

Per  Ions

Deer.

A 1

I'trion-

Uecr.

Ages  1

living.

of  Life.

Ages.
27

living.  <

jf  Life.

Ages.j

54

living

,f  Life.

0

1000

320

321

6

^35

6

I

680

^33

28

3^5

7

55

129

6

2

547

51

29

308

7

56

123

6

0

496

27

30

301

7

57

117

5

4

469

J7

31

294

7

58

112

5

5

452

12

32

287

7

59

107

5

6

440

10

33

280

7

60

102

5

7

430

s

34

273

7

61

97

5

8

422

7

35

266

7

62

92

5

9

415

5

36

259

7

63

87

5

10

410

5

37

252

7

64

82

5

'  II

405

5

38

245

8

65

77

5

12

400

5

39

237

8

66

72

5

13

395

5

40

229

7

67

67

5

. 14

390

5

41

222

8

68

62

4

15

385

5

42

214

8

69

58

4

16

380

5

43

206

7

70

54

4

17

375

5

44

199

7

71

50

4

iS

370

5

45

192

7

72

46

4

19

3^5

5

46

185

7

73

42

3

20

360

5

47

178

7

74

39

3

21

355

^

48

171

6

75

36

3

22

35^

5

49

165

6

76

33

3

23

345

6

50

^59

6

77

30

3

24

339

6

51

^53

6

78

27

2

25

323

6

52

147

6

79

25

26

3^7

6

53

141

6

APPENDIX.


327


TABLE IX.

Shewing  the  ExpeBations  of  Life  in  London,  ac-
cording to  the  preceding  Table.  See  Mr.  Simp-
fort's  Se(e£i  Exercifes,  p.  255.


( Age.

ExpeflatioD.

Age.
28

£xpe£lation.

\ Age.

Expectation.

I

27.0

24.6

55

14.2

2

32.0

29

24.1

56

13-8 ,

3

34.0

30

23.6

57

13-4

4

35-^

31

23.1

5«

13-1

5

36.0

32

22.7

59

12.7

6

36.0

33

22.3

60

12.4

7

35-8

34

21.9

6r

12.0

8

35'^

35

21.5

62

II. 6

9

35-2

36

21. 1

63

II. 2

10

34-8

37

20.7

64

10.8

II

34'3

3^^^

20.3

65

10.5

12

33-7

39

19.9

66

10. 1

13

33'"^

40

19.6

67

.j.^

H

3^-5

41

19.2

68

9,4

15

31-9

42

1S.8

69

q.I

16

31-3

43

18.5

70

8.8

17

307

44

iS.i

71

8.4

18

30.1

45

17.8

72

8.1

^9

29.5

46

17-4

73

7.8

20

28.9

47

17.0

74

7-5

2l

28.3

48

16.7

75

7.2

22

27.7

49

16.3

76

6.^

23

27.2

50

16.0. !

77

6.4

24

26.6

51

15.6

7«

6.0 .

25

26.1

52

15.2

79

5-5 •

26

25.6

53

149

80

5.0

27

25.1

54

^^'5

i

Y  4


128


APPENDIX.


TABLE X.

Shewing  the  Value  of  an  Annuity  on  One  Life,  ac-
cording to  the  probabilities  of  life  in  London.

See  Mr.  Simpfon's  Sek£l  Exercifes,  p.  260.


«  c


1 ""


ii  <-^


>^  15


18. 8  16.2114.1

18.9116.3114.2

19.0  16.4  14.3'

19. 016.414.3
19.016.414.31


II  I9.016.41I4.3'

12  18.9I16.3J14.2

I3!i8.7'i6.2|i4.i

14J18.5J16.014.0


?^ rt


31  14.8

32  14.6

33H-4
3414.2

3514-1

3613-9
13713-7
3^13-5
391I3-3
40113.2


2  ^

12.9
12.7
12.6
12.4
12.3


i6'i8.i  15.6J13.7

17',  1 7-9;  1 5  ■41 1 3- 5
1817.615.2,13.4

I9,i7.4|i5. 013.2

20'l7'.2  14.8  I3.C


II. 4

"•3

II. 2!

II. o

10.9


3 b


K?* «


12. 1 10-8

II. 9  10.6
11.8  10,5

II. 6  10.4

11.5  10.3


56  1 0.1

57  9-9

58!  9.6

59  9-4

60  9-2


9.1

8.9

8.7
8.6

8.4


3 b


^ rt


8.4

8.2

8.1

8.0

7-9


21  17.0  14.7

22  16.8  14.5
2316.5I14.3
241 1 6.3  14
25  16.1  14.0


4ri3.o]ii.4|id.2J

42I12.8

43!i2.6

I4'i2.5

4512.3


12.7
12.6
12.4
12.3


I  1. 2110.1
I  I.IIIO.©
II. O

10.8


461 1 2.1

47!  1 1.9

48  1 1.8

49  1 1. 6

50  II. 4


10.7
10.5
10.4
10.2

10.  I


9.9
9.8


61
62

63
64

65

66

67
68

69

70


8.9

8-7
8.5

8.3

8.0


7-9
7-7
7-5


7-7
7.6

7-4
7-3
7-1


7.8

7.6

7-4|

7-1

6.9


26i5.9'i3.8
27  i5.6[i3.6

28]  1 5-4  13-4
29,15.213.2

30  15-0, '3-^


12.1
12.0
II. 8
11.7
II. 6


II. 2

II. o

10.7
54'io.5|

5510-31


9-9
9.8

9.6

9.4

9-3


9-7
9-5
9-4
93

Q.2


71

7^1
73
74'

75i


67
6.5
6.2


9.0
8.9
8.8
8.6
8.5


7-3
7-1
6.9
6.7
6.5


6-3
6.1

5-9


6.9

6.7
6.6
6.4.
6.2


5-91  5-^
5.6I  5.4


6.0
5.8
5-6
5-4
5.2


APPENDIX.


329


TABLE XI.

Shewing  the  Value  of  an  Annuity  on  the  joint  con-
tinuance of  IVo  Lives,  according  to  the  proba-
bilities of  life  in  London.  See  Mr.  Simpfon's
Sele£l  Exercifes,  p.  266.


u . V 1 m 1

* \  "^ 1 '

u ,0 1 rr 1

■^

ir,

U 3

J3

S2

So

til

0 &£J

eof  th
Ideft.

lueat
Cent.

3  0

Jo

ba  0

to  V

(4 li

fei)  3

00  0 ™  r;

rg >>4

<  ^

<

>  s.

>  s.

>  s.

<  ^

< >  a.

»i-3

lO.I

10

14.7

13.0  II. 6

20 12.8

15

14-31

12.7J

II-3

25 12.2

10.8

97

20

13.8

12.2  10.8

30  II. 6

10.3

9.2

25

I3-I

II. 6  10.2

35 10.9

9.8

8.8

30

12.3

10.9 1

9-7

40

10.2

9.2

8.4

10

35

II. 5

10.2!

1

9.1

20

45

9-5

8.6

7-9

40

10.7

9.6

8.6

50

8.8

8.0

7-4

45

10.0

9.0

8.1

55

8.1

7-5

6.9

50

9-3

8.4

7.6

60

7-4

6.9

6.4

55

8.6

7.8

7-1

65

6.7

6.3

5-9

60

7.8

7.2

6.6

70

6.0

57

5-4

65
70

6.9
6.1

6.5

58

6.1
5-5

75

5.2

5.0

4.8

i

75

5-3

5.1

4-9

25
30

35

IX. 8
II. 3

10.7

10.5
10. 1

9.4
9.0
8.^

15

13-9

12.3

II.O

g.6

20

^3-3

II. 8  10.5

40

10. 0

9.1

8.2

25

12.6

1 1.2  lO.I

45

9.4

8.5

7.8

30

II. 9

10.6

9-5

25

50

8.7

7-9

7-3

35

II. 2

10,0

,  9-0

55

8.0

7-4

6.8

40

10.4

9.4

8.5

60

7-3

6.8

6.3

15

45

96

8.8

8.0

65

66

6.2

5-8

50

8.9

8.2

7-5

70

5-9

5-6

5-3

55

8.2

7.6

7.0

75

5-1

4.9

47

60

7-5

7.0

6.5

65

6.8

6.4

6.0

30

10.8

9. 61  8.6

70

6.0

5-7

5-4

30

35  10.3

9.2 8.3

75

5.2

5.0!  4-8

40 9.7

1  S.8l  8.o|

53'^


APPENDIX.


TABLE XL Continued.


V

l-«

f^  .

x^

4- A^

-  c:

•^  ^

n  C

«  c

o  ta

i;:i

%U

M  ^

Jo

<s.

<:"■

>  s.

>  ^

>  £L

45

9.1

8.:;

7.6

50

^•5

7.8

7.2

55

7-9

.7-3

6.7

30

60

7.2

6.7

6,2

65

6.5

6.1

5-7

70

5.0

5-5

5.2

75

5-1

4.9

4-7

35

9-9

8.8

8.0

40

9.4

«-5

7-7

45

8.9

8.1

7-4

50

8.3

7.6

7.0

35

55

7-7

7-1

6.6

60

7-1

6.5

6.1

65

6.4

6.0

5-6

70

5-7

5-4

5-1

75

5.0

4.8

4.6

40

9.1

8.1

7-3

45

H.y

7.8

7-1

50

8.2

7-4

6.8

40

55

7.6

69

64

60

7.0

6.4

6.0

•35

6.4

59

5-5

70

5-7

5-A-

5-1

75

5.0

4.8

4.6

45

8-3

7-4

6.7

45

50

7-9

7-1

6.5

55

"7  /I
/ T

6.7

6.2

60

6.S

6.3

5.8

•5  *■  ;■


45


65
70


6.3
5.6


75

1  4.9

50

i  7.6

55

7.2

50

60

6.7

65

6.2

70

5-5

75

4.8

55

6.9

60

6.^

55

65

6.0

70

5.4

75

4-7

60

6.1

60

65

5-7

70

5-2

75

4-6
5-4

65

65

70

4.9

75

4.4
4.6

70

70

75

42

75

75

3-8

>  s.


5.8

5-3

4-7

6.8

6.5
6.1

5-7
5.2

if

6.2

5-9

5.6

5-1

4-:;


5-6

5-3
4.9

4.4

5-0
4.6

4.2

4.4
4.0

3-7


54-
5-0
4.5


6.2
6.0


5-7'
5-3
4-9
4-4'

5-7
5-5
5.2
4.8

4-3

5'2

4-9
4.6

4.2

4-7
4.4

4.0

4.2
3-9

3.6

APPENDIX.


33^


TABLE XII.

Shewing  the  Probabilities  of  Life  in  London,  on
the  fuppofition,  that  all  who  die  in  London
were  born  there.  Formed  from  the  Bills,  for
ID  years,  from  1759  to  1768. Sec  page  245.


Perfons

Deer.

Perfons

Deer.

'  Ages
62

Perfons

Deer.  (

Ages
0

living.

of  Life.

Ages

3^

tivinj);.
.^04

of  Life.

living.

of  Life.'

1000

240

9

132

7

I

760

99

32

395

9

;63

125

7

2

661

42

33

386

9

64

118

7

3

619

29

34

377

9

'65

III

7

4

59^

21

35

36S

9

66

104

7

5

569

II

36

359

9

67

97

7

6,

55^

10

37

350

9

68

90

7

7*

548

7

38

341

9

'6g

^3

7

8

541

6

39

332

10

70

76

6

9

535

5

40

322

10

i7i

70

6

10

53^

4

41

312

10

172

64

6

II

526

4

42

302

10

h^^

58

5

12

522

4

43

292

10

174

53

5

13

51S

3

44

282

10

|75

48

5

14.

51.5

3

45

272

10

:76

43

5

15

512

0
0

46

262

10

i77

3^

5

16

509

3

47

252

10

j78-

0  0
0  J

4

17

506

3

48

242

9

'79

29

4

18

5^3

4

49

233

9

1  80

25

3

19

499

5

50

224

9

jSi

0  .'->

3

20

494

7

51

215  ^

9

1  Si

^9

3

21

487

8

52

206

8

83

16

3

22

479

8

53

198

8

84

13

2

471

8

54

190

7

85

II

2

7 1

4'^3

8

55

183

7

86

9

2

25

455

8

56

176

7

87

7

2

26

447

8

57

169

7

8S

5

I

27

43  Q

8

58

162

7

89

4

r

28

4-3  i

9

59

^55

8

90

3

I

29

422

9

60

H7

8

30

413

9 '

61

139

7

^z^


APPENDIX.


TABLE Xlir.

Shewing  the  true  Probabilities  of  Life  in  London
till  the  Age  of  19. See  page  249.


Age.

Perfons  liv-

Decrements '

0

ing.

ofjife.
240

75^

I

510

99

2

411

42

3

3%

29

4

340

21

5

319

II

6

308

10

»7
/

298

7

8

291

6

9

285

5

10

280

4

II

276

4

12

272

4

13

268

3

14

265

3

15

262

1
3

16

259

3

17

256

3

18

'2-53

4 .

19

249

20

494

21

487

&c.

&c.

The  numbers  in  the  fecond  column  to  be  con-
tinued  as  in  the  lall  Table.


333


APPENDIX.

TABLE XIV.

Shewing  the  true  Probabilities  of  Life  in  Londow
for  all  Ages.  Formed  from  the  bills  for  lo  years,
from  1759  to  1768. See  page  251.


Perfons  1

Deer,

. Perfons  1

Deer.

;  Perfons

Deer.

Ages,

living.

of  Life.

Ages.
31

living.

of  Life.

Ages.
62

'  living.

of  Life.

O

1518

486

404

9

132

7

I

1032

200

32

395

9

63

125

7

2

832

85

33

386

9

64

118

7

3

747

59

34

377

9

65

III

?

4

688

42

35

368

9

66

104

7

5

646

23

36

359

9

67

97

7

6

623

20

37

350

9

68

90

7

7

603

H

38

341

9

69

83

7

8

589

12

39

332

lO

70

76

6

9

577

10

40

322

10

71

70

6

lO

5^7

9

41

312

10

72

64

6

II

55^

9

42

302

10

73

58

5

12

549

8

43

292

lO

74

53

5

i3

541

7

44

282

10

75

48

5

H

534

6

45

272

lO

76

43

5

15

528

6

46

262

jo

77

38

5

i6

522

7

47

252

lO

7S

33

4

'7

5^5

7

48

242

9

79

29

4

i8

508

7

49

233

9

80

25

3

'9

501

7

50

224

9

81

22

3

20

494

7

51

215

9

82

19

3

21

487

8

52

206

8

83

16

3

22

479

8

53

198

8

84

13

2

23

471

8

54

190

7

S5

1 1

2

24

463

8

55

1^3

7

'86

9

2

25

455

8

56

176

7

187

7

2

26

447

8

57

169

7

i88

5

I

27

439

8

58

162

7

139

4

I

28

431

9

59

^55

8

90

3

1

29

422

9

60

H7

8

!

1

jO

413

9

61

^9

7

1
1

334


APPENDIX.


OBSERVATIONS

ON
TABLES I. and II.


^  I  ^'HESE  Tables  may  be  met  with  in
J[  moft  of  the  books  that  treat  of  com-
pound intereft  and  annuities  j  but  there  has
been,  in  this  work,  fo  much  occafion  for  re-
ferring to  them,  that  it  was  necefTary  to  fave
the  reader  the  trouble  of  turning  to  other
books  for  them.

The  2d,  3d,  4th,  &c.  numbers  in  the  Second
Table,  are  only  the  fums  of  the  firft  2,  3,
4,  &c.  numbers  in  the  Firjl  Table.  This
Table,  therefore,  is  the  foundation  of  the
Second.',  and,  indeed,  of  all  the  common
tables  of  compound  interefl  j  and,  with  the
help  of  it,  almoft  all  the  queflions  in  com-
pound intereft  may  be  eafily  anfwered.

The  following  fpecimen  of  this  may,  I
think,  be  of  confiderable  ufe.

Question  I.  "  To  what  fum  or  annuity
*'  will  any  given  fum  or  annuity,  now  to  be
"  laid  up  for  improvement,  at  a  given  rate
*^  of  compound  intereft,  increafe,  in  a  given
"  number  of  years  ?"

5  An^


APPENDIX.  335

Answer.  Divide  the  given  fum  or  an-
nuity by  the  value  of  i/.  payable  at  the  end
of  the  given  number  of  years,  and  the  quo-
tient  will  be  the  anfvver.

Example.  Let  the  given  fum  be  50  /.  and
the  given  time  18  years.  The  rate  of  intereft
^  per  cent. — The  prefent  value,  at  \  per  cent.
of  i/.  payable  at  the  end  of  18  years  is,  by
Table  I.  .4936;  and  50/.  divided  by  this
value,  gives/.  101.296,  or  101/.  ^s.  \.\\Qfu?nlo
which  50  /.  will  increafe  in  1 8  years.  In
like  manner;  2  I. per  anttum,  the  firfl  payment
of  which  is  to  be  made  a  year  hence,
will  increafe  (intereft  fuppofed  the  fame)  in
18  years,  to  an  annuity  of  /.4.05  :  for  2/.
the  given  annuity,  divided  by  .4936,  gives
/.  4.05,  or  4/.  I  J-.

Question  II.  "  To  what  fiun  will  a
"  given  annuity  amount,  in  confequence  of
**  being  forborn  and  improved,  at  a  given
**  rate  of  compound  intereft,  for  a  given
**  number  of  years  ?"

Answer.  From  the  hicreafed  annuity,
found  by  the  laft  Queftion,  fubtradt  the  givefi
annuity ;  and  multiply  the  remainder  by  the
PERPETUITY,  and  the  product  \\\\\  be  the
anfwer.

Example.  2/.  per  ann.  Improved  at  4  per
cent,  compound  intereft,  will,  by  the  laft
Qiieftion,  increafe,  in  18  years;  to  l.^.o^per
ann. 2/.  fubtradted  from  4.05,  leaves  2.05,

which.


336 appendix:*

%vhich,  multiplied  by  25,  th^  perpetuity,  gives
/.  51.25,  or  51/.  5J-,  the  amount  in  18  years.
In  the  lame  manner  it  may  be  found,  that
\ol.  per  ann.  (intereft  being  the  fame)  will
amount,  in  41  years,  to  998/.

It  fhould  be  remembered,  that  the  per-
petuity is  33.33>  — 28.57,-25  — 20,— or
16.666,  according  as  intereft  is  reckoned  at
3,  — 31,-4,  — 5  or  6  per  cent :  And  that  the
annuity  meant  in  all  thefe  Queftions  is  an
annuity,  the  firii:  payment  of  which  is  to  be
made  at  the  end  of  a  year.

Question  III.  *'  In  what  number  of
**  years  will  a  given  fum  or  annuity  increafe
"  to  another  givtnfum  or  annuity,  in  confe-
*'  quence  of  being  improved  at  a  given  rate
*'  of  intereft  r"

Answer.  Divide  the  original  fum  or  ari'^
nuity  by  the  increafed  fum  or  annuity ;  and
look  for  the  quotient,  or  the  number  neareft
to  it,  in  Table  I ;  and  the  number  of  years
correfponding  to  it  will  be  the  anfwer.

Example.  Let  ih^fum  be  50/.  The  in-
creafed fum  /.  101.29.  The  rate  of  intereft,
/^per  cent.  The  former  fum  divided  by  the
latter  gives  .49 '^6,  which  ftands  oppofite  in
the  Table  to  1 8  years,  or  the  time  in  which

50/.  will  gain  the  required  increafe. In

like  manner,  it  may  be  found,  that  18  years
is  the  time  in  which  2/.  p'er  ann.  will  increafe
to  /.4.05  per  ann.

Question


APPENDIX.  -^17

Question  IV.  "  In  what  time  will  any
**  given  f /z 72 z///y  amount  to  a  given  fum^  in
"  confequence  of  being  forborn  and  im-
*'  proved,  at  a  given  rate  of  compound  in-
"  tereft  ?"

Ansv/er.  Divide  the  g\wQ.nfum  to  which
the  annuity  muft  amount  by  the  perpetu-
ity. -Add  the  given  annuity  to  the  quo-
tient ',  and  by  the  quotient  fo  increafed,  di-
vide the  given  annuity;  and  this  fecond  quo-
tienty  found  in  Table  I.  will  fhevv  the  an-
fwer.

Example.  A  perfon  owes  iooo/.  and  re-
folves  to  appropriate  lo/.  -per  annum  of  his
income  towards  difcharging  it.  In  what
time  will  fuch  an  appropriation,  in  confe-
quence of  being improved at 4  per  ce?2t.

amount  to  a  fum  equal  to  the  debt  ?

1000/.  divided  by  25  gives  40/.  10/.  added
to  40/.  makes  50/i  and  10/.  divided  by  50/,
gives  .20C0,  which  in  the  Table  flands  op-
pofite  to  41  years,  the  required  time.

In  the  fame  manner  it  will  appear,  that
the  fame  annuity,  if  improved  at  5  per  cent.
will  amount  to  1000/.  in  37  years.

Question  V.  ^'  In  what  time  will  a
'*  given  principal  be  annihilated,  by  taking
**  out  of  it,  at  the  end  of  a  year,  a  given  fum,
*'  and  after  that,  the  fame  fum  annually,  to-
**  gether  with  its  growing  interefts  ?"

Z  An-'


338  APPENDIX.

Answer.  In  the  fame  time  plainly  in
which  an  equal  annuity  would  amount  to  the
given  principal.

A  perfon,  therefore,  poflefs'd  of  1000/.
capital,  bearing  interefl  at  4  per  cent,  would,
by  Queftion  IV.  reduce  it  to  nothing  in  41
years,  by  taking  out  of  it  10/.  the  firft  year,
and  as  much  more  every  following  year,  as
would  be  ncceffary,  together  with  the  intereft
of  the  remaining  capital,  to  make  his  annual
income  conftantly  50/.

Remark.  The  fum  to  which  a  given  an-
nuity \vill  amount  in  a  given  time,  is  the
fame  with  the  value  of  an  annuity  for  the
given  time,  equal  to  the  given  annuity  in-
creafed  by  the  yearly  intereft  of  the  amount.
That  is,  1000/.  is  the  value  of  50/.  per  ann.
for  41  years,  at  4  per  cent :  And  the  fame
fum  is  iikewife  the  value  of  60/.  per  anminti
for  37  years,  at  5  per  cent.  The  reafon  is
plain:  1000/.  it  has  appeared,  would,  in
confequence  of  being  put  out  to  thefe  dif-
ferent rates  of  intereft,  be  juft  fufficient  to
pay  the  annuities.

I  have  been  the  more  explicit  in  thefe  rules,
becaufe  they  point  out  a  very  eafy  method
of  deducing  and  examining  all  I  have  faid,
in  different  parts  of  this  work,  and  particu-
larly in  Chap.  III.  concerning  the  increafe  of

money  at  intereft. 1  will  jud  mention  one

inltance.

400,000/,


APPENDIX.  339

400,000/.  per  annum i  applied  in  the  man-
ner fuppofed  in  Queflions  IV  and  V.  would
annihilate  55  millions,  bearing  intereft  at  5
fer  cent,  in  42  years.

In  1716,  when  tho.  Jinking  fund  \v2.s  cfla-
blifhed,  the  public  debts  were  near  this  fum,
and  bore  5  per  cent,  intereft.  This  fund  then,
had  but  400,000/.  of  it  been  inviolably  ap-
plied to  the  annihilation  of  the  public  debts,
would,  in  iyfS,  have  dilcharged  all  the  debts
contradled  before  1716. — - — And  it  may  be
further  found  very  eafily,  by  the  anfvver  to
Queftion  IV.  that  had  it  been  fuffered  to  go
on  in  its  operation,  and  been  applied,  Jince
1758,  to  the  redemption  of  only  3  per  cents
at  par,  it  would  by  this  time  have  difcharged
104  millions; and  feven  years  hence, 140

millions. The aiTertion, therefore, in

page  164,  is  ftridly  true.  But  the  following
proof  of  that  aflertion  will,  perhaps,  be  more
clear  and  ftrikin?.

Suppofe  an  annuity  of  400^000/,  beginning
in  1716,  to  have  been  applied  till  1730,  to
the  annihilation  of  debts  bearing  intereft  at  5
percent',  from  1730  to  1748,  to  the  anni-
hilation of  debts  bearing  intereft  at  ^per  cent 6
and  from  1748  to  1771,  to  the  annihilation
ot  debts  bearing  intereft  at  3  per  cent.  In
the  firft  of  thele  oeriods  the  annuity  would
have  incrcafed  to  8co,coo/.  ;  in  the /(fr:?;;<3',  to

1, 600,000/. ;  in  the  laft,  to  3,200,000/. *

In the  prefent  year, therefore, the  nation


/j  7.  might


-wLO  APPENDIX.

might  have  been  eafed  of  above  t/jree  77nUions
per  annum  in  taxes.  And,  at  the  fame  time,
(fuppofmg  all  the  fame  meafures  taken  in
other  refpeds)  it  would  have  enjoyed  that
very  Jinking  fund  it  now  has  ;  and  no  detri-
ment could  have  arifen  to  the  public,  from
any  applications  of  it  to  current  expences.

As  I  am  now  again  on  the  national  debt,
I  will  beg  leave  to  add  the  following  proof
of  another  obfervation  on  this  fubjedl-,  in
page  140.

The  diiburfements,  on  account  of  any  loans,
will  be  the  fame,  whatever  different  interefls
they  bear,  fuppoiing  a  provifion  made  for
difcharging  the  principal,  by  applying  to  that
purpofe  furpluiTes  bearing  to  one  another  the
fame  proportions  with  thofe  interefts.

For  Example.  Let  a  million  be  borrowed
at  3  per  cent,  and  let  a  fund  be  charged  with
it.  which  brings  in  6j".  per  cent,  per  annum
more  than  the  interefiij  or  3-^^,000/.  inftead
ot  30,000/.  per  anmifn.  This  furplu?,  ap-
plied in  the  manner  I  have  explained,  will
annihilate  the  principal  in  81  years,  as  may
be  gathered  from  Quellion  V.  At  the  end
of  this  time,  the  difnurfements  on  account  of
the  loan  will  be  33,000/.  multiplied  by  8i  j
that  is,  2,673,000/.

Let  us  again  fuppofe  a  million  borrowed  at
6  per  cent,  and  let  a  fund  be  char.o-ed  with
It  producing  a  furplus  of  12  s.  per  cent,  per

annum.


appendix:. 341

anmitn.  Such  a  fund,  befides  paying  the  in-
tcreft,  will  difcharge  the  principal  in  41
years ;  and  the  difburfements  on  account  of
the  k)an,  will  be  66,000/.  multiplied  by  41;
that  is,  2,706,000/.  or  very  nearly  the  fame
with  the  difburfements  on  account  of  an
equal  loan  at  3  per  cent.

It  appears,  therefore,  agreeably  to  the  ob-
fervation  to  which  I  have  referred,  that  were
the  public,  in  railing  money,  to  adopt  the
plan  I  have  propofed,  it  would  be  of  little
confequence  what  intereft  was  given"  for
money.  The  pradicability  of  fuch  a  plan
is  felf-evident,  for  it  cannot  be  lefs  eafy  to
apply  the  intereft  of  a  fum,  to  the  payment
of  a  debt,,  than  the  fum  itfelf :  and  this  plan
requires  no  more. — One  particular  advantage
attending  it,  already  hinted,  I  will  beg  leave
here  to  repeat.  By  keeping  \\\QftQcks  fteadily
at  or  near^^r,  that  flu^fluation  in  them  would
be  in  a  great  meafure  prevented,  which  now
produces  fo  many  evils;  and  which,  with
the  aid  of  annual  lotteries,  will,  I  fear,  in
time,  ruin  all  honefl:  induftry,  and  turn  us
into  a  nation  of  fliarpers  and  gamblers.


D  I-


^42  APPENDIX.

Directions  for  finding  the  Va--^
LUES  of  Two  Joint  Lives
of  given  Ages,  by  Table  VII.

F  both  the  ages  are  given  in  the  Table^
the  value  v/anted  Vv'^ill  be  found  imme-
diately by  infpedion.

If  the  ages  are  not  given  in  the;  Table,  it  will
be  beft  to  proceed  in  the  following  manner.
Suppofe  the  rate  of  intereft  4  per  cent,  and

the propofed ages 40 and 66. It  will

appear,  from  infpecfling  the  Table,  that  the
value  fought  would  be  6.556,  were  the  age
of  the  elder  life  65;  and  5.383,  were  it  70.
Since,  therefore,  it  is  66,  the  value  muft  be
the  Jirjl  of  four  arithmetical  means  between

6.556 and 5.383, or 6.322. For the

fame  reafon,  had  the  ages  of  the  elder  been
68,  the  value  would  have  been  the  3d  arith-
metical mean  between  6.556  and  5.383,  or

5.854.- In  like  manner,  were  the  propofed

ages  43  and  65,  the  value  Vv^ould  be  the  3d
arithmetical  mean  between  6.556  (the  value
of  two  joint  lives  v/hofe  ages  are  40  and  65)
and  6.425,  (the  value  of  two  joint  lives
wiiofe  ages  are  45  and  65)  or  6.478.

Again,  let  the  ages  be  43  and  66.  That
is,  let  it  be  fuppofed,  that  neither  of  the
propofed  ages  is  given  in  the  Table.

The  values  correfponding  to  the  ages
C407 , C667  C6.3227

i^sS  166S'  Z6.2GQS

The


APPENDIX.  343

The  value,  therefore,  correfponding  to  the
ages  43  and  66,  muft  be  the  3d  mean  be-
jtwcen 6.322 and 6.200, or 6.250.

A^.  B.  The  I  ft,  2d,  3d,  and  4th  of  four
arithmetical  means  between  two  numbers
are  found  by  fubtraCting  4>  t>  t>  ^nd  ±  of
the  difference  between  the  two  numbers,  from
the  great ejl  of  them.

Thus.  The  difference  between  6.556,
and  5.383,  is  1.173.  One  fifth  of  this  dif-
ference is  .234;  which,  fubtraded  from
6.556,  leaves  6.3223  the  firft  of  4  means
between  6.556  and  5.383.— —In  like  man-
ner i  the  difference  between  6.322  and  6.200
is  .122.  One  fifth  of  this  difference  is  .024;
and,  therefore,  three-fifths  of  this  difference
is  .072,  which,  fubtradied  from  6.322,  leaves
6.250,  the  //6/r^/ arithmetical  mean  between
6.322  and  6.200.

In  order  to  avoid  trouble,  if  the  ages  are
nearly  equal,  a  year  or  two  may  be  added  to
the  lead,  and  as  much  fubtracited  from  tlie
greateft  ;  and  the  value  taken  by  infpcvftlon.
But  if  one  of  them  much  exceeds  the  other,
it  v/ill  in  general  be  fufficient  to  take  the
peareft  number  in  the  Table  for  the  leffer.

The  mean  between  the  values  at  3  per
cent,  and  4  fer  cent,  may  be  taken  for  the
value  at  3I:  per  cent,  without  any  error  of
confequence.  And  the  like  may  be  faid  of
the  values  at  4I  per  cent.

The  values  of  the  longeji  of  two  lives  Is

found  by  fubtrading  the  value  of  the  joint

4  lives


544  APPENDIX.

lives  from  the  fiim  of  the  values  of  the  two

fingle lives. -Thus, the values of  two

iiDgle  lives,  v/hofe  ages  are  25  and  30,  are
by  Table  VI.  (intereft  reckoned  at  4  per
cent.)  15.31  and  14.68.  The  fum  of  thefe
two  values  is  29.99  *  ^^  value  of  the  joint
lives  is  (by  Table  VII)  11.46;  and  this  va-
lue, fubtrailed  from  29.99,  gives  18.53,  qr
the  value  of  an  annuity  on  the  longeft  of  the
two  lives.

The  value  of  two  joint  lives  being  given,
the  value  of  three  ]o\nt  lives  may  be  found  by
the  following  rule,  taken  from  Mr.  Simpfons
Sele5l  Exercijesy  page  279.

Let  A  be  the  youngeft,  and  C  the  olded
of  the  three  propofed  lives.  Take  the  value
of  the  two  joint  lives  B  and  C,  and  find  the
age  of  a  Jingle  life  D  of  the  fime  value.
Then  find  the  value  of  the  joint  lives  A  and
D,  which  Vk'iil  be  the  anfwer.

Example.  Let  the  three  given  ages  be
25,  30,  and  40,  and  let  the  rate  of  interell
be  A^  per  cent.  Then  the  value  of  the  two
oldeil:  joint  lives  B  and  C,  will  (by  Tab.  VII.)
be  10.428,  anfwering,  in  Tab.  VI.  to  a  fingle
life  D  of  54  years  of  age.  And  the  value  of
the  joint  lives  A  and  D,  which  is  8.917
year's  purchafe,  will  be  the  value  fought.


FINIS,  .^


\


4


•
