OBSERVATIONS

ON THE NATURE OF

CIVIL LIBERTY,

THE PRINCIPLES OF

GOVERNMENT,

AND THE

JUSTI  CE  AND  POLICY*

O  F THE

WAR  WITH  AMERICA.

[  Price  Two  Shillings.  ]


OBSERVATION  S

ON THE NATURE OF

CIVIL LIBERTY,

THE PRINCIPLES OF

GOVERNMENT,

AND THE

JUSTICE AND POLICY

OF THE

WAR WITH AMERICA.

To  which  is  added

AN APPENDIX,

Containing  a  State  of  the  National  Debt,  an
Eftimate  of  the  Money  drawn  from  the  Public
by  the  Taxes,  and  an  Account  of  the  National
Income  and  Expenditure  fince  the  laft  War.

^uis  furor  ijle  novm  ?  quo  nunc,  quo  tenditis


Heu !  m'lferi  elves ?  non  Hojlem,  inimicaque  cajira,
—  VeJIras  Spes  uritis.  ViRG.

By  RICHARD PRICE,  D.D.  F.R.S.

THE FOURTH EDITION.


LONDON:

Printed  for T. C  a  d  e  l  l,  in  the  Strand.
M.DCC.LXXVL


ADVERTISEMENT.

TN  the  following  Obfervatmts,  I  have  taken
that  liberty  of  examining  public  meafures,
which,  happily  for  this  kingdom,  every  perfon
in  it  enjoys,  They  co?itain  the  fentiineiits  of  a
private  and  unconnetled  man  yfor  which,  Jhoiild
there  be  any  thing  wrong  in  them,  he  alone  is
anfwerable.

After  all  that  has  been  written  on  the  dif-
pute  with  America,  710  reader  can  expedl  to  be
informed,  in  this  publication,  of  much  that  he
has  not  before  known.  Perhaps,  however,  he
may  find  in  it  fome  new  matter ;  and  if  he
jhould,  it  will  be  chiefiy  in  the  Obfcrvations  on
the  Nature  of  Civil  Liberty,  and  the  Policy
of  the  War  with  America ;  and  in  the  Ap-
pendix.


CONTENTS.

PART I.

Page

SECT.  I.  Of  the  Nature  of  Liberty  in  general. 2

SECT.  II.  Of  Civil  Liberty  and  the  Princi-
ples of  Government,  —  6

SECT.  III.  Of  the  Authority  of  one  Country
over  another,  —  — — 19

PART II.

SECT.!. Of  the  Jujlice  of  the  War  with
America.  * 34

SECT.  II.  Whether  the  War  with  America
is  jujlified  by  the  Principles  of  the  Cotiftitution. 48

SECT.  III.  Of  the  Policy  of  the  War
with  America.  —  —  50

SECT.  IV.  Of  the  Honour  of  the  Nation
as  affected  by  the  War  with  America. 8  7

S  E  C  T.  V.  Of  the  Probability  of  fucceeding
in  the  War  with  America.  — -  —  94

APPENDIX,

Containing  a  State  of  the  National  Debt  at  Mid-
fummer  1775;  an  Ejlimate  of  the  Money
drawn  from  the  Public  by  the  I'axes^  and  a
Cornparifon  of  the  National  Income  fince  the
lajl  War,  with  the  National  Expenditure. 1 1 1


Piiblified  by  t  Joe  fame  Author  y


I. fy^ BSERVATIONS 00 REVERSIONARY PAY-
MENTS ;  on Schemes for providing An-


o

nuities  for  Widows,  and  Perfons  in  Old  Age  •,  on
the  Method  of  calculating  the  Values  of  AiTur-
ances  on  Lives  ;  and  on  the  National  Debt.  To
which  are  added.  Four  Effays  on  different  Subjeds
in  the  Doctrine  of  Life-Annuities  and  Political
Arithmetic.  Alio,  an  Appendix,  containing  a  com-
plete Set  of  Tables ;  particularly  four  New  Tables,
fhewing  the  Probabilities  of  Lit^  in  London,  Nor-
wich, and  Northampton  i  and  the  Values  of  two
joint  Lives.

The  3d  Edition,  with  a  Supplement,  containing
(befideb  leveral  New  Tables)  additional  Obfervations
on  the  Probabilities  of  Human  Life  in  different  Si-
tuations i  on  the  London  Societies  for  the  Benefit
of  Widows  and  of  Old  Age  •,  and  on  the  prefenc
State  of  Population  in  this  Kingdom.  Price  6s.

IL  A  Review  of  the  principal  Qiieftions  and  Dif-
ficulties in  Morals.  Particularly,  thofe  relating  to
the  Original  of  our  Ideas  of  Virtue,  its  Nacure,
Foundation,  Referefice  to  the  Deity,  Obligation,
Subjeft-matter,  and  Sancftions.  The  Second  Edition
corredfed, Price  6s.

III.  Four  Dissertations. 1.  On  Providence.

IL  On Prayer. III.  On the  Rcafons  for

expedling  that  virtuous  Men  fhall  meec  auer  Death

in  a  State  of  Happineis.- IV.  On  the  Importance

of  Chriftianity,  the  Nature  of  Hilforical  Evidence,
and  Miracles. The  3d  Edition.  Price  6s.

IV,  An  Appeal  to  the  Public,  on  the  Subjefl  of
the  National  Debt,  The  2d  Edition  i  with  an
Appendix,  containing  Explanatory  Obfervations
and  Tables  \  and  an  Account  of  the  prcfent  State
of  Population  in  Norfolk. Price  2s.

Printed  for  T.  C  a  d  e  l  l,  in  the  Strand,


OBSERVATIONS,


Ci


^C.


OU  R  Colonies  ih  North  America  appear
to  be  now  determined  to  rifk  and  fuff^-r
every thing,  ilnder the perfuafion,  that
Great  Britain  is  attempting  to  rob  them  of  that
Liberty  to  which  every member  of  fociety,  and
all  civil  communities,  have  a  natural  and  unalien-
able right. The  queftion,  therefore,  whether  this
is  a  reafonable perfuafion,  is  highly intefefting,
and  deferves  the  moll  careful  attention  of  every
Englijhman who values  Liberty,  and  willies to
avoid ftaining  himfelf  with  the  guilt  of  invading
it. But  it  is  impoffible  to  judge  properly  of  this
queftion  without correct  ideas  of  Liberty  in  ge-
neral •,  and  of  the  nature,  limits, and  principks
of  Civil  Liberty in  particular. — The  following
obfervations  on tfiis fubje6l appear to  me  im-
portant, as  well  as  juft  ;  and  I  cannot  make  myfelf
eafy  without  offering them  to the  public  at  the
prefent  period,  big  with  events of  the  ialt  confc-
quence  to  this  kingdom.  1  do  this,  with  reluctance
and  pain,  urged  by  ftrong  feelings,  but  at  the  fame?

B  tim£


[  2  1

time  checked  by  the  confcioufnels  that  I  am  likel/
to  deliver  ientiments  not  favourable  to  the  prefent
meafures  of  that  government,  under  which  I  live,
and  to  which  I  am  a  conftant  and  zealous  well-
wi(hcr.  Such,  however,  are  my  prefent  fentiments
and  views,  that  this  is  a  confideration  of  inferior
moment  with  me  ♦,  and,  as  i  hope  never  to  go  be-
yond the  bounds  of  decent  difcufHon  and  expoftu-
lation,  I  flatter  myfelf,  that  I  fl:iall  be  able  to  avoid
giving  any  perfon  juft  canfe  of  ofi^ence.

The  obfervations  with  which  I  Ihall  begin,  are
of  a  more  general  and  abflraftcd  nature-,  but  be-
mg,  in  my  opinion,  of  particular  confequence;
and  neceflary  to  introduce  what  I  have  principally
in  view,  I  hope  they  will  be  patiently  read  and
confidered.

SECT. I.

Of  the  Nature  of  Liberty  in  General.

IN  order  to  obtain  a  more  di^indt  and  accurate
view  of  the  nature  of  Liberty  as  fuch,  it  will
be  ufeful  to  confider  it  under  the  four  following
general  divifions.

Firft, Phyfical  Liberty. Secondly,  Moral

Liberty. Thirdly,  Religious  Liberty. And

Fourthly, Civil  Liberty. Thefe heads  com-
prehend under  them  all  the  different  kinds  of  Li-
berty,


- i  3  :i

berty.  And  I  have  placed  Civil  Liberty  lafl,  be-
caufe  I  mean  to  apply  to  it  all  I  fhall  fay  of  the
other  kinds  of  Liberty.

By  Physical  Liberty  I  mean  that  principle  of
Spontaneity,  or  Self-ditennination,  which  conftitutes
us  Agents  -,  or  which  gives  us  a  command  over  our
a6tions,  rendering  them properly  curs, and not

efFc(5ls  of  the  operation of  any  foreign  caufe. •

Moral  Liberty  is  the  power  of  following,  in  all
circumftances,  our  fenfe  of  right  and  wrong;  or
of  ading  in  conformity  to  our  reflecting  and  moral
principles,  without  being  controuled  by  any  con-
trary principles. Religious  Liberty  fignifies

the  power  of  exercifing,  without  moleflation,  that
mode  of  religion  which  v/e  think  beft ;  or  of  ma-
king the  decifions  of  our  own  confciences,  refpedl-
ing  religious  truth,  the  rule  of  our  condud,  and
not  any  of  the  decifions  of  others. In  like  man-
ner j  Civil  Liberty  is  the  power  of  a  Civil  So-
ciety or  State  to  govern  itfelf  by  its  own  difcrecion  ;
or  by  laws  of  its  own  making,  without  being  fub-
jed  to  any  foreign  difcrction,  or  to  the  impofitions
of  any  extraneous  will  or  power.

It  Ihould  be  obferved,  that.,  according  to  thefe
definitions  of  the  different  kinds  of  liberty,  there
is  one  general  idea,  that  runs  through  them  all  j
1  mean,  the  idea  of  Seif-dire^ion^  or  Self-govern-
ment.— Did  our  volitions  originate  not  with  our-
feheSy  but  with  fome  ca'^fe  over  which  we  have  no
B $  power  j


[ 4 ]
power ;  or  were  we  under  a  neceflity  of  always  fol-
lowing Ibme  will  different  from  our  own,  we  fliould
want  Physical  LiBERxy.

In  like  manner;  he  wiiofe  perceptions  of  moral
obligation  are  controuled  by  his  paflions  has  loft
his  Moral  Liberty  -,  and  the  moft  common  lan-
guage applied  to  him  is,  that  he  wants  Self-gcvern-
inent.

He  likewife  who,  in  religion,  cannot  govern
himfelf  by  his  convictions  of  religious  duty,  but  is
obliged  to  receive  formularies  of  faith,  and  to
pradlife  raoiies  of  worfliip  impofed  upon  him  by
others,  wants  Religious  Liberty.- And  the  Com-
munity alfo  that  is  governed,  not  by  itfelf,  but  by
fome  will  independent  of  it,  and  over  which  it  has
no  controul,  wants  Civil  Liberty.

In  all  tliefe  cafes  there  is  a  force  which  ftands
oppofed  to  the  agent's  ciun  will  •,  and  which,  as
far  as  it  operates,  produces  Servitude.-'— —In  the
Jjrjl  cafe,  this  force  is  incompatible  with  the  very
idea  of  voluntary  motion  ;  and  the  fubject  of  it  is
a  mere  pafTi-ve  inftrument  which  never  a^s.,  but  is

always  coiedupon.' In  the/fft«^cafc  •,  this  force

is  the  infi-uence  of  pafiion  getting  the  better  of  rca-
fon ;  or  tlie  brute  overpowering  and  conquering

the  will  of  the tnajt. In  the  third  cafe-, it  is

Ilianan  Authority  in  religion  requiring  conformity
to  particuLir  modes  of  faith  and  worlliip,  and  fu-

perfeding  private  jitdg77:ent. And in  the  lafk

cafe.


[ 5 ]

cafe,  it  is  any  will  diflindl  from  that  of  the  Ma-
jority of  a  Community,  which  claims  a  power
of  making  laws  for  it,  and  difpofing  of  its  pro-
perty.

This  it  is,  I  think,  that  marks  the  limit,  or  that
lays  the  line  between  Liberty  and  Slavery.  As  far
a^,  in  any  inftance,  the  operation  of  any  caufe
comes  in  to  reftrain  the  power  of  Self-government,
fo  far  Slavery  is  introduced  :  Nor  do  1  think  that
a  precifer  idea  than  this  of  Liberty  and  Slavery
can  be  formed.

I  cannot  help  wiihing  I  could  here  fix  my  rea-
der's attention,  and  engage  him  to  confider  care-
fully the  dignity  of  that  bleffing  to  which  we  give
the  name  of  Liberty,  according  to  the  reprefenta-
tion  now  made  of  it.  There  is  not  a  word  in  the
whole  compafs  of  language  which  exprefles  fo
much  of  what  is  important  and  excellent.  It  is,
in  every  view  of  it,  a  bleffing  truly  facred  and  in-
valuable.  Without  Phyjical Libert)\m3.n  would

be  a  machine  afted  upon  by  mechanical  fprings,
having  no  principle  of  motion  in  himfelf,  or  com-
mand over  events;  and,  therefore,  incapable  of  all

merit  and  demerit. Without  Moral  Liberty  he

is  a  wicked  and  deteftable  being,  fubjed  to  the
tyranny  of  bafe  lufts, and  the  fport  of  every  vile

appetite. And  without  Religicus  and  Civil  Li-

herty  he  is  a  poor  and  abjeft  animal,  without  rights,

without  property,  and  without  a  confcience,  bcnd-

B  3  ing


[ 6 ]

i«g  his  neck  to  the  yoke,  and  crouching  to  the
will  of  every  fi'ly  creature  who  has  the  infolence

to  pretend to  authority  over  him. Nothing,

therefore,  can  be  of  fo  much  confeqiience  to  us  as
Liberty.  It  is  the  foundation  of  all  honour,  and
the  chief  privilege  and  glory  of  our  natures.

In  fixing  our  ideas  on  the  fubject  of  Liberty,  it
is  of  particular  ufe  to  take  fuch  an  enlarged  view
of  it  as  I  have  now  given.  But  the  immediate  ob-
je6l  of  the  prefent  enquiry  being  Ciz'il  Liberty^  I
will  confine  to  it  all  the  fubfequent  obfervations.


SECT. ir.

Of  Crcil  Liberty  and  the  Principles  of  Go-
vernment,

FROM  what  has  been  faid  it  is  obvious,  that
all  civil  government,  as  far  as  it  can  be  deno-
minated/r^^,  is  the  creature  of  the  people.  It
originates  with  them.  It  is  conduced  under  their
dirc(ftion-,  and  has  in  view  nothing  but  their  happi-
ncfs.  All  its  difi'ere'nt  forms  are  no  more  than  fo
many  different  modes  in  which  they  chufe  to  di-
refl  their  affairs,  and  to  fecure  the  quiet  enjoyment

of  their  rights. In  every  free  (late  every  man  is

his own Legiflator. All  taxes  are free-gifts

for  public  fervices. All  laws  are  particular

provifions  or  regulations  eftablifhed  by  common
1  consent


[ 7 1

CONSENT  for  gaining  protection  and  fafety.'^

And  all  Magifirates  are  Truftees  or  Deputies  for
carrying  thefe  regulations  into  execution.

Liberty,  therefore,  is  too  imperfeflly  defined
when  it  is  faid  to  be  "  a  Government  by  Laws,
and  not  by  Men."  If  the  laws  are  made  by  one
man,  or  a  junto  of  men  in  a  ftate,  and  not  by  com-
mon CONSENT,  a  government  by  them  does  not  dif-
fer from  Slavery.  In  this  cafe  it  would  be  a  con-
trad  i6lion  in  terms  to  fay  that  the  ftate  governs  it-
felf.

From  hence  it  is  obvious  that  Civil  Liberty^  in
its  moft  perfedl  degree,  can  be  enjoyed  only  in
fmall  ftates,  where  every  member  is  capable  of
giving  his  fuffrage  in  perlbn,  and  of  being  chofen
into  public  offices.  When  a  ftate  becomes  fo  nu-
merous, or  when  the  different  parts  of  it  are  re-
moved to  fuch  diftances  from  one  another,  as  to
render  this  imprafticable,  a  diminution  of  Liberty
neceflarily  arifes.  There  are,  however,  in  thefe
circumftances,  methods  by  which  fuch  near  ap-
proaches may  be  made  to  perfed  Liberty  as  fhall
anfwer  all  the  purpofes  of  government,  and  at  the
fame  time  fecure  every  righc  of  human  nature.

Tho'  all  the  members  of  a  ftate  fhould  not  be
capable  of  giving  their  fuffrages  on  public  mea-
fures,  individually  and  perfonally,  they  may  do  this
by  the  appointment  of  Suhjlitutes  ox  Reprefcnta-
lives.  They  may  entruft  the  powers  of  legiflation,
B  4  fubjeft


[ 8 ]

fnbiefl  to  fuch  reftritftions  a^  they  fiiall  tliink  ne-
ceflary  with  any  number  of  Delegates;  and  what-
ever can  be  done  by  fuch  delegates  within  the  li-
mits  of  their  trull:,  may  be  confidcred  as  done  by
the  united  voice  and  counfel  of  the  Community.

^ In  tliis  method  a  free  government  may be

eftablillied  in  the  largeO:  (late  •,  and  it  is  conceiv-
able that  by  regulations  of  this  kind,  any  number  of
flares  might  be  fubjefted  to  a  fcheme  of  govern-
ment, that  would  exclude  the  dcfolations  of  war,
and  produce  univerfal  peace  and  order.

Let  us  think  here  of  whan  may  be  praclicable
in  this  way  with  refpedl  to  Europe  in  particular.

■ While  it  continues  divided,  as  it  is  at  prefent,

into  a  great  number  of  independent  kingdoms
"whofe  interefts  are  continually  clafhing,  it  is  im-
po.Tible  but  that  difputcs  will  often  arife  which
mud  end  in  war  and  carnage.  It  would  be  np
remedy  to  this  evil  to  make  one  of  thefe  flates  fu-
preme  over  the  reft-,  and  to  give  it  an  abfolute
plenitude  of  power  to  fuperintend  and  controul
them.  This  would  be  to  fubjeft  all  the  ftates  to
the  arbitrary  difcretion  of  one,  and  to  cllablifli  an
ignominious  flavery  not  pofTible  to  be  long  en-
dured. It  would,  therefore,  be  a  remedy  worfe
than  the  difeafci  nor  is  it  pofTible  it  Ihould  be  ap-
proved by  any  mind  that  has  not  lofl:  every  idea  of
Civil  Liberty.  On  the  contrary. — Let  every  (late,
with  refpeft  to  all  its  internal  concerns,  be  coa-

tinued


[ 9 ]

tinued  independent  of  all  the  reft  ;  and  let  a  gene-
i-al  confederacy  be  formed  by  the  appointment  of
a  Senate  confifting  of  Reprefentatives  from  all
the  ditferent  dates.  Let  this  Senate  pofTefs  the
power  of  managing  all  the  common  concerns  of  the
united  dates,  and  of  judging  and  deciding  be-
tween them,  as  a  common  Arbiter  or  Umpire,  in  all
difputes  ;  having,  at  the  fam-e  time,  under  its  direc-
tion, the  common  force  of  the  dates  to  fupport  its

decifions. In  thefe  circumdances,  each  feparate

date  would  be  kcure  againd  the  interference  of  fo-
reign power  in  its  private  concerns,  and,  therefore,
would  poflefs  Liberty  •,  and  at  the  fame  time  ic
would  be  fecure  againd  all  oppredion  and  infulc

from  every neighbouring  date. Thus  might

the  fcattered  force  and  abilities  of  a  whole  continent
be  gathered  into  one  point  •,  all  litigations  fettled
as  they  rofe  ;  univerfal  peace  preferved  •,  and  na-
tion prevented  from  any  more  lifting  tip  a  fivord
p.gainji  nation.

I  have  obferved,  that  tho',  in  a  great  date,  all
the  individuals  that  compofe  it  cannot  be  admit-
ted to  an  immediate  participation  in  the  powers  of
legidation  and  government,  yet  they  may  partici-
pate in  thefe  powers  by  a  delegation  of  them  to  a
body  of  reprefentatives. -In  this  cafe  it  is  evi-
dent that  the  date  will  be  dill/>Y^  or  felf  governed;
and  that  it  will  be  more  or  lefs  lb  in  proportion

as


[ lo ]

as  it  is  more  or  kfs  fairly  and  adequately  reprefent-
td.  If  tb€  pcrfons  to  whom  the  truft  of  govern-
xnent  is  committed  hold  their  places  for  fhort
terms  •,  if  they  are  chofen  by  the  unbialTed  voices
-of  a  majority  of  the  ftate,  and  fubje(fl  to  their  in-
ftrudions  •,  Liberty  will  be  enjoyed  in  its  higheft
degree.  But  if  they  are  chofen  for  long  terms  by
apart  only  cf  the  ilate  ;  and  if  during  that  term
they  are  fubjed:  to  no  controul  from  their  conftitu-
ents  i  the  very  idea  of  Liberty  will  be  loft,  and  the
power  of  chufing  reprefentatives  becomes  nothing
but  a  power,  lodged  in  a/c-cc,  to  chufe  at  certain
periods,  a  body  of  Alajlers  for  thcmfelves  and  for
the  reft  of  the  Community.  And  if  a  ftate  is  fo
iunk  that  the  majority  of  its  reprefentatives  are  e-
lected  by  a  handful  of  the  meaneft  {a)  perfons  in
.it,  whofe  votes  are  always  paid  for;  and  if  alfo,
there  is  a  higher  will  on  which  even  thefe  mock  re-
prefentatives themfclves  depend,  and  that  diredls
iheir  voices :  In  thefe  circumftances,  it  will  be  an
abufe  of  language  to  fay  that  the  ftate  pofTcfies  Li-
berty. Private  men,  indeed,  might  be  allowed  the
exercife  of  Liberty  ;  as  they  might  alfo  under  the
nfiOft  defpotic  government-,  but  it  would  be  an  tndul-

{a)  In  Great  Brrtain,  confifting  of  near  fix  millions  of  inha-
bitants, 5723  perfons,  moft  of  them  the  lowefl  of  the  people,
cleft  one  half  of  the  Hcufe  of  Common  ;  and  364  votes  chufe
e  ninth  part.  This  may  be  feen  diftinftly  made  out  in  the  Po//-
lual  Difquiticnjy  Vol.  I.  Book  2.  C.  4.  a  work  full  of  impor-
tant and  ufeful  inftruftion.

gence


[  •'  ]

gence  or  connivance  derived  from  the  fpirit  of  the
times,  or  from  an  accidental  mildnefs  in  the  ad-
ininiftration.  And,  rather  than  be  governed  in
fuch  a  manner,  it  would  perhaps  be  better  to  be
governed  by  the  will  of  one  man  without  any  re-
prefentation :  For  a  reprefentation  fo  degenerated
could  anfwer  no  other  end  than  to  miflead  and  de-
ceive, by  difguifing  flavery,  and  keeping  up  zform
of  Liberty  when  the  reality  was  loft.

Within  the  limits  now  mentioned,  Liberty  may
be  enjoyed  in  every  pofliblc  degree;  from  that
which  is  complete  and  perfed:,  to  that  which  is
merely  nominal  •,  according  as  the  people  have
more  or  lefs  of  a  fliare  in  government,  and  of  a
controuling  power  over  the  perfons  by  whom  it  is
adminiftered.

In  general,  to  be  free  is  to  be  guided  by  one's
own  will  •,  and  to  be  guided  by  the  will  of  another
is  the  charafteriftic  of  Serviltide.  This  is  particu-
larly applicable  to  Political  Liberty.  That  ftate,
I  have  obferved,  is  free^  which  is  guided  by  its
own  will  •,  or,  (which  comes  to  the  fame)  by  the
will  of  an  aflembly  of  reprefentatives  appointed  by
itfelf  and  accountable  to  itfelf.  And  every  ftate
that  is  not  fo  governed ;  or  in  which  a  body  of
men  reprefenting  the  people  make  not  an  eflential

part  of  the  Legiflature,  is  in  Jlavery. In  order

to  form  the  moft  perfect  conftitution  of  govern-

ment^


r  '2  ]

ment,  there  may  be  the  befb  reafons  for  joining  to
iach  a  body  of  reprefentatives,  an  Hereditary  Coun-
cil^ confifting  of  men  of  the  firft  rank  in  the  ftate,
with  a  Supreme  executive  Magijirate  at  the  head  of
a)I.  This  will  form  ufeful  checks  in  a  legiOature;
and  contribiue  to  give  it  viirour,  union,  and  dif-
patch,  without  infringing  Uberty  :  for,  as  long  as
that  part  of  a  government  which  reprefents  the
people  is  a/n/r  reprefeyitation-y  and  alio  has  a  ne-
gative on  all  public  meafures,  together  with  the
fole  power  of  impoCing  taxes  and  originating  fup-
plies;  the  eflentials  of  liberty  will  be  preferved.

We  make  it  our  boaft  in  this  country, that

this  is  our  own  conffitution.  I  will  not  fiy  with
how  much  reafon.

Of  fuch  Liberty  as  I  have  now  defcribed,  it  is
impoffible  that  there  fhould  be  an  excels.  Go-
vernment is  an  inftirution  for  the  bencHt  of  the
people  governed,  which  they  have  power  to  mo-
del as  they  plcafe-,  and  to  fay,  that  they  can  have
too  much  of  this  power,  is  to  fiy,  that  there  ought
to  be  a  power  in  the  ftatc  fuperior  to  that  which
gives  it  being,  and  from  which  all  jurifdiclion  in

it  is  derived. Licentiournefs,  which  has  been

commonly  mentioned,  as  an  extreme  of  liberty,  is
indeed  its  oppofite.  It  is  government  by  the  will
of  rapacious  inxiividuals,  iivoppofition  to  the  will

of


[ '3 ]

of  the  community,  made  known  and  declared  in
the  laws.  A  free  ftate,  at  the  fame  time  that  it  is
free  itfelf,  makes  all  its  members  free  by  exclud-
ing licentioufnefs,  and  guarding  their  perfons  and
property  and  good  name  againft  infult.  It  is  the
end  of  all  juft  government,  at  the  fame  time  that
it  fecures  the  liberty  of  the  public  again  ft /^/y/V;?
injury,  to  fecure  the  liberry  of  the  individual
2ig-i\n^  private  injury.  I  do  not,  therefore,  think
it  ftridly  juft  to  fay,  that  it  belongs  to  the  nature
of  government  to  entrench  on  private  liberty.  It
ought  never  to  do  this,  except  as  far  as  the  excrcife
of  private  liberty  encroaches  on  the  liberties  of
others.  That  is ;  it  is  licentioufnefs  it  reftrains,  and
liberty  itfelf  only  when  ufcd  to  deftroy  liberty.

It  appears  from  hence,  that  licentioufnefs  and
defpotifm  are  more  nearly  allied  than  is  commonly
imagined.  They  are  both  alike  inconfiftent  with
liberty,  and  the  true  end  of  government ;  nor  is
there  any  other  difference  between  them,  than
that  the  one  is  the  licentioufnefs  o^ great  men,  and
the  other  the  licentioufnefs  oi  little  men  \  or  that,
by  the  one,  the  perfons  and  property  of  a  people
are  fubjeifl  to  outrage  and  invafion  from  a  King,  or
a  lawlefs  body  oi Grandees  \  and  that,  by  the  other,
they  are  fubje6l  to  the  like  outrage  from  a  laivlefs

mob, In  avoiding  one  of  thefe  evils,  mankind

have  often  run  into  the  other.  Rut  all  well  conRL-
tuced  governments  guard  equally  agair.ft  both.

Indeed


[ «4 ]

Indeed  of  the  two,  the  laft  is,  on  feveral  accounts,
the  lead  to  be  dreaded,  and  has  done  the  leaft
milchief.  It  may  be  truly  faid,  that  if  licentiouf-
nefs  has  deftroyed  its  thoufands,  defpotifm  has  de-
ftroyed  its  millions.  The  former,  having  little
power,  and  no  fyftem  to  fupport  it,  neceflarily
finds  its  own  remedy  •,  and  a  people  foon  get  out
of  the  tumult  and  anarchy  attending  it.  But  a
defpotifm,  wearing  the  form  of  government,  and
being  armed  with  its  force,  is  an  evil  not  to  be
conquered  without  dreadful  ftruggles.  It  goes  on
from  age  to  age,  debafing  the  human  faculties,  le-
velling all  diftindions,  and  preying  on  the  rights
and  bleflings  of  fociety. — - — It  deferves  to  be  add-
ed, that  in  a  (late  difturbed  by  licentioufnefs,  there
is  an  animation  which  is  favourable  to  the  human
mind,  and  which  puts  it  upon  exerting  its  powers.
But  in  a  ftate  habituated  to  a  defpotifm,  all  is  ftill
and  torpid.  A  dark  and  favage  tyranny  (lifles
every  effort  of  genius ;  and  the  mind  lofes  all  its
Spirit  and  dignity.

Before  I  proceed  to  what  I  have  farther  in  view,
I  will  obferve,  that  the  account  now  given  of  the
principles  of  public  Liberty,  and  the  nature  of  an
equal  and  free  government,  fiiews  what  judgment
we  fhould  form  of  that  omnipotence,  which,  ic
has  been  faid,  muft  belong  to  every  government
as  fuch. Great  (trefs  has  been  laid  on  this,  but

moil


f >5 ]

moft  unreafonably. Government,  as  has  been

before  obferved,  is,  in  the  very  nature  of  it,  a
Trust;  and  all  its  powers  a  delegation  for
gaining  particular  ends.  This  truji  may  be  mif-
applied  and  abufed.  It  may  be  employed  to  de-
feat the  very  ends  for  which  it  was  inftituted  •,  and
to  fubvert  the  very  rights  which  it  ought  to  pro-
tect.  A  Parliament,  for  inftance,  ccnfiRing

of  a  body  of  reprefentatives,  chofen  for  a  limited
period,  to  make  laws,  and  to  grant  money  for  pub-
lic fervices,  would  forfeit  its  authority  by  making
itfelf  perpetual,  or  even  prolonging  its  own  dura-
tion •,  by  nominating  its  own  members;  by  accept-
ing bribes  •,  or  fubjecling  itfelf  to  any  kind  of  fo-
reign influence.  This  v/ould  convert  a  Parlia-
ment into  a  conclave  or  junto  of  felf- created  tools ;
and  a  ftate  that  has  loft  its  regard  to  its  own  rights,
fo  far  as  to  fubmit  to  fuch  a  breach  of  truft  in  its

rulers,  is  enflavcd. Nothing,  therefore,  can  be

more  abfurd  than  the  doftrine  which  fome  have
taught,  with  refpedt  to  the  omnipotence-  of  parlia-
ments. They  poiTefs  no  power  beyond  the  limits  of
the  truft  for  the  execution  of  which  they  were
formed.  If  they  contradi61:  this  trufl,  they  betray
their  conftituents,  and  diffolve  themfflves.  All  de-
legated power  mufl:  be  fubordinate  and  limited. —
If  omnipotence  can,  with  any  fenfe,  be  afcribcd  to
a  legiflature,  it  muft  be  lodged  where  all  legiflativp
authority  originates  >  that  is,  in  the  People.  For

their


[ .6 }

their  fakes  government  is  inftituted  •,  and  theii*s
is  the  only  real  omnipotence.

I  am  fenfible,  that  all  I  have  been  faying  would
be  very  abfurd,  were  the  opinions  jult  which  fomc
have  maintained  concerning  the  origin  of  govern-
ment. According  to  thefe  opinions,  government
is  not  the  creature  of  the  people,  or  the  refult  of
a  convention  between  them  and  their  rulers :  Bun
there  are  certain  men  who  poflefs  in  themfelves,
independently  of  the  will  of  the  people,  a  right  of
governing  them,  which  they  derive  from  the
Deity.  This  do(5lrine  has  been  abundantly  refuted
by  many  (a)  excellent  writers.  It  is  a  doctrine
■which  avowedly  fubvertsCivil  Liberty ;  and  which
reprefents  mankind  as  a  body  of  valTals,  formed  tr>
defcend  like  cattle  from  one  fet  of  owners  to  ano-
ther, who  have  an  abfolute  dominion  over  them.
It  is  a  wonder,  that  thofe  who  view  their  fpccies
in  a  light  fo  humiliating,  fhould  ever  be  able  t!i>
think  of  themfelves  without  regret  and  fhame.
Theintention  of  thefe  obfervations  is  not  to  oppofe
fuch  fentiments  ;  but,  taking  for  granted  the  rea-
fonablenefs  of  Civil  Liberty,  to  fliew  wherein  it
con  fills,  and  what  diftinguiflies  it  from its  cort-


(a)  See  among  others  Mr.  Locke  on  Government,  and  Dr.^
Pricftley's  EfTay  on  the  firft  Principles  of  Government.

trary.


[ '7 ]

i;rary. And,  in  confideririg  this  fubjecl, as  it

has  been  now  treated,  it  is  unavoidable  to  refled
bn  the  excellency  of  a  free  government,  and  its

tendency  to  exalt  the  nature  of  man. Every

member  of  a  free  (late,  having  his  property  fecurc,
and  knowing  himfelf  his  own  governor,  pofieffes
a  confcioufnefs  of  dignity  in  himfelf,  and  feels  in-
citements to  emulation  and  improvement,  to  which
the  miferable  (laves  of  arbitrary  power  muft  be  ut-
ter (Irangers.  In  fuch  a  (late  all  the  fprings  of  ac-
tion have  room  to  operate,  and  the  mind  is  (timu-
lated  to  the  nobleft  exertions  (a). — But  to  be  ob-
ligedj  from  our  birth,  to  look  up  to  a  creature  nd
better  than  ourfelves  as  the  mafter  of  our  fortunes ;
and  to  receive  his  will  as  our  law — What  can  be
more  humiliating  ?  What  elevated  ideas  can  enter
a  mind  in  fuch  a  fituation  ?•■  Agreeably  to  this
remark ;  the  fubjeds  of  free  ftates  have,  in  all
ages,  been  mod  didinguidied  for  genius  and  know-
ledge. Liberty  is  the  foil  where  the  arts  and  fcien-
ces  have  flouriflied  -,  and  the  more  free  a  ftate  has
been,  the  more  have  the  powers  of  the  human
mind  been  drawn  forth  into  adlion,  and  the  greater
number  of  brave  men  has  it  produced.  With  what
luftre  do  the  antient  free  (lates  of  Greece  fhine
in  the  annals  of  the  world?  How  different  is  tliat
country  nov/,  under  the  Great  Turk  ?  The  differ-

(«) See  Dr.  Prieftley  on  Government,  page  68,  69,  &c.

C  ence


L i» J

cnce  between  a  country  inhabited  by  men,  and  by
brutes,  is  not  greater.

Thefe  are  reflexions  which  (hould  be  conftantly
prefent  to  every  mind  in  this  country. As  Mo-
ral Liberty  is  the  prime  blefling  of  man  in  his
private  capacity,  fo  is  Civil  Liberty  in  his  public
capacity. There  is  nothing  that  requires  more  to
be  watched  than  power. There  is  nothing  that
ouf^ht  to  be  oppofed  with  a  more  determined  refo-
lution  than  its  encroachm.ents. Sleep  in  a  (late,  as
Montefquieu  fays,  is  always  followed  by  llavery,
- The  people  of  this  kingdom  were  once  warmed
by  fuch  fentiments  as  thefe. Many  a  fycophant  ot
power have they facrificed. Often have they
fought  and  bled  in  the  caufe  of  Liberty. But  that
time  feems  to  be  going. The  fair  inheritance  of
Liberty  left  us  by  our  anceftors  many  of  us  are  not
unwilling  co  refign. An  abandoned  venality,  the
infeparable  companion  of  diffipation  and  extrava-
gance, has  poifoned  the  fprings  of  public  virtue
among  us:  And  fhould  any  events  ever  arife  that
fhould  render  the  fame  oppofition  neceflary  that
took  place  in  the  times  of  King  Charles  the  Firft,
and  James  the  Second,  I  am  afraid  all  that  is  valu-
able to  us  would  be  loft. The  terror  of  the  ftand-
ing  army,  the  danger  of  the  public  funds,  and  the
all  corrupting  influence  of  the  treafury, would
deaden  all  zeal,  and  produce  general  acquiefcence
and  fervility.

/;  SECT.


t 19 ]
SECT. III.

Of  the  Authority  of  one  Country  over  another.

R  O  M  the  nature  and  principles  of  Civil  Li-
berty, as  they  have  been  now  explained,  it
is  an  immediate  and  neceflary  inference  that  noJ
one  community  can  have  any  povv'er  over  the  pro-
perty or  legidation  of  another  community,  that
is  not  incorporated  with  it  by  a  jufl:  and  adequate

reprefentation. Then  only^  it  has  been  fliewn^

is  a  ftate/r^^,  when  it  is  governed  by  its  ov/n  will*
But  a  country  that  is  lubjeft  to  the  legiflature  of
another  country,  in  which  it  has  no  voice,  and
over  which  it  has  no  controul^  cannot  be  faid  to  b^
governed  by  its  own  will.  Such  a  country^  there^
fore,  is  in  a  (late  of  flavery.  And  itdeferves  to  be
particularly  confidered,  that  fuch  a  Oavery  is  worfe^
on  ftveral  accounts,  than  any  (lavery  of  private
men  to  one  another,  or  of  kingdoms  to  defpots
v/ithin  themfelves. — Between  one  {late  and  ano-
ther, there  is  none  of  that  fellow-feeling  that  takes,
place  between  perfons  in  private  life.  Being  de-
tached bodies  that  never  fee  one  another,  and  re-
ading perhaps  in  different  quarters  of  the  globe^
the  ftate  that  governs  cannot  be  a  witnefs  to  the
fufferings  occafioncd  by  its  opprefTions ;  or  a  com-
petent judge  of  the  circumftances  and  abilities
Q  %  of


[ 20 ]

of  the  people  who  are  governed.  They  mufi
alfo  have  in  a  great  degree  feparate  interefts ;  and
the  more  the  one  is  loaded,  the  more  the  other
may  be  eafed.  The  infamy  likewife  of  oppreffion,
being  in  fuch  circumftances  fhared  amonp;  a  mul-
titude,  is  not  likely  to  be  much  felt  or  regard-
ed.  On  all  thefe  accounts  there  is,  rn  the  cafe

of  one  country  fubjugated  to  another,  little  or
nothing  to  check  rapacity  -,  and  the  moft  flagrant
injuftice  and  cruelty  may  be  pradlifed  without  re-

morfe  or  pity, 1  will  add,  that  it  is  particularly

difficult  to  fliake  off"  a  tyranny  of  this  kind.  A
fmgle  defpot,  if  a  people  are  unanimous  and  refo-
lute,  may  be  foon  fubdued.  But  a  defpotic  ftate
is  not  eafily  fubdued  ;  and  a  people  fubjed  to  ic
cannot  emancipate  themfelves  without  entering
into  a  dreadful,  and,  perhaps,  very  unequal  con-
teft.

I  cannot  help  obferving  farther,  that  the  flavery
of  a  people  to  internal  defpots  may  be  qualified
and  limited  i  but  I  don't  fee  what  can  limit  the
authority  of  one  ftate  over  another.  The  exercife
of  power  in  this  cafe  can  have  no  other  meafure
than  difcretion  •,  and,  therefore,  muft  be  indefinite
and  abfolute.

Once  more.  It  (hould  be  confidered  that  the
government  of  one  country  by  another,  can  only
be  fuppor:ed  by  a  military  force  -, and,  without

fuch


I 21 ]

fuch  a  fupport,  muft  be  deftitute  of  all  weight  and
efficiency.

This  will  be  befl  explained  by  putting  the  fol-
lowing cafe. There  is,  let  us  fuppofe,  in  a  pro-
vince fubjefl  to  the  fovereignty  of  a  diftant  llate,
a  fubordinate  legiflature  confiding  of  an  Aflembly
chofen  by  the  people  •,  a  Council  chofen  by  that
Aflembly  -,  and  a  Governor  appointed  by  the  So-
vereign State,  and  paid  by  the  Province.  There
are,  likewife,  judges  and  other  officers,  appointed
and  paid  in  the  fame  manner,  for  adminiftering
jujlice  agreeably  to  the  laws,  by  the  verdifls  of  ju-
ries fairly  and  indifcriminately  chofen. This

forms  a  conftitution  feemingiy  free,  by  giving  the
people  a  ffiare  in  their  own  government,  and  Tome
check  on  their  rulers.  But,  while  there  is  a  higher
legiflative  power,  to  the  controul  of  which  fuch  a
conftitution  is  fubjeft,  it  does  not  itfelf  poflcfs  Li-
berty, and  therefore,  cannot  be  of  any  ufe  as  a  fe-
curity  to  Liberty;  nor  is  it  poffible  that  it  ffiould
be  of  long  duration.  Laws  offenfive  to  the  Pro-
vince will  be  enaftcd  by  the  Sovereign  State.  The
legiflature  of  the  Province  will  remonfl:rate  againll
them.  The  magiftrates  will  not  execute  them.
Juries  will  not  convi(51:  upon  them  •,  and  confe-
quently,  like  the  Pope's  Bulls  which  once  go-
verned Europe,  they  will  become  nothing  but
forms  and  empty  founds,  to  which  no  regard  will

be  fhewn. In  order  to  remedy  this  evil,  and

C  3  to


[ 22 ]

to  give  efficiency  to  its  governmenr,  the  fupreme
(late  will  naturally  be  led  to  withdraw  the  Governor^
the  Council^  and  the  Judges  (a)  from  the  controul

(a)  The  independency  of  the  Judges  weelleemin  this  coun-
try one  of  our  greateft  privileges. Before  the  revolution

they  generally,  I  believe,  held  their  places  duiing  pkafure.
King  William  gave  them  i\ie].r  ^\z.zes  during  good  bebai'iour.
At  the  acceffion  of  the  prefent  Royal  Family  their  places  were
given  them  during  good  behaviour,  in  confcguence  of  the  A61
of  Settlement,  12  and  13  W.  HI,  C.  2.  But  an  opinion  having
been  entertained  by  fome,  that  though  their  commiHions  were
made  under  the  Acl  of  Settlement  to  continue,  during  good  be-
haviour, yet  that  they  determined  on  the  demife  of  the  Crown  ;
it  was  enaded  by  a  ftatute  made  in  the  iirft  year  of  his  prefent
Majefty,  Chap,  23.  "That  the  commiiilons  of  Judges  for
?'  the  time  being  fhall  be,  continue,  and  remain  in  full  force,
**  during  their  good  behaviour,  notwithllanding  the  demife
"  of  his  Majefty,  or  of  any  of  his  Heirs  and  Succeflbrs  ;"
v.ich  a  provifo,  "  that  it  may  be  lawful  for  his  Majefty,  his
*'  Heirs  and  Succeftbrs,  to  remove  any  Judge  upon  the  addrefs
"  of  both  Houfes  of  Parliament."  And  by  the  fame  Statute
their  falaries  are  fecured  to  them  during  the  continuance  of
their  commiflions :  His  Majefty,  according  to  the  preamble  of
tlie  Statute,  having  been  pleafed  to  declare  from  the  Throne
to  both  Houfes  of  Parliament,  •'  That  he  looked  upon  the
"  independency  and  uprightnefs  of  Judges  as  effential  to  the
"  impartial  adminiftration  of  Juftice,  as  one  of  the  beft  fecu-
*'  rities  to  the  Rights  and  Liberties  of  his  loving  Subjeds,  and.
*'  as  moft  conducive  to  the  honour  of  his  Crown,"

A  worthy  friend  and  able  Lawyer  has  fupplied  me  with  this
note.  It  afibrds,  when  contrafted  with  that  dependence  of  the
Judges  which  has  been  thought  reafonable  in  America.,  a  fad
fpecimen  of  the  different  manner  in  which  a  kingdom  may
think  proper  to  govern  itfelf,  and  the  provinces  fubjecl  to  it,

of


f  23 ]

of  the  Province,  by  making  them  entirely  depen-
dant on  irlelf  for  their  ^^j  and  continuance  in  office^
as  well  as  for  their  appointment. It  will  alfo  alter
the  mode  of  chufing  Juries  on  purpofe to  bring
them  more  under  its  influence  :  Andinfome  cafes,
under  the  pretence  of  the  impo'ffibility  of  gaining
an  impartial  trial  where  government  is  refifted, it
will  perhaps  ordain,  that  offenders  fhall  be  removed
from  the  Province  to  be  tried  within  its  own  terri-
tories :  And  it  may  even  go  fo  far  in  this  kind  of
policy,  as  to  endeavour  to  prevent the  cffecfls  of
difcontents, by  forbidding  all  meetings  and aflb-
ciations  of  the  people,  except  at  fuch  times, and
for  fuch  partfcular  purpofes,  as  fliiiU  be  permitted
them.

Thus  will  fuch  a  Province  be  exadly  in  the
fame  flate  that  Britain  v/ould  be  in,  v/ere  our  firfl;
executive  magiftrate,  our  floufe  of  Lords,  and
our  Judges,  nothing  but  the  inlirum.ents  of  a  fo-
reign democratical  povyer  •,  were  our  Juries  no-
minated by  that  power ;  or  were  we  liable  to  be
tranfported  to  a  diftant  country  to  be  tried  for
offences  committed  here  ;  and  reftrained  from  cal-
ling any  meetings,  confulting  about  any  grie-
vances, or  affociating  for  any  purpofes,  except
when  leave  fnould  be  given  us  by  a  Lord  Lieu-
tenant  or  Viceroy.

It  is  certain  that  this  is  a  ftate  of  opprefllon

which  no  country  could  endure,  and  to  which  it

C  4  would


[ 24 ]

would  be  vain  to  expert,  that  any  people  fhould
fubmit  an  hour  without  an  armed  force  to  com-
pel them.

The  late  tranfacflions  in  Majfachiifet^  Bay  are
a  perfect  exemplification  of  what  I  have  now  faid.
The  government  of  Great  Britain  in  that  Province
has  gone  on  exafljy  in  the  train  I  have  defcribed  ;
till  ai  lad  it  became  neceflary  to  ftation  troops
there,  not  amenable  to  the  civil  power  -,  and  all
termina:ed  in  a  government  by  the  Sword.  And
fuch,  if  a  people  are  not  funk  below  the  chara6ter
of  men,  will  be  the  iffue  of  all  government  in  fimi^
iarcircumllances.

It  may  be  afked "  Are  there  not  caufes  by

*'  which  one  Hate  may  acquire  a  r;^/'//"«/ authority
"  over  another,  though  not  confolidated  by  an  ade-

**  quate  Reprefentation  ?" 1  anfwer,  that  there

are  no  fuch caufes. All  the  caufes  to  which

fuch  an  effcift  can  be  afcribed  are  Conc^uest,  Com-
pact, or  Obligations  conferred.

Much  has  been  faid  of  the  right  of  conqtiejl ;
and  hiftory  contains  little  more  than  accounts  of
kingdoms  reduced  by  it  under  the  dominion  of
other  kingdoms,  and  of  the  havock  it  has  made
among  mankind.  But  the  authority  derived  from
hence,  being  founded  on  violence,  is  ntver  right-
ful. The  Reman  Republic  was  nothing  but  a  fac-
tion againft  the  general  liberties  of  the  world  ;  and

had


t  25  ]

had  no  more  right  to  give  law  to  the  Provinces
fubjedl  to  ir,  than  thieves  have  to  the  property
they  feize,  or  to  the  houfes  into  which  they  break.

Even  in  the  cafe  of  a  juft  war  undertaken  by

one  people  to  defend  itfelf  againft  the  opprefTions
of  another  people,  conqueft  gives  only  a  right  to
an  indemnification  for  the  injury  which  occafioned
the  war,  and  a  reafonable  fecurity  againft  future
injury.

Neither  can  any  ftate  require  fuch  an  authority
over  other  ftates  in  virtue  of  any  compa5ls  or  cef-
Jions*  This  is  a  cafe  in  which  compacts  are  not
binding.  Civil  Liberty  is,  in  this  refped,  on  the
fame  footing  with  Religious  Liberty.  As  no  peo-
ple can  lawfully  furrender  their  Religious  Liberty,
by  giving  up  their  right  of  judging  for  themfelves
in  religion,  or  by  allowing  any  human  beings  to
prefcribe  to  them  what  faith  they  fhall  embrace,
or  what  mode  of  worfliip  they  fhall  praflife ;  fo
neither  can  any  civil  focieties  lawfully  furrender
their  Civil  Liberty,  by  giving  up  to  any  extrane-
ous jurifdiftion  their  power  of  legiflating  for  them-
felves and  difpofing  their  property.  Such  a  cef-
fion,  being  inconfillent  with  the  unalienable  rights
of  human  nature,  would  either  not  bind  at  all;
or  bind  only  the  individuals  who  made  it.  This
is  a  blefling  which  no  one  generation  of  men  can
give  up  for  another  ;  and  which,  when  loft,  a  peo-
ple  have  always  a  right  to  refume.— — Had  our

anceftors


[ 26 ]

anccftors  in  this  country  been  lb  mad  as  to  have
fubjedied  themfelves  to  any  foreign  Community,
we  could  not  have  been  under  any  obligation  to
continue  in  iuch  a  ftate.  And  all  the  nations  now
in  the  world  who,  in  confeqiience  of  the  tamenefs
and  folly  of  their  predecefTors,  are  fubje6l  to  arbi-
trary power,  have  a  right  to  emancipate  themfelves
as  foon  as  they  can.

If  neither  conquefi  nor  comfa^l  can  give  fuch  an
authority,  much  lefs  can  any  favours  received,  or
any  fervices  performed  by  one  flate  for  another.
• Let  the  favour  received  be  what  it  will,  Li-
berty is  too  dear  a  price  for  it.  A  ftate  that  has
been  ohliged  is  not,  therefore,  bound  to  be  enjlavcd.
It  ought,  if  poITible,  to  make  an  adequate  return
for  the  fervices  done  to  it  j  but  to  fuppofe  that  it
ought  to  give  up  the  power  of  governing  itfelf,  and
the  difpofal  of  its  property,  would  be  to  fuppofe,
that,  in  order  to  fhew  its  gratitude,  it  ought  to  part
with  the  power  of  ever  afterwards  cxercifing  grati-
tude.  How  much  has  been  done  by  this  king-
dom for  Hanover?  But  no  one  will  lay  that  on  this
account,  we  have  a  right  to  make  the  laws  of  Ha-
nover; or  even  to  draw  a  fingle  penny  from  it  with-
out its  ov;n  confent.

After  what  has  been  faid  it  will,  I  am  afraid,
be  trifling  to  apply  the  preceding  arguments  to
the  cafe  of  different  communities,  which  are  con-

fidered


[ 27 ]

-^idered  as  different  parts  of  the  fame  Empire.  But
there  are  reafons  which  render  it  neceflary  for*  me
to  be  explicit  in  makino;  this  application.

What  I  mean  here  is  juil  to  point  out  the  dif-
ference of  fituation  between  communities  formino-
an  Empire;  and  particular  bodies  or  claffesof  men
forming  different  parts  of  a  Kingdom.  Difi^erent
communities  forming  an  Empire  have  no  con-
nexions, which  produce  a  neceffary  reciprocation
of  interefts  between  them.  They  inhabit  difi^erent
diftricls,  and  are  governed  by  different  legiflatures.

r On  the  contrary. The  diff^erent claffes of

men  within  a  kingdom  are  all  placed  on  the  fame
ground.  Their  concerns  and  interefts  are  the
fame;  and  what  is  done  to  one  part  mud  affl'd  all.
— — Thefe  are  fituations  totally  different;  and  a
conftitution  of  government  that  may  be  confiftent
with  Liberty  in  one  of  them,  may  be  entirely  in-
confiftent  Vv^ith  it  in  the  other.  It  is,  however,
certain  that,  even  in  the  laftof  thefe  fituations,  no
one  part  ouc;ht  to  govern  the  reff.  In  order  to  a
fair  and  equal  government,  there  ought  to  be  a
fair  and  equal  reprefentation  of  all  that  are  govern-
ed;  and  as  far  as  this  is  wanting  in  any  govern-
ment,  it  deviates  from  the  principles  of  Liberty,

and  becomes  unjuft  and  oppreflive. But in

the  circumftances  of  different  communities,  all  this
holds  with  unfpeakably  more  force. The  govern-
ment of  a  part  in  this  cafe  becomes  complete  ty-
ranny ;


[ 28 ]

ranny  -,  and  fubjeflion  to  it  becomes  complete  tla-*
very.

But  ought  there  not,  it  is  afked,  to  exifl:  fome-
where  in  an  Empire  a  fupreme  legiflative  authority
over  the  whole-,  or  a  power  to  controul  and  bind

all  the  different  dates  of  which  it  confifls. This

enquiry  has  been  already  anfwered.  The  truth  is,
that  fuch  a  fupreme  controuling  power  ought  to
cxift  no-where  except  in  fuch  a  Senate  or  body
of  delegates  as  that  defcribed  in  page  8  •,  and
that  the  authority  orfupremacy  of  even  thisfenate
ought  to  be  limited  to  the  common  concerns  of  the
Empire. 1  think  1  have  proved  that  the  funda-
mental principles  of  Liberty  neceflarily  require
this.

In  a  word.  An  Empire  is  a  colledlion  of  ftates
or  communities  united  by  fome  common  bond  or
lye.  If  thefe  dates  have  each  of  them  free  confti-
tutions  of  government,  and,  with  refpecft  to  taxa-
tion and  internal  Icgiflation,  are  independent  of
the  other  ftates,  but  united  by  compafts,  or  alli-
ances, or  fubjeftion  to  a  Great  Council.^  reprcfenting
the  whole,  or  to  one  monarch  entrufted  with  the
fupreme  executive  power  :  In  thefe  circumftances,
the  Empire  will  be  an  Empire  of  Freemen.  —  If,
on  the  contrary,  like  the  different  provinces  fub-
jeft  to  the  Grand  Seignior,  none  of  the  dates  poffefs
any  independent  legiflative  authority  j but  are  all

fubjed


[ 29 ]

fubjeft  to  an  abfolute  monarch,  whofe  will  is  their

law ;  then  is  the  Empire  an  Empire  of  Slaves. .

If  one  of  the  ftates  is  free,  but  governs  by  ijs  will
all  the  other  ftates ;  then  is  the  Empire,  like  that
of  the  Romans  in  the  times  of  the  republic,  an
Empire  confifting  of  one  ftate  free,  and  the  reft  in
flavery  :  Nor  does  it  make  any  more  difference  in
this  cafe,  that  the  governing  ftate  is  itfelf  free,
than  it  does  in  the  cafe  of  a  kingdom  fubjecft  to  a
defpot^  that  this  defpot  is  himfelf  free.  I  have
before  obferved,  that  this  only  makes  the  flavery
worfe.  There  is,  in  the  one  cafe,  a  chance,  that  in
the  quick  fucceffion  of  defpots,  a  good  one  will
fometimes  arife.  But  bodies  of  men  continue  the
fame ;  and  have  generally  proved  the  moft  unre-
lenting of  all  tyrants.

A  great  writer  before  {a)  quoted,  obferves  of
the  Roman  Empire^  that  while  Liberty  was  at  the
center,  tyranny  prevailed  in  the  diftant  provinces ;
that  fuch  as  were  free  under  it  were  extremely  fo,
while  thofe  who  were  flaves  groaned  under  the  ex-
tremity of  flavery  ;  and  that  the  fame  events  that
defiroyed  the  liberty  of  the  former,  gave  liberty
to  the  latter.

The  Liberty  of  the  RojnanSy  therefore,  was  only
an  additional  calamity  to  the  provinces  governed
by  them  j  and  though  it  might  have  been  faid  of
the  citizens  of  Rome,  that  they  were  the  "  freeft

(a)  Monteftjuieu's  Spirit  of  Laws,  Vol.  I.  Book  1 1 .  C.  xix.
2  **  members


t  JO  J

"  members  of  any  clvit  fociety  in  the  known
"  world  i"  yet  of  the  fuhjeHs  of  Rome,  it  mu(l
have  been  faid,  that  they  were  the  completcfl:
flaves  in  the  known  world.— 'How  remarkable
is  it,  that  this  very  people,  once  the  freed  of
mankind,  but  at  the  fame  time  the  mod  proud  and
tyrannical,  fliould  become  at  laft  the  mod  con-
temptible and  abjcd;  flaves  that  cverexided?


PART


[ 31 ]


PART ir.


IN  the  foregoing  difqnifitions,  I  have,  from  one
leading  principle,  deduced  a  number  of  confe-
quences,  that  feem  to  me  incapable  of  being  dif-
puted.  I  have  meant  that  they  fiiould  be  applied
to  the  great  queftion  between  this  kingdom  and
the  Colonies  which  has  cccafioned  the  prefect  war
with  them.

It  is  impofllble,  but,  my  readers  muft  have
been  all  along  making  this  application  ;  and  if
they  flill  think,  that  the  claims  of  this  kingdom  are
reconcilable  to  the  principles  of  true  liberty  and  le-
gitimate government,  I  am  afraid,  that  nothing  I
fliall  farther  fay  will  have  any  cffed  on  their  judg-
ments. I  wifh,  however,  they  would  have  the  pa-
tience and  candour  to  go  with  me^  and  grant  m.e  a
hearing  fome  time  longer.

Though^  clearly  decided  in  my  own  judgment
on  this  fubjeft,  I  am  inclined  to  make  great  allow-
ances for  the  differentjudginents  of  others.  We
have  been  fo  ufed  to  fpeak  of  the  Colonies  as  cur

Colonies,


[ 32 ]

Colonies,  and  to  think  of  them  as  in  a  ftate  of  fub-
ordination  to  us,  and  as  holding  their  cxiftence  in
America  only  for  our  ufe,  that  it  is  no  wonder  the
prejudices  of  many  are  alarmed,  when  they  find  a
different  do6lrine  maintained.  The  meaneft  per-
fon  among  us  is  difpofed  to  look  upon  himfelf  as
having  a  body  of  fubjefls  in  America ;  and  to  be
offended  at  the  denial  of  his  right  to  make  laws
for  them,  though  perhaps  he  does  not  know  what
colour  they  are  of,  or  what  language  they  talk.
Such  are  the  natural  prejudices  of  this  coun-
try.  But  the  time  is  coming,  I  hope,  when  the

unreafonablenefs  of  them  will  be  feen  i  and  more
juft  fentiments  prevail.

Before  I  proceed,  I  beg  it  may  be  attended  to,
that  I  have  chofen  to  try  this  queftion  by  the  ge-
neral principles  of  Civil  Liberty  -,  and  not  by  the
praftice  of  former  times*,  or  by  the  Charters  grant-
ed  the colonies, The  arguments  for them,

drawn  from  thefe  laft  topics,  appear  to  me  greatly
to  outweigh  the  arguments  againji  them.  But  I
wifh  to  have  this  queftion  brought  to  a  higher  tcft,
and  furcr  iffue.  The  queftion  with  all  liberal  en-
quirers ought  to  be,  not  what  jurifdiftion  over
them  Precedents,  Statutes,  and  Charters  give,  but
what  reafon  and  equity,  and  the  rights  of  humanity

give. This  is,  in  truth,  a  queftion  which  no

kingdom  has  ever  before  had  occafion  to  agitate.

The


[ 33 i

'I'he  cafe  of  a  free  country  branching  itfelf  out  in
the  manner  Britain  has  done,  arid  fending  to  a
diftant  world  colonies  which  have  there,  from
fmall  beginnings,  and  urider  free  legiflatures  of  their
own,  increafcd,  and  formed  a  body  of  powerful
flates,  likely  foon  to  become  fuperior  to  the  parent
ftate — This  is  a  cafe  which  is  new  in  the  hiftory
of  mankind;  and  it  is  extremely  improper  to  judge
of  it  by  the  rules  of  any  narrow  and  partial  poli-
cy ;  or  to  confider  it  on  any  other  ground  than  the

general  one  of  reafon  and  juftice. -Thofe  who

will  be  candid  enough  to  judge  on  this  ground,  and
who  can  diveit  themfelves  of  national  prejudices,

will  not,  I  fancy,  remain  long  unfatisfied. But

alas !  Matters  are  gone  too  far.  The  difpute  pro-
bably muft  be  fettled  another  Way  •,  and  the  fword
alone,  I  am  afraid,  is  now  to  determine  what  the

rights  of  Britain  and  America  are. Shocking

fituation  ! — ^Detefted  be  the  meafures  which  have
brought  us  into  it: And,  if  we  are  endeavourincr

to  enforce  injuftice,  curfed  will  be  the  war. A

retreat,  however,  is  not  yet  impradicable.  The
duty  we  owe  our  gracious  fover.eign  obliges  us  to
fely  on  his  difpofition  to  ftay  the  fviord,  and  to
promote  the  happinefs  of  all  the  different  parts
cf  the  Empire  at  the  head  of  which  he  is  placed.
With  fome  hopes,  therefore,  that  it  may  not  be
^'too  late  to  reafon  on  this  fubje^,  I  will,  in  the  fol-

D  lowino;


[ 34 ]

lowing  Sedlions,  enquire  what  the  war  with  Ame-
rica  is  in  the  following  refpedls.

1.  In  refpeft  of  Juftice.

2.  The  Principles  of  the  Conftitution.

3.  In  refpeft  of  Policy  and  Humanity.

4.  The  Honour  of  the  Kingdom.

And  laftly,  The  Probability  of  fucceeding  in  it.

SECT. I.

Of  the  Jujiice  of  the  War  with  America.

TH  E  enquiry,  whether  the  war  with  the  Co-
lonies is  "^i  juji  war,  will  be  beft  determined
by  dating  the  power  over  them,  which  it  is  the
end  of  the  war  to  maintain :  And  this  cannot  be
better  done,  than  in  the  words  of  an  afi:  of  parlia-
ment, made  on  purpofe  to  define  it.  That  a<5l,  it
is  well  known,  declares,  "  That  this  kingdom  has
"  power,  and  of  right  ought  to  have  power  to
'*  make  laws  and  ftatutes  to  bind  the  Colonies,
*'  and  people  of  America^  in  all  cafes  whatever."

Dreadful  power  indeed  ! I  defy  any  one  to

exprcfs  flavery  in  ilronger  language. It  is  the
fame  with  declaring  "  that  we  have  a  right  to  do

•with  them  what  we  pleafe." 1  will  not  wafte  my

time  by  applying  to  fuch  a  claim  any  of  the  pre-
ceding arguments. If  my  reader  does  not  feel

more


[ 35 ]

more  in  this  cafe,  than  words  can  exprefs,  all  rea-
foning  muft  be  vain.

But,  probably,  mod  perfons  will  be  for  ufing
milder  language ;  and  for  faying  no  more  than,
that  the  united  legiflatures  of  England  and  Scot-
land  have  of  right  power  to  tax  the  Colonies,  and

a  fupremacy  of  legiflaiion  over  America. But

this  comes  to  the  fame.  If  it  means  any  thing,  it
means,  that  the  property,  and  the  legiflations  of
the  Colonies,  are  fubjefl  to  the  abfolute  difcretion
of  Great  Britain^  and  ought  of  right  to  be  fo.  The
nature  of  the  thing  admits  of  no  limitation.  The
Colonies  can  never  be  admitted  to  be  judges,  how
far  the  authority  over  them  in  thefe  cafes  Ihall  ex-
tend. This  would  be  to  deftroy  it  entirely.

If  any  part  of  their  property  is  fubjc6l  to  our  dif-
cretion, the  whole  mufl:  be  ^o.  If  we  have  a  right
to  interfere  at  all  in  their  internal  legiflations,  we
have  a  right  to  interfere  as  far  as  we  think  proper.

" It  is  felf-evident,  that  this  leaves  them  nothing

they  can  call  their  own. And  what  is  it  that

can  give  to  any  people  fuch  a  fupremacy  over

another  people  ? 1  have  already  examined

the  principal  anfwers  which  have  been  given  to
this  enquiry.  But  it  will  not  be  amifs  in  this  place
to  go  over  fome  of  them  again.

It  has  been  urged,  that  fuch  a  right  mufl  be
lodged  fomewhere,  "  in  order  to  preferve  the
"  Unity  of  the  Britifh  Empire."

D  2  Pleas


[ 36 ] '

Pleas  of  this  fort  have,  in  all  ages,  been  ufed  to

juftify tyranny. They have in Religion

given  rife  to  numberlefs  opprefllve  claims,  and
flavifh  Hierarchies.  And  in  the  Romifro  Commumon
particularly,  it  is  well  known,  that  the  Pope
claims  the  title  and  powers  of  the  fupreme  head
on  earth  of  the  Chriftian  church,  in  order  to  pre-

ferve  its  Unity. With  refpeft  to  the  Bnlijh

Empire^  nothing  can  be  more  prepofterous  than  to
endeavour  to  maintain  its  unity,  by  fetting  up  fuch
a  claim.  This  is  a  method  of  eftablilhing  unity,
which, like  the fimilar  method  in  religion, can

produce nothing  but  difcord  and  mifchief.

The  truth  is,  that  a  common  relation  to  one  fu-
preme executive  head  ;  an  exchange  of  kind  of-
fices •,  tyes  of  intereft  and  affection,  and  compass,
are  fufficient  to  give  the  Britifli  Empire  all  the
unity  that  is  neccffary.  But  if  not If,  in  or-
der to  preferve  its  Unityy  one  half  of  it  muft  be  en-
flaved  to  the  other  half,  let  it,  in  the  name  of
God,  want  Unity.

Much  has  been  faid  of  *'  the  Superiority  of  the
*'  Britifli  State."  But  what  gives  us  our  fuperiori-
ty  ? — Is  it  our  IVealth  ? — This  never  confers  real
dignity.  On  the  contrary  :  Its  effeft  is  always  to
debafe,  intoxicate,  and  corrupt.-  Is  it  the  num-
ber of  our  people '^  The  colonies  will  foon  be  equal  to

us  in  number. Is  it  our  Knowledge  and  Virtue?

They are probably equally  knowing, and  more

virtuous.


[ i7 ]

virtuous.  There  are  names  among  them  that  will
not  ftoop  to  any  names  among  the  philofoph-rs
and  politicians  of  this  ifland.

"  But  we  are  the  Parent  State." — Thefe  are
the  magic  words  which  have  fafcinated  and  milled

us.-— The  Englifh  came  from  Germany.  Does

that  give  the  German  dates  a  right  to  tax  us  ?-^
Children,  having no  property, and being  inca-
pable of  guiding  themfelves,  the  author  of  nature
has  committed  the  care  of  them  to  their  parents,
and  fubjeded  them  to  their  abfolute authority.
But  there  is  a  period  when,  having  acquired  pro-
perty, and  a  capacity of  judging  for  themfelves,
they  become  indepc^ndent  agents ;  and  when,  for
this  reafon,  the  authority  of  their  parents  ceafes,
and  becomes  nothing  but  the  refpeftand  influence
due  to  benefadors. Suppofing,  therefore,  that  the
order  of  nature  in  eftablifliing  the  relation  between
parents  and  children,  ought  to  have  been  the  rule
of  our  condudl to  the  Colonies,  we  fliould  have
been  gradually  relaxing  our  authority  as  they  grew
up.  But,  like  mad  parents,  we  have  done  the  con-
trary ;  and,  at  the  very  time  when  our  authority
(hould  have  been  moft  relaxed,  we  have  carried  it
to  the  greateft  extent,  and  exercifcd  it  with the
greateft  rigour. No  wonder  then,  that  they  have
turned  upon  us  •, and  obliged  us  to  remember,
that  they  are  not  Children.

P  3  *^  But


r  38  ]

*'  But  we  have,  it  is  faid,  protefled  them,  and
"  run  deeply  in  debt  on  their  account." — The  full
anfwer  to  this  has  been  already  given,  (page  26.)
Will  any  one  fay,  that  all  we  have  done  for  them
has  not  been  more  on  our  o'-jun  account,  {a)  than

on  theirs? But  fuppofe  the  contrary. Have

they  done  nothing  for  us  ?  Have  they  made  no
compenfation  for  the  proteflion  they  have  receiv-
ed ^  Have  they  not  helped  us  to  pay  our  taxes.,  to
fupport  our  poor,  and  to  bear  the  burthen  of  our
debts,  by  taking  from  us,  at  our  own  price,  all  the
commodities  with  which  we  can  fupply  them  ? —
Have  they  not,  for  our  advantage,  fubmitted  to

(a)  This  is  particularly  true  of  the  bounties  granted  on  fome
American  commodities  (as  pitch,  tar,  indigo,  &c.)  when  im-
ported into  Britain  ;  for  it  is  well  known,  that  the  end  of
granting  them  was,  to  get  thofe  commodities  cheaper  from  the
Colonics,  and  in  return  for  our  manufaftures,  which  we  ufed
to  ^tt  from  RtcJJia  and  other  foreign  countries.  And  this  is
expreffed  in  the  preambles  of  the  laws  which  grant  thefe  boun-
ties. See  the  Appeal  to  the  Juftice,  &c.  page  2 1 ,  third  edition.
It  is,  therefore,  Urange  that  Doctor  Tucker  and  others,  ihould
haveinfifced  fo  much  upon  thefe  bounties  as  favours  and  indul-

gencies  to  the  Colonics. But  it  is  ftill  more  ftrange,  that  the

fame  reprefentation  iliould  have  been  made  of  the  compenfa-
tions  granted  them  for  doing  more  during  the  laft  war  in  aflifl-
ing  us  than  eould  have  been  reafonably  expefted  ;  and  alfo
of  the  fums  we  have  fpent  in  maintaining  troops  among  them
n.vithout  their  confent  ;  and  in  oppofitiou  io  their  wiihes.
See  a  Pamphlet,  entitled  "  The  rights  of  Great  Britain  af-
ferted  againft  the  claims  of  America."

many


[ 39 ]

many  reftraints  in  acquiring  property  ?  Mud  they
likewife  refign  to  us  the  difpofal  of  that  property  ?
— Has  not  their  exclufive  trade  with  us  been  for
many  years  one  of  the  chief  fources  of  our  national
wealth  and  power  ? — In  all  our  wars  have  they  not
fought  by  our  fide,  and  contributed  much  to  our
fuccefs  ?  In  the  lafl  war,  particularly,  it  is  well
known,  that  they  ran  themfelves  deeply  in  debt  j
and  that  the  parliament  thought  it  neceflary  to
grant  them  confiderable  fums  annually  as  compen-
fations  for  going  beyond  their  abilities  in  afTifting
us.  And  in  this  courfe  would  they  have  continu-
ed for  many  future  years  ^  perhaps,  for  ever. — la
fhort ;  were  an  accurate  account  dated,  it  is  by  no
means  certain  which  fide  would  appear  to  be  mod
indebted.  When  alked  2ls  freemen^  they  have  hither-
to feldom  difcovered  any  reluctance  in  giving.
But,  in  obedience  to  a  demand,  and  with  the  bayo-
net at  their  breads,  they  will  give  us  nothing  but

blood.

It  is  farther  faid,  "  that  the  land  on  which  they

^'  fettled  was  ours." — But  how  came  it  to  be  ours  ?
If  failing  along  a  coad  can  give  a  right  to  a  coun-
try, then  might  the  people  of  Japan  become,  as
foon  as  they  pleafe,  the  proprietors  of  Britain.
Nothing  can  be  more  chimerical  than  property
founded  on  fuch  a  reafon.  If  the  land  on  which
the  Colonies  fird  fettled  had  any  proprietors,  they
were  the  natives. The  greated  part  of  it  they

P  4  bought


[ 40 ]

bought  of  the  natives.  They  have  fince  cleared
and  cultivated  it  •,  and,  without  any  help  from  us,
converted  a  wildernefs  into  fruitful  and  pleafanc
fields.  It  is,  therefore,  now  on  a  double  account
their  property  ;  and  no  power  on  earth  can  have
any  right  todifturb  them  in  the  poffefTion  of  it,  or
to  take  from  them,  without  their  confent,  any  pare
of  its  produce.

But  let  it  be  granted,  that  the  land  was  ours.
Did  they  not  fettle  upon  it  under  the  faith  of  char-
ters, which  promifed  them  the  enjoyment  of  all
the  rights  of  Englijhmen  ;  and  allowed  them  to  tax
themfelves,  and  to  be  governed  by  legiflatures  of
their  own,  fimilar  to  ours  ?  Thefe  charters  were
given  them  by  an  authority,  which  at  the  time  was
thought  competent  \  and  they  have  been  rendered
facred  by  an  acquiefcence  on  our  part  for  more
than  a  century.  Can  it  then  be  wondered  at,  that
the  Colonies  fhould  revolt,  when  they  found  their
charters  violated  -,  and  an  attempt  made  to  force
INNOVATIONS  upon  them  by  famine  and  the  fword  ^
But  I  lay  no  ftrefs  on  charters.  They  derive
their  rights  from  a  hia-her  fource.  It  is  inconfift-
ent  with  common  fenle  to  imagine,  that  any  people
would  ever  think  of  fettling  in  a  diftant  country,
on  any  fuch  condition,  as  that  the  people  from
whom  they  withdrew,  Ihould  for  ever  be  mailers  of
their  property,  and  have  power  to  fubjefl  them  tQ
any  modes  of  government  they  pleafed. And  had

there


[ 41 ]

there  been  exprefs  ftipulations  to  this  purpofe  in  all
the  charters  of  the  colonies,  they  would,  in  my
opinion,  be  no  more  bound  by  them,  than  if  it
had  been  flipulated  with  them,  that  they  fliould  go
naked,  or  expofe  themfelves  to  the  incurflons  of
wolves  and  tigers.

The  defedive  ftate  of  the  reprefentation  of  this
kingdom  has  been  farther  pleaded  to  prove  our
right  to  tax  America.  We  iubmit  to  a  parliament
that  does  not reprefent us,  and  therefore they

ought. How  ftrange  an  argument  is  this  ?  It

is  faying  we want liberty  •, and therefore, they

ought  to  want  it. Suppofe  it  true,  that they

are  indeed  contending  for  a  better  conftitution  of
government,  and more liberty than  we enjoy:

Ought  this  to  make  us  angry  ? Who  is  there

that  does  not  fee  the  danger  to  which  this  country

is  expofed  ? Is  it  generous, becaufe  we  are  in

a  fink,  to  endeavour  to  draw  them  into  it  ?  Ought
we  not  rather  to  wifh  earncftly,  that  there  may  at
leaft  be  one  free  country  left  upon  earth,  to
which  we  may  fly,  when  venality,  luxury,  and  vice
have  completed  the  ruin  of  liberty  here  ?

It  is,  however,  by  no  means  true,  that  America
has  no  more  right  to  be  exempted  from  taxation

hy  the  Britijh  parliament,  than  Britain  itfelf

Here,  all  freeholders,  and  burgefies  in  boroughs,
are  reprefented. There^  not  one  Freeholder,  or  any

other


[ 42 ]

other  perfon, is reprefenced. Here^ the aids

granted  by  the  reprefented  part  of  the  kingdom
muft  be  proportionably  paid  by  themfelves  ;  and
the  laws  they  make  for  oihers,  they  at  the  fame
time  make  for  themfehes.  There,  the  aids  they
would  grant  would  not  be  paid,  but  received,  by
themfelves  -,  and  the  laws  they  made  would  be
made  for  others  only. — In  fhort.  The  relation  of  one
country  to  another  country,  whofe  reprefentatives
have  the  power  of  taxing  it  (and  of  appropriating
the  money  raifed  by  the  taxesj  is  much  the  fame
with  the  relation  of  a  country  to  a  fingle  defpot,  or
a  body  of  defpots,  within  itfelf,  invefted  with  the
like  power.  In  both  cafes,  the  people  taxed  and
thofe  who  tax  have  feparate  intcrefls  •,  nor  can  there
be  any  thing  to  check  opprefTion,  befidcs  either  the
abilities  of  the  people  taxed,  or  the  humanity  of
the  taxers. — But  indeed  I  can  never  hope  to  con-
vince t'.iat  perfon  of  any  thing,  who  does  not  fee  an
cfTentiai  difference  {a)  between  the  two  cafes  now

{a)  It  gives  me  pleafure  to  find,  that  the  author  of  the
Remarks  on  the  Principal  ASis  of  the  \ph  Parliament  of  Great
Britain,  &:c.  acknowledges  this  difference. It  has,  how-
ever, been  at  the  fame  time  mortifying  to  me  to  find  fo  able  a
writer  adopting  fuch  principles  of  government,  as  are  contain-
ed in  this  work.  According  to  him,  a  people  have  no  pro-
perty or  rights,  except  fuch  as  their  Ci-ziil  Go'vernors  are  pleafed
not  to  take  from  them.  Taxes,  therefore,  he  afferts,  are  in  no
fenfe  the  gifts,  much  lefs  the  free  gifts  of  the  people.  See
p.  58.  and  191.

mentioned  j


[ 43 J

mentioned  ;  or  between  the  circumftances  of  indi-
viduals, and  clafles  of  men,  making  parts  of  a  com-
munity imperfedly  reprefented  in  the  legiflature
that  governs  it ;  and  the  circumftances  of  a  whole
community,  in  a  diftant  world,  not  at  all  repre-
fented.

But  enough  has  been  faid  by  others  on  this  point-,
nor  is  it  pofTible  for  me  to  throw  any  new  light
Upon  it.  To  fini(h,  therefore,  what  1  meant  to
oiFer  under  this  head,  I  muft  beg  that  the  follow-
ing confiderations  may  be  particularly  attended  to.

The  queftion  now  between  us  and  the  Colonies
is.  Whether,  in  refpedt  of  taxation  and  internal
legiQation,  they  are  bound  to  be  fubjecfl  to  the
jurifdiftion  of  this  kingdom  :  Or,  in  other  words.
Whether  the  Briiijh  parliament  has  or  has  not  of
right,  a  power  to  difpofc  of  their  property,  and  to

model  as  it  pleafes  their  governments  ? To

this  fupremacy  over  them,  we  fay,  we  are  entitled  \
and  in  order  to  maintain  it,  we  have  begun  the
prefenl  war. Let  me  here  enquire,

ijl.  Whether,  if  we  have  now  this  fupremacy,
wefliall  not  be  equally  entitled  to  it  in  any  future

time  ? They  are  now  but  little  fhort  of  half

pur  number.  To  this  number  they  have  grown,
from  a  fmail  body  of  original  ietclcrs,  by  a  very
rapid  increafe.  The  probability  is,  that  they  will
go  on  to  increafe  •,  and  that,  in  50  or  60  years,  they

will


[  44  ]
will  be  double  our  number  •,  {a)  and  form  a  mighty
Empire,  confifting  of  a  variety  of  ftates,  all  equal
or  fuperior  to  ourlelves  in  all  the  arts  and  accom-
plifhmentSj  which  give  dignity  and  happinefs  to
human  life.  In  that  period,  will  they  be  ftill
bound  to  acknowledge  that  fupremacy  over  them
which  we  now  claim  ?  Can  there  be  any  perfon
who  will  aflert  this ;  or  whofe  mind  does  not  re-
volt at  the  idea  of  a  vaft  continent,  holding  all
that  is  valuable  to  ic,  at  the  dilcretion  of  a  hand-
ful of  people  on  the  other  fide  the  A'.Iantic  ?

But  if,  at  that  period,  this  would  be  unreafonable  ;
what  makes  it  otherwife  n(nv  ? — Draw  the  line,
if  you  can. — But  there  is  a  ftill  greater  difficulty.

Britain  is  now,  I  wilj  fuppofe,  the  feat  of  Liber-
ty and  Virtue  -,  and  its  legiflature  confifts  of  a  body
of  able  and  independent  men,  who  govern  with
wifdom  and  juftice.  The  time  may  come  when  all
will  be  reverfed  :  When  its  excellent  conftitution
of  government  will  be  fubverted  :  When,  prefled
by  debts  and  taxes,  it  will  be  greedy  to  draw  to
itfelf  an  increafe  of  revenue  from  every  diftant
Province,  in  order  to  eafe  its  own  burdens  :  Wheri
the  influence  of  the  crown,  ftrengthened  by  luxury
and  an  univerfal  profligacy  of  manners,  will  have
tainted every  heart,  broken  down every fence

{a)  See  Obfcrvations  on  Reverfionary  Payments,  page  207,

3  o^


t 45 ]

of  Liberty,  and  rendered  us  a  nation  of  tame  and
contented  vaffals  :  When  a  General  Election  will  be
nothing  but  a  General  Au£lion  of  Boroughs  .'  And
when  the  Parliament,  the  Grand  Council  of  the
nation,  and  once  the  faithful  guardian  of  the  flate,
and  a  terror  to  evil  minifters,  will  be  degenerated
into  a  body  of  Sycophants^  dependent  and  venal,
always  ready  to  confirm  any  meafures  ;  and  little
more  than  a  public  court  for  regiftering royal

edidts. Such,  it  is  pofiible,  may,  fome  time  or

other, be the  (late  of  Great  Britain. What

will,  at  that  period,  be  the  duty  of  the  Colonies  ?
Will  they  be  ftill  bound  to  unconditional  fub-
miflion  ?  Muft  they  always  continue  an  appendage
to  our  government  •,  and  follow  it  implicitly
through  every  change  that  can  happen  to  it  ?— —
Wretched  condition,  indeed,  of  millions  of  free-
men as  good  as  ourfelves. Will you  (ay  that

we  now  govern  equitably  \  and  that  there  is  no
danger  of  any  fuch  revolution? — Would  to  God

this  were  true. But  will  you  not  always  (ay  the

lame?  Who  fhall  judge  whether  we  govern  equit-
ably or  not  ?  Can  you  give  the  Colonies  anv  fecurity
that  fuch  a  period  will  never  come  ?  Once  more.

If  we  have  indeed  that  power  which  we  claim
over  the  legiQations,  and  internal  rights  of  the
Colonies,  may  we  nor,  whenever  we  pleale,  fub-
jedt  them  to  the  arbitrary  power  of  the  crown  ?
—I  do  not  mean,  that  this would  be  a  difad-

vantageous


[ 46 ]

vantageous  change  :  For  I  have  before  obferve'd,-
that  if  a  people  are  to  be  fubjefl  to  an  external
power  over  which  they  have  no  command,  it  is
better  that  power  fhould  be  lodged  in  the  hands  of
one  man  than  of  a  multitude.  But  many  perfons
think,  otherwife  i  and  fu^-h  ought  to  confider  that,
if  this  would  be  a  calamity,  the  condition  of  the
Colonies  mud"  be  d(?plorable. "  A  govern-
ment by  King,  Lords,  and  Commons,  (it  has
been  faid)  is  the  perfection  of  government;"  and
fo  it  is,  when  the  Commons  are  a  juft  rcpre-
fentation  of  the  people  ;  and  when  alfo,  it  is  n3t
extended  to  any  diftant  people,  or  communities,
not  reprefented.  But  if  this  is  the  bejiy  a  go-
vernment by  a  king  only  muft  be  the  worjl  j  and
every  claim  implying  a  right  to  eftablifh  fuch
a  government  among  any  people  muft  be  unjull:

and  cruel. It  is  felf-evidenr,  that  by  claiming

a  right  to  alter  the  conftitutions  of  the  Colonies,
according  to  our  difcretion,  we  chim  this  power  :
And  it  is  a  power  tha:  we  have  thought  ftt  to  ex-
erclfe  in  o'/te  of  our  Colonies  •,  and  that  we  have  at-
tempted to  exercife  in  another. Canada^  ac-
cording to  the  late  extenfion  of  its  limits,  is  4
country  almofl:  as  large  as  half  Europe-,  and  it  m:.7
pofTibly  come  in  time  to  be  filled  with  Britilh  fub-
jedls. The  ^lebec  a<5l  makes  the  king  of  Great

Britain  a  defpot  over  all  that  country. In  the

Province  of  M^Jfachiifet's  Bay  the  fame  thing  has
been  attempted  and  begun.

3  The


[ 47 ]

The  a6l  for  better  regulating  their  government,
pafTcd  at  the  fame  time  with  the  ^ebec  aft,  gives
the  king  the  right  of  appointing,  and  removing  at
his  pleafure,  the  members  of  one  part  of  the  legifla-
ture;  alters  themodeofchufing  juries,  on  purpofe
to  brinp;  it  more  under  the  influence  of  the  kin^  •
and  takes  away  from  the  province  the  power  of
calling  any meetings  of  the  people without  the

king's  confent.  [a) Thejudges,  likewife,  have

been  made  dependent  on  the  king,  for  their  nomi-
nation and  pay,  and  continuance  in  office. — If  all
this  is  no  more  than  we  have  a  right  to  do  -,  may
we  not  go  on  to  abolifh  the  houfe  of  reprefenta-
tives,  to  deftroy  all  trials  by  juries,  and  to  give  up
the  province  abfolutely  and  totally  to  the  will  of

the  king  ? May  we  not  even  eftablifh  popery

in  the  province,  as  has  been  lately  done  in  Canada,
leaving  the  fupport  of  proteftantifm  to  the  king's
difcretion  ? — Can  there  be  any  Englilhman  who,
were  it  his  own  cafe,  would  not  fooner  lofe  his
heart's  blood  than  yield  to  claims  lb  pregnant  with
evils,  and  deftru6live  to  every  thing  that  can  di-
ftinguifli  a  Freeman  from  a  Slave  ?

I  will  take  this  opportunity  to  add,  that  what  I
have  now  faid,  fuggefts  a  confideration  that  de-
monftrates,  on  how  different  a  footing  the  Colonies
are  with  refpeft  to  our  government,  from  particu-
lar bodies  of  men  within  the  kingdom,  who  hap-

(«) Seepage  22.

pen


[ 43 ]

pen  not  to  be  reprefcnred.  Here,  it  is  impofTible
that  the  reprefcnted  pare  fhould  fubjeifl  the  unre-
prefcnted  part  to  arbitrary  power,  without  in-
cluding thenifelves.  But  in  the  Colonics  it  is  }ioi
impolTible. We  know  that  it  has  been  done.

SECT. II.

Whether  the  War  'with  America  is  jujlified  by
the  Pri?2ciples  of  the  ConJlitiiiio?2.

T  Have  propofed,  in  the  next  place,  to  examine
the  war  with  the  Colonies  by  the  principlt-s  ot
the  conftitution.  —  I  know,  that  it  is  comnion  to
fay  that  we  are  now  maintaining  the  conllitution  irk
America.  If  this  means  that  we  are  endeavouring
to  eftablifli  our  own  conftitution  of  government
there;  it  is  by  no  means  true  •,  nor,  were  it  true^
would  it  be  right.  They  have  chartered  govern-
ments of  their  own,  with  wiiich  they  are  plealed  •,.
and  which,  if  any  power  on  earth  may  change
without  their  content,  that  pov/er  may  likewife,  i(
it  thinks  proper,  deliver  them  over  to  the  Cirand

Seignior. Suppofe  the  Colonies  ot  France  and

Spain  had,  by  compacts,  enjoyed  for  near  a  cen-
tury and  a  half,  free  governments  open  to  all  the
world,  and  under  which  they  had  grown  and
flourilhed  •,  what  fliould  we  think  of  thofe  iTTng-
doms,  were  they  to  attempt  to  deftroy  their  go-
vernments, and  to  force  upon  them  their  own
mode of  government  ?  Should  we  not  applaud

any


[ 49 ]

any  zeal  they  difcovered  in  repelling  fuch  an  in-*

jury  ? But  the truth is,  in the  prefent  in-

ftance,  that  we  are  not  maintaining  but  violating
our  own  conftitution  in  America,  The  eflence  of
our  conftitution  confifts  in  its  independency.
There  is  in  this  cafe  no  difference  between  yz^(^Vc-
tion  and  annihilation.  Did,  therefore,  the  Colonies
poffefs  governments  perfe(ftly  the  fame  with  ours,
the  attempt  to  fubjed  them  to  ours  would  be  an
attempt  to  ruin  them.  A  ^ree  government  lofes
its  nature  from  the  m6ment*t  becomes  liable  to  be
commanded  or  altered  by  any  fuperior  power.

But  I  intended  here  principally  to  make  the  fol-
lowing obfervation.

The  fundamental  prii^iple  of  our  government
IS,  "  The  right  of  a  people  to  give  and  grant  their

"  own money.". Itf  s  of  no  confequence,  in

this  cafe,  whether  we  enjoy  this  right  in  a  proper
manner  or  not.  Moft  certainly  we  do  not.  It  is,
however,  the  j?r/«a/>/^  on  which  our  government,
as  2, free  government,  is  founded.  The  fpirit  of
the  conftitution  gives  it  us  ;  and,  however  imper-
fedlly  enjoyed,  we  glory  in  it  as  our  firft  and
greateft  bleffing.  It  was  an  attempt  to  encroach
upon  this  right,  in  a  trifling  inftance,  that  produc-
ed the  civil  war  in  the  reign  oi Charles  the  Firft. —
Ought  not  our  brethren  in  America  to  enjoy  this
right  as  well  as  ourfelves  ?  Do  the  principles  of
the  conftitution  give  it  us>  but  deny it  to  them  ?

E  Or


[ 5° J

Or  can  we,  with  any  decency,  pretend  that  when
we  give  to  the  king  ibeir  money,  we  give  him  our

own?  {a) What  difference  does  it  make,  that

in  the  time  of  Charles  the  Firft  the  attempt  to  take
away  this  right  was  made  by  one  man  :  but  that,  in
the  cafe  of  America,  it  is  made  by  a  body  of  men  ?
In  a  word.  This  is  a  war  undertaken  not  only
againll  the  principles  of  our  own  conftitution  ;  but
on  purpolc  to  deftroy  other  fimilar  conflicutions  in
America  \  and  to  f^^bftitute  in  their  room  a  mili-
tary force.  See  page^.3,  24. It  is,  therefore,  a

grofs  and  flagrant  violation  of  the  conftitution.

S E diT. III.

Of  the  Policy  of  the^JVar  uDith  America.

IN  writing  the  prefent^eclion,  1  have  entered
upon  a  fubjecfb  of  the  laft  importance,  on  which
much  has  been  faid  by  other  writers  with  great
force,  and  in  the  ableft  manner  (h). But  I  am  not

[a)  The  author  of  Taxatien  710  Tyranny  will  undoubtedly  af-

fert  this without  hefitation,  tor  in  page  6y  he  compares  our

prefent  fitaation  with  refpecl  to  the  Colonies  to  that  of  the  an-

^x^TitSi^ihianSy who, upon  returning  from  a  war, ylwW /Z-t-*-

felijesjlmt  oict  of  their  cv-ii  Hot'.',  Es  hy  their  Slavls.

{b)  See  particularly,  a  fpeech  intended  to  have  been  fpoken
rm  the  bill  for  altering  the  Charter  of  the  Colony  of  MafTachu-
fct's  Bay  ;  the  Conjideraticns  on  the  Meajures  carrying  on  ivith
re/peSi  to  the  Britijh  Colonics ;  the  7'n'jo  Appeals  to  the  fujiice  and
Interejls  of  the  People  \  and  the  /;/r;/,'fr  Examination,  juft  pub-
litlied,  ofourprtjint  American  Minfurti,  by  the  Author  of  the
Con fi derations, &c.

7  willin-g


[ S' ]

billing  to  omit  any  topic  which  I  think  of  great
fconlequence,  merely  becaufe  it  has  already  been
difcufled  :  And,  with  relpetft  to  this  in  particular,
it  will,  I  believe,  be  found  that  fome  of  the  obfer-
vations  on  which  I  fhall  infift,  have  not  been  fufE-
ciently  attended  to.

The  obje(5l  of  this  war  has  been  often  enough
declared  to  be  "  maintaining  the  fupremacy  of  this
'*  country  over  the  colonies."  i  have  already  en-
quired how  far  reafon  and  juftice,  the  principles  of
Liberty,  and  the  rights  of  humanity,  entitle  us  to
this  fupremacy.  Setting  afide,  therefore,  now
all  confiderations  of  this  kind,  I  would  obferve,
that  this  fupremacy  is  to  be  maintained,  either
merely  fir  its  oiJOn  fake^  or  for  the  fake  of  fome
public  intereft  connected  with  it  and  dependent
upon.it.-— — If  for  i/s  own  fake  •,  the  only  objetft
of  the  war  is  the  extenfion  of  dominion-,  and  its
only  motive  is  the  luft  of  power. All  govern-
ment, even  within  a  (late,  becomes  tyrannical,-
as  far  as  it  is  a  needlefs  and  wanton  exercife
of  power ;  or  is  carried  farther  than  is  abfolutely
ncceffary  to  preferVe  the  peace  and  to  fecurs
the  fafety  of  the  (late.  This  is  what  an  excel-
lent Writer calls GOVERNING TOO MUCH}

and its  effedt  muft always be, weakening go-

Vgrnment  by  rendering  it contemptible  and  odt-

©us, — Nothing  can  be  of  mora  importance,  in  go-

E  2  verning


[ 52 ]

verningdirtant  provinces  and  adjiiding  the  clafh-
ing  incerefts  of  diffcrenc  focieties,  than  attention  to
this  remark.  In  thefe  circumftances  it  is  particu-
larly necefiary  to  make  a  fparing  ufe  of  power,  in

order  to  preferve  power. Happy  would  it  have

been  for  Greai  Briiatny  had  this  been  remembered
by  thofe  who  have  lately  conduded  its  affairs.
But  our  policy  has  been  of  another  kind.  At  the
period  when  our  authority  (hould  have  been  moil
concealed,  it  has  been  brought  moll  in  view  ;
and,  by  a  progrcffion  of  violent  roeaflires,  every
one  of  which  has  increaied  diftrefs,  we  have  given
the  world  reafon  to  conclude,  that  we  are  acquaint-
ed with  no  other  method  of  governing  than  hy
force. — What  a  ihocking  miftake  ? — If  our  object
is  power,  we  fhould  have  known  better  how  to  ufe
it ;  and  our  rulers  fliould  have  confidered,  that
freemen  will  always  revolt  at  the  fight  of  a  naked
fword  •,  and  that  the  complicated  ali'airs  of  a  great
kingdom,  holding  in  fuborqination  to  it  a  multi-
tude of  diftant  communities,  all  jealous  of  their
rights,  and  warmed  with  fpirirs  as  high  as  our  own,
require  not  only  the  moll  Ikilful,  but  the  mod  cau-
tious and  tender  management.  The  confcquences
of  a  different  management  we  are  now  feeling.
We  fee  ourfelves  driven  among  rocks,  and  in  dan-
ger of  being  loll.

There  are  the  following  reafons  which  feem  to

make  it  too  probable,  that  the  prefent  conteft  with

7  AmerUa


[ 53 ]

America  is  a  conteft  for  power  only  (^),  abftraded
from  all  the  advantages  connefted  with  it.

ifi.  There  is  a  love  of  power  inherent  in
human  nature  \  and  it  cannot  be  uncharit-
able to  fuppofe  that  the  nation  in  general,  and
the  cabinet  in  particular,  are  too  likely  to  be  influ-
enced by  it.  What  can  be  more  flattering  than  to
look  acrofs  the  Atlantic^  and  to  fee  in  the  bound-
lefs  continent  of  America^  increafing  Millions
whom  we  have  a  right  to  order  as  we  pleafe,  who
hold  their  property  at  our  difpofal,  and  who  have
no  other  law  than  our  will.  With  what  compla-
cency have*  we  been  ufcd  to  talk  of  them  as  our

fubjeds  ? Is  it  not  the  interruption  they  now

give  to  this  pleafure  :  Is  it  not  the  o^vpofition  they
make  to  our  pride;  and  not  any  injury  they  have
done  us,  that  is  the  fecret  fpringofourprefent  ani-
mofity  againft  them  ?- 1  wifli  all  in  this  king-
dom would  examine  themfclves  carefully  on  this
point.  Perhaps,  they  might  find,  that  they  have
not  known  what  fpirit  they  are  of. — Perhaps,  they
would  become  fenfible,  that  it  was  a  fpirit  of  c'.omi-
nation,  more  than  a  regard  to  the  true  intercft  of

{a)  I  have  heard  it  faid  by  a  perfon  in  one  of  the  firft  de-
partments of  the  ilate,  that  the  prefent  contell  is  for  Do-
minion on  the  fide  of  the  Colonies,  as  well  as  on  ours :  And
fo  it  is,  indeed ;  but  with  this  efiential  difference.  We  are
Jlruggling  for  dominion  over  othkrs.  ^T'fy  are  llruggling
for  SpLF-dominion  ;  The  nobleft  ot  all  bleflings.

E  3  this


[ 54 ]
this  country,  that  lately  ledib  many  of  them,  with
fnch  favage  folly,  to  addrefs  the  throne for  the
(laughter  of  their  brethren  in  America^  if  they  will
not  fubmit  to  them  •,  and  to  make  offers  of  their

lives  and  fortunes  for  that  purpole. Indeed,  I

am  perfuaded,  that,  were  pride  and  the  lull  of  do-
minion exterminated  from  every  heart  among  us,
and  the  humility  of  Chriftians  infufed  in  their
roomi,  this  quarrel  would  be  Toon  ended.

2dly.  Another  reafon  for  believing  that  this  is  a
conteft  for  power  only  is,  that  our  minifters  have
frequently  declared,  that  their  objefl  is  not  to  draw
a  revenue  from  America  •,  and  that  many  of  thofe
who  are  warmed  for  continuing  it,  reprefent  the
American  trade  as  of  no  great  confequence.

But  what  deferves  particular  confideration  here
is,  that  this  is  a  contell:  from  which  no  advan-
tages can  pofTibly  be  derived. Not  a  revenue  :

For  the  provinces  of  America,  when  dcfolated,
vvill  afford  no  revenue  ■,  or  if  they  (hould,  the  ex-
pence  of  fubduing  them  and  keeping  them  in  fub-

jeclion  will  nuich  exceed  that  revenue. Not

any  of  the  advantages  of  trade  :  h or  it  is  a  folly,
next  to  insanity,  to  think  trade  can  be  promoted
by  impoveriOiing  our  cuffomers,  and  fixing  in
their  m.inds  an  everlailing  abhorrence  of  us. —
It  remains,  therefore,  that  this  war can have  no

other  obje6l  than  the  extenfion  of  power. Mi-

ferable


[ 5S 'i

ferable  refle6lion  ! To  flieath  our  fwordsin  the

bowels  of  our  brethren,  and  fpread  mifery  and
ruin  among  a  happy  people,  for  no  other  end
than  to  oblige  them  to  acknowledge  our  fupre-
macy.  How  horrid  ! — This  is  the  curfed  ambition
that  led  a  C^far  and  an  Alexander^  and  many  other
mad  conquerors,  to  attack  peaceful  communities,
and  to  lay  wafte  the  earth.

But  a  worfe  principle  than  even  this,  influences
fome  among  us.  Pride  and  the  love  of  dominion
are  principles  hateful  enough  ;  but  blind  refent-
ment  and  the  defire  of  revenge  are  infernal  princi-
ples :  And  thefe,  I  am  afraid,  have  no  fmall  Ihare
at  prefent  in  guiding  our  public  condud.— —
One  cannot  help  indeed  being  aftonifhed  at  the
virulence,  with  which  fome  fpeak  on  the  prefent

occafion  againft  the  Colonies. For,  what  have

they  done  ? — Have  they  crofled  the  ocean  and
invaded  us  ?  Have  they  attempted  to  take  from
us  the  fruits  of  our  labour,  and  to  overturn  that
form  of  government  which  we  hold  fo  facred  } —
This cannot be  pretended.  —  On  the  contrary.

This  is  what  we  have  done  to  them. We  have

tranfported  ourfelves  to  their  peaceful  retreats,
and  employed  our  fleets  and  armies  to  flop  up
their  ports,  to  deftroy  their  commerce,  to  feizc
their  eff^eds,  and  to  burn  their'towns.  Would  we
but  let  them  alone,  and  fuffer  them  to  enjoy  in
fffurity  their  property  and  governments,  inftead

E  4  Qf


[ S6 ]

of  difturbing  us,  they  would  thank  and  blefs  us.
And  yet  it  is  We  who  imagine  ourfelves  ill-ufed.
■  The  truth  is,  we  expeded  to  find  them
a  cowardly  rabble  who  would  lie  quietly  at  our
feet;  and  they  have  difappolnted  us.  They  have
rifen  in  their  own  defence,  and  repelled  force  by
force.  They  deny  the  plentitude  of  our  power
over  them  •, and  infill  upon  being  treated  as  free

communities. It  is  this  that  has  provoked

\is  •, and  kindled  our  governors  into  rage.

I  hope  1  fhall  not  here  be  underllood  to  inti-
mate, that  all  who  promote  this  war  are  afluated
by  thefe  principles.  Some,  I  doubt  not,  are  in-
fluenced by  no  other  principle,  than  a  regard  to
what  they  think  the  juft  authority  of  this  country
over  its  colonies,  and  to  the  unity  and  indivifibi-
lity  of  the  Britifli  Empire.  I  wifh  fuch  could  be
engaged  to  enter  tho-oughly  into  the  enquiry,
which  has  been  the  fubjeft  of  the  firft  part  of  this
pamphlet ;  and  to  confider,  particularly,  how  dif-
ferent athing  maintaining  the  authority  of  govern-
ment witbin  a  ftate  is  from  maintaining  the  autho-
rity of  one  people  over  another,  already  happy  in
the  enjoyment  of  a  government  of  their  own.  I
wifli  farther  they  would  confider,  that  the  defireof
maintaining  authority  is  warrantable,  only  as  far  as
it  is  the  means  of  promoting  fome  end,  and  doing
fome  good  -,  and  that,  before  we  refolve  to  fpread
famine  and  fire  through  a  country  in  order  to  make

it


[ 57 ]
it  acknowledge  our  authority,  we  ought  to  be  af-
fured  that  great  advantages will  arife  not  only  to
ourfelves,  but  to  the  country  we  wifh  to  conquer.

That  from  the  prefent  contcft  no  advantage

to  ourfelves  can  arife,  has  been  already  (hewn,  and
will  prefently  be  fhewn  more  at  large.-  That  no
advantage  to  the  Colonies  can  arife  from  it,  need
not,  1  hope,  be  fhewn.  It  has  however  been  af-
ferted,  that  even  their  good  is  intended  by  this
war.  Many  of  us  are  perfuaded,  that  they  will  be
much  happier  under  our  government,  than  under
any  government  of  their  own  •,  and  that  their  li-
berties will  be  fafer  when  htld for  them  by  us»

than  when  trufted  in  their  own  hands. How

kind  is  it  thus  to  take  upon  us  the  trouble  of
judging  for  them  what  is  mofl:  for  their  happinefs  ?
Nothing  can  be  kinder  except  the  refolution  we
have  formed  to  exterminate  them,  if  they  will  not
fubmit  to  our  judgment.- What  (Irange  lan-
guage have  I  fometimes  heard  ?  By  an  armed
force  we  are  now  endeavouring  to  deftroy  the  laws
and  governments  of  America ;  and  yet  I  have
heard  itfaid,  that  we  are  endeavouring  to  fupport
law  and  government  there.  We  are  infifting  upon
our  right  to  leavy  contributions  upon  them  ;  and
to  maintain  this  right,  we  are  bringing  upon  them
all  the  miferies  a  people  can  endure  \  and  yet  it  is
afierted,  that  we  mean  nothing  but  their  fecurity
and  happinefs.

But


[ S8 }

But  I  have  wandered  a  little  from  the  point  I  in*
tended  principally  to  infift  upon  in  this  fc6tion,
which  is,  *'  the  folly,  in  refpeft  cf  policy,  of  the
"  meafures  which  have  brought  on  this  contell »
'^  and  its  pernicious  and  fatal  tendency."

The  following  obfervations  will,  I  believe,
abundantly  prove  this.

iJt.  There  are  points  which  are  likely  always  to
fuffcr  by  difcuffion.  Of  this  kind  are  mod  points
of  authority  and  prerogative  •,  and  the  bed  policy  is
to  avoid,  as  much  as  polTible,  giving  any  occafioii
for  calling  them  into  queftion,

I'he  Colonies  were  at  the  beginning  of  this  reign
in  the  habit  of  acknov;ledging  our  authority,  and
of  allowing  us  as  much  power  over  them  as  our
intereft  required  •,  and  more,  in  fome  inftances,
than  we  could  reafonably  claim.  This  habit  they
would  have  retained  :  and  had  we,  inftead  of  im-
poling  new  burdens  upon  them,  and  increafing
their  reftraints,  ftudied  to  promote  their  com-
merce, and  to  grant  them  new  indulgences,  they
would  have  been  ahvays  growing  more  at-tached  to
us.  Luxury,  and,  together  \\\i\\  it,  their  depen-
dence upon  us,  and  our  inftuence  [a)  in  their  af-
femblies,  would  have  increafed,  till  in  time  per-
haps they  would  have become  as  corrupt  as  our-

{a)  This  has  been  our  policy  with  refpecl  to  the  people  of
Ireland;  and  the  confequence  is,  that  we  now  fee  their  parli^r
inent  as  obedient  as  we  can  willi.

fclves  3,


[ 59 1

ielves ;  and  we  might  have  fucceeded  to  our  wi(he$

:n  eftablifhing  our  authority  over  them. But,

happily  for  them,  we  have  chofen  a  different  courfe.
3y  exertions  of  authority  which  have  alarmed  them,
they  have  been  put  upon  examining  into  the
grounds  of  all  our  claims,  and  forced  to  give  up
their  luxuries,  and  tofeek  all  their  refources  with-
in themfelves :  And  the  ifllie  is  likely  to  prove
the  lofs  of  all  our  authority  over  them,  and  of  all
the  advantages  conneiled  with  it.  So  little  do
men  in  power  fometimes  know  how  to  preferve
power-,  and  fo  remarkably  does  the  defire  of  ex-
tending dominion  fometimes  dellroy  it.- Man-
kind are  naturally  difpofed  to  continue  in  fubjec-
tion  to  that  mode  of  government,  be  it  what  it
will,  under  which  they  have  been  born  and  educat-
ed. Nothing  roufes  them  into  refiftance  but  grofs
abufcs,  or  fome  particular  opprclTions  out  of  the
road  to  which  they  have  been  ufed.  And  he  who
will  examine  the  hiftory  of  the  world  will  find,
there  has  generally  been  more  reafon  for  complain-
ing that  they  have  been  too  patient,  than  that  they
have  been  turbulent  and  rebellious.

Our  governors,  ever  fince  I  can  remember,  have
been  jealous  that  the  Colonies,  fome  rime  orotlier,
would  throvv  off  their  dependence.  This  jealoufy
>vas  not  founded  on  any  of  their  a6ls  or  decla-
rations. They  have  always,  while  at  peace  with
us,  diiclaimed any  fuch  defign  j and they  have

continued


[ 6o ]

continued  to  difclaim  it  lince  they  have  been  at
war  with  us.  I  have  reafon,  indeed,  to  believe,
that  independency  is,  even  at  this  moment,  ge-
nerally dreaded  among  them  as  a  calamity  to  which
they  are  in  danger  of  being  driven,  in  order  to
avoid  a  greater.— ——The  jcaloufy  I  have  mention-
ed, was,  however,  natural  •,  and  betrayed  a  fecret
opinion,  that  the  fubjedbion  in  which  they  were
lield  was  more  than  we  could  expetfl  them  always
to  endure.  In  fuch  circumftances,  all  pofTible
care  (hould  have  been  taken  to  give  them  no  rea-
fon for  difcontent  •,  and  to  prelerve  them  in  fub-
jetftion,  by  keeping  in  that  line  of  conducl  to  which
cuftom  had  reconciled  them,  or  at  lead  never  de-
viating from  it,  except  with  great  caution  j  and
particularly,  by  avoiding  all  direft  attacks  on  their
property  and  legiflations.  Had  we  done  this,  the
different  interefts  of  fo  many  dates  fcattered  over  a
vaft  continent,  pined  to  our  own  prudence  and
moderation,  would  have  enabled us to  maintain

them  m  dependence  for  ages  to  come. But  ^n-

ftead of  this,  how  have we  acfted  ? It  is in-

truth  too  evident,  that  our  whole  conducft,  inftead
of  being  directed  by  that  found  policy  and  fore-
fi^ht  which  in  fuch  circumftances  were  ablblutely
neceflary,  has  been  nothing  (to  fay  the  beft-  of  it)
but  a  I'eries  of  the  blindeft  rigour  followed  by  re-
traftation  •,  of  violence  followed  by  concefllon  ;
of  miftake,  weakncfe  and  inconfiftency. A  re-
cital


[ 6i ]

cicpl  of  a  few  fa6ls,  within  every  body's  recol-
ledion,  will  fully  prove  this.

In  the  6th  of  George  the  Second^  an  afl  was
paOed  for  impofing  certain  duties  on  all  foreign
fpirits,  molaires  and  fugars  imported  into  the  plan-
tations. In  this  afl,  the  duties  impofed  are  faidto
be  GIVEN  and  granted  by  the  Parliament  to  the
King  ;  and  this  is  the  firft  American  acl  in  which
thefe  words  have  been  uied.  But  notwithftanding
this,  as  the  aft  had  the  appearance  of  being  only
a  regulation  of  trade,  the  colonies  fubmitted  to
it; and  a  fmall  diredt  revenue  was  drawn  by  it

from  them. In  the  4th  of  the  prefent  reign,

many  alterations  were  made  in  this  adl:,  with
the  declared  purpofe  of  making  provifion  for
raifing  a  revenue  in  America.  This  alarmed  the
Colonies  •,  and  produced  difcontents  and  remon-
ftrances,  which  might  have  convinced  our  rulers
this  was  tender  ground,  on  which  it  became  them

to  tread  very  gently. There  is, hov/evcr, no

realbn  to  doubt  but  in  time  they  would  have
funk  into  a  quiet  fubmifTion  to  this  revenue  aft,
as  being  at  word  only  the  exercife  of  a  power
which  then  they  feem  not  to  have  thought  much
of  conteftingi I  mean,  the  power  of  taxing  them

EXTERNALLY. But before they had time to

cool,  a  worfe  provocation was  given  them  ; and
the  Stamp-Act  was  palled. This  being  an  at-
tempt to  tax  them  internally  j  and  a  dire<5t  at-
tack


r  62  1

tack  on  their  property,  by  a  power  which  would
not  fufier  itfelf  to  be  queftioncd -,  which  eafcd  it-
Jelf  by  loading  them\  and  to  which  it  was  im-
polTible  to  fix  any  bounds  \  they  were  thrown  at
once,  from  one  end  of  the  continent  to  the  oiher^
into  refiftance  and  rage. Government,  dread-
ing the  confequences,  gave  way  -,  and  the  Par-
liament (upon  a  change  of  miniftry)  repealed
the  Stamp-J^^  without  requiring  from  them
any  recognition  of  its  authority,  or  doing  any
more  to  preferve  its  dignity,  than  alTerting,  by
the  declaratory  law,  that  it  was  poffeffed  of  full
power  and  authority  to  make  laws  to  bind  them

in  all  cafes  whatever. Upon  this,  peace  was

reftored  •,  and,  had  no  farther  arrempts  of  the
fame  kind  been  made,  they  w^ould  undoubt-
edly have  fuffercd  us  (as  the  people  of  Ireland
have  done)  to  enjoy  quietly  our  declaratory  law.
They  would  have  recovered  iheir  former  habits
of  fubjeclion  j  and  our  connexion  with  them  might
have  continued  an  increafing  fource  of  our  wealth

and glory. But the  fpirit  of  defpotifm  and

avarice,  always  blind  and  reftlefs,  loon  broke
forth  again.  The  fchcme  for  drawing  a  revenue
from  America^  by  parliamentary  taxation,  was
refumed  \  and  in  a  little  more  than  a  year  after
the  repeal  of  the  Stamp- Al^^  when  all  was  peace.
a  third  aCC  was  pafTed,  impofing  duties  payable  in
/imcrica  on  tea,  paper,  glafs,  painters  colours,  &c-

This,


[ 63 ]

This,  as  might  have  been  expefted,  revived

all  the  former  heats;  and  the  Empire  was  a  fecond
time  threatened  with  the  mofb  dangerous  com.mo-

tions. Government receded again  •, and the

Parliament  (under  another  change  of  minifl:ry)
repealed  all  the  obnoxioLis  duties,  except  that
upon  tea.  This  exception  was  made  in  order
to  maintain  a  (hew  of  dignity.  But  it  was,  in
reality,  facrificing  fafety  to  pride;  and  leaving
a  fplinrer  in  the  wound  to  produce  a  gangrene.

For  Ibme  time,  however,  this  relaxation  an-

fwcred  its  intended  purpofes.  Our  commercial
intercourfe  with  the  Colonies  was  again  reco-
vered ;  and  they  avoided  nothing  but  that  tea
which  we  had  excepted  in  our  repeal.  In  this
ftate  would  things  have  remained,  and  even  tea
would  perhaps  in  time  have  been  gradually  ad-
mitted, had  not  the  evil  genius  of  Britabi  ftepped
forth  once  more  to  embroil  the  Empire.

The  Eaji  India  company  having  fallen  under
difficulties,  partly  in  confequence  of  the  lofs  of  the
American  market  for  tea,  a  fcheme  was  formed  for
afTifting  them  by  an  attempt  to  recover  that  mar-
ket. With  this  view  an  ad  was  pafled  to  enable
them  to  export  their  tea  to  America  free  of  all  du-
ties here,  and  fubjetft  only  to  3d.  per  pound  duty,
payable  in  America.  By  this  expedient  they  were
enabled  to  offer  it  at  a  low  price  -,  and  it  was
expected  the  confequence  would  prove  that  the

Colonies


[ 64 ]

Colonies  would  be  tempted  by  it;  a  precedent
gained  for  taxing  them,  and  at  the  fame  time  the
company  relieved.  Ships  were,  therefore,  fitted
out-,  and  large  cargoes  fent.  The  fnarc  was  too
grofs  to  efcape  the  notice  of  the  Colonies.  They
faw  it,  and  fpurned  at  it.  They  refuted  to  admit
the  tea-,  and  at  Boston^  fome  perfons  in  dilguife

buried  it  in  the  fea. Had  our  governors  in  this

cafe  fatisfied  themlelves  with  requiring  a  compenfa-
tion  from  the  province'for  the  damage  done,  there  is
no  doubt  but  it  would  have  been  granted.  Or
had  they  proceeded  no  farther  in  the  infliflion  of
punidiment,  than  flopping  up  the  port  and  deftroy-
ing  the  trade  of  Bofton,  till  compenfation  was
made,  the  province  might  pofllbly  hav€  fubmit-
ted,  and  a  fufficient  faving  would  have  been  gain-
ed for  the  honour  of  the  nation.  But  having  hi-
therto proceeded  without  wifdom,  they  obferved
now  no  bounds  in  their  refentment.  To  the  Bol-
ton port  bill  was  added  a  bill'v/hich  deftroyed  the
chartered  government  of  the  province  ;  a  bill
which  withdrew  from  the  jurifdiiflion  of  the  pro-
vince, perfons  who  in  particular  cafes  fliould  com-
mit murder ;  and  the  ^lebec  bill.  At  the  fame
time  a  flrong  body  of  troops  was  Rationed  at  Brjlon
to  enforce  obedience  to  thefe  bills.

All  who  knew  any  thing  of  the  temper  of  the
Colonics  faw  that  the  cffed  of  all  this  fudden  accu-
mulation


[ 65 ]

mulation  of  vengeance,  would  probably  be  not  in-
timidating but  exafperaring  them,  and  dnv:r.g
them  into  a  general  revolt.  But  our  minifters  had
different  appreiienfions.  They  believed  that  the
maleconrents  in  the  Colony  of  Majfachufett\  were
a  fmall  party,  headed  by  a  few  fadious  men ;
that  the  majority  of  the  people  would  take  the
fide  of  government,  as  foon  as  they  faw  a  force
among  them  capable  of  fupporting  them  •,  that,  ac
worft,  the  Colonies  in  general  would  never  make
a  common  caufe  with  this  province;  and  that,
the  ifTue  would  prove,  in a  few months,  order,

tranquility  and  fubmiflion. Every  one  of  thefe

apprchenfions  was  falfified  by  the  events  that  fol-
lowed .

When  the  bills  I  have  mentioned  came  to  be
carried  into  execution,  the  whole  Province  was
thrown  into  confufion.  Their  courts  of  juftice
were  fiiut  up,  and  all  government  was  diflblvcd.
The  commander  in  chief  found  it  neceflary  to  for-
tify himfelf  in  Boston  -,  and  the  other  Colonies
immediately  refolved  to  make  a  common  Caufc
with  this  Colony.

So  ftrangely  mifinformcd  were  our  minifters,
that  this  was  all  afurprife  upon  them.  They  took,
fright,  therefore;  and  once  more  made  an  effort
to  retreat  •,  but  indeed  the  moft  ungracious  one
that  can  well  be  imagined.  A  propofal  was  fent
lo  the  Colonies,  called  Conciliatory  >  and  the  fub-
F  fiance


[ 66 ]
ftance  of  which  was, that  if  any  of  them  would
raik  fuch  funis  as  fhould  be  demanded  of  them
by  taxing  thcnilelves, the  Parliament  would  for-
bear to  tax  them. It  will  be  karcely  believed,

hereafter,  that  fuch  a  propolal  could  be  thought
conciliatory.  It  was  only  telling  them  j  *'  If
*'  you  will  tax  yourfelves ev  our  order,  we  will

*'  fave  ourfelves  the  trouble  of  taxing you."

They  received  the  propofal  as  an  infult ;  and  re-
je(5led  it  with  difdain.

Ac  the  time  this  conceiTion  v/as  tranfmitted  to
America^  open  hoftilities  were  not  begun.  In  the
fword  our  minifters  thought  they  had  ftill  a  re-
fource  which  would  immediately  fettle  all  difputes.
They  confidered  the  people  of  New-England  as
nothing  but  a  mob,  who  would  be  foon  routed
and  forced  into  obedience.  It  was  even  believed,
that  a  few  thoufands  of  our  army  might  march
through  all  America^  and  make  all  quiet  where-
ever  they  went.  Under  this  conviction  our  mi-
nifters did  not  dread  urging  the  Province  of  Maf-
fachufeit's  Bay  into  rebellion,  by  ordering  the  army
to  feize  thc-ir  flores,  and  to  take  up  fome  of  their

leading  men. The attempt was made.

The  people  fled  immediately  to  arms,  and  re-
pelled the  attack. A  confiderable  part  of  the

•flower  of  the  Britifli  army has been  deftroyed.

Some  of  our  belt  Generals, and the  braveft

of  our  troops,  are now difgracefuUy  and mif-

erably


[ 6; ]

erably  imprifoned  at  Bojion. A  horrid  civil  war

is  commenced  j- And  the  Empire  is  diftraclcd

and  convLilfed.

Can  it  be  pofTible  to  think  with  patience  of  the
policy  that  has  brought  us  into  thefe  circum-
ftanccs  ?  Did  ever  Heaven  punifh  the  vices  of
a  people  more  feverely  by  darkening  their  coun-
fels  ?  How  great  would  be  our  happinefs  could
we  now  recal  former  times,  and  return  to  the  po-
licy of  the  lad  reigns  ? — But  thofe  times  are  gone.

1  will,  however,  beg  leave  for  a  few  moments

to  look  back  to  them  ;  and  to  compare  the  ground
we  have  left  with  that  on  which  we  find  ourfclves.
This  muft  be  done  with  deep  regret ;  but  it  forms
a  necefTary  part  of  rny  pre  fen  t  defign.

In  thofe  times  our  Colonies,  foregoing  every  ad-
vantage which  they  might  derive  from  trading  with
foreign  nations,  confented  to  fend  only  to  us  what-
ever it  was  for  our  intereftto  receive  from  them;  and
to  receive  only  from  us  whatever  it  was  for  our  in-
tereft  to  fend  to  them.  They  gave  up  the  power
of  making  fumptuary  laws,  and  expofed  them-
fdves  to  all  the  evils  of  an  increafing  and  waftefiil
luxury,  becaufe  we  were  benefited  by  vending
among  them  the  materials  of  it.  The  iron  with
which  providence  had  bleficd  their  country,  they
were  required  by  laws,  in  which  they  acquiefced,
to tranfport hither,  that  our people might  be

F  2  maintained


f 68 ]

maintained  by  working  it  for  them  into  nails,
ploughs,  axes,  .&:c.  And,  in  fcvcral  inftances,
even  one  Colony  vvas  not  allowed  to  lupply  any
neighbourin^x  Colonies  with  commodities,  which

could  be  conveyed  to  them  from  hence. But

they  yielded  much  farther.  They  conlented
that  we  fhould  have  the  appointment  of  one
branch  of  their  legiQature.  By  recognizing  as
their  King,  a  King  refident  among  us  and  under
our  influence,  they  gave  us  a  negative  on  all
their  laws.  By  allowing  an  appeal  to  us  in  their
civil  difputes,  they  gave  Us  likewife  the  ultimate
determination  of  all  civil  caufes  among  them.
•— — In  fhort.  They  allowed  us  every  power  we
could  defire,  except  that  of  taxing  them,  and  in-
terfering in  their  internal  legidations  :  And  they
had  admitted  precedents  which,  even  in  th^-fe  in-
ftances, gave  us  no  inconfiderable  authority  over
them.  By  purchafing  our  goods  they  paid  our
taxes  i  and,  by  allowing  us  to  regulate  their  trade
in  any  manner  we  thought  moft  for  our  advan-
tage, they  enriched  our  merchants,  and  helped
us  to  bear  our  growing  burdens.  They  fou2;ht
our  battles  with  us.  They  gloried  in  their  re-
lation to  us.  All  their  gains  centered  among  us-,
and  they  always  fpoke  of  this  country  and  looked
to  it  as  their  home.

Such WAS  the  ftatc  of  things. What  is  it

now  ?

Not


[ 69 ]

Not  contented  with  a  degree  of  power,  fufficient
to  fatisfy  any  reafonable  ambition,  we  have  attempt-
ed to  extend  it. Not  contented  with  drawing

from  them  a  large  revenue  indirerily,  we  have  en-
deavoured to  procure  one  dire^ilybyzn  authoritative
feizure  •,  and,  in  order  to  gain  a  pepper-corn  in  this
way,  have  chofen  to  hazard  millions,  acquired  by
the  peaceable  intercourfc  of  trade. Vile  poli-
cy ! Whatafcourge  is  government  fo  conduded  ?

Had  we  never  deferted  our  old  ground  :  Had

we  nourifhed  and  favoured  America^  with  a  view  to
commerce,  inftead  of  confidering  it  as  a  country
to  be  coverned  :  Had  we,  like  a  liberal  and  wife
people,  rejoiced  to  fee  a  multitude  of  free  dates
branched  forth  from  ourfelves,  all  enjoying  inde-
pendent legiflatures  fimilar  to  our  own  :  Had  we
aimed  at  binding  them  to  us  only  by  the  tyes  of
affeftion  and  intereft  -,  and  contented  ourfelves  with
a  moderate  power  rendered  durable  by  being  leni-
ent and  friendly,  an  umpire  in  their  differences,
an  aid  to  them  in  improving  their  own  free  govern-
ments, and  their  common  bulwark  againft  the  af-
fauics  of  foreign  enemies  :  Had  this,  I  fay,  been
our  policy  and  temper  ;  there  is  nothing  {o  great
or  happy  thac  we  might  not  have  expected.  With
their  increafe  our  tlrength  would  have  increafcd.
A  growing  furplus  in  the  revenue  might  have  been
gained,  which,  invariably  applied  to  the  gradual
difcharge  of  the  national  debt,  would  have  deliver-
ed us  from  the  ruin  with  which  Jt  threatens  us.
F  3  The


[ 7° ]

The  Liberty  of  America  might  have  preferred  ouf
Liberty  ;  and,  under  the  diredion  of  a  patriot  king
or  wife  minifter,  proved  the  means  of  rcftoringtQ
us  our  almoft  loft  conftitution.  Perhaps,  in  time,
we  might  alfo  have  been  brought  to  fee  the  necef-
fity  of  carefully  v/atching  and  rcflricting  our  paper-
credit  :  And  thus  we  might  have  regained  fafety  ;
and,  in  union  with  our  Colonies,  have  been  more
than  a  match  for  every  enemy,  and  rifen  to  a  fi-
tuation  of  honour  and  dignity  never  before  known

amongft  mankind. But  I  am  forgetting my-

fflf. Our Colonies  are  likely  to  be  loft for

ever.  Their  love  is  turned  into  hatred ;  and
their  refpecfl  for  our  government  into  refentment

and  abhorrence. We  (hall  fee  more  diftinftly

what  a  calamity  this  is,  and  the  obfervations  1  have
now  made  will  be  confirmed,  by  attending  to  the
following  fa6ls.

Our  American  Colonies,  particularly  the  Nor-
thern ones,  have  been  for  fome  time  in  the  very
happieft  ftate  of  focicty  •,  or,  in  that  middle  ftate  of
civilization,  between  its  firft  rude  and  its  laft  refin-
ed and  corrupt  ftate.  Old  countries  confift,  gene-
rally, of  three  clafles  of  people-,  a  Gentry;  a
Yeomanry  ;  and  a  Peasantry.  The  Colonies
confift  only  of  a  body  of  Yeomanry  (a)  fupported

by

(<^)  Excepting  the  Negroes  in  the  Southern  Colonies,  who
probably  will  now  either  foon  become  extinit, or  have  their

condition


[ 7' ]

by  agriculture,  and  all  independent,  and  nearly  upon
a  level  ;  in  coniequence  of  which,  joined  to  a
boundlefs  extent  of  country,  the  means  of  fubfift-
ence  are  procured  without  difficulty,  and  the  temp-
tations to  wickednefs  are  fo  inconfiderable,  that
executions  (b)  are  feldom  knov;n  among  them.
From  hence  arifes  an  encouragement  to  popu-
lation fo  great,  that  in  fome  of  the  Colonies
they  double  their  own  number  in  fifteen  years  ;
in  others,  in  eighteen  years-,  and  in  all,  taken  one

with  another, in  twenty-five  years. Such an

increafe  was,  I  believe,  never  before  known.  It
demonftrates  that  they  muft  live  at  their  eafe  ;  and
be  free  from  thofe  cares,  oppreffions,  and  difeafes
which  depopulate  and  ravage  luxurious  {tares.

With  the  population  of  the  Colonies  has  increaf-
ed  their  trade;  but  much  fafter,  on  account  of  the

gradual  introduftion  of  luxury  among  tht^m. •

In  1723  the  exports  to  Penfyhania  v/ere  16,000  1.
— In  1742  they  were  75,2951. In 1757 they

condition  changed  into  that  o{  Freemen. It  is  not  the  fault

of  the  Colonies  that  they  have  among  them  {o  many  of  thcfe
unhappy  people.  They  have  made  laws  to  prohibit  the  im-
portation of  them  ;  but  thefe  laws  have  always  had  a  negative
put  upon  them  here,  becaufe  of  their  tendency  to  hurt  our  Ne-
gro trade.

(b)  In  the  Province  of  Maflachufett's  Bay  there  has  not  been,
I  am  informed,  more  than  one  execution  thefe  1 8  years.

F  4  were


[ "2 1

were  increafed  to  268,426!.  and  in  1773  to  half
a  million.

The  exports  to  all the  Colonies  in  1744  were

640,114!.— In 1758,  they were  increaled to

1,832,948  !.  and  in  1773,  to  three  millions,  (a)
And  the  probability  is,  that,  had  ic  not  been  tor  the
difcontents  among  the  Colonies  fince  the  yean  764,
our  trade  with  them  would  have  been  this  year
double  to  what  it  was  in  177-3;  and  that  in  a
few  years  more,  it  would  not  have  been  poiTibie
for  the  whole  kingdom,  though  confilbng  only  of
manufafturers,  to  fupply  the  American  demand.

This  trade,  icihoukl  be  coniidered,  was  not  only
thus  an  increafii  g  trade-,  but  it  was  a  trade  m
which  we  had  no  rivals  ;  a  trade  certain,  conftant,
and  uninterrupted  ;  and  which,  by  the  fliipping
employed  in  it,  and  the  naval  ftorcs  fupplied  by  it^
contributed  greatly  to  the  fupport  of  that  navy
which  is  our  chief  national  (Irength.— — Viewed  in
thefe  lights  it  v/as  an  objefl  unfpcakably  imporcant.
But  it  will  appear  itill  more  \o  if  we  view  it  in  its
connexions  and  dependencies.  It  is  well  known,
that  our  trade  with  yHfrica  and  the  JVeJl  Indies  can-
not eafily  fubfift  without  it.  And,  upon  the
whole,  it  is  undeniable,  that  it  has  been  one  of  the

(a)  Mr.  Burke  (in  liis  excellent  and  ain-.irahle  Speech  on
moving  his  rcfolutions  for  conciliation  with  the  Colonics,  P.  o,
&c.)  has  fljewn,  that  our  trade  to  the  Colonies,  including  that  to
Jfrka  and  the  lFeJi-I,idies,vj2.%  in  1772  nearly  equal  to  tlie  trade
vhich  v/e  carried  on  with  the  whole  world  at  the  beginning  of
thi^  Century.

7  main


[ 73 1

main  fprings  of  our  opulence  and  fplendour  ;  ^nd
that  we  have,  in  a  great  meafure,  been  indebted  to
it  for  our  ability  to  bear  a  debt  fo  much  heavier,
than  that  which,  fifty  years  ago,  the  wifefl:  men
thought  v/ould  ne<;e(rarily  fink  us.

This  ineftimable  prize,  and  all  the  advantages
connected  with  America^  we  are  now  throwing
away.  Experience  alone  can  Ihevv  what  calamities
muft  follow.  It  will  indeed  be  aftonilbing  if  this
kingdom  can bear fuch  a  lofs  without dreadful

confequences. Thele  confequences  have  been

amply reprefented by  others  \ and it is  need*

iefs  to  enter  into  any  account  of  them- At  the

time we  fhall be feeling rhem The  Empire

jdilmembered  %  the  blood  of  thoufands  fhed  in  an
unrighteous  quarrel  j  our  llrengch  exhaufted  ;  our
merchants  breaking  ;  our  manqfafturers  ftarvingj
our  debts  increafing  ;  the  revenue  finking  \  the
funds  tottering-, and  all the  miferies  of  a  public

bankruptcy  impending At  fuch  a  crifis  iliould

Dur  natural  enemies,  eager  for  our  ruin,feize  theop-
portunity — *— The  apprehenfion  is  too  diftrelTing.
Let  us  view  thjs  fubjed  in  another  light.

Ov\  this  occafion,  particular  attention  fliould  be
given  to  the  prefent  singular  firuation  of  this
kingdom.  This  is  a  circumllance  of  the  uttnoll
importance;  and  as  I  am  afraid  it  is  not  much
confidered^  I  will  beg  leave  to  give  a  difl:in(5l  ac-
count of  it.

At


I 74 ]

At  the  Revolution,  the  fpscie  of  the  kingdom
amounted,  according  to  (a)  Davenanfs  account,  to

eighteen  millions  and  a  half. From  the  Acces-

SI  ON  to  the  year  1772,  there  were  coined  at  the
mint,  near  29  millions  of  gold ;  and  in  ten  years
only  of  this  time,  or 'from  January  1759  to  Janu-
ary 1769,  there  were  coined  eiglu  millions  and  a
half,  {b)  But  it  has  appeared  lately,  that  the  gold
fpecie  now  left  in  the  kingdom'  is  no  more  than

about  twelve  millions  and  a  half. Not  lb  much

as  half  a  million  of  Siher  fpecie  has  been  coined
thefe  fixty  years ;  and  it  cannot  be  fuppofed,  that
the  quantity  of  it  now  in  circulation  exceeds  two
or  three  millions.  The  whole  fpecie  of  the  king-
dom, therefore,  is  probably  at  this  time  about  {c)
fourteen  or  fifteen  niillions.  Of  this  feveral  millions
muft  be  hoarded  at  the  Bank. Our  circulat-
ing fpecie.,  therefore,  appears  to  be  greatly  decreaf-
ed.  But  our  wealth,  or  the  quantity  of  money  in
the  kingdom,  is  greatly  increaled.  This  is  paper
to  a  vail  amount,  iffued  in  almoft  every  corner  of
the  kingdom ;  and,  particularly,  by  the  Bank  of
England. While  this  paper  maintains  its  credit

(.7)  See  Dr.  Davenant's  works,  collefted  and  rcvifcd  by  Sir
Charles  Whitworth,  Vol.  I.  Page  363,  &c.  443,  kc.

{b)  See  Confiderations  on  Money,  Bullion,  &c. Page 2
and  II.

(c)  Or  nearly  the  fame  that  it  was  in  Crorn-well's  time. See
Dr.  Davenant's  works,  Vol.  I.  Page  365.

it


[ 75 ]

it  anfwers  all  the  purpofes  of  Ipecie,  and  is  in  all
refpe<5ls  the  fame  with  money.

Specie  reprefents  fome  real  value  in  goods  or
Gommodities.  On  the  contrary  ;  paper  reprefents
immediately  nothing  but  fpecie.  It  is  a  promife
or  obligation,  which  the  emitter  brings  himfelf  un-
der to  pay  a  given  fum  in  coin  ;  and  it  owes  its
currency  to  the  credit  of  the  emitter  ;  or  to  an
opinion  that  he  is  able  to  make  good  his  engage-
ment ;  and  that  the  fum  fpecified  may  be  received
upon  being  demanded. — Paper,  therefore,  repre-
fents coin  ;  and  coin  reprefents  real  value.  That
is,  the  one  is  2.fign  of  wealth. The  other  is  the

fign  of  that  fign. But  farther. Coin  is  an  uni-

verfal  fign  of  wealth,  and  will  procure  it  every
where. It  will  bear  any alarm, and itand any

fbock:- On the  contrary. Paper,  owing its

currency  to  opinion,  has  only  a  local  and  ima-
ginary value,  It  can  (land  no  fhock.  It  is  de-
ftroyedby  the  approach  of  danger  ^  or  even  the  fuf-
picion  of  danger.

In  fhort.  Coin  is  the  bafis  of  our  paper-credit ;
and  were  it  either  all  deftroyed,  or  were  only  the
quantity  of  it  reduced  beyond  a  certain  limit,  the
paper  circulation  of  the  kingdom  Vvould  fink  at
once.  But,  were  our  paper  deftroyed,  the  coin
would  not  only  remain,  but  rife  in  value,  in  pro-^
portion  to  the  quantity  of  paper  deftroyed.

From


r  76  ]

From  this  account  it  follows,  that  as  far  as,  in
any  ciicumftances,  fpecie  is  not  to  be  procured  in
exchange  for  paper, it  reprefcnts  nothings  and is

worth  nothing. The  fpecie  of  this  kingdom  is

inconfiderabie,  compared  with  the  amount  of  che
paper  circulating  in  it.  This  is  generally  believ-
ed •,  and,  therefore,  it  is  natural  to  enquire  how  its

currency  is  fupported. The  anfwer  is  eafy. Ir

is  fupported  in  the  fame  manner  with  all  other
bubbles.  Were  all  to  demand  fpecie  in  exchange
for  their  notes,  payment  could  not  be  made  •,  but,
at  the  fune  time  that  this  is  known,  every  one
trulb,  that  no  alarm  producing  fuch  a  demand  will
happen,  v^hile  he  holds  the  paoer  he  is  pofieired  of;
and  that  if  itfliould  happen,  he  will  Hand  a  chance
for  being  firft  paid  i  and  this  makes  him  eafy.
And  it  alio  makes  all  with  whom  he  trafiics  •  eafy.
— Butlcrt  any  events  happen  which  threaten  danger;
and  every  one  wilt  become  diffident.  A  run  v.'ili
take  place;  and  a  bankruptcy  foilcjw,

This  is  an  account  of  what  has  often  hap})eaed
m  prrjate  credit.  And  it  is  alfo  an  account  of
what  avV/  (if  no  change  of  meafures  takes  place)
happen  fome  time  or  other  in  public  credit.  The
defcriprion  I  hive  given  of  our  paper-circulation
implies,  tliJt  nothing;  can  be  more  deiicate  or  ha-

fiardous. It  is  an  immenfe  fabrick, with  its  head
n  ihecloud-^, ihac  is  continually  trembling  with
every  advcrlc  blaft  and  every  fiuctuation  ot  trade  ;

an4


Iv 3

.and  which,  like  the  bafelefs  fabrick  of  a  vifion,
may  in  a  moment  vanifh,  and  leave  no  wreck  be-
hind.  The  deftrLi(5tion  of  a  few  books  at  the

Bank  \  an  improvement  in  the  art  of  forgery  \  the
landing  of  a  body  of  French  troops  on  our  co:ifts ;
infurreclions  threatening;  a  revolution  in  2;overn-
ment;  or  any  events  that  fhould  produce  a  gene-
ral panic,  however  groundleis,  would  a:  once  aa-
nihilare  it,  and  leave  us  v/ithout  any  other  medi-
um of  traffic,  than  a  quantity  of  ypifc/V  fcarceiy
equal  in  am.ount  to  the  money  now  drawn  from
the  public  by  the  taxes.  It  would,  therefore,
become  impoffible  to  pay  the  taxes.  The  revenue
would  fail.  Near  a  hundred  and  forty  millions  of
property  would  be  dedroyed.  The  whole  frame  of
government  would  fall  to  pieces  •,  and  a  (late  of  na-
ture would  take  place. What  a  dreadful  fitua-

tion.'*  It  has  never  had  a  parallel  among  mankind  ;
except  at  one  time  in  France  after  the  eftabhihment
there  of  the  Royal  Mijfijfippi  Bank.  In  1720  this
bank  broke ;  {a)  and,  after  involving  lor  fome
time  the  whole  kingdom  in  a  golden  dream,  fpread

through  it  in one  day,  defolation  and  ruin.

The  diftrefs  attending  fuch  an  event,  in  this  free
country,  would  be  greater  than  it  was  in  France.
Happily  for  that  kingdom,  they  have  fliot  this
gulph. Paper-credit  has  never  fince  recovered  iCa..

(a)  See  Sir  James  Steuart's  Enquiry  into  the  Principles  01
polidcal  Oeconomy,  Vol.  II.  Book  4,  Chap.  32.

felf


[ 78 ]

fclf  there  •,  and  their  circulating  cafh  confuls  now
all  of  folid  coin,  amounting,  I  am  informed,  to
no  lefs  a  fum  than  1500  millions  of  Livres  \  or
near  67  millions  of  pounds  fterling.  This  gives
them  unfpeakable  advantages  •,  and,  joined  toth;it
quick  redudion  of  their  debts  which  is  infeparable.
(a)  from  their  nature,  places  them  on  a  ground  of
fafety  which  we  have  rtafon  to  admire  and  envy.

Thefe  are  fubjefcs  on  which  I  (hould  have  cho-
fen  to  be  filent,  did  I  not  think  it  necefTary,  that
this  country  fhould  be  apprized  and  warned  of  the
danger  which  threatens  it.  This  danger  is  created
chiefly  by  the  national  debt.  High  taxes  are  ne-
cefTary to  fupport  a  great  public  debt  •,  and  a  large
fupply  of  c  a  ill  is  neceflary  to  fupport  high  taxes.
This  carti  we  owe  to  our  papery  and,  in  propor-
tion to  our  paper,  muft  be  the  produclivcnefs  of
our  taxes. King William's wars drained  the

CaJ  Their  debts  confift  chiefly  of  money  raifed  by  anHuidesr
on  lives,  Ihort  annuities,  anticipations  of  taxes  for  Ihort  terms,
Sec.  During  the  whole  laft  war  they  added  to  t\it\r  perpetual
annuities  only  12  millions  fterling,  according  to  Sir  James
Steuart's  account ;  whereas  we  added  to  thefe  annuities  near
60  millions.  In  confequence  therefore  of  the  nature  of  their
debts,  as  well  as  of  the  management  they  are  now  ufing  for
haflening  the  reduftion  of  them,  they  muft  in  a  few  years,  if
;e  continues,  be  freed  from  moll  of  their  incumbrances ;
lie  we  probably  (if  no  event  comes  foon  that  will  unburthen
OS  at  once)  (hall  continue  with  tliem  all  upon  us.

kingdon:!


[ 79 ]

kingdom  of  its  fpecie.  This  funk  the  revenue,
and  diilrefled  government.  In  1694  the  Bank
was  eftablifbed ;  and  the  kingdom  was  provided
with  a  fubftitute  for  fpecie.  The  taxes  became
again  produdlive.  The  revenue  rofe ;  and  go-
vernment was  relieved. Ever  fince  that  period

our  paper  and  taxes  have  been  increafing  toge-
ther, and  fupportingone  another-,  and  one  reafon,
undoubtedly,  of  the  late  increale  in  the  produce
tivenefs  of  our  taxes  has  been  the  increafe  of  our
paper.

Was  there  no  public  debt,  there  v/ould  be  no
occafion  for  half  the  prefent  taxes.  Our  paper-
circulation  might  be  reduced.  The  balance  of
trade  would  turn  in  our  favour.  Specie  would
flow  in  upon  us.  The  quantity  of  property  de-
ilroyed  by  a  failure  of  paper-credit  (fhould  it  in
fuch  circumftances  happen)  would  be  140  millions
Jefs  ;  and,  therefore,  the  fliock  attending  it  would
be  tolerable.  But,  in  the  prefent  (late  of  things,
whenever  any  calamity  or  panic  fliall  produce
fuch  a  failure,  the  fhock  attending  it  will  be  in-
tolerable.  May heaven foon raife  up  for us

fome  great  (latefman  who  fliall  fee  thefe  things ;
and  enter  into  effectual  meafures,  if  not  now  too
late,  for  extricating  and  preferving  us.

Public  banks  are,  undoubtedly, attended  wi^
great  conveniencies. But  they  alfo  do  great  har
and,  if  their  emiffions  are  not  rellrained,  and  con-
ducted


m


[ 8o 1

dueled  with  great  wifdom,  they  may  prove  thd
moft  pernicious  of  all  inititutions  •,  not  only,  by
fubftituting  fi^itious  for  reai  wealth  ;  by  increat-
ing  luxury  ;  by  raifing  the  prices  of  provifions  5
by  concealing  an  unfavourable  balance  of  trade  ;
and  by  rendering  a  kingdom  incapable  of  bearing
any  internal  tumults  or  external  attacks,  without
the  danger  of  a  dreadful  convulfion  :  But,  parti-
cularly, by  becoming  inftruments  in  the  hands  of
minifters  of  flate  to  increafe  their  influence,  to
leflen  their  dependence  on  the  people,  and  to
keep  up  a  dclulive  fhevv  of  public  profperity,  when
perhaps,  ruin  may  be  near.  There  is,  in  truth,
nothing  that  a  government  may  not  do  with  fuch
a  mine  at  its  command  as  a  public  Bank,  while  it
can  maintain  its  credit  •,  nor,  theref  )re,  is  there  any
thing  more  likely  to  be  improperly  and  danger-
ously ufed. But  to  return  to  what  may  be  more

applicable  to  our  own  ftate  at  prefenr.

Among  the  caules  thnt  may  produce  a  failure
of  paper-credit,  there  are  two  which  the  prclent
quarrel  with  America  cwWs  upon  us  particularly to

confider. The  firfl:  is,  "  An  unfavourable  bal-

"  lance  of  trade."  This,  in  proportion  to  the  de-
gree in  which  it  takes  place,  mufl  turn  the  courfe
foreign  exchange  againft  us  ;  raife  the  price  of
.illioni  and  carry  off  our  fj^ecie.  The  danger  to
which  this  would  expofe  us  is  obvious-,  and  it  ha»

been


«


[ Si ]

been  much  increaied  by  the  new  coinage  of  the
gold  Ipecie  which  begun  in  1772.  Before  this
coinage,  the  greatell  part  of  our  gold  coin  being
light,  but  the  fame  in  currency  As  if  it  had  been
heavy,  always  tenlained  in  the  kingdom.  But<
being  now  full  weight,  whenever  a  vVrong  balance
of  foreign  trade  alters  the  courfe  of  exchange^
Jind  gold  in  'coi/i  becomes  of  lefs  value  than  in  hul-
iion,  there  is  reafon  to  fear,  that  it  will  be  melted
down  in  fuch  great  quantities,  and  exported  fd  fafl:,
as  in  a  little  time  to  leave  none  behind  •,  (a)  the
confequence  of  which  mud  prove,  that  the  whold

fuper-

("aj  Mr.  Lozvni/a  in  the  difpute  between  him  and  Mr.  Lockei
contended  for  a  reduftioh  of  the  liandard  of  filver.  One  of  his
reafonswas,  that  it  would  render  the  filver-coin  more  cdmnlen-
furatc  to'the  wailts  of  the  nation  ;  and  ciiEcic  hazardous
Paper-credit. — Mr.  Coi^duit,  SirIs.».AC  Newton's  fuc-
ceflbr  in  the  mint,  has  propofed,  in  direft  contradiction  to  the
laws  now  in  being,  that  all  the  bullion  imported  into  the
kingdom  Ihould  be  carried  into  the  mint  to  be  coined ;  and
only  coin  allowed  to  be  exported,  "  The  height,  ho  fays,  of
*'  Paper-credit  is  the  ftrongell  argument  for  trying  this  and  eve!y
"  other  method  that  is  likely  to  increafe  the  coiaage.  For
*'  whilllPaperiCredit  docs  in  a  great  meafure  the  bufmefs  of  mo-
'*  ney  at  home.  Merchants  and  Bankers  are  not  under  a  necefii-
"  ty,  as  they  were  formerly,  of  coining  a  quantity  of  fpecie  fur
•'  their  home  trade  ;  and  as  Paper-credit  brings  mdhey  to  the
*•  Merchants  to  be  exported,  the  nioney  rhaygo  away  infenfi-
**  bly,  and  not  be  missed  till  it  be  too  late:  AnJW
*'  where  Paper-credit  is  large  and  increafmg,-  if  the  money
*'  be  Cxpoftdd  and  the  coinage  decfeafe,  tAat  credW
" .MAY  sink  at  once  ; iot  want  of  a  proportionable  quzm-

U  •'  ti:v


[ 82 ]

fuper(lra:?l:Lirc  of  paper-credit,  now  fupported by

it,  will  break  down. The  only  remedy,  in  iuch

circumftances,  is  an  incrcale  of  coinage  at  the
mint.  But  this  will  operate  too  liowly  ;  and,  .by
iWng  the  price  of  bullion,  will  only  increafe  the
evil. — I:  is  the  Bank  that  at  iuch  a  time  mud  be
the  immediate  fufferer  :  For  it  is  from  thence  that
thofe  who  want  coin  for  any  purpofewill  always
draw  it.

For  many  years  before  1772,  the  price  of  gold
in  bullion  had  been,  from  2  to  3  or  4  per  cent.
higher  than  in  coin.  This  was  a  temptation  to  melt
dovvn  and  export  the  coin,  which  could  not  be  re-
fifted.  Hence  arofe  a  demand  for  it  on  the  Bank  •,
and,  confequently,  the  necefilty  of  purchafing  bul-
lion at  a  lofs  for  a  new  coinage.  But  the  more
coin  the  Bank  procured  in  this  way,  the  lower  its
price  became  in  comparifon  with  that  of  bullion,
and  the  fafler  it  vanifhed  ;  and,  confequently,  the
more  neceiTary  it  becan^ie  to coin  again,  and  the

greater  lots  fell  upon  the  Bank. Had  things

continued  much  longer  in  this  train,  the  confe-
quences  might  have  proved  very  lerious.  I  am  by
no  means  fufficienrly  informed  to  be  able  to  afTigrj
the  caafes  which  have  produced  the  change  that
happened  in  1772.  But,  without  doubt,  the  ftate
of  things  that  took  place  before  that  year  muft  be

••  tity  of"  Specity  which  alone  cia  fupport  it  in  a  time  of  dif^

''  trcfs." See  Mr.  Ccnduit's  Obfervations  oa the  ftate  of

ouf  Gold  and  Silver  Corns  in  1730,  Page  36  to  46.

cxpeded


[ 83 ]

expeflcd  to  return.  The  flutluations  of  trade,  irt
its  bed  (late,  render  this  unavoidable.  But  the  con-
teft  with  our  Colonies  has  a  tendency  to  bring  it
on  foon  ;  and  to  increafe  unfpeakably  the  dldrcfs
attending  it.

All  know  that  the  balance  of  trade  with  them
is  greatly  in  our  favour  j  (a)3ind  that  this  balance
is  paid  partly  by  dired:  remittances  of  bullion  ♦,
and  partly  by  circuitous  remittances  through  Spain^
Portugal,  Italy, &c.  which  diminifh  the  balance

againft  us  with  thefe  countries. During  the

iall  year  they  have  been  employed  in  paying  their
debts,  without  adding  to  them  \  and  their  expor-
tatiofis  and  remittances  for  that  purpofe  have  con-«
tributed  to  render  the  general  balance  of  trade
more  favourable  to  us,  and,  alfo,  (in  conjundlion
with  the  late  operations  of  the  Bank)  to  keep  up
our  funds.  Thefe  remittances  are  now  ceafed  ;
and  a  year  or  two  will  determine,  if  this  conteft
goes  on,  how  far  we  can  fuflain  fuch  a  lofs
without  fuffering  the  confcquences  I  have  de-
fcribed.

The  fecond  event,  ruinous  to  our  paper-circu-
lation, which  may  arife  from  our  rupture  with
Amsrica,  is  a  deficiency  in  the  revenue.  As  a  fai-
lure of  our  paper  would  deftroy  the  revenue,  fo  a

(a)  According  to  the  accounts  of  the  exports  to,  and  Si-
ports  from  the  North- American  Colonies,  laid  before  Parlia-
ment ;  the  balance  in  our  favour  appears  to  have  been,  for
II  year*  before  1774,  near  a  million  and  a  bat/ annuilly .

G  2  failure


[ 84 ]

failure  of  the  revenue,  or  any  confiderable  dimina"
tion  of  it,  would  deftroy  our  paper.  The  Bank
is  the  fupportof  our  paper  i  and  the  fupport  of  the
Bank  is  the  credit  of  government.  Its  principal
fecurities,  are  a  capital  of  near  eleven  millions  lent
to  government  i  and  money  continually  advanced
to  a  vafli  amonnr  on  the  Land-tax,  Sinking  fund.
Exchequer  Bills,  Navy  Bills,  &c.  Should,  there-
fore, deficiencies  in  the  revenue  bring  government
under  any  difficulties,  all  thcfe  fecurities  would  lofe
their  value,  and  the  Bank  and  Government,  and  all

private  and  public  credit,  would  fall  together.

Let  any  one  here  imagine,  what  would  probably
follow,  were  it  but  fufpedled  by  the  public  in  ge-
neral, that  the  taxes  were  fo  fallen,  as  not  to  pro-
duce enough  to  pay  the  intereft  of  the  public  debts,
befides  bearing  the  ordinary  expences  of  the  na-
tion •,  and  that,  in  order  to  fupply  the  deficiency
and  to  hide  the  calamity,  it  had  been  neceffary  in
any  one  year  to  anticipate  the  taxes,  and  to  bor-
row of  the  Bar.k. IrT  fuch  circumftances  I  can

fcarcely  doubt,  bur  an  alarm  would  fpread  of  the

moft  dangerous tendency. The  next  foreign

war,  fliould  it  prove  half  z^  expenfive  as  the  la(f,
will  probably  occafion  fuch  a  deficiency  •,  arKl
bring  our  aflairs  to  that  crifis  towards  which  they

have been long  tending. But the  war  witli

America  has  a  greater  tendency  to  do  this ;  and  the
reafon  is,  that  it  affeds  our  refources  more  ;  and  is

attended


[ 8s ]

attended  more  with  the  danger  of  internal  diftur-
bances.

Some  have  made  the  proportion  of  our  trade  de-
pending on  North  America  to  be  near  one  half.  A
moderate  computation  makes  it  a  third,  (a)  Let
it,  however,  be  fuppofed  to  be  only  a  fourth.  I
will  venture  to  fay,  this  is  a  proportion  of  ourfo-
reigr^  trade,  the  Ids  of  which,  when  it  comes  to  be-

felt,  will  be  found  infupportable. In  the  article

of  'Tobacco  alone  it  will  caufe  a  dedu6lion  from  the
Cujloms  of  at  lead  300,000/.  per  ann.  {b)  including-
the  duties  paid  on  foreign  commodities  purchafed
by  the  exportation  of  tobacco.  Let  the  whole  de-
du(flion  from  the  revenue  be  fuppofed  to  be  only
half  a  million.  This  alone  is  more  than  the  king-
dom  can  at  prefent  bear,  without  having  recourfe

(fl)  See  the  fubftance  of  the  evidence  on  the  petition  pre-
fented  by  the  Weft-India  Planters  and  Merchants  to  the  Houfe
of  Commons,  as  it  was  introduced  at  the  bar,  and  fummed  up
by  Mr.  Glover.

(//)  The  annual  average  of  the  payments  into  the  Exchequer,
on  account  of  the  duties  on  tobacco,  was  for  five  years,  from
1770  to  1774,  219,1171.  exclufive  of  the  payments  from  Scot^

land. Near  one  half  of  the  tobacco  trade  is  carried  on  from

Scotland;  and  aho\efoiirffths  of  the  tobacco  imported  is  after-
wards exported  to  France,  Germany  and  other  countries.  From.
France  alone  it  brings  annually  into  the  Kingdom,  lam  in-
formed, about  150,000  1.  in  money.

In  1775,  being,  alas!  the  parting  year,  the  duties  on  tobacco  ■
in  England  brought  into  the  Exchequer  no  lefs  a  fum  than.
298,202  1.

G  3.  to


[ 86 J

to  additional  taxes  in  order  to  defray  the  conrmon.
and  necefiary  expences  of  peace.  But  to  this  muft:
be  added  a  deduflion  from  the  produce  of  the  ^a--
cifes^  in  confequence  of  the  increafe  of  the  poor,  of
the  difficulties  of  our  merchants  and  manufa(5lurers,,
of  lefs  national  wealth,  and  a  retrenchment  of  luxu-
ry. There  is  no  pofiibility  of  knowing  to  what
ihefe  dedfi(^ions  may  amount.  When  the  evils
producing  them  begin,  they  will  proceed  rapidly  •»•
and  they  may  end  in  a  general  wreck  before  we  arc
aware  of  any  danger.

In  order  to  give  a  clearer  view  of  this  fubje6l,  I
will  in  an  Appendix,  ftate  particularly  the  national
€xpenditure  and  income  for  eleven  years,  from  1764
to  1774^  From  that  account  it  will  appear,  that
the  money  drawn  every  year  from  the  public  by
the  taxes,  falls  but  little  fhort  of  a  fum  equal  to
the  whole  y/)(?a>  of  the  kingdom  ;  and  that,  not-
withftanding  the  late  increafe  in  the  produflivenefs
of  the  taxes,  the  whole  furplus  of  the  national  in-
come has  not  exceeded  320,000 1.  per  ann.  *  This
is  a  furplus  fo  inconfiderable  as  to  be  fcarcely  fuffi-
cient  to  cuard  ag-ainft  the  deficiencies  arifing  from
the  common  fluftuaticns  of  foreign  trade,  and  of
homeconfumption.  It  is  nothino  when  confider-
ed  as  the  only  fund  v/e  have  for  paying  off  a  debt
of  near  140  millions. — Had  we  continued  in  a  ftate
of  profound  peace,  it  could  not  have  admitted  of
any  diminution. What  then  muft  follow,  when

*  See  the  Appendix.

one


f  87  ]

one  of  the  mofl:  profitable  branches  of  our  trade  k
deftroyed ;  when  a  third  of  the  Empire  is  lofl  •,
when  an  addition  of  many  millions  is  made  to  the
public  debt;  and  when,  at  the  fame  time,  perhaps,
fome  millions  are  taken  away  from  the  revenue  ?
1  fhudder at  this  profpecl. A  kingdom,

ON  AN EDGE  SO  PERILOUS, SHOULD  THINK  OF  NO-
THING BUT A RETREAT.

SECT. IV.

Of  the  Honour  of  the  Nation  as  offered  by
the  War  with  America.

N  E  of  the  pleas  for  continuing  the  conteft
with  America  is,  "  That  our  honour  is  en-
**  gaged  ;  and  that  we  cannot  now  recede  without
"  the  moft  humiliating  concelTions."

With  refpeft  to  this,  it  is  proper  toobferve,  that
a  diftindion  fliould  be  made  between  the nation,
and  its  rulers.  It  is  melancholy  that  there  fhould  be
ever  any  reafon  for  making  fuch  a  diftindlion.  A  go-
vernment is,  or  ought  to  be,  nothing  but  an  inftitu-
tionforcolle6ting  and  for  carrying  into  execution  the
will  of  the  people.  But  lb  far  is  this  from  being  in
general  the  fact,  that  the  meafures  of  government,
and  the  fenfe  of  the  people,  are  fometimes  in  di-
reft  oppofition  to  one  another ; nor  does  it  often
happen  that  any  certain  conclufion  can  be  drawn
G  4  from


[ 8S ]

from  the  onetotheo:her.- 1  will  not  preterui  tu

dettrmine,  whcrther,  in  the  prclVnc  inftancc,  the  dii-
honour  attending  a  retreat  would  belong  to  the
nation  at  large,  or  only  to  the  perfons  in  power  whq
guide  its  affairs.  Let  it  be  granted,  though  pro-
bably far  from  true,  that  the  majority  of  the  king-,
dom  favQur  the  prefent  meafures.  No  good  argu-
ment could  be  drawn  from  hence  againll  receding,
1  he  difgrace  to  which  a  kingdom  mull  fubmit  by
making  concclTiuns,  is  nothing  to  that  of  being  the
aggrelFors  in  an  unrighteous  quarrel ;  and  dignity,
in  iuch  circumftances,  confifls  in  retracting  freely,

ipeedily,  and  magnanimoufly. For,  (to  adopt,

on  this  occafion,  words  which  I  have  heard  applied
to  this  very  purpofp,  in  a  great  alTembly,  by  a  peer
to  whom  this  kingdom  has  ofcpn  looked  as  its  de-
liverer, and  whofe  ill  ftate  of  health  at  this  awful
moment  of  public  danger  every  friend  io  Britain
11111(1  deplore)  to  adopt,  I  iay,  tiie  words  of  this
great  man "  Rcctituds  is  dignity.  Op-
pression- ONLY  is  .meanness  j  AND  JUSTICE,  HO-
NOUR."

I  will  add,  that  Prudence,  no  kfj  than  true
Honour,  requires  us  to  retracfb.  For  the  time
may  come  when,  if  it  is  not  done  voluntarily,  we
may  be  obliged  to  do  it  ;  and  lind  ourfclvcs  under
a  neceliity  of  granting  that  to  our  diftrefles,  which
we  now  deny  to  equity  and  hum;;nity,  and  tht;.
prayers  of  A}::cii.:a..  The  poflibility  of  this  ap-
pear^


[ 89 ]

pfars  plainly  from  the  preceding  pages  •,  and
fliOLild  it  happen,  it  will  bring  upon  us  difgrace
indeed,  difgrace  greater  than  the  worft  rancour
can  vvifli  to  fee  accumulated  on  a  kingdom  already

too much  difhonoured. Let  the  reader  think

here  what  we  are  doing. — - — A  nation,  once  the
protestor  of  Libeny  in  diftant  countries,  and  the
fcourge  of  tyranny,  changed  into  an  enemy  to
Liberty,  and  engaged  in  endeavouring  to  reduce
to  fervitude  its  own  brethren. A  great  and  en-
lightened nation,  not  content  with  a  controulin*
power  over  millions  of  people  which  gave  it  every
reafonable  advantage,  infifting  upon  fuch  a  fu-
premacy  over  them  as  would  leave  them  nothing
they  could  call  their  own,  and  carrying  defo-
lation and  death  among  them for  difputing  it.

. -What  can  be  more  ignominious  ? How;

have  we  felt  for  the  brave  Corficans,  in  their
ftruggle  with  the  Gcnoefe,  and  afterwards  With  the
French  government  ?  Did  Genoa  or  France
want  more  than  an  abfolute  command  over  their
property  and  legiflations  •,  or  the  power  of  bind-
ing them in  all  cafes  wliatfoever  ? The  Corji-

cans  had  been  fuhjed  to  the  Genoefe;  but,  find-
ing it  difficult  to  keep  them  in  fubjeclion,  they

CEDED  them  to  the  Fr€nch. All  fuch cefTions

of  one  people  by  another  are  difgraceful  to  hu-
fiian  nature.  But  if  our  claims  arejuft,  may  not
we  alfo,  if  we  pleafe.^  cede  the  Colonies  to  France  ?

There


[ 9= ]

There  is,  in  truth,  no  other  dlfTerence  be-
tween thefe  two  cafes  than  that  the  Ccrficans  were
not  deiccnded  trom  the  people  who  governed  them»
but  that  the  Amer.icans  are.

There  are  fome  wiio  fcem  to  be Tcnfible,  that
the  authority  of  one  country  over  another,  cannot
be  difliinguifhed  from  the  fervitude  of  one  country
to  another ; and  that  unlefs  different  communi-
ties, as  well  as  different  parts  of  the  fame  com-
munity, are  united  by  an  equal  reprefentation,  all
fuch  authority  is  inconfiftent  with  the  principles  of
Civil  Liberty. But  they  except the  cafe  of  the
Colonies  and  Great  Britain  ; becaufe  the  Colonies
are  communities  which  have  branched  forth  from^
and which, therefore, as  they  think, belong  to
Britain. Had  the  Colonies  been  communities  of
foreigners-,  over  whom  we  wanted  to  acquire  domi-
nion, or  even  to  extend  a  dominion  before  acquir-
ed, they  are  ready  to  admit  that  their  refiftancc

would  have  beenjuft. In  my  opinion, this  is

the  fame  with  faying,  that  the  Colonies  ought  to
be  worfe  off  than  the  reft  of  mankind,  becaufe  they
are  our  own  Brethren.

Again.  The  United  Provinces  of  Holland  v/ere
cnce  fubjedl  to  the  Spanijh  monarchy  ;  but,  pro-
voked by  the  violation  of  their  charters ;  by  levies
of  money,  without  their  conftrnt ;  by  the  introduc-
tion of  Spanifh  troops  among  them  v  by  innova-
tions in  thtir  antient  modes  of  government;  and

the


I 9> ]

the  rejc<5l'ion  of  their  pciitions,  they  were  driven  ta
that  rcliilance  whicli  we  and  ail  the  world  hava
ever  fince  admired  -,  and  which  has  given  birth  to
one  of  the  greatcft  and  happicft  Republics  that

ever  exifled. Let  any  one  read  alio,  the  hif-

tory  of  the  war  which  the  Athenians^  from  a  third
of  Empire,  made  on  the  Syracujam  in  Sicily^  a  peo-
ple derived  from  the  fame  origin  with  them  j  and
let  him,  if  he  can,  avoid  rejoicing  in  the  defeat  of
the  Athenians.

Let  him,  likewife,  read  the  account  of  the  focial
\vr,r among  the  Romans. The  allied ftates  of
Italy  had  fought  the  battles  of  Rome,  and  contri-
buted by  their  valour  and  treafure  to  its  conquefts
and  grandeur. They  claimed,  therefore,  the  rights
of  Roman  citizens, and a  fhare with  them in
legiflation. The  Romans,  difdaining  to  make  thofe
x[\t\x  fello-jo- citizens^  whom  they  had  always  looked
upon  as their  fubjt^s^  v/ould  not  comply  i  and
a  war  followed,  the  moft  horrible  in  the  annals
of  mankind,  which  ended  in  the  ruin  of  the  Ro-
man  Republic. The  feelings  of  every  Briton  in
this  cafe  muil  force  him  to  approve  the  conduct
of  the  Allies,  and  to  condemn  the  proud  and  un-
grateful Romans.

But  not  only  is  the  prefent  contefl:  with  Ame^
rica  thus  difgraceful  to  us,  bccaufe  inconfiftenc
with  our  own  feelings  in  fimilar  cafes  j  but  alfo
isccaufe  condemned  by  our  own  prat^ice  in  former

times.


r  92  ]

times.  The  Colonies  are  perfuaded  that  they  are
fighting  for  Liberty.  We  fee  them  iacrificing  to
this  jxrfuafion  every  private  advantage.  If  milla-
\^€n,  and  tl-iough  guilty  of  irregularities,  they
fiiould  be  pardoned  by  a  people  whofe  ancetlors
have  given  them  fo  many  examples  of  fimilar  con-
du'fi.  England  fhould  venerate  ihe  attachment
to  Liberty  amidft  alUits  excefles  -,  and,  inftead  of
indignation  or  fcorn,  it  would  be  moft  becomino-
them,  in  the  prefent  inftance,  to  declare  their  ap-

plaufe,  ^nd  to  fay  to  the  Colonies "  We  ex-

**  cufe  your  miftakes.  We  admire  your  fpirit.
"  It  is  the  fpirit  that  has  more  than  once  faved
"  ottrfehs'S.  We  afpire  to  no  dominion  over  you.
*'  We  underfland  the  rights  of  men  too  well  to
"  think  of  taking  from  you  the  ineftimable  pri-
"  vilege  of  governing  yourfclves  •,  and,  inftead  of
"  employing  our  power  for  any  fuch  purpofe,
*'  we  offer  it  to  you  as  a  friendly  and  guardian
"  power,  to  be  a  mediator  in  your  quarrels ;  a
**■  proteclion  againft  your  enemies ;  and  an  aid
*'  to  you  in  eftablifhing  a  plan  of  Liberty  that  (hall
"■'  make  you  great  and  happy.  In  return,  we
*' afk  norhing  but  your  gratitude  and  your  con>
'•  merce."

This  v/ould  be  a  language  worthy  of  a  bra\'e
and  enlightened  nation.  But  alas  !  it  often  hap-
pens in  the  Political  JVorl^d  as  it  does  in  Rdigien^
that  ths  people  who  cry  O'.ic  moft  vehemently  for

Liberty


[ 93 ]

Liberty  to  theoifelves  are  the  mofl  unwilling  to
grant  it  to  others.

One  of  the  mod  violent  enemies  of  the  Colonies
has  pronounced  them "  all Mr. Locke's  difci-

*'  pies," Glorious  title  ! How  fhameful  is

it  to  make  war  againft  them  for  that  reafon  ?

But  farther.  This  war  is  dii'graceful  on  account
of  the  perfuafion  which  led  to  it,  and  tfnder  which
jt  has  been  undertaken.  The  general  cry  was
laft  winter,  that  the  people  of  New-England
were  a  body  of  cowards,  who  would  at  once  be
reduced  to  fubmifiion  by  a  hoftile  look  from  our
troops.  In  this  light  were  they  held  up  to  public
derifion  in  both  Houfes  of  Parliament  -,  and  it  was
this  perfuafion  that,  probably,  induced  a  Noble-
man of  thefirft  weight  in  the  ftate  to  recommend,
at  the  paffing  of  the  Bojlon  Port  Bill,  coercive
meafures  •,  hinting  at  the  fame  time,  that  the  ap-
pearance of  hoftilides  would  be  fufficient,  and  that

all  would  be  foonover,  sine  glade. Indeed  no

one  can  doubt,  but  that  had  ic  been  believed  fome
time  ago,  that  the  people  of  America  were  brave,
more  care  would  have  been  taken  not  to  provoke
them.

Again. The  manner  in which  this  war  has
been  hitherto  conduded,  renders  it  ftill  more  dif-

graccful. Englilh  valour  being  thought  infuf-

ficient  to  fubdue  the  Colonies,  the  laws  and  religion

oi  France  were  cftablifticd  in  Canada^  on  purpofe  to

2  .  obtain


[ 94 ]

obtain  the  power  of  bringing  upon  them  from
thence  an  army  of  French  Papifts.  The  wild  Indi^
am  and  their  own  Slaves  have  been  inftigated  \o
attack them  ; and  attempts  have  been made  to

gain  the  afiiftance  of  a  large  body  of  Ruffians. ►

With  like  views,  German  troops  have  been  hired  ;
and  the  defence  of  our  Forts  and  Garrifons  truHed
in  their  hands.

Thele  are  meafures  which  need  no  comment.
The  laft  of  them,  in  particular,  having  been  carried
into  execution  without  the  confenc  of  parliament,
threatens  us  with  imminent  danger  ;  and  Ihcws
that  we  are  in  the  way  to  lofe  even the  Forms  of

the  conftitution.' If,  indeed,  our  minifters  can

^tany  time,  without  leave,  not  only  fend  away
the  national  troops,  but  introduce /<?r^?|-?z  troops
ill  their  room,  we  lie  entirely  at  mercy;  and  we
iiave  every  thing  to  dread.

SECT. V.

Of  the  Probability  of  Succeeding  in  the  War
ivith  America.

LE  T  us  next  confider  how  far  there  is  a  pofli-
bility  of  fucceeding  in  the  prefent  war.
Our  own  people,  being  unwilling  to  enlift,  and
the  attempts  to  procure  armies  oi  RuJJiaus^  Indians^
and  Canadia^ts  having  milcarried  ;  the  utmoft  force
we  can  employ,  including  foreigners,  does  not  ex-
ceed.


[ 95 ]

ceed,  if  I  am  rightly  informed,  30,000  cfFcdive
men.  Let  it,  however,  be  called  40,000.  7  his
is  the  force  that  is  to  conquer  half  a  million  at  leajl
(<?)  of  determined  men  fighting  on  their  own
ground,  within  fight  of  their  houfcs  and  families,
and  for  that  facred  blelTing  of  Liberty,  without
which  man  is  a  bead,  and  government  a  curie.
All  hiftory  proves,  that  in  fuch  afituation,  a  hand-
ful is  a  match  for  millions.

In  the  Netherlands^  a  few  dates  thus  circum-
ftanced,  withftood,  for  thirty  years,  the  vvholeforce
of  the  Spanifli  monarchy,  when  at  its  zenith ;
and at  laft  humbled  its  pride,  and  emancipated

themfclves  from  its  tyranny. The  citizens  of

Syracuse  alio,  thus  circumftanced,  withftood  the
whole  power  of  the  Athenians^  and  almofl  ruined
them —  The  fame  happened  in  the  conteft  be-
tween the  houfe  of  Aufiria^  and  the  cantons  [b)  of

Sivitzerland.' There is  in  this  cafe  an  infinite

difference  between  attacking  and  being  attacked ;
between  fighting  to  defirc)\  and  fighting  lopref^rve.
or  acquire  Liberty. Were  we,  therefbre,  ca-
pable of  employing  a  land  force  againft  America
equal  to  its  own,  there  would  be  little  probability

(a)  A  quarter  of  the  inhabitants  of  every  country  are  fight-
ing men. If,  therefore,  the  Colonies confifl only  of  tw»

millions  of  inhabitants,  the  number  of  fighting  men  in  them
will  be  half  a  million.

fifj  See  the  Appendix  to  Dr.  Zubly's  Sermon,  preached  at
the  opening  of  the  Provincial  Congrefs  of  Georgia.

of


[ 96 1

of  fiiccefs.  But  to  think  of  conquering  that  whol^
continent  with  30,000  or  40,000  men  to  be  tranf-
ported  acrofs  the  Atlantic,  and  fed  from  hence,
and  incapable  of  being  recruited after  any  defeat

This  is  indeed  a  folly  fo  great,  that  language

does  not  afford  a  name  for  it.

With  rcfpedl  to  our  naval  force,  could  if  fail  at
land  as  it  does  at  Tea,  much  mi^ht  be  done  with  it  v
but  as  that  is  impoffible,  liilJe  or  nothing  can  be
done  with it,  which  v/ili  not  hurt  ourfelves  more

than  the  Colonijis. Such  of  their  maritime  towns

as  they  cannot  guard  againft  our  fleets,  and  have
not  been  already  deftroyed,  they  are  determined
cither  to  give  up  to  our  relentment,  or  {a)  deftroy
themfeives :  The  confequence  of  which  will  be,
that  thefe  towns  will  be  rebuilt  in  fafer  fituations  ;
and  that  we  fnall  lofe  fome  of  the  principal  pled-
ges by  which  we  have  hitherto  held  them  in  fub-
jeclion.- — -As  to  their  trade;  having  all  the  necef-
faries  and  the  chief  conveniencies  of  life  within
themfeives,  they  have  no  dependence  upon  itj
and  the  Icfs  of  it  will  do  them  unfpeakable  good,
by  preierving  them  from  the  evils  of  luxury  and
the  temptations  of  wealth  ;  and  keeping  them  in
that  dare  of  virtuous  fimplicity  which  is  the  great-
eft  happinefs. I  know  that I  am  now fpcaking

(a)  New  Vork  has  been  long  deferted  by  the  greatcftpa'-t
of  the  inhabitants  ;  and  they  are  determined  to  burn  it  them-
feives, rather  than  funer  U5  to  burn  it.

the


[ 97 ]

the  fenfe  of  fome  of  the  wifefi:  men  in  America.
It  has  been  long  their  wifh  that  Britain  would  fliuc
up  all  their  ports.  They  will  rejoice,  partieularly,
in  the  laft  reftraining  aft.  It  might  have  happen-'
ed,  that  the  people  would  have  grown  weary  of
their  agreements  not  to  export  or  import.  But
this  a<5t  will  oblige  them  to  keep  thefe  agree-
ments; and  confirm  their  unanimity  and  zeal.
It  will  alfo  furnifh  them  with  a  reafon  for  confif-
cating  the  eftates  of  all  the  friends  of  our  govern-
ment among  them,  and  for  employing  their  failors^
v/ho  would  have  been  othervvife  idle,  in  making
reprifals  on  Britifli  property.  Their  fhips,  before
ufelefs,  and  coniifting  of  many  hundreds,  will  be
turned  into  fhips  of  war  ;  and  .ill  that  attention,^
which  they  have  hitherto  confined  to  trade,  will  be
employed  in  fitting  out  a  naval  force  for  their  ownf
defence  i  and  thus  the  way  will  be  prepared  for
their  becoming,  much  fooner  than  they  would
otherwife  have  been,  a  great  maritime  power.^
This  a6t  of  pariiamcntj  therefore,  crowns  the  folly
of  all  our  late  meafures. — None  who  know  me,  can
believe  me  to  be  dilpofed  to  fuperftition.  Per-
haps, however,  I  am  not  in  the  prefent  inftance,

free  from  this  vveaknefs. 1  fancy  I  fee  in  thefe.

meafures  fomething  that  cannot  be  accounted  for
merely  by  human  ignorance.  1  am  inclined  to^
think,  that  the  hand  of  Providence  is  in  them
working  to  bring  about  fome  great  ends. — But
this  leads  pie  to  one  confiderution  more,  which  I-
H  cannot


[ 9^ ]

cannot  help  offering  to  the  public,  and  which  ap-
pears to  me  in  the  higheft  degree  important.

In  this  hour  of  tremendous  danger,  it  would  be-
come us  to  turn  our  thoughts  to  Heaven.  This
is  what  our  brethren  in  the  Colonies  are  doing.
From  one  end  of  North-America  to  the  other,
they  are  fasting  and  praying.  But  what  are
we  doing  ? — Shocking  thought!  we  are  ridiculing

them as  Fanatics,  and  fcoffing  at religion.

We  are  running  wild  after  pleafure,  and  forget-
ting every  thing  ferious  and  decent  at  Mafque-
rades. — We  are  gambling  in  gaming  houfes ;  traf-
ficking for  Boroughs ;  perjuring  ourfelves  at  Elec-
tions i  and  felling  ourfelves  for  places. — Which
fide  then  is  Providence  likdy  to  favour?

In  America  vfc  fee  a  number  of  rifing  ftates  in  the
vigour  of  youth,  infpired  by  the  nobleft  of  all
pafTicns,  the  pafTion  for  being  free  -,  and  animated
by  piety. Here  we  fee  an  old  ftate,  great  in-
deed, but  inflated  and  irreligious ;  enervated  by
luxury ;  encumbered  with  debts ;  and  hanging  by

a  thread. Can  any  one  look  without  pain  to  the

ifllie  ^  May  we  not  expeft  calamities  that  fhall
recover  to  reflexion  (perhaps  to  devotion^  our  hi-
I er tines  and  Atheijis  ?

Is  our  caufe  fuch  as  gives  us  reafon  to  afk  God
to  blefs  it  ? Can  we  in  the  face  of  Heaven  de-
clare, *'  that  we  are  not  the  aggreflbrs  in  this  war  ;
"  and  that  we  mean  by  it,  not  to  acquire  or  even
"  preferve  dominion  for  its  own  fake  ;  not  con-

•'  queft


[ 99 ]

"  queft,  or  Empire,  or  the  gratification  of  refent-
"  ment-,  but  folely  to  deliver  ourlelves  from  op-
**^reflion-,  to  gain  reparation  for  injury-,  and
'*  to  defend  ourfelves  againfc  men  who  would  plun-
"  der  or  kill  us  ?" — Remember,  reader,  whoever
thou  art,  that  there  are  no  other  juft  caufes  of  war ;
dnd  that  blo6d  fpilled,  with  any  other  views,  muft

fome  time  or  other  be  accounted  for. But  not

to  expofe  myfelf  by  faying  more  in  this  way,  I  will
now  beg  leave  to  recapitulate  fome  of  the  argu-
ments I  have  ufed;  and  to  deliver  the  feelings
of  my  heart  in  a  brief,  but  earneft  addrefs  to  my
countrymen.

I  am hearing  it  continually urged *'  Are

"  they  not  our  fubjeds." The  plain  anfwer  isj

they  are  not  your  fubjecls.  The  people  of  Ame-
i'ica  are  no  more  the  fubjecfts  of  the  people  of  BH-
tain^  than  the  people  of  Torkjjjtre  are  the  fu'bjefts
of  the  people  of  Middkfex.  They  are  your  fel-
low-fubje^s.

"  But  we  are  taxed  ,  and why  fliould  not  they

be  taxed  ?" Tbu  are  taxed  by  yourfelves.  They

infift  6n  the  fafne  privilege. ^They  art taxed

to  fupport  their  own  governments-,  and  they  help
alfo  to  pay  your  taxes  by  purchafing  your  manu-
faflures,  and  giving  you  a  monopoly  of  their
trade.  Muft  they  maintain  two  governments  }
Muft  they  fubmit  to  be  triple  taxed  ? — Has  your
moderation  in  taxing  yourfelves,  been  fuch  as  en-

H2


[ Jco ]
courages  them  to  truft  you  with  the  power  of  tax-»
ins;  them?

"  But  they  will  not  obey  the  Parliament  and

iWLcwsy Say  rather,  they  will  not  obey jy<?«r^

parliament  dind your  laws.  Their  realbn  is  :  They
have  no  voice  in  your  parliament. They  have  no

ihare  in  making  (j)  your  laws. ""Neither  have

mcji  of  us." Then  you fo  far  want  Liberty  ;

and  your  language  is,  "  IVe  are  not  free,  Why

will  they  be  free  ?" But  many  of  you  have  a

voice  in  parliament :  None  of  them  have.  All
your  freehold  land  is  reprefented  :  But  not  a  foot
of  their  land  is  reprefented.  At  worft,  therefore,
you  can  be  only  enflaved  partially. — They  would
be  endaved  totally. They  are  governed  by  par-
liaments chofen  by  themfelves,  and  by  legiflatures

(a)  *'  I  have  no  other  notion  of  flavery,  but  being  bound
'*  by  a  law  to  which  I  do  not  confent."  See  the  cafe  of
Ireland's  being  bound  by  a>!ls  of  Parliament  in  England,  ftated

by  William Molyneux,  Efq; Dublin. In  arguing  againd

the  authority  of  Communities,  and  all  people  not  incorpor-
ated, over  one  another;  I  have  confined  my  views  to  taxation
and  internal  legiflation.  Mr,  Molyneux  carried  his  views
much  farther ;  and  denied  the  right  of  Englajid  to  make  any
laws  even  to  regulate  the  trade  of  Ireland.  He  was  the  inti-
mate friend  of  Mr.  Locke;  and  writ  his  book  in  1698,  fodn
after  the  publication  of  Mr.  Locke's  Treatife  on  Government.

What  I  have  faid,  in  Part  ift.  Sedl.  3d,  of  fubjedling  a  num-
ber of  Hates  to  a  general  council  reprefenting  them  all,  I  fup-
pofe  every  one  mull  confidcr  as  entirely  theoretical  ;  and  not
a  propofal  of  any  thing  I  wifli,  may  take  place  under  the  Bri-
•  ti(h  Empire.

fimilar


[ '01 ]

fimilar  to  yours. "Why  will  you  difturb  them  in
the  enjoyment  of  a  blefling  fo invaluable  ?  Is  ic
reafonable  to  infifl:,  that  your  difcretion  alone  fliall
be  their  law  :  that  they  fliall  have  no  conftitutions
of  government,  except  fuch  as  you  fliall  be  pleafed
to  give  them-,  and  no  property  except  fuch  as  your
parliament  fliall  be  pleafed  to  leave  them  ? — What
is  your  parliament  ? — Powerful  indeed  and  refpecft-
able  :  But is  there  not  a  growing  intercourfe  be-
tween it  and  the  court?  Does  it  aweminillers  offlate
as  it  once  did  ? — Inftead  of  contending  for  a  con-
trouling  power  over  the  governments  of  America^
fliould  you  not  think  more  of  watching  and  reform-
ing your  own  ? — Suppofe  the  worll. Suppofe,  in
oppofition  to  all  their  own  declarations,  that the
Colonifts  are  now  aiming  at  independence. — "-If
they  can  fubfifb  without  you-,"  is  it  to  be  wondered
at  ?  Did  there  ever  exift  a  community^  or  even  an  in-
dividual^ that  would  not  do  the  fmie  ? — "  If  they
cannot  fubfiR  without  you-,"  let  them  alone.  They

will  foon  come back. ■ " If  you cannot

fubfift  without  them  ;"  reclaim  them  by  {a)  kind-
H 3  nefs ;

{a)  Some  perfoiis,  convinced  of  the_/o//)'  as  well  as  barlarity
of  attempting  to  keep  the  Colonies  by  flaughtering  them,
have  very  humanely  propofcd  giving  them  up.  But  the  high-
eft  authority  has  informed  us,  with  great  reafon,  "  That
**  they  are  too  important  to  be  given  up." — Dr.  Tucker  has
infixed  on  the  depopulation,  produced  by  migrations  from  this
country  to  the  Colonies,  as  a  reafon  for  this  meaiure.  But,
.t  unhsfs


[ 102 ]

pcfs  ;  engage  them  by  moderation  and  equity.  It
is  madnefs  to  refolve  to  butcher  them.  This  will
make  them  detefl:  and  avoid  you  forever.  Free-
men are  not  to  be  governed  by  force  ;  or  dragoon-
ed into  compliance.  If  capable  of  bearing  to  be
fo  treated,  it  is  a  difgrace  to  be  conneded  with
them.

"  \i  they  can  fubfift  without  you ;  and  a.Ko  yon
without  them,"  the  attempt  to  fubjugate  them
by  confifcating  their  effedls,  burning  their  towns,
and  ravaging  their  territories,  is  a  wanton  exertion
of  cruel  ambition,  which,  however  common  it  has
been  among  mankind,  deferves  to  be  called  by
ha'"der  names  than  I  chufe  to  apply  to  it. — Sup-
pofe  fuch  an  attempt  was  to  be  fucceeded :
Would  it  not  be  a  fatal  preparation  for  fubduing
yourfclves  ?  Would  not  the  difpofal  of  Ame7'icau
places,  and  thediftribution  of  an  American  revenue,
render  that  influence  of  the  crown  irrefiftible,  which
has  already  ftabbed  your  liberties  ?

unlefs  the  kingdom  is  made  a  prifon  to  its  inhabitants,  thefe
migrations  cannot  be  prevented  ;  nor  do  I  think  that  they  have
any  great  tendency  to  produce  depopulation.  When  a  num-
ber of  people  quit  a  country,  there  is  more  employment  and
greater  plenty  of  the  means  of  fubfiftence  left  for  thofe  who  re-
main ;  and  the  vacancy  is  foon  filled  up.  The  grand  caufes
of  depopulation  are,  not  migrations,  or  even  famines  and
plagues,  or  any  other  temporary  evils  ;  but  the  permanent  and
ilowly  working  evils  of  debauchery,  luxury,  high  taxes,  and
oppreffion.

Turn


[ 103 ]

Turn  your  eyes  to  hdia  :  There  more  has  been
done  than  is  now  attempted  in  America.  There
Englishmen,  afluated  by  the  love  of  plunder  and
the  fpirit  of  conqued,  have  depopulated  whole
kingdoms,  and  ruined  millions  of  innocent  people
by  the  moft  infamous  opprefllon  and  rapacity.—^
The  juflice  of  the  nation  has  fiept  over  thefe  enor-
mities. Will  the  juftice  of  heaven  fleep  ? Are

we  not  now  execrated  on  both  fides  of  the  globe  ?

With  refpeft  to  the  Colonifts  \  it  would  be  folly
to  pretend  they  are  faultlefs.  They  were  running
faft  into  our  vices.  But  this  quarrel  gives  them  a
ialutary  check  :  And  it  may  be  permitted  on  pur-
pofe  to  favour  them,  and  in  them  the  reft  of  man-
kind ;  by  making  way  for  the  eftablifhment,  in  an
extenfive  country  poflefled  of  every  advantage,  a
plan  of  government,  and  a  growing  power  that
fhall  aftonifh  the  world,  and  under  which  every
fubjedl  of  human  enquiry  fliall  be  open  to  free  dif-
cuftion,  and  the  friends  of  Liberty,  in  every  quarter
of  the  globe,  find  a  fafe  retreat  from  civil  and  fpi-

ritual  tyranny. 1  hope,  therefore,  our  brethren

in  America  will  forgive  their  enemies. It  is  cer-^
tain  that  they  know  not  what  thy  are  doings


H  4  CON-


[ 1^4 ]


CONCLUSION.

HAVING  faid  fo  much  of  the  war  with
America,  and  particularly  of  the  danger  with
which  it  threatens  us,  it  may  be  expefted  that  I
iliould  propofe  fome  method  of  efcaping  from  this
danger,  and  of  reftoring  this  once  happy  Empire
to  a  ftare  of  peace  and  lecurity. — Various  plans  of
pacification  have  been  propofed ;  and  fome  of
them,  by  perfons  fo  diftinguifhed  by  their  rank  and
merit,  as  to  be  above  my  applaufe.  But  till  there
is  more  of  a  difpofition  to  attend  to  fuch  plans  -,
they  cannot,  I  am  afraid,  be  of  any  great  fervice.
And  there  is  too  much  reafon  to  apprehend,  that
noihing  but  calamiiy  vvill  bring  us  to repentance

and  wiidom. In order, however,  to  comr^lcte

my  defign  in  thefe  obfervations,  I  will  take  the  li-
berty to  lay  before  the  public  the  following  fketch
ot  one  of  the  plans  juft  referred  to,  as  it  was  open-
ed before  the  holidays  to  the  houfe  of  Lords  by
the  Earl  cf  Shelburne  -^  who  while  he  held  the  feals
of  the  Southern  Department,  with  the  bufmels  of
the  Colonies  annexed,  poflefTed  their  confidence,
without  ever  compromifing  the  authority  of  this
country  ;  a  confidence  which  difcovered  itfelf  by
peace  among  themfclves,  and  duty  and  fubmiffion
3  to


t 105 3

to  the  Mother-country.  I  hope  I  fhall  not  take  an
unwarrantable  liberty,  if,  on  this  occafion,  lufe  his
Lordfhips  own  words,  as  nearly  as  I  have  been
able  to  collexSt  them.

"  Meet  the  Colonies  on  their  own  ground,  in
"  the  lafl  petition  from  the  Congrefs  to  the  king.-
*'  The  fureft,  as  well  as  the  mod  dignified
*'  mode  of  proceeding  for  this  country. — Sufpend

"  all  hoftilities Repeal  the  acts  which imme-

"  diately  diftrefs  America,  namely,  the  lad  re^
*'  draining  adt, — the  charter  ad, — the  ad  for  the
'*  more  impartial  adminiftration  of  juftice-, — and
"  the  Qiiebec  a6t. — All  the  other  adls  (thecuftoni
"  houfe  a6l,  the  poft  office  act,  &c.)  leave  to  a  tem-

*'  perate  revifal. There will  be found  much

f'  matter  which  borh  countries  may  wiQi  repealed.
"  Some  which  can  never  be  given  up,  the  prin-
"  ciple  being  that  regulation  of  trade  for  the
"  common  good  of  the  Empire,  which  forms  our
*'  Palladium. Other  matter  which  is  fair  fubjcct  of

"  mutual  accommodation. Prefcribe  the  mod

*'  explicit  acknowledgment  of  your  right  of  regu-
"  laring  commerce  in  its  mod  exrenfive  fcnfe  ;  if
"  the  petition  and  other  public  ads  of  the  Colonies
*'  have  not  already,  by  their  declarations  and  ac-
'  "  knowledgments,  left  it  upon  a  fufficiently  fecure
"  foundation. — Befides  the  power  of  regulating  the
*'  general  commerce  of  the  Empire,  fomething
"  further  might  beexpeded-,  provided  a  due  and

"  tender


[ >o6 ]

"  tender  regard  were  had  to  the  means  and  abili-
"  ties  of  the  feveral  provinces,  as  well  as  to  thofe
"  fundamental,  unalienable  rights  of  EngUJhmen^
*'  which  no  father  can  furrender  on  the  part  of  his
"  fon,  no  reprefentative  on  the  part  of  his  eledor,
"  no  generation  on  the  partof  thefucceeding  one  ;
*' the  right  of  judging  not  only  of  the  mode  of
*'  raifing,  but  the  quantum^  and  the  appropriation
•*  of  fuch  aids  as  they  fliall  grant.'  To  be  more
•'  explicit ;  the  debt  of  England^  without  entering
*'  into  invidious  diftinclions  how  it  came  to  be
"  contracted,  might  be  acknowledged  the  debt  of
"  every individual  part  of  the whole  Empire,

*'  Afia, as  well  as  America, included. Pro-

•'  vided,  that  full  fecuricy  were  held  forth  to  them,

**  that  fuch  free aids,  together  with  the  Sinking

*'  Fund  (Great  Britain  contributing  her  fuperior

*'  fhare)  fhould  not  be  left  as  the privy  purle  of

*'  the  minitler,  but  be  unalienably  appropriated  to

*'  the  original  intention  of  that  fund,  the  difcharge

*'  of  the  debt  -,  — and  that  by  an  honell  application

*'  of  the  whole  fund,  the  taxes  might  in  time  be  lef-

*'  fened,  and  the  price  of  our  manufadures  confe-

"  quently  reduced,  fo  that  every  contributory  part

"  might  feel  the  returning  benefit — always  fuppo-

*'  fmg  the  laws  of  trade  duly  obferved  and  enforced.

"  The  time  was^ 1 am  confident — and per-

"  haps  //,  when thefe points might  be  obtain-

"  ed upon  the ealy, the conllitutional, and,

^*  therefore,  the  indifpcnfible  terms  of  an  exemp-

"  tioa


[ I07 1

"  tion  from  parliamentary  taxation,  and  an  ad^
"  minion  of  the  facrednefs  of  their  charters;  inftead
*'  of  facrificing  their  good  humour,  their  affec-
^*  tion,  their  effedlual  aids,  and  the  acft  of  navi-
"  CATION  itfelf,  (which  you  are  now  in  the  direft
"  road  to  do)  for  a  commercial  quit-rent,  (a)  or  a

"  barren metaphyfical  chimsera. How long

*'  thefe  ends  may  continue  attainable,  no  man  can

"  tell. But  if  no  words  are  to  be  relied  on  ex-

*^  cept  fuch  as  make  againft  the  Colonies — If
"  nothing  is  acceptable,  except  what  is  attainable
"  by  force  -,  it  only  remains  to  apply,  what  has
^'  been fo  often  remarked  of  unhappy periods,

" ^os  deus  vuli,  &c.''

Thefe  are  fentim.ents  and  propofals  of  the  laft
importance-,  and  I  am  very  happy  in  being  able
to  give  them  to  the  public  from  fo  refpedlable  an
authority,  as  that  of  the  diftinguiilied  Peer  I  have
mentioned ;  to  whom,  I  know,  this  kingdom,  as

CaJ  See  the  Refolutions  on  the  No-va-Scctia  petition  reported
\o  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  November  29,  177^,  by  Lord
North,  Lord  George  Germaine,"&c.  and  a  bill  ordered  to  be

brought  in  upon  the  faid  Refolutions. There  is  indeed,  as

Lord  Shelburnehas  hinted,  fomething  very  aflonifhing  in  thefe
Refolutions.  They  offer  a  relaxation  of  the  authority  of  this
(ountry,  in  points  to  which  the  Colonies  have  alway?  con-
fented,  and  by  which  we  are  great  gainers  ;  at  the  fame  time,
that,  with  a  rigour  which  hazards  the  Empire,  we  are  main.
gaining  its  authority  in  points  to  which  they  will  never  con-
fent ;  and  by  which  nothing  can  be  gained.

well


[ loS ]

well  as  America,  is  much  indebted  for  his  zeal
to  promote  thofe  grand  public  points  on  which  the
prefervation  of  Liberty  among  us  depends;  and
for  the  firm  oppofition  which,  jointly  with  many
others  (Noblemen  and  Commoners  of  the  firftcha-
radler  and  abilities,)  he  has  made  to  the  prefent
meafures.

Had  fuch  a  plan  as  that  now  propofed  been  a-
dopted  a  few  months  ago,  I  have  little  doubt  but
that  a  pacification would  have  taken place, on

terms  highly  advantageous  to  this  kingdom.

In  particular.  It  is  probable,  that  the  Colonies
would  have  confented  to  grant  an  annual  fupply,
which,  increafed  by  a  faving  of  the  money  now
fpent  in  maintaining  troops  among  them,  and  by
contributions  which  might  have  been  gained  from
other  parts  of  the  Empire,  would  have  formed  a
fund  confiderable  enough,  if  unalienably  applied,
(a)  to  redeem  the  greateft  part  of  the  public  debt  i
in  confequence  of  which,  agreeably  to  Lord  Shel-
burne's  ideas,  fome  of  our  word  taxes  might  be
taken  ofi^,  and  the  Colonies  would  receive  our  ma-
nufactures cheaper ;  our  paper-currency  might  be
.  retrained  ;  our  whole  force  would  be  free  to  meet
at  any  time  foreign  danger;  the  influence  of  the
Crown  would  be  reduced  •,  our  Parliament  would
become more independent; and the kingdom

{'aj  See  the  Appendix.

might.


[ 109 ]

might,  perhaps,  be  reftored  to  a  fituation  of  per-
manent fafety  and  profperity.

To  conclude. An  important  revolution  in

the  affairs  of  this  kingdom  feems  to  be  approach-
ing. If  ruin  is  not  to  be  our  lot,  all  that  has  been
lately  done  muft  be  undone,  and  new  meafures
adopted.  At  that  period,  an  opportunity  (never
perhaps  to  be  recovered,  if  loft)  will  offer  itfelf
for  ferving  effentially  this  country^  as  well  as  Ame-
rica J  by  putting  the  national  debt  into  a  fixed
courfe  of  payment ;  by  fubjefting  to  new  regula-
tions, the  adminiftration  of  the  finances  j  and  efta-
blifhing meafures for  exterminating  corruption

and reftoring  the  conftitution. For  my  own

part ;  if  this  is  not  to  be  the  confequence  of  any
future  changes  in  the  miniftry,  and  the  fyftem  of
corruption,  lately  fo  much  improved,  is  to  go  on;
I  think  it  totally  indifferent  to  the  kingdom  who
are  /«,  or  who  are  out  of  power.


APPENDIX.


[  I'l  ]


APPENDIX.

Amount  of  the  National  Debt  at  Mid^
fummert 1775.


The  amount  of  the  capi-
tals at  the  Bank,  South
Sea,  and  India  Houfes
was  (in  January  1775)
125,056,454!.  See  the
particulars  in  an  account
by  R.  Helm,  at  the  Stock
Exchange^  corrected  for
January 5th, 1775.

Deduft  424,500  1.  Confol.
Annuit.  246,300!.  Re-
duced i  161,650  1.  Old
S.  S.  Annuit.  124,200  1.
New  S.  S.  Annuit.  and
43,350  l.Aanuit.  I  751,
making  in  all  a  million
of  the  3  fer  cents,  pli^
off  in  1775;  and  the  re-
mainder will  be

Annuities  for  99,  ^6,  and
89  years,  from  various
dates  in  King  William's
and  Queen  Ann's  time.
Suppofing  18  years  to
come of  thefe  Annui-


Prlncipal.


I'

124.056,454


Interefl.


4-3i7»87®


ties,


[ 112 ]


tics,  their  value  will  be
Creckoninginterefi  at  3^
per  cent.)  1 3-'-  years  pur-
chale,  or  nearly  —

Annuities  for  lives,  with
benefit  of  furvivorfhip,
in  King  Williani's  time,
fuppolcd worth Four

vears purchafe.

N.B.The  benefit  of  iur-
vivorfhip  is  to  be  con-
■  tinued  till'  the  Annui-
tants are  reduced  to
Seven  •,  and  chey  are  not
yet  reduced  to  this  num
ber


Principal.

1.801,179


Annuities  on  lives,  with
benefit  of  Survivorfnip,
granted  Anno  1765, —
valued  at  20  years  pur
chafe  -  —

Annuities  for  two  or  three
Jives  granted  in  1693.
Alio  annuities  on  fingle
lives  1745*  1746,  1757-
The  original  amount
of  thefe  annuities,  ta-
ken all  together,  was
123,883  1.  They  are
now  reduced  by  deaths
to  about  80,000  1.  I
have  valued  them  at  10
years  purchafe


Intereft.


— 30,268


— 10,800


7o6'7


54^3


SoOjOOO


Total  /;.  126.698,701


80,000


4,542,430


Long


[  "3  i

Principal.

Brought  over — •  126.698,701
Long  annuity  for  99  years

1 76 1- The  value  of

this annuity is  in the

Jiky about  25^ years

purchafe;  but  the  re-
maining term is  really

worth  27  years  purchalb  6.702,750
Unfunded  Debt,  confid-
ing of  Exchequer  Bills

(  1,250,000  1.  ) Navy

debt  (1,850,000  1.)  and

Civil  liil  debt,  fuppofed

500,000  1.  The  intereft

is  reckoned  at  no  more

tha.n  2 'j:  per  cenL  3.600,000


Total  of  the  National
debt  in  1775  —


137.001,451


Intereft.

+.542,430


248,250


90,000


4.880,680


I  have  given  the  Navy  Debt  as  it  was  about  a

year  ago. It  mufl  be  now  greatly  increafed.

The  Civil  Lift  Deht  has  been  given  by  guefs.  jj-
is  generally  reckoned  not  to  be  lefs  than  the  fum  I
have  fpecified ;  and  it  is  alfo  expefted,  that  the
Civil  Lift  income  will  be  raifed  to  900,000  1.  pej'

annum In 1769  the fum of  513,5111. was

granted  by  parliament  towards  difcharging  the  ar-
rears and  debts  then  due  on  the  Civil  Lift.

By  an  ad  of  the  firft  of  George  II.  the  Civil
Lift  was  to  be  made  up  800,000 1.  whenever,  in
any  year,  the  duties  and  revenues  appropriated  to
it  fell  fhort  of  that  fum. The  clear  produce  of

I  thefe


[ 'H 3

thefe  duti.es  for  33  years,  or  from  Midfummer
1727,  to  Midfummer  1760,  was,  according  to  a
particular  account  in  my  poffeffion,  26.182,981  1.
17  s.  6  d.  or  793,423  1.  per  ann.  They  fell  fliorr,
therefore,  taking  one  year  with  another,  more  than
they  exceeded. In  1747,  they  had  been  de-
ficient for  feven  years  together  •,  and  the  whole
deficiency  amounted  to  456,733  1.  16  s. — which,
in  conformity  to  the  atfl  I  have  mentioned,  was
made  good  to  his  majefty  out  of  the  fupplies  for
that  year. ^in  1 729  alio,  1 1 5,000  1.  was  grant-
ed out  of  the  fupplies  for  the  like  reafon. — This
is  all  the  money,  received  by  his  late  majefty  from
parliament,  towards  fupporting  his  houfhold  and
the  dignity  of  his  civil  government  i  or  810,749].
per  ami. — I  have  thought  proper  to  ftate  this  mat-
ter fo  particularly  here ;  becaufe  accounts  grofsly
wrong  have  been  given  of  it.

The  amount  of  the  National  Debt,  it  has  ap-
peared, was  laft  year  137  millions. — The  great  de-
ficiencies of  laft  year,  added  to  the  extraordinary
expences  of  theprelent  year,  will  increafe  this  debt
confiderably.—— Drawing  out,  embodying,
and  maintaining  the  militia  in  the  laft  war,  coft  the
nation  near  half  a  million  per  aim. —  We  cannot
reckon  upon  a  lefs  expence  in  doing  this  novi*-.
Add  to  if,  pay  for  foreign  ^roop3,  and  all  the  ex-
traordinary expences  of  our  incrcafed  Navy  and
Army,  tranfport  fervice,  recruiting  fcrvice,  ord-
nance, &c.  and  it  will  be  evident  that  the  whole

expence


[ "5 ]

expence  of  this  unhappy  year  mufl:  be  enormous.
— But  I  expeft  that  care  will  be  taken  to  hide  ir,
by  funding  as  little  as  pofTible,  and  that  for  this
reafon  it  will  not  be  known  in  its  full  magnitude,
till  it  comes  to  appear  another  year  under  the  ar-
ticles of  Navy  debt,  extraordinaries  of  the  army,
tranfport  bills,  ordnance  debentures,  &c.  making
up  a  vail  unfunded  debt  which  may  bear  down
all  public  credit.

State  of  the  National Account i.i

ANNUAL INCOME.

Customs  in  England,  being  the
medium  of  the  payments  into  the
Exchequer, for  3  years  ending  in  ^.

1773  — 2.528,275

Amount  of  the  Excises  in  Eng-
land, including  the  malt  tax,
being  the  medium  of  3  years
ending  in  1773  ■ 4.649,892

Land  Tax  at  3s. •  — - 1.300,000

Salt  Duties,  being  the  medium  of

the  years  1765  and  1766 .  218,739

Duties  on  Stamps,  Cards,  Dice,
Advertifements,  Bonds,  Leafes,
Indentures,  News-papers,  Alma-
nacks, &c.  K —  280,788

Duties  on  houfes  and  windows,  be-
ing the  niedium  of  3  years  end-
ing in  1771 —  385^3%

I  2  Poft


[ 1,6 J

Pafl:  Office,  Seizures,  Wine  Licen-
ces, Hackney  Coaches,  fi?)  Tenths
of  the  Clergy,  &c.  ■■

Excises  inScoTLAND,  beingthe  me-
dium ot  3  years  ending  in  1773

Customs  in  Scotland,  being  the
medium of  3  years ending  in


^771


I-

250,000

95.229
68,360


Inland  taxes  in  Scotlan'd,  deduc-
tion of  6d.  in  the  pound  on  all
Penfions,  Salaries,  &-c.  cafual  re-
venues, fuch  as  the  duties  on
Gum-Senega,  American  revenue,
&;c.  — Thele  are  little  articles,  {b)
and  I  have  fuppofcd  them  to  a-
mount  to  as  much  as  will  make
the  whole  revenue  ten  millions
per  ami. -  —


222,339


Total £. 10.000,000


{a)  Thele  branches  of  th^  revenue  produced  in  175^
210,24.3!.  I  do  not  know  how  much  they  have  produced
lately  ;  but  I  believe  I  h:ive  ellimated  them  at  the  highell.

(^)  I  believe  no  articles  have  been  overlooked  in  this  ac-
count, which  c^n  raife  tlie  permanent  annual  revenue  above
Ten  Millions.  But  fhould  there  be  any  fuch  articles,  they
will  be  more  than  balanced  by  an  article  w  hich  I  have  negleft-
ed  to  charge,  in  the  account  of  the  national  debt :  I  mean,  the
cxpences  of  management  at  the  Bank,  South  Sea  Houfe,  India
Houfe,  and  Exchequer,  amounting  to  81,59^  I.


The


I "7 ]

The  annual  medium  of  the  payments  into  the
Exchequer  from  the  Customs  in  England,  for

the  laft  five  years,  has  been  2.521,769!. In

1774  this  payment  was  2.547,717!. — In  1775,
it  was  2.476,302  1.  —  The  produce  of  the  Cus-
toms, therefore,  has  been  given  rather  too  high.

The  produce  of  the"  Excises  in  England  has
been  higher  in  1772  and  1775  than  in  any  other
two  years ;  but  the  average  of  any  three  fuccefllve
years,  or  of  all  the  five  years  fince  1770,  will  not
differ  much  from  the  fum  I  have  given. — In  1754,
or  the  year  before  the  laft  war,  the  Customs  pro-
duced only  1.558,254!. The  Excifes  pro-
duced 2.819,702  I. And  the  whole  revenue,

exclufive  of  the  Malt-tax  and  Land-tax  at  2s.  was
5.097,617].

ANNUAL EXPENDITURE.

Intereft of  the National  Debt in  £.

1775  ■  —  4.880,680
Peace  Eftablifhment  for  the  Navy

and  Army,  including  all  mifcella-

neous  and  incidental  expences  3.700,000
Annual  Increafe of  the Navy  and

Civil  Lift  Debts — —  350,000

Civil  Lift — • -  800,000


9.730,680
Surplus  of  the  Revenue 269,320

£.  10.0CO5O00

I  3  The


[ "8 ]

The  eflimate  for  the  peace  cftablifliment,
including mifcellaneous  expcnccs,  amounted  in

1775  10.3.703,4761. In  1774  it  amounted

to  3.804,4521.  exclufive  of  250,0001.  raifed  byEx-
chequer  Bills,  towards  defraying  the  expence  of
calling  in  the  gold  coin.  And  the  medium  for  e-
IcvenyearSjfrorn  1765,  has  been  nearly  3.700,0001.
— According  to  the  accounts  which  I  have  col-
le(fled,  the  expence  of  the  peace  eftablifhment  (in-
cluding mifcellaneous  expences)  was  in  1765,
1766,  and  1767,  ^.^4.o^ooo\.  per  ann. —  In  1768,

1769,  and  1770,  it  was  3.354,0001.  per  ann.

In  1771,  1772,  1773,  1774,  and  1775,  the  ave-
rage has  been  nearly  four  millions  per  ann.  exclu-
five  of  the  expence  of  calling  in  the  coin.

The  parliament  votes  for  the  fea  fervice  4 1.
per  month  fer  man,  incluiiing  wages,  Weaf  and
tear,  victuals  and  ordnance.  This  allowance  is
infufficienr,  and  falls  fliort  ^"Jtxy  yt^ai"  more  or  Jefs,
in  proportion  to  the  number  of  men  voted.  From
hence,  in  a  great  meafurc,  iirifts  that  annual  in-
creale  of  the  navy  debt,  mentioned  in  the  third
article  of  the  National  Expenditure.  This  increafe
in  1772  and  \^']'i,  was  649,996!.  or  335,000!.  per
ann.  The  number  of  men  voted  }n  thofe  two
years,  wns  20,000.  I  have  fuppokd  them  reduc-
ed to  16,000,  and  the  annual  increafe  oi  tlie  Navy

pebt  to  be  only  250,001)!. Add  ioo,oool.

7  for


[ "9 ]

for  the  annual  increafe  of  the  Civil  Lift  Debt
(fee  page  ii3.)>  ^^^  the  total  will  be  350,0001.  ,

A  Second  Method  of  T>E-D\5ci}^Cy  the  Sur-
plus of  the  Revenue.

Unappropriated  Revenue.

NETTPRODucEof  the  SinkingFund,

for  the  laft  five  years,  including

cafual furplufies,  reckoning to

Chriflmas  in every  year  •, being

the  annual  medium,  after  deduc-
ing from  it  about  45,000  1.  always

carried to it  from  the  fupplies,

in  order  to  replace  fo  much  taken

from  it  every  year  to  make  good  a

deficiency  in  a Fund  eftabliflied  ^.

in  1758.  2.610,7^

Nett  annual  produce of  Land  Tax

at  gs.  militia  dedufted ;  and  of  the

Malt  Tax  — 1,800,000

(N.  B. Thefe  two  taxes,  In 1773,

brought  in  only  1.605,4751.)
There  are  fome  cafual  Receipts,  not

included  in  the  SinkingFund, fuch

as  duties  on  Gum  Senega,  Ame-
rican Revenue,  &c.  But  they  are  fo

uncertain  and  inconfiderabie,  that

it  is  fcarcely  proper  to  give  them

as  a  part  of  the  permanent  Re-

I  4  ^-  ;.;'  ■


[ 120 ]

venue. Add  however  on  tliis  ac-  £.

count  —  •  ^o,oco


Total  of  unappropriated  'a)  Revenue  £.  4  460,759

Produce  of  ihc Sinking Fund, reckoned
to  Chrillmas  ;;2  every  Tear.

jyyO 2.486,836

1771 ^-553^5^5

ijj2 2.683,831

1773 2.823,150

1774  — r- 2.731,476

In  1775  the  Sinking  Fund  was  taken  for
2. '900,000!.  including  an  extraordinary  charge  of
100,000 1.  on  the  Aggregate  Fund.  For  a  year  to
Michaelmas  lyys^  ^^  produced  2,855,718!.  in-
cluding 45,446!.  carried  to  it  from  the  fupplies.
It  has  not,  probably,  produced  more  for  a  year  to
Chrijl'rnas  -,  and  if  a  deficiency  has  arifen,  it  is  a
debt  contrafted  lafl:  year,  which  muft  be  added
to  other  debts  (referred  to  in  Page  114)  arifing
from  deficiencies  iq  thp  provifion  made  for  the
expenccs  of  iaft  year.  I'his  provifion  amounted
to  3.703,4761  i  but  it  is  faid  to  have  fallen  fhorf
above  a  million.

(a)  The  greatefi  part  of  this  Revenue  is  borrowed  pf  the.
Bank,  and  fpent  before  it  comes  into  the  Exchequer.  It  is,
therefore,  in  reality  fo  much  dwbi  couilantly  due  to  the  B^nk,
for  which  intereft  is  paid.

ANNU-


[ 121 ]

ANNUAJ. EXPENDITURE.

Peace  Eftablilhment,  including  the
annual  increafe  of  the  Navy  and
Civil  Lift  Debts  (fee  the  former  £.

apcount)  —  -_, — 4.050,000

Intereft  at  2\  of  3,600,0001.  unfund-
ed debt,  which  muft  be  paid  out
of  the  unappropriated  Revenue — 90,000

Total 4.140,000
Surplus 320,759

Annual  income  £.  4.460,759

Thefe  two  methods  of  deducing  the  Surplus  of
the  Revenue  confirm  one  another,  as  nearly  as
could  have  been  expef^ed.  They  cannot  agree
exa6lly,  unlefs  the  mean  produce  of  the  Sinking
Fund,  and  of  all  the  taxes,  are  taken  for  the
fame  years,  and  from  the  fame  quarter  in  every
year.

There  is  a  third  method  of  proving  that  the
permanent  furplus  of  the  revenue  cannot  exceed
the  fum  now  ftated.

I  have  learnt  from  the  higheft  authority,  that
the  national  debt,  about  a  year  ago,  had  been  di-
minifhed  near  9  millions  and  a  half,  fmce  the  peace
in  1763',  including  a  million  of  th^  ^  per  cent::
ijifch^rged  laft  year.— ^— The  money  employed  \n
2  making


[ 122 ]

making  this  rcduclion,  muft  have  been  derived
from  the  Turpi  us  of  the  ordinary  and  ftated  reve-
nue, added  to  the  extraordinary  receipts.  Thefe
extraordini^ry  rc(:e]pts  have  confifted  of  the  follow-
ing articles. 1.  The  Lafid  Tax  at  4  s.  in  the

pound  in  1764,  1765,  1766,  and  J771  ;  or  i  s.
in  the  pound  extraordinary  for  four  years,  making
1.750,000  1.  —  2.  The  profits  of  ten  Lotteries,
making  (at  150,000!.  each  lottery) 1.500,000!.

3. A  contribution of  400,000  1.  per ann.

from  the  India  company  for  five  years, making

2.000,000  1. 4. 1 10,000 1.  paid  by  the  Bank

in  1764  for  the  privilege  of  exclufive  banking.
Alfo  the  money  paid  by  France  for  maintaining
their  prifoners ;  and  the  money  arifing  from  the
fale  of  Fr^wf^  prizes,  taken  before  the  declaration
of  war  j  from  faving  on  particular  grants  at  the
end  of  the  war,  &c,  &c.— which,  all  together,  [a)
1  Vvill  fuppofe  a  million.  Add  3.600,000!.  ari-
fing from  a  furplus  of  300,000  1.  for  twelve  years;
and  the  total  will  be  9.850,000!.  which  is  a  fum
much  more  than  fufficient  to  difcharge  9  millions
and  a  half  of  the  public  debt.

(a)  The  Author  of  the  Prefant  State  cfthe  Nation,  pablifhed  in
176S,  makes  all  thefe  extracrdinary  Receipts  to  amount  to  above
two  millions  and  a  half.  But  the  greatcft  part  of  them  were
applied  to  fatisfy  German  claims,  and  foHiC  other  debts,  not
properly  included  in  die  current  national  expenditure.

Sketch


[ 123 ]

Sketch  of  an Account  of  the  Money  drawn
from  the  Public  by  the  Taxes.

Nett  Revenue  —  — 10.000,000

ExPENCE  of  colleding  the  Excises

in  England,  being  the  average  of

the  years  1767  and 1768,  when

their produce was  4-531,075  1,

per  ann.

6  fer  cent,  of  the  grofs  produce  — 297,887
ExPENCE  of  colleding  the  Excifes

in  Scotland,  being  the  medium

of  the  years  1772  and  1773,  and

the  difference between  the  grofs

and  nett  produce ^i  percent.

of  the  grofs  produce  —  43>254

ExPENCE  of  collefting  the  Customs

in  England, being  the  average

of  1 77 1  and  1772  ;  bounties  in-
cluded— 15  per  cent,  of  the  grofs

produce,  exclufive  of  drawbacks

and  over-entries  — 468,703

N.  B. The  bounties  for  1 771  were

202,840  1.  for  1772,  172,468  1.
The charges of management for

1771,  were  276,434  1.
For 1772, 285,764.1. or lo  per

tent,  nearly.

Per-


I 124  ]

Perquisites,  &c.  to  Cuftom-houfe  ^f,

officers,  &c.  fuppofed  to  be — 250,000

ExPENCE  of  colledling  the  Salt-du-

ties  in  England,  lol per  cent.  —  27,000

Bounties  on  fifh  exported — —  i8,oqo

ExPENCc  of  collecling  the  duties  on
Stamps,  Cards,  Advertifements,
&c.  5^  per  cent.  1 8,000

ExPENCE  of  collefling  the  Land  Tax
at  3  s. — 2-^-^  per  cent,  of  the  no-
minal produce  —  —  43,500

Add  for  IS.  extraordinary  Land-tax,

and  the  annual  profits  of  lotteries  600,000

Total I.  11.766,344

It  mull  be  feen,  that  this  account  is  very  imperfed.
It  is,  however,  fufficient  to  prove,  that  the  whole
money  raifed  DIRECTLY  by  the  taxes,  cannot  be  much
lefs  than  Twelve  Millions.  But  as  the  increaf-
cd  price  of  one  commodity  has  a  tendency  to  raife
the  price  of  other  commodities  •,  and  as  alfo  deal-
ers generally  add  more  than  the  value  of  a  tax  to
the  price  of  a  commodity,  befides  charging  intc-
relt  for  the  money  they  advance  on  the  taxes  i  for
thele  reafons,  it  feems  certain,  that  the  taxes  have
an  INDIRECT  eBc(5l  of  great  confequence-,  and  that
a  larger  fum  is  drawn  by  them  from the  public,

than  their  grcfs produce. It is  farther  to  be

confidered,  that  many  of  the  perfons  who  are  now
fupported  by  collecling  the  taxes,  would  have
fjoported  themfelves  by  commerce  or  agriculture  ;

and.


t 125 ]

and,  therefore,  inftcad  of  taking  away  from  the
public  ftock,  would  have been  employed  in  in-

ereafing  it. Some  have  reckoned, that  on  all

thefe  accounts  the  expence  of  the  taxes  is  doubled -^
but  this  muft  be  extravagant.  Let  us  fuppofe  a
Jifth  only  added ;  and  it  will  follow,  that  the
money  drawn  from  the  public  by  the  taxes  (ex-
clufive  of  thofe  which  maintain  the  poor)  is  near
14  millions />^r^««-,  a  fum  almoft  equal  to  the
whole  fpecie  of  the  kingdom  ;  which,  therefore,
had  we  no  paper  currency,  would  be  totally  ina-
dequate to  the  wants  of  the  kingdom.

Without  all  doubt  fuch  a  ftate  of  things,  in  a.
great  commercial  nation,  is  mod  dangerous,
and  frightful ;  but  it  admits  of  no  remedy, while

the  public  debt  continues  what  it  is. With  a

view,  therefore,  to  the  quick  redu<5l;ion  of  this
debt,  I  will  throw  away,  after  all  I  have  faid  on
this  fubjed  on former  occgifions,  the  following

propofals. It  has  appeared,  that,  fuppofing  the

taxes  not  to  become  lefs  produ(5live,  and  the  cur-
rent national  expence  to  continue  the  fame  that  it
had  been  for  ten  years  before  1775,  a  furplus  may
be  expefled  in  the  revenue  of  about  300,000  1.
per  ann. — With  a  furplus  fo  trifling,  nothing  can
be  done  ;  but  it  might  be  increafed,  firftof  all  j
By  keeping  the  Land  Tax  for  the  future  at  4  s.
in  the  pound. — As  rents  have  been  almoft  doubled,
this  will  not  be  much  more  to  the  prefent  proprie-
tors of  land,  than  2  s.  in  the  pound  was  formerly .

'Tis,


[ >26 ]

'Tis,  therefore,  equitable ;  and  it  will  add  to  the
national  income  near  450,000  i.

Secondly^  All  the  money  now  fpent  in  maintain-
ing troops  in  America  might  be  faved.  • ■  The

Colonies  are  able  to  defend  themfelves.  They
wifh  to  be  allowed  to  do  it.  Should  they  ever
^?vant  the  aid  of  our  troops,  they  will  certainly  be
very  willing  to  pay  us  for  them.  Indeed  I  am  of
opinion,  they  will  never  be  willing  to  make  peace
with  us,  without  Itipulating  that  we  fhall  withdraw
our  troops  from  them.  Were  there  any  external
power  that  claimed  and  exercifed  a  right  of
ftationing  troops  in  this  country,  without  our  con-
fent,  we  Ihould  certainly think  ourfelves entirely

undone. 1  will  eftimate  this  faving  at  no  more

than  200,000 1.  per  ann.

Thirdly^  I  do  not  fee  why  the  peace-eftablifh-
ment  might  not  be  reduced  to  what  it  was,  at  an
average,  in 1768, 1769  and  1770. This  would

produce a faving  of  350,000/.  per  ann. -I

might  here  propofe  reducing  the  peace-eftabiiHi-
ment  for  the  Navy  to  what  it  always  was  before
the  lafl:  war,  or  frorn  16,000  to  10,000  men.  But
it  would  be  infinitely  better  to  reduce  the  Army  i
and  this  might  produce  a  farther  faving  of  great

confcquence. But waving  this,  I  ihall  only

mention,

.  Fourthly^  That  contributions  might  be  obtained
from  North-America  and  other  parts  of  the  Britiili
Empire,  on  the  principles  ftated,  from  the  Earl.

of


[ 127 ]

of  Shelburne's  authority,  in  page  105. — I  will
eftimate  thcfe  at  no  more  than  400,000/.  per  ami.
— (a)  Acid  the  Surplus  now  in  our  poflcluon  ;  and

the  total  will  be  i  .700,000. In  the  Introdu^ion

to  the  third  edition  of  the  Treatife  on  Reverfto-
nary  PcymentSy  I  have  explained  a  method  of  pay-
ing off,  v^ith  a  finking  Fund  of  a  'a\\\\\Qn  per  ann.
(b)^  a  hundred  millions  of  the  national  debt  in
forty  years.  What  then  might  not  be  done
with  fuch  a  Fund  as  this }

In  five  years  18.986,300!.  will  fall  from  an  in-

terefl: of  4  per  cent,  to 3  per  cent. Alfo,

4.500,0001.  Q,\per  cent.  1758,  will  fall,  in  fix  years,

(aj  We  drew,  fome  years  ago,  this  contribution  from  Asia
only  ;  and  it  cannot  be  unreafonable  to  expert,  that  the  great-
eft  part  of  it  may  be  again  drawn  from  thence  after  the  expira-
tion, in  1780,  of  the  charter  of  the  East-India  company.
At  that  period  alfo,  it  is  much  to  be  wifhed  that  fome  effedual
meafures  may  be  cllabliftied  for  making  amends  to  the  inha-
bitants of  Bengal  for  the  fhocking  injuries  they  have  fuffered  ;
and  for  (kreening  them  from  all  farther  injuries ;  and,  likcwife,
for  withdrawing  from  the  crown  that  Patronage  of  the  Eaft
India  Company,  which  it  has  lately  acquired,  and  whicli
has  given  one  of  the  deepeli  wounds  to  the  conuitution.

{b)  At  the  time  of  writing  the  introdudion  here  referred  to,
above  three  years  ago,  I  thought,  or  rather  hopc^,  that  the  furplus
of  the  revenue  might  be  taken  at  900,0001.  per  ann.  But  it  malt
be  confidered,  that  the  nation  was  then  in  pofleffion  of  a  contri-
bution of  400,000  1.  per  r.nn.  from  the  Inula  Company,  which
has  been  fince  loiV. — Seethe  AdtlitionalPrci^ace  to  the  2d  Edi-
tion c/'Z-^r  Appeal  to  tht  Public  en  the  Suhje^  cf  the  National  Debt.

t»


[  =28  i

to  an  intereflof  3  per  cent. The  long  Annui-
ties granted  in  King  William's  time,  will,  in
20  years,  become  extinct ;  as  will  alfo  the  greatcll
part  of  the  Life  Annuities  fpecified  in  page  112.
— All  thefe  favings  will  not  amount  to  much
jefs  than  400,0001.  -per  ann.  And,  were  they
to  bfc added  to  the  fund  as  they  fall  in,  its  opera-
tions would  be  fo  much  accelerated,  that  in  a
few  years  we  lliould  fee  this  country above  all

its  difficulties. Still  more  might  be  done  by

llriking  off  unneceflary  places  and  penfions ;  by
giving  up  all  the  means  of  corruption  ;  by  reduc-
ing the  pay  of  the  great  officers  of  ftate-,  and
fimpiifying  the  taxes. A  minifter  who  appear-
ed determined  to  carry  into  execution  fuch  a  fyf-
r.em,  would  loon  gain  the  confidence  of  the  pub-
lic i  endear  himfclf  to  all  honeft  men;  and  in
time  come  to  be  bleffed  as  the  Saviour  of  his
country.  But  what  am  1  doing  ?  — We  have
no  fuch  happy  period  before  us. — Our  minifters  are
aftive  in  purfuing  meafures  which  mull  increafe
our  burdens.  A  horrid  civil  war  is  begun;  and
it  may  foon  leave  us  nothing  to  be  anxious  about.


FINIS.


!•,»>>


t.JSc^-  .'- -■■■ -.!» J»
2S»  :m»  -:r-.'ti-»  ■


3e>3  ^332>  v-^-V- '"^^


-  ,;>>v ■ 3*t-" .--■■■'■


:^SSI^^


"i^ip**^


; ;,*  .::t^i :■;■■...-'. .■■£!,


j*iai»i»'.5afc


xi»si>>


-:» >>>i


)i\^llkT»^^->
